古文：野王二老向长逢萌周党王霸严光井丹梁鸿高凤台佟韩康矫慎戴良法真汉阴老父陈留老父庞公《易》称 《遯》之时义大矣哉 。又曰： 不事王侯，高尚其事。 
现代文：逸民列传序。《易经》说：  遁卦 的含义大得很呀！ 
English: "The I Ching" says: The meaning of the Analects is very great!

古文：是以尧称则天，不屈颍阳之高；武尽美矣，终全孤竹之洁。
现代文：又说 ：不侍奉王侯大人，保留高尚的名节。 因此尧帝以天为法则，不能使巢父、许由接受他的王位；周武王可算是一个很完美的人了，最终只能成全孤竹君二子伯夷、叔齐不食周粟的清白名声。
English: He also said, "Don't serve princes and retain the noble name of the festival." Therefore, Emperor Zhou took heaven as the rule and couldn't make his father-in-law and cousin-in-law accept his throne; King Zhouwu was a very perfect person, and in the end, he could only fulfill the pure reputation of not eating millet.

古文：自兹以降，风流弥繁，长往之轨未殊，而感致之数匪一。
现代文：自此以后，隐逸之风流传更盛，多数人的行迹大体相同，而各自隐逸的动机就大不一样。
English: Since then, the tradition of seclusion has become more prevalent, with most people following roughly the same path, but with very different motivations for seclusion.

古文：或隐居以求其志，或回避以全其道，或静已以镇其躁，或去危以图其安，或垢俗以动其概，或疵物以激其清。
现代文：有的以隐居来满足自己的志向；有的回避大人物的纠缠来成全自己的品德；有的寻求安静的环境去抑制急躁的情绪；有的躲开危险的纷争来求得一时的安全；有的愤世嫉俗来建树自己的节操；有的鄙视富贵来保存自己的清白。
English: Some seek seclusion to satisfy their ambition; some avoid the entanglements of great men to perfect their character; some seek a quiet environment to restrain impetuous emotions; some avoid dangerous disputes to seek temporary safety; some cynicism to build their integrity; some despise wealth to preserve their innocence.

古文：然观其甘心畎亩之中，憔悴江海之上，岂必亲鱼鸟、乐林草哉！
现代文：然而，看他们甘心在田亩之中操劳，辛苦在江海之上垂钓，难道一定对鱼鸟林草那么感兴趣吗？
English: However, seeing that they are willing to toil in the fields and fish in the rivers and seas, are they really so interested in fish, birds and plants?

古文：亦云性分所至而已。
现代文：不过各人性格不同罢了。
English: But everyone's personality is different.

古文：故蒙耻之宾，屡黜不去其国；蹈海之节，千乘莫移其情。适使矫易去就，则不能相为矣。
现代文：所以柳下惠虽蒙受耻辱，三次被罢免仍不愿离开齐国，鲁仲连宁肯跳海而死也不愿尊秦为帝，即使千乘之国国君地位也不能让他动心。
English: Therefore, although Liu Shimohui suffered humiliation and was deposed three times, she still did not want to leave Qi. Lu Zhonglian preferred to die by jumping into the sea rather than honor Qin as emperor. Even the position of the ruler of the country could not move him.

古文：彼虽硜硜有类沽名者，然而蝉蜕嚣埃之中，自致寰区之外，异夫饰智巧以逐浮利者乎！
现代文：如果把他们换个位置，那么他们也就不会做出各自的行径了。他们那股子顽固劲确有些沽名钓誉的模样，然而他们却像蝉蜕于尘埃之中，跳出这个恶浊的环境，比那些削尖脑袋去追求名利的人就相距太远了。
English: If they were put in another position, they would not have done what they did. Their stubbornness does have the appearance of fame-seeking, but they are like cicadas in the dust, jumping out of this inhospitable environment, too far away from those who sharpen their heads to pursue fame and fortune.

古文：荀卿有言曰， 志意修则骄富贵，道义重则轻王公 也。
现代文：荀子说得好： 志趣高超就瞧不起富贵，讲究道义就轻视王公。 
English: Zou Zi said it well: If you have high morals, you will look down on the rich, and if you care about morality, you will despise the prince.

古文：汉室中微，王莽篡位，士之蕴藉义愤甚矣。
现代文：汉朝中道衰微，王莽篡位，有志之士胸怀义愤十分强烈。
English: In the middle of the Han Dynasty, Wang Mang usurped the throne, and the righteous indignation of the aspirants was very strong.

古文：是时裂冠毁冕，相携持而去之者，盖不可胜数。
现代文：当时丢掉乌纱帽相约离开官位的，不知有多少。
English: At that time, I don't know how many people lost their hats and left their posts.

古文：杨雄曰： 鸿飞冥冥，弋者何篡焉。 
现代文：扬雄说： 鸿雁飞得很高，猎人的箭射不中了。 
English: Yang Xiong said: The wild goose flew very high, and the hunter's arrow missed.

古文：言其违患之远也。
现代文：就是比喻那些远走高飞的人。
English: It's a metaphor for those who fly far and high.

古文：光武侧席幽人，求之若不及，旌帛蒲车之所征贲，相望于岩中矣。
现代文：光武帝即位，侧身而坐等待贤人，如饥似渴，他派人用旌帛、蒲车去征聘丘园之士，使者在崎岖山路上络绎不绝。
English: When Emperor Guangwu ascended the throne, he sat sideways and waited for the wise men. He was so hungry and thirsty that he sent messengers with donkeys and carts to recruit the people of Qiuyuan. The messengers never stopped on the rugged mountain road.

古文：若薛方、逢萌，聘而不肯至；严光、周党、王霸，至而不能屈。
现代文：像薛方、逢萌等人请他还不肯出来，严光、周党、王霸等人出来了但不肯就位。
English: Like Xue Fang, Feng Meng and others, he did not want to come out, Yan Guang, Zhou Dang, Wang Ba and others came out but did not want to take their seats.

古文：群方咸遂，志士怀仁，斯固所谓 举逸民天下归心 者乎！
现代文：当时各方面的条件都已具备，志士也在想念圣明的天子，这难道不正是 提拔逸民，使天下人心归顺 的大好时机吗？
English: At that time, the conditions in all aspects were already in place, and the aspirants were also thinking about the heavenly son of the sacred light. Isn't this a great opportunity to promote the people and make the people of the world obedient?

古文：肃宗亦礼郑均而征高凤，以成其节。
现代文：肃宗皇帝也礼遇郑均，聘请高凤，来完成他们的名节。
English: Emperor Suzong also treated Zhengjun with courtesy and hired Gaofeng to complete their famous festival.

古文：将用之，辞而去，莫知所在。向长字子平，河内朝歌人也。隐居不仕，性尚中和，好通《老》、《易》。
现代文：自此以后，帝德渐衰，小人当道，隐士们怀着戒心，感到与那班卿相站在一起为可耻，甚至拂袖而去，失去那种中和之道了。现在记录那些隐居不出，以及出来以后又相继归隐的人，列在这篇里面。向长传，向长字子平，河内朝歌人。隐居不做官，性格尚中和，通晓《老子》、《易经》。
English: From then on, the virtuous gradually waned, the villain became the norm, and the hermits, with a wary heart, felt that it was shameful to stand together with that group of nobles, and even went away, losing that way of neutrality. Now record those who can not live in seclusion, and those who come out and return to seclusion one after another, are listed in this article. Xiang Chang Chuan, Xiang Chang Zhiping, Hanoi morning singer. Seclusion does not do official, character is still neutral, familiar with "Lao Zi" and "I Ching."

古文：贫无资食，好事者更馈焉，受之取足而反其余。
现代文：家贫没有资财饭食，好事的人送给他一些食物，他接受一部分而退回多余的。
English: His family was poor and had no money for food. A kind-hearted person gave him some food, and he accepted part of it and returned the extra.

古文：王莽大司空王邑辟之，连年乃至，欲荐之于莽，固辞乃止。
现代文：王莽的大司空王邑召他，连年才到，想推荐给王莽，向长坚决辞让才罢了。
English: Wang Mang's chief steward, Kong Wang Yip, summoned him, and it took him years to arrive. He wanted to recommend him to Wang Mang, but only after he had firmly resigned to the chief.

古文：潜隐于家。
现代文：潜隐在家。
English: Lurking at home.

古文：读《易》至《损》、《益》卦，喟然叹曰： 吾已知富不如贫，贵不如贱，但未知死何如生耳。 
现代文：读《易经》至《损》、《益》两卦，深深叹气道 ：我已经知道富不如贫，贵不如贱，但不知道死比生怎样。 
English: Reading the "I Ching" to the "Loss" and "Gain" sagas, I deeply sighed: I already know that rich is not as good as poor, and high is not as good as low, but I don't know how life is compared to death.

古文：建武中，男女娶嫁既毕，敕断家事勿相关，当如我死也。
现代文：建武年间，他的儿子、姑娘娶嫁之事办完，便与家室断绝关系，说： 就把我当作死了吧。 
English: During the Jianwu era, after his son and daughter were married, he broke off relations with his family, saying, "Just consider me dead."

古文：于是遂肆意，与同好北海禽庆俱游五岳名山，竟不知所终。
现代文：于是就随意行动，与好友北海禽庆一道游五岳名山，最后不知所终。
English: As a result, he acted at will, and together with his friend Beihai Yuqing, he swam the famous mountains of the Five Mountains. In the end, he did not know where he would end up.

古文：逢萌字子康，北海都昌人也。
现代文：逢萌传，逢萌字子康，北海都昌人。
English: Feng Meng Chuan, Feng Meng Zi Kang, Beihai Du Changren.

古文：家贫，给事县为亭长。
现代文：家中贫困，给事县做亭长。
English: His family was poor, and he worked as the county's pavilion manager.

古文：时尉行过亭，萌候迎拜谒，既而掷叹曰： 大丈夫安能为人役哉！ 
现代文：当时县尉经过亭，逢萌等候迎接拜见，既而丢下木盾叹气道： 大丈夫怎能替人当差役呢？ 
English: At that time, the prefectural lieutenant passed through the pavilion, waited for Feng Meng to greet him, and left the wooden shield, sighing: How can a husband be an agent for someone?

古文：遂去之长安学，通《春秋经》。
现代文：于是到长安学习，通晓《春秋经》。
English: So he went to Chang'an to study and became familiar with the Spring and Autumn Classic.

古文：时王莽杀其子宇，萌谓友人曰： 三纲绝矣！
现代文：这时王莽杀了自己的儿子宇，逢萌对友人说： 三纲断绝了！
English: At this time, Wang Mang killed his own son Yu, and Feng Meng said to his friend: "The three principles are severed!"

古文：不去，祸将及人。 
现代文：不离开，祸将连累别人。 
English: If you don't leave, you will bring misfortune to others.

古文：即解冠挂东都城门，归，将家属浮海，客于辽东。
现代文：立即解下帽子挂在东都城门，回来后，将家属迁往海滨，客居在辽东。
English: He immediately took off his hat and hung it on the gate of Dongdu City. After returning, he moved his family to the seashore and stayed in Liaodong.

古文：萌素明阴阳，知莽将败，有顷，乃首戴瓦盎，哭于市曰： 新乎新乎！ 
现代文：逢萌素来明白阴阳之术，知道王莽不久将败，于是头戴瓦盆，在市上哭道： 新呀新呀！ 
English: Feng Meng had always understood the art of yin and yang, and knew that Wang Mang would soon be defeated, so he put a tile basin on his head and cried in the market: New, new!

古文：因遂潜藏。
现代文：于是就躲藏起来。
English: So he went into hiding.

古文：及光武即位，乃之琅邪劳山，养志修道，人皆化其德。
现代文：等到光武即位，便往琅笽劳山，养志修道，人都被他的德行感化。
English: When Guangwu ascended the throne, he went to Mulao Mountain to cultivate his mind. People were influenced by his virtue.

古文：北海太守素闻其高，遣吏奉谒致礼，萌不答。
现代文：北海太守素听说他的高尚品德，派吏去拜见行礼，逢萌不答礼。
English: When Hokkai Taishou heard of his noble character, he sent officials to pay homage, but they did not return the salute.

古文：太守怀恨而使捕之。
现代文：太守怀恨在心而派人去逮捕他。
English: With a grudge against him, the abbot sent someone to arrest him.

古文：吏叩头曰： 子康大贤，天下共闻，所在之处，人敬如父，往必不获，只自毁辱。 
现代文：吏叩头道 ：子康是大贤人，天下都闻名，他所在之处，人们敬之如父，去，一定抓不到，只是自取毁辱。 
English: The official bowed his head and said, "Zikang is a great sage, famous all over the world. Wherever he is, people respect him like a father. If you go there, you won't be able to catch him. You'll only bring disgrace on yourself."

古文：太守怒，收之系狱，更发它吏。
现代文：太守发怒，将吏关在牢中，再派别人前往。
English: Furious, the daimyō put the officials in prison and sent others.

古文：行至劳山，人果相率以兵弩捍御。吏被伤流血，奔而还。
现代文：那人走到劳山，人们果然联合起来用兵弩捍卫，吏被伤流血，跑了回来。
English: The man went to Mount Lao, and the people did indeed unite to defend themselves with soldiers and horses. The officials were wounded and bleeding, and ran back.

古文：后诏书征萌，托以老耄，迷路东西，语使者云： 朝廷所以征我者，以其有益于政，尚不知方面所在，安能济时乎？ 
现代文：后来朝廷用诏书召逢萌，萌托以年太老，迷失道路的东西方向，并对使者说 ：朝廷召我的原因，以为我对政治有益处，我连方向都不知道，怎能济时呢？ 
English: Later, the imperial court summoned Huanmeng with an imperial edict. Huanmeng said that he was too old and had lost his way in the east-west direction, and said to the envoy: The reason why the imperial court summoned me was that they thought I would be beneficial to politics. I don't even know the direction. How can I save time?

古文：即便驾归。
现代文：立即就便车回家。
English: He immediately hitchhiked home.

古文：连征不起，以寿终。
现代文：连续征召都不出来，以寿终。
English: Consecutive call-ups did not work out and ended with his death.

古文：初，萌与同郡徐房、平原李子云、王君公相友善，并晓阴阳，怀德秽行。
现代文：起初，逢萌与同郡徐房、平原李子云、王君公是好朋友，都晓得阴阳之学，怀德秽行。
English: At the beginning, Feng Meng was a good friend with his compatriots Xu Fang, Pingyuan Li Ziyun and Wang Jingu. They all knew the study of yin and yang, and practiced the virtue of filth.

古文：房与子云养徒各千人，君公遭乱独不去，侩牛自隐。
现代文：徐房与子云养学徒各千人，君公遭乱独不离开，做牛经纪自隐。
English: Xu Fang and Ziyun raised thousands of apprentices each, and the prince did not leave the chaos alone, and became a cattle broker.

古文：时人谓之论曰： 避世墙东王君公。 
现代文：当时人评论说 ：避世墙东王君公。 
English: At the time, people commented, "He is the king of the East.

古文：周党字伯况，太原广武人也。
现代文：周党传，周党字伯况，太原广武人。
English: Zhou Dangzhuan, Zhou Dangzhuan Zi Bo Jiao, Taiyuan Guangwu Ren.

古文：家产千金。
现代文：家产千金。
English: The family has a lot of money.

古文：少孤，为宗人所养，而遇之不以理，及长，又不还其财。
现代文：少时死了父亲，被族人所养，可是遇之不以礼，到了长大，又不还其财产。
English: His father died when he was young, and he was raised by members of his tribe. However, he was treated disrespectfully, and when he grew up, he did not return his property.

古文：党诣乡县讼，主乃归之。
现代文：周党到乡县打官司，主人才归还给他。
English: Zhou Dang went to the township to file a lawsuit, and only then was the owner returned to him.

古文：既而散与宗族，悉免遣奴婢，遂至长安游学。
现代文：不久，他把家财散与宗族，家中奴婢全部遣散，于是到长安游学。
English: Soon, he dispersed the family wealth with the clan, and all the slaves and maidservants in the family, so he went to Chang'an to study.

古文：初，乡佐尝众中辱党，党久怀之。
现代文：起初，乡佐曾经当着众人侮辱周党，周党久记在心。
English: At the beginning, Xiangsa had insulted the Zhou Party in front of everyone, and the Zhou Party has been remembered for a long time.

古文：后读《春秋》，闻复仇之义，便辍讲而还，与乡佐相闻，期克斗日。
现代文：后来读《春秋》，懂得复仇的意思，便停讲而回，通知乡佐，定日期相斗。
English: Later, he read "Spring and Autumn" and understood the meaning of revenge, so he stopped talking and went back to inform the townspeople and set a date to fight each other.

古文：既交刃，而党为乡佐所伤，困顿。
现代文：既交锋，而周党被乡佐所伤，困顿了。
English: After the duel, Zhou Party was injured by Xiangsa and was in a difficult situation.

古文：乡佐服其义，舆归养之，数日方苏，既悟而去。
现代文：乡佐服其义气，用车子送他回家养伤，数日才复活，已醒就离去。
English: The town of Sasa honored his loyalty and sent him home in a car to recover from his injuries. After a few days, he woke up and left.

古文：自此敕身修志，州里称其高。
现代文：从此束身修志，州里称赞他品格高尚。
English: Since then, the state has praised him for his noble character.

古文：及王莽窃位，托疾杜门。
现代文：等到王莽篡位，周党托病杜门不出。
English: Wait until Wang Mang usurps the throne, and the Zhou Party will not come out of the Dumen because of illness.

古文：自后贼暴从横，残灭郡县，唯至广武，过城不入。
现代文：以后贼暴纵横，残灭郡县，只有到了广武，经过城门也不进来。
English: After that, the thieves became violent and destroyed counties. Only in Guangwu, they did not enter through the city gate.

古文：建武中，征为议郎，以病去职，遂将妻子居黾池。
现代文：建武年间，召周党作议郎，因病离职，于是送妻子居渑池。
English: During the Kenmu era, Zhou Dang was called upon to act as a mediator, but left his post due to illness, so he sent his wife to live in the pond.

古文：复被征，不得已，乃着短布单衣，穀皮绡头，待见尚书。
现代文：又被召，不得已，便穿短布单衣，谷皮绡头，待见尚书。
English: He was summoned again, and, as a last resort, he put on a short cloth singlet, a corn-hide bonnets, and waited for Shanshu.

古文：及光武引见，党伏而不谒，自陈愿守所志，帝乃许焉。
现代文：等到光武引见，周党伏地而谒见，自己陈述愿守所志，帝才许可了。
English: It was not until Guangwu introduced him and Zhou made a public appearance, stating that he was willing to keep his promise, that the emperor gave his permission.

古文：博士范升奏毁党曰： 臣闻尧不须许由、巢父，而建号天下；周不待伯夷、叔齐，而王道以成。
现代文：博士范升奏毁周党道 ：臣听说尧帝不须许由、巢父，而建号于天下；周朝不待伯夷、叔齐，而王道以成。
English: Dr. Fan Shengxiao destroyed Zhou's party way: the vassal heard that Emperor Zhou did not need to be allowed to be a father, but to build a name in the world; the Zhou Dynasty did not wait for Bo Yi and Uncle Qi, but the king's way was achieved.

古文：伏见太原周党、东海王良、山阳王成等，蒙受厚恩，使者三聘，乃肯就车。
现代文：臣见到太原周党、东海王良、山阳王成等，蒙受厚恩，使者再三聘请，才肯上车。
English: The minister saw Taiyuan Zhou Dang, Donghai Wang Liang, Sanyang Wangcheng and so on, and received great favors. The envoy was repeatedly hired before he was willing to get on the bus.

古文：及陛见帝廷，党不以礼屈，伏而不谒，偃蹇骄悍，同时俱逝。
现代文：等到陛见朝廷，周党不以礼屈，伏而不谒，偃蹇骄悍，同时都去了。
English: When His Majesty arrived at the Imperial Court, Zhou's party did not bow down, they were proud and arrogant, and they all left at the same time.

古文：党等文不能演义，武不能死君，钓采华名，庶几三公之位。
现代文：周党等人文不能演义，武不能死君，钓采好名声，差点列于三公之位。
English: Zhou Dangdang and other humanities can't perform righteousness, martial arts can't kill you, fishing for a good reputation, almost ranked in the position of the three kings.

古文：臣愿与坐云台之下，考试图国之道。
现代文：臣愿和他们坐在云台之下，考试治国的方法。
English: Their subjects would like to sit with them under a canopy of clouds and examine the methods of governing the country.

古文：不如臣言，伏虚妄之罪。
现代文：如不像臣所说的，愿伏虚妄之罪。
English: If you do not do as you are told, you will be guilty of lying.

古文：而敢私窃虚名，夸上求高，皆大不敬。 
现代文：竟敢私窃虚名，夸上求高，都是大不敬。 
English: How dare I steal a false name, boast and seek high, are all very disrespectful.

古文：书奏，天子以示公卿。
现代文：书奏上，天子把它传给公卿。
English: When it comes to calligraphy, the Son of Heaven passes it on to the nobles.

古文：诏曰： 自古明王圣主，必有不宾之士。
现代文：诏书写道 ：自古以来明王圣主一定有不宾之士。
English: The edict reads: "Since ancient times, there must have been people who were not worthy of the name of the Lord Mingwang."

古文：伯夷、叔齐不食周粟，太原周党不受朕禄，亦各有志焉。
现代文：伯夷、叔齐不吃周朝的粟，太原周党不受朕的俸禄，也是各有志向。
English: Bo Yi and Uncle Qi did not eat the millet of the Zhou Dynasty, and the Taiyuan Zhou Party did not accept my salary. They also had their own ambitions.

古文：其赐帛四十匹。 
现代文：赐帛四十匹。 
English: and forty asses.

古文：党遂隐居黾池，著书上下篇而终。
现代文：周党便隐居在渑池，著书上下篇而死去。
English: Zhou then lived in seclusion in Dianchi and died while writing the next chapter of his book.

古文：邑人贤而祠之。
现代文：邑人认为贤人而建祠纪念。
English: The people of the town believe that it is wise to build a memorial shrine.

古文：初，党与同郡谭贤伯升、雁门殷谟君长，俱守节不仕王莽世。
现代文：起初，周党与同郡谭贤伯升、雁门殷谟君长，都守节不给王莽做官。
English: At first, the Zhou Party and the same county's Tan Xianbo Sheng and Yanmen Yinmu Junlong all kept the festival and did not give Wang Menglu an official post.

古文：建武中，征，并不到。
现代文：建武年间，都是召而不到。
English: During the Kenmu era, none of them were called up.

古文：王霸字儒仲，太原广武人也。
现代文：王霸传，王霸字儒仲，太原广武人。
English: Wang Ba Chuan, Wang Ba Zi Ju Zhong, Taiyuan Guangwu Ren.

古文：少有清节。
现代文：少时有清节。
English: Sometimes there is a spring festival.

古文：及王莽篡位，弃冠带，绝交宦。
现代文：等到王莽篡位，弃冠带，与官宦绝交。
English: Wait until Wang Mang usurps the throne, abandons the crown, and breaks off diplomatic relations with officials.

古文：建武中，征到尚书，拜称名，不称臣。
现代文：建武年间，召到尚书，拜称名，不称臣。
English: During the Jianwu era, he was summoned to Shangshu, and he was praised, but he was not praised as a minister.

古文：有司问其故。
现代文：有司问其缘故。
English: The cause of the accident is still under investigation.

古文：霸曰： 天子有所不臣，诸侯有所不友。 
现代文：霸说 ：天子有所不臣，诸侯有所不友。 
English: The tyrant said, "There are sons of heaven who are not subject, and there are princes who are not friends."

古文：司徒侯霸让位于霸。
现代文：司徒侯霸让位给王霸。
English: Szeto Houba gave way to Wang Baca.

古文：阎阳毁之曰： 太原俗党，儒仲颇有其风。 
现代文：阎阳毁王霸道： 太原俗党，王儒仲颇有这种风气。 
English: Yan Yang Zi Wang Hegemony: Wang Ruzhong is a member of the Taiyuan Secular Party.

古文：遂止。
现代文：于是便中止了。
English: So he stopped short of killing him.

古文：以病归，隐居守志，茅屋蓬户。
现代文：因病回家。隐居守志，茅屋蓬户。
English: Due to illness, he returned home. He lived in seclusion, in a hut.

古文：连征，不至，以寿终。
现代文：连召几次不到，以寿终。
English: He failed to be called up several times and ended his life.

古文：严光字子陵，一名遵，会稽余姚人也。
现代文：严光传，严光，字子陵，又名遵，会稽余姚人。
English: Yan Guang Chuan, Yan Guang, Zhizi Ling, also known as Zun, will audit Yuyao people.

古文：少有高名，与光武同游学。
现代文：年少时就有名声，与光武帝一同游历学习。
English: He became famous at a young age, traveling and studying with Emperor Guangwu.

古文：及光武即位，乃变名姓，隐身不见。
现代文：等到光武做了皇帝，严光就改名换姓，隐居不出来。
English: When Guangwu became emperor, Yan Guang changed his name and became a recluse.

古文：帝思其贤，乃令以物色访之。
现代文：皇帝想念他的才能，就派人拿着图像去寻找。
English: The emperor missed his talent and sent someone to look for him with the image.

古文：后齐国上言： 有一男子，披羊裘钓泽中。 
现代文：后来齐国有人报告 ：有一个男子，身披羊裘在泽中钓鱼。 
English: Later, someone in Qi reported: There is a man, dressed in a sheep coat, fishing in the lake.

古文：帝疑其光，乃备安车玄，遣使聘之。
现代文：帝怀疑是严光，就备了安车和玄黑色绸子，派人去请他。
English: Emperor suspected that it was Yan Guang, so he prepared a horse-drawn carriage and black silk, and sent someone to invite him.

古文：三反而后至。
现代文：请了三次才出来。
English: I had to ask three times before they let me out.

古文：舍于北军。给床褥，太官朝夕进膳。
现代文：让他住在军营里，铺好床褥，由太官早晚送饭。
English: Let him live in a military camp, make his bed, and let the eunuch bring him food in the morning and evening.

古文：司徒侯霸与光素旧，遣使奉书。
现代文：司徒侯霸和严光是老朋友，派人送信来。
English: Szeto Houba and Yan Guang are old friends. They sent someone to deliver the letter.

古文：使人因谓光曰： 公闻先生至，区区欲即诣造。迫于典司，是以不获。
现代文：送信人顺便说道 ：侯公听见先生到了，本想马上来看你，迫于公务在身，所以没有来。
English: By the way, the sender said, "When the lord of the manor heard that you had arrived, he wanted to come and see you immediately, but he was busy with his duties, so he didn't come."

古文：愿因日暮，自屈语言。 
现代文：希望你在黄昏时到他那里去谈谈。 
English: I want you to go to him at dusk and talk to him.

古文：光不答，乃投札与之，口授曰： 君房足下：位至鼎足，甚善。
现代文：严光不答话，就把纸笔给来人，自己口说道： 君房先生，做了三公，很好。
English: Yan Guang didn't answer, so he gave the pen and paper to the caller and said with his own mouth: Mr. Kim Fang, you did the Three Kings, very good.

古文：怀仁辅义天下悦，阿谀顺旨要领绝。 霸得书，封奏之。
现代文：希望你能怀着善心，辅以道义，让天下人高兴，如果阿谀奉承，顺着旨意办事就会遭杀身之祸。 
English: I hope you can lead a virtuous life, supported by morality, to make the world happy. If you flatter others and do as you are told, you will be killed.

古文：帝笑曰： 狂奴故态也。 
现代文：侯霸看了信，密封送给皇上。皇帝笑道： 真是狂奴的老样子。 
English: Houba read the letter and sealed it and sent it to the emperor. The emperor laughed and said, "This is the old look of a mad slave."

古文：车驾即日幸其馆。
现代文：于是驾着车马上到宾馆去。
English: So I drove straight to the hotel.

古文：光卧不起，帝即其卧所，抚光腹曰： 咄咄子陵，不可相助为理邪？ 
现代文：这时严光还睡着没有起来，皇帝走到床边。摸着他的肚子道： 唉呀！子陵，就不能帮我治理国家吗？ 
English: At this time, Yan Guang was still asleep and did not get up, the emperor walked to the bedside. Touching his stomach, he said: Alas! Ziling, can't you help me govern the country?

古文：光又眠不应，良久，乃张目熟视，曰： 昔唐尧著德，巢父洗耳。
现代文：严光还是睡着不吱声，过了好久，才睁开眼睛盯着皇帝，说道： 古时唐尧很有德行，想把帝位让给巢父，巢父听完洗了自己的耳朵。
English: Yan Guang was still sound asleep, and it took a long time before he opened his eyes and stared at the emperor, saying: In ancient times, Tang Xuan was very virtuous and wanted to give up the throne to his father-in-law. The father-in-law washed his ears after listening.

古文：士故有志，何至相迫乎！ 
现代文：读书人都各有志向，何必强迫人家！ 
English: Readers all have their own aspirations, so why force them?

古文：帝曰： 子陵，我竟不能下汝邪？ 
现代文：皇帝又说： 子陵，我竟不能使你屈就吗？ 
English: The emperor said, "Son of a bitch, can't I make you bend over?

古文：于是升舆叹息而去。
现代文：于是坐上车子叹息着走了。
English: So he got in his car and drove away, sighing.

古文：复引光入，论道旧故，相对累日。
现代文：另一次，皇帝又请严光进来，和他谈论过去的事，两人相对讲了几天。
English: On another occasion, the emperor invited Yan Guang to come in and talk to him about the past, and the two talked for a few days.

古文：帝从容问光曰： 朕何如昔时？ 
现代文：皇帝从容不迫地对严光道： 我比从前怎么样？ 
English: The emperor calmly said to Yan Guang: How am I compared to before?

古文：对曰： 陛下差增于往。 
现代文：答道 ：你比过去胖了一点。 
English: Answer: You are a little fatter than before.

古文：因共偃卧，光以足加帝腹上。
现代文：于是一起睡觉，严光把脚放在光武的肚子上。
English: So they slept together, and Yan Guang put his foot on Guangwu's stomach.

古文：明日，太史奏客星犯御坐甚急。
现代文：第二天，太史报告，天上有客星侵犯帝座，情况很紧急。
English: The next day, Tai Shi reported that there was a guest star in the sky encroaching on the imperial throne, and the situation was very urgent.

古文：帝笑曰： 朕故人严子陵共卧耳。 
现代文：皇帝笑着说： 我和老朋友严子陵一同睡觉哩！ 
English: The emperor smiled and said, "I sleep with my old friend Yan Zirong!"

古文：除为谏议大夫，不屈，乃耕于富春山，后人名其钓处为严陵濑焉。
现代文：光武帝拜严光作谏议大夫，严光不做，于是在富春山种田。后人把严光钓鱼的地方叫作严陵濑。
English: Emperor Guangwu worshiped Yan Guang as a wise man, but Yan Guang did not, so he farmed in Fuchun Mountain. Later generations called Yan Guang's fishing place Yanling.

古文：建武十七年，复特征，不至。
现代文：建武十七年，又特地派人去请严光，仍不肯出来。
English: In the seventeenth year of Jianwu, they sent someone specially to invite Yan Guang, but he still refused to come out.

古文：年八十，终于家。
现代文：严光活到八十岁，死在家里。
English: On the 15th of this month, he died without illness, and scholars believe that he was a man who understood the fate of the world.

古文：井丹字大春，扶风郿人也。
现代文：井丹传，井丹字大春，扶风人。
English: Ying Tan Chuan, Ying Tan Zi Da Chun, Fu Feng Ren.

古文：少受业太学，通《五经》，善谈论，故京师为之语曰： 《五经》纷纶井大春。 
现代文：少时在太学读书，通晓《五经》，善于谈论，所以京师的人有这么说法 ：五经纷纶井大春。 
English: When he was young, he studied in Taishu, was familiar with the "Five Classics" and was good at talking about them, so the people in the Beijing division have this saying: "Five Classics are all the same."

古文：性清高，未尝修刺修人。
现代文：性清高，从来没用名片问候过别人。
English: I'm very open-minded, and I've never used a business card to greet someone.

古文：建武末，沛王辅等五王居北宫，皆好宾客，更遣请丹，不能致。
现代文：建武末年，沛王刘辅等五王住在北宫，都好宾客，再次派人请井丹，不能请来。
English: At the end of the Jianwu period, the five kings including Pei Wang and Liu Fu lived in the North Palace. They were all good guests. They sent someone to invite Yidan again, but he couldn't come.

古文：信阳侯阴就，光烈皇后弟也，以外戚贵盛，乃诡说五王，求钱千万，约能致丹，而别使人要劫之。
现代文：信阳侯阴就，光烈皇后的弟弟，凭借外戚贵盛的地位，于是骗说五王，求用千万钱，相约能把井丹请来，而另外使人在半路抢劫他。
English: Xinyang Houyin, the younger brother of the glorious empress, by virtue of his mother's noble status, then lied to the five kings, asked for tens of thousands of money, promised to invite Jingdan, and in addition sent people to rob him halfway.

古文：丹不得已，既至，就故为设麦饭葱叶之食。丹推去之，曰： 以君侯能供甘旨，故来相过，何其薄乎？ 
现代文：井丹不得已，已经来到，阴就故意准备麦饭葱叶等食物，井丹推去不就，说道： 认为君侯能够供给甘美的食物，所以来访，怎么这样菲薄呢？ 
English: Yidan had no choice, he had already come, Yin deliberately prepared food such as wheat rice and green onion leaves, Yidan could not push him away, saying: He thought that the prince could provide sweet food, so he came to visit, how could he be so cheap?

古文：更置盛馔，乃食。
现代文：于是另设盛馔，才进食。
English: As a result, a separate serving table was set up for eating.

古文：及就起，左右进辇。丹笑曰： 吾闻桀驾人车，岂此邪？ 
现代文：等到阴就起身，左右的人推进一辇车，井丹笑道： 我听说夏桀曾用人驾车，难道就是这个吗？ 
English: When it got dark, they got up, and the people on either side of them pushed the cart forward. Jindan laughed and said, "I heard that Xia Yao used to have someone drive the cart, is this it?"

古文：坐中皆失色。
现代文：坐中宾客都变了颜色。
English: The guests changed colour as they sat down.

古文：就不得已而令去辇。
现代文：阴就不得已而叫人把辇车换掉。
English: Yin had no choice but to have the forklift truck replaced.

古文：自是隐闭，不关人事，以寿终。
现代文：自此井丹隐居闭门不与人们交往，以寿终。
English: From then on, Yidan lived in seclusion behind closed doors, not interacting with people, and died.

古文：梁鸿字伯鸾，扶风平陵人也。
现代文：梁鸿传，梁鸿字伯鸾，扶风平陵人。
English: Liang Hongzhuan, Liang Hongzhi Bo Xuan, Fu Feng Pingling Ren.

古文：父让，王莽时为城门校尉，封脩远伯，使奉少昊后，寓于北地而卒。
现代文：父亲梁让，王莽时做过守城的小官，封为远伯，王莽叫他祭祀少昊帝，寄居在北地而死去。
English: His father, Liang Zhan, had been a minor official guarding the city at the time of Wang Mang, and was given the title of distant uncle. Wang Mang asked him to make a sacrifice to Emperor Xiao Hao, sojourn in the north, and die.

古文：鸿时尚幼，以遭乱世，因卷席而葬。
现代文：梁鸿当时年幼，因遭乱世，就卷着席子把父亲草草埋葬。
English: At that time, Liang Hong was a young boy. Due to the troubled times, he rolled up the mat and buried his father.

古文：后受业太学，家贫而尚节介，博览无不通，而不为章句。
现代文：后来，梁鸿进入太学学习，因家贫，很节俭。他看了很多书，很精通，但不喜欢写文章。
English: Later, Liang Hong went to Taiwan to study. Due to his family's poverty, he was very frugal. He read a lot of books and was very proficient, but he did not like to write articles.

古文：学毕，乃牧豕于上林宛中。
现代文：学习之后，就在上林苑里放猪。
English: After studying, he released pigs in Shanglinyuan.

古文：曾误遗火，延及它舍。鸿乃寻访烧者，问所去失，悉以豕偿之。
现代文：有一次，不慎失火，烧掉别人的房子，梁鸿找到被烧的人家，了解损失情况，全部用猪作抵偿。
English: Once, when there was an accidental fire and someone else's house was burned, Liang Hong found the burned person's house, learned about the loss situation, and used pigs to compensate for everything.

古文：其主犹以为少。
现代文：那家主人还嫌少。
English: The owner of that house is not very popular.

古文：鸿曰： 无它财，愿以身居作。 
现代文：梁鸿说 ：我再无别的财产，愿以自己的劳动作补偿。 
English: Liang Hong said: I have no other property, I am willing to compensate with my own labor.

古文：主人许之。
现代文：主人同意了。
English: The owner agreed.

古文：因为执勤，不懈朝夕。
现代文：于是早晚劳动很卖力。
English: As a result, I had to work very hard in the morning and evening.

古文：邻家耆老见鸿非恒人，乃共责让主人，而称鸿长者。于是始敬异焉，悉还其豕。
现代文：邻居老翁看出梁鸿不是一般人，便一起责备那家主人，而称梁鸿为长者，从此主人才很敬重梁鸿，把他的猪全部退还。
English: Seeing that Liang Hong was not an ordinary person, the old man of the neighborhood together reproached the owner of the house and called Liang Hong an elder. From then on, the owner respected Liang Hong and returned all his pigs.

古文：鸿不受而去，归乡里。
现代文：梁鸿不肯接受，回乡去了。
English: Liang Hong refused to accept it and went back to his hometown.

古文：势家慕其高节，多欲女之，鸿并绝不娶。
现代文：有些富豪人家羡慕梁鸿高尚的品德，多想把女儿嫁给他，都被梁鸿谢绝了。
English: Some rich people envied Liang Hong's noble character and wanted to marry their daughters to him, but Liang Hong refused.

古文：同县孟氏有女，状肥丑而黑，力举石臼，择对不嫁，至年三十。
现代文：同县孟家有位姑娘，体胖又丑又黑，力能举起石臼，选择对象不中意，三十岁还未出嫁。
English: There is a girl in the Meng family in the same county. She is fat, ugly and black. She can lift a millstone. She is not happy with her choice of partner. She is still unmarried at the age of thirty.

古文：父母问其故。女曰： 欲得贤如梁伯鸾者。 
现代文：父亲问其缘故，女儿说： 想找一个像梁伯鸾那样的人。 
English: When the father asked the reason, the daughter said, "I want to find someone like Liang Bohua."

古文：鸿闻而娉之。
现代文：梁鸿听说就去下聘礼。
English: When Liang Hong heard about it, he went to pay the bride price.

古文：女求作布衣、麻屦，织作筐缉绩之具。
现代文：女方要求用布衣、麻鞋、线筐、纺绩等工具作嫁妆。
English: The woman demanded that the dowry be made of cloth, hemp shoes, thread baskets, spinning rods and other tools.

古文：及嫁，始以装饰入门。
现代文：出嫁时，梳妆打扮进门。
English: When you get married, dress up and walk through the door.

古文：七日而鸿不答。
现代文：过了七天，梁鸿不和妻子谈话。
English: After seven days, Liang Hong did not talk to his wife.

古文：妻乃跪床下请曰： 窃闻夫子高义，简斥数妇，妾亦偃蹇数夫矣。
现代文：妻子跪在床前说道： 我听说你品德高尚，选择对象很严，几位女子你都未同意，我也挑选过好几个人。
English: My wife knelt in front of the bed and said: I heard that you have a high moral character and that you are very strict when choosing a partner. You did not agree with several women, and I also chose several people.

古文：今而见择，敢不请罪。 
现代文：现在被你选上了，有什么过失请你明说，我好改正。 
English: Now that you have been elected, please let me know if there is any fault, so that I can correct it.

古文：鸿曰： 吾欲裘褐之人，可与俱隐深山者尔。
现代文：梁鸿说 ：我想找一个穿着朴素的人，一同到深山里隐居。
English: Liang Hong said, "I want to find a plain-clothed person to live in seclusion deep in the mountains with."

古文：今乃衣绮缟，傅粉墨，岂鸿所愿哉？ 
现代文：现在你穿着好衣裳，涂上脂粉，难道是我所希望的人？ 
English: Now that you're all dressed up and powdered, are you the person I hoped you'd be?

古文：妻曰： 以观夫子之志耳。妾自有隐居之服。 
现代文：妻说： 我是故意考验你的，我还有隐居的衣服。 
English: My wife said: "I'm testing you on purpose, I still have my cloak.

古文：乃更为椎髻，着布衣，操作而前。
现代文：于是把头发改成椎髻，穿上布衣，全身劳动打扮，走上前来。
English: So he changed his hair into a topknot, put on a cloth robe, worked his whole body to get dressed, and came forward.

古文：鸿大喜曰： 此真梁鸿妻也。
现代文：梁鸿大喜道： 这才真是梁鸿的老婆呀！
English: Liang Hong Da Xi said: This is really Liang Hong's wife!

古文：能奉我矣！ 
现代文：能和我过一辈子了！ 
English: You can spend the rest of your life with me!

古文：字之曰德曜，名孟光。
现代文：于是替她取字叫德曜，名孟光。
English: So he chose a name for her and called her Deyou, Mengguang.

古文：居有顷，妻曰： 常闻夫子欲隐居避患，今何为默默？
现代文：过了不久，妻子说： 常听说您想隐居避患，现在为什么默默不言，难道想向权势低头吗？ 
English: After a short while, his wife said: "I have often heard that you want to live in seclusion to avoid danger. Why are you silent now? Do you want to bow to power?

古文：无乃欲低头就之乎？ 
现代文：梁鸿说 ：你讲得很对。 
English: Liang Hong said: You are quite right.

古文：鸿曰： 诺。 乃共入霸陵山中，以耕织为业，咏《诗》、《书》，弹琴以自娱。
现代文：于是一同进入霸陵山中，以耕田织布为业。
English: So they went into the mountains of Bailing together, working in the fields and weaving cloth.

古文：仰慕前世高士，而为四皓以来二十四人作颂。
现代文：平日读诗书、弹琴作为消遣。常常羡慕前辈那些高雅的人，替商山四皓以后的二十四位贤者写赞歌。
English: On weekdays, he reads poetry and plays the piano as a pastime. He often envies the elegant people of his predecessors and writes songs of praise for the twenty-four sages after the Shangshan Four Masters.

古文：因东出关，过京师，作《五噫之歌》曰： 陟彼北芒兮，噫！顾览帝京兮，噫！宫室崔嵬兮，噫！人之劬劳兮，噫！
现代文：有一天，顺着东门出去，经过京城，写了一首《五噫之歌》道 ：攀登北芒山呀，看到帝京很华丽，宫室高耸入云，人生之辛劳呀，无穷又无尽。 
English: One day, I went out along the East Gate, passing through the capital city, and wrote a "Song of the Five Storks," saying: "Climbing the Beimang Mountain, seeing the magnificent imperial capital, the palace towering into the clouds, the toil of life, endless and endless."

古文：辽辽未央兮，噫！ 肃宗闻而非之，求鸿不得。
现代文：肃宗听了很不以为然，派人去找梁鸿，却未找到。
English: Su Zong did not think much of it and sent someone to look for Liang Hong, but they did not find him.

古文：乃易姓运期，名耀，字侯光，与妻子居齐鲁之间。
现代文：于是梁鸿就改姓为运期，名耀，字侯光，与妻子一道住在齐鲁一带地方。
English: As a result, Liang Hong changed his surname to "Yun Shih" (运期), "Ning Yao" (名耀) and "Zi Hou Guang" (字侯光), and lived with his wife in the Qilu area.

古文：有顷，又去适吴。将行，作诗曰：逝旧帮兮遐征，将遥集兮东南。心惙怛兮伤悴，志菲菲兮升降。
现代文：过了不久，又到吴国去，将出发了，写首诗道： 经过旧国奔远方，前途栖止想东南，心慌意乱多憔悴，志气菲菲升复降。
English: After a short while, he went to Wuzhong again and was about to set off, writing a poem: After passing through the old country, he ran far away, stopped thinking about the future in the southeast, his mind was confused, and his morale rose, fell, and rose again.

古文：欲乘策兮纵迈，疾吾俗兮作谗。
现代文：想骑骏马去驰骋，可恨谗言把人伤。
English: If you want to go galloping on a fine horse, it is hateful to hurt people with harsh words.

古文：竞举枉兮措直，咸先佞兮唌唌。
现代文：竟举小人弃贤良，利口佞舌先嚷嚷。
English: The villain abandons the virtuous, and the clever one is the first to shout.

古文：固靡惭兮独建，冀异州兮尚贤。
现代文：伯鸾无惭身独立，可能伯乐居他乡。
English: Hokkien people are not ashamed to be independent, and it is possible for Hokkien people to live in other places.

古文：聊逍遥兮遨嬉，缵仲尼兮周流。
现代文：暂时逍遥复何求，学习孔子去周游。
English: Temporarily indulge in what you want, learn Confucius to travel around.

古文：倘云睹兮我悦，遂舍车兮即浮。
现代文：如能见贤我心悦，宁弃车马改乘舟。
English: If I can see the virtuous and my heart is pleased, I would rather abandon the car and horse and take the boat.

古文：过季札兮延陵，求鲁连兮海隅。
现代文：到了延陵求季札，到了海隅见鲁连。
English: If you go to Yanling, you can ask for a season ticket. If you go to the seaside, you can see Lulian.

古文：虽不察兮光貌，幸神灵兮与休。
现代文：即使先贤找不到，遇到神灵也心甘。
English: Even if you can't find the sages, you're welcome to encounter the gods.

古文：惟季春兮华阜，麦含英兮方秀。
现代文：阳春三月烟景美，麦秀青青正含苞。
English: Yangchun March smoky beauty, wheat show Qingqing is containing cadmium.

古文：哀茂时兮逾迈，愍芳香兮日臭。
现代文：好景不常光阴迈，芳香转眼变腥臊。
English: The good times are fleeting, and the aroma quickly turns sour.

古文：悼吾心兮不获，长委结兮焉究！
现代文：我心伤悲不痛快，愁肠百结多烦忧。
English: My heart is sad and sorrowful, and my soul is troubled.

古文：口嚣嚣兮余讪，嗟恇恇兮谁留？
现代文：众口嚣嚣不停叫，何处藏身实难求。 
English: With the constant clamor, it's hard to know where to hide.

古文：遂至吴，依大家皋伯通，居庑下，为人赁舂。
现代文：于是到了吴地，找到一家富豪名叫皋伯通的，住在屋檐下，替人家舂米。
English: So when he arrived in Wuxi, he found a rich family named Zibo Tong, who lived under the same roof and grew rice for others.

古文：每归，妻为具食，不敢于鸿前仰视，举案齐眉。
现代文：每天回家，妻子替他做好饭，不敢抬着眼看丈夫，常把盘子举到眉毛边。
English: Every day when he comes home, his wife prepares the meal for him. She does not dare to look up at her husband and often raises the plate to her eyebrows.

古文：伯通察而异之，曰： 彼佣能使其妻敬之如此，非凡人也。 
现代文：伯通见了觉得奇怪，便说： 这个雇工能使老婆这样敬重，决不是一般的人。 
English: When Bertone saw this, he was surprised and said, "This hired hand is no ordinary man to treat his wife with such respect.

古文：乃方舍之于家。
现代文：于是才让他住在家里。
English: So they let him live at home.

古文：鸿潜闭著书十余篇。
现代文：梁鸿关起门来写了十多篇文章。
English: Liang Hong wrote more than ten articles behind closed doors.

古文：疾且困，告主人曰： 昔延陵季子葬子于嬴博之间，不归乡里，慎勿令我子持丧归去。 
现代文：后来病了十分困倦，便告诉主人道： 从前延陵季子把儿子埋在嬴博之间，没有到乡里，我死后，请不要让我儿子扶着灵柩回去。 
English: Later, very tired and ill, he told his master: Once upon a time, Yanling Qizi buried his son between Zibo and did not go to the countryside. When I die, please don't let my son carry the coffin back.

古文：及卒，伯通等为求葬地于吴要离冢傍。咸曰： 要离烈士，而伯鸾清高，可令相近。 
现代文：等到梁鸿死后，伯通等人把他埋在吴国要离的坟旁，都说： 要离是位烈士，而梁伯鸾很清高，可让他们很接近。 
English: After Liang Hong's death, Bertone and others buried him next to the grave that Wu Guotong wanted to leave. They all said: If you want to leave, you must be a martyr, but Liang Boqi is very clear and tall, so they can be very close.

古文：葬毕，妻子归扶风。
现代文：埋葬完毕，妻子回扶风去了。
English: After the burial, his wife went back to Fufeng.

古文：初，鸿友人京兆高恢，少好《老子》，隐于华阴山中。
现代文：起初，梁鸿的朋友京兆人高恢，年轻时喜欢读《老子》，隐居在华阴山中。
English: At the beginning, Liang Hong's friend, Jing Zhao, was a high-ranking person. When he was young, he liked to read "Lao Zi" and lived in seclusion in Huayin Mountain.

古文：及鸿东游思恢，作诗曰： 鸟嘤嘤兮友之期，念高子兮仆怀思，相念恢兮集兹。 
现代文：等到梁鸿东游时想到高恢，写诗道： 鸟嘤嘤叫着找朋友，我也想到高恢，希望他能到此来。 两人再没见过面。
English: When Liang Hong traveled to the East, he thought of Gao Wei and wrote a poem: Birds chirp to find friends, I also thought of Gao Wei and hoped he would come here. The two never met again.

古文：二人遂不复相见。
现代文：高恢也是高傲的人，一辈子未作过官。
English: Gao Wei is also a proud person, who has never been an official in his entire life.

古文：恢亦高抗，终身不仕。高凤字文通，南阳叶人也。
现代文：高凤传，高凤字文通，南阳叶人。
English: Gao Feng Chuan, Gao Feng Zi Wen Tong, Nanyang Ye Ren.

古文：少为书生，家以农亩为业，而专精诵读，昼夜不息。
现代文：少时做学生，家中以种田为业，而高凤专精诵读，昼夜不休息。
English: He was a student when he was young, and his family was engaged in farming, while Gao Feng specialized in reading, and did not rest day and night.

古文：妻尝之田，曝麦于庭，令凤护鸡。
现代文：妻子曾经到田中去劳动，晒了麦子在庭院，叫高凤护鸡。
English: My wife once went to work in Tanaka, and after drying the wheat in the courtyard, she called Gao Feng to take care of the chickens.

古文：时天暴雨，而凤持竿诵经，不觉潦水流麦。
现代文：这时天下暴雨，而高凤手持竹竿，口诵经书，不觉雨水流到麦子里。
English: At this time, it was raining heavily, and Gao Feng was holding a bamboo pole and reciting scriptures. Unconsciously, rainwater flowed into the wheat.

古文：妻还怪问，凤方悟之。
现代文：妻子回来感到奇怪，问他，他才觉悟。
English: When his wife returned, she was surprised. She asked him about it, and he came to his senses.

古文：其后遂为名儒，乃教授于西唐山中。
现代文：后来就成了名儒，在西唐山中教授门徒。
English: Later, he became a famous Confucian scholar, teaching disciples in the Western Tang Mountains.

古文：邻里有争财者，持兵而斗，凤往解之，不已，乃脱巾叩头，固请曰： 仁义逊让，奈何弃之！ 
现代文：邻里有争财产的，拿着兵器相斗，高凤去解劝，不得已，便脱去头巾叩头，坚决请求道： 仁义逊让，怎么都忘了呢？ 
English: Neighbors in a property dispute fought each other with weapons, Gao Feng went to dissuade them, and as a last resort, he took off his headscarf and bowed his head, pleading resolutely, "Ren Yixiong, why have you forgotten?

古文：于是争者怀感，投兵谢罪。
现代文：于是争斗者心受感动，放下武器向他谢罪。
English: The fighter was so moved that he put down his weapon and apologized.

古文：凤年老，执志不倦，名声著闻。
现代文：高凤年老了，坚持志向不知疲倦，名声传闻很远。
English: Gao Feng is old, he tirelessly persists in his ambition, and his reputation is far away.

古文：太守连召请，恐不得免，自言本巫家，不应为吏，又诈与寡嫂讼田，遂不仕。
现代文：太守连续召请，高凤恐怕不得免，自称本是巫家，不应为吏，又假称与寡嫂为田产打官司，于是不出去做官。
English: After being repeatedly summoned by the daimyō, Gao Feng was probably forced to resign. He claimed that he was a sorcerer and should not be an official, and also pretended to sue his widowed sister-in-law for land ownership, so he did not go out to work as an official.

古文：与夫委体渊沙，鸣弦揆日者，不其远乎！ 台佟字孝威，魏郡鄴人也。隐于武安山，凿穴为居，采药自业。
现代文：自己隐身渔钓，死在家中。台佟传，台佟字孝威，魏郡邺人。隐居在武安山，凿洞为住室，采药为职业。
English: Self-concealed fishing, died at home. Taishu Zhuang, Taishu Zi Xiaowei, Wei County Yanren. Secluded in Wu'an Mountain, digging a hole as a living room, collecting medicine as a profession.

古文：建初中，州辟，不就。
现代文：建初年间，州里召他不就。
English: During the first year of construction, it was not enough for the state to call him.

古文：刺史行部，乃使从事致谒。
现代文：刺史巡视到了邺，便派从事谒见台佟。
English: When the inspectors arrived in Handan, they were sent to work in Handan.

古文：佟载病往谢。
现代文：佟载病前往致谢。
English: He went to the hospital to express his gratitude.

古文：刺史乃执贽见佟曰： 孝威居身如是，甚苦，如何？ 
现代文：刺史便拿着见面礼问佟道： 孝威居身这样，很苦，怎么办？ 
English: Sashi then took the meet-and-greet and asked: How do you deal with the fact that Xiaowei lives in such a difficult situation?

古文：佟曰： 佟幸得保终性命，存神养和。
现代文：佟说 ：我幸得保终性命，存神养和。
English: Zou said, "I am fortunate to have been able to save my life and keep my spirits up.

古文：如明使君奉宣诏书，夕惕庶事，反不苦邪？ 
现代文：像明使君奉令宣读诏书，晚上为众事操劳，反而不苦么？ 
English: Like the Ming envoy who was ordered to read out the imperial edict and worked hard at night, but not hard?

古文：遂去，隐逸，终不见。
现代文：于是离去，隐逸，始终不见了。
English: So he went away, disappeared, and never came back.

古文：韩康字伯休，一名恬休，京兆霸陵人。
现代文：韩康传，韩康字伯休，又名恬休，京兆霸陵人。
English: Han Kang Chuan, Han Kang Zi Bo Xiu, also known as Zou Xiu, was the ruler of Beijing.

古文：家世著姓。
现代文：家世很有名气。
English: His family is very famous.

古文：常采药名山，卖于长安市，口不二价，三十余年。
现代文：常到名山采药，拿到长安市上出卖，价钱常说一不二，共有三十多年。
English: He often went to famous mountains to collect medicines and sold them on the Chang'an market. The price was often said to be one-to-one, for more than 30 years.

古文：时有女子从康买药，康守价不移。
现代文：当时有位姑娘向韩康买药，康坚持原价不变。
English: At that time, a girl bought medicine from Han Kang, but he insisted on the original price.

古文：女子怒曰： 公是韩伯休那？
现代文：姑娘发脾气道 ：你是韩伯休吗？
English: The girl lost her temper and said, "Are you Han Bo Xiu?"

古文：乃不二价乎？ 
现代文：竟不卖两种价吗？ 
English: Aren't there two prices?

古文：康叹曰： 我本欲避名，今小女子皆知有我，何用药为？ 
现代文：韩康叹气道 ：我本想不让人家知道名字，如今小姑娘都知道我的名字，还卖什么药啊！ 
English: Han Kang sighed, "I originally didn't want people to know my name, but now all the little girls know my name and what kind of medicine I sell!"

古文：乃遁入霸陵山中。
现代文：于是逃到霸陵山里去了。
English: So he fled to the Baring Mountains.

古文：博士公车连征，不至。
现代文：博士公车几次请韩康，韩康不至。
English: The doctor asked Han Kang to take the bus several times, but Han Kang did not come.

古文：桓帝乃备玄纁之礼，以安车聘之。
现代文：桓帝就备了黑色绸帘之礼，用安车聘请他。
English: Emperor Huan prepared a gift of a black silk curtain and hired him with an armored car.

古文：使者奉诏造康，康不得已，乃许诺。
现代文：使者奉皇帝诏书到韩康家里，韩康没有法子，只好答应了。
English: The emissary went to Han Kang's home with the emperor's edict. Han Kang had no choice but to agree.

古文：辞安车，自乘柴车，冒晨先使者发。
现代文：但是不坐安车，自己坐着柴车，一清早，在使者动身之前就出发了。
English: But he didn't take an armored car, he took a fire truck and set out early in the morning, before the envoy left.

古文：至亭，亭长以韩征君当过，方发人牛修道桥。
现代文：到了亭边，亭长知道韩徵君将从这里经过，于是派人牵牛修理道路桥梁。
English: When they arrived at the pavilion, the pavilion manager knew that Han Zhengjun would be passing by, so he sent someone to take the cow to repair the road and bridge.

古文：及见康柴车幅巾，以为田叟也，使夺其牛。
现代文：忽然看见韩康坐着柴车戴着幅巾到来，以为他是一般种田的老头，便叫人将牛夺走。
English: He suddenly saw Han Kang coming in a cart wearing a scarf and thought he was an old farmer, so he asked someone to take the cow away.

古文：康即释驾与之。
现代文：韩康就解开车前的牛给他。
English: Han Kang gave him the cow before driving away.

古文：有顷，使者至，知夺牛翁乃征君也。
现代文：过了不久，官使到来，发现被夺牛的老人正是徵君。
English: After a short while, the official arrived and found that the old man who had been robbed of his cattle was the one who was recruiting.

古文：使者欲奏杀亭长。
现代文：使者想奏明皇上杀掉亭长。
English: The messenger wanted to tell the emperor to kill the prince.

古文：康曰： 此自老子与之，亭长何罪！ 
现代文：韩康说 ：这头牛是我自己给他的，亭长有什么罪？ 
English: Han Kang said, "I gave him this cow myself. What is the fault of the innkeeper?"

古文：乃止。
现代文：使者才罢休。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：康因中道逃遁，以寿终。
现代文：韩康于是半路上逃走了，后来以高寿无疾而终。
English: Han Kang then ran away halfway, and later died of old age.

古文：矫慎字仲彦，扶风茂陵人也。
现代文：矫慎传，矫慎字仲彦，扶风茂陵人。
English: Jiao Zhen Chuan, Jiao Zhen Zi Nakahiko, Fu Feng Murying Ren.

古文：少好黄、老，隐遁山谷，因穴为室，仰慕松、乔导引之术。
现代文：少时好黄帝、老子之学，隐居山谷，就着山洞做房子，仰慕松、乔导引之术。
English: When he was young, he liked the teachings of Huangdi and Laozi, lived in seclusion in a valley, built a house in a cave, and admired the art of guiding pine trees and birds.

古文：与马融、苏章乡里并时，融以才博显名，章以廉直称，然皆推先于慎。
现代文：与马融、苏章乡里并时，马融以才博著名，苏章以廉直著称，但都推先于矫慎。
English: At the same time as Ma Rong and Su Zhang Township, Ma Rong is famous for his talent, and Su Zhang is famous for his integrity, but both are ahead of prudence.

古文：汝南吴苍甚重之，因遗书以观其志曰：仲彦足下：勤处隐约，虽乘云行泥，栖宿不同，每有西风，何尝不叹！
现代文：汝南吴苍很看重他。于是送信以观其志道 ：仲彦足下：勤处隐约，虽乘云行泥，栖宿不同，每逢西风吹来，何尝不叹息！
English: Yunan Wu Cang valued him very much. So he sent a message to observe his aspiration: Nakahiko Foot: The office is vague, although it is cloudy and muddy, the accommodation is different, every time the west wind blows, why not sigh!

古文：盖闻黄、老之言，乘虚入冥，藏身远遁，亦有理国养人，施于为政。
现代文：听说黄、老之言，乘虚入冥，藏身远遁，也有治国养民，在政治方面有所作为。
English: It is said that Huang and Lao Zi's words, taking advantage of the void into the darkness, hiding far away, but also governing the country and supporting the people, have made a difference in politics.

古文：至如登山绝迹，神不著其证，人不睹其验。
现代文：至如登山绝迹，神不著其证，人不见其效验。
English: Just as mountaineering is extinct, God does not bear witness to it, and people do not see its effects.

古文：吾欲先生从其可者，于意何如？
现代文：我想先生从其可者，于意怎样呢？
English: I think if you can't get what you want, what's the point?

古文：昔伊尹不怀道以待尧、舜之君。
现代文：从前伊尹不怀道以待尧舜之君。
English: Once upon a time, Yi Yin did not hesitate to wait for the crown prince.

古文：方今明明，四海开辟，巢、许无为箕山，夷、齐悔入首阳。
现代文：当今明明之世，四海开辟，巢、许无为于箕山，夷、齐悔入首阳山。
English: In today's bright world, the four seas have been opened up, the nest, the hare and the rooster have nothing to do with Shaoshan, and the eagle and the rooster have entered the Shouyang Mountain.

古文：足下审能骑龙弄凤，翔嬉云间者，亦非狐兔燕雀所敢谋也。
现代文：足下就是能够骑龙弄凤，翔嬉在云间的，也不是狐兔燕雀所敢想象得到的。 
English: To be able to ride a dragon with a phoenix, to fly joyfully among the clouds, is not something that foxes, rabbits, and sparrows dare to imagine.

古文：慎不答。
现代文：矫慎不作回答。
English: Prudence does not answer.

古文：年七十余，竟不肯娶。后忽归家，自言死日，及期果卒。
现代文：年七十多，竟不肯娶妻，后来忽然回家，自己说出将死之日，到期果然死去。
English: More than seventy years old, he refused to marry his wife, and then suddenly came home and said that he was going to die, and he did die.

古文：后人有见慎于敦煌者，故前世异之，或云神仙焉。
现代文：后来有人看见矫慎在敦煌，所以前世异之，有人说他是神仙。
English: Later, some people saw Kaishen in Dunhuang, so his previous life was different. Some people said he was a god.

古文：慎同郡马瑶，隐于山，以兔罝为事。
现代文：矫慎同郡人马瑶，隐居在山，以捕兔为业。
English: A prudent county resident, Ma Jun, lives in seclusion in the mountains and makes a living by trapping rabbits.

古文：所居俗化，百姓美之，号马牧先生焉。
现代文：所居之地俗化，百姓赞美他，叫马牧先生。
English: The place where he lived was secularized, and the people praised him and called him Mr. Ma Mu.

古文：戴良字叔鸾，汝南慎阳人也。
现代文：戴良传，戴良字叔鸾，汝南慎阳人。
English: Dai Liang Chuan, Dai Liang Zi Shuxuan, Runan Shenyang Ren.

古文：曾祖父遵，字子高，平帝时，为侍御史。
现代文：曾祖父戴遵，字子高，平帝时，做侍御史。
English: His great-grandfather, Dai Zun, was a high-ranking courtier who served Emperor Ping.

古文：王莽篡位，称病归乡里。家富，好给施，尚侠气，食客常三四百人。
现代文：王莽篡位，称病回乡里，家中富有，好施舍，尚侠气，食客常三四百人。
English: Wang Mang usurped the throne, claimed to be ill and returned to his hometown. His family was rich, charitable, and chivalrous. There were often three or four hundred diners.

古文：时人为之语曰： 关东大豪戴子高。 
现代文：当时人们这样讲 ：关东大豪戴子高。 
English: At the time, people said things like: "Kanto University students are arrogant."

古文：良少诞节，母憙驴鸣，良常学之，以娱乐焉。
现代文：戴良少诞节，母亲作驴叫，良常学它以娱乐。
English: On the Children's Day of Dai Liang, his mother made a donkey bray, and he often learned it for entertainment.

古文：及母卒，兄伯鸾居庐啜粥，非礼不行，良独食肉饮酒，哀至乃哭，而二人俱有毁容。
现代文：等母死后，兄伯鸾居庐喝粥，非礼不行，良却吃肉饮酒，哀至而哭，而二人都消瘦了。
English: After his mother's death, his elder brother Bo Xun drank porridge, which was not allowed, but Liang ate meat and drank alcohol, and wept bitterly, and both of them lost weight.

古文：或问良曰： 子之居丧，礼乎？ 
现代文：有人问戴良： 你居丧，合礼么？ 
English: Someone asked Dai Liang: Are you in mourning, why are you bowing?

古文：良曰： 然。
现代文：良说： 对。
English: Liang said: That's right.

古文：礼所以制情佚也。情苟不佚，何礼之论！
现代文：礼是为了制情佚，情如果不佚，谈什么礼？
English: Etiquette is to control emotions, if emotions are not polite, what is etiquette?

古文：夫食旨不甘，故致毁容之实。若味不存口，食之可也。 
现代文：吃美味不觉其甘，所以容貌毁了，如果味不存口，吃了也可。 
English: Eating delicious does not feel its sweetness, so the appearance is ruined. If the taste is not palatable, it can also be eaten.

古文：论者不能夺之。
现代文：论者不能说服他。
English: The critics couldn't convince him.

古文：良才既高达，而论议尚奇，多骇流俗。
现代文：戴良才既高达，而论议奇特，多使流俗惊讶。
English: Dai Liangcai is not only high, but the discussion is peculiar, which mostly surprises the vulgar.

古文：同郡谢季孝问曰： 子自视天下孰可为比？ 
现代文：同郡谢季孝问道 ：你认为天下人谁可相比？ 
English: He asked Xie Jitiao: Who do you think can be compared to the best in the world?

古文：良曰： 我若仲尼长东鲁，大禹出西羌，独步天下，谁与为偶！ 
现代文：良说： 我像孔子生在鲁国，大禹出自西羌，独步于天下，谁与我为偶！ 
English: Liang said, "I am like Confucius, who was born in the State of Lu, and Dayu, who was born in the State of Xi'an, who is unique in the world.

古文：举孝廉，不就。
现代文：戴良被举为孝廉，不就。
English: It's not enough to be a filial son.

古文：再辟司空府，弥年不到，州郡迫之，乃遁辞诣府，悉将妻子，既行在道，因逃入江夏山中。
现代文：再召司空府，一年不到，州郡催他，才用谦词到府，送走妻子，便逃入江夏山中。优游不仕，以寿终。
English: He was summoned to Siku Prefecture again, but less than a year later, the prefectural government urged him to come to the prefectural government with a humble speech, send his wife away, and then escape into the mountains of Jiangxia. He did not succeed, and ended his life.

古文：优游不仕，以寿终。初，良五女并贤，每有求姻，辄便许嫁，疏裳布被、竹笥木屐以遣之。五女能遵其训，皆有隐者之风焉。
现代文：起初，戴良五个女儿都贤惠，每有求姻的，就许嫁，用疏裳布被、竹笥木屐作陪送。五个女儿能遵父训，都有隐士的风度。
English: At the beginning, Dai Liang's five daughters were all virtuous. Whenever there was a suitor, they promised to marry him, and accompanied him with a shawl and a bamboo cane. The five daughters were able to follow their father's teachings, and they all had the demeanor of a hermit.

古文：法真字高卿，扶风眉阝人，南郡太守雄之子也。
现代文：法真传，法真字高卿，扶风人，南郡太守法雄的儿子。
English: Faxin Chuan, Faxin Zi Gaoqing, Fu Feng Ren, the son of Nanshun Taishou Faxiong.

古文：好学而无常家，博通内外图典，为关西大儒。
现代文：好学而不固定某一家，博通内外经典，是关西的大儒家。
English: An avid learner who doesn't stick to one school, he reads widely and is a great Confucian in Kansai.

古文：弟子自远方至者，陈留范冉等数百人。
现代文：弟子从远方来的，有陈留范冉等数百人。
English: Disciples came from far away, including hundreds of people such as Chen Ruifan.

古文：性恬静寡欲，不交人间事。
现代文：法真性恬静寡欲，不大与闻人间事。
English: The nature of truthfulness is quiet and modest, and it is not easy to hear about people's affairs.

古文：太守请见之，真乃幅巾诣谒。
现代文：太守请见他，法真便幅巾到来。
English: The daimyo asked to see him, and Fazhen arrived in a hurry.

古文：太守曰： 昔鲁哀公虽为不肖，而仲尼称臣。
现代文：太守说： 从前鲁哀公虽不贤，但仲尼仍称臣。
English: The daimyō said, "In the past, although Lu Aiko was not virtuous, Nakani still praised him as a vassal.

古文：太守虚薄，欲以功曹相屈，光赞本朝，何如？ 
现代文：太守虚薄，想请你出任功曹，光赞本朝。怎么样？ 
English: I am too weak to be a guardian, but I would like to ask you to serve as a gong cao and praise this morning. How about it?

古文：真曰： 以明府见待有礼，故敢自同宾末。
现代文：法真说： 因为明府这样待我以礼，所以敢自同宾客之末。
English: Fa Zhen said: Because the Ming government treated me with such courtesy, I dared to be late with the guests.

古文：若欲吏之，真将在北山之北，南山之南矣。 
现代文：如想用我为吏，我将在北山之北，南山之南了。 
English: If you want to use me as an official, I will be north of the North Mountain and south of the South Mountain.

古文：太守然，不敢复言。
现代文：太守觉得奇异，不敢再说了。
English: The Empress Dowager found it strange and did not dare to say any more.

古文：辟公府，举贤良，皆不就。
现代文：辟公府，举贤良，法真都不就。
English: It is not enough to set up a public office, promote the virtuous, and uphold the law.

古文：同郡田弱荐真曰： 处士法真，体兼四业，学穷典奥，幽居恬泊，乐以忘忧。将蹈老氏之高踪，不为玄纁屈也。
现代文：同郡田弱荐法真道： 处士法真，精通诗、书、礼、乐四业，学问尽及典奥，出幽深山，恬泊自娱，乐以忘忧，将追随老子的高踪，不被玄纟熏之礼所屈服。
English: The same Korita weakly recommended the Law of Truth: Law of Truth, proficient in poetry, books, etiquette, and music four careers, complete and profound knowledge, out of the deep mountains, stay and entertain yourself, enjoy to forget worries, will follow the high trail of Laozi, and will not be bowed down by the etiquette of the occult.

古文：臣愿圣朝就加衮职，必能唱《清庙》之歌，致来仪之凤矣。 
现代文：臣愿圣朝就加三公之职，一定能唱出《清庙》之歌，招来凤凰了。 
English: If a vassal wishes for the holy temple, he will be given the post of the three kings. He will surely be able to sing the song of "Qing Temple" and attract the phoenix.

古文：会顺帝西巡，弱又荐之。
现代文：碰巧顺帝西方巡狩，田弱又推荐他。
English: It so happened that Emperor Shun went on a hunting tour to the west, and Tian Wei recommended him.

古文：帝虚心欲致，前后四征。
现代文：帝虚心想请他，前后四次征召。
English: Emperor Huixin wanted to invite him, and he was called up four times.

古文：真曰： 吾既不能遁形远世，岂饮洗耳之水哉？ 
现代文：法真说 ：我既不能遁形离开尘世，岂愿饮许由洗耳之水么？ 
English: Dharmasena said, "Since I cannot leave this world unharmed, would I like to drink the water used to wash my ears?"

古文：遂深自隐绝，终不降屈。
现代文：于是深自隐居不出。
English: As a result, he was forced to live in seclusion.

古文：友人郭正称之曰： 法真名可得闻，身难得而见，逃名而名我随，避名而名我追，可谓百世之师者矣！ 
现代文：友人郭正称之说： 法真的名字可以听说，身体就难得一见，逃名而名随着我，避名而名追着我，可算是百世之师的了。 
English: Guo Zheng, a friend of his, said: "You can hear Fa Zhen's name, but you can't see his body. He is a great teacher.

古文：乃共刊石颂之，号曰玄德先生。
现代文：于是共刊石颂扬他，叫他玄德先生。
English: As a result, the joint publication praised him and called him Mr. Xuan De.

古文：年八十九，中平五年，以寿终。
现代文：年八十九岁，中平五年，以寿终。
English: He was eighty-nine years old, five years younger than Zhongping, and died of old age.

古文：汉阴老父者，不知何许人也。
现代文：汉阴老父传、汉阴老父，不知是什么人。
English: According to the legend of Han Yin Lao Zi, Han Yin Lao Zi, I don't know who he is.

古文：桓帝延熹中，幸竟陵，过云梦，临沔水，百姓莫不观者，有老父独耕不辍。
现代文：桓帝延熹年间，皇上幸竟陵，过云梦，临沔水。百姓没有不去看的，有老父独自耕种不止。
English: During the reign of Emperor Kan, the emperor was fortunate enough to have a tomb, a dream, and a water supply. The people did not fail to see that there was an old man who cultivated alone.

古文：尚书郎南阳张温异之，使问曰： 人皆来观，老父独不辍，何也？ 
现代文：尚书郎南阳张温觉得奇怪，派人问道 ：人们都来观看，老父独耕不止，为什么？ 
English: Shang Shulang Nanyang Zhang Wen thought it was strange and sent someone to ask: People come to watch, the old man works alone, why?

古文：老父笑而不对。
现代文：老父笑而不答。
English: The old man laughed and did not answer.

古文：温下道百步，自与言。
现代文：张温下来走百步，亲自与老父谈话。
English: Zhang Wen came down and walked a hundred paces to talk to the old man in person.

古文：老父曰： 我野人耳，不达斯语。
现代文：老父说： 我是野人，不懂这话。
English: The old man said, "I'm a savage, I don't understand that.

古文：请问天下乱而立天子邪？
现代文：请问天下因乱而立天子呢？
English: What happens when the world is in turmoil and a divine son is born?

古文：理而立天子邪？
现代文：还是因治而立天子？
English: Or is it the rule of law that leads to the rise of a god?

古文：立天子以父天下邪？
现代文：立天子是为了作天下人之父呢？
English: Was the Son of God set up to be the father of all mankind?

古文：役天下以奉天子邪？
现代文：还是役使百姓以养天子？
English: Or is it better to serve the people in order to raise God's children?

古文：昔圣王宰世，茅茨采椽，而万人以宁。
现代文：从前圣王治世，茅茨采椽，而万姓得以安宁。
English: Once upon a time, during the reign of a holy king, Maoz reigned supreme, and all families could live in peace.

古文：今子之君，劳人自纵，逸游无忌。
现代文：今你之君，劳役百姓而自己放纵，逸游无忌。
English: Now you're the king, you're working for the people, and you're indulging yourself. There's nothing to be afraid of.

古文：吾为子羞之，子何忍欲人观之乎！ 
现代文：我替你羞愧，你何忍心想人观看呢？ 
English: I'm ashamed of you. How dare you want people to see?

古文：温大惭。
现代文：张温听了大惭。
English: Zhang Wen listened with great embarrassment.

古文：问其姓名，不告而去。
现代文：问他的姓名，不告诉而离去。
English: She asked his name and left without telling him.

古文：陈留老父者，不知何许人也。
现代文：陈留老父传、陈留老父，不知是什么人。
English: Chen Liu Laofu, Chen Liu Laofu, I don't know who he is.

古文：桓帝世，党锢事起，守外黄令陈留张升去官归乡里，道逢友人，共班草而言。
现代文：桓帝年代，党锢事起，守外黄令陈留人张升离官位回乡里。路上遇友人，共铺草坐地而谈。
English: During the reign of Emperor Kantei, when the party was in turmoil, Zhang Sheng left his post and returned to his hometown. He met a friend on the road and they sat down to talk.

古文：升曰： 吾闻赵杀鸣犊，仲尼临河而反；覆巢竭渊，龙凤逝而不至。
现代文：张升说： 我听说赵国人杀了鸣犊，孔子到河滨而回去；覆巢竭渊，龙凤逝去而不到来。
English: Zhang Sheng said: I heard that the people of Zhao killed the warbler, Confucius went to the riverbank and came back, the nest was exhausted, and the dragon and phoenix passed away and did not come.

古文：今宦竖日乱，陷害忠良，贤人君子其去朝乎？
现代文：今日宦竖日乱，陷害忠良之人，贤人君子离开朝廷么？
English: Is it true that today there is a daily turmoil, trapping loyal people, and wise men and gentlemen are leaving the imperial court?

古文：夫德之不建，人之无援，将性命之不免，奈何？ 
现代文：德之不建，人之无援，将来性命难免，怎么办？ 
English: If virtue is not built, and there is no one to help, it is inevitable that lives will be lost in the future. What should we do?

古文：因相抱而泣。
现代文：于是相抱而哭。
English: So they hugged each other and cried.

古文：老父趋而过之，植其杖，太息言曰： 吁！二大夫何泣之悲也？
现代文：老父急走而过，拄着杖棍，叹息道 ：唉，二大夫哭得怎么这样悲伤呢？
English: The old man hurried past, holding his cane and sighing, "Alas, why are the two doctors crying with such sadness?"

古文：夫龙不隐鳞，凤不藏羽，网罗高县，去将安所？虽泣何及乎！ 
现代文：龙不隐鳞，凤不藏羽，网罗高悬，去到何方，即使哭泣有什么用呢？ 
English: The dragon does not hide its scales, the phoenix does not hide its feathers, the snare is high, where to go, even if crying, what is the use?

古文：二人欲与之语，不顾而去，莫知所终。
现代文：二人想和他谈话，不顾而去，不知其所终。
English: The two men wanted to talk to him, but left without knowing where they were going.

古文：庞公者，南郡襄阳人也。
现代文：庞公传，庞公，南郡襄阳人。
English: Pangong Chuan, Pangong, from South County, Yangyang.

古文：居岘山之南，未尝入城府。夫妻相敬如宾。
现代文：住岘山之南，从未进过城府，夫妻相敬如宾。
English: They live in the south of Lushan and have never been to Chengdu. They respect each other as guests.

古文：荆州刺史刘表数延请，不能屈，乃就候之。
现代文：荆州刺史刘表数次请他，不能屈，于是就去访问他。
English: Jingzhou Zishi Liu table invited him several times, can not give in, so he went to visit him.

古文：谓曰： 夫保全一身，孰若保全天下乎？ 
现代文：对他说： 保全自己一身，何如保全天下呢？ 
English: And said unto him, If thou wilt save thyself, what shall be the end of the world?

古文：庞公笑曰： 鸿鹄巢于高林之上，暮而得所栖；鼋鼍穴于深渊之下，夕而得所宿。夫趣舍行止，亦人之巢穴也。
现代文：庞公笑道 ：鸿鹄做巢在高林之上，晚上才得有所栖息之处；鼋鼍做洞在深渊之下，晚上才得到归宿，人们的取舍行止，也是人的巢穴。
English: Pangong laughed, "The great horned owl makes its nest in the high forest, and only at night does it have a place to roost; the cormorant makes its hole under the abyss, and only at night does it have a home. People's choices and actions are also people's nests."

古文：且各得其栖宿而已，天下非所保也。 
现代文：暂且各得其栖宿之处而已，天下非所保哩。 
English: For the time being, everyone has their own place to live, and nothing is guaranteed.

古文：因释耕于垄上，而妻子耘于前。
现代文：于是释耕于垄上，而妻子在前除草。
English: As a result, the fields were left fallow on the ridges, while his wife was weeding in front.

古文：表指而问曰： 先生苦居畎亩而不肯官禄，后世何以遗子孙乎？ 
现代文：刘表指而问道： 先生劳动在田亩而不肯受官禄，以后用什么留给子孙呢？ 
English: Liu Yubei pointed and asked: Teacher labors in the fields and refuses to accept the official salary. What will you leave for your children and grandchildren?

古文：庞公曰： 世人皆遗之以危，今独遗之以安。虽所遗不同，未为无所遗也。 
现代文：庞公说 ：世人都用危险留给子孙，今独用安宁留给子孙，虽然遗留不同，不算没有遗留吧。 
English: Pangong said: People used to leave danger to their children and grandchildren, but now they only leave peace to their children and grandchildren. Although the legacy is different, it is not without a legacy.

古文：表叹息而去。
现代文：刘表叹息而去。
English: Liu Biao sighed and left.

古文：后遂携其妻子登鹿门山，因采药不反。
现代文：后来庞公携其妻子登鹿门山，因采药再不回来。
English: Later, Pangong and his wife ascended Lumen Mountain, but never returned due to taking medicine.

