古文：滕文公问曰： 滕，小国也。竭力以事大国，则不得免焉。
现代文：滕文公问孟子： 滕国是个小国，就算竭力去侍奉大国，也不能免除威胁，怎么办才好呢？ 
English: Teng Wen Gong asked Mencius: Teng Guo is a small country. Even if you try your best to serve a big country, you can't get rid of the threat. What should you do?

古文：如之何则可？ 孟子对曰： 昔者大王居邠，狄人侵之。
现代文：孟子回答道： 从前，周太王居住在邠地，狄人来侵犯。
English: Mencius replied: Once upon a time, King Zhou Tai Rong lived in Shunde, and the Di people came to invade.

古文：事之以皮币，不得免焉；事之以犬马，不得免焉；事之以珠玉，不得免焉。
现代文：周太王拿皮裘丝绸送给狄人，不能免遭侵犯；拿好狗良马送给狄人，不能免遭侵犯；拿珠宝玉器送给狄人，还是不能免去他们的侵扰。
English: Zhou Taifang sent furs and silks to the Di people, but could not avoid being encroached upon; sent good dogs and horses to the Di people, but could not avoid being encroached upon; sent jewelry and jade to the Di people, but still could not avoid being encroached upon by them.

古文：乃属其耆老而告之曰： 狄人之所欲者，吾土地也。
现代文：于是太王召集邠地的父老，对他们说： 狄人想要的是我们的土地。
English: So the king called together the elders of the land and said to them, "What the Di people want is our land.

古文：吾闻之也：君子不以其所以养人者害人。
现代文：我听说过这样一句话：一个有德之人不拿用来养活人的东西害人。
English: I have heard it said that a virtuous person does not harm others with what is used to feed them.

古文：二三子何患乎无君？
现代文：你们何必担心没有君主？
English: Why should you worry about not having a monarch?

古文：我将去之。 
现代文：我要离开这里了。 
English: I'm getting out of here.

古文：去邠，逾梁山，邑于岐山之下居焉。
现代文：于是离开邠地，越过梁山，在岐山下建城邑定居下来。
English: Therefore, they left Shantian, crossed Liangshan Mountain, built a town at the foot of Qishan Mountain and settled down.

古文：邠人曰： 仁人也，不可失也。 
现代文：邠地的人说： 这是个仁德之人，我们不能失去他啊。 
English: People in Shunde said, "This is a benevolent person, we can't lose him."

古文：从之者如归市。
现代文：追随他迁居的人，多得像赶集市一般。
English: The number of people who moved to follow him was like a stampede.

古文：或曰： 世守也，非身之所能为也。
现代文：也有人说： 土地是必须世世代代守护的基业，不是能自作主张的处理的，哪怕牺牲性命也不能舍弃它。 
English: Others said: Land is a patrimony that must be protected from generation to generation. It is not something that can be dealt with on one's own initiative, and it cannot be given up even at the cost of one's life.

古文：效死勿去。 
现代文：您可以在这两个办法中选一个。 
English: You can choose one of these two options.

