古文：束伍之令曰：五人为伍，共一符，收于将吏之所。
现代文：束伍令规定，五人编为一伍，写一份五人联保凭征，保存在将吏那里。
English: The order stipulates that five people form a team, write a five-person joint insurance certificate, and keep it with the general officer.

古文：亡伍而得伍，当之；得伍而不亡，有赏，亡伍不得伍，身死家残。
现代文：战斗时，伍内伤亡与斩获的数量相等的，功罪相当；有斩获而自己没有伤亡的，有赏；伍内有伤亡而没有斩获的，处死刑，并惩办他的家族。
English: In battle, if the number of soldiers killed and wounded is equal to the number of soldiers killed and wounded, the merits and crimes are equal; if there are soldiers killed and wounded, but there are no soldiers killed and wounded, there will be a reward; if there are soldiers killed and wounded, but there are no soldiers killed and wounded, there will be a death penalty, and his family will be punished.

古文：亡长得长，当之；得长不亡，有赏，亡长不得长，身死家残；复战得首长，除之。
现代文：自己的什长伯长伤亡而能斩获敌人什长伯长的，功罪相抵；斩获敌人什长伯长而自己什长伯长没有伤亡的，有赏；自己什长伯长伤亡而没有斩获敌人什长伯长的，处死刑，并惩办他们的家族；战时军规律军，能斩获故人什长伯长的，可以免罪。
English: If one's own Shizhen Uncle is killed or wounded and the enemy's Shizhen Uncle can be captured, the merits and crimes are equal; if the enemy's Shizhen Uncle is captured and one's own Shizhen Uncle is not killed or wounded, there is a reward; if one's own Shizhen Uncle is killed or wounded and the enemy's Shizhen Uncle is not captured, the death penalty is imposed and their families are punished; if the regular army of the wartime army can capture the deceased Shizhen Uncle, they can be exonerated.

古文：亡将得将，当之；得将不亡，有赏，亡将不得将，坐离地遁逃之法。
现代文：将领伤亡而能斩获故统率将领的，功罪相抵；斩获敌人将领而自己将领没有伤亡的，有赏；自己将领伤亡而没有斩获敌人将领的，按放弃防地，临阵脱逃论罪。
English: If a general is killed or wounded and can defeat the generals led by the former general, the merits and crimes are offset; if an enemy general is defeated and the general himself is not killed or wounded, there is a reward; if a general is killed or wounded and does not defeat the enemy general, it is a crime according to abandoning the defense and escaping from the battlefield.

古文：战诛之法曰：什长得诛十人，伯长得诛什长，千人之将得诛百人之长，万人之将得诛千人之将，左、右将军得诛万人之将，大将军无不得诛。
现代文：战时军律规定，什长有权处死所属的任何一个人，伯长有权处死什长，统率千人的将领有权处死伯长，统率万人的将领有权处死统率千人的。将领，左、右将军有权处死统率万人的将领，大将军有权处死全军的任何人。
English: The laws of war stipulate that the commander-in-chief has the right to execute any person belonging to him, the colonel-in-chief has the right to execute the colonel-in-chief, the general in command of a thousand people has the right to execute the colonel-in-chief, the general in command of a thousand people has the right to execute the general in command of a thousand people, the general, the left and right general have the right to execute the general in command of a thousand people, and the general has the right to execute any person in the whole army.

