古文：许生颜浚郝惟谅浮梁张令欧阳敏奉天县民
现代文：许生颜浚郝惟谅浮梁张令欧阳敏奉天县民
English: Xu Shengyan dredges dredge dredge dredge dredge dredge dredge dredge dredge dredge

古文：许生
现代文：许生
English: Xu Sheng

古文：会昌元年春，孝廉许生，下第东归。
现代文：会昌元年春天，孝廉许生落榜东归。
English: In the spring of the first year of Huichang, Xiaolian Xu was relegated to the east.

古文：次寿安，将宿于甘泉店。
现代文：住在寿安，投宿到甘泉店。
English: They lived in Shouan and stayed at the Gansu store.

古文：甘棠馆西一里已来，逢白衣叟，跃青骢，自西而来。
现代文：在甘棠馆西一里多地，遇到一个穿白衣服的老头，骑着青搃马，从西边过来，后边跟着一大群随从。
English: About a mile west of the Sweetgum Pavilion, I met an old man dressed in white, riding a young horse, coming from the west, followed by a large group of followers.

古文：徒从极盛，醺颜怡怡，朗吟云：春草萋萋春水绿，野棠开尽飘香玉。
现代文：这老翁酒后容光焕发，精神振奋，边走边朗诵：春草萋萋春水绿，野花开尽飘香玉。
English: After drinking, this old man's face was radiant and his spirits were uplifted. As he walked, he recited: Spring grass is green, spring water is green, wildflowers are blooming and fragrant.

古文：繍岭宫前鹤发人，犹唱开元太平曲。
现代文：繍岭宫前鹤发人，犹唱开元太平曲。
English: In front of the Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager

古文：生策马前进，问其姓名，叟微笑不答。
现代文：许生策马往前走，问那老翁姓名，老翁微笑不回答。
English: Xu Sheng stepped forward and asked the old man his name. The old man smiled and did not answer.

古文：又吟一篇云：厌世逃名者，谁能答姓名。
现代文：又吟诵一篇道：厌世逃名者，谁能答姓名。
English: He also recited a passage: If you are a misanthrope, who can answer your name.

古文：曾闻三乐否，看取路傍情。
现代文：曾闻三乐否，看取路傍情。
English: He had heard about the three pleasures and saw the side of the road.

古文：生知其鬼物矣，遂不复问。
现代文：许生知道他是鬼，也就不再问，只是跟在他们后面走。
English: Xu Sheng knew he was a ghost, so he didn't ask any more questions, he just followed them.

古文：但继后而行，凡二三里，日已暮矣。
现代文：大约走了二三里，太阳已经落了。
English: After about two or three miles, the sun had set.

古文：至喷玉泉牌堠之西，叟笑谓生曰：吾闻三四君子，今日追旧游于此泉。
现代文：到了喷玉泉牌堠西边，老翁笑着对许生说：我告知三四个老朋友，由于怀念旧地，今日重来此泉游览。
English: When he arrived at the west side of the fountain Jade Spring plaque, the old man smiled and said to Xu Sheng: I told three or four old friends that I would visit this spring again today because I miss the old place.

古文：吾昨已被召，自此南去。吾子不可连骑也。
现代文：我昨日已被召，将从这里继续往南走，你们就不要跟随了。
English: I was called yesterday, and I'm going south from here, so don't follow me.

古文：生固请从，叟不对而去，生纵辔以随之。
现代文：许生请求同去，老翁不答，默然离去。许生执辔策马相随。
English: Xu Sheng requested to go with him, but the old man did not answer and silently left. Xu Sheng followed with his horse.

古文：去甘棠一里会，见车马导从，填隘路歧，生麾盖而进。
现代文：离甘泉一里多路，见前面车马人众堵塞了一条岔路。许生举起伞盖向前走。
English: More than a mile away from Ganquan, the crowd of cars and horses in front of him blocked a side road. Xu Sheng lifted the umbrella cover and walked forward.

古文：既至泉亭，乃下马。
现代文：到泉亭以后，才下马，就潜伏在灌木丛中。
English: After arriving at the spring pavilion, he dismounted and lurked in the bushes.

古文：伏于丛棘之下，屏气以窥之。
现代文：屏住呼吸偷偷观察。
English: Hold your breath and sneak a peek.

古文：见四丈夫，有少年神貌扬扬者，有短小器宇落落者，有长大少髭髯者，有清瘦言语及瞻视疾速者，皆金紫，坐于泉之北矶。
现代文：看见四个男子：一个年青英俊、神气十足；一个身材矮小，仪容举止潇洒大方；一个高大魁梧、胡须甚少；还有一个清瘦，而言语、眼光疾敏的，都是金印紫授高官打扮，坐在泉北的一块大石头上。
English: I saw four men: one young, handsome, and full of swagger; one short, with a dashing and generous demeanor; one tall and burly, with few whiskers; and one thin, well-spoken, and with a sensitive eye, all dressed as high-ranking officials with the Gold Seal and Purple Robe, sitting on a large rock in the north of Quanbei.

古文：叟既至，曰：玉川来何迟？
现代文：老翁来到之后，那四个人说：玉川为什么来这么晚？
English: After the old man arrived, the four people said: Why did Tamagawa come so late?

古文：叟曰：适傍石墨涧寻赏，憩马甘棠馆亭。于西楹偶见诗人题一章，驻而吟讽，不觉良久。
现代文：老翁回答说：到石墨涧近旁观赏游览，停马在甘堂馆亭休息，在西边的柱子上偶然见到某诗人题写的一首诗，就停下来吟咏、诵读，不觉过了很长时间。
English: The old man replied, "I went to the graphite crucible to watch the tour, stopped my horse to rest in the pavilion of the Gantang Museum, and happened to see a poem inscribed by a poet on the pillar on the west side. I stopped chanting and reading, and a long time passed before I realized it.

古文：座首者曰：是何篇什？得先生赏叹之若是？
现代文：坐首位的那个人说：是什么篇章，能博得先生这样的赞叹？
English: The man at the head of the table said, "What is it about this chapter that has won you such admiration?"

古文：叟曰：此诗有似为席中一二公有其题，而晦其姓名，怜其终章皆有意思，乃曰： 浮云凄惨日微明，沈痛将军负罪名。
现代文：老翁说：这诗的内容跟在座的二位有相似之处，但隐去了姓名。可佳的是篇末的几句都很有意思，是这样写的： 浮云凄惨日微明，沉痛将军负罪名。
English: The old man said, "The content of this poem is similar to the two of you here, but the names have been omitted. The good thing is that the last few sentences of the poem are very interesting. They are written like this: The clouds are gloomy, the sun is faint, and the general is guilty.

古文：白昼叫阍无近戚，缟衣饮气只门生。
现代文：白昼叫阍无近戚，缟衣饮气只门生。
English: During the day, there is no relative to call, only a disciple to drink qi.

古文：佳人暗泣填宫泪，厩马连嘶换主声。
现代文：佳人暗泣填宫泪，厩马连嘶换主声。
English: The beauty wept secretly to fill the palace with tears, and the stallion whinnied for the lead.

古文：六合茫茫悲汉土，此身无处哭田横。
现代文：六合茫茫悲汉土，此身无处哭田横。
English: Liuhe vast vast sad Han soil, this body nowhere cry Tianyang.

古文：座中闻之，皆以襟袖拥面，如欲恸哭。
现代文：在座的人听了，都用衣袖遮着脸，象要痛哭。
English: Everyone in the audience covered their faces with their sleeves as if they were about to cry.

古文：神貌扬扬者云：我知作诗人矣，得非伊水之上，受我推食脱衣之士乎？
现代文：年青英俊神情自得的人说：我知道作诗的人了，莫不是在伊水上接受我的食物和脱衣相赠的那个人？
English: The young, handsome, self-satisfied man said, "I know the poet, isn't he the one who accepted my food and undressed on the River Ili?"

古文：久之，白衣叟命飞杯，凡数巡巡，而座中欷歔未已。
现代文：过了好一会儿，老翁催促举杯畅饮，共饮过几巡，座中郗觑慨叹之声未断。
English: After a while, the old man urged everyone to raise a glass and drink, and after a few rounds of drinking, there was no end to the sighs and groans from the audience.

古文：白衣叟曰：再经旧游，无以自适。宜赋篇咏，以代管弦。
现代文：白衣老翁说：重游旧地，无以自慰，应该用吟诗作赋来代替音乐。
English: The white-robed old man said, "There is no consolation in revisiting the old country. Instead of music, we should make folk songs."

古文：命左右取笔砚，乃出题云：《喷玉泉感旧游书怀》，各七言长句。
现代文：于是命令左右取出笔砚等物并命题。题目为：喷玉泉感旧游书怀。各写七言长句。
English: Then the order was given to take out pencils and other objects left and right and write a topic. The topic was: Fountain of Jade Spring, Feeling of Old Travel Books. Each of them had to write a seven-word long sentence.

古文：白衣叟倡云：树色川光向晚晴，旧曾游处事分明。
现代文：白衣老翁首先吟唱道：树色川光向晚晴，旧曾游处事分明。
English: The white-robed old man first chanted: The tree-colored river is bright and clear, and the old Zengyou is clear.

古文：鼠穿月榭荆榛合，草掩花园畦垅平。
现代文：鼠穿月榭荆榛合，草掩花园畦垅平。
English: The mouse crosses the moon, the thistle and the bramble intertwine, and the grass covers the garden and makes it level.

古文：迹陷黄沙仍未寤，罪标青简竟何名。
现代文：迹陷黄沙仍未寤，罪标青简竟何名。
English: Traces of yellow sand have not yet been buried, and the number of criminal suspects is staggering.

古文：伤心谷口东流水，犹喷当时寒玉声。
现代文：伤心谷口东流水，犹喷当时寒玉声。
English: Sad valley mouth east flowing water, still spraying cold ball sound at that time.

古文：少年神貌扬扬者诗云：鸟啼莺语思何穷，一世荣华一梦中。
现代文：神气自得的年青人吟道：鸟啼莺语思何穷，一世荣华一梦中。
English: The self-assured young people chant: "What a poor bird, what a poor bird, what a poor bird, what a poor bird."

古文：孝固有冤藏蠹简，邓攸无子续清风。
现代文：李固有冤藏蠹简，邓攸无子续清风。
English: Li inherently held a grudge against Zang Jian, and Deng Yuanzhi continued the clear wind.

古文：文章高韵传流水，丝管遗音托草虫。
现代文：文章高韵传流水，丝管遗音托草虫。
English: Text: High-pitched running water, silk-tube imitation grasshopper.

古文：春月不知人事改，闲垂光彩照宫。
现代文：春月不知人事改，闲垂光影夺宫。
English: Spring moon does not know personnel changes, leisurely hanging light and shadow to seize the palace.

古文：短小器宇落落者诗云：桃蹊李径尽荒凉，访旧寻新益自伤。虽有衣衾藏李固，终无表疏雪王章。羁魂尚觉霜风冷，朽骨徒惊月桂香。天爵竟为人爵误，谁能高叫问苍苍。
现代文：身材矮小而又潇洒大方的人作诗道：桃蹊李径尽荒凉，访旧寻新益自伤，虽有衣衾藏李固，终无表疏雪王章，羁魂尚觉霜风冷。朽骨徒惊月桂香，天爵竟为人爵误，谁能高叫问苍苍。
English: A person of short stature but elegant and generous wrote a poem: The Taoist Taoist Taoist Taoist Taoist Taoist Taoist Taoist Taoist Taoist Taoist Taoist Taoist Taoist Taoist Taoist Taoist Taoist Taoist Taoist Taoist Taoist Taoist Taoist Taoist Taoist Taoist Taoist Taoist Taoist

古文：清瘦及瞻视疾速者诗云：落花寂寂草绵绵，云影山光尽宛然。
现代文：清瘦、目光疾敏的人诵道：落花寂寂草绵绵，云影山光尽宛然。
English: The slender, clear-eyed people chant: the flowers are withering, the grasses are withering, the clouds are darkening, the mountains are darkening.

古文：坏室基摧新石鼠，潴宫水引故山泉。
现代文：坏室基摧新石鼠，潴宫水引故山泉。
English: The new stone mouse was destroyed by the bad room foundation, and the old mountain spring was drawn by the water of the imperial palace.

古文：青云自致惭天爵，白首同归感昔贤。
现代文：青云自致惭天爵，白首同归感昔贤。
English: Qingyun is a self-proclaimed Shameful Lord, and Bai Shou is a former sage.

古文：惆怅林间中夜月，孤光曾照读书筵。
现代文：惆怅林间中夜月，孤光曾照读书筵。
English: In the middle of the night moon in the forest, a lone light was reading a book.

古文：长大少须髯者诗云：新荆棘路旧衡门，又驻高车会一樽。
现代文：高大魁梧、少胡须的人吟道：新荆棘路旧衡门，又驻高车会一樽。
English: The tall, burly, slightly bearded man chanted, "New Thorn Road, Old Hengmen, and the high-speed train will be a barrel."

古文：寒骨未沾新雨露，春风不长败兰荪。
现代文：寒骨未沾新雨露，春风不长败兰荪。
English: The cold bones have not been touched by the new rain and dew, and the spring breeze has not long defeated the orchids.

古文：丹诚岂分埋幽壤，白日终希照覆盆。
现代文：丹诚岂分埋幽壤，白日终希照覆盆。
English: Dangcheng is buried in soft soil, and hopes to see raspberries at the end of the day.

古文：珍重昔年金谷友，共来泉际话孤魂。
现代文：珍重昔年金谷友，共来泉际话孤魂。
English: Cherish the old gold mine friends, together with the souls of the lonely souls.

古文：诗成，各自吟讽，长号数四，响动岩谷。
现代文：诗写完，各自吟咏诵读，朗朗的诵读声此起彼伏，震动山谷。
English: After the poem was written, each of them chanted and recited it, and the loud chanting voice rose and fell, shaking the valley.

古文：逡巡，怪鸟鸱枭，相率啾唧；大狐老狸，次第鸣叫。
现代文：霎那间，怪鸟鸱枭相继不停地啾唧，大狐老狸也一个接一个地鸣叫。
English: In the meantime, the strange birds chirped incessantly one after another, and the big foxes chirped one after another.

古文：顷之，骡脚自东而来，金铎之声，振于坐中。各命仆马，颇甚草草。惨无言语，掩泣攀鞍，若烟雾状，自庭而散。
现代文：一会，车马从东边过来，铜铃的叮噹声传入席间，各自吩咐仆从准备车马，仓悴匆忙，悲切无语，忍泣上马，若烟雾一样散去了。
English: After a while, the chariot and horse came from the east, and the tinkling sound of the brass bells came into the dining room. Each of them ordered their servants to prepare the chariot and horse. Cang Yao hurriedly got on the horse, speechless with grief, and burst into tears. It was as if the smoke had dissipated.

古文：生于是出丛棘。
现代文：许生从这开始才从丛棘中出来，找到原路。
English: It was only then that Xu Sheng emerged from the thorns and found the original path.

古文：寻旧路，匹马龁草于涧侧，蹇童美寝于路隅。
现代文：途中马匹在涧旁吃草、跛脚牧童甜睡在路边。
English: On the way, horses graze next to the plough, and lame shepherds sleep on the roadside.

古文：未明，达甘泉店。
现代文：天未亮，到达甘泉店。
English: It was early in the morning when I arrived at the Amaizumi store.

古文：店媪诘昌夜，生具以对媪。
现代文：店中老妇人问为什么冒着黑夜赶路，许生把路上经历的事告诉他。
English: The old woman in the shop asked why he was speeding through the night, and Xu Sheng told him what he had experienced on the road.

古文：媪曰：昨夜三更，走马挈壶，就我买酒，得非此耶？
现代文：老妇人说：昨天夜里三更天，一伙人骑着马、带着壶，到我这里买酒，莫非就是你说的这些人。
English: The old woman said: "Yesterday night, at three in the morning, a group of people on horseback, with jugs, came to me to buy wine. Could it be that these are the people you are talking about?

古文：开柜视，皆纸钱也。颜浚
现代文：打开柜看昨晚收的钱，都是纸钱。颜浚
English: Opening the cabinet to see the money received last night, it was all paper money.

古文：会昌中，进士颜浚，下第游广陵。遂之建业，赁小舟，抵白沙。
现代文：会昌年中，颜浚参加进士考试，落榜后去游广陵，于是又到了建业，租条小船到白沙游玩。
English: In the middle of the Heichang year, Yan Jun took part in the entrance examination, and went to Guangling after falling off the list, so he went to Jianye and rented a small boat to play in Baisha.

古文：同载有青衣，年二十许，服饰古朴，言词清丽。
现代文：同船有婢女，二十岁刚出头，服饰古朴，说话口齿清晰，辞藻华丽。
English: On board was a servant girl, in her early twenties, dressed in simple clothes, speaking with a clear mouth and beautiful diction.

古文：浚揖之，问其姓氏，对曰：幼芳姓赵。
现代文：浚上前拱手见礼，问她姓名。那女子回答说：我的名字叫幼芳，姓赵。
English: He bowed before her and asked her name. The woman replied, "My name is Youfang, surname Zhao."

古文：问其所适，曰：亦之建业。
现代文：问她到什么地方去。回答说也是去建业。
English: He asked her where she was going and she replied that she was going to Jianye.

古文：浚甚喜，每维舟，即买酒果，与之宴饮。
现代文：颜浚很高兴。每当停船，就买酒肉果品跟她宴饮。
English: Yan Jun is very happy. Whenever the boat stops, he buys wine, meat and fruit to have a banquet with her.

古文：多说陈隋间事，浚颇异之，即正色敛衽不对。
现代文：她说的都是前代陈朝、隋朝的事。颜浚感到很奇怪，就板着脸孔、整理着衣襟不予回答。
English: All she talked about was the previous Chen and Sui dynasties. Yan Jun felt very strange, so she kept a straight face and tidied up her clothes, refusing to answer.

古文：抵白沙，各迁舟航，青衣乃谢浚曰：数日承君深顾，某陋拙，不足奉欢笑。然亦有一事，可以奉酬。
现代文：到白沙后，各自搭船上路。分别前那婢女上前道歉说：几天来蒙您照顾，我浅陋拙笨，不足以陪伴您玩乐，然而有件事可以略表酬谢，七月十五那一天，您一定要去游瓦官阁。
English: After arriving at Baisha, they each took a boat ride. Separately, the former maid came forward to apologize and said: I have been taken care of by you for a few days, I am shallow and stupid, not enough to accompany you to play, however, there is one thing that can be slightly appreciated, on the day of July 15th, you must go to visit Wakan Pavilion.

古文：中元必游瓦官阁，此时当为君会一神仙中人。况君风仪才调，亦甚相称。望不逾此约。至时。
现代文：那时我会介绍你去见一个神仙中的人物，况且你的风度、仪表和才气，与他也很相称，希望你不要错过这次约会，到那时，我在那里恭候你。
English: At that time I will introduce you to one of the immortals, and your manners, appearance and talent are also very suitable for him, I hope you do not miss this appointment, by then, I will be there to wait for you.

古文：某候于彼。
现代文：说完，各自登船而去。
English: And when they had thus spoken, they departed every man to his ship.

古文：言讫，各登舟而去。浚志其言，中元日，来游瓦官阁。
现代文：颜浚记着她的话，阴历七月十五那天，去游瓦官阁。
English: Yan Jun remembered her words, and on the 15th day of the 7th lunar month, he went to visit Wakan Pavilion.

古文：士女阗咽，及登阁，果有美人，从二女仆，皆双环而有媚态。
现代文：看见少男少女挤满楼台。登阁之后，果然有美人，后面跟从两个女仆，头上都梳有双髻，娇媚多情。
English: I saw young boys and girls crowding the platform. After boarding, there was indeed a beauty, followed by two maids, both with double braids on their heads, charming and affectionate.

古文：美人依栏独语，悲叹久之。
现代文：那美人靠着栏杆自言自语，长嘘短叹了很长时间。
English: The beauty leaned against the railing and talked to herself, sighing for a long time.

古文：浚注视不易，美人亦讶之。
现代文：颜浚停下来注视着她，那美人看见他也很惊讶。
English: Yan Jun stopped and stared at her, and the beauty was surprised to see him.

古文：又曰：幼芳之言不谬矣。
现代文：颜浚心想：幼芳的话果然不错。
English: Yan Jun thought to himself: Young Fang's words are really good.

古文：使双鬟传语曰：西廊有惠鉴闍黎院，则某旧门徒。
现代文：美人派丫环传话给颜浚说：西廓有惠鉴高僧院，那里有我的旧门徒，你可以到那里去。
English: Beauty sent a maidservant to Yan Jun to tell him: "There is a monastery in Xikou, where there are my old disciples. You can go there."

古文：君可至是，幼芳亦在彼。
现代文：幼芳也在那。
English: Young Fang was also there.

古文：浚甚喜，蹑其踪而走，果见同舟青衣，出而微笑。
现代文：颜浚很高兴，跟着他们到那里。果然看见同船的那个女子出来对他微笑。
English: Yan Jun was very happy and followed them there. Sure enough, he saw the woman from the same boat come out and smile at him.

古文：浚遂于美人叙寒暄，言语毕日。
现代文：颜浚于是就跟那美人寒暄、叙谈，谈了整整一天。
English: Yan Jun then chats with the beautiful woman for a whole day.

古文：僧进茶果。
现代文：有僧人送来茶果。
English: A monk brought tea and fruit.

古文：至暮，谓浚曰：今日偶此登览，为惜高阁。病兹用功，不久毁除。
现代文：到了晚上，美人对颜浚说：今天偶尔来登楼观览，可惜这高大的楼阁，这样有功用，我忧虑它不久就要被拆除了，所以特来告别。
English: In the evening, the beautiful woman said to Yan Jun: "Today, I occasionally came to visit the building. Unfortunately, this tall mansion has such a function. I am worried that it will be demolished soon, so I came to say goodbye."

古文：故来一别，幸接欢笑。某家在清溪，颇多松月，室无他人，今夕必相过。
现代文：幸好蒙您这样开心，我家在清溪，松多月朗，室无他人，今晚您一定要过去探访。
English: Fortunately, you are so happy, my home is in Qingxi, Songdo, the moon is bright, there is no one else in the room, tonight you must go and visit.

古文：某前往，可与幼芳后来。
现代文：我先去了，你和幼芳可随后来。
English: I'll go first, you and Yufang can follow later.

古文：浚然之，遂乘轩而去。
现代文：颜浚同意了。美人于是乘车而去。
English: Yan Jun agreed. The beauty then left by car.

古文：及夜，幼芳引浚前行，可数里而至。有青衣数辈，秉独迎之。
现代文：到了晚上，幼芳带领颜浚前去。大约走了几里地到了那地方，有几个婢女拿着蜡烛出来迎接。
English: In the evening, Young Fang led Yan Jun to the place. After walking for a few miles, several maids came out with candles to greet him.

古文：遂延至内室，与幼芳环坐，曰：孔家娘子相邻，使邀之曰： 今夕偶有佳宾相访，愿同倾觞，以解烦愤。
现代文：把颜浚请到里间屋子，跟幼芳等人围成环形坐著。那美人说：孔家娘子住在隔壁，派人邀请她说： 今晚偶有佳宾来访，希望能同斟共饮，以解烦闷、忧愤。
English: The beautiful woman said, "The daughter of the Confucius family lives next door, and she sent someone to invite her, saying, 'There is a guest visiting tonight, and I hope we can have a drink together to relieve our boredom and anger.'

古文：少顷而至，遂延入，亦多说陈朝故事。
现代文：不一会，那人来了，就请了进来。也说一些陈朝的往事。
English: After a while, the man came and invited me in. He also told me some stories about the Chen Dynasty.

古文：浚因起白曰：不审夫人复何姓第，颇贮疑讶。
现代文：颜浚于是起身说：不知夫人姓什么？出身什么门第？
English: Yan Jun then stood up and said, "I don't know what your wife's surname is, or what family she comes from.

古文：答曰：某即陈朝张贵妃，彼即孔贵嫔。
现代文：美人现出疑虑和惊讶的样子，然后回答说：我就是陈朝的张贵妃，她是孔贵嫔。
English: The beauty looked doubtful and surprised, and then replied, "I am Zhang Guifei of the Chen Dynasty, and she is Kong Guifei."

古文：居世之时，谬当后主采顾，宠幸之礼，有过嫔嫱。
现代文：活在世上的时候，被后主错爱和光顾，宠幸的待遇，超过一般的嫔妃。
English: While living in the world, she was mistakenly loved and patronized by her stepmother, and was treated as a favorite, more than the average concubine.

古文：不幸国亡，为杨广所杀。
现代文：不幸陈朝灭亡了，我们被杨广杀害。
English: Unfortunately, the Chen Dynasty perished, and we were killed by Yang Guang.

古文：然此赋不仁可甚，于刘禅、孔皓，岂无嫔御？
现代文：然而这贼不仁到了极点。刘禅、孙皓难道没有嫔妃侍候？
English: However, this thief was extremely unkind. Didn't Liu Zen and Sun Yat-sen have concubines to wait on them?

古文：独有斯人，行此冤暴。
现代文：唯独这贼这样结冤暴虐。
English: Only the thief could be so cruel.

古文：且一种亡国，我后主实即风流，诗酒追欢，琴樽取乐而已。
现代文：同样都是亡国，我们的后主确实风流。吟诗、饮宴，抚琴、捧杯，只是取乐罢了。
English: Likewise, they are all ruined countries, and our empress is indeed a philanderer. The chanting of poetry, the banquets, the playing of the harps, and the holding of cups are just for fun.

古文：不似杨广，西筑长城，东征辽海，使天下男冤女旷，父寡子孤。
现代文：不象杨广那样西筑长城，东征辽海，使天下男子屈死，女子悲亡，父死儿孤。
English: Not like Yang Guang, who built the Great Wall in the west and the Liao Sea in the east, causing men all over the world to die, women to die miserably, and children to be orphaned.

古文：途穷广陵，死于匹夫之手，亦上天降鉴，为我报仇耳！
现代文：到广陵走到了穷途末路，死于普通人之手。也是上天明鉴，为我们报了冤仇。
English: Guangling went to the end of the road and died at the hands of an ordinary person. It is also a clear example of heaven, and we have reported a grudge.

古文：孔贵嫔曰：莫出此言，在坐有人不欲。
现代文：孔贵嫔说：不要说这种话，在座的有人不愿意听。
English: Kong Guizhen said, "Don't say such things. Some people here don't want to listen."

古文：美人大叫笑曰：浑忘却。
现代文：美人大笑说：我全忘了。
English: The beauty laughed loudly and said, "I've forgotten everything."

古文：浚曰：何人不欲斯言耶？
现代文：颜浚问：什么人不愿意听这话？
English: Yan Jun asked: Who doesn't want to hear this?

古文：幼芳曰：某本江令公家嬖者，后为贵妃侍儿。国亡之后，为隋宫御女。
现代文：幼芳说：我本是江令公家很受宠幸的人，后来做了贵妃的侍儿，亡国之后，又做了隋朝的宫女。
English: Young Fang said: I was originally a person who was very favored by Jiang Ling's court. Later, I became a waiter for a noblewoman, and after the fall of the country, I became a courtesan of the Sui Dynasty.

古文：炀帝江都，为侍汤膳者。
现代文：隋炀帝在江都时，我是为他端汤送饭的人。
English: When the Sui and Qian Dynasties were in Jiangdu, I was the one who served soup to him.

古文：及化及乱兵入，某以身蔽帝，遂为所害。
现代文：等到国家衰败乱兵侵入的时候，我用身体去遮挡掩护隋炀帝，于是被乱兵杀害。
English: When the country was in decline and the rebels invaded, I used my body to shield Emperor Sui and was killed by the rebels.

古文：萧后怜某尽忠于主，因使殉葬。
现代文：萧后怜惜我对主子一片忠心，于是让我陪葬。
English: Xiao Hou felt sorry for me because I was loyal to my master, so she let me accompany him to the funeral.

古文：后改葬于雷塘侧，不得从焉。时至此谒贵妃耳。
现代文：后来炀帝改葬于雷塘侧，我不能跟从他了，到现在我又来拜会贵妃罢了。
English: Later, Emperor Xuan was reburied on the side of the Lei Tang. I couldn't follow him, so now I just come to visit the empress.

古文：孔贵嫔曰：前说尽是闲理，不如命酒，略延曩日之欢耳。
现代文：孔贵妃说：方才说的都是些闲事，不如摆上酒，姑且再享受一点往日的欢乐啊。
English: Kong Guifei said, "What I have just said is nothing but trifles. It would be better to serve wine and enjoy a little of the past happiness."

古文：遂命双鬟持乐器，洽饮久之。
现代文：于是命丫环取来乐器、高高兴兴的痛饮了许多。
English: As a result, the maid of honor took the musical instrument and happily drank a lot.

古文：贵妃题诗一章曰：秋草荒台响夜萤，白杨声尽减悲风。
现代文：贵妃写诗一首吟诵道：秋草荒台响夜萤，白杨声尽减悲风。
English: Guifei wrote a poem and chanted: "Autumn grasslands ringing with night fireflies, poplars singing to dispel the gloomy wind."

古文：彩笺曾擘欺人总，绮阁尘清玉树空。
现代文：彩笺曾擘欺人总，绮阁尘清玉树空。
English: Cai Yao was once a deceiver, but he cleared away the dust and cleared the sky.

古文：孔贵嫔曰：宝阁排云称望仙，五云高艳拥朝天。
现代文：孔贵妃吟道：宝阁排云称望仙，五云高艳拥朝天。
English: Kong Guifei chanted: "The clouds of the treasure pavilion are said to be looking for the immortals, and the five clouds are holding the morning sky.

古文：清溪犹有当时月，夜照琼花绽绮筵。
现代文：清溪犹有当时月，月照琼花绽绮筵。
English: Qingxi still had the moon at that time, and the moonlight was beautiful.

古文：幼芳曰：皓魂初圆恨翠娥，繁华浓艳竟如何？
现代文：幼芳吟道：皓魂初圆恨翠娥，繁花浓艳竟如何。
English: Young Fang Ying said, "The soul of a young girl is at the beginning of its life, but how beautiful the flowers are!"

古文：两朝唯有长江水。依旧行人逝作波。
现代文：两朝唯有长江水，依旧行人逝作波。
English: In the two dynasties, only the water of the Yangtze River still makes waves when pedestrians die.

古文：浚亦和曰：萧管清吟怨丽华，秋江寒月倚窗斜。
现代文：颜浚也和道：萧管清吟怨丽华，秋江寒月依窗斜。
English: The colors are also harmonious: Xiao Guan, Qingyin, Ren and Lihwa, and the autumn river and the cold moon leaning against the window.

古文：惭非后主题笺客，得见临春阁上花。
现代文：惭非后主题笺客，得见临春阁上花。
English: Shameful post-war themed customers, you can see the flowers blooming on the vernal pavilion.

古文：俄闻叩门曰：江脩容、何婕妤、袁照仪来谒贵妃。
现代文：一会儿，听见外面叩门报告说：江脩容、何婕妤、袁照仪来拜见贵妃！
English: After a while, I heard someone knocking on the door outside and report: Jiang Yu Rong, He Ying, and Yuan Zhaoyi have come to see the princess!

古文：曰：窃闻今夕佳宾幽会，不免辄窥盛筵。
现代文：这三人进来后说：我们私下听说今晚有佳宾幽会，禁不住想见识一下盛筵。
English: After the three of them came in, they said, "We've heard privately that there's a bachelorette party tonight, and we can't help but want to meet Sheng Yao."

古文：俱艳其衣裾，明其珰珮而入坐。
现代文：于是都换上艳丽的衣裙、佩戴珠光宝饰而入坐。
English: As a result, they all changed into bright dresses, wore pearls and sat down.

古文：及见四篇，捧而泣曰：今夕不意再逢三阁之会，又与新狎客题诗也。
现代文：等见到方才四人写的诗，捧在手中、禁不住流下泪来。说：今晚不料能再遇见三阁聚会，又与新狎客吟诗作赋。
English: When she saw the poems written by the four members of Fangcai, she held them in her hands and couldn't help but shed tears. She said, "Tonight, I can't wait to meet the Sangaku gathering again, and make poems with the new guests."

古文：顷之，闻鸡鸣，孔贵嫔等俱起，各辞而去。
现代文：一会儿，听到鸡叫声，孔贵妃等都站起来，各自告辞离开。
English: After a while, upon hearing the crowing of a chicken, Kong Guifei and the others all stood up and left separately.

古文：浚与贵妃就寝，欲曙而起。
现代文：颜浚与贵妃一起睡。快天亮才起身。
English: Yan Jun slept with Guifei and got up at dawn.

古文：贵妃赠辟尘犀簪一枚，曰：异日睹物思人。昨宵值客多，未尽欢情。别日更当一小会，然须谘祈幽府。
现代文：张贵妃送给他辟尘犀簪一枚，说：他日你看见这东西，就可以想起我，昨天正赶上人多，未能尽享欢乐，他日还当相见，然而必须打听寻找阴府。
English: Zhang Guifei gave him a piece of a feather duster, saying, "The day you see this thing, you can think of me. Yesterday, I was catching up with a lot of people, so I couldn't fully enjoy the joy. The next day, I was supposed to meet him, but I had to inquire about finding the underworld."

古文：呜咽而别。
现代文：说完后洒泪而别。
English: After saying this, shed tears and leave.

古文：浚翌日懵然，若有所失。
现代文：第二天，颜浚迷迷糊糊的，好象丢了什么东西，随意睡下了。
English: The next day, Yan Ducheng fell into a drowsy sleep as if he had lost something.

古文：信宿，更寻曩日地，则近清溪，松桧丘墟。询之于人，乃陈朝宫人墓。
现代文：后来，再找从前相聚的地方，就找到清溪，那里长满了松树桧树，到处是土丘，向人打听，竟是陈朝的宫人墓。
English: Later, when they looked for the place where they used to meet, they found Qing Creek, which was full of pine trees and eucalyptus trees, and there were mounds everywhere. They asked people if it was the palace tomb of the Chen Dynasty.

古文：浚惨恻而返，数月，阁因寺废而毁。
现代文：浚怀着感伤哀怜之情返回来。几个月后，瓦官阁因为寺庙坍塌而被毁。
English: A few months later, the shingle pavilion was destroyed when the temple collapsed.

古文：后至广陵，访得吴公台炀帝旧陵，果有宫人赵幼芳墓，因以酒奠之。
现代文：后来到了广陵，寻访到吴公台炀帝的旧陵，果然有宫人赵幼芳的墓，于是洒酒祭奠她。
English: Later, they went to Guangling and visited the old mausoleum of Emperor Wu Gongtai, where they found the tomb of the palace attendant Zhao Yufang, so they sprinkled wine to commemorate her.

古文：郝惟谅
现代文：郝惟谅
English: Forgive me.

古文：荆州之民郝惟谅，性粗率，勇于私斗。
现代文：荆州的百姓郝惟谅，性格鲁莽、率直，勇于争斗。
English: The people of Jingzhou are kind-hearted, reckless, straightforward, and brave in battle.

古文：会昌二年寒食日，与其徒游于郊外，蹴踘角力，醉卧冢间。
现代文：会昌二年寒食节的那天，跟朋友到郊外游玩，作踢球游戏，彼此较量力气，醉酒后躺在坟冢间睡着了。
English: On the day of the second year of the cold food festival in Huichang, he and his friends went to the suburbs to play, play kickball games, and measure their strength against each other. After getting drunk, he fell asleep between the graves.

古文：宵分始寤，将归，道左见一人家，室绝卑陋，虽张灯而颇昏暗。
现代文：天黑以后才醒过来，将要回家，看见道左边有一人家，房子破烂、简陋，即使点着灯，屋里也很昏暗。
English: After dark, I woke up and was about to go home when I saw a man's house on the left side of the road. The house was tattered and shabby, and even with the lights on, it was very dark inside.

古文：遂诣乞浆，有一妇人，容色惨悴，服装雅素，方向灯纫缝。
现代文：于是郝惟谅就去那人家，想要点东西喝。那家有一个妇人，脸色苍白憔悴，衣服朴素，正面对灯做针线活。
English: So he went to the man's house to get something to drink, and there was a woman with a pale face and shabby clothes who was sewing in front of the lamp.

古文：延郝，良久谓郝曰：知君有胆气，故敢情托。
现代文：那妇人邀请郝惟谅进屋。停了好一会儿，才对他说：我知道你有胆量、有气魄，所以有事情才敢托付给你。
English: The woman invited 惟諒 into the house. She paused for a while before saying to him: "I know you have guts and courage, so I dare to entrust you with something."

古文：妾本秦人，姓张氏，嫁与府衙健儿李自欢。自欢太和中，戌边不返，妾遘疫而殁。
现代文：我本是秦人，姓张，嫁给府衙里一个身体强健男儿李自欢，自欢太和年中，被派守边关一去不返，我也得病死了。
English: I am originally from Qin, surnamed Zhang, married to Li Ziguan, a physically strong man from Fuyuan. When I was too old and too young, I was sent to the border and never returned. I also had to die of illness.

古文：别无亲戚，为邻里殡于此处，已逾一纪，迁葬无因。
现代文：我无亲无故，后来被邻居发丧埋葬在这里。现在已经过了十几年，没有机会迁葬了。
English: I had no relatives and was later buried here by a neighbor. Now, more than ten years have passed and there is no opportunity to move the grave.

古文：凡死者饥骨未复于土，魂神不为阴司所籍。虽散恍惚，如梦如醉。
现代文：凡死人尸骨没盖上土的，都不被阴司列入户籍，于是灵魂到处飘散，迷迷糊糊的，象作梦和醉酒一样。
English: If the bones of the dead are not covered with earth, they are not recorded in the family register by the necropolis, so the soul drifts everywhere, confused, like a dream and drunkenness.

古文：君能便妾遗骸得归泉壤，精爽有托，斯愿毕矣。
现代文：你如果能让我的遗骨回归地下，灵魂有所寄托，我的心愿也算了结了。
English: If you can return my remains to the ground, my soul will be saved, and my wish will be fulfilled.

古文：郝曰：某生业素薄，力且不办，如何？
现代文：郝惟谅说：我的生业财路一向薄浅，即使用力去办，恐怕也做不到。你看怎么办？
English: Zou Wei said, "My livelihood and financial means have always been shallow. Even if I use my strength to do it, I'm afraid I won't be able to do it. What do you think?

古文：妇人云：某虽为鬼，不废女工。
现代文：那妇人说：我虽然是鬼，但一直没有丢开针线活。
English: The woman said, "Even though I am a ghost, I have never given up needlework.

古文：自安此，常造雨衣，与胡氏佣作，凡数年矣。
现代文：自从住在这儿，常常缝制雨衣，给一家姓胡的做雇工，共有许多年了。
English: Since living here, I often sewed raincoats and worked as a hired hand for a family surnamed Hu for many years.

古文：所聚十三万，葬备有余也。
现代文：积赞的钱有十三万，安葬等一切费用还有剩余。
English: The accumulated money is one hundred and thirty thousand, and there is still a surplus for all expenses such as burial.

古文：郝许诺而归。
现代文：郝惟谅答应了他，就回去了。
English: But I forgave him and went back.

古文：迟明，访之胡氏，物色皆符，乃具以告。
现代文：天亮时候，访到了姓胡的，察看一下完全与那妇人说的相符，就把事情的经过详细地告诉了他，并跟他一块到坟地去。
English: At dawn, she visited a man surnamed Hu and found that he completely agreed with what the woman had said. She told him the details of what had happened and went to the cemetery with him.

古文：即与偕往殡所，毁瘗视之，散钱培榇，数如其言。
现代文：打开棺木一看，钱都零散的堆在里面，数一数，果然象妇人说的那么多。
English: When he opened the coffin, he saw that the money was scattered and piled up inside. He counted it, and it was indeed as much as the woman had said.

古文：胡氏与郝，哀而异之。
现代文：姓胡的人与郝惟谅都很怜惜她，同时也感到惊异。
English: People with the surname of Hu and those with the surname of Wei both felt pity for her and were surprised at the same time.

古文：复率钱于同辈，合二十万，盛其凶仪，瘗于鹿顶原。
现代文：之后就又拿着这些钱及从朋友那里筹集的钱，总共三十万，很隆重地给他举行了安葬仪式，重新葬在鹿顶原。
English: After that, they took the money and the money raised from friends, a total of three hundred thousand, and held a very grand funeral ceremony for him, and reburied him in Deer Top Plain.

古文：其夕，见梦于胡郝。
现代文：当天晚上，那妇人就托梦给胡、郝二人。
English: That evening, the woman told Hu and Zou about the dream.

古文：浮梁张令
现代文：浮梁张令
English: Floating girders

古文：浮梁张令，家业蔓延江淮间，累金积粟，不可胜计。
现代文：浮梁姓张的县令，家业遍布在江淮一带，积累的财宝和粮食，无法计算。
English: Fu Liang, surnamed Zhang, was a county magistrate. His family's business was all over the Jianghuai region. The amount of treasure and grain he accumulated is incalculable.

古文：秩满，如京师，常先一程致顿，海陆珍美毕具。
现代文：为官期满，到京城去，常提前一程用餐，把海陆珍奇各种美味佳肴全都准备齐全。
English: At the end of his term of office, when he goes to Beijing, he often dines a mile ahead of time, and prepares all kinds of delicious delicacies from the sea and land.

古文：至华阴，仆夫施幄幙，陈樽垒。
现代文：到了华阴，仆人搭好帐篷，摆上酒器、食具，厨师烤制的羊正好也熟了。
English: When they arrived in Huayin, the servants set up the tent, put out the wine and tableware, and the lamb roasted by the chef was just right.

古文：庖人炙羊方熟，有黄衫者，据盘而坐。
现代文：有个穿黄衣服的占了个位置屈膝而坐。
English: A man in yellow took his place, sitting with his knees bent.

古文：仆夫连叱，神色不挠。
现代文：仆人连声喝叱，那人面不改色，毫不屈从。
English: The servant scolded him in unison, but the man did not change his expression and did not give in.

古文：店妪曰：今五坊弋罗之辈，横行关内，此其流也，不可与竞。
现代文：店主老妇人说：现在五坊衙门搜寻追捕的不法之徒，在关内横行，这人大概就属于这类人。不能跟他争持。
English: The shopkeeper's elderly wife said, "Right now, the gatekeepers are searching for and hunting down the outlaws who are running rampant inside the gate. This man probably belongs to this type of person. We can't argue with him."

古文：仆夫方欲求其帅以责之，而张令至，具以黄衫者告，张令曰：勿叱。
现代文：仆人刚想找自己的长官斥责他，张县令来到了。仆人就把黄衣人的事全部告诉他。张县令说：不要喝叱他。
English: The servant had just wanted to find his superior to reprimand him, when the Zhang County magistrate arrived. The servant told him everything about the man in yellow. The Zhang County magistrate said, "Don't scold him.

古文：召黄衫者问曰：来自何方？
现代文：就把黄衣人召来问他说：你从什么地方来？
English: So they called the man in yellow and asked him, "Where are you from?"

古文：黄衫但唯唯耳。
现代文：黄衣人只是唯唯应诺罢了。
English: The man in yellow is just a yes-man.

古文：促暖酒，酒至，令以大金钟饮之。
现代文：张县令催促温酒，酒拿来了，让黄衣人用大金钟饮酒。
English: Zhang County ordered to urge warm wine, the wine was brought, and the person in yellow was allowed to drink with a large gold bell.

古文：虽不谢，似有愧色。
现代文：黄衣人虽然不表感谢，但表情好象有惭愧之色。
English: Although the man in yellow does not express gratitude, his expression seems to be tinged with shame.

古文：饮讫，顾炙羊，著目不移，令自割以劝之。
现代文：黄衣人喝完酒，回头目不转眼地盯着那只烤羊。张令亲自动手割羊肉劝他吃。
English: After the man in yellow finished drinking, he stared at the roasted lamb without turning a blind eye. Zhang Ling personally cut the lamb and persuaded him to eat it.

古文：一足尽，未有饱色，令又以奁中餤十四五啖之。
现代文：一条羊腿吃完了，没有吃饱，张令又把箱子里十分之四、五的食物拿出来给他吃。
English: After eating a leg of lamb, he was not satisfied, so Zhang Rong took out four or five tenths of the food in the box and gave it to him to eat.

古文：凡饮二斗余，酒酣，谓令曰：四十年前，曾于东店得一醉饱，以至今日。
现代文：酒喝到很尽兴的时候，黄衣人对张县令说：我四十年前曾经在东店吃饱喝足过一次，直到现在才吃顿饱饭。
English: When he had drunk his fill of wine, the man in yellow said to the Zhang County magistrate: Forty years ago, I once had enough to eat and drink at the East Store, but I have never had a full meal until now.

古文：令甚讶，乃勤恳问姓氏，对曰：某非人也，盖直送关中死籍之吏耳。
现代文：张令听后很惊讶，就极力恳切地打听他的姓氏。黄衣人回答说：我不是人，只是送关中死人薄籍的小吏罢了。
English: Zhang Ling was very surprised to hear this, so he earnestly tried to find out his last name. The man in yellow replied: "I'm not a person, I'm just a petty official with a poor record who is escorting a dead man through customs."

古文：令惊问其由，曰：太山召人魂，将死之籍付诸岳，俾某部送耳，令曰：可得一观呼？
现代文：张令吃惊地向他打听事情的原委。黄衣人说：太行山召募人魂，将要死去的人的名簿都放在那里，派我部里人送去罢了。张令说：能拿来给我看看吗？
English: Zhang Ling was surprised and asked him about the original commission of the matter. The man in yellow said, "Taihang Mountain calls for the collection of human souls. The name books of the people who are going to die are all placed there. Just send someone from my department to take them there." Zhang Ling said, "Can you show them to me?"

古文：曰：更窥亦无患。
现代文：那个黄衣人回答说：即便看看也没有什么妨害。于是解开皮囊。
English: The man in yellow replied that there was nothing to prevent him from taking a look, so he unzipped the bag.

古文：于是解革囊，出一轴，其首云：太行主者牒金天府。
现代文：拿一卷纸笺来，打开看那上面第一行写着：太行主者牒全天府。
English: Take out a roll of paper and open it to see that the first line above reads: "Taigang's master, Quan Tianfu."

古文：其第二行云：贪财好杀，见利忘义人，前浮梁县令张某。
现代文：第二行写着：贪财好杀、见利忘义人，前浮梁县令张某。
English: The second line reads: Greedy for money and eager to kill, seeing profit and forgetting the righteous, Zhang Mou, the former governor of Liang County.

古文：即张君也，令见名，乞告使者曰：修短有限，谁敢惜死。
现代文：张令看到自己的名字，乞求黄衣使者说：人生在世，修行和命运都是有一定限度的谁敢贪生怕死？
English: Zhang Ling saw his name and begged the yellow-clothed messenger, saying: Life on earth, practice and fate all have a certain limit. Who dares to be greedy for life and afraid of death?

古文：但某方强仕，不为死备，家业浩大，未有所付。何术得延其期？
现代文：只是我现在正身强力壮，家业这样浩大，还没有依托，有什么办法能延缓我的死期呢？
English: But now that I'm strong and healthy, and my family business is so huge, and I don't have any support, is there any way to delay my death?

古文：某囊橐中，计所值不下数十万，尽可以献于执事。
现代文：我的袋子里的财物总计不少于几十万，都可以奉献给你。
English: The belongings in my bag total no less than several hundred thousand, all of which can be dedicated to you.

古文：使者曰：一饭之恩，诚宜报答。
现代文：黄衫使者说：一顿酒饭的恩惠，我确实应该报答。
English: The yellow-shirted messenger said, "I really should repay the favor of a meal.

古文：百万之贶，某何用焉？
现代文：百万巨款的馈赠，对我有什么用呢？
English: What good would a million-dollar gift do me?

古文：今有仙官刘纲，谪在莲花峰。足下宜匍匐径往，哀诉奏章，舍此则无计矣。
现代文：现在有个仙官叫刘纲，被贬在莲花峰，你应该竭尽全力径直前往，悲伤地诉说、奏请。除此之外，再没有别的办法了。
English: Now there is a faery named Liu Gang who has been banished to Lotus Peak. You should make every effort to go straight to him and make a sad appeal. There is no other way.

古文：某昨闻金天王与南岳博戏不胜，输二十万，甚被逼逐。
现代文：我昨天听说金天王和南岳王作一种赌输赢的游戏，没取胜，输二十万，被催逼得很厉害，你可以到岳庙。
English: Yesterday, I heard that King Jin Tianwang and King Nangyue played a game of winning and losing. If you didn't win, you lost 200,000 yuan. They pushed you very hard. You can go to the Yue Temple.

古文：足下可诣岳庙，厚数以许之，必能施力于仙官。纵力不及，亦得路于莲花峰下。不尔，荆榛蒙密，川谷阻绝，无能往者。
现代文：用巨额的钱财许诺给他，他一定能在仙官那里给你出力。即使他出不了力，也可以从莲花峰下轻取登山之路，否则，荆榛遍布，密密层层，山谷阻断，你无法到达那里。
English: Promise him with a huge amount of money and wealth, he will definitely be able to give you a lift from the immortals. Even if he can't give you a lift, you can easily take the mountain path from the bottom of the lotus peak, otherwise, the brambles are all over, dense layers, the valley is blocked, you can't get there.

古文：令于是赍牲牢，驰诣岳庙，以千万许之。
现代文：张令于是带了宰杀了的牲畜，骑马直奔岳庙。用千万钱财向他许诺。
English: Zhang Ling then took the slaughtered livestock and rode straight to the Yue Temple. He promised him ten million yuan.

古文：然后直诣莲花蜂，得幽径。
现代文：然后直奔莲花峰，找到了登山的小路。
English: Then I went straight to Lotus Peak and found a hiking trail.

古文：凡数十里，至峰下，转东南，有一茅堂。
现代文：总共走了几十里路，到达莲花峰下。折向东南，有个茅草房，只见一个道士在小几案后面坐着。
English: After walking a total of dozens of miles, we arrived at the foot of Lotus Peak. Turning southeast, there was a thatched house, and I saw a Taoist priest sitting behind a small group of cases.

古文：见道士隐几而坐，问令曰：腐骨秽肉，魂亡神耗者，安得来此？
现代文：责问张令说：你这块腐骨秽肉，灵魂即将耗尽的人，怎么能到这里来？
English: He asked Zhang Ling: "You piece of rotten and filthy flesh, who's soul is about to be exhausted, how can you come here?

古文：令曰：钟鸣漏尽，露唏顷刻。
现代文：张令说：钟已击响，漏壶已报晓，露水顷刻间就晒干了。
English: Zhang Ling said: The clock has struck, the leaking pot has announced the dawn, and the dew has dried up in an instant.

古文：窃闻仙官，能复精魂于朽骨，致肌肉于枯骸。
现代文：我私下听说仙官能使朽骨复活，使白骨长肉。
English: Privately, I have heard that immortelle can revive dead bones and make white bones grow flesh.

古文：既有好生之心，岂惜奏章之力？
现代文：我既然还有求生之心，就会不惜一切财力向仙官奏请的。
English: Since I still have a heart for survival, I will spare no expense to appeal to the immortals.

古文：道士曰：吾顷为隋朝权臣一奏，道谪居此峰。尔何德于予，欲陷吾为寒山之叟乎？
现代文：道士说：我曾经替隋朝权臣启奏过一次，于是被贬住在这莲花峰下，你对我有什么恩德，想让我做终生孤守寒山的老翁呢？
English: The Taoist said: I once played for the Sui Dynasty's powerful minister, so I was relegated to live under this lotus peak. What kind of grace do you have for me, do you want me to be an old man who stays alone in the cold mountain all my life?

古文：令衷祈愈切，仙官神色甚怒。
现代文：张令苦苦哀求、感情更切迫。仙官神色很愤怒。
English: Zhang Ling begged and pleaded, his emotions even more urgent. The faerie looked very angry.

古文：俄有使者，赍一函而至，则金天王之书扎也。
现代文：一会儿，来一个使者，送来一封信，就是金天王的书信。
English: After a while, a messenger came to deliver a letter. It was a letter from King Jin Tianwang.

古文：仙官览书，笑曰：关节既到，难为不应。
现代文：仙官看完信，笑着说：机会已到，很难不答应。
English: After reading the letter, Xian Guan smiled and said, "The opportunity has come. It's hard not to accept it."

古文：召使者反报，曰：莫又为上帝谴责否？
现代文：召来使回告说：不会又因此受上天谴责吧。
English: The summoner replied, "You won't be condemned by heaven for this.

古文：乃启玉函，书一通，焚香再拜以遣之。
现代文：于是打开信，然后又写一阵子，烧香拜两拜打发使者回去。
English: So he opened the letter, then wrote for a while, burned incense and prayed for two days before sending the messenger back.

古文：凡食顷，天符乃降，其上署彻字，仙官复焚香再拜以启之，云：张某弃背祖宗，窃假名位。不顾礼法，苟窃官荣。而又鄙僻多藏，诡诈无实。百里之任，已是叨居；千乘之富，今因苟得。
现代文：共有一顿饭的工夫，上天的符命就下来了。那上面写着彻字，仙官又烧香拜两拜打开看，上面写着：张某弃背祖宗，窃假名位，不顾礼法，苟且官荣，而又鄙僻多藏，诡诈无实，百里之任，已是叨居；千乘之富，今因苟得。
English: There was time for a meal, and the heavenly sign came down. On it was written the following words, which the magicians burned incense and prayed for two days to open and read. It read: Zhang abandoned his ancestors, stole a prestigious position, disregarded etiquette, clung to his official glory, and hid a lot, and was deceitful and insincere. The task of a hundred miles is already a burden; the wealth of a thousand times is now earned.

古文：令按罪已实，待戮余魂。
现代文：令按罪已实，待戮余魂。
English: According to the order, the crime has been confirmed, and the remaining souls are waiting to be killed.

古文：何为奏章，求延厥命？
现代文：何为奏章，求延厥命？
English: What is the chant, "Pray for his life"?

古文：但以扶危拯溺者，大道所尚；纾刑宥过者，玄门是宗。
现代文：但以扶危拯溺者，大道所尚、纾刑肩过者，玄门是宗。
English: However, for those who rescue and save people in danger, for those who remain on the main road, and for those who pass by, the front gate is the main entrance.

古文：狥尔一甿，我全弘化，希其悛恶，庶乃自新。
现代文：徇乐甿。我全弘化，希其悛恶，庶乃自新。
English: I'm all about spreading the word, hoping for the best, and striving for the best.

古文：贪生者量延五年，奏章者不能无罪。
现代文：贪生者量延五年，奏章者不能无罪。
English: Those who are greedy for life will have their sentence extended by five years, and those who are given a criminal record will not be absolved.

古文：仙官览毕，谓令曰：大凡世人之寿，皆可至百岁。而以喜怒哀乐，汩没心源；爱恶嗜欲，伐生之根。
现代文：仙官看完，对张令说：大致世人的寿命，都可活到百岁，然而人因为有喜怒哀乐之情，弄乱了人的心性，爱和恨的嗜好和欲望，斩断了生命的根源。
English: After reading it, the oracle said to Zhang Ling, "Most people can live to be a hundred years old. However, because people have emotions, they have disturbed people's heart, love and hate, and have cut off the root of life.

古文：而又扬己之能，掩彼之长，颠倒方寸，顷刻万变。
现代文：宣扬夸大自己的本领、而掩盖他人的长处，扰乱心性，顷刻万变。
English: Propaganda exaggerates one's own ability and conceals the strengths of others. It disturbs one's disposition and leads to sudden changes.

古文：神倦思怠，难全天和。
现代文：就会使人的精神疲乏、倦怠。天时虽和，也不能完全发挥作用。
English: It will make people's spirit tired and weary. Although the weather is fine, it can not fully play its role.

古文：如彼淡泉，汩于五味，欲致不坏，甚可得乎？
现代文：就象甘美的泉水，投进五味，甘美的泉水仍不改变味道，难道可能吗？
English: Just like sweet spring water, if you add five flavors, the sweet spring water still does not change the taste, is it possible?

古文：勉导归途，无堕吾教。
现代文：所以我勉励你回归正道，不要忘记我的教诲。
English: So I urge you to return to the right path and do not forget my teachings.

古文：令拜辞，举手已失所在。
现代文：张令拜别告辞，举手之间，那人已不知去向。
English: Zhang Ling bade farewell, raised his hand and left, the man did not know where he was going.

古文：复寻旧路，稍觉平易，行十余里，黄衫吏迎前而贺。
现代文：又寻找原路而回。
English: and find their way back again.

古文：令曰：将欲奉报，愿知姓字。
现代文：心里稍觉平稳和轻松。走了十多里路，黄衫人迎上前向他道贺。张令说：将要答谢你，希望告诉我姓名。
English: He felt a little stable and relaxed in his heart. After walking more than ten miles, the man in the yellow shirt came forward to congratulate him. Zhang Ling said: I will thank you and hope to tell you my name.

古文：吏曰：吾姓钟，生为宣城县脚力。亡于华阴，遂为幽冥所录。
现代文：黄衣小吏说：我姓钟，活在世上时就做传递文书的差事，死在华阴，于是又被阴司录用、做传递文书的差事。
English: The yellow-clad clerk said, "My surname is Zhong. When I was alive, I was assigned to deliver documents. When I died in Huayin, I was assigned to deliver documents.

古文：递符之役，劳苦如旧。令曰：何以免执事之困？
现代文：跟从前一样劳苦。张令说：用什么办法可以免去你这差事的辛苦？
English: Zhang Ling said, "What can I do to relieve you from the hard work of this job?"

古文：曰：但酬金天王愿，曰请置子为阍人，则吾饱神盘子矣。
现代文：回答说：只要你能实现对金天王许下的诺言并且对他说，请他安排我做守门人，我也就心满意足了。
English: He replied: "As long as you can fulfill the promise you made to the King of Heaven and tell him to arrange for me to be the gatekeeper, I will be satisfied.

古文：天符已违半日，难更淹留。
现代文：送天符的时间已经耽搁了半天，不便再停留了。
English: The time for sending the amulets has been delayed by half a day, and it is inconvenient to stay any longer.

古文：便与执事别，入庙南柘林三五步而没。
现代文：张令便与黄衣差役告别，黄衣人进了庙南枯树中三、五步远的地方就不见了。
English: Zhang Ling then bade farewell to the yellow-clad policeman, and the yellow-clad man disappeared three to five paces into the dead trees south of the temple.

古文：是夕，张令驻车华阴，决东归。
现代文：这天晚上，张令停车住在华阴，决定东归去实现对金天王的许诺，花费要超过二万。
English: That evening, Zhang Ling parked his car in Huayin and decided to go back east to fulfill his promise to King Jin Tianwang. It would cost him more than 20,000 yuan.

古文：计酬金天王愿，所费数逾二万，乃语其仆曰：二万可以赡吾十舍之资粮矣，安可受祉于上帝，而私谒于土偶人乎？
现代文：就对他的仆人说：二万可以赡养十个象我这样的家庭，供应他们物资和粮食。怎以把逾万的祭品送给上天，而又私自去拜谒土偶呢？
English: He said to his servant: "Twenty thousand rupees can support ten families like mine, and provide them with goods and food. How can I offer more than ten thousand rupees in sacrifice to heaven, and then go and worship the clay figurine in private?"

古文：明旦，遂东至偃师，止于县馆。
现代文：第二天早晨就向东走，到了偃师，住在县馆。
English: The next morning, I headed east and arrived in Kashi, where I stayed at the prefectural office.

古文：见黄衫旧吏，赍牒排闼而进，叱张令曰：何虚妄之若是？
现代文：看见原来那个黄衫小吏、拿着天符推门进来，怒叱张令说：你怎么这样虚假，荒诞？
English: Seeing the original yellow-shirted petty official pushing in through the door holding the heavenly sign, he angrily scolded Zhang Rong and said, "How can you be so false and absurd?

古文：今祸至矣。由尔偿三峰之愿不果，俾吾答一饭之恩无始终。悒悒之怀，如痛毒螫。
现代文：现在就要大祸临头了，由你偿还对三峰的承诺没能实现，使我对你一饭之恩的报答也有始无终，心里很不安，象被毒虫咬了一样疼。
English: Now a great calamity is imminent. Your promise to repay the Three Peaks has not been fulfilled, so that my repayment of your one-meal grace has no beginning and no end. I am very uneasy in my heart, and it hurts like being bitten by a poisonous insect.

古文：言讫，失所在。
现代文：说完，就不见了。
English: And then he was gone.

古文：顷刻，张令有疾，留书遗妻子，未讫而终。
现代文：顷刻间，张令得了病，写遗书给妻子，还没写完就死了。
English: In an instant, Zhang Ling fell ill, wrote a suicide note to his wife, and died before finishing it.

古文：欧阳敏
现代文：欧阳敏
English: Ouyang Min

古文：行客或薄暮至此，即有人远迎安泊，及晓前进，往往有死者。
现代文：陕州东边三十里的地方本来没有旅馆，往来旅客有时傍晚到达这里，就有人老远地去迎接、安置。到天亮的时候，常常有死的。
English: Thirty miles to the east of Shaanxi Province, there are no hotels in this area. Sometimes, when travelers arrive here in the evening, someone has to travel a long distance to meet and accommodate them. By dawn, there are often deaths.

古文：杨州客欧阳敏，侵夜至，其鬼即为一老叟，迎归舍。
现代文：有个扬州旅客叫欧阳敏，在天渐渐黑下来的时候来到了这里。那鬼是一个老头，把他迎回了旅馆。
English: A Yangzhou tourist named Ouyang Min came here when it was getting dark. The ghost was an old man, who welcomed him back to the hotel.

古文：夜半后，诣客问乡地，便以酒炙延待。
现代文：半夜后，老头就到欧阳敏的住处，打听他的家乡。又用酒肉款待他。
English: After midnight, the old man went to Ouyang Min's residence to inquire about his hometown. He also treated him to wine and meat.

古文：客从容谈及阴骘之事，叟甚有惊怍之色。
现代文：欧阳敏从容地说到上天默默地安定下民的事，老头显出吃惊和惭愧的神色。
English: Ouyang Min calmly said that the heavens had silently stabilized the people. The old man looked surprised and ashamed.

古文：客问怪之，乃问曰：鬼神能侵害人乎？
现代文：欧阳敏认为他很奇怪，趁机问他说：鬼神能侵害人吗？
English: Ouyang Min thought he was very strange and took the opportunity to ask him: Can ghosts and gods harm people?

古文：人能害鬼乎？
现代文：人能害鬼吗？
English: Can a person harm a ghost?

古文：叟曰：鬼神之事，人不知，何能害之？
现代文：老头回答说：鬼神的事，人不了解，人怎么能害鬼？
English: The old man replied, "People don't understand about ghosts and gods. How can people harm ghosts?"

古文：鬼神必不肯无故侵害人也。或侵害人者，恐是妖鬼也，犹人间之贼盗耳。
现代文：鬼神也一定不能无缘无故地侵害人，有侵害人的，恐怕也是妖鬼，就象人间的盗贼罢了。
English: Ghosts and gods must not violate people for no reason. If they violate people, they are probably also ghosts, just like human thieves.

古文：若妖鬼之害人，偶闻于明神，必不容。亦不异贼盗之抵宪法也。
现代文：如果妖鬼害了人，偶尔被明察之神得知，一定不能宽容，跟盗贼触犯法规没什么不同。
English: If a genie harms a person and is occasionally discovered by the god of discernment, it must not be tolerated. It is no different from a thief breaking the law.

古文：叟复深有忧色，客怪之甚，遂谓叟曰：我若知妖鬼之所处，必诉于尊神，令尽剪除。
现代文：老头又现出忧虑的神色。欧阳敏更感诧异，于是对老头说：我如果知道妖鬼在什么地方，一定到尊神那去控告他，让他把妖鬼全部铲除。
English: The old man looked worried again. Ou Yangmin was even more surprised, so he said to the old man: "If I know where the demon is, I will definitely go to the venerated god to sue him, and let him eradicate the demon completely."

古文：叟不觉起拜，叩头而言曰：我强鬼也，虑至晓，君子不容，今幸望哀恕。
现代文：老头听后，不自觉地起身下拜并且说：我是强鬼，估计你知道全部真情，不会宽恕我。
English: After listening, the old man involuntarily stood up, bowed down and said, "I am a strong ghost. I guess you know the whole truth and will not forgive me."

古文：仍献一卷书与客曰：此书预知帝王历数，保惜保惜。
现代文：现在希望你能可怜我，饶恕我。老头于是献一卷书给欧阳敏，并说：这书能预先知道帝王的历数。要好好保存，好好爱惜。
English: Now I hope you can pity me and forgive me. The old man then presented a book to Ouyang Min and said, "This book can know the emperor's date in advance. You should keep it well and cherish it."

古文：客受之，至曙，不辞而去，回顾乃一坏坟耳。
现代文：欧阳敏接受了它。到早晨，老头不辞而去。回顾夜来的事，却是满腔愤怒。
English: Ouyang Min accepted it. In the morning, the old man left without a word. Looking back on the events of the night, he was filled with anger.

古文：其书是篆字，后客托人译之，传于世。
现代文：那书是篆字。欧阳敏托人译过来，流传在世上。
English: The book is in Chinese characters. Ouyang Min asked someone to translate it, and it spread around the world.

古文：奉天县民
现代文：奉天县民
English: The people of Bontian County

古文：会昌五年，奉天县国盛村民姓刘者，病狂，发时乱走，不避井堑。
现代文：会昌五年，奉天县国盛村村民姓刘的得了狂病。发病时到处乱走。
English: In the fifth year of Huichang, a villager surnamed Liu from Guosheng Village, Bongtian County, fell ill with rabies. When he fell ill, he wandered everywhere.

古文：其家为迎禁咒人侯公敏治之。
现代文：就连水井和沟塘也不知躲避。他家给他请了驱鬼的人侯公敏来给他治病。
English: Even wells and ditches could not be avoided. His family invited the exorcist Hou Gongmin to cure him.

古文：公敏才至，刘忽起曰：我暂出，不假尔治。
现代文：公敏刚刚来到，刘忽然起身说：我先出去，不让你治。
English: Just as Guomin arrived, Liu suddenly stood up and said, "I'm going out first, I won't let you rule."

古文：因杖薪担至田中，袒而运担，状若击物，良久而返。
现代文：于是手柱柴棍到了田里。光着膀子，拿着柴棍，好象在打什么东西。
English: So he went out into the field with a pole and a stick, bare-armed and holding a stick, as if he were beating something.

古文：笑曰：我病已矣，适打一鬼头落，埋于田中。
现代文：很长时间才回来，笑着说：我的病已经好了，刚才打落了一个鬼头，埋在田地里。
English: It took him a long time to come back, and he said with a smile, "My illness is over. I just knocked down a ghost and buried it in a field."

古文：兄弟及咒者，犹以为狂，遂同往验焉。
现代文：他的兄弟及驱鬼的人，还以为他说疯话。
English: His brothers and exorcists thought he was crazy.

古文：刘掘出一骷髅，戴赤发十余茎，其病竟愈。
现代文：于是同去田中察看，刘掘出一骷髅，长着十多根红头发。从此，他的病就好了。
English: So they went to Tanaka to investigate. Liu dug out a mole with more than a dozen red hairs. From then on, his illness was cured.

