古文：孟春之月，招摇指寅，昏参中，旦尾中。
现代文：孟春正月，招摇星指向十二辰的寅位，黄昏时参星位于正南方中天，黎明时尾星位于正南方中天。
English: In the first month of Mengchun, the wavering star points to the crescent of the twelfth hour. At dusk, the crescent star is located in the middle of the southern sky, and at dawn, the tail star is located in the middle of the southern sky.

古文：其位东方，其日甲乙，盛德在木，其虫鳞，其音角，律中太蔟，其数八，其味酸，其臭羶。其祀户。祭先脾。东风解冻，蛰虫始振苏，鱼上负冰，獭祭鱼，候雁北。
现代文：这个月的方位是东方，日干用甲乙，旺盛的德泽在于属木。
English: The direction of this month is the east, the sun dry with A and B, and the vigorous deze is in the wood.

古文：天子衣青衣，乘苍龙，服苍玉，建青旗，食麦与羊，服八风水，爨其燧火。
现代文：所属的动物是鳞龙。
English: The animal it belongs to is the lepidosaur.

古文：东宫御女青色，衣青采，鼓琴瑟。
现代文：代表的音是角音，所属的律是太蔟。
English: The maidservants of the East Palace wear blue clothes, the clothes are embroidered with blue patterns, and they play the piano and drums.

古文：其兵矛，其畜羊，朝于青阳左个，以出春令。
现代文：代表的数是八，所属的味道是酸味，所属的气味是膻味。
English: The number of representatives is eight, the taste they belong to is sour, and the smell they belong to is salty.

古文：布德施惠，行庆赏，省徭赋。
现代文：这个月祭祀户神，祭祀时先放上属木的脾脏。
English: In this month, the house god is sacrificed, and the spleen of the tree is placed on the altar first.

古文：立春之日，天子亲率三公九卿大夫以迎岁于东郊。
现代文：暖和的东风融解了冰冻，冬眠动物开始复苏活动，鱼儿靠近残冰游弋，水獭开始捕捉鱼儿，大雁开始飞往北方。天子穿青衣，骑青龙马，佩青色玉饰，树青色旗帜。
English: Warm easterly winds melted the ice, hibernating animals began to revive, fish swam near the remaining ice, otters began to catch fish, and geese began to fly to the north. Tianzi wore blue clothes, rode a blue dragon horse, wore blue jade ornaments, and had a blue flag.

古文：修除祠位，币祷鬼神，牺牲用牡。
现代文：吃麦面和羊肉，饮八风吹来的露水，烧饭用豆萁，用阳燧取火。
English: Eat wheat noodles and mutton, drink the dew blown by the eight winds, cook with soybean meal, and light a fire with cucumber.

古文：禁伐木，毋覆巢杀胎夭，毋麛，毋卵，毋聚众置城郭，掩骼薶骴。
现代文：东宫侍女穿青衣，衣裳绣有青色的花纹，弹琴鼓瑟。代表这个月的兵器是矛，代表这个月的家畜是羊。
English: The maids of the East Palace wear blue clothes, the clothes are embroidered with blue patterns, and they play the piano and drums. The weapon representing this month is the spear, and the domestic animal representing this month is the sheep.

古文：孟春行夏令，则风雨不时，草木旱落，国乃有恐；行秋令，则其民大疫，飘风暴雨总至，黎萎蓬蒿并兴；行冬令，则水潦为败，雨霜大雹，首稼不入。
现代文：天子在青阳宫左侧室上朝召见群臣，发布春季的政令，布施德泽恩惠，施行庆喜的奖赏，减轻徭役和赋税。立春之日，天子亲率三公九卿和大夫等文武官员到东郊去迎接春天的到来，修整祭坛清扫神位，献上圭璧祈求鬼神降福，祭祀用的牺牲是公畜。
English: In the upper room on the left side of the Qingyang Palace, the heavenly son summoned a group of ministers, issued a spring decree, dispensed favors, implemented festive rewards, reduced taxes and taxes. On the first day of spring, the heavenly son led the civil and military officials such as the three princes and nine nobles and doctors to the eastern suburbs to welcome the arrival of spring, repair the altar, clean the shrine, offer Gui Bi to pray for the blessing of ghosts and gods, and sacrifice the sacrificial animals.

古文：正月官司空，其树杨。
现代文：这个月的方位是东方，日干用甲乙。
English: This month's direction is east, and the solar terms are A and B.

古文：仲春之月，招摇指卯，昏弧中，旦建星中。
现代文：所属的动物是鳞龙。代表的音是角音，所属的律是夹钟。
English: The animal it belongs to is the lepidosaur. The representative sound is the horn sound, and the rhythm it belongs to is the gong.

古文：其位东方，其日甲乙，其虫鳞，其音角，律中夹钟，其数八，其味酸，其臭羶。其祀户。祭先脾。
现代文：代表的数是八，所属的味道是酸味，所属的气味是膻味。这个月祭祀户神，祭祀时先放上属木的脾脏。
English: The number of representatives is eight, the belonging taste is sour, the belonging smell is salty. This month, the house god is sacrificed, and the spleen of the tree is placed first during the sacrifice.

古文：始雨水，桃李始华，苍庚鸣，鹰化为鸠。
现代文：这时雨水开始多起来，桃李开始开花，黄莺鸟开始啼叫，鹰化成鸠。
English: At this time, more rain began to fall, peach and plum trees began to bloom, yellow starlings began to chirp, and eagles turned into storks.

古文：天子衣青衣，乘苍龙，服苍玉，建青旗，食麦与羊，服八风水，暴萁燧火。
现代文：天子穿青衣，骑青龙马，佩青色玉饰，树青色旗帜。吃麦面和羊肉，饮八风吹来的露水，烧饭用豆萁，用阳燧取火。
English: The Son of Heaven wears a blue robe, rides a blue dragon and horse, wears blue jade ornaments, and carries a blue flag. He eats wheat noodles and mutton, drinks dew blown by the eight winds, cooks with soybean meal, and uses impotence as a fire.

古文：东宫御女青色，衣青采，鼓琴瑟。
现代文：东宫侍女穿青衣，衣裳绣有青色的花纹，弹琴鼓瑟。
English: The maidservants of the East Palace wear blue clothes, the clothes are embroidered with blue patterns, and they play the piano and drums.

古文：其兵矛，其畜羊，朝于青阳太庙。
现代文：代表这个月的兵器是矛，代表这个月的家畜是羊。
English: The weapon of the month is the spear, and the animal of the month is the sheep.

古文：命有司，省囹圄，去桎梏，毋笞掠，止狱讼，养幼小，存孤独，以通句萌。
现代文：天子在青阳宫中厅上朝召见群臣，命令主管官员赦免轻罪囚犯，去除他们的手铐脚镣；停止拷打刑罚，调停诉讼争端；养育幼儿，抚养孤儿和孤老，以使万物在春天都能萌发生长。
English: In the middle hall of the Qingyang Palace, the heavenly son summoned the courtiers to the court and ordered the officials in charge to pardon prisoners of minor crimes and remove their shackles; stop torturing punishments, mediate litigation disputes; raise children, raise orphans and the elderly, so that everything can sprout and grow in the spring.

古文：择元日令民社。
现代文：选择吉利的日子，让百姓祭祀土地神。
English: Choose an auspicious day, and let the people offer sacrifices to the land god.

古文：是月也，日夜分，雷始发声，蛰虫咸动苏。
现代文：在这个月中，因春分使那天昼夜长短相等，春雷开始轰鸣，冬眠动物都被振动苏醒。
English: In this month, due to the vernal equinox, the length of day and night are equal on that day, the spring thunder begins to roar, and hibernating animals are awakened by vibration.

古文：先雷三日，振铎以令于兆民曰：雷且发声，有不戒其容止者，生子不备，必有凶灾。
现代文：在预计要打雷的前三天，摇动铎铃通知百姓： 雷将要响了，如果谁不检点自己的仪容举止，所生的小孩将会残缺不全，一定会有灾祸降临。 
English: Three days before the thunder is expected to strike, the bell is rung to inform the people: the thunder will ring, if anyone does not behave himself, the child will be incomplete, and disaster will surely come.

古文：令官市同度量，钧衡石，角斗称，端权概。
现代文：并命令官府管理市场，统一度量标准，检查各种衡量器具是否标准。
English: And ordered the government to manage the market, unify the measurement standards, and check whether various measuring instruments are standard.

古文：毋竭川泽，毋漉陂池，毋焚山林，毋作大事以妨农功。
现代文：不要排干河川湖泽及池塘内的水，不要焚烧山林，不要征集民工从事其他事情，以免妨碍春耕春种等农事。
English: Do not drain the water in rivers, lakes and ponds, do not burn mountains and forests, and do not recruit migrant workers to do other things, so as not to interfere with spring farming and spring planting.

古文：祭不用牺牲，用圭壁，更皮币。
现代文：祭祀时不必用牲畜，用圭璧、鹿皮和帛等来代替，保护家畜成长以符合春主生长主仁的原则。
English: It is not necessary to use livestock during the sacrifice, but to use gui bi, deer skin and gourd instead, to protect the growth of livestock in line with the principle of spring main growth.

古文：仲春行秋令，则其国大水，寒气总至，寇戎来征；行冬令，则阳气不胜，麦乃不熟，民多相残；行夏令，则其国大旱，暖气早来，虫螟为害。
现代文：如果仲春实施秋季的政令，就会使国家发生大水，寒潮不断袭来，敌国盗寇也会乘机侵犯；如果仲春实施冬季的政令，就会使阳气不能取胜，麦子就难以成熟，百姓则因饥荒而互相残杀；如果仲夏实施夏季的政令，就会使国家发生大旱，暖湿气流就会提前到来，螟虫会进一步危害农作物。
English: If Zhongchun implements the autumn decree, the country will be flooded, the cold wave will continue to strike, and the enemy bandits will also take the opportunity to invade; if Zhongchun implements the winter decree, the yang will not win, the wheat will be difficult to mature, and the people will kill each other due to famine; if the midsummer implements the summer decree, the country will be droughted, the warm and humid air flow will arrive ahead of time, and the aphids will further harm crops.

古文：二月官仓，其树杏。
现代文：这二月的代表官是仓官。代表的树是杏树。
English: This February's representative officer is the warehouse officer. The representative tree is the apricot tree.

古文：季春之月，招摇指辰，昏七星中，旦牵牛中。其位东方，其日甲乙，其虫鳞，其音角，律中姑洗，其数八，其味酸，其臭羶，其把户，祭先脾。
现代文：代表的音角音，所属的律是姑洗。代表的数是八，所属的味道是酸味，所属的气味是膻味。这个月祭祀户神，祭祀时先放上属木的脾脏。
English: The representative's tone angle is tone, the representative's rite is guba. The representative's number is eight, the representative's taste is sour, and the representative's smell is salty. This month, the house god is sacrificed, and the spleen of the tree is placed first during the sacrifice.

古文：桐始华，田鼠化为驾，虹始见，萍始生。
现代文：这时梧桐树开始茂华，田鼠变成鹌鹑，彩虹开始出现，浮萍开始生长。
English: At this time, the plane trees began to bloom, the voles turned into crickets, the rainbow began to appear, and the duckweed began to grow.

古文：天子衣青衣，乘苍龙，服苍玉，建青旗，食麦与羊，服八风水，暴萁燧火。
现代文：天子穿青衣，骑青龙马，佩青色玉饰，树青色旗帜。吃麦面和羊肉，饮八风吹来的露水，烧饭用豆萁，用阳燧取火。
English: The Son of Heaven wears a blue robe, rides a blue dragon and horse, wears blue jade ornaments, and carries a blue flag. He eats wheat noodles and mutton, drinks dew blown by the eight winds, cooks with soybean meal, and uses impotence as a fire.

古文：东宫御女青色，衣青采，鼓琴瑟，其兵矛，其畜羊，朝于青阳右个。
现代文：东宫侍女穿青衣，衣裳绣有青色的花纹，弹琴鼓瑟。代表这个月的兵器是矛，代表这个月的家畜是羊。天子在青阳宫右侧室上朝召见群臣。
English: The maid of the East Palace wears a blue dress, the dress is embroidered with a blue pattern, and plays the piano and drums. The weapon representing this month is a spear, and the livestock representing this month is a sheep. The Emperor summons the courtiers in the upper room on the right side of the Qingyang Palace.

古文：舟牧覆舟，五覆五反，乃言具于天子。天子乌始乘舟，荐鲔于寝庙，乃为麦祈实。
现代文：主管船只的官员将船翻来覆去检查多遍，确准无损，才禀告天子船只准备就绪，这时天子才乘船出发，奉献鲟鱼给宗庙祭祀，祈求上天保佑夏粮作物麦子颗粒饱满。
English: The official in charge of the ship turned the ship over and over and checked it many times to make sure it was not damaged, and then reported to the heavenly son that the ship was ready. At this time, the heavenly son set off by boat, dedicated the eel to the ancestral temple, and prayed to the heavens to bless the summer grain crop with full wheat grains.

古文：是月也，生气方盛，阳气发泄，句者毕出，萌者尽达，不可以内。
现代文：在这个月里，化育万物生长的阳气正旺盛，散泄洋溢于各个方面，弯曲的小草和笔直的树木都呈现出难以抑制的蓬勃生机。
English: In this month, the yang qi that nurtures the growth of all things is vigorous, the dissipation is overflowing in all aspects, and the crooked grass and straight trees are showing an irrepressible vigorous vitality.

古文：天子命有司发囷仓，助贫穷，振乏绝；开府库，出币帛，使诸侯，聘名士，礼贤者。
现代文：天子下令官员打开仓库，资助救济贫困百姓。又下令打开财物仓库，拿出丝帛出使诸侯，还拜访名士、礼待贤人。
English: Tianzi ordered the officials to open the warehouse to fund the relief of poor people. He also ordered to open the property warehouse, take out the silk cocoons to send out the princes, and also visit the celebrities and treat the wise men with courtesy.

古文：命司空，时雨将降，下水上腾，循行国邑，周视原野，修利堤防，导通沟读，达路除道，从国始，至境止。
现代文：命令司空，告诫他雨季将临，地下水将上升，有必要巡视大都小镇，察看郊外田野，加固堤防，疏通沟渠，清除路障，保证都城通往四方的道路畅通无阻。
English: He ordered Siku to warn him that the rainy season was approaching, groundwater would rise, and it was necessary to inspect most of the small towns in the capital, inspect the fields in the suburbs, strengthen the dikes, clear the ditches, remove the roadblocks, and ensure that the roads leading to the four sides of the capital were unimpeded.

古文：田猎毕弋、罝罘罗网，餧毒之药，毋出九门。
现代文：打猎用的各种弋射网具、诱毒兽物的药物一律不准携带出城门。
English: All kinds of laser nets used for hunting and drugs used to lure poisonous animals are not allowed to be carried out of the city gate.

古文：乃禁野虞，毋伐桑朽。
现代文：同时又令主管山林农田的官员不许砍伐桑树、柘树。
English: At the same time, officials in charge of mountain forests and farmlands were ordered not to cut down mulberry and eucalyptus trees.

古文：鸣鸠奋其羽，戴鵀降于桑。具扑曲筥筐。
现代文：这时，斑鸠展翅飞翔、戴胜鸟停集在桑林中，表示养蚕季节来临，有必要准备好蚕箔箩筐。
English: At this time, the pied flycatcher spreads its wings and the hoopoe stops in the mulberry grove, indicating that the silkworm rearing season is coming, and it is necessary to prepare silkworm foil baskets.

古文：后妃斋戒，东乡亲桑，省妇使，劝蚕事。
现代文：然后，后妃在斋戒之后亲自去东方采摘桑叶。
English: Then, the empress dowager herself went to the east to pick mulberry leaves after fasting.

古文：命五库，令百工，审金铁皮革筋角箭干脂胶丹漆，无有不良。
现代文：视察妇女们的劳动，勉励她们致力于养蚕事业。又命令掌管各种仓库的官员，督促各种工匠检查金铁、皮革、筋角、箭杆、脂胶、朱砂丹漆等材料是否完好，而不许有劣品。
English: He also ordered the officials in charge of various warehouses to supervise various craftsmen to check whether the materials such as gold and iron, leather, muscle angle, arrow shaft, grease glue, cinnamon lacquer are in good condition, and do not allow inferior products.

古文：择下旬吉日，大合乐，致欢欣。
现代文：选择本月下旬的吉日，让乐师演奏各种乐器，让大家欢欣鼓舞。
English: Choose an auspicious day at the end of this month, let musicians play various musical instruments, and let everyone rejoice.

古文：乃合牛腾马，游牝于牧。
现代文：这时该将公牛公马与母牛母马合在一起放牧。
English: At this time, bulls and stallions should be herded together with cows and mares.

古文：令国傩，九门磔攘，以毕春气。
现代文：并命令国都举行驱赶疫鬼的仪式，在国都九座城门宰杀牲畜祭神以驱除妖邪之气来结束春季时令。
English: He also ordered the capital to hold a ceremony to drive out the pestilence, slaughtering livestock and offering sacrifices to the gods at the nine gates of the capital to drive out the evil spirits and end the spring season.

古文：行是月令，甘雨至三旬。
现代文：如果能在本季春中实施上述这些政令，那么甘雨就会及时降临在这段时间里。
English: If the above-mentioned decrees can be implemented in the spring of this season, then the sweet rain will come in time during this period.

古文：季春行冬令，则寒气时发，草木皆肃，国有大恐；行夏令，则民多疾疫，时雨不降，山陵不登；行秋令，则天多沈阴，淫雨早降，兵革并起。
现代文：如果季春实施冬季的政令，就会出现寒冷的气温，草木也因此萎缩，国家会出现大恐慌；如果季春实施夏季的政令，人民就会有疾病瘟疫，该下的雨也就不降临，山上的植物就不能正常生长；如果季春实施秋季的政令，就会出现阴沉的天气，淫雨提早来到，战祸纷起。
English: If the winter decree is implemented in the spring, the cold temperature will occur, the plants will shrink, and the country will panic; if the summer decree is implemented in the spring, the people will have diseases and plagues, the rain will not fall, and the plants in the mountains will not grow normally; if the autumn decree is implemented in the spring, the weather will be gloomy, the rain will come early, and the war will be disastrous.

古文：三月官乡，其树李。
现代文：这三月的代表官是乡官。代表的树是李树。
English: The representative of this March is the township official. The representative tree is the plum tree.

古文：孟夏之月，招摇指巳，昏翼中，旦婺女中。
现代文：这个月的方位是南方，日干用丙丁，旺盛的德泽在于属火。
English: This month's location is the south, the dry day is fire, and the vigorous deze is fire.

古文：其位南方，其日丙丁，盛德在火，其虫羽，其音徵，律中仲吕，其数，其味苦，其臭焦，其祀社，祭先肺。
现代文：所属的动物是羽鸟。代表的音是徵音，所属的律是仲吕。代表的数是七，所属的味道是苦味，所属的气味是焦味。这个月祭祀灶神，祭祀时先放上属火的肺脏。
English: The animal it belongs to is the feathered bird. The representative sound is the call, the law it belongs to is Zhong Lü. The number of representatives is seven, the taste it belongs to is bitterness, and the smell it belongs to is scorching. This month, the god of the hearth is sacrificed, and the lungs belonging to fire are placed first during the sacrifice.

古文：蝼蝈鸣，丘螾出，王瓜生，苦菜秀。
现代文：这时蝼蛄开始啼鸣，蚯蚓钻出地面，王瓜长出，苦菜开花。
English: At this time, the crickets began to chirp, the crickets drilled out of the ground, the king melon grew out, and the bitter cabbage bloomed.

古文：天子衣赤衣，乘赤骝，服赤玉，建赤旗，食菽与鸡，服八风水，爨柘燧火。
现代文：天子穿赤红衣，骑赤红马，佩赤红玉饰，树赤红旗帜。吃豆类和鸡，饮八风吹来的露水，烧饭用柘木，用阳燧取火。
English: The Son of Heaven wears a scarlet robe, rides a scarlet horse, wears a scarlet jewel, and carries a scarlet banner. He eats beans and chicken, drinks the dew of the eight winds, cooks with birch, and lights a fire with coals.

古文：南宫御女赤色，衣赤采，吹竽笙。
现代文：南宫侍女穿赤红衣，衣裳绣有赤红的花纹，吹奏竽笙。
English: The handmaidens of the Southern Court wear crimson robes, embroidered with crimson patterns, and play gongs.

古文：其兵乾，其畜鸡，朝于明堂左个，以出夏令。
现代文：代表这个月的兵器是戟，代表这个月的家畜是鸡。天子在明堂宫左侧室上朝召见群臣，发布夏季的政令。
English: The weapon of the month is the crossbow, and the domestic animal of the month is the chicken. The emperor summons his ministers in the upper room on the left side of the Myeongdong Palace and issues a summer decree.

古文：立夏之日，天子亲率三公九卿大夫以迎岁于南郊。
现代文：立夏之日，天子亲率三公九卿和大夫等文武官员到南郊去迎接夏天的到来。
English: On the first day of summer, Tianzi progenitor led the three princes, nine nobles and doctors and other civil and military officials to the southern suburbs to welcome the arrival of summer.

古文：还乃赏赐，封诸侯，修礼乐，飨左右。
现代文：返回后论功行赏，分封诸侯，举行隆重的礼仪，弹奏高雅的音乐，宴请左右近臣。
English: After returning, they discussed the reward for meritorious deeds, divided the fiefs, held a grand ceremony, played elegant music, and held a banquet for close ministers.

古文：命太尉，先杰俊，选贤良，举孝悌。
现代文：命令主管军事的太尉，推举智勇超群的人才，选拔品行优秀的贤士，推荐孝悌父母兄弟的人士，授予他们爵位和赏赐他们俸禄。
English: He ordered the captain in charge of the military to promote the most intelligent and courageous talents, select the sages with excellent moral conduct, recommend the persons who are filial to their parents and brothers, award them with a title and reward them with a salary.

古文：行爵出禄，佐天长养，继修增高，无有隳坏。
现代文：要辅佐上天养育万物，使万物生长正常而不至于出现毁坏夭折。
English: It is necessary to assist heaven to nurture all things, so that all things grow normally and do not die prematurely.

古文：毋兴土功，毋伐大树。
现代文：不要大兴土木，不要砍伐大树。
English: Don't build big buildings, don't cut down big trees.

古文：令野虞，行田原，劝农事，驱兽畜，勿令害谷。
现代文：命令主管田野山林的官员，巡视田间原野，勉励农事，驱赶野兽和家畜，不使它们进入庄稼地危害谷物。
English: He ordered the officials in charge of the fields and forests to inspect the fields and fields, encourage farming, drive away wild animals and livestock, and prevent them from entering the crops and endangering the grain.

古文：天子以彘尝麦，先荐寝庙。
现代文：天子将尝过新麦的猪献祭给宗庙请祖先神灵尝新。
English: The son of heaven will sacrifice a pig that has tasted the new wheat to the ancestral temple to ask the ancestral gods to taste the new wheat.

古文：聚畜百药，靡草死。
现代文：积蓄采集各种药材。这时诸如葶苈草这样的靡草开始衰死，而麦子将成熟。
English: At this time, weeds such as rushes begin to wither and die, and the wheat will ripen.

古文：麦秋至，决小罪。断薄刑。
现代文：对那些轻罪犯人进行判决，并处以轻微的刑罚。
English: Those who are petty criminals are tried and given light sentences.

古文：孟夏行秋令，则苦雨数来，五谷不滋，四邻入保。
现代文：如果孟夏实施秋季的政令，就会使有害的雨下个不停，五谷不能很好地生长，郊外的百姓就要涌入都城内以求活命。
English: If Mengxia implemented the autumn decree, it would make the harmful rain fall incessantly, the grain would not grow well, and the people in the suburbs would flood into the capital to survive.

古文：行冬令，则草木早枯，后乃大水败坏城郭。
现代文：如果孟夏实施冬季的政令，草木就会过早枯死，不久还会发生洪涝大水，毁坏城廓。
English: If Mengxia implemented the winter decree, the plants would die prematurely, and floods would soon occur, destroying the city.

古文：行春令，则蠢蝗为败，暴风来格，秀草不实。
现代文：如果孟夏实施春季的政令，就会有蝗虫为灾使庄稼歉收，而暴风发生还可使该抽穗的植物不能结果实。
English: If Mengxia implements the spring decree, there will be locusts to cause crop failure, and storms can also make the plants of the tassel unable to bear fruit.

古文：四月官田，其树桃。
现代文：所属的动物是羽鸟。
English: The animal it belongs to is the feathered bird.

古文：仲夏之月，招摇指午，昏亢中，旦危中。其位南方，其日丙丁，其虫羽，其音徵，律中蕤宾，其数七，其味苦，其臭焦，其祀灶，祭先沛。
现代文：代表的音是徵音，所属的律是蕤宾。代表的数是七，所属的味道是苦味，所属的气味是焦味。这个月祭祀灶神，祭祀时先放上属火的肺脏。
English: The sound of the representative is a call for sound, the law that belongs to it is 宾. The number of representatives is seven, the taste that belongs to it is bitterness, and the smell that belongs to it is scorching. This month, the god of the hearth is sacrificed, and the lungs that belong to fire are placed first during the sacrifice.

古文：小暑至，螳螂生，鵙始鸣，反舌无声。
现代文：这时小暑节气来到，螳螂出生，伯劳开始啼鸣，百舌鸟却寂寞无声。
English: At this time, the summer solstice comes, cockroaches are born, shrimps begin to chirp, and the lone hundred-tongued bird is silent.

古文：天子衣赤衣，乘赤骝，服赤玉，载赤旗，食菽与鸡，服八风水，爨柘燧火。
现代文：天子穿赤红衣，骑赤红马，佩赤红玉饰，树赤红旗帜。吃豆类和鸡，饮八风吹来的露水，烧饭用柘木，用阳燧取火。
English: The Son of Heaven wears a scarlet robe, rides a scarlet horse, wears a scarlet jewel, and carries a scarlet banner. He eats beans and chicken, drinks the dew of the eight winds, cooks with birch, and lights a fire with coals.

古文：南宫御女赤色，衣赤采，吹竽笙，其兵戟，其畜鸡，朝于明堂太庙。
现代文：南宫侍女穿赤红衣，衣裳绣有赤红的花纹，吹奏竽笙。代表这个月的兵器是戟，代表这个月的家畜是鸡。
English: The maids of honour of the Southern Court wear scarlet robes, embroidered with scarlet patterns, and play gongs. The weapon of the month is the gong, and the domestic animal of the month is the chicken.

古文：命乐师修鞀鼙琴瑟管萧，调竽箎，饰钟磬，执干戚戈羽。
现代文：天子在明堂宫中央厅上朝召见群臣，命令乐师修整好鞀鼙鼓、琴瑟和管箫，并调配好竽和箎，装饰好钟和磬，整治好盾、斧、戈和羽旗。
English: In the central hall of the Myeongdong Palace, the Son of Heaven summoned the courtiers to the palace and ordered the musicians to fix the gongs, harps, and gongs, and arrange the cymbals and gongs, decorate the bells and gongs, and fix the shields, axes, gongs, and flags.

古文：命有司为民祈祀山川百源。大雩帝，用盛乐。
现代文：命令主管的官员替百姓祈祷山峰河流和江河源头，举行大雩仪式祭祀上天，为百姓祈求神灵赐福降雨，并使用盛大的古代音乐。
English: The officials in charge were ordered to pray for the people from the peaks of mountains and rivers and the source of rivers, to hold a grand funeral ceremony to offer sacrifices to the heavens, to pray for the people to bless the gods with rain, and to use grand ancient music.

古文：天子以雉尝黍，羞以含桃，先荐寝庙。
现代文：天子用品尝过黍米的小鸡和成熟的樱桃，献祭给宗庙的祖宗神灵。
English: Tianzi products have tasted glutinous chicken and ripe cherries, and offered sacrifices to the ancestral spirits of the ancestral temple.

古文：禁民无刈蓝以染，毋烧灰，毋暴布，门阎无闭，关市无索，挺重囚，益其食，存鳏寡，振死事，游牧别其群，执腾驹，班马政。日长至，阴阳争，死生分。君于斋戒，慎身无躁，节声色，薄滋味。百官静，事无径，以定晏阴之所成。
现代文：夏至这天白天最长，而开始上升的阴气和正处鼎盛的阳气互相争抗着，这使万物生死界限分明，有些植物濒临死亡，有些植物旺盛生长。这时的君子应实行斋戒，做到谨慎恃身，言行稳重，节制声色之欲，并饮食清淡，让身体的所有器官平和恬静，处事周密不粗糙，遇事舒宽不烦躁，这样使自身来适应这阳气阴气相交的季节。
English: On the day of the summer solstice, the day is the longest, and the yin that has begun to rise competes with the yang that is at its peak. This makes the boundaries of life and death of all things clear. Some plants are on the verge of death, and some plants are growing vigorously. At this time, the gentleman should practice fasting, be cautious and prudent, speak and act steadily, restrain the desire of voice and color, and eat light, let all the organs of the body be peaceful and quiet, deal with things carefully and not rough, and deal with things comfortably and not irritable, so as to adapt himself to this season of yang and yin.

古文：鹿角解，蝉始鸣，半夏生，木堇荣。
现代文：同样，这时鹿角开始脱落，蝉鸣可以听到，半夏应时生长，木槿树正在开花。
English: This month, the antlers fell off, the chinchillas began to howl, seedlings sprouted in mid-summer, and the chrysanthemums bloomed.

古文：禁民无发火，可以居高明，远眺望，登丘陵，处台树。
现代文：这时同样应发布禁令，要老百姓小心火烛；可以选高而明亮的地方作为居所，这样能登高望远，并能登上建于山坡土岗上的高台榭屋望云物占氛祥。
English: At this time, a ban should also be issued, asking the common people to be careful with candles; you can choose a high and bright place as a residence, so you can climb high and far, and you can climb a high-rise gazebo built on a hillside mound.

古文：仲夏行冬令，则雹霰伤谷，道路不通，暴兵来至；行春令，则五谷不熟，百螣时起，其国乃饥；行秋令，则早木零落，果实蚤成，民殃于疫。
现代文：如果仲夏实施冬季的政令，就会发生冰雹霰雪砸伤五谷庄稼的事，并导致道路不通，战乱随时会发生；如果仲夏实施春季的政令，五谷就不会成熟，各种虫害就会发生，这时国家就要闹饥荒；如果仲夏实施秋季的政令，草木就会凋零，果实提早长成，百姓就要遭受瘟疫的祸害。
English: If the winter decree is implemented in mid-summer, hail and snow will damage grain crops and cause roads to be impassable, and war will occur at any time; if the spring decree is implemented in mid-summer, the grain will not mature, various insect pests will occur, and then the country will have famine; if the autumn decree is implemented in mid-summer, the plants will wither, the fruits will grow early, and the people will suffer the scourge of plague.

古文：五月官相，其树榆。
现代文：这五月的代表官是相官。代表的树是榆树。
English: The representative of this month of May is the phase. The representative tree is the camphor tree.

古文：季夏之月，招摇指未，昏心中，旦奎中。
现代文：季夏六月，招摇星指向十二辰的未位，黄昏时心星位于正南方中央，黎明时奎星位于正南方中央。
English: In the summer of June, the wavering star points to the twelfth day of the twelfth month. At dusk, the heart star is located in the center of the south, and at dawn, the Kui star is located in the center of the south.

古文：其位中央，其日戊己，盛德在土，其虫赢，其音宫，律中百钟，其数五，其味甘，其臭香，其祀为雷，祭先心。
现代文：代表的数是五，所属的味道是甜味，所属的气味是香味。这个月祭祀中霤宅神，祭祀时先放上属土的心脏。
English: The number of representatives is five, the belonging taste is sweetness, and the belonging smell is fragrance.In this month's sacrifice, the earthy heart is placed at the beginning of the sacrifice.

古文：凉风始至，蟋蟀居奥，鹰乃学习，腐草化为蚜。
现代文：这时凉风开始来到，蟋蟀转移到房屋西南角的墙缝里，雏鹰开始学习飞行搏击，腐败的草中孵化出萤火虫来。
English: At this time, the cool wind began to arrive, the dragonflies moved to the wall cracks in the southwest corner of the house, the eaglets began to learn to fly and fight, and fireflies hatched in the rotten grass.

古文：天子衣黄衣，乘黄骝，服黄玉，建黄旗，食稷与牛，服八风水，爨柘燧火。
现代文：天子穿黄衣，骑黄骝马，佩黄色玉饰，立黄色旗帜。吃谷类和牛肉，饮八风吹来的露水，烧饭用柘木，用阳燧取火。
English: The heavenly son wears yellow clothes, rides a yellow horse, wears yellow jade ornaments, and raises a yellow flag. He eats cereals and beef, drinks dew blown by the eight winds, cooks rice with birch, and makes fire with cedar.

古文：中宫御女黄色，衣黄采。
现代文：中宫侍女穿黄衣，衣裳绣有黄色的花纹。
English: The handmaidens of the middle court wear yellow, and their dresses are embroidered with yellow patterns.

古文：其兵剑，其畜牛，朝于中宫。
现代文：代表这个月的兵器是剑，代表这个月的家畜是牛。
English: The weapon of the month is the sword, and the animal of the month is the ox.

古文：乃命渔人伐蛟取鼍，登龟取重。
现代文：天子在中宫上朝召见群臣，命令主管渔业的官员捕捉蛟龙猎取鼍龙，收集神龟捉拿鼋鱼。
English: The heavenly son summoned a group of courtiers to the Imperial Court and ordered the officials in charge of fisheries to capture the dragon and hunt the dragon, collect the tortoise and catch the eel.

古文：令滂人，人材苇。
现代文：又命令掌管池泽的官员收缴成材的芦苇。
English: He also ordered officials in charge of the pond to collect the reeds.

古文：命四监大夫，令百县之秩刍，以养牺牲，以供皇天上帝、名山大川、四方之神、宗庙社稷，为民祈福行惠。
现代文：还命令四监大夫汇集各地方按规定缴纳的饲草，来喂养祭祀用的牲畜，以便以后用这些牲畜祭奉皇天上天、名山大川、四方神灵、宗庙社稷，为百姓祈求福祥。
English: He also ordered the four supervising doctors to collect the fodder grasses paid by all localities according to regulations to feed the sacrificial animals, so that they could later use these livestock sacrifices to worship the emperor, heaven, famous mountains and rivers, the gods of the four directions, and ancestral temples and shrines, and pray for the people.

古文：令吊死问疾，存视长老，行释粥，厚席彦，以送万物归也。
现代文：这时还要实施仁慈宽厚的政令，哀悼死者，吊唁丧事，慰问病人，探望拜访长者老人，施舍碅粥，提供蓐垫，使万物都有一个好的归宿。
English: At this time, it is also necessary to implement benevolent and lenient decrees, mourn the dead, condole with the bereaved, comfort the sick, visit the elderly, give alms, and provide blankets, so that everything has a good home.

古文：命妇官染彩，黼黻文章，青黄白黑，莫不质良，以给宗庙之服，必宣以明。
现代文：命令妇官染制彩帛，使各种花纹各种色彩的布帛质地优良，以便能制作成祭祀宗庙的、颜色多样、色彩鲜亮的礼服。
English: The gynaecologists were ordered to dye the cloth and make the fabric with various patterns and colors of fine texture, so that it could be made into a colorful and bright dress for the worship of the family temple.

古文：是月也，树木方盛，勿敢斩伐。
现代文：这个月树木正在繁盛生长，所以不能斩斫砍伐。
English: Trees are in full bloom this month, so they can't be chopped down.

古文：不可以合诸侯，起土功。动众兴兵，必有天殃。
现代文：不宜召集诸侯。这个月如果大兴土木，兴师动众，一定会受到老天爷的惩罚。
English: It is not appropriate to convene the princes. This month, if there is a large-scale construction project and the teachers are mobilized, they will surely be punished by God.

古文：上润褥暑，大雨时行，利以杀草粪田畴，以肥土疆。
现代文：这个季节土地湿润、温度高，并时常有大雨降临，所以可以割草烧灰沤制肥田，以便能增加土地的肥沃度。
English: In this season, the land is humid, the temperature is high, and heavy rain often falls, so it is possible to cut grass and burn ashes to make fertilizer fields in order to increase the fertility of the land.

古文：季夏行春令，则谷实解落，多风效，民乃迁徙；行秋令，则丘隅水潦，稼穑不熟，乃多水灾；行冬令，则风寒不时，鹰隼蚤挚，四鄙入保。
现代文：如果季夏实施春季的政令，那么谷物果实就会早落，人也易受风寒而咳嗽气喘，百姓就要迁徙转移；如果季夏实施秋季的政令，那么不论是高地还是洼地都会受水淹，庄稼就不易成熟，而且还会发生不少对妇女有害的灾病；如果季夏实施冬季的政令，就会使风寒不合时宜地提早发生，鹰隼也会提早搏击禽鸟，四方边远地方的人就会涌入城里谋生。
English: If the spring decree is implemented in the summer, then the cereal fruits will fall early, and people are also susceptible to wind chill and coughing and wheezing, and the people will have to migrate; if the autumn decree is implemented in the summer, then both the highlands and the lowlands will be flooded, the crops will not be easy to mature, and many diseases harmful to women will occur; if the winter decree is implemented in the summer, the wind chill will occur prematurely, the eagles will fight the birds early, and people from remote areas will flock to the city to make a living.

古文：六月官少内，其树梓。
现代文：这六月的代表官是少内。代表的树是梓树。
English: This June's representative officer is Shonai. The representative tree is Azusa tree.

古文：孟秋之月，招摇指申，昏斗中，旦毕中。
现代文：孟秋七月，招摇星指向十二辰的申位，黄昏时斗宿位于正南方中央，黎明时毕宿位于正南方中央。
English: In the autumn and July, the wavering star points to the position of the twelfth hour. At dusk, Douju is located in the center of the south, and at dawn, Bi is located in the center of the south.

古文：其位西方，其日庚辛，盛德在金，其虫毛，其音商，律中夷则，其数九，其味辛，其臭腥，其把门，祭先肝。
现代文：这个月的方位是西方，日干用庚辛，旺盛的德泽在于属金。
English: This month's location is the west, the sun is dry with goshin, and the vigorous deze is gold.

古文：凉风至，白露降，寒蝉鸣，鹰乃祭乌，用始行戮。
现代文：所属的动物是毛类的老虎。代表的音是商音，所属的律是夷则。
English: The animal it belongs to is the furry tiger. The representative sound is the Shang sound, and the law it belongs to is the crane.

古文：天于衣白衣，乘白骆，服白玉，建白旗，食麻与犬，服八风水，爨柘燧火。
现代文：代表的数是九，所属的味道是辛味，所属的气味是腥味。这个月祭祀门神，祭祀时先放上属金的肝脏。
English: The number of representatives is nine, the flavor they belong to is spicy, and the smell they belong to is pungent. This month, the door gods are sacrificed, and the golden liver is placed first.

古文：西宫御女白色，衣白采，撞白钟，其兵戈，其畜狗。
现代文：这时凉风已经兴起，白露降落大地，寒蝉尚能鸣啼，老鹰开始捕捉鸟雀，这个季节顺秋气而始行杀戮刑罚。天子穿白衣，骑白骆马，佩白色玉饰，树白色旗帜。
English: At this time, the cool wind has risen, the white dew has fallen on the earth, the chills can still chirp, the eagle has begun to catch birds and finches, and this season has begun to carry out the killing penalty in accordance with the autumn weather. The heavenly son wears white clothes, rides a white camel, wears white jade ornaments, and the tree has a white flag.

古文：朝于总章左个，以出秋令。
现代文：吃黍类和狗肉，饮八风吹来的露水，烧饭用柘木，用阳燧取火。
English: They eat mackerel and dog meat, drink the dew blown by the eight winds, cook with birch, and make fire with rushes.

古文：求不孝不悌、戮暴傲悍而罚之，以助损气。
现代文：西宫侍女穿白衣，衣裳绣有白色的花纹，敲白钟。
English: The West Court maids wear white, their dresses are embroidered with white patterns, and they ring a white bell.

古文：立秋之日，天子亲率三公九卿大夫以迎秋于西郊。
现代文：代表这个月的兵器是戈，代表这个月的家畜是狗。天子在总章宫左侧室上朝召见大臣，发布秋季的政令。
English: The weapon representing this month is the Go, and the domestic animal representing this month is the Dog. The Emperor summons the ministers in the upper room on the left side of the General Chapter Palace to issue the autumn government decree.

古文：还乃赏军率武人于朝。
现代文：要严惩那些不孝父母、不敬兄长、凶残蛮横的人，来张扬秋天刑杀之气。
English: It is necessary to severely punish those who are unfilial to their parents, disrespectful to their brothers and sisters, and cruel and insolent, in order to promote the spirit of punishment and killing in the autumn.

古文：命将率，选卒厉兵，简练桀俊，专任有功，以征不义，洁诛暴慢，顺彼四方。
现代文：立秋那天，天子亲率三公九卿和大夫等文武百官到西郊去迎接秋天的到来。返回以后便在朝廷奖赏勇武有功的官兵。并命令将帅挑选精悍士兵，磨砺兵器，精选训练中杰出的将士，信用有才有功人员去讨伐那些不义的诸侯，惩治那些凶暴傲蛮的人，以安定四方天下。
English: On the day of the beginning of autumn, Heavenly Father led the three princes, nine nobles and doctors and other civil and military officials to the western suburbs to welcome the arrival of autumn. After returning, he rewarded the brave and meritorious officers and soldiers at the imperial court. And he ordered the commander to select the brave soldiers, sharpen the weapons, select the outstanding soldiers in the training, and credit the meritorious personnel to fight those unjust lords and punish those violent and arrogant people to stabilize the world in all directions.

古文：命有司修法制，缮囹圄，禁奸塞邪，审决狱，平词讼。
现代文：命令主管官员，修订严明法律制度，修缮牢房，禁绝奸邪，审理案件，处理诉讼。
English: He ordered the officials in charge to amend the strict legal system, renovate cells, ban adultery, hear cases, and handle lawsuits.

古文：天地始肃，不可以赢。是月农始升谷，天子尝新，先荐寝庙。
现代文：这时的秋季是天地自然到处显示肃杀收敛的时令，所以不许容忍有邪气霸道的现象存在。这个月农夫开始收割庄稼，天子将用新谷进献给宗庙中的祖宗神灵。
English: At this time, autumn is a time when heaven and earth naturally show signs of austerity everywhere, so it is not permissible to tolerate the existence of evil and domineering phenomena. This month, farmers begin to harvest crops, and the Son of Heaven will use the new valley to dedicate it to the ancestral gods in the ancestral temple.

古文：命百官始收敛，完堤防、谨障塞以备水潦，修城郭，缮宫室。毋以封侯，立大官，行重市，出大使。
现代文：命令各级官员开始征收赋税，加固堤防，兴修水利以防水患；修整城墙及修缮宫室；不要割地封侯、任命官员和施行重赏及派出使节。
English: He ordered officials at all levels to start collecting taxes, strengthen the dike, and build water conservancy to prevent water damage; repair the city wall and repair the palace room; do not cut land, appoint officials and implement heavy rewards and send envoys.

古文：行是月令，凉风至三旬。
现代文：这个季节如果实施这些政令，那么凉风就会不时出现。
English: This season, if these decrees are implemented, then cool winds will appear from time to time.

古文：盂秋行冬令，则阴气大胜，介虫败谷，戎兵乃来；行春令，则其国乃旱，阳气复还，五谷无实；行夏令，则冬多火灾，寒暑不节，民多虐疾。
现代文：如果孟秋实施冬季的政令，那么阴气就会过盛而使甲壳动物伤害谷物庄稼，敌兵就会来犯入侵；如果孟秋实施春季的政令，国家就会发生旱灾，阳气就会还复，五谷不能结果实；如果孟秋实施夏季的政令，到了冬天就会多火灾，寒暑失调，百姓会发疟疾。
English: If Meng Qiu implemented the winter decree, then the gloom would be too prosperous and crustaceans would harm grain crops, and enemy soldiers would invade; if Meng Qiu implemented the spring decree, the country would suffer drought, the yang qi would return, and grain could not be harvested; if Meng Qiu implemented the summer decree, in winter there would be more fires, cold and heat disorders, and people would get malaria.

古文：七月官库，其树楝。
现代文：这七月的代表官是库官。代表的树是楝树。
English: This July's representative officer is the treasurer. The representative tree is the eucalyptus.

古文：仲秋之月，招摇指西。昏牵牛中，旦觜巂中。
现代文：仲秋八月，招摇星指向十二辰的酉位，黄昏时牵牛星位于正南方中央，黎明时觜碐星位于正南方中央。
English: In mid-autumn and August, the wavering star points to the rising sign of the 12 hours. At dusk, the morning star is located in the center of the south, and at dawn, the morning star is located in the center of the south.

古文：其位西方。
现代文：这个月的方位是西方，日干用庚辛。
English: This month's direction is west, with the sun dry and the moon hot.

古文：其日庚辛，其虫毛，其音商，律中南吕，其数九，其味辛，其臭腥，其把门，祭先肝。
现代文：所属的动物是毛类的白虎。
English: The animal it belongs to is the furry white tiger.

古文：凉风至，候雁来，玄鸟归，群鸟翔。
现代文：代表的音是商音，所属的律是南吕。
English: The representative sound is Shangyin, and the group to which Lu belongs is Nanlu.

古文：天子衣白衣，乘白骆，服白玉，建白旗，食麻与犬，服八风水，爨柘燧火。西宫御女白色，衣白采，撞白钟。
现代文：代表的数是九，所属的味道是辛味，所属的气味是腥味。这个月祭祀门神，祭祀时先放上属金的肝脏。这时凉风已经兴起，候雁飞来，燕子南飞，群鸟因寒气来临而长出羽毛并飞翔于空中。天子穿白衣，骑白骆马，佩白色玉饰，树白色旗帜。吃黍类和狗肉，饮八风吹来的露水，烧饭用柘木，用阳燧取火。西宫侍女穿白衣，衣裳绣有白色的花纹，敲白钟。
English: The number of representatives is nine, the belonging taste is spicy, the belonging smell is fishy. This month, the door gods are sacrificed, and the golden liver is put on first during the sacrifice. At this time, the cool wind has risen, the geese are flying, the swallows are flying south, and the birds have grown feathers due to the cold weather and are flying in the air. The heavenly son is dressed in white, riding a white camel, wearing white jade jewelry, and the tree is a white flag. They eat ferns and dog meat, drink the dew blown by the eight winds, cook with birch, and use the phallus to make fire. The West Palace

古文：其兵戈，其畜犬。
现代文：代表这个月的兵器是戈，代表这个月的家畜是狗。
English: The weapon of the month is the goose, and the domestic animal of the month is the dog.

古文：朝于总章太庙。
现代文：天子在总章宫正厅上朝召见群臣。
English: The Emperor summoned all the courtiers to meet him in the main hall of the General Chapter.

古文：命有司申严百刑，斩杀必当，无或在挠。决狱不当，反受其殃。
现代文：命令主管刑法的官员，严明各种刑律，处死犯人一定要得当，依据事实而不可有一点冤屈；如果判决案件不合事实、处理不当，必将受到上天的惩罚。
English: The officials in charge of criminal law should be ordered to strictly enforce all kinds of criminal laws, and the execution of the criminal must be proper, based on the facts, and there must not be any grievance; if the judgment case does not conform to the facts and is handled improperly, it will certainly be punished by heaven.

古文：是月也，养长老，授几杖，行稃鬻饮食。
现代文：这个月里要赡养好老人，赐给他们可用的几案和手杖，施舍碅粥，保障他们的饮食。
English: In this month, it is necessary to support the elderly, give them useful cases and canes, distribute porridge, and ensure their diet.

古文：乃命宰祝行牺牲，案刍豢，视肥臞全粹，察物色，课比类，量小大，视少长，莫不中度。
现代文：还要命令主管祭祀的官员，巡视检查那些准备用来祭祀的牲畜，察看肥瘦是否适中，是否完好无缺，毛色是否纯正，体形大小是否符合等级类别，重量齿龄是否符合规定标准。
English: The officials in charge of the sacrificial rites should also be ordered to inspect the livestock that is to be used for the sacrificial rites, and check whether the weight and thickness are appropriate, whether it is intact, whether the coat color is pure, whether the body size is in line with the grade category, and whether the weight and tooth age are in line with the prescribed standards.

古文：天子乃傩，以御秋气。
现代文：天子将举行驱疫仪式，以抵御秋天的阴气。
English: In order to ward off the gloomy autumn, the emperor will hold a ceremony to drive out the epidemic.

古文：以犬尝麻，先荐寝庙。
现代文：让狗品尝过黍子后进献给宗庙的祖宗神灵。
English: The newly harvested hemp seeds were tasted with dog meat, and before tasting the new seeds, they were first offered to the ancestral temple.

古文：是月可以筑城郭，建都邑，穿窦窖，修囷仓，乃命有司趣民收敛畜采，多积聚，劝种宿麦，若或失时，行罪无疑。
现代文：在这个月中可以修筑城郭，建设都邑，疏通水道和挖好地窖，建造各种粮仓。又命令相关的官员，督促好百姓搞好收割、储藏、畜养和采摘，多多积聚并勉励百姓种好越冬麦子。
English: During this month, it is possible to build a castle, build a capital city, dredge waterways and dig cellars, and build various granaries. Relevant officials are also ordered to urge the people to do a good job of harvesting, storage, animal husbandry and picking, accumulate more and encourage the people to grow good wintering wheat.

古文：是月也，雷乃始收，蛰虫培户，杀气浸盛，阳气日衰，水始涸，日夜分。
现代文：如果此时谁耽误农时，则毫不迟疑地定这些人的罪。在这个月里，雷鸣将要停息，冬眠动物开始要准备它们的洞穴。肃杀的阴气越来越占上风，阳气将进一步衰竭，江河水资源也开始干涸。
English: In this month, the thunder will cease, hibernating animals will begin to prepare their burrows, the gloomy air of suppression will increasingly prevail, the yang air will be further depleted, and river water resources will begin to dry up.

古文：一度量，平权衡，正钧石角斗称，理关市，来商旅，入货财，以便民事。
现代文：秋分日昼夜长短相等，所以有必要统一度量标准，检查衡器并校正重量标准和各种容器，整治关卡集市，使客商自由来往交易，互通有无，以方便百姓的生活。
English: The autumnal equinox day and night are of equal length, so it is necessary to unify the standard of measurement, check the weighing instruments and calibrate the weight standard and various containers, rectify the checkpoint market, and enable merchants to freely trade and exchange goods, so as to facilitate the lives of the people.

古文：四方来集，远方皆至，财物不匾，上无乏用，百事乃遂。
现代文：这样，四面八方的人都会聚集到这里来，随之带来的财物使市场丰富，人不受物品匮乏的困扰，各种事情就能称心如意。
English: In this way, people from all over the world will gather here, and the goods brought along will enrich the market. People will not be troubled by the shortage of goods, and all kinds of things will be satisfactory.

古文：仲秋行春令，则秋雨不降，草木生荣，国有大恐；行夏令，则其国乃旱，蛰虫不藏，五谷皆复生；行冬令，则风灾数起，收雷先行，草木蚤死。
现代文：如果仲秋实施春季的政令，则秋雨就不会降落，草木反倒旺盛生长，这时国家就会发生大的恐慌；如果仲秋实施夏季的政令，国家就会发生旱灾，本应蛰伏的蛇虫反倒不伏藏，五谷又长出新苗；如果仲秋实施冬季的政令，那么风灾就会时常发生，雷鸣提前收停，草木过早死亡。
English: If the government order of spring is implemented in mid-autumn, the autumn rain will not fall, but the plants will grow vigorously, and then the country will have a big panic; if the government order of summer is implemented in mid-autumn, the country will have a drought, but the snakes and insects that should be lying down will not lie down, and new seedlings will grow in the grain; if the government order of winter is implemented in mid-autumn, then the wind disaster will often occur, the thunder will stop in advance, and the plants will die prematurely.

古文：八月官尉，其树拓。
现代文：所属的动物是毛类的白虎。
English: The animal it belongs to is the furry white tiger.

古文：季秋之月，招摇指戌，昏虚中，旦柳中。其位西方，其日庚辛，其虫毛，其音商，律中无射，其数九，其味辛，其臭腥，其祀门，祭先肝。
现代文：代表的音是商音，所属的律是无射。代表的数是九，所属的味道是辛味，所属的气味是腥味。这个月祭祀门神，祭祀时先放上属金的肝脏。
English: The representative sound is "商音" (traditional Chinese:商音) and the representative rhyme is "无射" (traditional Chinese:无射). The number of representatives is nine, the representative taste is "辛味" (spicy), and the representative smell is "腥味" (fishy). This month, the door god is sacrificed, and the golden liver is placed first.

古文：候雁来宾雀入大水为蛤，菊有黄华，豺乃祭兽戮禽。
现代文：这时候雁从北飞来，小家雀飞入大海而变成了蛤蜊，菊开出黄灿灿的花朵，豺在这时开始捕捉小的飞禽与走兽。
English: At this time, geese fly from the north, small house sparrows fly into the sea and turn into cormorants, chrysanthemums open yellow brilliant flowers, and cormorants begin to catch small birds and animals at this time.

古文：天子衣白衣，乘白骆，服白玉，建白旗，食麻与犬，服八风水，爨柘燧火。
现代文：天子穿白衣，骑白骆马，佩白色玉饰，树白色旗帜。吃黍类和狗肉，饮八风吹来的露水，烧饭用柘木，用阳燧取火。
English: The Son of Heaven wears white clothes, rides a white camel and horse, wears white jade ornaments, and carries a white flag. He eats ferns and dog meat, drinks dew blown by the eight winds, cooks with birch wood, and lights fires with coals.

古文：西宫御女白色，衣白采，撞白钟。
现代文：西宫侍女穿白衣，衣裳绣有白色的花纹，敲白钟。
English: The West Court maids wear white, their dresses are embroidered with white patterns, and they ring a white bell.

古文：其兵戈，其畜犬。
现代文：代表这个月的兵器是戈，代表这个月的家畜是狗。
English: The weapon of the month is the goose, and the domestic animal of the month is the dog.

古文：朝于总章右个。
现代文：天子在总章宫右侧室上朝召见群臣。
English: The emperor summoned his retainers to meet him in the upper room on the right side of the General Chapter Palace.

古文：命有司申严号令，百官贵贱，无不务人以会天地之藏，无有宣出，乃命家宰，农事备收，举五谷之要，藏帝籍之收于神仓。
现代文：命令主管官员，严明号令，各级官员无论级别高低，都必须致力于收敛纳藏大事，以顺应天地秋季肃杀闭藏万物的旨意，不可有散逸外泄之事。还命令冢宰，农事结束之后，必须统计五谷收成情况及记入账簿，将天子籍田的收入藏入神仓之中。
English: He ordered the officials in charge to issue a strict order that officials at all levels, no matter how high or low, must be committed to converging the great event of collection and storage, in order to comply with the will of heaven and earth to suppress and close all things in the autumn, and there must be no leakage. He also ordered the overseer, after the end of the agricultural work, to count the grain harvest and record it in the account book, and hide the income from the fields of the son of heaven into the sacred vault.

古文：是月也，霜始降，百工休。
现代文：这个月，霜降开始，各种工匠应该停止工作。
English: This month, with the onset of frost, craftsmen of all kinds should stop working.

古文：乃命有司曰：寒气总至，民力不堪，其皆入室。
现代文：还命令有关的官员，对百姓宣明寒冷的气流将要来临，人忍受不了这样的寒冷，应住入家里室内避寒。
English: The cold weather will come suddenly, and the people will not be able to withstand it, so let them all move back home from the huts in the field.

古文：上丁入学习吹。
现代文：在这个月的上旬丁日要组织大家进宫学习、练习吹奏竽笙等。
English: In the first half of this month, we will organize everyone to go to the palace to study, practice playing the gong, and so on.

古文：大飨帝，尝牺牲。
现代文：举行祭祀上天的仪式，并奉献牺牲请上天享用。
English: Hold a ceremony to offer sacrifices to the heavens, and offer sacrifices to the heavens for their enjoyment.

古文：合诸侯，制百县。为来岁受朔日，与诸侯所税于民，轻重之法，贡岁之数，以远近土地所宜为度。
现代文：召集诸侯，制定百县的各种制度，颁布来年各月的朔日，以及确定各诸侯国税收的轻重、进贡朝廷的多少，均按这些诸侯国所处地域的远近和土质肥瘠的情况来确定。
English: The convening of the vassals, the establishment of the various systems of the hundred counties, the promulgation of the new year's day of each month of the coming year, as well as the determination of the importance of the taxation of each vassal state and the amount of tribute to the imperial court, are all determined according to the distance and the soil fertility of the regions where these vassal states are located.

古文：乃教于田猎，以习五戎。
现代文：还要教会百姓田猎，使之能使用各种兵器。
English: It is also necessary to teach the people to hunt, so that they can use all kinds of weapons.

古文：命太仆及七驺咸驾戴荏，授车以级，皆正设于屏外。
现代文：还命令太仆和七驺全都驾好猎车，插好各种旗帜，天子按不同的等级发给下属，然后让他们整齐地排列在天子营帐屏风外面。
English: He also ordered all the servants and the seven concubines to drive a good hunting car and set up all kinds of flags. Tianzi distributed them to subordinates according to different levels, and then arranged them neatly outside the screen of Tianzi's camp.

古文：司徒措朴北向以赞之。
现代文：这时腰插鞭杖的司徒官面北训诫众官要遵守田猎规定。
English: At this time, the magistrate with a whip in his waist scolded the officials to abide by the hunting regulations.

古文：天子乃厉服广饰，执弓操矢以猎，命主词祭禽四方。
现代文：然后天子一身戎装并披挂打猎所需的饰物，手执弓箭开始打猎。打猎完毕，命令主祠官员将所猎取的禽兽祭祀四方神灵。
English: Then the heavenly son dressed in military attire and put on hunting accessories, holding a bow and arrow, and began to hunt. After the hunt was over, he ordered the officials of the main shrine to sacrifice the animals they had hunted to the gods of the four directions.

古文：是月草木黄落，乃伐薪为炭。
现代文：这个月草木开始枯黄凋零，这时可以砍伐树木烧制木炭。
English: This is the month when plants and trees begin to wither and die, so you can cut down trees to make charcoal.

古文：蛰虫咸悦。
现代文：蛰虫也开始伏藏冬眠。
English: Ladybugs have also begun to hibernate.

古文：乃趋狱刑，毋留有罪，收禄秩之不当、供养之不宜者。
现代文：于是督促判决刑案，不要留下有罪当杀的人，没收那些不该享受俸禄者的俸禄，取消那些不该享受供养待遇者的待遇。
English: Therefore, he urged that criminal cases should be adjudicated, that those who are guilty of murder should not be left behind, that the salaries of those who should not enjoy salaries should be confiscated, and that the treatment of those who should not enjoy support should be canceled.

古文：通路除道，从境始，至国而后己；是月天子乃以犬尝麻，先荐寝庙。
现代文：疏通道路使边境到京都的道路都能畅通无阻。这个月天子还将尝过黍类的狗奉献给宗庙中的神灵。
English: The dredging of the road has made the road from the border to Kyoto unimpeded.This month, the son of heaven will also dedicate dogs that have tasted mackerel to the gods in the ancestral temple.

古文：季秋行夏令，则其国大水，冬藏殃败，民多鼽窒；行冬令，则国多盗贼，边境不宁，土地分裂；行春令，则暖风来至，民气懈情，师旅并兴。
现代文：如果季秋实施夏季的政令，国家就会发生洪水，原本准备贮藏过冬的物品就会受损毁坏，百姓会患鼻阻塞的疾病；如果季秋实施冬天的政令，国内就多盗贼，边境也不得安宁，国土就会被分裂；如果季秋实施春季的政令，就会不断刮来暖气温风，百姓被吹得志气松懈及懒惰，战争就会到处兴起。
English: If summer decrees are implemented in the autumn, the country will be flooded, the goods originally prepared for storage for the winter will be damaged and destroyed, and the people will suffer from nasal congestion diseases; if winter decrees are implemented in the autumn, there will be more thieves in the country, the border will not be peaceful, and the country will be divided; if spring decrees are implemented in the autumn, the warm temperature wind will continue to blow, the people will be blown to be lazy and lazy, and wars will arise everywhere.

古文：九月官候，其树槐。
现代文：这九月的代表官是候官。代表的树是槐树。
English: This September's delegate is a candidate. The delegate's tree is the elm.

古文：孟冬之月，招摇指亥，昏危中，旦七星中。
现代文：孟冬十月，招摇星指向十二辰的亥位，黄昏时危星位于正南方中央，黎明时七星位于正南方中央。
English: In the winter of Meng in October, the wavering star points to the sign of the boar in the twelfth hour. At dusk, the danger star is located in the center of the south, and at dawn, the seven stars are located in the center of the south.

古文：其位北方，其日壬癸，盛德在水，其虫介，其音羽，律中应钟，其数六，其味咸，其臭腐，其把井，祭先肾。
现代文：所属的动物是甲壳类的神龟。代表的音是羽音，所属的律是应钟。代表的数是六，所属的味道是咸味，所属的气味是腐朽味。这个月祭祀井神，祭祀时先放上属水的肾脏。
English: The animal belongs to the crustacean tortoise. The representative sound is the feather sound, the law belongs to the bell. The number of representatives is six, the taste belongs to the salty taste, and the smell belongs to the rotten taste. This month, the god of the well is sacrificed, and the water kidney is placed first during the sacrifice.

古文：水始冰，地始冻，雉人大水为蜃，虹藏不见。
现代文：这时水开始结冰，大地将凝冻。雉鸟进入江河变成蛤蜊，霓虹这时隐藏不露面。
English: At this time, the water begins to freeze, the earth will freeze. The ostrich enters the river to become a dragonfly, and the neon then hides and does not show its face.

古文：天子衣黑衣，乘玄骊，服玄玉，建玄旗，食黍与彘，服八风水，爨松燧火。
现代文：天子穿黑衣，骑玄骊马，佩黑色玉饰，树黑色旗帜。吃黍和猪肉，饮八风吹来的露水，烧饭用松木，用阳燧取火。
English: The son of heaven wears black clothes, rides a black horse, wears black jade ornaments, and carries a black flag. He eats locusts and pork, drinks dew blown by the eight winds, cooks with pine wood, and lights fires with coals.

古文：北宫御女黑色，衣黑采，击磐石。
现代文：北宫侍女穿黑衣，衣裳绣有黑色的花纹，敲击磬石。
English: The ladies of the Northern Court wear black, embroidered with black patterns, and strike flints.

古文：其兵铩，其畜彘。
现代文：代表这个月的兵器是铩，代表这个月的家畜是猪。
English: The weapon of the month is the armadillo, and the domestic animal of the month is the pig.

古文：朝于玄堂左个，以出冬令，命有司修群禁，禁外徙，闭门阎，大搜客，断罚刑，杀当罪。阿上乱法者诛。
现代文：天子在玄堂宫左侧室上朝召见群臣，发布冬季的政令。命令主管官员，执行各种禁令，禁止居民外流迁徙，关闭城门和里门，全面搜查外来流动人员，判决罪犯执行刑罚，处决那些应当处决的罪犯，严惩逢迎上司扰乱法纪的人。
English: In the upper room on the left side of the palace, the emperor summoned his ministers and issued a winter decree, ordering the officials in charge to implement various prohibitions, prohibit the outflow of residents, close the city gate and inner gate, comprehensively search for foreign mobile personnel, sentence criminals to carry out punishments, execute those criminals who should be executed, and severely punish those who disrupt the law and discipline.

古文：立冬之日，天子亲率三公九卿大夫以迎岁于北郊。
现代文：立冬那天，天子亲自率领三公、九卿及大夫等文武百官到六里外的北郊去迎接冬天的来临。
English: On the day of the winter solstice, the emperor personally led the three princes, nine nobles and doctors and other civil and military officials to the northern suburbs six miles away to welcome the winter.

古文：还乃赏死事，存孤寡。
现代文：返回宫后即奖赏为国事献身的烈士的家属，抚恤孤儿寡妇。
English: After returning to the palace, she rewarded the families of the martyrs who sacrificed their lives for the national cause, and gave alms to orphans and widows.

古文：是月命太祝祷祀神位，占龟策，审卦兆，以察吉凶。
现代文：在这个月内，命令太祝祈祷、祭祀神灵，并用龟和蓍草占卜占筮，审视卦象以观察凶吉。
English: During this month, it is ordered to pray for good luck, make offerings to the gods, use turtles and reeds for divination, and look at the constellations to observe bad luck.

古文：于是天子始裘，命百官谨盖藏。命司徒行积聚，修城郭，警门闾，修楗闭；慎管禽，固封玺，修边境，完要塞，绝踢径，饬丧纪，审棺槨衣衾之薄厚，营丘拢之小大高痺，使贵贱卑尊各有等级。
现代文：这时天子开始穿上皮裘，下令百官谨慎地贮存好过冬的物品，并命令司徒巡视财力积聚的情况，修缮城墙，加强对城门的警戒，修理好门闩插销，保管好锁匙，加固印封；修治边境，筑好要塞，堵塞旁径小道；整治丧事规则，审定内棺外槨和随葬衣被的厚薄，测定坟垅的大小高低，使它们的规格符合贵贱尊卑的不同等级。
English: At this time, Tianzi began to put on fur coats, ordered the officials to carefully store the goods for the winter, and ordered the magistrates to inspect the accumulation of financial resources, repair the city wall, strengthen the vigilance of the city gate, repair the latch pin, keep the key, and strengthen the seal; repair the border, build a fortress, and block the side path; rectify the funeral rules, verify the thickness of the inner coffin outer coffin and the burial quilt, and measure the size and height of the tombs, so that their specifications meet the different levels of noble and humble.

古文：是月也，工师效功，陈祭器，案度程，坚致力上。
现代文：在这个月里，主管工匠的官员考核工匠们的工作成效，将所制作的祭器陈列出来，并察看其规格质量，以坚固精致的为上品。
English: During this month, officials in charge of craftsmen evaluate the effectiveness of the craftsmen's work, display the sacrificial vessels they have made, and inspect the quality of their specifications, with solid and delicate as the top grade.

古文：工事苦慢，作为淫巧，必行其罪。
现代文：如果工匠的制作粗制草率、质量低劣以及过分奇巧、华而不实，就一定要追究他们的责职。
English: If the workmanship of the craftsmen is sloppy, poor quality, and too fancy, flashy, and insubstantial, they must be held accountable.

古文：是月也，大饮蒸。天于祈来年于天宗，大祷祭于公社，毕，飨先祖。
现代文：在这个月中，将举行盛大的蒸祭，天子向各路天神祈求来年的福祥，还将在公共祭坛举行隆重的祭奠，祭祀天地神灵，然后再祭祀祖宗神灵。
English: In this month, a grand steaming festival will be held. The heavenly son will pray to all the gods for the coming year's blessings. A grand ceremony will also be held at the public altar to worship the gods of heaven and earth, and then to worship the ancestral gods.

古文：劳农夫以休息之。
现代文：要慰劳农夫，在勤劳一年后能休养生息。
English: It is necessary to comfort the hard-working farmers so that they can rest and recuperate after a year of hard work.

古文：命将率讲武，肄射御，角力劲。
现代文：命令将领操练武艺，练习射箭和驾御车马，比试武艺、力量。
English: The commander of the drill was ordered to practice martial arts, practice archery and driving a chariot horse, and compete in martial arts and strength.

古文：乃命水虞渔师收水泉池泽之赋，毋或侵牟。
现代文：还命令水虞漁师，收取河流湖泽池塘的赋税，并不准在这个收税过程中有贪污侵占现象。
English: He also ordered the waterfront fishermen to collect taxes from rivers, lakes and ponds, and not to allow corruption and embezzlement in this tax collection process.

古文：孟冬行春令，则冻闭不密，地气发泄，民多流亡；行夏令，则多暴风，方冬不寒，蛰早复出；行秋令，则雪霜不时，小兵时起，土地侵削。
现代文：如果孟冬实施春季的政令，那么冰冻封闭就不严实，地气就会泄漏，百姓多有流亡；如果孟冬实施夏季的政令，就会有暴风发生，冬天也就不寒冷，冬眠动物又会出来活动；如果孟冬实施秋季的政令，那么霜雪就会不适时宜地降落，小规模的战争时有发生，国土就容易被侵占。
English: If Meng Dong implements the spring decree, then the frozen closure will not be strict, the gas will leak, and many people will be exiled; if Meng Dong implements the summer decree, there will be storms, the winter will not be cold, and hibernating animals will come out again; if Meng Dong implements the autumn decree, then frost and snow will fall inappropriately, small-scale wars will occasionally occur, and the land will be easily occupied.

古文：十月官司马，其树檀。
现代文：这十月的代表官是司马。代表的树是檀树。
English: The representative officer of this October is Sima. The representative tree is the sandalwood.

古文：仲冬之月，招摇指子，昏壁中，旦轸中。
现代文：仲冬十一月，招摇星指向十二辰的子位，黄昏时壁星位于正南方中央，黎明时轸星位于正南方中央。
English: In mid-winter in November, the wavering star points to the sub-position of the 12th. At dusk, the wall star is located in the center of the south, and at dawn, the bright star is located in the center of the south.

古文：其位北方，其日壬癸，其虫介，其音羽，律中黄钟，其数六，其味咸，其臭腐，其把井，祭先肾。
现代文：这个月的方位是北方，日干用壬癸。
English: This month's direction is north, with the sun rising in the east.

古文：冰益壮，地始拆，鳱鴠不鸣，虎始交。
现代文：所属的动物是甲壳类的神龟。代表的音是羽音，所属的律是黄钟。
English: The animal it belongs to is the crustacean divine turtle. The representative sound is the feather sound, and the law it belongs to is the yellow bell.

古文：天子衣黑衣，乘铁骊，服玄玉，建玄旗，食黍与彘，服八风水，爨松燧火。北宫御女黑色，衣黑采，击磐石，其兵铩。其畜彘。
现代文：代表的数是六，所属的味道是咸味，所属的气味是腐朽味。这个月祭祀井神，祭祀时先放上属水的肾脏。这时冰更加坚硬，大地也开始冻到裂开的程度，碼磂鸟也不鸣叫了，老虎则开始交配了。天子穿黑衣，骑铁骊马，佩黑色玉饰，树黑色旗帜。吃黍和猪肉，饮八风吹来的露水，烧饭用松木，用阳燧取火。北宫侍女穿黑衣，衣裳绣有黑色的花纹，敲击磬石。代表这个月的兵器是铩，代表这个月的家畜是猪。
English: The number of representatives is six, the taste of belonging is salty, the smell of belonging is rotten. This month, the god of the well is sacrificed, and the water kidney is placed first during the sacrifice. At this time, the ice is harder, the earth begins to freeze to the extent of cracking, the ostriches do not sing, and the tigers begin to mate. The heavenly son wears black clothes, rides the iron horse, wears black jade jewelry, and the tree black flag. Eats clams and pork, drinks the dew blown by the eight winds, cooks with pine wood, and uses the yakitori to make fire. Bei Gong waitresses wear black clothes

古文：朝于玄堂太庙。
现代文：天子在玄堂宫正厅上朝召见群臣。
English: In the main hall of the main hall of the main hall of the main hall of the main hall of the main hall of the main hall of the main hall of the main hall of the main hall.

古文：命有司曰：土事无作，无发室居及起大众，是谓发天地之藏，诸蛰则死，民必疾疫，有随以丧。
现代文：命令有关的官员：土木工程不要开工，不要打开居家的地窖，更不可调动众多民众服劳役，如果兴土木开地窖就违背了这时天地闭藏的原则，就会导致各种冬眠动物冻死，百姓将会染上疾病，还会有丧事随之发生。
English: The relevant officials were ordered: Do not start the civil engineering works, do not open the cellars at home, and do not mobilize a large number of people to perform labor service. If the construction of civil engineering works and the opening of cellars violate the principle of closing the heavens and the earth at this time, it will cause various hibernating animals to freeze to death, the people will catch diseases, and there will be deaths.

古文：急捕盗贼，诛淫泆诈伪之人。
现代文：这时应抓紧追捕盗贼，严惩诛伐那些胡作非为虚伪奸诈之人。
English: At this time, it is necessary to speed up the pursuit of thieves, and severely punish those who are hypocritical and treacherous.

古文：命曰畅月。
现代文：这些就使本月称为 碞月 。
English: These are the reasons why this month is called the Crescent Moon.

古文：命奄尹申宫令，审门闾，谨房室，必重闭，省妇事。
现代文：命令阉官的头目，申明宫中的禁令，仔细察看宫中各种门户，谨慎看护宫中各种房室，宫中门户都将定时关闭，以减省由妃嫔宫女所引起的一些麻烦事。
English: He ordered the head of the eunuchs to confirm the ban in the palace, carefully inspect the various portals in the palace, carefully watch the various rooms in the palace, and the portals in the palace will be closed regularly to reduce some of the troubles caused by the concubines.

古文：乃命大酋，秫稻必齐，麴蘖必时，湛熺必洁，水泉必香，陶器必良，火齐必得，无有差忒。
现代文：还命令掌管酿酒的官员，酿酒用的秫和稻谷一定要备齐，酒曲投放必须适时，浸泡蒸煮的器具一定要洁净，酿酒用水必须清香，陶瓦器具一定要精良，火候必须掌握得恰到好处，所有这些都要符合规定，不能有差错。
English: He also ordered the officials in charge of brewing, the stalks and rice for brewing must be ready, the wine must be timely, the soaking and steaming equipment must be clean, the brewing water must be fragrant, the pottery must be fine, and the heat must be just right, all of which must be in accordance with the regulations and there can be no mistakes.

古文：天子乃命有司把四海大川名泽。
现代文：天子还命令主管祭祀的官员祭祀天下所有大河名川和名泽。
English: The heavenly son also ordered the official in charge of the ritual to perform the ritual for all the great rivers, famous rivers and famous lakes in the world.

古文：是月也，农有不收藏积聚，牛马畜兽有放失者，取之不诘，山林药泽有能取疏食、田猎禽兽者，野虞教导之。
现代文：在这个月里，如果有农夫不好好收藏积聚东西，或让饲养的牛马等牲畜走失，尽管可以认领回来，但必须受到告诫警戒以防往后再发生此类事情。
English: During this month, if a farmer does not properly collect and accumulate things, or loses livestock such as cattle and horses, although they can be claimed back, they must be warned to prevent such things from happening in the future.

古文：其有相侵夺，罪之不赦。是月也。
现代文：而对那些在山林湖泽中采摘蔬果、猎取禽兽的人，主管山林湖泽的官员必须对其加以教育引导。
English: However, officials in charge of mountains, forests and lakes must educate and guide those who pick fruits and vegetables and hunt animals in mountains, forests and lakes.

古文：日短至，阴阳争。君子斋戒，处必掩，身欲静，去声色，禁嗜欲，宁身体，安形性。
现代文：如果发生相互间侵占争夺，有关部门就必须追究责任加以惩处而不能宽赦。在这个月里，因冬至日白昼最短，阴阳二气抗争转化，所以君子养生必须实行斋戒，居室住处要隐掩安静，身心欲望要清静平和，还要去声色、禁嗜欲，使身体心性安宁平静。
English: In this month, due to the winter solstice, the day is the shortest, and the yin and yang are transformed into two opposing forces, so the gentleman's health must practice fasting, the living room should be hidden and quiet, the physical and mental desires should be quiet and peaceful, and the voice color and abstinence of desire should be removed, so that the body and mind can be calm.

古文：是月也，荔挺出，苔始生，丘螾结，麋角解，水泉动，则伐树木，取竹箭。
现代文：在这个月里，马荔破土而出，芸蒿开始生长，蚯蚓屈结蠕动，麋鹿脱角解堕，水泉涌动流淌，这时可以砍伐树木，削制竹箭。
English: In this month, Malai emerges from the soil, the gourd begins to grow, the kite creeps, the elk descends, and the water springs flow. At this time, trees can be cut down and bamboo arrows can be made.

古文：罢官之无事、器之无用者。涂阙庭门闾，筑囹圄，所以助天地之闭。
现代文：撤换无所事事的庸官和弃扔没有用处的器具，修补涂饰城楼、宫门、厅堂、院门和里门，加固修补监狱以符合顺应当时的天地闭藏原则。
English: They replaced idle bureaucrats and discarded useless equipment, repaired and decorated the city tower, palace gate, hall, courtyard gate and inner gate, and strengthened and repaired the prison to comply with the principle of closing heaven and earth at that time.

古文：仲冬行夏令，则其国乃旱，氛雾冥冥，雷乃发声；行秋令，则其时雨水，瓜瓠不成，国有大兵；行春令，则虫螟为败，水泉咸竭，民多疾病。
现代文：如果仲冬实施夏季的政令，国家就会有旱灾，到处云雾弥漫、昏昏沉沉，雷声也会又轰鸣起来；如果仲冬实施秋季的政令，雨水就会过多，到时瓜瓠都不能成熟，国家还会发生大的战争；如果仲冬实施春季的政令，螟虫就会危害农作物，水源将枯竭，百姓有瘟疫。
English: If the summer decree is implemented in mid-winter, the country will have droughts, clouds will be thick and heavy everywhere, and thunder will roar again; if the autumn decree is implemented in mid-winter, there will be too much rain, the melons will not be ripe, and the country will have a big war; if the spring decree is implemented in mid-winter, the aphids will harm the crops, the water sources will be exhausted, and the people will have plagues.

古文：十一月官都尉，其树枣。
现代文：这十一月的代表官是都尉。代表的树是枣树。
English: The representative officer of this November is the captain. The representative tree is the jujube tree.

古文：季冬之月，招摇指丑，昏娄中，旦氏中。
现代文：季冬十二月，招摇星指向十二辰的丑位，黄昏时娄星位于正南方中央，黎明时氐星位于正南方中央。
English: In the winter season of December, the wavering star points to the ugly position of the 12th. At dusk, the bright star is located in the center of the south, and at dawn, the bright star is located in the center of the south.

古文：其位北方，其日壬癸，其虫介，其音羽，律中大吕，其数六，其味咸，其臭腐，其祀井，祭先肾。
现代文：这个月的方位是北方，日干用壬癸。所属的动物是甲壳类的神龟，代表的音是羽音，所属的律是大吕。代表的数是六，所属的味道是咸味，所属的气味是腐朽味。这个月祭祀井神，祭祀时先放上属水的肾脏。
English: The direction of this month is the north, and the sun is used as the compass. The animal that belongs to the crane is the crustacean divine turtle, the representative sound is the feather sound, and the law that belongs to it is the Great Lu. The number of representatives is six, the taste that belongs to it is the salty taste, and the smell that belongs to it is the rotten taste. This month, the god of the well is sacrificed, and the kidneys that belong to the water are placed first during the sacrifice.

古文：雁北向，鹊加巢，雉雊，鸡呼卵，天子衣黑衣，乘铁骊，服玄玉，建玄旗，食麦与彘，服八风水，爨松燧火。
现代文：这时大雁向北飞去，喜鹊开始筑巢，雉叫着求配偶，母鸡叫着预告下蛋。天子穿黑衣，骑铁骊马，佩黑色玉饰，树黑色旗帜。吃黍和猪肉，饮八方吹来的露水，烧饭用松木，用阳燧取火。
English: At this time, the geese flew north, the magpies began to build nests, the crows called for a mate, and the hens called to announce the laying of eggs. The heavenly son wore black clothes, rode an iron horse, wore black jade ornaments, and had a black flag. He ate locusts and pork, drank dew blown from all directions, cooked with pine wood, and used impotence as a fire.

古文：北宫御女黑色，衣黑采，击磐石，其兵铩，其畜彘。
现代文：北宫侍女穿黑衣，衣裳绣有黑色的花纹，敲击磬石。
English: The ladies of the Northern Court wear black, embroidered with black patterns, and strike flints.

古文：朝于玄堂右个。
现代文：代表这个月的兵器是铩，代表这个月的家畜是猪。
English: The weapon of the month is the armadillo, and the domestic animal of the month is the pig.

古文：命有司大傩，旁磔，出土牛。
现代文：天子在玄堂宫右侧室上朝召见群臣。
English: In the upper chamber on the right side of the Hondo Palace, the emperor summons his retainers.

古文：命渔师始渔，天子亲往射渔，先荐寝庙。
现代文：命令有关官员在此腊月举行盛大的驱除疫鬼的仪式，将被杀死肢解的牺牲陈放在四方城门以驱赶邪气，并放出泥塑土牛以劝农民勤劳耕作。
English: The relevant officials were ordered to hold a grand ceremony to drive out the pestilence in this lunar month. The killed and dismembered sacrifice was placed on the square city gate to drive out evil spirits, and clay clay cows were released to persuade farmers to work hard.

古文：令民出五种，令农计耦耕事，修来耜，具田器，命乐师大合吹而罢。
现代文：还命令渔业主管的官员可以开始捕鱼，天子也将亲自前往射渔，将射猎到的鱼进献给宗庙的祖先神灵。命令农民取出收藏的五谷种子，合计筹划好春耕播种事宜，并修理准备好耒耜和耕田用具。
English: He also ordered the officials in charge of fisheries to start fishing, and the heavenly son himself to go shooting, and to dedicate the fish caught to the ancestor gods of the ancestral temple. He ordered the farmers to take out the grain seeds they had collected, make a good overall plan for spring sowing, and repair the plow and farm tools.

古文：乃命四监收秩薪，以供寝庙及百把之薪燎。
现代文：还命令乐师举行盛大的音乐演奏会：这是今年的最后一次。还命令四监大夫收聚各地例行缴纳的柴薪，以供以后宗庙祭祀及各种祭祀时作燃料和照明之用。
English: He also ordered the musicians to hold a grand music concert: this is the last one of the year. He also ordered the four supervising doctors to collect the firewood that is routinely paid from all over the country, which will be used for fuel and lighting in the future for the ancestral temple sacrifice and various sacrifices.

古文：是月也，日穷于次，月穷于纪，星周于天，岁将更始。
现代文：在这个月里，太阳走完一年行程，月亮也完成了和太阳的最后一次相会，星宿绕天也运行了一周，新的一年也将来临。
English: In this month, the sun has completed its one-year journey, the moon has also completed its last meeting with the sun, the stars have also orbited the sky for a week, and the new year is coming.

古文：令静农民，无有所使。
现代文：这时要下令让农民安静下来，为了来年的春耕，不要再增加他们的任何负担。
English: At this time, it is necessary to order the farmers to calm down and not to increase any burden on them for the next year's spring plowing.

古文：天子乃与公卿大夫饰国典，论时令，以待嗣岁之宜，乃使大史次诸侯之列，赋之牺牲，以供皇天上帝社稷之刍享。
现代文：天子和公卿大夫们一起讨论修订国典，并研究讨论与一年四季相应的政令法规，以待新的一年来到。还下令太史官，排定诸侯们的等级次序，并按等级次序向他们征收牺牲以供皇天、社稷祭祀之用。
English: Together, the emperor, princes, and court doctors discussed the revision of the national code, and studied and discussed the decrees and regulations corresponding to the four seasons of the year, waiting for the new year to come. They also ordered the official historian to arrange the rank order of the princes, and according to the rank order, they collected sacrifices for the emperor and the society.

古文：乃命同姓之国，供寝庙之刍豢；卿士大夫至于庶民，供山林名川之祀。
现代文：又下令与天子同姓的各诸侯，向天子供奉进献祭祀宗庙用的牛羊猪狗；诸侯国内的卿士大夫和普通百姓也要供奉进献祭祀山林名川用的祭品。
English: He also ordered all the lords with the same surname as the heavenly son to offer to the heavenly son the cattle, sheep, pigs and dogs used for the sacrificial rites of the ancestral temple; the nobles, scholars and ordinary people in the lordships should also offer the sacrificial offerings for the sacrificial rites of the mountains, forests and famous rivers.

古文：季冬行秋令，则白露早降，介虫为妖，四鄙入保；行春令，则胎夭伤，国多瘤疾，命之曰逆；行夏令，则水潦败国，时雪不降，冰冻消释。
现代文：如果季冬实施秋季的政令，那么白霜就会提早降落，甲壳类的虫就会兴妖作怪，四方百姓涌入都城以求避灾谋生；如果季冬实施春季的政令，那么正在怀胎的动物则胎儿夭折，国家就会出现许多顽固难治的疾病，这种反常的现象称之为 逆 。如果季冬实施夏季的政令，那么国家就水灾为害，并败坏国家，该下的雪不下，该结冰冻的却消融化解。
English: If the autumn decree is implemented in the winter season, then the white frost will fall early, crustaceans will play tricks, and people from all over the country will rush into the capital to avoid disasters and earn a living; if the spring decree is implemented in the winter season, then the animals that are pregnant will have their fetuses die prematurely, and the country will have many stubborn and intractable diseases. This abnormal phenomenon is called inverse. If the summer decree is implemented in the winter season, then the country will suffer from floods and corrupt the country. The snow will not fall, but the frozen will melt and dissolve.

古文：十二月官狱，其树栎。
现代文：这十二月的代表官是狱官。代表的树是栎树。
English: The representative officer of this December is the prison officer. The representative tree is the camphor tree.

古文：五位：东方之极，自碣石山过朝鲜，贯大人之国，东至日出之次，模木之地，青土树木之野，太皞、句芒之所司者，万二千里，其令曰：挺群禁，开闭阖，通穷窒，达障塞，行优游，弃怨恶，解役罪，免忧患，休罚刑，开关梁，宣出财，和外怨，抚四方，行柔惠，止刚强。
现代文：东南西北中的五个方位是这样的：东方最远的范围，从碣石山到朝鲜，穿过大人国，往东到太阳升起的地方，即榑桑和青丘树木之野，是太皞、句芒所管辖的区域，共一万二千里。他们的政令是：解除各种禁令，打开关闭的门户，清除疏通堵塞之处，使之畅达无障碍，让万物优悠自在；抛弃怨恨和憎恶，解除劳役的惩罚，免除忧烦和祸患，停止惩处和刑法；开放关卡和津梁，散发库内财物，缓和周边国家的仇怨，安抚好四方的关系，实施柔惠政策，停止恃强凌弱。
English: The five directions in the middle of the southeast-northwest are as follows: The farthest range in the east, from the Shishishan Mountains to North Korea, through the adult country, and eastward to the place where the sun rises, that is, the fields of the mulberry and the green hills, is the area under the jurisdiction of the Taishan and the Jumang, a total of twelve thousand miles. Their decrees are: lift all kinds of prohibitions, open the closed portals, clear the blocked places, make it unobstructed, and make everything free and easy; abandon resentment and hatred, lift the punishment of labor service, exempt worries and disasters, stop punishment

古文：南方之极，自北户孙之外，贯版项之国，南至委火炎风之野，赤帝、祝融之所司者，万二千里。
现代文：南方最远的范围是，从反户之外穿过颛顼国，向南到委火炎风之野，那是赤帝、祝融所管辖的地方，共一万二千里。
English: The farthest extent of the south is from outside of Anju, through Shandong Province, and southward to the field of fire and wind, which is the place governed by the Red Emperor and Zhu Rong, a total of twelve thousand miles.

古文：其令曰：爵有德，赏有功，惠贤良，救饥渴，举力农，振贫穷，惠孤寡，忧罢疾，出大禄，行大赏，起毁宗，立无后，封建侯，立贤辅。
现代文：他们的政令是：赐爵位给有德行的人，奖赏有功之臣，优待赠惠贤良之士；赈救贫穷百姓，优惠关心孤儿寡妇，优待照顾疲弱患病者；出高俸禄聘请高官，执行实施奖赏政策来振兴将濒临毁灭的宗族，选定将绝后无嗣的国家的继承者，分封建立诸侯国，确定贤能的辅佐大臣。
English: Their decrees were as follows: to give knighthoods to virtuous people, to reward meritorious ministers, to give preferential treatment to virtuous people; to save the poor people, to give preferential care to orphans and widows, to give preferential treatment to the weak and sick; to hire high-ranking officials with high salaries, to implement the reward policy to revitalize the clan that will be on the verge of destruction, to select the inheritors of the country that will have no heirs, to establish vassal states, and to determine the assistant ministers of virtue.

古文：中央之极，自昆仑东绝两恒山，日月之所道，江汉之所出，众民之野，五谷之所宜，龙门、河、济相贯，以息壤堙洪水之州，东至于碣石，黄帝、后土之所司者，万二千里。
现代文：中央这块广宽的土地范围是，从昆仑山以东，越过恒山，到达日月普照地带，这是长江与汉水的发源地和流域，又是人口稠密的地区，这里的土地适宜五谷生长，龙门、黄河、济水在这里穿过，是大禹用息壤堵塞洪水的地方，它东到碣石山，是黄帝、后土管辖的地域，共一万二千里。
English: The vast land area in the center is from the Kunlun Mountains in the east, over the Hengshan Mountains, to the sun and moon-drenched area. This is the birthplace and basin of the Yangtze River and the Han River, and it is also a densely populated area. The land here is suitable for growing grain. The Longmen, the Yellow River, and the Jishui River pass through here. It is the place where Dayu used the soil to block the flood. It is east to Shishi Mountain. It is the area under the jurisdiction of the Yellow Emperor and the hinterland, a total of twelve thousand miles.

古文：其令曰：平而不阿，明而不苛，包裹覆露，无不囊怀，溥汜无私，正静以和，行稃鬻，养老衰，吊死问疾，以送万物之归。
现代文：他们的政令是：处事要公正不阿、明察秋毫而不苛求，能包容宽怀而无不关心备至，博大而不偏私，这样就能使政治安定平和；要施舍碅粥，赈济贫困，扶养老弱病残，哀悼死者慰问病者，使万物都有一个好归宿。
English: Their decrees are as follows: to be fair and just in dealing with others, to be clear-sighted and not demanding, to be tolerant and broad-minded but not uncaring, and to be broad-minded but not selfish, so that political stability and peace can be achieved; to give alms, relieve poverty, support the elderly, the weak and the sick, mourn the dead, and comfort the sick, so that everything has a good home.

古文：西方之极，自昆仑绝流沙、沈羽，西至三危之国，石城金室，饮气之民，不死之野，少皞、蓐收之所司者，万二千里。
现代文：西方最远的范围，从昆仑山穿过流沙河、弱水，向西到三危国，那里是石头为城、金属为屋的地方，居民以气为食而长生不死，是少皞、蓐收所管辖的地方，共一万二千里。
English: The farthest extent of the West, from the Kunlun Mountains through the Lingsha River and Weak Water, westward to the Three Dangers, where the stone is the city, the metal is the house, and the residents live forever with the gas as food, is under the jurisdiction of the Shaoxing and Jiaozuo Collection Centers, a total of 12,000 miles.

古文：其令曰：审用法，诛必辜，备盗贼，禁奸邪，饰群牧，谨著聚，修城郭，补决窦，塞蹊径，遏沟渎，止流水，雝谿谷，守门闾，陈兵甲，选百官，诛不法。
现代文：他们的政令是：谨慎小心使用刑法，诛杀者必是死有余辜者，防备盗贼，禁绝奸邪，整治地方不正官员，慎重积聚收藏，修建城郭，填补河道决口堤防漏洞，阻塞旁径小道，遏止阻绝泛滥洪水，堵填废弃沟渠而不使流水进入，还壅堵山涧，防守城门，陈列各种兵器，选任百官，严惩不法之徒。
English: Their decrees are: to use the criminal law with caution and care, to kill only those who are guilty, to prevent thieves, to prohibit adultery, to rectify local corrupt officials, to carefully accumulate collections, to build castles, to fill levee breaches, to block side paths, to prevent flooding, to fill abandoned ditches without letting running water enter, to block mountains, to defend city gates, to display various weapons, to elect officials, and to severely punish wrongdoers.

古文：北方之极，自九泽穷夏晦之极，北至令正之谷，有冻寒积冰、雪雹霜霰、漂润群水之野，颛顼、玄冥之所司者，万二千里。
现代文：北方最远的范围，从九泽一直到大海之边，北至令止山谷，那里长年冰天雪地，雪雹霜霰不断，为漂润群水的水源之处，是颛顼、玄冥所管辖的地域，共一万二千里。
English: The farthest north, from Jiuzhaigou all the way to the edge of the sea, and north to the Lingzhu Valley, where there is snow and ice for a long time, sleet and frost are incessant, and where there is a source of water for the drifting water, is the area under the jurisdiction of the gods and demons, a total of twelve thousand miles.

古文：其令曰：申群禁，固闭藏；修障塞，缮关梁；禁外徙，断罚刑，杀当罪；闭关闾，大搜客，止交游，禁夜乐，蚤闭晏开，以窒奸人，已德，执之必固：天节已几，刑杀无赦，虽有盛尊之亲，断以法度；毋行水，毋发藏，毋释罪。
现代文：他们的政令是：重新申述各种禁令，加强固定收藏封闭，修筑设立关卡障碍，修整关口桥梁，杜绝居民流徙，处理判定刑罚，处决那些罪大恶极者，关闭城门，全面搜捕外来流动犯罪分子，禁止交往游玩，不准夜间寻欢作乐，门户提早关闭，以便搜寻奸邪之徒，如抓获这些奸邪之徒，要严加看管拘押。这时一年的节令将结束，执行刑罚要严厉，对死刑不能宽赦，即使是势力庞大地位尊贵的亲族犯罪，也要依法判决。这时不可搅动水源，不要打开动用封藏之物，不要释放罪犯。
English: Their decrees are as follows: re-enact all kinds of prohibitions, strengthen fixed collection closures, build checkpoint barriers, repair checkpoint bridges, prevent residents from migrating, deal with sentencing penalties, execute those who have committed the most heinous crimes, close the city gates, comprehensively search for foreign mobile criminals, prohibit socializing and playing, prohibit nighttime amusement, and close the portals early to search for evil-doers. If these evil-doers are caught, they must be strictly supervised and detained. At this time, the one-year ban will end, the punishment must be severe, and the death penalty cannot be pardoned. Even if it is a crime of a

古文：六合：孟春与孟秋为合，仲春与仲秋为合，季春与季秋为合，孟夏与孟冬为合，仲夏与仲冬为合，季夏与季冬为合。
现代文：所谓 六合 是说：一年之中的十二个月，总有两个相对应的月份互相影响互相制约并产生变化。这就是，孟夏一月与孟秋七月相合并对应，仲春二月与仲秋八月相合并对应，季春三月与季秋九月相合并对应，孟夏四月与孟冬十月相合并对应，仲夏五月与仲冬十一月相合并对应，季夏六月与季冬十二月相合并对应。
English: The so-called "six conjunctions" means that in the twelve months of the year, there are always two corresponding months that influence and restrict each other and produce changes. That is, Mengxia January corresponds to Mengqiu July, Mid-Spring February corresponds to Mid-Autumn August, Quarter Spring March corresponds to Quarter Autumn September, Mengxia April corresponds to Mengwinter October, Mid-Summer May corresponds to Mid-Winter November, and Quarter Summer June corresponds to Quarter Winter December.

古文：孟春始赢，孟秋始缩。仲春始出，仲秋始内。季春大出，季秋大内。孟夏始缓，孟冬始急。仲夏至修，仲冬至短。季夏德毕，季冬刑毕。
现代文：接下来它们的关系是这样的，孟春万物开始生长，孟秋万物开始衰败；仲春开始播种，仲秋开始纳藏；季春万物发育高峰，季秋万物纳藏高潮；孟夏平和舒缓，孟冬肃杀急迫；仲夏日最长，仲冬日最短；季夏阳气将穷尽，季冬阴气将结束。
English: Next, their relationship is as follows: Mengchun, all things begin to grow; Mengchun, all things begin to decay; Mid-spring, sowing begins; Mid-autumn, gathering begins; Mid-spring, all things reach the peak of development; Mid-autumn, all things reach the climax of gathering; Mengchun, summer is peaceful and soothing; Mengchun, winter is urgent; Mid-summer is the longest day; Mid-winter is the shortest day; Mid-summer, yang qi will be exhausted; Mid-winter, yin qi will end.

古文：故正月失政，七月凉风不至；二月失政，八月雷不藏；三月失政，九月不下霜；四月失政，十月不冻；五月失政，十一月蛰虫冬出其乡；六月失政，十二月草木不脱；七月失政，正月大寒不解：八月失政，二月雷：不发；九月失政，三月春风不济；十月失政，四月草木不实；十一月失政，五月下雹霜；十二月失政，六月五谷疾狂。
现代文：所以，正月政令不当，七月凉风就不来；二月政令不当，八月雷鸣就不停；三月政令不当，九月霜就不下；四月政令不当，十月天无冰冻；五月政令不当，十一月冬眠动物就会钻出洞穴；六月政令不当，十二月草木就不适时凋落。反过来也是这样，七月政令不当，正月则严寒不散；八月政令不当，二月则春雷不响；九月政令不当，三月则春风不止；十月政令不当，四月则草木不实；十一月政令不当，五月则雹霜降落；十二月政令不当，六月则五谷狂长。
English: Therefore, if the government decrees improperly in the first month, the cool wind will not rise in July; if the government decrees improperly in February, the thunder will not stop in August; if the government decrees improperly in March, the frost will not fall in September; if the government decrees improperly in April, there will be no frost in October; if the government decrees improperly in May, the hibernating animals will dig out of the cave in November; if the government decrees improperly in June, the grass will not fall in December. Conversely, if the government decrees improperly in July, the cold will not disperse in the first month; if the government decre

古文：春行夏令，泄；行秋令，水；行冬令，肃。
现代文：由此看来，如果春季实施夏季的政令，春气就发泄失散；如果春季实施秋季的政令，就会有水灾发生；如果春季实施冬季的政令，就会充斥肃杀之气。
English: From this perspective, if the summer decree is implemented in the spring, the spring air will be released and dissipated; if the autumn decree is implemented in the spring, there will be floods; if the winter decree is implemented in the spring, it will be full of suffocation.

古文：夏行春令，风；行秋令，芜；行冬令，格。
现代文：如果夏季实施春季的政令，就会刮风不止；如果夏季实施秋季的政令，就会田野荒芜；如果夏季实施冬季的政令，就会草木零落。
English: If the spring decree is implemented in summer, the wind will continue to blow; if the autumn decree is implemented in summer, the fields will be deserted; if the winter decree is implemented in summer, the plants will be scattered.

古文：秋行夏令，华；行春令，荣；行冬令，耗。
现代文：如果秋季实施夏季的政令，草木会开花繁茂；如果秋季实施春季的政令，草木持续茂盛；如果秋季实施冬季的政令，树木就过早衰落。
English: If the summer decree is implemented in autumn, the plants will bloom and flourish; if the spring decree is implemented in autumn, the plants will continue to flourish; if the winter decree is implemented in autumn, the trees will decline prematurely.

古文：冬行春令，泄；行夏令，旱；行秋令，雾。
现代文：如果冬季实施春季的政令，阴气就会布散发泄；如果冬季实施夏季的政令，便会出现旱灾；如果冬季实施秋季的政令，就会雾气弥漫。
English: If the spring decree is implemented in winter, the gloom will spread and vent; if the summer decree is implemented in winter, there will be a drought; if the autumn decree is implemented in winter, it will be foggy.

古文：制度：阴阳大制有六度：天为绳，地为准，春为春规，夏为衡，秋为矩，冬为权。绳者所以绳万物也，准者所以准万物也，规者所以员万物也，衡者所以平万物也，矩者所以方万物也，权者所以权万物也。
现代文：规定度量天地自然阴阳二气的规则制度有六种：天是绳，地是准，春天为规，夏天为衡，秋天为矩，冬天为权。 绳 是用来度量万物曲直的； 准 是用来衡量万物平正的； 规 是用来衡量万物圆曲的； 衡 是用来度量万物均衡的； 矩 是用来度量万物方正的； 权 是用来衡量万物权变的。
English: There are six kinds of rules and systems for measuring the natural yin and yang of heaven and earth: the sky is a rope, the earth is a standard, spring is a standard, summer is a measure, autumn is a moment, and winter is a right; the rope is used to measure the straightness of all things; the standard is used to measure the evenness of all things; the standard is used to measure the roundness of all things; the measure is used to measure the balance of all things; the moment is used to measure the square of all things; and the weight is used to measure the weight of all things.

古文：绳之为度也，直而不争，修而不穷：久市不弊，远而不忘；与天合德，与神合明；所欲则得，所恶则亡；自古及今，不可移匡；厥德孔密，广大以容，是故上帝以为物宗。
现代文： 绳 作为一种量具制度，它是正直而不弯曲，修长而没有尽头，经久而不弊败，久远而不遗忘；它与天合德，与神合明；它所喜爱的则存在，它所厌恶的则消亡；从古到今，都改变不了它的框架尺度；它的功用德行十分周全缜密，广大而兼容。所以上天以它为万物的根本。
English: Rope As a measuring system, it is honest and unbending, slender and endless, enduring and invincible, long-lasting and unforgettable; it is compatible with heaven and God; what it likes exists, and what it dislikes disappears; from ancient times to the present, it can not change its frame scale; its function and virtue are very thorough and meticulous, broad and compatible. Therefore, heaven regards it as the foundation of all things.

古文：准之为度也，平而不险，均而不阿；广大以容，宽裕以和；柔而不刚，锐而不挫；流而不滞，易而不秽；发通而有纪，周密而不泄，准平而不失；万物皆平，民无险谋谋，怨恶不生，是故上帝以为物平。
现代文： 准 作为一种量具制度，它是平整而不起伏，平均而不偏袒；广大兼容，宽裕平和；柔顺而不刚强，锐利而不挫折；流畅而不停滞，简易而不伤害；开通而有律度，周密而不泄散，平稳而不偏失。万物公正平准，人们就没有险恶心机，怨恨也就无从生起。
English: As a measuring instrument system, it is flat and not ups and downs, average and not biased; widely compatible, wide and peaceful; flexible and not rigid, sharp and not frustrated; smooth and not stagnant, simple and not harmful; open and rhythmic, thorough and not loose, stable and not biased. All things are fair and level, people have no sinister motives, and resentment can not arise.

古文：规之为度也，转而不复，员而不垸；优而不纵，广大以宽；感动有理，发通有纪；优优简简，百怨不起；规度不失，生气乃理。
现代文：所以上天以它为事物的标准。 规 作为一种量具制度，它是转运而不重复，圆滚而不乱转；优悠而不放纵，广大而兼容；感奋万物而秩序井然，发动万物而开通有序；宽容平和简约舒缓而使怨恨无从生起。有这种 规 度存在，则事物就能气顺理当而通畅顺达。
English: Therefore, heaven takes it as the standard of things. Regulation, as a measuring instrument system, is transfer without repetition, rolling but not unsteady; leisurely but not indulgent, broad and compatible; exciting everything but orderly, starting everything but orderly; tolerant, peaceful, simple and soothing so that resentment can not arise. With this kind of regulation, things can be smooth and smooth.

古文：衡之为度也，缓而不后，平而不怨；施而不德，吊而不责；当平民禄，以继不足；勃勃阳阳，唯德是行；养长化育，万物蕃昌；以成五谷，以实封疆；其政不失，天地乃明。
现代文： 衡 作为一种量具制度，它是缓顺而不居后，公平而不怨悔；给予而不图回报，恤问而不责备；它公平恰当地平衡人们的收入，给济那些收入不足的人们；它清阳蓬勃、施行善德；养育生长，使万物繁荣昌盛；让五谷丰收，使国家强盛。它公正无偏，天地万事万物得以彰显明亮。
English: As a measuring instrument system, it is easy-going and not lagging behind, fair and not complaining; giving and not seeking returns, asking and not blaming; it balances people's income fairly and properly, giving to those who are underpaid; it clears the sun vigorously, practices good morals; nurtures growth, makes all things flourish; makes the grain harvest plentiful, makes the country strong. It is fair and unbiased, and everything in the world can shine brightly.

古文：矩之力度也，肃而不悖，刚而不愦，取而无怨，内而无害；威厉而不慑，令行而不废；杀伐既得，仇敌乃克；矩正不失，百诛乃服。
现代文： 矩 作为一种量具制度，它是肃重而不乖悖，刚正而不昏愦；它拿取而不生怨恨，收纳而不会有害；威严而不可怕，令行而不废弛；征伐无不成功，仇敌必定制服。有这种 矩 平正不失的存在，所以使诸多受惩罚者得以信服认罪。
English: As a measuring instrument system, it is solemn but not disobedient, upright but not deluded; it takes without causing resentment, receives without harm; it is dignified but not terrible, and it does not waste; the conquest is not without success, and the enemy must be subdued. The existence of this kind of moment without loss has made it possible for many punished people to confess their guilt.

古文：权之为度也，急而不赢，杀而不割；充满以实，周密而不泄，败物而弗取，罪杀而不赦；诚信以必，坚悫以固；粪除苛慝，不可以曲；故冬正将行，必弱以强，必柔以刚，权正而不失，万物乃藏。
现代文： 权 作为一种量具制度，它是急迫而不浮躁，伐杀而不剥夺；充满而诚实，周密而不疏散；毁物而不索取，诛杀罪犯而不宽赦；诚实守信决不含糊，坚定谨慎决不动摇；清除奸邪暴虐而不容歪曲。所以冬季的政令一旦实施推行，弱小事物必定逐渐变强，柔弱事物必定变得刚强。有这种 权 度的存在，万物得以收纳隐藏。
English: As a measuring system, it is urgent but not impetuous, killing but not depriving; full but honest, thorough but not evacuating; destroying but not demanding, killing criminals but not forgiving; honesty and trustworthiness are never vague, firm and cautious but never wavering; eliminating treachery and tyranny but not allowing distortion. Therefore, once the winter decree is implemented, weak things must gradually become stronger, and soft things must become strong. With the existence of such authority, all things can be contained and hidden.

古文：明堂之制，静而法准，动而法绳，春治以规，秋治以矩，冬治以权，夏治以衡，是故燥湿寒暑以节至，甘雨膏露以时降。
现代文：明堂的制度，静则以 准 为法则制度，动则以 绳 为法则制度；春天则用 规 来治理，秋天就用 矩 来治理，冬天则用 权 来治理，夏天就用 衡 来治理。这样，干燥、潮湿、寒冷、暑热都会按季节适时出现，甘甜雨露也会按时节适时降落。
English: According to the Ming-Tang system, quiescence is governed by standard and movement is governed by rope; spring is governed by regulation, autumn is governed by moment, winter is governed by power, and summer is governed by balance. In this way, dryness, dampness, coldness, and heat will all appear at the right time according to the season, and sweet rain and dew will also fall at the right time according to the season.

