古文：起玄黓执徐，尽柔兆涒滩，凡五年。
现代文：起玄黓执徐，尽柔兆涒滩，一共五年。
English: It lasted for a total of five years, beginning in the 17th year of the reign of Emperor Jinxiao Wu.

古文：则天顺圣皇后中之上
现代文：则天顺圣皇后中之上
English: and Tenshun Saint Empress Junior High School

古文：长寿元年壬辰，公元六九二年
现代文：则天皇后长寿元年正月，戊辰朔，太后在万象神宫祭祀。
English: In the first month of the first year of the Emperor's long life, the Empress Dowager was enshrined at the Bansho Shrine.

古文：正月，戊辰朔，太后享万象神宫。腊月，立故于阗王尉迟伏阇雄之子瑕为于阗王。
现代文：腊月，朝廷封原于阗王尉迟伏雄的儿子尉迟瑕为于阗王。
English: In the twelfth month of the lunar calendar, the son of Prince Fuxiong, who was originally given the title of Prince Fuxiong by the imperial court, became King Fuxiong.

古文：春，一月，丁卯，太后引见存抚使所举人，无问贤愚，悉加擢用，高者试凤阁舍人、给事中，次试员外郎、侍御史、补阙、拾遗、校书郎。
现代文：春季一月，丁卯，太后接见存抚使所荐举的人员，无论有才能与否，都加以任用，才高的试任凤阁舍人、给事中，其次的试任员外郎、侍御史、补阙、拾遗、校书郎。
English: In the spring of January, Ding Wu, the empress dowager received the personnel recommended by the depositary, and appointed them all, regardless of whether they had talent or not. The most talented were the probationers of Fengge's housekeeper and the secretary, followed by the probationers of the secretary, the attendant of history, the supplement, the collection of relics, and the school librarian.

古文：试官自此始。
现代文：试任制度从此开始。
English: The probationary appointment system will start from now on.

古文：时人为之语曰： 补阙连车载，拾遗平斗量；欋推侍御史，碗脱校书郎。 
现代文：当时人编顺口溜说： 补阙接连用车载，拾遗平平常常用斗量；用耙子才能推拢的侍御史，一个模子脱出的校书郎。 
English: At that time, the person who compiled the book said, "To supplement the records, I used a cart to carry them one after another; to collect the records, I often used a bucket; to gather the records, I used a pair of pliers; and to become a school librarian, I had to break out of a mold."

古文：有举人沈全交续之曰： 糊心存抚使，眯目圣神皇。 
现代文：有个被荐举的人沈全交补充说： 面浆糊心的存抚使，眯了眼睛的圣神皇。 
English: Shen Quanzhong, who was recommended for promotion, added: "The Holy Spirit Emperor, with his eyes narrowed, is stroked by the face cream.

古文：为御史纪先知所擒，劾其诽谤朝政，请杖之朝堂，然后付法，太后笑曰： 但使卿辈不滥，何恤人言！
现代文：御史纪先知将他擒获，弹劾他诽谤朝政，请求在朝堂上对他施杖刑，然后依法治罪。太后笑着说： 只要使你们自己称职，何必怕人家说话！
English: The Prophets of History caught him, impeached him for slandering the imperial government, and requested that he be punished with the cane in the imperial court, and then punished according to the law. The empress dowager said with a smile, "As long as you do your duty, why should you be afraid of what others say?"

古文：宜释其罪。 
现代文：应该宽免他的罪。 
English: He should be pardoned.

古文：先知大惭。
现代文：纪先知大为惭愧。
English: Ji Sheng is very ashamed.

古文：太后虽滥以禄位收天下人心，然不称职者，寻亦黜之，或加刑诛。
现代文：太后虽然滥用禄位以笼络天下人心，但对不称职的人，也随即撤职，或加以判刑或处死。
English: Although the empress dowager abused her position to win the hearts and minds of the people, those who were incompetent were immediately dismissed, sentenced or executed.

古文：挟刑赏之柄以驾御天下，政由己出，明察善断，故当时英贤亦竞为之用。
现代文：她掌握着刑罚和赏赐的权柄以驾御天下人，政令由自己作出，明察事理，善于决断，所以当时的杰出人材也竞相为她所用。
English: She wielded the power to punish and reward in order to rule the world. She made her own decrees, was clear-sighted and good at making decisions, so the outstanding talents of the time also competed for her use.

古文：宁陵丞庐江郭霸以诌谀干太后，拜监察御史。
现代文：宁陵县丞庐江人郭霸靠对太后阿谀奉承以求取禄位，当上了监察御史。
English: Guo Baoliang, the ruler of Ningling County and a native of the Minjiang River, flattered the empress dowager in order to obtain a lucrative position, and became the inspector of imperial history.

古文：中丞魏元忠病，霸往问之，因尝其粪，喜曰： 大夫粪甘则可忧；今苦，无伤也。 
现代文：御史中丞魏元忠患病，郭霸去探视，亲口尝他的粪便，高兴地说： 大夫的粪便如果味甘便可忧了；现在是苦的，没有事。 
English: Guo Ba went to visit Wei Yuanzhong when he was ill. He tasted his excrement and said happily, "If the doctor's excrement tasted sweet, it would be a cause for concern. Now it tastes bitter, so it's no problem."

古文：元忠大恶之，遇人辄告之。
现代文：魏元忠因此极厌恶他，逢人就揭露这件事。
English: Wei Yuanzhong was so disgusted with him for this that he revealed the matter to everyone.

古文：戊辰，以夏官尚书杨执柔同平章事。
现代文：戊辰，朝廷任命夏官尚书杨执柔为同平章事。
English: At that time, the imperial court appointed the summer official, Shangshu Yang Cui Rong, as a peer.

古文：执柔，恭仁弟之孙也，太后以外族用之。
现代文：杨执柔是杨恭仁弟弟的孙子，太后因他是她母亲家族里的人而加以任用。
English: Yang Jiruo is the grandson of Yang Guoren's younger brother, and was appointed by the empress dowager because he was a member of her mother's family.

古文：初，隋炀帝作东都，无外城，仅有短垣而已，至是，凤阁侍郎李昭德始筑之。
现代文：当初，隋炀帝营造东都洛阳，没有外城，只有低矮的围墙而已。这时候，凤阁侍郎李昭德才开始营建东都外城。
English: At first, Emperor Sui and Qian built the eastern capital Luoyang, but there was no outer city, only a low wall. At this time, Fengge waiter Li Zhaode began to build the eastern capital outer city.

古文：左台中丞来俊臣罗告同平章事任知古、狄仁杰、裴行本、司农卿裴宣礼、前文昌左丞卢献、御史中丞魏元忠、潞州刺史李嗣真谋反。
现代文：左台中丞来俊臣罗织罪名告发同平章事任知古、狄仁杰、裴行本、司礼卿崔宣礼、前文昌左丞卢献、御史中丞魏元忠、潞州刺史李嗣真谋反。
English: Zuodai no chujo (middle-ranking officer of the Left Division of the Inner Palace Guards) came to Juntian Luo to accuse Tongping Zhang Zhi Ren Zhigu, Di Renjie, Pei Xingpeng, Sirei Ching Cui Xuanli, former Wenchang Zuo Jiao Lu Ken, Mi Shi no chujo Wei Yuanzhong, and Zhangzhou Zhi Shi Li Shizhen of plotting rebellion.

古文：先是，来俊臣奏请降敕，一问即承反者得减死。
现代文：这以前，来俊臣曾奏请太后下命令：一经审问即承认谋反的人可以减免死罪。
English: Prior to this, Lai Junchen had requested the empress dowager to issue an order that anyone who admitted to plotting a rebellion after being interrogated could have their death sentence commuted.

古文：及知古等下狱，俊臣以此诱之，仁杰对曰： 大周革命，万物惟新，唐室旧臣，甘从诛戮。
现代文：等到任知古等入狱，来俊臣便用这道命令引诱他们认罪。狄仁杰回答说： 大周改朝换代，万物更新，唐朝旧臣，甘愿听任诛戮。
English: When Ren Zhi Gu and others went to prison, Zhu Juntian used this order to lure them into confessing their crimes. Di Renjie replied: Great Zhou changed the dynasty, everything was renewed, the Tang Dynasty's old vassals were willing to be slaughtered.

古文：反是实！ 
现代文：谋反是事实！ 
English: Conspiracy is a fact!

古文：俊臣乃少宽之。
现代文：来俊臣便对他稍加宽容。
English: It's only when he comes to Shunshin that he's dealt with a little more leniently.

古文：判官王德寿谓仁杰曰： 尚书定减死矣。
现代文：来俊臣的属官王德寿对狄仁杰说： 您一定能减免死罪了。
English: Wang Deshou, a subordinate official of Lai Junvian, said to Di Renjie: You will definitely be able to commute the death penalty.

古文：德寿业受驱策，欲求少阶级，烦尚书引杨执柔，可乎？ 
现代文：我已受人指使，想略找一个升迁阶梯，烦您牵连杨执柔，可以吗？ 
English: I have been instructed by someone to try to find a promotion ladder, bother you to implicate Yang Jie Rong, is that okay?

古文：仁杰曰： 皇天后土遣狄仁杰为如此事！ 
现代文：狄仁杰说： 天神地神在上，竟要狄仁杰干这种事！ 
English: Di Renjie said, "How could the gods of heaven and earth ask Di Renjie to do such a thing!

古文：以头触柱，血流被面；德寿惧而谢之。
现代文：说完一头撞在柱子上，血流满面；王德寿害怕因而向他道歉。
English: After saying this, Wang Deshou hit his head on a pillar and bled profusely. Wang Deshou was afraid and apologized to him.

古文：侯思止鞫魏元忠，元忠辞气不屈；思止怒，命倒曳之。
现代文：侯思止审讯魏元忠，魏元忠义正词严不屈服；侯思止大怒，命令在地上倒着拖他。
English: Hou Sisi interrogated Wei Yuanzhong, and Wei Yuanzhong firmly refused to give in; Hou Sisi was furious and ordered to drag him on the ground upside down.

古文：元忠曰： 我薄命，譬如坠驴，足絓于镫，为所曳耳。
现代文：魏元忠说： 我命运不好，譬如从驴背上掉下来，脚挂在足镫上，被驴拉着走。 
English: Wei Yuanzhong said, "My fate is not good. For example, I fell off the back of a donkey, my foot got caught in the stirrup, and I was dragged along by the donkey.

古文：思止愈怒，更曳之，元忠曰： 侯思止，汝若须魏元忠头则截取，何必使承反也！ 
现代文：侯思止愈加发怒，命令接着拖他。魏元忠说： 侯思止，你如果需要我魏元忠的脑袋就砍下，何必让我承认谋反呢！ 
English: Hou Sizhong became more and more angry, and gave the order to drag him away. Wei Yuanzhong said: Hou Sizhong, if you need my Wei Yuanzhong's head, just cut it off. Why should I admit to plotting a rebellion?

古文：狄仁杰既承反，有司待报行刑，不复严备。
现代文：狄仁杰已承认谋反，有关部门只等待判罪执行刑罚，不再严加防备。
English: Di Renjie has admitted to plotting a rebellion, and the relevant departments are only waiting for the sentencing to carry out the punishment, and will no longer strictly prevent it.

古文：仁杰裂衾帛书冤状，置绵衣中，谓王德寿曰： 天时方热，请授家人去其绵。 
现代文：狄仁杰便从被子上撕下一块帛，书写冤屈情况，塞在绵衣里面，对王德寿说： 天气热了，请将绵衣交给我家里人撤去丝绵。 
English: Di Renjie then tore a piece of felt from the quilt, wrote the grievance situation, stuffed it inside the cotton clothes, and said to Wang Deshou: The weather is hot, please give the cotton clothes to my family to remove the silk.

古文：德寿许之。
现代文：王德寿同意。
English: Wang Deshou agreed.

古文：仁杰子光远得书，持之称变，得召见。
现代文：狄仁杰的儿子狄光远得到帛书，拿着去说有紧急情况要报告，得到太后召见。
English: Di Renjie's son, Di Guangyuan, got the letter, took it to say that there was an emergency to report, and was summoned by the empress dowager.

古文：则天览之，以问俊臣，对曰： 仁杰等下狱，臣未尝褫其巾带，寝处甚安，苟无事实，安肯承反！ 
现代文：武则天看了帛书，质问来俊臣，他回答说： 狄仁杰等入狱后，我未曾剥夺他们的头巾和腰带，生活很安适，假如没有事实，怎么肯承认谋反！ 
English: Wu Zetian read the letter and questioned the young minister. He replied, "After Di Renjie and others went to prison, I did not deprive them of their headscarves and belts. Their lives were very comfortable. If there were no facts, how could they admit to plotting a rebellion!"

古文：太后使通事舍人周綝往视之，俊臣暂假仁杰等巾带，罗立于西，使綝视之；綝不敢视，唯东顾唯诺而已。
现代文：太后派通事舍人周前往查看，来俊臣临时发给狄仁杰等头巾腰带，让他们排列站立在西边让周验看；周不敢向西看，只是面向东边唯唯诺诺而已。
English: The empress dowager sent a courier to go and inspect Zhou, and the courier came and temporarily gave Di Renjie and others headscarf belts, and let them stand in a row on the west side for Zhou to inspect; Zhou did not dare to look west, but only faced the east side.

古文：俊臣又诈为仁杰等谢死表，使綝奏之。
现代文：来俊臣又伪造狄仁杰等的谢死罪表，让周上奏太后。
English: Lai Junchen also forged the death certificate of Di Renjie and others to let Zhou Shang play the empress dowager.

古文：乐思晦男未十岁，没入司农，上变，得召见。
现代文：乐思晦的儿子未满十岁，被籍没入司农寺为奴，要求上告特别情况，获得太后召见。
English: Le Siyu's son, who was under ten years old, was registered as a slave in the Sinoon Temple, and requested to appeal for special circumstances, and was summoned by the Empress Dowager.

古文：太后问状，对曰： 臣父已死，臣家已破，但惜陛下法为俊臣等所弄。陛下不信臣言，乞择朝臣之忠清、陛下素所信任者，为反状以付俊臣，无不承反矣。 
现代文：太后问他有什么情况，他回答说： 我父亲已死，家已破，只可惜陛下的刑法为来俊臣等所玩弄，陛下如果不相信我说的话，请选择朝臣中忠诚清廉、陛下一贯信任的人，提出他们谋反的罪状交给来俊臣，他们没有不承认谋反的。 
English: When the Empress Dowager asked him what the situation was, he replied, "My father is dead and my family is ruined. It's just a pity that His Majesty's criminal law is being toyed with by Lai Junshi and others. If Your Majesty doesn't believe what I'm saying, please choose a loyal and honest courtier whom Your Majesty has always trusted, and present their charges of plotting a rebellion to Lai Junshi. They didn't deny plotting a rebellion.

古文：太后意稍寤，召见仁杰等，问曰： 卿承反何也？
现代文：太后听后稍有醒悟，召见狄仁杰等，问道： 你承认谋反，为什么？ 
English: After listening, the Empress Dowager had a bit of a wake-up call, summoned Di Renjie, and asked: You admitted to plotting a rebellion, why?

古文：对曰： 不承，则已死于拷掠矣。 
现代文：回答说： 不承认，便已经死于严刑拷打了。 
English: He replied: "If you don't confess, you have already died from severe torture."

古文：太后曰： 何为作谢死表？ 
现代文：太后说： 为何作谢死罪表？ 
English: The empress dowager said, "Why make a death certificate?"

古文：对曰： 无之。 
现代文：回答说： 没有。 
English: "There's no such thing as etiquette," she replied.

古文：出表示之，乃知其诈，于是出此七族。
现代文：太后出示所上的奏表，才知道是伪造的，于是释免这七个家族。
English: The Empress Dowager showed the report form only to find out that it was a forgery, so she released the seven families.

古文：庚午，贬知古江夏令，仁杰彭泽令，宣礼夷陵令，元忠涪陵令，献西乡令；流行本、嗣真于岭南。
现代文：庚午，任知古降职为江夏县令、狄仁杰降职为彭泽县令、崔宣礼降职为夷陵县令、魏元忠降职为涪陵县令、卢献降职为西乡县令；流放裴行本、李嗣真于岭南。
English: At noon, Ren Zhi Gu was demoted to Jiangxia County, Di Renjie was demoted to Pengze County, Cui Xuanli was demoted to Yiling County, Wei Yuanzhong was demoted to Fuling County, Lu Xian was demoted to Xixiang County, and Pei Xingben and Li Shizhen were exiled to Lingnan.

古文：俊臣与武承嗣等固请诛之，太后不许。
现代文：来俊臣与武承嗣等仍坚持请求处死他们七个人，太后不答应。
English: Lai Junchen and Wu Chengzhi still insisted on requesting the execution of their seven people, but the Empress Dowager did not agree.

古文：俊臣乃独称行本罪尤重，请诛之；秋官郎中徐有功驳之，以为： 明主有更生之恩，俊臣不能将顺，亏损恩信。 
现代文：来俊臣便又特别提出裴行本罪恶尤其严重，请处死他；秋官郎中徐有功予以反驳，以为 英明君主有使臣下再生的恩惠，来俊臣不能顺势促成，有损君主恩信。 
English: Lai Junchen then specifically proposed that Pei Xingjun's crime was particularly serious, and he should be put to death; Emperor Qianlong's son-in-law Xu Yougong refuted this, saying that the wise monarch had the grace to regenerate his envoys, and Lai Junchen could not facilitate this, which would damage the monarch's credit.

古文：殿中侍御史贵乡霍献可，宣礼之甥也，言于太后曰： 陛下不杀裴宣礼，臣请陨命于前。 
现代文：殿中侍御史贵乡人霍献可是崔宣礼的外甥，对太后说： 陛下不杀崔宣礼，我请求死在陛下眼前。 
English: Huo Xian, the nephew of Cui Xuanli, a villager from Guizhigu, who was serving in the palace, said to the empress dowager: Your majesty, don't kill Cui Xuanli. I beg you to die in front of your majesty.

古文：以头触殿阶，血流沾地，以示为人臣不私其亲。
现代文：他一头撞在宫殿台阶上，流血浸湿地面，用以表示作臣下的不袒护自己的亲戚。
English: He hit his head on the steps of the palace, blood soaked the ground, to show that he would not protect his relatives as a subject.

古文：太后皆不听。
现代文：太后都不听从。
English: The Queen Mother did not listen.

古文：献可常以绿帛裹其伤，微露之于幞头下，冀太后见之以为忠。
现代文：霍献可时常用绿帛包扎伤口，略为显露于帽子下面，希望太后看见认为他忠诚。
English: Huo Xian sometimes used the green scissors to dress his wounds, which were slightly exposed under his hat, hoping that the Empress Dowager would see that he was loyal.

古文：甲戌，补阙薛谦光上疏，以为： 选举之法，宜得实才，取舍之间，风化所系。
现代文：甲戌，补阙薛谦光上疏认为： 选拔人才的办法，应该使朝廷能得到有真才实学的人，录取和舍弃什么样的人，关系到国家的教化。
English: Xue Qianguang believed that: The method of selecting talents should enable the imperial court to obtain people with real talent and real learning, and what kind of people to accept and abandon is related to the country's enlightenment.

古文：今之选人，咸称觅举，奔竞相尚，喧诉无惭。
现代文：现今选拔人，都赞许自求举荐，于是奔走门路，相互争胜，自己大吹大擂而无愧色。
English: Nowadays, the selectors are all in favor of self-recommendation, so they rush to the door, compete with each other, and brag about themselves.

古文：至于才应经邦，惟令试策；武能制敌，止验弯弧。
现代文：至于人才是应该能治理国家的，却只让试策文；武官必须能克敌制胜，却只考弯弓射箭。
English: As for talents, they should be able to govern the country, but they are only allowed to write policy papers; military attachés must be able to defeat the enemy, but they are only tested on bows and arrows.

古文：昔汉武帝见司马相如赋，恨不同时，及置之朝廷，终文园令，知其不堪公卿之任故也。
现代文：从前汉武帝读了司马相如所作的《子虚赋》，恨不能与他同时，等到得知他是当代人，安置他在朝廷，最终只让他担任汉文帝的陵园令，这是知道他不能胜任公卿职务的缘故。
English: Once upon a time, Emperor Hanwu read the "Son of Wu Fu" by Sima Xiangru. He wanted to be able to read it at the same time as him, until he learned that he was a contemporary, placed him in the court, and eventually only let him serve as the Emperor Hanwen's mausoleum director, because he knew that he was not competent for the post of court noble.

古文：吴起将战，左右进剑，起曰： 将者提鼓挥桴，临敌决疑，一剑之任，非将事也。 
现代文：吴起将出战，身边的人递给他剑，吴起说： 为将的任务是提战鼓挥动鼓槌，临阵解决疑难问题，使用一把剑的任务，不是为将的事情。 
English: Wu Qiming will go to war, the people around him handed him a sword, Wu Qiming said: The general's task is to raise the war drum, wave the drumstick, and solve difficult problems on the spot. The task of using a sword is not a matter for the general.

古文：然则虚文岂足以佐时，善射岂足以克敌！
现代文：如此说来，徒有文才如何足以辅佐时政，善于射箭如何足以克敌制胜！
English: In this way, how can mere literary talent be enough to support the current government, and how can being good at archery be enough to defeat the enemy and win!

古文：要在文吏察其行能，武吏观其勇略，考居官之臧否，行举者赏罚而已。 
现代文：关键在于对文官要考察他的品行和能力，对武官要看他的勇气和谋略，考核当官时政绩的好坏，对举荐人施行赏罚而已。 
English: The key is to examine the character and ability of the civil servant, the courage and strategy of the military attaché, the good or bad performance of the government when he was in office, and the reward and punishment of the recommenders.

古文：来俊臣求金于左卫大将军泉献诚，不得，诬以谋反，下狱。乙亥，缢杀之。
现代文：来俊臣向左卫大将军泉献诚索取钱财，没有达到目的，便诬陷他谋反，逮捕入狱，乙亥，他被吊死。
English: Zhu Juncheng came to solicit money from Zuo Wei general Quan Jianzhong. When he failed to achieve his goal, he was framed for plotting a rebellion, arrested and imprisoned, and hanged.

古文：庚辰，司刑卿、检校陕州刺史李游道为冬官尚书、同平章事。
现代文：庚辰，司刑卿、检校陕州刺史李游道任冬官尚书、同平章事。
English: Geng Chen, Chief of the Criminal Investigation Department, Inspector of Schools of Shaanxi Province, Li Youdao, Director of the Winter Office, and Tongping Zhang.

古文：二月，己亥，吐蕃党项部落万馀人内附，分置十州。
现代文：二月，己亥，吐蕃党项部落一万余人归附唐朝，被分别安置在十个州。
English: In February, Ji Hai, more than ten thousand people of the Tubo Party Tribes were annexed to the Tang Dynasty and were resettled in ten states.

古文：戊午，以秋官尚书袁智弘同平章事。
现代文：戊午，朝廷任命秋官尚书袁智弘为同平章事。
English: In the afternoon, the imperial court appointed Yuan Zhihong, the autumn official Shangshu, to the position of Tongping Zhangji.

古文：夏，四月，丙申，赦天下，改元如意。
现代文：夏季四月，丙申，朝廷大赦天下罪人，更改年号为如意。
English: In the summer of April, the imperial court amnestied all the sinners in the world and changed the year name to Ruyi.

古文：五月，丙寅，禁天下屠杀及捕鱼虾。
现代文：五月，丙寅，朝廷禁止天下屠杀牲畜及捕捞鱼虾。
English: In May, the imperial court banned the slaughter of livestock and the fishing of fish and shrimp.

古文：江淮旱，饥，民不得采鱼虾，饿死者甚众。
现代文：江、淮间旱灾，发生饥荒，百姓不得捕鱼虾，饿死的人很多。
English: Droughts and famines occurred between the Yangtze River and the Huai River. People were not allowed to catch fish and shrimp, and many people died of starvation.

古文：右拾遗张德，生男三日，私杀羊会同僚，补阙杜肃怀一餤，上表告之。
现代文：右拾遗张德，生儿子三天，私自杀羊宴请同事，补阙杜肃怀揣宴席上的一些食物，上表告发。
English: Zhang De, who was born three days after his father's death, invited colleagues to a sheep banquet, packed some food for the banquet, and announced it on the table.

古文：明日，太后对仗，谓德曰： 闻卿生男，甚喜。 
现代文：第二天，太后临朝听政，对张德说： 听说你生儿子，很高兴。 
English: The next day, the Empress Dowager Lintong listened to Zhang De and said, "I am very happy to hear that you have a son.

古文：德拜谢。
现代文：张德拜谢。
English: Zhang Debaixie.

古文：太后曰： 何从得肉？ 
现代文：太后说： 从哪里弄来的肉？ 
English: The empress dowager said: Where did the meat come from?

古文：德叩头服罪。
现代文：张德叩头认罪。
English: Zhang De kowtowed and pleaded guilty.

古文：太后曰： 朕禁屠宰，吉凶不预。
现代文：太后说： 朕禁止屠宰牲畜，有吉凶事不干涉。
English: The empress dowager said, "I forbid the slaughter of livestock, and do not interfere in matters of fortune or misfortune."

古文：然卿自今召客，亦须择人。 
现代文：但你今后请客，也需要选择人。 
English: But if you want to invite guests in the future, you also need to choose people.

古文：出肃表示之。
现代文：说完拿出杜肃的奏表给他看。
English: After that, take out Du Su's report card and show it to him.

古文：肃大惭，举朝欲唾其面。
现代文：杜肃十分惭愧，举朝文武官员都想啐他的脸。
English: Du Su was so ashamed that all the officials wanted to punch him in the face.

古文：吐蕃酋长曷苏帅部落请内附，以右玉钤卫将军张玄遇为安抚使，将精卒二万迎之。
现代文：吐蕃酋长曷苏率领部落请求归附唐朝，朝廷任命右玉钤卫将军张玄遇为安抚使，领精卒二万迎接他。
English: The chief of Tubo, Jinsu, led the tribe to request to be annexed to the Tang Dynasty. The imperial court appointed the right jade guardian general Zhang Xuanyuan as a pacifying envoy, and twenty thousand courtiers greeted him.

古文：六月，军至大渡水西，曷苏事泄，为国人所擒。
现代文：六月，唐军到大渡水西边，曷苏归附唐朝的事情泄露，被本国人擒拿。
English: In June, the Tang army went to the west side of the Dadu River, and the matter of Bansu's annexation to the Tang Dynasty was leaked, and it was captured by the local people.

古文：别部酋长昝捶帅羌蛮八千馀人内附，玄遇以其部落置莱川州而还。
现代文：别部酋长昝捶率领羌蛮八千余人归附唐朝，张玄遇将他的部落安置在莱川州后，便撤军了。
English: Other chiefs led more than eight thousand people to join the Tang Dynasty. Zhang Xuan placed his tribe in Laichuan and then withdrew.

古文：辛亥，万年主簿徐坚上疏，以为： 书有五听之道，令著三覆之奏。
现代文：辛亥，万年县主簿徐坚上疏认为： 古书记载审案实行听词、听色、听气、听耳、听目等 五听 ，贞观年间有死罪经三次复奏才行刑的命令。
English: In Xinhai, Xu Jian Shang Shou, the county's chief bookkeeper for ten thousand years, believed that: the ancient records recorded the trial of the implementation of listening to words, listening to colors, listening to qi, listening to ears, listening to eyes, etc.

古文：窃见比有敕推按反者，令使者得实，即行斩决。
现代文：我看见近来有命令审讯谋反者，让使者审得事实，立即判决处死。
English: I have seen recently that there is an order to interrogate the plotters, let the envoys judge the facts, and immediately sentence them to death.

古文：人命至重，死不再生，万一怀枉，吞声赤族，岂不痛哉！
现代文：人命至关重要，死后不能复生，万一含冤，被灭族而怀怨不敢出声，岂不令人痛心！
English: Human life is of the utmost importance. It cannot be revived after death. In the unlikely event of a grievance, if a person is exterminated and does not dare to voice his or her grievances, it would be heartbreaking!

古文：此不足肃奸逆而明典刑，适所以长威福而生疑惧。
现代文：这样做不足以肃清恶人和叛逆，彰明常刑，恰好助长一些人擅权枉法，使人们产生疑惧。
English: This is not enough to purge the wicked and traitors, and to highlight the death penalty, but it just encourages some people to abuse power, and makes people suspicious.

古文：臣望绝此处分，依法覆奏。
现代文：我希望杜绝这种处理办法，依法复奏再行刑。
English: I hope to put an end to this method of dealing with cases, and have the death penalty carried out again in accordance with the law.

古文：又，法官之任，宜加简择，有用法宽平，为百姓所称者，愿亲而任之；有处事深酷，不允人望者，愿疏而退之。 
现代文：还有，任用法官，应当加以选择，有执法宽大公平，为百姓所称赞的，希望亲近而任用他；有处理事情峻刻严酷，不孚众望的，请疏远而斥退他。 
English: Moreover, in the appointment of judges, there should be a choice. For those who enforce the law, are lenient and fair, and are praised by the people, they should be appointed if they wish to be close to them. For those who deal with things sternly and harshly, and do not live up to the expectations of the public, they should be distanced and rejected.

古文：坚，齐聃之子也。
现代文：徐坚是徐齐聃的儿子。
English: Xu Jian is the son of Xu Qichen.

古文：夏官侍郎李昭德密言于太后曰： 魏王承嗣权太重。 
现代文：夏官侍郎李昭德私下对太后说： 魏王武承嗣权太重。 
English: Li Zhaode, the summer official's valet, said privately to the empress dowager: Wei King Wu inherited too much power.

古文：太后曰： 吾侄也，故委以腹心。 
现代文：太后说： 他是我的侄儿，所以任为亲信。 
English: The Empress Dowager said, "He is my nephew, so he is a close confidant.

古文：昭德曰： 侄之于姑，其亲何如子之于父？
现代文：李昭德说： 侄儿对于姑姑，怎么能比得上儿子对于父亲亲近？
English: Li Zhaode said: How can a nephew be as close to his aunt as a son is to his father?

古文：子犹有篡弑其父者，况侄乎！
现代文：儿子还有杀死父亲的，何况侄儿呢！
English: A son can kill his father, let alone a nephew!

古文：今承嗣既陛下之侄，为亲王，又为宰相，权侔人主，臣恐陛下不得久安天位也！ 
现代文：现在武承嗣既是陛下的侄儿，是亲王，又任宰相，权势与君主等同，我恐怕陛下不能久安于天子之位！ 
English: Now that Emperor Wu's heir is not only his nephew, but also a prince and prime minister, with the same power as the monarch, I'm afraid His Majesty can't stay on the throne of the Son of Heaven for long!

古文：太后矍然曰： 朕未之思。 
现代文：太后震惊地说： 朕没有想到这点。 
English: The Queen Mother was shocked and said, "I hadn't thought of that."

古文：秋，七月，戊寅，以文昌左相、同凤阁鸾台三品武承嗣为特进，纳言武攸宁为冬官尚书，夏官尚书、同平章事杨执柔为地官尚书，并罢政事；以秋官侍郎新郑崔元综为鸾台侍郎，夏官侍郎李昭德为凤阁侍郎，检校天官侍郎姚璹为文昌左丞，检校地官侍郎李元素为文昌右丞，与司宾卿崔神基并同平章事。
现代文：秋季，八月，戊寅，朝廷任命文昌左相、同凤阁鸾台三品武承嗣为特进，纳言武攸宁为冬官尚书，夏官尚书、同平章事杨执柔为地官尚书，一并罢去相职；任命秋官侍郎新郑人崔元综为鸾台侍郎，夏官侍郎李昭德为凤阁侍郎，检校天官侍郎姚为文昌左丞，检校地官侍郎李元素为文昌右丞，与司宾卿崔神基并任同平章事。
English: In the autumn, in August, in Wuyin, the imperial court appointed Wenchang Zuo, Tongfeng Pavilion and Three Generations of Wu Heirs as special envoys, Nagon Wu Youning as the winter official Shangshu, Xia official Shangshu, Tongping Zhangji Yang Cui Rong as the local official Shangshu, and resigned from the position of minister; appointed the attendant of the autumn official, the new Zheng person, Cui Yuan Sim, as the attendant of Xingtai, Xia official attendant Li Zhaode as the attendant of Feng Pavilion, the attendant of the school inspector, Yao, as the attendant of Wenchang Zuo,

古文：璹，思廉之孙；元素，敬玄之弟也。
现代文：姚是姚思廉的孙子；李元素是李敬玄的弟弟。
English: Yao is the grandson of Yao Siliang; Li Element is the younger brother of Li Jingxuan.

古文：辛巳，以营缮大匠王璿为夏官尚书、同平章事。
现代文：辛巳，朝廷任命营缮大匠王为夏官尚书、同平章事。
English: Soon after, the imperial court appointed Wang, a great master of camp decoration, as the summer official of Shangshu and Tongping.

古文：承嗣亦毁昭德于太后，太后曰： 吾任昭德，始得安眠，此代吾劳，汝勿言也。 
现代文：武承嗣也向太后诋毁李昭德，太后说： 我任用李昭德，才睡得安稳，他可以为我代劳，你不要说了。 
English: Wu Chengzhi also slandered Li Zhaode to the empress dowager. The empress dowager said, "I only appointed Li Zhaode so that I could sleep peacefully. He can work for me. Don't say anything."

古文：是时，酷吏恣横，百官畏之侧足，昭德独廷奏其奸。
现代文：当时，酷吏恣意横行，百官畏惧他们，不敢正面站立，只有李昭德敢于在朝廷揭露他们的邪恶。
English: At that time, ruthless officials were running amok. All officials were afraid of them and did not dare to stand up to them. Only Li Zhaode dared to expose their evil in the imperial court.

古文：太后好祥瑞，有献白石赤文者，执政诘其异，对曰： 以其赤心。 
现代文：太后迷信祥瑞，有人进献有赤色花纹的白石，主管官员责问他这石头有什么特别之处，回答说： 因为它的心忠诚。 
English: The empress dowager was superstitious about Xiang Rui. Someone presented a white stone with a red pattern. The responsible official asked him what was special about this stone and replied: Because its heart is loyal.

古文：昭德怒曰： 此石赤心，他石尽反邪？ 
现代文：李昭德大怒说： 这块石头的心忠诚，其他石头全都造反吗？ 
English: Li Zhaode said angrily: Is the heart of this stone loyal, and are all the other stones rebellious?

古文：左右皆笑。
现代文：身边的人都发笑。
English: People on both sides burst out laughing.

古文：襄州人胡庆以丹漆书龟腹曰： 天子万万年。 
现代文：襄州人胡庆用红漆在龟的腹部书写 天子万万年 几个字，到皇宫门口进献。
English: Hu Qing, a resident of Xiangzhou, used red paint to write a few words on the abdomen of the turtle, and presented it to the gate of the imperial palace.

古文：谐阙献之。昭德以刀刮尽，奏请付法。
现代文：李昭德用刀把字刮除净尽，奏请将进献者法办。
English: Li Zhaode used a knife to scrape out the words and asked the donor to be prosecuted.

古文：太后曰： 此心亦无恶。 
现代文：太后说： 这个人用心并不坏。 
English: The Empress Dowager said, "This man is not bad at heart.

古文：命释之。
现代文：命令释放他。
English: order his release.

古文：太后习猫，使与鹦鹉共处，出示百官。传观未遍，猫饥，搏鹦鹉食之，太后甚惭。
现代文：太后训练猫，让它和鹦鹉在一起。有一次拿出向百官展示，传看还未完毕，猫饿了，捕捉鹦鹉而食，太后为此很羞愧。
English: The Empress trained the cat to be with the parrot. Once she took it out to show it to the officials, but before the show was over, the cat was hungry and caught the parrot to eat it. The Empress was very ashamed of this.

古文：太后自垂拱以来，任用酷吏，先诛唐宗室贵戚数百人，次及大臣数百家，其刺史、郎将以下，不可胜数。
现代文：太后自垂拱年间以来，任用酷吏，首先处死唐朝皇族和贵戚数百人，然后杀大臣数百家，杀刺史、郎将以下官吏更数不清。
English: The empress dowager had been appointing cruel officials ever since she was in her twilight years. First, she executed hundreds of members of the Tang dynasty royal family and their noble relatives, and then she killed hundreds of ministers. She also killed countless officials, including princes and generals.

古文：每除一官，户婢窃相谓曰： 鬼朴又来矣。 
现代文：每任命一名官吏，宫中守门的官婢便私下互相说道： 作鬼的材料又来了。 
English: Every time an official was appointed, the palace gatekeepers said to each other in private: Here comes the material for making ghosts again.

古文：不旬月，辄遭掩捕、族诛。
现代文：不满一个月，这些官吏即遭突然逮捕，举族被杀。
English: In less than a month, these officials were suddenly arrested and their entire family was killed.

古文：监察御史朝邑严善思，公直敢言。
现代文：监察御史朝邑人严善思公正耿直敢说话。
English: The inspector of the history of the morning people are strict, fair-minded, and dare to speak.

古文：时告密者不可胜数，太后亦厌其烦，命善思按问，引虚伏罪者八百五十馀人。
现代文：当时告密的人多到数不清，太后也厌烦，命令严善思查问，结果承认诬告服罪而死的有八百五十余人。
English: At that time, there were countless informers. The empress dowager was also fed up and ordered a rigorous investigation. As a result, more than 850 people died after admitting to making false accusations and pleading guilty.

古文：罗织之党为之不振，乃相与共构陷善思，坐流欢州。
现代文：罗织罪名害人的集团为之丧气，他们便共同诬陷严善思，结果他被流放州。
English: Disheartened by Luo Weaving's group of accusers, they jointly framed Yan Shan Si, as a result of which he was exiled to the state.

古文：太后知其枉，寻复召为浑仪监丞。
现代文：太后知道他冤枉，不久又召他回来担任浑仪监丞。
English: The empress dowager knew that he had wronged her, and soon called him back to serve as the chief inspector of ceremonies.

古文：善思名譔，以字行。
现代文：严善思名叫，字善思，人们习惯称呼他的字。
English: His name is Yan Shan Si, and people are accustomed to calling him "Zhan Si."

古文：右补阙新郑硃敬则以太后本任威刑以禁异议，今既革命，众心已定，宜省刑尚宽，乃上疏，以为： 李斯相秦，用刻薄变诈以屠诸侯，不知易之以宽和，卒至土崩，此不知变之祸也。
现代文：右补阙新郑人朱敬则认为太后的本意是用刑罚来禁止不同意见，现在既已登上帝位，人心也已安定，就应减省刑罚，崇尚宽大，于是上疏认为： 李斯辅助秦国，用刻薄欺诈手段屠杀诸侯，不知道及时改变为宽大温和，终于土崩瓦解，这是不知道变化的祸害。
English: Zhu Jing, the new Zheng, the right-hand compiler, believed that the intention of the empress dowager was to use punishment to prohibit dissenting opinions. Now that she has ascended to the throne and the people's hearts have been stabilized, she should reduce the punishment and advocate leniency. Therefore, Shang Shou believed that: Li Si assisted the Qin State and slaughtered the princes with cruel and fraudulent means, and did not know how to change to leniency and moderation in time, and finally collapsed. This is the scourge of not knowing change.

古文：汉高祖定天下，陆贾、叔孙通说之以礼义，传世十二，此知变之善也。
现代文：汉高祖平定天下，陆贾、叔孙通说服他施行礼义，结果皇位传了十二代，这是知道变化的好处。
English: Emperor Gaozhu of the Han Dynasty pacified the world. Lu Jia and his uncle Sun Tong persuaded him to implement etiquette. As a result, the imperial throne was passed down for twelve generations. This is the benefit of knowing change.

古文：自文明草昧，天地屯蒙，三叔流言，四凶构难，不设钩距，无以应天顺人，不切刑名，不可摧奸息暴。
现代文：自文明年间帝业初创，一切刚刚开始，韩王、霍王等三位皇叔散布流言，徐敬业等四个元凶制造祸乱，这时候不用手段套出实情，不能应天命顺人心，不亲近法家的刑名之学，不能摧毁邪恶止息暴乱。
English: Since the beginning of imperial rule in the Age of Civilization, everything was just beginning. Three imperial uncles such as Han Wang and Huo Wang spread rumors, and four main culprits such as Xu Jingye created disasters. At this time, it was not necessary to use means to expose the truth, it was not possible to meet the fate of the people, it was not close to the legalist's study of capital punishment, and it was not possible to destroy evil and stop riots.

古文：故置神器，开告端，曲直之影必呈，包藏之心尽露，神道助直，无罪不除，苍生晏然，紫宸易主。
现代文：所以设铜匦，开告密之门，使或曲或直的形影必然显现出来，包藏着的阴谋全部暴露，结果神明帮助正直之人，罪恶尽除，百姓安定，帝位转移。
English: Therefore, set up a gong, open the door to inform, so that the shape of the song or the straight line will inevitably appear, and the hidden conspiracy will be fully exposed. As a result, the gods will help the honest people, the evil will be eliminated, the people will be stable, and the imperial throne will be transferred.

古文：然而急趋无善迹，促柱少和声，向时之妙策，乃当今之刍狗也。
现代文：但快走不会有完整的脚印，短的琴柱奏不出和声，过去的妙策，成了当今的无用之物。
English: But fast walking will not have a complete footprint, short piano columns do not play harmonies, and the brilliant strategy of the past has become a useless thing today.

古文：伏愿览秦、汉之得失，考时事之合宜，审糟粕之可遗，觉蘧庐之须毁，去萋菲之牙角，顿奸险之锋芒，窒罗织之源，扫朋党之迹，使天下苍生坦然大悦，岂不乐哉！ 
现代文：恳切希望看看秦、汉的得和失，考察当前的事怎样办才合适，哪些属于糟粕可以遗弃，发现那些一时有用过后即需破除的东西，去掉诬陷者的牙和角，挫去邪恶阴险者的锋芒，堵塞罗织罪状的源头，扫除结党营私的痕迹，使天下百姓无忧无虑，岂不快乐！ 
English: I earnestly hope to see the gains and losses of the Qin and Han dynasties, to examine how current affairs should be handled, which are wasteful and can be abandoned, to discover those things that need to be eliminated after being useful for a while, to remove the teeth and horns of the framers, to frustrate the sharpness of the evil and insidious, to block the source of the crime, to sweep away the traces of the party and the party, and to make the people of the world worry-free, is not it happy!

古文：太后善之，赐帛三百段。
现代文：太后赞许他的话，赏赐他帛三百段。
English: The empress dowager approved of his words and rewarded him with three hundred dan.

古文：侍御史周矩上疏曰： 推劾之吏皆相矜以虐，泥耳笼头，枷研楔，摺膺签爪，悬发薰耳，号曰 狱持 。
现代文：侍御史周矩上疏说： 审问犯人的官吏都以残暴相夸耀，泥塞耳朵，笼罩脑袋，用重枷磨脖颈，在头上加箍再打进楔子，打折胸骨，手指钉竹签，吊头发，薰耳朵，号称为 狱持 。
English: Attendant historian Zhou Jianxiao said: The officials who interrogated the prisoners all boasted of their brutality, plugged their ears with mud, covered their heads, used heavy shackles to grind their necks, added shackles to their heads and then drove wedges into them, broke their sternums, nailed bamboo sticks to their fingers, hung their hair, and rubbed their ears. They were called "prisoners."

古文：或累日节食，连宵缓问，昼夜摇撼，使不得眠，号曰 宿囚 。
现代文：或者多日减少供应食物，通宵审问，昼夜摇撼，不让睡觉，号称为 宿囚 。
English: Or they may be deprived of food for several days, interrogated all night, shaken day and night, and not allowed to sleep. This is called "incarceration."

古文：此等既非木石，且救目前，苟求赊死。
现代文：犯人既不是木石，为避免眼前的痛苦，便姑且认罪谋求晚一点死去。
English: In order to avoid the immediate pain, the prisoner, who was not a stone, pleaded guilty and sought to die later.

古文：臣窃听舆议，皆称天下太平，何苦须反！
现代文：我私下听到的舆论，都说天下太平，有什么必要造反？
English: The public opinion that I have heard in private all says that the world is at peace, so why is it necessary to rebel?

古文：岂被告者尽是英雄，欲求帝王邪？
现代文：难道被告发的人全是英雄，想谋取帝王的地位吗？
English: Are the accused all heroes who want to become emperors?

古文：但不胜楚毒自诬耳。
现代文：只是受不住酷刑，被迫认罪罢了。
English: He just couldn't stand the torture and was forced to confess.

古文：愿陛下察之。
现代文：希望陛下考察。
English: I hope His Majesty is watching.

古文：今满朝侧息不安，皆以为陛下朝与之密，夕与之仇，不可保也。
现代文：如今满朝百官坐卧不安，都以为陛下早上同他们亲近，晚上即与他们成为仇敌，难以保全性命。
English: Now a whole dynasty of officials are restless, all thinking that His Majesty is close to them in the morning and becomes their enemy in the evening, making it difficult to save their lives.

古文：周用仁而昌，秦用刑而亡。
现代文：周朝行仁义而昌盛，秦朝用刑罚而灭亡。
English: The Zhou Dynasty prospered by practicing benevolence, while the Qin Dynasty was destroyed by punishment.

古文：愿陛下缓刑用仁，天下幸甚！ 
现代文：愿陛下减缓刑罚，施行仁义，则天下百姓就很幸运了！ 
English: May His Majesty commute the sentence and implement benevolence and righteousness, then the people of the world will be very lucky!

古文：太后颇采其言，制狱稍衰。
现代文：太后颇采纳他的意见，特种监狱的囚犯逐渐衰减。
English: The empress dowager was quite receptive to his opinion, and the number of prisoners in the special prison gradually decreased.

古文：太后春秋虽高，善自涂泽，虽左右不觉其衰。
现代文：太后年岁虽大，但善于自己修饰容貌，即使她左右的人也感觉不出她衰老。
English: Although the empress dowager is old, she is good at self-grooming her appearance, and even those around her do not feel her aging.

古文：丙戌，敕以齿落更生，九月，庚子，御则天门，赦天下，改元。更以九月为社。
现代文：丙戌，下诏说因自己牙齿脱落后又长出新牙，九月，庚子，到则天门宣布赦免天下罪人，更改年号；又改于九月祭土神。
English: The next edict said that because of his own teeth falling out, he had grown new teeth. In September, Geng Zi, the Gate of Heaven, announced the amnesty of the world's sinners, changed the year; and changed to September to celebrate the soil god.

古文：制于并州置北都。
现代文：太后下令在并州设置北都。
English: The empress dowager ordered that the northern capital be set up in the annexed prefecture.

古文：癸丑，同平章事李游道、王璿、袁智弘、崔神基、李元素、春官侍郎孔思元、益州长史任令辉，皆为王弘义所陷，流岭南。
现代文：癸丑，同平章事李游道、王、袁智弘、崔神基、李元素、春官侍郎孔思元、益州长史任令辉，都因被王弘义诬陷，流放岭南。
English: Li Youdao, Wang, Yuan Zhihong, Cui Shengyi, Li Xianye, Kong Siyuan, the attendant of the Spring Government, and the governor of Yixing, Shi Renlinghui, were all exiled to Lingnan for being framed by Wang Hongyi.

古文：左羽林中郎将来子珣坐事流爱州，寻卒。
现代文：左羽林中郎将来子因事获罪流放爱州，不久去世。
English: Zuo Lin Zhongro's future son was exiled to Aizhou after being convicted of a crime, and died soon after.

古文：初，新丰王孝杰从刘审礼击吐蕃，为副总管，与审礼皆没于吐蕃。
现代文：当初，新丰人王孝杰跟从刘审礼进攻吐蕃任副总管，与刘审礼一起沦落于吐蕃。
English: At the beginning, Xinfeng's Wang Xiaojie followed Liu Xunli's attack on Tubo as deputy chief, and fell to Tubo together with Liu Xunli.

古文：赞普见孝杰泣曰： 貌类吾父。 
现代文：吐蕃赞普见到王孝杰，哭泣说： 相貌像我父亲。 
English: When she saw Wang Xiaojie, she cried and said, "He looks like my father."

古文：厚礼之，后竟得归，累迁右鹰扬卫将军。
现代文：因此给予他优厚的待遇，后来终于得以返回，连续升官至右鹰扬卫将军。
English: Therefore, he was given generous treatment, and later he was finally able to return, and was continuously promoted to the right eagle Yangwei general.

古文：孝杰久在吐蕃，知其虚实。
现代文：王孝杰长期在吐蕃，知道他们的情况。
English: Wang Xiaojie has been in Tibet for a long time and knows their situation.

古文：会西州都督唐休璟请复取龟兹、于阗、疏勒、碎叶四镇，敕以孝杰为武威军总管，与左武卫大将军阿史那忠节将兵击吐蕃。
现代文：正好西州都督唐休请求再收复龟兹、于阗、疏勒、碎叶四镇，太后便下诏任命王孝杰为武威军总管，与武卫大将军阿史那忠节领兵进攻吐蕃。
English: Just as the governor of Xizhou, Tang Xiu, requested to recapture the four towns of Kuez, Yuzhang, Shule and Chibi, the empress dowager issued an imperial edict appointing Wang Xiaojie as the commander-in-chief of the Wuwei army, and he and the general of the Wuwei army, Ashina Zhongjie, led the troops to attack Tubo.

古文：冬，十月，丙戌，大破吐蕃，复取四镇，置安西都护府于龟兹，发兵戍之。
现代文：冬季，十月，丙戌，唐军大败吐蕃，又攻下四镇。朝廷设置安西都护府于龟兹，派兵戍守。
English: In the winter, in October, the Tang army suffered a major defeat in Tubo, and also captured four towns. The imperial court set up the Anxi Capital Protectorate in Gezi, and sent soldiers to guard it.

古文：长寿二年癸巳，公元六九三年正月，壬辰朔，太后享万象神宫，以魏王承嗣为亚献，梁王三思为终献。
现代文：长寿二年正月，壬辰朔，太后在万象神宫祭祀，让魏王武承嗣第二个献祭品，梁王武三思最后一个献祭品。
English: In the first month of the second year of longevity, the empress dowager offered a sacrifice at the Vientiane God's Palace. Wei Wangwu inherited the second sacrificial offering, and Liang Wangwu considered the last sacrificial offering.

古文：太后自制神宫乐，用舞者九百人。
现代文：太后自编神宫乐，是乐舞人员九百人。
English: The dowager empress herself composed the music for the sacred palace, and there are nine hundred musicians and dancers.

古文：户婢团儿为太后所宠信，有憾于皇嗣，乃谮皇嗣妃刘氏、德妃窦氏为厌咒。
现代文：宫中守门的官婢团儿受太后宠信，对皇嗣不满，于是诬陷皇嗣妃刘氏、德妃窦氏，说她们用邪术诅咒太后。
English: A group of court officials and maidservants who guarded the gate of the palace were favored by the empress dowager and were dissatisfied with the imperial heir, so they framed the imperial heiress Liu and Tefui Dou, saying that they had cursed the empress dowager with magic.

古文：癸巳，妃与德妃朝太后于嘉豫殿，既退，同时杀之，瘗于宫中，莫知所在。
现代文：癸巳，皇嗣妃与德妃朝见太后于嘉豫殿，退出后同时被杀，掩埋在宫中，人们不知道掩埋的处所。
English: Once upon a time, the Crown Princess and the Empress Dowager met the Empress Dowager at Jiayuan Palace. After they left, she was killed at the same time and buried in the palace. People do not know where she is buried.

古文：德妃，抗之曾孙也。
现代文：德妃是窦抗的曾孙女。
English: Tokuhi is Dou Huan's great-granddaughter.

古文：皇嗣畏忤旨，不敢言，居太后前，容止自如。
现代文：皇嗣畏惧违犯太后的旨意，对这件事不敢说话，在太后面前，表情和举动都保持和平常一样。
English: The heir to the throne was afraid of violating the will of the empress dowager and did not dare to speak about the matter. In front of the empress dowager, his facial expression and behavior remained the same as usual.

古文：团儿复欲害皇嗣，有言其情于太后者，太后乃杀团儿。
现代文：团儿又想陷害皇嗣，有人将她的情况告诉太后，太后才杀死团儿。
English: Tuan Er also tried to frame the heir to the throne. Someone told the empress dowager about her situation, and the empress dowager killed Tuan Er.

古文：是时，告密者皆诱人奴婢告其主，以求功赏。
现代文：当时，告密的人都引诱别人的奴婢告发他们的主人，以谋取功劳赏赐。
English: At that time, informers enticed other people's slaves to inform on their masters in order to receive a reward.

古文：德妃父孝谌为润州刺史，有奴妄为妖异以恐德妃母庞氏，庞氏惧，奴请夜祠祷解，因发其事。
现代文：德妃的父亲窦孝谌任润州刺史，有家奴妄作妖异以恐吓德妃的母亲庞氏。庞氏害怕，家奴便请她夜间向神祈祷以消除妖异。
English: Tefui's father, Dou Xiaojun, was the governor of Rongzhou, and a servant of the family pretended to be a monster to scare Tefui's mother, Pang. Pang was afraid, so the servant asked her to pray to God at night to eliminate the monster.

古文：下监察御史龙门薛季昶按之，季昶诬奏，以为与德妃同祝诅，先涕泣不自胜，乃言曰： 庞氏所为，臣子所不忍道。 
现代文：家奴又告发这件事，庞氏因此被送到监察御史龙门人薛季昶处查问。薛季昶诬奏庞氏与德妃共同求神降祸于太后，他先痛哭流涕好像经受不住的样子，然后说： 庞氏的行为，我不忍说出口。 
English: The family slave reported the matter again, and Pang was sent to the inspector of the palace gate, Xue Jizhen, for investigation. Xue Jizhen falsely played that Pang and Defei jointly asked God to bring evil to the empress dowager. He first cried bitterly as if he couldn't bear it, and then said: "I can't bear to say anything about Pang's behavior.

古文：太后擢季昶为给事中。
现代文：太后便提升薛季昶为给事中。
English: The empress dowager then promoted Xue Jizhe to the middle of things.

古文：庞氏当斩，其子希瑊诣侍御史徐有功讼冤，有功牒所司停刑，上奏论之，以为无罪；季昶奏有功阿党恶逆，请付法，法司处有功罪当绞。
现代文：庞氏应当斩首，她的儿子窦希找侍御史徐有功诉冤，徐有功通知有关部门停止执行死刑，然后上奏辩论，认为她没有罪。薛季昶上奏说徐有功循私偏袒恶逆罪犯，请求法办，执法部门判徐有功的罪应当处以绞刑。
English: Pang should be beheaded, and her son Douxi should find the attendant Shi Xu Yougong to complain about the injustice. Xu Yougong informed the relevant departments to stop the execution of the death penalty, and then submitted a debate that she was not guilty. Xue Jizhen submitted a report saying that Xu Yougong followed selfishness and favored evil criminals, and requested legal proceedings. The law enforcement department sentenced Xu Yougong to be hanged.

古文：令史以白有功，有功叹曰： 岂我独死，诸人永不死邪！ 
现代文：徐有功的属官把情况告诉他，徐有功叹息说： 难道只有我一个人死，其他人永远不死吗？ 
English: Xu Yougong's subordinate officers informed him of the situation. Xu Yougong sighed and said, "Am I the only one to die, and the others will never die?

古文：既食，掩扇而寝。
现代文：他进餐后，便用扇子掩面睡觉。
English: After eating, he would sleep with a fan covering his face.

古文：人以为有功苟自强，必内忧惧，密伺之，方熟寝。
现代文：人们以为徐有功只是暂时强作镇静，必定内心忧惧，但偷看他，他却正在熟睡。
English: People thought that Xu Yougong was just trying to stay calm for the time being. He must have been worried, but when they peeked in on him, he was fast asleep.

古文：太后召有功，迎谓曰： 卿比按狱，失出何多？ 
现代文：太后召见徐有功，责问他： 你近来办案，重罪不办或轻办的失误怎么那样多？ 
English: The empress dowager summoned Xu Yougong and scolded him: How many mistakes have you made recently in handling cases, such as failing to handle serious crimes or handling them lightly?

古文：对曰： 失出，人臣之小过；好生，圣人之大德。 
现代文：回答说： 重罪不办或轻办，是作臣下的小过失；喜欢让人活着，是圣人的大德。 
English: He replied, "It is a minor fault of a subject not to commit a serious crime or to commit a minor crime; it is the virtue of a saint to prefer to let people live."

古文：太后默然。
现代文：太后沉默不语。
English: The empress dowager listened in silence.

古文：由是庞氏得减死，与其三子皆流岭南，孝谌贬罗州司马，有功亦除名。
现代文：因此庞氏得减免死罪，同三个儿子一起流放岭南，窦孝谌降职为罗州司马，徐有功也被削除名籍。
English: As a result, Pang's death sentence was commuted and he was exiled to Lingnan together with his three sons, Dou Xiaojuan was demoted to the position of Luozhou Sima, and Xu Yougong was also removed from the family register.

古文：戊申，姚璹奏请令宰相撰《时政记》，月送史馆；从之。
现代文：戊申，姚上奏请求命令宰相撰写《时政记》，每月送交史馆。
English: Wushin, Yao Shangso requested the Prime Minister to order the Prime Minister to write "History of Politics" and send it to the History Museum every month.

古文：《时政记》自此始。
现代文：这个意见被采纳。《时政记》的撰写从这时候开始。
English: This suggestion was accepted, and the writing of "History of Politics" began at this time.

古文：腊月，丁卯，降皇孙成器为寿春王，恒王成义为衡阳王，楚王隆基为临淄王，卫王隆范为巴陵王，赵王隆业为彭城王，皆睿宗之子也。
现代文：腊月，丁卯，皇孙李成器被降为寿春郡王，恒王李成义为衡阳郡王，楚王李隆基为临淄郡王，卫王李隆范为巴陵郡王，赵王李隆业为彭城郡王，他们都是睿宗李旦的儿子。
English: Lazyue, Dingwu, and the emperor's grandson Li Chengji were reduced to the king of Shuchun County, Heng Wang Li Chengyi was reduced to the king of Hengyang County, Chu King Li Longji was reduced to the king of Linyi County, Wei King Li Long Fan was reduced to the king of Baling County, and Zhao King Li Longye was reduced to the king of Pengcheng County. They were all the sons of Ruizong Li Dan.

古文：春，一月，庚子，以夏官侍郎娄师德同平章事。
现代文：春季一月，庚子，太后任命夏官侍郎娄师德为同平章事。
English: In the spring of January, Geng Zi, the empress dowager, appointed Xia Guan's attendant, Zou Shide, as a peer.

古文：师德宽厚清慎，犯而不校。
现代文：娄师德为人宽厚，清廉谨慎，冒犯他也不计较。
English: Gong Shide is a generous, honest and prudent person, and he does not care about offending him.

古文：与李昭德俱入朝，师德体肥行缓，昭德屡待之不至，怒骂曰： 田舍夫！ 
现代文：他与李昭德一同入朝，娄师德身体肥胖行动缓慢，李昭德老等他不来，便怒骂他： 乡下佬！ 
English: He entered the imperial court together with Li Zhaode. Gong Shide's body was fat and his movements were slow. Li Zhaode waited for him not to come and then scolded him: "Countryman!"

古文：师德徐笑曰： 师德不为田舍夫，谁当为之！ 
现代文：娄师德笑着说： 我不作乡下佬，谁应当作乡下佬！ 
English: Gong Shide said with a smile: I am not a country bumpkin, who should be a country bumpkin!

古文：其弟除代州刺史，将行，师德谓曰： 吾备位宰相，汝复为州牧，荣宠过盛，人所疾也，将何以自免？ 
现代文：他的弟弟授任代州刺史，将要赴任时，娄师德对他说： 我任宰相，你又为州刺史，得到的恩庞太盛，是别人所妒忌的，将如何自己避祸？ 
English: When his younger brother was appointed as the acting state governor and was about to take office, Zou Shide said to him: I am the prime minister, and you are the state governor. The favor you have received is too great and is envied by others. How will you avoid disaster?

古文：弟长跪曰： 自今虽有人唾某面，某拭之而已，庶不为兄忧。 
现代文：他弟弟直身而跪说： 今后就是有人唾我脸上，我只擦拭而已，希望不致使哥哥担忧。 
English: His younger brother fell to his knees and said, "From now on, if someone spits in my face, I'll just wipe it off, hoping it won't worry my brother."

古文：师德愀然曰： 此所以为吾忧也！
现代文：娄师德神色忧虑地说： 这正是使我担忧的！
English: Gong Shide looked worried and said, "This is exactly what worries me!"

古文：人唾汝面，怒汝也；汝拭之，乃逆其意，所以重其怒。
现代文：人家唾你脸，是因为恨你，你擦拭，便违反人家的意愿，正好加重人家的怒气。
English: People spit in your face because they hate you, and when you wipe it off, you violate their wishes, which just increases their anger.

古文：夫唾，不拭自干，当笑而受之。 
现代文：唾液，不擦拭它会自己干，应当笑而承受。 
English: Saliva, if you don't wipe it off, it will dry on its own. You have to grin and bear it.

古文：甲寅，前尚方监裴匪躬、内常侍范云仙坐私谒皇嗣，腰斩于市。
现代文：甲寅，前尚方监裴匪躬、内常侍范云仙因私自拜见皇嗣获罪，腰斩于街市。
English: Emperor Jia, the former Shangfang supervisor Pei Gangwu, and the imperial attendant Fan Yunxian were found guilty of worshipping the emperor's heir, and were beheaded in the streets.

古文：自是公卿以下皆不得见。
现代文：从此公卿以下官员都不得晋见皇嗣。
English: From then on, no officials lower than court nobles were allowed to succeed to the throne.

古文：又有告皇嗣潜有异谋者，太后命来俊臣鞫其左右，左右不胜楚毒，皆欲自诬。
现代文：又有人告发皇嗣有秘密异谋，太后命令来俊臣审讯他身边人员，他们受不住酷刑，都想违心认罪。
English: Another person accused the heir to the throne of having a secret plot, and the empress dowager ordered a courtier to interrogate the people around him. They could not bear the torture and wanted to confess their sins against their will.

古文：太常工人京兆安金藏大呼谓俊臣曰： 公既不信金藏之言，请剖心以明皇嗣不反。 
现代文：太常寺工人京兆人安金藏大声对来俊臣说： 您既然不相信我的话，我请求剖出心肝以表明皇嗣不谋反。 
English: An Jinzang, a worker at Taizhoji Temple in Beijing, shouted at the young minister: "Since you don't believe my words, I request that you cut out my heart and soul to show that the imperial heir won't rebel.

古文：即引佩刀自剖其胸，五藏皆出，流血被地。
现代文：他立即抽出佩刀自己剖胸，五脏都流出，血流满地。
English: He immediately took out his saber and cut his own chest. All of his internal organs were drained, and blood streamed all over the floor.

古文：太后闻之，令轝入宫中，使医内五藏，以桑皮线缝之，傅以药，经宿始苏。
现代文：太后听说，命令将他抬入宫中，让医生将五脏纳入体内，用桑皮线缝合，敷上药，经过一个晚上才苏醒。
English: The empress dowager heard that he was ordered to be carried into the palace, and that the doctor was to put his five internal organs into his body, sew them up with mulberry thread, apply medicine, and wake up after one night.

古文：太后亲临视之，叹曰： 吾有子不能自明，使汝至此。 
现代文：太后亲自去看望他，叹息说： 我有儿子不能自己看清楚，结果使得你这样。 
English: The Empress Dowager went to see him in person and said with a sigh, "I have a son who can't see clearly on his own, and as a result, he has made you like this."

古文：既命俊臣停推。睿宗由是得免。
现代文：立即命令来俊臣停止审讯，皇嗣因此得免于难。
English: He immediately ordered his courtiers to stop the trial, and the heir to the throne was thus spared.

古文：罢举人习《老子》，更习太后所造《臣轨》。
现代文：朝廷停止应举的人学习《老子》，改为学习太后所编的《臣轨》。
English: The imperial court stopped the study of "Lao Zi" for those who should be promoted, and changed to the study of "Subordinate Tracks" compiled by the empress dowager.

古文：二月，丙子，新罗王政明卒，遣使立其子理洪为王。
现代文：二月，丙子，新罗王金政明去世，朝廷派遣使者封他的儿子金理洪为王。
English: In February, King Jin Zhengming of Silla died, and the imperial court sent an envoy to crown his son, Jin Li Hong, as king.

古文：乙亥，禁人间锦。
现代文：乙亥，朝廷禁止民间拥有彩色有花纹的丝织品。
English: In the second year of the Heian period, the imperial court banned the possession of colored silk fabrics with patterns.

古文：侍御史侯思止私畜锦，李照德按之，杖杀于朝堂。
现代文：侍御史侯思止私自贮存这种丝织品，李昭德查办他，用杖刑将他杀死于朝堂。
English: Li Zhaode investigated the attendant, Shi Hou, who had been storing this silk fabric, and killed him in the imperial hall with a cane.

古文：或告岭南流人谋反，太后遣司刑评事万国俊摄监察御史就按之。
现代文：有人告发岭南流放人员谋反，太后派遣司刑评事万国俊代理监察御史前往查问。
English: Someone denounced the Lingnan exiles for plotting a rebellion, and the empress dowager dispatched the chief criminal judge, Wan Guojun, to act as an inspector to investigate.

古文：国俊至广州，悉召流入，矫制赐自尽。
现代文：万国俊到达广州后，召集全部流放人员，假传太后命令让他们自尽。
English: After arriving in Guangzhou, Ban Guojun gathered all the exiles and falsely told them that the Empress Dowager had ordered them to commit suicide.

古文：流人号呼不服，国俊驱就水曲，尽斩之，一朝杀三百馀人。
现代文：流放人员呼喊着不服罪，万国俊将他们驱赶到河边，全部斩首，一个早上就杀死三百多人。
English: Ban Guojun drove them to the river, beheaded them all, and killed more than three hundred people in one morning.

古文：然后诈为反状，还奏，因言诸道流人，亦必有怨望谋反者，不可不早诛。
现代文：然后伪造他们谋反的罪状，回来上报，同时还对太后说其他各道的流放者，也一定有怀恨而谋反的，不能不及早清除掉。
English: Then he falsified their charges of plotting to rebel and returned to report them. At the same time, he told the empress dowager that other exiles of various sects must also have plotted to rebel out of hatred and must not be purged prematurely.

古文：太后喜，擢国俊为朝散大夫、行侍御史。
现代文：太后高兴，提升万国俊为朝散大夫、行侍御史。
English: The empress dowager was pleased and promoted Bankokun to Asosan-dokufu and Gyoshibi-goshi.

古文：更遣右翊卫兵曹参军刘光业、司刑评事王德寿、苑南面监丞鲍思恭、尚辇直长王大贞、右武威卫兵曹参军屈贞筠皆摄监察御史，诣诸道按流人。
现代文：太后又派遣右翊卫兵曹参军刘光业、司刑评事王德寿、苑南面监丞鲍思恭、尚辇直长王大贞、右武威卫兵曹参军屈贞筠都任代理监察御史，到各道审查流放人员。
English: The empress dowager also sent Liu Guangye, the right-arm guard Cao Zhanjun, Wang Deshou, the criminal judge, Bao Sikyong, the supervisor of the south side of the courtyard, Wang Daizhen, the chief of the Shang Dynasty, and Qu Zhenya, the right-arm guard Cao Zhanjun, all of whom were acting as supervisors of Gu Shi, and went to each province to examine the exiled personnel.

古文：光业等以国俊多杀蒙赏，争效之，光业杀七百人，德寿杀五百人，自馀少者不减百人，其远年杂犯流人亦与之俱毙。
现代文：刘光业等因万国俊多杀人受到奖赏，争相仿效他。刘光业杀死七百人，王德寿杀死五百人，其余少的也不少于一百人，早年的各种罪犯、流放人员也一同被杀。
English: Liu Guangye killed seven hundred people, Wang Deshou killed five hundred people, and the rest were no less than a hundred people, and various criminals and exiles in the early years were also killed together.

古文：太后颇知其滥，制： 六道流人未死者并家属皆听还乡里。 
现代文：太后也颇知滥杀的情况，因此下令 六道流放人员未死的连同他们的家属，都准许返回家乡。 
English: The empress dowager was also well aware of the indiscriminate killing, so she ordered that the six exiles who had not died, together with their families, were allowed to return to their hometowns.

古文：国俊等亦相继死，或得罪流窜。
现代文：万国俊等也相继死去，或获罪流放。
English: Ban Guojun and others also died one after another, or were exiled.

古文：来俊臣诬冬官尚书苏干，云在魏州与琅邪王冲通谋，夏，四月，乙未，杀之。
现代文：来俊臣诬告冬官尚书苏，说他在魏州时与琅邪王李冲串通谋反。夏季，四月，乙未，他被处死。
English: Lai Junchen falsely accused the winter official Shang Shusu, saying that when he was in Weizhou, he conspired and plotted with the evil king Li Chong. In the summer, in April, he was executed.

古文：五月，癸丑，棣州河溢，流二千馀家。
现代文：五月，癸丑，棣州河水泛滥。秋季，九月，丁亥朔，出现日食。
English: In May, Yingwu, Zhangzhou river floods. In autumn, September, Dinghai, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：秋，九月，丁亥朔，日有食之。魏王承嗣等五千人表请加尊号曰金轮圣神皇帝。
现代文：魏王武承嗣等五千人上表请求太后加尊号为金轮圣神皇帝。
English: Wei King Wu Chengzhi and five thousand others petitioned the empress dowager to add the honorific title of the Holy Spirit Emperor of the Golden Wheel.

古文：乙未，太后御卫象神宫，受尊号，赦天下。
现代文：乙未，太后到万象神宫，接受尊号，赦免天下罪人。
English: Two years later, the empress dowager went to the Vientiane God's Palace to receive the title of nobility and pardon all the sinners in the world.

古文：作金轮等七宝，每朝会，陈之殿庭。
现代文：朝廷制作金轮等七宝，每次朝会，都陈列在殿庭。
English: The seven treasures made by the imperial court, such as the golden wheel, are displayed in the palace garden every time the imperial court meets.

古文：庚子，追尊昭安皇帝曰浑元昭安皇帝，文穆皇帝曰立极文穆皇帝，孝明高皇帝曰无上孝明高皇帝，皇后从帝号。
现代文：庚子，朝廷追尊昭安皇帝为浑元昭安皇帝，文穆皇帝为立极文穆皇帝，孝明高皇帝为无上孝明高皇帝；皇后的尊号与帝号相同。
English: Geng Zi, the imperial court's honorific for Emperor Zhao'an is Emperor Hun Yuan Zhao'an, Emperor Wenmu is the supreme Emperor Wenmu, Emperor Xiaoming Gao is the supreme Emperor Xiaoming Gao; the honorary title of the empress is the same as the imperial title.

古文：辛丑，以文昌左丞、同平章事姚璹为司宾卿，罢政事；以司宾卿万年豆卢钦望为内史，文昌左丞韦巨源同平章事，秋官侍郎吴人陆元方为鸾台侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：辛丑，朝廷任命文昌左丞、同平章事姚为司宾卿，罢除相职；任命司宾卿万年人豆卢钦望为内史，文昌左丞韦巨源为同平章事，秋官侍郎吴人陆无方为鸾台侍郎、同平章事。
English: In a shocking turn of events, the imperial court appointed Wenchang Zuojie and Tongping Zhangjiyao as the chief secretaries and removed them from their posts; Wenchang Zuojie and Tongping Zhangjiyao were appointed as the chief secretaries and removed from their posts; Wenchang Zuojie and Tongping Zhangjiyao were appointed as the chief secretaries and removed from their posts; Wenchang Zuojie and Tongping Zhangjiyao were appointed as the chief secretaries and removed from their posts; Wenchang Zuojie and Tongping Zhangjiyao were appointed as the chief secretaries and removed from their posts; Wenchang Zuojie and Tongping Zhangjiyao were

古文：巨源，孝宽之玄孙也。
现代文：韦巨源是韦孝宽的玄孙。
English: Wei Jigen is the great-great-grandson of Wei Xiaokang.

古文：延载元年甲午，公元六九四年
现代文：延载元年正月，丙戌，太后在万象神宫祭祀。
English: In the first month of the first year of the year, the empress dowager was worshipped at the Bansho Shrine.

古文：正月，丙戌，太后享万象神宫。突厥可汗骨笃禄卒，其子幼，弟默啜自立为可汗。
现代文：突厥可汗阿史那骨笃禄去世，他的儿子年幼，他的弟弟阿史那默啜自立为可汗。
English: The Turkic khan, Ashnakotlu, died, his son was young, and his brother, Ashnamer, became khan.

古文：腊月，甲戌，默啜寇灵州。
现代文：腊月，甲戌，阿史那默啜侵扰灵州。
English: The waxing gibbous moon, the armour-plated dragonfly, and the ashen moth all invade Lingzhou.

古文：室韦反，遣右鹰扬卫大将军李多祚击破之。
现代文：室韦反叛，唐朝派遣右鹰扬卫大将军李多祚击败他们。
English: When the Shumwei rebelled, the Tang Dynasty dispatched Yangwei's right eagle, General Li Dorong, to defeat them.

古文：春，一月，以娄师德为河源等军检校营田大使。
现代文：春季，一月，朝廷任命娄师德为河源等军检校营田大使。
English: In the spring, in January, the imperial court appointed Gong Shide as Yingtian ambassador of Heyuan and other military inspection schools.

古文：二月，武威道总管王孝杰破吐蕃孛攵论赞刃、突厥可汗俀子等于泠泉及大岭，各三万馀人，碎叶镇守使韩思忠破泥熟俟斤等万馀人。
现代文：二月，武威道总管王孝杰在冷泉及大岭打败吐蕃论赞刃、突厥可汗子等各三万多人。碎叶镇守使韩思忠打败泥熟俟斤等一万余人。
English: In February, the chief administrator of Wuwei Road, Wang Xiaojie, defeated more than 30,000 people in each of Lengquan and Daling, such as Tuyong Onzan Blade and Turkic Khan Zi. The town guard of Broken Leaf let Han Sizhong defeat more than 10,000 people such as Mud-Cured Dragonfly.

古文：庚午，以僧怀义为代北道行军大总管，以讨默啜。
现代文：庚午，朝廷任命和尚怀义为代北道行军大总管，以讨伐阿史那默啜。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, the imperial court appointed the monk Huaiyi to be the grand marshal of the march on behalf of the North, to fight against Ashinamoku.

古文：三月，甲申，以凤阁舍人苏味道为凤阁侍郎、同平章事，李昭德检校内史，更以僧怀义为朔方道行军大总管，以李昭德为长史，苏味道为司马，帅契苾明、曹仁师、沙吒忠义等十八将军以讨默啜，未行，虏退而止。
现代文：三月，甲申，朝廷任命凤阁舍人苏味道为凤阁侍郎、同平章事，李昭德为检校内史；又任命和尚怀义为朔方道行军大总管，以李昭德为长史，苏味道为司马，率领契明、曹仁师、沙吒忠义等十八将军以讨伐阿史那默啜，还没有出发，因敌人退走而停止出兵。
English: In March of the year of Jiaxing, the imperial court appointed Fengge's overseer Su Zhiguo as Fengge's chamberlain, Tongping Zhangji, and Li Zhaode as the internal history of the inspection of the school; and also appointed the monk Huaiyi as the general manager of the march of Shuo Fang Road, with Li Zhaode as the long history, and Su Zhiguo as the Sima, and led eighteen generals such as Qiming, Cao Renshi, and Shajing Zhongyi to fight against Ashina Miao. They had not yet set out, and stopped sending troops because the enemy had retreated.

古文：昭德尝与怀义议事，失其旨，怀义挞之，昭德惶惧请罪。
现代文：李昭德曾与和尚怀义商议事情，不符合他的心意，被怀义鞭打，李昭德恐惧请罪。
English: Li Zhaode once discussed a matter with the monk Huaiyi, but it did not meet his wishes. He was whipped by Huaiyi. Li Zhaode pleaded guilty out of fear.

古文：夏，四月，壬戌，以夏官尚书、武威道大总管王孝杰同凤阁鸾台三品。
现代文：夏季，四月，壬戌，朝廷任命夏官尚书、武威道大总管王孝杰为同凤阁鸾台三品。
English: In the summer, in April, the imperial court appointed Shang Shu, the summer official, and Wang Xiaojie, the general director of Wuwei University, as the three officials of Tongfeng Pavilion.

古文：五月，魏王承嗣等二万六千馀人上尊号曰越古金轮圣神皇帝。
现代文：五月，魏王武承嗣等二万六千余人给太后上尊号为越古金轮圣神皇帝。
English: In May, more than 26,000 people, including Wei King Wu Chengzhi, gave the Empress Dowager the honorary title of Emperor of the Holy Spirit of the Golden Wheel of the Yue Dynasty.

古文：甲午，御则天门楼受尊号，赦天下，改元。
现代文：甲午，太后驾临则天门城楼接受尊号，大赦天下罪人，更改年号。
English: In the afternoon of the 1st, the Empress Dowager arrived at the Zetian Gate Tower to accept the honorary title, pardon the sinners of the world, and change the year.

古文：天授中，遣监察御史寿春裴怀古安集西南蛮。
现代文：天授年间，朝廷派遣监察御史寿春人裴怀古招抚西南蛮族。
English: During the Tianzhu era, the imperial court dispatched inspector-general Shuchun Zang Pei Huaguo to appease the southwestern barbarians.

古文：六月，癸丑，永昌蛮酋薰期帅部落二十馀万户内附。
现代文：六月，癸丑，永昌蛮首领薰期率领部落二十余万户归附唐朝。
English: In June, Yongchang barbarian chieftain Guanzhi led more than 200,000 households of the tribe to be annexed to the Tang Dynasty.

古文：河内有老尼居神都麟趾寺，与嵩山人韦什方等以妖妄惑众。
现代文：河内地方有老尼姑，居住在神都麟趾寺，与嵩山人韦什方等以邪说迷惑群众。
English: In Hanoi, there are old nuns who live in the Shinto Rinzai Temple, who, together with the Songshan people, such as the Wesh Fang, confuse the masses with their heresies.

古文：尼自号净光如来，云能知未然；什方自云吴赤乌元年生。
现代文：老尼姑自号净光如来，说能预知未来；韦什方自称是三国时孙吴赤乌年间出生的人。
English: The old nun called herself Jingguangrui and said that she could predict the future; Wei Shifang claimed to be a person born in the Three Kingdoms period of Sun Wu Chiawu.

古文：又有老胡亦自言五百岁，云见薛师已二百年矣，容貌愈少。
现代文：又有一个老胡人也自称五百岁，说他看见和尚怀义已二百年了，怀义的面貌越来越年轻。
English: There was also an old man named Hu who claimed to be five hundred years old. He said that it had been two hundred years since he had seen the monk Huaiyi, and that Huaiyi's face was getting younger and younger.

古文：太后甚信重之，赐什方姓武氏。
现代文：太后很信任器重他们，赐韦什方姓武氏。
English: The empress dowager trusted them very much and gave them the surname Wu.

古文：秋，七月，癸未，以什方为正谏大夫、同平章事，制云： 迈轩代之广成，逾汉朝之河上。 
现代文：秋季，七月，癸未，朝廷任命韦什方为正谏大夫、同平章事，命令中说： 他胜过轩辕时代的广成子，超越汉朝的河上公。 
English: In the autumn, in July, the imperial court appointed Wei Shifang as the doctor of Zheng Yao and Tong Ping Zhangji, and said in the order: He is better than Guang Chengzi in the era of Xuanzang, and surpasses the Han Dynasty's He Shangguo.

古文：八月，什方乞还山，制罢遣之。
现代文：八月，韦什方要求返回嵩山，太后命令免去职务，遣送他返山。
English: In August, Wei Shifang requested to return to Songshan, and the Empress Dowager ordered him to be relieved of his duties and sent back to the mountain.

古文：戊辰，以王孝杰为瀚海道行军总管，仍受朔方道行军大总管薛怀义节度。
现代文：戊辰，朝廷任命王孝杰为瀚海道行军总管，并受朔方道行军大总管和尚怀义的指挥。
English: In Wucheng, the imperial court appointed Wang Xiaojie as the general manager of the march of the Hanhai Highway, and was commanded by the general manager of the march of the Shuo Fang Road and the monk Shang Huaiyi.

古文：己巳，以司宾少卿姚璹为纳言；左肃政中丞原武杨再思为鸾台侍郎，洛州司马杜景俭为凤阁侍郎，并同平章事。
现代文：己巳，朝廷任命司宾少卿姚为纳言；左肃政中丞原武人杨再思为鸾台侍郎，洛州司马杜景俭为凤阁侍郎，一并任同平章事。
English: At that time, the imperial court appointed the chief secretary Yao as Nagan; the left Su political middle-ranking officer Yang Zaisi as the attendant of Xingtai, and the Lozhou secretary Ma Du Jing Jian as the attendant of Fengge, both of whom served as Tongping officials.

古文：豆卢钦望请京官九品已上输两月俸以赡军，转帖百官，令拜表。
现代文：豆卢钦望请九品以上的京官每人交两个月的薪俸以补助军用，写了一份通知让百官传阅，让他们一起上奏表。
English: Douluqin hoped to ask Beijing officials with nine or more pins to each pay two months' salary to subsidize the military, wrote a notice for the hundred officials to read, and let them submit the report together.

古文：百官但赴拜，不知何事。
现代文：百官只是聚到一起，不知是什么事情。
English: A hundred officials just got together, I don't know what happened.

古文：拾遗王求礼谓钦望曰： 明公禄厚，输之无伤；卑官贫迫，奈何不使其知而欺夺之乎？ 
现代文：拾遗王求礼对豆卢钦望说： 您俸禄丰厚，交纳没有什么关系；低级官吏贫困，为什么不让他们知道而加以欺骗夺取呢？ 
English: "Your salary is rich, it doesn't matter how you pay it; low-ranking officials are poor, so why not let them know about it and deceive them?

古文：钦望正色拒之。
现代文：豆卢钦望严正拒绝他。
English: Doulu Qinwang sternly refused him.

古文：既上表，求礼进言曰： 陛下富有四海，军国有储，何藉贫官九品之俸而欺夺之！ 
现代文：上表后，王求礼进言说： 陛下富有天下，军用和国用都有储备，如何用得着贫官九品的俸禄而加以欺骗夺取！ 
English: After the above table, Wang Qurei said: His Majesty is rich in the world, he has reserves for military and national use, how can he use the salary of a poor official of nine pins to deceive and seize!

古文：姚璹曰： 求礼不识大体。 
现代文：姚说： 王求礼不识大体！ 
English: Yao said: Wang Qurei doesn't know much!

古文：求礼曰： 如姚璹，为识大体者邪？ 
现代文：王求礼说： 像姚这样，是识大体的人吗！ 
English: Wang Qurei said: Like Yao, is it a person who understands the big picture?

古文：事遂寝。
现代文：事情终于没有实施。
English: So it was stopped.

古文：戊寅，鸾台侍郎、同平章事崔元综坐事流振州。
现代文：戊寅，鸾台侍郎、同平章事崔元综因事获罪流放振州。
English: Wu Yin, Xingtai Zhilong, Tongping Zhang, and Cui Yuanxiao were convicted and exiled to Zhenzhou.

古文：武三思帅四夷酋长请铸铜铁为天枢，立于端门之外，铭纪功德，黜唐颂周；以姚璹为督作使。
现代文：武三思等率领四夷首领请用铜铁铸造大 天枢 柱，树立在端门外，柱上有记述功德的铭文，贬黜唐朝，称颂武周；任命姚为督作使。
English: Wu Sanxi and the other leaders of the Four Emperors, please use the copper and iron to cast a large pillar of heaven, and set it up outside the end gate. The pillar has an inscription describing the merits, denouncing the Tang Dynasty and praising Wu Zhou; appoint Yao as the governor.

古文：诸胡聚钱百万亿，买铜铁不能足，赋民间农器以足之。
现代文：诸胡聚集钱百万亿，买铜铁尚不够用，又征收民间的农具加以补充。
English: Zhu Hu collected hundreds of billions of money, but it was not enough to buy copper and iron. He also collected folk agricultural tools to supplement it.

古文：九月，壬午朔，日有食之。
现代文：九月，壬午朔，出现日食。
English: In September, at the stroke of noon, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：殿中丞来俊臣坐赃贬同州参军。
现代文：殿中丞来俊臣犯贪赃罪，降职为同州参军。
English: Tencho chujo, a courtier who committed the crime of embezzlement, was demoted to join the army in the same province.

古文：王弘义流琼州，诈称敕追还，至汉北，侍御史胡元礼遇之，按验，得其奸状，杖杀之。
现代文：王弘义流放琼州，伪称太后有令追他回京，到了汉水以北，侍御史胡元礼遇见他，经过查验，弄清他作假的事实，于是用杖刑处死。
English: Wang Hongyi exiled Qiongzhou, falsely claiming that the empress dowager had ordered him to return to Beijing. When he reached the north of Hanshui, the attendant Shi Huyuanli met him, and after checking and clarifying the fact that he was a fake, he was sentenced to death with a cane.

古文：内史李昭德恃太后委遇，颇专权使气，人多疾之。
现代文：内史李昭德依仗太后的信任，独揽大权，意气用事，人们多憎恨他。
English: In history, Li Zhaode relied on the trust of the empress dowager, monopolized power, and was full of ambition. People hated him.

古文：前鲁王府功曹参军丘愔上疏攻之，其略曰： 陛下天授以前，万机独断。自长寿以来，委任昭德，参奉机密，献可替否；事有便利，不预咨谋，要待画日将行，方乃别生驳异。
现代文：前鲁王府功曹参军丘上疏抨击他，内容大致说： 陛下在天授年间以前，政事由自己决断，自长寿年间以来，委任李昭德，让他参与机密，提出可行的事，否决不可行的事；一些对国家便利的事，他事先不参与商议，待到已批示将要推行时，才另提出不同意见，显露出独断独行，好表现自己。
English: The former gong cao of the King of Lu's palace, who joined the army, criticized him on the hill, saying roughly: His Majesty used to decide political affairs by himself before the Year of the Gift of Heaven, and since the Year of the Long Life, he has appointed Li Zhaode to participate in confidential matters, propose feasible matters, and veto unfeasible matters; for some matters that are convenient for the country, he did not participate in the discussion in advance, and waited until the instructions were to be implemented before proposing different opinions, revealing his arbitrariness, so as to show himself.

古文：扬露专擅，显示于人，归美引愆，义不如此。 又曰： 臣观其胆，乃大于身，鼻息所冲，上拂云汉。 
现代文：善事归于君主，过失自己承担，他并不遵循这种君臣关系的常理。 又说： 我看他的胆子，比身体还大，鼻孔出的气，上冲霄汉。 
English: Good deeds are attributed to the sovereign, mistakes are borne by himself, he does not follow the common sense of this monarch-subject relationship. He also said: I think his courage is bigger than his body, the breath coming out of his nostrils, he is a man of the world.

古文：又曰： 蚁穴坏堤，针芒写气，权重一去，收之极难。 
现代文：又说： 蚂蚁的洞穴可以毁掉大堤，针尖大的小孔足以泄气，权力一旦失去，要收回就极难。 
English: He also said: An ant's burrow can destroy a large dike, and a small hole with a large needle tip is enough to discourage. Once power is lost, it is extremely difficult to regain it.

古文：长上果毅邓注，又著《石论》数千言，述昭德专权之状。
现代文：长上果毅邓注，又著《石论》数千言，叙述李昭德专权的事实。
English: The fact of Li Zhaode's absolute power was described in thousands of words by Deng Zhu, who was a disciple of Li Zhaode, and in his book "The Stone Theory."

古文：凤阁舍人逄弘敏取奏之，太后由是恶昭德。壬寅，贬昭德为南宾尉，寻又免死流窜。
现代文：凤阁舍人逄弘敏将它上奏，太后因此而憎恶李昭德，壬寅，将他降职为南宾县尉，不久又减免死罪，将他流放。
English: Fengge's concubine Zou Hongmin played it, and the empress dowager hated Li Zhaode and Ren Yin for it, demoted him to the rank of Nanbin County lieutenant, and soon commuted his death sentence and exiled him.

古文：太后出梨花一枝以示宰相，宰相皆以为瑞。
现代文：太后拿出一枝梨花给宰相们看，宰相们都以为是吉兆。
English: The empress dowager took out a pear blossom to show the prime ministers, who all thought it was a good omen.

古文：杜景俭独曰： 今草木黄落，而此更发荣，阴阳不时，咎在臣等。 
现代文：只有杜景俭说： 现在草木枯黄凋落，而梨树却开花，这是阴阳错乱，过失在我们这些人。 
English: Only Du Jingjian said: Now the plants are withered and withered, but the pear trees are blooming. This is a disorder of yin and yang, and the fault lies with us.

古文：因拜谢。
现代文：他因此跪下谢罪。
English: He fell to his knees in penitence.

古文：太后曰： 卿真宰相也！ 
现代文：太后说： 你是真正的宰相。 
English: The Empress Dowager said, "You are a true prime minister."

古文：冬，十月，壬申，以文昌右丞李元素为凤阁侍郎，右肃政中丞周允元检校凤阁侍郎，并同平章事。
现代文：冬季，十月，壬申，朝廷任命文昌左丞李元素为凤阁侍郎，左肃政中丞周允元为检校凤阁侍郎，一并任同平章事。
English: In winter, in October, in Jinshin, the imperial court appointed Wenchang Zu Rong Li Rong as Fengge's chamberlain, Zu Su Zheng Zhong Rong Zhou Yun Yuan as Fengge's chamberlain, and both of them as Tongping's officials.

古文：允元，豫州人也。
现代文：周允元是豫州人。
English: Zhou Yunyuan is a native of Yuzhou.

古文：岭南獠反，以容州都督张玄遇为桂、永等州经略大使以讨之。
现代文：岭南獠人反叛，朝廷任命容州都督张玄遇为桂、永等州经略大使以讨伐他们。
English: The Lingnan Xiongnu rebelled, and the imperial court appointed the Yongzhou governor Zhang Xuan as the economic strategy ambassador of Guizhou and Yongzhou to fight them.

古文：天册万岁元年乙未，公元六九五年正月，辛巳朔，太后加号慈氏越古金轮圣神皇帝，赦天下，改元证圣。
现代文：天册万岁元年正月，辛巳朔，太后加尊号为慈氏越古金轮圣神皇帝，大赦天下，更改年号为证圣。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first year of the Chinese calendar, Xin Si Shuo, the empress dowager was given the honorary title of Cixi Yue Gu Jinlun Holy Spirit Emperor, the world was amnestied, and the year name was changed to Zheng Shen.

古文：周允元与司刑少卿皇甫文备奏内史豆卢钦望、同平章事韦巨源、杜景俭、苏味道、陆元方附会李昭德，不能匡正，钦望贬赵州，巨源贬麟州，景俭贬溱州，味道贬集州，元方贬绥州刺史。
现代文：周允元与司刑少卿皇甫文备上奏说内史豆卢钦望、同平章事韦巨源、杜景俭、苏味道、陆元方依附李昭德，不能纠正政事的过失。豆卢钦望被降职为赵州刺史，韦巨源被降职为麟州刺史，杜景俭被降职为溱州刺史，苏味道被降职为集州刺史，陆元方被降职为绥州刺史。
English: Zhou Yunyuan and Wang Fuwen, the chief magistrate, wrote a report to the emperor, saying that Zhu Lu Qinwang, Tongping Zhang, Wei Jiuyuan, Du Jingjian, Su Fang, and Lu Yuan adhered to Li Zhaode and could not correct the mistakes of government affairs. Zhu Lu Qinwang was demoted to Zhao Zhou, Wei Jiuyuan was demoted to Linzhou, Du Jingjian was demoted to Zhangzhou, Su Fang was demoted to Juzhou, and Lu Yuan was demoted to Zhangzhou.

古文：初，明堂既成，太后命僧怀义作夹紵大像，其小指中犹容数十人，于明堂北构天堂以贮之。
现代文：当初，明堂已落成，太后命令和尚怀义用麻布夹缝制作大佛像，佛像的小指中就能容得下数十人，在明堂北面构筑天堂用来贮存。
English: At that time, Myeongdong had already been completed, and the Empress Dowager ordered Monk Hoaiyi to make a large Buddha statue with a linen slit. The little finger of the Buddha statue could accommodate dozens of people, and it was used to build a paradise on the north side of Myeongdong for storage.

古文：堂始构，为风所摧，更构之，日役万人，采木江岭，数年之间，所费以万亿计，府藏为之耗竭。
现代文：天堂初造时被风吹倒，又重新再造，每天役使一万人，采集木料于江河山岭，数年之中，花费以万亿计算，国库因此耗尽。
English: When the heaven was first built, it was blown down by the wind, and it was rebuilt again, with ten thousand people working every day, collecting wood from rivers and mountains. Over the years, the cost was calculated in trillions, and the national treasury was exhausted.

古文：怀义用财如粪土，太后一听之，无所问。
现代文：和尚怀义花钱像粪土一样，太后全都听任他，不加过问。
English: Monk Huaiyi spends money like excrement, and the empress dowager lets him do it all, without question.

古文：每作无遮会，用钱万缗；士女云集，又散钱十车，使之争拾，相蹈践有死者。
现代文：每次举行无遮法会，用钱万缗；等四方男女汇集，又散钱十车，让他们争相拣拾，有人因争抢被踩死。
English: Every time they hold an open-air puja, they spend a lot of money; when men and women from all four directions gather, they scatter ten carts of money and let them scramble to pick it up. Some people were trampled to death because of the scramble.

古文：所在公私田宅，多为僧有。
现代文：各地的公私田宅，多数为和尚所有。
English: Most of the public and private rice fields around the country are owned by monks.

古文：怀义颇厌入宫，多居白马寺，所度力士为僧者满千人。
现代文：和尚怀义不喜欢入宫，多数时间居住在白马寺，他剃度千名身强力壮的人为僧。
English: Monk Huaiyi did not like to enter the palace, and spent most of his time living in the White Horse Temple, where he trained thousands of strong men to become monks.

古文：侍御史周矩疑有奸谋，固请按之。
现代文：侍御史周矩怀疑他有奸谋，一再请求审查他。
English: The chamberlain, Zhou Rui, suspected him of plotting treachery and repeatedly requested that he be examined.

古文：太后曰： 卿姑退，朕即令往。 
现代文：太后说： 你且回去，朕即命令他去你处。 
English: The empress dowager said, "Go back, and I will order him to come to you."

古文：矩至台，怀义亦至，乘马就阶而下，坦腹于床。
现代文：周矩回到御史官署，和尚怀义也到，他就着台阶下马，露腹坐在椅子上。
English: Shortly after returning to the Imperial Historian's Office, Monk Huaiyi also arrived. He dismounted from his horse, bare-chested, and sat down on a chair.

古文：矩召吏将按之，遽跃马而去。
现代文：周矩召集手下吏卒将要审问他，他立即跃上马飞驰而去。
English: He immediately leapt on his horse and galloped away.

古文：矩具奏其状，太后曰： 此道人病风，不足诘，所度僧，惟卿所处。 
现代文：周矩上报他的行为，太后说： 这个道人患疯病，不值得追问，他所剃度的僧人，任由你处理。 
English: The empress dowager immediately reported his behavior, saying, "This Taoist is suffering from a mental illness and is not worth questioning. The monks he has shaved are at your disposal.

古文：悉流远州。
现代文：周矩将他们全部流放到边远州县。
English: Zhou Moments exiled them all to outlying prefectures.

古文：迁矩天官员外郎。
现代文：升任周矩为天官员外郎。
English: Zhou Momoku was promoted to be the second son of a high-ranking official.

古文：乙未，作无遮会于朝堂，凿地为坑，深五丈，结彩为宫殿，佛像皆于坑中引出之，云自地涌出。
现代文：乙未，太后作无遮法会于明堂，挖地为坑，深五丈，结札彩绸作宫殿，佛像都从深坑中拉出，说是从地下涌出。
English: On the 2nd day of the 2nd month, the Empress Dowager held an open-air puja in the Ming Hall. The ground was dug into a pit, five meters deep, and colored silk was used as a palace. Buddha statues were pulled out of the pit, and it was said that they gushed out from the ground.

古文：又杀牛取血，画大像，首高二百尺，云怀义刺膝血为之。
现代文：又杀牛取血，用来画大佛像，佛像的头高二百尺，说是和尚怀义刺膝取血画的。
English: They also killed a cow to draw blood, which was used to paint a large Buddha statue. The head of the Buddha statue is two hundred feet high, and it is said that the monk Huai Yi stabbed his knee to draw blood.

古文：丙申，张像于天津桥南，设斋。
现代文：丙申，在天津桥南边张挂大佛像，摆上供神佛用的食品。
English: Bishen, on the south side of Tianjin Bridge, hung a large Buddha statue and displayed food for gods and Buddhas.

古文：时御医沈南翏亦得幸于太后，怀义心愠，是夕，密烧天堂，延及明堂。火照城中如昼，比明皆尽，暴风裂血像为数百段。
现代文：当时御医沈南也得到太后宠幸，和尚怀义对此心里不高兴，当晚秘密焚烧天堂，延烧到明堂，火光照得洛阳城中如同白昼，到天亮时天堂明堂全部烧光，狂风刮坏牛血画的佛像断成数百段。
English: At that time, the imperial physician Shen Nan was also favored by the empress dowager, and the monk Huai Rong was not happy about this. That night, he secretly burned heaven and extended the burning to the Ming Hall. The firelight shone in Luoyang City as if it were broad daylight. By dawn, all of the Heaven and Ming Hall were burned to the ground, and the raging wind tore down the ox-blood painting of the Buddha statue into hundreds of pieces.

古文：太后耻而讳之，但云内作工徒误烧麻主，遂涉明堂。
现代文：太后羞愧而不敢说明真象，只说是在天堂里干活的工徒疏忽烧着麻布佛像，而延烧明堂。
English: Embarrassed, the Empress Dowager did not dare to reveal the truth, but only said that the workmen who worked in heaven had negligently burned the linen Buddha statues, but continued to burn the Ming Hall.

古文：时方酺宴，左拾遗刘承庆请辍朝停酺以答天谴，太后将从之。
现代文：当时全城臣民正在聚饮，左拾遗刘承庆请求停止朝会和聚饮，以回答上天的谴责，太后准备接受。
English: At that time, the subjects of the whole city were gathering to drink. Liu Chengqing, the heir to the throne, requested to stop the imperial meeting and gathering to drink in order to answer the condemnation of heaven. The empress dowager was ready to accept.

古文：姚璹曰： 昔成周宣榭，卜代愈隆；汉武建章，盛德弥永。
现代文：姚说： 从前周代成周城宣榭失火，占卜的结果是朝代更加兴盛；汉武帝时柏梁台失火后再造建章宫，盛德更加久远。
English: Yao said: From the previous Zhou Dynasty, when Cheng Zhoucheng's Xuanwu Palace was destroyed by fire, the result of divination was that the dynasty was more prosperous; when Emperor Hanwu's Bei Liang Tai Palace was destroyed by fire and then rebuilt, Shengde lasted longer.

古文：今明堂布政之所，非宗庙也，不应自贬损。 
现代文：现在明堂只是发布政令的场所，并不是宗庙，不应自我贬抑。 
English: Now Myeongdong is just a place to issue decrees, not a family temple, and it should not degrade itself.

古文：太后乃御端门，观酺如平日。
现代文：太后于是登上端门，像平时一样观看臣民会饮。
English: The empress dowager then boarded the main gate and watched as usual as her subjects drank.

古文：命更造明堂、天堂，仍以怀义充使。又铸铜为九州鼎及十二神，皆高一丈，各置其方。
现代文：她命令重新建造明堂、天堂，仍然任命和尚怀义为主持建造的使者；又为九州各铸一座铜鼎及十二属相神，都高一丈，安置在各自的方位。
English: She ordered the rebuilding of Myeongdong and Heaven, and still appointed the monk Huaiyi as the emissary to preside over the construction; she also cast a bronze tripod and twelve kinds of deities for each of Kyushu, all of which were one step higher and placed in their respective positions.

古文：先是，河内老尼昼食一麻一米，夜则烹宰宴乐，畜弟子百馀人，淫秽靡所不为。
现代文：在这以前，河内老尼姑白天只食一点麻籽和一点米，晚上则屠宰烹调宴饮作乐，收养弟子一百多人，乱无所不为。
English: Before this, the old nun of Hanoi only ate a little hemp seed and a little rice during the day. In the evening, she slaughtered, cooked, feasted, drank, and made merry. She adopted more than a hundred disciples, and did anything and everything.

古文：武什方自言能合长年药，太后遣乘驿于岭南采药。
现代文：武什方自称能配制长生不老药，太后派遣他乘驿车赴岭南采药。
English: Wu Shifang claimed to be able to prepare the elixir of life, and the Empress Dowager sent him to Lingnan to collect the elixir.

古文：及明堂火，尼入唁太后，太后怒叱之，曰： 汝常言能前知，何以不言明堂火？ 
现代文：等到明堂火灾，老尼姑入宫慰问太后，太后怒斥她，说： 你经常说能预知未来，何以不预言明堂火灾？ 
English: When the fire broke out in the Ming Court, the old nun went into the palace to console the Empress Dowager. The Empress Dowager scolded her, saying, "You often say that you can predict the future, why don't you predict the Ming Court fire?"

古文：因斥还河内，弟子及老胡等皆逃散。
现代文：因此驱逐她回河内，他的弟子及老胡人都逃散了。
English: So he banished her back to Hanoi, and his disciples and old Ho fled.

古文：又有发其奸者，太后乃复召尼还麟趾寺，弟子毕集，敕给使掩捕，尽获之，皆没为官婢。
现代文：又有人告发她们的罪恶，太后便又召老尼姑返回麟趾寺，她的弟子们也闻讯全都回来，于是命令宦官出其不意逮捕她们，全部捕获，都没入官府为官婢。
English: Someone else denounced their crimes, and the empress dowager summoned the old nun to return to Rinzai Temple. Hearing that her disciples had all returned, she ordered the eunuchs to arrest them by surprise, capture them all, and take them to the government office as maidservants.

古文：什方还，至偃师，闻事露，自绞死。
现代文：武什方从岭南返回，至偃师时，听说事情败露，自己上吊而死。
English: When Wu Shifang returned from Lingnan to Jinshi, he heard that the matter had been exposed and hanged himself to death.

古文：庚子，以明堂火告庙，下制求直言。
现代文：庚子，太后将明堂失火的事禀告太庙，并下令征求直言。
English: Geng Zi, the empress dowager reported the fire of the Ming Hall to the Imperial Temple, and ordered to solicit direct speech.

古文：刘承庆上疏，以为： 火发既从麻主，后及总章，所营佛舍，恐劳无益，请罢之。
现代文：刘承庆上疏认为： 火既然从麻布佛像烧起，后延及明堂总章三室，可见所营建的佛舍恐徒劳无益，请停止营造。
English: Liu Chengqing Shangsuo thought: Since the fire started from the linen Buddha statue and spread to the third room of the main chapter of the Ming Hall, it can be seen that the Buddhist house built is likely to be futile, please stop building.

古文：又，明堂所以统和天人，一旦焚毁，臣下何心犹为酺宴！忧喜相争，伤于情性。
现代文：还有，明堂的作用是调和天与人的关系，一旦焚毁，大臣们还有什么心思参加聚饮，忧愁和喜悦两种心情相互争斗，有伤于人的性情。
English: Moreover, the role of the Ming Hall is to reconcile the relationship between heaven and man. Once it is burned down, what thoughts will the ministers have to participate in the drinking party? Sadness and joy are two moods that fight with each other and hurt people's disposition.

古文：又，陛下垂制博访，许陈至理，而左史张鼎以为今既火流王屋，弥显大周之祥，通事舍人逄敏奏称，弥勒成道时有天魔烧宫，七宝台须臾散坏，斯实谄妄之邪言，非君臣之正论。
现代文：还有，陛下下令广泛访求，允许臣下陈述最根本的道理，而左史张鼎认为现在既然有火烧到帝王居住的地方，更显出大周朝的祥瑞，通事舍人逄敏奏称，弥勒佛成道时有天魔烧宫，七宝台顷刻散坏，这些实在是谄媚荒诞之言，不是君臣间正常的言论。
English: Moreover, His Majesty ordered a wide range of visits, allowing his subjects to state the most fundamental truth. And Zuo Shi Zhang Ding believed that now that there is a fire burning to the place where the emperor lives, it shows the auspiciousness of the Great Zhou Dynasty. He also said that when Maitreya Buddha became enlightened, there was a heavenly devil burning the palace, and the Seven Treasures were destroyed in an instant. These are really charming and absurd words, not normal words between sovereigns and subjects.

古文：伏愿陛下乾乾翼翼，无戾天人之心而兴不急之役，则兆人蒙赖，福禄无穷。 
现代文：恳请陛下自强不息，小心翼翼，不违反天理人心而兴办非急切的工程，则亿万百姓有所依靠，福禄无穷。 
English: I implore Your Majesty to be self-reliant, cautious, and not to violate the principles of the people, and to carry out non-urgent projects. Then, hundreds of millions of people will have something to rely on, and the benefits will be endless.

古文：获嘉主簿彭城刘知几表陈四事。其一以为： 皇业权舆，天地开辟，嗣君即位，黎元更始，则时藉非常之庆，以申再造之恩。
现代文：获嘉县主簿彭城人刘知几上表陈述四件事：其一，以为： 皇业起始，天地开辟，嗣君即位，百姓重新开始，当时则凭借非常的喜庆以显示使人重新获得生命的恩惠，现在天下清静安宁而赦令不断发布，近来则一年中不止一次，前些时则每年都有。
English: Liu Zhiqian, a resident of Pengcheng, who was awarded the main book of Jiayuguan County, stated four things in the above table: First, he thought that: the beginning of imperial industry, the opening up of heaven and earth, the enthronement of the prince, and the people's new beginning, at that time, with the help of very joyful celebrations to show the grace of restoring life, now the world is quiet and peaceful, and pardon orders are constantly issued, recently more than once a year, and in the past, every year.

古文：今六合清晏而赦令不息，近则一年再降，远则每岁无遗，至于违法悖礼之徒，无赖不仁之辈，编户则寇攘为业，当官则赃贿是求。而元日之朝，指期天泽，重阳之节，伫降皇恩，如其忖度，咸果释免。
现代文：至于违法背礼的人，刁猾凶残之徒，当百姓则以偷盗为业，当官则以贪赃索贿为目标。而元旦的朝会，期望皇帝的恩泽，重阳的节日，久立等待降皇恩，结果正如他们所揣测，全都获得赦免。
English: As for those who broke the law and committed sacrilege, those who were cunning and cruel, those who were ordinary people stole for a living, and those who were officials sought bribery as their goal. And the New Year's Day imperial meeting, the expectation of the emperor's favor, the festival of Chongyang, and the long wait for the fall of the imperial favor, as a result, as they speculated, were all pardoned.

古文：或有名垂结正，罪将断决，窃行货贿，方便规求，故致稽延，毕沾宽宥。
现代文：有人接近结案判定，刑罚将要执行，而私下贿赂，官吏乘机索取，以致判决拖延，终于获宽容饶恕。
English: Some people near the end of the case decided that the punishment would be carried out, and officials took the opportunity to solicit bribes in private, so that the judgment was delayed, and was finally forgiven.

古文：用使俗多顽悖，时罕廉隅，为善者不预恩光，作恶者独承徼幸。古语曰： 小人之幸，君子之不幸。 
现代文：这就使得社会上出现众多顽劣逆乱之徒，而缺少行为、品性端正严肃的人，行善的人得不到皇恩，作恶的人却独自获得意外的利益。古语说： 小人的幸运，便是君子的不幸。 
English: This has led to the emergence of many unscrupulous and rebellious people in society, and there is a lack of people with good behavior and upright and serious character. Those who do good will not receive royal grace, while those who do evil will only receive unexpected benefits. An ancient saying says: The fortune of the small man is the misfortune of the gentleman.

古文：斯之谓也。
现代文：就是这个意思。
English: That's what it means.

古文：望陛下而今而后，颇节于赦，使黎氓知禁，奸宄肃清。 
现代文：希望陛下从今以后，适当节制赦令，使百姓知道禁令，为非作歹的人被肃清。 
English: It is hoped that from now on, His Majesty will properly control the pardon order, so that the people know the ban, and the wrongdoers will be eliminated.

古文：其二以为： 海内具僚九品以上，每岁逢赦，必赐阶勋，至于朝野宴集，公私聚会，绯服众于青衣，象板多于木笏；皆荣非德举，位罕才升，不知何者为妍蚩，何者为美恶。
现代文：其二，以为： 海内任官九品以上的人，每年遇到发布赦令，必赐官阶勋级，以至朝野宴会、公私聚会时，穿红色衣服的官员多于穿青色衣服的官员，持象牙笏的多于执木笏的；他们的荣显并非因品德高尚而获得，他的官阶很少是因为才能出众而提升的，分不清什么是美与丑，什么是善与恶。
English: Second, they believed that: People who have been appointed to positions of nine or more grades in the navy must be given official ranks and orders every year when pardon orders are issued, so that when there are banquets, public and private gatherings, there are more officials wearing red clothes than those wearing blue clothes, and more officials holding ivory gongs than those holding wooden gongs; their glory is not obtained because of their high moral character, and their official ranks are rarely promoted because of their outstanding talents. It is unclear what is beautiful and ugly, and what is good and evil.

古文：臣望自今以后，稍息私恩，使有善者逾效忠勤，无才者咸知勉励。 
现代文：我希望从今以后稍微停止以私意赏赐官阶和勋级，使有才德的人更加忠诚勤奋，无才能的人都知道努力上进。 
English: I hope that from now on, we will slightly stop rewarding officials and ranks with self-interest, so that talented people will be more loyal and diligent, and untalented people will know how to work hard.

古文：其三以为： 陛下临朝践极，取士太广，六品以下职事清官，遂乃方之土芥，比之沙砾，若遂不加沙汰，臣恐有秽皇风。 
现代文：其三，以为： 陛下临朝即帝位以来，取士太多，六品以下有具体职务、政事清闲的官吏，就像泥土草芥一样微不足道，像沙砾一样数不清，如果不加以淘汰，恐怕要玷污君主的教化。 
English: Thirdly, they thought: Since His Majesty's accession to the throne, there have been too many officials, and the officials below the sixth grade who have specific duties and are not involved in political affairs are as insignificant as mud and grass, and as innumerable as gravel. If they are not eliminated, I am afraid that they will tarnish the enlightenment of the monarch.

古文：其四以为： 今之牧伯迁代太速，倏来忽往，蓬转萍流，既怀苟县之谋，何暇循良之政！
现代文：其四，以为： 现在州郡官吏更换调动太快，忽来忽往，像蓬草和浮萍一样流转不定，他们既怀着得过且过的打算，哪里还有心思搞奉公守法的政事。
English: Fourth, they thought: Nowadays, the replacement and transfer of state and county officials is too fast, and they come and go, and they are as unstable as puff grass and duckweed. Even if they have the intention of getting by, they still have the mind to engage in the political affairs of obeying the law.

古文：望自今刺史非三岁以上不可迁官，仍明察功过，尤甄赏罚。 
现代文：希望今后刺史在任不到三年以上不能调动，同时认真考察他们的功过，尤其要严明赏罚。 
English: It is hoped that in the future, those who have been in office for less than three years cannot be transferred, and their merits and demerits should be carefully examined. In particular, they should be strictly rewarded and punished.

古文：疏奏，太后颇嘉之。
现代文：奏疏上达后，太后很赞赏。
English: The empress dowager was very appreciative after the performance.

古文：是时官爵易得而法网严峻，故人竞为趋进而多陷刑戮，知几乃著《思慎赋》以刺时见志焉。
现代文：当时官爵容易得到而法网严峻，所以人们争着求取官爵而多陷身刑罚甚至被杀，刘知几便著《思慎赋》以讽刺时俗，表明自己的志趣。
English: At that time, peerages were easy to obtain and the legal system was strict, so people fought to obtain peerages and were often imprisoned and even killed. Liu Zhikai wrote "Thoughtful Endowment" to satirize the customs of the time and show his ambition.

古文：丙午，以王孝杰为朔方道行军总管，击突厥。
现代文：丙午，朝廷任命王孝杰为朔方道行军总管，进攻突厥。
English: In the afternoon of the 3rd day, the imperial court appointed Wang Xiaojie as the general manager of the march of Shuo Fang Road to attack the Turks.

古文：春，二月，己酉朔，日有食之。
现代文：春季，二月，己酉朔，出现日食。
English: In the spring, in February, when the new year begins, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：僧怀义益骄恣，太后恶之。
现代文：和尚怀义日益骄傲放纵，太后因此憎恨他。
English: The empress dowager hated the increasingly arrogant and self-indulgent monk.

古文：既焚明堂，心不自安，言多不顺；太后密选宫人有力者百馀人以防之。
现代文：他焚烧明堂后，内心不安，言语多不恭顺；太后秘密挑选一百多名身强力壮的宫女以防备他。
English: After he set fire to the Ming Hall, he was uneasy in his heart, and his words were often insubordinate; the empress dowager secretly selected more than a hundred physically strong court ladies to guard against him.

古文：壬子，执之于瑶光殿前树下，使建昌王武攸宁师壮士殴杀之，送尸白马寺，焚之以造塔。
现代文：壬子，在瑶光殿前树下将他逮捕，让建昌王武攸宁率领壮士将他打死，把尸体送往白马寺，焚尸造塔。
English: Jinzi, arrested him under a tree in front of the Palace of Light, and let Jianchang Wangwu Youning lead the strong men to beat him to death, send the body to the White Horse Temple, and burn the corpse to build a tower.

古文：甲子，太后去 慈氏越古 之号。
现代文：甲子，太后除去 慈氏越古 的称号。
English: As a result, the empress dowager removed the title of Cixi Yuegu.

古文：三月，丙辰，凤阁侍郎、同平章事周允王薨。
现代文：三月，丙辰，凤阁侍郎、同平章事周允元去世。
English: In March, Bing Chen, Fengge waiter and Tongping chapter member Zhou Yunyuan passed away.

古文：夏，四月，天枢成，高一百五尺，径十二尺，八面，各径五尺。
现代文：夏季，四月，朝廷铸造天枢柱完成，高一百零五尺，直径十二尺，柱身八面，每面宽五尺。
English: In the summer, in April, the casting of the heavenly pivot column was completed at the imperial court. It was 105 feet high, 12 feet in diameter, with eight sides and a width of five feet on each side.

古文：下为铁山，周百七十尺，以铜为蟠龙麒麟萦绕之；上为腾云承露盘，径三丈，四龙人立捧火珠，高一丈。
现代文：大柱下面是一座铁山，周边长一百七十尺，环绕铁山的是铜做的蟠龙和麒麟；柱顶上铸一个腾云形的承露盘，直径三丈，四个龙人站在盘上捧火珠，火珠高一丈。
English: Below the pillar is an iron mountain, with a circumference of 170 feet. Surrounding the iron mountain are bronze dragons and unicorns. At the top of the pillar is a cloud-shaped dewdrop dish, three meters in diameter. Four dragons stand on the dish holding fireballs, which are one meter high.

古文：工人毛婆罗造模，武三思为文，刻百官及四夷酋长名，太后自书其榜曰 大周万国颂德天枢 。
现代文：工人毛婆罗造模型，武三思撰文，天枢上刻百官和四夷首领的姓名，太后亲自书写匾额为： 大周万国颂德天枢。 
English: The worker Mao Bala made the model, Wu Sansi wrote the article, the names of hundreds of officials and leaders of the four ethnic groups were engraved on the heavenly center, and the empress dowager herself wrote the inscription: "Great Zhou, the praise of the nations, the heavenly center."

古文：秋，七月，辛酉，吐蕃寇临洮，以王孝杰为肃边道行军大总管以讨之。
现代文：秋季，七月，辛酉，吐蕃侵扰临洮，朝廷任命王孝杰为萧边道行军大总管以讨伐他们。
English: In the autumn, in July, when Xinjiang and Tibet invaded Linyi, the imperial court appointed Wang Xiaojie as the general manager of the march of Xiaobian Road to fight them.

古文：九月，甲寅，太后合祭天地于南郊，加号天册金轮大圣皇帝，赦天下，改元。
现代文：九月，甲寅，太后合祭天地于南郊，加尊号为天册金轮大圣皇帝，大赦天下，更改年号。
English: In September, the Queen of Heaven and Earth held a festival in the southern suburb of Kaohsiung, and the name of the emperor was changed to the Emperor of Heaven and Earth, and the year was renamed.

古文：冬，十月，突厥默啜遣使请降，太后喜，册授左卫大将军、归国公。
现代文：冬季，十月，突厥阿史那默啜派遣使者向唐朝请降，太后高兴，封他为左卫大将军、归国公。
English: In the winter, in October, the Turk Ashnamo sent an envoy to the Tang Dynasty to ask for surrender. The empress dowager was pleased and appointed him as the General of the Left Division and the Returning Prince.

古文：万岁通天元年丙申，公元六九六年
现代文：万岁通天元年
English: Long live the first year of Tsuten

古文：腊月，甲戌，太后发神都；甲申，封神岳；赦天下，改元万岁登封，天下百姓无出今年租税；大酺九日。
现代文：腊月，甲戌，太后从神都出发；甲申，祭天于神岳嵩山，大赦天下，更改年号为万岁登封，让天下百姓免交今年租税；全国会饮九天。
English: The waxing moon, the armadillo, and the empress dowager will set out from Shintou; Jiaxing will hold a celestial sacrifice on Mount Shenyue, which will grant amnesty to the world, change the year name to Long Live Dengfeng, and let the people of the world be exempt from paying taxes this year; the whole country will drink for nine days.

古文：丁亥，禅于少室；己丑，御朝觐坛受贺；癸巳，还宫；甲午，谒太庙。
现代文：丁亥，祭地于嵩山少室峰；己丑，登上朝觐坛接受朝贺；癸巳，回宫；甲午，禀告太庙。
English: Dinghai, the festival site is located at the foot of Songshan Mountain; Jiushi, ascended the altar to receive morning greetings; Jinshi, returned to the palace; Jiawu, reported to the Imperial Temple.

古文：右千牛卫将军安平王武攸绪，少有志行，恬澹寡欲，扈从封中岳还，即求弃官，隐于嵩山之阳。
现代文：右千牛卫将军安平王武攸绪，少年时就有志向品行，淡泊不贪图名利，随从太后封中岳回来后，即要求抛弃官爵，隐居于嵩山南麓。
English: When he was a boy, Anping Wangwu, the commander of the Right Division of the Thousand-Cow Guards, was full of ambition and did not covet fame and fortune. After returning from the Empress Dowager's residence in Zhongyue, he asked to give up his title and lived in seclusion at the southern foot of Songshan Mountain.

古文：太后疑其诈，许之，以观其所为。
现代文：太后怀疑他有诈，同意他的请求，以观察他的行动。
English: The Empress suspected him of treachery and agreed to his request to observe his actions.

古文：攸绪遂优游岩壑，冬居茅椒，夏居石室，一如山林之士。
现代文：武攸绪于是悠然自得于山水之间，冬天居住在茅椒作墙的屋子里，夏天居住于石室，和山林隐士一样。
English: Therefore, Wu Yuesu felt at ease among the mountains and rivers. In winter, he lived in a house with a wall made of cilantro, and in summer, he lived in a stone room, just like a mountain hermit.

古文：太后所赐及王公所遗野服器玩，攸绪一皆置之不用，尘埃凝积。
现代文：太后的赏赐，王公赠给的衣服玩物，武攸绪一概闲置不用，上面积满灰尘尘。
English: The rewards of the empress dowager, the clothes and toys given by the prince, and the weapons are all idle and unused, with dust piled up on them.

古文：买田使奴耕种，与民无异。
现代文：他买田让家奴耕种，和普通百姓没有区别。
English: He bought land for his slaves to cultivate, and there was no difference between him and ordinary people.

古文：春，一月，甲寅，以娄师德为肃边道行军副总管，击吐蕃。
现代文：春季，一月，甲寅，朝廷任命娄师德为肃边道行军副总管，进攻吐蕃。
English: In the spring, in January of the year of Jia Yin, the imperial court appointed Zou Shide as the deputy commander-in-chief of the march of Subei Road, and the attack on Tubo began.

古文：己巳，以师德为左肃政大夫，知政事如故。
现代文：己巳，任命娄师德为左肃政大夫，仍旧主持政事。
English: At that time, Gong Shide was appointed as Zuo Su's political advisor, and still presided over political affairs.

古文：改长安崇尊庙为太庙。
现代文：朝廷改长安崇尊庙为太庙。
English: The imperial court changed Chang'an Chongzon Temple to Taimiao.

古文：二月，辛巳，尊神岳天中王为神岳天中黄帝，灵妃为天中黄后；启为齐圣皇帝；封启母神为玉京太后。
现代文：二月，辛巳，朝廷尊神岳天中王为神岳天中黄帝，灵妃为天中黄后；夏启为齐圣皇帝；封启母神为玉京太后。
English: In February, Xin Si, the imperial court revered King Shen Yue of the Middle Kingdom as the Yellow Emperor of the Middle Kingdom, Lingfei as the Yellow Empress of the Middle Kingdom, Xiaqi as the Holy Emperor, and Huqi's mother god as the Jade Empress Dowager.

古文：三月，壬寅，王孝杰、娄师德与吐蕃将论钦陵赞婆战于素罗汗山，唐兵大败；孝杰坐免为庶人，师德贬原州员外司马。
现代文：三月，壬寅，王孝杰、娄师德与吐蕃论钦陵赞婆交战于素罗汗山，唐军大败；王孝杰因此被免官为平民，娄师德被降职为原州员外司马。
English: In March, Ren Yin, Wang Xiaojie, Zou Shide and Tubo Onqinling Zhanba fought in the Surokhan Mountain, and the Tang army was defeated. As a result, Wang Xiaojie was dismissed as a civilian, and Zou Shide was demoted to a former state member.

古文：师德因署移牒，惊曰： 官爵尽无邪？ 
现代文：一次，娄师德在签署官府文书时，吃惊地说： 官爵全都没有了！ 
English: Once, when he was signing an official document, Zou Shide said in surprise: "All the officials are gone!"

古文：既而曰： 亦善，亦善！ 
现代文：接着又说： 也好，也好。 
English: Then he added: "It's all right, it's all right."

古文：不复介意。
现代文：不再把这事情放在心上。
English: I don't think about it anymore.

古文：丁巳，新明堂成，高二百九十四尺，方三百尺，规模率小于旧。
现代文：丁巳，新明堂落成，高二百九十四尺，纵横三百尺，规模大致小于被焚烧的明堂。
English: Soon after, Shin Myeongdong was completed. It is 294 feet high, 300 feet long and 300 feet wide, and is roughly smaller than the Myeongdong that was destroyed by fire.

古文：上施金涂铁凤，高二丈，后为大风所损；更为铜火珠，群龙捧之，号曰通天宫。
现代文：上面放置涂金铁凤，高二丈，后来被大风损坏；另造铜火珠，由群龙捧着，定名为通天宫。
English: A gold-painted iron phoenix, two meters high, was placed on it and was later damaged by a strong wind; another bronze fireball, held by a group of dragons, was named Tsutenkyo.

古文：赦天下，改元万岁通天。
现代文：朝廷大赦天下罪人，改年号为万岁通天。
English: The imperial court granted amnesty to the world's sinners, and changed the year name to "Vanzhei Tongtian."

古文：大食请献师子。姚璹上疏，以为： 师子专食肉，远道传致，肉既难得，极为劳费。
现代文：大食国请求给朝廷进献狮子，姚上疏认为： 狮子专门吃肉，远道运来，肉既难得，极费人力财力。
English: When the big-eating country requested a lion to be presented to the imperial court, Yao Shangsuo thought: Lions are specialized in eating meat, and they are transported from far away. Meat is rare, and it takes a lot of manpower and financial resources.

古文：陛下鹰犬不蓄，渔猎悉停，岂容菲薄于身而厚给于兽！ 
现代文：陛下鹰犬都不畜养，渔猎全部停止，哪能容许对自己菲薄而对野兽优厚！ 
English: Your Majesty, hawks and hounds are not kept as livestock, fishing and hunting have all been stopped, how can you allow yourself to be thin while being generous to the beasts!

古文：乃却之。
现代文：于是拒绝接受。
English: So they refused to accept it.

古文：以检校夏官侍郎孙元亨同平章事。
现代文：朝廷任命检校夏官侍郎孙元亨为同平章事。
English: The imperial court appointed Sun Yuanheng, the son of the summer official of the inspection school, to be the same rank.

古文：夏，五月，壬子，营州契丹松漠都督李尽忠、归诚州刺史孙万荣举兵反，攻陷营州，杀都督赵文翙。
现代文：夏季五月，壬子，营州契丹松漠都督李尽忠、归诚州刺史孙万荣起兵反唐，攻陷营州，杀都督赵文。
English: In the summer of May, Imzi, Yingzhou, Qidan, Songpan, the governor of Yingzhou, Li Jinzhong, and Guicheng, the governor of Shizhou, Sun Wanrong, raised an army against the Tang Dynasty, invaded Yingzhou, and killed the governor, Zhao Wen.

古文：尽忠，万荣之妹夫也，皆居于营州城侧。
现代文：李尽忠是孙万荣的妹夫，都居住在营州城边。
English: Li Jianzhong is the brother-in-law of Sun Wanrong, both of whom live in the outskirts of Yingzhou.

古文：文翙刚愎，契丹饥不加赈给，视酋长如奴仆，故二人怨而反。
现代文：赵文傲慢而固执，契丹发生饥荒，他不赈济，看待他们的首领如同奴仆，所以他们二人怨恨而造反。
English: Zhao Wen was arrogant and obstinate. When there was a famine in Khitan, he did not help, and treated their leaders like slaves. Therefore, the two of them rebelled out of resentment.

古文：乙丑，遣左鹰扬卫将军曹仁师、右金吾卫大将军张玄遇、左威卫大将军李多祚、司农少卿麻仁节等二十八将讨之。
现代文：乙丑，唐朝派遣左鹰扬卫将军曹仁师、右金吾卫大将军张玄遇、左威卫大将军李多祚、司农少卿麻仁节等二十八将讨伐他们。
English: Second, the Tang Dynasty sent twenty-eight generals to fight against them, including the left eagle Yang Wei general Cao Ren Shi, the right eagle Yang Wei general Zhang Xuan Yu, the left eagle Yang Wei general Li Duoyan, and the farmer Shaoqing Ma Ren Jie.

古文：秋，七月，辛亥，以春官尚书梁王武三思为榆关道安抚大使，姚璹副之，以备契丹。改李尽忠为李尽灭，孙万荣为孙万斩。
现代文：秋季，七月，辛亥，朝廷任命春官尚书梁王武三思为榆关道安抚大使，姚作他的副职，以防备契丹；改李尽忠为李尽灭，孙万荣为孙万斩。
English: In the autumn, in July, Xinhai, the imperial court appointed the Spring official, Shang Shuliang, Wang Wu Sanshi, as the ambassador for the pacification of Shaoguan Road, and Yao as his deputy, in order to prevent the Khitan; Li Jianzhong was changed to Li Jianzhong, and Sun Wanrong was changed to Sun Wancheng.

古文：尽忠录自称无上可汗，据营州，以万荣为前锋，略地，所向皆下，旬日，兵至数万，进围檀州，清边前军副总管张九节击却之。
现代文：李尽忠不久自称无上可汗，占据营州，以孙万荣为前锋，夺取地盘，所向无敌，十日间拥兵至数万，进兵包围檀州，被清边前军副总管张九节击退。
English: Li Jianzhong soon claimed to be the supreme khan, occupied Yingzhou, with Sun Wanrong as the striker, seized the site, and was invincible. Within ten days, he had tens of thousands of soldiers, surrounded Danzhou, and was repulsed by Zhang Jiujie, the deputy commander of the Qing frontier army.

古文：八月，丁酉，曹仁师、张玄遇、麻仁节与契丹战于硖石谷，唐兵大败。
现代文：八月，丁酉，曹仁师、张玄遇、麻仁节与契丹战于硖石谷，唐兵大败。
English: In August, Ding Xuan, Cao Ren Shi, Zhang Xuan Yu, and Ma Ren Si fought against the Khitan in Shaoshidani, and the Tang soldiers were soundly defeated.

古文：先是，契丹破营州，获唐俘数百，囚之地牢，闻唐兵将至，使守牢绐之曰： 吾辈家属，饥寒不能自存，唯俟官军至即降耳。 
现代文：先是，契丹破营州，获唐俘数百，囚之地牢，闻唐兵将至，使守牢绐之曰： 吾辈家属，饥寒不能自存，唯俟官军至即降耳。 
English: First of all, the Khitan broke the camp state, received hundreds of Tang prisoners, prisoners of the prison, heard that the Tang soldiers were coming, and the prison guard said: My family members, hunger and cold can not be self-sustaining, but the official army will fall on deaf ears.

古文：既而契丹引出其俘，饲以糠粥，慰劳之曰： 吾养汝则无食，杀汝又不忍，今纵汝去。 
现代文：既而契丹引出其俘，饲以糠粥，慰劳之曰： 吾养汝则无食，杀汝又不忍，今纵汝去。 
English: Once the Khitan had brought out his captive and fed him with gruel, he consoled him by saying, "I raised you without food, I killed you without mercy, and now I am sending you away."

古文：遂释之。
现代文：遂释之。
English: As a result, Wang Hanzhang was captured and presented to the emperor.

古文：俘至幽州，具言其状，诸军闻之，争欲先入。
现代文：俘至幽州，具言其状，诸军闻之，争欲先入。
English: Captured to Yuzhou, to put it bluntly, all the armies heard about it and wanted to get in first.

古文：至黄麞谷，虏又遣老弱迎降，故遗老牛瘦马于道侧。
现代文：至黄獐谷，虏又遣老弱迎降，故遗老牛瘦马于道侧。
English: To Huangpi Valley, the captors also sent the old and weak to meet the fall, so the old cow and thin horse were left on the side of the road.

古文：仁师等三军弃步卒，将骑兵轻进。
现代文：仁师等三军弃步卒，将骑兵先进。
English: Ninshih and the other three armies abandoned their foot soldiers, and the cavalry advanced.

古文：契丹设伏横击之，飞索以鎉玄遇、仁节，生获之，将卒死者填山谷，鲜有脱者。
现代文：契丹设伏横击之，飞索以玄遇、仁节，生获之，将卒死者填山谷，鲜有脱者。
English: The Khitans set up ambushes to attack from the side, and flew ropes to meet with the dead and the living. The living and the dead filled the valley, and there were few escapees.

古文：契丹得军印，诈为牒，令玄遇等署之，牒总管燕匪石、宗怀昌等云： 官军已破贼，若至营州，军将皆斩，兵不叙勋。 
现代文：契丹得军印，诈为牒，令玄遇等署之，牒总管燕匪石、宗怀昌等云： 官军已破贼，若至营州，军将皆斩，兵不叙勋。 
English: The military seal of Khitan, fraud as an ultimatum, the occurrence of the mysterious incident, the general manager of the ultimatum, Yan Gangshi, Zong Huichang and other clouds: The official army has broken the thieves, if it comes to Yingzhou, the generals will all be killed, and the soldiers will not be awarded.

古文：匪石等得牒，昼夜兼行，不遑寝食以赴之，士马疲弊；契丹伏兵于中道邀之，全军皆没。
现代文：匪石等得牒，昼夜兼行，不遑寝食以赴之，士马疲弊；契丹伏兵于中道邀之，全军皆没。
English: The bandits were given an ultimatum, and they marched day and night, going without sleep or food, and the horses were exhausted; the Khitan ambush was invited in the middle of the road, and the whole army was gone.

古文：九月，制： 天下系囚及士庶家奴骁勇者，官偿其直，发以击契丹。 
现代文：宗怀昌等说： 官军已破贼，如果你们不到达营州，军官都斩首，兵卒不给勋级。 
English: Zong Huichang and others said: The government army has defeated the bandits. If you do not reach Dajing Prefecture, the officers will be beheaded, and the soldiers will not be given a rank.

古文：初令山东近边诸州置武骑团兵，以同州刺史建安王武攸宜为右武威卫大将军，充清边道行军大总管，以讨契丹。
现代文：燕匪石等得到通知，便昼夜兼程，连吃饭睡觉都顾不上，一直往前赶，士卒马匹都疲劳得很；结果被契丹人在中途埋伏截击，全军覆没。九月，太后下令： 天下囚犯及官民家奴有勇力的，官府给钱赎出，发往前线进攻契丹。 朝廷开始命令崤山以东靠近边地各州设置武骑团兵，任命同州刺史建安王武攸宜为右武威卫大将军，充任清边道行军大总管，以讨伐契丹。
English: When Yan Gangshi and others were notified, they traveled day and night, and could not even eat or sleep. They kept driving forward, and the soldiers and horses were very tired. As a result, they were ambushed and intercepted by the Khitan in the middle of the way, and the whole army was destroyed. In September, the empress dowager ordered: The prisoners and civil servants have courage, and the government will give money to redeem them and send them to the front line to attack the Khitan. The court began to order the states east of Shaoshan near the border to set up cavalry regiments, and appointed the governor of the same state, Jian Wang Wu Youyi, as

古文：右拾遗陈子昂为攸宜府参谋，上疏曰： 恩制免天下罪人及募诸色奴充兵讨击契丹，此乃捷急之计，非天子之兵。
现代文：右拾遗陈子昂任武攸宜军府参谋，上疏说： 太后下令赦免天下罪人及招募官民家奴当兵讨伐契丹，这只是应急的办法，不是天子的兵员。
English: Right after the death of Chen Zi Ang, Wu Youyi was appointed as the staff officer of the military government. Shang Zuo said: The empress dowager ordered to pardon all the sinners in the world and to recruit officials and slaves to fight against the Khitan. This was only an emergency measure, not a soldier of the son of heaven.

古文：且比来刑狱久清，罪人全少，奴多怯弱，不惯征行，纵其募集，未足可用。
现代文：况且近来刑狱早已公平，罪人减少，家奴多数懦弱，不习惯行军打仗，纵使能募集到，也不见得可用。
English: Moreover, in recent times, prison sentences have long been fair, the number of criminals has decreased, and the majority of domestic slaves are cowardly, not used to marching and fighting, and even if they can be recruited, they are not necessarily available.

古文：况当今天下忠臣勇士，万分未用其一，契丹小孽，假命待诛，何劳免罪赎奴，损国大体！
现代文：何况当今天下的忠臣义士，还没有用上万分之一，契丹小小的祸乱，发个命令就将诛灭，用不着赦免罪犯和赎出家奴，有损国家的体面！
English: What's more, today's loyal subjects and righteous people have not yet used even one ten-thousandth of a cent, and a small disaster in Khitan will be wiped out with a single order. There is no need to pardon criminals and redeem slaves, which is detrimental to the country's dignity!

古文：臣恐此策不可威示天下。 
现代文：我恐怕这种政策不足以向天下显示国家威力。 
English: I'm afraid this kind of policy is not enough to show the world the power of the state.

古文：丁巳，突厥寇凉州，执都督许钦明。
现代文：丁巳，突厥侵扰凉州，虏走州都督许钦明。
English: At the same time, the Turks invaded Liangzhou and took away the provincial governor, Xu Qinming.

古文：钦明，绍之曾孙也；时出按部，突厥数万奄至城下，钦明拒战，为所虏。
现代文：许钦明是许绍的曾孙；当时他正外出巡查所辖地区，突厥兵数万人突然进攻到城下，许钦明抵抗，被俘虏。
English: Xu Qinming was the great-grandson of Xu Shao. At that time, he was out inspecting the area under his jurisdiction, when tens of thousands of Turkish soldiers suddenly attacked the city. Xu Qinming resisted and was captured.

古文：钦明兄钦寂，时为龙山军讨击副使，与契丹战于崇州，军败，被擒。
现代文：许钦明的哥哥许钦寂，当时任龙山军讨击副使，与契丹在崇州交战，兵败被擒。
English: Xu Qinming's elder brother, Xu Qinzhong, was then the deputy envoy of the Longshan Army, and fought with the Khitan in Chongzhou. He was defeated and captured.

古文：虏将围安东，令钦寂说其属城未下者。
现代文：契丹人将包围安东，命令许钦寂劝说其属下未被攻下的城邑投降。
English: The Khitans will encircle Andong and order Xu Qinzhak to persuade his subordinates to surrender the towns that have not been captured.

古文：安东都护裴玄珪在城中，钦寂谓曰： 狂贼天殃，灭在朝夕，公但励兵谨守以全忠节。 
现代文：安东都护裴玄正在城中，许钦寂对他说： 狂贼为天所罚，灭亡就在朝夕之间，您只管勉励士兵严密防守以保全忠诚和气节。 
English: Pei Xuan, Anton's tutor, was in the city, and Xu Qinzhao said to him: "Crazy thieves are punished by heaven, and their demise is between morning and evening. You only need to encourage the soldiers to guard closely to preserve their loyalty and morale.

古文：虏杀之。
现代文：契丹人因此把他杀了。
English: The Khitans killed him for it.

古文：吐蕃复遣使请和亲，太后遣右武卫胄曹参军贵乡郭元振往察其宜。
现代文：吐蕃又派遣使者请求与唐和好，太后派遣右武卫胄曹参军贵乡人郭元振前去观察情况。
English: Tubo also sent an envoy to ask for peace with Tang, and the empress dowager sent the right guard Yu Cao to join the army, and Guo Yuan Zhen, a villager from Guizhou, went to observe the situation.

古文：吐蕃将论钦陵请罢安西四镇戍兵，并求分十姓突厥之地。
现代文：吐蕃将领论钦陵请求唐朝撤去安西四镇的守军，并请求分给他们十姓突厥的土地。
English: On the subject of Qinling, the generals of Tubo requested the Tang Dynasty to withdraw the defenders from the four towns in Anxi, and requested that they be given the land of the Ten Turkic Tribes.

古文：元振曰： 四镇、十姓与吐蕃种类本殊，今请罢唐兵，岂非有兼并之志乎？ 
现代文：郭元振说： 四镇、十姓突厥与吐蕃本是不同民族，现在请撤唐朝守军，难道不是有兼并的打算吗？ 
English: Guo Yuanzhen said: "Four towns, ten surnames, Turks and Tibetans are originally different ethnic groups. Now, please withdraw the Tang Dynasty defenders. Isn't there a plan for annexation?

古文：钦陵曰： 吐蕃苟贪土地，欲为边患，则东侵甘、凉，岂肯规利于万里之外邪！ 
现代文：论钦陵说： 吐蕃假如贪求土地，想成为唐朝边地的祸患，则东侵甘州、凉州，哪里肯谋利于万里之外呢！ 
English: On the subject of Qinling, he said: "If Tubo is greedy for land and wants to become a scourge on the outskirts of the Tang Dynasty, then invade Ganshou and Liangzhou, where would he seek profit thousands of miles away!

古文：乃遣使者随元振入请之。
现代文：于是派遣使者随郭元振入唐朝提出上述请求。
English: As a result, an envoy was sent to accompany Guo Yuanfen to the Tang Dynasty to make the above request.

古文：朝廷疑未决，元振上疏，以为： 钦陵求罢兵割地，此乃利害之机，诚不可轻举措也。
现代文：是否答应他的要求，朝廷拿不定主意，郭元振上疏认为： 论钦陵要求罢兵割地，这是利害的关键，确实不应轻易作出决定。
English: The imperial court was undecided whether to grant his request, and Guo Yuan Zhen Shangsuo thought: On Qinling's request to strike and divide the land, this is the key to the interests, and it is true that the decision should not be made easily.

古文：今若直拒其善意，则为边患必深。
现代文：现在如果直截了当地拒绝他的善意，结果将招致很深的边患。
English: To reject his goodwill out of hand now would be to invite serious trouble down the road.

古文：四镇之利远，甘、凉之害近，不可不深图也。
现代文：四镇的利益远，甘州、凉州的受害近，不可不深入考虑。
English: The interests of the four towns are far away, but the sufferings of Ganzhou and Liangzhou are near, which must be considered in depth.

古文：宜以计缓之，使其和望未绝则善矣。
现代文：应当用计策拖延时间，使他和好的希望未断绝就好了。
English: It would be well to procrastinate by stratagems, that his hope of reconciliation may not be cut off.

古文：彼四镇、十姓，吐蕃之所甚欲也，而青海、吐谷浑，亦国家之要地也，今报之宜曰： 四镇、十姓之地，本无用于中国，所以遣兵戍之，欲以镇抚西域，分吐蕃之势，使不得并力东侵也。
现代文：那四镇、十姓，吐蕃是很想得到的，而青海、吐谷浑，也是我们的要地。现在回答他应该说： 四镇、十姓之地，本来对唐朝没有什么用处，所以派兵戍守，是想安定抚慰西域，分散吐蕃的军力，使吐蕃不能全力东侵。
English: Those four towns and ten surnames are very desirable for Tubo, and Qinghai and Tubo are also important places for us. Now he should answer: The four towns and ten surnames were originally of little use to the Tang Dynasty, so sending soldiers to guard them was to stabilize and soothe the western region, and to disperse Tubo's military strength, so that Tubo could not invade the east with all its might.

古文：今若果无东侵之志，当归我吐谷浑诸部及青海故地，则五俟斤部亦当以归吐蕃。 
现代文：现在如果吐蕃无东侵的打算，就应当归还我吐谷浑各部及青海故地，而西突厥五俟斤部也应当归还吐蕃 。
English: Now, if there is no intention to invade the east, then I should return all parts of the Tugu Valley and the Qinghai Province, and the West Turkic Five Provinces should also be returned to Tugu.

古文：如此则足以塞钦陵之口，而亦未与之绝也。
现代文：这样便足以堵住论钦陵的嘴，而且也未与他断绝关系。
English: This was enough to silence him, but it did not sever relations with him.

古文：若钦陵小有乖违，则曲在彼矣。
现代文：如果论钦陵略有违背，则是他没有道理。
English: If On Qinling slightly violates it, then he has no reason to do so.

古文：且四镇、十姓款附岁久，今未察其情之向背，事之利害，遥割而弃之，恐伤诸国之心，非所以御四夷也。 
现代文：而且四镇、十姓诚恳归附已久，现在还未发现他们有反叛的情况，做有害于我们的事情，因为遥远而抛弃他们，恐怕要使各国伤心，不是控制四夷的良策。 
English: Moreover, the four towns and ten families have been sincerely attached for a long time, and it has not yet been discovered that they have a rebellious situation and do things that are harmful to us. Because they are far away and abandon them, I am afraid that it will make the countries sad, and it is not a good strategy to control the four countries.

古文：太后从之。
现代文：太后听从他的意见。
English: The Queen Mother complied.

古文：元振又上言： 吐蕃百姓疲于徭戍，早愿和亲；钦陵利于统兵专制，独不欲归款。
现代文：郭元振又向太后进言： 吐蕃百姓为徭役和兵役所苦，早就愿意与我们和好；只有论钦陵图统兵专制的私利，不想归附。
English: Guo Yuanzhen also said to the Empress Dowager: The people of Tubo, who have suffered from forced labor and military service, have long been willing to make peace with us; they only want to talk about the autocratic self-interest of the generalissimo of Qinlingtu, and do not want to join.

古文：若国家岁发和亲使，而钦陵常不从命，则彼国之人怨钦陵日深。望国恩日甚，设欲大举其徒，固亦难矣。
现代文：如果我们每年都派去表示和好的使者，而论钦陵常不从命，则吐蕃百姓对论钦陵的怨恨就会日益加深，盼望得到国家的恩惠就会日甚一日，他要想大规模发动他的百姓，肯定就困难了。
English: If we send envoys every year to express reconciliation, but On Qinling often does not follow orders, then the resentment of the people of Tubo against On Qinling will deepen day by day, and the hope of receiving state favors will increase day by day. If he wants to mobilize his people on a large scale, it will certainly be difficult.

古文：斯亦离间之渐，可使其上下猜阻，祸乱内兴矣。 
现代文：这也是逐渐离间的办法，可以使他们上下猜疑，祸乱从内部产生。 
English: This is also a method of gradual separation, which can make them suspicious from top to bottom, and the calamity arises from within.

古文：太后深然之。
现代文：太后深表赞同。
English: The Empress Dowager expressed her deep approval.

古文：元振名震，以字行。
现代文：郭元振名震，元振是他的字，人们习惯称呼他的字。
English: Guo Yuan Zhen is famous, Yuan Zhen is his character, people are used to calling him the character.

古文：庚申，以并州长史王方庆为鸾台侍郎，与殿中监万年李道广并同平章事。
现代文：庚申，朝廷任命并州长史王方庆为鸾台侍郎，与殿中监万年人李道广一并任同平章事。
English: Goshun, the imperial court appointed the governor Shi Wang Fangqing as the attendant of Xingtai, and he served as the co-equal officer with the palace middle superintendent of ten thousand years, Li Daoguan.

古文：突厥默啜请为太后子，并为其女求昏，悉归河西降户，帅其部众为国讨契丹。
现代文：突厥阿史那默啜请求作太后的儿子，并为他女儿向唐朝求婚，全部归还河西降户，率领他的部众为唐朝讨伐契丹。
English: The Turk Ashnamoos requested to be the son of the empress dowager, and proposed marriage to the Tang Dynasty for his daughter. He returned all of his property to his family in Hexi and led his followers to fight against the Khitan for the Tang Dynasty.

古文：太后遣豹韬卫大将军阎知微、左卫郎将摄司宾卿田归道册授默啜左卫大将军、迁善可汗。
现代文：太后派遣豹韬卫大将军阎知微、左卫郎将代理司宾卿田归道带着册书任命阿史那默啜为左卫大将军、迁善可汗。
English: The empress dowager dispatched the great general of the Left Guards, Yan Zhiwei, and the Left Guards sent the acting chief secretary, Tian Guido, with a book of records to appoint Ashinamer as the great general of the Left Guards and Qianzhen Khan.

古文：知微，立德之孙；归道，仁会之子也。
现代文：阎知微是阎立德的孙子；田归道是田仁会的儿子。
English: Yan Zhiwei is the grandson of Yan Lide; Tian Guido is the son of Tian Renhui.

古文：冬，十月，辛卯，契丹李尽忠卒，孙万荣代领其众。
现代文：冬季，十月，辛卯，契丹李尽忠去世，孙万荣替代他率领部众。
English: In the winter, October, Xinwu, Khitan Li Jianzhong died, Sun Wanrong replaced him to lead the troops.

古文：突厥默啜乘间袭松漠，虏尽忠、万荣妻子而去。
现代文：突厥阿史那默啜乘机袭击松漠，俘虏李尽忠、孙万荣的妻子儿女后退走。
English: The Turk Ashnamo took the opportunity to attack Songmu, and the captives, Li Jinzhong, Sun Wanrong's wife and children, retreated.

古文：太后进拜默啜为颉跌利施大单于、立功报国可汗。
现代文：太后晋升阿史那默嗓为颉跌利施大单于、立功报国可汗。
English: The empress dowager promoted Ashinam to the position of khan.

古文：孙万荣收合馀众，军势复振，遣别帅骆务整、何阿小为前锋，攻陷冀州，杀刺史陆宝积，屠吏居数千人；又攻瀛州，河北震动。
现代文：孙万荣收集余众，军势再次兴盛，派遣别帅骆务整、何阿小为前锋，攻陷冀州，杀州刺史陆宝积，屠杀官吏和百姓数千人；又进攻瀛州，黄河以北地区震动。
English: Sun Wan Rong gathered the rest of the army, and the army prospered again. He sent the other generals, Luo Wujie and He Ah Xiao, as the vanguard to invade Jizhou, kill Lu Baozhe, and slaughter thousands of officials and people. He also attacked Zhangzhou, and the area north of the Yellow River was shaken.

古文：制起彭泽令狄仁杰为魏州刺史。
现代文：太后命令起用彭泽令狄仁杰为魏州刺史。
English: The empress dowager ordered the appointment of Peng Ze Ling Di Renjie as the chief historian of Weizhou.

古文：前刺史独孤思庄畏契丹猝至，悉驱百姓入城，缮修守备。
现代文：前任刺史独孤思庄畏惧契丹突然到来，将百姓全部驱赶入城，修筑工事，加强守备。
English: Fearing the sudden arrival of the Khitan, his predecessor, Sashi Duku, drove all the people into the city to carry out construction work and strengthen defenses.

古文：仁杰至，悉遣还农，曰： 贼犹在远，何烦如是！
现代文：狄仁杰到任后，将百姓全部遣返务农，说： 敌人距离还远，用不着这样！
English: After taking office, Di Renjie sent all the people back to farming, saying: The enemy is still far away, there is no need to do this!

古文：万一贼来，吾自当之。 
现代文：万一敌人来，我自己抵挡他们。 
English: If the enemy should come, I will stand up to them myself.

古文：百姓大悦。
现代文：百姓很高兴。
English: The people are happy.

古文：时契丹入寇，军书填委，夏官郎中硖石姚元崇剖析如流，皆有条理，太后奇之，擢为夏官侍郎。
现代文：当时契丹侵扰，军事文书堆集，夏官郎中硖石人姚元崇剖析决断，如水分流，都有条理，太后认为他不寻常，提升他为夏官侍郎。
English: At that time, the intrusion of the Khitan, the accumulation of military documents, and the analysis and decision of Yao Yuan Chong, the chief of the Summer Palace, were all systematic, such as the flow of water. The Empress Dowager thought he was unusual and promoted him as the Summer Palace's equerry.

古文：太后思徐有功用法平，擢拜左台殿中侍御史，远近闻者无不相贺。
现代文：太后思念徐有功执法公平，重新提拔他为左台殿中侍御史，知道的人无不互相庆贺。
English: The empress dowager missed Xu Yulong's achievements in law enforcement and fairness, and re-promoted him as the attendant of history in the Left Palace, and everyone who knew him congratulated each other.

古文：鹿城主簿宗城潘好礼著论，称有功蹈道依仁，固守诚节，不以贵贱死生易其操履。
现代文：鹿城主簿宗城人潘好礼撰写文章，称赞徐有功遵循正道、依从仁义，坚守真诚的气节，不因贵贱死生改变自己的操行。
English: Pan Haoli, a resident of Lucheng, wrote an article praising Xu for following the right path, adhering to benevolence and righteousness, adhering to the sincere spirit, and not changing his behavior because of his high and low life.

古文：设客问曰： 徐公于今谁与为比？ 
现代文：文章中假设客人提问： 当今谁可以和徐公相比？ 
English: In the article, a hypothetical guest asks: Who can be compared to Xu Gong today?

古文：主人曰： 四海至广，人物至多，或匿迹韬光，仆不敢诬，若所闻见，则一人而已，当于古人中求之。 
现代文：主人说： 四海极广，人物极多，有的隐匿行迹，藏匿光采，我不敢乱下结论，但就我所闻所见，就他一人而已，能与他相比的只有从古人中寻求。 
English: The owner said: The four seas are very wide, there are many people, some are hiding their tracks, hiding their brilliance, I dare not jump to conclusions, but as far as I have heard and seen, he is the only one, and he can only be compared with the ancients.

古文：客曰： 何如张释之？ 
现代文：客人说： 比张释之如何？ 
English: The guest said: How is it compared to Zhangye?

古文：主人曰： 释之所行者甚易，徐公所行者甚难。难易之间，优劣见矣。
现代文：主人说： 张释之所做的事情很容易，徐有功所做的事情很困难，难易之间优劣就可以显示出来了。
English: The master said, "What Zhang Xizhi has done is easy, what Xu Yugang has done is difficult, and the advantages and disadvantages between the difficult and easy can be shown.

古文：张公逢汉文之时，天下无事，至如盗高庙玉环及渭桥惊马，守法而已，岂不易哉！
现代文：张释之遇上汉文帝的时候，天下太平无事，至于像盗窃汉高祖庙中的玉环和汉文帝在渭桥的惊马事件，只不过按法律办理而已，难道不是很容易吗！
English: When Zhang Xizhi encountered Emperor Hanwen, the world was peaceful and uneventful. As for incidents like the theft of the jade ring from the ancestral temple of Emperor Henkel and Emperor Hanwen's horse-riding accident at the Qianqiao Bridge, they were simply handled according to the law. Isn't that easy?

古文：徐公逢革命之秋，属惟新之运，唐朝遗老，或包藏祸心，使人主有疑。
现代文：徐有功遇上朝代变换的年代，适值万象更新的世道，唐朝的遗老，或包藏祸心，使君主有疑虑。
English: In the era of dynastic transformation, Xu has the merit of being able to adapt to the ever-changing world, the legacy of the Tang Dynasty, or harboring evil intentions, causing the monarch to have doubts.

古文：如周兴、来俊臣，乃尧年之四凶也，崇饰恶言以诬盛德；而徐公守死善道，深相明白，几陷囹圄，数挂网罗，此吾子所闻，岂不难哉！ 
现代文：如周兴、来俊臣，便是帝尧年代的四凶，大肆粉饰恶言以诬陷有德之人；而徐有功死守正道，深入审视清楚，几乎身陷监狱，多次触犯法度，这些都是您所听说过的，难道不是很难吗！ 
English: For example, Zhou Xing and Lai Junchen were the four villains in the imperial and imperial years, and they made a great effort to whitewash evil words in order to frame virtuous people; while Xu did his best to keep to the right path, thoroughly examined clearly, almost fell into prison, and repeatedly violated the law. These are all things you have heard of. Isn't it difficult?

古文：客曰： 使为司刑卿，乃得展其才矣。 
现代文：客人说： 假使任命他为司刑卿，就得以施展他的才能了。 
English: The guest said: If he were to be appointed chief magistrate, he would be able to use his talents.

古文：主人曰： 吾子徒见徐公用法平允，谓可置司刑；仆睹其人，方寸之地，何所不容，若其用之，何事不可，岂直司刑而已哉！
现代文：主人说： 您只看到徐公用法平允，以为可任司刑卿；我观察他这个人，心里什么都有，如果得以发挥，什么事情都能胜任，何止司刑卿而已！ 
English: The master said: You only saw that Xu Gong used the method of Ping Yun and thought that he could be appointed as a chief magistrate; I observed him as a person, he has everything in his heart, if he can play it, he can do anything, let alone be a chief magistrate!

