古文：王规，字威明，琅邪临沂人。
现代文：王规字威明，琅邪临沂人。
English: Wang Jizhe, Wei Ming, and Xing Yizhe, Linyi Ren.

古文：祖俭，齐太尉南昌文宪公。
现代文：他的祖父王俭，齐时任太尉，被封为南昌县公，谧为文宪公。
English: His grandfather, Wang Jian, who was a captain at the time, was named the governor of Nanchang County and given the title of Prince Wenxian.

古文：父骞，金紫光禄大夫南昌安侯。
现代文：父亲王骞，任金紫光禄大夫，被封为南昌安侯。
English: His father, Wang Qi, was appointed as the doctor of Jin Zi Guanglu, and was named the Prince of Nanchang.

古文：规八岁，以丁所生母忧，居丧有至性。太尉徐孝嗣每见必为之流涕，称曰孝童。
现代文：王规八岁时，遭逢生母丧事，居丧期间至诚至孝，太尉徐孝嗣每次见到他，都被他的孝心感动得流泪，称他为孝童。
English: When Wang Jian was eight years old, he was bereaved by his birth mother. During the mourning period, he was very sincere and filial. Every time Lieutenant Xu Xiaozhi saw him, he was moved to tears by his filial piety and called him a filial child.

古文：叔父暕亦深器重之，常曰： 此儿吾家千里驹也。 
现代文：王规的叔父王陈对他也十分器重，曾经说： 逭孩子是我家的千里驹。 
English: Wang Chen, Wang Gui's uncle, also holds him in high regard. He once said: "This child is the apple of my eye.

古文：年十二，《五经》大义，并略能通。
现代文：王规十二岁时，《五经》大义便都大致通晓。
English: When Wang Gui was twelve years old, he had a general understanding of the Five Classics.

古文：既长，好学有口辩。
现代文：长大成人之后，更喜爱学习且有口才。
English: As an adult, he became more studious and eloquent.

古文：州举秀才，郡迎主簿。
现代文：王规被州裹举为秀才，郡裹选用他任主簿。
English: Wang Gui was selected by the state as an outstanding talent, and the county selected him as the chief accountant.

古文：起家秘书郎，累迁太子舍人、安右南康王主簿、太子洗马。
现代文：王规被从家中征召出来任秘书郎，累经升迁任太子舍人，安右南康王主簿，太子洗马。
English: Wang Gui was conscripted from home to serve as secretary, and was promoted to serve as the prince's concubine, the chief secretary of King Anyu Nankang, and the prince's groom.

古文：天监十二年，改构太极殿，功毕，规献《新殿赋》，其辞甚工。
现代文：天监十二年，朝廷改建太极殿，建成之后，王规呈献《新殿赋》，文辞精巧。
English: In the twelfth year of Tianjing, the imperial court rebuilt the Taiji Hall. After it was completed, Wang Bi presented "New Hall Fu" with exquisite words.

古文：拜秘书丞。
现代文：他被任命为秘书丞。
English: He was appointed secretary-general.

古文：历太子中舍人、司徒左西属、从事中郎。
现代文：历任太子中舍人，司徒左西属，从事中郎。
English: Of all the successive princes, he was the one to give up his position, and it was Satoshi Sato who took on the role of middle son.

古文：晋安王纲出为南徐州，高选僚属，引为云麾谘议参军。
现代文：晋安王萧纲出京任南徐州刺史，他从严选用属宫，王规被选用为云麾谘议参军。
English: King Xiao Gang of Jin'an went to Beijing to serve as the governor of South Xuzhou. He was strictly selected to be a member of the imperial court, and Wang Gu was selected as a consul of Yunqi to join the army.

古文：久之，出为新安太守，父忧去职。
现代文：过了很久，王规又出京任新安太守，因居父丧而离职。
English: After a long time, Wang Gui went to Beijing to serve as the new governor of An, but left the post due to his father's death.

古文：服阕，袭封南昌县侯，除中书黄门侍郎。
现代文：服丧期满之后，袭封南昌县侯，被任命为中书黄门侍郎。
English: After the expiration of the mourning period, he succeeded to the fief of Nanchang County and was appointed as the attendant of the Yellow Gate.

古文：敕与陈郡殷钧、琅邪王锡、范阳张缅同侍东宫，俱为昭明太子所礼。
现代文：皇上命王规与陈郡殷钩、琅邪王锡、范阳张缅一同侍奉太子，昭明太子对他们都以礼相待。
English: Wang Gui, who was ordered by the emperor, served the crown prince together with Chen County's Yin Hook, Zhaoyao Wang Xi, and Fan Yang Zhang Meng. The crown prince treated them all with courtesy.

古文：湘东王时为京尹，与朝士宴集，属规为酒令。
现代文：当时，湘东王任京尹，和朝士集会宴饮，席间，湘东王让王规行酒令。
English: At that time, the king of eastern Hunan was named Jing Yin, and the morning warriors held a banquet. During the banquet, the king of eastern Hunan let Wang Gui make the wine.

古文：规从容对曰： 自江左以来，未有兹举。 
现代文：王规从容回答道： 自从晋迁至江左以来，没有过这种做法。 
English: Wang Gui calmly replied, "Since I was transferred to Jiangzuo, I haven't done this.

古文：特进萧琛、金紫傅昭在坐，并谓为知言。
现代文：当时，特进萧琛、金紫傅昭在座，都认为逭话说得很有见识。
English: At that time, Special Inspector Xiao Jun and Jin Zi Fu Zhao, who were present, both thought that the speech was very insightful.

古文：普通初，陈庆之北伐，克复洛阳，百僚称贺，规退曰： 道家有云：非为功难，成功难也。
现代文：普通初年，陈庆之北伐，收复洛阳，朝中百官齐声称贺，王规退朝后说： 道家说，着手办事并不难，但要成就功业却很难。
English: In the first year of the common era, when the Northern Expedition led by Chen Qing and the recapture of Luoyang were at their peak, hundreds of officials in the imperial court expressed their congratulations. After Wang Jie retired from the imperial court, he said: Taoists say that it is not difficult to start doing things, but it is difficult to accomplish the work.

古文：羯寇游魂，为日已久，桓温得而复失，宋武竟无成功。我孤军无援，深入寇境，威势不接，馈运难继，将是役也，为祸阶矣。 
现代文：羯寇似游魂出没不定，为时已久，担温征讨，得而复失，宋武帝最终也未能成功，我们孤军深入敌境，没有后援，深入羯寇占领的地区，兵力无法相连，军粮难继，这一仗，将要招来祸患了。 
English: It has been a long time since the invaders have come and gone like wandering spirits. The war has been fought and won and lost, and Emperor Song Wudi was ultimately unsuccessful. Our lone army has penetrated deep into the enemy territory, without backup, deep into the areas occupied by the invaders. The forces cannot be connected, and the military food is unsustainable. This war will bring disaster.

古文：俄而王师覆没，其识达事机多如此类。
现代文：不久朝廷军队果然全军覆没。他对事物的透彻了解多舆此相似。
English: Not long after, the imperial army was completely wiped out. His thorough understanding of things is similar to this.

古文：六年，高祖于文德殿饯广州刺史元景隆，诏群臣赋诗，同用五十韵，规援笔立奏，其文又美。
现代文：六年，高祖在文德殿设宴为广州刺史元景隆饯行，下诏命大臣们赋诗，规定都写一百句诗，王规提起笔立即就写完呈奏，诗句文辞又很优美。
English: In the sixth year, Gao Zu held a banquet at the Palace of Literature and Art for Guangzhou's famous poet, Yuanqing Longjun. He issued an edict ordering the ministers to compose poems, stipulating that they should all write one hundred poems. Wang Gu immediately finished writing and presented the performance, and the poetry was very beautiful.

古文：高祖嘉焉，即日诏为侍中。
现代文：高祖非常赞赏王规的才气，当天便下韶任命他为侍中。
English: Gao Zu greatly appreciated Wang Gui's talent, and appointed him as a chamberlain on the same day.

古文：大通三年，迁五兵尚书，俄领步兵校尉。
现代文：大通三年，王规迁任五兵尚书，不久兼任步兵校尉。
English: In the third year of Datong, Wang Jian was transferred to the post of five soldiers, and soon he also served as an infantry lieutenant.

古文：中大通二年，出为贞威将军骠骑晋安王长史。
现代文：中大通二年，王规出京任贞威将军骠骑晋安王长史。
English: In the second year of junior high school, Wang Jie went to Beijing as General Zhen Wei to ride on the horse of Jinan Wang Changshi.

古文：其年，王立为皇太子，仍为吴郡太守。
现代文：当年，晋安王被立为皇太子，王规接着就任吴郡太守。
English: In that year, King Jinan was appointed crown prince, and Wang Jie was then appointed governor of Wu County.

古文：主书芮珍宗家在吴，前守宰皆倾意附之。是时珍宗假还，规遇之甚薄，珍宗还都，密奏规云 不理郡事 。
现代文：主书芮珍宗的家在吴，以前的太守都一心巴结他，王规上任时，珍宗继休假回家，王规待他很疏远，继返回京都，秘报王据说他 不理郡中政事 。
English: The home of the chief scribe, Zou Zhenzong, is in Wuxi, and the former governors of the county have all been trying to ingratiate themselves with him. When Wang Gui took office, Zhenzong went home after a vacation, and Wang Gui treated him very distantly. After returning to Kyoto, Wang Zhenzong is said to have ignored the political affairs of the county.

古文：俄征为左民尚书，郡吏民千余人诣阙请留，表三奏，上不许。
现代文：于是王担不久便改任左民尚书，吴郡的官吏百姓一千多京城请求让王规留任，先后三次上表请奏，皇上不答应。
English: As a result, Wang Tan was soon replaced by Zuo Min Shang Shu, and more than a thousand officials and commoners in the capital city of Wu County requested that Wang Ji remain in office. They petitioned the emperor three times in succession, but the emperor did not agree.

古文：寻以本官领右军将军，未拜，复为散骑常侍、太子中庶子，领步兵校尉。
现代文：不久王规以左民尚书的名义兼任右军将军，没有授任，又被任命为散骑常侍、太子中庶子，兼任步兵校尉。
English: Soon after, Wang Bi also served as a general of the right army under the name of Zuo Min Shang Shu, but he was not given the post. He was also appointed as a cavalryman, an illegitimate son of the prince, and an infantry captain.

古文：规辞疾不拜，于钟山宗熙寺筑室居焉。
现代文：王规称病推辞，不肯任职，在宋熙寺筑室居住。
English: Wang Gui refused to take the post, claiming illness, and lived in a room built by Song Xi Temple.

古文：大同二年，卒，时年四十五。
现代文：主回二年，王捏去世，死时四十五岁。
English: In the second year of the main cycle, Wang Pinchong passed away, at the age of forty-five.

古文：诏赠散骑常侍、光禄大夫，赙钱二十万，布百匹。谥曰章。
现代文：皇上下韶追赠他为散骑常侍、光禄大夫，并赠钱二十万、布一百匹为他办丧事，赐给他谧号章。
English: The Emperor and Empress presented him posthumously with the title of errant riding attendant and doctor of Guanglu, as well as 200,000 yuan in cash and 100 horses of cloth to pay for his funeral, and gave him the imperial seal.

古文：皇太子出临哭，与湘东王绎令曰： 威明昨宵奄复殂化，甚可痛伤。
现代文：皇太子到王规灵前哭吊，下令给说： 王昨夜突然间去世，实在令人痛心。
English: The crown prince went to Wang Jian's grave in tears and gave the following order: "Wang Jian passed away suddenly last night, which is really heartbreaking.

古文：其风韵遒正，神峰标映，千里绝迹，百尺无枝。
现代文：他的风韵美好清正，神采光耀特出，千里之内无人能比，挺拔杰出无人可及。
English: His grace is beautiful and pure, his brilliance is outstanding, no one can match him within a thousand miles, and no one can match his outstanding prowess.

古文：文辩纵横，才学优赡，跌宕之情弥远，濠梁之气特多，斯实俊民也。
现代文：他的文辞雄辩奔放，才学丰赡优异，潇洒放逸，才气高远，寄情山水，自得其乐，逭实在是杰出的人物呀!
English: His words are eloquent and unrestrained, he is a brilliant scholar, a dashing and free-spirited person, a man of great talent, he loves the landscape and enjoys himself, he is truly an outstanding person!

古文：一尔过隙，永归长夜，金刀掩芒，长淮绝涸。
现代文：他那短促的一生飞快地逝去，如今长归暝暝九泉，像金刀失去了光芒，淮水断流而干涸。
English: His short life passed quickly, and now he has returned to the Nine Springs. Like a golden sword, it has lost its shine, and the water has dried up.

古文：去岁冬中，已伤刘子；今兹寒孟，复悼王生。俱往之伤，信非虚说。 
现代文：去年仲冬，我为刘遵的去世悲伤，今年初冬，又来追悼王捏，为好友纷纷去世而哀伤，确实不是空话啊! 
English: Last midwinter, I was saddened by the death of Liu Zun, and at the beginning of this winter, I came to mourn Wang Pin, and grieve for my friends who died one after another. These are not empty words!

古文：规集《后汉》众家异同，注《续汉书》二百卷，文集二十卷。
现代文：玉捏收集《后汉书》各家不同说法，注《续汉书》二百卷，还有文集二十卷。
English: Yuping collected the different sayings of "Post-Hanshu," 200 volumes of "Continued Hanshu," and 20 volumes of anthologies.

古文：子褒，字子汉，七岁能属文。
现代文：王规的儿子王褒，字子渊。王褒七岁时便能写文章。
English: Wang Bo's son, Wang Bo, Zi Yuan. Wang Bo was able to write articles at the age of seven.

古文：外祖司空袁昂爱之，谓宾客曰： 此儿当成吾宅相。 
现代文：外祖父司空袁昂喜爱他，对宾客说： 这孩子将会成为我们家显贵的外甥。 
English: Grandfather-in-law Siku Yuan Ang loved him and said to the guests: "This child will become the great nephew of our family."

古文：弱冠举秀才，除秘书郎、太子舍人，以父忧去职。
现代文：王褒二十岁被举为秀才，任秘书郎。太子舍人，因居父丧离职。
English: At the age of 20, Wang Bo was awarded the title of "excellent talent" and was appointed secretary. However, he resigned due to the death of his father.

古文：服阕，袭封南昌侯，除武昌王文学、太子洗马，兼东宫管记，迁司徒属，秘书丞，出为安成内史。
现代文：服丧期满之后袭封南昌侯，被任命为武昌王文学，太子洗马，兼任束宫管记，又升任司徒属，秘书丞，出京任安成内史。
English: After the expiration of the mourning period, he succeeded to the fief of Nanchang, was appointed as the Wuchang King of Literature, the prince of the horse, and also served as the palace secretary, and was promoted to the tutor, the secretary, and went to Beijing to serve as the internal history of Ancheng.

古文：太清中，侯景陷京城，江州刺史当阳公大心举州附贼，贼转寇南中，褒犹据郡拒守。
现代文：太清年间，侯景攻陷京城，江州刺史当阳公萧大心率领整个江州依附逆贼，逆贼转而进犯南中，王褒依然坚守安成与逆贼对抗。
English: During the period of the Qing Dynasty, Houjing attacked and captured the capital city, Yang Gong Xiao Daxin led the whole of Jiangzhou to attach the traitors, the traitors turned to attack the South Middle School, and Wang Bo still adhered to Ancheng and opposed the traitors.

古文：大宝二年，世祖命征褒赴江陵，既至，以为忠武将军、南平内史，俄迁吏部尚书、侍中。
现代文：大实二年，世祖下令征调王褒赶赴江陵，王褒到江陵后，世祖任命他为忠武将军、南平内史，不久升任吏部尚书、侍中。
English: In the 2nd year of Daxi, the ancestor ordered the recruitment and transfer of Wang Bo to Jiangling. After Wang Bo arrived in Jiangling, the ancestor appointed him as a loyal general and a historian of Nanping, and soon he was promoted to the post of secretary and chamberlain.

古文：承圣二年，迁尚书右仆射，仍参掌选事，又加侍中。
现代文：承圣二年，王褒升任尚书右仆射，接着参与掌管铨选职官之事，又加侍中。
English: In the second year after his consecration, Wang Bo was promoted to the position of Shangshu's right-hand man, and then took part in the selection of officials, and was also made an attendant.

古文：其年，迁左仆射，参掌如故。
现代文：当年，又升任左仆射，和先前一样参与掌管铨选职官之事。
English: In the same year, he was promoted to Zuoxi, and participated in the management of the selection of officials as before.

古文：三年，江陵陷，入于周。
现代文：承圣三年，江陵被攻陷，他归顺周朝。
English: In the third year of his consecration, Jiangling was invaded and he surrendered to the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：褒著《幼训》，以诫诸子。
现代文：王褒着有《幼训》，用来告诫儿子们。
English: Wang Hongzhu wrote "Childhood Training" to admonish his sons.

古文：其一章云：
现代文：其中一章说：
English: One of the chapters says:

古文：陶士衡曰： 昔大禹不吝尺璧而重寸阴。 
现代文：陶士衡说： 过去大禹不看重直径盈尺的玉璧，却爱惜一寸光阴。 
English: Tao Shiheng said: In the past, Dayu did not value the diameter of the jade, but cherished one inch of time.

古文：文士何不诵书，武士何不马射？
现代文：文人为什么不诵读诗书，武士为什么不骑马射箭。
English: Why don't literati recite poetry, and why don't warriors ride horses and shoot arrows?

古文：若乃玄冬修夜，硃明永日，肃其居处，崇其墙仞，门无糅杂，坐阙号呶。
现代文：如果在那寒冬的长夜，盛夏的永昼，让自己的居室安安静静，把院墙筑得高高的，家中没有杂七杂八的人来往，自己坐在屋裹高声诵读。
English: If, on that long, cold winter's night, in the middle of the summer's eternal day, you let your room be quiet, built the courtyard wall high, and there were no random people coming and going in your home, you would sit in your room and read aloud.

古文：以之求学，则仲尼之门人也；以之为文，则贾生之升堂也。
现代文：用这种精神来求学，那就要成为仲尼的门徒了，用这种态度去写文章，那就要成为贾谊的升堂弟子了。
English: To study with this spirit is to become a disciple of Zhong Ni, and to write articles with this attitude is to become a disciple of Jia Yi.

古文：古者盘盂有铭，几杖有诫，进退循焉，俯仰观焉。
现代文：古时候盘盂上刻有铭文。几案和手杖上写着警言，进退俯仰都看着它，遵循它。
English: In ancient times, there was an inscription engraved on the table, and a warning was written on several cases and canes. Everyone looked at it and followed it.

古文：文王之诗曰： 靡不有初，鲜克有终。 
现代文：《诗经文王》篇说： 没有人没有个好的开始，但很少有人能坚持到底。 
English: "The King of Poems" says: No one has a bad start, but few people can stick it out.

古文：立身行道，终始若一。 造次必于是 ，君子之言欤？
现代文：一个人立身行道，要始终如一。 仓猝间也不能违背仁 ，这确实是君子说的话啊!
English: A person standing on the sidewalk should always be consistent. You can't violate benevolence in a hurry, which is really what the gentleman said!

古文：儒家则尊卑等差，吉凶降杀。
现代文：儒家本来就讲求尊卑高下的等级，吉礼凶礼的差别变化。
English: Confucianism was originally about respect for the inferior and the superior, and the difference between auspicious and inauspicious changes.

古文：君南面而臣北面，天地之义也；鼎俎奇而笾豆偶，阴阳之义也。
现代文：国君面朝南而臣子面朝北，这是天经地义的准则。祭祀时鼎俎用奇数而篷豆用偶数，这是阴阳配合的道理。
English: The sovereign faces south and the vassal faces north, which is a natural principle. At the time of sacrifice, the odd number of gongs is used and the even number of beans is used, which is the reason for the combination of yin and yang.

古文：道家则堕支体，黜聪明，弃义绝仁，离形去智。
现代文：道家则不重形体，废弃聪明机巧，摒弃仁义，离弃形体，舍弃智慧。
English: Taoists, on the other hand, do not weigh the body, discard cleverness, abandon benevolence, abandon the body, and abandon wisdom.

古文：释氏之义，见苦断习，证灭循道，明因辨果，偶凡成圣，斯虽为教等差，而义归汲引。
现代文：佛教的教义，实践苦行，斩断俗念，参悟生死之理，遵循佛祖教义，明辨因果报应，身处俗世却能成为圣人。即使各教宗旨有这样的差别，而最终目的都归结于开导众生。
English: The teachings of Buddhism, the practice of asceticism, the cutting off of worldly ideas, the attainment of enlightenment from the law of life and death, following the Buddha's teachings, distinguishing between cause and effect, and being able to become a saint in the secular world. Even if there is such a difference in the purposes of each religion, the ultimate goal is to enlighten all beings.

古文：吾始乎幼学，及于知命，既崇周、孔之教，兼循老、释之谈，江左以来，斯业不坠，汝能修之，吾之志也。
现代文：我从初入学开始，到知命之年，既崇尚儒家的学说，同时又信奉道家之说和佛教教义，自从晋迁江左以来，儒、道、佛三家的学说都没有湮灭，如果你们能继续修习，这是我的心愿。
English: From my first day of school until the year of my death, I have not only advocated the teachings of Confucianism, but also believed in the teachings of Taoism and Buddhism. Since I was transferred to Jiangzu, the teachings of the three schools of Confucianism, Taoism and Buddhism have not been extinguished. If you can continue to practice, this is my wish.

古文：初，有沛国刘、南阳宗懔与褒俱为中兴佐命，同参帷幄。
现代文：当初，沛国刘彀、南阳宗懔和王褒都是朝廷中兴的辅佐大臣，一同参与谋划决策。
English: At the beginning, Pei Guo Liu Ye, Nanyang Zongye and Wang Bao were all assistant ministers of ZTE in the imperial court, and they participated in the planning and decision-making together.

古文：刘，字仲宝，晋丹阳尹真长七世孙也。
现代文：刘彀字仲实，是晋丹阳尹刘真长的第七代子孙。
English: Liu Xizhong Zhongshi is the seventh generation descendant of Jin Danyang Yin Liu Zhenlong.

古文：少方正有器局。
现代文：他年轻时便品行端正，有才识有器量。
English: When he was young, he was well-behaved, talented and resourceful.

古文：自国子礼生射策高第，为宁海令，稍迁湘东王记室参军，又转中记室。
现代文：他以国子监礼生的身份参加射策应对，成绩优秀，被任命为宁海令，逐渐升迁为湘东王记室参军，又转任中记室。
English: He participated in the shooting strategy response as a student of the provincial son inspector, with excellent results. He was appointed as the Ninghai commander, gradually promoted to join the army as the Shandong Wang Ji office, and then transferred to the Zhong Ji office.

古文：太清中，侯景乱，世祖承制上流，书檄多委焉，亦竭力尽忠，甚蒙赏遇。
现代文：左撞年间，鳄叛乱，世担秉承皇帝旨意在江之上游斟酌情势自行处理事情，各类文书大多交给刘彀起草，刘彀也竭力尽忠，很得世祖的赏识和厚遇。
English: During the years of the left collision, the crocodile rebellion, the world, adhering to the emperor's will, went upstream of the river to deal with things at their own discretion. Most of the various types of documents were handed over to Liu Yao to draft. Liu Yao also tried his best to be loyal, and was very appreciated and well received by the ancestor.

古文：历尚书左丞、御史中丞。
现代文：他历任尚书左丞、御史中丞。
English: He successively held the posts of Shoshu-zojo and Goshi-chujo.

古文：承圣二年，迁吏部尚书、国子祭酒，余如故。
现代文：丞圣二年，刘彀迁任吏部尚书、国子祭酒，其余官职和原先一样。
English: In the second year of the Joseon Dynasty, Liu Bei was transferred to the position of the official in charge of Shangshu and Guozihai liquor, and the rest of the official positions remained the same as before.

古文：宗懔，字元懔。
现代文：宗懔字元懔。
English: The word "son" (宗) becomes "gen" (元).

古文：八世祖承，晋宜都郡守，属永嘉东徙，子孙因居江陵焉。
现代文：他的第八代祖先宗承，晋时任宜都郡守，恰逢永嘉之乱，朝廷东迁，因此后代子孙便住在江陵。
English: His eighth-generation ancestor Zongcheng was appointed governor of Yidu County at the time of the Jin Dynasty, which coincided with the Yongjia Rebellion, when the imperial court moved east. As a result, his descendants lived in Gangneung.

古文：懔少聪敏好学，昼夜不倦，乡里号为 童子学士 。
现代文：宗懔年少时聪明好学，昼夜读书不知疲倦，家乡人称他为 童子学士 。
English: When he was young, Zong Yao was bright and eager to learn. He studied tirelessly day and night. People in his hometown called him the "Boy Scholar."

古文：普通中，为湘东王府兼记室，转刑狱，仍掌书记。
现代文：普通年间，他任湘束王府兼记室，转任刑狱，依旧掌管书记。
English: During the ordinary years, he served as the Hunan Provincial Governor's Office and the Records Office, and was transferred to the Penitentiary, still in charge of the secretary.

古文：历临汝、建成、广晋等令，后又为世祖荆州别驾。
现代文：宗懔历任临汝、建成、广晋等地的县令，后来又任世祖荆州别驾。
English: Zonglu successively served as the county magistrate of Linyu, Jiancheng, Guangjin and other places, and later served as the founder of Jingzhou Beidou.

古文：及世祖即位，以为尚书郎，封信安县侯，邑一千户。
现代文：世祖即位之后，又任命他为尚书郎，封他为信安县侯，食邑一千户。
English: After the Emperor ascended to the throne, he also appointed him as Shang Shuro, and made him the lord of Shinyan County, with a thousand households.

古文：累迁吏部郎中、五兵尚书、吏部尚书。
现代文：宗懔屡经升迁至吏部郎中、五兵尚书、吏部尚书。
English: Sosho was repeatedly promoted to the position of junior secretary of the personnel department, secretary of the five soldiers, and secretary of the personnel department.

古文：承圣三年，江陵没，与俱入于周。
现代文：承圣三年，江陵被攻陷，他与刘瑴都归属于周。
English: In the third year after the enthronement, Jiangling was conquered, and both he and Liu Bei belonged to Zhou.

古文：王承，字安期，仆射暕子。
现代文：王承字安期，是仆射剑暕的儿子。
English: Wang Chengzhaanzhi, is the son of a servant of the Sword Thrower.

古文：七岁通《周易》，选补国子生。
现代文：他七岁就通晓《周易》，被选补为国子生。
English: At the age of seven, he was familiar with "Zhou Yi" and was selected as a national student.

古文：年十五，射策高第，除秘书郎。
现代文：十五岁时参加射策应对，成绩优秀，被授为秘书郎。
English: At the age of fifteen, he took part in a shooting strategy competition, with excellent results, and was awarded the title of secretary.

古文：历太子舍人、南康王文学、邵陵王友、太子中舍人。
现代文：历任太子舍人、南康王文学、邵陵王友、太子中舍人。
English: Successive princes have been herders, including King Nankang of literature, King Shao Ling of literature, and Prince Zhong of literature.

古文：以父忧去职。
现代文：因居父丧而离职。
English: He left the post due to the death of his father.

古文：服阕，复为中舍人，累迁中书黄门侍郎，兼国子博士。
现代文：服丧期满之后，又任中舍人，屡经升迁为中书黄门侍郎，兼国子博士。
English: After the expiration of the mourning period, he was also appointed as a member of the middle school, and was repeatedly promoted to the attendant of the Yellow Gate of Chinese Literature, and also to the doctor of Kuniko.

古文：时膏腴贵游，咸以文学相尚，罕以经术为业，惟承独好之，发言吐论，造次儒者。
现代文：当时高官贵人富贵子弟都以文章才气相互标榜，很少有人专攻经术，衹有王承爱好经术，发表言论，处处体现他是个善辩的儒生。
English: At that time, the sons and daughters of high-ranking dignitaries and the rich flaunted their writing talent to each other. Few people specialized in the study of scripture. Wang Cheng, who was fond of the study of scripture, made speeches, which showed that he was a well-spoken Confucian.

古文：在学训诸生，述《礼》、《易》义。
现代文：他在学校训导学生，讲述《礼》、《易》的经义。
English: He teaches students at school and tells them about the meaning of "Li" and "Yi."

古文：中大通五年，迁长兼侍中，俄转国子祭酒。
现代文：中大通五年，王承迁任长兼侍中，不久转任国子祭酒。
English: In the fifth year of junior high school, Wang Chengqian was appointed headmaster and chamberlain, and was soon transferred to the Kuniko Festival.

古文：承祖俭及父暕尝为此职，三世为国师，前代未之有也，当世以为荣。
现代文：王承的祖父王俭和父亲王暸都曾担任遇遣一职务，祖孙三代人都任国子祭酒，前代没有遇这样的事，当代人都认为这是很大的荣耀。
English: Wang Cheng's grandfather, Wang Jian, and his father, Wang Xuan, both served in the same position, and all three generations of ancestors and grandchildren have served as the national son's sacrificial wine. The previous generation did not encounter such a thing, and the current generation believes that this is a great honor.

古文：久之，出为戎昭将军、东阳太守。
现代文：遇了很久，王承又出京任戎昭将军、束阳太守。
English: After a long time, Wang Cheng also went to Beijing to serve as the general of the army and the governor of Sokyang.

古文：为政宽惠，吏民悦之。
现代文：王承管理政事宽厚仁惠，官吏和百姓都爱戴他。
English: Wang Cheng managed the affairs of state with generosity and benevolence. Both officials and common people loved him.

古文：视事未期，卒于郡，时年四十一。
现代文：王承任职未满一年，便在束阳郡去世，死时四十一岁。
English: Wang Cheng served less than a year and died in Sokyang County at the age of forty-one.

古文：谥曰章子。
现代文：朝廷赠谧号为章子。
English: The imperial court bestowed the posthumous title of "Choshi" on him.

古文：承性简贵有风格。
现代文：王承生性轻视权贵有骨气。
English: Wang Chengsheng has the spirit to despise authority.

古文：时右卫硃异当朝用事，每休下，车马常填门。
现代文：当时右卫将军朱异在朝中掌权，每当朱异休假回家，常常车马盈门，前来拜访的人往来不绝。
English: At that time, Zhu Yixing, the right guard general, was in power in the DPRK and China. Whenever Zhu Yixing went home on leave, there were often many cars and horses at the door, and people came to visit.

古文：时有魏郡申英好危言高论，以忤权右，常指异门曰： 此中辐辏，皆以利往。能不至者，惟有大小王东阳。 
现代文：当时魏郡申英喜欢直言议论，指责权贵，他常常指着朱异的大门说： 逭裹面来来往往的人，都是为利而来，能不到逭襄来的人，祇有大小王束阳。 
English: At that time, Wei County's Shen Ying liked to speak frankly and criticize the powerful. He often pointed to Zhu Yiyi's gate and said: "Those who come and go from Zhu Yiyi are all for profit. Those who can't come from Zhu Yiyi are only big and small Wang Zokuyang."

古文：小东阳，即承弟稚也。
现代文：小束阳，就是王承的弟弟王稚。
English: Xiao Zuyang is Wang Cheng's younger brother Wang Wuchang.

古文：当时惟承兄弟及褚翔不至异门，时以此称之。
现代文：当时衹有王承两兄弟和褚翔不到朱异府中去，当时人们也因此赞扬他们。
English: At that time, there were two brothers, Wang Cheng and Xiang Xiang, who did not go to Zhu Yifu. At that time, people also praised them for this.

古文：褚翔，字世举，河南阳翟人。
现代文：褚翔字世举，河南阳翟人。
English: The word "soar" is world-renowned, and the people of Yangshuo, Henan Province, are famous for it.

古文：曾祖渊，齐太宰文简公，佐命齐室。
现代文：他的曾祖父褚渊，齐时任太宰，赠谧文简公，辅佐齐室。
English: His great-grandfather, Zou Yuan, was Dazai of Qi at the time, bestowed the title of Zou Wen Jian Gong, and assisted Qi's wife.

古文：祖蓁，太常穆子。
现代文：祖父褚蓁，追赠为太常，赠谧穆子。
English: Grandfather Zou, posthumously awarded the title of "Grandfather Zou," gave away a pea.

古文：父向，字景政。
现代文：父亲褚向，字景政。
English: His father, Min Xiang, was called Jing Zheng.

古文：年数岁，父母相继亡没，向哀毁若成人者，亲表咸异之。
现代文：褚向才几岁时，父母相继去世，他哀痛欲绝，形容消瘦如同成人一般，亲戚都感到十分惊异。
English: When Hao Xiang was just a few years old, his parents died one after another. He was distraught and described himself as being as thin as an adult. His relatives were very surprised.

古文：既长，淹雅有器量。
现代文：长大之后，褚向学识渊博性情高雅，有器量。
English: After growing up, Zou Xiang was well-educated, well-spoken, elegant and resourceful.

古文：高祖践阼，选补国子生。
现代文：高祖即位后，褚向被补选为国子生。
English: After Emperor Gao Zu ascended the throne, Xiang Xiang was elected as the son of the country.

古文：起家秘书郎，迁太子舍人、尚书殿中郎。
现代文：褚向被从家中征召出来任秘书郎，后迁任太子舍人，尚书殿中郎。
English: Hao Xiang was recruited from his home to serve as secretary, and later moved to serve as the prince's concubine, Shang Shudong Zhongro.

古文：出为安成内史。还除太子洗马、中舍人，累迁太尉从事中郎、黄门侍郎、镇右豫章王长史。
现代文：他出京任安成内史，回京又任太子洗马，中舍人，屡经升迁为太尉从事中郎，黄门侍郎，镇右豫章王长史。
English: He went to Beijing as Ancheng Naishi, and returned to Beijing as Prince Zama, Zhong Sheren, and was repeatedly promoted to lieutenant to engage in churo, Huangmen waiter, and Zhenyu Yuzhang Wang Changshi.

古文：顷之，入为长兼侍中。
现代文：不久，又入京任长兼侍中。
English: Soon after, he was appointed to the post of mayor and chamberlain of the capital.

古文：向风仪端丽，眉目如点，每公庭就列，为众所瞻望焉。
现代文：褚向长得端正英俊有风度，眉清目秀，眼珠如漆，黑而闪亮，站在同僚之中，他都要被众人瞻望。
English: Gao Xiang is neat, handsome and personable. His eyebrows are clear and bright, and his eyes are lacquered, black and shiny. Standing among his colleagues, he is a sight to behold.

古文：大通四年，出为宁远将军北中郎庐陵王长史。三年，卒官。
现代文：太通四年，訑出京任宁远将军北中郎庐医王长史，三年后在任上去世。
English: In the fourth year of Taitong's reign, he was sent to Beijing to be appointed as the general of Ningyuan, the vice-governor of the north and the physician of Wang Changshi. He died in office three years later.

古文：外兄谢举为制墓铭，其略曰： 弘治推华，子嵩惭量；酒归月下，风清琴上。 
现代文：表兄谢皋替他作墓志铭，概括褚向的为人说： 杜弘治都要崇尚他的姿容，庾子嵩也要自惭器量不如。他的品行高洁，有如清风明月。 
English: His cousin Xie Yao wrote an epitaph for him, summing up the man who was the best: Du Hongzhi should admire his appearance, and Zang Zi Song should be ashamed of himself. His conduct was noble, like the clear wind and the bright moon.

古文：论者以为拟得其人。
现代文：评论者认为写出了褚向的为人。
English: The reviewer thought that the author had written about a person who was heading in the right direction.

古文：翔初为国子生，举高第。
现代文：褚翔起初为国子生，成绩优秀。
English: At first, Sohei was a Kuniko student with excellent grades.

古文：丁父忧。服阕，除秘书郎，累迁太子舍人、宣城王主簿。
现代文：他为父亲服丧，期满后任秘书郎，累经升迁为太子舍人，宣城王主簿。
English: He was in mourning for his father, and after his term expired, he became the secretary's assistant, and after promotion, he became the prince's assistant, and became the main book of the king of Xuancheng.

古文：中大通五年，高祖宴群臣乐游苑，别诏翔与王训为二十韵诗，限三刻成。
现代文：中大通五年，高祖在乐游苑设宴招待群臣，特地下诏命褚翔舆王训作二十韵之诗，限定三刻完成。
English: In the fifth year of the middle and high school, Gao Zu held a banquet in the Le Youyuan to invite a group of ministers, and specially ordered the Emperor to write a poem of twenty rhymes, limited to three minutes.

古文：翔于坐立奏，高祖异焉，即日转宣城王文学，俄迁为友。
现代文：褚翔即席完成，进呈高祖，高祖十分惊异，当日便命褚翔转任宣城王文学，不久又迁任宣城王友。
English: Gaozu was very surprised, and on the same day he ordered Gao Xiang to be transferred to the position of the King of Literature of Xuancheng, and soon he was transferred to the position of the King of Friends of Xuancheng.

古文：时宣城友、文学加它王二等，故以翔超为之，时论美焉。
现代文：当时任宣城王友和宣城王文学比其他王的属官高出二等，所以高祖越级提拔褚翔担任这一职务，在当时传为美谈。
English: At that time, the posts of Xuancheng Wangyou and Xuancheng Wang Literature were two grades higher than the other subordinate officers of the king, so Gao Zu promoted Gao Xiang to this post. At that time, it was a fairy tale.

古文：出为义兴太守。翔在政洁已，省繁苛，去浮费，百姓安之。
现代文：褚翔出京任义兴太守，他为政清廉，洁身自好，减省繁杂苛刻的政令，除去浮华靡费的用度，老百姓的生活很安宁。
English: Soaring out of Beijing, he appointed Yixing as the de facto ruler. He was politically incorruptible, clean and self-respecting. He reduced the number of complicated and harsh decrees, eliminated the use of extravagant expenses, and the people's lives were very peaceful.

古文：郡之西亭有古树，积年枯死；翔至郡，忽更生枝叶，百姓咸以为善政所感。
现代文：义兴的西亭有棵古树，已经枯死多年，褚翔到义兴后，逭树忽然生出新枝新叶，百姓都认为是被他的善政所感动。
English: There is an ancient tree in the West Pavilion of Yixing, which has been dead for many years. After flying to Yixing, the eucalyptus tree suddenly sprouted new branches and leaves. The people all thought that they were moved by his good governance.

古文：及秩满，吏民诣阙请之，敕许焉。
现代文：到他任期一满，官吏及百姓去京城请求让他连任，皇上下令同意。
English: When his term of office came to an end, officials and citizens went to the capital to request that he be reappointed, and the emperor agreed.

古文：寻征为吏部郎，去郡，百姓无老少追送出境，涕泣拜辞。
现代文：不久，朝廷又征召褚翔为吏部郎，褚翔离郡之时，百姓无论老少都追随着送他出境，人们哭泣着与他拜别。
English: Soon after, the imperial court recruited Sohei to be a bureaucrat. When Sohei left the county, the people, both young and old, followed him to send him out of the country. People cried and said goodbye to him.

古文：翔居小选公清，不为请属易意，号为平允。
现代文：褚翔担任吏部郎的时候，公正清廉，不因为别人的请求嘱托而改变自己的主张，人们称赞他公正平允。
English: When Gao Xiang served as the secretary, he was fair and incorruptible, and did not change his opinion because of others' requests and instructions. People praised him for his fairness and equanimity.

古文：俄迁侍中，顷之转散骑常侍，领羽林监，侍东宫。
现代文：不久，他迁任侍中，很快又转任散骑常侍，领羽林监，侍奉东宫。
English: Soon, he was transferred to the position of chamberlain, and soon he was transferred to the position of equestrian equerry, chief ranger, and attendant of the East Palace.

古文：出为晋陵太守，在郡未期，以公事免。
现代文：后来，他出京任晋陵太守，在任未满一年，因公事免职。
English: Later, he went to Beijing to serve as the governor of the Jin Mausoleum, but was dismissed for official business after less than a year in office.

古文：俄复为散骑常侍，侍东宫。
现代文：不久又任散骑常侍，侍奉束宫。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as a knight errant, serving the Shogun.

古文：太清二年，迁守吏部尚书。
现代文：太清二年，他迁任守吏部尚书。
English: In the second year of the Taiqing Dynasty, he was transferred to the Shuri Department of Shangshu.

古文：其年冬，侯景围宫城，翔于围内丁母忧，以毁卒，时年四十四。
现代文：那年冬天，侯景围困宫城，褚翔在围城内为母亲服丧，因伤心过度而去世，死时四十四岁。
English: That winter, Houjing besieged Miyagi. Soaring in the besieged city to mourn for his mother, he died of excessive grief, at the age of forty-four.

古文：诏赠本官。
现代文：皇上下韶追赠他为吏部尚书。
English: The imperial edict posthumously awarded him his original post.

古文：翔少有孝性。
现代文：褚翔年少时就有孝心。
English: When Sohei was young, he had a sense of filial duty.

古文：为侍中时，母疾笃，请沙门祈福。中夜忽见户外有异光，又闻空中弹指，及晓，疾遂愈。
现代文：他任侍中的时候，母亲病得很厉害，他请僧徒为母亲求福，半夜突然看见门外有奇异的光彩，又听见空中有弹指之声，等到天亮，母亲的病就好了。
English: When he was an attendant, his mother was very ill. He asked the monks to pray for his mother. In the middle of the night, he suddenly saw a strange splendor outside the door, and heard the sound of a finger in the air. By dawn, his mother's illness was cured.

古文：咸以翔精诚所致焉。
现代文：人们都认为这是褚翔的精诚所致。
English: People all think that this is the result of Soaring's sincerity.

古文：萧介，字茂镜，兰陵人也。
现代文：萧介字茂镜，兰陵人。
English: Xiao Jie, Maojing, Lanling people.

古文：祖思话，宋开府仪同三司、尚书仆射。
现代文：他的祖父萧思话，宋时任开府仪同三司、尚书仆射。
English: His grandfather, Xiao Siwei, was the Song Dynasty's third-ranking official in charge of ceremonies and ceremonies, as well as the third-ranking official in charge of calligraphy.

古文：父惠茜，齐左民尚书。
现代文：他的父亲萧惠葡，齐时任左民尚书。
English: His father, Xiao Huiguo, was a member of the Communist Party of China at the time.

古文：介少颖悟，有器识，博涉经史，兼善属文。
现代文：萧介从小聪明，有悟性，有见识，他广泛地涉猎经书史书，还擅长写文章。
English: Xiao Jie has been clever, insightful and knowledgeable since childhood. He has extensively dabbled in books of scripture and history, and is also good at writing articles.

古文：齐永元末，释褐著作佐郎。
现代文：齐永元末年，他初出仕任著作佐郎。
English: At the end of the first year of the Qin Dynasty, he first appeared in the role of Shosho Saro.

古文：天监六年，除太子舍人。
现代文：天监六年，被任为太子舍人。
English: After six years as overseer of heaven, he was appointed crown prince.

古文：八年，迁尚书金部郎。
现代文：天监八年，迁任尚书金部郎。
English: Eight years later, he was transferred to the post of Shosho Kaneburo.

古文：十二年，转主客郎。出为吴令，甚著声绩。
现代文：天监十二年，他转任主客郎，又出京任吴令，政绩卓著声望很高。
English: In the twelfth year of Tianjing, he was transferred to the post of host guest, and he also went to Beijing as Wu Ling. His political achievements were outstanding and his reputation was very high.

古文：湘东王闻介名，思共游处，表请之。
现代文：湘东王听到了萧介的名声，想与他交游，于是上表向皇上请求让萧介作自己的属官。
English: The king of eastern Hunan heard of Shousuke's reputation and wanted to befriend him, so the upper table asked the emperor to make Shousuke his subordinate officer.

古文：普通三年，乃以介为湘东王谘议参军。
现代文：普通三年，朝廷任命萧介为湘东王谘议参军。
English: Three years later, the imperial court appointed Xiao Jie as the king of eastern Hunan to consult on joining the army.

古文：大通二年，除给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：大通二年，萧介被任命为给事黄门侍郎。
English: In the second year of Datong, Xiaosuke was appointed to be the attendant of the Yellow Gate.

古文：大同二年，武陵王为扬州刺史，以介为府长史，在职清白，为朝廷所称。
现代文：大同二年，武陵王出任扬州刺史，又任命萧介为府长史。萧介任职期间廉洁清白，被朝廷赞扬。
English: In the second year of the same year, King Wuling served as Yangzhou governor and appointed Xiao Jie as prefectural governor. Xiao Jie was clean and honest during his tenure and was praised by the imperial court.

古文：高祖谓何敬容曰： 萧介甚贫，可处以一郡。 
现代文：高祖对何敬容说： 萧介十分清贫，可以拿一个郡给他治理。 
English: Gaozu said to He Jingrong: Xiao Jie is very poor, you can give him a county to govern.

古文：敬容未对，高祖曰： 始兴郡顷无良守，岭上民颇不安，可以介为之。 
现代文：何敬容还没有回答，高祖又说： 始兴郡近来没有好太守，岭上百姓很不安定，可以让萧介去做太守。 
English: He Jingrong has not yet answered, Gao Zu also said: Shixing County has not had a good governor recently, and the people on the ridge are very unstable, so Xiao Jie can be the governor.

古文：由是出为始兴太守。
现代文：因此萧介出京任始兴太守。
English: As a result, Shōsuke left Kyoto to become the first Shōken daimyō.

古文：介至任，宣布威德，境内肃清。
现代文：萧介上任后，公开处理违犯法纪的案件，又广布德政，很快便境内清平。
English: After taking office, Xiao Jie openly dealt with cases of violations of laws and regulations, and promoted good governance, and soon the territory was cleared.

古文：七年，征为少府卿，寻加散骑常侍。
现代文：大同七年，萧介被征召为少府卿，不久又加散骑常侍。
English: In the seventh year of Datong, Xiao Jie was conscripted as Shao Fuqing, and soon after, he was promoted to the rank of Sanzhiyi Changzhi.

古文：会侍中阙，选司举王筠等四人，并不称旨，高祖曰： 我门中久无此职，宜用萧介为之。 
现代文：恰巧侍中空缺，吏部推举王筠等四人，但都不合皇上的心意，高祖说： 宫中此职很久无人担任，应该让萧介来担任。 
English: Coincidentally, there was a vacancy in the Chamberlain's Office, and four people, including Wang Qianlong, were nominated by the Cadre Department, but they did not meet the Emperor's wishes. Gao Zu said: This post has not been held by anyone in the palace for a long time, and Xiao Jie should be allowed to hold it.

古文：介博物强识，应对左右，多所匡正，高祖甚重之。
现代文：萧介学识渊博，记忆力超群，在皇上身边应对时，常常有所匡正，高祖很器重他。
English: Xiao Jie was very knowledgeable and had an excellent memory. When he was around the emperor, he would often correct him. Gaozu held him in high regard.

古文：迁都官尚书，每军国大事，必先询访于介焉。
现代文：后来萧介迁任都官尚书，每逢有国家大事，高祖必定先向他征求意见。
English: Later, Xiao Jie was transferred to the post of the capital official, Shang Shu. Whenever there was a national event, Gaozu would certainly ask him for advice first.

古文：高祖谓硃异曰： 端右之材也。 
现代文：高祖对朱异说： 此人是宰相之材。 
English: Gaozu said to Zhu Yi: This man is prime ministerial material.

古文：中大同二年，辞疾致事，高祖优诏不许。终不肯起，乃遣谒者仆射魏祥就拜光禄大夫。
现代文：中大同二年，萧介因病辞职，请求退休，高祖下诏褒美嘉奖他，但不答应他退休，萧介始终不肯赴任，于是高祖派谒者仆射魏祥前去萧介家任命他为光禄大夫。
English: In the second year of the middle and high school, Xiao Jie resigned due to illness and requested to retire. Gao Zu issued an edict to reward and commend him, but did not allow him to retire. Xiao Jie always refused to take office, so Gao Zu sent his servant Wei Xiang to Xiao Jie's house to appoint him as a doctor of Guanglu.

古文：太清中，侯景于涡阳败走，入寿阳。
现代文：太清年间，侯景从涡阳败逃，逃到寿阳，高祖下令让防主韦黯接纳他。
English: During the Qing Dynasty, Hou Jing fled to Shouyang after he was defeated by Wuyang. Gao Zu ordered Wei Ying, the defender, to receive him.

古文：高祖敕防主韦默纳之，介闻而上表谏曰：臣抱患私门，窃闻侯景以涡阳败绩，只马归命，陛下不悔前祸，复敕容纳。
现代文：萧介听说此事便上表进谏说：我在家中养病，听说侯景在涡阳兵败，只身归顺，陛下不因他先前造成的祸乱而追悔，反而又下令接纳他。
English: When Xiao Jie heard about this, he went to the emperor and said, "I am recovering from illness at home. I heard that Hou Jing was defeated in the Battle of the Yangtze River and surrendered. Your Majesty did not repent for the calamity he had previously caused, but instead ordered to accept him.

古文：臣闻凶人之性不移，天下之恶一也。
现代文：我听说凶恶的人天性不会改变，天下的恶人都是一样的。
English: I've heard it said that the nature of the wicked never changes, that the wicked are always the same.

古文：昔吕布杀丁原以事董卓，终诛董而为贼；刘牢反王恭以归晋，还背晋以构妖。
现代文：过去吕布杀死丁原投奔董卓，最终又杀了董卓而成为逆贼；刘牢背叛王恭归顺晋朝，回过头来又背叛晋朝酿成祸害。
English: In the past, Lü Bu killed Ding Yuan for defecting to Dong Zhuo, and finally killed Dong Zhuo to become a traitor; Liu Du betrayed Wang Gong to the Shun Jin Dynasty, and then betrayed the Jin Dynasty to create a disaster.

古文：何者？
现代文：这是什么原因呢?
English: Why is that?

古文：狼子野心，终无驯狎之性；养虎之喻，必见饥噬之祸。
现代文：狼子野心，始终不会驯服亲近；养虎贻患的比喻，就是说养虎的人一定会有被饿虎吃掉的祸患。
English: The ambition of a wolf cub will never be tamed by closeness; the metaphor of raising a tiger cub means that the person who raises a tiger will definitely be eaten by a hungry tiger.

古文：侯景兽心之种，鸣镝之类。
现代文：侯景有禽兽之心，就像是杀人的响箭。
English: Houjing has the heart of a beast, just like a murderous arrow.

古文：以凶狡之才，荷高欢翼长之遇，位忝台司，任居方伯；然而高欢坟土未干，即还反噬。
现代文：他凭藉凶狠狡猾之才，博得高欢庇护重用的厚遇，窃取了三公之位，担任了独霸一方的地方长官，然而高欢坟土未干，他就立即回头反叛。
English: By virtue of his ferocious cunning, he won the favor of Gao Huan's protection and use, stole the position of the three princes, and served as the local governor of the dominant side. However, Gao Huan's grave was not dry, and he immediately turned back and rebelled.

古文：逆力不逮，乃复逃死关西；宇文不容，故复投身于我。
现代文：反叛的力量不足，于是又往关西逃命，宇文不接纳他，所以又投靠我们。
English: The strength of the rebellion was insufficient, so he fled to Kansai to save his life. Uwen did not accept him, so he turned to us.

古文：陛下前者所以不逆细流，正欲以属国降胡以讨匈奴，冀获一战之效耳。
现代文：陛下先前像江河不拒细流那样接纳他，其原因就是想要把国家大事托付给他，让他降服胡人，讨伐匈奴，希望获得作战的胜利罢了。
English: The reason why His Majesty had previously accepted him like a river does not resist a trickle is that he wanted to entrust him with national affairs, let him surrender to the Hu people, fight the Xiongnu, and hope to win the battle.

古文：今既亡师失地，直是境上之匹夫。陛下爱匹夫而弃与国之好，臣窃不取也。
现代文：现在他丢失了军队，失去了土地，衹不过是边境上的一介匹夫，陛下您怜爱匹夫而抛弃舆同盟国家的友好交往，我认为这是不应采取的做法。
English: Now he has lost his army, he has lost his land, he is nothing more than a peasant on the frontier. Your Majesty, you pity the peasant and abandon the friendly relations of the allied countries. I think this is not the way to proceed.

古文：若国家犹待其更鸣之晨，岁暮之效，臣窃惟侯景必非岁暮之臣。
现代文：皇上还想期待侯景再次振作，晚年为朝廷作出贡献，我认为侯景一定不是能为国献力的老臣。
English: The emperor also wanted to expect Hou Jing to cheer up again and contribute to the imperial court in his later years. I think that Hou Jing is definitely not an old minister who can contribute to the country.

古文：弃乡国如脱屣，背君亲如遗芥，岂知远慕圣德，为江淮之纯臣！
现代文：他抛弃故国如同脱鞋，毫不顾惜，背叛国君就像扔掉草芥，毫无感情。他哪裹知道仰慕圣德，做江淮的忠臣呢?
English: He abandons his motherland as if he were taking off his shoes, without any consideration, and betrays the sovereign as if he were throwing away a mustard seed, without any emotion. How does he know how to admire holiness and be a loyal vassal of Jianghuai?

古文：事迹显然，无可致惑。
现代文：造事的迹象明显，没有什么可疑惑的。
English: There are clear signs of foul play, there is nothing to doubt.

古文：一隅尚其如此，触类何可具陈？
现代文：在逭一方面尚且如此，其他相类似的事情又哪襄需要一一陈述呢。
English: On the one hand, this is still the case, but other similar things need to be stated.

古文：臣朽老疾侵，不应辄干朝政。但楚囊将死，有城郢之忠；卫鱼临亡，亦有尸谏之节。
现代文：我已老朽，又被疾病侵扰，本不应擅自干预朝政，但是楚国子囊临死，有不忘修筑郢城的忠心，卫国史鱼临死，也有以尸谏君的气节。
English: I am old and infested with disease, and I should not have interfered in the affairs of the imperial court without authorization. However, Chu Guozibac was dying, he had the loyalty not to forget to build Shicheng, the patriotic historian Yu was dying, and he also had the temperament to use the corpse of his dead father.

古文：臣忝为宗室遗老，敢忘刘向之心？
现代文：我愧为宗室老臣，不敢忘记应有型向的忠心。
English: I am ashamed to be a senior vassal of the family, I dare not forget the loyalty that should be typical.

古文：伏愿天慈，少思危苦之语。
现代文：老臣衷心地希望陛下开恩赦免我的罪过，稍稍想想我的一番逆耳直言。
English: I sincerely hope that Your Majesty will have the grace to forgive my sins, and think for a moment about my insolent words.

古文：高祖省表叹息，卒不能用。
现代文：高祖看了表章之后叹息不已，但最终没有采用他的主张。
English: Gaozu looked at the seal and sighed, but ultimately did not adopt his proposal.

古文：介性高简，少交游，惟与族兄琛、从兄眎素及洽、从弟淑等文酒赏会，时人以比谢氏乌衣之游。
现代文：萧介生性高傲，很少与人交往，衹和族兄萧彊、堂兄芦胚塞和芦迨、堂弟蕉遨等人赋诗饮酒赏景聚会，当时人们把他们的聚会比作谢家乌衣之游。
English: Xiao Jiesheng was a proud person and rarely interacted with people. He and his elder brother Xiao Jiesheng, his cousins Lv Xu and Lv Yu, and his cousin Banana Jie and others had a poetry drinking and viewing party. At that time, people compared their party to Xie Jia's Uyi tour.

古文：初，高祖招延后进二十余人，置酒赋诗。臧盾以诗不成，罚酒一斗，盾饮尽，颜色不变，言笑自若；介染翰便成，文无加点。高祖两美之曰： 臧盾之饮，萧介之文，即席之美也。 
现代文：当初，高祖延请二十多位后辈饮酒作诗，因为没写成诗被罚饮酒一斗，叠盾全喝了，面色不改，谈笑自如；萧介提笔作诗，一挥而就，不加修改，高祖赞扬他们二人说： 臧盾的豪饮，芦金的文辞，就是宴席之中最值得褒美的事了。 
English: At first, Gaozu Yan invited more than twenty of his descendants to drink alcohol to write poetry. Because they did not write a poem, they were fined for drinking a bucket of alcohol. They drank all the shields, their faces did not change, and they talked freely. Xiao Jie picked up a pen to write a poem, and it was done in one stroke, without modification. Gaozu praised the two of them, saying, "The booze of shields and the words of gold are the most worthy of praise at a banquet."

古文：年七十三，卒于家。
现代文：萧介七十三岁时在家中去世。
English: At the age of 73, Xiao Jie passed away at home.

古文：第三子允，初以兼散骑常侍聘魏，还为太子中庶子，后至光禄大夫。
现代文：萧介的第三个儿子萧允，起初以兼散骑常侍的身份作使臣赴魏聘间，回朝后任太子中庶子，后来官职升至光禄大夫。
English: Xiao Jun, the third son of Xiao Jie, first went to Wei and Baian as an envoy with the status of horseback riding attendant. After returning to the imperial court, he served as an illegitimate son of the crown prince. Later, he was promoted to the post of Guanglu doctor.

古文：洽，字宏称，介从父兄也。
现代文：萧洽字宏称，是萧介的堂兄。
English: Xiao Chaozhihong is Xiao Su's cousin.

古文：父惠基，齐吏部尚书，有重名前世。
现代文：他的父亲萧惠基，齐时任吏部尚书，在前代享有盛名。
English: His father, Xiao Huiqi, was an official of the Ministry of Civil Affairs at that time, and enjoyed a high reputation in the previous generation.

古文：洽幼敏寤，年七岁，诵《楚辞》略上口。
现代文：萧洽年幼时聪慧有悟性，七岁时诵读《楚辞》，便大致流畅不误。
English: Xiao Cai was intelligent and insightful when he was young. When he was seven years old, he recited the "Wisdom" and was generally fluent.

古文：及长，好学博涉，亦善属文。
现代文：成年之后，他喜爱学习，广泛地涉猎各种书籍，还擅长写文章。
English: As an adult, he loved to study, read widely, and excelled at writing.

古文：齐永明中，为国子生，举明经。起家著作佐郎，迁西中郎外兵参军。
现代文：齐永明年间，他为园子生，被皋为明经，从家中征召出来任著作佐郎，升任西中郎外兵参军。
English: In the middle of the following year, when he was a kindergarten student, he was sent to the Ming Dynasty to be conscripted from his home to serve as a scholar, and he was promoted to the position of a foreign soldier to join the army.

古文：天监初，为前军鄱阳王主簿、尚书囗部郎，迁太子中舍人。
现代文：天监初年，他任前军鄱阳王主簿、尚书口部郎，又升任太子中舍人。
English: In the first year of the celestial supervisor, he was appointed as the main bookkeeper of the former army, Shanyang Wang, and the secretary of Shang Shukou, and was also promoted to the prince's junior assistant.

古文：出为南徐州治中，既近畿重镇，史数千人，前后居之者皆致巨富。
现代文：萧介出京任南徐州治中。南徐州是靠近京城的重镇，有官吏敷千人，先后在此任官的都成了巨富。
English: Xiao Jie went to Beijing to serve as the vice-governor of South Xuzhou. South Xuzhou is a major town near Beijing. There are thousands of government officials, and those who have successively served as officials here have become very rich.

古文：洽为之，清身率职，馈遗一无所受，妻子不免饥寒。
现代文：萧洽到任，清廉奉公，别人的馈赠一律不接受，妻子儿女免不了挨饿受冻。
English: Xiao Ci took office, served the public with integrity, did not accept gifts from others, and his wife and children could not avoid starving and freezing.

古文：还除司空从事中郎，为建安内史，坐事免。
现代文：他回京任司空从事中郎，任建安内史，因事获罪被免职。
English: He returned to Beijing to work as a churo (middle-ranking official) and as an internal historian of Jian'an, but was removed from his post after being convicted of a crime.

古文：久之，起为护军长史、北中郎谘议参军，迁太府卿、司徒临川王司马。
现代文：过了很久，他被重新起用任护军长史，北中郎谘议参军，升任太府卿，司徒临川王司马。
English: After a long time, he was reappointed as the commander of the garrison, Kitanakachiro advised him to join the army, promoted to daifu-kyo, and became the steward of Linchuan Wang Sima.

古文：普通初，拜员外散骑常侍，兼御史中丞，以公事免。
现代文：普通初年，趸迨被任命为员外散骑常侍，兼御史中丞，因公事而免职。
English: In the first year of the common era, Zou was appointed as a non-commissioned officer riding horseback as a regular attendant, and also as a member of the Imperial Historian's Council. However, he was relieved of his duties due to his official duties.

古文：顷之，为通直散骑常侍。
现代文：过了不久，他又任通直散骑常侍。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as Tsuchida Sanshiro no Tsuneishi.

古文：洽少有才思，高祖令制同泰、大爱敬二寺刹下铭，其文甚美。
现代文：萧洽年轻时有才气，文思敏捷，高祖命他写的回台、两座寺庙佛塔下的铭文，文辞都十分优美。
English: When Xiao Cang was young, he was talented and quick-witted. When he returned to Taiwan, he wrote the inscriptions under the Buddhist pagodas of two temples. The words are very beautiful.

古文：二年，迁散骑常侍。出为招远将军、临海太守。
现代文：普通二年，他升任散骑常侍，出京任招远将军、临海太守。
English: Two years later, he was promoted to the rank of knight errant, and went to Beijing to serve as the general of Zhaoyuan and the governor of Linhai.

古文：为政清平，不尚威猛，民俗便之。
现代文：他为政清廉公正，不崇尚威严凶猛，百姓都感到很安适。
English: Fan Shu once governed a clean, honest and just government, and did not advocate governing the people by means of majesty and ferocity. The people felt at ease.

古文：还拜司徒左长史，又敕撰《当涂堰碑》，辞亦赡丽。
现代文：他回京被授任司徒左长史，又奉旨撰写《当涂堰碑，文辞也丰赡华丽。
English: On his return to Beijing, he was given the post of the chief historian of the Shituzo, and he was also ordered to write "When painting the weir monument, the words are also rich and gorgeous.

古文：六年，卒官，时年五十五。
现代文：普通六年，萧洽在任上去世，死时五十五岁。
English: Six years later, Xiao Cai died in office, at the age of fifty-five.

古文：有诏出举哀，赙钱二万，布五十匹。
现代文：皇上下令出殡时京城举哀，赐钱二万、布五十匹给他家办丧事。
English: When the emperor ordered the funeral to be held, the capital held a mourning, and gave twenty thousand yuan and fifty pieces of cloth to his family for the funeral.

古文：集二十卷，行于世。
现代文：萧洽着有文集二十卷，流传于世。
English: Xiao Qiaodong has a collection of twenty volumes, which has been passed down to the world.

古文：褚球，字仲宝，河南阳翟人。
现代文：褚球字仲宝，河南阳翟人。
English: Zhou Zi Zhong Bao, Henan Yang Xuanren.

古文：高祖叔度，宋征虏将军、雍州刺史；祖暧，太宰外兵参军；父缋，太子舍人；并尚宋公主。
现代文：他的高祖叔度，宋时任征虏将军、雍州刺史。他的祖父褚暧，任太宰外兵参军。父亲褚绩，任太子舍人。这几人都娶了宋朝的公主。
English: His great-great-grandfather, Shudu, was a conscript general in the Song Dynasty, and the governor of Yongzhou. His grandfather, Zou, was a foreign soldier in the Song Dynasty. His father, Zou Yi, was a prince in the Song Dynasty. All of them married princesses in the Song Dynasty.

古文：球少孤贫，笃志好学，有才思。
现代文：褚球年少时父亲去世，家中贫穷，但志向专一勤奋好学，才思敏捷。
English: His father died when he was young, and the family was poor, but he was dedicated, diligent, studious, and quick-thinking.

古文：宋建平王景素，元徽中诛灭，惟有一女得存。
现代文：宋建平王刘景素，在丞銮年间被诛减，衹留下一个女儿还活着。
English: Liu Jingsu, the king of Song Dynasty Jianping, was reduced to a pauper during the Joseon Dynasty. He left behind a daughter who is still alive.

古文：其故吏何昌珝、王思远闻球清立，以此女妻之，因为之延誉。
现代文：他的老部下何昌珝、王思远听说褚球清高坚贞，便把这女孩嫁给他，接着为他播扬名誉。
English: When his old subordinates, He Changyao and Wang Siyuan, heard that Heqiuqing Gao Jianzhen, they married the girl to him and then promoted his reputation.

古文：仕齐，起家征虏行参军，俄署法曹，迁右军曲江公主簿。
现代文：褚球在齐时出仕，起初任征虏行参军，不久代署法曹，升任右军曲江公主簿。
English: At the beginning, he was assigned to the conscription march to join the army, and soon he was assigned to the legal assistant and promoted to the right army, Qujiang Princess Book.

古文：出为溧阳令，在县清白，资公俸而已。
现代文：褚球出京任溧阳令，在任清正廉洁，衹是靠俸禄为生罢了。
English: When he left Beijing, he was appointed by the Yang di-Pertuan Agong. While in office, he was honest and clean. He only lived off his salary.

古文：除平西主簿。
现代文：后又被授任平西主簿。
English: Later, he was given the post of the chief bookkeeper of Pingxi.

古文：天监初，迁太子洗马、散骑侍郎，兼中书通事舍人。
现代文：天监初年，褚球升迁为太子洗马，散骑侍郎，兼中书通事舍人。
English: In the first year of the overseer of heaven, he was promoted to the position of the prince's horse-washing, horseback riding attendant, and secretary.

古文：出为建康令，母忧去职，以本官起之，固辞不拜。
现代文：他出京任建康令，居母丧离职，后来朝廷要他在服丧期间夺情起复，就任原职，他坚决推辞不肯就职。
English: He went to Beijing to take up the post of Jiankang, and left the post after his mother's death. Later, the imperial court asked him to take up the post during the period of mourning, and he firmly refused to take up the post.

古文：服阕，除北中郎谘议参军，俄迁中书郎，复兼中书通事舍人。
现代文：服丧期满后，他被任命为北中郎谘议参军，不久升任中书郎，又兼中书通事舍人。
English: After the expiration of the period of mourning, he was appointed as the Northern Middle Clerk to advise on joining the army, and soon he was promoted to the Middle Clerk, and he was also the Clerk of the Middle Clerk.

古文：除云骑将军，累兼廷尉、光禄卿，舍人如故。
现代文：褚球又被授任云骑将军，累经迁升任兼廷尉，光禄卿，和原先一样兼中书通事舍人。
English: Yanqiu was also awarded the title of General of the Cloud Cavalry, and was promoted to the post of Lieutenant of the Imperial Court, Guangluqing, as well as the post of General Secretary of the CPC Central Committee.

古文：迁御史中丞。
现代文：后升任御史中丞。
English: He was later promoted to goshi chujo.

古文：球性公强，无所屈挠，在宪司甚称职。
现代文：褚球性情公正刚强，没有什么能让他屈服，担任御史中丞很称职。
English: He is fair-minded and strong-willed, and nothing can make him give in. He is very qualified to serve as the Vice-Minister of History.

古文：普通四年，出为北中郎长史、南兰陵太守；入为通直散骑常侍，领羽林监。
现代文：普通四年，他出京任北中郎长史、南兰陵太守。又入京任通直散骑常侍，兼领羽林监。
English: In ordinary four years, he went to Beijing to serve as the Northern Middle Lord Choshu and the Southern Imperial Governor. He also went to Beijing to serve as a regular attendant of Tsuchizane Sanzai, and also as the leader of the Ura Forest Supervisor.

古文：七年，迁太府卿，顷之，迁都官尚书。
现代文：普通七年，他升任太府卿，不久升任都官尚书。
English: After seven years, he was promoted to daifu-kyo, and soon after, to tokan-sho.

古文：中大同中，出为仁威临川王长史、江夏太守，以疾不赴职。
现代文：中大同年间，他出京任仁威临川王长史、江夏太守，因为生病没有赴任。
English: In the same year of junior high school and college, he went to Beijing to serve as the prince of Jinwei, the king of Linchuan and the governor of Jiangxia, but did not take up the post due to illness.

古文：改授光禄大夫，未拜，复为太府卿，领步兵校尉。
现代文：朝廷改任他为光禄大夫，还没有接受，又任太府卿，兼领步兵校尉。
English: The imperial court appointed him as the doctor of Guanglu, which he has not yet accepted, and he was also appointed as the prefectural governor and the captain of the infantry.

古文：俄迁通直散骑常侍、秘书监，领著作。
现代文：不久升任通直散骑常侍，秘书监，领著作。
English: Soon he was promoted to the post of Tsuchida Sanzhiyi's regular attendant, secretary supervisor, and supervisor of works.

古文：迁司徒左长史，常侍、著作如故。
现代文：后又升任司徒左长史，常侍、著作的职位不变。
English: After that, he was promoted to the post of chief historian of the Sidu Left, and his posts as a regular attendant and author remained unchanged.

古文：自魏孙礼、晋荀组以后，台佐加貂，始有球也。
现代文：自从魏代孙礼和晋代茎鱼之后，三公的佐史加官侍中，就从褚球开始。
English: Since the time of Sun Li in the Wei Dynasty and Zhu Yu in the Jin Dynasty, the Sasika officials and attendants of the Three Princes have started from the ball.

古文：寻出为贞威将军轻车河东王长史、南兰陵太守；入为散骑常侍，领步兵。
现代文：不久，他出京任贞威将军轻车河东王长史、亩堕陆太守。入京后任散骑常侍，领步兵。
English: Soon after, he went to Beijing to serve as General Zhenwei, Light Chariot King of the East, and Grand Prince of Mu. After entering Beijing, he served as a cavalryman and led the infantry.

古文：寻表致仕，诏不许。
现代文：不久，上表要求辞去官职，皇上下诏不准许。
English: Soon after, the upper table demanded that he resign from his official post, but the emperor did not allow it.

古文：俄复拜光禄大夫，加给事中。卒官，时年七十。
现代文：不久，又被授为光禄大夫，加给事中，他在任上去世，死时七十岁。
English: Not long after, he was also awarded the title of Guanglu Doctor. To make matters worse, he died in office, at the age of seventy.

古文：刘孺，字孝稚，彭城安上里人也。
现代文：刘孺字孝稚，彭城安上里人。
English: Liu Shanzi, a filial son, was from Pengcheng An Shangri-La.

古文：祖勔，宋司空忠昭公。
现代文：他的祖父刘勔，宋时任司空，追谧忠昭公。
English: His grandfather's name was Liu Xuan, and he was the Song Dynasty's second-in-command, Ku Zhong Zong.

古文：父悛，齐太常敬子。
现代文：他的父亲刘悛，齐时任太常，谧为敬子。
English: His father, Liu Ye, was a member of the Qi Dynasty, and he was a respected son.

古文：孺幼聪敏，七岁能属文。
现代文：刘孺年幼时聪慧机敏，七岁就能写文章。
English: When Liu Wei was young, he was clever and quick-witted. He was able to write articles at the age of seven.

古文：年十四，居父丧，毁瘠骨立，宗党咸异之。
现代文：他十四岁时，为父亲守丧，因哀伤遇度而骨瘦如柴，族人和乡人都对此感到惊异。
English: When he was fourteen years old, he was at his father's funeral. He was so thin from grief that his relatives and fellow villagers were surprised.

古文：服阕，叔父瑱为义兴郡，携以之官，常置坐侧，谓宾客曰： 此儿吾家之明珠也。 
现代文：服丧期满，他叔父刘瑱任义兴郡太守，带着他到任上，常将他安坐在自己身旁，对宾客说： 这孩子就是我家的明珠。 
English: At the end of the mourning period, his uncle Liu Xuan was appointed governor of Yixing County. He took him with him to the post, and often sat him next to him, saying to the guests: This child is the pearl of my family.

古文：既长，美风采，性通和，虽家人不见其喜愠。
现代文：成年后，刘孺风度翩翩，性情平正温和，即使是家中人也不曾见过他的喜怒之色。
English: After he became an adult, Liu Yao had a charming demeanor and a calm and gentle disposition. Even his family members had never seen his emotions.

古文：本州召迎主簿。
现代文：本州选用他为主簿。
English: Honshu selected him as the head librarian.

古文：起家中军法曹行参军。时镇军沈约闻其名，引为主簿，常与游宴赋诗，大为约所嗟赏。
现代文：刘孺初出仕任中军法曹行参军，当时，镇军沈约听到他的名声，便选拔他为主簿，经常舆他一起出游聚会赋诗，他的文才很为沈约叹赏。
English: Liu Wei was the first to join the army when he was appointed as the legal officer of the Chinese army. At that time, the town army Shen You heard of his reputation and selected him as the main book. He often traveled with him to gatherings to compose poems. His literary talent was very appreciated by Shen You.

古文：累迁太子舍人、中军临川王主簿、太子洗马、尚书殿中郎。
现代文：刘孺屡经升迁任太子舍人，中军临川王主簿，太子洗马，尚书殿中郎。
English: Liu Ye was repeatedly promoted and appointed as the prince's attendant, the main bookkeeper of the Chinese army in Linchuan, the prince's horse washer, and the junior clerk of the palace.

古文：出为太末令，在县有清绩。
现代文：他出京任太末令，在任期间有清廉的政绩。
English: He went to Beijing to serve as grand marshal, and during his tenure, he had a clean record.

古文：还除晋安王友，转太子中舍人。
现代文：他回京后任晋安王友，转任太子中舍人。
English: After he returned to Beijing, he was appointed as the Prince of Jinan, and later as the Prince of Zhou.

古文：孺少好文章，性又敏速，尝于御坐为《李赋》，受诏便成，文不加点，高祖甚称赏之。
现代文：刘孺年轻时喜欢写文章，又生性敏捷，曾经在皇帝身旁写《李赋》，受命便成，文思敏捷，下笔不加涂改，高祖十分赞赏。
English: When Liu Ye was young, he liked to write articles. He was also quick-witted. He once wrote "Li Fu" next to the emperor. He was ordered to do so. His writing was quick, and he did not make any changes to the first draft. Gao Zu was very appreciative.

古文：后侍宴寿光殿，诏群臣赋诗，时孺与张率并醉，未及成，高祖取孺手板题戏之曰： 张率东南美，刘孺雒阳才。揽笔便应就，何事久迟回？ 
现代文：后来，他在寿光殿侍宴，高祖命群臣赋诗，当时刘孺和张率都醉了，诗还没有完成，高祖便拿过刘孺的手板题诗取笑他俩： 张率是东南俊士，刘孺为雒阳才子，提笔便应写就，为何迟迟不成? 
English: Later, he was at a banquet in the Shuguang Hall, and Gao Zu's subordinates were busy composing poems. At that time, Liu Yu and Zhang Rui were both drunk, and the poem had not yet been completed. Gao Zu took Liu Rui's tablet poem and made fun of the two of them: Zhang Rui was a Southeastern gentleman, and Liu Rui was a talented person from Shenyang. They should have just picked up a pen to write, so why did they delay?

古文：其见亲爱如此。
现代文：他被高祖亲近器重到了这种地步。
English: He was raised to this level by his great-grandparents.

古文：转中书郎，兼中书通事舍人。
现代文：刘孺转任中书郎，兼中书通事舍人。
English: Liu Ye was transferred to the post of chushiro (master of Chinese calligraphy) and concurrently served as the chushiro's secretary.

古文：顷之迁太子家令，余如故。
现代文：不久又迁任太子家令，其他官职不变。
English: He was soon transferred to the position of the Prince's Household Division, but his other official positions remained unchanged.

古文：出为宣惠晋安王长史，领丹阳尹丞。迁太子中庶子、尚书吏部郎。
现代文：刘孺出京任宣惠晋安王长史，领丹阳尹丞，迁任太子中庶子，尚书吏部郎。
English: Liu Bei went to Beijing and was appointed as the second son of Wang Changshi of Xuan Hui Jinan, the leader of Danyang Yin Zheng, the second son of the prince, and the second son of Shang Shuli.

古文：出为轻车湘东王长史，领会稽郡丞，公事免。
现代文：他出京任轻车湘束王长史，领会稽郡丞，因公事免职。
English: He went to Beijing to work as a light vehicle inspector, and was dismissed for official business.

古文：顷之，起为王府记室散骑侍郎，兼光禄卿。
现代文：不久他又被重新起用，任王府记室，散骑侍郎，兼光禄卿。
English: Soon after, he was reappointed to the position of the royal office's secretary, horseback riding attendant, and minister of finance.

古文：累迁少府卿、司徒左长史、御史中丞，号为称职。
现代文：累经升迁任少府卿，司徒左长史，御史中丞，被认为能胜任职位。
English: After promotion and transfer, he was appointed to the position of Shōfu-kyō, Shitō Sakanagaishi, and Goshi Chujo, and was considered to be qualified for the position.

古文：大通二年，迁散骑常侍。
现代文：去通二年，他迁任散骑常侍。
English: Two years after he left, he was transferred to the position of samurai.

古文：三年，迁左民尚书，领步兵校尉。
现代文：大通三年，他迁任左民尚书，领步兵校尉。
English: In the third year of the Great Route, he was transferred to the post of Zuomin Shangshu, leading infantry lieutenant.

古文：中大通四年，出为仁威临川王长史、江夏太守，加贞威将军。
现代文：中大通四年，刘孺出京任仁威临川王长史、江夏太守，加贞威将军。
English: In the fourth year of middle and high school, Liu Bei went to Beijing to serve as the prince of Linchuan, the governor of Jiangxia, and the general of Zhengyi.

古文：五年，为宁远将军、司徒左长史，未拜，改为都官尚书，领右军将军。
现代文：中大通五年，他任宁远将军、司徒左长史，还未授官，又改任都官尚书，领右军将军。
English: In the middle of the five years, he was appointed as General Ningyuan, and Sito Zuo Changshi, but he had not yet been appointed, and he was reappointed as the governor of the capital, leading the right army.

古文：大同五年，守吏部尚书。
现代文：大同五年，他守吏部尚书。
English: In the fifth year of Datong, he entered the cadre department.

古文：其年，出为明威将军、晋陵太守。
现代文：当年，他又出京任明威将军、登陆太守。
English: In the same year, he went to Beijing to be appointed as Mingwei general and landed governor.

古文：在郡和理，为吏民所称。
现代文：政事治理得通达和顺，被官吏百姓称颂。
English: The political governance has been smooth and harmonious, and has been praised by officials and the people.

古文：七年，入为侍中，领右军。
现代文：大同七年，他入京任侍中，领右军。
English: In the seventh year of Datong, he entered Beijing as a chamberlain and led the right army.

古文：其年，复为吏部尚书，以母忧去职。
现代文：当年，又任吏部尚书，因居母亲丧而离职。
English: In the same year, Shang Shu, who was also in charge of the personnel department, left his post due to the death of his mother.

古文：居丧未期，以毁卒，时年五十九。
现代文：居丧未满，他因哀伤过度而去世，死时五十九岁。
English: He was fifty-nine years old at the time of his death.

古文：谥曰孝子。
现代文：谧号为孝子。
English: His posthumous name was Takako.

古文：孺少与从兄苞、孝绰齐名。苞早卒，孝绰数坐免黜，位并不高，惟孺贵显。
现代文：刘孺年轻时与堂兄苞、孝绰齐名，苞早逝，孝绰多次因罪被罢官，他们的地位都不高，祇有刘孺位高名显。
English: When he was young, Liu Yao was as famous as his cousins Yao and Xiaozhuo. Yao died early, and Xiaozhuo was repeatedly dismissed for crimes. Their status was not high, only Liu Yao was famous.

古文：有文集二十卷。
现代文：刘孺着有文集二十卷。
English: Liu Xuanqiu has a collection of twenty volumes.

古文：子刍，著作郎，早卒。
现代文：刘孺的儿子刘刍，任著作郎，早逝。
English: Liu Yao's son, Liu Yao, who worked as a scribe, died at an early age.

古文：孺二弟：览、遵。
现代文：刘孺有两个弟弟：刘览和刘遵。
English: Liu Yao has two younger brothers: Liu Zhan and Liu Zun.

古文：览，字孝智，十六通《老》、《易》。
现代文：刘览字孝智，十六岁就精通《老》、《易》。
English: Liu Shan Zi Xiao Zhi, at the age of 16, is proficient in "Lao" and "Yi."

古文：历官中书郎，以所生母忧，庐于墓。再期，口不尝盐酪，冬止著单布。
现代文：他任中书郎。因为替生母服丧，他在墓地旁筑草屋居住，两年淡食素餐，不尝盐酱，冬天衹穿单布衣。
English: He served as a junior high school teacher. Because he was mourning for his birth mother, he built a grass hut next to the cemetery and lived there. For two years, he ate a light vegetarian diet, did not taste salt sauce, and wore a single cloth in winter.

古文：家人患其不胜丧，中夜窃置炭于床下，览因暖气得睡，既觉知之，号恸欧血。
现代文：家人担心他承受不住丧期的哀伤，半夜暗中将炭火置于床下，刘览因为屋内有暖气而睡着了，醒后察知此事，号叫恸哭以致呕血。
English: His family worried that he would not be able to bear the grief of the mourning period. In the middle of the night, they secretly put a charcoal fire under his bed. Liu Shan fell asleep because there was heating in the house. When he woke up, he realized what had happened and cried until he vomited blood.

古文：高祖闻其有至性，数省视之。
现代文：高祖听说他有至孝之情，多次问候看望他。
English: Gao Zu heard that he had filial piety, and visited him several times with greetings.

古文：服阕，除尚书左丞。
现代文：服丧期满，任尚书左丞。
English: At the end of the mourning period, he was awarded the title of Shangshuzojo.

古文：性聪敏，尚书令史七百人，一见并记名姓。
现代文：刘览秉性聪明，尚书令史有七百人，他一见过面就能记住姓名。
English: Liu Qian is a clever person. There are 700 people in the history of Shang Shuling, and he can remember names as soon as he meets them.

古文：当官清正，无所私。
现代文：刘览为官清廉公正，没有私心。
English: Liu Yan is a clean and fair official, with no selfishness.

古文：姊夫御史中丞褚湮、从兄吏部郎孝绰，在职颇通赃货，览劾奏，并免官。
现代文：他的姐夫御史中丞褚湮，堂兄吏部郎刘孝绰，在职时常收受贿赂，刘览向皇帝检举弹劾，两人都被免去官职。
English: His brother-in-law, Gu Shizhongzheng, and cousin, Li Bu Lang, Liu Xiaoqiao, often accepted bribes while in office. Liu Qian reported to the emperor for impeachment, and both were removed from office.

古文：孝绰怨之，尝谓人曰： 犬啮行路，览噬家人。 
现代文：刘孝绰怨恨刘览，曾经对人说： 狗咬行路人，刘览咬自家人。 
English: Liu Xiaoqiao held a grudge against Liu Zhan and once said to someone: "Dogs bite passers-by, Liu Zhan bites his own family members."

古文：出为始兴内史，治郡尤励清节。
现代文：刘览出京任始兴内史，治理政事，他努力保持清廉高洁。
English: Liu Zhaoxuan, the first Beijing-appointed person to succeed in domestic history and political governance, strived to maintain a clean and pure image.

古文：还复为左丞，卒官。
现代文：他回京后又任尚书左丞，在任上去世。
English: After his return to Kyoto, he was appointed Shojo-zojo and died in office.

古文：遵，字孝陵。
现代文：刘遵字孝陵。
English: The Mausoleum of Liu Zunzhi.

古文：少清雅，有学行，工属文。
现代文：他年轻时高洁文雅，有学问，品行端正，擅长写文章。
English: When he was young, he was refined, educated, moral, and good at writing articles.

古文：起家著作郎、太子舍人，累迁晋安王宣惠、云麾二府记室，甚见宾礼，转南徐州治中。
现代文：刘遵初出仕任著作郎，太子舍人，累经升迁为晋安王宣惠、云麾二府记室，受到隆厚的礼遇。他后来转任南徐州治中。
English: At the beginning of his career, Liu Zun was promoted to the position of the author's son, the prince's son-in-law, and after promotion, he was transferred to the Jinan Wang Xuan Hui and the Yunnan Second Prefectural Office, receiving generous courtesy. Later, he was transferred to the South Xuzhou Jizhong.

古文：王后为雍州，复引为安北谘议参军，带邔县令。
现代文：晋安王后来任雍州刺史，又选拔刘遵任安北谘议参军、带邔县县令。
English: Jin An Wang was later appointed as the Yongzhou chief historian, and Liu Zun was selected as the Anbei advisory to join the army and take the command of Jixian County.

古文：中大通二年，王立为皇太子，仍除中庶子。
现代文：中大通二年，晋安王被立为皇太子，接着就任命刘遵为中庶子。
English: In the second year of Zhongdaxu, Jin'an Wang was appointed crown prince, and then Liu Zun was appointed as the middle child.

古文：遵自随籓及在东宫，以旧恩，偏蒙宠遇，同时莫及。
现代文：刘遵从开始在藩镇以及后来在柬宫一直跟随晋安王，因为往日的恩义使他受到特别的宠遇，当时没有人能赶得上他。
English: Liu Zunong always followed the King of Jinan, first in the town and later in the Cambodian Palace, because the gratitude of the past made him receive special favors, when no one could catch up with him.

古文：大同元年，卒官。皇太子深悼惜之，与遵从兄阳羡令孝仪令曰：
现代文：大同元年，刘遵在任上去世，皇太子深切地悼念他，为他的逝世感到惋惜，写教令对刘遵的堂兄阳羡令刘孝仪说：
English: In the first year of Datong, Liu Zun died in office. The crown prince deeply mourned him and felt sorry for his death. He wrote an edict to Liu Zun's cousin Yang Zhenling Liu Xiaoyi, saying:

古文：贤从中庶，奄至殒逝，痛可言乎！
现代文：贤堂兄弟中庶子刘遵，突然间去世，我的哀痛怎么能以言语来表达啊!
English: Liu Zun, the illegitimate son of a virtuous cousin, died suddenly. How can I express my grief in words?

古文：其孝友淳深，立身贞固；内含玉润，外表澜清。
现代文：他孝顺父母友爱兄弟情深意厚。立身处世坚守正道，内有如玉的美德，仪表清澄如水。
English: His filial piety, obedience to his parents, friendship and brotherly love are profound. He adheres to the right path in his life, has virtues like a jewel, and his appearance is as clear as water.

古文：美誉嘉声，流于士友；言行相符，终始如一。
现代文：他美好的声誉，在朋友中流布，他言行一致，始终如一。
English: His good reputation spread among his friends, and he was consistent in word and deed.

古文：文史该富，琬琰为心；辞章博赡，玄黄成采。
现代文：他文史博通，心怀美好品德，下笔文辞丰赡华丽，编织成章，五彩绚烂。
English: His literary history is extensive, he has a good moral character, and his next words are rich and gorgeous, woven into chapters, and colorful.

古文：既以鸣谦表性，又以难进自居，未尝造请公卿，缔交荣利。是以新沓莫之举，社武弗之知。自阮放之官，野王之职，栖迟门下，已逾五载；同僚已陟，后进多升，而怡然清静，不以少多为念。确尔之志，亦何易得？
现代文：他既表露自己谦退的心性，又在蹉跎不进的职位上安心自处，他未曾拜访公卿，请谒私门，暗中结交，谋取名利，所以新沓没有推荐他，杜武未能了解他，以致他在阮放、桓野王曾经任过的官职上，辗转蹉跎，已经超过五年，同僚已经陟升，后进多被擢拔，但他怡然自乐，固守清静，不考虑俸禄多少，这种坚定不移的志向，又哪裹能随便找到。
English: He not only showed his humble and retiring nature, but also felt at ease in a position where he was not promoted. He did not visit the nobles, invite them to his private door, secretly make friends, and seek fame and fortune. Therefore, Xinyu did not recommend him, Duwu could not understand him, so that he has been in the official position once held by Ruan Fang and King Huan Ye for more than five years. His colleagues have soared, and most of them have been promoted. But he is pleasantly self-satisfied, adheres to tranquility, and does not consider the amount of salary. This unswerving ambition can be found anywhere.

古文：西河观宝，东江独步，书籍所载，必不是过。
现代文：有如西河观宝，东江独步，古书上记载的，也决不会超过这种品德。
English: Just as the West River is regarded as a treasure and the East River as a solitary step, what is recorded in ancient books will never exceed this kind of virtue.

古文：吾昔在汉南，连翩书记，及忝硃方，从容坐首。
现代文：从前我在汉南之时，刘遵连任书记，到我忝居朱方之位，他又在坐首任职。
English: Once upon a time, when I was in Hannan, Liu Zunren was the secretary, and when I was in Zhu Fang, he was the chairman.

古文：良辰美景，清风月夜，鹢舟乍动，硃鹭徐鸣，未尝一日而不追随，一时而不会遇。
现代文：良辰美景之日，清风明月之夜，乘着鹚舟荡漾，听着朱鹭徐呜，他未尝一日不和我相随，未曾一时不舆我相会。
English: On a fine day with a beautiful view, on a clear windy night with a bright moon, riding a boat, listening to Zhu Xi Xu, he never missed a day without following me, never missed a moment without meeting me.

古文：酒兰耳热，言志赋诗，校覆忠贤，榷扬文史，益者三友，此实其人。
现代文：宴饮之中，酒酣耳热之际，我们一起抒志赋诗，评论忠贤，研讨文史，古人有 益者三友 之说，他实在就是那种益友。
English: During the banquet, when the wine was hot, we recited poems together, commented on the loyal and virtuous, and discussed literary history. The ancients said that there were three friends of the benefactor, and he was really that kind of benefactor.

古文：及弘道下邑，未申善政，而能使民结去思，野多驯雉，此亦威凤一羽，足以验其五德。
现代文：他在小县邑中弘扬教化，德政不需反复重申，而能使百姓在他离职时久存怀念之情，人人有仁爱之心，致使野外处处可以见到温驯的野雉，遣如同威凤一羽，可见刘遵善政之一斑，足可验证他的德行才学样样俱备。
English: He promoted enlightenment in small counties and towns. He did not need to reiterate the virtue of politics, but could make the people have a long-lasting nostalgia when he left office. Everyone had a heart of benevolence, so that everywhere in the field you could see the tame wild boar, flying like a mighty phoenix. It can be seen that Liu Zun is one of the good politicians, which is enough to verify that his virtue is well-trained.

古文：比在春坊，载获申晤，博望无通宾之务，司成多节文之科。所赖故人，时相媲偶；而此子溘然，实可嗟痛。 惟与善人 ，此为虚说；天之报施，岂若此乎！
现代文：到我进入东宫，我们能够经常见面晤谈，身处博望苑中，无可交游宾客，主管对我的品德教育，又多礼仪条文，只好依故人时相陪伴；现在这位老友溘然而逝，实在叫人哀叹伤痛。 天衹帮助善人 ，这是虚妄之说；天给人的回报恩赐，难道竟是这样吗?
English: By the time I entered the East Palace, we were able to meet and talk frequently. Being in the middle of Bohangyuan Garden, there were no visiting guests, the person in charge of my moral education, and many etiquette regulations, so I had to accompany the deceased; now this old friend has passed away, it is really sad and painful. Heaven helps good people, this is a false saying; is it a gift that God gives to people in return?

古文：想卿痛悼之诚，亦当何已。
现代文：可以想见你伤痛悼念的沉重心情，又怎么能够止息。
English: I can only imagine how difficult it must have been for you to come to terms with your grief and loss.

古文：往矣奈何，投笔恻怆。
现代文：人已逝去，无可奈何，放下笔来，更觉凄恻悼伤。
English: A person has passed away, and there is no choice but to put down the pen and mourn.

古文：吾昨欲为志铭，并为撰集。
现代文：昨天我想为刘遵撰写墓志铭，同时为他编撰文集。
English: Yesterday, I wanted to write an epitaph for Liu Zun and compile a collection of essays for him.

古文：吾之劣薄，其生也不能揄扬吹歔，使得骋其才用，今者为铭为集，何益既往？
现代文：但我才劣力薄，他在世的时候不能为他播扬名声，使他能得以展示自己的才能，现在为他写铭文编文集，对已死之人有何益处?
English: But I am too weak, I cannot make a reputation for him while he is alive, so that he can show his talent, and now I am writing a collection of inscriptions for him, what good is it for a dead person?

古文：故为痛惜之情，不能已已耳。
现代文：衹是因为这种深深的伤痛之情，无法子息罢了。
English: It's because of this deep hurt that I can't have children.

古文：刘潜，字孝仪，秘书监孝绰弟也。
现代文：刘潜字孝仪，他是秘书监刘孝绰的弟弟。
English: Liu Qian Zi Xiaoyi, he is the younger brother of the secretary supervisor Liu Xiaochu.

古文：幼孤，与兄弟相励勤学，并工属文。
现代文：年幼时父亲去世，他和兄弟们相互勉励，勤奋学习，他们几兄弟都擅长写文章。
English: When his father died when he was young, he and his brothers encouraged each other to study hard. Several of them were good at writing articles.

古文：孝绰常曰 三笔六诗 ，三即孝仪，六孝威也。
现代文：型耋垄常说 三弟的文章写得好，六弟的诗作得好 ，三弟就是刘孝仪，六弟是指刘孝威。
English: It is often said that the third brother's articles are well written, and the sixth brother's poems are well written. The third brother is Liu Xiaoyi, and the sixth brother is Liu Xiaowei.

古文：天监五年，举秀才。
现代文：天监五年，刘潜被举为秀才。
English: In the fifth year of Tianjun, Liu Qian was promoted as an outstanding talent.

古文：起家镇右始兴王法曹行参军，随府益州，兼记室。
现代文：他初出仕任镇右始兴王法曹行参军，跟随王府到益州，兼记室。
English: He joined the army for the first time when he was assigned to Zhenyu Shi Xing Wang Fa Cao, and followed the royal court to Yizhou, where he also worked as a secretary.

古文：王入为中抚军，转主簿，迁尚书殿中郎。
现代文：始兴王入京任中抚军，刘潜转任主簿，迁任尚书殿中郎。
English: Shi Xing Wang entered Beijing as a middle-ranking military official, Liu Qian was transferred to the post of chief secretary, and transferred to the post of vice-minister of the palace.

古文：敕令制《雍州平等金像碑》，文甚宏丽。
现代文：皇帝命他撰写《雍州平等寺金像碑》，文辞甚为宏伟华丽。
English: The emperor ordered him to write "The Golden Monument of Yongzhou Byongyong Temple," the words are very magnificent and gorgeous.

古文：晋安王纲出镇襄阳，引为安北功曹史，以母忧去职。
现代文：晋安王萧纲出京镇守襄阳，选用刘孝仪任安北功曹史，因为居母亲丧而离职。
English: Xiao Gang, the king of Jin'an, went to Beijing to guard Xiangyang, and chose Liu Xiaoyi as the Anbei Gong Cao Shi, but he left the post because of his mother's death.

古文：王立为皇太子，孝仪服阕，仍补洗马，迁中舍人。
现代文：晋安王立为皇太子，刘孝仪服丧期满，接着补任太子洗马，迁任中舍人。
English: Jinan Wang was appointed crown prince, Liu Xiaoyi's mourning period expired, and then he was appointed as the prince of Saima, and he was transferred to the position of middle cadet.

古文：出为戎昭将军、阳羡令，甚有称绩，擢为建康令。
现代文：刘潜出京任戎昭将军、阳羡令，有不少为人称颂的政绩，因而被擢拔为建康令。
English: Liu Qian was promoted to Jiankangling after he left Beijing and was appointed as the general of the army of Zhao and Yang Zhenling. He had many praiseworthy political achievements.

古文：大同三年，迁中书郎，以公事左迁安西谘议参军，兼散骑常侍。
现代文：大同三年，他迁任中书郎，因公事而降职，任安西谘议参军，兼散骑常侍。
English: In the same year, he was transferred to the position of Chushiro, but was demoted due to his official duties. He was appointed to the position of Ansi to advise on joining the army, and also became a samurai.

古文：使魏还，复除中书郎。
现代文：他出使魏国回京，又被任命为中书郎。
English: He was sent by Wei to return to Beijing, and was also appointed to the post of Zhongshuro.

古文：顷之，权兼司徒右长史，又兼宁远长史、行彭城琅邪二郡事。
现代文：不久，他暂兼司徒右长史，又兼宁远长史、行彭城琅邪二郡事。
English: Soon after, he temporarily served as the Long History of Szeto U, and also as the Long History of Ningyuan, and traveled to Pengcheng and Shiyan counties.

古文：累迁尚书左丞，兼御史中丞。在职弹纠无所顾望，当时称之。
现代文：他累经升迁任尚书左丞，兼御史中丞，任职时弹劾大臣无所畏惧，当时人们都称赞他。
English: He was promoted to Shoshu-zojo and Goshi-chujo. He was not afraid to impeach ministers when he was in office, and people praised him at the time.

古文：十年，出为伏波将军、临海太守。
现代文：大同十年，刘潜出京任伏波将军、临海太守。
English: In the 10th year of Datong, Liu Qian left Beijing to serve as the General of Fuba and the Governor of Linhai.

古文：是时政网疏阔，百姓多不遵禁。
现代文：这时法纪松弛，许多百姓不守禁令。
English: At this time, law and order were relaxed, and many people did not abide by the ban.

古文：孝仪下车，宣示条制，励精绥抚，境内翕然，风俗大革。
现代文：刘孝仪一到任，就公布法令条文，励精图治，安抚百姓，境内很快就安定下来，风俗民情大为改变。
English: As soon as Liu Xiaoyi took office, he announced the provisions of the law, worked hard to govern, and appeased the people. The territory soon settled down, and the customs and people's feelings changed greatly.

古文：中大同元年，入守都官尚书。
现代文：中大同元年，他入京任守都官尚书。
English: In the first year of junior high and high school, he entered Beijing and was appointed as the governor of the capital.

古文：太清元年，出为明威将军、豫章内史。
现代文：太清元年，他出京任明威将军、豫章内史。
English: In the first year of the Taiqing Dynasty, he went to Beijing and was appointed as the Mingwei General and the Yuzhang Naishi.

古文：二年，侯景寇京邑，孝仪遣子励帅郡兵三千人，随前衡州刺史韦粲入援。
现代文：太清二年，侯景进犯京城，刘孝仪派儿子刘励率领豫章郡的士兵三千人，跟随前衡州刺史韦粲赴京救援。
English: In the second year of the Qing Dynasty, Hou Jing invaded Beijing. Liu Xiaoyi sent his son Liu Li to lead three thousand soldiers from Yuzhang County to Beijing to rescue the city.

古文：三年，宫城不守，孝仪为前历阳太守庄铁所逼，失郡。
现代文：太清三年，京城陷落，刘孝仪被前历阳太守庄铁逼迫，丢失了豫章郡。
English: In the third year of the Qing Dynasty, Beijing fell, and Liu Xiaoyi was persecuted by the former Liyang governor Zhuang Tie and lost Yuanzhang County.

古文：大宝元年，病卒，时年六十七。
现代文：大实元年，刘孝仪病逝，死时六十七岁。
English: In the first year of the Dashi era, Liu Xiaoyi died of illness at the age of sixty-seven.

古文：孝仪为人宽厚，内行尤笃。
现代文：刘孝仪为人宽厚，平日在家品行也非常真诚专一。
English: Liu Xiaoyi is a generous person, and she is very sincere and single-minded in her daily life.

古文：第二兄孝能早卒，孝仪事寡嫂甚谨，家内巨细，必先谘决。
现代文：他的二哥刘孝能早逝，他侍奉守寡的嫂嫂十分恭谨。家中不论大事小事，定要先问过嫂嫂再作决定。
English: His second brother, Liu Xiaoneng, died young, and he served his widowed sister-in-law very respectfully. No matter how big or small the family is, he must first ask his sister-in-law before making a decision.

古文：与妻子朝夕供事，未尝失礼。
现代文：他和妻子每天供养侍奉嫂嫂，从未有过失礼的行为。
English: He and his wife provided for and served his sister-in-law every day, and never acted disrespectfully.

古文：世以此称之。
现代文：世人因此而称赞他。
English: As a result, people around the world praised and thanked him.

古文：有文集二十卷，行于世。
现代文：刘孝仪着有文集二十卷，流传后世。
English: Liu Xiaoyi wrote a 20-volume anthology, which has been passed down to posterity.

古文：第五弟孝胜，历官邵陵王法曹、湘东王安西主簿记室、尚书左丞。
现代文：刘孝仪的五弟刘孝胜，历任邵陵王法曹、湘东王安西主簿记室，尚书左丞。
English: Liu Xiaoyi's fifth brother, Liu Xiaosheng, successively held the posts of Shao Ling Wang's legal assistant and Hunan Dong Wang Anxi's chief bookkeeper.

古文：出为信义太守，公事免。
现代文：他出京任信义太守，因公事免职。
English: He went to Beijing to take up the post of Shinyi Taishu, but was dismissed for official business.

古文：久之，复为尚书右丞，兼散骑常侍。
现代文：遇了很久，又再任尚书右丞，兼散骑常侍。
English: It was a long time before he was reappointed as Shoshu Ujo, and also as Sanzhishi no Tsunenobu.

古文：聘魏还，为安西武陵王纪长史、蜀郡太守。
现代文：出使魏国行聘问之礼回京，他任安西武陵王萧纪长史、蜀郡太守。
English: He was sent back to Beijing on the invitation of the Wei government, and he served as the Anxi Wuling King Xiao Ji Changshi and the Shu County Governor.

古文：太清中，侯景陷京师，纪僭号于蜀，以孝胜为尚书仆射。
现代文：太清年间，侯景攻陷京城，萧纪在蜀郡僭位称王，任命刘孝胜为尚书仆射。
English: During the Qing Dynasty, Hou Jing conquered the capital, Xiao Ji became king in Shu County, and appointed Liu Xiaosheng as Shang Shuxu's subordinate.

古文：承圣中，随纪出峡口，兵败，被执下狱。
现代文：承圣年间，他跟随萧纪出兵峡口，兵败后被捕入狱。
English: During the consecration year, he followed Xiao Ji to the mouth of the gorge, and was arrested and imprisoned after the defeat.

古文：世祖寻宥之，起为司徒右长史。
现代文：不久世祖宽恕他，起用他为司徒右长史。
English: Soon after, the patriarch forgave him and appointed him as the head priest.

古文：第六弟孝威，初为安北晋安王法曹，转主簿，以母忧去职。
现代文：刘孝仪的六弟刘孝威，初出仕任安北置安王法曹，转任主簿，因为居母亲丧而离职。
English: Liu Xiaoyi's sixth brother, Liu Xiaowei, was first appointed to the position of Anbei Jing An Wang Law Clerk, and then transferred to the position of chief clerk, but left the position due to his mother's death.

古文：服阕，除太子洗马，累迁中舍人、庶子、率更令，并掌管记。
现代文：服丧期满，被授任太子洗马，累经升迁任中舍人，庶子，率更令，并掌管记。
English: At the end of the mourning period, he was awarded the title of prince of Saima, and was promoted to the position of middle son, son-in-law, son-in-law, and in charge of the record.

古文：大同九年，白雀集东宫，孝威上颂，其辞甚美。
现代文：大同九年，白雀聚集在东宫，刘孝威为此事献颂，文辞很优美。
English: In the ninth year of Datong, the White Sparrows gathered in the East Palace, and Liu Xiaowei gave a eulogy for this event. The words were very beautiful.

古文：太清中，迁中庶子，兼通事舍人。
现代文：太清年间，他迁任中庶子，兼通事舍人。
English: During the Taiching period, he was transferred to the position of middle child and concurrently worked as a courier.

古文：及侯景寇乱，孝威于围城得出，随司州刺史柳仲礼西上，至安陆，遇疾卒。
现代文：侯景叛乱时，刘孝威从围城中逃出，跟随司州刺史柳仲礼西进，到了安陆，因病去世。
English: During the rebellion of Houjing, Liu Xiaowei escaped from the besieged city, followed Liu Zhongli, the governor of Shizhou, westward to Anlu, and died of illness.

古文：第七弟孝先，武陵王法曹、主簿。王迁益州，随府转安西记室。
现代文：刘孝仪的七弟刘孝先，任武陵王法曹、主簿，武陵王迁任益州刺史，他跟随王府至益州，转任安西记室。
English: Liu Xiaoyi's seventh brother, Liu Xiaoqian, served as Wuling Wang's legal assistant and chief accountant, and Wuling Wang was transferred to Yizhou as a historian. He followed the royal court to Yizhou and was transferred to the Anxi Records Office.

古文：承圣中，与兄孝胜俱随纪军出峡口，兵败，至江陵，世祖以为黄门侍郎，迁侍中。
现代文：丞圣年间，他和哥哥刘孝胜一起跟随纪军出峡口，兵败后到江陵，世祖任命他为黄门侍郎，迁任侍中。
English: During the reign of Emperor Yongzheng, he and his brother Liu Xiaosheng followed the Ji army out of the mouth of the gorge. After the defeat, they went to Gangneung. The ancestor appointed him as the Yellow Gate chamberlain and moved to the position of chamberlain.

古文：兄弟并善五言诗，见重于世。
现代文：他们兄弟都擅长写五言诗，因此被世人看重。
English: Their brothers are both good at writing five-character poems, so they are valued by the world.

古文：文集值乱，今不具存。
现代文：因遭逢战乱，他的文集如今没有完整地保存下来。
English: Due to the war, his collection has not been preserved in its entirety.

古文：殷芸，字灌蔬，陈郡长平人。
现代文：殷芸字灌蔬，陈郡长平人。
English: Yin Yi Zi watering vegetables, Chen County Governor Pingren.

古文：性倜傥，不拘细行。然不妄交游，门无杂客。
现代文：他性情洒脱，不拘小节，但不随便与人交往，家裹没有闲杂客人。
English: He is easy-going and informal, but he doesn't socialize with people casually, and he doesn't have idle guests.

古文：励精勤学，博洽群书。
现代文：殷芸立志上进，勤奋好学，博览群书。
English: Yin Yi is determined to advance, diligent and eager to learn, and well-read.

古文：幼而庐江何宪见之，深相叹赏。
现代文：他年幼时，庐江何宪见到他，非常赞赏他。
English: When he was young, He Xian of Minjiang saw him and admired him very much.

古文：永明中，为宜都王行参军。
现代文：永明年间，宜都王行参军。
English: In the middle of last year, Yidu Wangxing joined the army.

古文：天监初，为西中郎主簿、后军临川王记室。
现代文：天监初年，他任西中郎主簿、后军临川王记室。
English: In the first year of the Tenko, he served as the chief secretary of Nishinakuro and the secretary of the rear army of the King of Linkawa.

古文：七年，迁通直散骑侍郎，兼中书通事舍人。
现代文：玉监七年，他迁任通直散骑侍郎，兼中书通事舍人。
English: In the seventh year of his stewardship, he was transferred to the post of Tsuchizane Sanzhijijiro, concurrently serving as Chusho Tsuchizaijiro.

古文：十年，除通直散骑侍郎，兼尚书左丞，又兼中书舍人，迁国子博士、昭明太子侍读、西中郎豫章王长史，领丹阳尹丞，累迁通直散骑常侍、秘书监、司徒左长史。
现代文：天监十年，他被授任通直散骑侍郎，兼尚书左丞，又兼中书舍人，迁任国子博士，昭明太子侍读，西中郎豫章王长史，领且盐尹丞，累经升迁任通直散骑常侍，秘书监，司徒左长史。
English: Ten years after he assumed the post of Heaven's Inspector, he was awarded the post of Tsuchizane Sanzhijishi waiter, concurrently serving as Shosho Zujo, and concurrently serving as a junior high school teacher, and was transferred to the post of Kuniko hakase, Shomei taishi waiter, West junior high school teacher, Yuanzhang Wangchongshi, leader, and Yan Yunjo, and was promoted to the post of Tsuchizane Sanzhijishi regular waiter, secretary supervisor, and Shuto Zuochongshi.

古文：普通六年，直东宫学士省。
现代文：普通六年，当值东宫学士省。
English: Usually six years, on duty at the East Palace of the Ministry of Education.

古文：大通三年卒，时年五十九。
现代文：主通三年，去世，死时五十九岁。
English: He died three years later at the age of fifty-nine.

古文：萧几，字德玄，齐曲江公遥欣子也。
现代文：萧几字德玄，是齐曲江公遥欣的儿子。
English: Xiao Gui Zi De Xuan was the son of Qi Qujiang's Prince Yao Xin.

古文：年十岁，能属文。
现代文：他十岁就能写文章。
English: He could write articles at the age of ten.

古文：早孤，有弟九人，并皆稚小，几恩爱笃睦，闻于朝野。
现代文：萧几很早就失去了父亲，有九个弟弟，而且都年幼。芦几对弟弟十分恩爱，兄弟间感情深厚，相处和睦，朝野士人都了解他的这种美行。
English: Xiao Qi lost his father at a very early age, and has nine younger brothers, all of whom are very young. Lu Qi is very kind to his younger brothers, and the brothers have deep feelings for each other and get along harmoniously. People from both the North and the West are all aware of his good deeds.

古文：性温和，与物无竞，清贫自立。
现代文：他性情温和，与人无争，家境清贫，却能努力自立。
English: He is mild-mannered, does not quarrel with others, his family is poor, but he can work hard to become self-reliant.

古文：好学，善草隶书。
现代文：他喜爱学习，擅长草书隶书。
English: He likes to study and is good at cursive handwriting.

古文：湘州刺史杨公则，曲江之故吏也。
现代文：翅业刺史挝公则，是迪辽公的旧部属。
English: Wing industry sting Shao Gongzhe, is a former subordinate of Di Liao Gong.

古文：每见几，谓人曰： 康公此子，可谓桓灵宝出。 
现代文：他每次见到萧几，都要对人说： 曲江公这个儿子，可以说是桓灵宾重新出世。 
English: Every time he saw Xiao Jia, he would say to people, "This son of Qu Jianggong can be said to be the reincarnation of Huan Lingbin.

古文：及公则卒，几为之诔，时年十五，沈约见而奇之，谓其舅蔡撙曰： 昨见贤甥杨平南诔文，不减希逸之作，始验康公积善之庆。 
现代文：杨公则去世，萧几为他撰写谏文，当时他年仅十五岁，沈约看了他的文章而大加赞赏，对萧几的舅舅蔡撙说： 昨看见您的外甥为杨公则写的谏文，不比谢希逸的文章逊色，逭正是曲江公积善留下福庆的应验啊。 
English: Yang Gongze passed away, and Xiao Qi wrote a eulogy for him. At that time, he was only fifteen years old. Shen Yu read his article and greatly appreciated it. He said to Xiao Qi's uncle Cai Qi: "I saw your nephew's eulogy for Yang Gongze yesterday. It is not inferior to Xie Xiyi's article. It is the fulfillment of Qujiang Gongzixian's good fortune."

古文：释褐著作佐郎、庐陵王文学、尚书殿中郎、太子舍人、掌管记，迁庶子、中书侍郎、尚书左丞。
现代文：萧几出仕任著作佐郎，庐陵王文学，尚书殿中郎，太子舍人，掌管记，迁任太子中庶子，中书侍郎，尚书左丞。
English: Xiao Jia was assigned to the position of "Writing Saro," "Burying the King of Literature," "Chungshu palace middle servant," "Prince's son and concubine," "in charge of records," "middle prince's illegitimate son," "Chungshu chamber servant," and "Chungshu left junior secretary."

古文：末年，专尚释教。
现代文：晚年他一心崇尚释教。
English: In his later years, he devoted himself to advocating liberation theology.

古文：为新安太守，郡多山水，特其所好，适性游履，遂为之记。
现代文：萧几任新安太守，郡内多奇山异水，正好适合他的爱好，他随着性情游历，接着又为此作记。
English: Xiao served several times as the governor of Xin'an, and the county has many strange mountains and rivers, which is just right for his hobby. He travels according to his temperament, and then writes about it.

古文：卒于官。
现代文：他在任上去世。
English: He died in office.

古文：子为，字元专，亦有文才。仕至太子舍人，永康令。
现代文：萧几的儿子萧为，字元专，也有文才，官至太子舍人，永康令。
English: Xiao Wei, the son of Xiao Jia, was a scholar of characters and literature. He was an official of the highest rank, Yong Kangling.

古文：史臣曰：王规之徒，俱著名誉，既逢休运，才用各展，美矣。
现代文：史臣曰：王规这些人，全都名声播扬，他们逢好时机，各自展示才能，真是美事啊!
English: Shichen said: Wang Gui and these people, all of them are famous, they have a good opportunity to show their talents, it's really a beautiful thing!

古文：萧洽《当涂》之制，见伟辞人；刘孝仪兄弟，并以文章显。君子知梁代之有人焉。
现代文：萧洽捡奉命撰写的《当涂堰碑》被文人赞赏，刘孝仪几兄弟都凭着文章扬名，君子凭此可以知道凿伐有人才啊!
English: "Dang Tu Weir Monument," which was written by Xiao Cai, was praised by writers. Several brothers of Liu Xiaoyi are famous for their articles. This is how a gentleman can know that he has talent!

