古文：圣人之为国也，壹赏，壹刑，壹教。
现代文：圣人治理国家的办法，统一奖赏，统一刑罚，统一教化。
English: The sage's method of governing the country, unified reward, unified punishment, unified edification.

古文：壹赏则兵无敌，壹刑则令行，壹教则下听上。
现代文：实施统一奖赏，那么军队就会无敌于天下；实行统一的刑罚，那么君主的命令就能实行；实行了统一教化，那么民众就会听从君主的役使。
English: If uniform rewards are implemented, then the army will be invincible in the world; if uniform punishments are implemented, then the monarch's orders can be implemented; if uniform education is implemented, then the people will obey the monarch's orders.

古文：夫明赏不费，明刑不戮，明教不变，而民知于民务，国无异俗。
现代文：公正高明的奖赏并不浪费财物，严明的刑罚不杀人，修明教育不改变风俗，而民众却知道自己该做什么，国家也没有特殊的风俗。
English: A just and wise reward does not waste wealth, a strict punishment does not kill, a correct education does not change customs, but the people know what they should do, and the country has no special customs.

古文：明赏之犹至于无赏也，明刑之犹至于无刑也，明教之犹至于无教也。
现代文：公正高明的奖赏到了一定程度就可以不用奖赏，严明的刑法到一定时候就可以不用刑罚，修明教育到了一定程度就可以不用教化。
English: To a certain extent, a fair and high reward can be used without reward, a strict criminal law can be used without punishment to a certain extent, and a clear education can be used without indoctrination to a certain extent.

古文：所谓壹赏者，利禄官爵抟出于兵，无有异施也。
现代文：所说的统一奖赏，就是指利益、俸禄、官职、爵位都专一根据在战争中的功绩赐给，没有其它不同的恩惠。
English: The so-called unified reward means that profits, salaries, official positions, and titles are all given exclusively on the basis of merits in the war, and there are no other different favors.

古文：夫固知愚、贵贱、勇怯、贤不肖，皆尽其胸臆之知，竭其股肱之力，出死而为上用也；天下豪杰贤良从之如流水；是故兵无敌而今行于天下。
现代文：因此聪慧、愚昧、富贵、低贱、勇敢、胆怯、贤德、不贤德的，都全部用尽自己的智慧、竭尽自己的全部力量，出生入死而替君主卖命。天下的英雄豪杰像流水一样追随君主，所以军队就天下无敌而政令得以在天下贯彻实行。
English: Therefore, the wise, the foolish, the rich, the lowly, the brave, the cowardly, the virtuous and the unvirtuous, have all exhausted their wisdom and exerted all their strength to serve the monarch from birth to death. The world's heroes and heroines follow the monarch like flowing water, so the army is invincible and the government order can be implemented in the world.

古文：万乘之国不敢苏其兵中原；千乘之国不敢捍城。
现代文：有一万辆兵车的国家没有谁敢在野外同他的军队对抗，有一千辆兵车的国家不敢守卫城镇。
English: A country with ten thousand chariots would not dare to confront its army in the field, and a country with a thousand chariots would not dare to guard a town.

古文：万乘之国，若有苏其兵中原者，战将覆其军；千乘之国，若有捍城者，攻将凌其城。
现代文：拥有一万辆兵车的国家如果有在原野中同它对抗的军队，只要战争打起来就会让他全军覆没；拥有一千辆兵车的小国如果防守城池，只要他一进攻就会登上他的城池。
English: A country with ten thousand chariots, if it has an army to oppose it in the field, will, if war breaks out, lose its whole army; a small country with a thousand chariots, if it defends its castle, will be overrun if attacked.

古文：战必覆人之军，攻必凌人之城，尽城而有之，尽宾而致之，虽厚庆赏，何费匮之有矣？
现代文：打仗就一定消灭别人的军队，进攻就一定占领别人的城池，那么所有的城池便都能占领它，天下所有的诸侯都能来朝贡，即使对立功的军队多加奖赏，财务怎么会浪费不足呢？
English: In war, you must destroy other people's armies, and in attack, you must occupy other people's cities. Then all cities can occupy it, and all princes in the world can come to pay tribute. Even if more rewards are given to opposing meritorious armies, how can there be a lack of financial waste?

古文：昔汤封于赞茅，文王封于岐周，方百里。
现代文：从前商汤在赞茅建立国家，周文王在岐山下的周原建立国家，方圆也只有百里。
English: Once upon a time, Shang Tang established a state in Zhanmao, and Zhou Wen Wang established a state in Zhouyuan under the Qishan Mountains. The radius is only a hundred miles.

古文：汤与桀战于鸣条之野，武王与纣战于牧野之中，大破九军，卒裂土封诸侯，士卒坐陈者，里有书社。车休息不乘，纵马华山之阳，纵牛于农泽，纵之老而不收。
现代文：商汤与夏桀在鸣条的原野上开战，周武王与商纣王在牧野地区交战，他们都大败夏桀和商纣王的强大军队，最后商汤和周武王都划分土地，分封诸侯，凡是坚守阵地的士兵，回到家乡后都按社里登记入册的人口拥有土地，战车放在那里不再乘坐，将马放到华山的南坡，将牛放到弘农一带的地里，一直到老死也不收回来。
English: Shang Tang and Xia Yao went to war on the plain of Mingzhu, and King Zhou Wu and King Shang Hui fought in the pasture area. They both defeated the powerful army of Xia Yao and King Shang Hui. In the end, Shang Tang and King Zhou Wu divided the land and divided the princes. All the soldiers who held their positions, after returning to their hometowns, owned land according to the population registered in the company. The chariots were placed there and no longer used, the horses were placed on the southern slope of Huashan, and the cattle were placed in the land around Hongnong. They would not be collected back until old age.

古文：此汤、武之赏也。
现代文：这就是商汤和周武王的奖赏啊。
English: This is the reward of Shang Tang and Zhou Wu Wang.

古文：故曰：赞茅、岐周之粟，以赏天下之人，不人得一升；以其钱赏天下之人，不人得一钱。
现代文：因此说：赞茅、岐周的粮食，如果用来奖赏天下的人，每个人还得不到一升；如果用赞茅、岐周的钱奖赏天下的人，每个人还不能得到一文钱。
English: Therefore, it is said: if the grain of Zhanmao and Qizhou is used to reward the people of the world, everyone will not get a liter; if the money of Zhanmao and Qizhou is used to reward the people of the world, everyone will not get a penny.

古文：故曰：百里之君，而封侯其臣，大其旧；自士卒坐陈者，里有书社；赏之所加，宽于牛马者；何也？
现代文：所以说：本来只拥有方圆百里土地的君主，却封自己的大臣为诸侯，这些诸侯的封地也比他们原来的国土大；对临阵的士兵，回到家乡后都拥有里社按书册登记人口分得的土地；他们的奖赏所涉及的对象，甚至放宽到了牛和马，为什么呢？
English: Therefore, it is said: the monarch, who originally owned only a hundred miles of land, made his ministers princes, and the fiefs of these princes were also larger than their original lands; the soldiers who were on the battlefield, after returning home, all owned the land allocated by the society according to the population registered in the book; the objects involved in their rewards were even extended to cattle and horses, why?

古文：善因天下之货以赏天下之人。
现代文：是因为他们善于使用天下的财物，用来奖赏天下的民众。
English: It is because they are good at using the world's wealth to reward the world's people.

古文：故曰：明赏不费。
现代文：所以说：公正高明的奖赏并不浪费财物。
English: Therefore it is said: A just and wise reward is not a waste of wealth.

古文：汤、武既破桀、纣，海内无害，天下大定，筑五库，藏五兵，偃武事，行文教，倒载干戈，搢笏，作为乐，以申其德，当此时也，赏禄不行，而民整齐。
现代文：商汤、周武王已经攻破了夏桀、商纣王，国内没有什么祸害，天下十分安定。他们修建了五种仓库，收藏起来各种兵器，停止了征战之事，实行文化品德教育。将兵器倒着放好，不再征伐打仗，大臣们都穿着朝服，将朝笏插在腰间，创制了音乐，用来彰明自己的功德。正当这个时候，奖赏和利禄都不实行，可是民众却很有规矩。
English: Shang Tang and King Zhou Wu have broken through Xia Yao and Shang Yao Wang, there is no disaster in the country, and the world is very stable. They built five kinds of warehouses, collected all kinds of weapons, stopped the war, and carried out cultural and moral education. They put the weapons upside down, and no longer fought wars. The ministers all wore court uniforms, put the hajj in the waist, and created music to show their merits. At this time, rewards and bonuses are not implemented, but the people are very orderly.

古文：故曰：明赏之犹至于无赏也。
现代文：所以说：公正明确的奖赏达到了一定程度，就可以不用奖赏了。
English: Therefore, it is said that once a fair and clear reward has reached a certain level, it can be dispensed with.

古文：所谓壹刑者，刑无等级，自卿相、将军以至大夫、庶人，有不从王令、犯国禁、乱上制者，罪死不赦。
现代文：所说的统一刑罚是指使用刑罚没有等级，从卿相、将军、一直到大夫和平民百姓，有不听从君主命令的，违反国家法令的。违反国家禁令，破坏君主制定的法律的，可以处以死罪，不赦免。
English: The so-called unified punishment refers to the use of punishment without rank, from ministers and generals to doctors and ordinary people, including those who disobey the monarch's orders and violate state laws. Violation of state prohibitions and destruction of laws formulated by the monarch can be punished by death, and will not be pardoned.

古文：有功于前，有败于后，不为损刑。
现代文：从前立过战功，但后来有触犯刑罚的事发生，也不因此而减轻刑罚。
English: In the past, he had distinguished himself in battle, but later there was a case of violating the punishment, and the punishment was not reduced because of this.

古文：有善于前，有过于后，不为亏法。
现代文：从前做过好事，又在后来犯过错误，也不因此而破坏法令。
English: If you have done something good in the past and later make a mistake, do not break the law because of it.

古文：忠臣孝子有过。必以其数断。
现代文：就是那些忠臣、孝子犯了罪也一定根据他们罪过的大小来判断。
English: Even those loyal vassals and filial sons who have committed crimes must be judged according to the magnitude of their sins.

古文：守法守职之吏有不行王法者，罪死不赦，刑及三族。
现代文：执行法令的官吏，担任现职的官吏有不实行君主法令的，也犯了死罪，决不赦免。
English: Officials who execute decrees, officials who are currently in office who do not implement the monarch's decrees, have also committed the death penalty and will never be pardoned.

古文：周官之人，知而讦之上者，自免于罪，无贵贱，尸袭其官长之官爵田禄。
现代文：而且刑罚株及到了他们的父、母、妻子的身上。官吏四周的人，知道他们的罪过，并能向君主揭发检举他们罪行的人，自己不仅能免受刑罚的处分，而且不分富贵贫穷，都能继承那位官吏的官爵、土地和俸禄。
English: Moreover, the stocks of punishment were applied to their fathers, mothers, and wives; and those around the magistrate, who knew their crimes, and could denounce them to the sovereign, were not only exempt from punishment themselves, but, whether rich or poor, inherited the magistracy, the lands, and the salary of the magistrate.

古文：故曰：重刑，连其罪，则民不敢试。民不敢试，故无刑也。
现代文：所以说：加重刑罚，株连他们的父、母、妻子，那么民众就不敢以身试法，也就等于没有刑罚了。
English: Therefore, it is said: If the punishment is made more severe, and their fathers, mothers, and wives are also punished, then the people will not dare to put themselves to the test, and there will be no punishment.

古文：夫先王之禁，刺杀，断人之足，黥人之面，非求伤民也，以禁奸止过也。
现代文：古代帝王制定的法令，有将人处死的，有砍断犯人的脚的，有在犯人脸上刺字再涂上墨的，这不是追求伤害民众，而是要用来禁止奸邪阻止犯罪。
English: The decrees made by ancient emperors, such as putting people to death, amputating the feet of prisoners, and tattooing and inking the faces of prisoners, were not aimed at harming the people, but were used to ban adultery and prevent crime.

古文：故禁奸止过，莫若重刑。
现代文：因此禁止奸邪阻止犯罪，没有什么办法能比得上使用重刑。
English: Therefore, prohibiting adultery prevents crime, and there is nothing comparable to the use of severe punishment.

古文：刑重而必得，则民不敢试，故国无刑民。
现代文：刑罚重就一定能捕获犯人，那么民众就不敢以身试法了，所以国家就等于没有受刑罚处治的民众。
English: If the punishment is severe, the criminals will surely be caught, then the people will not dare to test the law, so the state is equal to the people who have not been punished.

古文：国无刑民，故曰：明刑不戮。
现代文：国家没有受刑罚处治的民众，因此说严明的刑罚不是为了杀人。
English: The state does not have a population subject to criminal punishment, so the strict punishment is not for killing.

古文：晋文公将欲明刑以亲百姓，于是合诸卿大夫于侍千宫，颠颉后至，吏请其罪，君曰： 用事焉。 
现代文：晋文公想要严明刑罚使百姓亲近服从他，于是招集所有的卿相、大夫一块待千宫、颠颉来晚了，执法官请示晋文公定他的罪，晋文公说： 对他用刑吧。 
English: Jinwen Gong wanted to impose a strict punishment so that the people would come close to obeying him, so he called together all the ministers and doctors to wait for Qianmi, but it was too late. The magistrate asked Jinwen Gong to sentence him. Jinwen Gong said: Let him be punished.

古文：吏遂断颠颉之脊以殉。
现代文：执法官于是砍断了颠颉的脊梁骨来示众。
English: The magistrate then cut off the jolting backbone to show the public.

古文：晋国之土，稽焉皆惧，曰： 颠颉之有宠也，断以殉，况于我乎！ 
现代文：晋国的将士、民众议论起这件事都很惧怕，相互说： 颠颉是国君宠爱的大臣，触犯了刑律都腰斩来示众，何况对于我们了。 
English: The soldiers and people of Jin were afraid to discuss the matter, and said to each other: "Bumps is the favorite minister of the sovereign, and those who violate the criminal law are beheaded to show the public, not to mention us."

古文：举兵伐曹、五鹿，及反郑之埤，东徵之亩，胜荆人于城濮。
现代文：后来，晋文公发兵进攻曹国及卫国的五鹿，回军时又推翻了郑国的矮墙，命令卫国的田垄一律改东西方向，用来方便自己国家的兵车通过。
English: Later, Jin Wenkong sent soldiers to attack Cao and Wolu of the defending country. When he returned to the army, he overthrew the low wall of Zheng and ordered the fields and ridges of the defending country to change the east-west direction to facilitate the passage of his own country's military vehicles.

古文：三军之士，止之如斩足，行之如流水。
现代文：晋国一位三军将领和士兵，如下令停止前进，他们就像被砍断了肢一样站立，命令他们进攻，走路像流水一样迅速。
English: A general and soldiers of the three armies of Jin were ordered to stop advancing, they stood up as if their limbs were cut off, ordered them to attack, and walked as fast as running water.

古文：三军之士，无敢犯禁者。
现代文：三军的将领和士兵没有谁敢于违反禁令。
English: None of the generals and soldiers of the three armies dared to violate the ban.

古文：故一假道重轻于颠颉之脊，而晋国治。
现代文：因此晋文公一借用颠颉犯轻罪而处以重刑腰斩的办法，晋国就得到了治理。
English: Therefore, as soon as Jinwen Gong committed a misdemeanor by borrowing a jolt and was punished with a heavy sentence of beheading, Jin Province was governed.

古文：昔者周公旦杀管叔、流霍叔，曰： 犯禁者也。 
现代文：过去周公旦杀了管叔，流放了霍叔，说： 他们是犯了法令的人。 
English: In the past, Zhou Gongdan killed Uncle Guan and exiled Uncle Huo, saying: They are people who have violated the law.

古文：天下众皆曰： 亲昆弟有过，不违，而况疏远乎！ 
现代文：天下的人都说： 亲兄弟犯了罪过都执行法律，更何况我们这些疏远的人了？ 
English: People all over the world say, "If our brothers have committed crimes, we will all carry out the law, how much more those of us who are estranged?"

古文：故天下知用刀锯于周庭，而海内治，故曰：明刑之犹至于无刑也。
现代文：从此天下人都知道周公将刑罚用在了朝廷内，国境内的秩序得到治理。因此说： 公正严明的刑罚用到一定程度，等于没有刑罚。 
English: From then on, people all over the world knew that Zhou Gong had used punishment within the imperial court, and order within the country had been governed. Therefore, it was said: If a fair and strict punishment is used to a certain extent, it is equal to no punishment.

古文：所谓壹教者，博闻、辩慧，信廉、礼乐、修行、群党、任誉、清浊，不可以富贵，不可以评刑，不可独立私议以陈其上。
现代文：所说的统一教化，是指那些见闻广博，聪慧而富有辩才的人，所谓的诚实廉洁、精通礼制音乐、有道德修养、结成朋党、保举信誉、颠倒黑白的人，不能因为这个而富贵，不能因这个本事而评论法令刑罚，不能因为这个独自创立私人的学说，并用私人学说向君主陈述自己的思想。
English: The so-called unified education refers to those who are well-informed, intelligent and eloquent, the so-called honest and incorruptible, proficient in ceremonial music, morally cultivated, make friends, maintain credibility, and reverse black and white. They cannot be rich because of this, cannot comment on laws and punishments because of this ability, cannot independently create private doctrines because of this, and use private doctrines to present their thoughts to the monarch.

古文：坚者被，锐者挫。
现代文：对那些顽固不化的要摧垮他，对那些锋芒毕露的要挫败他。
English: To those who persevere, crush him; to those who waver, frustrate him.

古文：虽曰圣知、巧佞、厚朴，则不能以非功罔上利。
现代文：即使所谓的圣明睿智、花言巧语、阿谀奉承、忠厚纯朴的人，也不能凭借不是在战场上立功而欺骗君主得到好处。
English: Even the so-called saintly, wise, eloquent, flattering, loyal and simple people cannot deceive the monarch by virtue of not having distinguished themselves on the battlefield.

古文：然富贵之门，要存战而已矣。
现代文：如果这样，那些富贵的家族门第，也只能在战场上立功受赏罢了。
English: If that were the case, those wealthy families would only be rewarded for their services on the battlefield.

古文：彼能战者践富贵之门。
现代文：只有那些能打仗的人，才能踏进富贵的大门。
English: Only those who can fight can enter the gate of wealth.

古文：强梗焉，有常刑而不赦。
现代文：那些骄横跋扈的人，就会受到一定刑法的惩处而不能得到赦免。
English: Those who are arrogant will be punished by a certain criminal law and cannot be pardoned.

古文：是父兄、昆弟、知识、婚姻、合同者，皆曰： 务之所加，存战而已矣。 
现代文：这样，那些父亲伯叔、兄弟、相知相识的朋友、男女亲家，志同道合的人，都说： 我们务必要加倍努力的地方不过在战场上罢了。 
English: Thus, those fathers, uncles, brothers, acquaintances, friends, relatives, and like-minded people all said: The only place where we must redouble our efforts is on the battlefield.

古文：夫故当壮者务于战，老弱者务于守，死者不悔，生者务劝，此臣之所谓壹教也。
现代文：因此，那些正当年富力强的人都一定努力作战，年老体弱的人努力从事防守，那些死在战场的人不后悔，活着的人互相鼓励，这就是我说的统一教化。
English: Therefore, those who are old, rich and strong must fight hard, those who are old and weak must work hard to engage in defense, those who die on the battlefield do not regret, and those who are alive encourage each other. This is what I call unified education.

古文：民之欲富贵也，共阖棺而后止，而富贵之门必出于兵，是故民闻战而相贺也，起居饮食所歌谣者，战也。
现代文：民众中想要得到富贵的，都是到死后盖上棺材才停止，可富贵的门一定都是面向当兵的，所以民众听说要打仗便互相庆贺。民众起居饮食时所唱的歌谣，全是打仗的事。
English: Among the common people, those who wanted to get rich would wait until they were dead and covered with a coffin, but the doors of the rich were always open to soldiers, so when the common people heard that there was going to be a war, they would celebrate with each other. The songs that the common people sang when they were eating and drinking were all about the war.

古文：此臣之所谓明教之犹至于无教也。
现代文：这就是臣所说的严明教育到一定程度等于没有教化。
English: This is what the minister called rigorous education to a certain extent is equal to no indoctrination.

古文：此臣所谓叁教也。
现代文：这些就是我所说的奖赏、刑罚、教化三件事。
English: These are the three things I call reward, punishment, and education.

古文：圣人非能通，知万物之要也。
现代文：圣明的人不能通晓一切，而是明白万事万物的要领。
English: A holy man does not know everything, but he understands the essentials of everything.

古文：故其治国，举要以致万物，故寡教而多功。
现代文：因此他统治国家，抓住要领而达到通晓一切，所以只实行这三种教育就能取得很多功绩。
English: Therefore, he ruled the country, grasped the essentials and achieved omniscience, so only by practicing these three kinds of education, he could achieve a lot of merits.

古文：圣人治国也，易知而难行也。
现代文：圣明的人治理国家，容易明白却很难实行。
English: It is easy to understand, but difficult to implement, that a holy man governs a country.

古文：是故圣人不必加，凡主不必废；杀人不为暴，赏人不为仁者，国法明也。
现代文：所以圣人不用称赞，平凡的君主不一定要废掉；杀人不算残暴，奖赏人不算仁爱，这是因为国家法律严明公正。
English: Therefore, saints do not need to be praised, ordinary monarchs do not necessarily need to be abolished; killing is not considered cruel, rewarding is not considered benevolence, because the national law is strict and fair.

古文：圣人以功授官予爵，故贤者不忧；圣人不宥过，不赦刑，故奸无起。
现代文：圣明的人凭功绩授官职赐给爵位，因此贤德的人不用担忧，圣人不宽恕别人的错误，不赦免罪犯的刑罚，因此那些邪恶的事无法发生。
English: The holy man confers office and bestows titles of nobility on the basis of merit, so the virtuous man need not worry, the saint does not forgive the mistakes of others, does not pardon the punishment of criminals, so those evil things cannot happen.

古文：圣人治国也，审壹而已矣。
现代文：可见，圣明的人治理国家，只是考虑统一奖赏、统一刑罚，统一教化而已。
English: It can be seen that the holy man governing the country is only considering unified rewards, unified punishments, and unified indoctrination.

