古文：魏将与秦攻韩，朱己谓魏王曰： 秦与戎、翟同俗，有虎狼之心，贪戾好利而无信，不识礼义德行。苟有利焉，不顾亲戚兄弟，若禽兽耳。
现代文：魏国将要同秦国一同去攻打韩国，无忌对魏王说： 秦国与戎狄习俗相同，有虎狼一样的心肠，贪暴好利不守信用，不知道札义德行，假如有利可图，就不管亲戚兄弟，像禽兽一般。
English: Wei is going to attack Korea together with Qin, and he must say to the Wei king: Qin has the same customs as Qin Di, has the same heart as a tiger and wolf, is greedy for profit and dishonest, does not know how to practice righteousness, and if it is profitable, it does not care about relatives and brothers, just like animals.

古文：此天下之所同知也，非所施厚积德也。
现代文：这是天下人魔共知的，根本不是施恩惠、积德性的国家。
English: This is common knowledge all over the world. It is not a benevolent, virtuous country at all.

古文：故太后母也，而以忧死；穰侯舅也，功莫大焉，而竟逐之；两弟无罪，而再夺之国。
现代文：因此秦太后虽然是秦昭王的母亲，却因为忧愁而死；穰侯是秦昭王的舅舅，没有谁的功劳比饱大，竟然被放遂了；高陵君、泾阳君两个弟弟没有罪过，却两次剥夺他们的封地。
English: Therefore, the empress dowager, who was the mother of King Qin, died of grief, and the prince, who was the uncle of King Qin, had no greater merit than him, but he was expelled; the two brothers of King Qin were not guilty, but they were repeatedly deprived of their fiefs.

古文：此于其亲戚兄弟若此，而又况于仇雠之敌国也！
现代文：这样看来他自己的亲戚兄弟都如此，更何况对于结仇的敌国泥！
English: That's how his own relatives and brothers see it, not to mention his bitter enemies!

古文：今大王与秦伐韩而益近秦，臣甚或之，而王弗识也，则不明矣。
现代文：现在大王同秦国讨伐韩国，这就更加接近秦国，臣下很不理解。而大王还是不明白这个道理，那就是不明智了。
English: Now that the Great King and the State of Qin are fighting in Korea, which is even closer to the State of Qin, the vassals don't understand it, and the Great King still doesn't understand it, which is unwise.

古文：群臣知之，而莫以此谏，则不忠矣。
现代文：群臣对此事很清楚，却没有谁劝谏，那就是没有尽忠心。
English: The courtiers were well aware of this, but no one tried to dissuade him, that is, they were not loyal enough.

古文：今夫韩氏以一女子承一弱主，内有大乱，外安能支强秦、魏之兵，王以为不破乎？
现代文： 现在韩国靠一个女子辅佐一个幼主，国内出现大的混乱，对外又怎能抵抗强大的秦、魏军队，大王还认为攻不破韩国吗？
English: Now South Korea relies on a woman to assist a young lord. There is great chaos in the country. How can it resist the powerful Qin and Wei armies? Does the great king still think it is impossible to invade South Korea?

古文：韩亡，秦尽有郑地，与大梁邻，王以为安乎？
现代文：韩国灭亡了，秦国全部占有了原属于郑国的土地，就将与大梁为邻了，大王认为能安全吗？
English: South Korea has perished, and the Qin State has occupied all the land that originally belonged to the Zheng State, so it will be neighbors with the Great Beam. Does the Great King think it can be safe?

古文：王欲得故地，而今负强秦之祸也，王以为利乎？
现代文：大王想要收回原来失去的土地，而今却遭受上强秦的祸患，大王认为这样有利吗？
English: The great king wants to recover the lost land, but now he is suffering from the scourge of the Qin Dynasty. Does the great king think this is beneficial?

古文：秦非无事之国也，韩亡之后，必且便事；便事，必就易与利；就易与利，必不伐楚与赵矣。
现代文：秦国绝非不爱滋事的国家，韩国灭亡以后，必定将会再生事端，再生事端一定索取容易占领和有利可图之地，索取容易占领和有利可图之地，一定不会进攻楚国和赵国。
English: Qin is by no means a country that does not like trouble. After the demise of South Korea, there will certainly be renewed trouble. Renewed trouble will certainly claim land that is easy to occupy and profitable. It will certainly not attack Chu and Zhao.

古文：是何也？
现代文：这是为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：夫越山逾河，绝韩之上党而攻强赵，则是复阏与之事也，秦必不为也。
现代文：越过高山大河，横穿韩国的上党而去攻打强大的赵国，那么就将重演阏与败北的溜事，秦国一定不会去傲。
English: If you cross the Gaoshan River and cross the upper part of South Korea to attack the powerful Zhao Kingdom, then you will repeat the ups and downs of defeating the North. Qin will not be proud.

古文：若道河内，倍邺、朝歌，绝漳、滏之水，而以与赵兵决胜于邯郸之郊，是受智伯之祸也，秦又不敢。
现代文：如果取道河内，背朝邺邑、朝歌，渡过漳水、滏水，在邯郸的郊外同赵国军队决一胜负，这将遭到智伯遭到的大祸，秦国又不敢。
English: If we take the road to Hanoi, leaving behind the imperial cities of Nha Trang and Nha Trang, cross the provinces of Surabaya and Surabaya, and fight the Zhao army in the suburbs of Nha Trang, it will be a great disaster for Zhibo, and Qin will not dare to do so.

古文：伐楚，道涉而谷行三十里，而攻危隘之塞，所行者甚远，而所攻者甚难，秦又弗为也。
现代文：去进攻楚国，取道跋涉三千里去攻打黾隘的边塞，要走的路太远，要进攻的目标又太难，秦国不会去做。
English: It would be too far to attack Chu, and it would be too difficult to attack a narrow border fortress after traveling 3,000 miles. Qin would not do it.

古文：若道汉河外，背大梁，而右上蔡、召陵，以与楚兵决于陈郊，秦又不敢也。
现代文：假如取道河外，背朝大梁，右靠上蔡、召陵，在陈地郊外同楚军决战，秦国又不敢。
English: If we take the road outside the river, with the big beam behind us, and Cai and Zhaoling on the right, and fight a decisive battle with the Chu army in the outskirts of Chen, Qin will not dare.

古文：故曰，秦必不伐楚与赵矣，又不攻卫与齐矣。
现代文：所以说，秦国一定不会进攻楚国和赵国，又不会进攻燕国和齐国。
English: Therefore, Qin will not attack Chu and Zhao, nor will it attack Yan and Qi.

古文：韩亡之后，兵出之日，非魏无攻矣。
现代文：韩国灭亡之后，秦国出兵的时候，除了魏国再没有可以进攻的了。
English: After the fall of Korea, when Qin dispatched troops, there was no one to attack except Wei.

古文：秦故有怀地刑丘、之城垝津，而以临河内，河内之共、汲莫不危矣。
现代文：秦国本来有怀、茅、刑丘，再在堍津筑城，来近逼河内，河内的共、汲等地没有不危急的了。
English: Qin originally had Huai, Mao, and Jieqiu, and then built a city in Shuijin, and came close to Hanoi. There is nothing in Hanoi that is not critical.

古文：秦有郑地，得垣雍，决荥泽，而水大梁，大梁必亡矣。
现代文：秦国占领郑地，取得垣雍，掘开荧泽水淹大梁，大梁一定会失守。
English: Qin occupied Zheng, obtained the Yangtze River, dug out the fluorescent water-flooded girders, and the girders will certainly be lost.

古文：王之使者大过矣，乃恶安陵氏于秦，秦之欲许之久矣。
现代文：大王的使者犯了一个大错，竟向秦国中伤安陵氏，秦国很久就想占领许地了。
English: The emissary of the great king made a big mistake, and actually slandered the Anling clan to Qin. Qin has long wanted to occupy Xu's land.

古文：然而秦之叶阳、昆阳与舞阳、高陵邻，听使者之恶也，随安陵氏而欲亡之。
现代文：然而秦国的叶阳、昆阳与魏国的舞阳、高陵为邻，秦国听了使者的中伤之言，随后就将灭亡安陵氏了。
English: However, Qin's Yeyang and Kunyang were neighbors of Wei's Muyang and Gaoling. Qin listened to the slanderous words of the envoy, and then the Anling clan would perish.

古文：秦绕舞阳之北，以东临许，则南国必危矣。
现代文：秦军绕过舞阳的北面向东逼近许地，那么魏国的南方就危险了。
English: If the Qin army bypassed the north of Wuyang and approached Xu Province from the east, the south of Wei would be in danger.

古文：南国虽无危，则魏国岂得安哉?
现代文：甫方即使没有危险，魏国难道就能得到安宁吗？
English: But even if there is no danger, will the country be able to find peace?

古文：且夫憎韩不受安陵氏可也，夫不患秦之不爱南国，非也。
现代文：再说憎恨韩国、不爱惜安陵氏，还算可以，而不担心秦国占领南方土地，就不对了。
English: Furthermore, hating South Korea and not caring about the Anlin clan is fine, but not worrying about Qin occupying the southern land is not right.

古文：异日者，秦乃在河西，晋国之去梁也，千里有余，河山以蘭之，有周、韩而间之。
现代文： 以前，秦国还在河西之外，晋国溜都绎与安邑一带距离大粱有予余里，靠有河山遮挡，又有周、韩在中间隔开。
English: In the past, Qin was still outside of Hexi, and the distance between the capital of Jin and the area around An'i was only a few miles, shielded by rivers and mountains, with Zhou and Han separated in the middle.

古文：从林军以至于今，秦十攻魏，五入国中，边城尽拔。
现代文：从林乡之战一直到现在，秦国十次进攻魏国，五次攻入国中。
English: From the Battle of Linxiang to the present, Qin attacked Wei ten times and invaded Guozhong five times.

古文：文台堕，垂都焚，林木伐，糜鹿尽，而国继以困。
现代文：边境的城邑都被攻破，文台被毁坏，垂都被焚烧，林木遭砍伐，糜鹿被杀尽。接着国都被围困。
English: The border towns were attacked, the printing presses were destroyed, the cattle were burned, the forests were cut down, the elk were killed, and then the country was besieged.

古文：又长驱梁北，东至陶、卫之郊，北至平阚，所亡乎秦者，山北、河外、河内，大县数百，名都数十。
现代文：秦军又长驱直入魏国北部，东面到了陶、魏两她的郊外，北面到了乎阚，被泰国侵占的地方，有中条山南、中条山北，黄河以南、黄河以北，大的县邑有数百个，有名的都邑数十个。
English: The Qin army also drove straight into the northern part of Wei, to the east to the suburbs of Tao and Wei, and to the north to Huancheng. The areas occupied by Thailand were Zhongjia Mountain in the south, Zhongjia Mountain in the north, south of the Yellow River, and north of the Yellow River. There were hundreds of large counties and dozens of famous cities and towns.

古文：秦乃在河西，晋国之去大梁也尚千里，而祸若是矣。又况于使秦无韩而有郑地，无河山以蘭之，无周、韩以间之，去大梁百里，祸必百此矣。
现代文：秦国还在河西之外，晋国故都绛与安邑一带距大梁还有千里之遥，而祸患达到如此程度，更何况让秦国没有韩国的阻隔而据有郑地，失去了河山的遮挡，失去了周、韩的阻隔，距离大梁只有百里的路程，祸患一定超过这百倍了。
English: Qin was still outside of Hexi, and the areas between the ancient capital of Jin and Ami were still thousands of miles away from the girders, but the disaster reached such a level, not to mention that Qin did not have the barrier of South Korea but had Zheng, lost the barrier of rivers and mountains, lost the barrier of Zhou and South Korea, and was only a hundred miles away from the girders. The disaster must have exceeded this hundredfold.

古文：异日者，从之不成矣，楚、魏疑而韩不可得而约也。
现代文：等到他日，即使想合纵也不能成功了，楚国、魏国就会互相猜疑而韩国更不可能来缔结盟约。
English: When the day comes, even if they want to merge, they will not succeed, Chu and Wei will be suspicious of each other, and South Korea will not be able to conclude an alliance treaty.

古文：今韩受兵三年矣，秦挠之以讲，韩知亡，犹弗听，投质于赵，而请为天下雁行顿刃。
现代文：现在韩国遭受兵祸已有三年，秦国想使它屈服求和，韩国知道要被灭亡了依然不听命，给赵国送去人质，请求联合天下诸侯如雁阵前行，杀钝士兵的兵刃。
English: Now it has been three years since Korea has been plagued by war. Qin wanted to bring it to its knees and sued for peace. Korea, knowing that it was about to be destroyed, still disobeyed orders, sent hostages to Zhao, and requested that the princes of the world unite and march forward like geese, killing the blunt sword of the soldiers.

古文：以臣之观之，则楚、赵必与之攻矣。
现代文：以臣下看来，楚国、赵国一定会同韩国一道攻击秦国。
English: In the opinion of his subordinates, the states of Chu and Zhao would certainly attack the state of Qin together with Korea.

古文：此何也?
现代文：这是为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：则皆知秦之无穷也，非尽亡天下之兵，而臣海内之民，必不休矣。
现代文：因为都知道泰国的贪欲无休无止，不全部消灭天下的军队而使海内的百姓臣服，一定不会罢休。
English: Because they all know that Thailand's greed is endless, and it will not stop until it has completely annihilated the armies of the world and subjugated the people of the sea.

古文：是故臣愿以从事乎王，王速受楚、赵之约，而挟韩、魏之质，以存韩为务，因求故地于韩，韩必效之。
现代文：困此臣下愿意用合纵的力量来侍奉大王，大王赶快接受楚、赵的盟约挟持韩国的人质，把保存韩国作为急务，凭这些向韩国索要原来失去的土地，韩国一宠会献上这些土地。
English: This distressed vassal was willing to serve the great king with the power of the conciliator. The great king quickly accepted the alliance of Chu and Zhao to hold South Korea hostage, and regarded the preservation of South Korea as an urgent matter. With these, he asked South Korea for the land that he had lost, and South Korea would offer these lands.

古文：如此，则士民不劳而故地得，其功多于与秦共伐韩，然而无与强秦邻之祸。
现代文：像这样，士兵、百姓不付辛劳就得到了原来失去的土地，这个功绩要比同秦国一起讨伐韩国大得多，而且能避免同强秦为邻的祸患。
English: In this way, the soldiers and people got the land they had lost without much effort. This achievement is much greater than fighting Korea together with Qin, and it can avoid the disaster of being neighbors with the strong Qin.

古文： 夫存韩安魏而利天下，此亦王之大时已。
现代文： 再说能够保存韩国、安定魏国而对天下有利，这也是大王施展抱负的大好时机。
English: Moreover, it is beneficial to the world to be able to preserve South Korea and stabilize Wei, which is also a great opportunity for the king to show his ambition.

古文：通韩之上党于共、莫，使道已通，因而关之，出入者赋之，是魏重质韩以其上党也。
现代文：沟通韩国上党到共、宁两地的交通，使道路畅通后，随之而设立关卡，出入的人交纳赋税，这是因为韩国把它的上党交给了魏国作为重要的抵押。
English: After communicating the traffic of South Korea's Shangdang to the two places of the Communist Party of China and Ningxia and making the roads smooth, checkpoints were set up, and people entering and leaving paid taxes. This was because South Korea handed over its Shangdang to Wei as an important collateral.

古文：共有其赋，足以富国，韩必德魏、爱魏、重魏、畏魏，韩必不敢反魏。韩是魏之县也。
现代文：魏国同韩国共分赋税，足可以使国家富强，韩国一定感激魏国、爱戴魏国、尊重魏国、惧怕魏国，韩国一定不敢反对魏国，韩国将是魏国的一个县了。
English: Wei and South Korea share taxes, which is enough to make the country rich and strong. South Korea must be grateful to Wei, love Wei, respect Wei, and fear Wei. South Korea must not dare to oppose Wei. South Korea will be a county of Wei.

古文：魏得韩以为县，则卫、大梁、河外必安矣。
现代文：魏国得到韩国作为自己的一个县，那么卫地、大梁、河外一定安全了。
English: If the State of Wei gets South Korea as one of its counties, then the provinces of Meidi, Daliang, and Hebei will be safe.

古文：今不存韩，则二周必危，安陵必易。
现代文：现在不保存韩国，东西周一定危险，安陵必被秦军夺走。
English: If South Korea is not preserved now, the East and West Circuits will be in danger, and Anling will be taken away by the Qin Army.

古文：楚、赵楚大破，卫、齐甚畏。天下之西乡而驰秦，入朝为臣之日不久。 
现代文：楚、赵两国如再被秦军大败，燕国、齐国会更加惧怕，天下诸侯会面向西方争着奔向秦国，入朝称臣的日子不会太远了。 
English: If the two countries of Chu and Zhao are again defeated by the Qin army, Yan and Qi will be even more afraid, and the princes of the world will face the West and rush to Qin, and the days of entering the court and being a minister will not be too far away.

