古文：任光字伯卿，南阳宛人也。
现代文：◆任光传任光字伯卿，南阳郡宛县人。
English: ◆ Ren Guang Chuan Ren Guang Zi Boqing, a native of Wen County, Nanyang County.

古文：少忠厚，为乡里所爱。
现代文：年轻时忠厚，为乡里所爱。
English: Faithful in his youth, he was loved by the village.

古文：初为乡啬夫、郡县吏。
现代文：起初为乡啬夫，郡县吏。
English: At first he was a country bumpkin, a county clerk.

古文：汉兵至宛，军人见光冠服鲜明，令解衣，将杀而夺之。
现代文：汉兵到宛，军人见任光冠服鲜明，令他解下衣服，准备把他杀掉而夺其衣服。
English: When the Han soldiers arrived, the soldiers saw Ren's brightly colored uniform and ordered him to take off his clothes, preparing to kill him and take his clothes.

古文：会光禄勋刘赐适至，视光容貌长者，乃救全之。
现代文：刚好光禄勋刘赐到了，看任光容貌像个长者模样，就把他救了。
English: Just as the award arrived, Ren Guang, who looked like an elderly man, saved him.

古文：光因率党与从赐，为安集掾，拜偏将军，与世祖破王寻、王邑。
现代文：任光就率领党徒跟从刘赐，为安集掾，拜为偏将军，与世祖破王寻、王邑。
English: Ren Guang led the party members to follow Liu Zi, to be the leader of Anji, to be the leader of Bi, and to break away from Wang Xun and Wangyi.

古文：更始至洛阳，以光为信都太守。
现代文：更始到洛阳，以任光为信都太守。
English: He went to Luoyang to begin with, believing Ren Guang to be too conservative.

古文：及王郎起，郡国皆降之，光独不肯，遂与都尉李忠、令万脩、功曹阮况、五官掾郭唐等同心固守。
现代文：王郎兴起，郡国都投降了王郎，任光独不肯，就与都尉李忠、令万修、功曹阮况、五官掾郭唐等同心固守。
English: With the rise of Wang Lang, the county and the country all surrendered to Wang Lang. However, Ren Guang Du refused to surrender, so he and his lieutenants Li Zhong, Ling Wan Xiu, Gong Cao, Ruan Zhan, and five officials, including Guo Guotang, held fast with one heart.

古文：廷掾持王郎檄诣府白光，光斩之于市，以徇百姓，发精兵四千人城守。
现代文：廷掾拿着王郎的檄文到任光家去说服任光，任光把廷掾斩之于市，以宣示于百姓，发精兵四千人加强城守。
English: Ting Yao went to Ren Guang's home with Wang Lang's petition to persuade Ren Guang. Ren Guang beheaded Ting Yao in the city to announce to the people, and sent four thousand soldiers to strengthen the city's defense.

古文：更始二年春，世祖自蓟还，狼狈不知所向，传闻信都独为汉拒邯郸，即驰赴之。
现代文：更始二年春，世祖自蓟回来，狼狈得不知往何处去，听说信都独为汉拒王郎，就奔赴信都。
English: In the spring of the second year of the Heian period, Shiso came back from his self-imposed exile. He was so confused that he did not know where to go. When he heard that Shintoku was the only place to reject Han, he rushed to Shintoku.

古文：光等孤城独守，恐不能全，闻世祖至，大喜，吏民皆称万岁，即时开门，与李忠、万脩率官属迎谒。
现代文：任光等独守孤城，恐不能保全，听说世祖到了，大喜，官吏民众都称万岁，即时开门，与李忠、万修率领官属欢迎晋谒。
English: Ren Guang and others were left alone to guard the lonely city, fearing that they would not be able to preserve it. When they heard that the patriarch had arrived, they were overjoyed. The officials and people all said "long live the patriarch" and immediately opened the door, welcoming the crown prince with Li Zhong and Wan Xiu leading the officials.

古文：世祖入传舍，谓光曰： 伯卿，今势力虚弱，欲俱入城头子路、力子都兵中，何如邪？ 光曰： 不可。 世祖曰： 卿兵少，如何？ 光曰： 可募发奔命，出攻傍县，若不降者，恣听掠之。
现代文：世祖到住所，对任光说 ：伯卿，今势单力薄，想与你一起到城头子路、力子都兵中去，你看怎样呢？ 任光说： 不可。 世祖说： 你兵少，怎么办呢？ 任光说： 可招募快速部队，出攻旁县，如不投降的，就任其掠夺。
English: When the patriarch arrived at his residence, he said to Ren Guang: Your Excellency, you are now in a weak position, and you want to go with you to the soldiers at the top of the city. What do you think? Ren Guang said: No. The patriarch said: You have few soldiers, what should you do? Ren Guang said: You can recruit rapid troops, attack the neighboring counties, and if they do not surrender, take over their plunder.

古文：人贪财物，则兵可招而致也。 世祖从之。
现代文：人贪财物，这样兵就可以招到了。 世祖听从了。
English: People are greedy for wealth, so soldiers can be summoned. The patriarch obeyed.

古文：拜光为左大将军，封武成侯，留南阳宗广领信都太守事，使光将兵从。
现代文：拜任光为左大将军，封武成侯，留南阳宗广领信都太守职务，使任光带兵跟从自己。
English: Bai Renguang was the left-most general, Fong Wu Chenghou, and Liu Nanyang Zongguang Lianxin all kept their posts too, so that Renguang led the soldiers to follow him.

古文：光乃多作檄文曰： 大司马刘公将城头子路、力子都兵百万众从东方来，击诸反虏。 遣骑驰至巨鹿界中。
现代文：任光就多作檄文说 ：大司马刘公率领城头子路、力子都兵百万之众从东方到来，征讨各部反贼。 遣骑奔驰到巨鹿界中。
English: Ren Guang wrote more than one obituary, saying, "Grand Master Ma Liu Gong led a million soldiers from the East, who came from all over the country to fight against the bandits, and sent them on horseback to the Deer Kingdom.

古文：吏民得檄，传相告语。
现代文：官吏民众得到檄文，互相传告。
English: Officials and the public received the message and passed it on to each other.

古文：世祖遂与光等投暮入堂阳界，使骑各持炬火，弥满泽中，光炎烛天地，举城莫不震惊惶怖，其夜即降。
现代文：世祖于是与任光等在日暮时进入堂阳界，令骑兵各持火炬，使火光弥漫于泽中，火光照耀天地，举城莫不震惊恐怖，当夜就投降了。
English: Therefore, the patriarch, together with Ren Guang and others, entered the Doyang Realm at dusk, ordered the cavalry to each hold a torch, so that the fire would fill the middle of the lake, the fire would illuminate the sky and the earth, and the city would not be shocked and terrified, and surrendered that night.

古文：旬日之间，兵众大盛，因攻城邑，遂屠邯郸，乃遣光归郡。
现代文：旬日之间，兵力大盛，因而转攻城邑，攻克邯郸，于是遣任光回郡。
English: Between the 10th and the 15th, the troops were in full strength, so they turned to attack the city, conquered the county, and then sent Ren Guang back to the county.

古文：城头子路者，东平人，姓爰，名曾，字子路，与肥城刘诩起兵卢城头，故号其兵为 城头子路 。
现代文：城头子路，是东平人，姓爰，名曾，字子路，与肥城刘诩起兵卢城头，所以称他的兵是 城头子路。 
English: Chengtouzi Lu, is a Dongping people, surname Zou, name Zeng, character Zouzi Lu, and Fucheng Liu Zou started to fight Lu Chengtou, so he called his soldiers Chengtouzi Lu.

古文：曾自称 都从事 ，诩称 校三老 ，寇掠河、济间，众至二十余万。
现代文：子路自称 都从事 ，刘诩称 校三老 ，在黄河、济水之间侵略掠夺，部众达二十多万。
English: Zilu claimed that they were all engaged in aggression and plunder between the Yellow River and Jishui, and the number of followers reached more than 200,000.

古文：更始立，曾遣使降，拜曾东莱郡太守，诩济南太守，皆行大将军事。
现代文：更始立，爰曾遣使归降，更始拜爰曾为东莱郡太守，刘诩为济南太守，都行使大将军事。
English: At the beginning of the war, Zou had sent an envoy to surrender, at the beginning of the war, Bai Zou had been the governor of Donglai County, and Liu Zou was the governor of Jinan, all of which were military generals.

古文：是岁，曾为其将所杀，众推诩为主，更始封诩助国侯，令罢兵归本郡。
现代文：这年，爰曾被他的部将所杀，众推刘诩为主，更始封刘诩为助国侯，令他罢兵回到自己郡里去。
English: This year, Zou was killed by his subordinate, and the people pushed Liu Zou to be the leader, and even appointed Liu Zou as the assistant governor, and ordered him to leave the army and return to his county.

古文：力子都者，东海人也。起兵乡里，抄击徐、兖界，众有六七万。
现代文：力子都，是东海人，在乡里起兵，劫掠攻击在徐州，兖州一带，有部众六七万人。
English: Li Zi Du was from the East China Sea. He raised an army in the countryside and attacked and plundered areas in Xuzhou and Zhangzhou, with a force of sixty to seventy thousand men.

古文：更始立，遣使降，拜子都徐州牧。
现代文：更始立，遣使投降，拜力子都为徐州牧。
English: Xuzhou herdsmen were the first to stand up, the envoys were sent to surrender, and the worshippers were all Xuzhou herdsmen.

古文：为其部曲所杀，余党复相聚，与诸贼会于檀乡，因号为檀乡。
现代文：被其部下所杀，其余党再聚集起来，与诸贼相会檀乡，因此号为檀乡。
English: He was killed by his subordinates, and the rest of the party regrouped and met with the bandits in Dangxiang, hence the name Dangxiang.

古文：檀乡渠帅董次仲始起茌平，遂渡河入魏郡清河，与五校合，众十余万。
现代文：檀乡大帅董次仲开始时起于茌平县，于是渡河入魏郡清河，与五校会合，有众十多万。
English: Dangxiang Dashai Dong Jizhong started in Fenping County at the beginning, so he crossed the river into Qinghe, Wei County, and met with five schools, with more than one hundred thousand.

古文：建武元年，世祖入洛阳，遣大司马吴汉等击檀乡，明年春，大破降之。
现代文：建武元年，世祖入洛阳，派遣大司马吴汉军袭击檀乡，第二年春，檀乡失败投降。
English: In the first year of Jianwu, the founder of the dynasty entered Luoyang and dispatched the general Ma Wu Han army to attack Dangxiang. In the spring of the following year, Dangxiang surrendered in defeat.

古文：是岁，更封光阿陵侯，食邑万户。
现代文：这年，更封任光为阿陵侯，食邑万户。
English: In the same year, Ren Guang was given the title of Alinghou, and became a household name.

古文：五年，征诣京师，奉朝请。
现代文：建武五年，征召到京师，奉朝请。
English: In the fifth year of Jianwu, he was conscripted to the Beijing division and served as a general.

古文：其冬卒。
现代文：其年冬去世。
English: He died in the winter of that year.

古文：子隗嗣。
现代文：子任隗嗣位。
English: His son was appointed heir to the throne.

古文：后阮况为南阳太守，郭唐至河南尹，皆有能名。
现代文：◆李忠传
English: ◆Li Zhongzhuan

古文：隗字仲和，少好黄、老，清静寡欲，所得奉秩，常以赈恤宗族，收养孤寡。
现代文：李忠字仲都，东莱郡黄县人。
English: Li Zhongzi Zhongdu, Donglai County, Huang County.

古文：父为高密都尉。忠元始中以父任为郎，署中数十人，而忠独以好礼修整称。王莽时为新博属长，郡中咸敬信之。
现代文：父亲为高密都尉。李忠平帝时以父任为郎，署中数十人，而李忠独以好礼修饰整齐著称。王莽时为新博属长，郡中都尊敬信任他。
English: His father was Captain Gao Mi. When Emperor Li Zhongping was in power, he was the son of his father Ren. There were dozens of people in the station, and Li Zhong Du was known for his good manners and neat appearance. When Wang Mang was the chief of Xinbo, everyone in the county respected and trusted him.

古文：更始立，使使者行郡国，即拜忠都尉官。
现代文：更始即位，派遣使者巡行郡国，即拜李忠为都尉官。
English: He was enthroned at the beginning of the new year and sent an envoy to tour the county, i.e. he appointed Li Zhong as a lieutenant.

古文：忠遂与任光同奉世祖，以为右大将军，封武固侯。
现代文：李忠就与任光共同奉世祖，以为右大将军，封武固侯。
English: Li Zhong and Ren Guang jointly honored the ancestor, thought that he was a great general of the right, and appointed him as a military governor.

古文：时，世祖自解所佩绶以带忠，因从攻下属县。至苦陉，世祖会诸将，问所得财物，唯忠独无所掠。
现代文：当时世祖自己解下所佩带的绶带替李忠带上，因而从世祖攻下属县，到达苦胫县，世祖会合诸将，问他们得到了哪些财物，只有李忠没有掠夺。
English: At that time, the ancestor himself untied the umbilical cord he was wearing and put it on Li Zhong's belt. As a result, from the time the ancestor conquered the subordinate counties to the time he arrived in Bitou County, the ancestor gathered the generals and asked them what kind of property they had obtained. Only Li Zhong did not plunder.

古文：世祖曰： 我欲特赐，李忠，诸卿得无望乎？ 即以所乘大骊马及绣被衣物赐之。
现代文：世祖说 ：我想特别赏赐李忠，你们不会有什么怨恨吧？ 就以所乘的大马丽马及绣被衣物赐给李忠。
English: The ancestor said, "I want to give a special reward to Li Zhong. You won't have any grudges, will you?" So he gave Li Zhong the horse he was riding and the embroidered cloak.

古文：诸将皆惊曰： 家属在人手中，杀其弟，何猛也！ 忠曰： 若纵贼不诛，则二心也。 世祖闻而美之，谓忠曰： 今吾兵已成矣，将军可归救老母、妻、子，宜自募吏民能得家属者，赐钱千万，来从我取。 忠曰： 蒙明公大恩，思得效命，诚不敢内顾宗亲。 世祖乃使任光将兵救信都，光兵于道散降王郎，无功而还。
现代文：诸将都惊恐说： 你母亲妻子还在人家手中，杀了他的弟弟，不是过分了吗！ 李忠说 ：如反贼不诛，那就是二心了。 世祖听到后赞美李忠说： 现在我的兵已成了，将军可以回去救你的老母妻子，要招募吏民中能救得家属的，赏赐千万，到我这里来领取。 李忠说： 蒙明公大恩，我只想到为公效命，实在不敢顾及自己家属。 世祖就使任光率兵救信都，任光的兵在路上分散投降了王郎，任光无功而还。
English: All the generals were alarmed and said, "Your mother's wife is still in the hands of others, and they killed his younger brother, isn't that too much!" Li Zhong said, "If you don't fight against the thieves, then you have two hearts." Upon hearing this, the patriarch praised Li Zhong and said, "Now that my army is complete, the general can go back and save your old mother's wife. He should recruit officials and commoners who can save their families, and reward them with tens of thousands of dollars, and come to me to collect them." Li Zhong said, "Mengming Gong is very generous. I only thought about serving the public, but I really

古文：会更始遣将攻破信都，忠家属得全。
现代文：恰逢更始派遣将领攻破了信都，李忠家属才得到安全。
English: Li Zhong's family members were only able to get to safety when a general was dispatched to break through the city of Xindu.

古文：世祖因使忠还，行太守事，收郡中大姓附邯郸者，诛杀数百人。
现代文：世祖因而使李忠回信都，行太守事，李忠就把郡中那些归附王郎的大姓，诛杀数百人。
English: As a result, the ancestor asked Li Zhong to reply to the capital and act as a guardian. Li Zhong then killed hundreds of the grand families in the county who belonged to Wang Lang.

古文：及任光归郡，忠乃还复为都尉。
现代文：等到任光回到郡里，李忠就复原为都尉。
English: When Ren Guang returned to the county, Li Zhong was reinstated as captain.

古文：建武二年，更封中水侯，食邑三千户。
现代文：建武二年，更封中水侯，食邑三千户。
English: In the second year of Jianwu, it was renamed Zhongshui Hou, with 3,000 households in the food village.

古文：其年，征拜五官中郎将，从平宠萌，董宪等。
现代文：这年，征拜为五官中郎将，跟从平定庞萌、董宪等。
English: In this year, Zeng Bai was appointed as the general of the five departments, followed by Pingding Pang Meng, Dong Xian and others.

古文：六年，迁丹阳太守。
现代文：建武六年，迁丹阳太守。
English: Jianwu six years, moved to Danyang governor.

古文：是时，海内新定，南方海滨江淮，多拥兵据土。
现代文：这时海内刚刚平定，南方海滨江淮一带，很多人拥兵割据。
English: At this time, the inland sea had just been pacified, and many people supported the separation of troops along the southern coast of the Jianghuai River.

古文：忠到郡，招怀降附，其不服者悉诛之，旬月皆平。
现代文：李忠到郡，招使归附，其不服从的全部诛灭，旬日之内都平定了。
English: Li Zhong went to the county, invited it to join, and all of its disobedience was put to an end, and it was all settled within ten days.

古文：忠以丹阳越俗不好学，嫁娶礼仪，衰于中国，乃为起学校，习礼容，春秋乡饮，选用明经，郡中向慕之。
现代文：李忠以丹阳越俗不喜学习，嫁娶仪礼，不如中原隆重，就为之起学校，习礼仪，春秋举行礼会，选用通晓经术，在郡中为人向慕的人主持。
English: Li Zhong said that Danyang is more vulgar and does not like to study, and the wedding ceremony is not as grand as the Central Plains, so he started a school, studied etiquette, held a ceremony in spring and autumn, chose to be familiar with the scriptures, and presided over the people who were admired in the county.

古文：垦田增多，三岁间流民占著者五万余口。
现代文：由此垦田增多，三年之中流民成为当地土著者达五万余口。
English: As a result, the number of rice paddies increased, and within three years, more than fifty thousand people became local aborigines.

古文：永初七年，邓太后复封纯琴亭侯。
现代文：建武十四年，三公考核评定为天下第一，迁豫章太守。因病免官，征召到京师。
English: In the 14th year of the Jianwu era, he was ranked first in the world in the third public examination, and he was transferred to the position of the grand marshal of the Yuan Dynasty. Due to illness, he was relieved of his duties and conscripted to the Beijing division.

古文：纯卒，子广嗣。
现代文：建武十九年去世。
English: He died in the 19th year of the Kenmu era.

古文：万脩字君游，扶风茂陵人也。
现代文：◆万脩传万脩字君游，扶风郡茂陵人。
English: ◆Manchukuo Manchukuo Zi Junyu, a native of Murying, Fufeng County.

古文：更始时，为信都令，与太守任光、都尉李忠共城守，迎世祖，拜为偏将军，封造义侯。
现代文：更始时，为信都令，与太守任光、都尉李忠共同守城，迎接世祖，拜为偏将军，封造义侯。
English: At the time of the change of the capital, Emperor Shintō, together with Taisho Renko and Lieutenant Li Zhong, guarded the city to welcome the founder of the dynasty, to worship him as a great general, and to seal Yoshiharu.

古文：及破邯郸，拜右将军，从平河北。
现代文：等到破了邯郸，拜为右将军，跟从平定河北。
English: Wait until the shackles are broken, worship the right general, and follow the pacification of Hebei.

古文：建武二年，更封槐里侯。
现代文：建武二年，更封槐里侯。
English: In the second year of the Jianwu era, he was given the title of Jilin Marquis.

古文：与扬化将军坚镡俱击南阳，未克而病，卒于军。
现代文：与扬化将军坚镡共攻南阳，没攻下而得了病，在军中去世。
English: He attacked Nanyang together with Yanghua General Jianzhong, but got sick and died in the army.

古文：子普嗣，徙封泫氏侯。
现代文：子万普嗣位，徙封泫氏侯。
English: His son Wanpu became heir to the throne and was given the title of marquis.

古文：普卒，子亲嗣，徙封扶柳侯。
现代文：万普卒，子万亲嗣位，徙封扶柳侯。
English: Wanputu, the son of Wancheng, the heir to the throne, was exiled to Fuliu.

古文：亲卒，无子，国除。
现代文：万亲卒，无子，封国废除。
English: No relatives, no children, abolish the feudal state.

古文：永初七年，邓太后绍封脩曾孙丰为曲平亭侯。
现代文：永初七年，邓太后续封万脩曾孙万丰为曲平亭侯。
English: In the seventh year of the Yongzheng era, Emperor Deng subsequently made Wanfeng, the great-grandson of Wanli, the Prince of Qupingting.

古文：丰卒，子炽嗣。
现代文：万丰卒，子万炽嗣位。
English: A man of many talents, a son of many talents, an heir to the throne.

古文：永建元年，炽卒，无子，国除。
现代文：永建元年，万炽卒，无子，封国废除。
English: In the first year of the Yongjian era, Wan blazed a path, had no children, and the feudal state was abolished.

古文：延熹二年，桓帝绍封脩玄孙恭为门德亭侯。
现代文：延熹二年，桓帝续封万脩玄孙万恭为门德亭侯。
English: In the second year of Yanjing, Emperor Kan renewed the appointment of Wanzhong Gensun Wanyong as Mende Tinghou.

古文：邳彤字伟君，信都人也。
现代文：◆邳彤传邳彤字伟君，信都人。
English: ◆A great man, a man of faith.

古文：父吉，为辽西太守。
现代文：父邳吉，为辽西太守。
English: His father, Shunji, was the governor of western Liaoning.

古文：彤初为王莽和成卒正。
现代文：邳彤起初为王莽和成卒正。
English: At first, it was Wang Mang and Cheng Tuo Zheng.

古文：世祖徇河北，至下曲阳，彤举城降，复以为太守，留止数日。
现代文：世祖攻取河北，到下曲阳。邳彤举城投降，世祖便以邳彤为太守，居留数日。
English: The ancestor conquered Hebei and went down to Quyang. Zou held up the city and surrendered. The ancestor then made Zou the governor and stayed there for a few days.

古文：世祖北至蓟，会王郎兵起，使其将徇地，所到县莫不奉迎，唯和成、信都坚守不下。
现代文：世祖北到蓟，恰逢王郎兵起，使将领攻略土地，所到之县莫不奉迎，惟有和成、信都坚守不下。
English: The arrival of King Sejong in the north coincided with the rise of Wang Lang's army, which led the generals to conquer the land. They were welcomed in every county they visited, but they could only hold on to Hacheng and Xin.

古文：彤闻世祖从蓟还，失军，欲至信都，乃先使五官掾张万、督邮尹绥，选精骑二千余匹，缘路迎世祖军。
现代文：邳彤听说世祖从蓟回来，失了军队，准备到信都，就先派五官掾张万、督邮尹绥选精骑二千余匹，沿路迎世祖军。
English: Hearing that the ancestor had returned from Shifang, lost his army, and was preparing to go to Xindu, he first sent five officials, Zhang Wan, postmaster Yin Xuan and more than two thousand horses to welcome the ancestor's army along the road.

古文：彤寻与世祖会信都。
现代文：邳彤不久就与世祖相会于信都。
English: He soon met his ancestor in Shintō.

古文：世祖虽得二郡之助，而兵众未合，议者多言可因信都兵自送，西还长安。
现代文：世祖虽然得到了二郡的帮助，但兵众没有集合，部下多说可用信都兵送他西归长安。
English: Although the ancestor received help from the two counties, the soldiers did not gather, and his subordinates mostly said that they could send the soldiers to Chang'an.

古文：彤廷对曰：议者之言皆非也。
现代文：邳彤当即回答说 ：议者之言都错了。
English: Zhai immediately replied, "The speaker's words are all wrong."

古文：吏民歌吟思汉久矣，故更始举尊号而天下响应，三辅清宫除道以迎之。
现代文：吏民歌颂思念汉朝已久了，所以更始即位天下群起响应，三辅清宫扫榻除道以表欢迎。
English: It has been a long time since the officials and the people have been singing the praises of the Han Dynasty, so the world has responded in droves since the beginning of the reign. The three auxiliary Qing Palace sweepers are welcomed with a table.

古文：一夫荷戟大呼，则千里之将无不捐城遁逃，虏伏请降。
现代文：一个人举戟大呼，则千里之将无不献城而逃遁，贼虏匍匐请降。
English: If one person shouts and shouts, then everyone within a thousand miles will surrender the city and flee, and the thief will surrender.

古文：自上古以来，亦未有感物动民其如此者也。
现代文：自从上古以来，也没有感物动民达到这种程度的。
English: Since time immemorial, there has never been an event that moved people to such an extent.

古文：又卜者王郎，假名因势，驱集乌合之众，遂震燕、赵之地；况明公奋二郡之兵，扬响应之威，以攻则何城不克，以战则何军不服！
现代文：那王郎只是一个卜卦之士，假借刘氏宗室之名乘天下混乱之势，驱使集合乌合之众，竟震慑燕、赵之地；何况明公奋起二郡之兵，宣扬响应之威，要攻则何城不可克，要战则何军不可降！
English: That Wang Lang was just a fortune-teller who, under the guise of the name of Liu's family, took advantage of the chaos in the world and drove the gathering of the rabble to shock the land of Yan and Zhao. What's more, Ming Gong raised the soldiers of the two counties and preached the power of response. If you want to attack, you can't defeat any city, and if you want to fight, you can't defeat any army!

古文：今释此而归，岂徒空失河北，必要惊动三辅，堕损威重，非计之得者也。
现代文：现在弃此而归，不但空失河北，而且更惊动三辅，使威风重名一旦坠损，这就不是有利的良计。
English: Abandoning this and returning now will not only lose Hebei, but will also alarm the three auxiliary provinces, so that once the prestige and reputation are lost, this is not a good plan.

古文：若明公无复征伐之意，则虽信都之兵犹难会也。
现代文：假若明公没有再次征伐的意图，那么虽有信都之兵也难以相会哩。
English: If Ming Gong did not intend to invade again, it would be difficult to meet soldiers from Xindu.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：明公既西，则邯郸城民不肯捐父母、背城主，而千里送公，其离散亡逃可必也。
现代文：明公既已西归，那么邯郸的城民是不肯捐弃父母，背弃城主，而千里送公西归的，他们的离散逃亡是必然的了。 
English: Ming Gong had already returned to the West, so the citizens of Handan were not willing to abandon their parents and turn their backs on the city's lord, but those who sent their father-in-law thousands of miles to return to the West, their dispersion and escape was inevitable.

古文：世祖善其言而止。
现代文：世祖以其言为善而停止西归。
English: The founder of the world stopped returning to the West because his words were good.

古文：即日拜彤为后大将军，和成太守如故，使将兵居前。
现代文：即日拜邳彤为后大将军，和成太守一如过去，使他率兵在前面。
English: On the same day, Baizhang became the next general, and Cheng Taishou, as in the past, made him lead the troops in front.

古文：比至堂阳，堂阳已反属王郎，彤使张万、尹绥先晓譬吏民，世祖夜至，即开门出迎。
现代文：等到达堂阳，堂阳已反属王郎，邳彤派遣张万、尹绥先去晓谕官吏民众，世祖夜间到达，堂阳就开门出迎。
English: When he arrived at Doyang, Doyang was already a prince. He sent Zhang Wan and Yin Qi to tell the officials and people. The patriarch arrived at night, and Doyang opened the door to welcome him.

古文：引兵击破白奢贼于中山。
现代文：又引兵击破白奢贼于中山。
English: Another army was brought in to defeat the White Thieves in Zhongshan.

古文：自此常从战攻。
现代文：自此邳彤常从世祖攻战。
English: Since then, he has often attacked from the ancestor.

古文：信都复反为王郎，郎所置信都王捕系彤父弟及妻子，使为手书呼彤曰： 降者封爵，不降族灭。 彤涕泣报曰： 事君者不得顾家。
现代文：信都复造归顺王郎，王郎所设置的信都王拘捕囚缚邳彤的叔父及妻子儿女，使他们以手书呼唤邳彤说： 投降就封爵，不投降就灭族。 邳彤流泪哭泣回报说 ：事君王的不得顾家。
English: A replica of the capital was sent to Wang Rong of Shun, and the capital set up by Wang Rong arrested and imprisoned his uncle, his wife and children, and made them call out to him in handwriting: "If you surrender, you will be given a title of nobility, but if you do not surrender, you will be exterminated."

古文：彤亲属所以至今得安于信都者，刘公之恩也。
现代文：邳彤亲属所以至今得以安身于信都，是刘公的恩德。
English: It is thanks to Liu Gong's kindness that his relatives have been able to settle down in Xindu.

古文：公方争国事，彤不得复念私也。 会更始所遣将攻拔信都，郎兵败走，彤家属得免。
现代文：刘公现在正忙于国事，我邳彤不得以私事为念。 恰好更始派去的将领攻下了信都，王郎兵败走，因此邳彤家属得免于难。
English: Liu Gong is now busy with state affairs, so I can't think about my private affairs. It just so happens that the generals sent from the beginning captured Xindu, and Wang Lang's soldiers were defeated, so my family members were spared.

古文：及拔邯郸，封武义侯。
现代文：攻拔邯郸后，封邳彤为武义侯。
English: After the attack on Wuyi, he was given the title of Wuyi marquis.

古文：建武元年，更封灵寿侯，行大司空事。
现代文：建武元年，更封灵寿侯，代理大司空事。
English: In the first year of the Jianwu era, Ling Shouhou was promoted to the post of acting chief magistrate.

古文：帝入洛阳，拜彤太常，月余日转少府，是年免。
现代文：帝入洛阳，拜邳彤为太常，月余之间日转少府，这年免太常职事。
English: When the emperor entered Luoyang, it was customary to pay homage to the emperor. During the rest of the month, the emperor would go to a lesser capital, and this year he was exempted from performing the duties of the emperor.

古文：复为左曹侍中，常从征伐。
现代文：再为左曹侍中，常从征伐。
English: He was also a member of the Left-Handed Knights, and often went on campaigns.

古文：六年，就国。
现代文：建武六年回到封国。
English: It has been six years since Jianwu returned to the feudal state.

古文：彤卒，子汤嗣，九年，徙封乐陵侯。
现代文：邳彤去世，子邳汤嗣位，建武九年，徙封为乐陵侯。
English: Zou died, his son Zou Tang became the heir, and in the ninth year of Jianwu, he was transferred to Le Ling Hou.

古文：十九年，汤卒，子某嗣；无子，国除。
现代文：建武十九年，邳汤去世，子邳某嗣位，无子，封国被废。
English: In the 19th year of the Jianwu era, Zhaotang died, and his son Zhaozhou, who had no children, became the heir to the throne, and the fief was abolished.

古文：元初元年，邓太后绍封彤孙音为平亭侯。
现代文：元初元年，邓太后续封邳彤孙邳音为平亭侯。
English: At the beginning of the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, Emperor Deng Tai followed up by appointing Sun Ying as the Prince of Ping Ting.

古文：音卒、子柴嗣。
现代文：邳音去世，子邳柴嗣位。
English: Shion passed away, and his son Shiba succeeded to the throne.

古文：初，张万，尹绥与彤俱迎世祖，皆拜偏将军，亦从征伐。
现代文：起初，张万、尹绥与邳彤同迎世祖，都拜为偏将军，也跟从征伐。
English: At the beginning, Zhang Wan, Yin Qi, and Zou, together with Ying Shizhu, all worshiped the general, and also followed the expedition.

古文：万封重平侯，绥封平台侯。
现代文：张万封重平侯，尹绥封平台侯。
English: Zhang Wanfeng was the second vassal of the Taira clan, and Yin Zifeng was the vassal of the Taira clan.

古文：论曰：凡言成事者，以功著易显；谋几初者，以理隐难昭。
现代文：史官评论道：凡是说到成事的，都是因功劳卓著而容易显声扬名；预谋事的先见的，因事理隐晦而难以昭著。
English: The historian commented: When it comes to accomplishment, those who are outstanding in merit are easily famous; those who are foresighted in planning are obscure and difficult to be known.

古文：斯固原情比迹，所宜推察者也。
现代文：这当然是按照实情比较而言的，是应当推理考察的。
English: This is, of course, based on a factual comparison, and should be reasoned and examined.

古文：若乃议者欲因二郡之众，建入关之策，委成业，临不测，而世主未悟，谋夫景同，邳彤之廷对，其为几乎！
现代文：至于世祖虽得二郡之众，仍想西还长安，弃成业，临不测之境，而世祖并未觉悟，出谋划策者都附和跟从，在这种情况下，邳彤的话，难道不是先见之明吗！
English: As for the ancestor, although he won the people of the two counties, he still wanted to go to the west and to Chang'an, abandoned his business, and faced an unpredictable situation, but the ancestor did not realize it, and the strategists all followed suit. In this case, isn't it prescient to say so!

古文：语曰 一言可以兴邦 ，斯近之矣。
现代文：论语上面说 一句话可以使国家兴隆 ，邳彤的话，是很接近的了。
English: The anecdote above says a word can make a country flourish, well, it's pretty close.

古文：刘植字伯先，巨鹿昌城人也。
现代文：◆刘植传刘植字伯先，巨鹿昌城人。
English: ◆Liu Zhi ChuanLiu Zhi Zi Zi Bo Xian, a resident of Jiulu Changcheng.

古文：王郎起，植与弟喜、从兄歆率宗族宾客，聚兵数千人据昌城。
现代文：王郎起事后，刘植与弟刘喜、从兄刘歆率领宗族宾客数千人据昌城。
English: After Wang Lang's departure, Liu Zhi, his brother Liu Xi, and his younger brother Liu Yao led thousands of guests from the clan to Changcheng.

古文：闻世祖从蓟还，乃开门迎世祖，以植为骁骑将军，喜、歆偏将军，皆为列侯。
现代文：听说世祖从蓟回来，就开城门迎世祖，世祖以刘植为骁骑将军，以刘喜，刘歆为偏将军，都封为列侯。
English: Hearing that the ancestor had returned from Yunnan, he opened the city gate to welcome the ancestor. The ancestor designated Liu Zhi as the general of the cavalry, Liu Xi and Liu Ye as the generals of the cavalry, and they were all made princes.

古文：时真定王刘扬起兵以附王郎，众十余万，世祖遣植说扬，扬乃降。
现代文：这时真定王刘扬起兵以归附王郎，有众十多万人，世祖派遣刘植去劝说刘扬，刘扬就降了。
English: At this time, Liu Yang, the king of Zhending, raised an army of more than one hundred thousand people to join Wang Lang. The ancestor sent Liu Zhi to persuade Liu Yang, and Liu Yang surrendered.

古文：世祖因留真定，纳郭后，后即扬之甥也，故以此结之。
现代文：世祖因而留在真定，纳了郭后，郭后就是刘扬的外甥女，所以以此厚结。
English: As a result, Shizu stayed in Jinding and married Guo Hou. Guo Hou was Liu Yang's niece, so they tied the knot.

古文：乃与扬及诸将置酒郭氏漆里舍，扬击筑为欢，因得进兵拔邯郸，从平河北。
现代文：就与刘扬及诸将在郭氏漆里的家中摆酒庆贺，刘扬为之击筑以为欢，因此得进兵攻拔邯郸，跟从平定河北。
English: He celebrated with Liu Yang and others by drinking wine at Guo's home in Shicli. Liu Yang thought it would be fun to fight for him, so he had to join the army to attack and subdue Hebei.

古文：建武二年，更封植为昌城侯。
现代文：建武二年，更封刘植为昌城侯。
English: In the second year of the Jianwu era, Liu Zhi was re-appointed as the marquis of Changcheng.

古文：讨密县贼，战殁。
现代文：讨伐密县贼，死于战事。
English: He died in battle while fighting against thieves in Mixian County.

古文：子向嗣。
现代文：子刘向嗣位。
English: His son Liu Xiang succeeded him.

古文：帝使喜代将植营，复为骁骑将军，封观津侯。
现代文：帝使刘喜代为率领刘植的军队，复封为骁骑将军，封为观津侯。
English: The emperor sent Liu Xidai to lead Liu Zhi's army, and he was reinstated as the general of the imperial cavalry and crowned as the lord of Guanzin.

古文：喜卒，复以歆为骁骑将军，封浮阳侯。
现代文：刘喜去世，又以刘歆为骁骑将军，封为浮阳侯。
English: Liu Xi passed away, and Liu Ye was appointed as the general of the cavalry. He was also given the title of "Fuyang Hou" (Prince of the Floating Sun).

古文：喜、歆从征伐，皆传国于后。
现代文：刘喜、刘歆跟从征伐，都传封国于后代。
English: Liu Xi and Liu Ye followed the conquest and passed down the state to their descendants.

古文：向徙封东武阳侯，卒，子述嗣，永平十五年，坐与楚王英谋反，国除。
现代文：刘向徙封为东武阳侯，死后，子刘述嗣位。永平十五年，因与楚王刘英谋反有牵连，封国被废除。
English: Liu Xiangyang was given the title of Dongwuyang, and after his death, his son Liu Shulong became the heir to the throne. In the 15th year of Yongping, Liu Xiangyang was involved in a conspiracy with the king of Chu, Liu Ying, and the title was abolished.

古文：耿纯字伯山，巨鹿宋子人也。
现代文：◆耿纯传耿纯字伯山，巨鹿宋子人。
English: ◆Geng Chun passed down the Geng Chun character Baishan, the giant deer to Song Zi Ren.

古文：父艾，为王莽济平尹。
现代文：父亲耿艾，是王莽济平尹。
English: His father, Geng Ai, was Wang Mang, Jiping and Yin.

古文：纯学于长安，因除为纳言士。
现代文：耿纯就学于长安，所以授官为纳言士。
English: Geng Chun studied in Chang'an, so he was awarded the title of "Nagon scholar."

古文：王莽败，更始立，使舞阴王李轶降诸郡国，纯父艾降，还为济南太守。
现代文：王莽败，更始即位，使舞阳王李轶向各郡国招降，耿纯父亲耿艾投降，回去任济南太守。
English: Wang Mangfei was defeated and ascended to the throne at the beginning of the year, causing the Wuyang King Li Xi to offer his surrender to all counties and states, and Geng Chun's father, Geng Ai, surrendered and returned to be the governor of Jinan.

古文：时李轶兄弟用事，专制方面，宾客游说者甚众。
现代文：当时李轶兄弟掌权，独断行于一方，宾客游说的很多。
English: At that time, the Lihong brothers were in power and acted arbitrarily. There was a lot of lobbying by guests.

古文：纯连求谒不得通，久之乃得见，因说轶曰： 大王以龙虎之姿，遭风云之时，奋迅拔起，期月之间兄弟称王，而德信不闻于士民，功劳未施于百姓，宠禄暴兴，此智者之所忌也。
现代文：耿纯连续多次求见不得通报，过了很久才得见。因而对李轶说： 大王以龙虎之雄姿，逢风云之际会，迅速拔地而起，一月之间兄弟称王，但士民们并不知道你有什么德行，你也没有对百姓宣扬有什么功劳，恩宠与官位暴兴，这是聪明人所忌讳的。
English: Geng Chun repeatedly asked to see him, but was not allowed to inform him, and it was a long time before he was able to see him. So he said to Li Xi: The great king, with the heroic figure of the dragon and tiger, will rise up quickly when the wind blows, and the brothers will be crowned king between January and May. But the people do not know what virtues you have, and you have not preached to the people what merits you have. Grace and official position are rampant, which is a taboo for smart people.

古文：兢兢自危，犹惧不终，而况沛然自足，可以成功者乎？ 轶奇之，且以其巨鹿大姓，乃承制拜为骑都尉，授以节，令安集赵、魏。
现代文：兢兢业业警惕自持，还恐怕没有好下场，何况是骤然暴发而自足，难道可以成功吗？ 李轶很奇异，而且以耿纯是巨鹿的大姓，就以帝旨拜耿纯为骑都尉，授以符节，令他安集赵。
English: Dedication, vigilance and self-control, but I'm afraid it won't end well, not to mention the sudden outbreak and self-sufficiency, can it be successful? Li Yao is very strange, and with Geng Chun being the eldest son of a giant deer, he was given the imperial order to worship Geng Chun as the captain of the cavalry, and he was given a rune festival to make him calm down.

古文：会世祖度河至邯郸，纯即谒见，世祖深接之。
现代文：恰逢世祖渡河到了邯郸，耿纯即往谒见，世祖高兴地接待了他。
English: Just as Shizu crossed the river and arrived in Handan, Geng Chun went to Handan to meet him. Shizu welcomed him happily.

古文：纯退，见官属将兵法度不与它将同，遂求自结纳，献马及缣帛数百匹。
现代文：耿纯退，看到官属们统帅军队的法度与别的将领不同，就要求自行结交采纳，贡献马匹及缣帛数百匹。
English: When Geng Chun retired, he saw that the officials and subordinates who commanded the army were different from other generals, so he asked them to make friends and contribute hundreds of horses and mules.

古文：世祖北至中山，留纯邯郸。
现代文：世祖北上到中山，留耿纯在邯郸。
English: The founder traveled north to Zhongshan, leaving Geng Chun behind.

古文：会王郎反，世祖自蓟东南驰，纯与从昆弟、宿、植共率宗族宾客二千余人，老病者皆载木自随，奉迎于育。
现代文：恰逢王郎造，世祖自蓟向东南奔驰，耿纯与从弟耿讠斤、耿宿、耿植共同率领宗族宾客二千余人，老者病者都载棺木相随，迎世祖于育县。
English: Coinciding with Wang Lang's birthday, the founder of the family drove to the southeast, and Geng Chun and his younger brothers, Geng Shujin, Geng Shuang, and Geng Zhi, jointly led more than two thousand guests from the clan. The elderly and the sick all accompanied the coffin, welcoming the founder of the family to Yu County.

古文：拜纯为前将军，封耿乡侯，、宿、植皆偏将军，使与纯居前，降宋子，从攻下曲阳及中山。
现代文：拜耿纯为前将军，封耿乡侯，耿讠斤、耿宿、耿植都拜为偏将军，使他们与耿纯居前队，降下宋子，又跟从攻下曲阳及中山。
English: Geng Jun was the former general, Geng Xianghou, Geng Shujin, Geng Shukin, and Geng Zhi were all former generals, so they were in the front line with Geng Jun, and they brought down Song Zi, and followed to conquer Quyang and Zhongshan.

古文：是时，郡国多降邯郸者，纯恐宗家怀异心，乃使、宿归烧其庐舍。
现代文：这时很多郡国都向邯郸投降，耿纯惟恐宗室心怀二心，就使耿讠斤、耿宿回去把宗室的庐舍都烧掉。
English: At this time, many counties and provinces had surrendered to Yan. Geng Chun, fearing that his father-in-law might have second thoughts, ordered Geng Bingjin and Geng Shuku to go back and burn down the father-in-law's house.

古文：世祖问纯故，对曰： 窃见明公单车临河北，非有府臧之蓄，重赏甘饵，可以聚人者也，徒以恩德怀之，是故士众乐附。
现代文：世祖问耿纯为什么这样做，耿纯说： 我看到明公单车来到河北，并无府藏之积蓄，可为重赏之甘饵，可以聚集众人的，只不过以恩德为怀，是以士众乐于归附。
English: The patriarch asked Geng Chun why he did this. Geng Chun said: I saw that the Ming Gong bicycle came to Hebei, and there was no hidden savings, it could be the reward of the reward, it could gather many people, but with kindness in mind, the people were happy to join.

古文：今邯郸自立，北州疑惑，纯虽举族归命，老弱在行，犹恐宗人宾客半有不同心者，故燔烧屋室，绝其反顾之望。 世祖汉息。
现代文：现在邯郸自立尊号，北州疑惑，我虽举族归命于明公，老弱同行，还害怕宗人宾客不同心的人，所以烧其庐舍，以绝其反顾的希望。 世祖叹息。
English: Now, with the name of self-reliance, Beizhou is in doubt. Although I have entrusted my entire family to Ming Gong, I am afraid of those who do not have the same heart as my guests, so I burn their houses and hope that they will never come back. The patriarch sighs.

古文：及至鄗，世祖止传舍，鄗大姓苏公反城开门内王郎将李惲。
现代文：到了高阝，世祖止于旅舍，高阝大姓苏公造开城门放王郎将李恽入内。
English: When they arrived at Gaocheng, Shizu stopped at the hostel. Gaocheng's eldest son, Su Gongzhu, opened the gate and let Wang Lang take Li Xuan inside.

古文：纯先觉知，将兵逆与惲战，大破斩之。
现代文：耿纯先发觉，率兵与李恽激战，大破并斩了李恽。
English: Geng Chun was the first to discover this, and led his soldiers into a fierce battle with Li Qiye, defeating and beheading Li Qiye.

古文：从平邯郸，又破铜马。
现代文：跟从平定邯郸，又破铜马。
English: Followed by the vanquishing of the dragonfly, and the breaking of the bronze horse.

古文：时，赤眉、青犊、上江、大彤、铁胫、五幡十余万众并在射犬，世祖引兵将击之。
现代文：这时赤眉、青犊、上江、大彤、铁胫、五幡十多万部众都在射犬，世祖引兵准备进击。
English: At this time, more than one hundred thousand units of the Red-browed, Blue-browed, Upper-river, Great-browed, Iron-browed, and Yellow-browed Bulldogs were shooting dogs, and Shizuo was preparing to attack.

古文：纯军在前，去众营数里，贼忽夜攻纯，雨射营中，士多死伤。
现代文：耿纯军在前，离众营数里，贼忽然乘夜攻耿纯，箭矢如雨点射进营中，士卒多有死伤。
English: Geng Chun's army was in front, separated from the rest of the battalion by a few miles. The thieves suddenly attacked Geng Chun at night, shooting arrows into the camp like rain. Many soldiers were killed or wounded.

古文：纯勒部曲，坚守不动。
现代文：耿纯勒令部众，坚守不动。
English: Geng Chun ordered his subordinates to stand firm.

古文：选敢死二千人，俱持强弩，各傅三矢，使衔枚间行，绕出贼后，齐声呼噪，强弩并发，贼众惊走，追击，遂破之。
现代文：选出敢死队二千人，都手持强弩，各著三矢，令他们轻骑潜行，绕入贼兵背后，齐声呼叫，强弩并发，贼众惊走，耿纯追击，大破贼兵。
English: Select a death squad of two thousand people, all holding a strong scepter, each with three arrows, make them ride stealthily, go around the back of the thieves, shout in unison, make a strong scepter, the thieves are startled, Geng Chun chases and destroys the thieves.

古文：驰骑白世祖。
现代文：耿纯派遣快马去禀报世祖。
English: Geng Chun sent a fast horse to Yunnan to report to his ancestor.

古文：世祖明旦与诸将俱至营，劳纯曰： 昨夜困乎？ 纯曰： 赖明公威德，幸而获全。 世祖曰： 大兵不可夜动，故不相救耳。
现代文：第二天一早世祖与诸将都到营，慰劳耿纯说 ：昨夜很困吗？ 耿纯说 ：仰赖明公威德，幸而得到安全。 世祖说： 大兵不可夜间行动，所以没有相救。
English: Early the next morning, the patriarch and all the generals went to the camp, and the consoler, Geng Chun, said, "Were you sleepy last night?" Geng Chun said, "I was lucky to be safe, because I relied on Ming Gong Weid." The patriarch said, "The soldiers are not allowed to operate at night, so there was no rescue."

古文：军营进退无常，卿宗族不可悉居军中。 乃以纯族人耿伋为蒲吾长，悉令将亲属居焉。
现代文：军营进退没有常规，你的宗族不可全居军中哩。 就以耿纯同族人耿及为蒲吾长，令耿纯将亲属都住在蒲吾县。
English: There is no rule for entering and leaving the military camp, and your clan cannot all stay in the army. So, Geng Chun, a member of the same clan as Geng, was appointed as the governor of Pugu, and Geng Chun ordered all of his relatives to live in Pugu County.

古文：世祖即位，封纯高阳侯。
现代文：世祖即位，封耿纯为高阳侯。
English: The founder ascended to the throne, and Geng Jun was given the title of Goyang Hou.

古文：击刘永于济阴，下定陶。
现代文：击刘永于济阴，攻下定陶。
English: Hit Liu Yong in Jiyin, and captured Ding Tao.

古文：初，纯从攻王郎，堕马折肩，时疾发，乃还诣怀宫。
现代文：起初，耿纯跟从攻击王郎，坠马肩部折伤，时常肩伤病发，于是回到怀宫。
English: At first, Geng Chun followed the attack on Wang Lang, fell off his horse and broke his shoulder, and often suffered from shoulder injuries, so he returned to the palace.

古文：帝问： 卿兄弟谁可使者？ 纯举从弟植，于是使植将纯营，纯犹以前将军从。
现代文：帝问： 你兄弟谁可以使？ 耿纯推举从弟耿植，于是使耿植率耿纯军马，耿纯还是以前将军职务相从。
English: The emperor asked, "Who can your brother use?" Geng Chun was chosen from his younger brother Geng Zhi, so Geng Zhi became Geng Chun's horse, and Geng Chun still followed the general's duties.

古文：时真定王刘扬复造作谶记云： 赤九之后，癭扬为主。 扬病癭，欲以惑众，与绵曼贼交通。
现代文：这时真定王刘扬又造作谶记说 ：赤九之后，瘿扬为主。 刘扬有瘿病，想惑乱群众，与绵曼贼相往来。
English: At this time, Liu Yang, the king of Zhending, also made up a legend saying: "After the Red Nine, Zhenyang is the main." Liu Yang had rickets, wanted to confuse the masses, and had dealings with petty thieves.

古文：建武二年春，遣骑都尉陈副、游击将军邓隆征扬，扬闭城门，不内副等。
现代文：建武二年春，光武派遣骑都尉陈副、游击将军邓隆征召刘扬，刘扬关闭城门，不让陈副等进城。
English: In the spring of the second year of Jianwu, Guangwu dispatched the cavalry captain Chen Zi and the guerrilla general Deng Long to recruit Liu Yang. Liu Yang closed the city gate and did not allow Chen Zi and others to enter the city.

古文：乃复遣纯持节，行赦令于幽、冀，所过并使劳慰王侯。
现代文：于是再派遣耿纯持符节，颁行赦令于幽州、冀州，所过之处并使其慰劳王侯。
English: Therefore, he sent Geng Chun to hold the festival of symbols, to issue pardon orders in Yuzhou and Jizhou, and to comfort the princes.

古文：密敕纯曰： 刘扬若见，因而收之。 纯从吏士百余骑与副、隆会元氏，俱至真定，止传舍。
现代文：秘密命令耿纯说： 刘扬如果见你，你就把他收捕起来。 耿纯带领吏士百余骑与陈副、邓隆相会于元氏，同到真定，在旅舍住下。
English: Geng Chun secretly ordered: "If Liu Yang sees you, arrest him." Geng Chun led more than a hundred officers and horsemen to meet Chen Zifu and Deng Long at the Yuan Clan, and together they went to Zhending to live in a hostel.

古文：扬称病不谒，以纯真定宗室之出，遣使与纯书，欲相见。
现代文：刘扬称有病不肯谒见，以耿纯是真定宗室姊妹之子，就派遣使者送书信给耿纯，准备与他相见。
English: Liu Yang said that he was ill and did not want to see him, and sent an envoy to send a letter to Geng Chun, saying that he was the son of Geng Ding's sister-in-law, in preparation for meeting him.

古文：纯报曰： 奉使见王侯牧守，不得先诣，如欲面会，宜出传舍。 时，扬弟临邑侯让及从兄细各拥兵万余人，扬自恃众强而纯意安静，即从官属诣之，兄弟并将轻兵在门外。
现代文：耿纯回报说 ：我奉使见王侯牧守，不得先去见你，你如要晤面，应到馆舍。 这时刘扬弟临邑侯刘让及从兄刘细各拥兵万余人，刘扬自恃兵多势强而耿纯意在安静，就带着官属去见他，兄弟各带轻兵在门外。
English: At this time, Liu Yang's younger brother, Liu Zhan, the lord of Linyi, and his younger brother, Liu Xie, each had more than ten thousand soldiers. Liu Yang thought that the soldiers were more powerful, while Geng Chun wanted to be quiet, so he went to see him with his officials and subordinates. The brothers each brought light soldiers outside the gate.

古文：扬入见纯，纯接以礼敬，因延请其兄弟，皆入，乃闭閤悉诛之，因勒兵而出。
现代文：刘扬进去见到耿纯，耿纯以礼相敬，因而请刘让、刘细都进屋内，于是关门把刘扬兄弟全部杀了，再带兵而出。
English: Liu Yang went in to see Geng Chun. Geng Chun treated him with courtesy and respect, so he invited Liu Zhan and Liu Xie to enter the house. He then closed the door, killed all of Liu Yang's brothers, and then led the soldiers out.

古文：真定震怖，无敢动者。
现代文：真定震惊恐怖，没有人敢异动。
English: Truly shocked and horrified, no one dared to move.

古文：帝怜扬、让谋未发，并封其子，复故国。
现代文：帝怜悯刘扬、刘让阴谋尚未发动，就封了他们的儿子，恢复了他们的故国。
English: The emperor had mercy on Liu Yang and Liu Zhang before the conspiracy was launched, and had their sons beheaded and their homeland restored.

古文：纯还京师，因自请曰： 臣本吏家子孙，幸遭大汉复兴，圣帝受命，备位列将，爵为通侯。
现代文：耿纯回到京师，因而请求说： 臣本是官吏家子孙，有幸逢大汉复兴，圣主即位，我备位列将，被爵为通侯。
English: Geng Chun returned to the Beijing division, and thus he pleaded: My father-in-law is the descendant of a family of government officials. He was fortunate enough to see the revival of great men, and the enthronement of the saint. I am ready to be ranked as a general, and I have been given the title of Tonghou.

古文：天下略定，臣无所用志，愿试治一郡，尽力自效。 帝笑曰： 卿既治武，复欲修文邪？ 乃拜纯为东郡太守。
现代文：现在天下略已平定，臣无处施展才志，愿意试治一个郡，尽力报效。 帝笑着说： 你既治武事，又想修文治吗？ 就拜耿纯为东郡太守。
English: Now that the country has been more or less pacified, there is nowhere for the vassal to display his talents, and he is willing to try his hand at ruling a county and do his best. The emperor smiled and said, "Do you want to rule the martial arts as well as the literary arts? Then make Geng Chun the governor of Dong County."

古文：时，东郡未平，纯视事数月，盗贼清宁。
现代文：当时东郡还没有平定，耿纯视事数月，盗贼都清静安宁了。
English: At that time, Dong County had not yet been pacified. Geng Chun saw the situation for several months, and the thieves were all quiet and peaceful.

古文：四年，诏纯将兵击更始东平太守范荆，荆降。
现代文：建武四年，诏令耿纯率兵击更始东平太守范荆，范荆投降。
English: In the fourth year of the Jianwu era, Geng Chun led his troops to attack Fan Jing, the first governor of Dongping, and Fan Jing surrendered.

古文：进击太山济南及平原贼，皆平之。
现代文：又进击太山济南及平原贼，都平定了。
English: They also attacked Taishan, Jinan, and the Plains Thieves. All of them were pacified.

古文：居东郡四岁，时发干长有罪，纯案奏，围守之，奏未下，长自杀。
现代文：居东郡四年，这时发干县长有罪，耿纯案奏，将县长围守，奏没有下来，发干县长自杀了。
English: JuDong County for four years. At this time, the county head of Fagan County was guilty, Geng Chun filed a case, surrounded the county head, but the case did not come down, and the county head of Fagan County committed suicide.

古文：纯坐免，以列侯奉朝请。
现代文：耿纯被牵连免职，以列侯奉朝请。
English: Geng Chun was implicated and dismissed from his post, and was invited to serve the Emperor as a vassal.

古文：从击董宪，道过东郡，百姓老小数千随东驾涕泣，云 愿复得耿君 。
现代文：跟从攻击董宪，路过东郡，百姓老小数千人跟着世祖车驾流泪哭泣，说 愿再得耿君。 
English: Following the attack on Dong Xian, passing through Dong County, thousands of people, old and young, followed the ancestor's car, weeping and crying, saying, "May we have Geng Jun again."

古文：帝谓公卿曰： 纯年少被甲胄为军吏耳，治郡乃能见思若是乎？ 
现代文：帝对公卿们说 ：耿纯从小身披甲胄为军吏罢了，作为东郡太守竟然能这样为百姓所思念吗？ 
English: The emperor said to the nobles, "Geng Chun has only been a military officer since he was a little boy. As the governor of Dong County, how can he be so missed by the people?

古文：六年，定封为东光侯。
现代文：建武六年，定封为东光侯。
English: In the sixth year of Jianwu's reign, he was enthroned as Dongguang marquis.

古文：纯辞就国，帝曰： 文帝谓周勃 丞相吾所重，君为我率诸侯就国 ，今亦然也。 纯受诏而去。
现代文：耿纯告辞就国，帝说： 文帝对周勃说过丞相是我所敬重的，你现在为我率诸侯到封国去 ，现在也是这样啊。 耿纯接受诏命而去。
English: Geng Chun's farewell to the country, the emperor said: Emperor Wen told Zhou Bo that the prime minister was someone I respected, you are now leading the princes to the fief for me, and now it is the same. Geng Chun accepted the imperial command and left.

古文：至邺，赐谷万斛。
现代文：到了邺，赐谷万斛。
English: When you get to the valley, give the valley a million kisses.

古文：到国，吊死问病，民爱敬之。
现代文：到了封国，耿纯吊唁死者慰问病人，民众很敬爱他。
English: When he arrived in Hunan Province, Geng Chun offered condolences to the dead and consoled the sick. The people loved him very much.

古文：八年，东郡、济阴盗贼群起，遣大司空李通、横野大将军王常击之。
现代文：建武八年，东郡、济阴盗贼群起，帝派遣大司空李通、横野大将军王常去讨伐。
English: In the eighth year of the Jianwu era, thieves in Dong County and Jiyin rose up in droves, and the emperor dispatched the grand secretary Ku Li Tong and the grand general Yokono Wang Chang to fight them.

古文：帝以纯威信著于卫地，遣使拜太中大夫，使与大兵会东郡。
现代文：帝以耿纯在卫地有很高的威信，遣使拜耿纯为太中大夫，让他与大军会于东郡。
English: Emperor Geng Chun had a high prestige in the Wei territory, and sent Bai Geng Chun to be the Grand Physician, so that he and the great army would meet in Dong County.

古文：东郡闻纯入界，盗贼九千余人皆诣纯降，大兵不战而还。
现代文：东郡听说耿纯到了，盗贼九千余人都到耿纯处投降，大军不战而回。
English: Dong County heard that Geng Chun had arrived. More than nine thousand thieves went to Geng Chun's place to surrender, and the army returned without a fight.

古文：玺书复以为东郡太守，吏民悦服。
现代文：玺书再以耿纯为东郡太守，官吏百姓都心悦诚服。
English: The imperial edict re-designated Geng Chun as the governor of Dong County, and the officials and common people were sincerely pleased.

古文：十三年，卒官，谥曰成侯。
现代文：建武十三年，卒于官，谥封为成侯。
English: In the thirteenth year of Jianwu, he died in office and was enthroned as a prince.

古文：子阜嗣。
现代文：子耿阜嗣位。
English: His son Genfu succeeded to the throne.

古文：植后为辅威将军，封威邑侯。
现代文：耿植后来为辅威将军，封武邑侯。
English: Geng Zi later became General Zhuowei, the lord of Fongwu.

古文：宿至代郡太守，封遂乡侯。
现代文：耿宿为代郡太守，封遂乡侯。
English: Geng Shuk was the acting county governor, and he was given the title of township head.

古文：为赤眉将军，封著武侯，从邓禹西征，战死云阳。
现代文：耿讠斤为赤眉将军，封著武侯，跟从邓禹西征，战死于云阳。
English: Geng Shujin was the general of the Red Eyebrows, sealed the Wuhou, followed Deng Yu to the West, and died in the battle of Yunyang.

古文：凡宗族封列侯者四人，关内侯者三人，为二千石者九人。
现代文：宗族中被封为列侯的有四人，关内侯的三人，为二千石的共九人。
English: Four members of the clan were made vassals of the lord of the manor, and three were vassals of the lord of the manor, making a total of nine members of 2,000 koku.

