古文：王者之制禄爵，公侯伯子男，凡五等。
现代文：天子为臣下制定俸禄和爵位。以爵位来说，有公、侯、伯、子、男五等。
English: The Son of Heaven sets the salary and peerage for his vassals. In terms of peerage, there are five ranks: duke, lord, great-grandson, son, and son.

古文：诸侯之上大夫卿，下大夫，上士中士下士，凡五等。
现代文：诸侯为其臣下制定的爵位，分为上大夫卿、下大夫、上士、中士、下士五等。
English: The ranks of nobility established by the princes for their vassals were divided into the following five grades: senior doctor, junior doctor, staff sergeant, sergeant and corporal.

古文：天子之田方千里，公侯田方百里，伯七十里，子男五十里。
现代文：天子的禄田是千里见方，公、侯的禄田是百里见方；伯的禄田七十里见方，子、男的禄田是五十里见方。
English: The fields of the sons of heaven are a thousand li in circumference, the fields of the princes are a hundred li, the fields of the nobles are seventy li, and the fields of the sons of men are fifty li.

古文：不能五十里者，不合于天子，附于诸侯曰附庸。
现代文：禄田不足五十里见方的小诸侯，不朝会于天子，而附属于较大的诸侯，叫做附庸。
English: A small vassal of a great vassal, whose territory is less than fifty li from the capital, is not a vassal of the emperor, but a vassal of a greater vassal.

古文：天子之三公之田视公侯，天子之卿视伯，天子之大夫视子男，天子之元士视附庸。
现代文：天子的三公一一太师、太傅、太保的禄田比照公、侯，天子的卿的禄田比照伯，天子的大夫的禄田比照子、男，天子的上士的禄田比照附庸。
English: The three princes of the son of heaven - the grand master, the grand tutor, and the guardian of the son of heaven, the lord and vassal of the son of heaven, the lord and vassal of the son of heaven, the lord and vassal of the son of heaven, the lord and vassal of the son of heaven, the doctor of the son of heaven, the son and vassal of the son of heaven, and the superior officer of the son of heaven.

古文：制：农田百亩。
现代文：分配土地的规定：每个农户受田一百亩。
English: Rules for allocating land: Each farmer will receive 100 mu of land.

古文：百亩之分：上农夫食九人，其次食八人，其次食七人，其次食六人；下农夫食五人。
现代文：百亩之田按其土质肥沃分为三等，上农夫每一百亩田养活九人，稍次一些的养活八人；中农夫每一百亩田养活七人，稍次一些的养活六人；下农夫每一百亩养活五人。
English: A hundred mu of farmland is divided into three classes according to the fertility of the soil. The upper farmer feeds nine people per hundred mu of farmland, and the lower farmer feeds eight people; the middle farmer feeds seven people per hundred mu of farmland, and the lower farmer feeds six people; and the lower farmer feeds five people per hundred mu of farmland.

古文：庶人在官者，其禄以是为差也。
现代文：在官府当差的平民，他们的俸禄也参照这个等差受田。
English: Civilians who were on duty in government offices received their salary according to this scale.

古文：诸侯之下士视上农夫，禄足以代其耕也。
现代文：诸侯的下士的俸禄比照上农夫，使他们的俸禄能够抵得上他们耕种所得的收获。
English: Corporals of lords were paid the same as farmers, so that their pay was equal to the harvest of their crops.

古文：中士倍下士，上士倍中士，下大夫倍上士；卿，四大夫禄；君，十卿禄。
现代文：诸侯中士的俸禄是下士的两倍，上士是中士的两倍，下大夫是上士的两倍。大国诸侯的卿的俸禄是大夫的四倍，国君的俸禄是卿的十倍。
English: The salary of a vassal sergeant is twice that of a corporal, a staff sergeant is twice that of a sergeant, and a junior doctor is twice that of a staff sergeant. The salary of a vassal lord is four times that of a doctor, and the salary of a sovereign lord is ten times that of a lord.

古文：次国之卿，三大夫禄；君，十卿禄。
现代文：中等诸侯国的上卿的俸禄是大夫的三倍，国君的俸禄是卿的十倍。
English: The salary of a high-ranking lord in a middle-ranking vassal state was three times that of a doctor, and the salary of a sovereign was ten times that of a lord.

古文：小国之卿，倍大夫禄，君十卿禄。
现代文：小国诸侯的卿的棒禄是大夫的两倍，国君的律禄是卿的十倍。
English: The stipend of a lord of a small state is twice that of a doctor, and the stipend of a sovereign is ten times that of a lord.

古文：次国之上卿，位当大国之中，中当其下，下当其上大夫。
现代文：中等诸侯国的上卿，其爵位相当于大国的中卿，其中卿相当于大国的下卿，其下卿相当于大国的上大夫。
English: The nobility of a high-ranking lord of a middle-ranking vassal state is equivalent to that of a middle-ranking lord of a great power, a middle-ranking lord is equivalent to a low-ranking lord of a great power, and a low-ranking lord is equivalent to a high-ranking doctor of a great power.

古文：小国之上卿，位当大国之下卿，中当其上大夫，下当其下大夫，其有中士、下士者，数各居其上之三分。
现代文：小国的上卿，其爵位相当于大国的下卿，中卿相当于大国的上大失，下卿相当于大国的下大夫。天下一共有九个州。每个州的面积都是千里见方。
English: In a small country, the title of nobility is equivalent to the nobility of a big country, the middle nobility is equivalent to the great loss of a big country, and the lower nobility is equivalent to the lower doctor of a big country. There are nine states in the world. The area of each state is a thousand miles square.

古文：凡四海之内九州岛，州方千里。州，建百里之国三十，七十里之国六十，五十里之国百有二十，凡二百一十国；名山大泽不以封，其余以为附庸间田。
现代文：每州之内分封百里见方的大诸侯国三十个，七十里见方的中等诸侯国六十个，五十里见方的小国一百二十个，一共二百一十个诸侯国。名山大泽不分封给诸侯。分封剩余的土地或作为附庸，或留待赏赐之用。
English: Within each state, 30 large vassal states with a square of 100 li, 60 medium vassal states with a square of 70 li, and 120 small states with a square of 50 li were allotted, for a total of 210 vassal states. Famous mountains and lakes were not allotted to vassals. The remaining land was allotted either as vassals or reserved for rewards.

古文：八州，州二百一十国。
现代文：这样的州一共八个，每州有二百一十个诸侯国。
English: There are eight prefectures and 210 counties in the country.

古文：八州八伯，五十六正，百六十八帅，三百三十六长。八伯各以其属，属于天子之老二人，分天下以为左右，曰二伯。
现代文：天子王畿所在的州，只分封百里见方的大国九个，七十里见方的中等诸侯国二十一个，五十里见方的小诸侯国六十三个，一共九十三个国。在这九十三国之内，如有名山大川，也不用来分配。分配剩余的土地，或用作士人的禄田，或留待赏赐之用。
English: Of the provinces in which the King of Heaven and Earth resides, there are only nine large provinces of a hundred miles square, twenty-one medium-sized provinces of seventy miles square, and sixty-three small provinces of fifty miles square, a total of ninety-three countries. Within these ninety-three countries, even famous mountains and rivers cannot be used for distribution. The remaining land can be distributed, or used as stipendiary fields, or reserved for rewards.

古文：千里之内曰甸，千里之外，曰采、曰流。天子：三公，九卿，二十七大夫，八十一元士。
现代文：总计，九个州共有一千七百七十三个国家，而天子的上士的封地、诸侯的附庸尚未计算在内。天子的官属，有三公，九卿，二十七大夫，八十一上士。
English: In total, there are a total of 1,773 countries in the nine prefectures, and the fiefs of the officers and vassals of the princes have not yet been counted. There are three princes, nine lords, 27 doctors, and 81 officers in the official ranks of the son of heaven.

古文：大国：三卿；皆命于天子；下大夫五人，上士二十七人。
现代文：大诸侯国的官属，有三卿，都由天子直接任命，下大夫五人，上士二十七人。
English: The officials and subordinates of the great principality have three nobles, all of whom are directly appointed by the Son of Heaven, five junior doctors, and 27 senior officers.

古文：次国：三卿；二卿命于天子，一卿命于其君；下大夫五人，上士二十七人。
现代文：中等诸侯国的官属，有三卿，其中两个是由天子直接任命的，一个是国君任命的，下大夫五人，上士二十七人。
English: The middle-ranking officials of the principality included three nobles, two of whom were directly appointed by the Son of Heaven, one of whom was appointed by the sovereign, five junior doctors, and 27 senior officers.

古文：小国：二卿；皆命于其君；下大夫五人，上士二十七人。
现代文：小诸侯国的官属也有三卿，其中一个是由天子直接任命的，两个是国君任命的，下大夫五人，上士二十七人。
English: There were also three nobles, one of whom was directly appointed by the emperor, and two who were appointed by the sovereign. There were also five junior doctors and 27 staff sergeants.

古文：天子使其大夫为三监，监于方伯之国，国三人。
现代文：至于天子、诸侯的中士和下士，其数额均为上士的三倍。天子任命他的大夫当三监，代表天子去监察每州的方伯，每一州派三个大夫去。
English: The Son of Heaven sent doctors as the three supervisors to monitor the country of Fangbo. There were three of each.

古文：天子之县内诸侯，禄也；外诸侯，嗣也。
现代文：王城内分配给公卿的土地，那是一种禄田，活着享用，死去归还。王城外分封给诸侯的土地，那是可以世袭的。
English: The land allotted to the nobles within the royal city was a kind of allotment, to be enjoyed while alive and returned upon death. The land allotted to the lords outside the royal city was hereditary.

古文：制：三公，一命卷；若有加，则赐也。
现代文：命服的规定：天子的三公本已八命，再加一命成九命，就可以穿衰衣了。
English: The rules of the life jacket: the three sons of heaven have eight lives, plus one life to nine lives, you can wear a life jacket.

古文：不过九命。次国之君，不过七命；小国之君，不过五命。
现代文：如果再有增加，只能叫做赐，因为人臣不可能超过九命。
English: If there is an increase, it can only be called a gift, because a vassal cannot have more than nine lives.

古文：大国之卿，不过三命；下卿再命，小国之卿与下大夫一命。
现代文：中等诸侯国的国君至多七命，其礼服七章；小国之君最多五命，其礼服五章；大国之卿最多三命，其礼服三章；下卿再命，其礼服二章；小国之卿与下大夫都是一命，其礼服一章。
English: The king of a middle-ranking vassal state has a maximum of seven lives, and his ceremonial dress has seven chapters; the king of a small country has a maximum of five lives, and his ceremonial dress has five chapters; the lord of a large country has a maximum of three lives, and his ceremonial dress has three chapters; the lower lord has a second life, and his ceremonial dress has two chapters; the lord of a small country and the lower doctor both have one life, and their ceremonial dress has one chapter.

古文：凡官民材，必先论之。
现代文：凡是选用平民中有才能的人做官，一定要对他的德才先进行考察。
English: Anyone who chooses a talented person from among the common people to become an official must first examine his or her moral qualities.

古文：论辨然后使之，任事然后爵之，位定然后禄之。
现代文：考察清楚了，然后试用。如果胜任工作，然后授予一定的爵位。爵位定了，然后授予一定的俸禄。
English: If the examination is clear, then try it. If it is competent to work, then award a certain rank. If the rank is fixed, then award a certain salary.

古文：爵人于朝，与士共之。
现代文：在朝廷上品评某人爵位时，让士也一道参加，以示公正无私。
English: When someone's knighthood was being evaluated at court, the vassals also participated to show their impartiality.

古文：刑人于市，与众弃之。
现代文：在闹市上处决犯人，让众人都厌弃他，以示大快人心。
English: Execute the criminal in the middle of the city, so that everyone abhors him, as a sign of great happiness.

古文：是故公家不畜刑人，大夫弗养，士遇之涂弗与言也；屏之四方，唯其所之，不及以政，亦弗故生也。
现代文：所以国君不录用判过罪受过刑的人，大夫也不收留这种人，士在路上和这种人相遇也不理他。把他们流放到四方边远地区，不管他们到哪儿去，国家既不向他们征租税派摇役，也不分给他们赖以生存的田地，这就是表示不要他们活在世上的意思。
English: Therefore, the sovereign does not hire those who have been convicted and punished, the doctor does not accept such people, and the scholar does not meet such people on the road and ignores him. They are exiled to remote areas in the four directions. No matter where they go, the state neither levies taxes on them nor assigns them fields to live on. This is the meaning of not wanting them to live in the world.

古文：诸侯之于天子也，比年一小聘，三年一大聘，五年一朝。
现代文：诸侯对于天子，每年要派大夫去聘问一次，每三年要派卿去聘问一次，每五年诸侯亲自朝见一次。
English: The princes should send a doctor to consult the emperor once a year, a nobleman once every three years, and the princes should meet the emperor in person once every five years.

古文：天子五年一巡守：岁二月，东巡守至于岱宗，柴而望祀山川；觐诸侯；问百年者就见之。
现代文：天子每隔五年出外巡察一次。巡察那一年二月出发，先到东岳泰山，在山上烧柴祭天，又遥祭当地的大山大川。接见东方各诸侯，登门拜访当地年近百岁的老人。
English: Once every five years, the Son of Heaven goes on an inspection tour. The inspection tour departs in February of that year, and first goes to Mount Tai in Dongyue, burns firewood on the mountain to worship Heaven, and then goes to worship the local great mountain river. Meets the princes of the East, and visits the local nearly 100-year-old.

古文：命大师陈诗以观民风，命市纳贾以观民之所好恶，志淫好辟。
现代文：命令各诸侯国掌管音乐的太师进呈当地的民歌民谣，从而考察人民的风化习俗。命令管理市场的官员呈交物价统计表，从而了解百姓喜爱和讨厌的物品。
English: He ordered the music masters in charge of each state to introduce local folk songs and ballads to examine the customs of the people, and ordered the officials in charge of the market to submit price statistics to understand the people's likes and dislikes.

古文：命典礼考时月，定日，同律，礼乐制度衣服正之。
现代文：如果民风不正，那么人民喜欢的都是邪僻之物。命令负责礼典的官员，校定当地的季节、月份、日期，并检查当地的音律、礼乐、制度、衣服，发现有不符合规格者，予以纠正。
English: If the folk style is not correct, then the people's likes are all eccentric things. Order the official in charge of the ceremony to calibrate the local season, month, date, and check the local music, ritual, system, clothes, and correct those that do not meet the specifications.

古文：山川神只，有不举者，为不敬；不敬者，君削以地。
现代文：当地的山川及其他神灵没有全部祭祀就是不敬，有不敬的，国君就要被削减封地。
English: If the local mountains, rivers and other deities do not have all the sacrifices, it is disrespectful. If there is disrespect, the sovereign will be cut off from the fief.

古文：宗庙，有不顺者为不孝；不孝者，君绌以爵。
现代文：宗庙的祭祀有不按昭穆顺序进行者，就是不孝，有不孝的，国君就要被降低爵位。
English: Those who do not perform the rituals of the ancestral temple according to the order of Shomu are unfilial, and if they are unfilial, the sovereign will be reduced in rank.

古文：变礼易乐者，为不从；不从者，君流。
现代文：任意改变礼乐就是不服从，有不服从的，国君就要被流放驱逐。
English: To arbitrarily change the ritual music is disobedience. If there is disobedience, the sovereign will be exiled and expelled.

古文：革制度衣服者，为畔；畔者，君讨。
现代文：擅自改革制度，改变服饰就是背叛天子，背叛天子的国君就要被讨伐。
English: To reform the system or change the dress without permission is to betray the Son of Heaven, and the sovereign who betrays the Son of Heaven will be fought.

古文：有功德于民者，加地进律。
现代文：被老百姓歌功颂德的国君，要增加封地晋升爵位。
English: The sovereign, who has been praised by the people, should increase his fiefs and be promoted to a knighthood.

古文：五月，南巡守至于南岳，如东巡守之礼。
现代文：五月向南巡察，来到南岳衡山，其种种作法，如同巡视东方之礼。
English: In May, he inspected the south and came to Nan Yue Heng Mountain, and his various practices were like a tour of the Orient.

古文：八月，西巡守至于西岳，如南巡守之礼。
现代文：八月向西巡察，来到西岳华山，其种种作法，如同巡视南方之礼。
English: In August, I went on a tour to the west and came to the West Yue Huashan Mountain. The various practices were like a courtesy tour to the south.

古文：十有一月，北巡守至于北岳，如西巡守之礼。
现代文：十一月向北巡察，来到北岳恒山，其种种作法，如同巡视西方之礼。
English: In November, I went on a tour to the north and came to Beidake Hengshan. The various practices were like a tour of the West.

古文：归，假于祖祢，用特。
现代文：全国巡察结束回宫后，到祖庙和父庙举行祭告，每庙各用一牛为牲。
English: After returning to the palace at the end of the nationwide inspection, a ritual was held at the ancestral temple and the father temple, with each temple sacrificing a cow.

古文：天子将出，类乎上帝，宜乎社，造乎祢。
现代文：天子将外出，要祭祀上帝、社稷、宗庙。
English: The heavenly son will go out, and it is necessary to offer sacrifices to God, the shrine, and the ancestral temple.

古文：诸侯将出，宜乎社，造乎祢。
现代文：诸侯将外出，要祭祀社稷和宗庙。
English: The lords will be out, and it is necessary to offer sacrifices to shrines and ancestral temples.

古文：天子无事与诸侯相见曰朝，考礼正刑一德，以尊于天子。
现代文：天子不是为了征伐之事而与诸侯相见统称为 朝 。朝，可以考校礼仪，订正刑法，统一道德规范，使诸侯尊崇天子。
English: It is not for the sake of conquering that the Son of Heaven is at odds with the princes, and they are collectively called the dynasty. The dynasty can examine school etiquette, revise the criminal law, and unify moral norms so that the princes will respect the Son of Heaven.

古文：天子赐诸侯乐，则以柷将之，赐伯、子、男乐，则以鼗将之。
现代文：天子把成套的乐器赏赐给诸侯时，用柷作为代表物授予诸侯。天子赏给伯、子、男乐器时，用鼗鼓为代表物授予被赐者。
English: When the Son of Heaven bestowed sets of musical instruments on princes, he used the gong as a representative object to award princes. When the Son of Heaven bestowed musical instruments on nobles, sons, and men, he used the gong and drum as a representative object to award recipients.

古文：诸侯，赐弓矢然后征，赐鈇钺然后杀，赐圭瓒然后为鬯。未赐圭瓒，则资鬯于天子。
现代文：诸侯被天子赏赐了弓矢后，才有权力征伐;被赏赐了鈇钺，才有权力刑杀;被赏赐了圭瓒，才能自己酿造鬯酒;如果没有被赏赐圭瓒，就等待天子资助鬯酒。
English: After the princes were given bows and arrows by the Son of Heaven, they only had the power to conquer; after they were given halberds, they only had the power to kill; after they were given gourds, they only had the power to brew their own gourds; after they were not given gourds, they waited for the Son of Heaven to subsidize their gourds.

古文：天子命之教然后为学。
现代文：天子命令诸侯办教育，诸侯才可以设立学校。
English: Heaven's Son ordered the lords to run education, and only the lords could establish schools.

古文：小学在公宫南之左，大学在郊。
现代文：小学设在王宫的东南，大学设在郊外。
English: The primary school is located southeast of the royal palace, and the university is located in the suburbs.

古文：天子曰辟痈，诸侯曰頖宫。
现代文：天子的大学叫辟雍，诸侯的大学叫頖宫。
English: The University of the Son of Heaven is called Pai Yong, and the University of the Princes is called Shuguang.

古文：天子将出征，类乎上帝，宜乎社，造乎祢，祃于所征之地。
现代文：天子将出征，先祭祀上帝、社稷、宗庙。开战前在阵地上祭祀造军法的人，以壮军威。
English: When the Son of Heaven goes to war, he will first offer sacrifices to God, the shrine, and the ancestral temple. Before the war begins, he will offer sacrifices to those who created military law on the battlefield, in order to strengthen military power.

古文：受命于祖，受成于学。
现代文：出发前在祖庙中接受祖先的征伐命令，到大学里听取先师的计谋。
English: Before departure, they received their ancestors' conquest orders in the ancestral temple, and went to the university to listen to the forerunner's strategies.

古文：出征，执有罪；反，释奠于学，以讯馘告。
现代文：出征就是要捉拿那些有罪的人。征伐回来后，再到大学里设奠祭祀先师，报告捕获的俘虏和杀死敌人的数目。
English: After returning from a campaign, he would go to the university to offer a memorial service and report on the number of prisoners taken and the number of enemies killed.

古文：天子、诸侯无事则岁三田：一为干豆，二为宾客，三为充君之庖。
现代文：天子、诸侯在没有战争的时候，每年田猎三次。其目的在于，第一是为了准备祭祀的供品，第二是为招待宾客准备菜肴，第三是为了充实天子、诸侯日常所用膳食。
English: When there is no war, the emperor and princes go hunting in the fields three times a year. The purpose of this is, firstly, to prepare offerings for religious services, secondly, to prepare dishes for inviting guests, and thirdly, to enrich the daily meals of the emperor and princes.

古文：无事而不田，曰不敬；田不以礼，曰暴天物。
现代文：没有特殊的情况而不举行田猎就是不敬。由猎时不守规矩，随意捕杀就是损害天物。
English: If there are no special circumstances, it is disrespectful not to hold a field hunt. If you do not follow the rules when hunting, and kill at will, you will damage the celestial objects.

古文：天子不合围，诸侯不掩群。
现代文：田猎的规定是：天子打猎不应四面合围，诸侯打猎不应把成群的野兽全部杀光。
English: The rules for hunting in the countryside were: the emperor should not be surrounded on all sides when hunting, and the lords should not kill all the herds of wild animals when hunting.

古文：天子杀则下大绥，诸侯杀则下小绥，大夫杀则止佐车。
现代文：射杀野兽之后，天子要放下指挥的大旗，诸侯要放下指挥的小旗。大夫射杀野兽后，就应命令协助驱赶野兽的副车停止驱赶。
English: After shooting the beast, the prince should put down the big flag of command, and the lords should put down the small flag of command. After the doctor shot the beast, he should order the second car to help drive the beast to stop driving.

古文：佐车止，则百姓田猎。
现代文：大夫的副车停止驱赶之后，百姓开始田猎。
English: After the doctor's second car stopped driving away, the people began to hunt.

古文：獭祭鱼，然后虞人入泽梁。
现代文：正月以后，渔人才可以到川泽捕鱼。
English: After the first month of the year, fishermen can go to Kawazawa to catch crabs.

古文：豺祭兽，然后田猎。
现代文：九月以后，才可以开始田猎。
English: Field hunting can only begin after September.

古文：鸠化为鹰，然后设罻罗。
现代文：八月以后，才可以设网捕鸟。
English: Nets can only be set up to catch birds after August.

古文：草木零落，然后入山林。
现代文：到了十月，才可以进入山林砍伐。
English: It was not until October that logging was allowed in the mountains.

古文：昆虫未蛰，不以火田，不麑，不卵，不杀胎，不殀夭，不覆巢。
现代文：昆虫尚未蛰居地下之前，不可以烧野草而猎取野兽。田猎的时候不捕捉小兽，不取鸟卵，不杀怀胎的母兽，不杀刚出生的小兽，不捣毁鸟巢。
English: When hunting in the field, do not catch small animals, do not take bird eggs, do not kill the mother animal in the womb, do not kill the newborn small animal, do not destroy the bird's nest.

古文：冢宰制国用，必于岁之杪，五谷皆入然后制国用。
现代文：大宰编制下一年的国家开支总预算，必定在年终进行。因为要等五谷入库之后才能编制预算。
English: Dazai's preparation of the next year's total state expenditure budget must be carried out at the end of the year, because the budget can only be prepared after the grain is stored.

古文：用地小大，视年之丰耗。以三十年之通制国用，量入以为出，祭用数之仂。
现代文：根据国土大小和年成好坏，用三十年收入的平均数作依据制定预算，根据收入的多少预算开支。祭祀所用，占每年收入的十分之一。
English: According to the size of the country and the quality of the year, the budget is based on the average of thirty years of income, and the budget expenditure is based on the amount of income. One-tenth of the annual income is used for sacrifices.

古文：丧，三年不祭，唯祭天地社稷为越绋而行事。丧用三年之仂。
现代文：遇有父母之丧，服丧的三年中不祭宗庙，只有祭天地、社稷不受丧事的限制，照常举行，所以丧事的开支也可以用三年收入的平均数的十分之一。
English: In the event of the death of a parent, the ancestral temple is not dedicated during the three years of mourning. Only the heaven and earth festival and the social banquet are not subject to the restrictions of the funeral and are held as usual. Therefore, the expenses of the funeral can also use one-tenth of the average three-year income.

古文：丧祭，用不足曰暴，有余曰浩。
现代文：丧事和祭祀的开支超出预算的就叫 暴 ，用后有余叫做 浩 。
English: Expenditure on funerals and religious services that exceeds the budget is called "violence," and if there is any surplus, it is called "excess."

古文：祭，丰年不奢，凶年不俭。
现代文：祭祀不能因丰年而奢华，不能因荒年而节俭。
English: Sacrifices should not be extravagant because of a good year, nor should they be frugal because of a bad year.

古文：国无九年之蓄曰不足，无六年之蓄曰急，无三年之蓄曰国非其国也。
现代文：一个国家没有九年的积蓄，可以说是不富足;没有六年的积蓄，可以说是拮据;没有三年的积蓄，就不像个国家了。
English: A country without nine years of savings can be said to be poor; without six years of savings, it can be said to be poor; without three years of savings, it is not like a country.

古文：三年耕，必有一年之食；九年耕，必有三年之食。
现代文：耕种三年，必定有一年的余粮;耕种九年，必定有三年的余粮。
English: After three years of cultivation, there must be one year of surplus grain; after nine years of cultivation, there must be three years of surplus grain.

古文：以三十年之通，虽有凶旱水溢，民无菜色，然后天子食，日举以乐。
现代文：以三十年的平均收入来制定预算，即使遇到饥荒水旱等灾害，老百姓也不会挨饿。达到这样的水平后，天子的膳食，可以每天宰杀牲畜，吃饭时也可以奏乐了。
English: With an average income of 30 years to set the budget, even if faced with famine, drought and other disasters, the people will not starve. After reaching this level, God's diet can slaughter livestock every day, and music can also be played during meals.

古文：天子七日而殡，七月而葬。
现代文：天子死后七天入殡，第七个月入葬。
English: The emperor was buried seven days after his death, and in the seventh month.

古文：诸侯五日而殡，五月而葬。
现代文：诸侯死后五天入殡，第五个月入葬。
English: Princes are buried five days after their death, and princes are buried in the fifth month.

古文：大夫、士、庶人，三日而殡，三月而葬。
现代文：大夫、士、平民死后三日即停棺正寝堂西，死后三个月即举行葬礼。
English: On the third day after the death of a doctor, a priest, or a commoner, the coffin is placed on the hearse, and the funeral is held three months after the death.

古文：三年之丧，自天子达，庶人县封，葬不为雨止，不封不树，丧不贰事，自天子达于庶人。
现代文：为父母须守丧三年，上起天子下至平民均不例外。平民下葬，只能用绳子缝棺入穴，即使下雨也照样埋葬，不聚土成坟，也不种树。服丧期间不得做其他事情，从原则上讲，从天子到平民都适用这一规定。
English: Parents must be mourned for three years, from the emperor to the common people. Civilians can only be buried by using a rope to sew a coffin into a hole, even if it rains, they are still buried, they do not gather soil into a grave, and they do not plant trees. Other things may not be done during the mourning period, in principle, this rule applies from the emperor to the common people.

古文：丧从死者，祭从生者。
现代文：办丧事的规格是依据死者的爵位来定，而祭祀的规格是依据主持祭祀者的爵位来定。
English: The specifications for holding a funeral are based on the rank of the deceased, while the specifications for a religious service are based on the rank of the person leading the service.

古文：支子不祭。
现代文：不是嫡长子就不能主持祭祀。
English: If he is not the eldest son, he cannot preside over the sacrificial rites.

古文：天子七庙，三昭三穆，与太祖之庙而七。
现代文：天子设立七庙：文王世室、高祖、祖父三个昭庙，武王世室、曾祖、父三个穆庙，加上一个太祖庙，共七庙。
English: Tianzi set up seven temples: three Zhao temples for King Wen's family, Gao Zu, and grandfather, three Mu temples for King Wu's family, great-grandfather, and father, and one Taizu temple, for a total of seven temples.

古文：诸侯五庙，二昭二穆，与太祖之庙而五。
现代文：诸侯为祖宗立五庙:高祖、祖父二个昭庙，曾祖、父二个穆庙，加上太祖庙，共五庙。
English: The princes established five temples for their ancestors: Gao Zu, grandfather two Zhao temples, great-grandfather, father two Mu temples, plus the great-grandfather temple, a total of five temples.

古文：大夫三庙，一昭一穆，与太祖之庙而三。
现代文：大夫为祖宗立三庙;一个昭庙，一个穆庙，加上太祖庙，共三庙。
English: Dafu built three temples for his ancestors; a Zhaomiao, a Mu temple, and a Taizu temple, for a total of three temples.

古文：士一庙。
现代文：士只设一庙。
English: There is only one Buddhist temple.

古文：庶人祭于寝。
现代文：平民无庙，祭祀祖宗就在居室内进行。
English: Civilians have no temples, and ancestor worship takes place in the living room.

古文：天子、诸侯宗庙之祭：春曰礿，夏曰禘，秋曰尝，冬曰烝。
现代文：天子、诸侯宗庙四时祭：春祭叫礿，夏祭叫禘，秋祭叫尝，冬祭叫烝。
English: There are four seasonal festivals at the Temples of the Sons of Heaven and Princes: the Spring Festival, the Summer Festival, the Autumn Festival, and the Winter Festival.

古文：天子祭天地，诸侯祭社稷，大夫祭五祀。
现代文：天子祭祀天神、地祇及其他大小神灵;诸侯祭祀土神、谷神及其他神灵;大夫祭祀门神、灶神、行神、户神、中禫神等五种小神。
English: Tenshi (celestial sons) offer sacrifices to Tenjin (gods of heaven), Jingi (gods of earth) and other large and small deities; vassals offer sacrifices to Tsuchigami (gods of the soil), Tanigami (gods of the valley) and other deities; doctors offer sacrifices to five minor gods, such as Denshin (gods of the door), Zasshojin (gods of the hearth), Gyojin (gods of movement), Hojin (gods of the house) and Chushin (gods of the middle).

古文：天子祭天下名山大川：五岳视三公，四渎视诸侯。
现代文：天子祭祀天下的名山大川，祭祀五岳用享三公的九献礼，祭祀四渎用享诸侯的七献礼。
English: The Son of Heaven is worshipped with the world's famous mountains and rivers, the Five Mountains are worshipped with the nine offerings of the Three Princes, and the Four Deities are worshipped with the seven offerings of the Princes.

古文：诸侯祭名山大川之在其地者。
现代文：诸侯只祭祀在自己封地内的名山大川。
English: Princes only worshiped the famous mountain rivers within their own fiefdoms.

古文：天子诸侯祭因国之在其地而无主后者。
现代文：天子、诸侯都要祭祀境内已经灭亡而又没有后嗣的古国先君。
English: Heavenly sons and princes should offer sacrifices to the ancient ancestors who have perished in the territory and have no heirs.

古文：天子犆礿，祫禘，祫尝，祫烝。
现代文：天子的春祭是分别遍祭各庙，夏祭、秋祭、冬祭都是合祭。
English: The Spring Festival of the Son of Heaven is celebrated separately in each temple, while the Summer Festival, Autumn Festival, and Winter Festival are all combined.

古文：诸侯礿则不禘，禘则不尝，尝则不烝，烝则不礿。
现代文：诸侯每年只举行三次时祭，如举行春礿，就不举行夏禘;举行夏禘就不举行秋尝;举行秋尝就不举行冬烝;举行冬烝就不举行春礿。
English: The lords only hold three seasonal festivals each year. If the Spring Festival is held, the Summer Festival will not be held; if the Summer Festival is held, the Autumn Festival will not be held; if the Autumn Festival is held, the Winter Festival will not be held; if the Winter Festival is held, the Spring Festival will not be held.

古文：诸侯礿，犆；禘，一犆一祫；尝，祫；烝，祫。
现代文：诸侯的春礿是分别遍祭各庙，夏祭则一年分别遍祭各庙，一年合祭群庙，秋祭和冬祭都是合祭群庙。
English: The Spring Festival of the princes is the festival of the temples separately, the summer festival is the festival of the temples separately, the festival of the temples together, the autumn festival and the winter festival are the festival of the temples together.

古文：天子社稷皆大牢，诸侯社稷皆少牢。
现代文：天子祭社神、谷神都用牛、羊、猪三牲，诸侯祭社神、谷神都用羊、猪二牲。
English: Cows, sheep, and pigs are the three animals used to sacrifice the god of the shrine and the god of the valley in the festival of the son of heaven, and sheep and pigs are the two animals used in the festival of the god of the shrine and the god of the valley in the festival of the princes.

古文：大夫、士宗庙之祭，有田则祭，无田则荐。
现代文：大夫和士的宗庙之祭，有禄田的用祭礼，无禄田的用荐礼。
English: The festival of the ancestral temple of the doctor and the priest, there is the ritual with the field of honor, and there is the ritual with the recommendation without the field of honor.

古文：庶人春荐韭，夏荐麦，秋荐黍，冬荐稻。韭以卵，麦以鱼，黍以豚，稻以雁。
现代文：平民祭祀祖先的荐新之礼是：春天荐韭菜，夏天荐麦子，秋天荐黍子，冬天荐稻子；韭菜配以鸡蛋，麦子配以鱼，黍子配以小猪，稻子配以鹅。
English: The new recommended gifts for the common people to worship their ancestors are: spring recommended leek, summer recommended wheat, autumn recommended hazelnut, winter recommended rice; leek with egg, wheat with fish, hazelnut with piglet, rice with goose.

古文：祭天地之牛，角茧栗；宗庙之牛，角握；宾客之牛，角尺。
现代文：祭祀天地所用的牛较小，牛角不过像蚕茧、栗子那般大小；祭祀宗庙所用的牛略大，牛角大约四指来长；招待宾客所用的牛较大，牛角有一尺来长。
English: Cows used for the worship of heaven and earth are smaller, with horns no bigger than a silkworm cocoon or a chestnut. Cows used for the worship of ancestral temples are slightly larger, with horns about four fingers long. Cows used for entertaining guests are larger, with horns one foot long.

古文：诸侯无故不杀牛，大夫无故不杀羊，士无故不杀犬豕，庶人无故不食珍。
现代文：诸侯没有特殊原因不可杀牛，大夫没有特殊原因不可杀羊，士没有特殊原因不可杀狗与猪，平民没有特殊原因不吃时鲜物品。
English: Princes have no special reason not to kill cattle, doctors have no special reason not to kill sheep, priests have no special reason not to kill dogs and pigs, and civilians have no special reason not to eat seasonal fresh items.

古文：庶羞不逾牲，燕衣不逾祭服，寝不逾庙。
现代文：日常吃的菜肴，再好不能超过祭祀用的牲牢；日常穿的衣服，再好不能超过祭祀用的礼服；日常居住的堂屋不能比宗庙好。
English: The dishes you eat every day can't be better than the sacrificial animal dungeon; the clothes you wear every day can't be better than the ceremonial dress; the house you live in every day can't be better than the ancestral temple.

古文：古者：公田，藉而不税。市，廛而不税。
现代文：在古代，农户帮助耕种公田，不另缴田租；市场上，商贩缴纳地皮税后，不再缴所得税。
English: In ancient times, farmers helped cultivate public land and did not pay additional land rent; in the market, after merchants paid land tax, they no longer paid income tax.

古文：关，讥而不征。
现代文：物品出入关口，只稽查是否违禁，而不抽关税。
English: At the entry and exit points of goods, only check whether it is prohibited, but do not collect tariffs.

古文：林麓川泽，以时入而不禁。
现代文：在规定的时限内进入山林川泽采伐渔猎，就不加禁止。
English: Entering the mountains, forests, rivers and lakes to harvest, fish and hunt within the specified time limit is not prohibited.

古文：夫圭田无征。
现代文：余夫耕种卿大夫的圭田也不必缴税。
English: Yu's husband, Keida, who is a doctor of the Ministry of Agriculture, also does not have to pay taxes.

古文：用民之力，岁不过三日。
现代文：分派平民服劳役，每人每年不超过三天。
English: Civilians are assigned to labor service for no more than three days per person per year.

古文：田里不粥，墓地不请。
现代文：公家分配的农田和宅地不准买卖。国家有公共墓地，不得申请另处安葬。
English: Farmland and residential land allocated to public families are not allowed to be bought and sold. The country has public cemeteries, and it is not possible to apply for burial elsewhere.

古文：司空执度度地，居民山川沮泽，时四时。量地远近，兴事任力。
现代文：司空负责用工具测量土地，安置人民，观测山川沼泽的不同地势，测定四季气候的变化，测量土地的远近，然后才大兴土木征用民力。
English: It is responsible for surveying the land with tools, resettling people, observing the different topography of mountains, rivers and marshes, measuring the changes in the four-season climate, measuring the proximity of the land, and then commissioning civil engineering.

古文：凡使民：任老者之事，食壮者之食。
现代文：凡征用民力，活不能太累，要像给老年人分配任务那样；伙食标准却要按照棒劳力对待。
English: Where people's labor is requisitioned, life should not be too tiring, just as tasks should be assigned to the elderly; however, the standard of meals should be treated according to the standard of labor.

古文：凡居民材，必因天地寒暖燥湿，广谷大川异制。
现代文：凡安置百姓住处，必须考虑使百姓的生活习惯和当地的气候地势相适应。
English: Wherever people are resettled, consideration must be given to adapting people's living habits to the local climate and terrain.

古文：民生其间者异俗：刚柔轻重迟速异齐，五味异和，器械异制，衣服异宜。
现代文：生在深山谷和长在大河边上的人外表就不一样，他们的风俗习惯也自然两样：有的性情急躁，有的性情迟缓，酸苦甘辛咸，各有偏爱，使用的工具各有不同，穿的衣服也各有所好。
English: People born in a deep valley and those who grow up on the edge of a large river are different in appearance, and their customs and habits are naturally different: some are impatient, some are slow, bitter and sweet, each has preferences, the tools they use are different, and the clothes they wear are different.

古文：修其教，不易其俗；齐其政，不易其宜。
现代文：政府应当注重对他们进行礼义方面的教育，不必改变其风俗；同时应当注重统一政令，不必改变其习惯。
English: The government should focus on educating them about etiquette, without changing their customs; at the same time, it should focus on unifying government decrees, without changing their habits.

古文：中国戎夷，五方之民，皆有其性也，不可推移。
现代文：由中原民族与四方少数民族构成的一五方之民，各有不同的生活习性，不可互相转换。
English: The people of the one and five directions, composed of the Central Plains ethnic groups and the ethnic minorities of the four directions, each have different living habits and cannot be converted into each other.

古文：东方曰夷，被髪文身，有不火食者矣。
现代文：住在东方的民族叫夷，他们时兴剃光头，在身上刺花纹，其中有不吃熟食的人。
English: The people who live in the East are called Yi. They shave their heads and have tattoos on their bodies. Some of them don't eat cooked food.

古文：南方曰蛮，雕题交趾，有不火食者矣。
现代文：住在南方的少数民族叫蛮，他们额头上刻着花纹，走路时两脚的脚趾相向，其中也有不吃熟食的人。
English: The ethnic minorities who live in the south are called Manchu. They have patterns engraved on their foreheads and walk with their toes facing each other. Some of them do not eat cooked food.

古文：西方曰戎，被髪衣皮，有不粒食者矣。
现代文：住在西方的叫戎人，他们披散着头发，用兽皮做衣服，其中有不以五谷为食的人。
English: Those who live in the west are called eunuchs. They wear their hair loose and make clothes from animal skins. Among them are people who do not eat grain.

古文：北方曰狄，衣羽毛穴居，有不粒食者矣。
现代文：住在北方的叫狄人，他们用羽毛连缀成衣，住在洞穴中，其中有不以五谷为食的人。
English: The Di people, who live in the north, wear feathers on their clothing and live in caves, and some of them do not eat grain.

古文：中国、夷、蛮、戎、狄，皆有安居、和味、宜服、利用、备器，五方之民，言语不通，嗜欲不同。达其志，通其欲：东方曰寄，南方曰象，西方曰狄鞮，北方曰译。
现代文：中原、东夷、南蛮、西戎、北狄的人民，都有安逸的住处，偏爱的口味，舒适的服饰，便利的工具，完备的器物。东西南北中五方的人民，虽然言语不通，嗜好不同，但当他们要表达心意、互相交流的时候，有懂得双方语言的人帮助沟通。这种人，在东夷叫寄，在南蛮叫象，在西戎叫狄鞮，在北狄叫译。
English: The people of Central Plains, Dongyi, Nanban, Xirong, and North Di Cang all have comfortable living places, preferred tastes, comfortable clothing, convenient tools, and complete utensils. Although the people in the five directions of East, West, South, and North do not speak the same language and have different tastes, when they want to express their feelings and communicate with each other, they have people who understand both languages to help them communicate. Such people are called "sending" in Dongyi, "elephant" in Nanban, "devil" in Xirong, and "translator" in North Di.

古文：凡居民，量地以制邑，度地以居民。地、邑、民、居，必参相得也。
现代文：凡安置民众，必须根据土地的广狭来确定修建城邑的规格，来决定安置人民的数量，要使土地广狭、城邑大小、被安置民众的多少这三者互相配合得当，做到没有空闲的土地，没有无业游民。
English: Where people are to be resettled, it is necessary to determine the specifications for the construction of cities and towns according to the size of the land, and to determine the number of people to be resettled. It is necessary to make the size of the land, the size of the city, and the number of people to be resettled match each other properly, so that there is no idle land and no unemployed vagrants.

古文：无旷土，无游民，食节事时，民咸安其居，乐事劝功，尊君亲上，然后兴学。
现代文：人民食饮节俭，各项工作都按部就班地进行，百姓就会安居乐业，勉于功事，尊敬君长，然后兴办学校教育他们。
English: The people are frugal in food and drink, and all kinds of work are carried out in a step-by-step manner. The people will live and work in peace, enjoy their work, respect the monarchs, and then set up schools to educate them.

古文：司徒修六礼以节民性，明七教以兴民德，齐八政以防淫，一道德以同俗，养耆老以致孝，恤孤独以逮不足，上贤以崇德，简不肖以绌恶。
现代文：司徒职掌修习六礼以节制人民的性情，明辨七教以提高人民的道德，统一八政以防止僭越，提倡统一的道德规范，以造成共同的社会风尚。赡养老人以促进孝顺的风气，救济孤独以避免这部分人被社会遗弃，尊重有贤德的人，以提倡崇尚德行；检举邪恶的人，以摒弃罪恶。
English: It is the duty of the clergy to practice the Six Rites to temper the people's temperament, to distinguish the Seven Teachings to improve the people's morality, to unify the Eight Rites to prevent the people from transgressing, to promote a unified moral code to create a common social culture, to support the elderly to promote a culture of filial piety, to relieve loneliness to prevent this part of the people from being abandoned by society, to respect the virtuous people to promote the promotion of virtue, and to denounce the evil people to abandon evil.

古文：命乡，简不帅教者以告。
现代文：司徒命令六乡的长官将不听从教诲的人汇报上来。
English: Sito ordered the governors of the six townships to report anyone who did not follow his instructions.

古文：耆老皆朝于庠，元日，习射上功，习乡上齿，大司徒帅国之俊士与执事焉。
现代文：选定一个吉日，把乡里的德高望重的老人们请到乡学，演习乡射礼，射中多者居前，演习乡饮酒礼，年纪大者居前；司徒带领国学的学生也来帮忙。
English: Select a good day, invite the respected elders in the village to the village school, practice the village shooting ceremony, shoot more people in front, practice the village drinking ceremony, the elderly in front; Stowe led the students of Chinese studies to help.

古文：不变，命国之右乡，简不帅教者移之左；命国之左乡，简不帅教者移之右，如初礼。不变，移之郊，如初礼。
现代文：这样做的用意在子感化那些不听从教诲的人。隔了一年，如果他们还不悔改，司徒就命令国都右边兰乡的长官将这些不听教诲者检举出来并且转移到左边三乡，命令国都左边三乡的长官将不听教诲者检举出来并且转移到右边三乡，在新的环境中，让他们再接受一次和第一次同样的感化教育，隔了一年还不悔改，就把他们迁移到更远一点的郊，在新的环境中让他们再接受一次感化教育。
English: The purpose of this was to influence those who did not listen to the teachings. After one year, if they still did not repent, St. Peter ordered the officials of Lanxiang on the right side of the capital to report these people who did not listen to the teachings and transfer them to the three townships on the left. The officials of the three townships on the left side of the capital were ordered to report the people who did not listen to the teachings and transfer them to the three townships on the right side. In the new environment, they were allowed to receive the same influence education as the first time. After one year, if they did not repent, they were moved to a more distant suburb. In the

古文：不变，移之遂，如初礼。
现代文：隔了一年还不悔改，就把他们迁移到更远的遂，在遂学里再对他们进行一次感化教育。
English: After one year, if they still did not repent, they were moved to Sui, which was farther away, and then they were given a reform education at Sui Academy.

古文：不变，屏之远方，终身不齿。
现代文：几经教育仍不悔改，说明已不可救药，就把他们放逐到遥远的边疆，一辈子都不予录用。
English: If after several educations they still do not repent, indicating that they are beyond redemption, they will be banished to a distant frontier and will not be hired for the rest of their lives.

古文：命乡，论秀士，升之司徒，曰选士。
现代文：司徒命令六乡的长官考察乡学中德才兼优的学生并把他们推荐给司徒，被推荐者被称作选士。
English: Stout ordered the superintendent of the six townships to inspect the students who were both talented and excellent in the township school and recommend them to Stout. The recommended person was called the selector.

古文：司徒论选士之秀者而升之学，曰俊士。
现代文：司徒亲自考察选士中的出类拔萃者并把他们推荐给大学，这样的被推荐者被称作俊士。
English: Szeto personally examines the outstanding candidates and recommends them to the university. Such recommended candidates are known as juniors.

古文：升于司徒者，不征于乡；升于学者，不征于司徒，曰造士。
现代文：获得选士荣誉的就不再承担乡里的摇役，获得俊士荣誉的就不再承担国家的摇役，后者又叫造士。
English: Those who have won the honor of "Selector" will no longer assume the role of "Village Shaker," and those who have won the honor of "Junior" will no longer assume the role of "National Shaker," which is also called "Creator."

古文：乐正崇四术，立四教，顺先王诗书礼乐以造士。
现代文：乐正特别重视大学生的四门必修课，每门课都设有教师，也就是沿用先王传下来的《诗》、《书》、《礼》、《乐》四种教材来培养人才。
English: Lezheng attaches particular importance to the four compulsory courses for college students. Each course has a teacher, that is, the four teaching materials of "Poetry," "Book," "Rite" and "Music" handed down from the ancestors are used to train talents.

古文：春、秋教以礼乐，冬、夏教以诗书。
现代文：春秋二季教授《礼》、《乐》，冬夏二季教授《诗》、《书》。
English: "Rite" and "Music" are taught in the spring and autumn, and "Poetry" and "Books" are taught in the winter and summer.

古文：王大子、王子、群后之大子、卿大夫元士之适子、国之俊选，皆造焉。凡入学以齿。
现代文：国王的太子和庶子、诸侯的太子、卿大夫、元士的嫡子，国家的俊士和选士，都被送到大学学习。
English: Princes and illegitimate sons of kings, princes of princes, noble doctors, legitimate sons of emperors, and the country's best and brightest were all sent to study at the university.

古文：将出学，小胥、大胥、小乐正简不帅教者以告于大乐正。大乐正以告于王。
现代文：入学以后，不管是哪个学生，大家都只以年龄大小为序，不论尊卑。大学将要毕业时，小青将不听教导的大学生汇报给大青，大青汇报给小乐正，小乐正汇报给大乐正，大乐正汇报给天子。
English: After enrollment, no matter which student, everyone is only in order of age, regardless of rank. When the university is about to graduate, Xiao Qing will report unruly college students to Da Qing, Da Qing will report to Xiao Le Zheng, Xiao Le Zheng will report to Da Le Zheng, and Da Le Zheng will report to Tianzi.

古文：王命三公、九卿、大夫、元士皆入学。
现代文：天子于是择个吉日，下令三公、九卿、大夫、元士齐集大学，演习有关礼仪以感化不听教导者。
English: The Son of Heaven then chose an auspicious day and ordered the three princes, nine nobles, doctors, and former judges to gather at the university to practice the relevant etiquette to influence those who did not listen to the teacher.

古文：不变，王亲视学。
现代文：这样做了还不改，天子就亲自到校视察。
English: Even though he did this, he still did not change, so Tenshi went to the school to inspect it in person.

古文：不变，王三日不举，屏之远方。西方曰棘，东方曰寄，终身不齿。
现代文：这样做了还不改，天子首先自责，三天的饭内不见肉，而且吃饭时也不奏乐，然后将屡教不改者流放到远方，西部远方叫棘，东部远方叫寄，终身不予录用。
English: After doing this and still not changing, the heavenly son first reproached himself for not having meat in the meal for three days, and for not playing music during the meal. He then banished those who repeatedly did not change to a faraway place. The far west is called Thorn, the far east is called Mail, and they will not be hired for life.

古文：大乐正论造士之秀者以告于王，而升诸司马，曰进士。
现代文：大司乐考察评定优秀的国学毕业生，汇报给天子，并荐举给司马，被荐举的学生就叫进士。
English: The Daisiraku Inspection evaluates outstanding graduates of Chinese studies, reports to the Emperor, and recommends them to Sima. The recommended students are called Jin Shi.

古文：司马辨论官材，论进士之贤者以告于王，而定其论。
现代文：堪做何官，考察每个进士的特长司马再逐个考察每个进士的才能结爵，汇报给天子，并拿出结论来。
English: Sima, who is qualified to be a magistrate, examined the special ability of each candidate, and then examined the ability of each candidate one by one, reported to Tianzi, and came up with a conclusion.

古文：论定然后官之，任官然后爵之，位定然后禄之。
现代文：论确定了然后委派官职试用，表明能胜任职务然后封以爵位，位定了然后发给俸禄。
English: The theory is confirmed, and then the official position is assigned for trial, and then the knighthood is awarded after the official position is confirmed, and then the salary is paid after the official position is determined.

古文：大夫废其事，终身不仕，死以士礼葬之。
现代文：大夫因不称职而被免官，终身不再录用，死后用士一级的礼葬之。
English: The doctor was dismissed for incompetence, never re-hired, and given a first-class funeral after his death.

古文：有发，则命大司徒教士以车甲。
现代文：遇到国家的征召，就命令大司徒对国学生加以军事训练。
English: When faced with conscription by the state, he ordered the Daisetsu to give military training to Chinese students.

古文：凡执技论力，适四方，裸股肱，决射御。
现代文：凡靠技艺谋生的人，只考察其技艺精否，不考察其德行。
English: Those who make a living by their skills only examine the excellence of their skills, not their virtues.

古文：凡执技以事上者：祝史、射御、医卜及百工。
现代文：要派他们到各地去执行任务，就让他们卷起衣袖裤管，互相比赛技艺，以决定人选。
English: To send them to various places to carry out tasks, let them roll up their sleeves and compete with each other in skills to determine the candidates.

古文：凡执技以事上者：不贰事，不移官，出乡不与士齿。
现代文：凡靠技艺为官府服务以谋生的人，计有祝、史、射、御、医、卜及各种工匠七种。此七种人，不得从事其他职业，有了成绩也不迁官，离开本乡，就不能与士人论辈分年龄。
English: There are seven types of people who rely on their skills to earn a living by serving the government, including those skilled in wishing, history, shooting, government, medicine, and divination, as well as various craftsmen. These seven types of people are not allowed to engage in other occupations, nor are they allowed to leave their hometown if they leave their hometown.

古文：仕于家者，出乡不与士齿。
现代文：在大夫家里服务的这些人，离开本乡后也是如此。
English: Those who served in the doctor's family did the same when they left their hometown.

古文：司寇正刑明辟以听狱讼。
现代文：司寇负责正定刑书，明断罪法，以审理案件。
English: The chief magistrate is responsible for correcting the written sentence and clearly determining the crime in order to try the case.

古文：必三刺。有旨无简不听。
现代文：审理时，一定要向群臣、群吏、民众三个方面征求意见，以求断案得当。
English: During the trial, it is necessary to solicit opinions from the three aspects of vassals, officials and the public in order to properly decide the case.

古文：附从轻，赦从重。
现代文：有犯罪的动机而无犯罪的事实，这样的案子不予受理。
English: The heavier or lighter the sentence, the lighter it will be. In the case of a pardon, the heavier sentence will be pardoned first.

古文：凡制五刑，必即天论。
现代文：量刑时，可轻可重者从轻；赦免时，虽重罪亦可获赦免。
English: When it comes to sentencing, the lighter the punishment the better; when it comes to pardoning, even a serious crime can be pardoned.

古文：邮罚丽于事。凡听五刑之讼，必原父子之亲、立君臣之义以权之。
现代文：凡根据五刑条文进行判决时，一定要合乎天理，使刑罚与罪行相当。
English: Whenever a judgment is made according to the five criminal provisions, it must be in accordance with the principles of heaven, so that the punishment is equivalent to the crime.

古文：意论轻重之序、慎测浅深之量以别之。悉其聪明、致其忠爱以尽之。
现代文：凡审案断罪，一定要从父子之亲、君臣之义的角度加以衡量；脑子里始终要考虑罪行有轻重，量刑有深浅，个案与个案不同；要竭尽自己的才智，发扬忠恕仁爱之心，使案情真相大白。
English: Whenever a case is tried and a crime is adjudicated, it must be measured from the perspective of the righteousness of the father and son, the prince and the minister; the mind must always consider the seriousness of the crime, the depth of the sentencing, and the case is different from case to case; we must do our best to promote the loyalty and compassion, and make the truth of the case clear.

古文：疑狱，泛与众共之；众疑，赦之。
现代文：遇有疑而难决的案子，就与民众共同审理。
English: In case of doubtful and difficult cases, they will be tried together with the public.

古文：必察小大之比以成之。
现代文：如果民众也感到疑而难决，那就应该宣布当事人无罪。
English: If the public is also doubtful, then the person should be acquitted.

古文：成狱辞，史以狱成告于正，正听之。
现代文：处理类似的案件，一定要参考一下过去判重判轻的先例再形成判决。判决书拟好之后，史把判决书提交给正。
English: In dealing with similar cases, it is necessary to refer to past precedents of heavy and light sentences to form a judgment. After the judgment is prepared, the judge submits the judgment to the court.

古文：正以狱成告于大司寇，大司寇听之棘木之下。
现代文：正再审理一遍，然后把判决书提交给大司寇。大司寇在有孤卿大夫等人的陪审下在外朝再审理一遍，然后把判决书提交给天子。
English: It is being tried again, and then the verdict will be submitted to the Grand Scroll. The Grand Scroll will be tried again in the Outer Court under the jury of Dr. Kokei and others, and then the verdict will be submitted to the Emperor.

古文：大司寇以狱之成告于王，王命三公参听之。
现代文：天子又命令三公共同审理一遍，三公审理之后把判决书提交给天子。
English: Tianzi also ordered the three justices to jointly try the case again, and after the three justices tried the case, they submitted the verdict to Tianzi.

古文：三公以狱之成告于王，王三又，然后制刑。
现代文：天子再审查一下案件是否适用于三肴，如果没有，然后判刑。
English: Tianzi will then review whether the case is applicable to the three dishes, if not, then sentence.

古文：凡作刑罚，轻无赦。
现代文：既然到了最后判刑的时刻，就是再轻的罪也不会得到赦免。
English: Now that it's time for the final sentence, even the most minor crime will not be pardoned.

古文：刑者侀也，侀者成也，一成而不可变，故君子尽心焉。
现代文：这是因为，所谓刑，就是定型的意思。所谓定型，就是形成的意思。判决一经形成就不可改变，所以君子对审理案件是非常尽心的。
English: This is because the so-called "sentence" is the meaning of stereotype. The so-called "stereotype" is the meaning of formation. Once the judgment is formed, it cannot be changed, so the gentleman is very conscientious about hearing the case.

古文：析言破律，乱名改作，执左道以乱政，杀。
现代文：凡是断章取义曲解法律，擅自改变事物的既定名称而另搞一套， 用邪道扰乱政令的人，杀掉。
English: Anyone who twists the meaning of the law out of context, changes the established name of things without authorization and engages in another set, and disturbs the government order with evil ways, should be killed.

古文：作淫声、异服、奇技、奇器以疑众，杀。
现代文：凡是制作靡靡之音、奇装异服、怪诞之技、奇异之器而蛊惑民心的人，杀掉。
English: Kill all those who produce bewitching sounds, strange costumes, grotesque skills, and strange utensils to bewitch the people.

古文：行伪而坚，言伪而辩，学非而博，顺非而泽，以疑众，杀。
现代文：行为诈伪而又顽固不化、言辞虚伪而又巧言利舌、所学陷入异端而又自以为博闻、言辞谬庚而讲得冠冕堂皇，以此蛊惑人心者，杀掉。
English: Deceitful and obstinate in their actions, deceitful and eloquent in their words, heretical in their teachings, boastful in their knowledge, and deceitful in their words, those who lead the people astray should be put to death.

古文：假于鬼神、时日、卜筮以疑众，杀。
现代文：凡是假托鬼神、时辰日子、卜签招摇撞骗以蛊惑人心者，杀掉。
English: Kill anyone who deceives the people by pretending to be a ghost or a deity, or by playing tricks.

古文：有圭璧金璋，不粥于市；命服命车，不粥于市；宗庙之器，不粥于市；牺牲不粥于市；戎器不粥于市。
现代文：上述的四种被杀者，不再接受他们的申诉。凡是推行禁令，就是要使民众一律遵守，所以即使是过失犯禁，也不饶恕。圭、璧、琼、璋是高贵的玉器，不准在市场上出售。表明身份的命服命车，不准在市场上出售。宗庙中的祭器，不准在市场上出售。用于祭祀的牲畜，不准在市场上出售。军器，不准在市场上出售。
English: The above-mentioned four types of victims will no longer receive their complaints. Any ban is to make the people comply with it, so even if it is a negligent ban, it will not be forgiven. Gui, Bi, Qiong and Yao are noble jade objects and are not allowed to be sold on the market. Identity-revealing life vests and chariots are not allowed to be sold on the market. Sacrificial objects in ancestral temples are not allowed to be sold on the market. Livestock used for sacrifice are not allowed to be sold on the market. Military equipment is not allowed to be sold on the market.

古文：用器不中度，不粥于市。
现代文：日常所用的器血不合规格，不准在市场上出售。
English: Blood vessels used in daily life do not meet specifications and are not allowed to be sold on the market.

古文：兵车不中度，不粥于市。
现代文：兵车不合规格，不准在市场上出售。
English: The military vehicles do not meet the specifications and are not allowed to be sold on the market.

古文：布帛精粗不中数、幅广狭不中量，不粥于市。
现代文：布帛的丝缕密疏不合规格，其幅宽不合尺寸，不准在市场上出售。
English: Silk threads of the fabric are too sparse to meet the specifications, and its width does not meet the size, and it is not allowed to be sold on the market.

古文：奸色乱正色，不粥于市。
现代文：将布帛染以间色而与正色相乱的，不准在市场上出售。
English: If the cloth is dyed with a neutral color and is mixed with the positive color, it is not allowed to be sold on the market.

古文：锦文珠玉成器，不粥于市。
现代文：有纹彩的布帛、珠玉以及制作精美的器物，不准在市场上出售。
English: It is not allowed to sell embroidered cloth, precious stones and beautifully made utensils in the market.

古文：衣服饮食，不粥于市。
现代文：华美的衣服饮食，不准在市场上出售。
English: Luxurious clothes and food are not allowed to be sold in the market.

古文：五谷不时，果实未熟，不粥于市。
现代文：没有到成熟期的五谷和瓜果，不准在市场上出售。未成材的树木，不准在市场上出售。
English: Cereals and melons that have not reached maturity are not allowed to be sold on the market. Unfinished trees are not allowed to be sold on the market.

古文：木不中伐，不粥于市。
现代文：禽兽鱼鳖尚未长大，不准在市场上出售。
English: The fins of animals and birds have not yet grown, and they are not allowed to be sold on the market.

古文：禽兽鱼鳖不中杀，不粥于市。关执禁以讥，禁异服，识异言。
现代文：关卡上执行禁令的人要严格稽查，禁止奇装异服，识别各地的方言。
English: At checkpoints, those enforcing the ban will have to carry out strict checks, ban fancy dress and identify local dialects.

古文：大史典礼，执简记，奉讳恶。
现代文：太史主管一切礼仪，执掌各种典籍，记录违避的名字、忌日、灾异等。
English: Taishi is in charge of all etiquette, in charge of various classics, records the names of evasion, the day of death, disasters and so on.

古文：天子齐戒受谏。
现代文：天子听受太史的劝谏之前要斋戒。
English: The son of heaven should fast before he listens to the advice of the great historian.

古文：司会以岁之成，质于天子，冢宰齐戒受质。
现代文：司会于每年年终将一年的收支总报表呈请天子考核。太宰斋戒后佐天子接受报表。
English: At the end of each year, the board of directors submits a one-year general statement of income and expenditure to Tenshi for assessment. Tenshi accepts the statement after Dazai fasting.

古文：大乐正、大司寇、市，三官以其成，从质于天子。
现代文：大司乐、大司寇和管理市场的官将各自的报表附于司会的报表之后呈请天子考核。
English: The officials in charge of Daesiraku, Daesikko and the management of the market attached their respective reports to the report of the committee and then submitted them to the emperor for assessment.

古文：大司徒、大司马、大司空齐戒受质；百官各以其成，质于三官。
现代文：大司徒、大司马、大司空斋戒后接受报表进行考核，他们所统领的百官也把各自的情况上报给这三个大官考核。
English: After fasting, Daishi Tutu, Daishi Ma and Daishi Ku accepted the report for evaluation, and the hundred officials under their command also reported their respective situations to the three officials for evaluation.

古文：大司徒、大司马、大司空以百官之成，质于天子。
现代文：大司徒、大司马、大司空把考核的结果向天子报告。
English: Daishi-tsu, Daishi-ma, and Daishi-kucho report the results of the assessment to the emperor.

古文：百官齐戒受质。然后，休老劳农，成岁事，制国用。
现代文：百官斋戒后听候天子宣布考核结果，然后举行养老的宴会，举行蜡祭慰劳农夫。
English: After the officials fasted, they waited for the heavenly son to announce the results of the assessment, and then held a banquet for the elderly, and held a wax sacrifice to comfort the laboring farmers.

古文：凡养老：有虞氏以燕礼，夏后氏以飨礼，殷人以食礼，周人修而兼用之。
现代文：到这时，一年的农事都已完成，可以编制下一年的预算了。养老之礼，有虞氏用燕礼，夏后氏用飨礼，殷人用食礼，周人遵循古制而三礼兼用。
English: By this time, a year's farming has been completed, and the next year's budget can be prepared. For the gift for the elderly, the Yu clan will use the Yan gift, the Xiao clan will use the Gong gift, the Yin clan will use the food gift, and the Zhou clan will follow the ancient system and use all three gifts.

古文：五十养于乡，六十养于国，七十养于学，达于诸侯。
现代文：五十岁的老人就可以参加在乡学中举行的敬老宴会，六十岁的老人就可以参加在王宫小学中举行的宴会，七十岁的老人就可以参加在大学举行的宴会。诸侯国也是如此。
English: A fifty-year-old can attend a banquet held at the village school, a sixty-year-old can attend a banquet held at the palace elementary school, and a seventy-year-old can attend a banquet held at the university. This is also true for the princely states.

古文：八十拜君命，一坐再至，瞽亦如之。九十使人受。五十异粻，六十宿肉，七十贰膳，八十常珍；九十，饮食不离寝、膳饮从于游可也。六十岁制，七十时制，八十月制；九十日修，唯绞、衾、冒，死而后制。
现代文：人到了六十岁，做子女的就要为其准备需要一年时间才能做好的丧葬用品；人到了七十岁，子女就要为其准备需要一季时间才能做好的丧葬用品；人到了八十岁，子女就应为其准备需要一月时间才能做好的丧葬用品；人到了九十岁，子女就应为其准备需要一天时间才能做好的丧葬用品；只有绞、给、袅、冒，死后再做也不迟。
English: When a person reaches the age of sixty, it takes one year to prepare funeral supplies for his or her children; when a person reaches the age of seventy, it takes one season to prepare funeral supplies for his or her children; when a person reaches the age of eighty, it takes one month to prepare funeral supplies for his or her children; when a person reaches the age of ninety, it takes one day to prepare funeral supplies for his or her children; it is only necessary to wring, give, rub, and take, and it is not too late to do it after death.

古文：五十始衰，六十非肉不饱，七十非帛不暖，八十非人不暖；九十，虽得人不暖矣。
现代文：人到五十岁就开始衰老，六十岁以后不吃肉就吃不饱，七十岁以后没有丝绵就会感到身上不暖，八十岁以后没有人暖被就感到睡不暖和，九十岁以后虽有人暖被也睡不暖和了。
English: People start aging at the age of fifty. After the age of sixty, if you don't eat meat, you won't have enough to eat. After the age of seventy, if you don't have silk, you won't feel warm. After the age of eighty, if you don't have a warm quilt, you won't feel warm. After the age of ninety, even if you have a warm quilt, you won't sleep warm.

古文：五十杖于家，六十杖于乡，七十杖于国，八十杖于朝；九十者，天子欲有问焉，则就其室，以珍从。
现代文：五十岁以后可以拄杖于家，六十岁以后可以拄杖于乡，七十岁以后可以拄杖于国都，八十岁以后可以拄杖上朝，九十岁以后，天子若有事询问，就要派人到他家请教，还要带上好吃的东西。
English: After the age of fifty, you can walk with a cane at home. After the age of sixty, you can walk with a cane in the village. After the age of seventy, you can walk with a cane in the capital. After the age of eighty, you can walk with a cane to the capital. After the age of ninety, if you have any questions, you should send someone to his house to ask for advice. You should also bring something delicious.

古文：七十不俟朝，八十月告存，九十日有秩五十不从力政，六十不与服戎，七十不与宾客之事，八十齐丧之事弗及也。
现代文：大夫到了七十岁就可以不在朝里佳候，八十岁以后，天子要每月派人来问候安康，九十岁以后，天子要每天派人送食物来。平民到了五十岁就不服劳役，六十岁以后就不服兵役，七十岁以后就不再参与应酬宾客的活动，八十岁以后，就连祭祀丧葬这类重要的事也不参与了。
English: When a doctor reaches the age of seventy, he can no longer greet people in the morning. After the age of eighty, the Son of Heaven will send someone every month to wish him good health. After the age of ninety, the Son of Heaven will send someone every day to bring him food. Civilians at the age of fifty will not perform labor service, after the age of sixty they will not perform military service, after the age of seventy they will no longer participate in the activities of entertaining guests, and after the age of eighty they will not even participate in important things such as sacrifices and funerals.

古文：五十而爵，六十不亲学，七十致政。
现代文：五十岁后得到封爵，六十岁后不亲自向别人请教，七十岁后就告老致仕，遇到丧事只要穿上孝服就行，其他礼数全免。
English: After the age of fifty, he was given a knighthood. After the age of sixty, he did not personally ask others for advice. After the age of seventy, he retired. In the event of a funeral, all he had to do was to put on a suit of filial piety. All other courtesies were dispensed with.

古文：唯衰麻为丧。有虞氏养国老于上庠，养庶老于下庠。
现代文：有虞氏的时代，在上庠宴飨国老，在下庠宴飨庶老。
English: In the era of the Yuezhi, the elders of the country were invited to the upper banquet, and the lesser elders to the lower banquet.

古文：夏后氏养国老于东序，养庶老于西序。
现代文：夏后氏在东序宴飨国老，在西序宴飨庶老。
English: Natsugo clan entertained the elders of the country at the East ceremony and the elders of the country at the West ceremony.

古文：殷人养国老于右学，养庶老于左学。
现代文：殷代在右学宴飨国老，在左学宴飨庶老。
English: In the Yin Dynasty, the elders of the country were invited to the right-hand banquet, while the lesser elders were invited to the left-hand banquet.

古文：周人养国老于东胶，养庶老于虞庠：虞庠在国之西郊。
现代文：周代在东胶宴飨国老，在虞庠宴飨庶老，虞庠在王城的西郊。
English: Zhou dynasties in the East Jiaotong feast of the old, in the Yu feast of the old, Yu feast in the western suburb of the royal city.

古文：有虞氏皇而祭，深衣而养老。
现代文：有虞氏的时代，祭祀时戴 皇 ，养老时穿深衣。
English: In the era of the Yugo clan, the emperor was worn during religious services, and the elderly wore dark clothes.

古文：夏后氏收而祭，燕衣而养老。
现代文：夏代祭祀时戴 收 ，养老时穿燕衣。殷代祭祀时戴 冔 ，养老时穿纯白的深衣。
English: In the Summer Dynasty, they wore long robes when performing religious rites; in the Elder Dynasty, they wore long robes; in the Yin Dynasty, they wore short robes when performing religious rites; and in the Elder Dynasty, they wore pure white robes.

古文：殷人冔而祭，缟衣而养老。
现代文：周代祭祀时戴冕，养老时穿玄衣白裳。
English: Zhou dynasties wore crowns when performing religious rites, and wore plain white robes when they were old.

古文：周人冕而祭，玄衣而养老。凡三王养老皆引年。
现代文：夏、殷、周三代的天子举行养老宴会，都要依据户籍来核实与会老人的年龄。
English: Xia, Yin and the third generation of Tianzi held a pension banquet, and they had to verify the age of the elderly participants according to their household registration.

古文：八十者一子不从政，九十者其家不从政，废疾非人不养者一人不从政。
现代文：家有八十岁以上老人的，可以有一人被豁免力役之征。家有九十岁老人的，豁免其全家的力役征召。家有残废人、病人必须有他人侍候的，也可以豁免一人的劳役。
English: If there is an 80-year-old or older person in the family, one person can be exempted from conscription for forced labor. If there is a 90-year-old in the family, the whole family can be exempted from conscription for forced labor. If there is a disabled person or a sick person in the family who must be attended by others, one person can also be exempted from forced labor.

古文：父母之丧，三年不从政。
现代文：父母去世，在三年守丧期间不应力役之征。
English: After the death of his parents, he was conscripted into the armed forces during the three-year period of mourning.

古文：齐衰、大功之丧，三月不从政。
现代文：遇到齐衰、大功亲属去世，可以三个月不应力役之征。
English: In the event of simultaneous decline and the death of a highly meritorious relative, they may not be conscripted for three months.

古文：将徙于诸侯，三月不从政。自诸侯来徙家，期不从政。
现代文：将从王瓷移居诸侯的家庭，临行之前免役三月；自诸侯移居王瓷的家庭，到达后免役一年。
English: The families that will move from Wangjiao to Zhuhou will be exempted from military service for three months before departure; the families that will move from Zhuhou to Wangjiao will be exempted from military service for one year after arrival.

古文：少而无父者谓之孤，老而无子者谓之独，老而无妻者谓之矜，老而无夫者谓之寡。
现代文：年幼失去父亲的人叫做孤，年老没有子孙的人叫做独，年老无妻的人叫做矜，年老无夫的人叫做寡。
English: A young man who has lost his father is called a lonely man, an old man who has no children is called a lonely man, an old man who has no wife is called a widower, and an old man who has no husband is called a widow.

古文：此四者，天民之穷而无告者也，皆有常饩。
现代文：这四种人，是世上生活困难而又求告无门的人，要经常分发粮饷。
English: These four types of people are those who live a difficult life in the world and have no one to turn to. They should regularly distribute grain baskets.

古文：瘖、聋、跛、躃、断者、侏儒、百工，各以其器食之。
现代文：哑吧、聋子、一足瘸者、两足俱废者、肢体残缺者、躯体矮小者也在抚恤的范围内。
English: The mute, the deaf, the lame, the lame-footed, the lame-limbed, the crippled, and the short are also within the scope of the pension.

古文：道路：男子由右，妇人由左，车从中央。
现代文：老年人与年轻人都挑着重担子，年轻人应把老人的重担分过来一些。
English: Both the elderly and the young shoulder heavy burdens, and the young should share some of the burdens of the elderly.

古文：父之齿随行，兄之齿雁行，朋友不相逾。轻任并，重任分，斑白者不提挈。君子耆老不徒行，庶人耆老不徒食。
现代文：不要让头发花白的老人提着东西走路。士大夫阶级的老者，出门必有车，不至于徒步；平民阶级的老者，吃饭必有肉。
English: Don't let the gray-haired old man carry things and walk. The old man of the scholar class must have a car to go out, not on foot; the old man of the commoner class must have meat to eat.

古文：大夫祭器不假。
现代文：有地的大夫都是自备祭器，不向别人借用。
English: Local doctors have their own sacrificial vessels and do not borrow from others.

古文：祭器未成，不造燕器。
现代文：祭器没有备齐之前，不考虑制造日常生活用器。
English: The manufacture of everyday utensils is not considered until the sacrificial vessels are ready.

古文：方一里者为田九百亩。
现代文：一里见方的土地，折合为田地是九百亩。
English: A square kilometer of land is equivalent to 900 mu of farmland.

古文：方十里者，为方一里者百，为田九万亩。
现代文：十里见方的土地，有一百个一里见方，折合为田地是九万亩。
English: Ten square miles of land is equal to one hundred square miles, or 90,000 mu of farmland.

古文：方百里者，为方十里者百，为田九十亿亩。
现代文：百里见方的土地，有一百个十里见方，折合为田地是九百万亩。
English: A hundred square kilometers of land is equal to one hundred ten square kilometers, equivalent to nine million mu of farmland.

古文：方千里者，为方百里者百，为田九万亿亩。
现代文：千里见方的土地，有一百个百里见方，折合为田地是九亿亩。
English: There are a hundred thousand square kilometers of land, equivalent to 900 million mu of farmland.

古文：自恒山至于南河，千里而近；自南河至于江，千里而近。
现代文：从恒山到南边的黄河，这一段南北距离不足千里。再从此段黄河到南边的长江，这一段的距离也不足千里。
English: From the Hengshan Mountains to the south of the Yellow River, the north-south distance is less than a thousand miles, and from this section of the Yellow River to the south of the Yangtze River, the distance is also less than a thousand miles.

古文：自江至于衡山，千里而遥；自东河至于东海，千里而遥。
现代文：从长江往南到衡山，这段距离千里有余。从东河向东到东海，这一段东西的距离千里有余。
English: From the Yangtze River south to Hengshan, the distance is more than a thousand. From the East River to the East Sea, the distance is more than a thousand.

古文：自东河至于西河，千里而近；自西河至于流沙，千里而遥。
现代文：从东河往西到西河，这段距离不足千里。从西河再向西到沙漠，这段距离千里有余。
English: From the East River to the West River, the distance is less than a thousand miles. From the West River to the desert, the distance is more than a thousand miles.

古文：西不尽流沙，南不尽衡山，东不近东海，北不尽恒山，凡四海之内，断长补短，方三千里，为田八十万亿一万亿亩。
现代文：沙漠并非西边的尽头，衡山并非南边的尽头，东海并非东边的尽头，恒山并非北边的尽头，这样，四海之内，截长补短，大约就是三千里见方，折合成田地就是八十一亿亩。
English: The desert is not the end of the west, Hengshan is not the end of the south, the East Sea is not the end of the east, and the Hengshan is not the end of the north. In this way, within the four seas, the intersection of the long and short is about three thousand miles square, and the field is 8.1 billion mu.

古文：方百里者为田九十亿亩：山陵、林麓、川泽、沟渎、城郭、宫室、涂巷，三分去一，其余六十亿亩。
现代文：百里见方的土地，折合成田地本应是九百万亩，但因其中有山脉、森林、河流湖泊、沟渠水道、城郭、宫室、道路，要占去三分之一，所以只剩下农田六百万亩。
English: A hundred-mile-square piece of land should be nine million mu of farmland, but because mountains, forests, rivers, lakes, canals, waterways, castles, palaces, and roads account for one-third of it, only six million mu of farmland remain.

古文：古者以周尺八尺为步，今以周尺六尺四寸为步。
现代文：古时候是以周尺八尺为一步，现在汉代是以周尺六尺四寸为一步。
English: In ancient times, Zhou shaku eight shaku was a step, and now in the Han Dynasty, Zhou shaku six shaku four sun is a step.

古文：古者百亩，当今东田百四十六亩三十步。
现代文：所以古时候的一百亩，等于现在的一百四十六亩零三十平方步。
English: Therefore, one hundred mu in ancient times is equal to one hundred and forty-six mu and thirty square meters now.

古文：古者百里，当今百二十一里六十步四尺二寸二分。
现代文：古时候的一百里，相当于现在的一百二十一里零六十步四尺二寸二分。
English: One hundred miles in ancient times was equivalent to one hundred and twenty-one miles, sixty paces, four feet, two inches and two minutes today.

古文：方千里者，为方百里者百。
现代文：所谓千里见方者，实包括一百个百里见方的区域。
English: The so-called thousand-mile square actually includes a hundred hundred-mile square areas.

古文：封方百里者三十国，其余，方百里者七十。
现代文：如果分封出三十个百里见方的诸侯国，就余下七十个百里见方的地方。
English: If thirty principalities of a hundred miles square are partitioned off, there will be seventy hundred miles square left.

古文：又封方七十里者六十为方百里者二十九，方十里者四十。
现代文：再分封出六十个七十里见方的诸侯国，折合为二十九个方百里和四十个方十里，剩下四十个方百里和六十个方十里的土地。
English: The sixty and seventy li cubed vassal states were divided into twenty-nine hundred li cubed and forty hundred li cubed, leaving forty hundred li cubed and sixty hundred li cubed.

古文：其余，方百里者四十，方十里者六十；又封方五十里者二十为方百里者三十；其余，方百里者十，方十里者六十。
现代文：又分封出一百二十个五十里见方的诸侯国，折合为三十个百里见方之地，还剩下十个方百里和六十个方十里的土地。
English: And he set apart one hundred and twenty provinces of fifty miles square, which is equal to thirty provinces of a hundred miles square; and there remained ten provinces of a hundred miles square, and threescore provinces of a hundred miles square.

古文：名山大泽不以封，其余以为附庸间田。
现代文：名山大泽不作封地来用，剩下的土地，或者作为大诸侯国的附庸，或者作为闲田。
English: Famous Danzhao Ze cannot be used as a fief, and the rest as a vassal field.

古文：诸侯之有功者，取于间田以禄之；其有削地者，归之间田。
现代文：诸侯有功，就从闲田中拿出土地作为封赏；诸侯有罪，其被削去的土地则并入闲田。
English: If the lords were meritorious, they were rewarded with land taken from idle fields; if the lords were guilty, the land taken from them was incorporated into idle fields.

古文：天子之县内：方千里者为方百里者百。
现代文：天子的王畿千里见方，也就是一百个百里见方。
English: The kingdom of heaven is a thousand li cubed, that is, a hundred hundred li cubed.

古文：封方百里者九，其余方百里者九十一。
现代文：如果分封出九个方百里的诸侯国，就剩下九十一个百里见方的土地。
English: If nine vassal states of a hundred miles square were partitioned off, there would be ninety-one square miles of land left.

古文：又封方七十里者二十一为方百里者十，方十里者二十九；其余，方百里者八十，方十里者七十一。
现代文：如果又分封出二十一个方七十里的诸侯国，折合为十个方百里和二十九个方十里，就剩下八十个方百里和七十一个方十里的土地。
English: If we also divide out the principalities of twenty-one square and seventy miles, equivalent to ten square miles and twenty-nine square miles, there will be eighty square miles and seventy-one square miles of land left.

古文：又封方五十里者六十三为方百里者十五，方十里者七十五；其余方百里者六十四，方十里者九十六。
现代文：如果又分封出六十三个五十里见方的诸侯国，折合为十五个方百里和七十五个方十里，最后剩下六十四个方百里和九十六个方十里的土地。
English: If the sixty-three vassal states of fifty-six square miles are also divided, it is equivalent to fifteen square miles and seventy-five square miles, and finally there are sixty-four square miles and ninety-six square miles of land.

古文：诸侯之下士禄食九人，中士食十八人，上士食三十六人。下大夫食七十二人，卿食二百八十八人。君食二千八百八十人。
现代文：诸侯的下士，其俸禄可以养活九人，中士的俸禄可以养活十八人，上士的俸禄可以养活三十六人，下大夫的俸禄可以养活七十二人，卿的俸禄可以养活二百八十八人，国君的俸禄可以养活二千八百八十人。
English: The salary of a lordship corporal can support nine people, the salary of a sergeant can support eighteen people, the salary of a staff sergeant can support thirty-six people, the salary of a junior doctor can support seventy-two people, the salary of a lord can support two hundred and eighty-eight people, and the salary of a sovereign can support two thousand eight hundred and eighty people.

古文：次国之卿食二百一十六人，君食二千一百六十人。
现代文：中等诸侯国的卿，其俸禄可以养活二百一十六人，国君的俸禄则可养活二千一百六十人。
English: The salary of a middle-ranking vassal lord could support 216 people, while the salary of a sovereign could support 2,160 people.

古文：小国之卿食百四十四人，君食千四百四十人。
现代文：小诸侯国的卿，其俸禄可以养活一百四十四人，国君的俸禄则可养活一千四百四十人。
English: The salary of a lord of a small principality can support 144 people, while the salary of a sovereign can support 1,440 people.

古文：次国之卿，命于其君者，如小国之卿。
现代文：中等诸侯国的卿，如果是由其国君任命的，其所得俸禄，等于小国诸侯的由天子任命的卿。
English: The salary of a middle-ranking vassal lord, if appointed by his sovereign, is equal to that of a vassal lord appointed by the Son of Heaven in a small vassal state.

古文：天子之大夫为三监，监于诸侯之国者，其禄视诸侯之卿，其爵视次国之君，其禄取之于方伯之地。
现代文：天子的大夫被派到诸侯国去做监察的，其俸禄比照大诸侯国之卿，其爵位比照中等诸侯国的国君，其俸禄从方伯那里支取。
English: If a doctor of the Son of Heaven is sent to a vassal state to supervise, his salary is comparable to that of a great vassal state lord, his rank is comparable to that of a middle vassal state lord, and his salary is deducted from the provincial governor.

古文：方伯为朝天子，皆有汤沐之邑于天子之县内，视元士。
现代文：方伯为了朝见天子，在王瓷内都有专供其斋戒沐浴的土地。汤沐邑的大小，和天子上士的禄田一般多。
English: In order to see the heavenly son in the morning, the abbot has a special land for his fasting and bathing in the royal porcelain. There are generally more than the size of the Tang Muyi and the location of the Heavenly Father.

古文：诸侯世子世国，大夫不世爵。使以德，爵以功，未赐爵，视天子之元士，以君其国。
现代文：诸侯的太子可以继承君位，大夫的儿子则不能世袭爵位，因为大夫的儿子未必贤惠，有德行才委以职务，有功劳才赐以爵位。诸侯的儿子在天子没有赐爵之前，其身份视同天子之上士，并且以这种身份统治他的国家。
English: Princes of princes can inherit the throne, but the sons of doctors cannot inherit the title of nobility, because the sons of doctors are not necessarily virtuous. They are entrusted with duties only if they are virtuous, and they are given the title of nobility only if they are meritorious. The sons of princes, before the Son of Heaven did not give them the title of nobility, regarded their status as the superior of the Son of Heaven, and ruled their country in this capacity.

古文：诸侯之大夫，不世爵禄。
现代文：至于诸侯的大夫，其爵位和俸禄都不能世袭。
English: As for the princes' doctors, their titles and salaries cannot be inherited.

古文：六礼：冠、昏、丧、祭、乡、相见。
现代文：所谓六礼，是指冠礼、婚礼、丧礼、祭礼、乡饮酒礼和乡射礼、相见礼。
English: The so-called six rites refer to the coronation, wedding, funeral, festival, town drinking ceremony, town shooting ceremony and meeting ceremony.

古文：七教：父子、兄弟、夫妇、君臣、长幼、朋友、宾客。
现代文：所谓七教，是指七种人伦关系，即父子有亲，兄弟有爱，夫妇有别，君臣有义，长幼有序，朋友有信，宾客有礼。
English: The so-called seven religions refer to seven kinds of human relations, namely, father and son have relatives, brothers have love, couples have differences, monarchs and ministers have righteousness, elders and children have order, friends have faith, and guests have courtesy.

古文：八政：饮食、衣服、事为、异别、度、量、数、制。
现代文：所谓八政，是指饮食的方式，衣服的制度，工艺的标准，器具的品类，长度的规定，容量的单位，数码的进位和布帛的宽窄。
English: The so-called eight policies refer to the way of eating and drinking, the system of clothing, the standards of craftsmanship, the categories of utensils, the length requirements, the unit of capacity, the digital advancement and the width and narrowness of the cloth.

