古文：蓝继宗，字承祖，广州南海人。
现代文：蓝继宗，字承祖，广州南海人。
English: Lan Jizong, Zha Cheng Zu, a native of Nanhai, Guangzhou.

古文：事刘鋹为宦者，归朝，年十二，迁为中黄门。
现代文：是刘钅长宫中的宦官，归宋时十二岁，升为中黄门。
English: He was a eunuch in Liu Bei's Long Court, and was promoted to the Middle Yellow Gate at the age of twelve when he returned to Song.

古文：从征太原，传诏营陈间，多称旨。
现代文：跟从皇上征伐太原，在各营阵中传达诏命，多合皇上的心意。
English: Following the emperor's conquest of Taiyuan, he conveyed the imperial command to each battalion, which was more in line with the emperor's intentions.

古文：秦州并边有大、小洛门砦，自唐末陷西羌。雍熙中，温仲舒谕酋豪使献其地，徒众渭北。
现代文：秦州边境有大、小洛门寨，自唐末陷入西羌，雍熙中期，温仲舒晓谕西羌首领献地归宋，把他们迁到渭北。
English: On the border of Qin State, there are large and small Lomen villages. Since the end of the Tang Dynasty, they fell into Xidi. In the middle of the Yongxi Dynasty, Wen Zhongshu ordered the leaders of Xidi to return to the Song Dynasty and moved them to the north of Shandong.

古文：言者以为生事，请罢仲舒。
现代文：言官认为温仲舒惹事，请求罢去他。
English: The magistrate thought that Wen Zhongshu was stirring up trouble and requested that he be dismissed.

古文：太宗遣继宗往按视，还奏二砦据要害，产良木，不可弃。
现代文：太宗派蓝继宗前去察看，蓝继宗回来后上奏说大、小洛门寨地势险要，产好木材，不能放弃。
English: Tai Sect sent Lan Jizong to inspect the situation, and after his return, Lan Jizong made a report saying that the Da and Xiao Lomenzhai sites were in a precarious situation, producing good timber, and could not be abandoned.

古文：帝悦，复使继宗劳赐仲舒。
现代文：皇上高兴，又派蓝继宗去慰劳赏赐温仲舒。
English: The emperor was pleased and sent Lan Jizong to reward Wen Zhongshu.

古文：累迁西京作坊副使、勾当内东门。
现代文：蓝继宗历迁西京作坊副使、勾当内东门。
English: Lan Jizong became the vice envoy of the West Beijing workshop, and worked as the East Gate of the Inner Court.

古文：元德太后、章穆皇后葬，为按行园陵使。
现代文：元德太后、章穆皇后下葬，蓝继宗为按行园陵使。
English: Empress Dowager Yuan De and Empress Zhang Mu were laid to rest, and Lan Jizong served as the mausoleum envoy.

古文：车驾北征，勾当留司、皇城司。
现代文：皇帝北征时，他任勾当留司、皇城司。
English: During the Emperor's Northern Expedition, he was appointed as the chief of the Imperial Residence Division and the Imperial City Division.

古文：车驾谒诸陵，近陵旧乏水，继宗疏泉陵下，百司从官皆取以济。
现代文：皇上拜谒诸陵，陵的附近缺水，蓝继宗把泉水引到陵下，百官侍从都由此渡过。
English: The emperor paid homage to the mausoleums. There was a shortage of water in the vicinity of the mausoleum. Lan Jizong brought spring water to the mausoleum, and hundreds of officials and attendants passed through it.

古文：擢入内副都知，为天书扶侍都监。
现代文：他被提升为入内副都知，为天书扶侍都监。
English: He was promoted to the post of vice-prefect of the Imperial Household Agency, and to the post of Tenshu assistant governor.

古文：诏与李神祐第东封扈从内臣之劳，而入内供奉官范守逊等诉其不公，罢都知。
现代文：诏命他和李神佑排列东封扈从内侍的功劳，入内供奉官范守逊等告他排列的不公平，他被罢去都知的职务。
English: The edict ordered him and Li Shenyu to rank the merits of the Eastern Fongzhao from the inner servant, and he was dismissed from the position of duke after being accused of unfairness by the inner servant, Fan Shousong.

古文：祀汾脽，复为天书扶侍都监，再迁东染院使。
现代文：皇上在汾月隹祭祀，蓝继宗重任天书扶侍都监，又升为东染院使。
English: The emperor held a wreath-laying ceremony on the third day of the third month, and Lan Jizong was appointed as the supervisor of the Divine Calligraphy Office, and was also promoted to the envoy of the East Dyeing Institute.

古文：明年，领会州刺史，进崇仪使、勾当皇城司。
现代文：第二年，蓝继宗任会州刺史，升为崇仪使、勾当皇城司。
English: In the second year, Lan Jizong was appointed as the state secretary of the association, and was promoted to the position of the imperial city.

古文：修玉清昭应宫，与刘承珪典工作。
现代文：朝廷修玉清昭应宫，他和刘承王圭负责。
English: He and Liu Chengwang Gui were in charge of the imperial court.

古文：宫成，迁洛苑使、高州团练使，充都监。
现代文：宫修成后，他升为洛苑使、高州团练使，充当都监。
English: After the completion of the Imperial Palace, he was promoted to the Loyuan Envoy and the Gaozhou Reunification Envoy, and served as the supervisor of the capital.

古文：坐章穆皇后陵隧垫，贬如京使。
现代文：因章穆皇后陵的墓道下陷，他被贬为如京使。
English: Due to the collapse of the tomb road of the tomb of Empress Zhang Mu, he was relegated to the status of a Beijing envoy.

古文：典修景灵宫，进南作坊使，复修会灵、祥源观。
现代文：负责修景灵宫，升为南作坊使，又修会灵、祥源观。
English: He was responsible for the construction of Jingling Palace, and was promoted to the position of the Southern Workshop's assistant. He was also responsible for the construction of Hui Ling and Xiangyuan View.

古文：车驾幸亳州，管勾留司、大内公事，提举在京诸司库务，勾当三班院，修国史院。为赵德明加恩使，德明与继宗射，继宗每发必中，德明遗以所乘名马。
现代文：皇上到亳州，他为管勾留司、大内公事，提举在京诸司库务，勾当三班院、修国史院，为赵德明加恩使，赵德明与蓝继宗射箭，蓝继宗每发必中，赵德明把自己所乘的名马赠送给他。
English: When the emperor came to Zhangzhou, he was in charge of the detention department and the internal affairs of the imperial court, appointed the treasurer of various departments in Beijing, served as the head of the Third Class Academy and the Academy of National History, and acted as an envoy for Zhao Deming. Zhao Deming shot arrows with Lan Jizong, and whenever Lan Jizong shot, Zhao Deming gave him the famous horse he was riding.

古文：为内侍省右班都知，迁入内都知。
现代文：蓝继宗为内侍省右班都知，升为入内都知。
English: Lan Jizong was promoted to Naishi provincial right class tutor and then to Rinnai tutor.

古文：仁宗即位，迁左骐骥使、忠州防御使、永定陵修奉钤辖。
现代文：仁宗即位后，蓝继宗升为左骐骥使、忠州防御使、永定陵修奉钤辖。
English: After the enthronement of Ninsong, Lan Jizong was promoted to Zuo Jiefi, Chungju Defense Envoy, Yongding Mausoleum Cultivator.

古文：历昭宣、宣政、宣庆使。
现代文：历任昭宣、宣政、宣庆使。
English: He was successively appointed as Shou Xuan, Xuan Zheng, and Xuan Qing envoy.

古文：累上章求致仕，特免入朝拜舞及从行幸。
现代文：他多次上表请求辞官，皇上特免他入朝拜舞和跟从皇帝出行。
English: He repeatedly went to the table to request a resignation, and the emperor specially exempted him from entering the pilgrimage dance and traveling with the emperor.

古文：顷之，复固请罢都知，以景福殿使、邕州观察使家居养疾。
现代文：不久，他又坚决请求罢去都知，就以景福殿使、邕州观察使的身份回家养病。
English: Not long after, he made a firm request to leave the capital, and returned home to recuperate as the envoy of the Gyeongbokgung Palace and the observer of Jeonju.

古文：卒，赠安德军节度使，谥僖靖。
现代文：去世后被赠官为安德军节度使，谥号 僖靖 。
English: After his death, he was bestowed with the title of the Anding Army's Festival Envoy, and was given the nickname "Tu Jing" (靖).

古文：继宗事四朝，谦谨自持，每领职未久，辄请罢。
现代文：蓝继宗历事四朝，谦谨自持，每次任职时间不长，就请求罢官。
English: Lan Jizong has been in office for four dynasties. He is modest and self-possessed. Each time he has been in office for a short time, he has requested to be dismissed.

古文：家有园池，退朝即亟归，同列或留之，继宗曰： 我欲归种花卉、弄游鱼为乐尔。 景福殿置使，自大中祥符间至继宗，授者才三人。
现代文：家中有园池，退朝后他就立即回家，同僚中有人挽留他，蓝继宗说： 我想回家种花卉、抚弄游鱼取乐。 景福殿设使，从大中祥符年间到蓝继宗，只有三人担任过。
English: There was a garden pond at home, and he went home immediately after retiring from the imperial court. Some of his colleagues held him back, and Lan Jizong said, "I want to go home to plant flowers and play with fish for fun." Only three people have served as envoys of the Gyeongbokgung Palace from the middle school years to Lan Jizong.

古文：养子元用、元震。
现代文：他的养子叫蓝元用、蓝元震。
English: His adopted sons are named Lan Yuan Rong and Lan Yuan Zhen.

古文：元用终左藏库使、梓州观察使。
现代文：蓝元用死于左藏库使、梓州观察使任内。
English: Lan Yuanmei died while serving as the Left Repository Envoy and the Zizhou Observation Envoy.

古文：元震以兄荫补入内黄门，转高班，给事明肃太后。
现代文：蓝元震因哥哥的恩荫被补为入内黄门，转为高班，侍奉明肃太后。
English: Due to his elder brother's favor, Lan Yuan Zhen was appointed to the Inner Yellow Gate, transferred to the high class, and served the Empress Dowager Mingshu.

古文：禁中夜火，后拥仁宗登西华门，左右未集，元震独传呼宿卫，以功迁高品。
现代文：宫中晚上失火，明肃太后抱着仁宗登上西华门，左右侍从没跟过来，只有蓝元震传呼宿卫，他因功升为高品。
English: There was a fire in the palace in the evening, and the Empress Dowager of Mingshu held Nanzong in her arms as they boarded the West China Gate. The attendants on the left and right never followed. Only Lan Yuan Zhen was summoned by the guards, and he was promoted to a high rank for his achievements.

古文：为三陵都监，条列防守法，其后诸陵以为式。
现代文：蓝元震为三陵都监，他条列防守法，以后各陵都以此为榜样。
English: Lan Yuan Zhen was the superintendent of the three mausoleums, and his method of defending the mausoleums in a row served as an example for all the mausoleums in the future.

古文：历群牧都监，监三馆秘阁，积官皇城使。
现代文：蓝元震历任群牧都监，监三馆秘阁，官至皇城使。
English: Lan Yuanzhen successively served as the inspector of the herdsmen, the inspector of the three pavilions, and the imperial city envoy.

古文：累迁入内副都知、忠州防御使。
现代文：历迁入内副都知、忠州防御使。
English: He was transferred to the Inner Vice-Governor of Tochigi and the Defense Minister of Chungju.

古文：积官至宣庆使、康州防御使、内侍右班副都知。
现代文：仙韶院失火，蓝元震去救护，火被及时扑灭。皇上下诏褒奖他，赏赐给他袭衣金带。
English: Sengan-in suffered a fire, Lan Yuanquan went to the rescue, and the fire was extinguished in time. The emperor praised him and gave him a golden belt.

古文：卒，年六十七，赠昭武军留后。
现代文：他去世后被赠官为镇海军留后。
English: After his death, he was given the post of town naval officer.

古文：李宪，字子范，开封祥符人。
现代文：蓝元震有五个养子，都不是宦官。李宪，字子范，开封祥符人。
English: Lan Yuan Zhen has five adopted sons, none of whom are eunuchs. Li Xian, Zizi Fan, and Kaifeng Xiangfu are the most famous.

古文：皇祐中，补入内黄门，稍迁供奉官。
现代文：皇中期，补为入内黄门，稍稍升为供奉官。
English: In the middle of the reign of the emperor, he was promoted to enter the Yellow Gate, and he was slightly promoted to the official in charge of offerings.

古文：神宗即位，历永兴、太原府路走马承受，数论边事合旨，干当后苑。
现代文：神宗即位后，他历任永兴、太原府路走马承受，多次论说边防事符合皇上的意思，为干当后苑。
English: After Emperor Shenzong ascended to the throne, his successors, Yongxing and Taiyuan prefectures, followed in his footsteps, and repeatedly argued that border defense was in line with the emperor's will and was a good thing to do.

古文：王韶上书请复河湟，命宪往视师，与韶进收河州，加东染院使，干当御药院。
现代文：王韶上书请求收复河湟，皇上派李宪前去督师，他和王韶收复河州，被任为东染院使，干当御药院。
English: Wang Qian sent a letter to request the recovery of Hezhou, and the emperor sent Li Xian to supervise. He and Wang Qian recovered Hezhou, and were appointed as envoys of Dongye Hospital and worked as pharmacists.

古文：复战牛精谷，拔珂诺城，为熙河经略安抚司干当公事。
现代文：又在牛精谷与敌人交战，占领珂诺城，他任熙河经略安抚司干当公事。
English: He also fought against the enemy in the Niu Jing Valley and occupied the city of Kono. He was appointed by the He River to be a pacifying officer to do business.

古文：按视鄜延军制，行至蒲中，会木征合董毡、鬼章之兵攻破踏白城，杀景思立，围河州，诏趣赴之，宪驰至军。
现代文：李宪巡视延军制，走到蒲中，正赶上木征与董毡、鬼章合兵攻破踏白城，杀死景思立，包围了河州，皇上命他赶赴前线，他快马加鞭来到军中。
English: Li Xian inspected the Yan military system, walked to the middle of the country, and was just in time to catch up with Mu Zheng, Dong Xuan, and Guizhang to defeat the White City, kill Jing Sili, and surround Hezhou. The emperor ordered him to rush to the front line, and he quickly came to the army with a whip.

古文：先是，朝廷出黄旗书敕谕将士，如用命破贼者倍赏。
现代文：先前，朝廷用写有敕旨的黄旗晓谕将士，对用力破贼的人加倍奖赏。
English: Previously, the imperial court used a yellow banner with the imperial edict to double the reward for those who broke the thieves.

古文：于是宪晨起帐中，张以示众曰： 此旗，天子所赐也，视此以战，帝实临之。 士争呼用命以进。
现代文：于是李宪早晨从营帐中起来，打开黄旗给将士们看并说 ：这面旗，是皇上赐予的，看见它与敌人战斗，就是皇上亲临前线了。 将士们高呼要全力以赴。
English: So Li Xian got up from his camp in the morning, opened the yellow flag and showed it to his soldiers, saying, "This flag was given to me by the emperor, and when I saw it fighting against the enemy, it meant that the emperor himself had come to the front line."

古文：督诸将傍山焚族帐，即日通路至河州。
现代文：李宪督促诸将依山焚烧敌人的帐篷，当天就打通了到河州的道路。
English: Li Xiandu urged the generals to burn the enemy's tents on the mountain, and the road to Hezhou was opened on the same day.

古文：贼余众保踏白，官军出与战，大破之。
现代文：敌人余众保卫踏白城，宋军出兵与他们交战，大败敌人。
English: The enemy's remnants defended Baicheng, and the Song Army sent troops to fight with them, defeating the enemy.

古文：进至余川，又破贼堡十余，木征率酋长八十余人诣军门降。
现代文：宋进兵到余川，又攻破敌人十多座堡寨，木征率八十多个首领到宋营投降。
English: Song marched into Yuchuan and broke through more than ten enemy fortresses, and led more than eighty leaders to the Song camp to surrender.

古文：捷闻，以功加昭宣使、嘉州防御使。
现代文：捷报传到京城，李宪因功被加官为昭宣使、嘉州防御使。
English: News of the victory spread to Beijing, and Li Xian was promoted to Zhaoxuan Envoy and Jiaozhou Defense Envoy for his service.

古文：还，为入内内侍省押班、干当皇城司。
现代文：李宪回京城后，担任入内内侍省押班、干当皇城司。
English: After Li Xian returned to Beijing, he served as the escort of the Imperial Household Agency and the imperial city.

古文：安南叛，副赵卨招讨，未行，卨建言： 朝廷置招讨副使，军事须共议，至节制号令即宜归一。 宪衔之。
现代文：安南反叛，李宪作为赵的副手前去招讨，没出发时，赵建议 ：朝廷设招讨副使，军事应该一同商量，至于对军队的节制号令应该归一人掌管。 
English: When Annan rebelled and Li Xian, as Zhao's deputy, went to summon him, but did not set off, Zhao suggested: the imperial court should set up a summoning deputy envoy, the military should consult together, and as for the order of restraint on the military, it should be under the control of one person.

古文：由是屡纷辨，遂罢宪而令乘驿计议秦凤、熙河边事，诸将皆听节度。
现代文：李宪怨恨他。于是引起朝中多次论辩，李宪被罢去招讨副使之职，皇上命他赶快到秦凤、熙河路去安排边疆的事，这里的将领由他节制。
English: Li Xian resented him, which led to many arguments between the two sides. Li Xian was dismissed to solicit a vice-regent, and the emperor ordered him to hurry to Qinfeng and Xihe Road to arrange the affairs of the frontier, and the generals here were restrained by him.

古文：于是御史中丞邓润甫、御史周尹、蔡承禧、彭汝砺极论其不可，又言： 鬼章之患小，用宪之患大；宪功不成其祸小，有成功其祸大。 章再上，弗听。
现代文：于是御史中丞邓润甫，御史周尹、蔡承禧、彭汝砺透彻地论述认为这样不行，又说： 鬼章的祸患小，重用李宪的祸患大；李宪不成功祸患小，成功祸患大。 他们多次上奏，皇上都不听。
English: Therefore, the chief historian Deng Runfu, the chief historian Zhou Yin, Cai Chengxi, and Peng Ruchen thoroughly argued that this was not possible, and said: The evil of the ghost chapter is small, and the evil of reusing Li Xian is great; the evil of Li Xian's failure is small, and the evil of success is great. They played it many times, but the emperor did not listen.

古文：冷鸡朴诱山后生羌扰边，木征请自效，众以为不可。
现代文：冷鸡朴诱惑山后生羌侵扰边境，木征请求去征讨，众人认为不行。
English: Cold chicken Park tempts mountain hinds to invade the border, wood requisition request to collect, many people think it is not possible.

古文：宪曰： 何伤乎！
现代文：李宪说： 有什么危害？
English: Li Xian said: What is the harm?

古文：羌人天性畏服贵种。 听之往。
现代文：羌人天生就畏服高贵的种族。 
English: Deaf people are naturally afraid of the noble race.

古文：木征盛装以出，众耸视，皆无斗志，师乘之，杀获万计，斩冷鸡朴。
现代文：就让木征去镇压。木征披挂整齐率军出发，敌人尊敬地看着他，全无斗志，宋军乘机进攻，杀死和俘虏一万多人，冷鸡朴被杀。
English: The Song army took advantage of the opportunity to attack, killing and capturing more than 10,000 people, while Lengji Pu was killed.

古文：董毡惧，即遣使奉贽效顺。
现代文：董毡害怕，就派使者带礼物来归降。
English: Dong Xuan was afraid, so he sent an envoy with gifts to surrender.

古文：加宣州观察使、宣政使、入内副都知，又迁宣庆使。
现代文：李宪被加官为宣州观察使、宣政使、入内副都知，又升为宣庆使。
English: Li Xian was appointed as the Xuanzhou observation envoy, the Xuanzhou political envoy, the vice minister of the interior, and the Xuanqing envoy.

古文：时用兵连年，度支调度不继，诏宪兼经制财用，裁冗费什六，岁运西山巨木给京师营缮。
现代文：当时连年用兵，军费调度不足，皇上诏命李宪经制财用，李宪裁去冗费达十分之六，年年把西山的巨木运到京城供修建使用。
English: At that time, soldiers were used year after year, military expenditure was insufficiently dispatched, the emperor's edict ordered Li Xian to use the surplus funds, Li Xian cut the surplus expenses by six-tenths, and transported the huge trees of the West Mountain to the capital city for construction use every year.

古文：赐瑞应坊园宅一区。
现代文：皇上赏给李宪瑞应坊的一座园宅。
English: The emperor rewarded Li Xianrui with a garden house in Yingfang.

古文：元丰中，五路出师讨夏国，宪领熙、秦军至西市新城。
现代文：元丰中期，宋分五路出兵讨伐夏国，李宪率熙、秦两路军到西市新城。
English: In the middle of the Yuan and Feng Dynasties, the Song Dynasty sent troops from five provinces to fight against the Xia Dynasty, and Li Xian led the Qin and Xi armies to Xicheng.

古文：复兰州，城之，请建为帅府。
现代文：收复兰州，请求在兰州城建帅府。
English: He recovered Lanzhou and requested that a general's residence be built in Lanzhou City.

古文：帝又诏宪领兵直趣兴、灵，董毡亦称欲往，宜乘机协助力入扫巢穴，若兴、灵道阻，即过河取凉州。
现代文：皇上又诏命李宪率兵直奔兴、灵二州，董毡也声称想前去，应该乘机合力扫灭敌人巢穴，如果兴、灵二州道路被阻，就过河攻取凉州。
English: The emperor also ordered Li Xian and his soldiers to go straight to Xing and Ling two states. Dong Xi also claimed that if he wanted to go forward, he should take the opportunity to work together to destroy the enemy's lair. If the Xing and Ling two states road was blocked, he would cross the river to capture Liangzhou.

古文：乃总兵东上，平夏人于高川石峡。
现代文：于是李宪率兵东上，在高川石峡平定夏人。
English: As a result, Li Xian and his soldiers marched eastward and subdued the Xia people in the Takagawa Rock Gorge.

古文：进至屈吴山，营打啰城，趋天都，烧南牟府库，次葫芦河而还。
现代文：又进兵到屈吴山，在打口罗城扎营，奔天都，烧南牟府库，大军到葫芦河而还。
English: They also marched into the mountains of Quwusan, camped in the city of Dacou Luo, raided Tiandu, burned Nanmufuku, and returned to the Huludao River.

古文：宪既不能至灵州，董毡亦失期，师无功。
现代文：李宪既不能到达灵州，董毡也失军期，宋军无功而回。
English: Li Xian was not able to reach Lingzhou, Dong Xi also lost his military career, and the Song army returned without success.

古文：宪欲以开兰、会邀功弭责，同知枢密院孙固曰： 兵法，期而后至者斩。
现代文：李宪想以开拓兰、会二州邀功消责，同知枢密院孙固说： 兵法说，贻误军期者斩。
English: Li Xian wanted to use the opening up of the country and the meeting of the two states to invite merit and eliminate responsibility. Sun Gu, a member of the Privy Council, said: According to military law, those who delay the military period will be cut off.

古文：况诸路皆至而宪独不行，不可赦。 帝以宪犹有功，但令诘擅还之由，宪以馈饷不接为辞，释弗诛。
现代文：何况诸路兵马都到而只有李宪没到，不能赦免。 皇上认为李宪还是有功，只下令责问他擅自退兵的理由，李宪以粮饷不接作答，皇上没杀他。
English: Moreover, soldiers and horses came from all directions, but only Li Xian did not come, so he could not be pardoned. The emperor thought that Li Xian still had merit, and only ordered him to ask the reason for his unauthorized withdrawal from the army. Li Xian did not answer with food and money, but the emperor did not kill him.

古文：复上再举之策，兼陈进筑五利，且从之。
现代文：李宪又提出再发兵的策略，并陈述进兵的五项好处，皇上将要采纳。
English: Li Xian also proposed the strategy of re-sending troops, and stated the five benefits of entering the army, which the emperor will adopt.

古文：会李舜举入奏，具陈师老民困状，乃罢兵。
现代文：正好李舜举上奏，详细地论说宋廷师老民困的情形，才罢兵。
English: It was just then that Li Qiye raised his trumpet and spoke in detail about the plight of Song Ting's old people before he left the army.

古文：趣宪赴阙，道赐银帛四千。
现代文：皇上催李宪回京，在路上赏他银帛四千。
English: The emperor urged Li Xian to return to Beijing and rewarded him with 4,000 silver ingots on the way.

古文：为泾原经略安抚制置使，给卫三百。
现代文：李宪任泾原经略安抚制置使，给他三百卫士。
English: Li Xian appointed Xuan Yuan as a special envoy and gave him three hundred bodyguards.

古文：进景福殿使、武信军留后，使复还熙河，仍兼秦凤军马。
现代文：李宪升为景福殿使、武信军留后，让他又回到熙河，仍兼节制秦、凤军马。
English: After Li Xiansheng became the envoy of the Gingfu Palace and the Wuxin army stayed, he let him return to Heihe and still restrained the Qin and Feng armies.

古文：夏人入兰州，破西关，降宣庆使。
现代文：夏人入侵兰州，攻破西关，李宪降为宣庆使。
English: Xia invaded Lanzhou and broke through Xiguan. Li Xian was demoted to the position of Xuanqing envoy.

古文：宪以兰州乃西人必争地，众数至河外而相羊不进，意必大举，乃增城守堑壁，楼橹具备。
现代文：李宪认为兰州是夏人必争之地，夏人多次到河外但却徘徊不前，一定是有大的举动，于是就增加守城的力量和器械，深挖堑壕，加厚城墙。
English: Li Xian believed that Lanzhou was a place that needed to be fought for by the Xia people. The Xia people went out of the river many times but did not move forward. There must have been a big move, so he increased the strength and equipment of the city, dug deep trenches, and thickened the city walls.

古文：明年冬，夏人果大入，围兰州，步骑号八十万众，十日不克，粮尽引去。
现代文：第二年冬，夏人果然大举入侵，包围兰州，号称有步、骑兵八十万，十天没攻克兰州，夏人因粮尽而退。
English: In the winter of the second year, the Xia people did indeed invade and encircle Lanzhou on a large scale, claiming to have 800,000 infantry and cavalry. They did not invade Kranzhou for ten days, and the Xia people retreated due to food shortages.

古文：又诏宪遣间谕阿里骨结等，且选骑渡河，与贼遇，破之。
现代文：皇上又诏命李宪派间谍去告谕阿里骨结等，并选骑兵渡河，与敌人相遇，打败了敌人。
English: The emperor also ordered Li Xian to send spies to tell Ali Knuckles and others, and select cavalry to cross the river, meet the enemy, and defeat the enemy.

古文：坐妄奏功状，罢内省职事。
现代文：李宪因谎奏功劳，被罢去内省的官职。
English: Li Xian was ousted from the post of introspective official for lying about his achievements.

古文：哲宗立，改永兴军路副都总管，提举崇福宫。
现代文：哲宗即位后，李宪改任永兴军路副都总管，提举崇福宫。
English: After the enthronement of Zhezong, Li Xian was appointed as the vice-governor of Yongxing Military Road and promoted to the Chongfu Palace.

古文：御史中丞刘挚论宪贪功生事，一出欺罔，避兴、灵会师之期，顿兵以城兰州，遗患至今，永乐之围，逗留不急赴援。
现代文：御史中丞刘挚论奏李宪贪功惹事，全都出于欺罔皇上，违兴、灵州会师的日期，在兰州城屯兵不动，遗患至今，永乐被围，他逗留观望，不赶快救援。
English: Grand Historian Liu earnestly argued that Li Xian was greedy for power and provoked trouble, all out of bullying the emperor, violating the date of the Xing and Lingzhou meeting, the troops in Lanzhou City did not move, the survivors have been besieged so far, Yongle was besieged, he stayed and watched, and did not rush to rescue.

古文：降宣州观察使，又贬右千牛卫将军，分司南京，居陈州。
现代文：李宪被降为宣州观察使，又贬为右千牛卫将军，分管南京，在陈州居住。
English: Li Xian was demoted to the position of Xuanzhou observation envoy, and was also demoted to the position of General of the Right Thousand Cattle Guards, in charge of Nanjing, and living in Chenzhou.

古文：丰稷论奏，以为凡称公者皆须耆宿、大臣与乡党有德之士，其曰： 念公之劳，久徙于外 ，斯乃古周公之事，于用臣非所宜言也。止令赐谥，论者是之。
现代文：去世时五十一岁。绍圣元年，赠他武泰军节度使的官职，起初谥号 敏恪 ，后来改谥为 忠敏 。李宪以内侍的身份担任将帅，虽然能开辟疆土，降服敌人，但他欺蒙皇上，残害百姓，最终贻患中国。初，留任皇城使，罢去内侍省诸职。
English: He was fifty-one years old at the time of his death. In the first year of the Shosheng era, he was given the official post of the military commander of the Thai army. At first, his nickname was Min Ke, later changed to Zhong Min. Li Xian served as a general in the capacity of a palace attendant. Although he was able to open up the territory and subjugate the enemy, he deceived the emperor, brutalized the people, and eventually plagued China. At first, he remained as an imperial city envoy and resigned from the positions of the palace attendant.

古文：王中正，字希烈，开封人。
现代文：天禧三年王中正，字希烈，开封人。
English: Wang Zhongzheng in the third year of the reign of Heaven, the character Xirong, the person who opened the envelope.

古文：因父任补入内黄门，迁赴延福宫学诗书、历算。
现代文：因父亲的恩荫补为入内黄门，转到延福宫学习诗书、历算。
English: Due to his father's favor, he was admitted to the Yellow Gate and transferred to Yanfu Palace to study poetry and calendars.

古文：仁宗嘉其才，命置左右。
现代文：仁宗赏识他的才华，下令安排在身边。
English: Nanzong appreciated his talent and ordered him to stay with him.

古文：庆历卫士之变，中正援弓矢即殿西督捕射，贼悉就擒，时年甫十八，人颇壮之。
现代文：庆历时卫士反叛，王中正拿着弓箭在宫殿西边督促捕射反叛者，反叛者都被抓住，当时他刚十八岁，人们十分敬重他。
English: At the time of the celebration, the guards rebelled. Wang Zhong was holding a bow and arrow on the west side of the palace, urging the rebels to be shot. The rebels were all caught. At that time, he was just eighteen years old. People respected him very much.

古文：迁东头供奉官，历干当御药院、鄜延、环庆路公事，分治河东边事。
现代文：王中正升为东头供奉官，历任干当御药院，延、环庆路公事，分管河东边防的事。
English: Wang Zhongzheng rose to the position of Dongtou offering official, and successively served as a pharmacist, Yan and Huanqing Road official, and was in charge of the affairs of the eastern border defense.

古文：破西人有功，带御器械。
现代文：他因攻破敌人有功，为带御器械。
English: He is credited with defeating the enemy, and is credited with carrying out the operation.

古文：神宗将复熙河，命之规度。
现代文：神宗将恢复熙河，命令王中正筹划。
English: Shenzong will restore Heihe, ordered Wang Zhong is planning.

古文：还言： 熙河譬乳虎抱玉，乘爪牙未备，可取也。 遂从王韶入熙河，治城壁守具，以功迁作坊使、嘉州团练使，擢内侍押班。
现代文：他回京上奏说 ：熙河就像乳虎抱着宝玉一样，乘乳虎的爪牙没齐全时可以取来。 就跟随王韶进入熙河，修城墙，备守城的器械，王中正因功升为作坊使、嘉州团练使，升任内侍押班。
English: He went back to Beijing and said, "The Heihe River is like a milk tiger holding a precious stone, and you can take it when the milk tiger's paws are not full. " He followed Wang Yao into the Heihe River, repaired the city wall, and prepared the instruments for defending the city. Wang Zhongzheng was promoted to workshop envoy, Jiazhou regimental training envoy, and promoted to the inner attendant.

古文：吐蕃围茂州，诏率陕西兵援之，围解。
现代文：吐蕃包围茂州，皇上诏命他率陕西的兵马去救援，茂州解围。
English: The emperor ordered him to lead the soldiers and horses of Shaanxi Province to rescue the besieged Moushou. Moushou was liberated.

古文：自石泉至茂州，谓之陇东路，土田肥美，西羌据有之，中正不能讨。
现代文：从石泉到茂州，称陇东路，土地肥美，西羌据有这里，王中正不能讨伐。
English: From Shiquan to Maozhou, it is said that the East Road is fertile, and the West Road is said to be here. Wang Zhongzheng is unable to fight.

古文：乃因吐蕃入寇，言： 其路经静州等族，棒僻不通，迩年商旅稍往来，故外蕃因以乘间。
现代文：就乘吐蕃入侵之机上奏说 ：陇东路经过静州等族，荆棘多，偏僻不通，近年商旅稍有往来，所以外族才得以从此进入。
English: He said in his report on the occasion of the invasion of the Tubo tribe: "The eastern road of the Tubo tribe passes through the Shizhou tribe and other tribes. There are many thorns and thorns, it is remote and impassable. In recent years, there has been some business travel, so the foreign tribe was able to enter from here.

古文：县至绵与茂，道里均，而龙安有都巡检，缓急可倚仗。
现代文：石泉县与绵、茂二州距离相等，龙安有都巡检，缓急时可以倚仗。
English: Shiquan County is equidistant from Mian and Maozhou, and Long'an has a city inspection, which can be relied on when prioritizing.

古文：请割石泉隶绵，而窒其故道。 从之，陇东遂不可得。
现代文：请割石泉县隶属绵州，以堵塞这条旧路。 皇上允许，陇东就不能得到。
English: Please cut off Shiquan County, which belongs to Mianzhou, to block this old road. With the emperor's permission, you can't get to Shandong.

古文：还，使熙河经画鬼章，进昭宣使、入内副都知。
现代文：王中正回来，出使熙河，经略鬼章，升为昭宣使，入内副都知。
English: When Wang Zhongzheng returned, he sent an envoy to Heihe, who was awarded the title of ghost, promoted to Zhaoxuan envoy, and promoted to vice-minister of the interior.

古文：元丰初，提举教畿县保甲将兵捕贼盗巡检，献民兵伍保法，请于村疃及县以时阅习，悉行其言。
现代文：元丰初年，王中正为提举教畿县保甲将兵捕贼盗巡检，献上民兵伍保法，请求在村旁空地和县中按时教阅，都被采纳。
English: In the first year of Yuanfeng, Wang Zhongzheng, in order to promote the teaching of the patrol inspection of armored soldiers and thief-catchers in Guixian County, presented the militia troop protection law and requested that it be taught on time in the open space next to the village and in the county middle school. Both were adopted.

古文：复往鄜延、环庆经制边事，诏凡所须用度，令两路取给，无限多寡。
现代文：他又去延、环庆筹措边事，皇上下诏凡是边事所须费用，都由这两路提供，多少不限。
English: He also went to Yancheng and Huanqing to raise side issues. The emperor decreed that all the expenses required for side issues would be provided by these two roads, no matter how much.

古文：既行，又称面受诏，所过募禁兵，愿从者将之，主者不敢违。
现代文：他已经出发了，又声称是得到皇上的当面允许，在他所过之处招募禁兵，愿跟从他的他就带走，主帅不敢违抗。
English: He had already set out, and claimed to have the emperor's permission to recruit forbidden soldiers wherever he passed. If he wanted to follow him, he would take him away. The coach did not dare to disobey.

古文：问罪西夏，以中正签书泾原路经略司事。
现代文：宋讨伐西夏，以王中正为签书泾原路经略司事。
English: In the Song Dynasty's campaign against Western Xia, Wang Zhongzheng was the secretary who signed the document outlining the route of the Song Dynasty.

古文：诏五路之师皆会灵州，中正失期，粮道不继，士卒多死，命权分屯鄜延并边城砦，以俟后举。
现代文：皇上命令五路兵马都到灵州会师，王中正失期不到，粮草不济，士卒死了很多，皇上下令各军暂时分屯到延路沿边各城寨，等待时机出兵。
English: The emperor ordered the five armies and horses to come to Lingzhou to join the division. Wang Zhongzheng was about to expire, grain and grass were not abundant, and many soldiers died. The emperor ordered the armies to be temporarily divided into various castles along the road, waiting for the opportunity to send troops.

古文：自请罢省职，迁金州观察使、提举西太一宫，坐前败贬秩。
现代文：王中正自己请求罢去内侍省官职，转为金州观察使、提举西太一宫，因前次兵败被贬官禄。
English: At his own request, Wang Zhongzheng was dismissed from his position as the provincial palace attendant, and he was transferred to the post of the Jinzhou observation envoy and promoted to the position of the West Taichi Palace. He was demoted because of the previous military defeat.

古文：元祐初，言者再论其将王师二十万，公违诏书之罪，刘挚比中正与李宪、宋用臣、石得一为四凶，又贬秩两等。
现代文：元初年，言官又论奏他率二十万军队，公开违背诏书的罪状，刘挚把王中正、李宪、宋用臣、石得一列为四凶，王中正又被贬官两等。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, the speech officer also talked about Wang Zhongzheng, Li Xian, Song Yongshen, and Shide as the four villains, and Wang Zhongzheng was demoted to the second grade.

古文：久之，提举崇福宫。
现代文：后来，王中正为提举崇福宫。
English: Later, Wang Zhongzheng raised the Chongfu Palace.

古文：绍圣初，复嘉州团练使。
现代文：绍圣初年，起用他为嘉州团练使。
English: In the first year of Shaosheng, he was appointed as the training envoy of the Jiazhou group.

古文：卒，年七十一。
现代文：王中正去世时七十一岁。
English: He died at the age of 71.

古文：李舜举，字公辅，开封人。
现代文：去世，终年七十一岁。他的儿子窦守志被任为入内供奉官。
English: He died at the age of seventy-one. His son Dou Shouji was appointed as an official of the Imperial Household Agency.

