古文：初八日大雨，不成行，坐李君家作田署州《期政四谣》，以李君命也。
现代文：初八日下大雨，未成行，坐在李君家中写《田署州期政四谣梦，是奉李君的命令。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, it rained heavily, and before the trip could be made, I sat in Li Jun's home and wrote "The Dream of the Four Dynasties of the State Council of the People's Republic of China" on Li Jun's orders.

古文：初九日大雨，复不成行，坐李君家录《腾志》。
现代文：初九日下大雨，又不能成行，坐在李君家中抄录《腾越州志》。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, it rained heavily, and I couldn't make the trip. I sat at Li Jun's home and copied "Teng Yue Zhou Zhi."

古文：初十日雨不止。
现代文：初十日雨不停。
English: It rained non-stop for the first ten days.

古文：既午稍霁，遂同李君联骑，由村西半里，横陟半个山、南甸大路，经南草场，半里，西上岭坡，乃来凤南度半个山之脊也。
现代文：中午后稍微晴开，就同李君并肩骑马，由村西行半里，横向上登半个山通往南甸的大路，经过南草场，半里，向西上了岭上的山坡，就是来凤山往南延伸到半个山的山脊。
English: After noon, when it was a little clearer, he rode side by side with Li Jun. They rode half a mile westward from the village and climbed half a mountain sideways to the main road leading to Nandian. After passing Nan Caochang, they rode half a mile westward up the hillside on the ridge, which is the ridge of Lai Feng Shan extending southward to half a mountain.

古文：来凤至是南降而下伏，脊间中洼为平塘而不受水。
现代文：来凤山到了此地往南下降低伏，山脊间中间下洼成平坦的池塘但不容水。
English: When Fengshan came to this place, it lowered the voltage to the south, and the middle between the ridges sank into a flat pond, but it did not allow water.

古文：洼之西为金银堆，即南度之脊。
现代文：洼地的西边是金银堆，就是向南延伸的山脊。
English: On the west side of the depression is the gold and silver heap, which is the ridge extending southward.

古文：洼北半里，有坪倚来凤而南瞰半个山，乃昔王尚书骥驻营之处，《志》称为尚书营。
现代文：洼地北边半里，有平地依傍着来凤山而向南远望半个山，是从前尚书王骥驻扎兵营之处，志书称为尚书营。
English: Half a mile to the north of the depression, there is a flat land next to Lai Feng Mountain and looking south to half a mountain. It is the place where Shang Shuxu Wang Ya was stationed in the military camp. Zhishu is called Shang Shuxu Camp.

古文：陟坪北半里，有路横沿来凤峰南，西越金银堆，出芭蕉关。
现代文：骑过平地北边半里，有路沿来凤峰的南面横着，往西越过金银滩，通到芭蕉关。
English: After riding half a mile to the north of the flatland, there is a road along the south side of the Fengfeng Peak, westward across the Gold and Silver Beach, leading to the Basho Pass.

古文：芭蕉关西通河上屯、缅箐之道，州西跌水河路，不若此之平，昔兵部郎中龚永吉从王公南征，有 狭转芭蕉关，难于橄榄坡 之句。从此复转骑，循来凤东峰而北，八里，乃还官店。
现代文：从此再掉转马头，沿来凤峰往北走，八里，就返回官庄。
English: From here, turn around and walk north along Fengfeng for eight miles to return to Guanzhuang.

古文：迨晚复雨。
现代文：到晚上又下雨。
English: It rained again in the evening.

古文：十一日雨不止，坐官店。
现代文：十一日雨不停，坐在官店中。
English: On the 11th day, it rained incessantly, so I sat in the government store.

古文：时倪按君命承差来觅碧玉，潘苦之，故屡屡避客。
现代文：上午，李君来访。下午，雨稍停，非常泥泞，踩着稀泥前往潘秀才家，未遇上；用书信催促他为我买东西，也不回信。
English: In the morning, Li Jun came to visit. In the afternoon, the rain stopped for a while, it was very muddy, I stepped on the mud to go to Pan Xiucai's house, but I did not meet him; I urged him to buy something for me by letter, but he did not reply.

古文：十二日雨，坐店中。
现代文：十二日下雨，坐在店中。
English: It rained on the 12th, so I sat in the store.

古文：李生以《期政四谣》私投署州田二府，不答。
现代文：李生把《期政四谣》私下投送给代理州官田二府，未得回音。
English: Li Sheng privately sent "Four Ballads of the Period of Government" to the agent, Shuzhou Kanta Nipu, but received no reply.

古文：十三日雨时止时作，而泥泞尤甚。
现代文：十三日雨时停时作，而尤其泥泞得厉害。
English: On the 13th, it rained and rained and rained, and it was especially muddy.

古文：李生来，同往苏玄玉寓观玉。
现代文：李生来访，一同前往苏玄玉的寓所观赏玉石。
English: Li Sheng came to visit, and together they went to Su Xuanyu's apartment to see the jade.

古文：苏，滇省人本青衿，弃文就戎，为吴参府幕客。
现代文：姓苏的是云南省人，本来是儒生，弃文从戎，成为吴参将府中的幕僚门客。
English: Su is a native of Yunnan Province. Originally a Confucian scholar, he abandoned his studies and went to Eun, where he became a member of the staff of General Wu's headquarters.

古文：先是一见顾余，余亦目其有异，非风尘中人也。
现代文：这之前一见面就回头看我，我看他也有奇异的气质，不是风尘中的俗人。
English: Before this, he looked back at me as soon as we met. I think he also has a strange temperament, not a commoner in the wind and dust.

古文：十四至十八日连雨不止，坐寓中，不能移一步。
现代文：十四至十八日连日淫雨不止，坐在寓所中，不能移动一步。
English: From the 14th to the 18th, it rained every day, and I sat in my apartment, unable to move a step.

古文：潘捷余以倪院承差苏姓者，索碧玉宝石，窘甚，屡促不过余寓，亦不敢以一物示人，盖恐为承差所持也。
现代文：潘捷余因为倪按院姓苏的差役，逼要碧玉宝石，处境非常窘迫，屡次催促仍不来我的寓所探访，也不敢拿一件东西给人看，大概是害怕被差役拿住。
English: Pan Jieyu is in a very difficult situation because of Ni Yan's servant, surnamed Su, who forced him to buy the jasper gemstone. Despite repeated urging, he still did not come to visit my apartment, nor did he dare to show anything to anyone, probably because he was afraid of being caught by the servant.

古文：觅担夫，以连日雨泞，贵甚。既而雨复作，上午乃止而行。
现代文：幸好吴参将府拿来路费惠赠给我，另外借了他的 八关 及 三个宣抚司 、 六个宣慰司 的各种地图，我一一抄录了，数日来无片刻的闲暇，竟然不知是在寓所中并且是在雨中了。十九日早晨，雨稍停。
English: Fortunately, Wu Sangfu presented me with the travel expenses. In addition, he lent me his eight passes and three pacifiers and six pacifiers of various maps. I copied them one by one. For several days, I did not have a moment of leisure, and I did not know that I was in the apartment and in the rain. On the morning of the 19th, the rain stopped slightly.

古文：店人欲掯ｋèｎ刁难余罗一端，不遂，与之閧ｈóｎｇ斗争而后行。
现代文：去找挑夫，因为连日下雨道路泥泞，夫价很贵。随后雨又下起，上午才停，于是动身。
English: I went to look for a porter, because it had been raining for days and the road was muddy, and the price of a porter was very expensive. Then it rained again, and only stopped in the morning, so I set off.

古文：由东街，始泞甚，已而渐燥。
现代文：店里人想勒索我的一匹绩罗，没做到，与他吵架后上路。由东街走，开始非常泥泞，不久渐渐干燥。
English: Someone in the shop tried to blackmail one of my horses, Shiro, but didn't manage it. After a quarrel with him, I went on my way. Walking from Higashi-gai, it started out very muddy, but soon became dry.

古文：二里，居庐始尽，下坡行塍中。
现代文：二里，居室房屋才完了，下坡行走在田埂中。
English: Two miles, the house is just finished, walking downhill in the middle of the fields.

古文：半里，连越二小桥，水皆自东南来，即罗汉冲所出分流之水也。
现代文：半里，接连越过两座小桥，水都是自东南流来，就是罗汉冲流出来分流的水。
English: For half a mile, we crossed two small bridges in succession. The water came from the south-eastern stream, the water diverted by the rushing waters of the Lohan River.

古文：又二里余，为雷打田，有数家东向。
现代文：又走二里多，是雷打田，有数家人面向东方。
English: Two miles further on is Lei Datian, where several families are facing east.

古文：从其前转而东行里余，又过一小亭桥，其流亦自东南向西北者，乃黄坡泉所溢也。
现代文：从村前转向东行一里多，又走过一座小亭桥，桥下的水流也是自东南流向西北的，是黄坡泉溢出的水。
English: From the front of the village, turn east for more than a mile, and walk across a small pavilion bridge. The water flow under the bridge also flows from the southeast to the northwest, and is the overflow water from Huangpo Spring.

古文：又东里余，抵东坡下，停担于酒家。
现代文：又向东一里多，抵达东面山坡下，把担子停在酒店中。
English: Another mile to the east, arrived at the bottom of the hill to the east, and parked the load in the hotel.

古文：问大洞温泉道，土人指在东南山坳中，此去尚有数里。
现代文：询间去大洞温泉的路，当地人指示在东南的山坳中，从此地去还有数里地。
English: When enquiring about the way to Datong Hot Spring, the locals pointed out that it was in the southeastern foothills, and it was still several miles from here.

古文：时天色已霁，令担夫与顾行待于其家，余即循东山而南。
现代文：此时天色已经晴开，命令挑夫与顾仆在他家等着，我立即沿东山往南走。
English: At this time, the sky had already cleared. I ordered the porter and his servant to wait at his house, and I immediately walked south along Dongshan.

古文：二里，过土主庙。
现代文：二里，走过土主庙。
English: For two miles, I walked past the local temple.

古文：庙倚山西向，前二柏巨甚。
现代文：庙靠山向西，前边的两棵柏树非常巨大。
English: The temple is backed by a mountain to the west, and the two huge cypress trees in front of it.

古文：又南二里，路歧为二：一南循山麓，为黄坡道；一东南上坡，为趋温泉道。
现代文：又向南二里，路岔为两条：一条往南沿山麓走，是去黄坡的路；一条向东南上坡，是通向温泉的路。
English: Another two miles to the south, there are two roads: one going south along the foot of the mountain is the road to Huangpo; one going southeast uphill is the road to the hot springs.

古文：乃从上坡者，南一里，登坡嘴。
现代文：于是从上坡的路走，往南一里，登上坡嘴。
English: So I walked from the uphill road, one mile to the south, and climbed to the top of the slope.

古文：西瞰山麓，有泉西向溢于下，即黄坡之发源处也。
现代文：向西俯瞰山麓，有泉水在下边向西溢出，就是黄坡的发源处了。
English: Overlooking the foot of the mountain to the west, there is a spring overflowing to the west at the bottom, which is the origin of Huangpo.

古文：于是东转，有路颇大，横越之，就其东南小径。
现代文：从此向东转，有条路很大，横越过此路，走上它东南的小径。
English: From here, turn east, there is a large road, cross this road and take the path southeast of it.

古文：一里，渐上坡，折而东北。
现代文：一里，渐渐上坡，折向东北。
English: One mile, gradually uphill, turn to the northeast.

古文：一里，其道渐高，心知其误。有负刍喂牲口的草者二人至，问之。
现代文：斜视温泉所在的山峡，正在它的南面，中间也有峡谷向南下延，只是茅草阻塞没有路径。一里，此条小道渐渐爬高，心知路错了，就顺着小道往西北上。有两个背干草的人来，向他们问路。
English: The gorge where the Kishi Onsen is located is just south of it, and there is also a canyon in the middle that extends southward, but there is no path blocked by thatch. For a mile, this trail gradually climbs higher, and knowing that the path is wrong, it follows the trail to the northwest. Two people with hay on their backs come to ask them the way.

古文：曰： 此入山樵道，可通芹菜塘者。
现代文：说： 这是进山打柴的路，可以通到芹菜塘。
English: He said, "This is the way to go into the mountains to collect firewood, and it leads to the celery pond.

古文：温泉在南，尚隔一峰。 
现代文：温泉在南边，还隔着一座山峰。 
English: The hot springs are on the south side, separated by a mountain peak.

古文：遂与之俱返，一里，下至茅塞之峡，指余南去。
现代文：于是与他们一同返回来，一里，下到茅草阻塞的峡谷，他们指点我往南去。
English: So I went back with them, one mile, down a thatch-blocked ravine, and they pointed me south.

古文：余从之，横蹈峡中，既渐得小径。
现代文：我听从他们的话，横向踏入峡中，不久渐渐找到小径。
English: I followed their advice and stepped sideways into the gorge, soon gradually finding a path.

古文：半里，忽有峡从足下下坠而西，其上石崖骈突如门。
现代文：半里，忽然有山峡从脚下往西下坠，峡上石崖并列突耸如门一样。
English: Half a mile away, a mountain gorge suddenly plunges westward from under your feet, and the stone cliffs on the gorge jut out like doors.

古文：从其东又南半里，逾坡而下，其峡始大，有水淙淙流其中，田塍交潆之，即大洞村之后峡也。
现代文：从它东边又南行半里，越过山坡下走，这里峡谷开始变大，有水涂涂流淌在峡中，田埂交相潇绕着它，这就是大洞村的后峡了。
English: From its eastern side and half a mile southward, walk over the hillside and go down, here the canyon begins to grow, there is water flowing in the canyon, fields and fields surround it, this is the back canyon of Datong Village.

古文：有大道从峡中东上，又南下半里，从之东。
现代文：有大道从峡中往东上行，又向南下走半里，沿大道往东行。
English: There is an avenue from the middle of the gorge to the east, and half a mile to the south, along the avenue to the east.

古文：半里，上一坡，大道东北上，亦芹菜塘道；乃从坡东南下，半里，及溪。
现代文：半里，上了一道坡，大道向东北上走，也是去芹菜塘的路；于是从坡上往东南下走，半里，到溪边。
English: Half a mile, up a slope, walking northeast on the boulevard, is also the way to the celery pond; so walk southeast from the slope, half a mile, to the stream.

古文：又东溯溪半里，则溪流奔沸盘石中，右一崖突而临之，崖下则就石为池，而温泉汇焉。
现代文：又向东溯溪流走半里，只见溪流奔泻沸腾在盘环的岩石中，右边一道石崖前突面临着溪流，崖下就着石崖成为水池，而温泉汇积在这里。
English: I also followed the stream for half a mile to the east. I saw the stream rushing and boiling in the ring of rocks. On the right, a rocky cliff protruded in front of the stream. Under the cliff, the cliff became a pool, and the hot springs gathered here.

古文：其池与溪同峡，而水不关溪流也。
现代文：这个水池与溪流同在峡中，但泉水不与溪流相连。
English: The pool and stream are in the gorge, but the spring is not connected to the stream.

古文：崖石叠覆如累棋，其下凑环三面，成一小孔，可容一人坐浴。
现代文：石崖的岩石重叠下覆如累起来的棋子，石崖下部三面呈环状凑拢，成为一个小孔，可容得下一个人坐着洗澡。
English: The rock overlap of the cliff is like a stacked chess piece, the lower three sides of the cliff are ring-shaped and close together, becoming a small hole that can accommodate the next person to sit and take a bath.

古文：其后倒覆之石，两片下垂而中划，如所谓试剑石，水从片石中淙淙下注，此温泉之源也。
现代文：它后方倒覆的岩石，两片下垂而中间分开，如所谓的试剑石，水从石片中涂涂下注，这是温泉的源头。
English: The overturned rock behind it, two pieces hanging down and separated in the middle, like the so-called touchstone, water smears the bottom from the stone, which is the source of the hot spring.

古文：池孔之中，水俱不甚热，正可着体。
现代文：孔状的水池之中，水都不怎么热，正可用身体接触。
English: In the porous pools, the water is not very hot, and it is possible to swim with physical contact.

古文：其上更得一亭覆之，遂免风雨之虑矣。
现代文：它上方另外有一座亭子覆盖着它，便免去了风雨的忧虑了。
English: Above it, there is another pavilion covering it, so it is free from the worries of wind and rain.

古文：时池上有十余人共浴，余恐其旁有石洞，姑遍觅之，不得，乃还浴池中。
现代文：此时池塘上有十多人一同洗澡，我担心它旁边有石洞，姑且四处寻找，找不到，这才返回池中洗澡。
English: At this time, there were more than ten people bathing together in the pond. I was worried that there was a stone cave next to it. I searched around and couldn't find it, so I returned to the pond to bathe.

古文：又三里，随山之西嘴抵黄坡，转北一里，过麓间溢水之上。
现代文：又行三里，沿西面的山嘴抵达黄坡，转向北走一里，经过山麓间溢水处的上方。
English: Walk another three miles, along the west side of the mountain to reach Huangpo, turn north and walk one mile, passing above the overflow between the foothills.

古文：又北三里，乃入来时分岐处。
现代文：又向北三里，这才走入来时分岔之处。
English: Another three miles to the north, and then you're in the middle of nowhere.

古文：又西北四里，至矣比坡之麓。
现代文：又往西北行四里，到矣比坡的坡脚。
English: Another four miles to the northwest, to the foot of the slope.

古文：促挑夫行，以晚辞，遂止。
现代文：催促挑夫上路，他推辞天太晚了，只得停下来。
English: Urging the driver to go on his way, he said that it was too late and he had to stop.

古文：二十日晨起，饭而登坡，雨色复来。
现代文：二十日清晨起床，吃饭后登坡，雨色又来临。
English: On the 20th, I got up early in the morning, climbed the slope after dinner, and the rain came again.

古文：平上二里，峻上八里，抵岭头。
现代文：平缓上登二里，陡峻地上登八里，抵达岭头。
English: After a gentle climb of two miles and a steep climb of eight miles, we arrived at Lingtou.

古文：又平行岭上四里，又稍下一里，过芹菜塘。
现代文：又平缓行走在岭上四里，又稍下走一里，经过芹菜塘。
English: I walked smoothly for four miles on the ridge, and walked a little further down for one mile, passing the celery pond.

古文：复东上坡，半里而下，半里过木厂，又下二里，过北下之峡。又东上三里，至坡脊。
现代文：再往东上坡，半里后下走，走半里路过木厂，又下行二里，经过往北下延的峡谷，又向东上行三里，来到坡脊。
English: Further east uphill, half a mile downhill, half a mile past the lumber mill, two miles downhill, through the canyon stretching north, and three miles eastward, to the ridge.

古文：平行脊间，一里至永安哨，五六家当坡间而已。
现代文：平缓行走在山脊间，一里路到永安哨，五六家人临坡而居。
English: Walking gently between the ridges, one mile to Yongan Sentinel, five or six families live on the slope.

古文：又东南半里，逾岭脊而下。
现代文：又往东南行半里，翻过岭脊下走。
English: Another half-mile to the southeast, over the ridge and down the ridge.

古文：一里，有水自北而南，路从之。
现代文：一里，有水流自北流向南，路顺着它走。
English: There was a stream of water flowing from the north to the south for a mile, and the road followed it.

古文：半里，乃东陟坡，平行脊上。
现代文：半里，就向东涉水上坡，平缓走在山脊上。
English: After half a mile, I waded eastward uphill and walked smoothly on the ridge.

古文：三里，至甘露寺，饭。
现代文：三里，到甘露寺吃饭。
English: Sanli, to eat at Kanro-ji Temple.

古文：从寺东下三里，至赤土铺桥，其下水自南而北，即大盈江水也。
现代文：从寺东下走三里，到赤土铺桥，桥下的水自南流向北，就是大盈江江水了。
English: From the east of the temple, walk three miles to the red soil bridge. The water under the bridge flows from south to north, which is the source of the Yangtze River.

古文：《一统志》谓大盈之源出自赤土，其言不谬。
现代文：《一统志》说大盈江的源头出自赤土山，这话不错。
English: It is true that the source of the Yangtze River comes from the Red Earth Mountains, according to the "History of the Yangtze."

古文：桥东复上半里，有四五家当坡坳，为赤土铺。
现代文：从桥东再上走半里，有四五家临坡坳而居，是赤土铺。
English: Half a mile further up from the east side of the bridge, there are four or five houses that live on the slope and are made of red clay.

古文：铺东又上半里，遂从岭脊东南行。
现代文：从铺东又上行半里，就从岭脊上往东南行。
English: From the east of the pavement and half a mile up, go southeast from the ridge.

古文：一里，有岐南去，为猛柳道；余仍东南，三里，乃东下，又十里而止于橄榄坡。
现代文：一里，有条岔路往南去，是去猛柳的路；我仍向东南走，三里，就往东下行，又走十里后，停在橄榄坡。
English: One mile south, there was a fork in the road, the road to Mammoth Willow; I continued to walk southeast, three miles, I went east, and after another ten miles, I stopped at Olive Slope.

古文：时才午，雨时下时止，遂止不前。
现代文：此时才是中午，雨时下时停，便停下来不再前走。
English: At this time, it was noon, and when it rained, they stopped and did not go any further.

古文：二十一日平明起饭。
现代文：二十一日黎明起床吃饭。
English: On the twenty-first day, I got up at dawn to eat.

古文：自橄榄坡东下，五里，抵龙川江西岸，过巡检司，即下渡桥。
现代文：自橄榄坡往东下走，五里，抵达龙川江西岸，走过巡检司，立即走下渡桥。
English: Walk eastward from the Olive Slope for five miles, arrive at the west bank of the Longchuan River, walk past the patrol inspector, and immediately walk down the bridge.

古文：西岸峻若堵墙，乃循岸北向叠级，始达桥。
现代文：西岸险峻得好似一堵墙，只好沿着江岸向北垒砌了石阶，这才得以到达桥头。
English: The west bank was so precipitous that it resembled a wall, so they had to build stone steps along the riverbank to the northern bastion to reach the bridgehead.

古文：桥东有阁，登之可眺江流夭矫之势。
现代文：桥东头有楼阁，登上它可以眺望江流屈曲的江势。
English: At the east end of the bridge, there is a mansion, on which you can look out over the curving river.

古文：又南向随东岸行半里，东向平上者一里余，始曲折峻上。
现代文：又向南沿东岸行半里，向东平缓上登一里多，开始曲折地上登陡峻地山路。
English: I also walked half a mile along the east coast to the south, slowly climbed more than a mile to the east, and began to climb the steep mountain road.

古文：五里，过茶房，僧舍无一人。
现代文：五里，路过茶房，僧房中空无一人。
English: After five miles, I passed a teahouse, but there was no one in the monk's room.

古文：又峻上三里，过竹笆铺。
现代文：又上登三里陡峻的路，路过竹笆铺。
English: I climbed another three miles of steep road, passing a bamboo shoots shop.

古文：又上七里余，饭于小歇场。
现代文：又上走七里多，在小歇场吃饭。
English: Then I walked more than seven miles and ate at a small rest area.

古文：又上五里，过太平辅，又平行入坞。
现代文：又上走五里，路过太平铺，又平缓地走入山坞。
English: I walked another five miles, passed the Taiping Store, and walked smoothly into the dock.

古文：二里余，有水自北涧来，涉之，遂东上。
现代文：二里多，有水流自北边的山涧中流来，涉过涧水，就向东上走。
English: For more than two miles, a stream of water came from the mountains in the north, waded through the rushing water, and went eastward.

古文：其上愈峻，两旁皆竹石深翳，而风雨西来，一天俱漫，于是行雨浪中。
现代文：那上面愈加陡峻，两旁全是竹石深深地密蔽着，而风雨从西方下过来，满天都是漫漫一片，于是行走在如浪的暴雨中。
English: It was getting steeper and steeper up there, and on both sides it was covered with bamboo and stone, and the wind and rain were coming from the west, and the sky was all over the place, so I was walking in the stormy rain.

古文：三里，逾一最高之岭，乃屡上屡下，屡脊屡坳，皆从密箐中行。
现代文：三里，越过一座最高的山岭，于是屡上屡下，屡次上登山脊，多次越过山坳，都是从深密的林木中走。
English: For three miles, I crossed one of the highest mountains, so I repeatedly went up and down, repeatedly went up the ridge, and repeatedly crossed the ridge, all from deep woods.

古文：七里抵新安哨，两三家夹岭头，皆以劈藤竹为业。
现代文：七里抵达新安哨，有两三家夹在岭头，都是以劈藤条竹子为业。
English: Seven miles after arriving at Xin'an Sentinel, there are two or three houses sandwiched in the ridge, all of which are engaged in splitting rattan bamboo.

古文：时衣湿透寒甚，就其家烧薪烘之。
现代文：此时衣服湿透，冷极了，到他们家中烧柴烤衣服。
English: At this time, their clothes were soaking wet and it was extremely cold. They went to their home to burn firewood to bake their clothes.

古文：又二里余，抵分水关，有五六家当关之东。
现代文：又走二里多，到达分水关，有五六家人位于关隘的东面。
English: After another two-mile walk, they arrived at the water diversion gate. There were five or six families on the east side of the gate.

古文：余乃就火炙衣，贳ｓｈì赊欠烧酒饮四五杯乃行。
现代文：我便就着火烤衣服，买烧酒饮了四五杯才上路。
English: I set fire to my clothes, bought some soju and drank four or five glasses before I set off.

古文：天色大霁，路磴俱燥，乃知关名分水，实分阴晴也。
现代文：天色十分晴朗，道路石瞪全是干燥的，这才明白关隘的名字叫分水，实际是按阴晴划分的。
English: It was a very clear day, and the road was completely dry. It was only then that I understood that the name of the pass was "partial water" and that it was actually divided according to whether it was cloudy or sunny.

古文：于是东向下者八里，始就东行之脊。
现代文：从这里向东下行八里，这才走上往东延伸的山脊。
English: From here, it's an eight-mile walk east downhill before you reach the ridge that stretches east.

古文：又二里，过蒲满哨。
现代文：又走二里，经过蒲满哨。
English: Walk another two miles and you will pass Po Man Sentinel.

古文：又平行岭上，东十五里，宿于磨盘石之卢姓者；家有小房五六处，颇洁。
现代文：又平缓行走在岭上，往东十五里，住宿在磨盘石姓卢的人家；家中有五六处小房间，相当清洁。
English: After another gentle walk on the ridge, fifteen miles to the east, we stayed at the home of a man named Lu in Grindstone. There were five or six small rooms in the house, and they were quite clean.

古文：二十二日平明饭而行。
现代文：二十二日黎明吃饭后上路。
English: At dawn on the 22nd, after eating, we set out.

古文：其下甚峻，曲折下者六里，及岭北之涧。
现代文：那下走的路非常陡峻，曲折下走里，到达岭北的山涧。
English: The road down there is very steep, with twists and turns along the way, reaching the mountains in the north of the ridge.

古文：是岭自蒲满哨分大东突，左右俱有深峡夹流，来时从南峡上行，至此坠北峡之口过，涉北涧，又越北岭东突之嘴，共一里余而过八湾。
现代文：这座山岭自蒲满哨分支向东突，左右全是深深的峡谷，溪流相夹，来的时候从南边的峡上行，到此处坠入北峡的峡口走过。涉过北边的山涧，又越过北面山岭东突的山嘴，共一里多后路过八湾。
English: This mountain range juts eastward from the branch of the Pu Man Post, with deep canyons on the left and right, and streams sandwiched between them. When coming, walk up from the canyon on the south side, and walk through the mouth of the canyon that falls into the north canyon here. Walk through the mountains on the north side, and then cross the mouth of the east jut of the mountain range on the north side, and pass the Bay after a total of more than one mile.

古文：八湾亦有数家居坡上，人谓其地暑瘴ｚｈｎｇ湿热的空气为甚，无敢置足者。
现代文：八湾也有数家人居住在坡上，人们称说此地暑热瘴气最为厉害，无人敢驻足的。
English: There are also several families living on the slope in the Bay of Eight. People say that the heat and humidity here are the most severe, and no one dares to stop.

古文：于是东向行平坡间，十二里抵江，则怒流奔腾，势倍于来时矣。
现代文：从这里向东行走在平坤间，十二里抵达江边，就见狂怒的江流奔腾，水势比来的时候加倍了。
English: Walking east from here in Pingkun, twelve miles to the river, I saw the furious river rushing, and the water potential doubled when it came.

古文：乃坐巨树下待舟，观洪流汹涌，竞渡者之纷纭，不啻从壁上观也。
现代文：于是坐在巨树下等船，观看汹涌的洪流和纷纷纭纭争着渡江的人，如同从壁上旁观了。
English: So I sat under a huge tree and waited for the boat, watching the raging torrent and the people competing to cross the river, as if I were watching from the wall.

古文：俟久之，乃渡而东上坡。
现代文：等了很久，才渡过江向东上坡。
English: We waited for a long time before crossing the river and heading east uphill.

古文：又二里，南折而北，乃逾其北突之嘴而东，遂东南渐上，其峡遂曲折掩蔽，始不能西见高黎贡峰矣。
现代文：三里，抵达北山的山麓，沿山坡往东行。五里，越过往南下延的山嘴，见到一座桥横跨山涧，这里是著口。
English: Three miles, arrived at the foot of the North Mountain, along the slope to the east. Five miles, over the southward extension of the promontory, saw a bridge across the mountains, here is the entrance.

古文：又南六里，抵杨柳湾而饭。
现代文：于是渡过山涧走入峡谷，顺山涧南边的山崖向里，抵达杨柳湾后吃饭。
English: So we walked across the ridge into the canyon, along the cliff on the south side of the ridge, and arrived at Yangliu Bay, where we had dinner.

古文：乃逾南来之峡，溯东来之流，二里，有桥跨涧，西度之。
现代文：于是越过南边延来的峡谷，溯东面流来的水流，二里，有座桥跨在涧上，过到涧西。
English: So he crossed the canyon that extended to the south, followed the stream of water that flowed to the east, two miles, there was a bridge on the raft, and crossed to the west of Shaanxi.

古文：从涧西溯管上，又一里，为打板箐，有数十家当涧西。
现代文：从涧西溯山署上行，又走一里，是打板著，有数十家位于涧西。
English: If you go up from the Shaanxi Mountain Tracing Station, you will have to walk another mile. There are dozens of them in Shaanxi.

古文：又东北四里，过平度之脊。
现代文：又向东北四里，越过平缓延伸的山脊。
English: Another four miles to the northeast, over a gently extending ridge.

古文：其脊度峡中，乃自北而南，即从冷水箐西度蒲缥，又北过此，夹蒲缥之水北出而入潞江者也。
现代文：此条山脊延伸到峡中，是自北延向南，就是从冷水著往西延伸到蒲缥，又往北经过此地，夹住蒲缥的水流往北流出后流入潞江的山脊。
English: This ridge extends into the gorge from the north to the south, that is, it extends from the cold water to the west to the Po To, and passes through this place to the north. The water flow that grips the Po To flows out to the north and flows into the Lijiang River.

古文：是日热甚，得一荫辄止而延飕纳凉，数息树边，不复问行之远近矣。
现代文：这一天热得厉害，见到一处树荫就停下来纳凉，数次在树边歇息，不再管走路的远近了。
English: It was a very hot day. When I saw a shady place, I stopped to cool off and rested by the tree several times. I no longer cared how far I walked.

古文：过脊东下一里，止于落马厂。
现代文：翻过山脊向东下走一里，停在落马厂。
English: Turn over the ridge and walk one mile eastward, stopping at the horse-drawn carriage factory.

古文：时才下午，以热甚，担夫不前也。
现代文：此时才是下午，因为太热，挑夫不肯前走了。
English: At this point it was afternoon, because it was too hot, the porter refused to go.

古文：二十三日平明，从落马厂东行。
现代文：二十三日黎明，从落马厂往东行。
English: At dawn on the 23rd, he left the Lok Ma Works and headed east.

古文：三里，逾东突之山嘴而南，又一里余，有一庵倚西山之上。
现代文：三里，翻过东突的山嘴后往南，又走一里多，有一座寺庵紧靠在西山之上。
English: For three miles, after turning over the east ridge of the mountain to the south, and then walking more than a mile, there is a temple and hermitage close to the top of the west mountain.

古文：又南四里，过石子哨，始南下。
现代文：又向南四里，过了石子哨，开始往南下走。
English: Another four miles to the south, past the stone sentry post, I began to walk south.

古文：二里余，望温泉在东山下，乃从岐东南下。
现代文：二里多，望见温泉在东山下，就从岔路往东南下走。
English: After more than two miles, you can see the hot springs at the foot of the east mountain, so walk southeast from Kushiro Road.

古文：二里余，转而北涉北流一涧，又半里，东从石山之嘴，得温泉焉。
现代文：二里多，转向北涉过一条向北流的山涧，文走半里，向东在石山的山嘴处，找到温泉。
English: After more than two miles, I turned north and waded through a mountain stream flowing northward. After half a mile, I found a hot spring eastward at the mouth of the stone mountain.

古文：其水温而不热，浑而不澄，然无气焰，可浴。
现代文：温泉的水温而不热，浑而不清，不过无蒸气火焰，可以洗澡。
English: The water temperature of the hot springs is not hot, muddy and unclear, but there is no steam flame, so you can take a bath.

古文：又平行岭夹，一里稍东下，有亭桥跨峡间。
现代文：这里的山自东山横突向西，是蒲缥下游的案山。洗澡洗了很久，从涧东溯水流走二里多，抵达蒲缥的东村吃饭。因为挑夫不肯前走，逗留了很久。
English: The mountain here juts out to the west from Dongshan, and is the mountain of the lower reaches of Putuo. I took a long shower, walked more than two miles from the east-tracking stream of Putuo, and arrived at the east village of Putuo to eat. Because the porter refused to go forward, I stayed for a long time.

古文：时风雨大至，而担夫尚后，坐亭桥待久之，过午始行。
现代文：于是向东二里后上坡，五里，透道巡逃登上峰头。又平缓行进在山岭相夹间，一里后稍向东下走，有座亭桥跨在峡中。此时风雨暴降，可挑夫还在后头，坐在亭桥中等了很久，过了中午才动身。
English: So, after two miles to the east, they went uphill, and after five miles, they went on a thoroughfare patrol to get to the top of the peak. They continued to travel smoothly between the mountains, and after one mile, they went slightly eastward, and there was a pavilion bridge across the gorge. At this time, the wind and rain fell, but the porter was still behind, sitting in the middle of the pavilion bridge for a long time, and only left after noon.

古文：又东南上坡，逾坡一重，转而北，又逾坡一重，共六里，过孔雀寺。
现代文：又向东南上坡，越过一重山坡，转向北，又越过一重山坡，共六里，走过孔雀寺。
English: He walked uphill to the southeast, crossing a heavy hillside, and turned north, crossing another heavy hillside, for a total of six miles, passing Peacock Temple.

古文：又东上坡五里，直蹑东峰南突之顶。
现代文：又向东上坡五里，径直登上东峰南突的山顶。
English: Another five miles uphill to the east, straight up to the top of the East Peak South Col.

古文：此顶自北而南，从此平坠度为峡，一冈西迤，乃复起为崖，度为蒲缥后山，北去而夹蒲缥之涧，南去而尽于攀枝花者也。
现代文：此处山顶自北延向南，从此处平缓下坠延伸为山峡，一座山冈向西斜行，于是再度突起为山崖，延伸为蒲缥的后山，往北延去夹住蒲缥的山涧，往南延去在攀枝花到了尽头。
English: Here the top of the mountain stretches from north to south, from here it gently drops down and extends into a canyon, a mountain slope to the west, and then rises again as a cliff, extending to the back of the mountain, extending to the north to clamp the mountain, and extending to the south to the end of Panzhihua.

古文：又东一里稍上，复盘一南突之嘴，于是渐转而北，二里，有公馆踞冈头。
现代文：又向东一里稍上走，再绕过一处南突的山嘴，于是渐渐转向北，二里，有公馆盘踞在冈头。
English: Another mile to the east, slightly uphill, and then around a south-facing promontory, so gradually turning to the north, two miles, there is a mansion entrenched at the top of the hill.

古文：乃北下一里，而止于冷水箐。
现代文：于是向北下行一里，然后停在冷水著。
English: So he rode north for a mile and then stopped in the cold water.

古文：时方下午，以担不能前，遂止。
现代文：此时正好下午，因为挑夫不能前走，便停下来。
English: At this time, it was just afternoon, because the driver could not go forward, he stopped.

古文：见邸榻旁有卧而呻吟者，乃适往前途，为劫盗所伤，还卧于此。
现代文：见客店中床旁有躺着呻吟的人，是刚才去到前面的途中，被抢劫的强盗杀伤，返回来躺在此处。
English: I saw a groaning person lying next to a bed in the middle of the inn. It was the robber who had just been robbed and killed on his way to the front and returned to lie here.

古文：被劫之处，去此才六里，乃日才过午，而盗即纵横，可畏也。
现代文：被抢劫的处所，离此地才有六里，竟然太阳才过正午，强盗就横行霸道，可怕呀！
English: The place that was robbed is only six miles from here, and the sun has just passed noon, and the robbers are running amok. It's terrible!

古文：二十四日雨复达旦，但不甚大。
现代文：二十四日夜雨又下到天亮，但不怎么大。
English: On the night of the 24th, it rained again until dawn, but not very hard.

古文：平明，饭而行。
现代文：黎明，吃饭后上路。
English: At dawn, after dinner, we hit the road.

古文：随东行之箐，上其北坡，三里，循嘴北转。
现代文：顺往东走的山著，上到山著的北坡，三里，沿山嘴往北转。
English: Go east along the mountain, go up to the north slope of the mountain, three miles, turn north along the mountain mouth.

古文：二里渐下，一里下至坳，即昨被劫之商遇难处也。
现代文：二里渐渐下走，一里下到山坳，就是昨天被抢劫的客商遇难之处了。
English: Two miles gradually downhill, one mile downhill to the foothills, that's where the merchant who was robbed yesterday was killed.

古文：其北丛山夹立，穿其峡行三里，再过一东突之坡，其水始北下。
现代文：山坳北面成丛的山峦相夹而立，穿越山峡行三里，再走过一处东突的山坡，这里的水开始往北下流。
English: To the north of the hawthorn, clumps of hawthorn cling to each other. After travelling three miles through the gorge, they pass an east-facing hillside, where the water begins to flow northwards.

古文：随之北二里，下至坳洼中，乃东转而上。
现代文：顺水流往北二里，下到山坳的洼地中，就向东转上走。
English: The stream flows north for two miles, descends into the depressions of the mountains, and then turns east and goes up.

古文：一里，过坳子铺，觅火把为芭蕉洞游计。
现代文：一里，经过坳子铺，找火把准备去游芭蕉洞。
English: One mile, past the dice shop, looking for torches to prepare for a trip to Basho-dong.

古文：又东半里，过冈头洼地，遂转北下。
现代文：又向东半里，走过冈头的洼地，就转向北下走。
English: I walked half a mile to the east, past the depression at the top of the hill, and then turned north.

古文：三里余，越一坡脊，过洼中汇水之崖。
现代文：三里多，越过一道坡脊，经过洼地中积水的石崖。
English: More than three miles, over a ridge, past the water-logged cliffs in the depression.

古文：崖石上插而水蓄崖底，四面俱峻，水无从出而甚浑。
现代文：石崖上插而水蓄在石崖底下，四面全很陡峻，水无法流出去而且非常浑浊。
English: The cliff is jutting up and the water is stored at the bottom of the cliff. It is very steep on all sides, the water cannot flow out and it is very muddy.

古文：由其南再越脊而下，一里余，至芭蕉洞，乃候火于洞门。
现代文：由它南面再越过山脊下走，一里多，来到芭蕉洞，就在洞口等候火种。
English: From the south side of it, we walked over the ridge for more than a kilometer and came to the Basho Cave, where we waited for the kindling.

古文：担夫摘洞口黑果来啖，此真覆盆子也；其色红，熟则黑而可食，比前去时街子所鬻ｙù黄果，形同而色异，其熟亦异，其功用当亦不同也。
现代文：挑夫摘了洞口的黑果子来吃，这是真的覆盆子了，果实色红，成熟就变黑，可以吃，比较先前去的街子上所卖的黄果，形状相同而颜色相异，它们成熟的情况也不同，它们的功用应当也不同了。
English: The picker picked the black fruit from the hole and ate it. This was a real raspberry. The fruit is red and turns black when ripe, so it can be eaten. Compared to the yellow fruit sold in the town I went to before, the shape is the same but the color is different. Their ripening conditions are also different, and their functions should also be different.

古文：黄者非覆盆。
现代文：火种到后，点燃火把进洞。
English: After the kindling has arrived, light the torch into the hole.

古文：覆盆补肾，变白为黑，则为此果无疑。火至，燃炬入洞口始向北，即转东下四丈余，至向所入昏黑处，即转北向，其下已平，两崖愈狭而愈高。六七丈，更宽崇，一柱中悬，大如覆钟，击之声鋐鋐然。
现代文：开始时向北走，立即转向东下走四丈多，来到从前走入的昏黑处，马上转向北，脚下随即平坦起来，两面的石崖越来越窄而且越来越高。六七丈后，又变宽变高，一根石柱悬在中央，大处如下覆的铜钟，敲击它声音轰轰响。
English: At the beginning, I walked north, immediately turned to the east and walked more than four heights, came to the dark place I had entered before, immediately turned to the north, the foot immediately flattened, and the cliffs on both sides became narrower and higher. After six or seven heights, they became wider and higher, and a stone pillar hung in the center, covered with a copper bell in most places, and the sound of it was loud.

古文：其处盖不特此石有声，即洞底顿足，辄成应响，盖其下亦空也。
现代文：原来此处不仅此石柱有声音，就是在洞底跺脚，也立即形成回响，大概它下边也是空的。
English: Originally, not only did this stone pillar have a sound here, but even if you stamped your foot at the bottom of the cave, it would immediately reverberate, and it would probably be empty underneath.

古文：又入五六丈，两崖石色有垂溜成白者，以火烛之，以手摩之，石不润而燥，纹甚细而晶。
现代文：又深入五六丈，两侧石崖岩石的颜色有水滴垂淌形成白色的地方，用火光照它，拿手去摸它，岩石干燥不湿润，纹路非常细腻晶莹。
English: Another five or six meters deep, on both sides of the stone cliff, the color of the rock is dripping with water droplets to form a white place. Shine it with firelight and touch it with your hands. The rock is dry and not wet, and the lines are very fine and crystal clear.

古文：土人言，二月间石发润而纹愈皎茁，谓之 开花 ，洞名 石花 以此。
现代文：当地人说，二月间石色发润而且纹理愈加皎洁粗壮，称这种现象为 开花 ，山洞起名叫 石花 是根据这个原因。
English: Locals say that in February, the stone color becomes more moist and the texture becomes more beautiful and robust. They call this phenomenon blossoming, and the cave was named Stone Flower for this reason.

古文：石花名颇佳，而《志》称为芭蕉，不如方言之妙也。
现代文：石花的名字很美，可志书称为芭蕉，不如方言起得巧妙了。
English: The name of the stone flower is very beautiful, but the book is called Basho, which is not as clever as the dialect.

古文：更北路尽，由西腋透隙入，复小如门。
现代文：再向北路完了，由西侧穿过缝隙进去，又沂像门。
English: After the road to the north is finished, go through the gap from the west side and enter the gate.

古文：五丈，有圆石三叠，如幢盖下垂，又如大芝菌而三级累之者。
现代文：五丈后，有三层圆石，如石幢的顶盖样下垂，又如巨大的灵芝菌分三层叠起来的样子。
English: After the five heights, there are three layers of round stones, like the top cover of a stone building, and like a huge Ganoderma mushroom stacked up in three layers.

古文：从其下复转而北，其中复穹然宏耸。
现代文：从它下边再转向北，洞中再次弯然宏大高耸。
English: From the bottom of it and then turning north, the cave is once again curved and towering.

古文：又五六丈，西北路尽，洞分两岐：一南上环为曲室，三丈而止；一北入降为坠道，七丈而止。
现代文：又走五六丈，西北的路完了，山洞分为两个岔洞：一个往南上通环绕成深邃的密室，三丈后断了；一个通入北边下降为深坠的通道，七丈后断了。
English: After another five or six meters, the northwest path is finished, and the cave is divided into two caves: one leading southward is surrounded by a deep chamber, and is broken after three meters; one leading northward descends into a deep passage, and is broken after seven meters.

古文：是洞曲折而旁窦不多，宛转而底平不，故游者不畏深入，使中有通明之处，则更令人恍然矣。
现代文：此洞曲曲折折可旁洞不多，弯弯转转但洞底平坦不积水，所以游览的人不怕深入，假使洞中有通入亮光之处，那就更令人豁然开朗了。
English: There are not many twists and turns in this cave, but the bottom of the cave is flat and does not accumulate water, so visitors are not afraid to go deep. If there is a bright spot in the cave, it will be even more exciting.

古文：出至向所入昏黑北转处，今已通明。
现代文：出来到从前走入的昏黑向北转之处，现在已通入亮光了。
English: I came out to the place where I used to walk into the dark and turned north, and now I have entered the light.

古文：见直东又一岐，入，有柱中间之，以余炬入探其中，亦穹然六七丈而止。
现代文：见到正东方又有一个岔洞进去，有石柱在中央隔开洞口，用剩余的火把进去探看其中，也是弯然隆起六七丈便断了。
English: I saw that there was another cave in the east. A stone pillar separated the cave entrance in the center. I used the remaining torch to look into it. It was also bent and rose six or seven meters before it broke.

古文：出，从洞门外以余炬入探西崖间小窦。
现代文：出洞，从洞口外拿剩余的火把进去探察西边石崖间的小洞。
English: Out of the cave, take the remaining torches from outside the cave entrance and explore the small cave between the rocky cliffs on the west side.

古文：其窦北向悬壁间，其门甚隘，而中亦狭而深，秽气扑人，乃舍之。
现代文：此洞向北，高悬在石壁间，洞口非常狭窄，而洞中也是又窄又深，污秽之气扑人，只得舍弃了它。
English: This cave faces north and hangs high between the stone walls. The mouth of the cave is very narrow, while the inside of the cave is also narrow and deep. It was so filthy that it had to be abandoned.

古文：出洞，下百余步，抵坑峡下观水洞。
现代文：出洞来，下走百多步，抵达坑谷峡中下去观看水洞。
English: Come out of the cave, walk down more than a hundred steps, reach the middle of the valley and go down to see the water cave.

古文：水洞，即此洞之下层也，虽悬数丈，实当一所，前中入有声，已知其下之皆空矣。
现代文：水洞，就是此洞的下层了，虽然悬隔数丈，实际应当是一个地方，先前进去洞中有声音，已知它下边全是空的了。
English: The water cave is the lower level of this cave, although it is a few meters away, it should actually be a place, there is a sound when you go to the cave first, it is known that it is completely empty below.

古文：洞前亦东向，稍入，亦曲而自北来，与上洞同一格，但水溢其中，不能进也。
现代文：洞前边也是向东，稍进去，亦是转弯而且自北边通来，与上洞同出于一格，但水溢满洞中，不能前进了。
English: The front side of the cave is also to the east, a little into it, it is also a turn and comes from the north, the same as the upper hole, but the water overflows in the hole, it can not move forward.

古文：由此东折而北，共里余，抵卧狮窝村，饭于村妇家。
现代文：由此往东折向北，共走一里多，抵达卧狮窝村，在村中农妇家吃饭。
English: From there, turn east to north, walk a total of more than one mile, arrive at the village of Lying Lion's Den, and eat at the farmer's house in the village.

古文：北三里，过一村，即东上堤，是为大海子。
现代文：往北三里，走过一村，立即向东走上堤坝，这是大海子。
English: Go north three miles, walk through a village, and immediately walk east up the embankment. This is the Great Ocean.

古文：随海子南堤东行，二里下堤，又东一里为沙河桥。
现代文：顺海子的南堤往东行，二里后下堤，又向东一里是沙河桥。
English: Go east along the south embankment of Haizi, go down the embankment after two miles, and the Shahe Bridge is one mile to the east.

古文：其桥五巩，名众安桥。
现代文：此桥有五拱，名叫众安桥。
English: This bridge has five arches and is called Zhong'an Bridge.

古文：越桥东，即从岐西北循山行。
现代文：越到桥东，马上从岔路往西北沿着山走。
English: After crossing to the east of the bridge, immediately walk along the mountain from Kushiro to the northwest.

古文：二里，过胡家坟，为正统间挥使胡琛墓。
现代文：二里，路过胡家坟，是正统年间指挥使胡深的墓地。
English: Two miles away, passing Hu Jia's grave, is the graveyard of Hu Sheng, the commander during the orthodox era.

古文：墓有穹碑，为王学士英所撰，又一碑，乃其子者，则王翰撰时之文，与吾家梧塍之陇，文翰规制颇相似，其颓芜亦相似也。
现代文：墓前有高大的石碑，是学士王英撰写的，又有一块碑，是他儿子叫王访的碑，碑由翰林院撰修王时撰文，与我家乡梧腿里的坟墓，文章辞藻规模形制十分相似，它们的颓败荒芜也相似了。
English: In front of the tomb, there is a tall stone monument, which was written by the scholar Wang Ying, and another monument, which was written by his son Wang Zhi. The monument was written by the Hanlin Academy, and the tomb in my hometown, Wu Li, is very similar in terms of scale and shape. Their decay and desolation are also similar.

古文：其一时崇尚，穷徼薄海，万里同风，至荆棘铜驼残破的景象，又旷代无异，可慨也！
现代文：那种一时间的崇尚，尽于边境逼近海疆，万里之间风气相同，到了旧王朝灭亡后铜驼埋于荆棘丛中，又隔代无异了，可叹息呀！
English: That kind of worship for a time, as the border approached the sea, the customs were the same between thousands of miles, and after the old dynasty was destroyed, the bronze camel was buried in the thorns, and it was no different from generation to generation, sigh!

古文：其墓欲迎水作东北向，遂失下手砂，且偏侧不依九隆正脉，故胡氏世赏虽仅延，而当时专城之盛遂易。
现代文：他修墓时想要面迎水流作东北向，便失去了下手的龙砂，结果使偏在一侧不靠着九隆山的正脉，所以胡家世代的赏赐虽然仅能延续，然而当时独占一城的盛况终于改变了。
English: When he was repairing the tomb, he wanted to face the water flow in the northeast direction, but he lost the dragon sand he started with. As a result, he did not lean on the positive line of the Jiulong Mountain on one side. Therefore, although the reward of the Hu family generation can only continue, the grand situation of monopolizing a city at that time has finally changed.

