古文：《士农必用》：生蚁，惟在凉暖知时，开措得法，使之莫有先后也。
现代文：《士农必用》：蚕下蚁这件事情，一定要知道，蚕种什么时候要凉，什么时候要暖，和恰当的掌握好变色和抑制下蚁的方法，使生蚁的时间齐整化，不分先后。
English: "Essential for farmers": It is necessary to know when to plant silkworms in the cool and when to plant them in the warm, as well as how to properly control the color change and control the ants, so that the time of the ants is uniform, regardless of the order.

古文：生蚁不齐，则其蚕眠起，至老俱不能齐也。
现代文：如果下蚁的时间不整齐，蚕从眠起一直到老都不会齐整如一。
English: If the time of the lower ant is not uniform, the silkworm will not grow uniformly from sleep to old age.

古文：其法：变灰色已全，以两连相合，铺于一净箔上，紧卷了两头，绳束，卓立于无烟净凉房内。
现代文：做到这一点的方法是：蚕卵已经全部变为灰色时，将每两张蚕连面对面地合起，铺在一张干净的空箔上，把箔紧卷起来，两头用绳子捆好，竖立在没有烟气的干净的凉房中。
English: The way to do this is: when the silkworm eggs have all turned gray, connect every two silkworms together face to face, spread them on a clean empty foil, roll the foil tightly, tie the two ends with a rope, and stand in a clean cool room without smoke.

古文：第三日晚，取出展箔，蚁不出为上；若有先出者，鸡翎扫去不用，名 行马蚁 ，留则蚕不齐。
现代文：等到第三天晚间，将箔取出，打开，若没有蚕蚁生出来，那是再好不过了；若有些蚕蚁已经先生出来，便要用鸡翎毛扫去不要用。先生的蚁，叫 行马蚁 ，如将这种蚁养起来，蚕便会眠起不齐整。
English: Wait until the evening of the third day, take the foil out and open it. If no silkworms are born, that's the best; if some silkworms have already emerged, they should be swept away with a feather duster and not used. The master's ants, called walking ants, if this ant is raised, the silkworms will sleep unevenly.

古文：每三连虚卷为一卷，放在新暖蚕屋内。槌匝下，隔箔上。
现代文：然后将每三张蚕连，轻轻地虚着卷成卷，放到新修理过的，温暖的蚕室中，立放在蚕架的四周下方，底箔的上方。
English: Then, each of the three silkworm coils is gently rolled into a roll with an empty reel, placed in a newly repaired, warm silkworm room, placed under the perimeter of the silkworm frame, above the bottom foil.

古文：候东方白，将连于院内一箔上单铺；如有露，于凉房中或棚下。
现代文：等候东方天色放亮，将连拿到室外，在院内的箔上单张铺开，如有露水，可在凉爽的屋中或棚下。
English: Wait for the eastern sky to brighten, then take it outside and spread it out on a sheet of foil in the courtyard. If there is dew, it can be in a cool room or under a shed.

古文：待半顿饭时，移连入蚕房，就地一箔上单铺。
现代文：大约过半顿饭时间，便将连移进蚕室，在靠近地面的底箔上，单张铺开。
English: After about half a meal time, they will move into the silkworm room and spread the leaflets on the bottom foil close to the ground.

古文：少间，黑蚁齐生。
现代文：不要多时，黑色的蚕蚁，便会同时化生，没有一个先生或后生的。
English: If you don't do it often enough, the black silkworms will be born at the same time, without a master or offspring.

古文：并无一先一后者，和蚁秤连，记写分两。
现代文：将初生的蚕连同空连一起用秤称过，记录重量。
English: Weigh the newborn silkworm together with the empty string together with a scale and record the weight.

