古文：耶律化哥耶律斡腊耶律速撒萧阿鲁带耶律那也耶律何鲁扫古耶律世良耶律化哥，字弘隐，孟父楚国王之后。
现代文：耶律化哥，字弘隐，孟父楚国王之后。
English: He was named after King Meng's father, King Chu.

古文：善骑射。
现代文：擅长骑马射箭。
English: He is proficient in horse riding and archery.

古文：乾亨初，为北院林牙。
现代文：乾亨初，任北院林牙。
English: At the beginning of the reign of Emperor Qianheng, Lin Ya was appointed as the head of the Northern Court.

古文：统和四年，南侵宋，化哥擒谍者，知敌由海路来袭，即先据平州要地。
现代文：统和四年，皇上南征宋国，化哥擒获宋军探子，知道敌人要从海路前来袭击，便先行据守平州要地。
English: In the fourth year of the Unification, the emperor went to the south to conquer the Song Dynasty, and Huagang Pu obtained a Song Army scout. Knowing that the enemy was going to attack from the sea, he took the lead in defending the important places in Pingzhou.

古文：事平，拜上京留守，迁北院大王。
现代文：战事平定，拜为上京留守，迁北院大王。
English: After the war was settled, Bae stayed in Kyoto and moved to the Northern Palace.

古文：十六年，复侵宋，为先锋，破敌于遂城，以功迁南院大王，寻改北院枢密使。
现代文：十六年，我国再次进攻宋国，化哥任先锋，在遂城击败敌军，因功迁任南院大王，不久改任北院枢密使。
English: Sixteen years later, China once again attacked Song, with Hua Ge as the vanguard, defeating the enemy army in Suicheng. For his service, he was transferred to the position of the Grand Prince of the Southern Court, and soon became the Privy Envoy of the Northern Court.

古文：开泰元年，伐阻卜，阻卜弃辎重遁走，俘获甚多。
现代文：开泰元年，讨伐阻卜，阻卜抛弃辎重逃跑，化哥俘虏缴获甚多。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taizong, there were a lot of prisoners captured in the course of the suppression and obstruction, and the obstruction and abandonment of heavy escapes.

古文：帝嘉之，封豳王。
现代文：圣宗嘉奖他，封为豳王。
English: The Holy Sect rewarded him with the title of Shao Wang.

古文：后边吏奏，自化哥还阙，粮乏马弱，势不可守，上复遣化哥经略西境。
现代文：后来边官奏称，自从化哥回京，当地便粮草缺乏，战马瘦弱，看样子难以把守，皇上便又派遣化哥经营治理西部边境。
English: Later, the border official reported that since Huago returned to Beijing, the local grain and grass were in short supply, the war horses were thin and looked difficult to guard, and the emperor sent Huago to manage and govern the western border.

古文：化哥与边将深入，闻蕃部逆命，居翼只水，化哥徐以兵进。
现代文：化哥与边将深入敌境，得知蕃部违抗命令居于翼只水，化哥率兵徐徐进发。
English: He and the commander went deep into the enemy territory, and learned that the commander's disobedience order was only water in the wings. He and his soldiers slowly marched forward.

古文：敌望风奔溃，获羊马及辎重。
现代文：敌人望风奔逃溃散，化哥缴获了羊马及辎重。
English: The enemy ran away to escape the wind and scattered. Brother Hu captured the sheep, horse and yakitori.

古文：路由白拔烈，遇阿萨兰回鹘，掠之。
现代文：途经白拔烈，遇到阿萨兰回鹘，掳掠之。
English: Passing through Bai Baili, he met Asalan Hui Quan and captured him.

古文：都监褭里继至，谓化哥曰： 君误矣！
现代文：都监袅里后到，对化哥说： 你弄错了！
English: After arriving at the Metropolitan Detention Centre, he said to his brother: "You've made a mistake!

古文：此部实效顺者。 
现代文：这个部落实际上是投效归顺的。 
English: The tribe is effectively docile.

古文：化哥悉还所俘。
现代文：化哥闻言便全部放回俘虏。
English: When his brother-in-law heard this, he released all of them back to their captors.

古文：诸蕃由此不附。
现代文：诸蕃从此不再归附。
English: Zhuye will no longer be affiliated.

古文：上使按之，削王爵。
现代文：皇上派人查验，削去化哥王爵。
English: The emperor sent someone to check, and the title of Duke of Huago was removed.

古文：以侍中遥领大同军节度使，卒。
现代文：以侍中遥领大同军节度使，不久去世。
English: He led the Datong Army's military ceremony with his attendant, Haru, and died soon after.

古文：耶律斡腊，字斯宁，奚迭剌部人。
现代文：耶律斡腊，字斯宁，奚迭剌部人。
English: Yerut Yerut Yerut Yerut Yerut Yerut.

古文：趫捷有力，善骑射。
现代文：矫健敏捷，有勇力，擅长骑马射箭。
English: He is agile, courageous, and good at riding and archery.

古文：保宁初，补护卫。
现代文：保宁初，补为护卫。
English: At the beginning of Boryeong, he became an escort.

古文：车驾猎颉山，适豪猪伏丛莽，帝射中，猪突出。
现代文：景宗皇上在颉山狩猎，适逢豪猪伏于丛林草莽之中，皇上一箭射中，豪猪冲了出来。
English: Emperor Jingzong was hunting in the Lushan Mountains when a porcupine was lying in the jungle grass. The emperor shot an arrow and the porcupine rushed out.

古文：御者托满舍辔而避，厩人鹤骨翼之，斡腊复射而毙。
现代文：车夫托满撇下缰绳慌忙躲避，厩人鹤骨保护着皇上，斡腊再射一箭，豪猪死去。
English: The coachman, Toman, left the reins behind and hurried to hide, the stableman, Herne, protected the emperor, and the porcupine died.

古文：帝嘉赏。
现代文：皇上为之嘉赏不已。
English: The Emperor was very appreciative.

古文：及猎赤山，适奔鹿奋角突前，路隘不容避，垂犯跸。
现代文：及至随从皇上田猎于赤山，刚好有一只奔鹿扬起双角向前冲来，道路狭窄无法躲避，眼看就要伤及皇上。
English: When he was out hunting in Akayama with the Emperor, a deer rushed forward with its horns raised. The road was narrow and there was no way to avoid it, and it looked like it was going to hurt the Emperor.

古文：斡腊以身当之，鹿触而颠。
现代文：斡腊用身子挡住皇上，鹿撞到斡腊身上倒地而亡。
English: The deer bumped into her and she fell to the ground and died.

古文：帝谓曰： 朕因猎，两濒于危，赖卿以免，始见尔心。 
现代文：皇上对他说： 朕因为出猎，两次濒临险境，全靠了你才得脱险，从中朕看见了你的爱朕之心。 
English: The emperor said to him, "Because I was out hunting, I was on the verge of danger twice. It was all thanks to you that I was able to get out of danger. From this, I saw your love for me.

古文：迁护卫太保。
现代文：迁任他为护卫太保。
English: He was reassigned to be a bodyguard.

古文：从枢密使耶律斜轸破宋将杨继业军于山西。
现代文：他曾随从枢密使耶律斜轸在山西击破宋将杨继业军。
English: He once followed the imperial envoy, Ye Lu, to defeat the Song general, Yang Jiye, in Shanxi.

古文：统和十三年秋，为行军都监，从都部署奚王和朔奴伐兀惹乌昭度，数月至其城。
现代文：统和十三年秋，任行军都监，随从都部署奚王和朔奴讨伐兀惹乌昭度，几个月后到达兀惹城。
English: In the autumn of the thirteenth year of the unification, he was appointed as the inspector of the marching army, and his followers were deployed by the king and Shuo to fight against the Wu Zhaodu, and after a few months they arrived in the city of Yuyao.

古文：昭度请降。
现代文：昭度请求投降。
English: Soido asked for surrender.

古文：和朔奴利其俘掠，令四面急攻。
现代文：和朔奴贪图俘掳劫掠之利，下令四面紧急攻城。
English: He and Shao Nong, greedy for the profits of capture and plunder, ordered an emergency siege of the city on all sides.

古文：昭度率众死守，随方捍御。
现代文：昭度率众死守，想方设法地抵御。
English: Zhaodu led the crowd in a desperate defense, trying to resist in every possible way.

古文：依埤堄虚构战棚，诱我军登陴，俄撤枝柱，登者尽覆。
现代文：他紧靠城墙虚设战棚，引诱我军登城，紧接着撤去支柱，登城者全都遭受灭顶之灾。
English: He set up empty battlements close to the city wall, lured our army to climb the city, then immediately removed the pillars, and all those who climbed the city were destroyed.

古文：和朔奴知不能下，欲退。
现代文：和朔奴料想难以攻下，想要退兵。
English: He and Shuo thought that it would be difficult to attack, and wanted to retreat.

古文：萧恒德谓师久无功，何以藉口，若深入大掠，犹胜空返。
现代文：萧恒德说，出兵这么久没有建功，回去无法交账，如果深入后方大肆抢掠，还强似空手而回。
English: Xiao Hengde said that the soldiers had not made any contribution for such a long time, and they could not pay the bill when they returned. If they went deep into the rear and plundered, it would be as if they returned empty-handed.

古文：寿隆元年，第功，加同中书门下平章事，进爵郡公，改西北路招讨使。
现代文：斡腊说： 深入敌境，恐怕所得到的还抵不上所损失的。 恒德不听，征战于东南，顺着高丽北部边境而回。道路遥远，粮草断绝，人员马匹大多死去。
English: Gundotra said, "If we go deeper into the enemy territory, I am afraid that what we gain will not be able to compensate for what we lose. Hengde did not listen and went to war in the southeast, returning along the northern border of Korea. The roads were far away, the grain and grass were cut off, and most of the men and horses died.

古文：乾统三年，坐留宋俘当遣还者为奴，免官。
现代文：诏令削夺诸将官职，只有斡腊因为先前有异议而得以免予处分。
English: The edict stripped all generals of their posts, with only the vice-premier being exempted from punishment because he had previously raised objections.

古文：后被征，以老疾致仕，卒。
现代文：不久，斡腊升任同政事门下平章事，任东京留守。
English: Soon after, Yura was promoted to the post of political adviser to the next Taira Shoshoji, and stayed in Tokyo.

古文：耶律那也，字移斯辇，夷离堇蒲古只之后。
现代文：开泰年间去世。耶律那也，字移斯辇，夷离堇蒲古只之后。
English: He died during the reign of Keitai, and so did Yerushalayim, only after the destruction of Shobuko.

古文：父斡，尝为北克，从伐夏战殁。
现代文：父亲耶律斡，曾任北克，随从讨伐夏国时战死。
English: His father, Yerushalayim, was once the governor of Beik, and died in the war when he followed the crusade against Xia.

古文：季父赵三，始为宿直官，累迁至北面林牙。
现代文：季父赵三，初时任宿直官，累迁至北面林牙。
English: Zhao San, the father of the third generation, was initially a postmaster, and gradually moved to Linya in the north.

古文：咸雍四年，拜北院大王，改西南面招讨使。
现代文：咸雍四年，拜为北院大王，改任西南面招讨使。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Xianyong, he was given the title of Beiyin Daowang and was appointed as the southwestern recruiting envoy.

古文：大康中，西北诸部扰边，议欲往讨，帝以为非赵三不可，遂拜西北路招讨使，兼行军都统，平之，以功复为北院大王。
现代文：大康年间，西北诸部骚扰边境，朝议想要前往讨伐，皇上认为非赵三不可，于是拜为西北路招讨使，兼任行军都统，平定之，因功再任北院大王。
English: During the prosperous years, the northwestern provinces harassed the border, the imperial court wanted to go to the crusade, the emperor thought that Zhao San was indispensable, so he called for the northwestern road to recruit the envoy, and also served as the march to the capital, pacified it, and was re-appointed as the Great King of the Northern Court for his service.

古文：那也敦厚才敏。
现代文：那也敦厚而才思敏捷。
English: They are also strong-willed and quick-thinking.

古文：上以其父斡死王事，九岁加诸卫小将军，为题里司徒，寻召为宿直官。
现代文：道宗因为其父耶律斡死于征伐，九岁便让他做了诸卫小将军，任题里司徒，不久征召为宿直官。
English: Due to the death of his father, Yerutomo, in a military campaign, at the age of nine, Dao Zong made him a minor general of Zhuwei, appointed him as a disciple of Li Zhili, and soon conscripted him as a postmaster.

古文：大康三年，为遥辇克。
现代文：大康三年，任遥辇克。
English: After three years of prosperity, he retired.

古文：大安九年，为倒塌岭节度使。
现代文：大安九年，任倒塌岭节度使。
English: In the 9th year of the Taian era, he was appointed as the delegate to the Qingming Festival.

古文：明年冬，以北阻卜长磨古斯叛，与招讨都监耶律胡吕率精骑二千往讨，破之。
现代文：次年冬天，因为北阻卜酋长磨古斯反叛，那也与招讨都监耶律胡吕统率精骑兵二千前往讨伐，击败之。
English: In the winter of the following year, because of the rebellion of the Northern Daba chieftain Maqus, it was also necessary to invite the governor Yerut Hulut to lead two thousand elite cavalry to go to the crusade and defeat it.

古文：那也荐胡吕为汉人行宫副部署。
现代文：那也举荐胡吕担任汉人行宫副部署。
English: It also recommended that Hu Lyu serve as the vice-delegate of the Han People's Court.

古文：何鲁扫古不以实闻，坐是削官，决以大杖。
现代文：寿隆元年，再次讨伐达理得、拔思母等立有战功，皇上赐给诏书褒奖赞美，改任为乌古敌烈部统军使，边境因而得以安宁。
English: In the first year of Shulong, the emperor gave the emperor a certificate of commendation and praise for the outstanding war exploits of Daride and Batshimato, and he was reappointed as the envoy of the united forces of the ancient enemy, thus bringing peace to the border.

古文：寿隆间，累迁惕隐，兼侍中，赐保节功臣。
现代文：任满后，部民请求让他留任，皇上下诏准予再任。乾统六年，拜为中京留守，改任北院大王，不久逝世。
English: After his term of office expired, his subordinates requested that he remain in office, and the Emperor issued an imperial edict approving his reappointment. Emperor Qian ruled for six years, remaining in Beijing as a worshiper, and was reappointed as the Great King of the Northern Court. He died soon after.

古文：道宗崩，与宰相耶律俨总山陵事。乾统中，致仕，卒。耶律世良，小字斡，六院部人。
现代文：那也为人清廉耿介，擅长治理百姓，每当出现诉讼之事时，总要亲自考察是非曲直，不标榜威严，常常说 ：大凡治理百姓，本来是为了分别是非，何必要逼迫威胁他人以树立自己的威名呢？ 
English: Geng Ke, who was also a man of integrity, was good at governing the people. Whenever there was a lawsuit, he always had to personally investigate the rights and wrongs, and did not flaunt his authority. He often said: Great governance of the people is originally to distinguish right from wrong. Why is it necessary to persecute and threaten others to establish one's prestige?

古文：才敏给，练达国朝典故及世谱。
现代文：因此所到之处以教化惠民著称。耶律世良，乳名斡，六院部人。才智敏捷，熟悉本朝典故及世族谱牒。
English: Therefore, the places he visited were famous for enlightening and benefiting the people. Yelu Shiliang, Nyaoyao, and six members of the imperial court. He was quick-witted and familiar with the legends of the dynasty and the genealogy.

古文：上书与族弟敌烈争嫡庶，帝始识之。
现代文：上书与族弟敌烈争论嫡庶问题，圣宗皇上这才认识他。
English: Emperor Shengzong only got to know him after he had a heated argument with his younger brother Shangshu over the issue of legitimate children.

古文：时北院枢密使韩德让病，帝问： 孰可代卿？ 
现代文：当时北院枢密使韩德让生病，皇上问他说 ：谁可以代替你？ 
English: At that time, the privy councilor of the Northern Court made Han Dezhen sick, and the emperor asked him, "Who can replace you?"

古文：德让曰： 世良可。 
现代文：德让说 ：世良可以。 
English: DeJean said, "Sera can do it."

古文：北院大王耶律室鲁复问北院之选，德让曰： 无出世良。 
现代文：北院大王耶律室鲁又问北院之合适人选，德让说： 没有人能比得上世良。 
English: When the Northern Court's great king, Jerushimuro, asked Dejan about suitable candidates for the Northern Court, Dejan said, "No one can match the world's best."

古文：统和末，为北院大王。
现代文：统和末，任北院大王。
English: At the end of the unification, he was appointed as the Great King of the Northern Court.

古文：开泰初，因大册礼，加检校太尉、同政事门下平章事。
现代文：开泰初，因为举行大册礼，升任检校太尉、同政事门下平章事。
English: At the beginning of the reign of Emperor Taizong, he was promoted to the rank of lieutenant of the inspection of the school and to the rank of the subordinate of the political affairs because of holding the big book ceremony.

古文：时边部拒命，诏北院枢密使耶律化哥将兵，以世良为都监，往御之。
现代文：当时边境地区抗拒王命，诏令北院枢密使耶律化哥统兵，任命世良为都监，前往抵御。
English: At that time, the border areas resisted the king's order, and the emperor ordered the Northern Court's privy council to send the Yeluhuacao to lead the troops, appointing Sheliang as the governor of the capital, and go to resist.

古文：明年，化哥还，将罢兵，世良上书曰： 化哥以为无事而还，不思师老粮乏，敌人已去，焉能久守？
现代文：次年，化哥回，朝廷也将罢兵。世良上书说 ：化哥以为边境已然无事，故此回朝，没有考虑到人马疲惫困乏粮草缺乏，敌人已经离去，怎么能长期把守？
English: The following year, when Hua Ge returned, the imperial court would also call off the troops. Sera sent a letter saying: Hua Ge thought that there was nothing wrong with the border, so he returned to the morning without considering the exhaustion of men and horses, the lack of grain and grass, the enemy had left, how could he guard it for a long time?

古文：若益兵，可克也。 
现代文：如果增兵，可以打垮敌人。 
English: If we increase the number of troops, we can defeat the enemy.

古文：帝即命化哥益兵，与世良追之。至安真河，大破而还。
现代文：皇上便命令化哥增兵，与世良一道追击敌军，到安真河，大破敌军而还。
English: The emperor then ordered Huagang to increase the number of troops, and together with Sheliang, they chased the enemy army to Anzhen River, defeated the enemy army and returned.

古文：自是边境以宁。
现代文：从此，边境得到安宁。
English: Since then, the border has been quiet.

古文：以功王岐，拜北院枢密使。
现代文：因功封为岐王，拜北院枢密使。
English: Because of his meritorious service, he was awarded the title of King of Qi and became a privy councilor of the Bei Bei Academy.

古文：三年，命选马驼于乌古部。
现代文：三年，受命到乌古部挑选马、驼。
English: Three years later, he was ordered to go to Ugube to select horses and camels.

古文：会敌烈部人夷剌杀其酋长稍瓦而叛，邻部皆应，攻陷巨母古城。
现代文：适逢敌烈部人夷剌杀死其酋长稍瓦而反叛，邻近部落都响应，攻陷巨母古城。
English: When the fierce enemy, the barbarians, killed their chief and rebelled a little, the neighboring tribes responded and captured the giant ancient city.

古文：世良率兵压境，遣人招之，降数部，各复故地。
现代文：世良率兵逼近敌境，派人招降，降服数部，分别恢复其旧地。
English: Seiryo and his soldiers approached the enemy territory, and sent people to invite them to surrender, and several units surrendered and resumed their former positions.

古文：四年，伐高丽，为副部署。
现代文：四年，讨伐高丽，担任副部署。
English: For four years, he led the campaign against Korea and served as deputy commander.

古文：都统刘慎行逗留失期，执还京师，世良独进兵。
现代文：都统刘慎行逗留拖延误了军期，被抓回京师，世良单独领兵而进。
English: Liu Shengxing, the general of the capital, delayed his stay and missed the military period. He was arrested and taken back to the Beijing Division, while Se Liang led the army alone.

古文：明年，至北都护府，破追兵于郭州。
现代文：次年，到北都护府，在郭州击败追兵。
English: The following year, he went to the northern capital, Guofu, and defeated the pursuing troops in Guozhou.

古文：以暴疾卒。
现代文：因患暴病而亡。
English: He died of a violent illness.

