古文：陈修，字伯昂，上饶人。
现代文：陈修，字伯昂，上饶人。
English: Chen Xiu, Zi Bo'ang, Shangrao Ren.

古文：从太祖平浙东，授理官。援引律令，悉本宽厚，尽改元季弊政。擢兵部郎中，迁济南知府。
现代文：跟从太祖平定浙东，授予理官，援引律令，悉本宽厚，完全革除了元末的弊政，提升为兵部郎中，晋升为济南知府。
English: He followed his great-great-grandfather to pacify eastern Zhejiang, to confer the title of magistrate, to invoke the ritsuryo, and to completely eliminate the maladministration at the end of the Yuan Dynasty. He was promoted to vice-minister of the military department, and promoted to Jinan Prefecture.

古文：时乱后，比户彫残，且多卫将练兵屯田其间。修抚治有方，兵民相安，流亡复业。
现代文：当时，大乱后一片萧条，许多卫将练兵在此屯田，陈修抚治有方，兵民相安，流亡复业。
English: At that time, after the Great Turmoil, there was a depression. Many guardsmen trained soldiers in this garrison, Chen repaired and governed, the soldiers and the people were at peace, and the exiles were reinstated.

古文：帝嘉之。
现代文：太祖嘉奖他。
English: Zhuang Zong praised him.

古文：洪武四年拜吏部尚书。
现代文：洪武四年，任命为吏部尚书。
English: In the fourth year of Hongwu, he was appointed as the secretary of the Ministry of Personnel.

古文：六部之设，始自洪武元年。
现代文：六部的设置，开始于洪武元年。
English: The six-part series began in the first year of Hongwu.

古文：镇江滕毅首长吏部，佐省台裁定铨除考课诸法略具。
现代文：镇江的滕毅首任吏部长官，辅佐省台裁定铨除考课诸法略具。
English: Zhenjiang's Teng Yi, the first secretary of the Ministry of Civil Service Affairs, assisted the provincial Taiwanese government in making the decision to abolish the examination.

古文：至是修与侍郎李仁详考旧典，参以时宜，按地冲僻，为设官烦简。
现代文：至此，陈修与侍郎李仁详考，参照时宜，按地之重要、偏僻，为设官烦简。
English: At this point, Chen Xiu and his servant Li Ren made a detailed examination, referring to the time, the importance of the place, the remoteness, and the difficulty of setting up an office.

古文：凡庶司黜陟及课功核实之法，皆精心筹画，铨法秩然。
现代文：凡庶司黜陟及课功核实之法，都精心筹划，铨法秩然。
English: All the methods of marking and coursework verification are carefully planned, and the marking method is perfect.

古文：未几，卒官。
现代文：不久，死于官位上。
English: He died in office shortly afterwards.

古文：其后部制屡创。
现代文：其后制度多次修改。
English: Since then, the system has been amended several times.

古文：令入觐官各举所知，定内外封赠荫叙之典，自浮山李信始。
现代文：令入朝觐见的官吏各举所知，制定内外封赠荫叙之典章，从浮山李信开始。
English: Let the officials who come to the imperial court know each other, and formulate the internal and external seals of the award, starting from the floating mountain of the letter.

古文：天下朝正官各造事迹文册，图画土地人民以进，及拨用吏员法，自昆山余熂始。
现代文：天下朝正官各造事迹文册图画土地人民献上，及拨用吏员法，自昆山余火气开始。
English: The world's dignitaries have each created their own records, documents, and pictures to be presented to the people of the land, and the method of assigning officials has begun in Kunshan Yuhaiqi.

古文：仿《唐六典》，自五府、六部、都察院以下诸司设官分职，编集为书曰《诸司职掌》；定吏役考满，给由法以为司、卫、府、县首领；选监生能文章者兼除州县官及学正、教谕，自泰兴翟善始。
现代文：效法《唐六典》，自五府、六部、都察院以下诸司设官分职，编辑成书，书名为《诸司职掌》，定吏役考满给由法以为司、卫、府、县首领，选拔监生中会写文章者兼任州县官及学正、教谕，自泰兴翟善开始。
English: Following the example of the "Tang Six Classics," officials from the five prefectures, six departments, and all departments up to and including the Inspection Yuan were divided into positions and edited into a book, titled "Departments and Departments," and given to the heads of departments, departments, prefectures, and counties after passing the examination. The writers of the articles in the selection of supervisors and students also served as prefectural and county officials, school principals, and teachers, starting from Taixingxuan.

古文：三年一朝，考核等第，自沂水杜泽始。
现代文：三年一朝，考核等第，自沂水杜泽开始。
English: On the morning of the first day of the third year, the assessment, etc. will begin from Shishimizu Duze.

古文：此洪武时铨政大略也。
现代文：这就是洪武年间的铨政大略。
English: This was the general plan for overthrowing the government during the Hongwu era.

古文：六部初属中书省，权轻，多仰承丞相意指。
现代文：六部最初属于中书省，权势较轻，多仰承丞相的旨意。
English: The six departments originally belonged to the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology. They were less powerful and more subject to the will of the minister.

古文：毅、修及詹同、吴琳、赵好德辈，居吏部称贤，然亦无大建竖。
现代文：滕毅、陈修及詹同、吴琳、赵好德等人，在吏部时可以称得上贤良，但也没有大的建树。
English: Teng Yi, Chen Xiu and Zhantong, Wu Lin, Zhao Haode and others, can be said to be virtuous when they were cadres, but they did not have great achievements.

古文：农人敛手，对曰： 琳是也。 
现代文：至十三年，中书省撤消，各部的权力专一，而吏部为首要。
English: By the thirteenth year, the Ministry of Literature was abolished, and the power of each ministry was concentrated, with the Ministry of Personnel being the most important.

古文：使者以状闻。帝为嘉叹。
现代文：太祖执法严密，余火气因排挤宋讷而被杀，翟善被贬，杜泽被任命为尚书，没几月就被罢免。
English: The great-grandfather enforced the law strictly, Yu Huiqi was killed for ousting Song Ne, Yu Shan was demoted, Du Ze was appointed as Shang Shu, and was dismissed in a few months.

古文：杨思义，不详其籍里。
现代文：唯独李信历任侍郎，担任尚书达两年多，死于官任上。杨思义，不知其籍贯。
English: The only exception was Li Xin, who served as an attendant for more than two years and died in office. Yang Siyi, I don't know where he came from.

古文：太祖称吴王，授起居注。
现代文：太祖称吴王时，授予他起居注。
English: When the great-grandfather called Wu Wang, he granted him a living note.

古文：初，钱谷隶中书省。
现代文：最初，钱谷隶属中书省。
English: At first, Qianya belonged to the Ministry of Literature.

古文：吴元年始设司农卿，以思义为之。
现代文：吴元年，开始设立司农卿，任用了杨思义。
English: In the first year of the Wu Dynasty, the post of Secretary of Agriculture was established, and Yang Siyi was appointed.

古文：明年设六部，改为户部尚书。
现代文：第二年，设置了六部，思义改任户部尚书。
English: In the second year, six departments were set up, and Siyi was transferred to the household department of Shangshu.

古文：大乱之后，人多废业。
现代文：大乱之后，人多废业。
English: After the turmoil, many people left the industry.

古文：思义请令民间皆植桑麻，四年始征其税。不种桑者输绢，不种麻者输布，如《周官》里布法。
现代文：思义请求皇上命令百姓都种植桑麻，四年后才征收税，不种桑者上缴绢，不种麻者上缴布，就如《周官》的里布法。
English: Siyi requested the emperor to order the people to grow mulberry, and only collect the tax after four years. Those who did not grow mulberry would pay the tax, and those who did not grow hemp would pay the tax, just like the rib method in "Zhou Guan."

古文：诏可。帝念水旱不时，缓急无所恃，命思义令天下立预备仓，以防水旱。
现代文：太祖念及不时水旱，缓急没有保障。命思义令天下设立预备仓，以此来防备水旱。
English: The great-grandfather thought that there would be floods and droughts from time to time, and there was no guarantee of delay. He ordered the world to set up a reserve warehouse to prevent floods and droughts.

古文：琬才敏，有心计，年二十七，卒于官。
现代文：思义首先实施，以农桑积贮为当务之急。
English: Siyi will be implemented first, with agricultural mulberry storage as the top priority.

古文：时人惜之。周祯，字文典，江宁人。
现代文：凡他所兴设，虽是太祖的旨意，但他经划详密，当时都称颂他能干。后调任陕西行省参政，死于官任上。周祯，字文典，江宁人。
English: Everything he built, although it was the will of the great-grandfather, he planned in detail, and was praised for his ability at the time. Later, he was transferred to Shaanxi Province to participate in politics, and died in office. Zhou Qi, dictionary, Jiangning people.

古文：元末流寓湖南。
现代文：元朝末年流亡到湖南。
English: He was exiled to Hunan at the end of the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：太祖平武昌，用为江西行省佥事，历大理卿。
现代文：太祖平定武昌，任用他为江西行省佥事，历任大理卿等职。
English: The great ancestor Pingding Wuchang, appointed him as the governor of Jiangxi Province, and successively held the position of Daliqing.

古文：太祖以唐、宋皆有成律断狱，惟元以一时行事为条格，胥吏易为奸，诏祯与李善长、刘基、陶安、滕毅等定律令。少卿刘惟谦、丞周浈与焉。
现代文：太祖认为唐、宋都有成律断狱，唯独元朝以一时行事为条格，官吏容易违法。诏令周祯与李善长、刘基、陶安、滕毅等人制定律令，少卿刘惟谦、丞周浈也参与此事。
English: Taizu believed that both the Tang and Song dynasties had laws to break the prison, but the Yuan Dynasty was the only one to act in a timely manner, and officials were easy to break the law. Zhou Qi and Li Shanzhong, Liu Ji, Tao An, Teng Yi and others formulated the laws and regulations, and Shaoqing Liu Weiqian and Cheng Zhouqi also participated in the matter.

古文：书成，太祖称善。
现代文：书写成后，得到太祖的称赞。
English: After the book was written, it was praised by the great-grandfather.

古文：洪武元年设刑部，以祯为尚书。寻改治书侍御史。
现代文：洪武元年，设置刑部，任命周祯为尚书，不久改任治书侍御史。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, he set up a criminal investigation department, appointed Zhou Qi as his secretary, and soon changed his title to secretary to the emperor.

古文：明年出为广东行省参政。
现代文：第二年出任广东行省参政。
English: The following year, he became a member of the Guangdong Provincial Party Committee.

古文：时省治初开，正官多缺，吏治鲜劝惩。
现代文：当时省治刚开始实行，正官大多空缺，吏治不严厉。
English: At that time, the provincial government had just begun to implement, most of the officials were vacant, and the officials were not strict.

古文：香山丞冲敬有治行，以劳卒官。
现代文：香山丞冲敬治理有政绩，积劳成疾，死于官位上，周祯作文祭奠。
English: Xiangshan Rongjing governance has political achievements, accumulated labor has become a disease, died in office, Zhou Yu's composition is a memorial service.

古文：祯为文祭之，闻者感动。
现代文：闻者感动。
English: Those who heard it were moved.

古文：一时郡邑良吏雷州同知余骐孙、惠州知府万迪、乳源知县张安仁、清流知县李铎、揭阳县丞许德、廉州知府脱因、归善知县木寅，祯皆列其政绩以闻。
现代文：一时郡邑良吏雷州同知余骐孙、惠州知府万迪、乳源知县张安仁、清流知县李铎、揭阳县丞许德、廉州知府脱因、归善知县木寅，周祯列举他们的政绩上奏。
English: At one time, the leaders of the counties and towns were Leizhou Tongzhi Yu Xinsun, Huizhou Zhifu Wandi, Yuyuan Zhixian Zhang Anren, Qingliu Zhixian Li Yan, Jieyang Zhixian Zhe Xu De, Lianzhou Zhifu Deyin, and Guizhan Zhixian Mu Yin. Zhou Yi listed their political achievements.

古文：寅，土司。
现代文：木寅是土司。
English: Mokitora is Toji.

古文：脱因，蒙古人也。
现代文：脱因是蒙古人。
English: It's because he's Mongolian.

古文：于是属吏益劝。
现代文：于是属吏益加努力。
English: As a result, officials have stepped up their efforts.

古文：三年九月召为御史中丞。
现代文：三年九月召为御史中丞。
English: In September of the following year, he was appointed to the post of Goshi chujo.

古文：帝贤之，擢工部侍郎，改刑部。
现代文：不久因病辞官。太祖初即位时，有鉴于元朝的宽纵，使用法律很严，奉行者重足立。
English: When the great-grandfather ascended the throne at the beginning of his reign, the use of the law was very strict due to the leniency of the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：出为徽州府同知，有惠政，卒于官。杨靖，字仲宁，山阳人。
现代文：法律制定以后，吏士开始循守。其后多次修正，都以周祯的书为依据。杨靖，字仲宁，山阳人。
English: After the law was enacted, officials began to follow it. It was subsequently amended many times, all based on Zhou Qi's book. Yang Jing, Zhaozhong Ning, Shanyang people.

古文：洪武十八年进士，选吏科庶吉士。
现代文：洪武十八年，中进士，选拔为吏科庶吉士。
English: In the 18th year of Hongwu, he was promoted to junior high school student, and was selected as an associate member of the cadre.

古文：明年擢户部侍郎。
现代文：第二年提升为户部侍郎。
English: In the second year, he was promoted to the position of head waiter.

古文：时任诸司者，率进士及太学生，然时有不法者。
现代文：当时担任诸司者，一般是进士和太学生，但经常有不法者。
English: At that time, those who served as administrators were generally scholars and students, but there were often illegals.

古文：帝制《大诰》，举通政使蔡瑄、左通政茹瑺、工部侍郎秦逵及靖以讽厉之曰： 此亦进士太学生也，能率职以称朕心。 
现代文：太祖御制《大诰》，举通政使蔡蠧、左通政茹王常、工部侍郎秦逵及杨靖赞扬说： 这也是进士、太学生，但都能尽职而令我满意。 
English: He praised the production of "Daxing" by the great-grandfather, the political envoys Cai Jun, Zuo Tong Zheng Ru Wang Chang, the chamberlain of the Ministry of Industry, Qin Hui and Yang Jing, saying: "This is also a scholar and a student, but I am satisfied that they can do their duty.

古文：其见称如此。
现代文：他受到了如此的称赞。
English: Shifang has been praised so much.

古文：二十二年进尚书。
现代文：二十二年晋升为尚书。
English: He was promoted to Shangshu in 1922.

古文：明年五月诏在京官三年皆迁调，著为令。
现代文：第二年五月，诏令在京为官三年的都能升迁，并成为规定。
English: In May of the following year, the Imperial Edict stipulated that officials in Beijing could be promoted after three years of service.

古文：乃以刑部尚书赵勉与靖换官。谕曰： 愚民犯法，如啖饮食。
现代文：太祖要刑部尚书赵勉和杨靖交换官职，谕曰： 百姓犯法，就如饮食一样容易。
English: The great-grandfather wanted the Minister of Justice, Shangshu Zhao, to exchange official posts with Yang Jing. He said: "It is as easy for the people to break the law as to eat.

古文：设法防之，犯者益众。
现代文：设法防范，违犯者越多。
English: The more you try to prevent it, the more offenders there will be.

古文：推恕行仁，或能感化。
现代文：推恕行仁，或许能感化。
English: It may be possible to influence them by encouraging them to practice benevolence.

古文：自今惟犯十恶并杀人者死，余罪皆令输粟北边。 
现代文：从今开始，犯有十恶罪并杀人的一律处死，犯其他罪的都让他们向北边输粟。 
English: From now on, all those who have committed the ten evil crimes and murder will be executed, and those who have committed other crimes will be made to send corn to the north.

古文：又曰： 在京狱囚，卿等覆奏，朕亲审决，犹恐有失。
现代文：又说 ：在京城的囚犯，你等应复奏，我亲自审决，尚怕有所失误。
English: He also said, "Prisoners in the capital, you should wait for the reenactment, I will judge it myself, I am afraid of making a mistake."

古文：在外各官所拟，岂能尽当？
现代文：在外地的官吏所思量的，又怎么能全面呢？
English: How can the thoughts of officials in foreign countries be comprehensive?

古文：卿等当详谳，然后遣官审决。 
现代文：你们应详细上奏，然后派遣官吏审决。 
English: You should play it in detail and then send officials to judge.

古文：靖承旨研辨，多所平反。
现代文：杨靖领旨研办，大多数得以平反。
English: Yang Jing led the investigation, and most of them were rehabilitated.

古文：帝嘉纳之。
现代文：太祖予以嘉奖，并采纳了他的意见。
English: The emperor appreciated and adopted his opinion.

古文：尝鞫一武弁，门卒捡其身，得大珠，属僚惊异。
现代文：曾抓了一武弁，卫兵搜了他的身，得到一颗大珠，属僚十分惊异。
English: Once he caught a Wuben, the guards searched his body and got a large bead. His colleagues were very surprised.

古文：靖徐曰： 伪也，安有珠大如此者乎。 
现代文：杨靖却慢条斯理地说： 这是假的，怎么能有如此大的珠呢？ 
English: Yang Jing said slowly and rationally, "This is a fake. How can there be such a big bead?"

古文：不献朕求悦，一善也；不穷追投献，二善也；不奖门卒，杜小人侥幸，三善也；千金之珠卒然而至，略不动心，有过人之智，应变之才，四善也。 
现代文：千金之珠猝然而至，毫不动心，说明杨靖有过人之智，应变之才，这是其四。 
English: The sudden arrival of the pearl of great value, without moving, shows that Yang Jing has superior wisdom and ability to cope with change. This is the fourth.

古文：二十六年，兼太子宾客，并给二禄。
现代文：二十六年兼任太子宾客，并给予二份俸禄。
English: In 1926, he also served as a guest of the Crown Prince and was given two salaries.

古文：已，坐事免。
现代文：不久，犯罪被免职。
English: He was soon relieved of his duties.

古文：会征龙州赵宗寿，诏靖谕安南输粟饷师。
现代文：正遇上征讨龙州赵宗寿，诏令杨靖晓谕安南为军队输送军粮。
English: When Longzhou Zhao Zongshou was being conscripted, Yang Jing ordered Annan to send military food to the army.

古文：以白衣往。
现代文：杨靖穿上白衣前往。
English: Yang Jing put on a white coat and set off.

古文：安南相黎一元以陆运险艰，欲不奉诏。
现代文：安南相黎一元以陆运险艰为由，欲不奉行诏令。
English: On the grounds that land transport was too dangerous, Annan-Sang-Lien-Yuan did not want to carry out the edict.

古文：靖宣示反覆开谕，且许以水运。
现代文：杨靖反复宣讲谕令，并允许他水运。
English: Yang Jing repeatedly proclaimed the edict and allowed him to sail.

古文：一元乃输粟二万，至沲海江别造浮桥以达龙州。
现代文：一元于是输送粮食二万石至沲海江，另造浮桥到达龙州。
English: One yuan was used to transport 20,000 koku of grain to the Bohai River, and another to build a pontoon bridge to Longzhou.

古文：帝大悦，拜靖左都御史。
现代文：太祖十分高兴，任命杨靖为左都御史。
English: The great-grandfather was very pleased and appointed Yang Jing as the left capital's imperial historian.

古文：靖公忠有智略，善理繁剧，治狱明察而不事深文。
现代文：杨靖公忠而有智略，善于处理繁杂的事务，治狱明察而不事深文。
English: Yang Jing was loyal and prudent. He was good at handling complicated affairs. He was a good observer but not a deep thinker.

古文：宠遇最厚，同列无与比。
现代文：他得到的宠遇最丰厚，同行没有人可与他比。
English: He is the most favored, and no one in the company can compare with him.

古文：乃北面拱手，称 圣恩，圣恩 云。单安仁，字德夫，濠人。
现代文：三十年七月因为乡人代改诉状而犯罪，被御史弹劾。太祖大怒，于是赐他死罪。终年三十八岁。单安仁，字德夫，濠州人。
English: In July of the thirtieth year, he was impeached by the imperial court because he committed a crime by altering the complaint on behalf of the villagers. The great-grandfather was furious, so he gave him the death penalty. Thirty-eight years old. Shan Anren, aka Dev, from Zhangzhou.

古文：少为府吏。
现代文：少年就担任府吏。
English: The boy became a prefectural official.

古文：元末江淮兵乱，安仁集义兵保乡里，授枢密判官。
现代文：元朝末年，江淮兵荒马乱，安仁召集义兵保卫乡里，元朝廷授予他枢密判官。
English: At the end of the Yuan Dynasty, when soldiers of the Jianghuai and Huai armies clashed, Anren called up volunteers to defend the countryside. The Yuan Dynasty awarded him the title of Privy Councillor.

古文：从镇南王孛罗普化守扬州。
现代文：跟从镇南王孛罗普化镇守扬州。
English: He followed the king of the south of the town, Luo Pu, and became the town guard of Yangzhou.

古文：时群雄四起，安仁叹曰： 此辈皆为人驱除耳。王者之兴，当自有别。 
现代文：当时群雄四起，安仁感叹道： 这些人都是为渊驱鱼，为虫驱雀罢了，王者兴起，不会是这样的。 
English: At that time, a group of heroes rose up, and Anren lamented, "These people are just chasing fish for the abyss and birds for the insects. If a king arises, it won't be like this."

古文：镇南王为长枪军所逐，安仁无所属，闻太祖定集庆，乃曰： 此诚是已。 
现代文：镇南王被长枪军赶跑，安仁没有归属，听说太祖平定集庆，就说 ：这才是王者。 
English: King Zhenan was chased away by the Long Rifle Army, and Anren did not belong to it. When he heard that the founder of the dynasty was celebrating, he said, "This is the king."

古文：率众归附。
现代文：率众前去归附。
English: and led the crowd forward to join them.

古文：太祖悦，即命将其军守镇江。
现代文：太祖十分高兴，就命令他率军镇守镇江。
English: The great-grandfather was very pleased and ordered him to lead the army to guard the town.

古文：严饬军伍，敌不敢犯。
现代文：安仁严格整顿军队，敌人不敢进犯。
English: Anren strictly reorganized the army, and the enemy did not dare to attack.

古文：移守常州。其子叛，降张士诚，太祖知安仁忠谨，弗疑也。
现代文：移守常州，他的儿子叛降了张士诚，太祖深知安仁忠谨，也没怀疑他。
English: After moving to Changzhou, his son rebelled against Zhang Shicheng. The great-grandfather was well aware of Anren's loyalty and did not doubt him.

古文：久之，迁浙江副使。
现代文：一段时间后，晋升为浙江副使。
English: After a period of time, he was promoted to deputy envoy of Zhejiang Province.

古文：悍帅横敛民，名曰 寨粮 ，安仁置于法。
现代文：有悍帅横敛百姓，名目叫寨粮，安仁绳之于法。
English: There is a brave general who is encircling the people. His name is Zhai Liang, and his code is An Renzhe.

古文：进按察使，征为中书左司郎中，佐李善长裁断。
现代文：晋升为按察使，征召为中书左司郎中，辅佐李善长裁断政事。
English: He was promoted to the rank of inspector, and was called up to be the assistant secretary of the Left Division of the Middle School of Calligraphy, and the assistant of Li Shanchang to decide on political affairs.

古文：调瑞州守御千户，入为将作卿。
现代文：调任瑞州守御千户，入宫任将作卿。
English: He was transferred to the position of the governor of Mizushima Province, and was appointed to the palace as the lord of the castle.

古文：洪武元年擢工部尚书，仍领将作事。
现代文：洪武元年，提升为工部尚书，仍统领将作事务。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, he was promoted to Shangshu of the Ministry of Industry, and still led the general affairs.

古文：安仁精敏多智计，诸所营造，大小中程，甚称帝意。
现代文：安仁精敏，足智多谋，诸多营造工程，大小及程式，十分符合太祖的心意。
English: Anren is sensitive, resourceful, and many construction projects, sizes and programs, are very much in line with the mind of the great-grandfather.

古文：逾年改兵部尚书。
现代文：过了一年改任工部尚书，因年老请求还乡。
English: After a year, he was reassigned to the Ministry of Industry and Commerce, and requested to return to his hometown due to his old age.

古文：请老归，赐田三千亩，牛七十角，岁给尚书半俸。
现代文：赐给三千亩田，七十头牛，每年供给尚书俸禄的一半。
English: He gave him 3,000 mu of farmland, 70 head of cattle, and half of his annual stipend.

古文：六年起山东参政。恳辞，许之。
现代文：六年，任山东参政，恳切推辞，得到许可。
English: In six years, he was appointed to Shandong to participate in politics, earnestly declined, and received permission.

古文：家居，尝奏请浚仪真南坝至朴树湾，以便官民输挽；疏转运河江都深港以防淤浅；移瓜州仓廒置扬子桥西，免大江风潮之患。
现代文：回老家闲居，曾上奏请求疏通仪真南坝至朴树湾的水道，以便利官民运输，疏通运河江都深港以防止淤塞，迁移瓜洲粮仓至扬子桥西，以免受大江风潮的侵害。
English: He returned to his hometown and lived idly. He once petitioned for the dredging of the waterway from the Yizhen South Dam to Pakshu Bay to facilitate the transportation of government officials and the public, the dredging of the Yangtze River Canal to prevent silting, and the relocation of the Guazhou granary to the west of the Yangtze River Bridge to protect it from the tidal wave of the Yangtze River.

古文：帝善其言，再授兵部尚书，致仕。
现代文：太祖认为他的建议很好。再次授予他兵部尚书。他辞官不做。
English: The great-grandfather thought his suggestion was good. He was once again awarded the title of General of the Army. He did not resign.

古文：初，尚书阶正三品。
现代文：最初，尚书官阶是正三品。
English: In the beginning, the official rank of Shangshu was Zheng Sanpin.

古文：十三年，中书省罢，始进为正二。而安仁致仕在前。
现代文：十三年，中书省撤消后，尚书升为正二品，但安仁辞官在此之前。
English: Thirteen years later, after the abolition of the Chinese Book Ministry, Shang Shu was promoted to Senior Second Class, but Anren resigned before that.

古文：久之，致仕。永乐初，入朝，遇疾卒。薛祥，字彦祥，无为人。
现代文：太祖念及安仁的功勋，二十年，特授予他为资善大夫。当年十二月，安仁去世，终年八十五岁。薛祥，字彦祥，无为人。
English: The great-grandfather thought about Anren's merits for 20 years and specially awarded him the title of doctor of merits. In December of that year, Anren passed away at the age of 85. Xue Xiang, also known as Yan Xiang, was a nobody.

古文：从俞通海来归。渡江，为水寨管军镇抚。数从征有功。
现代文：跟从俞通海前来归附，渡长江时担任水寨管军镇抚，多次从征有功。
English: He came to Guizhou from Shantonghai, and served as the governor of Shuizhai when he crossed the Yangtze River. He has made contributions to the war effort many times.

古文：洪武元年转漕河南，夜半抵蔡河。
现代文：洪武元年，转漕至河南。半夜抵达蔡河，强盗突然到来。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, he rowed to Henan. Arriving at Caihe in the middle of the night, the robbers suddenly arrived.

古文：贼骤至，祥不为动，好语谕散之。
现代文：薛祥不为所动，好语劝散了强盗。
English: Unmoved, Xue Xiang used kind words to dissuade the robbers.

古文：帝闻大喜。
现代文：太祖听说后十分高兴。
English: The great-grandfather was very happy to hear this.

古文：以方用兵，供亿艰，授京畿都漕运使，分司淮安。
现代文：派他带兵，任职十分卖力，授予京畿都漕运使，负责淮安。
English: He was assigned to lead the troops, worked very hard, and was awarded the post of Gyeonggi Provincial Transportation Commissioner, responsible for Huai'an.

古文：浚河筑堤，自扬达济数百里，徭役均平，民无怨言。
现代文：浚河修筑堤坝，自扬州到济南长达数百里，徭役分担十分均平，百姓没有什么怨言。
English: It takes hundreds of miles from Yangzhou to Jinan to build a dike on the Jianhe River, and the share of dredging work is very even, and the people have no complaints.

古文：有劳者立奏，授以官。
现代文：有功劳的立即上奏，授予官职。
English: Those with meritorious achievements will be promoted to higher posts immediately.

古文：元都下，官民南迁，道经淮安，祥多方存恤。
现代文：元朝都城被攻下，官民纷纷南迁，途经淮安，薛祥多方给予方便。
English: When the capital city of the Yuan Dynasty was captured, the government and the people moved south one after another, passing through Huai'an, which was facilitated by Xue Xiang in many ways.

古文：山阳、海州民乱，驸马都尉黄琛捕治，诖误甚众。
现代文：山阳、海州民乱，驸马都尉黄琛前去平定，牵连了许多人。
English: The Sanyang and Haizhou civil wars, which Lieutenant Huang Qi went to quell, involved many people.

古文：祥会鞫，无验者悉原之。
现代文：薛祥会同审讯，无罪的就当场释放。
English: Xue Xiang will be tried together, and those who are not guilty will be released on the spot.

古文：治淮八年，民相劝为善。
现代文：薛祥治理淮安八年，百姓都称赞他。
English: Xue Xiang governed Huai'an for eight years, and the people praised him.

古文：及考满还京，皆焚香，祝其再来，或肖像祀之。
现代文：到他任期满后回京城时，百姓焚香希望他再来，有的还祭祀他的肖像。
English: When he returned to Beijing after his term of office, the people burned incense to wish him to come again, and some even sacrificed his portrait.

古文：八年授工部尚书。
现代文：八年授予工部尚书。
English: Eight years later, he was awarded the title of Shang Shu by the Ministry of Industry.

古文：时造凤阳宫殿。
现代文：当时正在修建凤阳宫殿。
English: At that time, the Fengyang Palace was under construction.

古文：帝坐殿中，若有人持兵斗殿脊者。
现代文：皇上坐在殿上，就好像有人持兵器相斗于屋脊上。
English: The emperor was sitting in the palace, as if someone were fighting on the roof with a weapon.

古文：太师李善长奏诸工匠用厌镇法，帝将尽杀之。
现代文：太师李善长奏说诸工匠用厌镇法，皇上将要把他们全部杀了。
English: Grand Master Li Shan Changsoo said that all the craftsmen were using the method of disgust, and the emperor was going to kill them all.

古文：祥为分别交替不在工者，并铁石匠皆不预，活者千数。
现代文：薛祥分别清理出因交替而不在工地上的工匠，还有铁石匠也都没有参预，这样幸免一死的有千余人。
English: Xue Xiang separately cleaned up the craftsmen who were not on the construction site due to the alternation, and the masons did not participate in advance, so more than a thousand people were spared from death.

古文：营谨身殿，有司列中匠为上匠，帝怒其罔，命弃市。
现代文：营造谨身殿时，有关衙门把中匠列为成上匠。太祖对他们这种欺上行为十分愤怒，命令将他们斩首弃市。
English: During the construction of the main hall, the gatekeepers listed the middle craftsmen as the top craftsmen. The great ancestor was very angry at their deception and ordered them to be beheaded and thrown out of the city.

古文：祥在侧，争曰： 奏对不实，竟杀人，恐非法。 
现代文：薛祥在一旁急辩说 ：因奏请不如实，竟而杀人，恐怕不符国法吧？ 
English: On the sidelines, Xue Xiang hastily argued: Because the play is not as good as the reality, killing people, I'm afraid, is not in accordance with the national law?

古文：得旨用腐刑。
现代文：得到命令将用腐刑。
English: Corruption will be used if ordered.

古文：祥复徐奏曰： 腐，废人矣，莫若杖而使工。 
现代文：薛祥又奏请说 ：腐刑，就是废人，还不如鞭杖他们，然后要他们上工。 
English: Xue Xiang also made a plea: "Corruption punishment, that is, wasting people, is not as good as whipping them, and then asking them to work.

古文：帝可之。
现代文：得到了太祖的许可。
English: The emperor agreed to his request.

古文：明年改天下行省为承宣布政司。
现代文：第二年把天下的行省改为承宣布政司。
English: In the second year, he changed the title of the world's leading province to that of the world's leading government.

古文：以北平重地，特授祥，三年治行称第一。为胡惟庸所恶，坐营建扰民，谪知嘉兴府。
现代文：以北平为重地，特别授职于薛祥。三年薛祥的政绩列为第一，因被胡惟庸诽谤营建扰民而犯罪，被贬任嘉兴府知府。
English: With Beiping as the focal point, a special post was given to Xue Xiang. In three years, Xue Xiang's political achievements were ranked first. Because he was slandered by Hu Weirong for building and disturbing the people and committing crimes, he was demoted to the post of Jiaxing prefectural governor.

古文：惟庸诛，复召为工部尚书。
现代文：胡惟庸被被杀以后，再次被召为工部尚书。
English: After Hu Wei Rong was killed, he was once again summoned to the Ministry of Works.

古文：寻致仕去。俊，十七年免。
现代文：太祖说： 谗臣迫害你，你为什么不申诉呢？ 回答说 ：我不知实情。 
English: The great-grandfather said, "Why didn't you complain when your vassals persecuted you?" He replied, "I don't know the truth."

古文：而逵于二十五年九月坐事自杀。
现代文：第二年犯罪被杖打致死，天下的人为之哀痛。
English: The following year, the criminal was beaten to death with a cane. People all over the world mourned his death.

古文：唐铎，字振之，虹人。
现代文：他有儿子四人，被贬至琼州，于是成为了琼山人。唐铎，字振之，虹人。
English: He had four sons, was relegated to Qiongzhou, and thus became a Qiongshan person.

古文：太祖初起兵，即侍左右。
现代文：太祖刚刚起兵时，他就侍奉在太祖的左右。
English: He served at his grandfather's side when he had just raised an army.

古文：守濠州，从定江州，授西安县丞。召为中书省管勾。
现代文：镇守濠州，从定江州，授予西安县丞，召为中书省管勾。
English: He was awarded the title of Xi'an county magistrate from Jingjiang county and the title of China's provincial magistrate from Shandong province.

古文：洪武元年，汤和克延平，以铎知府事，拊辑新附，士民安之。
现代文：洪武元年，汤和攻克延平，任命唐铎为知府，抚辑新附，使士民都安居乐业。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, Tang He conquered Yanping and appointed Tang Jie as the prefect, with the newly added Fuxi, so that the people could live and work in peace.

古文：居三年，入为殿中侍御史，复出知绍兴府。
现代文：任职三年，召入朝中为殿中侍御史，再次出任绍兴府知府。
English: He held the post for three years, was called to the Imperial Court to serve as court chamberlain, and again served as the governor of Shaoxing Prefecture.

古文：六年十二月，召拜刑部尚书。
现代文：六年十二月召为刑部尚书。
English: In December of the sixth year, he was summoned to the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：明年改太常卿。
现代文：第二年改任太常卿。
English: In the following year, he was appointed to the position of Taijo-kyo.

古文：丁母忧，特给半俸。
现代文：在为母守丧期间，特许供给半禄。
English: During the period of mourning for his mother, a special half-loan was provided.

古文：十四年，服阕，起兵部尚书。
现代文：十四年，上朝参拜，被任命为兵部尚书。
English: In the 14th year, he visited the Shang Dynasty and was appointed as a military official.

古文：明年，初置谏院，以为谏议大夫。
现代文：第二年，设置谏院，任命他为谏议大夫。
English: In the second year, he set up the Confucius Institute and appointed him as a doctor of Confucius.

古文：帝尝与侍臣论历代兴废，曰： 使朕子孙如成、康，辅弼如周、召，则可祈天永命。 
现代文：太祖常常和侍臣讨论历代兴衰，说： 使我的子孙如成、康，辅弼如周、召，则可祈天永命。 
English: The great-grandfather often discussed the rise and fall of past generations with his retainers, saying, "If I can make my children and grandchildren prosperous and healthy, and help them succeed and prosper, then I can pray for eternal life."

古文：铎因进曰： 豫教元良，选左右为辅导，宗社万年福也。 
现代文：唐铎因此进言说： 自小就打好根基，选左右大臣为辅导，国家就可以万年福贵。 
English: Therefore, Tang Xuan said: since childhood, we should lay a good foundation, choose the right and left ministers as guidance, and the country can be prosperous for thousands of years.

古文：帝又谓铎曰： 人有公私，故言有邪正。
现代文：太祖又对唐铎说 ：人有公私，故言有邪正。
English: The great-grandfather also said to Tang Xuan, "People have private and public interests, and there are evil and righteous words.

古文：正言务规谏，邪言务谤谀。 
现代文：正言务规谏，邪言务谤谀。 
English: Correct speech is regulated, and evil speech is slandered.

古文：铎曰： 谤近忠，谀近爱。不为所眩，则谗佞自远。 
现代文：唐铎说： 诽谤接近忠良，阿谀接近厚爱，只要不被他们所迷惑，谗佞之人自然远去。 
English: Don Juan said, "Slander is close to loyalty, and flattery is close to love. As long as one is not deceived by them, the slanderer will naturally go away."

古文：未几，左迁监察御史。请选贤能京官遍历郡县，访求贤才，体察官吏。选历练老成、望隆名重者，居布政、按察之职。
现代文：不久，晋升为监察御史，请求挑选贤能的京官深入偏僻的郡县，访求贤才，体察官吏，挑选阅历丰富、老练、名望很高的人，委以布政、按察之重任。
English: Soon, he was promoted to the position of inspector of imperial history. He requested the selection of capable Beijing officials, went deep into remote counties and counties, visited talents, inspected officials, selected people with rich experience, sophistication, and high reputation, and entrusted with the important task of spreading politics and inspecting.

古文：帝从之。
现代文：得到皇上的批准。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：既复擢为右副都御史，历刑、兵二部尚书。
现代文：又提升为右副都御史，历任刑、兵二部尚书。
English: He was also promoted to the right vice-governor of the capital, and all of his successors were punished with imprisonment and two years of military service.

古文：二十二年，置詹事院，命吏部曰： 辅导太子，必择端重之士。三代保傅，礼甚尊严。
现代文：二十二年，设置詹事院，命令吏部说 ：辅导太子，一定要挑选端重之士，三代保傅，礼甚尊严。
English: In the 22nd year, Zhanji Academy was set up, and the cadre department was ordered to say: "To tutor the crown prince, we must select a dignified person, a third-generation tutor, with great dignity."

古文：兵部尚书铎，谨厚有德量，以为詹事。食尚书俸如故。 
现代文：兵部尚书唐铎，谨厚有德量，以为詹事，仍享受尚书俸禄。 
English: Shangshu Tang Yao of the Military Department, who was honorable and virtuous, still enjoyed Shangshu's salary.

古文：以铎尝请豫教故也。
现代文：唐铎请求豫教故里。
English: Tang Xuan asked Yu Jiao to return to his hometown.

古文：其年，致仕。
现代文：当年，辞官。
English: In that year, he was appointed to the position of dictionary officer.

古文：二十六年，起太子宾客，进太子少保。
现代文：二十六年，为太子宾客，进而任太子少保。
English: In 1926, he became a guest of the Crown Prince and was appointed as the Crown Prince's Junior Bodyguard.

古文：二十八年，龙州土官赵宗寿以奏郑国公常茂死事不实，被召，又不至。帝怒，命杨文统大军往讨。而命铎招谕。
现代文：二十八年，龙州土官赵宗寿因上奏郑国公常茂死事不实，被召而又不至，皇上大怒，命杨文统率大军前去征讨，而命唐铎前去招谕。
English: In the 28th year, Longzhou local official Zhao Zongshou was summoned but did not come because the death of Zheng Guogong Changmao had been falsely reported. The emperor was furious and ordered Yang Wen to lead an army to investigate, and ordered Tang Xuan to summon.

古文：铎至，廉得茂实病死，宗寿亦伏罪来朝。
现代文：唐铎到了以后，证实了常茂已病死，宗寿也已伏罪来朝。
English: After Tang Xuan arrived, he confirmed that Changmao had died of illness, and that Zoshu had also come to the North to commit a crime.

古文：乃诏文移兵征奉议诸州叛蛮，即以铎参议军事。
现代文：于是诏令杨文移兵征讨奉议诸州叛蛮，任命唐铎参议军事。
English: As a result, the emperor ordered Yang Wen to recruit soldiers to fight against the rebellious states, and appointed Tang Jun as a military councilor.

古文：逾月，诸蛮平。
现代文：过了一个月，诸蛮得以平定。
English: After a month, Zhuanmen was pacified.

古文：铎相度形势，请设奉议卫及向武、河池、怀集、武仙、贺县诸处守御千户所，镇以官军。
现代文：唐铎相度形势，请求在奉议卫及向武、河池、怀集、武仙、贺县诸处设置守御千户所，派官军镇守。
English: When the situation in Tang and Qin Dynasties was at its peak, it was requested to set up thousands of guard posts and send officers and soldiers to guard towns in Bongyewei, Xiangwu, Hechi, Huaiji, Wuxian and He counties.

古文：皆报可。
现代文：都得到许可。
English: All replied in the affirmative.

古文：铎为人长者，性慎密，不妄取予。
现代文：唐铎为人总似长者，性格缜密，不妄加取予。
English: Tang Xuan always seemed to be an elderly man, with a meticulous personality, and he would not take advantage of others.

古文：帝以故旧遇之，尝曰： 铎自友及臣至今三十余年，其与人交不至变色，绝亦不出恶声。 
现代文：太祖以老朋友对待他，曾说： 唐铎从朋友到臣子至今已有三十余年了，他与人交往，不会翻脸，也绝对不会恶言伤人。 
English: The great-grandfather treated him as an old friend and once said, "It has been more than thirty years since Tang Jun changed from a friend to a courtier. He mingles with people, never turns his back, and never speaks ill of others.

古文：又曰： 都御史詹徽刚断嫉恶，胥吏不得肆其贪，谤讪满朝。
现代文：又说： 都御史詹徽刚断，疾恶如仇，胥吏不得肆意贪污，但满朝都诽谤他。
English: He also said, "The governor of the capital, Zhanhui, is stubborn, evil is his enemy, and officials must not engage in wanton corruption, but the whole court has slandered him."

古文：唐铎重厚，又谓懦而无为。
现代文：唐铎重厚，又说他懦而无为。
English: Tang Xuan was a dignified man, and he also said that he was a coward and did nothing.

古文：人心不古，有若是耶！ 
现代文：人心不古，怎么会到今天这一步啊！ 
English: The human heart is not ancient, how did it come to this step today!

古文：帝曰： 国家得一卒易，得一士难。 
现代文：后来詹徽犯罪被杀，但唐铎得到的恩遇一直没有改变。
English: Later, Zhan Hui was killed for his crimes, but the favors Tang Jun received have not changed.

古文：遂除之。然此皆特恩云。
现代文：三十年七月死于京师，终年六十九岁。
English: He died at the age of sixty-nine in July, 30 years old.

古文：开济，字来学，洛阳人。
现代文：太祖赠送礼物十分丰厚，命官府护送他归葬故里。开济，字来学，洛阳人。
English: The great-grandfather gave a very rich gift, and ordered the government to escort him to his burial place. Kaizhi, a word to learn, Luoyang people.

古文：元末为察罕帖木儿掌书记。
现代文：元末是察罕帖木儿的掌管书记。
English: At the end of the Yuan Dynasty, he was the secretary-in-charge of Cahan Timur.

古文：洪武初，以明经举。授河南府训导，入为国子助教。
现代文：洪武初年，受人举荐，授予河南府训导，入宫为国子助教。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, he was recommended by others and awarded the Henan Provincial Teaching Award. He entered the palace as a Kuniko assistant teacher.

古文：以疾罢归。
现代文：因疾免职回乡。
English: Due to illness, he was relieved of duty and returned to his hometown.

古文：十五年七月，御史大夫安然荐济有吏治才，召试刑部尚书，逾年实授。
现代文：十五年七月，御史大夫安然举荐开济有治理之才，召任试刑部尚书，一年之后，正式任命。
English: In July of the fifteenth year, he was appointed to the Probation Department, and formally appointed a year later.

古文：济以综核为己任，请天下诸司设文簿，日书所行事，课得失。又各部勘合文移，立程限，定功罪。
现代文：开济以综核为己任，奏请天下诸司设置文簿，每天都记载做过的事情，考核得失，又令各部勘合文移，设立程限，评定功罪。
English: With the overall assessment as his responsibility, he asked all departments in the world to set up books, record what they have done every day, assess the gains and losses, and order the departments to transfer the documents, set the limits, and evaluate the merits and demerits.

古文：又言，军民以细故犯罪者，宜即决遣。
现代文：又说，军民以细故犯罪的，应立即谪贬。
English: He also said that military personnel and civilians who commit crimes for petty reasons should be reprimanded immediately.

古文：数月间，滞牍一清。
现代文：数月之间，堆集的文牍一扫而清。
English: Within a few months, the piles of papers were cleared away.

古文：帝大以为能。
现代文：太祖十分赞赏他的能力。
English: His great-grandfather was full of praise for his ability to sing.

古文：会都御史赵仁言，曩者以 贤良方正 、 孝弟力田 诸科所取士列置郡县，多不举职。宜核其去留。
现代文：都御史赵仁建议，从前以 贤良方正 、 孝弟力田 诸科所取之士列置郡县，大多不能胜任，应考核他们，决定去留。
English: Metropolitan Historian Zhao Ren suggested that most of the people who were previously listed as counties and counties by virtue of their virtues, such as the virtuous Fang Zheng and the filial brother Li Tian, were not competent. They should be examined and decided to stay.

古文：济条议，以 经明行修 为一科、 工习文词 为一科、 通晓书义 为一科、 人品俊秀 为一科、 练达治理 为一科、 言有条理 为一科。六科备者为 上 ；三科以上为 中 ；不及三科者为 下 。
现代文：开济分别予以商议，以 经明行修 为一科， 工习文词 为一科 ，通晓书义 为一科 ，人品俊秀 为一科 ，练达治理 为一科 ，言有条理 为一科，六科完备的为上，三科以上的为中，不及三科的为下。
English: The candidates will be discussed separately, with the following as the subjects to be selected: clear and correct writing as the first subject, technical study of words as the first subject, knowledge of writing as the first subject, good character as the first subject, good governance as the first subject, well-organized speech as the first subject, complete six subjects as the top subject, more than three subjects as the middle subject, and less than three subjects as the bottom subject.

古文：从之。
现代文：得到许可。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：济敏慧有才辩。凡国家经制、田赋、狱讼、工役、河渠事，众莫能裁定，济一算画，即有条理品式，可为世守。
现代文：开济敏慧有才辩，凡国家经制、田赋、狱讼、工役、河渠等事务，众人没有能裁定的，开济一算画，就形成了条理品式，并且可为世代遵守。
English: Kaizhi was a shrewd and talented debater. In matters that could not be decided by the general public, such as state administration, land allocation, prison litigation, labor service, and river canals, Kaizhi's calculations formed a well-organized style that could be observed for generations.

古文：以故帝甚信任，数备顾问，兼预他部事。
现代文：因此太祖十分信任他，多次召他为顾问，并兼理其他部的一些事务。
English: Therefore, the great-grandfather trusted him very much, called him as a consultant many times, and concurrently handled some affairs of other departments.

古文：人以是忌之，谤议滋起。
现代文：人们因此顾忌，诽谤之声四起。
English: As a result, people are wary, and slanderous voices are on the rise.

古文：然济亦深刻，好以法中伤人。
现代文：然而开济深沉尖刻，善于以律法伤人。
English: However, Kaizhi is deep and sharp, and is good at hurting people with the law.

古文：尝奉命定诈伪律。
现代文：曾奉命制定诈伪律。
English: He was once ordered to draw up a law on fraud.

古文：济议法巧密。
现代文：皇上说 ：制定严密的法律约束百姓，可以吗？ 
English: The emperor said: Is it possible to enact strict laws to restrict the people?

古文：帝曰： 张密网以罗民，可乎？ 又设籍曰 寅戌之书 ，以程僚属出入。
现代文：又设籍，称为 寅戌之书 ，以衡量僚属出入。
English: He also set up a register, known as the 寅之書, to keep track of his subordinates.

古文：帝切责曰： 古人以卯酉为常。今使趋事者朝寅暮戌。奉父母，会妻子，几何时耶！ 
现代文：太祖斥责说： 古人以卯西为常，今使趋事者朝寅暮戌，奉父母，会妻子，几何时耶？ 
English: The great-grandfather reprimanded, "The ancients used to live in the West, but now they live in the East and the West. They serve their parents and their wives. How long has this been going on?

古文：又为榜戒其僚属，请揭文华殿。
现代文：又张榜告诫其僚属，请求张贴在文华殿。
English: There was also a poster warning his colleagues and requesting that it be posted in the Wenhua Hall.

古文：帝曰： 告诫僚属之言，欲张殿廷，岂人臣礼？ 
现代文：太祖说： 告诫僚属的言论，欲张贴在殿廷，难道是人臣之礼吗？ 
English: The great-grandfather said, "Is it the courtesy of a vassal to post a speech admonishing a subordinate in the palace?

古文：济惭谢。
现代文：开济谢罪。
English: Kageji made a shamefaced apology.

古文：寻令郎中仇衍脱囚死，为狱官所发。
现代文：不久令郎中仇衍妄图开脱死囚，被狱官发觉。
English: Not long after, his son-in-law, Qian Yan, was found by prison officials to be attempting to free a death row inmate.

古文：济与侍郎王希哲、主事王叔徵执狱官，毙之。
现代文：开济和侍郎王希哲、主事王叔征把狱官捉拿击毙了。
English: Kaizhi and his servant, Wang Xizhe, and the chief warden, Wang Shusei, killed the warden, Fangna.

古文：其年十二月，御史陶垕仲等发其事，且言： 济奏事时，置奏劄怀中，或隐而不言，觇伺上意，务为两端，奸狡莫测。
现代文：当年十二月，御史陶篨仲等揭发了此事。就说 ：开济奏时事，把奏章藏在怀中，有时隐藏着而不做声，察看皇上意思，模棱两可，奸狡莫测。
English: In December of that year, Emperor Taozhong and others exposed the matter. They said: to play current affairs, to hide the score in the bosom, sometimes hidden without making a sound, to inspect the emperor's intention, ambiguous, devious.

古文：役甥女为婢。
现代文：把他的外甥女奴役为婢。
English: He made his niece his slave.

古文：妹早寡，逐其姑而略其家财。 
现代文：他妹妹早已守寡，赶走了姑姑并吞并了她的家财。 
English: His sister, already a widow, had ousted her aunt and taken over the family fortune.

古文：帝怒，下济狱，并希哲、衍等皆弃市。
现代文：太祖大怒，把开济投入了狱中，并把王希哲、仇衍等人斩首。
English: The great-grandfather flew into a rage, threw Kaizi into prison, and beheaded Wang Xizhe, Qianyan and others.

