古文：二十有七年春，公如齐。
现代文：二十七年春季，昭公去到齐国。
English: In the spring of the 27th year, Shoko went to Qi Province.

古文：公至自齐，居于郓。
现代文：昭公回到鲁国，居住在郓地。
English: Zhaogong returned to the State of Lu and lived in Shunde.

古文：夏四月，吴弑其君僚。
现代文：夏季四月，吴国弑杀了他们的国君。
English: In the summer of April, the Wu Guozhen killed their sovereign.

古文：楚杀其大夫郤宛。
现代文：楚国杀了自己的大夫郤宛。
English: The state of Chu killed its own doctor, Yuawan.

古文：秋，晋士鞅、宋乐祁犁、卫北宫喜、曹人、邾人、滕人会于扈。
现代文：秋季，晋国的士鞅、宋国的乐祁犁、卫国的北宫喜、曹人、邾人、滕人在扈地会见。
English: In autumn, the Shifu of Jin, the Le of Song, the Bei Gongxi of Wei, the Cao, the Yao, and the Teng meet in Loudi.

古文：冬十月，曹伯午卒。
现代文：冬季十月，曹伯午去世。
English: In the winter of October, Cao Boao passed away.

古文：邾快来奔。
现代文：邾娄国的快逃到鲁国。
English: Flee quickly from the country of Sin to the country of Lu.

古文：公如齐。
现代文：昭公去到齐国。
English: Shoko went to Qi Province.

古文：二十七年春，公如齐。
现代文：二十七年春季，昭公到齐国去。
English: In the spring of the 27th year, Shoko went to Qi Province.

古文：公至自齐。处于郓，言在外也。
现代文：昭公从齐国回来，住在郓地，这是说住在国都以外。
English: Zhaogong returned from Qi and lived in Shunde, which means he lived outside the capital.

古文：吴子欲因楚丧而伐之。使公子掩馀、公子烛庸帅师围潜。使延州来季子聘于上国，遂聘于晋，以观诸侯。
现代文：吴王想要借楚国有丧事的机会进攻楚国，派公子掩馀、公子烛庸领兵包围潜地，派延州来季子到中原各国聘问。季子到晋国聘问，以观察诸侯的态度。
English: The king of Wu wanted to take the opportunity of the funeral of the State of Chu to attack the State of Chu. He sent his nobles to hide the remains and his nobles to lead the troops to surround the hiding place. He sent his nobles to Yanzhou to invite Qizi to Central Plains countries. Qizi came to invite Qizi to Jin Province to observe the attitude of the princes.

古文：楚莠尹然、工尹麇帅师救潜。左司马沈尹戌帅都君子与王马之属以济师，与吴师遇于穷。
现代文：楚国的莠尹然、工尹麇领兵救援潜地，左司马沈尹戌率领都邑亲兵和王马的部属增援部队，和吴军在穷地相遇。
English: Chu's Zou Yinran and Gong Yinran led the troops to the rescue hiding place, while Zuo Sima's subordinate Shen Yinran led the troops from the capital and Wang Ma's subordinate reinforcement troops, and met the Wu army in the badlands.

古文：令尹子常以舟师及沙汭而还。左尹郤宛、工尹寿帅师至于潜，吴师不能退。
现代文：令尹子常带着水军到了沙汭而回来，左尹郤宛、工尹寿领兵到达潜地，吴军不能撤退。
English: Yin Zichang led the navy to Shajing and returned, while Zuo Yin Shuan and Gong Yin Shou led the army to the hiding place, and the Wu army could not retreat.

古文：吴公子光曰： 此时也，弗可失也。 
现代文：吴国的公子光说： 这是机会，不能失去了。 
English: "This is an opportunity that must not be lost," said Prince Guang of Wuzhong.

古文：告设诸曰： 上国有言曰，不索何获？
现代文：告诉鱄设诸说： 中原的国家有话说： 不去寻求，哪里能够得到王位。 
English: Tell that to the people of the Central Plains, who have a saying: "If you don't go looking for it, where can you get a throne?"

古文：我，王嗣也，吾欲求之。
现代文：我是王位的继承人，我就要寻求。
English: I'm the heir to the throne, and I'm going to find out.

古文：事若克，季子虽至，不吾废也。 
现代文：事情如果成功，季子虽然来到，也不能废掉我。 
English: If things work out, even if Kiko comes, she can't replace me.

古文：鱄设诸曰： 王可弑也。
现代文：鱄设诸说： 君王是可以杀掉的。
English: It is said that a king can be killed.

古文：母老子弱，是无若我何。 光曰： 我，尔身也。 
现代文：但是我母亲老了，儿子还小，我拿他们没有办法。 公子光说： 我，就是你。 
English: But my mother is old, and my son is young, and I can't do anything about them.He said: I am you.

古文：夏四月，光伏甲于堀室而享王。
现代文：夏季，四月，公子光在地下室埋伏甲士而设享礼招待吴王。
English: In the summer, in April, Prince Guang ambushed the knights in the basement and held a banquet to invite King Wu.

古文：王使甲坐于道，及其门。
现代文：吴王让甲士坐在道路两旁，一直到大门口。
English: King Wu made the knights sit on both sides of the road all the way to the gate.

古文：门阶户席，皆王亲也，夹之以铍。羞者献体改服于门外。执羞者坐行而入，执铍者夹承之，及体以相授也。
现代文：大门、台阶、里门、坐席上，都是吴王的亲兵，手持短剑护卫在吴王两旁，端菜的人在门外先脱光衣服再换穿别的衣服，端菜的人膝行而入，持剑的人用剑夹着他，剑尖几乎碰到身上，然后才递给上菜的人。
English: The gate, the steps, the inner gate, and the seats were all guarded by Wu Wang's personal soldiers. Guards with short swords were on both sides of Wu Wang. The person serving the dishes first stripped naked outside the door and then changed into other clothes. The person serving the dishes entered on his knees. The person holding the sword held him with the sword, the tip of the sword almost touching his body, before handing it to the person serving the dishes.

古文：光伪足疾，入于堀室。鱄设诸置剑于鱼中以进。抽剑刺王，铍交于胸，遂弑王。
现代文：公子光假装有病，躲进地下室，鱄设诸把剑放在鱼肚子里然后进入，抽出剑猛刺吴王，两旁亲兵的短剑也交叉刺进了鱄设诸的胸膛，结果还是杀死了吴王。
English: Xiang Ziguang pretended to be ill and hid in the basement. Zou Shizhu put the sword in the fish's stomach and then entered. He pulled out the sword and stabbed Wu Wang. The short swords of the soldiers on both sides also crossed and stabbed into Zou Shizhu's chest. As a result, he still killed Wu Wang.

古文：阖庐以其子为卿。
现代文：阖庐让鱄设诸的儿子做了卿。
English: He made the sons of Ujisetsu into nobles.

古文：季子至，曰： 苟先君无废祀，民人无废主，社稷有奉，国家无倾，乃吾君也。
现代文：季子到达，说： 如果先君没有废弃祭祀，百姓没有废弃主子，土地和五谷之神有人奉献，国家和家族没有颠覆，他就是我的国君。
English: Ji Zi arrived and said, "If the former emperor did not abandon the sacrificial rites, the people did not abandon their lord, the land and the god of grain were dedicated by someone, and the country and the family were not overthrown, he is my sovereign.

古文：吾谁敢怨？
现代文：我敢怨恨谁？
English: Whom shall I hate?

古文：哀死事生，以待天命。
现代文：哀痛死去的，事奉活着的，以等待天命。
English: I can only mourn the dead, serve the living, and deal with the arrangement of fate.

古文：非我生乱，立者从之，先人之道也。 
现代文：不是我发起了动乱，谁立为国君，我就服从谁，这是先代的常法。 
English: If a calamity is not of one's own making, then one should obey the newly-installed monarch. This is the principle of our predecessors.

古文：复命哭墓，复位而待。
现代文：到坟墓前哭泣复命，回到自己原来的官位上等待命令。
English: To the grave weeping for his life, back to his old post awaiting orders.

古文：吴公子掩馀奔徐，公子烛庸奔钟吾。楚师闻吴乱而还。
现代文：吴国的公子掩馀逃奔徐国，公子烛庸逃亡钟吾，楚军听说吴国发生动乱就收兵返回。
English: The prince of the State of Wu fled to the State of Xu, and the prince of the State of Chu fled to the State of Zhongwu. When the army of the State of Chu heard that there was a disturbance in the State of Wu, they withdrew and returned.

古文：郤宛直而和，国人说之。
现代文：郤宛正直而和善，国内的人们都喜欢他。
English: He is honest and kind, and people all over the country like him.

古文：鄢将师为右领，与费无极比而恶之。
现代文：鄢将师做右领，和费无极勾结，憎恨郤宛。
English: Zou made his division commander his right-hand man, colluded with Fei without end, and hated Zou Wan.

古文：令尹子常贿而信谗。无极谮郤宛焉，谓子常曰： 子恶欲饮子酒。 
现代文：令尹子常贪求财物而相信诬蔑人的话，费无极就诬陷郤宛，对子常说： 郤宛要请您喝酒。 
English: Because Yin Zi was always greedy for wealth and believed in slandering people, he spent a lot of effort to frame Gong Wan. He often said to his son: "Gong Wan wants to buy you a drink."

古文：又谓子恶： 令尹欲饮酒于子氏。 
现代文：又对郤宛说： 令尹要到您家里去喝酒。 
English: He also said to Gong Wan: Ling Yin wants to go to your house to drink.

古文：子恶曰： 我，贱人也，不足以辱令尹。
现代文：郤宛说： 我是下贱的人，不足以让令尹到这里来。
English: Haowan said, "I am a lowly person, I am not good enough for Lingyin to come here.

古文：令尹将必来辱，为惠已甚。
现代文：令尹如果真想要前来，赐给我的恩惠就太大了。
English: If Ling Yin really wants to come, the favor given to me is too great.

古文：吾无以酬之，若何？ 
现代文：我没有东西奉献，怎么办？ 
English: I don't have anything to donate, what should I do?

古文：无极曰： 令尹好甲兵，子出之，吾择焉。 
现代文：费无极说： 令尹喜欢皮甲武器，您拿出来，我来挑选。 
English: It was extremely difficult to say: Ling Yin likes leather armor weapons, you take it out, I'll choose it.

古文：取五甲五兵。曰： 寘诸门，令尹至，必观之，而从以酬之。 
现代文：选取了五领皮甲，五种武器，说： 放在门口，令尹到来，一定要观看，就乘机献给他。 
English: He selected five kinds of armor and five kinds of weapons, and said, "Put them at the door, let Yin come, be sure to watch, and take the opportunity to dedicate them to him."

古文：及飨日，帷诸门左。无极谓令尹曰： 吾几祸子。子恶将为子不利，甲在门矣，子必无往。
现代文：等到举行享礼的那一天，郤宛把皮甲武器放在门边的帐幔里，费无极对令尹说： 我几乎让您遭祸，郤宛打算对您不利，皮甲和武器都放在门口了。您一定不要去！
English: On the day of the ceremony, Zou Wan put his leather armor and weapons in the curtain by the door. With great effort, he said to Ling Yin, "I almost caused you a disaster. Zou Wan intends to harm you. The leather armor and weapons are all at the door. You must not go!"

古文：且此役也，吴可以得志，子恶取赂焉而还，又误群帅，使退其师，曰： 乘乱不祥。 
现代文：况且这次潜地的战役，本来楚国可以得志于吴国，郤宛受了贿赂而回来，又贻误了将领们，让他们退兵，说 乘人动乱而进攻，不吉祥 。
English: Moreover, in this hidden battle, originally, the state of Chu could have won against the state of Wu, but Shuan received a bribe and came back. He also delayed the generals and made them withdraw, saying that it was not auspicious to attack by taking advantage of human turmoil.

古文：吴乘我丧，我乘其乱，不亦可乎？ 
现代文：吴国乘我们有丧事，我们乘他们的动乱，不也是可以的吗？ 
English: Wu can take advantage of our mourning, and we can take advantage of their turmoil. Isn't that okay?

古文：令尹使视郤氏，则有甲焉。
现代文：令尹让人到郤氏那里看动静，就看到有皮甲和武器在门口。
English: Ling Yin asked someone to go to Mr. Zou's place to see what was going on, and saw that there were leather armor and weapons at the door.

古文：不往，召鄢将师而告之。将师退，遂令攻郤氏，且爇之。
现代文：令尹不去郤家了，便召见鄢将师并把情况告诉他，鄢将师退下，就下令攻打郤氏，并且放火烧了他的家。
English: After ordering Yin not to go to Zou's house, he summoned Zou and told him the situation. When Zou retreated, he ordered to attack Zou and set fire to his house.

古文：子恶闻之，遂自杀也。
现代文：郤宛听到消息，就自杀了。
English: On hearing the news, Yan Wan committed suicide.

古文：国人弗爇。令曰： 不爇郤氏，与之同罪。 
现代文：国内的人们不肯放火，鄢将师下令说： 不烧郤家，和他同罪。 
English: People in the country did not want to set fire to the house, so the commander of the imperial army issued an order saying, "If you do not burn my house, you will be guilty of the same crime."

古文：或取一编菅焉，或取一秉秆焉，国人投之，遂弗爇也。令尹炮之。尽灭郤氏之族党，杀阳令终与其弟完及佗与晋陈及其子弟。
现代文：有人拿着一张席子，有人拿着一把稻草，国内的人们都拿去扔掉，因此没有烧着，令尹派人烧了郤家，把郤氏的族人、亲属全都消灭，杀了阳令终和他的弟弟完及佗，还杀了晋陈和他的子弟。
English: Someone was holding a mat, someone was holding a handful of straw, and people in the country were taking and throwing them away, so they did not burn. He ordered Yin to send people to burn Yan's house, to exterminate all the members and relatives of the Yan clan, to kill Yang Lingfa and his brother Gan and Yan, and to kill Jin Chen and his son.

古文：晋陈之族呼于国曰： 鄢氏、费氏自以为王，专祸楚国，弱寡王室，蒙王与令尹以自利也。
现代文：晋陈的族人在国都里喊叫说： 鄢氏、费氏以君王自居，专权而祸乱楚国，削弱孤立王室，蒙蔽君王和令尹来为自己牟利。
English: Jin Chen's tribesmen shouted in the capital: "The Zou and Fei clans have made themselves kings, and their autocratic power has brought disaster to Chu, weakened and isolated the royal family, and hoodwinked the king and Ling Yin to make a profit for themselves.

古文：令尹尽信之矣，国将如何？ 
现代文：令尹全都相信他们了，国家将要怎么办？ 
English: If everyone believes them, what will the country do?

古文：令尹病之。
现代文：令尹很担心。
English: Yin was worried.

古文：秋，会于扈，令戍周，且谋纳公也。
现代文：秋季，晋国士鞅、宋国乐祁犁、卫国北宫喜、曹人、邾人、滕人在扈地会见，这是为了命令去成周戍守，同时商量送回昭公。
English: In the autumn, the Jin statesmen, the Song statesmen, the Northern Palace Guards, the Cao people, the Qin people, and the Teng people met in the Qin area, in order to order them to go to the Zhou Dynasty, and at the same time to discuss sending them back to Zhaogong.

古文：宋、卫皆利纳公，固请之。
现代文：宋国、卫国都认为送回昭公对自己国家有利，坚决地请求。
English: Both the Song Dynasty and the Qing Dynasty thought that it would be beneficial to their country to send back Zhaogong, and they resolutely requested it.

古文：范献子取货于季孙，谓司城子梁与北宫贞子曰： 季孙未知其罪，而君伐之，请囚，请亡，于是乎不获。
现代文：范献子在季孙那里取得了财礼，对司城子梁和北宫贞子说： 季孙还不知道他自己的罪过，而国君攻打他，他请求囚禁、请求逃亡，在当时都得不到同意。
English: Fan Xianzi obtained a financial gift from Qisun, and said to Sijong Ziliang and Beigu Sadako: Qisun did not know his own sin, and the sovereign attacked him. He asked to be imprisoned and asked to escape, but he did not get consent at that time.

古文：君又弗克，而自出也。夫岂无备而能出君乎？
现代文：国君又没有战胜他，就自己出国了，难道没有防备而能赶走国君吗？
English: The sovereign did not defeat him and left the country on his own. Was there no defense to drive the sovereign away?

古文：季氏之复，天救之也。休公徒之怒，而启叔孙氏之心。
现代文：季氏恢复原来的职位，是上天挽救了他，止息了昭公亲兵的愤怒，启发了叔孙氏的心意。
English: It was heaven that saved him, stopped the anger of Akihiko's soldiers, and inspired his uncle's heart.

古文：不然，岂其伐人而说甲执冰以游？
现代文：不是这样，难道那些人攻打别人反而脱下皮甲手拿箭筒在那里玩？
English: Is it not true that those who attack others take off their armor and play with their quivers?

古文：叔孙氏惧祸之滥，而自同于季氏，天之道也。
现代文：叔孙氏害怕祸难的泛滥，因而自愿和季氏站在一边，这是上天的意志。
English: It is God's will that Uncle Sun, fearing the spread of the calamity, voluntarily stood on the side of Ji.

古文：鲁君守齐，三年而无成。
现代文：鲁国的国君请求齐国帮助，三年没有成功。
English: The ruler of the State of Lu requested help from the State of Qi, but was unsuccessful for three years.

古文：季氏甚得其民，淮夷与之，有十年之备，有齐、楚之援，有天之赞，有民之助，有坚守之心，有列国之权，而弗敢宣也，事君如在国。
现代文：季氏很受百姓的拥护，淮夷亲附他，有打十年的准备，有齐国、楚国的支援，有上天的赞助，有百姓的帮助，有坚守的决心，有诸侯一样的权势，但没有敢把事情公开，事奉国君像在国内一样。
English: Ji was well supported by the people, and Huaiyi was personally attached to him. He had ten years of preparation, the support of Qi and Chu, the patronage of heaven, the help of the people, the determination to hold fast, and the same power as the princes, but he did not dare to make things public. He served the sovereign as he did at home.

古文：故鞅以为难。
现代文：所以鞅认为难办。
English: That's why I think it's difficult.

古文：二子皆图国者也，而欲纳鲁君，鞅之愿也。
现代文：您二位都是为国家考虑的人，想要送回鲁国国君，这也是鞅的愿望。
English: Both of you are people who think about the country and want to send back the Lu Guo Guo Jun, which is also the wish of the dragonfly.

古文：请从二子以围鲁，无成，死之。 
现代文：请跟随您二位去包围鲁国，如果不成功，我就为此而死。 
English: Please follow the two of you to encircle the country of Lu. If it doesn't work, I will die for it.

古文：二子惧，皆辞。
现代文：这二位害怕，都辞谢了。
English: Both of them were afraid and declined.

古文：乃辞小国，而以难复。
现代文：于是就辞退小国，而答复晋国说事情不好办。
English: So he dismissed the small country, and replied to the Jin country that things were not easy.

古文：孟懿子、阳虎伐郓。郓人将战。
现代文：孟懿子、阳虎进攻郓地，郓地人准备迎战。
English: Meng Xunzi and Yang Hu attacked Handan, and the people of Handan were ready to fight.

古文：子家子曰： 天命不慆久矣。使君亡者，必此众也。
现代文：子家子说： 天命无可怀疑已经很久了，让国君逃亡的，一定就是这批人。
English: Zi Jia Zi said, "There is no doubt that it has been a long time since the fateful day. It must have been this group of people who made the sovereign flee."

古文：天既祸之，而自福也，不亦难乎？
现代文：上天已经降祸于国君，而要自己求福，不也是很困难吗？
English: Heaven has already brought down disaster on the sovereign, but to seek one's own blessing, isn't it also very difficult?

古文：犹有鬼神，此必败也。
现代文：如果有鬼神，这一战必然失败。啊！
English: If there are ghosts and gods, this battle will inevitably fail.

古文：呜呼！
现代文：没有希望了吧！
English: Alas!

古文：为无望也夫，其死于此乎！ 公使子家子如晋。
现代文：恐怕要死在这里了吧！ 昭公派子家子到晋国去。
English: I'm afraid I'm going to die here! Akira sent his son and daughter to go to Jin Province.

古文：公徒败于且知。
现代文：昭公的亲兵在且知被打败。
English: Akihiko's own soldiers were defeated at Katakuchi.

古文：楚郤宛之难，国言未已，进胙者莫不谤令尹。沈尹戌言于子常曰： 夫左尹与中厩尹莫知其罪，而子杀之，以兴谤，至于今不已。
现代文：楚国郤宛的祸难，国内的怨言没有停止，进胙肉的人无不指责令尹，沈尹戌对令尹子常说： 左尹和中厩尹，没有人知道他们的罪过，而您杀了他们，招致指责，到现在没有停止。
English: The calamity of Chu Guowan, the domestic complaints have not stopped, the people who entered the meat have all accused Ling Yin, and Shen Yunyang often said to Ling Yin Zi: Zuo Yin and Zhongmai Yin, no one knows their sins, and you killed them, attracted criticism, and have not stopped until now.

古文：戌也惑之。仁者杀人以掩谤，犹弗为也。今吾子杀人以兴谤而弗图，不亦异乎？
现代文：戌很怀疑：仁爱的人杀了人来掩盖指责，他还不干呢，现在您杀了人来招致指责，而不考虑补救办法，不也很奇怪吗？
English: I'm very suspicious: isn't it strange that a benevolent person killed someone to cover up accusations, and he didn't do it, and now you kill someone to attract accusations, without considering remedies?

古文：夫无极，楚之谗人也，民莫不知。
现代文：那个费无极，是楚国的坏人，百姓没有不知道的。
English: There is no way that the people did not know that he was a hard-working, bad man from the state of Chu.

古文：去朝吴，出蔡侯朱，丧大子建，杀连尹奢，屏王之耳目，使不聪明。
现代文：去掉朝吴、赶走蔡侯朱、丧失太子建、杀害连尹伍奢，遮蔽君王的耳目，让他听不清看不明。
English: Remove the Emperor Wu, drive away Cai Hou Zhu, lose Prince Jian, kill Lian Yin Wuxia, cover the ears and eyes of the monarch, and make him unable to hear or see.

古文：不然，平王之温惠共俭，有过成、庄，无不及焉。
现代文：如果不是这样，平王的温和仁慈，恭敬节俭，有超过成王、庄王而没有不及他们的地方。
English: If this were not the case, the gentleness, benevolence, respect, and frugality of King Ping would surpass that of King Cheng and King Zhuang, and not fall short of them.

古文：所以不获诸侯，迩无极也。
现代文：所以还得不到诸侯的拥戴，是由于接近了费无极。
English: That's why they haven't won the support of the lords yet, because it was extremely difficult to get close to them.

古文：今又杀三不辜，以兴大谤，几及子矣。
现代文：现在又杀了三个无罪的人，招致了极大的指责，几乎要牵涉到您身上了。
English: Now you've killed three more innocent people, and you're getting a lot of blame, and it's almost getting to you.

古文：子而不图，将焉用之？
现代文：而您不去想办法，哪里还用得着您？
English: And if you don't find a solution, where else can you be of use?

古文：夫鄢将师矫子之命，以灭三族，国之良也，而不愆位。
现代文：鄢将师假传您的命令，消灭了三个家族。这三个家族，都是国家杰出的良材，在位没有过错。
English: General Gong misrepresented your order and wiped out three families. These three families are all outstanding talents of the country, and there is no fault on the throne.

古文：吴新有君，疆埸日骇，楚国若有大事，子其危哉！
现代文：吴国新近立了国君，边境一天天紧张。楚国如果发生战事，您恐怕危险了！
English: A new sovereign has recently been installed in the State of Wu, and the border is becoming increasingly tense. If war breaks out in the State of Chu, I'm afraid you will be in danger!

古文：知者除谗以自安也，今子爱谗以自危也，甚矣其惑也！ 
现代文：聪明人消除诬陷来使自己安定，现在您喜欢谗人来使自己危险，您的昏庸也太过份了！ 
English: Clever people eliminate the frame-up to make themselves stable, now you like to beat people to make yourself dangerous, your stupor is too much!

古文：子常曰： 是瓦之罪，敢不良图。 
现代文：令尹子常说： 这是我的罪过，岂敢不好好想一下！ 
English: Rinchen Dorjee Rinpoche often said, "This is my fault. Don't you dare to think about it!

古文：九月己未，子常杀费无极与鄢将师，尽灭其族，以说于国。谤言乃止。
现代文：九月十六日，令尹子常杀了费无极和鄢将师，把他们的族人全部消灭了，来让国内的人们高兴，于是怨谤的言论就停止了。
English: On September 16th, Yin Zichang ordered Fei Wujiang and Zou Zheng to kill Fei Wujiang and Zou Zheng, and wiped out all their tribesmen to make the people in the country happy, so the slanderous speech stopped.

古文：冬，公如齐，齐侯请飨之。
现代文：冬季，昭公到齐国去，齐景公请求设享礼招待他。
English: In the winter, Shao Gong went to Qi Province, and Qi Jing Gong requested that he be invited.

古文：子家子曰： 朝夕立于其朝，又何飨焉？
现代文：子家子说： 每天早晚都在他的朝廷上，又设享礼干什么？
English: His son said, "What's the point of being at his court every morning and evening, and giving out presents?

古文：其饮酒也。 
现代文：还是喝酒吧。 
English: Or drink in a bar.

古文：乃饮酒，使宰献而请安。
现代文：于是就喝酒，让宰臣向昭公敬酒，自己却请求退席。
English: As a result, he drank alcohol and asked the vice-minister to make a toast to Akimoto, but he asked to leave the table.

古文：子仲之子曰重，为齐侯夫人，曰： 请使重见。 
现代文：子仲的女儿名叫重，是齐景公的夫人，齐景公说： 请让重出来见您。 
English: Zizhong's daughter, whose name was Chong, was the wife of Qi Jinggong. Qi Jinggong said, "Please let Chong come out to see you."

古文：子家子乃以君出。
现代文：子家子就带着昭公出去了。
English: The children went out with Akihiko.

古文：十二月，晋籍秦致诸侯之戍于周，鲁人辞以难。
现代文：十二月，晋国的籍秦把诸侯的戍卒送到成周，鲁国人用发生祸难为理由，辞谢不去。
English: In December, Qin, a native of Jin, sent the vassals of the princes to Cheng Zhou. The people of Lu used the disaster as a reason not to go.

