古文：武王问太公曰： 引兵深入诸侯之地，与敌人临水相拒，敌富而众，我贫而寡，逾水击之则不能前，欲久其日则粮食少，吾居斥卤之地，四旁无邑又无草木，三军无所掠取，牛马无所刍牧，为之奈何？ 
现代文：武王询问太公说： 率领军队深入敌国境内，与敌军隔河对峙，敌人物资充足，兵力众多，我军物资匮乏，兵力寡少。我想渡河进攻，却无力前进；我想拖延时日，又缺少粮食。而且我军处于荒芜贫瘠的盐碱之地，附近既没有城邑也没有草木，没有地方可以掠夺物资，没有地方可以放养牛马，应该怎么办呢？ 
English: King Wu asked the Grand Duke, "What should I do if I lead an army deep into the enemy territory and confront the enemy across the river? The enemy is well-equipped and has a large number of troops, while our army is short of supplies and has few troops. I want to cross the river to attack, but I can't move forward. I want to delay the time, but I don't have enough food. Moreover, our army is in a barren and barren saline land, there are no towns or trees nearby, there is no place to loot supplies, there is no place to raise cattle and horses. What should I do?"

古文：太公曰： 三军无备，牛马无食，士卒无粮，如此者，索便诈敌而亟去之，设伏兵于后。 
现代文：太公答道： 军队没有战备，牛马没有饲料，士兵没有粮食，在此情况下，应当寻找机会，欺骗敌人，迅速向别处转移，并在后面设置埋伏以防敌人追击。 
English: The father-in-law replied, "When the army is unprepared for battle, when the oxen and horses have no fodder, and the soldiers have no grain, you should look for opportunities to deceive the enemy, quickly move to other places, and set up ambushes behind to prevent the enemy from pursuing.

古文：武王曰： 敌不可得而诈，吾士卒迷惑，敌人越我前后，吾三军败而走。
现代文：武王问： 如果敌人不上当，我军士兵迷惑恐惧，敌人进攻我军前后，我全军溃退败逃，应该怎么办？ 
English: King Wu asked: What should we do if the enemy is not fooled, our soldiers are confused and afraid, the enemy attacks our army before and after, and our whole army is defeated and retreats?

古文：为之奈何？ 太公曰： 求途之道，金玉为主，必因敌使，精微为宝。 
现代文：太公答道： 这时寻求退路的方法，主要是用金银财宝引诱敌人前来掠夺，同时贿赂敌方使者。此事必须精密细致，不使敌人察觉最为重要。 
English: The lady-in-waiting replied: At this time, the way to find an escape route is mainly to use gold, silver and treasure to lure the enemy to come and plunder, and at the same time bribe the enemy's emissaries. This matter must be precise and meticulous, and it is most important not to make the enemy aware.

古文：武王曰； 敌人知我伏兵，大军不肯济，别将分队以逾于水，吾三军大恐，为之奈何？ 
现代文：武王问： 敌人已经侦查到我军设有埋伏，大军不肯渡河，另派一支小部队渡河向我军进攻，我全军震恐，应该怎么办？ 
English: King Wu asked: The enemy has already detected that our army has set up an ambush, the large army refuses to cross the river, another small army is sent to cross the river to attack our army, our whole army is terrified, what should we do?

古文：太公曰： 如此者，分为冲陈，便兵所处，须其毕出，发我伏兵，疾击其后，强弩两旁，射其左右。
现代文：太公答道： 在这种情况下，我军应部署为四武冲阵，配置在方便作战的地方，待敌军全部渡河后，出动我方伏兵，猛烈攻击敌人侧后，强弩从两旁射击敌人左右。
English: Taigong replied, "In this case, our army should be deployed as a four-armed storming formation, positioned in a convenient place for combat. After all the enemy troops have crossed the river, we should send out our ambush troops, violently attack the enemy side, and forcefully shoot the enemy from both sides.

古文：车骑分为鸟云之陈，备其前后，在三军疾战。
现代文：同时把我战车和骑兵布列为鸟云之阵，戒备前后，使全军猛烈战斗。
English: At the same time, I put my chariot and cavalry cloth as a cloud of birds, alert before and after, so that the whole army fought fiercely.

古文：敌人见我战合，其大军必济水而来，发我伏兵，疾击其后，车骑冲其左右，敌人虽众，其将可走。
现代文：敌人发现我军与它的小部队交战，其大军必会渡河前来。这时就发动我的伏兵，猛烈攻击敌军侧后，并用战车和骑兵冲击敌军两翼，这样，敌军虽然人数众多，定会被打败，其将领也必然逃走。
English: When the enemy perceived that we were engaged with his small force, and that his great army must come over the river, he set my ambush in motion, and made a violent attack upon the rear and flanks of the enemy, with chariots and horsemen, so that the enemy, though numerous, were defeated, and their leaders fled.

古文：凡用兵之大要，当敌临战，必置冲陈，便兵所处。然后以车骑分为鸟云之陈，此用兵之奇也。
现代文：大凡用兵，其基本原则是，当与敌对阵面临作战时，必须把军队布列为冲阵，配置在便于作战的地方，然后再把战车和骑兵布成鸟云之阵，这就是出奇制胜的方法。
English: The basic principle of the great general's use of troops is that when facing a hostile line of battle, the troops must be arranged as a rushing line, arranged in a place convenient for combat, and then the chariots and cavalry are arranged as a cloud of birds. This is the method of surprising victory.

古文：所谓鸟云者，鸟散而云合，变化无穷者也。 
现代文：所谓鸟云，就是像鸟散云合那样，灵活机动，变化无穷。 
English: The so-called bird cloud is like a cloud of scattered birds, flexible and flexible, with endless changes.

古文：武王曰： 善哉！ 
现代文：武王说： 说得真好啊！ 
English: King Wu said, "What a great way to say it!

