古文：田膨郎宣慈寺门子李龟寿潘将军贾人妻荆十三娘许寂丁秀才
现代文：田膨郎宣慈寺门子李龟寿潘将军贾人妻荆十三娘许寂丁秀才
English: Tian Xuan Rong, a disciple of Xuan Zi Temple, Li Gui Shupan, a general, Jia, a married woman, Jing, the thirteenth daughter, Xu Jaking, a scholar

古文：田膨郎
现代文：田膨郎
English: Tashiro

古文：唐文宗皇帝尝宝白玉枕，德宗朝于阗国所贡，追琢奇巧，盖希代之宝。
现代文：唐文宗皇帝非常喜欢的白玉枕，是德宗朝时于阗国进贡的，精雕细刻，非常奇巧。是稀世之宝。
English: Emperor Wenzong of Tang Dynasty was very fond of the white jade pillow. It was a tribute paid by the Emperor Dezong to the State of Min. It is finely carved and very intricate. It is a rare treasure.

古文：置寝殿帐中。一旦忽失所在。
现代文：放置在文宗皇帝寝室的帐中，一天早晨，忽然不见了。
English: It was placed in a drawer in Emperor Wenzong's bedroom, and one morning it suddenly disappeared.

古文：然禁卫清密，非恩渥嫔御莫有至者，珍玩罗列，他无所失。
现代文：宫廷中禁卫严密，不是皇上亲信的人是到不了这里的。殿中陈列的珍宝很多，其他的都没有丢失。
English: The palace is heavily guarded, and anyone who is not a close confidant of the emperor cannot get here. There are many treasures on display in the palace, and the rest have not been lost.

古文：上惊骇移时，下诏于都城索贼。密谓枢近及左右广中尉曰：此非外寇所入，盗当在禁掖。苟求之不获，且虞他变。一枕诚不足惜，卿等卫我皇宫，必使罪人斯得。不然，天子环卫，自兹无用矣。
现代文：皇上觉得惊讶、奇怪，下令在都城中抓贼，秘密地对他身边禁卫说：这不是外人进来干的，盗贼就在宫禁之中，若是抓不到，恐怕有其他的变化，一个白玉枕倒无所谓，你们是保卫皇宫的人，必须抓住这个盗贼，不然的话，你们这些保卫皇上的人，也显得无用。
English: The Emperor was surprised and puzzled. He gave orders to catch the thief in the capital, and secretly said to the guards around him: "This was not done by outsiders. The thief is under house arrest. If he is not caught, I am afraid there will be other changes. A white jade pillow does not matter. You are the people who defend the palace, and you must catch this thief. Otherwise, you, the people who defend the Emperor, will also appear useless."

古文：内宫惶栗谢罪，请以浃旬求捕。
现代文：内宫这些人非常惶恐，请求恕罪，要在十几天内捕到盗贼。
English: The people in the inner palace were very frightened and asked for forgiveness. They wanted to catch the thief within ten days.

古文：大悬金帛购之，略无寻究之迹。圣旨严切，收系者渐多，坊曲闾里，靡不搜捕。
现代文：用金银绸缎来悬赏，但是一点线索也没有，圣旨非常严厉，抓了很多嫌疑犯，街坊巷里都搜遍了。
English: A reward was offered in gold and silver, but there was not a single clue. The decree was very strict, many suspects were arrested, and every nook and cranny was searched.

古文：有龙武二蕃将王敬弘尝蓄小仆，年甫十八九，神彩俊利，使之无往不届。
现代文：龙武二蕃将王敬弘家有一个小仆人，年龄十八九岁，非常英俊，主人让他办事没有办不成的时候。
English: There was a little servant in the Wang Jinghong family. He was eighteen or nineteen years old and very handsome. When his master asked him to do something, he never failed to do it.

古文：敬弘曾与流辈于威远军会宴，有侍儿善鼓胡琴。四座酒酣，因请度曲。
现代文：曾经有一次，王敬弘和他的同僚们在威远军中会宴，有一侍者会弹乐器，四座酒兴正浓时，请他弹奏一曲，以助酒兴。
English: Once upon a time, Wang Jinghong and his colleagues were at a banquet in the army of Wei Yuan. There was a waiter who could play a musical instrument. When the wine was getting strong, he was asked to play a song to help the wine.

古文：辞以乐器非妙，须常御者弹之。
现代文：侍者说：乐器不太好，若是有他常使用的那件就好了。
English: The waiter said: "The instrument isn't very good, but it would be nice to have the one he often uses."

古文：钟漏已传，取之不及，因起解带。小仆曰：若要琵琶，顷刻可至。
现代文：这时，已夜半更深，去取乐器已来不及。敬弘家小仆说，若用琵琶，一会儿就能取来。
English: At this time, it was already late at night, and it was too late to get the musical instrument. A servant of the Keihiro family said that if he used a lute, he could get it in a moment.

古文：敬弘曰：禁鼓才动，军门已锁，寻常汝起不见，何见之谬也？
现代文：敬弘说：禁鼓已经敲过，军门已经关闭，我平常也没见过你有这个本事，你净瞎说。
English: Keihiro said, "The forbidden drum has already been beaten and the military gate has been closed. I've never seen you do this before. You're just talking nonsense."

古文：既而就饮数巡，小仆以绣囊将琵琶而至，座客欢笑。
现代文：于是，大家又开始饮，数巡之后，小仆将琵琶取回来了，大家都很高兴。
English: As a result, everyone started drinking again. After a few rounds, the servant retrieved the lute, and everyone was happy.

古文：南军去左广，往复三十余里，入夜且无行伍，既而倏忽往来。敬弘惊异如失。
现代文：从南军到左广，往返三十多里，夜间又没有同行者，就这么快去而复还，王敬弘颇感惊异。
English: Wang Jinghong was quite surprised to go and return so quickly from the Southern Army to Zuogang, a round trip of more than thirty miles, without a companion during the night.

古文：因言父母皆在蜀川，顷年偶至京国，今欲却归乡里，有一事欲报恩。偷枕者早知姓名，三数日当令伏罪。
现代文：这时，搜捕盗贼的行动越来越严，王敬弘疑心小仆是盗贼。宴会之后已经天亮，王敬弘回家后就问小仆：你在我这里已经好几年，我还不知道你这他又说，父母都在四川，近几年我到京城当差，现在很想回家乡，我想告诉你一件事，用来报答你的恩情，我早就知道偷枕者的姓名，叫他三天内伏法认罪。
English: After the banquet, it was already dawn. When Wang Jinghong returned home, he asked his manservant, "You have been with me for several years. I don't know you yet." He added, "My parents are both from Sichuan. In recent years, I have been working in Beijing, and now I really want to go back to my hometown. I want to tell you something to repay your kindness. I already know the name of the person who stole the pillow, and I want him to confess his crime within three days."

古文：敬弘曰：如此事，即非等闲，遂令全活者不少。未知贼在何许，可报司存掩获否？
现代文：敬弘说：这件事，不能等闲视之，抓来的嫌疑犯不少，就是不知贼在哪里，现在可报上司秘密逮捕他吧？
English: Jinghong said, "This matter cannot be ignored. There are many suspects who have been arrested. I don't even know where the thief is. Can I report to my boss and have him secretly arrested?"

古文：小仆曰：偷枕者田膨郎也。市廛军伍，行止不恒，勇力过人，且善超越。苟非便折其足，虽千兵万骑，亦将奔走。
现代文：小仆说：偷枕的是田膨郎，他有时在市民百姓中，有时混迹军队，行踪不定，勇力过人，尤其善于腾高飞越，若不打断他的腿，就是千军万马，他也能跑掉。
English: The manservant said, "The one who stole the pillow is Tian Xuan Rong. Sometimes he is among the citizens, sometimes he is with the army. His whereabouts are uncertain. He is very brave. He is especially good at soaring and flying. If he doesn't break his legs, he can run away with an army of a thousand horses."

古文：自兹再宿，候之于望仙门，伺便擒之必矣。
现代文：等到夜间，在望仙门藏着，看准机会就可以抓住他。
English: Wait until night, hiding in the Wangxianmen, and seize the opportunity to catch him.

古文：将军随某观之，此事仍须秘密。
现代文：将军我去看看，这事仍须保密。
English: General, I'll check it out. It's still classified.

古文：是时涉旬无雨，向晓尘埃颇甚，车马腾践，跬步间人不相睹。膨郎与少年数辈，连臂将入军门，小仆执球杖击之，歘然已折左足。仰而窥曰：我偷枕来，不怕他人，唯惧于尔。
现代文：这时，十多天没下雨，天快亮时尘土飞扬，人走车行，几步内看不见人影，膨郎与几个青年人，膀挨膀地刚要进入军门，小仆用打球的球杖打他的腿，把左腿打断，膨郎仰面朝天说：我偷了玉枕，不怕别人，就怕你。
English: At this time, it hadn't rained for more than ten days, and when it was almost dawn, the dust was flying. People were walking and driving, and you couldn't see a person within a few steps. Huan Lang and several young men were just about to enter the military gate, arm in arm. The servant hit his leg with a club and broke his left leg. Huan Lang looked up at the sky and said, "I stole the jade pillow. I'm not afraid of others, I'm afraid of you."

古文：既此相值，岂复多言。于是舁至左右军，一款而伏。
现代文：这时，也不用多说什么，埋伏的左右军一拥而上，将他绑走了。
English: At this time, there is no need to say more, the ambushed left and right armies swarmed up and tied him up.

古文：上喜于得贼，又知获在禁旅，引膨郎临轩诘问，具陈常在营内往来。
现代文：皇上很高兴，知道盗贼是在禁旅中抓获的，便把膨郎叫到厅内追问他，他说他常在军营中来往。
English: The emperor was very pleased, knowing that the thief had been caught in the forbidden journey, and he called the swell to the hall to question him. He said that he often came and went in the military camp.

古文：上曰：此乃任侠之流，非常之窃盗。
现代文：皇上说：你是侠客之流的人物，不是一般的盗窃。
English: The emperor said, "You are a knight, not a common thief.

古文：内外囚系数百人，于是悉令原之。
现代文：因此案被捕的数百人，都放回了家。
English: As a result, hundreds of people arrested in the case have been allowed to return home.

古文：小仆初得膨郎，已告敬弘归蜀。
现代文：抓到了膨郎后，小仆便向王敬弘告辞回蜀。
English: After catching the swell, the little servant said goodbye to Wang Jinghong and returned to Shu.

古文：寻之不可，但赏敬弘而已。宣慈寺门子
现代文：皇上要奖赏小仆，找不到他，只好奖赏了王敬弘。宣慈寺门子
English: The emperor wanted to reward a servant, but he couldn't find him, so he rewarded Wang Jinghong. The gate of Xuan Zi Temple

古文：宣慈寺门子不记姓氏，酌其人，义侠徒也。
现代文：宣慈寺门子，不知他的姓名，看他的为人处世，一定是个侠义之士。
English: A disciple of Xuan Zi Temple, I don't know his name, but judging by his life, he must be a man of chivalry.

古文：唐乾符二年，韦昭范登宏词科，昭范乃度支使杨严懿亲。及宴席帟幕器皿之类，假于计司，严复遣以使库供借。
现代文：唐僖宗乾符二年，韦昭范考上了宏词科，他是度支使杨严的至亲，韦昭范准备设宴庆贺，宴会需要的帐篷、器具都是杨严给他借的。
English: In the second year of Emperor Qianfu of Tang Dynasty, Wei Zhaofan was admitted to the Grand Thesaurus. He was a close relative of Yang Yan. Wei Zhaofan was preparing to hold a banquet to celebrate. The tents and utensils needed for the banquet were borrowed by Yang Yan.

古文：其年三月，宴于曲江亭子。供帐之盛，罕有伦拟。
现代文：这年三月，在曲江亭子设宴，规模之大，无与伦比。
English: In March of this year, a banquet was held at Qujiang Pavilion. The scale of the banquet was unparalleled.

古文：时进士同日有宴。都人观者甚众。
现代文：那天，还有新科进士也设宴，京城里来观看的人很多。
English: On that day, there was also a banquet held by the New Science Pioneers, and many people in the capital came to watch.

古文：饮兴方酣，俄睹一少年跨驴而至，骄悖之状，傍若无人。
现代文：酒兴正浓时，看见一个少年骑着驴来了，那骄横之态，旁若无人。
English: He was drinking heavily when he saw a young man riding a donkey. He was so arrogant that no one else was around.

古文：于是俯逼筵席，张目引颈及肩，复以巨垂枨筑佐酒。谑浪之词，所不能听。
现代文：他走到宴席前，拄着马鞭子，伸头瞪眼地要喝酒，放荡的言词，不堪入耳。
English: He went to the banquet, holding a horse whip, head outstretched, eyes wide open, asking for a drink. His debauched words were unbearable to hear.

古文：诸子骇愕之际，忽有于众中批其颊者，随手而堕。于是连加殴击，又夺所执垂，垂之百余。
现代文：大家正在感到惊愕的时候，忽然，座中有一人站起来，打那少年一记耳光，夺下了马鞭，又接二连三地打了一百多鞭子，大家也很气愤，用石头瓦块打那少年。
English: They were all in a state of consternation when suddenly one of them stood up, slapped the boy in the face, seized the horse-whip, and in quick succession beat him with more than a hundred lashes. They were also very angry, and beat the boy with stones and bricks.

古文：众皆致怒，瓦砾乱下，殆将毙矣。当此之际，紫云楼门轧然而开，有紫衣从人数辈驰告曰：莫打。
现代文：眼看要打死的时候，紫云楼的楼门突然开了，有好几个穿紫衣的从人骑马奔来，喊道：不要打了！
English: When they were about to fight to the death, the door of Ziyun Building suddenly opened, and several people in purple robes came running on horseback, shouting: "Stop fighting!

古文：传呼之声相续。
现代文：不要打了！喊声连续不断。
English: Stop it! the shouts went on and on.

古文：又一中贵驱殿甚盛，驰马来救。
现代文：又有一个有身份的人骑马从殿中出来，救那少年。
English: And another man of authority rode out of the temple to rescue the boy.

古文：复操垂迎击，中者无不面仆于地。敕使亦为所垂。既而奔马而反，左右从而俱入门，门亦随闭而已。
现代文：那人又拿起马鞭来迎击，那些被打的人，都趴在地上，敕使也被打了，敕使打马往回返，左右随从者也和他一起跑回了紫云楼，紧闭了楼门。
English: The man picked up the horse whip again to meet the attack. Those who were beaten were all lying on the ground. The messenger was also beaten. The messenger beat the horse back and forth, and the left and right followers also ran back to Ziyun Building with him and closed the building door tightly.

古文：坐内甚忻愧，然不测其来，又虑事连宫禁，祸不旋踵，乃以缗钱束素，召行殴者讯之曰：尔何人？与诸郎君阿谁有素？
现代文：在坐的人是又惊又喜，怕的是事连宫禁，招来灾祸。大家凑了些钱物，问那个打少年的人，是和在座的哪一位平时有交情，才能这么干？
English: The people who were sitting there were both surprised and pleased. They were afraid that the incident would lead to a palace ban and bring disaster. Everyone gathered some money and asked the man who was beating the boy, which one of the people present had a friend in their daily life to be able to do such a thing?

古文：而能相为如此。对曰：某是宣慈寺门子，亦与诸郎君无素，第不平其下人无礼耳。
现代文：那人说：我是宣慈寺门子，和在坐的诸位没有关系，只是看那人太无礼了，打抱不平。
English: The man said, "I am a disciple of Xuan Zi Temple, and I have nothing to do with the people sitting here. I just think that person is too rude, and I am not happy about the hug."

古文：众皆嘉叹，悉以钱帛遗之。
现代文：大家很赞赏他的行为，凑来钱物送给他。
English: Everyone appreciated his actions and came up with money to give him.

古文：复相谓曰：此人必须亡去，不然，当为擒矣。
现代文：大家互相议论，这人必须逃走，不然的话，就要被逮捕。
English: They said to one another, "This man must get away, or he will be arrested."

古文：后旬朔，坐中宾客多有假途宣慈寺门者，门子皆能识之，靡不加敬。竟不闻有追问之者。
现代文：过了十几天后，曾赴宴的宾客有的去宣慈寺，看见了那门子，门子也都认识他们，大家都很敬重他，也没听说再追问那件事。
English: A dozen days later, some of the guests who had been to the banquet went to Xuan Zi Temple and saw the doorknob. The doorknob also knew them. Everyone respected him, and they never heard of the matter being investigated again.

古文：李龟寿
现代文：李龟寿
English: Li Guishou

古文：唐晋公白敏中，宣宗朝再入相。
现代文：唐时，晋公白敏中，到宣宗时当了宰相。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Jin Gong Baimin was in the middle, and became the prime minister when he came to Xuan Zong.

古文：不协比于权道，唯以公谅宰大政。
现代文：他耻于和那些弄权者为伍，唯以典章制度为准绳去处理政事。
English: He is ashamed to be in the company of those who seek power, and only deals with political affairs on the basis of the legal code.

古文：四方有所请，碍于德行者，必固争不允。由是征镇忌焉。
现代文：下面有些官员做了不道德的事，他是绝不允许的，因此，遭到了地方上一些文武官员的忌恨。
English: Some officials below have done immoral things, which is absolutely impermissible, and therefore, they have been hated by some local civil and military officials.

古文：而志尚典籍，虽门施行马，庭列凫锺，而寻绎未尝倦。
现代文：他非常喜欢读书，虽然门庭中车马往来，络绎不绝，公事缠身，但他寻求学问，喜欢读书的精神孜孜不倦。
English: He likes to read very much. Although the chariot and horse traffic in the courtyard is endless and he is busy with business, he seeks knowledge and likes to read tirelessly.

古文：于永宁里第别构书斋，每退朝，独处其中，欣如也。
现代文：他在永宁里住宅旁建了一个书斋，每当退朝时，他一人独坐书斋，心情是非常欣慰的。
English: He built a study next to his house in Yongningli. Whenever he retired, he would sit alone in the study, feeling very relieved.

古文：居一日，将入斋，唯所爱卑脚犬花鹊从。
现代文：一天，他想进书斋，他平时非常喜爱的名叫花鹊的小狗跟着他。
English: One day, he wanted to go to the study, and his beloved little dog, named Huayu, followed him.

古文：既启扉，而花鹊连吠，衔公衣却行。
现代文：刚开门，花鹊就叫起来了，口衔着晋公的衣服不敢往前走。
English: As soon as he opened the door, Hanayo started to scream. He didn't dare to go any further, clutching his father-in-law's clothes.

古文：叱去复至。既入阁，花鹊仰视，吠转急。公亦疑之，乃于匣中拔千金剑，按于膝上。向空祝曰：若有异类阴物，可出相见。吾乃丈夫，岂慑于鼠辈而相逼耶？
现代文：喝退，又回来了，进了书斋，花鹊抬头看，叫声更急，晋公也觉得怪异，便从匣中抽出千金剑，放在膝上，向空中说：不管你是人是鬼，可以出来见我，我是一个正人君子，我不怕那些鼠辈之流来威胁我。
English: He left, came back again, and went into the study. Hua Tuo looked up. The shouting was more urgent, and Jingu also felt strange. He took out a thousand golden swords from the box, put them on his lap, and said to the air: "No matter if you are a human or a ghost, you can come out to see me. I am an upright gentleman, and I am not afraid of those rats and rats to threaten me."

古文：言讫，歘有一物自梁间坠地，乃人也。
现代文：说完，很快有一种东西从梁上落下来，是个人。
English: Having said that, something soon falls from the beam: a person.

古文：朱鬒鬓，衣短后衣，色貌黝瘦。
现代文：这人长一头红发，短打扮，又黑又瘦。
English: The man had red hair, wore a short dress, and was dark and thin.

古文：顿首再拜，唯曰死罪。
现代文：一再向晋公叩拜，还说自己死罪。
English: He repeatedly kowtowed to Shinkong and said that he was guilty of a capital crime.

古文：公止之，且询其来及姓名。
现代文：晋公止住了他，问他来干什么？
English: Jin Gong stopped him and asked him what he had come for.

古文：对曰：李龟寿，卢龙塞人也。或有厚赂龟寿，令不利于公。龟寿感公之德，复为花鹊所惊，形不能匿。
现代文：叫什么名字？那人说：我叫李龟寿，卢龙塞人，别人给我很多钱，让我来杀你，我感到你品德高尚，又被花鹊惊动，无法藏身。
English: What's your name? The man said, "My name is Li Guishou, I'm from Lulong, I've been given a lot of money to kill you. I feel that you're of high moral character, and you can't hide when you're startled by flowers.

古文：公若舍龟寿罪，愿以余生事公。
现代文：你要是能原谅我的罪过，我愿服侍你一辈子。晋公说：我不治你死罪。
English: If you can forgive my sins, I would like to serve you for the rest of my life. Jin Gong said: I will not give you the death penalty.

古文：公谓曰：待汝以不死。遂命元从都押衙傅存初录之。明日诘旦，有妇人至门，服装单急，曳履而抱持襁婴，请于阍曰：幸为我呼李龟寿。
现代文：随后又命令元从都押衙傅存初留用了他。第二天早晨，有一妇人来到门前，穿得很单薄，拖着鞋抱着个吃奶孩子，对看门人说：请为我找李龟寿。
English: The next morning, a woman came to the door, dressed very thinly, wearing slippers and holding a toddler, and said to the doorman: "Please find Li Jiushou for me."

古文：龟寿出，乃妻也。且曰：讶君稍迟，昨夜半自蓟来相寻。
现代文：李龟寿出来了，竟是他的妻子，妻子说：我来晚了，我是昨晚半夜从蓟县来的。
English: Li Kamei came out, and it turned out to be his wife. His wife said, "I'm late. I came from Jixian County at midnight last night."

古文：及公薨，龟寿尽室亡去。
现代文：到晋公死时，李龟寿全家也走了。
English: By the time of Jin Gong's death, Li Guishou's entire family had also left.

古文：潘将军
现代文：潘将军
English: General Pan

古文：京国豪士潘将军住光德坊，本家襄汉间。
现代文：京城里有位很有气魄的潘将军，家住光德坊。他的老家在湖北襄汉之间，常乘船作生意。
English: There is a very spirited General Pan in Beijing, who lives in Guangdefang. His hometown is between Hubei and Xianghan, and he often travels by boat for business.

古文：常乘舟射利，因泊江壖。
现代文：一次，船停靠在江岸，有一个僧人乞斋，留住了数日。
English: Once, when the boat docked on the riverbank, there was a monk begging for food, and he stayed there for several days.

古文：有僧乞食，留止累日，尽心檀施。僧归去，谓潘曰：观尔形质器度，与众贾不同。至于妻孥，皆享厚福。
现代文：他很尽心尽意地伺候僧人。僧人要走时对潘将军说：我看你的气质器度，和一般商人不一样，你的妻子和儿女也会跟你享厚福。
English: When the monk was about to leave, he said to General Pan, "I think your temperament is different from that of an ordinary merchant, and your wife and children will also enjoy good fortune with you."

古文：因以玉念珠一串留赠之，宝之不但通财，他后亦有官禄。
现代文：我赠送你一串玉念珠，你要好好珍藏，不但能使你发财，以后还能有官运。
English: I present you with a string of jade prayer beads. You should treasure them. Not only will they make you rich, but they will also bring you good luck in the future.

古文：既而迁贸数年，遂镪均陶郑。其后职居左广，列第于京师。
现代文：以后他又经商了几年，财产都比得上陶朱公和郑弦了，后来职居左广，家住在京城。
English: After that, he did business for a few more years, and his property was comparable to that of Tao Zhu Gong and Zheng Zhen. Later, he lived in Zuogang, and his family lived in Beijing.

古文：常宝念珠，贮之以绣囊玉合。置道场内。每月朔则出而拜之。
现代文：他非常珍视念珠，贮在绣囊玉盒中，放到寺庙中的道场内，每月初一拿出来拜一次。
English: He treasures his prayer beads very much. They are stored in an embroidered jade box, placed in the dojo in the temple, and brought out once a month on the first day of the month for worship.

古文：一旦开合启囊，已亡珠矣。然而缄封若旧，他物亦无所失。
现代文：一天，打开盒子和绣囊一看，玉念珠却没有了，外面的封条完好如初，其他东西都没损失。
English: One day, when I opened the box and the embroidered bag, I saw that the jade prayer beads were gone, the outer seal was still intact, and nothing else was lost.

古文：于是夺魄丧精，以为其家将破之兆。
现代文：潘将军有些丧魂失魄，认为这是破产的先兆。
English: General Ban is a little despondent, seeing this as a harbinger of bankruptcy.

古文：有主藏者，常识京兆府停解所由王超，年且八十，因密话其事。
现代文：他认识京兆府曾在监狱任过职的王超，王超已年近八十，将军把丢失念珠的事告诉了他。
English: He knows Wang Chao, who used to work in a prison in Beijing. Wang Chao is nearly eighty years old, and the general told him about the lost prayer beads.

古文：超曰：异哉，此非攘窃之盗也。某试为寻之，未知果得否。
现代文：王超说：奇怪呀，这可不是抓一般的盗贼，我试试看吧，不一定能有结果。
English: Wang Chao said, "It's strange. This is not a case of catching a common thief. Let me try it. It may not work."

古文：超他日曾过胜业坊北街。时春雨初霁，有三鬟女子，可年十七八。衣装褴褛，穿木屐，于道侧槐树下。
现代文：王超有一天经过胜业坊北街，当时正是春雨刚过，看见一个扎着三个环形发髻的女子，年龄十七八岁，衣服很破烂，穿一双木底鞋，站在路旁的槐树下。
English: One day, when Wang Chao was passing through the North Street of Shengyefang, just after the spring rain, he saw a woman with three ring-shaped hairpins, aged seventeen or eighteen, with tattered clothes and a pair of wooden shoes, standing under a roadside eucalyptus tree.

古文：值军中少年蹴踘，接而送之，直高数丈。于是观者渐众。
现代文：这时，军队中一些年轻人正在玩球，姑娘接球后送还时，踢了几丈高，于是观众越来越多。
English: At this time, some young people in the army were playing with a ball, and when the girl received the ball and returned it, she kicked it several feet high, so the audience was growing.

古文：超独异焉。而止于胜业坊北门短曲，有母同居，盖以纫针为业。
现代文：王超对姑娘的行为感到疑惑，便跟踪她走到胜业坊北门一个小胡同中，姑娘和母亲住在一起，以缝补为业。
English: Wang Chao was puzzled by the girl's behavior, so he followed her to a small alley in the north gate of Shengye Square. The girl lived with her mother and was a seamstress.

古文：超时因以他事熟之，遂为舅甥。
现代文：王超借其他事由和这母女熟悉了，称姑娘为外甥女。
English: Wang Chao got to know the mother and daughter through other means and called the girl his niece.

古文：居室甚贫，与母同卧土榻，烟爨不动者，往往经于累日。
现代文：居室很清贫，睡的土炕，经常几天不动烟火。有时饭菜很丰盛，有山珍海味。
English: The living room is very poor, the sleeping mound, often several days without fireworks. Sometimes the meals are very rich, with mountain and sea delicacies.

古文：或设肴羞，时有水陆珍异。吴中初进洞庭橘，恩赐宰臣外，京辇未有此物。密以一枚赠超云：有人于内中将出。
现代文：洞庭桔是江苏进贡之物，皇上用它来恩赐大臣宰相，就是京城中也没有，姑娘却拿一只桔子送给王超，说：这是别人从宫中拿出来的。
English: Dongting oranges were a tribute from Jiangsu, and the emperor used them to give gifts to ministers and prime ministers. There were none in the capital, but the girl took an orange and gave it to Wang Chao, saying, "This was taken from the palace by someone else."

古文：而禀性刚决，超意甚疑之。
现代文：姑娘的性格特别刚烈，王超更觉得疑惑。
English: The girl's character is particularly strong-willed, and Wang Chao is even more suspicious.

古文：如此往来周岁矣。
现代文：就这样，彼此来往了一年多。
English: In this way, they have been visiting each other for more than a year.

古文：超一旦携酒食与之从容。徐谓曰：舅有深诚，欲告外甥，未知何如？
现代文：一天，王超拿来了酒、菜、饭，和她们母女一起吃喝，慢慢地对姑娘说：我心里有件事，想告诉外甥女，不知行不行？
English: One day, Wang Chao brought wine, dishes and food, ate and drank with their mother and daughter, and slowly said to the girl: I have something in my heart, I want to tell my niece, I don't know if I can?

古文：因曰：每感重恩，恨无所答。若力可施，必能赴汤蹈火。
现代文：姑娘说：我很感谢你的恩德，恨我无法报答，若能为您出力，就是赴汤蹈火也在所不辞。
English: The girl said, "I'm very grateful for your kindness. I hate that I can't repay you. If I can do something for you, I'll do anything."

古文：超曰：潘军失却玉念珠，不知知否？
现代文：王超说：潘将军丢失了一串玉念珠，不知你知不知道？
English: Wang Chao said, "General Pan has lost a string of jade prayer beads. Don't you know?

古文：微笑曰：从何知之？
现代文：姑娘微笑着说，我从哪知道。
English: The girl smiled and said, "How should I know?

古文：超揣其意不甚藏密，又曰：外甥忽见寻觅，厚备缯彩酬赠。
现代文：王超琢磨姑娘的意思，她不会太保密。王超又说：外甥女若是能给找到，一定用厚礼酬谢你。
English: Wang Chao pondered the meaning of the girl, she would not be too confidential. Wang Chao also said: If you can find your niece, you will be rewarded with a thick gift.

古文：女子曰：勿言于人，某偶与朋侪为戏，终却送还，因循未暇。
现代文：姑娘说：别告诉别人，是我偶然和朋友们玩耍游戏时做的，终归一定要送还的，一直拖下来，没有工夫送还。
English: The girl said, "Don't tell anyone. I did it by accident when I was playing a game with my friends. I had to return it eventually. I kept putting it off and didn't have time to return it."

古文：舅来日诘旦，于慈恩寺塔院相候，某知有人寄珠在此。
现代文：舅你明天早晨到慈恩寺塔院等我，我知道有人把珠子可放在那里。
English: Uncle, you wait for me tomorrow morning in the pagoda yard of the Zi'en Temple. I know someone who can put the beads there.

古文：超如期而往，顷刻至矣。时寺门始开，塔户犹锁。
现代文：王超按时前往，一会儿就到，当时寺门已经开了，塔院门还锁着。
English: Wang Chao went on time and arrived in a short time. At that time, the temple gate was already open, but the gate to the pagoda was still locked.

古文：谓超曰：少顷仰观塔上，当有所见。
现代文：她对王超说：待一会儿你往塔上看，一定会看到。
English: She said to Wang Chao, "If you stay here for a while and look up at the tower, you will definitely see it."

古文：超送诣潘，具述其旨。
现代文：说完，姑娘象鸟飞似的飞到塔上，在塔顶的相轮上向王超举手示意。
English: After that, the girl flew to the tower like a bird, and raised her hand to Wang Chao on the photo wheel at the top of the tower.

古文：因以金玉缯帛，密为之赠。
现代文：很快，她拿着珠子下来了，说：你可以还给人家，别送我东西。
English: Soon she came down with the beads and said: "You can give them back, don't give me anything."

古文：明日访之，已空室矣。
现代文：王超把玉念珠送给潘将军，把经过告诉了他。
English: Wang Chao gave the jade prayer bead to General Pan and told him what had happened.

古文：冯缄给事尝闻京师多任侠之徒。
现代文：他们想秘密地赠送姑娘一些金银布匹。第二天去姑娘家，已经是人去室空。
English: They wanted to secretly give the girl some gold and silver cloths. The next day, when they went to the girl's house, there was no one there.

古文：及为尹，密询左右。引超具述其语。
现代文：给事冯缄曾听说京城中多侠义之士，他升为府尹的时候，秘密地询问身边的人，把王超找来，详细地询问了这事的经过。
English: For this matter, Feng Yao had heard that there were many chivalrous and righteous people in Beijing. When he was promoted to Fu Yin, he secretly inquired about the people around him, found Wang Chao, and inquired in detail about the matter.

古文：将军所说，与超符同。
现代文：潘将军所说的和王超讲的完全一样。
English: What General Pan said was exactly the same as what Wang Chao said.

古文：贾人妻
现代文：贾人妻
English: Jia's wife

古文：唐余干县厨王立调选，佣居大宁里。
现代文：唐时，余干县尉王立调选时，租房住在大宁里。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, when Yu Gan County Lieutenant Wang Li was transferred and elected, he rented a house and lived in Daming.

古文：文书有误，为主司驳放。
现代文：因为文书有错误，被主管部门解除官职。
English: Because of a mistake in the paperwork, he was dismissed from his post by the competent authorities.

古文：资财荡尽，仆马丧失，穷悴颇甚，每丐食于佛祠。
现代文：钱财用光了，仆人也辞了，马也卖了，穷困潦倒。他经常去佛祠讨饭吃，早晨去，晚间回来。
English: He had run out of money, his servants had quit, his horse had been sold, and he was destitute. He often went to the Buddhist shrine to beg for food, going in the morning and returning in the evening.

古文：徒行晚归，偶与美妇人同路。或前或后依随。
现代文：偶然一次和一个长得很美的妇人同路，那妇人或前或后地跟随着他。
English: Once he happened to be traveling with a very beautiful woman, who followed him either ahead or behind.

古文：因诚意与言，气甚相得。
现代文：王立很坦诚地和妇人搭话，两人意气相投。
English: Wang Li spoke to the woman very frankly, and the two of them hit it off.

古文：立因邀至其居，情款甚洽。
现代文：王立邀请妇人到他的住处，一夜之间，二人感情很融洽。
English: Wang Li invited the woman to his residence. Overnight, the two became very close.

古文：翌日谓立曰：公之生涯，何其困哉！妾居崇仁里，资用稍备。倘能从居乎？
现代文：第二天，妇人对王立说：你的生活，现在很困难，我住在崇仁里，生活还可以，你能不能上我那里去住。
English: The next day, the woman said to Wang Li: "Your life is very difficult now. I live in Chongren, but my life is still okay. Can you come and live with me?"

古文：立既悦其人，又幸其给，即曰：仆之厄塞，阽于沟渎，如此勤勤，所不敢望焉，子又何以营生？
现代文：王立本来就很喜欢这个妇人，妇人又要在生活上帮助他。他说：我现在正处在危难之中，几乎要倒毙街头，你这样热心帮助我，是我不敢想的。你现在以什么职业维持生活？
English: Wang Li originally liked this woman very much, and the woman wanted to help him in his life. He said: I am now in danger, almost dying on the street, I can't believe you are so eager to help me. What kind of job do you do now to make a living?

古文：对曰：妾素贾人之妻也。夫亡十年，旗亭之内，尚有旧业。朝肆暮家，日赢钱三百，则可支矣。公授官之期尚未，出游之资且无，脱不见鄙，但同处以须冬集可矣。
现代文：妇人回答说：我是一个商人的妻子，丈夫已经死了十年，街上的店铺仍然营业，白天去营业，晚上回家，每天能收入三百文左右，足够维持支出，你授官的日期还没到，出去游历又没有钱，你若不嫌弃我的话，咱们同居吧。王立很愿意。
English: The woman replied: "I am a merchant's wife. My husband has been dead for ten years. The shops on the street are still open. I go to work during the day and go home at night. I can earn about three hundred yuan a day, which is enough to maintain my expenses. The date of your promotion has not yet arrived, and I have no money to travel. If you don't mind abandoning me, let's live together. Wang Li is very willing."

古文：立遂就焉。
现代文：看她的家庭，生活也很节俭。
English: Looking at her family, they also live frugally.

古文：阅其家，丰俭得所。
现代文：家里的钥匙都交给了王立。
English: Wang Li was given the keys to the house.

古文：至于扃锁之具，悉以付立。每出，则必先营办立之一日馔焉，及归，则又携米肉钱帛以付立。
现代文：每天早晨先给王立准备好一天的饭食，晚上回来时，总要带回些米、肉、布匹之类的生活用品交给王立。天天如此，王立看到妇人太劳累了，叫她雇个奴仆，妇人总是托词拒绝，王立也不强求。一年后，生了一个儿子，每天中午回来喂奶，就这样，和王立同居了二年。
English: Every morning, Wang Li would prepare a day's worth of meals for Wang Li, and when he came back in the evening, he would always bring back some rice, meat, cloth and other daily necessities to hand over to Wang Li. Every day, Wang Li saw that the woman was too tired and asked her to hire a servant. The woman always refused on pretext, and Wang Li did not insist. A year later, she gave birth to a son, and came back every day at noon to breastfeed. In this way, she lived with Wang Li for two years.

古文：凡与立居二载，忽一日夜归，意态惶惶，谓立曰：妾有冤仇，痛缠肌骨，为日深矣。
现代文：忽然一天夜间妇人回来后，显得惶恐不安。她对王立说：我有冤仇，刻骨铭心，为时已久。
English: All of a sudden, one night, after the woman returned, she appeared frightened and uneasy. She said to Wang Li: "I have a grudge, I've been thinking about it for a long time.

古文：伺便复仇，今乃得志。
现代文：总想找机会报仇，今天总算如愿了。
English: Always looking for an opportunity to get revenge, today it finally happened.

古文：便须离京，公其努力。
现代文：我要离开京城，希望你好自为之。
English: I'm leaving the capital. I hope you'll behave yourself.

古文：此居处，五百缗自置，契书在屏风中。室内资储，一以相奉。
现代文：这房子，是我花钱自己买的，契书就在屏风里，这室内的东西，也都送给你。
English: I bought this house with my own money, the deed is in the screen, and everything in this room is also given to you.

古文：婴儿不能将去，亦公之子也，公其念之。
现代文：孩子我不能带去，他也是你的儿子，希望好好照顾他。
English: I can't take my child with me. He is also your son. I hope you will take good care of him.

古文：言讫，收泪而别。立不可留止，则视其所携皮囊，乃人首耳。立甚惊愕。
现代文：说完，擦干了眼泪就要走，王立也留不住，他看了她所带的皮囊，竟装着一个人头！王立很惊愕。
English: After saying this, Wang Li wiped his tears and was about to leave. Wang Li couldn't keep her. He looked at the leather bag she was carrying, and it actually contained a human head! Wang Li was stunned.

古文：其人笑曰：无多疑虑，事不相萦。
现代文：她笑着说：你不要多考虑，这事与你没关系。
English: She smiled and said, "Don't think about it, it's none of your business."

古文：遂挈囊逾垣而去，身如飞鸟。
现代文：立即拿着皮囊越墙而去，身如飞鸟。
English: He immediately took the leather bag and flew over the wall like a bird.

古文：立开门出送，则已不及矣。方徘徊于庭，遽闻却至。
现代文：王立开门出去送，妇人已经走远了，王立在庭院中徘徊，又听到女人回来了，王立到门口迎接。
English: Wang Li opened the door and went out to see her off. The woman had already walked away. Wang Li wandered around the courtyard. When he heard the woman return, Wang Li went to the door to greet her.

古文：立迎门接俟，则曰：更乳婴儿，以豁离恨，就抚子。
现代文：妇人说，母子就要离开了，再喂他一次奶吧，她进屋去抚慰孩子。
English: The woman said that the mother and child were about to leave and that she would nurse him again. She went into the house to soothe the child.

古文：俄而复去，挥手而已。
现代文：不一会儿，又出来走了，只是挥了挥手。
English: After a while, he came out again and just waved his hand.

古文：立回灯褰帐，小儿身首已离矣。
现代文：王立掌灯回到室内一看，帐中的小孩已经身首分离。
English: When Wang Lihuang returned to the room, he saw that the child in the account had been decapitated.

古文：立惶骇，达旦不寐。
现代文：王立很惊慌，一夜未睡。
English: Wang Li was very alarmed and did not sleep all night.

古文：则以财帛买仆乘，游抵近邑，以伺其事。
现代文：他变卖了财产，买了马，雇了仆，到附近县内去住，等待这个事的结果。
English: He sold his property, bought a horse, hired a servant, and went to live in a nearby county to await the outcome of the matter.

古文：久之，竟无所闻。
现代文：很长时间，也没听到什么风声。
English: For a long time, we didn't hear anything.

古文：其年立得官，即货鬻所居归任。
现代文：这年，王立又得了官，卖了住房去赴任。
English: This year, Wang Li became an official again and sold his house to take up the post.

古文：尔后终莫知其音问也。
现代文：以后始终不知她的音信。
English: I never heard from her again.

古文：荆十三娘
现代文：荆十三娘
English: The Thirteenth Daughter

古文：唐进士赵中行家于温州，以豪侠为事。
现代文：唐朝进士赵中行，家住温州，多行豪侠之事。
English: Zhao Zhongxing, a member of the Tang Dynasty, lived in Wenzhou and had many heroic deeds.

古文：至苏州，旅舍支山禅院。僧房有一女商荆十三娘，为亡夫设大祥斋。
现代文：他到苏州，住支山禅院，僧房内有一女商荆十三娘，为她的亡夫设斋。
English: He went to Suzhou and lived in the Zhishan Zen Temple. In the monk's room, there was a female merchant, Jing XIII's daughter, who set up a fast for her dead husband.

古文：因慕赵，遂同载归扬州。
现代文：她仰慕赵中行，便和他同船到了扬州。
English: She admired Zhao Zhongxing and sailed with him to Yangzhou.

古文：赵以气义耗荆之财，殊不介意。
现代文：赵中行很讲义气，花费了十三娘的一些资财，但她毫不介意。
English: Zhao Zhongxing was very generous and spent some of the wealth of the 13th daughter, but she did not mind.

古文：其友人李正郎弟三十九有爱妓，妓之父母，夺与诸葛殷。李怅怅不已。
现代文：赵中行的朋友李正郎的弟弟三十九郎有一个非常喜欢的妓女，妓女的父母强逼妓女嫁给了诸葛殷，三十九郎闷闷不乐。
English: Zhao Zhongxing's friend, Li Zhengrong's younger brother, Thirty-Nine-Nine-Nine-Nine-Nine-Nine-Nine-Nine-Nine-Nine-Nine-Nine-Nine-Nine-Nine-Nine-Nine-Nine-Nine-Nine-Nine-Nine-Nine-Nine-Nine-Nine-Nine-Nine-Nine-Nine-Nine-Nine-Nine-Nine-Nine-Nine-Nine-Nine-Nine-Nine-Nine-Nine-N

古文：时诸葛殷与吕用之幻惑太尉高骈，姿行威福。李慎祸，饮泣而已。
现代文：当时，诸葛殷和吕用之互相勾结，迷惑太尉高骈，作威作福，三十九郎怕惹祸，忍气吞声。
English: At that time, Zhuge Yin and Lv Yingzhu colluded with each other to confuse the captain Gao Yao, to be arrogant and to be blessed, and the thirty-nine brothers were afraid of getting into trouble and swallowed their anger.

古文：偶话于荆娘，荆娘亦愤惋。
现代文：偶然间把这事对十三娘说了。
English: He happened to mention this to the thirteenth daughter.

古文：谓李三十九郎曰：此小事，我能为郎仇之。旦请过江，于润州北固山六月六日正午时待我。
现代文：十三娘很气愤，对三十九郎说：这是小事，我能为你报仇，明早你过江到润州北固山，在六月六日正晌午时等我。
English: The thirteenth daughter was very angry and said to the thirty-ninth brother, "This is a small matter. I can avenge you. Tomorrow morning, you cross the river to Beigushan, Runchu, and wait for me at noon on June 6th."

古文：李亦依之。至期，荆氏以囊盛妓，兼致妓之父母首，归于李。
现代文：三十九郎按约定时间到了，十三娘用皮口袋装着那个妓女，还有妓女父母的头，都送给了三十九郎。
English: When the appointed time came, the thirteenth daughter put the prostitute in a leather bag and gave him the heads of the prostitute's parents.

古文：复与赵同入浙中，不知所止。
现代文：后来，她与赵中行又一同回到了浙中，不知住在什么地方。
English: Later, she and Zhao Zhongxing returned to Zhejiang together, I don't know where they lived.

古文：许寂
现代文：许寂
English: Xu Jakang

古文：蜀许寂少年栖四明山，学易于晋徵君。
现代文：四川人许寂，少年时住在四明山，向晋徵君学习《易经》。
English: Xu Jia, a native of Sichuan, lived in Shiming Mountain as a boy and studied the I Ching from Jin Zhengjun.

古文：一旦有夫妇偕诣山居，携一壶酒。
现代文：一天早晨，有一对夫妇结伴来到山里，提一壶酒。
English: One morning, a couple came to the mountain together to fetch a jug of wine.

古文：寂诘之，云：今日离剡县。
现代文：许寂问他们，他们说，今天离开的剡县。
English: When Xu Zhizhi asked them, they said, "The county we are leaving today is Zhu County."

古文：寂曰：道路甚遥，安得一日及此。
现代文：许寂说：道路这么远，怎么能一天到？
English: Xu Zha said, "The road is so far away, how can I get there in one day?"

古文：颇亦异之。
现代文：也觉得很奇怪。
English: I also find it very strange.

古文：然夫甚少，而妇容色过之，状貌毅然而寡默。
现代文：丈夫很年轻，妻子的容貌更超过丈夫。容貌形象都很刚毅，然而却有些沉默寡言。
English: The husband is very young, and the wife looks even older than her husband. They both have a strong appearance, but are somewhat taciturn.

古文：其夕，以壶觞命许同酌。
现代文：这天晚上，拿酒和许寂同饮。
English: That night, I drank wine with Xu Shaoshong.

古文：乃抗声高歌，悉是说剑之意，俄自臂间抽出两物，展而喝之，即两口剑。跃起，在寂头上盘旋交击，寂甚惊骇。
现代文：丈夫拿出一副拍板，往板上钉了很多铜钉，边钉边高声歌唱，歌词都是说剑的事。一会儿又从臂间抽出两件东西，一边展开一边吆喝，竟是两口剑，并跳起，在许寂头上互相交击。许寂很害怕，一会儿又把剑收回匣中。
English: The husband took out a clapperboard, nailed a lot of copper nails to the board, singing loudly while nailing, the lyrics are about swords. A moment later, he pulled out two things from between his arms, shouting as he unfolded them. It turned out to be two swords, and they jumped up to fight each other on Xu Shanzhong's head. Xu Shanzhong was very scared, and a moment later he took the sword back into the box.

古文：寻而收匣之，饮毕就寝。
现代文：喝完酒睡觉，天亮时，床上没有人了。
English: After drinking, I went to bed, and when morning came, there was no one in the bed.

古文：迨晓，乃空榻也。至日中，复有一头陀僧来寻此夫妇。寂具道之。
现代文：到中午，又有一个陀头僧来寻找那对夫妇，许寂把具体经过告诉了他。
English: By midday, another head monk came to look for the couple, and Xu Zhas told him exactly what had happened.

古文：僧曰：我亦其人也，道士能学之乎？
现代文：僧人说：我也是那样的人，你不想学吗？
English: The monk said, "I'm like that too. Don't you want to learn?"

古文：寂辞曰：少尚玄学，不愿为此。
现代文：许寂推辞说：我喜欢玄学，不愿学这个。
English: Xu Zhijie said: I like metaphysics, I don't want to learn this.

古文：其僧傲然而笑，乃取寂净水拭脚。徘徊间不见。尔后再于华阴遇之，始知其侠也。
现代文：那僧人很傲慢地笑了笑，又用许寂的净水洗脚，徘徊间不见了僧人，后来在华阴又遇到了他，才知道他是侠客。
English: The monk smiled very haughtily, and washed his feet with the purifying water of Xu Jia. The monk disappeared while he was wandering around. Later, he met him again in Huayin, and only then did he know that he was a knight.

古文：杜光庭自京入蜀，宿于梓潼厅。有一僧继至，县宰周某与之有旧，乃云：今日自兴元来。
现代文：杜光庭从京城到四川，住宿在梓潼厅，有一个僧人也随后来了，县宰周某和他有旧交。僧人说，今天从兴元来。
English: Du Guangting traveled from Beijing to Sichuan and stayed at the Zizhi Hall. A monk also followed him. The county magistrate Zhou had an old friendship with him. The monk said that he came from Xingyuan today.

古文：杜异之。
现代文：杜光庭感觉奇怪。
English: Du Guangting felt strange.

古文：明发，僧遂前去。宰谓杜曰：此僧仍鹿卢蹻，亦侠之类也。
现代文：第二天，僧人走了，县宰对杜光庭说，这个僧人是鹿卢蹻，也是侠客之类的己。
English: The next day, after the monk had left, the county magistrate told Du Guangting that the monk was a rook and a knight.

古文：诗僧齐己于沩山松下，亲遇一僧，于头指甲下抽出两口剑，跳跃凌空而去。
现代文：诗僧齐己在沩山松下，曾经遇到一个僧人，从大拇指甲下抽出两口剑，跳跃着向空中飞去。
English: The poet and monk Qi Zi once met a monk under the pine trees of Lushan. He pulled out two swords from under his thumbnail and jumped into the air.

古文：丁秀才
现代文：丁秀才
English: Ding Xiucai

古文：朗州道士罗少微顷在茅山紫阳观寄泊。
现代文：朗州道士罗少微有一段寄居在茅山紫阳观，有一个丁秀才也和他同住观中。
English: Luo Shaowei, a Taoist priest from Lanzhou, lived in Ziyang Temple in Maoshan for a period of time. A certain Ding Xiucai also lived with him in the temple.

古文：有丁秀才者亦同寓于观中，举动风味，无异常人，然不汲汲于仕进。盘桓数年，观主亦善遇之。
现代文：丁秀才的言谈举止，和平常人没有两样，但他不醉心于科举考试，徘徊逗留了好几年，观主一直待他很好。
English: Ding Xiucai's speech and behavior are no different from that of ordinary people, but he is not obsessed with the imperial examination, he has lingered for several years, and the audience has always treated him well.

古文：冬之夜，霰雪方甚，二三道士围炉，有肥羜美酝之羡。
现代文：冬天的夜晚，大雪正下个不停，有两个三个道士围炉闲谈，若是有肥羊肉为肴，喝着美酒该多好。
English: On a winter's night, when heavy snow is falling incessantly, two or three Taoist monks are chatting around the hearth. If they have fatty mutton as a dish, how good it would be to drink good wine.

古文：丁曰：致之何难。
现代文：丁秀才说：这有什么难的？
English: Ding Xiucai said, "What's so difficult about this?"

古文：时以为戏。俄见开户奋袂而去。
现代文：大家认为他只是玩笑而已，一会儿，他竟开门挥袖走了。
English: Everyone thought he was just joking, but then he opened the door and walked out.

古文：至夜分，蒙雪而回，提一银榼酒，熟羊一足，云浙帅厨中物。
现代文：到了半夜，他披了一身雪回来了，提一银榼酒，拿了一只熟羊腿，他说这是从浙江帅府厨房中拿来的。
English: At midnight, he came back covered in snow, carrying a bottle of wine and a cooked leg of lamb, which he said he got from a kitchen in Shuaifu, Zhejiang Province.

古文：由是惊讶欢笑，掷剑而舞，腾跃而去，莫知所往。唯银榼存焉。
现代文：大家既惊讶又高兴，挥剑跳舞，丁秀才却腾跃而去，不知到什么地方去了，唯有那只银榼还在。
English: Everyone was both surprised and happy, waving their swords and dancing. However, Ding Xiucai pranced away. I don't know where he went, only the egret is still there.

古文：观主以状闻于县官。
现代文：紫阳观观主把此事报告了县官。
English: Mr. Ziyang reported the matter to the county government.

古文：诗僧贯休侠客诗云：黄昏风雨黑如磐，别我不知何处去。
现代文：诗僧贯休所作《侠客诗》中说：黄昏风雨黑如磐，别我不知何处去。
English: In the "Chivalry Poem" written by the poet and monk Jianyu, he said: "At dusk, when the wind and rain are as black as rock, I don't know where to go.

古文：得非江淮间曾聆此事而构思也。
现代文：大概就是在江淮一带听了这件事而构思的吧。
English: It was probably conceived after hearing about it in the Jianghuai area.

