古文：秦攻赵于长平，大破之，引兵而归。
现代文：秦军在长平进攻赵军，把赵军打得大败，领兵回国。
English: The Qin army attacked the Zhao army in Changping, defeated the Zhao army, and led the soldiers back to China.

古文：因使人索六城于赵而讲。
现代文：于是秦国派人向赵国索取六座城邑并讲和。
English: As a result, Qin sent people to claim six cities from Zhao and make peace.

古文：赵计未定，楼缓新从秦来，赵王与楼缓计之曰： 与秦城何如?
现代文：赵国的主意还没有拿定。楼缓刚从秦国前来，赵孝成王与楼缓谋划说： 给秦国城邑怎么样？
English: Zhao Guo's idea had not yet been decided. Lou Yu had just arrived from Qin. Zhao Xiaocheng and Lou Yu discussed the plan and said, "What about the cities and towns in Qin?"

古文：不与何如? 
现代文：不给怎么样？ 
English: How about not giving it?

古文：楼缓辞让曰： 此非人臣之所能知也。 
现代文：楼缓辞谢说： 这不是臣下能够知道的事情。 
English: Lou Ye Xie said: This is not something that a vassal can know.

古文：王曰： 虽然，试言公之私。 
现代文：赵王说： 即使这样，请试谈一下您个人的见解。 
English: Zhao Wang said: In spite of that, you might as well try to talk about your personal opinion.

古文：楼缓曰： 王亦闻夫公甫文伯母乎?
现代文：楼缓说： 君王听说过公甫文伯母亲的事情吗？
English: Lou slowly said, "Has the king heard about Gongfu Wenbo's mother?"

古文：公甫文伯官于鲁，病死。
现代文：公甫文伯在鲁国做官，病死了。
English: Public official Wenbo, who worked as an official in the State of Lu, died of illness.

古文：妇人为之自杀于房中者二人。
现代文：妇人为他在房中自杀的有十六人。
English: There were sixteen people in the room when the woman killed herself for him.

古文：其母闻之，不肯哭也。
现代文：他母亲听说后，不肯哭。
English: His mother refused to cry when she heard the news.

古文：相室曰： 焉有子死而不哭者乎? 
现代文：随嫁的妇女说： 哪里有儿子死了而不哭的人呢？ 
English: The women said, "Where is the man who does not weep for the death of his son?"

古文：其母曰： 孔子，贤人也，逐于鲁，是人不随。
现代文：他的母亲说： 孔子是个贤明的人，被鲁国驱逐在外，这个人不去跟随。
English: His mother said, "Confucius was a wise man, but he was exiled from Lu. This man will not follow him."

古文：今死，而妇人为死者十六人。
现代文：如今他死了，然而却有十六个妇人为他而死。
English: Now he is dead, but sixteen women died for him.

古文：若是者，其于长者薄，而于妇人厚? 故从母言之，之为贤母也；从妇言之，必不免为妒妇也。
现代文：像这样的人，说明他对长者情薄，而对妇人情厚 所以从他母亲说的话来看，她是一位贤良的母亲，如果从妇人嘴里说出这话，一定免不了被人称为嫉妒的妇人。
English: A man like this shows that he has a soft spot for the elderly, but a strong one for women. So from what his mother said, she is a good mother, and if this is said from the woman's mouth, it is inevitable that she will be called a jealous woman.

古文：故其言一也，言者异，则人心变矣。
现代文：因此说出同样的话，由于说话的人不同，那么人们心中的看法就变化了。
English: So if you say the same thing, because the speaker is different, then people's minds change.

古文：今臣新从秦来，而言勿与，则非计也；言与之，则恐王以臣之为秦也。
现代文：如今臣下刚从秦国来，如果我说不割城给秦国，那不是好计谋；如果说割城给秦国，那么恐怕大王认为臣下是为秦国说话。
English: Now that the vassal has just come from Qin, if I say that I will not give the city to Qin, that is not a good strategy; if I say that I will give the city to Qin, then I am afraid that the king will think that the vassal is speaking for Qin.

古文：故不敢对。
现代文：所以不敢回答。
English: So I didn't dare to answer.

古文：使臣得为王计之，不如予之。 
现代文：假如让臣下为大王谋划此事，不如绘它。 
English: If you ask your vassal to plan something for the king, it is better to draw it.

古文：王曰： 诺。 
现代文：赵王说： 好吧。 
English: After listening, Zhao Wang said, "Hmm.

古文：虞卿闻之，入见王，王以楼缓言告之。
现代文：虞卿听到这件事后，入宫拜见赵王，赵王把楼缓的话告诉他。
English: After hearing this, Prince Yu went to the palace to see King Zhao, who told him to calm down.

古文：虞卿曰： 此饰说也。 
现代文：虞卿说： 这是伪装的游说之辞。 
English: "This is disguised lobbying," Mr. Yu said.

古文：秦既解邯郸之围，而赵王入朝，使赵郝约事于秦，割六县而讲。
现代文：赵王说： 为什么这样说呢？ 虞卿说： 秦国攻打赵国，是他们疲倦退兵的呢？
English: Zhao Wang said, "Why do you say that?" Yu Jing said, "When Qin attacked Zhao, did they get tired and retreat?"

古文：王曰： 何谓也? 虞卿曰： 秦之攻赵也，倦而归乎?王以其力尚能进，爱王而不攻乎？ 王曰： 秦之攻我也，不遗余力矣，必以倦而归也。 
现代文：大王还是认为他们还有进攻能力，只是因为爱护大王才不进攻呢？ 赵王说： 秦国攻打我国，可以说是不遗余力了，一定是因为疲倦了才退兵的。 
English: The great king still thinks that they still have the ability to attack, but only because they love and protect the great king, they do not attack? Zhao Wang said: Qin attacked our country, it can be said that they spared no effort, they must have retired because they were tired.

古文：虞卿曰： 秦以其力攻其所不能取，倦而归。
现代文：虞卿说： 秦国因为用它的力量进攻它所不能夺取的城邑，疲倦之后退兵。
English: Yuqing said: Because Qin used its strength to attack cities that it could not capture, it tired and withdrew.

古文：王又以其力之所不能攻以资之，是助秦自攻也。
现代文：大王又把它力量所不能攻占的城邑割让出去资助它，这是帮助秦围攻打自己。
English: The great king also ceded towns that his forces could not capture to finance it, which was to help Qin besiege and attack himself.

古文：来年秦复攻王，王无以救矣。 
现代文：明年秦国再来攻打大王，大王就没有什么办法挽救自己了。 
English: Next year, Qin will attack Daowang again, and Daowang will have no way to save himself.

古文：王又以虞卿之言告楼缓。
现代文：赵王又把虞卿的话转告楼缓。
English: Zhao Wang relayed Yuqing's words to Lou Xiao.

古文：楼缓曰： 虞卿能尽知秦力之所至乎？
现代文：楼缓说： 虞卿能够全部了解秦国军力的最大限度吗？
English: Lou said slowly: Can Yu Ching fully understand the maximum military strength of Qin?

古文：诚知秦力之不至，此弹丸之地，犹不予也，令秦来年复攻王，得无割其内而媾乎? 
现代文：如果的确知道秦国兵力达不到它所要达到的目的，那么弹丸那么大的地方也还是不能给它，假如明年秦国再来攻打赵国，大王恐怕会割让赵国内地的城邑去讲和吧？ 
English: If it is indeed known that the military strength of Qin can not achieve the goal it wants to achieve, then a place as big as a projectile can not be given to it. If Qin attacks Zhao again next year, I am afraid that the great king will cede the cities in the interior of Zhao to make peace.

古文：王曰： 诚听子割矣，子能必来年秦之不复攻我乎? 
现代文：赵王说： 果真听您的话割让了城邑，您一定能够保证明年秦国不再来攻打我吗？ 
English: Zhao Wang said: If I really listened to your words and ceded the cities, will you be able to guarantee that the Qin State will no longer attack me?

古文：楼缓对曰： 此非臣之所敢任也。
现代文：楼缓回答说： 这可不是我敢承担的事情。
English: Lou Xiao replied: This is not something I dare to undertake.

古文：昔者三晋之交于秦，相善也，今秦释韩、魏而独攻王，王之所以事秦必不如韩、魏也。
现代文：从前韩、魏、赵三国和泰国结交，互相亲善。如今秦国放下韩、魏偏偏攻打大王，大王用来事奉秦玉的礼仪一定不如韩国、魏国。
English: Formerly, Korea, Wei, Zhao and Thailand had friendly relations and were on friendly terms with each other. Now that Qin has abandoned Korea and Wei has attacked the king, the etiquette used by the king to serve Qin Yu must be inferior to that of Korea and Wei.

古文：今臣为足下解负亲之攻，启关通敝，齐交韩、魏。
现代文：如今臣下为您解除由于辜负秦国亲善招致的进攻，开放边关，互通使节，赶上韩国、魏国同秦国的交情。
English: Now, your vassals have relieved you of the attack caused by your betrayal of the goodwill of Qin, opened the border, exchanged envoys, and caught up with the diplomatic relations between South Korea and Wei with Qin.

古文：至来年而王独不取于秦，王之所以事秦者，必在韩、魏之后也。
现代文：假如到了明年大王偏偏不能取得秦王的欢心，那么大王所用来事奉秦国的礼仪，一定是落在了韩国、魏国的后面。
English: If by next year the great king is unable to win the favor of the Qin king, then the etiquette used by the great king to serve the Qin state must have fallen behind Korea and Wei.

古文：此非臣之所敢任也。 
现代文：这可不是臣下所敢承担的事情。 
English: So it's not something that I would take on.

古文：王以楼缓之言告。
现代文：赵王把楼缓讲出话告诉虞卿。
English: Zhao Wang told Yuqing to speak slowly.

古文：虞卿曰： 楼缓言不媾，来年秦复攻王，得无更割其内而媾。
现代文：虞卿说： 楼缓说如果不与秦国讲和，明年泰国又来攻打赵国，恐怕大王会再割让国内的土地去讲和。
English: Yuqing said, "If Lou Ye said that if he didn't make peace with Qin, Thailand would attack Zhao again next year, I'm afraid the king would cede more land to make peace.

古文：今媾，楼缓又不能必秦之不复攻也，虽割何益?
现代文：如果现在讲和，楼缓又不能一定保证秦国不再来进攻赵国，即使割让土地又有什么好处？
English: If peace is declared now, Lou Ye can't guarantee that Qin won't attack Zhao again, and even if the land is ceded, what is the benefit?

古文：来年复攻，又割其力之所不能取而媾也，此自尽之术也。
现代文：如果明年秦国再来进攻赵国，又割让它力量无法夺取的土地去讲和，这是自取灭亡的办法。
English: If next year Qin attacks Zhao again and tries to make peace with it by giving it land that it cannot take, this is a way of self-destruction.

古文：不如无媾。
现代文：不如不讲和。
English: It's better not to talk about peace.

古文：秦虽善攻，不能取六城；赵虽不能守，而不至失六城。
现代文：秦国即使善于进攻，也不能夺取六座城邑；赵国即使不善于防守，也不至于丢失六座城邑。
English: Even if Qin is good at attacking, it cannot capture six cities; even if Zhao is not good at defending, it will not lose six cities.

古文：秦倦而归，兵必罢。
现代文：秦国由于劳累退兵，秦兵一定疲惫不堪。
English: The Qin state was exhausted and withdrew its troops, and the army was inevitably weak.

古文：我以五城收天下以攻罢秦，是我失之于天下，而取偿于秦也，吾国尚利，孰与坐而割地，自弱以强秦?
现代文：我们用五座城邑收买天下诸侯而去攻打疲惫的秦国，这样，我们虽然在天下有所失，但却从秦国得到了补偿。我国还是有利的，这与白自地割让土地，自己削弱自己反而使秦国强大比起来，哪个好？
English: We used five cities and towns to bribe the princes of the world to attack the tired Qin State. In this way, although we lost something in the world, we received compensation from the Qin State. Our country is still advantageous, which is better than freely ceding land, weakening ourselves, but making the Qin State strong?

古文：今楼缓曰： 秦善韩、魏而攻赵者，必王之事秦不如韩、魏也。 
现代文：如今楼缓说： 泰国与韩国、魏国友善而攻打赵国的原因，一定是大王事奉秦国不如韩国、魏国。 
English: Now Lou slowly said: The reason why Thailand was friendly with Korea and Wei and attacked Zhao was that the great king served Qin less than Korea and Wei.

古文：是使王岁以六城事秦也，即坐而地尽矣。
现代文：这是让大王每年都用六座城邑去事奉秦国，也就是平白地把国土丢光。
English: This is to let the great king use six cities and towns every year to serve the Qin State, that is, to lose the land in vain.

古文：来年秦复求割地，王将予之乎?
现代文：明年秦国再要求割让土地，大王准备给它吗？
English: Next year, the State of Qin will again demand the cession of land. Is the great king prepared to give it?

古文：不与，则是弃前贵而挑秦祸也；与之，则无地而给之。
现代文：如果不给，那么这是抛弃以前已付出的代价并挑起秦军带来的战祸；如果给它，那么却没有土地供给了。
English: If it is not given, then it is abandoning the previously paid price and provoking the calamity of war brought by the Qin Army; if it is given, then no land is provided.

古文：语曰： 强者善攻，而弱者不能自守。 
现代文：俗话说： 强大的善于进攻，而弱小的不能自卫防守。 
English: As the saying goes: The strong are good at attacking, while the weak cannot defend themselves.

古文：今坐而听秦，秦兵不敝而多得地，是强秦而弱赵也。
现代文：如今平白地听从秦国的要求，秦兵不受任何损伤却多占了土地，这是使秦国强大而使赵国衰弱的作法。
English: Nowadays, they simply obey the demands of Qin. Qin soldiers are not harmed in any way, but they occupy more land. This is a way to make Qin strong and Zhao weak.

古文：以益愈强之秦，而割愈弱之赵，其计固不止矣。
现代文：以此增强越发强大的秦国，宰割越发衰弱的趑国，秦国侵夺赵国的计谋一定不会停止了。
English: In this way, the increasingly powerful Qin State will be strengthened, the increasingly weak Shao State will be defeated, and the Qin State's strategy of invading and seizing Zhao State will certainly not stop.

古文：且秦虎狼之国也，无礼义之心。
现代文：再说秦国是猛虎恶狼一样的国家，没有一点礼仪之心。
English: Moreover, Qin is a country of ferocious tigers and wolves, with no sense of etiquette.

古文：其求无已，而王之地有尽。
现代文：它的追求没有止境，可是大王的土地是有送尽的时候。
English: There is no end to its pursuit, but the land of the great king has to be exhausted.

古文：以有尽之地给无已之求，其势必无赵矣。
现代文：用有限的土地，供给无止境的贪求，那形势发展的结果必然灭亡赵国了。
English: With limited land, supply and endless greed, the result of the development of the situation will inevitably be the demise of Zhao.

古文：故曰：此饰说也。
现代文：因此说：这是装饰诈伪的游说之辞。
English: Therefore, it is said: This is a decorative fraudulent lobbying.

古文：王必勿与。 
现代文：大王一定不要割让土地给秦国。 
English: The great king must not cede land to Qin.

古文：王曰： 诺。 
现代文：赵王说： 好吧。 
English: After listening, Zhao Wang said, "Hmm.

古文：楼缓闻之，入见于王，王又以虞卿言告之。
现代文：楼缓听说后，入宫拜见赵王，赵王又把虞卿讲的话告诉了他。
English: After hearing the story, he went to the palace to see King Zhao, and King Zhao told him what Emperor Yu had said.

古文：楼缓曰： 不然。
现代文：楼缓说： 不是这样。
English: Lou said slowly, "That's not true."

古文：虞卿得其一，未知其二也。
现代文：虞卿只知其一，不知其二。
English: Yuqing only knows the first, and doesn't know the second.

古文：夫秦、赵构难，而天下皆说，何也?
现代文：如果秦国、赵国结为怨仇造成祸乱，天下诸侯都会高兴，为什么呢？
English: If the states of Qin and Zhao were to unite as enemies and cause a calamity, all the states in the world would be happy. Why?

古文：曰： 我将因强而乘弱。 
现代文：他们说： 我将要依靠强大的秦国而欺凌弱小的赵国。 
English: They said: I will rely on the powerful Qin State and bully the weak Zhao State.

古文：今赵兵困于秦，天下之贺战者，则必尽在于秦矣。
现代文：如今赵兵被秦国所困，天下祝贺战胜的人，必定都在秦国一方了。
English: Now Zhao Bing is trapped by Qin. The world congratulates the victors, who must all be on the side of Qin.

古文：故不若亟割地求和，以疑天下，慰秦心。
现代文：所以大王不如赶快割地求和，以此使天下诸侯心生疑虑，安慰秦王的心。
English: Therefore, it would be better for the great king to quickly divide the land and ask for peace, in order to make the hearts of the princes of the world doubt and comfort the heart of the Qin king.

古文：不然，天下将因秦之怒，秦赵之敝而瓜分之，赵且亡，何秦之图?
现代文：不这样做，天下诸侯将借着秦国的愤怒，趁着赵国的破败而将它瓜分。赵国将要灭亡了，还图谋什么秦国？
English: Otherwise, the princes of the world will use the anger of Qin to take advantage of the ruin of Zhao and divide it up. Zhao will perish, and what will Qin do?

古文：王以此断之，勿复计也。 
现代文：大王就此作出决断，不要再打其它主意了。 
English: The great king made a decision on this and did not have any other ideas.

古文：虞卿闻之，又入见王曰： 危矣，楼子之为秦也!夫赵兵困于秦，又割地求和，是愈疑天下，而何慰秦心哉?
现代文：虞卿听到后，又入宫拜见赵王说： 危险了，楼缓是为秦国服务啊赵兵被秦国所困，又去向秦国割地求和，这是越发使天下诸侯对我们产生疑心，又怎么能安慰秦王的心呢？
English: After hearing this, Emperor Yu went back to the palace to see King Zhao and said, "It's dangerous, I'm serving the Qin State. Zhao's soldiers are trapped by the Qin State, and they go to the Qin State to sue for peace. This is making the princes of the world more and more suspicious of us. How can we comfort the Qin King's heart?

古文：是不亦大示天下弱乎?
现代文：这不也是大肆地向天下诸侯显示了赵国的弱小吗？
English: Wasn't this also a wanton display of Zhao's weakness to the world's princes?

古文：且臣曰勿予者，非固勿予而已也。
现代文：再说臣下说不给土地，不是一定不拿出土地。
English: Furthermore, when a vassal says that he will not give land, he does not necessarily mean that he will not take out land.

古文：秦索六城于王，王以五城赂齐。
现代文：秦国向大王索要六座城邑，大王用五座城邑贿赂齐国。
English: Qin asked the Great King for six cities, and the Great King used five cities to bribe Qi.

古文：齐，秦之深仇也，得王五城，并力而西击秦也，齐之听王，不待辞之毕也。
现代文：齐国、秦国是有深仇大恨的国家，齐国得到大王五座城邑，就会与我们合力向西进攻秦国，齐国听从大王的旨意，用不着等到把话说完。
English: Qi and Qin are countries with deep hatreds. If Qi gets the five cities of the great king, it will join forces with us to attack Qin to the west. Qi obeys the will of the great king and does not need to wait until the words are finished.

古文：是王失于齐而取偿于秦，一举结三国之亲，而与秦易道也。 赵王曰： 善! 
现代文：这就是大王虽在齐国有所失，却在秦国取得了补偿，这一举动可以使我们与韩、魏、齐三国结成亲密友邦，而与秦国交换了处境。 赵王说： 好。 
English: This means that although the great king lost something in Qi, he gained compensation in Qin, and this move can make us close friends with Han, Wei and Qi, and exchange the situation with Qin. Zhao Wang said: Good.

古文：因发虞卿东见齐王，与之谋秦。
现代文：因此派遣虞卿向东去渴见齐王，与齐王谋划攻打秦国。
English: Therefore, he sent Yu Jing to the east to see King Qi, and plotted with him to attack Qin.

古文：虞卿未反，秦之使者已在赵矣。
现代文：虞卿还没有从齐国回来，秦国的使者已来到赵围讲和了。
English: Yuqing had not yet returned from Qi, and the Qin envoy had already come to Zhaowei to make peace.

古文：楼缓闻之，逃去。
现代文：楼缓听说后，就从赵国逃走了。
English: After hearing the news, Lou ran away from Zhao.

