古文：西北海之外，大荒之隅，有山而不合，名曰不周负子，有两黄兽守之。
现代文：在西北海以外，最荒远之地的角落，有一座山，断裂而合不拢，名叫不周山，有两头黄色的野兽守护着它。
English: Beyond the Northwest Sea, in the corner of the most desolate land, there is a mountain, broken but not closed, called Fuzhou Mountain, guarded by two yellow beasts.

古文：有水曰寒署之水。
现代文：有一条水流名叫寒暑水。
English: There is a stream of water called the cold and hot water.

古文：水西有湿山，水东有幕山。
现代文：寒暑水的西面有座湿山，寒暑水的东面有座幕山。
English: To the west of the cold and hot water, there is a wet mountain, and to the east of the cold and hot water, there is a curtain mountain.

古文：有禹攻共工国山。
现代文：还有一座禹攻共工国山。
English: There is also a Yu attack the co-workers' national mountain.

古文：有国名曰淑士，颛顼之子。
现代文：有一个国家，名叫淑士国，这里的人是帝颛顼的子孙后代。
English: There is a country called Shushi, and the people here are the descendants of emperors.

古文：有神十人，名曰女娲之肠，化为神，处栗广之野；横道而处。
现代文：有十位神人，名叫女娲肠，就是女娲的肠子变化而成神的，居住在栗广的原野上；他们拦断道路而居住。
English: There are ten deities, named Gorgon's Bowels, that is, Gorgon's bowels transformed into gods, who live in the fields of Kurihiro; they live by blocking the roads.

古文：有人名曰石夷，来风曰韦，处西北隅以司日月之长短。
现代文：有一位神人，名叫石夷，风吹来的地方叫做韦，石夷在西北角掌管着日月运行时间的长短。
English: There is a godman named Shi Yi, and the place where the wind blows is called Wei. Shi Yi controls the length of the sun and moon in the northwest corner.

古文：有五采之鸟，有冠，名曰狂鸟。
现代文：有一种长着五彩羽毛的鸟，头上有冠，名叫狂鸟。
English: There is a bird with multicolored feathers and a crown on its head, called the mad bird.

古文：有大泽之长山。
现代文：有一座大泽长山。
English: There is a mountain called Osawa Nagayama.

古文：有白氏之国。
现代文：有一个白氏国。
English: There is a Baekje country.

古文：西北海之外，赤水东，有长胫之国。
现代文：在西北海以外，赤水的东岸，有个长胫国。
English: Beyond the Northwest Sea, on the eastern shore of the Red Sea, there is a country called Nagatoro.

古文：有西周之国，姬姓，食谷。
现代文：有一个西周国，国中的人都姓姬，吃谷米。
English: Once upon a time, there was a country in western Zhou, and everyone in the country had the surname "Hee" and ate corn rice.

古文：有人方耕，名曰叔均。
现代文：有个人正在耕田，名叫叔均。
English: A man named Shujun was ploughing a field.

古文：帝俊生后稷，稷降以谷。
现代文：帝俊生了后稷，后稷把各种谷物的种子从天上带到下界。
English: Teijun gave birth to Houyu, and Houyu brought all kinds of grain seeds from heaven to the netherworld.

古文：稷之弟曰台玺，生叔均。
现代文：后稷的弟弟叫台玺，台玺生了叔均。
English: Hou Yi's younger brother was named Tai Yi, and Tai Yi gave birth to Uncle Jun.

古文：叔均是代其父及稷播百谷，始作耕。
现代文：叔均于是代替父亲和后稷播种各种谷物，开始创造耕田的方法。
English: So, in place of his father and his stepmother, he sowed various grains and began to create a method of cultivating fields.

古文：有赤国妻氏。
现代文：有个赤国妻氏。
English: There is an Akakuni wife clan.

古文：有双山。
现代文：有座双山。
English: There are two mountains.

古文：西海之外，大荒之中，有方山者，上有青树，名曰柜格之松，日月所出入也。
现代文：在西海以外，最荒远之地，有座山叫方山，山上有棵青色大树，名叫柜格松，是太阳和月亮出入的地方。
English: Beyond the West Sea, in the most desolate place, there is a mountain called Fangshan. On the mountain, there is a large blue tree called the Qiange Pine. It is the place where the sun and the moon come and go.

古文：西北海之外，赤水之西，有先民之国，食谷，使四鸟。
现代文：在西北海以外，赤水的西岸，有已个天民国，这里的人吃谷米，能驯化驱使四种野兽。
English: Beyond the Northwest Sea, on the west coast of the Red Sea, there is already a Republic of Heaven. The people here eat grain and can domesticate and drive four kinds of beasts.

古文：有北狄之国。
现代文：有一个北狄国。
English: There is a North Korea.

古文：黄帝之孙曰始均，始均生北狄。
现代文：黄帝的孙子叫始均，始均的后代子孙，就是北狄国人。
English: The grandson of the Yellow Emperor is called Shijun, and the descendants of Shijun are the Bei Di people.

古文：有芒山。
现代文：有座芒山。
English: There is a mountain of mangoes.

古文：有桂山。
现代文：有座桂山。
English: There is also Mount Katsura.

古文：有榣山，其上有人，号曰太子长琴。
现代文：有座榣山，山上有一个人，号称太子长琴。
English: There is a mountain called Lushan, and on the mountain there is a man who is known as Prince Changqin.

古文：颛顼生老童，老童生祝融，祝融生太子长琴，是处榣山，始作乐风。
现代文：颛琐生了老童，老童生了祝融，祝融生了太子长琴，于是太子长琴住在榣山上，开始创作乐而风行世间。
English: Zhao Zhao gave birth to Lao Tong, Lao Tong gave birth to Zhu Rong, Zhu Rong gave birth to Prince Changqin, so Prince Changqin lived on Lushan Mountain and began to create music and become popular in the world.

古文：有五采鸟三名：一曰皇鸟，一曰鸾鸟，一曰凤鸟。
现代文：有三种长着彩色羽毛的鸟：一种叫凰鸟，一种叫鸾鸟，一种叫凤鸟。
English: There are three kinds of birds with colored feathers: one is called the phoenix bird, one is called the ostrich bird, and one is called the phoenix bird.

古文：有虫状如菟，胸以后者裸不见，青如猨状。
现代文：有一种兽，外形像兔子，胸部以下裸露，但是看上去不像裸露，因为它的皮色像猿一样发青。
English: One beast, shaped like a rabbit, is naked from the chest down, but it doesn't look like it's naked, because its skin is bluish like an ape.

古文：大荒之中，有山名曰丰沮玉门，日月所入。
现代文：最荒远之地，有一座山名，叫丰沮玉门山，是太阳和月亮降落的地方。
English: In the most desolate place, there is a mountain called Feng Deyu Yumen Mountain, which is the place where the sun and the moon land.

古文：有灵山，巫咸、巫即、巫盼、巫彭、巫姑、巫真、巫礼、巫抵、巫谢、巫罗十巫，从此升降，百药爰在。
现代文：有一座灵山，巫咸、巫即、巫盼、巫彭、巫姑、巫真、巫礼、巫抵、巫谢、巫罗十位巫师从这里上下天庭，山中生长着各种药物。
English: There is a spiritual mountain. Ten wizards, including Wuxian, Wuzhong, Wuzhong, Wupan, Wupeng, Wuzhu, Wuzhen, Wulai, Wuzhuai, Wuzhe, and Wulao, go up and down the heavenly garden from here. Various medicines grow in the mountain.

古文：西有王母之山，壑山、海山。
现代文：有西王母山、壑山和海山。
English: There are the West Wangmu Mountain, the Lushan Mountain and the Sea Mountain.

古文：有沃之国，沃民是处。
现代文：有一个沃民国，沃民就居住在那里。
English: There is a Vaud Republic, and the Vaudois live there.

古文：沃之野，凤鸟之卵是食，甘露是饮。
现代文：他们生活在一片沃野上，吃的是凤鸟的卵，喝的是甘露。
English: They live in a fertile field, eating phoenix eggs and drinking nectar.

古文：凡其所欲其味尽存。
现代文：凡是他们想吃的东西，这里应有尽有。
English: Anything they want to eat, they can get it here.

古文：爰有甘华、璇瑰、甘柤、瑶碧、白木、白柳、视肉、琅玕、白丹、青丹、多银铁。
现代文：这里还有甘华、甘柤、白柳、视肉、三骓马、璇瑰、美玉、青绿色的玉石、白木、琅玕、白色的丹和青色的丹，另外还有很多银和铁。
English: There are also ambergris, ambergris, white willow, jujube, three-spined horse, jujube, jade, blue-green jade, white wood, camphor, white camphor and blue camphor, as well as a lot of silver and iron.

古文：鸾凤自歌，凤鸟自舞，爰有百兽，相群是处，是谓沃之野。
现代文：鸾鸟在自由地歌唱，凤鸟在自在地起舞，这里还有各种野兽，成群生活在一起，这就是所谓的沃野。
English: Ostriches are singing freely, phoenixes are dancing freely, and there are all kinds of wild animals living together in groups. This is the so-called fertile field.

古文：有三青鸟，赤首黑目，一名曰大鵹，一曰少鵹，一名曰青鸟。
现代文：有三只青鸟，长着红色的脑袋，黑黑的眼睛，一只叫做大鵹，一只叫做少鵹，一只叫做青鸟。
English: There are three bluebirds with red heads and black eyes. One is called the great warbler, one is called the lesser warbler, and one is called the bluebird.

古文：有轩辕之台，射者不敢西向射，畏轩辕之台。大荒之中，有龙山，日月所入。
现代文：有一座轩辕台，因为敬畏轩辕台上黄帝的威灵，射箭的人都不敢向西射。最荒远之地，有一座龙山，是太阳和月亮降落的地方。
English: There is a Xuanwu Tei, because of the awe of the Yellow Emperor's Wailing on the Xuanwu Tei, archers do not dare to shoot to the west. In the most desolate place, there is a Dragon Mountain, where the sun and the moon land.

古文：有三泽水，名曰三淖，昆吾之所食也。
现代文：有三个汇聚成的大水地，名叫三淖，是昆吾族人取得食物的地方。
English: There are three converging large water areas, called Sanxing, where the Kunwu people get their food.

古文：有人衣青，以袂蔽面，名曰女丑之尸。
现代文：有个人穿着青色衣服，用袖子遮住脸面，名叫女丑尸。
English: One person, dressed in blue and covering her face with her sleeves, is called the Ugly Woman.

古文：有女子之国。
现代文：有个女子国。
English: There is a woman's country.

古文：有桃山。
现代文：有座桃山。
English: There is a Momoyama.

古文：有虻山。
现代文：还有座虻山。
English: There is also a mountain called Lushan.

古文：有桂山。
现代文：又有座桂山。
English: There is also Mount Katsura.

古文：有于土山。
现代文：又有座于土山。
English: There is also one in Tsuchiyama.

古文：有丈夫之国。
现代文：有个丈夫国。
English: There is a husband country.

古文：有弇州之国，五采之鸟仰天，名曰鸣鸟。
现代文：有有一座弇州山，有一只五彩斑斓的鸟，仰面向天，它的名字叫鸣鸟。
English: There is a mountain in Zhangzhou with a multi-colored bird that looks up to the sky. Its name is Songbird.

古文：爰有百乐歌舞之凤。
现代文：这里有盛行各种音乐和唱歌跳舞的风气。
English: There is a thriving music and song and dance scene.

古文：有轩辕之国。
现代文：有一个轩辕国。
English: There is a country of uproar.

古文：江山之南栖为吉。不寿者乃八百岁。
现代文：这里的人把居住在江河山岭的南边当作吉利，寿命最短的人也活到了八百岁。
English: People here consider it good luck to live on the south side of the rivers and mountains. The shortest-lived person lived to be eight hundred years old.

古文：西海郩中，有神，人面鸟身，珥两青蛇，践两赤蛇，名曰弇兹。
现代文：在西海的岛屿上，有一位神人，人面鸟身，耳朵上穿挂着两条青色蛇，脚底下踩踏着两条红色蛇，名叫弇兹。
English: On an island in the West Sea, there was a god-man with a human face and a bird's body. He wore two blue snakes on his ears and two red snakes under his feet. His name was Hanzi.

古文：大荒之中，有山名曰日月山，天枢也。
现代文：最荒远之地，有座山名叫日月山，是天的枢纽。
English: In the most desolate place, there is a mountain called Sun Moon Mountain, which is the hub of the sky.

古文：吴姖天门，日月所入。
现代文：这座山的主峰叫吴姖天门山，是太阳和月亮降落的地方。
English: The main peak of this mountain is called Wuxi Tianmen Mountain. It is the place where the sun and the moon land.

古文：有神，人面无臂，两足反属于头山，名曰嘘。
现代文：有一个神人，形状像人而没有臂膀，两只脚反转着连在头上，名叫嘘。
English: And there was a man of God, whose appearance was like the appearance of a man, but he had no arms, and his feet were twisted together at his head; and his name was Shuh.

古文：颛顼生老童，老童生重及黎，帝令重献上天，令黎邛下地。
现代文：帝颛顼生了老童，老童生了重和黎，帝颛顼命令重托着天用力往上举，又命令黎撑着地使劲朝下按。
English: Emperor Xuan gave birth to Lao Tong, Lao Tong gave birth to Chong and Li, Emperor Xuan ordered Chong to hold the sky and lift it up, and ordered Li to hold it down and push it down.

古文：下地是生噎，处于西极，以行日月星辰之行次。
现代文：于是黎来到地下并生了噎，他就处在大地的最西端，主管着太阳、月亮和星辰运行的先后次序。
English: So Li went underground and gave birth to a dragonfly, and he was at the westernmost point of the earth, in charge of the order of the sun, moon and stars.

古文：有人反臂，名曰天虞。
现代文：有一位神人反长着臂膀，名叫天虞。
English: There was a godman with long arms, named Tianyu.

古文：有女子方浴月。
现代文：有一位女子正在给月亮洗澡。
English: A woman is bathing the moon.

古文：帝俊妻常羲，生月十有二，此始浴之。
现代文：帝俊的妻子常羲，生了十二个月亮，这是她刚开始给他们洗澡。
English: Emperor Jun's wife, Tsuneyoshi, had just given birth to twins, and she was just beginning to bathe them.

古文：行玄丹之山。
现代文：有一座玄丹山。
English: There is a Xuan Dan Mountain.

古文：有五色之鸟，人面有发。
现代文：有一种羽毛五彩缤纷的鸟，长着人一样的脸，头上有发。
English: There is a bird with multicolored feathers, a human-like face, and hair on its head.

古文：爰有青鴍、黄鷔、青鸟、黄鸟，其所集者其国亡。
现代文：这里有青、黄、青鸟和黄鸟，这些鸟在哪个国家聚集，哪个国家就会灭亡。
English: There are blue, yellow, bluebirds and yellowbirds, and in whichever country these birds gather, that country will perish.

古文：有池，名孟翼之攻颛顼之池。
现代文：有个水池，名叫孟翼攻颛顼池。
English: There is a pool called Meng Ying Zhaojong Pool.

古文：大荒之中，有山名曰鏖鏊钜，日月所入者。
现代文：最荒远之地，有一座山，名叫鏖鏊钜山，是太阳和月亮降落的地方。
English: In the most desolate place, there is a mountain called Lushan, where the sun and the moon land.

古文：有兽，左右有首，名曰屏蓬。
现代文：有一种野兽，左边和右边各长着一个头，名叫屏蓬。
English: There is a beast with one head on the right and one on the left. It is called a folding screen.

古文：有巫山者。
现代文：有一座叫做巫山的山。
English: There is a mountain called Wushan Mountain.

古文：有壑山者。
现代文：又有座叫做壑山的山。
English: There is also a mountain called Shaoshan.

古文：有金门之山，有人名曰黄姖之尸。
现代文：还有座金门山，山上有个人名叫黄姖尸。
English: There is also a Kinmen Mountain, on which there is a man named Huang Xingzhu.

古文：有比翼之鸟。
现代文：有比翼鸟。
English: There are birds of a feather.

古文：有白鸟，青翼，黄尾，玄喙。
现代文：有一种白鸟，长着青色的翅膀，黄色的尾巴，黑色的嘴壳。
English: There is a white bird with blue wings, yellow tail and black beak.

古文：有赤犬，名曰天犬，其所下者有兵。
现代文：有一种红颜色的狗，名叫天犬，它所降临的地方都会发生战争。
English: There is a red-coloured dog called the sky dog, and wherever it descends, there is war.

古文：西海之南，流沙之滨，赤水之后，黑水之前，有大山，名曰昆仑之丘。
现代文：在西海的南面，流沙的边沿，赤水的后面，黑水的前面，屹立着一座大山，就是昆仑山。
English: In the south of the West Sea, along the edge of the quicksand, behind the red water and in front of the black water, stands a large mountain, namely, Mount Kunlun.

古文：有神，人面虎身，有文有尾，皆白，处之。
现代文：有一个神人，长着人的面孔、老虎的身子，尾巴有花纹，而尾巴上尽是白色斑点，住在这座昆仑山上。
English: There is a godman with a human face, a tiger's body, a patterned tail, and a tail full of white spots, who lives on this Kunlun Mountain.

古文：其下有弱水之渊环之，其外有炎火之山，投物辄然。
现代文：昆仑山下有条弱水汇聚的深渊环绕着它，深渊的外边有座炎火山，一投进东西就燃烧起来。
English: It is surrounded by a shallow abyss at the foot of Mount Kunlun. Outside the abyss, there is a volcano, which bursts into flames as soon as anything is thrown into it.

古文：有人戴胜，虎齿，有豹尾，穴处，名曰西王母。
现代文：有人头上戴着玉制首饰，满口的老虎牙齿，有一条豹子似的尾巴，在洞穴中居住，名叫西王母。
English: Someone with jade jewelry on her head, a mouth full of tiger teeth, and a leopard-like tail, lives in a cave and is called the West Queen Mother.

古文：此山万物尽有。
现代文：这座山拥有世上的各种东西。
English: This mountain has everything in the world.

古文：大荒之中，有山名曰常阳之山，日月所入。
现代文：最荒远之地，有一座山，名叫常阳山，是太阳和月亮降落的地方。
English: In the most desolate place, there is a mountain called Changyang Mountain, which is the place where the sun and moon land.

古文：有寒荒之国。
现代文：有一个寒荒国。
English: There is a cold and desolate land.

古文：有二人女祭、女薎。
现代文：这里有两位神人，分别叫女祭、女薎。
English: There are two deities here, called the priestess and the maiden respectively.

古文：有寿麻之国。
现代文：有一个国家叫寿麻国。
English: There is a country called Shuma country.

古文：南岳娶州山女，名曰女虔。
现代文：南岳娶了州山的女子为妻，她的名字叫女虔。
English: Nan Yue married a woman from Zhoushan. Her name was Jie Qian.

古文：女虔生季格，季格生寿麻。
现代文：女虔生了季格，季格生了寿麻。
English: The pious woman gave birth to Tigger, and Tigger gave birth to Shuma.

古文：寿麻正立无景，疾呼无响。
现代文：寿麻端端正正站在太阳下不见任何影子，高声疾呼而四面八方没有一点回响。
English: Shou Ma Duan Duanzheng stood in the sun without any shadow, shouted loudly and there was no echo in all directions.

古文：爰有大暑，不可以往。
现代文：这里异常炎热，人不可以前往。
English: It's so hot here, people can't go outside.

古文：有人无首，操戈盾立，名曰夏耕之尸。
现代文：有个人没了脑袋，手拿一把戈和一面盾牌立着，名叫夏耕尸。
English: There was a man without a head, holding a club and a shield. His name was Xia Gongzhu.

古文：故成汤伐夏桀于章山，克之，斩耕厥前。
现代文：从前成汤在章山讨伐夏桀，打败了夏桀，斩杀夏耕尸于他的面前。
English: Once upon a time, Cheng Tang fought against Xia Yao in Zhangshan, defeated Xia Yao, and killed Xia Yao's corpse in front of him.

古文：耕既立，无首，走厥咎，乃降于巫山。
现代文：夏耕尸站立起来后，发觉没了脑袋，为逃避他的罪咎，于是窜到巫山去了。
English: After Xia Gangzhe stood up, he found that his head was gone. In order to escape his guilt, he fled to Wushan.

古文：有人名曰吴回，奇左，是无右臂。
现代文：有个人名叫吴回，只剩下左臂膀，而没了右臂膀。
English: There was a man named Wu Hui who only had his left arm left, but his right arm was gone.

古文：有盖山之国。
现代文：有一个盖山国。
English: There is a country covered with mountains.

古文：有树，赤皮枝干，青叶，名曰朱木。
现代文：有一种树，长着红色的树皮和树枝，青色的叶子，名字叫朱木。
English: There is a kind of tree with red bark and branches and blue leaves, called cedar.

古文：有一臂民。
现代文：有一种只长一条臂膀的一臂民。
English: There is a kind of one-armed people with only one arm.

古文：大荒之中，有山，名曰大荒之山，日月所入。
现代文：最荒远之地，有一座山，名叫大荒山，是太阳和月亮降落的地方。
English: In the wildest land, there is a mountain called the Great Wild Mountain, where the sun and the moon land.

古文：有人焉三面，是颛顼之子，三面一臂，三面之人不死。
现代文：这里有一种人的头上的前边和左边、右边各长着一张面孔，是颛顼的子孙后代，三张面孔一只胳膊，这种三张面孔的人永远不死。
English: Here is a man with a face on the front of his head, on the left, and on the right. He is the descendant of a baboon. He has three faces and one arm. This three-faced man will never die.

古文：是谓大荒之野。
现代文：这里就是所谓的大荒野。
English: This is the so-called Great Wilderness.

古文：西南海之外，赤水之南，流沙之西，有人珥两青蛇，乘两龙，名曰夏后开。
现代文：西南海的外面，赤水的南边，流沙的西边，有一个人以两条青蛇为耳饰，乘着两条龙，名字叫夏后启。
English: Outside the Southwest Sea, south of the red water, west of the quicksand, there is a man with two blue snakes as earrings, riding two dragons, his name is Xiaoqi.

古文：开上三嫔于天，得《九辩》与《九歌》以下。
现代文：启三次上天做客，把天上的乐曲《九辩》和《九歌》带到了下界。
English: Kai ascended to heaven three times as a guest and brought the heavenly music "Nine Arguments" and "Nine Songs" to the lower realm.

古文：此天穆之野，高二千仞，开焉得始歌《九招》。
现代文：在这高达两千仞的天穆之野上，启才得以开始演唱《九招》。
English: It was here, on the two-thousand-meter-high field of Tenmu, that Kai was able to start singing "Nine Movements."

古文：有互人之国。
现代文：有一个氐人国。
English: There is a country of eunuchs.

古文：炎帝之孙名曰灵恝生百互人，是能上下于天。
现代文：炎帝的孙子名叫灵恝，灵恝生了氐人，这里的人都能乘云驾雾上下于天。
English: Emperor Yan's grandson was named Lingyao, and Lingyao gave birth to Xianren. People here can go up and down in the sky on clouds and fog.

古文：有鱼偏枯，名曰鱼妇。颛顼死即复苏。
现代文：有一种鱼的身子半边干枯，名叫鱼妇，是帝颛顼死了又立即苏醒而变化的。
English: There is a kind of fish with a half-withered body, called a fishwife. It is a fish that changes when the emperor dies and immediately wakes up.

古文：风道北来，天及大水泉，蛇乃化为鱼，是为鱼妇。
现代文：风从北方吹来，天于是涌出大水如泉，蛇于是变化成为鱼，这便是所谓的鱼妇。
English: The wind blew from the north, and the sky poured out water like a spring, and the snake turned into a fish. This is the so-called fishwife.

古文：颛顼死即复苏。有青鸟，身黄，赤足，六首，名曰鸀鸟。
现代文：而死去的颛顼就是趁蛇鱼变化未定之机托体鱼躯并重新复苏的。有一种青鸟，身子是黄色的，爪子是红色的，长有六个头，名叫鸀鸟。
English: And the dead toad is taking advantage of the snake fish's uncertain change to lift the body of the fish and revive it. There is a blue bird with a yellow body, red claws and six heads, called the ostrich.

古文：有大巫山。
现代文：有座大巫山。
English: There is a big witch mountain.

古文：有金之山。
现代文：又有座金山。
English: There's another mountain.

古文：西南，大荒之中隅，有偏句、常羊之山。
现代文：西南方最荒远之地的一角，有偏句山和常羊山。
English: In a corner of the most desolate land in the southwest, there are the mountains of Hekku and Changyang.

