古文：西夏西夏，本魏拓跋氏后，其地则赫连国也。
现代文：西夏，本为魏拓跋氏之后嗣，其地域则在赫连夏国之方位。
English: Xixia, originally a descendant of the Wei Tuoba clan, is located in the direction of Helianxia.

古文：远祖思恭，唐季受赐姓曰李，涉五代至宋，世有其地。
现代文：远祖思恭，唐末受赐姓为李，经五代至宋，世代保守疆域。
English: The distant ancestor Sikyong, at the end of the Tang Dynasty, was given the surname Li, and from the fifth generation to the Song Dynasty, the conservative territory prevailed.

古文：至李继迁始大，据夏、银、绥、宥、静五州，缘境七镇，其东西二十五驿，南北十余驿。
现代文：至李继迁开始拓土，据有夏、银、绥、宥、静五州，沿边七镇，从东至西二十五驿，从南到北十余驿。
English: By the time Li Jijian began to excavate, there were five prefectures: Xia, Yin, Handan, Yu and Jing, seven towns along the border, 25 counties from east to west, and more than 10 counties from south to north.

古文：子德明，晓佛书，通法律，尝观《太一金鉴诀》、《野战歌》，制番书十二卷，又制字若符篆。
现代文：子李德明，通晓佛书，精通法律，曾读过《太一金鉴诀》、《野战歌》，做番书十二卷，又造文字，像符节上的篆书一样。
English: His son, Li Deming, was well-versed in Buddhist scriptures and law. He had read "The Art of Goldsmithing" and "The Field Battle Hymn." He compiled twelve volumes of books, and also created characters, just like the characters in Chinese characters.

古文：其俗，衣白窄衫，毡冠，冠后垂红结绶。
现代文：其民俗，穿白窄衫子，戴毡帽，帽后垂红结带。
English: Their folk custom is to wear a narrow white shirt, a skullcap, and a red ribbon tied at the back of the cap.

古文：自号嵬名，设官分文武。
现代文：自称嵬名，设官分文武二班。
English: He claimed to be a samurai and was assigned to the 2nd class of the civil and military division.

古文：其冠用金缕贴，间起云，银纸帖，绯衣，金涂银带，佩蹀躞、解锥、短刀、弓矢，穿靴，秃发，耳重环，紫旋襕六袭。
现代文：其帽贴以金丝缕，间起云纹，用银纸贴成，穿绯色上衣，系涂金的银腰带，佩带蹀躞、解锥、短刀、弓箭、穿靴子，秃发，耳坠重环，紫色窄袖长衫六套。
English: His cap is lined with gold filigree, with intermittent clouding, and is made of silver paper. He wears an ochre-coloured tunic, a gold-plated silver sash, a ploughshare, a de-cone, a knife, a bow and arrow, boots, bald hair, heavy earrings, and six sets of purple long-sleeved shirts.

古文：出入乘马，张青盖，以二旗前引，从者百余骑。
现代文：出入乘马，张青盖，以二旗在前导引，随从百余骑。
English: In and out on horseback, Zhang Qingge, with two flags in front of the guide, followed by more than a hundred riding.

古文：民庶衣青绿。
现代文：百姓穿青、绿衣。
English: The common people wear blue and green.

古文：革乐之五音为一音，裁礼之九拜为三拜。
现代文：改乐之五音为一音，减礼制之九拜为三拜。
English: The five notes of the prelude are one note, and the nine bows of the minuet are three bows.

古文：凡出兵先卜，有四：一炙勃焦，以艾灼羊胛骨；二擗算，擗竹于地以求数，若揲蓍然；三咒羊，其夜牵羊，焚香祷之，又焚谷火于野，次晨屠羊，肠胃通则吉，羊心有血则败；四矢击弦，听其声，知胜负及敌至之期。
现代文：凡遇出兵先行占卜，有四法：一是炙勃焦，用艾条等烧灼羊胛骨；二是剖竹占卜，剖竹于地以求其数，像用蓍草占卜一样；三是咒羊，于夜里牵羊，焚香祷告，又于野外焚烧谷火，次日早晨杀羊，肠胃通则吉，羊心有血则行事必败；四是以箭矢击弓弦，听其声音，从而得知胜负及敌人到来之日期。
English: There are four methods of divination in the event of soldiers being sent out: one is roasting, using sticks of mugwort to burn the shin bones of sheep; the second is divination by cutting bamboo, cutting bamboo on the ground to find its number, like divination with rushes; the third is cursing sheep, leading sheep at night, burning incense and praying, and burning bonfires in the field, and killing sheep the next morning, if the stomach is good, and if the sheep's heart has blood, it will be defeated; the fourth is striking the bowstring with arrows and listening to its sound, so as to know the victory and defeat and the date of the enemy'

古文：病者不用医药，召巫者送鬼，西夏语以巫为 厮 也；或迁他室，谓之 闪病 。
现代文：生病之人不用请医服药，召巫者来送鬼，西夏语以巫为 厮 ；有时迁到别屋去，称之 闪病 。
English: People who are ill do not need to go to a doctor to take medicine. They can call a sorcerer to send the ghost away. In the Xixia language, sorcery is called ; sometimes they move to another house, which is called 闪病.

古文：喜报仇，有丧则不伐人，负甲叶于背识之。
现代文：喜欢报仇，有丧事则不攻打别人，背甲叶于背以便识认。
English: They like to take revenge, but if there is a tragedy, they will not attack others, and they will wear their armor back-to-back so that they can be recognized.

古文：仇解，用鸡猪犬血和酒，贮于髑髅中饮之，乃誓曰： 若复报仇，谷麦不收，男女秃癞，六畜死，蛇入帐。 
现代文：仇解，用鸡猪犬血和酒，贮藏于死人的骨头中饮之，然后发誓说 ：如果再报仇，谷麦不收，男女秃发生癞，六畜死去，蛇进帐中。 
English: For revenge, he drank blood and wine from chickens, pigs, and dogs, stored in the bones of the dead, and then swore: If revenge is taken again, no grain will be harvested, baldness will occur in men and women, six animals will die, and snakes will enter the account.

古文：有力小不能复仇者，集壮妇，享以牛羊酒食，趋雠家纵火，焚其庐舍。
现代文：有力小不能复仇的，召集强健的妇女，用牛羊酒食招待，赶赴仇家放火，焚烧其房舍。
English: Those who are too weak to avenge themselves call together strong women, invite them to a banquet of oxen and sheep and wine, and rush to the house of their enemy to set it on fire and burn down the house.

古文：俗曰敌女兵不祥，辄避去。
现代文：俗称与女兵作战不吉利，便逃走了。
English: It is said that it is unlucky to fight with female soldiers, so he ran away.

古文：诉于官，官择舌辩气直之人为和断，官听其屈直。
现代文：向官府诉讼，官府选择能言善辩者为和断官，了解其屈直。
English: Litigating with the government, the government chooses those who can speak and argue well as arbitrators, and understands their straightness.

古文：杀人者，纳命价钱百二十千。
现代文：杀人者，交纳抵命钱一万二千。
English: A murderer shall pay a life forfeiture of twelve thousand.

古文：土产大麦、荜豆、青稞、皞子、古子蔓、碱地蓬实、苁蓉苗、小芜荑、席鸡草子、地黄叶、登厢草、沙葱、野韭、拒灰、白蒿、碱地松实。
现代文：当地出产大麦、荜豆、青稞、广禾子、古子蔓、咸地蓬实、苁蓉苗、小芜荑、席鸡草子、地黄叶、登厢草、沙葱、野韭菜、拒灰、白蒿、咸地松实。
English: The local production includes barley, peas, green beans, broad beans, ancient cranberries, salty fluffy, bean sprouts, cumin, chickweed, yellow leaves, bean sprouts, shallots, wild leeks, ash, chalk, and salty fluffy.

古文：民年十五为丁。
现代文：百姓年满十五为丁。
English: Children must be at least 15 years old.

古文：有二丁者，取一为正军。
现代文：有两丁者，取其中之一充正军。
English: If there are two boys, take one of them to form a full-fledged army.

古文：负担杂使一人为抄，四丁为两抄。
现代文：随军杂役派一人为抄，四人为两抄。
English: The attendants sent one person to copy, four people to copy twice.

古文：余人得射它丁，皆习战斗。
现代文：其余未入正军的可以在比赛中射杀正军一人取而代之，因此众人都习惯于与人争战相斗。
English: The rest of those who are not in the regular army can shoot one regular soldier in the game to replace him, so everyone is used to fighting with people.

古文：正军马驼各一，每家自置一帐。
现代文：正军配给马驼各一匹，每家自设一帐篷。
English: The regulars were allotted one camel each, and each family set up its own tent.

古文：团练使上，帐、弓、矢各一，马五百匹，台驼一，旗鼓五，枪、剑、棍棓、炒袋、雨毡、浑脱、锹、、箭牌、铁笊篱各一；刺史以下，人各一驼，箭三百，毛幕一；余兵三人共一幕。
现代文：团练使以上，帐篷、弓、马各一，马匹五百只，驼一只，旗鼓五，枪、剑、棍蒬、米少袋、雨毡、浑脱、锹、钅矍、箭牌、铁笊篱各一；刺史以下，人各一匹骆驼、箭三百只，毛幕一套；其余士兵三人共一帐幕。
English: Above the regimental drill, one tent, one bow, one horse, five hundred horses, one camel, five drums, one gun, one sword, one club, one small bag of rice, one raincoat, one raincoat, one yakitori, one yakitori, one arrow, and one iron fence; below the drill, one camel, three hundred arrows, and one woolen curtain; the remaining three soldiers share one tent.

古文：有炮手二百人，号 泼喜 。
现代文：有炮手二百人，号称 泼喜 。
English: There are two hundred gunners, known as "Porky."

古文：勇健者号 撞令郎 。
现代文：勇健者号称 撞令郎 。
English: The bravest of them all is known as "Kuchiryo-ro."

古文：赍粮不过一旬。
现代文：备军粮不超过十天之数。
English: No more than ten days' worth of rations shall be kept in reserve.

古文：昼则举烟、扬尘，夜则篝火为候。
现代文：白天则燃放烟幕、扬起灰尘，夜里便点篝火伺望敌情。
English: During the day, they set off smoke screens and raise dust, and at night they light bonfires to wait for the enemy situation.

古文：若获人马，射之，号曰杀鬼招魂。
现代文：如果俘获人马，则射杀之，号称杀鬼招魂。
English: If they capture a person or animal, they shoot it, which is known as killing ghosts and summoning spirits.

古文：或射草缚人。
现代文：有时射草缚之假人。
English: Sometimes he shoots the dummy tied to the grass.

古文：出军用单日，避晦日。
现代文：出兵用单日，避免晦日。
English: Troops should be dispatched on a single day, avoiding New Year's Eve.

古文：多立虚寨，设伏兵。
现代文：很多时候立虚寨，设立伏兵。
English: They often set up fake villages and ambushes.

古文：衣重甲，乘善马，以铁骑为前锋，用钩索绞联，虽死马上不落。
现代文：穿重甲，乘良马，以骑兵为前锋，人与马用钩索绞联，即使死在马上也不掉下来。
English: Wearing heavy armor, riding a good horse, with a cavalryman as a striker, man and horse with a noose, even if dead on the horse will not fall down.

古文：其民俗勇悍，衣冠、骑乘、土产品物、子姓传国，亦略知其大概耳。
现代文：其百姓一般勇敢强悍，对其服饰、坐骑、土产物品、子孙传国方式，也稍稍知道一些大致情况。
English: Its people are generally brave and strong, and they also know a little about their clothing, horses, local products, and the way their descendants pass on the country.

古文：初，西夏臣宋有年，赐姓曰赵；迨辽圣宗统和四年，继迁叛宋，始来附辽，授特进检校太师、都督夏州诸军事，遂复姓李。
现代文：起先，西夏对宋称臣已许多年，赐姓为赵；到了辽圣宗统和四年，继迁叛宋，开始依附于辽，授为特进检校太师、都督夏州诸军事，于是复姓李。
English: At first, Western Xia had been a vassal of Song for many years and was given the surname Zhao; when it came to Liao Sheng Zongtong and four years, he began to attach himself to Liao and was awarded as a special inspector and military governor of Xiazhou, so he changed his surname to Li.

古文：十月，遣使来贡。
现代文：十月，派使者前来进贡。
English: In October, they sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：六年，入贡。
现代文：六年，入朝询问。
English: Six years later, he went to the Imperial Court to inquire.

古文：七年，来贡，以王子帐耶律襄之女封义成公主，下嫁继迁。
现代文：七年，前来进贡，将王子帐耶律襄之女封为义成公主，下嫁于李继迁。
English: In the seventh year, they came to pay tribute and made the daughter of Prince Jie Ruxiang the princess of Yicheng, and married her to Li Jiji.

古文：八年正月，来谢。
现代文：八年正月，前来致谢。
English: In the first month of the eighth year, I came to thank you.

古文：三月，又来贡。
现代文：三月，又来进贡。
English: In March, the tribute came again.

古文：九月，继迁遣使献宋俘。
现代文：九月，继迁派使者献宋俘。
English: In September, the emissaries were sent to pay tribute to Song POWs.

古文：十月，以败宋军来告。
现代文：十月，以击败宋军告捷。
English: In October, they achieved success by defeating the Song army.

古文：十二月，下宋麟、鄜等州，来告，遣使封继迁为夏国王。
现代文：十二月，攻下宋麟、等州，前来告捷，我派使者封继迁为夏国王。
English: In December, after conquering Songlin and other prefectures, I sent an envoy to King Xia.

古文：九年二月，遣使告伐宋之捷。
现代文：九年二月，派使者报告伐宋之捷报。
English: In February of the ninth year, an emissary was sent to report the success of the Song Dynasty.

古文：四月，遣李知白来谢封册。
现代文：四月，派遣李知白来谢册封。
English: In April, Li Zhibai was sent to thank the envelope.

古文：七月，复绥、银二州，来告。
现代文：七月，收复绥、银二州，来告捷。
English: In July, the recovery of gold and silver in the two states came to a successful conclusion.

古文：十月，继迁以宋所授敕命，遣使来上。
现代文：十月，继迁派使者将宋所授之敕命奉上。
English: In October, Sui Qian sent an envoy to deliver the command given by Song.

古文：是月，定难军节度使李继捧来附，授开府仪同三司、检校太师，兼侍中，封西平王，仍赐推忠效顺启圣定难功臣。
现代文：同月，定难军节度使李继捧前来归附，授为开府仪同三司、检校太师，兼侍中，封西平王，又赐为推忠效顺启圣定难功臣。
English: In the same month, the festival of the Dingan Army made Li Jitang come to annex it, and he was awarded the title of the third secretary of the Kaifu ceremony, the inspector of the school, the attendant, and the king of Xiping, and he was also given the title of the hero of Dingan for his loyalty and obedience.

古文：西夏遣使来奏德威俘掠，赐诏抚谕。
现代文：十二月，继迁暗地里依附于宋，派韩德威持诏书晓之以利害。
English: In December, Sui Qian secretly adhered to Song, and sent Han Dewei to hold an imperial edict to make it clear that he was interested.

古文：十月，来贡。十二年，入贡。
现代文：十年二月，韩德威回，奏称继迁托故不出，所以派兵往灵州掳掠而回。
English: In February of the 10th year, Han Dewei returned, saying that there was no reason for the succession, so he sent troops to Lingzhou to kidnap and return.

古文：十三年，败宋师，遣使来告。
现代文：西夏派使者来奏告韩德威掳掠，赐诏给以抚慰、晓谕。十月，前来进贡。十三年，击败宋军，派使者告捷。
English: Western Xia sent an envoy to report Han Dewei's abduction and plunder, and issued an edict to comfort and instruct him. In October, they came to pay tribute. In the thirteenth year, they defeated the Song Army and sent an envoy to claim victory.

古文：十四年，又来贡。
现代文：十四年，又来进贡。
English: Fourteen years later, the tribute came again.

古文：十五年三月，以破宋兵来告，封继迁为西平王。
现代文：十五年三月，以击败宋军来告，封继迁为西平王。
English: In March of the fifteenth year, he announced that he had defeated the Song army and was enthroned as the King of Xiping.

古文：六月，遣使来谢封册。
现代文：六月，派使者来谢册封。
English: In June, he sent an envoy to thank the emperor.

古文：十六年，来贡。
现代文：十六年，前来进贡。
English: Sixteen years later, they came to pay tribute.

古文：十八年，授继迁子德明朔方军节度使。
现代文：十八年，授继迁子李德明为朔方军节度使。
English: In the 18th year, Li Deming, the son of the designated successor, became the military envoy of the Shuo side.

古文：十九年，遣李文冀来贡。
现代文：十九年，派李文贵前来进贡。
English: In 1919, he sent Li Wengui to pay tribute.

古文：六月，奏下宋恒、环、庆三州，赐诏褒美。
现代文：六月，奏告攻下宋恒、环、庆三州，赐诏给以嘉奖。
English: In June, it was reported that Song Heng, Huan, and Qing had conquered the three states, and they were awarded a commendation.

古文：二十年，遣使来进马、驼。
现代文：二十年，派使者前来进献马、骆驼。
English: For twenty years he sent messengers to offer horses and camels.

古文：六月，遣刘仁勖来告下灵州。
现代文：六月，派刘仁勖来报告攻下灵州。
English: In June, Liu Renzhen was sent to report the capture of Lingshou.

古文：二十一年，继迁薨，其子德昭遣使来告。
现代文：二十一年，继迁薨，其子李德昭派使者前来告知。
English: In 1921, his son Li Dezhao sent an envoy to inform him of the relocation.

古文：六月，赠继迁尚书令，遣西上阁门使丁振吊慰。
现代文：六月，追赠继迁为尚书令，派西上阁门使丁振吊唁。
English: In June, the posthumous transfer of the succession was ordered by Shang Shuling, who sent the envoy Ding Zhen to the west to offer condolences.

古文：八月，德昭遣使来谢吊赠。
现代文：八月，德昭派使者前来为吊唁、赠号致谢。
English: In August, Dezhao sent an envoy to express his gratitude for the condolences and the donation.

古文：二十二年三月，德昭遣使上继迁遗留物。
现代文：二十二年三月，德昭派使者奉上继迁遗物。
English: In March 1922, De Zhao sent an emissary to bring back the relic.

古文：七月，封德昭为西平王。
现代文：七月，封德昭为西平王。
English: In July, Fong De Zhao became the King of Xiping.

古文：十月，遣使来谢封册。
现代文：十月，派使者前来谢册封。
English: In October, they sent an emissary to thank him.

古文：二十三年，下宋青城，来告。
现代文：二十三年，攻下宋之青城，前来奏告。
English: Twenty-three years later, after capturing Song's Qingcheng, he came to report.

古文：二十五年，德昭母薨，遣使吊祭，起复。
现代文：二十五年，德昭母薨，派使者吊唁、祭祀，特许德昭起复。
English: In the 25th year of the reign of Emperor Dezhao, Empress Dowager Dezhao sent an envoy to offer condolences and make a sacrifice.

古文：二十七年，承天皇太后崩，遣使报哀于夏。
现代文：二十七年，承天皇太后崩，派使者向夏报哀。
English: In the 27th year of Emperor Shōnen's reign, the Empress Dowager passed away, and an envoy was sent to pay her respects.

古文：二十八年，遣使册德昭为夏国王。
现代文：二十八年，派使者册封德昭为夏国王。
English: In the 28th year, he sent an envoy to proclaim Dezhao as the king of Xia.

古文：开泰元年，德昭遣使进良马。
现代文：开泰元年，德昭派使者进献良马。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taizong, Emperor Dezhao sent an envoy to present good horses.

古文：二年，遣使引进使李延弘赐夏国王李德昭及义成公主车马。
现代文：二年，派引进使李延弘赐给夏国王李德昭及义成公主车马。
English: In the second year, Li Yanhong sent an envoy to King Li Dezhao of Xia and Princess Yicheng to give them chariots and horses.

古文：太平元年，来贡。
现代文：太平元年，前来进贡。
English: In the first year of the Taiping era, they came to pay tribute.

古文：十一年，圣宗崩，报哀于夏，德昭遣使来进赙币。
现代文：十一年，圣宗驾崩，向夏报哀，德昭派使者前来进献助丧之财物和钱。
English: In the eleventh year, after the death of the Holy Sect, in mourning for Xia Bao, De Zhao sent an emissary to come and donate the property and money for the funeral.

古文：兴宗即位，以兴平公主下嫁李元昊，以元昊为驸马都尉。
现代文：兴宗即位，以兴平公主下嫁李元昊，以元昊为驸马都尉。
English: When Emperor Xingzong ascended the throne, he married Princess Xingping to Li Yuanhao, and made Yuanhao the captain of the imperial horse.

古文：重熙元年，夏国遣使来贺。
现代文：重熙元年，夏国派使者前来朝贺。
English: In the first year of Chongxi, Xia Guo sent an envoy to congratulate the emperor.

古文：李德昭薨，册其子夏国公元昊为王。
现代文：李德昭薨，册立其子夏国公元昊为王。
English: Li De Zhaohui proclaimed his son Xia Guo Bao as king.

古文：二年，来贡。
现代文：二年，前来进贡。
English: Two years later, they came to pay tribute.

古文：十二月，禁夏国使沿路私市金铁。
现代文：十二月，禁止夏国使者沿路私自买卖金铁。
English: In December, Xia's emissaries were prohibited from buying and selling gold and iron along the road.

古文：七年，来贡。
现代文：七年，前来进贡。
English: Seven years later, they came to pay tribute.

古文：李元昊与平公主不谐，公主薨，遣北院承旨耶律庶成持诏问之。
现代文：李元昊与兴平公主不和，公主薨，派北院承旨耶律庶成持诏责问。
English: Li Yuanhao did not get along with Princess Xingping, and the princess rebuked him and sent him to the Northern Court to ask for punishment.

古文：九年，宋遣郭祯以伐夏来报。
现代文：九年，宋派郭祯以伐夏之事来告。
English: In the ninth year, the Song Dynasty sent Guo Wei to complain about the summer felling.

古文：十年，夏国献所俘宋将及生口。
现代文：十年，夏国进献所俘宋将及生口。
English: Ten years later, Song Zheng and Zengkou were captured by Xia Guo Jinxian.

古文：十一年，遣使问宋兴师伐夏之由。
现代文：十一年，派使者责问宋兴兵伐夏之原因。
English: In the eleventh year, he sent an emissary to ask Song Xing the reason for the soldiers cutting down the trees.

古文：十二月，禁吐浑鬻马于夏，沿边筑障塞以防之。
现代文：十二月，禁止吐浑卖马给夏，沿边境修筑屏障要塞以防之。
English: In December, the sale of horses to Tibet was banned, and fortifications were built along the border to prevent this.

古文：十二年正月，遣同知析津府事耶律敌烈、枢密都承旨王惟吉谕夏国与宋和。
现代文：十二年正月，派同知析津府事耶律敌烈、枢密都承旨王惟吉劝导夏国与宋讲和。
English: In the first month of the twelfth year, Wang Weiji, a scholar of the history of Tianfu, was sent to persuade Xia and Song to make peace.

古文：二月，元昊以加上尊号，遣使来贺。
现代文：二月，元昊以我国加皇上以尊号，派使者前来祝贺。
English: In February, Yuan Hao sent an envoy to congratulate him, using the honorifics of "our country" and "emperor."

古文：耶律敌烈等使夏国还，奏元昊罢兵，遣使报宋。
现代文：耶律敌烈等出使夏国回来，奏称元昊停止用兵，派使者向宋报告。
English: When the envoys sent by Xia Guo returned, they reported that Yuan Hao had stopped using soldiers and sent an envoy to report to Song.

古文：四月，夏国遣使进马、驼。
现代文：四月，夏国派使者进献马、骆驼。
English: In April, Xia sent an envoy to offer horses and camels.

古文：七月，元昊上表请伐宋，不从。
现代文：七月，元昊上表请求伐宋，不准。
English: In July, Yuan Hao went to the table to request Song Battalions, but was not allowed.

古文：十月，夏人侵党项，遣延昌宫使高家奴让之。
现代文：十月，夏人攻打党项，派延昌宫使高家奴责备之。
English: In October, Xia attacked the Party and sent Gao Jia Nong to Yanchang Palace to reprimand him.

古文：十三年四月，党项及山西部族节度使屈烈以五部叛入西夏，诏征诸道兵讨之。
现代文：十三年四月，党项及山西部族节度使屈烈以五部叛入西夏，下诏征发诸道兵马讨伐。
English: In April of the thirteenth year, the party and the festival of the Shanxi tribe caused the Qure to invade Western Xia in five parts, and issued the following edict to send soldiers and horses to fight.

古文：六月，阻卜酋长乌八遣其子执元昊所遣求援使窊邑改来。
现代文：六月，阻卜酋长乌八派其子拘执元昊所派求援使纞邑改前来。
English: In June, the chief of Dangbu, Wuhachi, sent his son, Zhenxing Yuanhao, to ask for help from the government to persuade the people of Ganyu to come to his aid.

古文：八月，夏使对不以情，羁之。
现代文：八月，夏使者答话不按实情，拘留之。
English: In August, Xia Envoy's answer did not reflect the truth, and he was detained.

古文：使复来，询事宜不实对，笞之。
现代文：使者又来，询问事体不照实回答，笞击之。
English: The envoy came again, inquired about the matter, did not answer truthfully, and rebuked him.

古文：十月，元昊上表谢罪，欲收集叛党以献，从之。进方物，命北院枢密副使萧革迓之。
现代文：十月，元昊上表谢罪，想收集叛党进献，从之；进献土产，命北院枢密副使萧革迎接。
English: In October, Yuan Hao made a confession of guilt and wanted to collect donations for the rebel party. From there, he offered local products and ordered Xiao Ge, the vice-secretary of the Northern Yuan, to meet him.

古文：元昊亲率党项三部来降，诘其纳叛背盟，元昊伏罪。
现代文：元昊亲率党项三部前来降附，责问他收纳叛贼背叛盟约，元昊伏罪。
English: Yuan Hao's father-in-law led the three branches of the party to surrender and accused him of receiving traitors and betraying the covenant, and Yuan Hao committed a crime.

古文：初，夏人执萧胡睹，至是，请以被执者来归。
现代文：当初，夏人拘执萧胡睹，到这时，请元昊归还所拘执之人。
English: At first, Xia Rongxing detained Xiao Hujian. At this time, he asked Yuan Hao to return the detained person.

古文：诏所留夏使亦还其国。
现代文：诏令将所留夏使还给夏国。
English: The imperial edict returned the remaining Xia envoys to Xia.

古文：十二月，胡睹来归，又遣使来贡。
现代文：十二月，萧胡睹回国，夏又遣使前来进贡。
English: In December, Xiao Hujian returned to China, and in the summer, he sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：十七年，元昊薨，其子谅祚遣使来告，上其父遗留物。
现代文：十七年，元昊薨，其子李谅祚派使者来告，奉上其父遗物。
English: In the seventeenth year of Yuan Hao's reign, his son Li Yuanzhang sent an envoy to complain and presented his father's relics.

古文：铁不得国乞以本部军助攻夏国，不许。
现代文：铁不得国请求以本部兵马协助进攻夏国，不许。
English: It is not allowed for the Iron Throne to request the headquarters troops and horses to assist the attack on Xia.

古文：十八年，复议伐夏，留其贺正使不遣，遣北院枢密副使萧惟信以伐夏告宋。
现代文：十八年，又商议伐夏，扣留其贺正使不放还，派北院枢密副使萧惟信以伐夏事告知宋。
English: In the 18th year, they also discussed the summer felling, detained He Zheng and did not allow him to return, and sent Xiao Weixin, the vice-envoy of the Imperial Court, to inform Song of the summer felling.

古文：六月，夏国遣使来贡，留之。
现代文：六月，夏国派使者前来进贡，扣留之。
English: In June, Xia Guo sent an envoy to collect tribute and detained him.

古文：七月，亲征。
现代文：七月，亲征。
English: In July, he enlisted in person.

古文：八月，渡河，夏人遁。
现代文：八月，渡黄河，夏人逃走。
English: In August, after crossing the Yellow River, Xia ran away.

古文：九月，萧惠为夏人所败。
现代文：九月，萧惠为夏人击败。
English: In September, Xiao Hui was defeated by Xia Ren.

古文：十月，招讨使耶律敌古率阻卜军至贺兰山，获元昊妻及其官属。
现代文：十月，招讨使耶律敌古率阻卜军到贺兰山，俘获元昊妻及其属吏。
English: In October, Yuan Hao's wife and her subordinates were captured by the Taobao Army led by Ye Lu's old enemy, who was summoned to Mount Helan.

古文：遇其军三千来拒，殪之；详稳萧慈氏奴、南克耶律斡里殁于阵。
现代文：遇其军三千人前来拒战，敌古中箭死；详稳萧慈氏奴、南克耶律斡里死于军中。
English: When his army of three thousand men came to oppose the war, the old enemy was killed by an arrow; Diao Wen, Xiao Ci, and Nankeyeru died in the army.

古文：十九年正月，遣使问罪于夏。
现代文：十九年正月，派使者向夏问罪。
English: In the first month of the 19th year, an emissary was sent to interrogate Xia.

古文：夏将洼普等攻金肃城，耶律高家奴等破之，洼普被创遁去，杀猥货乙灵纪。
现代文：夏将洼普等人攻金肃城，耶律高家奴等破之，洼普受伤逃走，杀猥货乙灵纪。
English: Xia sent Wa Pu and others to attack Jinsu City, Yerut Gao Jia Nong and others broke it, Wa Pu was injured and fled, and killed obscene goods Biling Ji.

古文：三月，殿前都点检萧迭里得与夏军战于三角川，败之。
现代文：三月，殿前都点检萧迭里得与夏军战于三角川，败之。
English: In March, in front of the palace, Xia Deri had to fight against Xia Jun in the Triangle River and was defeated.

古文：招讨使萧蒲奴、北院大王宜新等帅师伐夏，都部署别古得为监战。
现代文：招讨使萧蒲奴、北院大王宜新等率军伐夏，都部署别古得为监战。
English: Xiao Punu and Beiyin Daowang Yixin, who were recruited to lead the army to attack Xia, were deployed to Biegu to supervise the battle.

古文：五月，萧蒲奴等入夏境，不遇敌，纵军俘掠而还。
现代文：五月，萧蒲奴等进入夏境，未遇敌军，纵兵掳掠而回。
English: In May, Xiao Punu and others entered the summer, but they did not encounter the enemy army, and they were captured and taken back.

古文：夏国洼普来降。
现代文：夏国洼普来降。
English: Xia Guowa fell to the bottom.

古文：十月，李谅祚母遣使乞依旧称臣。
现代文：十月，李谅祚母派使者请求依旧称臣。
English: In October, Li Yuanzhong sent an envoy to the emperor to request that he continue to be treated as a courtier.

古文：十二月，谅祚上表如母训。
现代文：十二月，谅祚依母训上表。
English: In December, I followed my mother's advice and went to the table.

古文：二十年二月，遣使索党项叛户。
现代文：二十年二月，派使者索要党项叛户。
English: In February of the 20th, an envoy was sent to demand that the traitors be expelled from the Party.

古文：五月，萧爻括使夏回，进谅祚母表，乞代党项权进马驼牛羊等物；又求唐隆镇，仍乞罢所建城邑。
现代文：五月，萧爻括出使夏国回来，呈进谅祚母所上表：请代党项暂且进献马驼牛羊等物品；又求唐隆镇，仍请求自行撤销所建城邑。
English: In May, Xiao Yu sent his envoys back to Xia Guo and submitted the following list to the Provincial Party Committee: On behalf of the party, please temporarily donate horses, camels, cattle, sheep and other items; and also ask Tanglong Town to still request the self-cancellation of the built town.

古文：以诏答之。
现代文：以诏答之。
English: He replied with an imperial edict.

古文：六月，获元昊妻，及俘到夏人置于苏州。
现代文：六月，将元昊妻并所俘夏人安置于苏州。
English: In June, Yuan Hao's wife and captive Xia Ren were resettled in Suzhou.

古文：二十一年十月，谅祚遣使乞弛边备，遣爻括赍诏谕之。
现代文：二十一年十月，谅祚派使者请求撤去边备，派爻括赐诏慰恤之。
English: In October of the twenty-first year, the emperor sent an envoy to request the removal of the border guards, and the envoys gave him the imperial pardon.

古文：二十二年七月，谅祚进降表，遣林牙高家奴赍诏抚谕。
现代文：二十二年七月，谅祚进呈降表，派林牙高家奴赐诏给以安慰抚恤。
English: In July of the 22nd year, Yuanzhong Jin submitted a resignation letter and sent Linya Gao Jia Nong to give him a consolation pension.

古文：二十三年正月，贡方物。
现代文：二十三年正月，贡献土产。
English: In the first month of the 23rd year, it contributed to local production.

古文：五月，乞进马驼，诏岁贡之。
现代文：五月，请求进献马、驼，诏令每年一贡。
English: In May, a request was made for the donation of a horse and a camel, and the imperial edict decreed an annual tribute.

古文：七月，谅祚遣使求婚。
现代文：七月，谅祚派使者求婚。
English: In July, he sent an envoy to propose.

古文：十月，进誓表。
现代文：十月，进呈誓表。
English: In October, the oath form was submitted.

古文：二十四年，兴宗崩，遣使报哀于夏。
现代文：二十四年，兴宗崩，派使者向夏报哀。
English: Twenty-four years later, when Emperor Xingzong passed away, he sent an envoy to pay his respects to Xia.

古文：道宗即位，清宁元年，遣使来贺。
现代文：道宗即位，清宁元年，派使者前来朝贺。
English: In the first year of the Qing Dynasty, Emperor Daozong ascended to the throne, and sent an envoy to congratulate the emperor.

古文：九月，以先帝遗物赐夏。
现代文：九月，以先帝遗物赐予夏。
English: In September, Xia was bestowed with a relic of the former emperor.

古文：四年四月，遣使会葬。
现代文：四年四月，派使者来参加太皇太后的会葬。
English: In April of the fourth year, an envoy was sent to attend the funeral of the great empress dowager.

古文：九年正月，禁民鬻铜于夏。
现代文：九年正月，禁止民间卖铜给夏。
English: In the first month of the ninth year, it was forbidden for the people to sell copper to Xia.

古文：咸雍元年五月，来贡。
现代文：咸雍元年五月，前来进贡。
English: In May of the first year of the reign of Emperor Xianyong, they came to pay tribute.

古文：三年十一月，遣使进回鹘僧、金佛、《梵觉经》。
现代文：三年十一月，派使者进献回鹘僧人、金佛、《梵觉经》。
English: In November of the third year, an emissary was sent to present the monks, the golden Buddha, and the "Buddha Consciousness Sutra" to the emperor.

古文：十二月，谅祚薨。
现代文：十二月，谅祚薨。
English: December, excuse me.

古文：四年二月，谅祚子秉常遣使报哀，即遣使吊祭。
现代文：四年二月，谅祚子李秉常派使者前来报哀，当即派使者吊唁祭祀。
English: In February of the fourth year, Li Bingzheng, a scholar, sent an envoy to mourn, and immediately sent an envoy to offer condolences.

古文：秉常上其父遗物。
现代文：秉常奉上其父遗物。
English: He always presented his father's relics to the emperor.

古文：十月，册秉常为夏国王。
现代文：十月，册封秉常为夏国王。
English: In October, he was enthroned as the king of Xia.

古文：十二月，来贡。
现代文：十二月，前来进贡。
English: In December, they came to pay tribute.

古文：五年七月，遣使来谢封册，闰十一月，秉常乞赐印绶。
现代文：五年七月，派使者来谢册封。闰十一月，秉常请求赐予印绶。
English: In July of the fifth year, an envoy was sent to thank the seal. In leap November, he persistently requested that the seal be granted.

古文：九年，遣使来贡。
现代文：九年，派使者前来进贡。
English: Nine years later, an envoy was sent to pay tribute.

古文：大康二年正月，仁懿皇后崩，遣使报哀于夏，以皇太后遗物赐之。
现代文：大康二年正月，仁懿皇后崩，派使者向夏报哀，以皇太后遗物赐之。
English: In the first month of the second year of the Taikang era, Empress Nianye passed away, and sent an envoy to pay her respects to Xia, presenting her with a relic of the empress dowager.

古文：遣使来吊祭。
现代文：夏派使者前来吊唁、祭祀。
English: Xia sent emissaries to offer condolences and make offerings.

古文：五年，来贡。
现代文：五年，前来进贡。
English: Five years later, they came to pay tribute.

古文：八年二月，遣使以所获宋将张天益来献。
现代文：八年二月，派使者以所俘宋将张天益前来进献。
English: In February of the eighth year, an envoy was sent to present Zhang Tianyi with the captured Song.

古文：大安元年十月，秉常遣使报其母哀。
现代文：大安元年十月，秉常派使者报其母哀。
English: In October of the first year of the Taian era, Bing Chang sent an envoy to report his mother's mourning.

古文：二年十月，秉常薨，遣使诏其子乾顺知国事。
现代文：二年十月，秉常薨，派使者诏令其子李乾顺执掌国事。
English: In October of the second year, Bing Changjun sent an envoy to the emperor to order his son Li Qianshun to take charge of state affairs.

古文：十二月，李乾顺遣使上其父秉常遗物。
现代文：十二月，李乾顺派使者奉上其父秉常遣物。
English: In December, Li Qianshun sent an envoy with a gift for his father Bingzhang.

古文：十一月，遣枢密直学士耶律俨使宋，讽与夏和。
现代文：四年七月，册封李乾顺为夏国王。五年六月，派使者来谢册封。
English: In July of the fourth year, Li Qianshun was proclaimed the king of Xia. In June of the fifth year, an envoy was sent to thank him for the proclamation.

古文：夏复遣使来求援。
现代文：八年六月，夏为宋所侵略，派使者求援。
English: In June of the eighth year, Xia was invaded by the Song Dynasty and sent an envoy to China to ask for help.

古文：五年正月，诏乾顺伐拔思母等部。
现代文：寿隆三年六月，因宋在战略要地设置工事，派使者前来报告。四年六月，诏令乾顺攻打拔思母等部。
English: In June of the third year of Shulong, because Song set up construction in a strategic location, he sent an envoy to report. In June of the fourth year, he ordered Qian Shun to attack and capture Shimo and other provinces.

古文：十一月，夏以宋人罢兵，遣使来谢。
现代文：十一月，夏因宋人停止用兵，派使者前来致谢。
English: In November, the Xiayin Song people stopped using soldiers and sent an envoy to express their thanks.

古文：六年十一月，遣使请尚公主。
现代文：六年十一月，派使者请求娶公主。
English: In November of the sixth year, he sent an envoy to ask the princess to marry him.

古文：七年，道宗崩，遣使告哀于夏。
现代文：七年，道宗崩，派使者向夏告哀。
English: Seven years later, when Dao Zong passed away, he sent an envoy to mourn Xia.

古文：遣使来慰奠。
现代文：夏派使者前来慰唁祭祀。
English: Xia sent an emissary to offer a consolation sacrifice.

古文：天祚即位，乾统元年，夏遣使来贺。
现代文：天祚帝即位，乾统元年，夏派使者前来祝贺。
English: Emperor Tenzin ascended to the throne, and in the first year of the Qian Dynasty, Emperor Xia sent an envoy to congratulate him.

古文：二年，复请尚公主。
现代文：二年，又请求下嫁公主。
English: Two years later, he asked the princess to marry him.

古文：又以为宋所侵，遣李造福、田若水来求援。
现代文：又因为宋所侵，派李造福、田若水来求援。
English: Because of Song's invasion, he sent Li Zuofu and Tian Ruoshui to ask for help.

古文：三年，复遣使请尚公主。
现代文：三年，又派使者请求下嫁公主。
English: Three years later, he sent another envoy to ask the princess to marry him.

古文：十月，使复来求援。
现代文：十月，使者又来求援。
English: In October, the envoy came again to ask for help.

古文：四年、五年，李造福等至，乞援。
现代文：四年、五年，李造福等到来，求援。
English: In the fourth and fifth years, Li Zuofu arrived and asked for help.

古文：以族女南仙封成安公主下嫁乾顺。
现代文：以族女南仙封为成安公主，下嫁于乾顺。
English: Nan Xianfu, a member of the same ethnic group, is portrayed as Princess Cheng'an, who later marries Qian Shun.

古文：六年正月，遣牛温舒使宋，令归所侵夏地。
现代文：六年正月，派牛温舒出使宋，责令归还所侵占的夏国土地。
English: In the first month of the sixth year, Emperor Niu Wenshu sent an envoy to Song and ordered the return of the occupied land of Xia.

古文：六月，遣李造福来谢。
现代文：六月，派李造福前来致谢。
English: In June, he sent Li Zuofu to thank him.

古文：八年，乾顺以成安公主生子，遣使来告。
现代文：八年，乾顺以成安公主生了儿子，派使者前来告知。
English: In the eighth year, Emperor Qianshun sent an envoy to inform Princess Cheng'an that she had given birth to a son.

古文：九年，以宋不归地来告。
现代文：九年，以宋不退还侵地来报告。
English: In the ninth year, it was reported that the Song Dynasty did not return the invaded land.

古文：十年，遣李造福等来贡。
现代文：十年，派李造福等前来进贡。
English: Ten years later, Li Zuofu and others were sent to pay tribute.

古文：天庆三年六月，来贡。
现代文：天庆三年六月，前来进贡。
English: In June of the third year of Tianqing, they came to pay tribute.

古文：保大二年，天祚播迁，乾顺率兵来援，为金师所败，乾顺请临其国。
现代文：保大二年，天祚帝流亡，乾顺率兵援救，为金兵所败，乾顺请天祚帝屈尊到夏国。
English: In the second year of Bao Dai, Emperor Jianzhong went into exile, and Emperor Qianshun led soldiers to rescue him. Defeated by the Golden Army, Emperor Jianzhong invited Emperor Jianzhong to come to Xia.

古文：六月，遣使册乾顺为夏国皇帝，而天祚被执归金矣。
现代文：六月，我派使者册封乾顺为夏国皇帝，然而天祚帝被俘到了金国。
English: In June, I sent an envoy to enthrone Qian Shun as the emperor of Xia, but Emperor Tianyao was captured and taken to Jin.

