古文：陈胜者，阳城人也，字涉。
现代文：陈胜，是阳城人，字涉。
English: Chen Sheng is from Yangcheng and is fluent in Chinese.

古文：吴广者，阳夏人也，字叔。
现代文：吴广，是阳夏人，字叔。
English: Wu Guang is a Yangxia person, a word uncle.

古文：陈涉少时，尝与人佣耕，辍耕之垄上，怅恨久之，曰： 苟富贵，无相忘。 
现代文：陈涉年轻的时侯，曾经和别人一起被雇用耕田，一次当他停止耕作走到田埂上休息时，感慨恼恨了好一会儿，说： 假如谁将来富贵了，大家相互不要忘记了。 
English: When Chen Tang was young, he was once hired to work the fields together with others. Once, when he stopped farming and went to the paddock to rest, he felt resentment for a while and said: If anyone becomes rich in the future, let's not forget each other.

古文：庸者笑而应曰： 若为庸耕，何富贵也？ 
现代文：和他一起受雇佣的伙伴们笑着回答说： 你是被雇给人家耕田的，哪能富贵呢？ 陈涉叹息着说： 唉！
English: His fellow employees laughed and replied, "You are hired to farm, how can you be rich?" Chen Zhou sighed and said, "Alas!

古文：陈涉太息曰： 嗟乎，燕雀安知鸿鹄ú之志哉！ 
现代文：燕子、麻雀这类小鸟怎么能理解大雁、天鹅的远大志向呢！ 
English: How can small birds such as swallows and sparrows understand the lofty ambitions of geese and swans?

古文：二世元年七月，发闾左敌戍渔阳，九百人屯大泽乡。
现代文：秦二世元年七月，征调居住在里巷左边的贫民去防守渔阳，一共有九百人驻扎在大泽乡。
English: In July of the first year of Qin II, the poor people living on the left side of the alley were conscripted to defend Yuyang. A total of nine hundred people were stationed in Osawa Township.

古文：陈胜、吴广皆次当行，为屯长。
现代文：陈胜、吴广都编入这次征发的行列之中，当了屯长。
English: Chen Sheng and Wu Guang were both drafted into the ranks of this conscription and dispatched, and became camp commanders.

古文：会天大雨，道不通，度已失期。
现代文：恰遇天下大雨，道路不通，他们估计已经误了到达渔阳规定的期限。
English: It just so happened that there was heavy rain all over the world and the roads were impassable. They estimated that they had missed the deadline for reaching Yuyang.

古文：失期，法皆斩。
现代文：过了规定的期限，按照法津规定是都该杀头的。
English: After the specified period, according to the provisions of the law, they should all be beheaded.

古文：陈胜、吴广乃谋曰： 今亡亦死，举大计亦死，等死，死国可乎？ 
现代文：陈胜、吴广就商量说： 如今逃走也是死，起义干一番大事业也是死，同样都是死，为国事而死好不好？ 
English: Chen Sheng and Wu Guang discussed the matter and said, "Nowadays, it is death to escape, and it is death to do a great deed in an uprising. They are also death. Is it good to die for the national cause?

古文：陈胜曰： 天下苦秦久矣。
现代文：陈胜说： 天下受秦王朝统治之苦已经很久了。
English: Chen Sheng said: The world has suffered from the Qin Dynasty's rule for a long time.

古文：吾闻二世少子也，不当立，当立者乃公子扶苏。
现代文：我听说二世皇帝是始皇帝的小儿子，不应该他来继位，应该继位的是公子扶苏。
English: I heard that the second emperor was the youngest son of the first emperor, and that he should not succeed to the throne, but that the nobleman Fusu should succeed.

古文：扶苏以数谏故，上使外将兵。
现代文：扶苏因为屡次规劝皇上的缘故，皇上派他领兵在外地驻守。
English: Due to Fusu's repeated persuasion of the emperor, the emperor sent him to lead an army stationed in a foreign country.

古文：今或闻无罪，二世杀之。
现代文：如今有人听说他并没有什么罪，却被二世皇帝杀害了。
English: Now some people have heard that he was not guilty of anything, but was killed by the second emperor.

古文：百姓多闻其贤，未知其死也。
现代文：老百姓都听说他很贤德，不知道他已经死了。
English: The common people all heard that he was very virtuous, but did not know that he had died.

古文：项燕为楚将，数有功，爱士卒，楚人怜之。
现代文：项燕原是楚国的将军，多次立功，爱护士兵，楚国人都很爱戴他。
English: Xiang Yan Yuan was a general of the State of Chu. He made meritorious service many times and loved soldiers. People of the State of Chu loved him very much.

古文：或以为死，或以为亡。
现代文：有的人以为他已经死了，有的人以为他逃亡在外躲藏了起来。
English: Some thought he was dead, others that he had run away and gone into hiding.

古文：今诚以吾众诈自称公子扶苏、项燕，为天下唱，宜多应者。 
现代文：现在假使我们冒用公子扶苏和项燕的名义，向天下人民发出起义的号召，应该会有很多人响应。 
English: Now, if we were to issue a call for an uprising to the people of the world in the guise of Nobuko Fuso and Xiang Yan, there should be a lot of people responding.

古文：吴广以为然。
现代文：吴广认为很对。
English: Wu Guang thinks that's exactly right.

古文：乃行卜。卜者知其指意，曰： 足下事皆成，有功。
现代文：于是他他就去占卜吉凶，占卜的人知道他们的意图，说道： 你们的事都能成，能够建功立业。
English: So he went to a fortuneteller, and the fortuneteller knew their intentions and said, "You can achieve anything, you can achieve anything.

古文：然足下卜之鬼乎！ 
现代文：然而你们向鬼神问过吉凶了吗？ 
English: However, have you ever asked the spirits about good or bad luck?

古文：陈胜、吴广喜，念鬼，曰： 此教我先威众耳。 
现代文：陈胜、吴广很高兴，揣摩占卜人所说向鬼神问吉凶的意思，说： 这是教我们先在众人中树立威望。 
English: Chen Sheng and Wu Guang were very happy, guessing the meaning of what the diviner said about asking ghosts and gods for good or bad luck, saying: This is to teach us to establish prestige among the masses first.

古文：乃丹书帛曰 陈胜王 ，置人所罾鱼腹中。
现代文：于是就用朱砂在一块白绸子上写了 陈胜王 三个字，塞进别人用网捕来的鱼肚子里。
English: So he used cinnabar to write the three characters of Chen Shengwang on a piece of white silk and stuffed it into the stomach of a fish that someone else had caught with a net.

古文：卒买鱼烹食，得鱼腹中书，固以怪之矣。又间令吴广之次所旁丛祠中，夜篝火，狐鸣呼曰 大楚兴，陈胜王 。卒皆夜惊恐。
现代文：戍卒买鱼回来煮着吃，发现了鱼肚中的帛书，对这事自然觉得很奇怪了。 陈胜又暗中派吴广到驻地附近一草木丛生的古庙里，在夜里点燃起篝火，模仿狐狸的声音叫喊道： 大楚兴，陈胜王。 戍卒们在深更半夜听到这种鸣叫声，都惊恐起来。
English: Chen Sheng then secretly sent Wu Guang to an overgrown ancient temple near the garrison, lit a bonfire at night, and, imitating the voice of a fox, shouted: Dazhu Xing, Chen Sheng Wang. When the guards heard this chanting in the middle of the night, they were all terrified.

古文：旦日，卒中往往语，皆指目陈胜。
现代文：第二天早晨，戍卒中到处议论纷纷，都指指点点地看着陈胜。
English: In the morning of the next day, there was a lot of discussion among the soldiers, and they were all pointing at Chen Sheng.

古文：吴广素爱人，士卒多为用者。
现代文：吴广一向关心别人，戍卒中很多人愿为他效劳出力。
English: Wu Guang has always been concerned about others, and many students are willing to work hard for him.

古文：将尉醉，广故数言欲亡，忿恚尉，令辱之，以激怒其众。
现代文：一次押送队伍的县尉喝醉了酒，吴广故意多次扬言自己要逃走，以激怒县尉，惹他当众侮辱自己，借以激怒众人。
English: On one occasion, the county lieutenant who was escorting the team was drunk. Wu Guang Zhuang deliberately threatened to run away several times in order to anger the county lieutenant, provoking him to insult himself in public, thereby angering everyone.

古文：尉果笞广。尉剑挺，广起，夺而杀尉。
现代文：那县尉果然鞭打吴广，县尉又拔出佩剑，吴广奋起夺剑杀死了县尉。
English: The prefectural officer whipped Wu Guang, the prefectural officer pulled out his sword, and Wu Guang grabbed the sword and killed the prefectural officer.

古文：陈胜佐之，并杀两尉。
现代文：陈胜协助吴广，一起杀死了两个县尉。
English: Chen Sheng assisted Wu Guang and together they killed two county lieutenants.

古文：召令徒属曰： 公等遇雨，皆已失期，失期当斩。
现代文：随即召集属下号召说： 各位在这里遇上大雨，大家都已经错过了前往渔阳的期限，误期按规定要杀头。
English: He then called together his subordinates and said, "You have all encountered heavy rain here, and you have all missed the deadline for going to Yuyang. If you miss the deadline, you must kill yourself according to regulations.

古文：藉弟令毋斩，而戍死者固十六七。
现代文：即使不被杀头，将来戍边死去的肯定也得十之六七。
English: Even if he is not killed, it is certain that he will die in the future.

古文：且壮士不死即已，死即举大名耳，王侯将相宁有种乎！ 
现代文：再说大丈夫不死便罢，要死就要名扬后世，王侯将相难道都是天生的贵种吗？ 
English: Besides, it's all right if you don't die. If you die, you'll be famous for posterity. Aren't princes and generals all born noble?

古文：徒属皆曰： 敬受命。 
现代文：属下的人听了都异口同声地说： 我们心甘情愿地听凭差遣。 
English: When they heard this, they all said with one voice, "We are willing to do as you say."

古文：乃诈称公子扶苏、项燕，从民欲也。
现代文：于是陈胜等人就假冒公子扶苏和楚将项燕的名义举行起义，以顺应民众的愿望。
English: As a result, Chen Sheng and others staged an uprising in the name of the fake nobles Fu Su and Chu Zheng Xiang Yan, in order to comply with the wishes of the people.

古文：袒右，称大楚。
现代文：大家都露出右臂作为标志，打着 大楚 的旗号。
English: Everyone showed their right arm as a sign and marched under the banner of Dachu.

古文：为坛而盟，祭以尉首。
现代文：他们又筑起高台来宣誓，用将尉的头作祭品。
English: They also built a high platform to take the oath, and used the captain's head as an offering.

古文：陈胜自立为将军，吴广为都尉。
现代文：陈胜任命自己做将军，吴广做都尉。
English: Chen Sheng appointed himself as general and Wu Guang as captain.

古文：攻大泽乡，收而攻蕲。
现代文：首先进攻大泽乡，攻克后又攻打蕲县。
English: First, they attacked Osawa Township, and after conquering it, they attacked Tsuru County.

古文：蕲下，乃令符离人葛婴将兵徇蕲í以东。
现代文：蕲县攻克后，就派符离人葛婴率兵攻取蕲县以东的地方。
English: After the conquest of Jixian, he sent Fu Liangzhe to lead the troops to conquer the east of Jixian.

古文：攻铚、酂、苦、柘、谯皆下之。
现代文：一连进攻铚、酂、苦柘、谯几个地方，都攻克了。
English: The company attacked several places, including Handan, Handan, Bitan and Handan, and conquered them all.

古文：行收兵。比至陈，车六七百乘，骑千余，卒数万人。
现代文：他们一面进军，一面不断补充兵员扩大队伍。等行进到了陈县的时候，已拥有兵车六七百辆，一千多名骑兵，步卒好几万人。
English: As they marched, they constantly replenished their troops and expanded their ranks. By the time they marched to Chen County, they already had six or seven hundred chariots, more than a thousand cavalry, and tens of thousands of foot soldiers.

古文：攻陈，陈守令皆不在，独守丞与战谯门中。
现代文：攻打陈县时，那里的郡守、县令正好都不在城中，只有留守的郡丞领兵与起义军在城门下作战。
English: During the attack on Chen County, the county governor and the county magistrate were not in the city at the time, and only the county magistrate, who stayed behind to lead the troops, fought with the insurgents under the city gate.

古文：弗胜，守丞死，乃入据陈。
现代文：结果郡丞兵败身死，于是起义军就进入城中占领了陈县。
English: As a result, the soldiers of the county magistrate were defeated and killed, so the insurgents entered the city and occupied Chen County.

古文：数日，号令召三老、豪杰与皆来会计事。
现代文：过了几天，陈胜下令召集掌管教化的三老和地方豪杰都来开会议事。
English: A few days later, Chen Sheng ordered that the Three Elders and local heroes in charge of indoctrination be summoned to a meeting.

古文：三老、豪杰皆曰： 将军身被坚执锐，伐无道，诛暴秦，复立楚国之社稷，功宜为王。 陈涉乃立为王，号为张楚。
现代文：与会的人都说： 将军您身披铠甲，手执锐利的武器，讨伐无道昏君，诛灭暴虐的秦王朝，重新建立了楚国的政权，论功劳应该称王。 陈涉于是就自立为王，国号为张楚。
English: The attendees all said: General, you are wearing armor, holding sharp weapons, fighting against the senseless dim prince, annihilating the tyrannical Qin Dynasty, re-establishing the power of Chu, and you should be called king for your merits.

古文：当此时，诸郡县苦秦吏者，皆刑其长吏，杀之以应陈涉。
现代文：在这个时候，各个郡县因秦朝官吏的治理而受苦的百姓，都劫持宣判他们官吏的罪状，把他们杀死来响应陈涉。
English: At this time, the people in various counties and counties who suffered from the governance of the officials of the Qin Dynasty kidnapped and sentenced their officials and killed them in response to the petition.

古文：乃以吴叔为假王，监诸将以西击荥阳。
现代文：于是就以吴广为代理王，督率各将领向西进攻荥阳。
English: As a result, Wu Guang was appointed as the acting king, and the governor led the generals to attack Fenyang in the west.

古文：令陈人武臣、张耳、陈余徇赵地，令汝阴人邓宗徇九江郡。
现代文：命令陈县人武臣、张耳、陈馀去攻占原来赵国的辖地，命令汝阴人邓宗攻占九江郡。
English: He ordered the people of Chen County, Wuxin, Zhang Er, and Chen Yu, to occupy the territory formerly under the jurisdiction of Zhao, and ordered the people of Ruyin, Deng Zong, to occupy Jiujiang County.

古文：当此时，楚兵数千人为聚者，不可胜数。
现代文：这时候，楚地的义军几千人聚集在一起的，多得不计其数。
English: At this time, there were countless thousands of Chu rebels gathered together.

古文：葛婴至东城，立襄强为楚王。
现代文：葛婴到达东城，拥立襄强为楚王。
English: Ge Ying arrived in Dongcheng and supported Xiang Qiang as the King of Chu.

古文：婴后闻陈王已立，因杀襄强，还报。
现代文：葛婴后来听说陈胜已自立为王，接着就杀了襄强，回来向陈胜报告。
English: Ge Ying later heard that Chen Sheng had established himself as king, then he killed Xiang Qiang and came back to report to Chen Sheng.

古文：至陈，陈王诛杀葛婴。
现代文：一到陈县，陈胜就杀了葛婴。
English: As soon as he arrived in Chen County, Chen Sheng killed Ge Ying.

古文：陈王令魏人周市北徇魏地。
现代文：陈胜命令魏人周市北上攻取原属魏国的地方。
English: Chen Sheng ordered the Wei people to go to the north of Zhou City to capture the place that originally belonged to Wei.

古文：吴广围荥阳。
现代文：吴广包围了荥阳。
English: Wu Guang encircled Fenyang.

古文：李由为三川守，守荥阳，吴叔弗能下。
现代文：李由任三川郡守，防守荥阳，吴广久攻不下。
English: Li Yu was appointed as the governor of Mikawa County to defend Fenyang, but Wu Guangjiu was unable to conquer it.

古文：陈王征国之豪杰与计，以上蔡人房君蔡赐为上柱国。
现代文：陈胜召集国内的豪杰商量对策，任命上蔡人房君蔡赐做上柱国。
English: Chen Sheng called together domestic heroes to discuss countermeasures, and appointed Shang Cai Renfangjun Cai Jie as the top pillar country.

古文：周文，陈之贤人也，尝为项燕军视日，事春申君，自言习兵，陈王与之将军印，西击秦。
现代文：周文，是陈县有名的贤人，曾经是项燕军中占卜时日吉凶的官员，也在楚相春申黄歇手下做过事，他自称熟习用兵，陈王就授给他将军印，命他带兵西去攻打秦朝军队。
English: Zhou Wen, a famous sage in Chen County, was once an official in the Xiangyan Army who divined the auspicious and inauspicious times. He also worked under Chuxiang Chunshen Huang Xie. He claimed to be familiar with the use of soldiers. King Chen gave him the seal of a general and ordered him to take soldiers west to attack the Qin Dynasty army.

古文：行收兵至关，车千乘，卒数十万，至戏，军焉。
现代文：他一路上边走边召集兵马，到达函谷关的时候，有战车千辆，士兵几十万人，到了戏亭时，就驻扎了下来。
English: He gathered soldiers and horses along the way, and by the time he reached Han-gu Pass, he had a thousand chariots and hundreds of thousands of soldiers. When he reached the theater, he stationed himself there.

古文：秦令少府章邯免郦山徒、人奴产子生，悉发以击楚大军，尽败之。周文败，走出关，止次曹阳二三月。
现代文：秦王朝派少府章邯赦免了因犯罪而在骊山服役的人、以及家奴所生的儿子，将他们全部招收去攻打张楚的大军，把楚军全给打败了，周文失败之后，逃出了函谷关，在曹阳驻留了两三个月。
English: The Qin dynasty sent the young prefect Zhang Ye to pardon the people who had served in Lushan for crimes, as well as the son born to the family slave. He recruited all of them to attack Zhang Chu's army and defeated the entire Chu army. After Zhou Wen's defeat, he escaped from the Hangu Pass and stayed in Caoyang for two or three months.

古文：章邯追败之，复走次渑池十余日。
现代文：章邯又追来把他打败了，周文再逃到渑池驻留了十几天。
English: Zhang Ye chased and defeated him. Zhou Wen then fled to Dianchi and stayed there for ten days.

古文：章邯击，大破之。
现代文：章邯又来追击，把他打得惨败。
English: Zhang Ye chased after him again and beat him badly.

古文：周文自刭，军遂不战。
现代文：周文自杀，他的军队也就不能作战了。
English: Zhou Wen committed suicide, and his army was unable to fight.

古文：武臣到邯郸，自立为赵王，陈余为大将军，张耳、召骚为左右丞相。
现代文：武臣到达邯郸，就自立为赵王，陈馀做大将军，张耳、召骚任左、右丞相。
English: When the warriors arrived at the capital, they declared themselves as King Zhao, Chen Yu as the great general, and Zhang Er and Zhao So as the left and right ministers.

古文：陈王怒，捕系武臣等家室，欲诛之。
现代文：陈王知道后非常生气，就把武臣等人的家属逮捕囚禁了起来，打算杀死他们。
English: Chen Wang was very angry when he found out, so he arrested and imprisoned the family members of the vassals and others, intending to kill them.

古文：柱国曰： 秦未亡而诛赵王将相家属，此生一秦也。
现代文：上柱国蔡赐说： 秦王朝还没有灭亡就杀了赵王将相的家属，这等于是又生出一个与我们为敌的秦国来。
English: The upper pillar state Cai Zi said: The Qin Dynasty had not yet perished when it killed the family members of Zhao Wang Zhaoxiang, which was tantamount to giving birth to another Qin state that was our enemy.

古文：不如因而立之。 
现代文：不如趁此机会封他做赵王。 
English: It is better to take this opportunity to make him Zhao Wang.

古文：陈王乃遣使者贺赵，而徙系武臣等家属宫中，而封耳子张敖为成都君，趣赵兵亟入关。
现代文：陈王于是就派遣使者前往赵国去祝贺，同时把武臣等人的家属迁移到宫中软禁起来，又封张耳的儿子张敖做成都君，催促赵军尽快进军函谷关。
English: King Chen then sent an envoy to Zhao to congratulate him. At the same time, he moved the families of warriors and other people to the palace and put them under house arrest. He also made Zhang Er's son Zhang Jun the prince of Chengdu, urging the Zhao army to march into Hantian Pass as soon as possible.

古文：赵王将相相与谋曰： 王王赵，非楚意也。
现代文：赵王武臣的将相们商议说： 大王您在赵地称王，并不是楚国的本意。
English: Zhao Wang's generals and courtiers deliberated and said: Great King, it was not the intention of the State of Chu for you to become king in Zhao.

古文：楚已诛秦，必加兵于赵。
现代文：等到楚灭秦以后，一定会来攻打赵国。
English: After waiting for Chu to exterminate Qin, he will definitely attack Zhao.

古文：计莫如毋西兵，使使北徇燕地以自广也。
现代文：最好的办法莫过于不派兵向西进军，而派人向北攻取原来燕国的辖地以扩张我们自己的领地。
English: The best way is not to send troops to the west, but to send people to the north to expand our own territory by conquering the former Yan territory.

古文：赵南据大河，北有燕、代，楚虽胜秦，不敢制赵。
现代文：赵国南面据黄河天险，北面又有燕、代的广大土地，楚国即使战胜了秦国，也不敢来压制赵国。
English: In the south of Zhao, there is the natural danger of the Yellow River, and in the north, there is the vast land of Yan and Dai. Even if Chu defeated Qin, it would not dare to suppress Zhao.

古文：若楚不胜秦，必重赵。
现代文：如果楚国不能战胜秦国，必定就会借重赵国。
English: If Chu could not defeat Qin, it would have to rely on Zhao.

古文：赵乘秦之弊，可以得志于天下。 
现代文：到时候赵国趁着秦国的疲敝，就能实现称王天下的志向。 
English: At that time, Zhao State will take advantage of the fatigue of Qin State to achieve the ambition of being the king of the world.

古文：赵王以为然，因不西兵，而遣故上谷卒史韩广将兵北徇燕地。
现代文：赵王认为说得有道理，因而不向西出兵，而派了原上谷郡卒史韩广领兵北上去攻取燕地。
English: Zhao Wang thought that this was reasonable, so he did not send troops to the west, but sent Han Guang, a history graduate from Shanggu County, to lead the troops to the north to attack Yan.

古文：燕故贵人豪杰谓韩广曰： 楚已立王，赵又已立王。
现代文：燕国原来的贵族豪杰劝告韩广说： 楚国已经立了王，赵国也已立了王。
English: Han Guang was advised by Yan's original noble hero to say: Chu has already established a king, and Zhao has also established a king.

古文：燕虽小，亦万乘之国也，愿将军立为燕王。 
现代文：燕国地方虽然小，过去也是个拥有万辆兵车的国家，希望将军您自立做燕王。 
English: Even though Yan Province is small, it used to be a country with 10,000 chariots in the past. I hope you will become the king of Yan independently.

古文：韩广曰： 广母在赵，不可。 
现代文：韩广回答说： 我的母亲还留在赵国，不能这样做。 
English: Han Guang replied: My mother is still in Zhao Province and cannot do this.

古文：燕人曰： 赵方西忧秦，南忧楚，其力不能禁我。
现代文：燕人说： 赵国现在正西面担忧秦，南面担忧楚，它的力量不能来限制我们。
English: Yan said: Zhao Guo is now worried about Qin in the west and Chu in the south. Its power cannot restrict us.

古文：且以楚之强，不敢害赵王将相之家，赵独安敢害将军之家！ 韩广以为然，乃自立为燕王。
现代文：况且以楚国的强大，都不敢杀害赵王将相的家属，赵国又怎敢杀害将军您的家属呢？ 韩广认为他们说的有道理，于是就自立做了燕王。
English: Moreover, with the strength of the State of Chu, no one dared to kill the family members of Zhao Wang Shosheng. How could the State of Zhao dare to kill the family members of your general? Han Guang thought what they said was reasonable, so he became the King of Swallows on his own.

古文：居数月，赵奉燕王母及家属归之燕。
现代文：过了几个月，赵国派人护送燕王的母亲及其家属来到了燕国。
English: A few months later, Zhao sent someone to escort Yan Wang's mother and her family to Yan's country.

古文：当此之时，诸将之徇地者，不可胜数。
现代文：这个时候，到各地去攻城占地的将领，数不胜数。
English: At this time, the number of generals who went to various places to attack the city and occupy the land was countless.

古文：周市北徇地至狄，狄人田儋杀狄令，自立为齐王，以齐反击周市。
现代文：周市北上攻城掠地到达了狄县，狄县人田儋杀死了狄县县令，自立为齐王，凭借齐地的力量来反击周市。
English: Zhou went north to attack and capture the city and reached Di County. The leader of Di County, Tian Yao, killed the county magistrate of Di County and established himself as the king of Qi, relying on the strength of Qi to counterattack Zhou.

古文：市军散，还至魏地，欲立魏后故甯陵君咎为魏王。
现代文：周市的军队溃散了，退回到了魏地，打算立魏王的后代宁陵君咎做魏王。
English: Zhou's army broke up and retreated back to Wei, intending to set up the descendants of the Wei king, Ningling Junbei, as the Wei king.

古文：时咎在陈王所，不得之魏。
现代文：其时咎在陈王那里，不能回到魏地去。
English: At that time, the blame was with King Chen, and he could not return to Wei.

古文：魏地已定，欲相与立周市为魏王，周市不肯。
现代文：魏地平定以后，大家想共同拥立周市做魏王，周市不肯接受。
English: After the Wei dynasty was established, everyone wanted to jointly support Zhou Shi to become the king of Wei. Zhou Shi refused to accept this.

古文：使者五反，陈王乃立甯陵君咎为魏王，遣之国。
现代文：使者先后五次往返于陈王与周市之间，陈王乃答应立宁陵君咎做魏王，遣送他回到魏国去。
English: The envoy went back and forth between Chen Wang and Zhou Shi five times in succession. Chen Wang Nai promised to make Ning Lingjun Guan Wei King and send him back to Wei.

古文：周市卒为相。
现代文：周市最后做了魏国的相。
English: Zhou eventually became the prime minister of Wei.

古文：将军田臧等相与谋曰： 周章军已破矣，秦兵旦暮至，我围荥阳城弗能下，秦军至，必大败。
现代文：将军田臧等人共同谋划说： 周章的部队已经被击破，秦朝的军队早晚会到，我军包围荥阳城，不能攻克，秦军来了，一定会大败。
English: General Tian Xuan and others jointly planned: Zhou Zhang's troops have been defeated, the Qin Dynasty's army will arrive sooner or later, our army has surrounded the city of Fenyang and cannot conquer it, the Qin Army is coming and will surely be defeated.

古文：不如少遗兵，足以守荥阳，悉精兵迎秦军。
现代文：不如少留下一些兵力，足够围住荥阳，带领全部精兵前去迎击秦军。
English: It is better to leave a small number of troops, enough to surround Fenyang, and lead all the elite soldiers forward to meet the Qin army.

古文：今假王骄，不知兵权，不可与计，非诛之，事恐败。 
现代文：如今假王吴广骄横无礼，不懂得用兵作战的权谋，不能和他商量，如果不杀掉他，事情恐怕会失败。 
English: Nowadays, the false king Wu Guang is arrogant and rude. He does not understand the strategy of using soldiers to fight. It is impossible to consult with him. If he is not killed, the matter will probably fail.

古文：因相与矫王令以诛吴叔，献其首于陈王。
现代文：因此一起假传陈王的命令杀掉了吴叔，将他的首级献给了陈王。
English: Therefore, a fake order from King Chen killed Uncle Wu and dedicated his head to King Chen.

古文：陈王使使赐田臧楚令尹印，使为上将。
现代文：陈王派使者赐给田臧楚国的令尹官印，将他任命为上将军。
English: Emperor Chen sent an envoy to bestow upon Tian Xizhu the imperial seal of command, and appointed him as a senior general.

古文：田臧乃使诸将李归等守荥阳城，自以精兵西迎秦军于敖仓。
现代文：田臧就派部将李归等人围守荥阳城，自己带着精兵向西到敖仓迎击秦军。
English: Tian Xuan sent Li Gui and others to encircle the city of Fenyang, and took his elite soldiers to the west to attack the Qin army at Jiaochang.

古文：与战，田臧死，军破。
现代文：与秦军作战，田臧战死，军队被击溃。
English: He fought against the Qin army, Tian Xuan died in the battle, and the army was defeated.

古文：章邯进兵击李归等荥阳下，破之，李归等死。
现代文：章邯进军来到荥阳城下攻打李归等人，击败了他们，李归等人战死。
English: Zhang Jun marched to the city of Shenyang and attacked Li Gui and others, defeating them. Li Gui and others were killed in the battle.

古文：阳城人邓说将兵居郏，章邯别将击破之，邓说军散走陈。
现代文：阳城人邓说领兵驻扎在郏城，被章邯部将所带的一支部队击败，邓说率军溃逃到陈县。
English: Deng, a resident of Yangcheng, said that the leader of the army was stationed in Lucheng, and was defeated by a force led by Zhang Yubei. Deng said that he led the army to flee to Chen County.

古文：铚人伍徐将兵居许，章邯击破之，伍徐军皆散走陈。
现代文：铚人伍徐率兵驻扎在许县，也被章邯的军队击溃了他。伍徐的军队都溃散逃到了陈县。
English: Zhang Ye's troops, led by Wu Xu, stationed in Xu County, were also defeated by Zhang Ye's troops. Wu Xu's troops fled to Chen County.

古文：陈王诛邓说。
现代文：陈王杀了邓说。
English: Chen Wang killed Deng, he said.

古文：陈王初立时，陵人秦嘉、铚人董绁、符离人朱鸡石、取虑人郑布、徐人丁疾等皆特起，将兵围东海守庆于郯。
现代文：陈胜刚刚自为王的时候，陵县人秦嘉、铚县人董緤、符离人朱鸡石、取虑人郑布、徐县人丁疾等都自成一军起兵反秦，他们领兵把东海郡守名叫庆的围困在郯城。
English: When Chen Sheng had just made himself king, Qin Jia from Ling County, Dong Quan from Jixian County, Zhu Jishi from Fuyi County, Zheng Bu from Sorrow County, and Ding Zhi from Xu County all raised an army against Qin. They led the army to besiege Qing, the governor of Donghai County, in Lucheng.

古文：陈王闻，乃使武平君畔为将军，监郯下军。
现代文：陈王听说后，就派武平君畔做将军，督率郯城下的各路军队。
English: After Chen Wang heard about it, he sent Wu Ping Junhan as a general to supervise and lead all the troops under the castle.

古文：秦嘉不受命，嘉自立为大司马，恶属武平君。
现代文：秦嘉拒不接受这个命令，自立为大司马，不想隶属于武平君畔。
English: Qin Jia refused to accept this order and became a self-supporting grand steed, not wanting to be subordinate to Wu Ping Jun's side.

古文：告军吏曰： 武平君年少，不知兵事，勿听！ 
现代文：便告诉他的军吏说： 武平君年轻，不懂得军事，不要听他的！ 
English: He told his military officials: Wu Pingjun is young and doesn't understand military affairs, don't listen to him!

古文：因矫以王命杀武平君畔。
现代文：接着就假托陈王的命令杀死了武平畔。
English: He then killed Wu Pingran on the orders of the pretended King Chen.

古文：章邯已破伍徐，击陈，柱国房君死。
现代文：章邯打败伍徐以后，接着进攻陈县，陈王的上柱国房君蔡赐战死了。
English: After Zhang Ye defeated Wu Xu, he then attacked Chen County. The king of Chen, Guofangjun Cai Qi, died in the battle.

古文：章邯又进兵击陈西张贺军。
现代文：章邯又领兵进攻驻守在陈县西面的张贺部队。
English: Zhang Ye also led troops to attack Zhang He's troops stationed in the west of Chen County.

古文：陈王出监战，军破，张贺死。
现代文：陈王亲自出来督战，结果楚军还是战败，张贺阵亡。
English: Chen Wang personally came out to supervise the battle. As a result, the Chu army was defeated and Zhang He was killed.

古文：腊月，陈王之汝阴，还至下城父，其御庄贾杀以降秦。
现代文：十二月，陈王退到了汝阴，在回到下城父时，他的车夫庄贾杀死了他并投降秦军。
English: In December, Chen Wang retreated to Ruyin. When he returned to his hometown, his coachman Zhuang Jia killed him and surrendered to the Qin army.

古文：陈胜葬砀，谥曰隐王。
现代文：陈胜死后安葬在砀县，谥号叫隐王。
English: After Chen Sheng's death, he was buried in Jixian County. His posthumous name was Yin Wang.

古文：陈王故涓人将军吕臣为仓头军，起新阳，攻陈下之，杀庄贾，复以陈为楚。
现代文：陈王从前的侍臣吕臣将军组织了一支青巾裹头的 苍头军 ，从新阳起兵攻打陈县，攻克后，杀死了庄贾，又以陈县为楚都。
English: Chen Wang's former vassal, General Lyu Chen, organized a Cang Tou army with a blue scarf wrapped around its head. From Xinyang, the army attacked Chen County. After conquering it, they killed Zhuang Jia and made Chen County the capital of Chu.

古文：初，陈王至陈，令铚人宋留将兵定南阳，入武关。
现代文：起初，陈王刚到陈县的时候，曾命令铚县人宋留领兵去平定南阳，再进兵武关。
English: At first, when Chen Wang had just arrived in Chen County, he had ordered Song Liu, a man from Min County, to lead the troops to pacify Nanyang and then march into Wuguan.

古文：留已徇南阳，闻陈王死，南阳复为秦。
现代文：宋留攻占了南阳之后，传来陈王被杀的消息，于是南阳又被秦军夺了回去。
English: After Song Liu captured Nanyang, news came that Chen Wang had been killed, so Nanyang was taken back by the Qin army.

古文：宋留不能入武关，乃东至新蔡，遇秦军，宋留以军降秦。
现代文：宋留不能进入武关，就往东到了新蔡，不料又遇上了秦军，宋留带着部队投降了秦军。
English: Song Liu could not enter Wuguan, so he went east to Xin Cai, but unexpectedly encountered the Qin Army. Song Liu surrendered to the Qin Army with his troops.

古文：秦传留至咸阳，车裂留以徇。
现代文：秦军押解宋留到了咸阳，将他车裂示众。
English: The Qin army urged Song to stay in Xianyang, and made a spectacle of his broken carriage.

古文：秦嘉等闻陈王军破出走，乃立景驹为楚王，引兵之方与，欲击秦军定陶下。
现代文：秦嘉等人听说陈王的军队已经兵败逃走了，就拥立了景驹做楚王，率兵到了方与，准备在定陶附近袭击秦军。
English: When Qin Jia and others heard that Chen Wang's army had been defeated and fled, they supported Jing Jie as the King of Chu and led their troops to Fangye, preparing to attack the Qin army near Dingtao.

古文：使公孙庆使齐王，欲与并力俱进。
现代文：于是派公孙庆出使齐国去会见齐王田儋，想联合他一同进兵。
English: Therefore, Sun Qing sent an envoy from Qi to meet with Wang Tianjun of Qi and wanted to join him in entering the army.

古文：齐王曰： 闻陈王战败，不知其死生，楚安得不请而立王！ 
现代文：齐王说： 听说陈王战败了，至今生死不明，楚国怎么能不来向我请示就自立为王呢？ 
English: King Qi said, "I have heard that King Chen was defeated in battle, and his life and death are still unknown. How can the State of Chu establish itself as a king without coming to me for instructions?"

古文：公孙庆曰： 齐不请楚而立王，楚何故请齐而立王！
现代文：公孙庆说： 齐国不请示楚国而立王，楚国为什么要向齐国请示才能立王呢？
English: Gongsun Qing said, "Qi did not ask Chu to set up a king. Why should Chu ask Qi to set up a king?

古文：且楚首事，当令于天下。 
现代文：何况楚是率先起义反秦的，理当号令天下。 
English: What's more, Chu was the first to revolt against the Qin Dynasty, so he should be the leader of the world.

古文：田儋诛杀公孙庆。
现代文：田儋杀死了公孙庆。
English: Tian Rong killed Gong Sun Qing.

古文：秦左右校复攻陈，下之。
现代文：秦军的左右校尉率领部队再次进攻陈县，并占领了它。
English: The left and right lieutenants of the Qin Army led the troops to attack Chen County again and occupied it.

古文：吕将军走，收兵复聚。
现代文：将军吕臣失败逃跑后，重新集结兵马。
English: After General Lv Chen's failed escape, he regrouped his troops.

古文：鄱盗当阳君黥布之兵相收，复击秦左右校，破之青波，复以陈为楚。
现代文：并与当年在鄱阳为盗后被封为当阳君的黥布所率领的军队联合起来，再次进攻秦左右校尉的军队，在青波把他们打败了，再度以陈县为楚都。
English: He also united with the army led by Zibo, who was named as the crown prince of Dangyang after he plundered Dangyang that year, and attacked the army of Lieutenant Qin again. He defeated them in Qingbo and made Chen County the capital of Chu again.

古文：会项梁立怀王孙心为楚王。
现代文：正赶上项梁拥立楚怀王的孙子心做了楚王。
English: Just in time, the grandson of Xiang Liang, who supported the establishment of King Chu Huai, became King Chu.

古文：陈胜王凡六月。
现代文：陈胜称王总共六个月的时间。
English: Chen Sheng reigned for a total of six months.

古文：已为王，王陈。
现代文：称王之后，以陈县为国都。
English: After proclaiming himself king, he made Chen County the national capital.

古文：其故人尝与庸耕者闻之，之陈，扣宫门曰： 吾欲见涉。 
现代文：从前一位曾经与他一起被雇佣给人家耕田的伙计听说他做了王，来到了陈县，敲着宫门说： 我要见陈涉。 
English: A former colleague who had been hired to work the fields with him heard that he had become king and came to Chen County, knocking on the palace door and saying, "I want to see Chen Zang."

古文：宫门令欲缚之。
现代文：守宫门的长官要把他捆绑起来。
English: The officer guarding the palace gate wants to tie him up.

古文：自辩数，乃置，不肯为通。
现代文：经他反复解说，才放开他，但仍然不肯为他通报。
English: After he repeatedly explained, they let him go, but still refused to inform him.

古文：陈王出，遮道而呼涉。
现代文：等陈王出门时，他拦路呼喊陈涉的名子。
English: While waiting for Chen Wang to leave, he blocked the road and called out Chen Zhan's name.

古文：陈王闻之，乃召见，载与俱归。
现代文：陈王听到了，才召见了他，与他同乘一辆车子回宫。
English: When Chen Wang heard this, he summoned him and took a car with him back to the palace.

古文：入宫，见殿屋帷帐，客曰： 伙ǒ颐！
现代文：走进宫殿，看见殿堂房屋、帷幕帐帘之后，客人说： 夥颐！
English: After walking into the palace, seeing the hall of fame, the house, and the curtains, the guests said: "Come on!

古文：涉之为王沉沉者！ 
现代文：陈涉大王的宫殿高大深邃啊！ 
English: The palace of Chen Zhan Da Wang is tall and deep!

古文：楚人谓多为伙，故天下传之，伙涉为王，由陈涉始。
现代文：楚地人把 多 叫做 夥 ，所以天下流传 夥涉为王 的俗语，就是从陈涉开始的。
English: The people of Chud call a lot of things "kan," so the world-wide popular saying that "kan" is king, began with "kan."

古文：客出入愈益发舒，言陈王故情。
现代文：这客人在宫中出出进进越来越随便放肆，常常跟人讲陈涉从前的一些旧事。
English: The guest became more and more unruly as he wandered in and out of the palace, often talking to people about old times.

古文：或说陈王曰： 客愚无知，颛ā妄言，轻威。 
现代文：有人就对陈王说： 您的客人愚昧无知，专门胡说八道，有损于您的威严。 
English: Someone said to Chen Wang: Your guests are ignorant and full of nonsense, which is detrimental to your dignity.

古文：陈王斩之。
现代文：陈王就把来客杀死了。
English: Chen Wang then killed the guest.

古文：诸陈王故人皆自引去，由是无亲陈王者。
现代文：从此之后，陈王的故旧知交都纷纷自动离去，没有再亲近陈王的人了。
English: Since then, all of Chen Wang's old acquaintances have left of their own accord, and no one is close to Chen Wang anymore.

古文：陈王以朱房为中正，胡武为司过，主司群臣。
现代文：陈王任命朱房做中正，胡武做司过，专门督察群臣的过失。
English: Chen Wang appointed Zhu Fang as Zhongzheng and Hu Wu as Sifu, specifically to inspect the faults of the ministers.

古文：诸将徇地，至，令之不是者，系而罪之，以苛察为忠。
现代文：将领们攻占了地方回到陈县来，命令稍不服从，就抓起来治罪，以苛刻地寻求群臣的过失作为对陈王的忠心。
English: The generals returned to Chen County after conquering the area. They ordered that anyone who disobeyed the order would be arrested and punished. They showed their loyalty to King Chen by rigorously investigating the faults of their subordinates.

古文：其所不善者，弗下吏，辄自治之。陈王信用之。
现代文：凡是他俩不喜欢的人，一旦有错，不交给负责司法的官吏去审理，就擅自予以惩治。陈王却很信任他们。
English: If anyone they did not like made a mistake and did not hand it over to the officials in charge of justice, they would arbitrarily punish them. However, King Chen trusted them very much.

古文：诸将以其故不亲附，此其所以败也。
现代文：将领们因为这些缘故就不再亲近依附他了。这就是陈王所以失败的原因。
English: For these reasons, the generals were no longer close to him and attached to him. This is why King Chen failed.

古文：陈胜虽已死，其所置遣侯王将相竟亡秦，由涉首事也。
现代文：陈胜虽然已经死了，他所封立派遣的侯王将相终于灭掉了秦王朝，这是由于陈涉首先起义反秦的结果。
English: Although Chen Sheng was already dead, his feudal vassal Hou Wang Zhe Xiang finally destroyed the Qin Dynasty, which was the result of Chen Tang's first uprising against the Qin.

古文：高祖时为陈涉置守冢三十家砀，至今血食。
现代文：汉高祖时，在砀县安置了三十户人家为陈涉看守坟墓，到现在仍按时杀牲祭祀他。
English: When Han Gao Zu was alive, thirty families were placed in Jixian County to guard the tomb for Chen Wanzhu. To this day, they still sacrifice animals to him on time.

古文：褚先生曰：地形险阻，所以为固也；兵革刑法，所以为治也。
现代文：褚先生说：地形险恶难行，是为了巩固防务；兵革武器与刑法制度，是为了统治国家。
English: Mr. Zou said: the terrain is treacherous and difficult to travel, in order to consolidate defense; military weapons and criminal law system, in order to rule the country.

古文：犹未足恃也。
现代文：这些仍不足依靠。
English: These are still not reliable.

古文：夫先王以仁义为本，而以固塞文法为枝叶，岂不然哉！
现代文：先王以仁义作为治国的根本，而将坚固的要塞和法令条文看作细枝末节，难道不应该这样吗！
English: The previous king took benevolence and righteousness as the foundation of governing the country, but regarded strong fortresses and legal provisions as minor details. Shouldn't it be like this?

古文：吾闻贾生之称曰：
现代文：我听贾生曾经说过：
English: I heard Jia Sheng once say:

古文： 秦孝公据殽函之固，拥雍州之地，君臣固守，以窥周室。有席卷天下，包举宇内，囊括四海之意，并吞八荒之心。
现代文：秦孝公占据崤山和函谷的险固地势，拥有整个雍州地区，君臣牢固把守，随时窥视着周王朝的政权，大有席卷天下，包举宇内，囊括四海的劲头儿，并吞八方极远之地的心气儿。
English: Qin Xiaogong occupied the precarious position of Lushan and Hanzhong Valley, owned the entire Yongzhou region, the monarchs and ministers firmly guarded, and peered at the Zhou Dynasty's political power at any time. He had the power to sweep the world, cover the world, cover the four seas, and swallow the distant lands in all directions.

古文：当是时也，商君佐之，内立法度，务耕织，修守战之备；外连衡而斗诸侯。
现代文：那个时候，商鞅辅佐秦孝公，对内建立法令制度，致力于耕种纺织，整治攻守的武器，对外用连横的策略使诸侯们互相争斗。
English: At that time, Qin Xiaogong, a merchant and assistant to the emperor, established a legal system domestically, devoted himself to the cultivation of textiles, rectified offensive and defensive weapons, and used the strategy of external contention to make the princes fight each other.

古文：于是秦人拱手而取西河之外。
现代文：于是秦国像两手相合那样，容易毫不费力地取得了黄河以西的大片土地。
English: As a result, Qin easily and effortlessly acquired a large area of land west of the Yellow River.

古文： 孝公既没，惠文王、武王、昭王蒙故业，因遗策，南取汉中，西举巴蜀，东割膏ā腴之地，收要害之郡。
现代文：秦孝公死后，秦惠文王、武王、昭襄王承接了秦孝公的治国事业，遵循着先人留下来的策略，向南面夺取了汉中，向西南夺取了巴蜀，向东面割得了肥沃的土地，向北面夺得了冲要险阻的郡邑。
English: After Qin Xiaogong's death, Qin Huiwen Wang, Wu Wang, and Zhaoxiang Wang took over Qin Xiaogong's governance of the country, and followed the strategy left by their ancestors. They conquered Hanzhong to the south, Bashu to the southwest, fertile land to the east, and counties and towns with dangerous obstacles to the north.

古文：诸侯恐惧，会盟而谋弱秦。
现代文：诸侯们因此而恐惧惊慌，相会结盟商量对策来削弱秦国。
English: As a result, the feudal lords were frightened and panicked, and met to form an alliance and discuss countermeasures to weaken Qin.

古文：不爱珍器重宝肥饶之地，以致天下之士。
现代文：他们不吝惜珍贵的财宝和富饶的土地，用来招纳天下的人才。
English: They do not begrudge the precious treasure and rich land, used to recruit the world's talent.

古文：合从缔交，相与为一。
现代文：采取合纵策略缔结盟约，互相支援，为一体。
English: We should adopt the long-term strategy of forming an alliance and supporting each other as one.

古文：当此之时，齐有孟尝，赵有平原，楚有春申，魏有信陵：此四君者，皆明知而忠信，宽厚而爱人，尊贤而重士。
现代文：在这个时候，齐国有孟尝君，赵国有平原君，楚国有春申君，魏国有信陵君：这四位公子，都英明智慧而忠诚信义，宽宏厚道而爱惜人才，尊重贤者而器重士人。
English: At this time, the State of Qi had Meng Yaojun, the State of Zhao had Pingyuan Jun, the State of Chu had Chunshen Jun, and the State of Wei had Xinling Jun. These four noblemen were all wise and loyal, generous and caring for talent, and respected the wise and respected people.

古文：约从连衡，兼韩、魏、燕、赵、宋、卫、中山之众。
现代文：他们互相约定实行合纵联合抗秦，破坏秦国的连横策略，联合韩、魏、燕、楚、齐、赵、宋、卫、中山等国的有关人士。
English: They mutually agreed to carry out the longitudinal and vertical joint anti-Qin strategy, to destroy the longitudinal and horizontal strategy of Qin, and to unite the relevant people from South Korea, Wei, Yan, Chu, Qi, Zhao, Song, Wei, Zhongshan and other countries.

古文：于是六国之士有宁越、徐尚、苏秦、杜赫之属为之谋，齐明、周冣、陈轸、邵滑、楼缓、翟景、苏厉、乐毅之徒通其意，吴起、孙膑、带他、儿良、王廖、田忌、廉颇、赵奢之伦制其兵。
现代文：于是六国的人才，有宁越、徐尚、苏秦、杜赫这些人替他们策划；有齐明、周最、陈轸、邵滑、楼缓、翟景、苏厉、乐毅这些人沟通他们的意见；有吴起、孙膑、带佗、倪良、王廖、田忌、廉颇、赵奢这些人统率他们的军队。
English: As a result, the talented people of the Six Kingdoms, including Ning Yue, Xu Shang, Su Qin, and Du He, planned for them; Qi Ming, Zhou Zhi, Chen Yao, Shao Slip, Lou Ye, Gong Jing, Su Li, and Le Yi communicated their opinions; Wu Qi, Sun Yao, Biao Wei, Ni Liang, Wang Liao, Tian Bo, Liang Po, and Zhao Lao led their armies.

古文：尝以什倍之地，百万之师，仰关而攻秦。
现代文：诸侯们曾经用相当于秦国十倍的土地，百万的大军，攻打函谷关而进击秦国。
English: The lords once invaded Qin with a million-strong army and an area equivalent to ten times the size of Qin.

古文：秦人开关而延敌，九国之师遁逃而不敢进。
现代文：秦国开关迎敌，九国的军队反逃跑而不敢前进。
English: Qin switched sides to meet the enemy, while the armies of the Nine Kingdoms fled rather than advance.

古文：秦无亡矢遗镞之费，而天下固已困矣。
现代文：秦国没有耗费一个箭头，而天下的诸侯却已经疲惫不堪了。
English: Qin didn't waste a single arrow, while the world's lords were exhausted.

古文：于是从散约败，争割地而赂秦。
现代文：于是合纵解散，盟约破坏，各自争相割地贿赂秦国。
English: As a result, the alliance was dissolved, the treaty was broken, and each side scrambled to bribe Qin.

古文：秦有余力而制其弊，追亡逐北，伏尸百万，流血漂橹。因利乘便，宰割天下，分裂山河，强国请服，弱国入朝。
现代文：秦国有充余的力量来利用诸侯的弱点，追赶逃亡败走的敌人，杀得他们横尸百万，流的血把大盾牌都漂浮起来；秦国趁着有利的形势，方便的时机，分割土地山河，因而强国请求臣服，弱国前来朝拜称臣了。
English: The state of Qin had enough strength to take advantage of the weakness of the princes, chase the fleeing and defeated enemies, kill millions of them, and the blood shed made the great shields float; the state of Qin took advantage of the favorable situation and convenient time to divide the land, mountains and rivers, so the strong countries asked for submission, and the weak countries came to worship and praise.

古文： 施及孝文王、庄襄王，享国之日浅，国家无事。
现代文： 延续到秦孝文王、庄襄王的时候，他们在位的时间短暂，国家没有发生什么大事。
English: When it continued to King Qin Xiaowen and King Zhuangxiang, their reigns were short and nothing major happened in the country.

古文： 及至始皇，奋六世之余烈，振长策而御宇内，吞二周而亡诸侯，履至尊而制六合，执敲朴以鞭笞ī天下，威振四海。
现代文： 到了秦始皇，发扬六代传下来的功业，像驾车似的挥动长鞭来驾御各诸侯国，吞并了东周和西周两个小国，灭亡了六国诸侯，登上了皇帝的宝座而控制天下，手持刑杖来鞭笞天下的人民，声威震慑四海。
English: When Emperor Qin Shi Huang arrived, he carried forward the work passed down through six generations, waved the long whip like driving a car to drive the vassal states, annexed the two small countries of East Zhou and West Zhou, destroyed the vassals of the six countries, ascended the throne of the emperor and controlled the world, and whipped the people of the world with a cane, and his voice shook the four seas.

古文：南取百越之地，以为桂林、象郡，百越之君俯首系颈，委命下吏。
现代文：向南方夺取了百越的土地，把它设为桂林郡和象郡；百越的君长们，低着头，用绳子拴住自己的脖子来投降，把自己的性命交给秦王朝的下级官吏掌握。
English: To the south, they seized the land of Baiyue, and set it up as Guilin County and Xiang County; the rulers of Baiyue, with their heads bowed, tied their necks with ropes to surrender, and put their lives in the hands of the lower-level officials of the Qin Dynasty.

古文： 乃使蒙恬北筑长城而守藩篱，却匈奴七百余里，胡人不敢南下而牧马，士亦不敢贯弓而报怨。
现代文：于是派蒙恬到北方去修筑万里长城，作为边疆上的屏障来防守，把匈奴向北驱赶了七百多里；匈奴人不敢到南边来牧马，兵士也不敢搭起弓箭来报仇。
English: So he sent Meng Rong to the north to build the Great Wall of China, to defend it as a barrier on the frontier, and drove the Huns more than seven hundred miles to the north; the Huns did not dare to go to the south to herd horses, and the soldiers did not dare to set up bows and arrows to take revenge.

古文：于是废先王之道，燔百家之言，以愚黔首。堕名城，杀豪俊，收天下之兵聚之咸阳，销锋镝í，铸以为金人十二，以弱天下之民。
现代文：于是废除了先王的治国之道，焚烧了诸子百家的著作，以图使老百姓愚昧无知；他还毁坏各地的名城，杀戳豪杰，收集天下的武器集中到咸阳，熔化刀剑和箭头，铸成十二个金属人像，来削弱天下人民的反抗力量。
English: As a result, he abolished the former king's way of governing the country and burned the works of hundreds of scholars in an attempt to make the common people ignorant; he also destroyed famous cities around the country, killed heroes, collected weapons from all over the world and concentrated them in Xianyang, melted swords and arrows, and cast twelve metal statues to weaken the resistance of the people around the world.

古文：然后践华为城，因河为池，据亿丈之城，临不测之溪以为固。
现代文：然后依凭华山当作城墙，凭借黄河作为护城河，依据亿丈高的华山，临守着深险莫测的黄河，作为守卫的险要之地。
English: Then, relying on Huashan as the city wall, relying on the Yellow River as the moat, relying on the billion-height Huashan, guarding the perilous Yellow River, as the most important place to guard.

古文：良将劲弩，守要害之处，信臣精卒，陈利兵而谁何。
现代文：良将拿着强弓，防守冲要的地方，可靠的大臣带领精干的士兵，摆列着锋利的武器，严厉盘查过往的行人是谁。
English: A good general, armed with a strong bow, defends the rushing places, a reliable minister leads capable soldiers, lines up sharp weapons, and rigorously checks the identity of passing pedestrians.

古文：天下已定，始皇之心，自以为关中之固，金城千里，子孙帝王万世之业也。
现代文：天下已经平定，秦始皇的心中，自以为关中的坚固，是千里金城，可以作为子子孙孙万世当皇帝的基业了。
English: The world has been pacified. In the heart of Qin Shihuang, he thought that the solidity of Guanzhong was a golden city, and it could be used as the foundation for his children and grandchildren to become emperors.

古文： 始皇既没，余威振于殊俗。
现代文： 秦始皇死了以后，他的余威还震慑着远方。
English: After the death of Qin Shihuang, his afterglow still shakes the distant lands.

古文：然而陈涉瓮牖绳枢之子，甿隶之人，而迁徙之徒也。
现代文：然而陈涉是一个用破瓮作窗户，用草绳拴门轴的穷苦人家的子弟，是耕田的人，是供人役使的人，是被征发戍守边境的人。
English: However, Chen Zang is the son of a poor family who used a broken plow to make windows and a straw rope to pull the door shaft. He is a person who cultivates fields, a person who is used as a laborer, and a person who is conscripted to guard the border.

古文：材能不及中人，非有仲尼、墨翟之贤，陶朱、猗顿之富也。蹑足行伍之间，俯仰仟佰之中，率罢散之卒，将数百之众，转而攻秦。斩木为兵，揭竿为旗，天下云集响应，赢粮而景从，山东豪俊遂并起而亡秦族矣。
现代文：他的才能比不上一般平常的人，既没有孔子、墨子那样的贤明，也没有陶朱、猗顿那样的富有，置身在戍卒的行列之中，兴起在乡野之间，带领着疲乏散乱的戍卒，统率着几百个人，转身攻打秦国，砍下木棍做武器，高举竹竿为旗帜，天下的人就像风云那样迅速汇集起来，像回响那样应声而起，挑着粮食，如影随形地跟着他。崤山函谷关以东的英雄豪杰一齐起来，就把秦王朝推翻了。
English: His talent is not comparable to that of ordinary people. He is neither as wise as Confucius and Mozi, nor as rich as Tao, Zhu and Xing. He was in the ranks of soldiers, rose up in the countryside, led the tired and scattered soldiers, led hundreds of people, turned around and attacked Qin, cut down wooden sticks to make weapons, and held up bamboo poles as flags. The people of the world gathered as quickly as the wind and clouds, rose in response to the echo, picked up grain, and followed him like shadows. The heroes east of Shaoshan Hakodate Valley rose together and overthrew the Qin Dynasty.

古文： 且天下非小弱也。雍州之地，殽函之固自若也。
现代文： 再说，那秦王朝的天下并没有缩小削弱；雍州的土地，崤山函谷关的险要坚固，还像从前一样。
English: Moreover, the world of the Qin Dynasty did not shrink or weaken; the land of Yongzhou and the mountains of Lushan and Hanzhong were still as strong as before.

古文：陈涉之位，非尊于齐、楚、燕、赵、韩、魏、宋、卫、中山之君也；锄耰棘矜，非铦于勾戟长铩也；适戍之众，非俦于九国之师也；深谋远虑，行军用兵之道，非及乡时之士也。
现代文：陈涉的地位，并不比齐、楚、燕、赵、韩、宋、卫、中山的国君尊贵；锄耙戟柄，并不比钩戟长矛锋利；被征发戍守边地的民众，并不比九国的军队强大；深谋远虑，行军与指挥作战的本领，也比不上先前六国的那些才智之士。
English: Chen Tang's status was no higher than that of the sovereigns of Qi, Chu, Yan, Zhao, Han, Song, Wei, and Zhongshan; the handle of the scepter was no sharper than that of the hooked spear; the people who were conscripted to defend the borderlands were no stronger than the armies of the Nine Kingdoms; and the ability to foresight, march, and command the battle was no better than that of the talented people of the previous six countries.

古文：然而成败异变，功业相反也。
现代文：但是成功失败完全不同；功业完全相反，这是什么原因呢？
English: But success and failure are completely different; success and failure are completely opposite, what is the reason for this?

古文：尝试使山东之国与陈涉度长絜大，比权量力，则不可同年而语矣。
现代文：假使拿崤山、函谷关以东各国诸侯来跟陈涉量量长短，比比大小，比较一下他们的权威，衡量衡量他们的实力，那简直不能够同年而语，相提并论。
English: If we were to take the princes of countries east of Lushan and Hankow Pass and compare their authority and measure their strength, we would not be able to draw a parallel.

古文：然而秦以区区之地，致万乘之权，抑八州而朝同列，百有余年矣。
现代文：然而秦国当初凭借很小的地方，发展为有万辆兵车的强国，进而控制了其它八州，使来与它地位相同的诸侯国都来向秦国朝拜称臣，已经有一百多年的历史了。
English: However, Qin initially relied on a small place to develop into a powerful country with tens of thousands of chariots, and then controlled the other eight states. It has been more than a hundred years since all the princely states with the same status as Qin came to worship Qin.

古文：然后以六合为家，殽函为宫。
现代文：然后把天地四方当作家，把崤山、函谷关当作宫墙。
English: Then, he regarded the four directions of heaven and earth as writers, and regarded Lushan and Hakodate as palace walls.

古文：一夫作难而七庙堕，身死人手，为天下笑者，何也？
现代文：可是陈涉一个人首倡起义，秦王朝的七代宗庙就被毁坏，连秦王子婴也死在别人手中，被天下的人所讥笑，这是什么原因呢？
English: But what is the reason why Chen Zang initiated an uprising, the seven-generation ancestral temple of the Qin Dynasty was destroyed, even the Qin Prince died in the hands of others, and was ridiculed by the world?

古文：仁义不施，而攻守之势异也。 
现代文：这是因为不施行仁政，而攻取天下和后来防守天下的形势是不同的啊。 
English: This is because they do not practice benevolent politics, and the situation of conquering the world and later defending the world is different.

