古文：吴王濞者，高帝兄刘仲之子也。
现代文：吴王刘濞，是汉高祖哥哥刘仲的儿子。
English: The king of Wu, Liu Bei, was the son of Liu Zhong, the brother of the founder of the Han Dynasty.

古文：高帝已定天下七年，立刘仲为代王。
现代文：高祖平定天下七年后，封刘仲为代王。
English: Seven years after Gaozhu conquered the country, Liu Zhong was appointed as the acting king.

古文：而匈奴攻代，刘仲不能坚守，弃国亡，间行走雒阳，自归天子。
现代文：后来，匈奴攻打代国，刘仲不能坚守，丢弃封国逃跑，抄小路跑到洛阳，向天子自首。
English: Later, when the Xiongnu attacked the country on behalf of the emperor, Liu Zhong could not hold out, so he abandoned the country and ran away. He took a side road to Luoyang and surrendered to the emperor.

古文：天子为骨肉故，不忍致法，废以为郃阳侯。
现代文：天子因为是骨肉兄弟的缘故，不忍依法制裁，只是废黜王号贬他做郃阳侯。
English: Because Tianzi is a flesh-and-blood brother, he could not bear to be sanctioned according to the law, but he was dethroned and demoted to the position of Prince of Shenyang.

古文：高帝十一年秋，淮南王英布反，东并荆地，劫其国兵，西度淮，击楚，高帝自将往诛之。
现代文：高祖十一年秋，准南王英布反叛，向东兼并了荆地，挟持那个地方侯国的军队，向西渡过淮水，攻打楚国，高祖亲自率军诛讨他。
English: In the autumn of the eleventh year of Gaozu's reign, the Junnan king Yingbu rebelled, annexed the Jing region to the east, seized the army of the vassal state in that region, crossed the Huai River to the west, and attacked the state of Chu. Gaozu personally led the army to defeat him.

古文：刘仲子沛侯濞年二十，有气力，以骑将从破布军蕲西，会甀，布走。
现代文：刘仲的儿子沛侯刘濞这年二十岁，强壮有力，以骑将的身分跟随高祖打败英布的军队在蕲县西边的会甀，英布逃走。
English: Liu Zhong's son, Pei Hou Liu Yan, was twenty years old, strong and powerful. As a cavalry commander, he followed Gao Zu to defeat Ying Bu's army at the meeting in the west of Handan County. Ying Bu fled.

古文：荆王刘贾为布所杀，无後。
现代文：荆王刘贾被英布杀死，没有后嗣。
English: Jing Wang Liu Jia was killed by Ying Bu and had no heir.

古文：上患吴、会稽轻悍，无壮王以填之，诸子少，乃立濞於沛为吴王，王三郡五十三城。
现代文：皇帝担心吴地、会稽地的人轻浮好斗，没有勇壮的王来镇慑他们，自己的儿子们年龄小，就封立刘濞在沛地做吴王，统辖三郡五十三个县。
English: The emperor was worried that the people of Wudi and Hefei were frivolous and aggressive, and there was no brave king to calm them down. His sons were young, so he appointed Liu Bei to be the king of Wudi in Hefei, and he governed the three counties and fifty-three counties.

古文：已拜受印，高帝召濞相之，谓曰： 若状有反相。 
现代文：已经拜官受印，高祖让刘濞前来，要为刘濞相面，看后说： 你的容貌有反叛之相。 
English: Having already received the official seal of worship, Gao Zu asked Liu Ye to come and meet him. After seeing him, Gao Zu said, "You have a rebellious look.

古文：心独悔，业已拜，因拊其背，告曰： 汉後五十年东南有乱者，岂若邪？
现代文：同时内心后悔起来，但已经任命了，就轻拍他的后背，告诫他说： 汉兴立以后五十年间东南方向将有叛乱发生，难道是你吗？
English: At the same time, he regretted inwardly that he had already been appointed, so he patted him on the back and admonished him: "Fifty years after the rise of Han Xing, there will be a rebellion in the southeast direction. Is it you?

古文：然天下同姓为一家也，慎无反！ 
现代文：然而天下同姓是一家人，你千万不要造反！ 
English: However, the world is one family with the same surname, you must not rebel!

古文：濞顿首曰： 不敢。 
现代文：刘濞叩着头说： 不敢。 
English: Liu Wei tapped his head and said: I dare not.

古文：会孝惠、高后时，天下初定，郡国诸侯各务自拊循其民。
现代文：到孝惠帝、高后时期，天下刚刚安定，一些郡国的诸侯们各自努力安抚自己的百姓。
English: By the time of Emperor Xiao Hui and Emperor Gao, the world had just stabilized, and the lords of some counties made efforts to appease their own people.

古文：吴有豫章郡铜山，濞则招致天下亡命者铸钱，煮海水为盐，以故无赋，国用富饶。
现代文：吴国拥有豫章郡的铜矿山，刘濞就招募天下亡命之徒私下铸钱，煮海水制盐，因为这个缘故国家不征赋税，而国家费用很富足。
English: The State of Wu owned the copper mines in Yuzhang County, so Liu Bei recruited the world's desperadoes to privately mint money and boil seawater to make salt. Because of this, the state did not levy taxes, but the state expenses were very rich.

古文：孝文时，吴太子入见，得侍皇太子饮博。
现代文：孝文帝时，吴王太子入京朝见，得以陪伴皇太子饮酒下棋。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xiaowen, Wu Wang Taizi visited the imperial court in Beijing and was able to accompany the crown prince to drink and play chess.

古文：吴太子师傅皆楚人，轻悍，又素骄，博，争道，不恭，皇太子引博局提吴太子，杀之。於是遣其丧归葬。
现代文：吴太子的老师都是楚地人，轻浮强悍，又平素骄纵，与皇太子下棋时，为下棋发生争执，态度不恭敬，皇太子拿起棋盘掷击吴太子，打死了他，事后把他的遗体送回吴国埋葬。
English: Prince Wu's teachers were all from Chudi. They were flamboyant, strong, and proud. When playing chess with the crown prince, they had a quarrel over the game, and their attitude was disrespectful. The crown prince picked up the chessboard and threw it at Prince Wu, killing him, and later sent his body back to the State of Wu for burial.

古文：至吴，吴王愠曰： 天下同宗，死长安即葬长安，何必来葬为！ 
现代文：到了吴国，吴王怨怒地说： 天下同姓一家，死在长安就应该葬在长安，何必送来吴国下葬呢！ 
English: When he arrived in the State of Wu, the King of Wu said angrily, "We all have the same family name. If you die in Chang'an, you should be buried in Chang'an. Why do you need to be sent to the State of Wu for burial?"

古文：复遣丧之长安葬。
现代文：又送遗体到长安下葬。
English: The remains were also sent to Chang'an for burial.

古文：吴王由此稍失籓臣之礼，称病不朝。
现代文：吴王自此逐渐违忤藩臣所应遵守的礼节，称病不肯入朝。
English: From then on, King Wu gradually violated the etiquette that should be observed by the vassals of the Han Dynasty, saying that he was ill and refused to enter the imperial court.

古文：京师知其以子故称病不朝，验问实不病，诸吴使来，辄系责治之。
现代文：京城的人知道他因儿子死了的缘故才称病不肯入朝的，经查问确实没有病，此后吴王的使臣一来，就拘禁诘问而治罪。
English: The people in Beijing knew that he only said he was ill because of his son's death and refused to enter the imperial court. After investigation, he was indeed not ill. After that, when King Wu's envoys came, they detained and interrogated him and punished him.

古文：吴王恐，为谋滋甚。
现代文：吴王害怕了，更积极地策划谋反行动。
English: Wu Wang was scared and became more active in plotting countermeasures.

古文：及後使人为秋请，上复责问吴使者，使者对曰： 王实不病，汉系治使者数辈，以故遂称病。
现代文：后来吴王派人进京行秋请的礼节，皇帝又诘问这个使者，使者对皇帝说： 吴王确实没有病，朝廷拘禁惩治好几个使者，因此就称病不来了。
English: Later, King Wu sent someone to Beijing to ask for the etiquette of the autumn, and the emperor questioned the envoy. The envoy said to the emperor: King Wu is indeed not ill. The imperial court has detained and punished several envoys. Therefore, he claimed that he was not ill.

古文：且夫 察见渊中鱼，不祥 。
现代文：而且有这样的话 看到深潭中的鱼，这是不吉利的 。
English: Moreover, it is unlucky to see a fish in a deep pool.

古文：今王始诈病，及觉，见责急，愈益闭，恐上诛之，计乃无聊。
现代文：现今吴王开始假称生病，等到被朝廷察觉，遭严厉地诘问，就越想隐瞒自己的行为，害怕皇上诛杀他，称病的计谋出于无可奈何。
English: Nowadays, King Wu began to pretend to be ill. When he was discovered by the imperial court and severely interrogated, the more he wanted to conceal his actions, fearing that the emperor would kill him, he said that the illness was a desperate ploy.

古文：唯上弃之而与更始。 
现代文：希望皇帝摒弃前嫌给吴王重新开始的机会。 
English: It is hoped that the emperor will give up the old grudge and give King Wu a fresh start.

古文：於是天子乃赦吴使者归之，而赐吴王几杖，老，不朝。
现代文：于是天子就赦免吴国的使者让他们回去，并赐给吴王几、杖，认为他老了，可以不入京朝见。
English: As a result, the heavenly son pardoned the emissaries of the State of Wu and allowed them to return, and gave the king of Wu a pair of scales and a staff, thinking that he was old and could not enter the capital to see the imperial court.

古文：吴得释其罪，谋亦益解。
现代文：吴王得以解除他的罪过，谋反的事情也就放松了。
English: King Wu was able to absolve him of his sins, and the rebellion was relaxed.

古文：然其居国以铜盐故，百姓无赋。
现代文：然而他所在的封国因为有铜盐的收益，百姓没有赋税。
English: However, the people of the feudal state he was in did not pay taxes because of the income from copper and salt.

古文：卒践更，辄与平贾。
现代文：士兵服役发给代役金，而且给价公平。
English: The soldiers were paid compensation for their service, and the price was fair.

古文：岁时存问茂材，赏赐闾里。
现代文：每年在一定时候去慰问有才能的人，给平民赏赐。
English: At a certain time every year, it is customary to pay tribute to talented people and give awards to ordinary people.

古文：佗郡国吏欲来捕亡人者，讼共禁弗予。
现代文：其他郡国法吏要追捕的逃犯，吴王就收容他们而不交出。
English: Other county and state legal officials wanted to hunt down the fugitives, but Wu Wang took them in and did not hand them over.

古文：如此者四十馀年，以故能使其众。
现代文：这样做了四十多年，吴王就能支使利用他的百姓了。
English: After doing this for more than forty years, King Wu was able to make use of his people.

古文：晁错为太子家令，得幸太子，数从容言吴过可削。
现代文：晁错做太子家令，得到太子的宠幸，多次怂恿太子说吴王有罪应削减他的封地。
English: He was mistakenly made the prince's family order, and was favored by the prince. He repeatedly told the prince that the king of Wu was guilty and should reduce his fief.

古文：数上书说孝文帝，文帝宽，不忍罚，以此吴日益横。
现代文：也多次上书劝说文帝，文帝宽厚，不忍处罚他，因此吴王更加骄横。
English: He also wrote to Emperor Wen several times to persuade him, but Emperor Wen was too lenient and could not bear to punish him, so King Wu became even more arrogant.

古文：及孝景帝即位，错为御史大夫，说上曰： 昔高帝初定天下，昆弟少，诸子弱，大封同姓，故王孽子悼惠王王齐七十馀城，庶弟元王王楚四十馀城，兄子濞王吴五十馀城：封三庶孽，分天下半。
现代文：等到景帝即位，晁错做御史大夫，又劝皇帝说： 从前高祖刚刚平定天下时，兄弟少，儿子年幼，就广泛分封同姓的人，所以他的庶子悼惠王封为齐王统辖七十多个县，异母弟刘交做楚元王统辖四十多个县，哥哥的儿子刘濞做吴王统辖五十多个县：分封这三个人，就分去了天下的一半。
English: When Emperor Jing ascended to the throne, he persuaded the emperor that Gaozhu, who had just unified the country, had few brothers and young sons, so he had widely divided people with the same surname. Therefore, his illegitimate son, Gui Wangfeng, ruled more than 70 counties for King Qi, his half-brother, Liu Jia, ruled more than 40 counties for King Chu Yuan, and his brother's son, Liu Xi, ruled more than 50 counties for King Wu. These three people were divided into half of the country.

古文：今吴王前有太子之郄，诈称病不朝，於古法当诛，文帝弗忍，因赐几杖。
现代文：现今吴王因以前有儿子被打死的嫌隙，假称生病不肯入京朝见，依照古代法令该杀，文帝不忍心，就赏他座几和拐杖。
English: Nowadays, the King of Wu is suspected of having had a son beaten to death in the past. He pretended to be ill and refused to visit the imperial court in Beijing. According to ancient laws, he should be killed. Emperor Wen could not bear it and rewarded him with a chair and a cane.

古文：德至厚，当改过自新。
现代文：对他的恩德非常优厚，本当改过自新。
English: The kindness shown to him is very generous, and he has truly reformed.

古文：乃益骄溢，即山铸钱，煮海水为盐，诱天下亡人，谋作乱。
现代文：却更加骄横过度，依据铜矿铸造钱币，煮海水制盐，引诱天下亡命之徒，谋划叛乱。
English: But he was even more arrogant and excessive. He minted coins based on copper mines, boiled seawater to make salt, lured the world's outlaws, and plotted rebellion.

古文：今削之亦反，不削之亦反。
现代文：现在削减他也是造反，不削减他也是造反。
English: To reduce it now would be a revolt, and not to reduce it would be a revolt.

古文：削之，其反亟，祸小；不削，反迟，祸大。 
现代文：削减他，反得快，灾祸小；不削减他，反得晚，灾祸大。 
English: If you cut it short, it will be quick and the damage will be small; if you don't cut it short, it will be late and the damage will be big.

古文：三年冬，楚王朝，晁错因言楚王戊往年为薄太后服，私奸服舍，请诛之。
现代文：景帝三年冬天，楚王来朝见，晁错借这个机会说楚王刘戊去年为薄太后服丧时，在服丧住的房子里偷偷淫乱，请求诛杀他。
English: In the winter of the third year of King Jing's reign, King Chu came to see the emperor. He mistakenly took this opportunity to say that when King Chu Liu Wu was in mourning for the Empress Dowager Bo last year, he secretly committed adultery in the house where she was in mourning and asked her to kill him.

古文：诏赦，罚削东海郡。
现代文：景帝下诏赦免了他的死罪，只是削减东海郡作为惩罚。
English: Emperor Jing's edict pardoned him of the death penalty, only reducing Donghai County as a punishment.

古文：因削吴之豫章郡、会稽郡。
现代文：随之削减了吴的豫章郡、会稽郡。
English: As a result, Wu's Yuzhang County and Huiqi County were reduced.

古文：及前二年赵王有罪，削其河间郡。
现代文：还有两年前赵王因为有罪，削减了他的河间郡。
English: And two years ago, Zhao Wang was found guilty and had his sentence reduced.

古文：胶西王卬以卖爵有奸，削其六县。
现代文：胶西王刘卬因为售卖爵位时舞弊，削减了他的六个县。
English: Liu Hui, the king of Jiaoxi, had his six counties reduced because of fraud in the sale of titles.

古文：汉廷臣方议削吴。
现代文：汉朝的大臣正在讨论削减吴王的土地。
English: The ministers of the Han Dynasty are discussing the reduction of King Wu's land.

古文：吴王濞恐削地无已，因以此发谋，欲举事。
现代文：吴王刘濞担心削地没有止境，便想趁机公开自己的图谋，要起兵发难。
English: Wu Wang Liu Ye was worried that there was no limit to the amount of land that could be cleared, so he wanted to take the opportunity to disclose his plans and raise an army.

古文：念诸侯无足与计谋者，闻胶西王勇，好气，喜兵，诸齐皆惮畏，於是乃使中大夫应高誂胶西王。
现代文：又想到诸侯中没有能共同谋划的人，知道胶西王勇壮，好逞势斗胜，几个齐地的诸侯王都畏惧他，于是派中大夫应高去诱惑胶西王。
English: It also occurred to him that there was no one in the provinces who could work out a plan together. He knew that King Jiaosi was brave and strong, and had the courage to fight and win. Several princes in Qi were afraid of him, so he sent the middle-ranking doctor Ying Gao to tempt King Jiaosi.

古文：无文书，口报曰： 吴王不肖，有宿夕之忧，不敢自外，使喻其驩心。 
现代文：不带书信，只是口头通报说： 吴王不才，有着很快降临的忧虑，不敢把自己当作外人，使您明白他的好意。 
English: Without a letter, just a verbal notification saying: Wu Wang is incompetent, has worries that will soon come, and does not dare to regard himself as a stranger, so that you can understand his good intentions.

古文：王曰： 何以教之？ 
现代文：胶西王说： 有何指教？ 
English: Guoxi Wang said: What advice do you have?

古文：高曰： 今者主上兴於奸，饰於邪臣，好小善，听谗贼，擅变更律令，侵夺诸侯之地，徵求滋多，诛罚良善，日以益甚。
现代文：应高说： 现在皇帝任用臣，被邪之臣蒙蔽，喜欢眼前的利益，听信谗言，擅自改变法令，侵夺诸侯的封地，对封国征求越来越多，诛杀惩罚善良的人，这些情形日益严重。
English: Ying Gao said, "Nowadays, the emperor appoints vassals, is deceived by evil vassals, likes immediate benefits, listens to advice, changes decrees without authorization, usurps the fiefs of princes, solicits more and more for the fiefdoms, kills and punishes good people. These situations are becoming increasingly serious.

古文：里语有之， 舐及米 。
现代文：俗话说： 吃完米糠就会吃到米 。
English: As the saying goes: After eating rice bran, you will eat rice.

古文：吴与胶西，知名诸侯也，一时见察，恐不得安肆矣。
现代文：吴王和胶西王是有名的诸侯，一旦被注意盯上，恐怕不能安宁自由了。
English: King Wu and King Jiaoxi are famous princes. Once they are targeted, they will not be able to enjoy peace and freedom.

古文：吴王身有内病，不能朝请二十馀年，尝患见疑，无以自白，今胁肩累足，犹惧不见释。
现代文：吴王身患内疾，不能朝见皇帝二十多年了，曾经担心被猜疑，又没有办法解释，现在缩敛肩膀小步走路，犹且害怕不被谅解。
English: King Wu suffers from an internal disease and has not been able to meet the emperor for more than 20 years. Once he was worried about being suspected and had no way to explain it. Now he shrugs his shoulders and walks at a slow pace, still afraid of not being understood.

古文：窃闻大王以爵事有適，所闻诸侯削地，罪不至此，此恐不得削地而已。 
现代文：我听说大王因为卖爵的事而被罚罪，我听说诸侯被削减封地，所犯罪过不该这样处罚，这种惩罚恐怕不只削地就能罢休的。 
English: I have heard that the great king was punished for selling his title, and I have heard that the lords were reduced in their fiefs. Crimes should not be punished in this way. I am afraid that this kind of punishment can be stopped not only by cutting the land.

古文：王曰： 然，有之。
现代文：胶西王说： 是的，有这样的事。
English: Guoxi Wang said: Yes, there is such a thing.

古文：子将柰何？ 
现代文：你说怎么办呢？ 
English: What do you say we do?

古文：高曰： 同恶相助，同好相留，同情相成，同欲相趋，同利相死。
现代文：应高说： 憎恶相同的互相帮助，爱好相同的互相留连，情感相同的互相成全，愿望相同的共同追求，利益相同的死在一起。
English: Ying Gao said: "Hate the same mutual help, love the same mutual stay, the same emotional mutual completion, the same common pursuit of desire, the same interests die together.

古文：今吴王自以为与大王同忧，原因时循理，弃躯以除患害於天下，亿亦可乎？ 
现代文：现在吴王自认为和大王有相同的忧虑，愿借着时机顺应事理，牺牲个人身躯为天下除害，想一想可以吗？ 
English: Now, King Wu thinks that he has the same worries as the king, and is willing to take advantage of the opportunity to conform to reason and sacrifice his personal body to eliminate harm to the world. Can you think about it?

古文：王瞿然骇曰： 寡人何敢如是？
现代文：胶西王吃惊地说： 我哪里敢这样做呢？
English: Taken aback, Guoxi Wang said, "How dare I do this?

古文：今主上虽急，固有死耳，安得不戴？ 
现代文：现在皇帝虽然威逼急迫，我本来就有死罪啊，怎能不拥戴他呢？ 
English: Now, although the emperor is threatening and pressing, I already have the death penalty, so how can I not embrace him?

古文：高曰： 御史大夫晁错，荧惑天子，侵夺诸侯，蔽忠塞贤，朝廷疾怨，诸侯皆有倍畔之意，人事极矣。
现代文：应高说： 御史大夫晁错，迷惑天子，侵夺诸侯，蔽塞忠贞贤良的人，朝廷之臣都有憎恨怨恨之心，诸侯都有背叛之意，人臣之事他已做到极点了。
English: Ying Gao said, "The Grand Historian has made mistakes, confused the Son of Heaven, usurped the lordships, and deceived the loyal and virtuous people. The courtiers of the court all have hatred and resentment, and the lords all have the intention of betrayal. He has done the utmost for the people.

古文：彗星出，蝗蟲数起，此万世一时，而愁劳圣人之所以起也。
现代文：现在彗星出现，蝗灾不断发生，这是万世难逢的唯一机会，而且忧愁劳苦的时候就是圣人所以产生的时代。
English: Now that comets are appearing and locust plagues continue to occur, this is a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity, and the time of sorrow and hardship is the time when sages are born.

古文：故吴王欲内以晁错为讨，外随大王後车，彷徉天下，所乡者降，所指者下，天下莫敢不服。
现代文：所以吴王想对内以讨伐晁错为借口，在外追随大王车后，驰骋天下，使面对着的地方投降，使手指着的地方攻克，天下没有敢不顺从的。
English: Therefore, the king of Wu wanted to use the pretext of fighting against the wrongdoers inside the country, and after following the great king's chariot outside the country, he would gallop around the world, make the places he faced surrender, and make the places he touched conquer. There was no one in the world who dared to disobey.

古文：大王诚幸而许之一言，则吴王率楚王略函谷关，守荥阳敖仓之粟，距汉兵。
现代文：大王您假使能够答应我一句话，那么吴王就率领楚王攻下函谷关，守住荥阳敖仓的粮食，抗拒汉兵。
English: Great King, if you can promise me one thing, then King Wu will lead the King of Chu to attack the Huan Valley Pass, hold the grain in the Huan Yang warehouse, and resist the Chinese soldiers.

古文：治次舍，须大王。
现代文：修筑军队驻扎的房舍，等待大王的到来。
English: Build houses for the army to stay in and wait for the arrival of the great king.

古文：大王有幸而临之，则天下可并，两主分割，不亦可乎？ 
现代文：大王真的能够幸临，那么天下就可以并吞，两个君主分治天下，不也是可以的吗？ 
English: If the great king can really come, then the whole world can be annexed, and the two monarchs can divide the world, isn't that also possible?

古文：王曰： 善。 
现代文：胶西王说： 好。 
English: Japan is preparing to send an envoy to South Korea.

古文：高归报吴王，吴王犹恐其不与，乃身自为使，使於胶西，面结之。
现代文：应高回去报告吴王，吴王犹且担心胶西王不参与起兵发难，就亲自做使者，到胶西出使，当面和胶西王订立盟约。
English: Ying Gao went back to report to the king of Wu. The king of Wu was worried that King Jiaosi would not participate in the military uprising, so he personally sent an envoy to Jiaosi to sign a covenant with King Jiaosi in person.

古文：胶西群臣或闻王谋，谏曰： 承一帝，至乐也。
现代文：胶西群臣中有的人知道了胶西王的反叛之谋，规劝说： 侍奉一个皇帝，是最快乐的事。
English: When some of Jiaosi's vassals learned of King Jiaosi's rebellion, they tried to dissuade him, saying, "It is the happiest thing to serve an emperor.

古文：今大王与吴西乡，弟令事成，两主分争，患乃始结。
现代文：现在大王和吴王向西进兵，假使事情成功了，两主定会有分歧争端，灾难就从这开始缠身。
English: Now the Great King and the King of Wu are marching westward. If the matter succeeds, the two masters will certainly have disagreements and disputes, and the disaster will begin to haunt them.

古文：诸侯之地不足为汉郡什二，而为畔逆以忧太后，非长策也。 
现代文：诸侯的土地不足朝廷各郡的十分之二，而背叛朝廷也会使太后担忧，这不是长远之计啊。 
English: The land of the princes is less than two-tenths of the counties of the imperial court, and betrayal of the imperial court will also make the empress dowager worried. This is not a long-term plan.

古文：王弗听。
现代文：胶西王不听。
English: Guoxi Wang did not listen.

古文：遂发使约齐、菑川、胶东、济南、济北，皆许诺，而曰 城阳景王有义，攻诸吕，勿与，事定分之耳 。
现代文：于是派使者联合齐王、菑川王、胶东王、济南王、济北王，都答允了，而且说： 城阳景王为了正义，攻打那些姓吕的，不要让他参与起兵，事成之后分些土地给他就行了。 
English: So he sent envoys to King Qi, King Minchuan, King Jiaodong, King Jinan, and King Jibei, and they all agreed, and said, "For the sake of justice, King Jiyangjing should attack those surnamed Lu. Don't let him take part in raising an army, just give him some land after the matter is settled."

古文：诸侯既新削罚，振恐，多怨晁错。
现代文：诸侯近来受到削减土地的惩罚，都震惊恐惧，大多怨恨晁错。
English: The princes, recently punished by the reduction of land, were shocked and frightened, and most of them resented the mistake.

古文：及削吴会稽、豫章郡书至，则吴王先起兵，胶西正月丙午诛汉吏二千石以下，胶东、菑川、济南、楚、赵亦然，遂发兵西。
现代文：等到削减吴国会稽郡、豫章郡的文书发到吴国，吴王首先起兵作乱，胶西王在正月丙午这天杀死了朝廷派来的二千石以下的官员，胶东王、菑川王、济南王、楚王、赵王也都如此，于是向西进军。
English: When the documents for the reduction of the Wu Congressional Audit County and the Yuanzhang County were sent to the State of Wu, the King of Wu first raised an army to create a disturbance. On the afternoon of the second day of the first month, King Jiaoxi killed the officials sent by the imperial court who were less than 2,000 koku, as did King Jiaodong, King He Chuan, King Jinan, King Chu, and King Zhao, and then marched westward.

古文：齐王後悔，饮药自杀，畔约。
现代文：齐王后来后悔，服毒自杀，违背盟约。
English: King Qi later regretted it and committed suicide by taking poison, breaking the covenant.

古文：济北王城坏未完，其郎中令劫守其王，不得发兵。
现代文：济北王的城墙损坏没有修好，他的郎中令劫持看守他，使他不能发兵。
English: The damage to the city wall of the king of Jibei was not repaired, and his vassal ordered to kidnap and guard him, so that he could not send troops.

古文：胶西为渠率，胶东、菑川、济南共攻围临菑。
现代文：胶西王为首领，和胶东王、菑川王、济南王一起率兵围攻临菑。
English: King Jiaoxi was the leader, and together with King Jiaodong, King Liuchuan, and King Jinan, he led an army to besiege Linyi.

古文：赵王遂亦反，阴使匈奴与连兵。
现代文：赵王刘遂也反叛了，暗中派使者到匈奴商议联合作战的事。
English: Zhao Wang Liu then also rebelled and secretly sent an envoy to the Xiongnu to discuss the matter of joint operations.

古文：七国之发也，吴王悉其士卒，下令国中曰： 寡人年六十二，身自将。
现代文：七国发动叛乱的时候，吴王全部征召他的士兵，下令全国说： 我年纪六十二岁，亲自统率军队。
English: When the Seven Kingdoms rebelled, King Wu called up all his soldiers and ordered the whole country to say: I am sixty-two years old, and I am personally leading the army.

古文：少子年十四，亦为士卒先。
现代文：小儿子年龄十四岁，也身先士卒。
English: The youngest son, aged fourteen, was also the first to graduate.

古文：诸年上与寡人比，下与少子等者，皆发。 
现代文：所以年纪上和我一样，往下和我小儿子一样的人，都要出征。 
English: That's why people my age and younger, as well as my youngest son, have to go to war.

古文：发二十馀万人。
现代文：征发了二十多万人。
English: More than two hundred thousand people were conscripted.

古文：南使闽越、东越，东越亦发兵从。
现代文：向南出使闽越、东越，东越也发兵跟随吴王。
English: They sent envoys to the south from the Kingdom of Yunnan and the Kingdom of East Vietnam, and the East Vietnamese also sent troops to follow the King of Wu.

古文：孝景帝三年正月甲子，初起兵於广陵。
现代文：景帝三年正月甲子，吴王先从广陵起兵出发。
English: In the first month of the third year of Emperor Jing's reign, Wu Wang first set out from Guangling.

古文：西涉淮，因并楚兵。
现代文：向西渡过淮河，于是和楚军会合。
English: They crossed the Huai River to the west and met up with the Chu army.

古文：发使遗诸侯书曰： 吴王刘濞敬问胶西王、胶东王、菑川王、济南王、赵王、楚王、淮南王、衡山王、庐江王、故长沙王子：幸教寡人！
现代文：派使者送给诸侯的信上说： 吴王刘濞恭敬地问候胶西王、胶东王、菑川王、济南王、赵王、楚王、淮南王、衡山王、庐江王、已故的长沙王的儿子：希望得到你们的指教！
English: The letter sent by the emissary to the princes said: Wu King Liu Bei respectfully sends greetings to King Jiaoxi, King Jiaodong, King Liuchuan, King Jinan, King Zhao, King Chu, King Huainan, King Hengshan, King Liangjiang, and the son of the late King Changsha: I hope to receive your advice!

古文：以汉有贼臣，无功天下，侵夺诸侯地，使吏劾系讯治，以僇辱之为故，不以诸侯人君礼遇刘氏骨肉，绝先帝功臣，进任奸宄，诖乱天下，欲危社稷。
现代文：因为朝廷有奸臣，无功天下，却侵夺诸侯的土地，派法吏弹劾拘捕审讯惩治诸侯，专以侮辱诸侯为能事，不用诸侯王的礼仪对待刘氏骨肉至亲，抛开先帝的功臣，提拔任用坏人，惑乱天下，想要危害国家。
English: Because the imperial court had treacherous vassals who did nothing, but invaded the land of the princes, sent legal officials to impeach, arrest, interrogate, and punish the princes, especially to insult the princes, did not use the etiquette of the princes to treat Liu's flesh and blood relatives, abandoned the meritorious vassals of the former emperor, promoted and appointed bad people, confused the world, and wanted to endanger the country.

古文：陛下多病志失，不能省察。
现代文：陛下体弱多病神志失常，不能明察政情。
English: His Majesty is frail, sick and demented, and cannot see the political situation clearly.

古文：欲举兵诛之，谨闻教。
现代文：我想要起兵诛讨他们，我恭敬听从各位指教。
English: I want to take up arms against them, and I respectfully follow your advice.

古文：敝国虽狭，地方三千里；人虽少，精兵可具五十万。
现代文：我国虽然狭小，土地也是方圆三千里；人口虽然少，精锐的士兵也能准备五十万人。
English: Although our country is small, the land is also three thousand miles in circumference; although the population is small, the elite soldiers can prepare five hundred thousand people.

古文：寡人素事南越三十馀年，其王君皆不辞分其卒以随寡人，又可得三十馀万。
现代文：我一向侍奉南越三十多年，他们的君主都不拒绝征召分派士兵跟随我进兵，又可以得到三十多万人。
English: I have been serving South Vietnam for more than thirty years, and their monarchs do not refuse to conscript soldiers to follow me into the army, and they can get more than three hundred thousand people.

古文：寡人虽不肖，原以身从诸王。
现代文：本人虽不才，愿亲自追随各位王侯。
English: Although I am not talented, I would like to personally follow the princes.

古文：越直长沙者，因王子定长沙以北，西走蜀、汉中。
现代文：越地和长沙接壤，他们可追随长沙王的儿子平定长沙以北，然后向西进攻蜀地、汉中。
English: Yueji is on the border with Changsha. They can follow the son of the King of Changsha to pacify the north of Changsha, and then attack Shu and Hanzhong in the west.

古文：告越、楚王、淮南三王，与寡人西面；齐诸王与赵王定河间、河内，或入临晋关，或与寡人会雒阳；燕王、赵王固与胡王有约，燕王北定代、云中，抟胡众入萧关，走长安，匡正天子，以安高庙。
现代文：派人告诉东越王、楚王、淮南王三位，和我一起向西进攻；齐地诸王和赵王平定河间、河内后，有的进入临津关，有的和我在洛阳会合；燕王、赵王本来和匈奴有盟约，燕王在北方平定代郡、云中郡，然后统领匈奴军队进入萧关，直取长安，纠正天子的错误，来安定高祖庙。
English: I sent someone to tell the three kings of Dongyue, Chu and Huainan to attack the west with me. After the kings of Qi and Zhao conquered Dinghe and Hanoi, some of them entered Linjin Pass and some of them met me in Luoyang. King Yan and King Zhao originally had a treaty with the Huns. King Yan conquered Dingde County and Yunzhong County in the north, and then led the Hun army into Shouguan, directly taking Chang'an, correcting the mistakes of the emperor, and stabilizing Gaozhu Temple.

古文：原王勉之。
现代文：希望各为都努力去做。
English: I hope everyone will make an effort to do so.

古文：楚元王子、淮南三王或不沐洗十馀年，怨入骨髓，欲一有所出之久矣，寡人未得诸王之意，未敢听。
现代文：楚元王的儿子、淮南的淮南王、衡山王、庐江王各自心有所专注已经十多年了，怨恨深入骨髓，想要有所行动已很久了，只是我不得知诸王的心意，不敢听命。
English: It has been more than ten years since King Chu Yuan's son, King Huainan of Huainan, King Hengshan, and King Liangjiang have had their hearts focused on something. Resentment has sunk deep into the marrow of their bones, and they have wanted to do something for a long time. However, I do not know the will of the kings, and I do not dare to follow their orders.

古文：今诸王苟能存亡继绝，振弱伐暴，以安刘氏，社稷之所原也。
现代文：现在诸位王侯如能保存延续将要灭绝的国家，扶弱锄强，来安定刘氏，这是宗庙社稷所希望的。
English: Now, if you princes can preserve and continue the country that is about to become extinct, help the weak and stubborn, and stabilize the Liu clan, this is what the ancestral temple society hopes for.

古文：敝国虽贫，寡人节衣食之用，积金钱，脩兵革，聚穀食，夜以继日，三十馀年矣。凡为此，原诸王勉用之。
现代文：我国虽然贫穷，我节省衣食的费用，积蓄金钱，修治兵器甲胄，积聚粮食，夜以继日的努力，有三十多年了，都是为了今天，希望诸王努力利用这些条件。
English: Although our country is poor, I have been saving the cost of food and clothing, saving money, repairing weapons and armor, accumulating grain, and working hard day and night for more than 30 years, all for today. I hope all kings will strive to take advantage of these conditions.

古文：能斩捕大将者，赐金五千斤，封万户；列将，三千斤，封五千户；裨将，二千斤，封二千户；二千石，千斤，封千户；千石，五百斤，封五百户：皆为列侯。
现代文：能逮捕杀死大将军的，赏赐黄金五千斤，封邑万户；逮捕杀死将军的，赏赐黄金三千斤，封邑五千户；逮捕杀死副将的，赏赐黄金二千斤，封邑二千户；逮捕杀死俸禄二千石的官员，赏赐黄金一千斤，食邑一千户；逮捕俸禄一千石的官员，赏赐黄金五百斤，封邑五百户；以上有功的人都可被封为列侯。
English: If you can arrest the person who killed the general, you will be rewarded with 5,000 kilos of gold and 1,000 households will be sealed; if you can arrest the person who killed the general, you will be rewarded with 3,000 kilos of gold and 5,000 households will be sealed; if you can arrest the person who killed the vice-general, you will be rewarded with 2,000 kilos of gold and 2,000 households will be sealed; if you can arrest the person who killed the official with 2,000 koku of salary, you will be rewarded with 1,000 koku of gold and 1,000 households will be sealed; if you can arrest the official with 1,000 koku of salary, you will be rewarded with 500 koku of gold and 500 households will be

古文：其以军若城邑降者，卒万人，邑万户，如得大将；人户五千，如得列将；人户三千，如得裨将；人户千，如得二千石；其小吏皆以差次受爵金。
现代文：那些带着军队或者城邑来投降的，士兵有万人，城中户口万户，如同得到大将军；士兵城中户数五千的，如同得到将军；士兵城中户数三千的，如同得到副将；士兵城中户数一千的，如同得到二千石的官员；那些投降的小官吏也依职位差别受到封爵赏金。
English: Those who surrendered with an army or a town had ten thousand soldiers, and ten thousand households in the town counted as a general; five thousand households with five thousand soldiers counted as a general; three thousand households with three thousand soldiers counted as a vice-general; one thousand households with one thousand soldiers counted as an official with two thousand koku; those minor officials who surrendered were also rewarded with a knighthood, depending on their position.

古文：佗封赐皆倍军法。
现代文：其他的封赏都一倍于汉朝规定。
English: All other awards were double the Han Dynasty stipulations.

古文：其有故爵邑者，更益勿因。
现代文：那些原有封爵城邑的人，只会增加不会保持原状。
English: Those in the original burghs will only increase, not stay the same.

古文：原诸王明以令士大夫，弗敢欺也。
现代文：希望诸王明确地向士大夫们宣布，我不敢欺骗他们。
English: I hope that the kings will clearly announce to the scholars that I dare not deceive them.

古文：寡人金钱在天下者往往而有，非必取於吴，诸王日夜用之弗能尽。
现代文：我的金钱天下到处都有，不一定到吴国来取，诸王日夜使用也不能用光。
English: My money can be found everywhere in the world, and I don't have to go to the State of Wu to get it. The kings can use it day and night without running out.

古文：有当赐者告寡人，寡人且往遗之。
现代文：有应赏赐的人告诉我，我将前往送给他。
English: He that hath a reward tell me, and I will go and give it unto him.

古文：敬以闻。 
现代文：恭敬地奉告诸王。 
English: Respectfully submitted to the kings.

古文：七国反书闻天子，天子乃遣太尉条侯周亚夫将三十六将军，往击吴楚；遣曲周侯郦寄击赵；将军栾布击齐；大将军窦婴屯荥阳，监齐赵兵。
现代文：七国反叛的书信报知天子后，天子派太尉条侯周亚夫率领三十六位将军，去攻打吴、楚；派曲周侯郦寄攻打赵；将军栾布攻打齐；大将军窦婴驻扎在荥阳，监视齐、赵的军队。
English: After the rebellious letters of the seven countries were reported to Tian Zi, Tian Zi sent the 36 generals led by the first lieutenant of the Zhou Dynasty, Zhou Yafu, to attack Wu and Chu; sent the second lieutenant of the Zhou Dynasty, Qu Zhou, to attack Zhao; sent the general Zibo to attack Qi; and stationed the general Dou Ying in Fenyang to monitor the armies of Qi and Zhao.

古文：吴楚反书闻，兵未发，窦婴未行，言故吴相袁盎。
现代文：吴楚等反叛的书信被人们闻知时，汉朝的军队还没出发，窦婴也未出发，向皇帝称赞过去吴王的丞相袁盎。
English: When Wu Chu's and other rebellious letters were made known to the people, the Han Dynasty's army had not yet set out, and Dou Ying had not yet set out, praising Yuan Ang, the former prime minister of King Wu, to the emperor.

古文：盎时家居，诏召入见。
现代文：袁盎当时正闲居在家，皇帝下诏召他进见。
English: Yuan Ang was lounging at home at the time, and the emperor issued an edict summoning him to appear before him.

古文：上方与晁错调兵笇军食，上问袁盎曰： 君尝为吴相，知吴臣田禄伯为人乎？
现代文：皇帝正和晁错一起筹算军队和军粮的事情，皇帝问袁盎说： 你曾作过吴王的丞相，知道吴国臣子田禄伯的为人吗？
English: The emperor was planning the army and army rations together with Zou Er. The emperor asked Yuan Ang, "You once served as the prime minister of King Wu. Did you know that Tian Luo Bo, a minister of the State of Wu, was a person?

古文：今吴楚反，於公何如？ 
现代文：现在吴楚反叛，你的看法如何？ 
English: Now that Wu Chu has rebelled, what is your opinion?

古文：对曰： 不足忧也，今破矣。 
现代文：袁盎回答说： 不值得忧虑，马上就能打败他们。 
English: Yuan Ang replied, "It's nothing to worry about, we can defeat them right away."

古文：上曰： 吴王即山铸钱，煮海水为盐，诱天下豪桀，白头举事。若此，其计不百全，岂发乎？
现代文：皇帝说： 吴王依靠铜矿铸造钱币，煮海水制盐，引诱天下豪杰，在头发白了的时候举兵作乱，如果没有周全的计谋，哪里会发动反叛呢？
English: The emperor said: King Wu relied on copper mines to mint coins, boiled seawater to make salt, seduced the world's heroes, and raised an army to rebel when his hair turned white. If there is no comprehensive strategy, where will he launch a rebellion?

古文：何以言其无能为也？ 
现代文：为什么说他不能有所作为呢？ 
English: Why say he can't make a difference?

古文：袁盎对曰： 吴有铜盐利则有之，安得豪桀而诱之！
现代文：袁盎回答说： 吴国有铜矿煮盐之利那是确实的，哪里能得到豪杰并且诱惑他们呢！
English: Yuan Ang replied, "It is true that there is profit to be made from the salt boiled from the copper mines in Wuzhou. Where can I get heroes and tempt them?

古文：诚令吴得豪桀，亦且辅王为义，不反矣。
现代文：假如吴王真能得到豪杰，也应该辅佐吴王做合乎道理的事，就不会反叛了。
English: If the king of Wu can really get a hero, he should also help the king of Wu to do the right thing, and he will not rebel.

古文：吴所诱皆无赖子弟，亡命铸钱奸人，故相率以反。 
现代文：吴王所诱惑的都是无赖子弟，逃亡铸钱的奸邪之徒，所以才互相勾引而反叛。 
English: The temptresses of King Wu were all ruffians, traitors who fled to mint money. That's why they seduced each other and rebelled.

古文：晁错曰： 袁盎策之善。 
现代文：晁错说： 袁盎分析得对。 
English: Zou wrongly said: Yuan Wanzhong's analysis is correct.

古文：上问曰： 计安出？ 
现代文：皇帝问： 怎样才能拿出好的对策呢？ 
English: The emperor asked: How can we come up with a good countermeasure?

古文：盎对曰： 原屏左右。 
现代文：袁盎说： 希望屏退左右的人。 
English: Yuan Ang said: Those who want the screen to go back are right.

古文：上屏人，独错在。
现代文：皇帝让身边的人退下去，只有晁错还在。
English: The emperor asked the people around him to step back, and only Shao Kuo remained.

古文：盎曰： 臣所言，人臣不得知也。 
现代文：袁盎说： 我所说的，为人臣的也不能知道。 
English: Yuan Ang said, "What I have said cannot be known by a courtier."

古文：乃屏错。
现代文：于是又屏退晁错。
English: Then the screen went blank again.

古文：错趋避东厢，恨甚。
现代文：晁错急忙到东厢回避，对此十分恼恨。
English: He hurried to the east compartment to avoid making a mistake, and was very angry about it.

古文：上卒问盎，盎对曰： 吴楚相遗书，曰 高帝王子弟各有分地，今贼臣晁错擅適过诸侯，削夺之地 。
现代文：皇帝最后又问袁盎，袁盎回答说： 吴、楚相互往来的书信说 高祖封立刘氏子弟为王并有各自的分封土地，现在贼臣晁错擅自贬谪责罚诸侯，削夺诸侯的土地 。
English: The emperor finally asked Yuan Ang, and Yuan Ang replied: The letters exchanged between Wu and Chu said that Gao Zu had made the sons of the Liu clan kings and had their own fief lands. Now, the treacherous vassals have arbitrarily humiliated and punished the princes and seized the lands of the princes.

古文：故以反为名，西共诛晁错，复故地而罢。
现代文：他们用造反的名义，共同向西进攻联合诛讨晁错，恢复了原来封地就会罢兵。
English: In the name of rebellion, they jointly attacked the west, united to make mistakes, restored the original fief, and then went on strike.

古文：方今计独斩晁错，发使赦吴楚七国，复其故削地，则兵可无血刃而俱罢。 
现代文：现在的计策只有斩杀晁错，派使者赦免吴、楚七国的罪过，恢复原来被削减的封地，那么就能够不必血染兵器而战事全部结束。 
English: The only strategy now is to cut out the mistakes, send an envoy to pardon the sins of the seven kingdoms of Wu and Chu, and restore the fiefs that were originally reduced. Then the war can be ended without the need for blood-stained weapons.

古文：於是上嘿然良久，曰： 顾诚何如，吾不爱一人以谢天下。 
现代文：于是皇帝静默了很长一段时间，说： 只是真实的情况怎样呢，我不会因为爱一个人而拒绝天下的。 
English: Then the emperor was silent for a long time and said, "But what is the real situation? I wouldn't reject the whole world just because I love someone.

古文：盎曰： 臣愚计无出此，原上孰计之。 
现代文：袁盎说： 我愚蠢的计策没有能超出这个的了，希望皇帝认真地考虑考虑。 
English: Yuan Ang said: My foolish stratagem has not been able to surpass this. I hope the emperor will seriously consider it.

古文：乃拜盎为太常，吴王弟子德侯为宗正。
现代文：于是任命袁盎做了太常，吴王弟弟的儿子德侯做了宗正。
English: Therefore, Yuan Ang was appointed as Taizhang, and De Hou, the son of King Wu's younger brother, was appointed as Zong Zheng.

古文：盎装治行。
现代文：袁盎秘密准备行装。
English: Yuan Ang secretly prepared for the shipment.

古文：後十馀日，上使中尉召错，绐载行东市。错衣朝衣斩东市。
现代文：十多天后，皇帝派中尉召晁错，骗晁错乘车巡行东市，晁错穿着上朝的衣服在东市被杀。
English: More than ten days later, the emperor sent a lieutenant to summon the wrong person, deceived the wrong person, took the wrong person on a car parade in Dongshi, and the wrong person was killed in Dongshi wearing the clothes of the last dynasty.

古文：则遣袁盎奉宗庙，宗正辅亲戚，使告吴如盎策。
现代文：然后就派袁盎以侍奉宗庙的太常身份，德侯以辅助亲戚的宗正身份，按照袁盎的计策出使告知吴王。
English: Then he sent Yuan Ang to inform the king of Wu in accordance with Yuan Ang's plan, with Yuan Ang serving as the chief priest of the ancestral temple and De Hou as the auxiliary relative of the patriarch.

古文：至吴，吴楚兵已攻梁壁矣。
现代文：到了吴国，吴楚的军队已进攻梁国营垒了。
English: By the time they reached Wu, Wu Chu's army had already attacked Liang's camp.

古文：宗正以亲故，先入见，谕吴王使拜受诏。
现代文：宗正因有亲戚的关系，先进见吴王，谕告吴王跪拜接受诏令。
English: Zong Zheng, because he was a relative, went first to see King Wu and ordered him to kneel down and accept the edict.

古文：吴王闻袁盎来，亦知其欲说己，笑而应曰： 我已为东帝，尚何谁拜？ 
现代文：吴王听说袁盎来了，也知道他要说服自己，笑着回答说： 我已经成为东帝，还跪拜谁呢？ 
English: When King Wu heard that Yuan Ang had arrived, he knew that he had to convince himself. He smiled and replied, "I have become the Eastern Emperor. Whom should I kneel before?

古文：不肯见盎而留之军中，欲劫使将。
现代文：不肯见袁盎而把他扣留在军中，想胁迫袁盎做将军。
English: He did not want to see Yuan Ang and kept him in the army, trying to coerce Yuan Ang to become a general.

古文：盎不肯，使人围守，且杀之，盎得夜出，步亡去，走梁军，遂归报。
现代文：袁盎不肯，就派人包围守卫着他，将要杀他，袁盎得以趁夜色逃出，徒步离开，跑到梁王的军营，而后归朝报告。
English: Yuan Ang refused, and sent men to surround and guard him, intending to kill him. Yuan Ang was able to take advantage of the darkness to escape on foot, run to the camp of Liang Wang, and then report back to the imperial court.

古文：条侯将乘六乘传，会兵荥阳。
现代文：条侯乘坐六匹马拉的传车，会师荥阳。
English: The feudal lord rode in a carriage drawn by six horses and rode to Shiyang.

古文：至雒阳，见剧孟，喜曰： 七国反，吾乘传至此，不自意全。
现代文：到洛阳，看见剧孟，高兴地说： 七国反叛，吾乘传车到达这里，自己没有想到会安全抵达。
English: When he arrived in Luoyang, he saw the play Meng and said happily: "The seven countries rebelled. I arrived here by ferry. I didn't expect to arrive safely."

古文：又以为诸侯已得剧孟，剧孟今无动。
现代文：还以为诸侯们已经得到了剧孟，剧孟现在没有起兵的举动。
English: They also thought that the lords had already received the play money, but the play money did not act to raise an army.

古文：吾据荥阳，以东无足忧者。 
现代文：我又占据荥阳，荥阳以东没有值得忧虑的了。 
English: I have occupied Fenyang again, and there is nothing to worry about east of Fenyang.

古文：至淮阳，问父绛侯故客邓都尉曰： 策安出？ 
现代文：到达淮阳，询问父亲绛侯从前的门客邓都尉说： 怎样才能拿出好的计策呢？ 
English: Arriving in Huaiyang, he asked his father Zhou Hou's former protégé, Lieutenant Deng Du, "How can I come up with a good strategy?"

古文：客曰： 吴兵锐甚，难与争锋。楚兵轻，不能久。
现代文：门客说： 吴兵锐气正盛，和他交战很难取胜。楚兵浮躁，锐气不能保持长久。
English: The doorkeeper said: Wu soldiers are full of vigor, and it is difficult to win a battle with him. Chu soldiers are impetuous, and their vigor cannot be maintained for a long time.

古文：方今为将军计，莫若引兵东北壁昌邑，以梁委吴，吴必尽锐攻之。
现代文：现在为将军提出一个计策，不如率军在东北的昌邑筑垒坚守，把梁国放弃给吴军，吴军一定会用全部精锐军队攻打梁。
English: Now he proposed a strategy for the general. It would be better to lead the army to Changyi in the northeast, build fortifications and hold out, and give up Liangguo to the Wu army. The Wu army would certainly attack Liang with all its elite troops.

古文：将军深沟高垒，使轻兵绝淮泗口，塞吴饟道。
现代文：将军深挖沟高筑垒坚守，派轻装的军队断绝淮河泗水交汇处，阻塞吴军的粮道。
English: The general dug a deep trench and built high fortifications to hold out, and sent light-armed troops to cut off the Huaihe River and its confluence, blocking the food route of the Wu army.

古文：彼吴梁相敝而粮食竭，乃以全彊制其罢极，破吴必矣。 条侯曰： 善。 
现代文：吴梁之间因相持疲弊而且粮草耗尽，然后用保持强盛锐气的军队制服那些疲弊已极的军队，打败吴国是必然的。 条侯说： 好。 
English: It was inevitable that Wu Liang would defeat the State of Wu because they were exhausted from fighting against each other and the grain and grass were exhausted, and then they would use the army that remained strong and vigorous to subdue the exhausted army.

古文：从其策，遂坚壁昌邑南，轻兵绝吴饟道。
现代文：按照他的计策，坚守在昌邑南边，接着派轻装的军队断绝吴军粮道。
English: According to his strategy, he insisted on holding the southern edge of Changyi, and then sent lightly armed troops to cut off the Wu army's supply route.

古文：吴王之初发也，吴臣田禄伯为大将军。
现代文：吴王刚发兵的时候，吴臣田禄伯做大将军。
English: When the king of Wu just sent out an army, Wu Tingtian Lu Bo became a great general.

古文：田禄伯曰： 兵屯聚而西，无佗奇道，难以就功。
现代文：田禄伯说： 军队集结在一起西进，没有其他道路出奇兵，难于成功。
English: Tian Rubei said: "The army is gathering together to advance westward. There is no other way to make a surprise attack, and it is difficult to succeed.

古文：臣原得五万人，别循江淮而上，收淮南、长沙，入武关，与大王会，此亦一奇也。 
现代文：我愿率领五万人，另外沿着长江、淮水而上，收聚淮南、长沙的军队，攻入武关，和大王会师，这也是一着奇计啊。 
English: I am willing to lead fifty thousand people and march up the Yangtze River and Huai Shui, gather the armies of Huainan and Changsha, invade Wuguan, and meet the great king. This is also a wonderful plan.

古文：吴王太子谏曰： 王以反为名，此兵难以藉人，藉人亦且反王，柰何？
现代文：吴王太子规劝说： 父王是以造反为旗号的，这样的军队是难以委托他人的，委托他人如果他也造反，该怎么办呢？
English: Prince Wu advised: My father, the king, took rebellion as his banner. It is difficult to entrust such an army to others. If he also rebels, what should we do?

古文：且擅兵而别，多佗利害，未可知也，徒自损耳。 
现代文：而且拥有军队单独行动，许多其他的利害，不可能预先知道，徒然损害自己罢了。 
English: Moreover, having the army act alone, many other interests, it is impossible to know in advance, only harm themselves in vain.

古文：吴王即不许田禄伯。
现代文：吴王也就没有应允田禄伯的建议。
English: King Wu also did not agree to Tian Luo Bo's suggestion.

古文：吴少将桓将军说王曰： 吴多步兵，步兵利险；汉多车骑，车骑利平地。
现代文：吴国一位年轻的桓将军对吴王说： 吴国大多是步兵，步兵适宜在险要地形作战；汉军多战车骑兵，战车骑兵适宜在平地作战。
English: A young general Huan of Wu said to Wu Wang: Most of Wu are infantrymen, and infantrymen are suitable for fighting in dangerous terrain; the Chinese army has many chariot cavalrymen, and chariot cavalrymen are suitable for fighting on flat ground.

古文：原大王所过城邑不下，直弃去，疾西据雒阳武库，食敖仓粟，阻山河之险以令诸侯，虽毋入关，天下固已定矣。
现代文：希望大王所经过的城邑攻不下，就径直放弃离开，迅速西进占领洛阳兵器库，吃敖仓粮食，依靠山河的险要来命令诸侯，即使不能进入关内，天下大局实际已经平定了。
English: Hoping that the cities and towns that the great king passed through could not be conquered, they gave up and left, quickly marched west to occupy the Luoyang Arsenal, ate grain from Kamakura, and relied on the dangers of mountains and rivers to order the lords. Even if they could not enter Guanai, the overall situation in the world had actually been settled.

古文：即大王徐行，留下城邑，汉军车骑至，驰入梁楚之郊，事败矣。 
现代文：假如大王行进迟缓，滞留攻城，汉军的战车骑兵一到，冲入梁国楚国的郊野，事情就失败了。 
English: If the great king marches slowly, stays to attack the city, and the Chinese army's chariots and cavalry rush into the countryside of Liang's Chu country as soon as they arrive, the matter will fail.

古文：吴王问诸老将，老将曰： 此少年推锋之计可耳，安知大虑乎！ 
现代文：吴王征询年老将军们的意见，他们说： 这年轻人进冲锋的计策还可以，他哪里能知道深远的计谋呢？ 
English: Wu Wang asked the old generals for their opinions. They said, "This young man's strategy of charging into battle is fine. How could he know about far-reaching strategies?"

古文：於是王不用桓将军计。
现代文：于是吴王没有采纳桓将军的计策。
English: As a result, King Wu did not adopt General Huan's strategy.

古文：吴王专并将其兵，未度淮，诸宾客皆得为将、校尉、候、司马，独周丘不得用。
现代文：吴王专断地集中兵力亲自率领，还没渡过淮河，众多的宾客都被授于将军、校尉、侯、司马等职务，只有周丘没被任用。
English: Wu Wang arbitrarily concentrated the troops and personally led them. Before crossing the Huai River, many of the guests were awarded the positions of general, lieutenant, marquess, secretary and so on. Only Zhou Qiu was not appointed.

古文：周丘者，下邳人，亡命吴，酤酒无行，吴王濞薄之，弗任。
现代文：周丘是下邳人，逃亡到吴国，喜欢喝酒，品行不好，吴王刘濞鄙薄他，没有任用。
English: Zhou Qiu was from Jiaozuo. He fled to the State of Wu. He liked to drink and had a bad character. The King of Wu, Liu Bei, despised him and did not appoint him.

古文：周丘上谒，说王曰： 臣以无能，不得待罪行间。
现代文：周丘拜见吴王，对吴王说： 我因为没有才能，不能在军队中任职。
English: Zhou Qiu paid a visit to King Wu and said to him, "I can't serve in the army because I don't have talent.

古文：臣非敢求有所将，原得王一汉节，必有以报王。 
现代文：我不敢要求率领军队，希望得到大王一个汉朝的符节，一定能够报答大王。 
English: I dare not ask to lead the army, I hope to get the great king a Han Dynasty rune, I will definitely be able to repay the great king.

古文：王乃予之。
现代文：吴王就给了他符节。
English: King Wu gave him a rune.

古文：周丘得节，夜驰入下邳。
现代文：周丘得到符节，连夜驱驰进入下邳。
English: Zhou Qiu got the talisman, and drove it into the lower jaw overnight.

古文：下邳时闻吴反，皆城守。
现代文：下邳当时听说吴王反叛，都坚守城池。
English: At that time, all of Jiaozuo heard that King Wu had rebelled, and they all held fast to the castle.

古文：至传舍，召令。
现代文：周丘到了客舍，召来下邳县令。
English: When Zhou Yu arrived at the guest house, he summoned the county magistrate.

古文：令入户，使从者以罪斩令。
现代文：县令走进门来，就让随从人员借用罪名斩杀了他。
English: When the county magistrate came to the door, he had his entourage kill him on trumped up charges.

古文：遂召昆弟所善豪吏告曰： 吴反兵且至，至，屠下邳不过食顷。
现代文：就又召集他弟兄们交好的富豪官吏告诉说： 吴王造反的军队将到，到达后，沙尽邳城里的人不过是吃顿饭的时间。
English: Then he called together his brothers, the wealthy officials who were his friends, and told them, "King Wu's rebel army is about to arrive, and when it does, the people in Shajingshan City will only have time to eat a meal.

古文：今先下，家室必完，能者封侯矣。 
现代文：现在先投降，家室一定能保全，有才能的人还可以封侯。 
English: If you surrender now, your family will be safe, and talented people can be knighted.

古文：出乃相告，下邳皆下。
现代文：这些人出去后互相转告，下邳人全投降了。
English: After these people went out, they told each other, and all of them surrendered.

古文：周丘一夜得三万人，使人报吴王，遂将其兵北略城邑。
现代文：周丘一夜工夫得到三万人，派人报告吴王，就率领他的军队向北攻占城邑。
English: Zhou Qiu gained 30,000 men overnight. He sent someone to report to King Wu, who led his army north to capture the city.

古文：比至城阳，兵十馀万，破城阳中尉军。
现代文：等到城阳，军队已发展到十多万人，攻破城阳中尉的军队。
English: By the time of Chengyang, the army had grown to more than one hundred thousand people, defeating Lieutenant Chengyang's army.

古文：闻吴王败走，自度无与共成功，即引兵归下邳。
现代文：后来听说吴王战败逃走，自己估计没有人一起成就功业，就率领军队返回下邳。
English: Later, when he heard that King Wu had been defeated and fled, he estimated that no one could accomplish the feat together, so he led the army back to Jiaozuo.

古文：未至，疽发背死。
现代文：还没到达，就因后背毒疮发作而死。
English: Before he arrived, he died from an attack of poisonous sores on his back.

古文：二月中，吴王兵既破，败走，於是天子制诏将军曰： 盖闻为善者，天报之以福；为非者，天报之以殃。
现代文：二月中旬，吴王军队已被击垮，战败而逃，于是皇帝颁布命令给将军们： 听说行善的人，上天会用福事报答他；作恶的人，上天会用灾祸报偿他。
English: In mid-February, when King Wu's army had been defeated and fled in defeat, the emperor issued an order to the generals: "I have heard that heaven will reward those who do good with blessings, and those who do evil with calamities.

古文：高皇帝亲表功德，建立诸侯，幽王、悼惠王绝无後，孝文皇帝哀怜加惠，王幽王子遂、悼惠王子卬等，令奉其先王宗庙，为汉籓国，德配天地，明并日月。
现代文：高祖皇帝亲自表扬功德，封立诸侯，幽王、悼惠王的封爵断绝了，孝文皇帝哀怜他们格外给予恩惠，封立幽王的儿子遂、悼惠王的儿子卬为王，让他们奉祀他们先王的宗庙，成为汉朝的藩国，恩德与天地相匹配，光明与日月同光。
English: Emperor Gao Zu personally praised the merits and severed the knighthoods of princes, You Wang and You Hui Wang. Emperor Xiaowen pitied them and gave them special favors. The son of You Wang and the son of You Hui Wang became kings. Let them worship the ancestral temple of their ancestors and become the Han Dynasty's feudal state. Ende matches heaven and earth, and light is the same as the sun and the moon.

古文：吴王濞倍德反义，诱受天下亡命罪人，乱天下币，称病不朝二十馀年，有司数请濞罪，孝文皇帝宽之，欲其改行为善。
现代文：吴王刘濞违背恩德违反道义，引诱天下逃亡的罪人，扰乱天下的钱币，称病不入京朝见二十多年，主管大臣多次呈请惩治刘濞的罪行，孝文皇帝宽恕他，希望他能改过从善。
English: Liu Xuan, the king of Wu, violated the principles of benevolence and morality, seduced the criminals who fled the world, disturbed the money of the world, and said that he would not go to Beijing to see the imperial court for more than 20 years. The minister in charge repeatedly submitted a request to punish Liu Xuan's crime. Emperor Xiaowen forgave him and hoped that he would change his ways.

古文：今乃与楚王戊、赵王遂、胶西王卬、济南王辟光、菑川王贤、胶东王雄渠约从反，为逆无道，起兵以危宗庙，贼杀大臣及汉使者，迫劫万民，夭杀无罪，烧残民家，掘其丘冢，甚为暴虐。
现代文：现在竟然与楚王刘戊、赵王刘遂、胶西王刘卬、济南王刘辟光、菑川王刘贤、胶东王刘雄渠盟约反叛，做出叛逆无道的事，发兵危害宗庙，残杀大臣和汉朝的使者，胁迫千万百姓，乱杀无辜，烧毁民舍，挖掘坟墓，极为暴虐。
English: Now, he has conspired with Chu King Liu Wu, Zhao King Liu Sui, Jiaoxi King Liu Kun, Jinan King Liu Biguang, Shichuan King Liu Xian, and Jiaodong King Liu Xiongqui to rebel, commit treasonous and senseless acts, send troops to endanger ancestral temples, kill ministers and emissaries of the Han Dynasty, coerce tens of thousands of people, kill innocent people indiscriminately, burn down houses, and dig graves. This is extremely tyrannical.

古文：今卬等又重逆无道，烧宗庙，卤御物，朕甚痛之。
现代文：现在胶西王刘卬等更加大逆无道，烧毁宗庙，掠夺宗庙中皇室的器物，我甚为痛恨他们。
English: Now, Jiaosi Wang Liu Ye and others are even more rebellious, burning down the ancestral temple and plundering the imperial family's belongings in the ancestral temple. I really hate them.

古文：朕素服避正殿，将军其劝士大夫击反虏。
现代文：我穿着白色衣服避开正殿，将军们要勉励士大夫们攻击叛敌。
English: Dressed in white, I avoided the main hall. The generals wanted to encourage the doctors to attack the rebels.

古文：击反虏者，深入多杀为功，斩首捕虏比三百石以上者皆杀之，无有所置。
现代文：攻击叛敌时，深入敌军多杀敌人才是有功，捕捉到的官员要在俸禄是比三百石以上者都杀死，不要释放。
English: When attacking the rebels, it is only meritorious to go deep into the enemy army and kill more enemies. The captured officials should be killed if their salary is more than 300 koku, and should not be released.

古文：敢有议诏及不如诏者，皆要斩。 
现代文：胆敢有议论诏书和不按诏书去做的，都处腰斩之刑。 
English: Anyone who dared to discuss the edict or act against it was to be beheaded.

古文：初，吴王之度淮，与楚王遂西败棘壁，乘胜前，锐甚。
现代文：当初，吴王渡过淮河，与楚王向西进军，在棘壁打败汉军，乘胜向前，锐气极盛。
English: At first, King Wu crossed the Huai River and marched westward with King Chu, defeating the Chinese army at the ridge and advancing with victory, full of vigor.

古文：梁孝王恐，遣六将军击吴，又败梁两将，士卒皆还走梁。
现代文：梁孝王害怕了，派六位将军攻打吴王，梁王的两个将军又被打败，士兵都逃回了梁。
English: Liang Xiaowang was scared and sent six generals to attack Wu Wang. Liang Wang's two generals were defeated and the soldiers fled back to Liang.

古文：梁数使使报条侯求救，条侯不许。
现代文：梁王多次派使者向条侯报告情况并求援，条侯不答允。
English: King Liang repeatedly sent emissaries to report the situation to the vassals and ask for help, but the vassals did not agree.

古文：又使使恶条侯於上，上使人告条侯救梁，复守便宜不行。
现代文：又派使者在皇帝面前说条侯坏话，皇帝派人让条侯救援梁国，条侯还是坚持对自己有利的计策不肯出兵。
English: He also sent an envoy to badmouth Jokowi in front of the emperor. The emperor sent someone to let Jokowi rescue Liang Guo, but Jokowi still insisted on his own advantageous strategy and refused to send troops.

古文：梁使韩安国及楚死事相弟张羽为将军，乃得颇败吴兵。
现代文：梁王派韩安国和为国事而被杀的楚国丞相的弟弟张羽做将军，才得以稍微打败吴国的军队。
English: King Liang sent Han An and Zhang Yu, the younger brother of the prime minister of Chu, who was killed for state affairs, as generals, only to be able to slightly defeat the army of Wu.

古文：吴兵欲西，梁城守坚，不敢西，即走条侯军，会下邑。欲战，条侯壁，不肯战。
现代文：吴国的军队想要西进，梁国据城坚守，吴军不敢西进，就跑到条侯驻军的地方，在下邑与条侯的军队相遇。
English: The army of the State of Wu wanted to advance westward, while the State of Liang held fast to the city, and the army of the State of Wu did not dare to advance westward, so they ran to the place where Ji Hou was stationed, and met Ji Hou's army in the lower town.

古文：吴粮绝，卒饥，数挑战，遂夜饹条侯壁，惊东南。
现代文：吴军想与条侯作战，条侯坚守营垒，不肯交战。吴军粮食断绝，士兵饥饿，多次向条侯挑战没有结果，就夜里奔袭条侯的营垒，骚扰东南阵角。
English: The Wu army wanted to fight against the Jiao, but the Jiao held fast to their camp and refused to fight. The Wu army ran out of food, the soldiers were starving, and repeated challenges to the Jiao were fruitless. So they raided the Jiao's camp at night and harassed the southeastern front.

古文：条侯使备西北，果从西北入。
现代文：条侯派人防备西北方向，敌人果然从西北方向侵入。
English: The county magistrate sent people to guard the northwest direction, and the enemy invaded from the northwest direction.

古文：吴大败，士卒多饥死，乃畔散。
现代文：吴军大败，士兵大多饿死，有的叛逃溃散。
English: The Wu army suffered a crushing defeat, most of the soldiers starved to death, and some defected and scattered.

古文：於是吴王乃与其麾下壮士数千人夜亡去，度江走丹徒，保东越。
现代文：于是吴王和他的部下壮士几千人连夜逃走，渡过长江逃到丹阳，得到东越的保护。
English: As a result, King Wu and several thousand of his able-bodied men fled overnight, crossed the Yangtze River and fled to Danyang, where they were protected by East Vietnam.

古文：东越兵可万馀人，乃使人收聚亡卒。
现代文：东越有军队大约一万多人，又派人收容集中吴国的逃兵。
English: East Vietnam had an army of more than ten thousand men, and sent people to round up the deserters from the State of Wu.

古文：汉使人以利啗东越，东越即绐吴王，吴王出劳军，即使人鏦杀吴王，盛其头，驰传以闻。
现代文：汉朝派人用厚利诱惑东越，东越就骗吴王，让吴王出去慰劳军队，就派人用矛戟刺杀吴王，将他的头装起来，派一部快车迅速报知皇上。
English: The Han Dynasty sent someone to tempt East Vietnam with rich profits. East Vietnam then deceived King Wu and made him go out to comfort the troops. They then sent someone to stab King Wu with a spear, stuffed his head, and sent an express train to quickly inform the emperor.

古文：吴王子子华、子驹亡走闽越。
现代文：吴王的儿子子华、子驹逃跑到了闽越。
English: The sons of King Wu, Zi Hua and Zi Ya, fled to Xuan Yue.

古文：吴王之弃其军亡也，军遂溃，往往稍降太尉、梁军。
现代文：吴王丢下他的军队逃跑时，他的军队就溃散了，大多陆续投降了太尉、梁王的军队。
English: When King Wu abandoned his army and fled, his army was dispersed, and most of them surrendered one after another to the army of First Lieutenant Liang Wang.

古文：楚王戊军败，自杀。
现代文：楚王刘戊兵败，自杀而亡。
English: Chu King Liu Wu was defeated and committed suicide.

古文：三王之围齐临菑也，三月不能下。
现代文：齐的胶西王、胶东王、菑川王围攻齐国的临菑，三个月都无法攻下。
English: Qi's Jiaoxi King, Jiaodong King, and Qianchuan King besieged Linyi in Qi and could not capture it for three months.

古文：汉兵至，胶西、胶东、菑川王各引兵归。
现代文：汉朝军队到来，胶西王、胶东王、菑川王各自率领军队回去。
English: When the Han Dynasty army arrived, King Jiaosi, King Jiaodong, and King Sui Chuan each led an army to go back.

古文：胶西王乃袒跣，席，饮水，谢太后。
现代文：胶西王于是赤膊光脚，坐在草席上，喝着水，向他的母亲王太后谢罪。
English: King Jiaoxi then sat bare-chested and barefoot on a straw mat, drinking water and apologizing to his mother, the empress dowager.

古文：王太子德曰： 汉兵远，臣观之已罢，可袭，原收大王馀兵击之，击之不胜，乃逃入海，未晚也。 
现代文：王太子刘德说： 汉军远道而来，我看他们已经很疲弊了，可以袭击他们，希望收集大王的剩余军队进攻汉军，进攻不能取胜，就逃到海上去，也不算晚啊。 
English: The crown prince Liu De said: The Chinese army has come from far away, I think they are very tired, they can attack them, hoping to collect the king's remaining army to attack the Chinese army, if the attack cannot win, they will flee to the sea, it is not too late.

古文：王曰： 吾士卒皆已坏，不可发用。 
现代文：胶西王说： 我的士兵已经溃散，再不能发动使用他们了。 
English: King Koxi said: My soldiers have been scattered, and I can no longer use them.

古文：弗听。
现代文：没有听从太子的话。
English: He did not listen to the words of the crown prince.

古文：汉将弓高侯穨当遗王书曰： 奉诏诛不义，降者赦其罪，复故；不降者灭之。
现代文：当朝的将军弓高侯颓当送给胶西王的信写道： 奉诏书前来诛讨不义的人，投降的人就赦免他的罪过，恢复原来的爵位封土；不投降的人就诛灭他们。
English: The letter sent to King Gyosei by the general of the time, Kyoko Hōjō wrote: "If you come with a decree to punish the unjust, those who surrender will have their sins forgiven and their former titles and fiefs restored; those who do not surrender will be annihilated."

古文：王何处，须以从事。 
现代文：大王要怎么处置，我等待答复以采取相应的行动。 
English: I am waiting for a reply to take the appropriate action.

古文：王肉袒叩头汉军壁，谒曰： 臣卬奉法不谨，惊骇百姓，乃苦将军远道至于穷国，敢请菹醢之罪。 
现代文：胶西王到汉军营垒前赤膊叩头请求说： 我刘卬违犯王法，惊扰百姓，才使将军辛苦地远道而来到这个穷国，请求惩处我碎尸万段的罪。 
English: King Jiaoxi went to the Chinese army camp, prostrated himself shirtless, and made a request: "I, Liu Ye, violated the king's law and alarmed the people, which made the general come all the way to this poor country to ask for punishment for my crime of cutting up thousands of corpses.

古文：弓高侯执金鼓见之，曰： 王苦军事，原闻王发兵状。 
现代文：弓高侯手持金鼓来见他，说： 大王被战事所苦，我希望知道大王发兵的原因。 
English: Bow Gao Hou came to see him with a golden drum in his hand and said: The great king is suffering from the war, I hope to know the reason why the great king sent troops.

古文：王顿首膝行对曰： 今者，晁错天子用事臣，变更高皇帝法令，侵夺诸侯地。
现代文：胶西王叩头膝行回答说： 当时，晁错是皇帝当政的大臣，他改变高祖皇帝的法令，侵夺诸侯的土地。
English: Guoxi Wang kowtowed and kneeled and replied: At that time, Zou Er was the emperor's minister in power. He changed Emperor Gaozhu's decree and seized the land of the princes.

古文：卬等以为不义，恐其败乱天下，七国发兵，且以诛错。
现代文：我们认为这是不道义的，担心他会败乱天下，所以七国发兵，将要诛杀晁错。
English: We think this is immoral, fearing that he will bring chaos to the world, so the seven countries sent troops, will fight and kill each other.

古文：今闻错已诛，卬等谨以罢兵归。 
现代文：现在听说晁错已被诛杀，我们就收兵而归。 
English: Now that we've heard that he's been killed, we're withdrawing.

古文：将军曰： 王苟以错不善，何不以闻？
现代文：将军说： 大王如果认为晁错不好，为什么不报告天子？
English: The general said, "If the king thinks it's bad to make a mistake, why doesn't he report it to the emperor?"

古文：未有诏虎符，擅发兵击义国。
现代文：没有得到皇帝的诏书虎符，擅自发兵攻打遵守王法的正义侯国。
English: Not having obtained the Emperor's edict, he sent troops without authorization to attack the righteous principality that abided by the royal law.

古文：以此观之，意非欲诛错也。 
现代文：由此看来，你们的本意并非是要诛杀晁错啊。 
English: From this point of view, your intention is not to fight, but to make a mistake.

古文：乃出诏书为王读之。
现代文：就拿出诏书给他宣读。
English: He took out the imperial edict and read it to him.

古文：读之讫，曰： 王其自图。 
现代文：读完后，说： 大王自己考虑应怎么办吧！ 
English: After reading it, he said: Let the great king himself consider what should be done!

古文：王曰： 如卬等死有馀罪。 
现代文：胶西王说： 像我这样的人死有余辜。 
English: Guoxi Wang said: "People like me have a lot to be sorry for.

古文：遂自杀。
现代文：就自杀了。
English: Zhang Tang then committed suicide.

古文：太后、太子皆死。
现代文：太后、太子也都跟着死去。
English: The empress dowager and the prince also died.

古文：胶东、菑川、济南王皆死，国除，纳于汉。
现代文：胶东王、菑川王、济南王也先后死去，封国被废除，收归汉朝。
English: King Jiaodong, King Shichuan, and King Jinan also died successively, and their fiefdoms were abolished and returned to the Han Dynasty.

古文：郦将军围赵十月而下之，赵王自杀。
现代文：郦将军围攻赵都城十个月才攻克，赵王自杀。
English: General Zhai besieged Zhaotucheng for ten months before conquering it, and Zhao Wang committed suicide.

古文：济北王以劫故，得不诛，徙王菑川。
现代文：济北王因被劫持的缘故，才得以未被诛杀，被徙封为菑川王。
English: Due to his abduction, King Jibei was able to avoid being killed and was enthroned as the King of Jecheon.

古文：初，吴王首反，并将楚兵，连齐赵。
现代文：当初，吴王刘濞带头反叛，把楚军和吴军合在一起率领，联合齐、赵的军队。
English: At first, the king of Wu, Liu Bei, took the lead in the rebellion and led the Chu army and the Wu army together, uniting Qi and Zhao's army.

古文：正月起兵，三月皆破，独赵後下。
现代文：正月起兵作乱，三月全线溃散，只有赵国最后被攻克。
English: In the first month of the year, the soldiers started a riot, and in March, the whole line collapsed. Only Zhao Province was finally conquered.

古文：复置元王少子平陆侯礼为楚王，续元王後。
现代文：景帝又封立楚元王的小儿子平陆侯刘礼为楚王，作为楚元王的继承人。
English: Emperor Jing also made the youngest son of King Chu Yuan, Pinglu Hou Liu Li, King of Chu, as the heir of King Chu Yuan.

古文：徙汝南王非王吴故地，为江都王。
现代文：徙封汝南王刘非统辖吴国原有封地，做江都王。
English: Liu Fei, the king of the south of the country, transferred his fief to take over the original fief of the State of Wu and became the king of Jiangdu.

古文：太史公曰：吴王之王，由父省也。
现代文：太史公说： 吴王刘濞所以被封吴王，由于父亲被贬谪的缘故。
English: Tai Shikong said, "Wu Wang Liu Ye was given the title of King of Wu because his father was dethroned.

古文：能薄赋敛，使其众，以擅山海利。
现代文：吴王能够免除赋税，支使民众，是因他拥有铜矿海盐的便利。
English: Wu Wang was able to exempt taxes and support the people because he had the convenience of copper ore and sea salt.

古文：逆乱之萌，自其子兴。
现代文：叛逆作乱的念头是因儿子的被打死萌生的。
English: The idea of rebellion and rioting was triggered by the death of his son.

古文：争技发难，卒亡其本；亲越谋宗，竟以夷陨。
现代文：因下棋争执而发难，最后国灭身亡；亲近外族的越人而谋害同宗，最后自己死亡。
English: Due to a dispute over a game of chess, he got into trouble and eventually lost his life; he was close to a foreign ethnic group, the Viets, and plotted to kill a member of the same clan, and eventually he died.

古文：晁错为国远虑，祸反近身。
现代文：晁错为国家深谋远虑，灾祸反而降临自己的身上。
English: If you make a mistake while making foresight for the country, disaster will befall you.

古文：袁盎权说，初宠後辱。
现代文：袁盎善于权变游说，最初受到宠信，最后遭受屈辱。
English: Yuan Ang was good at power-shifting lobbying. At first, he was favored, but eventually he was humiliated.

古文：故古者诸侯地不过百里，山海不以封。 毋亲夷狄，以疏其属 ，盖谓吴邪？ 毋为权首，反受其咎 ，岂盎、错邪？
现代文：所以古时候诸侯土地不超过百里，山海也不分封给诸侯。 不亲近夷狄，以致疏远宗亲 ，大概是对吴王说的吧？ 不要做出谋划策的人，反而会受到惩罚 ，岂不是说的袁盎、晁错吗？
English: Therefore, in ancient times, the land of the princes did not exceed a hundred miles, and the mountains and seas were not assigned to the princes. Do not be close to the Yidi, so as to alienate the relatives, probably said to the king of Wu? Do not make plans, but will be punished, is not it said Yuan Ang, wrong?

