古文：秦、晋围郑，郑人谓秦盍舍郑以为东道主。
现代文：秦国和晋国结成联盟，围攻宋国，郑人说秦国为什么不把郑国留下作为东道主。
English: Qin and Jin formed an alliance and besieged Song. Zheng said, "Why didn't Qin leave Zheng as the host?"

古文：盖郑在秦之东，故云。
现代文：这是因为郑国位于秦国东部，所以这样说。
English: This is because Zheng Guo is located in the eastern part of Qin Guo, so it is said.

古文：今世称主人为东道者，此也。
现代文：现在人们称主人为东道主，其由来即在于此。
English: Now people call the host the host, and that's where it comes from.

古文：《东汉》载北道主人，乃有三事： 常山太守邓晨会光武于巨鹿，请从击邯郸，光武曰： 伟卿以一身从我，不如以一郡为我北道主人。  
现代文：《汉书》中载有北道主人，共见三处。其一是《邓晨传》中记载：常山太守邓晨与汉光帝巨鹿相会，邓晨，要求跟随光武帝进攻邯郸。光武帝回答说： 伟卿你一人跟随我出战，不如以一郡之地为我的北道主人。 
English: "Hanshu" contains the masters of the North, which can be seen in three places. The first is the record in "Deng Chen Biography": the Changshan governor Deng Chen met with the giant deer of Han Guangdi, and Deng Chen asked to follow Guangwu Emperor to attack Han. Guangwu Emperor replied: Wei Sir, you alone follow me into battle, it is better to be my master of the North with a county of land.

古文：又 光武至蓟，将欲南归，耿弇以为不可，官属腹心皆不肯，光武指弇曰： 是我北道主人也。  
现代文：其二是《耿弇传》记载，耿弇跟随汉光武帝来到了蓟州，听说敌方的军队已到邯郸，光武帝想率师南归。于是便召集各位将领共同研究议论这事。在议论中，诸说不一，耿弃不赞成光武帝南归，认为只要调集渔阳、上谷两郡的兵力，邯郸是不必多虑的。
English: The second is the record of "The Biography of Geng Xiu," Geng Xiu followed the Han Emperor Guangwu to Ganzhou. He heard that the enemy's army had arrived in Ganzhou, and Emperor Guangwu wanted to return south with his army. Therefore, he gathered all the generals to jointly study and discuss this matter. In the discussion, they all disagreed. Geng Xiu disapproved of Emperor Guangwu's return to the south, and believed that as long as the troops of Yuyang and Shanggu counties were mobilized, there was no need to worry about the return.

古文： 彭宠将反，光武问朱浮，浮曰 大王倚宠为北道主人，今既不然，所以失望。  后人罕引用之。
现代文：而光武帝的部下心腹们则不赞成这一意见，光武帝在进行盘决时，指着耿弇说： 你是我的北道主人。 其三是《彭宠传》记载，彭宠投归汉先武帝后，投予大将军。
English: However, Emperor Guangwu's subordinates and confidants did not agree with this opinion. During the deliberation, Emperor Guangwu pointed to Geng Yao and said, "You are my master of the North." The third is a record in "The Biography of Peng Jia," which says that after Peng Jia was given to Emperor Wu of the Han Dynasty, he was given to the great general.

