古文：董仲舒，广川人也。
现代文：董仲舒，广川人。
English: Dong Zhongshu is from Guangchuan County.

古文：少治《春秋》，孝景时为博士。
现代文：年轻时研究《春秋》，汉景帝时为博士。
English: He studied "Spring and Autumn" when he was young, and was a doctor when he was Han Jingdi.

古文：下帷讲诵，弟子传以久次相授业，或莫见其面。
现代文：他在室内挂上帷幕，坐在帷幕后面讲学，弟子们先入学的对后入学的传授学业，有的学生竟然没有见过他。
English: He hung a curtain in the room, sat behind the curtain and lectured. His disciples entered the school first and then taught the school. Some students did not even see him.

古文：盖三年不窥园，其精如此。
现代文：董仲舒三年不看园圃，精心钻研学问到如此的程度。
English: Dong Zhongshu did not look at the garden for three years, and carefully studied the knowledge to such an extent.

古文：进退容止，非礼不行，学士皆师尊之。
现代文：他的进退仪容举止，不符合礼仪的不做，学士们都尊他为老师。
English: His appearance and demeanour when he enters and leaves the classroom are all in keeping with proper etiquette, and the students respect and revere him.

古文：武帝即位，举贤良文学之士前后百数，而仲舒以贤良对策焉。
现代文：汉武帝继承帝位以后，下令荐举贤良文学先后一百多位，董仲舒作为贤良回答皇帝的策问。
English: After Emperor Hanwu succeeded to the throne, he ordered to recommend more than a hundred virtuous literature, and Dong Zhongshu answered the emperor's inquiry as a virtuous person.

古文：制曰： 朕获承至尊休德，传之亡穷，而施之罔极，任大而守重，是以夙夜不皇康宁，永惟万事之统，犹惧有阙。
现代文：汉武帝策问道：我继承了先帝最崇高的地位和最美好的德行，要永久传下去，延长到无穷尽的未来，这项任务巨大而且职守重要，所以我从早到晚都没有时间来享乐休息，长久地思考一切事情的原委，惟恐有不周到的地方。
English: Emperor Hanwu asked, "I have inherited the former emperor's loftiest position and finest virtues, and I want to pass them on forever, extending into the endless future. This task is huge and the duties are important. Therefore, I have no time to enjoy myself and rest from morning to night, and I have to think about the reasons for everything for a long time, lest there be something inconsiderate.

古文：故广延四方之豪俊，郡国诸侯公选贤良修洁博习之士，欲闻大道之要，至论之极。
现代文：因此广泛地邀请各地的豪杰俊才，郡守、国王、诸侯公正地推选出来的贤良、修德、博学的才士们，我想知道治国大道的纲要，安民理论的最高原则。
English: Therefore, I widely invite the heroes and talents from all over the country, county governors, kings, and nobles who are justly elected, virtuous, moral, and learned. I want to know the outline of the road to governing the country and the highest principles of the theory of peace and tranquility.

古文：今子大夫褎然为举首，朕甚嘉之。
现代文：现在大夫们卓然作为贤良的首选，我认为这很好。
English: I think it's great that doctors are now being held up as the first choice of the virtuous.

古文：子大夫其精心致思，朕垂听而问焉。
现代文：大夫们要精心思考，我很想知道和要问的如下。
English: Doctors have to think carefully, and here's what I'd like to know and ask.

古文：盖闻五帝三王之道，改制作乐而天下洽和，百王同之。
现代文：听说五帝三王治理国家之道，是改革制度，创作乐章，因而天下安定，后来的百位国王也都同样这么作。
English: It is said that the Five Emperors and Three Kings governed the country by reforming the system and composing musical pieces, which brought stability to the country. Later, hundreds of kings did the same.

古文：当虞氏之乐莫盛于《韶》，于周莫盛于《勺》。
现代文：虞舜的乐以《韶》乐最美好，周朝的乐以《勺》最优美。
English: The music of Yu Xi is the most beautiful with the melody of "," and the music of Zhou Dynasty is the most beautiful with the melody of "勺."

古文：圣王已没，钟鼓管弦之声未衰，而大道微缺，陵夷至乎桀、纣之行，王道大坏矣。
现代文：圣明的君王死后，钟鼓管弦的声音依然存在，可是大道衰微，逐渐变坏到桀纣那样的所作所为，王道大大地败坏了。
English: After the death of a saintly king, the sound of the bell, drum and orchestra still exists, but the road is fading and gradually deteriorating to the behavior of the dragonfly. The royal road has been greatly corrupted.

古文：夫五百年之间，守文之君，当涂之士，欲则先王之法以戴翼其世者甚众，然犹不能反，日以仆灭，至后王而后止，岂其所持操或誖缪而失其统与？
现代文：这五百年中闾，遵守旧制度的国君和当权的士人，想学习先王的法制来辅助当时政治的很多，可是都没有扭转过来，而且王道还一天天走向灭亡，一直到后来的王兴起了，这种没落的趋势才得到制止。难道是他们所信奉的有错误，而失掉了道的传统吗？
English: Over the past five hundred years, the sovereigns and the scholars in power who adhered to the old system have tried to learn a lot from the legal system of the former king to assist the politics of the time, but they have not been reversed. Moreover, the royal way has been dying day by day. It was not until the rise of the later king that this downward trend was stopped. Is it that they believed in mistakes and lost the tradition of the way?

古文：固天降命不查复反，必推之于大衰而后息与？
现代文：还是天命就是这样，不是人力所能扭转的，一定要衍变到国家危亡以后才停止呢？唉！
English: Or is it just the fate of nature, which cannot be reversed by manpower, and must evolve until the country is in peril? Alas!

古文：乌乎！凡所为屑屑，夙兴夜寐，务法上古者，又将无补与？
现代文：所作的一切日夜勤劳，力求效法遥远的古代，难道都没有作用吗？
English: Are all the efforts made day and night, striving to emulate distant antiquity, of no avail?

古文：三代受命，其符安在？
现代文：那么，夏、商、周三代的君主承受天命，他们的依据在什么地方？
English: So, what is the basis for the three generations of monarchs, Xia, Shang and San, to have received the Mandate of Heaven?

古文：灾异之变，何缘而起？
现代文：灾异变故，又是因为什么而发生的呢？
English: What was the cause of the disaster?

古文：性命之情，或夭或寿，或仁或鄙，习闻其号，未烛厥理。
现代文：性命的实际，或者天亡，或者长寿，或者仁德，或者鄙陋，常常听到这些名称，可是没能透彻地明晓其中的道理。
English: The reality of life, or natural death, or long life, or benevolence, or meanness, we often hear these names, but we have not been able to thoroughly understand the reason.

古文：伊欲风流而令行，刑轻而奸改，百姓和乐，政事宣昭，何修何饬而膏露降，百谷登，德润四海，泽臻草木，三光全，寒暑平，受天之祜，享鬼神之灵，德泽洋溢，施乎方外，延及群生？
现代文：想用风俗教化的力量使命令推行；使刑罚减轻，奸邪改变；使百姓和睦安乐，政治开明。应该怎样整顿政治才能使甘露普降，百谷丰收，使四海之内的人民都受到德泽，连草木也得到滋润？怎样才能使曰、月、星三光完全不发生亏蚀，寒暑季节正常，能够得到天的福佑，为鬼神所歆享？使德泽洋溢，扩大到国外，普及到所有的生命呢？
English: They want to use the power of custom and education to enforce orders; to reduce punishments, to change evil and vice; to make the people peaceful and happy, and to open up politics. How should politics be rectified in order to make the nectar drop, the grain harvest plentiful, so that the people within the four seas are blessed with virtue, and even the plants are nourished? How can the three lights of the sun, moon, and stars be completely free from loss and erosion, the cold and hot seasons be normal, and the blessings of heaven be obtained and enjoyed by ghosts and gods? How can virtue be overflowed, expanded abroad, and spread to all life?

古文：子大夫明先圣之业，习俗化之变，终始之序，讲闻高谊之日久矣，其明以谕朕。
现代文：大夫们通晓先代圣王的事业，熟悉风俗变化的道理，了解事物从发生、发展到结束的次序，而且你们研究高深道理的时间也很久了，希望把研究的成果明白地告诉我！
English: The doctors are familiar with the cause of the previous holy kings, are familiar with the principle of changing customs, and understand the order of things from occurrence, development to completion. Moreover, you have been studying the higher and deeper principles for a long time, and hope to clearly tell me the results of your research!

古文：科别其条，勿猥勿并，取之于术，慎其所出。
现代文：要分清条理，不要笼统，不要混乱，提出的方案，也应慎密考虑。
English: It is necessary to be clear and coherent, not generalized, not confusing, and the proposed plan should also be carefully considered.

古文：乃其不正不直，不忠不极，枉于执事，书之不泄，兴于朕躬，毋悼后害。
现代文：要是有不正直、不忠实、邪曲不守中道的官吏，你们大胆告诉我，决不会泄露出去，我亲自拆看，希望你们不要有后顾之忧。
English: If there are any officials who are dishonest, unfaithful, devious, or do not adhere to the middle way, you can tell me boldly that they will never be revealed, and I will personally look into it. I hope you will not worry about it.

古文：子大夫其尽心，靡有所隐，朕将亲览焉。
现代文：大夫们尽管说出所知道的一切，不要隐瞒，我要亲自看的啊！
English: Doctors, tell me everything you know, don't hide it, I want to see for myself!

古文：仲舒对曰：陛下发德音，下明诏，求天命与情性，皆非愚臣之所能及也。
现代文：董仲舒的对策说：仲舒说：陛下发出有德的声音和英明的韶书，寻求天命和情性的解答，这两个问题都不是愚臣所能答覆的。
English: Dong Zhongshu's countermeasure said: Zhongshu said: His Majesty issued a virtuous voice and a wise imperial edict, seeking the answer of fate and temperament, both of which are questions that fools cannot answer.

古文：臣谨案《春秋》之中，视前世已行之事，以观天人相与之际，甚可畏也。
现代文：我谨慎地按照《春秋》中的记载，考察前代已经做过的事情，来研究天和人相互作用的关系，情况是很可怕的呀！
English: I carefully followed the records in "Spring and Autumn" and examined what had been done in previous generations to study the relationship between the interaction of heaven and man. The situation is very terrible!

古文：国家将有失道之败，而天乃先出灾害以谴告之，不知自省，又出怪异以警惧之，尚不知变，而伤败乃至。
现代文：国家将要发生违背道德的败坏事情，那么天就降下灾害来谴责和提醒它；如果不知道醒悟，天又生出一些怪异的事来警告和恐吓它；还不知道悔改，那么伤害和败亡就会降临。
English: If a nation is about to fall into immoral corruption, then heaven sends down disasters to condemn and remind it; if it does not know to wake up, then heaven produces some strange things to warn and frighten it; if it does not know to repent, then harm and ruin will come.

古文：以此见天心之仁爱人君而欲止其乱也。
现代文：由此可以看出，天对人君是仁爱的，希望帮助人君消弥祸乱。
English: From this, it can be seen that heaven is benevolent to man and hopes to help man eliminate evil.

古文：自非大亡道之世者，天尽欲扶持而全安之，事在强勉而已矣。
现代文：如果不是非常无道的世代，天总是都想扶持和保全他，事情在于君主发奋努力罢了。
English: If it is not a very unscrupulous generation, the heavens always want to support and preserve him, the matter is that the monarch makes strenuous efforts.

古文：强勉学习，则闻见博而知益明；强勉行道，则德日起而大有功：此皆可使还至而有效者也。《诗》曰 夙夜匪解 ，《书》云 茂哉茂哉！ 
现代文：发奋努力钻研学问，就会见闻广博使才智更加聪明；奋发努力行道，德行就会曰见崇高，而且越发成功，这些都是可以很快得到，并且是可以很快就有成效的。《诗经》上说： 从早到晚，不敢懈怠。 《尚书》中说： 努力呀！努力呀！ 
English: To study hard and diligently will make one's knowledge more extensive and one's wisdom more intelligent; to study hard and diligently will make one's virtue more sublime and one's success more successful. All of these can be obtained quickly and can be effective quickly. "Song of Songs" says: "From morning to night, dare not slacken." "Song of Songs" says: "Work hard! Work hard!"

古文：皆强勉之谓也。
现代文：都是奋勉努力的意思。
English: It's all about hard work.

古文：道者，所繇适于治之路也，仁义礼乐皆其具也。
现代文： 道 就是由此达到治理国家的道路，仁、义、礼、乐都是治理国家的工具。
English: Tao is the way to govern the country, and benevolence, righteousness, propriety, and happiness are the tools to govern the country.

古文：故圣王已没，而子孙长久安宁数百岁，此皆礼乐教化之功也。
现代文：所以虽然圣明的君王死了，可是他的子孙还能长久统治，安宁数百年，这都是礼乐教化的功效啊。
English: Therefore, although the king of Shengming is dead, his descendants can still reign for a long time, and there will be peace for hundreds of years. This is all the effect of the teaching of ritual music.

古文：王者未作乐之时，乃用先五之乐宜于世者，而以深入教化于民。
现代文：君王在自己没有制作乐章的时候，就选用先代君王乐章中能适合当时社会的，用它来深入教化人民。
English: When the monarch did not make his own music, he chose the music of the previous monarch that was suitable for the society at that time, and used it to deeply educate the people.

古文：教化之情不得，雅颂之乐不成，故王者功成作乐，乐其德也。
现代文：得不到教化的实效，典雅、歌颂的乐也就做不成，所以君王功成名就以后才作乐，用乐来歌颂他的功德。
English: Without the practical effect of enlightenment, the music of elegance and praise cannot be made, so the music will be made after the king's achievement is famous, and the music will be used to praise his merits.

古文：乐者，所以变民风，化民俗也；其变民也易，其化人也著。
现代文：乐是用来改变民风，感化民俗的；乐改变民风容易，感化人民也有显著的功效。
English: Music is used to change folk customs and influence folk customs; music is easy to change folk customs and has a significant effect on influencing people.

古文：故声发于和而本于情，接于肌肤，臧于骨髓。
现代文：所以，乐的声音是从和谐的气氛中发出，依据于感情，接触到肌肤，深藏在骨髓。
English: Therefore, the sound of music emanates from a harmonious atmosphere, based on feelings, touches the skin, and is deeply hidden in the bone marrow.

古文：故王道虽微缺，而管弦之声未衰也。
现代文：因此王道虽然衰微了，管弦之声却依然流传。
English: Therefore, although the royal road has waned, the sound of the orchestra is still spreading.

古文：夫虞氏之不为政久矣，然而乐颂遗风犹有存者，是以孔子在齐而闻《韶》也。
现代文：虞舜的政治已经很久都没有了，可是流传下来的乐颂还依旧存在，所以孔子在齐国能听到《韶》乐。
English: The politics of the Yue and Qiu dynasties have long been gone, but the music that has been passed down still exists, so Confucius can hear the music of the Yue and Qiu dynasties in Qi.

古文：夫人君莫不欲安存而恶危亡，然而政乱国危者甚众，所任者非其人，而所繇者非其道，是以政日以仆灭也。
现代文：人君没有不希望国家安宁而憎恶危亡的，然而政治混乱、国家危亡的很多，这是由于任用的人不得当，言行举止不符合治理国家的 道 ，所以政事一天天衰败下去。
English: There are no people who do not want the country to be peaceful and abhor danger, but there are many people who want political chaos and the country to be in danger. This is because the people who are appointed are not proper, and their words and deeds are not in line with the way of governing the country, so the political affairs are deteriorating day by day.

古文：夫周道衰于幽、厉，非道亡也，幽、厉不繇也。
现代文：周代的 道 到了周厉王、周幽王时衰落了，不是 道 亡了，而是厉王和幽王不遵循这个 道 走。
English: The Tao of the Zhou Dynasty declined when it came to King Li of Zhou and King Yu of Zhou. It was not that the Tao died, but that King Li and King Yu did not follow the Tao.

古文：至于宣王，思昔先王之德，兴滞补弊，明文、武之功业，周道粲然复兴，诗人美之而作，上天晁之，为生贤佐，后世称通，至今不绝。
现代文：周宣王思念先代圣君的德行，复兴久已停滞的事业，补救时弊，发扬周文王、周武王开创的功业，周代的 道 又灿烂复兴起来。诗人赞美他，为他作诗，认为上天保佑他，为他出生贤良的辅佐，后世称颂周宣王，至今不绝。
English: Zhou Xuan Wang thought about the virtue of the previous saint, revived the long-stagnant cause, remedied the shortcomings of the time, and carried forward the work pioneered by King Zhou Wen and King Zhou Wu. The way of Zhou Dynasty was brilliantly revived. Poets praised him, wrote poems for him, believed that God blessed him, and was born as a virtuous assistant for him. Later generations praised Zhou Xuan Wang, which has not ceased to this day.

古文：此夙夜不解行善之所致也。
现代文：这是周宣王日夜不懈地做好事得来的。
English: This is the result of Zhou Xuan Wang's tireless efforts to do good deeds day and night.

古文：孔子曰 人能弘道，非道弘人 也。
现代文：孔子说 人能光大道，不是道光大人 。
English: Confucius said that people can light the road, but not the road light.

古文：故治乱废兴在于己，非天降命不得可反，其所操持誖谬失其统也。
现代文：所以治和乱、废和兴，都在于自己。世遭衰乱并不是天命不可挽回，而是由于人君的行为荒谬，失掉了先王优良的传统啊。
English: Therefore, it is up to oneself to control chaos, waste and prosperity. It is not an irrevocable fate that the world is in decline, but because of the absurd behavior of the human ruler, the fine tradition of the previous king has been lost.

古文：臣闻天之所大奉使之王者，必有非人力所能致而自至者，此受命之符也。
现代文：臣听说受到天的尊重，天使他得到天下而成为王的人，必定有人力做不到而自然达到的事情，这就是王者承受天命的凭证。
English: The vassal heard that he was respected by heaven, and the angel who received him from heaven and became the king must have achieved something that could not be done by human power, but was achieved naturally. This is the proof that the king has received the destiny of heaven.

古文：天下之人同心归之，若归父母，故天瑞应诚而至。
现代文：天下的人都同心归顺他，就像归顺父母一样，所以天感应到诚意，祥瑞就出现了。
English: People all over the world submitted to him with one heart, just as they would submit to their parents, so Heaven sensed his sincerity and Xiang Rui appeared.

古文：周公曰 复哉复哉 ，孔子曰 德不孤，必有邻 ，皆积善累德之效也。
现代文：《尚书》中说： 白鱼跳进王乘坐的船裹，有火覆盖着王屋，变成了乌鸦。 这就是承受天命的凭证啊。周公说： 应得善报呀！应得善报呀！ 孔子说： 有德的人决不会孤立，一定会得到帮助。 这都是积善累德的效果啊。
English: "Shangshu" said: "The white fish jumped into the boat that the king was riding in, and the fire covered the king's house and turned into a crow. This is the proof of bearing the fate of heaven. Zhou Gong said: You deserve a good reward! You deserve a good reward! Confucius said: A virtuous person will never be isolated and will definitely get help. This is all the effect of accumulating virtues.

古文：及至后世，淫佚衰微，不能统理群生，诸侯背畔，残贱良民以争壤土，废德教而任刑罚。
现代文：可是到了后世，君主淫逸奢侈，道德衰微，不能治理人民，诸侯背叛他，杀害良民，争夺土地，废弃道德教化，滥用刑罚。
English: However, in later generations, the monarch was lascivious and extravagant, his morals declined, and he was unable to govern the people. The princes betrayed him, killed good people, competed for land, abandoned moral education, and abused punishment.

古文：刑罚不中，则生邪气；邪气积于下，怨恶畜于上。上下不和，则阴阳缪盭而娇孽生矣。
现代文：刑罚使用不适当，就产生了邪气；邪气聚积在下面，怨恶聚集在上面，上下不和，就会阴阳错乱，妖孽滋生。
English: If punishments are used inappropriately, evil spirits will arise. Evil spirits will accumulate below, hatreds will gather above, and if there is discord between the upper and lower levels, yin and yang will become disordered, and witchcraft will breed.

古文：此灾异所缘而起也。
现代文：造就是灾害怪异发生的原因。
English: Creation is the reason for the strange occurrence of disasters.

古文：臣闻命者天之令也，性者生之质也，情者人之欲也。
现代文：臣听说，命就是天的命令，性就是生来的本质，情就是人的欲望。
English: The minister heard that life is the order of heaven, sex is the essence of birth, and love is the desire of man.

古文：或夭或寿，或仁或鄙，陶冶而成之，不能粹美，有治乱之所在，故不齐也。
现代文：有的人夭折，有的人长寿，有的人仁慈，有的人卑鄙，好比造瓦铸金，不可能都是纯粹美好的，由于社会治、乱的影响，所以人的寿命、品行是不一致的。
English: Some people die young, some people live long, some people are kind, and some people are mean. It's like making bricks and mortar into gold. They can't all be pure and beautiful. Due to the influence of social order and chaos, people's lifespans and behaviors are inconsistent.

古文：孔子曰： 君子之德风，小人之德草，草上之风必偃。 
现代文：孔子说： 君子的德行像风，小人的德行像草，风向哪边吹，草就向哪边倒。 
English: Confucius said: The virtue of a gentleman is like the wind, and the virtue of a villain is like the grass. Whichever way the wind blows, the grass will fall.

古文：故尧、舜行德则民仁寿，桀、纣行暴则民鄙夭。
现代文：所以尧、舜实行德政，人民就仁慈长寿；桀纣肆行暴虐，人民就贪鄙天亡。
English: Therefore, if you and I practice virtue, the people will be kind and long-lived; if we are violent, the people will be greedy and perish.

古文：未上之化下，下之从上，犹泥之在钧，唯甄者之所为，犹金之在熔，唯冶者之所铸。 绥之斯俫，动之斯和 ，此之谓也。
现代文：在上的人君教化在下的人民，下面的人民服从在上的人君，好像泥土放在模型裹，听凭陶匠的加工；也好像金属放在容器裹，听凭冶匠的铸造。《论语》中说： 使人民安定，人民就来归顺，使人民得到鼓舞，人民就会同心协力。 
English: In the Analects of Confucius, it is said: "If the people are stable, the people will be obedient; if the people are inspired, the people will work together."

古文：臣谨案《春秋》之文，求王道之端，得之于正。正次王，王次春。
现代文：说的就是这样的意思。臣仔细考察《春秋》裹 春王正月 的意思，寻求王道的开端，得到了 正 。 正 次于 王 ， 王 次于 春 。
English: The minister carefully examined the meaning of "Spring and Autumn" wrapped around the Spring King's first month, seeking the beginning of the king's way, and got it right.

古文：春者，天之所为也；正者，王之所为也。
现代文：春是天的作为。正是王的作为。
English: Spring is the act of heaven. It is the act of the king.

古文：其意曰，上承天之所为，而下以正其所为，正王道之端云尔。
现代文：它的意思是说，君主上面奉承天的作为，下面用来端正自己的行为， 正 是王道的开端啊。
English: It means that the monarch is above all flattered by the actions of heaven, and below he is used to correct his own behavior, which is the beginning of the royal road.

古文：然则王者欲有所为，宜求其端于天。
现代文：可是，王者想有所作为，应该向天去求到这个开端。
English: However, if the king wants to make a difference, he should ask the heavens for this beginning.

古文：天道之大者在阴阳。阳为德，阴为刑；刑主杀而德主生。
现代文：天道最大的就是阴阳，阳作为德，阴作为刑，刑主杀，德主生。
English: The greatest heavenly way is yin and yang, yang as virtue, yin as punishment, punishment as killing, and virtue as begetting.

古文：是故阳常居大夏，而以生育养长为事；阴常居大冬，而积于空虚不用之处。
现代文：所以阳常常处在盛夏，把生育养长作为自己的事；阴经常处在严冬，积聚在空虚不起作用的地方。
English: Therefore, the yang is often in the height of summer, taking fertility and growth as its own business; the yin is often in the severe winter, accumulating in places where emptiness does not work.

古文：以此见天之任德不任刑也。
现代文：由此可以看出，天是任用德教，不任用刑罚的。
English: From this, it can be seen that Heaven uses moral education, not punishment.

古文：天使阳出布施于上而主岁功，使阴入伏于下而时出佐阳；阳不得阴之助，亦不能独成岁。
现代文：天使阳出现，在上面布施，主管一年的收成；使阴入内，在下面藏伏，时常出来帮助阳；阳没有阴的帮助，也不能使年岁独自完成。
English: The angel yang appears, distributes alms above, and supervises the year's harvest; causes the yin to enter, hide below, and often come out to help the yang; the yang does not have the help of the yin, and cannot make the years complete on its own.

古文：终阳以成岁为名，此天意也。
现代文：从始至终阳是以完成年岁为名的，这是天意啊。
English: From beginning to end, the sun is named after the completion of the year, which is the will of heaven.

古文：王者承天意以从事，故任德教而不任刑。
现代文：王者秉承天意来做事，所以任用德教而不任用刑罚。
English: The king adheres to the will of heaven to do things, so he appoints moral education rather than punishment.

古文：刑者不可任以治世，犹阴之不可任以成岁也。
现代文：刑不能任用来治理社会，就像阴不能用来完成年岁一样。
English: Punishment cannot be used to govern society, just as yin cannot be used to complete the cycle of years.

古文：为政而任刑，不顺于天，故先王莫之肯为也。
现代文：执政而任用刑罚，是不顺从天意，所以先王没有肯这样做的。
English: The former king did not want to do so, as it was not in accordance with God's will to rule by imposing punishment.

古文：今废先王德教之官，而独任执法之吏治民，毋乃任刑之意与！
现代文：现在废除了先王掌管德教的官员，衹任用执法官吏来治理人民，这难道是先王任用刑罚的本意吗？
English: Now that the former king has abolished the officials in charge of moral education and appointed law enforcement officials to govern the people, is this the original intention of the former king's appointment of punishment?

古文：孔子曰： 不教而诛谓之虐。 
现代文：孔子说： 不进行教育就杀人，叫做暴虐。 
English: Confucius said: To kill without instruction is called tyranny.

古文：虐政用于下，而欲德教之被四海，故难成也。
现代文：暴虐的政治施用到下面，却想使德教普及到四海，这是难以办到的啊。
English: The tyrannical politics is applied to the bottom, but they want to spread moral education to the four seas, which is difficult to do.

古文：臣谨案《春秋》谓一元之意，一者万物之所从始也，元者辞之所谓大也。
现代文：臣认真考察《春秋》讲的 一元 的意义， 一 就是万物的开始， 元 就是辞语中所说的 大 。
English: The minister carefully examined the meaning of "one yuan" mentioned in "Spring and Autumn," one is the beginning of all things, the original is the word "big."

古文：谓一为元者，视大始而欲正本也。
现代文：说 一 是 元 ，显示了大的开始并且想正其根本。
English: Saying that one is the original shows a big beginning and wants to correct it fundamentally.

古文：《春秋》深探其本，而反自贵者始。
现代文：《春秋》深深地探究它的本源，原来却要从尊贵的人开始。
English: "Spring and Autumn" probes deeply into its origin, but it begins with a noble person.

古文：故为人君者，正心以正朝廷，正朝廷以正百官，正百官以正万民，正万民以正四方。
现代文：所以做君主的，先正心才能正朝廷，正朝廷才能正百官，正百官才能正万民，正万民才能正四方。
English: Therefore, to be a monarch, one must have a righteous heart in order to be righteous in the imperial court, righteous in the imperial court in order to be righteous in a hundred officials, righteous in a hundred officials in order to be righteous in all people, and righteous in all people in order to be righteous in all directions.

古文：四方正，远近莫敢不壹于正，而亡有邪气奸其间者。
现代文：四方正了，远近就没有敢不趋向于正的，而且没有邪气掺杂在裹面。
English: When the four directions are positive, there is no daring not to tend to the positive in the near and far, and there is no evil mixed in the wrapping.

古文：是以阴阳调而风雨时，群生和而万民殖，五谷孰而草木茂，天地之间被润泽而大丰美，四海之内闻盛德而皆徕臣，诸福之物，可致之祥，莫不毕至，而王道终矣。
现代文：所以阴阳调和而风雨及时，万物和谐而人民长育，五谷丰收而草木茂盛，天地间都受到恩泽，并呈现出非常丰富美好的景象，四海之内听到君主的盛德都来称臣，一切幸福的东西，可以得到的祥瑞，无不毕至，这就是王道完成了。
English: Therefore, the yin and yang are harmonized and the wind and rain are timely, all things are harmonious and the people grow up, the grain harvest is bountiful and the plants are lush, the heavens and the earth are blessed, and a very rich and beautiful scene is presented. All over the world, when they hear the greatness of the monarch, they all come to praise the minister. All happy things, the auspiciousness that can be obtained, are endless. This is the completion of the royal road.

古文：孔子曰： 凤鸟不至，河不出图，吾已矣夫！ 
现代文：孔子说： 凤鸟不来到， 河图 不出现，我恐怕要完了吧！ 
English: Confucius said: "If the phoenix bird does not come, and the river map does not appear, I am afraid I am finished!"

古文：自悲可致此物，而身卑贱不得致也。
现代文：这是他悲伤自己的德行可以招致这些祥瑞，却因为自己地位卑贱而不能招来。
English: He was saddened by the fact that his virtuous deeds could attract these blessings, but he could not attract them because of his lowly status.

古文：今陛下贵为天子，富有四海，居得致之位，操可致之势，又有能致之资，行高而恩厚，知明而意美，爱民而好士，可谓谊主矣。
现代文：现在陛下贵为天子，富有四海，处在可以招致祥瑞的地位，掌握了可以招致祥瑞的形势，又有能招致祥瑞的资质，行为高尚而恩德广厚，才智聪明而意向美好，爱护人民而喜欢文士，可以说是有道义的君主了。
English: Now His Majesty is the son of heaven, rich in the four seas, in a position that can attract good fortune, has mastered the situation that can attract good fortune, and has the qualifications that can attract good fortune, acts nobly and generously, is intelligent and has good intentions, loves the people and likes scribes, and can be said to be a moral monarch.

古文：然而天地未应而美祥莫至者，何也？
现代文：然而天地没有感应，美好的祥瑞没有到来，这是什么原因呢？
English: However, heaven and earth did not respond, and the beautiful auspiciousness did not come. What is the reason for this?

古文：凡以教化不立而万民不正也。
现代文：大概是教化没有建立，没有把人民纳入正道吧。
English: It is probably because enlightenment has not been established and the people have not been brought onto the right path.

古文：夫万民之从利也，如水之走下，不以教化堤防之，不能止也。
现代文：万民追逐利益，就好像水向下流一样，不拿教化作他们的堤防，就不能制止。
English: The pursuit of profit by all nations is like the downward flow of water, which cannot be stopped without turning education into their dike.

古文：是故教化立而奸邪皆止者，其堤防完也；教化废而奸邪并出，刑罚不能胜者，其堤防坏也。
现代文：所以教化建立而奸邪停止，是因为它的堤防完好；教化废止而奸邪并出，用刑罚也不能制止，这是它的堤防坏了。
English: Therefore, the establishment of enlightenment and the cessation of evil is because its dike is intact; the abolition of enlightenment and the emergence of evil cannot be stopped by punishment, because its dike is broken.

古文：古之王者明于此，是故南面而治天下，莫不以教化为大务。
现代文：古代的王者明白这个道理，所以坐朝治理天下，没有不把教化当作主要任务的。
English: The ancient kings understood this principle, so they sat down to govern the world, and there was no one who did not regard enlightenment as the main task.

古文：立太学以教于国，设痒序以化于邑，渐民以仁，摩民以谊，节民以礼，故其刑罚甚轻而禁不犯者，教化行而习俗美也。
现代文：在国都设立太学进行教育，在县邑设立县学、乡学实施教化，用仁来教育人民，用义来感化人民，用礼来节制人民，所以，虽然刑罚很轻，却没人违犯禁令，这是教化施行，习俗美好的缘故啊。
English: In the capital of the country, a university was set up for education, and in counties and townships, county schools and township schools were set up to carry out indoctrination. People were educated with benevolence, influenced with righteousness, and restrained with etiquette. Therefore, although the punishment was light, no one violated the ban. This was due to the implementation of indoctrination and the beauty of customs.

古文：圣王之继乱世也，扫除其迹而悉去之，复修教化而崇起之。
现代文：圣明的君王承继乱世，他把乱世所遗留的一切痕迹都扫除掉，恢复教化，并且给以特别推崇。
English: The holy king succeeded the chaotic world. He swept away all the traces left by the chaotic world, restored enlightenment, and gave him special respect.

古文：教化已明，习俗已成，子孙循之，行五六百岁尚未败也。
现代文：到了教化已经明了，习俗已经养成，子孙遵循推行下去，遇五、六百年仍然不会衰败。
English: When it comes to enlightenment, it is already clear, the custom has been developed, and the descendants will follow the implementation, and it will still not decay in five or six hundred years.

古文：至周之末世，大为亡道，以失天下。
现代文：到周朝末世，君主非常无道，以致失去了天下。
English: By the end of the Zhou Dynasty, the monarch was so ruthless that he lost the whole country.

古文：秦继其后，独不能改，又益甚之，重禁文学，不得挟书，弃捐礼谊而恶闻之，其心欲尽灭先圣之道，而颛为自恣苟简之治，故立为天子十四岁而国破亡矣。
现代文：秦朝承继周朝以后，不但没有更改，反而比周朝末年更加无道，严禁文学，不许私自藏书，摒弃礼义，甚至厌恶听到礼义的话，他想把先王的道义完全毁灭掉，专门用自己放肆、苟且、简陋的一套办法来治理国家，所以做天子才十四年，国家就灭亡了。
English: The Qin Dynasty succeeded the Zhou Dynasty, and not only did it not change, but it was even more ruthless than the Zhou Dynasty at the end of the year. Literature was strictly forbidden, and people were not allowed to collect books without permission. They abandoned propriety, and even hated to hear propriety words. They wanted to completely destroy the morality of the former king, and used their own arrogant, rigorous, and simple set of methods to govern the country. Therefore, after only fourteen years as the Son of Heaven, the country was doomed.

古文：自古以来，未尝有以乱济乱，大败天下之民如秦者也。
现代文：自古以来，还没有像秦朝这样用乱救乱，严重危害天下人民的。
English: Since ancient times, there has never been anyone like the Qin Dynasty to use chaos to save chaos, seriously endangering the people of the world.

古文：其遗毒余烈，至今未灭，使习俗薄恶，人民嚚顽，抵冒殊扞，孰烂如此之甚者也。
现代文：秦朝遗留下来的毒素像残余的火焰，到现在还没有熄灭，它使习俗薄恶，人民欺诈顽劣，抵触抗拒，犯法乱德，腐败达到如此严重的地步。
English: The toxin left behind by the Qin Dynasty is like a residual flame, which has not yet been extinguished. It has made the customs weak and evil, the people's deception and wickedness, resistance and resistance, law-breaking and immorality, and corruption reach such a serious level.

古文：孔子曰： 腐朽之木不可雕也，粪土之墙不可圬也。 
现代文：孔子说： 腐朽的木头，不能雕饰啊；泥糊的墙，不能粉饰啊。 
English: Confucius said, "Decaying wood cannot be carved; muddy walls cannot be whitewashed.

古文：今汉继秦之后，如朽木、粪墙矣，虽欲善治之，亡可奈何。
现代文：现在汉朝继承秦朝之后，社会状况就像朽木和泥墙，虽然想很好地治理它，却没有好办法。
English: Now, after the Han Dynasty succeeded the Qin Dynasty, the social situation is like rotten wood and mud wall. Although we want to manage it well, there is no good way.

古文：法出而奸生，令下而诈起，如以汤止沸，抱薪救火，愈甚亡益也。
现代文：法令一颁布，奸邪接着就发生，命令一下达，欺骗跟着就兴起，好像用热水去制止沸腾，抱着木柴去救火，衹会越来越糟，没有任何益处。
English: As soon as a decree is issued, treachery follows; as soon as a command is issued, deceit follows. It is like using hot water to stop a boil, or firewood to put out a blaze. It will get worse and worse, and it will not do any good.

古文：窃譬之琴瑟不调，甚者必解而更张之，乃可鼓也；为政而不行，甚者必变而更化之，乃可理也。
现代文：譬如琴瑟的音不协调，严重的必须把弦折下来重新安装，才能弹奏；处理政事不行，坏得厉害的，必须破旧立新，才能治理。
English: For example, if the sound of a harp is not harmonious, the strings must be broken down and reinstalled before they can be played; it is not possible to deal with political affairs, and if they are badly broken, they must be torn down and rebuilt before they can be governed.

古文：当更张而不更张，虽有良工不能善调也：当更化而不更化，虽有大贤不能善治也。
现代文：应当重新张设琴弦而不改弦更张的，虽然有优秀技工也不能调理好；应当改革而不改革的，虽然有大贤人也不能整治好。
English: Those strings that should be re-strung, but are not, cannot be adjusted well, even if there are excellent technicians; those that should be reformed, but are not, cannot be adjusted well, even if there are great sages.

古文：故汉得天下以来，常欲善治而至今不可善治者，失之于当更化而不更化也。
现代文：所以汉朝得天下以来，常想好好治理，可是到现在还没治理好，问题就在于应当改革而没有改革。
English: Therefore, since the Han Dynasty came to power, it has often wanted to govern well, but so far it has not been governed well. The problem is that it should be reformed, but there is no reform.

古文：古人有言曰： 临渊羡鱼，不如退而结网。 
现代文：古人证过： 站在潭边羡慕别人捕到了鱼，不如自己回去编织鱼网。 
English: The ancients testified: Standing on the edge of the pond and admiring the fish caught by others, it is better to go back and weave a fishing net.

古文：今临政而愿治七十余岁矣，不如退而更化；更化则可善治，善治则灾害日去，福禄日来。
现代文：汉朝临政并且想把政事治理好，到现在已经七十多年了，不如回头来进行改革，改革了就能好好治理，国家治理好了，灾害就会一天天消除，福禄也就会一天天到来。
English: The Han Dynasty was in power and wanted to manage political affairs well. Now it has been more than 70 years. It is better to go back and carry out reforms. If reforms are carried out, it will be possible to govern well. If the country is governed well, disasters will be eliminated day by day, and benefits will come day by day.

古文：《诗》云： 宜民宜人，受禄于人。 
现代文：《诗经》上说： 适合于民，适合于人，接受天给予的福禄。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: Be suitable for the people, be suitable for the people, and accept the blessings given by heaven.

古文：为政而宜于民者，固当受禄于天。
现代文：执政能适合人民，自然会得到天给予的福禄。
English: If the government can suit the people, it will naturally receive the blessings given by heaven.

古文：夫仁、谊、礼、知、信五常之道，王者所当修饬也；五者修饬，故受天之晁，而享鬼神之灵，德施于方外，延及群生也。
现代文：仁、义、礼、智、信是五种恒久不变的道，这是王者应培养整饬的。这五种道能培养整饬好，就能得到天的保佑，鬼神也来赞助他接受祭祀，恩德就会普及到国外，扩大到一切生命。
English: Benevolence, righteousness, propriety, wisdom, and faith are the five eternal and unchanging paths, which a king should cultivate and rectify. If these five paths can be cultivated and rectified well, he will be blessed by heaven, and ghosts and gods will also come to sponsor him to accept sacrifices. Ende will spread abroad and expand to all life.

古文：天子览其对而异焉，乃复册之曰：制曰：盖闻虞舜之时，游于岩郎之上，垂拱无为，而天下太平。
现代文：汉武帝看了董仲舒的对策认为很不寻常，于是又策问大夫们说：策问说：听说虞舜的时候，虞舜常常在宫殿的走廊裹散步，没有什么作为，可是天下太平。
English: Emperor Hanwu looked at Dong Zhongshu's countermeasure and thought it was very unusual, so he questioned the doctors and said: "Question: When I heard about the cormorant, the cormorant often walked in the corridor of the palace, there was nothing to do, but the world was peaceful.

古文：周文王至于日昃不暇食，而宇内亦治。
现代文：周文王整天忙到头偏西，连吃饭的空儿都没有，天下也很太平。
English: Zhou Wenwang was so busy all day that he didn't even have time to eat, and the world was very peaceful.

古文：夫帝王之道，岂不同条共贯与？
现代文：帝王治理天下的道，难道没有共同的条理，一贯的主张吗？
English: Isn't there a common structure and consistent idea behind the way emperors govern the world?

古文：何逸劳之殊也？
现代文：为什么安逸和劳苦有这样大的差别呢？
English: Why is there such a big difference between ease and toil?

古文：盖俭者不造玄黄旌旗之饰。
现代文：那些勤俭的帝王连黑色、黄色的旌旗也不制作。
English: Those industrious emperors did not even make black and yellow flags.

古文：及至周室，设两观，乘大路，朱干玉戚，八佾陈于庭，而颂声兴。
现代文：可是到了周朝，在宫门外筑了两座观望的台，乘坐用玉装饰的车，制造红色的盾和玉石做的斧柄，朝廷裹排列着六十四人的舞蹈，到处响起歌颂的声音。
English: However, in the Zhou Dynasty, two observation platforms were built outside the palace gate, a car decorated with jade was used, red shields and jade axe handles were made, 64 people danced around the court, and the sound of singing was heard everywhere.

古文：夫帝王之道岂异指哉？
现代文：帝王的道，难道意旨不一样吗？
English: The emperor's way, isn't the intention different?

古文：或曰良玉不瑑，又曰非文亡以辅德，二端异焉。
现代文：有入说： 良玉不需要雕琢， 有人说 没有文采就不能辅助德行， 两种说法是不同的。
English: Some people say, "Good gems don't need to be carved," and some people say, "You can't support virtue without literature," but the two statements are different.

古文：殷人执五刑以督奸，伤肌肤以惩恶。
现代文：殷朝人制定五种刑法来防止奸诈，用毁伤身体的办法来惩戒邪恶。
English: The people of the Yin Dynasty formulated five kinds of criminal laws to prevent treachery, and used physical injury to punish evil.

古文：成、康不式，四十余年天下不犯，囹圄空虚。
现代文：可是周成王和周康王放弃这些刑法四十多年，天下也没有犯法的。监狱空荡无人。
English: However, Zhou Cheng Wang and Zhou Kang Wang have abandoned these criminal laws for more than forty years, and there has been no violation of the law in the world. Prisons are empty.

古文：秦国用之，死者甚众，刑者相望，秏矣哀哉！
现代文：秦国使用这些刑法，杀死的人很多，受刑的人接连不断，天下空虚，人口减少，真可哀呀！唉！
English: Qin used these criminal laws, killed many people, sentenced people one after another, the world is empty, the population is decreasing, what a pity! Alas!

古文：乌乎！朕夙寤晨兴，惟前帝王之宪，永思所以奉至尊，章洪业，皆在力本任贤。
现代文：我晚睡早起，考虑先代帝王的法典，久久地思虑用什么来适合至尊的地位，光大祖宗的事业，我认为关键在于努力搞好农业，任用贤人。
English: I go to bed late and get up early, consider the code of the previous emperor, and think for a long time about what is suitable for the supreme position, the cause of the great ancestors. I think the key is to work hard to do a good job in agriculture and appoint wise men.

古文：今朕亲耕籍田以为农先，劝孝弟，崇有德，使者冠盖相望，问勤劳，恤孤独，尽思极神，功烈休德未始云获也。
现代文：现在我亲自耕种籍田为农民做榜样，鼓励百姓孝敬父母，友爱兄弟，尊敬有德行的人，并且派出很多使者，络绎不绝地去慰问劳苦人家，救济没有父母、没有子女的孤独的人，一切办法都想到了，但并没有收到大的成效和美好的德行。
English: Now I am personally cultivating my home farm to set an example for farmers, encouraging the people to be filial to their parents, to love their brothers and sisters, and to respect those who are virtuous. I have also sent out many emissaries to continuously offer condolences to the families of the working people, and relief to the lonely people who have no parents or children. I have thought of every possible way, but I have not received any great results or good deeds.

古文：今阴阳错缪，氛气充塞，群生寡遂，黎民未济，廉耻贸乱，贤不肖浑淆，未得其真，故详延特起之士，庶几乎！
现代文：现在阴阳错乱，天地间充满了恶劣的气氛，许多生物得不到生长，人民陷在贫困的境地，廉洁的人和无耻的人混淆在一起，好人和坏人也分不清楚，得不到真实的情况，所以我广泛地邀请了特别杰出的士人来请教，目的也许可以达到吧！
English: At present, the yin and yang are disordered, the world is full of bad atmosphere, many creatures cannot grow, the people are trapped in poverty, honest people and shameless people are mixed together, good people and bad people are also unclear, and the true situation cannot be obtained, so I have widely invited particularly outstanding scholars to seek advice. Perhaps the goal can be achieved!

古文：今子大夫待诏百有余人，或道世务而未济，稽诸上古之不同，考之于今而难行，毋乃牵于文系而不得骋与？
现代文：现在大夫们等待诏命的有一百多人，有的谈论当今的事情却不切实际，用古代历史来印证不相符合，用现在的情况来考察又难于实行，难道是因为受到文吏法令的牵累而不能任意发挥吗？
English: At present, there are more than a hundred doctors waiting for the imperial edict. Some of them talk about current affairs, but it is impractical to do so. They use ancient history to prove that they are not consistent, and use the current situation to investigate and difficult to implement. Is it because they are affected by civil servants' decrees and cannot play freely?

古文：将所繇异术，所闻殊方与？
现代文：还是因为学术的来源不同，所得的见解各异呢？
English: Or is it because the academic sources are different, resulting in different opinions?

古文：各悉对，著于篇，毋讳有司。明其指略，切磋究之。以称朕意。
现代文：每个人都可以尽意对答，写在篇上，不要害怕主管官吏，阐明你们的意旨和方略，进行切磋研究，以符合我的心意。
English: Everyone can answer at will, write on the article, do not be afraid of the competent officials, clarify your intentions and strategies, and conduct cross-examination to meet my intentions.

古文：仲舒对曰：臣闻尧受命，以天下为忧，而未以位为乐也，故诛逐乱臣，务求贤圣，是以得舜、禹、稷、卨、咎繇。
现代文：董仲舒对策说：臣听说尧承受了天命，担忧天下不容易治理，没有拿处在天子的尊位作为欢乐，他诛杀、放逐扰乱国家的大臣，努力寻求贤圣的人，所以得到舜、禹、后稷、高、咎繇。
English: Dong Zhongshu replied: "The minister heard that he had received the fate of heaven, worried that it was not easy to govern the world, and did not take the dignity of being the son of heaven as a joy. He killed and banished the ministers who disturbed the country, and worked hard to find the wise and holy people, so he got,禹,后,高,咎.

古文：众圣辅德，贤能佐职，教化大行，天下和洽，万民皆安仁乐谊，各得其宜，动作应礼，从容中道。
现代文：有众多圣明的人来帮助他提高德行，有许多贤能的人来辅助他恪尽职守，于是教化大行，天下太平，人民都安于行仁，乐于行义，各得其所，行动合乎礼义，从从容容地在正确的道路上前进。
English: There are many holy people to help him improve his virtue, and there are many wise people to assist him in fulfilling his duties. As a result, the enlightenment is great, the world is peaceful, the people are comfortable in doing benevolence, happy to do righteousness, each has its place, acts in accordance with propriety, and advances on the right path with ease.

古文：故孔子曰： 如有王者，必世而后仁， 此之谓也。
现代文：所以孔子说： 假如有王者，必须经过三十年，才能实现仁政， 就是指这说的啊。
English: That is why Confucius said, "If there is a king, it will take thirty years to realize benevolent government."

古文：尧在位七十载，乃逊于位以禅虞舜。
现代文：尧在位七十年，就让位给虞舜。
English: After reigning for seventy years, Emperor Zeng gave way to Emperor Yu.

古文：尧崩，天下不归尧子丹朱而归舜。
现代文：尧死后，天下人民没有归心于尧的儿子丹朱，却归心于舜。
English: After Yu's death, the people of the world did not return their hearts to Yu's son, Dan Zhu, but they did return their hearts to Yu.

古文：舜知不可辟，乃即天子之位，以禹为相，因尧之辅佐，继其统业，是以垂拱无为而天下治。
现代文：舜知道不可逃避，于是即位做了天子，用禹做宰相，继续任用尧所任用的人，继承了尧的传统和事业，所以垂衣拱手没有作为，就使天下太平。
English: He knew that he could not escape, so he ascended to the throne as the Son of Heaven, made Yu the prime minister, continued to appoint the people he had appointed, and inherited the tradition and career of Yu. Therefore, he did not do anything to make the world peaceful.

古文：孔子曰 《韶》尽美矣，又尽善矣 ，此之谓也。
现代文：孔子说 《韶》乐十分美，又十分善啊 ，就是这个意思。
English: This is what Confucius meant when he said, "Dao" Le is very beautiful and very good."

古文：至于殷纣，逆天暴物，杀戮贤知，残贼百姓。
现代文：至于商纣，违背天意，残毁万物，杀害贤良聪慧的人，残害百姓。
English: As for scheming, it violates the will of heaven, destroys all things, kills the wise and intelligent, and harms the people.

古文：伯夷、太公皆当世贤者，隐处而不为臣。
现代文：伯夷、姜太公都是当时的贤人，他们隐藏起来，不愿出来做官。
English: Both Bo Yi and Jiang Taigong were sages at that time. They hid themselves and did not want to come out and become officials.

古文：守职之人皆奔走逃亡，入于河海。
现代文：在职为官的人，都逃亡到河边、海滨。
English: Those who were on duty as officials all fled to the riverside and the seashore.

古文：天下秏乱，万民不安，故天下去殷而从周。
现代文：天下黑暗混乱，人民不得安宁，所以天下的老百姓都背弃殷纣王，拥护周文王。
English: The world was dark and chaotic, and the people could not find peace. Therefore, the people of the world turned their backs on King Yin and supported King Zhou.

古文：文王顺天理物，师用贤圣，是以闳夭、大颠、散宜生等亦聚于朝廷。
现代文：周文王顺从天意治理万物，以贤良有德的人为教师并且起用他们，所以闳夭、大颠、散宜生等贤士都聚集在周的朝廷。
English: King Zhou Wen governed all things in obedience to the will of heaven, and took the virtuous and virtuous people as teachers and used them, so the sages such as Jiao, Dabou, and San Yisheng all gathered in the Zhou court.

古文：爱施兆民，天下归之，故太公起海滨而即三公也。
现代文：仁爱施于人民，天下人都归顺他，所以姜太公从偏僻的海滨来投奔，后来做了周朝的三公。
English: Kindness to the people, the whole world is obedient to him, so Jiang Taigong fled from the remote coast, and later became the three kings of Zhou Dynasty.

古文：当此之时，纣尚在上，尊卑昏乱，百姓散亡，故文王悼痛而欲安之，是以日昃而不暇食民。
现代文：这时候，商纣王还在做天子，尊卑的次序混乱，百姓四散逃亡，周文王非常痛心，想让人民过上安定的生活，所以他整天忙得头偏西还没时间吃饭。
English: At this time, the merchant Zhou Wang was still acting as the son of heaven, the order of superiority and inferiority was chaotic, the people scattered and fled, Zhou Wen Wang was very distressed and wanted the people to live a stable life, so he was busy all day and had no time to eat.

古文：孔子作《春秋》，先正王而系万事，见素王之文焉。
现代文：孔子写《春秋》，先写王作为正，然后记载各种事情，这表现了在下位而有德行的所谓素王的文章。
English: When Confucius wrote "Spring and Autumn," he first wrote about the king as the righteous, and then recorded various things. This shows the article of the so-called king who was inferior and had virtue.

古文：由此观之，帝王之条贯同，然而劳逸异者，所遇之时异也。
现代文：这样看来，帝王的条理系统是一致的，但是勤劳和安逸不相同，是因为所遭逢的时代不一样。
English: In this way, the emperor's organizational system is consistent, but hard work and ease are different, because the times encountered are different.

古文：孔子曰 《武》尽美矣，未尽善也 ，此之谓也。
现代文：孔子说 《武》乐十分美，不够十分善啊 ，就是这个意思。
English: This is what Confucius meant when he said that "Wu" Le is very beautiful, but not good enough.

古文：臣闻制度文采玄黄之饰，所以明尊卑，异贵贱，而劝有德也。
现代文：臣听说制度文采和黑色、黄色的装饰，都是用来分别尊卑、区分贵贱和劝勉人们要有德行的。
English: The minister heard that the decoration of the system and the black and yellow decorations were all used to distinguish between the superior and the inferior, to distinguish between the high and the low, and to encourage people to be virtuous.

古文：故《春秋》受命所先制者，改正朔，易服色，所以应天也。
现代文：《春秋》是承受天命著述的，所以它首先制定的，就是改变历法和衣服的颜色，用这来顺应天。
English: "Spring and Autumn" is a work of destiny, so the first thing it did was to change the calendar and the color of the clothes to suit the weather.

古文：然则官至旌旗之制，有法而然者也。
现代文：那么，宫室和旌旗的制度是有效法才那样的。
English: So, the system of the palace chamber and the banner is the only valid law.

古文：故孔子曰： 奢则不逊，俭则固。 
现代文：所以孔子说： 奢侈了就不够谦逊，节俭了便简陋。 
English: Therefore, Confucius said: "If you are extravagant, you are not humble enough. If you are frugal, you are simple."

古文：俭非圣人之中制也。
现代文：节俭并不是圣人适中的制度。
English: Frugality is not a saintly virtue.

古文：臣闻良玉不瑑，资质润美，不待刻瑑，此亡异于达巷党人不学而自知也。
现代文：臣听说好玉不雕琢，是因为它的质地本来就滑润美好，不需要再加以雕饰，造就好像项橐没有学习就能自己知道一样。
English: The minister heard that good jade is not carved, because its texture is already smooth and beautiful, and it does not need to be carved again. It is as if the necklace can be known by itself without learning.

古文：然则常玉不瑑，不成文章；君子不学，不成其德。
现代文：可是普通的玉要是不雕刻，就不能成就美丽的花纹；君子不学习，就不能成就美德。
English: But if ordinary jade is not carved, it cannot achieve beautiful patterns; if a gentleman does not study, he cannot achieve virtue.

古文：臣闻圣王之治天下也，少则习之学，长则材诸位，爵禄以养其德，刑罚以威其恶，故民晓于礼谊而耻犯其上。
现代文：臣听说圣明的君王治理天下，对年轻的就教他们养成学习的好习惯，对年长的就授给职位察看他们的才能。用职位和俸禄来培养他们的德行，用刑罚来禁止他们作恶，所以人民都懂得礼义而耻于触犯他们的上级。
English: The vassal heard that the wise king ruled the world, teaching the young to acquire the habit of learning, and appointing elders to supervise their talents, using their positions and salaries to cultivate their virtues, and using punishments to prohibit them from doing evil, so that the people all knew the etiquette and were ashamed to offend their superiors.

古文：武王行大谊，平残贼，周公作礼乐以文之，至于成康之隆，囹圄空虚四十余年，此亦教化之渐而仁谊之流，非独伤肌肤之效也。
现代文：周武王施行大义，平定残贼，周公作礼乐来加以文治，直到周成王和周康王时的盛世，牢狱空虚了四十多年。这也是教化的感染和仁义的影响，不仅仅是毁伤身体的刑剖的功效。
English: King Zhou Wu carried out the great righteousness, pacified the remnants of thieves, and Zhou Gong made ritual music to administer justice. Until the golden age of King Zhou Cheng and King Zhou Kang, the prison was empty for more than forty years. This is also the influence of the influence of enlightenment and benevolence, not just the effect of dissecting the body.

古文：至秦则不然。师申商之法，行韩非之说，憎帝王之道，以贪狼为俗，非有文德以教训于下也。
现代文：到了秦朝就不是这样，效法申不害、商鞅的办法，实行韩非的学说，憎恶古代帝王治理天下的道理，贪污成风，并不是用礼义来教化天下。
English: However, this was not the case in the Qin Dynasty. They followed the principle of "do no harm" and "negotiate with others" to implement the teachings of Han Fei. They abhorred the principle of ancient emperors governing the world, and corruption was endemic. They did not use courtesy to enlighten the world.

古文：诛名而不察实，为善者不必免，而犯恶者未必刑也。
现代文：秦衹求名而不察实，行善的好人不一定能免罪，犯法的坏人也不一定就受到惩罚。
English: Qin Hui seeks fame without verifying the facts. Good people who do good deeds are not necessarily exempt from punishment, and bad people who break the law are not necessarily punished.

古文：是以百官皆饰虚辞而不顾实，外有事君之礼，内有背上之心；造伪饰诈，趣利无耻；又好用憯酷之吏，赋敛亡度，竭民财力，百姓散亡，不得从耕织之业，群盗并起。
现代文：所以百官都谎言欺诈，不务实际，表面上都表现出尊敬君上的礼貌，内心却怀着背叛君上的打算，弄虚作假来掩饰狡诈，追逐私利，没有羞耻；又总喜欢使用残忍刻毒的官吏，无限制地征收赋税，榨尽人民的财力，百姓四处逃亡，不能从事耕田和纺织工作，于是强盗到处起事。
English: Therefore, all officials lie and cheat, are not pragmatic, and on the surface show respect and courtesy, but in their hearts they have the intention of betraying the prince. There is no shame in using deception to cover up cunning and pursuing self-interest. They always like to use cruel and harsh officials, collect taxes without limit, and squeeze the people's financial resources. The people fled everywhere, unable to engage in farmland and textile work. As a result, robbers arose everywhere.

古文：是以刑者甚众，死者相望，而奸不息，俗化使然也。
现代文：所以受刑的人很多，死的人一个接一个，但是做坏事的并没有停止，这是风俗教化所造成的。
English: Therefore, there are many people who are punished, and people who die one after another, but they do not stop doing bad things. This is caused by the indoctrination of customs.

古文：故孔子曰 导之以政，齐之以刑，民免而无耻 ，此之谓也。
现代文：所以孔子说： 用政法来教导人民，用刑罚来制裁人民，人民苟且地要求免受惩罚却不知道羞耻。 就是这个意思。
English: That is why Confucius said: "Use political law to teach the people, use punishment to punish the people, the people earnestly request to be exempted from punishment but do not know shame."

古文：今陛下并有天下，海内莫不率服，广览兼听，极群下之知，尽天下之美，至德昭然，施于方外。
现代文：现在陛下统一了天下，四海之内没有不顺服的。陛下广泛地观察，多方面听取，尽可能地吸取群下的智慧，具备了天下的美德，崇高的德行显耀普照，扩大到国外。
English: Now that His Majesty has unified the world, there is no disobedience within the four seas. His Majesty has observed widely, listened in many ways, absorbed the wisdom of the crowd as much as possible, possessed the virtues of the world, and the lofty virtues have shone and expanded abroad.

古文：夜郎、康居，殊方万里，说德归谊，此太平之致也。
现代文：远达万里的夜郎和康居悦服归心，就真是太乎到来的景象啊。
English: When Yoroh and Kangju Yosufu, who are thousands of miles away, come to their senses, it is truly a sight to behold.

古文：然而功不加于百姓者，殆王心来加焉。
现代文：但是恩德并没有施加到普通百姓身上，大概是您还没有注意到这个问题吧。
English: But the benefits have not trickled down to ordinary people, something you may not have noticed.

古文：曾子曰： 尊其所闻，则高明矣；行其所知，则光大矣。
现代文：曾子说： 尊崇自己所听到的道理，就高明了；实践自己所知道的道理，就光大了。
English: Zengzi said: "Honor what you have heard, and you will be enlightened; practice what you know, and you will be enlightened."

古文：高明光大，不在于它，在乎加之意而已。 
现代文：高明光大，不在于别的，在于对这些注意罢了。 
English: The brilliance lies not in anything else, but in paying attention to these.

古文：愿陛下因用所闻，设诚于内而致行之，则三王何异哉！
现代文：希望陛下采用所听到的道理，诚心诚意按那些道理去做，那么，跟三王又有什么不同呢？
English: I hope that His Majesty will adopt the principles he has heard and sincerely follow those principles. Then, what is the difference with the three kings?

古文：陛下亲耕籍田以为农先，夙寤晨兴，忧劳万民，思维往古，而务以求贤，此亦尧、舜之用心也，然而未云获者，士素不厉也。
现代文：陛下亲自耕种籍田来倡导农业，早起晚睡，为人民担忧，思念古代治世，用心寻求贤人，这也是尧舜的用心啊，可是没有得到贤人，这是因为平时对于士人没有鼓励劝勉的缘故。
English: His Majesty personally cultivated his ancestral land to promote agriculture, got up early and went to bed late, worried about the people, missed the ancient reign, and sought sages with all his heart. This was also the intention of Yao, but he did not get the sages. This was because there was no encouragement and persuasion for scholars in peacetime.

古文：夫不素养士而欲求贤，譬犹不琢玉而求文采也。
现代文：平时不培养人才却想寻求贤人，就好比不雕刻玉却要求玉有文采一样。
English: If you do not cultivate talent but want to seek sages, it is like not carving jade but requiring jade to be literary.

古文：故养士之大者，莫大乎太学；太学者，贤士之所关也，教化之本原也。今以一郡一国之众，对亡应书者，是王道往往而绝也。
现代文：所以培养人才没有比办好太学更重要的了，太学是产生贤士的地方，是教化的本源，现在各郡国的人都很多，可是有些郡国还没有应举贤良文学策问、作对策的人，造就是因为王道在那裹经常断绝。
English: Therefore, there is nothing more important for cultivating talent than running a good imperial academy. An imperial academy is a place that produces sages and is the source of enlightenment. Nowadays, there are many people in all counties and states, but some counties and states have yet to produce good literary scholars and people who can make countermeasures. This is because the royal road is often cut off there.

古文：臣愿陛下兴太学，置明师，以养天下之士，数考问以尽其材，则英俊宜可得矣。
现代文：臣希望陛下兴办太学。聘请高明的教师来教育培养天下的士人，经常考问他们而使他们充分发挥自己的才能，那么英俊的人才就可以得到了。
English: The minister hoped that His Majesty would set up a university. If he hired skilled teachers to educate and train the world's scholars, and regularly examined them so that they could give full play to their talents, then handsome talents could be obtained.

古文：今之郡守、县令，民之师帅，所使承流而宣化也；故师帅不贤，则主德不宣，恩泽不流。
现代文：现在的郡守、县令，就是百姓的老师和表率，是委派他们禀承君主的恩泽去宣扬教化的，师表不贤良，君主的仁德就得不到宣扬，恩泽就传布不到下面。
English: The current county governors and county magistrates are the people's teachers and role models. They are appointed to inherit the monarch's grace and spread enlightenment. If the teacher is not virtuous, the monarch's benevolence will not be promoted, and the grace will not be spread below.

古文：今吏既亡教训于下，或不承用主上之法，暴虐百姓，与奸为市，贫穷孤弱，冤苦失职，甚不称陛下之意。
现代文：现在官吏既然没有教育人民，或者不实行君主的法令，暴虐百姓，和坏人狼狈为奸，谋取私利，致使贫穷孤弱的人含冤受苦，流离失所，很不符合陛下的意愿。
English: Now that the officials are failing to educate the people, or failing to implement the monarch's decrees, oppressing the people, colluding with the bad guys, seeking personal gain, and causing the poor and the weak to suffer unjustly and be displaced, this is very much against His Majesty's wishes.

古文：是以阴阳错缪，氛气弃塞，群生寡遂，黎民未济，皆长吏不明，使至于此也。
现代文：所以阴阳错乱，怨气充满，人民无法生活，在苦难中得不到救助，这都是郡守县令们不贤明，才造成这样的现象啊。
English: Therefore, the yin and yang are disordered, full of resentment, the people cannot live, and they cannot get help in their suffering. This is all caused by the county governors' and county magistrates' lack of wisdom.

古文：夫长吏多出于郎中、中郎，吏二千石子弟选郎吏，又以富訾，未必贤也。
现代文：郡守、县令多数是出身于郎中、中郎，年俸二千石的大官的子弟选任郎官，又仗着有钱财，不一定贤明。
English: Most of the county governors and county magistrates were born as lanzhong and zhonglang, and were selected as lanzhong by the children of the grand officials with an annual salary of 2,000 koku. They were wealthy and not necessarily wise.

古文：且古所谓功者，以任官称职为差，非谓积日累久也。
现代文：而且古时候考核官吏的功劳，是按照做官是否称职来区分的，不以在任时间的长短为标准。
English: Moreover, in ancient times, the merit of officials was evaluated according to whether they were competent to perform their duties, not according to the length of time in office.

古文：故小材虽累日，不离于小官；贤材虽未久，不害为辅佐。
现代文：所以才能小的人，虽然任职时间很长，还是小吏；有才能的人，虽然任职不久，并不妨碍他升迁为辅佐大臣。
English: Therefore, a person with little talent, although he has been in office for a long time, is still a minor official; a talented person, although he has been in office for a short time, does not prevent him from being promoted to assistant minister.

古文：是以有司竭力尽知，务治其业而以赴功。
现代文：所以有职守的官吏，都竭尽自己的才能和智慧，努力做好工作，争取立功。
English: Therefore, officials with a sense of duty are doing their best with their talent and wisdom, striving to do a good job and strive for meritorious service.

古文：今则不然。累日以取贵，积久以致官，是以廉耻贸乱，贤不肖浑淆，未得其真。
现代文：现在却不是这样，官吏们积累时间就可以得到高位，日子一久，就可以升官，所以廉洁和无耻混淆，好人和坏人不分，真正的贤才就无法得到。
English: Now, however, this is not the case. Officials can accumulate time to get high positions, and they can be promoted as long as they live. Therefore, integrity and shamelessness are confused, good people and bad people are not distinguished, and true talents cannot be obtained.

古文：臣愚以为使诸列侯、郡守、二千石各择其吏民之贤者，岁贡各二人以给宿卫，且以观大臣之能；所贡贤者有赏，所贡不肖者有罚。
现代文：臣愚蠢地认为让各位诸侯、郡守、二千石各自选择他们管辖下的官吏和百姓中的贤才，每年荐举两人，用他们在皇宫中值宿守卫，而且还可以拿这件事来观察大臣的能力，如果荐举的人贤能，就给予奖赏；要是荐举的人不好，就加以惩罚。
English: The courtiers foolishly thought that it was up to the various lords, county governors, and 2,000-koku nobles to choose the officials under their jurisdiction and the wise men among the people, recommend two people each year, and use them as guards on duty in the imperial palace. Moreover, they could also use this matter to observe the ability of the minister. If the person recommended was wise, he would be rewarded; if the person recommended was not good, he would be punished.

古文：夫如是，诸侯、吏二千石皆尽心于求贤，天下之士可得而官使也。
现代文：如果像这样，诸侯、二千石官都尽心寻求贤才，天下有才能的人就可以得到，授给他们官职加以任用了。
English: If, like this, the lords and officials of two thousand koku were to devote themselves to the search for talent, the world's talented people could be obtained, given official positions and appointed.

古文：遍得天下之贤人，则三王之盛易为，而尧、舜之名可及也。毋以日月为功，实试贤能为上，量材而授官，录德而定位，则廉耻殊路，贤不肖异处矣。
现代文：遍得天下的贤人，那么三王的盛世也就容易做到，尧舜的声名也就可以赶上了，千万不要用做官时间的长短来计算功劳，实际考察官吏的贤能是上策，衡量了才能以后再授给官职，考察了德行以后再确定职位，那样，廉洁和无耻待遇不同，好人和坏人就能够区别了。
English: Don't use the length of time spent as an official to calculate merit. The best strategy is to actually examine the ability of officials. After measuring the ability, the official position will be awarded. After examining the virtue, the position will be determined. In this way, the good and the bad people can be distinguished from the shameless and the shameless treatment.

古文：陛下加惠，宽臣之罪，令勿牵制于文，使得切磋究之，臣敢不尽愚！
现代文：陛下给臣恩惠，宽恕臣的罪过，教臣不要害怕主管官吏，使臣能够切磋研究，臣不敢不倾吐自己肤浅的见解。
English: His majesty gives his vassals favors, forgives the sins of his vassals, teaches his vassals not to be afraid of the officials in charge, enables his vassals to learn from each other, and dares his vassals not to pour out their shallow opinions.

古文：于是天子复册之。
现代文：于是天子又提出策问。
English: So Tenshi asked again.

古文：制曰：盖闻 善言天者必有征于人，善言古者必有验于今 。
现代文：汉武帝策问道：听说 善言天的，一定能找到人事来印证，善说古的，一定能在现实中得到证明 。
English: Hanwu Dice asked: I heard that if you are good at saying things, you will definitely be able to find people to corroborate it. If you are good at saying things, you will definitely be able to prove it in reality.

古文：故朕垂问乎天人之应，上嘉唐虞，下悼桀、纣，浸微浸灭浸明浸昌之道，虚心以改。
现代文：所以我问你们天人感应的关系，往上赞美唐尧虞舜，往下哀悼夏桀商纣，看到这些渐渐灭亡和逐步昌盛的道理，我要虚心改正错误。
English: Therefore, I would like to ask you about the relationship between the divine and the human, praise the Tang Dynasty, the Yuan Dynasty and the Shang Dynasty, and mourn the Xia Dynasty and the Shang Dynasty. Seeing these principles of gradual death and gradual prosperity, I would like to humbly correct my mistakes.

古文：今子大夫明于阴阳所以造化，习于先圣之道业，然而文采未极，岂惑乎当世之务哉？
现代文：大夫们明晓阴阳的变化和作用，熟悉先代圣王的道术和事业，可是你们的文章并没有把这些充分表达出来，难道是你们对当代的政务有什么疑惑吗？
English: Doctors are well aware of the changes and functions of yin and yang, and are familiar with the teachings and undertakings of the previous holy kings, but your articles do not fully express these. Do you have any doubts about contemporary government affairs?

古文：条贯靡竟，统纪未终，意朕之不明与？听若眩与？
现代文：有些道理没有系统整理和完整表达，大概是由于我不聪明，或是听话会迷惑吧？
English: Some truths are not systematized and fully expressed, probably because I am not smart, or is it confusing to be obedient?

古文：夫三王之教所祖不同，而皆有失，或谓久而不易者道也，意岂异哉？
现代文：三王的教化，最初各不相同，却都有不足，有人说道是恒久不变的，这两种说法意思难道有什么不同吗？
English: The enlightenment of the three kings was initially different, but they all had shortcomings. Some people said that it was permanent and unchanging. Are there any differences in the meaning of these two statements?

古文：今子大夫既已著大道之极，陈治乱之端矣，其悉之究之，孰之复之。
现代文：现在大夫们既然已经写出了大道的最高原则，陈述了治理乱世的方法，希望你们再说详细些、深刻些、周到些。
English: Now that the doctors have written out the highest principles of the Great Way and stated the methods for governing the chaotic world, I hope you will speak in more detail, more profoundly, and more thoughtfully.

古文：《诗》不云乎， 嗟尔君子，毋常安息，神之听之，介尔景福。 
现代文：《诗经》上不是说： 君子呀，不要苟且安息，神是听着你的，帮助你获得大福。 
English: The Book of Psalms does not say, "gentlemen, do not neglect your rest. God is listening to you and will help you obtain great blessings."

古文：朕将亲览焉，子大夫其茂明之。
现代文：我要亲自看你们的对策，大夫们要努力阐明你们的见解。
English: I want to see your countermeasures for myself, and the doctors should try to clarify your opinions.

古文：仲舒复对曰：臣闻《论语》曰： 有始有卒者，其唯圣人虖！ 
现代文：董仲舒又对策说道：臣听《论语》上说： 有始有终的，衹有圣人啊！ 
English: Dong Zhongshu also said in response: "Listening to the Analects, the minister said: There is a beginning and an end, there is no saint!

古文：今陛下幸加惠，留听于承学之臣，复下明册，以切其意，而究尽圣德，非愚臣之所能具也。
现代文：很荣幸地承蒙陛下的恩惠，留心听取我们这些接受过传统学问的臣子的意见，又颁下高明的册书，切合其中的意义，并且彻底地研究圣德，这不是愚臣的能力所能详细陈述的。
English: It is a great honor to receive Your Majesty's favor, to listen attentively to the opinions of those of us who have received the traditional learning, and to issue a clever book, to fit the meaning of it, and to thoroughly study the sanctity, which is not a fool's ability to elaborate.

古文：前所上对，条贯靡竟，统纪不终，辞不别白，指不分明，此臣浅陋之罪也。
现代文：先前臣所上的对策，有些道理缺乏系统整理和完整的表达，辞句不清晰，意旨不明了，这都是我浅陋的罪过。
English: The previous minister's countermeasures, some reasons lack systematic arrangement and complete expression, the words are not clear, and the intention is unclear. These are all my shallow sins.

古文：册曰： 善言天者必有征于人，善言古者必有验于今。 
现代文：策问中说： 善言天的，一定能找到人事来印证；善说古的，一定能得到现实的证明。 
English: In the question and answer session, he said: If you are good at talking about the future, you will definitely be able to find personnel to corroborate it; if you are good at talking about the past, you will definitely be able to get a realistic proof.

古文：臣闻天者群物之祖也。
现代文：臣听说，天是万物之祖，所以天对万物普遍地覆盖着、包含着，没有偏颇。
English: The minister heard that heaven is the ancestor of all things, so heaven universally covers and contains all things, and there is no bias.

古文：故遍覆包函而无所殊，建日月风雨以和之，经阴阳寒暑以成之。
现代文：天造作曰、月、风、雨来调和万物，通过阴、阳、寒、暑来生育万物。
English: It is said that the moon, wind, and rain are created by heaven to harmonize all things, and to give birth to all things through yin, yang, cold, and heat.

古文：故圣人法天而立道，亦溥爱而亡私，布德施仁以厚之，设谊立礼以导之。
现代文：所以圣人效法天建立道，也是广施仁爱而没有一点私心，布施恩德和仁爱来厚待百姓，设立义理和礼制去引导人民。
English: Therefore, following the example of Heaven, the sages established the Tao, and they also practiced benevolence and love without any selfishness. They practiced kindness and benevolence to treat the people well, and established the principles of righteousness and etiquette to guide the people.

古文：春者天之所以生也，仁者君之所以爱也；夏者天之所以长也，德者君之所以养也；霜者天之所以杀也，刑者君之所以罚也。
现代文：春季是天用来生育万物的，仁是人君用来爱护百姓的；夏季是天用来滋长万物的，德是人君用来养育人民的；秋霜是天用来诛杀万物的，刑法是人君用来惩罚罪犯的。
English: Spring is used by heaven to give birth to all things, benevolence is used by human beings to protect the people; summer is used by heaven to grow all things, virtue is used by human beings to nurture the people; autumn frost is used by heaven to kill all things, and criminal law is used by human beings to punish criminals.

古文：繇此言之，天人之征，古今之道也。
现代文：由此说来，天和人的验证，是从古至今的道理。
English: Therefore, the verification of heaven and man has been the principle from ancient times to the present.

古文：孔子作《春秋》，上揆之天道，下质诸人情，参之于古，考之于今。
现代文：孔子作《春秋》，上度量天道。下验证人情，参看于古代，考察于今时。
English: In "Spring and Autumn" by Confucius, the measurement of the heavenly way is at the top, and the verification of human feelings is at the bottom.

古文：故《春秋》之所讥，灾害之所加也；《春秋》之所恶，怪异之所施也。
现代文：所以《春秋》所讥讽的，就是灾害所侵犯的；《春秋》所憎恶的，就是怪异所触及的。
English: Therefore, what "Spring and Autumn" satirizes is what is violated by disasters; what "Spring and Autumn" abhors is what is touched by weirdness.

古文：书邦家之过，兼灾异之变；以此见人之所为，其美恶之极，乃与天地流通而往来相应，此亦言天之一端也。
现代文：孔子写出了国家的过失和灾异的变化，从逭裹可以看出人们行为的好和坏，是和天地相通并且互相感应的，这也是谈天道的一种看法。
English: Confucius wrote about the country's mistakes and disastrous changes. It can be seen from the scrolls that the good and bad of people's behavior are connected to heaven and earth and are mutually responsive. This is also a view of the heavenly way.

古文：古者修教训之官，务以德善化民，民已大化之后，天下常亡一人之狱矣。
现代文：古时候设立掌管教导训化的官，职责是用德和善来教化人民，人民大受感化以后，天下常常没有一个人在监狱裹。
English: In ancient times, officials in charge of education and training were set up. Their duty was to educate the people with virtue and goodness. After the people were greatly inspired, there was often no one in the world in prison.

古文：今世废而不修，亡以化民，民以故弃行谊而死财利，是以犯法而罪多，一岁之狱以万千数。
现代文：现代废弃这种制度，没法教化人民，因此人民都不知道行义而死于追逐财利，所以违法犯罪的人就多了，一年之内，坐牢和诉讼的人竟有成千上万。
English: Modern society has abandoned this system, and there is no way to educate the people. As a result, the people do not know how to act righteously and die in the pursuit of profit. As a result, there are more people who break the law and commit crimes. Within a year, there are thousands of people in prison and lawsuits.

古文：以此见古之不可不用也，故《春秋》变古则讥之。
现代文：由此可见，古时候的法度是不能不采用的，所以《春秋》遇到改变古代制度的事情就加以讥讽。
English: From this it can be seen that the laws of ancient times cannot be avoided, so "Spring and Autumn" ridicules things that change the ancient system.

古文：天令之谓命，命非圣人不行；质朴之谓性，性非教化不成；人欲之谓情，情非度制不节。
现代文：天的命令叫做命，这个命不是圣人不能照着去做；生来的本性叫做性，这种性不是教化不能完成；人的欲望叫做情，这种情不用法度不能加以节制。
English: Heaven's command is called life, and this life is not a saint and cannot be followed; the innate nature is called sex, and this sex cannot be completed without enlightenment; human desire is called passion, and this passion cannot be restrained without legal measures.

古文：是故王者上谨于承天意，以顺命也；下务明教化民，以成性也；正法度之宜，别上下之序，以防欲也；修此三者，而大本举矣。
现代文：所以做君王的，上面很谨慎地奉承天意来顺从天命；下面必须教化人民，使人民能够完成他们的性；建立应该遵循的法度，分清上下尊卑的次序，来防止贪欲；做好这三件事，国家的根本就奠定了。
English: Therefore, as a king, the top must be very careful to flatter the will of heaven and obey the destiny of heaven; the bottom must educate the people so that the people can fulfill their nature; establish the laws that should be followed, and distinguish the order of superiority and inferiority to prevent greed; if these three things are done well, the foundation of the country will be laid.

古文：人受命于天，固超然异于群生，入有父子兄弟之亲，出有君臣上下之谊，会聚相遇，则有耆老长幼之施，粲然有文以相接，欢然有恩以相爱，此人之所以贵也。
现代文：人承受了天命，本来是超群的，和其他生物不同。在家裹有父子兄弟之亲，在外面有君臣上下的名分，大家聚会相遇，就有尊敬老人和分别长幼的规范，有明确的礼节相互接待，欢欣地有恩德地互相亲爱，造就是人可贵的地方。
English: People have received the destiny of heaven, they are originally superior to others, and different from other creatures. At home, there are father-son and brother-brother relatives, outside there are monarchs and ministers, and everyone meets together. There are norms for respecting the elderly and separating the eldest and youngest, there is a clear etiquette for receiving each other, and there is joyfully and graciously loving each other. It is a place where people are valuable.

古文：生五谷以食之，桑麻以衣之，六畜以养之，服牛乘马，圈豹槛虎，是其得天之灵，贵于物也。
现代文：种植五谷作为食物，播种桑麻用来做衣，饲养六畜，驾牛骑马，圈豹槛虎，造就是人得到天的灵气，比万物可贵的表现。
English: Planting grain as food, sowing mulberry to make clothes, raising six animals, driving cattle and riding horses, and trapping leopards and tigers, all show that man has received the spirit of heaven, which is more precious than all things.

古文：故孔子曰： 天地之性人为贵。 
现代文：所以子子说： 天地所生，人是最可贵的。 
English: That is why the Son said: Man is the most precious thing born of heaven and earth.

古文：明于天性，知自贵于物；知自贵于物，然后知仁谊；知仁谊，然后重礼节；重礼节，然后安处善；安处善，然后乐循理；乐循理，然后谓之君之。
现代文：人们明白了天性，就知道自己比万物可贵；知道自己比万物可贵然后知道礼义；知道礼义，然后注重礼节；注重礼节，然后安心处于善道；安心处于善道，然后乐于遵循道理做事；乐于遵循道理，然后叫做君子。
English: When people understand nature, they know that they are more valuable than anything else; when they know that they are more valuable than anything else, they know propriety; when they know propriety, they pay attention to etiquette; when they pay attention to etiquette, they are reassured that they are on the right path; when they are reassured that they are on the right path, they are happy to do things according to reason; when they are happy to follow reason, they are called gentlemen.

古文：故孔子曰 不知命，亡以为君子 ，此之谓也。
现代文：所以孔子说 不知道命，不可以做君子 ，就是这个意思啊。
English: That's why Confucius said that if you don't know life, you can't be a gentleman. That's what he meant.

古文：册曰： 上嘉唐、虞，下悼桀、纣，浸微浸灭浸明浸昌之道，虚心以改。 
现代文：策问说： 往上赞美唐尧、虞舜，往下悲悼夏桀、商纣。看到这些渐渐灭亡和渐渐昌盛的道理，我要虚心改正错误。 
English: The strategist said, "Praise Tang Xuan and Yu Xuan from above, and mourn Xia Xuan and Shang Xuan from below. Seeing these principles of gradual death and gradual prosperity, I want to humbly correct my mistakes."

古文：臣闻众少成多，积小致臣，故圣人莫不以晻致明，以微致显。
现代文：臣听说积少就能成多，积小就能成大，因此圣人无不是积累暗淡的微明而达到光明，从微贱的地位一步步地达到显贵的。
English: It is said that less can become more, and small can become great. Therefore, sages are nothing but the accumulation of dim dimness to light, and from a lowly position to a prominent one step by step.

古文：是以尧发于诸侯，舜兴乎深山，非一日而显也，盖有渐以致之矣。
现代文：所以尧由诸侯而升为天子，舜从在深山中耕种兴起，都不是一天而尊颢的，是逐渐达到的。
English: Therefore, it is not a one-day thing for a prince to be elevated to the Son of Heaven, and it is not a one-day thing for a farmer to be raised from farming in the mountains. It is a gradual process.

古文：言出于已，不可塞也；行发于身，不可掩也。
现代文：话由自己说出，就不能再去堵塞；行为由自己做出，也无法再来掩盖。
English: Words uttered by oneself can no longer be blocked; deeds done by oneself can no longer be covered up.

古文：言行，治之大者，君子之所以动天地也。
现代文：言和行是治理国家最重大的条件，君子之所以能感动天地的也是言行。
English: Words and deeds are the most important conditions for governing a country. It is through words and deeds that a gentleman can move heaven and earth.

古文：故尽小者大，慎微者著。《诗》云： 惟此文王，小心翼翼。 
现代文：所以积小成大，谨慎注意细微的行为就会着名。《诗经》上说： 这文王啊，小心翼翼。 
English: Therefore, small things become big, and careful attention to subtle behavior will be famous. "Song of Songs" said: "This King Wen, be careful."

古文：胡尧兢兢日行其道，而舜业业日致其孝，善积而名显，德章而身尊，以其浸明浸昌之道也。
现代文：所以尧战战兢兢地每天实行他的治国之道，舜小心恐惧地每天尽他的孝道，做的好事积累多了，自然名声显达，德行彰着，自身也受人尊重，造就是渐渐昌盛的道理。
English: Therefore, he is fearfully and tremblingly practicing his way of governing the country every day, he is carefully and fearfully fulfilling his filial piety every day, the good deeds he has done have accumulated more, his natural reputation has been revealed, his moral conduct has been highlighted, and he has been respected by others. This is the principle of gradual prosperity.

古文：积善在身，犹长日加益，而人不知也；积恶在身，犹火之销膏，而人不见也。
现代文：积善在自己身上，就好像人曰渐长大而自己不觉察；积恶在自己身上，好像灯火消耗油一样，人也不容易看出来。
English: Accumulating good in oneself is like a person gradually growing up without being aware of it; accumulating evil in oneself is like a lamp consuming oil, and it is not easy for people to see it.

古文：非明乎情性察乎流俗者，孰能知之？
现代文：不是明晓情性和洞察世俗情况的人，谁能够懂得这种道理呢？
English: Who can understand this if not a man of sensibility and worldly insight?

古文：此唐、虞之所以得令名，而桀、纣之可为悼惧者也。
现代文：这就是唐尧、虞舜得到美名，夏桀、商纣却使人伤痛恐惧的原因。
English: This is the reason why Tang Xuan and Yu Xuan have gained a good reputation, while Xia Xuan and Shang Xuan have caused pain and fear.

古文：夫善恶之相从，如景乡之应形声也。
现代文：善或恶的行为所得到的结果，好像影子跟随着人形，回响跟随着声音。
English: The result of good or evil actions is like the shadow following the puppet, the reverberation following the sound.

古文：故桀、纣暴谩，谗贼并进，贤知隐伏，恶日显，国日乱，晏然自以如日在天，终陵夷而大坏。
现代文：所以桀、纣暴虐怠慢，谗恶的人都受到进用，贤良智慧的人都隐藏起来，于是桀、纣的罪恶一天比一天显著，国家也一天比一天混乱，可是他们却依旧安然怡得，自以为如太阳在天空一样，终于逐渐败坏以至于毁灭。
English: Therefore, the tyrants and oppressors are neglected, the evil-doers are exploited, and the virtuous and wise are hidden. As a result, the evils of the tyrants and oppressors are more and more obvious day by day, and the country is more and more chaotic day by day, but they are still at ease, thinking that they are like the sun in the sky, and finally gradually deteriorate to destruction.

古文：夫暴逆不仁者，非一日而亡也，亦以渐至，故桀、纣虽亡道，然犹享国十余年，此其浸微浸灭之道也。
现代文：那些残暴不仁的君主，并不是一下子就灭亡的，也是慢慢造成的。所以桀、纣虽然无道，都还在位十多年，造就是慢慢地衰微以至灭亡的道理啊。
English: Those cruel and insensitive monarchs did not die out all at once, but were created slowly. Therefore, although they had no morals, the emperors and queens were still in power for more than ten years. This is the reason for their gradual decline and demise.

古文：册曰： 三王之教所祖不同，而皆有失，或谓久而不易者道也，意岂异哉？ 
现代文：策问说： 三王的教化，效法的各不相同，而且都有不足，有人说道是永久不变的，这两种说法用意有什么不同吗？ 
English: The strategist asked: The enlightenment of the three kings, the examples are all different, and they all have shortcomings. Some people say that it is permanent and unchanging. Are there any differences between these two statements?

古文：臣闻夫乐而不乱复而不厌者谓之道；道者万世之弊，弊者道之失也。
现代文：臣听说享乐而不至于淫乱，反复实行而不厌倦的叫做道；道是万世都没有弊端的，出现弊端是由于违背了道。
English: He who hears about pleasure and does not commit adultery, and repeatedly practices without getting tired, is called the Way. The Way has no drawbacks in all ages, and drawbacks occur due to violating the Way.

古文：先王之道必有偏而不起之处，故政有眊而不行，举其偏者以补其弊而已矣。
现代文：先王的道一定有偏颇不能实行的地方，所以在政治上也时有昏暗而行不通的，举出它的偏向，补救它的弊病就行了。
English: The former king's way must have been biased and unable to be implemented. Therefore, in politics, there are sometimes obscure and impracticable things. It is enough to point out its bias and remedy its ills.

古文：三王之道所祖不同，非其相反，将以救溢扶衰，所遭之变然也。
现代文：三王的道虽然效法不同，可并不是相反的，都是为了补救过失，扶助衰败，之所以有所不同，是因为遇到的环境发生了变化。
English: Although the ways of the three kings are different, they are not opposite. They are all for the purpose of remedying faults and supporting decay. The reason why they are different is because the environment they encountered has changed.

古文：故孔子曰： 亡为而治者，其舜乎！ 
现代文：所以孔子说： 无所作为而能治理国家的，就是舜呀！ 
English: That is why Confucius said, "If you can govern a country by doing nothing, that is great!

古文：改正朔，易服色，以顺天命而已；其余尽循尧道，何更为哉！
现代文：舜仅仅改变了历法，改换了车马、祭牲、服装的颜色，来顺承天命罢了，其他完全遵循尧的治国之道，为什么要改变呢！
English: He only changed the calendar, changed the colors of the chariots, horses, sacrifices, and clothing to comply with the will of heaven. The others completely followed his way of governing the country. Why should they change?

古文：故王者有改制之名，亡变道之实。
现代文：所以王者衹改变制度的名称，没有改变道的实质。
English: Therefore, changing the name of the system does not change the essence of the Tao.

古文：然夏上忠，殷上敬，周上文者，所继之救，当用此也。
现代文：可是夏代注重忠，殷代崇尚敬，周朝尊崇文的原因，是因为朝代更替时，前代有过失存在，为了补救，应当这样做。
English: However, the reason why the Xia Dynasty emphasized loyalty, the Yin Dynasty revered respect, and the Zhou Dynasty revered literature is because when dynasties change, the previous generation was at fault, and this should be done in order to remedy it.

古文：孔子曰： 殷因于夏礼，所损益可知也；周因于殷礼，所损益可知也；其或继周者，虽百世可知也。 
现代文：孔子说： 殷朝根据夏代的礼制，有所增减，这是可以知道的；周朝根据殷朝的礼制，有所增减，也是可以知道的；其他承继周朝兴起的，虽然经历了百世，这也是可以知道的。 
English: King Kong said: If the Yin Dynasty follows the Summer Rite system and increases or decreases it, it can be known as the Summer Rite; if the Tang Dynasty follows the Chisel Rite system and increases or decreases it, it can be known as the Yin Rite; if someone inherits the Zhou Rite system later, it can be known in a hundred years.

古文：此言百王之用，以此三者矣。
现代文：造就是说，百王所用的就是忠、敬、文这三者。
English: That is to say, the three things that the hundred kings use are loyalty, respect, and discipline.

古文：夏因于虞，而独不言所损益者，其道如一而所上同也。
现代文：夏朝沿袭虞舜，却独独不说增减，是因为夏朝和虞舜的道是一样的；夏崇尚的忠和虞舜是相同的。
English: The reason why the Xia dynasty followed the yuzu lineage, but only increased and decreased, is because the path of the Xia dynasty and the yuzu lineage are the same; the loyalty of the Xia dynasty and the yuzu lineage are the same.

古文：道之大原出于天，天不变，道亦不变，是以禹继舜，舜继尧，三圣相受而守一道，亡救弊之政也，故不言其所损益也。
现代文：道的根本来自于天，天不变，道也不变，所以禹继承了舜的道，舜继承了尧的道，三位圣人互相传授，遵守一个道，没有救弊的措施，所以不说他们对道的增减。
English: The foundation of the Tao comes from Heaven. Heaven does not change, and the Tao does not change. Therefore, Yu inherits the Tao of Zhou, and Zhou inherits the Tao of Zhou. The three sages teach each other and abide by the same Tao. There is no remedy, so they do not talk about the increase or decrease of the Tao.

古文：繇是观之，继治世者其道同，继乱世者其道变。
现代文：由此看来，继承治世的，他们的道是相同的；继承乱世的，他们的道是要改变的。
English: From this perspective, inheriting the reign of the world, their path is the same; inheriting the chaotic world, their path is to be changed.

古文：今汉继大乱之后，若宜少损周之文致，用夏之忠者。
现代文：现在汉朝承继大乱之后，应当减少周朝的文而用夏朝的忠。
English: Now, the Han Dynasty, following the Great Turmoil, should reduce the Zhou Dynasty's literature and use the Xia Dynasty's loyalty.

古文：陛下有明德嘉道，愍世俗之靡薄，悼王道之不昭，故举贤良方正之士，论议考问，将欲兴仁谊之林德，明帝王之法制，建太平之道也。
现代文：陛下有圣明的德和美好的道，痛心世俗的衰薄，悲伤王道的不明，所以选举贤良方正的士人，议论考问，打算兴起仁义的美德，阐明帝王的法制，建立太平的治国之道。
English: His majesty has the virtue of holiness and the beautiful way, is saddened by the weakness of the world, and is saddened by the uncertainty of the royal way, so he elects virtuous and upright scholars, discusses the examination, intends to arouse the virtue of benevolence and righteousness, clarify the emperor's legal system, and establish a peaceful way of governing the country.

古文：臣愚不肖，述所闻，诵所学，道师之言，廑能勿失耳。
现代文：臣愚昧不肖，叙述曾听到的，背诵曾学过的，说的是老师教的道理，仅仅能够不忘记罢了。
English: The minister is so ignorant that he can only recount what he has heard, recite what he has learned, and say what the teacher has taught, but he cannot forget it.

古文：若乃论政事之得失，察天下之息耗，此大臣辅佐之职，三公九卿之任，非臣仲舒所能及也，然而臣窃有怪者。
现代文：至于议论政事的得失，研究社会的兴盛和贫弱，这是大臣辅佐的职事，三公九卿的责任，不是臣下仲舒所能知道的。但是臣私下有感到奇怪的问题。
English: As for discussing the merits and demerits of political affairs, studying the prosperity and poverty of society, this is the duty of the minister's assistant, the responsibility of the three kings and nine lords, which is not something that the vassal Zhongshu can know. However, the vassal has a strange problem in private.

古文：夫古之天下亦今之天下，今之天下亦古之天下，共是天下，古以大治，上下和睦，习俗美盛，不令而行，不禁而止，吏亡奸邪，民亡盗贼，囹圄空虚，德润草木，泽被四海，凤皇来集，麒麟来游，以古准今，壹何不相逮之远也！
现代文：古时候的天下也就是现在的天下，现在的天下也就是古时候的天下，同是一样的天下，古时候天下太平，上下和睦，习俗美好，不令而行，不禁而止，官吏没有奸邪，民间没有盗贼，牢狱空空，没有犯人，入主的恩德滋润了草木，普及到四海，凤凰飞来了，麒麟出现了，拿古时候的情况来衡量现在，怎么相差那么远呢？
English: The world of ancient times is the world of today. The world of today is the world of ancient times. It is the same world. In ancient times, the world was peaceful, there was harmony between the upper and lower classes, customs were beautiful, people did not have to do anything, they could not help but stop, officials did not commit evil, people did not steal, prisons were empty, and there were no prisoners. The grace of the Lord moistened the grass and trees and spread to the four seas. The phoenix flew and the unicorn appeared. Taking the situation of ancient times as a measure of the present, how can there be so much difference?

古文：安所缪盭而陵夷若是？意者有所失于古之道与？
现代文：有什么错误致使衰落达到这样的地步？我想也许是违背了古代的治国之道吧？
English: What error has brought the decline to this point? I think it may be a violation of the ancient way of governing the country?

古文：有所诡于天之理与？
现代文：也许是违背了天理吧？
English: Maybe it's against the laws of nature?

古文：试迹之于古，返之于天，党可得见乎。
现代文：尝试考察过去的事情，追溯到天理，或许可以看出一些问题吧？
English: Try to look into the past, back to the Divine Principle, and maybe you can see some problems, right?

古文：夫天亦有所分予，予之齿者去其角，傅其翼者两其足，是所受大者不得取小也。
现代文：天对生物是分别给予的，给予利齿的就不再给角，给予翅膀的就衹给两只脚，也就是接受了大的，就不能再取小的。
English: The heavens are given to creatures separately. If they are given sharp teeth, they are no longer given horns. If they are given wings, they are given two legs. In other words, if you accept the big one, you can no longer take the small one.

古文：古之所予禄者，不食于力，不动于末，是亦受大者不得取小，与天同意者也。
现代文：古时候领取俸禄的，就不靠体力劳动来吃饭，也不谋取工商之利，这也是接受了大的，不能再取小的，和天意是相同的。
English: In ancient times, those who received a salary did not rely on physical labor to eat, nor did they seek business profits. This is also the same as God's will.

古文：夫已受大，又取小，天不能足，而况人乎！
现代文：假如已经得到了大的，又去取小的，天还不能那样给予，何况是人呢？
English: If you have already obtained the great and now want to take the small, heaven cannot give that, let alone man.

古文：此民之所以嚣嚣苦不足也。
现代文：造就是人民纷纷愁苦衣食不足的原因啊。
English: This is the reason why the people are suffering from lack of food and clothing.

古文：身宠而载高位，家温而食厚禄，因乘富贵之资力，以与民争利于下，民安能如之哉！
现代文：那些受君主宠爱身居高位的人，家中衣食饱暖并且享有优厚的俸禄，依仗富厚的资产和势力，在下面和百姓争利，老百姓怎么能和他们比呢？
English: Those who are favored by the monarch and hold high positions, have warm food and clothing at home and enjoy generous salaries, and rely on rich assets and power to compete with the people below. How can the common people compete with them?

古文：是故众其奴婢，多其牛羊，广其田宅，博其产业，畜其积委，务此而亡已，以迫蹴民，民日削月浸，浸以大穷。
现代文：所以那些人使用众多的奴婢，拥有众多的牛羊，扩大他们的田地住宅，扩充他们的产业，增加他们的积蓄，致力于这些而且没有止境，压迫百姓，使百姓感到惊惧，百姓天天受到剥削，渐渐走向穷困。
English: Therefore, those people use many male and female slaves, have many cattle and sheep, expand their field houses, expand their industries, increase their savings, devote themselves to these and there is no end, oppress the people, make the people feel frightened, the people are exploited every day, gradually moving towards poverty.

古文：富者奢侈羡溢，贫者穷急愁苦；穷急愁苦而不上救，则民不乐生；民不乐生，尚不避死，安能避罪！
现代文：富人奢侈浪费，穷人穷急愁苦；穷人穷急愁苦而处在上位的人却不救济，就会民不聊生；民不聊生，百姓就会连死都不怕，又怎会害怕犯罪！
English: The rich are extravagant and wasteful, the poor are poor and desperate; the poor are poor and desperate, but those in power do not provide relief, the people will not live; the people do not live, the people will not even be afraid of death, and how can they be afraid of crime!

古文：此刑罚之所以蕃而奸邪不可胜者也。
现代文：这就是刑罚繁多，奸邪却不能禁止的原因啊。
English: This is the reason why there are many punishments, but adultery cannot be prohibited.

古文：故受禄之家，食禄而已，不与民争业，然后利可均布，而民可家足。
现代文：所以享受俸禄的人家，应该衹食俸禄就算了，不应当和百姓争夺谋利的产业，这样利益就可以平均分配，百姓也可以家用充足。
English: Therefore, people who enjoy salaries should not compete with the people for profit-making industries, so that the profits can be evenly distributed and the people can have enough for their homes.

古文：此上天之理，而亦太古之道，天子之所宜法以为制，大夫之所当循以为行也。
现代文：这是上天的理，也是古代的道，天子应当效法定为制度，大夫应该遵守实行。
English: This is God's principle, and it is also the ancient way. God's law should be the system, and doctors should abide by and implement it.

古文：故公仪子相鲁，之其家见织帛，怒而出其妻，食于舍而茹葵，愠而拔其葵，曰： 吾已食禄，又夺园夫红女利乎！ 
现代文：所以公仪子在鲁国做宰相时，回到家裹看见妻子织帛，非常生气，赶走了他的妻子；在家裹吃饭，吃到自家园裹种的葵菜，气愤地把园裹的葵菜拔了，说： 我已经有了俸禄，还要夺种菜人和织布女的利益吗？ 
English: Therefore, when Gong Yizi was the prime minister of the State of Lu, when he returned home and saw his wife weaving, he was very angry and drove away his wife; when he dined at home, he ate sunflower seeds from his home, and angrily pulled out the sunflower seeds from the garden, saying: I already have a salary, do I still have to seize the interests of vegetable growers and weavers?

古文：古之贤人君子在列位者皆如是，是故下高其行而从其教，民化其廉而不贪鄙。
现代文：古时候的贤人君子做官的都是这样，因此人民都尊敬他们的德行，听从他们的教化，人民受到他们廉洁的感化，就没有贪婪卑鄙的行为。
English: In ancient times, the wise men and gentlemen who served as officials were all like this. Therefore, the people respected their virtues, listened to their enlightenment, and the people were influenced by their integrity, and there was no greed and despicable behavior.

古文：及至周室之衰，其卿大夫缓于谊而急于利，亡推让之风而有争田之讼。
现代文：到了周朝末年，卿大夫就不大讲求礼义而急于求利，失掉了谦让的风气而有争田的讼事。
English: By the end of the Zhou Dynasty, Jingdafu did not care much about courtesy and was eager to seek profits. He lost his humble demeanor and had disputes over fields.

古文：故诗人疾而刺之，曰： 节彼南山，惟石岩岩，赫赫师尹，民具尔瞻。 
现代文：所以诗人憎恶、讽刺他们说： 高高的那座南山啊，山石是那样叠积；赫赫有名的师尹啊，人民都在瞻望着您！ 
English: Therefore, the poet detested and ridiculed them, saying: "O lofty Nan Shan, the mountains and rocks are piled up like that; O renowned Shi Yin, the people are all looking at you!

古文：由是观之，天子大夫者，下民之所视效，远方之所四面而内望也。
现代文：做官的人心向仁义，人民自然就爱好仁义，风俗也就善良；做官的人好利，人民也就不正直，风俗就会败坏。
English: When officials are benevolent, the people will naturally love benevolence, and the customs will be kind; when officials are greedy, the people will be dishonest, and the customs will be corrupted.

古文：近者视而放之，远者望而效之，岂可以居贤人之位而为庶人行哉！
现代文：由此看来，天子和大夫，是人民仰望、效法的榜样，是远方的人遥望着模仿他们，怎么能够处在贤人的地位却去做出平民的行为呢？
English: From this perspective, the heavenly sons and doctors are the role models for the people to look up to and imitate, and people from far away look up to and imitate them. How can they be in the position of sages but behave like commoners?

古文：夫皇皇求财利常恐乏匮者，庶人之意也；皇求仁义常恐不能化民者，大夫之意也。
现代文：那些忙着谋取财利，常常担心穷困的想法，是平民的意向；忙着寻求仁义，时常忧虑不能教化人民的打算，是大夫的思想。
English: Those who are busy with the pursuit of wealth and often worry about poverty are the intentions of the common people; those who are busy with the pursuit of righteousness and often worry about not being able to enlighten the people are the thoughts of the doctors.

古文：《易》曰： 负且乘，致寇至。 
现代文：《周易》上说： 背着东西又坐车，招致强盗的到来。 
English: "I Ching" says, "If you are negative and take advantage of others, you will attract thieves."

古文：乘车者君子之位也，负担着小人之事也，此言居君子之位而为庶人之行者，其患祸必至也。
现代文：乘车是说处在君子的地位，负担东西是小人的事情，这就是说，处在君子的地位却做出庶人的行为，他的祸患一定会到来。
English: To ride in a carriage is to be in the position of a gentleman, and to be burdened with things is the business of a villain. That is to say, if one is in the position of a gentleman but acts like a commoner, his misfortune is sure to come.

古文：若居君子之位，当君子之行，则舍公仪休之相鲁，亡可为者矣。
现代文：如果处在君子的地位，做君子应当做的事，那么，除了像公仪休在鲁国做宰相那样，就没有别的可以做的了。
English: If you are in the position of a gentleman, and do what a gentleman should do, then there is nothing else you can do, except to be like Gongiri Shu, who was the prime minister of the State of Lu.

古文：《春秋》大一统者，天地之常经，古今之通谊也。
现代文：《春秋》推重统一，这是天地永恒的原则，是古今共通的道理。
English: "Spring and Autumn" emphasizes unification, which is the eternal principle of heaven and earth, and is a common principle from ancient times to the present.

古文：今师异道，人异论，百家殊方，指意不同，是以上亡以持一统；法制数变，下不知所守。
现代文：如今老师所述的道理彼此不同，人们的议论也彼此各异，诸子百家研究的方向不同，意旨也不一样，所以处在上位的人君不能掌握统一的标准，法令制度多次改变，在下的百姓不知道应当怎样遵守。
English: Nowadays, the principles described by teachers are different from each other, people's discussions are also different from each other, the research directions of hundreds of schools are different, and the intentions are not the same. Therefore, people in higher positions cannot grasp a unified standard, the legal system has changed many times, and the people below do not know how to comply.

古文：臣愚以为诸不在六艺之科孔子之术者，皆绝其道，勿使并进。
现代文：臣认为凡是不属于六艺的科目和孔子学术的学说都一律禁止，不许它们同样发展。
English: The minister believed that all subjects that did not belong to the six arts and the teachings of Confucius scholarship were prohibited, and they were not allowed to develop in the same way.

古文：邪辟之说灭息，然后统纪可一而法度可明，民知所从矣。
现代文：邪僻的学说消失，然后学术的系统可以统一，法令制度就可以明白，人民也知道服从的对象了。
English: Then the academic system can be unified, the legal system can be understood, and the people will know whom to obey.

古文：对既毕，天子以仲舒为江都相，事易王。
现代文：对策结束后，汉武帝任命董仲舒为江都相，辅助易王。
English: After the countermeasures ended, Emperor Hanwu appointed Dong Zhongshu as the governor of the Yangtze River to assist Yi Wang.

古文：易王，帝兄，素骄，好勇。
现代文：易王刘非，是汉武帝的哥哥，乎素很骄横，喜欢勇武。
English: Yi Wang Liu Fei, the elder brother of Emperor Hanwu, was very arrogant and liked bravery.

古文：仲舒以礼谊匡正，王敬重焉。
现代文：董仲舒用礼义扶正易王，易王很敬重他。
English: Dong Zhongshu supported King Yi with courtesy and righteousness. King Yi respected him very much.

古文：久之，王问仲舒曰： 粤王勾践与大夫泄庸、种、蠡谋伐吴，遂灭之。
现代文：过了一段时间，易王问董仲舒说： 越王勾践和大夫泄庸、文种、范蠡密谋攻打吴国，后来终于减了吴国。
English: After a period of time, Yi Wang asked Dong Zhongshu and said: Yue Wang Gochun and doctors Tuyong, Wenzhong and Fan Ye conspired to attack Wu, and later finally reduced Wu.

古文：孔子称殷有三仁，寡人亦以为粤有三仁。
现代文：孔子说殷纣王有三位仁人，我认为越王勾践也有三位仁人。
English: Confucius said that there were three benevolent people in the Yin Dynasty, and I think that there are also three benevolent people in the Yue Dynasty.

古文：桓公决疑于管仲，寡人决疑于君。 
现代文：春秋时的齐桓公有疑难的事让管仲解答，我有疑问请您解说。 
English: In spring and autumn, Qi Kuan Gong asked Guanzhong to answer difficult questions. If you have any questions, please explain.

古文：仲舒对曰： 臣愚不足以奉大对。
现代文：董仲舒回答说： 臣愚昧不能解答您提出的问题。
English: Dong Zhongshu replied: "The minister is too stupid to answer your question.

古文：闻昔者鲁君问柳下惠： 吾欲伐齐，何如？ 柳下惠曰： 不可。 
现代文：我听说春秋时鲁国国君鲁僖公问鲁国大夫柳下惠： 我想攻打齐国，怎么样？ 柳下惠说： 不行。 
English: I heard that in the Spring and Autumn Period, Lu Guojun, the ruler of the State of Lu, asked Lu Guojun, the doctor of the State of Lu, Liu Shimo Hui: I want to attack Qi, how about it? Liu Shimo Hui said: No.

古文：归而有忧色，曰： 吾闻伐国不问仁人，此言何为至于我哉！ 
现代文：他回家后面有忧色，说： 我听说攻伐别的国家不问有仁德的人，国君想攻打齐国为什么问我呢！
English: When he returned home, he was gloomy and said, "I have heard that no one with benevolence is asked to attack other countries. Why would the sovereign ask me if he wanted to attack Qi?"

古文：徒见问耳，且犹羞之，况设诈以伐吴乎？
现代文：柳下惠衹不过被询问罢了，尚且感到羞愧，何况是设谋诈降来攻打吴国呢？
English: After being interrogated, Liu Xiao Hui Yao felt ashamed, what's more, he had plotted to attack Wuzhong.

古文：由此言之，粤本无一仁。
现代文：由此说来，越国根本没有一位仁人。
English: Therefore, there is not a single benevolent person in Viet Nam.

古文：夫仁人者，正其谊不谋其利，明其道不计其功。是以仲尼之门，五尺之童羞称五伯，为其先诈力而后仁谊也。
现代文：仁人端正他的义却不谋取私利，阐明他的道却不计较自己的功劳，所以在孔子的门徒裹，即使是尚未成年的儿童也羞于谈论五霸，因为五霸推崇欺诈武力不注重仁义。
English: A benevolent person rectifies his righteousness but does not seek personal gain, clarifies his way but does not care about his own merit, so in the disciple of Confucius, even immature children are ashamed to talk about the Five Dynasties, because the Five Dynasties advocate fraudulent force and do not pay attention to benevolence and righteousness.

古文：苟为诈而已，故不足称于大君子之门也。
现代文：越王君臣不过是实行不正当的诈术罢了，所以不值得孔子的门徒谈论。
English: Yue Wangjunchen is nothing more than practicing improper deception, so it is not worth the disciples of Confucius to talk about.

古文：五伯比于他诸侯为贤，其比三王，犹武夫之与美玉也。 王曰： 善。 
现代文：五霸比其他诸侯贤明，可是和三王相比，就好像似玉的石块和美玉相比一样啊。 易王说： 讲得好。 
English: The five overlords were wiser than the other lords, but compared to the three kings, they were like a piece of jade compared to a precious stone. Yi Wang said, "Well said.

古文：仲舒治国，以《春秋》灾异之变推阴阳所以错行，故求雨，闭诸阳，纵诸阴，其止雨反是；行之一国，未尝不得所欲。
现代文：董仲舒治理国家，是用《春秋》记载的灾异变化来推究阴阳错行的原因，所以求雨时，闭阳纵阴，他止雨时就闭阴纵阳。这种祈雨止涝的方法推行到江都全国，没有不随心所欲的。
English: When Dong Zhongshu governed the country, he used the cataclysmic changes recorded in "Spring and Autumn" to investigate the causes of yin and yang misbehavior. Therefore, when praying for rain, he closed the yang to the yin, and when he stopped the rain, he closed the yang to the yang. This method of praying for rain and stopping the hail has been promoted to the whole country of Jiangdu, and there is no one who does not do whatever he wants.

古文：中废为中大夫。
现代文：后来，董仲舒被废为中大夫。
English: Later, Dong Zhongshu was abolished as a middle doctor.

古文：先是辽东高庙、长陵高园殿灾，仲舒居家推说其意，草稿未上，主父偃候仲舒，私见，嫉之，窃其书而奏焉。
现代文：在这之前，辽东郡祭祀汉高祖的高庙和汉朝皇帝祭祖的地方长陵高园殿先后发生火灾，董仲舒在家里推论天降火灾和人世的关系，奏章草稿写好了没有上呈。主父偃来探望董仲舒，私自看了奏章草稿，他平素就嫉妒董仲舒，便把奏章草稿偷走，上交给汉武帝。
English: Prior to this, fires occurred successively in the high temple in Liaodong County, which was dedicated to the ancestors of the Han Dynasty, and in the Changling Gaoyuan Hall, the place where the ancestors of the Han Dynasty were enshrined. At home, Dong Zhongshu deduced the relationship between the sky falling fire and the human world. He had already written the draft of the musical composition, but did not submit it. His father came to visit Dong Zhongshu, and he read the draft of the musical composition himself. He was always jealous of Dong Zhongshu, so he stole the draft of the musical composition and handed it to Emperor Hanwu.

古文：上召视诸儒，仲舒弟子吕步舒不知其师书，以为大愚。
现代文：汉武帝召集了很多儒生，让他们看董仲舒的奏章草稿。董仲舒的学生吕步舒不知道这个奏章草稿是他老师写的，认为非常愚昧。
English: Emperor Hanwu gathered many Confucian scholars and asked them to read Dong Zhongshu's draft of the musical composition. Dong Zhongshu's student Lü Bu Shu did not know that the draft of the musical composition was written by his teacher and thought it was very ignorant.

古文：于是下仲舒吏，当死，诏赦之，仲舒遂不敢复言灾异。
现代文：于是汉武帝把董仲舒交官问罪，判处死刑，汉武帝下诏赦免了他。董仲舒从此便不敢再谈论灾异变化。
English: As a result, Emperor Hanwu convicted and sentenced Dong Zhongshu to death, but he was pardoned by Emperor Hanwu. From then on, Dong Zhongshu no longer dared to talk about catastrophic changes.

古文：仲舒为人廉直。
现代文：董仲舒为人廉洁正直。
English: Dong Zhongshu is a man of integrity and honesty.

古文：是时方外攘四夷，公孙弘治《春秋》不如仲舒，而弘希世用事，位至公卿。
现代文：当时汉朝正用兵周边少数民族，公孙弘研究《公羊春秋》的水平不如董仲舒，可是公孙弘迎合世俗，掌握大权，位至公卿。
English: At that time, the Han Dynasty was using soldiers from the surrounding ethnic minorities. Gongsun Hong's level of research on "Ram Spring and Autumn" was not as good as that of Dong Zhongshu, but Gongsun Hong catered to the secular, seized power, and rose to the nobility.

古文：仲舒以弘为从谀，弘嫉之。
现代文：董仲舒认为公孙弘奉承谄媚，公孙弘嫉恨董仲舒。
English: Dong Zhongshu believes that Gongsun Hong is flattering and charming, Gongsun Hong is jealous of Dong Zhongshu.

古文：胶西王亦上兄也，尤纵恣，数害吏二千石。
现代文：胶西王刘端也是汉武帝的哥哥，为人特别放纵，凶残蛮横，多次谋杀朝廷派去的二千石官。
English: Liu Duan, the King of Jiaoxi, was also an older brother of Emperor Han Wudi. He was a particularly indulgent and cruel person. He repeatedly murdered officials of 2,000 koku who were sent by the imperial court.

古文：弘乃言于上曰： 独董仲舒可使相胶西王。 
现代文：公孙弘就跟汉武帝说： 衹有董仲舒可以担任胶西王相。 
English: Gongsunhong told Emperor Hanwu: "If you have Dong Zhongshu, you can serve as Jiaoxi's prime minister."

古文：胶西王闻仲舒大儒，善待之。
现代文：胶西王刘端听说董仲舒是有名的儒家大师，待他还比较尊重。
English: Liu Duan, the king of Jiaoxi, heard that Dong Zhongshu was a famous Confucian master and treated him with respect.

古文：仲舒恐久获罪，病免。
现代文：董仲舒害怕时间长了会遭到不测之罪，就以年老有病为由辞职回家了。
English: Dong Zhongshu was afraid that if the time was too long, he would be subjected to unforeseen crimes, so he resigned and went home on the grounds of old age and illness.

古文：凡相两国，辄事骄王，正身以率下，数上疏谏争，教令国中，所居而治。
现代文：董仲舒共计做过江都、胶西两国的相，都是辅佐骄横的诸侯王，他以身作则为下属做表率，多次上疏直言规谏，制定教令颁行国中，他所在的江都、胶西两国国都均治理得很好。
English: In total, Dong Zhongshu served as the minister of Jiangdu and Jiaoxi, both of which were supported by the arrogant princes. He set an example for his subordinates by his own example. He repeatedly set forth the rules and regulations, and in the process of formulating and issuing edicts, both Jiangdu and Jiaoxi, where he was, were well governed.

古文：及去位归居，终不问家产业，以修学著书为事。
现代文：到了去官归家后，他根本不管家庭产业，衹是埋头诵读，专心著书。
English: When he returned home after leaving the government, he didn't care about the family business at all. He just buried his head in reading and concentrated on writing books.

古文：仲舒在家，朝廷如有大议，使使者及廷尉张汤就其家而问之，其对皆有明法。
现代文：董仲舒养病在家，朝廷如果讨论重大问题，就派使者和廷尉张汤到他家征询他的意见，董仲舒的解答都有根有据。
English: Dong Zhongshu recuperated at home. If the imperial court wanted to discuss a major issue, it would send an envoy and courtier Zhang Tang to his home to solicit his opinion. Dong Zhongshu's answers were well-founded.

古文：自武帝初立，魏其、武安侯为相而隆儒矣。及仲舒对册，推明孔氏，抑黜百家。
现代文：从汉武帝初即位，魏其侯窦婴和武安侯田纷先后做丞相，开始推崇儒学，到董仲舒对策，推尊宣扬孔子，抑黜百家。
English: From Emperor Hanwu's early accession to the throne, Wei Qihou Douyou and Wu'an Hou Tianran successively became prime ministers, began to promote Confucianism, to Dong Zhongshu's countermeasures, promoted Confucius, and suppressed hundreds of schools.

古文：立学校之官，州郡举茂材孝廉，皆自仲舒发之。
现代文：设立管理学校的官吏，州郡举荐茂材孝廉，都是从董仲舒开始的。
English: The government officials who set up the management school, the state and county recommended Shuzai Xiaolian, all started from Dong Zhongshu.

古文：年老，以寿终于家，家徙茂陵，子及孙皆以学至大官。
现代文：董仲舒老年在家裹寿终。后来他家迁往茂陵县，他的儿子和孙子都凭学问做了大官。
English: In his old age, Dong Zhongshu died at home. Later, his family moved to Muling County, and his son and grandson became high-ranking officials by virtue of their education.

古文：仲舒所著，皆明经术之意，及上疏条教，凡百二十三篇。
现代文：董仲舒的著作，都是阐明儒家经学意旨的，加上奏疏教令，总共一百二十三篇。
English: Dong Zhongshu's works, all of which clarify the meaning of Confucian classics, together with Song Suo's edict, total one hundred and twenty-three.

古文：而说《春秋》事得失，《闻举》、《玉杯》、《蕃露》、《清明》、《竹林》之属，复数十篇，十余万言，皆传于后世。
现代文：解说《春秋》记事的得失，及《闻举》、《玉杯》、《蕃露》、《清明》和《竹林》之类的文章，还有几十篇，十多万字，都流传到了后世。
English: The commentary on the merits and demerits of the "Spring and Autumn" chronicle, and articles such as "Wenju," "Jade Cup," "Dew," "Clear" and "Bamboo Forest," as well as dozens of articles, more than 100,000 words, have been passed down to future generations.

古文：掇其切当世施朝廷者著于篇。
现代文：我挑选其中切合当今社会和朝廷的内容写在文章里。
English: I have selected some of them that are relevant to today's society and the Imperial Court and written about them in this article.

古文：赞曰：刘向称： 董仲舒有王佐之材，虽伊、吕亡以加，管、晏之属，伯者之佐，殆不及也。 
现代文：赞日：刘向称赞： 董仲舒有做君王辅佐的才干，即使是伊尹、吕望也不能超过他，管仲、晏婴之辈，是霸主的辅佐，怕是不如他吧。 
English: Praise: Liu Xiang praised: Dong Zhongshu has the ability to be the king's assistant, even Yi Yin and Lvang can't surpass him. Guanzhong, the baby-faced generation, is the overlord's assistant, I'm afraid it's not as good as him.

古文：至向子歆以为： 伊、吕乃圣人之耦，王者不得则不兴。
现代文：刘向的儿子刘歆认为 伊尹、吕望是圣人的伴偶，王者得不到他们就不能兴起。
English: Liu Xuan, Liu Xiang's son, believed that Yin and Lvang were the companions of a saint. If the king did not have them, he could not rise.

古文：故颜渊死，孔子曰 噫！
现代文：所以颜渊死了，孔子说 噫！
English: That's why Yan Yuan died, Confucius said!

古文：天丧余。 唯此一人为能当之，自宰我、子赣、子游、子夏不与焉。
现代文：天灭亡我，衹有颜渊一人能和伊尹、吕望相比，至于宰我、子贡、子游、子夏等人就不能列入圣人之偶的行列了。
English: Heaven destroy me, only Yan Yuan can be compared to Yi Yin and Lvang. As for Zai Me, Zigong, Ziyou, Zixia and others, they cannot be included in the ranks of saints.

古文：仲舒遭汉承秦灭学之后，《六经》离析，下帷发愤，潜心大业，令后学者有所统壹，为群儒首。
现代文：董仲舒遭逢西汉承接秦朝焚灭学术之后，《六经》分崩离析，于是他下帷发愤钻研，潜心经学大业，使后来的学者对儒家学说有了系统一致的认识，成为群儒的首领。
English: After the Western Han Dynasty succeeded the Qin Dynasty and burned down the academic system, the "Six Classics of Confucianism" fell apart, so Dong Zhongshu went off to study furiously, devoting himself to the great cause of Confucianism, so that later scholars had a systematic and consistent understanding of Confucianism, and became the leader of the Confucianists.

古文：然考其师友渊源所渐，犹未及乎游、夏，而曰管、晏弗及，伊、吕不加，过矣。 
现代文：可是考察他的师友渊源，看他们彼此间的影响，董仲舒还赶不上子游、子夏，却说管仲、晏婴不如他，伊尹、吕望超不过他，这种看法是不对的。 
English: However, if we examine the origins of his teachers and friends and see the influence between them, it is wrong to say that Dong Zhongshu is not as good as Ziyu and Zixia, but that Guanzhong and Zibo are not as good as him, and that Yi Yin and Lü Wang are superior to him.

古文：至向曾孙龚，笃论君子也，以歆之言为然。
现代文：刘向的曾孙刘龚则是善于确当评论人物的君子，他认为刘歆对董仲舒的评价是恰当的。
English: Liu Xiang's great-grandson Liu Hui is a gentleman who is good at commenting on figures. He believes that Liu Hui's evaluation of Dong Zhongshu is appropriate.

