古文：二十五日晓霁。
现代文：二十五日拂晓转晴。
English: The morning of the 25th dawned clear.

古文：崔君来候余餐，与之同入市，买琥珀绿虫。
现代文：崔君来等候我用餐，与他一同进市场，买唬拍绿虫。
English: Cui Jun came to wait for me to have dinner, went to the market with him, and bought and sold green worms.

古文：又有顾生者，崔之友也，导往碾玉者家，欲碾翠生石印池杯，不遇，期明晨至。
现代文：又有个姓顾的儒生，是崔君的朋友，引导前往碾玉的人家中，打算碾翠生石的印池、杯子，没遇上，约定明天早晨来。
English: There was also a Confucian scholar surnamed Gu, a friend of Cui Jun, who led the way to the home of the person who was grinding the jade, intending to grind the seal pools and cups of jade. He did not meet him, but agreed to come tomorrow morning.

古文：今命工以白质者为二池，以纯翠者为杯子。
现代文：二十六日崔、顾二人同碾玉的人到来，把翠生石交给碾玉人。
English: On the twenty-sixth day, Cui and Gu both arrived with the jade-grinder and handed over the emerald stone to the jade-grinder.

古文：时囊中已无银，以丽江银杯一只，重二两余。
现代文：两个印池、一个杯子，碾玉工价一两五钱，这样，加工的费用超过买原料的价钱了，因为石料重不便带着走路，故而勉强迁就了他。
English: Two printing pools, one cup, the price of grinding jade is one or two and a half dollars. In this way, the cost of processing exceeds the price of buying raw materials. Because the stone is heavy and inconvenient to walk with, he was forced to move.

古文：畀顾生易书刀三十柄，余付花工碾石。
现代文：此时口袋中已无银子，把丽江的一只银杯，交给顾生换来三十把书刀，其余的付给花工碾石料。
English: At this time, there was no silver in his pocket. He gave a silver cup from Lijiang to Gu Sheng in exchange for thirty knives, and paid the rest to the flower worker to grind stone.

古文：是午，工携酒肴酌于北楼，抵晚乃散。
现代文：这夭中午，工匠带来酒肴在北楼饮酒，到晚上才散去。
English: At noon this morning, the craftsmen brought wine and food to drink in the north tower, and only dispersed in the evening.

古文：二十七日坐会真楼作记。
现代文：二十七日坐在会真楼作游记。
English: On the 27th, I sat in the Kaizhen Building to write a travelogue.

古文：二十八日花工以解石来示，二十九日坐会真楼。
现代文：二十八日花工拿解开的石料来给我看。二十九日坐在会真楼。
English: On the 28th, the flower workers showed me the stones they had taken apart, and on the 29th, they sat in the main hall.

古文：与邱生邱，新添人，眇一目，以箕仙行术，前会于腾，先过此。同行。万里知己，得之意外，喜甚，遂同过余寓。
现代文：上午前往叩见闪知愿，将取回从前寄留的信札碑帖。闪某推辞说明天。返回时路过潘莲华家，将进门见面，遇见鸡足山安仁禅师与邱生同行。万里外遇知己，意外之间遇到他，非常高兴，就一同去我的寓所，坐谈了很久。
English: In the morning, I went to knock on the door to see Sen Chih-wang, and I will get back the letter and monument that I used to stay. Sen said that it would be tomorrow. When I returned, I passed by Pan Lianhua's house, and I will meet him at the door, and I will meet Chicken Foot Mountain An-Ren Zen Master and Qiu Sheng. I met a friend from thousands of miles away, and I was very happy to meet him by accident, so we went to my apartment together and sat and talked for a long time.

古文：坐久之，余亦随访其寓。
现代文：我也跟随他去拜访他的寓所。
English: I also followed him to visit his home.

古文：下午乃返。
现代文：下午才返回来。
English: I didn't get back until the afternoon.

古文：三十日晨餐后，往拜潘，即造闪知愿。
现代文：三十日早餐后，前去拜见潘莲华，立即去找闪知愿。
English: After breakfast on the 30th, he went to see Pan Lianhua and immediately went to find Xing Zhizhen.

古文：犹不出，人传先生以腹泻，延入西亭相晤。
现代文：知愿仍不出见，人们传说先生因为腹泻，延请到西亭相见。
English: Zhixian still did not appear, and people said that because of his diarrhea, he was invited to the West Pavilion for a meeting.

古文：余以安仁远来，其素行不凡，且赍有丽江《云中全集》来至，并求收览。
现代文：我由于安仁远来，他平素的品行不凡，并且持有丽江的《云菠全集》来到，一并请求收入阅览。
English: I came here because of Anren's extraordinary character, and I came with Lijiang's "Yunspanai Complete Collection" and requested to read it.

古文：闪公颔之。
现代文：闪公点头同意了此事。
English: Shen Gong nodded and agreed to the matter.

古文：余乃出，往安仁寓，促其以集往，而余遂出龙泉门观九龙泉。
现代文：我这才出门，前往安仁的寓所，催促他把集子送去，而我便出了龙泉门去观览九龙泉。
English: I just went out, went to Anren's apartment, urged him to send the agglomerate, and I went out of the Longquan Gate to see the Kowloon Spring.

古文：龙泉门，城之西南门也，在太保山之南麓。
现代文：龙泉门，是城的西南门，在太保山的南麓。
English: Longquan Gate is the southwest gate of the city, at the southern foot of Mount Taibo.

古文：门外即有涧自西山北夹而出，新城循之而上。
现代文：门外就有山涧自西山北边的夹谷中流出来，新城沿着山涧上延。
English: Outside the gate, there is a mountain stream flowing from the valley on the north side of the West Mountain, and the new city extends along the mountain stream.

古文：涧之南有山一支，与太保并垂，而易罗池当其东尽处，周回几百亩，东筑堤汇之，水从其西南隅泛池上溢，有亭跨其上，东流入大池。
现代文：山涧之南有一山支脉，与太保山一样重要，而易罗池正当它在东边的尽头处，周围有几百亩，东面筑堤蓄水，水从它的西南隅漫过池子从上边溢出，有亭子跨在水上，向东流入大池。
English: There is a mountain branch to the south of the ridge, which is as important as Taibaoshan. Yiluo Pond is located at the end of the east side, with several hundred mu around it. On the east side, a dike is built to store water. Water flows from its southwest corner through the pond and overflows from the top. There is a pavilion straddling the water and flowing into the large pond to the east.

古文：大池北亦有亭。
现代文：大池北边也有亭子。
English: There is also a pavilion on the north side of the large pond.

古文：池之中，则邓参将子龙所建亭也，以小舟渡游焉。
现代文：池子的中央，则是参将邓子龙修建的亭子，用小船渡过去游览。
English: In the center of the pond is a pavilion built by Deng Zilong, who participated in the parade, and took a small boat to visit it.

古文：池之南，分水循山腰南去，东泄为水窦，以下润川田。
现代文：池子的南边，池水分流顺山腰往南流去，东边泄水的是水洞，以便下流灌溉平川中的农田。
English: On the south side of the pond, the water of the pond flows along the mountainside to the south. On the east side, there is a water discharge cave to irrigate farmland in the Hirakawa River downstream.

古文：凡四十余窦，五里，近胡坟而止焉。
现代文：共有四十多个洞，五里长，接近胡家坟便完了。
English: A total of more than forty holes, five miles long, close to the tomb of Hu Jia.

古文：由池西上山，北冈有塔，南冈则寺倚之。
现代文：由水池西边上山，北冈上有塔，南冈则有佛寺背靠着它。
English: From the west side of the pool, there is a tower on the north hill and a Buddhist temple on the south hill.

古文：寺后有阁甚钜同 巨 。
现代文：寺后边有楼阁极为巨大。
English: At the back of the temple, there is a huge mansion.

古文：阁前南隙地，有花一树甚红，即飞松之桐花也，色与刺桐相似，花状如凌霄而小甚，然花而不实，土人谓之雄树。
现代文：阁子前方南边的空地上，有一棵花树十分红艳，就是叫飞松的桐花了，颜色与刺桐相似，花的形状如凌霄花但非常小，然而只开花却不结果实，当地人称之为雄树。
English: In the open space on the south side in front of the pavilion, there is a flower tree that is very bright red. It is called the flying pine paulownia. The color is similar to that of the thorn tree. The shape of the flower is like a roller coaster but very small. However, it only blooms but does not bear fruit. Locals call it the male tree.

古文：既而入城，即登城北，蹑其城侧倚而上。
现代文：既而入城，立即登到城北，踏着那城墙倾斜地向上走。
English: As soon as you enter the city, immediately climb to the north of the city and walk up the city wall.

古文：一里余，过西向一门，塞而不开。
现代文：一里多，经过向西的一道城门，城门堵塞着不开。
English: After more than a kilometer, I passed through a gate to the west. The gate was blocked and wouldn't open.

古文：乃转而北又里余，则山东突之坪也。
现代文：于是转向北又走一里多，就是山向东突出的平地了。
English: So I turned to the north and walked more than a mile, to the flat land where the mountain juts out to the east.

古文：其西宝盖山穹立甚高，东下而度一脊，其南北甚狭，度而东，铺为平顶，即太保之顶也，旧为寨子城。
现代文：它西边宝盖山弯然矗立非常高峻，往东下延一条山脊，山脊的南北非常窄，延伸向东，铺开成为平顶，就是太保山的山顶了，旧时是寨子城。
English: To the west of it, Mount Baogaishan stands very high, and a ridge stretches down to the east. The ridge is very narrow from north to south, extending to the east, spreading out to become a flat top, which is the top of Mount Taibo. In the old days, it was a walled city.

古文：胡渊拓而包此顶于内，西抵度脊处而止，亦设门焉；塞而不开，所谓永定、永安二门也。
现代文：胡渊拓城把这山包围在城内，西边抵达山脊延伸处便止住了，也设有城门；堵塞不开的，是所谓永定、永安二门。
English: Huyuan Tuo City encircled the mountain within the city, and when it reached the extension of the ridge on the west side, it stopped and also had a city gate; the so-called Yongding and Yongan two gates could not be blocked.

古文：旧武侯祠在诸葛营，今移于此顶，余入而登其楼，姜按君有诗碑焉。
现代文：旧武侯祠在诸葛营，今天移到此处山顶上，我进去登上祠堂的楼，姜按君立有诗碑。
English: The old Wuhou ancestral hall is in Zhugeying. Today, it has been moved to the top of the mountain here. I went inside and climbed up to the ancestral hall. There is a poem monument of Jiang Yajun.

古文：坪之前有亭踞其东。
现代文：平地之前有亭子雄踞在它的东面。
English: In front of the plain, there is a pavilion called "雄" on its eastern side.

古文：由此坠而下，甚峻，半里即下临玉皇阁后，由其西转阁前，而入会真饭焉。
现代文：由此坠落而下，甚为陡峻，半里路就下临玉皇阁后方，由它西边转到阁前便进入会真楼吃饭。
English: The fall from here is very steep. Half a mile down the road is the rear of the Jade Emperor Pavilion, and from the west side of it to the front of the pavilion, you will enter the Kaizhen Building to eat.

古文：六月初一日憩会真楼。
现代文：六月初一日在会真楼休息。
English: On the first day of June, the museum will be closed.

古文：初二日出东门，溪之自龙泉门灌城而东者，亦透城而出。
现代文：初二日走出东门，自龙泉门流贯城中往东流去的溪水，也穿城而出。
English: On the second day of the first month, I walked out of the east gate, and the stream flowing eastward from the Longquan Gate through the city also flowed out of the city.

古文：度吊桥，遂随之东行田塍中。
现代文：越过吊桥，于是顺着溪流往东行走在田野中。
English: Crossed the suspension bridge, then walked east along the stream in the fields.

古文：十里至河中村，有石桥，北来之水遂分而为二：一由桥而东南注，一绕村而西南曲。
现代文：十里到河中村，有座石桥，北面流来的河水于是分为两条：一条由桥下往东南流注，一条绕着村子向西南弯曲。
English: Ten miles to the middle of the river, there is a stone bridge, and the water flowing from the north is divided into two: one flows from the bridge to the southeast, and one curves around the village to the southwest.

古文：越桥东一里余，则其地中洼而沮洳低沼。
现代文：越到桥东走一里多，就见这里的地势中间下洼而且全是泥沼。
English: If you walk more than a mile to the east of the bridge, you will see a depression in the middle of the terrain here and it is all a quagmire.

古文：又里余，越冈而东，一里，抵东山之麓。
现代文：又走一里多，越过山冈往东走，一里，抵达东山的山麓。
English: I walked another mile and more, over the mountains and hills to the east, one mile, and arrived at the foot of Higashiyama.

古文：由岐东北二里，过大官庙。
现代文：由岔道往东北行二里，经过大官庙。
English: Two miles north-east from Shantou Road, past the Grand Official Temple.

古文：上山，曲折甚峻，二里余，至哀牢寺。
现代文：上山，曲曲折折十分陡峻，二里多，到了哀牢寺。
English: On the way up the mountain, the twists and turns are very steep, more than two miles, to Ailei Temple.

古文：寺倚层岩下，西南向，其上崖势层叠而起，即哀牢山也。
现代文：寺院靠在层层岩石之下，朝向西南，它上方崖势层层叠累而起，就是哀牢山了。
English: The temple rests under layers of rock, facing south-west. Above it, cliffs rise up in layers, forming Mount Ailuo.

古文：饭于寺。
现代文：在寺中吃饭。
English: Eat at the temple.

古文：由寺后沿崖上，一里转北，行顶崖西，半里转东，行顶崖北，一里转南，行顶崖东。顶崖者，石屏高插峰头，南北起两角而中平。
现代文：由寺后沿石崖上登，一里后转向北，走在山顶石崖的西边，半里后转向东，走在山顶石崖的北边，一里后转向南，走在山顶石崖的东边，山顶的石崖，是屏风状的岩石高插在峰头，南北突起两角而中段平缓。
English: From the temple, climb up along the cliff, turn north after one mile, walk on the west side of the summit cliff, turn east after half a mile, walk on the north side of the summit cliff, turn south after one mile, walk on the east side of the summit cliff, the cliff at the top of the mountain is a screen-shaped rock stuck high at the peak, the two corners of the north and south protrude and the middle section is flat.

古文：玉泉二孔在平脊上，孔如二大履ｌǔ麻鞋，并列，中隔寸许，水皆满而不溢，其深尺余，所谓金井也。
现代文：玉泉的两个泉孔在平缓的石脊上，泉孔如两个并列的大麻鞋，中间隔开一寸左右，泉水都是满而不溢，水深一尺多，是所谓的金井了。
English: The two spring holes of Jade Spring are on a gentle stone ridge. The spring holes are like two parallel hemp shoes, separated by about an inch. The spring water is full but not overflowing, and the water depth is more than a foot. It is the so-called golden well.

古文：今有树碑其上者，大书为 玉泉 。
现代文：今天有人在泉上树了碑，大字写为 玉泉 。
English: Today, someone has erected a monument on the spring, with the word "Jade Spring" written in large letters.

古文：按玉泉在山下大官庙前，亦两孔，而中出比目鱼，此金井则在山顶，有上下之别，而碑者顾溷ｈùｎ同 混 之，何也？
现代文：据考察，玉泉在山下大官庙前，也是两个孔，而水中出产比目鱼，此金井则在山顶，有上下的区别，可立碑的人却把它们混淆了，为什么呢？
English: According to the investigation, the Jade Spring at the foot of the mountain in front of the Grand Official Temple is also two holes, and flounder is produced in the water, while this gold well is at the top of the mountain, there is a difference between the top and bottom, but the person who erected the monument confused them, why?

古文：又一碑树北顶，恶不喜欢哀牢之名，易为 安乐 焉，益无征矣。
现代文：又有一块碑树在北面的山顶，厌恶哀牢的名称，改为 安乐 ，益加无根据了。
English: There is also a monument on the top of the mountain in the north, the name of the abhorrence of sadness, changed to peace and happiness, is increasingly unfounded.

古文：南一里至顶。
现代文：往南一里到达山顶南侧。
English: Go one mile south to the south side of the summit.

古文：南一里，东南下。又一里，西南下。
现代文：向东南下走一里，又向西南下走一里。
English: Walk one mile southeast and one mile southwest.

古文：其处石崖层叠，盖西北与哀牢寺平对，俱沿崖而倚者也。
现代文：此处石崖层层叠叠，大概与西北的哀牢寺水平相对，全是沿石崖紧靠着的。
English: Here, the rock cliffs are stacked on top of each other, roughly at the level of the northwest's Aileioji Temple, all of which are close to each other along the cliff.

古文：又南下里余，为西来大道，有茅庵三间倚路旁，是为茶庵。
现代文：又向南下走一里多，是西来的大道，有三间茅草盖成的寺庵紧靠路旁，这是茶庵。
English: Further south, more than a mile away, is the main road to the west, with three thatch-roofed temples and hermitages right next to the road. These are the tea huts.

古文：由此东向循峡而入，五里，过一坳。
现代文：由此向东顺峡谷进去，五里，经过一处山坳。
English: From there, it's a five-mile walk into the Dongshun Gorge, passing through a mountain pass.

古文：坳中有庙西向。
现代文：山坳中有座庙面向西方。
English: In the foothills of the mountains, there are temples facing west.

古文：东一里，度中洼之客，复东过坳。
现代文：向东一里，越过中间下洼的石坑，再往东走过山坳。
English: One mile to the east, past the sinkhole in the middle, and further east through the mountains.

古文：又从岭上二里余，盘北突之嘴。
现代文：又从岭上行二里多，绕过北突的山嘴。
English: From the ridge, it climbed more than two miles, skirting the northern tip of the mountain.

古文：其北峡之底，颇见田形。
现代文：它北面峡谷的谷底，颇能见到田地的影子。
English: At the bottom of the canyon on its northern side, the shadow of a field can be seen.

古文：于是东南下，二里，越一峡而东，一里，东上冈。
现代文：从这里往东南下走，二里，越过一条峡谷往东，一里，向东上冈。
English: From here, walk southeast, two miles, cross a canyon to the east, one mile, go east up the hill.

古文：又里余，逾坳东南行，见其东有南北峡，中干无水。
现代文：又是一里多，穿越山坳往东南行，见山坳东边有条南北向的峡谷，峡中干涸无水。
English: Another mile and more, crossing the mountains to the southeast, I saw a north-south canyon on the east side of the mountains. The canyon was dry and there was no water.

古文：峡东其山亦南北亘，有一二家倚之，是为清水沟。
现代文：峡谷东面那山也是呈南北向绵亘，有一二家人背靠山居住，这是清水沟。
English: The mountain to the east of the canyon also stretches in a north-south direction, with one or two families living behind the mountain. This is the Clear Water Gully.

古文：沟中水不成流，以从峡底东度脉者。
现代文：沟中的水不成流，似乎是从峡底向东穿流过山脉的水。
English: The water in the ditch does not flow, it seems to be water flowing from the bottom of the gorge to the east through the mountains.

古文：随峡南行一里，复度而东上冈，始望见南壑中洼，其南有峰危耸中立，即笔架山之北峰也；前从水寨西南盘岭时，所望正南有峰双突如马鞍者，即此峰也。
现代文：顺峡谷往南行一里，再向东越上山冈，这才望见南面壑谷中间下洼，它南边有座高耸的山峰当中而立，这就是笔架山的北峰了；从前从水寨向西南绕着山岭走时，望见正南方有山峰双双突起如同马鞍的，即是此峰了。
English: Walking south along the canyon for one mile, and then eastward over the mountain, I could only see the depression in the middle of the valley to the south. On the south side of it, there was a towering mountain standing in the middle, which was the northern peak of Pen Stand Mountain. In the past, when walking around the mountain from the water village to the southwest, I saw a mountain in the south with two peaks protruding like a saddle, which was this peak.

古文：其峰在郡城东南三十余里，即清水西山南下之脉，至此而尽，结为此山，南北横亘，西自郡城望之，四顶分尖，北自此临之，只见北垂一峰如天柱。
现代文：此峰在府城东南三十多里，就是清水沟西山往南下延的山脉，到此地到了尽头，盘结为此山，呈南北向横亘，自西面的府城望它，分为四个尖顶，从北方的此处面向它，只见北垂一座山峰如擎天柱。
English: This peak is located more than thirty miles southeast of the capital city. It is the mountain range that extends southward from the western mountain of Shimizu-gou. It has come to the end of this place. It is coiled as a mountain, extending north-south. Looking at it from the capital city in the west, it is divided into four spires. Facing it from this place in the north, one can only see a peak like a skyscraper hanging to the north.

古文：从冈上东盘北峰，三里降而下洼，始有小水自北峡下，一里，涉之。
现代文：从冈上向东绕过北峰，下降三里走到洼地，这才有小溪自北面峡中流下来，一里，涉过小溪。
English: From the hill to the east around the north peak, descending three miles to the depression, only then did the stream flow down from the north face gorge, one mile, wading through the stream.

古文：又东循北山一里余，过一脊坳。
现代文：又向东沿北山行一里多，走过一处脊坳。
English: I walked east along the North Mountain for more than a mile and passed a ridge.

古文：又西稍降一里，始见东山渐豁。山冈向东南下，中路因之；又一岐东北分趋瓦渡；又一岐西南下坑，坑中始闻水声。
现代文：又往西稍下降一里，才见到东山渐渐开阔，山冈向东南下延，中间的路沿着它走；又有一条岔路分向东北通往瓦渡；又一条岔路向西南下到坑中，坑中开始听到水声。
English: After descending another mile to the west, I saw that the eastern mountain gradually opened up, the mountain range extended to the southeast, and the middle road followed it; there was also a branch road to the northeast leading to Wadu; another branch road to the southwest went down to the pit, and the sound of water began to be heard in the pit.

古文：有三四家倚西山崖下，是为沈家庄，其下有田塍当坑底焉。
现代文：有三四家人紧靠在西山的山崖下，这是沈家庄，村子下方有田地位于坑底。
English: There are three or four families clinging to the cliff of the West Mountain. This is Shenjiazhuang. There is a field at the bottom of the pit below the village.

古文：已暮，欲投之宿，遂西南下一里余，及坑底。
现代文：此时已天晚，打算到村中投宿，于是向西南下走一里多，到达坑底。
English: At this time, it was late in the day, and they planned to stay in the village, so they walked more than a mile to the southwest to reach the bottom of the pit.

古文：渡小水，西南半里，投宿村家，暮雨适来。
现代文：渡过小溪，向西南半里，投宿到村中农家，暮雨恰好来临。
English: Crossing the stream, half a mile to the southwest, we stayed at a farmhouse in the village, just as dusk was falling.

古文：初三日雨潺潺不止。
现代文：初三日雨哗哗不停。
English: It rained non-stop for the first three days.

古文：饭而登途，稍霁。
现代文：饭后登上途程，渐渐晴开。
English: After the meal, it gradually cleared up on the way up.

古文：复南下坑底，半里，渡坑涧。
现代文：再往南下到坑底，半里，渡过坑中的山涧。
English: Further south to the bottom of the pit, half a mile, across the mountains in the pit.

古文：复东南上坡，一里余，得北来大路，随之南行冈脊三里。
现代文：再向东南上坡，一里多，遇到北来的大路。顺大路在冈脊上往南行三里。
English: Further uphill to the southeast, for more than a mile, I encountered the main road coming from the north. I followed the main road along the ridge for three miles to the south.

古文：其冈在垂坞中，遂随之下一里，南行坞中。
现代文：这山冈在低下的山坞中，就顺着它下走一里，向南行走在坞中。
English: This hill is in the lower dock, so walk down it for a mile and walk south in the dock.

古文：其中有小水唧唧，乃穿壑西南，逼近笔架东北之麓，合北来沈庄水，同东而绕于闪太史墓前者也。
现代文：坞中有小溪潺潺而流，是往西南穿过壑谷，逼近笔架山东北的山麓，汇合北面沈家庄流来的水流，一同向东绕到闪太史墓前的溪流。
English: In the dock, there is a small stream that flows in a meandering manner. It is the stream that runs southwest through the Shugu Valley, approaches the northeast foothills of Pengjia Mountain, merges with the stream that flows from Shenjiazhuang in the north, and together they wind eastward to the tomb of Shen Taishi.

古文：路又南一里，逾一小坳。
现代文：路又向南走一里，越过一个小山坳。
English: The road goes south for another mile, crossing a small ridge.

古文：一里稍下，遂沿坞东行，其坞始豁而东向去，水从其西南濒笔架山之北冈，亦随之东折。
现代文：一里稍下走，于是沿山坞往东行，这里山坞开始开阔起来向东伸展而去，水从它的西南方濒临笔架山的北冈，也随着北冈往东折。
English: After a short walk of one mile, they followed the dock to the east, where the dock began to open up and stretch to the east, and the water from its southwest bordered the north hill of Penjang Mountain, and also turned east with the north hill.

古文：一里余，逾一小冈而下，即闪墓之虎砂也。
现代文：一里多，越过一座小山冈下走，就是闪太史墓的虎砂了。
English: For more than a kilometer, crossing a small hill and going down, it is the tiger sand of the Shentai Tomb.

古文：北望有茔当中坡之嘴，乃涉壑而登之，即闪太史夫人马氏之冢，太翁所择而窆ｂｉｎ埋葬者，已十余年矣。
现代文：远望北边有坟荃正当中间山坡的尖嘴处，于是涉过壑谷登上墓地，是闪太史夫人马氏的坟墓，是太翁选择的埋葬之处，已经十多年了。
English: Looking far and wide to the north, there is a graveyard at the tip of the hillside in the middle of the valley, so I waded through the valley to reach the cemetery. It is the grave of Mrs. Ma, the wife of Shen Taishi, and it is the burial place chosen by Taewon. It has been more than ten years.

古文：其脉西北自昨所度沈家庄东岐之脊东南下，又峙为一巨山下坠。
现代文：这里的山脉自西北方昨天越过的沈家庄向东分岔的山脉往东南下延，又耸峙为一座巨大的山峰向下坠。
English: The mountains here extend from Shenjiazhuang, which was crossed yesterday in the northwest, to the mountains that branch off to the east, to the southeast, and rise as a huge mountain peak.

古文：自西而东者为虎砂，即来道所再逾者；自东而南为龙砂，即庄居外倚者，而穴悬其中，东南向。
现代文：自西往东延伸的是虎砂，就是来时的道路两次越过的山；自东往南延伸的是龙砂，就是庄园居屋在外紧靠着的山；而墓穴悬在两者中间，面向东南。
English: Extending from west to east is the tiger sand, which is the mountain that the road crosses twice when coming; extending from east to south is the dragon sand, which is the mountain that the manor house is close to; and the tomb hangs in the middle of the two, facing southeast.

古文：外堂即向东之坞，水流横其前，而内堂即涉壑而登者，第少促而峻泻。
现代文：外侧宽敞平坦之地就是向东的山坞，水流横在它前方，而内侧宽敞平坦之地就是涉过壑谷上登之处，但只是稍有些狭窄而且陡峻下泻。
English: The wide, flat area on the outside is the dock to the east, with the water flowing in front of it, and the wide, flat area on the inside is the place where the valley is climbed, but it is only slightly narrow and steep.

古文：当横筑一堤，亘两砂间，而中蓄池水，方成全局。
现代文：应当横着筑起一道堤，横亘在龙虎两砂之间，而中间蓄一池水，才成完整的格局。
English: A dike should be built horizontally, extending between the two sands, and a pond of water should be stored in the middle to form a complete pattern.

古文：虎砂上有松一圆独耸，余意亦当去之。
现代文：虎砂上有一棵松树圆圆地独立高耸，我的意见也应该去掉它。
English: On the tiger sand, there is a pine tree that stands alone in a round shape. In my opinion, it should also be removed.

古文：其庄即在龙砂东坡上，又隔一小坞，亦有细流唧唧，南注外堂东下之水。
现代文：守墓的庄子就在龙砂的东坡上，又隔着一个小山坞，也有卿眼的细流，是往南注入外侧宽敞平坦之地往东下流的溪水。
English: The village where the tomb is guarded is on the eastern slope of the Longsand River, separated by a small dock. There is also a small stream, the Jingye, which is a stream that flows southward into a spacious flat area on the outside and flows eastward.

古文：从墓又东半里，逾小水抵庄。
现代文：从墓地又向东走半里，越过小溪到达庄子。
English: From the cemetery, walk another half mile to the east, across the stream to Zhuangzi.

古文：庄房当村庐之西，其门南向。
现代文：庄子的房屋位于村子庐舍的西面，庄门向南。
English: Zhuangzi's house is located on the west side of the villager's house, and the Zhuangzi gate faces south.

古文：前三楹即停太翁之柩者，钥之未启；后为庐居，西三楹差可憩。
现代文：前面三间房屋就是停放太翁灵枢的地方，关锁着未开启；后边是居住的庐舍，西侧三间房屋稍微可以歇息。
English: The three houses in the front are the places where the Taewon spirit center is parked, locked and unlocked; the back is the living outhouse, and the three houses on the west side can rest a little.

古文：时守者他出，止幼童在。
现代文：此时守墓的人外出，只有年幼的儿童在家。
English: At this time, the guardians of the tomb go out, only young children are at home.

古文：余待久之，欲令其启钥入，叩太翁灵几，不得。
现代文：我等了很久，想命令儿童开锁进屋，叩拜太翁的灵枢几案，不能够。
English: I waited for a long time. I wanted to order the children to open the locks and enter the house, and to knock on the spiritual center of the Taiong several times, but I couldn't.

古文：遂从村东问所谓落水坑者，其言或远或近，不可方物。
现代文：于是从村东打听所谓的落水坑的地方，他们说的有的远有的近，不可辨别方位。
English: So they inquired from the east of the village about the location of the so-called sinkhole. They said that some were far away and some were near, and it was impossible to discern the location.

古文：有指在东北隅者，趋之。
现代文：有人指点在东北方的，就向那里赶去。
English: When someone pointed to the northeast, he hurried there.

古文：逾冈脊而北，二里余，得一中洼之潭，有水嵌其底，四面皆高，周遭大百亩，而水无从出。
现代文：越过冈脊往北，二里多，见到一个中央下洼的水潭，有水嵌在潭底，四面都高，周围大百亩，而水无处流出去。
English: Crossing the ridge to the north, more than two miles, I saw a water pool with a depression in the center, with water embedded in the bottom of the pool, high on all sides, surrounded by hundreds of acres, and the water had nowhere to flow out.

古文：从洼上循其北而东上坡，又里余而得儸儸寨，数十家分踞山头。
现代文：从洼地上沿着它的北边往东上坡，又走一里多遇到个锣锣寨，有数十家人分散开盘踞在山头。
English: From the depression along the north side of it to the east uphill, and walk a mile more to encounter a village, there are dozens of families scattered in the mountains.

古文：其岭亦从北而亘南，东南接天生桥者，为闪庄东障之山。
现代文：此处的山岭也是从北绵亘到南边，东南连接天生桥的，是闪庄东面屏障样的山。
English: The mountain range here also stretches from the north to the south, connecting Tiansheng Bridge in the southeast, and is a barrier-like mountain on the east side of Xianzhuang.

古文：余时不知其为天生桥，但求落水坑而不得，惟望闪庄正东，其山屏起下陷，如有深穴，意此中必有奇胜，然已随土人之指逾其北矣。
现代文：我此时不知它是天生桥，只管找落水坑却找不到，仅望见闪庄的正东，那里的山屏风样耸起下陷，好像有深穴，意料这里边必定有奇异的胜景，然而已按当地人的指点走过头到了它的北面了。
English: At this time, I didn't know it was Tiansheng Bridge, but I couldn't find it even though I was looking for a sinkhole. I could only see the east side of Xianzhuang, where there was a mountain screen-like rise and fall, as if there were a deep pit. I expected that there must be a strange beauty here, but I followed the locals' instructions and walked past it to the north.

古文：遍叩寨中儸儸，终无解语者。
现代文：问遍寨子中的锣锣，始终没有懂汉语的人。
English: After asking all over the village, there is still no one who understands Chinese.

古文：遂从东岭西南下，仍抵洼潭之东，得南趋之道，乃随之循东岭而南。
现代文：于是从东岭向西南下行，仍然抵达下洼水潭的东面，找到通向南方的道路，就顺着路沿东岭往南走。
English: So I drove down from Dongling to the southwest, still arrived at the east side of the lower basin, found the road leading to the south, and followed the road along Dongling to the south.

古文：二里，见有峡东自屏山下陷处出，峡中无水而水声甚沸。
现代文：二里，见有峡谷自东面屏风样山下陷处出来，峡中无水但水声十分鼎沸。
English: Two miles away, a canyon emerges from the screen-like mountain depression on the eastern side. There is no water in the canyon, but the sound of the water is very loud.

古文：乃下，见有水西自壑底，反东向腾跃，而不见下流所出，心奇之而不能解。
现代文：于是下去，见有水自西边的壑谷底，反而向东腾跃，却不见下游流出的地方，心里对此感到奇异却不能解释。
English: So I went down and saw water coming from the bottom of the valley in the west, but instead it was leaping to the east, but I couldn't see where it was flowing downstream. I felt strange about this in my heart, but I couldn't explain it.

古文：乃先溯旱峡遵北岭东入，二里抵下陷处，见石崖骈列，中夹平底。
现代文：便首先溯干旱的峡谷沿北岭向东深入，二里路抵达下陷处，见有石崖并列，中间相夹峡底平坦。
English: They first followed the arid canyon eastward along the North Ridge. When they reached the sinkhole on Erli Road, they saw the stone cliffs side by side and the flat bottom of the canyon between them.

古文：半里，峡分两岐：一北向入者，峡壁双骈而底甚平，中无滴水，如扶堑而入，而竟无路影；一南向入者，东壁甚雄，峡底稍隆起，而水与路影亦俱绝。
现代文：半里，峡谷分为两岔：一条向北深入的，峡壁双双并列而底部非常平坦，其中没有一滴水，如像挖成的堑沟通进去，但终究没有路的影子；一条向南进去的，东边的峡壁十分雄伟，峡底稍稍隆起，而水与路的影子也是全然断绝。
English: For half a mile, the canyon is divided into two canyons: a deep canyon to the north, where the canyon walls are side by side and the bottom is very flat, and not a single drop of water can enter, like a dug-out canyon, but after all there is no shadow of the road; a canyon to the south, where the eastern canyon wall is very majestic, the canyon floor is slightly raised, and the shadow of the water and the road is completely cut off.

古文：路则直东蹑岭而上，余意在穷崖、不在陟岵ｈù有草木的山，乃先趋北向峡中。
现代文：路却在正东登岭而上，我的兴趣在于穷尽山崖不在登山，就先赶到向北的峡中。
English: The road, however, climbs up the ridge in the east. My interest lies in exhausting the cliff and not climbing, but first reaching the gorge to the north.

古文：底平若嵌，若鸿沟之界，而中俱茅塞，一里未有穷极。
现代文：峡底平整好似镶嵌成的，有如鸿沟样隔开，而峡中全是茅草塞路，一里路后还没有穷尽。
English: The bottom of the canyon is flat and looks like a mosaic, separated like a chasm, and the canyon is full of thatched roads, which are not exhausted after one mile.

古文：复转，再趋南向峡中，披茅而入。
现代文：又转回来，再赶去向南的峡中，拨开茅章进去。
English: Turned back again, and then hurried to the south of the gorge, opened the door and went in.

古文：半里，东崖突耸，路辄缘西崖上。
现代文：半里，东边的石崖突耸，路总是沿西边的山崖上走。
English: For half a mile, the cliffs on the east side jut out, and the road always follows the cliffs on the west side.

古文：俯瞰峡中，其南忽平坠而下，深嵌数丈。
现代文：俯瞰峡中，它南面忽然平缓下坠，深嵌数丈。
English: Overlooking the gorge, it suddenly drops gently to the south, deeply embedded a few meters.

古文：东崖特耸之下，有洞岈然，西向而辟于坑底。
现代文：东面特别高耸的石崖之卞，有个山河十分深邃，面向西，张开在坑底。
English: At the foot of a particularly high stone cliff in the east, there is a very deep mountain river, facing west, stretching out at the bottom of the pit.

古文：路亦从西崖陡下坑中，遂伏莽而入洞。
现代文：路也从西面的山崖上陡直下到坑中，于是伏在草丛中走入洞中。
English: The road also plunged into the pit from the western cliff, so he crouched in the grass and walked into the hole.

古文：洞门高数丈，阔止丈余，水痕尚湿，乃自外入洞中者。
现代文：洞口高数丈，宽只有一丈多，水迹还湿淋淋的，是自外边流入洞中的水。
English: The mouth of the cave is a few meters high and only a few meters wide, and the water is still wet. It is water flowing into the cave from the outside.

古文：时雨甫过，坑源不长，已涸而无流。
现代文：此时雨刚下过，坑中的水源不长，已干涸无流。
English: At this time, it had just rained, the water source in the pit was not long, it had dried up and there was no flow.

古文：入洞二丈，中忽暗然下坠，其深不测。
现代文：进洞二丈远，洞中忽然黑暗下坠，那深处深不可测。
English: Into the cave two joules away, suddenly darkness falls in the cave, the depths are unfathomable.

古文：余乃以石块掷之，久而硿然，若数十丈不止。
现代文：我于是用石块掷下去，咚咚咚地响了很久，好像不只数十丈。
English: So I threw a stone down and it rattled for a long time, it seemed to be more than a few tens of meters high.

古文：然有声如止洞底，有声如投水中，固知其下有水而又不尽水也。
现代文：然而有的声音好像是在洞底止住，有的声音好像是投入水中，我本来就知道那下边有水却又不全然是水。
English: However, some sounds seemed to stop at the bottom of the cave, and some sounds seemed to be thrown into the water. I knew there was water down there, but it was not entirely water.

古文：出洞南眺，其坑亦南夹，不知穷极，然或高或洼，底亦无有平准。
现代文：出洞后往南眺望，那坑谷也夹在南边，不知尽头，不过有的高有的下洼，底部也是没有一定的高度。
English: Looking south after leaving the cave, the valley is also sandwiched on the south side, with no end in sight, but some are high and some are low, and the bottom does not have a certain height.

古文：乃从旧路北出半里，复随大路行峡底半里，复随北岭小径二里，西抵闻水声处，其坡在闪墓正东。
现代文：于是从原路向北出来半里，再顺大路在峡底行半里，再顺北岭的小径走二里，抵达西边听见水声之处，这个山坡在闪太史墓的正东。
English: So I walked half a mile north from the original road, then half a mile along the main road at the bottom of the gorge, then two miles along the path of the North Ridge, and arrived at the place where I heard the sound of water in the west, this hillside is just east of the Shentai Tomb.

古文：二里，逾横峡而南，有寨数家，乃西通山窠，南通落水寨总道，大路自山窠走天生桥，出枯柯、顺宁，即从此寨沿南岭而入者。
现代文：二里，越过横向的峡谷往南，有个数家人的寨子，是往西通山案，往南通落水寨道路汇集之处，大路自山案通向天生桥，到枯柯、顺宁，就是从此寨沿南岭进去的。
English: Two miles to the south, across the transverse canyon, there is a village of several families. It is the place where the roads converge to West Tongshan Village and South Tonglu Waterfall Village. The road from Mountain Village leads to Tiansheng Bridge, to Kuike, Shuning, and it is from this village along the South Ridge.

古文：余时尚不知所入岭即天生桥也，惟亟西下绝壑，视西来腾跃之水。
现代文：我此时还不知走入的山岭就是天生桥了，只是急忙向西下到断绝的壑谷中，观看从西边流来腾跃的水。
English: At this time, I didn't know that the mountain range I walked into was Tianshengqiao, but I hurried down to the west to the broken valley and watched the water flowing from the west.

古文：一里，抵壑之悬绝处，则水忽透石穴下坠。
现代文：一里，抵达壑谷的悬绝处，就见水流忽然钻入石穴下坠。
English: One mile later, when we arrived at the precipice of Shibuya, we saw water suddenly rushing into the cave.

古文：其石皆磊落倚伏，故水从西来，掏空披障而投之，当亦东合天生桥之下者也。
现代文：这里的岩石都是错杂地靠着伏着，所以水从西边流来，冲激着空隙投进去，应当也是往东流在天生桥之下会合的水流。
English: The rocks here are jumbled and leaning against each other, so the water coming from the west, rushing into the gap, should also be the eastward flow of water that meets under the Tiansheng Bridge.

古文：其水即沈家庄西北岭坳诸水，环闪墓、闪庄之前，又东盘冈嘴，始北曲而东入于此。
现代文：这里的水就是沈家庄西北岭坳间的诸条水流，环绕过闪太史墓、闪庄之前，又向东绕过冈嘴，这才向北弯曲后往东流进来达到此地。
English: The water here is the streams flowing between the ridges in the northwest of Shenjiazhuang. It circled around the Shentai Tomb, Shentang, and then eastward around Ganzhou before bending north and flowing eastward to reach here.

古文：此所谓小落水坑也，即土人所谓近者，余求之而不得，不意过而遇之。
现代文：这是所谓的小落水坑，就是当地人所说在近处的，我四处找它却找不到，不料经过时遇上了它。
English: This is the so-called small sinkhole, which the locals say is nearby. I looked for it everywhere but couldn't find it. I came across it when I was passing by.

古文：时已过午，遂南越一冈，又西下一里，仍南渡其水曲，复西逾坡，一里再至闪庄。
现代文：此时已过中午，就向南越过一座山冈，又往西下走一里，仍往南渡过那河曲，再向西爬坡，一里后再次来到闪庄。
English: At this time, it was already past noon, so he walked south across a mountain range, and then walked one mile to the west. He still walked south across the bend of the river, and then climbed the slope to the west. One mile later, he came to Xianzhuang again.

古文：余令顾奴瀹水餐饭。
现代文：我命令顾奴烧水煮饭吃。
English: I ordered Gu Nong to boil water and cook rice.

古文：既毕，而其守者一人归，觅匙钥不得，乃开其外门而拜于庭，始询所为天生桥、落水洞之道。
现代文：吃完后，那守墓的有一个人归来了，找不到钥匙，只好开了灵堂的外门在庭院中叩拜，这才询问去所谓天生桥落水洞的路。
English: After the meal, one of the tomb guards came back and couldn't find the key, so he had to open the outer door of the chapel and kneel in the courtyard. Only then did he inquire about the way to the so-called Tiansheng Bridge Waterfall Cave.

古文：乃知落水有二洞，小者近，即先所遇者，为本坞之水；大者远，在东南十里之外，乃山窠南道所经，为合郡近城诸流。
现代文：才了解到落水洞有两处，小的近，就是先前遇见的，是本处山坞中的水；大的远，在东南十里之外，是去山案的南路经过的地方，是全府靠近府城的诸条水流。
English: It was only then that I learned that there are two parts to the overflow cave. The small nearby part, which I had previously encountered, is the water in the dock at this location; the large distant part, ten miles to the southeast, is the place where the southern road to the mountain passes, and is the streams of the whole prefecture near the capital.

古文：又知天生桥非桥也，即大落水洞透穴潜行，而路乃逾山陟之，其山即在正东二里外。
现代文：又了解到天生桥不是桥，而是大落水洞穿过地穴潜流，而道路就翻山越过它，此山就在正东二里外。
English: I also learned that Tiansheng Bridge is not a bridge, but a large sinkhole through the underground stream, and the road goes over the mountain, which is two miles to the east.

古文：余随其指，先正东寻天生桥。
现代文：我按照他指点的，先往正东去找天生桥。
English: I followed his directions and headed due east to find Tiansheng Bridge.

古文：二里，至横峡南岭之寨，将由南岭大路东入。
现代文：二里，来到横向峡谷南岭的山寨，将由南岭的大路向东进去。
English: After two miles, when you come to the cottage of the transverse canyon Nanling, you will enter the road of Nanling to the east.

古文：再执途人问之，始知即前平底峡中东上之坡，是为天生桥，逾之即为枯柯者。
现代文：再次拉住路上的人问路，才知道就是从先前底部平坦的峡谷中向东上走的山坡，那就是天生桥，翻过它就是枯柯。
English: Once again, I stopped people on the road to ask for directions, only to find out that it was the hillside that went eastward from the previously flat bottom of the canyon, that is, Tiansheng Bridge, and turning over it is Kaike.

古文：余乃不复入，将南趋落水寨。
现代文：我便不再进去，将往南赶去落水寨。
English: I won't be going in again, I'll be heading south to Loushuizhai.

古文：一土人老而解事，知余志在山水，曰： 是将求落水洞，非求落水寨者，此洞非余不能指。
现代文：一个年老的当地人明白事理，知道我的兴趣在于山水，说： 这是要找落水洞，不是去找落水寨的人。此洞除了我不能指路。
English: An old local man, who understood the matter and knew that my interest was in the landscape, said: "This is to find the waterfall cave, not to find the waterfall village. I can't point the way except this hole."

古文：若至落水寨而后回，则迂折多矣。 
现代文：如果到了落水寨后回走，就迂回曲折多了。 
English: If you go back after reaching the waterfall, there are many detours and twists.

古文：遂引余从其寨之后东逾岭。
现代文：于是领我从他寨子之后向东越岭。
English: So he led me from his stockade to the east across the ridge.

古文：莽苍无路，姑随之行。
现代文：苍翠的莽野无路可走，姑且随着他走。
English: The verdant wilderness has no way to go. Let it go with him.

古文：二里，越岭东下，即见一溪西南自落水寨后破石门东出，盘曲北来，至此岭东麓，即捣入峡。
现代文：二里，越岭往东下走，马上见一条溪水自西南的落水寨后冲破石门往东流出，向北弯弯曲曲盘绕而来。流到此岭东麓，立即捣入峡中。
English: After walking eastward for two miles across the ridge, I immediately saw a stream break through the stone gate and flow out to the east from the fallen water fort in the southwest, curving and winding to the north. It flowed to the eastern foot of this ridge and immediately broke into the gorge.

古文：峡东即屏山下陷之南峰，与所逾之岭夹成南北峡。
现代文：峡东就是屏风样山下陷的南峰，与我所翻越的山岭夹成南北向的峡谷。
English: East of the canyon is the south peak of the folding screen-like mountain, sandwiched between the mountain range I climbed over and the north-south canyon.

古文：水从南入峡，悬溜数丈，汇为潭。
现代文：水从南边流入峡中，迅急的水流高悬数丈，汇积为深潭。
English: Water flows into the gorge from the south, and the rapid flow of water overhangs several heights, accumulating into a deep pool.

古文：东崖忽迸而为门，高十余丈，阔仅数尺，西向峙潭上，水从潭中东捣而入之，其势甚沸。
现代文：东面的石崖忽然迸裂为门，高十多丈，宽仅数尺，朝向西方，耸峙在水潭之上，水从潭中向东捣入石门，水势十分鼎沸。
English: The stone cliff on the eastern side suddenly splits into a door, more than ten meters high, only a few feet wide, facing west, towering over the pool, water rushing from the pool to the east into the stone door, the water is very boiling.

古文：余从西崖对瞰，其入若饮之入喉，汩汩而进，而不知其中之崆峒作何状也。
现代文：我从西边的石崖上对面远瞰，水流进去有如水饮入喉咙，泪泊地进去，但不知其中的空洞是什么形状了。
English: I look across from the cliff on the west side, and the water rushes in like water down the throat. I enter in tears, but I don't know what shape the hole is in.

古文：余从西崖又缘崖石而北，见峡中水虽东入，而峡犹北通，当即旱峡南或高或洼南出之峡，由此亦可北趋。
现代文：我从西边的石崖上又沿崖石往北走，见峡中的水虽向东流进去，但峡谷仍通向北方，应是干旱的峡谷南面有的高有的下洼往南通出去的峡谷，也可以往北走向峡底，向西到干旱壑谷中的山洞。
English: I walked north from the cliff on the west side and along the cliff stones. I saw that although the water in the canyon flowed eastward, the canyon still led to the north. It should be a canyon with some high points and depressions to the south of the arid canyon, and it could also go north to the bottom of the canyon and west to the cave in the arid valley.

古文：峡底西向旱壑洞，固知两洞南北各峙，而同在一峡中，第北无水入而南吸大川耳，其中当无不通，故前投石有水声，而上以桥名也。
现代文：我本来就知道两个洞分在南北各自对峙，但同在一条峡中，只是北边的无水进去而南边的吞吸着大河罢了，其中应当无处不通，所以先前投石有水声，而上面用桥来命名。
English: I already knew that the two holes were separated by a north-south face-off, but they were in the same canyon, except that the north side had no water and the south side sucked in a large river. There should have been no passage between them, so previously there had been the sound of water falling from the rocks, but they were named after the bridge.

古文：从西崖俯瞰久之，仍转南出。
现代文：从西边石崖上俯瞰了很久，仍转向南出来。
English: After looking down from the western cliff for a long time, I still turned south.

古文：土老翁欲止余宿，余谓日尚高，遂别之，遵南路可以达郡，惟此处犹不得路，盖沿大溪而南，抵西山峡门，即落水寨；西越坡，溯小溪而西上岭，盘笔架山之南，即郡中通枯柯大道。
现代文：当地老人想留我住宿，我说日头还高，就辞别了他。沿往南的路可以到达府城，只是此处还找不到路，大概沿大溪往南，抵达西山的峡口，就是落水寨；向西越坡，溯小溪往西上岭，绕过笔架山之南，就是府中通往枯柯的大道。
English: The local old man wanted to stay with me for the night, but when I said that the sun was still high, he said goodbye. You can get to Fucheng along the road to the south, but you can't find the road here. You should probably go south along the creek and arrive at the mouth of the West Mountain, that is, Ochushuizhai. Go west across the slope, follow the creek to the West Upland, bypass the south of the Pencil Rack Mountain, that is, the main road from Fuchu to Kuike.

古文：余乃西从之。
现代文：我于是从西边的路走。
English: So I took the road to the west.

古文：沿坡涉坞，八里抵西坡下，有儸儸寨数家，遂西上坡。
现代文：沿山坡涉过山坞，八里抵达西坡下，有个数家人的锣锣寨，于是向西上坡。
English: Wading along the hillside past the dockyard, eight miles to the bottom of the west slope, there is a village of several families, and then uphill to the west.

古文：层累而上八里，其山北盘为壑，而南临下嵌之涧，有四五家倚北峡而居，上复成田焉。
现代文：层层叠叠地上走八里，这里的山北面盘绕成壑谷，而南边面临下嵌的山涧，有四五家背靠北面的峡谷居住，山上又开垦成农田。
English: Walking eight miles on the ground in layers, the north side of the mountain here is coiled into a valley, while the south side faces the embedded mountains. There are four or five families living in the canyon behind the north side, and the mountains have been reclaimed into farmland.

古文：又西盘西峰南嘴而上三里，其上甚峻。
现代文：又向西绕着西峰南边的山嘴上登三里，上走的路非常陡峻。
English: I also climbed three miles to the west around the mouth of the mountain on the south side of the west peak. The way up was very steep.

古文：又平行峰头二里，余以为此笔架南峰矣，而孰知犹东出之支也，其西复下坠为坑，与笔架尚隔一坞。
现代文：又平缓在峰头行二里，我以为这是笔架山的南峰了，却哪里知道仍是往东伸出的支峰，它西边又下坠为深坑，与笔架山还隔着一个山坞。
English: I thought that this was the southern peak of Pen Stand Mountain, but I didn't know that it was still a spur extending to the east. It fell into a deep pit on the west side, and there was still a dock across from Pen Stand Mountain.

古文：乃下涉坑一里，越坑西上，始为笔架南垂。
现代文：于是下到坑中跋涉一里，越过坑谷往西上山，这才是笔架山的南垂。
English: So I went down to the pit and trudged for a mile, crossing the pit valley to the west and up the mountain. This is the southern slope of Pen Stand Mountain.

古文：有数十家即倚南崖而居，是为山窠。
现代文：有数十家人就紧靠南面的山崖居住，这是山案。
English: There are dozens of families living right next to the cliff to the south, which is a mountain case.

古文：当从投宿，而路从树底行，不辨居址，攀树丛而上，一里遂出村居之后。
现代文：应当从此去投宿，可路从树底下走，辨不出居屋的地点，攀着树丛上登，一里路便出来到村庄的后面。
English: From here they should go to their lodgings, but the path starts under a tree, and it is not possible to identify the location of the HOS, so they climb up through the trees, and after a mile they reach the back of the village.

古文：意西路可折而转，既抵其西，复无还岐，竟遵大路西北驰。
现代文：推想往西的路可以折转来，抵达它的西边后，又无返回的岔路，竟自沿大路往西北疾奔。
English: He thought that the road to the west could be turned around, but when he reached the west side of it, there was no way back, so he ran along the highway to the northwest.

古文：二里余，下涉一涧，复西北上坡。
现代文：二里多，下涉一条山涧，再向西北上坡。
English: More than two miles, wading down a mountain ridge, and then uphill to the northwest.

古文：二里余，越坡，复下而涉涧。
现代文：二里多，越过山坡，又下山涉过涧水。
English: More than two miles, over the hillside, and then down the mountain through Surabaya.

古文：共三里，又上逾一坡，乃西向平下。
现代文：共三里，又上走越过一道坡，于是向西平缓下行。
English: A total of three miles, and walked up over a slope, so slowly down to the west.

古文：二里出峡门，已暮，从昏黑中峻下二里，西南渡一溪桥，又西北从岐逾坡，昏黑中竟失路迷路。
现代文：二里走出峡口，已经天黑，从昏黑之中陡峻地下走二里，往西南渡过一座溪上的桥，又向西北从岔路越坡，昏黑中竟然迷了路。
English: Two miles out of the mouth of the gorge, it was already dark. From the middle of the darkness, I walked two miles down a steep slope, crossed a bridge over a stream to the southwest, and crossed the slope from the fork to the northwest. In the dark, I actually lost my way.

古文：踯躅二里，得一寨于坡间，是为小寨。
现代文：跌跌绊绊地走了二里，在坡上遇到一个寨子，这是小寨。
English: I stumbled along for two miles and came across a small village on the slope. It was a small village.

古文：叩居人，停行李于其侧，与牛圈邻，出橐ｔｕó袋子中少米为粥以餐而卧。
现代文：敲开居民的门，把行李停放在屋侧，与牛圈相邻，拿出袭中的少许来煮粥来吃了便躺下。
English: Knock on the resident's door, park the luggage on the side of the house, next to the cowshed, take out a little of the attack to cook porridge, eat and lie down.

古文：初四日其家插秧忙甚，竟不为余炊。
现代文：初四日他家插秧非常忙，竟然不为我烧饭。
English: On the first four days of the new year, his housekeeper was so busy that she didn't cook dinner for me.

古文：余起问知之，即空腹行，以为去城当不及三十里也。
现代文：我起床问知情况，立即空肚子上路，以为离城应当不到三十里了。
English: I got up to inquire about the situation and immediately hit the road on an empty stomach, thinking that I should be less than thirty miles from the city.

古文：及西行，复逾坡两重，共八里，有庐倚山西向而居，始下见郡南川子。
现代文：往西走时，再次越过两重山坡，共八里，有房屋靠山向西居住，这才见到下方府城南边的平川。
English: When walking west, I crossed the double-layered hillside again, a total of eight miles, and there were houses supporting the mountain and living westward. It was only then that I saw Hirakawa on the south side of Shimogata prefecture.

古文：又随坡西向平行五里，趋一西下小峡，复上一西突之冈，始逼近西川。
现代文：又顺山坡向西平缓前行五里，走向一条往西下延的小峡谷，再登上一座向西突的山冈，这才逼近西面的平川。
English: I also walked five miles slowly along the mountain slope to the west, up to a small canyon extending to the west, and then climbed a mountain that juts out to the west, before approaching the Hirakawa River to the west.

古文：下瞰川中之水，从坡西南环坡足，东南抱流而入峡，坡之南有堰障之，此即清水关沙河诸水，合流而东南至此，将入峡东向而出落水寨者也。
现代文：下瞰平川中的水，从山坡西南环绕坡脚，向东南围抱流入峡中，山坡的南边有堤坝挡水，这就是清水关沙河诸条河水，合流后往东南流到此地，将流入峡中向东流到落水寨。
English: Looking down at the water in the Pingchuan River, from the southwest of the mountain slope around the foot of the slope, it flows into the gorge in the southeast, and there is a dam on the south side of the mountain slope to block the water. This is the clear water of the Kansha River. After the confluence, it flows to the southeast to this place, and will flow into the gorge to the east to the waterfall.

古文：于是东北一里余，下至坡麓。
现代文：于是往东北行一里多，下到坡脚。
English: So I drove more than a mile to the northeast, down to the foot of the slope.

古文：循嘴北转半里，始舍山而西北行平陆间。
现代文：沿山嘴向北转半里，开始离开山向西北行走在平地上。
English: Turn north along the ridge for half a mile and start walking northwest away from the mountain on level ground.

古文：二里，西及大溪，有巨木桥横其上，西渡之。
现代文：二里，往西来到大溪边，有座巨大的木桥横在溪上，渡到溪流西岸。
English: Two miles to the west, at the edge of the large stream, there is a huge wooden bridge across the stream to the west bank of the stream.

古文：西北行川间，屡过川中村落，十六里而及城之东南隅。
现代文：向西北前行在平川间，屡次走过平川中的村落，十六里后到达府城的东南隅。
English: Heading northwest between the Hirakawa, I repeatedly walked through villages in the middle of the Hirakawa, and after sixteen miles I reached the southeast corner of the prefecture.

古文：度小桥，由城南西向行，一里而入南门，始入市食馒面而饱焉。
现代文：越过小桥，由城南向西行，一里后走入南门，这才走入街市买面条和馒头吃了个饱。
English: After crossing a small bridge, I walked from the south of the city to the west. After a mile, I walked into the south gate. Only then did I walk into the street market to buy noodles and steamed buns and eat my fill.

古文：下午，返会真楼。
现代文：下午，返回会真楼。
English: In the afternoon, return to the main hall.

