古文：汉武帝末年，盗贼滋起，大群至数千人，小群以百数。
现代文：汉武帝末年，盗贼越来越多，大的盗匪群多达数千人，小群的也有几百人。
English: At the end of Emperor Hanwu's reign, there were more and more thieves. Large groups of thieves numbered up to several thousand, while small groups had several hundred members.

古文：上使使者衣绣衣，持节虎符，发兵以兴击，斩首大部或至万余级，于是作 沈命法 ，曰： 群盗起不发觉，觉而弗捕满品者，二千石以下至小吏主者皆死。 
现代文：皇上派使者穿上绣衣，拿着符节凭证，派军队进行攻击，斩首大的部队有的达一万多首级，于是建立 沈命法 ，法律规定： 成群的盗匪出现没有发觉，发觉了而没有捕获到规定的标准的，二千石以下的官员到下级官吏主持这件事的人都判死刑。 
English: The emperor sent emissaries to put on embroidered clothes, holding symbols and certificates, and sent troops to attack, beheading more than ten thousand heads of large troops, thus establishing the "death penalty law," the law stipulates: Hordes of robbers appeared without detection, detected but not captured to the required standard, officials under two thousand koku to lower-level officials who presided over the matter were sentenced to death.

古文：其后小吏畏诛，虽有盗，弗敢发，恐不能得，坐课累府，府亦使不言。
现代文：这以后下级官吏害怕被杀，即使有盗贼也不敢上报，唯恐不能捕获，违反规定连累郡府，郡府也让他们不要上报。
English: After that, lower-level officials were afraid of being killed. Even if there was a thief, they did not dare to report it for fear of not being able to catch it. Violation of regulations even involved the county government, which also told them not to report it.

古文：故盗贼浸多，上下相为匿，以避文法焉。
现代文：因此盔贼渐渐增多，上上下下却相互隐瞒，好躲避法令条文的制裁。
English: As a result, there are more and more thieves, hiding and concealing from each other up and down, and using false documents to cover up the truth to evade legal prosecution.

古文：光武时，群盗处处并起。遣使者下郡国，听群盗自相纠擿，五人共斩一人者除其罪。
现代文：汉光武时，成群的盗贼到处兴起，汉光武帝派遣使者下到各郡，听任盗贼们自已相互纠纷揭发，五个人共同斩杀一人的，免除他们的罪行。
English: At the time of Han Guangwu, groups of thieves were springing up everywhere. Emperor Han Guangwu sent emissaries to every county, and allowed the thieves to expose their own disputes with each other. Five people killed one person together and were absolved of their crimes.

古文：吏虽逗留回避故纵者，皆勿问，听以禽讨为效。
现代文：官吏们即使停留拖延、回避不前、故意放纵盗贼的，都不加追问，只以捉获讨伐的成效论处。
English: Even if the officials delay, evade, or deliberately indulge the thieves, they will not be questioned, but will only be punished according to the effectiveness of the capture and crusade.

古文：其牧守令长坐界内有盗贼而不收捕者，及以畏懦捐城委守者，皆不以为负，但取获贼多少为殿最，唯蔽匿者乃罪之。
现代文：那些郡守、县令犯了管辖区域内有盗贼而不收容捕捉的罪过的，及因为害怕软弱丢弃城池和职守的人，都不看作过失，只根据捕获盗贼的多少来评定优劣，只有包庇隐藏的人才判罪。
English: Those county governors and county magistrates who have committed the crime of not arresting thieves in their jurisdiction, and those who have abandoned the city and their duties for fear of weakness, are not regarded as faults. They are only evaluated according to the number of thieves caught. Only those who cover up and hide are convicted.

古文：于是更相追捕，贼并解散。
现代文：于是互相追捕，盗贼们都解体逃散。
English: As a result, they chased each other and the thieves broke up and fled.

古文：此二事均为治盗，而武帝之严，不若光武之宽，其效可睹也。
现代文：这两件事都是治理盗贼的，而汉武帝的严厉不如汉光武宽缓，它们的效果不同是很明显的。
English: These two things are to control thieves, but Emperor Hanwu's severity is not as lenient as Han Guangwu's, and their different effects are obvious.

