古文：王洛兒，京兆人也。
现代文：王洛兒，是京兆人。
English: Taiwu Emperor was very regretful and angry, and every time he spoke of Liu Jie, he gritted his teeth. Wang Lore, Jingzhao people.

古文：少善骑射。
现代文：年轻时擅长骑马射箭。
English: When he was young, he was good at horseback riding and archery.

古文：太宗在东宫，给事帐下，侍从游猎，夙夜无怠。
现代文：太宗做太子时，在东宫供职，侍从出游打猎，日夜不懈。
English: When Taizong was crown prince, he served in the East Palace, and his attendants went out hunting day and night.

古文：性谨愿，未尝有过。
现代文：为人诚实，未曾有过失。
English: He is an honest man and does not make mistakes.

古文：太宗尝猎于氵垒南，乘冰而济，冰陷没马。洛兒投水，奉太宗出岸。
现代文：太宗曾到浸水以南打猎，踏冰过河。冰块陷落淹没马匹，洛儿投身水中，救太宗上岸。
English: Taizong once went hunting south of the flooded area and crossed the river on the ice. The falling ice drowned the horses, and Lore threw herself into the water to save Taizong from drowning.

古文：水没洛兒，殆将冻死，太宗解衣以赐之。
现代文：水淹没洛儿，几乎被冻死，太宗脱下衣服赐给他。
English: Taizong took off his clothes and gave them to Lore, who was nearly frozen to death.

古文：自是恩宠日隆。
现代文：从此宠爱日盛。
English: Since then, he has been a favorite of Nissho.

古文：天赐末，太宗出居于外，洛兒晨夜侍卫。无须臾违离，恭勤发于至诚。
现代文：天赐末年，太宗移居宫外，洛儿早晚侍卫，无一刻分离，恭敬勤勉出于至诚。
English: At the end of his life, Taizong moved out of the palace, and Lore served as an attendant in the morning and evening. They never left each other's side, and they were respectful and diligent out of sincerity.

古文：元绍之逆，太宗左右唯洛兒与车路头而已。
现代文：元绍谋反时，太宗身边衹有洛儿与车路头而已。
English: When Yuan Shao plotted a counterattack, Taizong only had Luo Er and Che Lu Tou by his side.

古文：昼居山岭，夜还洛兒家。
现代文：昼居山中，夜回洛儿家。
English: He lives in the mountains during the day and returns to Lore's house at night.

古文：洛兒邻人李道潜相奉给，晨昏往复，众庶颇知，喜而相告。绍闻，收道斩之。
现代文：洛儿的邻人李道偷偷地供给，日复一日，众人略知，欣喜相告元绍听说后，逮捕李道杀掉。
English: Luo Er's neighbor Li Dao secretly supplied, day after day, everyone knows a little, happy to tell Yuan Shao after hearing, arrest Li Dao killed.

古文：洛兒犹冒难往返京都，通问于大臣。大臣遂出奉迎，百姓奔赴。
现代文：洛儿仍然冒险往来京都，与大臣互通音讯，于是大臣出迎，百姓归心。
English: Lore still ventured to and from Kyoto, and exchanged messages with the minister, so the minister came to meet her, and the people were reconciled.

古文：太宗还宫，社稷获乂，洛兒有功焉。
现代文：太宗回宫，国家安宁，洛儿有功啊。
English: Emperor Taizong has returned to the palace, the country is peaceful, and Lore has made great contributions.

古文：太宗即位，拜散骑常侍。
现代文：太宗即位后，他被任命为散骑常侍。
English: After Emperor Taizong ascended to the throne, he was appointed as a knight errant.

古文：诏曰： 士处家必以孝敬为本，在朝则以忠节为先，不然，何以立身于当世，扬名于后代也？
现代文：诏令说： 士在家一定以孝敬为本，在朝廷则以忠为先，否则，凭什么在当世立身，在后代扬名呢。
English: The imperial edict said: "A scholar must put filial piety first at home, and loyalty first at the imperial court. Otherwise, how can he stand up in the present world and make a name for himself in future generations?"

古文：散骑常侍王洛兒、车路头等，服勤左右，十有余年，忠谨恭肃，久而弥至，未尝须臾之顷，有废替之心。
现代文：散骑常侍王洛兒、车路头等，在身边勤劳地服侍，有十多年，忠诚谨慎，久而更甚，未曾在片刻之间有懈怠的意念。
English: He has been diligently serving for more than ten years, faithfully and prudently, and even more so for a long time. He has never had the intention of slacking off for a moment.

古文：及在艰难，人皆易志，而洛兒等授命不移，贞操逾垦。虽汉之樊灌，魏之许典无以加焉。
现代文：及至处于危难，其他人都改变志向，而盗儿等舍命报效不移，忠贞的志节更加诚挚，即使汉代的樊啥灌婴，曹魏的许褚典韦也不过如此。
English: When in danger, other people change their aspirations, but thieves and others who sacrifice their lives are still effective, and their loyalty is more sincere. Even if the Han Dynasty's 啥灌婴, Cao Wei's Xu典韦 is no more than that.

古文：勤而不赏，何以奖劝将来为臣之节？
现代文：勤勉却不奖赏，怎么褒奖鼓励将来做臣子的节操?
English: If diligence is not rewarded, how can reward encourage the discipline of future vassals?

古文：其赐洛兒爵新息公，加直意将军。 
现代文：赐给洛儿爵位为新息公，加授直意将军。 
English: Lore was given the title of nobility for the new interest, and was also awarded the title of general.

古文：又追赠其父为列侯，赐僮隶五十户。
现代文：又追赠他的父亲为列侯，赐给奴仆五十户。
English: He also made his father a vassal and gave him fifty households of servants and slaves.

古文：永兴五年卒。
现代文：丞兴五年去世。
English: Zhexing died five years later.

古文：赠太尉，建平王，赐温明秘器，载以辒辌车，使殿中卫士为之导从。
现代文：被追赠为太尉、建平王，赐给贵族用的棺材，用辊鲸车运载，派殿中卫士做他的护卫。
English: He was posthumously promoted to the rank of captain and given a coffin to be used by aristocrats. He was carried in a whale-drawn carriage and had the palace guards escort him.

古文：太宗亲临哀恸者数四焉。
现代文：太宗多次亲临悲痛至极。
English: Taizong has been to the scene of the tragedy many times.

古文：乃鸩其妻周氏，与洛兒合葬。
现代文：竟然用毒酒杀死他的妻子且压，与渔儿合葬。
English: He even killed his wife and daughter-in-law with poisoned wine, and they were buried together with the fisherman.

古文：子长成，袭爵。
现代文：儿子长成，继承爵位。
English: The son grows up and inherits the peerage.

古文：卒，无子。
现代文：去世，没有儿子。
English: He died without a son.

古文：弟德成，袭爵。
现代文：弟弟德成，继承爵位。
English: His younger brother, Tokusei, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：徙为建城公，加镇远将军。
现代文：转为建城公，加授镇远将军。
English: He was transferred to the position of Jiancheng Gong and promoted to Zhenyuan General.

古文：官至散骑常侍，典作长安。
现代文：官至散骑常侍，主持营建长安。
English: officials to horseback riders, presided over the construction of Chang'an.

古文：真君十一年卒。
现代文：真君十一年去世。
English: Mankun passed away eleven years ago.

古文：子定州，袭爵，降为建阳侯，安远将军。
现代文：儿子定州，继承爵位，降为建阳侯、安远将军。
English: His son, Dingzhou, inherited the title and was demoted to Jianyang marquis and General Anyuan.

古文：后定州弟升为侍御中散，有宠于显祖，以祖父洛兒著勋先朝，诏复定州爵为公。
现代文：后来定州的弟弟王升任侍御中散，受到显祖宠爱，因祖父洛儿在先朝有显著的功勋，恢复公爵。
English: Later, Dingzhou's younger brother, Wang Sheng, was appointed as the middle-ranked attendant, and was favored by Xianzu. Because his grandfather Lore had remarkable merits in the previous dynasty, he was reinstated as a duke.

古文：高祖初，为长安镇将。
现代文：高祖初年，任长安镇将。
English: In Gaozu's first year, he was appointed as the commander of Chang'an Town.

古文：卒。
现代文：去世。
English: To die.

古文：子陵，袭升爵。
现代文：儿子王陵，继承王丑的爵位。
English: His son, Wang Ling, succeeded to Wang Xi's title.

古文：承明初，迁监御长，赐爵始新子，加宁朔将军、员外散骑常侍。
现代文：承明初年，升任监御长，被赐给始新子的爵位，加授宁朔将军、员外散骑常侍。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, he was promoted to the post of supervisor, and was given the title of Shixinzi, the title of Ningshuo General, and the title of non-commissioned officer.

古文：卒。
现代文：去世。
English: To die.

古文：车路头，代人也。
现代文：车路头，代地人。
English: The head of the road, the local substitute.

古文：少以忠厚选给东宫，为太宗帐下帅。
现代文：年轻时因忠厚被选拔供事东宫，任太宗的帐下帅。
English: When he was young, he was chosen to serve the Eastern Court because of his loyalty, and he served as a subordinate of Emperor Taizong.

古文：善自修立，谨慎无过。
现代文：善于修身而有所成就，谨慎而没有过错。
English: Good at self-cultivation and achievement, prudent and no fault.

古文：天赐末，太宗出于外，路头随侍竭力。
现代文：天赐末年，太宗出居宫外，路头忠诚侍卫。
English: At the end of his life, Taizong left the palace and was accompanied by loyal attendants.

古文：及太宗即位，拜为散骑常侍，赐爵金乡公，加忠意将军。
现代文：及至太宗即位，被任命为散骑常侍，赐爵金乡公，加授忠意将军。
English: When Emperor Taizong ascended to the throne, he was appointed as a knight errant, knighted as King Jinxiang and awarded the title of General of Loyalty.

古文：后改为宣城公。
现代文：后来改为宣城公。
English: Later, it was changed to Xuancheng.

古文：太宗性明察，群臣多以职事遇谴，至有杖罚，故路头优游不任事，侍宿左右，从容谈笑而已。
现代文：太宗生性严明，群臣多因任职受贬，甚至受杖刑，因此路头悠闲自得而不理事，伴寝左右，仅从容谈笑而已。
English: Emperor Taizong had a strict upbringing, and most of his courtiers were demoted or even caned because of their positions. As a result, they lived a life of leisure and self-indulgence, sleeping around and only talking and laughing.

古文：路头性无害，每至评狱处理，常献宽恕之议，以此见重于朝。
现代文：路头为人公正宽容，每至议罪定刑，常表陈宽恕的意见，因此在朝中被看重。
English: Road marshals are fair-minded and tolerant. Whenever a crime is to be sentenced, they often express their opinion of forgiveness. Therefore, they are valued in the North.

古文：太宗亦敬纳之，宠待隆厚，赏赐无数，当时功臣亲幸莫及。
现代文：太宗也尊重接受他的意见，恩遇深厚，赏赐无数，当时的功臣近臣没有人比得上。
English: Emperor Taizong also respected and accepted his opinion. He was deeply blessed and received countless rewards. At that time, there was no comparable meritorious vassal or close vassal.

古文：泰常六年卒。
现代文：泰常六年去世。
English: Tai Chang died six years later.

古文：太宗亲临哀恸。
现代文：太宗亲临丧礼悲痛至极。
English: Emperor Taizong attended the funeral in person and was extremely saddened.

古文：赠侍中、左卫大将军、太师、宣城王、谥曰忠贞。
现代文：被追赠为侍中、左卫大将军、太师、宣城王，谧号为忠贞。
English: He was posthumously awarded the titles of Samurai Junior Middle Officer, General of the Left Division of the Imperial Guards, Grand Master, and King of Xuancheng, and his posthumous name was Zhongzheng.

古文：丧礼一依安城王叔孙俊故事。
现代文：丧礼完全依照安城王叔孙俊的先例。
English: The funeral ceremony was entirely in accordance with the precedent set by Wang Ancheng's uncle Sun Jun.

古文：陪葬金陵。
现代文：陪葬金陵。
English: He was buried with Jinling.

古文：子眷袭爵。
现代文：儿子车眷继承爵位。
English: His son Che as the next in line to the throne.

古文：卢鲁元，昌黎徒河人也。
现代文：卢鲁元，是昌黎徒河人。
English: Lu Luyuan is a native of Litu River, Changchun.

古文：曾祖副鸠，仕慕容垂为尚书令、临泽公。
现代文：曾祖副鸠，做慕容垂的尚书令、临泽公。
English: Zeng Zu's vice-regent, Shang Shuling, who was Murongtui's subordinate, and Linze Gong.

古文：祖父并至大官。
现代文：祖父和父亲都位至大官。
English: Both his grandfather and father were high-ranking officials.

古文：鲁元敏而好学，宽和有雅度。
现代文：鲁元机敏好学，宽和而有高雅的度量。
English: Lu Yuan is quick-witted and eager to learn, with a broad and refined sense of proportion.

古文：太宗时，选为直郎。
现代文：太宗时，被选为直郎。
English: At the time of Emperor Taizong, he was selected as Nairo.

古文：以忠谨给侍东宫，恭勤尽节，世祖亲爱之。
现代文：以忠诚谨慎侍奉束宫，肃敬勤勉重义轻生，世祖亲近喜爱他。
English: He served Sokgong with loyalty and prudence, he was reverent, diligent, virtuous and frivolous, and he was loved by his ancestors.

古文：及即位，以为中书侍郎，拾遗左右，宠待弥深。而鲁元益加谨肃，世祖逾亲信之，内外大臣莫不敬惮焉。
现代文：及即位，任命他为中书侍郎，在身边补正缺点过失，恩遇更深，而鲁元更加谨慎恭肃，世祖更加亲近信赖他，内外大臣无不敬畏。
English: When he ascended to the throne, he appointed him as the attendant of the Chinese Academy of Letters, correcting the shortcomings and mistakes around him, and the favor was deeper, while Lu Yuan was more cautious and respectful, the patriarch was more intimate and trusted him, and the Minister of the Interior and the Minister of the Interior were all awe-inspiring.

古文：性多容纳，善与人交，好掩人之过，扬人之美，由是公卿咸亲附之。
现代文：为人宽容，善于交际，好掩饰他人的过失，称扬他人的长处，因此公卿都亲近依附他。
English: Tolerant and sociable, he was good at covering up the faults of others and praising their strengths, so the nobles were all close to him.

古文：鲁元以工书有文才，累迁中书监，领秘书事。
现代文：鲁元因工于书法，有写作才能，多次升任中书监，兼秘书职务。
English: Lu Yuan was promoted to the post of middle school librarian and secretary several times because of his skill in calligraphy and writing ability.

古文：赐爵襄城公，加散骑常侍、右将军。
现代文：赐爵襄城公，加授散骑常侍、右将军。
English: He was given the title of Lord of Xiangcheng, and the additional titles of Cavalryman, General of the Right.

古文：赐其父为信都侯。
现代文：赐他的父亲为信都侯。
English: Give his father the capital of faith.

古文：从征赫连昌。
现代文：跟从征讨赫连昌。
English: Followed by the conquest of Herenchang.

古文：世祖亲追击之，入其城门，鲁元随世祖出入。
现代文：世祖亲自追击他，进入他的城门，鲁元跟随世祖出入。
English: The ancestor personally chased him and entered his gate. Lu Yuan followed the ancestor in and out.

古文：是日，微鲁元，几至危殆。
现代文：这一天，没有鲁元，将遇到危险。
English: On this day, without Lu Yuan, we will be in danger.

古文：从征平凉，以功拜征北大将军，加侍中。
现代文：跟从征讨平凉，因功被任命为征北大将军，加授侍中。
English: Following the conquest of Pingliang, he was appointed as a general of the Northern Expeditionary Force for his meritorious service, and was additionally awarded the title of chamberlain.

古文：后迁太保、录尚书事。
现代文：后来升任太保、录尚书事。
English: Later, he was promoted to the position of Taiho and recorded in the records.

古文：世祖贵异之，常从征伐，出入卧内。
现代文：世祖特别看重他，经常跟从征伐，出入卧室。
English: The patriarch held him in high esteem and often accompanied him on campaigns and into and out of his bedroom.

古文：每有平殄，辄以功赏赐僮隶，前后数百人，布帛以万计。
现代文：每次有平定之功，总是赏赐奴仆，前后有几百人，布帛数以万计。
English: Every time there is a success in pacification, servants are always rewarded. There are hundreds of people in front and behind, and tens of thousands of cloth bags.

古文：世祖临幸其第，不出旬日。
现代文：世祖不过十天总要到他的府上一次。
English: The patriarch has to go to his residence once every ten days.

古文：欲其居近，易于往来，乃赐甲第于宫门南。
现代文：想要他的住宅近一些，便于往来，于是赏赐宫门南边的上等宅第。
English: He wanted his residence to be closer so that it would be easier to get to and from, so he was rewarded with a first-class residence on the south side of the palace gate.

古文：衣食车马，皆乘舆之副。
现代文：衣食车马仅次于皇帝。
English: Clothes, food, carriages and horses were second only to the emperor.

古文：真君三年冬，车驾幸阴山，鲁元以疾不从。
现代文：真君三年冬，皇上到阴山，鲁元因病没有随从。
English: In the winter of the third year of Mankun, the emperor went to Yinshan. Lu Yuan did not accompany him due to illness.

古文：侍臣问疾送医药，传驿相属于路。
现代文：侍臣探问疾病送医送药，驿站的车马沿途相继。
English: The courtier inquired about the disease, sent a doctor and medicine, and the cars and horses at the station came one after another along the way.

古文：及薨，世祖甚悼惜之。
现代文：及至逝世，世祖很为哀伤惋惜。
English: At the time of his death, he was very sad and regretful.

古文：还，临其丧，哭之哀恸。
现代文：返回后，亲临他的丧礼，哭得悲痛至极。
English: When she returned, she attended his funeral and wept bitterly.

古文：东西二宫命太官日送奠，晨昏哭临，讫则备奏钟鼓伎乐。
现代文：东西二宫派遣太官日曰送祭品，早晚到灵前吊祭，完毕就遍奏钟鼓乐舞。
English: The Eastern and Western Dynasties sent eunuchs to deliver offerings every day. In the morning and in the evening, they went to the spiritual hanging ceremony, and when it was over, they played the bell and drum music and dance.

古文：舆驾比葬三临之。
现代文：帝后在将要安葬时三次亲临丧礼。
English: The empress dowager attended the funeral three times when she was to be buried.

古文：丧礼依安城王故事，而赠送有加。
现代文：丧礼依照窒越王旧例，而赠送更多。
English: The funeral was held in accordance with the old custom of the King of Nian Yue, and more gifts were given.

古文：赠襄城王，谥曰孝。
现代文：被追赠为襄城王，谧号为孝。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of "King of Xiangcheng" and his posthumous name was "Xiang Xiao."

古文：葬于崞山，为建碑阙。
现代文：葬在崞山，为他建石碑石柱。
English: He was buried in Shaoshan, and a stone monument and stone pillar were built for him.

古文：自魏兴，贵臣恩宠，无与为比。
现代文：自北魏兴起，贵臣得到的优遇宠幸，没有能比得上的。
English: Since the rise of the Northern Wei Dynasty, the privileges and favors received by the noblemen have never been matched.

古文：子统袭爵。
现代文：儿子卢统继承爵位。
English: His son Lu Tong succeeded to the title.

古文：少子内，给侍东宫，恭宗深昵之，常与卧起同衣。
现代文：小儿子卢内，侍奉东宫，恭宗很亲近他，常与他同睡同起穿同样的衣服。
English: His youngest son, Lune, who served the East Palace, was very close to him, often sleeping with him and wearing the same clothes.

古文：父子有宠两宫，势倾天下。
现代文：父子得到皇上和太子的宠爱，权势压倒天下。
English: The father and son were favored by the emperor and the prince, and their power overwhelmed the world.

古文：内性宽厚，有父风，而恭顺不及。
现代文：卢内为人宽厚，有父亲的风范，而恭顺赶不上。
English: Lune is a generous person, with the demeanor of a father, while Kyo-Shun cannot keep up.

古文：正平初，宫臣伏诛，世祖以鲁元故，唯杀内而厚抚其兄弟。
现代文：正平初年，东宫臣僚被依法处死，世祖因鲁元的缘故，衹杀卢内而优厚地抚恤他的兄弟。
English: In the first year of Zhengping, a minister of the Eastern Court was executed according to the law. The ancestor, because of Lu Yuan, killed Lu Ne and generously supported his brother.

古文：统以父任，侍东宫。
现代文：卢统因父亲的保举，侍奉东宫。
English: Due to his father's patronage, Lu Tong served the East Palace.

古文：世祖以元舅阳平王杜超女、南安长公主所生妻之。
现代文：世祖把长舅屋王王拄超与南安长公主之女嫁给他。
English: The ancestor married the eldest uncle of the house, Wang Wang Yuchao, to the daughter of the eldest princess of Nan'an.

古文：车驾亲自临送，太官设供具，赐赍以千计。
现代文：皇上亲临送别，太官陈设酒食，赏赐数以千计。
English: The emperor himself came to see him off, the eunuchs set out food and drink, and thousands of gifts were given.

古文：高宗即位，典选部、主客二曹。
现代文：高宗即位，主持选部、主客二曹。
English: Gao Zong ascended the throne, presided over the selection committee, and was the second guest.

古文：兴安二年卒。
现代文：兴安二年去世。
English: Xing'an died two years later.

古文：赠襄城王，谥曰景。
现代文：被追赠为塞回迗，谧号为景。
English: He was posthumously awarded the posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous award.

古文：无子。
现代文：没有儿子。
English: Wang Jun has no son.

古文：弟弥娥，袭爵。
现代文：弟弟弥娥，继承爵位。
English: His younger brother, Yae, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：拜北镇都将。
现代文：被任命为北镇都将。
English: All of them will be appointed to the North Town.

古文：卒，赠襄城王，谥曰恭。
现代文：去世，被迫赠为襄城王，谧号为恭。
English: After his death, he was forced to be given the title of King of Xiangcheng, and his nickname was Yongxing.

古文：子兴仁袭爵。
现代文：儿子兴仁继承爵位。
English: His son, Heung-jin, succeeded to the title.

古文：陈建，代人也。
现代文：陈建，是代地人。
English: Chen Jian is a local representative.

古文：祖浑，太祖末为右卫将军。
现代文：祖父陈浑，太祖末年任右卫将军。
English: His grandfather, Chen Hun, was appointed to the post of General of the Right Division at the end of his grandfather's life.

古文：父阳，尚书。
现代文：父亲陈阳，任尚书。
English: Father Chen Yang, Ren Shangshu.

古文：建以善骑射，擢为三郎。
现代文：陈建因善于骑马射箭，被提升为三郎。
English: Chen Jian was promoted to Saburo because he was good at horse riding and archery.

古文：稍迁下大夫、内行长。
现代文：逐渐升任下大夫、内行长。
English: He was gradually promoted to junior doctor and head of internal affairs.

古文：世祖讨山胡白龙，意甚轻之，单将数十骑登山临险，每日如此。
现代文：世祖讨伐山胡人白龙，内心很轻视他，仅带领几十名骑兵登山临险，每天如此。
English: The ancestor of mountaineering, Hu Ren Bai Long, despised him in his heart, and only led dozens of cavalry to climb and take risks, like this every day.

古文：白龙乃伏壮士十余处，出于不意。世祖坠马，几至不测。
现代文：白龙于是在十几处埋伏勇士，事出意外，世祖堕马，几遇不测。
English: The White Dragon then ambushed the warriors in more than a dozen places, causing accidents, the ancestor falling off his horse, and several mishaps.

古文：建以身捍贼，大呼奋击，杀贼数人，身被十余创。
现代文：陈建冒死御贼，大声呼叫奋力攻击，杀贼人数名，身上受伤十多处。
English: Chen Jian risked his life to ward off the thieves, shouting loudly and attacking with all his might. He killed several of the thieves and was injured in more than ten places on his body.

古文：世祖壮之，赐户二十。
现代文：世祖赞许他，赏赐二十户
English: The patriarch praised him and rewarded him with twenty households

古文：高宗初，赐爵阜城侯，加冠军将军。
现代文：高宗初年，赐爵阜城侯，加授冠军将军。
English: In Gaozong's first year, he was given the title of Marquis of Fufu and the title of Champion General.

古文：出为幽州刺史，假秦郡公。
现代文：出任幽州刺史，假秦郡公。
English: He was appointed as the governor of Yuzhou County and the fake Qin County.

古文：高宗以建贪暴懦弱，遣使就州罚杖五十。
现代文：高宗因陈建贪婪暴虐懦弱，派使者到州中鞭挞五十。
English: Because of Chen Jian's greed, brutality and cowardice, Gaozong sent an envoy to Zhouzhong to flog him fifty times.

古文：高祖初，徵为尚书右仆射，加侍中，进爵赵郡公。
现代文：高祖初年，任尚书右仆射，加授侍中，升爵位为趟叠公。
English: In the first year of Gaozu, he was appointed as Shangshu's right-hand man, given the additional title of chamberlain, and was promoted to the peerage as Watarase no kimi.

古文：建与侍中尚书、晋阳侯元仙德，殿中尚书、长乐王穆亮，比部尚书、平原王陆叡密表曰： 皇天辅德，命集大魏。
现代文：速建与侍中尚书、置厘堡五工鲢，殿中尚书、长乐王穆亮，比部尚书、平原王陆壑秘密上表说：皇天匡辅仁德，天命降于大魏。
English: Quickly build and attendant Shangshu, set up five workmen's cottages, palace Shangshu, Changle King Mu Liang, Hibe Shangshu, Plains King Lu Yao secretly said on the table: Emperor Tiankuo is benevolent, and the fate of the world is down to Wei.

古文：臣等祖父翼赞初兴，勤过蜀汉，誓固山河，享兹景福，宠辱休戚，与国均焉。
现代文：我等祖辈父辈辅佐建国，致力超越蜀汉，立誓安定山河，享受洪福，荣辱休戚，与国相同。
English: Our ancestors assisted in the founding of the country, and we are committed to surpassing Shuhan, vowing to stabilize the mountains and rivers, enjoy prosperity, honor and disgrace, and be the same as the country.

古文：臣以凡近，识无远达，阶藉先宠，遂荷今任，彼己之讥，播于群口。
现代文：我因子庸浅薄，没有高远通达的见识，凭藉先辈的荣宠，才担任现今的官职，功德不称其位的讥讽，在众人日中传播。
English: I am shallow and shallow, I have no far-reaching insight, I only hold my current official position by virtue of the grace of my predecessors, and the ridicule that I am not worthy of my position is spread among the people day and night.

古文：仰感生成，俯自策厉，顾省驽钝，终于无益。
现代文：上感养育的恩德，下思自我策励，但是才能低下，终于无益。
English: The benevolence of the upbringing of the upper sense, the self-motivation of the lower sense, but the talent is low, and finally it is useless.

古文：然饮冰惊寐，实怀惭负。至于愿。天高地厚，何日忘之？
现代文：惶恐受命，确实断愧。至于报答天高地厚般的恩情，哪一天忘了呢。
English: I am truly humbled to have received the order with such trepidation. As for repaying such a generous act of kindness, what day will I forget?

古文：自永嘉之末，封豕横噬，马叡南据，奄有荆楚。
现代文：自永嘉末年，贪暴者残暴吞食，马敔占据南方，全部拥有型楚地区。
English: Since the end of the Yongjia Dynasty, the corrupt devoured with cruelty, and the horse and mule occupied the south, all of which belonged to the Chu region.

古文：及桓刘跋扈，祸难相继。
现代文：及但温型登跋扈，灾难相继。
English: And then the typhoons hit, and the disasters followed.

古文：岱宗隔望秩之敬，青徐限见德之风。
现代文：垡塞阻隔了遥祭山川的敬意，青徐地区阻隔了恩德教化。
English: Prevarication has blocked the reverence of the remote festival mountains and rivers, and the Qingxu region has blocked the Ende enlightenment.

古文：献文皇帝髫龀龙飞，道光率土，干戚暂舞，淮海从风，车书既同，华裔将一。
现代文：献文皇帝幼年即位，天下称颂圣德，干戚之舞初起，从淮水到海滨迅即响应，文物制度全都划一，国土将要统一。
English: Emperor Xianwen ascended the throne at a young age, the whole world praised the sanctity, the dance of the ancestors began from the beginning, from Huai Shui to the seashore quickly responded, the cultural relics system was all unified, and the country would be unified.

古文：昊天不吊，奄背万邦，窃闻刘昱天亡，权臣杀害，思正之民，翘想罔极。
现代文：昊天不哀悯庇佑，忽然背弃天下。听说刘昱夭亡，权臣相互杀害，思念正道的百姓，无穷无尽地盼望。
English: Hao Tian did not pity Fuxyou, but suddenly turned his back on the world. Hearing that Liu Bei had died young, and that high-ranking officials had killed each other, he thought about the righteous people and hoped endlessly.

古文：愚谓时不再来，机宜易失，毫分之差，致悔千里。
现代文：我以为时不再来，机会易失，差之毫厘，谬以千里。
English: I thought that time would never come again, that opportunities were easily lost, that a millimeter of difference was a thousand miles away.

古文：天与不取，反受其咎，所谓见而不作，过在介石者也。
现代文：天命所属而不取，反而遭受灾祸，所以不能见机而作。是操守坚贞的遇错。
English: It is a mistake of integrity to belong to the predestined destiny and not to accept it, but to suffer calamity instead, so that one cannot act opportunistically.

古文：宜简雄将，号令八方。
现代文：应当选拔杰出的将领，号令八方。
English: It is necessary to select outstanding generals and give orders to all sides.

古文：义阳王臣昶，深悟存亡，远同孙氏。
现代文：义阳王臣元昶深明存亡大事，远舆孙氏相同。
English: Yiyang Wangchen Yuanjun was deeply aware of the importance of survival and death, which is the same as the Sun Dynasty.

古文：苟历运响从，则吴会可定，脱事有难成，则振旅而返。
现代文：假使天象运行响应顺遂，那么吴会地区可以平定，如果事情难以成功，就整顿军队返回。
English: If the operation of the celestial body responds smoothly, then the Wuhui region can be pacified. If things are not successful, the army will be reorganized and returned.

古文：进可以扬义声于四海，退可以通德信于遐裔。
现代文：进可以向四海传扬德义的名声，退可以使恩德与威信通达边远地区。
English: Advance can spread the reputation of virtue and righteousness to the four seas, retreat can make Ende and prestige reach remote areas.

古文：宜乘之会，运钟今日。如合圣德，乞速施行。
现代文：应当乘这样的机会，现在就出兵，如果与皇上的决断一致，请求从速施行。
English: We should take advantage of this opportunity to send troops now, and if we agree with the emperor's decision, we should request that it be implemented immediately.

古文：脱忤天心，愿存臣表，徐观后验，赏罚随焉。 高祖嘉之。
现代文：如果舆皇上的思虑不一致，请存下我的奏表，慢慢地观察以后的效验，根据情况予以赏罚。高祖嘉许他。
English: If the emperor's thoughts are not consistent, please save my report card, slowly observe the subsequent effectiveness, and reward and punish according to the situation. Gaozu praised him.

古文：迁司徒，征西大将军，进爵魏郡王。
现代文：升任司徒、征西大将军，晋爵魏郡王。
English: He was promoted to the position of the tutor, the general of the Western Expedition, and the king of Wei County.

古文：高祖与文明太后频幸建第，赐建妻宴于后庭。
现代文：高祖与文明太后频频到陈建的府第，在后庭赐给陈建的妻子宴席。
English: Gao Zu and the Empress Dowager of Civilization frequently came to Chen Jian's residence and gave banquets to Chen Jian's wife in the backyard.

古文：太和九年薨。
现代文：太和九年逝世。
English: Taiwa died nine years later.

古文：子念，袭爵。
现代文：儿子念继承爵位。
English: His son, Nien, will inherit the title.

古文：为中山守，坐掠良人为御史中尉王显所弹。
现代文：任土山郡守，因掳掠百姓被御史中尉王题弹劾。
English: Appointed as the governor of Tsuchiyama County, he was impeached by Lieutenant Wang Qi for kidnapping and plundering people.

古文：遇赦，免。
现代文：遇上减免刑罚的韶令，被免罪。
English: In the case of a royal order to commute the sentence, he was exonerated.

古文：爵除。
现代文：爵位被废除。
English: Peerages abolished.

古文：万安国，代人也。
现代文：万安国，是代地人。
English: The country of Wan'an is a substitute for the local people.

古文：祖真，世为酋帅，恆率部民从世祖征伐，以功除平西将军、敦煌公，转骠骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：祖父万真，世袭为头领，经常率领部民跟从世祖征伐，因功被任命为平西将军、敦煌公，改任骠骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: Grandfather Wan Zhen, hereditary leader, often led his subordinates to follow the ancestor's conquest, and was appointed as the general of Pingxi and Dunhuang, and changed to the general of the cavalry and the three departments of Yidong.

古文：父振，尚高阳长公主，拜驸马都尉。
现代文：父亲万振，娶高阳长公主为妻，被授予驸马都尉。
English: His father, Wan Zhen, married the eldest princess of Gaoyang and was awarded the rank of lieutenant.

古文：迁散骑常侍、宁西将军、长安镇将，赐爵冯翊公。
现代文：升任散骑常侍、宁西将军、长安镇将，被赐给爵位为冯翊公。
English: He was promoted to straggler, Ningxi general, and Chang'an town general, and was given the title of Feng Yu Gong.

古文：安国少明敏，有姿貌。
现代文：安国年轻时聪明机敏，容貌美好。
English: When he was young, An Guo was smart and quick-witted, with a beautiful appearance.

古文：以国甥，复尚河南公主，拜驸马都尉。
现代文：作为皇帝的外甥，又娶河南公主为妻，被授予驸马都尉。
English: As the emperor's nephew, he married a Henan princess and was awarded the rank of lieutenant.

古文：迁散骑常侍。
现代文：升任散骑常侍。
English: Promoted to Sangetsu-no-Zenshi.

古文：显祖特亲宠之，与同卧起，为立第宅，赏赐至巨万。
现代文：显祖特别亲近喜欢他，与他同睡同起，给他建立宅第，赏赐数以万计。
English: Emperor Xianzu was particularly close to him, slept with him, built him a mansion, and rewarded him with tens of thousands of horses.

古文：超拜大司马，大将军，封安城王。
现代文：越级授予大司马、大将军，封安城王。
English: Higher ranks were awarded to Da Sima, Da Gen, and Feng An Cheng Wang.

古文：安国先与神部长奚买奴不平，承明初，矫诏杀买奴于苑中。
现代文：安国先前与神部长奚买奴不和，承明初年，假托诏令在苑中杀死买奴。
English: An Guo had previously been at odds with the Minister of Divinity, and in the first year of the Ming Dynasty, An Guo issued a fake edict to kill Buy Niu in the courtyard.

古文：高祖闻之，大怒，遂赐安国死。
现代文：高祖听说这事，很恼怒，于是赐安国自杀。
English: When Gaozu heard about this, he was very angry, so he committed suicide.

古文：年二十三。
现代文：终年二十三岁。
English: He was 23 years old.

古文：子翼，袭王爵。
现代文：儿子万翼继承王爵。
English: His son Wan Ying succeeds to the throne.

古文：太和十五年薨。
现代文：太和十五年逝世。
English: Taiwa died fifteen years later.

古文：高祖以其父受宠先朝，特赠并州刺史。
现代文：高祖因他的父亲受先帝的宠爱，特赠并州刺史。
English: Gao Zu, because his father was favored by the former emperor, was given a special gift of the state's history.

古文：子纂，字辅兴，袭，依例降为公。
现代文：儿子万籑，字辅兴，继承爵位，依照惯例降为公爵。
English: His son Wan Xuan, also known as Fu Xing, inherited the title and was demoted to Duke in accordance with the usual practice.

古文：世宗时，起家司徒仓曹参军。
现代文：世塞时，初入仕途任司徒仓曹参军。
English: At the time of World War II, he joined the army for the first time as Shituchang Cao.

古文：迁南秦平西府司马、护军长史，加右军将军。
现代文：升任直台平西府司马、护军长史，加授右军将军。
English: He was promoted to the post of Sima of Zhudaipingxi Prefecture, the chief of the escorting army, and was awarded the title of General of the Right Army.

古文：正光二年卒。
现代文：正光二年去世。
English: Masamitsu died two years later.

古文：赠假节、征虏将军、荆州刺史。
现代文：追赠为假节、征虏将军、型业刺史。
English: The follow-up gift is a fake festival, a conscripted general, and a history of the model industry.

古文：子金刚，袭。
现代文：儿子金刚，继承爵位。
English: His son, King Kong, inherits the title.

古文：武定末，开府祭酒。
现代文：武定末年，任开府祭酒。
English: At the end of Wuding's life, he was appointed as the brewer of Kaifu Festival Sake.

古文：齐受禅，爵例降。
现代文：北齐接受惮让，爵位依例下降。
English: If all accept Zen, the crown will fall as usual.

古文：有嵇拔者，世为纥奚部帅。
现代文：有个叫嵇拔的，世袭为纥奚部头领。
English: There is one called 拔, hereditary for crotch head collar.

古文：其父根，皇始初率众归魏。
现代文：他的父亲嵇根，皇始初年率领部众归顺北魏。
English: His father, He Rong, led the troops to surrender to the Northern Wei Dynasty in the first year of the reign.

古文：太祖嘉之。
现代文：太祖嘉许他。
English: His great-grandfather praised him.

古文：尚昭成女，生子拔，卒于尚书令。
现代文：娶昭成帝的女儿为妻，生儿子嵇拔，任尚书令时去世。
English: He married the daughter of Emperor Zhaocheng and had a son, Zhaba, but died while in office.

古文：拔尚华阴公主，生子敬。
现代文：嵇拔娶华阴公主为妻，生儿子嵇敬。
English: He married Princess Hua Yin and had a son, Yu Jing.

古文：元绍之逆也，主有功，超授敬大司马、大将军，封长乐王。
现代文：元绍谋逆时，公主有功，越级任命嵇敬为大司马、大将军，封长乐王。
English: When Yuan Shao conspired against Yuan Shao, the princess made a great contribution, and the higher ranks appointed Yu Jing as the grand steward, the general, and the king of Changle.

古文：薨。
现代文：逝世。
English: He died.

古文：子护，袭爵。
现代文：儿子嵇护，继承爵位。
English: His son, Shogo, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：拜外部大官。
现代文：任外都大官。
English: He became a high-ranking official outside of his post.

古文：太和中，诏以护年迈，既未致仕，令依旧养老之例。
现代文：太和年问，朝廷因嵇护年迈，既然没有退休，就命令依照年老闲居休养的旧例。
English: When asked about Taihe Nian, since the Imperial Court did not retire due to the protection of the elderly, they ordered to follow the old example of staying idle to recuperate.

古文：卒，子彦嗣。
现代文：去世，儿子嵇彦继承爵位。
English: He died, and his son, Yan Yan, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：根事迹遗落，故略附云。
现代文：嵇根的事迹散失，所以简单附载。
English: Hone's story is lost, so it's simply attached.

古文：史臣曰：王洛兒、车路头、卢鲁元、陈建，咸以诚至发衷，竭节危难，苟非志烈过人，亦何能以若此！
现代文：史臣曰：王洛兒、车路头、卢鲁元、陈建，都以发白内心的忠诚，在危难时刻能保全节操，如果不是德行过人，怎么能够这样!
English: Shichen said: Wang Lore, Che Lu Tou, Lu Lu Yuan, Chen Jian, are all loyal to the core, and can maintain discipline in times of crisis. If they are not virtuous, how can they do so!

古文：宜其生受恩遇，殁尽哀荣。
现代文：他们应当生受恩遇死尽哀荣。
English: They should live, die, and mourn.

古文：至如安国，贵宠异于数子哉！
现代文：至于安国，尊贵而受宠信与这几人不同。
English: As for An Guo, the honorable and beloved letter is different from these several people.

