古文：己卯七月初一至初三日抄书麓馆，亦无竟日之晴。
现代文：己卯年七月初一至初三日在山麓书馆抄书，也是无整夭的晴夭。
English: From the first day of the month of July to the third day of the month of July, I copied books at the library at the foot of the mountain. It was also unusually sunny.

古文：先是俞禹锡有仆还乡，请为余带家报家信。
现代文：这之前俞禹锡有仆人回家乡，请为我带家信。
English: Before this, Yu Yuxi had a servant go back to his hometown. Please bring me a letter from home.

古文：余念浮沉之身，恐家人已认为无定河边物，若书至家中，知身犹在，又恐身反不在也，乃作书辞告诉之。
现代文：我考虑自己浮沉不定之身，担心家里人已认为是无定河边的人，如果信到家中，知道我还在，又担心我反而不在了，便写了信辞谢他。
English: I considered myself a floating and uncertain body, worried that my family had already thought of me as a person on the edge of an uncertain river. If the letter arrived at home, knowing that I was still there, but worried that I was no longer there, I wrote a letter to thank him.

古文：至是晚间不眠，仍作一书，拟明日寄之。
现代文：到这天晚上睡不着，仍写了一封信，打算明天寄给他。
English: That night, unable to sleep, I still wrote a letter, intending to send it to him the next day.

古文：初四日送所寄家书至俞馆，而俞往南城吴氏园。
现代文：初四日送要寄的家信到俞禹锡的书馆，但俞禹锡去了城南的吴家花园。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, the family letter to be sent was sent to the library of Gong Yuxi, but Gong Yuxi went to the Wujia Garden in the south of the city.

古文：余将返，其童子导余同往。
现代文：我将返回去，他的书童领我一同前去。
English: I'll go back, and his book boy will take me with him.

古文：过南关而西，一里，从南城北入其园。
现代文：过了南关往西走，一里，从城南向北进入那园子。
English: After passing the south gate, walk west for one mile, and enter the garden from the south of the city to the north.

古文：有池有桥，有亭在池中。
现代文：园中有池子有小桥，有亭子在水池中。
English: In the garden, there is a pond, a small bridge, and a pavilion in the pond.

古文：主人年甚少，昆仲二人，一见即留酌亭中。
现代文：主人年纪很轻，兄弟二人，一见面就留我在亭中饮酒。
English: The owner was very young, two brothers, and as soon as they met, they let me drink in the pavilion.

古文：麟征以乡荐，初作教毗陵，升南部，故与俞遇，今任四川建昌道矣。
现代文：傍晚与禹锡一同辞别。这才知道二位主人就是吴麟征之子，新近从四川父亲任所归来。
English: In the evening, they bid farewell to Yu Xi together. It was only then that they learned that the two owners were the sons of Wu Lin Zheng, who had recently returned from his father's post in Sichuan.

古文：初五日又绝粮。
现代文：初五日又断粮。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, they went without food again.

古文：余作中寄潘莲华，复省中吴方生，潘父子以初八日赴公车。
现代文：我写信寄给潘莲华，回复省城中的吴方生，并且与潘莲华要粮。
English: I wrote a letter to Pan Lianhua, replying to Wu Fangsheng in the provincial capital, and asked Pan Lianhua for grain.

古文：且与潘索粮。不及待，往拜吴氏昆仲，不遇，即乘霁出龙泉门，为乾海子之游。
现代文：来不及等待，前去拜见吴家兄弟，没遇上，立即乘天放晴走出龙泉门，去乾海子游览。
English: Too late to wait, I went to visit the brothers of the Wu family. When I did not meet them, I immediately took advantage of the sunny weather to go out of the Longquan Gate to visit the Qianhai Lake.

古文：由九龙池左循北坡西向上，一里，出寺后，南瞰峡中马家园，即前日闪太史宴余其中者，昔为马业，今售闪氏矣。
现代文：由九隆池左边沿北坡向西上爬，一里，到寺后，往南俯瞰峡中的马家园，就是前几天闪太史在其中宴请我的地方，从前是马家的产业，如今卖给闪家了。
English: From the left side of the Jiulong Pond, climb westward along the north slope for one mile. After reaching the temple, look south over the horse homestead in the gorge. This is the place where Sheng Taishi invited me to a banquet a few days ago. It used to be the property of the horse family, but now it has been sold to the Sheng family.

古文：从此益西向上，一里，瞰其北峡，乃太保新城所环其上者，乃知其西即宝盖山之顶，今循其南冈而上也。
现代文：从此再向西上走，一里，俯瞰它的北峡，就是太保山新城环绕在它上面的地方，才知道它西面就是宝盖山的山顶，今天是沿着它的南冈上登。
English: From then on, I walked westward, one mile, overlooking its northern gorge, that is, the place where Taiboshan New Town is surrounded by it, only to know that it is the top of Baogaishan in the west, and today I climbed up along its south hill.

古文：又迤逦上者三里，始随南峡盘坡入。
现代文：又透邀上登三里，开始沿南峡绕着山坡进去。
English: Again, I was invited to climb three miles and began to walk around the hillside along the South Gorge.

古文：二里，路北之树木，森郁而上，路南之树木，又森郁而下，各有庄舍于其中。
现代文：二里，路北的树木，森然茂密地在上方，路南的树木，又森然茂密地在下方，各有村庄农舍在林中。
English: For two miles, the trees on the north side of the road are densely overgrown above, and the trees on the south side of the road are densely overgrown below, each with villages and farmhouses in the forest.

古文：其北者为薛庄，其南者为马庄，其树皆梨柿诸果。
现代文：那北面的是薛庄，那南边的是马庄，那些树都是梨、柿各种果树。
English: To the north is Xue Zhuang, to the south is Ma Zhuang, those trees are all pears, persimmons and various fruit trees.

古文：余夙闻马元中有兄居此，元中嘱余往游，且云： 家兄已相候久矣。 至是问主人，已归城，庄虚无人。
现代文：我过去听说马元中有兄长居住在此，元中嘱咐我去游一游，并说： 家兄已相等很久了。 到了这里打听主人，已归回城中，庄中空无一人。
English: In the past, I heard that one of Ma Yuan's brothers lived here. He told me to take a tour and said, "My brother has been waiting for me for a long time. When I came here to inquire about the owner, he had already returned to the city, and there was no one in the village.

古文：时日甫上午，遂从其后趋干海子道。
现代文：此时日光刚是上午，就从庄后走向去乾海子的路。
English: At this time, Nikko was just in the morning, walking from Shouhou to the road to Qianhaizi.

古文：其处峰稍南曲，其下峡中有深涧，自西北环夹东出，水声骤沸，即马家园绾九隆南坞之上流也。
现代文：此处山峰稍向南曲，山下峡中有深涧，自西北环绕夹谷往东流出去，水声急骤沸腾，这就是马家园束住九隆池南坞的上游了。
English: Here, the mountain peaks curve slightly to the south, there is a deep ravine in the lower gorge of the mountain, flowing from the northwest around the valley to the east, and the water sound suddenly boils, which is the upper reaches of the south dock of the Ma Jia Jia Jie.

古文：此处腾涌涧中，外至坞口，遂伏流不见。
现代文：此处腾涌的山涧中，外流到山坞口，便成伏流看不见了。
English: Here, among the towering mountains, the outflow flows to the mouth of the dock, and then becomes an undercurrent.

古文：南溢而下泛者，为马园内池；北溢而下泛者，为九隆泉池，皆此水之伏而再出者也。
现代文：往南溢出向下漫流的，成为马家园的内池；往北溢出向下漫流的，成为九隆泉池水，都是此条涧水伏流后再度流出形成的。
English: The water that overflowed to the south and flowed down became the inner pool of Ma Jia Jia; the water that overflowed to the north and flowed down became the water of Jiulong Spring. All of them were formed by the undercurrent of this salty water flowing out again.

古文：于是循涧北崖盘坡而上，一里，北折入峡。
现代文：于是沿山涧北面的山崖绕着山坡上走，一里，向北折入峡中。
English: So I walked along the cliff to the north of the ridge, around the hillside, one mile, and turned north into the gorge.

古文：二里，稍下就涧行。
现代文：二里，稍向下沿着山涧行。
English: Go two miles, slightly downhill, along the ridge.

古文：其处东西崖石夹峙，水腾跃其中，路随之而上，盖已披宝盖山之西麓矣。
现代文：此处东西石崖夹峙，水流腾跃在其中乡路顺着涧水上行，大概已穿越到宝盖山的西麓了。
English: Here, the east and west cliffs face each other, and the water flows along the middle of the township road, upstream, and has probably passed through to the western foot of Bao Gai Mountain.

古文：或涉水西，或涉水东，或涉水中而上。
现代文：有时涉到水西，有时涉到水东，有时涉水上走。
English: Sometimes wading to the west of the water, sometimes wading to the east of the water, sometimes wading upstream.

古文：北五里，渐西，其溪分两道来。
现代文：往北五里，渐渐向西，这里溪水分为两道流来。
English: Five miles to the north, gradually westward, here the stream is divided into two streams.

古文：由其中蹑岭西北上，始望见由此而北，分峡东下者，为宝盖之脊，又东下而为太保；由此而南，分峡东下者，为九隆南山之脊，又东下为九隆冈。
现代文：由两条溪流中间登岭向西北上去，才望见由此往北，分出峡谷往东下延的，是宝盖山的山脊，又向东下延成为太保山；由此往南，分出峡谷向东下延的，是九隆南山的山脊，又向东下延成为九隆冈。
English: From the middle of the two streams, ascend the ridge to the northwest, only to see the ridge of Bao Gai Mountain extending northward from there, branching out of the canyon to the east, and extending eastward to become Taibo Mountain; from there to the south, branching out of the canyon to the east, is the ridge of South Mountain of Jiulong, and extending eastward to become Jiulong Hill.

古文：此其中垂之短支，蹑之迤逦上，五里始西越其脊。
现代文：此地是两者中间下垂的短支脉，踩着它透巡上登，五里才向西越过它的山脊。
English: Here is a short branch that hangs down in the middle of the two, stepping on it to climb up, five miles to the west over its ridge.

古文：下瞰脊西有峡下绕甚深，水流其中沸甚，此即沙河之上流也。
现代文：下瞰山脊西面有峡谷在下方盘绕，非常深，水流在峡中沸腾，这就是沙河的上游了。
English: Looking down the west side of the ridge, there is a canyon winding below, very deep, and the water is boiling in the canyon. This is the upper reaches of the Sand River.

古文：其西又有山一重横夹之，乃为南下牛角关之脊，而此脊犹东向之旁支也。
现代文：峡谷西边又有一重山横亘夹住它，那是南下牛角关的山脊，而此处的山脊还只是向东延的旁支。
English: On the west side of the canyon, there is another mountain clinging to it. It is the ridge of Niu Jiao Guan to the south, while the ridge here is only a branch to the east.

古文：循北崖西行三里余，始西南坠壑下。
现代文：沿北边的山崖往西行三里多，开始向西南坠下壑谷。
English: Along the cliff in the north, I walked westward for more than three miles and began to fall southwest down Shibuya.

古文：下又三里余，始抵溪之东岸。
现代文：又下走三里多，才抵达溪流的东岸。
English: It was another three miles downhill before we reached the east bank of the stream.

古文：两崖夹溪之石甚突兀，溪流逗石底而下，层叠腾涌，而蒙箐笼罩之，如玉龙踊跃于青丝步障中，《志》所谓溜钟滩，岂即此耶？
现代文：两岸山崖夹住溪流的岩石极其突兀，溪流欢快地从岩石底往下流，层层叠叠，翻腾汹涌，而蒙密的竹林笼罩着溪流，如玉龙腾踊跳跃在青丝帷帐之中，志书所说的溜钟滩，莫非就是此地吗？
English: The rocks between the cliffs on both sides of the river are extremely jagged. The river flows cheerfully from the bottom of the rock, layer upon layer, churning furiously, while the dense bamboo forest envelops the stream, like a jade dragon dancing and jumping in the midst of the blue silk curtains. Isn't this the bell beach mentioned in the book?

古文：路缘东崖下，北溯溪，有小洞倚崖，西瞰溪流。
现代文：路沿着东面的山崖下走，向北溯溪行，有个小山洞依傍着山崖，向西俯瞰着溪流。
English: There is a small cave next to the cliff overlooking the stream to the west.

古文：入坐其间，水乳滴沥，如贯珠下。
现代文：进去坐在洞中，钟乳石上水珠下滴，如串珠样下落。
English: Go in and sit in the cave, the stalactites drip with water droplets, falling like beads.

古文：出，复北溯溪三里，有木桥跨而西。
现代文：出洞，再向北溯溪走三里，有座木桥跨到溪西。
English: Out of the cave, then walk three miles north along the stream, there is a wooden bridge across to the west of the stream.

古文：度其西上岭，遂与沙河上流别。
现代文：越到溪水西岸上岭，终于与沙河上游分别。
English: After crossing to the upper ridge on the west bank of the stream, it was finally separated from the upper reaches of the Sand River.

古文：三里，登南度之脊。
现代文：三里，登上往南延伸的山脊。
English: For three miles, climb the ridge that stretches south.

古文：其脊中低，南北皆高，南即牛角关之脉，北高处为虎坡，乃从西北度脉而来者。
现代文：此脊中间低南北都高，南面就是牛角关的山脉，北面高的地方是虎坡，是从西北的山脉延伸而来的。
English: The middle of this ridge is high in both the north and south, the south side is the mountains of Niu Jiao Guan, and the north side is high in the tiger slope, extending from the northwest mountains.

古文：路逆溯之，循北岭东坡而上，又二里，从岭北西向穿坳，是为虎坡。
现代文：路逆向迎着山势走，沿北岭的东坡上走，又是二里，从岭北向西穿过山坳，这是虎坡。
English: The road goes in the opposite direction against the mountain trend, along the eastern slope of the North Ridge, it is another two miles, from the north of the ridge to the west through the mountains, this is the tiger slope.

古文：此坡由北冲东蒲蛮寨岭度脊西南下，绕为北冲南峰，南向逶迤，东坠沙河之源，西环干海子之坞，南过此岭，稍伏而南耸牛角关。
现代文：此坡由北冲东边的蒲蛮寨岭山脊向西南下延，回绕成北冲的南峰，向南道巡而去，东面坠到沙河的源头处，西面环绕成乾海子所在的山坞，南面延过此岭，略微低伏后在南边耸为牛角关。
English: This slope descends from the ridge of Puan Zhai Ridge on the east side of Beichong to the southwest, turns around to become the southern peak of Beichong, and travels to the south, falling to the source of the Sand River on the east side, surrounding the dock where Qian Haizi is located on the west side, extending over this ridge on the south side, and rising to the south as Niu Jiao Guan after being slightly depressed.

古文：又伏而度脉，分支西北掉尾者，为蒲缥西岭；正支东峙松子山，绕石甸东而南尽于姚关者也。
现代文：又有低伏延伸的山脉，分支往西北掉转尾部的，是蒲缥的西岭；正支在东方耸峙为松子山，绕到石甸东面后在南边的姚关到了尽头。
English: There are also low-lying extended mountains, branching to the northwest and turning around the tail, is the west ridge of the Po Lou; the main branch rises in the east as the Pine Mountain, and after going around the east side of the Shidian, Yao Guan in the south comes to an end.

古文：过坳西即有坑西坠，路循北坡西北行，五里西下，行峡中。
现代文：过到山坳西边马上有坑谷坠下西面，路沿北坡往西北行，向西下走五里，走在峡中。
English: After passing the west side of the ridge, there is a valley immediately to the west. The road runs along the north slope to the northwest, five miles to the west, and walks in the gorge.

古文：溯流蹑涧，三里，再逾岭。
现代文：溯水流踩山涧，走三里，再次越岭。
English: Following the water current, I stepped on the ridge, walked three miles, and crossed the ridge again.

古文：又三里，出岭西。始见西南下壑稍开，有西峡自北而南，与南峡合而西去，有茅数龛嵌峡底，曰锣鼓寨。
现代文：又三里，到岭西，这才见西南方下面的壑谷稍微开阔了些，西边有峡谷自北向南，与南峡会合后往西延去，有茅屋数间深嵌在峡底，叫锣鼓寨。
English: Three more miles, to the west of the ridge, I saw that the valley below the southwest was slightly wider. On the west side, there was a canyon from north to south, extending to the west after meeting with the South Gorge. There were several huts deeply embedded in the bottom of the canyon, called Gongguzhai.

古文：皆儸儸之居。于是盘东坡北向，而转溯西峡之上行。
现代文：从这里绕着东坡向北走，而后转到西峡之上逆向走。
English: From here, walk around the east slope to the north, and then turn to the west gorge and walk in the opposite direction.

古文：盖西峡有山自北坳分支南亘，环于东界之西，路由其中直披北坳而入。
现代文：西峡有山自北面的山坳分支往南绵亘，环绕在东面一列山的西边，路由其中一直穿过北面的山坳进去。
English: There are mountains in the West Gorge that stretch from the branch of the hawthorn in the north to the south, encircling the west side of a line of mountains in the east, the route of which goes all the way through the hawthorn in the north.

古文：三里，涉北来小水，遂西盘其坳脊。
现代文：三里，涉过北来的小溪，于是向西盘绕这里的坳脊。
English: For three miles, I waded through the stream coming from the north, and then wound around the ridge here to the west.

古文：二里，出坳西，其西南盘壑复下开，而路乃北向蹑岭，曲折西北，盘之而升，三里余，登岭头。
现代文：二里，走到山坳西边，它的西南盘绕的壑谷又在下方张开，而路于是向北登岭，往西北曲折而行，绕着山岭上升，三里多，登到岭头。
English: After two miles, I reached the western side of the ridge, and its southwest winding valley opened below, and the road then went north to the ridge, zigzagged northwest, and went up around the ridge, more than three miles, and climbed to the ridge head.

古文：盖此岭从虎坡北干海子东分支西突，又西度为大寨西峰，西北横亘于大寨、玛瑙山之间，此其东下之岭也；其北为崇脊，其南为层壑。
现代文：此岭从虎坡北面的乾海子东边分支往西突，又向西延伸为大寨西峰，往西北横亘在大寨与玛瑙山之间，这里是它往东下延的山岭；它北面是高大的山脊，它南边是层层壑谷。
English: This ridge branches from the eastern edge of the Qianhaizi north of the tiger slope to the west, and extends to the west as the Dazhai West Peak. It extends to the northwest between the Dazhai and the Manaowan Mountains. Here is the ridge it extends to the east; it is a high ridge to the north, and it is a layered valley to the south.

古文：遥望数十家倚西亘横峰下，即大寨也。
现代文：远远望见有数十家紧靠在向西横亘的山峰下，那就是大寨了。
English: In the distance, dozens of houses can be seen nestled under the mountain peaks stretching westward. That's Dazhai.

古文：于是西南盘层壑之上，二里，越冈西下，又二里，西南下至坞间。
现代文：于是往西南盘绕在层层壑谷之上，二里，越过山冈向西下山，又走二里，向西南下到坞中。
English: So I wound my way south-west over the valley of reeds, two miles, over the hills and down the mountain to the west, and walked another two miles, south-west to the dock.

古文：涉北来小峡，又西上半里，是为大寨。
现代文：涉过北来的小峡谷，又向西上走半里，这是大寨。
English: After wading through a small canyon to the north and walking half a mile to the west, this is Dazhai.

古文：所居皆茅，但不架栏，亦儸儸之种。
现代文：居民住的全是茅屋，但不架楼，也是锣锣一类的民族。
English: The inhabitants live entirely in thatched cottages, but not in buildings. They are also a nomadic people.

古文：俗皆勤苦垦山，五鼓辄起，昏黑乃归，所垦皆硗ｑｉāｏ瘠坚硬平瘠之地，仅种燕麦、蒿麦而已，无稻田也。
现代文：民俗全是勤苦垦山，五更便起床，昏黑才归家，所垦种的都是痔薄的山地，仅能种植燕麦、嵩麦而已，没有稻田。
English: The folk customs are all about working hard to cultivate the mountains, getting up at five in the morning and returning home in the dark. The cultivated land is thin and mountainous, and can only grow oats and buckwheat. There are no rice paddies.

古文：余初买米装贮，为入山之具，而顾仆竟不之携，至是寨中俱不稻食。
现代文：我起初买来米装好贮存起来，为进山做准备，可顾仆居然不带上它，到了这里寨子中都不吃稻米。
English: At first, I bought rice, packed it and stored it in preparation for going into the mountains, but my servant didn't take it with him, and when he got here, he wouldn't eat rice in the stockade.

古文：煮大麦为饭，强啮之而卧。
现代文：煮大麦当饭，勉强嚼了些睡下。
English: Cooked a barley pancake, barely chewed some and went to sleep.

古文：初六日天色阴沉。
现代文：初六日天色阴沉。
English: On the sixth day of the first month, the sky was gloomy.

古文：饭麦。
现代文：吃了麦饭。
English: He ate the barley rice.

古文：由大寨后西涉一小峡，即西上坡。
现代文：由大寨后向西涉过一条小峡谷，立即向西上坡。
English: After leaving Dazhai, I waded through a small canyon to the west and immediately headed west uphill.

古文：半里，循西山北向而升。
现代文：半里，沿西山向北上升。
English: Half a mile, climbing north along the West Mountain.

古文：二里，坡东之峡，骈束如门，门以内水犹南流，而坡峡俱平，遂行峡中。
现代文：二里，坡东的峡谷，并列紧束如门一样，门以内水仍往南流，而山坡峡谷都很平缓，便行走在峡中。
English: Erli, the canyon on the eastern slope, is lined up tightly like a gate. The water still flows southward inside the gate, but the mountain canyons are very flat, so you walk in the canyon.

古文：又北一里，有岐逾西山之脊，是为玛瑙坡道。
现代文：又向北一里，有岔路越过西山的山脊，这是去玛瑙坡的路。
English: Another mile to the north, there is a fork in the road over the ridge of the West Mountain, which is the road to the onyx slope.

古文：余时欲穷干海子，从峡中直北行，径渐翳，水渐缩。
现代文：我此时想去探究乾海子，从峡中一直往北行，小径渐渐被遮蔽，水流渐渐缩小。
English: At this time I wanted to explore the dry sea, from the canyon all the way to the north, the path was gradually obscured, and the water flow gradually shrank.

古文：一里，峡中累累为环珠小阜，即度脉而为南亘西山，此其平脊也。
现代文：一里，峡中层层累累变为圆珠状的小阜，就是成为往南绵亘的西山延伸而过的山脉，此处是它平缓的山脊。
English: For a mile, Kofu, which has accumulated into a ball in the middle of the gorge, is the mountain range that has become the Xishan stretching southward. Here is its gentle ridge.

古文：半里过北，即有坑北下。
现代文：半里翻过北边，马上有坑谷往北下延。
English: Half a mile to the north, there is a valley stretching northwards.

古文：由坑东循大山西北行，又一里而见西壑下嵌，中圆如围城，而底甚平，即干海子矣。
现代文：由坑谷东边沿大山往西北行，又走一里后见西边的壑谷下嵌，中间圆得如环绕的城墙，但谷底非常平坦，这是乾海子了。
English: From the east side of the valley, walk along the big mountain to the northwest, and after walking for another mile, you will see the west side of the valley embedded. The middle is round like a city wall, but the bottom of the valley is very flat. This is a dry sea.

古文：路从东山西向，环海子之北，一里，乃趁峡下。
现代文：路从东山向西走，环绕到海子的北边，一里，于是急速赶到峡下。
English: The road went from the east mountain to the west, around to the north side of the sea, one mile, and then quickly reached the gorge.

古文：东山即虎坡大脊之脉，有岐东向，逾脊为新开青江坝道，入郡为近。
现代文：东山就是虎坡大脊的山脉，有岔路通向东，越过山脊是去新建的青江坝的路，是进府城的近路。
English: Dongshan is the mountain range of the tiger slope ridge. There is a forked road leading to the east. Crossing the ridge is the road to the newly built Qingjiang Dam, and is a shortcut to the capital city.

古文：南下半里，抵海子之北，即有泉一圆在北麓间，水淙淙由此成流出。
现代文：向南下走半里，抵达海子的北边，就有一眼泉水在北面山麓间，泉水涂涂由此流淌出。
English: Walk half a mile to the south, and when you reach the north side of the sea, there is a spring of water between the foothills of the mountain to the north, from which the spring water flows.

古文：其东西麓间，俱有茅倚坡临海而居，而西坡为盛。
现代文：海子东西山麓上，都有茅屋背靠山坡前临海子居住，而西坡上的最为兴盛。
English: On both the east and west sides of the foot of Mount Haizi, there are thatched cottages with their backs against the mountain slope and their fronts facing the sea, and the ones on the western slope are the most prosperous.

古文：又半里，循麓而入西麓之茅。
现代文：又走半里，沿山麓进入西麓上的茅屋。
English: Walk another half-mile, along the foot of the mountain, into a thatched cottage on the western foot.

古文：其庐俱横重木于前，出入皆逾之。
现代文：这里的房屋全都在屋前横了重叠的木头，出人都要越过木头。
English: All the houses here have overlapping pieces of wood in front of them, and anyone who wants to get out has to go over the wood.

古文：其人皆不解汉语，见人辄去。
现代文：村里人都不懂汉语，见人就走开。
English: People in the village don't understand Chinese, they just walk away when they see someone.

古文：庐侧小溪之成流者，南流海子中。
现代文：房屋侧边的小溪成流的，往南流进海子中。
English: The stream on the side of the house flows south into the sea.

古文：海子大可千亩，中皆芜草青青。
现代文：海子大处约有千亩，其中全是青青的荒草。
English: Haizi has a large area of about one thousand mu, all of which is green grass.

古文：下乃草土浮结而成者，亦有溪流贯其间，第但不可耕艺，以其土不贮水。
现代文：地下是草和土漂浮结成的，也有溪水流贯其中，但只是不能耕种，因为这里的土不积水。
English: The underground is made up of floating grass and soil, and there are streams running through it, but it just can't be cultivated, because the soil here doesn't accumulate water.

古文：行者以足撼之，数丈内俱动，牛马之就水草者，只可在涯涘间，当其中央，驻久辄陷不能起，故居庐亦俱濒其四围，只垦坡布麦，而竟无就水为稻畦者。
现代文：走路的人用脚震动地下，数丈以内都会摇动，牛马就水草放牧的，只可在岸边，站在海子中央停久了，就下陷不能起来，所以居屋也全是濒临在海子的四周，只是垦种了山坡布满了麦子，而竟然没有近水垦为稻田的。
English: People walking on the ground shake the ground with their feet, which can shake within a few meters. Cattle and horses grazing on water plants can only graze on the shore. If they stand in the middle of the sea for a long time, they will sink and cannot get up. Therefore, the HOS is also all on the periphery of the sea, but the hillside planted with oats is full of wheat, and there are no rice paddies near the water.

古文：其东南有峡，乃两山环凑而成，水从此泄，路亦从此达玛瑙山，然不能径海中央而渡，必由西南沿坡湾而去。
现代文：它的东南方有峡谷，是两面的山环绕凑拢形成的，水从此处外泄，路也是从此处通达玛瑙山，但不能径直从海子中央横渡，必须由西南沿山坡山湾而去。
English: There is a canyon in the southeast of the lake, formed by the mountains on both sides of the lake coming together. Water leaks out from here. The road also leads to Mount Agate from here, but it is not possible to cross directly from the center of the lake, and it is necessary to go from the southwest along the slope of the bay.

古文：于是倚西崖南行一里余，有澄池一圆，在西崖下芜海中，其大径丈余，而圆如镜，澄莹甚深，亦谓之龙潭。
现代文：于是靠着西边的山崖往南行一里多，有一圆形清澄的水池在西边山崖下荒芜的海子中，池子大处直径有一丈多，而且圆得如像镜子，澄澈晶莹水非常深，也称之为龙潭。
English: So, leaning against the western cliff and going south for more than a mile, there is a round clear pool in the deserted sea under the western cliff. The large part of the pool is more than a meter in diameter, and it is round like a mirror. The clear crystal water is very deep, and it is also called Longtan.

古文：在平芜中而独不为芜翳，又何也？
现代文：池子在平坦的荒草中却唯独不被丛生的草遮蔽，这又是为何呢？
English: Why is it that a pool in the middle of a flat field of weeds is the only one not obscured by clumps of grass?

古文：又南一里，过西南隅茅舍，其庐亦多，有路西北逾山，云通后山去，不知何所。
现代文：又往南一里，经过西南隅的茅屋，此处房屋也很多，有路向西北翻山，说是通到后山去，不知是什么处所。
English: Another mile to the south, past the huts in the southwest corner, there are also many houses here, there is a road to the northwest over the mountain, said to lead to the back of the mountain, I don't know what place.

古文：其南转胁间，有水从石崖下出，流为小溪东注。
现代文：村南转到侧边，有水从石崖下流出，流成小溪往东流注。
English: The south of the village turned to the side, water flowed out from under the stone cliff and flowed into a stream to the east.

古文：余初狎之，欲从芜间涉此水，近水而芜土交陷，四旁摇动，遂复迂陟西湾，盘石崖之上，乃倚南山东向行。
现代文：我起初走近小溪，想从荒草中涉过此条溪水，接近水边荒草和土地就交相下陷，四旁摇动，于是又绕道上登西边的山湾，绕到石崖之上，就紧靠南山向东行。
English: At first, I approached the creek and wanted to wade through the weeds to cross this stream. When I got close to the water's edge, the weeds and the land intersected and swayed, so I took a detour to climb the mountain bay on the west side, go around the cliff, and go east close to Nanshan.

古文：一里余，有岐自东峡上，南逾山脊，为新开道，由此而出烂泥坝者。
现代文：一里多，有岔道自东峡中上来，往南越过山脊，是新开的道路，为由此去到烂泥坝的路。
English: For more than a kilometer, there is a new road coming up from the middle of the East Gorge and going south over the ridge. This is the road to the Rotten Mud Dam.

古文：余乃随坡而下东峡。
现代文：我于是顺山坡下到东峡中。
English: So I went down the mountain slope to the middle of the East Gorge.

古文：半里，则峡中横木为桥，其下水淙淙，北自海子菰ｇū茭白蒲峡甚逼仄，故一木航之，此水口之最为潆结者。
现代文：半里，就见峡中横木架为桥，桥下水涂涂流淌，自北边海子的菱白蒲草中流出来，冲破峡谷往南下坠 山峡非常狭窄，所以一根木头就能架桥过河，这是河口中最为潇徊盘结之处、
English: After half a mile, I saw that the crossbeams in the gorge were bridges, and the water under the bridge flowed and flowed, and flowed out of the honeysuckle on the north side of the sea, breaking through the canyon and falling southward. The canyon is very narrow, so a piece of wood can be bridged across the river. This is the most beautiful place in the estuary.

古文：其水南下，即为玛瑙山后夹中瀑布矣。
现代文：越到横架的木头东头，再上坡，半里，登上它的东冈，由山脊上往东南行。
English: Go over to the east end of the wooden crossbeam, then uphill, half a mile, climb its east ridge, and go southeast from the ridge.

古文：度横木东。复上坡，半里，陟其东冈，由脊上东南行。还顾海子之窝，嵌其西北；出峡之水，坠其西南；其下东南坞中，平坠甚深，中夹为箐，丛木重翳，而轰崖倒峡之声不绝。
现代文：回头看海子所在的山窝，嵌在它的西北；流出峡中的水，坠到它的西南；它下方东南的山坞中，平缓下坠得十分深，中间夹为山著，丛林重重遮蔽，而在山崖中轰鸣着倒入峡谷的水声不绝于耳。
English: Looking back, the mountain cave where Haizi is located is embedded in its northwest; the water flowing out of the canyon falls to its southwest; in the dockyard in the southeast below it, it slowly falls very deep, sandwiched between the mountains, the jungle is heavily sheltered, and the water roaring into the canyon in the cliffs is incessant.

古文：其前则东西两界山又伸臂交舒，辟峡南去，海子峡桥之水，屡悬崖泻箐中，南下西转而出罗明坝焉。
现代文：它前方就见东西两列山又伸开手臂交相展开，宽广的峡谷往南延去，海子峡中桥下之水，屡次高悬着从山崖上倾泻到山著中，往南下流向西转到罗明坝。
English: In front of it, you can see the two rows of mountains in the east and west stretching out their arms to meet each other, the wide canyon stretches to the south, and the water under the bridge in Haizi Gorge repeatedly overhangs from the cliff and pours into the mountains, flowing southward to the west to Roming Dam.

古文：于是循东山，瞰西峡，东南行一里余，转而南下。
现代文：于是沿东山，瞰西峡，往东南行一里多，转向南下走。
English: So I walked along Dongshan, overlooking the West Gorge, heading southeast for more than a mile, turning south.

古文：一里，有路逾东岭来，即大寨西来者，随之西南下坡。
现代文：一里，有路越过东岭而来，就是大寨往西来的路，顺此路往西南下坡。
English: For one mile, there is a road coming over Dongling, which is the road coming from Dazhai to the west, and it is downhill to the southwest along this road.

古文：半里，忽一庐踞坡，西向而居，其庐虽茅盖，而檐高牖爽，植木环之，不似大寨、海子诸茅舍。
现代文：半里，忽然一所房屋盘踞在坡上，向西而居，此屋虽是茅草盖顶，但屋檐高大窗户明亮，种了树环绕着屋子，不像大寨、海子各处的茅屋。
English: Half a mile away, all of a sudden, a house was perched on the slope, facing west. Although this house was thatched, the eaves were tall, the windows were bright, and trees were planted around the house, unlike the thatched houses in Dazhai and Haizi.

古文：姑入而问其地，则玛瑙山也。
现代文：姑且进屋打听这个地方，就是玛瑙山了。
English: If I were to go into the house and inquire about this place, it would be Mount Agate.

古文：一主人衣冠而出，揖而肃客，则马元康也。
现代文：一个房主人衣冠整洁地出来，作揖敬客，是马元康。
English: One of the owners of the house, neatly dressed and ready to welcome guests, is Ma Yuankang.

古文：余夙知有玛瑙山，以为杖履所经，亦可一寓目，而不知为马氏之居。
现代文：我过去知道有座玛瑙山，认为是扶杖漫步经过的地方，也可以看一下，却不知是马家的居住地。
English: I used to know that there was an agate mountain, which I thought was a place where I could walk with a cane, and I could look at it, but I didn't know it was the residence of the Ma family.

古文：其山皆马氏之业。元康一见即谛视曰： 即徐先生耶？ 
现代文：马元中曾给我说过他的兄长在等我，我以为就是九隆池后山的马家庄，却不知他家有玛瑙山的住房。元康一见面就审视着说： 是徐先生吗？ 
English: Ma Yuanzhong had told me that his brother Wang was waiting for me. I thought it was Ma Jia Zhuang in the mountains behind Jiulong Lake, but I didn't know that his family had a house on Manaowan Mountain. As soon as we met, Yuankang scrutinized and said: Is it Mr. Xu?

古文：问何以知之。
现代文：问他凭什么知道的。
English: Ask him how he knows.

古文：曰： 吾弟言之。
现代文：说： 我兄弟谈起过您。
English: He said, "My brother told me about you.

古文：余望之久矣！ 盖元中应试省中，先以书嘱元康者，乃玛瑙山，而非九隆后之马家庄也。
现代文：我盼望您很久了！ 原来元中到省里应试时，事先送信嘱咐去元康所住的地方，是玛瑙山，而不是九隆池后山的马家庄。
English: I've been looking forward to seeing you for a long time! It turns out that when Yuan Zhong came to the province to take the exam, he sent a letter in advance instructing him to go to the place where Yuan Kang lived, which was Manaowan Mountain, rather than Ma Jia Zhuang in the mountains behind Jiulong Pond.

古文：元康即为投辖比喻殷勤留客，割鸡为黍，见其二子。
现代文：元康立即挽留客人，杀鸡做饭，引见了他的两个儿子。
English: Yuan Kang immediately retained the guests, cooked chicken, and introduced his two sons.

古文：深山杳蔼之中，疑无人迹，而有此知己，如遇仙矣！
现代文：杳渺霭霭的深山之中，怀疑没有人迹，却有此等知己，如同遇见神仙了！
English: In the depths of the vast mountains, there is no trace of suspicion, but there are such confidants, it's like meeting a god!

古文：下午，从庐西下坡峡中，一里转北，下临峡流，上多危崖，藤树倒置，凿崖迸石，则玛瑙嵌其中焉。
现代文：下午，从房屋西边下坡到峡中，一里转向北，下临峡中的水流，上方有许多危崖，藤条树枝倒覆，凿裂石崖，就有玛瑙嵌在其中了。
English: In the afternoon, from the west side of the house downhill to the gorge, one mile turned to the north, the water flow in the lower gorge, there are many dangerous cliffs above, rattan branches overturned, chiseled cliff, there is agate embedded in it.

古文：其色有白有红，皆不甚大，仅如拳，此其蔓也。
现代文：玛瑙颜色有白有红，都不十分大，仅如拳头，这是玛瑙的矿脉延伸之处。
English: The color of the agate is white and red, both are not very large, only like a fist, which is the extension of the vein of the agate.

古文：坐玛瑙崖洞间，有覆若堂皇，有深若曲房，其上皆垂于虬枝，倒交横络，但有氤氲之气，已无斧凿之痕，不知其出自人工者。
现代文：顺矿脉深入，间或找得到结成瓜一样大的地方，大处如升，圆如球体，中间悬空为石矿坑，却不粘在岩石上。石矿坑中有水养护着它，石质明亮晶莹，坚硬细密，不同于平常的矿脉，这是玛瑙的上品，不可在突然间遇到，那些经常堆积着卖给人的，全是挖凿矿脉得到的。
English: Deep down along the vein, occasionally you can find a place as big as a melon, large as a rose, round as a sphere, suspended in the middle as a stone pit, but it does not stick to the rock. There is water in the stone pit to conserve it. The stone is bright and crystal, hard and fine. It is different from the usual vein. This is the top grade of agate. It should not be encountered suddenly. Those that are often piled up and sold to people are all obtained by digging the vein.

古文：元康命凿崖工人停捶，而垂箐觅树蛾一筐，乃菌之生于木上者，其色黄白，较木耳则有茎有枝，较鸡葼则非土而木，以是为异物而已。
现代文：此山从海子峡口的桥以东，往南环绕下延，这是它从西向北掉头之处，也就是大寨西山的西坡了。峡口下游高悬为三级瀑布，都是在深著回崖之间，虽然相距咫尺，只听得见水声，但树丛石崖环拥掩蔽，不能见到瀑布的踪影，何况是走到那地方呢？坐在玛瑙石崖洞中，有的下覆如厅堂，有的深似幽深的密室，它们的上方都垂挂着拳曲的枝条，倒着横着交缠在一起，只有氰氯之气，己无斧头凿子挖凿的痕迹，不再知它们是出自人工挖掘成的。
English: This mountain extends from the east of the bridge at the mouth of the Haizi Gorge, southward around it. This is where it turns from west to north, that is, the western slope of the Dazhai West Mountain. The lower reaches of the gorge are high-hanging three-level waterfalls. They are all between deep cliffs. Although they are only a few feet apart, only the sound of water can be heard, but the cliffs are surrounded by trees and rocks. It is impossible to see the traces of the waterfall. What's more, how did you get to that place? Sitting in the agate rock cliff cave, some of which are covered like a hall, and some of which are

古文：且谓余曰： 箐中三瀑，以最北者为胜。
现代文：元康命令凿右崖的工人停止捶打，去临近的山著中找来一筐树蛾，并告诉我说： 山著中的三级瀑布，以最北边的为最优美。
English: Yuan Kang ordered the workers chiseling the right cliff to stop beating, went to the nearby mountains to find a basket of moths, and told me: The three-level waterfall in the mountains is the most beautiful, with the northernmost one.

古文：为崖崩路绝，俱不得行。
现代文：因为山崖崩塌道路断绝，全然不能走。
English: Because the road was cut off by the collapse of the mountain cliff, we couldn't walk at all.

古文：当令仆人停凿芟道，异日乃可梯崖下瞰也。 
现代文：应当命令仆人停止凿矿，割草开道，他日就可登上山崖下瞰了。 
English: The servants should be ordered to stop digging the mine, cut the grass and open the road, and the next day they can climb the cliff and look down.

古文：因复上坡，至其庐前，乃指点四山，审其形势。
现代文：因此重新上坡，来到他的屋前，于是指点四面群山，审视周围的地形山势。
English: Therefore, I went uphill again, came to his house, then pointed out the mountains on all sides and examined the surrounding terrain.

古文：元康瀹茗命醴，备极山家清供，视隔宵麦饭粝口，不谓之仙不可也。
现代文：元康烧好茶，命令上酒，极尽了山间人家清素的山珍，看那隔夜糙口的麦饭，非说是神仙不可了。
English: Yuan Kang made good tea, ordered wine, and made the most of the mountain delicacies of the mountain people. Looking at the wheat rice that was rough overnight, it must be a god.

古文：初七日雨。
现代文：初七日下雨。
English: It rained for the first seven days.

古文：与元康为橘通 局 ，指围棋中之乐。
现代文：与元康下围棋作乐。
English: He played Go with Yuan Kang.

古文：棋子出云南，以永昌者为上，而久未见敌手。
现代文：棋子出产在云南，以永昌产的为上等，但长期未遇见敌手。
English: The pieces are produced in Yunnan, with the ones from Yongchang being the best, but they haven't met an opponent for a long time.

古文：元康为此中巨擘形容很在行，堪称第一，能以双先让。余遂对垒者竟日。
现代文：元康是棋局中的高手，能够以双子先让我。我于是与他对垒了一整天。
English: Yuan Kang was a master at chess and was able to get me to move first with the twins, so I played against him for the whole day.

古文：初八日晨饭，欲别而雨复至。
现代文：初八日早饭后，想告别但雨又来临。
English: After breakfast on the eighth day of the first month, I wanted to say goodbye, but the rain came again.

古文：主人复投辖布枰。
现代文：主人重又留客布局。
English: The host is also focusing on the layout of staying guests.

古文：下午雨霁，同其次君从庐右瞰溪。
现代文：下午雨停转晴，同他的次子从屋子右侧俯瞰溪流。
English: In the afternoon, when the rain stopped and the weather cleared, he and his second son stood on the right side of the house, overlooking the stream.

古文：悬树下，一里，得古洞，乃旧凿玛瑙而深入者，高四五尺，阔三尺，以巨木为桥圈，支架于下，若桥梁之巩，间尺余，辄支架之。
现代文：悬垂在树上下去、一里，见到古洞，是旧时挖凿玛瑙深入进去的洞，高四五尺，宽三尺，用巨树作为拱圈，支撑着架在下边，好似桥梁的拱券，间隔一尺多，就支撑着木头。
English: Hanging over the trees, one mile down, I saw an ancient cave. It was a hole dug deep into the earthenware in the old days. It was four or five feet high and three feet wide. A huge tree was used as an arch, supporting the lower side. It was like the arch of a bridge, with a distance of more than a foot, supporting the wood.

古文：其入甚深，有木朽而石压者，上透为明洞。
现代文：洞内进去非常深，有的地方木头腐朽后岩石压下来，上方穿通成为透亮光的洞。
English: It is very deep inside the cave, and in some places the wood has rotted and the rock has been pressed down, penetrating the top to become a brightly lit hole.

古文：余不入而下，仍悬树，一里坠涧底。
现代文：我未进去便下走，仍从树上往下坠，一里坠到涧底。
English: I went down before I got in, still falling from the tree, a mile to the bottom.

古文：其奔涌之势甚急，而挂瀑处俱在其上下峡中，各不得达，仍攀枝上。
现代文：涧水奔腾汹涌十分湍急，而瀑布悬挂之处都在这里上下的峡中，各处都不能到达，仍攀着树枝上登。
English: The rushing water is very rapid, and the waterfall hangs here and there in the gorge. You can't reach everywhere, but you can still climb up the branches.

古文：所攀之枝，皆结异形怪果，苔衣雾须，蒙茸于上。
现代文：所攀的树枝，都结着异形怪果，苔鲜地衣的雾状须根，毛茸茸地蒙在上面。
English: The branches they climb bear strange-shaped fruits, the misty roots of mossy lichens, furry on top.

古文：仍二里，还庐舍。
现代文：仍是二里，返回房舍。
English: It's still two miles, back to the house.

古文：元康更命其仆执殳前驱，令次君督率之，从向来路上。
现代文：元康再命令他的仆人执着兵器在前引路，命令次子监督率领着他们，从先前来的路上走。
English: Yuan Kang then ordered his servants to hold on to their weapons and lead the way, and ordered the second son, Guan, to lead them and walk from the previous path.

古文：二里，抵峡口桥东冈，坠崖斩箐，凿级而下。
现代文：二里，抵达峡口木桥的东冈，坠下石崖斩断竹丛，开凿台阶下走。
English: After two miles, we arrived at the east ridge of the wooden bridge at the mouth of the gorge, fell down the stone cliff, cut off the bamboo thicket, and walked down the steps.

古文：一里余，凭空及底，则峡中之水，倒侧下坠，两崖紧束之，其势甚壮，黔中白水之倾泻，无此之深；腾阳滴水之悬注，无此之巨。
现代文：一里多，凌空下到峡底，就见峡中之水，倒斜着下坠，两侧石崖紧束着水流，水势十分雄壮，贵州倾泻的白水河，无此处的深；腾阳高悬倾注的滴水河，无此处的大。
English: After flying more than a mile down to the bottom of the canyon, you can see the water in the canyon rising and falling obliquely. The stone cliffs on both sides are tightly bound with water flow. The water potential is very strong. The white water river pouring in Guizhou is nowhere deep; the dripping river pouring in Tengyang is nowhere large.

古文：势既高远，峡复逼仄，荡激怒狂，非复常性，散为碎沫，倒喷满壑，虽在数十丈之上，犹霏霏珠卷霰集。
现代文：水势既高远，峡谷又狭窄，激荡狂怒，不再是平常的性子，散为碎沫，倒喷在满壑谷中，虽然在数十丈之上，仍是霏霏然水珠飞卷雪珠聚集。
English: The water level is high and far, the canyon is narrow and furious, and it is no longer the usual nature. It is scattered into fragments and sprayed in the valley, although it is dozens of feet above, it is still a swarm of water droplets flying snow.

古文：滇中之瀑，当以此为第一，惜悬之九天，蔽之九渊，千百年莫之一睹，余非元康之力，虽过此无从寓目也。
现代文：云南的瀑布，应当以此为第一，可惜高悬在九天之上，九重深渊障蔽着它，千百年无人能见它一次，我要不是元康之力，即使路过此地也无从看到了。
English: Yunnan's waterfalls should take this as the first, but it is a pity that it hangs high above the nine heavens, the nine-layer abyss barrier covers it, and no one can see it once for thousands of years. If I were not the power of Yuan Kang, even if I passed by here, I would not be able to see it.

古文：返元康庐，挑灯夜酌，复为余言此中幽胜。
现代文：返回元康屋中，连夜挑灯饮酒，元康又给我讲说这一带幽奇的胜景。
English: Returning to the house of Yuan Kang, he stayed up all night lighting lamps and drinking alcohol. Yuan Kang then told me about the wonderful scenery in this area.

古文：其前峡下五里，有峡底桥；过之随峡南出，有水帘洞；溯峡北入，即三瀑之下层。
现代文：这里前方峡谷中下走五里，有座峡底桥；过桥顺峡谷往南出去，有个水帘洞；溯峡谷往北深入，就是三级瀑布的下层。
English: Here, walk five miles up and down the canyon, there is a bridge at the bottom of the canyon; cross the bridge and go south along the canyon, there is a water curtain hole; follow the canyon northward, it is the lower layer of the three-level waterfall.

古文：而水帘尤奇，但路閟难觅，明晨同往探之。
现代文：而水帘洞尤其奇异，但道路堵塞难以找到，明天早晨一同前去探洞。
English: And the curtain of water cave is particularly strange, but the road is blocked and difficult to find. Tomorrow morning, we will go to explore the cave.

古文：此近胜也。
现代文：这是近处的胜景。
English: This is one of the best views in the area.

古文：渡上江而西，有石城插天，倚雪山之东，人迹莫到，中夜闻鼓乐声，土人谓之鬼城。
现代文：越到上江西边，有处石城插入空中，紧靠雪山之东，人迹无法到达，半夜听得见鼓乐声，当地人称它是鬼城。
English: Further to the west of the upper river, there is a stone city inserted into the air, close to the east of the snow-capped mountains. No human footprints can be reached, and the sound of drums can be heard in the middle of the night. Locals call it a ghost city.

古文：此远胜也。
现代文：这是远处的胜景。
English: It's a beautiful view in the distance.

古文：上江之东，玛瑙之北，山环谷迸，中有悬崖，峰峦倒拔，石洞崡岈，是曰松坡，为其家庄。
现代文：上江之东，玛瑙山之北，山脉环绕峡谷迸裂，当中有处悬崖，峰峦倒拔，石洞深邃，那叫松坡，是他家的庄子。
English: To the east of the Shangjiang River, to the north of the Manaoshan Mountain, the mountains surround the canyon and split, among which there is a cliff, the peak is upside down, the stone cave is deep, that is called Songpo, it is the village of his family.

古文：其叔玉麓构阁青莲，在石之阿弯曲的角落，其人云亡，而季叔太麓今继栖迟游息，一日当联骑而往。
现代文：他叔父马玉麓建了座青莲阁，在石山的弯曲处，此人已仙逝，今天小叔马太麓继续隐居在此，隔一天将一同骑马前去。
English: His uncle, Ma Yulong, built a blue lotus pavilion. He passed away at the bend of the stone mountain. Today, his uncle, Ma Taiyun, continues to live in seclusion here. The next day, they will ride together.

古文：此中道之胜也。
现代文：这是年距离路途的胜景。
English: This is a spectacular view of the year-long journey.

古文：余闻之，既喜此中之多奇，又喜元康之能悉其奇，而余之得闻此奇也。
现代文：我听说这些话，既喜这一带奇景多，又喜元康能熟悉这些奇景，而我得以听说这些奇景。
English: When I heard these words, I was both pleased that there are so many wonders in this area, and pleased that Motokayasu was familiar with these wonders, and I was able to hear about these wonders.

古文：地主所在地的主人山灵，一时济美，中夜喜而不寐。
现代文：所在地的主人热情和山间的灵气，使我能碰到这样的美事，半夜高兴得睡不着觉。
English: The enthusiasm of the owner of the location and the aura of the mountains have allowed me to encounter such beauty that I can't sleep at night.

古文：初九日余晨起，欲为上江之游。
现代文：初九日我起床很迟，打算去游上江。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, I got up very late and planned to swim upstream.

古文：元康有二骑，一往前山未归，欲俟明日同行。
现代文：元康有两匹坐骑，一匹去前山未归来，他要我等坐骑回来明天一同走。
English: Yuan Kang has two horses. One of them went to the mountains and never came back. He wants me to wait for the horse to come back and go with him tomorrow.

古文：余谓游不必骑，亦不必同，惟指示之功，胜于追逐。
现代文：我认为游览不必骑马，也不必陪同，只要那指点之功，胜过追随。
English: I don't think it's necessary to go on a tour on horseback, or to be accompanied, as long as it's better to point than to follow.

古文：余之欲行者，正恐其同，其不欲同者，正虑其骑也。
现代文：我上路时，担心他陪同，主要是考虑那坐骑还未回来。
English: When I set out, I feared his company, chiefly because the horse had not yet returned.

古文：元康固留。
现代文：元康坚决挽留。
English: Yuan Kang resolutely held back.

古文：余曰， 俟返途过此，当再为一日停。 
现代文：我说： 等返回途中路过此地，将再停留一日。 
English: I said: I'll pass by here on my way back and stay another day.

古文：乃饭而下山。
现代文：于是吃饭后下山。
English: So after dinner we went down the mountain.

古文：元康命其幼子为水帘洞导。
现代文：元康命令他的小儿子给我导游水帘洞。
English: Yuan Kang ordered his young son to give me a guided tour of the Water Curtain Cave.

古文：于是西下者五里，及峡底，始与峡口桥下下流遇。
现代文：于是向西下走五里，到峡底，开始与峡口桥下水流的下游相遇。
English: So I walked five miles to the west, to the bottom of the gorge, and began to encounter the downstream of the water flow under the gorge bridge.

古文：盖历三瀑而北迂四窠崖之下，曲而至此，乃平流也，有桥跨其上。
现代文：原来流水经过三级瀑布后往北迂回到四案崖之下，弯曲到此地，是平缓的水流了，有桥跨在水上。
English: Originally, the water flowed through the three-level waterfall and then circled north to the bottom of the four-case cliff, curving to this place. It was a gentle flow of water, with a bridge across the water.

古文：度桥，西北盘右岭之嘴，为烂泥坝道。
现代文：过了桥，往西北绕过右岭的山嘴，是去烂泥坝的路。
English: After crossing the bridge and going northwest around the headland of the right ridge, it is the road to the Rotten Mud Dam.

古文：从桥左登左坡之半，其上平衍，有水一塘汇冈头，数十家倚南山而居，是为新安哨，与右岭盘坡之道隔峡相对也。
现代文：从桥左登到左侧山坡的半坡上，坡上平展开来，有一塘水积在冈头，数十家人背靠南山居住，这是新安哨，与右岭绕着山坡走的道路隔峡相对。
English: From the left side of the bridge to the half slope of the left side of the hillside, the slope is flat. There is a pond of water at the head of the hill. Dozens of families live with their backs to the Nanshan. This is the Xin'an sentry post, opposite the road that goes around the hillside of the right ridge.

古文：水帘洞在桥西南峡底，倚石岭之麓，幽閟深阻，绝无人行。
现代文：水帘洞在桥西南的峡底，依傍着右岭的山麓，幽寂隐秘，深邃阻隔，绝无人走。
English: The Water Curtain Cave is at the bottom of the canyon southwest of the bridge, next to the foothills of the right ridge. It is quiet and secluded, deeply cut off, and no one ever goes there.

古文：初随流觅之，傍右岭西南，行荒棘中，三里，不可得，其水渐且出峡，当前坳尖山之隩即奥矣。
现代文：起初随着流水去找它，傍着右岭往西南，行走在荒草荆棘中，三里，找不到，那水流渐渐快要出峡，位于前面山坳尖山的西南角了。
English: At first, I followed the flowing water to find it. I walked along the right ridge to the southwest, walking among the thorns and weeds. After three miles, I couldn't find it. Gradually, the stream was about to leave the gorge, and it was located in the southwest corner of the mountain ahead.

古文：乃复转，回环遍索，得之绝壁下，其去峡底桥不一里也，但无路影，深阻莫辨耳。
现代文：只得再转回来，周围四处寻找，在绝壁下找到它，它离峡底木桥不到一里，只是荒无路影，深草阻隔无法辨认罢了。
English: I had to turn back again, search around and find it under the cliff, it is less than a mile from the wooden bridge at the bottom of the gorge, it is just a desolate road shadow, the deep grass barrier is unrecognizable.

古文：其崖南向，前临溪流，削壁层累而上，高数丈。
现代文：这里的石崖向南，前临溪流，陡削的绝壁层层叠累而上，高数丈。
English: The stone cliffs here face south, with a stream in front and sheer cliffs piled up, several stories high.

古文：其上洞门崡岈，重覆叠缀，虽不甚深，而中皆旁通侧透，若飞甍复阁，檐牖相仍。
现代文：崖上洞口深邃，重重下覆层层下缀，虽不怎么深，但洞中全向侧旁穿通，好似飞檐楼阁，屋檐窗户互相重叠。
English: The cave mouth on the cliff is deep, with layers of cladding underneath. Although it is not very deep, it penetrates all the way to the sides of the cave, like a flying castle, with the windows of the eaves overlapping each other.

古文：有水散流于外，垂檐而下，自崖下望之，若溜之分悬，自洞中观之，若帘之外幕， 水帘 之名，最为宛肖。
现代文：有水散流在外，如垂下的屋檐飞流而下，自石崖下望它，如屋檐水分散悬落，从洞中观看它，似门帘的外幕， 水帘 的名字，最为逼真。
English: There is water scattered outside, like a drooping eaves flying down, looking at it from under the stone cliff, like eaves water scattered and hanging, watching it from the cave, like the curtain of the door, the name of the water curtain, the most realistic.

古文：洞石皆棂柱绸缪，缨幡垂飏，虽浅而得玲珑之致。
现代文：洞中的岩石全是窗权柱子的形状，互相缠绕，如缨络旗帜垂挂飘扬，洞虽浅却得到了玲珑小巧的情趣。
English: The rocks in the cave are all in the shape of window-right pillars, entwined with each other, hanging and fluttering like flags. Although the cave is shallow, it has a delicate and small charm.

古文：但旁无侧路可上，必由垂檐叠覆之级，冒溜冲波，以施攀跻，颇为不便。
现代文：只是旁侧无路可上，必须经由如下垂的屋檐处重叠下覆的台阶，冒着滴水冲着水波，才得以攀登上去，颇为不便。
English: However, there is no way up from the side, and it is quite inconvenient to have to climb up by way of the steps that overlap at the base of the sagging eaves, braving the dripping water and the waves.

古文：若从其侧架梯连栈，穿腋入洞，以睇帘之外垂，只中观其飞洒，而不外受其淋漓，胜更十倍也。
现代文：如果从它侧面架梯又连成栈道，穿过侧旁进洞，得以斜视外边垂挂的水帘，只需在洞中观赏滴水的飞洒，却不受外边飞流的浇淋，赏心悦目之处更胜过十倍了。
English: If a ladder is set up from its side and connected to a walkway, and a ladder is passed through the side to enter the hole, it is possible to squint at the curtain of water hanging outside. You only need to watch the dripping of water in the hole, but you will not be drenched by the flying current outside. The pleasing place is more than ten times better.

古文：崖间有悬干虬枝，为水所淋滴者，其外皆结肤为石。
现代文：石崖上有悬垂拳曲的枝干，被水浇淋到的，它们的外边全结成岩石外壳。
English: On the cliff there are overhanging fistulas of branches and trunks, which have been drenched with water, and their outer edges have completely formed a rock shell.

古文：盖石膏日久凝胎而成，即片叶丝柯，皆随形逐影，如雪之凝，如冰之裹，小大成象，中边不欹，此又凝雪裹冰，不能若是之匀且肖者。
现代文：大概是石膏天长日久凝结为石胎而形成的，即便是一片叶子一丝树枝，全都顺势随形，如雪一样凝结，如冰一样包裹，大小都成为相像的形状，布满边沿不偏不倚，这又是雪凝冰裹，也不能如此一样均匀和逼真的了。
English: It is probably made of gypsum that has been condensed into a stone tire over a long period of time. Even if it is a leaf or a twig, it all follows the shape, condenses like snow, wraps like ice, the size becomes a similar shape, and the edges are covered with impartiality. This is also snow and ice, and it cannot be as uniform and realistic.

古文：余于左腋洞外得一垂柯，其大拱把，其长丈余，其中树干已腐，而石肤之结于外者，厚可五分，中空如巨竹之筒而无节，击之声甚清越。
现代文：我在洞外左侧得到一枝下垂的树枝，它的大处有一满把，长一丈多，其中树干已经腐烂，而结在外层的石壳，厚约五分，中间空如巨竹的竹筒但无竹节，敲击它声音非常清越。
English: I got a drooping branch on the left side outside the cave. There is a handful of it in the large part, which is much longer. The trunk has rotted, and the knot is a stone shell on the outside, about five minutes thick. In the middle, there is a hollow bamboo tube like a giant bamboo, but there is no bamboo knot. The sound of tapping it is very clear.

古文：余不能全曳，断其三尺，携之下，并取枝叶之绸缪凝结者减其中，盖叶薄枝细，易于损伤，而筒厚可借以相护，携之甚便也。
现代文：我不能全枝曳着走，折断其中的三尺，把它带下来，并选择些交缠凝结的枝叶藏在其中，因为叶薄枝细，易于损伤，而筒壁很厚可以借来保护枝叶，携带十分方便。
English: I can't drag the whole branch, break three feet of it, take it down, and choose some intertwined condensed branches and leaves to hide in it, because the leaves are thin and easy to damage, and the thick tube wall can be used to protect the branches and leaves, and it is very convenient to carry.

古文：水帘之西，又有一旱岩。
现代文：水帘洞之西，又有一个旱洞。
English: To the west of the water curtain cave, there is another dry cave.

古文：其深亦止丈余，而穹覆危崖之下，结体垂象，纷若赘旒，细若刻丝，攒冰镂玉，千萼并头，万蕊簇颖，有大仅如掌，而笋乳纠缠，不下千百者，真刻楮雕棘之所不能及！
现代文：洞也只有一丈多深，但弯隆下覆在危崖之下，岩石的结体呈各种形象下垂，纷纷然如下缀的玉串，细如刻成的蚕丝，攒冰镂玉，千百粤片并在头部，万朵花蕊簇拥成花穗，有的大处仅如手掌，而石笋石乳纠缠在一起，不下千百个，真正是精巧的雕刻所不能赶上的！
English: The cave is only a few feet deep, but the slope is covered under the cliff, the rock mass is sagging in all kinds of shapes, one after another, such as the following decorated jade strings, fine as carved silk, collected ice and jade, thousands of pieces and on the head, thousands of flower buds clustered into flower spikes, some large places are only like palms, and stalagmites are entangled together, no less than thousands, truly exquisite carvings can not catch up!

古文：余心异之，欲击取而无由，适马郎携斧至，借而击之，以衣下承，得数枝。
现代文：我心里对此感到很奇异，想要敲取却没有办法，恰好马家儿郎带着斧头来到，借来敲击石乳，用衣服在下边接着，得到数枝。
English: I felt very strange about this in my heart. I wanted to knock it down, but there was no way. It just so happened that Ma Jia Erlang came with an axe, borrowed it to knock down the stone milk, and used his clothes to attach it to the underside to get a few branches.

古文：取其不损者二枝，并石树之筒，托马郎携归玛瑙山，俟余还取之。
现代文：选择其中未损坏的两枝，连同石树的树筒，托马家儿郎带回玛瑙山，等我回来时取。
English: Choose two of the undamaged branches, together with the trunk of the stone tree, and take it back to the agate mountain when I return.

古文：遂仍出桥右，与马郎别。
现代文：于是仍出到桥右，与马家儿郎告别。
English: So he still went out to the right of the bridge to say goodbye to Ma Jia Rong.

古文：乃循右坡西上里余，隔溪瞰新安哨而行。
现代文：就沿右侧山坡向西上走一里多，隔溪下瞰着新安哨前行。
English: Just walk along the right side of the hill to the west for more than a mile, and look down the creek to Xin'an sentry post.

古文：大雨忽来，少憩树下。
现代文：大雨忽然来临，在树下稍作休息。
English: Heavy rain suddenly came, and we took a short break under a tree.

古文：又西里余，盘石坡之嘴，转而北行。
现代文：又向西一里多，绕过石坡的山嘴，转向北行。
English: Another mile to the west, around the rocky promontory, turning north.

古文：盖右坡自四窠崖颉颃西来，至此下坠，而崖石遂出，有若芙蓉，簇萼空中，有若绣屏，叠锦崖畔，不一其态。
现代文：右侧的山坡自四案崖上下起伏向西而来，到此处下坠，而石崖便露出来，有的如芙蓉，花尊簇拥在空中，有的似绣花屏风，锦绣重叠在崖畔，不止一种姿态。
English: The hillside on the right side rises and falls from the four cliffs to the west, and falls here, and the cliffs are exposed, some like hibiscus, flowers are clustered in the air, some like embroidered screens, embroidery overlaps on the cliffside, more than one posture.

古文：北盘三里，又随湾西转，一里余，又北盘其嘴，于是向北下峡中。
现代文：往北绕三里，又顺着山湾向西转，一里多，又往北绕过山嘴，于是向北下到峡中。
English: I went north for three miles, then turned west along the mountain bay for more than a mile, then north around the mountain mouth, and then went north into the gorge.

古文：盖四窠横亘之峰，至此西坠为壑，其余支又北转而突于外，路下而披其隙也。
现代文：四案崖横亘的山峰，到此处往西下坠为壑谷，它余下的支脉又向北转后突到外边，路下延穿过它的缺口。
English: At this point, the mountain peak, which stretches across the cliff of the four cases, falls down to the west and becomes a valley. Its remaining branches turn north and protrude to the outside, and the road extends down through its gap.

古文：二里余，坞底有峡自东北来，遂同盘为洼而西北出。
现代文：二里多，坞底有峡谷自东北延来，于是一同盘结为洼地后往西北出去。
English: For more than two miles, there is a canyon at the bottom of the dock extending from the northeast, so it is coiled together as a depression and goes out to the northwest.

古文：路乃挟西坡之麓，随之西转，其中沮洳，踔陷深泞，岂烂泥坝之名以此耶？
现代文：路于是傍着西坡的坡脚，顺山势向西转，其中全是泥沼，踩下去陷在深深的泥泞中，莫非烂泥坝的名字是出于此处吗？
English: The road then runs along the foot of the western slope, turns west along the mountain, which is full of mud, steps down and sinks into deep mud, is it not the name of the muddy dam?

古文：西北出隘一里，循东坡平行，西瞰坠壑下环，中有村庐一所，是为烂泥坝村。
现代文：往西北出隘口一里，沿东坡平缓前行，西瞰深坠的壑谷在下环绕，其中有一处村庄，这是烂泥坝村。
English: One mile to the northwest out of the pass, along the east slope of the smooth forward, west overlooking the deep ravine valley in the bottom around, including a village, this is a muddy dam village.

古文：路从其后分为二岐：一西向下坞，循村而西北者，为上江道；一北向盘坡，转而东北登坳者，为松坡道。
现代文：路从村后分为两条岔路：一条向西下到坞中，沿村子往西北去的，是去上江的路；一条向北绕山坡走，转向东北登上山坳的，是去松坡的路。
English: The road from the back of the village is divided into two branch roads: a westward down to the dock, along the village to the northwest, is the road to Shangjiang; a northward walk around the hillside, turning to the northeast to climb the ridge, is the road to Songpo.

古文：余取道松坡，又直北一里，挟东坡北嘴，盘之东行。
现代文：我选择了去松坡的路，又向正北走一里，傍东坡北面的山嘴，绕着它往东行。
English: I chose the road to Songpo, and walked one mile due north, near the mountain mouth north of the east slope, and went around it to the east.

古文：半里，遂东北披峡而上，蹑峻半里，其上峡遂平。
现代文：半里，就向东北穿过峡谷上走，陡峻地上登半里，那上面峡谷便平坦起来。
English: After half a mile, walk northeast through the canyon, climb half a mile on the steep ground, and the canyon above will be flat.

古文：溯之东入，一里，峡西转，半里，越西峡而西北上。
现代文：溯峡谷往东进去，一里，峡谷向西转，半里，越过西峡往西北上坡。
English: Trace the canyon to the east, one mile, turn the canyon to the west, half a mile, cross the West Gorge to the northwest uphill.

古文：其坡高穹陡削，一里余，盘其东突之崖，又里余，逾其北亘之脊。
现代文：此坡高高隆起，极陡削，一里多，绕过那向东突出的石崖，又走一里多，越过它北边横亘的山脊。
English: The slope rises high and is extremely steep for more than a mile, around the rocky cliff that juts out to the east, and then for more than a mile, over the ridge that stretches to the north of it.

古文：由脊东北向随坡一里，路又分岐为二：一直北随脊平行者，横松枝阻绝，以断人行；一转东入腋者，余姑随之。
现代文：由山脊上向东北顺山坡走一里，路又分为两条岔道：一条向正北顺山脊平行的，被横放的松枝阻断了，以阻止人走；一条向东转入侧边，我姑且顺着它走。
English: After walking one mile from the ridge to the northeast along the slope of the mountain, the road is divided into two forked roads: one parallel to the north-north along the ridge, which is blocked by horizontal pine branches to prevent people from walking; one turns to the east into the side, and I just follow it.

古文：一里，其坡东垂为脊，稍降而东属崇峰。
现代文：一里，山坡往东下垂为山脊，稍下降后往东连接到高峰。
English: For one mile, the hillside descends to the east as a ridge, and after a slight drop, it connects to the peak to the east.

古文：此峰高展众山之上，自北而南，东截天半，若屏之独插而起者，其上松罗丛密，异于他山，岂即松坡之主峰耶？
现代文：此峰高高伸展在群山之上，自北往南，在东边横截过半天空，好似屏风独插耸起的样子，山上松树密布，密密丛丛，与其他山不同，难道这就是松坡的主峰了吗？
English: This peak stretches high above the mountains, from north to south, cutting across half the sky in the east, like a screen standing alone. The mountain is densely covered with pine trees and dense thickets. Different from other mountains, is this the main peak of the pine slope?

古文：脊间路复两分：一逾脊北去，一随脊东抵崇峰。
现代文：山脊上路又分为两条：一条越过山脊往北去，一条顺山脊往东抵达高峰。
English: The road up the ridge is divided into two: one goes over the ridge to the north, and one goes along the ridge to the east to reach the peak.

古文：乃傍之南下，二里，径渐小而翳。
现代文：于是傍着山脊往南下走，二里，小径渐渐变小被遮蔽了。
English: So I walked south along the ridge for two miles, the path gradually shrinking and becoming obscured.

古文：余初随南下者半里，见壑下盘，绕祟峰南垂而东，不知其壑从何出，知非松坡道，乃仍还至脊，北向行，东截崇峰西坞。
现代文：我起初顺南下的路走了半里，见有壑谷盘绕在下方，绕过高峰的南垂往东去，不知这个壑谷从哪里出去，心知不是去松坡的路，就仍返回到山脊上，向北行，往东横截过高峰西面的山坞。
English: At first, I walked for half a mile along the road to the south. I saw a valley of reeds coiled below, going around the peak to the south and east. I don't know where this valley goes, but I know it's not the way to Songpan. I still returned to the ridge and headed north, crossing the dock on the west side of the peak to the east.

古文：二里，坞北坠峡西下，路从崇峰之西北崖行，盘其湾，越突坡，三里余，西北下峡中。其下甚峻，而路荒径窄，疑非通道。
现代文：二里，山坞北面向西下坠成峡谷，路从高峰西北的山崖上走，绕过山湾，越过前突的山坡，三里多，向西北下到峡中，那下走的路非常陡峻，而且道路荒芜小径狭窄，怀疑不是通道。
English: Two miles, the dock north facing west down into the canyon, the road from the peak northwest of the cliff, around the bay, over the jutting hillside, more than three miles, northwest down to the gorge, the road is very steep, and the road is barren and narrow, it is suspected that it is not a passage.

古文：下二里，有三四人倚北坡而樵，呼讯之，始知去松坡不远，乃西转而就峡平行。
现代文：下走二里，有三四个人紧靠北坡打柴，呼叫着向他们问路，才知离松坡不远，于是转向西走到峡中平缓前行。
English: Two miles down, there were three or four people chopping wood close to the north slope, calling out to them to ask for directions, only to find out that the pine slope was not far away, so they turned west and walked into the gorge.

古文：里余，出峡口，其西壑稍开，崇冈散为环阜，见有参差离立之势。
现代文：一里多，出了峡口，它西边的壑谷略为开阔起来，高冈散布为环形的土阜，便有了参差独立的气势。
English: More than a kilometer, out of the gorge, the west side of the valley is slightly open, and the hills are scattered as a ring-shaped earthen mound, which has the momentum of jagged independence.

古文：又西下里余，有村庐当中窝而居，村中巨庐，杨氏在北，马氏在南，乃南趋之。
现代文：又向西下走一里多，有村庄房屋正当中间的山窝居住，村中的房屋巨大，杨家在北，马家在南，就往南赶去。
English: They also walked more than a mile to the west. There were village houses right in the middle of the mountain, and the houses in the village were huge. The Yang family was in the north, and the Ma family was in the south.

古文：一翁方巾藜杖出迎，为马太麓；元康长郎先已经此，为言及。
现代文：一位老翁头戴方巾拄着黎茎手杖出门迎接，是马太麓；元康的长子先已先到此地，给他说起过。
English: An old man wearing a square scarf on his head and holding a cane went out to meet him at the foot of Mt. Matei; Yuan Kang's eldest son had been here first and had told him about it.

古文：翁讶惊讶元康不同来，余为道前意。
现代文：老翁惊讶元康不一同前来，我为此说明了先前的意思。
English: The old man was surprised that Yuan Kang didn't come with him, so I explained what I meant earlier.

古文：翁方瀹茗，而山雨大至。
现代文：老翁正在烹茶，而山雨猛烈来临。
English: The old man is making tea, while the mountain rain is coming down hard.

古文：俟其霁，下午，乃东蹑坡上青莲阁。
现代文：等天转晴，已是下午，于是向东登坡上了青莲阁。
English: When the weather cleared, it was already afternoon, so I climbed the slope eastward to Qingliange.

古文：阁不大，在石崖之下，玉麓先生所栖真处。
现代文：阁子不大，在石崖之下，是马玉麓先生隐居修真之处。
English: The pavilion is not large, and under the cliff is the place where Mr. Ma Yulun lives in seclusion.

古文：太麓于是日初招一僧止其中，余甫至，太麓即携酒授餐，遂不及览崖间诸胜。
现代文：太麓在这一天刚招来一位僧人住在其中，我刚到，太麓就带着酒送来饭，便来不及游览山崖间的诸处胜景。
English: On this day, Tai Foo had just invited a monk to live there. As soon as I arrived, Tai Foo brought me food and wine, and I was too late to visit the various places of interest between the cliffs.

古文：太麓年高有道气。
现代文：太麓高龄，有得道者的气度。
English: Tairoku is old and has the air of a scholar.

古文：二子：长读书郡城，元真，次随侍山中，元亮。为余言：其处多岩洞，亦有可深入者二三处，但路未开辟，当披荆入之。
现代文：有两个儿子：长子在府城读书，次子在山中随身侍候，对我说：此处岩洞很多，也有二三处可以深入的，但路未开辟，将披荆斩棘进洞。
English: I have two sons: the eldest son is studying in the capital, and the second son waits for me in the mountains. He said to me: "There are many caves here, and there are also two or three places where you can go deeper, but the road has not been opened, and you will have to cut thorns into the holes."

古文：地当山之翠微，深崖坠壑，尚在其下，不觉其为幽閟；乱峰小岫，初环于上，不觉其为孤高。
现代文：此地正当翠微的山间，山崖深坠成的壑谷，还在它的下方，不觉得它幽暗闭塞；乱峰小山，本来就环绕在它上方，不觉得它孤拔高耸。
English: Here, right in the midst of the verdant mountains, the valley formed by the deep drop of the mountain cliff is still below it, but it does not feel dark and closed; the peaks and hills, originally surrounded above it, do not feel that it is isolated and towering.

古文：盖崇山西北之支，分为双臂，中环此窝，南夹为门，水从中出，而高黎贡山又外障之，真栖遁隐居胜地，买山而隐，无过于此。
现代文：高山西北的支脉，分为双臂，中间环绕成此处山窝，南面相夹为门，水从中间流出去，而高黎贡山又在外面屏蔽着，真是隐居的胜地，买山来隐居，没有超过此地的。
English: The northwest branch of the high mountain is divided into two arms, the middle is surrounded by a mountain cave here, the south side is a door, the water flows out from the middle, and Mount Gaoligong is shielded outside. It is really a secluded resort, buy a mountain to live in seclusion, and it does not exceed this place.

古文：惟峡中无田，米从麓上尚数里也。
现代文：只是夹谷中无田，米从山麓运上来还有数里远。
English: However, there are no fields in the valley, and the rice is still several miles away from the foot of the mountain.

