古文： 元 者，善之长也； 亨 者，嘉之会也； 利 者，义之和也； 贞 者，事之干也。
现代文：《文言》说：元，是众善的首领。
English: "Wenwen" said: Yuan is the leader of all good.

古文：君子体仁足以长人，嘉会足以合礼，利物足以和义，贞固足以干事。君子行此四德者，故曰： 乾，元亨利贞。 初九曰： 潜龙勿用。 
现代文：亨，是众美的集合。利，是义理的统一。贞，是事业的主干。君子履行仁义就足够可以号令大众，众美的结合就足够可以符合礼义，利人利物就足够可以和同义理，坚持正道就足够可以成就事业。君子身体力行这四种美德，所以说： 《乾》卦具有这四种品德：元、亨、利、贞。 初九爻辞说： 潜藏的龙，无法施展。 
English: Gentleness is a collection of beauties. Beneficence is the unification of the principles of righteousness. Chastity is the backbone of the cause. It is enough for a gentleman to perform benevolence and righteousness to command the public, the combination of all beauties is enough to conform to etiquette, beneficence and beneficence is enough to be synonymous, and adhering to the right path is enough to achieve the cause. A gentleman practices these four virtues, so it is said: "Kian" gua has these four virtues: Yuan, gentleness, beneficence, and chastity. The first nine syllables say: The hidden dragon cannot be exerted.

古文：何谓也？
现代文：这是什么意思？
English: What does that mean?

古文：子曰： 龙德而隐者也，不易乎世，不成乎名，遯世无闷，不见是而无闷，乐则行之，忧则违之，确乎其不可拔，潜龙也。 
现代文：孔子说： 龙是比喻有才德而隐居的君子。操行坚定不为世风所转移，不求虚名，隐居避世而没有苦闷，言行不为世人所赏识而没有烦恼。乐意的事就施行它，忧患的事就避开它，坚定而不可动摇，这是潜龙的品德。 
English: Confucius said: The dragon is a metaphor for a gentleman who is virtuous and lives in seclusion. He acts firmly and is not moved by the world, does not seek a false name, lives in seclusion and avoids the world without suffering, speaks and acts without being appreciated by the world and is not troubled. He does what he likes and avoids what troubles him. He is firm and unshakable. This is the character of the hidden dragon.

古文：九二曰： 见龙在田，利见大人。 
现代文：九二爻辞说： 龙出现在大地上，有利于会见贵族王公。 
English: The Analects of Confucius said, "When a dragon appears on the land, it is auspicious to meet a noble prince."

古文：何谓也？
现代文：这是什么意思？
English: What does that mean?

古文：子曰： 龙德而正中者也。
现代文：孔子说： 龙是比喻有德行而秉性中正的君子。
English: Confucius said: The dragon is a metaphor for a gentleman who is virtuous and upright.

古文：庸言之信，庸行之谨，闲邪存其诚，善世而不伐，德博而化，《易》曰 见龙在田，利见大人 。
现代文：日常言论讲究诚信，日常行为讲究谨慎，防止邪恶的侵蚀，保持忠诚的秉性，引导世人向善而不夸耀，德行博大而能感化人民。《易经》上说： 龙出现在大地上，有利于会见贵族王公。 
English: Daily speech emphasizes honesty, daily behavior emphasizes prudence, prevents the erosion of evil, maintains a loyal disposition, guides the world to good without boasting, and has great virtue and can influence the people. "I Ching" said: Dragons appear on the earth, it is conducive to meeting noble princes.

古文：君德也。 
现代文：就是说民间出现了有才德的君子。 
English: That is to say, a gentleman with talent has emerged.

古文：九三曰： 君子终日乾乾，夕惕若厉，无咎。 
现代文：九三爻辞说： 君子始终是白天勤奋努力，夜晚戒惧反省，虽然处境艰难，终究没有灾难。 
English: "A gentleman is always diligent and hardworking during the day, and he is always fearless and self-reflective at night. Although the situation is difficult, there is no disaster.

古文：何谓也？
现代文：这是什么意思？
English: What does that mean?

古文：子曰： 君子进德修业。
现代文：孔子说： 君子致力于培育品德，增进学业。
English: Confucius said: A gentleman devotes himself to cultivating virtue and improving his studies.

古文：忠信所以进德也。修辞立其诚，所以居业也。
现代文：以忠信来培养品德，以修饰言辞来建立诚信，这是操持自己事业的立足点。
English: It is the foothold of conducting one's own business to cultivate character with loyalty and to establish integrity with embellished words.

古文：知至至之，可与几也。知终终之，可与存义也。
现代文：知道事业可以发展就发展它，从而努力去捕捉一瞬即逝的事机；知道事业应该终止就终止它，从而保持行为的道义。
English: Know that the cause can be developed and develop it, so as to strive to seize the fleeting opportunity; know that the cause should be terminated and terminate it, so as to maintain the morality of behavior.

古文：是故居上位而不骄，在下位而不忧，故乾乾因其时而惕，虽危无咎矣。 
现代文：所以处于尊贵的地位而不骄傲，处于卑微的地位而不忧愁。所以君子勤奋努力，随时提高警惕，虽然处境危险也没有灾害。 
English: Therefore, he is in an honorable position without being proud, and in a lowly position without being sad. Therefore, the gentleman diligently works hard and raises his vigilance at any time, although there is no danger or disaster.

古文：九四曰： 或跃在渊，无咎。 
现代文：九四爻辞说： 也许跳进深潭，没有灾难。 
English: The Ninety-Four Theses said, "Perhaps jumping into a deep pool is not disastrous.

古文：何谓也？
现代文：这是什么意思？
English: What does that mean?

古文：子曰： 上下无常，非为邪也。
现代文：孔子说： 有时处在上位，有时处在下位，本来就是变动无常的，不是什么行为邪恶的缘故。
English: Confucius said: Sometimes you are at the top, sometimes you are at the bottom, it is inherently changeable, not because of some evil act.

古文：进退无恒，非离群也。
现代文：有时奋进，有时退隐，本来就是应时变化的，不是什么喜爱离群索居的缘故。
English: Sometimes striving forward, sometimes retreating, it is due to changes in time, not because of any preference for living apart from others.

古文：君子进德修业，欲及时也，故无咎。 
现代文：君子致力于培养品德增进学业，随时准备着抓住时机全力以赴，所以没有灾难。 
English: Nobles are committed to cultivating moral character and improving their studies, and are always ready to seize the opportunity to go all out, so there is no disaster.

古文：九五曰： 飞龙在天，利见大人。 
现代文：九五爻辞说： 龙飞腾在天，有利于会见贵族王公。 
English: The Ninth Five-Year Plan said, "Dragons soar in the sky, which is conducive to meeting noble princes."

古文：何谓也？
现代文：这是什么意思？
English: What does that mean?

古文：子曰： 同声相应，同气相求。
现代文：孔子说： 声息相同就互相应和，气味相投就互相求助。
English: Confucius said: If the voice and the breath are the same, they will harmonize with each other; if the smell is the same, they will seek help from each other.

古文：水流湿，火就燥。
现代文：水向低湿的地方流动，火向干燥的地方漫延。
English: Water flows to low-humidity areas, while fire spreads to dry areas.

古文：云从龙，风从虎。
现代文：云萦绕着龙，风追随着虎。
English: The clouds follow the dragon, and the wind follows the tiger.

古文：圣人作而万物覩。
现代文：圣人兴起，万物景仰。
English: When a saint arises, all things are admired.

古文：本乎天者亲上，本乎地者亲下。则各从其类也。 
现代文：根基在天上的附丽于天空，根基在地上的依附着大地，万物都归属于各自的类别当中。 
English: The foundation in heaven adheres to the sky, the foundation in the earth adheres to the earth, and all things belong to their respective categories.

古文：上九曰： 亢龙有悔。 
现代文：上九爻辞说： 升腾到极限的龙，将有灾祸之困。 
English: On the ninth day of the month, he said: "The dragon that climbs to the limit will be plagued by disaster."

古文：何谓也？
现代文：这是什么意思？
English: What does that mean?

古文：子曰： 贵而无位，高而无民，贤人在下位而无辅，是以动而有悔也。 
现代文：孔子说： 身份显贵而没有根基，地位崇高而没有人民，有才德的压抑在下层，不能获得他们的辅助，因此有所行动必招祸殃。 
English: Confucius said: "If one's status is distinguished but has no foundation, if one's position is lofty but has no people, if one's talents are suppressed in the lower strata and one cannot obtain their assistance, then one's actions are sure to bring disaster."

古文： 潜龙勿用 ，下也； 见龙在田 ，时舍也； 终日乾乾 ，行事也； 或跃在渊 ，自试也； 飞龙在天 ，上治也； 亢龙有悔 ，穷之灾也；乾元 用九 ，天下治也。
现代文： 潜伏的龙，无法施展 ，是说有才德的君子压抑于底层。 龙出现在大地上 ，是说君子暂时隐伏等待时机。 终日里勤奋努力 ，是讲君子刻苦修身自强不息。 也许跳进深潭 ，是讲君子投身社会自我考验。 龙腾飞在天 ，是讲君子获得地位治国治民。 升腾到极限的龙将有灾殃 ，是讲事业极盛必由盛转衰。 天的美德  纯阳全盛 ，是讲天下政治安定。
English: The lurking dragon, unable to exert itself, means that the gentleman with talent is suppressed at the bottom. The dragon appears on the earth, means that the gentleman is temporarily hiding and waiting for the opportunity. The diligent efforts throughout the day, means that the gentleman is assiduous in self-improvement. Perhaps jumping into the abyss, means that the gentleman is engaged in social self-testing. The dragon soars in the sky, means that the gentleman has obtained the status of ruling the country and governing the people. The dragon that rises to the limit will have a disaster, means that the cause is at its peak and must change from prosperity to decline. The virtue of heaven, the pure sun is

古文： 潜龙勿用 ，阳气潜藏； 见龙在田 ，天下文明； 终日乾乾 ，与时偕行； 或跃在渊 ，乾道乃革； 飞龙在天 ，乃位乎天德； 亢龙有悔 ，与时偕极；乾元 用九 ，乃见天则。
现代文： 潜伏的龙，无法施展 ，初九阳爻居下位，象征万物蛰伏，阳气潜藏。 龙出现在大地上 ，阳爻上升一位，象征万物发生，大地锦绣，风光明媚。 终日里勤奋努力 ，阳爻再进一位，象征万物蓬勃，与时俱进。 也许跳进深潭 ，阳爻又升上一位，象征阳气更盛，天道发生变化。 龙飞腾在天空 ，阳爻上升到崇高的地位，象征时值金秋，天的功德已圆满完成。 升腾到极限的龙将有灾殃 ，阳爻上升到极限，象征阳气极盛，将由盛转衰。 天的美德  纯阳全盛 ，阳爻依位次而上升，阳气依时节而旺盛，六爻全阳，将尽变为阴爻，从而体现了天道运行的原则。
English: The lurking dragon, unable to exert itself, at the beginning of the 9th month, the yang qi is in the lower position, symbolizing all things prostrate, and the yang qi is latent. The dragon appears on the earth, the impotence rises one place, symbolizing all things occur, the earth is embroidered, the scenery is bright and beautiful. Throughout the day, diligent efforts, the impotence enters one more place, symbolizing all things vigorous, advancing with the times. Perhaps jumping into the abyss, the impotence rises one more place, symbolizing the yang qi is more prosperous, and the heavenly way changes. The dragon soars in the

古文：乾 元 者，始而亨者也； 利贞 者，性情也。
现代文：《乾》卦的卦辞：元、亨，是讲天具有生成之功，和谐之美。
English: The words of the "Kian" sutra, "Yuan" and "Hen," are about the heavens having the power of creation and the beauty of harmony.

古文：乾始能以美利利天下，不言所利，大矣哉，大哉乾乎，刚健中正，纯粹精也。
现代文：利、贞，是讲天具有恩惠之情，永恒之性。乾为天，只有天才能把美满的利益施予天下，而且从不提起它的恩德，伟大呀！伟大的上天！真正是刚强、劲健、适中、均衡，达到了纯粹精妙的境地。
English: Prosperity and chastity, it is said that heaven has a benevolent feeling and an eternal nature. After all, only heaven can bestow the benefits of happiness on the world, and it never mentions its grace. Great! Great heaven! It is truly strong, vigorous, moderate, and balanced, and has reached a purely exquisite state.

古文：六爻发挥，旁通情也，时乘六龙，以御天也。
现代文：六个阳爻发挥舒展，广通天道、地道、人道。
English: The Six Impotent Virgins play an expansive role, and are able to communicate with heaven, earth, and humanity.

古文：云行雨施，天下平也。
现代文：阳气的结晶一一太阳，驾驶着六条飞龙在空中飞行，分布着云彩，降洒着雨露，普天之下同享和平。
English: The crystallization of yang qi - one sun, driving six flying dragons flying in the air, distributing clouds, sprinkling rain and dew, and sharing peace under the whole sky.

古文：君子以成德为行，日可见之行也。 潜 之为言也，隐而未见，行而未成，是以君子弗用也。
现代文：君子以养成自身的品德作为行为的目的，每天应该落实在行动上。 潜 的意义在于，隐伏而不显露，当自身修养尚未达到成熟的程度，所以君子不能有所作为。
English: A gentleman takes the cultivation of his own moral character as the purpose of his behavior, and should implement it in his actions every day. The hidden meaning is that when his self-cultivation has not yet reached a mature level, a gentleman cannot make a difference.

古文：君子学以聚之，问以辩之，宽以居之，仁以行之。《易》曰： 见龙在田，利见大人。 
现代文：君子通过学习来积累知识，通过诘疑来辨明是非，以远大作为内心的目标，以仁义作为履行的责任。《易经》说： 飞龙出现在大地上，有利于会见贵族王公。 
English: A gentleman accumulates knowledge through study, discerns right and wrong through questioning, takes greatness as the goal of the heart, and takes benevolence and righteousness as the responsibility to fulfill. "I Ching" says: Flying dragons appear on the earth, which is conducive to meeting noble princes.

古文：君德也。
现代文：这就是说出现了有才德的君子。
English: That is to say, a gentleman with talent has emerged.

古文：九三重刚而不中，上不在天，下不在田，故乾乾因其时而惕，虽危 无咎 矣。
现代文：九三爻辞的含义是指，九三阳爻处在重叠的阳爻之上，没有处在上、下卦的中位，既没有占据天位，也没有占据地位，还须勤奋努力，随时提高警惕，不过处境虽然险恶，还没有灾难。
English: The meaning of the "Jiu San Jie" is that the "Jiu San Yang Jie" is on top of the overlapping "Jiu San Jie," it is not in the middle of the "Upper and Lower Gua," it does not occupy the "Heavenly Throne" nor the "Position," and it is necessary to work hard and be vigilant at all times. However, although the situation is dangerous, there is no disaster.

古文：九四重刚而不中，上不在天，下不在田，中不在人，故 或 之，或之者，疑之也。
现代文：九四阳爻处在重叠的阳爻之上，没有处在上、下卦的中位，既没有占据天位，又没有占据地位，也没有占据人位，所以有 也许 的说法。 也许 这个词就是表示迟疑。
English: Jiuxi Yang Di is on top of the overlapping Yang Di, not in the middle of the upper and lower trigrams, neither occupying the heavenly throne, nor occupying the status, nor occupying the human position, so there is a saying of "maybe."

古文：故 无咎 。
现代文：但没有灾难。
English: But there was no disaster.

古文：夫 大人 者，与天地合其德，与日月合其明，与四时合其序，与鬼神合其吉凶。
现代文：九五爻辞所讲的 大人 ，他的德行与天地相配合，生成万物，他的光明与日月相配合，普照一切；他的政令与四季相配合，井然有序；他的赏罚与鬼神相配合，吉凶一致。
English: The adult mentioned in the Ninth Five-Year Speech, his virtue is compatible with heaven and earth and produces all things, his light is compatible with the sun and moon and shines on all things, his decrees are compatible with the four seasons and are well-ordered, his rewards and punishments are compatible with ghosts and gods, and are consistent with good luck and bad luck.

古文：先天而天弗违，后天而奉天时，天且弗违，而况于人乎！
现代文：他的行动先天而发，但上天不会背弃他，他的行动后天而发，那是依奉天时行事。上天尚且不背弃他，更何况人呢？
English: His actions are predestined by Heaven, but Heaven will not turn its back on him. His actions are post-destined by Heaven, that is, he will act according to Heaven's timing. If Heaven does not turn its back on him, how much more will man?

古文：况于鬼神乎！ 亢 之为言也，知进而不知退，知存而不知亡，知得而不知丧，其唯圣人乎！
现代文：更何况鬼神呢？ 亢奋 这个词意思是，自以为自己的事业只会发展不会衰败，只会存在不会消亡，只会胜利不会失败。
English: What's more, what about ghosts and gods? Excitement This word means that you think that your business will only develop and not decline, only exist and not die, only win and not fail.

古文：知进退存亡而不失其正者，其唯圣人乎！
现代文：也许只有圣人才能了解进退存亡的相互联系，恰当地把握它们互相转化的关系，做到这一点，恐怕只有圣人吧！
English: I'm afraid there are no saints who can know the principles of advance and retreat and survive without losing the right path.

