古文：起阏逢执徐，尽旃蒙大荒落，凡二年。
现代文：起，止，一共两年。
English: From start to finish, a total of two years.

古文：高祖武皇帝六普通五年
现代文：梁武帝普通五年
English: Emperor Liangwu to serve five-year term

古文：春，正月，辛丑，魏主祀南郊。
现代文：春季，正月辛丑，北魏孝明帝在南郊祭天。
English: In spring, the first month of the year, the Northern Wei Emperor Xiaoming held a festival in the southern suburbs.

古文：三月，魏以临淮王彧都督北讨诸军事，讨破六韩拔陵。
现代文：三月，北魏委任临淮王元都督北讨诸军事，去讨伐破六韩拔陵。
English: In March, the Northern Wei Dynasty appointed Lin Huai Wang Yuan, the governor of the North, to lead the military to break through the tomb of the Six Han Battles.

古文：夏，四月，高平镇民赫连恩等反，推敕勒酋长胡琛为高平王，攻高平镇以应拔陵。
现代文：夏季四月，高平镇民赫连恩等人造反，推举敕勒酋长胡琛为高平王，并攻打高平镇，以便响应破六韩拔陵。
English: In the summer of April, the people of Gaoping Town, such as Herien, rebelled, elected the chief Hu Yao as the king of Gaoping Town, and attacked Gaoping Town in order to respond to the destruction of the Six Han Tombs.

古文：魏将卢祖迁击破之，琛北走。
现代文：北魏将领卢祖迁击败了他们，胡琛北逃而去。
English: The Northern Wei general Lu Zuqian defeated them, and Hu Yaobang fled north.

古文：卫可孤攻怀朔镇经年，外援不至，杨钧使贺拔胜诣临淮王彧告急。
现代文：卫可孤攻打怀朔镇整整一年了，外面援军不到，杨钧指派贺拔胜到临淮王元那里去告急。
English: Wei Ke alone had been attacking Wai Shuo Town for a whole year. With no outside reinforcements arriving, Yang Hui assigned He Baxian to go to Lin Huai Wang Yuan for help.

古文：胜募敢死少年十馀骑，夜伺隙溃围出，贼骑追及之，胜曰： 我贺拔破胡也。 
现代文：贺拔胜招募了十余名不怕死的少年骑兵，在夜间瞅空子突围而出，卫可孤的骑兵追上了他们，贺拔胜喊道： 我是贺拔破胡。 
English: He Baasheng recruited more than ten young cavalrymen who were not afraid of death. They broke out of the encirclement at night, and the brave cavalrymen caught up with them. He Baasheng shouted: I am He Baasheng.

古文：贼不敢逼。
现代文：追兵们便吓得不敢逼近了。
English: The enemy did not dare to advance.

古文：胜见彧于云中，说之曰： 怀朔被围，旦夕沦陷，大王今顿兵不进；怀朔若陷，则武川亦危，贼之锐气百倍，虽有良、平，不能为大王计矣。 
现代文：贺拔胜在云中见到了元，向他游说道： 怀朔被围，沦陷于敌就在眼前，大王现在却按兵不动。怀朔如果陷于放手，那么武川也将告危，那时贼寇的锐气将百倍增加，即使有张良、陈平在，也无法为大王您计议了。 
English: He Baisheng saw Yuan in the clouds and said to him, "Wai Shuo is surrounded and fallen to the enemy right in front of you, but the great king is now standing still. If Wai Shuo is trapped and lets go, then Wuchuan will also be in danger. At that time, the sharpness of the bandits will increase a hundredfold. Even if Zhang Liang and Chen Ping are there, they can't do anything for the great king.

古文：彧许为出师，胜还，复突围而入。
现代文：元答应出兵援救怀朔。贺拔胜返回，又突围而入城。
English: Yuan promised to send troops to rescue Waishuo. He returned victorious and broke through the siege and entered the city.

古文：钧复遣胜出觇武川，武川已陷。
现代文：杨钧又派遣贺拔胜出城去侦察武川的情况，去之后，武川已经失陷。
English: Yang Pi also sent He Baxing out of the city to investigate the situation in Bukawa. After he went there, Bukawa had already fallen.

古文：胜驰还，怀朔亦溃，胜父子俱为可孤所虏。
现代文：贺拔胜快马驰还，很快怀朔也被攻破，贺拔胜父子俱被卫可孤俘虏。
English: He Baxing galloped ahead, and soon Huai Shuo was also defeated, and He Baxing and his son were captured by Wei Ke.

古文：五月，临淮王彧与破六韩拔陵战于五原，兵败，彧坐削除官爵。
现代文：五月，临淮王元同破六韩拔陵在五原交战，战败，元因而获罪被削除官爵。
English: In May, Linhuai Wangyuan fought with and defeated six Korean kings in the Battle of Wuhuan, and was defeated. As a result, Yuan was convicted and stripped of his title.

古文：安北将军陇西李叔仁又败于白道，贼势日盛。
现代文：安兆将军陇西人李叔仁也在白道战败，因此贼兵的势力日益强盛了。
English: An Zhao's general Li Shuren, a native of Shaanxi, was also defeated in the Battle of Baidu, so the influence of the robber soldiers became increasingly strong.

古文：魏主引丞相、令、仆、尚书、侍中、黄门于显阳殿，问之曰： 今寇连恒、朔，逼近金陵，计将安出？ 
现代文：北魏孝明帝把朝廷中的丞相、令、仆、尚书、侍中、黄门等大臣召到显阳殿，问他们： 如今恒、朔之地贼寇蜂起，逼近祖先陵墓金陵，怎么办？ 
English: Emperor Xiaoming of the Northern Wei Dynasty summoned the imperial court's chancellors, regents, servants, courtiers, chamberlains, and ministers to the Xianyang Palace and asked them: What should we do now that thieves and robbers have risen up in the land of Heng and Shuo and are approaching the ancestral mausoleum of Jinling?

古文：吏部尚书元修义请遣重臣督军镇恒、朔以捍寇。帝曰： 去岁阿那瑰叛乱，遣李崇北征，崇上表求改镇为州，朕以旧章难革，不从其请。
现代文：吏部尚书元义请求派遣朝廷重臣督领军队镇守恒、朔，以抵御贼寇，孝明帝说： 去年阿那叛乱，派遣李崇北征，李崇上表请求改镇为州，联因为旧的章程难以变更，便没有听从他的请求。
English: The chief of staff, Shang Shouyuan, requested that the imperial court's chief vassal and commander of the army be sent to the towns of Shouheng and Shuo to resist the bandits, and Emperor Xiaoming said: Last year's Anah Rebellion, Li Chong was sent to the Northern Expedition, and Li Chong requested that the town be changed to a prefecture. Because the old regulations were difficult to change, the federation did not listen to his request.

古文：寻崇此表，开镇户非翼之心，致有今日之患；但既往难追，聊复略论耳。
现代文：思量李崇这个上表，开启了镇上人家的非份之想，以致有今日之患。但是过去的事情难以挽回，这里只是顺便说一下罢了。
English: Thinking about Li Chong, the above table, has opened the minds of people in the town, so that there is today's trouble. But the past is irretrievable, this is just a by-the-way.

古文：然崇贵戚重望，器识英敏，意欲还遣崇行，何如？ 
现代文：然而李崇是皇亲贵戚，名望甚重，气量大，识见远，英武机敏，我想派他前去，你们看如何呢？ 
English: However, Li Chong is a relative of the emperor. He is very famous, powerful, far-sighted and astute. I want to send him. What do you think?

古文：仆射萧宝寅等皆曰： 如此，实合群望。 
现代文：仆射萧宝寅等都说： 这样决定，非常符合众人之心。 
English: Xiao Baoying and others said: This decision is very much in line with the hearts of the people.

古文：崇曰： 臣以六镇遐僻，密迩寇戎，欲以慰悦彼心，岂敢导之为乱！
现代文：李崇说： 我考虑到六镇地处偏远，贼寇密布，提出改镇为州是为了安慰取悦当地人之心，岂敢引导他们作乱呢？
English: Li Chong said, "Considering that Liucheng is remote and full of bandits, proposing to change the town into a prefecture is to comfort and please the hearts of the local people. How dare I lead them to make trouble?"

古文：臣罪当就死，陛下赦之；今更遣臣北行，正是报恩改过之秋。
现代文：我罪该万死，陛下仁慈而赦免了我，如今更要派我北行，这对我正是一个报恩改过的机会。
English: I deserve to die for my crime. Your Majesty has mercifully pardoned me, and now you are sending me north, which is an opportunity for me to repay your kindness.

古文：但臣年七十，加之疲病，不堪军旅，愿更择贤材。 
现代文：但是我年已七十，加之疲病在身，不堪于军旅之事了。
English: But I'm seventy years old, and I'm too tired and sick to go on a military trip.

古文：帝不许。
现代文：希望能另外选择优秀人材。 
English: The emperor would not allow it.

古文：修义，天赐之子也。
现代文：孝明帝没有答应。元义是元天赐的儿子。
English: Emperor Xiaoming did not agree. Yuan Yi was Yuan Yuan's god-given son.

古文：臣光曰：李崇之表，乃所以销祸于未萌，制胜于无形。
现代文：臣司马光说：李崇的上表，是为了消除祸乱于未发之时，制敌取胜于无形之中。
English: Minister Sima Guang said: Li Chong's above table is to eliminate the calamity before it occurs, to defeat the enemy and win the invisible.

古文：魏肃宗既不能用，及乱生之日，曾无愧谢之言，乃更以为崇罪。彼不明之君，乌可与谋哉！
现代文：魏孝明帝既不能采纳他的建议，到祸乱产生之后，不但没有半点愧谢之言，反而更把这认为是李崇的罪过，那个不明智的君主，怎么可以同他谋事呢！
English: Emperor Wei Xiaoming could not accept his suggestion, and after the calamity occurred, not only did he not say a word of thanks, but he even considered this to be the fault of Li Chong, that unwise monarch, how could he do business with him!

古文：《诗》云： 听言则对，诵言如醉，匪用其良，覆俾我悖。 
现代文：《诗经》云： 听到美言便应对，听到不顺耳的真话，就装作喝醉酒的样子，不予理睬，良善之言不采用，反责我等行逆罪。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: "If you hear a kind word, you should respond; if you hear an unpleasant truth, you should pretend to be drunk and ignore it; if you do not accept a kind word, you should accuse us of committing treason."

古文：其是之谓矣。
现代文：说的正是这个意思。
English: This is exactly what happened.

古文：壬申，加崇使持节、开府仪同三司、北讨大都督，命抚军将军崔暹、镇军将军广阳王深皆受崇节度。
现代文：壬申，北魏委任李崇为使持节、开府仪同三司、北讨大都督，命令抚军将军崔暹、镇军将军广阳王元深一并接受李崇指挥调遣。
English: In Jinshin, the Northern Wei Dynasty appointed Li Chong as the commander-in-chief, the commander-in-chief of Kaifu, the commander-in-chief of the three divisions and the commander-in-chief of the Northern Expedition, and ordered the general of the Fuzhou army, Cui Siam, and the general of the town army, Guangyang Wangyuan Sheng, to accept the command and dispatch of Li Chong.

古文：深，嘉之子也。
现代文：元深是元嘉的儿子。
English: Yuan Sheng is the son of Yuan Jia.

古文：六月，以豫州刺史裴邃督征讨诸军事，以伐魏。
现代文：六月，梁朝委任豫州刺史裴邃负责征讨诸军事，去讨伐北魏。
English: In June, the Liang Dynasty appointed Pei Jun, a scholar from Yuzhou, to be in charge of recruiting soldiers to fight against the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：魏自破六韩拔陵之反，二夏、豳、凉寇盗蜂起。
现代文：北魏自从破六韩拔陵造反以来，二夏、豳、凉等地寇盗蜂起。
English: Since the Northern Wei Dynasty defeated the anti-rebellion of the Six Han Kingdoms, there were uprisings of robbers in Erxia, Handan, Liang and other places.

古文：秦州刺史李彦，政刑残虐，在下皆怨。
现代文：秦州刺史李彦施政严苛，刑罚残酷，无人不怨。
English: Li Yan, the governor of Qinzhou, was harsh in his policies and cruel in his punishments. No one complained.

古文：是月，城内薛珍等聚党突入州门，擒彦，杀之，推其党莫折大提为帅，大提自称秦王。
现代文：这月，城内薛珍等人结伙闯入州府门，抓住了薛彦，杀了他，推举同党莫折大提为元帅，莫折大提自称为秦王。
English: This month, a group of Xue Zhen and others in the city broke into the gate of the prefectural government, caught Xue Yan, killed him, and elected his party member Moreno Dati as marshal. Moreno Dati called himself Qin Wang.

古文：魏遣雍州刺史元志讨之。
现代文：北魏派遣雍州刺史元志去讨伐。
English: The Northern Wei dispatched the Yongzhou assassin, Yuan Zhi, to the crusade.

古文：初，南秦州豪右杨松柏兄弟，数为寇盗，刺史博陵崔游诱之使降，引为主簿，接以辞色，使说下群氐，既而因宴会尽收斩之，由是所部莫不猜惧。
现代文：起初，南秦州的豪强杨松柏兄弟几番为寇，刺史博陵人崔游引诱他投降，提他做了主簿，以亲近的言语和态度接待了他，让他去游说下面的氐族部落，事成之后借宴会之机把他们全部抓起来斩了，因此部下无不猜忌惧怕。
English: At first, the powerful Yang Songbo brothers of South Qin State made several attempts to steal the throne. The corrupt Boling man Cui You lured him to surrender, made him the master, received him with familiar words and attitude, let him go to lobby the lower Yi tribe, and after the event, seized the opportunity of the banquet to arrest and behead them all. Therefore, his subordinates were all afraid.

古文：游闻李彦死，自知不安，欲逃去，未果；城民张长命、韩祖香、孙掩等攻游，杀之，以城应大提。
现代文：崔游得知李彦的死讯之后，知道自己不会有好下场，想逃走，但没有得逞。城中百姓张长命、韩祖香、孙掩等人攻打崔游，杀了他，率全城百姓响应莫折大提。
English: After Cui You learned of Li Yan's death, he knew that he would not have a good ending and wanted to escape, but he did not succeed. People in the city such as Zhang Changmei, Han Zukang, and Sun Bai attacked Cui You, killed him, and led the whole city's people to respond.

古文：大提遗其党卜胡袭高平，克之，杀镇将赫连略、行台高元荣。
现代文：莫折大提派他的党徒卜胡袭击高平，攻克该城，杀了镇将赫连略和行台高元荣。
English: Mo Rong Dati sent his party member Bu Hu to attack Gaoping, conquered the city, and killed the town's commander, Herenliu, and the governor, Gao Yuan Rong.

古文：大提寻卒，子念生自称天子，置百官，改元天建。
现代文：莫折大提很快便去世，他的儿子莫折念生自称为天子，设置百官，改年号为天建。
English: Momotsu Dati died soon after, and his son, Momotsu Nensho, called himself the son of heaven, set up a hundred officials, and changed his era name to Tianjian.

古文：丁酉，魏大赦。
现代文：丁酉，北魏大赦天下。
English: Ding Xi, the Northern Wei Dynasty implemented an amnesty.

古文：秋，七月，甲寅，魏遣吏部尚书元修义兼尚书仆射，为西道行台，帅诸将讨莫折念生。
现代文：秋季，七月甲寅，北魏委任吏部尚书元义兼尚书仆射，为西道行台，统率众将去讨伐莫折念生。
English: In the autumn, in July, the Northern Wei Dynasty appointed the officials Shang Shumangyi and Shang Shumugui to fight for the West Road, and they will lead the people to fight against the unyielding.

古文：崔暹违李崇节度，与破六韩拔陵战于白道，大败，单骑走还。
现代文：崔暹不服从李崇指挥，与破六韩拔陵在白道交战，一败涂地，单人匹马跑了回来。
English: Cui Siam disobeyed the command of Li Chong and fought with the breaker of the Six Han Tombs in Baidoa. He was soundly defeated and ran back alone.

古文：拔陵并力攻崇，崇力战不能御，引还云中，与之相持。
现代文：破六韩拔陵集中兵力攻打李崇，李崇全力迎战，但是抵挡不住，便带领部队回到云中，与破六韩拔陵相持。
English: After the destruction of the Six Han Tombs, he concentrated his forces to attack Li Chong. Li Chong made every effort to fight, but he could not resist, so he led his troops back to the clouds and confronted the destruction of the Six Han Tombs.

古文：广相王深上言： 先朝都平城，以北边为重，盛简亲贤，拥麾作镇，配以高门子弟，以死防遏，非唯不废仕宦，乃更独得复除，当时人物，忻慕为之。
现代文：广阳王元深上奏孝明帝： 先朝建都平城时，以北部边境为重，郑重挑选亲近贤能，挂帅但任镇将，并且配以高门子弟，让他们拼死防止边患，不但不影响他们的仕宦前途，反而更因此而独得提升，当时的人们，都欣羡能去那里守边。
English: Guangyang Wangyuan wrote to Emperor Xiaoming: When the previous dynasty built the capital of Pingcheng, they focused on the northern border. They solemnly selected close and talented people, appointed a commander-in-chief, but appointed a town marshal, and equipped them with high-ranking sons and daughters, so that they would fight to prevent border troubles. Not only did this not affect their future as officials, but it also gave them a unique promotion. At that time, people were envious of being able to go there to protect the border.

古文：太和中，仆射李冲用事，凉州土人悉免厮役；帝乡旧门，仍防边戍，自非得罪当世，莫肯与之为伍。
现代文：太和年间，仆射李冲掌权，凉州的当地人全都免除服役，而平城的那些高门大姓，却仍然要去防守边关，如果不是得罪了当权者，谁也不愿意加入其列。
English: During the Taihe era, when the puppet Li Chong took power, all the local people in Liangzhou were exempted from military service, but those high-ranking officials in Pingcheng still had to defend the border. If they did not offend those in power, no one would want to join them.

古文：本镇驱使，但为虞候、白直，一生推迁，不过军主；然其同族留京师者得上品通官，在镇者即为清途所隔，或多逃逸。
现代文：这些人到了边关之后，受镇将驱使，只能担任虞侯或没有月俸的随从之类的卑下职务。一生之内，最高也只不过做到军主。然而他们同姓中留在京城的那些人却能做到上品显官，于是身在边镇的那些人便由于升迁之路与己隔绝，因而大量逃散。
English: After these people arrived at the border, they were forced by the town magistrate to only hold menial positions such as county magistrate or attendant without monthly salary. Within a lifetime, the highest was only to become a military commander. However, those who remained in the capital with the same surname were able to become high-ranking officials. As a result, those people in the border town were cut off from the path of promotion, so they fled in large numbers.

古文：乃峻边兵之格，镇人不听浮游在外，于是少年不得从师，长者不得游宦，独为匪人，言之流涕！
现代文：于是，朝廷制定了严厉的边兵制度，规定不允许边镇上的人浮游在外，于是少年人不能从师学习，成年人不能出外游宦，只有这些人不被当做人看待，说起来便让人心酸落泪！
English: As a result, the imperial court established a strict border guard system, stipulating that people from border towns were not allowed to wander outside. As a result, young people could not study under a teacher, and adults could not travel abroad. Only these people were not regarded as human beings, and it made people sad and tearful to say it!

古文：自定鼎伊、洛，边任益轻，唯底滞凡才，乃出为镇将，转相模习，专事聚敛。
现代文：自从迁都洛阳以来，边防职任更加被看得轻了，只有那些长期不能升迁的庸碌之才，才出任镇将，这些人互相仿效，一心为自己聚敛财物，而无心于本职之事。
English: Since the relocation of the capital to Luoyang, the border guard position has been regarded more lightly. Only those mediocre talents who have not been able to be promoted for a long time have been appointed as town generals. These people imitate each other, concentrate on accumulating wealth for themselves, and have no intention of doing their job.

古文：或诸方奸吏，犯罪配边，为之指踪，政以贿立，边人无不切齿。
现代文：或者各地方的奸吏，因犯罪而发配边关，这些人在背后为镇将尽出坏主意，贪脏枉法，以致贿赂成风，取代了正常的制度，边民们对此无不切齿。
English: Or crooked officials in various regions, who are given border posts for committing crimes. Behind their backs, these people will come up with all kinds of bad ideas and corrupt practices for the town, so that bribery has become the norm, replacing the normal system. Border residents are all very angry about this.

古文：及阿那瑰背恩纵掠，发奔命追之，十五万众度沙漠，不日而还。边人见此援师，遂自意轻中国。
现代文：到阿那背弃朝廷之恩，纵掠反叛而去，朝廷发兵长途追击。十五万大军越过沙漠，但不到几天功夫就返回来了，不能除尽反贼，边民见到这样的援军，于是便打心眼中瞧不起中原之国。
English: When Anah turned his back on the grace of the imperial court, plundered and rebelled, and the imperial court sent troops to pursue him for a long distance, a hundred and fifty thousand troops crossed the desert, but returned after a few days of hard work. They could not eliminate all the rebels. When the border people saw such reinforcements, they despised the country of the Central Plains in their hearts.

古文：尚书令臣崇求改镇为州，抑亦先觉，朝廷未许。
现代文：尚书令李崇请求改镇为州，或许也是先觉察到了这一点，但是朝廷没有准许他的请求。
English: Shang Shuling Li Chong's request to change the town into a prefecture may also have been aware of this, but the court did not grant his request.

古文：而高阙戍主御下失和，拔陵杀之，遂相帅为乱，攻城掠地，所过夷灭，王师屡北，贼党日盛。
现代文：高阙戌的主将管制下属严酷，上下失和，破六韩拔陵杀了他，于是结伙叛乱，攻城掠地，所过之处夷灭无遗。朝廷军队屡屡败北，贼党气焰日益嚣张。
English: Gaozhen's master controlled his subordinates harshly, and there was discord between the upper and lower ranks. He killed him by breaking the Six Han Tombs, so the gangs rebelled, attacked the city and plundered the land, and destroyed everything they passed. The imperial army was repeatedly defeated, and the thieves' party became increasingly arrogant.

古文：此段之举，指望销平；而崔暹只轮不返，臣崇与臣逡巡复路，相与还次云中，将士之情莫不解体。
现代文：这一段时间里的举动，指望能铲平叛乱，早获安定；但是崔暹全军覆没，李崇与我徘徊难进，只好一起顺原路回到云中，将士们的情绪一落千丈，无心再战。
English: During this period of time, the hope was that the rebellion could be quelled and the situation stabilized early; however, the entire army of Choi Siam was wiped out, and Li Chong and I were unable to advance, so we had to return to the clouds together along the original path. The soldiers' moods plummeted, and they had no intention of fighting again.

古文：今日所虑，非止西北，将恐诸镇寻亦如此，天下之事，何易可量！ 
现代文：现在的忧虑，不仅西北方面，恐怕各镇很快也会如此，天下之事，哪能容易地估量透呢！ 
English: The present anxiety, not only in the north-west, but I am afraid that it will soon be the same in all towns, how can the things of the world be easily gauged!

古文：书奏，不省。
现代文：元深的上书奏呈上去后，孝明帝没有亲自省阅。
English: The book went up and was not accepted.

古文：诏征崔暹系廷尉；暹以女妓、田园赂元义，卒得不坐。
现代文：孝明帝诏令召崔暹进朝，由廷尉问罪，但是崔暹用女妓、田产庄园贿赂元义，最后竟没有治罪。
English: Emperor Xiaoming issued an imperial edict summoning Choi Siam to the imperial court, where she was interrogated by a court lieutenant. However, Choi Siam bribed Yuan Yi with a prostitute and a farm, and in the end, no crime was committed.

古文：丁丑，莫折念生遣其都督杨伯年等攻仇鸠、河池二戍，东益州刺史魏子建遣将军伊祥等击破之，斩首千馀级。
现代文：丁丑，莫折念生派遣他属下的都督杨伯年攻打仇鸠、河池两个寨堡，东益州刺史魏子建派将军伊祥等人击败了杨伯年，斩首一千多人。
English: Ding Juxiong, without fail, sent his subordinate governor Yang Borenin to attack the two fortresses of Qianlong and Hechi, and the East Yizhou general Yi Xiang defeated Yang Borenin and beheaded more than a thousand people.

古文：东益州本氐王杨绍先之国，将佐皆以城民劲勇，二秦反者皆其族类，请先收其器械。子建曰： 城民数经行阵，抚之足以为用，急之则腹背为患。 
现代文：东益州本来是氐王杨绍先的封国，将佐们都因为州城中的民众勇悍不驯，南秦州和秦州的反叛者都是杨绍先的同族之人，于是请求要先没收城里人手中的兵器械仗，魏子建说： 城中民众数次经历打仗之事，安抚好他们便可为我所用，逼的太急了则会成为我们的心腹之患。 
English: Dongyizhou was originally a fiefdom of the warlord Yang Shaoshan, and the generals were all because the people in the state city were brave and unruly. The rebels in South Qin and Qin states were Yang Shaoshan's compatriots, so they asked to first confiscate the weapons and equipment in the hands of the people in the city. Wei Zijian said: The people in the city have experienced war several times. If they are pacified, they can be used for me. If they are forced too quickly, they will become our vassals.

古文：乃悉召城民，慰谕之，既而渐分其父兄子弟外戍诸郡，内外相顾，卒无叛者。
现代文：于是把城中民众都召集起来，安抚晓谕他们，然后逐渐把他们父子兄弟分派到外地各郡去戍守，这样内外相顾，到底也没有出现反叛者。
English: So he gathered all the people in the city, pacified and advised them, and then gradually sent their fathers and brothers to the outlying counties to guard them. In this way, they took care of each other both at home and abroad, and there were no rebels in the end.

古文：子建，兰根之族兄也。
现代文：魏子建是魏兰根的族兄。
English: Wei Zijian is the elder brother of Wei Langen.

古文：魏凉州幢帅于菩提等执刺史宋颖，据州反。
现代文：北魏凉州幢帅于菩提等人拘押了刺史宗颖，占据凉州而反。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, the commander of Liangzhou, Yu Bodi, and others detained Zishi Zongying and occupied Liangzhou.

古文：八月，庚寅，徐州刺史成景俊拔魏童城。
现代文：八月庚寅，梁朝徐州刺史成景俊攻拔北魏的童城。
English: In August, Geng Yin, Liang Zhaozhou and Cheng Jingjun attacked the Northern Wei Children's City.

古文：魏员外散骑侍郎李苗上书曰： 凡食少兵精，利于速战；粮多卒众，事宜持久。
现代文：北魏员外散骑侍朗李苗上书说： 粮少兵精，利于速战速决；粮多兵众，利于打持久之战。
English: Li Miao, a cavalry officer of the Northern Wei Dynasty, wrote: "Less grain and fewer soldiers are conducive to a quick war; more grain and more soldiers are conducive to a protracted war."

古文：今陇贼猖狂，非有素蓄，虽据两城，本无德义。其势在于疾攻，日有降纳，迟则人情离沮，坐待崩溃。
现代文：当今陇地贼寇猖狂，但是这些贼寇没有多少粮资储备崐，虽然占据了两座城，但本来没有德义，所以其势在于急攻，以使每日都有所降纳，迟缓了则会使人心离散，情绪颓丧，从而坐待崩溃。
English: Today, the bandits are rampant, but these bandits do not have much grain and resource reserves. Although they occupy two cities, they have no virtue. Therefore, their strength lies in the sudden attack, so that they can be lowered every day. If they are delayed, they will cause people's hearts to be scattered and their emotions will be depressed, so they will wait for the collapse.

古文：夫飚至风举，逆者求万一之功；高壁深垒，王师有全制之策。
现代文：飚至风举，逆反者求的是万一之功；高壁深垒，王师有全制之策。
English: When the wind blows, the rebels ask for a contingency plan; when the walls are high and the ramparts are deep, Wang Shi has a comprehensive plan.

古文：但天下久泰，人不晓兵，奔利不相待，逃难不相顾，将无法令，士非教习，不思长久之计，各有轻敌之心。
现代文：但是天下长久安泰，人们已经不知晓行伍征战了，都变得追逐利益唯恐落后，逃灾避难互不相顾，将帅没有法令，士兵不演习操练，人人不思长远之计，个个都有轻敌之心。
English: However, the world has been safe for a long time. People no longer know how to go to war. They have all become profit-seeking and backward-looking, fleeing disasters and taking refuge without regard for each other. Generals have no decrees, soldiers do not practice drills, everyone does not think about long-term plans, and everyone has the heart of a light enemy.

古文：如令陇东不守，汧军败散，则两秦遂强，三辅危弱，国之右臂于斯废矣。
现代文：如果使陇东失守，地元志的军队败溃，秦州和南秦州莫折念生及张长命等反贼的势力便可强大，那么长安附近顿时就会变得危而又弱，作为国家的右臂于是便废了。
English: If Shandong is defeated, the local troops are defeated, and the anti-thief forces such as Qin and South Qin are strong, then the vicinity of Chang'an will suddenly become dangerous and weak, and it will be useless as the right arm of the country.

古文：宜勒大将坚壁勿战，别命偏裨帅精兵数千出麦积崖以袭其后，则汧、岐之下，群妖自散。 
现代文：应该旨令主将坚壁而守，不要出战，另外命令副帅偏将率领兵数千名出麦积崖从背后袭击叛贼，如此则、陇之地，群妖自散。 
English: He should have ordered the commander-in-chief to stand firm and not to go to war, and ordered the vice-commander-in-chief to lead thousands of soldiers to attack the traitors from behind the cliff, so that the demons would disperse.

古文：魏以苗为统军，与别将淳于诞俱出梁、益，隶魏子建。未至，莫折念生遣其弟高阳王天生将兵下陇。
现代文：北魏任命李苗为统军，让他同别将淳于诞分别从梁州、益州出发去征讨叛贼，但还没有到达目的地，莫折念生便派遣他的弟弟高阳王莫折天生率兵前来陇地。
English: The Northern Wei appointed Li Miao as the unified army, and asked him to set out from Liangzhou and Yizhou to fight against the traitors, but before reaching the destination, he sent his younger brother Gaoyang Wang Moreno to lead the troops to the battlefield.

古文：甲午，都督元志与战于陇口，志兵败，弃众东保岐州。
现代文：甲午，都督元志与莫折天生在陇口交战，元志兵败，丢下部众跑到东边的岐州自守。
English: In the afternoon of the first day of the second month, the governor, Mototsune, fought with Mototsune in Hekiguchi. Mototsune was defeated and left his subordinates to defend himself in the eastern part of Kishu.

古文：东西部敕勒皆叛魏，附于破六韩拔陵，魏主始思李崇及广阳王深之言。
现代文：东部和西部的敕勒人都反叛了北魏，投附于破六韩拔陵，北魏孝明帝这才开始想到了李崇和广阳王元深曾经说过的话。
English: Both the eastern and western Qilian people rebelled against the Northern Wei Dynasty and attached themselves to the tomb of the Six Han Kings. It was only then that the Northern Wei Emperor Xiaoming began to think about what Li Chong and Guangyang King Yuan Shen had once said.

古文：丙申，下诏： 诸州镇军贯非有罪配隶者，皆免为民。 
现代文：丙申，孝明帝诏令： 各州镇在册的军人中凡不是因犯罪而被流放服役的，全都免为平民。 
English: Emperor Xiaoming decreed that all military personnel registered in all prefectures and towns who had not been exiled for crimes would be exempted from serving as civilians.

古文：改镇为州，以怀朔镇为朔州，更命朔州白云州。
现代文：改镇为州，以怀朔镇为朔州，又改名朔州为云州。
English: The town was changed to a prefecture, with Waishuo Town as Shuozhou, and Shuozhou was renamed Yunzhou.

古文：遣兼黄门侍郎郦道元为大使，抚慰六镇。
现代文：派遣兼黄门侍郎郦道元为大使，让他去安抚宣慰六镇。
English: He also sent Huangmen waiter Gong Dogen as an ambassador to appease and comfort the six towns.

古文：时六镇已尽叛，道元不果行。
现代文：当时六镇已经全部反叛，郦道元没有成行。
English: At that time, the six towns had all rebelled, and Shandong Yuan did not march.

古文：先是，代人迁洛者，多为选部所抑，不得仕进。
现代文：先前，从代京迁到洛阳的那些人，大多被吏部所压制，不能作官。
English: Previously, most of the people who moved from Daikyo to Luoyang were suppressed by the cadre department and could not work as officials.

古文：及六镇叛，元义乃用代来寒人为传诏以尉悦之。
现代文：到六镇反叛之时，元义才使用从代京迁来的人担任传诏，以便安慰、取悦他们。
English: When the six towns rebelled, Yuan Yizi only used people who had moved from Daikyo to serve as heralds in order to comfort and please them.

古文：廷尉评代人山伟奏记，称义德美，义摧伟为尚书二千石郎。
现代文：廷尉评代京人山伟在奏记中称颂元义道德高尚，元义便晋升山伟为尚书二千石郎。
English: In his report, the courtier praising the representative of Kyoto, Sanwei, praised Motoyoshi for his high moral standards, and Motoyoshi then promoted Sanwei to Shosho of 2,000 koku.

古文：秀容人乞伏莫于聚众攻郡，杀太守；丁酉，南秀容牧子万于乞真反，杀太仆卿陆延，秀容酋长尔硃荣讨平之。
现代文：秀容人乞伏莫于聚众攻打郡城，杀了太守。丁酉，南秀容的放牧人万于乞真杀了太仆卿陆延，秀容的酋长尔朱荣讨伐平定了这场叛乱。
English: Hsiu Rong's followers gathered in large numbers to attack the county seat and killed the governor. Ding Xuan, Nan Hsiu Rong's herdsman Wan Yu Kieng, killed the minister Lu Yan, and Hsiu Rong's chieftain Zhu Rong fought to quell the rebellion.

古文：荣，羽健之玄孙也。
现代文：尔朱荣是尔朱羽健的玄孙。
English: Er Zhu Rong is the great-great-grandson of Er Zhu Yu Jian.

古文：其祖代勤，尝出猎，部民射虎，误中其髀，代勤拔箭，不复推问，所部莫不感悦。
现代文：尔朱荣的祖父尔朱代勤，一次出外打猎，他的部落中的一个成员射虎，误中了他的大腿，他把箭拔出来，没有问罪于该人，因此部落成员们莫不对他心悦诚服。
English: Lzhu Rong's grandfather, Lzhu Daiqin, was once out hunting when a member of his tribe shot a tiger and hit his thigh by mistake. He pulled the arrow out and did not blame the person, so the tribe members were very pleased with him.

古文：官至肆州刺史，赐爵染郡公，年九十馀而卒；子新兴立。
现代文：尔朱代勤为官做到肆州刺史，受赐爵位梁郡公，活了九十多岁才去世。他的儿子尔朱新兴继承了爵位。
English: Er Zhu, who served as an official to make the history of Wuzhou, was given the title of Liang County. He lived for more than 90 years before he died. His son, Er Zhu Xingxing, inherited the title.

古文：新兴时，畜牧尤蕃息，牛羊驼马，色别为群，弥漫川谷，不可胜数。
现代文：尔朱新兴做酋长之时，畜牧业尤其兴旺，牛、羊、骆驼和马，以毛色分群，弥漫于川谷之中，数量多得无法计算。
English: At the time of the emergence of Lzhu as chief, animal husbandry was particularly prosperous. Cattle, sheep, camels and horses, grouped by color, pervaded the valley and were too numerous to count.

古文：魏每出师，新兴辄献马及资粮以助军，高祖嘉之。
现代文：北魏每到出兵之时，尔朱新兴便献上马匹以及军资粮食等来帮助军队，孝文帝经常表彰他。
English: Whenever the Northern Wei Dynasty sent troops, Er Zhu Xingxing offered horses and military grain to help the army, and Emperor Xiaowen often commended him.

古文：新兴老，请传爵于子荣，魏朝许之。
现代文：尔朱新兴年老了，请求把爵位传给尔朱荣，北魏朝廷准许了。
English: When Lzhu Xinxing became old, he asked to pass the title to Lzhu Rong, and the Northern Wei Dynasty granted his request.

古文：荣神机明决，御众严整。
现代文：尔朱荣心机神妙，明察而有决断，管理部属特别严格。
English: Le Zhu Rong has a wonderful mind, clear observation and determination, and the management department is particularly strict.

古文：时四方兵起，荣阴有大志，散其畜牧资财，招合骁勇，结纳豪杰，于是侯景、司马子如、贾显度及五原段荣、太安窦泰皆往依之。
现代文：当时四方兵起，烽火遍地，尔朱荣心中暗藏大志，把自己的牲畜钱财散发众人，招募纠合骁勇之徒，结交招纳豪杰，于是侯景、司马子如、贾显度以及五原人段荣、太安人窦泰等人都去依附了他。
English: At that time, soldiers from all four directions rose up, and bonfires spread all over the country. Er Zhurong had a hidden ambition in his heart, and distributed his livestock and money to the people, recruited and entangled courageous people, and made friends to recruit heroes. Therefore, Hou Jing, Sima Zi Ru, Jia Xindu, as well as Wuhan people Duan Rong and Tai'an people Dou Tai and others all followed him.

古文：显度，显智之兄也。
现代文：贾显度是贾显智的哥哥。
English: Jia Xindu is the elder brother of Jia Xianzhi.

古文：戊戌，莫折念生遣都督窦双攻魏盘头郡，东益州刺史魏子建遣将军窦念祖击破之。
现代文：戊戌，莫折念生派遣都督窦双攻打北魏盘头郡，东益州刺史魏子建派遣将军窦念祖击败了窦双。
English: Wuzhen, Mo Yinsheng dispatched the governor Dou Shuang to attack the North Wei Pan Tou County, and the East Yizhou, Wei Zijian dispatched the general Dou Yinshu to defeat Dou Shuang.

古文：九月，戊申，成景俊拔魏睢陵。
现代文：九月戊申，成景俊攻取了北魏的睢陵。
English: In September, Cheng Jingjun conquered the Northern Wei's Gongling.

古文：戊午，北兗州刺史赵景悦围荆山。
现代文：戊午，北兖州刺史赵景悦围困荆山。
English: In the afternoon, Zhaozhou's sister, Zhaozhou Zhaozhou, surrounded Lushan.

古文：裴邃帅骑三千袭寿阳，壬戌夜，斩关而入，克其外郭。
现代文：裴邃率领三千骑兵袭击寿阳，于壬戌夜，攻破城门，攻克了寿阳外城。
English: Pei Rong led three thousand cavalry to attack Shouyang, and broke through the city gate and conquered the outer city of Shouyang at night.

古文：魏扬州刺史长孙稚御之，一日九战，后军蔡秀成失道不至，邃引兵还。
现代文：北魏扬州刺史长孙稚抗击裴邃，一天交战了九次，后军蔡秀成迷路而没有赶来，裴邃只好领兵撤返。
English: In Northern Wei Yangzhou, the warlord Sun Wuchang fought against Pei Xuan. They fought nine times in one day. The latter's army, Cai Xucheng, got lost and did not arrive. Pei Xuan had to withdraw his troops.

古文：别将击魏淮阳，魏使行台郦道元、都督河间王琛救寿阳，安乐王鉴救淮阳。
现代文：梁朝派遣别将攻打北魏淮阳，北魏派遣行台郦道元、都督河间王元琛去援救寿阳，派安乐王元鉴去援救淮阳。
English: The Liang Dynasty dispatched its generals to attack Huaiyang of the Northern Wei Dynasty, the Northern Wei Dynasty dispatched the governor of Taishan, Dogen, and the governor of Hema, Wang Yuanjun, to rescue Shouyang, and sent the king of Anle, Wang Yuanjian, to rescue Huaiyang.

古文：鉴，诠之子也。
现代文：元鉴是元诠的儿子。
English: Yuan Jian is the son of Yuan Qian.

古文：魏西道行台元修义得风疾，不能治军。
现代文：北魏西道行台元义得了风疾，不能指挥军队了。
English: The commander of the Northern Wei army in the Western Road, Taiyuan Yi, fell ill and was no longer able to command the army.

古文：壬申，魏以尚书左仆射齐王萧宝寅为西道行台大都督，帅诸将讨莫折念生。
现代文：壬申，北魏任命尚书左仆射齐王萧宝寅为西道行台大都督，令他统率众将去讨攻莫折念生。
English: In Jinshin, the Northern Wei Dynasty appointed Shangshu's left-hand man, King Xiao Baoying, as the grand governor of the West Road Gangtai, and ordered him to lead the generals to attack Muxifeng.

古文：宋颖密求救于吐谷浑王伏连筹，伏连筹自将救凉州，于菩提弃城走，追斩之。
现代文：宋颖秘密地向吐谷浑王伏连筹求救，伏连筹亲自率兵援救凉州，于菩提弃城逃跑，伏连筹追上斩了他。
English: Song Ying secretly appealed to the King of Tuyun, Fuliang Che, for help. Fuliang Che personally led an army to rescue Liangzhou and fled to the abandoned city of Bodhi. Fuliang Che caught up with him and beheaded him.

古文：城民越天安等复推宋颖为刺史。
现代文：城中百姓赵天安等人又推举宋颖为刺史。
English: People in the city, such as Zhao Tian'an, also nominated Song Ying.

古文：河间王琛军至西硖石，解涡阳围，复荆山戍。
现代文：河间王元琛率兵抵达西硖石，解了涡阳之围，收复了荆山戍。
English: Kawama Wang Yuanjun and his soldiers arrived at Xishuanshi, broke the encirclement of the Vortex Sun, and recovered the Jingshan Mountains.

古文：青、冀二州刺史王神念与战，为琛所败。
现代文：梁朝青、冀二州刺史王神念与元琛交战，被元琛打败。
English: Liang Chaoqing and Jizhou Zhishi Wang Shennian fought with the Yuan Dynasty and were defeated by the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：冬，十月，戊寅，裴邃、元树攻魏建陵城，克之。
现代文：冬季，十月戊寅，裴邃、元树攻打北魏建陵城，攻克了该城。
English: In winter, in October, Wu Yin, Pei Yu and Yuan Shu attacked the Northern Wei Jianling City and conquered the city.

古文：辛巳，拔曲木，扫虏将军彭宝孙拔琅邪。
现代文：辛巳，又攻下了曲木，扫虏将军彭宝孙攻取了琅邪。
English: Soon after, they also captured Qumu, and the scavenger general Peng Baosun captured Xiji.

古文：魏营州城民刘安定、就德兴执史李仲遵，据城反。
现代文：北魏营州城的百姓刘安定、就德兴抓住了刺史李仲遵，占据州城而反。
English: The people of Yingzhou City in the Northern Wei Dynasty, Liu An and De Xing, seized the assassin Li Zhongzong and occupied the city.

古文：城民王恶儿斩安定以降；德兴东走，自称燕王。
现代文：城中的百姓王恶儿斩了刘安定而投降，就德兴向东逃跑，自称燕王。
English: The villain of the town, Wang Xi'er, cut off Liu An's head and surrendered, while De Xing fled eastward, calling himself Yan Wang.

古文：胡琛遣其将宿勤明达寂豳、夏、北华三州，壬午，魏遗都督北海王颢帅诸将讨之。
现代文：胡琛派遣手下将领宿勤明达侵扰豳、夏、北华三州，北魏派遣都督北海王元颢统率众将去讨伐。
English: Hubei dispatched his subordinate general, the leader of Jinmingda, to invade Shandong, Xia and North China, and Northern Wei dispatched the governor of the North Sea, Wang Yuanjun, to lead the general to fight.

古文：颢，详之子也。
现代文：元颢是元详的儿子。
English: Yuan Shao was the son of Yuan Zhao.

古文：甲申，彭宝孙拔檀丘。
现代文：甲申，梁朝彭宝孙攻取了檀丘。
English: Jiashen, Liang Dynasty, Peng Baosun conquered Dangqiu.

古文：辛卯，裴邃拔狄城；丙申。又拔甓城，进屯黎浆。
现代文：辛卯，裴邃攻取了狄城；丙申，又攻取了甓城，进驻黎将。
English: Xinwu, Peiwu captured Di City; Bishen, also captured Shicheng, and was stationed in Lijiao.

古文：壬寅，魏东海太守韦敬欣以司吾城降。
现代文：壬寅，北魏东海太守韦敬欣献上司吾城投降。
English: In Ren'in, Wei Jingxin, the governor of the East Sea of Wei, surrendered Shigu City.

古文：定远将军曹世宗拔曲阳；甲辰，又拔秦墟，魏守将多弃城走。
现代文：定远将军曹世宗攻取了曲阳；甲辰，又攻下了秦墟，北魏的守将大多数弃城逃跑。
English: Cao Shizong, a general from Dingyuan, captured Quyang; Jia Chen and Qinhuai, and most of the Northern Wei defenders abandoned the city and fled.

古文：魏使黄门侍郎卢同持节诣营州慰劳，就德兴降而复反。
现代文：北魏派黄门侍郎卢同持符节去营州慰劳，就德兴投降后又反叛了。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty sent Huangmen waiter Lu to Yingzhou for consolation, and he rebelled after the surrender of Dexing.

古文：诏以同为幽州刺史兼尚书行台，同屡为德兴所败而还。
现代文：朝廷诏令任命卢同为幽州刺史兼尚书行台。卢同屡次被就德兴打败而撤回。
English: The Imperial Court issued a decree appointing Lu Tong as Yuzhou Historian and Bookstore. Lu Tong was repeatedly defeated and withdrawn by De Xing.

古文：魏朔方胡反，围夏州刺史源子雍，城中食尽，煮马皮而食之，众无贰心。
现代文：北魏朔方的胡人反叛，围攻夏州刺史源子雍，城中的粮食吃光了，就煮食马皮，众人都一心一德守城。
English: The Hu people of the Northern Wei Shuo side rebelled and besieged Xiazhou Zhishiyuan Ziyong. When the grain in the city ran out, they cooked horse skin. Everyone was united in defending the city.

古文：子雍欲自出求粮，留其子延伯守统万，将佐皆曰： 今四方离叛，粮尽援绝，不若父子俱去。 
现代文：源子雍想亲自出城求粮，留下他的儿子源延伯守统万城，将佐们都说： 如今四方反叛，粮食耗尽，外援阻绝，不如你们父子都去。 
English: Yuan Zi Yong wanted to go out of the city in person to ask for grain, leaving his son Yuan Yanbo to take charge of the city. The generals said, "Now that there are rebellions in four directions, grain is exhausted, and foreign aid is blocked, it is better for you and your sons to go."

古文：子雍泣曰： 吾世荷国恩，当毕命此城；但无食可守，故欲往东州，为诸君营数月之食，若幸而得之，保全必矣。 
现代文：源子雍流着眼泪说道： 我家世世代代承受国恩，所以应拼死守住这座城。但是没有粮食，无法守城，所以想到东州去，为各位筹措几个月的食物，如果有幸能得到，就必定可以保住城。 
English: With tears streaming down her face, Yuan Zi Yong said, "My family has received the grace of the state for generations, so we should fight to defend this city. But without food, we can't defend the city, so I want to go to Dongzhou and collect a few months' worth of food for everyone. If we are lucky enough to get it, we will definitely be able to keep the city."

古文：乃师羸弱诣东夏州运粮，延伯与将佐哭而送之。
现代文：于是便率领羸弱之卒去东夏州运粮，源延伯与众将佐们哭着为他送行。
English: As a result, he led his feeble followers to transport grain to Dongxia Prefecture. Yuan Yanbo and his generals accompanied him in tears.

古文：子雍行数日，胡帅曹阿各拔邀击，擒之。
现代文：源子雍行走几日，遭到了胡人头领曹阿各拔的阻击，被曹阿各拔擒拿。
English: After walking for several days, Yuan Zi Yong was blocked by the Hu people's leader, Cao Agobar, and was captured by Cao Agobar.

古文：子雍潜遣人赍书，敕城中努力固守。
现代文：源子雍暗中派人给统万城送信，命令城中军民努力固守。
English: Yuan Zi Yongming sent a messenger to Tong Wancheng, ordering the soldiers and civilians in the city to stick to it.

古文：阖城忧惧，延伯谕之曰： 吾父吉凶不可知，方寸焦烂。
现代文：全城军民得知源子雍被擒，非常忧惧，源延伯晓谕他们说： 我父亲的生死吉凶还不可得知，我急得滚油浇心。
English: When the whole army and people of the city learned that Yuan Zi Yong had been captured, they were very worried. Yuan Yanbo told them: "The fate of my father's life and death cannot be known yet. I am so anxious.

古文：但奉命守城，所为者重，不敢以私害公。
现代文：但是我奉家父之命守城，责任重大，所以不敢因私损公而弃城不顾。
English: However, I was ordered by my father to defend the city, and the responsibility was great, so I did not dare to abandon the city due to personal loss.

古文：诸君幸得此心！ 
现代文：请各位理解我的心情。 
English: Please understand my feelings.

古文：于是众感其义，莫不奋励。
现代文：于是众人都被源延伯的节义所感动，无不奋发，立志守城。
English: As a result, everyone was moved by Yuan Yanbo's dedication to the festival, and they all worked hard to defend the city.

古文：子雍虽被擒，胡人常以民礼事之，子雍为陈祸福，劝阿各拔降。
现代文：源子雍虽然被擒，但是胡人一直把他当州长官来看待，以下民之礼奉事他，他对胡人陈述了祸福利弊，劝曹阿各拔投降。
English: Although Yuan Zi Yong was captured, the Hu people always regarded him as the governor and served him according to the people's worship. He told the Hu people about the evils, benefits and drawbacks, and advised Cao Aqibat to surrender.

古文：会阿各拔卒，其弟桑生竟帅其众随子雍降。
现代文：恰巧曹阿各拔去世，他的弟弟曹桑生竟率领部众随源子雍投降了。
English: Coincidentally, Cao Akhobar died, and his brother Cao Sansheng actually led the troops to surrender with Yuan Ziyong.

古文：子雍见行台北海王颢，具陈诸贼可灭之状，颢给子雍兵，令其先驱。
现代文：源子雍去见行台北海王元颢，一一讲陈了各路反贼可以被歼灭的情状，元颢给了源子雍兵力，令他作为先锋。
English: Yuan Zi Yong went to see the Taipei sea king, Yuan Zi, and told him that all the anti-traitors could be annihilated. Yuan Zi gave Yuan Zi Yong military strength and made him the vanguard.

古文：时东夏州阖境皆反，所在屯结，子雍转斗而前，九旬之中，凡数十战，遂平东夏州，征税粟以馈统万，二夏由是获全。
现代文：当时，东夏州全境俱反，到处贼寇聚集，源子雍转战而前，九十天之内，经历了几十场战役，终于平定了东夏州，于是征收税粟送往统万城，夏州、东夏州因此而得到保全。
English: At that time, the whole territory of Dongxia Prefecture rebelled, bandits and thieves gathered everywhere, and Yuan Zi Yong went to war. Within ninety days, he experienced dozens of battles and finally pacified Dongxia Prefecture. Therefore, he collected tax poppies and sent them to Tongwan City. As a result, Dongxia Prefecture and Dongxia Prefecture were preserved.

古文：子雍，怀之子也。
现代文：源子雍是源怀的儿子。
English: Yuan Zi Yong is the son of Yuan Huai.

古文：魏广阳王深上言： 今六镇尽叛，高车二部亦与之同，以此疲兵击之，必无胜理。
现代文：北魏广阳王元深上书说： 如今六镇全都反叛了，高车二部的情况也与六镇相同，以这样的疲劳之兵攻打他们，必定没有取胜的道理。
English: Wang Yuancheng of Guangyang in the Northern Wei Dynasty wrote: "Nowadays, the six towns have all rebelled, and the situation of Gaochu Second Division is the same as that of the six towns. If we attack them with such tired soldiers, there must be no way to win.

古文：不若选练精兵守恒州诸要，更为后图。 
现代文：所以，不如挑选演练精兵把守恒州的各个要冲之地，再作以后的打算。 
English: Therefore, it is better to select drill soldiers to protect the important places in Hengzhou, and then plan for the future.

古文：遂与李崇引兵还平城。
现代文：于是便与李崇领兵回到了平城。
English: So he returned to Pingcheng with Li Chong leading the troops.

古文：崇谓诸将曰： 云中者，白道之冲，贼之咽喉，若此地不全，则并、肆危矣。
现代文：李崇对众将说： 云中是白道的要冲，叛贼的咽喉要害，如果此地保不住，那么并州和肆州就危险了。
English: Li Chong said to the generals: Yunzhong is the key to the White Road, and the throat of the traitors. If this place cannot be preserved, then Bozhou and Zhouzhou will be in danger.

古文：当留一人镇之，谁可者？ 
现代文：所以，应当留下一个人镇守，谁来承当呢？ 
English: Therefore, one person should be left to guard the town, who will take over?

古文：众举费穆，崇乃请穆为朔州刺史。
现代文：众人推举费穆，李崇便奏请任命费穆为朔州刺史。
English: The people nominated Feimu, and Li Chong then requested that Feimu be appointed as the governor of Shuozhou.

古文：贺拔度拔父子及武川宇文肱纠合乡里豪杰，共袭卫可孤，杀之；度拔寻与铁勒战死。
现代文：贺拔度拔父子以及武川人宇文肱纠集乡里的豪杰，一同袭击卫可孤，杀了卫可孤；贺拔度拔不久又与敕勒交战而身亡。
English: He Ba Du Ba, his father and son, and Uwen Yao, a native of Bukawa, gathered the heroes in the village and attacked Wei Ke Guo together, killing Wei Ke Guo; He Ba Du Ba soon fought with Xule and died.

古文：肱，逸豆归之玄孙也。
现代文：宇文肱是宇文逸豆归的玄孙。
English: Uwen Yao is the great-great-grandson of Uwen Yatzu Gui.

古文：李崇引国子博士祖莹为长史；广阳王深奏莹诈增首级，盗没军资，莹坐除名，崇亦免官削爵征还。
现代文：李崇引荐国子博士祖莹为长史；广阳王元深弹劾祖莹谎报斩敌人数，侵吞军款，祖莹因而获罪被除名，李崇也被免去官职，削夺爵位而召回朝廷。
English: Li Chong has a long history of recommending Dr. Guo Zi to Zu Ying; Guangyang Wang Yuan Shen impeached Zu Ying for falsely reporting the number of enemies killed and embezzling military funds. As a result, Zu Ying was found guilty and removed from the list. Li Chong was also removed from office, stripped of his title and recalled to the imperial court.

古文：深专总军政。
现代文：于是，元深得以一人独揽军政大权。
English: As a result, Motonobu was able to seize military and political power all by himself.

古文：莫折天生进攻魏歧州，十一月，戊申，陷之，执都督元志及刺史裴芬之，送莫折念生，杀之。
现代文：莫折天生进攻北魏岐州，十一月戊申，攻陷了该城，抓获都督元志以及刺史裴芬之，把他们送给莫折念生，莫折念生杀了他们。
English: In November, he led an attack on the city of Wuzhou in Northern Wei and captured the city, capturing the governor, Yuan Zhi, and the governor, Shi Pei Fen, and gave them to him, who killed them.

古文：念生又使卜胡等寇泾州，败光禄大夫薛峦于平凉东。峦，安都之孙也。
现代文：莫折念生又派卜胡等人入侵泾州，在平凉东边打败了光禄大夫薛峦。薛峦是薛安都的孙子。
English: He sent Bu Hu and others to invade Zhangzhou, and defeated the Guanglu doctor Xue Yao on the east side of Pingliang. Xue Yao was the grandson of Xue Andu.

古文：丙辰，彭宝孙拔魏东莞。
现代文：丙辰，彭宝孙攻取了北魏的东莞。
English: Xing Chen and Peng Baosun captured Dongguan in the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：壬戌，裴邃攻寿阳之安城，丙寅，马头、安城皆降。
现代文：壬戌，裴邃攻打寿阳的安城，丙寅，马头和安城两处都投降了。
English: In Ancheng, where Renmin and Pei Jun attacked Shouyang, Hsin Yin, Ma Tou and Ancheng both surrendered.

古文：高平人攻杀卜胡，共迎胡琛。
现代文：高平人攻打并杀死了卜胡，一起迎接胡琛前来。
English: The Gaoping people attacked and killed Buhu, and came together to welcome Hu Yao.

古文：魏以黄门侍郎杨昱兼侍中，持节监北海王颢军，以救豳州，豳州围解。
现代文：北魏任命黄门侍郎杨昱兼侍中，令他持符节监督北海王元颢的军队，去援救幽州，豳州之围因而被解除。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty appointed the Yellow Gate's chamberlain, Yang Jie, to supervise the army of the North Sea king, Yuan Shao, to rescue Yuzhou, and the siege of Yuzhou was lifted.

古文：蜀贼张映龙、姜神达攻雍州，雍州刺史元修义请援，一日一夜，书移九通。都督李叔仁迟疑不赴，昱曰： 长安，关中基本，若长安不守，大军自然瓦散，留此何益？ 
现代文：迁到关中而居的蜀人张映龙、姜神达攻打雍州，雍州刺史元义请求援救，一天一夜之间，连派九人去送信，都督李叔仁迟疑不去救援，杨昱说： 长安是关中的根本所系，如果长安失守，则大军自然土崩瓦解，那么留在这里还有什么好处呢？ 
English: Zhang Yinglong and Jiang Shenda, the Shu people who moved to Guanzhong and lived there, attacked Yongzhou, and Yongzhou stabbed Shi Yuanyi to request rescue. One day and one night, they even sent nine people to send a message. The governor Li Shuren hesitated not to rescue. Yang Wei said: Chang'an is the fundamental system of Guanzhong. If Chang'an is lost, the army will naturally collapse, so what is the benefit of staying here?

古文：遂与叔仁进击之，斩神达，馀党散走。
现代文：于是，便与李叔仁进攻张映龙和姜神达，斩子姜神达，余党们都跑散了。
English: As a result, he and Li Shuren attacked Zhang Yinglong and Jiang Shenda, beheaded Jiang Shenda, and the rest of the party members ran away.

古文：十二月，戊寅，魏荆山降。
现代文：十二月戊寅，北魏的荆山城投降。
English: In December, Wuyin, the Northern Wei's Jingshan City surrendered.

古文：壬辰，魏以京兆王继为太师、大将军，都督西道诸军以讨莫折念生。
现代文：壬辰，北魏任命京兆王元继为太师、大将军，令他统率西路诸军讨伐莫折念生。
English: In Imjin, the Northern Wei Dynasty appointed Jingzhao Wangyuan to succeed him as Grand Master and General, and ordered him to lead the armies of the West Road to fight hard.

古文：乙巳，武勇将军李国兴攻魏平静关；辛丑，信威长史杨乾攻武阳关；任寅，攻岘关；皆克之。
现代文：乙巳，梁朝武勇将军李国兴攻打北魏的平靖关，辛丑，信威长史杨乾攻打武阳关，壬寅，又攻打岘关，都攻下来了。
English: At this time, Li Guoxing, the general of the Liang Dynasty, attacked the Northern Wei Dynasty's Pingjing Pass, Xinxiu Pass, Shi Yangqian attacked Wuyang Pass, and Renin Pass, and attacked Shaoguan Pass, all of which were defeated.

古文：国兴进围郢州，魏郢州刺史裴询与蛮酋西郢州刺史田朴特，相表里以拒之。
现代文：李国兴进军围攻郢州，北魏郢州刺史裴询与蛮族酋长西郢州刺史田朴特里外应合抵抗李国兴。
English: Li Guoxing marched into and besieged Bozhou. The Northern Wei governor of Bozhou, Zhi Shi Pei En, and the barbarian chieftain of West Bozhou, Zhi Tian Portri, joined forces to resist Li Guoxing.

古文：围城近百日，魏援军至，国兴引还。
现代文：郢州城被围困了将近一百天，北魏援军才到，李国兴领兵返回。
English: Zhangzhou City was besieged for nearly 100 days, and it was only when the Northern Wei reinforcements arrived that Li Guoxing led the troops back.

古文：询，骏之孙也。
现代文：裴询是裴骏的孙子。
English: Pei Xuan is Pei Yao's grandson.

古文：魏汾州诸胡反；以章武王融为大都督，将兵讨之。
现代文：北魏汾州的各部胡人反叛；朝廷委任章武王元融为大都督，率兵去讨伐。
English: The Hu people rebelled in all parts of Bozhou in Northern Wei; the imperial court appointed Zhang Wu Wangyuan as the grand governor and led the troops to fight.

古文：魏魏子建招谕南秦诸氐，稍稍降附，遂复六郡十二戍，斩贼帅韩祖香。
现代文：北魏魏子建宣谕招降南秦州各氐族部落，氐人稍微有所归附，于是便恢复了六郡十二戍，斩了韩祖香。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, Wei Zi Jian issued a proclamation to invite all the Yao tribes in Southern Qin State to surrender, and the Yao people subscribed to it slightly, so they restored the six counties and twelve counties, and cut off Han Zu Xiang.

古文：魏以子建兼尚书，为行台，刺史如故，梁、巴、二益、二秦诸州皆受节度。
现代文：北魏任命魏子建兼尚书，担任行台，刺史职务不变，梁、巴、二益、二秦各州都接受他的指挥调遣。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty appointed Wei Zijian and Shangshu to serve as the governor of Xingtai, and the position of the governor of Shishi remained unchanged. The states of Liang, Ba, Eriyu and Erqin all accepted his command and dispatch.

古文：莫折念生遣兵攻凉州，城民赵天安复执刺史以应之。
现代文：莫折念生派兵攻打凉州，凉州城的百姓赵天安再次抓住了州刺史响应莫折念生。
English: Zhao Tian'an, a citizen of Liangzhou, sent troops to attack Liangzhou. In response, Liangzhou sent troops to attack Liangzhou. Zhao Tian'an once again captured the history of Liangzhou.

古文：是岁，侍中、太子詹事周舍坐事免，散骑常侍钱唐硃异代掌机密，军旅谋议，方镇改易，朝仪诏敕，皆典之。
现代文：这一年，梁朝侍中、太子詹事周舍因事获罪而被免职，散骑常侍钱唐人朱异代替了周舍掌管朝廷机密大事，军事方面的出谋划策，以及各州文武长官的任免和朝廷礼仪、诏令等事情也都由他掌管。
English: In the same year, Prince Zhan Zhi Zhou She, Liang's personal attendant, was removed from his post after being convicted of a crime. Zhu Yan, a free-rider and frequent attendant of Qian Tang, replaced Zhou She in charge of the confidential affairs of the imperial court, the military strategy, the appointment and dismissal of the civil and military commanders of each state, and the imperial court etiquette and edicts.

古文：异好文义，多艺能，精力敏赡，上以是任之。
现代文：朱异喜好文章、义理，多才多艺，思想敏捷而周密，梁武帝因此而信任他。
English: Zhu Yixing likes articles, righteousness, versatility, quick-thinking and thoroughness, so Emperor Wu of Liang trusted him.

古文：高祖武皇帝六普通六年
现代文：普通六年
English: Normally six years

古文：春，正月，丙午，雍州刺史晋安王纲遣安北长史柳浑破魏南乡郡；司马董当门破魏晋城，庚戌，又破马圈、雕阳二城。
现代文：春季，正月丙午，雍州刺史晋安王萧纲派遣安北长史柳浑攻陷了北魏的南乡郡；派司马董当门攻陷了北魏的晋城，庚戌，又攻陷了马圈、阳二城。
English: In the spring, on the afternoon of the third day of the first month of the year, Xiao Gang, the king of Yangzhou, sent the Anbei chieftain Shi Liuhun to invade the Nanxiang County of the Northern Wei Dynasty; sent the Ma Dongdan to invade the Northern Wei Dynasty Jincheng, Gengbi, and also invaded Mahe and Yang Ercheng.

古文：辛亥，上祀南郊，大赦。
现代文：辛亥，梁武帝在南郊祭天，大赦天下。
English: In Xinhai, Emperor Liangwu held a religious ceremony in the southern suburbs, and issued a decree to grant amnesty to the whole world.

古文：魏徐州刺史元法僧，素附元义，见义骄恣，恐祸及己，遂谋反。
现代文：北魏徐州刺史元法僧，向来依附于元义，他见元义骄横纵恣，害怕祸及己身，于是便谋反。
English: The Northern Wei Xuzhou Xizhi Yuan Fa Monk had always been attached to Yuan Yi. Seeing Yuan Yi's arrogance and self-indulgence, he was afraid of the disaster and himself, so he plotted a rebellion.

古文：魏遗中书舍人张文伯至彭城，法僧谓曰： 吾欲与汝去危就安，能从我乎？ 
现代文：北魏派遣中书舍人张文伯到达彭城，元法僧对张文伯说： 我想与你去危就安，你能从我吗？ 
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty dispatched the scholar Zhang Wenbo to Pengcheng. The former monk said to Zhang Wenbo, "I want to go to safety with you. Can you help me?"

古文：文伯曰： 我宁死见文陵松柏，安能去忠义而从叛逆乎！ 
现代文：张文伯回答说： 我宁可死了去见孝崐文帝，怎么能离弃忠义而跟你一块叛逆呢！ 
English: Zhang Wenbo replied, "I would rather die to see my filial son Emperor Wen, how can I abandon my loyalty and rebel with you!"

古文：法僧杀之。
现代文：元法僧便杀了他。
English: The priest killed him.

古文：庚申，法僧杀行台高谅，称帝，改元天启，立诸子为王。
现代文：庚申，元法僧杀了行台高谅，自己称帝，改年号为天启，立几个儿子为王。
English: Goshun, a former Buddhist monk, killed Emperor Gaozong of Xingtai, proclaimed himself emperor, changed his name to Tianqi, and made several of his sons kings.

古文：魏发兵击之，法僧乃遣其子景仲来降。
现代文：北魏发兵讨伐，元法僧便派他的儿子元景仲来梁朝投降。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty sent troops to fight, and the former monk sent his son, Yuan Jing Zhong, to surrender to the Liang Dynasty.

古文：安东长史元显和，丽之子也，举兵与法僧战；法僧擒之，执其手，命其共坐，显和不肯，曰： 与翁皆出皇家，一朝以地外叛，独不畏良史乎！ 
现代文：安东长史元显和是元丽的儿子，他起兵与元法僧交战。元法僧擒拿了元显和，拉着元显和的手，令他和自己一起就座，元显和不肯，说： 我同您老人家都出身于皇室，但是你现在却据地而外叛，就不害怕丑行记入史书吗？ 
English: Anton Changshi, the son of Yuan Xianhe, the son of Yuan Li, raised an army to fight against the ex-monk. The ex-monk grabbed Yuan Xianhe, took Yuan Xianhe's hand and made him sit with him. Yuan Xianhe refused, saying: I and your old man were both born into the imperial family, but you are now a rebel, aren't you afraid of your misdeeds being recorded in the history books?

古文：法僧犹欲慰谕之，显和曰： 我宁死为忠鬼，不能生为叛臣！ 
现代文：元法僧还想要抚慰劝谕元显和，元显和说道： 我宁肯死而为忠义之鬼，不肯活着做叛逆之臣。 
English: The ex-monk also wanted to comfort and advise Yuan Xianhe. Yuan Xianhe said, "I would rather die as a loyal ghost than live as a traitorous vassal."

古文：乃杀之。
现代文：于是元法僧便杀了他。
English: Then he killed him.

古文：上使散骑常侍硃异使于法僧，以宣城太守元略为大都督，与将军义兴陈庆之、胡龙牙、成景俊等将兵应接。
现代文：梁武帝派散骑常侍朱异作为使者去见元法僧，又任命宣城太守元略为大都督，令元略与将军义兴人陈庆之、胡龙牙、成景俊等人率兵接应。
English: Emperor Liangwu sent Zhu Yi, the imperial equerry, as an envoy to meet the former monk, and also appointed Yuan Liang, the governor of Xuancheng, as the grand governor, ordering Yuan Liang and the generals Yi Xingren, Chen Qingzhi, Hu Longya, Cheng Jingjun and others to lead the troops to meet him.

古文：莫折天生军于黑水，兵势甚盛。
现代文：莫折天生驻军于黑水，兵势甚强。
English: He was born and raised in Blackwater, and his army was very strong.

古文：魏以岐州刺史崔延伯为征西将军、西道都督，帅众五万讨之。
现代文：北魏任命岐州刺史崔延伯为征西将军、西道都督，让他统率五万大军讨伐莫折天生。
English: The Northern Wei appointed the Qizhou assassin Cui Yanbo as the general of the Western Conquest and the governor of the West Road, and he was born to lead a 50,000-strong army.

古文：延伯与行台萧宝寅军于马嵬。
现代文：崔延伯同行台萧宝寅驻军在马嵬。
English: Cui Yanbo's counterpart, General Xiao Baoying, garrisoned troops in Malang.

古文：延伯素骁勇，宝寅趣之使战，延伯曰： 明晨为公参贼勇怯。 
现代文：崔延伯向来骁勇，萧宝寅催促他出战，崔延伯说： 明天早晨我为您去试探一下贼兵的士气如何。 
English: Cui Yanbo has always been brave. Xiao Baoying urged him to go to war. Cui Yanbo said, "Tomorrow morning, I will test the morale of the bandits for you."

古文：乃选精兵数千西渡黑水，整陈进向天生营；宝寅军于水东，遥为继援。
现代文：于是挑选精兵数千名西渡黑水，阵容齐整地向莫折天生的军营进发；萧宝寅驻扎在黑水东边，远远地作为增援力量。
English: As a result, thousands of elite soldiers were selected to go west to Heishui, and they marched in an orderly lineup to the natural military camp; Xiao Baoyin was stationed on the east side of Heishui, far away as a reinforcement force.

古文：延伯直抵天生营下，扬威胁之，徐引兵还。
现代文：崔延伯直抵莫折天生的营前，耀武扬威，对他们表示威胁，然后领兵徐徐返回。
English: Cui Yanbo arrived directly in front of the camp, which was born out of necessity, showed off his military prowess, threatened them, and then led the soldiers back slowly.

古文：天生见延伯众少，开营争逐之，其众多于延伯十倍，蹙延伯于水次，宝寅望之失色。
现代文：莫折天生的部下见崔延伯人马少，争相打开营门冲出来追赶崔延伯的人马，人数多出崔延伯的十倍，把崔延伯逼到了水边，萧宝寅望见这一情况不禁大惊失色。
English: Seeing that Cui Yanbo's men were few, Xiao Baoyin's natural subordinates rushed to open the gate of the camp to chase Cui Yanbo's men. There were ten times more men than Cui Yanbo, and they drove Cui Yanbo to the water's edge. Xiao Baoyin was shocked to see this situation.

古文：延伯自为后殿，不与之战，使其众先渡，部伍严整，天生兵不敢击。
现代文：崔延伯亲自殿后，不与追兵交战，让自己的部下先渡河，队伍整齐不乱，莫折天生的兵不敢进击。
English: After the palace, Cui Yanbo personally did not fight with the pursuing soldiers, and let his subordinates cross the river first. The team was neat and orderly, and the inexorable soldiers did not dare to attack.

古文：须臾，渡华，延伯徐渡，天生之众亦引还。
现代文：不一会儿，队伍全部渡过了河，崔延伯方才慢慢渡河，莫折天生的部下也返回了。
English: Soon, the whole team crossed the river. Cui Yanbo slowly crossed the river, and his natural-born subordinates also returned.

古文：宝寅喜曰： 崔君之勇，关、张不如。 
现代文：萧宝寅高兴地说： 崔君的勇武，关羽、张飞也比不上。 
English: Xiao Baoying said happily, "Cui Jun's bravery is no match for Guan Yu and Zhang Fei.

古文：延伯曰： 此贼非老奴敌也，明公但安坐，观老奴破之。 
现代文：崔延伯说： 这伙贼寇不是老夫我的敌手，明公您尽管安稳而坐，看老夫击败他们。 
English: Cui Yanbo said, "This band of thieves and robbers is not my old man's enemy. My lord, you may sit quietly and watch my old man defeat them.

古文：癸亥，延伯勒兵出，宝寅举军继其后。
现代文：癸丑，崔延伯统率兵马出发，萧宝寅领兵继后。
English: At dusk, Cui Yanbo led the troops and horses to set out, followed by Xiao Baotang.

古文：天生悉众逆战，延伯身先士卒，陷其前锋，将士尽锐竞进，大破之，俘斩十馀万，追奔至小陇，岐、雍及陇东皆平。
现代文：莫折天生倾巢出动迎战，崔延伯身先士卒，冲入敌阵，击败了敌军的前锋，将士们鼓足勇气，争先恐后地冲向敌军，杀得敌兵人仰马翻，溃不成军。共俘虏、斩首敌军十多万，并且一直追击到小陇，于是岐、雍以及陇东都平定了。
English: He rushed into the enemy lines and defeated the enemy's vanguard. The soldiers mustered all their courage and rushed to the enemy troops in a rush, killing the enemy soldiers and making them turn over on their horses. In total, he captured and beheaded more than one hundred thousand enemy troops, and pursued them all the way to Xiaotang. As a result, Qi, Yong, and Shandong were all pacified.

古文：将士稽留采掠，天生遂塞陇道，由是诸军不能进。
现代文：将士们因大事抢掠而逗留不进，以致使莫折天生堵塞了陇道，于是各路军队无法再前进了。
English: Due to the large-scale looting, the soldiers did not advance, so that they naturally blocked the main road, so the armies could not advance any further.

古文：宝寅破宛川，俘其民以为奴婢，以美女十人赏岐州刺史魏兰根，兰根辞曰： 此县介于强寇，不能自立，故附从以救死。
现代文：萧宝寅攻占了宛川，俘获该地之民为奴婢，并把十个美女赏给岐州刺史魏兰根，魏兰根推辞不受，说： 这个县处在贼寇之间，无法自立，所以百姓们不得不依附贼寇以便活命。
English: Xiao Baoying captured Wanchuan, captured the people of the place as slaves, and awarded ten beautiful women to the Qizhou assassin Shi Wei Langen. Wei Langen was not dissuaded, saying: This county is between the bandits, unable to stand on its own, so the people had to rely on the bandits to survive.

古文：官军之至，宜矜而抚之，奈何助贼为虐，翦以为贱役乎！ 
现代文：官军到来之后，应该怜悯而安抚百姓，为什么反而助贼为虐，把百姓都抓去做奴婢呢？ 
English: After the arrival of the government army, they should have been compassionate and appeased the people. Why, instead, did they help the thieves to be cruel and capture the people to be their slaves?

古文：悉求其父兄而归之。
现代文：因此便把被俘的父老乡亲全要回来，放他们回家了。
English: Therefore, he asked for the return of all the captured fathers and countrymen and let them go home.

古文：己巳，裴邃拔魏新蔡郡，诏侍中、领军将军西昌侯渊藻将众前驱，南兗州刺史豫章王综与诸将继进。
现代文：乙巳，裴邃攻占了北魏的新蔡郡，梁武帝诏令侍中、领军将军西昌侯萧渊藻率领部队先驱而行，南兖州刺史豫章王萧综与众将后继而进。
English: At this time, Baekje conquered the Northern Wei's New Cai County, and Emperor Liangwu issued an imperial edict ordering the leading general and aide-de-camp of Xichang, Prince Xiao Yuanmao, to lead the troops in the vanguard, while the governor of Southern Zhangzhou, Prince Yuzhang Wang Xiao Simi, and other generals followed suit.

古文：癸酉，裴邃拔郑城，汝、颖之间，所在响应。
现代文：崐癸酉，裴邃攻占了郑城，汝、颍一带，纷纷响应。
English: , Pei  conquered Zhengcheng, and the regions of Ru and  responded in succession.

古文：魏河间王琛等惮邃威名，军于城父，累月不进，魏朝遣廷尉少卿崔孝芬持节、赍斋库刀以趣之。
现代文：北魏河间王元琛等人慑于裴邃的威名，驻扎在城父，几个月不前进，北魏朝廷派遣廷尉少卿崔孝芬持符节并带着千牛刀前去城父，催促元琛等人进兵，贻误军机就斩首。
English: During the Northern Wei Dynasty, Wang Yuanzhang and others were deterred by Pei Yuanzhang's prestige and stationed in Chengdu, and did not advance for several months. The Northern Wei Dynasty dispatched the court lieutenant Cui Xiaofen to Chengdu, holding the sign and carrying the thousand-cattle knife, to urge Yuanzhang and others to march into the army, and the military aircraft beheaded them.

古文：孝芬，挺之子也。
现代文：崔孝芬是崔挺的儿子。
English: Cui Xiaofeng is Cui Ting's son.

古文：琛至寿阳，欲出兵决战。
现代文：元琛到了寿阳，想出兵决战。
English: When Yuan Shao arrived in Shouyang, he wanted to fight a decisive battle.

古文：长孙稚以为久雨，未可出；琛不听，引兵五万出城击邃。
现代文：长孙稚认为久雨不晴不可以出兵，元琛不听建议，率领五万兵士出城攻打裴邃。
English: The eldest grandson thought that since it had been raining for a long time, it was not possible to send troops, but Yuan Shao did not listen to the advice and led fifty thousand soldiers out of the city to attack Pei Shao.

古文：邃为四甄以待之，使直阁将军李祖怜先挑战而伪退；稚、琛悉众追之，四甄竞发，魏师大败，斩首万馀级。
现代文：裴邃列出四个长阵等待元琛的军队前来，并指派直将军李祖怜先去挑战，然后伪装败退；长孙稚和元琛出动全军追击李祖怜，裴邃的四个长阵争相行动，北魏军队一败涂地，一万多人被斩首。
English: Pei Jun listed four long lines waiting for Yuan Shao's army to come, and assigned General Li Zu'er to challenge first, and then retreat in disguise; the eldest grandson and Yuan Shao sent out the whole army to chase Li Zu'er, Pei Jun's four long lines competed for action, the Northern Wei army was defeated, and more than 10,000 people were beheaded.

古文：琛走入城，稚勒兵而殿，遂闭门自固，不敢复出。
现代文：元琛逃跑进城，长孙稚领兵殿后，入城后便关门固守，再也不敢出来了。
English: Yuan Shao fled into the city, and after the eldest grandson and the youngest son led the soldiers into the city, they closed the door and held fast, never daring to come out again.

古文：魏安乐王鉴将兵讨元法僧，击元略于彭城南。略大败，与数十骑走入城。
现代文：北魏安乐王元鉴率兵讨伐元法僧，在彭城南边攻击元略，元略大败，与几十名骑兵逃入城中。
English: Northern Wei Anle King Yuan Jian led an army to fight against Yuan Hossang and attacked Yuan Liang on the south side of Pengcheng. Yuan Liang was defeated and fled into the city with dozens of cavalry.

古文：鉴不设备，法僧出击，大破之，鉴单骑奔归。
现代文：元鉴不加设防，元法僧出城攻击，大败元鉴，元鉴单人匹马逃跑回去了。
English: The Yuan Dynasty did not fortify, the Yuan Dynasty monks went out of the city to attack, the Yuan Dynasty was defeated, and the Yuan Dynasty single-handedly fled back.

古文：将军王希聃拔魏南阳平，执太守薛昙尚。
现代文：梁朝将军王希聃攻取了北魏的南阳平，抓获了太守薛昙尚。
English: The Liang Dynasty general Wang Xichen captured Nanyangping in the Northern Wei Dynasty and captured the governor Xue Yinshang.

古文：昙尚，虎子之子也。
现代文：薛昙尚是薛虎子的儿子。
English: Xue Yuxiang is the son of Xue Huo Zi.

古文：甲戌，以法僧为司空，封始安郡公。
现代文：甲戌，梁朝任命元法僧为司空，并封为始安郡公。
English: Armor-plated, the Liang Dynasty appointed the former monk as the secretary of the sky, and he was named the governor of Shi'an County.

古文：魏以安丰王延明为东道行台，临淮王彧为都督，以击彭城。
现代文：北魏任命安丰王元延明为东道行台，临淮王元为都督，让他们去攻打彭城。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty appointed Anfeng Wangyuan Yanming as the host and Linhuai Wangyuan as the governor, and let them attack Pengcheng.

古文：魏以京兆王继为太尉。
现代文：北魏任命京兆王元继为太尉。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty appointed Jingzhao Wangyuan as a second lieutenant.

古文：二月，乙未，赵景悦拔魏龙亢。
现代文：二月乙未，赵景悦攻占了北魏的龙亢。
English: In February of the same year, Zhao Jingyue captured Longyu of the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：初，魏刘腾既卒，胡太后及魏主左右防卫微缓。
现代文：早先之时，北魏的刘腾死了之后，胡太后以及北魏孝明帝身边的监视稍微有所松缓。
English: Earlier, after the death of Liu Teng of the Northern Wei Dynasty, the surveillance around Empress Dowager Hu and Emperor Xiaoming of the Northern Wei Dynasty was slightly relaxed.

古文：元义亦自宽，时出游于外，留连不返，其所亲谏，义不纳；太后察知之。
现代文：元义也觉得宽心了不少，便时常出外游玩，留连而不返，他的亲信多次劝谏，但他根本不听；胡太后察知了这一情况。
English: Yuan Yi also felt a lot of relief, so he often went out to play, staying for a long time and not returning. His relatives repeatedly advised him, but he did not listen at all; Empress Dowager Hu noticed this situation.

古文：去秋，太后对帝谓群臣曰： 今隔绝我母子，不听往来，复何用我为！
现代文：去年秋天，胡太后当着孝明帝问众臣子们说： 现在把我们母子隔绝开来，不允许我们互相往来，那么我还有什么用处呢！
English: Last autumn, Empress Dowager Hu asked all the courtiers in front of Emperor Xiaoming: "Now that you have isolated our mother and son and do not allow us to interact with each other, what use do I have left?"

古文：我当出家，修道于嵩山闲居寺耳。 
现代文：我应当去出家，去嵩山闲居寺修行当尼姑。 
English: I should go and become a nun at Songshan Leisure Temple.

古文：因欲自下发。帝及群臣叩头泣涕，殷勤苦请，太后声色愈厉。
现代文：因此自己便要剃发，孝明帝以及群臣们磕头流泪，哀哀苦求，胡太后言语表情却更加严厉了，执意要出家做尼姑，不肯改变主意。
English: As a result, she had to shave her hair. Emperor Xiaoming and his courtiers bowed their heads in tears and begged for mercy. However, Empress Dowager Hu's words and expressions became harsher. She was determined to become a nun and refused to change her mind.

古文：帝乃宿于嘉福殿，积数日，遂与太后密谋黜义。
现代文：于是孝明帝便住在了嘉福殿，一连住了好几天，同胡太后一起密谋要贬黜元义。
English: As a result, Emperor Xiaoming stayed at Jiafu Hall for several days in a row, and conspired with Empress Dowager Hu to disparage Yuan Rong.

古文：然帝深匿形迹，太后有忿恚，欲得往来显阳之言，皆以告义；又对义流涕，叙太后欲出家，忧怖之心日有数四。
现代文：然而，孝明帝故深匿形迹，没有行动，胡太后也做出特别忿恨的样子，孝明帝便把胡太后想常来显阳殿见自己的话全告诉了元义；孝明帝还流着泪水对元议讲叙了胡太后想出家当尼姑一事，并特意表现出担忧害怕的样子，一天之内便讲了四次。
English: However, Emperor Xiaoming had disappeared without a trace and took no action, and Empress Dowager Hu also showed particular resentment. Emperor Xiaoming then told Yuan Rong that Empress Dowager Hu wanted to come to the Xianyang Palace to see him often; Emperor Xiaoming also told Yuan Rong with tears streaming down his face that Empress Dowager Hu wanted to become a nun, and deliberately showed concern and fear, and spoke four times in one day.

古文：义殊不以为疑，乃劝帝从太后所欲。
现代文：元义对此毫无所疑，便劝孝明帝顺从胡太后的要求。
English: Motoyoshi had no doubt about this and advised Emperor Xiaoming to comply with Empress Dowager Hu's request.

古文：于是太后数御显阳殿，二宫无复禁碍。
现代文：于是胡太后数次住宿于显阳殿，两宫之间不再有什么禁限了。
English: As a result, the Empress Dowager Hu stayed several times at the Xianyang Palace, and there was no longer any restriction between the two palaces.

古文：义举元法僧为徐州，法僧反，太后数以为言，义深愧悔。
现代文：元义推荐元法僧出任徐州刺史，元法僧反叛，胡太后数次提到此事，元义因此而深自愧悔。
English: Yuan Yi recommended the ex-monk to serve as Xuzhou chief historian, the ex-monk rebelled, and the Empress Dowager Hu mentioned the matter several times. As a result, Yuan Yi deeply repented.

古文：丞相高阳王雍，虽位居义上，而深畏惮之。
现代文：丞相高阳王元雍，虽然位居元义之上，然而却特别惧怕元义。
English: The chancellor Gaoyang Wang Yuan Yong, although he was above Yuan Yi, was particularly afraid of Yuan Yi.

古文：会太后与帝游洛水，雍邀二宫幸其第。
现代文：正好胡太后与孝明帝到洛水游玩，元雍便邀请他们临幸自己府上。
English: Just as Empress Dowager Hu and Emperor Xiaoming were visiting Luoshui, Yuan Yong invited them to visit his palace.

古文：日晏，帝与太后至雍内室，从者皆不得入，遂相与定图义之计。
现代文：日落之时，孝明帝与胡太后进入元雍的内室，随从的官员们都不许进去，于是便一起制定了收拾元义的计谋。
English: At sunset, Emperor Xiaoming and Empress Dowager Hu entered the inner chamber of Yuan Yong, and the officials accompanying them were not allowed to enter, so they worked out a plan to clean up Yuan Yi.

古文：于是太后谓之曰： 元郎若忠于朝廷，无反心，何故不去领军，以馀官辅政！ 
现代文：因此，胡太后对元义说： 元郎如果忠于朝廷，没有反心的话，为什么不辞去领军之职，只担任其余的官职来辅政呢！ 
English: Therefore, Empress Dowager Hu said to Yuan Yi, "If Yuan Rong is loyal to the imperial court and has no ill will, why doesn't he resign from the position of leading the army and only hold other official positions to assist the government?"

古文：义甚惧，免冠求解领军。
现代文：元义听了特别害怕，摘下帽子请求解除自己的领军一职。
English: Hearing this, Yuan Yi was particularly afraid and took off his hat to request that he be relieved of his position as leader.

古文：乃以义为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、尚书令、侍中、领左右。
现代文：于是，朝廷便任命元义为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、尚书令、侍中、领左右。
English: As a result, the imperial court appointed Motoyoshi as the commander of the imperial cavalry, the keeper of the imperial residences and the three offices, the secretary, the chamberlain, and the leader.

古文：戊戌，魏大赦。
现代文：戊戌，北魏大赦天下。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty granted amnesty to the whole country.

古文：壬辰，莫折念生遣都督杨鲊等攻仇池郡，行台魏子建击破之。
现代文：壬辰，莫折念生派遣都督杨等人去攻打仇池郡，行台魏子建击败了他。
English: In Imjin, he sent Yang, the governor of the capital, and others to attack Qiuchi County, and Wei Zijian defeated him.

古文：三月，己酉，上幸白下城，履行六军顿所。
现代文：三月己酉，梁武帝临幸白下城，步行视察了六军的驻守之地。
English: At the end of March, Emperor Liangwu inspected the garrison of the Six Armies on foot in the lower city of Xingbai.

古文：乙丑，命豫章王综权顿彭城，总督众军，并摄徐州府事。
现代文：乙丑，梁武帝命令豫章王萧综临时驻扎彭城，总督各路军队，并且兼管徐州府事。
English: Second, Emperor Liangwu ordered Yuanzhang Wang Xiao Simi to temporarily station in Pengcheng, the governor of all the troops, and also take charge of the affairs of Xuzhou.

古文：己巳，以元法僧之子景隆为衡州刺史，景仲为广州刺史。
现代文：己巳，梁朝任命元法僧的儿子元景隆为衡州刺史，元景仲为广州策史。
English: At that time, the Liang Dynasty appointed Yuan Jinglong, the son of a former monk, as the governor of Hengzhou, and Yuan Jingzhong as the governor of Guangzhou.

古文：上召法僧及元略还建康，法僧驱彭城吏民万馀人南渡。
现代文：梁武帝召元法僧及元略回建康，元法僧驱赶彭城的官员和百姓一万多人南渡。
English: Emperor Liangwu summoned the former legal monk and the former magistrate to Jiankang, and the former legal monk drove more than ten thousand officials and people from Pengcheng to the south.

古文：法僧至建康，上宠待甚厚；元略恶其为人，与之言，未尝笑。
现代文：元法僧到了建康，梁武帝特别宠待他；元略厌恶元法僧的为人，与他说话时，从来没有笑过。
English: When the former monk arrived in Jiankang, Emperor Liang Wu treated him with special favor. Yuan slightly disliked the former monk and never smiled when talking to him.

古文：魏诏京光王继班师。
现代文：北魏诏令京兆王元继班师回朝。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty issued an edict ordering Jingzhao Wangyuan's successor to return to the imperial court.

古文：北凉州刺史锡休儒等自魏兴侵魏梁州，攻直城。
现代文：北凉州刺史锡休儒等人从魏兴出发入侵北魏梁州，攻打直城。
English: Northern Liangzhou, Zhishizhi, Xixiu, Zhu and others set out from Wei Xing to invade Northern Wei Liangzhou and attack Zhicheng.

古文：魏梁州刺史傅竖眼遣其子敬绍击之，休儒等败还。
现代文：北魏梁州刺史傅竖眼派自己的儿子傅敬绍攻击他们，锡休儒等人败回。
English: The Northern Wei Liangzhou assassin Fu Zhixian sent his son Fu Jingshao to attack them, and Xixiu Ru and others were defeated.

古文：柔然王阿那瑰为魏讨破六韩拔陵，魏遣牒云具仁赍杂物劳赐之。
现代文：柔然国王阿那替北魏征讨破六韩拔陵，北魏派遣牒云具仁送去各种物品慰劳赏赐他们。
English: On behalf of the Northern Wei Dynasty, King Anan of Rouran conquered and destroyed the Six Han Tombs, and the Northern Wei Dynasty sent Cho Yun Ju Ren to send various goods to reward them for their hard work.

古文：阿那瑰勒众十万，自武川西向沃野，屡破拔陵兵。
现代文：阿那率众十万，从武川出发，西进沃野，多次打败破六韩拔陵的军队。
English: Anah led hundreds of thousands of people, starting from Bukchon, westward to Wo-yeon, and repeatedly defeated the army that broke through the Six Han Tombs.

古文：夏，四月，魏主复遣中书舍人冯俊劳赐阿那瑰。
现代文：夏季，四月，北魏孝明帝又派遣中书舍人冯俊去慰劳赏赐阿那。
English: In the summer, in April, Emperor Xiaoming of the Northern Wei Dynasty sent the Chinese scholar Feng Jun to reward Anna for her hard work.

古文：阿那瑰部落浸强，自称敕连头兵豆伐可汗。
现代文：阿那的部落渐渐强大了起来，便自称为敕连头兵豆伐可汗。
English: Ana's tribe gradually became powerful, and they called themselves the Peasants' War Khan.

古文：魏元义虽解兵权，犹总任内外，殊不自意有废黜之理。
现代文：北魏元义虽然被解除了兵权，但还总管朝廷内外之事，所以一点也不觉得自己有被废黜的可能。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, although Yuan Yi was relieved of military power, he was still in charge of the internal and external affairs of the imperial court, so he did not feel at all that he might be deposed.

古文：胡太后意犹豫未决，侍中穆绍劝太后速去之。
现代文：胡太后心里也犹豫不决，侍中穆绍劝说胡太后迅速除去元义。
English: The Empress Dowager Hu also hesitated in her heart, and the chamberlain Mushao persuaded the Empress Dowager Hu to quickly remove Yuan Yi.

古文：绍，亮之子也。
现代文：穆绍是穆亮的儿子。
English: Musho is the son of Mu Liang.

古文：潘嫔有宠于魏主，宦官张景嵩说之云： 义欲害嫔。 
现代文：潘嫔有宠于孝明帝，宦官张景俊游说她，说： 元议要谋害您。 
English: Pan Xuan was a favorite of Emperor Xiaoming, and the eunuch Zhang Jingjun lobbied her, saying, "The Yuan Council wants to kill you.

古文：嫔泣诉于帝曰： 义非独欲杀妾，又将不利于陛下。 
现代文：潘嫔也哭着向孝明帝诉说： 元义不仅仅要害我，而且还将对陛下使坏。 
English: Pan Xuan also cried and told Xiao Mingdi: Yuan Yi not only wants to harm me, but will also harm Your Majesty.

古文：帝信之，因义出宿，解义侍中。
现代文：孝明帝相信了他们的话，便借元义出宫住宿之机，解除了他的侍中之职。
English: Emperor Xiaoming believed their words and took advantage of the opportunity to leave the palace to stay, relieving him of his position as an attendant.

古文：明旦，义将入宫，门者不纳。
现代文：第二天早晨，元义将要进宫。守门的没有让他进去。
English: The next morning, Yuan Yi was about to enter the palace, but the gatekeeper would not let him in.

古文：辛卯，太后复临朝摄政，下诏追削刘腾官爵，除义名为民。
现代文：辛卯，胡太后再次临朝摄政。她下诏书追削去刘腾的官爵，把元义贬为平民。
English: However, the Empress Dowager Hu once again became the regent of the imperial court. She issued an edict to strip Liu Teng of his official title and reduce Yuan Yi to a commoner.

古文：清河国郎中令韩子熙上书为清河王怿讼冤，乞诛元义等，曰： 昔赵高柄秦，令关东鼎沸；今元义专魏，使四方云扰。
现代文：清河国的郎中令韩子熙上书朝廷为清河王元怿鸣冤，请求诛死元义等人，上书中说道： 昔日赵高执掌秦国，使得关东民变汹涌；如今元义专权魏国，崐导致四方祸乱纷起。
English: Han Zixi, a vassal of the Qing dynasty, sent a letter to the imperial court to mourn the death of the Qing dynasty king Yuan Shao, and requested the death of Yuan Yi and others. In the letter, he said: In the past, Zhao Gao was in charge of Qin, which made the people of Guandong become turbulent; today, Yuan Yi has absolute power in Wei, which has led to chaos in all directions.

古文：开逆之端，起于宋维，成祸之末，良由刘腾，宜枭首洿宫，斩骸沉族，以明其罪。 
现代文：由宋维起，开启了逆乱之端，而最终演变成祸难则实由刘腾而致。应该将宋维斩首示众，将刘腾的坟墓掘开，鞭尸灭族，以向世人宣明他们的罪行。 
English: It was Song Wei who started the beginning of the rebellion, but it was Liu Teng who eventually turned it into a calamity. Song Wei should be beheaded, Liu Teng's grave should be dug up, and their bodies should be whipped to exterminate the tribe, so that their crimes can be made known to the world.

古文：太后命发刘腾之墓，露散其骨，籍没家赀，尽杀其养子。
现代文：胡太后命令人挖开了刘腾的坟墓，把他的尸骨抛散，没收了他的家财，将他的养子全部杀尽。
English: Empress Dowager Hu ordered someone to dig up Liu Teng's grave, scatter his bones, confiscate his family's wealth, and kill all of his adopted sons.

古文：以子熙为中书舍人。
现代文：胡太后任命韩子熙为中书舍人。
English: Empress Dowager Hu appointed Han Zixi as the Chinese scholar.

古文：子熙，麒麟之孙也。
现代文：韩子熙是韩麒麟的孙子。
English: Han Zixi is the grandson of Han Qilin.

古文：初，宋维父弁常曰： 维性疏险，必败吾家！ 
现代文：原先，宋维的父亲宋弁经常说： 宋维生性粗野险毒，一定会败坏我家。 
English: Originally, Song Wei's father, Song Ben, often said: "Song Wei's crude and dangerous nature will surely corrupt my family."

古文：李崇、郭祚、游肇亦曰： 伯绪凶疏，终倾宋氏。若得杀身，幸矣！ 
现代文：李崇、郭祚、游肇也说： 宋伯绪凶狠粗暴，终究会颠倾宋家，如果能得到只有自己被杀的结局，则是万幸。 
English: Li Chong, Guo Wei, and You Zhao also said: Song Buxu's cruel and brutal behavior will eventually topple the Song family. If he can only get himself killed, it will be a blessing.

古文：维阿附元义，超迁至洛州刺史，至是除名，寻赐死。
现代文：宋维阿腴投靠元义，被越级提升为洛阳刺史，到现在因元义倒台而被除名，很快又被赐死。
English: Song Wei Aqian supported Yuan Yi, was promoted to Luoyang's highest-ranking official, and now, because of Yuan Yi's downfall, he has been removed from the list and will soon be put to death.

古文：义之解领军也，太后以义党与尚强，未可猝制，乃以侯刚代义为领军以安其意。
现代文：元义被解除领军职务之后，胡太后因为元义的党羽势力还很强大，不能立即制约住，便让侯刚代替元义担任领军，以便暂时稳住这些人。
English: After Yuan Yi was relieved of his duties as the leader of the army, Empress Dowager Hu, because the power of Yuan Yi's party was still very strong and could not be immediately restrained, asked Hou Gang to replace Yuan Yi as the leader of the army in order to temporarily stabilize these people.

古文：寻出刚为冀州刺史，加仪同三司，未至州，黜为征虏将军，卒于家。
现代文：很快又让侯刚出任冀州刺史，并加仪同三司之号，但是侯刚还没有去冀州上任，又被降为征虏将军，死在家中。
English: Soon, he also appointed Hou Gang as the chief historian of Jizhou, and added the names of the three departments, but Hou Gang did not go to Jizhou to take office, and was reduced to a conscript general, and died at home.

古文：太后欲杀贾粲，以义党多，恐惊动内外，乃出粲为济州刺史，寻追杀之，籍没其家。
现代文：胡太后想杀贾粲，但考虑到元义的党徒众多，但心惊动朝廷内外，于是让贾粲出任济州刺史，不及又派人追上杀了他，他的家产、人口全部没收入官府。
English: The Empress Dowager Hu wanted to kill Jia Jia, but considering the large number of Yuan Yi's party members, she was alarmed both inside and outside the court, so she made Jia Jia serve as the historian of Jeju, and sent someone to catch up and kill him. His family property and population all lost income to the government.

古文：唯义以妹夫，未忍行诛。
现代文：只有元义因为是胡太后的妹夫，便没有忍心杀掉他。
English: Only Yuan Yi did not have the heart to kill him because he was the brother-in-law of Empress Dowager Hu.

古文：先是，给事黄门侍郎元顺以刚直忤义意，以为齐州刺史；太后征还，为侍中。
现代文：早先之时，给事黄门侍郎元顺因刚直不阿而逆犯了元义，元义便把他贬出朝廷，前去担任齐州刺史，胡太后召回了他，任命他为侍中。
English: At an earlier time, the Yellow Gate's servant-master, Yuan Shun, had offended Yuan Yi by being unruly and rebellious. Yuan Yi expelled him from the imperial court and sent him to serve as the governor of Qizhou. Empress Dowager Hu recalled him and appointed him as a chamberlain.

古文：侍坐于太后，义妻在太后侧，顺指之曰： 陛下奈何以一妹之故，不正元义之罪，使天下不得伸其冤愤！ 
现代文：一次，元顺陪胡太后坐着，元义的妻子坐在太后一侧，元顺指着元义妻子说道： 陛下为何因一个妹妹的原故，便不惩处元义的罪行，致使天下之人不能伸其冤愤！ 
English: Once, Yuan Shun was sitting with the Empress Dowager Hu, and Yuan Yi's wife was sitting on the side of the Empress Dowager. Yuan Shun pointed to Yuan Yi's wife and said, "Why did Your Majesty not punish Yuan Yi's crime because she was a younger sister, so that people around the world could not avenge her wrongdoing!"

古文：太后嘿然。
现代文：说得胡太后哑口无言。
English: The Queen Mother was speechless.

古文：顺，澄之子也。
现代文：元顺是元澄的儿子。
English: Motoshin is the son of Motosumi.

古文：它日，太后从容谓侍臣曰： 刘腾、元义昔邀朕求铁券，冀得不死，朕赖不与。 
现代文：有一天，胡太后从容地对侍臣们说： 刘腾和元义过去曾经向我请求得到铁券，希望能获得任何时候都不被处以死罪的特权，但是朕横竖都没有给他们。 
English: One day, Empress Dowager Hu calmly said to her attendants: Liu Teng and Yuan Yi had asked me for iron coupons in the past, hoping to obtain the privilege of not being sentenced to death at any time, but I did not give it to them.

古文：韩子熙曰： 事关生杀，岂系铁券！
现代文：韩子熙说： 事关生杀，难道决定于铁券！
English: Han Zixi said: It's a matter of life and death, isn't it decided by the iron coupon!

古文：且陛下昔虽不与，何解今日不杀！ 
现代文：且陛下过去虽然没给他们铁券，不明白今日为何不杀掉他！ 
English: And although His Majesty did not give them a ticket in the past, he does not understand why they do not kill him today!

古文：太后怃然。
现代文：胡太后听后怅然不已。
English: After listening to it, the Empress Dowager Hu was speechless.

古文：未几，有告义及弟瓜谋诱六镇降户反于定州，又招鲁阳诸蛮侵扰伊阙，欲为内应。
现代文：不久，有人上告： 元义和弟弟元瓜密谋引诱六镇的降户在定州反叛，又招鲁阳的蛮族部落侵扰伊阙，他们则准备作内应。 
English: Soon, someone appealed: Yuan Yi and his brother Yuan Gua conspired to lure the descendants of the six towns to rebel in Dingzhou, and also invited the barbarian tribes of Luyang to invade Ili, and they were preparing to respond.

古文：得其手书，太后犹未忍杀之。
现代文：得到了元义的亲笔谋反信件，胡太后还不忍杀他。
English: After receiving Yuan Yi's personal letter, the Empress Dowager Hu had no choice but to kill him.

古文：群臣固执不已，魏主亦以为言，太后乃从之，赐义及弟瓜死于家，犹赠义骠骑大将军、仪同三司、尚书令。
现代文：众臣们坚持要杀元义，孝明帝也说要杀元义，胡太后才听了众人的意见，令元义和弟弟元瓜在家中自尽，但是还赠于元义骠骑大将军、仪同三司、尚书令之职。
English: The courtiers insisted on killing Yuan Rongyi, and Emperor Xiaoming also said that he wanted to kill Yuan Rongyi. It was only after the Empress Dowager Hu listened to everyone's opinions that she ordered Yuan Rongyi and his brother Yuan Gua to commit suicide at home. However, she also gave Yuan Rongyi the posts of General of Cavalry, Third Secretary of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies, and Third Secretary of the Ministry of Letters.

古文：江阳王继废于家，病卒。
现代文：元义的父亲江阳王元继被罢黜在家，最后病死。
English: Yuanyi's father, Jiangyang Wangyuan, was banished to his home and eventually died of illness.

古文：前幽州刺史卢同坐义党除名。
现代文：前幽州刺史卢同因系元义同党而获罪，被除名。
English: Former Yuzhou member Shilou Tong was expelled from the party after being found guilty of being a member of the same party.

古文：太后颇事妆饰，数出游幸，元顺面谏曰： 《礼》，妇人夫没自称未亡人，首去珠玉，衣不文采。
现代文：胡太后颇事妆饰打扮，数次出外游乐，元顺面谏她： 《礼》中规定，妇人丈夫去世之后自称为未亡人，头上去掉珠玉之饰，穿的衣服上面不加色彩花样。
English: Empress Dowager Cixi dressed up a lot, went out several times to have fun, and Yuan Shun scolded her: "Rite" stipulates that after the death of a woman's husband, she calls herself a widow, takes off the jewelry on her head, and does not add color patterns to the clothes she wears.

古文：陛下母临天下，年垂不惑，修饰过甚，何以仪型后世！ 
现代文：陛下母临天下，年近四十，修饰打扮的太过分了，何以为后世作出榜样呢？ 
English: Your Majesty's mother is on the verge of death, she is nearly forty years old, she is overdressed, why should she set an example for future generations?

古文：太后惭而还宫，召顺，责之曰： 千里相征，岂欲众中见辱邪！ 
现代文：胡太后听了惭愧地回到宫中，召来元顺，斥责他说： 我把你从千里之外征召回来，难道就是为了让你当着众人之面羞辱我吗？ 
English: Embarrassed, Empress Dowager Hu returned to the palace, summoned Yuan Shun, and scolded him: "Did I call you back from thousands of miles away just to let you humiliate me in front of everyone?

古文：顺曰： 陛下不畏天下之笑，而耻臣之一言乎！ 
现代文：元顺回答： 陛下为什么不害怕天下人讥笑，而只为我的一句话感到羞耻呢？ 
English: Yuan Shun replied: Why is Your Majesty not afraid of the world's ridicule, but is only ashamed of one of my words?

古文：顺与穆绍同直，顺因醉，入其寝所，绍拥被而起，正色让顺曰： 身二十年侍中，与卿先君亟连职事，纵卿方进用，何宜相排突也！ 
现代文：元顺与穆绍同在宫中值宿，元顺因喝醉酒而进入穆绍的寝室，穆绍拥被而起，严厉地责斥元顺说： 我做了二十年的侍中，与你的父亲屡次在一起共事，即使你刚刚得到重用，也不应该对我这么唐突呀！ 
English: Yuan Shun and Musao were on duty in the palace together. Yuan Shun entered Musao's bedroom because he was drunk. Musao got up from his bed and severely reprimanded Yuan Shun, saying: I have been a waiter for twenty years and have worked with your father many times. Even if you have just been promoted, you should not be so abrupt with me!

古文：遂谢事还家，诏谕久之，乃起。
现代文：于是便辞职回家，胡太后劝谕了他很长一阵子，他才重新回到宫中任职。
English: So he resigned and went home. Empress Dowager Hu advised him for a long time before he returned to work in the palace.

古文：初，郑羲之兄孙俨为司徒胡国珍行参军，私得幸于太后，人未之知。
现代文：当初，郑羲的哥哥的孙子郑俨但任司徒胡国珍的行参军，胡太后和他私通，但是外人都不知道。
English: At first, the grandson of Zheng Yao's brother, Zheng Yidan, joined the army under the tutelage of Hu Guozhen. Empress Dowager Hu had an affair with him, but outsiders did not know about it.

古文：萧宝寅西讨，以俨为开府属。
现代文：萧宝寅西征之时，任命郑俨为开府属。
English: At the time of Xiao Baoying's expedition to the West, Zheng He was appointed as the prefectural governor.

古文：太后再摄政，俨请奉使还朝，太后留之，拜谏议大夫、中书舍人，领尝食典御，昼夜禁中；每休沐，太后常遣宦者随之，俨见其妻，唯得言家事而已。
现代文：胡太后再次摄政之后，郑俨向萧宝寅请求奉命出使回朝，胡太后留下了他，委任他为谏议大夫、中书舍人，并兼尚食典御，昼夜住在宫中；每次到了放假的日子，郑俨回家，胡太后经常派遣宦官跟随着他，郑俨见到妻子，也只能说一些家务事。
English: After Empress Dowager Hu became regent for the second time, Zheng Rong asked Xiao Baoying to be sent back to the North. Empress Dowager Hu left him behind, appointed him as the chief advisor, the chief scribe, and also the chief eater, and he lived in the palace day and night. Every time it was a holiday, Zheng Rong went home. Empress Dowager Hu often sent eunuchs to follow him. When Zheng Rong saw his wife, he could only talk about some household chores.

古文：中书舍人乐安徐纥，粗有文学，先以诌事赵修，坐徙枹罕。
现代文：中书舍人乐安人徐纥，稍微有点文采，原先他靠谄媚追随赵修，受牵连而贬迁罕。
English: Xu Xi, a scholar of Chinese classics and a man of peace and contentment, was a bit of a poet. Originally, he followed Zhao Xiu through flattery, but was implicated and demoted.

古文：后还，复除中书舍人，又谄事清河王怿；怿死，出为雁门太守。
现代文：后来回朝，重新任为中书舍人，又巴结投靠清河王元怿；元怿死后，他出任雁门太守。
English: Later, he returned to the imperial court, and was reappointed as the person in charge of Chinese calligraphy. He also supported and relied on the Qing River King, Yuan Shao; after Yuan Shao's death, he became the governor of Ganmen.

古文：还洛，复谄事元义。
现代文：回到洛阳之后，他又讨好投身于元义。
English: After he returned to Luoyang, he was willing to devote himself to Yuanyi.

古文：义败，太后以纥为怿所厚，复召为中书舍人，纥又谄事郑俨。
现代文：元义垮台之后，胡太后因为徐纥是元怿所厚待之人，又召任他为中书舍人，因此，徐纥又开始攀附郑俨。
English: After the downfall of Yuan Yi, Empress Dowager Hu, because Xu Yao was a person who was well treated by Yuan Yao, also appointed him as a Chinese scholar. Therefore, Xu Yao began to cling to Zheng Yao.

古文：俨以纥有智数，仗为谋主；纥以俨有内宠，倾身承接，共相表里，势倾内外，号为 徐郑 。
现代文：郑俨因为徐纥有智术，便依靠他为自己出谋划策；徐纥因为郑俨有胡太后之宠，便对郑俨曲身迎奉，两个相为表里，权倾朝野，人称为徐、郑。
English: Zheng Qi, because Xu Qi had intelligence, relied on him to make suggestions for himself; Xu Qi, because Zheng Qi had the favor of the Empress Dowager Hu, bowed down to Zheng Qi. The two were on the same level, the power was in the court, and the people were called Xu and Zheng.

古文：俨累迁至中书令、车骑将军；纥累迁至给事黄门侍郎，仍领舍人，总摄中书、门下之事，军国诏令莫不由之。
现代文：郑俨升迁到中书令、车骑将军。徐纥升到给事黄门侍郎，仍兼舍人，总管中书省、门下省的事务，军政方面的诏书命令都由他负责。
English: Zheng Qian was promoted to the position of General of the Horse and Chariot Corps of the General Staff of the People's Liberation Army. Xu Qian was promoted to the position of the Attendant of the Yellow Gate, and he was still the person in charge of the affairs of the General Staff of the People's Liberation Army and the subordinate provinces, and he was responsible for the military and political orders of the General Staff.

古文：纥有机辩强力，终日治事，略无休息，不以为劳。
现代文：徐纥有机智，辩才好，精力旺盛，整日处理事务，很少休息，不感到劳累。
English: Xu Wei is intelligent, good at debate, energetic, handles affairs all day long, rarely rests, and does not feel tired.

古文：时有急诏，令数吏执笔，或行或臣，人别占之，造次俱成，不失事理。
现代文：在急于发出诏书之时，徐纥命令几个属吏执笔，自己一会儿在地上走动，一会儿卧在床上，分别对每人口述诏书内容，让他们记下，很快几篇诏书都写成了，而没有不合事理之处。
English: When he was in a hurry to issue the edict, Xu Xi ordered several subordinate officials to start writing. He walked on the ground for a while and lay on the bed for a while. He told the content of the edict to each person separately and asked them to write it down. Soon, several edicts were written, and there was nothing unreasonable.

古文：然无经国大体，专好小数，见人矫为恭谨，远近辐凑附之。
现代文：但是，徐纥没有治理国家的大才，专门喜好小技，见到人则有意做出恭敬小心的模样，远近之人都投靠依附他。
English: However, Xu Xi did not have the talent to govern the country. He was especially fond of minor skills. When he saw people, he deliberately made a respectful and careful appearance. People near and far relied on him.

古文：给事黄门侍郎袁翻、李神轨皆领中书舍人，为太后所信任，时人云神轨亦得幸于太后，众莫能明也。
现代文：给事黄门侍郎袁翻、李神轨都兼中书舍人，得到胡太后的信任，当时的人们讲李神轨也和胡太后私通，众人不能辨明真假。
English: The attendant of the Yellow Gate, Yuan Tuo, and Li Shenlu, both of whom were also scholars, gained the trust of the Empress Dowager Hu. At that time, people said that Li Shenlu also had sexual intercourse with the Empress Dowager Hu, and people could not distinguish between the true and the false.

古文：神轨求婚于散骑常侍卢义僖，义僖不许。
现代文：李神轨求散骑常侍卢义僖把女儿嫁给自己的儿子，卢义僖不答应。
English: Li Shenlu asked Lu Yixuan, a straggler, to marry his daughter to his son, but Lu Yixuan did not agree.

古文：黄门侍郎王诵谓义僖曰： 昔人不以一女易众男，卿岂易之邪！ 
现代文：黄门侍郎王诵对卢义僖说： 从前的人不以一个女儿夫家灭族而殃及几个儿子，您岂会如此做呢！ 
English: Huangmen waiter Wang Qiao said to Lu Yijun: In the past, people did not use one daughter to destroy a family, but several sons. Would you do such a thing?

古文：义僖曰： 所以不从，正为此耳。
现代文：卢义僖说： 我之所以没有答应，正是为的这个。
English: Lu Yijun said: "The reason why I didn't say yes is because of this.

古文：从之，恐祸大而速。 
现代文：如果答应了李神轨之请，恐怕灾祸既大且来的快。 
English: If you agree to Li Shenlu's request, I'm afraid the disaster will be great and come soon.

古文：诵乃坚握义僖手曰： 我闻有命，不敢以告人。 
现代文：王诵于是紧握住卢义僖的手说： 我听了你的这一见教，不敢拿来告诉别人，一定保守机密。 
English: Wang Qiao then tightly gripped Lu Yichen's hand and said, "I have listened to this teaching of yours, I dare not tell others about it, I must keep it confidential."

古文：女遂适他族。
现代文：因此，卢义僖的女儿便嫁给他姓之人。
English: As a result, Lu's daughter married someone with his surname.

古文：临婚之夕，太后遣中使宣敕停之，内外惶怖，义僖夷然自若。
现代文：出嫁的前夜，胡太后派中使宣旨让停嫁，卢家内外一片惶恐不安，只有卢义僖泰然自若。
English: On the eve of the wedding, the Empress Dowager Hu's faction issued a decree to stop the wedding, and the Lu family was in a panic. Only Lu Yijun remained calm.

古文：神轨，崇之子；义僖，度世之孙也。
现代文：李神轨是李度世的孙子。
English: Li Shenliao is the grandson of Li Tuo.

古文：胡琛据高平，遣其大将万俟丑奴、宿勤明达等寇魏泾州，将军卢祖迁、伊甕生讨之，不克。
现代文：胡琛占据高平，派遣他的大将万俟奴、宿勤明达等人入侵北魏的泾州，将军卢祖迁、伊瓮生率兵讨伐万俟奴和宿勤明达，未能取胜。
English: Hu Yao occupied Gaoping and sent his generals Wan Xunnu and Suqin Mingda and others to invade the Northern Wei state of Zhangzhou. General Lu Zuqian and Yi Xuan led the troops to fight against Wan Xunnu and Suqin Mingda and failed to win.

古文：萧宝寅、崔延伯既破莫折天生，引兵会祖迁等于安定，甲卒十二万，铁马八千，军威甚盛。
现代文：萧宝寅、崔延伯击败莫折天生之后，便领兵在安定同卢祖迁会合，会合之后共有兵卒十二万，甲马八千匹，军威甚壮。
English: After Xiao Baoying and Cui Yanbo defeated Muxi Nianrong, they led the troops to meet Lu Zuqin in Ding'an. After the meeting, there were a total of 120,000 soldiers and 8,000 horses, and the military prestige was very strong.

古文：丑奴军于安定西北七里，时以轻骑挑战。大兵未交，辄委走。
现代文：万俟奴驻扎在安定西北七里之处，不时地派轻骑挑战，大部队还没有交锋，便退逃。
English: Wan Xunnu was stationed seven miles northwest of Ding'an. From time to time, he would send light cavalry to challenge. The large force had not yet clashed, so they fled.

古文：延伯恃其勇，且新有功，遂唱议为先驱击之。
现代文：崔延伯依恃自己勇武，而且新近有功，于是便提议要担任先锋去进攻万俟丑奴。
English: Cui Yanbo thought that he was brave and brave, and he had recently won a merit, so he proposed to serve as a vanguard to attack Wanlu Ugly.

古文：别造大盾，内为锁柱，使壮士负而趋，谓之排城，置辎重于中，战士在外，自安定北缘原北上。
现代文：崔延伯又另外造了大盾，里面置有锁柱，让壮士们抬着前进，叫做排城，辎重放在里面，战十们在外面，从安定北边沿塬北上。
English: Cui Yanbo also made another large shield, with a locking post inside, so that the strong men could carry it forward. It was called Paicheng, with the anchor weight inside and the ten soldiers outside, from the north side of the stable to the north along the bank.

古文：将战，有贼数百骑诈持文书，云是降簿，且乞缓师。
现代文：将要开战之时，有数百名敌人的骑兵持着诈称为投降名册的信件来到近前，并且乞求崔延伯暂缓进攻。
English: As the battle was about to begin, hundreds of enemy cavalrymen approached with letters falsely claiming to be surrender lists, and begged Cui Yanbo to hold off the attack.

古文：宝寅、延伯未及阅视，宿勤明达引兵自东北至，降贼自西竞下，覆背击之。延伯上马奋击，逐北径抵其营。
现代文：萧宝寅、崔延伯还没有来得及阅看，宿勤明达便带兵从东北方向到了，而那些诈降的骑兵却从西边争相冲下来，由背后发起了进攻，崔延伯跃身上马奋力拼杀，一直追击到敌人的营盘之下。
English: Xiao Baoying and Cui Yanbo didn't have time to read it, but Suqin Mingda led the troops from the northeast direction, and those cavalry who cheated and surrendered rushed down from the west and launched an attack from behind. Cui Yanbo leaped on his horse and fought hard, chasing them all the way to the enemy's camp.

古文：贼皆轻骑，延伯军杂步卒，战久疲乏，贼乘间得入排城；延伯遂大败，死伤近二万人，宝寅收众退保安定。
现代文：敌人全是骑兵，而崔延伯的军队中却杂有不少步兵，作战时间长了人员疲乏，敌人便乘机进入了排城；于是崔延伯一败涂地，死伤了近两万人，萧宝寅收拢残部，退守安定。
English: The enemy were all cavalry, but Cui Yanbo's army was mixed with a lot of infantry. The fighting time was long and the men were tired, so the enemy took the opportunity to enter the blockhouse. As a result, Cui Yanbo suffered a crushing defeat, with nearly 20,000 killed and wounded, while Xiao Baoying rounded up the remnants and retreated to keep the peace.

古文：延伯自耻其败，乃缮甲兵，募骁勇，复自安定西进，去贼七里结营。
现代文：崔延伯因失败而感到耻辱，便修缮兵器，招募骁勇之士，再从安定向西进发，在离敌营七里远近的地方安营扎寨。
English: Feeling humiliated by his failure, Cui Yanbo repaired his weapons, recruited brave men, and then marched westward from Ding'an, setting up camp seven miles away from the enemy camp.

古文：壬辰，不告宝寅，独出袭贼，大破之，俄顷，平其数栅。
现代文：壬辰，崔延伯没有报告萧宝寅，便独自出发袭击敌营，大败敌人，转眼之间，敌人的数座栅垒便被夷平。
English: In the morning, without informing Xiao Baoying, Cui Yanbo went out alone to attack the enemy camp and defeated the enemy. In a blink of an eye, several of the enemy's fences were razed.

古文：贼见军士采掠散乱，复还击之，魏兵大败，延伯中流矢卒，士卒死者万馀人。
现代文：敌人见崔延伯的将士们抢掠财物乱作一团，便又回过头来还击，北魏军队大败，崔延伯中了流箭而身亡，兵卒死者达一万多人。
English: When the enemy saw Cui Yanbo's soldiers looting and making a mess of things, they turned around to fight back. The Northern Wei army was defeated. Cui Yanbo was hit by a stray arrow and died. More than 10,000 soldiers were killed.

古文：时大寇未平，复失骁将，朝野为之忧恐。
现代文：其时，强寇未平反而却失去了一员骁将，北魏朝野因此而忧恐不安。
English: At that time, Qiangqo Wei Ping instead lost one of his generals, and the Northern Wei court was worried and uneasy.

古文：于是贼势愈盛，而群臣自外来者，太后问之，皆言贼弱，以求悦媚，由是将帅求益兵者往往不与。
现代文：于是敌人的凶焰更加炽盛了，然而回到朝廷中的臣子们，每当胡太后问到讨征情况时，他们都说贼兵力量微弱，不足为虑，以此而讨好、取悦于胡太后，因此将帅们向朝廷请求增兵，往往不给。
English: As a result, the enemy's fierce flames became even more fierce. However, the courtiers who returned to the imperial court, whenever the Empress Dowager Hu asked about the situation of conscription, they all said that the robber soldiers were weak and not worth worrying about, in order to please and please the Empress Dowager Hu. Therefore, the generals asked the imperial court for more soldiers, but often did not give them.

古文：五月，夷陵烈侯裴邃卒。
现代文：五月，夷陵烈侯裴邃去世。
English: In May, Yiling Martyr Pei Xuan passed away.

古文：邃沉深有思略，为政宽明，将吏爱而惮之。
现代文：裴邃深沉而有谋略，为政宽厚而明断，将吏们对他既爱又怕。
English: Baekhyun is profound and has a strategy. He is generous and decisive in politics. The generals both love and fear him.

古文：壬子，以中护军夏侯亶督寿阳诸军事，驰驿代邃。
现代文：壬子，梁朝委派中护军夏侯督率寿阳军务，让他乘驿马前去代替裴邃。
English: In response, the Liang Dynasty sent the middle-ranking military officer Xia Houdu to lead the military affairs of Shouyang, and let him ride on a donkey to replace Pei Yao.

古文：益州刺史临汝侯渊猷遣其将樊文炽、萧世澄等，将兵围魏益州长史和安于小剑，魏益州刺史邴虬遣统军河南胡小虎、崔珍宝将兵救之。
现代文：梁朝益州刺史临汝侯萧渊猷派遣自己手下的将领樊文炽、萧世澄等人率兵在小剑围攻北魏的益州长史和安，北魏益州刺史邴虬派遣统军河南人胡小虎、崔珍宝率兵前去援救和安。
English: The Liang Dynasty's governor of Yizhou, Lin Ryou, sent his generals, such as Gao Wenglang and Xia Shicheng, to besiege the Northern Wei governor of Yizhou, Shi Hean, in Xiaojian. The Northern Wei governor of Yizhou, Shi Hean, sent the United Front Army, led by the Henan people, Hu Xiaohu and Cui Zhenbao, to rescue Hean.

古文：文炽袭破其栅，皆擒之，使小虎于城下说和安令早降。
现代文：樊文炽发动袭击，攻破了胡小虎和崔珍玉的栅垒，擒获了他们，并指使胡小虎到城下游说和安，让他早日投降。
English: Nie Wenhuang launched an attack, broke through the fence of Hu Xiaohu and Cui Zhenyu, captured them, and ordered Hu Xiaohu to go to the city to lobby for peace and let him surrender as soon as possible.

古文：小虎遥谓安曰： 我栅失备，为贼所擒，观其兵力，殊不足言。
现代文：胡小虎远远地对和安说： 我的栅垒失守，便被贼敌擒俘了。我察看了他们的兵力，实在不足称道。
English: Hu Xiaohu said to He An from a distance, "I lost my stronghold, and was captured by the enemy bandits. I inspected their troops, and I really cannot praise them enough.

古文：努力坚守，魏行台、傅梁州援兵已至。 
现代文：希望你努力，坚决守住，魏行台和傅梁州的援兵已经到了。 
English: I hope you will work hard and resolutely hold on. The reinforcements from Wei Xiangtai and Fu Liangzhou have arrived.

古文：语未终，军士以刀殴杀之。
现代文：胡小虎的话还没有说完，周围的兵士便用刀砍杀了他。
English: Before Hu Xiaohu had finished speaking, the soldiers around him hacked him to death with knives.

古文：西南道军司淳于诞引兵救小剑，文炽置栅于龙须山上以防归路。
现代文：北魏西南道军司淳于诞带兵援救小剑，樊文炽在龙须山上修筑栅垒防守在自己军队的退路上。
English: Jun Yu, the military commander of the Southwestern Military Region of the Northern Wei Dynasty, led soldiers to rescue Xiao Jian, and Zou Wen Blazing built a fence on Longsu Mountain to defend his army on the way back.

古文：戊辰，诞密募壮士夜登山烧其栅，梁军望见归路绝，皆恟惧。诞乘而击之，文炽大败，仅以身免。虏世澄等将吏十一人，斩获万计。
现代文：戊辰，淳于诞秘密招募壮士，在夜间登上龙须山，放火烧了樊文炽的栅垒，梁朝军队望见归路断绝，人人惊惧不安，淳于诞乘机发起进攻，樊文炽大败，崐他自己一人逃脱，萧世澄等十一个将吏被俘，被斩首的兵卒以万计算。
English: Wu Chen, Jun Yu Xing secretly recruited strong men, ascended Longsu Mountain at night, set fire to the barricade of Gao Wen blazing, the Liang Dynasty army lost sight of the way back, everyone was frightened and uneasy, Jun Yu Xing took the opportunity to launch an attack, Gao Wen blazing was defeated, and he escaped alone, Xiao Shizhen and other eleven generals were captured, and the soldiers who were beheaded were counted in the tens of thousands.

古文：魏子建以世澄购胡小虎之尸，得而葬之。
现代文：魏子建用萧世澄从梁朝军队手中换回了胡小虎的尸体，然后安葬了他。
English: Wei Zijian used Xiao Shizhen to exchange the body of Hu Xiaohu from the Liang Dynasty army, and then buried him.

古文：魏魏昌武康伯李崇卒。
现代文：北魏魏昌武康伯李崇去世。
English: Li Chong, Northern Wei Wuchang Wu Kangbo, passed away.

古文：初，帝纳齐东昏侯宠姬吴淑媛，七月而生豫章王综，宫中多疑之。
现代文：当初，梁武帝收纳了东昏侯的宠姬吴淑媛，七个月之后便生下了豫章王萧综，宫中许多人都怀疑萧综是东昏侯的儿子。
English: At first, Emperor Liangwu took in Wu Shuyuan, the favorite daughter of Dongwu Hou, and seven months later she gave birth to Yu Zhang Wang Xiao Simi. Many people in the palace suspected that Xiao Simi was the son of Dongwu Hou.

古文：及淑媛宠衰怨望，密谓综曰： 汝七月生儿，安得比诸皇子！
现代文：到了吴淑媛失宠而心怀怨恨之时，她便秘密地对萧综说： 你七个月就生下来了，怎么能与其他皇子相比！
English: When Wu Shuyuan fell out of favor and harbored resentment, she secretly said to Xiao Siming: You were born in seven months, how can you be compared to other princes!

古文：然汝太子次弟，幸保富贵，勿泄也！ 
现代文：然而你是太子的大弟弟，幸保富贵，千万不要泄露！ 
English: However, you are the prince's elder brother, fortunately wealthy, do not divulge!

古文：与综相抱而泣。
现代文：说毕便与萧综抱头而哭。
English: After saying that, Bi hugged his head with Xiao Zuo and cried.

古文：综由是自疑，昼则谈虐如常，夜则于静室闭户，披发席稾，私于别室祭齐氏七庙。
现代文：从此萧综便对自己的身世产生了怀疑，在白天他照旧言谈说笑，而到了夜间则关门闭户独处静室，披散着头发，坐在草席之上，私下里在别室中祭祀南齐的七庙祖先。
English: Since then, Xiao Zomei has had doubts about his background. During the day, he still talks and jokes, but at night, he closes the door and stays alone in a quiet room, wears his hair loose, sits on a straw mat, and secretly worships the ancestors of the seven temples in Nanzhi in another room.

古文：又微服至曲阿拜齐太宗陵，闻俗说割血沥骨，渗则为父子，遂潜发东昏侯冢，并自杀一男试之，皆验。由是常怀异志，专伺时变。
现代文：萧综又改换上平民服装到曲阿拜祭齐明帝陵，他听民间流传着把血滴在尸骨上，如果血渗进骨头就说明滴血者与死者为父了关系的方法，便偷偷地挖开了东昏侯的坟墓，并亲自杀死了一个男子来试验，结果他自己的血渗进了东昏侯的尸骨，而被他杀死的那个人的血却没渗进去，于是他便起了异心，一心伺机而起事。
English: Xiao Zhan also changed into civilian clothes to attend the Qibai Festival at the Tomb of Emperor Qiming. He heard folk tales about the method of dripping blood onto the bones of the corpse. If the blood seeped into the bones, it would indicate that the person dripping the blood was the father of the deceased. He secretly dug up the tomb of Dongwu Hou and personally killed a man to test it. As a result, his own blood seeped into the bones of Dongwu Hou, but the blood of the person he killed did not seep in. So he became hostile and waited for an opportunity to start something.

古文：综有勇力，能手制奔马；轻财好士，唯留附身故衣，馀皆分施，恒致罄乏。
现代文：萧综有猛力，能用手制服狂奔之马。他轻财好士，只留下自己穿的衣服，其他财物都分给他人，经常弄得手头很紧。
English: Xiao Zomei is strong and can use his hands to subdue a galloping horse. He is a man of light wealth, leaving only the clothes he wears, other belongings are distributed to others, often making his hands very tight.

古文：屡上便宜，求为边任，上未之许。
现代文：他多次上陈机宜，请求到边关去任职，梁武帝不予批准。
English: He repeatedly asked for opportunities and requested to go to the border to serve, but Emperor Liang Wu did not approve.

古文：常于内斋布沙于地，终日跣行，足下生胝，日能行三百里。
现代文：他常常在内室的地上布满沙子，终日光着脚在沙子上面行走，练得脚底长满老茧，一天能行走三百里路。
English: He often spread sand on the floor of the inner room and walked barefoot on it all day long. A thick layer of calluses developed on the soles of his feet, and he could walk three hundred miles a day.

古文：王、侯、妃、主及外人皆知其志，而上性严重，人莫敢言。
现代文：各王、侯、妃、主以及外人都知道了萧综的心机，但是因梁武帝性格严酷，所以谁也不敢说出来。
English: All kings, lords, queens, lords, and outsiders knew of Xiao Zomei's plot, but because Emperor Liangwu was a stern character, no one dared to speak out.

古文：又使通问于萧宝寅，谓之叔父。
现代文：萧综又派使者与萧宝寅接上了关系，把他认作叔父。
English: Xiao Zomei also sent an emissary to establish a relationship with Xiao Baoying, and recognized him as his uncle.

古文：为南兗州刺史，不见宾客，辞讼隔帘听之，出则垂帷于舆，恶人识其面。
现代文：肃综但任南兖州刺史，不接见宾客，审判案件时隔着帘子审问断决，外出时则在车前挂着布帷，特别不喜欢人认识他的面孔。
English: In all seriousness, however, he has been making history in southern Luzhou, does not receive guests, hears and decides cases through curtains during trials, and hangs cloth curtains in front of his car when he goes out. He especially does not like people to recognize his face.

古文：及在彭城，魏安丰王延明、临淮王彧将兵二万逼彭城，胜负久未决。
现代文：萧综在彭城时，北魏安丰王元延明、临淮王元率领两万兵马逼攻彭城，久而决不出胜负来。
English: When Xiao Zomei was in Pengcheng, the Northern Wei Anfeng Wang Yuan Yanming and Lin Huai Wang Yuan led twenty thousand soldiers and horses to attack Pengcheng, but they could not decide the outcome for a long time.

古文：上虑综败没，敕综引军还。
现代文：梁武帝担心萧综战败被擒，便命令他带兵返回。
English: Emperor Liangwu was worried that Xiao Zongji would be captured after the defeat, so he ordered him to return with his soldiers.

古文：综恐南归不复得至北边，乃密遣人送降款于彧；魏人皆不之信，彧募人入综军验其虚实，无敢行者。
现代文：萧综害怕南归之后不能再到北边来，便秘密派人给元送去降书；北魏人都不相信他，元招募人进入萧综的军中验明真假，但谁也不敢去。
English: Xiao Zomei was afraid that he would not be able to come to the north again after returning to the south, so he secretly sent someone to Yuan to deliver a surrender letter; the Northern Wei people did not believe him, and Yuan recruited people to enter Xiao Zomei's army to verify the truth, but no one dared to go.

古文：殿中侍御史济阴鹿悆为彧监军，请行，曰： 若综有诚心，与之盟约；如其诈也，何惜一夫！ 
现代文：殿中侍御史济阳人鹿任元的监军，他请求前去，说道： 如果萧综有诚意的话，便同他订立盟约；如果他是使诡诈之计的话，您又何必可惜一个普通人！ 
English: In the palace, the overseer of the army of Shi Jiyang, Deer Ren Yuan, asked him to come forward and said: If Xiao Zomei is sincere, he will enter into a covenant with him; if he is a trickster, why should you pity an ordinary person!

古文：时两敌相对，内外严固，单骑间出，径趣彭城，为综军所执，问其来状，悆曰： 临淮王使我来，欲有交易耳。 
现代文：当时两军相对，内外严加守固，鹿一个骑马抄小道而行，径直来到彭城，被萧综的军队抓住，当问道他前来的目的时，鹿回答： 临淮王让我前来，和你们商议一件事情。 
English: At that time, the two armies faced each other, both inside and outside were heavily fortified. Deer rode a horse and followed the trail, came straight to Pengcheng, and was caught by Xiao Zomei's army. When asked the purpose of his coming, Deer replied: "King Lin Huai asked me to come and discuss a matter with you."

古文：时元略已南还，综闻之，谓成景俊等曰： 我常疑元略规欲反城，将验其虚实，故遣左右为略使，入魏军中，呼彼一人。
现代文：当时元略已经回到南边去了，萧综知道元已经派人前来之后，对成景俊等人说： 我时常怀疑元略图谋率城反叛，我为了探明他的真假，所以派遣身边的人称作是元略的使者，进入北魏军中，叫他们派一个人前来联系。
English: At that time, Yuanliu had already returned to the south. After Xiao Zhao knew that Yuanliu had sent someone to him, he said to Cheng Jingjun and others: I often suspected that Yuanliu was plotting to lead a rebellion in the city. In order to find out whether he was real or not, I sent people around me, who called themselves Yuanliu's emissaries, into the Northern Wei Army and asked them to send someone to contact me.

古文：令其人果来，可遣人诈为略有疾在深室，呼至户外，令人传言谢之。 
现代文：现在他们果然派人来了，可以派一个假装成元略，并称有病而呆在深室之中，再把北魏派来的人叫到门外，令人假传元略的话感谢他。 
English: Now that they have sent someone, they can send someone who pretends to be Yuan Rong and stays in a deep room, claiming to be ill, and then call the person sent by the Northern Wei Dynasty outside the door and make people thank him with fake Yuan Rong's words.

古文：综又遣腹心安定梁话迎悆，密以意状语之。
现代文：萧综又派遣心腹安定人梁话去迎接鹿，并秘密地把萧综欲投降北魏以及与成景俊装模作样的一番安排告诉了鹿。
English: Xiao Zomei also sent his confidant Liang Ji to meet Deer, and secretly told Deer about Xiao Zomei's desire to surrender to the Northern Wei Dynasty and the elaborate arrangement with Chengjing Jun.

古文：悆薄暮入城，先引见胡龙牙，龙牙曰： 元中山甚欲相见，故遣呼卿。 
现代文：鹿在薄暮时分进了城，先被带去见胡龙牙，胡龙牙说： 中山王元略非常想见您，所以派我前来叫您。 
English: The deer entered the city at dusk and was first taken to see Hu Rongya. Hu Rongya said, "Zhongshan Wangyuan slightly really wants to see you, so he sent me to call you."

古文：又曰： 安丰、临淮，将少弱卒，规复此城，容可得乎！ 
现代文：又说： 安丰王和临淮王将少兵弱，企图光复这座城市，岂可以得到手呢？ 
English: He also said: King Anfeng and King Linhuai will be short of soldiers and weak, and if they try to recover this city, will they be able to get their hands on it?

古文：悆曰： 彭城，魏之东鄙，势在必争，得否在天，非人所测。 
现代文：鹿回答： 彭城是北魏的东部边境，势在必争，得到与否在于天命，非人力所能预料到的。 
English: Deer replied: Pengcheng is the eastern border of the Northern Wei Dynasty, and it is imperative to fight for it. Whether it is obtained or not depends on the fate of heaven, which cannot be predicted by human beings.

古文：龙牙曰： 当如卿言。 
现代文：胡龙牙又说： 确实和您所说的这样。 
English: Dragon's Teeth said: Just as you said.

古文：又引见成景俊，景俊与坐，谓曰： 卿不为刺客邪！ 
现代文：梁话又带鹿去见成景俊，成景俊与鹿一起就坐，对鹿说： 您不是来做刺客的吗？ 
English: Liang also took the deer to see Cheng Jingjun. Cheng Jingjun sat down with the deer and said to the deer, "Aren't you here to be an assassin?

古文：悆曰： 今者奉使，欲返命本朝。相刺之事，更卜后图。 
现代文：鹿回答： 如今我是奉命出使，一心想的是回朝复命，行刺之事，日后再择机而行吧。 
English: Deer replied: Now that I have been ordered to go, all I want to do is return to the North to answer for my life and carry out the assassination. Let's pick another opportunity to do it in the future.

古文：景俊为设饮食，乃引至一所，诈令一人自室中出，为元略致意曰： 我昔有以南向，且遣相呼，欲闻乡事；晚来疾作，不获相见。 
现代文：成景俊设酒席款待鹿，便把鹿引到一处地方，事先设计好让一个人从室内走出，替元略向鹿致意说： 我从前怀有目的而来到南方，现在派人把你叫来，想听一听家乡的情况；但是夜来患病，不能与你相见了。 
English: Cheng Jingjun set up a banquet to entertain the deer, then led the deer to a place, designed in advance so that a person could walk out of the room and pay a little tribute to the deer, saying: I used to come to the south with a purpose, now I sent someone to call you, I want to listen to the situation in my hometown; but I got sick at night, I can't meet you.

古文：悆曰： 早奉音旨，冒险祗赴，不得瞻见，内怀反侧。 
现代文：鹿回答道： 事先得到了您的通知，冒险前来，但是不能拜见您，内心实在不安。 
English: Deer replied: I got your notice in advance, ventured to come, but I can't visit you, I'm really worried.

古文：遂辞退。
现代文：于是便告辞而退了。
English: So he said goodbye and left.

古文：诸将竞问魏士马多少，悆盛陈有劲兵数十万。诸将相谓曰： 此华辞耳！ 
现代文：梁朝众将领争着询问北魏兵卒和战马的数量，鹿夸耀说有精兵几十万，众将领们互相说： 这是虚夸不实之言！ 
English: The generals of the Liang Dynasty were competing to inquire about the number of Northern Wei soldiers and horses. Deer boasted that there were hundreds of thousands of elite soldiers. The generals said to each other: This is a false boast!

古文：悆曰： 崇朝可验，何华之有！ 
现代文：鹿说： 这是一个早上就会得到验证的，有何不实之处呢！ 
English: Deer said: This is a morning will be verified, what is not true!

古文：乃遣悆还。
现代文：于是便打发鹿回去了。
English: So they sent the deer back.

古文：景俊送之于戏马台，北望城堑，谓曰： 险固如此，岂魏所能取！ 
现代文：成景俊把鹿送到戏马台，他北望城堑，对鹿说： 这样险固，北魏那里能够攻取呢？ 
English: Cheng Jingjun sent the deer to the circus ring. He looked north at the city walls and said to the deer: "This is so dangerous, where in Northern Wei can it be captured?

古文：悆曰： 攻守在人，何论险固！ 
现代文：鹿说： 攻守在人，何论险固？ 
English: Deer said: Offense and defense depend on people, how about danger and solidity?

古文：悆还，于路复与梁话申固盟约。
现代文：鹿返回，在路上又同梁话重申了彼此订立的盟约。
English: The deer returned, and on the way they spoke with Liang again, reaffirming the pact they had made.

古文：六月，庚辰，综与梁话及淮阴苗文宠夜出，步投彧军。
现代文：六月庚辰，萧综与梁话以及淮阳人苗文宠夜间出发，步行着投奔了北魏军队。
English: In June, Geng Chen, Xiao Zong and Liang Zhe, as well as Miao Wencai from Huaiyang, set out at night and joined the Northern Wei army on foot.

古文：及旦，斋内诸阁犹闭不开，众莫知所以，唯见城外魏军呼曰： 汝豫章王昨夜已来，在我军中，汝尚何为！ 
现代文：到了天亮之时，萧综住所的几个门都还紧闭不开，众人都不知原因，只听见城外面北魏军队在高声叫喊： 你们的豫章王昨天夜里已经前来投奔，现在我们军中，你们不投降还等什么呢？ 
English: When it was dawn, several doors of Xiao Zhao's residence were still tightly closed and could not be opened. Everyone did not know the reason. They only heard the Northern Wei army outside the city shouting in a loud voice: Your King Yuzhang came and fled yesterday night. Now, in our army, what are you waiting for if you do not surrender?

古文：城中求王不获，军遂大溃。
现代文：城中到处找不见萧综，于是军队彻底崩溃。
English: Xiao Zong could not be found everywhere in the city, so the army completely collapsed.

古文：魏人入彭城，乘胜追击梁兵，复取诸城，至宿豫而还。将佐士卒死没者什七八，唯陈庆之帅所部得还。
现代文：北魏人进入彭城，乘胜而追击，又攻占了几座城市，到了宿预才返回，梁朝的将佐兵卒被杀被俘的有十之七八，只有陈庆之率领自己的部队返回。
English: The Northern Wei people entered Pengcheng, took advantage of the victory and pursued, and captured several cities. They only returned to Suqian. Of the Liang Dynasty generals and soldiers, seven out of ten were killed or captured. Only Chen Qingzhi led his troops back.

古文：上闻之，惊骇，有司奏削综爵士，绝属籍，更其子直姓悖氏。
现代文：梁武帝知道这一情况之后，惊异万分，有关部门奏请削夺萧综的爵位和封地，并从皇族名册中除名，改他的儿子萧直姓悖氏。
English: After Emperor Liangwu learned of this situation, he was so surprised that the relevant departments made a petition to strip Xiao Zomei of his title and fief, remove his name from the royal family register, and change his son Xiao Zhengyi's surname to Parou.

古文：未旬日，诏复属籍，封直为永新侯。
现代文：但是没过十日，梁武帝又下诏恢复了萧综在皇族名册中的名字，封萧直为永新侯。
English: However, less than ten days later, Emperor Liang Wu issued an edict to restore Xiao Zuo's name in the royal family register, and Xiao Zhi was given the title of Yongxin Hou.

古文：西丰侯正德自魏还，志行无悛，多聚亡命，夜剽掠杀人于道，以轻车将军从综北伐，弃军辄还。
现代文：西丰侯萧正德从北魏返回之后，思想和行为方面没有一点悔改之意，大量召纳亡命之徒，夜间在道路上杀人越货，他被任命为轻车将军跟随萧综北伐，丢下军队私自返回。
English: After Xiao Zhengde, the lord of Xifeng, returned from the Northern Wei Dynasty, he did not have any intention of repentance in his thoughts and actions. He recruited a large number of desperadoes, killed people on the road at night, and robbed goods. He was appointed as a light vehicle general to follow Xiao Zhengde's Northern Expedition, and left the army to return secretly.

古文：上积其前后罪恶，免官削爵，徙临海；未至，追赦之。
现代文：梁武帝对他前后的罪恶一起清算，免去了他的官职，削夺了爵位，并流放临海；但是还没有到临海，梁武帝又派人追上赦免了他。
English: Emperor Liangwu liquidated his previous and subsequent crimes together, relieved him of his official position, stripped him of his title, and exiled him to Linhai; but before he reached Linhai, Emperor Liangwu sent someone to catch up and pardon him.

古文：综至洛阳，见魏主，还就馆，为齐东昏侯举哀，服斩衰三年。
现代文：萧综到了洛阳，拜见了北魏孝明帝之后，回住在客馆之中，他为南齐东昏侯举哀，服斩衰之孝三年。
English: Xiao Zong arrived in Luoyang, and after meeting the Northern Wei Emperor Xiaoming, he returned to live in a guest house. He mourned the death of Nanqidong, and served the dying Emperor Xiaoming for three years.

古文：太后以下并就馆吊之，赏赐礼遇甚厚，拜司空，封高平郡公、丹阳王，更名赞。
现代文：胡太后以下的王公大臣们全都到他的客馆吊唁，赏赐礼遇特别丰厚，拜他为司空，封为高平郡公、丹杨王，并改名为萧赞。
English: All the princes' ministers from Empress Dowager Hu down came to his guesthouse to offer their condolences, and the rewards and courtesies were particularly plentiful. He was worshipped as Siku, given the titles of Gapyeong County Governor and Danyang King, and his name was changed to Xiao Zan.

古文：以苗文宠、梁话皆为光禄大夫；封鹿悆为定陶县子，除员外散骑常侍。
现代文：苗文崐龙和梁话都被任命为光禄大夫；鹿被封为定陶县子，并行命为员外散骑常侍。
English: Miao Wenzhonglong and Liang Zhe were both appointed as Guanglu doctors; Deer was appointed as the son of Dingtao County, and was also appointed as the non-commissioned officer.

古文：综长史济阳江革、司马范阳祖暅之皆为魏所虏，安丰王延明闻其才名，厚遇之。
现代文：萧综的长史济阳人江革、司马苑阳人祖之都被北魏俘虏，安丰王元延明听说了他们的才名，对待他们十分优厚。
English: Xiao Zong's father, Changshi, Jiyang's father, Jiang Ge, and Sima Yuan's father, Yang's father, were all captured by the Northern Wei Dynasty. Anfeng Wangyuan Yanming heard of their talents and treated them very well.

古文：革称足疾不拜。
现代文：江革借口脚有毛病而不拜。
English: Jiang Ge's excuse for not bowing was that he had a foot problem.

古文：延明使恒之作《欹器漏刻铭》，革唾骂恒之曰： 卿荷国厚恩，乃为虏立铭，孤负朝廷！ 
现代文：元延明让祖之撰写《欹器铭》和《漏刻铭》，江革唾骂祖之道： 你承受国家的厚恩，却为敌虏撰写铭文，辜负了朝廷！ 
English: Yuan Yanming asked his ancestor to write the "Imperial Treasure Inscription" and the "Leaked Imperial Treasure Inscription," and Jiang Ge reviled his ancestor's way: You have received the country's generosity, but you have written inscriptions for your enemies, and you have failed the imperial court!

古文：延明闻之，令革作《大小寺碑》、《祭彭祖文》，革辞不为。
现代文：元延明知道了这一情况之后，便命令江革撰写《大小寺碑》、《祭彭祖文》，江革推辞不干。
English: After Yuan Yanming learned of this situation, he ordered Jiang Ge to write "Big and Small Temples and Monuments" and "Writing a Tribute to Peng Zu," but Jiang Ge refused to do so.

古文：延明将棰之，革厉色曰： 江革行年六十，今日得死为幸，誓不为人执笔！ 
现代文：元延明将要对江革用杖刑，江革厉声厉色地说道： 江革我已经活了六十岁了，今日得死实为大幸，誓死不为人执笔！ 
English: Yuan Yanming was going to beat Jiang Ge with a cane, and Jiang Ge said with a strong voice: "Jiang Ge, I have lived for sixty years, today I am truly blessed, I swear I will never write!

古文：延明知不可屈，乃止；日给脱粟三升，仅全其生而已。
现代文：元延明知道江革不可屈服，便停止了；每天只给江革糙米饭三升，仅够维持生命而已。
English: Yuan Yanming knew that Jiang Ge could not give in, so he stopped; he only gave Jiang Ge three liters of brown rice a day, which was just enough to sustain his life.

古文：上密召夏侯亶还，使休兵合肥，俟淮堰成复进。
现代文：梁武帝密召夏侯回朝，让停止进攻合肥，等待淮河堰堤修成之后再进攻。
English: Emperor Liangwu called Xia Hou back to the North to stop attacking Hefei and wait for the Huaihe Dam to be completed before attacking.

古文：癸未，魏大赦，改元孝昌。
现代文：癸未，北魏大赦天下，改年号为孝昌。
English: After the Northern Wei Dynasty was abolished, the name of the year was changed to Xiaochang.

古文：破六韩拔陵围魏广阳王深于五原，军主贺拔胜募二百人开东门出战，斩首百馀级，贼稍退。深拔军向明州，胜常为殿。
现代文：破六韩拔陵在五原围攻北魏广阳王元深，军主贺拔胜招募了两百人打开东门出战，斩首一百余，敌人稍微退却，元深把军队开赴朔州，贺拔胜经常担任后卫。
English: During the siege of Guangyang King Yuan Sheng in the Northern Wei Dynasty, the warlord He Baxing recruited two hundred men to open the east gate and go to war, beheading more than a hundred, the enemy retreated slightly, Yuan Sheng sent the army to Shuozhou, and He Baxing often served as a guard.

古文：云州刺史费穆，招抚离散，四面拒敌。
现代文：云州刺史费穆，招纳安抚离散之众，四面抵抗敌人。
English: Yunzhou stabbed Feimu, recruited and pacified the scattered people, and resisted the enemy on all sides.

古文：时北境州镇皆没，唯云中一城独存。
现代文：当时北魏北部边境上的州镇全都丢失了，只有云中一城还独存。
English: At that time, all the towns on the northern border of the Northern Wei Dynasty were lost, and only one city in the clouds remained.

古文：久之，道路阻绝，援军不至，粮仗俱尽，穆弃城南奔尔硃荣于秀容；既而诣阙请罪，诏原之。
现代文：由于道路阻绝，援军不到，粮食兵器全都用尽，费穆只好弃城向南到秀容投奔尔朱荣，很快又赴朝廷请罪，孝明帝诏令宽宥了他。
English: As the road was blocked, reinforcements were not available, and all grain weapons were exhausted, Feimu had no choice but to abandon the city and head south to Xiurong to join Bener Zhu Rong. He soon went to the imperial court to plead guilty, and Emperor Xiaoming pardoned him by imperial edict.

古文：长流参军于谨言于广阳王深曰： 今寇盗蜂起，未易专用武力胜也。
现代文：长流参军于谨对广阳王说： 如今盗寇蜂起，不好专用武力来取胜。
English: Yu Zheng, a long-time member of the army, said to Guangyang Wang Rong: Now that the bandits have risen up, it is not good to use special force to win.

古文：谨请奉大王之威命，谕以祸福，庶几稍可离也。 
现代文：于谨我请求奉大王您的威命，亲自前去对众贼晓以祸福利害，或许稍可以离间他们。 
English: Therefore, I respectfully request, by your majesty's command, that you personally go and deal with the thieves, and perhaps drive them apart a little.

古文：深许之。
现代文：元深十分赞同他的建议。
English: Yuan Sheng fully agreed with his suggestion.

古文：谨兼通诸国语，乃单骑诣叛胡营，见其酋长，开示恩信，于是西部铁勒酋长乜列河等将三万馀户南诣深降。
现代文：于谨兼通几个国家的语言，于是便单人匹马地前去反叛了的胡人的营地，见到了他们的酋长，他们许以恩惠表示信义。于是西部的铁勒酋长乜列河等人率领三万多户南下来到元深处投降。
English: Yu Jian spoke the languages of several countries at the same time, so he went single-handedly to the camp of the rebellious Hu people, met their chiefs, and they promised to show their loyalty with favors. Therefore, the western Tiele chief Zou Leche and others led more than thirty thousand households south to the depths of Yuan to surrender.

古文：深欲引兵至折敷岭迎之，谨曰： 破六韩拔陵兵势甚盛，闻乜列河等来降，必引兵邀之，若先据险要，未易敌也。
现代文：元深准备带兵到折敷岭迎接前来投降的胡人，于谨告诉他： 破六韩拔陵的兵势特别强大，他听到乜列河等人来投降，必定领兵阻截，如果他先占据了险要地势，便不容易抵挡。
English: Yuan Sheng was preparing to take soldiers to Orishiki-Ridge to meet the Hu people who had come to surrender, so he told him: The army that broke through the Six Han Tombs was particularly strong. When he heard that Xingleihe and others had come to surrender, he was sure to lead the troops to intercept them. If he occupied the critical terrain first, it would not be easy to resist.

古文：不若以乜列河饵之，而伏兵以待之，必可破也。 
现代文：因此，不如用乜列河来作诱饵，而埋伏下兵力等待他来上钩，便一定可以击败他。 
English: Therefore, it is better to use the Qili River as a bait, and wait for the ambushed troops to wait for him to hook, and they can definitely defeat him.

古文：深从之，拔陵果引兵邀击乜列河，尽俘其众；伏兵发，拔陵大败，复得乜列河之众而还。
现代文：元深听从了于谨的建议。破六韩拔陵果然带兵截击乜列河，全部俘获了乜列河的人马；元深的伏兵出击，破六韩拔陵被打得一败涂地，北魏伏兵重新得到了乜列河的部众而返回。
English: Yuan Sheng listened to Yu Zhen's suggestion. He successfully led troops to break through the Six Han Tombs and intercepted the Qili River, capturing all the men and horses of the Qili River; Yuan Sheng's ambush troops attacked, broke through the Six Han Tombs and were defeated, and the Northern Wei ambush troops regained the men of the Qili River and returned.

古文：柔然头兵可汗大破破六韩拔陵，斩其将孔雀等。
现代文：柔然国头兵可汗大败破六韩拔陵，斩了他的将领孔雀等人。
English: Khan, the head soldier of the country, defeated the six Korean tombs, and killed his general Peacock and others.

古文：拔陵避柔然，南徙渡河。
现代文：破六韩拔陵为避崐开柔然军队，往南迁移渡过了北河。
English: In order to evade the Japanese army, they moved south and crossed the Beichuan River.

古文：将军李叔仁以拔陵稍逼，求援于广阳王深，深帅众赴之。贼前后降附者二十万人，深与行台元纂表： 乞于恒州北别立郡县，安置降户，随宜赈赉，息其乱心。 
现代文：将军李叔仁因破六韩拔陵将要逼近，向广阳王元深求援，元深率众前去迎战破六韩拔陵，前后投附的敌人有二十万人，元深与行台元纂上奏朝廷，上表中指出： 请求在恒州之北另立郡县，安置来降的人家，根据情况而加以救济，以便消除他们的反乱之心。 
English: General Li Shuren asked for help from Guangyang King Yuan Sheng because the Tomb of the Six Korean Emperors was about to be breached. Yuan Sheng led the crowd to fight against the Tomb of the Six Korean Emperors. There were two hundred thousand enemies who attached themselves before and after. Yuan Sheng and the Taiwanese emissary appealed to the imperial court. The above table pointed out: Request to set up a separate county in the north of Hengzhou, resettle the people who came down, and provide relief according to the situation in order to eliminate their rebellious heart.

古文：魏朝不从，诏黄门侍郎杨昱分处之于冀、定、瀛三州就食。
现代文：但是北魏朝廷不同意，诏令黄门侍郎杨昱把这些降户分别安置在冀、定、瀛三州就食。
English: However, the Northern Wei court did not agree, and ordered the Yellow Gate's steward Yang Jie to place these households in the three states of Ji, Ding, and Jia respectively.

古文：深谓纂曰： 此辈复为乞活矣。 
现代文：元深对元纂说： 这些人又将成为流民了！ 
English: Yuan Sheng said to Yuan Cao: These people will become exiles again!

古文：秋，七月，壬戌，大赦。
现代文：秋季，七月壬戌，梁朝大赦天下。
English: In the autumn, in July, Liang Chao became emperor.

古文：八月，魏柔玄镇民杜洛周聚众反于上谷，改元真王，攻没郡县，高欢、蔡俊、尉景及段荣、安定彭乐皆从之。
现代文：八月，北魏柔玄镇平民杜洛周在上谷聚众造反，改年号为真王，攻陷郡县，高欢、蔡俊、尉景以及段荣、安定人彭乐等人都追随杜洛周造反。
English: In August, Douluo Zhou, a commoner from Zhuoxuan Town of Northern Wei Dynasty, gathered a crowd to rebel in Shanggu, changed his name to Zhenwang, and attacked counties. Gaohuan, Cai Jun, Yingjing, Duan Rong, and the stable person Peng Le all followed Douluo Zhou to rebel.

古文：洛周围魏燕州刺史博陵崔秉，九月，丙辰，魏以幽州刺史常景兼尚书为行台，与幽州都督元谭讨之。
现代文：杜洛周围攻北魏燕州刺史博陵人崔秉，九月丙辰，北魏委任幽州刺史常景为兼尚书，作为行台，与幽州都督元谭一起讨伐杜洛周。
English: Du Luo's entourage was attacked by the Northern Wei Yan Zhou assassin, the Boling man Cui Bing. In September, the Northern Wei appointed the Yuzhou assassin, the Changjing, as both an eminence and a platform, and fought against Du Luo Zhou together with the Yuzhou governor, Yuan Tan.

古文：景，爽之孙也。
现代文：常景是常爽的孙子。
English: Changjing is the grandson of Changshuang.

古文：自卢龙塞至军都关，皆置兵守险，谭屯居庸关。
现代文：从卢龙塞到军都关，常景都布置兵力守住险要之处，元谭驻扎在居庸关。
English: From Lulongse to Jiuyongguan, the troops were deployed to defend the critical points. The Yuan Tan was stationed in Jiuyongguan.

古文：冬，十月，吐谷浑遣兵击赵天安，天安降，凉州复为魏。
现代文：冬季，十月，吐谷浑派兵攻打赵天安，赵天安投降，凉州复为北魏所有。
English: In winter, in October, Tugu Hun sent troops to attack Zhao Tian'an, Zhao Tian'an surrendered, and Liangzhou was returned to the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：平西将军高徽奉使嚈哒，还，至枹罕。
现代文：平西将军高徽奉命出使哒，完成使命后返回，到了罕。
English: Pingxi General Gao Hui was ordered to send an envoy, and after completing his mission, he returned to Han.

古文：会河州刺史元祚卒，前刺史梁钊之子景进引莫折念生兵围其城。
现代文：正好遇上河州刺史元祚去世，前刺史梁钊的儿子梁景进带领莫折念生的兵马围攻罕城。
English: Just as the death of the Hezhou assassin Yuan Shikun occurred, the former assassin Liang Shikun's son, Liang Jingjin, led the soldiers and horses that he had learned so much from to besiege Hancheng.

古文：长史元永等推徽行州事，勒兵固守；景进亦自行州事。
现代文：长史元永等人推举高徽代理州政，高徽指挥兵力固守罕；梁景进也自己宣布代理州政。
English: Changshi Yuan Rong and others nominated Gaohui as the acting state government, Gaohui's commanding force adhered to Han; Liang Jingjin also announced the acting state government.

古文：徽请兵于吐谷浑，吐谷浑救之，景进败走。
现代文：高徽向吐谷浑请兵，吐谷浑派兵前来援救，梁景进战败而逃跑。
English: Gao Hui invited soldiers to Tuyun, Tuyun sent soldiers to come to the rescue, Liang Jingjin was defeated and fled.

古文：徽，湖之孙也。
现代文：高徽是高湖的孙子。
English: Gao Hui is the grandson of Gao Hu.

古文：魏方有事西北，二荆、西郢群蛮皆反，断三鸦路，杀都督，寇掠，北至襄城。
现代文：北魏正用兵西北，二荆、西郢的群蛮皆反叛了，他们阻断了三鸦路，杀了都督，烧杀抢掠向北直至襄城。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty was using soldiers in the northwest, and the troops of Erjing and Xidi all rebelled. They blocked the Three Ravens Road, killed the governor, and burned, looted and plundered as far north as Xiangcheng.

古文：汝水有冉氏、向氏、田氏，种落最盛，其馀大者万家，小者千室，各称王侯，屯据险要，道路不通。
现代文：汝水有冉氏、向氏、田氏，三姓部落最为强盛，其他的部落大的有一万户人家，小的有一千户，各自称王称侯，占据险要之处，以致道路不通。
English: There are Ran clan, Xiang clan and Tian clan in Ruisui. The three tribes are the most powerful. The other tribes have 10,000 large households and 1,000 small households. They each claim to be the king and lord of the village, occupying important places, so that the road is impassable.

古文：十二月，壬午，魏主下诏曰： 朕将亲御六师，扫荡逋秽，今先讨荆蛮，疆理南服。 
现代文：十二月壬午，北魏孝明帝诏令： 朕将亲率六军，扫荡流寇，现在先讨伐荆蛮，平定南方之乱。 
English: At noon of December, Emperor Xiaoming of the Northern Wei Dynasty issued a decree: I will personally lead the Six Armies to sweep away the invaders, and now I will first fight the barbarians and quell the Southern Rebellion.

古文：时群蛮引梁将曹义宗等围魏荆州，魏都督崔暹将兵数万救之，至鲁阳，不敢进。
现代文：当时群蛮们带领梁朝将领曹义宗等人围攻北魏荆州，北魏都督崔暹率兵数万前去救援，到了鲁阳，不敢向前进。
English: At that time, the barbarians led by the Liang Dynasty general Cao Yizong and others besieged the Northern Wei Jingzhou, and the Northern Wei Governor Cui Siam led tens of thousands of soldiers to rescue. When they reached Luyang, they did not dare to advance.

古文：魏更以临淮王彧为征南大将军，将兵讨鲁阳蛮，司空长史辛雄为行台左丞，东趣叶城。
现代文：北魏改换临淮王元为征南大将军，令他率兵讨伐鲁阳的蛮人，司空长史辛雄担任行台左丞，东赴叶城。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty changed Lin Huai Wangyuan to be the general of the Southern Expedition, and ordered him to lead the troops to fight the barbarians in Luyang. Sikyong Shi Xinxiong served as Gangtai Zuo, and went east to Yecheng.

古文：别遣征虏将军裴衍、恒农太守京兆王罴将兵一万，自武关出通三鸦路，以救荆州。
现代文：又另派征虏将军裴衍、恒农太守京兆人王元罴率兵一万，从武关出发打通三鸦路，以援救荆州。
English: In addition, he dispatched the conscript general Pei Yan and the permanent peasant governor of Jingzhao, Wang Yuanxuan, together with 10,000 soldiers, to open the Three Ravens Road from Wuguan to rescue Jingzhou.

古文：衍等未至，彧军已屯汝上，州郡被蛮寇者争来请救，彧以处分道别，不欲应之。辛雄曰： 今裴衍未至，王士众已集，蛮左唐突，挠乱近畿，王秉麾阃外，见可而进，何论别道！ 
现代文：裴衍等人还没有到达。元的军队已经驻扎于汝水之上，各州郡凡被蛮人寇掠的都争着前来求救，元因为原来安排在另一条路上出兵，不想答应他们，辛雄对他说： 现在裴衍还没有到来，而大王您的兵马已经聚集起来了，豫地的蛮子们来势凶猛，扰乱到了京畿附近，大王您挥旗统兵在外，有需要便进军，何必去管改变行军路线呢？ 
English: Pei Yan and the others had not yet arrived. Yuan's army was already stationed on the Yu Shui River, and everyone in the states and counties who had been plundered by the barbarians were scrambling to come for help. Yuan did not want to agree to them because he had originally arranged to send troops on another road. Xin Xiong said to him: Now Pei Yan has not yet arrived, but the great king has already gathered your soldiers and horses. The barbarians from Yu Di have come with a ferocious force and have disturbed the vicinity of Gyeonggi. The great king has waved his flag and led his soldiers outside. If necessary, he will march in. Why should

古文：彧恐后有得失之责，邀雄符下。
现代文：元恐怕会有所失而受到责处，便请求辛雄给自己下达一道尚书行台的符令。
English: Yuan was afraid that he would be held responsible for his failure, so he asked Xinxiong to give him an order to open a bookstore.

古文：雄以群蛮闻魏主将自出，心必震动，可乘势破也，遂符彧军，令速赴击。
现代文：辛雄认为群蛮闻知北魏孝明帝将亲自出征，崐众心必定受到震动，可以乘势而击败他们，便给元的军队下了一道符令，命令他们速去攻打蛮贼。
English: Xin Xiong thought that the barbarians knew that the Northern Wei Emperor Xiaoming would personally go to war, and that the hearts of the people must be shaken, and they could take advantage of the situation and defeat them. He gave a signal to Yuan's army, ordering them to quickly attack the barbarians.

古文：群蛮闻之，果散走。
现代文：群蛮闻知元要来，果然散逃了。
English: The group heard that Zhiyuan was coming, and they fled.

古文：魏主欲自出讨贼，中书令袁翻谏而止。
现代文：北魏孝明帝想要亲自出征讨贼，中书令袁翻劝谏阻止了他。
English: Emperor Xiaoming of the Northern Wei Dynasty wanted to personally go out to fight the bandits, but Yuan Rong persuaded him not to.

古文：辛雄自军中上疏曰： 凡人所以临陈忘身，触白刃而不惮者，一求荣名，二贪重赏，三畏刑罚，四避祸难。非此数者，虽圣王不能使其臣，慈父不能厉其子矣。
现代文：辛雄从军中上书孝明帝说： 人们之所以临阵而忘身，白刃触身而不害怕，一是为了求取荣华之名，二是贪得重赏，三是害怕刑罚，四是逃避祸难，不是因为这几种原因，即便是圣人也指使不动他的臣子，慈父也不能激发起他的儿子。
English: Xin Xiong wrote to Emperor Xiaoming from the middle of the army, saying: "The reason why people forget themselves in the face of battle, and touch themselves with a white blade without fear, is firstly, to seek the name of glory, secondly, to be greedy for rewards, thirdly, to be afraid of punishment, and fourthly, to escape misfortune. It is not because of these reasons. Even a saint can command his vassal not to move, and a merciful father cannot inspire his son.

古文：明主深知其情，故赏必行，罚必信，使亲疏贵贱勇怯贤愚，闻钟鼓之声，见旌旗之列，莫不奋激，竞赴敌场，岂恹久生而乐速死哉？
现代文：圣明的君主深知这一情况，所以赏必行，罚必信，使亲近的、疏远的、尊贵的、卑贱的、勇敢的、怯弱的、贤德的、愚顽的各种不同类型之人，听到钟鼓之声，看见旌旗之列，莫不奋发激厉，争赴敌阵，这难道是他们厌恶活的太久了而喜欢速死吗？
English: The all-wise sovereign is well aware of this situation, so reward must be done, punishment must be believed, so that all different types of people, close, distant, noble, lowly, brave, weak, wise, and stupid, hear the sound of the bell and drum, see the row of banners, and have no choice but to work hard and go to the enemy. Is this because they have been disgusted with life for too long and like to die quickly?

古文：利害悬于前，欲罢不能耳。
现代文：正是因为利害摆在眼前，欲罢而不能哪。
English: It is precisely because the stakes are so high that we cannot give up.

古文：自秦、陇逆节，蛮左乱常，已历数载，凡在戎役数十万人，扞御三方之师，败多胜少，迹其所由，皆不明赏罚之故也。
现代文：自从秦、陇之地叛逆，豫地蛮人作乱，已经有几年之久了，近来派军队讨伐，败多而胜少，查其原因，在于赏罚不明。
English: It has been several years since the Qin and Qiang rebelled and the barbarians in Henan started to make trouble. Recently, they sent an army to fight, but they lost more than they won. The reason for this is that the reward and punishment are unknown.

古文：陛下虽降明诏，赏不移时，然将士之勋，历稔不决，亡军之卒，晏然在家，是使节士无所劝慕，庸人无所畏慑；进而击贼，死交而赏赊，退而逃散，身全而无罪，此其所以望敌奔沮，不肯尽力者也。
现代文：陛下虽然颁下诏书，赏不移时，立马兑现，但是将士们的勋位，历年而不定，开小差的兵卒，安然住在家中，因而导致节义之士无所向往，庸碌之辈无所畏惧慑服；将士们前进而击贼，死亡近在眼前而奖赏遥不可见；后退而逃散，则保全自身而不承担罪责，这就是望见敌人便奔逃沮散，不肯尽力的原因。
English: Although His Majesty issued the edict, when the reward is unshakable, it is immediately honored, but the ranks of the soldiers are not fixed over the years, and the soldiers who have gone AWOL live safely at home. As a result, the righteous have nothing to aspire to, and the mediocre have nothing to fear; the soldiers advance and defeat the thieves, death is close at hand and the reward is far away; retreat and escape, they protect themselves without assuming guilt. This is the reason why they see the enemy and run away frustrated, unwilling to do their best.

古文：陛下诚能号令必信，赏罚必行，则军威必张，盗贼必息矣。 
现代文：陛下如果能做到号令必信，赏罚必行，则军威必振，盗贼必平。 
English: Your Majesty, if you can do this, then orders must be believed, rewards and punishments must be carried out, military power must be strengthened, and thieves must be crushed.

古文：疏奏，不省。
现代文：辛雄的奏章呈上去了，但是孝明帝没有研究察查。
English: There's no chorus.

古文：曹义宗等取魏顺阳、马圈，与裴衍等战于淅阳，义宗等败退。
现代文：曹义宗等人攻取了顺阳、马圈，与裴衍在淅阳交战，曹义宗等人战败而退。
English: Cao Yizong and others captured Shunyang and Ma Hui, and fought with Pei Yan in Shenyang. Cao Yizong and others were defeated and retreated.

古文：衍等复取顺阳，进围马圈。
现代文：裴衍等人收复了顺阳，进而围攻马圈。
English: Pei Yan and others recovered Shunyang, and then besieged Ma Hui.

古文：洛州刺史董绍以马圈城坚，衍等粮少，上书言其必败。
现代文：洛州刺史董绍因为马圈城防坚固，裴衍等人粮少，上书朝廷说裴衍等人必定失败。
English: Because of the strong defense of the horse ring city and the lack of grain for Pei Yan and others, the imperial court said in a letter that Pei Yan and others would certainly fail.

古文：邵陵王纶摄南徐州事，在州喜怒不恒，肆行非法。
现代文：没过多久，曹义宗攻打裴衍等人，战而胜之，又占取了顺阳。
English: Before long, Cao Yizong attacked Pei Yan and others, won the battle, and occupied Shunyang.

古文：遨游市里，问卖旦者曰： 刺史何如？ 对言： 躁虐。 
现代文：北魏任命王罴为荆州刺史。集市上游荡，问卖黄鳝的人： 刺史这个人如何？ 回答说： 暴躁残虐。 
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty appointed Wang Zhi as the chief historian of Jingzhou. Wandering in the market, he asked the seller of Huang Zhi: How is this person? He replied: He is violent and cruel.

古文：纶怒，令吞旦而死。百姓惶骇，道路以目。
现代文：萧纶大怒，命令这人吞吃黄鳝，将他活活折磨而死，百姓惶恐万分，道路相逢时只互相对视而不敢说话。
English: Xiao Yu was furious and ordered the man to eat the yellow gourd and tortured him to death. The people were terrified. When they met on the road, they only looked at each other and did not dare to speak.

古文：尝逢丧车，夺孝子服而著之，匍匐号叫。
现代文：有一次萧纶遇上了灵车，他夺过孝子的衣服穿上，匍匐嚎叫。
English: Once, when Xiao Yao encountered a hearse, he snatched his son's clothes, put them on, and howled.

古文：签帅惧罪，密以闻。
现代文：他身边的典签害怕自己获罪，秘密地把萧纶的情况报告了朝廷。
English: Fearful of incriminating himself, the captain secretly reported the matter to the emperor.

古文：上始严责，纶不能改，于是遣代。
现代文：梁武帝方才严厉斥责了萧纶，但是萧纶根本不思悔改，于是便派人代替了萧纶的官职。
English: Emperor Liangwu severely reprimanded Xiao Yao, but Xiao Yao did not want to repent at all, so he sent someone to replace Xiao Yao's official post.

古文：纶悖慢逾甚，乃取一老公短瘦类上者，加以衮冕，置之高坐，朝以为君，自陈无罪；使就坐剥褫，捶之于庭。
现代文：萧纶因此更加悖逆傲慢了，他找来一个矮短瘦小而象梁武帝的老头，给他加上兖服和王冠，让他坐在高处，将他当作君王来朝拜，并陈说自己无罪；又让老头来到座前，剥去他的衣冠，在庭堂上捶打他。
English: As a result, Xiao Yao became even more rebellious and arrogant. He found a short, skinny old man who resembled Emperor Liangwu, gave him a robe and a crown, let him sit on a high place, worshiped him as a king, and said that he was not guilty; he also let the old man come to the front of the throne, strip him of his crown, and beat him in the courtyard.

古文：又作新棺，贮司马崔会意，以轜车挽歌为送葬之法，使妪乘车悲号。
现代文：萧纶又制作了一口新棺材，将司马崔会意放在棺材里面，出动灵车，唱着挽歌，扮成送葬的阵势，并使一些老太婆坐在车上悲声号啕。
English: Xiao Yao also made a new coffin, put Sima Cui's will inside the coffin, sent out a hearse, sang a dirge, dressed up as a funeral procession, and made some old women sit in the car and wail in grief.

古文：会意不能堪，轻骑还都以闻。
现代文：崔会意不堪忍受其辱，骑马回到都城报告了萧纶的恶行。
English: Unable to bear the humiliation, Cui Huiyi rode back to the capital to report Xiao Yao's evil deeds.

古文：上恐其奔逸，以禁兵取之，将于狱赐尽，太子统流涕固谏，得免，戊子，免纶官，削爵土。
现代文：梁武帝害怕萧纶逃跑，便派禁卫兵把他抓回来，将要下狱赐死，太子萧统流着泪水再三劝谏，萧纶才得幸免，戊子，萧纶被免去崐官职，削夺了爵位和封地。
English: Emperor Liangwu was afraid of Xiao Yao's escape, so he sent the imperial guards to catch him back. He was going to be imprisoned and sentenced to death. Prince Xiao Tong repeatedly advised Xiao Yao with tears, and Xiao Yao was spared. Wu Zi, Xiao Yao was removed from the post of eunuch and deprived of his title and fief.

古文：魏山胡刘蠡升反，自称天子，置百官。
现代文：北魏的山胡刘蠡升反叛，自称为天子，设置了百官。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, Shanhu Liu Rongsheng rebelled, called himself the son of heaven, and set up a hundred officials.

古文：初，敕勒酋长斛律金事怀朔镇将杨钧为军主，行兵用匈奴法，望尘知马步多少，嗅地知军远近。
现代文：当初，敕勒酋长斛律金担任怀朔镇主将杨钧的军主，他用匈奴人的兵法指挥作战，望见尘土便可以知道战马和步兵有多少，用鼻子闻一下地面就知道军队离的远近。
English: At the beginning, the chief of Mule, Zhaolujin, served as the military commander of the town of Wai Shuo and the commander of Yang Jiu. He used the military methods of the Huns to command the battle. He could see the dust to know how many horses and infantry there were, and he could smell the ground with his nose to know how far away the army was.

古文：及破六韩拔陵反，金拥众归之，拔陵署金为王。
现代文：破六韩拔陵反叛时，斛律金带领部众前去投附，破六韩拔陵颁命斛律金为王。
English: When the Six Han Kingdoms rebelled, Gong Liukin led the people to attach themselves, and the Six Han Kingdoms issued an order to make Gong Liukin the king.

古文：既而知拔陵终无所成，乃诣云州降。仍稍引其众南出黄瓜堆，为杜洛周所破，脱身归尔硃荣，荣以为别将。
现代文：很快斛律金又知道破六韩拔陵终究不会有什么成就，便到云州去投降，仍然带领了少量的部众南出黄瓜堆，结果被杜洛周击败，斛律金逃脱后归顺了尔朱荣，尔朱荣让他担任了别将。
English: Soon, knowing that there would be no success in breaking through the six Korean tombs, he went to Yunnan to surrender, and still led a small number of subordinates south of the cucumber heap. As a result, he was defeated by Du Luo Zhou. After escaping, he surrendered to Le Zhurong. Le Zhurong let him serve as a petty general.

