古文：文王问太公曰： 文伐之法奈何？ 
现代文：文王问太公说： 想要用文伐的方法打击敌人应该怎样？ 
English: King Wen asked Emperor Taigong, "What should we do if we want to use the method of "Wen Hua" to attack the enemy?"

古文：太公曰： 凡文伐有十二节：
现代文：太公答道： 文伐的方法有十二种：
English: Taigong replied, "There are twelve methods of literary criticism:

古文： 一曰，因其所喜，以顺其志，彼将生骄，必有奸事，苟能因之，必能去之。
现代文：一是，根据敌人的喜好，顺从满足他的愿望。这样，他就会滋长骄傲的情绪，肯定会去做邪恶的事情。如果能利用他的这个弱点，就必定能把他除掉。
English: First, according to the enemy's preferences, obey and satisfy his wishes. In this way, he will grow a sense of pride, will certainly do evil things. If you can take advantage of this weakness of his, you will definitely be able to get rid of him.

古文： 二曰，亲其所爱，以分其威。
现代文：二是，亲近拉拢敌国君主的亲信，以分化敌国的力量。
English: The second is to win over the enemy monarch's close confidants in order to divide the enemy's forces.

古文：一人两心，其中必衰。
现代文：敌国的亲信如果怀有二心，就一定不会在忠心耿耿。
English: If the enemy's cronies are double-minded, they will not be loyal.

古文：廷无忠臣，社稷必危。
现代文：敌国朝中没有忠臣，那么国家就必定面临危亡。
English: If there are no loyal subjects in the enemy's country, then the country will inevitably face peril.

古文： 三曰，阴赂左右，得情甚深，身内情外，国将生害。
现代文：三是，暗中贿赂收买敌君近侍近臣，和他们建立深厚交情。这些人身居国内而心向外国，敌国就一定会发生灾祸。
English: The third is to secretly bribe and bribe the enemy ruler's close attendants and courtiers, and establish a deep friendship with them. If these people live in the country but their hearts are in a foreign country, a disaster will surely occur in the enemy country.

古文： 四曰，辅其淫乐，以广其志，厚赂珠玉，娱以美人。
现代文：四是，助长敌国君主的放纵享乐，增大他的荒淫欲望，用大量的珠宝去贿赂他，赠送美女讨好他。
English: The fourth is to encourage the enemy monarch's indulgence and pleasure, increase his lust, bribe him with a large amount of jewelry, and give him beautiful women to please him.

古文：卑辞委听，顺命而合。
现代文：言辞卑下，曲意听从，顺从他的命令，迎合他的心意。
English: To be humble in speech, obedient in song, obedient to his commands, and responsive to his will.

古文：彼将不争，奸节乃定。
现代文：这样，他就会放松警惕，而放肆地发展自己的邪恶行为了；
English: In this way, he will relax his vigilance and develop his evil behavior freely;

古文： 五曰，严其忠臣，而薄其赂，稽留其使，勿听其事。亟为置代，遗以诚事。亲而信之，其君将复合之，苟能严之，国乃可谋。
现代文：五是，故意尊敬敌国的忠臣，送给他微薄的礼物，与他出任使者前来交涉时，故意加以拖延，而对所交涉的问题不予答复，极力促使敌君改派使者，然后再诚心解决所交涉的问题，向他表示亲近以取得他的信任，从而使敌国君弥合与我国的关系。
English: The fifth is to deliberately respect the loyal subject of the enemy country, give him a meager gift, deliberately delay him when he comes to negotiate with him as an envoy, and do not answer the negotiated questions, strongly encourage the enemy prince to reassign the envoy, and then sincerely resolve the negotiated issues, show him closeness to gain his trust, so that the enemy prince can bridge the relationship with our country.

古文： 六曰，收其内，间其外，才臣外相，敌国内侵，国鲜不亡。
现代文：这样用不同的态度对待敌国的忠臣和奸佞，就能够离间敌国君臣之间的关系，从而可以谋取敌国了；
English: In this way, by treating the enemy's loyal servants and traitors with different attitudes, it is possible to break the relationship between the enemy's princes and ministers, and thus gain the enemy's favor;

古文： 七曰，欲锢其心，必厚赂之；收其左右忠爱，阴示以利；令之轻业，而蓄积空虚。
现代文：六是，收买敌国朝廷中的大臣，离间敌国朝廷在外的大臣，让有才干的大臣里通外国，造成敌国内部自相混乱，这样敌国就很少有不灭亡的。
English: The sixth is to bribe the ministers in the enemy's court, alienate the ministers of the enemy's court abroad, and let the talented ministers go abroad, causing the enemy's internal chaos. In this way, there are very few enemy countries that will not perish.

古文： 八曰，赂以重宝，因与之谋，谋而利之，利之必信，是谓重亲；重亲之积，必为我用，有国而外，其地大败。
现代文：七是，要使敌国君主对我深信不疑，就必须赠送很多贵重的礼物去贿赂他，同时收买他左右亲近大臣，暗中给他们各种好处，使其君臣忽视生产，造成财粮匮乏，国库空虚；八是，用贵重的财宝贿赂敌国君主，进而乘机与他同谋别国，所图谋的又对他有利。
English: Seventh, in order to make the enemy monarch believe in me, it is necessary to bribe him with many valuable gifts, and at the same time bribe him to be close to the ministers, secretly giving them all kinds of benefits, so that his monarchs and ministers neglect production, causing a shortage of wealth and grain, and the treasury is empty; eighth, bribe the enemy monarch with valuable treasure, and then take the opportunity to conspire with him in other countries, and what he planned was beneficial to him.

古文： 九曰，尊之以名，无难其身；示以大势，从之必信，致其大尊；先为之荣，微饰圣人，国乃大偷。
现代文：他得到利益后必然信任我们，这就密切了敌国与我的关系。关系越密切，敌国就必然会被我所利用。他自己有国而被外国利用，最终必遭惨败。
English: After receiving benefits, he will inevitably trust us, which will strengthen the relationship between the enemy country and me. The closer the relationship, the more the enemy country will inevitably be used by me. If he has his own country and is used by a foreign country, he will eventually suffer a disastrous defeat.

古文： 十曰，下之必信，以得其情；承意应事，如与同生；既以得之，乃微收之；时及将至，若天丧之。
现代文：九是，用显赫的名号尊崇他，不要使他身陷困境，给他以权倾天下的感觉，服从他的意志以博取他的信任。
English: The ninth is to honor him with a prominent name, not to put him in trouble, to give him a sense of power, and to obey his will to gain his trust.

古文： 十一曰，塞之以道。人臣无不重贵与富，恶死与咎。
现代文：十一是，用各种方法闭塞敌国君主的视听，凡是臣民没有不贪慕权势财富的，厌恶死亡和灾祸的。
English: The eleventh is to use all kinds of methods to block the audio and video of the enemy monarchs, all of whom are subjects who do not covet power and wealth, and are averse to death and disaster.

古文：阴示大尊，而微输重宝，收其豪杰。
现代文：暗中许诺他以高官厚禄，秘密赠送各种金银珠宝，来收买敌国的英雄豪杰。
English: He secretly promised to bribe the heroes and heroines of the enemy country with the generous salary of a high-ranking official and the secret gift of various gold and silver jewelry.

古文：内积甚厚，而外为乏。
现代文：自己国内积蓄充实，但一定要假装贫乏。
English: Their own domestic savings are plentiful, but they must pretend to be poor.

古文：阴纳智士，使图其计；纳勇士，使高其气。
现代文：暗中收纳敌国的智谋之士，使他与自己图谋大计；秘密结交敌国勇士，借以鼓舞我方的士气。
English: Secretly recruiting the enemy's strategists to plot against him; secretly befriending the enemy's warriors to boost our morale.

古文：富贵甚足，而常有繁滋。
现代文：要尽量满足这些人的贪婪欲望，并不断使之滋长蔓延。
English: We should try our best to satisfy the greedy desires of these people, and continue to let them grow and spread.

古文：徒党已具，是谓塞之。
现代文：这样，他们就会成为我们的同党。这就叫闭塞敌国君主的视听。
English: In this way, they will become our allies. This is called blocking the enemy monarch's audio-visual.

古文：有国而塞，安能有国。
现代文：敌国君主虽然还拥有国家，但视听己被闭塞，还怎么能维持他的统治呢？
English: How can the enemy monarch maintain his rule when he still has a country, but the audio-visual has been blocked?

古文： 十二曰：养其乱臣以迷之，进美女淫声以惑之，遗良犬马以劳之，时与大势以诱之，上察而与天下图之。
现代文：十二是，培植扶持敌国作乱的臣子，以迷乱其君主的心智；进献美女淫乐，以迷惑其君主的意志；赠送良犬骏马，以疲乏其君主的身体；经常报以有利的形势，让他沾沾自喜。
English: The twelfth is to cultivate and support the enemy's vassals to create turmoil, so as to confuse the mind of the monarch; to offer beautiful women to seduce the will of the monarch; to give good dogs and horses to wear out the body of the monarch; and to constantly report favorable situations to make the monarch complacent.

古文： 十二节备，乃成武事。
现代文：然后观察有利的时机，而与天下人共谋夺取他的国家。
English: Then, seeing an opportunity, he conspired with the world to take over his country.

古文：所谓上察天，下察地，征已见，乃伐之。 
现代文：这就是所谓上察天时，下观地利，有利的征兆一旦出现，就可以兴师讨伐敌国了。 
English: This is the so-called looking up at the sky, looking down at the earth, and once a favorable sign appears, it will be possible to raise an army to fight the enemy country.

