古文：黄帝问曰：夫痎疟皆生于风，其蓄作有时者何也？
现代文：黄帝问道：一般来说，疟疾都由于感受了风邪而引起，它的停止和发作有固定的时间，这是什么道理呢？
English: Huang Di asked: Generally speaking, malaria is caused by catching a cold, and its cessation and onset have a fixed time. What is the reason for this?

古文：岐伯对曰：疟之始发也，先起于毫毛，伸欠乃作，寒栗鼓颔，腰脊俱痛；寒去则内外皆热，头痛如破，渴欲冷饮。
现代文：岐伯回答说：疟疾开始发作的时候，先起于毫毛竖立，继而呵欠连连，乃至寒冷发抖而使上下颌止不住撞击，腰背都很疼痛。当寒冷过去之后，接着又是全身内外发热，头痛有如将要破裂，口很渴喜欢喝冷饮。
English: Qi Bo replied: "When malaria begins to attack, it starts with the hair standing on end, followed by yawning continuously, and even cold shivering, which makes the upper and lower eyelids unable to stop hitting, and the lower back is very painful. When the cold has passed, then the whole body is hot inside and out, the headache seems to be about to burst, very thirsty, like to drink cold drinks.

古文：帝曰：何气使然？
现代文：黄帝道：这是什么邪气引起的呢？
English: Huang Di said: What evil spirit caused this?

古文：愿闻其道。
现代文：请说明它的道理。
English: I would like to hear these reasons.

古文：岐伯曰：阴阳上下交争，虚实更作，阴阳相移也。
现代文：岐伯说：这是由于阴阳上下相争，虚实交替而作，阴阳虚实相互移易转化的关系。
English: Qi Bo said: This is due to the conflict between yin and yang, the alternation of false and true, and the relationship between yin and yang, false and true, and easy to transform.

古文：阳并于阴，则阴实而阳虚，阳明虚则寒栗，鼓颔也；巨阳虚则腰背头项痛；三阳俱虚则阴气胜，阴气胜则骨寒而痛；寒生于内，故中外皆寒；阳盛则外热，阴虚则内热，外内皆热则喘而渴，故欲冷饮也。
现代文：阳气并入于阴经，使阴气实而阳气虚，阳明经气虚，就寒冷发抖乃至两颌鼓动；太阳经气虚便腰背头项疼痛；三条阳经都气虚，则阴气更胜，阴气胜则骨节寒冷而疼痛，寒从内生，所以内外都觉寒冷。如阴气并入阳经，则阳气实而阴气虚。阳主外，阳盛就发生外热；阴主内，阴虚就发生内热，因此外内都发热，热甚的时候就气喘口渴，所以喜欢冷饮。
English: The yang qi is merged into the yin qi, making the yin qi solid and the yang qi weak. When the yang qi is merged into the yang qi weak, the yang qi weak, the cold shivers and even the palate is agitated; when the sun is merged into the yang qi weak, the lumbar spine is painful; when all three yang qi are merged into the yin qi weak, the yin qi is superior; when the yin qi is superior, the bones are cold and painful; when the cold is internalized, the inside and outside feel cold. When the yin qi is merged into the yang qi

古文：此皆得之夏伤于暑，热气盛，藏于皮肤之内，肠胃之外，此荣气之所舍也。
现代文：这都是由于夏天伤于暑气，热气过盛，并留藏于皮肤之内，肠胃之外，亦即营气居留的所在。
English: This is all due to the summer heat, the heat is too much, and it is stored in the skin, outside the stomach, that is, where the camp gas resides.

古文：此令人汗空疏，腠理开，因得秋气，汗出遇风，及得之以浴水，气舍于皮肤之内，与卫气并居。
现代文：由于暑热内伏，使人汗孔疏松，腠理开泄，一遇秋凉，汗出而感受风邪，或者由于洗澡时感受水气侵袭，风邪水气停留于皮肤之内，与卫气相合并居于卫气流行的所在。
English: As a result of heat and heat, people's sweat pores are loose, and the body is not able to excrete properly. When it is cool in autumn, people will sweat and feel cold, or feel the water vapor attack when taking a bath. The wind and water vapor stay in the skin, and combine with the geomagnetic field to live in the place where geomagnetic field is popular.

古文：卫气者，昼日行于阳，夜行于阴，此气得阳而外出，得阴而内薄，内外相薄，是以日作。
现代文：卫气，白天行于阳经，夜里行于阴经。如此，疟邪也就随着卫气，循行于体表阳经时就会向体外发散而发作，循行于体内阴经时就会潜伏在体内向里侵犯，阴阳相互搏斗与卫气的运行规律相同，所以疟疾每日定时发作。
English: In the daytime, the yin and yang fight each other, and in the night, the yin and yang fight each other. In this way, malaria will also spread out of the body and attack with the yin and yang, and when the yin and yang fight each other, the yin and yang fight each other and the yin and yang fight each other. The running rules of the yin and yang are the same as those of the yin and yang, so malaria attacks regularly every day.

古文：帝曰：疟疾间日而发作者为何也？
现代文：黄帝道：疟疾有隔一天发作，为什么呢？
English: Huang Di said: Malaria has an attack every other day. Why?

古文：岐伯曰：其气之舍深，内薄于阴，阳气独发，阴邪内着，阴与阳争不得出，是以间日而作也。帝曰：善。
现代文：岐伯说；这是因为疟邪停留的部位较深，向内迫近于阴经而运行较慢，阳气运行较快，疟邪与阳气运行不同步所以阳气独自运行于体表，而疟邪留住于体内较深的部位，阳气每两天能到达阴经的地方与疟邪相争，而疟邪在阴经不能外出与阳气相争，所以隔一天才发作一次。黄帝道：讲得好！
English: This is because the malarial parasite stays in a deeper part of the body, moving inwards closer to the vulva and moving more slowly, and the yang moves faster. The malarial parasite and the yang do not move at the same time, so the yang moves independently on the surface of the body, while the malarial parasite stays in the deeper parts of the body. The yang can reach the place of the vulva every two days to fight the malarial parasite, while the malarial parasite cannot go out to fight the yang during the menstrual period, so it only attacks once every other day. Huang Di said: Well said!

古文：其作日晏与其日早者，何气使然？
现代文：疟疾发作的时间，有的逐日推迟，有的逐日提前，是什么缘故呢？
English: Why is the onset of malaria delayed day by day in some cases and brought forward day by day in others?

古文：岐伯曰：邪气客于风府，循膂而下，卫气一日一夜大会于风府，其明日，日下一节，故其作也晏。
现代文：岐伯说：疟邪从风府穴侵入后，循脊椎骨逐日逐节下移，卫气是一昼夜会于风府，而疟邪却从第二天起，每日向下移行一节，所以其发作时间也就逐日推迟。
English: Qi Bo said: After the malaria parasite invaded from the Fengfu cave, it moved down along the vertebrae day by day, section by section. Weiqi would be in Fengfu day and night, but the malaria parasite moved down one section every day from the next day, so its onset time was delayed day by day.

古文：此先客于脊背也，每至于风府则腠理开，腠理开则邪气入，邪气入则病作，以此日作稍益晏也。
现代文：当疟邪首先侵袭于脊椎骨时，每当卫气会于风府穴时则腠理打开，腠理打开则疟邪侵入，疟邪侵入与卫气交争，病就发作，因疟邪日下一节，所以发病时间就日益推迟了。
English: When the malaria first invades the vertebrae, whenever the qi gathers in the fengfu cave, the qi opens, and when the qi opens, the malaria invades. When the malaria invades and the qi clashes, the disease occurs. Since the malaria dies, the onset time is increasingly delayed.

古文：其出于风府，日下一节，二十五日下至骶骨，二十六日入于脊内，注于伏膂之脉，其气上行，九日出于缺盆之中，其气日高，故作日益早也。
现代文：这种疟邪首先侵袭风府穴，逐日下移一节而发病的情况，经二十五日疟邪下行至骶骨，第二十六日入于脊内，而流注于伏膂脉，随后疟邪上行，至第九日上至于缺盆穴中，因为疟邪日渐上升，所以发病的时间也就逐日提前。
English: This kind of malaria first invades the carpel tunnel, and the incidence of the disease increases day by day. After the 25th day, the malaria descends to the tibia, enters the spine on the 26th day, and flows into the radial artery, and then the malaria ascends to the 9th day, as far as the pelvic cavity. Because the malaria is increasing day by day, the time of onset is also advancing day by day.

古文：其间日发者，由邪气内薄于五脏，横连募原也。
现代文：至于隔一天发病一次的，是因为疟邪内迫于五脏，横连于募原。
English: As for the one that occurs every other day, it is because the malaria parasite invades the five viscera and is transverse to the fundus.

古文：其道远，其气深，其行迟，不能与卫气俱行，不得皆出，故间日乃作也。
现代文：这种情况下疟邪所行走的道路较远，疟邪深藏，循行迟缓，不能和卫气并行，疟邪与卫气不能同时相会，所以隔一天才能发作一次。
English: In this case, the path of malaria is far away, malaria is deeply hidden, it is slow to follow, it can not be parallel with the health gas, malaria and health gas can not meet at the same time, so it can only occur once every other day.

古文：帝曰：夫子言卫气每至于风府，腠理乃发，发则邪气入，入则病作。
现代文：黄帝道：你说卫气每至于风府穴时，腠理打开，疟邪乘机袭入，疟邪入则病发作。
English: Huang Di said: You said that every time the wind blows, the Weiqi opens, the malaria takes the opportunity to invade, and the malaria takes the opportunity to attack.

古文：今卫气日下一节，其气之发也，不当风府，其日作者奈何？
现代文：现在又说卫气与疟邪相会的部位每日下行一节，那么发病时，疟邪就不恰好在风府穴，而能每日发作一次，是何道理呢？
English: Now it is said that the place where Weiqi and malaria meet goes down a section every day, so when the disease occurs, malaria is not exactly in the Fengfu cave, but can occur once a day. What is the reason for this?

古文：岐伯曰：此邪气客于头项，循膂而下者也。
现代文：岐伯说：以上是指疟邪首先侵入于头项，循着脊椎骨而下的情况所讲述的。
English: Qibo said: The above refers to the situation described in which malaria first invades the head and follows the vertebrae down.

古文：故虚实不同，邪中异所，则不得当其风府也。
现代文：但是，人体各部分的虚实不同，疟邪所侵犯的部位也不一样，所以疟邪侵入不一定都在风府穴处。
English: However, the reality of each part of the human body is different, and the parts invaded by malaria are also different, so malaria invasion is not necessarily in the wind.

古文：故邪中于头项者，气至头项而病；中于背者，气至背而病；中于腰脊者，气至腰脊而病；中于手足者，气至手足而病。
现代文：例如：疟邪中于头项的，卫气行至头顶而病发；疟邪中于背部的，卫气行至背部而病发；疟邪中于腰脊的，卫气行至腰脊而病发；疟邪中于手足的，卫气行至手足而病发。
English: For example: in malaria, if it is in the head, the qi will go to the top of the head and the disease will occur; in malaria, if it is in the back, the qi will go to the back and the disease will occur; in malaria, if it is in the lumbar spine, the qi will go to the lumbar spine and the disease will occur; in malaria, if it is in the limbs, the qi will go to the limbs and the disease will occur.

古文：卫气之所在，与邪气相合，则病作。
现代文：凡是卫气所行之处，与疟邪相合，那么病就要发作。
English: Wherever the actions of the spirit of virtue coincide with the malarial evil, then the disease will break out.

古文：故风无常府，卫气之所发，必开其腠理,邪气之所合，则其府也。帝曰：善。
现代文：所以说，与风邪相似，疟邪侵袭人体也没有一定的部位，要看卫气的循行流转，当卫气使腠理打开之时，疟邪乘机与之相合，这就是疟邪侵入的地方，也就是发病的所在。黄帝道：讲得好！
English: Therefore, similar to the common cold, malaria does not invade a specific part of the human body. It depends on the circulation of the qi. When the qi opens the body, malaria coincides with it. This is where malaria invades, that is, where the disease occurs. Huang Di said: Well said!

古文：夫风之与疟也，相似同类，而风独常在，疟得有时而休者，何也？
现代文：风邪病和疟疾相似而同属一类，为什么风邪病的症状持续常在，而疟疾却发作有休止呢？
English: Cold sores and malaria are similar and belong to the same category. Why do the symptoms of cold sores persist, while malaria is intermittent?

古文：岐伯曰：风气留其处，故常在。疟气随经络，沉以内薄，故卫气应乃作。
现代文：岐伯说：风邪为病是稽留于所中之处，所以症状持续常在；疟邪则是随着经络循行，深入体内，必须与卫气相遇，病才发作。
English: Qi Bo said: the common cold is a disease that stays in the middle of the body, so the symptoms persist; malaria is a disease that follows the meridians and goes deep into the body. It must meet with the qi before the disease occurs.

古文：帝曰：疟先寒而后热者何也？
现代文：黄帝道：疟疾发作有先寒而后热的，为什么呢？
English: Huang Di said: The onset of malaria is cold first and then hot, why?

古文：岐伯曰：夏伤于大暑，其汗大出，腠理开发，因遇夏气凄沧之水寒，藏于腠理皮肤之中，秋伤于风，则病成矣。
现代文：岐伯说：夏天感受了严重的暑气，出了大汗，肌肤腠理打开，此时又遇夏天凄冷的湿气，留藏在腠理皮肤之中，到秋天又伤了风邪，就成为疟疾了。
English: Qi Bo said: In the summer, I felt the severe heat, sweated profusely, and my skin opened up. At this time, I was exposed to the extremely cold summer humidity, which remained in my skin. In the fall, I caught a cold, and it became malaria.

古文：夫寒者，阴气也；风者，阳气也。
现代文：所以，寒湿之气是一种阴气，风邪是一种阳气。
English: Therefore, the cold and wet air is a kind of yin, and the wind is a kind of yang.

古文：先伤于寒而后伤于风，故先寒而后热也。
现代文：先伤于寒湿之气，后伤于风邪，所以先寒而后热。
English: First hurt by the cold and damp air, then hurt by the wind, so first cold and then hot.

古文：病以时作，名曰寒疟。
现代文：疟疾的发作有一定的时间，这病名叫 寒疟 。
English: The onset of malaria has a certain time, the disease is called cholera.

古文：帝曰：先热而后寒者何也？
现代文：黄帝道：有一种先热而后寒的疟疾，为什么呢？
English: Huang Di said: There is a kind of malaria that is hot first and then cold. Why?

古文：岐伯曰：此先伤于风而后伤于寒，故先热而后寒也。亦以时作，名曰温疟。
现代文：岐伯说：这是因为，先伤于风邪，后伤于寒湿之气，所以先热而后寒，发作也有一定的时间，这病名叫 温疟 。
English: Qi Bo said: This is because the first wound is caused by a cold, and the second is caused by cold and damp air, so the first is hot and then cold, and the attack also has a certain time. This disease is called malaria.

古文：其但热而不寒者，阴气先绝，阳气独发，则少气烦冤，手足热而欲呕，名曰瘅疟。
现代文：还有一种只发热而不恶寒的，这是由于病人的阴气先亏损于内，因此阳气独旺于外，疟疾发作时，出现少气烦闷，手足发热，想要呕吐，这病名叫 瘅疟 。
English: There is also a kind of fever without chills, which is due to the fact that the patient's yin qi is first lost inside, so the yang qi prevails outside. When malaria attacks, there is little qi, it is annoying, the hands and feet are hot, and they want to vomit. This disease is called malaria.

古文：帝曰：夫经言有余者泻之，不足者补之，今热为有余，寒为不足，夫疟者之寒，汤火不能温也，及其热，冰水不能寒也，此皆有余不足之类，当此之时，良工不能止，必须其自衰乃剌之，其故何也？
现代文：黄帝道：医经上说，有余的应当泻，不足的应当补。现如今对疟疾病而言，发热是有余，发冷是不足。而疟疾病人在感到寒冷时，虽然用热水或烤火的方法，也不能使之温暖；而感到发热的时候，即使用冰水，也不能使之凉爽。这些寒热表现，都是有余与不足同时出现的症状。当发病的时候，良医也束手无策，必须待其病势自行衰退之后，才可以施用针刺的方法治疗，这是什么缘故呢？
English: Huang Di said: According to the medical scriptures, the excess should be drained and the deficiency should be made up. Nowadays, for malaria, fever is excess and coldness is deficiency. And when a person with malaria feels cold, although using hot water or fire, it cannot be warmed; and when it feels hot, even using ice water, it cannot be cooled. These manifestations of cold and heat are symptoms of excess and deficiency at the same time. When the disease occurs, good doctors are helpless, and they must wait for the disease to recede on its own before they can apply acupuncture treatment. Why is this?

古文：愿闻其说。
现代文：请你告诉我。
English: Please tell me.

古文：岐伯曰：经言无剌熇熇之热，无剌浑浑之脉，无剌漉漉之汗，故为其病逆，未可治也。
现代文：岐伯说：医经上说过，有高热时不能刺，脉搏纷乱时不能刺，汗出不止时不能刺，因为这是正当邪盛气逆的时候，不可立即治疗。
English: Qi Bo said: It is said in the medical scriptures that when there is a high fever, it cannot be pricked, when the pulse is disordered, it cannot be pricked, and when sweating does not stop, it cannot be pricked, because this is the time when the righteous and the wicked are in high spirits, and it cannot be treated immediately.

古文：夫疟之始发也，阳气并于阴，当是之时，阳虚而阴盛，外无气，故先寒栗也。阴气逆极则复出之阳，阳与阴复并于外，则阴虚而阳实，故先热而渴。
现代文：疟疾刚开始发作的时候，阳气并于阴经，此时，阳虚而阴盛，外表阳气虚，所以先寒冷发抖；至阴气逆乱到极限的时候，则将回到阳经，于是阳气与阴气相并于外，此时阴气虚而阳气实，所以先发热而口渴。
English: At the beginning of the onset of malaria, the yang qi and the yin qi, at this time, the yang qi is weak and the yang qi is strong, the appearance of the yang qi is weak, so the first cold is shivering; when the yin qi reaches the limit, it will return to the yang qi, so the yang qi and the yin qi are outside, at this time, the yin qi is weak and the yang qi is strong, so the first heat and thirst.

古文：夫疟气者，并于阳则阳胜，并于阴则阴胜，阴胜则寒，阳胜则热。
现代文：疟疾的病邪之气，发于阳经则阳气胜，发于阴经则阴气胜，阴气胜则发寒，阳气胜则发热。
English: The malarial malignant gas emanating from the yang meridian produces yang gas, that emanating from the yin meridian produces yin gas, that emanating from the yin gas produces cold, and that from the yang gas produces heat.

古文：疟者，风寒之气不常也，病极则复至。
现代文：疟疾，因为引起发病的风寒之气变化无常，所以在到达寒热极点时就发生转换。
English: Malaria, because of the variability of the cold and wind that causes the onset of the disease, changes when it reaches the cold and heat extremes.

古文：病之发也，如火之热，如风雨不可当也。
现代文：当其病发作的时候，像火一样的炽热，如狂风暴雨一样迅不可挡。
English: When it strikes, it is as hot as fire and as fast as a raging storm.

古文：故经言曰： 方其盛时必毁，因其衰也，事必大昌。 
现代文：所以医经上说： 当疟邪到了盛极的时候必然变衰，抓住疟邪衰退的时候而攻之，必然获得成功。 
English: Therefore, the medical scriptures say: When malaria is at its peak, it will inevitably decline, and when malaria is in decline, it will inevitably succeed.

古文：此之谓也。
现代文：便是这个意思。
English: This is exactly what is happening.

古文：夫疟之未发也，阴未并阳，阳未并阴，因而调之，真气得安，邪气乃亡。
现代文：因此在疟疾还未发病的时候，阴气尚未并于阳经，阳气尚未并于阴经，就进行调理，则正气不至于受伤，而疟邪可以消灭。
English: Therefore, when malaria has not yet occurred, the yin qi has not yet arisen and passed through the yang qi, and the yang qi has not yet passed through the yang qi, it is adjusted, then the positive qi will not be injured, and malaria can be eliminated.

古文：故工不能治其已发，为其气逆也。帝曰：善。
现代文：所以，医生不能在疟疾发病的时候进行治疗，就是因为此时正当正气和疟邪交争逆乱的缘故。黄帝道：讲得好！
English: Therefore, doctors cannot treat malaria at the time of its onset, because at this time, the just and righteous and malaria are in conflict. Huang Di said: Well said!

古文：攻之奈何？
现代文：疟疾究竟怎样治疗呢？
English: How exactly is malaria treated?

古文：早晏何如？
现代文：时间的早晚应如何掌握呢？
English: How should time be mastered sooner or later?

古文：岐伯曰：疟之且发也，阴阳之且移也，必从四末始也。
现代文：岐伯说：疟疾将要发做，正是阴阳将要相移之时，必从四肢开始。
English: Qi Bo said, "Malaria will occur, just when yin and yang will phase shift, it will start from the extremities.

古文：阳已伤，阴从之，故先其时坚束其处，令邪气不得入，阴气不得出，审候见之，在孙络盛坚而血者皆取之，此真往而未得并者也。
现代文：若阳气已被邪伤，则阴经也必将受到疟邪的影响，所以只有在未发病之先，用绳子牢固缚住四肢末端，使疟邪不得进入阴经，阴气不得外泄，两者不能相移，在牢固缚住以后还应查看络脉的情况，在孙络充实而瘀血的地方，都要采用放血疗法，这是当真气尚未与疟邪相并之前的一种 迎而夺之 的治法。
English: If the yang qi has been harmed by evil spirits, then the yin qi will also be affected by the malarial evil spirits. Therefore, only before the onset of the disease, firmly tie the ends of the limbs with a rope, so that the malarial evil spirits cannot enter the yang qi, the yin qi cannot leak out, and the two cannot phase shift. After firmly tying, it is also necessary to check the condition of the vascular veins. In the place where the sun vein is full and bleeding, bloodletting therapy should be used. This is a kind of welcome cure when the true qi has not yet merged with the malarial evil spirits.

古文：帝曰：疟不发，其应何如？
现代文：黄帝道：疟疾在不发作的时候，它的情况应该怎样呢？
English: Huang Di said: When malaria does not occur, how should its condition be?

古文：岐伯曰：疟气者，必更盛更虚，当气之所在也。
现代文：岐伯说：疟邪留舍于人体，必然使阴阳虚实更替而作，以疟邪所在身体的部位而定。
English: Qi Bo said: If the malarial parasite remains in the human body, it will inevitably cause yin and yang to replace reality, depending on the part of the body where the malarial parasite is located.

古文：病在阳则热而脉躁，在阴则寒而脉静，极则阴阳俱衰，卫气相离，故病得休，卫气集则复病也。
现代文：当疟邪发作于阳经，则发热而脉象躁急；当疟邪发作于阴经，则发冷而脉象沉静，寒热到了极点的时候，则阴阳二气都已衰惫，卫气和疟邪的交争暂停，病就暂时休止；若卫气和疟邪再次交争，则病又发作了。
English: When malaria occurs in the Yang Ching, the body is feverish and the pulse is rapid; when malaria occurs in the Yin Ching, the body is cold and the pulse is calm. When the cold and heat are at their peak, the yin and yang qi are exhausted, the conflict between the yin and yang qi and malaria is suspended, and the disease is temporarily suspended; if the yin and yang qi and malaria conflict again, the disease occurs again.

古文：帝曰：时有间二日或至数日发，或渴或不渴，其故何也？
现代文：黄帝道：有些疟疾隔二日，或者隔数日发作一次，发作时有的口渴，有的不渴，是什么缘故呢？
English: Huang Di said: Some malaria attacks occur every two days, or every few days. During the attack, some are thirsty, some are not thirsty. What is the reason for this?

古文：岐伯曰：其间日者，邪气与卫气客于六腑，而有时相失，不能相得，故休数日乃作也。
现代文：岐伯说：其所以隔几天再发作，是因为疟邪与卫气都寄居在六腑中，它们相交的时间有时并不一致，不能相遇，所以要停几天待其相交时才发作。
English: Qi Bo said: The reason why it occurs every few days is because malaria and qi are both living in the Six Banyan Trees. The time when they intersect is sometimes not the same, so they cannot meet. Therefore, it is necessary to wait a few days until they intersect.

古文：疟者，阴阳更胜也，或甚或不甚，故或渴或不渴。
现代文：疟疾，是由于阴阳虚实更替而作，但其程度上也有轻重不同，所以有的口渴，有的不渴。
English: Malaria is caused by the alternation of yin and yang, but its degree is also different, so some are thirsty and some are not.

古文：帝曰：论言夏伤于暑，秋必病疟，今疟不必应者何者？
现代文：黄帝道：医经上说夏伤于暑，秋必得疟疾，而有些疟疾并不是这种情况，是什么道理呢？
English: Huang Di said: It is said in medical texts that summer injuries are caused by heat, and malaria must be contracted in autumn, but this is not the case with some types of malaria. What is the reason for this?

古文：岐伯曰：此应四时者也。
现代文：岐伯说：这是指应四时发病规律而言。
English: Qi Bo said: This refers to the four-hour onset rule.

古文：其病异形者，反四时也。
现代文：有些疟疾症型不同，与四时发病规律相反。
English: Some types of malaria are different, contrary to the four-hour onset rule.

古文：其以秋病者寒甚，以冬病者寒不甚，以春病者恶风，以夏病者多汗。
现代文：比如：发于秋天的，寒冷较重；发于冬天的，寒冷较轻；发于春天的，多恶风；发于夏天的，汗出得很多。
English: For example: if it is in autumn, the cold is heavier; if it is in winter, the cold is lighter; if it is in spring, there is more bad wind; if it is in summer, there is a lot of sweat.

古文：帝曰：夫病温疟与寒疟，而皆安舍，舍于何脏？
现代文：黄帝道： 温疟 和 寒疟 ，疟邪如何侵入呢？
English: Huang Di said: How does malaria invade?

古文：岐伯曰：温疟者，得之冬中于风，寒气藏于骨髓之中，至春则阳气大发，邪气不能自出，因遇大暑，脑髓烁，肌肉消，腠理发泄，或有所用力，邪气与汗皆出。
现代文：逗留在哪一脏呢？岐伯说： 温疟 是由于冬天感受风寒，寒邪之气留藏在骨髓之中，到了春天阳气生发活泼，疟邪仍不能自行外出，遇到夏天暑热炽盛之时，人的精神倦怠、肌肉消瘦、腠理全开等体能最低点时，如果再劳力过甚，寒邪之气与大汗就会一起外泄于体表。
English: What kind of filth do you stay in? Qi Bo said: "Temperature malaria is caused by feeling wind and cold in winter. The cold evil spirit is stored in the bone marrow. In spring, the yang spirit is lively, and the malaria evil spirit still can't go out on its own. When the summer heat is blazing, when people's mental fatigue, muscle wasting, and physical ability are at their lowest, if they work too hard, the cold evil spirit and sweat will be released on the body surface.

古文：此病藏于肾，其气先从内出之于外也。
现代文：这种寒邪之气原先伏藏于肾脏，故其发作时，寒邪之气是从内而发于外。
English: This cold evil spirit was originally hidden in the kidneys, so when it attacks, the cold evil spirit comes from the inside out.

古文：如是者，阴虚而阳盛，阳盛则热矣。
现代文：在这样的情况下，阴气虚而阳气偏盛，阳盛就会发热。
English: Under such circumstances, if the yin is weak and the yang is strong, the yang will generate heat.

古文：衰则气复反入，入则阳虚，阳虚则寒矣。
现代文：热极之时，则疟邪又回入于阴经，使阳气又虚，阳气虚便出现寒冷。
English: At the time of extreme heat, the malaria parasite re-enters the yin meridian, making the yang and void, and the yang and void appear cold.

古文：故先热而后寒，名曰温疟。
现代文：所以，这种先热而后寒的病，名叫 温疟 。
English: Therefore, this disease, which is hot first and then cold, is called malaria.

古文：帝曰：瘅疟何如？
现代文：黄帝道： 瘅疟 的情况怎样呢？
English: Huang Di said: What is the situation of malaria?

古文：岐伯曰：瘅疟者，肺素有热，气盛于身，厥逆上冲，中气实而不外泄，因有所用力，腠理开，风寒舍于皮肤之内，分肉之间而发，发则阳气盛，阳气盛而不衰则病矣。
现代文：岐伯说： 瘅疟 是由于肺脏素来有热，肺气壅盛，气逆而上冲，以致胸中气实而不能向外输布，在此时又遇过劳之后，腠理开泄，风寒之邪便乘机侵袭于皮肤之内、肌肉之间而发病，发病则阳气偏盛，阳气盛而不见衰减，于是病发但热不寒。
English: Qi Bo said: Malaria is due to the fact that the lungs are naturally hot, the lungs are full of gas, and the gas rushes up, so that the gas is solid in the chest and cannot be transported outside. At this time, after being overworked, the arteries are opened, and the evil of wind and cold invades the skin and between the muscles, and the disease occurs. The disease is caused by the yang qi, and the yang qi is high but not attenuated, so the disease occurs but it is not cold.

古文：其气不及于阴，故但热而不寒，气内藏于心，而外舍于分肉之间，令人消烁脱肉，故命曰瘅疟。
现代文：疟邪不入于阴经，所以但热而不恶寒，这种病邪在内藏伏于心脏，而外泄则留连于肌肉之间，能使人肌肉瘦削，所以病名叫 瘅疟 。
English: Malaria does not enter the menstrual period, so it is hot but not chilly. This disease lies within the heart, while the discharge remains between the muscles, which can make the muscles thin, so the disease is called malaria.

古文：帝曰：善。
现代文：黄帝道：讲得好！
English: Emperor Jinwu said, "Very good."

