古文：起强圉赤奋若，尽屠维单阏，凡三年。
现代文：起，止，一共三年。
English: A total of three years.

古文：高祖武皇帝永定元年
现代文：陈武帝永定元年
English: Emperor Chen Wudi in the first year of Yongding

古文：春，正月，辛丑，周公即天王位，柴燎告天，朝百官于露门；追尊王考文公为文王，妣为文后；大赦。
现代文：春季正月，辛丑，周公宇文觉即了天王正位，点燃篝火禀告上苍，在朝廷外的大门前接受文武百官的朝拜。追奠天王的父亲文公宇文泰为文王，母亲为文后。大赦天下。
English: In the first month of spring, Zhou Gong Uwen Jue was enthroned as the King of Heaven. He lit a bonfire and announced his enthronement to the heavens, receiving the worship of hundreds of civil and military officials in front of the gate outside the imperial court. The father of the King of Heaven, Zhou Gong Uwen Tai, was the King of Heaven, and his mother was the Queen of Heaven. He was pardoned by the world.

古文：封魏恭帝为宋公。
现代文：封退位的西魏恭帝为宋公。
English: Emperor Gong of the Western Wei Dynasty, who abdicated, was crowned Emperor Song.

古文：以木德承魏水，行夏之时，服色尚黑。
现代文：新朝体现五行中的木德，以表示继承西魏的水德，实行古代夏朝的历法，服装的颜色以黑色为上。
English: The new dynasty embodies the wood virtue in the five elements, to indicate that it inherits the water virtue of the Western Wei Dynasty, implements the calendar of the ancient summer dynasty, and the color of clothing is black.

古文：以李弼为太师，赵贵为太傅、大冢宰，独孤信为太保、大宗伯，中山公护为大司马。
现代文：任命李弼为太师，赵贵为太傅、大冢宰，独孤信为太保、大宗伯，中山公宇文护为大司马。
English: He appointed Li Qian as the grand master, Zhao Gui as the grand tutor and grand tutor, Du Guoxin as the grand tutor and grand tutor, and Zhongshan Gongyu Wengu as the grand tutor.

古文：诏以王琳为司空、骠骑大将军，以尚书右仆射王通为左仆射。
现代文：周王宇文觉任命王琳为司空、骠骑大将军，任命尚书右仆射王通为左仆射。
English: Zhou Wang Yuwen Jue appointed Wang Lin as the second-in-command and commander of the cavalry, and appointed Shangshu's right-hand man, Sha Wang Tong, as his left-hand man.

古文：周王祀圜丘，自谓先世出于神农，以神农配二丘，始祖献侯配南北郊，文王配明堂，庙号太祖。
现代文：周王宇文觉在圜丘祭天，自称祖先来自古代的神农氏，从神农配享圜丘和方丘，始祖献侯配享南北郊，文王配享明堂，庙号太祖。
English: Zhou Wang Yuwen Jue was at the Mengqiu Festival. He claimed that his ancestors were from the ancient Shennong clan. From Shennong, he enjoyed Mengqiu and Fangqiu, the founder of the clan enjoyed the northern and southern suburbs, and the king of Wenzhou enjoyed Myeongdong. He was also called the great ancestor of the temple.

古文：癸卯，祀方丘。
现代文：癸卯，在方丘祭地。
English: It is located at the Fangqiu Festival Grounds.

古文：甲辰，祭大社。
现代文：甲辰，在大社祭土神谷神。
English: Kuchin, the god of the valley in the Taisha festival.

古文：除市门税。
现代文：又下令免除进入市门者每人交纳一钱税的制度。
English: He also ordered to exempt those who enter the city gate from the system of paying one-dollar tax per person.

古文：乙巳，享太庙，仍用郑玄义，立太祖与二昭、二穆为五庙，其有德者别为祧庙，不毁。
现代文：乙巳，摆供品祭祀太庙的祖先，仍然采用郑玄所注的《礼记》的古义，设立太祖、二昭、二穆，共五庙，其中有德行的祖先另外设立祧庙，不加毁坏。
English: At the same time, the ancient meaning of the "Rites and Rituals" written by Zheng Xuan is still used to offer offerings to the ancestors of the Great Temple. There are five temples in total, including the Great Ancestor, the Second Zhao, and the Second Mu. Among them, the virtuous ancestors also set up the Second Temple, which was not destroyed.

古文：辛亥，祀南郊。
现代文：辛亥，在南郊祭祀。
English: Xinhai, a festival in the southern suburbs.

古文：壬子，立王后元氏。
现代文：壬子，立元氏为王后。
English: On the day of Imago, the Ritsumoto clan came to work.

古文：后，魏文帝之女晋安公主也。
现代文：王后元氏是西魏文帝的女儿晋安公主。
English: Empress Dowager Yuan is the daughter of Emperor Wen of the Western Wei Dynasty, Princess Jinan.

古文：齐南安城主冯显请降于周，周柱国宇文贵使丰州刺史太原郭彦将兵迎之，遂据南安。
现代文：北齐南安城主将冯显要求向北周投降。北周柱国宇文贵派丰州刺史太原人郭彦率领军队去迎接他，于是就占据了南安城。
English: Feng Xian, the lord of Nan'an City in Northern Qi, demanded the surrender to Northern Zhou. The pillar state of Northern Zhou, Uwen Gui, sent Guo Yan, a Taiyuan man from Fengzhou and Shishi, to lead an army to meet him, and then occupied Nan'an City.

古文：吐谷浑为寇于周，攻凉、鄯、河三州。
现代文：吐谷浑进犯北周，攻打凉、鄯、河三州。
English: Tuyuhun invaded Beizhou, attacking Liang, Handan, and He three prefectures.

古文：秦州都督遣渭州刺史于翼赴援，翼不从。
现代文：秦州都督派渭州刺史于翼急速去援救三州，于翼不服从命令。
English: The governor of Qin State sent Zhang Zhou to rescue the three states, but Yu Ying disobeyed the order.

古文：僚属咸以为言，翼曰： 攻取之术，非夷俗所长。
现代文：于翼的幕僚部属都以为不妥，纷纷劝说他。于翼说： 攻城取地的战术，不是蛮夷所擅长的。
English: Yu Ying's staff members all thought it was inappropriate and tried to persuade him. Yu Ying said: The tactic of attacking a city and taking land is not something barbarians are good at.

古文：此寇之来，不过抄掠边牧耳。掠而无获，势将自走。
现代文：这帮强盗来进犯，不过是为了抢劫边地的牧民，掠夺既无收获，势必自己退走。
English: This gang of robbers came to attack, but in order to rob the herdsmen in the outlying areas. Since there was nothing to be gained from plundering, they were bound to retreat on their own.

古文：劳师以往，必无所及。
现代文：我们兴师动众而去救援三州，必定追不上这些流窜之贼。
English: If we mobilize to rescue the three states, we will not be able to catch up with these rogue thieves.

古文：翼揣之已了，幸勿复言。 
现代文：我对这情况早已揣摩透了，你们不要再多说了。 
English: I've thought about this for a long time, so please don't say any more.

古文：数日，问至，果如翼所策。
现代文：过了几天，消息传来，一切果然象于翼所预料的一样。
English: A few days later, the news came that everything was indeed as Wings had expected.

古文：初，梁世祖以始兴郡为东衡州，以欧阳頠为刺史。
现代文：当初，梁元帝把始兴郡改为东衡州，任命欧阳为东衡州刺史。
English: At first, Emperor Liang Yuan changed Shixing County to Dongheng Prefecture and appointed Ouyang as the prefect of Dongheng Prefecture.

古文：久之，徙頠为郢州刺史，萧勃留頠不遣。
现代文：时间一长，又把欧阳调去当郢州刺史。萧勃把欧阳留下不让去。
English: As time passed, Ouyang was transferred to Zhangzhou. Xiao Bo did not let Ouyang go.

古文：世祖以王琳代勃为广州刺史，勃遣其将孙荡监广州，尽帅所部屯始兴以避之。
现代文：梁元帝任命王琳代替萧勃当广州刺史，萧勃派部将孙去监守广州，自己把所属的部队全部屯驻在始兴以避开王琳。
English: Emperor Liang Yuan appointed Wang Lin to replace Xiao Bo as the governor of Guangzhou. Xiao Bo sent Sun to supervise Guangzhou and stationed all his troops in Shixing to avoid Wang Lin.

古文：頠别据一城，不往谒，闭门自守。
现代文：欧阳另外占据一座城池，不去拜见萧勃，关起城门自己固守。
English: Ouyang also occupies a city pool, does not visit Xiao Bo, closes the city gate and sticks to it.

古文：勃怒，遣兵袭之，尽取其货财马仗；寻赦之，使复其所，与之结盟。
现代文：萧勃大怒，派兵去袭击他，把他的货物财产马匹兵器全部没收了，不久又赦免了他，让他回到他所据守的城池去，并和他结为同盟。
English: Xiao Bo flew into a rage, sent troops to attack him, confiscated all his goods, property, horses and weapons, and soon pardoned him, let him return to the city he defended, and formed an alliance with him.

古文：江陵陷，頠遂事勃。
现代文：后来江陵陷落，欧阳就归顺了萧勃。
English: Later, when Jiangling fell, Ouyang surrendered to Xiao Bo.

古文：二月，庚午，勃起兵于广州，遣頠及其将傅泰、萧孜为前军。
现代文：二月，庚午，萧勃在广州起兵，派欧阳崐和他的部将傅泰、萧孜为前头部队。
English: In the afternoon of February, Xiao Bo raised an army in Guangzhou and sent Ouyang Xuan and his subordinates Fu Tai and Xia Ze as the vanguard.

古文：孜，勃之从子也。
现代文：萧孜是萧勃的侄子。
English: Xiao Ze is the nephew of Xiao Bo.

古文：南江州刺史余孝顷以兵会之。
现代文：南江州刺史余孝顷带兵去与他们会合。
English: Yuxiao, the governor of the southern Jiangsu Province, led his soldiers to join them.

古文：诏平西将军周文育帅诸军讨之。
现代文：梁朝下诏调动平西将军周文育率领各路兵马去征讨他们。
English: The Liang Dynasty issued an edict to mobilize the Pingxi General Zhou Wenyu to lead soldiers and horses from all directions to fight against them.

古文：癸酉，周王朝日于东郊；戊寅，祭太社。
现代文：癸酉，周王在东郊朝拜日神。戊寅，在大社祭祀土谷神。
English: In ancient times, King Zhou worshipped the sun god in the eastern suburbs. In ancient times, the god Tsuchiya was worshipped at the grand shrine.

古文：周楚公赵贵、卫公独孤信故皆与太祖等夷，及晋公护专政，皆怏怏不服。
现代文：北周的楚公赵贵、卫公独孤信过去都和太祖宇文泰享有同等地位，待到晋公宇文护独掌政权时，都怏怏不乐，很不服气。
English: In the past, Northern Zhou's Chu Gong Zhao Gui and Wei Gong Duxunxin both enjoyed the same status as the great ancestor Yu Wentei. However, when the Jin Gong Yu Wengu took sole power, they were both unhappy and very dissatisfied.

古文：贵谋杀护，信止之；开府仪同三司宇文盛告之。
现代文：赵贵谋划要杀害宇文护，独孤信制止了他；开府仪同三司宇文盛告发了他。
English: Zhao Gui plotted to kill Uwen Rong, but Du Guoxin stopped him; Kaifu Yi and San Si Uwen Sheng denounced him.

古文：丁亥，贵入朝，护执而杀之，免信官。
现代文：丁亥，赵贵上朝，宇文护把他抓起来杀了，罢了独孤信的官。
English: Dinghai, Zhao Gui ascended to the throne, and Uwen You arrested and killed him. He was only a trusted official.

古文：领军将军徐度出东关侵齐，戊子，至合肥，烧齐船三千艘。
现代文：领军将军徐度从东关出发侵入北齐，戊子，抵达合肥，烧毁北齐船只三千艘。
English: The general leading the army gradually invaded Northern Qi and Wuzi from Dongguan, arrived in Hefei, and burned 3,000 Northern Qi ships.

古文：欧阳頠等出南康。
现代文：欧阳等从南康出发。
English: Ouyang and others set off from Nankang.

古文：頠屯豫章之苦竹滩，傅泰据蹠口城，余孝顷遣其弟孝励守郡城，自出豫章据石头。
现代文：欧阳屯驻在豫章的苦竹滩，傅泰据守在口城，余孝顷派他的弟弟余孝劢守卫郡城，自己从豫章出发据守石头。
English: Ouyang was stationed at the Bitter Bamboo Beach in Yuzhang, Fu Tai was stationed in Kuching, Yu Xiaohua sent his brother Yu Xiaojuan to guard the county seat, and he himself set out from Yuzhang to guard the stone.

古文：巴山太守熊昙朗诱頠共袭高州刺史黄法；又语法，约共破頠，且曰： 事捷，与我马仗。 
现代文：巴山太守熊昙朗引诱欧阳一起袭击高州刺史黄法氍。却又告诉黄法氍，相约一起打败欧阳，而且说： 事情成功后，给我一些马匹兵器就行了。 
English: Bashan's governor, Xiong Yaolang, lured Ouyang to attack Gaozhou's assassin, Huang Fahui, but told Huang Fahui that they had agreed to defeat Ouyang together, and said, "After the matter is successful, just give me some horse weapons."

古文：遂出军，与頠俱进。
现代文：就这样他出动军队，与欧阳一起前进。
English: In this way, he dispatched an army and advanced together with Ouyang.

古文：至法城下，昙朗阳败走，法乘之，頠失援而走，昙朗取其马仗，归于巴山。
现代文：抵达黄法氍城下的时候，熊昙朗假装兵败逃跑，黄法氍乘势追击，欧阳失去援军，也败逃了。熊昙朗缴获了他的马匹兵器，回到了巴山。
English: When he arrived at the foot of the Huangfahui castle, Xiong Yulang pretended to be defeated and fled, Huangfahui took advantage of the situation to pursue, Ouyang lost reinforcements and fled. Xiong Yulang captured his horse weapon and returned to Bashan.

古文：周文育军少船，余孝顷有船在上牢，文育遣军主焦僧度袭之，尽取以归，仍于豫章立栅。
现代文：周文育的军队缺少船只，余孝顷在上牢一带有船只，周文育就派军主焦僧度去袭击他，把船只全部抢了回来，仍然在豫章修建起营寨栅栏。
English: Zhou Wenyu's army was short of ships, and as soon as Yu Xiaoxiao went to jail with a ship, Zhou Wenyu sent the commander Jiao Zangdu to attack him, snatched all the ships back, and still built a camp fence in Yuzhang.

古文：军中食尽，诸将欲退。文育不许，使人间行遗周迪书，约为兄弟。
现代文：军队里粮食吃完了，诸将想退兵，周文育不允许，派人走小路给周迪送去一封信，和他相约结为兄弟。
English: When the army ran out of food, the generals wanted to retire, but Zhou Wenyu would not allow it. He sent someone to take a back road to send a letter to Zhou Di, and make an appointment with him to become brothers.

古文：迪得书甚喜，许馈以粮。
现代文：周迪得到信很高兴，答应送些粮食给周文育。
English: After Zhou Di received the letter, he was very happy and promised to send grain to Zhou Wenyu.

古文：于是文育分遣老弱乘故船沿流俱下，烧豫章栅，伪若遁去者。
现代文：于是周文育分头派遣老弱人员乘坐旧船顺流而下，烧掉在豫章的营寨栅栏，假装成好象已经逃跑了的样子。
English: Therefore, Zhou Wenyu sent weak and old people down the river in an old boat, burned down the camp fence in Yuzhang, and pretended to look like he had run away.

古文：孝顷望之，大喜，不复设备。
现代文：余孝顷远远望见这种情况，不禁大喜，再也不设立防备了。
English: Seeing this situation from afar, Yu Xiaohe couldn't help but be overjoyed and didn't set up any more defenses.

古文：文育由间道兼行，据芊韶，芊韶上流则欧阳頠、萧孜，下流则傅泰、余孝顷营，文育据其中间，筑城飨士，頠等大骇。
现代文：周文育从小路日夜兼程地行进，占据了芊韶。芊韶的上游是欧阳、萧孜的军队，下游则有傅泰、余孝顷的军营，周文育占据了这两者的中间，修筑城垣，大宴将士，欧阳等人大惊失色。
English: Zhou Wenyu marched from the small road day and night and occupied the city of Handan. The upstream of Handan was the army of Ouyang and Shazi, and the downstream was the military camp of Fu Tai and Yu Xiao He. Zhou Wenyu occupied the middle of the two, building city walls, holding a grand banquet, and Ouyang and others were shocked.

古文：頠退入泥溪，文育遣严威将军周铁虎等袭頠，癸巳，擒之。
现代文：欧阳率军退入泥溪，周文育派严威将军周铁虎等人率军袭击欧阳，癸巳，捉获了他。
English: Ouyang and his army retreated into the muddy creek. General Zhou Tiehu of the Zhou Culture and Education faction led an army to attack Ouyang and captured him.

古文：文育盛陈兵甲，与頠乘舟而宴，巡蹠口城下，使其将丁法洪攻泰，擒之，孜、孝顷退走。
现代文：周文育把兵甲大量地陈列出来，与欧阳一起坐在船上举行酒宴，船只巡行到口城下，派他的部将丁法洪进攻傅泰，捉获了他。萧孜、余孝顷闻讯退却逃跑了。
English: Zhou Wenyu displayed a large number of armor, sat on a boat with Ouyang and held a wine banquet. The ships cruised to the mouth of the city, sent his commander Ding Fahong to attack Fu Tai and captured him. Xiao Ze and Yu Xiao He heard the news and retreated and fled.

古文：甲午，周以于谨为太傅，大宗伯侯莫陈崇为太保，晋公护为大冢宰，柱国武川贺兰祥为大司马，高阳公达奚武为大司寇。
现代文：甲午，北周任命于谨为太傅，大宗伯侯莫陈崇为太保，晋公宇文护为大冢宰，柱国武川人贺兰祥为大司马，高阳公达奚武为大司寇。
English: In the afternoon of the 1st day of the 1st month, Northern Zhou appointed Yu Ji as Taifu, Daizong Boho Mo Chen Chong as Taipo, Jin Gong Yu Wengu as Daizai, Zhuo Guo Wuchuan's Helan Xiang as Daisima, and Gaoyang Gong Dada Xiangwu as Daisiko.

古文：周人杀魏恭帝。
现代文：北周人杀害了魏恭帝。
English: The Northern Zhou people killed Emperor Wei Gong.

古文：三月，庚子，周文育送欧阳頠、傅泰于建康。
现代文：三月，庚子，周文育送欧阳、傅泰到建康去。
English: In March, Geng Zi and Zhou Wen sent Ouyang and Fu Tai to Jiankang.

古文：丞相霸先与頠有旧，释而厚待之。
现代文：丞相陈霸先与欧阳有旧谊，不但释放了他，而且给予优厚的待遇。
English: The prime minister, Chen Baxian, had an old friendship with Ouyang, and not only released him, but also gave him favorable treatment.

古文：周晋公护以赵景公独孤信名重，不欲显诛之，己酉，逼令自杀。
现代文：北周晋公宇文护因为赵景公独孤信名望很大，不愿公开杀他，己酉，逼迫他自杀。
English: Because of Zhao Jinggong's reputation as a solitary believer, the guards of the Northern Zhou Jingu Monastery were reluctant to publicly kill him, so they forced him to commit suicide.

古文：甲辰，以司空王琳为湘、郢二州刺史。
现代文：甲辰，梁朝任命司空王琳为湘、郢二州的刺史。
English: Jia Chen, Liang Dynasty appointed Sikuo Wang Lin as the chief historian of Hunan and Fujian.

古文：曲江侯勃在南康，闻欧阳頠等败，军中忷惧。
现代文：曲江侯萧勃在南康，听到欧阳等兵败的消息，军中顿时人心惊慌。
English: Qujiang marquis Xiao Bo was in Nankang. When he heard the news of Ouyang's and other soldiers' defeat, people in the army suddenly panicked.

古文：甲寅，德州刺史陈法武、前衡州刺史谭世远攻勃，杀之。
现代文：甲寅，德州刺史陈法武，前衡州刺史谭世远攻打萧勃，杀死了他。
English: A Yin, Texas stabber Chen Law Wu, and former Hengzhou stabber Tan Shiyuan attacked Xiao Bo and killed him.

古文：夏，四月，己卯，铸四柱钱，一当二十。
现代文：夏季四月，己卯，梁朝铸造四柱钱，一枚当细钱二十枚。
English: In the summer of April, Jiwu and Liang Chao minted four-column money, with 20 pieces of small money per piece.

古文：齐遣使请和。
现代文：北齐派使者来梁朝请求和好。
English: They sent envoys to ask for peace.

古文：壬午，周王谒成陵；乙酉，还宫。
现代文：壬午，周王拜谒成陵。乙酉，回到宫中。
English: In the morning of the third day of the third month, King Zhou paid his respects at the mausoleum and returned to the palace.

古文：齐以太师斛律金为右丞相，前大将军可硃浑道元为太傅，开府仪同三司贺拔仁为太保，尚书令常山王演为司空，录尚书事长广王湛为尚书令，右仆射杨愔为左仆射，仍加开府仪同三司。并省尚书右仆射崔暹为左仆射，主党王涣录尚书事。
现代文：北齐任命太师斛律金为右丞相，前大将军可朱浑道元为太傅，开府仪同三司贺拔仁为太保，尚书令常山王高演为司空，录尚书事长广王高湛为尚书令，右仆射杨为左仆射，仍加开府仪同三司，并州行台尚书右仆射崔暹为左仆射，上党王高涣为录尚书事。
English: The Northern Qi appointed the Grand Master Gong Lujin as the Minister of the Right, the former Grand General Can Zhu Hun Dao Yuan as the Grand Master, Kaifu Yi and the Third Secretary He Bairin as the Grand Master, the Grand Secretary Changshan Wang Gao Rong as the Secretary, the Chief Secretary Guang Wang Gao Zhan as the Grand Secretary, the Right Servant Sho Yang as the Left Servant Sho, and the Grand Master and the Third Secretary, and the State Gaotai Grand Secretary, the Right Servant Sho Choi Siam as the Left Servant Sho, and the Upper Party King Gao Yao as the Grand Secretary.

古文：丁亥，周王享太庙。
现代文：丁亥，周王祭拜太庙。
English: Dinghai, Zhou Wang worship the temple.

古文：壬辰，改四柱钱一当十；丙申，复闭细钱。
现代文：壬辰，梁朝改变四柱钱的币值，一枚当细钱十枚。丙申，又停止细钱的流通。
English: In Imjin, the Liang Dynasty changed the value of the four-column money, one for ten small money, and stopped the circulation of small money.

古文：故曲江侯勃主帅兰敱袭杀谭世远，军主夏侯明彻杀敱，持勃首降。
现代文：原曲江侯萧勃的主帅兰袭击并杀死了谭世远，军主夏侯明彻杀了兰，拿着萧勃的首级投降。
English: Lan, the commander of the original warlord Xiao Bo, attacked and killed Tan Shiyuan. Xiao Mingcher, the commander of the warlord Xiao Bo, killed Lan and surrendered with the head of Xiao Bo.

古文：勃故记室李贺藏奉怀安侯任据广州。萧孜、余孝顷犹据石头，为两城，各居其一，多设船舰，夹水而陈。
现代文：萧勃原来的记室李宝藏拥戴怀安侯萧任据守广州，萧孜、余孝顷还占据着石头，修筑了两座城池，两人各据守一个，造了很多船舰，夹着江水两边摆开。
English: Xiao Bo's original office Li Baozhong supported Huai'an Hou Xiao Ren held Guangzhou, Xia Ze and Yu Xiao He also occupied the stone, built two castles, each of them held one, built a lot of ships, and spread out on both sides of the river.

古文：丞相霸先遣平南将军侯安都助周文育击之。
现代文：丞相陈霸先派平南将军侯安都协助周文育去攻打他们。
English: Premier Chen Baxian sent Pingnan General Hou Andu to assist Zhou Wenyu to attack them.

古文：戊戌，安都潜师夜烧其船舰，文育帅水军、安都帅步骑进攻之；萧孜出降，孝顷逃归新吴，文育等引兵还。
现代文：戊戌，侯安都偷偷派部队乘黑夜烧掉了他们的兵船，周文育率领水军，侯安都率领步军协同大举进攻，萧孜出城投降，余孝顷逃回新吴，周文育等人带兵回朝。
English: Both Wu Xi and Hou An secretly sent troops to take advantage of the dark night to burn their warships. Zhou Wenyu led the naval forces, and Hou An led the infantry forces to jointly attack in a big way. Xiao Ze left the city and surrendered. Yu Xiao He fled back to Xinwu, and Zhou Wenyu and others led the troops back to the North.

古文：丞相霸先以欧阳頠声著南土，复以頠为衡州刺史，使讨岭南。
现代文：丞相陈霸先考虑到欧阳的声望在南方一带很高，于是又任命欧阳为衡州刺史，派他去讨伐岭南。
English: Considering that Ouyang's reputation was very high in the southern region, Premier Chen Ba first appointed Ouyang as the chief historian of Hengzhou and sent him to fight Lingnan.

古文：未至，其子纥已克始兴，頠至岭南，诸郡皆降，遂克广州，岭南悉平。
现代文：欧阳还没抵达岭南，他的儿子欧阳纥已经攻下了始兴。欧阳抵达岭南后，岭南诸郡都投降了，于是就攻占了广州，岭南从此全部平定了。
English: Ouyang hadn't arrived in Lingnan yet, but his son Ouyang Yao had already captured Shixing. After Ouyang arrived in Lingnan, all counties in Lingnan surrendered, so he captured Guangzhou, and Lingnan was completely leveled.

古文：周仪同三司齐轨谓御正中大夫薛善曰： 军国之政，当归天子，何得犹在权门！ 
现代文：北周的仪同三司齐轨对御正中大夫薛善说： 国家的军政大权，都应该归天子掌握，怎么可以至今还在权门显要手中！ 
English: North Zhou's eulogy was in line with the three divisions and said to the imperial doctor Xue Shan: The military and political power of the country should be under the control of the Son of Heaven, how can it still be in the hands of the powerful!

古文：善以告晋公护，护杀之，以善为中外府司马。
现代文：薛善把这话报告了宇文护，宇文护杀了齐轨，任命薛善为中外府司马。
English: Xue Shan reported this to Uwen Shuo. Uwen Shuo killed Qi Rong and appointed Xue Shan as the Sima of Zhonggai Prefecture.

古文：五月，戊辰，余孝顷遣使诣丞相府乞降。
现代文：五月，戊辰，余孝顷派使者到丞相府乞求投降。
English: In May, Boshin, Yu Xiaohua sent an envoy to the prime minister's office to beg for surrender.

古文：王琳既不就征，大治舟舰，将攻陈霸先；六月，戊寅，霸先以开府仪同三司侯安都为西道都督，周文育为南道都督，将舟师二万会武昌以击之。
现代文：王琳既已不受征召，就大力修造舟舰，准备进攻陈霸先。六月，戊寅崐，陈霸先任命开府仪同三司侯安都为西道都督，周文育为南道都督，率领水师二万人会师于武昌，对王琳发动进攻。
English: Since Wang Lin had not been conscripted, he worked hard to build a boat and prepare to attack Chen Paxian. In June, Wu Yinqi, Chen Paxian appointed Kaifu Yi and the third secretary Hou Andu as the governor of the West Province, and Zhou Wenyu as the governor of the South Province, and led 20,000 sailors to join the division in Wuchang to launch an attack on Wang Lin.

古文：秋，七月，辛亥，周王享太庙。
现代文：秋季七月，辛亥，周王祭祀太庙。
English: In the autumn of July, Xinhai, Zhou Wang made a sacrifice to the Great Temple.

古文：河南、北大蝗。
现代文：黄河南岸与北岸发生大规模蝗灾。
English: Large-scale locust plagues occurred along the south and north banks of the Yellow River.

古文：齐主问于魏郡丞崔叔瓚曰： 何故致蝗？ 
现代文：北齐文宣帝问魏郡丞崔叔瓒： 是什么原因招致了蝗灾？ 
English: Northern Qi Emperor Qianxuan asked Wei County Governor Cui Shuxuan: What was the cause of the locust plague?

古文：对曰： 《五行志》：土功不时，蝗虫为灾。
现代文：崔叔瓒回答说： 《五行志》上说：土木工程不按时令兴建，就会导致蝗虫成灾。
English: Cui Shuxuan replied: "The Five Elements" said: if civil engineering projects are not built according to the schedule, it will lead to locust infestation.

古文：今外筑长城，内兴三台，殆以此乎！ 
现代文：现在我国在外修筑长城，在内兴建三台，大概蝗灾就因为这个原因而发生的吧？ 
English: Now that our country is building the Great Wall outside and three inside, the locust plague probably occurred for this reason, right?

古文：齐主大怒，使左右殴之，擢其发，以溷沃其头，曳足以出。
现代文：北齐文宣帝听了勃然大怒，命令左右殴打崔叔瓒，拔他的头发，用粪汁浇他的头，拽着他的脚拖出去。
English: Hearing this, Emperor Xuan of the Northern Qi Dynasty flew into a rage and ordered to beat Cui Shuxuan left and right, pull out his hair, douse his head with excrement, and drag him out by his feet.

古文：叔瓚，季舒之兄也。
现代文：崔叔瓒是崔季舒的哥哥。
English: Cui Shuxuan is the elder brother of Cui Jishu.

古文：八月，丁卯，周人归梁世祖之柩及诸将家属千馀人于王琳。
现代文：八月，丁卯，北周把梁元帝的灵柩和诸将家属一千多人送还给王琳。
English: In August, Dingwu and Bei Zhou returned the coffin of Emperor Liang Yuan and more than a thousand family members to Wang Lin.

古文：戊辰，周王祭太社。
现代文：戊辰，周王在大社祭祀土神、谷神。
English: During the Boshin and Zhou dynasties, local deities and valley gods were worshipped at the grand shrine.

古文：甲午，进丞相霸先位太傅，加黄钺、殊礼，赞拜不名。
现代文：甲午，梁朝提升丞相陈霸先为太傅，加赐黄钺、殊礼，进见赞拜时不用称名。
English: In the afternoon of the first day of the first month, the Liang Dynasty promoted the prime minister Chen Ba to the position of Taifu, and gave him the title of Huang Qi and the title of Shulei. He did not have to give his name when he went to worship.

古文：九月，辛丑，进丞相为相国，总百揆，封陈公，备九锡，陈国置百司。
现代文：九月，辛丑，又提升丞相为相国，总领朝政，封为陈公，备九锡，陈国设置百官。
English: In September, Xinwu was promoted to the position of chancellor of the imperial court and the leader of the imperial court. He was given the title of Chen Gong, Bei Jiuxi, and Chen Guo set up hundreds of officials.

古文：周孝愍帝性刚果，恶晋公护之专权。
现代文：北周孝愍帝性格刚强果决，对晋公宇文护的专权很反感。
English: Northern Zhou Xiaoqi Emperor had a strong and decisive personality, and he was very disgusted with the exclusive power of Jin Gongyuan.

古文：司会李植自太祖时为相府司录，参掌朝政，军司马孙恒亦久居权要，及护执政，植、恒恐不见容，乃与宫伯乙弗凤、贺拔提等共谮之于周王。
现代文：司会李植从太祖时就任相府司录，参与掌管朝政，军司马孙恒也久居权要之位，待到宇文护执政时，李植、孙恒担心不被宇文护容纳，于是就与宫伯乙弗凤、贺拔提等人一起在孝愍帝那儿说宇文护的坏话。
English: From the time of the great-grandfather, the secretary Li Zhi was appointed as the secretary of the prime minister's office and participated in the management of the imperial government. The military secretary Ma Sun Heng also occupied a position of power for a long time. When U Wen Rong was in power, Li Zhi and Sun Heng were worried that they would not be accepted by U Wen Rong, so they said bad words about U Wen Rong together with the emperor's brother-in-law Yifeng and He Baty.

古文：植、恒曰： 护自诛赵贵以来，威权日盛，谋臣宿将，争往附之，大小之政，皆决于护。
现代文：李植、孙恒说： 宇文护自从杀了赵贵，威权越来越盛大，谋臣宿将都争着去依附他。政事无论大小，都是宇文护一个人说了算。
English: Li Zhi and Sun Heng said: "Since Uwenu killed Zhao Gui, his authority has become more and more grandiose, and his advisers and courtiers are all vying to cling to him. No matter how big or small the government is, Uwenu is the only one who has the final say.

古文：以臣观之，将不守臣节，愿陛下早图之！ 王以为然。
现代文：依臣等观察，宇文护早晚会不守臣节，图谋纂夺大位，希望陛下早点作出安排，除掉他以绝后患！ 
English: According to the observation of his vassals and others, sooner or later, Umengor would not keep the Day of the Vassal, and would try to usurp the throne. I hope that His Majesty would make an early arrangement to get rid of him as the last heir!

古文：凤、提曰： 以先王之明，犹委植、恒以朝政，今以事付二人，何患不成！
现代文：孝愍帝认为他们说的很对。乙弗凤、贺拔提又说： 先王明察秋毫，尚且把朝政委托给李植、孙恒，可见这两个人的才能和品质了。
English: Emperor Xiaojun thought that what they said was very right. Ye Fofeng and He Baty also said: The previous king had a clear vision of the future, yet he entrusted the imperial government to Li Zhi and Sun Heng, which shows the talent and quality of these two people.

古文：且护常自比周公，臣闻周公摄政七年，陛下安能七年邑邑如此乎！ 
现代文：现在如果把除掉宇文护的事托付给这两个人，还怕事情办不成吗？而且宇文护常常把自己比成周公，臣等听说周公摄政七年之久，陛下怎么能在七年内都悒悒不乐地屈从宇文护专权呢？ 
English: Now, if the task of getting rid of Uwen Kuo were entrusted to these two people, would they still be afraid that the task would not be accomplished? Moreover, Uwen Kuo often compared himself to Zhou Gong, and the courtiers heard that Zhou Gong had been regent for seven years. How could His Majesty be unhappy to submit to Uwen Kuo's exclusive power for seven years?

古文：王愈信之，数引武士于后园讲习，为执缚之势。
现代文：孝愍帝听了，愈发信赖他们，多次带武士在宫廷后园练习如何捕捉捆绑人。
English: Emperor Xiaojun listened to them and trusted them more and more. He took the samurai to the backyard of the palace many times to practice how to catch the tied-up person.

古文：植等又引宫伯张光洛同谋，光洛以告护。
现代文：李植等人又勾引宫伯张光洛当同谋，张光洛就把他们的秘谋向宇文护告发了。
English: Li Zhi and others also lured the court noble Zhang Guangluo to be an accomplice, and Zhang Guangluo reported their secret plan to Yuwen Guo.

古文：护乃出植为梁州刺史，恒为潼州刺史，欲散其谋。
现代文：于是宇文护就调李植出任梁州刺史，孙恒出任潼州刺史，想以此来瓦解他们的阴谋。
English: As a result, Yu Wenguo transferred Li Zhi to be the governor of Liangzhou and Sun Heng to be the governor of Zhangzhou, hoping to break up their conspiracy.

古文：后王思植等，每欲召之，护泣谏曰： 天下至亲，无过兄弟，若兄弟尚相疑，它人谁可信者！
现代文：后来孝愍帝想念李植等人，总是想召见他们。宇文护痛哭流涕地谏阻说： 天下最亲的也亲不过兄弟，如果兄弟之间还相互怀疑，别的人还有谁是可以信任的！
English: Later, Emperor Xiaojun missed Li Zhi and the others and always wanted to see them. Uwen You said with tears in her eyes, "The closest people in the world are brothers. If brothers still have doubts about each other, who else can be trusted?"

古文：太祖以陛下富于春秋，属臣后事，臣情兼家国，实愿竭其股肱。
现代文：太祖因为陛下年幼，把后事托付给我，我对圣上的忠诚实际上兼有尽责于兄弟之托的亲情与君臣之义，实在愿意尽心竭力，效股肱之劳。
English: My great-grandfather, because His Majesty was young, entrusted me with the succession. My loyalty to His Holiness is actually a combination of my duty to my brother, my affection for him, and my loyalty to the monarchy. I am truly willing to do my best and do my best.

古文：若陛下亲鉴万机，威加四海，臣死之日，犹生之年。
现代文：如果陛下能够亲自察览万机，威权加于四崐海，那么，我即使死了，也好像还活着一样。
English: If Your Majesty can personally inspect all the machines and impose authority on the four seas, then, even if I die, it is as if I am still alive.

古文：但恐除臣之后，奸回得志，非唯不利陛下，亦将倾覆社稷，使臣无面目见太祖于九泉。
现代文：但是，恐怕把我除去之后，奸贼小人趁机得志，非但对陛下不利，也将倾覆社稷，危害国家，使我没有面目可见太祖于九泉之下。
English: However, I am afraid that after I am removed, the traitorous villains will take advantage of the opportunity, which will not only be unfavorable to His Majesty, but will also overturn society and endanger the country, so that I have no face to be seen under the sun.

古文：且臣既为天子之兄，位至宰相，尚复何求！
现代文：而且，我既然是天子的叔叔，官位也做到了宰相，还有什么可贪求的呢？
English: Moreover, since I am the son of heaven's uncle, and I have achieved the position of prime minister, what else can I aspire to?

古文：愿陛下勿信谗臣之言，疏弃骨肉。 
现代文：愿陛下不要相信谗臣的话，疏远抛弃骨肉之亲。 
English: May His Majesty not believe the words of his vassals, alienate and abandon his relatives.

古文：王乃止不召，而心犹疑之。
现代文：孝愍帝听了，才停止对李值等人的召见，但心里还是对宇文护有怀疑。
English: After hearing this, Emperor Xiaojun stopped summoning Li Zhen and others, but he still had doubts in his heart about Uwen Rong.

古文：凤等益惧，密谋滋甚，刻日召群公入宴，因执护诛之；张光洛又以告护。
现代文：乙弗凤等人见此情状，越发害怕起来，他们的密谋策划也更加紧张和频繁了。终于确定一个日子，要趁召集群臣入宫饮宴的机会，把宇文护抓起来杀掉。张光洛又把这密谋报告了宇文护。
English: Seeing this situation, Yifu Feng and others became more and more afraid, and their plotting became more intense and frequent. Finally, a day was set to take advantage of the opportunity to summon the courtiers to the palace banquet to arrest and kill Yuwengu. Zhang Guangluo reported this plot to Yuwengu.

古文：护乃召柱国贺兰祥、领军尉迟纲等谋之，祥等劝护废立。
现代文：宇文护于是召集柱国贺兰祥，领军尉迟纲等商量对策。贺兰祥等人劝宇文护废了孝愍帝另立皇帝。
English: Therefore, Uwenguo summoned the pillar country, Horan Xiang, the leading army lieutenant, Chi Gang, and others to discuss the countermeasures. Horan Xiang and others persuaded Uwenguo to abolish Emperor Xiaozhun and establish another emperor.

古文：时纲总领禁兵，护遣纲入宫召凤等议事，及至，以次执送护第，因罢散宿卫兵。
现代文：当时尉迟纲总领宫廷禁兵，宇文护派尉迟纲入宫召集乙弗凤等人商议国事，等他们来了，挨个抓住送到宇文护宅第里，同时把宿卫兵全部彻换、遣散掉了。
English: At that time, the commander-in-chief of the palace banned the soldiers, and the Uwen guard sent the captain-in-chief into the palace to convene Yifu Feng and others to discuss state affairs. When they came, they were caught one by one and sent to the Uwen guard house, and at the same time, all the guards were completely changed and dismissed.

古文：王方悟，独在内殿，令宫人执兵自守。
现代文：孝愍帝觉察到事情突变，独自躲在内殿，令宫人们手执兵器守护自己。
English: Emperor Xiaozhun noticed the sudden turn of events and hid alone in the inner hall, ordering the palace people to guard themselves with weapons.

古文：护遣贺兰祥逼王逊位，幽于旧第。
现代文：宇文护派贺兰祥进宫逼孝愍帝退位，把他幽禁在过去做略阳公时的旧府中。
English: Uwen's protégé, Horan Xiang, entered the palace and forced Emperor Xiaojun to abdicate, confining him to the old palace where he had been a minor official in the past.

古文：悉召公卿公议，废王为略阳公，迎立岐州刺史宁都公毓。
现代文：宇文护把全部公卿召集起来开会商议大事，把孝愍帝废为略阳公，把岐州刺史宁都公宇文毓迎来立为皇帝。
English: Uwen Rong called all the nobles together for a meeting to discuss important matters, abolished Emperor Xiaozhuang as Emperor Liangyang, and ushered in Emperor Uwen Hui from Qizhou and Ningdu.

古文：公卿皆曰： 此公之家事，敢不唯命是听！ 
现代文：公卿们都说： 这是您的家事，我们岂敢不唯命是听！ 
English: The court nobles all said: This is your family business, how dare we disobey orders!

古文：乃斩凤等于门外，孙恒亦伏诛。
现代文：于是就把乙弗凤等人斩首于宫门之外，孙恒也伏法被诛。
English: So he beheaded Yifu Feng and others outside the palace gate, and Sun Heng was also arrested.

古文：时李植父柱国大将军远镇弘农，护召远及植还朝，远疑有变，沈吟久之，乃曰： 大丈夫宁为忠鬼，安可作叛臣邪！ 
现代文：当时李植的父亲柱国大将军李远镇守弘农，宇文护下令召李远和李植回朝廷，李远怀疑朝廷里有非常事变，沈吟了很久，才说： 大丈夫宁可作忠鬼，怎么可以作叛臣呢！ 
English: At that time, Li Zhi's father, Zhu Guoda General Li Yuan, was in charge of the town of Hongnong, and Yu Wenzhou ordered Li Yuan and Li Zhi to be called back to the imperial court. Li Yuan suspected that there was a very big change in the imperial court, and after chanting for a long time, he said: "It's okay, I'd rather be a loyal ghost, how can I be a traitor!"

古文：遂就征。
现代文：于是接受了征召。
English: He decided to accept the call-up.

古文：既至长安，护以远功名素重，犹欲全之。引与相见，谓之曰： 公儿遂有异谋，非止屠戮护身，乃是倾危宗社。
现代文：到了长安之后，宇文护考虑到李远功劳名望一向很高，还想保全他的性命，就把他叫来见面，对他说： 您的儿子终于陷入与朝廷异心的阴谋，这种阴谋不止是要杀害我宇文护，而且是要颠覆危害宗庙社稷。
English: After arriving in Chang'an, considering that Li Yuan's reputation for merit has always been very high, and also wanting to save his life, Uwenbao called him to meet and said to him: Your son has finally fallen into a conspiracy with the imperial court. This conspiracy is not only to kill my Uwenbao, but also to subvert and harm the family temple community.

古文：叛臣贼子，理宜同疾，公可早为之所。 
现代文：对这样的叛臣贼子，我们理所应当一起痛恨，您可以早点为他准备一个处理办法。 
English: Traitors and thieves deserve our common hatred. You can deal with them as soon as possible.

古文：乃以植付远。
现代文：于是把李植交给李远处理。
English: and handed over Li Zhe to him.

古文：远素爱植，植又口辩，自陈初无此谋。
现代文：李远平时一向喜爱李植，李植又有口才，极力声辩自己本来就没有参与这样的阴谋。
English: Li Yuan has always loved Li Zhi, and Li Zhi has the eloquence to vigorously argue that he did not participate in such a conspiracy.

古文：远谓为信然，诘朝，将植谒护。
现代文：李远认为李植的申辩是可信的，第二天早朝，就带着李植去拜谒宇文护。
English: Li Yuan thought that Li Zhi's defense was credible. Early the next morning, he took Li Zhi to pay homage to Gong Yuwengu.

古文：护谓植已死，左右白植亦在门。护大怒曰： 阳平公不信我！ 
现代文：宇文护以为李植已被处死，但身边的人告诉他李植也来在门口，宇文护勃然大怒，说； 阳平公不相信我！ 
English: Yu Wenzhou thought that Li Zhi had been executed, but the people around him told him that Li Zhi was also at the door. Yu Wenzhou flew into a rage and said, "Yang Ping Gong doesn't believe me!

古文：乃召入，仍命远同坐，令略阳公与植相质于远前。
现代文：于是就把李远召进来，仍然让李远和自己同坐，让废帝略阳公与李植在李远面前相互对证。
English: So he called Li Yuan in, still let Li Yuan sit with him, and let the deposed emperor Liao Yang Gong and Li Zhi cross-examine each other in front of Li Yuan.

古文：植辞穷，谓略阳公曰： 本为此谋，欲安社稷，利至尊耳！
现代文：李植智竭辞穷，对略阳公说： 我参与这一次谋反，本来是为了安定社稷，有利于至尊的威权。
English: Li Zhi Zhi was at the end of his tether and said to Liao Yangzhu: I participated in this time of rebellion, originally for the sake of social stability and in favor of the supreme authority.

古文：今日至此，何事云云！ 
现代文：今天弄到这个地步，还有什么好说的呢！ 
English: To get to this point today, what else is there to say!

古文：远闻之，自投于床曰： 若尔，诚合万死。 
现代文：李远听得真切，自己仆倒在座位上，说： 如果是这样，实在是罪该万死！ 
English: Li Yuan heard that Yao said in front of Hu's bed: "If this is the case, the minister deserves to die."

古文：于是护乃害植，并逼远令自杀。
现代文：于是宇文护就杀害了李植，并逼李远，让他自杀。
English: Uwen Guo then killed Li Zhi and forced Li Yuan to commit suicide.

古文：植弟叔诣、叔谦、叔让亦死，馀子以幼得免。
现代文：李植的弟弟叔诣、叔谦、叔让也被杀死，李远的其他儿子因年幼得到宽免。
English: Li Zhi's younger brothers, Uncle Zhou, Uncle Qian and Uncle Zhang, were also killed, while Li Yuan's other sons were pardoned due to their young age.

古文：初，远弟开府仪同三司穆知植非保家之主，每劝远除之，远不能用。
现代文：当初，李远的弟弟开府仪同三司李穆知道李植不是保家的角色，常常劝李远除掉他，李远不能接受这一意见。
English: At first, Li Yuan's younger brother Kaifu Yi and Third Secretary Li Mu knew that Li Zhi was not the role of protecting the family, and often advised Li Yuan to get rid of him. Li Yuan could not accept this opinion.

古文：及远临刑，泣谓穆曰： 吾不用汝言，以至此！ 
现代文：待到李远临刑时，才哭着对李穆说： 我不采纳你的话，才有今天这样的下场！ 
English: It wasn't until Li Yuan was on his deathbed that he cried and said to Li Mu: I didn't accept your words, and this is what happened today!

古文：穆当从坐，以前言获免，除名为民，及其子弟亦免官。
现代文：李穆本来应当跟着治罪，但因有从前规劝李远的话而获得宽免，只是免官，削职为民，他的子弟也都被免去官职。
English: Li Mu was supposed to follow suit, but he was pardoned because he had previously advised Li Yuan. However, he was dismissed from his post and demoted, and his children were also dismissed from their posts.

古文：植弟淅州刺史基，尚义归公主，当从坐，穆请以二子代基命，护两释之。
现代文：李植的弟弟淅州刺史李基，娶崐义归公主为妻，本来应当跟着治罪，李穆要求以自己两个儿子的性命来替李基赎死，宇文护把他们连李基全都释放了。
English: Li Zhi's younger brother, Li Zhou's cousin, Li Qi, had married Princess Zou Yiguo, and should have been punished accordingly. Li Mu demanded that the lives of his two sons be used to atone for Li Qi's death. Wu Wenyou released them all, including Li Qi.

古文：后月馀，护弑略阳公，黜王后元氏为尼。
现代文：此后过了一个多月，宇文护杀害了略阳公，废黜了王后元氏，让她削发为尼。
English: After that, more than a month passed, and Uwen Guo killed Liao Yang Gong, dethroned Queen Yuan, and made her abdicate.

古文：癸亥，宁都公自岐州至长安，甲子，即天王位，大赦。
现代文：癸亥，宁都公宇文毓从岐州来到长安，甲子，即帝位，大赦天下。
English: In the Heian and Ningdu dynasties, King Wenzong of Qizhou came to Chang'an, and Emperor Jia of Jia was granted amnesty.

古文：冬，十月，戊辰，进陈公爵为王。
现代文：冬季，十月，戊辰，梁朝给陈公陈霸先进爵为王。
English: In the winter, in October, the Wangchen and Liang Dynasties gave Chen Gong and Chen He the title of king.

古文：辛未，梁敬帝禅位于陈。
现代文：辛未，梁敬帝把皇位禅让给了陈王。
English: Soon after, Emperor Liang Jing abdicated the imperial throne to King Chen.

古文：癸酉，周魏武公李弼卒。
现代文：癸酉，北周魏武公李弼去世。
English: At the same time, the Northern Zhou Wei Wugong Li Xi passed away.

古文：陈王使中书舍人刘师知引宣猛将军沈恪勒兵入宫，卫送梁主如别宫，恪排闼见王，叩头谢曰： 恪身经事萧氏，今日不忍见此。
现代文：陈王陈霸先派中书舍人刘师知带领宣猛将军沈恪指挥兵士进入皇宫，护送梁敬帝到别宫去居住。沈恪冲开大门拜见陈王，叩头谢罪，说： 我亲自经历过侍奉萧氏的事，今日不忍心看到这种逼宫的场面。
English: Chen Wang Chen Ba first sent Liu Shizhi, a Chinese scholar, to lead the fierce general Shen Ke to command soldiers to enter the imperial palace and escort Emperor Liang Jian to live in another palace. Shen Ke opened the door to meet Chen Wang, bowed and said: "I have personally experienced serving Xiao, and today I can't bear to see this scene of forcing the palace."

古文：分受死耳，决不奉命！ 
现代文：违命受死是我的本分，决不能接受这种任命！ 
English: It is my duty to disobey orders and suffer death. I must not accept this appointment!

古文：王嘉其意，不复逼，更以荡主王僧志代之。
现代文：陈王嘉勉了他的这种忠心，不再逼他担当此命，另换统领骁领骑兵的荡主王僧志代替他。
English: Chen Wang Jia encouraged his loyalty and no longer forced him to take on this mission. He replaced him with Wang Sanzhi, the leader of the eunuchs and cavalry.

古文：乙亥，王即皇帝位于南郊，还宫，大赦，改元。
现代文：乙亥，陈王陈霸先在南郊即皇帝位，回到宫庭，颁发大赦天下令，又改换年号为永定。
English: In the Year of the Boar, King Chen of the Southern Suburbs, i.e. the emperor, returned to the palace, issued a general amnesty, and changed his era name to Yongding.

古文：奉梁敬帝为江阴王，梁太后为太妃，皇后为妃。
现代文：封梁敬帝为江阴王，梁太后为太妃，皇后为妃。
English: Emperor Qianlong was crowned King of Jiangyin, Empress Dowager Liang was crowned Empress Dowager, and the Empress was crowned Empress Dowager.

古文：以给事黄门侍郎蔡景历为秘书监、中书通事舍人。
现代文：陈朝任命给事黄门侍郎蔡景历为秘书监，兼中书通事舍人。
English: The Chen dynasty appointed Cai Jingli, the Yellow Gate's attendant, as secretary and supervisor, as well as the person in charge of Chinese calligraphy.

古文：是时政事皆由中书省，置二十一局，各当尚书诸曹，总国机要，尚书唯听受而已。
现代文：这个时期国家政事都由中书省决定，中书省设置二十一个局，其职能分头与尚书省各曹相当，总揽国家军政大要，各部尚书只是听受命令而已。
English: During this period, all national political affairs were decided by the Ministry of Chinese Literature. The Ministry of Chinese Literature set up twenty-one bureaus, the functions of which were equivalent to those of the ministries of Chinese literature. The ministries of Chinese literature were only following orders.

古文：丙子，上幸钟山，祠蒋帝庙。
现代文：丙子，陈武帝驾临钟山，祭祀蒋帝庙。
English: According to legend, Emperor Chen Wu drove to Zhongshan Mountain to make a sacrifice at the Chiang Kai-shek Temple.

古文：庚辰，上出佛牙于杜姥宅，设无遮大会，帝亲出阙前膜拜。
现代文：庚辰，武帝从杜姥宅请出佛牙，设无遮大会，举办佛事，武帝亲自出来到宫阙前顶礼膜拜。
English: At Gengchen, Emperor Wu invited Buddha's tooth from Du Ubaba's house, set up an open-air conference, and held a Buddhist ceremony. Emperor Wu himself came out to the front of the palace to pay homage.

古文：辛巳，追尊皇考文赞为景皇帝，庙号太祖，皇妣董氏曰安皇后，追立前夫人钱氏为昭皇后，世子克为孝怀太子，立夫人章氏为皇后。
现代文：辛巳，陈武帝追尊皇考陈文为景皇帝，庙号太祖。皇妣董氏为安皇后。追立前夫人钱氏为昭皇后，世子陈克立为孝怀太子，夫人章氏立为皇后。
English: At that time, Emperor Wu of Chen pursued the revered Emperor Gao Chenwen to be the King of Jing and the Grandfather of Miao, the Empress Dowager Dong to be the Empress of An, the former Empress Qian to be the Empress of Zhao, the son Chen Keli to be the Prince of Xiaohui, and the wife Zhang to be the Empress.

古文：章后，乌程人也。
现代文：章后是乌程人。
English: At the end of the chapter is a man from Ucheng.

古文：置删定郎，治律令。
现代文：陈朝设置删定郎，负责修订法律条令。
English: The Chen Dynasty set up the Jiading Lang, which was responsible for revising laws and regulations.

古文：乙酉，周王祀圜丘；丙戌，祀方丘；甲午，祭太社。
现代文：乙酉，周王在圜丘祭天，丙戌，在方丘祭地，甲午，在太社祭祀土神和谷神。
English: Acetylene, the king of the Zhou Dynasty in the Mengqiu Festival, propylene, in the Fangqiu Festival, Khao, in the Taisha Festival, the earth god and the valley god.

古文：戊子，太祖神主祔太庙，七庙始共用一太牢，始祖荐首，馀皆骨体。
现代文：戊子，太祖的神主迁入太庙与祖先合祭，七庙开始共用一太牢为祭品。
English: Boshi, the god of Taizu, moved into Taimyo to hold a joint offering with his ancestors, and the seven temples began to share a Taifuku as an offering.

古文：侯安都至武昌，王琳将樊猛弃城走，周文育自豫章会之。
现代文：始祖用牛、羊、猪的头作祭品，其余的用其躯体作祭品。侯安都进抵武昌，王琳的部将樊猛弃城逃跑了，周文育从豫章出发去与侯安都会合。
English: The first ancestors used the heads of cattle, sheep, and pigs as sacrifices, and the rest used their bodies as sacrifices. Hou An arrived in Wuchang, Wang Lin's generals abandoned the city violently and fled, and Zhou Wenyu set off from Yuzhang to meet Hou An.

古文：安都闻上受禅，叹曰： 吾今兹必败，战无名矣！ 
现代文：侯安都听到武帝受禅让的消息，叹息说： 我这回一定失败，因为师出无名，不能服众了。 
English: Hou Andu heard the news of Emperor Wu's surrender to Zen Buddhism and said with a sigh, "I must have failed this time, because my teacher is unknown and I can't win over the public."

古文：时两将俱行，不相统摄，部下交争，稍不相平。
现代文：当时侯安都、周文育两个将领一起前进，相互间没有统摄与被统摄的关系，部下相互争执，逐渐不相和睦。
English: At that time, the two generals, Hou Andu and Zhou Wenyu, marched together, and there was no relationship between the general and the general, and their subordinates quarreled with each other and gradually did not get along.

古文：军至郢州，琳将潘纯陀于城中遥射官军，安都怒，进军围之；未克，而王琳至苻口，安都乃释郢州，悉众诣沌口，留沈泰一军守汉曲。
现代文：军队进到郢州时，王琳的将领潘纯陀在城里远远地放箭射向官军，侯安都勃然大怒，指挥军队进击并包围了郢州。郢州还没打下来，而王琳的大军已抵达口，于是侯安都就撤郢州之围，带领全部军队奔沌口，留下沈泰的一支部队守卫汉曲。
English: When the army entered Zhangzhou, Wang Lin's general Pan Chunda shot arrows at the government army from far away in the city. Hou Andu was furious and commanded the army to attack and encircle Zhangzhou. Zhangzhou had not yet been defeated, but Wang Lin's army had arrived at the entrance, so Hou Andu withdrew the siege of Zhangzhou and led all the troops to Chaozhou, leaving a force from Shen Tai to guard Hanqu.

古文：安都遇风不得进，琳据东岸，安都等据西岸，相持数日，乃合战，安都等大败。
现代文：侯安都遇到大风，不能前进。王琳据守东岸，侯安都据守西岸，两军相持了好几天，才交战，侯安都等人大败。
English: Both Hou and An encountered a strong wind and could not advance. Wang Lin Rong defended the east coast, and both Hou and An defended the west coast. The two armies held each other for several days before fighting, and both Hou and An suffered a crushing defeat.

古文：安都、文育及裨将徐敬成、周铁虎、程灵洗皆为琳所擒，沈泰引兵奔归。
现代文：侯安都、周文育及其裨将徐敬成、周铁虎、程灵洗都被王琳所擒获，沈泰带着他那一支军队逃跑回来了。
English: Hou Andu, Zhou Wenyu and his generals Xu Jingcheng, Zhou Tiehu, and Cheng Lingbai were all captured by Wang Lin, and Shen Tai fled back with his army.

古文：琳引见诸将与语，周铁虎辞气不屈，琳杀铁虎而囚安都等，总以一长锁系之，置琳所坐下，令所亲宦者王子晋掌视之。
现代文：王琳召见被俘的诸将，和他们说话，周铁虎言辞强硬，不屈服，王琳杀了周铁虎，把侯安都等人关押起来，用一根长长的锁链把他们全部系在一起，关在王琳所坐的大船的舱里，令自己信任的宦官王子晋看管监视。
English: Wang Lin summoned the captured generals and spoke with them. Zhou Tiehu was tough and did not give in. Wang Lin killed Zhou Tiehu, arrested Hou Andu and others, tied them all together with a long chain, and locked them in the cabin of the big ship where Wang Lin was sitting. She had her trusted eunuch Prince Jin keep watch.

古文：琳乃移湘州军府就郢城，又遣其将樊猛袭据江州。十一月，丙申，上立兄子茜为临川王，顼为始兴王；弟子昙朗已死，而上未知，遥立为南康王。
现代文：十一月丙申，陈武帝立其兄的儿子陈为临川王，陈顼为始兴王，其弟的儿子陈昙朗已经死去，但武帝还不知道，立他为康王。庚子，周王向太庙供献祭品。
English: In November, Emperor Wu of Chen appointed his brother's son Chen as the King of Linchuan and Chen Yao as the King of Shixing. His brother's son Chen Yulang had already died, but Emperor Wu didn't know it yet, so he appointed him as the King of Kang. Geng Zi and King Zhou offered sacrifices to the Imperial Temple.

古文：庚子，周王享太庙；丁未，祀圜丘；十二月，庚午，谒成陵；癸酉，还宫。
现代文：丁未，在圜丘祭天。十二月，庚午，拜谒成陵。癸酉，回到皇宫。
English: On the eve of the Dingwei Festival, he went to the Mengqiu Festival. In the afternoon of December, he visited the Mengcheng Mausoleum. Then he returned to the imperial palace.

古文：谯淹帅水军七千、老弱三万自蜀江东下，欲就王琳，周使开府仪同三司贺若敦、叱罗晖等击之，斩淹，悉俘其众。
现代文：谯淹率领水军七千人，老弱三万人，迫于北周的压力，从蜀江东下，意欲投靠王琳，北周派开府仪同三司贺若敦、叱罗晖等去袭击，谯淹被斩首，其军队全部被俘虏了。
English: Zou Fang led a naval force of seven thousand men, of whom thirty thousand were old and weak, and under the pressure of Northern Zhou, he sailed from the east of the Shu River, intending to support Wang Lin. Northern Zhou sent Kefuji with the three magistrates He Ruodong and Zhe Luo to attack. Zou Fang was beheaded, and his entire army was captured.

古文：是岁，诏给事黄门侍郎萧乾招谕闽中。
现代文：这一年，陈朝诏令给事黄门侍郎萧乾去招谕闽中。
English: In the same year, the Chen Dynasty issued an imperial edict ordering Huangmen waiter Xiao Qian to go to Zhaozhong.

古文：时熊昙朗在豫章，周迪在临川，留异在东阳，陈宝应在晋安，共相连结，闽中豪帅往往立砦以自保。
现代文：当时熊昙朗在豫章，周迪在临川，留异在东阳，陈宝应在晋安，这些人互相连结，互相呼应，闽中土豪的首领往往建立营寨以保卫自己。
English: At that time, Xiong Yulang was in Yuzhang, Zhou Di was in Linchuan, Ruoyi was in Dongyang, and Chen Bao was in Jin'an. These people were connected to each other and echoed each other. The leaders of the local heroes in Yunnan often built camps to defend themselves.

古文：上患之，使乾谕以祸福，豪帅皆帅众请降，即以乾为建安太守。
现代文：武帝对此很感不安，派萧乾去用祸福利害关系晓谕他们，土豪的首领都率领部众前来请求投降归顺。武帝便任命萧乾为建安太守。
English: Emperor Wu was very uneasy about this, and sent Xiao Qian to tell them about the relationship between evil, welfare and harm. The leaders of the local strongmen all led their subordinates to come and request surrender. Emperor Wu then appointed Xiao Qian as Jianan Taishu.

古文：乾，子范之子也。
现代文：萧乾是萧子范的儿子。
English: Xiao Qian is the son of Xiao Zifan.

古文：初，梁兴州刺史席固以州降魏，周太祖以固为丰州刺史。
现代文：当初，梁朝兴州刺史席固献出兴州降了西魏，周太祖任命席固为丰州刺史。
English: At first, Liang Zhaozhong designated Xingzhou as the seat of Shishi, and Xingzhou was downgraded to West Wei. Zhou Taizu designated Shishi as the seat of Fuzhou.

古文：久之，固犹习梁法，不遵北方制度，周人密欲代之，而难其人，乃以司宪中大夫令狐整权镇丰州，委以代固之略。
现代文：过了很久，席固还是习惯于梁朝的法制，不遵守北方的制度，于是北周方面秘密地想派人取代他，但一时又找不到合适的替代人，于是派司宪中大夫令狐整暂时镇守丰州，并把取代席固的策略委托给他。
English: After a long time, Xigu was still accustomed to the legal system of the Liang Dynasty and did not abide by the northern system. Therefore, the northern Zhou side secretly wanted to send someone to replace him, but could not find a suitable replacement at the time. Therefore, he sent the Chief of the Constitutional Affairs Department to order the fox to temporarily guard Fuzhou, and entrusted the strategy of replacing Xigu to him.

古文：整广布恩威，倾射抚接，数月之间，化洽州府。
现代文：令狐整去了之后，广泛地树威布恩，亲自安抚接见下属，数月之间，使州府上下一片融洽。
English: After putting the fox in order, he extensively planted Weibo, personally appeased and received subordinates, and made the state capital harmonious in a few months.

古文：于是除整丰州刺史，以固为湖州刺史。
现代文：于是朝廷任命令狐整为丰州刺史，席固则改任为湖州刺史。
English: As a result, the imperial court ordered the fox to be appointed as the chief historian of Fengzhou, and the seat to be appointed as the chief historian of Huzhou.

古文：整迁丰州于武当，旬日之间，城府周备，迁者如归。
现代文：令狐整把丰州的州府迁到武当去，十天功夫，新的城府就建设得很周全完备，迁去的人好象回到老家一样安心。
English: The fox moved the capital of Fuzhou to Wudang, and after ten days of hard work, the new capital was built very well. The people who moved were as relieved as if they had returned to their hometown.

古文：固之去也。其部曲多愿留为整左右，整谕以朝制，弗许，莫不流涕而去。
现代文：席固离开丰州时，他的部下有很多人表示愿意留下来为令狐整效力，令狐整用朝制谕示他们，不允许他们留下。
English: When Shigu left Toyosu, many of his subordinates expressed their willingness to stay and work for Ling Fuxi. Ling Fuxi used the imperial edict to tell them that they were not allowed to stay.

古文：齐人于长城内筑重城，自库洛枝东至鸣纥戍，凡四百馀里。
现代文：这些人临别时，没有不痛哭流涕、恋恋不舍的。北齐人在长城内又修筑一重城墙，从库洛枝开始，向东直到纥戍，崐共有四百多里长。
English: When these people were parting, there was no one who did not weep bitterly and yearn for each other. The Northern Qi people also built a heavy city wall inside the Great Wall, starting from the Kulo branch and going east to the Ying, with a total length of more than four hundred miles.

古文：初，齐有术士言 亡高者黑衣 ，故高祖每出，不欲见沙门。
现代文：当初，北齐有一个术士曾说： 将来灭亡高姓政权的人必是穿黑衣服的。 所以高祖高欢每次外出，都不愿碰见和尚。
English: At the beginning, there was a sorcerer in North Qi who said, "In the future, those who will overthrow the Gao regime must wear black clothes." Therefore, Gaozhu Gaohuan did not want to meet the monk every time he went out.

古文：显祖在晋阳，问左右： 何物最黑？ 
现代文：文宣帝高洋在晋阳时，问身边的人： 什么东西最黑？ 
English: When Emperor Gaoyang was in Jinyang, he asked the people around him: What is the blackest thing?

古文：对曰： 无过于漆。 
现代文：身边的人回答说： 没有比漆更黑的了。 
English: Those around him replied: "There is nothing blacker than paint."

古文：帝以上党王涣于兄弟第七，使库直都督破六韩伯升之鄴征涣。
现代文：文宣帝因为上党王高涣在兄弟中排行第七，七漆同音，就想除掉他。文宣帝派库直都督破六韩伯升去邺城征召高涣。
English: Emperor Wenzhong wanted to get rid of Gao Yao, the leader of the Upper Party, because he was ranked seventh among his brothers. Emperor Wenzhong sent the governor of Kuanzhong to recruit Gao Yao after defeating six Han Bo Sheng.

古文：涣至紫陌桥，杀伯升而逃，浮河南渡；至济州，为人所执，送鄴。
现代文：高涣走到紫陌桥，杀了破六韩伯升逃脱了，坐船向南渡过黄河，逃到济州时，被人抓获，送到了邺城。
English: Gao Yao walked to the Zimao Bridge, killed six Han Bo Sheng, escaped, crossed the Yellow River by boat to the south, fled to Jeju, was captured and sent to Lucheng.

古文：帝之为太原公也，与永安王浚偕见世宗，帝有时洟出，浚责帝左右曰： 何不为二兄拭鼻！ 
现代文：文宣帝还当太原公的时候，与永安王高浚一起去见文襄帝，文宣帝有时鼻涕流出来，高浚责备文宣帝身边的人说： 为什么不替二哥擦鼻涕？ 
English: When Emperor Wenxuan was still the Prince of Taiyuan, he went to see Emperor Wenxiang with the Yongan King Gao Jun. Emperor Wenxuan sometimes had runny nose. Gao Jun reproached the people around Emperor Wenxuan and said, "Why don't you wipe your nose for your second brother?"

古文：帝心衔之。
现代文：文宣帝因此深深地记恨他。
English: Emperor Wenzhong therefore deeply resented him.

古文：及即位，浚为青州刺史，聪明矜恕，吏民悦之。
现代文：待到文宣帝登上皇帝之位后，高浚任青州刺史，他为人聪明，对下体谅宽恕，官吏百姓都喜欢他。
English: After Emperor Wenxuan ascended to the throne, Gao Jian was appointed as the official historian of Qingzhou. He was a clever person, he was considerate and forgiving to his subordinates, and the officials and the people all liked him.

古文：浚以帝嗜酒，私谓亲近曰： 二兄因酒败德，朝臣无敢谏者。
现代文：高浚因为文宣帝嗜酒如命，私下对亲信说： 二哥因为嗜酒败坏了德行，朝廷里的大臣中没有敢犯颜进谏的人，我很为此担忧。
English: Gao Jun, because Emperor Wenzhong was so fond of drinking, said to his relatives in private: "My second brother's drinking has ruined his virtue. There is no minister in the imperial court who dares to commit a scandal. I am very worried about this."

古文：大敌未灭，吾甚以为忧。欲乘驿至鄴面谏，不知用吾不？ 
现代文：想坐驿车到邺城去当面进谏，不知道他能采纳我的意见不能？ 
English: I want to take a train to Handan to go to Handan in person, but I don't know if he can accept my opinion.

古文：或密以白帝，帝益衔之。
现代文：有人把这一番话秘密报告了文宣帝，文宣帝因此更加怀恨高浚了。
English: Someone secretly reported these words to Emperor Wenzhong, which made Emperor Wenzhong even more resentful.

古文：浚入朝，从幸东山，帝裸裎为乐。浚进谏曰： 此非人主所宜！ 
现代文：高浚入朝，跟随文宣帝游东山，文宣帝赤身裸体以为游乐，高浚进谏说： 这样做不是当皇帝的人所适宜的！ 
English: Gao Jun Rong said: "It is not appropriate for an emperor to do this." Gao Jun Rong said: "It is not appropriate for an emperor to do this."

古文：帝不悦。
现代文：文宣帝很不高兴。
English: Gao Di was not happy to hear this.

古文：浚又于屏处召杨愔，讥其不谏。
现代文：高浚又在隐蔽处召见杨，讽刺他不向皇帝进谏。
English: Gao Jun also summoned Yang at the hiding place, mocking him for not sucking up to the emperor.

古文：帝时不欲大臣与诸王交通，愔惧，奏之。
现代文：文宣帝当时不愿大臣和诸王有所交流接触，杨心里害怕，就把高浚召见他的事奏闻文宣帝。
English: Emperor Wenzhong did not want the minister to have contact with the kings at that time. Yang was afraid and summoned Gao Jun to report to Emperor Wenzhong.

古文：帝大怒曰： 小人由来难忍！ 
现代文：文宣帝勃然大怒说： 这小子如此猖狂，我从来就难以忍受他！ 
English: Emperor Wen Xuan said angrily, "This guy is so reckless, I've never been able to stand him!"

古文：遂罢酒，还宫。
现代文：于是就停下酒宴，回皇宫去了。
English: So he stopped the banquet and went back to the palace.

古文：浚寻还州，又上书切谏，诏征浚。
现代文：高浚不久回到青州，又上书垦切地进谏，文宣帝下诏书征召高浚。
English: Gao Jun soon returned to Qingzhou, and again wrote to Emperor Wenxuan to enlist Gao Jun.

古文：浚惧祸，谢疾不至，帝遣驰驿收浚，老幼泣送者数千人，至鄴，与上党王涣皆盛以铁笼，置于北城地牢，饮食溲秽，共在一所。
现代文：高浚害怕有杀身之祸，推托身体有病，没有应召。
English: Gao Jun was afraid of committing suicide, so he pretended to be ill and did not answer the call.

古文：高祖武皇帝永定二年
现代文：文宣帝派人乘驿马来抓高浚，抓走高浚时，老幼哭着送他的有几千人。
English: Emperor Wenxuan sent people to catch Gao Jian on horses. When Gao Jian was taken away, there were thousands of people who cried and sent him away.

古文：春，正月，王琳引兵下，至湓城，屯于白水浦，带甲十万。
现代文：高浚到了邺城，与上党王高涣一起，都被关在铁笼里，放在北城的地牢中，饮食便溺，都在一个屋里。
English: Gao Jun arrived in Handan City, and together with the Upper Party King Gao Jun, they were all locked up in an iron cage, placed in a dungeon in Beicheng, eating and defecating, all in one room.

古文：琳以北江州刺史鲁悉达为镇北将军，上亦以悉达为征西将军，各送鼓吹女乐。
现代文：永定二年春季正月，王琳带兵东下，抵达湓城，驻扎在白水浦，他共带有十万甲兵。王琳任命北江州刺史鲁悉达为镇北将军，陈武帝也任命鲁悉达为征西将军，双方都给鲁悉达送去乐队和女歌舞伎。
English: In the first month of the spring of the second year of Yongding, Wang Lin led the soldiers eastward, arrived in Shicheng, and stationed in Baishuipo. He brought a total of 100,000 soldiers. Wang Lin appointed the Northern Jiangzhou general Shishi Rusilda as the general of Zhenbei, and Emperor Chen Wu also appointed Rusilda as the general of the Western Expedition. Both sides sent a band and a female kabuki to Rusilda.

古文：悉达两受之，迁延顾望，皆不就；上遣安西将军沈泰袭之，不克。
现代文：鲁悉达对两边的委任和礼物都接受下来，行动上却拖延观望，两边的官位都不去就任。陈武帝派安西将军沈泰去袭击他，没有打胜。
English: Rushida accepted commissions and gifts from both sides, but he delayed his actions and did not take office. Emperor Chen Wu sent Anxi General Shen Tai to attack him, but he did not win.

古文：琳欲引军东下，而悉达制其中流，琳遣使说诱，终不从。
现代文：王琳想带兵东下，而鲁悉达的部队控制着长江中流，王琳派使者去劝说引诱，鲁悉达到最后也不服从。
English: Wang Lin wanted to lead the troops eastward, while Lu Xida's troops controlled the middle reaches of the Yangtze River. Wang Lin sent an envoy to persuade and entice, but Lu Xida did not obey in the end.

古文：己亥，琳遣记室宗虩求援于齐，且请纳梁永嘉王庄以主梁祀。
现代文：己亥，王琳派记室宗向北齐求援，而且请求迎纳作为质子滞留在北齐的梁朝永嘉王萧庄来主持梁室的祭祀。
English: At the same time, Wang Lin sent Liang Chao Yongjia Wang Xiaozhuang to North Qi to ask for help, and requested Liang Chao Yongjia Wang Xiaozhuang, who stayed in North Qi as a proton, to preside over Liang Chao's sacrifice.

古文：衡州刺史周迪欲自据南川，乃总召所部八郡守宰结盟，齐言入赴。
现代文：衡州剌史周迪想自己占据南川，于是就把所属的八郡的太守全部召来结盟，一齐声言要入朝。
English: Zhou Di, the governor of Hengzhou, wanted to occupy Nanchuan on his own, so he summoned all the governors of the eight counties he belonged to to form an alliance, and they all declared that they wanted to join the imperial court.

古文：上恐其为变，厚慰抚之。
现代文：陈武帝恐怕他们制造变乱，就派人给他们以优厚的慰劳和安抚。
English: Chen Wu Di was afraid that they would create turmoil, so he sent someone to give them generous consolation and appeasement.

古文：新吴洞主余孝顷遣沙门道林说琳曰： 周迪、黄法皆依附金陵，阴窥间隙，大军若下，必为后患；不如先定南川，然后东下，孝顷请席卷所部以从下吏。 
现代文：新吴洞主余孝顷派僧人道林去游说王琳，对他说： 周迪、黄法氍都依附了金陵，暗地里却窥伺着机会。您的大军如果东下，这帮人必然成为您的后患。不如先平定南川一带，然后东下，我余孝顷请求带着所有的部下去追随您，在您手下效力。 
English: The new Wu-dong lord, Yu Xiaohua, sent the monk Duolin to lobby Wang Lin, and said to him: Zhou Di and Huang Fahui are attached to Jinling, but secretly they are spying on opportunities. If your army goes east, these people will inevitably become your successor. It is better to first pacify the Nanchuan area, and then go east. I request Yu Xiaohua to take all his subordinates to follow you and serve under you.

古文：琳乃遣轻车将军樊猛、平南将军李孝钦、平东将军刘广德将兵八千赴之，使孝顷总督三将，屯于临川故郡，征兵粮于迪，以观其所为。
现代文：王琳于是就派轻车将军樊猛、平南将军李孝钦、平东将军刘广德带兵八千人去平定南川，让余孝顷总督他们三人，驻扎在临川故郡，同时向周迪征收兵粮，用以观察他的反应动静。
English: Wang Lin then sent the general of the light vehicles, the fierce, the general of Pingnan, Li Xiaoqin, and the general of Pingdong, Liu Guangde, to take eight thousand soldiers to pacify Nanchuan, and let the three of them, Yu Xiaohe, the governor, stationed in the late county of Linchuan, and at the same time collect grain from Zhou Di to observe his reaction.

古文：以开府仪同三司侯瑱为司空，衡州刺史欧阳頠为都督交、广等十九州诸军事、广州刺史。
现代文：陈朝任命开府仪同三司侯为司空；衡州刺史欧阳为都督交、广等十九州诸军事，广州刺史。
English: The Chen dynasty appointed Kaifu Yi and the three governors as Siku; Hengzhou Zhishi and Ouyang as the governor and the military of 19 states including Guang, and Guangzhou Zhishi.

古文：周以晋公护为太师。
现代文：北周任命晋公宇文护为太师。
English: The Northern Zhou Dynasty appointed Jinguang Yuwenguo as Grand Master.

古文：辛丑，上祀南郊，大赦；乙巳，祀北郊。
现代文：辛丑，陈武帝去南郊祭天，大赦天下。乙巳，去北郊祭地。
English: Sin ugly, Emperor Chen Wudi went to the southern suburb to hold a festival, and was forgiven by the world. This time, he went to the northern suburb.

古文：辛亥，周王耕藉田。
现代文：辛亥，周王去藉田，举行耕种仪式。
English: In Xinhai, King Zhou went to the borrowed field and held a cultivation ceremony.

古文：癸丑，周立王后独孤氏。
现代文：癸丑，北周册立独孤氏为王后。
English: At the same time, the Northern Zhou Dynasty established the Dukuo clan as the queen.

古文：戊午，上礼明堂。
现代文：戊午，陈武帝祭祀明堂。
English: In the afternoon, Emperor Chen Wu held a ritual in the Ming Hall.

古文：二月，壬申，南豫州刺史沈泰奔齐。
现代文：二月，壬申，南豫州刺史沈泰投奔北齐。
English: In February, in Jinshin, Shen Tai, the governor of South Yuzhou, went to North Qi.

古文：齐北豫州刺史司马消难，以齐主昏虐滋甚，阴为自全之计，曲意抚循所部。
现代文：北齐北豫州刺史司马消难看到文宣帝昏昧酷虐越来越厉害，便暗暗谋求自我保全的计策。他用心地安抚稳定自己的部下。
English: When Sima Qian, the governor of North Qi and North Yuzhou, saw that Emperor Wenzhong's cruelty was getting worse and worse, he secretly sought a self-preservation strategy. He tried to calm and stabilize his subordinates.

古文：消难尚高祖女，情好不睦，公主诉之。
现代文：司马消难娶的是高祖高欢的女儿，两人感情不和，公主在文宣帝那里诉说他不好。
English: Sima Qian could not marry the daughter of Gao Zu Gao Huan. The two did not get along, and the princess told Emperor Wenzong that he was not good.

古文：上党王涣之亡也，鄴中大扰，疑其赴成皋。
现代文：上党王高涣逃跑时，邺城里一片纷乱惊扰，都怀疑他逃到豫州府治成皋去了。
English: When Gao Wei, the high-ranking party official, fled, there was a lot of chaos and commotion in Handan City. Everyone suspected that he had fled to Jicheng, Henan Province.

古文：消难从弟子瑞为尚书左丞，与御史中丞毕义云有隙，义云遣御史张子阶诣北豫州采风闻，先禁消难典签家客等。
现代文：司马消难堂弟的儿子司马瑞任尚书左丞，与御史中丞毕义云有嫌隙，毕义云派御史张子阶到北豫州收集道路传闻，打探消息，去了后先把司马消难的典签官和家客监禁起来。
English: Sima Rui Ren, the son of Sima Qianlong's cousin Shang Shuzhu Zu Rong, had a grudge with Sima Qianlong's second cousin Bi Yiyun. Bi Yiyun sent Sima Qianlong's second cousin Zhang Zikai to Beiyuzhou to collect road rumors and investigate the news. After going there, he first imprisoned Sima Qianlong's signature officer and family guest.

古文：消难惧，密令所亲中兵参军裴藻托以私假，间行入关，请降于周。
现代文：司马消难感到害怕，秘密地命令他所亲信的中兵参军裴藻假托私事请假，抄小路入关，向北周请降。
English: Sima Qishan felt scared and secretly ordered his trusted Chinese soldiers to join the army, pretend to be on leave for personal reasons, take a side road to enter the customs, and go to the north of Zhou to surrender.

古文：三月，甲午，周遣柱国达奚武、大将军杨忠帅骑士五千迎消难，从间道驰入齐境五百里，前后三遣使报消难，皆不报。
现代文：三月，甲午，北周派柱国达奚武、大将军杨忠率领骑兵五千人去迎接司马消难来降。他们从小路驰入北齐境内五百里，前后三次派遣使者与司马消难联络，都没有联络上。
English: In the afternoon of the first day of March, the Northern Zhou Dynasty sent five thousand cavalry led by general Yang Zhong to meet the arrival of Sima Qishan. They drove five hundred miles into the territory of Northern Qi from a small road, and sent envoys to contact Sima Qishan three times, but there was no contact.

古文：去虎牢三十里，武疑有变，欲还，忠曰： 有进死，无退生！ 
现代文：到距离虎牢三十里的地方，达奚武怀疑情况有异变，想返回，杨忠慨然说： 我们只有前进赴死的责任，没有后退求生的道理！ 
English: At a distance of 30 miles from the tiger's prison, Dajinwu suspected that the situation had changed and wanted to return, Yang Zhong said indignantly: We only have the responsibility to move forward to die, there is no reason to retreat to survive!

古文：独以千骑夜趣城下。
现代文：于是独自带一千骑兵连夜赶到城下。
English: So he alone, with a thousand cavalry, rode all night to the foot of the city.

古文：城四面峭绝，但闻击柝声。
现代文：虎牢城四面极为高陡，犹如绝壁，只听得城中传来一阵阵击柝的声音。
English: The four sides of the Tiger's Lair are extremely high and steep, like cliffs, and only the sound of hammering can be heard in the city.

古文：武亲来，麾数百骑西去，忠勒馀骑不动，俟门开而入，驰遣召武。
现代文：达奚武亲自赶来，指挥几百骑兵退却西去，杨忠指挥剩下的骑兵原地不动，等城门开了进了城，才派人骑快马去叫达奚武。
English: Dabengwu himself arrived and commanded several hundred cavalrymen to retreat to the west. Yang Zhong commanded the remaining cavalrymen to remain where they were. When the city gate opened and they entered the city, he sent someone on a fast horse to call Dabengwu.

古文：齐镇城伏敬远勒甲士二千人据东城，举烽严警。
现代文：北齐镇守城池的伏敬远指挥甲士二千人据守东城，点燃烽火，严加警戒。
English: Fu Jingyuan, commander of the Beiqi Town garrison, commanded two thousand soldiers to defend the East Town, lit bonfires, and kept a strict vigil.

古文：武惮之，不欲保城，乃多取财物，以消难及其属先归，忠以三千骑为殿。
现代文：达崐奚武感到害怕，不想保住城池，于是就大肆虏掠财物，让司马消难和他的部属先回去，杨忠带三千骑兵殿后。
English: Dadongwu was afraid and did not want to keep the castle, so he plundered the property and let Sima Qidang and his subordinates go back first, followed by Yang Zhong with three thousand cavalry.

古文：至洛南，皆解鞍而卧。
现代文：军队行抵洛南，都解开马鞍躺下休息。
English: When the troops arrived in Lonan, they all unbuckled their saddles and lay down to rest.

古文：齐众来追，至洛北，忠谓将士曰： 但饱食，今在死地，贼必不敢渡水！ 
现代文：北齐军队追了过来，到达洛北，杨忠对将士们说： 你们只管吃得饱饱的，现在我们处于必死之地，贼兵怕我们与之拼命，一定不敢渡河来追！ 
English: The Beiqi army chased after them and reached the north of Luo. Yang Zhong said to the soldiers: "You just have to eat until you are full. Now we are in the land of death. The bandits are afraid of our desperate efforts and will not dare to cross the river to chase us!"

古文：已而果然，乃徐引还。
现代文：后来果然如杨忠所料，于是才慢慢地引领军队平安回来。
English: Later, as Yang Zhong expected, he slowly led the army back safely.

古文：武叹曰： 达奚武自谓天下健儿，今日服矣！ 
现代文：达奚武不由感叹地说： 我达奚武自认为是天下健儿，今天在杨忠面前算是服气了！ 
English: Dabangwu couldn't help but exclaim: I think Dabangwu is a world-class athlete. Today, in front of Yang Zhong, I'm convinced!

古文：周以消难为小司徒。
现代文：北周任命司马消难为小司徒。
English: North Zhou appointed Sima Qian as a minor disciple.

古文：丁酉，齐主自晋阳还鄴。
现代文：丁酉，北齐文宣帝从晋阳回到邺城。
English: Ding Xi, North Qibun Emperor Xuan returned to Lucheng from Jinyang.

古文：齐发兵援送梁永嘉王庄于江南，册拜王琳为梁丞相、都督中外诸军、录尚书事。
现代文：北齐派兵援助并护送梁朝永嘉王萧庄回到江南，并册拜王琳为梁朝丞相，都督中外诸军、录尚书事。
English: Northern Qi sent soldiers to assist and escort Liang Chao Yongjia Wang Xiaozhuang back to the south of the Yangtze River, and recorded Wang Lin as the prime minister of Liang Chao, the governor of the armies at home and abroad, and recorded the records.

古文：琳遣兄子叔宝帅所部十州刺史子弟赴鄴。
现代文：王琳派其兄的儿子王叔宝率领所统辖十个州刺史的子弟去邺城为人质。
English: Wang Lin sent his brother's son, Wang Shubao, to lead the children of the ruler of ten states, Zushi, to Lucheng as hostages.

古文：琳奉庄即皇帝位，改元天启。
现代文：王琳拥戴萧庄登上了皇帝位，改年号为天启。
English: Wang Lin supported Xiao Zhuang and ascended to the emperor's throne, changing the year name to Tianqi.

古文：追谥建安公渊明曰闵皇帝。
现代文：追谥建安公萧渊明为闵皇帝。
English: Xiao Yuanming, the prince of Jian'an, became the emperor.

古文：庄以琳为侍中、大将军、中书监，馀依齐朝之命。
现代文：萧庄任命王琳为侍中、大将军、中书监，其余官职依照北齐的册命。
English: Xiao Zhuang appointed Wang Lin as a chamberlain, general, and librarian, and the rest of the offices were in accordance with the order of the Northern Qi.

古文：夏，四月，甲子，上享太庙。
现代文：夏季四月，甲子，陈武帝向太庙供献祭品。
English: In the summer of April, Emperor Wu of Qo Zi offered sacrifices to the Great Temple.

古文：乙丑，上使人害梁敬帝，立梁武林侯谘之子季卿为江阴王。
现代文：乙丑，陈武帝派人杀害了梁敬帝，立梁朝武林侯萧谘的儿子萧季卿为江阴王。
English: Second, Emperor Chen Wu sent people to kill Emperor Liang Jing, and made Xiao Jicheng, the son of Xiao Zhi, the vassal of Emperor Liang in Wulin, the king of Jiangyin.

古文：己巳，周以太师护为雍州牧。
现代文：己巳，北周任命太师宇文护为雍州牧。
English: At that time, the Northern Zhou Dynasty appointed Grand Master U Wenwu as Yongzhou Patriarch.

古文：甲戌，周王后独孤氏殂。
现代文：甲戌，周王王后独孤氏去世。
English: In Jiuquan, King Zhou and Queen Dokao passed away.

古文：辛巳，齐大赦。
现代文：辛巳，北齐大赦天下。
English: It's time for the whole country to be united.

古文：齐主以旱祈雨于西门豹祠，不应，毁之，并掘其冢。
现代文：北齐文宣帝因为天旱在西门豹祠前祈雨，不灵验，于是毁了西门豹祠，并挖开了他的坟墓。
English: Because of the drought, Emperor Xuan of Northern Qi prayed for rain in front of the West Gate Leopard's Shrine, but it did not work, so he destroyed the West Gate Leopard's Shrine and dug up his grave.

古文：五月，癸巳，余孝顷等且二万军于工塘，连八城以逼周迪。
现代文：五月，癸巳，余孝顷在工塘屯驻了两万军队，连结八城的兵力以逼临周迪的驻地。
English: In May, Yu Xiaohua stationed 20,000 troops in Guntang, linking the forces of the eight cities to approach Zhou Di's residence.

古文：迪惧，请和，并送兵粮。
现代文：周迪害怕了，请求讲和，并送兵粮给余孝顷。
English: Frightened, Zhou Di asked for peace and sent grain to Yu Xiaohao.

古文：樊猛等欲受盟而还；孝顷贪其利，不许，树栅围之。
现代文：樊猛等将想接受和好的盟约收兵回去，但余孝顷贪图出兵之利，不许樊猛等退去，树起栅栏围住他们。
English: The fierce warriors wanted to accept the peaceful covenant and withdraw their troops, but Yu Xiaohe coveted the advantage of sending troops, did not allow the fierce warriors to retreat, and erected a fence to surround them.

古文：由是猛等与孝顷不协。
现代文：以此樊猛与余孝顷开始不和。
English: With this ferocity, he began to fall out with Yu Xiaohua.

古文：周以大司空侯莫陈崇为大宗伯。
现代文：北周任命大司空侯莫陈崇为大宗伯。
English: The Northern Zhou Dynasty appointed the Grand Secretary Ku Hou Mo Chen Chong as the Grand Patriarch.

古文：癸丑，齐广陵南城主张显和、长史张僧那各帅所部来降。
现代文：癸丑，北齐广陵南城城主张显和，长史张僧那各自率领所属部队来投降陈朝。
English: Xingwu, North Qi, Guangling, and Nancheng advocated for peace, and Changshi Zhang led his troops to surrender to the Chen dynasty.

古文：辛酉，齐以尚书令长广王湛录尚书事，骠骑大将军平秦王归彦为尚书左仆射。
现代文：辛酉，北齐任命尚书令长广王高湛为录尚书事，骠骑大将军平秦王高归彦为尚书左仆射。
English: Hsinchu and Northern Qi appointed Guang Wang Gaotan, the commander of the imperial army, as the chief of the imperial army, and Ping Qin Wang Gao Guihang, the commander of the imperial army, as the second-in-command.

古文：甲辰，以前左仆射杨愔为尚书令。
现代文：甲辰，任命前左仆射杨为尚书令。
English: On the 12th, he appointed his former left-hand man, Sho Yang, as Shang Shuling.

古文：辛酉，上幸大庄严寺舍身；壬戌，群臣表请还宫。
现代文：辛酉，陈武帝驾临大庄严寺向佛祖舍身。壬戌，群臣上表请皇上回宫。
English: Soon after, Emperor Chen Wu came to the Grand Solemn Temple to offer his body to the Buddha. Soon after, a group of courtiers came to invite the emperor to return to the palace.

古文：六月，乙丑，齐主北巡，以太子殷监国，因立大都督府与尚书省分理众务，仍开府置佐。
现代文：六月，乙丑，北齐文宣帝到北方巡视，委托太子高殷监理国事，因此设立大都督府与尚书省分头处理众多事务，同样开府办公，设置官佐崐。
English: In June, the second month of the year, the Northern Qi Wenxuan Emperor went on a tour to the north, and entrusted the prince Gao Yin to supervise state affairs. Therefore, the Grand Duchy and Shangshu Province were set up to deal with many affairs separately, and the same office was set up, and officials were set up.

古文：齐主特崇其选，以赵郡王叡为侍中、摄大都督府长史。
现代文：北齐文宣帝特别看重大都督府的人选，任命赵郡王高睿为侍中、摄大都督府长史。
English: Emperor Xuan of the Northern Qi Dynasty was particularly interested in the candidates for the important governor's office, and appointed Zhao Gu Wang Gao Rui as an aide-de-camp and the chief historian of the governor's office.

古文：己巳，诏司空侯瑱与领军将军徐度帅舟师为前军，以讨王琳。
现代文：己巳，陈武帝下诏命令司空侯与领军将军徐度率领水师为前头部队去讨伐王琳。
English: At this time, Emperor Chen Wu issued an edict ordering the air marshal and the leading general Xu Du to lead the sailors as the vanguard force to fight Wang Lin.

古文：齐主至祁连池；戊寅，还晋阳。
现代文：北齐文宣帝到达祁连池。戊寅，回到晋阳。
English: The Northern Qi Emperor Wenxuan arrived at Qilian Pond. Wu Yin, returned to Jinyang.

古文：秋，七月，戊戌，上幸石头，送侯瑱等。
现代文：秋季七月，戊戌，陈武帝驾临石头，送侯等出师。
English: In the autumn of July, Emperor Wu of the State of Wu and Emperor Chen of the State of Wu came to Shishi and sent him away.

古文：高州刺史黄法、吴兴太守沈恪、宁州刺史周敷合兵救周迪。
现代文：高州刺史黄法氍、吴兴太守沈恪、宁州刺史周敷联合出兵救援周迪。
English: Gaozhou governor Huang Fahui, Wu Xingta governor Shen Ke, and Ningzhou governor Zhou Shiki jointly sent troops to rescue Zhou Di.

古文：敷自临川故郡断江口，分兵攻余孝顷别城。
现代文：周敷从临川故郡切断江口，分兵攻打余孝顷的别城。
English: Zhou Shiki cut off the estuary from Linchuan County, and the detachment attacked the other city of Yu Xiaohao.

古文：樊猛等不救而没；刘广德乘流先下，故获全。
现代文：樊猛等不去救援，别城陷落。刘广德先一步乘流而下，所以得到保全。
English: The ferocity did not wait for rescue, and the other city fell. Liu Guangde took the first step down the stream, so he was preserved.

古文：孝顷等皆弃舟引兵步走，迪追击，尽擒之，送孝顷及李孝钦于建康，归樊猛于王琳。
现代文：余孝顷等都扔掉船只带兵士步行，周迪发兵追击，把他们全抓获了。余孝顷及李孝饮被送往建康，樊猛则归还了王琳。
English: Yu Xiaohua and others all threw away their boats and took soldiers on foot, Zhou Di sent troops to chase them and captured them all. Yu Xiaohua and Li Xiaojin were sent to Jiankang, and Wang Lin was returned to Fierce.

古文：甲辰，上遣吏部尚书谢哲往谕王琳。
现代文：甲辰，陈武帝派吏部尚书谢哲去宣谕王琳。
English: At that time, Emperor Chen Wu sent the official Shangshu Xiezhe to preach to Wang Lin.

古文：哲，朏之孙也。
现代文：谢哲是谢的孙子。
English: Xie Zhe is Xie's grandson.

古文：八月，甲子，周大赦。
现代文：八月，甲子，北周大赦天下。
English: In August, the Northern Zhou Dynasty was established in Jiaozi.

古文：乙丑，齐主还鄴。
现代文：乙丑，北齐文宣帝回到邺城。
English: Second Ugly, North Qiwen Emperor Xuan returned to Lucheng.

古文：辛未，诏临川王茜西讨，以舟师五万发建康，上幸冶城寺送之。
现代文：辛未，陈武帝下诏派临川王陈出兵向西讨伐，共有水军五万人从建康出发，陈武帝亲临冶城寺为陈送行。
English: Soon after, Emperor Chen Wu issued an edict to King Chen of Linchuan to send troops to the west for a crusade. A total of 50,000 sailors set out from Jiankang, and Emperor Chen Wu himself came to Yecheng Temple to see Chen off.

古文：甲戌，齐主如晋阳。
现代文：甲戌，北齐文宣帝去晋阳。
English: After Jiajing and Beijie, the main force went to Jinyang.

古文：王琳在白水浦，周文育、侯安都、徐敬成许王子晋以厚赂，子晋乃伪以小船依而钓。夜，载之上岸，入深草中，步投陈军，还建康自劾。
现代文：王琳在白水浦，周文育、侯安都、徐敬成答应给王子晋丰厚的财物，王子晋于是就假装乘小船靠近大船垂钓，夜里，把周文育等人用小船载上岸，藏入深草丛中，让他们得以步行回去投奔陈朝军队，并回建康请罪自劾。
English: In Bai Shui Pu, Wang Lin, Zhou Wenyu, Hou Andu, and Xu Jingsheng promised to give Prince Jin rich property. Prince Jin then pretended to take a small boat to fish near the big boat. At night, he took Zhou Wenyu and others ashore in a small boat and hid them in the deep grass, so that they could walk back to join the Chen Dynasty army and return to Jiankang to plead guilty.

古文：上引见，并宥之，戊寅，复其本官。
现代文：陈武帝接见了他们，一起宽宥了他们的兵败之罪。戊寅，恢复了他们原来的官职。
English: Emperor Chen Wu received them and together forgave them the sin of military defeat, and restored them to their former official positions.

古文：谢哲返命，王琳请还湘州，诏追众军还。
现代文：谢哲从王琳处回朝复命，王琳请求回到湘州去，陈朝下诏追回出征的军队。
English: Xie Zhe returned from Wang Lin's office to the North Korean government with his orders. Wang Lin requested to go back to Hunan, and the Chen government issued an edict to recover the troops that had left for the war.

古文：癸未，众军至自大雷。
现代文：癸未，众军从大雷回来。
English: The next day, the troops returned from Dairi.

古文：九月，甲申，周封少师元罗为韩国公以绍魏后。
现代文：九月，甲申，北周封少师元罗为韩国公以继承西魏的香火。
English: In September, Jia Sheng, the younger brother of Northern Zhoufeng, Yuan Luo, became the Korean prince to inherit the incense of the Western Wei Dynasty.

古文：丁未，周王如同州；冬，十月，辛酉，还长安。
现代文：丁未，周王去同州。冬季，十月，辛酉，回到长安。
English: Ding Wei, Zhou Wang went to Tongzhou. Winter, October, Xin Wei, back to Chang'an.

古文：余孝顷之弟孝劢及子公扬犹据旧栅不下；庚午，诏开府仪同三司周文育都督众军出豫章讨之。
现代文：余孝顷的弟弟余孝劢及其子余公仍然据守旧营栅不投降。康午，陈武帝诏命开府仪同三司周文育都督众军从豫章出发去讨伐他们。
English: Yu Xiaohua's younger brother, Yu Xiaohui, and his son, Yu Gong, still held fast to the old barricade and refused to surrender. On the afternoon of Kangwu's birthday, Emperor Chen Wu issued an edict to set out from Yuzhang with the troops of the Three Departments of Zhou Culture and Education and the provincial governors to fight them.

古文：齐三台成，更命铜爵曰金凤，金虎曰圣应，冰井曰崇光。
现代文：北齐建成三台，把铜爵台改名叫金凤台，金虎台改叫圣应台，冰井台改叫崇光台。
English: Three stations were built in North Qi, and the Tongjie Station was renamed Jinfeng Station, the Jinhu Station was renamed Shengye Station, and the Ice Well Station was renamed Chongguang Station.

古文：十一月，甲午，齐主至鄴，大赦。
现代文：十一月，甲午，北齐国主到了邺城，大赦天下。
English: In November, in the afternoon of the first day of the month, the ruler of Northern Qi arrived in Handan and granted amnesty to the whole world.

古文：齐主游三台，戏以槊刺都督尉子辉，应手而毙。
现代文：北齐文宣帝游览三台，戏用槊刺都督尉子辉，一下子就把他刺死了。
English: Emperor Xuan of the Northern Qi Emperor Xuan of the Northern Qi Emperor Xuan of the Northern Qi Emperor Xuan of the Northern Qi Emperor Xuan of the Northern Qi Emperor Xuan of the Northern Qi Emperor Xuan of the Northern Qi Emperor Xuan of the Northern Qi Emperor Xuan of the Northern Qi Emperor Xuan of the Northern Qi Emperor

古文：常山王演以帝沈湎，忧愤形于颜色。
现代文：常山王高演因为文宣帝沉溺于酒，忧愤形于颜色。
English: Wang Gao of Changshan is portrayed as a sad and angry man because Emperor Wenzhong indulged in alcohol.

古文：帝觉之，谓曰： 但令汝在，我何为不纵乐！ 
现代文：文宣帝发觉了，说： 只要你在，我为什么不纵情取乐！ 
English: Emperor Wenzhong found out and said, "As long as you are here, why shouldn't I indulge myself and have fun!"

古文：演唯啼泣拜伏，竟无所言。
现代文：高演只有痛哭流涕，拜伏在地，竟一句话也说不出来。
English: The high performance is nothing but weeping, prostrate on the ground, unable to say a word.

古文：帝亦大悲，抵杯于地曰： 汝似嫌我如是，自今敢进酒者斩之！ 
现代文：文宣帝也大放悲声，把酒杯扣在地上说： 你似乎嫌我这样酗酒，从今以后，谁敢把酒进献到我这儿来就斩首！ 
English: Emperor Wenxuan also uttered a loud cry of grief, clutched his wine glass to the ground and said, "It seems that you don't like me drinking so much, from now on, anyone who dares to bring wine to me will be beheaded!"

古文：因取所御杯尽坏弃。
现代文：于是把自己用的酒杯拿来，全摔坏扔了。
English: So he brought his own wine glasses and threw them all away.

古文：未几，沉湎益甚，或于诸贵戚家角力批拉，不限贵贱。唯演至，则内外肃然。
现代文：但是没过多久，文宣帝酒喝得更凶了。有时在贵戚们家里边喝酒边摔跤角斗，不分贵贱，但是只要高演一来，则内外肃然，谁也不敢出声。
English: But it didn't take long before Emperor Wenxuan's drinking became more violent. Sometimes, at the homes of his relatives, nobles and commoners would wrestle while drinking. However, as soon as a high-level performance occurred, everyone was awestruck, and no one dared to speak out.

古文：演又密撰事条，将谏，其友王晞以为不可。演不从，因间极言，遂逢大怒。
现代文：高演又秘密地撰与了条陈，准备再次进谏，常山王王以为不可行，高演不听，找到个机会就激动地说了个痛快，于是遭到文宣帝的怒斥。
English: Gao En secretly wrote a report and prepared to advance again. Changshan Wang Wang thought it was not feasible, Gao En did not listen, and when he found an opportunity, he excitedly said a heartfelt speech, and was then rebuked by Emperor Wenzhong.

古文：演性颇严，尚书郎中剖断有失，辄加捶楚，令史奸慝即考竟。
现代文：高演为人很严苛，他手下的尚书郎中判断处理事情一有失误，他就下令鞭打，令史们如有作奸犯科就拷死狱中。
English: Gao En was a very strict person. If his subordinate, Shang Shulong, made a mistake in handling things, he would order them to be whipped, and if they committed treason, they would be tortured to death in prison.

古文：帝乃立演于前，以刀镮拟胁，召被演罚者，临以白刃，求演之短；或无所陈，乃释之。
现代文：文宣帝让高演站在自己面前，用刀环比着他的肋下，威胁着要砍死他。又把高演责罚过的人叫来，用雪亮的刀刃加在他们脖子上，逼他们说出高演的短处；但这些人都表示没有什么可说的，于是就释放了他们。
English: Emperor Wenzhong made Gao En stand in front of him, put a knife under his ribs and threatened to cut him to death. He also called the people who had punished Gao En and forced them to say Gao En's shortcomings with a shiny blade on their necks; but these people said they had nothing to say, so he released them.

古文：晞，昕之弟也。
现代文：王是王昕的弟弟。
English: Wang is the younger brother of Wang Yao.

古文：帝疑演假辞于晞以谏，欲杀之。
现代文：文宣帝怀疑高演是在王那儿学到一些说辞才来进谏的，就想杀了王。
English: Emperor Wenzhong suspected that Gao Enro had learned some words from Wang and wanted to kill him.

古文：王私谓晞曰： 王博士，明日当作一条事，为欲相活，亦图自全，宜深体勿怪。 
现代文：高演私下对王说： 王博士，明天我将作一件事，为了让你活命，也求得我能自全，希望您深切地体会我的苦心，别责怪我。 
English: Gao En privately said to Wang: Dr. Wang, tomorrow I will do one thing. In order to let you live, I also ask that I can be self-sufficient. I hope you can deeply appreciate my hard work. Don't blame me.

古文：乃于众中杖晞二十。
现代文：于是当着众人打了王二十杖。
English: And he smote the king with twenty stripes before all the people.

古文：帝寻发怒，闻晞得杖，以故不杀，髡鞭配甲坊。
现代文：文宣帝不久发怒，听说王被打，反而不杀他了，只剃掉他的头发，鞭打一顿，配在兵器坊服役。
English: Emperor Wenxuan soon became angry. He heard that Wang had been beaten, but instead of killing him, he only shaved off his hair, whipped him, and assigned him to serve in the arsenal.

古文：居三年，演又因谏争，大被欧挞，闭口不食。
现代文：过了三年，高演又因进谏的事和文宣帝争执起来，被狠狠地鞭挞了一顿，高演闭口绝食。
English: Three years later, Gao En got into a dispute with Emperor Wenzhong over the matter of the imperial edict, and was severely whipped. Gao En went on a silent hunger strike.

古文：太后日夜涕泣，帝不知所为，曰： 倘小儿死，奈我老母何！ 
现代文：太后心疼儿子，日夜哭泣，文宣帝慌了，不知该怎么办，自言自语地说： 如果让这小子死了，那可拿我老母亲怎么办呢？ 
English: The Empress Dowager was heartbroken for her son and wept day and night. Emperor Wenxuan panicked and did not know what to do. He said to himself, "If I let this boy die, what will I do with my old mother?"

古文：于是数往问演疾，谓曰： 努力强食，当以王晞还汝。 
现代文：于是多次去问候高演病体如何，对他说： 你如果努力把饭咽下去，我就把王放出来还给你。 
English: So he repeatedly went to greet Gao Xuanwu to see how he was doing, and said to him, "If you try to swallow your meal, I will release Wang to you."

古文：乃释晞，令诣演。
现代文：于是就释放了王，叫他去看望高演。
English: So he released the king and told him to go and see the performance.

古文：演抱晞曰： 吾气息惙然，恐不复相见！ 
现代文：高演抱着王说： 我自觉气短乏力，恐怕再也不能相见了。 
English: Gao Yuan hugged Wang and said, "I feel short of breath and weak. I'm afraid I won't be able to see you again."

古文：晞流涕曰： 天道神明，岂令殿下遂毙此舍！
现代文：王痛哭流涕说： 天道神明，降福善类，降祸恶人，了了分明，难道会让殿下就这样死在这间屋里！
English: The king wept bitterly and said, "Heavenly gods, who bestow blessings on the good and curses on the wicked, how could they let His Royal Highness die in this room?"

古文：至尊亲为人兄，尊为人主，安可与计！
现代文：皇上论亲是您兄长，论尊是您主子，怎么能和他计较是非呢！
English: Emperor, you say that your father is your brother and your father is your master. How can you reason with him?

古文：殿下不食，太后亦不食。殿下纵不自惜，独不念太后乎！ 
现代文：殿下不进食，太后亦不进食，殿下即使不爱惜自己的生命，难道就不挂念太后吗？ 
English: His Imperial Highness does not eat, nor does the Empress Dowager. Even if His Imperial Highness does not care about his own life, does he not care about the Empress Dowager?

古文：言未卒，演强坐而饭。
现代文：话还没说完，高演就已经勉力坐起来吃饭了。
English: Before the speech was over, the high performer was already struggling to sit up and eat.

古文：晞由是得免徙，还为王友。
现代文：王因此免去配兵器坊服役的徒刑，回到高演府中任原职。
English: As a result, Wang was exempted from serving his sentence in the ordnance workshop and returned to his original position in Gaoyuanfu.

古文：及演录尚书事，除官者皆诣演谢，去必辞。
现代文：待到高演任录尚书事的时候，得到官职的人都去拜见高演表示谢意，离去时也都来向高演辞行。
English: When Gao Yuan's appointment was recorded in the records, the people who received the official position went to visit Gao Yuan to express their gratitude, and they also came to Gao Yuan to resign when they left.

古文：晞言于演曰： 受爵天朝，拜恩私第，自古以为不可，宜一切约绝。 
现代文：王对高演说： 从天朝那儿接受官爵，却到私人第宅去拜谢恩情，自古以来就认为这是不可以的，应该拒绝一崐切这类的拜会约见。 
English: The king said to Gao Rong: Since ancient times, it has been considered unacceptable to accept a title of nobility from the imperial court and then go to a private home to express gratitude. All such visits should be refused.

古文：演从之。
现代文：高演听从了他的意见。
English: Gao Yuan followed his advice.

古文：久之，演从容谓晞曰： 主上起居不恒，卿宜耳目所具，吾岂可以前逢一怒，遂尔结舌。
现代文：过了很久，高演从容地对王说： 皇上饮食起居没有规律，您该多听多看，准备点材料，我怎么可以因为以前遇上一次盛怒，就从此钳口结舌呢？
English: After a long time, Gao En calmly said to Wang: The emperor's diet is not regular. You should listen and watch more, and prepare some materials. How can I be tongue-tied because I was angry once before?

古文：卿宜为撰谏草，吾当伺便极谏。 
现代文：您得为我起草谏书，我准备寻找机会极力劝谏。 
English: You'll have to draft a letter for me, and I'm going to find an opportunity to try to persuade you.

古文：晞遂条十馀事以呈，因谓演曰： 今朝廷所恃者惟殿下，乃欲学匹夫耿介，轻一朝之命！
现代文：王于是就列举了十几件事呈给高演，同时对高演说： 现在朝廷所能依靠的人，也只有殿下您了。而您竟想学匹夫的耿直坦率，轻掷自己贵重生命于一早上！
English: The king then listed more than a dozen things to present to Gao Ren, and at the same time said to Gao Ren: Now the only person the court can rely on is your highness. And you want to learn from the frankness of the peer, and throw your precious life away in the morning!

古文：狂药令人不自觉，刀箭岂复识亲疏。
现代文：酒这种狂药让人失去理智，行为鲁莽灭裂而不自知，皇上一旦发酒疯震怒起来，刀箭哪里认得亲和疏！
English: Wine is a crazy drug that makes people lose their minds, behave recklessly and without knowing it, once the emperor is drunk and angry, where is the sword and arrow to recognize affinity and estrangement!

古文：一旦祸出理外，将奈殿下家业何！
现代文：一旦灾祸出于常理之外而降临，将拿殿下的家业怎么办呢？
English: What will happen to His Imperial Highness's family business once a disaster beyond all reason befalls it?

古文：奈皇太后何！ 
现代文：将拿皇太后的安危怎么办呢？ 
English: What is he going to do about the Empress Dowager's safety?

古文：演欷歔不自胜，曰： 乃至是乎！ 
现代文：高演听了这番话，欷感叹，悲不自胜，说： 难道真的到了这种地步了吗？ 
English: Gao Yuan listened to these words, sighed, saddened, and said: Has it really come to this?

古文：明日，见晞曰： 吾长夜久思，今遂息意。 
现代文：第二天，高演见了王，说： 我昨夜想了一夜，今天终于打消了犯颜极谏的念头。 
English: The next day, Gao En met Wang and said, "I thought about it all night last night, and today I finally got rid of the idea of committing the ultimate disgrace."

古文：即命火，对晞焚之。
现代文：于是就命人拿火来，当着王的面，把进谏的条陈烧了。
English: Then he commanded, and they took fire, and burned the wood of the burnt offering before the king.

古文：后复承间苦谏，帝使力士反接，拔白刃注颈，骂曰： 小子何知，是谁教汝？ 
现代文：后来高演又一次乘机会苦苦进谏，文宣帝命令左右力士把高演的双手反剪过来按住，拔出雪白的刀搁在他脖子上，骂道： 小子知道个啥？是谁在背后教你来进谏的？ 
English: Later, Gao En took another opportunity to struggle into the ring. Emperor Wenzhong ordered the wrestlers to hold Gao En's hands upside down, pull out a snow-white knife and put it on his neck, and scolded him: "Kid, what do you know? Who taught you to get into the ring behind your back?"

古文：演曰： 天下噤口，非臣谁敢有言！ 
现代文：高演说： 天下都震慑于您的淫威不敢出声，不是我谁还敢有话！ 
English: Gao Oration: The whole world is shocked by your arrogance and dares not speak out. It is not I who dares to speak out!

古文：帝趣杖，乱捶之数十；会醉卧，得解。
现代文：文宣帝奔过去拿起木杖，对高演乱打了几十下，打着打着正好醉倒了，高演才得到解脱。
English: Emperor Wenxuan rushed over, picked up a wooden cane, and beat Gao Yuan indiscriminately for dozens of times. He got drunk as he beat Gao Yuan, and only then did Gao Yuan get relief.

古文：帝亵黩之游，遍于宗戚，所往留连；唯至常山第，多无适而去。
现代文：文宣帝好作淫邪的游幸，凡宗戚之家，他几乎全去遍了。去了一个地方，就耽于淫乐，留连忘返。唯有到常山王家，多半不能尽欢，只好离去。
English: Emperor Wenxuan was fond of traveling for pleasure, and he visited almost every relative's home. When he went to a place, he indulged in sexual pleasures and forgot to return. However, when he went to the royal family in Changshan, he was mostly unable to enjoy himself and had to leave.

古文：尚书左仆射崔暹屡谏，演谓暹曰： 今太后不敢致言，吾兄弟杜口，仆射独能犯颜，内外深相愧感。 
现代文：尚书左仆射崔暹屡次进谏，高演对崔暹说： 现在太后不敢说话，我的兄弟们也都闭了嘴，仆射却独能犯颜进谏，宫廷内外对此都深深感动而且感到惭愧。 
English: Shang Shuxu's left-hand man Sho Choi Siam repeatedly made advances, Gao Yuan said to Choi Siam: Now the empress dowager does not dare to speak, my brothers have also shut their mouths, but Shoo Choi is the only one who can make advances, both inside and outside the court are deeply moved and ashamed.

古文：太子殷，自幼温裕开朗，礼士好学，关览时政，甚有美名。
现代文：太子高殷，自幼温和从容，性格开朗，礼贤下士，笃志好学，关心留意时政，很有美名。
English: Prince Gao Yin, gentle and calm since childhood, cheerful personality, courtesy corporal, eager to learn, concerned about current affairs, is very famous.

古文：帝尝嫌太子 得汉家性质，不似我 ，欲废之。
现代文：文宣帝曾经嫌太子 得了汉人的秉性气质，一点都不象我 ，想把他废了。
English: Emperor Wenxuan once disliked the fact that the crown prince had acquired a Chinese temperament and was nothing like me, and wanted to get rid of him.

古文：帝登金凤台，召太子，使手刃囚，太子恻然有难色，再三，不断其首。
现代文：一次，文宣帝登上金凤台召见太子，让太子亲手用刀杀一个囚犯，太子心怀怜悯，面有难色，试了好几回，砍不断囚犯的头。
English: On one occasion, Emperor Wenzong ascended the Jinfeng Terrace to summon the crown prince. He asked the crown prince to personally kill a prisoner with a sword. The crown prince, with compassion in his heart and a puzzled look on his face, tried several times and kept chopping off the prisoner's head.

古文：帝大怒，亲以马鞭撞之，太子由是气悸语吃，精神昏扰。
现代文：文宣帝勃然大怒，亲自动手用马鞭去撞击他，太子从此受惊吓，说话结巴，神志不清。
English: Emperor Wenxuan flew into a rage and personally hit him with a horsewhip. From then on, the prince was frightened, stammering and delirious.

古文：帝因酣宴，屡云： 太子性懦，社稷事重，终当传位常山。 
现代文：文宣帝趁着宴会上酒酣时，多次说： 太子性格懦弱，社稷大事很重要，怕他承当不了，看样子最后还是应当传位给常山王高演。 
English: Emperor Wenxuan took advantage of the banquet to say several times: "The prince is a weak character, social and political events are very important. I'm afraid he won't be able to handle it. It looks like the throne should be passed to King Gao of Changshan in the end."

古文：太子少傅魏收谓杨愔曰： 太子，国之根本，不可动摇。
现代文：太子少傅魏收对杨说： 太子，是国家的根本，不可以轻易动摇他。
English: The young prince Fu Wei Rui said to Yang: The prince is the foundation of the country and cannot be easily shaken.

古文：至尊三爵之后，每言传位常山，令臣下疑贰。
现代文：皇上喝了三杯酒后，老是说要传位给常山王，以致让臣下惑乱疑虑，怀有二心。
English: After drinking three glasses of wine, the emperor always said that he wanted to pass the throne to the King of Changshan, so that the vassals were confused and had second thoughts.

古文：若其实也，当决行之。
现代文：如果真的实有其事，就应当果断地实行。
English: If this is indeed the case, it should be resolutely implemented.

古文：此言非所以为戏，恐徒使国家不安。 
现代文：这种传位给谁的话可不是闹着玩的，老这样说恐怕会徒然使国家不安定。 
English: This kind of passing on of positions to someone is not a joke. To keep talking like this is likely to destabilize the country in vain.

古文：愔以收言白帝，帝乃止。
现代文：杨把魏收的话转告文宣帝，文宣帝才停止这样说了。
English: Yang relayed Wei Hui's words to Emperor Wenzhong, who then stopped saying this.

古文：帝既残忍，有司讯囚，莫不严酷，或烧犁耳，使立其上，或烧车釭，使以臂贯之，既不胜苦，皆至诬伏。
现代文：文宣帝生性既然残忍，上行下效，司法部门审问囚犯，没有不严酷行刑的。有的把铁犁的犁耳烧红，让囚犯站在上面；有的把车轴烧红，让囚犯用手臂从中间的孔中穿过去。囚犯既受不了这种苦刑，就都屈打成招，受诬屈服。
English: Since Emperor Wenxuan's nature is to be cruel, with both positive and negative effects, the judicial department interrogates prisoners, and there is no punishment that is not harsh. Some people burn the handle of the spade red to make the prisoner stand on it; some people burn the axle red to make the prisoner pass through the hole in the middle. Since the prisoners can't bear this kind of torture, they are all beaten into submission.

古文：唯三公郎中武强苏琼，历职中外，所至皆以宽平为治。
现代文：只有三公郎中武强人苏琼，在朝廷内外多年历任各种官职，所到之处都以宽和平缓作为治理的法则。
English: Only Su Qiong, a military strongman among the three princes, has held various official positions in and out of the imperial court for many years. Wherever he goes, he takes leniency and moderation as the rule of governance.

古文：时赵州及清河屡有人告谋反者，前后皆付琼推检，事多申雪。
现代文：当时赵州和清河老是有人告发谋反者，前后多次都交给苏琼推问检查，这些诬告的事最后都得到申明昭雪。
English: At that time, people in Zhaozhou and Qinghe were always accusing the plotters, and Su Qiong was repeatedly questioned and examined. These false accusations were finally confirmed.

古文：尚书崔昂谓琼曰： 若欲立功名，当更思馀理；数雪反逆，身命何轻！ 
现代文：尚书崔昂对苏琼说： 你如果想建立功名，那就应当重新想想别的办法；象这样多次为谋反的逆贼洗刷罪名，那你的身家性命就太不值钱了！ 
English: Shangshu Cuiang said to Su Qiong: If you want to build a reputation, then you should rethink other methods; if you repeatedly whitewash the crimes of treasonous traitors like this, then your property and life are too worthless!

古文：琼正色曰： 所雪者冤枉耳，不纵反逆也。 
现代文：苏琼严肃地说： 我所洗刷的是被冤枉的人，从来也不纵容谋反逆贼。 
English: Su Qiong said solemnly, "I only exonerate those who have been wronged, and I never condone treason.

古文：昂大惭。
现代文：崔昂听了非常惭愧。
English: Choi Aung was ashamed.

古文：帝怒临漳令稽晔、舍人李文师，以赐臣下为奴。中书侍郎彭城郑颐私诱祠部尚书王昕曰： 自古无朝士为奴者。 
现代文：文宣帝对临漳令稽晔、舍人李文思非常恼火，把他们赐给臣下当奴仆，中书侍郎彭城人郑颐私下设圈套陷害祠部尚书王昕。他有意对王昕说： 自古以来，没有朝廷士大夫当奴仆的。 
English: Emperor Wenzhong was very angry with Li Wensi, who refused to obey the order to copy the imperial edict, and gave them to his vassals as slaves. Pengcheng's Zheng Qi, the servant of the imperial secretary, secretly set up a trap to frame Wang Qi, the priest of the imperial secretary. He deliberately said to Wang Qi: Since ancient times, there has never been an imperial secretary as a slave.

古文：昕曰： 箕子为之奴。 
现代文：这句话引得王昕说了一句： 商朝的箕子不就当了纣王的奴隶吗？ 
English: This sentence led Wang Yao to say: "Didn't the Shanzi of the Shang Dynasty become the slaves of King Yao?

古文：颐以白帝曰： 王元景比陛下于纣。 
现代文：郑颐把这话拿去报告给文宣帝，对文宣帝说： 王元景把陛下比成纣王。 
English: Zheng Yi reported this to Emperor Wenzhong, saying: "Wang Yuanqing compared His Majesty to King Zhao.

古文：帝衔之。
现代文：文宣帝自此对王昕怀恨在心。
English: Emperor Wenzhong held a grudge against Wang Xuan ever since.

古文：顷之，帝与朝臣酣饮，昕称疾不至，帝遣骑执之，见方摇膝吟咏，遂斩于殿前，投尸漳水。
现代文：过了不久，文宣帝与朝廷大臣们设宴畅饮，王昕借口有病没有去参加，文宣帝派骑兵去抓他，骑兵去了一看，王昕正坐在那儿晃着腿吟呢，于是把他抓来斩首于宫殿前，尸体被扔入漳河水。
English: Not long after, Emperor Wenxuan held a banquet with the ministers of the imperial court. Wang Yao did not attend on the pretext of illness. Emperor Wenxuan sent cavalry to catch him. The cavalry went to take a look. Wang Yao was sitting there swinging his legs and chanting, so they caught him and beheaded him in front of the palace. The body was thrown into the water of the Fen River.

古文：齐主北筑长城，南助萧庄，士马死者以数十万。
现代文：北齐文宣帝在北边修筑长城，在南边兴兵帮助萧庄，士兵战马因此死亡的共有几十万人。
English: Emperor Xuan of Northern Qi built the Great Wall in the north, and raised troops to help Xiaozhuang in the south. Hundreds of thousands of soldiers and horses died as a result.

古文：重以修筑台殿，赐与无节，府藏之积，不足以供，乃减百官之禄，撤军人常廪，并省州郡县镇戍之职，以节费用焉。
现代文：此外，还动工修筑台阁宫殿，赏赐臣下也凭一时的高兴，毫无节度，这样一来，弄的内府仓库的积蓄全耗光了。于是就下令减少文武百官的俸禄，撤消对军人平常的供给，把省、州、郡、县、镇、戍的职官予以合并，想用这种办法来节省费用。
English: In addition, he also started the construction of the Taigak Palace, and rewarded his vassals with pleasure, without restraint, so that the savings of the inner warehouse were completely exhausted. Therefore, he ordered to reduce the salaries of civil and military officials, cancel the usual supply of soldiers, and merge the provincial, state, county, county, town, and county officials, in order to save costs.

古文：十二月，庚寅，齐以可硃浑道元为太师，尉粲为太尉，冀州刺史段韶为司空，常山王演为大司马，长广王湛为司徒。
现代文：十二月，戊寅，北齐任命可朱浑道元为太师，尉粲为太尉冀州刺史段韶为司空，常山王高演为大司马，长广王高湛为司徒。
English: In December, Wuyin and Beiqi appointed Zhuhun Dojuan as grand master, Jizhou Zhishidan as grand master, Changshan Wang Gaoyuan as grand master, and Changguang Wang Gaotan as grand master.

古文：壬午，周大赦。
现代文：壬午，北周大赦天下。
English: At that time, the Northern Zhou Dynasty ruled the world.

古文：齐主如北城，因视永安简平王浚、上党刚肃王涣于地牢。
现代文：北齐国主文宣帝到北城，趁便到地牢去看永安简平王高浚，上党刚肃王高涣。
English: Emperor Xuan of Northern Qi went to Beicheng and took the opportunity to go to the dungeon to see Yongan Jianping Wang Gaojun and Shangdang Gansu Wang Gaojun.

古文：帝临穴讴歌，令浚等和之，浚等惶怖且悲，不觉声颤；帝怆然，为之下泣，将赦之。
现代文：文宣帝站在地牢边放声唱歌，命令高浚等囚犯应和，高浚等人惶惶然，又恐怖又悲伤，不知不觉声音颤抖起来。文宣帝听，不禁也悲伤起来，为之流泪，准备赦免他们。
English: Emperor Wenxuan stood at the edge of the dungeon and sang loudly, ordering Gao Jun and other prisoners to join in. Gao Jun and others were panic-stricken, terrified and sad. Unconsciously, their voices trembled. Emperor Wenxuan could not help but be sad and shed tears, ready to pardon them.

古文：长广王湛素与浚不睦，进曰： 猛虎安可出穴！ 
现代文：长广王高湛平素与高浚有矛盾，见状进言说： 猛虎怎么能放出洞穴？ 
English: Changguang Wang Gao Zhanping had a contradiction with Gao Jian, and said: How can a tiger leave a cave?

古文：帝默然。
现代文：文宣帝听了默不作声。
English: The emperor was silent.

古文：浚等闻之，呼湛小字曰： 步落稽，皇天见汝！ 
现代文：高浚等人听了，就叫着高湛的小名说： 步落稽呀，皇天看到你今天的作为了！ 
English: When Gao Jun and the others heard this, they shouted Gao Zhan's nickname and said, "You're out of step, the emperor saw what you did today!

古文：帝亦以浚与涣皆有雄略，恐为后害，乃自刺涣，又使壮士刘桃枝就笼乱刺。
现代文：文宣帝也因为高浚与高涣都有雄才大略，恐怕留下他们将来是个祸害，于是自己抽剑刺向高涣，又让壮士刘桃枝朝囚笼乱刺。
English: Emperor Wenxuan also feared that leaving Gaojun and Gaojun would be a disaster in the future, because Gaojun and Gaojun both had great talents, so he drew his sword and stabbed Gaojun, and let the strong man Liu Taoji stab the prisoners.

古文：槊每下，浚、涣辄以手拉折之，号哭呼天。于是薪火乱投，烧杀之，填以土石。
现代文：刘桃枝的槊每次刺去，高浚、高涣就用手拽住折断它，同时呼天抢地地号哭着，于是随从们用点着的柴禾往里乱扔，把高浚、高涣活活烧死在地牢，再填上泥土石块。
English: Every time Liu Taozhi's shovel was stabbed, Gao Jian and Gao Yao would pull it with their hands and break it. At the same time, they cried and cried, so the followers threw lit firewood into the dungeon, burned Gao Jian and Gao Yao alive in the dungeon, and then filled it with dirt and stones.

古文：后出之，皮发皆尽，尸色如炭，远近为之痛愤。
现代文：后来挖出来，皮肤头发都脱落光了，尸体的颜色和木炭一样，远近的人们看到了，都为之痛哭愤恨不已。
English: Later, when they dug him up, his skin and hair had all fallen off, and his corpse was the same color as charcoal. People from near and far saw this, and wept bitterly and bitterly.

古文：帝以仪同三司刘郁捷杀浚，以浚妃陆氏赐之；冯文洛杀涣，以涣妃李氏赐之，二人皆帝家旧奴也。
现代文：文宣帝因为仪同三司刘郁捷动手杀了高浚，就把高浚的妃子陆氏赐给他；因为冯文洛杀了高涣，就把高涣的妃子李氏赐给他。刘郁捷、冯文洛这两个人都是皇帝家的旧家奴。
English: Emperor Wenzhong gave Gaozhun's concubine, Lu, to him because Yi and his third cousin Liu Yujie had killed Gaozhun; and gave Gaozhun's concubine, Li, to Feng Wenluo because he had killed Gaozhu. Liu Yujie and Feng Wenluo were both former slaves of the emperor's family.

古文：陆氏寻以无宠于浚，得免。
现代文：不久又由于陆氏并不为高浚所宠爱，才被命令离开刘家。
English: Soon after, because Mr. Lu was not a favorite of Gao Jun, he was ordered to leave the Liu family.

古文：高凉太守冯宝卒，海隅扰乱。
现代文：高凉太守冯宝去世，海边一带发生骚乱。
English: Emperor Gaoliang's father-in-law Feng Bao died, and riots broke out along the coast.

古文：妻洗氏怀集部落，数州晏然。
现代文：冯宝的妻子洗氏善于安抚团结部落，几个州安定无事。
English: Feng Bao's wife, Zai, is good at appeasing and uniting the tribes, and several states are stable.

古文：其子仆，生九年，是岁，遣仆帅诸酋长入朝，诏以仆为阳春太守。
现代文：冯宝的儿子冯仆，才九岁，这一年，洗氏派冯仆率领诸酋长进朝廷觐见皇帝，皇帝下诏任命冯仆为阳春太守。
English: Feng Bao's son, Feng Mudu, was only nine years old. In this year, the Shao clan sent Feng Mudu and his chiefs to the imperial court to meet the emperor. The emperor issued an edict appointing Feng Mudu as Yangchun's grand vizier.

古文：后梁主遣其大将军王操将兵略取王琳之长沙、武陵、南平等郡。
现代文：后梁国主派他的大将军王操带兵攻取王琳控制的长沙、武陵、南平等郡。
English: Later, Liang Guozhong sent his general Wang Cao to lead troops to capture Changsha, Wuling and Nanping County, which were controlled by Wang Lin.

古文：高祖武皇帝永定三年
现代文：永定三年
English: Three years of Yongding

古文：春，正月，己酉，周太师护上表归政，周王始亲万机；军旅之事，护犹总之。
现代文：春季正月，己酉，北周太师宇文护上表表示把政权归还周王，周王开始亲理万机；但军事方面的事务，宇文护还是总揽着。
English: In the first month of spring, Northern Zhou's grandmaster, Umenguo, returned the power to King Zhou, who began to deal with everything personally. However, in terms of military affairs, Umenguo was still in charge.

古文：初改都督军州事为总管。
现代文：开始把都督州军事这一官职改称总管。
English: He began to rename the post of the military governor of the province as the director-general.

古文：王琳召桂州刺史淳于量。
现代文：王琳召见桂州刺史淳于量。
English: Wang Lin summoned Guizhou's chief historian Jun Yuquan.

古文：量虽与琳合，而潜通于陈；二月，辛酉，以量为开府仪同三司。
现代文：淳于量虽然表面上与王琳合作，但背地里却与陈朝相通。二月，辛酉，朝廷任命淳于量为开府仪同三司。
English: Although on the surface he cooperated with Wang Lin, behind the scenes he was in communication with the Chen dynasty. In February, at the end of the year, the imperial court appointed Jun Yuzheng as the keeper of the imperial residences and the third secretary.

古文：壬午，侯瑱引兵焚齐舟舰于合肥。
现代文：壬午，侯带兵在合肥烧毁了北齐的兵舰。
English: In the morning of the second day of the third month, Hou's soldiers burned Beiqi's warships in Hefei.

古文：丙戌，齐主于甘露寺禅居深观，唯军国大事乃以闻。
现代文：丙戌，北齐国主文宣帝在甘露寺坐禅念经，传令只有发生了军机大事才可以报告他。
English: According to legend, the ruler of Northern Qi, Emperor Wenxuan, was sitting in meditation and chanting a sutra at the Kanlu Temple. It was decreed that no one could report him until a major military event occurred.

古文：尚书右仆射崔暹卒，齐主幸其第哭之，谓其妻李氏曰： 颇思暹乎？ 
现代文：尚书左仆射崔暹去世，文宣帝到他家里去哭吊，问他的妻子李氏说： 你很想崔暹吗？ 
English: Shang Shuxu's second-in-command Shot Choi Siam passed away. Emperor Wenxuan went to his home to weep and asked his wife Ri: Do you miss Choi Siam?

古文：对曰： 思之。 
现代文：李氏回答说： 很想。 
English: Mr. Li replied, "I would like to."

古文：帝曰： 然则自往省之。 
现代文：文宣帝说： 那么你自己去看望他吧！ 
English: Emperor Wenxuan said: Then you should go and see him yourself!

古文：因手斩其妻，掷首墙外。
现代文：于是挥剑斩下李氏的首级扔到墙外头。
English: So he swung his sword and cut off Mr. Li's head and threw it outside the wall.

古文：齐斛律光将骑一万，击周开府仪同三司曹回公，斩之，柏谷城主薛禹生弃城走，遂取文侯镇，立戍置栅而还。
现代文：北齐斛律光带领骑兵一万人，去袭击北周开府仪同三司曹回公，将他斩杀。柏谷城守将薛禹扔下城池逃跑，于是斛律光占领了文侯镇，在那儿建立营栅，留下戍守将士，才回来。
English: North Qi Yongruiguang led 10,000 cavalry to attack North Zhou Kaifu Rongyi and the Third Cao Huigong, and killed him. The Kegu castle guard threw Xue Yu out of the castle and fled, so Yongruiguang occupied Wenhou Town, set up a camp gate there, and left behind the guards before returning.

古文：三月，戊戌，齐以侍中高德政为尚书右仆射。
现代文：三月，戊戌，北齐任命待中高德政为尚书右仆射。
English: In March, Wu Xi and Bei Qi appointed Zhu Gao Dezheng as Shang Shuxu's right-hand man.

古文：吐谷浑寇周边；庚戌，周遣大司马贺兰祥击之。
现代文：吐谷浑入侵北周边境。庚戌，北周派大司马贺兰祥去抗击。
English: Tuyuhun invaded the Northern Zhou border. Geng Yao, Northern Zhou sent Major Magoran Xiang to fight back.

古文：丙辰，齐主至鄴。
现代文：丙辰，北齐文宣帝到了邺城。
English: In the 4th century, the Northern Qibun Emperor Xuancheng arrived in Lucheng.

古文：梁永嘉王庄至郢州，遣使入贡于齐。
现代文：梁永嘉王萧庄抵达郢州，派使者向北齐进贡礼品。
English: Liang Yongjia Wang Xiaozhuang arrived in Ganzhou and sent an envoy to North Qi to bring tribute gifts.

古文：王琳遣其将雷文策袭后梁监利太守蔡大有，杀之。
现代文：王琳派他的将领雷文策去袭击后梁监利太守蔡大有，杀了他。
English: Wang Lin sent his general Lei Wenzhe to attack Cai Dayu, the eunuch of the Later Liang Dynasty, and killed him.

古文：齐主之为魏相也，胶州刺史定阳文肃侯杜弼为长史，帝将受禅，弼谏止之。
现代文：北齐国主文宣帝还在当东魏的宰相时，胶州刺史定阳文肃侯杜弼当长史，文宣帝将要接受禅让时，杜弼曾进谏劝阻他。
English: When the head of Northern Qi, Emperor Wenxuan, was still the chancellor of the Eastern Wei Dynasty, Jiaozhou stabbed history, Dingyang, Wenzhou, and Cucao were long history. When Emperor Wenxuan was about to accept Zen concessions, Cucao had the courage to dissuade him.

古文：帝问： 治国当用何人？ 
现代文：文宣帝问他： 治理国家应该任用什么样的人？ 
English: Emperor Wenxuan asked him: What kind of person should be appointed to govern the country?

古文：对曰： 鲜卑车马客，会须用中国人。 
现代文：杜弼回答说： 鲜卑族不过是些驾车骑马的流浪汉，如果要说治理国家，还是应当用中原的汉人。 
English: He replied: Xianbei people can only be allowed to manage chariots and horses, and Central Plains people should be used to govern the country.

古文：帝以为讥己，衔之。
现代文：文宣帝认为他这话是讥笑自己不能治国，对他记恨在心。
English: Emperor Wenxuan thought that his words were a mockery of his inability to govern the country, and he held a grudge against him.

古文：高德政用事，弼不为之下，尝于众前面折德政；德政数言其短于帝，弼恃旧，不自疑。
现代文：高德政管政事时，杜弼不服他的气，曾经当着众人的面驳斥高德政的意见。高德政多次在文宣帝面前数说杜弼的短处，杜弼自恃是旧臣，并不怀疑高德政会在文宣帝面前进谗言害自己。
English: When Gao Desheng was in charge of government affairs, Du Juan did not accept his anger and refuted Gao Desheng's opinion in front of everyone. Gao Desheng repeatedly mentioned Du Juan's shortcomings in front of Emperor Wenzhong. Du Juan considered himself to be an old minister, and did not doubt that Gao Desheng would speak ill of him in front of Emperor Wenzhong.

古文：夏，帝因饮酒，积其愆失，遣使就州斩之；既而悔之，驿追不及。
现代文：夏季，文宣帝乘着酒酣，把他的罪愆过失积累起来清算，派使者到州里去把杜弼斩首。不久后悔了，派驿使去追回成命，已经来不及了。
English: In the summer, Emperor Wenzhong, drunk on wine, took stock of his sins and faults, and sent an envoy to the state to behead Du Xuan. He soon regretted it, and it was too late to send an envoy to recover his life.

古文：闰四月，戊子，周命有司更定新历。
现代文：闰四月，戊子，北周命令有关部门重新修订新历法。
English: In leap April, the Empress Dowager Cixi and the Northern Zhou Dynasty ordered the relevant departments to revise the new calendar.

古文：丁酉，遣镇北将军徐度将兵志南皖口。
现代文：丁酉，陈朝派镇北将军徐度带兵在南皖口修城。
English: Ding Xi, Chen Dynasty sent Zhenbei General Xu Du to lead the troops to rebuild the city in Nanluogou.

古文：齐高德政与杨愔同为相，愔常忌之。
现代文：北齐高德政与杨同为宰相，杨常常忌恨他。
English: Northern Qi Gao Desheng and Yang were both prime ministers, and Yang often resented him.

古文：齐主酣饮，德政数强谏，齐主不悦，谓左右曰： 高德政恒以精神凌逼人。 
现代文：北齐国主文宣帝酗酒酣饮，高德政多次激切地进谏，文宣帝不高兴，对身边左右的人说： 高德政经常以盛气欺凌逼迫我。 
English: The ruler of Northern Qi, Emperor Wenzhong, was a heavy drinker, and Gao Dezheng was often violently drunk. Unhappy, Emperor Wenzhong said to the people around him: Gao Dezheng often bullied and persecuted me.

古文：德政惧，称疾，欲自退。
现代文：高德政听说后，心中恐惧，托言有病，想引退。
English: After hearing about Gao Dezheng, his heart was filled with fear. He used the excuse that he was ill and wanted to retire.

古文：帝谓杨愔曰： 我大忧德政病。 
现代文：文宣帝对杨说： 我很担忧高德政的病。 
English: Emperor Wenxuan said to Yang: I am very worried about Gao Dezheng's illness.

古文：对曰： 陛下若用为冀州刺史，病当自差。 
现代文：杨说： 陛下如果起用他当冀州刺史，他的病自己就会好的。 
English: Yang said, "If Your Majesty appoints him as the chief historian of Jizhou, his illness will get better by itself."

古文：帝从之。
现代文：文宣帝听从了这个建议。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：德政见除书，即起。
现代文：高德政见到任命他为冀州刺史的文书，马上就起来没病了。
English: Gao Dezheng saw the document appointing him as the chief historian of Jizhou and immediately got up and did not feel ill.

古文：帝大怒，召德政谓曰： 闻尔病，我为尔针。 
现代文：文宣帝知道后勃然大怒，把高德政召来，对他说： 听说你病了，我来给你扎扎针。 
English: When Emperor Wenxuan learned of this, he flew into a rage. He summoned Gao Dezheng and said to him, "I heard that you are ill. I'll give you a ligation needle."

古文：亲以小刀刺之，血流沾地。
现代文：亲自拿出小刀刺他，血流下一地。
English: He personally took out a knife and stabbed him, and blood flowed all over the floor.

古文：又使曳下斩去其足，刘桃枝执刀不敢下，帝责桃枝曰： 尔头即坠地！ 
现代文：又让人把他拉下去砍去他的双脚。刘桃枝拿着刀不敢下手，文宣帝责骂刘桃枝说： 你的头马上就要坠地了！ 
English: Another person pulled him down and chopped off his feet. Liu Taozhi held the knife and did not dare to use it. Emperor Wenxuan scolded Liu Taozhi and said, "Your head is about to fall to the ground!"

古文：桃枝乃斩其足之三指。
现代文：刘桃枝于是就砍去高德政脚上的三个指头。
English: Liu Taozhi then chopped off three fingers on Gao Desheng's foot.

古文：帝怒不解，囚德政于门下，其夜，以氈舆送还家。
现代文：文宣帝的盛怒还没有缓解，把高德政关在门下省，当天晚上，用铺着毛毡的车子送他回家。
English: Emperor Wenzhong's rage had not yet abated, and Gao Dezheng was locked up in a closed province. That evening, he was driven home in a car covered with felt.

古文：明旦，德政妻出珍宝满四床，欲以寄人，帝奄至其宅，见之，怒曰： 我内府犹无是物！ 
现代文：第二天早上，高德政的妻子拿出摆满四个坐床的珍宝，想用这些珍宝来托人求情。文宣帝出其不意地到他家，看到了这些珍宝，勃然大怒说： 我的御府里还没有这些宝物呢！ 
English: The next morning, Gao Dezheng's wife took out the treasures that filled the four beds and wanted to use these treasures to ask for mercy. Emperor Wenxuan unexpectedly came to his house, saw these treasures, and flew into a rage, saying, "My imperial palace doesn't have these treasures yet!"

古文：诘其所从得，皆诸元赂之，遂曳出，斩之。
现代文：追问高家这些珍宝从何处得来，一问才知道都是诸位元姓的贵族贿赂高德政的东西，于是就把高德政拽出来斩首了。
English: After asking Gao Jia where these treasures came from, he found out that it was all the aristocrats with the surname of Yuan who bribed Gao Dezheng, so he dragged Gao Dezheng out and beheaded him.

古文：妻出拜，又斩之，并其子伯坚。
现代文：高妻出来拜见文宣帝，又被斩首，一起被斩的还有高德政的儿子高伯坚。
English: Gao's wife came out to meet Emperor Wenxuan and was beheaded, along with Gao Dezheng's son Gao Bojian.

古文：以司州牧彭城王浟为司空，侍中高阳王湜为尚书右仆射；乙巳，以浟兼太尉。
现代文：文宣帝任命司州牧彭城王高为司徒，侍中高阳王高为尚书右仆射。乙巳，任命高兼太尉一职。
English: Emperor Wenxuan appointed Wang Gao of Shizhou Mu Pengcheng as a disciple, and the attendant Gaoyang Wang Gao as his right-hand man. At the same time, he appointed Gao and Taifeng as a post.

古文：齐主封子绍廉为长安王。
现代文：北齐文宣帝封儿子高绍廉为长乐王。
English: North Qiwen proclaimed Emperor Feng's son Gao Shao Lian as the King of Changle.

古文：辛亥，周以侯莫陈崇为大司徒，达奚武为大宗伯，武阳公豆卢宁为大司寇，柱国辅城公邕为大司空。
现代文：辛亥，北周任命侯莫陈崇为大司徒，达奚武为大宗伯，武阳公豆卢宁为大司寇，柱国辅城公宇文邕为大司空。
English: In Xinhai, the Northern Zhou Dynasty appointed Hou Mo Chen Chong as the grand steward, Dadongwu as the grand patriarch, Buyang Gongzu Luning as the grand steward, and Zhu Guo Yu Cheng Gongyuan as the grand steward.

古文：乙卯，周诏： 有司无得纠赦前事；唯库厩仓廪与海内所共，若有侵盗，虽经赦宥免其罪，征备如法。 
现代文：乙卯，北周下诏，规定： 有关部门不能再检举大赦以前的事；只有国家的车马库、粮仓、货栈是海内所共有的财产，如果有侵吞盗窃的人，虽然经过赦免宽大免去罪行，但必须让他依照规定缴纳钱粮作为赔偿。 
English: Second, the Northern Zhou issued an edict, stipulating: Relevant departments can no longer prosecute matters before the amnesty; only the state's car depot, granary and warehouse are common property within the country. If there is a person who embezzles and steals, although he is pardoned and pardoned, he must pay money and grain as compensation in accordance with the regulations.

古文：周贺兰祥与吐谷浑战，破之，拔其洮阳、洪和二城，以其地为洮州。
现代文：北周贺兰祥与吐谷浑开战，打败了吐谷浑，攻取了其所属的洮阳、洪和两城，把这两个城的地方合并为洮州。
English: Northern Zhou, Helanxiang, went to war with Tuyugun, defeated Tuyugun, captured its two cities of Shenyang and Honghe, and merged the two cities into Zhangzhou.

古文：五月，丙辰朔，日有食之。
现代文：五月，丙辰朔，发生日食。
English: In May, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：齐太史奏，今年当除旧布新。
现代文：北齐的太史上奏，提议今年应当除旧布新。
English: Beiqi's Taixing Shengxiao proposed that the old cloth should be removed and replaced this year.

古文：齐主问于特进彭城公元韶曰： 汉光武何故中兴？ 
现代文：北齐文宣帝问特进彭城公元韶说： 汉朝光武皇帝为什么能实现中兴大业呢？ 
English: Northern Qi Emperor Qian Xuan asked Tejin Pengcheng in the year of the Rooster: Why was Emperor Guangwu of the Han Dynasty able to achieve the great cause of ZTE?

古文：对曰： 为诛诸刘不尽。 
现代文：元韶回答说： 这是因为当时没有把姓刘的杀干净。 
English: Yuan Qi replied: This is because at that time, the surname Liu was not killed cleanly.

古文：于是齐主悉杀诸元以厌之。
现代文：于是文宣帝把姓元的全部杀掉，以此预防类似光武中兴一类的事发生。
English: As a result, Emperor Wenxuan killed all the surnames, in order to prevent something similar to Guangwu Zhongxing from happening.

古文：癸未，诛始平公元世哲等二十五家，囚韶等十九家。
现代文：癸未，杀了始平公元世哲等二十五家，把元韶等十九家关起来。
English: At the same time, he killed twenty-five families including Shi Ping and Shizhe, and locked up nineteen families including Yuan Qi.

古文：韶幽于地牢，绝食，啗衣袖而死。
现代文：元韶关在地牢里，断绝了食物，最后咬嚼衣袖，活活饿死。
English: He was locked in a dungeon, deprived of food, and finally chewed his sleeve and starved to death.

古文：周文育、周迪、黄法共讨余公扬，豫章内史熊昙朗引兵会之，众且万人。
现代文：周文育、周迪、黄法氍一起讨伐余公。豫章大守熊昙朗带兵去与他们会合，这样共有一万军队。
English: Zhou Wenyu, Zhou Di, and Huang Faqin fought together against Yu Gong. The governor of Yuzhang, Xiong Yulang, led his troops to join them, bringing the total number of troops to 10,000.

古文：文育军于金口，公扬诈降，谋执文育，文育觉之，囚送建康。
现代文：周文育驻扎在金口，余公假装投降，密谋着要在周文育受降时抓住他。
English: Zhou Wenyu was stationed in Jinkou. Yu Gong pretended to surrender and plotted to capture Zhou Wenyu when he surrendered.

古文：文育进屯三陂。
现代文：周文育察觉到这一密谋，反而把余公抓住送到建康去。
English: Zhou Wenyu was aware of this plot, but instead he seized Yu Gong and sent him to Jiankang.

古文：王琳遣其将曹庆帅二千人救余孝劢，庆分遣主帅常众爱与文育相拒，自帅其众攻周迪及安南将军吴明彻，迪等败，文育退据金口。
现代文：周文育接着进驻三陂。王琳派他的部将曹庆率领二千人去救援余孝劢。曹庆分派主帅常众爱去与周文育相对抗，自己率领队伍攻打周迪和安南将军吴明彻，周迪等败退下来，周文育也退守金口。
English: Wang Lin sent his general Cao Qing to lead 2,000 men to rescue Yu Xiaohui. Cao Qing sent the general manager Chang Zhong Ai to oppose Zhou Wenyu. He led the team to attack Zhou Di and Annan's general Wu Mingcher. Zhou Di was defeated and retreated, and Zhou Wenyu also retreated to defend Jinkou.

古文：熊昙朗因其失利，谋杀文育以应众爱，监军孙白象闻其谋，劝文育先之，文育不从。
现代文：熊昙朗因周迪、周文育兵败，就谋划杀害周文育以接应常众爱。监军孙白象知道了这一密谋，就劝周文育要先动手，但周文育不听。
English: Because of the defeat of Zhou Di and Zhou Wenyu, Xiong Yulang planned to kill Zhou Wenyu in order to win the people's love. Sun Baixiang, the supervisor of the army, knew about this conspiracy and advised Zhou Wenyu to start first, but Zhou Wenyu did not listen.

古文：时周迪弃船走，不知所在，乙酉，文育得迪书，自赍以示昙朗，昙朗杀之于座而并其众，因据新淦城。
现代文：这时周迪扔下船逃跑了，不知去向，乙酉，周文育才得到周迪的信，他亲自带着周迪的信去给熊昙朗看，熊昙朗就在座位上把周文育杀了，吞并了周文育的部众，乘势占据了新淦城。
English: At this time, Zhou Di threw himself off the ship and ran away. I don't know where he went, but Zhou Wenyu got Zhou Di's letter. He personally took Zhou Di's letter to show it to Xiong Yulang. Xiong Yulang killed Zhou Wenyu on the seat, swallowed up Zhou Wenyu's subordinates, and took advantage of the situation to occupy Xinyi City.

古文：昙朗将兵万人袭周敷，敷击破之，昙朗单骑奔巴山。
现代文：熊昙朗又带兵一万人去袭击周敷，周敷把他打败了，熊昙朗单人匹马逃奔巴山。
English: Xiong Yulang led another ten thousand soldiers to attack Zhou Shiki. Zhou Shiki defeated him, and Xiong Yulang fled to Bashan alone.

古文：鲁悉达部将梅天养等引齐军入城。
现代文：鲁悉达的部将梅天养等人引领北齐军队入城。
English: Lu Xida's subordinate general Mei Tianyao and others led the Beiqi army into the city.

古文：悉达帅麾下数千人济江自归，拜平南将军、北江州刺史。
现代文：鲁悉达自己率领部下几千人渡过长江回去，陈朝拜他为平面将军、北江州刺史。
English: Lu Sida himself led several thousand of his subordinates across the Yangtze River to go back, and Chen Chao worshiped him as a plane general and the history of North Jiangzhou.

古文：六月，戊子，周以霖雨，诏群臣上封事极谏。
现代文：六月，戊子，北周因为久雨不停，下诏让群臣献上密封的条陈尽力进谏。
English: In June, because of the incessant rain, the Northern Zhou issued an edict that the courtiers should present a sealed strip of paper and try their best to enter the capital.

古文：左光禄大夫猗氏乐逊上言四事：其一，以为 比来守令代期既促，责其成效，专务威猛；今关东之民沦陷涂炭，若不布政优优，闻诸境外，何以使彼劳民，归就乐土！ 
现代文：左光禄大夫猗氏县人乐逊上书说了四件事：其一，认为： 近来太守县令接替的期限太短促，上司又严格责求他们施政的成效，为了表现政绩，他们就专门在威猛上着力。现在关东之民沦陷于水火之中，生灵涂炭，如果不实施比较宽和的政策，让仁政的名声传遍境外，那怎么能使那些劳苦的百姓来投奔我们来呢？ 
English: Dr. Zuo Guanglu, a resident of Jinshi County, said four things in his letter: First, he believed that: Recently, the time limit for the replacement of the governor of Jinshi County was too short, and the boss strictly demanded the effectiveness of their governance. In order to show their political performance, they focused on power. Now the people of Kanto are caught in the middle of water and fire, and lives are being lost. If we do not implement a more lenient policy and let the reputation of benevolent government spread abroad, then how can we make those hard-working people come to us?

古文：其二，以为 顷者魏都洛阳，一时殷盛，贵势之家，竞为侈靡，终使祸乱交兴，天下丧败；比来朝贵器服稍华，百工造作务尽奇巧，臣诚恐物逐好移，有损政俗。 
现代文：其二，认为： 不久前魏国国都洛阳，一时间富足强盛，贵族权势之家，比赛着奢华浪费，终于使灾祸动乱交替出现，天下丧失破败。同样，近来我国朝廷上的权贵们所用器具、所着服饰也开始奢华起来了，各种工匠们在制造工艺上都争着穷尽奇巧之思，我实在担心这种追美器美佳物的风气成为一时之好，这会损害政教风俗的。 
English: Secondly, I think that: Not long ago, Luoyang, the capital of the State of Wei, was rich and powerful for a while, and the aristocrats and powerful families competed in luxury and waste, and finally caused disasters to occur in a tumultuous and chaotic manner, and the world was lost and ruined. Similarly, recently, the utensils and clothing used by the dignitaries in our court have also begun to be luxurious, and various craftsmen are competing to exhaust their ingenious ideas in manufacturing technology. I am really worried that this style of chasing beautiful utensils and goods will become a temporary good, which will damage the political and religious customs.

古文：其三，以为 选曹补拟，宜举众共之；今州郡选置，犹集乡闾，况天下铨衡，不取物望，既非机事，何足苛密！
现代文：其三，认为： 选官员去补缺或准备升迁，这种人事方面的决定应该和大家共同商讨。现在州郡一级选配官员，还要召集乡闾人士征求意见，何况中央政府对官员的考察衡量，是关系天下利弊的大事，竟然不听取社会上的舆论，不按官员在民间的声望来决定，这既然不是什么机密事，有什么可以保密的！
English: Third, it is believed that: the selection of officials to fill vacancies or prepare for promotion, such personnel decisions should be discussed with everyone. At present, the selection and placement of officials at the state and county level, but also to convene the villagers to solicit opinions. Moreover, the central government's examination and measurement of officials is a major matter of the world's advantages and disadvantages. How dare they not listen to public opinion in the society and not decide according to the reputation of officials in the people. Since this is not a confidential matter, what can be kept confidential!

古文：其选置之日，宜令众心明白，然后呈奏。 
现代文：官员选拔任用时，应该让大家心里明白，然后再向皇帝启奏。 
English: At the time of selection and appointment, it should be made clear to everyone in their hearts, and then reported.

古文：其四，以为 高洋据有山东，未易猝制，譬犹棋劫相持，争行先后，若一行不当，或成彼利。
现代文：其四，认为： 高洋占据山东一带，不容易马上制伏他，双方的形势，就象下围棋的打劫一样相持不下，互相争着落子的先后，如果一步不妥当，也许造成了对方的优势。
English: Fourth, it is believed that: it is not easy for Gaoyang to occupy the Shandong area, and it is not easy to immediately subdue him. The situation of the two sides is like the robbery of Go, and they are competing with each other in the order of falling pieces. If one step is not appropriate, it may have caused the other side's advantage.

古文：诚应舍小营大，先保封域，不宜贪利边陲，轻为举动。 
现代文：鉴于这种情况，我们的策略应该是舍弃小利，求取大利，先保住自己的封域，不宜为贪图边陲之地而轻举妄动。 
English: In view of this situation, our strategy should be to give up small profits, seek big profits, and first preserve our own fiefdoms. It is not appropriate to act rashly for the sake of coveting marginal lands.

古文：周处士韦琼，孝宽之兄也，志尚夷简。魏、周之际，十征不屈。
现代文：北周的处士韦琼是韦孝宽的哥哥，他的志向是崇尚平和淡泊，魏、周之际，曾十次征召他做官，他都不屈志服从。
English: Wei Qiong, the official of Northern Zhou, was the elder brother of Wei Xiaokuan. His ambition was to advocate peace and indifference. When Wei and Zhou summoned him to be an official ten times, he did not bend to obey.

古文：周太祖甚重之，不夺其志，世宗礼敬尤厚，号曰 逍遥公 。
现代文：文帝宇文泰对他很尊重，不强迫他改变素志，明帝宇文毓对他的礼遇敬重尤其优厚，称他为 逍遥公 。
English: Emperor Wenzong respected him very much and did not force him to change his mind. Emperor Wenzong held him in particularly high esteem, calling him "Unrestrained."

古文：晋公护延之至第，访以政事；护盛修第舍，琼仰视堂，叹曰： 酣酒嗜音，峻宇雕墙，有一于此，未或不亡。 
现代文：晋公宇文护把他请到家里，询问他对政事的意见；宇文护把自己的房子修得高大漂亮，韦进门后仰头看看厅堂，感叹地说： 酗酒纵饮，嗜好靡靡之音，修建高峻的房子，雕绘屋墙，这几样如果占了一样，没有不灭亡的。 
English: Wu Wenzhou invited him to his home to ask his opinion on political affairs. Wu Wenzhou built his house tall and beautiful. After entering the door, Wei looked up at the hall and said with a sigh: "Drinking alcohol, indulging in loud music, building tall houses, and carving house walls, if all of these things are the same, there is nothing that will not perish."

古文：护不悦。
现代文：宇文护听了很不高兴。
English: Umengor is very unhappy.

古文：骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司寇俊，赞之孙也，少有学行。
现代文：骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司寇俊是寇的孙子，自小就有学问，有品行。
English: General Zou Jie, Kaifu Yi and Third Division Ko Jun are Ko's grandsons. They have been learning and behaving well since childhood.

古文：家人尝卖物，多得绢五匹，俊于后知之，曰： 得财失行，吾所不取。 
现代文：家里人常常卖东西，有一回卖东西多得了五匹绢，寇俊后来知道了，说： 得到财物，失去品行，这是我所不容之事。 
English: Members of the family often sold things. On one occasion, selling things resulted in an extra five yakitori. Kojun found out about this later and said, "It is unacceptable for me to gain wealth and lose my morals.

古文：访主还之。
现代文：于是寻访到绢的主人，把多得的绢还给了他。
English: He found the owner of the goods and returned it to him.

古文：敦睦宗族，与同丰约，教训子孙，必先礼义。
现代文：寇俊平时与宗族里的人和睦相处，和他们保持同样的生活水平，教育训导子孙，必定先把礼义教给他们。
English: Ko Jun usually lives in harmony with the people in his clan and maintains the same standard of living with them. When educating and training his children and grandchildren, he must first teach them manners and righteousness.

古文：自大统中，称老疾，不朝谒；世宗虚心欲见之，俊不得已入见。
现代文：从大统中期开始他就托言老病，不再进朝见皇帝。明帝宇文毓虚心礼贤，想和他见面，寇俊不得已才入朝见。
English: From the middle of the reign of Emperor Taizong, he pretended to be ill and no longer went to the imperial court to meet the emperor. Emperor Mingyu Wenxuan, a modest and virtuous man, wanted to meet with him, but Ko Jun had no choice but to go to the imperial court.

古文：王引之同席而坐，问以魏朝旧事；载以御舆，令于王前乘之以出，顾谓左右曰： 如此之事，唯积善者可以致之。 
现代文：明帝拉着他，和他同席而坐，问他有关魏朝的旧事；用御用的车子给他乘坐，让他就在自己面前乘上车子出宫。明帝看看左右的人，说： 象寇俊今天享受的礼遇，只有积善的人才可以得到。 
English: Emperor Ming took him, sat with him at the table, and asked him about the old days of the Wei Dynasty; he gave him a ride in the royal car, and let him get on the car in front of him to leave the palace. Emperor Ming looked at the people around him and said: The courtesy that Kojun enjoys today is only available to those who are good.

古文：周文育之讨余孝劢也，帝令南豫州刺史侯安都继之。
现代文：周文育讨伐余孝劢的时候，陈武帝命令南豫州刺史侯安都带兵去当后备军。
English: When Zhou Wenyu was fighting against Yu Xiaojuan, Emperor Chen Wu ordered the governor of South Yu Province, Shishi Hou Andu, to take soldiers to serve as a reserve army.

古文：文育死，安都还，遇王琳将周灵、周协南归，与战，擒之。
现代文：周文育被谋害后，侯安都只好回来，路上遇到王琳带着周炅、周协回南方去，就拦住打了一杖，把王琳等人俘获了。
English: After Zhou Wenyu was murdered, Hou Andu had no choice but to return. On the way, he met Wang Lin taking Zhou Qian and Zhou Xie back to the south. He stopped them with a stick and captured Wang Lin and others.

古文：孝劢弟孝猷帅所部四千家诣安都降。安都进军至左里，击曹庆、常众爱，破之。
现代文：余孝劢的弟弟余孝猷率领他管辖的百姓四千家到侯安都那里去请降，侯安都挥兵前进到左里，猛攻曹庆、常众爱，打败了他们。
English: Yu Xiaojuan's younger brother, Yu Xiaojuan, led 4,000 people under his jurisdiction to ask Hou Andu to surrender. Hou Andu advanced to Zuoli with his army, stormed Cao Qing and Chang Cong Ai, and defeated them.

古文：众爱奔庐山，庚寅，庐山民斩之，传首。
现代文：常众爱奔逃到庐山，庚寅，庐山的百姓杀了他，把他的首级拿出来示众。
English: Chang Ye ran away to Lushan, Goyang. The people of Lushan killed him and displayed his severed head.

古文：诏临川王蒨于南皖口置城，使东徐州刺史吴兴钱道戢守之。
现代文：陈武帝下诏让临川王陈在南皖口设立城堡，派东徐州刺史吴兴人钱道戢去驻守。
English: Emperor Chen Wu decreed that King Chen of Linchuan set up a castle in Nanluogou, and sent Qian Daojun, a scholar of Eastern Xuzhou and Wu Xing, to guard it.

古文：丁酉，上不豫，丙午，殂。
现代文：丁酉，陈武帝身体不适，丙午，病逝。
English: Ding Xi, Chen Wu Di was unwell, and died in the afternoon of the third day.

古文：上临戎制胜，英谋独运，而为政务崇宽简，非军旅急务，不轻调发。
现代文：陈武帝每临军机大事都能确定破敌制胜之道，他英勇善谋，独出心裁，而处理政务则崇尚宽和简朴，如不是军旅急务，一般不轻易调发军队。
English: Chen Wudi could determine the way to defeat the enemy and win every time he came to the military and political events. He was brave and resourceful, and had a unique mind. However, he advocated a broad and simple approach to government affairs. If it was not an urgent military matter, it was generally not easy to dispatch the army.

古文：性俭素，常膳不过数品，私宴用瓦器、蚌盘，殽核充事而已；后宫无金翠之饰，不设女乐。
现代文：他天性节俭朴素，平常膳食只有几样菜而已，私人宴会用瓦器、饰以蚌壳的木盘，酒菜足够应付也就行了。后宫的妃子、宫女没有披金带翠的服饰，也不设女乐。
English: He was by nature frugal and simple, and his usual meals consisted of only a few dishes. For his private banquets, he used earthenware, wooden plates decorated with shells, and enough wine and food to cope. The concubines and concubines of his harem did not wear gold and emerald jewelry, nor did they have female music.

古文：时皇子昌在长安，内无嫡嗣，外有强敌，宿将皆将兵在外，朝无重臣，唯中领军杜稜典宿卫兵在建康。
现代文：当时皇子陈昌被俘在长安，陈朝国内没有嫡亲的皇位继承人，国外又有强大的敌人，有经验的老将都带兵在外头，朝廷里也没有重臣。只有领军杜棱掌管宫廷宿卫军还在建康。
English: At that time, the prince Chen Chang was captured in Chang'an, the Chen dynasty had no legitimate heir to the throne in China, there were powerful enemies abroad, experienced veterans were leading soldiers outside, and there were no senior vassals in the court. Only the leader Du Ren, who was in charge of the palace guards, was still doing well.

古文：章皇后召稜及中书侍郎蔡景历入禁中定议，秘不发丧，急召临川王蒨于南宛。
现代文：章皇后召杜棱和中书侍郎蔡景历进入宫禁之中商量主意，决定秘不发丧，紧急从南皖召回临川王陈。
English: Empress Zhang summoned Du Ren and Cai Jingli, the attendant of Chinese calligraphy, to enter the palace to discuss the idea, decided not to mourn secretly, and urgently recalled Linchuan Wang Chen from Nanluo.

古文：景历亲与宦者、宫人密营敛具。
现代文：蔡景历亲自和宦官、宫人一起秘密地办理装殓尸体的器具。
English: Cai Jingli personally, together with eunuchs and courtiers, secretly handled the equipment for decorating the corpse.

古文：时天暑，须治梓宫，恐斤斧之声闻于外，乃以蜡为秘器。
现代文：当时天气很热，必须做一个较大的棺材，因为担心斧头砍削木头的声音传出宫外，就用蜡做成一装尸的棺材。
English: At that time, the weather was very hot and it was necessary to make a larger coffin. Fearing that the sound of the axe chopping wood would be heard outside the palace, wax was used to make a coffin for the corpse.

古文：文书诏敕，依旧宣行。
现代文：朝廷的一应文书诏敕，仍然按平时的样子宣布颁行。
English: The imperial edict issued by the imperial court was still promulgated as usual.

古文：侯安都军还，适至南皖，与临川王俱还朝。
现代文：侯安都的军队回朝，正好到达南皖，听到消息，就和临川王陈一起回到朝廷。
English: Hou Andu's army returned to the imperial court and arrived at Nanlu just in time. Hearing the news, he returned to the imperial court with Linchuan King Chen.

古文：甲寅，王至建康，入居中书省，安都与群臣定议，奉王嗣位，王谦让不敢当。
现代文：甲寅，临川王到了建康，入朝后住在中书省。侯安都与各崐位大臣商量，决定拥戴临川王继承皇帝位，临川王表示谦让不敢接受。
English: When Linchuan Wang arrived in Jiankang, he stayed in Zhongshui Province after entering the imperial court. Hou Andu discussed with the three ministers and decided to support Linchuan Wang to succeed to the imperial throne. Linchuan Wang expressed his modesty and did not dare to accept.

古文：皇后以昌故，未肯下令，群臣犹豫不能决。
现代文：皇后因为皇子陈昌还活着的原故，也不肯下这个命令，大臣们议论纷纷，犹豫着不能做出决定。
English: The Empress, for the reason that Prince Chen Changtu was still alive, was also reluctant to issue this order, and the ministers discussed it one after another, hesitating and unable to make a decision.

古文：安都曰： 今四方未定，何暇及远！
现代文：侯安都说： 现在四方都不安定，哪有功夫想得那么远！
English: Hou Andu said: Now all four sides are unstable, how hard is it to think that far ahead!

古文：临川王有大功于天下，须共立之。
现代文：临川王平定东土，为国家立有大功，我们必须共同拥立他为国主。
English: King Linchuan's pacification of the East is a great achievement for the country. We must jointly support him as the head of the country.

古文：今日之事，后应者斩！ 
现代文：今天之事，迟疑而不立即答应的人一律斩首。 
English: As of today, anyone who hesitates and does not immediately agree will be beheaded.

古文：即按剑上殿，白皇后出玺，又手解蒨发，推就丧次，迁殡大行于太极西阶。
现代文：于是手执剑把走上宫殿，要求皇后拿出玉玺，又亲手解开陈的头发，推他站到了丧事中皇位继承人应该站的位置上，并把棺材迁到太极殿西阶，隆重地为陈武帝发丧。
English: So he walked up to the palace with a sword in his hand, asked the empress to take out the jade urn, and personally untied Chen's hair, pushed him to stand in the position that the heir to the throne should stand in the funeral, and moved the coffin to the west steps of the Taiji Temple, and solemnly mourned for Emperor Chen.

古文：皇后乃下令，以茜纂承大统。是日，即皇帝位，大赦。
现代文：皇后这才下了命令，让陈继承皇帝位，当天，陈就即位，颁布了大赦天下令。
English: It was only then that the empress gave the order for Chen to succeed to the imperial throne. On the same day, Chen ascended the throne and issued an amnesty decree.

古文：秋，七月，丙辰，尊皇后为皇太后。
现代文：秋季，七月，丙辰，尊奉皇后为皇太后。
English: In the autumn, in July, in the spring, the queen is honored as the empress dowager.

古文：辛酉，以侯瑱为太尉，侯安都为司空。
现代文：辛酉，任命侯为太尉，侯安都为司空。
English: Xin Yao appointed Hou as the first lieutenant, and Hou Andu as the second lieutenant.

古文：齐显祖将如晋阳，乃尽诛诸元，或祖父为王，或身尝贵显，皆斩于东市，其婴儿投于空中，承之以槊。
现代文：北齐文宣帝将要去晋阳，于是全部杀掉旧朝元姓的子孙，其中或祖父封过王，或自己曾经显赫富贵过，都在东市被斩首，他们的婴儿被扔上空中，掉下来时让兵士用槊接住。
English: Emperor Xuan of the Northern Qi Dynasty was going to go to Jinyang, so they killed all the descendants of the former Yuan Dynasty, among whom either their grandfather had been crowned king, or they had been prominent and wealthy, and they were all beheaded in Dongshi. Their babies were thrown into the air, and when they fell down, they were caught by soldiers with shackles.

古文：前后死者凡七百二十一人，悉弃尸漳水，剖鱼者往往得人爪甲，鄴下为之久不食鱼。
现代文：前后死去的共有七百二十一人，尸体全部扔入了漳河水内，老百姓剖鱼时往往能见到人的指甲，邺城周围的人因此很久都不再吃鱼了。
English: A total of 721 people died before and after, and all the bodies were thrown into the water of the Lushan River. When people cut fish, they can often see people's fingernails, so people around Lushan stopped eating fish for a long time.

古文：使元黄头与诸囚自金凤台各乘纸鸱以飞，黄头独能至紫陌乃堕，仍付御史中丞毕义云饿杀之。
现代文：又让元黄头和很多囚犯从金凤台上乘上纸鸢飞下，落地的人大都摔死了，但元黄头居然能飞到紫陌才落到地上，没有摔死，于是又把他交给御史中丞毕义云看管，最后活活被饿死。
English: He also let Yuan Huangtu and many prisoners fly down from Jinfeng Terrace on a paper kite, and most of the people who fell to the ground died. However, Yuan Huangtu was able to fly to Zimao before he fell to the ground, and he did not die. Therefore, he was handed over to Gu Shizhongzheng Bi Yiyun for supervision, and finally he was starved to death.

古文：唯开府仪同三司元蛮、祠部郎中元文遥等数家获免。
现代文：在这次大杀戮中，只有开府仪同三司元蛮、祠部郎中元文遥等几家得到赦免。
English: In this large-scale killing, only several families such as Kaifu Yi Tong, Sanji Yuanman, and the priest's son, Zhongyuan Yuanwenyao, were pardoned.

古文：蛮，继之子，常山王演之妃父；文遥，遵之五世孙也。
现代文：元蛮是元继的儿子，常山王高演的妃子的父亲。元文遥是常山公元遵的五世孙。
English: Yuan Man was the son of Yuan Zhi, the father of the concubine of King Gao En of Changshan. Yuan Wen Yao was the fifth generation grandson of King Jun of Changshan.

古文：定襄令元景安，虔之玄孙也，欲请改姓高氏，其从兄景皓曰： 安有弃其本宗而从人之姓者乎！
现代文：定襄县县令元景安，是陈留王元虔的玄孙，他想请求改姓高，但是他的堂兄元景皓说： 怎么能扔掉自己的本姓而去姓别人的姓呢？
English: Dingxiang County magistrate Yuan Jing'an, the great-great-grandson of Chen Liu Wang Yuanqian, wanted to ask Gao to change his surname, but his cousin Yuan Jingyao said: How can you throw away your own surname and take someone else's?

古文：丈夫宁可玉碎，何能瓦全！ 
现代文：大丈夫宁可玉碎，怎么能求瓦全呢？ 
English: It's okay, I'd rather break the jade, how can I ask for the whole jade?

古文：景安以其言白帝，帝收景皓，诛之，赐景安姓高氏。
现代文：元景安把他的话向文宣帝告密，文宣帝把元景皓抓起来，杀害了。赐元景安改姓高氏。
English: Yuan Jingan reported his words to Emperor Wenzhong, who arrested and killed Yuan Jingtao, and forced Yuan Jingan to change his surname to Gao.

古文：八月，甲申，葬武皇帝于万安陵，庙号高祖。
现代文：八月，甲申，陈朝葬陈武帝于万安陵，庙号为高祖。
English: In August, Emperor Gaoshen of the Chen Dynasty buried Emperor Chen Wu in the Wan'an Mausoleum. The temple's name was Gao Zu.

古文：戊戌，齐封皇子绍义为广阳王；以尚书右仆射河间王孝琬为左仆射，都官尚书崔昂为右仆射。
现代文：戊戌，北齐封皇子高绍义为广阳王，任命尚书右仆射河间王高孝琬为左仆射，都官尚书崔昂为右仆射。
English: Wuzhen, Northern Qifeng Prince Gao Shao Yi was the Guangyang King, and he appointed Shangshu's right-hand man, King Gao Xiaojun, as his left-hand man, and Shangshu's right-hand man, Choi Ang, as his right-hand man.

古文：周御正中大夫崔猷建议，以为： 圣人沿革，因时制宜。
现代文：北周的御正中大夫崔猷提出建议，认为： 圣人在政事上的继承或变革，都按照因时制宜的原则来进行。
English: Northern Zhou's imperial doctor, Cui Jun, made a suggestion, saying: The succession or change of saints in political affairs should be carried out in accordance with the principle of time.

古文：今天子称王，不足以威天下，请遵秦、汉旧制称皇帝，建年号。 
现代文：现在我们的天子只称为王，实在不能威慑天下，请遵照秦、汉旧制称为皇帝，建立年号。 
English: Now our heavenly son is only called the king, which really cannot intimidate the world. Please follow the Qin and Han dynasties to call him the emperor and establish the era name.

古文：己亥，周王始称皇帝，追遵文王曰文皇帝，改元武成。
现代文：己亥，周王才开始称皇帝，追遵文王为文皇帝，改换年号为武成。
English: It was only at the end of the Heian period that Zhou Wang began to call himself emperor, followed by Zunwen Wang as Wen Emperor, and changed his era name to Wucheng.

古文：癸卯，齐诏： 民间或有父祖冒姓元氏，或假托携养者，不问世数远近，悉听改复本姓。 
现代文：癸卯，北齐诏令： 民间百姓中如果有父祖辈的人假冒元氏的姓的，或因为受元氏的携带养育而假托姓元氏的，不管年代远近，一律让他们改复本姓。 
English: At the same time, the Northern Qi issued an edict: If there are people among the common people who have ancestors who have falsified the surname of the Yuan Dynasty, or who have been brought up by the Yuan Dynasty and have falsified the surname of the Yuan Dynasty, regardless of the age, let them change the original surname.

古文：初，高祖追谥兄道谭为始兴昭烈王，以其次子顼袭封。
现代文：当初，陈武帝追谥哥哥陈道谭为始兴昭烈王，让他的第二个儿子陈顼继承封号。
English: At first, Emperor Wu of Chen pursued his elder brother Chen Daotan to become the King of the Pioneers, and let his second son Chen Xi inherit the title.

古文：及世祖即位，顼在长安未还，上以本宗乏享，戊戌，诏徙封顼为安成王，皇子伯茂为始兴王。
现代文：等到文帝陈即位，陈顼还被俘在长安没有回来，文帝因为他自己继承了皇位，本宗缺乏主祭的人，于是在戊戌那天，下诏改封陈顼为安成王，封皇子陈伯茂为始兴王，让他供奉陈道谭的祭祀。
English: When Emperor Wenchen ascended the throne, Chen Xi was still in captivity in Chang'an and did not return. Emperor Wen, because he himself had succeeded to the throne, and because the sect lacked a high priest, changed the title of Chen Xi to King Ancheng and the title of the prince Chen Bo Mao to King Shi Xing on the day of Wu Xi, and let him offer the sacrifice of Chen Daotan.

古文：初，周太祖平蜀，以其形胜之地，不欲使宿将居之，问诸子： 谁可往者？ 
现代文：当初，北周文帝平定蜀地，考虑到蜀地山高路险，是军事要地，不想让老将去镇守，就问自己的儿子们： 谁可以去镇守蜀地？ 
English: At the beginning, the Northern Zhou Wendi conquered Shudi, considering that Shudi Mountain Highway is a military important place. He did not want to let the veteran go to guard the town, so he asked his sons: Who can go to guard Shudi?

古文：皆不对。
现代文：儿子们都不回答。
English: No one answered.

古文：少子安成公宪请行，太祖以其幼，不许。
现代文：只有小儿子安成公宇文宪要求去，文帝因为他年幼，没有批准。
English: Only the youngest son, Ancheng Gongwu Wenxian, asked to go, but Emperor Wen did not approve because he was too young.

古文：壬子，周人以宪为益州总管，时年十六，善于抚绥，留心政术，蜀人悦之。
现代文：壬子，北周任命宇文宪为益州总管，当时他年仅十六岁，却很善于安抚治理，留心治政之术，蜀地人民很喜欢他。
English: At that time, he was only 16 years old, but he was very good at pacifying and governing, and the people of Shu liked him very much.

古文：九月，乙卯，以大将军天水公广为梁州总管。
现代文：九月，乙卯，任命大将军天水公宇文广为梁州总管。
English: In September, General Tianshui Gongyu Wenguang was appointed as the chief administrator of Liangzhou.

古文：广，导之子也。
现代文：宇文广是宇文导的儿子。
English: Uwenguang is the son of Uwundu.

古文：辛酉，立皇子伯宗为太子。
现代文：辛酉，陈朝立皇子陈伯宗为太子。
English: Soon after, the Chen dynasty made Prince Chen Bozong the crown prince.

古文：己巳，齐齐如晋阳。
现代文：己巳，北齐国主去晋阳。
English: At that time, the ruler of Northern Qi went to Jinyang.

古文：辛未，周主封其弟辅成公邕为鲁公，安成公宪为齐公，纯为陈公，盛为越公，达为代公，通为冀公，逌为滕公。
现代文：辛未，北周国主封他的弟弟辅城公宇文邕为鲁公，安成公宇文宪为齐公，宇文纯为陈公，宇文盛为越公，宇文达为代公，宇文通为冀公，宇文为滕公。
English: In Xinwei, North Zhou Province made his younger brother, Fu Cheng Gong, U Wenyi the ruler of Lu, An Cheng Gong, U Wenyi the ruler of Qi, U Wenyi the ruler of Chen, U Wenyi the ruler of Yue, U Wenyi the ruler of Da, U Wenyi the ruler of Ji, and U Wenyi the ruler of Teng.

古文：乙亥，立太子母吴兴沈妃为皇后。
现代文：乙亥，陈朝立太子陈伯宗的母亲吴兴人沈妃为皇后。
English: Wu Xingren Shenfei, the mother of Chen Bozong, the crown prince of the Chen dynasty, became the empress.

古文：周少保怀宁庄公蔡祐卒。
现代文：北周少保怀宁庄公蔡去世。
English: North Zhou Minor Protector Huainingshuang Gong Cai passed away.

古文：齐显祖嗜酒成疾，不复能食，自知不能久，谓李后曰： 人生必有死，何足致惜！
现代文：北齐文宣帝因为嗜酒病重，不能进食，自己知道不能活多久了，便对李后说： 人生必有一死，我对死没有什么可惜的。
English: Emperor Xuan of Northern Qi was seriously ill with alcoholism and could not eat. He knew that he did not have long to live, so he said to Empress Li: "Life must come to an end, I have nothing to regret about death."

古文：但怜正道尚幼，人将夺之耳！ 
现代文：只是怜悯太子正道年纪还小，恐怕有人会夺他的皇位！ 
English: It's just a pity that Prince Masamichi is still young, I'm afraid someone will take his throne!

古文：又谓常山王演曰： 夺则任汝，慎勿杀也！ 
现代文：又对常山王高演说： 要夺皇位也只好由你去，但千万不要杀害我儿。 
English: He also said to Wang Gao of Changshan, "If you want to seize the throne, you will have to do it yourself, but don't kill my son.

古文：尚书令开封王杨愔、领军大将军平秦王归彦、侍中广汉燕子献、黄门侍郎郑颐皆受遗诏辅政。
现代文：尚书令开封王杨、领军大将军平秦王高归彦、侍中广汉人燕子献、黄门侍郎郑颐都接受遗诏承担辅政的责任。
English: Wang Yang of Kaifeng, Wang Gao Guihong of Pingqin, the leading general of the army, Yan Zi Xian of Guanghan, and Zheng Qi, the attendant of Huangmen, all accepted the edict to assume the responsibility of supporting the government.

古文：冬，十月，甲午，殂。
现代文：冬季，十月，甲午，北齐文宣帝去世。
English: In the winter, in October, in the afternoon of the first day of the month, Northern Qi Emperor Wenxuan passed away.

古文：癸卯，发丧，群臣号哭，无下泣者，唯杨愔涕泗呜咽。
现代文：癸卯，为其发丧，群臣们都作出号哭的样子，但没有人流泪。只有杨涕泪俱下，呜咽不止。
English: Unfortunately, for his funeral, the courtiers were all crying, but no one shed tears. Only Yang Han was in tears, sobbing endlessly.

古文：太子殷即位，大赦。
现代文：太子高殷即皇帝位，大赦天下。
English: Prince Gao Yin is the emperor, and the whole world will be amnestied.

古文：庚戌，尊皇太后为太皇太后，皇后为皇太后；诏诸土木金铁杂匠一切停罢。
现代文：庚戌，尊称皇太后为太皇太后，皇后为皇太后；下诏命令各种土木金铁杂作之事全部暂停。
English: Geng Zheng, respectfully called the Empress Dowager as the Grand Empress Dowager, and the Empress as the Empress Dowager; issued an order to suspend all kinds of civil, metal and iron miscellaneous works.

古文：王琳闻高祖殂，乃以少府卿吴郡孙瑒为郢州刺史，总留任，奉梁永嘉王庄出屯濡须口，齐扬州道行台慕容俨帅众临江，为之声援。
现代文：王琳听到陈武帝去世的消息，便任命少府卿吴郡人孙为郢州刺史，让他总揽留守事宜，自己则拥奉梁朝永嘉王萧庄出兵屯驻濡须口，北齐扬州道行台慕容俨率领部众逼近长江，为其声援。
English: When Wang Lin heard the news of Emperor Chen Wu's death, she appointed the young prefect of Wu County, Rensun, as the governor of Zhangzhou, and let him take care of all matters concerning his stay there. She herself supported the Liang Dynasty, Yongjia King, Xiaozhuang, and stationed troops in Wusukou. The Northern Qi, Yangzhou, and Jiangtai Murongjun led the crowd to approach the Yangtze River to show their solidarity.

古文：十一月，乙卯，琳寇大雷，诏侯瑱、侯安都及仪同徐度将兵御之。
现代文：十一月，乙卯，王琳进犯大雷。陈文帝诏令侯、侯安都和仪同徐度带兵去抵抗。
English: In November, Wang Lin invaded Dailai. Emperor Chen ordered Hou, Hou Andu and Yi to lead the troops to resist.

古文：安州刺史吴明彻夜袭湓城，琳遣巴陵太守任忠击明彻，大破之，明彻仅以身免。
现代文：安州刺史吴明彻乘夜袭击湓城，王琳派巴陵太守任忠进攻吴明彻，把他打得大败，吴明彻只逃出了一条命。
English: Anzhou assassin Wu Mingche attacked Lucheng at night. Wang Lin sent Baling Taishou Renzhong to attack Wu Mingche and defeated him. Wu Mingche only escaped with his life.

古文：琳因引兵东下。
现代文：王琳乘引势兵东下。
English: Wang Lin took the opportunity to lead the soldiers eastward.

古文：齐以右丞相斛律金为左丞相，常山王演为太傅，长广王湛为太尉，段韶为司徒，平原王淹为司空，高阳王湜为尚书左仆射，河间王孝琬为司州牧，侍中燕子献为右仆射。
现代文：北齐任命右丞相斛律金为丞相，常山王高演为太傅，长广王高湛为太尉，段韶为司徒，平原王高淹为司空，高阳王高为尚书左仆射，河间王高孝琬为司州牧，侍中燕子献为右仆射。
English: The Northern Qi appointed the Minister of the Right, Yu Liujin, as the Minister of the Right, Changshan Wang Gao Rong as the Grand Master, Changguang Wang Gaotan as the Second Lieutenant, Duan Yu as the Master of the Horse, Pingyuan Wang Gaotan as the Master of the Horse, Gaoyang Wang Gao as the Left Footman of the Horse, Kawama Wang Gaotiao as the Master of the Horse, and Yan Zi Xian as the Right Footman of the Horse.

古文：辛未，齐显祖之丧至鄴。
现代文：辛未，北齐文宣帝的灵柩由晋阳移到邺城。
English: In Xinwei, the coffin of the Northern Qibun Emperor Xuan moved from Jinyang to Shicheng.

古文：十二月，戊戌，齐徙上党王绍仁为渔阳王，广阳王绍义为范阳王，长乐王绍广为陇西王。
现代文：十二月，戊戌，北齐改封上党王高绍仁为渔阳王，广阳王高绍义为范阳王，长乐王高绍广为陇西王。
English: In December, Wuyi, North Qi changed the title of the party king Gao Shao Ren to Yuyang King, Guangyang King Gao Shao Yi to Fanyang King, and Changle King Gao Shao Guang to Shaanxi King.

