古文：黄帝问于岐伯曰：凡刺之法，先必本于神。
现代文：黄帝向岐伯问道：针刺的法则，必须先以病人的神气为依据。
English: Huang Di asked Qibo: The rule of acupuncture must first be based on the patient's aura.

古文：血、脉、营、气、精、神，此五脏之所藏也。
现代文：因为血、脉、营、气、精，都是五脏所贮藏的。
English: Because blood, veins, qi, qi, and qi are all stored in the five viscera.

古文：至其淫泆，离臓则精失，魂魄飞扬，志意恍乱，智虑去身者，何因而然乎？
现代文：如果失常，离开了贮藏之脏，五脏的精气就会失掉，出现魂魄飞扬、志意烦乱，本身失去思想，这是什么原因呢？
English: If you become deranged, if you leave the stored filth, the essence of the five organs will be lost, the soul will be flying, the will will be disturbed, and the mind itself will be lost. What is the reason for this?

古文：天之罪与？人之过乎？
现代文：是自然的病态呢，还是人为的过失呢？
English: Is it a natural pathology, or is it human error?

古文：何谓德、气、生、精、神、魂、魄、心、意、志、思、智、虑？
现代文：为什么说德气能够产生精、神、魂、魄、心、意、志、思、智、虑？
English: Why is it said that virtue can produce spirit, god, soul, soul, heart, mind, aspiration, thought, wisdom, and concern?

古文：请问其故。
现代文：希望听听其中的道理。
English: I would like to hear the reason for this.

古文：岐伯答曰：天之在我者德也，地之在我者气也。德流气薄而生者也。
现代文：岐伯回答说：天之生我的是德，地之生我的是气，天德地气交流搏击就生成了人。
English: Qi Bo replied, "I was born with virtue, and I was born with qi. The exchange of qi between heaven and earth gave birth to a human being.

古文：故生之来谓之精，两精相搏谓之神，随神往来者谓之魂，并精而出入者谓之魄，所以任物者谓之心，心有所忆谓之意，意之所存谓之志，因志而存变谓之思，因思而远慕谓之虑，因虑而处物谓之智。
现代文：因此，演化成人体的原始物质叫做精，阴阳两精结合而产生的生命运动叫做神，随着神的往来活动而出现的知觉机能叫做魂，跟精气一起出入而产生的运动机能叫做魄，可以支配外来事物的叫做心，心对外来事物有所记忆而留下的印象叫做意，意念积累而形成的认识叫做志，根据认识而研究事物的变化叫做思，由思考而产生远的推想叫做虑，依靠思虑能抓住事物发展规律处理得当叫做智。
English: Therefore, the original substance that evolved into the human body is called essence, the life movement that arises from the combination of yin and yang is called god, the perceptual function that appears with the interaction of god is called soul, the motor function that arises with the essence is called ghost, the mind that can control foreign things is called heart, the impression that the heart has a memory of foreign things is called meaning, the knowledge formed by the accumulation of ideas is called aspiration, the study of changes in things based on knowledge is called thinking, the far-reaching inferences that arise from thinking are called concerns, and the ability to grasp the laws of development of things and handle them properly by relying on considerations is called wisdom

古文：故智者之养生也，必顺四时而适寒暑，和喜怒而安居处，节阴阳而调刚柔。如是，则僻邪不至，长生久视。
现代文：因此，明智之人的养生方法，必定顺应四时寒暑气候的变化，调和喜怒而安定起居，节制阴阳之偏而调谐刚柔，象这样，才不至被虚邪贼风所侵袭，可以长生不老。
English: Therefore, a wise person's health regimen must conform to the changes in the cold and hot weather at four o'clock, reconcile joy and anger and live stably, control the bias of yin and yang and tune up the stiffness and softness. In this way, they will not be attacked by the evil wind and can live forever.

古文：是故怵惕思虑者则伤神，神伤则恐惧，流淫而不止。
现代文：所以过度的惊恐思虑，会伤神气，伤了神气会使阴气流失而不能固摄。
English: Therefore, excessive fear and anxiety will hurt one's self-confidence, and if one's self-confidence is hurt, one's negative energy will be lost and cannot be fixed.

古文：因悲哀动中者，竭绝而失生。
现代文：悲哀过度的，会使气绝而丧命。
English: Excessive sorrow will cause one to faint and die.

古文：喜乐者，神惮散而不藏。
现代文：喜乐过度的，会使气散而不能收藏。
English: Excessive joy will cause the qi to dissipate and cannot be collected.

古文：愁忧者，气闭塞而不行。
现代文：忧愁过度的，会使神气闭塞而不能流畅。
English: Excessive melancholy will make the aura blocked and unable to flow.

古文：盛怒者，迷惑而不治。
现代文：过分的恼怒，会使神志昏迷，失去常态。
English: Excessive irritation will make you lose your sanity and lose your normal state.

古文：恐惧者，神荡惮而不收。
现代文：恐惧过度的，会由于精神动荡而精气不能收敛。
English: If the fear is excessive, it will result in mental instability and the energy will not be able to converge.

古文：心，怵惕思虑则伤神，神伤则恐惧自失，破䐃脱肉；毛悴色夭，死于冬。
现代文：过度的惊恐思虑，会伤神气，神伤就会恐惧自己控制不住，日久则内耗伤，肌肉脱消，皮毛憔悴，颜色异常，必死于冬季。
English: Excessive fear and anxiety will hurt one's self-esteem, and self-injury will lead to uncontrollable fear. In the long run, it will lead to internal injuries, muscle loss, dandruff, abnormal color, and death in winter.

古文：脾，愁忧而不解则伤意，意伤则悗乱，四肢不举；毛悴色夭，死于春。
现代文：过度的忧愁而得不到解除，就会伤意，意伤就会苦闷烦乱，四肢无力，不能举动，皮毛憔悴，颜色枯槁，必死于春季。
English: If the excessive sorrow is not relieved, it will be sad, the mental injury will be distressed, the limbs will be weak and unable to move, the fur will be wrinkled, the color will be dull, and it will die in the spring.

古文：肝，悲哀动中则伤魂，魂伤则狂忘不精，不精则不正，当人阴缩而挛筋，两胁骨不举；毛悴色夭，死于秋。
现代文：过度悲哀影响到内脏，就会伤魂，魂伤会出现精神紊乱，致使肝脏失去藏血功能，阴器收缩，筋脉拘挛，两胁骨痛，毛发憔悴，颜色枯槁，必死于秋季。
English: Excessive sadness affects the internal organs, it will hurt the soul, and the soul injury will lead to mental disorder, causing the liver to lose its function of hiding blood, the genitals to contract, the myocardium to constrict, the two coccyxes to ache, the hair to fall out, the color to fade, and it will surely die in the autumn.

古文：肺，喜乐无极则伤魄，魄伤则狂，狂者意不存人，皮革焦；毛悴色夭，死于夏。
现代文：过度的喜乐就会伤魄，魄伤就会神乱发狂，对意识活动失去观察能力，其人皮肤枯焦，毛发憔悴，颜色异常，必死于夏季。
English: Excessive joy will lead to sorrow, sorrow will lead to madness, loss of ability to observe the activities of consciousness, the person's skin is charred, the hair is coarse, the color is abnormal, and he will die in the summer.

古文：肾，盛怒而不止则伤志，志伤则喜忘其前言，腰脊不可以俛仰屈伸；毛悴色夭，死于季夏。
现代文：大怒不止会伤志，志伤则经常忘掉自己从前说过的话，腰脊不能俯仰屈伸，毛发憔悴，颜色异常，必死于季夏。
English: Anger not only hurts one's spirit, but a wounded spirit often forgets what one has said in the past, the spine cannot bend, the hair is unkempt, the color is abnormal, and one is sure to die in the summer.

古文：恐惧而不解则伤精，精伤则骨酸痿厥，精时自下。
现代文：过度的恐惧而解除不了，就会伤精，精伤就会发生骨节酸楚和阳痿，常有遗精现象。
English: If the excessive fear cannot be relieved, it will injure the sperm, and if the sperm is injured, it will cause osteoarthritis and impotence, and often there will be sperm excretion.

古文：是故五脏主藏精者也，不可伤，伤则失守而阴虚，阴虚则无气，无气则死矣。
现代文：因此，五脏是主藏精气的，精气不可被损伤，如伤就会使精气失守而形成阴虚，阴虚就不能气化，那样人就不能生存了。
English: Therefore, the five viscera are the main reservoirs of the essence, and the essence must not be damaged. If it is damaged, the essence will be lost and the yin void will be formed. The yin void cannot be vaporized, so people cannot survive.

古文：是故用针者，察观病人之态，以知精、神、魂、魄之存亡，得失之意，五者以伤，针不可以治之也。
现代文：所以使用针刺的人，首先要观察病人的形态，从而了解他的精、神、魂、魄等精神活动的旺盛或衰亡，假若五脏的精气都受到损伤，针刺就不能治疗了。
English: Therefore, people who use acupuncture must first observe the patient's form, so as to understand the vigor or decline of his spirit, god, soul, soul and other spiritual activities. If the essence of the five organs is damaged, acupuncture cannot be treated.

古文：肝藏血，血舍魂，肝气虚则恐，实则怒。
现代文：肝是藏血的器官，魂又是依附于血液的，肝气虚就会恐惧，肝气盛就会发怒。
English: The liver is the organ that stores blood, and the soul is attached to the blood. If the liver is deficient in qi, it will become fearful, and if it is abundant in qi, it will become angry.

古文：脾藏营，营舍意，脾气虚则四肢不用，五脏不安；实则腹胀，经溲不利。
现代文：脾是藏营气的器官，意又是依附于营气的，脾气虚就会使四肢活动不灵，五脏也不安和，脾气过实就会发生腹胀、月经及大小便不利。
English: The spleen is the organ that stores the qi, and the mind is attached to the qi. If the spleen is deficient, the limbs will not be able to move, and the internal organs will not be at ease. If the spleen is too strong, there will be bloating, menstruation, and unfavorable bowel movements.

古文：心藏脉，脉舍神，心气虚则悲；实则笑不休。
现代文：心是藏脉气的器官，神则依附于脉，心气虚就会产生悲伤情绪，心气太盛就会狂笑不止。
English: The heart is the organ that stores qi, while the gods are attached to it. If the heart is deficient in qi, sadness will arise. If the heart is too abundant in qi, there will be endless laughter.

古文：肺藏气，气舍魄，肺气虚，则鼻塞不利，少气；实则喘喝，胸盈仰息。
现代文：肺是藏气的器官，魄是依附于气的，肺气虚就会发生鼻塞、呼吸不利，气短，肺气太实就会发生大喘、胸满甚至仰面而喘。
English: The lungs are the organs that store gas, and the lungs are attached to the gas. If the lungs are deficient in gas, nasal congestion will occur, breathing will be unfavorable, shortness of breath, if the lungs are too solid, there will be wheezing, chest full, and even on the back.

古文：肾藏精，精舍志，肾气虚则厥；实则胀，五脏不安。
现代文：肾是藏精的器官；人的意志是依附于精气的，肾气虚就会四肢发冷，肾气太盛就会有胀满、五脏不安之状。
English: The kidney is an organ that stores essence; a person's will is attached to the essence. If the kidney qi is deficient, the extremities will feel cold. If the kidney qi is too abundant, the organs will feel full and uneasy.

古文：必审五脏之病形，以知其气之虚实，谨而调之也。
现代文：因此，五脏如患病，一定要审察其病形，了解元气的虚实，从而谨慎加以调治。
English: Therefore, if the five viscera are diseased, it is necessary to examine their pathology, understand the truth and falsity of vitality, and then carefully adjust and treat them.

