古文：点字子皙，年十一，居父母忧，几至灭性。
现代文：何点字子晰，十一岁时，为父母居丧，几乎到了毁灭身体的地步。
English: When I was eleven years old, I grieved for my parents, almost to the point of physical destruction.

古文：及长，感家祸，欲绝昏宦，尚之强爲娶琅邪王氏。
现代文：等他长大，为家祸而伤感，要断绝婚姻和仕途，祖父何尚之强行为他娶了琅笽的王氏。
English: When he grew up, he was saddened by the family misfortune and wanted to break off his marriage and career. His grandfather He Shang was so strong that he married the shy Wang clan.

古文：礼毕，将亲迎，点累涕泣，求执本志，遂得罢。
现代文：媒礼结束后，即将亲自迎娶，何点屡次哭泣，请求坚持本来的志向，于是作罢。
English: Other ceremonies have been completed, and when the welcoming ceremony is about to take place, at what time, again and again, they cry to what kind of tears, and ask themselves to stick to their original wishes, so they can stop the marriage.

古文：点明目秀眉，容貌方雅，真素通美，不以门户自矜。
现代文：何点眼明眉秀，容貌方正文雅，真率素淡，十分美好，不以门户高贵自夸。
English: The eyes are bright and the eyebrows are beautiful, the appearance is square and elegant, the sincerity is plain, it is very beautiful, and it does not boast of being noble.

古文：博通群书，善谈论。
现代文：博通群书，善于谈论。
English: He is well-read and good at talking.

古文：家本素族，亲姻多贵仕。
现代文：他家本来素为世族，亲戚婚姻多是贵官。
English: His family had always been a worldly one, and most of his relatives were married to high-ranking officials.

古文：点虽不入城府，性率到，好狎人物。
现代文：何点虽然没有进入城府做官，但是性格随便，好亲近人物。
English: Although he did not enter the city government to work as an official, he has a casual personality and is very close to people.

古文：遨游人间，不簪不带，以人地并高，无所与屈，大言踑踞公卿，敬下。
现代文：遨游人间，不插簪不系带，因为人才地位都很高，没有什么人让他受委屈，他面对公卿展脚倚坐，高谈阔论，而对下层人士却很敬重。
English: When he travels, he does not mingle with the common people, because the status of talented people is very high, and there is no one to let him be wronged. In the face of the nobles, he sits on his feet and speaks highly, but he respects the lower-class people.

古文：或乘柴车，蹑草屩，恣心所适，致醉而归。
现代文：有时他乘着柴车，穿着草鞋，随心漫游，酒醉而归。
English: Sometimes he roams around in a chai cart, wearing straw sandals, and comes home drunk.

古文：故世论以点爲孝隐士，弟胤爲小隐士，大夫多慕从之。
现代文：所以世人评论以何点为孝隐士，他弟弟何胤为小隐士，很多士大夫都仰慕和追随他们。
English: Therefore, people around the world commented on the fact that he was a filial recluse, and his younger brother, He Yan, was a minor recluse, and many scholars admired and followed them.

古文：时人称重其通,号曰 游侠处士 。
现代文：当时的人们赞扬和重视他的博通，称他为 游侠处士 。
English: People at that time praised and valued his broad-mindedness, calling him a ranger officer.

古文：兄求亦隐吴郡武丘山。
现代文：他的哥哥何求也隐居在武丘山。
English: His brother, He Kui, also lived in seclusion on Mount Wuqiu.

古文：求卒，点菜食不饮酒，讫于三年，腰带减半。
现代文：何求去世，何点只吃蔬菜不饮酒，持续了三年，腰带减细了一半。
English: How to die, how to eat only vegetables and not drink alcohol, lasted three years, the belt was reduced by half.

古文：宋泰始末，征爲太子洗马。
现代文：宋朝的泰始末年，征调他为太子洗马。
English: At the end of the Taishi era of the Song Dynasty, he was conscripted to wash horses for the crown prince.

古文：齐初，累征中书侍郎、太子中庶子，并不就。
现代文：齐朝初年，多次征调他为中书侍郎、太子中庶子，都没有就任。
English: In the first year of the Qi Dynasty, he was repeatedly conscripted to serve as a junior secretary and an illegitimate son of the crown prince, but never took office.

古文：与陈郡谢伷、吴国张融、会稽孔德璋爲莫逆友。
现代文：他与陈郡的谢、吴国的张融、会稽的孔德璋是亲密的知己。
English: He is a close confidant of Xie of Chen County, Zhang Rong of Wuzhong and Kong Dejun of Hefei.

古文：点门世信佛，从弟遁以东篱门园居之，德璋爲筑室焉。
现代文：何点家门世代信佛，堂弟何遁让他住在东篱门的园子中，孔德璋为他筑了一所房子。
English: Several generations of the family believed in Buddhism. His cousin, He Yao, let him live in the garden of the East Hedge Gate, and Kong Deyao built a house for him.

古文：园有卞忠贞冢，点植花于冢侧，每饮必举酒酹之。
现代文：园子中有卞忠贞的墓，何点在墓旁种了花草，每次饮酒必定要举酒祭奠他。
English: In the garden, there is the tomb of Zou Zhongzheng. Flowers and plants have been planted next to the tomb at several points. Every time you drink, you must raise your glass to pay tribute to him.

古文：招携胜侣，乃名德桑门，清言赋咏，优游自得。
现代文：招聚名人好友，后来取名德桑门，赋诗咏唱，悠游自得。
English: It attracted celebrities and friends, and was later named the De Sang Gate. It was a place for poetry and song, and people could enjoy a leisurely stroll.

古文：初，褚彦回、王俭爲宰相，点谓人曰： 我作齐书已竟，赞云 回既世族，俭亦国华，不赖舅氏，遑恤国家 。 
现代文：起初，褚彦回、王俭做宰相，何点对别人说： 我作《齐书》已经完成，赞论中说： 彦回本是世家大族，王俭也是国家精华，他们不是依赖舅氏，哪里顾上考虑国家！  
English: At the beginning, when Yan Yanhui and Wang Jian were prime ministers, how many points did they say to others: I have completed the "Book of Qi," and said in praise: Yan Yanhui is originally a great family, and Wang Jian is also the essence of the country. They do not rely on their uncle, and they always consider the country!

古文：王俭闻之，欲候点，知不可见，乃止。
现代文：王俭听说了，想等候何点，知道无法见到，才停下了。
English: When Wang Jian heard this, he originally wanted to visit at what time, but later he knew that he could not see at what time, so he gave up the plan to visit.

古文：豫章王嶷命驾造点，点从后门遁去。
现代文：豫章王萧嶷乘车去见何点，何点从后门离开了。
English: At what time did Yuanzhang Wang Xiaoqi drive to visit, and at what time did he escape through the back door?

古文：司徒竟陵王子良闻之，曰： 豫章王尚望尘不及，吾当望岫息心。 
现代文：司徒竟陵王萧子良听到后，说： 豫章王尚且望尘不及，我应当远望山岫消除这种想法了。 
English: After hearing Xiao Ziliang, the King of Mausoleums, say, "The King of Yuzhang still has no hope. I should look to the mountains to dispel this thought."

古文：后点在法轮寺，子良就见之，点角巾登席，子良欣悦无已，遗点嵇叔夜酒杯、徐景山酒枪。
现代文：后来何点在法轮寺，萧子良前往见他，何点头戴隐士的方巾登席，萧子良欢欣不止，赠给何点嵇叔夜酒杯、徐景山酒枪。
English: Later, at Falun Temple, Xiao Ziliang went to see him. He nodded and wore a hermit's square scarf to attend the ceremony. Xiao Ziliang was overjoyed. He gave Xiao Ziliang a night glass and a Xu Jingshan wine gun.

古文：点少时尝患渴利，积岁不愈。
现代文：何点少年时候曾经患过渴痢病，多年不愈。
English: At some point in his youth, he suffered from dysentery, which lasted for many years.

古文：后在吴中石佛寺建讲，于讲所昼寝，梦一道人，形貌非常，授丸一掬，梦中服之，自此而差，时人以爲淳德所感。
现代文：后来在吴中石佛寺建坛讲经，在讲经的地方白天小睡，梦见有一个道人，形貌不凡，送给他一捧药丸，梦中把它吃了，从此病就好了，当时的人认为这是由于他的美好德行感动了神人。
English: Later, he gave a sermon on the foundation of the altar of the stone Buddhist temple in Wuzhong, and took a nap during the day in the place where the sermon was preached. He dreamed of a Taoist with an extraordinary appearance, and gave him a bunch of pills. He ate it in his dream, and his illness was cured. People at the time thought that it was because of his beautiful virtue that moved the godman.

古文：性通侻好施，远近致遗，一无所逆，随复散焉。
现代文：他性格通脱爱好施舍，远近的人给他赠送财物，他一概不推辞，随后就又散发出去。
English: He is a generous person with a penchant for charity. People from near and far give him gifts of money, which he does not refuse at all, and then distributes them.

古文：尝行经朱雀门街，有自车后盗点衣者，见而不言，旁人禽盗与之，点乃以衣施盗。
现代文：他曾经路过朱雀门街，有一个人从车后偷盗何点的衣物，他看见了却不吱声，旁人把盗贼捉住交给了他，何点却把衣服送给了盗贼。
English: He once passed through Suzakumen Street. A man was stealing some clothes from the back of the car. He saw it but didn't say a word. A bystander caught the thief and handed him over, but gave the clothes to the thief.

古文：盗不敢受，点令告有司，盗惧乃受之。
现代文：盗贼不敢接受，何点要让人向有关部门告发，盗贼非常害怕，这才接受了。
English: Thieves do not dare to accept, how many points should be reported to the relevant authorities, thieves are very afraid, this is accepted.

古文：点雅有人伦鉴，多所甄拔。
现代文：何点对人物很有鉴别能力，他识别奖励提拔过许多人。
English: He is very discerning about people, and he has promoted many people by recognizing rewards.

古文：知吴兴丘迟于幼童，称济阳江淹于寒素，悉如其言。哀乐过人。
现代文：吴兴的丘迟还在幼童的时候，何点就发现了他；济阳的江淹还在贫寒的时候，何点就称赞过他，结果和他说的完全一样。他的哀乐超过常人。
English: When Wu Xing's hill was still in its infancy, he found him at any time; when Jiyang's river flood was still poor and cold, he praised him at any time, and the result was exactly the same as he said. His sorrow and joy exceeded that of ordinary people.

古文：尝行逢葬者，叹曰： 此哭者之怀，岂可思邪。 
现代文：他曾在走路的时候遇到送葬的人，慨叹说： 这痛哭人的心情，怎么可以想象呢！ 
English: He once encountered a mourner while walking and lamented, "How can I imagine the feelings of someone who is crying so hard!

古文：于是悲恸不能禁。
现代文：于是悲痛得不能自制。
English: So the grief is uncontrollable.

古文：老又娶鲁国孔嗣女，嗣亦隐者。点虽昏，亦不与妻相见，筑别室以处之，人莫谕其意。
现代文：年老时候又娶了鲁国孔嗣的女儿，孔嗣也是一个隐士，何点虽然结了婚，也不与妻子相见，另外筑了一处房子让她住，人们都不知道他是什么意思。
English: In his old age, he married the daughter of Kongzhi of Lu. Kongzhi was also a hermit. Although he was married, he did not see his wife at all. He also built a house for her to live in. People did not know what he meant.

古文：吴国张融少时免官，而爲诗有高言，点答诗曰： 昔闻东都日，不在简书前。 
现代文：吴国的张融少年的时候被免官，而作诗有很高妙的句子，何点答诗说： 昔闻东都日，不在简书前。 
English: Zhang Rong of the State of Wu was dismissed from his post when he was a teenager, and his poem has very wonderful sentences. How many points does the answer poem say: Once upon a time, the capital of the East was not in front of Jianshu.

古文：虽戏而融久病之。
现代文：虽然是开玩笑的话，而张融心中一直怨恨了很久。
English: Although it was a joke, Zhang Rong had held a grudge for a long time.

古文：及点后昏，融始爲诗赠点曰： 惜哉何居士，薄暮遘荒淫。 
现代文：等何点后来又结了婚，张融便写诗赠给何点说： 惜哉何居士，薄暮遘荒淫。 
English: After he married again, Zhang Rong wrote a poem and gave it to him, saying, "What a pity, what a layman, the twilight is so wild.

古文：点亦病之。
现代文：何点也很怨恨。
English: There's a lot of resentment.

古文：永元中，崔慧景围城，人间无薪，点悉伐园树以赡亲党。
现代文：永元时期，崔慧景围城，人们都没有柴烧，何点便把园子中的树全部砍掉送给亲友和乡邻。
English: In the Yongyuan period, when Cui Huijing besieged the city, people had no firewood, so they cut down all the trees in the garden at any time and gave them to relatives and friends and neighbors.

古文：慧景性好佛义，先慕交点，点不顾之。
现代文：崔慧景喜欢佛理，先前向往结交何点，何点不理他。
English: Cui Huiqing liked Bu Li. She had longed to make friends with him, but had ignored him at times.

古文：至是乃逼召点，点裂裙爲裤，往赴其军，终日谈说，不及军事。
现代文：到了现在便逼召何点，何点把裙子撕开作为裤子，到了他的军中，终日谈佛，而不谈及军事。
English: Now he is forced to wear a skirt, which he rips off to use as trousers, to join his army, and spends all day talking about Buddhism instead of the military.

古文：其语默之迹如此。
现代文：他谈话的情况就是这样。
English: That was the extent of his conversation.

古文：慧景平后，东昏大怒，欲诛之。
现代文：崔慧景平定以后，东昏侯大怒，要把他杀掉。
English: After Cui Huijing was subdued, Dongwu Hou was furious and wanted to kill him.

古文：王莹爲之惧，求计于萧畅。
现代文：王莹很替他害怕，求萧畅出个主意。
English: Wang Ying was very afraid for him and asked Xiao Chang to come up with an idea.

古文：畅谓茹法珍曰： 点若不诱贼共讲，未必可量，以此言之，乃应得封。 
现代文：萧畅对茹法珍说： 何点如果不引诱敌人共同讲佛，情况就未必可以估量了，由此而言，便应该得到封赏。 
English: Xiao Chang said to Ru Fazhen: If you do not entice the enemy to jointly preach Buddhism, the situation may not be measurable. Therefore, you should be rewarded.

古文：东昏乃止。
现代文：东昏侯才罢休了。
English: It was only after the Eastern dusk that they stopped.

古文：梁武帝与点有旧，及践阼，手诏论旧，赐以鹿皮巾等，并召之。
现代文：梁武帝与何点有旧交，登基以后，写了手诏叙说旧情，赐给他鹿皮巾等物品，并且要召见他。
English: Emperor Liangwu had an old friendship with Ho Ting. After he ascended to the throne, he wrote a handwritten edict recounting the old situation, gave him a deerskin scarf and other items, and summoned him.

古文：点以巾褐引入华林园，帝赠诗酒，恩礼如旧，仍下诏征爲侍中。
现代文：何点以方巾粗衣的穿戴被引入了华林园，武帝赠他诗酒，像从前一样以礼相待，并下诏书征他为侍中。
English: Emperor Wu presented him with poetic wine, treated him with the same courtesy as before, and issued an edict to recruit him as an attendant.

古文：捋帝须曰： 乃欲臣老子。 
现代文：他竟敢违逆武帝，说： 还想让我老头子来做大臣！ 
English: How dare he disobey Emperor Wu and say, "I still want my old man to be a minister!"

古文：辞疾不起。
现代文：辞病不起。
English: I can't afford to go on sick leave.

古文：复下诏详加资给，并出在所，日费所须，太官别给。
现代文：武帝又下诏书详加资助，全部送到他的住处，每天所需要的费用，由太官另外供给。
English: Emperor Wu also issued an imperial edict detailing additional subsidies, all of which were sent to his residence, and the daily expenses required were provided separately by the eunuch.

古文：天监二年卒，诏给第一品材一具，丧事所须，内监经理。
现代文：天监二年去世，诏令赠给一等棺材一具，丧事所需要的花费，由太监经管。
English: The eunuch died two years later, and the imperial edict gave him a first-class coffin. The expenses required for the funeral were managed by the eunuch.

古文：点弟胤。胤字子季，出继叔父旷，故更字胤叔。
现代文：何胤字子季，过继给了叔叔何旷，所以改字叫季叔。
English: Ho Yan's character, Zi Qi, was passed down to his uncle Ho Meng, so he changed his name to Ji Shuo.

古文：年八岁，居忧，毁若成人。
现代文：八岁时，居丧，哀伤超过成人。
English: When I was eight years old, I was bereaved and grieved more than an adult.

古文：及长轻薄不羁，晚乃折节好学，师事沛国刘瓛，受易及礼记、毛诗。
现代文：等长大后，轻薄不羁，很晚的时候才自强好学，以沛国刘王献为师，学习《易》和《礼记》、《毛诗》。
English: When he grew up, he was light-hearted and uninhibited. It was very late when he became self-reliant and eager to learn. He studied "Yi" (易) and "Li Ji" (礼記) and "Mao Shi" (毛詩) under the tutelage of King Liu of the Pei Kingdom.

古文：又入锺山定林寺听内典，其业皆通。
现代文：又入了钟山定林寺去听内典，其学业都能通晓。
English: He also went to the Zhongshan Dinglin Temple to listen to the sutras, and his studies can be understood.

古文：而纵情诞节，时人未之知也，唯瓛与汝南周顒深器异之。
现代文：而纵情旷放，当时的人们却不知道，只有刘王献和汝南周深深地惊异和器重他。
English: However, people at that time did not know that only Liu Wangken and Runan Zhou were deeply surprised and respected him.

古文：仕齐爲建安太守，政有恩信，人不忍欺。
现代文：在齐国做官担任建安太守，为政有恩德信誉，人们不忍相欺。
English: In the state of Qi, he held the post of Jianan Taishou, and had a reputation for benevolence and virtue. People could not bear to deceive each other.

古文：每伏腊放囚还家，依期而反。
现代文：他常常在伏日和腊日放囚犯回家，都能按时返回。
English: He often released prisoners to go home in Fuhe and Lari, and they were able to return on time.

古文：历黄门侍郎，太子中庶子。
现代文：他曾历任黄门侍郎、太子中庶子。
English: He was a successive attendant of the Yellow Gate and an illegitimate son of the middle son of the prince.

古文：尚书令王俭受诏撰新礼，未就而卒。
现代文：尚书王俭接受诏令撰写新礼仪，没有写完就死了。
English: Shangshu Wang Jian accepted the imperial decree to write a new etiquette, but died before he could finish.

古文：又使特进张绪续成，绪又卒，属在司徒竟陵王子良。
现代文：又派特进张绪把它续成，张绪又死去，便交给了司徒竟陵王萧子良。
English: He also sent a special envoy, Zhang Xiu, to complete it. Zhang Xiu also died, and it was handed over to the disciple of King Xiao Ziliang.

古文：子良以让胤，乃置学士二十人佐胤撰录。
现代文：萧子良又让给了何胤，于是设置了学士二十人，帮助何胤进行撰录。
English: Xiao Ziliang also gave the lead to He Yin, so he set up 20 scholars to help He Yin with the transcription.

古文：后以国子祭酒与太子中庶子王莹并爲侍中。
现代文：后来，何胤以国子祭酒的身份与太子中庶子王莹一起为侍中。
English: Later, He Yin served as an attendant together with Wang Ying, the prince's illegitimate son, in the capacity of the national son's sacrificial wine.

古文：时胤单作祭酒，疑所服。
现代文：当时何胤单做祭酒，怀疑所穿的衣服。
English: At the time, He Yanzan was making sacrificial wine and was suspicious of the clothes he was wearing.

古文：陆澄博古多该，亦不能据，遂以玄服临试。
现代文：陆澄博通古事，也没找到依据，于是便穿着黑色衣服临场监考。
English: Lu Cheng, an expert in ancient history, did not find any evidence, so he dressed in black clothes to supervise the on-site inspection.

古文：尔后详议，乃用朱服。祭酒朱服，自此始也。
现代文：此后又进行详细讨论，乃用红色衣服，祭酒穿红衣，就是由此开始的。
English: After that, there was a detailed discussion, but with red clothes, the sacrificial wine wearing red clothes, that's how it started.

古文：及郁林嗣位，胤爲后族，甚见亲待。
现代文：后来郁林继承皇位，何胤属于皇后家族，所以很受亲近。
English: Later, Yulin succeeded to the throne, and He Yin belonged to the empress's family, so he was very close to her.

古文：爲中书令，领临海、巴陵王师。
现代文：做了中书令，兼做临海、巴陵王师。
English: He was made a middle-ranking official, and also served as Linhai and Baling Wang's teacher.

古文：胤虽贵显，常怀止足。
现代文：何胤虽然显贵，却常常想着止足。
English: Although He Yan was rich and accomplished, he often felt a sense of resignation.

古文：建武初，已筑室郊外，恒与学徒游处其内。
现代文：建武初年，他已经在郊外建了房子，经常与徒弟到里面游玩和居住。
English: In the first year of Jianwu, he had already built a house in the suburbs, and often visited and lived in it with his apprentice.

古文：至是遂卖园宅欲入东。
现代文：到了现在于是便想卖掉园宅东去。
English: Now he wants to sell the house and move east.

古文：未及发，闻谢朏罢吴兴郡不还，胤恐后之，乃拜表解职，不待报辄去。
现代文：还没有出发，就听说谢紻免了吴兴郡的职务不再回来，何胤恐怕落在他后面，便上表辞职，没等回答就离去了。
English: Before they set off, they heard that Xie Jun had relieved Wu Xing County of its duties and would not be returning. As they feared that He Yan would fall behind him, they put their resignation on the table and left without waiting for an answer.

古文：明帝大怒，使御史中丞袁昂奏收胤。
现代文：明帝大怒，指使御史中丞袁昂奏表拘捕何胤。
English: The Ming Emperor was furious and ordered Yuan Anso, the Imperial Historian, to arrest He Yin.

古文：寻有诏许之。
现代文：不久又下了诏书释放了他。
English: A decree was soon issued to release him.

古文：胤以会稽山多灵异，往游焉，居若邪山云门寺。
现代文：何胤因为会稽的山多有灵异，便前往旅游，住在若邪山云门寺。
English: He thought that the mountain of Huaiqi was wonderful and magical, so he went there for a tour and stayed at the Yunmen Temple on Mount Wakasa.

古文：初，胤二兄求、点并栖遁，求先卒，至是胤又隐，世号点爲 大山 ，胤爲 小山 ，亦曰 东山 。
现代文：起初，何胤的两个哥哥何求、何点都隐遁起来，何求先死，到现在何胤又隐居，世人称何点为 大山 ，何胤为 小山 ，也叫 东山 。
English: At first, the two brothers of He Tuo and He Tuo both went into seclusion, and He Tuo died first. Until now, He Tuo has lived in seclusion again. The world calls He Tuo a big mountain, He Tuo a small mountain, and also called Dongshan.

古文：兄弟发迹虽异，克终皆隐，世谓何氏三高。
现代文：兄弟发迹虽然不同，最终都是隐居，世人称为何氏三高。
English: Although the brothers had different career paths, they both ended up living in seclusion. They are known to the world as the Ho brothers.

古文：永元中，征爲太常、太子詹事，并不就。
现代文：永元年间，他被征召为太常、太子詹事，都没有到任。
English: During the first year of the reign of Emperor Yongzheng, he was called up to serve as Grand Marshal and Crown Prince Zhanji, but he did not take up the post.

古文：梁武帝霸朝建，引爲军谋祭酒，并与书诏，不至。
现代文：梁武帝的霸朝建立，引他为军谋祭酒，并且给他发了聘书，没有前来。
English: Emperor Liangwu's tyrannical dynasty was established, he was invited as a military strategist to offer wine, and he was issued a letter of appointment, but he did not come.

古文：及帝践阼，诏爲特进、光禄大夫，遣领军司马王杲之以手敕谕意，并征谢朏。
现代文：等武帝登基，诏令他为特进、光禄大夫，派领军司马王杲之带着手诏去传达意旨，并同时征召谢紻。
English: When Emperor Wu ascended to the throne, he ordered him to be a special envoy and doctor of Guanglu, and sent the leader of the army, Sima Wang Qizhi, to convey his intention with a hand signal, and at the same time conscripted Xie Qizhi.

古文：杲之先至胤所，胤恐朏不出，先示以可起，乃单衣鹿皮巾执经卷，下床跪受。
现代文：王杲之先到了何胤的住所，何胤恐怕谢紻不出，先是表示可以起身，便穿着单衣，戴着鹿皮巾，手拿经卷，下床跪拜接受。
English: Wang Yao arrived at He Yin's residence first, and He Yin could not help but thank him. He first said that he could get up, then dressed in a singlet, wearing a deerskin scarf, holding a scroll, got out of bed and knelt down to accept it.

古文：诏出，就席伏读。
现代文：诏令他出山，他却坐在席上低头读书。
English: The emperor ordered him to leave the mountain, but he sat on the seat and bowed his head to read.

古文：胤因谓杲之曰： 吾昔于齐朝欲陈三两条事：一者欲正郊丘，二者欲更铸九鼎，三者欲树双阙。
现代文：何胤于是便对王杲之说： 我从前在齐朝想提出三两条建议：一是想校正郊丘，二是想另铸九鼎，三是想建立双阙。
English: He then said to Wang Xizhi: I used to want to make three or two suggestions in Qi Dynasty: one is to correct the suburb hills, the second is to cast another Jiuding, and the third is to build a double moat.

古文：世传晋室欲立阙，王丞相指牛头山云， 此天阙也 。是则未明立阙之意。
现代文：世上传说晋室想要立阙，王丞相指着牛头山说： 这就是天阙， 这是他不明白立阙的意义。
English: There is a legend in the world that Jin's wife wanted to erect a watchtower, and Wang Josho pointed to Niu Tou Mountain and said, "This is the heavenly watchtower. He did not understand the significance of erecting a watchtower."

古文：阙者谓之象魏，悬法于其上，浃日而收之。
现代文：阙，是指象魏，把法令挂在上面，十天后收下。
English: , meaning Wei, hung the edict on it, and it was taken down ten days later.

古文：象者法也，魏者当涂而高大貌也。
现代文：象的意思是法，魏的意思是位于路口而且高大的样子。
English: Elephant means law, Wei means located at the junction and tall.

古文：鼎者神器，有国所先。
现代文：鼎是神器，有国家首先就要有它。
English: Ding is a sacred artifact, and any country must first have it.

古文：圆丘南郊，旧典不同。
现代文：圆丘和南郊，旧典中并不相同。
English: The round hill and the southern suburb are not the same in the old text.

古文：南郊祠五帝灵威仰之类，圆丘祠天皇大帝、北极大星是也。
现代文：南郊是祭祀五帝灵威仰之类，圆丘是祭祀天皇大帝、北极大星的。
English: In the southern suburbs, deities such as the Five Emperor Deities are worshipped, and in the hills, the Emperor and the North Star are worshipped.

古文：往代合之郊丘，先儒之巨失。
现代文：以往的朝代合为郊丘，是前辈儒者的巨大失误。
English: In the past, dynasties were collectively referred to as suburb hills, which was a major mistake of the previous generation of Confucians.

古文：今梁德告始，不宜遂因前谬。
现代文：现在梁德宣告开始，不应该因循前朝的谬误。
English: Now that the German policy of the Liang Dynasty has just begun, it should not be affected by the fallacies of the previous dynasty.

古文：卿宜陈之。 
现代文：您应该向朝廷说明。 
English: You should explain to the court.

古文：杲之曰： 仆之鄙劣，岂敢轻议国典，此当敬俟叔孙生耳。 
现代文：王杲之说： 在下鄙劣，岂敢轻率地议论国家典章，这应当敬候叔孙生前来呀！ 
English: Wang Xizhi said, "How dare you dare to discuss national ordinances in such a despicable manner. You should wait for your great-grandchildren to come!"

古文：及杲之从谢朏所还，问胤以出期。
现代文：王杲之从谢籫那里回来，问何胤的出山日期。
English: Wang Xizhi came back from Xie Xuan and asked He Ying about the date of his departure from the mountain.

古文：胤知朏已应召，答杲之曰： 吾年已五十七，月食四斗米不尽，何容复有宦情？ 
现代文：何胤知道谢籫已经应召，回答王杲之说： 我年纪已经五十七岁，一月吃不完四斗米，怎能再有做官的心情？ 
English: He knew that Xie Yao had been summoned, and replied to Wang Xizhong, "I am 57 years old, and I can't eat four buckets of rice in a month. How can I be in the mood to be an official again?"

古文：杲之失色不能答。
现代文：王杲之失色不能回答。
English: Wang Xizhi lost his composure and couldn't answer.

古文：胤反谓曰： 卿何不遣传诏还朝拜表，留与我同游邪？ 
现代文：何胤反过来又对他说： 您何不派人传诏回朝奏表，留下来与我同游呢？ 
English: He, in turn, said to him, "Why don't you send a messenger back to the morning report and stay with me for the trip?"

古文：杲之愕然曰： 古今不闻此例。 
现代文：王杲之愕然地说： 古今没听说有这样的例子。 
English: Wang Xizhi said in dismay: I have never heard of such an example.

古文：胤曰： 檀弓两卷，皆言物始。
现代文：何胤说： 《檀弓》两卷，都是讲事物的开始。
English: He Tan said: "The two volumes of "Danyu" are both about the beginning of things.

古文：自卿而始，何必有例？ 
现代文：从您开始，何必要有先例？ 
English: Why should there be a precedent, starting with you?

古文：胤、朏俱前代高士，胤处名誉尤迈矣。
现代文：何胤、谢籫，都是前代的高士，何胤的名誉尤其高迈。
English: Both He Tan and Xie Qi were high-ranking officials in the previous generation, and He Tan's reputation was particularly high.

古文：杲之还，以胤意奏闻，有敕给白衣尚书禄。
现代文：王杲之回去后，把何胤的意思上奏，皇帝诏令供给他白衣尚书的俸禄。
English: After Wang Xizhi's return, He Yatian's wish was carried out, and the emperor issued an imperial edict to provide him with the salary of a scholar in white.

古文：胤固辞。
现代文：何胤坚决推辞。
English: Hoin firmly refused.

古文：又敕山阴库钱月给五万，又不受。
现代文：又诏令山阴把官库中的钱每月供给他五万，何胤又不接受。
English: He also ordered Shan Yin to provide him with 50,000 yuan a month from the treasury, but He Yin did not accept.

古文：乃敕何子朗、孔寿等六人于东山受学。
现代文：于是便诏令何子朗、孔寿等人在东山跟他上学。
English: As a result, he ordered He Zilang, Kong Shou and others to go to school with him in Dongshan.

古文：太守衡阳王元简深加礼敬，月中常命驾式闾，谈论终日。
现代文：太守衡阳王萧元简深深地加以礼敬，每个月中常常乘车登门拜访，谈论终日。
English: Xiao Yuanjian, the eunuch of Hengyang King, highly respected He Yatong and treated him with courtesy. He often drove to He Yatong's house every month and talked with him all day.

古文：胤以若邪处势迫隘，不容学徒，乃迁秦望山。
现代文：何胤因为若邪山所处的地方狭小，容不下学徒，于是迁到了秦望山。
English: He moved to Qinwang Mountain because the area where Wakaizhan is located was too small to accommodate apprentices.

古文：山有飞泉，乃起学舍，即林成援，因岩爲堵；别爲小合室，寝处其中，躬自啓闭，僮仆无得至者。
现代文：山上有飞泉，便建起了学舍，以树林为外援，就山崖做围墙，另外建了一座小阁室，住在里面，亲自开关门户，僮仆都不能进来。
English: There is a flying spring on the mountain, so they built a schoolhouse. Using the forest as foreign aid, they made a fence around the cliff. In addition, they built a small attic room, lived in it, and personally opened and closed the portal, so that servants could not enter.

古文：山侧营田二顷，讲隙从生徒游之。
现代文：山旁种田二顷，讲课之余就由学生跟着游览。
English: He also bought a hectare of land on the mountain side, and in his spare time he took his students to visit this place.

古文：胤初迁将筑室，忽见二人着玄冠，容貌甚伟，问胤曰： 君欲居此邪？ 
现代文：何胤起初迁来将要筑室的时候，忽然看见两个人戴着黑冠，容貌伟岸，问何胤说： 您想住在这里吗？ 
English: When he first moved in and was about to build a room, he suddenly saw two men wearing black crowns and with great looks. He asked them, "Do you want to live here?"

古文：乃指一处云： 此中殊吉。 
现代文：便指着一处地方说： 此处特别吉利。 
English: So he pointed to a piece of land and said to Ho Tan, "It is very lucky to have a piece of land."

古文：忽不复见。
现代文：忽然又不见了。
English: After saying this, her mother suddenly disappeared, and the whole night was full of grief.

古文：胤依言而卜焉。
现代文：何胤依照他们的话作了选择。
English: He made his choice according to their words.

古文：寻而山发洪水，树石皆倒拔，唯胤所居室岿然独存。
现代文：不久山上发了洪水，树木石头都被倒拔，只有何胤所住的房子独存。
English: A flash flood soon broke out. Rocks and stones were washed away, trees were washed down, and the house where Yu Hatane lived was still intact.

古文：元简乃命记室参军锺嵘作瑞室颂，刻石以旌之。
现代文：萧元简便让记室参军钟嵘作了一篇《瑞室颂》，刻在石头上作为表扬。
English: Xiao Yuanjian simply had the recorder and the conscript Zhong Qi write an "Ode to the Sui Room," which was engraved on the stone as a commendation.

古文：及元简去郡，入山与胤别。
现代文：后来萧元简要离开会稽郡，入山与何胤告别。
English: Later, Xiao Yuan briefly left Heji County and went into the mountains to bid farewell to He Yin.

古文：胤送至都赐埭，去郡三里，因曰： 仆自弃人事，交游路断，自非降贵山薮，岂容复望城邑。
现代文：何胤送他到都赐埭，离郡三里，于是说： 我自己弃绝了人事，交游的道路断绝，不是您贵人降临山林，哪会重见城镇。
English: Ho Yan sent him to Dujiayuan, three miles away from the county, and then said: I myself have abandoned the people, cut off the road of travel, it is not your noblemen who come down to the mountains and forests, which will see the town again.

古文：此埭之游，于今绝矣。 
现代文：此地的游览，从今就要断绝了。 
English: After that, my footprints will never be seen again.

古文：执手涕零。
现代文：握着手流下了眼泪。
English: The two held hands and shed tears.

古文：何氏过江，自晋司空充并葬吴西山。
现代文：何氏过江后，从晋朝的司空何光开始，都葬在吴地的西山。
English: After crossing the river to the south, generations of the He family were buried in Wuxi Mountain, starting with the Jin Shi Ku He Cheng.

古文：胤家世年皆不永，唯祖尚之至七十二。
现代文：何胤的家世年龄都不长久，只有祖父何尚之活到七十二岁。
English: Several generations of He's family did not have a long life expectancy, with only his grandfather He Shangzhi living to the age of 72.

古文：胤年登祖寿，乃移还吴，作别山诗一首，言甚凄怆。
现代文：何胤的年龄赶上了祖父时，便迁移回到了吴地，作了《别山诗》一首，言辞十分凄怆。
English: When He Tan's age caught up with his grandfather's, he moved back to Wudi and composed a poem called "Beyond the Mountains," which is very poignant.

古文：至吴，居武丘山西寺讲经论，学僧复随之。
现代文：到了吴地，他住在武丘山西寺讲述经论，学徒们又随他前来。
English: When he arrived in Wudi, he stayed at the West Temple on Mount Wuqiu to teach the sutras, and his disciples followed him.

古文：东境守宰经途者，莫不毕至。
现代文：东部的郡县官员路过的，无不全部前来。
English: All the county officials from the eastern part of the county came to see us.

古文：胤常禁杀，有虞人逐鹿，鹿径来趋胤，伏而不动。
现代文：何胤常常禁止杀生，有个虞人追逐一只鹿，鹿径直跑到何胤跟前，趴下不动。
English: He often forbade the killing of animals. There was a wealthy man who chased a deer. The deer kept running towards He and lay motionless beside him.

古文：又有异鸟如鹤红色，集讲堂，驯狎如家禽。
现代文：又有一只奇异的鸟像是鹤，红色，聚集在讲堂里，驯顺如同家禽。
English: Another strange bird like a crane, red, gathered in the lecture hall, tame as a fowl.

古文：初，开善寺藏法师与胤遇于秦望山，后还都，卒于锺山。
现代文：起初，开善寺的藏法师与何胤在秦望山相遇，后来回到了京城，死在钟山。
English: At first, the Tibetan mage from Kaisen-ji Temple met He Yin on Qinwang Mountain. Later, he returned to Beijing and died on Zhongshan Mountain.

古文：死日，胤在波若寺见一名僧，授胤香炉奁并函书，云： 贫道发自扬都，呈何居士。 
现代文：临死的那天，何胤在波若寺见了一个僧人，送给何胤一个香炉匣和一盒子书，说： 贫道从扬都出发，呈给何居士。 
English: On the day he was about to die, he met a monk at Bora Temple, who gave him an incense burner and a box of books, saying, "From Yangdu, take the road of poverty and present it to him."

古文：言讫失所在。
现代文：说罢便不见了。
English: And with that, he was gone.

古文：胤开函，乃是大庄严论，世中未有。
现代文：何胤打开盒子，乃是《大庄严论》，世间未有。
English: When he opened the box, it was "The Great Solemnity," which had never been seen before in the world.

古文：访之香炉，乃藏公所常用。
现代文：查访这个香炉，原是藏公所曾用的。
English: This incense burner was originally used by the Tibet Public Security Bureau.

古文：又于寺内立明珠柱，柱乃七日七夜放光。
现代文：又在寺内立了明珠柱，柱便七天七夜放光。
English: In addition, a pearl pillar was erected in the temple, and the pillar emitted light for seven days and seven nights.

古文：太守何远以状啓昭明太子，太子钦其德，遣舍人何思澄致手令以褒美之。
现代文：太守何远把这种情况启奏了昭明太子，太子钦佩他的德行，就派舍人何思澄送上了手令对他进行赞美。
English: Taishou He Yuan revealed this situation to Prince Shouming, who admired his virtue and sent his subordinate, He Sichen, with a warrant to praise him.

古文：中大通三年卒，年八十六。
现代文：中大通三年去世，享年八十六岁。
English: Zhongdazhong passed away three years ago, at the age of 86.

古文：先是胤疾，妻江氏梦神告曰： 汝夫寿尽，既有至德，应获延期，尔当代之。 
现代文：在此以前，何胤曾经生病，妻子江氏梦见神告诉她说： 你丈夫的阳寿已尽，既然有了大德，应该获得延期，你要去代替他。 
English: Prior to this, He Yin had fallen ill, and his wife, Jiang Shi Rong, had a dream in which God told her: Your husband's solar life is over, and since he has great virtue, he should be granted an extension, and you should go to replace him.

古文：妻觉说焉，俄得患而卒，胤疾乃瘳。
现代文：妻子醒了叙说了梦中的情景，很快就得病而死，何胤的病却好了。
English: Mr. Jiang woke up and recounted the dream. Soon after, he fell ill and passed away.

古文：至是胤梦见一神女并八十许人，并衣帢，行列在前，俱拜床下，觉又见之，便命营凶具。
现代文：到现在何胤梦见了一个神女和八十来个人，都穿着交领的丧服，排列在面前，一起跪拜在床下，醒了以后，又一次看到，于是他便让人安排丧事。
English: Until now, He Ying dreamed of a goddess and eighty or so people, all wearing collared mourning clothes, lined up in front of him, kneeling together under the bed. After waking up, he saw it again, so he had someone arrange the funeral.

古文：既而疾困不复瘳。
现代文：随后就病重不再好转。
English: Subsequently, the severity of the illness did not improve.

古文：初，胤侈于味，食必方丈，后稍欲去其甚者，犹食白鱼、夔脯，糖蟹，以爲非见生物。
现代文：起初，何胤奢侈于美味，吃饭必定要大量菜肴，后来逐渐想去掉那些太过分的，仍然是吃白鱼、鳝脯、糖蟹，还认为是见不到生物。
English: At first, He Ying was extravagant in deliciousness, eating a large number of dishes. Later, he gradually wanted to get rid of those that were too excessive, still eating white fish, clams, sugar crabs, and thought that he could not see any living creatures.

古文：疑食蚶蛎，使门人议之。
现代文：他对吃蚶蛎有怀疑，就让门人进行讨论。
English: When he had doubts about eating quail, he let the porter do the talking.

古文：学生锺岏曰： 夔之就脯，骤于屈申，蟹之将糖，躁扰弥甚。
现代文：学生钟祎说： 鳝鱼取脯，骤然屈伸，螃蟹沾糖，躁动更甚。
English: Student Zhong Yao said: "The catfish takes the bait, suddenly flexes, the crab dips into the sugar, and becomes even more agitated.

古文：仁人用意，深怀如怛。
现代文：仁人心意，深怀忧伤。
English: Compassionate and full of sorrow.

古文：至于车螯蚶蛎，眉目内阙，惭浑沌之奇，犷壳外缄，非金人之慎。
现代文：至于车鳌蚶蛎，眉目内陷，可悲浑沌得出奇，粗壳外裹，无需金人的谨慎。
English: As for the chariot, the eyebrows are sunken, the pathetic chaos is surprising, the rough shell is wrapped, and there is no need for the prudence of gold.

古文：不悴不荣，曾草木之不若，无馨无臭，与瓦砾其何算。
现代文：不衰不盛，连草木也不如，无香无臭，与瓦砾有何异！
English: Not fading, not flourishing, even the grass and trees are not as good, no fragrance, no smell, how different from the rubble!

古文：故宜长充庖厨，永爲口实。 
现代文：所以应该长久地供应厨房，永远地作为食品。 
English: Therefore, it should be supplied to the kitchen for a long time and used as food forever.

古文：竟陵王子良见岏议大怒。
现代文：竟陵王萧子良见了钟祎的议论大怒。
English: In fact, Xiao Zi Liang, the King of the Mausoleum, was furious when he saw Zhong Yao's speech.

古文：汝南周顒与胤书，劝令食菜，曰： 变之大者，莫过死生，生之所重，无逾性命。
现代文：汝南的周给何胤写信，劝告让他吃菜，说： 变化最大的，莫过于死生，活着最重的，无过于性命。
English: Runan's Zhou wrote a letter to He Yinglu, advising him to eat vegetables, saying: The greatest change is nothing more than life and death, and the heaviest living is nothing more than life and death.

古文：性命之于彼极切，滋味之在我可赊。
现代文：性命对于它们极其迫切，滋味对于我们可以松缓。
English: For them, life is extremely urgent, but for us, taste can be relaxed.

古文：若云三世理诬，则幸矣良快，如使此道果然，而受形未息，一往一来，生死常事，则伤心之惨，行亦自及。
现代文：如果说关于过去、现在、未来三世的理论虚假，则十分幸运愉快，如果这种现象果然存在，而托生不止，一往一来，生死成为常事，那么令人伤心的惨状，自己也将会遇上。
English: If the theory about the past, present and future of the three lives is false, it is very fortunate and happy. If this phenomenon really exists, and there are more than one birth, and life and death become commonplace, then I will also encounter a sad tragedy.

古文：丈人于血气之类，虽不身践，至于晨凫夜鲤，不能不取备屠门。
现代文：先生对于血气之类，虽然没有亲自动手，但是早晨野鸭，晚上鲤鱼，不能不从屠宰者那里取来。
English: For things like blood gas, although he did not personally handle it, he had to get wild duck in the morning and eel in the evening from the butcher.

古文：财贝之经盗手，犹爲廉士所弃，生性之一啓銮刀，宁复慈心所忍。
现代文：财宝经过了贼手，还为廉士所抛弃，生命遭受了刀割，难道慈者能忍心？
English: Treasures have passed through the hands of thieves, abandoned by corrupt officials, and lives have been cut short by the sword. Can the merciful have patience?

古文：驺虞虽饥，非自死之草不食，闻其风者，岂不使人多媿。
现代文：驺虞虽然饥饿，但不是自己枯死的草不吃，听到了它的风格，岂不让人多有惭愧？
English: Although Yan Yu is hungry, it is not that he does not eat his own withered grass. Hearing its style, won't it make people feel ashamed?

古文：丈人得此有素，聊复片言发起耳。 
现代文：先生早就懂得了这些道理，我只是说上几句提醒一下罢了。 
English: The teacher has long understood these principles, I am just saying a few words to remind him.

古文：故胤末年遂绝血味。
现代文：所以何胤晚年便断绝了血味。
English: So in his later years, He Yan gave up the taste of blood.

古文：胤注百论、十二门论各一卷，注周易十卷，毛诗总集六卷，毛诗隐义十卷，礼记隐义二十卷，礼答问五十五卷。
现代文：何胤注《百论》、《十二门论》各一卷，注《周易》十卷，《毛诗总集》六卷，《毛诗隐义》十卷，《礼记隐义》二十卷，《礼答问》五十五卷。
English: He also annotated one volume each of "The Hundred Commentaries" and "The Twelve Commentaries," ten volumes of "Zhou Yi," six volumes of "The Complete Collection of Mao Poetry," ten volumes of "The Hidden Meaning of Mao Poetry," twenty volumes of "The Hidden Meaning of Etiquette," and fifty-five volumes of "Questions and Answers on Etiquette."

古文：子撰亦不仕，有高风。
现代文：他的儿子何撰也不做官，有高尚的风范。
English: His son, who is not a government official, has a noble demeanor.

