古文：三年春，王正月丁未，滕子原卒。
现代文：三年春季，周历正月丁未日，滕成公原去世。
English: In the spring of the third year, on the first day of the first month of the lunar calendar, Teng Chenggongyuan died.

古文：夏，叔弓如滕。
现代文：夏季，叔弓去到滕国。
English: In the summer, Shuyun went to Tengguo.

古文：五月，葬滕成公。
现代文：五月，安葬滕成公。
English: In May, Teng Chenggong was buried.

古文：秋，小邾子来朝。
现代文：秋季，小邾穆公来鲁国朝见。
English: In the autumn, Xiao Yanmu Gong came to see the Emperor of Lu.

古文：八月，大雩。
现代文：八月，举行大的求雨祭祀活动。
English: In August, a large rain-worshipping ceremony was held.

古文：冬，大雨雹。
现代文：冬季，鲁国下了大冰雹。
English: In winter, large hailstones fell in Russia.

古文：北燕伯款出奔齐。
现代文：北燕国国君逃到了齐国。
English: Beiyan Guo Guojun fled to Qi Province.

古文：三年春，王正月，郑游吉如晋，送少姜之葬。梁丙与张趯见之。
现代文：三年春季，周王朝历法的正月，郑国的游吉到晋国去，为少姜送葬，梁丙和张趯拜见他。
English: In the spring of the third year, the first month of the Zhou dynasty calendar, Youji from Zheng went to Jin to attend Shao Jiang's funeral, and Liang Huan and Zhang Ye paid homage to him.

古文：梁丙曰： 甚矣哉！子之为此来也。 
现代文：梁丙说： 太过分了，您为这件事情而来！ 
English: Liang said: "It's too much. You've come for this!

古文：子大叔曰： 将得已乎？
现代文：游吉说： 不得已呀！
English: Youji said: I had to do it!

古文：昔文、襄之霸也，其务不烦诸侯。
现代文：从前文公、襄公称霸的时候，他们的事情不烦劳诸侯。
English: Once upon a time, when King Wen and King Xiang reigned supreme, their affairs did not trouble the princes.

古文：令诸侯三岁而聘，五岁而朝，有事而会，不协而盟。
现代文：命令诸侯三年一聘问，五年一朝觐，有事就会见，不和睦就结盟。
English: He ordered the lords to meet once every three years for an interview, once every five years for a court ceremony, to meet whenever there was a need, and to form an alliance whenever there was discord.

古文：君薨，大夫吊，卿共葬事。
现代文：国君死，大夫吊唁，卿参加安葬。
English: When the sovereign died, doctors offered their condolences, and nobles attended the funeral.

古文：夫人，士吊，大夫送葬。
现代文：夫人死，士去吊唁，大夫送葬。
English: When a lady dies, a gentleman goes to pay his condolences, and a doctor attends the funeral.

古文：足以昭礼命事谋阙而已，无加命矣。
现代文：只要发扬礼仪、发布命令，商量补救缺失就足够了，不再用额外的命令加于诸侯。
English: As long as they promote etiquette, issue orders, and discuss remedies for deficiencies, it is enough, and no additional orders will be imposed on the princes.

古文：今嬖宠之丧，不敢择位，而数于守適，唯惧获戾，岂敢惮烦。
现代文：现在宠姬的丧事，别国不敢选择适当职位的人参加丧礼，而且礼数超过正夫人，惟恐得到罪过，岂敢怕麻烦？
English: Now, when it comes to the funeral of a favorite aunt, other countries do not dare to choose people with appropriate positions to participate in the funeral, and the number of eulogies exceeds that of the wife. For fear of being guilty, do they dare to be afraid of trouble?

古文：少齐有宠而死，齐必继室。
现代文：少姜得到宠爱而死，齐国必然继续送女子前来。
English: When Shao Jiang died after being pampered, the State of Qi inevitably continued to send women to visit him.

古文：今兹吾又将来贺，不唯此行也。 
现代文：现在我又一次将要来祝贺，不仅是这一趟啊。 
English: Now I'm going to congratulate them again, and not just this time.

古文：张趯曰： 善哉！
现代文：张趯说： 好啊，我能够听到这样的礼数！
English: Zhang Ye said: Good, I can hear such a number of salutes!

古文：吾得闻此数也。然自今，子其无事矣。
现代文：然而从今以后您大约没有这样的事情了。
English: From now on, however, you probably won't.

古文：譬如火焉，火中，寒暑乃退。
现代文：譬如大火星，它在天空正中，寒气或者暑气就要消退。
English: For example, big Mars, it is in the middle of the sky, cold or hot air is about to subside.

古文：此其极也，能无退乎？
现代文：这一次就是极点，能够不衰退吗？
English: This time is the peak, can it continue without a downturn?

古文：晋将失诸侯，诸侯求烦不获。 
现代文：晋国将会失去诸侯的拥护，诸侯想要麻烦还得不到呢。 
English: Jin will lose the support of the lords. If the lords want trouble, they won't get it.

古文：二大夫退。
现代文：两位大夫退出。
English: Two doctors quit.

古文：子大叔告人曰： 张趯有知，其犹在君子之后乎！ 
现代文：游吉告诉别人说： 张趯明白事理，也许还是跟在君子的行列里吧！ 
English: Youji told others: Zhang Ye understands the reason, maybe he should join the ranks of gentlemen!

古文：丁未，滕子原卒。
现代文：正月二十四日，滕成公原死了。
English: On the 24th day of the first month, Teng Chenggong Yuan died.

古文：同盟，故书名。
现代文：由于是同盟国家，所以《春秋》记载他的名字。
English: Since it is an allied country, "Spring and Autumn" records his name.

古文：齐侯使晏婴请继室于晋，曰： 寡君使婴曰： 寡人愿事君，朝夕不倦，将奉质币，以无失时，则国家多难，是以不获。
现代文：齐景公派晏婴请求继续送女子到晋国，说： 寡君派遣婴的时候说： 寡人愿意奉事君王，早晚都不倦怠，要奉献财礼而不失去定时，然而由于国家多难，因此不能前来。
English: Qi Jing Gong sent the infant to request that the woman continue to be sent to Jin Province, saying: When the monarch sent the infant, he said: Many people are willing to serve the king, sooner or later they do not get tired, they want to offer gifts without losing time, however, due to the difficulties of the country, they cannot come.

古文：不腆先君之適，以备内官，焜燿寡人之望，则又无禄，早世陨命，寡人失望。
现代文：先君的嫡女有幸在君王的内宫充数，照亮了寡人的希望，但又没有福气，过早地死去了，寡人失去了希望。
English: The previous monarch's legitimate daughter was fortunate enough to fill the inner palace of the monarch, lighting up the hopes of many, but without luck, she died prematurely, and many lost hope.

古文：君若不忘先君之好，惠顾齐国，辱收寡人，徼福于大公、丁公，照临敝邑，镇抚其社稷，则犹有先君之適及遗姑姊妹若而人。
现代文：君王如果不忘记先君的友好，加恩顾念齐国，对寡人和睦，求福于太公、丁公，光辉照耀敝邑，镇定安抚我们的国家，那么还有先君的嫡女和其余姑姐妹若干人。
English: If the monarch does not forget the friendship of his predecessor, if he does not forget to be considerate of the country, if he does not make peace with anyone, if he does not seek the blessings of the Grand Duke and the Grand Duke of Ding, if he does not let the light of glory shine on his hometown, and if he does not calm down and pacify our country, then there will still be the legitimate daughter of his predecessor and several other aunts and sisters.

古文：君若不弃敝邑，而辱使董振择之，以备嫔嫱，寡人之望也。  
现代文：君王如果不抛弃敝邑，而派遣使者慎重选择，作为姬妾，这就是寡人的希望。  
English: If the monarch does not abandon the county, but sends an emissary carefully selected as a concubine, this is the hope of many.

古文：韩宣子使叔向对曰： 寡君之愿也。
现代文：韩宣子派叔向回答说： 这正是寡君的愿望。
English: Han Xuan Zi's uncle replied, "This is exactly what the oligarchs want.

古文：寡君不能独任其社稷之事，未有伉俪。在缞绖之中，是以未敢请。
现代文：寡君不能单独承担国家大事，没有正式的配偶，由于在服丧期间，因此没有敢提出请求。
English: Widows and widowers cannot undertake state affairs alone, have no official spouse, and do not dare to make a request because of the mourning period.

古文：君有辱命，惠莫大焉。
现代文：君王有命令，没有比这再大的恩惠了。
English: There is no greater boon than a king's command.

古文：若惠顾敝邑，抚有晋国，赐之内主，岂唯寡君，举群臣实受其贶。其自唐叔以下，实宠嘉之。 
现代文：如果加恩顾念敝邑，安抚晋国，赐给晋国内主，岂独是寡君，所有的臣下都受到他的恩赐，从唐叔以下都会尊崇赞许他。 
English: If Gahn cared about the city of Jin, pacified Jin, and gave the city to the lord of Jin, then he would be the sole monarch, and all his subjects would receive his gift, and everyone from Uncle Tang on down would respect and praise him.

古文：既成昏，晏子受礼。叔向从之宴，相与语。
现代文：订婚以后，晏子接受享礼，叔向陪他饮宴，互相谈话。
English: After the betrothal, the mule accepted the wedding gift, the uncle accompanied him to the banquet, and they talked to each other.

古文：叔向曰： 齐其何如？ 
现代文：叔向说： 齐国怎么样？ 
English: Uncle Xiang said, "How is Qi Province?"

古文：晏子曰： 此季世也，吾弗知。齐其为陈氏矣！
现代文：晏子说： 到了末世了，我不能不说齐国可能属于陈氏了。
English: Xunzi said, "In the last days, I can't help but say that Qi Province may belong to the Chen clan."

古文：公弃其民，而归于陈氏。
现代文：国君不爱护他的百姓，让他们归附陈氏。
English: The sovereign did not care for his people and let them fall to the Chen clan.

古文：齐旧四量，豆、区、釜、钟。
现代文：齐国过去有四种量器，豆、区、釜、钟。
English: In the past, there were four kinds of measuring instruments in Qi Province: bean, district, kettle and bell.

古文：四升为豆，各自其四，以登于釜。
现代文：四升为一豆，各自再翻四倍，以成为一釜。
English: Four liters is one bean, each of which is then multiplied four times to become one cucumber.

古文：釜十则钟。
现代文：十釜就是一钟。
English: Ten kettles is one bell.

古文：陈氏三量，皆登一焉，钟乃大矣。
现代文：陈氏的豆、区、釜三种量器都加大四分之一，钟的容量就大了。
English: Mr. Chen's three measuring instruments of bean, zone and kettle have been increased by a quarter, and the capacity of the bell has increased.

古文：以家量贷，而以公量收之。
现代文：他用私家的大量器借出，而用公家的小量器收回。
English: He lends with a large amount of private utensils and takes back with a small amount of public utensils.

古文：山木如市，弗加于山。
现代文：山上的木料运到市场，价格不高于山上。
English: The timber from the mountains is transported to the market, and the price is no higher than that from the mountains.

古文：鱼盐蜃蛤，弗加于海。
现代文：鱼盐蜃蛤，价格不高于海边。
English: Fish salted cod, the price is not higher than the seaside.

古文：民参其力，二入于公，而衣食其一。公聚朽蠹，而三老冻馁。
现代文：百姓力量如果分为三份，两分归于国君，只有一份维持衣食。国君的积蓄腐朽生虫，而老人们却挨冻受饥。
English: If the strength of the people is divided into three parts, two parts belong to the sovereign, and only one part maintains food and clothing. The sovereign's savings rot and give rise to worms, while the elderly suffer from cold and hunger.

古文：国之诸市，屦贱踊贵。
现代文：国都的市场上，鞋子便宜而假足昂贵。
English: In the capital's market, shoes are cheap but prosthetic legs are expensive.

古文：民人痛疾，而或燠休之，其爱之如父母，而归之如流水，欲无获民，将焉辟之？
现代文：百姓有痛苦疾病，陈氏就厚加赏赐。他爱护百姓如同父母，而百姓归附如同流水。想要不得到百姓的拥护，哪里能避开？
English: If the people have painful diseases, the Chen clan will reward them generously. He loves the people like a parent, and the people are attached like flowing water. If you don't want to get the support of the people, where can you avoid?

古文：箕伯、直柄、虞遂、伯戏，其相胡公、大姬，已在齐矣。 
现代文：箕伯、直柄、虞遂、伯戏，他们跟随着胡公、太姬，已经在齐国了。 
English: Zou Bo, Zhigang, Yu Sui, and Bo Xue, along with Hu Gong and Dai Ji, have already set out for Qi Province.

古文：叔向曰： 然。
现代文：叔向说： 是呀。
English: Uncle Xiang said: Yes.

古文：虽吾公室，今亦季世也。
现代文：即使是我们公室，现在也是末世了。
English: Even in our office, it's the end of days.

古文：戎马不驾，卿无军行。公乘无人，卒列无长。
现代文：战马不驾战车，卿不率领军队，公室的战车没有御者和戎右，步兵的行列没有长官。
English: The horse does not drive the chariot, the lord does not lead the army, the chariot of the office does not have a driver and a right-hand man, the ranks of the infantry do not have a commander.

古文：庶民罢敝，而宫室滋侈。
现代文：百姓困疲，而宫室更加奢侈。
English: The people are exhausted, but the imperial family is even more extravagant.

古文：道殣相望，而女富溢尤。民闻公命，如逃寇仇。
现代文：道路上饿死的人坟堆一个接着一个可以互相看见，而宠姬的家里财富特别多，百姓听到国君的命令，好像躲避仇敌一样。
English: The piles of graves of those who died of starvation on the road can be seen one after another, and Peta's family has so much wealth that the people hear the sovereign's orders as if they were hiding from an enemy.

古文：栾、郤、胥、原、狐、续、庆、伯，降在皂隶。政在家门，民无所依。
现代文：栾、郤、胥、原、狐、续、庆、伯这八家已经降为低贱吏役，政事在于私家，百姓无依无靠。
English: The eight families of Zou, Zou, Zou, Yuan, Fox, Zong, Qing and Bo have been reduced to low-ranking officials. Government affairs are in the hands of private families, and the people have no one to rely on.

古文：君日不悛，以乐慆忧。
现代文：国君毫不改悔，用欢乐来排遣忧患。
English: The sovereign did not repent and used joy to dispel sorrow.

古文：公室之卑，其何日之有？
现代文：公室的卑微，还能有几天？
English: The humbleness of the office, how many more days can it last?

古文：谗鼎之铭曰： 昧旦丕显，后世犹怠。 况日不悛，其能久乎？ 
现代文：谗鼎上的铭文说， 黎明即起，声名可以显赫，子孙后代还会懈怠 ，何况毫不改悔，他能够长久吗？ 
English: The inscription on the top of the steeple says, "From dawn to dawn, fame can be prominent, future generations will slack off, let alone without repentance, can he last long?"

古文：晏子曰： 子将若何？ 
现代文：晏子说： 您打算怎么办？ 
English: The cripple said, "What are you going to do?

古文：叔向曰： 晋之公族尽矣。
现代文：叔向说： 晋国的公族完结了。
English: Uncle Xiang said, "The Jin dynasty is over.

古文：肸闻之，公室将卑，其宗族枝叶先落，则公从之。
现代文：肸听说，公室将要卑微，它的宗族像树叶一样先落，公室就跟着凋零了。
English: I heard that the official residence will be humble, its clan will fall first like leaves, and the official residence will follow.

古文：肸之宗十一族，唯羊舌氏在而已。
现代文：肸的一宗十一族，只有羊舌氏还在。
English: Of the eleven clans of the Xiongnu, only the Sheep Tongue clan is still alive.

古文：肸又无子。公室无度，幸而得死，岂其获祀？ 
现代文：肸又没有好儿子，公室又没有法度，得到善终就是侥幸，难道还会受到祭祀？ 
English: If you don't have a good son, and your office doesn't have any rules, getting a good ending is just a fluke. Will you still be sacrificed?

古文：初，景公欲更晏子之宅，曰： 子之宅近市，湫隘嚣尘，不可以居，请更诸爽塏者。 
现代文：当初，齐景公要为晏子更换住宅，说： 您的住房靠近市区，低湿狭小，喧闹多尘，不能居住，请您换到高爽明亮的房子里去。 
English: At first, Qi Jing Gong wanted to change the house for the cripple, saying: Your house is close to the urban area, low humidity, narrow, noisy and dusty, can not live, please change to a high and bright house.

古文：辞曰： 君之先臣容焉，臣不足以嗣之，于臣侈矣。
现代文：晏子辞谢说： 君王的先臣住在这里，下臣不足以继承祖业，住在里边已经过分了。
English: "The vassals of the king live here. The vassals are not enough to inherit the ancestral property. It is too much for them to live here.

古文：且小人近市，朝夕得所求，小人之利也。敢烦里旅？ 
现代文：而且小人靠近市场，早晚能得到所需要的东西，这是小人的利益，岂敢麻烦邻里大众为我造新房子？ 
English: Moreover, the villain is close to the market, and sooner or later he can get what he needs. This is the villain's benefit. How dare he trouble the neighbors to build a new house for me?

古文：公笑曰： 子近市，识贵贱乎？ 
现代文：齐景公笑着说： 您靠近市场，知道物价的贵贱吗？ 
English: Qi Jinggong said with a smile: You are close to the market, do you know the price?

古文：对曰： 既利之，敢不识乎？ 
现代文：晏子回答说： 既然以它为利，哪能不知道呢？ 
English: The cripple answered, "Since it is to my advantage, how can I not know?

古文：公曰： 何贵何贱？ 
现代文：景公说： 什么贵？什么贱？ 
English: Jing Gong said: What is expensive? What is cheap?

古文：于是景公繁于刑，有鬻踊者。故对曰： 踊贵屦贱。 
现代文：当时，齐景公滥用刑罚，有出卖假腿的，所以晏子回答说： 卖受刖刑之人穿的鞋子很贵，普通草鞋便宜。 
English: At that time, Qi Jing Gong abused the punishment, and there were people who sold their prosthetic legs, so the mule replied: "Selling shoes worn by people who were beaten is very expensive, and ordinary straw shoes are cheap.

古文：既已告于君，故与叔向语而称之。
现代文：晏子已经告诉国君，所以跟叔向说话的时候也谈到这个。
English: Mame had already told the sovereign about this, so she also mentioned it when talking to her uncle.

古文：景公为是省于刑。
现代文：齐景公为此就减省了刑罚。
English: For this, Lord Qi Jing reduced the penalty.

古文：君子曰： 仁人之言，其利博哉。
现代文：君子说： 仁人的话，它的利益多么广大啊！
English: The gentleman said, "If it is benevolent, how great are its benefits!

古文：晏子一言而齐侯省刑。
现代文：晏子一句话，齐侯就减省刑罚。
English: With a word from Xunzi, Qi Hou reduced the sentence.

古文：《诗》曰： 君子如祉，乱庶遄已。 其是之谓乎？ 
现代文：《诗》说， 君子如果喜悦，祸乱庶几乎很快停歇 ，说的就是这个吧！ 
English: "Poetry" says, if the gentleman is happy, the evil and chaos will soon stop, that's what it says!

古文：及晏子如晋，公更其宅，反则成矣。
现代文：等到晏子去晋国，齐景公更换他的住宅，回来，新屋就已经完工。
English: By the time Zizi went to Jin Province, Qi Jing Gong had replaced his residence, and when he returned, the new house had already been completed.

古文：既拜，乃毁之而为里室，皆如其旧。则使宅人反之。 且谚曰： 非宅是卜，唯邻是卜。 
现代文：晏子拜谢以后，就拆毁了新房而建造邻居的房屋，恢复如原来的一样，让原来的住户回来，说： 俗话说： 不是住宅需要占卜，惟有邻居需要占卜。 
English: After the mule had given thanks, he tore down the new house and built the neighbor's house, restored it to its original state, and allowed the original residents to return, saying: As the saying goes: It is not the house that needs divination, but the neighbors.

古文：二三子先卜邻矣，违卜不祥。
现代文：这几位已经先占卜邻居了，违背占卜不祥。
English: These people have already divined their neighbors, and it's bad luck to go against divination.

古文：君子不犯非礼，小人不犯不祥，古之制也。吾敢违诸乎？ 
现代文：君子不去做不合礼的事情，小人不去做不祥的事情，这是古代的制度，我敢违背它吗？ 
English: A gentleman does not do things that are not proper, and a villain does not do things that are ominous. This is an ancient system. Do I dare to go against it?

古文：卒复其旧宅。
现代文：终于恢复了旧居。
English: The former residence has finally been restored.

古文：公弗许。因陈桓子以请，乃许之。
现代文：齐景公开始不允许，晏子托陈桓子代为请求，齐景公才允许了。
English: At first, Lord Qi Jing did not allow it, so the mule asked Chen Huan Zi to go on his behalf. Only then did Lord Qi Jing allow it.

古文：夏四月，郑伯如晋，公孙段相，甚敬而卑，礼无违者。
现代文：夏季，四月，郑简公到晋国，公孙段作为相礼者，很恭敬而卑躬屈节，礼仪没有违背的。
English: In the summer, in April, when Zheng Jian Gong went to Jin Province, Gong Sun Duan, as a relative, was very respectful and servile, and the etiquette was not violated.

古文：晋侯嘉焉，授之以策曰： 子豐有劳于晋国，余闻而弗忘。
现代文：晋平公赞许，把策书授给公孙段，说： 子丰在晋国有过功劳，我听说了以后不会忘记。
English: Jinping Gong praised and gave the strategy book to Gongsun Duan, saying: Zifeng has done great service in Jin State, I will not forget it after hearing about it.

古文：赐女州田，以胙乃旧勋。 
现代文：赐给你州县的土田，以报答你们过去的勋劳。 
English: I bestow upon you the state and county of Tsuchida in return for your past distinguished service.

古文：伯石再拜稽首，受策以出。君子曰： 礼，其人之急也乎？
现代文：公孙段再拜叩头，接受了策书而去，君子说： 礼仪，大约是人所急迫需要的吧！
English: Gongsun Duan bowed his head again, accepted the policy book and left. The gentleman said: "Etiquette, it seems, is something that people urgently need!

古文：伯石之汰也，一为礼于晋，犹荷其禄，况以礼终始乎？《诗》曰： 人而无礼，胡不遄死。 其是之谓乎？ 
现代文：公孙段这样骄傲，一旦在晋国有了礼仪，尚且承受了它的福禄，何况始终都有礼仪呢？《诗》说， 人没有礼仪，为什么不快点死 ，说的就是这个吧！ 
English: Gongsun Duan is so proud that once he had etiquette in Jin, he still received its blessing, and what's more, he always had etiquette? "Poetry" says, people have no etiquette, why not hurry to die, that's what it says!

古文：初，州县，栾豹之邑也。
现代文：当初，州县是栾豹的采邑。
English: At the beginning, Zhoushan was the cradle of the cheetah.

古文：及栾氏亡，范宣子、赵文子、韩宣子皆欲之。
现代文：等到栾氏灭亡，范宣子、赵文子、韩宣子都想要这块地方。
English: After the death of the Min clan, Fan Xuan Zi, Zhao Wen Zi, and Han Xuan Zi all wanted this place.

古文：文子曰： 温，吾县也。 
现代文：赵文子说： 温县，是我的县。 
English: Zhao Wenzi said, "Wen County is my county.

古文：二宣子曰： 自郤称以别，三传矣。
现代文：两个宣子说： 从郤称划分州县以来，已经传了三家了。
English: The two missionaries said: Since the division of prefectures and counties, there have been three families.

古文：晋之别县不唯州，谁获治之？ 
现代文：晋国把一县划分为二的不仅只州县，谁能够按划分前的情况去治理它？ 
English: Jin Guo divides one county into two, not only into prefectures, who can govern it according to the situation before the division?

古文：文子病之，乃舍之。
现代文：赵文子感到惭愧，就放弃了州县。
English: Feeling ashamed, Zhao Wenzi gave up the prefecture.

古文：二子曰： 吾不可以正议而自与也。 
现代文：两个宣子说： 我们不能口头上公正，而把好处给自己。 
English: The two missionaries said, "We can't be verbally just and give ourselves an advantage.

古文：皆舍之。
现代文：就都放弃了。
English: They all gave up.

古文：及文子为政，赵获曰： 可以取州矣。 文子曰： 退！
现代文：等到赵文子执政，赵获说： 可以把州县拿过来了。 
English: When Zhao Wenzi came to power, Zhao Zuo said, "We can take over the prefectures and counties."

古文：二子之言，义也。
现代文：赵文子说： 出去！
English: Zhao Wenzi said: Get out!

古文：违义，祸也。
现代文：这两位的话，是合于道义的。违背道义，就是祸患。
English: The words of these two are in line with morality. Violation of morality is a disaster.

古文：余不能治余县，又焉用州？其以徼祸也。
现代文：我不能治理我的封邑，又哪里用得着州县，而去自找祸患？
English: I can't govern my fiefdom, and what's the use of counties and prefectures if I have to go looking for trouble?

古文：君子曰： 弗知实难。 
现代文：君子说： 不知道祸患是很难的。 
English: The gentleman said, "It's hard not to know what evil is."

古文：知而弗从，祸莫大焉。
现代文：知道了不照着做，没有比这再大的祸患了。
English: There is no greater evil than to know and not to do.

古文：有言州必死。 
现代文：再有人提到州县的一定处死！ 
English: Someone else mentioned a certain death penalty in the state or county!

古文：豐氏故主韩氏，伯石之获州也，韩宣子为之请之，为其复取之之故。
现代文：丰氏原来住在韩氏家里，公孙段得到州县，是韩宣子为公孙段请求的，这是为了他可以再次取得州县的缘故。
English: Feng originally lived in Han's family, and it was Han Xuan Zi who requested the county for Gongsun Duan, so that he could obtain the county again.

古文：五月，叔弓如滕，葬滕成公，子服椒为介。
现代文：五月，叔弓到滕国去，参加滕成公的葬礼，子服椒作为副手。
English: In May, Shuyun went to Tengguo to attend the funeral of Teng Chenggong, with Zifu Jiao as his deputy.

古文：及郊，遇懿伯之忌，敬子不入。
现代文：到达郊外，碰上懿伯的忌日，叔弓便不进入滕国。
English: When he reached the outskirts and came across the day of Zou Bo's death, he did not enter Tengguo.

古文：惠伯曰： 公事有公利，无私忌。
现代文：子服椒说： 公家的事情只能考虑公家的利益，没有私家的忌避。
English: Zifu pepper said: public affairs can only consider the interests of the public, there is no private avoidance.

古文：椒请先入。 
现代文：椒请求先进入。 
English: Pepper requests to enter first.

古文：乃先受馆，敬子从之。
现代文：于是就先住进宾馆。叔弓听从了他的意见。
English: So he first stayed in a hotel. Shukyu followed his advice.

古文：晋韩起如齐逆女。
现代文：晋国的韩起到齐国迎接齐女。
English: Jin's Han went to Qi to welcome Qi's daughter.

古文：公孙虿为少姜之有宠也，以其子更公女而嫁公子。
现代文：公孙虿因为少姜受到宠爱，把他的女儿更换了齐景公的女儿，而把齐景公的女儿嫁给别人。
English: Because Shao Jiang was favored, Gongsun Yao replaced his daughter with Qi Jinggong's daughter and married Qi Jinggong's daughter to someone else.

古文：人谓宣子： 子尾欺晋，晋胡受之？ 
现代文：别人对韩宣子说： 子尾欺骗晋国，晋国为什么接受？ 
English: Others said to Han Xuan Zi: Zio deceived Jin, why did Jin accept it?

古文：宣子曰： 我欲得齐而远其宠，宠将来乎？ 
现代文：韩宣子说： 我们想要得到齐国，却反而疏远他的宠臣，宠臣能够来吗？ 
English: Han Xuan Zi said: We want to get Qi Guo, but instead alienate his favorite, can the favorite come?

古文：秋七月，郑罕虎如晋，贺夫人，且告曰： 楚人日征敝邑，以不朝立王之故。
现代文：秋季，七月，郑国的罕虎到晋国去，祝贺夫人，并且报告说： 楚国人每天来问敝邑不去朝贺他们新立国君的原因。
English: In the autumn, in July, Han Hu of Zheng went to Jin to congratulate his wife, and reported: "The people of Chu come every day to ask the reason why they do not go to the morning to congratulate their new sovereign.

古文：敝邑之往，则畏执事，其谓寡君， 而固有外心 。
现代文：如果敝邑派人前去，就害怕执事会说寡君本来就有心向外。
English: If the county sent someone, they were afraid that the deacon would say that the prince had always wanted to go abroad.

古文：其不往，则宋之盟云。
现代文：如果不去，那么在宋国的盟约又规定了是要去朝见的。
English: If they do not go, then the covenant in the Song Dynasty also stipulates that they should go to the imperial court.

古文：进退罪也。
现代文：进退都是罪过。
English: It is a sin to advance or retreat.

古文：寡君使虎布之。 
现代文：寡君派虎前来陈述。 
English: The tyrant sent the tiger to make a statement.

古文：宣子使叔向对曰： 君若辱有寡君，在楚何害？
现代文：宣子派叔向回答说： 君王如果心向着寡君，在楚国有什么害处？
English: Xuan Zi's uncle replied, "If the king's heart is inclined towards an eunuch, what is the harm in the State of Chu?

古文：修宋盟也。
现代文：这是为了重修在宋国盟会的友好。
English: This is in order to rebuild the friendship in the Song League.

古文：君苟思盟，寡君乃知免于戾矣。
现代文：君王如果想到盟约，寡君就知道可以免于罪过了。
English: If a prince thinks of the covenant, he knows that he will be free from sin.

古文：君若不有寡君，虽朝夕辱于敝邑，寡君猜焉。
现代文：君王如果心中没有寡君，虽然早晚光临敝邑，寡君也会猜疑的。
English: If a king does not have a vassal in his heart, even if he comes to Gyeongju sooner or later, the vassal will be suspicious.

古文：君实有心，何辱命焉？
现代文：君王果真实心向寡君，何必来告诉寡君。
English: If the king's heart is true, why does he need to tell the king?

古文：君其往也！
现代文：君王还是前去吧！
English: Go ahead, Your Majesty!

古文：苟有寡君，在楚犹在晋也。 
现代文：如果心向寡君，在楚国在晋国都是一样的。 
English: If one's heart is set on becoming a widower, it's the same in both Chu and Jin.

古文：张趯使谓大叔曰： 自子之归也，小人粪除先人之敝庐，曰： 子其将来！ 
现代文：张趯派人对太叔说： 自从您回去以后，小人扫除先人的破旧房子，说， 您可能会来的。 
English: Zhang Ye sent a message to his great-uncle: "Since you returned, villains have been sweeping away the dilapidated houses of our ancestors, saying that you might come.

古文：今子皮实来，小人失望。 
现代文：现在子皮来了，小人失去了希望。 
English: Now that the cuttings have come, the little man has lost hope.

古文：大叔曰： 吉贱不获来，畏大国、尊夫人也。
现代文：太叔说： 吉的地位低下，不能前来，这是由于害怕大国、尊敬夫人的缘故。
English: Uncle said: Ji's status is low, he can't come, this is because of his fear of big countries and respect for his wife.

古文：且孟曰： 而将无事。 吉庶几焉。 
现代文：而且孟说 你将要没事了 ，吉大概没事了。 
English: And Meng said you're going to be fine, Ji is probably fine.

古文：小邾穆公来朝。季武子欲卑之，穆叔曰： 不可。
现代文：小邾穆公前来朝见，季武子不想用诸侯的礼仪接待他。穆叔说： 不行。
English: Xiao Yan Mu Gong came to see him in the morning, Ji Wuzi did not want to receive him with the etiquette of the princes. Mu uncle said: No.

古文：曹、滕、二邾，实不忘我好。敬以逆之，犹惧其贰。又卑一睦焉，逆群好也。
现代文：曹国、滕国和两个邾国确实没有忘记和我国的友好，恭恭敬敬的迎接他，还害怕他有二心，反而又降低一个友好国家的地位，怎么能迎接许多友好国家呢？
English: Cao Guo, Teng Guo and the two Yao Guo have indeed not forgotten the friendship with our country, and greet him respectfully. They are also afraid that he has double-mindedness, and on the contrary, he will lower the status of a friendly country. How can we welcome many friendly countries?

古文：其如旧而加敬焉！《志》曰： 能敬无灾。 
现代文：还是像过去一样更加恭敬些。《志》说： 能够恭敬没有灾祸。 
English: Or be more respectful as in the past. "Zhi" said: There is no disaster to be able to respect.

古文：又曰： 敬逆来者，天所福也。  
现代文：又说： 恭敬地迎接前来的人，这就是上天降福的原因。  
English: He also said, "To respectfully welcome those who come is the reason for God's blessing.

古文：季孙从之。
现代文：季孙听从了他的话。
English: Ji Sun obeyed his words.

古文：齐侯田于莒，卢蒲嫳见，泣且请曰： 余发如此种种，余奚能为？ 
现代文：八月，举行大雩祭，这是由于旱灾的缘故。齐景公在莒地打猎，卢蒲嫳进见，哭泣，而且请求说： 我的头发这么短，我还能做什么？ 齐景公说： 好。
English: In August, the Great Ploughing Festival was held, which was due to the drought. Prince Qi Jing was hunting in the ploughed land. Lu Puchen saw him, wept, and begged, "My hair is so short, what else can I do?" Prince Qi Jing said, "Good."

古文：公曰： 诺，吾告二子。 
现代文：我告诉那两位。 回去以后就告诉了子尾和子雅。
English: I told the other two, and when I got back, I told Ziwei and Zi Ya.

古文：归而告之。子尾欲复之。子雅不可，曰： 彼其发短而心甚长，其或寝处我矣。 
现代文：子尾想要让他官复原位，子雅不同意，说： 他的头发短，心计长，他也许要睡在我的皮上了。 
English: Ziwei wanted to restore his position, but Ziya disagreed, saying, "His hair is short, his mind is long, he may want to sleep on my skin."

古文：九月，子雅放卢蒲嫳于北燕。
现代文：九月，子雅把卢蒲嫳放逐到北燕。
English: In September, Ziya banished Lu Bu Ya to Beiyan.

古文：燕简公多嬖宠，欲去诸大夫而立其宠人。
现代文：燕简公有很多宠爱的人，想要去掉大夫们而立宠臣为大夫。
English: Yan Jian Gong has a lot of favorite people. He wants to get rid of the doctors and appoint his favorite vassals as doctors.

古文：冬，燕大夫比以杀公之外嬖。
现代文：冬季，燕国的大夫们勾结起来杀死了简公的宠臣。
English: In winter, the doctors of Yan's country colluded to kill Jian Gong's favorite.

古文：公惧，奔齐。
现代文：简公害怕，逃亡到齐国。
English: Jian Gong was afraid and fled to Qi Province.

古文：书曰： 北燕伯款出奔齐。 
现代文：《春秋》记载说 北燕伯款出奔齐 ，这是说他有罪。
English: "Spring and Autumn" records that Beiyan Boqing went on the run, which means that he was guilty.

古文：罪之也。十月，郑伯如楚，子产相。
现代文：十月，郑简公去到楚国，子产作为相礼者。
English: In October, Zheng Jiangong went to Chu Province, and Zibo was chosen as the best man.

古文：楚子享之，赋《吉日》。
现代文：楚灵王设享礼招待郑简公，赋《吉日》这首诗。
English: King Chuling held a banquet to invite Zheng Jiankang and gave him the poem "Fortunate Day."

古文：既享，子产乃具田备，王以田江南之梦。
现代文：享礼结束，子产就准备了打猎用具，楚灵王和郑简公在江南的云梦打猎。
English: After the ceremony, the children prepared hunting equipment, and King Chuling and Zheng Jiangong went hunting in Yunmeng, south of the Yangtze River.

古文：齐公孙竈卒。
现代文：齐国的公孙灶死了。
English: The great-grandson of Qi Zhao died.

古文：司马竈见晏子，曰： 又丧子雅矣。 
现代文：司马灶进见晏子，说： 又失去了子雅了。 
English: Sima Zhao went to see Zizi and said, "I've lost Ziya again."

古文：晏子曰： 惜也，子旗不免，殆哉！
现代文：晏子说： 可惜啊！子旗不能免于祸患，危险啊！
English: The lame man said, "What a pity! The lame man is not exempt from calamity, danger!

古文：姜族弱矣，而妫将始昌。
现代文：姜族削弱了，而妫氏将要开始昌盛。
English: The Jiang family has weakened, while the Zou family will begin to flourish.

古文：二惠竞爽，犹可，又弱一个焉，姜其危哉！ 
现代文：惠公的两个子孙刚强明白，还可以维持姜氏，又丧失了一个，姜氏恐怕危险呀！ 
English: The two sons of Huigong Gangqiang understand that they can still maintain the Jiang clan, and they have lost another one. I'm afraid the Jiang clan is in danger!

