古文：司马休之，字季豫，本河内温人，晋宣帝季弟谯王逊之后也。
现代文：司马休之，字季豫，本来是河内温人，是晋宣帝司马懿最小的弟弟谯王逊的后代。
English: Sima Xiu Zhi, also known as Ji Yu, was originally a native of Hanoi and a descendant of Emperor Sima Xuan's youngest brother, Xuan Wangxun.

古文：司马叡僭立江南，又以逊子孙袭封。至休之父恬，为司马昌明镇北将军、青兗二州刺史。
现代文：司马睿在江南称帝，又让司马逊的子孙承袭其封授，直到司马休之的父亲司马恬，任司马昌明的镇北将军、青兖二州刺史。
English: Sima Rui proclaimed himself emperor in the south of the Yangtze River, and allowed the descendants of Sima Sion to inherit his title, until Sima Yu, the father of Sima Xiu, served as the Zhenbei general of Sima Changming and the history of the two states in the Qing Dynasty.

古文：天兴五年，休之为司马德宗平西将军、荆州刺史。
现代文：天兴五年，司马休之任司马德宗的平西将军、荆州刺史。
English: In the fifth year of Tianxing, Sima Xiu became the general of Pingxi and the governor of Jingzhou.

古文：为桓玄逼逐，遂奔慕容德。
现代文：司马休之被桓玄逼迫，就投奔了慕容德。
English: Sima Huizhi was persecuted by Kan Xuan, so he fled to Murongde.

古文：刘裕诛玄后，还建鄴，裕复以休之为荆州刺史。
现代文：刘裕杀掉桓玄以后，司马休之回到建邺，刘裕又任他为荆州刺史。
English: After Liu Yu killed Huan Xuan, Sima Xuzhi returned to Jianye, and Liu Yu appointed him as the chief historian of Jingzhou.

古文：休之颇得江汉人心，刘裕疑其有异志。
现代文：司马休之颇得长江、汉水一带的人心，刘裕怀疑他有背逆之心。
English: Sima Xiu has won the hearts of people in the Yangtze River and Han River areas, and Liu Yu suspects that he has a rebellious heart.

古文：而休之子文思继休之兄尚之为谯王，谋图裕，裕执送休之，令自为其所。
现代文：司马休之的儿子司马文思继承司马休之之兄司马尚之的爵位为谯王，图谋除掉刘裕，刘裕捉住了他，将其送给司马休之，令他自己进行处置。
English: Sima Wensi, the son of Sima Xiu, succeeded Sima Xiangzhi, the brother of Sima Xiu, to the title of Shao Wang and tried to get rid of Liu Yu. Liu Yu caught him and gave him to Sima Xiu to deal with on his own.

古文：休之表废文思，并与裕书陈谢。
现代文：司马休之给朝廷上表请求废黜司马文思，并写信给刘裕谢罪。
English: Sima Huizhi sent a petition to the imperial court to depose Sima Wensi, and wrote a letter to Liu Yuxie.

古文：神瑞中，裕收休之子文宝，兄子文祖，并杀之，乃率众讨休之。
现代文：神瑞年间，刘裕逮捕了司马休之的儿子司马文宝、侄子司马文祖，并把他们杀掉，于是率军讨伐司马休之。
English: During the reign of Shen Rui, Liu Yu arrested Sima Wenzhu's son, Sima Wenbao, and nephew, Sima Wenzhu, and killed them. He then led an army to fight Sima Xiu.

古文：休之上表自陈于德宗，与德宗镇北将军鲁宗之、宗之子竟陵太守轨等起兵讨裕。
现代文：司马休之上表给司马德宗陈述自己的事，并同司马德宗的镇北将军鲁宗之、鲁宗之的儿子竟陵太守鲁轨等人起兵讨伐刘裕。
English: Sima Xiu presented his case to Sima Dezong on the table, and raised an army to fight Liu Yu with Sima Dezong's Zhenbei General Lu Zongzhi, Lu Zongzhi's son Jingling Taishu Lu Lu and others.

古文：裕军至江陵，休之不能敌，遂与轨奔襄阳。
现代文：刘裕的军队进至江陵，司马休之不能抵挡，就与鲁轨一道奔往襄阳。
English: When Liu Yu's army entered Jiangling, Sima Xiu could not resist and rushed to Xiangyang together with Lu Lu.

古文：裕复进军讨之。
现代文：刘裕又进军征讨襄阳。
English: Liu Yu also marched to conquer Xiangyang.

古文：太宗遣长孙嵩屯河东，将为之援。
现代文：太宗派遣长孙嵩在河东驻军，准备作为司马休之的援军。
English: Emperor Taizong sent his eldest son, Sun Song, to garrison troops in the eastern part of the river and prepare to reinforce Sima Xiu.

古文：时姚兴征虏将军姚成王、冠军将军司马国璠亦将兵救之，不及而还。
现代文：当时姚兴的征虏将军姚成王、冠军将军司马国也率军前往援救，还没有到达就退了回去。
English: At that time, Yao Xing's conscript general, Yao Cheng Wang, and champion general, Sima Guo, also led the army to rescue, but they retreated back before they arrived.

古文：休之遂与子文思及宗之等奔于姚兴。
现代文：司马休之只得与其子司马文思和鲁宗之等人投奔姚兴。
English: Sima Huizhi had to flee to Yaoxing with his sons Sima Wensi and Lu Zongzhu.

古文：裕灭姚泓，休之与文思及德宗河间王子道赐、辅国将军温楷、竟陵内史鲁轨、荆州治中韩延之、殷约、平西参军桓谧、桓璲及桓温孙道度、道子、勃海刁雍、陈郡袁式等数百人，皆将妻子诣嵩降。
现代文：刘裕消灭了姚泓之后，司马休之与司马文思以及司马德宗的河间王之子司马道赐，辅国将军温楷，竟陵内史鲁轨，荆州治中韩延之、殷约，平西参军桓谧、桓遂及桓温之孙桓道度、桓道子，渤海人刁雍，陈郡人袁式等数百人，都带着妻子儿女到长孙嵩那里归降。
English: After Liu Yu eliminated Yao Yao, hundreds of people, including Sima Xiu Zhi, Sima Wensi, Sima Dao Zi, the son of the King of Kawama of the Sima De Zong, Wen Kai, the General of the Auxiliary State, Xing Ne Ne Ne Shi Lu Lu Lu, Han Yan Zi, Yin Yu, Huan Xi, Huan Sui, Huan Wens grandson Huan Dao Du, Huan Dao Zi, the Bohai people Huan Yong, and the Chen County people Yuan Shih, all returned to the eldest son Song with their wives and children.

古文：月余，休之卒于嵩军。
现代文：一个多月之后，司马休之死于长孙嵩军中。
English: More than a month later, Simakyu died in the army of Nagasun Song.

古文：诏曰： 司马休之率其同义，万里归诚，雅操不遂，中年殒丧，朕甚愍焉。
现代文：太宗下达诏令说： 司马休之率领与他义气相同的人，不远万里前来归诚，其美好的节操未能实现，中年殒丧，朕甚感怜惜。
English: Taizong issued a decree saying: "I am very sorry that Sima Xiu led people with the same spirit of righteousness as him, who came thousands of miles to repent, but their good deeds could not be realized, and they died in middle age.

古文：其追赠征西大将军、右光禄大夫，谥始平声公。 
现代文：现追赠他为征西大将军、右光禄大夫，谥号为始平声公。 
English: He is now posthumously awarded the titles of General of the Western Conquest and Doctor of the Right Light, and his posthumous name is Shihei Shoko.

古文：文思与淮南公国璠、池阳子道赐不平，而伪亲之，引与饮宴。
现代文：司马文思与淮南公司马国、池阳子司马道赐不和，但表面上却装得非常友好，请他们一同饮宴。
English: Sima Wensi did not get along with Ma Guo and Chiyangzi Sima Dao of Huainan Company, but they pretended to be very friendly on the surface and invited them to have a banquet together.

古文：国璠性疏直，因酒醉，遂语文思，言己将与温楷及三城胡酋王珍、曹栗等外叛，因说京师豪强可与为谋数十人。
现代文：司马国性情粗疏率直，因为喝醉了酒，就告诉司马文思，说自己准备同温楷以及三城胡人头领王珍、曹栗等人反叛朝廷，并说出京师中的豪强可以参与、为其同谋的数十个人。
English: Sima Guo had a coarse and straightforward temperament. Because he was drunk, he told Sima Wensi that he was preparing to rebel against the imperial court with Wen Kai, Wang Zhen, the leader of the Wu people in the three cities, Cao Gui, and others. He also said that the powerful people in the Beijing division could participate and that there were dozens of people who were his accomplices.

古文：文思告之，皆坐诛。
现代文：司马文思告发了他们，这些人全部被杀。
English: Sima Wensi denounced them and they were all killed.

古文：以文思为延尉卿，赐爵郁林公。
现代文：世祖任司马文思为廷尉卿，赐爵位为郁林公。
English: The founder, Sima Wensi, was appointed Lord Lieutenant and given the title of Duke of Yulin.

古文：善于其职，听讼断狱，百姓不复匿其情。
现代文：司马文思能很好地履行自己的职责，处理诉讼判断案子，百姓不敢再隐匿他们的实情。
English: Sima Wenshi is able to perform his duties well and deal with litigation and judgment cases, and the people no longer dare to hide their truth.

古文：刘义隆遣将裴方明击杨难当于仇池，世祖以文思为假节、征南大将军，进爵谯王，督洛豫诸军南趣襄阳，邀其归路。
现代文：刘义隆派部将裴方明在仇池攻击杨难当，世祖任司马文思为假节、征南大将军，晋爵为谯王，督率洛、豫诸军向南直指襄阳，阻截裴方明的归路。
English: Liu Yilong sent Baifangming to attack Yang Nantang in Qiuchi. The ancestor of Baifangming, Sima Wensi, was the False Section, the General of the Southern Expedition, and Jinjue was the King of the Southern Expedition. He led the Luo and Yu armies to the south to Yangyang and blocked Baifangming's way back.

古文：还京，为怀朔镇将。
现代文：司马文思回京之后，被任为怀朔镇将。
English: After Sima Wensi returned to Beijing, he was appointed as the mayor of Waishuo Town.

古文：兴安初薨。
现代文：司马文思死于兴安初年。
English: Sima Wensi died in the first year of Xingan.

古文：子弥陀，袭爵。
现代文：司马文思的儿子司马弥陀，承袭父亲的爵位。
English: Sima Mida, the son of Sima Wensi, inherits his father's title.

古文：以选尚临泾公主，而辞以先取毗陵公窦瑾女。
现代文：他被皇帝选中要将临泾公主嫁给他，但他因为事先娶了毗陵公窦瑾之女而加以谢绝。
English: He was chosen by the emperor to marry the princess Linyi to him, but he refused because he had previously married the daughter of Viling Gong Dou Yao.

古文：与瑾并坐祝诅伏诛。
现代文：后来他和窦瑾一起因祈诉鬼神降祸于人而获罪被杀。
English: Later, he and Dou Yu were both convicted and killed for praying for evil spirits to befall people.

古文：司马楚之，字德秀，晋宣帝弟太常馗之八世孙。
现代文：司马楚之，字德秀，晋宣帝司马懿之弟太常司马馗的八世孙。
English: Sima Chuzhi, also known as Dexiu, was the eighth-generation grandson of Emperor Jinxuan's younger brother, Emperor Taizong.

古文：父荣期，司马德宗梁益二州刺史，为其参军杨承祖所杀。
现代文：父荣期，司马德宗政权的梁、益二州刺史，被其参军杨承祖所杀。
English: During his father's Rong period, Yang Chengzu, a member of the Sima Dezong regime, was killed by Yang Chengzu.

古文：楚之时年十七，送父丧还丹阳。
现代文：楚之当时十七岁，送父丧回丹杨。
English: At that time, Chu Zhi was seventeen years old. He sent his father back to Danyang after his death.

古文：值刘裕诛夷司马戚属，叔父宣期、兄贞之并为所杀。
现代文：正逢刘裕诛杀司马氏家族，叔父宣期、兄贞之都被杀害。
English: At the same time that Liu Yuxuan killed the Sima family, his uncle Xuan Jie and elder brother Zhen Zhi were both killed.

古文：楚之乃亡匿诸沙门中济江。
现代文：司马楚之混在众和尚中渡江。
English: Sima Chu mixed with the monks and crossed the river.

古文：自历阳西入义阳、竟陵蛮中。
现代文：从历阳西入义阳、竟陵蛮人当中。
English: From the west of Liyang into Yiyang, into the middle of the barbarians.

古文：及从祖荆州刺史休之为裕所败，乃亡于汝颍之间。
现代文：等到堂祖荆州刺史司马休之被刘裕打败，他又逃亡于汝、颍之间。
English: When Liu Yu defeated Tong Zu Jingzhou's assassin, Sima Xiu, he fled to You and Yao.

古文：楚之少有英气，能折节待士。
现代文：司马楚之少有英气，能够折节待人。
English: From an early age, Chu Zhi had a heroic spirit and was able to be a corporal.

古文：与司马顺明、道恭等所在聚党。
现代文：与司马顺明、司马道恭等聚集力量。
English: With Sima Shunming, Sima Daogong and other gathered forces.

古文：及刘裕自立，楚之规欲报复，收众据长社，归之者常万余人。
现代文：等到刘裕自立为帝，司马楚之计划报复，收集士卒据守长社，投奔他的有一万多人。
English: When Liu Yu established himself as emperor, Sima Chu's plan of retaliation was to collect officers and men to guard the imperial palace, and more than ten thousand people joined him.

古文：刘裕深惮之，遣刺客沐谦害楚之。
现代文：刘裕深为害怕，派刺客沐谦加害楚之。
English: Liu Yuxen was afraid and sent assassins to humiliate and harm him.

古文：楚之待谦甚厚。
现代文：楚之待沐谦很好。
English: Sima Chuzhi was very generous to Mu Qian.

古文：谦夜诈疾，知楚之必自来，因欲杀之。
现代文：沐谦晚上谎称有病，知道他一定会来探望，便想乘机杀了他。
English: In the evening, Mu Qian lied that he was ill. Knowing that he would definitely come to visit, he wanted to take the opportunity to kill him.

古文：楚之闻谦病，果自赍汤药往省之。
现代文：楚之听说沐谦病了，果然亲自携带汤药前往慰问。
English: Chu Zhi heard that Mu Qianlong was ill, so he went to offer his condolences in person, carrying soup medicine.

古文：廉感其意，乃出匕首于席下，以状告之曰： 将军为裕所忌惮，愿不轻率，以保全为先。 
现代文：沐谦被他深深感动了，于是从席子底下拿出匕首，以实相告： 将军您深为刘裕所害怕，愿你不要轻率从事，以保全性命为先。 
English: Mu Qian was deeply moved by him, so he took out a dagger from under the mat and told him the truth: General, you are deeply afraid of Liu Yu. I hope you will not act rashly, and put the preservation of your life first.

古文：楚之叹曰： 若如来言，虽有所防，恐有所失。 
现代文：司马楚之叹气说： 如真像你所说的那样，我虽有所防，也恐怕会有闪失。 
English: Sima Chu said with a sigh: If it's really like you said, I'm afraid I'll slip up, even though I've taken precautions.

古文：谦遂委身以事之。
现代文：沐谦于是委身侍奉司马楚之。
English: Mu Qian then dedicated himself to serving Sima Chu.

古文：其推诚信物，得士之心，皆此类也。
现代文：司马楚之的推诚信物，得士之心的行为，大致都是这样。
English: Sima Chu Zhi's promotion of honest things, the behavior of winning the hearts of scholars, are generally like this.

古文：太宗末，山阳公奚斤略地河南，楚之遣使请降。
现代文：太宗末年，山阳公奚斤攻打黄河以南，司马楚之派使者请求归降。
English: In the last years of Emperor Taizong's reign, Emperor Shanyang launched an attack south of the Yellow River, and sent an envoy to Sima Chu to ask him to surrender.

古文：因表曰： 江淮以北，闻王师南首，无不扑舞，思奉德化。
现代文：上表说： 长江、淮河以北的百姓听说王师南来，无不欢欣鼓舞，思求归顺。
English: The above table says: When the people north of the Yangtze River and Huaihe River heard that Wang Shimin had come to the south, they were all excited and eager to submit.

古文：而逼于寇逆，无由自致。
现代文：而迫于寇逆压境，无法自行前来。
English: However, under pressure from the invaders, they were unable to come themselves.

古文：臣因民之欲，请率慕义为国前驱。
现代文：为臣顺民之心，请求统领慕义之兵作为皇魏前驱。
English: For the heart of being a subject and obeying the people, he asked to command the soldiers of Muyi as the forerunner of the Emperor Wei.

古文：今皆白衣，无以制服人望。
现代文：而今，臣等都是白衣无官之人，无法使人信服。
English: But now, ministers and others are just white-coated bureaucrats, and they cannot convince people.

古文：若蒙偏裨之号，假王威以唱义，则莫不率从。 
现代文：如若蒙赐偏裨将领的名号，假借王威以倡义举，则这里士众无不响应。 
English: If Wang Wei were to be given the title of general of deviations, and if he were to take the initiative, then there would be no lack of response from the scholars here.

古文：于是假楚之使持节、征南将军、荆州刺史。
现代文：于是朝廷给予他使持节、征南将军、荆州刺史的官职。
English: As a result, the imperial court gave him the official positions of envoy to Jishijie, general of the Southern Expedition, and the governor of Jingzhou.

古文：奚斤既平河南，以楚之所率户民分置汝南、南阳、南顿、新蔡四郡，以益豫州。
现代文：奚斤平定黄河以南之后，把司马楚之所率户民分别安置在汝南、南阳、南顿、新蔡四郡，以加强豫州。
English: After conquering the south of the Yellow River, he resettled the households led by Sima Chu in the four counties of Runan, Nanyang, Nantong and Xinzai to strengthen Yuzhou.

古文：世祖初，楚之遣妻子内居于鄴，寻徵入朝。
现代文：世祖初年，楚之送妻子迁居到邺城，不久奉召入朝。
English: In the first year of King Sejong's reign, his wife moved to Yeongseong and was soon called to the imperial court.

古文：时南籓诸将表刘义隆欲入为寇，以楚之为使持节、安南大将军，封琅邪王，屯颍川以拒之。
现代文：当时南疆众将表奏刘义隆想侵犯边境，朝廷命司马楚之为使持节、安南大将军，封琅笽王，屯军颍川以迎战敌军。
English: At that time, the people of southern Xinjiang showed Liu Yilong that they wanted to invade the border, and the imperial court ordered Ma Chu, the commander of the imperial army, to dispatch the commander of the imperial army, General Annan, the commander of the imperial army, the commander of the imperial army, and the troops of the imperial army to Luchuan to meet the enemy troops.

古文：其长史临邑子步还表曰： 楚之渡河，百姓思旧，义众云集，汝颍以南，望风翕然，回首革面。
现代文：他的长史临邑子步还上表说： 司马楚之渡河，百姓思旧，义众云集，汝、颍以南，望风翕然归心，回首革面。
English: His long history of Lin-yur Zibo also said on the table: Sima Chu crossed the river, the people thought about the old days, the righteous people gathered, you, south of the Yunnan River, looked at the wind and came to your senses, and looked back.

古文：斯诚陛下应天顺民，圣德广被之所致也。 
现代文：这实在是陛下应天顺人，圣德广被的结果啊。 
English: This is truly the result of His Majesty's benevolence and broad-mindedness.

古文：世祖大悦，玺书劳勉，赐前后部鼓吹。
现代文：世祖看完大为高兴，下诏慰劳勉励，赐给司马楚之前后几部鼓吹。
English: After watching it, the patriarch was greatly pleased and gave Sima Chu the following words of encouragement.

古文：义隆将到彦之氵斥河而西，列守南岸，至于潼关。
现代文：刘义隆部将到彦之溯黄河西上，列兵据守黄河南岸，一直到潼关。
English: Liu Yilong will go to the west of the Yellow River, and the soldiers will guard the south bank of the Yellow River, all the way to Shaoguan.

古文：及彦之等退走，楚之破其别军于长社。
现代文：等到到彦之等退走之后，司马楚之在长社打败他的一路军队。
English: After waiting for Hikon and others to retreat, Sima Chuzhi defeated his entire army in Chosha.

古文：又与冠军将军安颉攻滑台，拔之，擒义隆将朱修之、李元德及东郡太守申谟，俘万余人。
现代文：又与冠军将军安颉一起攻打滑台，攻克滑台，擒获刘义隆将朱修之、李元德以及东郡太守申谟，俘敌一万多人。
English: He also attacked the slide together with the champion general An Xuan, conquered the slide, captured Liu Yilong's generals Zhu Xiuzhi and Li Yuande, as well as the East County Governor Shenmue, and captured more than 10,000 enemies.

古文：上疏曰： 臣奉命南伐，受任一方，而智力浅短，诚节未效，所以夙夜忧惶，忘寝与食。
现代文：司马楚之上疏说： 臣奉命南伐，受任一方，而智力短浅，忠诚无法报效，所以日夜忧心忡忡，忘寝废食。
English: Sima Chu said solemnly: "I was ordered to go to the south, and I was assigned to one side, but my intelligence was shallow and my loyalty could not be rewarded, so I was worried day and night, and I lost sleep and food.

古文：臣屡遣人至荆扬，所在陈说，具论天朝盛化之美，莫不忻承圣德，倾首北望。
现代文：臣屡次派人到荆扬，不断陈说宣扬天朝盛化之美，大家无不欣承圣德，倾首北望。
English: The minister repeatedly sent people to Jingyang, constantly telling and preaching the beauty of the prosperity of the Heavenly Dynasty. Everyone was pleased to inherit the sacredness and looked to the north.

古文：而义隆兄弟知人情摇动，遣臣私仇顺为司州刺史，统淮北七郡，代垣苗守悬瓠。
现代文：而刘义隆兄弟知道人情动摇，派为臣的私人仇敌顺任司州刺史，统领淮北七郡，代替垣苗守据悬瓠。
English: But the Liu Yilong brothers knew that human feelings were wavering, and they sent their private enemy Shun, who was a vassal, to be the governor of Shizhou, to lead the seven counties of Huaibei, and to guard the hanging coffin in place of Kakimiao.

古文：自巩、洛、滑台败散已来，义隆耻其败北，多加罪罚。
现代文：从巩、洛、滑台败散以来，刘义隆以其败北为耻，对将领多加罪罚。
English: Since the fall of Gong, Luo, and Nantai, Liu Yilong has been ashamed of his defeat and has increased the punishment for generals.

古文：到彦之削位，退同卒伍，杀姚纵夫于寿春，斩竺灵秀于彭城，王休元托疾，檀道济斥放。
现代文：到彦之削除爵位，成为一般士兵，在寿春杀了姚纵夫，在彭城斩了竺灵秀，王休元称病不出，檀道济斥出放逐。
English: Duan Yanzhi was stripped of his title and became an ordinary soldier. He killed Yao Zhengfu in Shouchun, and executed Yan Lingxiu in Pengcheng. Wang Xiuyuan said that he was not ill, and Dang Daoji was expelled and exiled.

古文：凡在腹心，悉怀疑阻。
现代文：凡在他身边的人，都心怀疑虑。
English: Everyone around him is suspicious.

古文：民怨臣猜，可谓今日。
现代文：民怨臣猜，就是敌人今天的情况。
English: The people's grudge is the enemy's situation today.

古文：臣闻平殄寇逆，必乘战胜之威;建立功勋，亦因离贰之势。
现代文：臣听说平灭寇逆，必须乘胜追击，建功立勋，也应在敌人离散混乱之时。
English: The vassal heard that in order to defeat the invaders, it is necessary to take advantage of the victory to pursue and make meritorious achievements, and it should also be done when the enemy is dispersed and confused.

古文：伏惟陛下圣德膺符，道光四海，神旌所指，莫不摧服，其未宾者义隆而已。
现代文：臣思陛下圣德广布，道播四海，神旗所指，无不摧服，仍未宾服称臣的，只有一个刘义隆而已。
English: There is only one Liu Yilong who, according to the divine banner, is indestructible and has not yet obeyed and praised the emperor.

古文：今天纲遐举，殊方仰德。
现代文：今天，天网远举，万方仰德。
English: Today, Skynet has spread far and wide.

古文：固宜扫清东南，齐一区宇，使济济之风，被于江汉。 
现代文：应当扫清东南，统一海内，使和煦之风，被盖江、汉。 
English: It is necessary to clear the southeast, unify the sea, and make the winds of peace blow, and be covered by the river and Han.

古文：世祖以兵久劳，不从。
现代文：魏世祖觉得兵马劳顿已久，没有听从他的意见。
English: Wei Shizu felt that the soldiers had been tired for a long time and did not listen to his advice.

古文：以散骑常侍徵还。
现代文：以散骑常侍召还司马楚之。
English: He is often seen riding around on horseback and is also known as Sima Chu.

古文：从征凉州，以功赐隶户一百。
现代文：司马楚之跟从皇驾征讨凉州，因功被赐给隶户一百。
English: Sima Chuzhi followed the emperor to conquer Liangzhou, and was given one hundred subordinate households for his service.

古文：义隆遣将裴方明、胡崇之寇仇池。
现代文：刘义隆派将裴方明、胡崇之侵犯仇池。
English: Liu Yilong sent Pei Fangming and Hu Chong to invade Qiuchi.

古文：以楚之为假节，与淮阳公皮豹子等督关中诸军从散关西入，击走方明，擒崇之。仇池平而还。
现代文：朝廷以司马楚之为假节，与淮阳公皮豹子等督领关中诸军从散关西进，赶走裴方明，捉住胡崇之，平定仇池而还。
English: The imperial court regarded Sima Chu as a false festival, and with Huaiyang Gongpi Leopards and other supervisors, the troops of Guanzhong marched westward from the scattered Guanzhong, drove out Pei Fangming, captured Hu Chongzhi, and pacified Qiu Chi and returned.

古文：车驾伐蠕蠕，诏楚之与济阴公卢中山等督运以继大军。
现代文：皇帝车驾讨伐柔然，命司马楚之与济阴公卢中山等人督运粮草以供应大军。
English: The emperor ordered Ma Chuzhi and Jijin Gong Lu Zhongshan to transport grain and grass to supply the large army.

古文：时镇北将军封沓亡入蠕蠕，说令击楚之等以绝粮运。
现代文：当时镇北将军封沓逃入柔然，劝说柔然攻击司马楚之以断粮道。
English: At that time, Zhenbei General Feng Qi fled to Juran and persuaded Juran to attack Sima Chu and cut off the food supply.

古文：蠕蠕乃遣奸觇入楚之军，截驴耳而去。
现代文：柔然便派探子进入楚之军中，割下驴耳而去。
English: Solemnly, he sent a scout into Chu's army, cut off the donkey's ear and left.

古文：有告失驴耳者，诸将莫能察。
现代文：有人报告说驴耳没了，众将领无人知道这是怎么回事。
English: Someone reported that the donkey's ears were gone, but none of the generals knew what had happened.

古文：楚之曰： 必是觇贼截之以为验耳，贼将至矣。 
现代文：楚之说： 一定是敌人探子割去作为凭证，敌人快来了。 
English: Chu Zhi said: It must be the enemy's scouts who have left as evidence. The enemy is coming soon.

古文：即使军人伐柳为城，水灌之令冻，城立而贼至。
现代文：他立即派人砍柳为城，灌上水让其结冰，城刚修起，敌人便到了。
English: He immediately sent someone to cut the willow for the city, fill it with water and let it freeze. As soon as the city was built, the enemy arrived.

古文：冰峻城固，不可攻逼，贼乃走散。
现代文：冰坚城固，无法攻打，敌人只好走散。
English: The ice fortress was impregnable, and the enemy had no choice but to scatter.

古文：世祖闻而嘉之。
现代文：世祖听说大为赞赏。
English: The patriarch heard about it and praised him.

古文：寻拜假节、侍中、镇西大将军、开府仪同三司、云中镇大将、朔州刺史，王如故。
现代文：不久朝廷拜司马楚之为假节、侍中、镇西大将军、开府仪同三司、云中镇大将、朔州刺史，王爵仍旧。
English: Soon after, the imperial court named Sima Chu as the False Festival, and he became the Chamberlain, Zhenxi Grand General, Kaifu Yi Tong San Si, Yunzhong Zhen Grand General, and Shuozhou Zishi, and he was still a prince.

古文：在边二十余年，以清俭著闻。
现代文：在边疆二十多年，司马楚之以清俭著称。
English: Sima Chuzhi has been working at the border for more than 20 years and is known for his frugality.

古文：和平五年薨，时年七十五。
现代文：和平五年去世，时年七十五岁。
English: He died five years later, at the age of 75.

古文：高宗悼惜之，赠都督梁益秦宁四州诸军事、征南大将军、领护西戎校尉，扬州刺史，谥贞王。
现代文：高宗很痛惜，追赠他为都督梁、益、秦、宁四州诸军事、征南大将军、领护西戎校尉、扬州刺史，谥称贞王。
English: Gaozong was very sorry, and posthumously bestowed him as the military governor of Liang, Yiming, Qin, and Ning four states, the general of the Southern Expedition, the lieutenant of the Xi Rong escort, the Yangzhou stabbing history, and the nickname Zhen Wang.

古文：陪葬金陵。
现代文：陪葬金陵。
English: He was buried with Jinling.

