古文：王凌字彦云，太原祁人也。
现代文：王凌，字彦云，太原郡祁县人。
English: Wang Ling, also known as Yan Yun, is from Min County, Taiyuan County.

古文：叔父允，为汉司徒，诛董卓。
现代文：叔父王允，是汉朝的司徒，诛杀了董卓。
English: Uncle Wang Yun, a scholar of the Han Dynasty, killed Dong Zhuo.

古文：卓将李傕、郭汜等为卓报仇，入长安，杀允，尽害其家。
现代文：董卓的部将李傕、郭汜等人想要为董卓报仇，率兵进入长安，杀害了王允和他的家人。
English: Dong Zhuo's subordinates Li Zhe, Guo Zhe and others wanted to take revenge for Dong Zhuo and led soldiers into Chang'an, killing Wang Yun and his family.

古文：凌及兄晨，时年皆少，逾城得脱，亡命归乡里。
现代文：王凌和他的兄长王晨，当时都还年少，翻出城墙得以逃脱，一路逃亡回到乡里。
English: Wang Ling and his older brother Wang Chen, who were both young at the time, were able to escape by climbing over the city wall and fled all the way back to the countryside.

古文：凌举孝廉，为发干长，稍迁至中山太守，所在有治，太祖辟为丞相掾属。
现代文：王凌被推举为孝廉，担任发干县长，渐渐升任到中山太守，所在的地方都很有政绩，太祖征召他为丞相掾属。
English: Wang Ling was promoted to the position of filial piety and served as the head of Fagan County. He was gradually promoted to the position of the governor of Zhongshan. He had a lot of political achievements in the places where he was. The great-grandfather called him to be the chancellor and subordinate.

古文：文帝践阼，拜散骑常侍，出为兖州刺史，与张辽等至广陵讨孙权。
现代文：文帝登基后，王凌被授命为散骑常侍，出京担任衮州刺史，和张辽等人到广陵征讨孙权。
English: After Emperor Wen ascended to the throne, Wang Ling was appointed as a strolling equerry. He went to Beijing to serve as a historian of Zhangzhou, and went with Zhang Liao and others to Guangling to enquire about Sun Quan.

古文：临江，夜大风，吴将吕范等船漂至北岸。
现代文：大军靠近江边，夜间出现大风，吴国将领吕范等人乘船漂到北岸。
English: The great army was close to the river, and there was a strong wind at night. The general of the State of Wu, Lv Fan, and others floated to the north bank by boat.

古文：凌与诸将逆击，捕斩首虏，获舟船，有功，封宜城亭侯，加建武将军，转在青州。
现代文：王凌和将领们迎击，抓捕并斩杀了敌军，缴获了敌军的船只，立下功劳，被封为宜城亭侯，加官建武将军，调任为青州刺史。
English: Wang Ling and the generals counterattacked, captured and killed the enemy, captured the enemy's ships, and made great contributions. He was named the governor of Yicheng, promoted to the post of general Jianwu, and transferred to the post of the governor of Qingzhou.

古文：是时海滨乘丧乱之后，法度未整。
现代文：当时海边地区在经历战乱之后，法度没有得到整顿。
English: At that time, after the coastal areas experienced war, the laws were not rectified.

古文：凌布政施教，赏善罚恶，甚有纲纪，百姓称之，不容於口。
现代文：王凌处理事务，推广教化，惩恶扬善，很有法度，百姓都不断地称赞他。
English: Wang Ling handled affairs, promoted enlightenment, punished evil and promoted good, and was very law-abiding. The people constantly praised him.

古文：后从曹休征吴，与贼遇於夹石，休军失利，凌力战决围，休得免难。
现代文：后来王凌跟随曹休征讨吴国，和敌军在夹石相遇，曹休的部队战败，王凌奋力作战突围而出，曹休得以逃脱。
English: Later, Wang Ling followed Cao Xiu to conquer the State of Wu, and met the enemy army at Jiaoshi. Cao Xiu's troops were defeated, and Wang Ling fought hard to break out of the encirclement, and Cao Xiu was able to escape.

古文：仍徙为扬、豫州刺史，咸得军民之欢心。
现代文：后来王凌仍然转任为扬州、豫州刺史，在的地方都得到官吏百姓的拥戴。
English: Later, Wang Ling was still transferred to the post of Yangzhou and Yuzhou chief historian, and was supported by officials and common people in all places.

古文：始至豫州，旌先贤之后，求未显之士，各有条教，意义甚美。
现代文：王凌刚开始到豫州，表彰当地先贤的后代，求取还没有显达的士人，都各自有教令，名声非常好。
English: Wang Ling has just arrived in Yuzhou to commend the descendants of local sages, and to seek out scholars who have not yet achieved prominence. They all have their own orders, and their reputation is very good.

古文：初，凌与司马朗、贾逵友善，及临兖、豫，继其名迹。
现代文：当初，王凌和司马朗、贾逵交好，等王凌到了衮州、豫州，又延续了他在青州时期的名声和政绩。
English: At first, Wang Ling and Sima Lang and Jia Wei were good friends. Wang Ling went to Zhangzhou and Yuzhou, and continued his reputation and achievements in Qingzhou.

古文：正始初，为征东将军，假节都督扬州诸军事。
现代文：正始初年，王凌担任征东将军，并持符节督领扬州各项军事。
English: At the beginning of the first year, Wang Ling served as the general of the eastward expedition, and led the military of Yangzhou with the commander of the festival.

古文：二年，吴大将全琮数万众寇芍陂，凌率诸军逆讨，与贼争塘，力战连日，贼退走。
现代文：正始二年，吴国将领全琮率领几万兵马进犯芍陂，王凌率领各路军队迎击，和敌军争夺堤岸，奋战了几天，敌军撤退。
English: At the beginning of the second year, the general of the State of Wu, Quanzhang, led tens of thousands of soldiers and horses to invade the Yangtze River, and Wang Ling led the various armies to counterattack, and fought with the enemy army for the embankment for several days, and the enemy army retreated.

古文：进封南乡侯，邑千三百五十户，迁车骑将军、仪同三司。
现代文：王凌被进封为南乡侯，食邑一千三百五十户，又升任为车骑将军、仪同三司。
English: Wang Ling was given the title of Nan Xiang Hou, with 1,350 households in the food village. He was also promoted to General of Cavalry and Cavalry Troops, and the Third Division of the Office of Ceremonial Affairs.

古文：是时，凌外甥令狐愚以才能为兖州刺史，屯平阿。
现代文：当时，王凌的外甥令狐愚因为才干而担任衮州刺史，在平阿驻军。
English: At that time, Wang Ling's nephew Ling Fugu served as the governor of Zhangzhou because of his talent and stationed troops in Ping'a.

古文：舅甥并典兵，专淮南之重。
现代文：舅舅和外甥一同主管军事，掌握淮南地区重任。
English: Both the uncle and the nephew are in charge of the military and hold important positions in Huainan.

古文：凌就迁为司空。
现代文：王凌被提升为司空。
English: Wang Ling was promoted to the position of Vice President.

古文：司马宣王既诛曹爽，进凌为太尉，假节钺。
现代文：司马懿诛杀曹爽后，晋升王凌为太尉，并授予符节斧钺。
English: After Sima Ye killed Cao Shuang, Wang Ling was promoted to the rank of first lieutenant and was awarded the Fu Jie axe.

古文：凌、愚密协计，谓齐王不任天位，楚王彪长而才，欲迎立彪都许昌。
现代文：王凌、令狐愚暗中谋划，认为齐王曹芳不能担负皇位，楚王曹彪年长又有才干，想要奉迎曹彪为天子，建都许昌。
English: Wang Ling and Ling Fugu plotted in the dark, thinking that Qi Wang Cao Fang could not assume the throne, Chu King Cao Biao was old and talented, and wanted to welcome Cao Biao as the son of heaven and build the capital Xu Chang.

古文：嘉平元年九月，愚遣将张式至白马，与彪相问往来。
现代文：嘉平元年九月，令狐愚派部将张式到白马，与曹彪相互来往。
English: In September of the first year of Jiaping, the Lingfugu faction sent Zhang Shihong to Baima to interact with Cao Biao.

古文：凌又遣舍人劳精诣洛阳，语子广。
现代文：王凌又派舍人劳精到洛阳，将计划告诉儿子王广。
English: Wang Ling also sent Luo Jing to Luoyang to tell his son Wang Guang about the plan.

古文：广言： 废立大事，勿为祸先。 
现代文：王广说： 天子的废立是大事，不要做为祸患的开端。 
English: Wang Guang said, "It is a great thing to dethrone the Son of Heaven. Don't make it the beginning of a calamity."

古文：其十一月，愚复遣式诣彪，未还，会愚病死。
现代文：这年十一月，令狐愚又派张式到曹彪那里，还没有回来，适逢令狐愚病死。
English: In November of that year, Ling Fugu sent Zhang Shih to Cao Biao again, but he did not return, and Ling Fugu died of illness.

古文：二年，荧惑守南斗，凌谓： 斗中有星，当有暴贵者。 
现代文：嘉平二年，荧惑出现在南斗星的位置上，王凌说： 斗星的位置中有星，应该会出现突然贵重的人。 
English: In the second year of Jiaping, fluorescence appeared in the position of the Southern Dipper. Wang Ling said: If there is a star in the position of the Dipper, a suddenly valuable person should appear.

古文：三年春，吴贼塞涂水。
现代文：嘉平三年春天，吴国敌军出兵堵塞涂水。
English: In the spring of the third year of Jiaping, the enemy army of the State of Wu sent troops to block the water supply.

古文：凌欲因此发，大严诸军，表求讨贼；诏报不听。
现代文：王凌想要趁机起事，就严格整顿军队，上表请求出兵征讨敌军；皇帝诏令回复没有允准。
English: Wang Ling wanted to take advantage of the opportunity to start an uprising, so he strictly reorganized the army and requested to send troops to recruit the enemy army; the emperor's reply was not allowed.

古文：凌阴谋滋甚，遣将军杨弘以废立事告兖州刺史黄华，华、弘连名以白太傅司马宣王。
现代文：王凌的阴谋想法越来越滋长，派将军杨弘将废立天子的事情告诉衮州刺史黄华，黄华、杨弘一起将这件事告诉太傅司马懿。
English: Wang Ling's conspiracy idea grew more and more. He sent the general Yang Hong to tell Huang Hua, the governor of Zhangzhou, about the matter of abolishing the emperor. Huang Hua and Yang Hong together told this matter to the grand master Sima Yu.

古文：宣王将中军乘水道讨凌，先下赦赦凌罪，又将尚书广东，使为书喻凌，大军掩至百尺逼凌。
现代文：司马懿率领中军沿着水路前往征讨王凌，先发出赦令赦免王凌的罪行，又派尚书广东，让他写信晓谕王凌，大军暗中行进，逼近王凌百尺之内。
English: Sima Qian led the Chinese army to go along the waterway to recruit Wang Ling. First, he issued a pardon to pardon Wang Ling's crime. He also sent Shang Shu to Guangdong and asked him to write a letter to Wang Ling. The large army marched secretly and approached within a hundred feet of Wang Ling.

古文：凌自知势穷，乃乘船单出迎宣王，遣掾王彧谢罪，送印绶、节钺。
现代文：王凌知道自己走投无路，就乘船独自出城迎接司马懿，派掾属王彧前去谢罪，并送出印信绶带、符节斧钺。
English: Wang Ling knew that he was cornered, so he took a boat to go out of the city alone to meet Sima Qian. He sent his subordinate Wang Qian to apologize, and sent a seal ribbon and a festival axe.

古文：军到丘头，凌面缚水次。
现代文：大军行进到丘头，王凌让人把自己双手反绑站在水中。
English: The army marched to the top of the hill, and Wang Ling had people tie his hands behind his back and stand in the water.

古文：宣王承诏遣主簿解缚反服，见凌，慰劳之，还印绶、节钺，遣步骑六百人送还京都。
现代文：司马懿奉诏派主簿解开王凌的绳子，并召见王凌，对他进行安抚，归还印信绶带，符节斧钺，还派了六百步兵骑兵将王凌送回京都。
English: Sima Yi sent a messenger to untie Wang Ling's rope, and summoned Wang Ling to appease him, returned the seal ribbon, the seal axe, and sent six hundred infantry and cavalry to send Wang Ling back to Kyoto.

古文：凌至项，饮药死。
现代文：王凌到了项城，喝了毒药自尽。
English: Wang Ling went to Xiangcheng and drank poison to commit suicide.

古文：宣王遂至寿春。
现代文：司马懿就去到寿春。
English: Sima Yi went to Shuchun.

古文：张式等皆自首，乃穷治其事。
现代文：张式等人都前来自首认罪，这件事得到最终解决。
English: Zhang and the others all pleaded guilty, and the case was finally resolved.

古文：彪赐死，诸相连者悉夷三族。
现代文：曹彪被赐死后，跟他有所牵连的人都被灭了三族。
English: After Cao Biao's death, those who were involved with him were exterminated by the Three Tribes.

古文：朝议咸以为春秋之义，齐崔杼、郑归生皆加追戮，陈尸斫棺，载在方策。
现代文：朝中商议都认为，《春秋》的要义，齐崔杼、郑归生都被追杀，然后开棺陈尸，并记载在史书上。
English: Both the DPRK and the PRC agreed that the essence of "Spring and Autumn" was that both Qi Cui Rong and Zheng Guisheng were chased and killed, and then their coffins were opened and their bodies were cremated, and this was recorded in the history books.

古文：凌、愚罪宜如旧典。
现代文：王凌、令狐愚的罪行，也应该像旧例那样做。
English: The crimes of Wang Ling and Ling Fugu should also be dealt with in the same way as in the past.

古文：乃发凌、愚冢，剖棺，暴尸於所近市三日，烧其印绶、朝服，亲土埋之。
现代文：皇帝就下诏挖开王凌、令狐愚的坟墓，劈开棺材，将尸首暴露在临近的街市上三天，烧掉他们的印信绶带和朝服，后来有亲友将他们下葬。
English: The emperor ordered the graves of Wang Ling and Ling Fugu to be dug up, the coffins to be split open, the bodies to be exposed in a nearby market for three days, and their seal ribbons and imperial robes to be burned. Later, relatives and friends buried them.

古文：进弘、华爵为乡侯。
现代文：朝廷晋升杨弘、黄华的爵位为乡侯。
English: The imperial court promoted Yang Hong and Huang Hua to the rank of townsman.

古文：广有志尚学行，死时年四十馀。
现代文：王广有崇尚学问德行的志向，去世的时候之后四十几岁。
English: Wang Guang had the aspiration of advocating learning and virtue, and was in his forties when he died.

古文：毌丘俭字仲恭，河东闻喜人也。
现代文：毋丘俭，字仲恭，河东郡闻喜县人。
English: He was a native of Wensi County, Hedong County.

古文：父兴，黄初中为武威太守，伐叛柔服，开通河右，名次金城太守苏则。
现代文：父亲毋丘兴，黄初年中任武威太守，征讨叛贼，安抚顺服者，连通了河右地区，名声仅次于金城太守苏则。
English: Although his father was Zhuoxing, in the early years of the Yellow Emperor, Zhuoxing became the military governor of Jincheng, recruiting traitors, pacifying those who obeyed, connecting the right side of the river, and his reputation was second only to that of the governor of Jincheng, Su Ze.

古文：讨贼张进及讨叛胡有功，封高阳乡侯。
现代文：毋丘俭因为征讨反贼张进还有反叛的胡人立了功，被封为高阳乡侯。
English: Be that as it may, he was awarded the title of Gaoyang Township Mayor for his contribution to the anti-thief Zhangjin and the rebellious Hu people.

古文：入为将作大匠。
现代文：他入朝担任将作大匠。
English: When he entered the imperial court, he served as a grandmaster.

古文：俭袭父爵，为平原侯文学。
现代文：毋丘俭承袭父亲的爵位，被任命为平原侯文学。
English: He inherited his father's title and was named the Prince of the Plain.

古文：明帝即位，为尚书郎，迁羽林监。
现代文：明帝登基后，毋丘俭担任尚书郎，又升任为羽林监。
English: After Emperor Ming ascended to the throne, he served as Shang Shuro, and was also promoted to Ulin Supervisor.

古文：以东宫之旧，甚见亲待。
现代文：因为过去在东宫的交情，明帝对待他很是亲厚。
English: Because of his friendship in the East Palace in the past, Emperor Ming treated him very kindly.

古文：出为洛阳典农。
现代文：后来毋丘俭出京担任洛阳典农。
English: Later, he went to Beijing to work as a Luoyang ceremonial farmer.

古文：时取农民以治宫室，俭上疏曰： 臣愚以为天下所急除者二贼，所急务者衣食。
现代文：当时征发百姓来营建宫殿，毋丘俭上疏说： 臣的愚见认为国家现在所着急消灭的是吴蜀两贼，所急于努力的是百姓的衣食。
English: At that time, the people were conscripted to build the palace, but they were too frugal and said: "The minister's foolish view is that the country is now anxious to eliminate the two thieves of Wu Shu, and the people's clothing and food are eager to work hard.

古文：诚使二贼不灭，士民饥冻，虽崇美宫室，犹无益也。 
现代文：如果吴蜀两贼没有消灭，士人百姓挨饿受冻，即使有华丽的宫室，也没有什么好处。 
English: If the two thieves of Wu and Shu are not eliminated, and the scholars and commoners are starving and freezing, even if there is a gorgeous palace, it is of no benefit.

古文：迁荆州刺史。
现代文：后来他调任为荆州刺史。
English: Later, he was transferred to the post of Jingzhou chief historian.

古文：青龙中，帝图讨辽东，以俭有幹策，徙为幽州刺史，加度辽将军，使持节，护乌丸校尉。
现代文：青龙年间，明帝计划征讨辽东，因为毋丘俭有智谋，就调任他为幽州刺史，加官度辽将军，让他持符节，担任护乌丸校尉。
English: During the Qinglong Dynasty, Emperor Ming planned to conquer Liaodong. Because of his frugality and cleverness, he appointed him as the governor of Yuzhou, promoted him to the rank of General of Liaodong, let him hold the rank of Fu Jie, and made him the captain of Wu Maru.

古文：率幽州诸军至襄平，屯辽隧。
现代文：毋丘俭率领幽州各路军队行进到襄阳，在辽隧驻扎。
English: However, Qiu Jian led the troops of all roads in Yuzhou to march to Yangyang and stationed in Liaocheng.

古文：右北平乌丸单于寇娄敦、辽西乌丸都督率众王护留等，昔随袁尚奔辽东者，率众五千馀人降。
现代文：右北平乌丸单于寇娄敦、辽西乌丸率领部众王护留等人，还有过去跟随袁绍逃奔到辽东的人，带领五千多人前来投降。
English: The Right Northern Pingwu Maru led by Guo Zhidong, the West Liao Maru led by Wang Shou Yu and others, as well as those who had fled to Liaodong with Yuan Shao in the past, led more than five thousand people to surrender.

古文：寇娄敦遣弟阿罗槃等诣阙朝贡，封其渠率二十馀人为侯、王，赐舆马缯彩各有差。
现代文：寇娄敦派弟阿罗槃等人到朝中进贡，朝廷赐封他们的二十多个首领为侯、王，并赏赐了车马绸缎等物品，各有差等。
English: Col. Colton sent his brother Aloju and others to pay tribute to the central government, and the imperial court granted more than twenty of their leaders the titles of marquess and king, and rewarded them with chariots, horses, silks, and other goods, all of which were inferior.

古文：公孙渊逆与俭战，不利，引还。
现代文：公孙渊迎面和毋丘俭交战，失利，就率军退回。
English: Gongsun Yuan went toe-to-toe with Bezooku Jian in battle, and when he was defeated, he led his army back.

古文：明年，帝遣太尉司马宣王统中军及俭等众数万讨渊，定辽东。
现代文：第二年，明帝派太尉司马懿率领中军还有毋丘俭等人共几万人征讨公孙渊，平定了辽东。
English: In the second year, the Ming Emperor sent the Chinese army led by the captain Sima Yan and other people such as Bao Qiuqian, a total of tens of thousands of people, to conquer Gongsunyuan and leveled Liaodong.

古文：俭以功进封安邑侯，食邑三千九百户。
现代文：毋丘俭因为功劳被进封为安邑侯，食邑三千九百户。
English: However, because of his merits, he was given the title of Ami no kuni, and he ruled over 3,900 households.

古文：正始中，俭以高句骊数侵叛，督诸军步骑万人出玄菟，从诸道讨之。
现代文：正始年间，毋丘俭认为高句丽多次侵犯，就督领各军一万多步兵骑兵出击玄菟，从各路进军征讨他们。
English: At the beginning of the year, although Qiu Jian believed that Goguryeo had repeatedly invaded, he commanded more than ten thousand infantry and cavalry of each army to attack Xuanzang and march from all directions to conquer them.

古文：句骊王宫将步骑二万人，进军沸流水上，大战梁口，宫连破走。
现代文：句骊王宫率领两万步兵骑兵，进军沸流水上游，两军在梁口交战，宫接连败退后逃走。
English: The palace of King Kucho led twenty thousand infantry and cavalry and marched into the upper reaches of the boiling water. The two armies fought in Liangkou. The palace was defeated one after another and fled.

古文：俭遂束马县车，以登丸都，屠句骊所都，斩获首虏以千数。
现代文：毋丘俭就驾马乘车，登上丸都，屠杀了句骊都城的人，斩杀俘虏的有数千人。
English: Without any scruples, he drove a horse-drawn carriage up to Maruto and slaughtered the people of the capital, killing thousands of captives.

古文：句骊沛者名得来，数谏宫，宫不从其言。
现代文：有一个句骊的官吏叫得来，多次劝谏宫，宫都不听从他的建议。
English: There was one official who was so frustrated that he repeatedly tried to persuade the imperial court, but the court would not listen to his advice.

古文：得来叹曰： 立见此地将生蓬蒿。 
现代文：得来感叹说： 不久就会看到这个地方生长蓬蒿了。 
English: "We'll soon see this place covered in moss," he said with a sigh.

古文：遂不食而死，举国贤之。
现代文：于是就绝食而死，全国人都认为他很贤能。
English: So he went on a hunger strike and died, and the whole country thought he was very capable.

古文：俭令诸军不坏其墓，不伐其树，得其妻子，皆放遣之。
现代文：毋丘俭下令各军不能破坏他的坟墓，不砍掉周围的树木，得来的妻子孩子，全都释放送还。
English: However, he ordered the troops not to destroy his tomb, not to cut down the surrounding trees, and to release his wife and children.

古文：宫单将妻子逃窜。
现代文：宫独自带着妻子孩子逃跑。
English: Miyako fled alone with his wife and child.

古文：俭引军还。六年，复征之，宫遂奔买沟。
现代文：正始六年，毋丘俭再次征讨宫，宫就逃奔向买沟。
English: At the beginning of the sixth year, no matter how frugal the palace was, the palace fled to buy a ditch.

古文：俭遣玄菟太守王颀追之，过沃沮千有馀里，至肃慎氏南界，刻石纪功，刊丸都之山，铭不耐之城。
现代文：毋丘俭派玄菟太守王颀追击，追击超过沃沮一千多里，一直到肃慎氏南面边界，在石碑上刻录功绩，在丸都山上，不耐城中，都刻了碑石。
English: However, Xuanzang's daimyō Wang Qian, who was a follower of Zhuge Zhen, pursued Zhuge Zhen for more than a thousand miles, all the way to the southern border of Sushen, and recorded his achievements on stone tablets. On the Marudu Mountain, in the middle of the city, there were inscribed stone tablets.

古文：诸所诛纳八千馀口，论功受赏，侯者百馀人。
现代文：那些诛杀或接纳招降的，一共八千多人，后按照功劳赏赐，被封侯的有一百多人。
English: Of those who fought or accepted the offer of surrender, there were a total of more than eight thousand people, of whom more than one hundred were given titles of nobility in accordance with their merits.

古文：穿山溉灌，民赖其利。
现代文：后来毋丘俭穿山修渠，引水灌溉农田，百姓都从中获利。
English: Later, the people profited from the canalization of the mountains and the diversion of water to irrigate farmland.

古文：迁左将军，假节监豫州诸军事，领豫州刺史，转为镇南将军。
现代文：毋丘俭被提升为左将军，持符节监管豫州各项军事事宜，兼任豫州刺史，又转任为镇南将军。
English: However, he was promoted to General Zuo, supervised various military affairs in Yuzhou with the rank of General, served as the historian of Yuzhou, and was transferred to General Zhenan.

古文：诸葛诞战于东关，不利，乃令诞、俭对换。
现代文：诸葛诞在东关作战，战斗失利，朝廷就下令让毋丘俭、诸葛诞调换职位。
English: Zhuge Zheng fought in Dongguan, and after losing the battle, the imperial court ordered that he and Zhuge Zheng be transferred to different positions.

古文：诞为镇南，都督豫州。
现代文：诸葛诞担任镇南将军，督领豫州。
English: Zhuge Zi served as the general of Zhenan and the governor of Yuzhou.

古文：俭为镇东，都督杨州。
现代文：毋丘俭担任镇东将军，督领扬州。
English: He served as the general of Zhendong and the governor of Yangzhou.

古文：吴太傅诸葛恪围合肥新城，俭与文钦御之，太尉司马孚督中军东解围，恪退还。
现代文：吴国太傅诸葛恪围攻合肥新城，毋丘俭和文钦率军抵御，太尉司马孚督领中军往东解除困局，诸葛恪就撤退了。
English: Zhuge Ke, the grand vizier of Wu, besieged Hefei Xincheng, but Zhuge Jian and Wen Qin led the army to resist, and Zhuge Ke led the Chinese army to the east to relieve the predicament. Zhuge Ke then withdrew.

古文：初，俭与夏侯玄、李丰等厚善。
现代文：当初，毋丘俭和夏侯玄、李丰等人关系很好。
English: At first, he had a good relationship with Xia Houxuan, Li Feng and others.

古文：扬州刺史前将军文钦，曹爽之邑人也，骁果粗猛，数有战功，好增虏获，以徼宠赏，多不见许，怨恨日甚。
现代文：扬州刺史前将军文钦，是曹爽的同乡，骁勇果敢又粗鲁凶猛，多次立下战功，喜欢谎报俘虏人数或缴获的物资，以获得更多的赏赐，但朝廷大多没有给赏赐，文钦心中的怨恨越来越深重。
English: The Yangzhou assassin, the former general Wenqin, was a fellow villager of Cao Shuang. He was brave, courageous, rude and fierce. He made war exploits many times. He liked to lie about the number of captives or captured materials to get more rewards, but the court mostly did not give rewards. The resentment in Wenqin's heart grew deeper and deeper.

古文：俭以计厚待钦，情好欢洽。
现代文：毋丘俭因为计策，厚待文钦，两人情谊深厚关系融洽。
English: No matter how frugal, because of the strategy, Wenqin was treated well, and the two had a deep and harmonious relationship.

古文：钦亦感戴，投心无贰。
现代文：文钦心中也很尊敬他，诚心交往，没有二心。
English: Wen Qin also respected him in his heart, sincerely interacted with him, and had no second thoughts.

古文：正元二年正月，有彗星数十丈，西北竟天，起于吴、楚之分。
现代文：正元二年正月，天上出现几十丈长的彗星，跨过西北天空，从吴、楚分界处开始。
English: In the first month of the second year of the Yuan Dynasty, dozens of tall comets appeared in the sky, crossing the northwest sky, starting from the boundary between Wu and Chu.

古文：俭、钦喜，以为己祥。
现代文：毋丘俭、文钦很欣喜，认为这对自己来说是吉祥的征兆。
English: In spite of his frugality, Wen Qin was very pleased and thought that this was an auspicious sign for himself.

古文：遂矫太后诏，罪状大将军司马景王，移诸郡国，举兵反。
现代文：于是就伪造的太后的诏书，历数大将军司马师的罪行，并将诏书发布到各郡国，随后起兵反叛。
English: Therefore, he forged the empress dowager's imperial edict, recorded the crimes of the great general Sima Shi, and issued the imperial edict to all counties and states, and then raised an army to rebel.

古文：迫胁淮南将守诸别屯者，及吏民大小，皆入寿春城，为坛於城西，歃血称兵为盟，分老弱守城，俭、钦自将五六万众渡淮，西至项。
现代文：他们胁迫那些另外驻守在淮南的精灵们还有官吏百姓，让他们都进入寿春城，并在城西设置祭坛，对天发誓，滴血为盟，分出老弱的百姓守城，毋丘俭、文钦自己率领五六万部众渡过淮水，往西一直到项城。
English: They coerced the elves who were also stationed in Huainan, as well as officials and commoners, to let them all enter Shouchun City, and set up an altar in the west of the city, swear to the heavens, be blood allies, and separate the weak people to defend the city. Rather than being frugal, Wenqin himself led fifty or sixty thousand people to cross Huai Shui and go west to Xiangcheng.

古文：俭坚守，钦在外为游兵。
现代文：毋丘俭在城中坚守，文钦在城外做为游兵。
English: Although Qiu Jian held out in the city, Wen Qin remained outside the city as a wandering soldier.

古文：大将军统中外军讨之，别使诸葛诞督豫州诸军从安风津拟寿春，征东将军胡遵督青、徐诸军出于谯、宋之间，绝其归路。
现代文：大将军司马师统率大军出兵征讨毋丘俭，另外派诸葛诞率豫州各路军队从安风津进逼寿春。征东将军胡遵督领青州、徐州的军队从谯、宋之间出击，以断绝毋丘俭的退路。
English: The great general Sima Shih led a large army to send troops to recruit butchers. In addition, he sent troops from all parts of Yuzhou from Anfengjin to force Shuchun with Zhuge Zhixing. The army of the East Conquest General Hu Zun led the army of Qingzhou and Xuzhou to attack from the middle of the Song Dynasty and Song Dynasty to break the retreat of butchers.

古文：大将军屯汝阳，使监军王基督前锋诸军据南顿以待之。
现代文：大将军司马师在汝阳驻军，派监军王基督领前锋各路军队据守南顿以等待敌军。
English: General Sima stationed troops in Ruyang, and sent the overseer of the army, King Christ, to lead the vanguard of the various armies to guard Nantong to wait for the enemy to leave.

古文：今诸军皆坚壁勿与战。
现代文：现在各军都坚守阵地，不要和敌军交战。
English: Now all the armies are holding their positions and not engaging with the enemy.

古文：俭、钦进不得斗，退恐寿春见袭，不得归，计穷不知所为。
现代文：毋丘俭、文钦，进军不能作战，退军又担心寿春被袭击，所以不能返回，正无计可施。
English: No matter how frugal, Wenqin, marching into the army can not fight, retreating and worried about Shouchun being attacked, so can not return, there is nothing to be done.

古文：淮南将士，家皆在北，众心沮散，降者相属，惟淮南新附农民为之用。
现代文：淮南的将士，家乡都在北方，部众的情绪低沉涣散，投降的人接连不断，只有淮南刚依附的百姓为他们所用。
English: The soldiers of Huainan are all from the north, the mood of the subordinates is low and scattered, and the people who surrender are one after another. Only the people who have just adhered to Huainan are used for them.

古文：大将军遣兖州刺史邓艾督泰山诸军万馀人至乐嘉，示弱以诱之，大将军寻自洙至。
现代文：大将军司马师派衮州刺史邓艾督领泰山郡各路军队一万多人开到乐嘉，向敌军示弱以引诱他们，大将军司马师不久就到达了洙至。
English: The general Sima Division sent the governor of Luzhou Zhishi Deng Ai to lead more than 10,000 troops from all over Taishan County to Lekia, to show weakness to the enemy and lure them. The general Sima Division soon arrived in Lijiang.

古文：钦不知，果夜来欲袭艾等，会明，见大军兵马盛，乃引还。
现代文：文钦不知情，果然趁夜前来想要袭击邓艾等人，刚好天亮，看到魏军兵马强盛，就率军撤退了。
English: Unbeknownst to Wenqin, he took advantage of the night to attack Deng Ai and others. Just before dawn, when he saw that the Wei army was strong, he led the army to retreat.

古文：大将军纵骁骑追击，大破之，钦遁走。
现代文：大将军司马师派骁勇骑兵追击，大获全胜，文钦逃走。
English: General Sima's division sent Yong Yong's cavalry to pursue, and won a complete victory. Wen Qin fled.

古文：是日，俭闻钦战败，恐惧夜走，众溃。
现代文：当天，毋丘俭得知文钦战败，心中惊恐，连夜逃走，部众溃逃。
English: On the same day, when he learned that Wenqin had been defeated, he panicked and fled in the middle of the night, leading his followers in a rout.

古文：比至慎县，左右人兵稍弃俭去，俭独与小弟秀及孙重藏水边草中。
现代文：等毋丘俭跑到慎县，他身边的士兵都渐渐离开他，毋丘俭独自和小弟毋丘秀和孙子毋丘重藏在水边的草中。
English: After he ran to Shenshan County, the soldiers around him gradually left him, and he was left alone with his younger brother and grandson, hiding in the grass by the water's edge.

古文：安风津都尉部民张属就射杀俭，传首京都。
现代文：安风津都尉的部属张属射杀了毋丘俭，将他的脑袋传报京都。
English: Zhang Rong, a subordinate of Captain Anfeng Tsu, shot and killed Boqiu Jian and sent his head to Kyoto.

古文：属封侯。
现代文：张属被封为侯。
English: Zhang Zhen was given the title of marquis.

古文：秀、重走入吴。
现代文：毋丘秀、毋丘重二人逃到吴国。
English: Both of them fled to the State of Wu.

古文：将士诸为俭、钦所迫胁者，悉归降。
现代文：那些被毋丘俭、文钦胁迫的将士，全都返回投降。
English: Those soldiers who were coerced by Neoco Jian and Wenqin all returned to surrender.

古文：俭子甸为治书侍御史，先时知俭谋将发，私出将家属逃走新安灵山上。
现代文：毋丘俭的儿子毋丘甸任治书侍御史，之前得知毋丘俭的的谋划将要泄露，就暗中出城带领家属逃奔到新安灵山上。
English: Before learning that his plan was about to be revealed, his son, Beccudian Renjishi, secretly left the city with his family and fled to Xin'anling Mountain.

古文：别攻下之，夷俭三族。
现代文：朝廷另外派兵攻克，并诛杀了毋丘俭三族。
English: In addition, the imperial court sent troops to conquer and kill the three clans.

古文：钦亡入吴，吴以钦为都护、假节、镇北大将军、幽州牧、谯侯。
现代文：文钦逃往到吴国，吴国任命文钦为都护、授予符节，镇北大将军、幽州牧、封为谯侯。
English: Wenqin fled to the State of Wu, and the State of Wu appointed Wenqin as the guardian of the capital, awarded him the title of Fu Jie, the general of Zhenbei, the general of Yuzhou, and the title of Gonghou.

古文：诸葛诞字公休，琅邪阳都人，诸葛丰后也。
现代文：诸葛诞，字公休，琅笽阳都人，是诸葛丰的后代。
English: Zhuge's birthday, the word public holiday, the people of Shenyang, are the descendants of Zhuge Feng.

古文：初以尚书郎为荥阳令，入为吏部郎。
现代文：起初凭借尚书郎的职位担任荥阳县令，之后进入洛阳任吏部郎。
English: At first, by virtue of his position as Shang Shuro, he served as the governor of Shenyang County, after which he entered Luoyang as the secretary.

古文：人有所属讬，辄显其言而承用之，后有当否，则公议其得失以为褒贬，自是群僚莫不慎其所举。
现代文：凡是人们有所嘱托，向他推荐人才，他都会将推荐的人说的话公布出来，然后才会任用被推荐的人。至于用人的得失，则按照众人议论的结果来给予褒奖或者贬损，正是这个原因，群僚都十分谨慎地向他推荐人才。
English: When people recommend talents to him, he will publish the words of the recommenders before appointing the recommended person. As for the advantages and disadvantages of employing people, he will give praise or derogation according to the results of the discussion. It is for this reason that colleagues are very careful to recommend talents to him.

古文：累迁御史中丞尚书，与夏侯玄、邓飏等相善，收名朝廷，京都翕然。
现代文：累迁至御史中丞尚书，与夏侯玄、邓飏等人关系很好，在朝廷很有名气，京城内尽人皆知。
English: Shang Shu, who was successively moved to the Imperial Historian's Office, had a good relationship with Xia Hou Xuan, Deng Yao and others. He was very famous in the imperial court and was well known in the capital.

古文：言事者以诞、飏等脩浮华，合虚誉，渐不可长。
现代文：有人告发说，诸葛诞、邓飏等人崇尚浮华，喜欢虚名，这种风气不能助长。
English: Some people reported that Zhuge Zheng, Deng Wei and others advocated pompousness and liked false names. This kind of culture should not be encouraged.

古文：明帝恶之，免诞官。
现代文：于是魏明帝遍布喜欢诸葛诞，免去了诸葛诞的官职。
English: As a result, Emperor Wei Ming liked Zhugezi everywhere and exempted Zhugezi from the official post.

古文：会帝崩，正始初，玄等并在职。复以诞为御史中丞尚书，出为扬州刺史，加昭武将军。
现代文：待魏明帝去世，正始初年，夏侯玄等人还在做官掌权，又一次推荐诸葛诞任命为御史中丞尚书，出任出任扬州刺史，加封昭武将军。
English: In the first year after the death of Emperor Wei Ming, when Xia Houxuan and other officials were still in power, Zhuge Zi was once again recommended by Zhuge Zi to be appointed to the post of Imperial Historian, Yangzhou Historian, and General Zhaowu.

古文：王凌之阴谋也，太傅司马宣王潜军东伐，以诞为镇东将军、假节都督扬州诸军事，封山阳亭侯。
现代文：王凌暗中谋划要废掉皇帝，太傅司马懿暗中派兵向东讨伐王凌，让诸葛诞担任镇东将军、持符节督领扬州军事事务，并封他为山阳亭侯。
English: Wang Ling secretly plotted to depose the emperor, and Grand Master Sima Yu secretly sent troops to the east to fight Wang Ling, and let Zhu Gexue serve as the general of Zhendong and the commander of Yangzhou's military affairs, and made him the prince of Sanyangting.

古文：诸葛恪兴东关，遣诞督诸军讨之，与战，不利。还，徙为镇南将军。
现代文：诸葛恪在东关出兵，朝中派诸葛诞率领各路人马征讨，两军交战，诸葛诞失利，率军返回，朝廷调任他为镇南将军。
English: Zhuge sent troops to Dongguan, and the two armies clashed. Zhuge lost the battle and returned with his army. The imperial court transferred him to be the general of Zhenan.

古文：后毌丘俭、文钦反，遣使诣诞，招呼豫州士民。
现代文：后来毋丘俭、文钦反叛，派出使者到诸葛诞那里，招揽豫州的官吏百姓。
English: Later, however, Qiu Jian and Wen Qin rebelled and sent emissaries to Zhugezi to recruit officials and common people in Yuzhou.

古文：诞斩其使，露布天下，令知俭、钦凶逆。
现代文：诸葛诞斩杀了他们的使者，并将他们的谋划告知天下，让天下人都知道毋丘俭、文钦的叛逆行为。
English: Zhuge Zheng killed their emissary, and told the world of their plan, so that the world would know the treacherous behavior of Wenqin.

古文：大将军司马景王东征，使诞督豫州诸军，渡安风津向寿春。
现代文：大将军司马师东征，派诸葛诞都督豫州诸军，渡过安风渡口向寿春进逼。
English: The great general Sima Shi marched eastward, sent Zhuge Zi to supervise the troops in Yuzhou, and forced them to cross the Anfeng Ferry to Shuchun.

古文：俭、钦之破也，诞先至寿春。
现代文：毋丘俭、文钦被攻破后，诸葛诞先来到寿春。
English: However, after Qiu Jian and Wenqin were defeated, Zhuge Xingxian came to Shuchun.

古文：寿春中十馀万口，闻俭、钦败，恐诛，悉破城门出，流迸山泽，或散走入吴。
现代文：寿春城中有十几万人口，得知毋丘俭、文钦被攻破，担心被诛杀，都攻破城门逃出城外，流散在山林间，有的逃奔到吴国境内。
English: More than a hundred thousand people in Shuchun City, learning that Boqiu Jian and Wenqin had been breached and fearing that they would be killed, broke through the city gate and fled outside the city, scattered among the mountains and forests, and some fled to the territory of Wu.

古文：以诞久在淮南，乃复以为镇东大将军、仪同三司、都督扬州。
现代文：因为诸葛诞在淮南的时间很长，朝廷就又任命诸葛诞为镇东大将军、仪同三司，都督扬州。
English: Because Zhuge was in Huainan for a long time, the imperial court appointed Zhuge as the general of the town of Dongdong, the three departments of ceremony and etiquette, and the governor of Yangzhou.

古文：吴大将孙峻、吕据、留赞等闻淮南乱，会文钦往，乃帅众将钦径至寿春；时诞诸军已至，城不可攻，乃走。
现代文：东吴大将孙峻、吕据、留赞等听说淮南已经叛乱，刚好文钦前往淮南，就派文钦率领众将直奔寿春。当时诸葛诞的各路人马已经来到淮南，城没有办法攻破，就撤退了。
English: When the Eastern Wu generals Sun Jun, Lv Zhi, and Ruizan heard that Huainan had rebelled, just as Wenqin was leaving for Huainan, they sent Wenqin to lead the generals straight to Shuchun. At that time, people from Zhugezi had already come to Huainan, and there was no way to break through the city, so they retreated.

古文：诞遣将军蒋班追击之，斩赞，传首，收其印节。
现代文：诸葛诞派手下大将蒋班追击，将留赞杀死，将其脑袋传送京都，又没收其印节。
English: Zhuge Zheng sent his subordinate, General Jiang Ban, to pursue them, killed Remzan, sent his head to Kyoto, and confiscated his seal.

古文：进封高平侯，邑三千五百户，转为征东大将军。
现代文：诸葛诞被封为高平侯，食邑三千五百户，又转为征东大将军。
English: Zhuge Zi was given the title of Gaoping Hou (高平侯), with 3,500 households in the food village, and was also promoted to General of the Expedition to the East.

古文：诞既与玄、飏等至亲，又王凌、毌丘俭累见夷灭，惧不自安，倾帑藏振施以结众心，厚养亲附及扬州轻侠者数千人为死士。
现代文：诸葛诞既和夏侯玄、邓飏等人关系很好，又看到王凌、毋丘俭相继被灭族，心中惊恐不安宁，就花光储蓄赈济施舍以结交众人，优厚地对待亲近的人，还有扬州侠义之士几千人甘愿为自己而死。
English: Zhuge Zi not only had a good relationship with Xia Houxuan and Deng Qian, but also saw Wang Ling, who was frugal and thrifty, being exterminated one after another. His heart was frightened and uneasy. He spent all his savings, gave alms to make friends with everyone, and treated those close to him with kindness. There were also thousands of chivalrous people in Yangzhou who were willing to die for themselves.

古文：甘露元年冬，吴贼欲向徐堨，计诞所督兵马足以待之，而复请十万众守寿春，又求临淮筑城以备寇，内欲保有淮南。
现代文：甘露元年冬天，东吴打算进攻徐土曷，朝廷估计诸葛诞所督领的兵马足以抵御他，但诸葛诞还是请求增加十万人马来守卫寿春，又请求在淮水边修筑城池以防备敌寇进犯，心中想要保住淮南地区。
English: In the winter of 1181, Dongwu planned to attack Xu Tuotang. The imperial court estimated that the soldiers and horses under the command of Zhuge Liang would be enough to resist him, but Zhuge Liang still requested an additional 100,000 men to guard Shuchun, and also requested that a castle be built on the edge of Huai Shui to prevent enemy raiders from attacking. In his heart, he wanted to keep the south of Huai.

古文：朝廷微知诞有自疑心，以诞旧臣，欲入度之。
现代文：朝廷大概知道诸葛诞心存疑虑，但因为诸葛诞是旧臣，就想要将他召回。
English: The imperial court probably knew that Zhuge Zetian had misgivings, but because Zhuge Zetian was a former minister, they wanted to recall him.

古文：二年五月，徵为司空。
现代文：甘露二年五月，征召诸葛诞为司空。
English: In May of the second year of Kamloops, Zhuge Zhixing was conscripted as a steward.

古文：诞被诏书，愈恐，遂反。
现代文：诸葛诞接到诏书，心中更加惊恐，就反叛了。
English: When Zhuge Zi received the edict, he was even more frightened and rebelled.

古文：召会诸将，自出攻扬州刺史乐綝，杀之。
现代文：他召集会见各位将领，自己出兵攻打扬州刺史乐綝，并将他杀了。
English: He called for a meeting with the generals and sent his own troops to attack Yangzhou Jinshi Lejun and killed him.

古文：敛淮南及淮北郡县屯田口十馀万官兵，扬州新附胜兵者四五万人，聚谷足一年食，闭城自守。
现代文：又聚集淮南淮北十几万官兵，扬州新归属的四五万人，储足了有一年的粮食，闭城死守。
English: In addition, more than 100,000 officers and soldiers from Huainan and Huaibei gathered, as well as 450,000 people from the newly annexed Yangzhou. They stored enough grain for one year and closed the city.

古文：遣长史吴纲将小子靓至吴请救。
现代文：又派长史吴纲带领小儿子诸葛靓到东吴求援。
English: He also sent his eldest son, Shi Wu Gang, and his youngest son, Zhuge Liang, to Dongwu to seek help.

古文：吴人大喜，遣将全怿、全端、唐咨、王祚等，率三万众，密与文钦俱来应诞。
现代文：吴国人很欣喜，派将领全怿、全端、唐咨、王祚等人率领三万士兵，暗中和文钦一起前来接应诸葛诞。
English: The people of Wu were overjoyed and sent generals Quanzhang, Quanzhang, Tangzhi, Wang Hui and others, leading 30,000 soldiers, to secretly come with Wenqin to attend Zhuge's birthday.

古文：以诞为左都护、假节、大司徒、骠骑将军、青州牧、寿春侯。
现代文：又让诸葛诞担任左都护，持符节，担任大司徒骠骑将军、青州刺史、寿春侯。
English: In addition, Zhuge Zi served as the left capital guard, held the sign festival, and served as the general of the cavalry, the history of Qingzhou, and the prince of Shouchun.

古文：是时镇南将军王基始至，督诸军围寿春，未合。
现代文：当时，镇南将军王基刚到，督领各军围攻寿春，没有能形成包围的形势。
English: At that time, the Zhenan general Wang Jigang arrived and led the armies to besiege Shuchun. There was no encirclement situation.

古文：咨、钦等从城东北，因山乘险，得将其众突入城。
现代文：唐咨、文钦从城的东北面，倚仗山势天险，得以率领部众突围冲入城中。
English: From the northeast side of the city, Tang Zhi and Wen Qin, relying on the natural danger of the mountain, were able to lead the troops to break through and rush into the city.

古文：六月，车驾东征，至项。
现代文：六月，皇帝东征，到了项城。
English: In June, the emperor left for the East and arrived in Xiangcheng.

古文：大将军司马文王督中外诸军二十六万众，临淮讨之。
现代文：大将军司马昭督领内外各军共二十六万人，临近淮河征讨。
English: The great general Sima Zhao led a total of 260,000 troops from home and abroad, and went to the vicinity of the Huaihe River to fight.

古文：大将军屯丘头。使基及安东将军陈骞等四面合围，表里再重，堑垒甚峻。
现代文：大将军司马昭在丘头驻扎，派王基和安东将军陈骞等人四面包围，将城池内外包围了两层，并修建了高峻坚固的堑壕和堡垒。
English: General Sima Zhao was stationed at the top of the hill. He sent Wang Qi and General Anton Chen Qi to surround the city on all sides, encircled the city inside and outside on two levels, and built high and solid trenches and fortresses.

古文：又使监军石苞、兖州刺史州泰等，简锐卒为游军，备外寇。
现代文：又派监军石苞、兖州刺史州泰等人，率精锐部队为机动部队，以防备外部的入侵。
English: He also dispatched the monitoring troops of Shijiazhuang, Zhangzhou, Jinshi, Zhutai and others to lead the elite troops as a mobile force to prevent external invasion.

古文：钦等数出犯围，逆击走之。
现代文：王钦等人多次想冲出重围，但迎面交战都战败撤退。
English: Wang Qin and others repeatedly tried to break out of the heavy siege, but they were defeated and retreated in the face-to-face battle.

古文：吴将朱异再以大众来迎诞等，渡黎浆水，泰等逆与战，每摧其锋。
现代文：吴国将领朱异又派大军来接应诸葛诞等人，渡过黎浆水。州泰等人在此迎战，多次打退东吴军队的进攻。
English: Zhu Yixing, the general of the State of Wu, also sent a large army to meet Zhu Gexing and others and crossed the Li River. Zhu Tai and others fought here and repeatedly repulsed the attack of the East Wu army.

古文：孙綝以异战不进，怒而杀之。
现代文：孙綝因为朱异交战失利，愤怒之下杀了朱异。
English: Sun Yat-sen killed Zhu Rong in anger because he lost the battle with Zhu Rong.

古文：城中食转少，外救不至，众无所恃。
现代文：城中的粮食渐渐紧缺，外部的救援又没有到，军中将士没有可以倚靠的。
English: Grain in the city gradually became scarce, and outside help did not arrive. The lieutenant generals had no one to rely on.

古文：将军蒋班、焦彝，皆诞爪牙计事者也，弃诞，逾城自归大将军。
现代文：将军蒋班、焦彝，都是诸葛诞的亲信部下，也舍弃了诸葛诞，翻越城墙自行归附大将军司马昭。
English: Generals Jiang Ban and Jiao Tong, both of whom were trusted subordinates of Zhuge Zi, also abandoned Zhuge Zi and climbed over the city wall to attach themselves to General Sima Zhao.

古文：大将军乃使反间，以奇变说全怿等，怿等率众数千人开门来出。
现代文：司马昭就使用反间计，用权谋劝说全怿等人，他们率领几千部众打开城门投降。
English: Sima Zhao used countermeasures and power to persuade Quanzhang and others, who led several thousand people to open the city gate and surrender.

古文：城中震惧，不知所为。
现代文：城中的人都震动恐惧，不知道该怎么办。
English: People in the city were shaking with fear, not knowing what to do.

古文：三年正月，诞、钦、咨等大为攻具，昼夜五六日攻南围，欲决围而出。
现代文：甘露三年正月，诸葛诞、文钦、唐咨等制造出许多进攻的武器，连续五六天，不分昼夜进攻南面的包围圈，想要突围出城。
English: In the first month of the third year of the Chinese lunar calendar, Zhuge Zheng, Wenqin, Tang Zhe and others made many offensive weapons, attacking the southern encirclement for five or six days in a row, day and night, and trying to break out of the city.

古文：围上诸军，临高以发石车火箭逆烧破其攻具，弩矢及石雨下，死伤者蔽地，血流盈堑。
现代文：围困的各路人马，从高处用发石车发射石块，用火箭烧毁攻城器具，弓箭和石头像雨一样落下，死伤的人遍地，血流满堑壕。
English: Men and horses from all sides of the siege fired stones from high places with flint chariots, rockets burned the siege equipment, bows and arrows and stones fell like rain, the dead and wounded were everywhere, and blood flowed in the trenches.

古文：复还入城，城内食转竭，降出者数万口。
现代文：诸葛诞等人又返回城中，城中粮食渐渐短缺，出城投降的人有上万之多。
English: Zhuge Liuxing and others returned to the city. There was a gradual shortage of food in the city, and there were tens of thousands of people who surrendered outside the city.

古文：钦欲尽出北方人，省食，与吴人坚守，诞不听，由是争恨。
现代文：文钦打算将北方的人都赶出城外以节省粮食，和东吴坚守，诸葛诞没有听从，因此产生了嫌隙。
English: Wenqin planned to drive the people in the north out of the city to save grain, and Dongwu held firm. Zhuge did not listen, and thus a rift arose.

古文：钦素与诞有隙，徒以计合，事急愈相疑。
现代文：文钦向来和诸葛诞有隔阂，只是因为计划而合谋，在事情紧急的时候更加互相猜疑。
English: Wenqin has always been at odds with Zhuge Zhou, but they conspire because of the plan, and they are more suspicious of each other when things are urgent.

古文：钦见诞计事，诞遂杀钦。
现代文：文钦看到诸葛诞谋划事情，诸葛诞就杀掉了文钦。
English: Wenqin saw Zhuge Zi planning things, and Zhuge Zi killed Wenqin.

古文：钦子鸯及虎将兵在小城中，闻钦死，勒兵驰赴之，众不为用。
现代文：文钦的儿子文鸯、文虎在小城中领兵，得知文钦身死，就率兵迅速赶往，但众人都不听从他的指挥。
English: Wenqin's sons, Wen Rong and Wen Hu, led the troops in the small town. When they learned that Wenqin had died, they quickly rushed to the scene with their troops, but no one obeyed his command.

古文：鸯、虎单走，逾城出，自归大将军。
现代文：文鸯、文虎只好独自翻越城墙出城，自去投奔大将军司马芝。
English: Wenyi and Wenhu had no choice but to climb over the city wall and leave the city on their own. They went to join General Sima Zhi.

古文：军吏请诛之，大将军令曰： 钦之罪不容诛，其子固应当戮，然鸯、虎以穷归命，且城未拔，杀之是坚其心也。 
现代文：军中的将士请求诛杀他们，司马昭下令说： 文钦罪大恶极，他的儿子也本来应该处死，但是文鸯、文虎是在走投无路的情况下投降的，况且现在城池还没有攻克，杀了他们，是坚定了城内坚守的决心。 
English: The soldiers in the army requested to fight and kill them, and Sima Zhao ordered: Wenqin's crime was extremely evil, and his son should have been executed, but Wen Rong and Wen Hu surrendered in a desperate situation. Moreover, the city has not yet been conquered, and killing them has strengthened the determination to hold on to the city.

古文：乃赦鸯、虎，使将兵数百骑驰巡城，呼语城内云： 文钦之子犹不见杀，其馀何惧？ 
现代文：就赦免了赦免了文鸯、文虎，又让他们率领几百名骑兵赶到城外，向城内喊话说： 文钦的儿子尚且没有被杀害，剩下的人还担心什么呢？ 
English: He pardoned and pardoned Wen Xuan and Wen Hu, and let them lead hundreds of cavalry to drive out of the city, shouting to the city: Wen Qin's son has not yet been killed, what are the rest of the people worried about?

古文：表鸯、虎为将军，各赐爵关内侯。
现代文：司马昭上表任命文鸯、文虎为将军，赐封关内侯的爵位。
English: Sima Zhao appointed Wenyi and Wenhu as generals at the top table and gave them the title of Marquis of Guanzhong.

古文：城内喜且扰，又日饥困，诞、咨等智力穷。大将军乃自临围，四面进兵，同时鼓噪登城，城内无敢动者。
现代文：城中的将士既欣喜又担忧，又因为连日以来饥饿困顿，诸葛诞、唐咨等人又无计可施，司马昭就亲自来到重围之前，四面同时出兵，同时击鼓登城，城中没有敢有所行动的。
English: The soldiers in the city were both happy and worried, and because they had been starving for days, Zhuge Zi, Tang Zi and others had nothing to do, Sima Zhao personally came to the siege, sent troops to all four sides at the same time, and drummed up the city at the same time. The city did not dare to take any action.

古文：诞窘急，单乘马，将其麾下突小城门出。
现代文：诸葛诞穷途末路，骑马率部下从小城门突围。
English: Zhuge Xing was at the end of his rope, and his subordinates on horseback broke through the small city gate.

古文：大将军司马胡奋部兵逆击，斩诞，传首，夷三族。
现代文：大将军司马胡奋率兵迎击，斩杀了诸葛诞，并将首级传到洛阳，夷灭三族。
English: General Sima Huqin led the troops to counterattack, killed Zhuge Zi, and sent the heads to Luoyang to exterminate the three ethnic groups.

古文：诞麾下数百人，坐不降见斩，皆曰： 为诸葛公死，不恨。 
现代文：诸葛诞部下几百人，都因为不投降被处死，都说： 为了诸葛诞而死，没有遗憾。 
English: Zhuge Zhao's hundreds of subordinates, who were all executed for not surrendering, all said, "I have no regrets for dying for Zhuge Zhao."

古文：其得人心如此。
现代文：诸葛诞受到拥戴到这种程度。
English: That's how popular he is.

古文：唐咨、王祚及诸裨将皆面缚降，吴兵万众，器仗军实山积。
现代文：唐咨、王祚和将领们都自己反绑投降，俘虏了一万多吴军士兵，缴获的器械装备堆积得像山一样。
English: Tang Zi, Wang Hui and the generals all surrendered themselves, captured more than ten thousand soldiers of the Wu Army, and the captured equipment and equipment piled up like a mountain.

古文：初围寿春，议者多欲急攻之，大将军以为： 城固而众多，攻之必力屈，若有外寇，表里受敌，此危道也。
现代文：当初魏国大军包围寿春的时候，商议的人大多想要迅速进攻，大将军司马昭认为： 寿春城墙坚固并且人数众多，现在进攻一定会有很大上网，如果外部有敌军进犯，内外受敌，这是很危险的方法。
English: At the beginning, when the Wei army surrounded Shouchun, most of the negotiators wanted to attack quickly. General Sima Zhao thought: Shouchun's city wall is solid and there are many people. Now the attack will certainly have a large net. If there is an enemy attack from the outside and the enemy is attacked from the inside and outside, this is a very dangerous method.

古文：今三叛相聚於孤城之中，天其或者将使同就戮，吾当以全策縻之，可坐而制也。 
现代文：现在三个叛贼在孤城中聚集，上天大概是想要让他们一同被诛杀，我们应该准备一个万全之策，就能轻易地制服他们。 
English: Now that the three traitors are gathered in the lonely city, and the heavens are probably trying to let them be killed together, we should prepare a perfect plan that can easily subdue them.

古文：诞以二年五月反，三年二月破灭。
现代文：诸葛诞在甘露二年五月反叛，三年二月被杀。
English: Zhuge Zi rebelled in May of the following year and was killed in February of the following year.

古文：六军按甲，深沟高垒，而诞自困，竟不烦攻而克。
现代文：大军围城，挖深沟，修筑高堡垒，而诸葛诞将自己困在城中，最后不用进攻就自己崩溃了。
English: A large army besieged the city, dug a deep ditch, and built a high fortress, but Zhuge Liang trapped himself in the city, and finally collapsed without attacking.

古文：及破寿春，议者又以为淮南仍为叛逆，吴兵室家在江南，不可纵，宜悉坑之。
现代文：等到攻破了寿春，商议的人又认为淮南仍在在反叛，吴军将士的家人都在江南，不能宽纵，应该全部坑杀。
English: When Shuchun was defeated, the negotiators thought that Huainan was still in rebellion, and the family members of the Wu soldiers were all in the south of the Yangtze River. They could not be lenient, and they should all be killed.

古文：大将军以为古之用兵，全国为上，戮其元恶而已。
现代文：大将军司马昭认为自古以来用兵，以保全百姓为上策，杀死罪魁祸首就行了。
English: General Sima Zhao believes that since ancient times, soldiers have been used to protect the people as the best policy, and killing the culprit is enough.

古文：吴兵就得亡还，適可以示中国之弘耳。
现代文：东吴的士兵可以返回家中，就能向东吴地区展示中原地区的宽宏大度。
English: The soldiers of the Eastern Wu can return home, and they can show the magnanimity of the Central Plains to the Eastern Wu region.

古文：一无所杀，分布三河近郡以安处之。
现代文：所以魏军没有杀死一个俘虏，而且把靠近三河的郡县腾出来安顿他们。
English: Therefore, the Wei army did not kill a single prisoner, and freed the counties near the Three Rivers to settle them.

古文：唐咨本利城人。
现代文：唐咨本来是利城人。
English: Tang Zhe was originally from Licheng.

古文：黄初中，利城郡反，杀太守徐箕，推咨为主。
现代文：黄初年中，利城郡反叛，杀害了太守徐箕，推举唐咨为首领。
English: In the first year of Huang, Licheng County rebelled, killed the governor Xu Wei, and promoted Tang Zhe to be the leader.

古文：文帝遣诸军讨破之，咨走入海，遂亡至吴，官至左将军，封侯、持节。
现代文：文帝派各军出兵征讨，唐咨逃亡到海上，又逃到东吴，做官到左将军，被封侯、持符节。
English: Emperor Wen sent all the armies to recruit soldiers, Tang Zi fled to the sea, fled to Dongwu, became an official to General Zuo, was made a feudal lord, and held the festival of symbols.

古文：诞、钦屠戮，咨亦生禽，三叛皆获，天下快焉。
现代文：诸葛诞、文钦被杀，唐咨也被生擒，三个叛将都被抓获，天下人都拍手称快。
English: Zhuge Zi, Wen Qin were killed, Tang Zi was also captured alive, three traitors were captured, and the whole world applauded.

古文：拜咨安远将军，其馀裨将咸假号位，吴众悦服。
现代文：朝廷任命唐咨为安远将军，其他的副将都给予称号官位，东吴的将士都心悦诚服。
English: The imperial court appointed Tang Zhao as General Anyuan, the other vice generals were given titles and ranks, and the soldiers in the East and the West were sincerely convinced.

古文：江东感之，皆不诛其家。
现代文：江东地区的百姓都感念魏国的做法，也没有株连他们的家人。
English: The people in the Kanto region are all impressed by the practice of Wei, and they do not even have their families.

古文：其淮南将吏士民诸为诞所胁略者，惟诛其首逆，馀皆赦之。
现代文：那些被诸葛诞所胁迫的淮南的将士百姓，只诛杀那些带头作乱的人，其他的全部都赦免了。
English: The soldiers and people of Huainan, who were coerced by Zhuge Zhao, only killed those who led the riots, and all others were pardoned.

古文：听鸯、虎收敛钦丧，给其车牛，致葬旧墓。
现代文：并允许文鸯、文虎兄弟收殓文钦尸首，供应给他们车马，让他们回到祖坟安葬。
English: He also allowed Wen Rong and Wen Hu brothers to collect Wen Qin's body and provided them with a carriage and horse so that they could return to the ancestral grave for burial.

古文：邓艾字士载，义阳棘阳人也。
现代文：邓艾，字士载，义阳棘阳县人。
English: Deng Ai, a writer of Chinese characters, was born in Yiyang Spinyang County.

古文：少孤，太祖破荆州，徙汝南，为农民养犊。
现代文：年少时就失去了父亲，太祖攻破荆州，邓艾迁移到了汝南，为当地农民放牛。
English: He lost his father at a young age, his great-grandfather invaded Jingzhou, and Deng Ai moved to the south of the country to herd cattle for local farmers.

古文：年十二，随母至颍川，读故太丘长陈寔碑文，言 文为世范，行为士则 ，艾遂自名范，字士则。
现代文：十二岁的时候，邓艾跟随母亲到了颍川，读到故太丘长陈萛的碑文，说 写文章是世人的典范，言行举止成为士人的准则 ，邓艾就自己改名为邓范，字士则。
English: When he was twelve years old, Deng Ai followed his mother to Luochuan and read the inscription of the late Taiyukang Chen Yao, saying that writing articles is a model for the world, and words and deeds have become the standards of scholars. Deng Ai changed his name to Deng Fan and became a scholar of words.

古文：后宗族有与同者，故改焉。
现代文：后来族中有跟他同名的人，所以他就改掉了这个名字。
English: Later, there was someone in his family with the same name, so he changed it.

古文：为都尉学士，以口吃，不得作幹佐。为稻田守丛草吏。
现代文：后来他担任都尉学士，因为口吃，不能担任文书工作，就担任了稻田守丛草吏。
English: Later he served as captain bachelor, because of stuttering, can not serve as clerical work, he served as rice paddy guard Congsa officer.

古文：同郡吏父怜其家贫，资给甚厚，艾初不称谢。
现代文：跟他同郡的吏役父老同情他家中贫困，给他提供的资助很丰厚，邓艾最开始也没有表示感谢。
English: His fellow county officials sympathized with his family's poverty and provided him with generous subsidies, but Deng Ai initially did not express gratitude.

古文：每见高山大泽，辄规度指画军营处所，时人多笑焉。
现代文：他每次看到高山大湖，就指点规划军营应该驻扎的地方，当时的人大多嘲笑他。
English: Whenever he saw Gaoshan Lake, he would point out the place where the military camp should be stationed, and most people laughed at him at the time.

古文：后为典农纲纪，上计吏，因使见太尉司马宣王。
现代文：后来邓艾担任了典农纲纪、上计吏，就能通过出使拜见了太尉司马懿。
English: Later, Deng Ai served as an agronomist and chief accountant, and was able to visit Lieutenant Sima Yao through an emissary.

古文：宣王奇之，辟之为掾，迁尚书郎。
现代文：司马懿认为他是个奇才，就征召他为属官，提升他为尚书郎。
English: Sima Ye thought he was a prodigy, so he conscripted him as a subordinate officer and promoted him to Shang Shuro.

古文：时欲广田畜谷，为灭贼资，使艾行陈、项已东至寿春。
现代文：当时朝廷想要开垦土地，积蓄粮食，做为消灭敌军的储备，就派邓艾到陈、项等县以东，直到寿春巡行视察。
English: At that time, the imperial court wanted to reclaim land, accumulate grain, and as a reserve for the destruction of the enemy army, they sent Deng Ai to the east of Chen, Xiang and other counties until Shouchun inspection tour.

古文：艾以为 田良水少，不足以尽地利，宜开河渠，可以引水浇溉，大积军粮，又通运漕之道。 
现代文：邓艾认为 土地肥沃但水分不够，不能够完全利用土地，应该开挖河渠，才能引水灌溉，积聚粮食，又能连通运输粮食的水道。 
English: Deng Ai believes that the land is fertile but the water is not enough, and the land cannot be fully utilized. It is necessary to dig canals in order to divert water for irrigation, accumulate grain, and connect waterways for transporting grain.

古文：乃著济河论以喻其指。
现代文：就撰写了《济河论》来表明他的看法。
English: He wrote "On the Ji River" to express his views.

古文：又以为 昔破黄巾，因为屯田，积谷于许都以制四方。
现代文：又认为 过去攻破黄巾军，因此而开垦土地，在许都储备粮食以控制四周。
English: They also believed that they had defeated the Yellow Turban Army in the past, so they reclaimed land and stored grain in Xudu to control the surrounding areas.

古文：今三隅已定，事在淮南，每大军征举，运兵过半，功费巨亿，以为大役。
现代文：现在国家三面已经平定，战事只在淮南地区出现，每次大军出征，用于运输的士兵就超过一半，花费也很巨大，劳役繁重。
English: At present, the three sides of the country have been pacified, and the war only occurs in the Huainan region. Every time a large army goes to war, more than half of the soldiers are used for transportation. The cost is also huge, and the labor is heavy.

古文：陈、蔡之间，土下田良，可省许昌左右诸稻田，并水东下。
现代文：陈、蔡之间，土地肥沃，可以减省许昌周围的稻田，引水往东。
English: Between Chen and Cai, the land is fertile, and it is possible to reduce the rice fields around Xuchang and divert water to the east.

古文：令淮北屯二万人，淮南三万人，十二分休，常有四万人，且田且守。
现代文：在淮北驻扎两万人，淮南三万人，按十分之二的比例轮休，常备的有四万人，一边耕种一边守卫。
English: In Huaibei, there are 20,000 people stationed in the north and 30,000 people in the south of Huaibei. They take turns to rest according to the ratio of two out of ten, and there are 40,000 people standing by, guarding while cultivating.

古文：水丰常收三倍於西，计除众费，岁完五百万斛以为军资。
现代文：风调雨顺的时候，收成经常比西面的土地多三倍，除掉各项花费，每年都有五百万斛作为军用。
English: When the weather is good, the harvest is often three times more than the land in the west, eliminating various costs, every year there are five million cormorants as military.

古文：六七年间，可积三千万斛於淮上，此则十万之众五年食也。
现代文：六七年之间，可以在淮河上储备三千万斛粮食，这就是十万人五年的粮食了。
English: In 67 years, 30 million cormorant grains can be stored on the Huai River, which is the grain for 100,000 people for five years.

古文：以此乘吴，无往而不克矣。 
现代文：凭借这些来攻打吴国，没有不胜利的。 
English: With these to attack the State of Wu, there is no failure.

古文：宣王善之，事皆施行。
现代文：司马懿认为他说得对，各项事情都具体实行。
English: Sima Yi believed that he was right and that all matters would be implemented concretely.

古文：正始二年，乃开广漕渠，每东南有事，大军兴众，汎舟而下，达于江、淮，资食有储而无水害，艾所建也。
现代文：正始二年，就扩大漕运的水渠，每当东南方有战事，大军出发，乘船而下，一直到江淮地区，这是因为有充足的粮食储备并且没有水患灾害，这都是邓艾建立起来的。
English: At the beginning of the second year, the canal of rowing transport was expanded. Whenever there was a war in the southeast, the large army set out and went down by boat all the way to the Jianghuai region. This was because there were sufficient grain reserves and there was no flood disaster. This was all established by Deng Ai.

古文：出参征西军事，迁南安太守。
现代文：后来邓艾出京担任征西将军的军事，升任南安太守。
English: Later, Deng Ai went to Beijing to serve as a military general of the Western Expedition, and was promoted to the governor of Nan'an.

古文：嘉平元年，与征西将军郭淮拒蜀偏将军姜维。
现代文：嘉平元年，与征西将军郭淮一起抵御西蜀偏将军姜维的进犯。
English: In the first year of Jiaping, together with Guo Huai, the general of the Western Expedition, he resisted the attack of Jiang Wei, the general of the Western Shu.

古文：维退，淮因西击羌。
现代文：姜维退军后，郭淮趁机往西进攻羌地。
English: After Jiang Wei's retreat, Guo Huai took the opportunity to attack Shantian in the west.

古文：艾曰： 贼去未远，或能复还，宜分诸军以备不虞。 
现代文：邓艾说： 敌军离开还没有远，或许还会再回来，应该分卡各军以防备意外情况。 
English: Deng Ai said, "The enemy troops have not left for a long time, and may come back again. It is necessary to divide the troops to prevent unexpected situations.

古文：於是留艾屯白水北。
现代文：于是郭淮将邓艾留下驻守白水北面。
English: As a result, Guo Huai left Deng Ai stationed to the north of Baishui.

古文：三日，维遣廖化自白水南向艾结营。
现代文：过了三天，姜维派廖化从白水南面往邓艾的军营进逼。
English: Three days later, Jiang Wei sent Liao Hua to march from the south of Baishui to the military camp of Deng Ai.

古文：艾谓诸将曰： 维今卒还，吾军人少，法当来渡而不作桥。
现代文：邓艾对将领们说： 姜维现在突然回军，我军兵力少，按照常理，应该是前来渡河而不是建桥。
English: Deng Ai said to the generals: Jiang Wei is now suddenly returning to the army, our army is small, according to common sense, it should be to cross the river rather than build a bridge.

古文：此维使化持吾，令不得还。
现代文：这是姜维想要让廖化牵制我，让我不能回军。
English: This is Jiang Wei's attempt to make Liao Hua restrain me, so that I cannot return to the army.

古文：维必自东袭取洮城。 
现代文：姜维一定会从东面袭击攻取洮城。 
English: Jiang Wei will definitely attack and capture Fucheng from the east.

古文：洮城在水北，去艾屯六十里。
现代文：洮城在白水以北，离邓艾兵营有六十里。
English: Lucheng is in the north of Baishui, sixty miles away from Deng'ai Military Camp.

古文：艾即夜潜军径到，维果来渡，而艾先至据城，得以不败。
现代文：邓艾随即趁着夜色潜行出军一直到洮城，姜维果然渡河，但邓艾已经先到，据守的城池，所以才得以不失败。
English: Deng Ai then took advantage of the darkness to sneak out of the army and went all the way to Lucheng. Jiang Wei did indeed cross the river, but Deng Ai had arrived first and defended the city, so he was able not to fail.

古文：赐爵关内侯，加讨寇将军，后迁城阳太守。
现代文：邓艾被赐封爵位为关内侯，加官讨寇将军，后来调任为城阳太守。
English: Deng Ai was given a knighthood as a Guanai marquess, promoted to a general in charge of fighting piracy, and later transferred to the position of the city's Yang di-custodian.

古文：是时并州右贤王刘豹并为一部，艾上言曰： 戎狄兽心，不以义亲，强则侵暴，弱则内附，故周宣有玁狁之寇，汉祖有平城之围。
现代文：当时并州右贤王刘豹将部队合并成一支部队，邓艾上奏说： 夷狄之人，是野兽的心思，不因为道义而亲近，强盛的时候就会施暴，衰弱的时候就投靠朝廷，所以周宣王时，有戎狄南侵，逼近周都之事；汉高祖时期有被围困在平城的事。
English: At that time, Liu Bang, the right-hand king of the state, combined the troops into one army, and Deng Ai, the last emperor, said: "The people of Yidi are the minds of beasts. They are not close because of morality. When they are strong, they will commit violence, and when they are weak, they will rely on the imperial court. Therefore, when Zhou Xuan Wang, there was the matter of the invasion of the south and the approaching of Zhou Capital; during the time of Emperor Gaozu, there was the matter of being besieged in Pingcheng.

古文：每匈奴一盛，为前代重患。
现代文：每次匈奴强盛，都是前朝各代的大患。
English: Every time the Xiongnu became powerful, it was a big problem for all generations of the previous dynasty.

古文：自单于在外，莫能牵制长卑。
现代文：当单于在塞外的时候，朝廷不能控制他们。
English: The court cannot control them when they are out of the country.

古文：诱而致之，使来入侍。
现代文：就只能引诱使他们前来，让他归顺。
English: He can only entice them to come and make him submit.

古文：由是羌夷失统，合散无主。
现代文：因此才能让外族失去统帅，没有首领。
English: This is the reason why the foreigners have lost their commander and have no leader.

古文：以单于在内，万里顺轨。
现代文：因为单于处在关内，周围的少数民族就会顺服。
English: Because just by being in Kansai, the surrounding ethnic minorities will obey.

古文：今单于之尊日疏，外土之威浸重，则胡虏不可不深备也。
现代文：现在单于的尊位渐渐衰弱，外部右贤王刘豹的威势渐渐强盛，这是我们不能不深入防备的敌人。
English: Now, the dignity of singleness is gradually weakening, and the power of the external right-hand king, Liu Bao, is gradually gaining strength. This is an enemy that we cannot help but be prepared for.

古文：闻刘豹部有叛胡，可因叛割为二国，以分其势。
现代文：听说刘豹的部队有人反叛，可以趁着叛乱的时机分割成两个国家，以分解他们的势力。
English: I heard that some of Liu Bang's troops rebelled, and they could take advantage of the opportunity of the rebellion to split into two countries in order to dissolve their forces.

古文：去卑功显前朝，而子不继业，宜加其子显号，使居雁门。
现代文：右贤王去卑在汉朝时功勋卓著，但后代没有能延续他的基业，应该给他的儿子加封尊号，让他们留守雁门。
English: Ugyen Wang Dangbai had outstanding achievements during the Han Dynasty, but his descendants were not able to continue his legacy. He should have given his son a title of honor and let them stay in the Wild Goose Gate.

古文：离国弱寇，追录旧勋，此御边长计也。 
现代文：以此远离国土，使他们的势力衰弱。让他们追思祖先的功绩，这是守卫边境的长远之计。 
English: This is a long-term strategy for guarding the border, to keep them away from the country, to weaken their power, and to make them think about the achievements of their ancestors.

古文：又陈： 羌胡与民同处者，宜以渐出之，使居民表崇廉耻之教，塞奸宄之路。 
现代文：又陈述： 那些和百姓一同生活在一处的胡人，应该逐渐分离他们，让他们尊崇礼义廉耻的教化，堵住奸邪滋生的道路。 
English: Also stated: Those Hu people who live in the same place with the people should gradually separate them, educate them to respect propriety and rectitude, and block the road for the breeding of treachery and evil.

古文：大将军司马景王新辅政，多纳用焉。
现代文：大将军司马师刚辅佐朝政，对于他的建议大多采纳并实施了。
English: Major General Sima Shi Gang, Assistant to the Vice-premier, had most of his suggestions adopted and implemented.

古文：迁汝南太守，至则寻求昔所厚己吏父，久已死，遣吏祭之，重遗其母，举其子与计吏。
现代文：后来邓艾调任为汝南太守，刚到汝南就去寻找曾经对自己很好的官吏的父亲，但他已经去世很久了，邓艾就派人去祭扫，又给官吏的母亲送了很厚重的礼物，并将他的儿子举荐给计吏。
English: Later, Deng Ai was transferred to be the governor of Runan. As soon as he arrived in Runan, he went to look for the father of the official who had been very good to him, but he had been dead for a long time. Deng Ai sent someone to sweep up the debris, gave the official's mother a very heavy gift, and recommended his son to the accountant.

古文：艾所在，荒野开辟，军民并丰。
现代文：邓艾所任职的地方，都开垦荒地，军士百姓都很富足。
English: All the places where Deng Ai served were reclaimed wasteland, and the soldiers and civilians were very rich.

古文：诸葛恪围合肥新城，不克，退归。
现代文：诸葛恪围困合肥新城，没有攻下，就撤军返回。
English: Zhuge besieged Hefei New Town, and withdrew and returned after failing to capture it.

古文：艾言景王曰： 孙权已没，大臣未附，吴名宗大族，皆有部曲，阻兵仗势，足以建命。
现代文：邓艾对司马师说： 孙权已经死了，国中大臣们没有可依附的，东吴的世家大族，都各自有他们的部队，依仗兵力权势，足以称霸一方。
English: Deng Ai said to Sima Shi: Sun Quan is dead, the ministers of the Middle Kingdom have nothing to cling to, the great families of Eastern Wu all have their own troops, relying on military strength and power, enough to dominate one side.

古文：恪新秉国政，而内无其主，不念抚恤上下以立根基，竞於外事，虐用其民，悉国之众，顿於坚城，死者万数，载祸而归，此恪获罪之日也。
现代文：诸葛恪刚主持国事，到内部没有君主，没有想着安抚上下的百姓以树立好根基，却多次出兵作战，虐待百姓，倾尽全国之力攻打合肥这座坚固的城池，死伤数以万计，带着祸患返回，这是诸葛恪获罪的时候了。
English: Zhuge Ke just presided over state affairs, there was no monarch inside, he did not think about appeasing the people up and down to establish a good foundation, but he repeatedly sent troops to fight, abused the people, and devoted all the strength of the country to attack Hefei, a solid city, tens of thousands of deaths and injuries, and returned with disaster. This is the time for Zhuge Ke to be convicted.

古文：昔子胥、吴起、商鞅、乐毅皆见任时君，主没而败。
现代文：过去伍子胥、吴起、商鞅、乐毅都被当时的君主重用，君主去世后就落败了。
English: In the past, Wu Ziqi, Wu Qi, Shang Qi, and Le Yi were all used by the monarch at that time, and they were defeated after the death of the monarch.

古文：况恪才非四贤，而不虑大患，其亡可待也。 
现代文：更何况诸葛恪的才能比不上这四位贤人，却不考虑大的忧患，他的败亡是指日可待的了。 
English: What's more, Zhuge Ke's talent is not as good as these four sages, but without considering the great sorrow, his defeat is just around the corner.

古文：恪归，果见诛。
现代文：诸葛恪回到国中，果然被诛杀了。
English: Zhuge Ke returned to the country and was indeed beaten to death.

古文：迁兖州刺史，加振威将军。
现代文：邓艾被提升为衮州刺史，加封振威将军。
English: Deng Ai was promoted to the highest rank in the history of Zhangzhou, and given the title of General Zhenwei.

古文：上言曰： 国之所急，惟农与战，国富则兵强，兵强则战胜。
现代文：他上奏说： 国家所急切的东西，只有农业和战事，国家富强那士兵就会强盛，士兵强大那打仗就能取胜。
English: He began by saying, "Agriculture and war are the only things that the country is anxious about. If the country is rich and strong, then the soldiers will be strong. If the soldiers are strong, then they can win the war."

古文：然农者，胜之本也。
现代文：但农业，是取胜的根本。
English: But agriculture is the key to victory.

古文：孔子曰 足食足兵 ，食在兵前也。
现代文：孔子说 粮食充足，士兵才能强大 ，粮食的重要性在士兵之前。
English: Confucius said, "Sufficient food makes a strong soldier, and the importance of food comes before that of soldiers."

古文：上无设爵之劝，则下无财畜之功。
现代文：上级如果不设置奖励，那下层的百姓就不会努力积蓄财富。
English: If the higher level does not set rewards, then the lower-level people will not work hard to accumulate wealth.

古文：今使考绩之赏，在於积粟富民，则交游之路绝，浮华之原塞矣。 
现代文：现在让如果设立奖励制度，那让百姓储备粮食，丰衣足食，那四处游说的路径就会断绝，崇尚浮华的风气也会被遏制了。
English: Now, if a reward system is set up, the people will be allowed to stockpile grain and have enough food and clothing, the path of lobbying everywhere will be cut off, and the culture of advocating flashy will be curbed.

古文：高贵乡公即尊位，进封方城亭侯。
现代文：魏高贵乡公曹髦即皇帝位，晋封邓艾为方城亭侯。
English: Wei Gao Gui Xiang Gong Cao Xiang, that is, the emperor, promoted Deng Ai to the position of Fangcheng Tinghou.

古文：毌丘俭作乱，遣健步赍书，欲疑惑大众，艾斩之，兼道进军，先趣乐嘉城，作浮桥。
现代文：毋丘俭作乱，并派行走迅速的人前去送信，想要迷惑众人，邓艾将这个人斩杀了，并从各路进军，先逼近乐嘉城，建造浮桥。
English: Rather than stirring up trouble and sending a fast-moving man to send a message to confuse everyone, Deng Ai killed the man and marched from all directions, first approaching the city of Lejia and building a floating bridge.

古文：司马景王至，遂据之。
现代文：司马师来到，就占据了这里。
English: When Sima Shi came, he occupied this place.

古文：文钦以后大军破败於城下，艾追之至丘头。
现代文：文钦因为大军来得比较迟，所以在城下被攻破。
English: As Wenqin's large army arrived late, it was defeated at the foot of the city.

古文：钦奔吴。吴大将军孙峻等号十万众，将渡江，镇东将军诸葛诞遣艾据肥阳，艾以与贼势相远，非要害之地，辄移屯附亭，遣泰山太守诸葛绪等于黎浆拒战，遂走之。
现代文：邓艾率军追赶到丘头，文钦逃奔到吴国，吴国的大将军孙峻等人，号称十万大军将要渡过长江，镇东将军诸葛诞派遣邓艾率军占据肥阳。邓艾认为和敌军的主力距离很远，不是要害之地，就移军驻守在附亭，并派遣泰山太守诸葛绪等人在黎浆与敌军激战，并击退了敌人。
English: Deng Ai led the army to chase them to the hilltop, and Wenqin fled to Wu. Sun Jun, the general of Wu, and others claimed that a hundred thousand army would cross the Yangtze River. Zhendong General Zhu Gexue sent Deng Ai and his army to occupy Feiyang. Deng Ai thought that the distance from the main force of the enemy army was very far, and it was not a critical place, so he moved the army and stationed it in Fuxing. He also sent Tai Shan Taishou Zhu Gexu and others to fight fiercely with the enemy army in Lili, and repelled the enemy.

古文：其年徵拜长水校尉。以破钦等功，进封方城乡侯，行安西将军。
现代文：这一年邓艾被征召任命为长水校尉，因为攻破了文钦等的功绩被封为方城乡侯，行使安西将军的职权。
English: This year, Deng Ai was conscripted and appointed as a Changshui lieutenant, and because of his achievements in defeating Wenqin, he was appointed as the mayor of Fangcheng, exercising the powers of General Anxi.

古文：解雍州刺史王经围於狄道，姜维退驻锺提，乃以艾为安西将军，假节、领护东羌校尉。
现代文：并在狄道解除了雍州刺史王经的围困，姜维退军驻守在钟提，朝廷就任命邓艾为安西将军，持符节兼任护东羌校尉。
English: And in Dido, he lifted the siege of Yongzhou's Jishi Wangjing, and Jiang Wei retreated to stay in Zhongti. The court appointed Deng Ai as General of Anxi, and he also held the position of Lieutenant of Dongyi.

古文：议者多以为维力已竭，未能更出。艾曰： 洮西之败，非小失也；破军杀将，仓廪空虚，百姓流离，几於危亡。
现代文：商议的人大多认为姜维已经穷尽实力不能再出击了，邓艾说： 洮西的战败不是小的损失，军队被攻破，将领被杀害，仓库空虚，百姓流离失所，几乎处于危亡之中。
English: Deng Ai said: "The defeat in Shaanxi is not a small loss. The army was broken, the generals were killed, the warehouses were empty, the people were displaced, and they were almost in danger.

古文：今以策言之，彼有乘胜之势，我有虚弱之实，一也。
现代文：按照现在的情况来看，敌军有乘胜追击的形势，我方有虚弱的情况，这是一方面。
English: According to the current situation, on the one hand, the enemy has a situation of winning and pursuing, and on the other hand, we have a weak situation.

古文：彼上下相习，五兵犀利，我将易兵新，器杖未复，二也。
现代文：敌军上下级之间互相熟悉，兵器锋利，我军新换将领，士兵不足兵器不足，这是第二个方面。
English: The enemy's higher and lower ranks are familiar with each other, the weapons are sharp, our army has a new general, the soldiers are not enough, and the weapons are not enough. This is the second aspect.

古文：彼以船行，吾以陆军，劳逸不同，三也。狄道、陇西、南安、祁山，各当有守，彼专为一，我分为四，四也。
现代文：敌军依靠船只行进，我方以陆军为主，劳累和安逸的情况不同，这是第三个方面，狄道、陇西、南安、祈山各自应当有所守卫，敌军专注于进攻一城，我军分成了四路人马，这是第四个方面。
English: The enemy relies on ships to travel. Our side relies on the army. The situation of fatigue and comfort is different. This is the third aspect. Dido, Shaanxi, Nan'an and Qishan should be guarded separately. The enemy is focused on attacking one city. Our army is divided into four directions. This is the fourth aspect.

古文：从南安、陇西，因食羌谷，若趣祁山，熟麦千顷，为之县饵，五也。贼有黠数，其来必矣。 
现代文：如果从南安陇西出发，要征用羌人的粮食，如果逼近岐山，那里有良田千顷，稻谷成熟，容易找到粮食，这是第五个方面，敌军有狡猾的计谋，他们是一定会来的。
English: If you set out from Nan'an and Shaanxi, you will have to requisition the grain of the Xiongnu people. If you approach Qishan, there are thousands of hectares of good fields, the rice is ripe, and it is easy to find grain. This is the fifth aspect. The enemy army has a cunning plan. They will definitely come.

古文：顷之，维果向祁山，闻艾已有备，乃回从董亭趣南安，艾据武城山以相持。维与艾争险，不克，其夜，渡渭东行，缘山趣上邽，艾与战於段谷，大破之。
现代文：不久姜维果然进逼祁山，得知邓艾已有所防备，就回军从董亭进逼南安，邓艾占据武城山，两军相持，姜维与邓艾争夺险要地形，没有攻克，当天晚上就渡过渭水东行，沿着山路，来到上圭阝，邓艾和姜维在断骨交战，大败姜维。
English: Not long after, Jiang Wei did indeed enter and besiege Lushan. When he learned that Deng Ai had made some preparations, he returned from Dongting to besiege Nan'an. Deng Ai occupied Wucheng Mountain. The two armies were on a stalemate. Jiang Wei and Deng Ai fought for the dangerous terrain, but failed to conquer it. That evening, they crossed Surabaya to the east, along the mountain road, and came to Shangguiyu. Deng Ai and Jiang Wei fought with broken bones, and Jiang Wei was defeated.

古文：甘露元年诏曰： 逆贼姜维连年狡黠，民夷骚动，西土不宁。艾筹画有方，忠勇奋发，斩将十数，馘首千计；国威震於巴、蜀，武声扬於江、岷。
现代文：甘露元年，皇帝下诏说： 逆贼姜维连年作乱，百姓不安，西边国土不宁，邓艾筹谋有方，英勇顽强，斩杀了十数位敌军将领，以及数以千计的数以千计的敌军。
English: In the first year of the Kamloops, the emperor issued a decree saying: The traitor Jiang Wei Lian started a riot, the people were uneasy, the western land was restless, Deng Ai was resourceful, brave and tenacious, and killed more than a dozen enemy generals, as well as thousands of thousands of enemy troops.

古文：今以艾为镇西将军、都督陇右诸军事，进封邓侯。分五百户封子忠为亭侯。 二年，拒姜维于长城，维退还。迁征西将军，前后增邑凡六千六百户。
现代文：使国家的威势在巴蜀之地传扬，展示了武力，现在任命邓艾为镇西将军，都领陇右地区的各项军事事宜，进封为邓侯，分五百户封邑册封他的儿子邓忠为亭侯。 甘露二年，邓艾在长城抗击姜维，姜维退还，邓艾被调任为征西将军，前后一共增加封邑一共六千六百户。
English: He spread the power of the country in the land of Bashu and demonstrated the power of force, and now he appointed Deng Ai as the general of the west of the town, led all military affairs in the right side of the country, appointed Deng Hou as the vassal, and appointed his son Deng Zhong as the vassal of five hundred vassal households. In the second year of Ganlu, Deng Ai fought against Jiang Wei at the Great Wall, Jiang Wei retreated, Deng Ai was transferred to the general of the west of the country, and a total of six thousand six hundred households were added to the vassal households.

古文：景元三年，又破维于侯和，维卻保沓中。四年秋，诏诸军征蜀，大将军司马文王皆指授节度，使艾与维相缀连；雍州刺史诸葛绪要维，令不得归。艾遣天水太守王颀等直攻维营，陇西太守牵弘等邀其前，金城太守杨欣等诣甘松。
现代文：景元三年，邓艾又在侯和攻破了姜维，姜维撤军据守沓中，景元四年年秋天，皇帝诏令各路人马征讨蜀国，大将军司马昭负责统率指挥，司马昭派邓艾与姜维互相牵制，雍州刺史诸葛绪阻击姜维，令姜维不能撤军，邓艾派天水王颀等人直接攻打姜维的军营，陇西太守牵弘等人率军阻击他的前锋部队，金城太守杨欣等人到达甘松。
English: In the third year of the Jingyuan era, Deng Ai also defeated Jiang Wei at Houhe, and Jiang Wei withdrew his army from the garrison of Shao. In the autumn of the fourth year of the Jingyuan era, the emperor issued an order to recruit people from all walks of life to fight against Shu. The general Sima Zhao was responsible for command and control. Sima Zhao sent Deng Ai and Jiang Wei to restrain each other. The Yongzhou governor Zhu Gexu blocked Jiang Wei and made it impossible for Jiang Wei to withdraw his army. Deng Ai sent Tianshui Wang Qi and others to directly attack Jiang Wei's military camp. The Shaanxi governor Tong Hong and others

古文：维闻锺会诸军已入汉中，引退还。
现代文：姜维得知钟会各军已进入汉中，就率军撤退。
English: When Jiang Wei learned that Zhonghui's armies had entered Hanzhong, he led his army to retreat.

古文：欣等追蹑於强川口，大战，维败走。闻雍州已塞道，屯桥头，从孔函谷入北道，欲出雍州后。
现代文：杨欣等人追踪姜维到强川口，两军交战，姜维战败撤走，得知雍州已经堵塞了道路，在桥头驻扎，姜维就想要从孔函谷进入北边的路，想要从雍州的后方逃走。
English: Yang Xin and others tracked Jiang Wei to Qiangchuangkou, the two armies fought, Jiang Wei was defeated and withdrew, and learned that Yongzhou had blocked the road and stationed at the bridgehead, Jiang Wei wanted to enter the northern road from Konghan Valley and wanted to escape from the rear of Yongzhou.

古文：诸葛绪闻之，卻还三十里。维入北道三十馀里，闻绪军卻，寻还，从桥头过，绪趣截维，较一日不及。维遂东引，还守剑阁。
现代文：诸葛绪的听说后，就率军后退了三十里，姜维进入北边三十多里，得知诸葛绪的军队撤退，不久就返回想要从桥头经过，诸葛绪率军截击姜维，但晚了一天，姜维就率军往东返回，驻守剑阁。
English: After hearing of Zhugexu, he led his army back thirty miles. Jiang Wei entered more than thirty miles to the north. When he learned that Zhugexu's army was retreating, he soon returned and wanted to pass through the bridgehead. Zhugexu led his army to intercept Jiang Wei, but a day later, Jiang Wei led his army to the east and returned to guard Jiange.

古文：锺会攻维未能克。
现代文：钟会攻打姜维，没有能攻克。
English: The bell would attack Jiang Wei, but could not defeat him.

古文：艾上言： 今贼摧折，宜遂乘之，从阴平由邪径经汉德阳亭趣涪，出剑阁西百里，去成都三百馀里，奇兵冲其腹心。
现代文：邓艾上奏说： 现在敌军势力衰减，应该乘胜追击，从阴平沿小路、经汉德阳亭，奔赴涪县，距剑阁西有一百多里，距离成都有三百多里，派精锐部队攻打敌军的重要地区。
English: Deng Ai Shangsoo said: Now that the enemy forces are in decline, we should take advantage of the victory and pursue them. From Yinping, along the small road, through Hande Yangting, we should rush to Lixian County, which is more than a hundred miles west of Jiange, and more than three hundred miles from Chengdu, and send elite troops to attack important areas of the enemy forces.

古文：剑阁之守必还赴涪，则会方轨而进；剑阁之军不还，则应涪之兵寡矣。
现代文：驻守在剑阁的守军一定会返回救援涪县，那钟会就能乘势进攻；如果剑阁的守军不返回，那援救涪县的兵力就会很少。
English: The defenders stationed in Jiange will certainly return to rescue Jixian, and the Bell Association will be able to take advantage of the situation to attack; if the defenders of Jiange do not return, there will be little force to rescue Jixian.

古文：军志有之曰： 攻其无备，出其不意。
现代文：兵法上说： 在他没有预料的时候，攻打他没有防备的地方。 
English: The art of war says: When he does not expect it, attack him where he is unprepared.

古文：今掩其空虚，破之必矣。 
现代文：现在攻打姜维空虚的地方，一定能攻破。 
English: If we attack Jiang Wei's empty place now, we will definitely be able to break through.

古文：冬十月，艾自阴平道行无人之地七百馀里，凿山通道，造作桥阁。
现代文：这年十月，邓艾从阴平进军七百多里，路上都是无人之地，开山通路架设栈道，山高谷深，非常艰险。
English: In October of that year, Deng Ai marched more than seven hundred miles from Yinping. The roads were no man's land. A mountain path was set up, and the mountain was high and deep. It was very arduous.

古文：山高谷深，至为艰险，又粮运将匮，频於危殆。
现代文：又因为粮食的运输很匮乏，粮食已经到了紧缺的地步。
English: And because the transportation of grain is very scarce, grain has reached the point of shortage.

古文：艾以毡自裹，推转而下。
现代文：邓艾用毛毡裹住自己，旋转着往下。
English: Deng Ai wrapped herself in the felt and spun down.

古文：将士皆攀木缘崖，鱼贯而进。
现代文：将领士兵们都抓着树木沿着悬崖，一个一个的前进。
English: The generals and soldiers were all clinging to the trees along the cliff, advancing one by one.

古文：先登至江由，蜀守将马邈降。
现代文：首先来到江由县，西蜀守将马邈投降。
English: First, they came to Jiangyu County, where the governor of West Shuxi surrendered to Ma Jun.

古文：蜀卫将军诸葛瞻自涪还绵竹，列陈待艾。
现代文：西蜀卫将军诸葛瞻从涪县退还绵竹，整顿军队，等待邓艾的到来。
English: Western Shuwei General Zhu Gezhan returned Mianzhu from Jixian County, reorganized the army, and waited for Deng Ai's arrival.

古文：艾遣子惠唐亭侯忠等出其右，司马师纂等出其左。
现代文：邓艾派遣自己的儿子邓忠等率兵从右边出击，司马师纂等率兵从左边进军。
English: Deng Ai sent his son Deng Zhong and other soldiers to attack from the right, while Sima Shizang and other soldiers marched in from the left.

古文：忠、纂战不利，并退还，曰： 贼未可击。 
现代文：邓中、师篡等战斗失利，一起撤退，说： 敌军很难攻破。 
English: Deng Zhong, Shizhu Zhuo and others lost the battle and retreated together, saying: It is difficult to break through the enemy.

古文：艾怒曰： 存亡之分，在此一举，何不可之有？ 
现代文：邓艾大怒说： 生死存亡，就在这一战了，有什么可以不可以的？ 
English: Deng Ai said angrily, "This is a battle of life and death, what is acceptable and what is not?

古文：乃叱忠、纂等，将斩之。忠、纂驰还更战，大破之，斩瞻及尚书张遵等首，进军到雒。
现代文：大骂他们，想要将他们斩杀，邓忠师篡等快速返回交战，攻破了敌军，斩下诸葛瞻及尚书张遵等人的首级，并进军雒县。
English: Swearing at them and wanting to behead them, Deng Zhongshu quickly returned to the battle, defeated the enemy, cut off the heads of Zhugezhan and Shangshu Zhang Zun, and marched into Jixian County.

古文：刘禅遣使奉皇帝玺绶，为笺诣艾请降。
现代文：刘禅派使者捧着皇帝的印信绶带，并写下书信，到邓艾的军营中请求投降。
English: Liu Zhen sent an emissary to Deng Ai's military camp with the emperor's seal and sash, and wrote a letter to request Deng Ai's surrender.

古文：艾至成都，禅率太子诸王及群臣六十馀人面缚舆榇诣军门，艾执节解缚焚榇，受而宥之。
现代文：邓艾率兵进驻成都，刘禅率太子及王侯群臣六十余人两手反绑，把棺材装在车上，表示罪该当死，来到军门。
English: Deng Ai led the troops into Chengdu, and Liu Zhen led the prince and more than 60 princes and courtiers, who tied their hands behind their backs, loaded the coffin on the car, said that the crime deserved death, and came to the military gate.

古文：检御将士，无所虏略，绥纳降附，使复旧业，蜀人称焉。
现代文：邓艾解开绳索，烧掉棺材，并表示宽恕他们。他又检阅部队，没有所夺取的东西，对于投降的大臣们，让他们恢复过去的职务，蜀地的百姓都称赞他。
English: Deng Ai untied the ropes, burned the coffins, and expressed forgiveness for them. He also reviewed the troops, nothing was taken, and the people of Shu praised him for the surrendered ministers, allowing them to resume their previous duties.

古文：辄依邓禹故事，承制拜禅行骠骑将军，太子奉车、诸王驸马都尉。
现代文：又依邓禹旧制，命刘禅代理骠骑大将军，太子为奉车，诸王为驸马都尉。
English: Also, according to Deng Yu's old system, Liu Zen was ordered to act as the cavalry general, the prince as a messenger, and the kings as cavalry captains.

古文：蜀群司各随高下拜为王官，或领艾官属。
现代文：蜀地的官员们都依靠情况被任命为官员，或者成为邓艾的下属。
English: The officials in Shu were all appointed officials or became subordinates of Deng Ai, depending on the situation.

古文：以师纂领益州刺史，陇西太守牵弘等领蜀中诸郡。
现代文：又让师篡兼任益州刺史，陇西太守牵弘等人管辖蜀中的各郡县。
English: In addition, he allowed Shi Zi, concurrently serving as the governor of Yizhou, and the governor of Shaanxi Province, Yan Hong, to govern the counties in Shu.

古文：使於绵竹筑台以为京观，用彰战功。
现代文：又在绵竹修建土台，堆积敌军的尸首，做成京观，用来彰显战功。
English: They also built a foundation in Mianzhu, piled up the corpses of the enemy army, and made a view of Beijing, which was used to highlight their war exploits.

古文：士卒死事者，皆与蜀兵同共埋藏。
现代文：战死的魏国士兵，都和蜀兵一同埋葬。
English: The Wei soldiers who died in the war were buried together with the Shu soldiers.

古文：艾深自矜伐，谓蜀士大夫曰： 诸君赖遭某，故得有今日耳。
现代文：邓艾非常自矜自夸，对蜀地的士大夫们说： 各位都是因为遇上了我，所以才能有今天。
English: Deng Ai was very boastful and said to the scholars and doctors of Shu, "You are all here today because of me.

古文：若遇吴汉之徒，已殄灭矣。 
现代文：如果遇上的是吴汉这样的人，现在已经被杀掉了。 
English: If it had been someone like Wu Han, he would have been killed by now.

古文：又曰： 姜维自一时雄儿也，与某相值，故穷耳。 
现代文：又说： 姜维只只是一时的英雄，因为跟我相遇，所以才穷途末路罢了。 
English: He also said: "Jiang Wei is only a hero for a moment, because he met me, so it's just a dead end.

古文：有识者笑之。
现代文：有见识的人都讥笑他。
English: Everyone with any sense laughed at him.

古文：十二月，诏曰： 艾曜威奋武，深入虏庭，斩将搴旗，枭其鲸鲵，使僣号之主，稽首系颈，历世逋诛，一朝而平。
现代文：十二月，皇帝下诏说： 邓艾展示武力宣扬国威，深入敌军腹地，斩杀将领砍下战旗，斩杀首领，使得伪称帝王的人引颈自杀，在逃多年的罪人一朝之间就平定了。
English: In December, the emperor issued the following edict: Deng Ai used military force to promote national prestige, penetrated deep into the enemy's military heartland, killed generals, cut down the battle flag, killed leaders, and made those who falsely claimed to be emperors commit suicide. The criminals who had been on the run for many years were pacified between the two dynasties.

古文：兵不逾时，战不终日，云彻席卷，荡定巴蜀。
现代文：战斗不超过预计的时间，很快就结束了。威势席卷，平定了巴蜀之地。
English: The battle did not last as long as expected, and it was over quickly. The army swept in and leveled the land of Bashu.

古文：虽白起破强楚，韩信克劲赵，吴汉禽子阳，亚夫灭七国，计功论美，不足比勋也。
现代文：即使是白起攻破强大的楚国，韩信攻克强劲的赵国，吴汉擒住公孙述，周亚夫平定七国之乱，论起功绩，也不能和邓艾相比。
English: Even if Bai Qi defeated the powerful state of Chu, Han Xin defeated the strong state of Zhao, Wu Han subdued Gong Sun Su, and Zhou Yafu quelled the Seven Kingdoms War, in terms of achievements, they cannot be compared with Deng Ai.

古文：其以艾为太尉，增邑二万户，封子二人亭侯，各食邑千户。 
现代文：现在任命邓艾为太尉，增加食邑二万户，封他的两个儿子为亭侯，各食邑一千户。 
English: Now, he has appointed Deng Ai as the first lieutenant, increased the number of food villages by 20,000, and appointed his two sons as pavilion lords, with 1,000 households in each food village.

古文：艾言司马文王曰： 兵有先声而后实者，今因平蜀之势以乘吴，吴人震恐，席卷之时也。
现代文：邓艾对司马昭说： 按照兵法应该先树立威势，然后再真正进攻，现在凭着攻打蜀地的威势进攻吴国，吴人惊恐，正是平定天下的时机。
English: Deng Ai said to Sima Zhao, "According to the rules of war, you should build up your power first, and then really attack. Now, with the power of attacking Shu, you are attacking Wuxi. The people of Wuxi are terrified. This is the time to pacify the world."

古文：然大举之后，将士疲劳，不可便用，且徐缓之；留陇右兵二万人，蜀兵二万人，煮盐兴冶，为军农要用，并作舟船，豫顺流之事，然后发使告以利害，吴必归化，可不征而定也。
现代文：但是大举用兵之后，将是疲惫，不能立刻出兵，应该慢慢的图谋；先留陇右兵二万人，巴蜀兵二万人，煮盐炼铁。作为军事和农业的要务，同时建造船只，为顺流而下，征讨东吴做准备，做好这些后，派出使者将利害关系告知吴国，吴国一定会归顺，那就可以不用争吵就能平定了。
English: However, after the large-scale use of troops, it will be exhaustion. It is not possible to send troops immediately, and it is necessary to plan slowly. First, keep twenty thousand right-hand soldiers and twenty thousand left-hand soldiers, boil salt to make iron. As a military and agricultural priority, at the same time, build ships to go down the river and prepare for the conquest of East Wu. After doing these things, send an envoy to inform Wu of the interests. Wu will definitely surrender, and then it can be settled without quarreling.

古文：今宜厚刘禅以致孙休，安士民以来远人，若便送禅於京都，吴以为流徙，则於向化之心不劝。
现代文：现在应该厚待刘禅，以招揽孙休，安抚百姓以招揽边远之人，如果立即将刘禅送到京城，东吴认为是流放他，那在劝他们归顺的事情上不会顺利。
English: Now is the time to treat Liu Zen with kindness, to woo Sun Xiu, to appease the people and to woo those who are far away. If Liu Zen is immediately sent to the capital, and Dongwu considers him to be exiled, it will not go well in persuading them to submit.

古文：宜权停留，须来年秋冬，比尔吴亦足平。
现代文：应该暂时将刘禅留下，等到来年秋冬时候，那时东吴也可以平定了。
English: Liu Zhen should be left in place for the time being, and by the autumn and winter of next year, Dongwu can also be pacified.

古文：以为可封禅为扶风王，锡其资财，供其左右。
现代文：我认为可以封刘禅为扶风王，赏赐他财物，派人服侍左右。
English: I think it is possible to name Liu Zhen as the King of Fu Feng, reward him with wealth, and send someone to serve him.

古文：郡有董卓坞，为之宫舍。
现代文：郡内有董卓坞作为他的宫室。
English: There is a Dong Zhuojing in the county as his palace.

古文：爵其子为公侯，食郡内县，以显归命之宠。
现代文：封赐他的儿子为公侯，分郡中一县为食邑，以展示归顺的恩宠。
English: He gave his son the title of prince and one of his counties the title of food town to show his gratitude.

古文：开广陵、城阳以待吴人，则畏威怀德，望风而从矣。 
现代文：应该设置广陵，城阳城等待吴人，他们就会畏惧威势，感怀恩德，望风前来顺从了。 
English: If Guangling and Chengyangcheng should be set up to wait for the Wu people, they will be afraid of the power, feel the grace, and wait for the wind to come and obey.

古文：文王使监军卫瓘喻艾： 事当须报，不宜辄行。 
现代文：司马昭派监军卫馞告示邓艾说： 这件事应该上报朝廷，不能立刻实行。 
English: Sima Zhao sent the supervisor of the military garrison to notify Deng Ai, saying: This matter should be reported to the imperial court, and cannot be implemented immediately.

古文：艾重言曰： 衔命征行，奉指授之策，元恶既服；至于承制拜假，以安初附，谓合权宜。
现代文：邓艾又说： 我奉皇上之命征讨。敌军首领既然已经归服，就应该按照制度给予官职，安抚他们，这才是符合时宜的。
English: Deng Ai also said, "I have been ordered by the emperor to fight. Since the leaders of the enemy army have surrendered, they should be given official positions according to the system to appease them. This is what is timely."

古文：今蜀举众归命，地尽南海，东接吴会，宜早镇定。若待国命，往复道途，延引日月。春秋之义，大夫出疆，有可以安社稷，利国家，专之可也。今吴未宾；势与蜀连，不可拘常以失事机。
现代文：现在蜀国举国归顺，我国的疆土南街接海，东边与吴国相连，应该早日平定，如果等待朝廷的命令，路上来往的时间很长，《春秋》中说，将领守卫边疆，如果有可以安定设立，有利于国家的方法，那专断也是可以的，现在吴国没有臣服，领地蜀国相连，就不能拘于常例以失去时机。
English: Now, the whole country of Shu has surrendered. The southern part of our territory is connected to the sea, and the eastern part is connected to Wu. It should be pacified as soon as possible. If you wait for an order from the imperial court, it will take a long time to go back and forth on the road. "Spring and Autumn" said that generals guarding the border, if there is a method that can be established stably and is beneficial to the country, then arbitrariness is also possible. Now that Wu is not subject, and the territory of Shu is connected, it is impossible to lose the opportunity by sticking to the usual.

古文：兵法，进不求名，退不避罪，艾虽无古人之节，终不自嫌以损于国也。 锺会、胡烈、师纂等皆白艾所作悖逆，变衅以结。
现代文：孙子兵法上说，进军不是为了求得名声，后退也不躲避罪责。我邓艾虽然没有古人的气节，但也不会自我嫌弃以损害国家的利益。 钟会、胡烈、师纂等都上告说邓艾悖逆作乱，有反叛的征兆。
English: According to Sun Tzu's Art of War, marching into battle is not for the purpose of gaining fame, and retreating does not avoid guilt. Although I, Deng Ai, do not have the stamina of the ancients, I will not abhor myself to the detriment of the interests of the country. The bell association, Hu Lie, and the teacher all reported that Deng Ai had rebelled and caused a disturbance, and that there were signs of rebellion.

古文：诏书槛车徵艾。
现代文：皇帝下诏书将邓艾囚禁起来，用囚车押送京城。
English: The emperor issued an edict to imprison Deng Ai, and he was escorted to the capital in a prison wagon.

古文：艾父子既囚，锺会至成都，先送艾，然后作乱。会已死，艾本营将士追出艾槛车，迎还。瓘遣田续等讨艾，遇於绵竹西，斩之。子忠与艾俱死，馀子在洛阳者悉诛，徙艾妻子及孙於西域。
现代文：邓艾父子被囚禁之后，钟会来到成都，先送走邓艾，然后起兵作乱，钟会死后，邓爱营中的将士追赶到邓艾的囚车，将他迎接回来，卫馞派田续等人攻打邓艾，两军在绵竹的西面相遇，田续等人斩杀了邓艾，邓艾的儿子邓忠也一起死了，其余在洛阳的儿子都被诛杀了，朝廷将邓艾的妻子孩子还有孙辈都流放到西域。
English: After Deng Ai and his son were imprisoned, Zhong Hui came to Chengdu, first sent Deng Ai away, and then started a riot. After the death of Zhong Hui, the soldiers in Deng Ai's battalion chased him to Deng Ai's prison car and welcomed him back. The guards sent Tian Cui and others to attack Deng Ai. The two armies met on the west side of Mianzhu. Tian Cui and others killed Deng Ai. Deng Ai's son Deng Zhong also died together. The remaining sons in Luoyang were all killed. The court exiled Deng Ai's wife, children and grandchildren to the western region.

古文：初，艾当伐蜀，梦坐山上而有流水，以问殄虏护军爰邵。
现代文：当初，邓艾将攻打西蜀时，梦见自己坐在山上，山上有流水。他用这个梦殄虏护军爰邵。
English: At the beginning, when Deng Ai was about to attack West Shou, he dreamed that he was sitting on a mountain and there was running water on the mountain. He used this nightmare to take the lead in protecting the troops.

古文：邵曰： 按易卦，山上有水曰蹇。
现代文：爰邵说： 按《易》经的卦辞，山上有水叫《蹇》。
English: Zou Shao said: According to the words of the Yi Jing, there is water on the mountain called "Zou."

古文：蹇繇曰： 蹇利西南，不利东北。
现代文：《蹇》繇说： 《蹇》在西南面有利，在东北面不利。 
English: "" said: "" is advantageous in the southwest and disadvantageous in the northeast.

古文：孔子曰： 蹇利西南，往有功也；不利东北，其道穷也。
现代文：孔子说： 《蹇》利西南，经常能建立功勋;不利东北，往往穷途末路。 
English: Confucius said: "Confucianism" is beneficial to the southwest, and can often build merits; it is unfavorable to the northeast, and often leads to a dead end.

古文：往必克蜀，殆不还乎！ 
现代文：前去讨伐西蜀，难道回不来吗? 
English: If you go to fight against Xishu, can't you come back?

古文：艾怃然不乐。
现代文：邓艾怅然不乐。
English: Deng Ai was not happy.

古文：泰始元年，晋室践阼，诏曰： 昔太尉王凌谋废齐王，而王竟不足以守位。征西将军邓艾，矜功失节，实应大辟。
现代文：泰始元年，晋朝建立。皇帝下诏说： 过去太尉王凌密谋废掉齐王，而齐王最终没有能守住帝位，征西将军邓艾夸耀功劳，失去品节应该判处死刑。
English: In the first year of Taishi, the Jin Dynasty was established. The emperor issued an edict saying: In the past, the captain Wang Ling plotted to abolish the king of Qi, and the king of Qi eventually failed to keep the imperial throne. The general of the Western Conquest, Deng Ai, boasted of his merits. The loss of the festival should be sentenced to death.

古文：然被书之日，罢遣人众，束手受罪，比于求生遂为恶者，诚复不同。
现代文：但颁发诏书的时候，邓艾遣散众人，俯首认罪，跟那些为了苟且偷生而作恶的人又有所不同。
English: However, when the edict was issued, Deng Ai dismissed everyone, bowed his head and confessed, which was different from those who committed evil in order to steal a living.

古文：今大赦得还，若无子孙者听使立后，令祭祀不绝。 三年，议郎段灼上疏理艾曰： 艾心怀至忠而荷反逆之名，平定巴蜀而受夷灭之诛，臣窃悼之。
现代文：现在大赦天下可以返回京城，如果没有子孙后代的，可以让他们选定继承人，使得祭祀得以延续。 泰始三年，议郎段灼上疏为邓艾不平说： 邓艾心怀忠诚，却背负叛逆的罪名，平定巴蜀之地，却受到灭族的惩罚，臣私下为他哀悼。
English: Now the general amnesty can return to Beijing, and if there are no descendants, they can be allowed to choose a successor, so that the sacrifice can be continued.In the first three years of the Taizhi era, Deng Ai's vassal, Deng Ai, was burned at the stake, and Deng Ai said: Deng Ai was loyal, but he was charged with treason, he pacified the land of Bashu, but he was punished by the extermination of the tribe, and the vassal privately mourned for him.

古文：惜哉，言艾之反也！艾性刚急，轻犯雅俗，不能协同朋类，故莫肯理之。
现代文：说邓艾谋反实在是很可惜啊，邓艾性情刚烈正直，经常会冒犯众人，不能处理好与朋友的关系，所以没有朋友为他鸣冤。
English: It is a pity to say that Deng Aimou, on the other hand, has a strong and honest temperament, often offends people, and cannot handle relationships with friends, so he has no friends to take revenge for him.

古文：臣敢言艾不反之状。
现代文：臣敢说邓艾并不是谋反。
English: A courtier dared to say that Deng Ai was not plotting a rebellion.

古文：昔姜维有断陇右之志，艾脩治备守，积谷强兵。
现代文：过去，姜维有垄断陇右的野心，邓艾严防死守，储备粮食，训练士兵。
English: In the past, Jiang Wei had the ambition of monopolizing power, while Deng Ai was on the defensive, stockpiling grain and training soldiers.

古文：值岁凶旱，艾为区种，身被乌衣，手执耒耜，以率将士。上下相感，莫不尽力。
现代文：适逢干旱，邓艾推广分区种植的办法穿着布衣拿着工具，率领将士耕田，上下的人都感念他，没有不尽力耕种的。
English: At the time of drought, Deng Ai promoted the method of sub-district planting, wearing cloth and holding tools, leading soldiers to cultivate fields. People at all levels were impressed by him, and no one did not try their best to cultivate.

古文：艾持节守边，所统万数，而不难仆虏之劳，士民之役，非执节忠勤，孰能若此？
现代文：邓艾持符节，守卫边疆，所统率的军队有上万之数，但不将将士百姓的工作看得非常劳累，如果不是尽忠职守，谁能做到这样的地步呢？
English: Deng Ai presided over the Festival of the Rune, guarded the frontiers, and commanded tens of thousands of troops, but he did not regard the work of the soldiers and people as very tiring. If he did not fulfill his duties, who could achieve such a level?

古文：故落门、段谷之战，以少击多，摧破强贼。
现代文：所以落门、段谷两次战役，邓艾以少胜多，攻破了强大的敌军。
English: Therefore, in the two battles of the gate and the valley, Deng Ai won more with less, and defeated the powerful enemy army.

古文：先帝知其可任，委艾庙胜，授以长策。
现代文：先帝知道他可以重用，所以经常召见邓艾制定行军策略，并任命他为将领。
English: The former emperor knew that he could reuse it, so he often summoned Deng Ai to formulate a marching strategy and appointed him as a general.

古文：艾受命忘身，束马县车，自投死地，勇气陵云，士众乘势，使刘禅君臣面缚，叉手屈膝。
现代文：邓艾接受任命之后，把马蹄包裹起来，把车钩牢。然后率军冲入战场，勇气强劲，将士们乘胜追击，让刘禅君主反绑双手，俯首称臣，屈膝投降。
English: After Deng Ai accepted the appointment, he wrapped the horseshoe and hooked the cart tightly. Then he led the army into the battlefield, with strong courage, and the soldiers chased after the victory, so that the Liu Zen monarch tied his hands, bowed his head and bowed his knees in surrender.

古文：艾功名以成，当书之竹帛，传祚万世。
现代文：邓艾功成名就，应当在史书上写下他的功绩，流传万世。
English: As soon as Deng Ai Gong became famous, his exploits should be written down in the history books and passed down for all time.

古文：七十老公，反欲何求！
现代文：七十岁的老人，反叛是为了图谋什么呢？
English: A seventy-year-old man, what is he planning to rebel against?

古文：艾诚恃养育之恩，心不自疑，矫命承制，权安社稷；虽违常科，有合古义，原心定罪，本在可论。
现代文：邓艾确实是仰仗着皇上的恩德，心中没有自我怀疑，实际上是为了安定社稷，虽然违背了常理，但也符合古义，他确实有罪，但追究他的用心还是可以加以商议的。
English: Deng Ai was indeed relying on the emperor's benevolence, there was no self-doubt in his heart, in fact, in order to stabilize the society, although contrary to common sense, but also in line with the ancient meaning, he is indeed guilty, but the pursuit of his intentions can still be discussed.

古文：锺会忌艾威名，构成其事。
现代文：钟会嫉妒邓艾的威名，捏造罪名。
English: Bell jealous of Deng Ai's prestige, trumped up charges.

古文：忠而受诛，信而见疑，头县马巿，诸子并斩，见之者垂泣，闻之者叹息。
现代文：邓艾忠诚，却被诛杀，讲求信义却被怀疑，首级被悬挂在马市，儿子也牵连被杀，见到的人无不流泪，听说的人都感叹不已。
English: Deng Ai was loyal, but he was beaten to death; he asked for loyalty, but was suspected; his head was hung in Ma City; his son was also implicated and killed. Everyone who saw it shed tears, and everyone who heard about it was overwhelmed with emotion.

古文：陛下龙兴，阐弘大度，释诸嫌忌，受诛之家，不拘叙用。
现代文：陛下登基后，发挥宽宏大度的气量，尽释前嫌，被诛杀的人的家人，也给予录用。
English: After His Majesty ascended to the throne, he gave full play to his magnanimity and did his best to release the previous grudge, and the family members of those who were killed were also hired.

古文：昔秦民怜白起之无罪，吴人伤子胥之冤酷，皆为立祠。
现代文：过去秦朝百姓怜悯白起的无辜，吴国百姓感伤伍子胥的冤屈，都为他们建立祠堂。
English: In the past, the people of the Qin Dynasty pitied the innocent, and the people of the State of Wu grieved the grievances of the Wu Zixuan, and both built ancestral halls for them.

古文：今天下民人为艾悼心痛恨，亦犹是也。
现代文：现在天下百姓都为邓艾的冤屈心痛不已，也是这样的情况。
English: Now people all over the world are heartbroken for Deng Ai's grievances, and this is also the case.

古文：臣以为艾身首分离，捐弃草土，宜收尸丧，还其田宅。
现代文：臣认为邓艾身首分离，葬在田野中，应该，为他收尸埋葬，归还他的田产住宅。
English: The vassal thought that Deng Ai's head was separated and buried in the field, and that it was necessary to collect and bury his body and return his farmhouse.

古文：以平蜀之功，绍封其孙，使阖棺定谥，死无馀恨。
现代文：邓艾有平定巴蜀的功劳，应该册封他的后代，让邓艾得以安葬后定好谥号，让死者没有遗憾。
English: Deng Ai has the merit of pacifying Bashu, his descendants should be canonized, so that Deng Ai can be buried and have a good name, so that the dead have no regrets.

古文：赦冤魂于黄泉，收信义于后世，葬一人而天下慕其行，埋一魂而天下归其义，所为者寡而悦者众矣。 
现代文：让九泉之下的冤魂得以赦免，让后代人认为朝廷是讲求信义的，安葬一人，而天下百姓都仰慕朝廷的行为，埋葬一个魂灵，天下都会归顺朝廷道义，这是做的很少，但是高兴的人很多。 
English: Let the unjust souls under the Nine Springs be pardoned, let future generations think that the imperial court is seeking truth and justice, bury one person, and the people all over the world admire the behavior of the imperial court, bury a soul, and the whole world will submit to the moral principles of the imperial court. This is rarely done, but there are many people who are happy.

古文：九年，诏曰： 艾有功勋，受罪不逃刑，而子孙为民隶，朕常愍之。其以嫡孙朗为郎中。 
现代文：泰始九年，皇帝下诏说： 邓艾建立功勋，遭受罪名但不逃脱刑罚，子孙也成为了奴隶，朕经常怜悯他们，现在任命他的嫡孙邓朗为郎中。 
English: In the ninth year of Taizhi, the emperor issued an edict saying: Deng Ai built up merits, suffered crimes but did not escape punishment, and his children and grandchildren also became slaves. I have always pitied them, and now I appoint his legitimate grandson Deng Lang as his junior.

古文：艾在西时，修治障塞，筑起城坞。
现代文：邓艾在西部边境时，整治关塞，修建城堡。
English: When Deng Ai was on the western border, he tidied up the checkpoints and built a castle.

古文：泰始中，羌虏大叛，频杀刺史，凉州道断。
现代文：泰始年中，羌人作乱，频繁杀害刺史，通往凉州的道路断绝。
English: In the first half of the year of Tai, the Xiongnu people made disturbances, frequently killed the Jishi, and the road to Liangzhou was cut off.

古文：吏民安全者，皆保艾所筑坞焉。
现代文：那些活下来的将士百姓，都是依赖邓艾所修筑的堡垒。
English: Those soldiers and civilians who survived were all dependent on the fortress built by Deng Ai.

古文：艾州里时辈南阳州泰，亦好立功业，善用兵，官至征虏将军、假节都督江南诸军事。景元二年薨，追赠卫将军，谥曰壮侯。
现代文：邓艾有一个同龄的同郡人叫州泰，也喜欢建立功业，善于用兵，做官到征虏将军，持符节，督领江南各项军事事宜，在景元二年去世，被追赠为卫将军，谥号为壮侯。
English: Deng Ai had a compatriot of the same age in the same county named Zhu Tai, who also liked to build a career, was good at using soldiers, served as a conscript general, held a sign festival, and supervised various military affairs in the south of the Yangtze River. He died in the second year of Jingyuan, and was posthumously awarded the title of Wei general, and his nickname was Zhuang Hou.

古文：锺会字士季，颍川长社人，太傅繇小子也。
现代文：钟会传，钟会，字士季，颍川长社人。太傅钟繇的幼子。
English: Zhong Hui Chuan, Zhong Hui, Zhi Shi Ji, member of the Qianchuan Presbyterian Church. He was the youngest son of Taifu Zhong Yao.

古文：少敏惠夙成。
现代文：年少的时候就聪慧早成。
English: When I was young, I was very smart.

古文：中护军蒋济著论，谓 观其眸子，足以知人。 
现代文：中护军蒋济著书。说 观察人的眼睛，就足以知道他的为人。 
English: Jiang Jie, a member of the Middle Guards, wrote: "It is enough to look into a person's eyes to know what kind of person he is.

古文：会年五岁，繇遣见济，济甚异之，曰： 非常人也。 
现代文：钟会五岁时，钟繇带着他去见蒋济，蒋济认为他很奇异，说： 这不是常人啊。 
English: When Zhong Hui was five years old, Zhong Hui took him to see Jiang Ji. Jiang Ji thought he was very strange and said, "This is not an ordinary person."

古文：及壮，有才数技艺，而博学精练名理，以夜续昼，由是获声誉。
现代文：等到年长，钟会有很多技艺，并且博学多闻，精通事理，经常夜以继日地学习，因此获得了声誉。
English: When he was older, Bell would have many skills, and he was well-read, well-versed in things, and often studied day and night, so he gained a reputation.

古文：正始中，以为秘书郎，迁尚书中书侍郎。
现代文：正始年间，朝廷任命他为秘书郎，又升任为尚书中书侍郎。
English: At the beginning of the year, the imperial court appointed him secretary, and he was promoted to the position of secretary.

古文：高贵乡公即尊位，赐爵关内侯。
现代文：高贵乡公曹髦即位为帝，赐封他爵位为关内侯。
English: Gao Guixiang Gong Cao Xiang was enthroned as emperor, and he was given the title of Guanai Hou.

古文：毌丘俭作乱，大将军司马景王东征，会从，典知密事，卫将军司马文王为大军后继。
现代文：毋丘俭作乱，大将军司马师东征。钟会跟随，主管机密事宜，卫将军司马昭作为大军的后继部队。
English: No matter how frivolous, the general Sima Shi led the eastward march. The bell association followed, in charge of confidential matters, and the guard general Sima Zhao as the successor force of the army.

古文：景王薨於许昌，文王总统六军，会谋谟帷幄。
现代文：司马师在许昌去世，司马昭总管六军，钟会在军营中出谋划策。
English: Sima Shi died in Xu Chang, Sima Zhao was in charge of the Sixth Army, and the Bell Association made suggestions in the military camp.

古文：时中诏敕尚书傅嘏，以东南新定，权留卫将军屯许昌为内外之援，令嘏率诸军还。
现代文：当时皇帝从宫中发出诏书给尚书傅嘏，觉得东南地区刚刚平定，暂时留下卫将军司马昭驻守许昌，作为内应外援，并命傅嘏率各路人马返回洛阳。
English: At that time, the emperor sent an imperial edict from the palace to Shang Shufu Fu Rong, feeling that the southeastern region had just been pacified, temporarily leaving the guard general Sima Zhao stationed in Xu Chang, as a domestic response to foreign aid, and ordered Fu Rong to lead all the way back to Luoyang.

古文：会与嘏谋，使嘏表上，辄与卫将军俱发，还到雒水南屯住。
现代文：钟会与傅嘏密谋，让傅嘏上奏，随后跟卫将军司马昭一同出发，还军到雒水南驻扎。
English: The bell association conspired with Fu Yao to have Fu Yao play on the bell, and then set off with the guard general Sima Zhao to return to the south of Surabaya.

古文：於是朝廷拜文王为大将军、辅政，会迁黄门侍郎，封东武亭侯，邑三百户。
现代文：于是朝廷任命司马昭为大将军，辅佐朝政，钟会被提升为黄门侍郎，并封为东武亭侯，封邑三百户。
English: As a result, the imperial court appointed Sima Zhao as a general and a top aide to the imperial government, promoted Bell to the position of Yellow Gate chamberlain, and made him the lord of Tobutei, with three hundred fiefs.

古文：甘露二年，徵诸葛诞为司空，时会丧宁在家，策诞必不从命，驰白文王。文王以事已施行，不复追改。
现代文：甘露二年，朝廷征召诸葛诞担任司空，当时钟会正在家守丧，估计诸葛诞一定不会从命，就快马告诉了司马昭，司马昭认为事情已经实行了，就不再更改。
English: Two years later, the imperial court summoned Zhuge Zhao to serve as the steward of the sky. At that time, the clock association was holding a funeral at home. It was estimated that Zhuge Zhao would not follow the order, so he quickly told Sima Zhao. Sima Zhao thought that the matter had already been implemented and would not be changed.

古文：及诞反，车驾住项，文王至寿春，会复从行。
现代文：等到诸葛亮反叛的时候，皇上住在项城，司马昭来到寿春，钟会又再次跟随。
English: When Zhuge Liang rebelled, the emperor lived in Xiangcheng, Sima Zhao came to Shuchun, and the Bell Association followed again.

古文：初，吴大将全琮，孙权之婚亲重臣也，琮子怿、孙静、从子端、翩、缉等，皆将兵来救诞。
现代文：当初东吴的大将全琮，是孙权的姻亲，且是朝中重臣。全琮儿子全怿，孙子全静，从侄全端、全翩、全缉等都率兵来援救诸葛诞。
English: At that time, the general of Dongwu, Quanzhang, was the son-in-law of Sun Quan and a high-ranking official in the court. Quanzhang's son, Quanzhang, and grandson, Quanzhang, as well as his nephews, Quanzhang, Quanzhang, and Quanzhang, all led troops to rescue Zhuge Zi.

古文：怿兄子辉、仪留建业，与其家内争讼，携其母，将部曲数十家渡江，自归文王。
现代文：全怿哥哥的儿子全辉、全仪留在建业，和家中争执，就带着他的母亲，率领数十名部将渡江前去去归顺司马昭。
English: Quanzhang's brother's sons, Quanhui and Quanzhi, stayed in Jianye and quarreled with the family, so they took his mother and led dozens of ministers to cross the river to return to Shunshi Ma Zhao.

古文：会建策，密为辉、仪作书，使辉、仪所亲信赍入城告怿等，说吴中怒怿等不能拔寿春，欲尽诛诸将家，故逃来归命。
现代文：钟会设计，暗中为全辉、全仪写信，派全辉、全仪的亲信拿着信到城内报告全怿等，说东吴的朝廷对全怿等人不能攻克寿春很愤怒，要将众位将领的家属全部诛杀，所以才渡江前来归顺司马昭。
English: He secretly wrote a letter for Quan Hui and Quan Yi, sent Quan Hui and Quan Yi's close confidants to take the letter to the city to report to Quan Yu, saying that the court of Eastern Wu was very angry that Quan Yu and others could not defeat Shuchun, and wanted to kill all the families of the generals, so he crossed the river to return to Shun Sima Zhao.

古文：怿等恐惧，遂将所领开东城门出降，皆蒙封宠，城中由是乖离。
现代文：全怿等人都很惊恐，就带领着所率领的士兵打开东城门出城投降，都受到了封赏恩宠，城中的诸葛诞从此背离东吴。
English: Quanzhang and the others were very frightened, so they led the soldiers led by Wu to open the East City Gate and surrender. They all received the blessing of the award. Zhuge in the city has since departed from Dongwu.

古文：寿春之破，会谋居多，亲待日隆，时人谓之子房。
现代文：寿春得以攻破，钟会的谋划很多，司马昭对待他越来越亲近，当时的人都称他为张良。
English: Shuchun was defeated, there was a lot of planning by the bell association, Sima Zhao treated him more and more closely, and people at that time called him Zhang Liang.

古文：军还，迁为太仆，固辞不就。
现代文：大军返回洛阳后，钟会被提升为太仆，他坚决推辞，没有上任。
English: After the large army returned to Luoyang, Zhong Xuan was promoted to the position of eunuch, but he resolutely refused and did not take up the post.

古文：以中郎在大将军府管记室事，为腹心之任。
现代文：随后以中郎的身份在大将军府任记室，作为司马昭的心腹。
English: Subsequently, he was appointed to the records office of the general's office as a middle-ranking official, serving as Sima Zhao's confidant.

古文：以讨诸葛诞功，进爵陈侯，屡让不受。
现代文：因为征讨诸葛诞的功劳，钟会被晋升爵位为陈侯，他多次推辞，没有接受封赏。
English: Because of the merit of soliciting Zhuge, the bell was promoted to the knighthood of Chen Hou. He repeatedly declined and did not accept the award.

古文：诏曰： 会典综军事，参同计策，料敌制胜，有谋谟之勋，而推宠固让，辞指款实，前后累重，志不可夺。
现代文：皇帝下诏说： 钟会参与军事，协同谋划，能预料敌人出奇制胜，有着贡献谋略的功绩，却推辞封赏，言辞恳切，前后多次推让，志向不能改变。
English: The emperor issued an edict saying: The bell society participated in the military, cooperated in planning, could predict the enemy's surprise victory, and had the merit of contributing to the strategy, but refused the award, the words were earnest, and made concessions many times before and after, and the ambition could not be changed.

古文：夫成功不处，古人所重，其听会所执，以成其美。 
现代文：有功绩却不自傲的人，是古人所敬重的，现在还是听从钟会的意向以成全他的美德。 
English: The man of merit, but not of pride, who was esteemed by the ancients, still obeys the will of the clock to perfect his virtue.

古文：迁司隶校尉。虽在外司，时政损益，当世与夺，无不综典。嵇康等见诛，皆会谋也。
现代文：钟会被调任为司隶校尉，虽然他在朝廷之外，但当时朝政的得失利害，官员的任免，钟会没有不掌管的，嵇康等人被杀，都是他的计谋。
English: He was appointed by the Bell Association as a lieutenant of the Sili. Although he was outside the imperial court, the gains and losses of the imperial government at that time, the appointment and dismissal of officials, the control of the Bell Association, and the killing of Shikang and others were all his schemes.

古文：文王以蜀大将姜维屡扰边陲，料蜀国小民疲，资力单竭，欲大举图蜀。
现代文：司马昭因为蜀国大将姜维多次侵扰边境，想到蜀国地方狭小，百姓疲惫，势单力薄，想要大举出兵征讨蜀国。
English: Sima Zhao, thinking of the small size of Shu, the tiredness of the people, and the weakness of the local forces, wanted to send out a large number of soldiers to attack Shu because the general of Shu, Jiang Wei, had repeatedly invaded the border.

古文：惟会亦以为蜀可取，豫共筹度地形，考论事势。
现代文：钟会也认为蜀国可以攻打，就预先共同筹划，考察地形，谈论形势。
English: The Bell Association also believed that Shu Province could be attacked, so they planned together in advance, examined the terrain, and discussed the situation.

古文：景元三年冬，以会为镇西将军、假节都督关中诸军事。
现代文：景元三年冬天，朝廷任命钟会为镇西将军，持符节督领关中各项军事事宜。
English: In the winter of the third year of the Jingyuan era, the imperial court appointed Zhonghui as the general of Zhenxi, and he was in charge of all military affairs in Zhengzhou.

古文：文王敕青、徐、兖、豫、荆、扬诸州，并使作船，又令唐咨作浮海大船，外为将伐吴者。
现代文：司马昭下令青州、徐州、豫州、兖州、荆州、扬州等城都建造船只，又命令唐咨建造航海用的大船，为讨伐东吴作准备。
English: Sima Zhao ordered the cities of Qingzhou, Xuzhou, Yuzhou, Zhangzhou, Jingzhou, and Yangzhou to build ships, and ordered Tang Zi to build large ships for navigation to prepare for the crusade against Dongwu.

古文：四年秋，乃下诏使邓艾、诸葛绪各统诸军三万馀人，艾趣甘松、沓中连缀维，绪趣武街、桥头绝维归路。会统十馀万众，分从斜谷、骆谷入。先命牙门将许仪在前治道，会在后行，而桥穿，马足陷，於是斩仪。
现代文：景元四年秋天，朝廷下诏派邓艾、诸葛绪各统领各军三万多人，邓艾奔向甘松、沓中牵制姜维，诸葛绪进逼武街、桥头，断绝姜维的退路，钟会统率十几万军队，分别从斜谷、骆谷进入，先派牙门将许仪在前面开路，钟会在后面跟行，但出现桥塌，马腿陷落的状况，钟会就斩杀了许仪。
English: In the autumn of the 4th year of the Jingyuan, the imperial court sent Deng Ai and Zhuge Xu, each of whom commanded more than 30,000 troops. Deng Ai ran to Guanzhong and Shizhong to restrain Jiang Wei, Zhuge Xu went to Qiwu Street and Qiaotou to cut off Jiang Wei's escape route, and the Bell Association led more than 100,000 troops to enter from Xizhou Valley and Luohu Valley respectively. They first sent the gatekeeper Xu Yi to open the road in front, and the Bell Association followed behind, but when the bridge collapsed and the horse's leg fell, the Bell Association killed Xu Yi.

古文：仪者，许褚之子，有功王室，犹不原贷。诸军闻之，莫不震竦。
现代文：许仪是许褚的儿子，曾对朝廷有功劳，尚且没有受到宽恕，各军将士得知后，没有不震惊耸动的。
English: Xu Yi was the son of Xu Xi. He had been of great service to the imperial court, yet he had not been pardoned. When the generals and soldiers learned of this, they were shocked and moved.

古文：蜀令诸围皆不得战，退还汉、乐二城守。
现代文：蜀国命令各城守军都不能与魏军交战，退回到汉城、乐城固守。
English: Shu ordered the defenders of each city not to engage the Wei army, but to retreat to Seoul and hold fast to Lecheng.

古文：魏兴太守刘钦趣子午谷，诸军数道平行，至汉中。
现代文：魏兴太守刘钦向子午谷转移，各军沿着几条道路并行，到达汉中。
English: Liu Qin, Wei Xing's eunuch, moved to Zi Wu Valley, and the armies marched along several roads in parallel to reach Hanzhong.

古文：蜀监军王含守乐城，护军蒋斌守汉城，兵各五千。
现代文：蜀国监军王含守卫乐城，护军蒋斌守卫汉城，各率领五千士兵。
English: Wang Han, the military governor of Shu, guarded Lecheng, and Jiang Bin, the military protector, guarded Seoul, each leading five thousand soldiers.

古文：会使护军荀恺、前将军李辅各统万人，恺围汉城，辅围乐城。
现代文：钟会派护军荀恺、前将军李辅各率领一万多人马，荀恺围攻汉城，李辅围攻乐城。
English: The bell association dispatched more than ten thousand soldiers to escort the troops, led by the former general Li Fuxiong, to besiege Seoul, and Li Fuxiong besieged the city of Le.

古文：会径过，西出阳安口，遣人祭诸葛亮之墓。
现代文：钟会率军直行，从阳安口出发，派人祭扫诸葛亮的坟墓。
English: The bell association led the army straight, starting from the Yang'an exit, and sent people to sweep Zhuge Liang's grave.

古文：使护军胡烈等行前，攻破关城，得库藏积谷。
现代文：并派护军胡烈等人在军前开路，攻破了关城，得到城中府库的储备粮食。
English: He also sent the escort Hu Lie and others to open the way ahead of the army, broke through Guancheng, and obtained the reserve grain from the government warehouse in the city.

古文：姜维自沓中还，至阴平，合集士众，欲赴关城。
现代文：姜维从沓中回军，到了阴平，集合士兵百姓，想要奔赴关城。
English: Jiang Wei returned to the army from Shizhong and went to Yinping to gather soldiers and civilians and wanted to rush to Guancheng.

古文：未到，闻其已破，退趣白水，与蜀将张翼、廖化等合守剑阁拒会。会移檄蜀将吏士民曰：
现代文：还没有到达，得知关城已被攻破，就退回到白水城，跟蜀国将领张翼、廖化等人共同戍守剑阁，抗击钟会，钟会向蜀国的将士百姓发布檄文说：
English: He had not yet arrived, but when he learned that Guancheng had been breached, he retreated to Baishuicheng, and together with the Shu generals Zhang Ying and Liao Hua jointly guarded Jiange, resisting the Bell Association. The Bell Association issued a message to the soldiers and people of Shu, saying:

古文：往者汉祚衰微，率土分崩，生民之命，几于泯灭。太祖武皇帝神武圣哲，拨乱反正，拯其将坠，造我区夏。
现代文：从前汉代国势衰微，国家分崩离析，老百姓处于水深火热中，太祖武皇帝曹操拨乱反正，拯救濒临颓危的百姓，恢复天下安宁。
English: Once upon a time, in the Han Dynasty, the country was in decline, the country was falling apart, and the people were in a desperate situation. Emperor Cao Cao, the great-grandfather of all emperors, set things right, saved the endangered people, and restored peace to the world.

古文：高祖文皇帝应天顺民，受命践阼。
现代文：高祖文皇帝曹丕顺应天意，顺乎民心，登基称帝。
English: Emperor Cao Pi ascended to the throne in accordance with the will of heaven and the will of the people.

古文：烈祖明皇帝奕世重光，恢拓洪业。
现代文：烈祖明皇帝重光伟业，拓展功绩。
English: Emperor Ming, the founder of the Ming Dynasty, re-emphasized his great achievements and expanded his exploits.

古文：然江山之外，异政殊俗，率土齐民未蒙王化，此三祖所以顾怀遗恨也。
现代文：但我疆域之外，有与我不同的政治和风俗，那里的天地百姓没有沐浴到浩荡的皇恩德泽。
English: But outside my territory, there are different politics and customs from mine, and the people of the world and the people there have not been bathed in the vastness of the Emperor Ndeze.

古文：今主上圣德钦明，绍隆前绪，宰辅忠肃明允，劬劳王室，布政垂惠而万邦协和，施德百蛮而肃慎致贡。
现代文：这是我们三位圣祖甚感遗憾的事。而今皇帝宽宏大量，要继承发扬前代的业绩；辅佐大臣忠心耿耿，效力皇室，安排政事，流惠百姓，所以各地得以调和一致。对那些少数民族施以圣德，他们都来归顺。
English: This is a matter of great regret for our three holy ancestors. Today, the emperor is magnanimous and wants to inherit and carry forward the achievements of the previous generation; the assistant minister is loyal, serves the royal family, arranges government affairs, and benefits the people, so all regions can be reconciled. If you sanctify those ethnic minorities, they will all come to submit.

古文：悼彼巴蜀，独为匪民，愍此百姓，劳役未已。
现代文：可怜你们巴蜀士众，难道你们不是人民吗？同情那里的人民，他们服役终身，无休无止。
English: Have pity on you, people of Bashu, are you not the people? Have pity on the people there, they serve for life, endlessly.

古文：是以命授六师，龚行天罚，征西、雍州、镇西诸军，五道并进。
现代文：因此命令大军，奉行天意，惩罚那些对朝廷有二心的人。征西将军、雍州刺史、镇西将军等率五路大兵，齐头并进。
English: Therefore, he ordered the great army to follow the will of heaven and punish those who had double-mindedness towards the imperial court. General Qixi, General Yongzhou Zhishi, General Zhenxi and other generals led the five-way soldiers and marched side by side.

古文：古之行军，以仁为本，以义治之；王者之师，有征无战；故虞舜舞干戚而服有苗，周武有散财、发廪、表闾之义。
现代文：古代行军，以仁义作根本，以仁义治理军队。帝王的军队，有征无战。所以，虞舜修文教，有苗臣服；周武王灭掉商朝，分散鹿台的资财，打开矩桥的仓库，表彰商朝贤臣。
English: The ancient marches were based on benevolence and righteousness, and the army was governed by benevolence and righteousness. The emperor's army had no war without conscription. Therefore, the state of Yunnan was cultivating literature and education, and there were young vassals; King Zhou Wu eliminated the merchant dynasty, dispersed the wealth of Lutetia, opened the warehouse of Momobiao, and commended the merchant dynasty's wise men.

古文：今镇西奉辞衔命，摄统戎重，庶弘文告之训，以济元元之命，非欲穷武极战，以快一朝之政，故略陈安危之要，其敬听话言。
现代文：而今镇西将军奉命征讨，统率大军，解救老百姓的生命，并不是炫耀武力，好大喜功，以光大当朝的政绩。所以在此为你们大略陈述一下安危，请敬听善意的劝告。
English: And now, General Zhenxi has been ordered to collect and lead a large army to save the lives of the people. This is not a show of force, but a great celebration of the achievements of the government of that time. Therefore, here is a brief description of the safety and security for you. Please listen to the good advice.

古文：益州先主以命世英才，兴兵朔野，困踬冀、徐之郊，制命绍、布之手，太祖拯而济之，与隆大好。
现代文：益州先主刘备以著名的雄才伟略，在原野起兵，被困在冀州、徐州的郊外，被袁绍、吕布牵制，我朝太祖武皇帝曹操援救了他，并与他关系密切。
English: Liu Bei, the forefather of Yizhou, was famous for his brilliant strategy. He raised an army in the wilderness and was trapped in the suburbs of Jizhou and Xuzhou. He was held back by Yuan Shao and Lv Bu. Emperor Cao Cao, the forefather of our dynasty, rescued him and had a close relationship with him.

古文：中更背违，弃同即异，诸葛孔明仍规秦川，姜伯约屡出陇右，劳动我边境，侵扰我氐、羌，方国家多故，未遑修九伐之征也。
现代文：但中途违背约定，与太祖意见相左，诸葛亮还是驻守秦川，而姜伯约则多次出兵陇右，进犯我朝边境，侵扰我国氐、羌族百姓。正是国家变故多的时候，没有时间征讨。
English: However, he broke the agreement halfway through and had a different opinion from the great-grandfather. Zhuge Liang was still stationed at Qin River, while Jiang Boyo repeatedly sent troops to the right and attacked the Korean border, disturbing the Korean and Yi people in China. It was a time when there were many changes in the country, and there was no time to discuss.

古文：今边境乂清，方内无事，畜力待时，并兵一向，而巴蜀一州之众，分张守备，难以御天下之师。
现代文：现在边境已经肃清，国内无事，正在积蓄力量，等待时机，共同出兵，而巴蜀不过只有一个州的兵力，又分散守卫，难以抵抗朝廷大军。
English: Now that the border has been cleared and there is nothing going on in the country, they are gathering strength, waiting for the right time to send troops together, while Bashu only has the military strength of one state, and guards are scattered, making it difficult to resist the imperial army.

古文：段谷、侯和沮伤之气，难以敌堂堂之陈。
现代文：在段谷、侯和。
English: In Duanyi, Houhe.

古文：比年以来，曾无宁岁，征夫勤瘁，难以当子来之民。此皆诸贤所亲见也。
现代文：已经挫伤他们的锐气，难以抵抗朝廷大军，近年以来巴蜀没有太平的年岁，士兵疲惫不堪，很难抵挡我朝协同一心的军队，这是众位贤人都能亲眼看到的。
English: It is difficult to resist the imperial army. Bashu has not been peaceful in recent years, and the soldiers are exhausted. It is difficult to resist the army with the same heart of the Korean People's Army, which all the sages can see with their own eyes.

古文：蜀相壮见禽於秦，公孙述授首于汉，九州之险，是非一姓。此皆诸贤所备闻也。
现代文：蜀国的丞相陈壮被秦捉拿，公孙述被吴汉所杀，天下的险要地区，并不是某一姓氏的统治者能长久控制的，这些也是你们所得知的。
English: Chen Zhuang, the prime minister of Shu, was captured by the Qin, Gongsun Su was killed by the Wu Han, and it is not possible for a ruler with a certain surname to control important regions of the world for a long time, as you also know.

古文：明者见危于无形，智者规祸于未萌，是以微子去商，长为周宾，陈平背项，立功于汉。
现代文：鲜明的人能在没有显露的时候遇见危险睿智的人，能在没有萌芽的时候防止灾祸。所以微子离开了商朝，是周朝长期的宾客，陈平背离了项羽，在汉朝立下功劳。
English: Clear-sighted people can meet dangerous sages when they are not revealed, and can prevent disasters when they have not sprouted. Therefore, Weizi left the Shang Dynasty and was a long-term guest of the Zhou Dynasty. Chen Ping deviated from Xiang Yu and made contributions to the Han Dynasty.

古文：岂晏安鸩毒，怀禄而不变哉？
现代文：你们偏安一隅，像饮下鸩毒一样，难道能只想用蜀国的愤怒而不改变吗？
English: You have been lulled into complacency, as if you had drunk poison, can you just use the wrath of Shu and not change?

古文：今国朝隆天覆之恩，宰辅弘宽恕之德，先惠后诛，好生恶杀。
现代文：现在朝廷给予天大的恩德，大臣们怀着宽恕的仁德，先投降的人给予恩惠，后投降的被诛杀，但朝廷喜欢宽恕，厌恶杀戮。
English: At present, the imperial court bestows great bounty, and the ministers act with the benevolence of forgiveness. Those who surrender first are granted favors, and those who surrender later are killed. However, the imperial court likes to forgive and abhors killing.

古文：往者吴将孙壹举众内附，位为上司，宠秩殊异。
现代文：过去东吴的将领孙壹率队向朝廷归顺，结果被封为高官，恩宠和俸禄都很优异。
English: In the past, Sun Yat-sen, the general of Eastern Wu, led a team to submit to the imperial court. As a result, he was appointed as a high-ranking official. His grace and salary were excellent.

古文：文钦、唐咨为国大害，叛主仇贼，还为戎首。
现代文：文钦、唐咨是国家的大祸害，背叛主上，成为贼人首脑。
English: Wenqin and Tangzhi are the great scourge of the country, betraying the Lord and becoming the heads of thieves.

古文：咨困逼禽获，钦二子还降，皆将军、封侯；咨与闻国事。壹等穷踧归命，犹加盛宠，况巴蜀贤知见机而作者哉！
现代文：唐咨在围困中被擒获，文钦的两个儿子投降，都被封为将军或公侯；唐咨还参与国事，孙壹等人穷途末路归顺朝廷，朝廷依然给予盛大的恩宠，更何况是巴蜀地区那些能预见时机的贤人们呢？
English: Tangzhe was captured in the siege, Wenqin's two sons surrendered and were both named as generals or princes; Tangzhe still participated in state affairs, Sun Yi and others surrendered to the imperial court in the last resort, and the imperial court still gave great grace, not to mention the sages in Bashu region who could foresee the opportunity?

古文：诚能深鉴成败，邈然高蹈，投迹微子之踪，错身陈平之轨，则福同古人，庆流来裔，百姓士民，安堵旧业，农不易亩，巿不回肆，去累卵之危，就永安之福，岂不美与！
现代文：如果能明察成败，远来投靠，追随微子的步伐，效仿陈平的做法，那福气就会和古人一样，也会给后人带来福分，百姓士人，安居旧业，农田不荒废，市场不更改，远离紧急的危险，造就长久的福分，这不也是一件美事吗？
English: If you can clearly observe the success and failure, come from afar, follow the pace of the microbe, and follow the practice of Chen Ping, then the blessing will be the same as the ancients, and it will also bring blessings to future generations. People and scholars, live in peace and tranquility, farmland is not abandoned, the market does not change, away from the urgent danger, and create long-term blessings. Isn't this also a beautiful thing?

古文：若偷安旦夕，迷而不反，大兵一发，玉石皆碎，虽欲悔之，亦无及已。其详择利害，自求多福，各具宣布，咸使闻知。
现代文：如果一朝之间苟且偷安，迷途却不知返，我朝大军一旦出军，那就会玉石皆碎，到时候即使想要后悔也来不及了，希望你们谨慎的选择其中的利害关系，自求多福，请互相转告，使大家都得知这个情况。 
English: If you try to steal peace from one day to the next, but lose your way and never return, once our great army goes out, all the stones will be broken. At that time, even if you want to regret it, it will be too late. I hope you will carefully choose the interests involved and seek blessings for yourselves. Please tell each other so that everyone knows about this situation.

古文：邓艾追姜维到阴平，简选精锐，欲从汉德阳入江由、左儋道诣绵竹，趣成都，与诸葛绪共行。
现代文：邓艾追击姜维到了阴平，选取精锐部队，想要从汉德南面进入江由、左栈道，直到绵竹，进逼成都，和诸葛绪一起出兵。
English: Deng Ai chased Jiang Wei to Yinping, selected elite troops, and wanted to enter the Yangtze River from the south of Hande, the left embankment road, until Mianzhu, enter Chengdu, and send troops together with Zhugexu.

古文：绪以本受节度邀姜维，西行非本诏，遂进军前向白水，与会合。会遣将军田章等从剑阁西，径出江由。未至百里，章先破蜀伏兵三校，艾使章先登。
现代文：诸葛旭绪原本受命拦截姜维，往西进军并不是朝廷的命令，姜维往前进军，到了白水，跟钟会会合，钟会派遣将军田章等人从剑阁的西面径直行往江由，行进没有到一百里，田章先攻破了西蜀伏击的三个营垒，邓艾派田章先行登城。
English: Zhuge Xuxu was originally ordered to intercept Jiang Wei. The westward march was not ordered by the imperial court. Jiang Wei marched to the advancing army, arrived at Baishui, and met with the Bell Association. The Bell Association dispatched General Tian Zhang and others from the west of Jiange straight to Jiangyu. The march did not reach one hundred miles. Tian Zhang first broke through the three camps of the West Shu ambush, and Deng Ai sent Tian Zhang to the city first.

古文：遂长驱而前。
现代文：然后率大军前行。
English: Then he led a large army forward.

古文：会与绪军向剑阁，会欲专军势，密白绪畏懦不进，槛车徵还。
现代文：钟会和诸葛绪的部队直奔剑阁，钟会想要专揽军事，暗中上告朝廷说诸葛绪畏懦不敢前进，朝廷下诏用囚车将诸葛绪带回京城。
English: The bell association and Zhugexu's troops headed straight for Jiange. The bell association wanted to specialize in military affairs and secretly appealed to the imperial court that Zhugexu was afraid to advance. The imperial court ordered Zhugexu to be taken back to Beijing in a prison van.

古文：军悉属会，进攻剑阁，不克，引退，蜀军保险拒守。
现代文：军队都听从钟会的命令，进攻剑阁没有攻克，钟会率军撤退，蜀军占据天险据守。
English: The army all obeyed the order of the Bell Association, the attack on Jiange was not defeated, the Bell Association led the army to retreat, and the Shu army occupied the natural peril.

古文：艾遂至绵竹，大战，斩诸葛瞻。
现代文：邓艾就率军到了绵竹，两军交战，邓艾斩杀了诸葛瞻。
English: Deng Ai led the army to Mianzhu, the two armies fought, and Deng Ai killed Zhuge Zhan.

古文：维等闻瞻巳破，率其众东入于巴。
现代文：姜维等人得知诸葛瞻已被攻破，就率领他的部队东行进入巴西郡。
English: When Jiang Wei and others learned that Zhuge Zhan had been defeated, he led his troops eastward into the Brazil County.

古文：会乃进军至涪，遣胡烈、田续、庞会等追维。
现代文：钟会就进军到了涪县，派胡烈、田续、庞惠等人追击姜维。
English: The Bell Association marched into Handan County and sent Hu Lie, Tian Zhuo, Pang Hui and others to pursue Jiang Wei.

古文：艾进军向成都，刘禅诣艾降，遣使敕维等令降于会。
现代文：邓艾向成都进军，刘禅到邓艾营中请求投降，并派遣使者告诉姜维等人，让他们向钟会投降。
English: Deng Ai marched to Chengdu, Liu Zen went to Deng Ai's camp to request surrender, and sent an envoy to tell Jiang Wei and others to surrender to the Bell Association.

古文：维至广汉郪县，令兵悉放器仗，送节传於胡烈，便从东道诣会降。
现代文：姜维行至广汉妻阝县，让士兵们放下武器，并将自己的符节送给胡烈，随后从东道长钟会投降。
English: Jiang Wei went to Tsumago County, Guanghan Province, and asked the soldiers to lay down their weapons, and gave his rune festival to Hu Lie, and then surrendered from the host Long Bell Association.

古文：会上言曰： 贼姜维、张翼、廖化、董厥等逃死遁走，欲趣成都。
现代文：钟会上书说： 姜维、张翼、廖化、董厥等人冒死逃走，想要直奔成都。
English: Zhong Shangshuo wrote: Jiang Wei, Zhang Ying, Liao Hua, Dong Jue and others risked their lives to escape and wanted to go straight to Chengdu.

古文：臣辄遣司马夏侯咸、护军胡烈等，经从剑阁，出新都、大渡截其前，参军爰青彡、将军句安等蹑其后，参军皇甫闿、将军王买等从涪南出冲其腹，臣据涪县为东西势援。
现代文：臣就派遣司马夏侯咸，护军胡烈等人，取道剑阁，赶到新都、大渡，在他们前面拦截，参军受爰青彡、将军句安等人在后追击，参军皇甫閏、将军王买等从涪县南面进攻敌人腹地，臣就据守涪县做为他们东西面的援救。
English: The vassal sent Sima Xia, Hou Xian, the escort Hu Lai and others to take the road of Jiange, rushed to Xindu and Dadu, intercepted in front of them, joined the army and was pursued by Zou Qingqi, General Guan An and others, joined the army and was attacked the enemy's hinterland from the south of Zou County, and the vassal relied on the guard of Zou County to rescue them from the east to the west.

古文：维等所统步骑四五万人，擐甲厉兵，塞川填谷，数百里中首尾相继，凭恃其众，方轨而西。
现代文：姜维所率领的步兵骑兵四五万人，装备精良，塞川填谷，沿着川谷几百里间首尾相连，依仗人多势众，沿着路往西行。
English: Led by Jiang Wei, the infantry and cavalry of 450,000 men, well-equipped, filled the valley of the Sai River, and were connected end-to-end along the valley for hundreds of miles, relying on a large number of people and moving west along the road.

古文：臣敕咸、闿等令分兵据势，广张罗罔，南杜走吴之道，西塞成都之路，北绝越逸之径，四面云集，首尾并进，蹊路断绝，走伏无地。
现代文：我命令夏侯咸、皇甫閏等分兵拒守，各占据有利地形，南边堵住逃亡吴国的道路，西面堵塞前往成都的道路，往北断绝各条小路，四面包抄，首尾进军，断绝他的退路，使他无路可走。
English: I ordered the detachments of Xia Houxian, Wang Fuxi and others to hold out, each occupying a favorable terrain, blocking the escape route to Wuzhou in the south, blocking the road to Chengdu in the west, cutting off all the small roads to the north, and marching in four directions to cut off his escape route and make him have no way to go.

古文：臣又手书申喻，开示生路，群寇困逼，知命穷数尽，解甲投戈，面缚委质，印绶万数，资器山积。
现代文：我又手写告示并发布，向他们指示生路，敌军困顿，知道气数已尽，就解下盔甲放下兵器，双手反绑前来投降，收缴印信上万之数，武器和战利品堆积如山。
English: I also wrote a handwritten notice and published it, instructing them on how to survive. The enemy troops were in trouble, and knowing that their time was up, they took off their armor, put down their weapons, tied their hands behind their backs, came to surrender, collected tens of thousands of printed letters, and piled up mountains of weapons and booty.

古文：昔舜舞干戚，有苗自服；牧野之师，商旅倒戈：有征无战，帝王之盛业。
现代文：过去虞舜宣扬教化，有苗氏自行前来臣服；周武王在牧野讨伐纣王，商朝军队反戈相向，有征讨的形势但不必征战，是帝王的伟业。
English: In the past, Gu Yao preached enlightenment, and the Miao clan came to submit on their own; King Zhou Wu led a crusade against King Yao in Makino, and the Shang and Korean armies fought against each other. There was a situation of conscription, but there was no need to go to war. This was the emperor's great cause.

古文：全国为上，破国次之；全军为上，破军次之：用兵之令典。
现代文：保全国家是上策，攻破敌国是下策，攻破敌军又是下下策，这是行军打仗的道理。
English: Safeguarding the country is the best strategy, defeating the enemy country is the next best strategy, and defeating the enemy army is the next best strategy. This is the reason for marching to fight.

古文：陛下圣德，侔踪前代，翼辅忠明，齐轨公旦，仁育群生，义征不譓，殊俗向化，无思不服，师不逾时，兵不血刃，万里同风，九州共贯。
现代文：陛下圣明，追随前代的踪迹，辅佐的大臣们也忠厚贤明，与周公旦等同。陛下惠泽天下万民，征讨不义之人，偏远地区的百姓也向往朝廷教化，没有不心悦诚服的。大军出征，不超过预定时间，敌军不需要战斗也被攻破，万里之地，九州地区，都一样仰望朝廷盛德。
English: His Majesty Shengming, following in the footsteps of his predecessors, and the ministers assisting him are also loyal and wise, the same as Zhou Gongdan. His Majesty benefits all the people in the world, solicits those who are unjust, and the people in remote areas also yearn to be enlightened by the imperial court, and there is no one who is not pleased and sincere. A large army goes to war, does not exceed the scheduled time, the enemy army does not need to fight and is defeated, and the land of a thousand miles, the Kyushu region, all look up to the imperial court.

古文：臣辄奉宣诏命，导扬恩化，复其社稷，安其闾伍，舍其赋调，弛其征役，训之德礼以移其风，示之轨仪以易其俗，百姓欣欣，人怀逸豫，后来其苏，义无以过。 
现代文：臣就奉诏宣导，向百姓宣扬教化，恢复王道，安抚将士，免除他们的赋税征调，松缓他们的徭役，用文德教化以转变他们的风俗，向他们展示礼以转变教化，百姓欢欣，心中安定，希望能没有过错。 
English: The minister preached according to the edict, preached enlightenment to the people, restored the royal way, appeased the generals, exempted them from taxation and transfer, relaxed their guard duty, used literary and moral enlightenment to change their customs, showed them courtesy to change enlightenment, and the people were happy, stable in their hearts, and hoped that there would be no fault.

古文：会于是禁检士众不得钞略，虚己诱纳，以接蜀之群司，与维情好欢甚。
现代文：钟会就训导将士，下令不许抢夺百姓，虚心招揽，以安抚蜀地官员，并且和姜维的关系很好。
English: The Bell Association trained soldiers, ordered not to rob the people, humbly solicited to appease Shu officials, and had a good relationship with Jiang Wei.

古文：十二月诏曰： 会所向摧弊，前无强敌，缄制众城，罔罗迸逸。
现代文：十二月，皇帝下诏说： 钟会率军所到之地，战无不胜，控制各城，并网罗各地将领。
English: In December, the emperor issued an imperial edict saying, "Wherever Zhong Hui leads the army, he will be invincible, control all cities, and capture all generals.

古文：蜀之豪帅，面缚归命，谋无遗策，举无废功。凡所降诛，动以万计，全胜独克，有征无战。
现代文：蜀地的大将，都反绑双手前来投降。钟会制定计划周全，所以做事没有徒劳无功的。被诛杀的敌军，共有一万之数，战无不胜，出军征讨，但不需要战斗。
English: The generals of Shu all came to surrender with their hands tied behind their backs. The bell ringers had a well-thought-out plan, so nothing was done in vain. A total of ten thousand enemy troops were killed, they were invincible, they went out to fight, but they didn't need to fight.

古文：拓平西夏，方隅清晏。其以会为司徒，进封县侯，增邑万户。
现代文：平定巴蜀地区，边疆安定无事，现在任命钟会为司徒，进封爵位为县侯，增加封邑一万户。
English: The Bashu region was pacified, and the frontier was stable. Now, the bell association is appointed as the sutra, the county magistrate is knighted, and the number of fiefdoms is increased by 10,000.

古文：封子二人亭侯，邑各千户。 
现代文：封他的两个儿子为亭侯，封地各一千户。 
English: He made his two sons princes, each with a fief of a thousand households.

古文：会内有异志，因邓艾承制专事，密白艾有反状，於是诏书槛车徵艾。
现代文：钟会怀有二心，因为邓艾奉命办事，独断专权，他就暗中上告邓艾有谋反的情况。
English: Zhong Hui was of two minds. Because Deng Ai acted under orders and had absolute power, he secretly accused Deng Ai of plotting a rebellion.

古文：司马文王惧艾或不从命，敕会并进军成都，监军卫瓘在会前行，以文王手笔令宣喻艾军，艾军皆释仗，遂收艾入槛车。
现代文：于是皇帝下令用囚车将邓艾带回京城，司马昭担心邓艾不服从命令，就让钟会一同进军成都，让将军卫馞在军前前行，并带着司马昭手写的命令，宣告邓艾的部队，邓艾的部队都放下武器，并将邓艾押进囚车内。
English: As a result, the emperor ordered that Deng Ai be taken back to Beijing in a prison wagon. Sima Zhao was worried that Deng Ai would not obey the order, so he let the bell association march into Chengdu together, let General Wei Wei march in front of the army, and took Sima Zhao's handwritten order to announce Deng Ai's troops, Deng Ai's troops all laid down their weapons, and forced Deng Ai into the prison wagon.

古文：会所惮惟艾，艾既禽而会寻至，独统大众，威震西土。自谓功名盖世，不可复为人下，加猛将锐卒皆在己手，遂谋反。
现代文：钟会所忌惮的只有邓艾，邓艾既然被擒获，钟会立即赶到成都，独自统帅大军，威震西蜀，钟会自认为功绩盖世，不愿再为人臣子，再加上精良将领，精锐士兵已在自己手上，于是起兵反叛。
English: Only Deng Ai was feared by the Bell Club. Since Deng Ai was captured, the Bell Club immediately rushed to Chengdu to single-handedly command a large army, overwhelming Xishu. The Bell Club believed that their achievements would be immortalized, and did not want to be a vassal again. In addition, they already had excellent generals and elite soldiers in their hands, so they rebelled.

古文：欲使姜维等皆将蜀兵出斜谷，会自将大众随其后。既至长安，令骑士从陆道，步兵从水道顺流浮渭入河，以为五日可到孟津，与骑会洛阳，一旦天下可定也。
现代文：他想派姜维等人带领西蜀部队出兵斜谷，钟会自己带领大军紧随其后，到了长安以后，钟会下令骑兵走陆路，步兵走水路，顺着渭水进入黄河，认为五天就可以到达孟津，跟骑兵部队在洛阳会合，很快就能平定天下。
English: He wanted to send Jiang Wei and others to lead the West Shu troops to send troops to the valley, and Zhong Hui himself led a large army to follow. After arriving in Chang'an, Zhong Hui ordered the cavalry to take the land route, the infantry to take the water route, and follow the water into the Yellow River. He thought that he could reach Mengjin in five days, meet with the cavalry troops in Luoyang, and soon be able to pacify the world.

古文：会得文王书云： 恐邓艾或不就徵，今遣中护军贾充将步骑万人径入斜谷，屯乐城，吾自将十万屯长安，相见在近。 
现代文：钟会得到司马昭的书信： ，我担心邓艾会不服从命令，现在派中护军贾充带领步兵骑兵一万人径直进入斜谷，在乐城驻守，我自己带领十万人马在长安驻守，两军相见的日子很近了。 
English: Bell will get a letter from Sima Zhao: "I am worried that Deng Ai will disobey orders, and now I will send the central guard Jia Chong to lead 10,000 infantry and cavalry straight into the valley and garrison in Lecheng, and I myself will lead 100,000 horses to garrison in Chang'an. The day when the two armies meet is very close.

古文：会得书，惊呼所亲语之曰： 但取邓艾，相国知我能独办之；今来大重，必觉我异矣，便当速发。事成，可得天下；不成，退保蜀汉，不失作刘备也。
现代文：终会收到信件后惊慌失色的对亲信说： 只是抓获了邓艾，司马昭知道我能独立完成，现在来的军队太多，一定是发觉了我有异心，我们应当立即出兵，事情顺利就可以得天下，事情不顺就退回西蜀驻守，也能学刘备称帝为王。
English: After finally receiving the letter, he panicked and said to his relatives: "I only captured Deng Ai, Sima Zhao knew that I could complete it independently, there are too many troops coming now, they must have discovered that I have a different intention, we should send troops immediately, if things go well, we can win the world, if things go wrong, we can return to Xishu to stay, and we can also learn from Liu Bei to call the emperor the king."

古文：我自淮南以来，画无遗策，四海所共知也。我欲持此安归乎！ 
现代文：我自从淮南征战以来，算无遗策，是天下都知道的，我难道能在这样的功绩之下有好的归宿吗？ 
English: Ever since I went to fight in Huainan Province, I have been an all-out strategy, which is known to the whole world. Can I really have a good home under such merits?

古文：会以五年正月十五日至，其明日，悉请护军、郡守、牙门骑督以上及蜀之故官，为太后发丧于蜀朝堂。
现代文：钟会在景元五年正月十五日来到成都。第二天，召请护军、郡守、牙门骑督以上的将士以及西蜀的旧官，在蜀国朝堂上，为郭太后发丧。
English: The bell association came to Chengdu on the 15th day of the first month of the fifth year of the Jingyuan era. On the second day, the escort, the county governor, the soldiers above the cavalry commander of the tooth gate and the old officials of West Shu were summoned to mourn the Empress Dowager Guo in the Shu National Hall.

古文：矫太后遗诏，使会起兵废文王，皆班示坐上人，使下议讫，书版署置，更使所亲信代领诸军。
现代文：并伪造太后遗命，说命钟会起兵废掉司马昭，并将诏书展示给堂上的人，让他们议论发表意见，并将朝臣们的议论书写下来，又派亲信统率各路军队。
English: He also forged the empress dowager's last will and testament, saying that he would raise an army to abolish Sima Zhao, and showed the edict to the people in the hall to let them discuss and express their opinions, and wrote down the discussion of the courtiers, and sent his relatives to lead the various armies.

古文：所请群官，悉闭著益州诸曹屋中，城门宫门皆闭，严兵围守。
现代文：钟会所请来的官员，都被收押在益州的各官府中，城中的城门宫门都关闭，派士兵严加守卫。
English: The officials invited by the bell association were all detained in various government offices in Yizhou, the city gate and palace gate in the city were closed, and soldiers were sent to guard them strictly.

古文：会帐下督丘建本属胡烈，烈荐之文王，会请以自随，任爱之。
现代文：钟会部下帐下督丘建原来是胡烈下属，胡烈将他举荐给司马昭，钟会让他跟随自己出兵征讨，非常器重他。
English: Zhonghui's subordinate, Duku Qujian, was originally a subordinate of Hu Rong. Hu Rong recommended him to Sima Zhao, and Zhonghui asked him to follow him to go to war. He was very important to him.

古文：建愍烈独坐，启会，使听内一亲兵出取饮食，诸牙门随例各内一人。
现代文：丘建同情胡烈被独自关押，对钟会说，希望能派一名亲信为胡烈传送饮食，其他将领官员也应该有一名侍奉的人。
English: Yau Jian sympathized with Hu Rong being held in solitary confinement, and told Zhong Rong that he hoped to send a trusted person to deliver food to Hu Rong, and that other generals and officials should also have a servant.

古文：烈绐语亲兵及疏与其子曰： 丘建密说消息，会已作大坑，白棓数千，欲悉呼外兵入，人赐白〈巾臽〉，拜为散将，以次棓杀坑中。 
现代文：胡烈编造谎言告诉亲信侍从，又写信给儿子说： 邱建暗中传递消息，钟会已经挖好大坑，准备了几千根白棒，想要将所有的士兵都请进去，给他们戴上白瞁，然后任命为散将，然后将他们一个个打死并埋在坑里。 
English: Hu Lie made up lies to tell his trusted attendants, and wrote to his son: Qiu Jian secretly passed on the news that the Bell Association had dug a large pit and prepared thousands of white sticks, and wanted to invite all the soldiers in, put white coats on them, and then appoint them as scouts, and then kill them one by one and bury them in the pit.

古文：诸牙门亲兵亦咸说此语，一夜传相告，皆遍。
现代文：很多牙门将的亲兵都传说此事，一夜之间互相流传，所有人都知道了。
English: A lot of the goalkeeper's relatives were talking about it, it went viral overnight, everyone knew about it.

古文：或谓会： 可尽杀牙门骑督以上。 
现代文：有的人对钟会说： 可以将牙门骑都以上的官吏全都杀了。 
English: Some people will say to the bell: You can kill all the officials from Zhameng to the capital.

古文：会犹豫未决。十八日日中，烈军兵与烈儿雷鼓出门，诸军兵不期皆鼓噪出，曾无督促之者，而争先赴城。
现代文：钟会犹豫不决，十八日中午，胡烈部下的士兵跟胡烈的儿子出门敲鼓，其他将士都一起出来击鼓，没有督促的人，但大家争先恐后的涌出城门。
English: The bell ringers hesitated. At noon on the 18th, the soldiers under Hu Rong and Hu Rong's son went out to beat the drums. The other soldiers all came out to beat the drums together. There was no one to urge them, but everyone rushed out of the city gate.

古文：时方给与姜维铠杖，白外有匈匈声，似失火，有顷，白兵走向城。会惊，谓维曰： 兵来似欲作恶，当云何？ 
现代文：当时刚姜维铠甲兵器，有人上报说外面有吵嚷的声音，好像失火了，不久，又上报说士兵奔向城门，钟会大惊对姜维说： 将士们过来，好像是要作乱该怎么办呢？ 
English: At that time, Jiang Wei was wearing armor. Someone reported that there was a loud noise outside, as if there was a fire. Soon, it was reported that soldiers were rushing to the city gate. The bell would be shocked and said to Jiang Wei: "The soldiers are coming, it looks like they want to make trouble. What should I do?"

古文：维曰： 但当击之耳。 会遣兵悉杀所闭诸牙门郡守，内人共举机以柱门，兵斫门，不能破。
现代文：姜维说： 只有进攻他们罢了。 钟会就派遣士兵将关押在屋里的牙门郡守全部杀了，屋里的人一起拿桌子顶住门，士兵们用兵器砸门，也没有能打开。
English: Jiang Wei said, "All we have to do is attack them." The Bell Association dispatched soldiers to kill all the county governors of Yamen County who were detained in the house. The people in the house held the table together to hold the door, and the soldiers smashed the door with weapons, but could not open it.

古文：斯须，门外倚梯登城，或烧城屋，蚁附乱进，矢下如雨，牙门、郡守各缘屋出，与其卒兵相得。姜维率会左右战，手杀五六人，众既格斩维，争赴杀会。会时年四十，将士死者数百人。
现代文：不久，门外有人架着梯子登上城楼，有的人烧毁屋子，随后争着进攻，弓箭像下雨一般。衙门郡守都冲出屋子和他们部下会合，姜维率领钟会左右迎击，杀掉了五六个人，众人已经斩杀了姜维，又争先去斩杀钟会，钟会当时四十岁，在场死去的将士有数百人。
English: Soon, outside the gate, some people climbed up the tower with ladders, some people burned down the house, and then fought to attack, the bows and arrows were like rain. The governor of Zhimen County rushed out of the house to meet with their subordinates. Jiang Wei led the bell association to counterattack left and right, killing five or six people. Everyone had already killed Jiang Wei, and they also competed to kill the bell association first. The bell association was forty years old at the time, and there were hundreds of soldiers who died.

古文：初，艾为太尉，会为司徒，皆持节、都督诸军如故，咸未受命而毙。
现代文：当初，邓艾担任太尉，钟会担任司徒，都持符节，像从前一样督领各路军马，也还没有被处死。
English: At the beginning, Deng Ai served as a captain and Zhong Hui served as an officer, both of whom held the rank of Fu Jie and led the army horses as in the past. They have not yet been executed.

古文：会兄毓，以四年冬薨，会竟未知问。
现代文：钟会兄钟毓在景元四年去世，但钟会最终也没有过问。
English: Zhong Hui, the brother of Zhong Hui, died in the fourth year of the reign of King Jingyuan, but the Zhong Hui did not question him in the end.

古文：会兄子邕，随会与俱死，会所养兄子毅及峻、辿等下狱，当伏诛。
现代文：钟会兄长的儿子钟邕也跟着钟会一起被杀，钟会所养育的兄长的儿子钟毅、钟峻、钟秥等被捕入狱，论罪应当被处死。
English: The son of the elder brother of the bell association, Zhong Jun, was also killed together with the bell association. The sons of the elder brother raised by the bell association, including Zhong Yi, Zhong Jun and Zhong Jun, were arrested and sentenced to death.

古文：司马文王表天子下诏曰： 峻等祖父繇，三祖之世，极位台司，佐命立勋，飨食庙庭。父毓，历职内外，幹事有绩。
现代文：司马昭代表天子下诏说： 钟峻等人的祖父钟繇在曹操，曹丕，曹睿三朝曾担任过三公，辅佐陛下，建立功业，配享太庙，他们的父亲钟毓在朝廷内外历任官职，在职位上都有政绩。
English: Sima Zhao, on behalf of the heavenly son, issued an edict saying, "The grandfather of Zhong Jun and others, Zhong Xi, once served as the Three Princes in the three dynasties of Cao Cao, Cao Pi, and Cao Rui, assisted His Majesty, established achievements, and enjoyed the imperial temple. Their father, Zhong Xi, held various official positions both inside and outside the imperial court, and had political achievements in his positions.

古文：昔楚思子文之治，不灭斗氏之祀。
现代文：过去楚国考虑到子文的功绩，没有断绝他们家的祭祀。
English: In the past, considering Ziwen's achievements, the state of Chu did not cut off their family's sacrifices.

古文：晋录成宣之忠，用存赵氏之后。
现代文：晋国顾念赵衰，赵盾的忠贞，留存了赵氏的后代。
English: In consideration of Zhao Zhen and Zhao Dun's loyalty, the descendants of the Zhao clan have been preserved.

古文：以会、邕之罪，而绝繇、毓之类，吾有愍然！
现代文：因为钟会、钟邕的罪过，而断绝了钟繇、钟毓这些人的后代，我非常的同情。
English: Because of the sins of the bell association and the bell tower, I am very sympathetic to the descendants of the bell tower and the bell tower.

古文：峻、辿兄弟特原，有官爵者如故。惟毅及邕息伏法。 
现代文：我认为可以宽赦钟峻、钟秥两兄弟，有官位爵位的，可以保持原状，但钟毅和钟邕的子孙应该伏法。 
English: I think that the two brothers Zhong Jun and Zhong Xi can be pardoned, and if they have official titles and peerages, they can remain in their original state, but the descendants of Zhong Yi and Zhong Xi should submit to the law.

古文：或曰，毓曾密启司马文王，言会挟术难保，不可专任，故宥峻等云。
现代文：有人说，钟毓曾经暗中告诉司马昭说钟会使用权术，不能使他掌握大权，所以司马昭宽恕了钟峻等人。
English: It is said that Zhong Qi once told Sima Zhao secretly that Zhong Hui would use the power trick and could not let him seize power, so Sima Zhao forgave Zhong Jun and others.

古文：初，文王欲遣会伐蜀，西曹属邵悌求见曰： 今遣锺会率十馀万众伐蜀，愚谓会单身无重任，不若使馀人行。 
现代文：当初，司马昭想派钟会征讨蜀国，西曹属邵悌求见说： 现在派钟会率领十万多人马征讨蜀国，我认为终会是单身之人，没有可留做人质的家属，不如派别人前去。 
English: At first, Sima Zhao wanted to send the Bell Association to invade Shu, and Western Cao's subordinate Shao Wei asked to see him and said, "Now I am sending the Bell Association to lead more than 100,000 people to invade Shu. I think they will eventually be single people, and if they don't have family members to keep as hostages, it's better to send someone else."

古文：文王笑曰： 我宁当复不知此耶？
现代文：司马昭笑着说： 我难道不知道这些这件事吗？
English: Sima Zhao said with a smile: Didn't I know about this?

古文：蜀为天下作患，使民不得安息，我今伐之如指掌耳，而众人皆言蜀不可伐。
现代文：但是蜀国是我国的祸患，让百姓不能安宁。我现在征讨是非常简单的，但众人都说西蜀不能征讨。
English: However, Shu is a scourge to our country, making it impossible for the people to live in peace. I am now collecting taxes very simply, but everyone says that Western Shu cannot be collected.

古文：夫人心豫怯则智勇并竭，智勇并竭而强使之，適为敌禽耳。惟锺会与人意同，今遣会伐蜀，必可灭蜀。灭蜀之后，就如卿所虑，当何所能一办耶？
现代文：如果心生胆怯，那智慧和英勇也会一同衰竭，智慧英勇衰竭却强迫他们去战斗，只会被敌人打败罢了，只有钟会和我的意见相同，现在派钟会讨伐蜀国，一定能攻破他们，攻破蜀国之后，就算事情像您所忧虑的一样，钟会又怎么能一时间就办成呢？
English: If the heart is timid, then wisdom and valor will fail together. If wisdom and valor fail, but they are forced to fight, they will only be defeated by the enemy. Only the bell society shares my opinion. If you send the bell society to fight against Shu, you will surely defeat them. After defeating Shu, even if things are as you are worried about, how can the bell society be done in no time?

古文：凡败军之将不可以语勇，亡国之大夫不可与图存，心胆以破故也。
现代文：凡是战败的将领，就不能和他谈论勇气，凡是亡国的大夫就不能和他谈论救国，这是因为他们心惊胆战。
English: All defeated generals cannot talk to him about courage, and all doctors who have lost their country cannot talk to him about saving it, because they are terrified.

古文：若蜀以破，遗民震恐，不足与图事；中国将士各自思归，不肯与同也。若作恶，祗自灭族耳。
现代文：如果西蜀已经被攻破，留下来的人会一定会震恐，就不足以和钟会图谋事情，中原的将士也各自想着回归故乡，也不肯和钟会同谋，如果钟会作恶，只会招来灭族的后果罢了。
English: If West Shu has been defeated, those who remain will surely be terrified, and it will not be enough to plot with the Bell Society. The soldiers in the Central Plains also want to return to their hometowns, and they do not want to be complicit with the Bell Society. If the Bell Society does evil, it will only lead to the consequences of extermination.

古文：卿不须忧此，慎莫使人闻也。 
现代文：您不需要担心，这件事也要小心，不要让人知道。 
English: You don't need to worry, and you should be careful not to let anyone know about it.

古文：及会白邓艾不轨，文王将西，悌复曰： 锺会所统，五六倍于邓艾，但可敕会取艾，不足自行。 
现代文：等到钟会上报邓艾有反叛的行为，司马昭将要率兵西征，邵悌又说： 钟会所率领的人是邓艾的五六倍，只需下令叫他进攻邓艾即可，就可以不需要自行前往。 
English: When Zhonghui reported Deng Ai's rebellious behavior, Sima Zhao was going to lead the troops to the West. Shao Wei also said: The people led by Zhonghui were five or six times that of Deng Ai. He only needed to order him to attack Deng Ai, so he didn't need to go on his own.

古文：文王曰： 卿忘前时所言邪，而更云可不须行乎？
现代文：司马昭说： 您忘记了之前所说的话吗？现在怎么又说不需要自己前去呢？
English: Sima Zhao said: Have you forgotten what you said before? How can you now say that you don't need to go there yourself?

古文：虽尔，此言不可宣也。我要自当以信义待人，但人不当负我，我岂可先人生心哉！
现代文：虽然这样，但这件事也不可宣扬，我要以信义对待他人，只要他人不背叛我，我又怎么能先生出疑虑呢？
English: Although this is the case, it should not be publicized. I should treat others with sincerity. As long as others do not betray me, how can I have any doubts?

古文：近日贾护军问我，言： 颇疑锺会不？ 
现代文：近日贾充问我说： 你很怀疑钟会吗？ 
English: Recently, Jia Chong asked me: Are you very suspicious of the bell association?

古文：我答言： 如今遣卿行，宁可复疑卿邪？ 
现代文：我回答说： 如果现在派你外出，难道我也怀疑你吗？ 
English: I replied: If I sent you out now, would I also suspect you?

古文：贾亦无以易我语也。
现代文：贾充也无话可说。等我到了长安，事情就自然解决了。 
English: Jia Chong also had nothing to say. When I arrived in Chang'an, the matter was resolved naturally.

古文：我到长安，则自了矣。 军至长安，会果已死，咸如所策。
现代文：司马昭率大军到了长安，钟会果然已经被杀，都像他所预料的那样。
English: Sima Zhao led a large army to Chang'an, and the Bell Association had indeed been killed, just as he had expected.

古文：会尝论易无互体、才性同异。
现代文：钟会曾认为《易经》没有互体，论述才性异同。
English: Zhonghui once thought that "I Ching" had no intersubjectivity, and discussed the similarities and differences in talent.

古文：及会死后，于会家得书二十篇，名曰道论，而实刑名家也，其文似会。
现代文：终会死后在他家中搜出一本书，共有二十篇名叫《道论》，实际上都是法家的刑名之学，文章像是钟慧撰写的。
English: After his death, a book was eventually found in his home, with a total of twenty articles called "Daoism." In fact, they were all about the legalist's study of capital punishment, and the articles seemed to be written by Zhong Hui.

古文：初，会弱冠与山阳王弼并知名。弼好论儒道，辞才逸辩，注易及老子，为尚书郎，年二十馀卒。
现代文：当初钟会二十岁的时候，跟山阳县的王弼一同出名，王弼喜好谈论儒道，很有文采，善于辩说，给《易经》和《老子》做过注释，曾经担任过尚书郎，二十多岁的时候就去世了。
English: When Zhonghui was 20 years old, he became famous together with Wang Xuan of Sanyang County. Wang Xuan liked to talk about Confucianism, was very literate, good at arguing, annotated "I Ching" and "Lao Zi," and once served as Shang Shulang. He died when he was in his twenties.

古文：评曰：王凌风节格尚，毌丘俭才识拔幹，诸葛诞严毅威重，锺会精练策数，咸以显名，致兹荣任，而皆心大志迂，不虑祸难，变如发机，宗族涂地，岂不谬惑邪！
现代文：评说：王凌的风骨和气节都很高尚，毋丘俭才识卓著，诸葛诞威严刚毅，钟会精于谋划，都因此而出名而被授予重任，但他们都好高骛远，没有考虑到后来的灾祸，事情变故得突然，以至于父母宗族都被连累，难道不是很糊涂吗？
English: Comment: Wang Ling's character and temperament are very noble. He is extremely frugal and knowledgeable. Zhuge Xuan is dignified and strong-willed, and the Bell Association is good at planning. They are famous for this and have been given important tasks. However, they are all too ambitious and do not take into account the subsequent disaster. Things have changed so suddenly that both parents and families have been involved. Isn't it very confused?

古文：邓艾矫然强壮，立功立事，然闇于防患，咎败旋至，岂远知乎诸葛恪而不能近自见，此盖古人所谓目论者也。
现代文：邓艾强壮勇敢，建立功业，但是疏于防范祸患，以至于灾祸很快来临，他能考虑到诸葛恪的境地，却没有考虑到自己的，这大概就是古人所说的能看见细微的东西，却看不见自己的睫毛吧。
English: Deng Ai was strong and brave. He built up his career, but neglected to prevent disasters, so much so that the disaster soon came. He was able to consider Zhuge Ke's situation, but did not consider his own. This is probably what the ancients said about being able to see subtle things, but not being able to see his own eyelashes.

