古文：襄公如楚，及汉，闻康王卒，欲还。
现代文：鲁襄公去楚国，到达汉水的时候，听闻楚康王去世的消息，打算返回。
English: Prince Lu Xiang went to Chu, and when he arrived at Hanshui, he heard the news of the death of King Chu Kang and planned to return.

古文：叔仲昭伯曰： 君之来也，非为一人也，为其名与其众也。
现代文：大夫叔仲昭伯说： 国君这次来楚国，并不是为了楚康王一个人，而是慑于它的大国盟主的身份和强大的军队。
English: Uncle Zhong Zhaobao, a doctor, said: The sovereign did not come to Chu for King Chukang alone, but because of its status as a great power and strong army.

古文：今王死，其名未改，其众未败，何为还？ 
现代文：如今楚康王虽然已死，但是它大国的身份并没有变，军队也没有衰败，为什么要返回呢？ 
English: Today, although King Chukang is dead, the identity of its great country has not changed, and the army has not decayed. Why return?

古文：诸大夫皆欲还。
现代文：众大夫还是希望回国。
English: Many doctors still hope to return to China.

古文：子服惠伯曰： 不知所为，姑从君乎！ 
现代文：大夫子服惠伯说： 既然不知如何是好，就姑且听从国君的吧！ 
English: Dafu Zifu Huibo said, "Since I don't know what to do, I'll just listen to the sovereign!"

古文：叔仲曰： 子之来也，非欲安身也，为国家之利也，故不惮勤远而听于楚；非义楚也，畏其名与众也。
现代文：叔仲昭伯说： 你们这次出行，不是为求个人安身立命，而是为了国家的利益，所以才不怕路遥辛劳来向楚国表示尊崇。你们不是服膺于楚国的正义，而是畏惧它的实力地位。
English: Uncle Zhong Zhao Bo said: Your trip this time is not to seek personal stability, but for the benefit of the country, so you are not afraid of Lu Yao's hard work to show respect to Chu. You are not subject to the justice of Chu, but fear its power position.

古文：夫义人者，固庆其喜而吊其忧，况畏而服焉？
现代文：服膺于别人的正义，固然要庆贺其喜而吊慰其丧，何况是畏惧而慑服于人呢？
English: To submit to the justice of others, of course, is to celebrate their joys and mourn their sorrows, but how much more to submit to them out of fear?

古文：闻畏而往，闻丧而还，苟芈姓实嗣，其谁代之任丧？
现代文：因为畏惧楚国而来，听闻楚君去世又要返回，如果楚国有了新君，又会有谁代替他主办丧事呢？
English: They came because they were afraid of Chu and heard that Chu Jun passed away and wanted to return. If Chu has a new Jun, who will replace him to host the funeral?

古文：王太子又长矣，执政未改，予为先君来，死而去之，其谁曰不如先君？
现代文：楚国的王太子现已成年，当政的显贵也未改变，我们为先君而来，他一死就回去，显然是看不起新君，谁能说新君的德行不如先君呢？
English: The crown prince of Chu has now come of age, and the dignitaries in power have not changed. We came for the former emperor, and he will go back as soon as he dies, obviously looking down on the new emperor. Who can say that the new emperor is not as virtuous as the former emperor?

古文：将为丧举，闻丧而还，其谁曰非侮也？
现代文：即使在国内听到楚国有丧也应前去吊慰，现在听到有丧反而要回去，谁能说这不是对楚国的侮辱呢？
English: Even if you hear of a death in the state of Chu in your own country, you should go and offer condolences. But now, when you hear of a death, you want to go back. Who can say that this is not an insult to the state of Chu?

古文：事其君而任其政，其谁由己贰？
现代文：楚国的卿大夫臣事自己的新君，负责本国的政事，谁会愿意在新君当政时别国怀有二心呢？
English: The chieftains and chiefs of the state of Chu are the ministers of their new prince, and are responsible for the political affairs of their country. Who would want to have second thoughts about other countries when the new prince is in power?

古文：求说其侮，而亟于前之人，其仇不滋大乎？
现代文：楚国的君臣要除去那些轻侮他们的人，一定会比以前更迫切，这样楚国对我国的仇恨不就更大了吗？
English: If the princes and ministers of Chu want to get rid of those who despise them, it will be more urgent than ever before. In this way, won't the hatred of Chu towards our country become even greater?

古文：说侮不懦，执政不贰，帅大仇以惮小国，其谁云待之？
现代文：楚国为免去耽辱就不会示弱，君臣上下一心，怀着深仇大恨来威胁我们，谁能抵御得了它呢？
English: In order to avoid being humiliated, the state of Chu will not show weakness. The monarchs and ministers have come up with one heart, threatening us with deep hatred. Who can resist it?

古文：若从君而走患，则不如违君以避难。
现代文：倘若听从国君的话中途回国而遭致祸患，那还不如违背国君的意见以避免灾难。
English: If, by obeying the sovereign's command, you should meet with disaster on your return, it would be better to disobey the sovereign's order to avoid disaster.

古文：且夫君子计成而后行，二三子计乎？
现代文：况且君子凡事考虑周详然后才采取行动，你们大家都认真考虑了吗？
English: Besides, a gentleman always thinks things through before taking action. Have you all seriously considered this?

古文：有御楚之术而有守国之备，则可也；若未有，不如往也。 
现代文：有抗御楚国的办法和守护国家的准备，就可以回去，如果没有，不如到楚国去。 
English: If you have the means to resist the Chus and the preparation to protect the country, you can go back. If not, it is better to go to Chu.

古文：乃遂行。
现代文：于是大家继续前行。
English: So everyone continued on their way.

古文：反，及方城，闻季武子袭卞，公欲还，出楚师以伐鲁。
现代文：访问完毕回国的路上，到方城山时，听说季武子袭占了卞城，襄公打算返回楚国，请求楚国出兵讨伐季武子。
English: On the way back home after the visit, when he arrived at Fangcheng Mountain, he heard that Jiwu Zi had attacked and occupied Lucheng. Xiang Gong intended to return to Chu and asked Chu to send troops to fight Jiwu Zi.

古文：荣成伯曰： 不可。
现代文：大夫荣成伯说： 不行。
English: Dr. Rong Chengbo said, "No.

古文：君之于臣，其威大矣。
现代文：君对于臣，他的权威是很大的。
English: As far as the minister is concerned, his authority is very great.

古文：不能令于国，而恃诸侯，诸侯其谁暱之？
现代文：国君的命令不能在本国被执行，却要依靠别国诸侯的力量，诸侯谁还会亲近你？
English: The sovereign's orders cannot be carried out in his own country, but he has to rely on the power of the lords of other countries. Which lords will be close to you?

古文：若得楚师以伐鲁，鲁既不违夙之取卞也，必用命焉，守必固矣。
现代文：倘若请到楚国的军队来攻打季武子，而鲁国人当时并未反对季武子夺取卞城的举动，他们一定会听从他的命令，防守一定会牢固。
English: If the army of Chu was invited to attack Ji Wuzi, and the people of Lu did not oppose Ji Wuzi's move to seize Lucheng at that time, they would certainly follow his orders, and the defense would certainly be strong.

古文：若楚之克鲁，诸姬不获焉，而况君乎？
现代文：倘若楚国战胜鲁国的季武子，就是周室的王公也见不到什么好处，何况国君您呢？
English: If the State of Chu were to defeat Ji Wuzi of the State of Lu, even the prince of the Zhou Dynasty would not see any benefit, let alone you, the sovereign.

古文：彼无亦置其同类以服东夷，而大攘诸夏，将天下是王，而何德于君，其予君也？
现代文：楚国将在鲁国安插其同姓巩固统治，进而征服东夷，全力驱逐中原各国的势力，以称王于天下。他们对国君有么什恩德，会把鲁国白白送给您呢？
English: The State of Chu will install its namesake in the State of Lu to consolidate its rule, and then conquer the Eastern Yi and do its best to expel the forces of the Central Plains countries to become the king of the world. Do they have any grudge against the sovereign and will they give the State of Lu to you for free?

古文：若不克鲁，君以蛮、夷伐之，而又求入焉，必不获矣。
现代文：倘若楚国没有打败鲁国的季武子，那么您用蛮夷的军队讨伐季武子不成，再想返回鲁国的话，一定不会获准。
English: If Chu did not defeat Ji Wuzi of Lu, then you will not be able to fight Ji Wuzi with the barbarian army, and if you want to return to Lu, you will not be allowed.

古文：不如予之。
现代文：与其这样，不如把卞城赐给季武子。
English: Instead of this, it would be better to give Shicheng to Ji Wu Zi.

古文：夙之事君也，不敢不悛。
现代文：季武子出于感恩事奉国君，也不敢不改过。
English: Out of gratitude, Ji Takeko served the sovereign, and he dared not change his ways.

古文：醉而怒，醒而喜，庸何伤？
现代文：一个人喝醉时常常会发怒，酒醒后也就回嗔为喜了，又有什么关系呢？
English: A person often gets angry when he is drunk, and when he wakes up he is happy again, so what does it matter?

古文：君其入也！ 
现代文：国君还是回国吧！ 
English: Mr. President, go back to your country!

古文：乃归。
现代文：于是襄公回到鲁国。
English: They withdrew and returned to their country.

