古文：疾病，外内皆扫。
现代文：病人病危时，要把寝室内外都打扫干净。
English: When the patient is critically ill, it is necessary to clean both inside and outside the bedroom.

古文：君大夫彻县，士去琴瑟。
现代文：病人是国君、大夫，就要撤去乐悬；是士，也要把琴瑟收藏起来。
English: If the patient is a sovereign or a doctor, the organ should be removed; if he is a scholar, the harpsichord should be collected.

古文：寝东首于北牖下。
现代文：让病人头朝东躺在室内北墙下。
English: Have the patient lie under the north wall of the room with their head facing east.

古文：废床。彻亵衣，加新衣，体一人。
现代文：废床，为病人脱下脏衣，换上新衣，由四个人分别按住病人的四肢。
English: Waste bed, take off the dirty clothes for the patient, put on new clothes, and hold the patient's limbs separately by four people.

古文：男女改服。
现代文：男女改换服装。
English: Men and women change clothes.

古文：属纩以俟绝气。
现代文：在病人的口鼻上放点丝绵，以观察和等待断气。
English: Place a sponge on the patient's nose and mouth to observe and wait for expiration.

古文：男子不死于妇人之手，妇人不死于男子之手。
现代文：临终时，男人不用女人侍候，女人也不用男人侍候。
English: At the time of death, a man does not have to wait for a woman, and a woman does not have to wait for a man.

古文：君夫人卒于路寝，大夫世妇卒于适寝，内子未命，则死于下室。
现代文：国君及其夫人都应死在正寝。大夫及其正妻都应死于正寝。卿的妻子如果未得任命，就要死在她自己的住处，然后迁尸于正寝。
English: The king and his wife should both die in the same bed. The doctor and his wife should both die in the same bed. If the wife of the lord has not been appointed, she should die in her own place and then be moved to the same bed.

古文：迁尸于寝，士士之妻皆死于寝。复，有林麓，则虞人设阶；无林麓，则狄人设阶。
现代文：士和士的妻也都应死于正寝。在为国君招魂时，如其境内有山林则由虞人设梯，如其境内,没有山林则由狄人设梯。
English: Both the priest and the priest's wife should die in their sleep. When summoning spirits for the sovereign, if there is a mountain forest in the territory, then the magistrate should set up a ladder, if there is no mountain forest in the territory, then the magistrate should set up a ladder.

古文：小臣复，复者朝服。
现代文：由国君的近臣招魂。招魂者要身穿朝服。
English: A close retainer of the sovereign is to summon the spirit. The summoner must wear a court dress.

古文：君以卷，夫人以屈狄；大夫以玄赪，世妇以襢衣；士以爵弁，士妻以税衣。
现代文：为国君招魂所用的衣服，上公用哀服，侯、伯用瞥服，子男用森服；为上公夫人招魂用伟衣，为侯、伯夫人用榆狄，为子、男夫人用屈狄。为大夫用玄衣缥裳，为大夫之妻用檀衣。为士用爵弃服，为士妻用税衣。
English: The robes used for summoning the spirits of the sovereign are the mourning robe for the shogun, the forest robe for the lord and vassal, and the forest robe for the son and son; the great robe for summoning the spirits of the lord's wife, the girdle for the lord and vassal's wife, and the cassock for the son and wife; the black robe for the doctor, and the sandal for the doctor's wife; the discarded robe for the gentleman, and the tax robe for the gentleman's wife.

古文：皆升自东荣，中屋履危，北面三号，衣投于前，司命受之，降自西北荣。
现代文：招魂者都是从东荣处登梯升屋，一直上到屋脊的正中间，面朝北，挥动着招魂所用的衣服，拉长声调地呼喊三声： 某，回来吧 然后把招魂的衣服卷起来从前檐投下，下面一个人用竹筐接住，招魂者从西北荣下来。
English: The soul-winners all ascended the staircase from the East Rong, all the way up to the middle of the roof ridge, facing north, waving the clothes used for soul-winning, shouting three times in a drawn-out tone: Come back, then roll up the soul-winning clothes and throw them down from the front eaves, the next person catches them with a bamboo basket, and the soul-winner comes down from the northwest rong.

古文：其为宾，则公馆复，私馆不复；其在野，则升其乘车之左毂而复。
现代文：出国访问时死掉的，如果是住在宾馆就招魂，如果是住在卿大夫之家就不招魂。如果是死在半路，就上到其乘车的左毅上招魂。
English: If a person died while visiting a foreign country, if he lived in a hotel, his soul would be summoned; if he lived in a doctor's house, his soul would not be summoned; if he died in the middle of a journey, his soul would be summoned by going up to the left yakitori of the car he was riding in.

古文：复衣不以衣尸，不以敛。
现代文：招魂所用的衣服，不再用来穿到死者身上，也不用来做敛衣。
English: The clothes used for summoning spirits are no longer used to dress the deceased, nor are they used to make chastity belts.

古文：妇人复，不以袡。
现代文：为妇人招魂，不用其嫁时所穿礼服。
English: Conjure up the spirit of a woman without her wedding dress.

古文：凡复，男子称名，妇人称字。
现代文：凡是招魂，男子呼喊其名，妇人则呼喊其字。
English: Whenever a spirit is summoned, the man calls out the name and the woman calls out the word.

古文：唯哭先复，复而后行死事。
现代文：只有哭泣是在招魂之前，其他善后事宜都是在招魂以后进行。
English: Only crying is done before the spirit is summoned, all other aftercare is done after the spirit is summoned.

古文：始卒，主人啼，兄弟哭，妇人哭踊。
现代文：国君刚断气，主人哀痛呜咽，其兄弟则放声而哭，妇女们则边哭边跺脚。
English: The king had just died, his master was sobbing, his brother was crying, and the women were crying and stamping their feet.

古文：既正尸，子坐于东方，卿大夫父兄子姓立于东方，有司庶士哭于堂下北面；夫人坐于西方，内命妇姑姊妹子姓立于西方，外命妇率外宗哭于堂上北面。
现代文：把尸体放正以后，哭位的安排是：孝子跪在尸体的东边，卿、大夫、死者的父辈和兄弟、男姓子孙立在孝子的身后。办理丧事的官员和众士哭于堂下，面向北。夫人跪于尸体的西边。内命妇、国君的姑、姊妹及女姓子孙立在夫人的身后。外命妇和外宗哭于堂上室门之外，面北而立。
English: After the body was placed upright, the arrangement of the weeping places was as follows: the filial son knelt on the east side of the body, the lord, the doctor, the deceased's fathers and brothers, and the male descendants stood behind the filial son; the funeral officials and all the men cried under the hall, facing north; the wife knelt on the west side of the body; the inner wife, the sovereign's sister-in-law, sister and female descendants stood behind the wife; the outer wife and the outer father cried outside the door of the upper room, facing north.

古文：大夫之丧，主人坐于东方，主妇坐于西方，其有命夫命妇则坐，无则皆立。
现代文：大夫死，哭位的安排是：孝子跪在尸体东边，孝子的正妻跪在尸体西边。亲属当中的命夫、命妇可以跪，非命夫、命妇则皆立。
English: When a doctor dies, the crying place is arranged as follows: the filial son kneels on the east side of the body, and the legitimate wife of the filial son kneels on the west side of the body. The surviving husband or wife among the relatives may kneel, but the surviving husband or wife must stand.

古文：士之丧，主人父兄子姓皆坐于东方，主妇姑姊妹子姓皆坐于西方。
现代文：士死，不但孝子可以跪在尸体东边，而且死者的父兄和男姓子孙也可以；不但孝子之妻可以跪在尸体西边，而且死者的姑、姊妹和女姓子孙也可以。
English: When a scholar dies, not only the filial son can kneel on the east side of the body, but also the deceased's father and brother and male descendants; not only the filial son's wife can kneel on the west side of the body, but also the deceased's mother-in-law, sister and female descendants.

古文：凡哭尸于室者，主人二手承衾而哭。
现代文：凡是在室内哭尸时，孝子都是双手抓住覆尸的被子而哭，表示痛不欲生，要追随死者而去。
English: When crying over a corpse indoors, a filial son would hold onto the blanket covering the corpse with both hands and cry, expressing his anguish at not being able to live and wanting to follow the deceased.

古文：君之丧，未小敛，为寄公国宾出；大夫之丧，未小敛，为君命出；士之丧，于大夫不当敛而出。
现代文：国君死，尚未小敛，如果此时有寄公、国宾前来吊唁，孝子要出迎。大夫死，尚未小敛，如桌此时国君派人前来吊唁或送礼，孝子要出迎。
English: When the sovereign dies, he has not yet humbled himself. If there are officials or state guests coming to offer condolences at this time, the filial son should welcome them. When a doctor dies, he has not yet humbled himself. If at this time the sovereign sends someone to offer condolences or gifts, the filial son should welcome them.

古文：凡主人之出也，徒跣扱衽拊心，降自西阶。
现代文：士死，对于大夫前来吊唁，只要不是正在小敛，孝子就要出迎。凡是孝子出迎的时候，都要光着脚，把衣襟下摆掖在腰带上，捶着胸口，从西阶下堂。
English: After the death of a scholar, if a doctor comes to offer condolences, as long as he is not in the process of retiring, a filial son should greet him. Whenever a filial son greets him, he should go barefoot, put the hem of his coat on his belt, cover his chest, and go down the hall from the west steps.

古文：君拜寄公国宾于位；大夫于君命，迎于寝门外，使者升堂致命，主人拜于下；士于大夫亲吊则与之哭；不逆于门外，夫人为寄公夫人出，命妇为夫人之命出，士妻不当敛，则为命妇出。小敛，主人即位于户内，主妇东面，乃敛。
现代文：国君在庭中向着来吊唁的寄公、国宾拜谢。大夫对于国君派来吊唁的使者，要出寝门之外迎接；使者升堂传达国君的旨意，孝子在堂下拜谢。士对于大夫的亲自来吊，孝子只是在西阶之下就位，与大夫皆面东而哭，但不到门外迎接。寄公夫人来吊唁时，国君夫人要出迎。国君夫人派使者来大夫之家吊唁时，大夫的妻子要出迎。士妻只要不是正在忙于小敛，都要出迎前来吊唁的大夫之妻。小敛时，主人在门内的东边就位，面向西；主妇则在门内的西边就位，面向东，这才进行小敛。
English: In the court, the sovereign prays for the condolences of the deceased and the guests of the state. The doctor greets the messenger of condolences sent by the sovereign outside the bedroom door; the messenger ascends the hall to convey the will of the sovereign, and the filial son prays for thanks under the hall. The scholar greets the doctor in person, the filial son just takes his place under the west steps, and both the doctor and the doctor cry, but do not meet outside the door. When the wife of the sovereign sends condolences, the wife of the sovereign greets her. When the wife of the sovereign sends messengers to the doctor's house for condolences, the doctor's wife

古文：卒敛，主人冯之踊，主妇亦如之。
现代文：小敛毕，主人凭尸而号哭跳跃，跳的次数不限。
English: Xiao Zhenbi, the owner cries and jumps with the corpse, the number of jumps is unlimited.

古文：主人袒说髦，括发以麻，妇人髽，带麻于房中。
现代文：主妇也像主人那样地号哭跳跃。然后，主人袒露左臂，脱去髦，用麻束住发髻。
English: The housewife screams and jumps like her master, who then bares his left arm, takes off his trousers and ties his hair in a snood.

古文：彻帷，男女奉尸夷于堂，降拜：君拜寄公国宾，大夫士拜卿大夫于位，于士旁三拜；夫人亦拜寄公夫人于堂上，大夫内子士妻特拜，命妇泛拜众宾于堂上。
现代文：大夫、士向来吊的卿、大夫逐一拜谢，对于来吊的士，不管人数多少，只向着他们所站的方位拜三拜。国君的夫人，也在堂上拜谢来吊的寄公夫人。卿大夫的妻子、士的妻子，对于来吊的命妇，在堂上逐一拜谢；对于普通女宾则总的一拜。
English: Doctors and courtiers have always bowed one by one to the lord and doctor who came to hang, and for the courtiers who came to hang, no matter how many there are, they only bowed three times to the direction they were standing in. The wife of the sovereign also bowed in the hall to the lady-in-waiting who came to hang. The wife of the lord and doctor, the wife of the courtier, bowed one by one in the hall to the dead woman who came to hang; for ordinary female guests, it was a general bow.

古文：主人即位，袭带绖踊─－母之丧，即位而免，乃奠。
现代文：拜过吊宾之后，主人在昨阶下就位，给左臂穿上袖子，腰缠麻带，头戴麻经，号哭跳跃。如果是母亲去世，拜宾之后在昨阶下就位时，不须括发，只须戴免即可。
English: After bidding farewell to the guests, the host takes his place at the foot of the last step, puts on sleeves for his left arm, wraps a hemp belt around his waist, wears a hemp sutra on his head, cries and jumps. If his mother has died, when he takes his place at the foot of the last step after bidding farewell, he does not need to braid his hair, he only needs to wear it loose.

古文：吊者袭裘，加武带绖，与主人拾踊。
现代文：然后设小敛之奠。从这时起，来吊唁的客人都要袭裘，在吉冠的冠圈上加上麻续，腰束麻带，跟在主人、主妇的后边交替哭踊。
English: Then, a small memorial service is held. From this time on, guests who come to pay their respects should make a wailing noise, add hemp threads to the crown of the auspicious crown, tie hemp ribbons around their waists, and cry and dance alternately behind the master and mistress.

古文：君丧，虞人出木角，狄人出壶，雍人出鼎，司马县之，乃官代哭，大夫官代哭不县壶，士代哭不以官。
现代文：办国君的丧事，由虞人提供烧火的木柴和舀水的勺子，狄人提供壶漏，雍人提供烧水的鼎，司马亲临视察壶漏的安置，然后安排官员轮流值班代哭。办大夫的丧事，只安排官员代哭，不设置壶漏。办士的丧事，由其亲属代哭，不得用官员代哭。
English: For the state ruler's funeral, the statesman provides the firewood and the ladle, the deacon provides the ladle, and the Yong people provide the boiling water. Sima personally inspects the placement of the ladle, and then arranges for officials to take turns crying on duty. For the doctor's funeral, only officials are arranged to cry on duty, and no ladles are set up. For the funeral of the clerk, relatives cry on behalf of their relatives, and officials are not allowed to cry on behalf of them.

古文：君堂上二烛、下二烛，大夫堂上一烛、下二烛，士堂上一烛、下一烛。
现代文：办国君的丧事，堂上点着两支火把，堂下点着两支火把。办大夫的丧事，堂上点一支火把，堂下点两支。办士的丧事，堂上、堂下都只点一支火把。
English: For the funeral of a sovereign, two torches are lit at the top of the hall and two torches at the bottom of the hall. For the funeral of a doctor, one torch is lit at the top of the hall and two torches at the bottom of the hall. For the funeral of a secretary, only one torch is lit at the top and bottom of the hall.

古文：宾出彻帷。哭尸于堂上，主人在东方，由外来者在西方，诸妇南乡。
现代文：小敛结束，主人下堂拜谢来吊之宾，待宾走了以后，才撤掉堂上的帷幕。在堂上哭死者的位置是，主人在尸体的东边，面朝西；主妇等妇人在尸体的西边，面朝东。如果此时有奔丧者到家，也在尸的西边哭，主妇等人则向北挪，面向南。
English: After the small gathering is over, the master goes down to the hall to thank the guests who have come to hang. The curtain on the hall is only removed after the guests have left. The position of the deceased crying in the hall is that the master is on the east side of the body, facing west; the housewife and other women are on the west side of the body, facing east. If there are mourners at home at this time, they also cry on the west side of the body, while the housewife and others move north and face south.

古文：妇人迎客送客不下堂，下堂不哭；男子出寝门见人不哭。
现代文：女习人迎客送客都不一堂，即令下堂迎送，也是只磕头而不哭。男子出寝丫迎宾，不哭。
English: Female attendants do not greet and see off every guest, and even if they do, they only shake their heads and do not cry. Men go out to welcome guests and do not cry.

古文：其无女主，则男主拜女宾于寝门内；其无男主，则女主拜男宾于阼阶下。
现代文：对于来吊的女宾，如果丧家没有主妇，就由主人在寝门内向女宾拜谢；对于来吊的男宾，如果丧家没有主人，就由主妇在昨阶下向男宾拜谢。
English: For female guests who come to hang, if there is no matron in the house, it is up to the host to thank the female guests in the bedroom door; for male guests who come to hang, if there is no master in the house, it is up to the hostess to thank the male guests in the last step.

古文：子幼，则以衰抱之，人为之拜；为后者不在，则有爵者辞，无爵者人为之拜。
现代文：如果孝子年龄很小，就让他穿上孝服，由别人替他拜谢吊宾。如果孝子因故不在家，对于有爵位的吊宾应说明缘故，对于无爵位的吊宾则由他人代为拜谢。
English: If the filial son is very young, let him wear filial piety clothes and have someone else thank the mourners for him. If the filial son is not at home for some reason, the reason should be explained for the mourners with peerage, and for the mourners without peerage, others should thank them on his behalf.

古文：在竟内则俟之，在竟外则殡葬可也。丧有无后，无无主。
现代文：孝子不在家而在国内的，就等孝子回来主持丧事；如果在国外不能回来，那就只好由别人主持殡葬。总之，丧家绝嗣的情况是有的，丧事无人主持的情况却是没有的。
English: If the filial son is not at home but is in China, the funeral will be presided over by the filial son when he returns; if he cannot return when he is abroad, then the funeral will have to be presided over by someone else. In short, there are cases where there is no heir, but there are no cases where no one presides over the funeral.

古文：君之丧：三日，子、夫人杖，五日既殡，授大夫世妇杖。
现代文：办诸侯的丧事，在其死后的三日，其世子及夫人即可拄丧杖；死后五日，已殡，世子授命大夫、世妇可以用丧杖。
English: For the funeral of a feudal lord, three days after his death, his heir and his wife can use the funeral stick; five days after his death, after the funeral, the heir can use the funeral stick.

古文：子、大夫寝门之外杖，寝门之内辑之；夫人世妇在其次则杖，即位则使人执之。子有王命则去杖，国君之命则辑杖，听卜有事于尸则去杖。
现代文：·世子和大夫，在寝门之外可以以杖拄地，进入寝门则要辑杖；夫人和世妇，在其丧次可以以杖拄地，到堂上就位哭时就要让别人拿住；世子在迎接天子派来吊丧的使臣时要将丧杖暂时丢开，在迎接诸侯派来吊丧的使者时要辑杖，在参与占卜葬日和虞祭以后的祭祀中，也要把丧杖暂时丢开＋。
English: The heir and the doctor, outside the bedroom door, may beat the ground with a cane, but when entering the bedroom door, they must remove the cane; the wife and the heiress, in their funeral, may beat the ground with a cane, and when they go to the hall to cry, they must let others hold them; the heir must temporarily discard the cane when meeting the envoys sent by the Son of Heaven to hang the dead, must remove the cane when meeting the envoys sent by the princes to hang the dead, and must also temporarily discard the cane when participating in the divination of the funeral day and the sacrificial rites after the state festival.

古文：大夫于君所则辑杖，于大夫所则杖。
现代文：大夫在世子居丧的地方要辑杖，在和其他大夫一道在寝门外就位时则可以以杖拄地。
English: The doctor should hold the staff in the place where the deceased lives, and when he and the other doctors take their places outside the bedroom door, they can beat the ground with the staff.

古文：大夫之丧：三日之朝既殡，主人主妇室老皆杖。
现代文：办大夫的丧事，在其死后三天的早晨成殡，然后主人、主妇、室老都可以拄丧杖。
English: The doctor's funeral will be held in the morning three days after his death, and then the master, the housewife, and the old man's wife can carry out the funeral.

古文：大夫有君命则去杖，大夫之命则辑杖；内子为夫人之命去杖，为世妇之命授人杖。
现代文：主人在迎接国君派来吊丧的使者时要暂时丢开丧杖，在迎接其他大夫派来吊丧的使者时要辑杖。卿大夫之妻在迎接国君夫人派来吊丧 的使者时要暂时丢开丧杖，在迎接世妇派来吊丧的使者时要把丧杖让别人拿住。
English: The master should temporarily discard the funeral stick when meeting the messenger sent by the monarch to hang the funeral, and should gather the stick when meeting the messenger sent by other doctors to hang the funeral. The wife of the doctor should temporarily discard the funeral stick when meeting the messenger sent by the wife of the monarch to hang the funeral, and should let others hold the funeral stick when meeting the messenger sent by the woman.

古文：士之丧：二日而殡，三日而朝，主人杖，妇人皆杖。
现代文：办士的丧事，在其死后二日成殡，次日早晨，主人可以拄丧杖，妇人都可以拄丧杖。
English: For the funeral of a steward, the funeral shall be held two days after his death. In the morning of the next day, the host may carry the funeral staff, and the women may carry the funeral staff.

古文：于君命夫人之命如大夫，于大夫世妇之命如大夫。
现代文：在迎接国君、夫人派来吊丧的使者时，礼数和大夫一样；在迎接大夫及其嫡妻派来吊丧的使者时，礼数也和大夫一样。
English: When greeting an envoy sent by the Emperor and Empress for the funeral, the number of courtesies is the same as for a doctor; when greeting an envoy sent by a doctor and his wife for the funeral, the number of courtesies is the same as for a doctor.

古文：子皆杖，不以即位。
现代文：凡庶子都可以用丧杖，但在就哭位时要暂时丢开。
English: Any bastard can use the bereavement cane, but it should be temporarily thrown away when crying.

古文：大夫士哭殡则杖，哭柩则辑杖。
现代文：大夫和士，在哭殡期间可以以杖拄地，在将葬起灵之后则要辑杖。
English: Doctors and priests may beat the ground with a cane during the wailing and funeral rites, but they must remove the cane after the spirit has been buried.

古文：弃杖者，断而弃之于隐者。
现代文：下葬以后就要把丧杖扔掉，为了防止被人裘读，应该把它折断以后扔到偏僻的地方。
English: After the burial, the funeral staff should be thrown away. In order to prevent it from being read by someone, it should be broken and thrown to a remote place.

古文：始死，迁尸于床，幠用敛衾，去死衣，小臣楔齿用角柶，缀足用燕几，君大夫士一也。
现代文：人断气以后，就在室内南窗下设床并迁尸于上，用敛袅将尸体覆盖，脱去断气时所着之衣，由近臣用角栖撑开死者的上下齿，用燕几把死者的脚加以固定。以上作法，对于国君、大夫、士都适用。
English: After the person expired, a bed was set up under the south window of the room and the corpse was moved to it, the corpse was covered with a cocoon, the clothes worn at the time of death were taken off, the close vassal propped up the upper and lower teeth of the deceased with a horned perch, and the feet of the deceased were fixed with several swallows. The above procedure is applicable to the sovereign, doctors, and soldiers.

古文：管人汲，不说繘、屈之，尽阶不升堂，授御者；御者入浴：小臣四人抗衾，御者二人浴，浴水用盆，沃水用枓，浴用絺巾，挋用浴衣，如它日；小臣爪足，浴余水弃于坎。
现代文：管人把水从井中打上来，一水桶上的绳子也不解开，而是屈叠起来握在手中，就提着水上堂，上到西阶的最高一个台阶，但不升到堂上，就把水交给侍者。侍者提着水进入室内为死者洗身子。洗时，由四个近臣各拉一个被角把盖尸被抬高，再由两个侍者为死者洗身子。
English: The steward fetched water from the well. He did not untie the rope on the bucket, but folded it up and held it in his hands. He carried the water up to the hall, up to the highest step of the west steps, but not up to the hall, and handed the water to the waiter. The waiter carried the water into the room to wash the body of the deceased. When washing, the four close retainers each pulled a quilt to cover the corpse, and then the two waiters washed the body of the deceased.

古文：其母之丧，则内御者抗衾而浴。
现代文：把盆子放在停尸床下承接浴水，用勺子往尸体上浇水。
English: Place a basin under the morgue to collect the bath water and use a spoon to pour it over the corpse.

古文：管人汲，授御者，御者差沐于堂上－─君沐粱，大夫沐稷，士沐粱。
现代文：洗时用细葛巾，擦干尸身用浴衣，这和生前洗身子的作法一徉。由近臣剪脚趾甲。
English: When washing, use a thin kudzu cloth, and when drying the body, use a yukata, which is the same as the practice of washing the body before death. Cut the toenails by a close retainer.

古文：甸人为垼于西墙下，陶人出重鬲，管人受沐，乃煮之，甸人取所彻庙之西北厞薪，用爨之。
现代文：洗头盆用瓦盆，揩干头发用巾，这和生前洗头的作法一样。由近臣为死者修剪手指甲和胡须。
English: The shingle basin is used for washing the head, and the towel is used for drying the hair, which is the same as the practice of washing the head before death. A close retainer trims the fingernails and beard for the deceased.

古文：管人授御者沐，乃沐；沐用瓦盘，挋用巾，如它日，小臣爪手翦须，濡濯弃于坎。
现代文：洗过头的废水也倒到堂下的坑里。为了防止尸体腐败，在国君的停尸床下放个大盘，用以盛冰；在大夫的停尸床下放个夷盘，用以盛冰。
English: In order to prevent the corpse from rotting, a large tray is placed under the king's mortuary bed to hold ice, and an ash tray is placed under the doctor's mortuary bed to hold ice.

古文：君设大盘造冰焉，大夫设夷盘造冰焉，士并瓦盘无冰，设床襢笫，有枕。
现代文：在士的停尸床下并放两只瓦盘，里边盛水而不盛冰。停尸床上别无他物，只剩一层竹席，以－利透气。停尸床上有枕。 
English: Underneath the corpse's bed, two tiles are placed, containing water but no ice. There is nothing else on the bed, just a layer of bamboo mats to allow air to pass through. There are pillows on the bed.

古文：含一床，袭一床迁尸于堂又一床，皆有枕席－─君大夫士一也。
现代文：饭含时用一张床，为死者穿衣时换一张床，把尸体由室内迁到堂上再换一张床，每张床上都有枕头和席子。以上作法，对国君、大夫、士都适用。
English: One bed is used for meals, one bed is changed for dressing the deceased, the body is moved from the room to the hall and another bed is changed. Each bed has a pillow and mat. The above practices are applicable to the king, doctors and priests.

古文：君之丧，子、大夫、公子、众士皆三日不食。
现代文：国君刚死，世子、大夫、庶子筛众士都三天不吃饭。
English: The sovereign had just died, and the heir, the doctor, and the son-in-law did not eat for three days.

古文：子、大夫、公子食粥，纳财，朝一溢米，莫一溢米，食之无算；士疏食水饮，食之无算；夫人世妇诸妻皆疏食水饮，食之无算。
现代文：三天以后，世子、大夫、庶子只喝稀粥，每天的粮食定量是，早上一溢米，晚上一溢米，随饿随吃，不限顿数。众士可以吃粗米做的饭和喝水，随饿随吃，不限顿数。国君的夫人、世妇、诸妻也都可以吃粗米做的饭和喝水，随饿随吃，不限顿数。
English: After three days, the heir, the doctor, and the son-in-law only drink thin gruel. The daily ration is one spoonful of rice in the morning and one spoonful in the evening, and they can eat and drink as much as they want, with no limit to the number of meals. Everyone can eat rice and water made from coarse rice, and they can eat and drink as much as they want, with no limit to the number of meals. The wife, the concubine, and the wives of the sovereign can also eat rice and water made from coarse rice, and they can eat and drink as much as they want, with no limit to the number of meals

古文：大夫之丧，主人室老子姓皆食粥；众士疏食水饮；妻妾疏食水饮。
现代文：大夫刚死，主人、室老、子孙都只喝稀粥，众士可以吃粗米做的饭和喝水，大夫的妻妾也可以吃粗米做的饭和喝水。
English: The doctor had just died, and his master, his father-in-law, and his children and grandchildren only drank gruel. Everyone else could eat rice and drink water made from coarse rice, and the doctor's wife and concubine could also eat rice and drink water made from coarse rice.

古文：士亦如之。
现代文：士刚死，主人等人的吃法和大夫刚死时一样。
English: When a doctor has just died, the host and others eat in the same way as when the doctor had just died.

古文：既葬，主人疏食水饮，不食菜果；妇人亦如之。
现代文：下葬以后，主人可以吃粗米做的饭和喝水，但不吃蔬菜瓜果；妇人也是这样。
English: After the burial, the owner can eat rice and drink water, but not eat vegetables and fruits; the same applies to the woman.

古文：君大夫士一也。
现代文：在这一点上，国君、大夫、士是一样的。
English: In this respect, the sovereign, the doctor, and the scholar are all the same.

古文：练而食菜果，祥而食肉。
现代文：练祭以后才可以吃蔬菜瓜果，大祥以后才可以吃肉。
English: Vegetables, fruits and vegetables can only be eaten after the training festival, and meat can only be eaten after the festival.

古文：食粥于盛不盥，食于篹者盥。
现代文：用杯碗喝稀粥用不着洗手，从竹筐里抓饭吃就得洗手。
English: You don't have to wash your hands if you drink gruel from a cup or bowl, but you have to wash your hands if you eat rice from a bamboo basket.

古文：食菜以酰酱，始食肉者先食干肉，始饮酒者先饮醴酒。
现代文：吃菜可以用醋酱调拌。开始吃肉时，要先吃干肉。开始饮酒时，要先饮甜酒。
English: When eating vegetables, you can mix them with vinegar sauce. When you start eating meat, you should first eat dry meat. When you start drinking alcohol, you should first drink sweet wine.

古文：期之丧，三不食；食：疏食水饮，不食菜果，三月既葬，食肉饮酒。
现代文：为丧期是一年的亲属服丧，头兰顿不吃饭。然后可以吃饭了，也只是吃粗米作的饭和喝水，不能吃蔬菜水果。三个月后下葬，下葬以后可以吃肉饮酒。
English: For the mourning period is a year of relatives mourning, the head Lanton does not eat. Then you can eat, but only eat rice made of coarse rice and drink water, can not eat vegetables and fruits. Three months after the funeral, after the funeral you can eat meat and drink alcohol.

古文：期终丧，不食肉，不饮酒，父在为母，为妻。
现代文：为丧期是一年的亲属服丧，从头到尾都不可吃肉饮酒的，限于父亲健在而为母服丧，限于为妻服丧。
English: For the mourning period is a year of relatives mourning, from beginning to end are not allowed to eat meat and drink alcohol, limited to the father alive and mourning for his mother, limited to mourning for his wife.

古文：九月之丧，食饮犹期之丧也，食肉饮酒，不与人乐之。
现代文：为大功亲属服丧的吃饭喝水规定，和为丧期是一年的亲属服丧一样。虽然葬后可以吃肉饮酒，但限于自斟自饮，不可以和他人在一齐饮酒作乐。
English: The regulations for eating and drinking water during the mourning period for relatives of great heroes are the same as those for the mourning period of one year for relatives. Although you can eat meat and drink alcohol after the funeral, you are limited to drinking at your own discretion, and you cannot drink and have fun with others.

古文：五月三月之丧，壹不食再不食可也。
现代文：小功、绍麻亲属刚死，或头两顿、或头一顿不吃就可以了。
English: Xiaogong, Shaoma relatives just died, or the first two meals, or the first meal can be skipped.

古文：比葬，食肉饮酒，不与人乐之。
现代文：在下葬以前，可以吃肉饮酒，只是不要和他人在一齐饮酒作乐。
English: Before the burial, you can eat meat and drink alcohol, but don't drink and make merry with others.

古文：叔母、世母、故主、宗子食肉饮酒。
现代文：为叔母、伯母、故主、宗子服丧期间，都可以吃肉饮酒。
English: During the period of mourning for the aunt, the aunt, the deceased, and the son, you can eat meat and drink alcohol.

古文：不能食粥，羹之以菜可也；有疾，食肉饮酒可也。
现代文：在规定喝粥期间，如果很不习惯，用菜羹泡饭吃也可以。如果有病，也允许吃肉喝酒。
English: During the prescribed period of drinking porridge, if you are not used to it, you can also eat rice with vegetable soup. If you are sick, you are also allowed to eat meat and drink alcohol.

古文：五十不成丧，七十唯衰麻在身。
现代文：五十岁以上的人居丧，不必事事都按规定去办。
English: For people over the age of fifty, it is not necessary to do everything according to the rules.

古文：既葬，若君食之则食之；大夫父之友食之则食之矣。
现代文：七十岁以上的人居丧，只要孝服在身就行，其他方面可以一如常人。葬后，如果国君赐予食品，是可以吃的。如果大夫或父亲生前友好赐予食品，也是可以吃的。
English: For those who are over 70 years old, as long as they wear filial piety, they can go to the funeral, and other aspects can be as usual. After the funeral, if the sovereign gives food, it can be eaten. If the doctor or father gave food in a friendly way before his death, it can also be eaten.

古文：不辟粱肉，若有酒醴则辞。
现代文：赐予的食品中哪怕有粱肉美味，也可以吃；但其中如有酒醛，则要谢绝。
English: Even if there is delicious meat stew in the food given, it can be eaten; but if there is alcohol in it, it should be rejected.

古文：小敛于户内，大敛于阼。
现代文：小敛在寝室门内进行，大敛在堂上当东阶处进行。
English: Small austerities are carried out inside the bedroom door, and major austerities are carried out at the east end of the hall.

古文：君以簟席，大夫以蒲席，士以苇席。
现代文：敛床上铺的席子，国君是覃席，大夫是蒲席，士是苇席。
English: A king is a king's seat, a doctor is a doctor's seat, and a scholar is a scholar's seat.

古文：小敛：布绞，缩者一，横者三。君锦衾，大夫缟衾，士缁衾，皆一。
现代文：小敛的程序：先铺好包扎敛衣和尸体的布带，这种带子，一根是竖着铺，三根是横着铺；然后铺上被子一条：国君是织锦被面，大夫是素帛被面，士是细帛被面；然后再铺上衣服；总共十九套。
English: The procedure for a small funeral: first, the bandage to wrap the shroud and the corpse is laid, this band, one is laid vertically, three are laid horizontally; then a quilt is laid: the sovereign is a brocade quilt, the doctor is a plain quilt, and the scholar is a fine satin quilt; then the clothes are laid; a total of nineteen sets.

古文：衣十有九称，君陈衣于序东；大夫士陈衣于房中；皆西领北上。
现代文：国君的小敛用衣陈放在东堂，大夫、士的小敛用衣都陈放在东房，都是领子朝西，由北往南排列，越靠北的衣服越尊贵。
English: The emperor's small retinue was placed in the east hall, and the small retinue of doctors and nobles were placed in the east room. The collars faced west and were arranged from north to south. The further north the clothes were, the more valuable they were.

古文：绞紟不在列。大敛：布绞，缩者三，横者五，布紟二衾。君大夫士一也。
现代文：包扎敛衣和尸体的布带、单层被子不计算在十九套之中。大敛的程序：先铺好包扎敛衣和尸体的布带，竖的三根，横的五根；然后铺上一条单被和两条夹被，在这一点上国君、大夫、士是一样的。
English: The dressing gown, the bandage, and the single-layer quilt are not counted among the nineteen sets. The procedure for the great dressing: first, the dressing gown and the bandage are laid out, three vertically and five horizontally; then a single quilt and two quilts are laid out. In this respect, the sovereign, the doctor, and the scholar are the same.

古文：君陈衣于庭，百称，北领西上；大夫陈衣于序东，五十称，西领南上；士陈衣于序东，三十称，西领南上。
现代文：国君的大敛用衣陈列在庭中，共二百套，领子朝北，从西往车排列，越靠西的衣服越尊贵；大夫的大敛用衣陈列在东堂，共五十套，领子朝西，由南往北排列，越靠南的衣服越尊贵；士的大敛用衣也陈列在东堂，共三十套，也是领子朝西，由南往北排列，越靠南的衣服越尊贵。
English: A total of 200 sets of the emperor's robes were displayed in the courtyard, with the collars facing north and arranged from west to east. The more west the robes are, the more valuable they are. A total of 50 sets of the doctor's robes were displayed in the east hall, with the collars facing west and arranged from south to north, the more valuable the robes are. A total of 30 sets of the emperor's robes were also displayed in the east hall, also with the collars facing west and arranged from south to north, the more valuable the robes are.

古文：绞紟如朝服，绞一幅为三、不辟，紟五幅、无紞。
现代文：包扎敛衣和尸体的布带、单被，其布料和朝服布料一样。大敛用的包扎布带，要把一幅宽的布撕成三条，这三条布带的两端就不再撕开。单被用五幅布拚缝，没有被头标志带。
English: The material of the bandage and the sheet is the same as that of the imperial robe. For a large bandage, it is necessary to tear a wide cloth into three strips, and the two ends of the three strips are no longer torn. The sheet is sewn with five pieces of cloth, and there is no headband.

古文：小敛之衣，祭服不倒。君无襚，大夫士毕主人之祭服；亲戚之衣，受之不以即陈。
现代文：小敛所用的十九套衣服中，其他衣服可以倒放，以求平展，只有祭服尊贵，不可倒放。国君的敛衣，不用臣下所赠。大夫和士的敛衣，要先尽着自己的祭服用，祭服用完才可以用他人所赠。大功以上亲属所赠之衣，可以接受，但不用来陈列。
English: Of the nineteen sets of clothes used for minor austerities, other clothes can be turned upside down to spread them out more evenly. Only the sacred vestments of the nobility may not be turned upside down. The sacred vestments of the sovereign do not need to be presented by a vassal. The sacred vestments of doctors and priests must first be worn at their own ceremonies before they can be presented by others. The vestments presented by relatives of great merit or higher may be accepted, but are not to be displayed.

古文：小敛，君大夫士皆用复衣复衾；大敛，君大夫士祭服无算，君褶衣褶衾，大夫士犹小敛也。
现代文：小敛时，国君、大夫、士用的都是著有丝絮的衣被。大敛时，国君、大夫、士的祭服有多少用多少，不限数量；国君用的是不著丝絮的夹衣夹被，大夫、士用的衣被还和小敛时一徉。
English: At the small gathering, the sovereign, doctors, and priests all use quilts with silk tassels. At the large gathering, there is no limit to how many ceremonial robes the sovereign, doctors, and priests can use; the sovereign uses a jacket with a quilt without silk tassels, and the quilts for doctors and priests are returned to the small gathering.

古文：袍必有表，不禅，衣必有裳，谓之一称。
现代文：作为敛衣的袍子必须外加罩衣，不能单用袍子；有上衣则必须有下裳，这叫做一套。
English: A robe that serves as a chador must be worn with a hood, and cannot be used as a robe alone; if there is a tunic, there must be a petticoat, which is called a set.

古文：凡陈衣者实之箧，取衣者亦以箧升，降者自西阶。
现代文：凡陈列敛衣，都要装在箱子里；凡把陈列的敛衣取走，也都要用箱子。拿取敛衣的人上堂下堂要走西阶。
English: Everyone who displays a robe should put it in a box; everyone who takes away a robe should also use a box. The person who takes the robe should walk up and down the west steps.

古文：凡陈衣、不诎，非列采不入，絺绤纻不入。
现代文：凡是陈列敛衣，都不可折叠。杂色衣服不可陈列，盛暑时穿的用细葛布、粗葛布、纷麻布做的贴身衣服也不可陈列。
English: Any loose-fitting clothing on display may not be folded. Miscellaneous-colored clothing may not be displayed, nor may close-fitting clothing made of thin georgette cloth, coarse georgette cloth, or ramie cloth that is worn in the heat of the day.

古文：凡敛者袒，迁尸者袭。
现代文：凡是参与大小敛的人都要袒露左臂，这样才便于做事；凡是参与迁移尸体的人都要穿好袖子，以表恭敬。
English: All those involved in the collection of corpses should uncover their left arm, so that it is easier to do things; all those involved in the transfer of corpses should wear sleeves to show respect.

古文：君之丧，大胥是敛，众胥佐之；大夫之丧，大胥侍之，众胥是敛；士之丧，胥为侍，士是敛。
现代文：国君的丧事，由太祝主持小敛、大敛，由众祝作其助手。大夫的丧事，由太祝亲临指点，由众祝动手小敛、大敛。
English: The funeral of the sovereign is presided over by the Grand Empress Dowager and assisted by all the courtiers. The funeral of a doctor is presided over by the Grand Empress Dowager and assisted by all the courtiers.

古文：小敛大敛，祭服不倒，皆左衽结绞不纽。
现代文：捆紧敛衣和尸体的布带子要打成死结而不是活扣。
English: Cloth bands used to bind the straitjacket and the corpse should be made into a dead knot, not a live knot.

古文：敛者既敛必哭。
现代文：参预装敛的人在装敛完毕之后一定要哭。
English: People who take part in the pre-casting must cry after the casting is over.

古文：士与其执事则敛，敛焉则为之壹不食。
现代文：生前与士曾经共事的人才参与士的小大敛，既然参与了小大敛就为哀悼死者停食一顿。
English: Talents who had worked with him before his death participated in his small retreat. Since they participated in the small retreat, they stopped eating to mourn the dead.

古文：凡敛者六人。
现代文：装敛工作共需六人。
English: A total of six people are needed for the installation work.

古文：君锦冒黼杀，缀旁七；大夫玄冒黼杀，缀旁五；士缁冒赪杀，缀旁三。
现代文：国君的韬尸袋，上半截是织锦的下半截是白黑相间的斧形花纹，旁边打七个结。大夫的韬尸袋，上半截是玄色的帛，下半截有白黑相间的斧形花纹，旁边打五个结。士的韬尸袋，上半截是黑色帛，下半截是赤色帛，旁边打三个结。
English: The king's body bag, the upper half is brocade, the lower half is white and black axe pattern, and seven knots are tied next to it. The doctor's body bag, the upper half is black satin, the lower half is white and black axe pattern, and five knots are tied next to it. The priest's body bag, the upper half is black satin, the lower half is red satin, and three knots are tied next to it.

古文：凡冒质长与手齐，杀三尺，自小敛以往用夷衾，夷衾质杀之，裁犹冒也。
现代文：韬尸袋的上半截，长度总与手齐，下半截长三尺。从小敛以后用夷袅覆尸，夷袅被面的质料和颜色也分上下两半截，和韬尸袋的上下半截一样。
English: The upper half of the body bag is cut off, the length is always the same as the hand, and the lower half is cut off three feet long. The corpse has been covered with a coffin since it was small. The material and color of the coffin cover are also divided into the upper and lower halves, the same as the upper and lower half of the body bag.

古文：君将大敛，子弁绖，即位于序端，卿大夫即位于堂廉楹西，北面东上，父兄堂下北面，夫人命妇尸西东面，外宗房中南面。
现代文：即将举行国君的大敛，世子头戴弃经在东序南端就位；卿、大夫在堂的南沿东楹以西就位，都面向北，以东边为上位；未仕的父辈兄辈族人在堂下就位，也都面向北，以东边为上位；夫人和内命妇在尸体西边就位，面向东；外宗在西房中就位，面向南。
English: When the great enthronement of the sovereign is about to take place, the heir, the head of the lineage, will take his place at the south end of the east row; the lord and the doctor will take their places at the south of the hall, along the east pier and west, all facing north, with the east side as the higher side; the unmarried fathers and brothers of the clan will take their places under the hall, all facing north, with the east side as the higher side; the wife and the wife of the deceased will take their places at the west side of the body, facing east; and the foreign family will take their places in the west room, facing south.

古文：小臣铺席，商祝铺绞紟衾衣，士盥于盘，上士举迁尸于敛上。
现代文：由小臣在昨阶上铺好敛席，然后由商祝依次铺上绞、纷、袅、衣，然后丧祝开始在盘子上洗手，抬起尸体，挪放到铺好的大敛衣服上。
English: The ministers lay out the clothes on the last step, and then the merchants lay out the bedding, bedding, bedding, and clothing, and then the mourners begin to wash their hands on the plates, lift the bodies, and place them on the laid-out clothes.

古文：卒敛，宰告，子冯之踊，夫人东面亦如之。
现代文：大敛结束，总管向世子报告，世子就抱着尸体痛哭，跳起跺脚。
English: When the mass hanging was over, the head steward reported to the heir, who cried bitterly while holding the corpse and jumped up and stamped his feet.

古文：大夫之丧，将大敛，既铺绞紟衾衣。
现代文：夫人在尸体西边，面向东，也像世子那样地痛哭跺脚。
English: On the west side of the corpse, facing east, his wife was also crying and stamping her feet, just like her son.

古文：君至，主人迎，先入门右，巫止于门外，君释菜，祝先入升堂，君即位于序端，卿大夫即位于堂廉楹西，北面东上；主人房外南面，主妇尸西，东面。
现代文：办大夫的丧事，将要大敛，绞、纷、表、衣都已经铺好，国君突然在此刻来吊，主人就要马上到大门外迎接。主人先进门，站在门内西边恭候国君进门。国君把随同而来的巫留到门外，祭过门神，随同国君而来的祝先进门，登堂；国君进门以后，登堂就位于东序的南端；卿、大夫在堂的南沿东楹以西就位，面都朝北，以东边为上位；主人站在东房之外，面向南；主妇仍在尸体西边，面向东。
English: The funeral of the doctor-in-charge is about to begin. The coffin, the bedroll, the table, and the clothes have all been laid out. The sovereign suddenly arrives at this moment, and the master is about to meet him outside the gate. The master enters the gate and stands on the west side of the gate, waiting for the sovereign to enter the gate. The sovereign leaves the attendant witch outside the gate, sacrifices the door deity, and the attendant god enters the gate and enters the hall. After the sovereign enters the door, the entrance to the hall is located at the southern end of the east row; the lord and the doctor are in the south of the hall, west of the

古文：迁尸，卒敛，宰告，主人降，北面于堂下，君抚之，主人拜稽颡，君降、升主人冯之，命主妇冯之。
现代文：此时，才将尸体抬起挪动到刚才已经铺好的大敛衣服上面。大敛结束，总管向主人报告，主人就下堂，面北而立，待君下堂。国君抚摩一下尸体，表示君臣从此永别，主人磕头拜谢。国君下得堂来，命主人升堂凭尸，命主妇升堂凭尸。
English: At this time, the corpse was lifted and moved to the clothes that had just been laid out on top of the large pile. When the large pile was over, the head steward reported to the master, and the master went down the hall, stood facing north, and waited for him to go down the hall. The sovereign stroked the corpse, indicating that the sovereign and the vassal would never see each other again, and the master bowed his head in thanks. The sovereign came down the hall, ordered the master to go up the hall with the corpse, and ordered the mistress to go up the hall with the corpse.

古文：士之丧，将大敛，君不在，其余礼犹大夫也。
现代文：办士的丧事，在即将大敛时，由于士的地位低下，国君是不会赏光前往的；除此而外，其余的礼数都和大夫一样。
English: When the funeral of an official is about to take place, because of the low status of the official, the sovereign will not be honored to go; except for this, the rest of the number of courtesies are the same as the doctor.

古文：铺绞紟，踊；铺衾，踊；铺衣，踊；迁尸，踊；敛衣，踊；敛衾，踊；敛绞紟，踊。
现代文：在大敛过程中，在铺绞、纷时，孝子要跳起跺脚；在铺被子时，孝子要跳起跺脚；在铺敛衣时，孝子要跳起跺脚；在挪动尸体时，孝子要跳起跺脚；在用敛衣裹尸时厂孝子要跳起跺脚；在用敛被裹尸时，孝子要跳起跺脚；在束紧裹尸的布带与单被时，孝子要跳起跺脚。
English: In the process of great restraint, the filial son should jump up and stamp his feet when wringing and winding; when laying a quilt, the filial son should jump up and stamp his feet; when laying a garment, the filial son should jump up and stamp his feet; when moving a corpse, the filial son should jump up and stamp his feet; when wrapping a corpse with a garment, the filial son should jump up and stamp his feet; when wrapping a corpse with a garment, the filial son should jump up and stamp his feet; when tying a cloth band and a sheet, the filial son should jump up and stamp his feet.

古文：君抚大夫，抚内命妇；大夫抚室老，抚侄娣。
现代文：大敛结束以后，国君抚摸大夫尸体的心口，抚摸内命妇的心口；大失则抚摸室老的心口，抚摸侄娣的心口。
English: After the great restraint was over, the sovereign touched the heart of the doctor's corpse, and the heart of his wife; the great loss touched the heart of his wife's sister, and the heart of his nephew.

古文：君大夫冯父母、妻、长子，不冯庶子；士冯父母、妻、长子、庶子，庶子有子，则父母不冯其尸。
现代文：国君、大夫要趴在父、母、妻、长子的尸体上痛哭，但不可趴在庶子的尸体上痛哭。士可以趴在父、母、妻、长子、庶子的尸体上痛哭；如果庶子有子，则庶子的父母就不趴在他的尸体上痛哭。
English: The sovereign and the doctor must lie down and weep over the dead bodies of the father, mother, wife, and eldest son, but they must not lie down and weep over the dead body of the illegitimate son. The scholar may lie down and weep over the dead bodies of the father, mother, wife, eldest son, and illegitimate son; if the illegitimate son has a son, the parents of the illegitimate son must not lie down and weep over his dead body.

古文：凡冯尸者，父母先，妻子后。
现代文：凡是举行凭尸之礼时，由父母先凭，妻子后凭。
English: Whenever a burial ceremony is held, the parents are buried first, followed by the wife.

古文：君于臣抚之，父母于子执之，子于父母冯之，妇于舅姑奉之，舅姑于妇抚之，妻于夫拘之，夫于妻于昆弟执之。
现代文：凭尸的方式因人而异，具体说来：国君对于臣下是以手抚按尸心部位的衣服而哭，父母对于儿子是抓紧尸心部位的衣服而哭，儿子对于父母是伏在尸体心口部位而哭，媳妇对于公婆是捧着尸心部位的衣服而哭，公婆对于媳妇是抚按尸心部位的衣服而哭，妻子对于丈夫是扯着尸心部位的衣服而哭，丈夫对于妻子和他的兄弟，是抓紧心口部位的衣服而哭。
English: The way of holding the corpse varies from person to person, specifically: the sovereign cries for his subjects by stroking the clothes that press the heart of the corpse, the parents cry for the son by holding the clothes that press the heart of the corpse, the son cries for the parents by lying down at the heart of the corpse, the daughter-in-law cries for the mother-in-law by holding the clothes that press the heart of the corpse, the mother-in-law cries for the daughter-in-law by stroking the clothes that press the heart of the corpse, the wife cries for the husband by pulling the clothes that press the heart of the corpse, and

古文：冯尸不当君所。
现代文：凡凭尸时，国君已经抚按过的地方要避开。
English: Avoid touching any part of the body where the sovereign has touched it.

古文：凡冯尸，兴必踊。
现代文：凡凭尸而哭都是跪姿，立起身后一定要跳起跺脚以发泄其哀痛。
English: Those who cry for the dead are kneeling, and after standing up, they must jump up and stamp their feet to vent their grief.

古文：父母之丧，居倚庐、不涂，寝苫枕块，非丧事不言。
现代文：居父母之丧，始死，孝子住在倚庐里，倚庐的棚顶不涂泥，孝子就睡在里边铺的草苫上，用土块当枕头，不说与丧事无关的话。
English: At the time of his parents' death, he was the first to die, and his son lived in a lean-to. The roof of the lean-to was not plastered with mud, and he slept on a straw bed inside, using a clod of earth as a pillow, not to mention anything unrelated to the funeral.

古文：君为庐宫之，大夫士襢之。
现代文：国君的倚庐，其外有一圈帷布围绕，作用如同宫墙；大夫、士的倚庐，其外就没有什么东西围绕。
English: The scepter of the sovereign is surrounded by a circle of drapery, acting like a palace wall; the scepter of the doctor and the priest is surrounded by nothing.

古文：既葬柱楣，涂庐不于显者。
现代文：葬过父母之后，就可以把卧地之媚用柱子支起来，把倚庐的内壁涂上泥。
English: After burying one's parents, one can prop up the coffin with a pillar and paint the inner wall of the coffin with mud.

古文：君、大夫、士皆宫之。
现代文：此时，国君、大夫、士的倚庐之外就都有帷帐围绕。
English: At this time, there are curtains around the coffins of the sovereigns, doctors, and priests.

古文：凡非适子者，自未葬以于隐者为庐。
现代文：凡不是嫡子的庶子，从一开始也住倚庐，但倚庐要设在比较隐蔽的地方，不可像嫡子的倚庐那祥引人注目。
English: Anyone who is not an illegitimate son of the legitimate son will also live in a yakitori restaurant from the beginning, but the yakitori restaurant should be located in a more secluded place and should not be as eye-catching as the yakitori restaurant of the legitimate son.

古文：既葬，与人立：君言王事，不言国事；大夫士言公事，不言家事。
现代文：葬毕，孝子可以与人并立，但还不可扎堆；孝子是国君的可以谈及天子的事情，但不可谈及本国之事；孝子是大夫、士的可以谈及国君的事，但不可谈及自家的事。
English: After the funeral, the filial son can stand side by side with other people, but he cannot yet make a pile; the filial son of the sovereign can talk about the things of the heavenly son, but he cannot talk about the things of the country; the filial son of the doctor and the scholar can talk about the things of the sovereign, but he cannot talk about the things of his own family.

古文：君既葬，王政入于国，既卒哭而服王事；大夫、士既葬，公政入于家，既卒哭、弁绖带，金革之事无辟也。
现代文：孝子是国君的，葬后，天子的政令就又可以畅通于本国了；卒哭以后，就可以为天子奔走效劳了。孝子是大夫、士的，葬后，国君的命令又要照常执行；卒哭以后，就是遇到打仗的事也不可推辞。
English: A filial son belongs to the sovereign. After the funeral, the decrees of the heavenly son can flow freely in the country. After crying, you can run to serve the heavenly son. A filial son is a doctor and a priest. After the funeral, the orders of the sovereign must be carried out as usual. After crying, even if there is a war, you can't refuse.

古文：既练，居垩室，不与人居。
现代文：练祭之后，服三年之丧的孝子就可以迁居垄室，不和别人住在一起。
English: After the training festival, the filial son who has served three years of mourning can move to the ridge room and not live with others.

古文：君谋国政，大夫、士谋家事。
现代文：此时，是国君的可以谋划国事，是大夫、士的可以谋划家事。
English: At this time, it is the sovereign who can plan national affairs, and doctors and scholars can plan family affairs.

古文：既祥，黝垩。
现代文：大祥以后，孝子搬进经过粉刷的殡宫居住。
English: After Taisho, Takako moved into a whitewashed funeral home.

古文：祥而外无哭者；禫而内无哭者，乐作矣故也。
现代文：这样一来大祥以后在殡宫门外就听不到孝子的哭声了；樟祭以后可以除去孝服，这样一来殡宫之内就听不到孝子的哭声了，因为已经可以奏乐了。
English: In this way, after the great blessing, the cries of the filial son will not be heard outside the door of the funeral hall; after the burnt offering, the filial clothing can be removed, and the cries of the filial son will not be heard inside the funeral hall, because the music can already be played.

古文：禫而从御，吉祭而复寝。
现代文：樟祭以后可以让妻妾服侍，因为吉祭以后孝子就搬回自己的寝室去住了。
English: After the burnt offering, the wife and concubine can serve, because after the auspicious festival, the filial son moved back to his bedroom and lived.

古文：期居庐，终丧不御于内者，父在为母为妻；齐衰期者，大功布衰九月者，皆三月不御于内。
现代文：服丧一年而住倚庐，并且在服丧期内始终不可让妇人侍寝的，只适用于父在为母和丈夫为妻这两种本应三年而降为齐衰一年的人。为大功亲属服丧的期限是九个月，头三个月不可让妇人侍寝。
English: For those who have been mourning for a year and have been living in a coffin, and who have never allowed a woman to sleep with them during the mourning period, it is only applicable to those whose father was a mother and husband was a wife, both of which should have been three years but were reduced to one year. The period of mourning for great relatives is nine months, and women should not be allowed to sleep with them for the first three months.

古文：妇人不居庐，不寝苫。
现代文：居丧期间，妇人不住倚庐，不睡在草苫子上。
English: During the period of mourning, the woman does not keep reclining, does not sleep on the straw mattress.

古文：丧父母，既练而归；期九月者，既葬而归。
现代文：妇人遇到自己父母的丧事，就在娘家住到练祭以后再回婆家；如果娘家去世的是期亲或大功之亲，那就在下葬以后即回婆家。
English: When a woman encounters the death of her parents, she will stay at her daughter's house until the practice of the festival and then return to her mother-in-law's house; if the death of her daughter's family is a relative or a relative of great merit, then she will return to her mother-in-law's house after the burial.

古文：公之丧，大夫俟练，士卒哭而归。
现代文：为国君服丧，异姓的大夫要等到练祭以后才可回家，异姓的士要等到卒哭以后才可回家。
English: For the national mourning, doctors with different surnames can not go home until after the ritual, and taxi drivers with different surnames can not go home until after crying.

古文：大夫、士父母之葬，既练而归。朔月忌日，则归哭于宗室。
现代文：身份是庶子的大夫、士，在滴长子家中为父母守丧，等到练祭以后就可以回到自己家里；只是在每逢初一和忌日时，应再回到嫡长子家去哭祭。
English: The status is that of an illegitimate son, a doctor or a priest, who holds a memorial service for his parents at the home of the eldest son, and can return to his own home after the ritual. However, on the first day of the new year and the day of death, he should return to the eldest son's home to cry.

古文：诸父兄弟之丧，既卒哭而归。
现代文：为伯父、叔父、兄弟守丧，在卒哭以后就可以回家。
English: For uncles, uncles and brothers, the funeral is over, and after a few tears, you can go home.

古文：父不次于子，兄不次于弟。
现代文：作父亲的不在庶子家里搭棚守丧，作哥哥的不在弟弟家里搭棚守丧。
English: The father shall not make his bed in the house of his son-in-law, nor shall the brother make his bed in the house of his brother.

古文：君于大夫、世妇大敛焉；为之赐则小敛焉。
现代文：一般情况下，国君只参加大夫、世妇的大敛；如果特别赏脸，就连小敛也参加。
English: Under normal circumstances, the sovereign only takes part in the grand gathering of doctors and women of the world; if he is particularly pleased, he will even take part in the small gathering.

古文：于外命妇，既加盖而君至。
现代文：国君对外命妇的吊唁，要在棺材加上盖子以后才到场。
English: The condolences of the sovereign to the foreign empress should not arrive until after the coffin has been covered.

古文：于士，既殡而往；为之赐，大敛焉。
现代文：国君吊士之丧，一般情况下是成殡以后再去；如果特别赏脸，就连大敛也前往。
English: In the case of the death of a national dignitary, it is usually necessary to go after the funeral; if you are particularly impressed, you can even go to the Great Wall.

古文：夫人于世妇，大敛焉；为之赐，小敛焉。
现代文：国君夫人对于世妇，一般情况下只参加其大敛；如果格外赏脸，就连小敛也参加。
English: The wife of the sovereign, in the case of a woman of the world, generally only participates in the grand wreath-laying ceremony; if she is particularly pleased, she will also participate in the small wreath-laying ceremony.

古文：于诸妻，为之赐，大敛焉。
现代文：夫人对于诸妻，在格外赏脸的情况下才亲临其大敛。
English: For wives, it is only when they are particularly pleased with their faces that their wives come to see them in person.

古文：于大夫外命妇，既殡而往。
现代文：夫人对大夫和外命妇的吊唁，都是在成殡以后前往。
English: His wife's condolences to the doctor and his estranged wife came after the funeral.

古文：大夫、士既殡而君往焉，使人戒之，主人具殷奠之礼，俟于门外。
现代文：大夫、士已经入殡，如果此刻国君前去吊丧，要派人通知丧家。
English: The doctor and the priest have already been buried. If the sovereign goes to the funeral at this time, someone should be sent to inform the funeral home.

古文：见马首，先入门右，巫止于门外，祝代之先，君释菜于门内。
现代文：主人接到通知后，感到非常荣幸，就要备下丰盛的奠礼准备祭告亡灵。然后在门外恭候，一见到国君乘车的马首：就先进门，立在门右。国君把随行的巫留在门外，由祝代巫在前领路。
English: After receiving the notice, the owner felt very honored and had to prepare a rich memorial service to prepare a sacrifice to the dead. Then he waited outside the door. As soon as he saw the horse's head of the sovereign riding in the car, he went to the front door and stood on the right side of the door. The sovereign left the accompanying witch outside the door, and the good luck witch led the way.

古文：祝先升自阼阶，负墉南面。
现代文：国君在门内祭祀门神，祝先从东阶上堂，背靠北墙，面南而立。
English: The sovereign offers a sacrifice to the door god inside the gate, and wishes to go up the hall from the east steps first, with his back against the north wall and his face facing south.

古文：君即位于阼。小臣二人执戈立于前，二人立于后。
现代文：此时国君在东阶上就位，两个近臣持戈立在国君身前，另外两个近臣持戈立在国君身后，以避邪气。
English: At this time, the sovereign takes his place on the east step, two courtiers hold Goliath in front of the sovereign, and two other courtiers hold Goliath behind the sovereign to avoid evil.

古文：摈者进，主人拜稽颡。
现代文：赞礼者命主人拜谢，主人于是在堂下面向北磕头拜谢。
English: The eulogizer ordered the host to give thanks, and the host then bowed down to the North Shantou below the hall.

古文：君称言，视祝而踊，主人踊。
现代文：国君说些慰问的话，并根据祝的示意跳起跺脚。主人也跟着哭泣跺脚。
English: The sovereign said some words of condolence, and jumped up and stamped his feet in accordance with the wishes. The host also cried and stamped his feet.

古文：大夫则奠可也。士则出俟于门外，命之反奠，乃反奠。
现代文：此时，如果丧家是大夫，就可以接着举行殷奠祭告亡灵了；如果丧家是士，主人就要先到门外等着拜送国君，等到国君命他返回举行殷奠，他才返回举行殷奠。
English: At this time, if the bereaved is a doctor, he can then hold a memorial service for the dead; if the bereaved is a priest, the owner must first wait outside the door to pay homage to the sovereign, and wait until the sovereign orders him to return to hold a memorial service before he returns to hold a memorial service.

古文：卒奠，主人先俟于门外，君退，主人送于门外，拜稽颡。
现代文：奠毕，主人要先到门外等候，在国君离去时，主人送到门外，磕头拜谢。
English: When the meal is over, the host should first wait outside the door. When the sovereign leaves, the host should escort him outside the door and bow his head in thanks.

古文：君于大夫疾，三问之，在殡，三往焉；士疾，壹问之，在殡，壹往焉。
现代文：大夫在病重期间，国君要去探望三次；大夫在停殡期间，国君要去吊丧三次。士在病重期间，国君要去探望一次；在停殡期间，要去吊丧一次。
English: When a doctor is gravely ill, the sovereign should visit three times; when a doctor is not attending a funeral, the sovereign should visit three times; when a priest is gravely ill, the sovereign should visit once; and when a funeral is not in session, the sovereign should visit once.

古文：君吊则复殡服。夫人吊于大夫、士，主人出迎于门外，见马首，先入门右。
现代文：国君在殡后去吊丧时，主人要脱去孝服，重新改为殡前未成服时的打扮。国君夫人到大夫、士的家里吊丧，主人要到门外迎接，一见到夫人乘车的马首，就先进门，立在门右。
English: When the sovereign goes to the funeral after the funeral, the owner should take off the filial piety robe and change it to the dress of the unfinished dress before the funeral. When the sovereign's wife went to the doctor and the gentleman's house for the funeral, the owner should meet her outside the door. As soon as he saw the horse's head of his wife riding in the car, he went to the front door and stood on the right side of the door.

古文：夫人入，升堂即位。
现代文：夫人入门，升堂就位。
English: The wife enters the door and ascends to her seat.

古文：主妇降自西阶，拜稽颡于下。夫人视世子而踊。
现代文：主妇从西阶下堂，在堂下面向夫人磕头拜谢。
English: The housewife went down the hall from the west steps and bowed to her wife.

古文：奠如君至之礼。
现代文：夫人在女祝的示意下哭踊。设奠的礼仪和国君来吊时一样。
English: The wife cries and dances at the suggestion of the maid of honor. The ceremony of laying a wreath is the same as when the sovereign comes to hang himself.

古文：夫人退，主妇送于门内，拜稽颡；主人送于大门之外不拜。
现代文：夫人临走时，主妇送到门内，磕头拜谢；主人则要送到大门之外，就不用再磕头拜谢了。
English: When the wife is about to leave, the housewife should go to the door and bow; the master should go outside the gate, and there is no need to bow.

古文：大夫君不迎于门外。
现代文：大夫到其家臣家里吊丧，家臣不必到门外迎接。
English: The doctor went to his vassal's house to mourn, and the vassal did not have to go outside to greet him.

古文：入即位于堂下。主人北面，众主人南面；妇人即位于房中。
现代文：大夫进得门来，在昨阶下就位，面朝西；主人立在大夫之南，面向北；众庶子面向南；主妇等女辈在东房中就位。
English: The doctor came in through the door and took his place under the last step, facing west; the master stood south of the doctor, facing north; the illegitimate children faced south; the housewives and other women took their places in the east room.

古文：若有君命，命夫命妇之命，四邻宾客，其君后主人而拜。
现代文：大夫来吊丧时，如果碰上国君派使者、命夫命妇派使者、或四邻来吊丧，大夫就让主人站在自己身后，自己先代表主人向吊宾拜谢，然后主人再拜谢。
English: When the doctor comes to the funeral, if he encounters the emissary sent by the sovereign, the emissary sent by the husband or the wife, or the four neighbors come to the funeral, the doctor will let the owner stand behind him, and he will first bow to the mourners on behalf of the owner, and then the owner will bow.

古文：君吊，见尸柩而后踊。
现代文：国君吊丧，要见到尸体或灵枢以后再哭踊。
English: After the death of a sovereign, it is necessary to see the corpse or the spirit center before weeping and dancing.

古文：大夫、士若君不戒而往，不具殷奠；君退必奠。
现代文：大夫、士在国君来吊丧时，如果事前未得到通知，仓促之中也办不来殷奠，那就只有在国君离去之后，立即设奠，祭告亡灵。
English: When doctors and priests come to pay their respects, if they have not been notified in advance and cannot pay their respects in a hurry, then they should pay their respects immediately after the king has passed away and pay their respects to the dead.

