古文：起著雍摄提格正月，尽七月，不满一年。
现代文：起著雍摄提格正月，尽七月，不满一年。
English: The lunar calendar starts in the first month of the year and ends in July, less than a year later.

古文：高祖神尧大圣光孝皇帝上之上
现代文：高祖神尧大圣光孝皇帝上之上
English: Gao Zu Shen, the great saint, is above Emperor Guangxiao

古文：武德元年，戊寅公元年
现代文：唐高祖武德元年春季，正月丁未朔。
English: Tang Gao's ancestor Wu De was born in the spring of the first year of the year.

古文：春，正月，丁未朔，隋恭帝诏唐王剑履上殿，赞拜不名。
现代文：隋恭帝下诏允许唐王佩带宝剑穿鞋上殿朝见，行礼时不必通报姓名。
English: Emperor Sui and Emperor Gong issued an edict allowing the Tang king to wear a sword and shoes to the palace for the imperial court, and he did not have to announce his name when he performed the salute.

古文：唐王既克长安，以书谕诸郡县，于是东自商洛，南尽巴、蜀，郡县长吏及盗贼渠帅、氐羌酋长，争遣子弟入见请降，有司复书，日以百数。
现代文：唐王攻克长安之后，便致函通告各郡县，于是东起商洛，南至巴蜀，各地的郡县长官、盗贼首领、氐羌酋长，争相派遣子弟见唐王请求归顺，有关衙门每天要回复数以百计的信函。
English: After the Tang King conquered Chang'an, he sent a letter to notify each county and county, so from Shangluo in the east to Bashu in the south, county and county magistrates, bandit leaders, and warlord chiefs from all over the country scrambled to send their sons and daughters to see the Tang King to request surrender. The relevant warlords had to reply to hundreds of letters every day.

古文：王世充既得东都兵，进击李密于洛北，败之，遂屯巩北。
现代文：王世充获得东都兵马，在洛北打败了李密，便驻札在巩县北面。
English: Wang Shichong gained Dongdu soldiers and horses, defeated Li Mi in the north of Luo, and then stationed in the north of Gongxian.

古文：辛酉，世充命诸军各造浮桥渡洛击密，桥先成者先进，前后不一。虎贲郎将王辩破密外栅，密营中惊扰，将溃；世充不知，鸣角收众，密因帅敢死士乘之，世充大败，争桥溺死者万馀人。
现代文：辛酉，王世充命令各军分别搭设浮桥渡洛河向李密进攻，先搭好桥的军队先攻击，各军前后不一致，虎贲郎将王辩突破李密军外层营墙，李密军营之中一片惊恐混乱，就要溃败，可王世充并不了解这一情况，吹号角收兵。李密乘机带领敢死者反攻，王世充大败，败军争相过浮桥，落水淹死了一万多人。
English: Xin Xin, Wang Shichong ordered each army to separately set up a pontoon bridge across the Luo River to attack Li Mi. The army that built the bridge first attacked first. The armies were inconsistent. Tigress broke Wang Dian through the outer camp wall of Li Mi's army. Li Mi's camp was in a panic and chaos and was about to collapse. However, Wang Shichong did not understand this situation and blew a horn to collect troops. Li Mi took the opportunity to lead the dead to counterattack. Wang Shichong was defeated. The defeated army scrambled across the pontoon bridge and fell into the water, drowning more than 10,000 people.

古文：王辩死，世充仅自免，洛北诸军皆溃。
现代文：王辩阵亡，王世充只保得自己脱身，洛北各军全线崩溃。
English: Wang Dian was killed in battle, Wang Shichong was only able to save himself, and all the armies in the northern part of Luo collapsed.

古文：世充不敢入东都，北趣河阳。
现代文：王世充不敢回东都，率军北赴河阳。
English: Wang Shichong did not dare to return to Dongdu and led his army north to Hebei.

古文：是夜，疾风寒雨，军士涉水沾湿，道路冻死者又以万数。
现代文：当晚，风狂雨冷，士兵趟水浑身上下都打湿了，一路冻死的又数以万计。
English: That night, it was windy, rainy and cold, and the soldiers were wet from head to toe. Tens of thousands more died of cold along the way.

古文：世充独与数千人至河阳，自系狱请罪，越王侗遣使赦之，召还东都，赐金帛、美女以安其意。
现代文：跟随王世充到达河阳的只有几千人。王世充绑缚自己投狱请求治罪。隋越王杨侗派人赦免了王世充，召他回东都，赐给他金钱锦缎美女安慰他。
English: Only a few thousand people followed Wang Shichong to Kheyang. Wang Shichong tied himself up and went to prison to plead for punishment. Sui and Yue King Yang Hui sent someone to pardon Wang Shichong, called him back to Dongdu, gave him money and a beautiful woman to comfort him.

古文：世充收合亡散，得万馀人，屯含嘉城，不敢复出。
现代文：王世充召集逃散的旧部，得一万多人，驻扎于含嘉城，不敢再出战。
English: Wang Shichong called together the former troops who had fled and dispersed, and more than ten thousand people were stationed in Hanzhajie. They did not dare to go to war again.

古文：密乘胜进据金墉城，修其门堞、庐舍而居之，钲鼓之声，闻于东都；未几，拥兵三十馀万，陈于北邙，南逼上春门。
现代文：李密乘胜进据金墉城，修复城门堞、房屋，住在城内，战鼓的声音由此传到东都。不久，李密拥兵三十万，在北邙列战阵，南边逼近东都上春门。
English: Li Mizhong entered the stronghold of Jinyuan City, repaired the city gates and houses, and lived in the city. The sound of the war drums spread to the eastern capital. Soon, Li Mizhong had 300,000 soldiers lined up in the north and approached the eastern capital Shangchun Gate in the south.

古文：乙丑，金紫光禄大夫段达、民部尚书韦津出兵拒之。达望见密兵盛，惧而先还。密纵兵乘之，军遂溃，韦津死。
现代文：乙丑，隋金紫光禄大夫段达、民部尚书韦津领兵抵御李密，段达一见李密军势强盛，心中害怕，率先回逃，李密纵兵追击，隋军溃败，韦津死。
English: Second ugly, Sui Jin Zi Guanglu doctor Duan Da, the Ministry of Civil Affairs Shang Shu Weijin led the troops to resist Li Mi, Duan Da saw Li Mi's army was strong, he was afraid, he took the lead in fleeing back, Li Mi's column pursued, the Sui army was defeated, and Wei Jin died.

古文：于是偃师、柏谷及河阳都尉独孤武都、检校河内郡丞柳燮、职方郎柳续等各举所部降于密。
现代文：于是隋偃师、柏谷及河阳都尉独孤武都、检校河内郡丞柳燮、职方郎柳续等各自率领部下投降了李密。
English: As a result, Sui Xuan's division, the Kashiwaya and Kawayan commanders, the inspector of schools, the governor of Hanoi County, Liu Xuan, and the officer-in-charge, Lang Liu, and their subordinates surrendered to Li Mi.

古文：窦建德、硃粲、孟海公、徐圆朗等并遣使奉表劝进，密官属裴仁基等亦上表请正位号，密曰： 东都未平，不可议此。 
现代文：窦建德、朱粲、孟海公、徐圆朗等都派人奉表劝李密称帝，李密属下裴仁基等也上表请正位号。李密回答： 东都没有攻克，还谈不上这事。 
English: Dou Jiande, Zhu Xi, Meng Haigong, Xu Yuanlang, and others all sent representatives to Li Mi to ask him to proclaim himself emperor, and Li Mi's subordinate Pei Renji also sent representatives to ask for the imperial regnal number. Li Mi replied: The East has not been conquered, and there is no point in talking about it.

古文：戊辰，唐王以世子建成为左元帅，秦公世民为右元帅，督诸军十馀万人救东都。
现代文：戊辰，唐王以世子李建成为左元帅，秦公李世民为右元帅，率领各路兵马十余万救援东都。
English: In Wuchen, Tang King made his son Li Jian the left field marshal, and Qin King Li Shimin the right field marshal, and led more than 100,000 soldiers and horses to rescue Dongdu.

古文：东都乏食，太府卿元文都等募守城不食公粮者进散官二品，于是商贾执象而朝者，不可胜数。
现代文：东都缺粮，隋太府卿元文都等人召募守城人，不吃公粮的进散官二品，这一来手持象牙笏板上朝的商人，不计其数。
English: There was a shortage of grain in Dongdu, and the Sui daifu chancellor, Yuanwen Du, and others called for the recruitment of people to guard the city. There were countless merchants who came to the Shang Dynasty with ivory chopping boards in their hands.

古文：二月，己卯，唐王遣太常卿郑元璹将兵出商洛，徇南阳，左领军府司马安陆马元规徇安陆及荆、襄。
现代文：二月，己卯，唐王派太常卿郑元领兵从商洛攻取南阳；派左领军府司马安陆人马元规攻取安陆及荆州、襄州。
English: In February, Emperor Tang sent Zheng Yuan (太常卿) to conquer Nanyang from Shangluo; he also sent Ma Anlu (馬安陆人) to conquer Anlu, Jingzhou and Xiangzhou.

古文：李密遣房彦藻、郑颋等东出黎阳，分道招慰州县。
现代文：李密派房彦藻、郑等人东行出黎阳分别招慰各州县。
English: Li Mi sent Fang Yanzuo, Zheng et al. eastbound out of Liyang to solicit the help of various states and counties.

古文：以梁郡太守杨汪为上柱国、宋州总管，又以手书与之曰： 昔在雍丘，曾相追捕，射钩斩袂，不敢庶几。 
现代文：李密以梁郡太守杨汪为上柱国、宋州总管，给杨汪的亲笔信写道： 过去我在雍丘曾遭您追捕，古人射钩斩袂的不计前嫌，我不敢说已经仿效了！ 
English: Li Mi regarded Yang Wang, the governor of Liang County, as the pillar of the country and the chief administrator of Song Province, and wrote a personal letter to Yang Wang: In the past, I was chased by you in Yongqiu. The ancients had no hesitation in shooting and beheading. I dare not say that I have followed suit!

古文：汪遣使往来通意，密亦羁縻待之。
现代文：杨汪派人与李密联系，李密也极尽笼络。
English: Yang Wang sent someone to contact Li Mi, and Li Mi also made every effort to woo him.

古文：彦藻以书招窦建德，使来见密。建德复书，卑辞厚礼，托以罗艺南侵，请捍御北垂。
现代文：房彦藻致书窦建德，请他来见李密，窦建德复信虽然言辞很谦卑、礼数很周全，但推托罗艺南下，请求守北边，不见李密。
English: Fang Yanxiao wrote to Dou Jiande, asking him to come and see Li Mi. Although Dou Jiande's reply was very humble and courteous, he urged Luo Yi to go to the south and asked him to stay in the north so that he would not see Li Mi.

古文：彦藻还，至卫州，贼帅王德仁邀杀之。
现代文：房彦藻回程走到卫州，贼帅王德仁截击并杀了他。
English: Fang Yanmao walked back to Weizhou, and the thief Wang Deren intercepted and killed him.

古文：德仁有众数万，据林虑山，四出抄掠，为数州之患。
现代文：王德仁有数万人，占据林虑山，四处抢劫，是几个州县的祸患。
English: Wang Deren has tens of thousands of people, occupying Linxi Mountain, robbing everywhere, and is the scourge of several states and counties.

古文：三月，己酉，以齐公元吉为镇北将军、太原道行军元帅、都督十五郡诸军事，听以便宜从事。
现代文：三月，己酉，唐王以齐公李元吉为镇北将军、太原道行军元帅，都督十五郡诸军事，允许他有权随机行事。
English: In March, the Tang king appointed Qi Gong Li Yuanji as the general of Zhenbei, the marshal of Taiyuan Road, and the military governor of fifteen counties, allowing him the right to act randomly.

古文：隋炀帝至江都，荒淫益甚，宫中为百馀房，各盛供张，实以美人，日令一房为主人。
现代文：隋炀帝到江都，更加荒淫，宫中一百多间房，每间摆设都极尽豪华，内住美女，每天以一房的美女作主人。
English: Sui and Qian emperors were even more extravagant when they came to Jiangdu. There were more than a hundred rooms in the palace, each of which was extremely luxurious, with beautiful women living in them. Every day, a beautiful woman was the master of one room.

古文：江都郡丞赵元楷掌供酒馔，帝与萧后及幸姬历就宴饮，酒卮不离口，从姬千馀人亦常醉。
现代文：江都郡丞赵元楷负责供应美酒饮食，炀帝与萧后以及宠幸的美女吃遍了宴会，酒杯不离口，随从的一千多美女也经常喝醉。
English: The governor of Jiangdu County, Zhao Yuankai, was responsible for the supply of fine wine and food. Emperor Gong and Empress Xiao and their favorite beauties ate all over the banquet. Wine glasses were always on their lips, and the more than one thousand beautiful women who accompanied them were often drunk.

古文：然帝见天下危乱，意亦扰扰不自安，退朝则幅巾短衣，策杖步游，遍历台馆，非夜不止，汲汲顾景，唯恐不足。
现代文：不过炀帝看到天下大乱，心情也忧虑不安，下朝后常头戴幅巾，身穿短衣，柱杖散步，走遍行宫的楼台馆舍，不到晚上不止步，不停地观赏四周景色，唯恐没有看够。
English: However, Emperor Gao saw the world in turmoil, and his mood was also worried and uneasy. In the morning and in the afternoon, he often wore a headscarf, wore a short coat, and walked with a cane. He walked all over the palace buildings, and did not stop walking until the evening. He kept watching the surrounding scenery, lest he did not see enough.

古文：帝自晓占候卜相，好为吴语；常夜置酒，仰视天文，谓萧后曰： 外间大有人图侬，然侬不失为长城公，卿不失为沈后，且共乐饮耳！ 
现代文：炀帝通晓占卜相面，爱说江浙话，经常半夜摆酒，抬头看星象，对萧后说： 外间有不少人算计侬，不过侬不失为长城公陈叔宝，卿也不失为沈后。我们姑且只管享乐饮酒吧！ 
English: Emperor Qian knew a lot about divination, loved to speak the language of Jiangsu and Zhejiang, often drank wine in the middle of the night, looked up at the stars, and said to Queen Xiao: There are a lot of people out there who think I'm a charlatan, but I'm also the Great Wall Prince Chen Shubao, and my lord is also the Queen of Sheng. Let's just enjoy the drinking bar!

古文：因引满沉醉。
现代文：然后倒满杯喝得烂醉。
English: He then pours himself a glass and gets very drunk.

古文：又尝引镜自照，顾谓萧后曰： 好头颈，谁当斫之？ 
现代文：炀帝还曾拿着镜子照着，回头对萧后说： 好一个头颅，该由谁斩下来？ 
English: Emperor Xuan also once held a mirror up to Xiao Hou and said, "This is a good head, who should cut it off?"

古文：后惊问故，帝笑曰： 贵贱苦乐，更迭为之，亦复何伤！ 
现代文：萧后惊异地问他为什么这样说，炀帝笑着说： 贵贱苦乐循环更替，又有什么好伤感的？ 
English: Xiao Hou was surprised and asked him why he said this. Emperor Zou smiled and said, "The cycle of noble and humble bittersweet music keeps changing, so what's so sad?

古文：帝见中原已乱，无心北归，欲都丹杨，保据江东，命群臣廷议之。内史侍郎虞世基等皆以为善；右候卫大将军李才极陈不可，请车驾还长安，与世基忿争而出。
现代文：炀帝见中原已乱，不想回北方，打算把国都迁到丹阳，保守江东，下令群臣在朝堂上议论迁都之事，内史侍郎虞世基等人都认为不错；右候卫大将军李才极力说明不可取，请炀帝御驾回长安，并与虞世基忿然争论而下殿。
English: Emperor Yao saw that the Central Plains had fallen into chaos and did not want to return to the north. He planned to move the capital to Danyang and keep the eastern part of the river. He ordered his courtiers to discuss the matter of moving the capital in the imperial court. Yu Shiji, the chamberlain of the imperial court, and others thought it was a good idea. Li Cai, the commander of the Right Division of the Imperial Guards, tried his best to explain why it was not advisable. He asked Emperor Yao to return to Chang'an, and angrily argued with Yu Shiji and left the palace.

古文：门下录事衡水李桐客曰： 江东卑湿，土地险狭，内奉万乘，外给三军，民不堪命，恐亦将散乱耳。 
现代文：门下录事衡水人李桐客说： 江东地势低洼，气候潮湿，环境恶劣，地域狭小，对内要奉养朝廷，对外要供奉三军，百姓承受不起，恐怕最终要起来造反的。 
English: Li Tongke, a door-to-door recorder, said: the Jiangdong region is low-lying, the climate is humid, the environment is bad, the area is small, it is necessary to maintain the imperial court internally, and to provide the three armies to the outside world. The people can not afford it, and I am afraid that they will eventually rebel.

古文：御史劾桐客谤毁朝政。于是公卿皆阿意言： 江东之民望幸已久，陛下过江，抚而临之，此大禹之事也。 
现代文：御史弹劾李桐客诽谤朝政，于是公卿都曲意阿奉炀帝之意说： 江东百姓渴望陛下临幸已经很久了，陛下过江抚慰统治百姓，这是大禹那样的作为。 
English: Imperial history impeached Li Tongke for slandering the imperial government, so the court nobles all came up with the idea of obeying the will of Emperor Xizong and said: The people of Jiangdong have been longing for His Majesty's arrival for a long time. His Majesty crossed the river to comfort and rule the people. This is the kind of deed that Dayu did.

古文：乃命治丹杨宫，将徙都之。
现代文：于是炀帝下令修建丹阳宫，准备迁都丹阳。
English: Therefore, Emperor Qian ordered the construction of Danyang Palace in preparation for moving the capital to Danyang.

古文：时江都粮尽，从驾骁果多关中人，久客思乡里，见帝无西意，多谋叛归。
现代文：当时江都的粮食吃完了，随炀帝南来的骁果大多是关中人，长期在外，思恋故乡，见炀帝没有回长安的意思，大都策划逃回乡。
English: At that time, the grain of Jiangdu was finished, and most of the strawberries that came south with Emperor Qian were Guanzhong people, who had been away for a long time and missed their hometown. Seeing that Emperor Qian had no intention of returning to Chang'an, most of them planned to flee back to their hometown.

古文：郎将窦贤遂帅所部西走，帝遣骑追斩之，而亡者犹不止，帝患之。
现代文：郎将窦贤便带领部下西逃。炀帝派骑兵追赶，杀了他，但仍然不断有人逃跑，令炀帝很头痛。
English: Emperor Xizong sent cavalry to chase and kill him, but people still kept escaping, causing Emperor Xizong a lot of headaches.

古文：虎贲郎将扶风司马德戡素有宠于帝，帝使领骁果屯于东城，德戡与所善虎贲郎将元礼、直阁裴虔通谋曰： 今骁果人人欲亡，我欲言之，恐先事受诛；不言，于后事发，亦不免族灭，奈何？
现代文：虎贲郎将扶风人司马德戡一向得炀帝信任，炀帝派他统领骁果，驻扎在东城，司马德戡与平时要好的虎贲郎将元礼、直裴虔通商量，说： 现在骁果人人想逃跑，我想说，又怕说早了被杀头；不说，事情真发生了，也逃不了族灭，怎么办？
English: Sima Degu, who had always gained the emperor's trust, was stationed in Dongcheng. Sima Degu and Tigahiro, who was usually a good friend, discussed the Yuan Rite and Zhi Pei Qian and said: "Nowadays, everyone wants to escape, I want to say, but I'm afraid of being killed if I say it too early. Besides, what if things really happened and we can't escape the genocide?

古文：又闻关内沦没，李孝常以华阴叛，上囚其二弟，欲杀之。我辈家属皆在西，能无此虑乎？ 
现代文：又听说关内沦陷，李孝常以华阴反叛，皇上囚禁了他的两个弟弟，准备杀掉，我们这些人的家属都在西边，能不担心这事吗？ 
English: I also heard that Guanai had fallen, that Li Xiaochang had rebelled with Huayin, that the emperor had imprisoned his two younger brothers and was preparing to kill them, and that the families of these people were all in the west. Shouldn't we be worried about this?

古文：二人皆惧，曰： 然计将安出？ 
现代文：元、裴二人都慌了，问： 既然如此，有什么好办法吗？ 
English: Yuan and Pei both panicked and asked, "Since this is the case, is there any good way out?"

古文：德戡曰： 骁果若亡，不若与之俱去。 
现代文：司马德戡说： 如果骁果逃亡，我们不如和他们一齐跑。 
English: Sima Deyao said: If Hao Guo escapes, we might as well run with them.

古文：二人皆曰： 善！ 
现代文：元、裴二人都说： 好主意！ 
English: Yuan and Bae both said, "What a great idea!

古文：因转相招引，内史舍人元敏、虎牙郎将赵行枢、鹰扬郎将孟秉、符玺郎李覆、牛方裕、直长许弘仁、薛世良、城门郎唐奉义、医正张恺、勋士杨士览等皆与之同谋，日夜相结约，于广座明论叛计，无所畏避。
现代文：于是相互联络，内史舍人元敏、虎牙郎将赵行枢、鹰扬郎将孟秉、符玺郎牛方裕、直长许弘仁、薛世良、城门郎唐奉义、医正张恺、勋侍杨士览等人都参与同谋，日夜联系，在大庭广众之下公开商议逃跑的事，毫无顾忌。
English: As a result, they contacted each other, and the person in charge of internal history, Yuan Min, the person in charge of tiger's teeth, Zhao Xingzhu, the person in charge of eagle's yakitori, Meng Bing, the person in charge of funerals, Niu Fangyu, the person in charge of direct administration, Xu Hongren, the person in charge of Xue Shiliang, the person in charge of the city gate, Tang Bongyi, the person in charge of medicine, Zhang Jun, the person in charge of honours, Yang Shizhang, and others all participated in the conspiracy. They contacted each other day and night, and openly

古文：有宫人白萧后曰： 外间人人欲反。 
现代文：有一位宫女告诉萧后： 外面人人想造反。 
English: A lady-in-waiting told Xiao Hou: "Outside, everyone wants to rebel.

古文：后曰： 任汝奏之。 
现代文：萧后说： 由你去报告吧。 
English: The empress said, "Play as you please to the emperor."

古文：宫人言于帝，帝大怒，以为非所宜言，斩之。
现代文：宫女便对炀帝说了，炀帝很生气，认为这不是宫女该过问的事，杀了这个宫女。
English: The lady-in-waiting then told Emperor Gong that Emperor Gong was very angry and thought that this was not something the lady-in-waiting should have asked about, so he killed the lady-in-waiting.

古文：其后宫人复白后，后曰： 天下事一朝至此，无可救者，何用言之！
现代文：后来又有人对萧后说起，萧后说： 天下局面到了今天这个地步，没法挽救了，不用说了，免得白让皇上担心！ 
English: Later, someone else started talking to Empress Xiao, and Empress Xiao said: The situation in the world has come to this point today, there is no way to save it, needless to say, so as not to worry the emperor in vain!

古文：徒令帝忧耳！ 
现代文：从此以后，再也没人说起外面的情况。
English: Since then, no one has said anything about the situation outside.

古文：自是无复言者。赵行枢与将作少监宇文智及素厚，杨士览，智及之甥也，二人以谋告智及，智及大喜。
现代文：赵行枢与将作少监宇文智及历来很要好，杨士览是宇文智及的外甥，赵、杨二人把他们的计划告诉了宇文智及，智及很高兴。
English: Zhao Xingzhu has always been very good friends with Yu Wenzhi and Yang Shizhan, who will be the junior inspector. Yang Shizhan is the nephew of Yu Wenzhi and Yang. Zhao and Yang told their plans to Yu Wenzhi and Yu Wenzhi, and Yu Wenzhi was very happy.

古文：德戡等期以三月望日结党西遁，智及曰： 主上虽无道，威令尚行，卿等亡去，正如窦贤取死耳。今天实丧隋，英雄并起，同心叛者已数万人，因行大事，此帝王之业也。 
现代文：司马德戡等人定于三月月圆那天结伴西逃，宇文智及说： 皇上虽然无道，可是威令还在，你们逃跑，和窦贤一样是找死，现在实在是老天爷要隋灭亡，英雄并起，同样心思想反叛的已有数万人，乘此机会起大事，正是帝王之业。 
English: Sima Deyao and others were scheduled to flee to the west together on the day of the March full moon, and Yu Wenzhi said: Although the emperor has no way, the command is still there. You are fleeing, and like Dou Xian, you are looking for death. Now it is really God who wants Sui to perish. Heroes are rising together. Tens of thousands of people have rebelled with the same heart and mind. Taking this opportunity to do great things is the emperor's cause.

古文：德戡等然之。
现代文：司马德戡等人同意他的意见。
English: Sima Deyu and others agree with him.

古文：行枢、薛世良请以智及兄右屯卫将军许公化及为主，结约既定，乃告化及。
现代文：赵行枢、薛世良要求由宇文智及的兄长右屯卫将军许公宇文化及为首领，协商定了，才告诉宇文化及。
English: Zhao Xingzhu and Xue Shiliang requested that Yu Wenzhi and his elder brother, General Xu Gongyong of the Right Division of the Middle Palace Guards, should be the leaders, and after consultation, they decided to tell Yu Wenzhi and the Right Division of the Middle Palace Guards.

古文：化及性驽怯，闻之，变色流汗，既而从之。
现代文：宇文化及性格怯懦，能力低下，听说后，脸色都变了，直冒冷汗，后来又听从了众人的安排。
English: Yu's culture and character were cowardly and his ability was low. After hearing this, his face changed and he broke into a cold sweat. Later, he followed everyone's arrangements.

古文：德戡使许弘仁、张恺入备身府，告所识者云： 陛下闻骁果欲叛，多醖毒酒，欲因享会，尽鸩杀之，独与南人留此。 
现代文：司马德戡让许弘仁、张恺去备身府，对认识的人说： 陛下听说骁果想反叛，酿了很多毒酒，准备利用宴会，把骁果都毒死，只和南方人留在江都。 
English: Sima Deya asked Xu Hongren and Zhang Ye to go to the capital to prepare themselves, and said to people he knew: "Your majesty heard that Xingguo wanted to rebel, brewed a lot of poisoned wine, prepared to take advantage of the banquet, poisoned Xingguo to death, and only left Xingguo with the southerners in Jiangdu.

古文：骁果皆惧，转相告语，反谋益急。
现代文：骁果都很恐慌，互相转告，更加速了反叛计划。
English: Both sides panicked, told on each other, and accelerated their plans for rebellion.

古文：乙卯，德戡悉召骁果军吏，谕以所为，皆曰： 唯将军命！ 
现代文：乙卯，司马德戡召集全体骁果军吏，宣布了计划，军吏们都说： 就听将军的吩咐！ 
English: One by one, Sima Dejun gathered all the military officials of Shiguo and announced the plan. The military officials all said, "Just listen to the general's orders!"

古文：是日，风霾昼昏。晡后，德戡盗御厩马，潜厉兵刃。
现代文：当天，大风刮得天昏地暗，黄昏，司马德戡偷出御厩马，暗地磨快了武器。
English: On the same day, the wind was blowing so hard that it made the sky dark. At dusk, Sima Deyao stole a stallion and secretly sharpened his weapons.

古文：是夕，元礼、裴虔通直阁下，专主殿内；唐奉义主闭城门，与虔通相知，诸门皆不下键。
现代文：傍晚，元礼、裴虔通在下值班，专门负责大殿内；唐奉义负责关闭城门，唐奉义与裴虔通等商量好，各门都不上锁。
English: In the evening, Yuan Li and Pei Qiantong were on duty, specifically in charge of the Great Hall; Tang Bongyi was responsible for closing the gate, Tang Bongyi and Pei Qiantong had a good discussion, and all the doors were not locked.

古文：至三更，德戡于东城集兵得数万人，举火与城外相应。帝望见火，且闻外喧嚣，问何事。
现代文：到三更时分，司马德戡在东城集合数万人，点起火与城外相呼应，炀帝看到火光，又听到宫外面的喧嚣声，询问发生了什么事。
English: At three o'clock, Sima Deyu gathered tens of thousands of people in Dongcheng, lit a fire and echoed outside the city. Emperor Qian saw the light of the fire, heard the noise outside the palace, and asked what happened.

古文：虔通对曰： 草坊失火，外人共救之耳。 
现代文：裴虔通回答： 草坊失火，外面的人在一起救火呢。 
English: Pei Qiantong replied, "The hay barn is on fire, and the people outside are fighting the fire together.

古文：时内外隔绝，帝以为然。
现代文：当时宫城内外相隔绝，炀帝相信了。
English: At that time, Miyagi was cut off from the outside world, and Emperor Shō believed it.

古文：智及与孟秉于城外集千馀人，劫候卫虎贲冯普乐布兵分守衢巷。
现代文：宇文智及和孟秉在宫城外面集合了一千多人，劫持了巡夜的候卫虎贲冯普乐，布署兵力分头把守街道。
English: Yu Wenzhi and Meng Bing gathered more than a thousand people outside Miyagi, hijacked the night watchman Feng Pule, and deployed troops to guard the streets.

古文：燕王倓觉有变，夜，穿芳林门侧水窦而入，至玄武门，诡奏曰： 臣猝中风，命悬俄顷，请得面辞。 
现代文：燕王杨发觉情况不对，晚上穿过芳林门边的水闸入宫，到玄武门假称： 臣突然中风，就要死了，请让我当面向皇上告别。 
English: Yan Wang Yang found that the situation was not right. In the evening, he entered the palace through the sluice gate next to the Fanglin Gate. At the Xuanwu Gate, he pretended to say: "The minister has a sudden stroke and is about to die. Please let me say goodbye to the emperor in person."

古文：裴虔通等不以闻，执囚之。
现代文：裴虔通等人不通报，而把杨关了起来。
English: Pei Qiantong and others did not inform Yang, but locked him up.

古文：丙辰，天未明，德戡授虔通兵，以代诸门卫士。
现代文：丙辰，天还没亮，司马德戡交给裴虔通兵马，用来替换各门的卫士。
English: B Chen, it was not yet dawn, Sima Deya handed Pei Qian Tong's horse and chariot to replace the guards of each gate.

古文：虔通自门将数百骑至成象殿，宿卫者传呼有贼；虔通乃还，闭诸门，独开东门，驱殿内宿卫者令出，皆投仗而走。
现代文：裴虔通由宫门率领数百骑兵到成象殿，值宿卫士高喊有贼，于是裴虔通又返回去，关闭各门，只开东门，驱赶殿内宿卫出门，宿卫纷纷放下武器往外走。
English: Pei Qiantong led hundreds of cavalry from the palace gate to the Chengxiang Hall. The guards on duty shouted that there was a thief, so Pei Qiantong returned, closed all the doors, only opened the east door, drove the guards out of the hall, and the guards put down their weapons and went outside.

古文：右屯卫将军独孤盛谓虔通曰： 何物兵，形势太异！ 
现代文：右屯卫将军独孤盛对裴虔通说： 什么人的队伍，行动太奇怪了！ 
English: General of the Right Division of Guards, Du Guosheng, said to Pei Qiantong: What a team of people, their actions are so strange!

古文：虔通曰： 事势已然，不预将军事；将军慎毋动！ 
现代文：裴虔通说： 形势已经这样了，不关将军您的事，您小心些不要轻举妄动！ 
English: Pei Qiantong said: The situation is already like this. It is none of the general's business. You should be careful not to act rashly.

古文：盛大骂曰： 老贼，是何物语！ 
现代文：独孤盛大骂： 老贼，说的什么话！ 
English: One lone person shouted: "Old thief, what a thing to say!"

古文：不及被甲，与左右十馀人拒战，为乱兵所杀。
现代文：顾不上披铠甲，就与身边十几个人一起拒战，被乱兵杀死。
English: Despite not being able to wear armor, he refused to fight together with a dozen people around him and was killed by the rioters.

古文：盛，楷之弟也。
现代文：独孤盛是独孤楷的弟弟。
English: Duolong Sheng is Duolong Kai's younger brother.

古文：千牛独孤开远帅殿内兵数百人诣玄武门，叩阁请曰： 兵仗尚全，犹堪破贼。陛下若出临战，人情自定；不然，祸今至矣！ 
现代文：千牛独孤开远带领数百殿内兵到玄览门，敲请求： 武器完备，足以破贼，陛下如能亲自临敌，人情自然安定；否则，祸事就在眼前。 
English: Qian Niu single-handedly led hundreds of palace soldiers to the Xuanshan Gate, knocking and pleading: The weapons are complete, enough to break the thieves, if His Majesty can personally confront the enemy, the human condition will naturally be stable; otherwise, disaster is at hand.

古文：竟无应者，军士稍散。
现代文：竟然没有回答的人，军士逐渐散去。
English: For those who did not answer, the sergeant gradually dispersed.

古文：贼执开远，义而释之。
现代文：反叛者捉住独孤开远，又为他的忠义行为感动而放了他。
English: The rebels capture Lone Ranger and release him, moved by his act of loyalty.

古文：先是，帝选骁健官奴数百人置玄武门，谓之给使，以备非常，待遇优厚，至以宫人赐之。
现代文：早先，炀帝挑选了几百名勇猛矫健的官奴，安置在玄武门，称为 给使 ，以防备突然发生的情况，待遇优厚，甚至把宫女赐给给使。
English: Earlier, Emperor Qian selected several hundred brave and vigorous official slaves and placed them at the Xuanwu Gate, known as the envoys, in case of unexpected situations. They were treated well and even given the palace maid to the envoys.

古文：司宫魏氏为帝所信，化及等结之使为内应。
现代文：司宫魏氏得炀帝信任，宇文化及等人勾结她作内应。
English: Empress Dowager Cixi gained the emperor's trust, and Yu Qianlin and others colluded with her to work as a concubine.

古文：是日，魏氏矫诏悉听给使出外，仓猝之际，无一人在者。
现代文：这天，魏氏假称圣旨放全体给使出宫，致使仓促之际玄武门没有一个给使在场。
English: On this day, the Wei clan pretended that all the emissaries had been released from the palace, resulting in a hasty situation in which not a single emissary from the Xuanwu Gate was present.

古文：德戡等引兵自玄武门入，帝闻乱，易服逃西阁。
现代文：司马德戡等人领兵从玄武门进入宫城，炀帝听到消息，换了衣服逃到西。
English: Sima Deyu and others led the troops from the Xuanwu Gate into the Imperial Palace. When Emperor Gao heard the news, he changed his clothes and fled to the west.

古文：虔通与元礼进兵排左阁，魏氏启之，遂入永巷，问： 陛下安在？ 
现代文：裴虔通和元礼进兵推撞左门，魏氏开，乱兵进了永巷，问： 陛下在哪里？ 
English: Pei Qiantong and the Yuanli marching troops pushed against the left door, Wei opened it, and the disorderly soldiers entered Yongxiang, asking: Where is Your Majesty?

古文：有美人出，指之。
现代文：有位美人出来指出了炀帝的所在。
English: A beautiful woman came out and pointed out the whereabouts of the emperor.

古文：校尉令狐行达拔刀直进，帝映窗扉谓行达曰： 汝欲杀我邪？ 
现代文：校尉令狐行达拔刀冲上去，炀帝躲在窗后对令狐行达说： 你想杀我吗？ 
English: The school captain ordered Foxtrot to draw his sword and rush to the scene. Emperor Zou hid behind a window and said to Foxtrot: "Do you want to kill me?

古文：对曰： 臣不敢，但欲奉陛下西还耳。 
现代文：令狐行达回答： 臣不敢，不过是想奉陛下西还长安罢了。 
English: Ling Xingxingda replied: The minister did not dare, but he just wanted to serve His Majesty Xi and secure Chang'an.

古文：因扶帝下阁。
现代文：说完扶炀帝下。
English: After saying this, Emperor Fu Rong left.

古文：虔通，本帝为晋王时亲信左右也，帝见之，谓曰： 卿非我敌人乎！
现代文：裴虔通本来是炀帝作晋王时的亲信，炀帝见到他，对他说： 你不是我的旧部吗！
English: Pei Qiantong was originally a close confidant of Emperor Gao when he was the king of Jin. When Emperor Gao saw him, he said to him, "Aren't you my old subordinate?"

古文：何恨而反？ 
现代文：有什么仇要谋反？ 
English: What kind of grudge would cause them to rebel?

古文：对曰： 臣不敢反，但将士思归，欲奉陛下还京师耳。 
现代文：裴虔通回答： 臣不敢谋反，但是将士想回家，我不过是想奉陛下回京师罢了。 
English: Pei Qiantong replied: "Vassals don't dare to rebel, but generals want to go home. I just want to serve His Majesty and return to Beijing."

古文：帝曰： 朕方欲归，正为上江米船未至，今与汝归耳！ 
现代文：炀帝说： 朕正打算回去，只为长江上游的运米船未到，现在和你们回去吧！ 
English: Hao Di said: I am planning to go back, only because the rice ship in the upper reaches of the Yangtze River has not arrived, let's go back with you now!

古文：虔通因勒兵守之。
现代文：裴虔通于是领兵守住炀帝。
English: Pei Qiantong then led an army to defend Emperor Zhao.

古文：至旦，孟秉以甲骑迎化及，化及战栗不能言，人有来谒之者，但俯首据鞍称罪过。
现代文：天明后，孟秉派武装骑兵迎接宇文化及，宇文化及浑身颤抖说不出话，有人来参见，他只会低头靠在马鞍上连说： 罪过 表示感谢。
English: After daybreak, Meng Bing sent armed cavalry to meet Yu Qunlin, who was trembling and speechless. If someone came to see him, he would only lean his head down on the saddle and say: Sin is grateful.

古文：化及至城门，德戡迎谒，引入朝堂，号为丞相。
现代文：宇文化及到宫城门前，司马德戡迎接他入朝堂，称丞相。
English: When U Bunka arrived at the city gate, Sima Deyu greeted him and led him into the imperial hall, calling him U Bunka and the prime minister.

古文：裴虔通谓帝曰： 百官悉在朝堂，陛下须亲出慰劳。 
现代文：裴虔通对炀帝说： 百官都在朝堂，需陛下亲自出去慰劳。 
English: Pei Qiantong said to Emperor Zhao: All the officials are in the court, it is necessary for His Majesty to go out to console them in person.

古文：进其从骑，逼帝乘之；帝嫌其鞍勒弊，更易新者，乃乘之。
现代文：送上自己随从的坐骑，逼炀帝上马，炀帝嫌他的马鞍笼头破旧，换过新的才上马。
English: He sent his attendant's horse and forced Emperor Gong to mount the horse. Emperor Gong thought his saddle was worn out and only mounted the horse after replacing it with a new one.

古文：虔通执辔挟刀出宫门，贼徒喜噪动地。
现代文：裴虔通牵着马缰绳提着刀出宫城门，乱兵欢声动地。
English: Pei Qiantong led the horse bridle and carried a knife out of the palace gate, and the soldiers cheered.

古文：化及扬言曰： 何用持此物出，亟还与手。 
现代文：宇文化及扬言： 哪用让这家伙出来，赶快弄回去结果了。 
English: U culture and threat: What's the use of letting this guy out, get him back quickly, and that's the result.

古文：帝问： 世基何在？ 
现代文：炀帝问： 虞世基在哪儿？ 
English: Emperor Zou asked: Where is Yu Shiji?

古文：贼党马文举曰： 已枭首矣！ 
现代文：乱党马文举说： 已经枭首了。 
English: The ruffian, Ma Wenqiu, said, "The dagger has already been used."

古文：于是引帝还至寝殿，虔通、德戡等拔白刃侍立。
现代文：于是将炀帝带回寝殿，裴虔通、司马德戡等拔出兵刃站在边上。
English: So he brought Emperor Xuan back to his bedchamber, while Pei Xentong, Sima Deyu and others drew their swords and stood on the edge.

古文：帝叹曰： 我何罪至此？ 
现代文：炀帝叹息道： 我有什么罪该当如此？ 
English: Emperor Xuan sighed and said, "What crime have I committed to deserve this?

古文：文举曰： 陛下违弃宗庙，巡游不息，外勤征讨，内极奢淫，使丁壮尽于矢刃，女弱填于沟壑，四民丧业，盗贼蜂起；专任佞谀，饰非拒谏；何谓无罪！ 
现代文：马文举说： 陛下抛下宗庙不顾，不停地巡游，对外频频作战，对内极尽奢侈荒淫。致使强壮的男人都死于刀兵之下，妇女弱者死于沟壑之中，民不聊生，盗贼蜂起；一味任用奸佞，文过饰非，拒不纳谏，怎么说没罪！ 
English: Ma Wen said: His majesty abandoned the ancestral temple, went on a non-stop tour, frequently fought abroad, and was extremely extravagant and debauched at home. As a result, strong men died under the sword, weak women died in the ditches, the people did not want to live, and thieves rose up. He was not guilty of appointing traitors, embellishing the truth, and refusing to accept bribes.

古文：帝曰： 我实负百姓；至于尔辈，荣禄兼极，何乃如是！今日之事，孰为首邪？ 
现代文：炀帝说： 我确实对不起老百姓，可你们这些人，荣华富贵都到了头，为什么还这样？今天这事，谁是主谋？ 
English: Emperor Xuan said, "I really feel sorry for the common people, but you people, your glory and wealth have all come to an end. Why is it still like this? Who is the mastermind behind today's events?

古文：德戡曰： 溥天同怨，何止一人！ 
现代文：司马德戡说： 整个天下的人都怨恨，哪止一个人！ 
English: Sima Deyao said: People all over the world have grudges against more than one person!

古文：化及又使封德彝数帝罪，帝曰： 卿乃士人，何为亦尔！ 
现代文：宇文化及又派封德彝宣布炀帝的罪状。炀帝说： 你可是士人，怎么也干这种事？ 
English: Emperor Wu sent Feng Dejun to announce the charges against Emperor Gong. Emperor Gong said, "You are a scholar, how could you do such a thing?

古文：德彝赧然而退。
现代文：封德彝羞红了脸，退了下去。
English: Feng Dejun blushed and retreated.

古文：帝爱子赵王杲，年十二，在帝侧，号恸不已，虔通斩之，血溅御服。
现代文：炀帝的爱子赵王杨杲才十二岁，在炀帝身边不停地嚎啕大哭，裴虔通杀了赵王，血溅到炀帝的衣服上。
English: Emperor Xuan's beloved son, Zhao Wang Yangjun, was only twelve years old. He cried constantly at Emperor Xuan's side. Pei Qianlong killed King Zhao, and the blood splattered onto Emperor Xuan's clothes.

古文：贼欲弑帝，帝曰： 天子死自有法，何得加以锋刃！取鸩酒来！ 
现代文：这些人要杀炀帝，炀帝说： 天子自有天子的死法，怎么能对天子动刀，取鸩酒来！ 
English: These people wanted to kill Emperor Qian. Emperor Qian said, "The Son of Heaven has His own method of death. How can you wield a sword against the Son of Heaven and take His wine?"

古文：文举等不许，使令狐行达顿帝令坐。
现代文：马文举等人不答应，让令狐行达按着炀帝坐下。
English: Ma Wenqiu and others did not agree, and asked Ling Xingda to sit down with the emperor.

古文：帝自解练巾授行达，缢杀之。
现代文：炀帝自己解下练巾交给令狐行达，令狐行达绞死了炀帝。
English: Emperor Gong himself untied the training towel and handed it to Ling Foo Xingda. Ling Foo Xingda hanged Emperor Gong.

古文：初，帝自知必及于难，常以罂贮毒药自随，谓所幸诸姬曰： 若贼至，汝曹当先饮之，然后我饮。 
现代文：当初，炀帝料到有遇难的一天，经常用罂装毒酒带在身边，对宠幸的各位美女说： 如果贼人到了，你们要先喝，然后我喝。 
English: At first, Emperor Zou expected a day of disaster, and often carried poisoned wine around with him, saying to his favored beauties: "If the thief arrives, you must drink first, and then I will drink."

古文：及乱，顾索药，左右皆逃散，竟不能得。
现代文：等到乱事真的来到，找毒酒时，左右都逃掉，竟然找不到。
English: Wait until the chaos really comes, when looking for poisoned wine, both sides escape and can't find it.

古文：萧后与宫人撤漆床板为小棺，与赵王杲同殡于西院流珠堂。
现代文：萧后和宫女撤下漆床板，做成小棺材，把炀帝和赵王杨杲一起停柩在西院流珠堂。
English: Queen Xiao and her ladies-in-waiting took down the lacquered floorboards and made a small coffin. They placed Emperor Zhou and King Zhao together in the West Courtyard of the Zhu Hall.

古文：帝每巡幸，常以蜀王秀自随，囚于骁果营。
现代文：炀帝每次巡幸，常常将蜀王杨秀随行，囚禁在骁果营。
English: Every time Emperor Xizong went on an inspection tour, he often took Yang Xiu, the King of Shu, along with him and imprisoned him in the Yingguo Camp.

古文：化及弑帝，欲奉秀立之，众议不可，乃杀秀及其七男。
现代文：宇文化及弑炀帝，准备奉杨秀为皇帝，众人舆论以为不行，于是杀了杨秀和他的七个儿子。
English: Emperor Yu and Emperor Zou planned to make Yang Xiu emperor, but the public thought it was not possible, so they killed Yang Xiu and his seven sons.

古文：又杀齐王暕及其二子并燕王倓，隋氏宗室、外戚，无少长皆死。
现代文：又杀齐王杨及其两个儿子和燕王杨，隋朝的宗室、外戚，无论老幼一律杀死。
English: They also killed Qi Wang Yang and his two sons, and Yan Wang Yang, the Sui Dynasty's ancestor's wife and maternal relative, regardless of whether they were old or young.

古文：唯秦王浩素与智及往来，且以计全之。
现代文：只有秦王杨浩平时与宇文智及有来往，宇文智及想办法保全了他。
English: Only Qin King Yang Hao had dealings with Wu Wenzhi in peacetime, and Wu Wenzhi tried to save him.

古文：齐王暕素失爱于帝，恒相猜忌。帝闻乱，顾萧后曰： 得非阿孩邪？ 
现代文：齐王杨一向失宠于炀帝，父子一直相互猜忌，炀帝听说起乱事，对萧后说： 不会是阿孩吧？ 
English: King Yang of Qi had always fallen out of favor with Emperor Qian, and father and son had always been suspicious of each other. Emperor Qian heard about the turmoil and said to Empress Xiao, "Couldn't it be Ah Qian?

古文：化及使人就第诛暕，暕谓帝使收之，曰： 诏使且缓儿，儿不负国家！ 
现代文：宇文化及派人到杨府第杀人，杨以为是炀帝下令来捕他，还说： 诏使暂且放开孩儿，儿没有对不起国家！ 
English: Yang thought that Emperor Xizong had ordered him to arrest him, and said, "The emperor has temporarily released the child, the child has not offended the country!"

古文：贼曳至街中，斩之，暕竟不知杀者为谁，父子至死不相明。
现代文：乱兵将他曳到街当中，杀了他，杨最终也不知道要杀他的是谁，父子之间至死也没能消除隔阂。
English: The rioters dragged him into the middle of the street and killed him. In the end, Yang didn't know who was going to kill him. Even death couldn't heal the rift between father and son.

古文：又杀内史侍郎虞世基、御史大夫裴蕴、左翊卫大将军来护儿、秘书监袁充、右翊卫将军宇文协、千牛宇文皛、梁公萧钜等及其子。
现代文：乱兵又杀了内史侍郎虞世基、御史大夫裴蕴、左翊卫大将军来护儿、秘书监袁充、右翊卫将军宇文协、千牛宇文、梁公萧钜等人及其儿子。
English: The rioting soldiers also killed Yu Shiji, the attendant of internal history, Pei Ying, the doctor of internal history, the left guard general who came to take care of the children, the secretary-supervisor Yuan Chong, the right guard general Yu Wen Hie, Qian Niu Yu Wen, Liang Gong Xiao Yao and others and their sons.

古文：钜，琮之弟子也。
现代文：萧钜是萧综弟弟的儿子。
English: Xiao Yao is the son of Xiao Zhao's younger brother.

古文：难将作，江阳长张惠绍驰告裴蕴，与惠绍谋矫诏发郭下兵收化及等，扣门援帝。
现代文：动乱就要发生时，江阳县长张惠绍飞驰去通告了裴蕴，裴蕴与张惠绍商量假称圣旨调江都城外的军队逮捕宇文化及等人，敲开城门援救炀帝。
English: When the turmoil was about to occur, Zhang Huishao, the governor of Jiangyang County, rushed to inform Peiyun. Peiyun discussed with Zhang Huishao to have the army outside the capital city of Jiangsu arrest U Bunya and others, knocking on the city gate to rescue Emperor Xuan.

古文：议定，遣报虞世基；世基疑告反者不实，抑而不许。
现代文：二人商量好后，派人报告虞世基，虞世基怀疑谋反的事不真实，压下来没有答复。
English: After the two had a good discussion, they sent someone to report to Yu Shiji. Yu Shiji suspected that the rebellion was not true, but there was no reply.

古文：须臾，难作，蕴叹曰： 谋及播郎，竟误人事！ 
现代文：一会儿，发难，裴蕴叹息道： 和播郎商量，竟然误了事！ 
English: After a while, when things got difficult, Baekhyun sighed and said, "I should have consulted with Haruro, but I made a mistake!

古文：虞世基宗人亻及谓世基子符玺郎熙曰： 事势已然，吾将济卿南渡，同死何益？ 
现代文：虞世基的同宗虞对世基的儿子符玺郎虞熙说： 事情已经这样了，我打算送你过长江去南边，一起死了又有什么用！ 
English: Yu Shiji's kinsman, Yu, said to Yu Shiji's son, Fu Yulang Yu Xi: "Things have come to this, I'm going to send you across the Yangtze River to the south, what's the use of dying together!

古文：熙曰： 弃父背君，求生何地？
现代文：虞熙说： 扔下父亲背叛君主，又有什么脸活着！
English: Yu Xi said, "If you abandon your father and betray the monarch, how can you live?

古文：感尊之怀，自此决矣！ 
现代文：感谢您的关心，从此永别了！ 
English: Thank you for your concern, and goodbye for now!

古文：世基弟世南抱世基号泣，请以身代，化及不许。
现代文：虞世基的弟弟虞世南抱着世基大哭，请求代替他赴死，宇文化及不准。
English: Shiji's younger brother, Shennan, held Shiji in his arms and cried loudly, begging to die in his place, which Yu did not allow.

古文：黄门侍郎裴矩知必将有乱，虽厮役皆厚遇之，又建策为骁果娶妇；及乱作，贼皆曰： 非裴黄门之罪。 
现代文：黄门侍郎裴矩知道肯定要发生动乱，因此对待作贱役的人也很优厚，又建议为骁果娶妇；待乱事发生后，乱兵都说： 不是裴黄门的错。 
English: Huangmen waiter Pei Jian knew that there would definitely be turmoil, so he treated the men who did menial labor very generously, and also suggested that they should marry women. After the turmoil occurred, the soldiers said: It's not Pei Huangmen's fault.

古文：既而化及至，矩迎拜马首，故得免。
现代文：不久，宇文化及到了，裴矩迎到马前行礼，因此得以免去了祸事。
English: Soon after, Yu Wencheng arrived, and Pei Zhen greeted him with a horse-riding salute, thus avoiding the calamity.

古文：化及以苏威不预朝政，亦免之。
现代文：宇文化及因为苏威不参与朝政，也放过了他。
English: U Culture and because Su Wei did not participate in imperial politics, he was also spared.

古文：威名位素重，往参化及；化及集众而见之，曲加殊礼。
现代文：苏威名声、地位历来显赫，他去参见宇文化及，宇文化及集合众人来见他，对他格外尊重。
English: Su Wei's reputation and status have always been prominent. He went to see Yu Cultura and Yu Cultura and gathered many people to see him, and he was particularly respected.

古文：百官悉诣朝堂贺，给事郎许善心独不至。
现代文：百官都到朝堂祝贺宇文化及，只有给事郎许善心不到。
English: All the dignitaries came to the hall to congratulate U Bunka, and only his son-in-law was able to do so.

古文：许弘仁驰告之曰： 天子已崩，宇文将军摄政，阖朝文武咸集。天道人事自有代终，何预于叔而低回若此？ 
现代文：许弘仁骑马跑去告诉他说： 天子已经驾崩了，宇文将军代理朝政，满朝文武都集于朝堂，天道人事自有它相互代替终结的道理，又与叔叔您有什么相干，何至于这样流连不舍！ 
English: Xu Hongren ran on horseback to tell him: Tianzi has passed away, General Uwen is acting as the regent of the court, the whole court is gathered in the court, the court personnel have their own reason for replacing each other, and what do you have to do with your uncle, why are you so persistent!

古文：善心怒，不肯行。
现代文：善心很生气，不肯去。
English: Goodheart was angry and wouldn't go.

古文：弘仁反走上马，泣而去。
现代文：弘仁回身上马，哭着走了。
English: Hirohito got back on his horse and rode away crying.

古文：化及遣人就家擒至朝堂，既而释之。
现代文：宇文化及派人到家里把许善心捉到朝堂上，一会儿又放了他。
English: He sent someone to the house to catch Xu Zenshin in the morning hall and released him a short while later.

古文：善心不舞蹈而出，化及怒曰： 此人大负气！ 
现代文：许善心不按朝见的规矩行礼就走出朝堂，宇文化及生气地说： 这人真不知好歹！ 
English: Xu Zenshin walked out of the hall without bowing according to the etiquette of the Imperial Court, and Yu Kun said angrily, "This man is really out of his depth!

古文：复命擒还，杀之。
现代文：重新下令把许善心捉回朝堂，杀了。
English: He reissued an order to capture Xu Zenshin back to the imperial court and kill him.

古文：其母范氏，年九十二，抚柩不哭，曰： 能死国难，吾有子矣！ 
现代文：许善心的母亲范氏九十二岁了，抚摸着灵柩但并不哭泣，说： 能死国难，真是我的儿子！ 
English: Mr. Xu's kindhearted 92-year-old mother, Ms. Fan, stroked the coffin but did not weep, saying, "It's really my son who can die for the country!"

古文：因卧不食，十馀日而卒。
现代文：躺着不吃东西，十几天后去世。
English: Lying down and not eating, he died ten days later.

古文：唐王之入关也，张季珣之弟仲琰为上洛令，帅吏民拒守，部下杀之以降。
现代文：唐王李渊入关时，张季的弟弟张仲琰是上洛令，带领部下、百姓占据城池抵抗，部下杀了他投降唐王。
English: When the Tang king Li Yuan entered the customs, Zhang Ji's brother Zhang Zhongya was sent to Luo, leading his subordinates and people to occupy the city to resist. His subordinates killed him and surrendered to the Tang king.

古文：宇文化及之乱，仲琰弟琮为千牛左右，化及杀之，兄弟三人皆死国难，时人愧之。
现代文：宇文化及之乱，仲琰的弟弟张琮为千牛左右，宇文化及杀了张琮，兄弟三人都死于国难，令当时的人感到羞愧。
English: During the War of Yu Culture and Rebellion, Zhongyi's younger brother Zhang Ye was worth about a thousand cows. Yu Culture killed Zhang Ye, and all three brothers died in the National Disaster, which made the people at the time feel ashamed.

古文：化及自称大丞相，总百揆。
现代文：宇文化及自称大丞相，总理百官。
English: and self-proclaimed grand chancellors and prime ministers.

古文：以皇后令立秦王浩为帝，居别宫，令发诏画敕书而已，仍以兵监守之。
现代文：以炀帝皇后的命令立秦王杨浩为皇帝，住在别宫，只让皇帝签署发布诏敕而已，仍然派兵监守。
English: On the order of Empress Dowager Cixi, Qin King Yang Hao was made emperor. He lived in a separate palace and only allowed the emperor to sign and issue the imperial edict. He still sent soldiers to guard him.

古文：化及以弟智及为左仆射，士及为内史令，裴矩为右仆射。
现代文：宇文化及以弟弟宇文智及为左仆射，宇文士及为内史令，裴矩为右仆射。
English: U Bunka and his younger brother, U Wenshi, were the left-hand shooters, U Wenshi and Naishi Ryo, and Baikang was the right-hand shooter.

古文：乙卯，徙秦公世民为赵公。
现代文：乙卯，改封秦公李世民为赵公。
English: Second, he changed the title of Qin Gong Li Shimin to Zhao Gong.

古文：戊辰，隋恭帝诏以十郡益唐国，仍以唐王为相国，总百揆，唐国置丞相以下官，又加九锡。
现代文：戊辰，隋恭帝下诏将十个郡增加给唐国，仍然以唐王为相国，总理百官，唐国可以设置丞相以下官吏，又加唐王九锡。
English: At the time of Emperor Wu of Wu, Emperor Suigong issued an edict to increase the number of counties in Tang to ten, and Tang was still the king of Tang. The prime minister had a hundred officials, and Tang could appoint officials from the rank of chancellor and below, as well as the king of Tang, Jiuxi.

古文：王谓僚属曰： 此谄谀者所为耳。孤秉大政而自加九锡，可乎？
现代文：唐王对手下的官员说： 这是阿谀奉承的人干的事，孤自己把握大政又给自己加优宠和九锡，能行吗？
English: Tang Wang said to the officials under him: This is the work of a flatterer. Is it possible to grasp the great political power by oneself and give oneself the favors and rewards?

古文：必若循魏、晋之迹，彼皆繁文伪饰，欺天罔人；考其实不及五霸，而求名欲过三王，此孤常所非笑，窃亦耻之。 
现代文：若说一定要照着魏、晋的规矩，那些都是些虚礼，欺骗人的；他们实际的作为赶不上春秋时的五霸，而追求的名声却想超过禹、汤、文王三王，这样的事是孤经常嘲笑的，也认为这样做很可耻。 
English: If you say that you must follow the rules of Wei and Jin, those are all false etiquette, deceiving people; their actual actions can not keep up with the Five Dynasties in the Spring and Autumn Period, but the pursuit of fame is to surpass Yu, Tang, and Wen Wang three kings, such a thing is often ridiculed, and it is also considered shameful to do so.

古文：或曰： 历代所行，亦何可废！ 
现代文：也有人说： 历朝都这样做，怎么可以废除？ 
English: Some people also said, "All dynasties have done this, how can it be abolished?"

古文：王曰： 尧、舜、汤、武，各因其时，取与异道，皆推其至诚以应天顺人，未闻夏、商之末必效唐、虞之禅也。
现代文：唐王说： 尧、禹、汤、武王分别以自己的时机，以不同方式登上王位，但都是以其至诚上应天意、下顺民情，没听说夏朝、商代末年一定得效法唐、虞的禅位。
English: The Tang Dynasty king said, "Dao, Yu, Tang, and King Wu ascended the throne at their own times and in different ways, but they all did so with their utmost sincerity, in accordance with the will of Heaven, and in accordance with the will of the people. I had not heard that the Summer Dynasty and the end of the Shang Dynasty had to follow the Tang and Yu's way of meditation.

古文：若使少帝有知，必不肯为；若其无知，孤自尊而饰让，平生素心所不为也。 
现代文：这事如果少帝知道，一定不肯做，如果少帝不知道，孤自己尊崇自己又假意推让，是平生从心里不愿做的事。 
English: If the young emperor knew about this, he would definitely not do it. If the young emperor did not know about it, he would only respect himself and pretend to give in. This is something he never wanted to do in his life.

古文：但改丞相为相国府，其九锡殊礼，皆归之有司。
现代文：唐王只是把丞相府改为相国府，九锡之类的特殊礼仪，则退还给负责官署。
English: Tang only changed the chancellor's office to the provincial governor's office, and the special etiquette such as Jiuxi was returned to the responsible government office.

古文：宇文化及以左武卫将军陈稜为江都太守，综领留事。
现代文：宇文化及以左武卫将军陈棱为江都太守，总管留守事宜。
English: Yu culture and with General Chen Ren of the Left Division of the Imperial Guards as the governor of Jiangdu, the head of the stay-at-home affairs.

古文：壬申，令内外戒严，云欲还长安。
现代文：壬申，命令内外戒严，声称准备回长安。
English: Jinshin, ordered internal and external martial law, claimed to be preparing to return to Chang'an.

古文：皇后六宫皆依旧式为御宫，营前别立帐，化及视事其中，仗卫部伍，皆拟乘舆。
现代文：皇后和六宫都按照老规矩作为御营，营房前另外搭帐，宇文化及在里面办公，仪仗和侍卫的人数，都比照着皇帝的规模。
English: Both the empress and the six palaces were used as the imperial camp in accordance with the old rules. A separate account was set up in front of the barracks. The imperial culture and the number of offices inside, the number of honor guards and attendants, were all in accordance with the scale of the emperor.

古文：夺江都人舟楫，取彭城水路西归。
现代文：他们抢了江都人的船，取道彭城由水路向西行。
English: They robbed the boats of the people in Jiangdu and took the waterway to Pengcheng to travel west.

古文：以折冲郎将沈光骁勇，使将给使营于禁内。
现代文：宇文化及因折冲郎将沈光骁勇，让他在御营内统领给使营。
English: U Bunka and Inori Chōro sent Shinkō Shinyu to command the envoy camp.

古文：行至显福宫，虎贲郎将麦孟才、虎牙郎钱杰与光谋曰： 吾侪受先帝厚恩，今俯首事仇，受其驱帅，何面目视息世间哉！
现代文：行进到显福宫，虎贲郎将麦孟才、虎牙郎钱杰和沈光商议： 我们都受了先帝极大的恩典，现在低头为仇人做事，受他驱使指挥，有什么脸见人！
English: Marching to the Xianfu Palace, Tigresser will consult with Mai Mengcai, Tigresser Qian Jie and Shen Guang: We have all received the great grace of the former emperor, now we bow down to work for the enemy, driven by him to command, what a face!

古文：吾必欲杀之，死无所恨！ 
现代文：我一定要杀了他，死了也没有什么遗憾的！ 
English: I must kill him, there is nothing to regret in death!

古文：光泣曰： 是所望于将军也！ 
现代文：沈光流着泪说： 这正是我指望将军的。 
English: With tears streaming down his face, Shen Guang said, "This is exactly what I expected from the general."

古文：孟才乃纠合恩旧，帅所将数千人，期以晨起将发时袭化及。
现代文：于是孟才联合了与他有恩旧的人，率领数千名部下，约定早晨起床后准备出发时袭击宇文化及。
English: So Meng Cai united with his old friends, led thousands of subordinates, and agreed to attack Yuban Culture when he got up in the morning and was ready to leave.

古文：语泄，化及夜与腹心走出营外，留人告司马德戡等，使讨之。
现代文：消息走露，夜里宇文化及和心腹走到御营外面，派人通知司马德戡，让他去诛戮麦孟才等人。
English: The news came out, and in the night, U Bunka and his confidant went outside the camp and sent someone to inform Sima Deya that he should go and kill Mai Mengcai and others.

古文：光闻营内喧，知事觉，即袭化及营，空无所获，值内史侍郎元敏，数而斩之。
现代文：沈光听到营里喧哗，知道事情被发觉了，马上袭击宇文化及的营帐，空无所获，碰着内史侍郎元敏，就列举了元敏的罪状，杀了他。
English: Shen Guang heard the noise in the camp and knew that the matter had been discovered. He immediately attacked the camp of U Culture and U Culture, but found nothing. When he encountered the internal history servant, Yuan Min, he enumerated the charges against Yuan Min and killed him.

古文：德戡引兵入围之，杀光，其麾下数百人皆斗死，一无降者，孟才亦死。
现代文：司马德戡领着兵进入营中围住沈光一行，杀了沈光，沈光手下的几百人全都拼杀而死，没有一个人投降，孟才也死了。
English: Sima Deyao led the soldiers into the camp, surrounded Shen Guang and his party, and killed Shen Guang. Hundreds of Shen Guang's men all died in the fight. No one surrendered, and Meng Cai also died.

古文：孟才，铁杖之子也。
现代文：麦孟才是麦铁杖的儿子。
English: Ma Meng is the son of Ma Tiecang.

古文：武康沈法兴，世为郡著姓，宗族数千家。
现代文：武康人沈法兴，世代都是郡中有声望的大姓，同一宗族就有几千家。
English: Wu Kang people Shen Faxing, generations are the county's prestigious surname, there are thousands of the same family.

古文：法兴为吴兴太守，闻宇文化及弑逆，举兵，以讨化及为名。比至乌程，得精卒六万，遂攻馀杭、毘陵、丹杨，皆下之，据江表十郡。自称江南道大总管，承制置百官。
现代文：沈法兴做吴兴太守，听说宇文化及弑君谋逆，以讨宇文化及为名起兵，待进发到乌程时，已拥有六万精兵，于是攻打余杭、毗陵、丹阳，全都攻克；占据了长江以南十几个郡，自称江南道大总管，承制设置百官。
English: Shen Fa Xing was the governor of Wu Xing. He heard that Yu Cultura and Zou Jun were plotting against him and raised an army in the name of fighting against Yu Cultura. By the time he went to Wucheng, he already had 60,000 elite soldiers. He then attacked Yuhang, Biling and Danyang, and conquered them all. He occupied more than a dozen counties south of the Yangtze River. He claimed to be the general manager of South Jiangsu Province and set up hundreds of officials.

古文：东国公窦抗，唐王之妃兄也。炀帝使行长城于灵武；闻唐王定关中，癸酉，帅灵武、盐川等数郡来降。
现代文：陈国公窦抗是唐王妃子的兄长，隋炀帝派遣他到灵武一带巡视长城，听说唐王平定了关中，癸酉，率领灵武、盐川几个郡前来归顺唐王。
English: Chen Guogong Douan is the elder brother of Tang's concubine. The Sui Dynasty sent him to Lingwu to inspect the Great Wall. It was said that Tang had leveled Guanzhong. He led several counties in Lingwu and Yanchuan to surrender to Tang.

古文：夏，四月，稽胡寇富平，将军王师仁击破之。
现代文：夏季，四月，稽胡侵犯富平，唐将军王师仁打败了稽胡。
English: In the summer, in April, Qianhu invaded Fuping, and Tang general Wang Shiren defeated Qianhu.

古文：又五万馀人寇宜春，相国府咨议参军窦轨将兵讨之，战于黄钦山。稽胡乘高纵火，官军小却；轨斩其部将十四人，拔队中小校代之，勒兵复战。
现代文：又有五万稽胡侵犯宜春，唐王相国府谘议参军窦轨统领兵马讨伐稽胡，在黄钦山交战，稽胡登高放火，官军稍退却；窦轨杀了十四名部将，提拔队中的小校代替，领兵重新作战。
English: Another 50,000 Qigong troops invaded Yichun. Tang Wang Xiang Guofu advised Dou Guo, the commander of the army, to join the army to fight Qigong. They fought in Huangqin Mountain. Qigong troops climbed high and set fire, and the government army retreated slightly. Dou Guo killed fourteen generals, promoted the junior officers in the team to replace them, and led the soldiers to fight again.

古文：轨自将数百骑居军后，令之曰： 闻鼓声有不进者，自后斩之！ 
现代文：窦轨自己带领几百骑兵在军队后面，下令说： 听到鼓声有不前进的，我们从后面杀了他！ 
English: Dou Liao himself led several hundred cavalry behind the army and gave the order: "If anyone does not advance at the sound of the drum, we will kill him from behind!"

古文：既而鼓之，将士争先赴敌，稽胡射之不能止；遂大破之，虏男女二万口。
现代文：不一会儿，战鼓响起，将士争先冲向敌人，稽胡放箭也阻止不了，于是大败稽胡，俘虏男女二万人。
English: In a short time, the war drums sounded, the soldiers rushed to the enemy, and Qin Hu could not stop them from shooting arrows. As a result, Qin Hu was defeated, and 20,000 men and women were captured.

古文：世子建成等至东都，军于芒华苑；东都闭门不出，遣人招谕，不应。
现代文：唐王世子李建成等人到东都，驻札在芳华苑；东都城关闭城门不出，唐军派人招谕，又不答复。
English: Li Jiancheng, the Tang king's heir, and others went to Dongdu and stationed themselves at Fanghua Yuan. Dongdu City closed its gates and did not come out. The Tang army sent someone to invite them, but they did not reply.

古文：李密出军争之，小战，各引去。
现代文：李密出军与唐军相争，稍微接触，就各自离开。
English: Li Mi went out to fight against the Tang army, and after a little contact, they left separately.

古文：城中多欲为内应者，赵公世民曰： 吾新定关中，根本未固，悬军远来，虽得东都，不能守也。 
现代文：东都城里有不少人想作为唐军的内应，赵公李世民说： 我们平定关中不久，根基还不牢固，即使得东都，也不能守住。 
English: There are many people in Dongdu City who want to serve as the Tang Army's internal response. Zhao Gong Li Shimin said, "It is not long since we pacified Guanzhong, but the foundation is still not solid. Even if we capture Dongdu, we will not be able to hold it.

古文：遂不受。
现代文：于是没有答允作内应的要求。
English: He finally refused to accept it.

古文：戊寅，引军还。
现代文：戊寅，领军队回关中。
English: Wu Yin, leading the troops back to the middle of the pass.

古文：世民曰： 城中见吾退，必来追蹑。 
现代文：世民说： 城里看见咱们撤退，肯定会追来。 
English: The people said, "If the city sees us retreating, it will definitely come after us."

古文：乃设三伏于三王陵以待之；段达果将万馀人追之，遇伏而败。
现代文：于是在三王陵设下三处埋伏等待追兵；段达果然带一万多人追来，遇到埋伏打了败仗。
English: So he set up three ambushes at the Three Kings' Mausoleum and waited for the pursuing soldiers; Duan Da did indeed bring more than ten thousand people to chase them, but they were ambushed and defeated.

古文：世民逐北，抵其城下，斩四千馀级。
现代文：李世民追击败军，直到东都城下，杀了四千多人。
English: Li Shimin chased the defeated army until the eastern capital was under siege, killing more than four thousand people.

古文：遂置新安、宜阳二郡，使行军总管史万宝、盛彦师将兵镇宜阳，吕绍宗、任瑰将兵镇新安而还。
现代文：于是设置新安、宜阳二郡，派行军总管史万宝、盛彦师镇守宜阳，吕绍宗、任统兵镇守新安，唐军回师。
English: As a result, the two counties of Xin'an and Yiyang were set up, and the commander-in-chief of the marching army, Shi Wanbao, sent the commander-in-chief of the marching army, Morihiko, to guard Yiyang, and Lu Shaozong, the commander-in-chief of the marching army, to guard Xin'an, and the Tang army returned to the division.

古文：初，五原通守栎阳张长逊以中原大乱，举郡附突厥，突厥以为割利特勒。
现代文：当初，五原通守栎阳人张长逊因为中原大乱，以整个郡归附突厥，突厥封他为割利特勒。
English: At first, because of the Central Plains Revolt, Zhang Changsun, a native of Wuhara who was in charge of Shiyang, annexed the entire county to the Turks, and the Turks made him a military governor.

古文：郝瑗说薛举，与梁师都及突厥连兵以取长安，举从之。
现代文：郝瑷劝薛举与梁师都及突厥联合兵力攻取长安，薛举听从他的意见。
English: He advised Xueju and Liang Shidu and the Turkic joint forces to capture Chang'an, and Xueju followed his advice.

古文：时启民可汗之子咄苾，号莫贺咄设，建牙直五原之北，举遣使与莫贺咄设谋入寇，莫贺咄设许之。
现代文：当时启民可汗之子咄称莫贺咄设，就在五原北面设官署，薛举派使节与莫贺咄设协商入侵长安；莫贺咄设答应了薛举的邀请。
English: At that time, the son of the Qimin Khan, called Moga, set up an official office in the north of Wuhan. Xue Jiu sent envoys to negotiate with Moga to invade Chang'an; Moga accepted Xue Jiu's invitation.

古文：唐王使都水监宇文歆赂莫贺咄设，且为陈利害，止其出兵，又说莫贺咄设遣张长逊入朝，以五原之地归之中国，莫贺咄设并从之。
现代文：唐王派遣都水监宇文歆贿赂莫贺咄设，并且向他陈述了利害得失，阻止他出兵，又劝莫贺咄设派张长逊入朝，把五原地区归还给中国，莫贺咄设全都应允。
English: The Tang king sent the water inspector of the capital, Uwenqian, to bribe Mogao, and told him the advantages and disadvantages to prevent him from sending troops. He also advised Mogao to send Zhang Changxun to the imperial court and return the Wuhuan region to China. Mogao all agreed.

古文：已卯，武都、宕渠、五原等郡皆降，王即以长逊为五原太守。
现代文：己卯，武都、宕渠、五原等郡全部归顺唐王，唐王就以张长逊为五原太守。
English: Jiwu, Wudu, Gaochu, Wuhara and other counties all submitted to the Tang king, and the Tang king appointed Zhang Changsun as the governor of Wuhara.

古文：长逊又诈为诏书与莫贺咄设，示知其谋。
现代文：张长逊又写假诏书给莫贺咄设，表示已经知道了莫贺咄设等人的阴谋。
English: Zhang Changsong also wrote a fake imperial edict to Moga Pu Si, saying that he already knew the conspiracy of Moga Pu Si and others.

古文：莫贺咄设乃拒举、师都等，不纳其使。
现代文：莫贺咄设于是拒绝了薛举、梁师都等的邀请，不接受他们派来的使者。
English: Moga then refused the invitation of Xue Qiu and Liang Shidu, and did not accept the envoys sent by them.

古文：戊戌，世子建成等还长安。
现代文：戊戌，唐世子李建成等回到长安。
English: Wu Xi, Tang's son Li Jiancheng and others returned to Chang'an.

古文：东都号令不出四门，人无固志，朝议郎段世弘等谋应西师。
现代文：东都隋廷能管辖的地方只有城里，人心不定，朝议郎段世弘等人谋划响应李建成等率领的西军。
English: The eastern capital of the Sui Dynasty could only be governed by the court in the city, and people's minds were uncertain. The councilor of the court, Duan Shihong, and others planned to respond to the western army led by Li Jiancheng.

古文：会西师已还，乃遣人招李密，期以己亥夜纳之。
现代文：恰好李建成的军队已经回师，他们便派人联络李密，约定己亥夜里迎接李密军进城。
English: Just as Li Jiancheng's army had returned to the division, they sent someone to contact Li Mi and agreed to meet Li Mi's army entering the city at night.

古文：事觉，越王命王世充讨诛之。
现代文：事情被发觉，隋越王杨侗命令王世充诛杀了段世弘等人。
English: When the affair was discovered, the Sui and Yue King Yang Jie ordered Wang Shichong to kill Duan Shihong and others.

古文：密闻城中已定，乃还。
现代文：李密听说城内已经被平定，便回去了。
English: When Li Mi heard that the city had been pacified, he went back.

古文：宇文化及拥众十馀万，据有六宫，自奉养一如炀帝。
现代文：宇文化及拥有十几万人，占有六宫，自己的供养与隋炀帝完全相同。
English: Yu culture and has more than one hundred thousand people, occupies six palaces, and his own support is exactly the same as that of the Sui and Qian Dynasties.

古文：每于帐中南面坐，人有白事者，嘿然不对；下牙，方取启状与唐奉义、牛方裕、薛世良、张恺等参决之。
现代文：每天象帝王一样面朝南坐在帐中，有人奏事，他默然无语；下朝后，才取出上报的启、状和唐奉义、牛方裕、薛世良、张恺等人商量着处理。
English: Every day, like an emperor, he sat facing south in his account. When someone made a report, he was speechless. It was only after the fall of the dynasty that he took out the report and discussed it with Tang Bongyi, Niu Fangyu, Xue Shiliang, Zhang Xi and others.

古文：以少主浩付尚书省，令卫士十馀人守之，遣令史取其画敕，百官不复朝参。
现代文：把少主杨浩交付给尚书省，命十几名卫士看守，派令史取少主签署的敕书，百官不再朝见皇帝。
English: Yang Hao, the minor lord, was handed over to Shangshu Province, more than a dozen guards were appointed to guard him, and Shi was ordered to take the imperial edict signed by the minor lord. The officials would no longer meet the emperor.

古文：至彭城，水路不通，复夺民车牛得二千两，并载宫人珍宝；其戈甲戎器，悉令军士负之，道远疲剧，军士始怨。
现代文：到彭城，水路不通，又抢百姓车、牛得二千辆，用来运载宫女和珍宝；长枪铠甲武器准备，全都由士兵背着，因为路远，累得很，士兵开始不满。
English: To Pengcheng, the waterway was impassable, and they robbed the people's cars and cattle to get two thousand carts, which were used to carry the princess and treasures; the soldiers carried all the long guns and armored weapons, because the road was far and they were very tired. The soldiers began to be dissatisfied.

古文：司马德戡窃谓赵行枢曰： 君大谬，误我！
现代文：司马德戡私下里对赵行枢说： 你真是害我不浅！
English: Sima Deyao said to Zhao Xingzhu in private: You really hurt me!

古文：当今拨乱，必藉英贤；化及庸暗，群小在侧，事将必败，若之何？ 
现代文：当今治平乱世，一定得靠杰出而有才干的人，化及没才能又糊涂，一群小人在他身边，肯定要坏事，那该怎么办？ 
English: In today's turbulent world, we must rely on outstanding and talented people, who are incompetent and confused, and a group of villains around him must be bad, so what should we do?

古文：行枢曰： 在我等耳，废之何难！ 
现代文：赵行枢说： 全在我们这些人了，废除他又有什么难？ 
English: Zhao Xingzhu said: It's all up to us people, what's the difficulty in abolishing him?

古文：初，化及既得政，赐司马德戡爵温国公，加光禄大夫；以其专统骁果，心忌之。
现代文：当初宇文化及得政之后，便赐司马德戡温国公爵位，加光禄大夫；因为司马德戡专门统领骁果，又从心里防备他。
English: In the beginning, after the establishment of the Kingdom of Heaven and the rise to power, Sima Deguang was given the title of Duke of Wenzhou and the title of Doctor of Guanglu; because Sima Deguang was a special leader of Guo Guo, he also guarded him from his heart.

古文：后数日，化及署诸将分配士卒，以德戡为礼部尚书，外示美迁，实夺其兵柄。
现代文：没过几天，化及布署诸将分别领兵，以司马德戡为礼部尚书，表面看是升官，实际是夺他的兵权。
English: A few days later, the generals were reorganized and dispatched to lead the soldiers separately, with Sima Deyu as the ceremonial leader. On the surface, it was a promotion, but in reality, it was to seize his military power.

古文：德戡由是愤怨，所获赏赐，皆以赂智及；智及为之言，乃使之将后军万馀人以从。
现代文：司马德勘因此愤恨不平，得到赏赐，都用来贿赂宇文智及；智及替他说情，才派他领着一万多后军殿后。
English: As a result, Sima Dekan was resentful, and his rewards were used to bribe Wu Wen Zhi and; Zhi and interceded for him, only to send him to lead more than ten thousand soldiers.

古文：于是德戡、行枢与诸将李本、尹正卿、宇文导师等谋以后军袭杀化及，更立德戡为主；遣人诣孟海公，结为外助；迁延未发，待海公报。
现代文：于是，司马德戡、赵行枢与几位将领李本、尹正卿、宇文导师等策划，准备用后军袭击诛杀宇文化及，改立司马德戡为主。派人到孟海公那里，联结他做外援，拖延着没有发动，等着孟海公的回音。
English: As a result, Sima Deyu, Zhao Xingzhu and several generals such as Li Ben, Yin Zhengqing, and Uwen Tutor planned and prepared to use the rear army to attack and kill Yu Culture and establish Sima Deyu as the main. They sent someone to Meng Haigong to contact him for foreign aid, but delayed and did not launch, waiting for Meng Haigong's response.

古文：许弘仁、张恺知之，以告化及。化及遣宇文士及阳为游猎，至后军，德戡不知事露，出营迎谒，因执之。
现代文：许弘仁、张恺知道了他们的计划，报告了宇文化及，宇文化及派宇文士及装作游猎，到后军，司马德戡不知道事情败露，出营迎接，宇文士及趁势逮捕他。
English: Xu Hongren and Zhang Qian learned of their plan, reported to Yu Cunlian, Yu Cunlian sent Yu Wenshi and pretended to go hunting. When they arrived at the rear of the army, Sima Dejun, not knowing that the matter had been exposed, went to the camp to meet Yu Wenshi and took advantage of the situation to arrest him.

古文：化及让之曰： 与公戮力共定海内，出于万死。
现代文：宇文化及责备司马德戡道： 我和阁下共同努力平定海内，冒着天大的风险。
English: U Culture and reproach Sima Dehong: I and your excellency have made joint efforts to pacify the sea, risking great risks.

古文：今始事成，方愿共守富贵，公又何反也？ 
现代文：如今事情刚刚成功，正想一起保富贵，阁下又为何要谋反呢？ 
English: Now that things have just been successful and you are trying to preserve your wealth together, why do you want to rebel?

古文：德戡曰： 本杀昏主，苦其淫虐；推立足下，而又甚之；逼于物情，不获已也。 
现代文：司马德戡说： 本来杀昏主，就是受不了他的荒淫暴虐；推立足下，却比昏主有过之而无不及；迫于人心，也是不得已。 
English: Sima Deya said: Originally, to kill the drowsy lord was to be unable to bear his lewdness and tyranny; to stand up under his feet, however, was better than and equal to the drowsy lord; to force one's heart, was also a last resort.

古文：化及缢杀之，并杀其支党十馀人。
现代文：宇文化及吊死了司马德戡，并杀了司马德戡十九名同党。
English: and hanged Sima Deyu, and killed nineteen of Sima Deyu's party members.

古文：孟海公畏化及之强，帅众具牛酒迎之。
现代文：孟海公害怕宇文化及的强盛，率领部下备办了牛和酒迎接宇文化及。
English: Meng Haigong was afraid of the strength of the U Culture and led his subordinates to prepare beef and wine to welcome the U Culture and.

古文：李密据巩洛以拒化及，化及不得西，引兵向东郡，东郡通守王轨以城降之。
现代文：李密占领了巩洛抵抗宇文化及，宇文化及不能向西前进，便领着队伍朝着东郡进发，东郡通守王轨以城投降了宇文化及。
English: Li Mi occupied Gongluo to resist Yu Cultura and, since Yu Cultura and could not advance westward, he led the team towards Dong County. Dong County's commander Wangluo Yicheng surrendered to Yu Cultura and.

古文：辛丑，李密将井陉王君廓帅众来降。
现代文：辛丑，李密的将领井陉人王君廓率部来降唐王。
English: Sinfully ugly, Li Mi's generals Jing Xunren and Wang Junku led the troops to bring down the Tang King.

古文：君廓本群盗，有众数千人，与贼帅韦宝、邓豹合军虞乡，唐王与李密俱遣使招之。宝、豹欲从唐王，君廓伪与之同，乘其无备，袭击，破之，夺其辎重，奔李密；密不礼之，复来降，拜上柱国，假河内太守。
现代文：王君廓部原本是一伙强盗，有数千人，和贼帅韦宝、邓豹队伍一同驻扎在虞乡，唐王和李密都派人去招降三人，韦宝、邓豹想从唐王，王君廓假意和二人相同，乘二人不防备，袭击并打败了韦、邓二人，抢了二人的辎重，投奔李密；李密对他不太尊重，又来投降唐王，唐王拜王君廓为上柱国、代理河内太守。
English: Wang Jun Guo's detachment was originally a band of robbers, with thousands of men, stationed in Yu Township together with Wei Bao and Deng Bao's teams of thieves. Tang Wang and Li Mi both sent people to recruit three men. Wei Bao and Deng Bao wanted to use the same pretext as the two men from Tang Wang and Wang Jun Guo, and took advantage of the two men's unpreparedness, attacked and defeated Wei and Deng, robbed the two men of their weight, and went to Li Mi; Li Mi did not respect him very much, and came to surrender to Tang Wang. Tang Wang paid tribute to Wang Jun Guo as the pillar state and acting

古文：萧铣即皇帝位，置百官，准梁室故事。
现代文：萧铣即皇帝位，设置属官，完全遵照梁朝的制度。
English: Xiao Xi, that is, the emperor, set up subordinate officials, and fully complied with the system of the Liang Dynasty.

古文：谥其从父琮为孝靖皇帝，祖岩为河间忠烈王，父璿为文宪王，封董景珍等功臣七人皆为王。
现代文：追谥他的叔父萧琮为孝靖皇帝，祖父萧岩为河间忠烈王，父亲萧璇为文宪王，董景珍等七位功臣都封为王。
English: He was followed by his uncle Xiao Yan as Emperor Xiaojing, his grandfather Xiao Yan as King Huama, his father Xiao Yan as King Wenxian, and seven other meritorious vassals including Dong Jingzhen.

古文：遣宋王杨道生击南郡，下之，徒都江陵，修复园庙。
现代文：派宋王杨道生进攻并攻克了南郡，把都城迁到江陵，修复了园林宗庙。
English: He sent Song King Yang Daosheng to attack and conquered Nan County, moved the capital to Jiangling, and restored the garden of the ancestral temple.

古文：引岑文本为中书侍郎，使典文翰，委以机密。
现代文：招岑文本为中书侍郎。派他掌管诏令文书，把机密委托给他。
English: The text of the invitation was for a Chinese scribe. He was put in charge of the imperial edict documents and entrusted with the secrets.

古文：又使鲁王张绣徇岭南，隋将张镇周、王仁寿等拒之；既而闻炀帝遇弑，皆降于铣。
现代文：又派鲁王张绣攻占岭南，隋朝将领张镇周、王仁寿等人抵抗张绣的进攻，不久听说隋炀帝遇弑，都投降了萧铣。
English: He also sent the Lu king Zhang Xiu to occupy Lingnan, and the Sui dynasty generals Zhang Zhen Zhou, Wang Renshou and others resisted Zhang Xiu's attack. Soon, they heard that the Sui and Qian emperors were killed, and they all surrendered to Xiao Qian.

古文：钦州刺史宁长真亦以郁林、始安之地附于铣。
现代文：钦州刺史甯长真也以郁林、始安地区归附于萧铣。
English: Ulin and Shi'an districts in Qinzhou County were also annexed to Xiaoqi by Zhi Shi and Changzhen.

古文：汉阳太守冯盎以苍梧、高凉、珠崖、番禺之地附于林士弘。
现代文：汉阳太守冯盎以苍梧、高凉、珠崖、番禺地区归附了林士弘。
English: Hanyang Daju Feng Aung annexed the areas of Cangwu, Gaoliang, Zhuji and Panyu to Lin Shihong.

古文：铣、士弘各遣人招交趾太守丘和，和不从。
现代文：萧铣、林士弘分别派人招降交趾太守丘和，丘和没有顺从。
English: Xiao Zheng and Lin Shihong respectively sent people to recruit and abdicate Koji Taishu Yuhe, but Yuhe did not obey.

古文：铣遣宁长真帅岭南兵自海道攻和，和欲出迎之，司法书佐高士廉说和曰： 长真兵数虽多，悬军远至，不能持久，城中胜兵足以当之，奈何望风受制于人！ 
现代文：萧铣派甯长真率领岭南的兵力从海路攻打丘和，丘和打算出城迎接，司法书佐高士廉劝他道： 长真的军队虽然人多，但是孤军深入远道而来，不能长期坚持，我们城里能打仗的士兵足以抵抗敌人，怎么能望风而降，受制于人？ 
English: Xiao Yu sent Zhang Changzhen to lead the forces of Lingnan to attack Qiu He from the sea. Qiu He planned to leave the city to meet him, and the judicial document Sago Shilian advised him: Although Changzhen's army is large, it is a lone army coming from far away and cannot persist for a long time. Our soldiers who can fight in the city are enough to resist the enemy. How can they hope for the wind and be controlled by people?

古文：和从之，以士廉为军司马，将水陆诸军逆击，破之，长真仅以身免，尽俘其众。
现代文：丘和听从他的劝告，以高士廉为军司马，统领水陆各军迎击，打败了甯长真，甯长真只身逃脱，他的部下全部被俘。
English: Heeding his advice, with Gao Shiliang as the commander of the army, Yuhe led the land and sea forces to counterattack, defeated Zou Changzheng, Zou Changzheng escaped alone, and all of his subordinates were captured.

古文：既而有骁果自江都至，得炀帝凶问，亦以郡附于铣。
现代文：不久有骁果从江都到交趾，交趾知道了隋炀帝的死讯，也以郡归附于萧铣。
English: Not long after, Guo Guo went from Jiangdu to Jiaozuo. When Jiaozuo learned of the death of Emperor Sui and Qian, they also attached the county to Xiao Yu.

古文：士廉，劢之子也。
现代文：高士廉是高劢的儿子。
English: Gao Shiliang is Gao Yao's son.

古文：始安郡丞李袭志，迁哲之孙也，隋末，散家财，募士得三千人，以保郡城；萧铣、林士弘、曹武彻迭来攻之，皆不克。
现代文：始安郡丞李袭志是李迁哲的孙子，隋末，拿出自己的财产，召募了三千士兵保卫郡城；萧铣、林士弘、曹武彻轮番进攻始安，都没有攻克。
English: At the end of the Sui Dynasty, Li Qizhi, the county magistrate of Shi'an and the grandson of Li Qizhe, took out his own property and recruited three thousand soldiers to defend the county seat; Xiao Qi, Lin Shihong, and Cao Wucher took turns to attack Shi'an, but failed to conquer it.

古文：闻炀帝遇弑，帅吏民临三日。
现代文：李袭志听说隋炀帝遇弑，率领吏民哭吊了三天。
English: Li Qizhi heard that the Emperor of Sui and Qin had been killed, and he led the officials and people in mourning for three days.

古文：或说袭志曰： 公中州贵族，久临鄙郡，华、夷悦服。
现代文：有人劝李袭志说： 您是中州的贵族，长期在这边远的郡县，无论华夏人还是夷族对您都心悦诚服。
English: Someone advised Li Wei Zhi and said: You are an aristocrat from Central China, and you have been in this faraway county for a long time. Both the Chinese and the barbarians are pleased with you.

古文：今隋室无主，海内鼎沸，以公威惠，号令岭表，尉佗之业可坐致也。 
现代文：现在隋王室无主，四海之内动荡不安，凭着您的威信德行，号令岭南，不费力就可以成就尉佗那样的事业。 
English: Now the Sui royal family has no master, and the four seas are turbulent and unstable. With your prestige and virtue, you can make Lingnan achieve a career like that of Fei Xuan without much effort.

古文：袭志怒曰： 吾世继忠贞，今江都虽覆，宗社尚存，尉佗狂僭，何足慕也！ 
现代文：李袭志十分生气，说： 我家世代都是忠贞不二，现在炀帝虽然被弑，但隋的宗庙社稷还在，尉佗狂妄僭立，又有什么可以羡慕的！ 
English: Li Qizhi was very angry and said, "My family's generations have all been loyal. Now, although Emperor Xizong has been executed, the Sui Dynasty's ancestral temple is still standing, and there is nothing to be envious of!

古文：欲斩说者，众乃不敢言。
现代文：要杀了劝说的人，众人于是再不敢说这样的话。
English: They wanted to kill those who were trying to persuade them, so people no longer dared to say such things.

古文：坚守二年，外无声援，城陷，为铣所虏，铣以为工部尚书，检校桂州总管。
现代文：李袭志坚守了两年，外面没有声援的军队，城池陷落，李袭志被萧铣俘虏，萧铣以他为工部尚书、检校桂州总管。
English: Li Wei Zhi held out for two years, there was no outside support for the army, the city fell, Li Wei Zhi was captured by Xiao Yu, Xiao Yu took him as the head of the Guizhou inspection.

古文：于是东自九江，西抵三峡，南尽交趾，北距汉川，铣皆有之，胜兵四十馀万。
现代文：于是东边从九江西边到三峡，南到交趾，北到汉川，都为萧铣所有，萧铣有四十万能作战的军队。
English: As a result, the east side from the west side of Jiujiang to the Three Gorges, the south to Jiaozuo, and the north to Hanchuan were all owned by Xiao Yao. Xiao Yao had an army of 400,000 capable of fighting.

古文：炀帝凶问至长安，唐王哭之恸，曰： 吾北面事人，失道不能救，敢忘哀乎！ 
现代文：隋炀帝的死讯传到长安，唐王李渊恸哭，说道： 我北面称臣侍奉君王，君主失道不能挽救，岂敢忘记哀痛悲伤呢？ 
English: The news of the death of the Emperor Sui and Qian spread to Chang'an. The Tang King Li Yuan cried and said: I am a subject serving the king in the north, the monarch cannot be saved, how dare I forget the grief and sorrow?

古文：五月，山南抚慰使马元规击硃粲于冠军，破之。
现代文：五月，山南抚慰使马元规在冠军进攻朱粲，打败了他。
English: In May, Shannan Fuziao made Ma Yuanhui attack Zhu Xi in the championship, and defeated him.

古文：王德仁既杀房彦澡，李密遣徐世勣讨之。
现代文：王德仁杀了房彦藻后，李密派遣徐世征伐他。
English: After Wang Deren killed Fang Yanxiao, Li Mi sent Xu Shihong to conquer him.

古文：德仁兵败，甲寅，与武安通守袁子幹皆来降，诏以德仁为鄴郡太守。
现代文：王德仁战败，甲寅，王德仁和武安通守袁子都向唐王投降，唐王以王德仁为邺郡太守。
English: Wang DeRen was defeated, and Qia Yin, Wang DeRen, and Yuan Zi, the governor of Wu'an Tonglu, all surrendered to the Tang king. The Tang king made Wang DeRen the governor of Jixian County.

古文：戊午，隋恭帝禅位于唐，逊居代邸。
现代文：戊午，隋恭帝禅位给唐，让出皇宫住在代邸。
English: At noon, Emperor Sui-kyong abdicated the throne to Emperor Tang and gave up the imperial palace to live in the vicarious residence.

古文：甲子，唐王即皇帝位于太极殿，遣刑部尚书萧造告天于南郊，大赦，改元。
现代文：甲子，唐王在太极殿即皇帝位，派刑部尚书萧造在南郊祭告上天，大赦天下，改换年号为武德。
English: A son, the Tang King ascended the throne in the Taiji Hall, and sent the Minister of Justice, Shangshu Xiaozhong, to the Southern Suburbs to announce to the world that the Emperor had been pardoned, and the year name was changed to Wu De.

古文：罢郡，置州，以太守为剌史。
现代文：停止用郡，设置州，改太守为刺史。
English: Stop using county, set up prefecture, and change Taishu to Shishi.

古文：推五运为土德，色尚黄。
现代文：推求五行的运行属土德，颜色以黄色为尊。
English: The running of the five lines is a local custom, and the color is yellow.

古文：隋炀帝凶问至东都，戊辰，留守官奉越王即皇帝位，大赦，改元皇泰。
现代文：隋炀帝的死讯传到东都，戊辰，留守东都的隋朝官员拥戴隋越王杨侗即皇帝位，大赦，改年号为皇泰。
English: The news of the death of the Sui and Yue Emperors spread to the Eastern Capital, Wucheng. The Sui Dynasty officials who stayed behind in the Eastern Capital held the Sui and Yue King Yang Di, that is, the emperor's throne, amnesty, and changed the year name to Huan Tai.

古文：是日于朝堂宣旨，以时钟金革，公私皆即日大祥。
现代文：当即在朝堂宣旨，由于当时正值战争期间，公私都以当天为守丧两年除去丧服的大祥日。
English: The imperial edict was immediately proclaimed in the Imperial Hall. Since it was wartime, both the public and private sectors took this day as the auspicious day to remove mourning clothes for two years.

古文：追谥大行曰明皇帝，庙号世祖；追尊元德太子曰成皇帝，庙号世宗。
现代文：追谥死去的皇帝为明皇帝，庙号世祖；追尊元德太子为成皇帝，庙号世宗。
English: The emperor who died in the chase is the Ming emperor, the temple name is the ancestor; the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince.

古文：尊母刘良娣为皇太后。
现代文：尊母亲刘良娣为皇太后。
English: His mother, Liu Liangyao, became empress dowager.

古文：以段达为纳言、陈国公，王世充为纳言、郑国公，元文都为内史令、鲁国公，皇甫无逸为兵部尚书、杞国公，又以卢楚为内史令，郭文懿为内史侍郎，赵长文为黄门侍郎，共掌朝政，时人号 七贵 。
现代文：以段达为纳言、陈国公，王世充为纳言、郑国公，元文都为内史令、鲁国公，皇甫无逸为兵部尚书、杞国公；又以卢楚为内史令，郭文懿为内史侍郎，赵长文为黄门侍郎，共同掌握朝政。当时人称 七贵 。
English: With Danda as Nagan, Chen Guogong, Wang Shichong as Nagan, Zheng Guogong, and Yuanwen as Naishi Rong, Lu Guogong, Emperor Fu Muxu as Heibu Shoshu, and Xing Guogong; with Lu Chu as Naishi Rong, Guo Wenyi as Naishi Rong, and Zhao Changwen as Huangmen Rong, they jointly controlled the imperial government. At that time, they were called Shichigui.

古文：皇泰主眉目如画，温厚仁爱，风格俨然。
现代文：皇泰主杨侗眉目如画，温和仁爱，仪容风度矜持庄重。
English: Emperor Taizong's master Yang Zhen has a picturesque brow, is gentle and benevolent, and has a dignified demeanor.

古文：辛未，突厥始毕可汗遣骨咄禄特勒来，宴之于太极殿，奏九部乐。
现代文：辛未，突厥始毕可汗派遣骨咄禄特勒前来唐朝，朝廷在太极殿宴请他，奏宴乐、清商、西凉等九部乐。
English: At the beginning of the Xinwei Dynasty, the Turkic ruler, Bikhan, sent the bone-stringed rottweiler to the Tang Dynasty. The court invited him to a banquet at the Taiji Hall, where he played nine pieces of music, including banquet music, Qing merchants, and Xilang.

古文：时中国人避乱者多入突厥，突厥强盛，东自契丹、室韦，西尽吐谷浑、高昌，诸国皆臣之，控弦百馀万。
现代文：当时中原避乱的人大多逃入突厥，突厥强盛，东自契丹、室韦，西边包括吐谷浑、高昌，各国都臣服于突厥，突厥有一百多万士兵。
English: At that time, most of the refugees from the Central Plains fled to the Turks. The Turks were very powerful, from Khitan and Murowe in the east to Tuyugun and Gochang in the west. All countries were subjugated to the Turks, who had more than a million soldiers.

古文：帝以初起资其兵马，前后饷遗，不可胜纪。
现代文：唐高祖因为起事初期曾借助于突厥兵马，所以前前后后赠送给突厥的东西，无法计算。
English: Since Emperor Gaozu of Tang used the help of Turkish soldiers and horses at the beginning of the uprising, it is impossible to calculate the number of gifts he gave to the Turks.

古文：突厥恃功骄倨，每遣使者至长安，多暴横，帝优容之。
现代文：突厥凭借过去的功劳，傲慢无礼，每次派遣使者来长安，大多都胡作非为，蛮不讲理，但皇上都优待、宽容他们。
English: The Turks, relying on their past achievements, were arrogant and rude. Every time they sent an envoy to Chang'an, most of them did something unreasonable, but the emperor treated them with preferential treatment and tolerance.

古文：壬申，命裴寂、刘文静等修定律令。
现代文：壬申，唐高祖命令裴寂、刘文静等人编纂审定律令。
English: According to Jinshin, Tang Gaozu ordered Pei Zh, Liu Wenzhing and others to compile laws and decrees.

古文：置国子、太学、四门生，合三百馀员，郡县学亦各置生员。
现代文：设置国子学、太学、四门学生，共三百多人，各郡县学校也都设置学员名额。
English: A total of more than three hundred students are enrolled in Kuniko, Taigaku, and Shimonoseki, and each county and prefectural school has its own quota of trainees.

古文：六月，甲戌朔，以赵公世民为尚书令，黄台公瑗为刑部侍郎，相国府长史裴寂为右仆射、知政事，司马刘文静为纳言，司录窦威为内史令，李纲为礼部尚书、参掌选事，掾殷开山为吏部侍郎，属赵慈景为兵部侍郎，韦义节为礼部侍郎，主簿陈叔达、博陵崔民幹并为黄门侍郎，唐俭为内史侍郎，录事参军裴晞为尚书右丞；以隋民部尚书萧瑀为内史令，礼部尚书窦璡为户部尚书，蒋公屈突通为兵部尚书，长安令独孤怀恩为工部尚书。
现代文：六月，甲戌朔，任命赵公李世民为尚书令，黄台公李为刑部侍郎，相国府长史裴寂为右仆射、知政事，司马刘文静为纳言，司录窦威为内史令，李纲为礼部尚书、参掌选事，掾殷开山为吏部侍郎，属赵慈景为兵部侍郎，韦义节为礼部侍郎，主簿陈叔达、博陵人崔民同为黄门侍郎，唐俭为内史侍郎，录事参军裴为尚书左丞；任命隋民部尚书萧为内史令，礼部尚书窦为户部尚书，蒋公屈突通为兵部尚书，长安令独孤怀恩为工部尚书。
English: In June, Jia Yuanshuo appointed Zhao Gong Li Shimin as Shangshu Ling, Huang Tai Gong Li as the attendant of the criminal department, the governor of the neighboring country, Shi Peizhang, as the right-hand man, the governor, Sima Liu Wenzhing as the prime minister, the secretary Dou Wei as the secretary of the internal history, Li Gang as the secretary of the ceremonial department and the staff member of the election, Yu Yin Kaishan as the attendant of the official department, Zhao Cijing as the attendant of the military department, Wei Yi Jie as the attendant of the ceremonial department, the main bookkeeper Chen Shuda and

古文：瑗，上之从子；怀恩，舅子也。
现代文：李是唐高祖的侄子；独孤怀恩是唐高祖舅舅的儿子。
English: Li was the nephew of Tang Gaozu; Duolou Wai En was the son of Tang Gaozu's uncle.

古文：上待裴寂特厚，群臣无与为比，赏赐服玩，不可胜纪；命尚书奉御日以御膳赐寂，视朝必引与同坐，入阁则延之卧内；言无不从，称为裴监而不名。
现代文：唐高祖对待裴寂特别优厚，群臣没有能与之相比的，赏赐给裴寂的服用和玩赏的物品无法计算；命尚食奉御每天将御膳赐给裴寂，上朝时，一定让裴寂与自己坐在一起，回到寝宫，一定邀请裴寂到内室；裴寂说什么是什么，不称裴寂的名字而称其旧官名 裴监 。
English: Tang Gao Zu treated Peizhang particularly well. There was no peer among his ministers who could compare to him. The items he gave Peizhang to use and play with are incalculable. He ordered him to eat and serve him and give him a meal every day. When he ascended to the throne, he must let Peizhang sit with him, return to his bedchamber, and invite Peizhang to his inner room. What did Peizhang say? Instead of calling him by his name, he called him by his old official title, Peizhang.

古文：委萧瑀以庶政，事无大小，莫不关掌。
现代文：唐高祖把各种行政事务托付给萧，事情无论大小，没有不由萧掌握的。
English: Tang Gaozu entrusted all kinds of administrative affairs to Xiao, and no matter how big or small, there was nothing that Xiao could not handle.

古文：瑀亦孜孜尽力，绳违举过，人皆惮之，毁之者众，终不自理。
现代文：萧也尽心尽力纠正违失，举发过错，人们都惧怕他，诋毁他的人很多，但他始终不为自己辩解。
English: Xiao also did his best to correct the violations and faults. People were afraid of him, and there were many people who slandered him, but he never defended himself.

古文：上尝有敕而内史不时宣行，上责其迟，瑀对曰： 大业之世，内史宣敕，或前后相违，有司不知所从，其易在前，其难在后；臣在省日久，备见其事。
现代文：高祖曾经下达命令而内史没有及时宣布，高祖责备内史迟缓，萧回答： 隋炀帝大业年间，内史宣布命令，有时前后命令相反，负责部门不知怎么办才好，只好把容易执行的命令放在前面，难的放在后面；臣下我在隋朝内史省待的时间很久，这样的事都见到了。
English: Gaozhu once issued an order, but did not announce it in time. Gaozhu reproached Gaozhu for being slow to announce it. Xiao replied: During the reign of Emperor Sui, Gaozhu announced the order, and sometimes the orders were contrary. The responsible department did not know what to do, so they had to put the easy-to-implement order in front and the difficult one behind. I have been in the Sui Dynasty History Department for a long time, and I have seen such things.

古文：今王业经始，事系安危，远方有疑，恐失机会，故臣每受一敕必勘审，使与前敕不违，始敢宣行；稽缓之愆，实由于此。 
现代文：如今陛下的大业刚刚开创，事情关系着社稷安危，远方的人有怀疑，恐怕就失去了机会，所以，臣下我每接受一个敕令，必须调查核审，使之与前面发布的敕令不相矛盾，然后才敢宣行，您所责备的命令迟迟没有宣布的过失，实际上是由于上述的缘故。 
English: Now that Your Majesty's great cause has just begun, the matter concerns the safety of society, and people far away have doubts, I am afraid they have lost the opportunity. Therefore, every time I receive a royal order, I must investigate and verify that it does not contradict the previously issued royal order before I dare to carry it out. The fault of delay in announcing the order you blame is actually due to the above reasons.

古文：上曰： 卿用心如是，吾复何忧！ 
现代文：高祖说： 你这样用心办事，我又还有什么可忧虑的！ 
English: Gaozu said, "If you work with such dedication, I have nothing to worry about!"

古文：初，帝遣马元规慰抚山南，南阳郡丞河东吕子臧独据郡不从；元规遣使数辈谕之，皆为子臧所杀。
现代文：当初，唐高祖派马元规宣慰安抚山南，唯有南阳郡丞河东人吕子臧据郡不归顺；马元规派好几个人前往劝喻，都被吕子臧杀了。
English: At first, Emperor Gaozong sent Ma Yuanhui to comfort and pacify Shannan. Only Lu Zixu, a man from Nanyang County, east of the Ye River, refused to surrender; Ma Yuanhui sent several people to persuade him, but they were all killed by Lu Zixu.

古文：及炀帝遇弑，子臧发丧成礼，然后请降；拜邓州刺史，封南郡公。
现代文：待隋炀帝遇弑，吕子臧发丧完成礼数，然后请求投降；唐任命他为邓州刺史、封南郡公。
English: After the death of Emperor Sui and Emperor Pu, Lu Zixuan held a funeral to complete the ritual, and then asked for surrender; Tang appointed him as the governor of Dengzhou and the governor of Fennan County.

古文：废大业律令，颁新格。
现代文：唐废除隋朝大业律令，颁布新的法律条文
English: Tang abolished the Sui Dynasty's Taiye Ritsuryo and promulgated new legal provisions

古文：上每视事，自称名，引贵臣同榻而坐。
现代文：唐高祖每次上朝，都自称名字，请贵臣们与他同坐一条榻上。
English: Every time Tang Gaozu ascended the throne, he called himself by his first name and invited his courtiers to sit with him on a couch.

古文：刘文静谏曰： 昔王导有言： 若太阳俯同万物，使群生何以仰照！ 
现代文：刘文静劝谏说： 过去王导说过这样的话： 假如太阳俯身与万物等同，那么一切生物又怎么仰赖它的照耀呢？ 
English: Liu Wenjing advised him, "In the past, Wang Du said this: If the sun bending down is the same as all things, then how can all living things rely on its shining?

古文：今贵贱失位，非常久之道。 
现代文：现在您的做法使贵贱失去了秩序，这不是国家长久之道。 
English: What you are doing now is throwing the nobility and the commoners out of order. This is not the way for the country to last.

古文：上曰： 昔汉光武与严子陵共寝，子陵加足于帝腹。
现代文：高祖回答： 过去汉光武帝与严子陵一起睡觉，严子陵把脚伸到汉光武帝的肚子上。
English: Gao Zu replied: In the past, Emperor Han Guangwu slept with Yan Zi Ling, and Yan Zi Ling put his foot on Emperor Han Guangwu's stomach.

古文：今诸公皆名德旧齿，平生亲友，宿昔之欢，何可忘也。
现代文：今天诸位大臣都是德高望重的旧同僚，平生的亲友，过去的欢情，怎能忘怀。
English: Today, all of you ministers are highly respected old colleagues, lifelong relatives and friends, and how can we forget the joys of the past.

古文：公勿以为嫌！ 
现代文：此事您不必疑虑！ 
English: You don't have to worry about this!

古文：戊寅，隋安阳令吕珉以相州来降，以为相州刺史。
现代文：戊寅，隋安阳令吕珉以相州降唐，唐封他为相州刺史。
English: Wu Yin, Sui Anyang ordered Lv Ying to take Xiangzhou to the Tang Dynasty, and the Tang Dynasty crowned him as Xiangzhou's crown prince.

古文：己卯，祔四亲庙主。
现代文：己卯，唐祭祀四亲庙主。
English: Jiwu, the head of the Tang Temple of the Four Ancestors.

古文：追尊皇高祖瀛州府君曰宣简公；皇曾祖司空曰懿王；皇祖景王曰景皇帝，庙号太祖，祖妣曰景烈皇后；皇考元王曰元皇帝，庙号世祖，妣独孤氏曰元贞皇后；追谥妃窦氏曰穆皇后。
现代文：追尊皇高祖瀛州府君为宣简公；皇曾祖司空为懿王；皇祖景王为景皇帝，庙号为太祖，祖母为景烈皇后；皇父元王为元皇帝，庙号为世祖，母亲独孤氏为元贞皇后；追谥皇妃窦氏为穆皇后。
English: Emperor Gaozong's great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-

古文：每岁祀昊天上帝、皇地祇、神州地祇，以景帝配，感生帝、明堂，以元帝配。
现代文：每年祭祀昊天上帝、皇地祗、神州地祗，以景帝配享，祭感生帝、明堂，以元帝配享。
English: Every year, Haotian God, the Imperial Palace, and the Divine State Palace are dedicated, with Emperor Jing as the recipient, and Emperor Kansei, Emperor Myeongdong, and Emperor Won as the recipients.

古文：庚辰，立世子建成为皇太子，赵公世民为秦王，齐公元吉为齐王，宗室黄瓜公白驹为平原王，蜀公孝基为永安王，柱国道玄为淮阳王，长平公叔良为长平王，郑公神通为永康王，安吉公神符为襄邑王，柱国德良为新兴王，上柱国博叉为陇西王，上柱国奉慈为勃海王。
现代文：庚辰，立世子李建成为皇太子，赵公李世民为秦王，齐公李元吉为齐王，宗室黄瓜公李白驹为平原王，蜀公李孝基为永安王，柱国李道玄为淮阳王，长平公李叔良为长平王，郑公李神通为永康王，安吉公李神符为襄邑王，柱国李德良为新兴王，上柱国李博义为陇西王，上柱国李奉慈为勃海王。
English: Geng Chen and his son Li Jian became the crown prince, Zhao Gong and Li Shimin became the King of Qin, Qi Gong and Li Yuanji became the King of Qi, Cucumber Gong and Li Baiyao became the King of the Plain, Shu Gong and Li Xiaoqi became the King of Yongan, Zhuang Guo and Li Daoxuan became the King of Huaiyang, Changping Guo and Li Shuliang became the King of Changping, Zheng Guo and Li Shengtong became the King of Yongkang, Anji Guo and Li Shenfu became the King of Xiangyi, Zhuang Guo and Li Deliang became the King of

古文：孝基、叔良、神符、德良，帝之从父弟；博叉、奉慈，弟子；道玄，从父兄子也。
现代文：孝基、叔良、神符、德良，都是高祖的堂弟；博义、奉慈是高祖的侄子；道玄是高祖的堂侄。
English: Xiaoji, Shuliang, Shenfu and Deliang are Gao Zu's cousins; Bo Yi and Bong Ci are Gao Zu's nephews; Dogen is Gao Zu's cousin.

古文：癸未，薛举寇泾州。以秦王世民为元帅，将八总管兵以拒之。
现代文：癸未，薛举侵犯泾州，高祖任命秦王李世民为元帅，统帅八路总管的军队去抵御。
English: After Xue Jiu invaded Zhangzhou, Gaozu appointed Qin King Li Shimin as marshal and commander of the Eighth Route Army to resist.

古文：遣太仆卿宇文明达招慰山东，以永安王孝基为陕州总管。
现代文：唐派遣太仆卿宇文明达招抚慰问崤山以东地区，任命永安王李孝基为陕州总管。
English: Tang dispatched the Great Servant of the Emperor, Yu Wenzhongda, to offer condolences to the areas east of Lushan, and appointed the Yongan King, Li Xiaoji, as the governor of Shaanxi Province.

古文：时天下未定，凡边要之州，皆置总管府，以统数州之兵。
现代文：当时天下还不安定，凡是边远重要的州郡，都设置总管府，以统帅几个州的军队。
English: At that time, the world was still unstable, and all remote and important states and counties set up headquarters to command the armies of several states.

古文：乙酉，奉隋帝为酅国公。
现代文：乙酉，唐尊奉隋恭帝为国公。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, Emperor Sui and Emperor Gong were the sovereigns of the country.

古文：诏曰： 近世以来，时运迁革，前代亲族，莫不诛夷。
现代文：高祖下诏说： 近世以来，时运变革更新，以前朝代的皇帝宗族，没有不被杀戮除灭的。
English: Gao Zu said: Since the modern era, the times have changed and become newer. The imperial family of the previous dynasties has not been eliminated by killing.

古文：兴亡之效，岂伊人力！
现代文：但朝代所以兴亡，岂只靠人力所为！
English: But for dynasties to rise and fall, they must rely on manpower!

古文：其隋蔡王智积等子孙，并付所司，量才选用。 
现代文：隋朝的蔡王杨智积等王室子孙，都交付有关官署，量才使用。 
English: Cai Wang, Yang Zhizhe, and other royal descendants of the Sui Dynasty were all delivered to the relevant government agencies, and only used in quantity.

古文：东都闻宇文化及西来，上下震惧。
现代文：东都听说宇文化及向西而来，上下震惊，一片恐慌。
English: Everyone in the East was shocked and panicked when they heard that Yu Qun and Xiang Xuan were coming.

古文：有盖琮者，上疏请说李密与之合势拒化及。
现代文：有一位盖琮上疏请求联合李密一起抵抗宇文化及。
English: A member of the Guizhong Shangsu requested to unite with Li Mi to resist the rise of U Culture.

古文：元文都谓卢楚等曰： 今仇耻未雪而兵力不足，若赦密罪使击化及，两贼自斗，吾徐承其弊。化及既破，密兵亦疲；又其将士利吾官赏，易可离间，并密亦可擒也。 
现代文：元文都对卢楚等人说： 现在宇文化及弑主之仇未报，而兵力又不足以报仇，假如赦免李密的罪过，让他攻宇文化及，两贼互相争斗，我们可以慢慢利用们的败落，宇文化及败了，李密的部队也疲劳不堪；他的将士贪图我们的官爵赏赐，容易离间，连李密也可以活捉。 
English: Yuan Wendu said to Lu Chu and others: Now that the revenge of the imperial culture and the tyrant has not been avenged, and the military strength is not enough to avenge, if we forgive Li Mi's sins and let him attack the imperial culture and the two thieves fight each other, we can slowly take advantage of our defeat. When the imperial culture is defeated, Li Mi's troops are also fatigued; his soldiers covet our noble rewards and are easily separated, and even Li Mi can be captured alive.

古文：楚等皆以为然，即以琮为通直散骑常侍，赍敕书赐密。
现代文：卢楚等人都认为说得对，便任命盖琮为通直散骑常侍，携带敕书赐予李密。
English: Lu Chu and others all thought that this was right, so they appointed Gaige to be a regular attendant of the Zongzhizhanyi, and gave Li Mi to carry the imperial edict.

古文：丙申，隋信都郡丞东莱麹稜来降，拜冀州刺史。
现代文：丙申，隋信都郡郡丞东莱人棱前来投降唐朝，唐拜他为冀州刺史。
English: Bishen, Sui Xin, Du County, Donglai people came to surrender to the Tang Dynasty, and the Tang Dynasty worshiped him as the history of Jizhou.

古文：丁酉，万年县法曹武城孙伏伽上表，以为： 隋以恶闻其过亡天下。
现代文：丁酉，万年县法曹武城人孙伏伽上表，以为： 隋朝因为不愿听到批评而丧失了天下。
English: Ding Yao, the county magistrate of Wucheng County, and Sun Fu Jia, the leader of the upper table, thought: The Sui Dynasty lost the world because it did not want to hear criticism.

古文：陛下龙飞晋阳，远近响应，未期年而登帝位；徒知得之之易，不知隋失之之不难也。
现代文：陛下兴起于晋阳，远近响应，不到一年就登上帝位，只知道得天下容易，而不知隋朝失天下也不难。
English: His Majesty was born in Jinyang, and people from near and far responded to him. He ascended to the throne in less than a year. He only knew that it was easy to gain the world, but he did not know that it was not difficult for the Sui Dynasty to lose the world.

古文：臣谓宜易其覆辙，务尽下情。
现代文：臣下我以为应当改变隋朝的作法，尽量了解下面的民情。
English: As a subject, I thought that we should change the practice of the Sui Dynasty and try to understand the people's conditions below.

古文：凡人君言动，不可不慎。
现代文：凡是人君的言行，不能不慎重。
English: All the words and deeds of a prince must be prudent.

古文：窃见陛下今日即位而明日有献鹞雏者，此乃少年之事，岂圣主所须哉！
现代文：我见到今天陛下即位，明天就有人献鹞雏，玩鹞雏是少年人的事，哪里是圣主所需要的？
English: I see that today His Majesty ascends the throne, and tomorrow someone will offer a young pheasant. Playing with young pheasants is a young man's game. What does the Lord need?

古文：又，百戏散乐，亡国淫声。近太常于民间借妇女裙襦五百馀袭以充妓衣，拟五月五日玄武门游戏，此亦非所以为子孙法也。
现代文：又，乐舞杂技是亡国的淫声，最近太常寺在民间借了五百多套妇女的裙子短衣充作歌妓之衣，拟于五月五日在玄武门演戏，这可不是子孙后代可以效法的事。
English: In addition, music, dance and acrobatics are the lewd sounds of a ruined country. Recently, the Taejō-ji Temple borrowed more than 500 sets of women's skirts and shorts from the people to be used as geisha outfits, and it is planned to perform on May 5 at the Genbū Gate. This is not something that future generations can emulate.

古文：凡如此类，悉宜废罢。
现代文：诸如此类，应当全部废止。
English: All of this should be abolished.

古文：善恶之习，朝夕渐染，易以移人。
现代文：好的与不好的习惯，每天接触一点，很容易改变人的性情。
English: Good and bad habits, a little daily contact, it is easy to change a person's disposition.

古文：皇太子、诸王参僚左右，宜谨择其人；其有门风不能雍睦，为人素无行义，专好奢靡，以声色游猎为事者，皆不可使之亲近也。
现代文：皇太子、诸王身边的官吏，应当谨慎挑选合适的人选；那种门风不能和睦相处，为人历来没有德行，专好奢侈靡烂，酷嗜乐舞游猎的人，都不能让他们接近皇太子、诸王。
English: The officials around the crown prince and the kings should carefully select the right candidates; those who cannot get along with each other, who have never been virtuous, who are devoted to luxury and debauchery, and who are addicted to dancing and hunting, should not be allowed to get close to the crown prince and the kings.

古文：自古及今，骨肉乖离，以至败国亡家，未有不因左右离间而然也。
现代文：从古到今，骨肉亲人不和、分离，以至败国亡家，没有不是由于身边亲近的人离间造成的。
English: From ancient times to the present, there has never been a time when close relatives have been estranged and separated, even to the point of losing the country and losing their homes. This was not caused by the estrangement of people who were close to them.

古文：愿陛下慎之。 
现代文：望陛下慎重对待。 
English: I hope His Majesty will treat it with caution.

古文：上省表大悦，下诏褒称，擢为治书侍御史，赐帛三百匹，仍颁示远近。
现代文：高祖看了表章非常高兴，下诏奖励，提升孙伏伽为治书侍御史，赐帛三百匹，并将奖励的决定公布到各处。
English: Gao Zu was very pleased to see the seal, and issued a decree to reward, elevate Sun Fu Jia to the position of the book keeper of history, bestow three hundred horses on him, and announce the award decision everywhere.

古文：辛丑，内史令延安靖公窦威薨。
现代文：辛丑，唐内史令延安靖公窦威去世。
English: Sinfully ugly, Tang Dynasty historian Yan Anjing Gong Dou Wei passed away.

古文：以将作大匠窦抗兼纳言，黄门侍郎陈叔达判纳言。
现代文：任命将作大匠窦抗兼纳言，黄门侍郎陈叔达判纳言。
English: The appointment will be made by the great master Dou Quan and Nagan, and the Yellow Gate waiter Chen Shuda will make the final decision.

古文：宇文化及留辎重于滑台，以王轨为刑部尚书，使守之，引兵北趣黎阳。
现代文：宇文化及将辎重留在滑台，任命王轨为刑部尚书，派他守卫辎重，自己率军向北到黎阳。
English: Yu Wenchuan and left Xingzhong on the slide, appointed Wang Lu as the head of the criminal department, sent him to guard Xingzhong, and led his army north to Liyang.

古文：李密将徐世勣据黎阳，畏其军锋，以兵西保仓城。
现代文：李密的将领徐世占领黎阳，畏惧宇文化及的军队勇猛，率军向西保守黎阳仓城。
English: Li Mi's general Xu Shih occupied Liyang, fearing Yu's culture and the army's bravery, and led the army to the west to protect Liyang Cangcheng.

古文：化及渡河，保黎阳，分兵围世勣。
现代文：宇文化及渡过黄河，占据黎阳，分兵几路包围徐世。
English: Yu Culture and crossed the Yellow River, occupied Liyang, and surrounded Xu Shi with several detachments.

古文：密帅步骑二万，壁于清淇，与世勣以烽火相应，深沟高垒，不与化及战。
现代文：李密率领二万步骑兵，驻扎在清淇，与徐世用烽火相呼应，挖深沟筑高城墙，不和宇文化及交战。
English: Li Mi led twenty thousand infantry and cavalry, stationed in Qingming, echoed with Xu Shi with bonfires, dug deep ditches and built high city walls, and fought against Yu culture.

古文：化及每攻仓城，密辄引兵以掎其后。
现代文：每当宇文化及攻仓城，李密就带兵牵制他的后方。
English: Whenever Yu Culture and the attack on Cangcheng, Li Mi led the troops to restrain his rear.

古文：密与化及隔水而语，密数之曰： 卿本匈奴皁隶破野头耳，父兄子弟，并受隋恩，富贵累世，举朝莫二。
现代文：李密隔着淇水斥责宇文化及道： 你本来不过是匈奴的奴隶破野头，父兄子弟都受隋的恩典，几代富贵，满朝文武没有第二家。
English: Across the water, Li Mi rebuked Yu Qunlun and said, "You were originally nothing more than a slave of the Xiongnu. Your father and brother were both favored by the Sui Dynasty. They have been wealthy for several generations. There is no second family of the Manwu Dynasty.

古文：主上失德，不能死谏，反行弑逆，欲规篡夺。
现代文：主上丧失德行，你不能以死规劝，反而谋逆弑君，还想窥测篡夺天下。
English: If the lord loses his virtue, you cannot persuade him by death. Instead, you will plot against him and try to usurp the whole world.

古文：不追诸葛瞻之忠诚，乃为霍禹之恶逆，天地所不容，将欲何之！
现代文：你不效法诸葛亮之子诸葛瞻蜀亡而死的忠诚，却效法霍光之子霍禹谋逆，为天地所不容，还准备干什么？
English: You do not imitate the loyalty of Zhuge Liang's son Zhuge Zhanshu, who died and died, but you imitate Huo Guang's son Huo Yu to plot against heaven and earth, what else are you prepared to do?

古文：若速来归我，尚可得全后嗣。 
现代文：如果赶快归顺我，还可以保全你的后嗣。 
English: If you hasten to submit to me, you will be able to preserve your offspring.

古文：化及默然，俯视良久，瞋目大言曰： 与尔论相杀事，何须作书语邪！ 
现代文：宇文化及默不作声，低头半天，瞪眼大声说： 和你作战较量，用不着说那么多书里的话！ 
English: He bowed his head for half a day, stared into his eyes and said loudly, "To fight with you, there is no need to say so many words in the book!"

古文：密谓从者曰： 化及庸愚如此，忽欲图为帝王，吾当折杖驱之耳！ 
现代文：李密对身边的人说： 化及这么糊涂，忽然想成为帝王，我要拿棍子把他赶跑！ 
English: Li Mi said to the people around him: "If you become so confused that you suddenly want to become emperor, I'll take a stick and chase you away!"

古文：化及盛修攻具以逼仓城，世勣于城外掘深沟以固守，化及阻堑，不得至城下。
现代文：宇文化及大规模修治攻城用具，进逼仓城，徐世在城外挖深沟坚守，化及受壕沟阻拦，无法到城下。
English: U Culture and large-scale repair of siege tools, into the forced warehouse city, Xu Shi dug a deep ditch outside the city to hold on, and was blocked by the trench, unable to get to the city.

古文：世勣于堑中为地道，出兵击之，化及大败，焚其攻具。
现代文：徐世在沟里挖地道，出兵攻打宇文化及，大败化及，焚烧了他的攻城用具。
English: Xu Shiji dug a tunnel in the ditch, sent troops to attack Uculture and greatly defeated and burned his siege equipment.

古文：时密与东都相持日久，又东拒化及，常畏东都议其后。见盖琮至，大喜，遂上表乞降，请讨灭化及以赎罪，送所获凶党雄武郎将于洪建，遣元帅府记室参军李俭、上开府徐师誉等入见。
现代文：当时李密与东都相持了很长时间，东边又要抵御宇文化及，经常怕东都从他的后方袭击，见到前来劝降的盖琮，非常高兴，于是上表要求投降皇泰主，并请求由他讨伐消灭宇文化及来赎罪，送上他俘获的宇文化及同党雄武郎将于洪建，派元帅府记室参军李俭、上开府徐师誉等人前往东都朝见。
English: At that time, Li Mi and Dongdu held each other for a long time. Dongfang also had to defend against U Culture and Dongdu, and was often afraid of Dongdu attacking from his rear. He was very happy to see Gaige who came to persuade him to surrender. Therefore, the above table demanded the surrender of King Tai, and asked him to fight to eliminate U Culture and to atone for his sins. He sent his captured U Culture and fellow party member Wu Rong to Hong Jian, and sent the Marshal's Office to join the army Li Jian, Shangkaifu Xu Shiyong and others to visit Dongdu.

古文：皇泰主命戮洪建于左掖门外，如斛斯政之法。
现代文：皇泰主杨侗下令照杀斛斯政的办法在左掖门外杀于洪建。
English: Emperor Taizong ordered Yang Jie to kill Hong Jian outside the Zuoying Gate in accordance with the method of killing Jiesheng.

古文：元文都等以密降为诚实，盛饰宾馆于宣仁门东。
现代文：元文都等人认为李密是真心诚意地投降，在宣仁门东极力装饰宾馆。
English: Yuanwendu and others believed that Li Mi had surrendered with sincerity and tried his best to decorate the hotel in the east of Xuanrenmen.

古文：皇泰主引见俭等，以俭为司农卿，师誉为尚书右丞，使具导从，列铙吹，还馆，玉帛酒馔，中使相望。
现代文：皇泰主引见了李俭等人，任命李俭为司农卿，徐师誉为尚书右丞，派导从、排列鼓吹乐将他们送还宾馆，赐给他们美玉绸缎与美酒佳食的宦者不绝于途。
English: Emperor Taizong met with Li Jian and others, appointed Li Jian as the Secretary of Agriculture, and Xu Shizhong as the Secretary of Education. He sent guides and arranged propaganda music to send them back to the hotel, and gave them beautiful silk brocade and fine wine and food.

古文：册拜密太尉、尚书令、东南道大行台行军元帅、魏国公，令先平化及，然后入朝辅政。
现代文：册拜李密为太尉、尚书令、东南道大行台行军元帅、魏国公，命他先平定宇文化及，然后入朝辅助政事。
English: He appointed Li Mi as the first lieutenant, Shang Shuling, the marshal of the southeast road march, Wei Guogong, and ordered him to first subdue Dingwu culture and then enter the court to assist in political affairs.

古文：以徐世勣为右武候大将军。
现代文：以徐世为右武候大将军。
English: With Xu Shih as the right military commander.

古文：仍下诏称密忠款，且曰： 其用兵机略，一禀魏公节度。 
现代文：并下诏称誉李密的忠诚，说： 军队行动方略，均由魏公李密掌管调度。 
English: He also praised Li Mi's loyalty, saying: Li Mi, the Wei emperor, is in charge of the army's operational strategy.

古文：元文都等喜于和解，谓天下可定，于上东门置酒作乐，自段达已下皆起舞。
现代文：元文都对于和李密的和解深感欣慰，认为天下可以平定了，在上东门摆酒作乐，从段达以下都起身舞蹈。
English: Yuanwen was deeply gratified by the reconciliation with Li Mi Rong, and thought that the world could be leveled. He made wine and music at Shangdong Gate, and got up and danced from Dan Da and below.

古文：王世充作色谓起居侍郎崔长文曰： 朝廷官爵，乃以与贼，其志欲何为邪！ 
现代文：王世充气愤地对起居侍郎崔长文说： 朝廷的官爵，竟然给了强盗，这是想干什么！ 
English: Wang Shiyi angrily said to his servant, Cui Changwen, "A court noble has given money to a robber. What is he trying to do?

古文：文都等亦疑世充欲以城应化及，由是有隙，然犹外相弥缝，阳为亲善。
现代文：元文都等人也怀疑王世充想以东都城响应宇文化及，彼此因此有了裂痕，不过外表相互和解，假作友好。
English: Yuanwendu and others also suspected that Wang Shizhong wanted to use Dongdu City to respond to the world culture and each other, so there was a rift, but outwardly they were reconciled and pretended to be friendly.

古文：秋，七月，皇泰主遣大理卿张权、鸿胪卿崔善福赐李密书曰： 今日以前，咸共刷荡；使至以后，彼此通怀。
现代文：秋季，七月，皇泰主杨侗派遣大理卿张权、鸿胪卿崔善福赐给李密书信说： 今日以前的事情，全部不论，至于今后，彼此要真诚相待。
English: In the autumn, in July, Emperor Taizong's master Yang Zhen sent Dali Lord Zhang Quan and Hong Zhen Lord Cui Shan Fu to give Li Mi a letter saying, "No matter what happened before today, as for the future, we should treat each other sincerely."

古文：七政之重，伫公匡弼；九伐之利，委公指挥。 
现代文：天下大事，还有待阁下匡救辅助，征伐大权，还委托阁下指挥。 
English: The great events of the world still need to be supported by Your Excellency's help and assistance, and Your Excellency should be entrusted with the command.

古文：权等既至，密北面拜受诏书。
现代文：张权等到清淇后，李密朝北拜受诏书。
English: After Zhang Quan waited for the Qing Qi, Li Mi bowed to the north and received the imperial edict.

古文：既无西虑，悉以精兵东击化及。
现代文：既然没有了来自西边东都方向的后顾之忧，李密便将全部精锐兵力向东攻击宇文化及。
English: Since there was no longer any concern for the future in the direction of the eastern capital from the west, Li Mi sent all his elite troops to the east to attack Ulan Bator.

古文：密知化及军粮且尽，因伪与和；化及大喜，恣其兵食，冀密馈之。
现代文：李密了解到化及的军粮快吃光了，就假意与宇文化及求和；宇文化及高兴万分，不再限制士卒吃粮，希望李密能送他些粮食。
English: When Li Mi learned that he was about to run out of military food, he pretended to be at peace with Yu Cultura; Yu Cultura was overjoyed and no longer restricted his soldiers from eating grain, and hoped that Li Mi could send him some grain.

古文：会密下有人获罪，亡抵化及，具言其情，化及大怒；其食又尽，乃渡永济渠，与密战于童山之下，自辰达酉；密为流矢所中，堕马闷绝，左右奔散。追兵且至，唯秦叔宝独捍卫之，密由是获免。
现代文：恰巧李密手下有人犯法，逃到宇文化及处，把李密的计谋全部说了出来，宇文化及十分气愤，他的军粮又吃完了，于是渡过永济渠，与李密在童山脚下交战，从早晨七八点打到傍晚六七点；李密被流箭射中，落马昏死过去，亲随跑散了，追兵就要赶到，只有秦叔宝一个人保护着他，李密因此得以逃脱。
English: It just so happened that one of Li Mi's subordinates broke the law, fled to Yu Qun and his place, and told all of Li Mi's plans. Yu Qun and was very angry, and his army rations were finished, so he crossed the Yongji Canal and fought with Li Mi at the foot of the Tongshan Mountain, from seven to eight in the morning to six to seven in the evening; Li Mi was shot by a stray arrow, fell off his horse and passed out, and he ran away, and the pursuers were about to arrive. Only Qin Shubao protected him, and Li Mi was able to escape.

古文：叔宝复收兵与之力战，化及乃退。
现代文：秦叔宝重新收拾兵力与宇文化及作战，宇文化及于是退军。
English: Qin Shubao re-gathered his forces and fought against the Yu Culture, and the Yu Culture then withdrew.

古文：化及入汲郡求军粮，又遣使拷掠东郡吏民以责米粟。
现代文：宇文化及进入汲郡求军粮，又派人拷打东郡的官吏百姓索取粮食。
English: He sent people to torture officials and civilians in Dong County to obtain grain.

古文：王轨等不堪其弊，遣通事舍人许敬宗诣密请降；密以轨为滑州总管，以敬宗为元帅府记室，与魏征共掌文翰。
现代文：王轨等人受不了他的作法，派通事舍人许敬宗到李密那里请求投降；李密以王轨为滑州总管，以许敬宗为元帅府记室，和魏徵一同掌管文书。
English: Wang Luo and others could not stand his actions, and sent a courier, Xu Jingzong, to Li Mi to request his surrender; Li Mi appointed Wang Luo as the head of the Slanting Province, and Xu Jingzong as the marshal's office, and together with Wei Zheng, they were in charge of paperwork.

古文：敬宗，善心之子也。
现代文：许敬宗是许善心的儿子。
English: Xu Jingzong is the son of Xu Zenshin.

古文：房公苏威在东郡，随众降密，密以其隋氏大臣，虚心礼之。威见密，初不言帝室艰危，唯再三舞蹈，称 不图今日复睹圣明！ 
现代文：房公苏威在东郡，随众人投降了李密，因为他是隋的大臣，李密对待他虚心而有礼貌，苏威见李密，一开始也不谈隋朝的艰难危厄，只是反复舞蹈，称颂： 想不到今天又见到圣明天子！ 
English: In Dong County, Su Wei, the lord of the manor, followed the crowd to surrender to Li Mi, because he was the minister of the Sui Dynasty. Li Mi treated him humbly and politely. When Su Wei saw Li Mi, he did not talk about the difficulties and dangers of the Sui Dynasty at first, but repeatedly danced and praised: I can't believe I saw Saint Ming again today!

古文：时人鄙之。
现代文：当时的人都很鄙视他。
English: People at that time despised him very much.

古文：化及闻王轨叛，大惧，自汲郡引兵欲取以北诸郡，其将陈智略帅岭南骁果万馀人，樊文超帅江淮排矛赞，张童儿帅江东骁果数千人，皆降于密。
现代文：宇文化及听说王轨叛变，十分惊慌，从汲郡带军队准备攻取汲郡以北各郡县，他的将领陈智略率领一万多岭南骁果，樊文超率江淮排，张童儿率领千江东骁果，均投降了李密。
English: He was very alarmed when he heard of Wang Luo's mutiny. He took troops from Gu County to prepare to capture all counties north of Gu County. His generals Chen Zhiliu led more than 10,000 Lingnan Guo Guo, Zou Wenchao led the Jianghuai platoon, and Zhang Tong'er led thousands of Jiangdong Guo Guo, all of whom surrendered to Li Mi.

古文：文超，子盖之子也。
现代文：樊文超是樊子盖的儿子。
English: Zou Wenchao is the son of Zou Ziguai.

古文：化及犹有众二万，北趣魏县；密知其无能为，西还巩洛，留徐世勣以备之。
现代文：宇文化及尚有兵众二万人，向北进兵魏县。李密知道宇文化及不会有什么作为，就向西回到巩洛，留下徐世防备宇文化及。
English: U Bun Hwa and his remaining 20,000 soldiers marched north into Wei County. Li Mi, knowing that U Bun Hwa would not do anything, returned west to Gonglu, leaving Xu Shibo to prepare for U Bun Hwa and his army.

古文：乙巳，宣州刺史周超击硃粲，败之。
现代文：乙巳，唐宣州刺史周超攻朱粲并打败了他。
English: Suddenly, Tang Xuanzhou stabbed Zhou Chao, attacked Zhu Xi and defeated him.

古文：丁未，梁师都寇灵州，骠骑将军蔺兴粲击破之。
现代文：丁未，梁师都侵犯灵州，唐骠骑将军蔺兴粲打败了他。
English: Ding Wei and Liang Shi both invaded Lingzhou, and Tang Xuan's cavalry general Yu Xingyu defeated him.

古文：突厥阙可汗遣使内附。
现代文：突厥阙可汗派遣使节归附中原王朝。
English: The Turkic Khans sent envoys to annex the Central Plains Dynasty.

古文：初，阙可汗附于李轨；隋西戎使者曹琼据甘州诱之，乃更附琼，与之拒轨；为轨所败，窜于达斗拔谷，与吐谷浑相表里，至是内附，上厚加慰抚。
现代文：当初阙可汗归附李轨，隋朝西戎使者曹琼占据甘州引诱阙可汗，阙可汗改为归附曹琼，与曹琼一起抵御李轨；被李轨打败，逃窜到达斗拔谷，和吐谷浑相表里，到北时内附。不久被李轨消灭。
English: At the beginning, the Qian Khan was attached to the Li Rail, and Cao Qiong, the envoy of the Sui Dynasty to the Western Rong Dynasty, occupied Ganzhou to lure the Qian Khan. The Qian Khan was changed to be attached to Cao Qiong, and together with Cao Qiong, he resisted the Li Rail; he was defeated by the Li Rail, and fled to the Tuobag Valley, and to the muddy surface of the Tuy Valley, and was attached to the Northern Shi. He was soon eliminated by the Li Rail.

古文：寻为李轨所灭。薛举进逼高墌，游兵至于豳、岐，秦王世民深沟高垒不与战。
现代文：薛举进逼高，散兵到达豳、岐一带，秦王李世民加深壕沟，加高壁垒，不和薛举部交锋。
English: Xue raised his army and forced it to move higher. The scattered soldiers reached the areas of Shao and Qi. The Qin king Li Shimin deepened the trench, raised the barriers, and did not fight with Xue.

古文：会世民得疟疾，委军事于长史、纳言刘文静、司马殷开山，且戒之曰： 薛举悬军深入，食少兵疲，若来挑战，慎勿应也。
现代文：恰逢世民得疟疾，把军事委托给长史纳言刘文静、司马殷开山，告诫二人说： 薛举孤军深入，粮食不多，士卒疲惫，假如来挑战，小心不要应战。
English: Just as the world's people got malaria, he entrusted the military to the commander-in-chief Liu Wenjing and Sima Yin Kaishan, admonishing the two of them, saying, "Xue has raised an isolated army in depth, there is not much grain, and the soldiers are tired. If you come to challenge, be careful not to fight."

古文：俟吾疾愈，为君等破之。 
现代文：等我的病痊愈后，为你们打败他。 
English: After my illness is cured, I will defeat him for you.

古文：开山退，谓文静曰： 王虑公不能办，故有此言耳。
现代文：退下后，殷开山对刘文静说道： 王爷担心您不能退敌，才说这番话。
English: After retreating, Yin Kaishan said to Liu Wenzhing: The prince was worried that you would not be able to defeat the enemy, so he said these words.

古文：且贼闻王有疾，必轻我，宜曜武以威之。 
现代文：贼兵听到王爷有病，必然轻视我们，应该显示一下武力威慑敌人。 
English: When the robber soldiers heard that the prince was ill, they must have despised us. They should have shown some force to deter the enemy.

古文：乃陈于高墌西南，恃众而不设备。
现代文：于是在高西南列阵，仗着人多不加防备。
English: So they lined up at the southwest corner of the high school and marched forward, many of them unprepared.

古文：举潜师掩其后，壬子，战于浅水原，八总管皆败，士卒死者什五六，大将军慕容罗睺、李安远、刘弘基皆没，世民引兵还长安。
现代文：薛举秘密进袭唐军背后，壬子，在浅水原交战，唐八位总管都败下阵，士卒死亡十分之五六，大将军慕容罗、李安远、刘弘基均阵亡。
English: Xue He secretly attacked the Tang army from behind, while Ren Zi led the battle at Asahimizu Plain. All eight general officers of the Tang Dynasty were defeated, and 56 out of every 10 officers and men were killed. The great generals Murong Luo, Li Anyuan, and Liu Hongji all died in battle.

古文：举遂拔高墌，收唐兵死者为京观；文静等皆坐除名。
现代文：世民带兵返回长安，薛举于是攻克高，收拾唐兵尸首筑成高台，刘文静等人均因此被罢官。
English: The world's people returned to Chang'an with soldiers. Xue Jiu then conquered Gao, collected the corpses of Tang soldiers and built a high platform. Liu Wenzhing and others were dismissed as a result.

古文：乙卯，榆林贼帅郭子和遣使来降。以为灵州总管。
现代文：乙卯，榆林盗贼首领郭子和派使节前来投降，唐任命郭子和为灵州总管。
English: In response, Guo Zi, the leader of the thieves in Yulin, sent envoys to surrender, and Tang appointed Guo Zi as the head of Lingzhou.

古文：李密每战胜，辄遣使告捷于皇泰主。隋人皆喜，王世充独谓其麾下曰： 元文都辈，刀笔吏耳，吾观其势，必为李密所擒。
现代文：李密每次打了胜仗，必定派人向皇泰主报捷，隋人都很高兴，唯有王世充对他的部下说： 元文都这些人，不过是办理文书的小吏，我看这形势，必定被李密捉去。
English: Every time Li Mi won a battle, he would send someone to report the victory to Emperor Taizong. The Sui people were very happy, but Wang Shichong said to his subordinates: "In the original text, all these people were just clerks who handled paperwork. I think Li Mi must have caught this situation.

古文：且吾军士屡与密战，没其父兄子弟，前后已多，一旦为之下，吾属无类矣！ 
现代文：而且我的部队多次与李密作战，前前后后打死李密军士的父兄子弟很多，一旦成了李密的部下，我们这些人没一个能逃得掉！ 
English: Moreover, my troops fought against Li Mi many times. There were many brothers and sisters who killed Sergeant Li Mi before and after the battle. Once we became Li Mi's subordinates, none of us could escape!

古文：欲以激怒其众。
现代文：想用这些话激怒他的部下。
English: He wanted to use these words to provoke his subordinates.

古文：文都闻之，大惧，与卢楚等谋因世充入朝，伏甲诛之。
现代文：元文都听说了，十分恐慌，和卢楚等人谋划，趁王世充入朝时，埋伏士兵杀掉王世充。
English: Yuanwen heard about it, panicked, and plotted with Lu Chu and others to take advantage of Wang Shicheng's accession to the imperial court by having soldiers kill Wang Shicheng.

古文：段达性庸懦，恐事不就，遣其婿张志以楚等谋告世充。
现代文：段达性格胆小怕事，恐怕事情不成功，派女婿张志将卢楚等人的计划告诉了王世充。
English: Duan Da's character is timid and afraid of things, I'm afraid things won't work out, so he sent his son-in-law Zhang Zhi to tell Wang Shichong about the plan of Lu Chu and others.

古文：戊午夜三鼓，世充勒兵袭含嘉门。
现代文：戊午半夜三更时分，王世充率兵袭击含嘉门。
English: At three minutes past midnight, Wang Shichong and his soldiers attacked Gan Jiamen.

古文：元文都闻变，入奉皇泰主御乾阳殿，陈兵自卫，命诸将闭门拒守。
现代文：元文都听说发生变故，进入内宫侍奉皇泰主至乾阳殿，安排军队自卫，命令诸将关闭城门抵御。
English: Yuanwen heard that there was a change of fortune, entered the inner palace to serve Emperor Tai to the Qianyang Palace, arranged for the army to defend itself, and ordered the generals to close the city gates to defend themselves.

古文：将军跋野纲将兵出，遇世充，下马降之。
现代文：将军跋野纲领兵出战，遇到王世充，下马投降。
English: General Basho's soldiers went out to fight, encountered Wang Shichong, dismounted and surrendered.

古文：将军费曜、田阇战于门外，不利。
现代文：将军费曜、田在宫城外与王世充交战，不利。
English: On Saturday, General Fei and Tian fought against Wang Shicheng outside of Miyagi, and were at a disadvantage.

古文：文都自将宿卫兵欲出玄武门以袭其后，长秋监段瑜称求门钥不获，稽留遂久。
现代文：元文都自己领宿卫兵准备出玄武门，从背后袭击王世充，长秋监段瑜声称找不到宫门的钥匙，拖延了很长时间。
English: Yuanwendu himself led the guards to prepare to go out of the Xuanwu Gate and attack Wang Shichong from behind. Changqiu supervisor Duan Yu claimed that he could not find the key to the palace gate, and delayed for a long time.

古文：天且曙，文都引兵复欲出太阳门逆战，还至乾阳殿，世充已攻太阳门得入。
现代文：天快亮了，元文都又打算领兵出太阳门迎战王世充，回到乾阳殿，王世充已攻破太阳门进宫。
English: The sun was about to rise, and Yuanwen planned to lead his soldiers out of the Sun Gate to meet Wang Shicheng and return to the Qianyang Palace. Wang Shicheng had already broken through the Sun Gate and entered the palace.

古文：皇甫无逸弃母及妻子，斫右掖门，西奔长安。
现代文：皇甫无逸抛下母亲和妻子儿女，砍开右掖门，向西逃往长安。
English: Emperor Wuyi left his mother, wife and children, cut open the right-hand gate, and fled westward to Chang'an.

古文：卢楚匿于太官署，世充之党擒之，至兴教门，见世充，世充令乱斩杀之；进攻紫微宫门。
现代文：卢楚藏在太官署，被王世充部下抓获，到兴教门，见王世充，王世充下令乱刀砍死卢楚；进攻紫微宫门。
English: Lu Chu was hiding in the Grand Magistrate's Office. He was caught by Wang Shicheng's subordinates. They went to Xing Jiao Gate to see Wang Shicheng. Wang Shicheng ordered Lu Chu to be hacked to death with a machete. They attacked Zi Wei Gong Gate.

古文：皇泰主使人登紫微观。问： 称兵欲何为？ 
现代文：皇泰主派人登上紫微观，问王世充： 举兵想做什么？ 
English: The owner of Hangtai sent someone to board the purple microscope and asked Wang Shichong: What do you want to do?

古文：世充下马谢曰： 元文都、卢楚等横见规图；请杀文都，甘从刑典。 
现代文：王世充下马谢罪说： 元文都、卢楚等对臣横加陷害，请杀了元文都，我甘愿受刑罚。 
English: Wang Shichong said of Ma Xie's crime: "Yuan Wentu, Lu Chu, and others have set traps for their vassals. Please kill Yuan Wentu. I am willing to be punished."

古文：段达乃令将军黄桃树执送文都。
现代文：于是段达命将军黄桃树绑了元文都送给王世充。
English: As a result, General Huang Taoshu, the commander of the mission, tied up the original document and gave it to Wang Shichong.

古文：文都顾谓皇泰主曰： 臣今朝死，陛下夕及矣！ 
现代文：元文都冲着皇泰主说： 臣今天早上死，晚上就轮到陛下了！ 
English: The original texts all addressed Emperor Taizong and said: "Your vassal died this morning, and in the evening it will be Your Majesty's turn!"

古文：皇泰主恸哭遣之，出兴教门，乱斩如卢楚，并杀卢、元诸子。
现代文：皇泰主恸哭送他，出兴教门，象卢楚一样被乱刀砍死，还杀了卢楚、元文都所有的儿子。
English: Emperor Taizong sent him away weeping, and he was expelled from the Xing Church, and like Lu Chu, he was hacked to death with a wild knife. He also killed all the sons of Lu Chu and Yuanwen.

古文：段达又以皇泰主命开门纳世充，世充悉遣人代宿卫者，然后入见皇泰主于乾阳殿。
现代文：段达又以皇泰主的命令开门迎王世充入宫，王世充用自己的人全部替换了宿卫禁兵，然后入乾阳殿见皇泰主。
English: Danda also opened the door to welcome Wang Shicheng into the palace by the order of the emperor. Wang Shicheng replaced the guards with all of his own men, and then entered the Qianyang Palace to see the emperor.

古文：皇泰主谓世充曰： 擅相诛杀，曾不闻奏，岂为臣之道乎！
现代文：皇泰主对王世充说： 擅自举兵杀人，不曾闻奏，难道是作臣子的作法吗？
English: Emperor Taizong said to Wang Shichong: "Is it the manner of a courtier to raise an army without authorization and kill people without having heard the music?

古文：公欲肆其强力，敢及我邪！ 
现代文：阁下想逞武力，胆敢杀我吗？ 
English: Do you want to use force, do you dare to kill me?

古文：世充拜伏流涕谢曰： 臣蒙先皇采拔，粉骨非报。
现代文：王世充伏身下拜流泪谢罪道： 臣蒙受先皇的提拔，粉身碎骨也难报答。
English: Wang Shizhong prostrated himself in tears and thanked the emperor, saying, "It is difficult for a minister to repay the promotion he received from the late emperor, even if his body is broken.

古文：文都等苞藏祸心，欲召李密以危社稷，疾臣违异，深积猜嫌；臣迫于救死，不暇闻奏。
现代文：文都等人包藏祸心，想召李密危及社稷，又怕臣不同意，怀疑猜忌臣；臣被迫求生，来不及闻奏。
English: Wentu and others harbored evil intentions, wanted to summon Li Mi to endanger the social order, and were afraid that the minister would not agree, and suspected that the minister would die; the minister was forced to survive, and it was too late to play.

古文：若内怀不臧，违负陛下，天地日月，实所照临，使臣阖门殄灭，无复遗类。 
现代文：如果怀有什么恶意，违背陛下，天地日月在上明鉴，让臣满门灭绝一个不留。 
English: If you harbor any malice, and go against your majesty, the heavens and the earth, the sun and the moon will make it clear, and all your subjects will be exterminated.

古文：词泪俱发。
现代文：声泪俱下。
English: His voice was choked with tears.

古文：皇泰主以为诚，引令升殿，与语久之，因与俱入见皇太后；世充被发为誓，称不敢有贰心。
现代文：皇泰主以为王世充是真心，令他上殿，和他谈了很久，又与王世充一同入后宫见皇太后；王世充披散头发发誓，声言不敢有二心。
English: Emperor Taizong thought that Wang Shicheng was sincere, so he had him come to the palace, talked with him for a long time, and then went with Wang Shicheng to the harem to see the empress dowager; Wang Shicheng wore his hair loose and swore, saying that he did not dare to have two hearts.

古文：乃以世充为左仆射、总督内外诸军事。
现代文：于是以王世充为左仆射，总督内外诸军事。
English: As a result, Wang Shichong was appointed as a left-hand man, and the governors at home and abroad were all military men.

古文：比及日中，捕获赵长文、郭文懿，杀之。
现代文：到了中午，捉住赵长文、郭文懿，杀了二人。
English: At noon, he caught Zhao Changwen and Guo Wenyuan and killed them.

古文：然后巡城，告谕以诛元、卢之意。
现代文：然后巡视全城，公布诛杀元、卢的原因。
English: Then they will inspect the entire city and announce the reasons for the killing of Yuan and Lu.

古文：世充自含嘉城移居尚书省，渐结党援，恣行威福。
现代文：王世充从含嘉城搬到尚书省，逐渐联结同党，恣意横行作威作福。
English: Wang Shichong moved from Hanjia Town to Shangshu Province and gradually linked up with the Party, acting arbitrarily and arrogantly.

古文：用兄世恽为内史令，入居禁中，子弟咸典兵马，分政事为十头，悉以其党主之，势震内外，莫不趋附，皇泰主拱手而已。
现代文：用哥哥王世恽为内史令，住在宫内，子弟都掌握兵权，把政事分为十头，全部交给同党主持，势震内外，人人争相趋附，皇泰主闲着无事罢了。
English: He used his brother Wang Shih-tao as the internal history order, lived in the palace, and his sons all controlled the military power, divided the political affairs into ten heads, and all of them were handed over to the same party to preside over. The situation was shocking inside and outside the country, and everyone was rushing to join in. There was nothing for Emperor Taizong to do.

古文：李密将入朝，至温，闻元文都等死，乃还金墉。
现代文：李密准备入朝，行到温县，得知元文都等已死，又回到金墉城。
English: Li Mi prepared to enter the imperial court, traveled to Wenshan, learned that Yuanwendu and others had died, and returned to Jinyuan City.

古文：东都大饥，私钱滥恶，太半杂以锡环，其细如线，米斛直钱八九万。
现代文：东都极度缺粮，私铸钱泛滥，质量低劣，多半在铜钱中掺了锡钱，薄细如线，一斛米价值八九万钱。
English: Dongdu is extremely short of grain. Privately minted money is rampant and of inferior quality. It is mostly tin money mixed with copper money. It is as thin as a thread. A kilo of rice is worth 890,000 yuan.

古文：初，李密尝受业于儒生徐文远。
现代文：当初，李密曾经跟随儒生徐文远学习。
English: At first, Li Mi used to study with the Confucian scholar Xu Wenyuan.

古文：文远为皇泰主国子祭酒，自出樵采，为密军所执；密令文远南面坐，备弟子礼，北面拜之。
现代文：徐文远当了皇泰主的国子祭酒，自己出城打柴，被李密的部下捉住；李密让徐文远朝南坐，自己尽弟子的礼节，朝北拜徐文远。
English: Xu Wenyuan became the national son and sacrificial wine of the Lord of the Imperial Palace. He went out of the city to collect firewood and was caught by Li Mi's subordinates. Li Mi asked Xu Wenyuan to sit facing south, and he did his best to follow the disciple's etiquette and bow to Xu Wenyuan facing north.

古文：文远曰： 老夫既荷厚礼，敢不尽言！
现代文：文远说： 老夫我既然受了厚礼，不敢不畅所欲言了！
English: Wenyuan said, "Old man, since I have received such a generous gift, I dare not say what I want!

古文：未审将军之志欲为伊、霍以继绝扶倾乎？
现代文：不知道将军的志向是不是打算象伊尹、霍光那样扶助朝廷于危难之中？
English: I don't know if the general's ambition is to support the imperial court in the midst of danger, like Yi Yin and Huo Guang.

古文：则老夫虽迟暮，犹愿尽力；若为莽、卓，乘危邀利，则无所用老夫矣！ 
现代文：那老夫虽然年迈，仍愿意尽力相助；假如是象王莽、董卓，乘国家危难谋利，那老夫是没什么用的！ 
English: Although the old man is old, he is still willing to do his best to help; if he is like Wang Mang and Dong Zhuo, taking advantage of the national crisis, then the old man is of no use!

古文：密顿首曰： 昨奉朝命，备位上公，冀竭庸虚，匡济国难，此密之本志也。 
现代文：李密叩头说道： 不久前奉了朝廷命令，位列上公，希望竭尽有限的能力，挽救国难，这才是密本来的愿望。 
English: Li Mi kowtowed and said: Not long ago, I received an order from the imperial court to be ranked as a public official, hoping to make the best of my limited ability to save the national tragedy. This is the original wish of Mi.

古文：文远曰： 将军名臣之子，失涂至此，若能不远而复，犹不失为忠义之臣。 
现代文：徐文远说： 将军您是名臣之子，迷途才落到今天的局面，如果能趁走得不太远及早回头，仍然不失为忠义之臣！ 
English: Xu Wenyuan said, "General, you are the son of a famous vassal. It was only when you lost your way that you ended up in today's situation. If you can take advantage of not going too far and turn back early, you will still be a loyal vassal!"

古文：及王世充杀元文都等，密复问计于文远。
现代文：等到王世充杀了元文都等人，李密又向徐文远请教对策。
English: After Wang Shizhen killed Yuan Wenda and others, Li Mi asked Xu Wenyuan for advice on countermeasures.

古文：文远曰： 世充亦门人也，其为人残忍褊隘，既乘此势，必有异图，将军前计为不谐矣。
现代文：徐文远说： 王世充也是我的弟子，为人残忍狭隘，既造成这种形势，必然有别的企图。将军您原来的计划不合适了。
English: Xu Wenyuan said: Wang Shichong is also my disciple. He is a cruel and narrow-minded person. Since he has caused this situation, there must be another intention. General, your original plan is not suitable.

古文：非破世充，不可入朝也。 
现代文：不打败王世充，不能入朝。 
English: If you don't beat Wang Shichong, you can't enter the imperial court.

古文：密曰： 始谓先生儒者，不达时事，今乃坐决大计，何其明也！ 
现代文：李密说： 原来以为先生是儒生，不通时势，现在不出门就定大计，又是多么贤明啊！ 
English: Li Mi said: I originally thought that my husband was a Confucianist and was out of touch with the times, but now he makes plans without leaving home. How wise he is!

古文：文远，孝嗣之玄孙也。
现代文：徐文远是徐孝嗣的玄孙。
English: Xu Wenyuan is the great-great-grandson of Xu Xiaozhi.

古文：庚申，诏隋氏离宫游幸之所并废之。
现代文：庚申，唐下诏废除隋代的皇帝离宫与行幸之处。
English: Goshun, the Emperor of the Tang Dynasty issued an edict to abolish the Emperor of the Sui Dynasty, leaving the palace and going to the place of happiness.

古文：戊辰，遣黄台公瑗安抚山南。
现代文：戊辰，唐派遣黄台公李安抚山南。
English: Wu Chen, Tang sent Huang Tai Gong Li to pacify Shannan.

古文：己巳，以隋右武卫将军皇甫无逸为刑部尚书。
现代文：己巳，任命隋右武卫将军皇甫无逸为刑部尚书。
English: At the same time, he appointed the Sui and Yu Wu Wei general, Emperor Fu Muxu, as the head of the Penal Department.

古文：隋河间郡丞王琮守郡城以拒群盗，窦建德攻之，岁馀不下；闻炀帝凶问，帅吏士发丧，乘城者皆哭。建德遣使吊之，琮因使者请降，建德退舍具馔以待之。
现代文：隋河间郡丞王琮守卫郡城抵抗各路盗贼，窦建德攻王琮，一年多没有攻下；王琮得知隋炀帝被弑的噩耗，领着官吏百姓发丧，守城的人都哭泣，窦建德派使节来吊唁，王琮就顺势向使者请求投降，窦建德退军准备了饭菜招待他。
English: Wang Yao, the county magistrate of Suihe County, guarded the county seat to resist thieves from all directions. Dou Jiande attacked Wang Yao, but failed to capture him for more than a year. Wang Yao learned the bad news that Emperor Sui Yao had been captured. He led the officials and people in mourning, and the defenders of the city were crying. Dou Jiande sent an envoy to offer condolences. Wang Yao requested the envoy to surrender, and Dou Jiande prepared a meal to invite him back.

古文：琮言及隋亡，俯伏流涕，建德亦为之泣。
现代文：王琮说到隋亡国，俯身痛哭，窦建德也流了泪。
English: When Wang Yao spoke about the fall of the Sui Dynasty, he bent over and wept. Dou Jiande also shed tears.

古文：诸将曰： 琮久拒我军，杀伤甚众，力尽乃降，请烹之。 
现代文：诸位将领说： 王琮抵抗我军这么长时间，被他杀伤的人很多，没有抵抗能力了才投降，请求烹了他。 
English: The generals said, "Wang Ye resisted our army for such a long time, and many people were killed and injured by him. He surrendered when he was no longer able to resist. Please cook him."

古文：建德曰： 琮，忠臣也，吾方赏之以劝事君，奈何杀之！
现代文：窦建德说： 王琮是忠臣，我正要奖赏他用来勉励忠于君主的人，怎么能杀了他？
English: Dou Jiande said, "Wang Xuan is a loyal subject. I was about to reward the person he used to encourage loyalty to the monarch. How could I kill him?"

古文：往在高鸡泊为盗，容可妄杀人；今欲安百姓，定天下，岂得害忠良乎！ 
现代文：以前在高鸡泊做强盗，也许可以随便杀人；现在要安抚百姓，平定天下，怎么可以杀害忠良呢？ 
English: In the past, if you were a robber in Gaochupo, you might be able to kill at will; now, if you want to appease the people and pacify the world, how can you kill Zhongliang?

古文：乃徇军中曰： 先与王琮有怨敢妄动者，夷三族！ 
现代文：于是宣告全军道： 原先与王琮有仇怨而敢胡乱行事的，杀三族！ 
English: Then the whole army declared: If anyone dares to act recklessly because of a grudge against Wang Yao, kill the three clans!

古文：以琮为瀛州刺史。
现代文：任命王琮为瀛州刺史。
English: Appointed Wang Qian as the chief historian of Zhangzhou.

古文：于是河北郡县闻之，争附于建德。
现代文：于是河北的郡县闻讯后，争相归附窦建德。
English: As a result, counties and counties in Hebei competed to be annexed to Dou Jiande after hearing the news.

古文：先是，建德陷景城，执户曹河东张玄素，将杀之，县民千馀人号泣请代其死，曰： 户曹清慎无比，大王杀之，何以劝善！ 
现代文：早先，窦建德攻下景城，捉住户曹河东人张玄素，将要杀了他，一千多县里的老百姓嚎啕大哭，请求代替张玄素去死，说： 没有比张户曹更清廉谨慎的了，大王杀了他，又怎么劝人向善？ 
English: Earlier, Dou Jiande conquered Jingcheng, captured Zhang Xuansu, a resident of the east of Caohe River, and was going to kill him. The people in more than a thousand counties cried loudly and begged to die in place of Zhang Xuansu, saying: There is no one more honest and prudent than Zhang Xuansu. The great king killed him, and how can he persuade people to be good?

古文：建德乃释之，以为治书侍御史，固辞；及江都败，复以为黄门侍郎，玄素乃起。
现代文：于是窦建德释放了张玄素，以他为治书侍御史，张玄素坚决推辞；待到隋炀帝死于江都，窦建德又以他为黄门侍郎，张玄素才上任。
English: As a result, Dou Jiande released Zhang Xuansu and appointed him as the secretary of the history of the book, but Zhang Xuansu firmly refused. It was not until the death of Emperor Sui in Jiangdu that Dou Jiande appointed him as the secretary of the Yellow Gate, and Zhang Xuansu took office.

古文：饶阳令宋正本，博学有才气，说建德以定河北之策，建德引为谋主。
现代文：隋饶阳令宋正本，知识渊博很有才华，以平定河北的策略说服窦建德，窦建德把他作为谋主。
English: Sui Raoyang ordered Song Zhengben, who was knowledgeable and talented, to persuade Dou Jiande with the strategy of pacifying Hebei, and Dou Jiande took him as the mastermind.

古文：建德定都乐寿，命所居曰金城宫，备置百官。
现代文：窦建德定都城于乐寿，下令住所称作金城宫，设置百官。
English: Dou Jiande fixed the capital at Lezhu, ordered the residence to be called Jincheng Palace, and set up a hundred officials.

