古文：民生而有欲、有恶、有乐、有哀、有德、有则，则有九聚，德有五宝，哀有四忍，乐有三丰，恶有二咎，欲有一极。
现代文：人生来就有欲望、有厌恶、有快乐、有悲哀、有办事能力、有，处事法则。法则有九聚，能力有五宝，悲哀有四忍，快乐有三丰，厌恶有三咎，欲望有七极。
English: In life, there are desires, aversions, joys, sorrows, the ability to do things, and the rules for doing things. The rules are nine, the ability is five, the sorrow is four, the joy is three, the aversion is three, and the desire is seven.

古文：极有七事，咎有三尼，丰有三频，忍有四教，宝有五大，聚有九酌。
现代文：七极有七事。三咎有三尼，三丰有三频，四忍有四教，五宝有五大，九聚有九酌
English: There are seven things at the seven ends of the earth. The three culprits have three nini, the three riches have three frequencies, the four forbearances have four teachings, the five treasures have five, and the nine gatherings have nine.

古文：九酌：一取允移人，二宗杰以亲，三发滞以正民，四贷官以属，我人□必礼，六往来取此，七商贾易资，八农人美利，九□宠可动。
现代文：九酌是：一，积聚诚信以感人；二，尊重英杰以亲人；三，发放仓廪安定民众；四，借贷官府连属百姓；五，对人一定要讲礼；六，交往一定要密切；七，使商贾交易货物；八，让农民多得利益；九，同情与嘉奖要适当施行。
English: The nine points are: First, accumulate good faith to impress people; second, respect heroes and relatives; third, distribute grain to stabilize the people; fourth, borrow money from the government and belong to the people; fifth, must be polite to people; sixth, must be in close contact; seventh, make merchants trade goods; eighth, let farmers get more benefits; ninth, sympathy and awards should be properly implemented.

古文：五大：一大知率谋，我大武剑勇，三大工赋事，四大商行贿，五大农假贷。
现代文：五大是：一，大智指行用谋略；二，大武乃收敛勇力；三，大工是操劳工事；四，大商为流通货物；五，大农即借贷粮食。
English: The five greats are: First, great wisdom refers to the implementation of strategies; Second, great warriors are the convergence of courage; Third, carpenters are laborers; Fourth, large merchants are circulating goods; Fifth, large farmers are borrowing grain.

古文：四教：一守之以信，二因亲家年，三取戚免梏，四乐生身复。
现代文：四教是：一，教人谨守诚信；二，教人亲近年长者；三，教人去忧戚免桎梏；四，教人喜爱生活使身心返归无哀之时
English: The four teachings are: First, teach people to be honest; Second, teach people to be kind to the elderly; Third, teach people to be free from sorrow; Fourth, teach people to love life and return their body and mind to a time without sorrow

古文：三频：一频禄质，二阴福灵极，三留身散真。
现代文：三频是：一，挥霍财物，物质就耗费；二，向鬼神求福，灵性就殆尽；三，纵情声色，就失掉本性。
English: The three frequencies are: one, squandering wealth and material things, and material things will be exhausted; two, seeking blessings from ghosts and gods, and spiritual nature will be exhausted; three, indulging in lust, and losing one's nature.

古文：三尼：一除戎咎丑，二申亲考疏，三假时权要。
现代文：三止是：一，治兵以攻其同类；二，约束亲近使成疏远；三，假人以大权而作威。
English: Three more are as follows: First, the military strategy is to attack one's own kind; Second, the restriction of closeness causes alienation; Third, the hypocrite uses great power to intimidate.

古文：七事：一滕咎信志，二援拔渎谋，三聚疑沮事，四滕属威众，五处宽身降，六陵塞胜备，七录兵免戎。
现代文：七事是：一，不顾过错而逞志；二，缓急不分而滥谋；三，多疑寡断而事不成；四，欺凌臣属而作威于人；五，屈身以求居处宽大；六，关闭边境作为胜敌之备；七，为免除武事而解散军队。
English: The seven things are: First, be courageous regardless of mistakes; Second, make hasty plans without prioritizing; Third, be suspicious and indecisive and fail to achieve anything; Fourth, bully subordinates and intimidate others; Fifth, bend over to find a spacious place to live; Sixth, close the border as a preparation for defeating the enemy; Seventh, disband the army in order to avoid martial affairs.

古文：一极：惟事昌道，开蓄伐。
现代文：只有从事昌盛之道，才能建养民之功。
English: Only by engaging in the road of prosperity can we build and maintain the people's merit.

古文：伐有三穆、七信、一幹、二御、三安、十二来。
现代文：建养民之功的具体办法有三穆、七信、一干、二御、三安、十二来。
English: The specific methods for building the work of raising the people are three mu, seven letters, one stem, two gongs, three cheers, and twelve.

古文：三穆：一绝灵破城，二筮奇昌为，三龟从惟凶。
现代文：三穆是：一，不敬神灵则破败精诚；二，占筮不吉也要善其所为；三，龟卜虽吉也要想到凶危。
English: The three muses are: First, if one does not respect the gods, one's sincerity will be ruined; second, one should be good at what he does in order to predict bad luck; third, even if the turtle is good luck, he should also think about the danger.

古文：七信：一仁之慎散，二知之万巧，三勇之精富，四族之寡贿，五商之浅资，六农之少积，七贵之争宠。
现代文：七审是：一，仁者的谨慎施舍；二，智者的处处工巧；三，勇者的锋锐富盛；四，族众的缺少财物；五，商人的短缺资本；六，农民的短少存粮；七，权贵的争夺荣耀。
English: The seven judgments are: First, the prudent almsgiving of the benevolent; Second, the cleverness of the wise; Third, the sharpness and prosperity of the brave; Fourth, the lack of wealth of the people; Fifth, the shortage of capital of the merchants; Sixth, the shortage of grain stored by the peasants; Seventh, the struggle for glory of the powerful.

古文：一幹：胜权舆。
现代文：一干是：有好的开端。
English: One is: get off to a good start.

古文：二御：一树惠不疒悉，二既用兹忧。
现代文：二御是：一，树立恩惠而不病民；二，竭尽自己忧民之心。
English: The second is: First, establish benevolence and do not take advantage of the sick; second, make every effort to care for the people.

古文：三安：一定居安帑，二贡贵得布，三刑罪布财。
现代文：三安是：一，定百姓居室以安其妻儿；二，看重贡赋而可以钱币代缴；三，处罚罪人可以财物赎罪。
English: The three guarantees of safety are as follows: First, a citizen's home must be safe for his wife and children; second, he may pay money in lieu of tribute; third, he may atone for his sins with money when he is punished.

古文：十二来：一弓二矢归射，三轮四舆归御，五剥六鱼归蓄，七陶八冶归灶，九柯十匠归林，十一竹十二苇归时。
现代文：十二来是：一弓人、二矢人，都归聚到射箭人一处；三轮人、四舆人都归聚到驾车人一处；五艳人、六函人都归聚到皮革积存的地方；七瓦工，八冶工，都归聚到窑炉旁边；九柯工、十木匠，都归聚到木材堆放的地方；十一竹工、十二席匠，都归聚到竹苇存放的地方。
English: On the twelfth day, one bowman and two arrowmen were all gathered at the archer's place; three wheelers and four minstrels were all gathered at the driver's place; five bright people and six hangers were all gathered at the place where leather was stored; seven tile workers and eight smiths were all gathered next to the kiln; nine stonecutters and ten carpenters were all gathered at the place where wood was stacked; eleven bamboo workers and twelve seat makers were all gathered at the place where bamboo shoots were stored.

古文：三穆、七信、一幹、二御、三安、十二来，伐道咸布，物无不落，落物取配，维有用究。
现代文：三穆、七信、一干、二御、三安、十二来已经完成，成功的方法就都具备了。事物有不过时的。
English: The three mu, the seven letters, the one stem, the two gongs, the three peace, and the twelve years have been completed, and the methods of success are all available.

古文：急哉急哉，后失时。
现代文：抓紧啊，落后了就失掉时机。
English: Hold on tight. If you fall behind, you'll lose the opportunity.

