古文：汉景帝恭俭爱民，上继文帝，故亦称为贤君。
现代文：汉景帝谦恭简约、爱护百姓，上承汉文帝，也被称为贤明的君主。
English: Emperor Han Jing was humble and simple, loved the people, and succeeded Emperor Hanwen. He was also known as a wise monarch.

古文：考其天资，则刻戾忍杀之人耳。
现代文：考察他的天性，却是个苛刻凶暴、残忍好杀的人。
English: He is, by nature, a harsh, violent, murderous brute.

古文：自在东宫时，因博戏杀吴太子，以起老濞之怨。
现代文：他在东宫当太子时，就因赌博游戏而杀了吴国太子，引起吴国刘濞的怨恨。
English: When he was the prince in the East Palace, he killed the prince of Wu for gambling, which aroused the resentment of Liu Xuan of Wu.

古文：即位之后，不思罪已，一旦于三郡中而削其二，以速兵端。
现代文：即位以后，不考虑责备自己，一天把三个郡国削减了两个，加速了战火争端。
English: After ascending to the throne, he did not consider reproaching himself, but reduced the three counties to two on the same day, accelerating the war dispute.

古文：正信用晁错，付以国事，及爰盎之说行，但请斩错而已，帝令有司劾错以大逆，遂父母妻子同产皆弃布。
现代文：当时正相信任用晁错，把国家大事交付给他，但等到爰盎加害晁错的主张实施时，虽然只请求斩杀晁错一人，汉景帝却命令官员们弹劾晁错有叛逆大罪，连他的父亲、妻子、儿女、兄弟们也都杀害了。
English: At that time, it was believed that the appointment of Xuan Er and the national affairs were entrusted to him, but when the idea of punishing Xuan Er was implemented, although only one person was requested to be killed, Emperor Han Jing ordered the officials to impeach Xuan Er for high treason, and even his father, wife, children and brothers were also killed.

古文：七国之役，下诏以深入多杀为功，比三百石以上皆杀，无有所置，敢有议诏及不如诏者，皆要斩。
现代文：在跟吴、楚等七国的战役中，下诏命令将士以深入七国多杀乱军为功劳，俸禄三百石以上的官员都被杀死，没有一个被放过，如果敢有对命令存有疑议以及不按诏令行事的，都要腰斩。
English: In the battle with Wu, Chu and other seven countries, the imperial edict ordered the soldiers to go deep into the seven countries to kill the chaotic army. Officials with a salary of more than 300 koku were all killed, and no one was spared. If anyone dared to have doubts about the order and did not act according to the imperial edict, they would be beheaded.

古文：周亚夫以功为丞相，坐争封匈奴降将事病免，心恶之，赐食不置箸，叱之使起，昧于敬礼大臣之义，卒以非罪置之死，悲哉！
现代文：周亚夫因为有战功当了丞相，又因为给匈奴的降将争得封爵而犯罪，后来由于生病幸免于难。汉景帝对他十分厌恶，曾经赐给饮食但不给安排碗筷，呵斥他让他站起来，十分违背尊敬礼待大臣的道义，最后根据不正当的罪名把周亚夫置于死地，可悲呀！
English: Zhou Yafu became chancellor because of his war exploits, and he committed a crime because he fought for a knighthood for the surrender to the Xiongnu, and later survived due to illness. Emperor Han Jing was very disgusted with him, once giving him food but not arranging bowls and chopsticks, yelling at him to stand up, very contrary to the morality of respect and courtesy to the minister, and finally put Zhou Yafu to death based on unjustified charges, pathetic!

古文：光武遣冯异征赤眉，敕之曰： 征伐非必略地屠城，要在平定安集之耳。
现代文：汉光帝排遣冯异去征讨赤眉军，命令他说： 争战讨伐不一定非要掠夺土地屠杀人民，关键在于平定安抚百姓。
English: Emperor Han Guangxu dispatched Feng Xian to fight against the Red Eyebrows and ordered him to say: fighting and fighting does not necessarily mean plundering land and slaughtering people, the key is to pacify and appease the people.

古文：诸将非不健斗，然好虏掠。
现代文：将领们不勇健能战，但是太喜欢抢夺杀掠了。
English: The generals are not brave enough to fight, but they are too fond of robbing and plundering.

古文：卿本能御吏士，念自修敕，无为郡县所苦。 
现代文：你本来善于控制官吏士人，希望你自我修整，不要做人民感到痛苦的事。 
English: You used to be good at controlling officials and judges. I hope you will discipline yourself and not do things that are painful for the people.

古文：光武此言，视景帝诏书，为不侔矣。
现代文：汉光帝的这番话，比起汉景帝的诏令来，二者是不能相提并论的。
English: Compared to the edict issued by Emperor Hanqing, these words of Emperor Han Kuang cannot be compared.

