古文：凡与敌战，须激励士卒，使忿怒而后出战。
现代文：凡是对敌作战，必须鼓舞将士士气，使他们对敌人充满忿怒和仇恨，然后再出战杀敌。
English: In any war against the enemy, it is necessary to encourage the morale of the soldiers, fill them with anger and hatred against the enemy, and then go out to fight and kill the enemy.

古文：法曰： 杀敌者，怒也。 
现代文：诚如兵法所说： 要让将士奋勇杀敌，就要让他们具有仇恨敌人的高昂士气。 
English: As it is said in the Art of War: If you want soldiers to kill the enemy bravely, you must give them a high morale of hating the enemy.

古文：汉光武建武四年，诏将军王霸、马武讨周建于垂惠。
现代文：东汉建武四年，光武帝刘秀命令偏将军王霸与捕虏将军马武共同率军讨伐割据垂惠称雄的周建。
English: In the fourth year of Jianwu in the Eastern Han Dynasty, Emperor Guangwu Liu Xiu ordered General Wang Ba and Captive General Ma Wu to jointly lead the army to fight against Zhou Jian, who was said to be a great man.

古文：苏茂将兵四千余救建，先遣精骑遮击马武军粮，武往救之。
现代文：苏茂率领四千余兵前来援救周建，事先派遣一支精锐骑兵部队拦截马武所部的军粮，马武获得消息后率兵前去救援，这时，周建从垂惠城中出兵与苏茂精骑夹击马武。
English: Su Mao led more than four thousand soldiers to come to the rescue of Zhou Jian. In advance, he sent an elite cavalry force to intercept the military food of Mabu's headquarters. After Mabu received the news, he led the soldiers to the rescue. At this time, Zhou Jian sent troops from the city of Tahui and Su Mao on horseback to attack Mabu.

古文：建于城中出兵夹击武，武恃霸援，战不甚力，为茂、建所败，过霸营，大呼求救。霸曰： 贼兵势盛，出必两败，努力而已。 
现代文：马武依赖有王霸为援，与敌交战不甚卖力，结果被苏茂、周建打败。马武率众溃逃经过王霸营垒时，大声疾呼地请求救援，但王霸回答说： 敌人兵力强盛，如果我出兵援救，连同你们必将两败俱伤，你们还是自己奋力战斗吧！ 
English: Mawu relied on Wangba for support and did not put much effort into fighting the enemy. As a result, he was defeated by Sumo and Zhou Jian. When Mawu led the crowd in a rout and fled past Wangba's camp, he called out loudly for help, but Wangba replied: The enemy's army is strong. If I send troops to help, I will lose both of us together with you. You should still fight hard.

古文：乃闭营坚壁。
现代文：说完就关闭营门坚持不出去。
English: Having said that, he closed the camp gate and insisted on not going out.

古文：军吏皆争之。霸曰： 茂兵精锐，其众又多，吾吏士心恐，而捕虏与吾相恃，两军不一，败道也。
现代文：王朝的部下都力争出援马武，王霸对此耐心解释说： 苏茂率领的将士都是精兵锐骑，且人数众多。我军将士心中恐慌，如果参战两军配合不利，非败不可。
English: The subordinates of the Wang Dynasty all tried to come to the aid of Ma Wu. Wang Badu patiently explained: The soldiers led by Sumo are all elite soldiers and riders, and there are many of them. Our soldiers are panicking. If the cooperation between the two armies in the war is unfavorable, they must be defeated.

古文：今闭营坚守，示不相救，彼必乘势轻进；武恨无救，则其战当自倍。
现代文：现在我部闭营固守，以示互不相救，敌人必定乘胜贸然轻进；马武所部在外无救援可以依赖的形势下，一定会加倍努力，图存奋战。
English: Now that our unit is locked up, to show that there is no mutual rescue, the enemy will surely take advantage of the victory to advance rashly; under the situation that the Mawu unit has no outside rescue to rely on, it will definitely redouble its efforts and try to survive and fight.

古文：如此，茂众疲劳，吾乘其敝，乃可克也。 
现代文：这样，苏茂部队就会疲惫劳困，我军乘其困敝不堪之时再出兵袭击，就能打败他。 
English: In this way, the Sumo troops will be tired and exhausted, and our army will take advantage of his distress and attack again to defeat him.

古文：茂、建果悉兵出攻武，合战良久，霸军中壮士数十人断发请战。霸乃开营后，大叱出精骑袭其背。茂、建前后受敌，遂败走之。
现代文：其后，苏茂、周建果然出动全部兵力进攻马武，双方激战很长时间，王霸所部有数十名壮士断发向他请求出战，王霸知道部队士气锐盛，出战时机成熟，于是就打开营门之后，出动精锐骑兵突袭敌军背后，苏茂、周建部队在汉军的前后夹击下，大败而逃。
English: After that, Sumo and Zhou Jian successfully dispatched all their forces to attack Mawu. The two sides fought fiercely for a long time. Dozens of strong men in Wang Ba's headquarters repeatedly asked him to go to war. Wang Ba knew that the morale of the troops was strong and the time was ripe to go to war, so after opening the camp gate, he dispatched elite cavalry to raid behind the enemy army. Sumo and Zhou Jian's troops were pinned down by the Chinese army and fled in defeat.

