古文：昔在文王，商纣并立，困于虐政，将弘道以弼无道，作《度训》。
现代文：从前在文王的时候，他与商纣王并立，受困于商纣王的暴政，要弘扬正道以纠正无道，因此作了《度训》。
English: Once upon a time, in the time of King Wen, he stood side by side with King Shangdi, and was trapped by the tyranny of King Shangdi. He wanted to promote the righteous path to correct the wicked path, so he wrote "Duhong."

古文：殷人作，教民不知极，将明道极，以移其俗，作《命训》。
现代文：殷人制定的教化，老百姓不知道标准，为了明确道德的标准以改变民俗，因此作了《命训》。
English: The people did not know the standards of the indoctrination system set up by the Yin people. In order to clarify the moral standards and change the folk customs, the "Teaching of Life" was made.

古文：纣作淫乱，民散无性习常，文王惠和，化服之，作《常训》。
现代文：纣王淫乱，百姓涣散以不善为常，文王以仁爱协调，教化驯服他们。因此作了《常训》。
English: King Gong was a fornicator, the common people were lazy and bad, and King Wen harmonized them with benevolence and love, and tamed them with education. Therefore, he wrote the "Regular Training."

古文：上失其道，民散无纪，西伯修仁，明耻示教，作《文酌》。
现代文：在上者失去了正道，百姓涣散不知法纪，西伯侯行仁义明耻辱以示教化，因此作了《文酌》。
English: In the above, he lost the right path, the people were scattered and did not know the law and discipline, and Xibo Hou Xingren was humiliated to show enlightenment, so he made "Wenjui."

古文：上失其道，民失其业，□□凶年，作《籴匡》。
现代文：在上者失去正道，百姓丢弃了职业，遭逢大荒，因此作了《籴匡》。
English: In the above, the righteous lost their way, the people abandoned their occupation, and suffered a great disaster, so they made the "Qingyuan."

古文：文王立，西距昆夷，北备猃狁，谋武以昭威怀，作《武称》。
现代文：文王即位，西边抵御昆夷，北边防备猃狁，谋划用武以显示威严，因此作了《武称》。
English: King Wen ascended to the throne, the west resisted Kunyi, the north guarded against the Han, and planned to use the military to show majesty, so he made "Wuye."

古文：武以禁暴，文以绥德，大圣允兼，作《允文》。
现代文：武力用来禁止暴乱，文教用来安定德行，圣人文武兼用，因此作了《允文》。
English: Force is used to prohibit riots, literature and education are used to stabilize moral conduct, and the Holy Spirit and humanism and martial arts are used simultaneously. Therefore, "Enlightenment" was made.

古文：武有七德，□王作《大武》、《大明武》、《小明武》三篇。
现代文：武事有七种功用，文王因此作了《大武》、《大明武》、《小明武》三篇。
English: Martial arts have seven kinds of functions. Therefore, King Wen wrote three works, "Da Wu," "Da Ming Wu" and "Xiao Ming Wu."

古文：穆王遭大荒，谋救患分灾，作《大匡》。
现代文：文王遭逢大荒，谋画救助患难减少灾害，因此作了《大匡》。
English: King Wen suffered a great calamity and planned to rescue and reduce disasters. Therefore, he wrote "The Great Counselor."

古文：□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□□作《九开》。文王唯庶邦之多难，论典以匡谬，作《刘法》。文王卿士谂发教禁戒，作《文开》。
现代文：文王在程，因此作了《程寤》、《程典》。因此作了《九开》。文王考虑到众多邦国多有灾难，谈论典章以匡正谬误，因此作了《刘法》。文王告诉卿士发布教化与禁戒，因此作了《文开》。
English: King Wen was on a journey, so he wrote "Cheng Yi" and "Cheng Ji." Therefore, he wrote "Jiu Kai." King Wen took into account the many disasters in many countries and talked about the ordinance to rectify the fallacies, so he wrote "Liu Fa." King Wen told the noblemen to issue enlightenment and prohibitions, so he wrote "Wen Kai."

古文：维美公命于文王，修身观天以谋商难，作《保开》。
现代文：姜太公告戒文王，修养自身，静观天时，利用商人的危难，因此作了《保开》。
English: Jiang Taiping issued a proclamation to warn King Wen, cultivate oneself, watch the time, and take advantage of the merchant's peril, and thus made "Protection and Opening."

古文：文王训乎武王以繁害之戒，作《八繁》。
现代文：文王训戒武王，政繁有害，因此作了《八繁》。
English: King Wen admonished King Wu that political multiplicity was harmful, and thus "Eight Multiplicities" was written.

古文：文王在酆，命周公谋商难，作《酆保》。
现代文：文王在丰邑，命令周公谋画利用商人的危难，因此作了《丰保》。
English: In Fengyi, King Wen ordered Zhou Gong to plan to take advantage of the plight of the merchants, and thus made "Toyobo."

古文：文启谋乎后嗣，以修身敬戒，作《大开》、《小开》二篇。
现代文：文王开导后嗣修养身心重视训戒，因此作了《大开》、《小开》两篇。
English: King Wen enlightened his heirs to cultivate their mind and body and to attach importance to discipline, so he wrote two articles, "Big Opening" and "Small Opening."

古文：文王有疾，告武王以没之多变，作《文儆》。
现代文：文王生大病，告诉武王百姓多变的道理，因此作了《文儆》。
English: When King Wen fell seriously ill, he told King Wu that the people were fickle, so he wrote "Wen Yao."

古文：文王告武王以序德之行，作《文传》。
现代文：文王告诉武王，以君王之德行事，因此作了《文传》。
English: King Wen told King Wu to act with the virtue of a king, and thus "Wen Biographies" was written.

古文：文王既没，武王嗣位，告周公禁五戎，作《柔武》。
现代文：文王去世之后，武王继位，告诉周公禁止五种招致兵戎的行为，因此作了《柔武》。
English: After the death of King Wen, King Wu succeeded to the throne, and told Zhou Gong to prohibit five kinds of behavior that invited soldiers, so he made "Jiu Wu."

古文：武王忌商，周公勤天下，作《大小开武》二篇。
现代文：武王憎恶商朝，周公为取天下而勤劳，因此作了《大开武》、《小开武》两篇。
English: King Wu detested the Shang Dynasty, and Zhou Gong worked diligently to take over the world. Therefore, he wrote two articles, "The Great Opening of Wu" and "The Small Opening of Wu."

古文：武王评周公，维道以为宝，作《宝典》。
现代文：武王告诉周公只有仁德才拿它视为宝，因此作了《宝典》。
English: King Wu told Zhou Gong that only benevolence regarded it as a treasure, so he made the "Treasure Book."

古文：商谋启平周，周人将兴师以承之，作《酆谋》。
现代文：商朝谋画开始平定周人，周人将组织军队对付它，因此作《丰谋》。
English: The Shang dynasty began to plan to pacify Zhou, and Zhou would organize an army to deal with it, hence the "plotting."

古文：武王将起师伐商，寤有商儆，作《寤儆》。
现代文：周武王将起兵讨伐商朝，梦中被商人惊醒，因此作了《寤儆》。
English: King Zhou Wu will raise an army to fight against the Shang Dynasty. He was awakened by a merchant in a dream, which is why he wrote "The Dragonfly."

古文：周将伐商，顺天革命，申喻武义，以训乎民，作《武顺》、《武穆》二篇。
现代文：周人将伐商，顺应天意革除殷命，重复晓喻武事的意义以训教百姓，因此作了《武顺》、《武穆》两篇。
English: Zhou people cut down the traders and, in accordance with the will of heaven, killed them, and repeated the meaning of martial arts to train the people. Therefore, he wrote two articles, "Wu Shun" and "Wu Mu."

古文：武王将行大事乎商郊，乃明德□众，作《和寤》、《武寤》二篇。
现代文：周武王将在商郊发动大战役，就对众人申明道德，因此作了《和寤》、《武寤》两篇。
English: King Zhou Wu will launch a great battle in the suburbs of the merchants, and he will affirm morality to the people. Therefore, he wrote two articles, "Harmony" and "Courage."

古文：武王率六州之兵，车三百五十乘，以灭殷，作《克殷》。
现代文：武王率领六州的兵车三百五十辆以灭殷朝，因此作了《克殷》。
English: King Wu led three hundred and fifty chariots from six states to destroy the Yin Dynasty, thus making "Ke Yin."

古文：武王既克商，建三监以救其民，为之训范，□□□□□□□□□作《大聚》。
现代文：武王灭掉商朝之后，设置三监以治理商朝的百姓，给他们制定训令和法规，因此作了《大匡》。一一，因此作了《大聚》。
English: After King Wu eliminated the Shang Dynasty, he set up the Three Supervisors to govern the people of the Shang Dynasty, and set up orders and regulations for them, thus making "Grand Councilor."

古文：□□□□□□□□□□□武王既释箕子囚，俾民辟宁之以王，作《箕子》。武王秉天下，论德施□，而□位以官，作《考德》。
现代文：武王释放箕子之后，使商的百姓臣服于王，因此作了《箕子》。武王执掌天下，考论德行任用人才，给以地位官职，因此作了《考德》。
English: After King Wu released Xunzi, he made the people of the merchants submit to the king, and thus "Xunzi" was made. King Wu ruled the world, and he appointed talents and gave them positions and posts, and thus "Cao De" was made.

古文：武王命商王之诸侯绥定厥邦，申义告之，作《商誓》。
现代文：武王命令商王的诸侯安定他们的邦国，申明大义告戒他们，因此作了《商哲》。
English: King Wu ordered the princes of the merchant kings to stabilize their states, declare the great righteousness and admonish them, so he made "Shanzhe."

古文：武王平商，维定保天室，规拟伊洛，作《度邑》。
现代文：武王平定商朝之后，为了定天保、依天室，规划测度伊水与洛水之间，因此作了《度邑》。
English: After King Wu conquered the Shang Dynasty, he planned to measure the distance between Yishui and Luoshui in order to determine Tianbao and Yitang. Therefore, "Douyi" was made.

古文：武王有疾，□□□□□□□□□□命周公辅小子，告以正要，作《五权》。
现代文：武王生大病，命周公辅佐太子，告诉他为政的大要，因此作了《五权》。
English: When King Wu fell seriously ill, he ordered Zhou Gongfu to assist the crown prince and to tell him the main points of government, which is why he wrote "Five Powers."

古文：武王既没，成王元年，周公忌商之孽，训敬命，作《成开》。
现代文：武王去世以后，成王元年，周公憎恶商纣余孽，训教成王敬顺天命，因此作了《成开》。
English: After the death of King Wu, in the first year of King Cheng, Zhou Gong abhorred the remaining evils of negotiation and taught King Cheng to respect the fate of heaven, so he made "Cheng Kai."

古文：周公既诛三监，乃谁武王之志，建都伊洛，作《作洛》。
现代文：周公诛灭三监以后，就遵从武王遗志，在伊、雒间修建都城，因此作了《作雒》。
English: After Zhou Gongjun eliminated the three supervisors, he followed the last wishes of King Wu and built a capital city between Yi and Han, which is why he wrote "The Making of Han."

古文：周公会群臣于闳门，以辅主之格言，作《皇门》。
现代文：周公在闳门会见群臣，广求辅佐君主的至理名言，因此作了《皇门》。
English: Zhou Gong met with a group of courtiers at the imperial gate and asked for the right words to assist the monarch, so he wrote "Imperial Gate."

古文：周公陈武王之言及，以赞己言，戒乎成王，作《大戒》。
现代文：周公陈述武王的话又加以自己的话，训戒成王，因此作了《大戒》。
English: Zhou Gong stated the words of King Wu and added his own words to discipline the king, thus making the "Great Commandment."

古文：周公制十二月赋政之法，作《月令》。
现代文：周公确定 三统 的意义，因此作了《周月》。
English: Zhou Gong determined the significance of the Three Unities, and therefore made "Zhou Yue."

古文：周公肇制文王之谥义，以垂于后，作《谥法》。
现代文：周公辨明二十四节气的时应以明确自然的季节，因此作了《时训》。周公首先制定出文王的谥号，使其意义垂传于后世，因此作了《谥法》。
English: Zhou Gong identified that the time of the 24 solar terms should start with a clear natural season, so he made the "Time Teaching." Zhou Gong first worked out the nickname of King Wen, so that its meaning would be passed down to future generations, so he made the "Fake Law."

古文：周公将致政成王，朝诸侯于明堂，作《明堂》。
现代文：周公将把国政交付成王，在明堂接受诸侯朝见，因此作了《明堂》。
English: Zhou Gong would hand over the affairs of state to Cheng Wang and receive the princes and the imperial court in the Ming Hall, which is why "Ming Hall" was made.

古文：成王近即政，因尝麦以语众臣，而求助，作《尝麦》。
现代文：成王亲政以后，借祭献新麦之机告诉群臣以求帮助，因此作了《尝麦》。
English: After Prince Naruhito came to power, he asked his ministers for help by telling them of the opportunity to offer new barley as a loan offering, and thus "Taste the Wheat" was made.

古文：周公为太师，告成王以五则，作《本典》。
现代文：周公做了太师，告诉成王行 五则 ，因此作了《本典》。
English: Zhou Gong became the grandmaster and told Cheng Wang Xing the five principles, thus making the "Textbook."

古文：成王访周公以民事，周公陈六征以观察之，作《官人》。
现代文：成王向周公询问民事，周公陈述 六徵 让他观察，因此作了《官人》。
English: Cheng Wang asked Zhou Gong about civil affairs, Zhou Gong made a six-character statement and let him observe, so he made "Officials."

古文：周石板嘲弄宁，八方会同，各以其职来献，欲垂法厥后，作《王会》。
现代文：周王室安定以后，八方诸侯前来朝会，各以他们的特产前来进献，想把它作为制度流传后世，因此作了《王会》。
English: After the stability of the Zhou royal family, the princes of the eight directions came to the imperial court, each with their special products, and wanted to pass it on to future generations as a system, so they made the "Royal Court."

古文：周公云殁，王制将衰，穆王因祭祖不豫，询某守位，作《祭公》。
现代文：周公已经去世，王制将要衰败；穆王借叔祖祭公谋父有病，请持王位的谋略，因此作了《祭公》。
English: Zhou Gong had already passed away, and the royal system was about to decline. King Mu used his uncle's ancestor's sacrifice as a strategy to keep his father on the throne when he was ill, and thus wrote "The Sacrifice."

古文：穆王思保位惟难，恐贻世羞，欲自警悟，作《史记》。
现代文：穆王考虑到保位的艰难，担心把耻辱留给后世，想借古事以自警觉，因此作了《史记》。
English: King Mu took into account the difficulty of maintaining the throne, worried about leaving the shame to future generations, and wanted to use ancient events to be vigilant, so he made "Histories."

古文：王化虽弛，天命方永，四夷八蛮，攸尊王政，作《职方》。
现代文：王化虽已废驰，天命正当久长，四夷八蛮仍然遵循王政，因此作了《职方》。
English: Although Wanghua has been abolished, the Mandate of Heaven has been legitimate for a long time, and the four barbarians still follow the king's rule. Therefore, "Shikigata" was made.

古文：芮伯稽古，作《训纳》。王于善暨，执政小臣咸省厥躬，作《芮良夫》。
现代文：芮伯稽考古事而作训戒，把厉王引向善良，以及执政大臣都反省自身，因此作了《芮良夫》。
English: Zou Bo, an archaeologist, gave him an admonition, guiding the king to be kind, and the ruling ministers all reflected on themselves, thus making "The Good Husband."

古文：晋侯尚力，侵我王略，叔向闻储幼而果贤，□复王位，作《太王晋》。
现代文：晋侯崇信武力，侵犯我们周王的疆界，叔向听说王储年幼又真正贤明，能够恢复周王以前的尊位，因此作了《太子晋》。
English: Prince Jin believed in force and violated the borders of our King Zhou. Uncle Xiang heard that the crown prince was young and truly wise and could restore the former dignity of King Zhou, so he made "Prince Jin."

古文：王者德以饰躬，用为所佩，作《王佩》。
现代文：作王的人用仁德装饰自己，用它来作佩戴，因此作了《王佩》。
English: Kings adorn themselves with benevolence and use it to wear, hence "Wang Pei."

古文：夏多罪，汤将放之，征前事以戒后王也，作《殷祝》。
现代文：夏桀罪恶多，成汤要流放他，取前事以警戒后王，因此作了《殷祝》。
English: Xia Yao was guilty of many crimes, Cheng Tang wanted to exile him, and he took the previous incident as a warning to the queen, so he made "Warm Wishes."

古文：民非后罔义，后非民罔与，为邦慎政在微，作《周祝》。
现代文：百姓没有君王得不到治理，君王没有百姓不能成为国家，谨慎理政在于细致，因此作了《周祝》。
English: The people cannot be governed without the king, and the king cannot become a country without the people. Careful governance lies in meticulousness, which is why "Zhou Zhuang" was made.

古文：武以靖乱，非直不克，作《武纪》。
现代文：武事用以平定祸乱，除非有理不能取胜，因此作了《武纪》。
English: Martial arts are used to quell evil, unless there is a reason to win, so "Martial Arts" was made.

古文：积习生常，不可不慎，作《铨法》。
现代文：养成习惯就视为平常，不能不谨慎，因此作了《铨法》。
English: Habit-forming is regarded as commonplace and cannot be done without caution, which is why "The Law of Discipline" was created.

古文：车服制度，明不苟逾，作《器服》。
现代文：涉及车马、服饰的规矩，明确了就不得随便超越，因此作了《器服》。
English: When it comes to chariots, horses, and clothing, once the rules are clear, they can't be overstepped. That's why I made "Equipment."

古文：周道于是乎大备。
现代文：周人治国的方法，在此就十分完备了。
English: Zhou's method of governing the country is fully complete here.

