古文：显德二年春正月辛未朔，帝不受朝贺。辛卯，诏： 在朝文班，各举堪为令录者一人，虽姻族近亲，亦无妨嫌。
现代文：显德二年春正月二十一日，诏令 ：在朝各位文官，各推荐可加任用的一人，即使是姻族近亲，也不用避嫌。
English: On the 21st day of the first month of the second year of Hende's reign, the imperial edict was issued: "Civil servants, each of you should recommend one person for appointment, even if they are close relatives by marriage.

古文：授官之日，各署举主姓名，若在官贪浊不任、懦弱不理，并量事状重轻，连坐举主。 
现代文：授官之日，各记载推荐人的姓名，如果被推荐人为官贪婪昏庸不能胜任，懦怯软弱不能理政，将根据情节轻重，一同处罚推荐人。 
English: On the day of awarding the post, each record shall include the name of the recommender. If the recommended person is an official who is greedy, stupid, incompetent, cowardly, weak, and unable to manage the government, the recommender shall be punished together according to the seriousness of the circumstances.

古文：二月戊申，遣使赴西京，赐太子太师致仕侯益、白文珂、宋彦筠等茶药钱帛各有差，仍降诏存问。
现代文：二十五日，诏令： 凡逃亡农户的庄田，均允许别人任意耕种，供纳税租。如果在三周年内原户主回来，他的桑田不论荒熟，均交回他一半；五周年内回归旧业的，交还三分之一；五周年以外回归的，其庄田除原户主的坟地以外，不在交付范围。
English: On the 25th, the imperial edict: All shodats of fleeing farmers are allowed to be cultivated by others at will for tax and rent. If the original head of household returns within the third anniversary, half of his mulberry fields will be returned to him, regardless of whether they are unripe; if he returns to his old business within the fifth anniversary, one third will be returned; if he returns outside the fifth anniversary, his shodats will not be delivered except for the cemetery of the original head of household.

古文：壬戌，诏曰：善操理者不能有全功，善处身者不能无过失。虽尧、舜、禹、汤之上圣，文、武、成康之至明，尚犹思逆耳之言，求苦口之药，何况后人之不逮哉！
现代文：临近北方的各州，凡有陷于蕃地的农户，从蕃地回归旧业的，五周年内回来的，交还三分之二的庄田；十周年内回来的，交还一半；十五周年回来的，交还三分之一；十五周年以外回来的，不在交还范围内。 二月二十三日，诏令说： 善于治政的人不能有圆满无阙的政绩，善于处世的人不能没有过错失误，就是尧、舜、禹、汤这样最高的圣人，文、武、成、康这样非常的明主，都思逆耳之忠言，求苦口之良药，何况后代不及他们的人呢？
English: On February 23, the imperial edict said: "Those who are good at governing cannot have a flawless political record, and those who are good at handling the world cannot be free of mistakes and errors. Even the highest saints such as Zou, Zou, Yu and Tang, and the very great sages such as Wen, Wu, Cheng and Kang, all think about the words of truth and seek the good medicine of bitter words. What's more,

古文：朕承先帝之灵，居至尊之位，涉道犹浅，经事未深，常惧昏蒙，不克负荷。
现代文： 朕蒙先帝的英灵，居皇帝的高位，从事政治还短，经历世事不深，经常担心昏庸愚昧，不能承担重任。
English: I am endowed with the imperial spirit of the former emperor, hold the high position of the emperor, have been engaged in politics for a short time, have not experienced the world deeply, often worry about dullness and stupidity, and cannot bear heavy responsibilities.

古文：自临宸极，已过周星，至于刑政取舍之间，国家措置之事，岂能尽是，须有未周，朕犹自知，人岂不察。
现代文：自从即位之后，已经历一年，对于刑政的取舍，国家的安排，哪能全都正确？一定有不周全的地方，朕自己都知道，别人哪没觉察！
English: A year has passed since I ascended the throne. How can everything about the choice of criminal policy and the state's arrangements be correct? There must be imperfections. I know it myself, but others are not aware of it!

古文：而在位者未有一人指朕躬之过失，食禄者曾无一言论时政之是非，岂朕之寡昧不足与言耶？
现代文：然而在官位的没有一人指摘朕的过失，食官禄的竟无一言论及朝政的是非，是因为朕的寡陋不值得与朕说话呢？
English: However, no one in an official position has pointed out my faults, and there has not been a single comment from a food official, and what is wrong with the government, is it because my inferiority is not worth talking to me?

古文：岂人之循默未肯尽心耶？
现代文：还是为官的因循沉默不肯尽心呢？
English: Or is it because officials are following the path of silence and are not willing to do their best?

古文：岂左右前后有所畏忌耶？
现代文：是朕身边的人有所畏忌呢？
English: Is that why people around me are afraid?

古文：岂高卑疏近自生间别耶？
现代文：还是因尊卑亲疏而产生隔阂呢？
English: Or is it because of inferiority and superiority that estrangement arises?

古文：古人云： 君子大言受大禄，小言受小禄。 
现代文： 古人说： 君子进大言才受大禄，进小言就受小禄。 
English: The ancients said: A gentleman only receives a large reward when he utters a big word, but a small reward when he utters a small word.

古文：又云： 官箴王阙。 
现代文：又说 ：为官的要规劝君王的过失。 
English: He also said, "Officials should admonish the faults of the king."

古文：则是士大夫之有禄位，无不言之人。
现代文：那么有禄位的士大夫中，就应没有不进诤言的人。
English: In that case, there should be no shidafu with a stipend who does not engage in criticism.

古文：然则为人上者，不能感其心而致其言，此朕之过也。得不求骨鲠之辞，询正直之议，共申裨益，庶洽治平。
现代文：而是作为君王的人，不能感动他们的心而让他们进言，这是朕的过失，没有去索求刚直的言辞，询访正直的建议，共同补益国是，协力治国安民。
English: It was my fault, as a monarch, that I could not touch their hearts and get them to speak. I did not ask them to speak forthrightly, seek honest advice, work together to benefit the country, and work together to govern the country and keep the people safe.

古文：朕于卿大夫才不能尽知，面不能尽识，若不采其言而观其行，审其意而察其忠，则何以见器量之深浅，知任用之当否？
现代文：朕对于卿大夫，不能尽知他们的才能，不能尽识他们的面目，如果不听其言而观其行，考其心意而察其忠贞，那么怎么能得知器识谋略的深浅，任用的当与不当？
English: For doctors, we cannot fully know their talents, we cannot fully know their faces. If we do not listen to their words but watch their actions, examine their hearts and loyalty, then how can we know the depth of their knowledge and strategy, the appropriateness and inappropriateness of the appointment?

古文：若言之不入，罪实在予；苟求之不言，咎将谁执！
现代文：如果进言而不听罪就在我，如果想听而不进言，责任又在谁？
English: If I speak and do not listen, the fault is mine. If I want to listen and do not speak, whose responsibility is it?

古文：应内外文武臣僚，今后或有所见所闻，并许上章论谏。
现代文： 凡朝廷内外文武臣僚，今后如有所见所闻，都允许上章议论进谏。
English: In the future, all the courtiers in and out of the imperial court, if they have seen or heard anything, are allowed to discuss the previous chapter.

古文：若朕躬之有阙失，得以尽言；时政之有瑕疵，勿宜有隐。
现代文：如果朕有过失，可以尽量进言；时政有弊病，不应有隐瞒。
English: If I am at fault, I can say as much as possible; if there are maladies in the current government, there should be no concealment.

古文：方求名实，岂尚虚华，苟或素不工文，但可直书其事。辞有谬误者，固当舍短，言涉伤忤者，必与留中，所冀尽情，免至多虑。
现代文：只求名实相符，不尚虚空浮华，如果不善文笔，尽管直书其事，词句有错误的，固当舍短求长，言语有抵牾的，必将取长补短，希望的是尽情进言，不要有过多的后虑。
English: If you are not good at writing, even if you write directly, there will be mistakes in your words. If you are short-sighted, you will be long-sighted. If your words are contradictory, you will be long-sighted. What you want is to say as much as you can and not worry too much.

古文：诸有司局公事者，各宜举职，事有不便者，革之可也，理有可行者，举之可也，勿务因循，渐成讹谬。
现代文：凡众部门官员，应各尽其责，有不可行的事，可以革除它，有可行的事，可以推荐它，不要因循守旧，逐渐形成讹谬。
English: All department officials should fulfill their responsibilities. If there is something unfeasible, they can eliminate it. If there is something feasible, they can recommend it. Don't follow the old ways and gradually form absurdities.

古文：《通鉴》：浚胡卢河在正月，至三月始建军额。
现代文：三月二日，在李晏口设立静安军，静安军南离冀州一百里，北距深州三十里，夹胡卢河建造营垒。
English: On March 2, the Jingan Army was set up in Li Yingkou. The Jingan Army was a hundred miles south of Jizhou and thirty miles north of Shenzhou, and built a camp on the Hulu River.

古文：先是，贝、冀之境密迩北疆，居常敌骑涉河而南，驰突往来洞无阻碍，北鄙之地民不安居。
现代文：此前，贝州、冀州边界，与契丹疆土非常接近，平常敌人骑兵过河向南，来往奔驰，畅通无阻，北部边界，民不安居。
English: Previously, the Baizhou and Jizhou borders were very close to the Khitan territory. Normally, the enemy cavalry would cross the river to the south, and the traffic would be unimpeded. On the northern border, the people were not safe.

古文：帝乃按图定策，遣许州节度使王彦超、曹州节度使韩通等领兵他徙，筑垒于李晏口，以兵戍守，功未毕，契丹众寻至，彦超等击退之。
现代文：世宗于是根据地图制定对策，派许州节度使王彦超、曹州节度使韩通等领兵迁移，在李晏口修建营垒，以兵戍守，工程尚未完成，契丹旋即领兵而来，王彦超等打退他们。
English: Shizong then formulated countermeasures according to the map. He sent Xu Zhou Jiedu to transfer Wang Yanchao and Cao Zhou Jiedu to transfer Han Tong and other leading soldiers. He built a camp at Li Yingkou and guarded it with soldiers. The project had not yet been completed, but the Khitan immediately came to lead the soldiers, and Wang Yanchao and others repelled them.

古文：及垒成，颇扼要害，自是敌骑虽至，不敢涉河，边民稍得耕牧焉。
现代文：到营垒筑成后，扼守要害之处，从此敌人骑兵即使来到，也不敢过河，边境人民稍稍得以耕田放牧了。
English: After the camp was built, the key points were closely guarded. From then on, even if the enemy cavalry came, they would not dare to cross the river. The border people were able to farm and graze for a while.

古文：壬辰，尚书礼部贡院进新及第进士李覃等一十六人所试诗赋、文论、策文等。诏曰： 国家设贡举之司，求英俊之士，务询文行，方中科名。
现代文：二十三日，尚书礼部贡院呈上新录取的进士李覃等十六人考试的诗赋、文论、策文等，世宗诏令说 ：国家设置贡举部门，是为选拔英俊之士，务须考查文才德行，才得让博取科举功名。
English: On the 23rd, the Tribute Institute of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies presented the poems, essays, and essays of the newly admitted 16 people, including the young scholar Li Xi, for the examination. Shizong Dahan said: The state set up the tribute department to select handsome people, and it is necessary to examine literary talent and virtue before they can win the merit of the examination.

古文：比闻近年以来，多有滥进，或以年劳而得第，或因媒势以出身。
现代文：朕不断听说近年以来，选拔人才多有虚假失真，有的因长年苦读而为进士及第，有的却因关系权势而成进士出身。
English: I have constantly heard that in recent years, the selection of talents has mostly been false and distorted. Some have been promoted because of their long years of hard study, and some have been promoted because of their relationship and power.

古文：今岁所放举人，试令看验，果见纰缪，须至去留。
现代文：今年所取举人中，试看验证，果然有滥误，必须再加取舍。
English: Among the people selected this year, there are some mistakes in the trial and verification, and we must make further adjustments.

古文：其李覃、何严、杨徽之、赵邻几等四人，宜放及第。
现代文：其中李覃、何日严、杨徽之、赵邻几等四人，应当及第。
English: Among them, Li Qian, He Nichian, Yang Huizhi, Zhao Lijiao and other four people should be in the first place.

古文：其严说、武允成、王汾、闾邱舜卿、任惟吉、周度、张慎徽、王翥、马文、刘选、程浩然、李震等一十二人，艺学未精，并宜勾落，且令苦学，以俟再来。
现代文：而严说、武允成、王汾、闾丘舜卿、任惟吉、周度、张慎徽、王翥、马文、刘选、程浩然、李震等十二人，学艺未精，均当落第，令他们刻苦攻读，等以后再试。
English: On the other hand, Yan said that Wu Yuncheng, Wang Hui, Yu Qiuqian, Ren Weiji, Zhou Du, Zhang Shenhui, Wang Hui, Ma Wen, Liu Xuan, Cheng Haoran, Li Zhen and other twelve people, who were not very good at learning, should all fail, so they should study hard and try again later.

古文：世宗自克高平，常训兵讲武，思混一天下，及览其策，欣然听纳，由是平南之意益坚矣。五月辛未，回鹘遣使贡方物。凤翔节度使王景上言： 奉诏攻收秦、凤二州，已于今月一日领军由大散关路进军次。 
现代文：礼部侍郎刘温叟在选拔士人上有过失，据其过失，理当贬谪，现特予宽恕容让，刘温叟免予定罪，将来的贡举公事，再令有关部门另外制订条例上奏。 五月四日，凤翔节度使王景上奏： 奉诏攻伐秦、凤二州，已在本月一日领军从大散关进军。 
English: On May 4, the Fengxiang Festival made Wang Jing recite: "I have been given the command to invade Qin and Feng Erzhou, and on the first day of this month, I led the army to march from Dasan Pass.

古文：先是，晋末契丹入晋，秦州节度使何建以秦、成、阶三州入蜀，蜀人又取凤州。
现代文：此前，后晋末年契丹人攻入晋朝时，秦州节度使何建率领秦、成、阶三州归顺蜀国，蜀人又占取了凤州。
English: Previously, when the Khitan invaded the Jin Dynasty at the end of the Later Jin Dynasty, the Qin State Festival made He Jian lead the three states of Qin, Cheng and Jia to Shun Shu, and the Shu people occupied Fengzhou.

古文：释氏贞宗，圣人妙道，助世劝善，其利甚优。
现代文：现在，秦州、凤州人民怨恨蜀国的暴政，不断地上京，请朝廷发兵收复故地，世宗于是诏令王景与宣徽南院使向训领军前往。
English: Now, the people of Qin and Fengzhou resented the tyranny of Shu, and constantly went to Beijing to ask the imperial court to send troops to recover their homeland. The emperor then ordered Wang Jing and the envoy of the Southern Yuan of Xuanhui to lead the troops to Xuanxun.

古文：前代以来，累有条贯，近年已降，颇紊规绳。
现代文：七日，诏令说： 佛教帮助人世鼓励行善，它的好处甚大。以前历代都有条规，近年以来条规紊乱。
English: On the seventh day, the edict said: "Buddhism helps the world to encourage people to do good, and its benefits are great. In previous generations, there were rules, but in recent years, the rules have been disrupted.

古文：近览诸州奏闻，继有缁徒犯法，盖无科禁，遂至尤违，私度僧尼，日增猥杂，创修寺院，渐至繁多，乡村之中其弊转甚。
现代文：最近阅览各州的报告，看到不断有僧人犯法之事，这是因为没有规章的约束，以至于大行违逆，私自度脱僧人尼姑，日渐芜杂，新修的寺院也逐渐增多，乡村之中，弊端更盛。
English: Recently, I read the reports of various states and saw that monks are constantly breaking the law. This is because there are no rules and regulations to restrain them, so much so that there is a large amount of disobedience, self-defeating monks and nuns are becoming more and more mixed, newly built temples are also gradually increasing, and in rural areas, the drawbacks are more prevalent.

古文：漏网背军之辈，苟剃削以逃刑；行奸为盗之徒，托住持而隐恶。
现代文：流亡的叛兵，去当和尚以逃避法办；作奸的盗贼，躲到寺院以隐瞒罪行。
English: A rebel in exile became a monk to evade justice; a thief who committed treason hid in a temple to conceal his crime.

古文：将隆教法，须辨否臧，宜举旧章，用革前弊。
现代文：要兴盛佛教，须辨别善恶，应恢复以前规章，以革除当前弊病。
English: In order for Buddhism to flourish, it is necessary to distinguish between good and evil, and the previous regulations should be restored to eliminate the current ills.

古文：诸道府州县镇村坊，应有敕额寺院，一切仍旧，其无敕额者，并仰停废，所有功德佛像及僧尼，并腾并于合留寺院内安置。
现代文： 各道州府县镇村坊，凡有诏赐名号的寺院，一切照旧，那些没有诏赐名号的，均得关闭废除，寺院中的功德佛像以及僧人尼姑，全迁出合并到准许保留的寺院中去安置。
English: In all provinces, prefectures, towns and villages, all temples with names given by imperial edict are to remain as before, and those without names given by imperial edict are to be closed and abolished. The statues of the Buddha of merit and the monks and nuns in the temples are to be moved out and merged into the temples permitted to remain.

古文：天下诸县城郭内，若无敕额寺院，只于合停废寺院内，选功德屋宇最多者，或寺院僧尼各留一所，若无尼住，只留僧寺院一所。
现代文：天下各县城内，如根本没有诏赐名号的寺院，那就在应当关闭废除的寺院中，挑选功德房屋最多的寺院，僧人、尼姑寺院各保留一所，如果没有尼姑居住，就只保留僧人寺院一所。
English: If there is no temple with the name given by the emperor in any county in the world, then among the temples that should be closed and abolished, the temple with the most houses of merit should be selected. One temple should be reserved for monks and nuns, and if there are no nuns living there, only one temple should be reserved for monks.

古文：诸军镇坊郭及二百户已上者，亦依诸县例指挥。
现代文：各二百户以上的军镇、城邑、村坊，也依照各县城规定办理。
English: Military towns, towns and villages with more than 200 households shall also be handled in accordance with the regulations of each county.

古文：如边远州郡无敕额寺院处，于停废寺院内僧尼各留两所。
现代文：如边远的州郡中没有诏赐名号的寺院，就在应当关闭废除的寺院中为僧人、尼姑各保留两所。
English: If there is no temple in a remote prefecture or county with a name given by imperial edict, two temples shall be reserved for monks and two for nuns in a temple that should be closed and abolished.

古文：今后并不得创造寺院兰若。王公戚里诸道节刺已下，今后不得奏请创造寺院及请开置戒坛。
现代文：今后均不准修建新的寺院，王公贵戚以及各道节度使刺史以下人等，今后不准上奏请求创建寺院以及请求开设戒坛。
English: In the future, no new temples will be allowed to be built, and Wang Gong's noble relatives as well as people below the level of sutra priests of various sects will not be allowed to petition for the creation of temples and the opening of Buddhist altars in the future.

古文：男子女子如有志愿出家者，并取父母、祖父母处分，已孤者取同居伯叔兄处分，候听许方得出家。
现代文：男女如有志愿出家者，全由其父母、祖父祖母决定，已是孤儿的由同住的伯叔兄长决定，被准许才能出家。
English: In the case of men and women who voluntarily enter the priesthood, it is entirely up to their parents and grandparents to decide. In the case of orphans, it is up to the uncles and brothers living with them to decide whether they are allowed to enter the priesthood.

古文：男年十五已上，念得经文一百纸，或读得经文五百纸，女年十三已上，念得经文七十纸，或读得经文三百纸者，经本府陈状乞剃头，委录事参军本判官试验经文。
现代文：男子年十五岁以上，能念一百页经文，或能读五百页经文，女子年十三岁以上，能念七十页经文，或能读三百页经文者，向所在官府申请削发，由录事参军判官考核念读经文。
English: Men over the age of 15 who can recite 100 pages of scripture, or can read 500 pages of scripture, and women over the age of 13 who can recite 70 pages of scripture, or can read 300 pages of scripture, should apply to their local government office for a haircut, and read the scripture by the record judge.

古文：其未剃头间，须留发髻，如有私剃头者，却勒还俗，其本师主决重杖勒还俗，仍配役三年。
现代文：在没被削发时，须保留发髻，如有私自削发者，勒令他还俗。他的师主判重杖之刑，勒令还俗，并服役三年。
English: If he did not have his hair cut, he had to keep it in a bun. If someone cut his hair without permission, he was ordered to return to lay life. His master sentenced him to a heavy cane, ordered him to return to lay life, and served three years.

古文：两京、大名府、京兆府、青州各处置戒坛，候受戒时，两京委祠部差官引试，其大名府等三处，只委本判官录事参军引试。
现代文：两京、大名府、京兆府、青州各处设置戒坛，等候受戒时到，两京委任祠部派官员引试，大名府等三处只委任本州府判官录事参军引试。
English: The two capitals, Daming Prefecture, Jingzhao Prefecture, and Qingzhou all set up the ordination altar, waiting for the time to be ordained, the two capitals appointed the ancestral hall to send officials to lead the trial, and the three places such as Daming Prefecture only appointed the judge of the prefecture to record the record and lead the trial.

古文：如有私受戒者，其本人、师主、临坛三纲、知事僧尼，并同私剃头例科罪。
现代文：如有私自受戒者，他本人、师主、临坛三纲、主事僧尼，均依照私自削发例惩治。
English: If there is a self-ordained person, he himself, the master, the three lineages of Rinpoche, and the responsible monks and nuns will all be punished according to the self-imposed example.

古文：应合剃头受戒人等，逐处闻奏，候敕下，委祠部给付凭由，方得剃头受戒。
现代文：凡应削发受戒的人，由各地上奏朝廷，等诏令下达后，由祠部发给凭证，才能削发受戒。
English: All those who should be given the precepts are to report to the imperial court from various regions. After the imperial edict is issued, the ancestral hall department will issue a certificate before the precepts can be given.

古文：应男女有父母、祖父母在，别无兒息侍养，不听出家。
现代文：凡男女其父母、祖父母还活着，又没有其他的儿子服侍奉养，就不准出家。
English: Any man or woman whose parents or grandparents are still alive, and who has no other sons to serve and raise, is not allowed to enter the priesthood.

古文：曾有罪犯，遭官司刑责之人，及弃背父母、逃亡奴婢、奸人细作、恶逆徒党、山林亡命、未获贼徒、负罪潜窜人等，并不得出家剃头。
现代文：曾犯有罪行，受过官司刑责的人，以及背弃父母之人，逃亡的奴婢、奸人细作、恶逆党徒、山林强盗、未捕获的贼党、负罪潜逃之人，均不准削发出家。
English: Those who have committed crimes and have been punished by the court, as well as those who have betrayed their parents, escaped slaves, traitors, treacherous party members, mountain and forest bandits, uncaught thieves, and guilty absconders are not allowed to leave home.

古文：如有寺院辄容受者，其本人及师主、三纲、知事僧尼、邻房同住僧，并仰收捉禁勘，申奏取裁。
现代文：如有寺院擅自收容他们，他本人以及师主、三纲、主事僧尼、隔壁同住的僧人，都要收审，上奏听取裁决。 
English: If a temple takes them in without permission, he himself, as well as the master, the three orders, the leading monks and nuns, and the monks living next door, must be examined, and a ruling must be heard.

古文：右谏议大夫李知损配流沙门岛，坐妄贡章疏，斥讟贵近，及求使两浙故也。己丑，前太常卿边蔚卒。
现代文：十八日，秦州伪观察判官赵王比献城投降，诏令任赵王比为郢州刺史。冬十月七日，成州归顺。
English: On the 18th, Zhao Wangbi, the judge of the Qin state pseudo-observation, surrendered the city, and the imperial edict appointed Zhao Wangbi as the historian of Zhangzhou. On October 7, winter, Chengzhou surrendered.

古文：是月始议南征。
现代文：本月开始商议南征。
English: Negotiations on the Southern Expedition began this month.

古文：十一月乙未朔，以宰臣李穀为淮南道前军行营都部署，知庐、寿等州行府事；以许州节度使王彦超为行营副部署；命侍卫马军都指挥使韩令坤等一十二将，各带征行之号以从焉。
现代文：十一月一日，以宰臣李谷为淮南道前军行营都部署，管理庐州、寿州行府事务；以许州节度使王彦超为行营副部署；命侍卫马军都指挥使韩令坤等十二位将领，各以出征的名号以跟从。
English: On November 1, Li Gu, the vice-minister of Huainan Province, was deployed as the camp commander of the former military camp to manage the affairs of Zhangzhou and Shoushou; Wang Yanchao was deployed as the deputy camp commander on the occasion of the Xuzhou Festival; and twelve generals, including Han Lingkun, were appointed as the commander of the guard and horse army, each with the name of the campaign to follow.

古文：己亥，谕淮南州县，诏曰：朕自缵承基构，统御寰瀛，方当恭己临朝，诞修文德，岂欲兴兵动众，专耀武功！
现代文：五日，告谕淮南州县，诏令说： 朕自继承帝位，驾御寰宇，正应恭敬治理朝政，大修文德，哪愿兴兵动众，炫耀武力！
English: On the fifth day, he issued an edict to Huainan County, saying: "Since I have succeeded to the imperial throne, I am the ruler of the world. I should respectfully administer the imperial government, and greatly improve literature and morals. Who would like to raise an army, mobilize the people, and show off force?

古文：顾兹昏乱之邦，须举吊伐之义。
现代文：只是看到昏惑叛乱的淮南伪邦，必须高扬吊民伐罪的义举。
English: However, seeing the bewildered rebellion of the pseudo-state of Huainan, we must exalt the righteous deed of hanging people for the crime of felling.

古文：蠢尔淮甸，敢拒大帮，因唐室之陵迟，接黄寇之纷乱，飞扬跋扈，垂六十年，盗据一方，僭称伪号。
现代文：你们小小淮甸，敢于抗拒大国，趁唐朝王室的衰微，继黄巢贼寇的纷乱，飞扬跋扈，近六十年，盗占盘踞一方，僭称吴国、南唐伪号。
English: You, little Huai Dian, dared to resist the great powers, taking advantage of the decline of the Tang Dynasty royal family, following the turmoil of the Yellow Nest thieves and robbers, flying high, nearly sixty years, stealing the occupied one side, falsely called Wu Guo, South Tang Pseudonym.

古文：幸数朝之多事，与北境以交通，厚启兵端，诱为边患。
现代文：以中原数朝多事为幸，与北部外敌勾通，大动杀伐之心，诱使北蕃为我边患。
English: Taking the Central Plains as a blessing, he colluded with foreign enemies in the north and made a great effort to kill them, and induced the Northern Wei Dynasty to attack our border.

古文：晋、汉之代，寰海未宁，而乃招纳叛亡，朋助凶慝，李金全之据安陆，李守贞之叛河中，大起师徒，来为应援，攻侵高密，杀掠吏民，迫夺闽、越之封疆，涂炭湘、潭之士庶。
现代文：晋、汉两代，海内不宁，而你们招降纳叛，佐助元凶，李金全占据安陆，李守贞在河中府反叛，你们大兴士卒，前来接应他们，攻击侵犯高密，杀掠官吏百姓，强夺闽、越的土地，蹂躏湘、潭的人民。
English: During the Jin and Han dynasties, there was unrest at sea, and you invited and accepted rebels, and assisted the main culprits, Li Jinquan occupied Anlu, and Li Shouzhen rebelled in Hechu Prefecture. You Daxing soldiers came to meet them, attacked and violated Gaomi, killed and plundered officials and people, forcibly seized the land of Yunnan and Yue, and ravaged the people of Hunan and Tan.

古文：以至我朝启运，东鲁不庭，发兵而应接叛臣，观衅而凭凌徐部。
现代文：以致我汉朝开国承运，东鲁不来朝拜，你们发兵应接叛臣，趁机侵凌徐部。
English: As a result, when the Han Dynasty founded the country, I was in charge of transportation, and Donglu did not come to pay homage. You sent troops to meet the traitor and took advantage of the opportunity to invade Xube.

古文：沭阳之役，曲直可知，尚示包荒，犹稽问罪。
现代文：沐阳之战，是非了然，我朝尚宽宏大量，未向你们问罪。
English: In the battle of Muyang, the rights and wrongs were clear. My government was magnanimous and did not charge you with any crime.

古文：迩后维扬一境，连岁阻饥，我国家念彼灾荒，大许籴易。
现代文：此后，淮扬一带，连年饥荒，我朝怜悯你们的灾荒，卖给你们许多的粮食。
English: After that, the area around Huaiyang suffered from famine for several years. I felt sorry for your suffering and sold you a lot of grain.

古文：前后擒获将士，皆遣放还，自来禁戢边兵，不令侵挠。
现代文：前后俘虏你们的将士，都被放回；我们一向禁止边防军士，不准侵扰你们。
English: The soldiers who captured you before and after have all been released; we have always prohibited border guards from harassing you.

古文：我无所负，彼实多奸，勾诱契丹至今未已，结连并寇与我为雠，罪恶难名，人神共愤。
现代文：我们没有对不起你们的地方，实在是你们过于奸邪，勾结诱招契丹，至今尚未停止，结交联合并州贼寇，以我为仇敌，罪恶难以言状，人神共同愤怒。
English: We do not feel sorry for you, it is really you who are too treacherous, colluding to entice the Khitan, and have not yet stopped, forming alliances and merging with the state thieves and robbers, with me as the enemy, the evil is indescribable, and people and gods are angry together.

古文：今则推轮命将，鸣鼓出师，征浙右之楼船，下朗陵之戈甲，东西合势，水陆齐攻。
现代文： 现在我们驱车命将，鸣鼓出兵，征发浙西的大船，调来朗陵的戈甲，东西合势，水陆齐攻。
English: Now we are driving the car of destiny, beating the drums to send troops, conscripting large ships from western Zhejiang, bringing in Goga from Langling, combining the strengths of east and west, and attacking both land and water.

古文：吴孙皓之计穷，自当归命；陈叔宝之数尽，何处偷生！
现代文：吴国孙皓走投无路时，自动投降归顺；陈朝后主气数完尽时，何处容他生存！
English: When Sun Yat-sen of the State of Wu was cornered, he automatically surrendered and submitted; after the Chen Dynasty, when his power was exhausted, who would allow him to survive!

古文：应淮南将士军人百姓等，久隔朝廷，莫闻声教，虽从伪俗，应乐华风，必须善择安危，早图去就。
现代文：凡淮南将士军民，久违大朝，未闻声德教化，虽然一时顺从伪朝，但应亲近中原正统，须善于选择安危，早定去向。
English: All Huainan soldiers, soldiers and civilians, long after the Great Dynasties, unheard of sound moral education, although temporarily obedient to the pseudo-Dynasty, but should be close to the Central Plains orthodoxy, must be good at choosing safety, and determine their destination early.

古文：如能投戈献款，举郡来降，具牛酒以犒师，纳圭符而请命，车服玉帛岂吝旌酬，土地山河诚无爱惜。
现代文：如能放下武器表示归顺，全郡投降，准备牛酒以犒劳我将士，交出符印而听从我命令，那么车服玉帛，奖赏你们决不吝惜，土地山河，封给你们决不小气。
English: If you can lay down your weapons to surrender, surrender the whole county, prepare beef and wine to reward our soldiers, hand over the seal and obey my orders, then you will never be stingy with the reward of car clothes and jade bracelets, and you will never be stingy with the land, mountains and rivers.

古文：刑赏之令，信若丹青，苟或执迷，宁免后悔。
现代文：奖惩之令，信如丹青，如果执迷不误，就不免将要后悔。
English: The order of reward and punishment, such as Danqing, if you persist, you will inevitably regret it.

古文：辛亥，以前沧州节度使李晖为邠州节度使。
现代文：王师所至，军纪严明，秋毫无犯，就如及时澍雨，百姓父老，务请放心安居，抢掠焚烧之类，必使禁止不生。 
English: When Wang Shisho arrives, military discipline will be strict, and there will be no crime in the autumn, just like timely rain, the people and the elderly, please rest assured to live in peace, looting and burning and the like, will make the ban not come into being.

古文：壬子，潞州奏，破河东贼军于祁县。
现代文：十八日，潞州上奏，在祁县打败河东贼军。
English: On the 18th, Bozhou went into action and defeated the Kleptocratic Army of Hedong in Bozhou County.

古文：癸丑，西南面行营都部署王景奏，收复凤州，获伪命节度使王环。
现代文：十九日，西南面行营都部署王景上奏，收复凤州，抓获伪节度使王环。
English: On the 19th, Wang Jing was deployed to the southwestern side of the encampment, recovered Fengzhou, and captured Wang Huan, a false commander.

古文：乙卯。曲赦秦、凤、阶、成等州管内罪人，自显德二年十一月已前，凡有罪犯，无问轻重，一切释放。
现代文：二十一日，部分赦免秦、凤、阶、成等州管区内犯人，从今年十一月以前，凡有罪犯，不管轻重，全部释放。
English: On the 21st, a partial amnesty was granted to prisoners in the Qin, Feng, Ji, Cheng and other prefectures, and from November this year, all criminals, regardless of severity, will be released.

古文：己未，邢州奏，河东刘崇死。
现代文：二十五日，邢州上奏，河东刘崇死亡。
English: On the 25th day of the month, Liu Chong from Hedong died.

古文：壬戌，淮南前军都部署李穀奏，先锋都指挥使白延遇破淮贼于来远镇。
现代文：二十八日，淮南前军都部署李谷上奏，先锋都指挥使白延遇在来远镇打败淮南贼军。
English: On the 28th, the Huainan vanguard was all deployed to Li Valley, and the vanguard was all commanded to make Bai Yan encounter and defeat the Huainan Kleptocracy in Laiyuan Town.

古文：十二月丙寅，以左金吾大将军盖万为右监门上将军。
现代文：十二月十日，李谷上奏，在寿州城下打败淮南贼军二千人。
English: On December 10th, Li Gu rose up and defeated two thousand Huainan bandits under the city of Shoushou.

古文：丁卯，淄州奏，前中书侍郎、同平章事景范卒。
现代文：十五日，李谷上奏，在山口镇打败淮南贼军一千多人。
English: On the fifteenth day, Li Gu went to war and defeated more than a thousand Huainan bandits in Yamaguchi Town.

