古文：起著雍执徐八月，尽重光协洽二月，凡二年有奇。
现代文：起著雍执徐八月，尽重光协洽二月，凡二年有奇。
English: Every two years, there is something strange about the month of August, which is auspicious and auspicious, and February, which is auspicious and auspicious.

古文：太祖神武元圣孝皇帝中开平二年八月，吴越王镠遣宁国节度使王景仁奉表诣大梁，陈取淮南之策。
现代文：后梁太祖开平二年八月，吴越王钱派遣宁国节度使王景仁带着奏表前往大梁，陈述攻取淮南的计策。
English: In August of the second year of Liang Taizu's reign, Wu Yue sent Wang Qian to Ningguo Festival to send Wang Jingren to Dalian with a report card to present the strategy of conquering Huainan.

古文：景仁即茂章也，避梁讳改焉。
现代文：王景仁，即王茂章，因避后梁太祖曾祖朱茂琳名讳而改。
English: Wang Jingren, that is, Wang Maozhang, changed his name to avoid the name of Liang Taizu's great-grandfather Zhu Maolin.

古文：淮南遣步军都指挥使周本、南面统军使吕师造击吴越，九月，围苏州。
现代文：淮南派遣步军都指挥使周本、南面统军使吕师造进攻吴越，九月，包围苏州。
English: Huainan dispatched its infantry forces under the command of Zhou Ben and the southern unified army under the command of Lv Shizhu to attack Wuyue and encircle Suzhou in September.

古文：吴越将张仁保攻常州之东洲，拔之。
现代文：吴越将领张仁保攻打常州的东洲，并把东洲夺取。
English: Zhang Renbo, the general of Wu Yue, attacked Dongzhou in Changzhou and captured Dongzhou.

古文：淮南兵死者万馀人。
现代文：淮南兵死了一万余人。
English: More than ten thousand soldiers died in Huainan.

古文：淮南以池州团练使陈璋为水陆行营都招讨使，帅柴再用等诸将救东洲，大破仁保于鱼荡，复取东洲。
现代文：淮南委任池州团练使陈璋为水陆行营都招讨使，统率柴再用等将领救援东洲，在鱼荡把张仁保打得大败，又夺回了东洲镇。
English: Huainan appointed Chizhou regimental drill sergeant Chen Jie as the recruiting sergeant for the land and water campaign, led the general such as firewood reuse to rescue Dongzhou, defeated Zhang Renbao in the fish swing, and won back Dongzhou Town.

古文：柴再用方战舟坏，长槊浮之，仅而得济。
现代文：柴再用正在战斗，船坏了，靠长矛浮托，才得渡过。
English: Chai Reuse was in the middle of a battle, his boat was broken, and he had to rely on his spear to float across the water.

古文：家人为之饭僧千人，再用悉取其食以犒部兵，曰： 士卒济我，僧何力焉！ 
现代文：家人为他施饭给一千名僧人，柴再用全部拿了这些饭食犒劳部兵，说： 士卒渡我上岸，僧人出了什么力呢！ 
English: His family gave food to a thousand monks for him, and then used all the wood to take these meals to the soldiers of the Ministry of Labor, saying: "The soldiers brought me ashore, what power did the monks have!

古文：丙子，蜀立皇后周氏。
现代文：丙子，蜀册立皇后周氏。
English: Cun Zi, the Queen of Shu, was from the Zhou dynasty.

古文：后，许州人也。
现代文：周皇后是许州人。
English: Empress Zhou was a native of Huzhou.

古文：晋周德威、李嗣昭将兵三万出阴地关，攻晋州，刺史徐怀玉拒守。帝自将救之，丁丑，发大梁，乙酉，至陕州。
现代文：晋周德威、李嗣昭率兵三万出阴地关，进攻晋州，晋州刺史除怀玉抵御防守；后梁太祖亲自统率军队前去救援，丁丑从大梁出发，乙酉到达陕州。
English: Jin Zhou Dewi and Li Tszyu Zhao led 30,000 soldiers out of the gates of hell to attack Jinzhou, and Jinzhou stabbed history except Huaiyu to resist the defense; Houliang Taizu personally led the army to go to the rescue, Dingwu departed from Daliang, and Acetylene arrived in Shaanxi.

古文：戊子，岐王所署延州节度使胡敬璋寇上平关，刘知俊击破之。
现代文：戊子，岐王李茂贞所任命的延州节度使胡敬璋侵犯上平关，刘知俊把岐军打败。
English: Wu Zi, the governor of Yanzhou appointed by Li Maozhen, the king of Qi, made Hu Jintao invade Pingguan, and Liu Zhijun defeated the Qi army.

古文：周德威等闻帝将至，乙未，退保隰州。
现代文：周德威等听说后梁太祖将要到达，乙未退兵保卫隰州。
English: After Zhou Dewei and others heard that Liang Taizu was about to arrive, B did not leave the army to defend Zhangzhou.

古文：荆南节度使高季昌遣兵屯汉口，绝楚朝贡之路。楚王殷遣其将许德勋将水军击之，至沙头，季昌惧而请和。
现代文：荆南节度使高季昌派遣军队在汉口驻扎，断绝楚朝见进贡的道路；楚王马殷派遣他的部将许德勋率领水军前去攻打，到达沙头，高季昌畏惧，请求和解。
English: The Jingnan Festival made Gao Jichang send troops to be stationed in Hankou and cut off the road for the Chu Dynasty to see the tribute; King Ma Yin of Chu sent his minister Xu Dejun to lead the navy to attack and reach the beachhead. Gao Jichang was afraid and asked for reconciliation.

古文：殷又遣步军都指挥使吕师周将兵击岭南，与清海节度使刘隐十馀战，取昭、贺、梧、蒙、龚、富六州。
现代文：马殷又派遣步军都指挥使吕师周率兵进攻岭南，与清海节度使刘隐打仗十余次，夺取昭、贺、梧、蒙、龚、富六州。
English: In addition, Ma Yin dispatched troops under the command of Du Du to make Lu's division Zhou lead the troops to attack Lingnan, and sent Liu Yin to fight more than ten times with Qinghai Jiedu to capture six states including Zhao, He, Wu, Meng, Yunnan and Fujian.

古文：殷土宇既广，乃养士息民，湖南遂安。
现代文：马殷的疆域已经广阔，就使兵民得到休养生息，湖南于是安居乐业。
English: The territory of Ma Yin is already vast, so the soldiers and people can get rest and recuperation, and Hunan can live and work in peace.

古文：冬，十月，蜀主立后宫张氏为贵妃，徐氏为贤妃，其妹为德妃。
现代文：冬季，十月，前蜀主王建册立后宫张氏为贵妃，徐氏为贤妃，徐氏的妹妹为德妃。
English: In winter, in October, the former Shu ruler Wang Jiancang set up the harem of the Zhang clan as Guifei, the Xu clan as Xianfei, and the sister of the Xu clan as Defei.

古文：张氏，郪人，宗懿之母也。二徐，耕之女也。
现代文：张氏是县人，是太子王宗懿的母亲；二徐是徐耕的女儿。
English: Zhang, a native of the county, was the mother of Prince Wang Zongyao; Er Xu was the daughter of Xu Gang.

古文：华原贼帅温韬聚众嵯峨山，暴掠雍州诸县，唐帝诸陵发之殆遍。
现代文：华原贼帅温韬聚从嵯峨山，肆意抢劫雍州各县，唐帝的陵墓几乎全被发掘。
English: The Chinese invaders, led by Wen Xun, gathered from Mount Saga and looted all the counties in Yongzhou. Almost all the mausoleums of the Tang Dynasty have been excavated.

古文：庚戌，蜀主讲武于星宿山，步骑三十万。
现代文：庚戌，前蜀主王建在星宿山讲习武事，参加的步兵、骑兵有三十万人。
English: Geng Zong, the former king of Shu, held martial arts classes on Xingju Mountain, with 300,000 infantry and cavalry taking part.

古文：丁巳，帝还大梁。
现代文：丁巳，后梁太祖回大梁。
English: Ding Si, Hou Liang's great-grandfather returned to Daliang.

古文：辛酉，以刘隐为清海、静海节度使，以膳部郎中赵光裔、右补阙李殷衡充官告使，隐皆留之。
现代文：辛酉，梁任命刘隐为清海、静海节度使，任命膳部郎中赵光裔、右补阙李殷衡充任官告使，刘隐把他们都留下了。
English: Xin Xuan, Liang appointed Liu Yin as the envoy of Qinghai and Jinghai festivals, and appointed Zhao Guangxu, the vice-minister of the Ministry of Food, and Li Yinheng, the vice-minister of the Ministry of Right, as the official envoys. Liu Yin left them all behind.

古文：光裔，光逢之弟；殷衡，德裕之孙也。
现代文：赵光裔是赵光逢的弟弟；李殷衡是李德裕的孙子。
English: Zhao Guangxu is the younger brother of Zhao Guangfeng; Li Yinheng is the grandson of Li Deyu.

古文：依政进士梁震，唐末登第，至是归蜀。
现代文：邛州依政进士梁震，唐末考中进士，到这时候归蜀。
English: Liang Zhen from Ganzhou was promoted to a scholar in accordance with the policy, and he was promoted to a scholar in the final examination of the Tang Dynasty. At this time, he returned to Shu.

古文：过江陵，高季昌爱其才识，留之，欲奏为判官。
现代文：路过江陵，高季昌喜爱他的才能见识，把他留下来，想要留下来，想要奏举他为判官。
English: Passing through Jiangling, Gao Jichang loved his talent and insight, kept him, wanted to stay, and wanted to promote him as a judge.

古文：震耻之，欲去，恐及祸，乃曰： 震素不慕荣宦，明公不以震为愚，必欲使之参谋议，但以白衣侍樽俎可也，何必在幕府！ 
现代文：梁震以为耻辱，想要离开，又恐怕遭祸，于是说： 我向来不羡慕荣华官宦，您不认为我愚昧无知，一定要让我参与谋划计议，只以没有官职的平民侍奉宴席就是了，何必在幕府任职呢！ 
English: Liang Zhen thought it was a disgrace, wanted to leave, and feared disaster, so he said: I have never envied Ronghua officials. You don't think I'm stupid and ignorant, you must let me participate in the planning and discussion. It's just to serve the banquet with civilians who don't have official positions. Why do you have to serve in the shogunate?

古文：季昌许之。
现代文：高季昌应允了他。
English: Gao Jichang agreed.

古文：震终身止称前进士，不受高氏辟署。
现代文：梁震终身只称前进士，不接受高季昌的征召任命。
English: Liang Zhen only called himself a forward for life and did not accept Gao Jichang's call-up and appointment.

古文：季昌甚重之，以为谋主，呼曰先辈。
现代文：高季昌很器重他，用他作谋主，呼为 先辈 。
English: Gao Jichang highly valued him, used him as a mentor, and called him an ancestor.

古文：帝从吴越王镠之请，以亳州团练使寇彦卿为东南面行营都指挥使，击淮南。
现代文：后梁太祖依从吴越王钱的请求，任命亳州团练使寇彦卿为东南面行营都指挥使，攻打淮南。
English: Later, Liang Taizu, at the request of King Qian of Wu Yue, appointed the commander of the Qizhou Regiment, General Qiao Yan, to lead the army to the southeast and attack Huainan.

古文：十一月，彦卿帅众二千袭霍丘，为土豪硃景所败；又攻庐、寿二州，皆不胜。
现代文：十一月，寇彦卿率从二千人袭击霍丘，被地方豪强朱景打败；又攻打庐、寿二州，都没有取胜。
English: In November, Emperor Korehiko led 2,000 men in an attack on Hokucho, which was defeated by the local strongman Zhu Jing; he also attacked Shaoshan and Shouzhou, but did not win.

古文：淮南遣滁州刺史史俨拒之，彦卿引归。
现代文：淮南派遣滁州史史俨抵御寇彦卿，寇彦卿带兵退回。
English: Huainan sent Zhangzhou Shi Shi to defend against Kouyan, and Kouyan retreated with his troops.

古文：定难节度使李思谏卒；甲戌，其子彝昌自为留后。
现代文：定难节度使李思谏去世，甲戌，他的儿子李彝昌自任留后。
English: Li Siyu passed away due to illness, leaving his son, Li Yuchang, to take his place.

古文：刘守文举沧德兵攻幽州，刘守光求救于晋，晋王遣兵五千助之。
现代文：刘守文发沧德军队进攻幽州，刘守光向晋王请求救援，晋王李存勖派遣五千军队援助刘守光。
English: Liu Shouwen's army attacked Yuzhou, Liu Shouguang asked Jin Wang for help, Jin Wang Li Cunxu sent five thousand troops to help Liu Shouguang.

古文：丁亥，守文兵至卢台军，为守光所败；又战玉田，亦败。
现代文：丁亥刘守文兵到达芦台军，被刘守光打败；又攻打玉田，也失败了。
English: Dinghai Liu Shouwen soldiers arrived at the Lutetian army and were defeated by Liu Shouguang; they also attacked Yutian and failed.

古文：守文乃还。
现代文：刘守文这才退回。
English: Liu Shouwen only then returned it.

古文：癸巳，中书侍郎、同平章事张策以刑部尚书致仕；以左仆射杨涉同平章事。
现代文：癸巳，后梁中书侍郎、同平章事张策以刑部尚书退休，任命左仆射杨涉为同平章事。
English: Soon after, Liang Zhongshu's personal attendant and Tongping Zhang retired from the criminal justice department, and appointed his left-hand man, Yang Zhan, as Tongping's personal attendant.

古文：保塞节度使胡敬璋卒，静难节度使李继徽以其将刘万子代镇延州。
现代文：保塞节度使胡敬璋去世，静难节度使李继徽委任他的部将刘万子代镇延州。
English: Hu Jintao passed away during the Securing Festival, and Li Jihui appointed his subordinate Liu Wanzi to represent the town of Yanzhou during the Calm Festival.

古文：是岁，弘农王遣军将万全感赍书间道诣晋及岐，告以嗣位。
现代文：这一年，弘农王杨隆演派遣军将万全感带着书信由偏僻小路前往晋阳及岐州，把自己继承王位的事告诉晋王及岐王。
English: In this year, Yang Longyan, the King of Hongnong, sent troops to Jinyang and Qizhou with a letter from a remote path, telling the King of Jin and the King of Qizhou about his succession to the throne.

古文：帝将迁都洛阳。
现代文：后梁太祖准备迁都洛阳。
English: Later Liang Taizu prepared to move the capital to Luoyang.

古文：太祖神武元圣孝皇帝中开平三年春，正月，己巳，迁太庙神主于洛阳。
现代文：开平三年春季，正月已巳，后梁太祖把太庙的祖宗牌的位迁到洛阳。
English: In the spring of the third year of the Kaiping era, in the first month of the year, Houliang Taizu moved the ancestral tablet of the Taimiao to Luoyang.

古文：甲戌，帝发大梁。
现代文：甲戌，太祖自大梁出发。
English: Kuching, Taizu departed from Daliang.

古文：壬申，以博王友文为东都留守。
现代文：壬申，任命博王朱友文为东都留守。
English: Jinshin, appointed Bo Wang Zhu Youwen as Dongdu absent.

古文：己卯，帝至洛阳。庚寅，飨太庙。辛巳，祀圆丘，大赦。
现代文：乙卯，太祖到达洛阳；庚寅，祭祀太庙；辛巳，祭祀上天，大赦天下。
English: Yi Wu, the great ancestor arrived in Luoyang; Geng Yin, sacrificed to the great temple; Xin Si, sacrificed to heaven, and was pardoned by the world.

古文：丙申，以用度稍充，初给百官全俸。
现代文：丙申，后梁由于费用开支逐渐充裕，开始发给文武百官全俸。
English: According to Bishin, Houliang began to pay full salaries to 100 civil and military officials due to the gradual increase in expenses.

古文：二月，丁酉朔，日有食之。
现代文：二月，丁酉朔，发生日食。
English: In February, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：保塞节度使刘万子暴虐，失众心，且谋贰于梁，李继徽使延州牙将李延实图之。
现代文：保塞节度使刘万子凶恶残酷，失去众心，并且图谋背叛投降大梁，静难节度使李继徽派遣延州牙将李延实设法除掉他。
English: The siege made Liu Wanzhong vicious and cruel, losing the hearts of the people, and plotting to betray the surrender girders. The siege made Li Jihui send Li Yanshi, the governor of Yanzhou, to try to get rid of him.

古文：延实因万子葬胡敬璋，攻而杀之，遂据延州。
现代文：李延实趁着刘万子埋葬胡敬璋，发动攻击并把他杀死，于是占据了延州。
English: Li Yanshi took advantage of Liu Wanzi to bury Hu Jintao, launched an attack and killed him, and then occupied Yanzhou.

古文：马军都指挥使河西高万兴与其弟万金闻变，以其众数千人诣刘知俊降。
现代文：马军都指挥使河西高万兴与他的弟弟高万金听到这个变故，率领他的部众数千人到刘知俊的军营投降。
English: Gao Wanxing and his younger brother Gao Wanjin of Hexi heard of the change and led thousands of his troops to Liu Zhijun's camp to surrender.

古文：岐王置翟州于鄜城，其守将亦降。
现代文：岐王李茂贞在城设置翟州，守城的将领也投降了刘知俊。
English: The king of Qi, Li Maozhen, set up a garrison in the city, and the general who guarded the city also surrendered to Liu Zhijun.

古文：三月，甲戌，帝发洛阳。
现代文：三月，甲戌，后梁太祖自洛阳出发。
English: In March, Jiaxuan and Houliang Taizu set off from Luoyang.

古文：以山南东道节度使杨师厚兼潞州四面行营招讨使。
现代文：任命山南东道节度使杨师厚兼潞州四面行营招讨使。
English: Yang Shihou, the host of the festival in Shannan, was appointed as the envoy.

古文：庚辰，帝至河中，发步骑会高万兴兵取丹、延。
现代文：庚辰，后梁太祖到达河中，征发步兵、骑兵会同高万兴的军队攻取丹州、延州。
English: Geng Chen, after Liang Taizu arrived in the middle of the river, conscripted infantry and cavalry would join Gao Wanxing's army to conquer Danzhou and Yanzhou.

古文：丙戌，以朔方节度使兼中书令韩逊为颍川王。
现代文：丙戌，后梁太祖封朔方节度使兼中书令韩逊为颍川王。
English: Later, Liang Taizu appointed Shuo Fang as the envoy of the emperor and ordered Han Xun to be the king of Qianchuan.

古文：逊本灵州牙校，唐末据本镇，前廷因而授以节钺。
现代文：韩逊本是灵州牙校，唐末占据本镇，后梁因而授予旌节仪仗。
English: Hanson was originally a dental school in Lingzhou. At the end of the Tang Dynasty, he occupied the town, and Houliang awarded him the title of "hero of the Spring Festival."

古文：辛卯，丹州刺史崔公实请降。
现代文：辛卯，丹州刺史崔公实请求投降。
English: Xinwu, Danzhou assassin Cui Gongsheng requests surrender.

古文：徐温以金陵形胜，战舰所聚，乃自以淮南行军副使领升州刺史，留广陵，以其假子元从指挥使知诰为升州队遏兼楼船副使，往治之。
现代文：徐温认为金陵地势优越，战船聚集，于是自己以淮南行军副使兼领升州刺史，留驻广陵，任命他的养子元从指挥使徐知诰为州防遏兼楼船副使，前去治理州。
English: Xu Wen thought that Jinling had a superior terrain and warships gathered there, so he himself stayed in Guangling as the deputy envoy of the Huainan Campaign and the leader of the Shengzhou Expedition, and appointed his adopted son Yuan as the commander and envoy Xu Zhixuan as the deputy envoy of the state prevention and control and the building ship, and went to govern the state.

古文：夏，四月，丙申朔，刘知俊移军攻延州，李延实婴城自守。知俊遣白水镇使刘儒分兵围坊州。
现代文：夏季，四月，丙申朔，刘知俊转移军队攻打延州，李延实环城守御；刘知俊派遣白水镇使刘儒分兵包围坊州。
English: In the summer, in April, Bishenshuo and Liu Zhijun transferred troops to attack Yanzhou, while Li Yanshi surrounded the city and guarded it; Liu Zhijun sent Baishui Town to surround Fangzhou with Liu Ru's detachment.

古文：庚子，以王审知为闽王，刘隐为南平王。
现代文：庚子，后梁太祖封彰武节度使王审知为闽王，清海、静海节度使刘隐为南平主。
English: Geng Zi and Liang Taizu's later ancestor Feng Changwu decreed that Wang Xizhi was the king of Qin, while Qinghai and Jinghai decreed that Liu Yin was the lord of Nanping.

古文：刘知俊克延州，李延实降。
现代文：刘知俊攻克延州，李延实投降。
English: Liu Zhijun conquered Yanzhou, and Li Yanshi surrendered.

古文：淮南兵围苏州，推洞屋攻城，吴越将临海孙琰置轮于竿首，垂纟亘投锥以揭之，攻者尽露，砲至则张网以拒之，淮南人不能克。
现代文：淮南军队包围苏州，推着用木架支撑、覆罩牛皮、形状如洞的洞屋攻城，吴越将领临海人孙琰在竹竿顶端安置滑轮，垂长索投锥把洞屋戳穿掀开，攻城的淮南军队便完全暴露了，炮石打来就张网拦阻，淮南军队不能攻克。
English: The Huainan army encircled Suzhou and attacked the city by pushing a cave-like structure supported by a wooden frame and covered with cowhide. The Wuyue general and frontiersman Sun Qian placed a pulley at the top of the bamboo pole, and a long rope and a cone pierced and opened the cave. The Huainan army attacking the city was completely exposed. When the cannonballs hit, a net was set up to block them, and the Huainan army could not be defeated.

古文：吴越王镠遣牙内指挥使钱镖、行军副使杜建徽等将兵救之。
现代文：吴越王钱派遣牙内指挥使钱镖、行军副使杜建徽等率兵救援苏州。
English: Wu Yue Wang Qian dispatched Fang Nai commander Qian Dart and deputy envoy Du Jianhui to lead the troops to rescue Suzhou.

古文：苏州有水通城中，淮南张网缀铃悬水中，鱼鳖过皆知之。
现代文：苏州有水通城中，淮南军队张网挂铃悬在水中，鱼鳖通过都能知道。
English: In the city of Suzhou with water passage, the Huainan army hung a net hanging bell in the water, which can be known through the fish gills.

古文：吴越游弈都虞候司马福欲潜行入城，故以竿触网，敌闻铃声举网，福因得过，凡居水中三日，乃得入城。
现代文：吴越游弈都虞候司马福欲潜水前行入城，故意用竿触网；淮南兵听到铃声举起网来，司马福因此能够通过，一共在水中待了三天，才得进入城里。
English: Sima Fu, who wanted to dive into the city, deliberately used a rod to touch the net; Huainan soldiers heard the bell and raised the net, so Sima Fu was able to pass. He stayed in the water for a total of three days before entering the city.

古文：由是城中号令与援兵相应，敌以为神。
现代文：从此，城中号令与援兵相应，淮南军队以为神奇莫测。
English: From then on, the signal in the city corresponded to the reinforcement, and the Huainan army thought it was unpredictable.

古文：吴越王镠尝游府园，见园卒陆仁章树艺有智而志之，及苏州被围，使仁章通信入城，果得报而返。
现代文：吴越王钱曾经到府园游玩，看见园丁陆仁章种植花草树木有智谋，就记住了他；等到苏州被围，让陆仁章送信到城里，果然得到答复就回来了。
English: King Qian of Wuyue once visited the palace garden, and when he saw the gardener Lu Renzhang planting flowers and trees, he remembered him. When Suzhou was besieged, he asked Lu Renzhang to send a message to the city, and when he got a reply, he returned.

古文：镠以诸孙畜之，累迁两府军粮都监使，卒获其用。
现代文：钱把陆仁章收作孙子教养，屡次升到两府军粮都监使，终于派上用场。
English: Qian collected Lu Renzhang as his grandson's upbringing, and was repeatedly promoted to inspector of military grain in the two prefectures, and finally came in handy.

古文：仁章，睦州人也。
现代文：陆仁章是睦州人。
English: Lu Renzhang is from Mutsu Province.

古文：辛亥，吴越兵内外合击淮南兵，大破之，擒其将何朗等三十馀人，夺战舰二百艘。
现代文：辛亥，吴越军队内外合击淮南军队，把他们打得大败，生擒淮南将领何朗等三十余人，夺取战般二百艘。
English: In Xinhai, the Wu Yue army fought against the Huainan army inside and outside, and defeated them. More than 30 people, including the Huainan general He Lang, were captured, and 200 ships were captured.

古文：周本夜遁，又追败之于皇天荡。
现代文：周本乘夜逃走，吴越军队追到皇天荡又把周本打败。
English: Zhou Ben fled by night, and the Wu Yue army chased him to the Imperial Palace and defeated Zhou Ben.

古文：钟泰章将精兵二百为殿，多树旗帜于菰蒋中，追兵不敢进而还。
现代文：淮南钟泰章率领二百精兵走在队伍的最后，在菰草中竖立很多旗帜，吴越的追兵不敢前进而返回。
English: Huainan Zhong Taizhang led 200 elite soldiers to walk at the end of the line, and erected many flags in the reeds. Wu Yue's pursuers did not dare to advance and returned.

古文：岐王所署保大节度使李彦博、坊州刺史李彦昱皆弃城奔凤翔，鄜州都将严弘倚举城降。
现代文：岐王节茂贞任命的保大节度使李彦博、坊州刺史李彦昱都弃城逃往风翔，州都将严弘倚率城投降。
English: The Great Protection Festival appointed by King Maozhen on the King's Day caused Li Yanbo and Bo Zhou scribe Li Yanqi to abandon the city and flee to Fengxiang, and the state surrendered the city under the leadership of Yan Hong.

古文：己未，以高万兴为保塞节度使，以绛州刺史牛存节为保大节度使。
现代文：已未，后梁任命高万兴为保塞节度使，任命绛州刺史牛存节为保大节度使。
English: In the past, Hou Liang appointed Gao Wanxing as the envoy of the Baosai Festival, and appointed Zhangzhou Zhishi Niu Cun Festival as the envoy of the Baosai Festival.

古文：淮南初置选举，以骆知祥掌之。
现代文：淮南开始建立选拔官吏的制度，任命骆知祥掌管。
English: Huainan began to establish a system for selecting officials and appointed Luo Zhixiang to be in charge.

古文：五月，丁卯，帝命刘知俊乘胜取邠州，知俊难之，辞以阙食，乃召还。
现代文：五月丁卯，后梁太祖命令刘知俊乘胜攻取州。刘知俊认为难以攻取，以缺少军粮为借口推辞，于是将他召回。
English: At the end of May, Emperor Taizu ordered Liu Zhijun to take advantage of the victory to capture the state. Liu Zhijun thought it was difficult to capture, but he refused on the pretext of a lack of military rations, so he was recalled.

古文：佑国节度使王重师镇长安数年，帝在河中，怒其贡奉不时，己巳，召重师入朝，以左龙虎统军刘捍为佑国留后。
现代文：佑国节度使王重师镇守长安数年，后梁太祖在河中，对他不按时进贡感到恼怒。已巳，召王重师到朝廷来，委任左龙虎统军刘捍为佑国留后。
English: Wang Chongshi had been appointed to guard Chang'an for several years during the National Day celebrations. Later, when Liang Taizu was in the middle of the river, he became angry at Wang Chongshi for not paying tribute on time. Wang Chongshi was summoned to the imperial court and Liu Han, the leader of the United Left and Right Armies, was appointed to guard the country.

古文：癸酉，帝发河中；己卯，至洛阳。
现代文：癸酉，后梁太祖自河中出发；已卯，回到洛阳。
English: Soon after, Liang Taizu set out from the middle of the river; he returned to Luoyang.

古文：刘捍至长安，王重师不为礼，捍谮之于帝，云重师潜与邠、岐通。
现代文：刘捍到长安，王重师不以礼相待，刘捍向后梁太祖中伤他，说王重师暗中与州、岐州互相往来。
English: When Liu Han went to Chang'an, Wang Chongshi did not treat him with courtesy, and Liu Han slandered him to the late Liang Taizu, saying that Wang Chongshi secretly interacted with Shuzhou and Qizhou.

古文：甲申，贬重师溪州刺史，寻赐自尽，夷其族。
现代文：甲申，贬王重师为溪州刺史，不久赐令自尽，诛杀他的全族。
English: Jiaxin denounced Wang Chongshi as a traitor to Xizhou and soon ordered him to commit suicide, killing his entire family.

古文：刘守文频年攻刘守光不克，力大发兵，以重赂招契丹、吐谷浑之众，合四万屯蓟州。
现代文：刘守文连年攻打刘守光不能攻下，于是大发兵，用重贿招致契丹、吐谷浑的兵众，合计四万人马驻扎蓟州。
English: Liu Shouwen had been attacking Liu Shouguang for years and was unable to capture him, so he sent out a large army and used heavy bribes to invite soldiers from Khitan and Tugukhun, with a total of 40,000 men stationed in Zhangzhou.

古文：守光逆战于鸡苏，为守文所败。
现代文：刘守光在鸡苏迎战，被刘守文打败。
English: Liu Shouguang fought in Jiangsu Province and was defeated by Liu Shouwen.

古文：守文单马立于陈前，泣谓其众曰： 勿杀吾弟！ 
现代文：刘守文单马立在阵前，器着对他的部众说： 不要杀死我的弟弟。 
English: Liu Shouwen stood alone at the front of the battle and said to his subordinates: Don't kill my brother.

古文：守光将元行钦识之，直前擒之，沧德兵皆溃。
现代文：刘守光的部将元行钦认淮刘守文，直冲向前反他擒住，沧德军队全部溃散。
English: Liu Shou-Kwang's troops recognized Huai Liu Shou-Wen as the general of the Yuan Dynasty, and rushed forward to fight against him. All of Cangde's troops were dispersed.

古文：守光囚之别室，栫之藂棘，乘胜进攻沧州。
现代文：刘守光把刘守文囚禁别室，用丛棘堵塞，乘胜进攻沧州。
English: Liu Shouguang imprisoned Liu Shouwen in a separate room, blocked it with a bunch of thorns, and attacked Cangzhou.

古文：沧州节度判宫吕兗、孙鹤推守文子延祚为帅，乘城拒守。
现代文：沧州节度判官吕兖、孙鹤推举刘守文的儿子的刘延祚为帅，登城抗御防守。
English: The judges of the Cangzhou Festival, Lv Ying and Sun He, nominated Liu Yanqi, the son of Liu Shouwen, as the best, and he went to the city to resist the defense.

古文：兗，安次人也。
现代文：吕兖是安次人。
English: Lyu Hao is from Anji.

古文：忠武节度使兼侍中刘知俊，功名浸盛，以帝猜忍日甚，内不自安。及王重师诛，知俊益惧。
现代文：忠武节度使兼侍中刘知俊，功绩名声逐渐盛大，由于后梁太祖猜疑残忍日益厉害，内心里感到自己不安全；等到王重师被杀，刘知俊更加恐惧。
English: Liu Zhijun, a loyal military commander and attendant, gradually became famous for his great achievements. As Emperor Liang's suspicions and cruelty became more and more severe, he felt insecure in his heart. When Wang Chongshi was killed, Liu Zhijun was even more afraid.

古文：帝将伐河东，急征知俊入朝，欲以为河东西面行营都统；且以知俊有丹、延之功，厚赐之。
现代文：太祖将要讨伐河东，紧急征召刘知俊到朝廷来，想要任命他担任河东西面行营都统。并且因为刘知俊有攻取丹州、延州的功劳，要重赏他。
English: The great-grandfather was going to fight in the east of the river, and urgently summoned Liu Zhijun to the imperial court, wanting to appoint him as the commander of the east and west of the river. And because Liu Zhijun had the merit of conquering Danzhou and Yanzhou, he wanted to reward him.

古文：知俊弟右保胜指挥使知浣从帝在洛阳，密使人语知俊云： 入必死。 
现代文：刘知俊的弟弟右保胜指挥使刘知浣跟随太祖在洛阳，秘密派人告诉刘知俊说： 到朝廷来一定死。 
English: Liu Zhijun's younger brother, Yu Baosheng, ordered Liu Zhijun to follow his grandfather in Luoyang. He secretly sent someone to tell Liu Zhijun: "If you come to the imperial court, you will surely die."

古文：又白帝，请帅弟侄往迎知俊，帝许之。
现代文：又禀告太祖，请求率领弟侄前去迎接刘知俊，太祖允许了他。
English: He also reported to the great-grandfather and asked him to lead his brother and nephew to meet Liu Zhijun. The great-grandfather allowed him.

古文：六月，乙未朔，知俊奏称 为军民所留 ，遂以同州附于岐，执监军及将佐之不从者，皆械送于岐。
现代文：六月，乙未朔，刘知俊奏称 为军民所留 ，于是带领同州军民归附岐王李茂贞。拘捕监军及不听从的将佐，全都戴上刑具押送凤翔。
English: In June, Liu Zhijun said that he was left behind by the military and the people, so he led the military and the people of the same state to the king of Qi, Li Maozhen. The arresting troops and the disobedient generals all put on the torture equipment to escort Fengxiang.

古文：遣兵袭华州，逐刺史蔡敬思，以兵守潼关。
现代文：刘知俊派兵袭击华州，驱逐刺史蔡敬思，守卫潼关。
English: Liu Zhijun sent troops to attack Huazhou, expel the assassin Cai Jingsi, and guard Shaoguan.

古文：潜遣人以重利啖长安诸将，执刘捍，送于岐，杀之。
现代文：暗中派人用重利引诱长安诸将，逮捕刘捍，送往凤翔，把他杀了。
English: He secretly sent someone to lure Chang'an generals with heavy interest, arrest Liu Han, send him to Fengxiang, and kill him.

古文：知俊遣使请兵于岐，亦遣使请晋人出兵攻晋、绛，遗晋王书曰： 不过旬日，可取两京，复唐社稷。 
现代文：刘知俊派遣使者向岐王李茂贞请兵，也派使者前往晋阳请求出兵攻打晋州、绛州，送给晋王李存勖的信中说： 不过十天，可以攻取两京，恢复唐室社稷。 
English: Liu Zhijun sent an envoy to the king of Qi, Li Maozhen, to solicit soldiers, and also sent an envoy to Jinyang to request the dispatch of troops to attack Jinzhou and Zhangzhou. In a letter sent to the king of Jin, Li Cunxu, he said: However, in ten days, it is possible to capture the two capitals and restore the Tang Dynasty.

古文：丁未，朔方节度使韩逊奏克盐城，斩岐所署刺史李继直。
现代文：丁未，朔方节度使韩逊奏报攻克盐州，斩岐王李茂贞任命的盐州刺史李继直。
English: Ding Wei, Shuo Fang and Sheng Du made Hansong report to conquer Yanzhou, and cut off the Yanzhou assassin Li Jizhong, who was appointed by King Li Maozhen.

古文：帝遣近臣谕刘知俊曰： 朕待卿甚厚，何忽相负？ 
现代文：后梁太祖派遣新近官员告谕刘知俊说： 朕待你甚厚，为什么忽然背弃？ 
English: After Liang Taizu dispatched a new official to tell Liu Zhijun: "I treat you very well, why do you suddenly turn your back on me?

古文：对曰： 臣不背德，但畏族灭如王重师耳。 
现代文：刘知俊回答说： 我不会忘记恩德，只是畏惧像王重师那样被诛灭全族罢了。 
English: Liu Zhijun replied, "I won't forget the kindness, I'm just afraid of being annihilated like Wang Chongshi.

古文：帝复使谓之曰： 刘捍言重师阴结邠、岐，朕今悔之无及，捍死不足塞责。 
现代文：太祖又派使者对他说： 刘捍说王重师暗中交结州、岐州，朕现在后悔不及，刘捍死了不足偿还罪责。 
English: The great-grandfather also sent an emissary to him, saying: Liu Han said that Wang Chongshi secretly crossed the state and Qizhou, I now regret it, Liu Han died short of repaying the guilt.

古文：知俊不报。
现代文：刘知俊没有答复。
English: Liu Zhijun did not reply.

古文：庚戌，诏削知俊官爵，以山南东道节度使杨师厚为西路行营招讨使，帅侍卫马步军都指挥使刘鄩等讨之。
现代文：庚戌，太祖降诏革除刘知俊官职爵位，任命山南东道节度使杨师厚为西路行营招讨使，率领侍卫马步军都指挥使刘等讨伐刘知俊。
English: Geng Zheng, the great-grandfather, demoted Liu Zhijun from the rank of official to knight, appointed Yang Shihou as the envoy to the west road campaign, and led the guards and horse infantry to command Liu to fight against Liu Zhijun.

古文：辛亥，帝发洛阳。
现代文：辛亥，后梁太祖自洛阳出发。
English: In Xinhai, Houliang Taizu set off from Luoyang.

古文：刘鄩至潼关东，获刘知俊伏路兵蔺如诲等三十人，释之使为前导。
现代文：刘到达潼关东，俘获刘知俊埋伏在路上侦察敌人的兵士蔺如海等三十人，把他们释放，让他们在前面当向导。
English: Liu arrived in Shigatse Kanto, captured Liu Zhijun and thirty other soldiers who were lying in wait on the road to spy on the enemy, released them, and let them act as guides in front.

古文：刘知浣迷失道，盘桓数日，乃至关下，关吏纳之。
现代文：刘知俊的弟弟刘知浣途中迷了路，徘徊数日，才到潼关下，关吏把他们放进关去。
English: Liu Zhijun's younger brother, Liu Zhisheng, lost his way on the way and wandered for several days before reaching Shouguan. The customs officers put them in the detention center.

古文：如海等继至，关吏不知其已被擒，亦纳之。
现代文：蔺如海等接着到了，关吏不知道他们已经被擒，也把他们放进关去。
English: The customs officers did not know that they had been arrested and put them in the same cell.

古文：鄩兵乘门开直进，遂克潼关，追及知浣，擒之。
现代文：刘的军队趁着关门打开，径直前进，于是夺取了潼关，追上刘知浣，把他擒住。
English: Liu's army took advantage of the opening of the closed door and went straight ahead, so they captured Shouguan, caught up with Liu Zhisheng and choked him.

古文：癸丑，帝至陕。
现代文：癸丑，后梁太祖到达陕州。
English: Ugly, after Liang Taizu arrived in Shaanxi.

古文：丹州马军都头王行思等作乱，刺史宋知海逃归。
现代文：丹州马军都头王行思等发动叛乱，丹州刺史宋知诲逃回。
English: Danzhou's horse army, led by Wang Xingsi, launched a rebellion, and Danzhou's Zhang Shi and Song Zhiyun fled back.

古文：帝遣刘知俊侄嗣业持诏指同州招谕知俊，知俊欲轻骑诣行在谢罪，弟知偃止之。
现代文：后梁太祖派遣刘知俊的侄子刘嗣业持诏前往同州招抚谕示刘知俊；刘知俊想要轻骑前往太祖的住地自认罪过，他的弟弟刘知偃阻止他。
English: Later, Liang Taizu sent Liu Zhijun's nephew Liu Shigeye with an imperial edict to go to the same state to invite Liu Zhijun; Liu Zhijun wanted to ride to the residence of Taizu and confessed his guilt, but his brother Liu Zhisheng stopped him.

古文：杨师厚等至华州，知俊将聂赏开门降。
现代文：杨师厚等到达华州，刘知俊的部将聂赏打开城门投降。
English: Yang Shihou and others arrived in Huazhou, and Liu Zhijun's troops opened the city gate and surrendered.

古文：知俊闻潼关不守，官军继至，苍黄失图，乙卯夜，举族奔岐。
现代文：刘知俊听说潼关没有守住，官兵接连到来，匆忙慌张失去了主意，乙卯夜里，带领全族投奔岐州。
English: Liu Zhijun heard that Shaoguan was not defended, officers and soldiers came one after another, he lost his mind in a hurry, and in the middle of the night, he led the whole family to Qizhou.

古文：杨师厚至长安，岐兵已据城，师厚以奇兵并南山急趋，自西门入，遂克之。
现代文：杨师厚到长安，岐兵已经占据长安城，机师厚率奇兵沿南山急趋直下，自西门入城，于是攻占了长安。
English: Yang Shihou went to Chang'an, Qibing had already occupied Chang'an City, and the pilot Hukou led the soldiers down along Nanshan and entered the city from the West Gate, thus capturing Chang'an.

古文：庚申，以刘鄩权佑国留后。
现代文：庚申，委任刘代理佑国留后。
English: Koshin, after appointing Liu as acting governor.

古文：岐王厚礼刘知俊，以为中书令。
现代文：岐王李茂贞对刘知俊厚礼相待，任命他为中书令。
English: The king of Qi, Li Maozhen, treated Liu Zhijun with great courtesy and appointed him as the second-in-command.

古文：地狭，无籓镇处之，但厚给俸禄而已。
现代文：岐州地域狭窄，没有藩镇安置他，只是厚给俸禄罢了。
English: The area of Qizhou is narrow, and there is no hanzhen to resettle him, but it is just a thick salary.

古文：刘守光遣使上表告捷，且言 俟沧德事毕，为陛下扫平并寇。 
现代文：刘守光派遣使者上表报捷，并且说 等到沧德事情完了，为陛下扫平并州敌寇 。
English: Liu Shouguang sent an envoy to report the victory, and said that when the vicissitudes of history were over, he would sweep up and annex the state for his majesty.

古文：亦致书晋王，云欲与之同破伪梁。
现代文：刘守光也送信给晋王李存勖，说想要与他共同消灭伪梁。
English: Liu Shuguang also sent a message to the Jin king Li Cunxu, saying that he wanted to work with him to eliminate the false beams.

古文：抚州刺史危全讽自称镇南节度使，帅抚、信、袁、吉之兵号十万攻洪州。
现代文：抚州刺史危全讽自称镇南节度使，率领抚、信、袁、吉四州的军队号称十万进攻洪州。
English: Fuzhou Zhishi Guzheng ironically claimed to be the envoy of Zhenan Festival, and led the army of Fuzhou, Xin, Yuan and Ji four states to attack Hongzhou with 100,000 troops.

古文：淮南守兵才千人，将吏皆惧，节度使刘威密遣使告急于广陵，日召僚佐宴饮。
现代文：淮南守兵才一千人，将吏都畏惧害怕，节度使刘威秘密派遣使者到广陵告急求援，自己每天召集属下将吏宴饮。
English: The Huainan garrison was only a thousand strong, and the generals were all afraid of him. Liu Wei secretly sent an envoy to Guangling to seek urgent help, and he gathered his subordinates and generals for a banquet every day.

古文：全讽闻之，屯象牙潭，不敢进，请兵于楚，楚王殷遣指挥使苑玫会袁州刺史彭彦章围高安以助全讽。
现代文：危全讽听说这情况，驻扎在象牙潭，不敢前进，向楚请求增兵。楚王马殷派遣指挥使苑玫会同袁州刺史彭彦章包围高安来援助危全讽。
English: Upon hearing of this, King Ma Yin of Chu, who was stationed at Ivory Pool, did not dare to advance and asked Chu for more troops. King Ma Yin dispatched the commanding envoy Yuan Mei He and Yuan Zhou's aide Peng Yan Zhang to encircle Gao'an to aid King Gao.

古文：玫，蔡州人；彦章，玕之兄子也。
现代文：苑玫是蔡州人；彭彦章是彭亲兄的儿子。
English: Yuanmei is from Caizhou; Peng Yanzhang is the son of Peng's brother.

古文：徐温问将于严可求，可求荐周本。
现代文：徐温向严可求询问将领人选，严可求荐举周本。
English: Xu Wen asked Yan Ke to inquire about the general's candidate, and Yan Ke to recommend Zhou Ben.

古文：乃以本为西南面行营招讨应援使，将兵七千救高安。
现代文：于是，任命周本为西南面行营招讨应援使，率兵七千援救高安。
English: As a result, Zhou Ben was appointed as the envoy to the southwest to recruit reinforcements, and led seven thousand soldiers to rescue Gao An.

古文：本以前攻苏州无功，称疾不出，可求即其卧内强起之。
现代文：周本以前攻苏州没有立功，声称有病不出，严可求到他的卧室内强迫他起来。
English: Zhou Ben had not made any contribution to the attack on Suzhou before, claiming that he was ill and could not get up. Yan could go to his bedroom and force him to get up.

古文：本曰： 苏州之役，敌不能胜我，但主将权轻耳。
现代文：周本说： 苏州这场战役，敌人不能战胜我，只是主将权轻罢了。
English: Zhou Ben said: In this battle of Suzhou, the enemy cannot defeat me, but the commander is powerless.

古文：今必见用，愿毋置副贰乃可。 
现代文：今天一定要用我，希望不要设置副职才可。 
English: I have to be used today. I hope they don't give me a second job.

古文：可求许之。
现代文：严可求应允了他。
English: Yan Kegui agreed to his request.

古文：本曰： 楚人为全讽声援耳，非欲取高安也。
现代文：周本说： 楚兵为危全讽声援罢了，不是要取高安。
English: Zhou Ben said: Chu soldiers are just showing solidarity for the crisis, not to take high security.

古文：吾败全讽，援兵必还。 
现代文：我打败危全讽，援兵必然撤回。 
English: I defeated the danger, and the reinforcements were inevitably withdrawn.

古文：乃疾趣象牙潭。
现代文：于是急速奔赴象牙潭。
English: So he hurried to the Ivory Pool.

古文：过洪州。刘威欲犒军，本不肯留。或曰： 全讽兵强，君宜观形势然后进。 
现代文：经过洪州，刘威想要犒劳军队，周本不肯停留，有人说： 危全调兵强，您应当观察形势然后再前进。 
English: After passing through Hongzhou, Liu Wei wanted to reward the labor of the army, Zhou Ben did not want to stay. Some people said: "Dangerous full transfer of troops, you should observe the situation and then advance."

古文：本曰： 贼众十倍于我，我军闻之必惧，不若乘其锐而用之。 
现代文：周本说： 贼众比我多十倍，我军听说这情况一定畏惧，不如乘他们锐气旺盛使用他们。 
English: Zhou Ben said, "There are ten times more thieves than me. Our army must be afraid of this situation. It is better to use them vigorously.

古文：秋，七月，甲子，以刘守光为燕王。
现代文：秋季，七月甲子，后梁太祖封授刘守光为燕王。
English: In the autumn, in July, Liu Shouguang was awarded the title of "King of Swallows" by Emperor Liang.

古文：梁兵克丹州，擒王行思。
现代文：后梁兵攻下丹州，生擒王行思。
English: After Liang's soldiers conquered Danzhou, Wang Xingxi was still alive.

古文：商州刺史李稠驱士民西走，将吏追斩之，推都押牙李玫主州事。
现代文：商州刺史李稠驱赶士民向西逃跑，商州将吏追赶并把他们斩杀，推举商州都押牙李玟主持州事。
English: Li Chuxiu, the sheriff of Shangzhou, drove the nobles and commoners to flee to the west. The sheriff of Shangzhou chased the officials and killed them. The sheriff of Shangzhou selected Li Jia to preside over the affairs of the state.

古文：庚午，改佑国军曰永平。
现代文：庚午，后梁太祖改佑国军为永平。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, Houliang Taizu blessed the national army as Yongping.

古文：河东兵寇晋州，抄掠至尧祠而去。
现代文：河东军队进犯晋州，抄没抢掠到达尧祠而离去。
English: The troops from Hedong invaded Jinzhou. They did not loot or plunder anything, but arrived at the Ancestral Hall and left.

古文：癸酉，帝发陕州，乙亥，至洛阳，寝疾。
现代文：癸酉，后梁太祖自陕州出发；乙亥，回到洛阳，患病卧床。
English: , after Liang Taizu departed from Shaanxi; 乙亥, returned to Luoyang, sick in bed.

古文：初，帝召山南东道节度使杨师厚，欲使督诸将攻潞州，以前兗海留后王班为留后，镇襄州。
现代文：当初，后梁太祖召山南东道节度使杨师厚，想要让他督率诸将攻打潞州，委任前兖海留后王班为山南东道留后，镇守襄州。
English: At first, Emperor Taizu summoned Yang Shihou from Shannan to be the host of the festival, and wanted him to lead the generals to attack Zhangzhou. After appointing Wang Ban, who had previously stayed in Bohai, to be the host of Shannan, he stayed in Xiangzhou.

古文：师厚屡为班言牙兵王求等凶悍，宜备之，班自恃左右有壮士，不以为意，每众辱之。
现代文：杨师厚屡次对王班说牙兵王求等凶猛强悍，应当防备他们，王班自恃左右有壮士，不以为意，往往当众侮辱他们。
English: Yang Shihou repeatedly said to Wang Ban that soldiers such as Wang Cuo were fierce and strong, and that they should beware of them. Wang Ban thought that there were strong men around him, but he often insulted them in public.

古文：戊寅，谪求戍西境，是夕，作乱，杀班，推都指挥使雍丘刘玘为留后。玘伪从之，明日，与指挥使王延顺逃诣帝所。
现代文：戊寅，把王求流放到西部边境戍守，当天晚上，王求等发动叛乱，杀王班，推举都指挥使雍丘人刘为留后；刘假装依从他们，第二天，与指挥使王延顺逃往后梁太祖那里。
English: Wu Yin exiled Wang Qiu to the western border to guard it. That evening, Wang Qiu and others launched a rebellion, killed Wang Ban, and ordered the Yongqiu people Liu to stay behind; Liu pretended to obey them, and the next day, he and the commander ordered Wang Yanshun to flee to Houliang Taizu.

古文：乱兵奉平淮指挥使李洪为留后，附于蜀。
现代文：乱兵拥奉平淮指挥使李洪为留后，归附前蜀主王建。
English: After the disorderly soldiers followed the command of Pinghuai to make Li Hong stay, it was annexed by the former Shu lord Wang Jian.

古文：未几，房州刺史杨虔亦叛附于蜀。
现代文：过了不久，房州刺史杨虔也叛梁附蜀。
English: Soon after, Yang Qian also defected to Shu.

古文：危全讽在象牙潭，营栅临溪，亘数千里。
现代文：危全讽在象牙潭，临溪营建栅栏，连绵数十里。
English: Irony of ironies, in Ivory Pool, Linxi built a fence, stretching for dozens of miles.

古文：庚辰，周本隔溪布陈，先使羸兵尝敌。全讽兵涉溪追之，本乘其半济，纵兵击之，全讽兵大溃，自相蹂藉，溺水死者甚众，本分兵断其归路，擒全讽及将士五千人。
现代文：庚辰，周本隔着溪水列阵，先派瘦弱兵卒挑战试敌；危全讽的军队徒步渡溪追赶，周本乘他们渡到一半，发兵攻击；危全讽的军队大败，自相践踏，溺水死的人很多，周本分兵断绝他们的归路，生擒危全讽及将士五千人。
English: Geng Chen, Zhou Ben, lined up across the stream, first sent his thin soldiers to challenge and test the enemy; the dangerous army chased them on foot across the stream, Zhou Ben took them halfway across and launched an attack; the dangerous army was defeated, trampled on each other, and many people drowned, Zhou Ben's detachment cut off their way back, and the lives of 5,000 soldiers were in danger.

古文：乘胜克袁州，执刺史彭彦章，进攻吉州，歙州刺史陶雅使其子敬昭及都指挥使徐章将兵袭饶、信，信州刺史危仔倡请降，饶州刺史唐宝弃城走。
现代文：周本率兵乘胜攻克袁州，逮住袁州刺史彭彦章，进攻吉州。歙州刺史陶雅派他的儿子陶敬昭及都指挥使徐章率兵袭击饶州、信州，信州刺史危仔倡请求投降，饶州刺史唐玉弃城逃走。
English: Zhou Ben led the troops to take advantage of the victory to conquer Yuanzhou, arrest Yuanzhou assassin Peng Yan Zhang, and attack Jizhou. Zhangzhou assassin Tao Ya sent his son Tao Jing Zhao and Du Du to command Xu Zhang to lead the troops to attack Raozhou and Shinshou. Shinshou assassin Wei Zi advocated surrender, and Raozhou assassin Tang Yu abandoned the city and fled.

古文：行营都指挥使米志诚、都尉吕师造等败苑玫于上高。
现代文：行营都指挥使米志诚、都尉吕师造等在上高打败苑玫。
English: The commanding officer of the encampment sent Mi Zhicheng, captain Lu Shizhuo and others to defeat Yuan Mei at Shanggao.

古文：吉州刺史彭玕帅众数千人奔楚，楚王殷表玕为郴州刺史，为子希范娶其女。
现代文：吉州刺史彭率众数千人逃奔到楚，楚王马殷上表委任彭为郴州刺史，并为自己的儿子马希范娶彭的女儿为妻。
English: The king of Chu, Ma Yin, appointed Peng to be the governor of Zhangzhou and married Peng's daughter to his son, Ma Xi Fan.

古文：淮南以左先锋指挥使张景思知信州，遣行营都虞候骨言将兵五千送之。
现代文：淮南委任左先锋指挥使张景思为信州刺史，派遣行营都虞候骨言率兵五千人送他赴任。
English: Huainan appointed the left vanguard commander to make Zhang Jingsi the history of Shinshu, and dispatched the commander-in-chief of the camp to lead five thousand soldiers to send him to the post.

古文：危仔倡闻兵至，奔吴越，吴越王镠以仔倡为淮南节度副使，更其姓曰元氏。
现代文：危仔倡听说淮南军队到了，逃奔吴越，吴越王钱任命危仔倡为淮南节度副使，改他的姓为元氏。
English: He heard that the Huainan army had arrived and fled to Wuyue. King Qian of Wuyue appointed him as the deputy envoy of Huainan Festival and changed his surname to Yuan.

古文：危全讽至广陵，弘农王以其尝有德于武忠王，释之，资给甚厚。
现代文：危全讽到广陵，弘农王杨隆演以他曾经对武忠王杨行密有恩德，把他释放，供给很丰厚。
English: When the crisis reached Guangling, Yang Longyan, the King of Hongnong, said that he had been kind to Yang Xing, the King of Wuchong, and had released him. The supplies were plentiful.

古文：八月，虔州刺史卢光稠以州附于淮南。
现代文：八月，虔州刺史卢光稠率州归附淮南。
English: In August, Qianzhou Zhishulu light density state was annexed to Huainan.

古文：于是江西之地尽入于杨氏。
现代文：于是，江西之地尽为杨氏所有。
English: As a result, the land of Jiangxi was entirely owned by the Yang family.

古文：光稠亦遣使附于梁。
现代文：卢光稠也派遣使者向后梁称臣归附。
English: Lu Guangxu also sent an envoy to the rear claiming that the subject had been annexed.

古文：甲寅，上疾小瘳，始复视朝。
现代文：甲寅，后梁太祖病稍愈，开始恢复临朝听政。
English: A Yin, after Liang Taizu's illness was slightly healed, began to resume listening to politics in the Lin Dynasty.

古文：以镇国节度使康怀贞为西路行营副招讨使。
现代文：后梁任命镇国节度使康怀贞为西路行营副招讨使。
English: Hou Liang appointed Zhenguo Jiedu to make Kang Huai Zhen the deputy recruiting envoy for the West Road Campaign.

古文：蜀主命太子宗懿判六军，开永和府，妙选朝士为僚属。
现代文：前蜀主王建命太子王宗懿管领六军，设置永和府，精选朝中官吏担任属官。
English: Former Prince of Shu, Wang Jianmin, and Prince Wang Zongtao led the Six Armies, set up Yonghe Prefecture, and selected officials from the court to serve as subordinate officers.

古文：辛酉，均州刺史张敬方奏克房州。
现代文：辛酉，均州刺史张敬方奏报攻克房州。
English: Xin Xin, the history of Jinshou, Zhang Jing's report on conquering Fuzhou.

古文：岐王欲遣刘知俊将兵攻灵、夏，且约晋王使攻晋、绛。
现代文：岐王李茂贞想要派遣刘知俊率领军队攻灵州、夏州，并且约晋王李存勖让他进攻晋州、绛州。
English: The king of Qi, Li Maozhen, wanted to send Liu Zhijun to lead an army to attack Lingzhou and Xiazhou, and the king of Jin, Li Cunxu, wanted him to attack Jinzhou and Zhangzhou.

古文：晋王引兵南下，先遣周德威等将兵出阴地关攻晋州，刺史边继威悉力固守。
现代文：李存勖率兵南下，先派遣周德威等率领军队出阴地关进攻晋州，晋州刺史边继威全力固守。
English: Li Cunxu led his troops southward, first dispatching Zhou Dewei and other leaders to lead the army to attack Jinzhou from the south, and Jinzhou adhered to it with all its might.

古文：晋兵穿地道，陷城二十馀步，城中血战拒之，一夕城复成。
现代文：晋兵挖穿地道，城墙塌陷二十余步，城中军队血战抵御，一个晚上城墙又修好。
English: Jin soldiers dug through the tunnel, the city wall collapsed more than twenty steps, the army in the city resisted the bloody battle, and the city wall was repaired one night.

古文：诏杨师厚将兵救晋州，周德威以骑扼蒙坑之险，师厚击破之，进抵晋州，晋兵解围遁去。
现代文：后梁太祖诏令杨师厚率兵救援晋州，周德威用骑兵据守地势险要的蒙坑，杨师厚把他们打败，进抵晋州，晋兵解除包围逃走。
English: After Liang Taizu issued an order to Yang Shihou and his soldiers to rescue Jinzhou, Zhou Dewei used cavalry to defend the impending Mengken, Yang Shihou defeated them, arrived in Jinzhou, and the Jin soldiers lifted the siege and fled.

古文：李洪寇荆南，高季昌遣其将倪可福击败之。
现代文：山南东道留后李洪侵犯荆南，荆南节度使高季昌派遣他的部将倪可福把李洪打败。
English: After being hosted by Shannan, Li Hong invaded Jingnan. During the Jingnan Festival, Gao Jichang sent his subordinate Ni Kefu to defeat Li Hong.

古文：诏马步都指挥使陈晖将兵会荆南兵讨洪。
现代文：后梁太祖诏令马步都指挥使陈晖率领军队会同荆南兵讨伐李洪。
English: Later, Liang Taizu ordered Ma Budu to command and make Chen Qi lead the army to fight against Li Hong together with Jing Nan soldiers.

古文：蜀主以御史中丞王锴为中书侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：前蜀主王建任命御史中丞王锴为中书侍郎、同平章事。
English: The former Shu lord Wang Jian appointed the goshi chujo Wang Xi to be the chujo waiter and the peer of the chapter.

古文：陈晖军至襄州，李洪逆战，大败，王求死。
现代文：后梁马步都指挥使陈晖率兵到达襄州，李洪迎战，被打得大败，牙兵王求战死。
English: After Liang Ma stepped in to lead the troops, Chen Qi led the troops to arrive in Xiangzhou, Li Hong went to war and was defeated, and the tooth soldier Wang died in battle.

古文：九月，丁酉，拔其城，斩叛兵千人，执李洪、杨虔等送洛阳，斩之。
现代文：九月丁酉，攻占襄州，斩叛兵一千人，生擒李洪、杨虔等押送洛阳，把他们斩首。
English: In September, Ding Xi captured Xiangzhou and beheaded 1,000 rebels. Li Hong and Yang Qian, who were still alive, were taken to Luoyang and beheaded.

古文：丁未，以保义节度使王檀为潞州东面行营招讨使。
现代文：丁未，后梁任命保义节度使王檀为潞州东面行营招讨使。
English: Ding Wei and Hou Liang appointed Baoyi Jiedu to make Wang Dan the recruiting envoy for the eastern camp of Zhangzhou.

古文：刘守光奏遣其子中军兵马使继威安抚沧州吏民。
现代文：刘守光奏报派遣他的儿子中军兵马使刘继威安抚沧州官吏平民。
English: Liu Shuguang sent his son, the Chinese military commander Liu Jiwei, to pacify the officials and civilians in Cangzhou.

古文：戊申，以继威为义昌留后。
现代文：戊申，委任刘继威为义昌留后。
English: Wushin, after appointing Liu Jiwei to stay in Yichang.

古文：辛亥，侍中韩建罢守太保，左仆射、同平章事杨涉罢守本官。
现代文：辛亥，韩建罢侍中知政事之职而拜太保，左仆射、同平章事杨涉罢同平章事之职任仆射本官。
English: In Xinhai, Han Jian stepped down from the position of vice-governor and minister of state to become Tai Bao, while Zuo Shuai, Tongping Zhangji Yang stepped down from the position of Tongping Zhangji to serve as Shuai's own official.

古文：以太常卿赵光逢为中书侍郎，翰林奉旨工部侍郎杜晓为户部侍郎，并同平章事。
现代文：任命太常卿赵光逢为中书侍郎，翰林奉旨、工部侍郎杜晓为户部侍郎，都为同平章事。
English: The appointment of Grand Secretary Zhao Guangfeng as the secretary of the Central Office, of Hanlin Bongzhi as the secretary of the General Office, and of Du Xiao as the secretary of the General Office of the Ministry of Industry, were all the same.

古文：晓，让能之子也。
现代文：杜晓是杜让能的儿子。
English: Du Xiao is the son of Du Zhenneng.

古文：淮南遣使者张知远修好于福建，知远倨慢，闽王审知斩之，表上其书，始与淮南绝。
现代文：淮南派遣使者张知远到福建建立友好关系。张知远骄横傲慢，闽王王审知把他杀了，并上表把淮南的书信进呈给后梁太祖，后梁开始与淮南断绝关系。
English: Huainan sent an envoy, Zhang Zhiyuan, to Fujian to establish friendly relations. Zhang Zhiyuan was arrogant and haughty. Wang Xizhi killed him and presented Huainan's letter to Houliang Taizu on the table. Houliang began to break off relations with Huainan.

古文：审知性俭约，常蹑麻屦，府舍卑陋，未尝营葺。
现代文：王审知生性俭朴，常穿麻鞋，官府房屋低下简陋，未曾修葺。
English: Wang Xizhi was frugal by nature and often wore hemp shoes. The government buildings were low and simple, and had not been renovated.

古文：宽刑薄赋，公私富实，境内以安。
现代文：刑罚宽大，赋税轻薄，公家私人都富裕充实，境内因此安定。
English: Penalties are lenient, taxes are light, and both the public and private sectors are affluent and prosperous. As a result, the country is stable.

古文：岁自海道登、莱入贡，没溺者什四五。
现代文：每年由海道经登州、莱州进贡物品到大梁，有十之四五的人在海上淹没溺死。
English: Every year, 45 out of every 10 people drowned in the sea from the sea route via the tributary goods of Dangzhou and Laizhou to the girders.

古文：冬，十月，甲子，蜀司天监胡秀林献《永昌历》，行之。
现代文：冬季，十月甲子，前蜀司天监胡秀林呈献《永昌历》，在前蜀通行。
English: In winter, in October, the former Shu governor Hu Xiulin presented the "Yongchang Calendar," which was circulated in the former Shu.

古文：湖州刺史高澧性凶忍，尝召州吏议曰： 吾欲尽杀百姓，可乎？ 
现代文：湖州刺史高澧性情凶暴残忍，曾经召集州吏商议说： 我想要把百姓全部杀死，可以吗？ 
English: Huzhou assassin Gao Yao had a ferocious and cruel disposition. He once called state officials together for consultation and said: "I want to kill all the people, is that okay?

古文：吏曰： 如此，则租赋何从出？
现代文：州吏说： 这样做，田租赋税从哪里出？
English: The state official said, "If we do this, where will the land rent and taxes come from?

古文：当择可杀者杀之耳。 
现代文：应当只是选择可以杀的人把他杀死罢了。 
English: You just have to choose someone you can kill and kill him.

古文：时澧纠民为兵，有言其咨怨者，澧悉集民兵于开元寺，绐云犒享，入则杀之，死者逾半；在外者觉之，纵火作乱。
现代文：当时高澧纠集百姓当兵，有人说他们叹息抱怨，高澧把民兵全部集中到开元寺，欺骗说是犒劳款待，进入寺内就把他们杀死；杀死的人超过一半，在寺外的人发觉了，放火作乱。
English: At that time, Gao Kun rallied the people to become soldiers. Some people said that they were sighing and complaining. Gao Kun gathered all the militia to Kaiyuan Temple, deceiving them into thinking that they were being entertained, and killed them when they entered the temple. More than half of the people were killed, and when people outside the temple found out, they started a fire.

古文：澧闭城大索，凡杀三千人。
现代文：高澧关闭城门大肆搜索，总共杀了三千人。
English: Gao Gan closed the city gate and searched wildly, killing a total of three thousand people.

古文：吴越王镠欲诛之，戊辰，澧以州叛附于淮南，举兵焚义和临平镇，镠命指挥使钱镖讨之。
现代文：吴越王钱想要杀死他，戊辰，高澧率州叛变归附淮南，发兵焚烧义和临平镇，钱命令指挥使钱镖前去讨伐他。
English: The king of Wuyue, Qian, wanted to kill him. Wuchen and Gao Rong led a state rebellion to annex Huainan, and sent troops to burn the towns of Yiwu and Linping. Qian ordered the commander to send Qian's bodyguards to fight him.

古文：十一月，甲午，帝告谢于圜丘；戊戌，大赦。
现代文：十一月甲午，后梁太祖到南郊天坛告谢上天。戊戌，大赦天下。
English: On the afternoon of November 1st, Hou Liang Taizu went to the Temple of Heaven in the southern suburbs to give thanks to the heavens.

古文：鄴王罗绍威得风痹病，上表称： 魏故大镇，多外兵，愿得有功重臣镇之，臣乞骸骨归第。 
现代文：邺王罗绍威得了风痹病，上表称： 魏州原是大镇，多数是外来的兵士，希望得到有功劳的重要大臣镇守，我乞求辞官回家。 
English: "Weizhou used to be a large town, most of whom were foreign soldiers. I hope to get an important and meritorious minister to guard the town. I beg the dictionary to come home."

古文：帝闻之，抚案动容。
现代文：后梁太祖听到这些话，不禁抚案动容。
English: Hearing these words, Houliang Taizu couldn't help but be moved by the case.

古文：己亥，以其子周翰为天雄节度副使，知府事。
现代文：已亥，后梁太祖任命他的儿子罗周翰为天雄节度副使，负责节度使府事务。
English: Later, Liang Taizu appointed his son Luo Zhouhan as the deputy envoy of Tianxiong, responsible for the affairs of the embassy.

古文：谓使者曰： 亟归语而主：为我强饭！
现代文：并对罗绍威的使者说： 赶快回去告诉你的主子：为我努力加餐！
English: And he said to the emissary from Roshowe: "Go back quickly and tell your master: Make an effort to make more food for me!"

古文：如有不可讳，当世世贵尔子孙以相报也。
现代文：如有不测，当使你的子孙世世代代永居高位来作报答。
English: In case of any mishap, you should reward your children and grandchildren with a permanent high position for generations to come.

古文：今使周翰领军府，尚冀尔复愈耳。 
现代文：现在派罗周翰前去典领军府事务，还希望你恢复健康啊。 
English: Now send Luo Zhouhan forward to take charge of the military affairs. I also hope you will recover your health.

古文：岐王欲取灵州以处刘知俊，且以为牧马之地，使知俊自将兵攻之。
现代文：岐王李茂贞想要攻取灵州来安置刘知俊，并且把灵州作为放牧马匹的地方，让刘知俊亲自带兵去攻打灵州。
English: The king of Qi, Li Maozhen, wanted to capture Lingzhou to settle Liu Zhijun, and used Lingzhou as a place to graze horses, so that Liu Zhijun personally led the troops to attack Lingzhou.

古文：朔方节度使韩逊遣使告急；诏镇国节度使康怀贞、感化节度使寇彦卿将兵攻邠宁以救之。
现代文：朔方节度使韩逊派遣使者告急，后梁太祖诏令镇国节度使康怀贞、感化节度使寇彦卿率领军队攻打州、宁州来救助灵州。
English: The Shuo Festival made Han Xun send an envoy to express his urgency, the Later Liang Taizu issued the Zhen Guo Festival to make Kang Huai Zhen, and the Xuanhua Festival made Kou Yanqing lead an army to attack Zhou and Ningzhou to rescue Lingzhou.

古文：怀贞等所向皆捷，克宁、衍二州，拔庆州南城，刺史李彦广出降。
现代文：康怀贞等打到哪里都取得胜利，攻克宁、衍二州，夺取庆州南城，庆州刺史李彦广出城投降。
English: Kang Huai Zhen and others achieved victory wherever they fought, conquering Ning, Yan Erzhou, seizing Gyeongju South Town, and Gyeongju's ruler, Li Yan Guang, surrendering outside the city.

古文：游兵侵掠及泾州之境，刘知俊闻之，十二月，己丑，解灵州围，引兵还。
现代文：游兵侵犯抢掠到达泾州的边境。刘知俊听说这情况，十二月已丑，解除对灵州的包围，带兵回去了。
English: When Liu Zhijun heard about the situation, he lifted the siege on Lingshou and returned with his soldiers.

古文：帝急召怀贞等还，遣兵迎援于三原青谷。
现代文：后梁太祖急召康怀贞等回去，派遣军队在三原县青谷接应援助。
English: After Liang Taizu urgently summoned Kang Huai Zhen to return, he dispatched troops to receive assistance in Aoya, Mihara County.

古文：怀贞等还，至三水，知俊遣兵据险邀之，左龙骧军使寿张王彦章力战，怀贞等乃得过。
现代文：康怀贞等回师，到达三水，刘知俊派遣军队占据险要进行拦击，左龙骧军使寿张人王彦章奋力作战，康怀贞等才得以通过。
English: Kang Huai Zhen waited for the return of the division, arrived at Sanshui, Liu Zhijun sent troops to occupy and almost intercepted, the Left Long March Army made Shou Zhang Ren Wang Yan Zhang fight hard, and Kang Huai Zhen and others were able to pass.

古文：怀贞与裨将李德遇、许从实、王审权分道而行，皆与援兵不相值，至升平，刘知俊伏兵山口，怀贞大败，仅以身免，德遇等军皆没。
现代文：康怀贞与副将李德遇、许从实、王审权分道前进，都与援兵没有相遇，到达升平，刘知俊在山口埋伏军队，康怀贞大败，仅以自身得免，李德遇等军全部覆灭。
English: Kang Huai Zhen and vice-commanders Li De Rong, Xu Cong Si, and Wang Xiguang all advanced separately, but did not meet the reinforcements, and reached the leveling. Liu Zhijun ambushed the army in Yamaguchi. Kang Huai Zhen was defeated, and only saved himself. Li De Rong and other troops were all destroyed.

古文：岐王以知俊为彰义节度使，镇泾州。
现代文：岐王李茂贞委任刘知俊为彰义节度使，镇守泾州。
English: The king of Qi, Li Maozhen, appointed Liu Zhijun as the deputy of Zhangyi and the town guard of Bozhou.

古文：王彦章骁勇绝伦，每战用二铁枪，皆重百斤，一置鞍中，一在手，所向无前，时人谓之 王铁枪 。
现代文：王彦章勇猛强悍，没有人可以与他相比，每次作战都用两杆铁枪，各重一百斤，一杆放在马鞍上，一杆拿在手里，所向无敌，当时人们称他为 王铁枪 。
English: Wang Yanzhang was brave, fierce and powerful. No one could compare to him. In every battle, he used two iron guns, each weighing a hundred pounds, one on his saddle and one in his hand. He was invincible. At that time, people called him the King of Iron Guns.

古文：蜀蜀州刺史王宗弁称疾，罢归成都，杜门不出。
现代文：前蜀蜀州刺史王宗弁声称有病，罢官回到成都，闭门不出。
English: Former Shu prefect Wang Zuben claimed to be ill, returned to Chengdu after being dismissed, and has not been seen since.

古文：蜀主疑其矜功怨望，加检校太保，固辞不受，谓人曰： 廉者足而不忧，贪者忧而不足。
现代文：前蜀主王建怀疑他居功自傲心怀怨恨，给他加官检校太保，他坚决推辞不接受，对别人说： 廉洁的人知足而没有忧愁，贪婪的人忧愁而不知足。
English: Former Shu master Wang Jian suspected him of being proud of his achievements and harboring resentment, and gave him the title of official inspector of schools. He resolutely refused to accept it, saying to others: A clean person is content without sorrow, and a greedy person is sorrowful without content.

古文：吾小人，致位至此，足矣，岂可求进不已乎！ 
现代文：我是个小人物，官位到此就满足了，哪里能要求提升不止呢！ 
English: I'm a little person, I'm satisfied with my official position, where can I ask for more than promotion!

古文：蜀主嘉其志而许之，赐与有加。
现代文：王建赞许他的志向并应允了他，赏赐增多。
English: Wang Jian praised his aspiration and agreed with him, and the reward was increased.

古文：刘守光围沧州久不下，执刘守文至城下示之，犹固守。
现代文：刘守光围攻沧州很久没有攻下，把刘守文押解到城下给城中的人观看，城中将士仍然固守。
English: Liu Shouguang besieged Cangzhou for a long time and failed to capture it. He sent Liu Shouwen to the outskirts of the city for the people in the city to see. The soldiers in the city still held on.

古文：城中食尽，民食堇泥，军士食人，驴马相啖尾。
现代文：城中吃的东西全完了，百姓吃胶泥，兵士吃人，驴马互相吃鬃尾。
English: The food in the city is all gone. The people eat plasticine, the soldiers eat people, the donkeys and horses eat each other's appendixes.

古文：吕兗选男女羸弱者，饲以麹面而烹之，以给军食，谓之宰杀务。
现代文：沧州节度判官吕兖挑选瘦弱的男人、女人，给他们吃酒曲麦粉，然后煮来供给军士食用，把这叫做 宰杀务 。
English: Cangzhou Jiedu judge Lv Ying selected emaciated men and women, gave them buckwheat noodles to eat, and then boiled them to feed the sergeants. This was called "slaughter duty."

古文：太祖神武元圣孝皇帝中开平四年春，正月，乙未，刘延祚力尽出降。
现代文：开平四年春季，正月乙未，刘延祚力量已尽，出城投降。
English: In the spring of the fourth year of the Kaiping era, on the first day of the second month of the second year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the

古文：时刘继威尚幼，守光使大将张万进、周知裕辅之镇沧州，以延祚及其将佐归幽州，族吕兗而释孙鹤。
现代文：当时刘继威年龄尚小，刘守光派大将张万进、周知裕辅佐他镇守沧州，把刘延祚及其将佐送归幽州，杀灭吕兖的全族，释放孙鹤。
English: At that time, Liu Jiwei was still young, and Liu Shuguang's generals Zhang Wanjin and Zhou Zhiyu assisted him in the defense of Cangzhou, sent Liu Yanqi and his generals to Yuzhou, killed the whole family of Lv Ying, and released Sun He.

古文：兗子琦，年十五，门下客赵玉绐监刑者曰： 此吾弟也，勿妄杀。 
现代文：吕兖的儿子吕琦，年十五岁，门下客赵玉欺骗监刑的人说： 这是我的弟弟，不要乱杀。 
English: Lyu Yu's son Lyu Yu, 15 years old, and a guest of his, Zhao Yu, tricked the jailer by saying, "This is my brother, don't kill indiscriminately."

古文：监刑者信之，遂挈以逃。
现代文：监刑的人听信了他的话，于是赵玉带领吕琦逃走。
English: The guards believed his words, so Zhao Yu led Lv Yao to escape.

古文：琦足痛不能行，玉负之，变姓名，乞食于路，仅而得免。
现代文：吕琦脚痛不能行走，赵玉背着他，改变姓名，在路上讨饭充饥，才得以免死。
English: Lv Yao couldn't walk because of his sore feet. Zhao Yu carried him on his back, changed his name and begged for food on the road to stave off death.

古文：琦感家门殄灭，力学自立，晋王闻其名，署代州判官。
现代文：吕琦感叹家族灭绝，努力学习自立，晋王李存勖听说他的名声，任命他为代州判官。
English: Lv Ying lamented the extinction of his family and worked hard to study and become self-reliant. The Jin king Li Cunxu heard of his reputation and appointed him as a deputy state judge.

古文：辛丑，以卢光稠为镇南留后。
现代文：辛丑，后梁任命卢光稠为镇南留后。
English: Sin ugly, after Liang appointed Lu Guangcong as the leader of the south of the town.

古文：刘守光为其父仁恭请致仕，丙午，以仁恭为太师，致仕。
现代文：卢龙节度使刘守光为他的父亲刘仁恭请求退休，丙午，后梁太祖命刘仁恭为太师退休。
English: During the Lulong Festival, Liu Shouguang asked Liu Rengong to retire as his father Liu Rengong, and in the afternoon, Liu Rengong retired as his grandfather Liu Rengong.

古文：守光寻使人潜杀其兄守文，归罪于杀者而诛之。
现代文：不久，刘守光派人暗杀他的哥哥刘守文，然后把罪名归于受他支使去杀刘守文的人，并把他处死。
English: Soon after, Liu Shouguang sent someone to assassinate his brother Liu Shouwen, and then he put the blame on the person who was sent by him to kill Liu Shouwen, and executed him.

古文：二月，万全感自岐归广陵，岐王承制加弘农王兼中书令，嗣吴王，于是吴王赦其境内。
现代文：二月，淮南军将万全感从岐州回到广陵，岐王李茂贞承用制书加封弘农王杨隆演兼中书令，继承吴王。于是，吴王杨隆演在淮南境内实行大赦。
English: In February, the Huainan army returned the omnipotence from Qizhou to Guangling, and the king of Qizhou, Li Maozhen, succeeded the king of Wu, Yang Longyan, the king of Wu, with the title of bookmaker and the title of farmer. Therefore, Yang Longyan, the king of Wu, implemented an amnesty in Huainan.

古文：高澧求救于吴，吴常州刺史李简等将兵应之，湖州将盛师友、沈行思闭城不内；澧帅麾下五千人奔吴。
现代文：湖州刺史高澧向吴王求救，吴常州刺史李简等率兵前去接应，湖州将领盛师友、沈行思关闭城门不接纳；高澧率领部下五千人投奔吴。
English: Gao Kun, the governor of Huzhou, appealed to the king of Wu for help. Li Jian, the governor of Wu Changzhou, led the troops to respond. Huzhou generals Sheng Shifu and Shen Xingsi closed the city gate and did not accept; Gao Kun led five thousand of his subordinates to Wu.

古文：三月，癸巳，吴越王镠巡湖州，以钱镖为刺史。
现代文：三月癸巳，吴越王钱巡视湖州，任命钱镖为湖州刺史。
English: At the end of March, Wu Yue Wang Qian inspected Huzhou and appointed Qian Dar as the governor of Huzhou.

古文：蜀太子宗懿骄暴，好陵傲旧臣。
现代文：前蜀太子王宗懿骄纵凶狠，喜好凌辱轻慢旧臣。
English: The former Prince of Shu, Wang Zongyao, was arrogant, arrogant and ferocious. He liked to humiliate and belittle his former ministers.

古文：内枢密使唐道袭，蜀主之嬖臣也，太子屡谑之于朝，由是有隙，互相诉于蜀主。
现代文：内枢密使唐道袭是前蜀主王建的宠臣，太子王宗懿屡次在朝廷上戏谑他，因此二人有了嫌隙，互相向王建诉说。
English: The Inner Privy Council's secret envoy Tang Tao He was the favorite of the former Shu lord Wang Jian, and the prince Wang Zongqi repeatedly teased him in the imperial court, so the two had a rift and complained to each other to Wang Jian.

古文：蜀主恐其交恶，以道袭为山南西道节度使、同平章事。
现代文：王建恐怕他们彼此憎恨仇视，任命唐道袭以同平章事衔为山南西道节度使。
English: Wang Jian feared that they would hate and hate each other, and appointed Tang Daoqi as the festival envoy of Shannan West Road with the title of Tongping Zhang.

古文：道袭荐宣徽北院使郑顼为内枢密使，顼受命之日，即欲按道袭昆弟盗用内库金帛。
现代文：唐道袭举荐宣徽北院使郑顼为内枢密使，郑顼接受任命那天，就要检查唐道袭兄弟盗用内库金帛之事。
English: On the day of Zheng He's appointment as the Inner Privy Councilor, it was necessary to investigate the theft of the treasury's gold ingots by Tang Dao He's brothers.

古文：道袭惧，奏项褊急，不可大任，丙午，出顼为果州刺史，以宣徽南院使潘炕为内枢密使。
现代文：唐道袭畏惧，奏称郑顼狭隘急躁，不能担当大任，丙午，调郑顼出任果州刺史，任命宣徽南院使潘炕为内枢密使。
English: Afraid of the Tang Dynasty, he said that Zheng He was narrow-minded and impatient, and could not take on important responsibilities. In the afternoon of the 4th, he transferred Zheng He to the post of secretary of the history of Guozhou, and appointed Pan Zhe, the envoy of the Southern Court of the State of Hunan, as the special envoy of the Inner Court.

古文：夏州都指挥使高宗益作乱，杀节度使李彝昌。
现代文：夏州都指挥使高宗益发动叛乱，杀定难节度使李彝昌。
English: The commander of Xiazhou ordered Gao Zongyi to launch a rebellion, and Li Yuchang to deal with the difficult situation.

古文：将吏共诛宗益，推彝昌族父蕃汉都指挥使李仁福为帅，癸丑，仁福以闻。
现代文：将吏共同杀死高宗益，推戴李彝昌族父蕃汉都指挥使李仁福为帅。癸丑，李仁福奏报后梁太祖。
English: The generals jointly killed Gao Zongyi, and promoted Li Yanchang, the father of Li Han, to command Li Renfu. Li Renfu played the role of Liang Taizu.

古文：夏，四月，甲子，以仁福为定难节度使。
现代文：夏季，四月甲子，太祖任命李仁福为定难节度使。
English: In the summer, in April, Emperor Taizu appointed Li Renfu as an envoy to settle disputes.

古文：丁卯，宋州节度使衡王友谅献瑞麦，一茎三穗，帝曰： 丰年为上瑞。
现代文：丁卯，宋州节度使衡王朱友谅进献瑞麦，一茎三穗，后梁太祖说： 如果在丰年，这是上等吉兆。
English: Dingwu, the Songzhou Festival made Heng Wang Zhu Youzhen present Ruimai, one stem and three spikes, after which Liang Taizu said: If it is a good year, it is a good omen.

古文：今宋州大水，安用此为！ 
现代文：现在宋州大水，这有什么用呢？ 
English: Now Songzhou is flooded, what is the use of this?

古文：诏除本县令名，遣使诘责友谅，以兗海留后惠王友能代为宋州留后。
现代文：诏令去掉出产瑞麦之县的好名声，派遣使者前去责问查究朱友谅，委任兖海留后惠王朱友能代为宋州留后。
English: The imperial edict erased the good reputation of Ruimai County, where the tea was produced, and sent an envoy to investigate Zhu Youkeng, and appointed Hui Wang Zhu Youneng as the representative of Songzhou after he stayed in Bohai.

古文：友谅、友能，皆全昱子也。
现代文：朱友谅、朱友能，都是后梁太祖之兄广王朱全昱的儿子。
English: Zhu Youren and Zhu Youneng were both sons of Guangwang Zhu Quanzhang, the elder brother of Houliang Taizu.

古文：帝以晋州刺史下邑华温琪拒晋兵有功，欲赏之，会护国节度使冀王友谦上言晋、绛边河东，乞别建节镇，壬申，以晋、绛、沁三州为定昌军，以温琪为节度使。
现代文：后梁太祖因为晋州刺史下邑人华温琪抵抗晋兵有功，想要赏赐他，适逢护国节度使冀王朱友谦奏称晋州、绛州与河东接壤，乞求另建节镇，壬申，以晋、绛、沁三州为定昌军，任命华温琪为定昌节度使。
English: Later, Liang Taizu wanted to reward Huawenqi, a resident of Jinzhou, for his contribution to the resistance against the Jin soldiers. At the time of the National Defense Festival, Zhu You, the King of Hebei, made Zhu Yuqian say that Jinzhou, Bozhou and Hedong were on the border, and begged for the construction of another festival town, Jinshin. Jin, Bozhou and Bozhou were the three states of the Dingchang army, and Huawenqi was appointed as the festival envoy of Dingchang.

古文：左金吾大将军寇彦卿入朝，至天津桥，有民不避道，投诸栏外而死。
现代文：后梁左金吾大将军寇彦卿进京朝见，走到天津桥，有百姓没有躲避让路，便被投掷桥栏外摔死了。
English: After Liang Zuo Kingu's general, Kou Yanqing, went to Beijing to meet the emperor, he walked to Tianjin Bridge. Some people did not avoid giving way and were thrown off the bridge and fell to their deaths.

古文：彦卿自首于帝。
现代文：寇彦卿向后梁太祖自首。
English: Prince Korehiko surrenders to Emperor Taizu.

古文：帝以彦卿才干有功，久在左右。命以私财遗死者家以赎罪。
现代文：太祖因寇彦卿很有才干，屡建功劳，长期以来就跟随左右，于是命令他用自己的钱财送给死者家属来赎罪。
English: The great-great-grandfather, Inko Sir, was very talented, had many achievements, and had been around for a long time, so he ordered him to use his own money to give to the families of the deceased to atone for his sins.

古文：御史司宪崔沂劾奏 彦卿杀人阙下，请论如法。 
现代文：御史司宪崔沂弹劾上奏 寇彦卿在宫阙之下杀人，请依法定罪 。
English: Mr. Cui Jian, the chief secretary of the Constitution and Legal Affairs Commission of the People's Republic of China, appealed for impeachment. Mr. Kou Yanqing killed people under the imperial edict, please follow the statutory crime.

古文：帝命彦卿分析。
现代文：太祖命寇彦卿分辩。
English: The great-great-great-grandfather's name, Kōhiko-kyō, is pronounced.

古文：彦卿对： 令从者举置栏外，不意误死。 
现代文：寇彦卿回答说： 我让随从把他举起放到桥栏外，没想到误伤死去。 
English: Lord Kōhiko replied, "I had my attendant lift him up and put him outside the bridge railing, but I didn't expect him to die from his injuries.

古文：帝欲以过失论，沂奏： 在法，以势使令为首，下手为从，不得归罪从者；不斗而故殴伤人，加伤罪一等，不得为过失。 
现代文：太祖想要按过失罪论定，崔沂奏称： 按照法律，以势力指使的人为首，下手的人为从，不能把罪过归于从者。没有争斗却故意殴伤别人，加伤罪一等，不能作为过失看待。 
English: The great-grandfather wanted to determine according to the crime of negligence, Cui Yingxiao said: According to the law, the person who is directed by the forces is the leader, and the person who starts the attack is the follower, and the crime cannot be attributed to the follower. If there is no fight, but deliberately hit and injure others, the crime of aggravated injury is first class, and cannot be regarded as a fault.

古文：辛巳，责授彦卿游击将军、左卫中郎将。
现代文：辛巳，太祖命贬降寇彦卿为游击将军、左卫中郎将。
English: Soon after, the great-grandfather's order demoted Kōhiko-chō to the rank of guerrilla general, and Sae no chūro to that of general.

古文：彦卿扬言： 有得崔沂首者，赏钱万缗。 
现代文：寇彦卿扬言： 有得崔沂首级的人，赏钱一万缗。 
English: Korehiko threatened: Anyone who gets the head of Choe Son will be rewarded with 10,000 baht.

古文：沂以白帝，帝使人谓彦卿： 崔沂有毫发伤，我当族汝！ 
现代文：崔沂把寇彦卿的话报告太祖，太祖派人告诉寇彦卿说： 崔沂有毫发受伤，我必当杀你的全族！ 
English: Cui Yao reported the words of Sir Ko Yan to the Great Ancestor. The Great Ancestor sent someone to tell Sir Ko Yan and said, "Cui Yao was not injured at all, I will kill your entire family!"

古文：时功臣骄横，由是稍肃，沂，沆之弟也。
现代文：当时功臣们骄傲专横，从此稍微收敛。崔沂是崔沆的弟弟。
English: At that time, the heroes and heroines were arrogant and domineering, but they have since moderated their behavior. Cui Yong is Cui Yong's younger brother.

古文：五月，吴徐温母周氏卒，将吏致祭，为偶人，高数尺，衣以罗锦，温曰： 此皆出民力，奈何施于此而焚之，宜解以衣贫者。 
现代文：五月，吴徐温的母亲周氏去世，将吏前去祭奠，制做木偶人，高数尺，穿着用罗锦做的衣服，徐温说： 这些罗锦都出于百姓之力，怎么能将它穿在这里烧掉呢，应当解下来给贫苦的人穿。 
English: In May, Wu Xuwen's mother, Zhou, passed away. The officials went to pay their respects. They made a puppet man, several feet tall, wearing clothes made of brocade. Xuwen said, "These brocades are made from the strength of the people. How can it be burned here? It should be loosened and worn by the poor."

古文：未几，起复为内外马步军都军使，领润州观察使。
现代文：过了不久，徐温又起用为内外马步军都军使，兼任润州观察使。
English: Soon after, Xu Wen was appointed as the envoy to the capital of the Inner and Outer Horse Guards, and also served as the observation envoy to Runzhou.

古文：岐王屡求货于蜀，蜀主皆与之。
现代文：岐王李茂贞屡次向前蜀索求财物，前蜀主王建都给了他。
English: The king of Qi, Li Maozhen, repeatedly asked for property from the former Shu ruler, Wang Jiandu, who gave him everything.

古文：又求巴、剑二州，蜀主曰： 吾奉茂贞，勤亦至矣；若与之地，是弃民也，宁多与之货。 
现代文：又索求巴、剑二州，王建说： 我侍奉李茂贞，勤勉到极点了。假如给他土地，就是抛弃百姓，宁可多给他财物。 
English: Wang Jian said, "I have served Li Maozhen, and I have been extremely diligent. If I were to give him land, I would be abandoning the people, and I would rather give him more wealth."

古文：乃复以丝、茶、布、帛七万遗之。
现代文：于是，又送给李茂贞丝、茶、布、帛七万。
English: As a result, he also gave Li Maozhen silk, tea, cloth and 70,000 baht.

古文：己亥，以刘继威为义昌节度使。
现代文：已亥，后梁任命刘继威为义昌节度使。
English: Later, Liang appointed Liu Jiwei as the chief envoy of the Yichang Festival.

古文：癸丑，天雄节度使兼中书令鄴贞庄王罗绍威卒。
现代文：癸丑，天雄节度使兼中书令邺贞庄王罗绍威去世。
English: Luo Shaowei, the king of Shizhenzhuang, the envoy of Tianxiong Jiedu and the commander of the Chinese army, passed away.

古文：诏以其子周翰为天雄留后。
现代文：后梁太祖诏令委任他的儿子罗周翰为天雄留后。
English: Later, Emperor Liang decreed to appoint his son Luo Zhouhan as the heir to the throne.

古文：匡国节度使长乐忠敬王冯行袭疾笃，表请代者。
现代文：匡国节度使长乐忠敬王冯行袭病重，上表请求任命代替的人。
English: Due to the Kuangguo Festival, Changle Zhongjing Wang Feng Xingyan fell seriously ill, and the above table requested the appointment of a replacement.

古文：许州牙兵二千，皆秦宗权馀党，帝深以为忧。
现代文：许州牙兵二行人，都是秦宗权的余党，后梁太祖深为忧虑。
English: Xu Zhou's two retainers were both members of the Qin Dynasty, and Emperor Liang was deeply worried about them.

古文：六月，庚戌，命崇政院直学士李珽驰往视行袭病，曰： 善谕朕意，勿使乱我近镇。 
现代文：六月庚戌，太祖命令崇政院直学士李驰往许州看视病情，说： 好好地告诉他朕的意思，不要乱了我的邻近藩镇。 
English: In June, Geng Zang, the great-grandfather ordered Li Chi, a direct scholar of the Chongzhen Academy, to go to Huzhou to see the condition, saying: Tell him what I mean, don't mess up my neighboring towns.

古文：珽至许州，谓将吏曰： 天子握百万兵，去此数舍耳；冯公忠纯，勿使上有所疑。
现代文：李到达许州，对将吏们说： 皇上手里掌管一百万军队，离这里很近，冯公忠诚纯正，不要使皇上有所怀疑。
English: When Li arrived in Xuzhou, he said to the generals: "The emperor is in charge of a million troops, and it is very close to here. Feng Gong is loyal and pure. Don't make the emperor have any doubts.

古文：汝曹赤心奉国，何忧不富贵！ 
现代文：你们赤胆忠心，报效国家，何愁没有荣华富贵！ 
English: You dared to be loyal and serve the country, why worry if you don't become rich and famous!

古文：由是众莫敢异议。
现代文：由此众人不敢提出不同意见。
English: As a result, no one dares to voice a dissenting opinion.

古文：行袭欲使人代受诏，珽曰： 东首加朝服，礼也。 
现代文：冯行袭想要派人代受诏书，李说： 头朝东穿上朝会时的礼服，就是受诏的礼仪了。 
English: When Feng Xinghai wanted to send someone to receive the imperial edict on his behalf, Li said, "It is the etiquette to receive the imperial edict by putting on the ceremonial robes of the imperial meeting.

古文：乃即卧内宣诏，谓行袭曰： 公善自辅养，勿视事，此子孙之福也。 
现代文：于是就在卧室内宣布诏书，对冯行袭说： 您好好地自己保养，不要办理公务，这是您子孙的福分啊。 
English: So he announced the edict in the bedroom and said to Feng Xingyuan: You should take good care of yourself, do not handle official business, this is the blessing of your children and grandchildren.

古文：行袭泣谢，遂解两使印授珽，使代掌军府。
现代文：冯行袭哭泣谢恩，于是解下节度使、观察使印交给李，让他代管军府。
English: Feng Xingyuan wept with gratitude, so he dismissed the commander of the military command and the observer and handed over the seal to Li, allowing him to take charge of the military government.

古文：帝闻之曰： 予固知珽能办事，冯族亦不亡矣。 
现代文：太祖听到这情况，说： 我本来知道李能办事，冯行袭一族不会灭亡了。 
English: When the great-grandfather heard this, he said, "I knew that Li could do things and that the Feng Xinghai family would not perish.

古文：庚辰，行袭卒。
现代文：庚辰，冯行袭病逝。
English: Geng Chen, Feng Xinggang died of illness.

古文：甲申，以李珽权知匡国留后，悉以行袭兵分隶诸校，冒冯姓者皆还宗。
现代文：甲申，太祖委任李暂时主持匡国留后事务，把冯行袭的军队全部分隶各校，冒冯姓的养子全部返归各家。
English: Jiaxin, the great-grandfather appointed Li to temporarily preside over the affairs of the remaining Kuanggu, subordinate the entire army of Feng Xing'an to each school, and return all the adopted sons with the surname of Feng to each family.

古文：楚王殷求为天策上将，诏加天策上将军。
现代文：楚王马殷请求担任天策上将，后梁太祖诏令加官马殷天策上将军。
English: King of Chu, Ma Yin, requested to be appointed as the General of the Heavenly Defense, and Liang Taizu ordered to promote Ma Yin to the General of the Heavenly Defense.

古文：殷始开天策府，以弟宾为左相，存为右相。
现代文：马殷开始设置天策府，任命他的弟弟马为左相、马存为右相。
English: Ma Yin began to set up the Tian Zhefu, and appointed his brother Ma as the left minister and Ma Cun as the right minister.

古文：殷遣将侵荆南，军于油口。高季昌击破之，斩首五千级，逐北至白田而还。
现代文：马殷派遣将领率兵侵犯荆南，驻扎在油口，高季昌把楚兵打败，斩下首级五千个，追赶逃兵到白田才返回。
English: Ma Yin dispatched generals and soldiers to invade Jingnan and stationed in Yaukou. Gao Jichang defeated the Chu soldiers, cut off five thousand heads, and chased the deserters to Baita before returning.

古文：吴水军指挥使敖骈围吉州刺史彭玕弟瑊于赤石，楚兵救瑊，虏骈以归。
现代文：吴水军指挥使敖骈在赤石洞包围吉州刺史彭的弟弟彭，楚军救援彭，俘虏敖骈而回。
English: The commander of the Wushui Army ordered the Zhai Army to encircle the younger brother of the Jizhou Zhaishi Peng, the Chu Army to rescue the Peng, and the prisoners to return to the Zhai Army.

古文：秋，七月，戊子朔，蜀门下侍郎兼吏部尚书、同平章事韧城卒。
现代文：秋季，七月，戊子朔，前蜀门下侍郎兼吏部尚书、同平章事韦庄去世。
English: In the autumn, in July, Wu Zishuo, the former Shu disciple's under-waiter and official, Shang Shu, and Tong Ping Zhang Zhi Wei Zhuang passed away.

古文：吴越王镠表 宦者周延诰等二十五人，唐末避祸至此，非刘、韩之党，乞原之。 
现代文：吴越王钱上表称： 宦官周延诰等二十五人，唐末避祸来到这里，他们不是刘季述、韩全诲的党羽，乞求原宥赦免他们。 
English: Wu Yue Wang Qian said on the table: Twenty-five people, including the eunuch Zhou Yanqi, came here at the end of the Tang Dynasty to avoid misfortune. They were not the party members of Liu Jishu and Han Quanzhi, and they begged Yuan Yu to pardon them.

古文：上曰： 此属吾知其无罪，但今革弊之初，不欲置之禁掖，可且留于彼，谕以此意。 
现代文：后梁太祖说： 这些宦官我知道他们没有罪，但现在革除各种弊端刚开始，不想把他们安置在宫中，可以姑且留在他那里。把这个意思告诉吴越王钱。 
English: Houliang Taizu said, "I know that these eunuchs are not guilty, but it is just the beginning of getting rid of all kinds of evils. If you don't want to place them in the palace, you can stay with him. Tell this to Wu Yue Wang Qian."

古文：岐王与邠、泾二帅各遣使告晋，请合兵攻定难节度使李仁福。晋王遣振武节度使周德威将兵会之，合五万众围夏州，仁福婴城拒守。
现代文：岐王李茂贞与州李继徽、泾州刘知俊二帅各派遣使者通告晋王李存勖，请求合兵攻打定难节度使李仁福；李存勖派遣振武节度使周德威领兵会同他们，合兵五万包围夏州，李仁福环城抗拒防守。
English: The king of Qi, Li Maozhen, and the two generals of the state, Li Jihui and Liu Zhijun, each sent an envoy to notify the king of Jin, Li Cunxu, to request a joint attack to determine the degree of difficulty to make Li Renfu; Li Cunxu sent a joint attack to make Zhou Dewei lead the army to join them, and a combined army of 50,000 surrounded Xiazhou, and Li Renfu ringed the city to resist the defense.

古文：八月，以刘守光兼义昌节度使。
现代文：八月，后梁太祖任命刘守光兼义昌节度使。
English: In August, Emperor Taizu appointed Liu Shuguang as Yichang's regent.

古文：镇、定自帝践祚以来虽不输常赋，而贡献甚勤。
现代文：镇州、定州自后梁太祖即位以来，虽然没有输送正常租税，但进献物品很勤。
English: In Zhenzhou and Dingzhou, although normal taxes and duties have not been transferred since the enthronement of Emperor Gao Liang Taizu, donations have been made very frequently.

古文：会赵王镕母何氏卒，庚申，遣使吊之，且授起复官。
现代文：适逢赵王王熔的母亲何氏去世。庚申，太祖派遣使者前去吊唁，并且在王熔守丧期间起用授予官职。
English: Coinciding with the death of Zhao Wang, Wang Rong's mother, Ms. He, the great-great-grandfather sent an envoy to offer condolences, and appointed Wang Rong to an official post during the mourning period.

古文：时邻道吊客皆在馆，使者见晋使，归，言于帝曰： 镕潜与晋通，镇、定势强，终恐难制。 
现代文：当时邻近各道的吊客都在馆舍，后梁使者看见晋王李存勖的使者，回到洛阳后，向太祖进言说： 王熔暗中与晋通好，镇、定势力强大，恐怕终究难以控制。 
English: At that time, the hangers of all the neighboring roads were in the pavilion, and the envoy of Hou Liang saw the envoy of the Jin king Li Cunxu, and after returning to Luoyang, he said to the great-grandfather: The king is good at communicating with the Jin in the dark, and the town is strong. I am afraid that it will be difficult to control after all.

古文：帝深然之。
现代文：太祖深以为是。
English: Xuanzong deeply felt justified.

古文：壬戌，李仁福来告急。
现代文：壬戌，定难节度使李仁福前来告急。
English: In the end, the difficulty of the festival made Li Renfu come here in a hurry.

古文：甲子，以河南尹兼中书令张宗奭为西京留守。
现代文：甲子，后梁任命河南尹兼中书令张全义为西京留守。
English: After Liang appointed Yin of Henan Province as vice-premier, Zhang Quanyi stayed in West Beijing.

古文：帝恐晋兵袭西京，以宣化留后李思安为东北面行营都指挥使，将兵万人屯河阳。
现代文：后梁太祖担心晋王李存勖的军队袭击西京洛阳，任命宣化留后李思安为东北面行营都指挥使，率兵一万人驻扎河阳。
English: Later, Liang Taizu was worried that the army of Jin King Li Cunxu would attack Luoyang in West Beijing. He appointed Li Si'an, who had stayed in Xuanhua, as the commanding envoy for the northeastern campaign, leading 10,000 soldiers stationed in Heyang.

古文：丙寅，帝发洛阳；己巳，至陕。
现代文：丙寅，太祖从洛阳出发；已巳，到达陕州。
English: Cui Yin, the great-grandfather, set out from Luoyang and has now arrived in Shaanxi.

古文：辛未，以镇国节度使杨师厚为西路行营招讨使，会感化节度使康怀贞将兵三万屯三原。
现代文：辛未，任命镇国节度杨师厚为西路行营招讨使，会同感化节度使康怀贞率兵三万在三原驻扎。
English: Xinwei appointed Yang Shihou, the commander of the Zhenguo Festival, as the envoy to the West Road encampment, and together with the leader of the Zhenguo Festival, he persuaded Kang Huizhen to station 30,000 soldiers in Mihara.

古文：帝忧晋兵出泽州逼怀州，既而闻其在绥、银碛中，曰： 无足虑也。 
现代文：太祖担忧晋王的军队出泽州进逼怀州，不久听说晋王的军队在绥州、银州的沙漠里，说： 不值得忧虑了。 
English: The great-grandfather was worried about Jin Wang's army marching out of Zezhou and into Huaizhou. Soon he heard that Jin Wang's army was in the deserts of Zhangzhou and Yinzhou. He said, "It's not worth worrying about."

古文：甲申，遣夹马指挥使李遇、刘绾自鄜、延趋银、夏，邀其归路。
现代文：甲申，太祖派遣夹马指挥使李遇、刘绾自州、延州奔赴银州、夏州，拦截晋兵的归路。
English: Gao Shen, the great-grandfather dispatched the commanding officer of the horse-whip to send Li Yu, Liu Wei from Zhizhou and Yanzhou to Yinzhou and Xiazhou to intercept the return of the Jin soldiers.

古文：吴越王镠筑捍海石唐，广杭州城，大修台馆。
现代文：吴越王钱修筑抵御海潮的石塘，扩大杭州城，大修楼台馆阁。
English: Wu Yue Wang Qian built a stone pond to resist the tide, expanded Hangzhou City, and overhauled the pavilion pavilion.

古文：由是钱唐富庶盛于东南。
现代文：由此，钱塘地区物产丰富，人口众多，盛于东南。
English: As a result, the Qiantang area is rich in products, has a large population, and is popular in the southeast.

古文：九月，己丑，上发陕；甲午，至洛阳，疾复作。
现代文：九月已丑，后梁太祖自陕州出发；甲午，到达洛阳，疾病复发。
English: September was already ugly, after Liang Taizu set out from Shaanxi; in the afternoon, when he arrived in Luoyang, the disease recurred.

古文：李遇等至夏州，岐、晋兵皆解去。
现代文：李遇等到夏州，岐王李茂贞、晋王李存勖的军队都解围撤走了。
English: Li Ying waited until Xiazhou, and the armies of the King of Qi, Li Maozhen, and the King of Jin, Li Cunxu, were relieved and withdrawn.

古文：冬，十月，遣镇国节度杨师厚、相州刺史李思安将兵屯泽州以图上党。
现代文：冬季，十月，后梁派遣镇国节度使杨师厚、相州刺史李思安率兵驻扎泽州来谋取上党。
English: In the winter, in October, Hou Liang sent Yang Shihou and Li Si'an, the leading soldiers of the Zhenguo Festival, to stay in Zhezhou to win the party.

古文：吴越王镠之巡湖州也，留沈行思为巡检使，与盛师友俱归。
现代文：吴越王钱巡视湖州的时候，留下沈行思担任巡检使，与盛师友一同回去。
English: When Wu Yue Wang Qian inspected Huzhou, he left Shen Xingsi as the inspector and went back with Sheng Shiru.

古文：行思谓同列陈瑰曰： 王若以师友为刺史，何以处我？ 
现代文：沈行思对同列陈说： 大王如果以盛师友为刺史，用什么来安置我？ 
English: Shen Xingxi said to the same line of Chen Rong: If the great king takes Sheng Shifu as a stabbing history, what will he use to place me?

古文：时瑰已得镠密旨遣行思诣府，乃绐之曰： 何不自诣王所论之！ 
现代文：当时陈已经得到吴越王钱派遣沈行思回军府的密旨，于是欺骗他说： 为什么不自己到大王的住所去陈述！ 
English: At that time, Chen had already obtained the secret order of Wu Yue Wang Qian to send Shen Xing Si back to the military government, so he deceived him and said: Why don't you go to the great king's residence to make a statement!

古文：行思从之。
现代文：沈行思听从了陈的建议。
English: Shen Xingshi followed Chen's suggestion.

古文：既至数日，镠送其家亦至，行思恨镠卖己。
现代文：到达军府数日以后，陈送的家人也到了，沈行思怨恨陈出卖了自己。
English: A few days after arriving at the military headquarters, Chen's family members also arrived, and Shen Xingxi resented Chen for betraying him.

古文：镠自衣锦军归，将吏迎谒，行思取锻槌击瑰，杀之，因诣镠，与师友论功，夺左右槊，欲刺师友，众执之。
现代文：钱自家乡衣锦军回来，将吏前去迎接谒见，沈行思取出锻槌击打陈，并把他杀死，于是谒见钱，与盛师友争论功劳大小，夺左右兵士的长矛，想要刺杀盛师友，众人把沈行思逮住。
English: When Qian Qian returned from his hometown of Yijin Army, he sent officials to meet him. Shen Xing Si took out a mallet to hit Chen and killed him. So Qian Qian Qian met Qian Qian, argued with Sheng Shifu about the size of his merit, snatched the spears of soldiers on the left and right, and tried to assassinate Sheng Shifu. Everyone caught Shen Xing Si.

古文：镠斩行思，以师友为婺州刺史。
现代文：钱杀了沈行思，任命盛师友为婺州刺史。
English: Qian killed Shen Xingxi and appointed Sheng Shifu as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：十一月，己丑，以宁国节度使、同平章事王景仁充北面行营都指挥招讨使，潞州副招讨使韩勍副之，以李思安为先锋将，趣上党。
现代文：十一月已丑，后梁任命宁国节度使、同平章事王景仁充任北面行营都指挥招讨使，潞州副招讨使韩任他的副手，以李思安担任先锋将，奔赴上党。
English: In November, after Liang had appointed the Ningguo Festival Envoy, Tongping Zhangjiakou Wang Jingren was appointed as the North Camp Command Recruitment Envoy, Zhangzhou Deputy Recruitment Envoy Han was appointed as his deputy, and Li Sian was appointed as the vanguard, he rushed to the party.

古文：寻遣景仁等屯魏州，杨师厚还陕。
现代文：随即派遣王景仁等驻扎魏州，杨师厚回陕州。
English: Subsequently, Wang Jingren and others were stationed in Weizhou, and Yang Shihou returned to Shaanxi.

古文：蜀主更太子宗懿名曰元坦。
现代文：前蜀主王建把太子王宗懿的名字改为王元坦。
English: Former Shu Lord Wang Jian changed the name of Prince Wang Zongyao to Wang Yuantan.

古文：庚戌，立假子宗裕为通王，宗范为夔王，宗钅岁为昌王，宗寿为嘉王，宗翰为集王；立其子宗仁为普王，宗辂为雅王，宗纪为褒王，宗智为荣王，宗泽为兴王，宗鼎为彭王，宗杰为信王，宗衍为郑王。
现代文：庚戌，前蜀主王建立养子王宗裕为通王，王宗范为夔王，王宗为昌王，王宗寿为嘉王，王宗翰为集王；立他的亲子王宗仁为普王，王宗辂为雅王，王宗纪为褒王，王宗智为荣王，王宗泽为兴王，王宗鼎为彭王，王宗杰为信王，王宗衍为郑王。
English: Genghis Khan, the former king of Shu, established his adopted son Wang Zongyu as King Tong, Wang Zong Fan as King Shun, Wang Zong as King Chang, Wang Zong Shou as King Ji, Wang Zong Han as King Ji; and his own son Wang Zong Ren as King Pu, Wang Zong Pi as King Ya, Wang Zong Ji as King Bao, Wang Zong Zhi as King Rong, Wang Zong Ze as King Xing, Wang Zong Ding as King Peng, Wang Zong Jie as King Xin, and Wang Zong Yan as King Zheng.

古文：初，唐末宦官典兵者多养军中壮士为子以自强，由是诸将亦效之。
现代文：起初，唐末主管军权的宦官大多收养军中的壮士做儿子来加强自己的势力，从此，各军的将领也仿效他们。
English: At first, most of the eunuchs in charge of military power at the end of the Tang Dynasty adopted strong men in the army as sons to strengthen their power. Since then, the generals of each army have followed their example.

古文：而蜀主尤多，惟宗懿等九人及宗特、宗平真其子；宗裕、宗钅岁、宗寿皆其族人；宗翰姓孟，蜀主之姊子；宗范姓张，其母周氏为蜀主妾；自馀假子百二十人皆功臣，虽冒姓连名而不禁婚姻。
现代文：而前蜀主王建的养子尤其多，只是王宗懿等九人及王宗特、王宗平是他的亲儿子；王宗裕、王宗、王宗寿都是他的族人；王宗翰姓孟，是王建姐姐之子；王宗范姓张，他的母亲周氏是王建之妾；其余养子一百二十人都是功臣，虽然冒作王姓并且兄弟连名，但不禁止相互结为婚姻。
English: The former Shu lord Wang Jian had a particularly large number of adopted sons. However, nine of them, including Wang Zongtao, Wang Zongte and Wang Zongping, were his own sons; Wang Zongyu, Wang Zong and Wang Zongshou were his relatives; Wang Zonghan, surnamed Meng, was the son of Wang Jian's sister; Wang Zong Fan, surnamed Zhang, and his mother, Zhou, was Wang Jian's concubine; and the remaining 120 adopted sons were meritorious vassals. Although they assumed the surname of Wang and were brothers with the same name, they were not prohibited from marrying each other.

古文：上疾小愈，辛亥，校猎于伊、洛之间。
现代文：后梁太祖病情稍愈，辛亥，到伊水、洛水之间设围打猎。
English: After Liang Taizu's illness was a little better, Xinhai went to set up a hunting area between Yishui and Luoshui.

古文：上疑赵王镕贰于晋，且欲因鄴王绍威卒除移镇、定。
现代文：后梁太祖怀疑赵王王熔有二心于晋，并且想趁着邺王罗绍威去世移调镇、定两处节度使。
English: Later, Liang Taizu suspected that Zhao Wang Wang Rong had second thoughts about Jin, and wanted to take advantage of the death of Shao Wang Rossowei to transfer the town and set up two festival envoys.

古文：会燕王守光发兵屯涞水，欲侵定州，上遣供奉官杜廷隐、丁延徽临魏博兵三千分屯深、冀，声言恐燕兵南寇，助赵守御。又云分兵就食。
现代文：恰巧燕王刘守光发兵驻扎涞水，想要侵犯定州，梁太祖派遣供奉官杜廷隐、丁延徽监督魏博兵三千分别驻扎深州、冀州，声称担心燕兵南犯，前来帮助赵兵防守抵御；又说分兵到粮多之处就地取得给养。
English: It so happened that Yan's king Liu Shouguang stationed his troops in Surabaya and wanted to invade Dingzhou. Liang Taizu dispatched Du Tingyin and Ding Yanhui to supervise Wei Bo's three thousand soldiers stationed in Shenzhou and Jizhou, respectively, claiming that he was worried about Yan's soldiers going south and would come to help Zhao's soldiers defend themselves. He also said that the soldiers would go to places with more grain to get supplies on the spot.

古文：赵将石公立戍深州，白赵王镕，请拒之。
现代文：赵将石公立戍守深州，禀报赵王王熔，请求拒绝他们。
English: Zhao Shiguang, the governor of Shenzhou, reported to Zhao Wangwanglu and asked him to refuse them.

古文：镕遽命开门，移公立于外以避之。
现代文：王熔突然命令打开深州城门，把石公立转移到城外躲避起来。
English: Wang Rong suddenly gave the order to open the gate of Shenzhou City, and moved the government officials to the outskirts of the city to hide.

古文：公立出门指城而泣曰： 硃氏灭唐社稷，三尺童子知其为人。
现代文：石公立出了城门，指着城流眼泪说： 朱氏灭唐社稷，三尺高的小都知道他的为人。
English: Shi Guozhong went out of the city gate, pointing to the tears flowing in the city, and said: "The Zhu Clan defeated the Tang Dynasty, and everyone under three feet tall knows who he is.

古文：而我王犹恃姻好，以长者期之，此所谓开门揖盗者也。
现代文：可是我王尚且仗恃联姻通好，以长者之心期待他，这就是所说的开门请强盗进来啊。
English: But I, the king, am still in favor of the marriage and look forward to it with the heart of an old man. This is what is meant by opening the door and inviting the robbers in.

古文：惜乎，此城之人今为虏矣！ 
现代文：可惜啊，这城内的人现在成为俘虏了！ 
English: Alas, the people of this city are now captives!

古文：梁人有亡奔真定，以其谋告镕者，镕大惧，又不敢先自绝；但遣使诣洛阳，诉称 燕兵已还，与定州讲和如故，深、冀民见魏博兵入，奔走惊骇，乞召兵还。 
现代文：梁人有逃奔到真定的，把后梁太祖想要移调镇、定的图谋告诉王熔，王熔非常害怕，又不敢先自己断绝与后梁的关系；只是派遣使者到洛阳，诉说： 燕兵已经撤走，与定讲和像从前一样，深州、冀州人民看见魏博军队进城，奔走惊慌，乞求把魏博军队召回。 
English: The Liang people fled to Zhengjian and told Wang Rong about the plot of Hou Liang's great-great-grandfather to transfer the town to Zhengjian. Wang Rong was very afraid and did not dare to break off the relationship with Hou Liang first. However, he sent an envoy to Luoyang and said: Yan soldiers have withdrawn, and as in the past, when the people of Shenzhou and Jizhou saw the Weibo army enter the city, they panicked and begged for the Weibo army to be recalled.

古文：上遣使诣真定慰谕之。
现代文：太祖派遣使者到直定慰劳宣谕他们。
English: The great-grandfather sent an envoy to Zhouding to comfort and preach to them.

古文：未几，廷隐等闭门尽杀赵戍兵，乘城拒守。
现代文：过了不外，杜廷隐等关闭城门，把赵的戍防兵士全部杀死，登城抵御防守。
English: After a while, Du Tingyin and others closed the city gate, killed all of Zhao's soldiers, and went to the city to resist the defense.

古文：镕始命石公立攻之，不克，乃遣使求援于燕、晋。
现代文：王熔才命令石公立攻打，不能攻取，于是派遣使者向燕、晋求援。
English: Wang Rongcai ordered Shiguang to attack, but was unable to capture it, so he sent an envoy to Yan and Jin for help.

古文：镕使者至晋阳，义武节度使王处直使者亦至，欲共推晋王为盟主，合兵攻梁。
现代文：王熔的使者到晋阳，义武节度使王处直的使者也到了，想要共同推举晋王李存勖为盟主，合兵攻后梁。
English: Wang Rong's emissaries came to Jinyang, and the emissaries of Wang Zhanzhong, who were sent by the Festival of the Volunteers to make Wang Zhanzhong king, also came. They wanted to jointly nominate the king of Jin, Li Cunxu, as the leader of the alliance, and together they attacked Houliang.

古文：晋王会将佐谋之，皆曰： 镕久臣硃温，岁输重赂，结以婚姻，其交深矣，此必诈也，宜徐观之。 
现代文：晋王会同将佐商议对策，都说： 王熔长期向朱温称臣，每年输送众多的财物，结为儿女姻亲，他们的交情太深了。这一定是欺骗手段，应当慢慢观察他们的动静。 
English: Jin Wang would discuss countermeasures with General Su, and they all said: Wang Rong has long been a loyal subject to Zhu Wen, and every year he sends a large amount of wealth to Zhu Wen, and they have become sons and daughters and in-laws. Their friendship is too deep. This must be a means of deception, and we should slowly observe their movements.

古文：王曰： 彼亦择利害而为之耳。
现代文：李存勖说： 他也是择其利害而为之罢了。
English: Li Cunxu said: He also chose his interests and did it.

古文：王氏在唐世犹或臣或叛，况肯终为硃氏之臣乎？
现代文：王氏在唐代尚且有时臣属、有时叛变，怎么肯愿意始终做朱氏的臣子呢？
English: In the Tang Dynasty, the Wang clan was sometimes a vassal and sometimes a renegade. How could they be willing to always be a vassal of the Zhu clan?

古文：彼硃温之女何如寿安公主！
现代文：那个朱温的女儿怎么比得上寿安公主！
English: How does that Zhu Wen's daughter compare to Princess Shouan!

古文：今救死不赡，何顾婚姻！
现代文：现在救死都不够，哪里还顾得上婚姻！
English: Now it is not enough to save a life, you have to save a marriage!

古文：我若疑而不救，正堕硃氏计中。
现代文：我如果怀疑他而不去援救，正好落入朱氏的计谋之中。
English: If I suspected him and didn't go to his rescue, I would fall right into Zhu's scheme.

古文：宜趣发兵赴之，晋、赵叶力，破梁必矣。 
现代文：应当急速发兵前往，晋、赵协力，打败梁兵是肯定的了。 
English: Jin and Zhao should quickly send troops to the scene and work together to defeat Liang.

古文：乃发兵，遣周德威将之，出井陉，屯赵州。
现代文：于是发兵，派遣周德威领兵，出井陉，驻扎赵州。
English: As a result, troops were dispatched and Zhou Dewei was sent to lead the troops and stationed in Zhaozhou.

古文：镕使者至幽州，燕王守光方猎，幕僚孙鹤驰诣野谓守光曰： 赵人来乞师，此天欲成王之功业也。 
现代文：王熔的使者到幽州，燕王刘守光正在外出打猎，幕僚孙鹤驰往野外打猎的地方对刘守光说： 赵人前来乞求援兵，这是上天想要成全大王的功业了。 
English: Wang Rong's emissary came to Yuzhou, and Yan Wang Liu Shuguang was out hunting. Sun He, an aide-de-camp, went to the field hunting place and said to Liu Shuguang: Zhao people come to beg for reinforcements, this is God's will to accomplish the great king's work.

古文：守光曰： 何故？ 
现代文：刘守光说： 这是什么缘故？ 
English: Liu Shuguang said: What is the reason for this?

古文：对曰： 比常患其与硃温胶固。
现代文：孙鹤回答说： 近来常常忧虑王熔与朱温关系牢固。
English: Sun He replied, "Recently, I often worry that the relationship between Wang Rong and Zhu Wen is strong.

古文：温之志非尽吞河朔不已，今彼自为仇敌，王若与之并力破梁，则镇、定皆敛衤任而朝燕矣。
现代文：朱温的志向是不全部吞并河朔不会停止，现在他们自己为仇敌，大王如果与王熔并力打败梁兵，那么镇州、定州都是提起衣襟朝见燕王了。
English: Zhu Wen's ambition is not to annex all of Hexuo and will not stop. Now they themselves are the enemy. If the great king merges with the king and defeats the Liang soldiers, then Zhenzhou and Dingzhou will all raise their collars to see the swallow king.

古文：王不早出师，但恐晋人先我矣。 
现代文：大王您不出兵，只怕晋人已经在我之先发兵了。 
English: Great King, if you do not send troops, I am afraid that the Jin people have already sent troops ahead of me.

古文：守光曰： 王镕数负约，今使之与梁自相弊，吾可以坐承其利，又何救焉！ 
现代文：刘守光说： 王熔屡次背弃盟约，现在让他与梁自相败坏，我可以坐收其利，救他做什么呢！ 
English: Liu Shuguang said: Wang Rong has repeatedly reneged on the covenant, now let him and Liang self-destruct, I can reap the benefits, what can I do to save him!

古文：赵使者交错于路，守光竟不为出兵。
现代文：赵的使者在路上接连不断，刘守光结果不发兵救援。
English: Zhao's envoys kept arriving one after another on the road, but Liu Shouguang did not send troops for rescue.

古文：自是镇、定复称唐天祐年号，复以武顺为成德军。
现代文：从此镇州王熔、定州王处直又称唐天年号，再将武顺军改称成德军。
English: From then on, Zhenzhou Wangluo and Dingzhou Wangchuanzhi, also known as Tang Tiannian, renamed the Wushun Army as the German Army.

古文：司天言： 来月太阴亏，不利宿兵于外。 
现代文：后梁主管观察天象的官员说： 下月月亮亏缺不利于在外面住宿军队。 
English: Hou Liang, an official in charge of observing celestial objects, said: The lack of the moon next month is not conducive to accommodating troops outside.

古文：上召王景仁等还洛阳。
现代文：后梁太祖召王景仁等回洛阳。
English: Later, Liang Taizu summoned Wang Jingren and others back to Luoyang.

古文：十二月，己未，上闻赵与晋合，晋兵已屯赵州，乃命王景仁等将兵击之。
现代文：十二月已未，太祖听说赵王王熔与晋王李存勖联合，晋兵驻扎赵州，于是命令王景仁等率兵前去攻打。
English: It was not yet December, when Taizu heard that Zhao Wang Wang Rong and Jin King Li Cunxu had united, and Jin soldiers were stationed in Zhao Prefecture, so he ordered Wang Jingren and other soldiers to attack.

古文：庚申，景仁等自河阳渡河，会罗周翰兵，合四万，军于邢、洺。
现代文：庚申，王景仁等自河阳渡过黄河，会同天雄留后罗周翰的军队，合兵四万，在邢州、州扎营。
English: Goshun, Wang Jingren and others crossed the Yellow River from Heyang, and together with Tianxiong stayed behind. Luo Zhouhan's army, with a total of 40,000 soldiers, set up camp in Zhangzhou and Zhouzhou.

古文：虔州刺史卢光稠疾病，欲以位授谭全播，全播不受。
现代文：虔州刺史卢光稠病重，想要把职位授予谭全播，谭全播不接受。
English: Gyeongju Gyeongsu Lu is seriously ill and wants to give the position to Tan Quan Biao, but Tan Quan Biao does not accept.

古文：光稠卒，其子韶州刺史延昌来奔丧，全播立而事之。
现代文：卢光稠病逝，他的儿子韶州刺史卢延昌到虔州奔丧，谭全播拥立并侍奉他。
English: Lu Guangzhu died of illness. His son, Zhangzhou Jishu Lu Yanchang, went to Qizhou to mourn, and Tan Quanbo supported and served him.

古文：吴遣使拜延昌虔州刺史，延昌受之，亦因楚王殷通密表于梁，曰： 我受淮南官，以缓其谋耳，必为朝廷经略江西。 
现代文：吴派遣使者授予卢延昌虔州刺史，卢延昌接受了，也通过楚王马殷秘密地向后梁通表，说： 我接受淮南的官职，藉以缓和他们的图谋罢了，一定为朝廷谋划治理江西。 
English: Wu sent an emissary to grant Lu Yanchang the post of governor of Qizhou. Lu Yanchang accepted, and through the king of Chu, Ma Yin, secretly sent a telegram to Liang Tong, saying: I accept the official post of Huainan, just to ease their plans, and I will definitely plan to govern Jiangxi for the imperial court.

古文：丙寅，以延昌为镇南留后。
现代文：丙寅，后梁任命卢延昌为镇南留后。
English: Cui Yin, Hou Liang appointed Lu Yanchang as the leader of the south of the town.

古文：延昌表其将廖爽为韶州刺史，爽，赣人也。
现代文：卢延昌上表委任他的部将廖爽为韶州刺史。廖爽是赣州人。
English: Lu Yanchang appointed his subordinate Liao Shuang, a native of Zhangzhou, as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：吴淮南节度判官严可求请置制置使于新淦县，遣兵戍之，以图虔州。
现代文：吴淮南节度判官严可求请求在淦县设置制置使，派遣军队戍守，以便谋取虔州。
English: Wu Huainan, the judge of the festival, can strictly request to set up an envoy in Jixian County and send troops to guard it, so as to seek success in Qianzhou.

古文：每更代，辄潜益其兵，虔人不之觉也。
现代文：每次更换交替，就在暗中增加新淦县驻兵，虔州有没有察觉。
English: Every time there is a change, Xinlu County's garrison is surreptitiously increased, whether Qianzhou is aware of it or not.

古文：庚午，蜀主以御史中丞周庠、户部侍郎判度支庾传素并为中书侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：庚午，前蜀主王建任命御史中丞周庠、户部侍郎判度支庾传素同为中书侍郎、同平章事。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, Wang Jian, the former Grand Master of the Shu Dynasty, appointed Zhou Xuan, the Vice-Minister of History, as the Vice-Minister of History, and Zhang Du, the Vice-Minister of Household Affairs, as the Vice-Minister of Household Affairs.

古文：太常卿李燕等刊定《梁律令格式》，癸酉，行之。
现代文：太常卿李燕等刊定《梁律令格式》，癸酉颁行。
English: "Liang Ruling Format" was published by Li Yan and others, and issued.

古文：丁丑，王景仁等进军柏乡。
现代文：丁丑，王景仁等进军柏乡。
English: Ding Gou, Wang Jingren and others march into Baoxiang.

古文：辛巳，蜀大赦，改明年元曰永平。
现代文：辛巳，前蜀实行大赦，改明年年号为永平。
English: Soon after, the former Shu implemented an amnesty and changed its name to Yongping the next year.

古文：赵王镕复告急于晋，晋王以蕃汉副总管李存审守晋阳，自将兵自赞皇东下，王处直遣将将兵五千以从。
现代文：赵王王熔再次向晋告急，晋王李存勖任命蕃汉副总管李存审守卫晋阳，亲自统率军队自赞皇向东进发，王处直派遣部将率兵五千跟从。
English: Zhao Wang Wang Rong once again made an urgent appeal to Jin. Jin King Li Cunxu appointed Li Cunxin, the vice-governor of Shihang, to guard Jinyang. He personally led the army to march eastward with the emperor's approval. Wang Shizhong dispatched a detachment of five thousand soldiers to follow.

古文：辛巳，晋王至赵州，与周德威合，获梁刍荛者二百人，问之曰： 初发洛阳，梁主有何号令？ 
现代文：辛巳，李存勖率兵到达赵州，与周德威会合，俘获割草打柴的后梁兵二百人，问他们说： 当初从洛阳出发的时候，梁主有什么号令？ 
English: Soon after, Li Cunxu and his soldiers arrived in Zhaozhou and met with Zhou Dewei. They captured 200 of Liang's soldiers who were cutting grass and chopping wood, and asked them: What was Liang's order when he set out from Luoyang?

古文：对曰： 梁主戒上将云： 镇州反覆，终为子孙之患。
现代文：后梁兵回答说： 梁主告诫上将说： 镇州王熔反复无常，终究要成为子孙的祸患。
English: Afterward, Liang Bing replied, "Master Liang warned the admiral: Zhenzhou Wang Rong is fickle and will eventually become a scourge to his descendants.

古文：今悉以精兵付汝，镇州虽以铁为城，必为我取之。  
现代文：现在把精锐部队都交付给你，镇州即使用铁铸城，也一定为我夺取。  
English: Now I'm handing over all the elite troops to you. Even if I have to use the iron cast city of Zhenzhou, I'll definitely capture it for you.

古文：晋王命送于赵。
现代文：李存勖命令把俘获的后梁兵送到赵王王熔那里去。
English: Li Cunxu ordered the captured soldiers of Houliang to be sent to Zhao Wangwanglu.

古文：壬午，晋王进军，距柏乡三十里，遣周德威等以胡骑迫梁营挑战，梁兵不出。
现代文：壬午，李存勖率军前进，距离柏乡三十里，派遣周德威等率胡人骑兵逼近后梁营挑战，后梁兵不出。
English: At noon, Li Cunxu led the army forward, 30 miles away from Baixiang, and dispatched Zhou Dewei and other Hu cavalry to challenge Houliang camp. Houliang soldiers did not come out.

古文：癸未，复进，距柏乡五里，营于野河之北，又遣胡骑迫梁营驰射，且诟之。
现代文：癸未，又和前推进，距柏乡五里，在野河的北面扎营，又派遣胡人骑兵逼近后梁营纵马射箭，并且辱骂他们。
English: In the afternoon, they again advanced together, five miles away from Baixiang, camped on the north side of the wild river, and sent Hu cavalry to approach Houliang camp to shoot arrows and abuse them.

古文：梁将韩勍等将步骑三万，分三道追之，铠胄皆被缯绮，镂金银，光彩炫耀，晋人望之夺气。
现代文：梁将韩等率领步兵、骑兵三万人马，分三路追击挑战的晋兵，铁甲头盔都披着华丽的丝织品，雕刻着金银花纹，光彩闪烁夺目，晋兵望见不禁丧失士气。
English: Liang will Han and others led the infantry, cavalry thirty thousand horses, divided into three ways to pursue the challenging Jin soldiers, iron armor helmets are covered with gorgeous silk fabrics, carved with gold and silver patterns, glittering, Jin soldiers can not help but lose morale.

古文：周德威谓李存璋曰： 梁人志不在战，徒欲曜兵耳。
现代文：周德威对李存璋说： 梁人的目的不在争战，只是显示兵威罢了。
English: Zhou Dewei said to Li Cunxu: Liang's purpose is not to fight, but to show military prowess.

古文：不挫其锐，则吾军不振。 
现代文：不挫伤他们的锐气，我军就不能振作。 
English: Without dampening their spirits, our army cannot be invigorated.

古文：乃徇于军曰： 彼皆汴州天武军，屠酤亻庸贩之徒耳，衣铠虽鲜，十不能当汝一。
现代文：于是巡视军中说： 他都是汴州的天武军，屠夫、酒徒、佣工、商贩之类罢了，衣甲虽然鲜艳，十个人不能抵挡你们一个人。
English: So the inspection team said, "He's all from the Heaven's Army of Zhangzhou, butchers, alcoholics, domestic workers, traders and the like. Although his clothing and armor are bright, ten people can't resist one of you."

古文：擒获一夫，足以自富，此乃奇货，不可失也。 
现代文：擒获他们一个人，足够使自己富裕了，这是奇货，不可失去啊！ 
English: Capturing just one of them is enough to make you rich. It's a rare commodity, you can't lose it!

古文：德威自帅精骑千馀击其两端，左驰右突，出入数四，俘获百馀人，且战且却，距野河而止。梁兵亦退。
现代文：周德威亲自带领精锐骑兵一千余人攻击后梁兵的两头，左右奔驰冲击，出入再四，俘获一百余人，边战边退，到野河为止，后梁兵也撤退了。
English: Zhou Dewei personally led more than a thousand elite cavalry to attack the two ends of the rear beam soldiers, the left and right Mercedes impact, the entrance and exit are four, more than a hundred people are captured, the battle is retreating, until the wild river, the rear beam soldiers have also retreated.

古文：德威言于晋王曰： 贼势甚盛，宜按兵以待其衰。 
现代文：周德威向晋王说： 贼人的声势很盛，应当按兵不动来等待他们士气衰退。 
English: Zhou Dewei said to the King of Jin, "The thieves are making a lot of noise, so we should wait for their morale to decline.

古文：王曰： 吾孤军远来，救人之急，三镇乌合，利于速战，公乃欲按兵持重，何也？ 
现代文：晋王李存勖说： 我孤军远道而来，救别人的危急，三镇军队是乌合之众，利于速战速决，您却要按兵不动持重求稳，什么缘故呢？ 
English: King of Jin Li Cunxu said: I have come a long way alone to save others from danger. The three-town army is a ragtag crowd, which is conducive to quick battle and quick decision, but you want to seek stability by not moving troops. What is the reason?

古文：德威曰： 镇、定之兵，长于守城，短于野战。
现代文：周德威说： 镇州、定州的军队，坚守城池是他们的长处，在城外旷野里作战是他们的短处。
English: Zhou Dewei said: Zhenzhou and Dingzhou armies, holding the city is their strength, fighting in the wilderness outside the city is their weakness.

古文：且吾所恃者骑兵，利于平原广野，可以驰突。
现代文：我军所仗恃的是骑兵，在平原旷野里作战最为有利，可以纵马奔驰冲击。
English: What our army relies on is cavalry. It is most advantageous to fight on the plains and in the wilderness, and it can be attacked from horseback.

古文：今压贼垒门，骑无所展其足。
现代文：现在迫近敌人的营垒墙门，战马没有施展它的四足的地方。
English: Now approaching the gate of the enemy's camp wall, there was no place for the horse to stretch its four legs.

古文：且众寡不敌，使彼知吾虚实，则事危矣。 
现代文：况且敌众我寡难于持久，如果敌人知道我军的虚实，那就危险了。 
English: Moreover, it is difficult for us to hold out against a large number of enemies. If the enemy knew the truth about our army, it would be dangerous.

古文：王不悦，退卧帐中，诸将莫敢言。
现代文：李存勖不高兴，退入帐中躺在床上，诸将没有人敢说话。
English: After listening to Zhou Dewei's explanation, Jin Wang was still not satisfied, so he took a break and rested. Other generals saw the displeasure on Jin Wang's face and did not dare to say anything more.

古文：德威往见张承业曰： 大王骤胜而轻敌，不量力而务速战。
现代文：周德威前去见监军张承业，说： 大王突然胜利就轻敌，不量力就追求速战。
English: Zhou Dewei went to see Zhang Chengye, the supervisor of the army, and said: The great king suddenly won the victory and despised the enemy, and pursued a quick war without any effort.

古文：今去贼咫尺，所限者一水耳。彼若造桥以薄我，我众立尽矣。
现代文：现在离敌人只有咫尺，两军不过一水之隔罢了，敌人如果造桥过河来逼近我军，我军兵众立刻就会被消。
English: At present, we are only a few feet away from the enemy, and the two armies are only separated by water. If the enemy builds a bridge across the river to approach our army, our soldiers will be eliminated immediately.

古文：不若退军高邑，诱贼离营，彼出则归，彼归则出，别以轻骑掠其馈饷，不过逾月，破之必矣。 
现代文：不如退兵到高邑，引诱敌人离开营垒，他们出来我们就回营，他们回营我们就出来，另派轻捷骑兵抄夺他们输送的粮饷，不过一个多月，打败敌人是必然无疑了。 
English: It would be better to retreat to Gaoyou, lure the enemy away from the camp, let them come out and we will return to the camp, let them return to the camp and we will come out, and send other light cavalry to seize the grain they transported, but for more than a month, there was no doubt that the enemy would be defeated.

古文：承业入褰帐抚王曰： 此岂王安寝时耶！
现代文：张承业进去，掀帐拍着晋王李存勖说： 现在难道是大王安稳睡觉的时候吗！
English: Zhang Chengye went in and patted the door and said to the king of Jin, Li Cunxu, "Isn't it time for the king to sleep soundly?"

古文：周德威老将知兵，其言不可忽也。 
现代文：周德威老将知兵，他的话不可忽视啊！ 
English: Zhou Dewei is a veteran, his words should not be ignored!

古文：王蹶然兴曰： 予方思之。 
现代文：李存勖突然站起来说： 我正在思考他的建议！ 
English: Li Cunxu suddenly stood up and said: I am thinking about his suggestion!

古文：时梁兵闭垒不出，有降者，诘之，曰： 景仁方多造浮桥。 
现代文：当时后梁兵关闭营垒不出，有来投降的便盘问他们，回答说： 王景仁正在造许多浮桥。 
English: At that time, Liang's soldiers closed the camp and did not come out, and those who came to surrender interrogated them and replied: Wang Jingren is building many floating bridges.

古文：王谓德威曰： 果如公言。 
现代文：李存勖对周德威说： 果然像您说的那样。 
English: Jin Wang said to Zhou Dewei: The general's expectations were not met.

古文：是日，拔营，退保高邑。
现代文：当天，撤营退保高邑。
English: On the same day, the camp was withdrawn to Baogao-eup.

古文：辰州蛮酋宋鄴，溆州蛮酋潘金盛，恃其所居深险，数扰楚边。
现代文：辰州蛮的首领宋邺，溆州蛮的首领潘金盛，仗恃他们的住处深险，屡次侵扰楚的边境。
English: The chieftain of the Chenzhou barbarians, Song Xi, and the chieftain of the Chenzhou barbarians, Pan Jinsheng, repeatedly invaded the border of Chu because their residence was in danger.

古文：至是，鄴寇湘乡，金盛寇武冈，楚王殷遣昭州刺史吕师周将衡山兵五千讨之。
现代文：到这时候，宋邺侵犯湘乡，潘金盛侵犯武冈。楚王马殷派遣昭州刺史吕师周率领衡山兵五千讨伐他们。
English: At this time, Song Xi invaded Hunan and Pan Jinsheng invaded Wu Gang. King Ma Yin of Chu dispatched Zhou Shishi Lv Shi Zhou to lead five thousand Hengshan soldiers to fight them.

古文：宁远节度使庞巨昭、高州防御使刘昌鲁，皆唐官也。
现代文：宁远节度使庞巨昭、高州防御使刘昌鲁，都是唐朝官员。
English: The governor of Ningyuan, Pang Jiazhao, and the governor of Gaozhou, Liu Changlu, were both officials of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：黄巢之寇岭南也，巨昭为容管观察使，昌鲁为高州刺史，帅群蛮据险以拒之，巢众不敢入境。
现代文：黄巢进攻岭南的时候，庞巨昭任容管观察使，刘昌鲁任高州刺史，率领群蛮据险抵抗，黄巢的军队不敢进入境内。
English: When Huang Chao attacked Lingnan, Pang Jiu Zhao was appointed as the observation envoy of the people's government, and Liu Changlu was appointed as the governor of Gaozhou, leading a group of wild resistance. Huang Chao's army did not dare to enter the territory.

古文：唐嘉其功，置宁远军于容州，以巨昭为节度使，以昌鲁为高州防御使。
现代文：唐廷嘉奖他们的功绩，在容州设置宁远军，任命庞巨昭为节度使，任命刘昌鲁为高州防御使。
English: Tang Ting commended their achievements, set up the Ningyuan Army in Rongzhou, appointed Pang Jiao Zhao as the Minister of Defense, and appointed Liu Changlu as the Minister of Defense of Gaozhou.

古文：及刘隐据岭南，二州不从；隐遣弟岩攻高州，昌鲁大破之，又攻容州，亦不克。
现代文：等到刘隐占岭南，二州不从；刘隐派遣他的弟弟刘岩攻打高州，刘昌鲁把他打得大败；又进攻容州，也没有攻克。
English: When Liu Ying occupied Lingnan, the two states did not follow; Liu Ying sent his brother Liu Yan to attack Gaozhou, and Liu Changlu defeated him; he also attacked Yongzhou, but did not conquer it.

古文：昌鲁自度终非隐敌，是岁，致书请自归于楚。楚王殷大喜，遣横州刺史姚彦章将兵迎之。
现代文：刘昌鲁自己估计终究不是刘隐的敌手，这一年，写信给楚请求自愿归附，楚王马殷大喜，派遣横州刺史姚彦章率兵前往迎接他。
English: Liu Changlu himself estimated that he was not Liu Yin's enemy after all. This year, he wrote to Chu to request voluntary annexation. King of Chu, Ma Yin, was overjoyed and dispatched Yangzhou's leader Yao Yanzhang and his soldiers to meet him.

古文：彦章至容州，裨将莫彦昭说巨昭曰： 湖南兵远来疲乏，宜撤储偫，弃城，潜于山谷以待之。
现代文：姚彦章到达容州，副将莫彦昭劝庞巨昭说： 湖南军队远来疲乏，应当撤去储备，抛弃城池，隐藏在山谷里等待他们。
English: When Yao Yanzhang arrived in Yongzhou, Vice Admiral Mo Yanzhao advised Pang Jiao Zhao, saying, "The Hunan army has been exhausted for a long time. It should withdraw its reserves, abandon the city, and hide in the valley to wait for them."

古文：彼必入城，我以全军掩之，彼外无继援，可擒也。 
现代文：他们一定入城，我们用全军袭击，他们在城外没有继续到来的援兵，可以擒住了。 
English: They will certainly enter the city, we will attack with the whole army, and they can hold out without reinforcements from outside the city.

古文：巨昭曰： 马氏方兴，今虽胜之，后将何如！
现代文：庞巨昭说： 马氏正在兴起，现在虽然战胜了他，以后将怎么办！
English: Pang Jiao Zhao said: Mr. Ma is on the rise, and although he has defeated him now, what will happen in the future!

古文：不若具牛酒迎之。 
现代文：不如准备牛酒饭食迎接他们。 
English: We might as well prepare beef, wine and food to welcome them.

古文：彦昭不从，巨昭杀之，举州迎降。
现代文：莫彦昭不从，庞巨昭把他杀死，率州迎降。
English: Mo Yan Zhao did not comply, Pang Jiu Zhao killed him and led the state to surrender.

古文：彦章进至高州，以兵援送巨昭、昌鲁之族及士卒千馀人归长沙。
现代文：姚彦章前进到达高州，用军队援助护送庞巨昭、刘昌鲁的亲族及士卒一千余人回长沙。
English: Yao Yanzhang advanced to Gaozhou and used the army to escort more than a thousand relatives and soldiers of Pang Jiao Zhao and Liu Changlu back to Changsha.

古文：楚王殷以彦章知容州事，以昌鲁为永顺节度副使。
现代文：楚王马殷任命姚彦章主持容州事务，任命刘昌鲁为永顺节度副使。
English: King Ma Yin of Chu appointed Yao Yanzhang to preside over the affairs of Yongzhou, and appointed Liu Changlu as the deputy envoy of Yongshun.

古文：昌鲁，鄴人也。
现代文：刘昌鲁是邺县人。
English: Liu Changlu is from Jixian County.

古文：太祖神武元圣孝皇帝中乾化元年
现代文：乾化元年春季，正月，丙戌朔，发生日食。
English: In the spring of the first year of the Qianhua era, the solar eclipse occurred in the first month of the year.

古文：春，正月，丙戌朔，日有食之。柏乡比不储刍，梁兵刈刍自给，晋人日以游军抄之，梁兵不出。
现代文：柏乡近来不贮存草料，后梁兵割草供给自己，晋人每天用流动部队抄掠他们，后梁兵不出营寨。
English: Recently, Baixiang did not store grass materials, and Houliang soldiers cut grass to supply themselves. Jin people plundered them with mobile troops every day, and Houliang soldiers did not leave the camp.

古文：周德威使胡骑环营驰射而诟之，梁兵疑有伏，愈不敢出，坐刂屋茅坐席以饲马，马多死。
现代文：周德威派遣胡人骑兵环绕后梁营奔驰射箭并辱骂他们，后梁兵怀疑设有埋伏，更加不敢出营，铡碎屋茅坐席来养马匹，马多有饿死的。
English: Zhou Dewei sent Hu horsemen to surround Houliang's camp to shoot arrows and abuse them. Houliang's soldiers suspected that there was an ambush, and they were even more afraid to leave the camp. They chopped down the stables to feed the horses, and many horses died of starvation.

古文：丁亥，周德威与别将史建瑭、李嗣源将精骑三千压梁垒门而诟之，王景仁、韩勍怒，悉众而出。
现代文：丁亥，周德威与别将史建瑭、李嗣源率领三千精锐骑兵逼近后梁军营门辱骂，王景仁、韩大怒，率领全体部众出战。
English: Ding Hai, Zhou Dewei and the other generals Shi Jianqian and Li Siyuan led 3,000 elite cavalrymen to approach Houliang's camp gate and insulted him. Wang Jingren and Han Da were angry and led the entire army to fight.

古文：德威等转战而北至高邑南；李存璋以步兵陈于野河之上，梁军横亘数里，竞前夺桥，镇、定步兵御之，势不能支。
现代文：周德威等转战到达高邑南边。晋将李存璋率步兵在野河岸边列阵，后梁军东西绵延数里，争相向前抢夺桥梁，镇州、定州的步兵抵御他们，势不能支。
English: Zhou Dewei and others turned to battle and reached the south of Gaoyun. Jin led Li Cunxu and his infantry lined up on the banks of the Yangtze River. Liang's army stretched for several miles to the east and west, scrambling forward to seize bridges. The infantrymen of Zhenzhou and Dingzhou could not resist them.

古文：晋王谓匡卫都指挥使李建及曰： 贼过桥则不可复制矣。 
现代文：晋王李存勖对匡卫都指挥使李建及说： 梁贼过桥就不能再遏制他们了。 
English: The Jin king Li Cunxu said to the commander of the Kuangwei capital Li Jianyi: "If the Liang thieves cross the bridge, we can no longer contain them.

古文：建及选卒二百，援枪大噪，力战却之。
现代文：李建及挑选步兵二百名，手执长枪大声喧噪，努力奋战把后梁兵打退。
English: Li Jian and selected two hundred infantrymen, holding long guns loudly and noisily, fought hard to beat back the rear soldiers.

古文：建及，许州人，姓王，李罕之之假子也。
现代文：李建及是许州人，姓王，是李罕之的养子。
English: Li Jianji is a native of Huzhou with the surname Wang. He is the adopted son of Li Han.

古文：晋王登高丘以望曰： 梁兵争进而嚣，我兵整而静，我必胜。 
现代文：晋王李存勖登上小土山眺望两军对战情形说： 梁兵争相前进而喧哗，我兵整齐有序而安静严肃，我军一定胜利。 
English: Li Cunxu, the king of Jin, climbed up the small hill of Dushan to look at the situation of the battle between the two armies and said: Liang soldiers are rushing forward and noisy, our soldiers are neat and orderly and quiet and serious, our army is sure to win.

古文：战自巳至午，胜负未决。
现代文：战斗自巳时打到午时，两个时辰没有决出胜负。
English: The battle lasted from noon to noon, and the outcome was not decided for two hours.

古文：晋王谓周德威曰： 两军已合，势不可离，我之兴亡，在此一举。
现代文：李存勖对周德威说： 两军已经交战，势难分开，我们的兴亡，就在此一举。
English: Li Cunxu said to Zhou Dewei: The two armies have already been at war, it is difficult to separate them, and our rise and fall is in this one move.

古文：我为公先登，公可继之。 
现代文：我为您先冲上前去，您可以随后跟上。 
English: I'll go ahead of you. You can follow later.

古文：德威叩马而谏曰： 观梁兵之势，可以劳逸制之，未易以力胜也。
现代文：周德威拉住战马，直言劝诫说： 观察梁兵的情势，可以逸待劳制服他，不易用力量战胜他。
English: Zhou Dewei pulled up his warhorse and bluntly admonished: "Observe the situation of Liang Bing, you can work hard to subdue him, it is not easy to use strength to defeat him.

古文：彼去营三十馀里，虽挟糗粮，亦不暇食，日昳之后，饥渴内迫，矢刃外交，士卒劳倦，必有退志。
现代文：梁兵离开营地三十余里，即使带着干粮，也没有空闲时间吃，日落以后，饥渴在腹中相逼，箭矢兵刃在身外交加，士卒劳累疲倦，一定有退却之心。
English: Liang soldiers leave the camp for more than 30 miles, even if they bring dry food, there is no free time to eat. After sunset, hunger and thirst are in the stomach, arrows and arrows are in the body, soldiers are tired and tired, and they must have a retreating heart.

古文：当是时，我以精骑乘之，必大捷。于今未可也。 
现代文：这时，我用精锐骑兵追逐他们，一定大胜，现在不可攻击啊！ 
English: At this time, I chased them with my elite cavalry. I am sure to win a great victory. Don't attack now!

古文：王乃止。
现代文：李存勖这才止住。
English: Wang Hun therefore did not respond.

古文：时魏、滑之兵陈于东、宋、汴之兵陈于西。
现代文：当时，魏州、滑州的后梁兵在东边列阵，宋州、汴州的后梁兵在西边列阵。
English: At that time, the rear-beam soldiers of Wei Province and Slanting Province lined up in the east, and the rear-beam soldiers of Song Province and Ganzhou lined up in the west.

古文：至晡，梁军未食，士无斗志，景仁等引兵稍却，周德威疾呼曰： 梁兵走矣！ 
现代文：到太阳下山的时候，后梁军没有吃东西，兵士没有斗志，王景仁等带兵逐渐退却，周德威大声呼喊说： 梁兵跑了！ 
English: By the time the sun went down, the Liang army had nothing to eat, the soldiers had no fighting spirit, Wang Jingren and other leaders gradually retreated, Zhou Dewei shouted loudly: Liang soldiers ran away!

古文：晋兵大噪争进，魏、滑兵先退，李嗣源帅众噪于西陈之前曰： 东陈已走，尔何久留！ 
现代文：晋兵大喧噪，争相前进，魏州、滑州军队先退，李嗣源率众在西边阵前大声呼叫，说： 东阵已经逃跑，你们为什么久留！ 
English: The Jin soldiers made a lot of noise and scrambled to advance. The Wei and Slate armies retreated first. Li Siyuan led the crowd in front of the Western Front and shouted loudly, saying: The Eastern Front has fled, why did you stay so long!

古文：梁兵互相惊怖，遂大溃。
现代文：后梁兵互相惊慌恐怖，于是大溃。
English: The rear-beam soldiers panicked and terrified each other, resulting in a rout.

古文：李存璋引步兵乘之，呼曰： 梁人亦吾人也，父兄子弟饷军者勿杀。 
现代文：李存璋率领步兵追逐逃散的梁兵，大呼唤说： 梁人也是我们的人，父兄子弟运送军粮的不杀。 
English: Li Cunxu led the infantry to chase the fleeing Liang soldiers, shouting loudly: Liang people are also our people, do not kill fathers and brothers transporting military food.

古文：于是战士悉解甲投兵而弃之，嚣声动天地。
现代文：于是，梁兵都脱下铠甲，扔掉兵器，喧哗声惊天动地。
English: As a result, Liang soldiers took off their armor, threw away their weapons, and the noise was earth-shattering.

古文：赵人以深、冀之憾，不顾剽掠，但奋白刃追之，梁之龙骧、神捷精兵殆尽，自野河至柏乡，僵尸蔽地。
现代文：赵人怀着后梁兵屠杀深州、冀州戍卒的仇恨，顾不上抢夺财物，只是挥舞利刃追杀后梁兵，兵梁的龙骧、神捷两军的精兵几乎全歼，从野河到柏乡，伏尸遍地。
English: The Zhao people, with the hatred of the soldiers of Houliang who slaughtered the soldiers of Shenzhou and Jizhou, did not take into account the looting of property, but only waved the sharp blade to chase and kill the soldiers of Houliang. The soldiers of Houliang, Longyu, and the elite soldiers of the two armies were almost completely annihilated, from Yihe to Baixiang, and the corpses were everywhere.

古文：王景仁、韩勍、李思安以数十骑走。
现代文：王景仁、韩、李思安率数十名骑兵逃走。
English: Wang Jingren, Han Han and Li Sian led dozens of cavalrymen to escape.

古文：晋兵夜至柏乡，梁军已去，弃粮食、资财、器械不可胜计。
现代文：晋兵夜里到达柏乡，后梁兵已经离开，抛弃的粮食、资财、器械不可计算。
English: The Jin soldiers arrived at Baixiang at night, the Houliang soldiers had already left, and the abandoned grain, resources, and equipment were incalculable.

古文：凡斩首二万级。
现代文：总共斩首二万级。
English: A total of 20,000 heads were chopped off.

古文：李嗣源等追奔至邢州，河朔大震。
现代文：李嗣源等追赶到邢州，河朔大为震动。
English: Li Siyuan and others chased them to Ganzhou, and the river was greatly shaken.

古文：保义节度使王檀严备，然后开城纳败卒，给以资粮，散遣归本道。
现代文：保义节度使王檀严密戒备，然后打开城门接纳残兵败卒，给予钱粮，分别遣送反回本道。
English: The festival of loyalty put Wangdan on high alert, and then opened the city gate to receive the remnants of the defeated soldiers, give them money and grain, and send them back to their hometowns.

古文：晋王收兵屯赵州。
现代文：晋王李存勖收兵驻扎赵州。
English: The Jin king Li Cunxu stationed troops in Zhaozhou.

古文：杜廷隐等闻梁兵败，弃深、冀而去，悉驱二州丁壮为奴婢，老弱者坑之，城中存者坏垣而已。
现代文：后梁供奉官杜廷隐等听说后梁兵失败，抛弃深州、冀州就离开了，驱赶二州的全部丁壮作为奴婢，老弱的全部活埋，城中留存的只有断墙残壁。
English: When Du Tingyin, Houliang's offering official, and others heard that Houliang's soldiers had failed, they abandoned Shenzhou and Jizhou and left. They drove out all the young and strong from the two states as slaves, and buried all the old and weak alive. All that remained in the city were the remains of broken walls.

古文：癸巳，复以杨师厚为北面都招讨使，将兵屯河阳，收集散兵，旬馀，得万人。
现代文：癸巳，后梁太祖又任命杨师厚为北面都招讨使，率兵驻扎河阳，收集逃散的兵卒，过了十几天，收得一万人。
English: Soon after, Emperor Taizu appointed Yang Shihou to be the envoy to the north, and he stationed troops in Heyang to collect the soldiers who had fled. After ten days, he had collected ten thousand people.

古文：己亥，晋王遣周德威、史建瑭将三千骑趣澶、魏，张承业、李存璋以步兵攻邢州，自以大军继之，移檄河北州县，谕以利害。
现代文：已亥，晋王李存勖派遣周德威、史建瑭率领三千骑兵奔赴澶州、魏州，张承业、李存璋率领步兵攻打邢州，自己统率大军在后面跟随，移送檄文给河北各州县，说明利害。
English: At this time, the Jin king Li Cunxu sent Zhou Dewei and Shi Jiankun, leading three thousand cavalrymen, to attack Ganzhou and Weizhou. Zhang Chengye and Li Cunxu led the infantry to attack Ganzhou, and they led a large army to follow behind. They transferred the imperial edict to all prefectures and counties in Hebei, explaining the interests.

古文：帝遣别将徐仁溥将兵千人，自西山夜入邢州，助王檀城守。
现代文：太祖派遣别将徐仁溥率领军队一千人，自西山在夜里进入邢州，协助保义节度使王檀守卫邢州城。
English: The great-great-grandfather dispatched the general Xu Renzhong, who led an army of a thousand people, from the West Mountain to enter Zhangzhou at night to assist in the loyalty festival and to make Wang Danzhong guard Zhangzhou City.

古文：己酉，罢王景仁招讨使，落平章事。
现代文：已酉，太祖罢王景仁的招讨使职务，免去平章事职衔。
English: Now that he has passed away, the great-great-grandfather has been relieved of his duties as the envoy of King Jingren, and has been exempted from the title of Pingzhangji.

古文：蜀主之女普慈公主嫁岐王从子秦州节度使继崇，公主遣宦者宋光嗣以绢书遣蜀主，言继崇骄矜嗜酒，求归成都，蜀主召公主归宁。
现代文：前蜀主王建的女儿普慈女儿嫁给了岐王李茂贞的侄子、秦州节度使李继崇，普慈公主派遣宦官宋光嗣把写在白绢上的书信送给王建，说李继崇骄矜嗜酒，请求回成都去，王建召普慈公主回归。
English: Former Shu lord Wang Jian's daughter Pu Ci's daughter married the nephew of Qi king Li Maozhen, the Qin State Festival made Li Jitong, Princess Pu Ci sent eunuch Song Guangzhi to send a letter written on a egret to Wang Jian, saying that Li Jitong was arrogant and drunk, requesting to go back to Chengdu, and Wang Jian called Princess Pu Ci to return.

古文：辛亥，公主至成都，蜀主留之，以宋光嗣为阁门南院使。
现代文：辛亥，普慈公主到达成都，王建让她留下居住，任命宋光嗣为门南院使。
English: When Xinhai and Princess Pu Ci arrived in Chengdu, Wang Jian asked her to stay and live there, and appointed Song Guangzhi as the envoy to the Southern Yuan.

古文：岐王怒，始与蜀绝。
现代文：岐王李茂贞勃然大怒，开始与前蜀断绝交往。
English: The king of Qi, Li Maozhen, flew into a rage and began to break off relations with the former Shu.

古文：光嗣，福州人也。
现代文：宋光嗣是福州人。
English: Song Guangzhi is from Fuzhou.

古文：吕师周引兵攀藤缘崖入飞山洞袭潘金盛，擒送武冈，斩之。
现代文：楚昭州刺史吕师周带领军队攀援藤条沿着崖壁进入飞山洞袭击溆州蛮首领潘金盛，把他擒住押送到武冈斩首。
English: Chu Zhaozhou assassin Lv Shizhou led the army to climb the rattan fence along the cliff into the flying cave to attack Pan Jinsheng, the leader of the Xizhou barbarians, and handcuffed him and sent him to Wugang to be beheaded.

古文：移兵击宋鄴。二月，己未，晋王至魏州，攻之，不克。
现代文：二月已未，晋王李存勖到达魏州，发动攻击，没有攻下。
English: In late February, the Jin king Li Cunxu arrived in Weizhou and launched an attack, but failed to capture the city.

古文：上以罗周翰年少，且忌其旧将佐，庚申，以户部尚书李振为天雄节度副使，命杜廷隐将兵千人卫之，自杨刘济河，间道夜入魏州，助周翰城守。
现代文：后梁太祖认为天雄留后罗周翰年纪轻，并且憎恶他父亲时的将领僚佐，庚申，任命户部尚书李振为天雄节度副使，命供奉官杜廷隐率兵一千人保卫他，从杨刘渡过黄河，从偏辟的小路在夜里进入魏州，帮助罗周翰防守。
English: Later Liang Taizu thought that Tianxiong was too young to retain Luo Zhouhan, and detested Luo Xiong, who was his father's general and aide-de-camp at the time. He appointed Shangshu Li Zhen, the head of the household department, as Tianxiong's deputy envoy for the festival, and ordered Du Tingyin, a military attaché, to lead a thousand soldiers to defend Luo Zhouhan. He crossed the Yellow River from Yang Liu and entered Weizhou at night from a remote path to help Luo Zhouhan defend the city.

古文：癸亥，晋王观河于黎阳，梁兵万馀将渡河，闻晋王至，皆弃舟而去。
现代文：癸亥，李存勖到黎阳观看黄河，一万多后梁兵将要渡黄河，听说晋王李存勖到来，都抛下船只而离开。
English: Yan Hai and Li Cunxu went to Liyang to watch the Yellow River. More than ten thousand Liang soldiers were about to cross the Yellow River. When they heard that the Jin king Li Cunxu was coming, they all left the ship and left.

古文：帝召蔡州刺史张慎思至洛阳，久未除代。
现代文：后梁太祖召蔡州刺史张慎思到洛阳，长期没有授官替代。
English: Later, Liang Taizu summoned Zhang Shanshi, the statesman of Caizhou, to Luoyang. For a long time, there was no official replacement.

古文：蔡州右厢指挥使刘行琮作乱，纵兵焚掠，将奔淮南；顺化指挥使王存俨诛行琮，抚遏其众，自领州事，以众情驰奏。
现代文：蔡州右厢指挥使刘行琮发动叛乱，放任兵丁焚烧抢掠，将要投奔淮南。顺化指挥使王存俨杀死刘行琮，安抚制止刘行琮的兵众，自己主持蔡州事务，把刘行琮部众情形飞驰奏报。
English: The commander of the right wing of Caizhou ordered Liu Xingyao to start a rebellion, let the soldiers burn and loot, and then go to Huainan. The commander of Hue ordered Wang Cunxu to kill Liu Xingyao, pacify the soldiers who stopped Liu Xingyao, preside over the affairs of Caizhou, and report the situation of Liu Xingyao's troops.

古文：时东京留守博王友文不先请，遽发兵讨之，兵至鄢陵，帝曰： 存俨方惧，若临之以兵，则飞去矣。 
现代文：当时东京留守博王朱友文没有事先奏请，急忙发兵讨伐，军队到达鄢陵，后梁太祖说： 王存俨处在恐惧之中，如果用军队去对付他，就要远走高飞了。 
English: At that time, Zhu Youwen, the king of Bo, who stayed in Tokyo, did not make a request in advance, and hurriedly sent an army to fight. The army arrived at Fuling. Houliang Taizu said: Wang Cunxu is in fear. If you use the army to deal with him, you will have to go far away.

古文：驰使召还。
现代文：派遣使者飞驰前去把朱友文召回。
English: Send an envoy to rush forward to call Zhu Youwen back.

古文：田子，授存俨权知蔡州事。
现代文：甲子，任命王存俨为权知蔡州事。
English: Jia Zi appointed Wang Cunxu as the authority of Caizhou.

古文：乙丑，周德威自临清攻贝州，拔夏津、高唐；攻博州，拔东武、朝城。攻澶州，刺史张可臻弃城走，帝斩之。
现代文：乙丑，周德威从临清攻打贝州，夺取夏津、高唐；攻打博州，夺取东武、朝城；攻打澶州，刺史张可臻弃城逃跑，后梁太祖把他杀了。
English: In the second ugly, Zhou Dewei from Linqing attacked Beizhou, captured Xiajin and Gaotang; attacked Bozhou, captured Dongwu and Morning City; attacked Bozhou, stabbed Zhang Kezhen, abandoned the city and fled, Houliang Taizu killed him.

古文：德威进攻黎阳，拔临河、淇门；逼卫州，掠新乡、共城。
现代文：周德威进攻黎阳，夺取临河、淇门；进逼卫州，抢掠新乡、共城。
English: Zhou Dewei attacked Liyang and captured Linhe and Qimen; he pushed into Weizhou and plundered Xinxiang and Gongcheng.

古文：庚午，帝帅亲军屯白司马阪以备之。
现代文：庚午，太祖亲自率领军队驻扎白司马阪来防备晋军。
English: In the late afternoon, Taizu personally led an army to garrison Baishima-zaka to guard against the Jin army.

古文：卢龙、义昌节度使兼中书令燕王守光既克沧州，自谓得天助，淫虐滋甚。
现代文：卢龙、义昌节度使兼中书令燕王刘守光攻克沧州之后，自认为得到上天佑助，荒淫暴虐更加厉害。
English: After the Lulong and Yichang festival envoys and the Chinese scribe Yan Wang Liu Shuguang conquered Cangzhou, they believed that they had received God's help, and the brutality was even more severe.

古文：每刑人，必置诸铁笼，以火逼之；又为铁刷刷人面。
现代文：每次惩罚人，一定要把他放置在铁笼子里，用火烤，又制作铁刷子刷人的脸。
English: Every time a person is punished, he must be placed in an iron cage, roasted with fire, and an iron brush must be made to brush the person's face.

古文：闻梁兵败于柏乡，使人谓赵王镕及王处直曰： 闻二镇与晋王破梁兵，举军南下，仆亦有精骑三万，欲自将之为诸公启行。
现代文：刘守光听说后梁兵在柏乡被打败，派人前去对赵王王熔及王处直说： 听说二镇与晋王打败梁兵，发兵南下，我也有三万精锐骑兵，想要亲自率领为诸公前行。
English: When Liu Shouguang heard that the Liang soldiers were defeated in Baixiang, he sent his men to Zhao Wangwanglu and Wang Duanzhong and said: "I heard that the Liang soldiers were defeated by the Jin soldiers and sent south. I also have 30,000 elite cavalry, and I want to personally lead the march for the princes.

古文：然四镇连兵，必有盟主，仆若至彼，何以处之？ 
现代文：但是四镇的军队联合，一定要有盟主，我如果到那里去，如何安置我？ 
English: But if the armies of the four towns unite, there must be a commander. If I go there, how will I be accommodated?

古文：镕患之，遣使告于晋王，晋王笑曰： 赵人告急，守光不能出一卒以救之；及吾成功，乃复欲以兵威离间二镇，愚莫甚焉！ 
现代文：赵王王熔很担忧，派遣使者报告晋王李存勖，晋王笑着说： 赵人告急求援，刘守光不能出一兵一卒救助。等到我成功了，却又想要用军队的威力来离间二镇，真是愚蠢到极点了！ 
English: Zhao Wang Wang Rong was very worried and sent an emissary to report to Jin Wang Li Cunxu. Jin Wang smiled and said: Zhao people urgently asked for help, Liu Shuguang could not send a soldier to help. When I succeeded, but I wanted to use the power of the army to separate the two towns, it was really stupid to the extreme!

古文：诸将曰： 云、代与燕接境，彼若扰我城戍，动摇人情，吾千里出征，缓急难应，此亦腹心之患也。
现代文：诸将说： 云州、代州与燕边境接连，他们如果侵扰我边城防务，就会动摇人心，我兵千里出征，缓急实难接应，这也是心腹之患。
English: The generals said: Yunnan, Daizhou and Yan's borders are contiguous. If they interfere with the defense of our border city, they will shake the hearts of the people. Our soldiers are thousands of miles away, and it is really difficult to meet the priority. This is also a problem of the heart.

古文：不若先取守光，然后可以专意南讨。 
现代文：不如先攻取刘守光，然后就可以专心一意南下讨伐了。 
English: It would be better to capture Liu Shuguang first, and then concentrate on the southward crusade.

古文：王曰： 善！ 
现代文：李存勖说： 好！ 
English: Li Cunxu said: Good!

古文：会杨师厚自磁、相引兵救邢、魏，壬申，晋解围去；师厚追之，逾漳水而还，邢州围亦解。
现代文：当时恰巧杨师厚自磁州、相州带兵前去救援邢州、魏州，壬申，晋兵解除包围离去。杨师厚率兵追赶，越过漳水而返回，邢州的包围也解除了。
English: At that time, it just so happened that Yang Shihou led troops from Magneto and Xiangzhou to rescue Zhangzhou, Weizhou, and Jinshin, and the Jin soldiers left after the siege was lifted. Yang Shihou led the troops to catch up, crossed the Surabaya and returned, and the siege of Zhangzhou was also lifted.

古文：师厚留屯魏州。
现代文：杨师厚留在魏州驻扎。
English: Yang Shihou remained stationed in Weizhou.

古文：赵王镕自来谒晋王于赵州，大犒将士，自是遣其养子德明将三十七都常从晋王征讨。
现代文：赵王王熔亲自到赵州进见晋王李存勖，对将士大加犒劳，从此派遣他的养子王德明率领三十七都的军队经常随从李存勖征战讨伐。
English: Zhao Wang Wang Rong personally went to Zhaozhou to see the Jin king Li Cunxu, and he was very hard on the soldiers. From then on, he sent his adopted son Wang Deming to lead the army of the thirty-seven capitals and often accompanied Li Cunxu to fight.

古文：德明本姓张，名文礼，燕人也。
现代文：王德明，本姓张，名文礼，是燕人。
English: Wang Deming, whose family name is Zhang, is a Swallow.

古文：壬午，晋王发赵州，归晋阳，留周德威等将三千人戍赵州。
现代文：壬午，晋王李存勖从赵州出发，回晋阳，留下周德威等率兵三千人守卫赵州。
English: At noon, the Jin king Li Cunxu set out from Zhaozhou and returned to Jinyang, leaving Zhou Dewi and others with 3,000 soldiers to guard Zhaozhou.

