古文：福寿康宁，固人之所同欲；死亡疾病，亦人所不能无。
现代文：福寿康宁是人人所期望的，疾病死亡是人们不可避免的。
English: Prosperity, health and well-being are expected by everyone, and death from disease is inevitable.

古文：惟智者能调，达人自玉。
现代文：只有聪明的人才会调养自己，通情达理的人才会珍爱自己。
English: Only a wise person will take care of himself, and a reasonable person will cherish himself.

古文：问人病曰贵体违和，自谓疾曰偶沾微恙。
现代文：询问别人的病情，说是 贵体违和 ；自己有病自谦为 偶沾微恙 。
English: If you inquire about someone else's illness, they will say that your body is out of harmony; if you have an illness, you should be humble and be a little embarrassed.

古文：罹病者，甚为造化小儿所苦；患病者，岂是实沈台骀为灾。
现代文：遭疾病困扰就说生病的人深受造化小儿的折磨；患了疾病说难道是实沈、台骀作怪？
English: If a person is plagued by illness, it is said that the sick person is tormented by the creature; if a person suffers from illness, it is said that it is the work of the real Shen and the monster.

古文：病不可疗，曰膏肓；平安无事，曰无恙。
现代文：病已经很严重了，叫做 病入膏肓 ，表示不会好了。安慰人不必吃药了，平安无事称为 无恙 。
English: If the illness is already very serious, it is called "terminal illness," indicating that it will not get better. The comforting person does not have to take medicine, and is safe and sound.

古文：采薪之忧，谦言抱病；河鱼之患，系是腹疾。
现代文： 采薪之忧 ，是患病者的自谦之语； 河鱼之患 ，是指得了腹泻。
English: To be worried about collecting one's salary is a self-deprecating expression for a sick person; to be sick with river fish is to have diarrhea.

古文：可以勿药，喜其病安；厥疾勿瘳，言其病笃。
现代文： 可以勿药 ，是为病将痊愈而高兴； 厥疾勿瘳 ，是说病得很重。
English: If you do not take medicine, it means you are happy that your illness will be cured; if you do not treat your illness, it means you are very ill.

古文：疟不病君子，病君子正为疟耳；卜所以决疑，既不疑复何卜哉？
现代文：传说疟疾不敢侵犯君子，既然君子得了疟疾，那就是它在作 疟 ；占卜是为了解决疑惑的事，既然没有疑问又何必占卜呢？
English: Legend has it that malaria does not dare to invade a gentleman, since a gentleman has malaria, that is, he is doing malaria; divination is to solve the matter of doubt, since there is no doubt, why do divination?

古文：谢安梦鸡而疾不起，因太岁之在酉；楚王吞蛭而疾乃痊，因厚德之及人。
现代文：谢安病中，梦行路十六里遇鸡而停止，悟到自己鸡年会重病不起；楚惠王待人有厚德，虽然吞吃了蛭而生病，但不久便痊愈了。
English: During Xie'an's illness, he stopped his 16-mile dream walk when he met a chicken, and realized that he would be seriously ill in the Year of the Rooster. King Chu Hui treated people with kindness, and although he became ill after eating quail, he soon recovered.

古文：将属纩，将易篑，皆言人之将死；作古人，登鬼箓，皆言人之已亡。
现代文： 将属纩 、 将易箦 都是人将死亡的意思。 作古人 和 登鬼箓 都是指人已经死亡了。
English: "Zhao Zhen" and "Zhao Yi" both mean that a person is about to die, while "Zhao Guo Ren" and "Climb the Ghost" both mean that a person has already died.

古文：亲死则丁忧，居丧则读《礼》。
现代文：父母亲去世称为 丁忧 ，居丧时应当读礼。
English: The death of one's parents is called Ding Zhen, and the funeral eulogy should be read.

古文：在床谓之尸，在棺谓之柩。
现代文：人死后停于灵床称为 尸 ，已盛入棺材叫做 柩 。
English: When a person dies and is laid in a casket, it is called a corpse, and when it is placed in a coffin, it is called a coffin.

古文：报孝书曰讣，慰孝子曰唁。
现代文：到亲友家去报丧叫做 讣 ，到丧家去安慰孝子叫做 唁 。
English: To go to a relative's or friend's house to report a death is called, and to go to a dead person's house to comfort a filial son is called.

古文：往吊曰匍匐，庐墓日倚庐。
现代文：去丧家吊唁叫做 匍匐 ，建在墓旁守墓的屋子称为 倚庐 。
English: The mourning house is called, and the house built next to the grave to guard the grave is called 倚.

古文：寝苫枕块，哀父母之在土；节哀顺变，劝孝子之惜身。
现代文： 寝苫枕块 是说孝子在灵堂旁睡草席、枕土块，以哀悼父母。 节哀顺变 是吊唁者劝慰丧家节制哀思、顺应变故、爱惜身体。
English: Dormition pillow block means that the filial son takes a sleeping grass seat and pillow soil block next to the funeral hall to mourn his parents.The mourning period is to encourage the mourners to restrain their grief, adapt to changes, and cherish their bodies.

古文：男子死曰寿终正寝，女人死曰寿终内寝。
现代文：古时男子将死就把他停卧在正屋，死后称为 寿终正寝 ；女子将死则安置在内室，死后称为 寿终内寝 。
English: In ancient times, when a man died, he was placed in the main room, and after death, it was called "death sleep"; when a woman died, she was placed in the inner room, and after death, it was called "death sleep."

古文：天子死曰崩，诸侯死曰薨，大夫死曰卒，士人死曰不禄，庶人死曰死，童子死曰殇。
现代文：天子死叫 崩 ，诸侯死叫 薨 ，大夫死叫 卒 ，士人死叫 不禄 ，百姓死叫 死 ，未成年人死叫 殇 ，不同身份的人去世，自然有不同的称呼。
English: The death of a heavenly son is called a death, the death of a vassal is called a death, the death of a vassal is called a death, the death of a doctor is called a death, the death of a scholar is called a disgrace, the death of a commoner is called a death, the death of a minor is called a death, and people of different statuses who have passed away naturally have different names.

古文：自谦父死曰孤子，母死曰哀子，父母俱死曰孤哀子；自言父死曰失怙，母死曰失恃，父母俱死曰失怙恃。
现代文：父亲死了自己谦称 孤子 ，母亲死了自谦为 哀子 ，父母俱亡自称为 孤哀子 ；自言父亲去世说 失怙 ，母亲去世说 失恃 ，父母皆不在则说 失怙恃 。
English: When his father died, he modestly called himself an orphan; when his mother died, he modestly called himself a poor child; when his parents died, he called himself a poor child; when his father died, he said he was a failure; when his mother died, he said he was a failure; when neither of his parents was present, he said he was a failure.

古文：父死何谓考，考者成也，已成事业也；母死何谓妣，妣者媲也，克媲父美也。
现代文：称呼已去世的父亲为 考 ，因为 考 有 成就 的意思，取父亲创业有成之义；称呼已去世的母亲为 妣 ，因为 妣 通 媲 ，是说母亲能媲美父亲的德行事业。
English: Calling the deceased father as 考, because 考 has the meaning of achievement, and taking the father's entrepreneurship has the meaning of achievement; calling the deceased mother as, because 通媲, means that the mother can be comparable to the father's virtuous career.

古文：百日内曰泣血，百日外曰稽颡。
现代文：父母去世后百日之内的哭泣叫 泣血 ，百日之外居丧者答谢宾客的跪拜礼节称 稽颡 。
English: Crying within a hundred days after the death of a parent is called "weeping blood," while those who are bereaved outside of the hundred days are called "kneeling ceremony" to thank the guests.

古文：期年曰小祥，两期曰大祥。
现代文：父母去世的周年祭礼叫做 小祥 ，两周年的祭礼称为 大祥 。
English: The festival held on the anniversary of the death of one's parents is called Xiaoxiang, and the festival held on the second anniversary is called Daxiang.

古文：不缉曰斩衰，缉之曰齐衰，论丧之有轻重；九月为大功，五月为小功，言服之有等伦。
现代文：用粗麻布做孝服且不缝边的谓之 斩衰 ，用粗麻布做孝服且缝边的叫做 齐衰 ，这是表示丧礼有轻重的等级。服丧九个月所穿的丧服叫 大功 ，五个月的丧服叫 小功 ，亲疏不同所穿丧服及丧期也有不同。
English: Using coarse linen to make filial piety clothes without seams is called chopping down, and using coarse linen to make filial piety clothes with seams is called chopping down, which means that the funeral has a weight class. The funeral clothes worn for nine months of mourning are called big gong, the five-month funeral clothes are called small gong, and the funeral clothes worn and the period of mourning are also different.

古文：三月之服曰缌麻，三年将满曰禫礼。
现代文：穿用细麻布做的丧服服期三个月叫 缌麻 ；服丧满三年要举行除丧服的礼节叫 禫礼 。
English: Wearing a mourning dress made of fine linen for three months is called nettle; wearing a mourning dress for three years is called 礼.

古文：孙承祖服，嫡孙杖期；长子已死，嫡孙承重。
现代文：孙子为祖父母服丧，嫡孙执杖，服一年期；长子已死，嫡长孙要承受丧祭和宗庙的重任，服丧三年。
English: The grandchild will hold a funeral for the grandparents, and the great-grandchild will hold the scepter and serve for one year; the eldest son has died, and the great-great-grandchild will have to bear the funeral rites and the heavy responsibility of the ancestral temple, and serve for three years.

古文：死者之器曰明器，待以神明之道；孝子之枚曰哀杖，为扶哀痛之躯。
现代文：死者随葬的器物叫做 明器 ，因为要用对待神明的办法来对待死人；孝子所执之杖称为 哀杖 ，为的是要扶持因丧亲而哀痛衰弱的身体。
English: The utensils buried with the deceased are called "Ming ware," because the dead are to be treated in the same way as the gods; the staff held by the filial son is called "Mourning staff," in order to support the body weakened by grief due to the loss of relatives.

古文：父之节在外，故杖取乎竹；母之节在内，故杖取乎桐。
现代文：父亲的节操在外，所以父死哀杖用竹子制作；母亲的节操在内，所以母亲死哀杖用桐木制作。
English: Father's festival is not included, so the mourning stick for his father's death is made of bamboo; mother's festival is included, so the mourning stick for her mother's death is made of paulownia.

古文：以财物助丧家，谓之赙；以车马助丧家，谓之赗；以衣殓死者之身，谓之禭；以玉实死者之口，谓之琀。
现代文：送财物给丧家叫做 赙 ，以车马帮助丧家办丧事称为 赗 。将衣服送给死者谓之 襚 ；放在死者口中的玉叫做 琀 。
English: Giving money to the bereaved family is called, helping the bereaved family with chariots and horses is called. Giving clothes to the deceased is called ; placing a bead in the mouth of the deceased is called.

古文：送丧曰执绋，出柩曰驾輀。
现代文：送葬时牵引灵柩叫 执绋 ；出柩叫做 驾輀 。
English: During the funeral procession, the lead coffin is called the "rising coffin"; the coffin is called the "driving coffin."

古文：吉地曰牛眠地，筑坟曰马鬣封。
现代文：吉祥的葬地名为 牛眠地 ；封土筑成的坟墓叫做 马鬣封 。
English: The auspicious burial ground is called the Cow's Burial Ground; the tomb built with fief soil is called the Horse's Burial Ground.

古文：墓前石人，原名翁仲；柩前功布，今日铭旌。
现代文：坟前所立的石像原名为 翁仲 ；丧葬时灵柩前竖的旗幡叫做 铭旌 。
English: The stone statue erected in front of the grave was originally named Wengzhong; the banner erected in front of the coffin during the funeral is called Mingzhu.

古文：挽歌始于田横，墓志创于傅奕。
现代文： 挽歌 是对死人的哀悼，始于汉初田横之去世；坟前的墓志记载死者的生平事略，由唐代傅奕始创。
English: Elegy is a mourning for the dead, which began with the death of Tian Yangtze in the Han Dynasty; the epitaph in front of the grave records the life and affairs of the deceased, which was first created by Fu Yi in the Tang Dynasty.

古文：生坟曰寿藏，死墓曰佳城。
现代文：生前预建的坟墓叫做 寿藏 ；死后才挖的坟墓叫做 佳城 。
English: A grave that is prepared before death is called "Shuzo"; a grave that is dug after death is called "Kashiro."

古文：坟曰夜台，圹曰窀穸。
现代文：坟墓又称 夜台 ，墓穴又名 窀穸 。
English: The tomb is also known as Yatai, and the grave is also known as.

古文：已葬曰瘗玉，致祭曰束刍。
现代文：死者已埋葬叫安瘗玉树，到坟前祭奠叫一束生刍。
English: The dead have been buried, and a bunch of oysters are brought to the grave to pay their respects.

古文：春祭曰禴，夏祭曰禘，秋祭曰尝，冬祭曰烝。
现代文：天子诸侯宗庙之祭，四时名称不同，春祭名 禴 、夏祭称 禘 、秋祭叫 尝 、冬祭谓 烝 。
English: The names of the four festivals of the Temple of the Son of Heaven, the Spring Festival, the Summer Festival, the Autumn Festival and the Winter Festival are different.

古文：饮杯棬而抱痛，母之口泽如存；读父书以增伤，父之手泽未泯。
现代文：拿着杯子喝水时不禁悲从中来，因为母亲的气息还留在杯子上；读父亲遗留下的书籍更增添忧伤，因为书中满是父亲的墨迹手印。
English: When I drink water from my glass, I feel sad because my mother's breath is still on it; when I read books left by my father, I feel even sadder because they are full of his inked handprints.

古文：子羔悲亲而泣血，子夏哭子而丧明。
现代文：子羔悲悼逝去的双亲而泣血，子夏痛失爱子而哭瞎了眼睛。
English: Zi Lam mourned the death of his parents and wept blood, Zixia lost her beloved son and cried her eyes out.

古文：王裒哀父之死，门人因废《蓼莪》诗；王修哭母之亡，邻里遂停桑柘杜。
现代文：王裒父亲死后，每当他读到《蓼莪》诗中的句子时，都要痛哭流涕，学生们不忍便不再去读这一首诗。
English: After the death of Wang Yao's father, whenever he read a sentence from the poem "The Dragonfly," he would burst into tears. The students could not bear to read this poem any more.

古文：树欲静而风不息，子欲养而亲不在。皋鱼增感，与其椎牛而祭墓，不如鸡豚之逮存，曾子兴思。
现代文：树想静止而风并不停息，儿子想奉养父母而双亲则已谢世，皋鱼为此悲伤不已；与其父母死后杀牛到坟前祭奠，不如当他们健在时以鸡猪之肉尽心奉养，这是曾子读丧礼时的感想。
English: The tree wants to be still, but the wind does not stop. The son wants to support his parents, but his parents have passed away. The eel is very sad about this. Rather than killing a cow to go to the grave after the death of his parents, it is better to fully support them with chicken and pork when they are alive. This is the impression of the great-grandson when reading the funeral.

古文：故为人子者，当思木本水源，须重慎终追远。
现代文：所以为人子女，应当想到木有本、水有源，不要忘了父母的养育之恩；必须慎重地按照礼仪办理父母的丧礼，虔诚恭敬地祭祀自己的祖先。
English: Therefore, as human children, we should remember that trees have roots and water has a source, and we should not forget the nurturing grace of our parents. We must carefully carry out the funeral of our parents in accordance with the etiquette, and worship our ancestors reverently and respectfully.

