古文：◎历一
现代文：历一
English: 历一

古文：后世法胜於古，而屡改益密者，惟历为最著。
现代文：后世制度胜过古代，并经多次改动而更加严密的，祇有历法最为显著。
English: Only the calendar is the most obvious example of a later-day system that has surpassed the ancient one and, after many changes, has become more rigorous.

古文：《唐志》谓天为动物，久则差忒，不得不屡变其法以求之。
现代文：《唐书历志》认为天是运动的物体，时间久了就有差错，不得不多次变动历法以跟上它。
English: "Tangshu Calendar" believes that the sky is a moving object, and if the time is long, there will be errors, and the calendar has to be changed many times to keep up with it.

古文：此说似矣，而不然也。
现代文：这种说法看起来羞不多，其实不对。
English: This statement does not seem to be shy, in fact, it is wrong.

古文：《易》曰： 天地之道，贞观者也。 
现代文：《易经》说： 天地之道，是以正确昭示于人。 
English: "I Ching" says: The way of heaven and earth is to be correctly revealed to man.

古文：盖天行至健，确然有常，本无古今之异。
现代文：天的运行最为刚健，确实是有规律的，本来没有古今的差异。
English: The movement of the heavens is the most robust, indeed it is regular, and originally there was no difference between the past and the present.

古文：其岁差盈缩迟疾诸行，古无今有者，因其数甚微，积久始著。
现代文：其岁差盈缩迟疾各种情况，古代无而现在有，是因为其数量很小，积累久了纔显著。
English: Its precession of the precession of the precession of the precession of the precession of the precession of the precession of the precession of the precession of the precession of the precession of the precession of the precession of the precession of the precession of the precession.

古文：古人不觉，而后人知之，而非天行之忒也。
现代文：古人没有感觉到，而后人感觉到了，并不是天运行的差错。
English: The ancients didn't feel it, but later generations did, and it wasn't the fault of the movement of the heavens.

古文：使天果久动而差忒，则必差参凌替而无典耍，安从修改而使之益密哉？
现代文：如果天果真是运行久了有差错，那必然参差衰败而没有规律，又从哪儿去修改而使它更严密呢？
English: If the heavenly fruit really has been running for a long time and there are errors, then it will inevitably decay unevenly and without regularity, and from where can it be modified to make it more rigorous?

古文：观传志所书，岁失其次、日度失行之事，不见於近代，亦可见矣。
现代文：看史书传志的记载，岁星宫次混乱、太阳运行度数失常的事情，不出现在近代，也可看出这一点。
English: It can also be seen from the historical records that the chaos of the solar calendar and the aberration of the sun's movement do not occur in modern times.

古文：夫天之行度多端，而人之智力有限，持寻尺之仪表，仰测穹苍，安能洞悉无遗。
现代文：天的运行规律繁复，而人的智力有限，拿着几尺长的圭表，去仰测苍穹，怎么能看清一切而没有遗漏呢？
English: The laws of the movement of the heavens are complex, and human intelligence is limited. How can you see everything clearly without missing anything if you hold a few feet long Gui watch and look up at the sky?

古文：惟合古今人心思，踵事增修，庶几符合。
现代文：只有综合古人今人的思想，继续前人的业绩而加以扩充修订，大概纔能符合实际。
English: Only by integrating the thoughts of the ancients and moderns, continuing the achievements of the predecessors and expanding and revising them, can it be realistic.

古文：故不能为一成不易之法也。
现代文：所以不可能制定一成不变的历法。
English: So it's impossible to have a fixed calendar.

古文：黄帝迄秦，历凡六改。
现代文：从黄帝到秦，历法共改了六次。
English: From the Yellow Emperor to the Qin, the calendar was changed a total of six times.

古文：汉凡四改。
现代文：汉共改了四次。
English: The Han Communists changed it four times.

古文：魏迄隋，十五改。
现代文：从魏到隋，改了十五次。
English: From Wei to Sui, it was changed fifteen times.

古文：唐迄五代，十五改。
现代文：从唐到五代，改了十五次。
English: From the Tang Dynasty to the Fifth Dynasty, it was changed fifteen times.

古文：宋十七改。
现代文：宋改了十七次。
English: Song changed the chorus 17 times.

古文：金迄元，五改。
现代文：从金到元，改了五次。
English: From gold to yuan, changed five times.

古文：惟明之《大统历》，实即元之《授时》，承用二百七十馀年，未尝改宪。
现代文：只有明的《大统历》，实际上就是元的《授时历》，袭用了二百七十多年，未曾改变历法。
English: Only the Ming "Great General Calendar," which is actually the original "Giving Calendar," has been used for more than 270 years and has not changed the calendar.

古文：成化以后，交食往往不验，议改历者纷纷。
现代文：成化以后，日食月食往往不灵验，议论改变历法的人很多。
English: After the formation, the solar eclipse and lunar eclipse are often ineffective, and there are many people who talk about changing the calendar.

古文：如俞正己、冷守中不知妄作者无论已，而华湘、周濂、李之藻、刑云路之伦颇有所见。
现代文：如俞正己、冷守中这些无知妄说的人就不说了，而华湘、周濂、李之藻、邢云路这些人颇有见解。
English: For example, Zou Zhengyi and Leng Shou did not say anything about these ignorant and delusional people, but Huaxiang, Zhou Qi, Li Zhizao and Zou Yunlu had quite a lot of opinions.

古文：郑世子载堉撰《律历融通》，进《圣寿万年历》，其说本之南部御史何瑭，深得《授时》之意，而能补其不逮。
现代文：郑王世子朱载堉撰写了《律历融通》，进献《圣寿万年历》，他的说法来源于南都御史何瑭，深得《授时历》的旨意，而又能补正它的不足。
English: Zheng Wang's descendant Zhu Zaiqi wrote "Linglian Rongtong" and presented "Sacred Life Perpetual Calendar." His saying was derived from the Nanto Imperial Historian He Zheng, who deeply understood the intention of "Giving the Calendar" and could correct its shortcomings.

古文：台官泥於旧闻，当事惮於改作，并格而不行。
现代文：主管官员拘泥于旧说，当事者又害怕变革，都予以阻拦而未能推行。
English: Officials cling to the old narrative, and stakeholders, fearful of change, resist and fail to implement it.

古文：崇祯中，议用西洋新法，命阁臣徐光启、光禄卿李天经先后董其事，成《历书》一百三十馀卷，多发古人所未发。
现代文：崇祯年间，朝廷议论采用西洋新历，皇上命令阁臣徐光启、光禄卿李天经先后管理此事，编成《历书》一百三十多卷，多能提出古人所没能提出的看法。
English: During the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, the imperial court discussed the adoption of the Western new calendar, and the emperor ordered the cabinet minister Xu Guangqi and the minister of Guanglu, Li Tianjing, to manage the matter successively, compiling more than one hundred and thirty volumes of the "Calendar," most of which could put forward the views that the ancients could not put forward.

古文：时布衣魏文魁上疏排之，诏立两局推验。
现代文：当时平民魏文魁上疏抨击新历，皇上下诏设立两局来推算检验。
English: At that time, Wei Wenkui, a commoner, criticized the new calendar, and the emperor issued an edict to set up two bureaus to calculate and test the new calendar.

古文：累年校测，新法独密，然亦未及颁行。
现代文：经过几年校核检测，新历特别严密，然而也没来得及颁行。
English: After several years of verification testing, the new calendar is particularly rigorous, but it has not yet been issued.

古文：由是观之，历固未有行之久而差者，乌可不随时修改，以求合天哉。
现代文：由此看来，历法本来就没有使用长久而无差错的，怎么能不随时修改，以求合乎天的运行呢！
English: From this point of view, the calendar has not been used for a long time and without error, how can it not be modified at any time in order to operate according to heaven!

古文：今采各家论说，有裨於历法者，著於篇端。
现代文：现在采集各家说法中有助于历法的，著录在篇首。
English: Now it is time to collect the sayings of various people that are helpful to the calendar, which is recorded at the beginning of the article.

古文：而《大统历》则述立法之原，以补《元志》之未备。
现代文：而《大统历》则叙述它的立法的本原，以补《元史历志》的不足。
English: On the other hand, the "Great General Calendar" describes the origin of its legislation in order to make up for the shortcomings of the "Former General Calendar."

古文：《回回历》始终隶於钦天监，与《大统》参用，亦附录焉。
现代文：《回回历》始终都属于钦天监管理，与《大统历》参互使用，也附录在这里。
English: The "Back-to-Back Calendar" has always belonged to the administration of the Qin Heavenly Supervisor, and is used interchangeably with the "Grand Unified Calendar," and is also appended here.

古文：▲历法沿革
现代文：历法沿革
English: History of the calendar

古文：吴元年十一月乙未冬至，太史院使刘基率其属高翼上戊申《大统历》。
现代文：吴元年十一月乙未冬至，太史院使刘基率领他的下属高翼进呈戊申《大统历》。
English: Before the winter solstice in November of the first year of the Wu Dynasty, the Institute of Chinese History sent Liu Ji and his subordinate Gao Ying to submit the "Grand Unified Calendar" to the Emperor.

古文：太祖谕曰： 古者季冬颁历，太迟。
现代文：太祖下谕说： 古代冬末颁布历法，太迟了。
English: The great-grandfather decreed: It is too late to promulgate the calendar at the end of the ancient winter.

古文：今於冬至，亦未善。
现代文：现在在冬至，也不好。
English: Now at the winter solstice, it's not good either.

古文：宜以十月朔，著为令。 
现代文：应该在十月初一，着焉法令。 
English: The decree should come into force on the first of October.

古文：洪武元年改院为司天监，又置回回司天监。
现代文：洪武元年，改太使院为司天监，又设置回回司天监。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, it was changed to the Imperial Envoy's Office for the Supervision of Heaven, and it was set back to the Supervision of Heaven.

古文：诏徵元太史院使张佑、回回司天太监黑的儿等共十四人，寻召回回司天台官郑阿里等十一有至京，议历法。
现代文：皇上下诏召元太史院使张佑、回回司天太监罴的儿等共十四人，不久又召回回司天台官郑阿里等十一人到京，讨论历法。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict summoning a total of fourteen people, including Zhang You, the envoy of the Yuan Dynasty Academy of History, and the son of the returning Emperor Jiankuo, and soon recalled eleven people, including Zheng Ali, the returning Emperor Jiankuo, to Beijing to discuss the calendar.

古文：三年改监为钦天，设四科：曰天文，曰漏刻，曰《大统历》，曰《回回历》。
现代文：三年，改司天监为钦天监，下设四科：天文、漏刻、《大统历》、《回回历》。
English: Three years later, the Department of Celestial Supervision was renamed the Department of Qin Celestial Supervision, and four disciplines were established: astronomy, omission, "Grand Unified Calendar" and "Hakka Calendar."

古文：以监令、少监统之。
现代文：以监令、少监统率他们。
English: They were led by supervisors and junior supervisors.

古文：岁造《大统民历》、《御览月令历》、《七政躔度历》、《六壬遁甲历》、《四季天象占验历》、《御览天象录》，各以时上。
现代文：每年制订《大统民历》《御览月令历》《七政躔度历》《六壬遁甲历》《四季天象占验历》《御览天象录》，各在适当的时候上呈。
English: The General People's Calendar, the General Monthly Calendar, the Seven Political Calendars, the Six Lunar Calendars, the Four-Season Astrological Calendar, and the General Astrological Catalogue shall be formulated annually, and shall be published at an appropriate time.

古文：其日月交食分秒时刻、起复方位，先期以闻。
现代文：发生日食月食的分秒时刻、起复方位，事先桌报皇上知道。
English: The minute and second time of the occurrence of the solar eclipse and lunar eclipse, as well as the rising and setting position, are known in advance by the emperor.

古文：十年三月，帝与群臣论天与七政之行，皆以蔡氏旋之说对。
现代文：十年三月，皇上与群臣讨论天和日月金木水火土七政的运行，群臣都用蔡氏的左旋之说来应对。
English: In March of the tenth year, the emperor and his courtiers discussed the operation of the seven political systems of heaven, earth, wood, water, fire and earth. The courtiers all responded with Cai's left turn.

古文：帝曰： 朕自起以来，仰观乾象，天左旋，七政右旋，历家之论，确然不易。
现代文：皇上说： 朕自起兵以来，仰观天象，天向左旋转，七政向右旋转，历术家的说法，确实而不可改变。
English: The emperor said, "Since I took up arms, I have been looking up at the celestial bodies. The heavens rotate to the left, and the seven governments rotate to the right. The sayings of the historians are true and cannot be changed.

古文：尔等犹守蔡氏之说，岂所谓格物致知学乎？ 
现代文：你们还墨守着蔡氏的说法，难道造就是所谓格物致知的学理吗？ 
English: You still cling to Cai's assertion. Is the so-called lattice-caused cognition theory true?

古文：十五年九月，诏翰林李翀、吴伯宗译《回回历书》。
现代文：十五年九月，诏令翰林李种、昊伯宗翻译《回回历书》。
English: In September of the fifteenth year, Hanlin Li Zeng and Hao Bozong translated "The Book of Calendars."

古文：十七年闰十月，漏刻博士元统言： 历以《大统》为名，而积分犹踵《授时》之数，非所以重始敬正也。
现代文：十七年闺十月，漏刻博士元统进言说： 现行历法以《大统》为名，而积分还继承《授时历》的数目，这不是重视王朝肇始和敬重皇上即位的做法。
English: In October of the seventeenth year, Dr. Yuan Tong, a leaker, said: The current calendar is named "Great Unification," and the number of points also inherits the number of "Giving Calendar." This is not a practice of attaching importance to the beginning of the dynasty and respecting the emperor's enthronement.

古文：况《授时》以元辛巳为历元，至洪武甲子积一百四年，年远数盈，渐差天度，合修改。
现代文：况且《授时历》以元至元辛巳年为历元即计时起点，至洪武甲子年已累计一百零四年，年代久速，日数盈余，渐渐地与天的运行度数有误差，应该修改。
English: Moreover, the "Giving of Time Calendar" uses the Yuan to Yuan and Xin to Xin years as the calendar year, that is, the starting point of time measurement. By the Hongwu Jiazi year, it has accumulated 104 years. The age is long, the number of days is surplus, and gradually there is an error with the running frequency of the day. It should be revised.

古文：七政运行不齐，其理深奥。
现代文：七政运行不齐，其中的道理很深奥。
English: The reason for the uneven performance of the seven policies is profound.

古文：闻有郭伯玉者，精明九数之理，宜徵令推算，以成一代之制。 
现代文：听说有一个叫郭伯玉的，精通数学的道理，应召来令他推算，以制成一代的历制。 
English: It is said that Guo Boyu, a mathematician, was called in to calculate the calendar for the next generation.

古文：报可。擢统为监令。
现代文：皇上答复可以，提拔元统焉监令。
English: The emperor replied that he could, and promoted Yuan Tongyan to superintendent.

古文：统乃取《授时历》，去其岁实消长之说，析其条例，得四卷，以洪武十七年甲子为历元，命曰《大统历法通轨》。
现代文：元统于是取用《授时历》，除去其中的一年长度消长的办法，分析它的条例，共得四卷，以洪武十七年甲子为历元，命名为《大统历法通轨》。
English: Therefore, the Yuan Dynasty used the "Granting Calendar" to eliminate the method of increasing the length of one year, and analyzed its regulations. A total of four volumes were obtained, with the 17th year of Hongwu Jiazi as the calendar element, and named the "Grand Unification Calendar."

古文：二十二年改监令、丞为监正、副。
现代文：二十二年，改监令、监丞为监正、监副。
English: In 1922, the post of supervisor was changed to supervisor, and the post of supervisor was changed to supervisor and deputy supervisor.

古文：二十六年，监副李德芳言： 监正统孜作洪武甲子历元，不用消长之法，以考鲁献公十五年戊寅岁天正冬至，比辛巳为元，差四日半强。
现代文：二十六年，监副李德芳上疏说： 监正元统改用洪武甲子年作历元，不采用一年长度消长的办法，以此考核鲁献公十五年戊寅天时正点冬至，比以至元辛巳年为历元，差囚天半还多。
English: In twenty-six years, the deputy superintendent Li Defang Shangsu said: The superintendent changed the calendar to the Hongwu Jiazi year, and did not adopt the method of increasing the length of one year. In this way, the winter solstice of the 15th year of Lu Xian was at the exact time of Wu Yin, which was more than that of the 20th year of the Yuan Dynasty, and was more than half a day.

古文：今当复用辛巳为元及消长之法。 
现代文：现在应当恢复以辛巳年焉历元及一年长度消长的办法。 
English: It is now time to return to the method of calculating the length of the year according to the lunar calendar and the length of the year.

古文：疏入，元统奏辨。
现代文：奏疏呈入后，元统上奏辩解。
English: After the briefs were filed, the defense began.

古文：太祖曰： 二说皆难凭，但验七政交会行度无差者为是。 
现代文：太祖说： 两种说法都难以凭信，只有验证七政交会时运行度数没有差错的纔是对的。 
English: Taizu said: Both statements are difficult to believe, only the verification that the running frequency of the seven political conventions is correct is correct.

古文：自是《大统历》元以洪武甲子，而推算仍依《授时》法。
现代文：从此《大统历》历元是洪武甲子年，而推算仍然依照《授时历》的办法。
English: Since then, the era of the "Grand Unified Calendar" is the year of Hongwu Jiazi, and the calculation is still in accordance with the method of the "Giving Calendar."

古文：三十一年在罢回回钦天监，其《回回历》科仍旧。
现代文：三十一年，撤鹞回回钦天监，《回回历》科仍旧保留。
English: In the 31st year after the withdrawal of Hui-Kin celestial supervision, the "Hui-Kin calendar" section was still retained.

古文：永乐迁都顺天，仍用应天冬夏昼夜时刻，至正统十四年始改用顺天之数。
现代文：永乐年间迁都顺天，仍然使用应天冬夏昼夜的时刻，到正统十四年纔开始改用顺天的数据。
English: In the Yongle era, the capital was moved to Shuntian, and the time of day and night in winter and summer was still used, but in the 14th year of orthodoxy, the data of Shuntian began to be used.

古文：其冬，景帝即位，天文生马轼奏，昼夜时刻不宜改。
现代文：这年冬天，景帝即位，天文生马轼上奏说，昼夜时刻不宜改变。
English: In the winter of that year, Emperor Jing ascended to the throne, and the astrophysics student Ma Xuan said that it was not appropriate to change the time of day and night.

古文：下廷臣集议。
现代文：皇上下发廷臣集体商议。
English: The emperors, empresses and courtiers held a collective discussion.

古文：监正许惇等言： 前监正彭德清测验得北京北极出地四十度，比南京高七度有奇，冬至昼三十八刻，夏至昼六十二刻。
现代文：监正许惇等说： 前监正彭德清测算得到北京的纬度是四十度，比南京高出七度多，冬至白天长三十八刻，夏至白天长六十二刻。
English: Supervisor Xu Wei and others said: The former supervisor Peng Deqing calculated that the latitude of Beijing is forty degrees, more than seven degrees higher than that of Nanjing. The winter solstice is thirty-eight hours long and the summer solstice is sixty-two hours long.

古文：奏准改入《大历》，永为定式。
现代文：奏请批准改写进《大统历》，永远以此为确定的模式。
English: He asked for approval to rewrite it into the "Grand Unified Calendar" and always use it as the established model.

古文：轼言诞妄，不足听。 
现代文：马轼所言荒诞虚妄，不足听信。 
English: What Ma Jun said was absurd and false, and not worth listening to.

古文：帝曰： 太阳出入度数，当用四方之中。
现代文：皇上说： 太阳出入的度数，应当采用四方的中央的度数。
English: The emperor said: The number of degrees of the sun's rising and setting should be the number of degrees in the center of the square.

古文：今京师在尧幽都之地，宁可为准。
现代文：现在京城在尧幽都地方，怎么可以作为标准？
English: Now that the capital is located in a secluded place, how can it be used as a standard?

古文：此后造历，仍用洪、永旧制。 
现代文：此后制定历法，仍然采用洪武、永乐的旧例。 
English: Since then, the old examples of Hongwu and Yongle are still used in the calendar.

古文：景泰元年正月辛卯，卯正三刻月食。
现代文：景泰元年正月辛卯，卯时后段三刻月食。
English: In the first month of the first year of Jing Tai, there was a lunar eclipse.

古文：监官误推辰初初刻，致失救护。
现代文：钦天监官员误推算焉辰时前段一刻，以致失去救护。
English: Qin Tianjun officials miscalculated the exact time of death by a fraction of a second, resulting in the loss of life.

古文：下法司，论徒。
现代文：下交法司审讯，定罪服徭役。
English: He was sent to the Department of Justice for trial, convicted, and sentenced to hard labor.

古文：诏宥之。
现代文：皇上诏令宽宥他们。
English: The Emperor decreed that they should be pardoned.

古文：成化十年，以监官多不职，擢云南提学童轩为太常寺少卿，掌监事。
现代文：成化十年，因司天监官员多不称职，提拔云南提学童轩为太常寺少卿，管理司天监事务。
English: Ten years later, due to the incompetence of many officials of the Department of Celestial Supervision, Yunnan Ti Schoolchild Xuan was promoted to Junior Secretary of Taizhong Temple to manage the affairs of the Department of Celestial Supervision.

古文：十五年十一月戊戍望，月食，监推又误，帝以天象微渺，不之罪也。
现代文：十五年十一月戊戌望日，月食，司天监推算又失误，皇帝认为天象精微渺茫，没有怪罪他们。
English: In November 15th, the day of the lunar eclipse, the celestial supervisor made another miscalculation. The emperor thought that the celestial phenomenon was too subtle, and did not blame them.

古文：十七年，真定教论俞正己上《改历议》，诏礼部及轩参考。
现代文：十七年，真定教谕俞正己上呈《改历议》，皇帝下令礼部及童轩参考。
English: In the seventeenth year, Emperor Jinzheng issued the "Proposal to Change the Calendar," and the Emperor ordered the Ministry of Ceremonies and Tongxuan to refer to it.

古文：尚书周洪谟等言： 正己止据《皇极经世书》及历代天文、历志推算气朔，又以己意创为八十七年约法，每月大小相间。
现代文：尚书周洪谟等说： 俞正己只根据《皇极经世书》及历代天文志、历志推算节气和初一，又根据自己的意思创造八十七年约法，每月大小相问。
English: Shangshu Zhou Hongmu and others said: Zou Zhengyi only calculated the solar terms and the first day of the new year according to the "Imperial Book of Records" and the astronomical chronicles and calendars of past generations, and also created the eighty-seven year method according to his own will, and inquired about the size of each month.

古文：钦天监谓祖制不可变，升说遂寝。
现代文：轻率狂妄，应惩治他的罪行。 于是将俞正己投入钦犯监狱。十九年，天文生张升进言修改历法。
English: He was imprudent and arrogant, and his crime should be punished. Therefore, he threw Yu Zhengyi into the Qin prison. In the 19th year, Zhang Sheng, a student of astronomy, proposed to revise the calendar.

古文：弘治中，月食屡不应，日食亦舛。
现代文：弘治年间，月食的推算多次不应验，日食的推算也出现错误。
English: During the Kōji era, calculations for lunar eclipses were repeatedly incorrect, and calculations for solar eclipses were also incorrect.

古文：正德十二、三年，连推日食起复，皆弗合。
现代文：正德十二、三年，连续推算日食的韧亏和复圆，都不相，符合。
English: In the 12th and 3rd years of Zhengde, the continuous calculation of the eclipse's toughness and comeback are all different and consistent.

古文：于是漏刻博士朱裕上言： 至元辛巳距今二百三十七年，岁久不能无差，若不量加损益，恐愈久愈舛。
现代文：于是漏刻博士朱裕进言说： 元至元辛巳年距今已二百三十七年，年岁久了不可能没有差错，如不酌情加以增减，恐怕越久差得越远。
English: As a result, Dr. Zhu Yujin, a leaker, said: It has been two hundred and thirty-seven years since the original to the original Xin Si year. It is impossible to have no error after so many years. If you do not add or subtract as appropriate, I am afraid that the longer the difference, the further it will be.

古文：乞简大臣总理其事，令本监官生半推古法，半推新法，两相交验，回回科推验西域《九执历法》。
现代文：请求选派大臣总管此事，命令本监官吏生员一半人用古法推算，一半人用新法推算，两种方法相互验证，回回科用西域《九孰历法》推算验证。
English: Request the election of a minister to be in charge of the matter, and order the supervisors, officials and students to use the old method for half of the calculation, the new method for half of the calculation, and the two methods to verify each other.

古文：仍遣官至各省，候土圭以测节气早晚。
现代文：仍然派遣官员到各省，观察土圭来推测节气的早晚。
English: Officials are still dispatched to various provinces to observe the morning and evening of the solar terms.

古文：往复参较，则交食可正，而七政可齐。 
现代文：反复参照比较，那么日食月食的时刻就可以准确，而七政的运行也可以整齐。 
English: Repeated reference and comparison, then the time of the solar eclipse and lunar eclipse can be accurate, and the operation of the seven governments can also be neat.

古文：部覆言： 裕及监官历学未必皆精，今十月望月食，中官正周濂等所推算，与古法及裕所奏不同，请至期考验。 
现代文：礼部答复说： 朱裕和监官的历法学识未必都精湛，今年十月望日月食，中官正周濂等所推算的，与古法及朱裕所上奏的不同，请到期考察验证。 
English: The Ministry of Ceremonies replied: Zhu Yu and the supervisor's knowledge of the calendar is not necessarily excellent. This October's solar and lunar eclipse, the calculation made by Vice-Minister Zheng Zhou and others, is different from the ancient law and Zhu Yu's performance, please due inspection and verification.

古文：既而濂等言： 日躔岁退之差一分五十秒。
现代文：接着周濂等进言说： 太阳运行的度数每年后退一分五十秒。
English: Then Zhou Yu et al. said: The degree of the sun's movement recedes by one minute and fifty seconds every year.

古文：今正德乙亥，距至元辛巳二百三十五年，赤道岁差，当退天三度五十二分五十秒。
现代文：今年是正德乙亥年，距元至元辛巳二百三十五年，赤道上的岁差，应当后退三度五十二分五十秒。
English: This year is the Zhengde Yi Hai year, the distance from the Yuan to the Yuan Xin is two hundred and thirty-five years, and the precession on the equator should retreat three times fifty-two minutes and fifty seconds.

古文：不经改正，推步岂能有合。
现代文：不经过订正，推算怎么能相符合。
English: Without revision, how can the projection be consistent?

古文：臣参较德验，得正德丙子岁前天正冬至气应二十七日四百七十五分，命得辛卯日丑初初刻，日躔赤道箕宿六度四十七五十秒，黄道箕宿五度九十六分四十三秒为历元。
现代文：臣审查校验，求得正德丙子年前天时正点冬至节气应焉二十七日四百七十五分，确定辛卯日丑时前段一刻，太阳运行到赤道箕宿六度四十七分五十秒，黄道箕宿五度九十六分四十三秒为历元。
English: After examination and verification, it was found that the winter solstice on the 27th day of the 27th month of the 27th year of the 5th month of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 6th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 6th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 6th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 6th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 6th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 6th year of the 5th

古文：其气闰转交四应，并周天黄赤道，诸类立成，悉从岁差，随时改正。
现代文：气、闰、转、交四应，以及周天黄道赤道，各类数据表，都根据岁差，随时改正。
English: According to the precession of the equinoxes, all kinds of data tables, such as the four eclipses, the intercalary day, the intercalary day, the intercalary day, and the intercalary day, are subject to correction at any time.

古文：望敕礼臣并监正董其事。 
现代文：希望命令礼部大臣和钦天监正管理这件事。 
English: He hoped to order the Minister of Ceremonial Affairs and the Qin Heavenly Supervisor to take charge of the matter.

古文：部奏： 古法未可轻变，请仍旧法。
现代文：礼部上奏说： 古代的历法不能轻易改变，请求沿用旧法。
English: The head of the etiquette department said: The ancient calendar cannot be easily changed, and we request that the old method be used.

古文：别选精通历学者，同濂等以新法参验，更为奏请。 
现代文：另外选择精通历学的人，和周濂等用新法参证检酸，再上奏禀报。 
English: In addition, people who are proficient in history and geography are selected, and Zhou Qi and others use the new method to check the acid, and then report the results.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上听从了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：十五年，礼部员外郎郑善夫言： 日月交食，日食最为难测。
现代文：十五年，礼部员外郎郑善夫进言说： 日月亏食，日食最为难测。
English: Fifteen years ago, Zheng Zhenfu, a member of the etiquette club, said: The sun and moon are eclipsed, and solar eclipses are the most difficult to measure.

古文：盖月食分数，但论距交远近，别无四时加减，且月小暗虚大，八方所见皆同。
现代文：大致月食的程度，只看距离交点的远近，另外没有四季的增减，而且月亮体积小光线弱周围的空间大，八方所见到的都相同。
English: The approximate extent of the lunar eclipse depends only on the distance from the intersection point. In addition, there is no increase or decrease in the four seasons. Moreover, the moon is small in size, the light is weak, and there is a large space around it. What is seen in all directions is the same.

古文：若日为月所掩，则日大而月小，日上而月下，日远而月近。
现代文：如果太阳被月亮掩盖，则太阳大而月亮小，太阳在上而月亮在下，太阳逮而月亮近。
English: If the sun is covered by the moon, then the sun is big and the moon is small, the sun is up and the moon is down, the sun is close and the moon is near.

古文：日行有四时之异，月行有九道之分。
现代文：太阳的运行有四季的差异，月亮的运行有青、白、朱、黑各二加黄道共九道的分别。
English: The movement of the sun has a four-season difference, and the movement of the moon has a blue, white, red, and black two each, plus a total of nine zodiacs.

古文：故南北殊观，时刻亦异。
现代文：所以南北观察到的景象不同，时间也有差异。
English: Therefore, the scenes observed from north to south are different, and the time is also different.

古文：必须据地定表，因时求合。
现代文：必须根据地方立标尺观测，按照时间求得吻合。
English: It is necessary to make observations according to the local scale and find a match according to the time.

古文：如正德九年八月辛卯日食，历官报食八分六十七秒，而闽、广之地，遂至食既。
现代文：如正德九年八月辛卯日食，历官预报日食程度为八分六十七秒，而福建、湖广地方，最终达到了全食。
English: For example, when the Xinwu solar eclipse occurred in August of the ninth year of Zhengde, the calendar officials predicted the extent of the solar eclipse to be eight minutes and sixty-seven seconds, and Fujian and Hukang finally reached the total eclipse.

古文：时刻分秒，安得而同？
现代文：时刻分秒，怎么能相同？
English: Hours, minutes, seconds, how can they be the same?

古文：今宜按交食以更历元，时刻分秒，必使奇零剖析详尽。
现代文：现在应按照日月食更改历元，时刻分秒，一定要将零数分割完毕。
English: Now you should change the calendar, hours, minutes and seconds according to the eclipse, and be sure to divide the zeros.

古文：不然，积以岁月，躔离朓朒，又不合矣。 
现代文：不然，积累多年，太旸运行的远近、月亮在月初月底出现的方位，又不符合了。 
English: Otherwise, the accumulation over the years, the far and near of the operation of the compass, and the position of the moon at the end of the month will not match.

古文：不报。
现代文：皇上没有答复。
English: It didn't make the papers.

古文：十六年以南京户科给事中乐頀、工部主事华湘通历法，俱擢光禄少卿，管监事。
现代文：十六年，因南京户科给事中乐护、工部主事华湘通晓历法，都提升焉光禄寺少卿，管理钦天监事务。
English: In the 16th year, due to the fact that the Nanjing Household Science Department was in charge of music protection and the Department of Engineering was in charge of the Huaxiang Tongxiao Calendar, he was promoted to the Shaoqing of Guanglu Temple to manage the affairs of Qin Tianjun.

古文：嘉靖二年，湘言： 古今善治历者三家，汉《太初》以钟律，唐《大衍》以蓍策，元《授时》以晷景为近。
现代文：嘉靖二年，华湘进言说： 古今善于制定历法的有三家，汉《太初历》用音律，唐《大衍历》用蓍草占卜，元《授时历》用日晷测影，最为接近真实。
English: In the second year of Jiajing, Huaxiang Jinyan said: There are three families that are good at formulating calendars from ancient times to the present. The Han Dynasty's "First Calendar" uses musical rhythms, the Tang Dynasty's "Great Yan Calendar" uses ephemeral divination, and the Yuan Dynasty's "Giving Calendar" uses sundials to measure shadows, which is the closest to reality.

古文：欲正历而不登台测景，皆空言臆见也。
现代文：想订正历法而不登观象台测日影，都是空话和缺乏根据的看法。
English: Those who want to revise the calendar without going to the observatory to measure the sun's shadow are empty words and unfounded opinions.

古文：望许臣暂朝参，督中官正周濂等，及冬至前诣观象台，昼夜推测，日记月书，至来年冬至，以验二十四气、分至合朔、日躔月离、黄赤二道、昏旦中星、七政四余之度，视元辛巳所测，离合何如，差次录闻。
现代文：希望准许臣暂时停止上朝参拜，率领中官正周濂等，赶在冬至前到观象台，昼夜观测推算，逐日逐月记录，直到明年冬至，以验证二十四节气、春分秋分夏至冬至及日月每月初一同时出现、太阳月亮的运行、黄道赤道、早晨黄昏时中天南方的星宿、七政和四余的运行度数，与元辛巳年所测定的数据相比，异同如何，依次记录禀告。
English: It is hoped that the minister will be allowed to temporarily stop visiting the Shang Dynasty, lead the lieutenant general Zheng Zhouqi and others to rush to the observatory before the winter solstice, observe and calculate day and night, and record day by day and month by month until the next winter solstice, in order to verify the 24 solar terms, the vernal equinox, the autumnal equinox, the summer solstice, the winter solstice, and the simultaneous appearance of the sun and the moon on the first day of each month, the movement of the sun and the moon, the zodiacal equator, the stars in the south of the sky at dusk in the morning,

古文：更敕礼部延访精通理数者徵赴京师，令详定岁差，以成一代之制。 
现代文：另外请救命礼部访求延聘精通历法敷术的人，征召到京城，命令他们详细测定岁差，以完成本朝的历制。 
English: In addition, please ask the life-saving ceremonial department to visit and recruit people who are proficient in the calendar and call them to the capital and order them to measure the precession in detail in order to complete the calendar system of this dynasty.

古文：下礼部集议，而护谓历不可改，与湘颇异。
现代文：下发礼部集体商议，而乐谨说历法不能改动，与华湘很不相同。
English: The lower hairdressing department discussed collectively, but Le said that the calendar could not be changed, which was very different from Huaxiang.

古文：礼部言： 湘欲自行测候，不为无识。
现代文：礼部上报说： 华湘想自己观测，不是没有见识。
English: The Ministry of Ceremonies reported: Huaxiang wanted to observe on his own, not without insight.

古文：请二臣各尽所见，穷极异同，以协天道。 
现代文：请两位臣子各自完全说出自己的见解，穷尽所有相同相异之处，以与天道相协调。 
English: Ask the two courtiers to each fully express their own opinions, exhaust all similarities and differences, and harmonize with the heavenly way.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上听从了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：七年，钦天监奏： 闰十月朔，《回回历》推日食二分四十七秒，《大统历》推不食。 
现代文：七年，钦天监上奏说： 闺十月初一，按《回回历》推算日食程度二分四十七秒，按《大统历》推算不发生日食。 
English: In the seventh year, the chief overseer of the Qin Heavenly Palace said: "On the first day of October, according to the calculation of the "Back to Back Calendar," the solar eclipse degree is two minutes and forty-seven seconds, and according to the calculation of the "Grand Unified Calendar," there will be no solar eclipse.

古文：已而不食。
现代文：后来没有发生日食。
English: There was no subsequent eclipse.

古文：十九年三月癸巳朔，台官言日当食，已而不食。
现代文：十九年三月癸巳初一，台官报告要发生日食，后来没有发生日食。
English: On March 19th, the first day of the new year, Taiwan officials reported that there would be a solar eclipse, but later there was no eclipse.

古文：帝喜，以为天眷，然实由推步之疏也。
现代文：皇上很高兴，以为是上天关照自己，然而实际上是由于推算的疏误。
English: The emperor was very happy, thinking that it was God who was taking care of him, but in fact it was due to a miscalculation.

古文：隆庆三年，掌监事顺天府丞周相刊《大统历法》，其历原历叙古今诸历异同。
现代文：隆庆三年，掌管钦天监事务的顺天府丞周相刊印《大统历法》，其中历法源流部分逐一叙述古今各种历法的异同。
English: In the third year of Longqing, Shun Tianfu Zhou, who was in charge of the Qin Heavenly Supervisor, published the "Grand Unified Calendar," in which the source of the calendar described the differences and similarities of various calendars from ancient times to the present.

古文：万历十二年十一有癸酉朔《大统历》推日食九十二秒，《回回历》推不食，已而《回回历》验。
现代文：万历十二年十一月癸酉初一，按《大统历》推算日食程度九十二秒，按《回回历》推算不发生日食，事后《回回历》应验。
English: On the first day of the eleventh month of the twelfth month of the twelfth year of the Wanli calendar, according to the calculation of the solar eclipse degree of ninety-two seconds according to the "Great General Calendar," according to the calculation of the "Houhou Calendar," the solar eclipse did not occur, and the "Houhou Calendar" was fulfilled afterwards.

古文：礼科给事中侯先春因言： 迩年月食在酉而曰戌，月食将既而曰未九分，差舛甚矣。
现代文：礼科给事中侯先春于是进言说： 近年月食在酉日而预报说在戌日，月食将要达到全食了却预报说不到九分，差错太大了。
English: Reikei gave the matter to Hou Shengchun, who then said: Recently, the lunar eclipse was on the 3rd day, but the forecast said that it would be on the 3rd day, and the lunar eclipse would reach the total eclipse, but the forecast said that it would be less than nine minutes, the error was too big.

古文：《回回历》科推算日月交食，五星凌犯，最为精密，何妨纂人《大统历》中，以备考验。 
现代文：《回回历》科推算日食月食，五星冲犯，最为精密，何不编入《大统历》中，以备考察检验。 
English: The scientific calculation of the solar eclipse and lunar eclipse, the five-star impact, is the most precise. Why not compile it into the "Great General Calendar" for inspection?

古文：诏可。
现代文：皇帝下诏许可。
English: The royal decree was approved.

古文：二十年五月戌夜月食，监官推算差一日。
现代文：二十年五月甲戌夜发生月食，钦天监官员推算差错一天。
English: Twenty years ago, a lunar eclipse occurred on the night of May 6th, and the officials of the Qin Heavenly Supervision made a mistake in the calculation by one day.

古文：二十三年，郑世子载堉进《圣寿万年历》、《律历融通》二书。
现代文：二十三年，郑王世子朱载堉迄献《圣寿万年历》、《律历融通》二书。
English: In the 23rd year, Zheng Wang's descendant Zhu Zaiqi presented two books, "The Eternal Life Calendar" and "The Integrated Calendar."

古文：疏略曰： 高皇帝革命时，元历未久，气朔未差，故不改作，但讨论润色而已。
现代文：奏疏大致说： 高皇帝推翻元朝时，元的历法使用不久，节气和朔日都没有差错，所以没有改制历法，只是斟酌修订而已。
English: Sonoso said roughly: When Emperor Gao overthrew the Yuan Dynasty, the Yuan calendar had not been used for a long time, and there was no error in the solar terms and the new year's day. Therefore, there was no change in the calendar, but it was only revised after careful consideration.

古文：积年既久，气朔渐差。
现代文：积累年岁久了以后，节气和朔日逐渐有误差。
English: After the accumulation of years and years, there is a gradual error between the solar terms and the new year.

古文：《后汉志》言 三百年斗历改宪 。
现代文：《后汉书，律历志》说 每遇三百年，历法就应改制 。
English: "Post-Hanshu, Legal Calendar" says that the calendar should be reformed every three hundred years.

古文：今以万历为元，而九年辛巳岁适当 斗历改宪 之期，又协 乾元用九 之义，历元正在是矣。
现代文：现在以万历为历元，而到万历九年辛巳正好到了 历法改制 的时间，又合 干卦用九 的意思，历元正在这时。
English: The calendar is now based on the Wanli calendar, and the ninth year of the Wanli calendar coincides with the time of the calendar reform, which is also in line with the meaning of the nine-year calendar. The calendar is at this time.

古文：臣尝取《大统》与《授时》二历较之，考古则气差三日，推今则时差九刻。
现代文：臣曾拿《大统历》和《授时历》进行比较，考察古代则节气差错三天，推算现时则时间差错九刻。
English: The minister once compared the "Great General Calendar" and the "Giving Calendar," and observed that in ancient times the solar terms were off by three days, while the current time was off by nine hours.

古文：夫差虽九刻，处夜半之际，所差便隔一日。
现代文：误差虽然祇有九刻，如处在夜半之际，误差就隔了一天。
English: Although the error is only nine hours, if it is in the middle of the night, the error will be one day.

古文：节气差天一日，则置闰差一月。
现代文：节气相差一天，则安排闰月就相差一月。
English: If the solar terms differ by one day, the leap month is arranged to differ by one month.

古文：闰差一月，则时差一季。
现代文：闰月相差一月，则时间就差了一季。
English: If the leap month differs by one month, then the time is off by one season.

古文：时差一季，则岁差一年。
现代文：时间差了一季，则年岁就相差一年。
English: If the time difference is one season, then the age difference is one year.

古文：其失岂小小哉？
现代文：其失误难道是微小的吗？
English: Were his mistakes minor?

古文：盖因《授时》减分太峻，失之先天；《大统》不减，失之后天。
现代文：因为《授时历》削减日长的分数太多，所以出现预报日期比天象早的失误；《大统历》不削减日长的分数，所以出现预报日期比天象晚的失误。
English: Because the "Giving Calendar" reduced the length of the day by too many points, there was a mistake in predicting the date earlier than the celestial event; the "Universal Calendar" did not reduce the length of the day by points, so there was a mistake in predicting the date later than the celestial event.

古文：因和会两家，酌取中数，立为新率，编撰成书，大旨出于许衡，而与历不同。
现代文：因此汇合两家的做法，酌情选取折中的数据，确立为新的比率，编撰成书，主要意旨出于许衡，而与许衡的历法不同。
English: Therefore, the practice of the two companies was merged, and the data in the compromise was selected as appropriate, established as a new ratio, and compiled into a book. The main intention was to balance, but it was different from the calendar of Xu Heng.

古文：黄钟乃律历本原，而旧历罕言之。新法则以步律吕爻象为首。
现代文：黄钟是律历的根本，但旧有历法很少谈到它，新历法就以推算音律的阴阳变化为首。
English: The yellow bell is the foundation of the lunar calendar, but the old calendar rarely talked about it. The new calendar is based on calculating the yin and yang changes of the musical rhythm.

古文：尧时冬至日躔宿次，何承天推在须、女十度左右，一行推在女、虚间，元人历议亦云在女、虚之交。
现代文：尧的时候冬至时太阳运行在二十八宿的位置，何承天推算在女宿十度左右，一行推算在女宿和虚宿之间，元代人的历法论述也说在女宿、虚宿交界的地方。
English: At the time of the winter solstice, the sun runs in the position of the twenty-eight inns, and the calculation of the heavens is about ten degrees in the inn, and one line of calculation is between the inn and the imaginary inn. The calendar discussion of the Yuan Dynasty people also said that it was in the place where the inn and the imaginary inn meet.

古文：而《授时历》考之，乃在牛宿二度。
现代文：而《授时历》考求，却在牛宿二度。
English: However, the "Granting of the Calendar of Hours" has been tested twice in Ushijuku.

古文：《大统历》考之，乃在危宿一度。
现代文：《大统历》考求，却在危宿一度。
English: The "Great Unification Calendar" has been studied, but it is in danger.

古文：相差二十六度，皆不与《尧典》合。
现代文：相差二十六度，都不与《尧典》相合。
English: There is a difference of 26 degrees, all of which are inconsistent with the "Analects of Confucius."

古文：新法上考尧元年甲辰岁，夏至午中，日在柳宿十二度左右，冬至午中，日在女宿十度左右，心昴昏中，各去午正不逾半次，与承天、一行二家之说合。
现代文：新历法向上考求尧元年甲辰年，夏至正午，太阳在柳宿十二度左右，冬至正午，太阳在女宿十度左右，心宿昴宿作为夏至冬至黄昏时的中星，各离午时前段不超过半个宿次，与何承天、一行两家的说法相合。
English: According to the new calendar, in the year of Jia Chen, the summer solstice at noon, the sun was about 12 degrees in the willow lodge, the winter solstice at noon, the sun was about 10 degrees in the girl's lodge, and the heart of the summer solstice and winter solstice at dusk, each was less than half an hour before noon, which is consistent with the saying of He Zhengten and a line of two.

古文：此皆与旧历不同大者，其余详见《历议》。
现代文：这些都是与旧历法显著的不同处，其余详见《历议》。
English: These are all significant differences from the old calendar, and the rest is detailed in the "Resolution."

古文：望敕大臣名儒参订采用。 
现代文：希望敕令大臣名家参订采用。 
English: It is hoped that the prime minister will order the famous families to participate in the adoption.

古文：其法首曰步发敛。
现代文：朱载堉的历法首先是推算太阳的往返。
English: Zhu Zaiyuan's calendar was first and foremost a calculation of the sun's round trip.

古文：取嘉靖甲寅岁为历元，元纪四千五百六十，期实千四百六十一，节气岁差一秒七十五忽，岁周气策无定率，各随岁差求而用之。
现代文：选取嘉靖甲寅年焉历元，一个元纪为四千五百六十年，一个期实一千四百六十一年，节气岁差一秒七十五忽岁周和气策没有固定的比率，各自根据岁差推求而采用。
English: Selecting the Jiajing Kato calendar, one era is up to 4560 years old, and one is actually 1461 years old. There is no fixed ratio between the precession of the solar terms and the precession of the meridian. Each is used according to the precession.

古文：律应五十五日六十刻八十九分，律总旬周六十日。
现代文：律应即是气应五十五日六十刻八十九分，律总旬周六十日。
English: It is the 55th day, 60th hour and 89th minute of the 55th day of the 55th day, and the 10th day of the 10th day of the 10th month.

古文：次曰步朔闰。
现代文：其次是推算朔闰。
English: The next step is to calculate the leap year.

古文：朔望弦策与《授时》同，闰应十九日三十六刻十九分。
现代文：朔望弦的度数和《授时历》相同，闰应十九日三十六刻十九分。
English: The frequency of the zodiacal string is the same as that of the "Giving Calendar," and the leap should be from the 19th day to the 36th hour and 19th minute.

古文：次曰步日躔。
现代文：再其次是推算太阳的运行度数。
English: The next step is to estimate the sun's orbital period.

古文：日平行一度，躔周三百六十五度二十五分，躔中半之，象策又半之，辰策十二分躔周之一。黄、赤道岁差，盈初缩末限，缩初盈末限，俱与《授时》同，周应二百三十八度二十二分三十九秒。次曰步晷漏。
现代文：现在数字不相合，可能有错误。再其次是推算晷影和滴漏。
English: Now the numbers don't add up, there may be errors, and then there's the extrapolation of shadows and drips.

古文：北极出地度分，冬、夏至中晷恒数，并二至昼夜长短刻数，俱以京师为准。
现代文：北极出地的度数，冬至、夏至正午晷影的长度和冬至夏至昼夜长短的刻敷，都以京师焉准。
English: The number of landings at the North Pole, the length of the winter solstice and summer solstice noon shadow, and the length of the winter solstice and summer solstice day and night are all based on the Beijing division.

古文：参以岳台，以见随处里差之数。
现代文：参照岳台的测量数据，可以看出各处因距离不同引起的差数。
English: Referring to the measurement data of Yue Tai, it can be seen that there are differences caused by different distances.

古文：次曰步月离。
现代文：再其次是推算月亮运行。
English: The next step is to calculate the moon's orbit.

古文：月平行、转周、转中，与《授时》同。
现代文：月平行度、转周、转中，与《授时历》相同。
English: The moon's parallelism, rotation, and rotation period are the same as that of the "Giving Calendar."

古文：离周三百三十六限十六分六十秒，离中半之，离象又半之。
现代文：离周即是迟疾限三百三十六限十六分六十秒，离中折半，离象又折半。
English: It is the three hundred and thirty-sixth limit of sixteen minutes and sixty seconds, which is half of the middle, and half of the elephant.

古文：转差一日九十刻六十分。
现代文：转差一日九十七刻六十分。
English: The difference is ninety-seven minutes and sixty minutes a day.

古文：转应七日五十刻三十四分。
现代文：转应七日五十刻三十四分。
English: It should be seven days, fifty hours and thirty-four minutes.

古文：次曰步交道。
现代文：再其次是推算交道。
English: The next step is to calculate the intersection.

古文：正交、中交与《授时》同。
现代文：正交、中交与《授时历》相同。
English: The orthogonal and intermediate crossings are the same as those in the "Giving Time Calendar."

古文：距交十四度六十六分六十六秒。
现代文：距交十四度六十六分六十六秒。
English: Fourteen degrees, sixty-six minutes, sixty-six seconds.

古文：交周、交中、交差，与《授时》同。
现代文：交周、交中、交差，与《授时历》相一致。
English: Jiaozhou, Jiaozhong and Jiaoxing are consistent with the "Giving Calendar."

古文：交应二十日四十七刻三十四分。
现代文：交应二十日四十七刻三十四分。
English: Forty-seven minutes and thirty-four minutes have passed since the handover on the 20th.

古文：次曰步交食。
现代文：再其次是推算日月食。
English: The next step is to predict the eclipse.

古文：日食交外限六度，定法六十一，交内限八度定法八十一。
现代文：日食交外限六度，定法六十一，交内限八度，定法八十一。
English: The outer limit of the solar eclipse is six degrees, the fixed method is sixty-one, and the inner limit is eight degrees, the fixed method is eighty-one.

古文：月食限定法与《授时》同。
现代文：月食限定法与《授时历》相同。
English: The lunar eclipse limitation method is the same as that of the "Giving Calendar."

古文：次曰步五纬。
现代文：再其次是推算五星。
English: And then there's the five-star rating.

古文：合应：土星二百六十二日三千二十六分，木星三百一十一千八百三十七分，火星三百四十三日五千一百七十六分，金星二百三十八千三百四十七分，水星九十一日七千六百二十八分。
现代文：合应：土星二百六十二日三千零二十六分，木星三百一十日一千八百三十七分，火星三百四十三日五千一百七十六分，金星二百零三日八千三百四十七分，水星九十一日七干六百二十八分。
English: Conjunction: Saturn 262 days 3026 minutes, Jupiter 310 days 1837 minutes, Mars 343 days 5176 minutes, Venus 203 days 8347 minutes, Mercury 91 days 7 hours 628 minutes.

古文：历应：土星八千六百四日五千三百三十八分，木星四千一十八日六千七十三分，火星三百一十四日四十九分，金星六十日一千九百七十五分，水星二百五十三日七千四百九十七分。周率、度率及晨夕伏见度，俱与《授时》同。
现代文：历应：土星八千六百零四日五千三百三十八分，木星四千零一十八日六千零七十三分，火星三百一十四日零四十九分，金星六十日一千九百七十五分，水星二百五十三日七千四百九十七分周率、度率及晨夕伏现度，都与《授时历》相同。
English: The calendar corresponds to: Saturn 8,604 days 5,338 minutes, Jupiter 4,018 days 6,073 minutes, Mars 314 days and 49 minutes, Venus 60 days and 1,975 minutes, Mercury 253 days and 7,497 minutes. The period, degree and precession of the equinoxes and solstices are the same as in the Almanac.

古文：其议岁余也，曰： 阴阳消长之理，以渐而积，未有不从秒起。
现代文：他论述岁余，说： 阴阳消长的道理，是逐渐变化而积累，没有不从秒开始的。
English: Commenting on the rest of the year, he said: The principle of yin and yang is gradually changing and accumulating, and it does not start from the second.

古文：《授时》考古，于百年之际顿加一分，于理未安。
现代文：《授时历》考察古代，在一百年的交接处就马上加一秒，从道理上讲不妥当。
English: According to the study of the ancient times in the "Giving Calendar," it is unreasonable to immediately add one second at the intersection of one hundred years.

古文：假如鲁隐公三年酉岁，下距至元辛巳二千年，以《授时》本法算之，于岁实当加二十分，得庚午日六刻，为其年天正冬至。
现代文：比如鲁隐公三年辛酉年，往下距离元至元辛巳年二千年，用《授时历》的方法计算，这一年该加二十分，推得庚午日六刻，是这一年的天正冬至。
English: For example, in the third year of Lu Yin Gong, there was a leap year, and the downward distance from the Yuan to the Yuan Xin Si year was two thousand years, calculated by the method of "Giving the time calendar," this year should add twenty minutes, pushing the Geng noon day six hours, which is the winter solstice of this year.

古文：次年壬戌岁，下距至元辛巳一千九百九十年，本法当加十九分，得乙亥日五十刻四十四分，为其年天正冬至。
现代文：鲁隐公四年壬戌年，往下距离元至元辛巳年一千九百九十九年，按算法该加十九分，推得乙亥日五十刻四十四分，是这一年的天正冬至。
English: In the year of Yin and Yang in the fourth year of Lu Yin Gong, the downward distance from the Yuan to the Yuan Xin Si in the year of 1899 was calculated to be plus nineteen points, pushing the day of Yihai to be plus fifty minutes and forty-four minutes, and it was the winter solstice of this year.

古文：两冬至相减，得相距三百六十五日四十四刻四十四分，则是岁余九分日之四，非四分日之一也。
现代文：两个冬至相减，得数相距三百六十五日四十四刻四十四分，那么这一年的岁余是九分之四日，而不是四分之一日了。
English: If two winter solstices are subtracted from each other, the result is a difference of three hundred and sixty-five days, forty-four hours, and forty-four minutes, so the remainder of the year is four-ninths of a day, not a quarter of a day.

古文：历法之廖，莫甚于此。
现代文：历法的荒谬，没有比这个更严重的了。
English: The calendar's absurdity doesn't get much worse than this.

古文：新法酌量，设若每年增损二秒，推而上之，则失昭公己丑；增损一秒至一秒半，则失僖公辛亥。
现代文：新历法酌情考虑，如果每年增减二秒，往上推，就与昭公己丑年不合；增减一秒至一秒半，又与僖公辛亥年不合。
English: Considering the new calendar as appropriate, if two seconds are added or subtracted each year and pushed up, it will not coincide with the Year of the Pig; an increase or decrease of one second to one and a half seconds will not coincide with the Year of the Rooster.

古文：今约取中数，其法置定距自相乘，七因八归，所得百，约之为分，得一秒七十五忽，则辛亥、己丑皆得矣。 
现代文：现在大致取一个折中数，方法是将定距自乘，再乘以七除以八，得到的百位数，化为分，得敷焉一秒七十五忽，逭样辛亥、己丑都可以兼顾了。 
English: Now roughly take a compromise number, by multiplying the fixed distance by itself, and then multiplying by seven and dividing by eight, the resulting hundred-digit number is converted into a fraction, resulting in one second and seventy-five seconds, which can be taken into account.

古文：其议日躔也，曰： 古历见于《六经》，灼然可考者莫如日躔及中星。
现代文：他论述太阳运行，说： 古历见于《六经》并明确可考的，没有比得上太阳运行和中星的了。
English: Discussing the sun's movement, he said, "The ancient calendar, which is found in the Six Classics and can be clearly studied, is incomparable to the sun's movement and the movement of the fixed stars.

古文：而推步家鲜有达者，盖由不知夏时、周正之异也。
现代文：而推算家很少有能透彻理解的，都是因为不知道夏历、周历的差异。
English: However, few mathematicians are able to thoroughly understand it, all because they do not know the difference between the summer calendar and the weekly calendar.

古文：大抵夏历以节气为主，周历以中气为主。
现代文：大致夏历以节气为主，周历以中气为主。
English: Generally speaking, the summer calendar is dominated by the solar terms, and the weekly calendar is dominated by the middle terms.

古文：何承天以正月甲子夜半合朔雨水为上元，进乖夏朔，退非周正。
现代文：何承天以正月甲子夜半合朔雨水为历元，进与夏历不合，退又不合周历。
English: According to He Zheng Tian, the lunar calendar is based on the lunar calendar of the first half of the first month of the year and the lunar calendar of the second half of the first month of the year.

古文：故近代推《月令》、《小正》者、皆不与古合。
现代文：所以近代推算《月令》《小正》的，都不能与古代相合。
English: Therefore, the modern calculations of the "monthly" and "minor" cannot be consistent with the ancient times.

古文：尝以新法岁差，上考《尧典》中星，则所谓四仲月，盖自节气之始至于中气之终，三十日内之中星耳后世执者于二分二至，是亦误矣。 
现代文：臣曾以新历法的岁差，向上考察《尧典》的中星，那么所谓的四仲月，大概是从节气的开始到中气的末尾，三十天内的中星而已。后世拘泥于春分秋分夏至冬至，这也就错了。 
English: The minister had used the precession of the new calendar to look up the middle star of the "Book of Changes," so the so-called four middle moons are probably from the beginning of the solar terms to the end of the solar terms, only the middle star within 30 days. Future generations are stuck in the vernal equinox, the autumnal equinox, the summer solstice and the winter solstice, which is also wrong.

古文：其议侯极也，曰： 自汉至齐、梁，皆谓纽星即不动处。
现代文：他论述测量北极出地，说： 从汉到齐、梁，都认为纽星就是不动的地方。
English: He discussed the measurement of the location of the North Pole, saying: From Han to Qi and Liang, they all think that New Star is a place that does not move.

古文：惟祖恒之测知纽星去极一度有余。
现代文：只有祖佢之测到纽星离北极有一度多。
English: Only Zu Yanzhi measured the new star to be more than one degree from the North Pole.

古文：自唐至宋，又测纽星去极三度有余。
现代文：从唐到宋，又测到纽星离北极三度多。
English: From the Tang Dynasty to the Song Dynasty, it was also measured that New Star was more than three degrees away from the North Pole.

古文：《元志》从三度，盖未有说也。
现代文：《元史，历志》依从三度，大致还没有定论。
English: "Yuan Shi, Li Zhi" adheres to the third degree, and has not yet reached a conclusion.

古文：新法不测纽星，以日景验之，于正方案上，周天度内权指一度为北极，自此度右旋，数至六十七度四十一分，为夏至日躔所在。
现代文：新历法不测纽星，用日影来检验。在正方的几案上，在一周天的度数内暂时指定一度作为北极，从此度向右旋转，数到六十七度四十一分。就是夏至太阳运行到的位置。
English: The new calendar does not measure the new star, but uses the shadow of the sun to check. In the case of the equinoxes, the north pole is temporarily designated once within the degree of the day of the week, and then rotated to the right to count to sixty-seven degrees and forty-one minutes. That is the position to which the summer solstice sun moves.

古文：复至一百一十五度二十一分，为冬至日躔所在。
现代文：又旋转到一百一十五度二十一分，就是冬至太阳运行到的位置。
English: It also rotated to one hundred and fifteen degrees and twenty-one minutes, which is the position of the winter solstice sun.

古文：左旋，数亦如之。
现代文：向左旋转，度数也一样。
English: Rotate to the left with the same number of degrees.

古文：四处并中心五处，各识一针。
现代文：四处和圆心共五处，各钉一枚针。
English: There are a total of five points around the circumference and the center of the circle, and one needle is nailed to each.

古文：于二至日午中，将案直立向南取景，使三针景合，然后县绳界取中绵，又取方十字界之，视横界上距极出地度分也，即极出地度分也。 
现代文：在冬至夏至正午，将几案直立向南产生日影，使三枚针的日影相合，然后悬着绳子取到中线，又取方十字划出界限，看横界上距北极的度数，就是北极出地的度数。 
English: At noon on the winter solstice and summer solstice, the sunshade is produced by placing several cases upright to the south, so that the sunshade of the three needles coincides, and then the rope is suspended to reach the middle line, and the square cross is drawn to draw a boundary, and the degree of the distance from the North Pole above the boundary is the degree of the North Pole leaving the ground.

古文：其议晷景也，曰： 何承天立表测景，始知自汉以来，冬至皆后天三日。
现代文：他论述日晷测影，说： 何承天立圭表测日影，开始知道从漠以来，冬至都比天象晚三天。
English: He discussed the sundial shadow measurement, saying: He Cheng Tian Ligui watch to measure the sun shadow, began to know that since the desert, the winter solstice is three days later than the celestial.

古文：然则推步晷景，乃治历之耍也。
现代文：所以推算晷影，是制定历法的重要工作。
English: Therefore, the calculation of eclipses is an important work in the development of the calendar.

古文：《授时历》亦凭晷景为本，而《历经》不载推步晷景之术，是为缺略，今用北极出地度数，兼弧矢二术以求之，庶尽其原。
现代文：《授时历》也凭借晷影作为根本，而《历经》不记载推算晷影的方法，这是缺陷。现在用北极出地的度数，兼用弧矢割圆的方法推求，有望穷尽它的本源。
English: The "Gift of Time Calendar" also relies on the mirage as the basis, and the "Record of Time" does not record the method of calculating the mirage, which is a defect. Now, it is expected to exhaust its source by using the degree of the North Pole and the method of arcing arrows.

古文：又随地形高下，立差以尽变，前此所未有也。 
现代文：又随着地势的高低，确定差数来表现它的变化，这是以前所没有的。 
English: And with the height of the terrain, determine the difference to show its changes, which is unprecedented.

古文：又曰： 《授时历》议据《前汉志》鲁献公十五年戊寅岁正月甲寅朔旦冬至，引用为首。
现代文：又说： 《授时历议》根据《漠书，律历志》鲁献公十五年戊寅岁正月甲寅朔旦冬至，引用为首例。
English: He also said: "Giving the Calendar" is based on "Moushou, Ruling the Calendar" Lu Xiangong fifteen years old, the first month of the year, the first day of the month, and the winter solstice, and is quoted as the first example.

古文：夫献公十五年下距隐公元年己未，岁百六十一年，其非春秋时明矣。
现代文：献公十五年往下到鲁隐公元年己未，有一百六十一年，时间不在春秋时段以内是很明白的了。
English: Fifteen years after the dedication of the Great Wall of China, the year of Luyin has not yet come. It is 161. It is clear that the time is not within the spring and autumn time period.

古文：而《元志》乃云 自春秋献公以来 ，又云 昭公冬至，乃日度失行之验 ，误矣。
现代文：而《元史，历志》却说 自春秋献公以来 ，又说 昭公冬至，就是太阳运行失常的证据 ，是错误的。
English: However, the "History of Yuan Dynasty" is wrong to say that since the Spring and Autumn Offering, and the Winter Solstice of Zhaogong, it is the evidence of the sun's abnormal operation.

古文：夫献公甲寅冬至，别无所据，惟刘歆《三统历》言之。
现代文：献公甲寅冬至，没有别的依据，只有刘歆《三统历》这样说。
English: There is no other basis for the dedication of the winter solstice, only Liu Ye's "Three Dynasties Calendar" says so.

古文：岂左传不足信，而歆乃可信乎？
现代文：难道《左传》不可信，而刘歆却可信吗？
English: Isn't it true that "Zhuan" can't be trusted, but Liu Ye can be trusted?

古文：太初元年冬至在辛酉，歆乃以为甲子，差天三日，尚不能知，而能逆知上下数百年乎？
现代文：太初元年冬至在辛酉，刘歆却认为是甲子，相差三天，这都尚且不能知道，还能够推知上下几百年吗？
English: At the beginning of the first century, the winter solstice was in Xinjiang, but Liu Bei considered it to be in Jiaozuo, with a difference of three days. This cannot be known yet, can it be inferred over the next few hundred years?

古文：故凡春秋前后千载之间，气朔交食，《长历》、《大衍》所推近是，刘歆、班固所说全非也。 
现代文：所以大凡春秋前后千年之间，气朔交食，《长历》、《大衍历》所推算的大致对，而刘歆、班固所说的完全是错的。 
English: Therefore, the calculations of the "Long Calendar" and the "Great Yin Calendar" are roughly correct, while what Liu Wei and Bangu said is completely wrong.

古文：又曰： 《大衍历》议谓宋元嘉十三年一月甲戌，景长为日度变行，《授时历》议亦云，窃以为过矣。
现代文：又说： 《大衍历议》说宋元嘉十三年十一月甲戌，影长是太阳运行度数的异常变化，《授时历议》也这样说，臣私下认为这是错的。
English: He also said: "Daiyuan Calendar Discussion" said that Song Yuanjia's November 13 lunar eclipse was caused by an abnormal change in the sun's movement rate. "Time Granting Calendar Discussion" also said this, and the minister privately thought that this was wrong.

古文：苟日度失行，当如岁差，渐渐而移。
现代文：如果太阳运行超出了常规，应当像岁差一样，渐渐地变化。
English: If the sun is out of kilter, it should change gradually, like precession.

古文：今岁既已不合，来岁岂能复合耶？
现代文：今年已经不合，来年难道能又相合吗？
English: It didn't fit this year, but will it fit again next year?

古文：盖前人所测，或未密耳。
现代文：大概前人的测量，有的不严密罢了。
English: Presumably, some of the measurements made by our predecessors were not exact.

古文：夫冬至之景一丈有余，表高晷长，则景虚而淡，或设望筒、副表、景符之类以求实景。然望筒或一低昂，副表、景符或一前却，所据之表或稍有倾欹，圭面或稍有斜侧，二至前后数日之景，进退只在毫厘之间，耍亦难辨。
现代文：冬至的日影有一丈多长，圭表高，日影长，那么日影就虚而淡。有时设置望筒、副表、影待之类来求实影，然而望筒或许有低昂，副表、影符或许有前后，所用的圭表或许稍有倾斜，圭面或许稍有不平，冬至夏至前后几天的日影，进退只在毫厘之间，也很难辨认。
English: At the winter solstice, the shadow of the sun is long and high, the compass is high, and the shadow is long, so the shadow is thin and light. Sometimes, a telescope, a secondary table, and a shadow watch are set up to find the real shadow. However, the telescope may be low, the secondary table and shadow marks may be forward and backward, the compass used may be slightly inclined, and the compass may be slightly uneven. The shadow of the sun a few days before and after the winter solstice is only a millimeter in and out, and it is difficult to identify.

古文：况委托之人，未智当否。
现代文：何况委托的人，不知是否恰当。
English: What's more, I don't know if it's appropriate for the person who commissioned it.

古文：九服之远，既非自挚，所报晷景，宁足信乎？ 
现代文：边远的地方，既然不是亲眼所见，他人所报告的晷影，难道可信吗？ 
English: In a remote place, since it is not seen with one's own eyes, but reported by others, is it credible?

古文：其议漏刻也，曰： 日月带食出入，五星晨昏伏见，历家设法悉因晷漏为准。
现代文：他论述漏刻，说： 日月带食出入，五星晨昏伏现，历家制定历法都以日晷漏刻为准。
English: He discussed the missing hours, saying: The sun and the moon come and go with eclipses, and the five stars appear in the morning and set in the evening. All the calendars established by various families are based on the missing hours of the sundial.

古文：而晷漏则随地势南北，辰极高下为异焉。
现代文：而日晷漏刻也随着地势的南北，纬度的高低有差异。
English: And the sundial omission also varies with the north and south of the terrain and the height of the latitude.

古文：元人都燕，其《授时历》七曜出没之早晏，四时昼夜之永短，皆准大都晷漏。
现代文：元人以燕京为都城，他们的《授时历》中日月五星出入的早晚，四季日夜的长短，都以大都的日晷漏刻焉准。
English: The founders chose Yanjing as the capital city. In their "Giving of Time Calendar," the rising and setting of the sun, moon and five stars in the morning and evening, as well as the length of the day and night in the four seasons, were all based on the sundials of the major cities.

古文：国初都金陵，《大统历》晷漏改徒南京，冬夏至相差三刻有奇。
现代文：国朝初年建都金陵，《大统历》日晷漏刻改为依从南京，冬至夏至相差三刻多。
English: In the first year of the Guo Dynasty, the capital was built in Jinling. The sundial omission of the General Calendar was changed to follow Nanjing, and the winter solstice and summer solstice were more than three hours apart.

古文：今推交食分秒，南北东西等差及五星定伏定见，皆因元人旧法，而独改其漏刻，是以互神舛误也。
现代文：现在推算日月食的分秒，南北东西等差及五星定伏定现，都根据元人的旧法，而单单改变了漏刻，因此互相违背出现错误。
English: Now, the calculation of the minute and second of the eclipse, the north-south east-west parity and the five-star fixed-point fixed-present are all based on the old method of Yuanren, but only changed the missing hour, so there are errors that contradict each other.

古文：故新法晷漏，照依元旧。 
现代文：所以新法日晷漏刻，照样依据元朝的老数字。 
English: Therefore, the new law of the Japanese calendar is still based on the old numbers of the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：其议日食也，曰： 日道与月道相交处有二，若正会于交，则食既，若但在交前后相近者，则食而不既。
现代文：他论述日食，说： 日道和月道相交点有两处，如果日月正好在交点相会，就是全食，如果只在交点前后相近的地方相会，就会发生日食但不是全食。
English: Discussing solar eclipses, he said: There are two points of intersection between the solar path and the lunar path. If the sun and the moon meet exactly at the intersection, it is a total eclipse. If they meet only at a place close to the intersection, there will be a solar eclipse but not a total eclipse.

古文：此天之交限也。
现代文：这是天的相交限度。
English: This is the intersection limit of the sky.

古文：又有人之交限，假令中国食既，戴日之下，所亏才半，化外之地，则交而不食。
现代文：还有人的相交限度，如果在中原是全食，那么在太阳的正下方，亏食只有一半，到僻远的地方，则是日月相会而不食。
English: There is also a limit to human interaction. If there is a total eclipse in the Central Plains, then only half of the eclipse will occur directly below the sun. In remote places, the sun and moon will meet without eclipsing.

古文：易地反观，亦如之。
现代文：几个地方交换反过来看，也是一样。
English: If you look at it the other way around, it's the same.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什磨呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：日如大赤丸，月如小黑丸，共县一绵，日上而下，即其下正望之，黑丸必掩赤丸，似食之既；及旁观有远近之差，则食数有多寡矣。
现代文：太阳像一个大的红丸子，月亮像一个小的黑丸子，共同悬挂在一根线上，太阳在上而月亮在下，如果从正下方望去，黑丸子必定掩盖红丸子，就像日全食；到旁边观看有远近的差别，那么日食的程度就有多少了。
English: The sun, like a big red marble, and the moon, like a small black marble, hang together on a line. The sun is above and the moon is below. If you look from directly below, the black marble must cover the red marble, just like a total solar eclipse. If you look from the side, there is a difference between far and near, so how much is the degree of the solar eclipse.

古文：春分已后，日行赤道北畔，交外偏多，交内偏少。
现代文：春分以后，太阳在赤道北面运行，交外偏多，交内偏少。
English: After the vernal equinox, the sun moves north of the equator, and there is more external communication and less internal communication.

古文：秋分已后，日行赤道南畔，交外偏少，交内偏多。是故有南北差。
现代文：秋分以后，太阳在赤道南面运行，交外偏少，交内偏多，所以有南北差。
English: After the autumnal equinox, the sun moves south of the equator, and there is less external communication and more internal communication, so there is a north-south difference.

古文：冬至已后，日行黄道东畔，午前偏多，午后偏少。
现代文：冬至以后，太阳在黄道柬面运行，午前偏多，午后偏少。
English: After the winter solstice, the sun moves across the face of the ecliptic, with more sun in the morning and less in the afternoon.

古文：夏至已后，日行黄道西畔，午前偏少，午后偏多。是故有东西差。
现代文：夏至以后，太阳在黄道西面运行，午前偏少，午后偏多，所以有东西差。
English: After the summer solstice, the sun moves on the west side of the zodiac, less in the morning and more in the afternoon, so things are different.

古文：日中仰视则高，旦暮平视则低。是有距午差。
现代文：中午仰视太阳就高，早晚平枧太阳就低，所以有距午差。
English: If you look up at the sun at noon, it will be high, and if you look down at the sun in the morning or evening, it will be low, so there is a difference in the meridian.

古文：食于中前见早，食于中后见迟。
现代文：中午前日食看见得早，中午后日食看见得迟，所以有时差。
English: The solar eclipse before noon is seen early, and the solar eclipse after noon is seen late, so there is a time difference.

古文：是故有时差，凡此诸差，唯日有之，月则无也。故推交食，惟日颇难。
现代文：这种种差别，只有太旸纔有，月亮没有。所以推算交食，只有太阳很困难。
English: This kind of difference, only the Earth has it, but the moon does not. Therefore, it is very difficult to calculate the eclipses, only the sun.

古文：欲推九服之变，必各据其处，考晷景之短长，揆辰极之高下，庶几得之。
现代文：想推算各个地方的变化，必须到那个地方，考察晷影的短长，测量星辰的高低，纔有希望得到。
English: If you want to calculate the changes in various places, you must go to that place, investigate the short length of the shadow, measure the height of the stars, and there is no hope.

古文：《历经》推定之数，徒以燕都所见者言之耳。
现代文：《历经》推定的数据，只是根据燕京所见到的来立说而已。
English: The data inferred by "Lijing" is only based on what Yanjing saw.

古文：旧云： 月行内道，食多有验。
现代文：老话说： 月亮运行内道，日食多能应验。
English: There is an old saying: The moon runs in an inside lane, so a solar eclipse is more likely to happen.

古文：月行外道，食多不验。 
现代文：月亮运行外道，日食多不应验。
English: The moon is out of phase, and the solar eclipse is mostly unchecked.

古文：又云： 天之交限，虽系内道，若在人之交限之外，类同外道，日亦不食。 
现代文：又说： 天的相交限度，虽然是在内道，若在人的相交限度之外，也同外道相似，也不发生日食。
English: He also said: Although the limit of heaven's fellowship is in the inner way, if it is outside the limit of human fellowship, it is similar to the outer way, and there will be no eclipse.

古文：此说似矣，而未尽也。
现代文：这种说法大致不错，但不全对。
English: That's mostly true, but not entirely.

古文：假若夏到前后，日食于寅卯酉戌之间，人向东北、西北观之，则外道食分反多于内道矣。
现代文：假如在夏至前后，在十二辰的寅卯酉戌之间发生日食，人向东北、西北观看，那么外道食分反而多于内道了。
English: If a solar eclipse occurs around the summer solstice, between the twelfth and twelfth hours, and people look to the northeast and northwest, then there will be more eclipses in the outer path than in the inner path.

古文：日体大于月，月不能尽掩之，或遇食既，而日光四溢，形如金环，故日无食十分之理。
现代文：太阳体积大于月亮，月亮不能完全掩盖，有时遇到全食，而阳光四溢，形状如同金环，所以太阳没有日食十分的道理。
English: The sun is larger than the moon, the moon can not be completely covered, sometimes there is a total eclipse, and the sun is overflowing, the shape is like a gold ring, so the sun does not have a solar eclipse.

古文：虽既，亦止九分八十秒。
现代文：即使全食，也只有九分八十秒。
English: Even a total eclipse lasts only nine minutes and eighty seconds.

古文：《授时历》日食，阳历限六度，定法六十，阴历限八度，定法八十。
现代文：《授时历》日食，阳历限六度，定法六十，阴历限八度，定法八十。
English: According to the "Giving of Time Calendar," the solar eclipse, the Yang calendar limit is six degrees, the fixed method is sixty, the lunar calendar limit is eight degrees, the fixed method is eighty.

古文：各置其限度，如其定法而一，皆得十分。
现代文：各将其限度，除以定法，都得到十分。
English: Each of their limits, divided by a fixed number, is sufficient.

古文：今于其定法下，各加一数以除限度，则得九分八十余秒也。 
现代文：现在在它们的定法下各加上一，用限度相除，就得到九分八十多秒了。 
English: Now, under their definition, add one to each and divide by the limit to get more than nine minutes and eighty seconds.

古文：其议月食也，曰： 暗虚者，景也。
现代文：他论述月食，说： 暗中虚的东西，是影子。
English: Discussing lunar eclipses, he said: "What is dark and shadowy is the shadow.

古文：景之蔽月，无早晚高卑之异，四时九服其之殊。
现代文：影子遮蔽月亮，没有早晚高低的差异，四季地区的不同。
English: The shadow covers the moon, there is no difference between morning and evening, and the four seasons are different in different regions.

古文：譬如县一黑丸于暗室，其左燃烛，其右县一白丸，若烛光为黑丸所蔽，则白丸不受其光矣。
现代文：比如悬一粒黑丸子在黑暗的屋子中，在它的左面点燃蜡烛，右面悬一粒白丸子，如果烛光被黑丸子遮蔽，那么白丸子就接受不到光线了。
English: For example, a black marble hangs in a dark room. A candle is lit on the left side of it, and a white marble hangs on the right side. If the candlelight is blocked by the black marble, then the white marble cannot receive light.

古文：人在四旁观之，所见无不同也。
现代文：人在四面观看，所见到的没有不同。
English: When you look around, you don't see anything different.

古文：故月食无时差之说。
现代文：所以月食役有时差的说法。
English: That's why lunar eclipses are sometimes referred to as a time difference.

古文：自《纪元历》妄立时差，《授时》因之，误矣。 
现代文：自从《纪元历》虚妄地定下时差，《授时历》也因袭它，是错误的。 
English: Since the "Chronological Calendar" falsely set the time difference, the "Giving Calendar" also followed it, which is wrong.

古文：其议五纬也，曰： 古法推步五纬，不如变数之加减。
现代文：他论述五星，说： 古法推算五星，不知道变敷的加减。
English: Commenting on the five stars, he said: The old method of calculating the five stars does not know the addition and subtraction of the change of cloth.

古文：北齐张子信仰观岁久，知五纬有盈缩之变，当加减以求逐日之躔。
现代文：北齐张子信长期仰观天文，知道五星有盈缩的变化，应当加减以求每天的运行度数。
English: Northern Qi Zhang Zixin has long been watching astronomy, and knows that the five stars have changes in expansion and contraction, and should be added or subtracted to find the daily running frequency.

古文：盖五纬出入黄道内外，各自有其道，视日远近为迟疾，其变数之加减，如里路之径直斜曲也。
现代文：五星出入黄道内外，各自有自己的远近轨道，根据和太阳的远近有快慢，它们变化数字的加减，就好像路程的曲直正斜。
English: The five stars go in and out of the ecliptic, each with its own orbit. They have a speed according to the distance from the sun, and they change the number of addition and subtraction, just like the curvature of the journey.

古文：宋人有言曰： 五星行度，惟留退之际最多差。
现代文：宋代有人说： 五星的运行度数，只有在停留逆行的时候差异最大。
English: In the Song Dynasty, someone said: The running frequency of the five stars is the biggest difference only when stopping and reversing.

古文：自内而进者，其退必向外，自外而进者，其退必由内。
现代文：在黄道内前进的，它后退必然向外，在黄道外前进的，它后退必然向内。
English: If it advances within the ecliptic, its retreat must be outward; if it advances outside the ecliptic, its retreat must be inward.

古文：其迹台循柳叶，两末锐于中间，往还之道相去甚远。
现代文：它运行的轨迹好像沿着一片柳叶，两端比中间尖，往返的轨道相差很远。
English: Its trajectory seems to run along a willow leaf, the two ends are sharper than the middle, and the orbits to and from are far apart.

古文：故星行两末度稍迟，以其斜行故也。
现代文：所以五星运行在两端较慢，因为它是斜着运行的缘故。
English: Therefore, the five-star operation is slower at both ends, because it is due to the oblique operation.

古文：中间行度稍速，以其径捷故也。 
现代文：中间的运行较快，因为它道路便捷的缘故。
English: The middle one runs faster because it's on a faster road.

古文：前代修历，止增损旧法而已，未尝实考天度。
现代文：前代修订历法，只是缯减旧法而已，不曾实际考察天体的运行度数。
English: The previous revision of the calendar was only a reduction of the old method, and did not actually examine the movement of celestial bodies.

古文：其法须测验每夜昏晓夜半，月及五星所在度秒，置簿录之。
现代文：办法是必须测量检骏每晚黄昏、夜半、拂晓月亮及五星所在的度秒，用本子记录下来。
English: The method is that it is necessary to measure the degree and second of the location of the moon and the five stars at dusk, midnight and dawn every night, and record it in a book.

古文：满五年，其间去阴云昼见日数外，可行三年实行，然后可以算术缀之也。 
现代文：满五年，除去中间阴云和五星出现在白昼的日数，可以测得三年的实际运行，然后可以推算补缀了。 
English: At the end of five years, after removing the number of days in which the middle cloud and five stars appear in the daytime, the actual operation of three years can be measured, and then the patching can be calculated.

古文：书上，礼部尚范谦奏： 岁差之法，自虞喜以来，代有差法之议，竟无昼一之规。
现代文：奏疏上呈，礼部尚书范谦上奏说： 岁差的规律，从虞喜以来，每代都有岁差规律的议论，最终没有统一的规矩。
English: According to the transcript of the speech, Fan Qian, a member of the Ministry of Ceremonies, said: The law of precession. Since Yu Xi, every generation has discussed the law of precession. Ultimately, there is no uniform rule.

古文：所以求之者，大约有三：考月令之中星，测二至之日景，验交食之分秒。
现代文：用来求岁差的方法，大致有三种：考察月令的中星，测量冬至夏至的日影，检验交食的分秒。
English: There are roughly three methods used to calculate the precession of the equinoxes: observing the middle star of the lunar month, measuring the shadow of the sun on the winter solstice and the summer solstice, and examining the intercalary minute.

古文：考以衡管，测以臬表，验以漏刻，斯亦危得之矣。
现代文：用衡管考察，用圭表测量，用漏刻验证，这也可望得到结果了。
English: With the inspection of the balance tube, with the measurement of the gauge, with the verification of the leakage, it is also expected to get the result.

古文：历家以周天三百六十五度四分度之一，纪七政之行，又析度为百分，分为百秒，可谓密矣。
现代文：历家用周天三百六十五度四分之一度，来记录日月五星的运行，又分一度为一百分，一分为一百秒，可以说很精密了。
English: Historians have recorded the movement of the sun, moon and five stars with 365 degrees and a quarter of a degree on Sunday and Sunday. It is also divided into one hundred and one hundred seconds, which can be said to be very precise.

古文：然浑象之体，径仅数尺，布周天度，每度不及指许，安所置分秒哉？
现代文：然而浑天仪直径只有几尺，分布周天的度数，每度不到一指头宽，又在哪儿去安置分秒呢？
English: However, the armillary sphere is only a few feet in diameter, and the number of degrees distributed around it is less than a finger's width. Where should the minutes and seconds be placed?

古文：至于臬表之树不过数尺，刻漏之筹不越数寸。
现代文：至于树立的圭表不过几尺，刻漏的筹码不过几寸。
English: As for the key table, it is only a few feet high, and the missing chips are only a few inches.

古文：以天之高且广也，而以寸之物求之，欲其纤微不爽，不亦难乎？
现代文：以天的高而且广，而用几尺几寸大小的东西来测量它，想要丝毫不差，不是太难了吗？
English: Isn't it too difficult to take the height and width of the sky and measure it with something a few feet and inches in size, in order to get it exactly right?

古文：故方其差在公秒之间，无可验者，至蹬逾一度，乃可以管窥耳。
现代文：所以当它差在分秒之间，无法检验，到差错超过一度，纔可以观察了。
English: So when it's off by a fraction of a second, it can't be tested, and when it's off by more than a fraction of a second, it can be observed.

古文：此所以穷古今之智七巧，不能尽其变欤？
现代文：这就是穷尽了古往今来人们的智慧和灵巧，还不能完全测算到天体变化的原因吧。
English: This is the reason why, after exhausting the wisdom and dexterity of people from ancient times to the present, it is not yet possible to fully calculate the changes in celestial bodies.

古文：即如世子言，以《大统》、《授时》二历相较，考古则气差三日，推今则时差必刻。
现代文：就以郑王世子来说，将《大统历》、《授时历》两历进行比较，考察古代气差了三日，推究今日时间差了九刻。
English: For example, Zheng Wang Shizi compared the two calendars of the "Great General Calendar" and the "Giving Calendar" and examined the difference of three days in ancient times, and deduced that the time difference today is nine hours.

古文：夫时差九刻，在亥子之间则移一日，在晦朔之交则移一月，此可验之于近也。
现代文：时间相差九刻，在亥时和子时之间就移动了一日，在晦日和朔日之交就移动了一月，这是可以在现在验证的。
English: There is a nine-hour time difference, and one day is moved between the winter solstice and the spring equinox, and one month is moved between the new year's eve and the new year's day, which can be verified now.

古文：设移而前，则生明在二日之昏，设移而后，则生明在四日之夕矣。
现代文：如果时间前移，那新月就出现在二日的黄昏，如果后移，新月就出现在四日的晚上了。
English: If the time moves forward, the new moon will appear at dusk on the 2nd, and if it moves backward, the new moon will appear on the evening of the 4th.

古文：今似未至此也。
现代文：现在似乎还没有到逭一步。
English: It doesn't look like we're there yet.

古文：其书应发钦天监参订测验。
现代文：郑王世子的书应该下发钦天监参订测验。
English: Zheng Wang Shizi's book should be sent to Qin Tianjun for examination.

古文：世子留心历学，博通今古，宜赐奖谕。 
现代文：世子用心于历学，博古通今，应该赐敕书奖励。 
English: The world's children are diligent in their study of history, and should be given awards for their books.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝听从了他的意见。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：河南佥事刑云路上书言： 治历之耍治历之耍，无逾观象、测景、候时、筹策四事。
现代文：河南佥事邢云路上书说： 治理历法的要点，没有超过观测天象、测量日影、测算天时、筹划计算四件事。
English: An anecdote from Henan Province, written on the road to Shenyun, said: "The main points of governing the calendar do not exceed the observation of celestial objects, the measurement of the sun's shadow, the calculation of the time of day, and the planning and calculation of four things.

古文：今丙申年日至，臣测得乙未日未正一刻，而《大统》推在申正二刻，相差九刻。
现代文：现在丙申年日至，臣测得在乙末日未时后段一刻，而《大统历》推算在申时后段二刻，相差九刻。
English: Now, from the year B to the year of the Monkey, it is measured by the minister to be one minute after the end of the second day, while the "Great General Calendar" is calculated to be two minutes after the hour of the Monkey, a difference of nine minutes.

古文：且今年立春、夏至、立冬皆适直子半之交。
现代文：而且今年立春、夏至、立冬都正巧在子时一半的时刻。
English: Moreover, this year, the beginning of spring, the summer solstice, and the beginning of winter are all coincidentally in the middle of the day.

古文：臣推立春乙亥，而《大统》推丙子；夏至壬辰，而《大统》推癸巳；立冬巳酉，而《大统》推庚戌。相隔皆一日。
现代文：臣推算立春在乙亥，而《大统历》推算在丙子；夏至在壬辰，而《大统历》推算在癸巳；立冬在己酉，而《大统历》推算在庚戌相隔都是一天。
English: The minister estimated that the beginning of spring was in Yihai, while the "Great Unification Calendar" was estimated in Cizi; the summer solstice was in Renchen, while the "Great Unification Calendar" was estimated in Jinshi; the beginning of winter was in Ji'an, while the "Great Unification Calendar" was estimated in Geng'an, all one day apart.

古文：若或直元日于子半，则当退履端于月穷，而朝贺大礼在月正二日矣。
现代文：如果正好元日在子时的一半，就该把正月初一退到上月的末尾，而朝贺大礼就在正月二日了。
English: If the New Year's Day falls in the middle of spring, the first day of the first month should be moved to the end of the last month, and the morning greeting ceremony is on the second day of the first month.

古文：岂细故耶？
现代文：这难道是小事吗？
English: Is that such a small thing?

古文：闰八月朔，日食，《大统》推初亏巳正二刻，食几既，而臣候初亏巳正一刻，食止七分余。
现代文：闰八月朔日，日食，《大统历》推算初亏在巳时后段二刻，接近日全食，而臣测到初亏在巳时后段一刻，亏食只有七分多。
English: On Leap August New Year's Day, the solar eclipse, the "Great General Calendar" estimated the initial loss at two hours after midnight, close to the total solar eclipse, while the minister measured the initial loss at one hour after midnight, the loss of food was only more than seven minutes.

古文：《大统》实后天几二刻，则闰应及转应、交应，各宜增损之矣。 
现代文：《大统历》实际落后于天象将近二刻，那么闰应及转应、交应，都各应增减了。 
English: The "Great General Calendar" actually lags behind the celestial phenomenon by nearly two hours, so the leap year and the transition year have increased and decreased respectively.

古文：钦天监见云路疏，甚恶之。
现代文：钦天监见到邢云路的奏疏，十分厌恶他。
English: When Qin Tianxuan saw Gongyunlu's performance, he was disgusted.

古文：监正张应候奏诋，谓其僣妄惑世。
现代文：监正张应侯上奏斥责，说他超越本分，狂妄惑众。
English: Supervisor Zhang Yinghou made a reprimand, saying that he exceeded his duty and misled the public.

古文：礼部尚书范谦乃言： 历为国家大事，士夫所当讲求，非历士之所得私。
现代文：礼部尚书范谦却说： 历法是国家的大事，士大夫应当讲求，不是从事历法的人能够私自占有的。
English: However, the clerk of the ritual department, Shang Shuxuan, said: The calendar is an important matter for the country, and the scholar-officials should pay attention to it. It is not that those who are engaged in the calendar can own it.

古文：律例所禁，乃妄言妖祥者耳。
现代文：法律禁止的，只是说妖异吉凶而已。
English: What is prohibited by law is only saying that something is evil, strange, lucky or unlucky.

古文：监官拘守成法，不能修改合天。
现代文：钦天监官员墨守成法，不能修改以符合天象。
English: The officials of the Qin Heavenly Inspector adhere to the established law, and cannot be amended to conform to the heavenly law.

古文：幸有其人，所当和衷共事，不宜妒忌。
现代文：幸好有邢云堕这样的人，应当与他和衷共事，不应该妒忌。
English: Fortunately, there is such a person as Gong Yunpeng, who should work with him sincerely, and should not be jealous.

古文：乞以云路提叔钦天监事，督率官属，精心测候，以成钜典。 
现代文：请求任命邢云路管理钦天监事务，率领督促部属，精心测量，以制成大典。 
English: He asked for the appointment of Gongyun Lu to manage the affairs of Qin Tianxuan, and led the supervision of subordinates to make careful measurements to make a great book.

古文：议上，不报。
现代文：奏议上呈，皇帝没有答复。
English: The result of the discussion was reported, but there was no reply.

古文：三十八年，监推十一月壬寅朔日食分秒及亏圆之候，职方郎范守己疏驳其误。
现代文：三十八年，钦天监推测十一月壬寅朔日日食的程度及初亏复圆的情况，职方郎范守己上疏驳斥他们的错误。
English: In the 38th year, Qin Tianyuan speculated on the extent of the solar eclipse in November and the situation of the first loss and the second loss, and the official party, Lang Fan Shou, refuted their mistakes.

古文：礼官因请博求知历学者，令与监官昼夜推测，庶几历法靡差。
现代文：礼官于是请求广招懂历学的人，命他们与钦天监官员日夜推测，以求历法没有差错。
English: The etiquette officer then asked for a wide range of people who understood the calendar, and ordered them to speculate with the Qin Tianjun officials day and night to ensure that there were no errors in the calendar.

古文：于是五官正周子愚言： 大西洋归化远臣庞迪峨、熊三拨等，携有彼国历法，多中国典籍所未备者。
现代文：这时五官正周子愚进言说： 大西洋来归顺的远方臣子庞迪峩、熊三拔等，带有那个国家的历法，多是中国典籍中没有的。
English: At this time, Zhou Zigu, the chief of the Five Departments, said, "The distant courtiers from the Atlantic Ocean, such as Pang Diyu and Xiong Sanbai, brought with them the calendars of that country, most of which are not found in Chinese classics.

古文：乞视洪中译西域历法例，取知历儒臣率同监官，将诸书尽译，以补典籍之缺。 
现代文：请求仿照洪武年间翻译西域历法的先例，选取懂历法的大臣率领钦天监官员，将各种书全部翻译，以补充典籍的缺陷。 
English: It is requested that, following the precedent of the translation of the Western calendar in the Hongwu era, a minister who understands the calendar will be selected to lead the Qin Tianjun officials to translate all kinds of books to supplement the defects of the classics.

古文：先是，大西洋人利玛窦进贡土物，而迪峨、三拨及能华同、邓玉函、汤若望等先后至，俱精究天文历法。
现代文：在此之前，大西洋人利玛窦进贡土产，而庞迪峩、熊三拔及龙华民、邓玉函、汤若望等先后到来，都精通天文历法。
English: Prior to this, the Atlanticist Matteo Ricci paid tribute to local products, while Pound Diao, Xiong Sanbai, Long Huamin, Deng Yuhang, Tang Ruowang and others came successively, all of whom were proficient in astronomical calendars.

古文：礼部因奏： 精通历法，如云路、守己为时所推，请改授京卿，共理历事。
现代文：礼部于是上奏说： 精通历法，像邢云路、范守己这样的人，被时人推重，请求改授京官，共同管理历法事务。
English: The Ministry of Ceremonies then made the following report: People who were proficient in the calendar, such as Gongyunlu and Fan Shouji, were highly regarded by the people of the time, and they requested to be awarded the post of Beijing official and jointly manage the calendar affairs.

古文：翰林院检讨徐光启、南京工部员外郎李之藻亦皆精心历理，可与迪峨、三拨等同译西洋法，俾云路等参订修改。
现代文：翰林院检讨徐光启、南京工部员外郎李之藻也都精心研究历法原理，可以和庞迪峩、熊三拔等共同翻译西洋历法，让邢云路等参订修改。
English: Xu Guangqi, a reviewer of the Hanlin Academy, and Li Zhizao, a member of the Nanjing Engineering Department, have also carefully studied the calendar principle. They can jointly translate the Western calendar with Pang Diyu and Xiong Sanbai, and let Yuyunlu and others participate in the revision.

古文：然历法疏密，莫显于交食，欲议修历，必重测验。
现代文：然而历法的粗疏严密，没有比日月食表现更明显的了，想要议论修订历法，必须注重测量检验。
English: However, the calendar is crude and strict, and there is nothing more obvious than the eclipse. If you want to discuss the revision of the calendar, you must pay attention to measurement and inspection.

古文：乞敕所司修治仪器，以便从事。 
现代文：请命令有关部门整治仪器，以便于事情的进行。 
English: Please order the relevant departments to rectify the instrument in order to facilitate the matter.

古文：疏入，留中。
现代文：奏疏呈入，留在宫中。
English: Sono-so went inside and stayed in the center of the court.

古文：未几云路、之藻皆召至京，参预历事。
现代文：不久邢云路、李之藻都被召到京城，参预历法事务。
English: Soon, Gongyunlu and Li Zhimo were summoned to the capital to participate in the pre-calendar affairs.

古文：云路据其所学，之藻则以西法为宗。
现代文：邢云路根据他所举的理论，李之藻则以西洋历法为宗旨。
English: Zou Yunlu based on his theory, and Li Zhizao based on the Western calendar.

古文：四十一年，之藻已改衔南京太仆少卿，奏上西洋历法，略言台监推算日月交食时刻亏分之谬。而力荐迪峨、三拨及华民、阳玛诺等，言： 其所论天文历数，有中国昔贤所未及者，不徒论其数，又能明其所以然之理。
现代文：四十一年，李之藻已改任南京太仆少卿，上奏呈上西洋历法，大致说了钦天监推算日月交食时刻亏分的错误，并极力推荐庞迪峩、熊三拔及龙华民、阳玛诺等，说： 他们论述天文历法，有中国过去的贤人所赶不上的，不但讨论运行的度数，而且又能说明其所以然的道理。
English: In the forty-first year, Li Zhimo, who had been transferred to the post of Nanjing Taigu Shaoqing, presented the Western calendar in the report. He roughly said the error of the Qin Heavenly Supervisor in calculating the deficit of the time of the solar and lunar eclipses, and strongly recommended Poon Diyao, Xiong Sanbai, Longhuamin, Yang Mano and others, saying: They discuss the astronomical calendar, which the wise men of China in the past cannot catch up with, not only discuss the frequency of operation, but also explain the reason for it.

古文：四十四年，云路献《七政真数》，言： 步历之法，必以两交相对。
现代文：他们所制造的观测天象太阳的仪器，每种都精妙绝伦。当时各种事情都因循守旧，没有功夫来设置翻译机构。四十四年，邢云路进献《七政真数》，说： 推算历法的方法，必须用两个交点相对。
English: The instruments they made for observing the heavenly bodies and the sun were all exquisite. At that time, all kinds of things were old-fashioned, and there was no effort to set up a translation agency. In 1944, Zou Yunlu presented "The True Numbers of the Seven Kingdoms," saying: "The method of calculating the calendar must use two intersections opposite each other.

古文：两交正，而中间时刻分秒之度数，一一可按。
现代文：两个交点正确，中间的时刻分秒的度数，一一可以查考落实。
English: The two intersections are correct, and the degrees of the minutes and seconds in the middle can be checked one by one.

古文：日月之交食，五星之凌犯，皆日月五星之相交也。
现代文：日月的交食，五星的冲犯，都是日月五星的交会。
English: The intersection of the sun and the moon, the impact of the five stars, are all the intersection of the sun, the moon and the five stars.

古文：两交相对，互相发明，七政之能事毕矣。 
现代文：两个交点相对，互相说明，日月五星的事情就完全清楚了。 
English: The two intersections are opposite and explain each other, and the matter of the sun, moon and stars is completely clear.

古文：天启元年春，云路复详述古今时刻，与钦天监所推互异。
现代文：玉启元年春，邢云路又详细叙述古今日月交食的几件事，以说明《授时历》的粗疏，证明新历法的精密。
English: In the spring of the first year of the Jade Emperor's reign, Gongyunlu also described in detail several events of the ancient lunar calendar to illustrate the coarseness of the "Giving Calendar" and prove the precision of the new calendar.

古文：症新法至密，章下礼部。
现代文：奏章下发礼部。
English: The ceremonial section begins at the bottom of the movement.

古文：四月壬申朔日食，云路所推食分时刻，与钦天监所推互异。
现代文：四月壬申朔日日食，邢云路所推算的食分时刻，和钦天监所推算的互有差异。
English: The April Jinshen New Year's Day solar eclipse, the eclipse time calculated by Jinyun Road, and that calculated by the Qin Observatory are different from each other.

古文：自言新法至密，至期考验，皆与天下不合。
现代文：自己说新历法十分精密，到时检验，都与天象不合。
English: They say that the new calendar is very precise, and when it is tested, it does not match the celestial phenomenon.

古文：云路又尝论《大统》宫度交界，当以岁差考定，不当仍用《授时》三百年前所测之数。
现代文：邢云路又曾论述《大统历》宫度的交界，应当用岁差来考定，不应当仍然用《授时历》三百年前所测定的数据。
English: Zou Yunlu also discussed that the junction of the "Great General Calendar" should be determined by the precession of the equinoxes, and should not still use the data measured three hundred years ago by the "Giving Calendar."

古文：又月建月关半杓所指，斗杓有岁差，而月建无改移。
现代文：又说月份和十二辰的对应与北斗斗柄的指向没有关系，北斗斗柄所指有岁差，而月份和十二辰的对应没有变动。
English: It is also said that the correspondence between the month and the 12 hours has nothing to do with the direction of the Big Dipper handle. The Big Dipper handle has a precession, but the correspondence between the month and the 12 hours has not changed.

古文：皆笃论也。
现代文：这些都是确切的评论。
English: These are accurate comments.

古文：崇祯二年五月乙酉朔日食，礼部侍郎徐光启依西法预推，顺天府见食二分有奇，琼州食既，大宁以北不食。
现代文：崇祯二年五月乙酉朔日日食，礼部侍郎徐光启按照西洋历法预测，顺天府见日食二分多，琼州日全食，大窒以北不发生日食。
English: In May of the second year of Chongzheng, the New Year's Day solar eclipse occurred. According to the prediction of the Western calendar, Shun Tianfu saw more than two minutes of solar eclipse, Qiongzhou saw a total solar eclipse, and there was no solar eclipse north of Datong.

古文：《大统》、《回回》所推，顺天食分时刻，与光启妻异。
现代文：《大统历》《回回历》所推算的，顺天府的时分时刻，舆徐光启不同。
English: According to the calculations of the "Great General Calendar" and the "Back-to-Back Calendar," the time and time of Shun Tianfu are different.

古文：已而光启法验，余皆疏。
现代文：后来徐光启的算法应验了，其它的都有疏误。
English: Later, Xu Guangqi's algorithm came true, and the others were all mistakes.

古文：帝切责监官。
现代文：皇帝严厉指责钦天监官员。
English: The emperor severely reprimanded the officials of Qin Tianjun.

古文：时五官正戈丰年等言： 《大统》乃国初所定，寮即郭守敬《授时历》也，二百六十年毫未增损。
现代文：这时五官正戈丰年等进言说： 《大统历》是建国初年制定的，实际上就是郭守敬的《授时历》，二百六十年丝毫没有增减。
English: At this time, five officials including Zheng Gefeng said: "The "Great General Calendar" was formulated in the first year of the founding of the People's Republic of China. In fact, it is Guo Shoujing's "Giving Calendar," and there has been no increase or decrease in two hundred and sixty years.

古文：自至元十八年造历，越十八年为大德三年八月，已当食不食，六年六月又食而失推。
现代文：从至元十八年制定历法，遇了十八年到大德三年八月，已经预报要发生日食而没有发生，六年六月又发生日食而没有推算出来。
English: From the establishment of the calendar in the 18th year of the Yuan Dynasty to the August of the 3rd year of the Great German Empire, a solar eclipse had been predicted to occur but did not occur, and a solar eclipse occurred in June of the 6th year but was not calculated.

古文：是时守敬方知院事，亦付之无可奈佑，况斤斤守法者哉？
现代文：当时郭守敬正主持太史坑事务，也无可奈何，更何况那些拘谨守法的人呢？
English: At that time, Guo Shoujing was presiding over Taishikeng affairs, and there was nothing he could do, let alone those who were scrupulously law-abiding.

古文：今若循旧，向后不能无差。 
现代文：现在如果遵循旧法，往后不能没有差错。 
English: If the old law is followed now, there will be mistakes in the future.

古文：于是礼部奏开局修改。乃以光启督修历法。
现代文：于是礼部上奏设置机构修改历法，皇帝就让徐光启统领修订历法。
English: As a result, the Ministry of Ceremonies set up an agency to revise the calendar, and the emperor asked Xu Guangqi to lead the revision of the calendar.

古文：光启言：近世言历诸家，大都宗郭守敬法，至若岁差环转，岁实参差，天有纬度，地有经度，列宿有本行，月五星有本轮，日月有真会、视会，皆古所未闻，惟西历有之。
现代文：徐光启进言说： 近代谈历法的各家，大都尊崇郭守敬的历法，至于说岁差有循环，岁寅有参差，天有纬度，地有经度，各宿有本行，月亮五星有本轮，日月有真正的会合、视觉的会合，都是古代没有听说遇的，祇有西洋历法纔有。
English: Xu Guangqi said: Most of the modern calendars respect Guo Shoujing's calendar. As for saying that the precession has a cycle, the year has a jagged difference, the sky has a latitude, the earth has a longitude, each place has its own industry, the moon and five stars have their own round, the sun and moon have a real meeting, and a visual meeting, they are all unheard of in ancient times. Only the Western calendar is rare.

古文：而舍此数法，则交食凌犯，终无密合理。
现代文：而舍弃这几绦法则，那磨日月交食五星冲犯，最终不会有切合的理论。
English: But abandoning these few rules, the sun and the moon will eventually not have a relevant theory.

古文：宜取其法参互考订，使与《大统》法会同归一。 
现代文：应该取来相互考订，使它与《大统历》汇合而一。 
English: It should be mutually adjusted and harmonized with the General Calendar.

古文：已而光启上历法修正十事：其一，议岁差，每岁东行渐长短之数，以正古来百年、五十年、六十年多寡互异之说。
现代文：事后徐光启上奏修订历法的十件事：第一，讨论岁差，每年束行逐渐变长逐渐变短的数据，以纠正自古以来一百年、五十年、六十年多少不同的说法。
English: After the event, Xu Guangqi made a report on ten things about the revision of the calendar: First, to discuss the precession of the equinoxes, and the data of the gradual lengthening and shortening of the solar terms each year, in order to correct the view that the length of the solar terms has varied by a hundred years, fifty years, and sixty years since ancient times.

古文：其二，议岁实小余，昔多今少，渐次改易，及日景长短岁岁不同之因，以定冬至，以正气明朔。
现代文：第二，讨论岁实小余，古代多，现在少，逐渐在改变，以及日影长短年年不同的原因，以确定冬至，以订正气和朔日。
English: Second, we will discuss the reasons for determining the winter solstice, the correction of the solar wind, and the new day, such as the fact that the year has a small surplus, the ancient year has more, the present year has less, and gradually changes, and the length of the sun's shadow varies from year to year.

古文：其三，每日测验日行经度，以定盈缩加减真率，东西南北高下之差，以步月离。
现代文：第三，每天测量太阳运行的经度，以确定盈缩加减差的准确比率，东西南北高下的差异，以推算太阳的运行。
English: Third, the longitude of the sun's movement is measured every day to determine the exact ratio of gain and loss, and the difference between east and west, north and south, to calculate the sun's movement.

古文：其四，夜测月行经纬度数，以定交转迟疾真率，东西北高下之差，以步月离。
现代文：第四，晚上测量月亮运行的经纬度数，以确定交转迟疾的准确比率，东西南北高下的差异，以推算月亮的运行。
English: Fourth, in the evening, the number of latitude and longitude of the moon's movement is measured to determine the accurate ratio of the rotation delay, and the difference between the height of the east and west, north and south, to calculate the movement of the moon.

古文：其五，密测列宿以纬行度，以定七政盈缩、迟疾、顺逆、违离、远近之数。
现代文：第五，精密测量各宿的经纬运行度数，以确定日月五星盈缩、迟疾、顺逆、违离、远近的数据。
English: Fifth, precise measurement of the latitude and longitude movement rate of each inn to determine the data of the waxing and waning of the sun, the moon and the five stars, the delay, the reverse, the deviation, and the distance and proximity.

古文：其六，密测五星经纬行度，以定小轮行度迟疾、留逆、伏见之数，东西南北高下之差，以推步凌犯。
现代文：第六，精密测量五星的经纬运行度数，以确定小轮运行的迟疾、停留逆行、伏现的数据，东西南北高下的差异，以推算五星冲犯。
English: Sixth, the latitude and longitude running rates of the five stars are precisely measured to determine the data of the slow running, stop-and-go and emerging of the small wheel, and the height difference between the east and west and the north and south to calculate the five-star impact.

古文：其七，推变黄道、赤道广狭度数，密测二道距度，及月五星各道与黄道相距之度，以定交转。
现代文：第七，推算黄道赤道问变宽变窄的度数，精密测量黄道赤道的距度，以及月亮五星各道与黄道相距的度数，以确定交转。
English: Seventh, calculate the degree of the change of the width and narrowness of the ecliptic equator, accurately measure the distance of the ecliptic equator, and the degree of the distance between the moon and the five stars and the ecliptic, in order to determine the rotation.

古文：其八，议日月去交远近及真会、视会之因，以定距午时差之真率，以正交食。
现代文：第八，讨论日月离交点的远近及真正会合、视觉会合的原因，以确定距午时差的准确比率，以订正日月食。
English: Eighth, to discuss the reasons for the distance and proximity of the sun-moon intersection and the real meeting and visual meeting, to determine the accurate ratio of the time difference from noon, and to revise the solar eclipse.

古文：其九，测日行，考知二极出入地度数，以定周天纬度，以齐七政。
现代文：第九，测量太阳运行，考察出南北极出入地的度数，以确定周天的纬度，以弄清日月五星的运行。
English: Ninth, measure the movement of the sun, investigate the degrees of the north and south poles to determine the latitude of the sun, and clarify the movement of the sun, moon and stars.

古文：因月食考知东西相距地轮经度，以定交食时刻。
现代文：通过月食考察确定东西相距地轮的经度，以确定交食的时刻。
English: Through the lunar eclipse investigation, the longitude of the earth wheel between east and west was determined in order to determine the time of mating.

古文：其十，依唐、元法，随地测验二极出入地度数，地轮经纬，以求昼夜晨昏永短，以正交食有无、先后、多寡之数。
现代文：第十，依照唐、元的方法，在各地测量南北极出入地的度数，地轮的经纬度，以求昼夜晨昏的长短，以订芷交食有无、先后、多寡的数据。
English: Tenth, according to the method of Tang and Yuan Dynasties, the frequency of the entrance and exit of the South and North Pole should be measured in various places, the latitude and longitude of the earth wheel should be measured to find the length of the day and night, and the data of whether, successively, and how much food should be eaten should be recorded.

古文：因举南京太仆少卿李之藻、西洋人能华民、邓玉涵。
现代文：并以此机会推荐南京太仆少卿李之藻、西洋人龙华民、邓玉函。
English: And take this opportunity to recommend the Nanjing servant Li Zhimo, the Westerner Long Huamin, and Deng Yukan.

古文：报可。
现代文：皇帝批覆同意。
English: Reimbursement agreed.

古文：九月癸卯开历局。
现代文：九月癸卯开设历局。
English: In September, the Bureau of Engraving and Printing opened.

古文：三年，玉函卒，又徵西洋人汤若望、罗雅谷译书演算。
现代文：三年，邓玉函去世，又征召西洋人汤若望、罗雅谷译书演算。
English: Three years later, Deng Yuhang passed away, and Westerners such as Tang Ruowang and Luo Yagu were enlisted.

古文：光启进本部尚书，仍督修历法。
现代文：徐光启进升礼部尚书，仍然统领修订历法。
English: Xu Guangqi entered the Ministry of Rites and Decrees, and still presided over the revision of the calendar.

古文：时巡按四御史马如蚊荐资县诸生冷守中精历学以所呈历书送局。
现代文：这时巡按四川御史马如蛟推荐资县诸生冷守中精通历学，将他所呈递的历书送交历局。
English: At this time, the Sichuan Grand Historian, Ma Ruzhen, recommended that the cold-blooded people in Zhixian County, who were proficient in calendar studies, send the calendar book he submitted to the calendar bureau.

古文：光启力驳其谬，并预推次年四月川食时刻，令其临时比测。
现代文：徐光启极力驳斥它的荒谬，并预推第二年四月四川月食的时刻，叫他们到时测量比较。
English: Xu Guangqi strenuously refuted its absurdity, and advanced the time of the lunar eclipse in Sichuan in April of the following year, asking them to measure and compare at that time.

古文：四年正月，光启进《历书》二十四卷。
现代文：四年正月，徐光启进呈《历书》二十四卷。
English: In the first month of the fourth year, Xu Guangqi presented the "Calendar Book" of 24 volumes.

古文：夏四月戊午，夜望月食，光启预推分秒时刻方位。
现代文：夏四月戊午，夜望月食，徐光启预推了分秒食刻方位。
English: At noon in the summer of April, looking at the lunar eclipse at night, Xu Guangqi advanced the position of the minute and second eclipses.

古文：奏言： 日食随地不同，则用地纬度算其食分多少，用地经度算其加时早晏。
现代文：上奏说： 日食各地不同，就用地的纬度算它的食分的多少，用地经度算它的加时的早晚。
English: The prelude said: The solar eclipse is different from place to place, so the latitude of the land is used to calculate the number of eclipses, and the longitude of the land is used to calculate the morning and evening of the extra time.

古文：月食分秒，海内并同，止用地经度推求先后时刻。
现代文：月食的分秒，各地相同，只是用地经度推求它的先后时刻。
English: The minute and second of a lunar eclipse are the same everywhere, it is just a matter of using the earth's longitude to deduce its chronological time.

古文：臣从舆地图约略推步，开载各布政司月食初亏度分，盖食分多少既天下皆同，则余率可以类推，不若日食之经纬各殊，心须详备也。
现代文：臣从地图大致推算，开列各布政司月食初亏度分，食分多少既然天下都相，同，那么余率就可以类推，不像日食在不同的经纬各不相同，必须详细算出。
English: The minister roughly calculated from the map, listing the initial loss rate of the lunar eclipse for each county, and the number of eclipse points. Since the whole world is the same, the same, then the remaining rate can be analogized. Unlike the solar eclipse, which varies in different latitudes and longitudes, it must be calculated in detail.

古文：又月体一十五分，则尽入暗虚亦十五分止耳。
现代文：又月体十五分，那么完全进入虚暗的空间也只有十五分。
English: If it takes fifteen minutes to reach the lunar body, then it takes only fifteen minutes to fully enter the dim space.

古文：今推二十六分六十六十秒者，盖暗虚体大于月，若食时去交稍远，即月体不能全入暗虚，止从月体论其分数。
现代文：现在推算二十六分六十秒，是虚暗的空间大于月亮，如果月食时离交点较速，月体就不能完全进入虚暗空间，只能从月体来说它的分数。
English: Now it is estimated to be 26 minutes and 60 seconds, which is a dim space larger than the moon. If the lunar eclipse departs from the node faster, the moon cannot fully enter the dim space, but only its fraction from the moon.

古文：是夕之食，极近於交，故月入暗虚十五分方为食既，更进一十一分有奇，乃得生光，故为二十六分有奇。
现代文：这晚上的月食，极其接近交点，所以月亮进入虚暗中十五分就是食既，再进去十一分多，就是生光，所以是二十六分多。
English: This night's lunar eclipse is extremely close to the point of intersection, so when the moon enters the dimness, it is eclipsed for fifteen minutes, and when it enters again, it is more than eleven minutes, it is born light, so it is more than twenty-six minutes.

古文：如《回回历》推十八分四十七秒，略同此法也。 
现代文：如《回回历》推算十八分四十七秒，大致和这种方法相同。 
English: For example, the calculation of eighteen minutes and forty-seven seconds in the "Lunar Calendar" is roughly the same as this method.

古文：已四川报次序守中所推月食实差二时，而新法密合。
现代文：后来四川报告冷守中推算的月食实际差二时，而新方法密切相合。
English: Later, Sichuan reported that the lunar eclipse calculated during the cold storage was actually two hours different, while the new method was closely matched.

古文：光启又进《历书》二十一卷。
现代文：徐光启又进呈《历书》二十一卷。
English: Xu Guangqi submitted the twenty-first volume of the "Calendar Book" again.

古文：冬十月辛丑朔日食，新法预顺天见食二分一十二秒，应天以南下食，大汉以北食既，例以京师见食不及三分，不救护。
现代文：冬十月辛丑朔日日食，新法预推顺天见食二分十二秒，应天以南不发生日食，大漠以北全食，按惯例因京师见食不到三分，不采取救护措施。
English: In the winter of October, when the sun eclipses the sun, the new law predicts that the eclipse will last for two minutes and twelve seconds, according to the sky, the eclipse will not occur in the south, and the total eclipse will not occur in the north of the desert. According to the usual practice, because the Beijing division will see the eclipse for less than three minutes, no rescue measures will be taken.

古文：光启言：
现代文：徐光启说：
English: Xu Guangqi said:

古文：月食在夜，加时早晚，若无定据。
现代文：月食在晚上，加时的早晚，苦于没有依据。
English: The lunar eclipse in the evening, the extra time in the morning and evening, suffer from no basis.

古文：惟日食按晷定时，无可迁就。
现代文：只有日食按日晷定时，无法变动。
English: Only the solar eclipse is timed according to the sundial and cannot be changed.

古文：故历法疏密，此为的症。
现代文：所以历法的粗疏严密，这是确实的证据。
English: So it's a real testament to the rigidity of the calendar.

古文：臣等纂辑新法，渐次就绪，而向生交食为期尚远，此时不与监臣共见，至成历后，将何徵信？
现代文：臣等编纂新历法，逐渐就绪，而以后一次的交食，为期还速，现在不和钦天监臣共同见证，到历法编成以后，将用什么证实？
English: After the new calendar was compiled by the ministers, it was gradually ready, and the next time the meal was held, the time was too fast, and now it was not witnessed by the Qintian supervisors. After the calendar was compiled, what would be used to confirm it?

古文：且是食之必当测俟，更有说焉。
现代文：而且这次日食必须观测，还有另外的理由。
English: And there's another reason why this eclipse is a must-see.

古文：旧法食在正中，则无时差。
现代文：旧历法日食在正中，就没有时差。
English: According to the old calendar, when the solar eclipse was in the middle, there was no time difference.

古文：今此食既在日中，而新法仍有时差者，盖以七政运行皆依黄道，不由赤道。
现代文：现在这次日食既然在中午，而新历法仍然有时差，是因为日月五星运行都沿着黄道，不由赤道。
English: Now that this solar eclipse is at noon, and the new calendar is still time-lagged, it is because the sun, moon and five stars all move along the ecliptic, not by the equator.

古文：旧法所谓中乃道之午中，非黄道之正中也。
现代文：旧历法所说的中是赤道的午中，而不是黄道的正中。
English: The old calendar referred to the middle of the day at the equator, not the middle of the ecliptic.

古文：黄赤道二道之中，独冬夏至加时正午，乃得同度。
现代文：黄赤二道的中，只有冬至夏至加时正午，纔可能同度。
English: On the other side of the Yellow Equator, only the winter solstice and the summer solstice have an extra hour at noon.

古文：今十月朔去冬至度数尚远，两中之差，二下三度有奇，岂可因加时近午，不加不减乎？
现代文：现在十月朔离冬至的度数还远，两个中的差，有二十三度多，难道可以因为加时接近中午。就不加不减吗？
English: Now, October is still far away from the winter solstice, and the difference between the two is more than 23 degrees. Can it be because the extra time is close to noon?

古文：适际此日，又值此时，足可验时差之正术，二也。
现代文：正好碰上这一天，又是这个时刻，足以验证关于时差的方法，这是第一点。
English: It just so happens to be the day, and the time, to test the time difference method, which is the first point.

古文：本方之地经度，未得真率，则加时难定，其法心从交食时测验数次，乃可较勘昼一。
现代文：本地的经度，没有得到准确的比率，那么加时就难以确定，它的数据一定要从交食时测验几次，纔可以勘测统一。
English: The local longitude has not obtained an accurate ratio, so it is difficult to determine the extra time. Its data must be tested several times from the time of the meal, and then it can be surveyed and unified.

古文：今此食依新术测候，其加时刻分，或后未合，当取从前所记地经度分，斟酌改定，此可以求里差之真率，二也。
现代文：现在这次日食依照新方法测量，它的加时刻分，或许前后不合，应当取从前所记的地经度数，斟酌改定，这可以求得里差的准确比率，这是第二点。
English: Now this solar eclipse is measured according to a new method, its added time is minutes, perhaps inconsistent, it should be taken from the previously recorded degree of longitude, and modified at discretion, which can obtain the accurate ratio of the difference, this is the second point.

古文：时差一法，但知中无加减，而不知中分黄赤，今一经目见，人人知加时之因黄道，因此推彼，他术皆然，足以知学习之甚易，三也。
现代文：定时差的方法，祇知道在中没有加碱，但不知道中还要分黄道和赤道，现在一经过目睹，就人人都知道加时要根据黄道。由此及彼，其它方法也是一样，由此足以知道学习很容易，这是第三点。
English: The method of determining the time difference, only know that there is no addition of alkali, but do not know that the zodiac and the equator are also divided. Now, as soon as it is witnessed, everyone knows that the time should be added according to the zodiac. Therefore, the other methods are the same, so it is enough to know that learning is easy, this is the third point.

古文：即分数甚少，宜详加测候，以求显验。
现代文：即使分数很少，也应该详细测量，以求应验。
English: Even if the score is low, it should be measured in detail in order to pass.

古文：帝是其言。
现代文：皇帝觉得他说得对。
English: The emperor thought this was a very good idea.

古文：至期，光启率监臣预点日晷，调壶漏，用测高仪器测食甚日晷高度。
现代文：到时，徐光启率领钦天监大臣预点日晷，调整壶漏，用测高仪器测量食甚时日晷的高度。
English: At that time, Xu Guangqi led the Minister of the State Administration of Radio, Film and Television of the People's Republic of China in setting the preset sundial, adjusting the pot leak, and using the altimeter to measure the height of the sundial during the eclipse.

古文：又于密室中斜开一隙，置窥筒、远镜以测亏圆，昼日体分板分数图板以定食分，其时刻、高度悉合，惟食甚分数未及二分。
现代文：又在暗室中斜着开了一道缝隙，设置窥管、远镜以测亏圆，画日体分数图板以确定食分。这次日食的时刻、高度全都相合，只是食甚分数不到二分。
English: In addition, a slit was opened diagonally in the darkroom, a telescope and a telescope were set up to measure the circle, and a heliocentric fraction chart was drawn to determine the eclipse fraction. The time and height of this eclipse were all the same, but the eclipse fraction was less than two minutes.

古文：于是光启言： 今食甚之度分密合，则经度里差已无烦更定矣。
现代文：于是徐光启进言说： 现在食甚的度分密切相合，那么经度里差就不必更改了。
English: So Xu Guangqi said: Now the degrees of eclipses are closely related, so there is no need to change the difference between longitude and latitude.

古文：独食分未合，原推者盖因太阳光大，能减月魄，必食及四五分以上，乃得与原推相合，然此测，用密室窥筒，故能得此分数，倘止凭目力，或水盆照映，则眩耀不定，恐少尚不止此也。 
现代文：只有食分不合，原来推算的大概是因为太阳光大，能够减小月亮的影子，一定会亏食到四五分以上，纔能与原来的推算相合。然而此次观测，是使用暗室窥管，所以能得到这样的分数。如果只凭眼力，或用盆子装水来照映，就会眩耀不定，恐怕还不止这个数了。 
English: Only the eclipse score did not match. The original calculation was probably due to the fact that the sun is large and can reduce the shadow of the moon. The eclipse will certainly be more than four or five points, which can be consistent with the original calculation. However, this observation was made using a darkroom scope, so it was possible to get such a score. If you only rely on your eyesight, or use a basin filled with water to shine, it will dazzle uncertainly, I'm afraid it's more than this number.

古文：时有满城布衣魏文魁，著《历元》、《历测》二书，令其子象乾进《历元》於朝，通政司送局考验。
现代文：当时有满城平民魏文魁，着了《历元》《历测》两本书，叫他的儿子魏象干将《历元》进献给朝廷，通政司送到历局考索验证。
English: At that time, Wei Wenkui, a commoner in the city, wrote two books, "Lianyuan" and "Lijiu," and asked his son Wei Xianggan to present "Lianyuan" to the imperial court, and the Secretary for Political Affairs sent it to the Historical Bureau for research and verification.

古文：光启摘当极论者七事：其一，岁实自汉以来，代有减差，到《授时》减为二十四分二十五秒。
现代文：徐光启摘录了应当极力论证的七个问题：第一，岁实从汉以来，代代有减差，到《授时历》碱为二十四分二十五秒。
English: Xu Guangqi excerpted seven issues that should be vigorously argued: First, the year has actually decreased from generation to generation since the Han Dynasty, and it is 24 minutes and 25 seconds according to the "Giving of Time Calendar."

古文：依郭法百年消一，今当为二十一秒有奇。
现代文：依郭守敬的方法一百年碱一秒，现在应当是二十一秒多。
English: According to Guo Shoujing's method, one hundred years of one second, now it should be more than twenty-one seconds.

古文：而《历元》用赵知微三十六秒，翻覆骤加。
现代文：而《历元》用赵知微的三十六秒，反复加很多。
English: But "Lianyuan" uses Zhao Zhiwei's thirty-six seconds, repeatedly adding a lot.

古文：其一，弧背求弦矢，宜用密率。
现代文：第二，根据弧背求弦矢，应当用密率。
English: Second, according to the back of the arc to find the chord, the density should be used.

古文：今《历测》中犹用径一围三之法，不合弧矢真数。
现代文：现在《历测》中还用径一围三的方法，不合弧矢的真实数据。
English: Now, "Historical Survey" also uses the method of one diameter and three circumferences, which does not match the real data of the arc arrow.

古文：其一，盈缩之限，不在冬夏至，宜在冬夏至后六度。
现代文：第三，盈缩限，不在冬至夏至，应在冬至夏至后六度。
English: Third, the limit of expansion and contraction should not be the winter solstice and summer solstice, but should be six degrees after the winter solstice and summer solstice.

古文：今考日躔，春分迄夏至，夏至迄秋分，此两限中，日时刻分不等。
现代文：现在考察太阳的运行，春分到夏至，夏至到秋分，这两限中，日时刻分不等。
English: Now examine the movement of the sun, from the vernal equinox to the summer solstice, and from the summer solstice to the autumn equinox.

古文：又立春迄立夏，立秋迄立冬，此两限中，日时刻分亦不等。
现代文：又立春到立夏，立秋到立冬，这两限中，日时刻分也不等。
English: From spring to summer and from autumn to winter, there is no time difference between the two.

古文：测量可见。
现代文：从测量可以见到。
English: You can see it from the measurements.

古文：其一，言太阴最高得疾，最低得迟，且以圭表测而得之，非也。
现代文：第四，说月亮最远运行快，最近运行慢，而且用圭表测到它，不对。
English: Fourthly, it is not correct to say that the moon moves fast at its farthest point and slowly at its closest point, and that it can be measured with a caliper.

古文：太阴迟疾是入转内事，表测高下是入交内事，岂容混推。
现代文：月亮的快慢是入转内的事，圭表测高下是入交内的事，岂容混合推算。
English: The speed of the moon is a matter of entering the revolution, and the height measured by the Gui table is a matter of entering the exchange, which does not allow mixed calculations.

古文：而月行转周之上，又复左旋，所以最高向西行极迟，最低向东行乃极疾，旧法正相反。
现代文：而月亮运行在转周之上，又向左旋转，所以最逮向西行最慢，最近向东行最快，旧历法正相反。
English: But the moon runs on a revolution and rotates to the left, so the earliest westbound is the slowest, and the latest eastbound is the fastest, which is the opposite of the old calendar.

古文：其一，言日食正午无时差，非也。
现代文：第五，说日食在正午没有时差，不对。
English: Fifth, it is wrong to say that there is no time difference between the solar eclipse and noon.

古文：时差言距，非距赤道之午中，乃距黄道限东西各九十度之中也。
现代文：时差所说的距离，不是距赤道的午中，而是距黄道限东西各九十度的中。
English: The distance referred to by the time difference is not from the midday of the equator, but from the midpoint of the ecliptic limit of ninety degrees east and west.

古文：黄道限之中，有距午前后二十余度者，但依午正加减，焉能必合。
现代文：黄道限的中，有距午前后二十多度的，只依午正加减，怎能必然相合。
English: In the middle of the ecliptic limit, there are more than twenty degrees from the morning to the afternoon, but only according to the noon plus and minus, how can they necessarily coincide.

古文：其一，言交食定限，阴历八度，阳历六度，非也。
现代文：第六，说交食定限，阴历八度，阳历六度，不对。
English: Sixth, it is not correct to say that the fixed limit of interbreeding is eight degrees in the lunar calendar and six degrees in the solar calendar.

古文：日食，阴历当十七度，阳历当八度。
现代文：日食，阴历应在十七度，阳历应在八度。
English: For a solar eclipse, the lunar calendar should be in the 17th degree and the solar calendar in the 8th degree.

古文：月食则阴阳历俱十二度。
现代文：月食则阴阳历都是十二度。
English: For lunar eclipses, the lunisolar calendar is twelve degrees out.

古文：其一，《历测》云： 宋文帝元嘉六年十一月己丑朔，日食不尽如钩，昼星见。
现代文：第七，《历测》说： 宋文帝元嘉六年十一月己丑朔，日食剩下的部分像钩子一样，白天星星显现。
English: Seventh, "Liji" said: The sixth year of Emperor Song Wen and Empress Yuan Jia passed away in November. The remaining part of the eclipse was like a hook, and stars appeared during the day.

古文：今以《授时》推之，止食六分九十六秒，郭历舛矣。 
现代文：现在用《授时历》推算，只亏食六分九十六秒，郭守敬的历法有错误。 
English: Now using the "Giving Calendar" to calculate, only six minutes and ninety-six seconds are lost, and Guo Shoujing's calendar has errors.

古文：夫月食天下皆同，日食九服各异。
现代文：月食天下都相同，日食各地不同。
English: Lunar eclipses are the same all over the world, solar eclipses are different everywhere.

古文：南宋都于金陵，郭历造于燕地，北极出地差八度，时在十一月则食差当得二分弱，其云 不尽如钩 ，当在九分左右。
现代文：南宋建都金陵，郭守敬的历法制定于燕地，纬度相差八度，时间在十一月那么食差有二分弱，说 日食剩下的部分像钩子一样 ，当在九分左右。
English: The Southern Song Dynasty built the capital Jinling, and Guo Shoujing's calendar was established in Yan Di. The latitude is eight degrees different, and the time is in November, so the eclipse difference is two points weak. It is said that the remaining part of the eclipse is like a hook, and it should be around nine points.

古文：郭历推得七分弱，乃密合，非舛也。
现代文：郭守敬历法推得七分弱，却是密切相合，不是不合。
English: Guo Shoujing's calendar method pushed seven points higher, but it was a close match, not a mismatch.

古文：本局今定日食分数，首言交，次言地，次言时，一不可阙。
现代文：本局现在定日食分数，首先说交，其次说地，再次说时，一样都不可缺。
English: The bureau is now fixing the eclipse score, and the first thing to do is to say it, the second is to say it, and the third is to say it again.

古文：已而文魁反覆论难，光启更申前说，著为《学历浊辨》。
现代文：后来魏文魁反复论辩，徐光启再次阐明前面的说法，着成《学历小辨》。
English: Later, Wei Wenkui repeatedly argued, and Xu Guangqi once again clarified the previous statement, and wrote "Education Criteria."

古文：其论岁实小余及日食变差尤明晰。
现代文：他论述岁实小余及日食变差特别明晰。
English: He was particularly clear about the small surplus of the year and the change of the solar eclipse.

古文：曰： 岁实小余，自汉迄元渐次消减。
现代文：他说： 岁寅水余，从漠到元逐渐消减。
English: He said: The surplus of water in the year of the tiger will gradually decrease from zero to one.

古文：今新法定用岁实，更减于元。
现代文：现在新历法确定采用的岁寅，更比元代减少。
English: Now that the new calendar has been adopted, the number of years has been reduced even more than in the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：不知者必谓不惟先天，更先《大统》。
现代文：不知道的人一定会说不仅先于天象，更先于《大统历》。
English: Those who don't know must say that it predates not only the celestial elephant, but also the "Great General Calendar."

古文：乃以推壬申冬至，《大统》得已亥寅正一刻，而新法得辰初一刻十八分。
现代文：乃至推壬申冬至，《大统历》得己亥寅时后段一刻，而新历法推得在辰时前段一刻十八分。
English: Even pushing the Jinshin winter solstice, the "Great Unification Calendar" was pushed to one minute after the hour of Hei Ting, while the new calendar was pushed to one minute and eighteen minutes before the hour.

古文：何也？
现代文：这是为什么呢？
English: What is it for?

古文：盖正岁年与步月离相似，冬至无定率，与定朔、定望无定率一也。
现代文：大致订正年岁和推算月亮运行相似，冬至没有定率，与定朔、定望没有定率是一样的。
English: The roughly revised year and year are similar to the calculation of the moon's movement, and the winter solstice has no fixed rate, which is the same as the fixed new year and fixed hope.

古文：朔望无定率，宜以平朔望加减之，冬至无定率，宜以平年加减之。
现代文：朔望没有定率，应用平朔望和它相加减，冬至没有定率，应用平年和它相加减。
English: There is no fixed rate for the new moon, the application of the new moon and its addition and subtraction. There is no fixed rate for the winter solstice, the application of the ordinary year and its addition and subtraction.

古文：故新法之平冬至，虽在《大统》前，而定冬至恒在《大统》后也。 
现代文：所以新历法的平冬至，虽在《大统历》前，而定冬至总是在《大统历》之后。 
English: Therefore, although the new calendar's midwinter solstice is before the "Grand Unified Calendar," the fixed winter solstice is always after the "Grand Unified Calendar."

古文：又曰： 宋仁宗天圣二年甲子岁，五月丁亥朔，历官推当食不食，诸历推算皆云当食。
现代文：又说： 宋仁宗天圣二年甲子年，五月丁亥朔，历官推算应当有日食而没有日食，各种历法推算都应当有日食。
English: He also said: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Song Renzong, the year of Jia Zi, and in May, the month of Ding Hai Shuo, the calendar officials calculated that there should be a solar eclipse, but there was no solar eclipse. All kinds of calendar calculations should have a solar eclipse.

古文：夫于法则实当食，而于时则实不食。今当何以解之？
现代文：从历法来讲确实应当有日食，而在逭时确实没有日食，现在应当如何解释？
English: From the point of view of the calendar, it is true that there should be a solar eclipse, but there is really no solar eclipse at the equinox, how should it be explained now?

古文：盖日食有变差一法，月在阴历，距交十度强，于法当食。
现代文：日食有变差的方法，月亮在阴历，距交点十度多，按历法应当有日食。
English: Solar eclipses have a way of changing, the moon is in the lunar calendar, more than ten degrees away from the node, according to the calendar there should be a solar eclipse.

古文：而独此日此之南北差，变为东西差，故论天行，则地心与日月相参直，实不失食。
现代文：而恰好这一天这个地方的南北差，变成了东西差，所以从天体的运行来说，则地心与日月相互参验，确实发生了日食。
English: And it just so happened that on this day, the north-south difference in this place became an east-west difference, so from the perspective of the movement of celestial bodies, the earth's center and the sun and moon interacted with each other, and a solar eclipse actually occurred.

古文：而从人目所见，则日月相距近变为远，实不得食。
现代文：而从人的眼睛所见到的，日月相距由近变为逮，确实没有日食。
English: But from what human eyes can see, the distance between the sun and the moon changes from close to close, and there is indeed no eclipse.

古文：顾独汴京为然，若从汴以东数千里，则渐见食，至东北万余里外，则全见食也。
现代文：所以只有汴京是这样，如从汴京以束几千里，就逐渐看得见日食，到东北一万多里外，就全都看得见日食了。
English: Therefore, only Beijing is like this. For example, the eclipse will gradually be visible from Beijing to a distance of several thousand miles, and the eclipse will be visible to more than ten thousand miles to the northeast.

古文：夫变差时不同，或多变为少，或少变为多，或有变为无，或无变为有。
现代文：变差随时不同，或多变为少，或少变为多，或有变为无，或无变为有。
English: The variation is always different, more becomes less, or less becomes more, or becomes nothing, or nothing becomes something.

古文：推历之难，全在此等。 
现代文：推算历法的困难，全在这些地方。 
English: The difficulties in calculating the calendar are all in these places.

古文：未几，光启入愉阁。
现代文：不久，徐光启进入内阁。
English: Soon after, Xu Guangqi entered the cabinet.

古文：五年九月十五日，月食，监推初亏在卯初一刻，光启等推在卯初三刻，回回科推在辰初初刻。
现代文：五年九月十五日，月食，钦天监推算初亏在卯时前段一刻，徐光启等推算在卯时前段三刻，《回回历》科推算在辰时前段初刻。
English: On September 15, 2005, the lunar eclipse, Qin Tian Guan's initial loss was estimated at one minute before midnight, Xu Guangqi's initial loss was estimated at three minutes before midnight, and Hui Hui's initial loss was estimated at one minute before midnight.

古文：三法异同，致奉诘问。
现代文：三种方法的异同，招致回答皇帝的诘问。
English: The similarities and differences of the three methods lead to the answer to the emperor's question.

古文：至期测候，阴云不见，无可徵验。
现代文：到时观测，阴天有云，月亮没有出现，无法检验。
English: At the time of observation, it was cloudy and cloudy, and the moon did not appear, so it could not be examined.

古文：光启具陈三法不同之故，言：
现代文：徐光启上疏陈述三种历法不同的原因，说：
English: Xu Guangqi Shangsuo stated the reasons for the three different calendars, saying:

古文：时刻之加减，由于盈缩、迟疾两差。
现代文：时刻的加减，是由于盈缩、迟疾雨差。
English: The increase and decrease of the time is due to the increase and decrease, the delay and the difference.

古文：而盈缩差，旧法起冬夏至，新法起最高，最高有行分，惟宋绍兴间与夏至同度。
现代文：而盈缩差旧历法从冬至夏至算起，新历法从最远点算起，最速点有行分，只有宋绍兴年间与夏至同度。
English: While the difference between the old calendar and the new calendar is calculated from the winter solstice to the summer solstice, the new calendar is calculated from the farthest point, and the fastest point has a line segment. Only during the Song and Shaoxing dynasties was it the same degree as the summer solstice.

古文：郭守敬后此百年，去离一度有奇，故未觉。
现代文：郭守敬比这晚一百年，相差一度多，所以没有觉察。
English: Guo Shoujing is a hundred years later than this, the difference is more than once, so he did not notice.

古文：今最高在夏至后六度。此两法之盈缩差所不同也。
现代文：现在最速点在夏至后六度，这就是两种历法的盈缩差不同的原因。
English: The fastest point now is six degrees after the summer solstice, which is the reason for the difference between the two calendars.

古文：迟疾差，旧法只用一转周，新法谓之自行轮。
现代文：迟疾差，旧历法只用一转周，新历法叫作自行轮。
English: The difference is that the old calendar uses only one revolution, and the new calendar is called a self-propelled wheel.

古文：自行之外，又有两次轮。
现代文：自行轮之外，又有两次轮。
English: In addition to the bicycle, there are two bicycles.

古文：此两法之迟疾差所以不同也。
现代文：这就是两种历法迟疾差不同的原因。
English: This is the reason for the difference in the two calendars.

古文：至于《回回历》又异者，或由於四应，或由于里差，臣实未晓其故。
现代文：至于《回回历》又有不周，或者由于四应，或者由于里差，臣确实不知道其中的缘故。
English: As for the "Back and Forth Calendars" being unsuitable, either because of the four conditions, or because of the location, the minister really did not know the reason for this.

古文：总之，三家俱依本法推步，不能变法迁就也。
现代文：总之，三种历法都依照自己的办法来推算，不能改变自己的办法去迁就。
English: In short, all three calendars are calculated according to their own methods, and they cannot change their methods to accommodate.

古文：将来有宜讲求者二端：一曰食分多寡。
现代文：将来应该讲求的有两条：一是食分多少。
English: In the future, there are two things that should be emphasized: First, how much to eat.

古文：日食时，阳晶晃耀，每先食而后见。
现代文：日食时，阳光闪耀，每每是先发生日食而人后看见。
English: During a solar eclipse, the sun shines. The eclipse always occurs first, and people see it later.

古文：月食时，游气纷侵，每先见而后食。
现代文：月食时，云气侵扰，每每人先看见而后发生月食。
English: When the moon eclipses, the clouds intrude and everyone sees it first, and then the lunar eclipse occurs.

古文：其差至一分以上。
现代文：其中的差异在一分以上。
English: The difference is more than one point.

古文：今欲灼见实分，有近造窥筒，日食时，于密室中取其光景，映照尺素之上，初亏至复圆。分数真确，书然不爽。
现代文：现在想明白地看到真实的食分，近来有造窥管的，日食时，在暗室中引来光影，映照在白的丝织品上，初亏至复圆，分数真实准确，明白不差。
English: Now I want to see the real eclipse clearly. Recently, I have a built-in telescope. During the solar eclipse, light and shadow are attracted in the dark room and reflected on the white silk fabric. From the beginning to the end, the score is true and accurate, and it is not bad.

古文：月食用以仰观二体离合之际，鄞鄂著明。与目测迥异。
现代文：月食时用来仰观两个天体离合的时刻，界限分明，与目测完全不同。
English: During a lunar eclipse, the time used to look up at the moment when two celestial bodies come together is clearly delineated and is completely different from visual observation.

古文：此定分法也。
现代文：这就是测定食分的方法。
English: This is the method of measuring food content.

古文：一曰加时早晚。
现代文：二是加时早晚。
English: The second is overtime in the morning and evening.

古文：定时之术，壶漏为古法，轮钟为新法，然不若求端於日星，昼则用日，夜则任用一星。皆以仪器测取经纬度数，推算得之。
现代文：测定时间的方法，壶漏是古法，轮钟是新法，然而都不如以太阳和星星作标准。白天用太阳，晚上任选一个星座，都用仪器测量经纬度数，推算得到时间。
English: The method of measuring time, the kettle is the old method, the clock is the new method, but it is not as good as using the sun and the stars as the standard. During the day, use the sun, at night, choose a constellation, use the instrument to measure the latitude and longitude, and calculate the time.

古文：此定时法也。
现代文：这是测定时间的方法。
English: It's a way of measuring time.

古文：二法既立，则诸术之疏密，毫末莫遁矣。
现代文：两种方法确立后，那各种技术的粗疏精密，丝毫也不能隐藏了。
English: After the establishment of the two methods, the coarseness and precision of various technologies cannot be hidden at all.

古文：古今月食，诸史不载。
现代文：古今月食，各种史书都没有记载。
English: Ancient lunar eclipses are not recorded in any history books.

古文：日食，自汉至隋，凡二百九十三，而食于晦者七十七，晦前一日者三，初二日者三，其疏如此。
现代文：日食，从汉到隋，共二百九十三次，而在晦日日食的七十七次，在晦日前一日的三次，初二日的三次，其疏漏到这样的程度。
English: From the Han Dynasty to the Sui Dynasty, there were a total of 293 solar eclipses, but the 77 solar eclipses on the eve of the New Year, the three solar eclipses on the day before the New Year, and the three solar eclipses on the first two days of the New Year were missed to such an extent.

古文：唐至五代凡一百一十，而食于晦者一，初二日者一，初三日者一，稍密矣。
现代文：唐至五代共一百一十次，而在晦日日食的一次，初二日的一次，初三日的一次，逐渐严密了。
English: From the Tang Dynasty to the Five Dynasties, there were a total of one hundred and ten eclipses, and the eclipses on the last day of the year, the second day of the year, and the third day of the year gradually became stricter.

古文：宋凡一百四十八人，无晦食者，更密矣。犹有推食而不食者一。
现代文：宋共一百四十八次，没有在晦日日食的，更严密了，还是有推算要日食而没有日食的十三次。
English: There were a total of 148 solar eclipses in the Song Dynasty, and of those that did not occur on the eve of the solar eclipse, there were still 13 that were predicted to be solar eclipses but did not occur.

古文：至加时差至四五刻者，当其时已然。可知高速无穷之事，必积时累世，仍稍见其端儿。
现代文：元共四十五次，也没有晦日日食的，还是有推算要日食而没有日食的一次，有日食而没有推算出的一次，傍晚日食而写成白天的一次。至于加时差错在四五刻的，当时已经是这样。可知高速无穷的事情，必须世代积累，纔能逐渐见到它的头绪。
English: Originally, there were a total of 45 times, and there was no solar eclipse on the eve of the solar eclipse, but there was still a calculation for a solar eclipse without a solar eclipse, there was a solar eclipse without a calculation, and an evening solar eclipse was written as a daytime one. As for the time error of four or five hours, this was already the case at that time.

古文：故汉至今千七百岁，立法者十有三家，而守敬为最优，尚不能无刻之差，而况于沿习旧法者，何能现其精密哉？
现代文：所以从汉到现在一千七百年，建立历法的有十三家，而郭守敬的为最优秀，尚且不能没有几刻的差错，而何况对于沿袭旧法的人，怎么能要求他精密呢？
English: Therefore, from the Han Dynasty to the present 1,700 years, there have been 13 calendars established, and Guo Shoujing's is the best, yet it cannot be without a few moments of error, and what's more, for those who follow the old law, how can they ask him to be precise?

古文：是年，光启又进《历书》三千卷。
现代文：这一年，徐光启又进献《历书》三十卷。
English: In the same year, Xu Guangqi presented another 30 volumes of the "Calendar Book."

古文：明年冬十月，光启以病辞历务，以山东参政李天经代之。
现代文：笫二年冬十月，徐光启因病辞去了历局的职务，用山东参政李天经代替他。
English: In October of the second year of winter, Xu Guangqi resigned from the History Bureau due to illness, and replaced him with Shandong politician Li Tianjing.

古文：逾月而光启卒。
现代文：遇了一个月，徐光启去世。
English: A month later, Xu Guangqi passed away.

古文：七年，魏文魁上言，历官所推交食节气皆非是。于是命魁入京测验。
现代文：七年，魏文魁进言说，历官所推的交食节气都不对，于是命令魏文魁进京测骏。
English: In the seventh year, Wei Wenkui said that the food rationing system promoted by various officials was not right, so he ordered Wei Wenkui to go to Beijing to measure it.

古文：是时言历者四家，《大统》、《回回》外、别立西洋为西局，文魁为炙局。
现代文：这时论述历法的有四家，除《大统历》《回回历》外，另设立西洋历法为西局，魏文魁焉束局。
English: At this time, there were four schools that discussed the calendar. In addition to the "Great Unified Calendar" and the "Hakka Calendar," the Western calendar was set up for the West Bureau, and the Wei Wenkui was set up for the East Bureau.

古文：言人人殊，纷若聚讼焉。
现代文：每一家的说法不同，乱纷纷的像打官司一样。
English: Each family's story is different, and it's like a series of lawsuits.

古文：天经缮进《历书》凡二十九卷，并星屏一具，俱故辅光启督率西人所造也。
现代文：李天经缮写进献《历书》共二十九卷，另有星宿屏风一座，都是已故宰辅徐光启率领西洋人制订制造的。
English: A total of twenty-nine volumes of the "Calendar" written by Li Tianjing and presented to the emperor, as well as a screen of constellations, were all designed and made by Westerners under the leadership of the late Zaifu Xu Guangqi.

古文：天经预推五星凌犯会合行度，言： 闰八月二十四，木犯积履尸气。
现代文：李天经预推五星冲犯会合行度，说： 闰八月二十四日，木星冲犯积尸气。
English: Li Tianjing advanced the agenda of the five-star impact meeting, saying: On the 24th day of the 8th month, Jupiter's impact will accumulate dead air.

古文：九月初四昏初，火土同度。
现代文：九月初四昏初，火星土星同度。
English: At the beginning of September, Mars is at the same degree as Saturn.

古文：初七卯正，金土同度。
现代文：初七卯时后段，金星土星同度。
English: In the second half of the seventh month, Venus is at the same degree as Saturn.

古文：十一昏初，金火同度。
现代文：十一昏初，金星火星同度。
English: At the beginning of the eleventh twilight, Venus and Mars are at the same degree.

古文：旧法推火土同度，在初七，是后天三日。
现代文：用旧历法推火星土星同度，在初七，这就落后天象三日。
English: According to the old calendar, Mars and Saturn are in the same degree. On the seventh day of the first month, this is three days behind the celestial body.

古文：金火同度在初三，是先天八日。 
现代文：金星火星同度在初三，造就先于天象八日。 
English: Venus and Mars are also on the third day of the first lunar month, and are created before the eight days of the astrological cycle.

古文：而文魁则言，天经所报，木星犯积尸不合。
现代文：而魏文魁则说，李天经所报告的，木星冲犯积尸与天象不合。
English: Wei Wenkui, on the other hand, said that what Li Tianjing reported, that Jupiter impinged on the pile of corpses, was not consistent with celestial phenomena.

古文：天经又言： 臣于闰八月二十五日夜及九月初一日夜，同体臣陈六韦等，用窥管测，见积尸为数十小星围聚，木与积尸，共纳管中。
现代文：李天经又说： 臣在闰八月二十五日夜及九月初一日夜，同礼部臣陈六轮等，用窥管观测，见积尸被几十个小星团团包围，木星与积尸，一起容纳在窥管中。
English: Li Tianjing also said: On the night of the 25th day of the 8th month and the night of the 1st day of the 9th month, the minister, together with the minister of etiquette Chen Liulun and others, observed with a spyglass, and saw the dead body surrounded by dozens of small star clusters. Jupiter and the dead body were held together in the spyglass.

古文：盖窥圆径寸许，两星相距三十分内者，方得同见。
现代文：窥管直径只有一寸多一点，两星相距三十分以内的，纔可能同时出现。
English: The diameter of the telescope is only a little more than one inch, and the two stars are within thirty minutes of each other, so the meteors may appear at the same time.

古文：如觜宿三星相距二十七分，则不能同见。
现代文：如觜宿三颗星相距三十七分，就不能同时出现。
English: If the three stars of Pleiades are 37 minutes apart, they cannot appear at the same time.

古文：而文魁但据臆算，未经实测。
现代文：而魏文魁只根据主观推算，没有经过实测。
English: Wei Wenkui, on the other hand, only based his conclusions on subjective calculations, without any actual measurements.

古文：据云初二日木星已在柳前，则前此岂能越鬼宿而飞渡乎？ 
现代文：据他说初二日木星已在柳宿前，那么在此之前难道能越过鬼宿而飞渡吗？ 
English: According to him, the first two days Jupiter has been in front of the willow lodge, so before that, can it fly over the ghost lodge?

古文：天经又推木星退行、顺行，两经鬼宿，其度分晷刻，已而皆验，于是文魁说绌。
现代文：李天经又推算木星的退行、顺行，两次经过鬼宿，它的度分晷刻，不久都应验了，于是魏文魁的说法被废除了。
English: Li Tianjing also calculated the retrograde and prograde motion of Jupiter, and passed through the haunted house twice, and its degrees and minutes were all fulfilled soon, so Wei Wenkui's theory was abolished.

古文：天经又进《历书》三十二卷，并日晷、星晷、窥筒诸仪器。
现代文：李天经又进献《历书》三十二卷，并有日晷、星晷、窥管等仪器。
English: Li Tianjing also presented thirty-two volumes of the "Calendar," and there were sundials, star clocks, spyglasses and other instruments.

古文：八年四月，又上《乙亥丙子七政行度历》及《参订历法条议》二十六则。
现代文：八年四月，又献上《乙亥丙子七政行度历》及《参订历法条议》二十六则。
English: In April of the same year, he also presented 26 articles of "The Seven Political Campaigns of Emperor Hezekiah" and "Legislation on the Participation Calendar."

古文：某七政公说之议七：一曰诸曜之应宜改。
现代文：其中七政公说有七则：一是各曜的应敷应修改。
English: Among them, there are seven principles of the Seven Principles of Politics and Public Policy: First, the requirements for every Thursday should be revised.

古文：盖日月五星平行起算之根则为应，乃某曜某日某时躔某宫次之数。
现代文：日月五星平行起算酌根敷就是应敷，即是某曜某日某时运行到某宫次的数字。
English: The five-star parallel reckoning of the sun, moon, and stars is based on the yingzhi, that is, the number that runs to a certain palace on a certain day at a certain time.

古文：今新法改定诸应，悉从崇祯元年戊辰前，冬至后，己卯日子正为始。
现代文：现在新法改定的各项应敷，都从崇祯元年戊辰前，冬至后，己卯日子时后段开始。
English: Now, the various requirements amended by the new law all start from the period before the spring equinox, after the winter solstice, and after the spring equinox.

古文：二曰测诸曜行度，应用黄道仪。
现代文：二是测各曜的运行度数，应该用黄道仪。
English: The second is to measure the running frequency of each day, and the zodiac should be used.

古文：盖太阳由黄道行，月星各有本道，出入黄道内外，不行赤道。
现代文：太阳由黄道运行，月亮五星各有自己的轨道，出入黄道内外，不走赤道。
English: The sun orbits the ecliptic, the moon and the five stars each have their own orbit, and they go in and out of the ecliptic, but not around the equator.

古文：若用赤道仪测之，所得经纬度分，须通以黄、赤通率表，不如用黄道仪，即得七政之本度为便也。
现代文：如用赤道仪观测，所得到的经纬度数，必须全部用黄道赤道通率表换算，不如用黄道仪实时得到七政的本度方便。
English: If you observe with an equatorial instrument, the number of degrees of longitude and latitude obtained must be fully converted using the zodiacal equatorial current table. It is more convenient to use the ecliptic instrument to obtain the degree of the seven real-time politics.

古文：三曰诸方七政行度，随地不等。
现代文：三是各方七政运行度数，随地方不同。
English: The third is the frequency of the operation of the seven political parties, which varies from place to place.

古文：盖日月东西见食，其时各有先后，既无庸疑矣。
现代文：日月在东西方所见到的交食，时间各有先后，已经不用怀疑了。
English: There is no need to doubt that the eclipses seen by the sun and the moon in the east and the west have each occurred at different times.

古文：则太阳之躔二十四节气，与月五星之掩食凌犯，安得不与交食同一理乎？
现代文：那么太阳运行产生二十四节气，与月亮五星的掩食冲犯，怎能不与交食同一道理呢？
English: So the sun's movement produces twenty-four solar terms, and the eclipsing impact of the moon and five stars, how can it not be the same reason as the intercalation?

古文：故新法水成诸表，虽以顺天府为主，而推算诸方行度亦皆各有本法。
现代文：所以新历法各数据表，虽然以顺天府为主，而推算各方的运行度数，也都各有自己的方法。
English: Therefore, although the data tables of the new calendar are mainly based on Shun Tianfu, they also have their own methods for calculating the running frequency of each side.

古文：四曰诸曜加减分，用平、立、定三差法，尚不足。
现代文：四是各曜的加减分，用平、立、定三差法，还不够。
English: Fourth, the addition and subtraction of points on each Friday, using the flat, vertical and fixed three-difference method, is not enough.

古文：盖加减平行以求自行，乃历家耍务。
现代文：加减平行分以求自身的运行度数，是历家的重要事情。
English: Adding and subtracting parallel points to find their own running frequency is an important thing for every family.

古文：第天实圆体，与平行异类，旧所用三差法，俱从句股平行定者，于天体未合。
现代文：只是天实际上是圆体，与平行不同，旧历用的三差法，都是从勾股平行来确定的，和天体不合。
English: However, the sky is actually a circle, and unlike the parallel, the old calendar's method of three differences is determined from the parallels, and does not coincide with the celestial bodies.

古文：即扣盈缩损益之数，未得其真。
现代文：就是各盈缩损益数据，也没有得到真实数字。
English: Even the shrinking profit and loss figures do not reflect the true figures.

古文：今新法加减诸表，乃以圆齐圆，始可合天。
现代文：现在新历法加碱各表，却是用圆治理圆，纔可以与天相合。
English: Now the new calendar method adds alkali to each table, but it uses a circle to govern the circle, and the cormorant can coincide with the sky.

古文：五曰随时随地可求诸曜之经度。
现代文：五是随时随地可以求得各曜的经度。
English: Fifth, the longitude of each meridian can be obtained anytime, anywhere.

古文：旧法欲得某日曜经度，必先推各曜冬至日所行宫度宿次，后乃以各段日度比算始得。
现代文：旧历法想得到某日某曜的经度，必须先推算各曜冬至日所运行的宫度宿次，然后用各段日度计算纔能得到。
English: According to the old calendar, in order to obtain the longitude of a certain day and a certain day of the week, it is necessary to first calculate the house number of the winter solstice, and then use the daily section to calculate the radial energy.

古文：今法不拘时日方所，只简本表推步即是。
现代文：现在的方法不限时间方所，只要查阅本表推算就是了。
English: The current method can be used for an unlimited period of time. All you have to do is consult this table for a calculation.

古文：六曰径一围三，非弧矢真法。
现代文：六是径一围三，不是弧矢的真法。
English: Six is the number of a circle, not the number of an arrow.

古文：盖古历家以直绵测圆形，名曰弧矢法，而算用径一围三，廖也。
现代文：古代历家用直钱测圆形，叫做弧矢法，而计算用径一围三，就错了。
English: Ancient calendars used straight money to measure a circle, called the arc-and-arrow method, and the calculation of one circumference and three diameters was wrong.

古文：今立割圆八绵表，其用简而大。
现代文：现在的立割圆八线表，用法简便而用处大。
English: Today's vertical-divide-circle-eight-line table is simple to use and very useful.

古文：弧矢等绵，但乘除一次，使能得之。
现代文：弧矢等线，只乘除一次，就能得到。
English: Arcs, arrows, and lines of equal length can be obtained by multiplying and dividing only once.

古文：七曰球上三角三弧形，非句股可尽。
现代文：七是球面三角三弧形，不是勾股可以完全算出来的。
English: The seventh is a spherical triangle with three arcs. It is not a trapezoid that can be completely calculated.

古文：盖古法测天以句股为本，然句股能御直角，不能御斜角。
现代文：古法测天以勾股焉根本，然而勾股只能解决直角，不能解决斜角。
English: The ancient method of measuring the sky is based on the oblique angle, but the oblique angle can only solve the right angle, but not the oblique angle.

古文：且天为圆球，其面上与诸道相割生多三弧形，句股不足以尽之。
现代文：而且天是圆球，球面上与各道相切割产生的三弧形，勾股不能够完全解决它。
English: Moreover, the sky is a round ball, and the three arcs produced by the cutting of the spherical surface with each channel cannot be completely resolved by the hook.

古文：恒星之议四：一曰恒星本行，即所谓岁差，从黄道极起算。
现代文：论述恒星有四则：一是恒星本行，即所说的岁差，从黄道极算起。
English: There are four rules for discussing the stars: First, the star itself, that is, the precession, is calculated from the ecliptic pole.

古文：盖各星距赤极度分，古今不同。
现代文：各星离赤极的度分，古今不同。
English: The distance of each star from the red pole varies from ancient to modern times.

古文：其距赤道内外地也，亦古今不同。
现代文：距离赤道内外，也古今不同。
English: Distances inside and outside the equator also vary from past to present.

古文：而距黄极或距黄道内外，则皆终古如一，所以知日月五星俱依黄道行。
现代文：而距黄极或距黄道内外，却是从古以来一样，所以知道日月五星都沿着黄道运行。
English: But from the yellow pole or from inside and outside the ecliptic, it has been the same since ancient times, so we know that the sun, moon and five stars all run along the ecliptic.

古文：其恒星本行，应从黄极起算，以为岁差之率。
现代文：恒星的本行，应该从黄遒极起算，作为岁差的比率。
English: The proper motion of a star should be calculated from the yellow-violet pole, as the ratio of precession.

古文：二曰古今各宿度不同。
现代文：二是古今各宿的度数不同。
English: The second is that the frequency of tsuma varies from inn to inn, both ancient and modern.

古文：盖恒星以黄道极为极，故各宿距星行度，与赤道极时近时远。
现代文：恒星以黄道极为极，所以各宿距星的运行度数，与赤道极时近时速。
English: Stars have their poles at the ecliptic, so the movement rate of each distant star is close to the speed at the equatorial pole.

古文：行渐近极，即赤道所出过距星绵渐密，其本宿赤道弧则较小。
现代文：运行逐渐接近赤道极，即从赤道发出的遇距星的线逐渐变密，本宿的赤道弧就较小。
English: The orbit gradually approaches the equatorial pole, that is, the line of encountering distant stars emitted from the equator gradually becomes denser, and the equatorial arc of the homestay is smaller.

古文：渐远极，即过距星绵渐疏，其本宿赤道弧则较大。
现代文：逐渐远离赤极，经过距星的线就逐渐稀疏，本宿的赤道弧就较大。
English: Gradually away from the red pole, the line passing through the distant star gradually thins, and the equatorial arc of the homestay becomes larger.

古文：此缘二道二极不同，非距星有异行，亦非距星有易位也。
现代文：这是因为黄道赤道黄极赤极不同，不是距星有不同的运行，也不是距星移动了位置。
English: This is because the ecliptic, the equator, the yellow pole and the red pole are different. It is not that the distant star has a different movement, nor has the distant star moved its position.

古文：如觜宿距星，汉测距参二度，唐测一度，宋崇宁测半度，元郭守敬五分。
现代文：如觜宿距星，漠测距参宿二度，唐测一度，宋崇宁年问测半度，元郭守敬测五分。
English: For example, the distance between Xizhou and Xizhou is two degrees, the distance between Tang Dynasty and Tang Dynasty is one degree, the distance between Song Dynasty and Song Dynasty is half a degree, and the distance between Yuan Dynasty and Guozhong Dynasty is five degrees.

古文：今测之，不啻无分，且侵入参宿二十四分，非一症乎？
现代文：现在测量，不但没有一分，反而侵入参宿二十四分，不是一个证据吗？
English: Isn't it a proof that the current measurement, instead of one point, has invaded 24 points of Betelgeuse?

古文：三曰夜中测星定时。
现代文：三是夜半测星定时。
English: The third is the midnight stargazing.

古文：盖太阳依赤道左行，每十五度为一小时。
现代文：太阳沿赤道左行，每十五度为一小时。
English: The sun moves to the left along the equator, rising every 15 degrees for one hour.

古文：今任测一星距子午圈前后度分，又以本星经行与太阳经行查加减，得太阳距子午圈度分，因以变为真时刻。
现代文：现在任意测量一颗星距子午圈前后的度分，又用本星经行和太阳经行相加减，得太阳距子午圈的度分，通过它变为真时刻。
English: Now arbitrarily measure the degree before and after the meridian of a star distance, and use the meridian of the star and the meridian of the sun to add and subtract, to obtain the degree of the meridian of the sun, through which it becomes the true time.

古文：四曰宋时所定十二宫次，在某宿度，今不能定于某宿度。
现代文：四是宋时所定的十二宫次在某宿度，现在不能定在某宿度。
English: The fourth is that the zodiac times set by the Song Dynasty are in a certain degree, and now they cannot be set in a certain degree.

古文：盖因恒星有本行，宿度已右移故也。
现代文：这是因为恒星有本行，宿度已经右移的缘故。
English: This is because the star has a proper motion, and the precession has shifted to the right.

古文：太阳之议四：一太阳盈缩之限，非冬、夏二至，所谓最高及最高冲出也。
现代文：关于太阳的论述有四条，一是太阳盈缩的极限，不是冬、夏二至，就是人们所说的最高及最高冲。
English: There are four arguments about the sun. The first is the limit of the sun's contraction, which is not the winter solstice or the summer solstice, but what people call the maximum and maximum impulse.

古文：此限年年右行，今已过二至后六度有奇。
现代文：这个极限年年向右移动，现在已超过了二至后六度多。
English: This limit has moved to the right every year and is now more than two to six degrees behind.

古文：二曰以圭表测冬夏二至，非法之善。
现代文：二是用圭表测量冬夏二至，不是好的办法。
English: Second, it is not a good way to measure the winter and summer solstice with a ruler.

古文：盖二至前后，太阳南北之行度甚微，计一丈之表，其一日之影差不过一分三十秒，则一秒得六刻有奇，若测差二三秒，即差几二十刻，安所得准乎？
现代文：在二至前后，太阳南北的运行度数很少，一丈长的圭表，一天的日影的差异不过一分三十秒，则一秒的长度就管六刻多的时间。如果测量误差二三秒，时间就将近二十刻，怎么能准确呢？
English: Before and after the solstice, the sun's north-south movement frequency is very small, and the length of the sun is very long. The difference of the sun's shadow in a day is only one minute and thirty seconds, so the length of one second is more than six hours. If the measurement error is two or three seconds, the time is nearly twenty hours. How can it be accurate?

古文：今法独用春、秋二分，盖以此时太阳一日南北行二十四分，一日之景差一寸二分，即测差一二秒，算不得满一刻，较二至为最密。
现代文：现在的办法只用春、秋二分，因为这时太阳一天南北运行二十四分，一天的日影差异有一寸二分，即使测量误差一二秒，折算时间也不满一刻，比二至更精密。
English: The current method only uses the spring and autumn equinoxes, because at this time the sun runs north-south for 24 minutes a day, and the difference in the sun's shadow for one day is one inch and two minutes. Even if the measurement error is one or two seconds, the conversion time is less than one minute, which is more precise than two to one.

古文：三曰日出入分，应从顺天府起算。
现代文：三是太阳起落的分数，应该从顺天府起算。
English: The third is the fraction of the sun's rise and fall, which should be calculated from Shun Tianfu.

古文：盖诸方北极出地不同，晨昏时刻亦因以异。
现代文：因各方纬度不同，早晨黄昏的时刻也因此有差异。
English: Due to the different latitudes, the time of morning twilight also varies.

古文：《大统》依应天府算，上以昼夜长短，日月东刃西带食，所推不准。
现代文：《大统历》依照应天府推算，所以昼夜长短，日月东西方位和是否带食，推算的都不准确。
English: The "Great General Calendar" is calculated according to the calculation of the Tianfu, so the length of day and night, the east-west orientation of the sun and moon, and whether there is food are all inaccurate.

古文：今依天罕改定。
现代文：现在依照顺天府改定。
English: It is now revised in accordance with Shuntianfu.

古文：四曰平节气，非上天真节气。
现代文：四是平节气不是天时的真节气。
English: Fourth, the ordinary solar terms are not the true solar terms.

古文：盖旧法气策，乃岁周二十四分之一。
现代文：旧历法一气的长度，是一年长度的二十四分之一。
English: The length of a day in the old calendar was one twenty-fourth of the length of a year.

古文：然太阳之行有盈有缩，不得平分。
现代文：然而太阳的运行，有快右慢，不能平分。
English: However, the movement of the sun, with fast and slow, cannot be evenly divided.

古文：如以平分，则春分后天二日，秋分先天二日矣。
现代文：如果平分，那么春分就比天象晚两天，秋分就比天象早两天了。
English: If evenly divided, then the vernal equinox is two days later than the celestial equinox, and the autumnal equinox is two days earlier than the celestial equinox.

古文：今悉改定。
现代文：现在全都改正。
English: All corrected now.

古文：太阴之议四：一曰朔望之外，别有损益分，一加减不足以尽之。
现代文：关于月亮的论述有四条：一是朔望之外，另外还有损益分，一次加碱不足以完全平衡。
English: There are four theses about the moon: one is that in addition to the synoptic perspective, there is also a loss-gain component, and a single addition of alkali is not enough to completely balance.

古文：盖旧定太阴平行，算朔望加减，大率五度有奇，然两弦时多寡不一，即《授时》亦言朔望外，平行数不定，明其理未著其法。
现代文：旧历法确定月亮匀速运行，推算朔望的加减数，大致五度多，然而上弦和下弦时多少不一，即使是《授时历》也说朔望之外，匀速运行的度数不一定，明白了这个道理，但是没有写进历法。
English: The old calendar determined that the moon moves at a constant speed and calculated the addition and subtraction of the synod, which was roughly more than five degrees. However, the rising and setting times were somewhat different. Even the "Chronological Calendar" also said that in addition to the synod, the degree of uniform speed operation was not necessary. I understood this principle, but it was not written into the calendar.

古文：今于加减外，再用一加减，名为二三均数。
现代文：现在在加减之外，再使用一次加减，取名叫二三均数。
English: Now, in addition to addition and subtraction, another addition and subtraction is used, which is called two or three even numbers.

古文：二曰纬度不能定于五度，时多时寡。
现代文：二是黄白二道的相距度不能确定焉五度，而是时多时少。
English: Second, the distance between the yellow and white roads cannot be determined to be less than five degrees, but is more or less.

古文：古今历家以交食分数及交泛等，测量定黄白二道相距约五度。
现代文：古今历家根据交食的分数及交泛等，测定黄道白道相距大约五度。
English: Ancient and modern historians have determined that the ecliptic and the meridian are about five degrees apart, based on the number of intersections and their latitude and longitude.

古文：然朔望外两道距度，有损有益，大距计五度三公度之一。
现代文：然而朔望日之外雨道的相距度数，有增有碱，最大距离达到五又三分之一度。
English: However, the degree of separation of the rain channels beyond the synodic day has increased, and the maximum distance has reached five and one-third degrees.

古文：若一月有两食，其弦时用仪求距黄道度五度，未能合天。
现代文：如果一个月有两次交食，在上下弦时用仪表求距离黄道的度数焉五度，就不能与天象相合。
English: If there are two eclipses in a month, and the instrument is used to find the degree of the ecliptic five degrees away from the ascending and descending chords, it cannot coincide with the celestial body.

古文：三曰交行有损益分。
现代文：三是交行有损益分。
English: Third, the interbank market has a profit and loss component.

古文：盖罗喉、计都即正交、中交行度，古今为平行。
现代文：罗喉、计都即正交、中交的行度，古今都定为匀速运行。
English: Luogang and Jiedu, that is, the degree of orthogonal and intersecting, have been set to run at a constant speed from ancient to modern times.

古文：今细测之，月有时在交上，以平求之，必不合算。
现代文：现在仔细测量，月亮有时在交点之上，用匀速去推求，必然与计算不合。
English: Now, carefully measuring, the moon is sometimes above the intersection, and using a uniform speed to infer, is bound to be inconsistent with the calculation.

古文：因设一加减，为交行均数。
现代文：因此再设置一次加减，成为交行的均数。
English: Therefore, set another addition and subtraction to become the average of the intersections.

古文：四曰天行无紫气。
现代文：四是天象没有紫气。
English: The fourth is that the celestial elephant does not have a purple aura.

古文：旧谓生于闰余，又为木之余气。
现代文：旧历法认为是从闰余中产生，又认为是木星的余气。
English: The old calendar was thought to have arisen from the intercalary period, and was also thought to be the remaining gas of Jupiter.

古文：今细考诸曜，无象可明，知为妄增。
现代文：现在仔细考察各星，没有天象可以说明，可知这是毫无根据地增加的。
English: But when the stars were carefully examined, and no sign was found to explain it, it was found to be an unfounded addition.

古文：交食之议四：一曰日月景径分恒不一。
现代文：关于交食的论述有四条：一是日月影像的直径大小总是不一样的。
English: There are four points to discuss about the conjunction: First, the diameter size of the sun and moon image is always different.

古文：盖日月时行最高，有时行最高，有时行最卑，因相距有远近，见有大小。
现代文：因为日月有时运行得最高，有时运行的最低，因为相距有速有近，所见到的就有大有小。
English: Because the sun and the moon sometimes move at their highest and sometimes at their lowest, because the distance between them is fast and close, what you see is big and small.

古文：又因远近竿太阴过景，时有厚薄，所以径分不能为一。
现代文：又因速的时候和近的时候看到月亮反射的光线，有强有弱，所以月亮影像的直径大小不会一样。
English: Also, due to the speed and proximity of the moon, the light reflected by the moon is strong and weak, so the diameter of the moon image will not be the same.

古文：二曰日食午正非中限，乃以黄道九十度限为中限。
现代文：二是日食正午不是中限，而应以黄道九十度限为中限。
English: Second, the solar eclipse at noon is not the midpoint, but should be the midpoint of the zodiacal ninety-degree limit.

古文：盖南北东西差俱依黄道，则时差安得不从黄道道论其初末以求中限乎？
现代文：南北东西差都是依据黄道，那么时差又怎能不依据黄道来论定它的初段末段以推求中限呢？
English: The north-south and east-west differences are all based on the ecliptic, so how can the time difference not be based on the ecliptic to determine its beginning and end to deduce the middle limit?

古文：且黄道出地平上，两象限自有其高，亦自有其中。
现代文：况且黄道在地平之上的部分，两个象限自有它的高处，也自有它的中限。
English: Moreover, in the part of the ecliptic that is above the horizon, the two quadrants have their own heights and their own midpoints.

古文：此理未明，或宜加反减，宜减反加，凡加进不合者由此也。
现代文：这个道理不明白，有时该加的反而减，该碱的反而加，凡是加时不合的都是由此产生的。
English: This principle is not understood, sometimes the additive is subtracted instead of added, the base is added instead of added, and everything that does not add up is the result of this.

古文：三曰日食初亏复圆，时刻多寡恒不等，非二时折半之说。
现代文：三是日食的初亏和复圆，时刻多少总是不一样的，不是两段时间各折一半的那种说法。
English: The third is the initial loss of the solar eclipse and its return, the time is always different, not the kind of argument that the two periods are split in half.

古文：盖视差能变实行为视行，则以视差较食甚前后，鲜有不参差者。
现代文：视觉的误差能把实际运行变为枧运行，那么用视差来比较食甚的前后，没有不出差错的。
English: The visual error can change the actual operation into a parallax operation, so there is no mistake in using the parallax to compare the before and after of the eclipse.

古文：夫视差既食甚前后不一，又安能令视行前后一乎？
现代文：根据视差既然食甚前后木一，又怎么能使枧运行前后相等呢？
English: According to the parallax, since the eclipse is very close to the front and back of the tree, how can we make the beak run equal?

古文：今以视行推变时刻，则初亏复圆，其不能相等也明矣。
现代文：现在用视运行来推算时刻，初亏和复圆不能相等就明确了。
English: It is now clear that the initial loss and the recovery cannot be equal.

古文：四曰诸方各依地经推算时刻及日食分。
现代文：四是各方各自依照当地的经度推算日食的时刻及日食的分数。
English: The fourth is for each side to calculate the time of the eclipse and the score of the eclipse according to the local longitude.

古文：盖地面上东西见日月出没，各有前后不同即所得时刻亦不同。
现代文：地面上东方和西方看见日月的出没，各有先后不同，那么得到的时刻也不相同。
English: On the ground, the east and the west see the sun and the moon haunt, each has a different sequence, so the time they get is also different.

古文：故见食虽一而时刻异，此日月食皆一理。
现代文：所以看到交食虽然是一个但时刻不同，这一点日食和月食都是一个道理。
English: Therefore, it is reasonable to see that although the eclipses are the same, the time is different, and this is true for both solar and lunar eclipses.

古文：若日食则因视差随地不一，即太阴视距不一，所见食分亦异焉。
现代文：如果是日食则因为视差各地不同，月食则因为看的距离不同，所见到的交食分数也就有差异。
English: If it is a solar eclipse, it is because the parallax is different from place to place, and if it is a lunar eclipse, it is because the viewing distance is different, and the observed cross-eclipse scores are also different.

古文：五纬之议三：一曰五星应用太阳视行，不得以段目定之。
现代文：关于五星的论述有三条：一是五星应根据太阳的视运行，而不能根据段目来确定。
English: There are three points to discuss about the five stars: First, the five stars should be determined according to the apparent movement of the sun, not according to the steps.

古文：盖五星皆以太阳为主，与太阳合则疾行，冲则退行。
现代文：因为五星都是以太阳为中心，与太阳合就前行得快。与太阳冲就退行。
English: Because the five stars are all centered on the sun, they move fast when they converge with the sun, and recede when they collide with the sun.

古文：且太阳之行有迟疾，则五星合伏日数，时寡时多，自不可以段目定其度分。
现代文：而且太阳的运行有快慢，这样五星的合伏日数，时多时少，自然不能根据段目来确定它的度分。
English: Moreover, the sun's movement is fast and slow, so the number of days for the five stars to converge is sometimes more and sometimes less. Naturally, it is not possible to determine its degree according to the segment.

古文：二曰五星应加纬行。
现代文：二是五星应增加纬度运行度数。
English: Second, the five stars should increase the latitude operation frequency.

古文：盖五星出入黄道，各有定距度。
现代文：因五星出入黄道，各有一定的相距度。
English: Because the five stars enter and leave the ecliptic, each has a certain degree of separation.

古文：又木、土、火三星冲太阳纬大，合太阳纬小。
现代文：又木、土、火三星与太阳相冲纬度大，与太阳相合纬度小。
English: In addition, wood, earth and fire three stars have a large latitude in opposition to the sun, and a small latitude in conjunction with the sun.

古文：金、水二星顺伏纬小，逆伏纬大。
现代文：金、水二星顺伏纬度小，逆伏纬度大。
English: The latitude of the retrograde motion of the two stars, Gold and Mercury, is greater than that of the prograde motion.

古文：三曰测五星，当用恒星为准则。
现代文：三是观测五星，应当用恒星作为标准。
English: The third is the observation of five stars, which should be used as a standard.

古文：盖测星用黄道仪外，宜用弧矢等仪。
现代文：测量五星除使用黄道仪外，还应使用弧矢等仪器。
English: In addition to the zodiac, instruments such as the arc arrow should also be used to measure the five stars.

古文：以所测纬星视距二恒星若干度分，依法布算，方得本星真经纬度分。
现代文：根据测到的某星距离两颗恒星的多少度分，依据有关方法计算，纔能得到这颗星的真经纬度分。
English: According to the measured distance of a certain star from two stars, calculated according to the relevant method, we can get the true latitude and longitude of this star.

古文：或绘图亦可免算。
现代文：有时绘图也可以免于计算。
English: Sometimes the drawing can also be exempted from the calculation.

古文：是时新法书器俱完，屡测交食凌犯俱密合，但魏文魁等多方阴挠，内官实左右之。
现代文：这时新历法书籍仪器都已完备，多次预测日月交食五星冲犯都密切相合，但魏文魁等想方设法阻挠，实际上是宦官在指使。
English: At this time, the new calendar books and instruments were complete, and the predictions of the sun-moon exchange and the five-star impact were closely matched. However, Wei Wenkui and others tried their best to obstruct it. In fact, it was the eunuch who was in charge.

古文：以故帝意不能决，谕天经同监局虚心详究，务祈书一。
现代文：因此皇帝不能决断，下谕叫李天经和钦天监历局虚心地详加研究，一定要求得到统一。
English: Therefore, the emperor could not make a decision, and ordered Li Tianjing and Qin Tianjing to humbly study in detail, and they must be unified.

古文：是年，天经推水星伏见及木星所在之度，皆与《大统》各殊，而新法为合。
现代文：这年，李天经推算水星隐现及木星所在的度数，都与《大统历》各不相同，而新历法与天象相合。
English: This year, Li Tianjing's calculation of the degrees of Mercury's occultation and Jupiter's location are all different from the "Grand Unified Calendar," and the new calendar is consistent with the celestial phenomenon.

古文：又推八月二十七日寅正二刻，木、火、月三曜同在张六度，而《大统》推木在张四度，火、月张三度。
现代文：又推算八月二十七日寅时后段二刻，木星、火星、月亮三曜同在张宿六度，而《大统历》推算木星在张宿四度，火星、月亮在张宿三度。
English: It is also estimated that on August 27th, two hours after the hour of the tiger, Jupiter, Mars, and the moon will be in Zhangshu six degrees on Wednesday, while the "Great General Calendar" estimates that Jupiter will be in Zhangshu four degrees, and Mars and the moon will be in Zhangshu three degrees.

古文：至期，果同在张六度。
现代文：到时，果然同在张宿六度。
English: At that time, he was indeed in Zhangshu six times.

古文：九年正月十五日辛酉，晓望月食。
现代文：九年正月十五日辛酉，望日早上月食。
English: On the 15th day of the 1st month of the 9th year of the Heian period, a lunar eclipse occurred in the morning.

古文：天经及《大统》、《回回》、东局，各顶推亏圆食甚分秒时刻。
现代文：李天经及《大统历》、《回回历》、束局，各自预先推算初亏复圆食甚的时刻和食分。
English: Li Tianjing and the "Great General Calendar," "Hui Hui Calendar" and "Shu Quan" each pre-calculated the time and food points for the first loss to recover to a full eclipse.

古文：天经恐至期云掩难见，乃按里差，推河南、山西所见时刻，奏遣官分行测验。
现代文：李天经怕到时被云掩盖难以见到，就根据地面距离的差距，推算河南、山西所见到的时刻，上奏派官员分别测量验证。
English: Li Tianjing was afraid that it would be difficult to see when it was covered by clouds, so he calculated the time he saw in Henan and Shanxi according to the difference in ground distance, and the Shangxu officials measured and verified it separately.

古文：其日，天经与罗雅谷、汤若望、大理评事王应遴、礼臣李焻及监局守登、文魁等赴台测验，惟天经所推独合。
现代文：到了那一天，李天经与罗雅谷、汤若塱、大理评事王应遴、礼官李焰及钦天监、历局守登、魏文魁等到观象台观测骏证，只有李天经所推算的与天象相合。
English: On that day, Li Tianjing, Luoyagou, Tang Ruojun, Dali's commentator Wang Yingzhu, etiquette officer Li Lai and Qin Tianjun, calendar bureau guard Deng, Wei Wenkui, and others waited at the observatory to observe the evidence. Only Li Tianjing's calculation was consistent with the celestial phenomenon.

古文：已而，河南所报尽合原推，山西则食时云掩无从考验。
现代文：不久，河南的报告也完全与原来的推算相合，山玺因月食时被云掩盖无从验证。
English: Soon, the report from Henan also fully coincided with the original estimate. Because the mountains were covered by clouds during the lunar eclipse, it was impossible to verify.

古文：帝以测验月食，新法为近，但十五日雨水，而天经以十三日为雨水，令再奏明。
现代文：皇帝认为测算月食，新历法最接近天象，只是十五日雨水，而李天经定十三日为雨水，命令他再上奏说明。
English: The emperor thought that the measurement of lunar eclipses, the new calendar is the closest to the celestial, only rain on the fifteenth day, and Li Tianjing set the thirteenth day as rain, and ordered him to re-record the explanation.

古文：天经覆言：谕节气有二法：一为平节气，一为定节气。
现代文：李天经答复说：讨论节气有两种办法：一是平节气，一是定节气。
English: Li Tianjing replied: There are two ways to discuss the solar terms: one is the flat solar term, and the other is the fixed solar term.

古文：平节气者，以一岁之实，二十四平分之，每得一十五日有奇，为一节气。
现代文：平节气，将一年的长度，平分为二十四份，每份得十五日多，就是一个节气。
English: Flat solar terms, the length of a year is evenly divided into twenty-four parts, each of which has more than fifteen days, is a solar term.

古文：故从岁前冬至起算，必越六十日八十七刻有奇为雨水。
现代文：所以从前一年的冬至开始算起，宁定要遇六十日八十七刻多纔是雨水。
English: Therefore, from the beginning of the previous year's winter solstice, it is more likely to rain for sixty days and eighty-seven hours.

古文：旧法所推十五日子正一刻者此也，定节气者，以三百六十为周天度，而亦以二十四平分之，每得一十五度为一节气。
现代文：旧历法推算的十五日子时后段二刻就是这样。定节气，以三百六十为周天的度数，也平分为二十四份，每份得十五度为一个节气。
English: The fixed solar terms, with three hundred and sixty as the number of days of the week, are also divided equally into twenty-four parts, with each part having fifteen degrees as a solar term.

古文：从岁前冬至起算，历五十九日二刻有奇，而太阳行满六十度为雨水。
现代文：从前一年的冬至开始算起，经过五十九日二刻多，而太阳运行满六十度就是雨水。
English: From the beginning of the winter solstice of the previous year, after more than fifty-nine days and two hours, and the sun runs full sixty degrees, it is rain.

古文：新法所推十三日卯初二刻八分者此也。
现代文：新历法所推算的十三日卯时前段二刻八分就是这样。
English: This is how the new calendar calculates the first part of the 13th day of the month at 2:08 a.m.

古文：太阳之行胡盈有缩，非用法加减之，必不合天，安得平分岁实为节气乎？
现代文：太阳的运行有快有慢，不设法加减，一定与天象不合，怎么能平分一年长度作为节气呢？
English: The movement of the sun has fast and slow, do not try to add or subtract, must be inconsistent with the celestial body, how can the length of a year be divided equally as the solar terms?

古文：以春分症之，其理更明。
现代文：用春分来验证，道理更加明白。
English: Using the vernal equinox to verify, the reason is more clear.

古文：分者，黄赤相交之点，太阳行至此，乃昼夜平分。
现代文：分，是黄道和赤道的交点，太阳运行到这里，就昼夜平分。
English: Minute, is the intersection of the ecliptic and the equator, the sun runs here, on the day and night are equally divided.

古文：旧法于二月十四日下，注昼五十刻、夜五十刻是也。
现代文：旧历法在二月十四日之下，注明白画五十刻、夜晚五十刻就是这样。
English: The old calendar was abolished on February 14th, with the addition of 50 hours of daylight and 50 hours of night.

古文：夫十四日书夜已平分，则新法推十四日春分者为合天，而旧法推十六日者，后天二日矣。
现代文：十四日昼夜已经平分，那么新历法推算十四日为春分符合天象，而旧历法推定为十六日，已落后天象二日了。
English: Since the 14th day and night have been equally divided, the new calendar's projection of the 14th day as the vernal equinox is in line with the celestial phenomenon, while the old calendar's projection of the 16th day is two days behind the celestial phenomenon.

古文：知春分，则秋分及各节气可知，而无疑於雨水矣。
现代文：知道了春分，那秋分和各节气就可知了，而对于雨水就没有疑问了。
English: After knowing the vernal equinox, the autumnal equinox and the solar terms can be known, and there is no doubt about rain.

古文：已而天经于春分屈期，每午赴台测午正太阳高度。
现代文：后来李天经在春分将到时，每天中午到观象台测量正午时太阳的高度。
English: Later, when the vernal equinox was approaching, Li Tianjing went to the observatory every day at noon to measure the height of the sun at noon.

古文：二月十四日高五十度八分，十五日高五十度三十分。
现代文：二月十四日高五十度八分，十五日高五十度三十三分。
English: On February 14, the high was 50 degrees and 8 minutes, and on the 15th, the high was 50 degrees and 33 minutes.

古文：末经乃言：
现代文：李天经于是说：
English: Li Tianjing then said:

古文：京师北极出地三十九度五十五分，则赤道应高五十度五分，春分日太阳正当赤道上，其午正高度与赤道高度等，过此则太阳高度必渐多，今置十四日所测高度，加以地半经差二分，较赤道已多五分。
现代文：京城的北极出地高度是三十九度五十五分，那么赤道的出地高度应是五十度五分，春分日太阳正在赤道上，太阳正午的高度与赤道的高度相等，过了这一位置太阳的高度必然逐渐增高。现在将十四日所测到的太阳高度，加上地半径差二分，比赤道高度已多五分。
English: The grounding height of the North Pole in Beijing is 39°55′, so the grounding height of the equator should be 50°5′. On the day of the vernal equinox, the sun is on the equator, and the height of the sun at noon is equal to the height of the equator. After this position, the height of the sun will inevitably gradually increase. Now, the height of the sun measured on the 14th, plus the difference of two points in the earth's radius, is five points more than the equatorial height.

古文：盖原推春分在卯正二五分弱，是时每日纬行二十四分弱，时差二十一刻五分，则纬行应加五分强。
现代文：这大概是因为原来推算的春分在卯时后段二刻五分弱，这时每天纬行度二十四分弱，时差二十一刻五分，那么纬行度应加五分强。
English: This is probably due to the fact that the originally calculated vernal equinox was two-and-a-half minutes after midnight, when the daily latitude was twenty-four minutes weak and the time difference was twenty-one-and-a-half minutes, so the latitude should be five minutes stronger.

古文：至十五日，并地半径较赤道高度已多至三十分，况十六日乎？
现代文：到十五日，加上地半径差比乔道高度已多达三十分，何况十六日呢？
English: By the fifteenth day, with the difference in ground radius, the height of Bijiao Road has reached as much as thirty minutes. What about the sixteenth day?

古文：是春分当在十四，不当在十六也。
现代文：所以春分应当在十四日，而不应当在十六日。
English: Therefore, the vernal equinox should be on the 14th, not the 16th.

古文：秋风京然。
现代文：秋分也是这样。
English: It's the same with the autumn equinox.

古文：又出《节气图》曰：
现代文：又上呈《节气图》，说：
English: He also presented the "Solar Chart" and said:

古文：内规分三百六十五度四分度之一者，日度也。
现代文：内规分三百六十五又四分之一度，是太阳运行的度数。
English: It is divided into three hundred and sixty-five and a quarter degrees, which is the degree of the sun's movement.

古文：外规公三百六十度者，天度也。
现代文：外规分三百六十度，是周天的度数。
English: The outside standard is three hundred and sixty degrees, which is the degree of Sunday.

古文：自冬至起算，越九十一日三十一刻六分，而始历春分者，日为之限敢，乃在天则已逾二度余矣。
现代文：从冬至算起，经过九十一日三十一刻六分，纔到达春分，这是受太阳运行度数的限制，而在周天的度数，已超过二度多了。
English: From the winter solstice, it takes 91 days, 31 hours and 6 minutes to reach the vernal equinox, which is limited by the sun's movement degree, but on Sunday, the degree has more than doubled.

古文：又越二百七十三日九十三刻，一十九分，而即交秋分者，亦日为之限也，乃在天不及二度余。
现代文：又经过二百七十三日九十三刻一十九分，而和秋分点相交，也是受太阳运行度数的限制，而在周天度数还差二度多。
English: And after 273 days, 93 hours and 19 minutes, it intersects with the autumnal equinox, which is also limited by the sun's movement degree, and the circumlunar degree is still more than two degrees short.

古文：岂非旧法春分每后天二日，秋分先天二日耶？
现代文：难道不是旧历法春分每次比天象落后两天，秋分比天象提前两天的原因吗？
English: Isn't that the reason why the old calendar placed the vernal equinox two days behind the celestial equinox and the autumnal equinox two days ahead of the celestial equinox?

古文：十年正月辛丑朔，日食，天经等预推京师师见食一分一十秒，应天及各省分秒各殊，惟云南、太原则不见食。
现代文：十年正月辛丑朔日，发生日食，李天经等预测京城见食一分十秒，应天及各省分秒各不相同，只有云南、太原看不到日食。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, a solar eclipse occurred, and Li Tianjing and others predicted that Beijing would see the eclipse for one minute and ten seconds, while the sky and the provinces would have different minutes and seconds. Only Yunnan and Taiyuan could not see the solar eclipse.

古文：其初亏、食甚、复圆时刻亦各异。
现代文：日食的初亏、食甚、复圆时刻也各不相同。
English: The time of the first loss of the eclipse, the eclipse itself, and the time of re-circulation also vary.

古文：《大统》推食一分六十三秒，《回回》推食三分七十秒，东局所推止游气侵光三十馀秒。
现代文：《大统历》推算食分一分六十三秒，《回回历》推算食分三分七十秒，柬局推算只有游动的云气侵扰日光三十多秒。
English: The "Great Unified Calendar" estimates the eclipse to last one minute and sixty-three seconds, the "Hakka Calendar" estimates the eclipse to last one minute and thirty-seven seconds, and the Cambodian Bureau estimates that only the moving cloud intrudes the sunlight for more than thirty seconds.

古文：而食时推验，惟天经为密。
现代文：而到发生日食时检验，只有李天经的推算最精确。
English: But when it comes to solar eclipses, only Li Tianjing's calculations are the most accurate.

古文：时将废《大统》，用新法，于上管理另局历务代州知州郭正中言： 中历必不可尽废，西历必不可专行。
现代文：当时将要废除《大统历》，使用新历法，这时管理其它历局事务的代州知州郭正中进言说： 中国历法一定不要完全废弃，西洋历法一定不要独家实行。
English: At that time, the "Great Unified Calendar" was about to be abolished and a new calendar was to be used. At that time, Guo Zhengzhong, Daizhou Zhizhou, who managed other calendar affairs, said: The Chinese calendar must not be completely abandoned, and the Western calendar must not be implemented exclusively.

古文：四历各有短长，当参合诸家，兼收西法。 
现代文：四种历法各有长短，应当综合各家，兼用西法。 
English: Each of the four calendars has its own strengths and weaknesses. It is necessary to integrate them and use the Western calendar.

古文：十一年正月，乃诏仍行《大统历》，如交食经纬，晦朔弦望，因年远有差者，旁求参考新法与回回科并存。
现代文：十一年正月，皇帝就下诏仍然使用《大统历》，至于交食的经纬度，晦朔弦望，因历法年代长了有差错的，另外考求和参考新历法与《回回历》，几种说法并存。
English: In the first month of the eleventh year, the emperor issued an edict to still use the "Great General Calendar." As for the latitude and longitude of the intercalary period, it is still too early to tell. Due to the long history of the calendar, there are errors. In addition, the new calendar and the "Back-to-Back Calendar" should be studied and referred to. Several explanations coexist.

古文：上年，进天经光禄寺卿，仍管历务，十四年十二月，天经言： 《大统》置闰，但论月无中气，新法尤视合朔后先。
现代文：这一年，进升李天经焉光禄寺卿，仍然管理层法事务。十四年十二月，李天经进言说： 《大统历》设置闰月，只要求月中没有中气，新历法尤其重视合朔的先后。
English: In December of the 14th year, Li Tianjing Jin said: "The General Calendar" sets a leap month, only requiring that there is no mid-month breath, and the new calendar attaches particular importance to the succession of new moons.

古文：今所进十五年新历，其十月、十二月中气，适交次月合朔时刻之前，所以月内虽无中气，而实非闰月。
现代文：现在所进献的十五年新历，其中十月、十二月的中气，正好在次月合朔时刻之前，所以月内虽然没有中气，而实际上并不是闰月。
English: In the present 15-year new calendar, the midpoints of October and December are just before the new moon of the next month, so although there is no midpoint in the month, it is not actually a leap month.

古文：盖气在朔前，则此气尚属前月之晦也。
现代文：大致气在朔日之前，则此气还属于上一月的晦日。
English: If the general atmosphere is before the New Year's Day, then this atmosphere still belongs to the last day of the previous month.

古文：至十六年第二月止有惊蛰一节，而春分中气，交第三月合朔之后，则第二月为闰正月，第三月为第二月无疑。 
现代文：到十六年第二个月只有惊螯一个节气，而中气春分，在第三个月合朔之后纔到来，那么第二个月是闰正月，第三个月是二月，是没有疑问的。 
English: There is only one solar term in the second month of the 16th year, and the vernal equinox in the middle of the year, which comes after the new moon in the third month, then there is no doubt that the second month is the leap month and the third month is February.

古文：时帝已深知西法之密。
现代文：当时皇帝已深知西洋历法的精密。
English: At that time, the emperor was well aware of the precision of the Western calendar.

古文：迨十六年三月乙丑朔日食，测又独验。
现代文：到十六年三月乙丑朔日日食，又惟独用西洋历法预测应验天象。
English: By March of the 16th year, the solar eclipse occurred, and only the Western calendar was used to predict the celestial phenomenon.

古文：八月，诏西法果密，即改为《大统历法》，通行天下。
现代文：八月，皇帝下诏说西洋历法确实精密，马上改名焉《大统历法》，通行天下。
English: In August, the emperor issued an edict saying that the Western calendar was indeed precise, and immediately changed its name to the "Great Unified Calendar" and became popular all over the world.

古文：未几国变，竟未施行。
现代文：不久国家发生变故，最终没有施行。
English: Soon after, the country underwent a change of government, and the law was eventually not enforced.

古文：本朝用为宪历。
现代文：本朝用的是《时宪历》。
English: This morning, the "Constitutional Calendar" was used.

古文：按明制，历官皆世业，成、弘间尚能建修改之议，万历以后则皆专己守残而已。
现代文：按照明朝的制度，历官都是世代相传作为职业，成化、弘治年间还能够提出修改的建议，万历以后就都是专用己说、抱残守缺而已。
English: According to the system of the Ming Dynasty, calendar officials were passed down from generation to generation as a profession, and suggestions for modification could be made during the Chenghua and Hongzhi years. After the Wanli era, they were all dedicated to their own sayings, holding on to the remnants.

古文：其非历官而知历者，郑世子而外，唐顺之、周述学、陈壤、袁黄、雷宗皆有著述。
现代文：那些不是历官而懂历法的，除郑世子之外，唐顺之、周述学、陈壤、袁黄、雷宗都有著述。
English: Those who are not calendar officials but understand the calendar, in addition to Zheng Shizi, Tang Shunzhi, Zhou Shuxue, Chen Jiao, Yuan Huang, and Lei Zong have all written.

古文：唐顺之未有成书，其议论散见周述学之《历宗通议》、《历宗中经》。
现代文：唐顺之的著述没有成书，他的论述散见于周述里的《历宗通议》、《历宗中经》。
English: Tang Shunzhi's writings have not been compiled into a book, and his discussions are scattered in Zhou's "Records of the Grand Historians," "Records of the Grand Historians" and "Records of the Middle Ages."

古文：袁黄著《历法新书》，其天地人三元，则本之陈壤。
现代文：袁黄着有《历法新书》，其中天地人三元，则是来源于陈壤，而雷宗也着有《合璧连珠历法》。
English: Yuan Huang is the author of the "New Book of Calendars," of which the Three Elements of Heaven, Earth, and Man is derived from Chen Lo, while Lei Zong is also the author of the "Herbi Lian Zhu Calendar."

古文：而雷宗亦著《合璧连珠历法》皆会通回回历以入《授时》，虽不能如郑世子之精微，其于中西历理，亦有所发明。
现代文：这些人都是融会《回回历》以纳入《授时历》，虽然不能像郑世子那样精深细致，他们对于中公历法的原理，都有所创新阐发。
English: All of these people integrated the "Hao Hui Calendar" into the "Giving Calendar," although they could not be as elaborate as Zheng Shizi, they had an innovative interpretation of the principle of the Gregorian calendar.

古文：邢云路《古今律历考》，或言本出魏文魁手，文魁学本虑浅，无怪其所疏《授时》，皆不得其旨也。
现代文：邢云路《古今律历考》，有人说本出自魏文魁之手。魏文魁学识本来肤浅，难怪他所注释的《授时历》，都不合原书的旨意。
English: Some people say that this book was written by Wei Wenkui. Wei Wenkui's knowledge was superficial, so it is no wonder that his commentary on the "Giving of the Calendar" did not conform to the original book.

古文：西洋人之来中土者，皆自称瓯罗巴人。其历法与回回同，而加精密。
现代文：西洋人来到中国的，都自称瓯罗巴人，他们的历法和《回回历》相同，而更加精密。
English: When Westerners came to China, they all called themselves Zorobans. Their calendar was the same as that of the Hui-Hui calendar, but more precise.

古文：尝考前代，远国之人言历法者多在西域，而东南北无闻。
现代文：曾经考察前代，远方国家谈历法的人多在西域，而东方、南方、北方没有听说遇。
English: In the previous generation, most people who talked about calendars in distant countries were in the western region, while the east, south, and north did not hear about it.

古文：盖尧命义、和仲叔分宅四方，义仲、义叔、和叔则以隅夷、南交、朔方为限，独和仲但曰 宅西 ，而不限以地，岂非当时声教之西被者远哉。
现代文：唐代的《九执历》、丞盐的《万年历》，以及湛亟年间所译的《回回历》，都是西域的历法。大概尧命令羲仲、羲叔、和仲、和叔分居四方，羲仲、羲叔、和叔就以蝎夷、南交、朔方为界限，惟独和仲祇说了 住在西方 ，而没有限制地点，难道不是当时的声威教化向西影响得很远吗。
English: The "Nine-year Calendar" in the Tang Dynasty, the "Ten-year Calendar" in the Joseon Dynasty, and the "Back-to-Back Calendar" translated in the Tang Dynasty are all calendars of the western region. Presumably, the emperor ordered that the emperor, emperors, emperors, emperors, emperors, emperors, emperors, emperors, emperors, emperors, emperors, emperors, emperors, emperors, emperors, emperors, emperors, emperors, emperors, emperors, emperors, emperors, emperors

古文：至于周末，畴人子弟分散。
现代文：到了周代末期，历官子弟四处分散。
English: By the end of the Zhou Dynasty, the sons and sons of officials were scattered everywhere.

古文：西域、天方诸国，接壤西陲，百若东南有大海之阻，又无极北严寒之畏，则抱书器而西征，势固便也。
现代文：西域、天方各国，和中原西部接壤，又不像东南有大海阻隔，又没有北方严寒的威胁，他们抱着书籍仪器而西去，从情势上讲确实是很方便的。
English: The western region, the countries of the East, and the western part of the Central Plains border each other, but unlike the southeast, which is separated by the sea, there is no threat of severe cold in the north. It is indeed very convenient for them to go west with books and instruments.

古文：瓯罗巴在回回西，其风俗相类，而好奇喜新竞胜之习过之。
现代文：瓯罗巴在回回的西面，他们的风俗和回回相似，而喜好新奇、争强好胜的习俗超过了回回。
English: The Zorobas are to the west of the Hui, and their customs are similar to those of the Hui, but their love of novelty and competitive customs surpass those of the Hui.

古文：故则历法与回回同源，而世世增修，遂非回回所及，亦其好胜之欲为之也。
现代文：所以他们的历法与回回同源，而代代增修，于是不是回回所能赶得上的了，这也是争强好胜的习俗造成的。
English: Therefore, their calendars have the same origin as Hui Hui, and they have been improved from generation to generation, so it is not possible for Hui Hui to catch up, which is also caused by the competitive custom.

古文：义、和既失其守，古籍之可见者，仅有《周髀》范围，亦可知其源流之所自矣。
现代文：羲、相失去他们的职守以后，现在还能见到的古籍，只有《周髀》。而西方人天文仪器，寒热五带的学说，地为圆球的道理，几何学的方法，都没有超出《周髀》的范围，由此也可以知道西洋历法的由来了。
English: However, the Westerners' astronomical instruments, the theory of the five zones of cold and heat, the theory that the earth is a sphere, and the methods of geometry have not gone beyond the scope of the Zhou Dynasty, and thus the origin of the Western calendar can also be known.

古文：夫旁搜采以续千百年之坠绪，亦礼秀求野之意也，故备论也。
现代文：四处搜索广博采纳，用以继续千百年来已失落的头绪，也是礼仪失落后到僻野之地求索的意思，所以详细地论述。
English: Search everywhere, widely adopted, used to continue the clue that has been lost for thousands of years, is also the meaning of searching in the wilderness after the loss of etiquette, so it is discussed in detail.

