古文：古之全大体者：望天地，观江海，因山谷，日月所照，四时所行，云布风动；不以智累心，不以私累己；寄治乱于法术，托是非于赏罚，属轻重于权衡；不逆天理，不伤情性；不吹毛而求小疵，不洗垢而察难知；不引绳之外，不推绳之内；不急法之外，不缓法之内；守成理，因自然；祸福生乎道法，而不出乎爱恶；荣辱之责在乎己，而不在乎人。
现代文：古代能够全面把握事物的整体和根本的人，了望天地的变化，观察江海的水流，顺应山谷的高低，遵循日月照耀、四时运行、云层分布、风向变动的自然法则；不让智巧烦扰心境，不让私利拖累自身；把国家的治乱寄托在法术上，把事物的是非寄托在赏罚上，把物体的轻重寄托在权衡上；不违背自然常规，不伤害人的性情；不吹开毛发来求小疵，不洗去污垢来察隐秘；不拉到准绳的外面，也不推到准绳的里面；对法禁以外的事情不苛刻，对法禁以内的事情不宽容；把握恒定的道理，顺应自然的规律；祸和福产生于是否遵守客观法则和国家法度，而不是产生于主观上的喜爱和厌恶；荣誉和耻辱的责任在于自己，而不在于他人。
English: In ancient times, people who were able to comprehensively grasp the totality and fundamentals of things, looked at the changes in the heavens and the earth, observed the water flow of rivers and seas, conformed to the height and depth of valleys, and followed the natural laws of the sun and the moon shining, the four-hour running, the distribution of clouds, and the change of wind direction; did not let cleverness disturb the mood, and did not let self-interest drag themselves down; put the control of the country on spells, put the rights and wrongs of things on rewards and punishments, and put the weight of objects on trade-offs; did not violate the natural routine, and did not hurt people

古文：故至安之世，法如朝露，纯朴不散，心无结怨，口无烦言。
现代文：所以，治理得最好的社会，法制好比早晨的露水那样纯洁质朴而不散漫，人们的心里没有积聚难解的怨恨，人们的口中没有愤愤不平的言论。
English: Therefore, in a well-governed society, the legal system is as pure and simple as the morning dew, and is not scattered. There is no accumulation of hard-to-resolve resentment in people's hearts, and there is no angry speech in people's mouths.

古文：故车马不疲弊于远路，旌旗不乱乎大泽，万民不失命于寇戎，雄骏不创寿于旗幢；豪杰不著名于图书，不录功于盘盂，记年之牒空虚。
现代文：所以，车马没有远途奔跑的劳累，旌旗没有兵败大泽的纷乱，民众不会因为外敌侵犯而丧命，勇士不天折在将军的战旗之下；英雄豪杰不把名字记录在图书上，不把战功铭刻在盘盂上，国家编年的史册无事可记。
English: Therefore, the chariots and horses do not have the fatigue of long-distance running, the battle flags do not have the chaos of the defeat of Osawa, the people will not die because of the invasion of foreign enemies, the warriors will not die under the general's battle flag; the heroes and heroines do not record their names in books, do not engrave their war exploits on the table, and the national chronicles have nothing to remember.

古文：故曰：利莫长乎简，福莫久于安。
现代文：所以说，没有比政令清简的好处更大的了，没有比天下太平的福遂更久的了。
English: Therefore, there is nothing greater than the benefit of simplifying government regulations, and there is nothing longer lasting than the blessing of world peace.

古文：使匠石以千岁之寿，操钩，视规矩，举绳墨，而正太山；使贲、育带干将而齐万民；虽尽力于巧，极盛于寿，太山不正，民不能齐。
现代文：让匠石长寿千年，拿着钩子，看着规矩，弹好墨线，而修整泰山；让孟贲、夏育带利剑，去治理民众；他们尽管能在技巧上用尽力气，又能特别长寿，但泰山仍然得不到修整，民众仍然得不到治理。
English: Let the stone crafters live for a thousand years, hold the hook, watch the rules, play the ink line well, and fix Mount Tai; let Meng Wei and Xia Yu take a sharp sword to govern the people; although they can use their best efforts in skills and can live for a long time, but Mount Tai still cannot be repaired, and the people still cannot be governed.

古文：故曰：古之牧天下者，不使匠石极巧以败太山之体，不使贲、育尽威以伤万民之性。
现代文：所以说，古代统治天下的人，不让匠石用尽技巧来毁坏泰山山体，不让孟贲、夏育用尽威力来伤害万民情性。
English: Therefore, the people who ruled the world in ancient times did not allow the smiths to use up their skills to destroy the mountains of Mount Tai, and did not allow Meng Qi and Xia Yu to use up their power to hurt the sentiments of the people.

古文：因道全法，君子乐而大奸止。
现代文：依据普遍法则，全面把握法度，君主就能享受安乐、大奸就会停止作恶。
English: According to the universal law, comprehensively grasp the law, the monarch will be able to enjoy peace and quiet, and the traitor will stop doing evil.

古文：澹然闲静，因天命，持大体。
现代文：淡泊闲静，来顺应然法则，来把握事物的整体和根本。
English: Stay calm, obey the laws of nature, and grasp the whole and essence of things.

古文：故使人无离法之罪，鱼无失水之祸。
现代文：所以能使人没有触犯法令的罪过，能使鱼没有离开水面的祸害。
English: Therefore, it can prevent people from breaking the law, and it can prevent fish from leaving the water surface.

古文：如此，故天下少不可。
现代文：正因如此，所以天下很少有行不通的。
English: Because of this, there are very few things in the world that cannot be done.

古文：上不天则下不遍覆，心不地则物不毕载。
现代文：上面如果不是有辽阔的天，就不能覆盖整个世界；心胸如果没有大地那样宽广，就不能负载万物。
English: If there is not a vast sky above, it cannot cover the whole world; if the heart is not as broad as the earth, it cannot carry all things.

古文：太山不立好恶，故能成其高；江海不择小助，故能成其富。
现代文：泰山对土石没有好恶之心，所以能够形成它的高大；江海对细流不加选择，所以能够形成它的富有。
English: Mount Tai has no love or hate for earth and stone, so it can form its height; the rivers and seas do not choose the small streams, so it can form its wealth.

古文：故大人寄形于天地而万物备，历心于山海而国家富。
现代文：所以君子要像天地那样遍覆毕载而使万物齐备，要像山海那样不立好恶、不择小助而使国家富强。
English: Therefore, a gentleman should, like heaven and earth, cover everything and make everything complete. Like the mountains and seas, he should not have any likes or dislikes, and should not choose small help to make the country rich and strong.

古文：上无忿怒之毒，下无伏怨之患，上下交顺，以道为舍。
现代文：君主没有忿怒引起的毒害，臣民没有因积怨造成的祸患，君主和臣下都归真返朴，把道作为归宿。
English: The monarch has no poison caused by anger, and the subjects have no evil caused by resentment. Both the monarch and the subjects return to the truth and return to simplicity, taking the road as the destination.

古文：故长利积，大功立，名成于前，德垂于后，治之至也。
现代文：所以长远的利益积聚了，巨大的功业建立了，名望树立于生前，恩德流传于后世，从而达到治理国家的最高境界。
English: Therefore, long-term benefits have been accumulated, great feats have been established, fame has been established in life, and benevolence has been passed down to future generations, thus reaching the highest level of governing the country.

