古文：史弥远，字同叔，浩之子也。
现代文：史弥远，字同叔，是史浩的儿子。
English: Shi Miyan, the same name as his uncle, is Shi Hao's son.

古文：淳熙六年，补承事郎。
现代文：淳熙六年，补官为承事郎。
English: In the sixth year of Atsuhiro's reign, he was promoted to the post of secretary.

古文：八年，转宣义郎，铨试第一，调建康府粮料院，改沿海制置司干办公事。
现代文：淳熙八年，转为宣义郎，他铨试第一，被调为建康府粮料院，改为沿海制置司干办公事。
English: In the 8th year of the Heian period, he was transferred to the position of Xuan Yiro. He was the first to pass the examination. He was transferred to the Jiankang Grain Refinery, and changed to the Coastal Construction Department to do office work.

古文：十四年，举进士。
现代文：淳熙十四年，被推举参加进士考试。
English: In Aung Hee's fourteenth year, he was selected to participate in the entrance examination.

古文：绍熙元年，授大理司直。
现代文：绍熙元年，史弥远被授予大理司直。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Xiaoxi, Shi Yanyuan was awarded the title of Dali Sizhi.

古文：二年，迁太社令。
现代文：绍熙二年，升为太社令。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Xiaoxi, he was promoted to Taisha.

古文：三年，迁太常寺主簿，以亲老请祠，主管冲佑观。
现代文：绍熙三年，升为太常寺主簿，他因侍奉老人请求祠观的官职，为主管冲佑观。
English: In the third year of Shaoxi's reign, he was promoted to the main bookkeeper of Taizhong Temple. Because he served the elderly, he asked for the official position of the ancestral hall, and became the supervisor of Chongyou Temple.

古文：丁父忧。
现代文：史弥远遭父丧。
English: Shimi lost his father a long time ago.

古文：庆元二年，复为大理司直，寻改诸王宫大小学教授。
现代文：庆元二年，史弥远重新任大理司直，不久改任诸王宫大小学教授。
English: In the second year of the Qing Dynasty, Shi Yayuan was reappointed as Dali Sizhi, and soon he was appointed as a professor of Zhuoguang University.

古文：轮对，乞旌廉洁之士，推举荐之赏；浚沟洫，固堤防，实仓廪，均赋役，课农桑，禁末作，为水旱之备；葺城郭，修器械，选将帅，练士卒，储粟谷，明烽燧，为边鄙之防。
现代文：百官轮次奏对，他请求表彰廉洁的人，对举荐贤能的人实行奖赏；疏导沟洫，加固堤防，充实仓库，平均赋役，督促农业生产，禁止农民从商，以预防水旱；修缮城郭，整理器械，选择将帅，训练士卒，储备粮草，加强警戒，以加强边防。
English: He asked the government to commend those who were honest and reward those who were able to recommend others. He also asked the government to dredge ravines, strengthen dikes, replenish storehouses, reward labor, supervise agricultural production, and prohibit farmers from doing business in order to prevent floods and droughts. He also asked the government to repair city walls, organize equipment, select generals and train soldiers, reserve grain and grass, and strengthen vigilance in order to strengthen border defense.

古文：丞相京镗屏左右曰： 君他日功名事业过镗远甚，愿以子孙为托。 四年，授枢密院编修官，迁太常丞，寻兼工部郎官，改刑部。
现代文：丞相京镗屏退左右说 ：你他日的功名事业将远远超过我，我希望能把子孙托付给你。 庆元四年，史弥远被任命为枢密院编修官，升为太常丞，不久兼任工部郎官，改到刑部。
English: In the fourth year of the Qing Dynasty, Shi Yanyuan was appointed as the editor of the Privy Council, promoted to the Grand Councilor, and soon concurrently served as the vice-minister of the Ministry of Industry, before being transferred to the Ministry of Justice.

古文：六年，改宗正丞。
现代文：庆元六年，改为宗正丞。
English: In the sixth year of the Keigen era, it was changed to Sosei-jo.

古文：丐外，知池州。
现代文：他请求到地方任职，被任命为池州知州。
English: He applied for a local post and was appointed to Chishu Chishu.

古文：嘉泰四年，提举浙西常平。
现代文：嘉泰四年，史弥远为提举浙西常平。
English: In the fourth year of Jia Tai, Shi Yanyuan was nominated for the promotion of Zhejiang West Changping.

古文：开禧元年，授司封郎官兼国史编修、实录检讨，迁秘书少监，迁起居郎。
现代文：开禧元年，他被授予司封郎官兼国史编修、实录检讨，升为秘书少监，升为起居郎。
English: In the first year of the 21st century, he was awarded the title of Sifong Langguan, as well as the title of National History Compiler and Record Reviewer, and was promoted to Secretary and Junior Supervisor, and Kijiro.

古文：二年，兼资善堂直讲。
现代文：开禧二年，兼任资善堂直讲。
English: In the second year of the jubilee, he also served as a direct teacher of Shizen-do.

古文：韩侂胄建开边之议，以坚宠固位，已而边兵大衄，诏在位者言事，弥远上疏曰： 今之议者，以为先发者制人，后发者制于人，此为将之事，施于一胜一负之间，则可以争雄而捷出。
现代文：韩胄建议北伐，来巩固自己的地位和加深皇上对自己的宠幸，不久边兵大败，朝廷下诏百官论事。史弥远上疏说 ：现在议事的人，认为先发者制人，后发者被人制，这是将领的事，把它用于一胜一负之间，就可以争雄并取胜。
English: Han Zheng suggested the Northern Expedition to consolidate his position and deepen the emperor's favor. Soon, the soldiers on the frontier were defeated, and the imperial court ordered the officials to discuss the matter. Shiyuan Shangsuo said: The people who are in charge now think that the first mover is the one who makes people, and the second mover is the one who is made by people. This is a matter for the generals, and it can be used between a win and a loss, so that they can fight for the lead and win.

古文：若夫事关国体、宗庙社稷，所系甚重，讵可举数千万人之命轻于一掷乎？
现代文：如果事关国体、宗庙社稷，关系重大，难道能把数千万人的性命轻易地抛出去吗？
English: If it is related to the National Sports Festival, the ancestral temples and shrines, and is of great importance, can the lives of tens of millions of people be easily thrown out?

古文：京师根本之地，今出戍既多，留卫者寡，万一盗贼窃发，谁其御之？
现代文：京师是国家的根本之地，现在已调走很多戍兵，留下守卫的很少，万一盗贼发动叛乱，谁能抵御他们？
English: Beijing Division is the fundamental place of the country, now many soldiers have been transferred, leaving few guards. In case the thieves launch a rebellion, who can resist them?

古文：若夫沿江屯驻之兵，各当一面，皆所以拱护行都，尤当整备，继今勿轻调发，则内外表里俱有足恃，而无可伺之隙矣。
现代文：沿江屯驻的兵马，各自独挡一面，都是拱卫首都的，尤其应该整顿边备，从今日起不要轻易调动，这样内外表里都有足够的依靠，而敌人无可乘之机了。
English: The soldiers and horses stationed along the river, each guarding one side, are for the defense of the capital. In particular, the border should be rectified. From today, they should not be easily mobilized. In this way, there is enough reliance on the outside and inside, and the enemy has no chance.

古文：所遣抚谕之臣，止令按历边陲，招集逋寇，戒饬将士，固守封圻。
现代文：朝廷派遣的抚谕使臣，只让他们巡视边疆，招集逃寇，告诫将士，固守京城附近的土地。
English: The envoys sent by the imperial court were only allowed to patrol the borderlands, summon fugitive robbers, admonish soldiers, and hold fast to the land near the capital.

古文：毋惑浮言以挠吾之规，毋贪小利以滋敌之衅，使民力愈宽，国势愈壮，迟之岁月，以俟大举，实宗社无疆之福。 
现代文：不要蛊惑流言来破坏我们的计划，不要贪图小利来使敌人滋生用兵的念头，使民力更宽，国势更壮，拖延时间，以便大举发兵，这实在是国家的福气。 
English: It is indeed a blessing for the country not to let rumors and gossip ruin our plans, not to seek small gains to make the enemy think of sending troops, to make the people more powerful and the country stronger, and not to delay the time to send troops in large numbers.

古文：奏方具，客曰： 侂胄必以奏议占人情，太夫人年高，能无贻亲忧乎？ 弥远曰： 时事如此，言入而益于国，利于人，吾得罪甘心焉。 封鄞县男兼权刑部侍郎。
现代文：史弥远的奏书刚献上，他的门客说： 韩胄一定以奏议来探知人情，太夫人年事已高，你的奏议能不给亲人带来忧虑吗？ 史弥远说： 时事这样，我的话有益于国，有利于人，我得罪也甘心了。 史弥远被封为鄞县男兼权刑部侍郎。
English: Shi Miyan's report had just been presented, and his protégé said: Han Yan must have used the report to probe human feelings. The great lady is very old, can your report not bring anxiety to relatives? Shi Miyan said: The current situation is such that my words are beneficial to the country and beneficial to people, and I am willing to be offended. Shi Miyan was appointed as the man of Shixian County and the attendant of the criminal justice department.

古文：三年，改礼部兼同修国史、实录院同修撰，仍兼刑部。
现代文：开禧三年，改任礼部侍郎兼同修国史、实录院同修撰，仍兼权刑部侍郎。
English: In the third year of the Heian period, he was reassigned as the attendant of the Ceremonial Department and the same department for the study of national history and the compilation of historical records, and he was still the attendant of the Penal Department.

古文：兵端既开，败衄相属，累使求和，金人不听。
现代文：宋兵北伐，连续失败，多次派使臣求和，金人不答应。
English: The Northern Expedition of Song soldiers was a continuous failure. They repeatedly sent envoys to China to sue for peace, but China did not agree.

古文：都城震摇，宫闱疑惧，常若祸在朝暮，然皆畏侂胄莫敢言。
现代文：都城震荡，宫中疑惧，常像祸患就在眼前一样，但都怕韩胄而没谁敢说什么。
English: The capital is in turmoil, the palace is in fear, it often feels like a disaster is just around the corner, but no one dares to say anything for fear of Han Yu.

古文：弥远力陈危迫之势，皇子询闻之，亟具奏，乃罢侂胄并陈自强右丞相。
现代文：史弥远极力陈述危急的形势，皇子赵询听说后，立即上奏，才罢去韩胄和陈自强的右丞相。
English: Shi Miyuan tried his best to explain the critical situation, and after the prince Zhao Zhen heard about it, he immediately reported it, before dismissing Han Zheng and Chen Ziqiang's right-hand minister.

古文：既而台谏、给舍交章论驳，侂胄乃就诛。
现代文：不久台谏、给舍连续上奏弹劾韩胄，韩胄才被杀。
English: Soon after, Taiwan's parliament, the National People's Congress, called for Han's impeachment, and Han was killed.

古文：召弥远对延和殿，帝欲命为签书枢密院事，力辞，乃迁礼部尚书兼国史实录院修撰。
现代文：皇上召史弥远在延和殿奏对，想任命他为签书枢密院事，史弥远极力推辞，他就被升为礼部尚书兼国史实录院修撰。
English: The emperor summoned Shiyan to the palace of Yanhe, and wanted to appoint him as a signer of the Privy Council. Shiyan strongly refused, and he was promoted to the Ministry of Ceremonies and the National History Recording Institute.

古文：询立为太子，兼詹事，遣使诣金求和，金人以大散隔牙二关、濠州来归，疏奏： 今两淮、襄、汉沿边之地，疮痍未瘳，军实未充。
现代文：赵询被立为太子，史弥远兼任詹事，宋派使臣到金国求和，金人把大散、隔牙二关、濠州归还宋朝，史弥远上奏说 ：如今两淮、襄、汉沿边地区，满目疮痍，器械、粮饷不充实。
English: Zhao Zhen was appointed as the prince, Shi Miyan concurrently served as Zhan Zhi, the Song Dynasty sent envoys to the Jin Dynasty to sue for peace, and the Jin Dynasty returned Dasan, Zhedao Erguan, and Luzhou to the Song Dynasty. Shi Miyan said in his report, "Today, the regions along the border of the two Huai, Xiang, and Han Dynasties are full of devastation, and equipment and grain are not sufficient.

古文：当勉厉将帅，尽吾委寄之诚；简阅士卒，核其尺籍之阙。缮城堡，葺器械，储糗粮。
现代文：应该勉励将帅，忠心报国；检阅士卒，核对兵额。修缮城堡，补充器械，储备粮食。
English: Generals should be encouraged to serve their country loyally; officers and men should be inspected, and the number of soldiers should be checked. Castles should be repaired, equipment should be replenished, and grain should be stored.

古文：当聘使既通之后，常如干戈未定之日，推择帅守以壮藩屏之势，奖拔智勇以备缓急之求。 拜同知枢密院事兼太子宾客，进封伯。
现代文：在同金国互通使臣后，常如战争时一样，推选将帅以壮大藩屏之势，奖励提拔智勇的人以备缓急的需要。 史弥远被任命为同知枢密院事兼太子宾客，进封伯爵。
English: After the exchange of envoys with Jin, as was often the case in war, generals were selected to strengthen the power of the clan, and those who promoted the wise and brave were rewarded to meet urgent needs. Shi Miyan was appointed as Tongzhi Privy Councillor and guest of the prince, and was made a count of Jinfeng.

古文：嘉定元年，迁知枢密院事，进奉化郡侯兼参知政事，拜右丞相兼枢密使兼太子少傅，进开国公。
现代文：嘉定元年，史弥远升为知枢密院事，进封为奉化郡侯兼任参知政事，被任命为右丞相兼枢密使兼太子少傅，进封为开国公。
English: In the first year of Jiading, Shimi was promoted to the position of the Privy Councillor, he was appointed as the lord of Fenghua County and also served as the Councillor of the Privy Council, he was appointed as the Minister of the Right, the Privy Councillor and the Prince's Younger Brother, and he was appointed as the Founding Prince.

古文：丁母忧，归治葬，太子请赐第行在，令就第持服，以便咨访。
现代文：遭母丧，他归家办丧事，太子请求在行在赐给他宅第，让他就此服丧，以便咨询。
English: After his mother's death, he returned home to carry out the funeral. The prince requested that he be given a place to stay, so that he could consult with her.

古文：二年，以使者趣行急，乃就道，起复右丞相兼枢密使兼太子少师。
现代文：嘉定二年，因使臣催他动身很急迫，他才上路，他被重新任命为右丞相兼枢密使兼太子少师。
English: In the second year of Jiading, because the envoys urged him to leave in a hurry, he only went on the road. He was reappointed as the Minister of the Right, the Privy Counsellor and the Prince's Young Master.

古文：四年，落起复。
现代文：嘉定四年，除去丧服，正式被起用。
English: Jiading four years, removed the mourning clothes, was officially appointed.

古文：雪赵汝愚之冤，乞褒赠赐谥，厘正诬史，一时伪学党人朱熹、彭龟年、杨万里、吕祖俭虽已殁，或褒赠易名，或录用其后，召还正人故老于外。
现代文：他替赵汝愚雪冤，请求褒赠赐谥，改正诬史，一时伪学党人朱熹、彭龟年、杨万里、吕祖俭虽然已去世，有的被褒赐改名，有的后代被录用为官，召陷于金境的归正人和元老。
English: He pleaded for Zhao Ruyuxue's wrongdoings, requested rewards and awards, and corrected the false history. Although the pseudo-academic party members Zhu Xi, Peng Kengnian, Yang Wanli, and Lv Zu Jian had passed away, some were rewarded and changed their names, some descendants were hired as officials, and the reformers and elders who were trapped in the golden age were summoned.

古文：十四年，赐家庙祭器。
现代文：嘉定十四年，赐给他家庙祭器。
English: In the 14th year of Jiading, he was given the sacrificial vessel of the family temple.

古文：宁宗崩，拥立理宗，于是拜太师，依前右丞相兼枢密使，进封魏国公，六辞不拜，因乞解机政，归田里，亟出关，帝从之。
现代文：宁宗去世，史弥远拥立理宗，因此被任命为太师，仍任右丞相兼枢密使，进封为魏国公，他六次推辞不接受，于是请求解除机务，归还故里，马上出朝，皇上允许。
English: After the death of Ningzong, Shi Miyan supported Lirizong, so he was appointed as the Grand Master, still served as the Minister of the Right and the Privy Envoy, and was given the title of Wei Guogong. He did not accept his six refusals, so he requested to be relieved of his duties and return to his hometown, and immediately went to the court, with the emperor's permission.

古文：实庆二年，拜少师，赐玉带。
现代文：宝庆二年，他被任命为少师，皇上赐给他玉带。
English: In the second year of Baoqing, he was appointed as a young teacher, and the emperor gave him a jade belt.

古文：劝上倾心顺承以事太后，力学修德以答皇天眷祐，以副四海归戴。
现代文：他劝皇上倾心顺承来服侍太后，力学修德以报答上天的保佑，以报答四方的拥戴。
English: He advised the emperor to serve the empress dowager with devotion and obedience, and the mechanics to cultivate virtue to repay the blessings of heaven, and to repay the support of the four quarters.

古文：绍定元年，上太后尊号，拜太傅，八辞不拜。
现代文：绍定元年，上太后尊号，史弥远被任命为太傅，他八次推辞不受。
English: In the first year of the Shao Ding Dynasty, Shi Miyan was appointed as Tai Fu, the honorary title of the empress dowager. He was rejected eight times.

古文：夏，得疾，累疏丐归，不许。
现代文：夏天，他得病，多次上疏请求回家，皇上不许。
English: In the summer, he fell ill and repeatedly begged to go home, but the emperor would not allow it.

古文：都城灾，五疏乞罢斥，乃降封奉化郡公。
现代文：都城出现灾祸，他五次上疏请求罢官，于是他被降封为奉化郡公。
English: A calamity occurred in the capital, and he petitioned for dismissal five times, so he was demoted to the county magistrate of Fenghua.

古文：五年春，复爵。
现代文：绍定五年春，又恢复原来的爵位。
English: In the spring of the fifth year of Shaoding, the original peerage was restored.

古文：六年，将拜太师，三具奏辞，乞免出命，不许。
现代文：绍定六年，将任命他为太师，他三次上奏推辞，请求免去成命，皇上不许。
English: Six years later, Shao Ding was to be appointed Grand Master. He submitted his resignation three times, asking to be excused from fulfilling his duties, but the emperor would not allow it.

古文：乃拜太师，依前右丞相兼枢密使、鲁国公，又三具奏辞。
现代文：于是他被任命为太师，仍任右丞相兼枢密使、鲁国公，他又三次上奏推辞。
English: As a result, he was appointed Grand Master, still serving as Minister of the Right and Privy Counsellor, Prince of Lu, and he submitted his resignation three times.

古文：绍定五年，上疏乞谢事，拜太傅。
现代文：绍定五年，他上疏请求辞官，被任命为太傅。
English: In the fifth year of Shao Ding, he went to the imperial court and asked to be demoted, and was appointed Taifu.

古文：未几，拜太师、左丞相兼枢密使。
现代文：不久，被任命为太师、左丞相兼枢密使。
English: Soon after, he was appointed Grand Master, Minister of the Left and Privy Counsellor.

古文：上疏乞解机政，依前太师特授保宁、昭信军节度使，充醴泉观使，进封会稽郡王。
现代文：他上疏请求解除机务，皇上仍任他为太师，又特别授予他保宁、昭信军节度使的官职，充当醴泉观使，进封为会稽郡王。
English: He petitioned the emperor to relieve him of his duties, but the emperor still appointed him as the Grand Master, and also specially granted him the official post of Boryeong, the Shoshin army's delegate to the festival, acting as the delegate to the Spring Festival, and was appointed as the county king of the county.

古文：卒，遗表闻，帝震悼，辍朝三日，特赠中书令，追封卫王，谥忠献。
现代文：史弥远去世，遗表传到朝廷，皇上震动并追悼他，停止朝事三天，特别赠给他中书令的官职，追封为卫王，谥号 忠献 。
English: Shi Miyan passed away, his watch was sent to the imperial court, the emperor was shocked and mourned for him, suspended the imperial court for three days, and specially presented him with the official post of the middle-ranking official, posthumously crowned as the king of Wei, and the nickname "loyalty."

古文：户部支赙赠银绢以千计，内帑特颁五千匹两，遣使祭奠。
现代文：户部支付给他丧葬费的银绢以千计，皇家仓库特拿出绢银五千匹两，皇上派使臣去祭奠。
English: The household department paid thousands of silver ingots for his funeral expenses, the royal warehouse specially brought out five thousand silver ingots, and the emperor sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：及其丧还，遣礼官致路祭于都门外，赐纛、佩玉、黝纁。
现代文：等安葬完史弥远，又派礼官在都城门外设筵祭奠，赐给他出殡时用的旗帜、佩玉、黝纟熏。
English: When Shiyiyuan's funeral was over, the etiquette official was sent to set up a wreath-laying ceremony outside the capital gate, and he was given a flag, beads, and incense to use during the funeral.

古文：初，诛李全，复淮安，克盱眙，第功行赏，诸将皆望不次拔擢。
现代文：当初，诛杀李全，收复淮安，攻克盱眙，论功行赏，众将都希望能越级提拔。
English: At first, the generals all hoped to be promoted to higher ranks after killing Li Quan, recovering Huai'an, and conquering Qi.

古文：或言于弥远，弥远曰： 御将之道，譬如养鹰，饥则依入，饱则扬去。
现代文：有人把这对史弥远说了，史弥远说： 驾驭将领的办法，就如养鹰，它饿时就依靠人，吃饱了就飞走。
English: Someone said this to Shi Yian, and Shi Yian said: The method of controlling generals is like raising an eagle. When it is hungry, it relies on people, and when it is full, it flies away.

古文：曹彬下江南，太祖未肯以使相与之。
现代文：曹彬攻克江南，太祖不肯授予他使相的官职。
English: Cao Bin conquered the south of the Yangtze River, but the great-grandfather refused to grant him the official post of envoy.

古文：况今边戍未撤，警报时闻，若诸将一一遂其所求，志得意满，猝有缓急，孰肯效死？ 赵善湘以从官开阃，指授之功居多，日夜望执政。
现代文：况且现在边防未撤，警报常有，如果众将一一遂心如愿，志得意满，仓猝间要有缓急，谁还肯效死力？ 赵善湘以从官的身份开设帅府，出谋划策的功劳很多，日夜盼望当上执政。
English: Moreover, the border defense has not been withdrawn, and there are often alarms. If the generals succeed in fulfilling their wishes, if they are satisfied with their ambitions, and if they have to postpone priorities in a hurry, who would still be willing to use deadly force? Zhao Shanxiang opened the headquarters as a subordinate official, and he has a lot of merit in devising and proposing policies. Day and night, he hopes to be in power.

古文：弥远曰： 天族于国有嫌，高宗有诏止许任从官，不许为执政。
现代文：史弥远说： 皇族对国家有嫌疑，高宗有诏只许皇族担任从官，不许任执政。
English: Shi Miyan said: The royal family is suspect to the country. Gao Zong had an edict that only the royal family was allowed to serve as officials and not allowed to govern.

古文：绍熙末，庆元初，因汝愚、彦逾有定策功，是以权宜行之。
现代文：绍熙末，庆元初，因为赵汝愚、赵彦逾有定策功，所以才权宜任命他们为执政。
English: At the end of the Shaoxing Dynasty and the beginning of the Qing Dynasty, because Zhao Ruwu and Zhao Yan had made more than a certain amount of policy achievements, it was only appropriate to appoint them to govern.

古文：某与善湘姻家，则又岂敢。 弥远亲密友周铸、兄弥茂、甥夏周篆皆寄以腹心，人皆谓三人者必显贵，然铸老于布衣，弥茂以执政恩入流，周篆以捧香恩补官，俱止训武郎而已。
现代文：我和赵善湘是姻亲，又怎敢违犯规定。 史弥远的密友周铸、哥哥史弥茂、外甥夏周篆都是他的心腹，人们都认为他们仨一定会显贵，然而周铸到死都是平民百姓，史弥茂因执政的恩荫得以入流，夏周篆因捧香恩才被补官，他们也只是训武郎而已。
English: Zhao Shanxiang and I are in-laws, how dare we violate the regulations. Shi Yuan's close friend Zhou Ji, his brother Shi Mao, and his nephew Xia Zhouqi are all his confidants, and people think that they must be distinguished, but Zhou Ji is a commoner until his death. Shi Mao was able to join the stream because of the grace of the government, and Xia Zhouqi was promoted because of the grace of the government. They are just martial artists.

古文：初，弥远既诛韩侂胄，相宁宗十有七年。
现代文：当初，史弥远杀死韩胄后，在宁宗朝当了十七年宰相。
English: At first, Shi Miyan became the prime minister for seventeen years in the Ningzong Dynasty after he killed Han Zheng.

古文：迨宁宗崩，废济王，非宁宗意。
现代文：宁宗去世后，济王被废，这不是宁宗的本意。
English: After the death of Ningzong, King Ji was abolished, which was not the original intention of Ningzong.

古文：立理宗，又独相九年，擅权用事，专任俭壬。
现代文：史弥远拥立理宗，又独自任相九年，他擅权用事，专门任用谄媚卑鄙的人。
English: Shi Miyan supported the founding of the Risshu sect, and he was the sole minister for nine years. He took matters into his own hands, specifically appointing flattering and despicable people.

古文：理宗德其立己之功，不思社稷大计，虽台谏言其奸恶，弗恤也。
现代文：理宗感念他拥立自己，不思国家大事，虽然台谏官论他奸恶，也不担忧。
English: Rissong felt that he supported himself and did not think about national affairs, although the Taiwanese officials said he was evil, he was not worried.

古文：弥远死，宠渥犹优其子孙，厥后为制碑铭，以 公忠翊运，定策元勋 题其首。
现代文：史弥远去世后，理宗对他的子孙们很宠幸优礼，后来替他制碑铭，把 公忠翊运，定策元勋 题写在碑文前面。
English: After the death of Shi Miyuan, Rizong was very gracious to his children and grandchildren. Later, he made a monument for him, and inscribed the inscriptions "Public Loyalty, Good Luck, and Determined Strategy" on the front of the monument.

古文：济王不得其死，识者群起而论之，而弥远反用李知孝、梁成大等以为鹰犬，于是一时之君子贬窜斥逐，不遗余力云。
现代文：济王不是正常去世的，有见识的人群起而攻之，而史弥远任用李知孝、梁成大等为爪牙，反而使当时的君子遭到贬逐流放，对此他们不遗余力。
English: King Ji did not die a natural death, and the people with insight rose up to attack him, while Shi Yiyuan appointed Li Zhitiao, Liang Chengda and others as his minions, but on the contrary, the gentleman at that time was humiliated and exiled, and they spared no effort.

古文：郑清之字，德源，庆元之鄞人。
现代文：郑清之，字德源，庆元鄞县人。
English: Zheng Qingzhi, also known as Deyuan, was from Qingyuan County.

古文：初名燮，字文叔。
现代文：原叫郑燮，字文叔。
English: His original name was Zheng Yao, and his nickname was Uncle Wen.

古文：少从楼昉学，能文，楼钥亟加称赏。
现代文：少年时跟从楼日方学习，能写文章，楼钥十分赞赏他。
English: When he was a boy, he learned from the Japanese side of the building and was able to write articles. He was highly appreciated by the key to the building.

古文：嘉泰二年，入太学。
现代文：嘉泰二年，他进入太学。
English: In the second year of Jia Tai, he entered Taigaku.

古文：十年，登进士第，调峡州教授。
现代文：嘉定十年，考中进士，调为峡州教授。
English: After ten years in Jiading, he was promoted to a junior high school entrance examination, and was transferred to a professor in Xiaozhou.

古文：帅赵方严重，靳许可，清之往白事，为置酒，命其子范、葵出拜，方掖清之无答拜，且曰： 他日愿以二子相累。 湖北茶商群聚暴横，清之白总领何炳曰： 此辈精悍，宜籍为兵，缓急可用。 炳亟下召募之令，趋者云集，号曰 茶商军 ，后多赖其用。
现代文：统帅赵方处事认真、严肃、庄重，不轻易许诺什么，郑清之去他那儿汇报事情，他给郑清之置办酒席，让他的儿子赵范、赵葵出来拜见，赵方拉着郑清之没进行答拜的礼仪，并说： 他日希望能照顾我的两个儿子。 湖北茶商群集暴横，郑清之向总领何炳建议说： 这些人很精悍，应该把他们编入军籍，紧急时可使用。 何炳马上下达招募他们的命令，来的人很多，号称 茶商军 ，后来多次依赖这支军队。
English: Zhao Fang, the commander-in-chief, dealt with the matter seriously, seriously, solemnly, and did not easily promise anything. Zheng Qingzhi went to him to report the matter. He arranged a banquet for Zheng Qingzhi, and asked his sons Zhao Fan and Zhao Kwai to come out to meet him. Zhao Fangzhi led Zheng Qingzhi to perform the ritual of answering the prayer, and said, "I hope to take care of my two sons one day." Hubei tea merchants gathered violently. Zheng Qingzhi suggested to the commander-in-chief He Qian: These people are very tough, they should be incorporated into the military

古文：调湖、广总所准备差遣、国子监书库官。
现代文：郑清之调为湖、广总所准备差遣、国子监书库官。
English: Zheng Qingzhi was transferred to the Lake and Guangyuan General Office to prepare for dispatch, and became the provincial supervisor and librarian.

古文：十六年，迁国子学录。
现代文：嘉定十六年，他升为国子学录。
English: In the 16th year of the Jiading Dynasty, he was promoted to the position of Guozi scholar.

古文：丞相史弥远与清之谋废济国公，事见《皇子竑传》。
现代文：丞相史弥远与郑清之谋划废济国公，这事见《皇子传》。
English: See "Imperial Biography" for details of the plot to abolish the prince of Jeju by the prime minister Shiyan and Zheng Qing.

古文：俄以清之兼魏惠宪王府教授，迁宗学谕，迁太学博士，皆仍兼教授。
现代文：不久任命郑清之兼任魏惠宪王府教授，升为宗学谕，升为太学博士，都仍兼教授。
English: Soon after, Zheng Qingzhi was also appointed as a professor of Wei Huixian Wangfu, promoted to the title of Patriarchal Scholar, and promoted to the title of Doctor of Theology, both of which he still held concurrently.

古文：宁宗崩，丞相入定策，诏旨皆清之所定。
现代文：宁宗去世，丞相献定国的策略，诏旨都是郑清之所拟定的。
English: The death of Ningzong, the strategy of dedicating the country by the prime minister, and the imperial edict were all drafted by Zheng Qing.

古文：理宗即帝位，授诸王宫大小学教授，迁宗学博士、宗正寺丞兼权工部郎、兼崇政殿说书。
现代文：理宗即位后，郑清之被授予诸王宫大小学教授，升为宗学博士、宗正寺丞兼权工部郎、兼崇政殿说书。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Dezong, Zheng Qingzhi was awarded the title of professor of Zhuwang Palace, and was promoted to Doctor of Religious Studies, Sojo-ji Temple chancellor, and also the right-hand man of the engineering department, and also the storyteller of the Sui Dynasty.

古文：帝问外人因阁子库进丝履有谤议，清之言： 禁中服用颇事新洁者。 帝曰： 故事，月进鞵数两，朕非敝不易，何由致谤？ 清之奏： 孝宗继高宗，故俭德易章，陛下继宁考，故俭德难著。
现代文：皇上询问外人为什么对子库进丝鞋有谤议，郑清之说： 宫中穿的用的都十分讲究新的、干净的。 
English: When the emperor asked why outsiders had slanderous opinions about the silk shoes, Zheng Qingzhi said: People in the palace are very particular about new and clean shoes.

古文：宁考自奉如寒士，衣领重浣，革舄屡补，今欲俭德著闻，须过于宁考方可。 帝嘉纳。
现代文：宁宗自己的日常供养就如同寒士，衣服多次洗涤，多次补衣服鞋子，现在想使节俭的美德显著，必须超过宁宗才行。 理宗高兴地采纳了他的建议。
English: Ningzong's own daily provision was like that of a cold person, his clothes were washed many times, his clothes and shoes were mended many times, and now, in order to make the virtue of frugality prominent, it was necessary to surpass Ningzong.

古文：宝庆元年，改兼兵部兼国史院编修官、实录院检讨官，迁起居郎，仍兼史官、说书、枢密院编修官。
现代文：宝庆元年，郑清之改兼兵部兼国史院编修官、实录院检讨官，升为起居郎，仍兼史官、说书、枢密院编修官。
English: In the first year of Baoqing, Zheng Qingzhi reformed both the military department and the editor-in-chief of the Academy of National History, and the reviewer of the Institute of Historical Records, and was promoted to the kijiro, still a historian, storyteller, and editor-in-chief of the Privy Council.

古文：二年，权工部侍郎，暂权给事中，进给事中，升兼同修国史、实录院同修撰。
现代文：宝庆二年，他为权工部侍郎，暂为权给事中，进升为给事中，升为兼同修国史、实录院同修撰。
English: In the second year of Baoqing, he was the attendant of the Department of Political Science and Technology, and was temporarily promoted to the middle of the department, promoted to the middle of the department, and promoted to the same department of national history and the same department of the Institute of Historical Records.

古文：绍定元年，迁翰林学士、知制诰兼侍读，升兼修国史实录院修撰、端明殿学士、签书枢密院事。
现代文：绍定元年，他升为翰林学士、知制诰兼侍读，升为兼修国史实录院修撰、端明殿学士、签书枢密院事。
English: In the first year of Shaoding, he was promoted to be a scholar of Hanlin, a scholar of Zhizhi and an attendant, a scholar of the National History Record Institute, a scholar of the Duanming Palace, and a signer of the Privy Council.

古文：三年，授参知政事兼签书枢密院事。
现代文：绍定三年，郑清之被授予参知政事兼签书枢密院事。
English: In the third year of Shao Ding, Zheng Qingzhi was awarded the post of deputy governor and secretary of the Privy Council.

古文：四年，兼同知枢密院事。
现代文：绍定四年，他兼任同知枢密院事。
English: In the fourth year of Shaoding, he also served as Tongzhi Privy Councillor.

古文：六年，弥远卒，命清之为右丞相兼枢密使。
现代文：绍定六年，史弥远去世，郑清之被任命为右丞相兼枢密使。
English: In the sixth year of Shaoding, Shi Yiyuan passed away, and Zheng Qingzhi was appointed as the Minister of the Right and the Privy Counsellor.

古文：端平元年，上既亲总庶政，赫然独断，而清之亦慨然以天下为己任，召还真德秀、魏了翁、崔与之、李、徐侨、赵汝谈、尤焴、游似、洪咨夔、王遂、李宗勉、杜范、徐清叟、袁甫、李韶，时号 小元祐。 大者相继为宰辅，惟与之终始辞不至，遣逸如刘宰、赵蕃皆见旌异。
现代文：端平元年，皇上亲政，显赫盛大，独自处理政事，郑清之也慨然以天下为己任，召回真德秀、魏了翁、崔与之、李埴、徐侨、赵汝谈、尤煜、游似、洪咨夔、王遂、李宗勉、杜范、徐清叟、袁甫、李韶，当时号称 小元 。大多相继担任宰辅，只有崔与之始终推辞不来，隐士如刘宰、赵蕃都被表彰。
English: In the first year of Duanping, the emperor's personal government was prominent and grand, and he dealt with political affairs independently. Zheng Qingzhi also took the world as his responsibility, and recalled Zhendexiu, Wei Liowong, Cui Zhuo, Li Qian, Xu Qiao, Zhao Rutan, You Qian, You Lian, Hong Zhiqian, Wang Sui, Li Zongcheng, Du Fan, Xu Qianqian, Yuan Fu, Li Qian, who was known as Xiao Yuan at that time. Most of them successively served as Zai Fu, only Cui and he always refused to resign, and hermits such

古文：是时金虽亡而入洛之师大溃。
现代文：这时金国虽亡而进入洛阳的宋军大败。
English: At this time, the Song army, which entered Luoyang despite the death of Jin Guo, suffered a major defeat.

古文：二年，上疏乞罢，不可，拜特进、左丞相兼枢密使。
现代文：端平二年，郑清之上疏请求罢官，皇上不许，授予他特进、左丞相兼枢密使。
English: In the second year of Duanping, Zheng Qing requested the dismissal of Shangwoshu, but the emperor did not allow it, awarding him the special promotion, the left josei minister and the confidential envoy.

古文：三年八月，霖雨大风，四疏丐去。
现代文：端平三年八月，秋雨绵绵，狂风大作，郑清之四次上疏请求辞职。
English: In August of the third year of Dengping, the autumn rain was continuous, the wind was fierce, and Zheng Qing was asked to resign four times.

古文：九月，禋祀雷变，请益力。
现代文：九月，祭祀时出现惊雷，他更是极力辞职。
English: In September, there was a thunderbolt during a religious service, and he even resigned.

古文：乃授观文殿大学士、醴泉观使兼侍读，四疏控辞，依旧大学士、提举洞霄宫。
现代文：他就被授予观文殿大学士、醴泉观使兼侍读，他四次上疏推辞，仍旧为观文殿大学士、提举洞霄宫。
English: He was awarded the title of a scholar of the Academy of Confucianism, and the title of an attendant of the Academy of Confucianism, and he submitted his resignation four times, but he was still awarded the title of a scholar of the Academy of Confucianism, and promoted to the Palace of Confucianism.

古文：及闻边警，密疏： 恐陛下忧悔太过，以汩清明之躬，累刚大之志。 嘉熙三年，封申国公。
现代文：听到边境警报后，他秘密上奏说： 恐怕陛下过于担忧和悔恨，这样会损害您的清明的身体，累及您的宏伟志向。 嘉熙三年，郑清之被封为申国公。
English: After hearing the border alarm, he secretly made a report: I am afraid that Your Majesty is too worried and regretful, which will damage your clear body and affect your grand aspirations.

古文：四年，遣中使赐御书 辅德明谟之阁 ，赐楮十万缗为筑室，乃日与宾客门生相羊山水间。
现代文：嘉熙四年，皇上派中使赐给他亲笔写的 辅德明谟之阁 的题字，赏给他十万缗钱用来修建房舍，郑清之就每天同宾客、门生游山玩水。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Jiaxi, the envoy sent by the emperor gave him a handwritten inscription of "Ju De Ming Miao Pavilion" and awarded him 100,000 baht to build a house. Zheng Qingzhi went to the mountains and rivers every day with guests and disciples.

古文：淳祐四年，依前观文殿大学士、醴泉观使兼侍读，屡辞不允，拜少保、观文殿大学士、醴泉观使兼侍读，进封卫国公。
现代文：淳祐四年，郑清之仍为观文殿大学士、醴泉观使兼侍读，他多次辞官都没被允许，他被授予少保、观文殿大学士、醴泉观使兼侍读，被加封为卫国公。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Junyu, Zheng Qingzhi was still a scholar of the Academy of Confucianism, a scholar and attendant of the Academy of Confucianism, and he was not allowed to be a diplomat for many times. He was awarded the Junior Protector, a scholar of the Academy of Confucianism, a scholar and attendant of the Academy of Confucianism, and was sealed as a patron of the country.

古文：趣入见，有旨赐第。
现代文：他入朝拜见皇上，皇上下诏赐给他府第。
English: He entered the imperial court to pay homage to the emperor, and the imperial edict gave him a seat in the government.

古文：五年正月，上寿毕，亦疏丐归，不允。
现代文：淳五年正月，为皇上祝寿结束后，他又上疏请求辞官，皇上不许。
English: In the first month of the fifth year of the Joseon Dynasty, after the celebration of the emperor's birthday, he went up to the emperor and asked for his resignation, but the emperor would not allow it.

古文：拜少傅，依前观文殿大学士、醴泉观使兼侍读，进封越国公。
现代文：郑清之被授予少傅，仍为观文殿大学士、醴泉观使兼侍读，进封为越国公。
English: Zheng Qingzhi was awarded the title of Shao Fu, he was still a scholar of the Academy of Confucianism and Literature, and he was also an attendant of Quanquan Confucianism, and he became the prince of Yue.

古文：居无何，丧其子士昌，决意东还，又不许。
现代文：不久，他的儿子郑士昌去世，他决意东还，辞职，又没被允许。
English: Soon after, his son Zheng Shichang passed away, and he decided to return the favor by resigning, but was not allowed to do so.

古文：拜少师、奉国军节度使，依前醴泉观使兼侍读、越国公，赐玉带，更赐第于西湖之渔庄。
现代文：他被授予少师、奉国军节度使，仍为醴泉观使兼侍读、越国公，皇上赏给他玉带，又在西湖的渔庄赏给他一处府第。
English: He was awarded the title of Junior Instructor, and the title of Festival Envoy of the Chinese People's Liberation Army. He was still the attendant and student of Quanquan Guan Envoy, and the prince of Yue Province. The emperor gave him a jade belt, and also gave him a mansion in the fishing village of West Lake.

古文：进读《仁皇训典》，谓： 仁祖之仁厚，发为英明，故能修明纪纲，而无宽弛不振之患；孝宗之英明，本于仁厚，故能涵养士气，而无矫励峭刻之习。
现代文：郑清之为皇上讲读《仁皇训典》，他说： 仁祖的仁德宽厚，使他表现得很英明，所以他能制定法度，国家也没有懈怠、不振奋的祸患；孝宗的英明，来源于他本身的仁德宽厚，所以他能培养和鼓舞士气，国家没有特别严厉苛刻的风气。
English: Zheng Qingzong read the "Courtesy of the Benevolent Emperor" to the emperor. He said: "The benevolence and generosity of the benevolent ancestors made him very wise, so he could formulate laws, and the country did not slacken, and there was no disaster of not inspiring; the wisdom of the filial piety came from his own benevolence and generosity, so he could cultivate and encourage morale, and the country did not have a particularly harsh and harsh culture.

古文：盖仁厚、英明二者相须，此仁祖、孝宗所以为盛也。 帝褒谕之。
现代文：仁德宽厚和英明二者互相弥补，缺一不可，这就是仁祖、孝宗统治时出现盛世的原因。 
English: Benevolence, kindness, and wisdom make up for each other and are indispensable. This is the reason for the prosperous times that occurred during the reigns of Ninshu and Xiaozong.

古文：六年，拜太保，力辞。
现代文：皇上表彰了他。淳祐六年，郑清之被授予太保，他极力推辞。
English: The emperor commended him. In the sixth year of the reign of Emperor Junyu, Zheng Qingzhi was awarded the title of grand tutor, which he strenuously refused.

古文：故事，许回授子孙，清之请追封高祖洽，帝从之，盖异恩也。
现代文：按惯例，允许他把官职转给子孙，郑清之请求皇上追封给他的高祖郑洽，皇上同意了，这是特殊的恩惠。
English: According to the usual practice, he was allowed to transfer his official position to his children and grandchildren. At the request of Zheng Qing, the emperor granted his great-grandfather Zheng Gao, which was a special favor.

古文：七年，拜太傅、右丞相兼枢密使、越国公。
现代文：淳七年，郑清之被授予太傅、右丞相兼枢密使、越国公。
English: In the seventh year of Jun, Zheng Qingzhi was awarded the title of Taifu, Minister of the Right and Privy Counsellor, and Prince of Yue.

古文：中使及门，清之方放浪湖山，寓僧刹，竟夕不归。
现代文：中使来到他家，郑清之正在湖光山色中游玩，住在寺院中，一直到傍晚还没回来。
English: When the envoy came to his home, Zheng Qingzhi was playing in the lake, living in a temple, and did not return until the evening.

古文：诘旦内引，叩头辞免，帝勉谕有外间所不及知者。
现代文：第二天早晨他入宫拜见皇上，磕头请求免去这些官职，皇上告诉了许多他不知道的事。
English: The next morning, he went to the palace to see the emperor. Shantou asked to be relieved of these official duties, and the emperor told him many things he did not know.

古文：甫退，则中使接踵而至。
现代文：郑清之刚离开宫廷，中使就接踵而至。
English: As soon as Zheng Qingzhi left the court, the envoys arrived one after another.

古文：或请更化改元，清之曰： 改元，天子之始事，更化，朝廷之大端，汉事已非古，然不因易相而为之。 
现代文：有的请求重定施政方针、改年号，郑清之说： 改年号，是天子刚登基时的事，重定施政方针，是国家的大事，汉代的事已经不是遥远的事，但不因为更换了宰相就那么做。 
English: Zheng Qingzhi said: "Changing the era name is something that happened when the heavenly son just ascended the throne, and resetting the policy direction is a major event for the country. The events of the Han Dynasty are not far away, but it is not because the prime minister has been changed.

古文：帝以边事为忧，诏赵葵以枢使视师，陈靴以知枢密院事帅湖、广，二人方辞逊，会清之再相，力主之，科降辟置无所留难，葵、靴遂往。
现代文：皇上忧虑边疆的事，下诏让赵葵以枢密使的身份检阅军队，陈韦华以知枢密院事的身份统率湖、广二州，他们二人正在推辞，恰好郑清之再次担任宰相，对他们极力支持，凡是他们所要求的都不刁难，赵葵、陈韦华就前去上任了。
English: The emperor was worried about the frontier, and issued a decree to let Zhao Kwai, as a privy councillor, review the army, and Chen Weihua, as a privy councillor, lead the lake and Guanzhou. Both of them were in the process of resigning. It just so happened that Zheng Qingzhi was once again the prime minister, and he strongly supported them. Anything they asked for was not difficult, and Zhao Kwai and Chen Weihua went to take office.

古文：于是战于泗水、涡口、木库，皆以捷闻。
现代文：于是宋军在泗水、涡口、木库作战，都取得了胜利。
English: As a result, the Song army fought in Surabaya, Turukou, and Kiku, and achieved victory.

古文：九年，拜太师、左丞相兼枢密使，辞太师不拜，依前太傅。
现代文：淳九年，郑清之被授予太师、左丞相兼枢密使，他没接受太师的官职，仍然是太傅。
English: In June 9th, Zheng Qingzhi was awarded the title of Grand Master, Left Minister and Privy Councilor. He did not accept the official position of Grand Master, but remained Grand Master.

古文：每谓天下之财困于养兵，兵费困于生券，思所以变通之，遇调戍防边，命枢属量远近以便其道涂，时缓急以次其遣发。
现代文：郑清之常感到国家的财富因为养兵而困乏，因为发放生券而使兵费短缺，他考虑变通的办法，每有调兵戍守边境的时候，就命令枢密院根据距离的远近，就近调兵戍守，根据情况的缓急决定调兵的先后顺序。
English: Zheng Qingzhi often felt that the country's wealth was depleted due to the maintenance of soldiers, and the military expenses were short due to the issuance of birth certificates. He considered alternative methods. Whenever troops were transferred to guard the border, he ordered the Privy Council to transfer troops to guard the border according to the distance and according to the priority of the situation.

古文：又议移岁调兵屯以戍淮面，并军分头目以节廪稍，先移镇江策胜一军屯泗水，公私便之。
现代文：又议定明年调兵戍守淮水，合并军队以便节省物资供给，先调镇江策胜军驻屯在泗水，公私都很便利。
English: It was also agreed to transfer troops to defend Huai Shui next year, to merge the armed forces in order to save material supplies, and to transfer the Zhenjiang Victory Army to be stationed in Surabaya first, which is convenient for both the public and private sectors.

古文：诸路亏盐，执其事者破家以偿，清之核其犯科者追理，挂误者悉蠲之，全活甚众。
现代文：各路盐额亏损，负责这件事的人都倾家荡产来偿还亏损的盐数，郑清之核实了那些违犯盐法的人加以追究处治，受牵连的人都被免去了罪责，使很多人得以活命。
English: All roads lost salt, and the people in charge of the matter went bankrupt to repay the lost salt. Zheng Qingzhi verified that those who violated the salt law were investigated and punished, and those who were implicated were exonerated, so that many people could live.

古文：沿江算舟之赋素重，清之次第停罢，如池之雁〈氵義〉有大法场之目，其钱分隶诸司，清之奏罢其并缘渔取者，盖数倍公家之入，合分隶者从朝廷偿之。
现代文：长江沿岸的船税一向很重，郑清之一项一项地废去，如池州的雁氵义有大法场这样的税目，这部分钱分别归属各衙门，郑清之上奏请求废除它并追究那些从中渔利的人，他们的收入是公家的好几倍，那些分别归属各衙门的钱由朝廷补偿。
English: The ship tax along the Yangtze River has always been very heavy. Zheng Qing abolished it one by one. For example, Chizhou's Yandangyi has a large legal field. This part of the money belongs to each gate separately. Zheng Qing made a request to abolish it and investigate those who profit from it. Their income is several times that of the public. The money that belongs to each gate separately will be compensated by the court.

古文：报下，清之方与客饮，举杯曰： 今日饮此酒殊快！ 四上谢事之章。
现代文：皇上同意了郑清之的请求，消息传来，郑清之正与客人饮酒，他举杯说 ：今天饮这个酒特别痛快。 郑清之四次上奏章辞职。
English: The emperor agreed to Zheng Qingzhi's request, and the news came that Zheng Qingzhi was drinking with guests, and he raised his glass and said, "Drinking this wine today is particularly delightful."

古文：十年，进《十龟元吉箴》，一持敬，二典学，三崇俭，四力行，五能定，六明善，七谨微，八察言，九惜时，十务实。
现代文：淳祐十年，郑清之进献给皇上《十龟元吉箴》，一是要谨慎恭敬，二是要掌管学校，三是要崇尚节俭，四是要积极实践，五是要能定大局，六是要明辨善恶，七是要谨小慎微，八是要考察言论，九是要珍惜时间，十是要多办实事。
English: In the tenth year of the Chunyu era, Zheng Qingzhi Jin dedicated to the emperor "Ten Years of Good Fortune." One is to be cautious and respectful, the second is to control the school, the third is to advocate frugality, the fourth is to actively practice, the fifth is to be able to determine the overall situation, the sixth is to distinguish between good and evil, the seventh is to be cautious, the eighth is to examine speech, the ninth is to cherish time, and the tenth is to do more real things.

古文：疏奏： 敬天之怒易，敬天之休难，天怒可忧而以为易，天休可喜而以为难，何哉？
现代文：他上疏说 ：上天发生灾变时，对天恭敬容易做到，上天正常时，对天恭敬不容易做到，上天发生灾变时使人产生忧虑，因此容易对天恭敬，上天正常时人们高兴，因此不容易对天恭敬，为什么呢？
English: He said to Shang Zuo, "When there is a catastrophe in heaven, it is easy to respect heaven; when heaven is normal, it is not easy to respect heaven; when there is a catastrophe in heaven, people are worried, so it is easy to respect heaven; when heaven is normal, people are happy, so it is not easy to respect heaven. Why?

古文：盖忧则惧心生，惧则怒可转而为休；喜则玩心生，玩则休或转而为怒。 帝大喜，命史官书之，赐诏奖谕。
现代文：因为忧虑时就心生恐惧，恐惧就可使灾变转化为好天气；高兴时就想享乐，享乐就或许会使好天气变为坏天气。 皇上非常高兴，命令史官记下这些话，下诏嘉奖了郑清之。
English: Because when one is worried, fear arises in one's heart, and fear can turn disaster into good weather; when one is happy, one wants to have fun, and fun may turn good weather into bad weather. The emperor was very happy and ordered the historian to write down these words, and awarded the award to Zheng Qing.

古文：十一年，十疏乞罢政，皆不许。
现代文：淳十一年，郑清之上疏请求辞官，皇上都没准许。
English: In the eleventh year of the June, Zheng Qing requested the resignation of Shang Shou, but the emperor did not allow it.

古文：拜太师，力辞。
现代文：郑清之被授予太师的官职，他极力推辞。
English: Zheng Qingzhi was awarded the official post of Grand Master, but he strenuously refused.

古文：有事于明堂，有旨閤门给扶掖二人，再赐玉带，令服以朝。
现代文：朝廷在明堂有事，皇上下诏让门官给郑清之派两个人，搀他上明堂，皇上又赐给他玉带，命令他戴着玉带上朝。
English: The imperial court had an incident at Myeongdong. The emperor ordered the gate officials to send two people to Zheng Qing to escort him to Myeongdong. The emperor also gave him a jade belt and ordered him to wear the jade belt to the imperial court.

古文：十一月丁酉，退朝感寒疾，危甚，犹以未得雪为忧。
现代文：十一月十二日，退朝后郑清之得了寒病，病势很重，他仍然因为天没下雪而担忧。
English: On November 12th, after the abdication, Zheng Qingzhi fell seriously ill with a cold. He was still worried because there was no snow.

古文：俄大雪，起曰： 百官贺雪，上必甚喜。 命掬雪床前观之。
现代文：不久天降大雪，他起身说： 百官庆贺下雪，皇上一定十分高兴。 他命令人把雪捧到床前观看。
English: Before long, heavy snow fell, and he got up and said, "The officials are celebrating the snow, the emperor must be very happy," and he ordered the snow to be brought to his bedside for him to see.

古文：累奏乞罢政，不允，奏不已，拜太傅、保宁军节度使充醴泉观使，进封齐国公致仕。
现代文：郑清之多次上奏请求辞官，皇上不许，他不停地上奏，皇上授予他太傅、保宁军节度使充任醴泉观使，他被加封为齐国公后退休。
English: Zheng Qingzhi repeatedly requested to resign from the post, but the emperor did not allow him to do so, and he kept playing on the ground. The emperor awarded him the title of Taifu, the Boryeong Army Festival Envoy, and the post of Quanquan Observer Envoy. He was awarded the title of Qi Guo Gong and retired.

古文：卒，遗表闻，帝震悼，辍朝三日，特赠尚书令，追封魏郡王，赐谥忠定。
现代文：郑清之去世，遗表送到朝廷，皇上十分震惊，追悼他，停止朝政三天，特赠给他尚书令的官职，追封他为魏郡王，赐给他的谥号是 忠定 。
English: Zheng Qingzhi passed away and his posthumous watch was sent to the imperial court. The emperor was very shocked, mourned for him, suspended the imperial government for three days, gave him the official post of Shang Shuling, posthumously crowned him as the king of Wei County, and gave him the nickname of Zhongding.

古文：清之不好立异，汤巾尝论事侵清之，及清之再相，巾求去，清之曰： 己欲作君子，使谁为小人。 力挽留之。
现代文：郑清之不喜欢树立异己，汤巾曾在论事时触犯了郑清之，郑清之再次担任宰相后，汤巾请求辞官，郑清之说 ：你自己想当君子，让谁当小人？ 就极力挽留汤巾。
English: Zheng Qingzhi did not like to set up a dissident, Tangwan had offended Zheng Qingzhi when discussing the matter, after Zheng Qingzhi served as prime minister again, Tangwan asked the dictionary, Zheng Qingzhi said: You want to be a gentleman, who should be a villain? He tried his best to retain Tangwan.

古文：徐清叟尝论列清之，乃引之共政。
现代文：徐清叟曾经弹劾过郑清之，郑清之却任用他一起执政。
English: Xu Qingyao once impeached Zheng Qingzhi, but Zheng Qingzhi appointed him to govern together.

古文：赵葵视师年余，乞罢，上未有以处之，清之曰： 非使作相不足以酬劳，陛下岂以臣故耶？
现代文：赵葵视师一年多，请求辞官，皇上不知如何安排他。郑清之说 ：不让他做宰相是不足以表达对他的酬劳的，陛下难道是因为我在宰相的位置上而不任命他吗？
English: For more than a year, Zhao Kwai-hsi requested to be appointed as a diplomat, but the emperor did not know how to arrange it. Zheng Qingzhi said: "Not allowing him to be prime minister is not enough to express his remuneration. Is it because I am in the position of prime minister that His Majesty did not appoint him?"

古文：臣必不因葵来遽引退，臣愿为左，使葵居右。 上讫从之，然葵竟不果来。
现代文：我一定不会因为赵葵任宰相就辞官，我愿意为左相，让赵葵为右相。 皇上最后同意了他的意见，但赵葵始终没来任职。
English: I will not resign because of Zhao Kwai's appointment as prime minister, I am willing to be the left minister and let Zhao Kwai be the right minister. The emperor finally agreed with his opinion, but Zhao Kwai never came to serve.

古文：清之代言奏对，多不存稿，有《安晚集》六十卷。
现代文：郑清之代言奏对，大多不保存底稿，他有《安晚集》六十卷。
English: Zheng Qingzhi's endorsement is correct, most do not keep the manuscript, he has "Good Evening Collection" sixty volumes.

古文：清之自与弥远议废济王竑，立理宗，骎骎至宰辅，然端平之间召用正人，清之之力也。
现代文：郑清之自从和史弥远一起议定废济王赵，立理宗为皇帝后，就逐渐升任为宰辅，然而端平年间正人君子被任用，都是郑清之的主张。
English: Ever since Zheng Qingzhi and Shi Yayuan jointly agreed to abolish King Zhao of Jizhou and install Li Zong as emperor, he was gradually promoted to the position of vice-premier. However, the appointment of Zhenren Junzi during the Duanping era was all Zheng Qingzhi's idea.

古文：至再相，则年齿衰暮，政归妻子，而闲废之人或因缘以贿进，为世所少云。
现代文：郑清之再次担任宰相时，年事已高，政事都由他的妻子、儿子处理，使那些被废罢的人都趁机用贿赂的手段得以任用，被世人所轻视。
English: When Zheng Qingzhi took up the post of prime minister again, he was already very old, and his wife and son handled all the government affairs, so that those who had been dismissed took the opportunity to use bribery to be appointed, and were despised by the world.

