古文：安重霸，云州人也。
现代文：安重霸，云州人。
English: An Chongba, a native of Yunnan.

古文：性狡谲，多智算。
现代文：生性狡猾，多有智谋。
English: Cunning and resourceful by nature.

古文：初，自代北与明宗俱事武皇，因负罪奔梁；在梁复以罪奔蜀，蜀以蕃人善骑射，因为亲将。
现代文：起初，从代北和明宗一起在武皇手下供事，因为犯罪投奔汴梁，在汴梁又因罪投奔蜀地，蜀人看他是蕃人擅长骑射，便任为亲将。
English: At first, Dai Beibei and Mingzong served under Emperor Wu together. Because of his crime, he was exiled to Qilian. In Qilian, he was exiled to Shu for his crime. The Shu people saw that he was good at riding and shooting, so they appointed him as their commander.

古文：蜀后主王衍，幼年袭位，其政多僻。
现代文：蜀后主王衍，幼年时继承王位，政治多有弊端。
English: The queen of Shu, Wang Yan, succeeded to the throne at a young age, and her politics had many drawbacks.

古文：宦官王承休居中用事，与成都尹韩昭内外相结，专采择声色，以固宠幸。
现代文：宦官王承休在宫中掌权，和成都尹韩昭内外勾结，专门收取美女声乐，以便得到蜀主的宠幸。
English: The eunuch Wang Chengyu took power in the palace, colluded with Chengdu Yin Han Zhao inside and outside, and specially collected beautiful women's vocal music in order to get the favor of the Shu master.

古文：武臣宿将，居常切齿。
现代文：武臣宿将都切齿痛恨他们。
English: The generals hated them with a vengeance.

古文：重霸谄事承休，特见委信。
现代文：而安重霸谄媚奉承王承休，特别受信任。
English: But An Chongba was especially trusted for his flattering fawning over Wang Chengyu.

古文：梁末，岐下削弱，蜀人夺取秦、成、阶等州，重霸说承休求镇秦州。
现代文：梁朝末年，岐下势力受到削弱，蜀人占领了秦、成、阶等州，安重霸游说王承休向蜀主请求镇守秦州。
English: At the end of the Liang Dynasty, Qishan's power was weakened, and the Shu people occupied Qin, Chengdu, Cha and other provinces. An Chongba lobbied Wang Chengxu to ask the Shu Lord to defend Qin Province.

古文：仍于军中选山东骁果，得数千人，号龙武都，以承休为军帅，重霸副焉，俱在天水。
现代文：又在军中挑选山东骁勇士兵数千人，号称龙武都，蜀主以王承休为秦州军帅，以安重霸为副帅，都在天水。
English: In addition, thousands of soldiers of Shandong Shenyong were selected from the army, known as Longwu, with Wang Chengxiu as the commander of the Qin State Army and An Chongba as the deputy commander, all in Tianshui.

古文：少主甚悦，即遣仗节赴镇，应所选龙武精锐，并充衙队从行。
现代文：一年后，王承休想要求旄钺节仗，便献上陇西的花木，又说秦州山水秀美，人物出众，请后主来巡视，而韩昭助成这事。
English: A year later, Wang Chengxiu wanted to ask for a festival, so he presented the flowers and trees of Shaanxi. He also said that Qinzhou's landscape was beautiful and its people were outstanding. He invited the empress dowager to inspect the situation, and Han Zhao helped him.

古文：同光二年十月，蜀主率众数万，由剑阁将出兴、凤，以游秦州；至兴州，遇魏王继岌军至，狼狈而旋。
现代文：同光二年十月，蜀主带着数万人，从剑阁准备经过兴州、凤州，再到秦州。到兴州时，遇上魏王李继岌的军队攻来，狼狈而回。
English: In October of the same year, the Lord of Shu took tens of thousands of people from Jiange to prepare to pass through Xingzhou, Fengzhou, and then to Qinzhou. When he arrived in Xingzhou, he was attacked by the army of Wei King Li Jixia and returned in disarray.

古文：承休遽闻东师入讨，大恐，计无从出，问于重霸。
现代文：王承休猛然听说后唐军队入川征讨，大为惊恐，想不出主意，向安重霸询问。
English: Wang Chengyu suddenly heard that the post-Tang army entered the river to conquer, was greatly alarmed, could not think of an idea, and asked An Chongba.

古文：对曰； 开府何患？
现代文：回答说 ：您有什么担心的？
English: He replied: What are you worried about?

古文：蜀中精兵，不下十万，咫尺之险，安有不济，纵东军尽如狼虎，岂能入剑门！
现代文：蜀地有不下十万的精兵，地势险要，哪有不取胜的？纵然东方军队都如狼虎般勇猛，怎么能进入剑门？
English: There are no less than one hundred thousand elite soldiers in Shu, the terrain is precarious, what is there not to win? Even if the Eastern armies are as brave as wolves and tigers, how can they enter the Sword Gate?

古文：然国家有患，开府特受主知，不得失于奔赴，此州制置事定，无虞得失，重霸愿从开府赴阙。 
现代文：然而国家有难，您受主上特别的知遇之恩，不应该不去救援，这里安置已定，不用操心，我愿随您去朝廷。 
English: However, the country is in trouble, and you, with the Lord's special grace, should not fail to come to the rescue. Your placement here has been decided. Don't worry, I am willing to follow you to the imperial court.

古文：承休素信以为忠赤。
现代文：王承休一直信任他的忠诚。
English: Wang Chengxu has always trusted his loyalty.

古文：重霸出秦州金帛以赂群羌，买由州山路归蜀。
现代文：安重霸拿出秦州的金帛来贿赂各路羌人，从文州的山路回蜀地。
English: An Chongba took out the gold ingots from Qinzhou to bribe people from all walks of life to return to Shu from the mountains of Wenzhou.

古文：承休拥龙武军及招置仅万人从行，令重霸权握部署，州人祖送，秦州军亦列部队。
现代文：王承休带龙武军及招置近一万人出发，命令安重霸掌管部署，当地百姓送行，秦州军队也排列成行。
English: Wang Chengyu led the Longwu Army and invited nearly 10,000 people to set off, ordered An Chongba to take charge of the deployment, the local people saw them off, and the Qinzhou army also lined up.

古文：承休登乘，重霸马前辞曰： 国家费尽事力，收获陇西，若从开府南行，陇州即时疏失，请开府自行，重霸且为国守籓。 
现代文：王承休登上车子，安重霸却在马前告辞说 ：国家费尽力气才收复陇西，如随从您回南边，陇州立即会出漏子，还是请您自己去，我且为国家守护疆土。 
English: Wang Chengxiu boarded the car, but An Chongba made a farewell in front of the horse, saying: The country made every effort to recover Shaanxi, if you follow you back to the south, Zhangzhou will immediately leak, or please go by yourself, and I will guard the territory for the country.

古文：承休既去，重霸在秦州，闻明宗起河北，即时遣使以秦、成等州来降。
现代文：王承休走了后，安重霸在秦州，听说明宗从河北发兵，立即派使者献上秦、成等州投降。
English: After Wang Chengxu left, An Chongba was in Qinzhou. He heard that the emperor had sent troops from Hebei and immediately sent an envoy to offer the surrender of Qin and Chengdu.

古文：天成初，用为阆州团练使。未几，召还为左卫大将军。常以奸佞揣人主意，明宗尤爱之。
现代文：天成初年，任阆州团练使，没多久，召回任左卫大将军，常常以奸佞揣测皇帝心意，明宗特别喜爱他。
English: In the first year of Tiancheng, he was appointed as the training envoy of the Bozhou Regiment, and shortly after, he recalled the General Ren Zuowei. He often speculated on the emperor's intentions with the help of spies, and Mingzong was particularly fond of him.

古文：长兴末，明宗谓侍臣曰： 安重霸朕之故人，以秦州归国，其功不细，酬以团练防御，恐非怀来之道。 
现代文：长兴末年，明宗对侍臣说： 安重霸是我的故人，献秦州归回国家，功劳不小，授任团练防御做报酬，恐怕不合招抚怀柔之道。 
English: At the end of Changxing, Mingzong said to his vassal: An Chongba is my deceased, he dedicated Qinzhou to return to the country, his merit is not small, and he was awarded a group defense training as a reward. I am afraid that it is not the way to woo Huairou.

古文：范延光曰： 将校内有自河东、河北从陛下龙飞故人，尚有未及团防者，今若遽授重霸方镇，恐为人窃议。 
现代文：范延光说 ：将校中有从河东、河北追随陛下的龙飞故人，有的还没当到团防一级官，现在如突然授给安重霸一处方镇，恐怕被人暗地议论。 
English: Fan Yanguang said: Among the officers, there are the deceased Longfei who followed His Majesty from Hedong and Hebei, and some have not yet become the first-level regimental defense officer. Now, if Anzhuoba is suddenly awarded a prescription town, I am afraid that people will secretly discuss it.

古文：明宗不悦。
现代文：明宗不高兴。
English: Myochon is not happy.

古文：未几，竟以同州节钺授之。
现代文：没多久，还是授给同州节钺。
English: It didn't take long before it was awarded the same state festival gong.

古文：清泰初，移授西京留守、京兆尹。
现代文：清泰初年，调任西京留守、京兆尹。
English: In the first year of the Qing Dynasty, he was transferred to stay in West Beijing and became Jing Zhaoyun.

古文：先是，秦、雍之间，令长设酒食，私丐于部民者，俗谓之 捣蒜 。
现代文：早先，秦雍二州之间，令长摆设酒食，私下向部民收买人心的，俗称 捣蒜 。
English: Earlier, between the two states of Qin and Yong, the commander-in-chief would set out food and wine and privately bribe his subordinates, commonly known as "pounding garlic."

古文：及重霸之镇长安，亦为之，故秦人目重霸为 捣蒜老 。
现代文：安重霸镇守长安时，也这样做，所以秦人把他看作 捣蒜佬 。
English: When An Chongba was the town guard of Chang'an, he did the same, so the Qin people regarded him as a troublemaker.

古文：其年冬，改云州节度。居无何，以病求代，时家寄上党，及归而卒。
现代文：这年冬天，改任云州节度使，没多久，因病请示别人代理，这时家庭寄居在上党，安重霸回到家中便死去。
English: In the winter of that year, he was transferred to the post of Yunnan Provincial Party Secretary, and not long after, due to illness, he asked someone else to act as his deputy. At that time, the family was living in Shangdang, and An Rongba died when he returned home.

古文：重霸善悦人，好赂遗，时人目之为俊。
现代文：安重霸善于取悦他人，喜欢送礼贿赂，当时人把他看作出众的人。
English: An Chongba was good at pleasing others and liked to give gifts and bribes. At that time, people regarded him as a popular person.

