古文：为文论事，当反复致志。救首救尾，则事词章著，览者可以立决。
现代文：写文章论述事情，应当反反复复突出中心思想，使首足连一，这样，就会演得事理明显，词气充沛，看的人马上就可以形成决发性的念见。
English: When writing an article to discuss a matter, the central idea should be highlighted repeatedly, so that it is consistent. In this way, the play will be obvious and the words will be full of vigor, and the viewer can immediately form a decisive idea.

古文：陈汤斩郅支而功未录，刘向上疏论之，首言： 周方叔、吉甫诛猃狁。 
现代文：陈汤斩杀匈奴的邱支骨邹单于，可是功劳未被朝廷记录，刘向上奏论述此事，开头说： 周代方叔、尹言甫诛灭猃狁，功成名就。 
English: Chen Tang's killing of the Xiongnu was carried out by Qiu Shih alone, but the merit was not recorded by the imperial court. Liu Xiangsuo discussed the matter, beginning with: Uncle Zhou and Yin Yan Fuxi exterminated the Xiongnu, and the achievement was famous.

古文：次言： 齐桓公有灭项之罪，君子以功覆过。
现代文：其次说： 齐桓公有伐灭项国之罪，可是有道德的人根据他具有尊周的大功，也就一再遮掩他的过错。
English: Secondly, he said: Qi Kuan Gong was guilty of destroying Xiangguo, but a moral person would repeatedly cover up his wrongdoing based on his respect for Zhou's great achievements.

古文：李广利靡亿万之费，捐五万之师，仅获宛王之首，孝武不录其过，封为列侯。 
现代文：李广利耗费了亿万的费用，损失了五万军队，只获得了大宛国王的脑袋，孝武皇帝却不考校他的罪过，封他为列侯。 
English: Li Guangli spent hundreds of millions in expenses, lost fifty thousand troops, and only gained the head of King Dawuan. However, Emperor Xiaowu did not examine his sins and made him a vassal.

古文：末言： 常惠随欲击之乌孙，郑吉迎自来之日逐，皆裂土受爵。 
现代文：末了说： 常惠是随着愿意打仗的乌孙兵进击匈奴，郑吉也只是迎来了自愿归附的匈奴的日逐王，然而都被认为有功，封茅袭土，授于爵位，常惠为长岁侯，郑吉为安远侯。 
English: At the end, he said: Chang Hui marched into the Huns with the Ussun soldiers who were willing to fight, and Zheng Ji only ushered in the day of the Hun's abdication, which was voluntarily annexed. However, both were considered to be meritorious, and were given titles of nobility, Chang Hui for longevity, and Zheng Ji for safety.

古文：然后极言： 今康居国强于大宛，郅支之号，重于宛王，杀使者罪甚于留马，而不烦汉士，不费斗粮，比于贰师，功德百之。 
现代文：然后极力进言： 现在康居国比大宛强大，郅支的名号，也比大宛国王的重要，郅支诛杀汉朝使臣的罪过也超过大宛的保留良马汗血马不来进贡，无论从哪方面说前者都是强敌。
English: Then he tried his best to make a speech: Now Kangju is more powerful than Dayuan, the name of Dayuan is also more important than the king of Dayuan, and Dayuan's crime of killing Han Dynasty's envoys is also greater than Dayuan's crime of withholding tribute. No matter from what aspect, the former is a strong enemy.

古文：又曰： 言威武勤劳则大于方叔、吉甫，列功覆过则优于齐桓、贰师，近事之功则高于安远、长罗，而大功未著，小恶数布，臣窃痛之！ 
现代文：可是陈汤不用汉军一兵一卒，没有耗费升斗之粮，立此大功，要是和贰师将军李广利相比，功劳则为其百倍。 又说： 陈汤这功，要论威武勤劳，则比方叔、尹吉甫的大；要说陈述大功不计小过，则要比齐桓公、贰师将军的贡献大；要谈时间远近，同是近日立功，其功也要高于安远侯和长罗侯，可是，这么大的功，竟未见记录，然而小的过错，却屡次传播，我内心里实在为他感到痛惜。 
English: However, Chen Tang did not need a single soldier of the Han army, did not spend the grain of a shoudou, and made such a great achievement, if it is compared with the general Li Guangli, the merits are a hundred times. He also said: Chen Tang's achievement, in terms of mighty and diligent, is greater than that of Uncle Fang and Yin Jifu; to say that the great achievement is not too small, it is greater than the contribution of Qi Huan Gong and the general Qi Shishi; to talk about time, it is the same as the recent achievements, and its achievements are also higher than that of Anyuan Hou and Changluo Hou, but such a great

古文：于是天子乃下诏议封。
现代文：于是天子才下令要群臣议论该如何封赏。
English: As a result, the emperor ordered his ministers to discuss how to bestow the award.

古文：盖其一疏抑扬援证，明白如此，故以丞相匡衡、中书石显，出力沮害，竟不能夺。
现代文：因为他的一封奏章，或抑或扬，多方取证，写得这样的明明白白，所以任凭宰相匡衡、中书令石显之流下力气阻止，终究没能破坏成功。
English: Because one of his musical compositions, or rather, Yang, multi-party evidence, written so clearly and clearly, so let the Prime Minister Kuangheng, Zhongshuling Shi Xian's efforts to stop, after all, failed to destroy the success.

古文：不然，衡、显之议，岂区区一故九卿所能亢哉？
现代文：不是这然的话，匡街、石显的议论，哪里是小小的一个至多做过九卿之一的刘向所能对抗的呢？
English: If this is not the case, where is the small Liu Xiang, who has at most been one of the nine lords, to counter the arguments of Kuang Jie and Shi Xian?

