古文：郦食其，陈留高阳人也。
现代文：郦食其，陈留县高阳人。
English: Gaoyang people in Chenliu County eat it.

古文：好读书，家贫落魄，无衣食业。
现代文：喜好读书，但家境贫寒，没有谋得衣食的职业。
English: He likes to study, but his family is poor and he has no job to earn food and clothing.

古文：为里监门，然吏县中贤豪不敢役，皆谓之狂生。
现代文：给村里当看门人，然而官吏及县中有权势的人都不敢役使他，都认为他是狂放的年轻人。
English: He is the gatekeeper of the village, but the officials and the powerful people in the county do not dare to serve him. They all think that he is a wild young man.

古文：及陈胜、项梁等起，诸将徇地过高阳者数十人，食其闻其将皆握龊好荷礼自用，不能听大度之言，食其乃自匿。
现代文：到陈胜、项梁等起义时，各个将军攻占下许多地区，他们中有数十人经过高阳县，郦食其听说这些将军都是气量狭小，拘泥琐细礼节，自以为是，而不能听取好的建议，郦食其便躲藏起来。
English: By the time of Chen Sheng, Xiang Liang and other uprisings, various generals had conquered many regions. Dozens of them passed through Gaoyang County. Hearing that these generals were narrow-minded, stick to trivial etiquette, self-righteous, and unable to listen to good advice, they hid.

古文：后闻沛公略地陈留郊，沛公麾下骑士适食其里中子，沛公时时问邑中贤豪。
现代文：后来听说沛公率军到了陈留郊区，沛公的部下有一位骑兵恰巧是郦食其的同乡，沛公经常向他询问邑中是否有贤者和豪杰。
English: Later, I heard that Pei Gong led his army to the outskirts of Chenliu. One of Pei Gong's subordinates was a cavalryman who happened to be a fellow villager. Pei Gong often asked him if there were any sages and heroes in the town.

古文：骑士归，食其见，谓曰： 吾闻沛公嫚易人，有大略，此真吾所愿从游，莫为我先。
现代文：骑士归乡时，郦食其对他说： 我听说沛公对人傲慢又看不起人，但很有远见，这真是我所愿意交往的人，先为我介绍一下。
English: When the knight returned home, the egret said to him: I have heard that Pei Gong is arrogant and despises people, but he is very far-sighted. This is really a person I would like to associate with. First, introduce him to me.

古文：若见沛公，谓曰 臣里中有郦生，年六十余，长八尺，人皆谓之狂生，自谓我非狂。  
现代文：如果看见沛公，对他说 我的家乡有一位姓郦的先生，六十多岁，身高八尺，人们皆认为他是狂妄之人，但他自己说我不是轻狂之徒。 
English: If you see Pei Gong, say to him: In my hometown, there is a gentleman surnamed Zou, who is over sixty years old and eight feet tall. People all think he is arrogant, but he himself said that I am not a frivolous person.

古文：骑士曰： 沛公不喜儒，诸客冠儒冠来者，沛公辄解其冠，溺其中。
现代文：骑兵说： 沛公不爱和读书人交往，请来的客人中若有带着儒生帽子的人，沛公就摘下他的帽子，在帽中小便。
English: The cavalryman said, "Pei Gong does not like to associate with readers. If there is a guest with a Confucian hat, Pei Gong will take off his hat and urinate in it.

古文：与人言，常大骂。未可以儒生说也。 
现代文：和人谈话时，常大骂读书人，所以不要像儒生那样说话。 
English: When talking to people, he often swears at readers, so don't talk like a Confucian.

古文：食其曰： 第言之。 
现代文：郦食其说： 只管这么说。 
English: He said, "Just say so."

古文：骑士从容言食其所戒者。
现代文：骑兵便像郦食其所告诫的那样从容地说明给沛公。
English: The cavalryman explained to Pei Gong as calmly as if he had been warned.

古文：沛公至高阳传舍，使人召食其。食其至，入谒，沛公方踞床令两女子洗，而见食其。
现代文：沛公到了高阳县的官舍，派人召郦食其来见，郦食其到了，沛公正坐在床上让两个女子为他洗脚，就这样召见郦食其。
English: When Pei Gong arrived at the official residence in Gaoyang County, he sent a messenger to summon Yan Jie to see him. When Yan Jie arrived, Pei Jie sat on the bed and asked two women to wash his feet. This is how he summoned Yan Jie.

古文：食其入，即长揖不拜，曰： 足下欲助秦攻诸侯乎？
现代文：郦食其进入室内即拱手而不行拜礼，说： 您是想帮助秦攻打诸侯吗？
English: When he entered the room, he shook hands without bowing and said, "Do you want to help Qin conquer the provinces?"

古文：欲率诸侯破秦乎？ 
现代文：还是想率领诸侯灭亡秦朝？ 
English: Or do you want to lead the lords to overthrow the Qin Dynasty?

古文：沛公骂曰： 竖儒！
现代文：沛公骂道： 你这个卑贱的儒生！
English: Pei Gong scolded: You are a Confucian!

古文：夫天下同苦秦久矣，故诸侯相率攻秦，何谓助秦？ 
现代文：天下百姓遭受秦的苦难已经很久了，所以诸侯才相继率兵攻秦，你怎么能说帮助秦呢？ 
English: The people of the world have been suffering from Qin for a long time, so it took the princes to attack Qin one after another. How can you say that you are helping Qin?

古文：食其曰： 必欲聚徒合义兵诛无道秦，不宜踞见长者。 
现代文：郦食其说： 您要招聚民众，纠合义兵，去推翻秦的暴虐统治，就不应当坐在床边召见老人。 
English: He said, "If you want to gather the people, rally the volunteers, and overthrow the tyrannical rule of Qin, you should not sit by the bedside and summon the old man.

古文：于是沛公辍洗，起衣，延食其上坐，谢之。
现代文：于是沛公停止洗脚，起身穿好衣服，请郦食其坐上座，对郦食其赔礼。
English: As a result, Pei Gong stopped washing his feet, got up and put on his clothes. He asked the eunuch to sit on the seat and bowed to the eunuch.

古文：食其因言六国从衡时，沛公喜，赐食其食，问曰： 计安出？ 
现代文：郦食其于是谈到了六国合纵连横时的情况。沛公很高兴，赐郦食其吃饭，问道： 你有什么好的计策吗？ 
English: Pei Gong then talked about the situation of the Six-Nation Alliance. Pei Gong was very happy, gave Pei Gong his dinner, and asked: Do you have any good strategies?

古文：食其曰： 足下起瓦合之卒，收散乱之兵，不满万人，欲以径人强秦，此所谓探虎口者也。
现代文：郦食其说： 您集合的未经训练之众不到一万人，要想直接攻打强大的秦国，这可以说是将手伸向老虎的口中啊！
English: You have gathered an untrained crowd of less than ten thousand people. If you want to directly attack the powerful Qin State, you can say that you are putting your hand into the tiger's mouth!

古文：夫陈留，天下之冲，四通五达之郊也，今其城中又多积粟，臣知其令，今请使，令下足下。
现代文：陈留县位于天下的要冲，四通八达，现在城里又囤积了许多粮食。我一向与陈留的县令友好，现在请您任命我为使者去命令他投降。
English: Chenliu County is located at the crossroads of the world, and now there is a lot of grain stockpiled in the city. I have always been friendly with Chenliu's county magistrate, now please appoint me as an envoy to order him to surrender.

古文：即不听，足下举兵攻之，臣为内应。 
现代文：如果他不听从，您就派兵攻打他，我来作内应。 
English: If he doesn't listen, you can send troops to attack the city again, and I can act as a mediator within the city.

古文：于是遣食其往，沛公引兵随之，遂下陈留。
现代文：于是派郦食其前往陈留县，沛公率兵跟随他而来，最后攻下了陈留。
English: So he sent his eunuch to Chenliu County, and Pei Gong led his soldiers to follow him, and finally captured Chenliu.

古文：号食其为广野君。
现代文：沛公封郦食其为广野君。
English: It is Hirono-kun who is eaten by Pei Gongfeng.

古文：食其言弟商，使将数千人从沛公西南略地。
现代文：郦食其推荐其弟郦商，让他率领数千人跟随沛公向西南夺取土地。
English: He recommended his younger brother, a merchant, and asked him to lead thousands of people to follow Pei Gong to the southwest to seize land.

古文：食其常为说客，驰使诸侯。
现代文：郦食其经常作说客，在诸侯之间奔走游说。
English: He often worked as a lobbyist, running around lobbying among the lords.

古文：汉三年秋，项羽击汉，拔荥阳，汉兵遁保巩。
现代文：汉三年秋天，项羽进攻汉军，夺取荣阳，汉军退保巩县。
English: In the autumn of the third year of the Han Dynasty, Xiang Yu attacked the Han army, captured Rongyang, and the Han army withdrew to Baogong County.

古文：楚人闻韩信破赵，彭越数反梁地，则分兵救之。
现代文：楚军听说韩信已攻下趟国，彭越又多次在梁一带扰乱，就分兵解救。
English: When the Chu army heard that Han Xin had conquered Wanzhou and that Peng Yue had repeatedly disturbed Liang's area, they split up to rescue him.

古文：韩信方东击齐，汉王数困荥阳、成皋，计欲捐成皋以东，屯巩、雒以距楚。
现代文：韩信刚东击齐国，汉王多次被围困在荣阳和成皋，计划放弃成皋县以束的地区，驻守巩县、洛阳以对抗楚军。
English: Han Xin Gang attacked Qi Province from the east. Han Wang was besieged many times in Rongyang and Chenghuang. He planned to abandon the area of Isshu in Chenghuang County and garrison Gongxian and Luoyang to fight against the Chu army.

古文：食其因曰： 臣闻之，知天之天者，王事可成；不知天之天者，王事不可成。
现代文：郦食其于是说： 我听说知道天之所以为天的人就可成就帝王之业；不知道天之所以为天的人就不能成功。
English: He then said, "I have heard that those who know why heaven is heaven can achieve the emperor's career; those who do not know why heaven is heaven cannot succeed.

古文：王者以民为天，而民以食为天。
现代文：称王的人以百姓为天，而百姓以粮食为天。
English: Those who praise the king make the people their god, but the people make the grain their god.

古文：夫敖仓，天下转输久矣，臣闻其下乃有臧粟甚多。
现代文：敖仓作为天下运输枢纽已经很久了，我听说敖仓贮藏有很多粮食。
English: Kamakura has been the world's transportation hub for a long time. I heard that Kamakura stores a lot of grain.

古文：楚人拔荥阳，不坚守敖仓，乃引而东，令適卒分守成皋，此乃天所以资汉。
现代文：楚军夺下荣阳，而不坚守敖仓，却带兵向东进军，留下受到处罚的士兵分别驻守成皋，这正是上天来帮助汉王。
English: The Chu army conquered Rongyang, but did not hold fast to Huancheng, but marched eastward with soldiers, leaving the punished soldiers stationed separately in Huancheng. This is exactly the heaven to help the Han king.

古文：方今楚易取而汉后却，自夺便，臣窃以为过矣。
现代文：如今楚军容易被攻取而漠军反要退却，这是自己放弃了有利的时机，我自认为太过分了。
English: Nowadays, the Chu army is easily captured, while the Mongol army wants to retreat. This is giving up a favorable opportunity, which I think is too much.

古文：且两雄不俱立，楚、汉久相持不决，百姓骚动，海内摇荡，农夫释耒，红女下机，天下之心未有所定也。
现代文：况且两雄不并立，楚、汉长久相战不休，百姓生活不得安宁，国内动荡，农夫不能种田，妇女不能纺织，天下的人心不安定。
English: Moreover, the two strongmen do not stand side by side, Chu and Han have been fighting each other for a long time, the people's life cannot be peaceful, the country is in turmoil, farmers cannot farm, women cannot weave, and the world's people are unstable.

古文：愿足下急复进兵，收取荥阳，据敖庚之粟，塞成皋之险，杜太行之道，距飞狐之口，守白马之津，以示诸侯形制之势，则天下知所归矣。
现代文：希望汉王能够尽快再次进军，夺取荣阳，占据敖仓的粮食，堵住成皋之险，封锁太行之道，占据飞狐的险关，坚守白马的渡，向诸侯显示漠已控制了有利形势，天下的人就知道应归顺谁了。
English: It is hoped that the Han king can march again as soon as possible, seize Rongyang, occupy the grain of Kamakura, block the danger of Chenghuang, block the way of Taihang, occupy the dangerous pass of the flying fox, adhere to the white horse's crossing, show the princes that the desert has controlled the favorable situation, and the people of the world will know who to obey.

古文：方今燕、赵已定，唯齐未下。
现代文：如今燕国、赵国已经平定，衹有齐国还没攻下。
English: Today, Yan and Zhao have been pacified, but Qi has yet to be conquered.

古文：今田广据千里之齐，田间将二十万之众军于历城，诸田宗强，负海岱，阻河济，南近楚，齐人多变诈，足下虽遣数十万师，未可以岁月破也。
现代文：现在田广占据着幅员千里的齐国，田间统率着二十万军队，在历城驻军，田氏势力强大，背靠大海和泰山，阻拦着黄河、济水的通道，向南靠近楚国，齐国兵将多计谋，将军即使派数十万大军，恐怕一年半载也攻不下。
English: At present, Tian Guang occupies the thousand-mile-wide Qi Province. Tian Tongtang leads two hundred thousand troops and has troops stationed in Licheng. The Tian clan is powerful, backed by the sea and Mount Tai, blocking the passage of the Yellow River and Jishui, and approaching the south of Chu Province. The soldiers of Qi will make more plans. Even if the general sends hundreds of thousands of troops, I am afraid that he will not be able to capture it for a year and a half.

古文：臣请得奉明诏说齐王使为汉而称东藩。 
现代文：我请求能得到韶书去劝说齐王，使他做漠的束邻。 汉王说：好! 
English: I asked for an imperial edict to persuade King Qi to make him a close neighbor in the desert. King Han said, "Good!

古文：上曰： 善。 乃从其画，复守敖仓，而使食其说齐王，曰： 王知天下之所归乎？ 
现代文：汉王听从了郦食其的策划，又驻守敖仓，并派郦食其劝说齐王，说： 大王知道天下的归属吗？ 
English: The king of Han listened to the plan of the eunuch, and stationed himself at Kamakura, and sent the eunuch to persuade the king of Qi, saying: Does the great king know the ownership of the world?

古文：曰： 不知也。 
现代文：齐王说： 不知道。 
English: Qi Wang said: I don't know.

古文：曰： 知天下之所归，则齐国可得而有也；若不知天下之所归，即齐国未可保也。 
现代文：郦食其说： 如果大王知道天下的归属，那么齐国可保；如果大王不知道天下的归属，齐国就难以保全。 
English: He said, "If the great king knows where everything belongs, then Qi can be protected. If the great king does not know where everything belongs, then it is difficult to protect Qi."

古文：齐王曰： 天下何归？ 
现代文：齐王说： 天下应该归谁？ 
English: King Qi said: Who should the world belong to?

古文：食其曰： 天下归汉。 
现代文：郦食其说： 天下归汉王 。
English: He said, "All power belongs to the king of Han."

古文：齐王曰： 先生何以言之？ 
现代文：齐王说： 先生凭什么这样说呢？ 
English: King Qi said, "How can you say such a thing?

古文：曰： 汉王与项王戮力西面击秦，约先入咸阳者王之，项王背约不与，而王之汉中。
现代文：郦食其说： 汉王与项羽奋力向西攻打秦军，约好先攻入咸阳为关中王。项羽违背盟约，在汉中称王。
English: He said: The Han king and Xiang Yu fought hard to attack the Qin army in the west, and agreed to attack Xianyang first as the king of Guanzhong. Xiang Yu violated the treaty and became king in Han.

古文：项王迁杀义帝，汉王起蜀汉之兵击三秦，出关而责义帝之负处，收天下之兵，立诸侯之后。
现代文：项王迁杀义帝，汉王便派蜀汉的军队平定三秦，出关征战，指责项羽杀害义帝的错误之处，收集天下军兵，立诸侯的后代。
English: Xiang Wang moved and killed Yidi, the Han King then sent the Shu and Han armies to pacify the Three Qin Dynasties, went out to fight, accused Xiang Yu of killing Yidi in the wrong place, collected the world's soldiers, and established the descendants of the princes.

古文：降城即以侯其将，得赂则以分其士，与天下同其利，豪英贤材皆乐为之用。
现代文：每攻占一座城都给降将封侯，汉王得到财物都分给士卒共享，和天下百姓共享好处，英豪贤士都愿听从他的使用。
English: Every time a city was conquered and occupied, it would be given to the vassal and the vassal would be put under house arrest. The wealth that the Han king obtained would be shared among the officials, and the benefits would be shared with the people of the world. The heroes and sages were all willing to obey his use.

古文：诸侯之兵四面而至，蜀汉之粟方船而下。
现代文：诸侯的军队从四面八方赶到，蜀汉的粮食用船运来。
English: The armies of the lords came from all directions to attach themselves, and the grain ships of Shuhan were sent along the river in a steady stream.

古文：项王有背约之名，杀义帝之负；于人之功无所记，于人之罪无所忘；战胜而不得其赏，拔城而不得其封；非项氏莫得用事；为人刻印，玩而不能授；攻城得赂，积财而不能赏。
现代文：项王有违背盟约之名、杀死义帝之错；别人的功绩从不记得，别人的错误却从不忘却；征战取胜了没有奖赏，攻占了城池也不给封爵；不是项氏家族的人不委以重任；为人刻印，把玩而不肯赐人；攻城所获的战利品，积压很多都不肯赏赐给兵将。
English: King Xiang is guilty of violating the name of the covenant and killing Emperor Righteousness; he never remembers the merits of others, but never forgets the mistakes of others; there is no reward for winning the war, and there is no knighthood for capturing the city; people who are not members of the Xiang family are not entrusted with important tasks; they engrave people and play with them, but refuse to give them to others; they do not want to reward the soldiers with many of the loot gained from attacking the city.

古文：天下畔之，贤材怨之，而莫为之用。
现代文：天下人叛离他，有才能的人埋怨他，没有人被他使用。
English: The world has turned against him, the talented have complained about him, and no one has been used by him.

古文：故天下之士归于汉王，可坐而策也。
现代文：所以天下的人才都投奔汉王，汉王坐着就可以指挥他们。
English: That's why the world's talented people have flocked to Han Wang. Han Wang can command them just by sitting down.

古文：夫汉王发蜀汉，定三秦；涉西河之外，授上党之兵；下井陉，诛成安君；破北魏，举三十二城：此黄帝之兵，非人之力，天之福今。
现代文：汉王从蜀汉发兵，平定三秦；涉西河之外；援上党之兵；攻下井陉，杀成安君；打败北魏，夺取三十二座城：这是黄帝的军队，不是人力，是天所保佑。
English: The Han Emperor sent troops from Shuhan to pacify the Three Qin Provinces; waded beyond the West River; aided the soldiers of the Party; captured Jingyi and killed Anjun; defeated the Northern Wei Dynasty and captured thirty-two cities: This is the army of the Yellow Emperor, not manpower, but blessed by heaven.

古文：今已据敖仓之粟，塞成皋之险，守白马之津，杜太行之厄，距飞狐之口，天下后服者先亡矣。
现代文：如今已占有敖仓的粮食，堵住成皋之险，驻守白马的渡口，封锁太行之要道，占据飞狐的关口，天下后服的人衹有先被消灭了。
English: Today, it has occupied the grain of Kamakura, blocked the danger of becoming a dragonfly, stationed the ferry of the white horse, blocked the important road of Taihang, occupied the pass of the flying fox, and the people who served the world have been eliminated first.

古文：王疾下汉王，齐国社稷可得而保也；不下汉王，危亡可立而待也。 
现代文：大王如赶快投降汉王，齐国的社稷就可以保全，不投降汉王，危险灭亡指曰可待呀。 
English: If the great king quickly surrenders to the Han king, the social stability of Qi can be preserved. If he does not surrender to the Han king, the danger of extinction can be expected.

古文：田广以为然，乃听食其，罢历下兵守战备，与食其日纵酒。
现代文：田广认为是对的，就听从郦食其的话，撤走历下的守兵及装备，与郦食其天天纵情而饮。
English: Tian Guang thought it was right, so he listened to Xing Xing's words, removed the guards and equipment, and indulged in drinking with Xing Xing every day.

古文：韩信闻食其冯轼下齐七十余城，乃夜度兵平原袭齐。
现代文：韩信听说郦食其乘车游说而取得齐国的七十多座城，于是连夜派兵穿过平原袭击齐国。
English: When Han Xin heard that more than 70 cities in Qi Province had been won through his car lobbying, he sent troops across the plains to attack Qi Province overnight.

古文：齐王田广闻汉兵至，以为食其卖己，乃亨食其，引兵走。
现代文：齐王田广听说汉军来到，认为郦食其欺骗了自己，就烹杀了他，带兵逃走。
English: When Qi Wang Tianguang heard that the Chinese army had arrived, he thought that he had deceived himself, so he killed him and fled with his soldiers.

古文：汉十二年，曲周侯郦商以丞相将兵击黥布，有功。
现代文：汉十二年，曲周侯郦商以丞相身份率兵攻打黥布，有战功。
English: In the 12th year of the Han Dynasty, Qu Zhou, the warlord and merchant, led an army to attack Zibo with the status of the prime minister.

古文：高祖举功臣，思食其。
现代文：高祖列举功臣，想到了郦食其。
English: Gaozu enumerated his heroes and thought of how to exploit them.

古文：食其子疥数将兵，上以其父故，封疥为高梁侯。
现代文：郦食其的儿子郦疥多次带兵出战，战功不大，没被封侯，皇帝因为他父亲的缘故，封郦疥为高梁侯。
English: Emperor Gaozong's son Gao took soldiers to war many times, but his war exploits were not great, and he was not given the title of marquis. However, because of his father, the emperor gave him the title of Gao Liang marquis.

古文：后更食武阳，卒，子遂嗣。
现代文：后改封武阳作食邑。他死后，儿子郦遂继承。
English: Later, he was given the fief of Wuyang as a food-producing county. After his death, his son Zeng Rong succeeded him.

古文：三世，侯平有罪，国除。
现代文：三代以后，郦平犯罪，封国被废除。
English: Three generations later, the crime was completely eliminated, and the feudal state was abolished.

古文：陆贾，楚人也。
现代文：陆贾，楚国人。
English: Lu Jia, a native of Chu.

古文：以客从高祖定天下，名有口辩，居左右，常使诸侯。
现代文：作为宾客跟从高祖平定天下，以有口才善辩而闻名，在高祖左右，常出使诸侯。
English: As a guest, he followed Gao Zu to pacify the world. He was famous for his eloquence and eloquence. Around Gao Zu, he often dispatched princes.

古文：时中国初定，尉佗平南越，因王之。
现代文：当时，国家刚刚稳定，尉佗平定了南越，因而在那裹称王。
English: At that time, the country had just stabilized, and Fong Quan had pacified South Vietnam, so he became a king there.

古文：高祖使贾赐佗印为南越王。
现代文：高祖派陆贾赐尉佗印，让他为南越王。
English: Gao Zu sent Lu Jia to give him the imperial seal and make him the king of South Vietnam.

古文：贾至，尉佗魋结箕踞见贾。
现代文：陆贾到，尉佗结发似椎形，伸开两腿而坐接见他。
English: When Lu Jia arrived, his hair was like a vertebra, and he stretched out his legs and sat down to meet him.

古文：贾因说佗曰： 足下中国人，亲戚昆弟坟墓在真定。
现代文：陆贾便对尉佗说： 足下是中原人，亲戚弟兄的坟墓都在真定县。
English: Lu Jia then said to Ip Man: The Central Plains people are at our feet. The graves of our relatives and brothers are all in Zhending County.

古文：今足下反天性，弃冠带，欲以区区之越与天子抗衡为敌国，祸且及身矣。
现代文：如今足下违反习惯，不穿中原服装，想在小小的越地称王，和朝廷抗衡而成为敌国，灾祸就将来临了。
English: Now, however, you have turned your back on the customs of the Central Plains people, thrown away your clothes, crowns, and scarves, and want to use tiny South Vietnam, which is just a land of marbles, to compete with the Son of Heaven and become an enemy country. Then your great calamity will be at hand.

古文：夫秦失其正，诸侯豪桀并起，唯汉王先入关，据咸阳。
现代文：秦丧失他的政权，诸侯豪杰纷纷起兵时，汉王最先进入关中，占据咸阳。
English: When the Qin Dynasty lost its political power and the powerful lords raised an army one after another, the Han King was the first to enter Guanzhong and occupy Xianyang.

古文：项籍背约，自立为西楚霸王，诸侯皆属，可谓至强矣。
现代文：项籍违背盟约，自立为西楚霸王，诸侯都归属他，可以说势力很强了。
English: Xuan Zeki violated the covenant and established himself as the king of Western Chu, and all the lords belonged to him. It can be said that his power was very strong.

古文：然汉王起巴、蜀，鞭笞天下，劫诸侯，遂诛项羽。
现代文：然而汉王从巴蜀发兵，争夺天下，制服诸侯，于是杀死了项籍。
English: However, the Han king sent soldiers from Bashu to fight for the world and subdue the princes, so he killed Xiangqi.

古文：五年之间，海内平定，此非人力，天之所建也。
现代文：五年之间，国内平定，这不是人的力量，是上天的功劳。
English: Within five years, the world was pacified. This is not something that man can do, but it is the result of God's assistance.

古文：天也闻君王王南越，而不助天下诛暴逆，将相欲移兵而诛王，天子怜百姓新劳苦，且休之，遣臣授君王印，剖符通使。
现代文：皇上听说君王在南越称王，而不帮助天下的人诛除暴虐势力，将相本来想要出兵来杀君王，可是皇上怜悯百姓刚刚劳苦完了，需要休养生息，派我授给君王大印，剖分符信，互通使节。
English: When the emperor heard that the king had proclaimed himself king in South Vietnam, instead of helping the people of the world to get rid of the tyrannical forces, he wanted to send troops to kill the king, but the emperor took pity on the people who had just finished their hard work and needed to rest and recuperate. He sent me to award the king the Great Seal, divide the letters, and exchange envoys.

古文：君王宜郊迎，北面称臣，乃欲以新造未集之越屈强于此。
现代文：君王应到郊外远迎，北面称臣，而你竟想以新建的、人心未集、政权未固的国家在此称强。
English: The king should be welcomed far away in the suburbs, the north should be praised, and yet you want to be strong here with a newly built country, where people are not concentrated and power is not consolidated.

古文：汉诚闻之，掘烧君王先人冢墓，夷种宗族，使一偏将将十万众临越，即越杀王降汉，如反覆手耳。 
现代文：汉王果真听说了，会掘开烧掉你祖先的坟墓，诛灭你的宗族，让一个副将率十万人攻越，越人就会杀君王而投降汉，造简直易如反掌。 
English: If the Han king really heard about it, he would dig up and burn the graves of your ancestors, annihilate your clan, and let a vice admiral lead a hundred thousand people to invade. The Viet people would kill the king and surrender to Han. It was as easy as pie.

古文：于是佗乃蹶然起坐，谢贾曰： 居蛮夷中久，殊失礼义。 
现代文：于是尉佗大惊而起，向陆贾谢罪道： 我在野蛮人中生活久了，真是太失礼了。 
English: So Ip Man was taken aback and said to Lu Jia Xie, "I've lived among savages for a long time, it's really very rude."

古文：因问贾曰： 我孰与萧何、曹参、韩信贤？ 
现代文：于是问陆贾： 我舆萧何、曹参、韩信相比谁贤呢？ 
English: So he asked Lu Jia: What do I think, compared to Cao San and Han Xin, who is better?

古文：贾曰： 王似贤也。 
现代文：陆买说： 君王比他们还要贤。 
English: Lu Mai said: The king is more virtuous than them.

古文：复问曰： 我孰与皇帝贤？ 
现代文：又问说： 我与皇帝相比谁贤呢？ 
English: And he said, Who am I, that I should be equal unto the emperor?

古文：贾曰 皇帝起丰沛，讨暴秦，诛强楚，为天下兴利除害，继五帝三王之业，统天下，理中国。
现代文：陆贾说： 皇帝在丰沛起兵讨伐暴秦，消灭了强大的楚军，为天下百姓兴利除害，继承了五帝、三王的大业，统一天下，治理国家。
English: Lu Jia said: The emperor in abundance raised an army to fight against the tyrannical Qin, eliminated the powerful Chu army, eliminated harm for the people of the world, inherited the great cause of the five emperors and three kings, unified the country, and governed the country.

古文：中国之人以亿计，地方万里，居天下之膏腴，人众车舆，万物殷富，政由一家，自天地剖判未始有也。
现代文：中原人数以亿计，地方万里，处在天下最富饶之地，人民众多，车马繁盛，万物富庶，政权统一，自开天辟地以来未曾有过。
English: The Central Plains has hundreds of millions of people, thousands of places, is in the richest place in the world, has a large number of people, cars and horses are prosperous, all things are abundant, and the regime is unified, which has not happened since the beginning of the world.

古文：今王众不过数万，皆蛮夷，崎岖山海间，譬如汉一郡，王何乃比于汉！ 
现代文：如今君王的人口不过数万，都是蛮夷人，处在崎岖山海之间，就像汉的一郡，君王怎能和汉王相比呢？ 
English: Today, the population of Wang Wang is only tens of thousands, all barbarians, located between the rugged mountains and the sea, just like a county of Han, how can Wang Wang be compared to the King of Han?

古文：佗大笑曰： 吾不起中国，故王此。
现代文：尉佗大笑着说： 我不在中原起兵，所以在此称王。
English: "I'm not raising an army in the Central Plains, so I'm calling myself king here," he said with a big smile.

古文：使我居中国，何遽不若汉？ 
现代文：假使让我在中原，哪能不如汉呢？ 
English: If I were in the Central Plains, where would I be better off than in Han?

古文：乃大说贾，留与饮数月。
现代文：于是十分喜欢陆贾，留他宴饮数月。
English: As a result, he liked Lu Jia very much and kept him as a guest for several months.

古文：曰： 越中无足与语，至生来，令我日闻所不闻。 
现代文：说： 南越没有能谈话的人，自先生来后，让我听到了我从没听到的事情。 
English: "None of the South Vietnamese could talk to me," he said, "and it wasn't until you came here that I heard things every day that I had never heard before."

古文：赐贾橐中装直千金，它送亦千金。
现代文：赏赐陆买的珠宝价值千金，所送其他财物亦值千金。
English: The jewelry bought by Lu was worth thousands of dollars, and the other gifts were also worth thousands of dollars.

古文：贾卒拜佗为南越王，令称臣奉汉约。
现代文：陆贾最后拜尉佗为南越王，让他向汉称臣，遵奉汉朝的命令。
English: In the end, Lu Jia made Bai Rong the king of South Vietnam, making him a subject of the Han Dynasty and obeying the orders of the Han Dynasty.

古文：归报，高帝大说，拜贾为太中大夫。
现代文：陆贾回来报告，皇帝非常高兴，拜陆买为太中大夫。
English: Lu Jia came back to report that the emperor was very pleased, and Bailu bought him as a doctor.

古文：贾时时前说称《诗》、《书》。
现代文：陆贾经常在皇帝面前谈《诗经》、《尚书》。
English: Lu Jia often talked about "The Book of Songs" and "The Book of Songs" in front of the emperor.

古文：高帝骂之曰： 乃公居马上得之，安事《诗》、《书》！ 
现代文：皇帝骂他说： 你老子我是在马上得天下的，为什么要研究《诗经》、《尚书》呢？ 
English: The emperor scolded him, saying, "You old man, I was born into the world right away. Why should I study the "Book of Songs" and "Song of Songs"?

古文：贾曰： 马上得之，宁可以马上治乎？
现代文：陆买说： 在马上得天下，难道也可以在马上治天下吗？
English: Lu Mei said, "If you can immediately conquer the world, can you also immediately rule the world?"

古文：且汤、武逆取而以顺守之，文帝并用，长久之术也。
现代文：况且商汤、周武王以武力夺取天下却以仁义守住天下，文武并用才是长久的治国之术。
English: Moreover, Shang Tang and King Zhou Wu conquered the world by force, but defended it with benevolence and righteousness. The combination of literature and martial arts is a long-term strategy for governing the country.

古文：昔者吴王夫差、智伯极武而亡；秦任刑法不变，卒灭赵氏。
现代文：以前吴王夫差、智伯都因穷兵黩武而灭亡；秦国一味使用刑法不知改变，终于亡了国。
English: In the past, Wu Wangfuba and Zhibo both caused the country's demise by showing off their martial arts skills; the Qin Dynasty also used severe torture methods and did not know how to change, which eventually led to their own demise.

古文：乡使秦以并天下，行仁义，法先圣，陛下安得而有之？ 
现代文：假使秦国统一天下后能够实行仁义，效法古代圣贤，陛下哪能得天下呢？ 
English: If, after the unification of the Qin Dynasty, it is possible to practice benevolence and righteousness, and follow the example of ancient sages, how can His Majesty win the world?

古文：高帝不怿，有惭色，谓贾曰： 试为我著秦所以失天下，吾所以得之者，及古成败之国。 
现代文：高帝不悦而有惭愧的神情，于是对陆贾说： 你试着为我撰写一下秦失掉天下而我能够得到天下的原因及自古以来的成败之国的情况。 
English: Gao Di was displeased and looked ashamed, so he said to Lu Jia: "Try to write down for me the reasons why Qin lost the world and I can get the world, and the situation of the country's success and failure since ancient times.

古文：贾凡著十二篇。
现代文：陆贾共写了十二篇。
English: Lu Jia wrote a total of twelve articles.

古文：每奏一篇，高帝未尝不称善，左右呼万岁，称其书曰《新语》。
现代文：每上奏一篇，皇帝都认为写得好。左右的官吏欢呼万岁，称陆贾的书为《新语》。
English: Every time Lu Jia's book was read aloud, the emperor thought it was well written. The officials on both sides cheered and called Lu Jia's book "New Language."

古文：孝惠时，吕太后用事，欲王诸吕，畏大臣及有口者。
现代文：孝惠帝时，吕太后专权，想封几个姓吕的为王，害怕大臣谏静。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xiao Hui, Empress Dowager Lv's absolute power made her want to make several Lv's kings, and she was afraid of Minister Yao Jing.

古文：贾自度不能争之，乃病免。
现代文：陆买自知无法和吕太后争辩，于是病休回家。
English: Lu Bai knew that he could not argue with Empress Dowager Lv, so he went home on sick leave.

古文：以好畴田地善，往家焉。
现代文：因为好峙的田地好，就搬到那裹定居安家。
English: Because of the good fields, they moved there to settle down.

古文：有五男，乃出所使越橐中装，卖千金，分其子，子二百金，令为生产。
现代文：他有五个儿子，于是拿出出使南越时所得到的珠宝财产，卖了千金，分给儿子，每人二百金，让他们用作生产。
English: He has five sons, so he took out the jewelry and property he got when he was sent to South Vietnam, sold a thousand dollars, and divided it among his sons, two hundred dollars each, for them to use for production.

古文：贾常乘安车驷马，从歌鼓瑟侍者十人，宝剑直百金，谓其子曰： 与女约：过女，女给人马酒食极欲，十日而更。
现代文：陆贾常坐安车驷马，率歌舞弹琴的十个侍者，还有一把价值百金的宝剑，对他的儿子说： 我和你们讲好条件，我到谁家，你们要给我的人马好酒饭，尽量让我满意，每十天更换一家。
English: Lu Jia often rode in a horse-drawn carriage, led by ten waiters who sang, danced and played the piano, and had a sword worth a hundred gold. He said to his son: "I will negotiate with you on good terms. Whichever house I go to, you must give my people good food and wine, and try to make me satisfied, and change the family every ten days.

古文：所死家，得宝剑车骑侍从者。
现代文：我在谁家死，谁就得到这把宝剑和车马侍从。
English: If I die in someone's house, I will give the chariot and the attendants to that person.

古文：一岁中以往来过它客，率不过再过，数击鲜，毋久溷女为也。 
现代文：一年之中，我还要到其他地方去作客，你们每家不过轮流两三次，在你们家时，要给我新鲜东西吃，我不会长久打扰你们。 
English: In the course of the year, I will also visit other places. Each of your families will only take turns two or three times. When you are at home, give me something fresh to eat, and I will not disturb you for a long time.

古文：吕太后时，王诸吕，诸吕擅权，欲劫少主，危刘氏。
现代文：吕太后时，让吕氏称王，吕氏家族独揽大权，打算劫持少帝，篡夺刘氏天下。
English: During the reign of Empress Dowager Lv, Zhu Lv was crowned king. Zhu Lv wanted to seize power to kidnap the young lord and take over the Liu family.

古文：右丞相陈平患之，力不能争，恐祸及己。平常燕居深念。
现代文：右丞相陈平为此很担忧，力量不足以与吕太后相争，恐怕会祸及自己，于是衹能静居深思。
English: The Minister of the Right, Chen Ping, was very worried about this. His strength was not enough to compete with Empress Dowager Lv, and he feared that it would bring misfortune to himself, so he was able to sit quietly and meditate.

古文：贾往，不请，直入坐，陈平方念，不见贾。
现代文：陆买前去问候，他一直进入陈平房中坐下，陈平正在思虑，没有看见陆买。
English: Lu Mei went to greet him. He went all the way into Chen Ping's bungalow and sat down. Chen Ping was thinking and did not see Lu Mei.

古文：贾曰： 何念深也？ 
现代文：陆买说： 想什么问题这么沉思啊？ 
English: Lu Mai said, "What problem do you think about so thoughtfully?"

古文：平曰： 生揣我何念？ 
现代文：陈平说： 你揣度我在想什么？ 
English: Chen Ping said: Can you guess what I'm thinking?

古文：贾曰： 足下位为上相，食三万户侯，可谓极富贵无欲矣。
现代文：陆买说： 您位居上相，食邑三万户的封侯，可以说极为富贵而不需要什么了。
English: Lu Mei said, "You are in the top echelon. As a feudal lord of 30,000 households in a food town, you can be said to be extremely wealthy and not in need of anything.

古文：然有忧念，不过患诸吕、少主耳。 
现代文：然而你有忧虑，不过是担心诸吕和少帝罢了。 
English: However, if you say that you are always sad, it is nothing more than worrying about Zhu Lu and the young master.

古文：陈平曰： 然。
现代文：陈平说： 对。
English: Chen Ping said: You guessed right. What should you do?

古文：为之奈何？ 
现代文：怎么办呢？ 
English: If I let you go, I'll lose a meal.

古文：贾曰： 天下安，注意相；天下危，注意将。
现代文：陆贾说： 天下安定时，大家注意的是丞相；天下危急的时候，大家注意的是将军。
English: Lu Jia said: When the world is stable, everyone's attention is on the prime minister; when the world is in crisis, everyone's attention is on the general.

古文：将相和，则士豫附；士豫附，天下虽有变，则权不分。
现代文：如果丞相和将军联合，那么人民才会全心归附；人心归附，天下即使有变乱，权力不会分裂。
English: If the prime minister and the general are united, then the people will wholeheartedly adhere; the hearts of the people will adhere, and even if there is turmoil in the world, power will not be divided.

古文：权不分，为社稷计，在两君掌握耳。
现代文：权力不分裂，为国家打算，在两位人士的掌握中了。
English: Power, which is not divided, but intended for the state, is now in the hands of two people.

古文：臣常欲谓太尉绛侯，绛侯与我戏，易吾言。
现代文：我常想和太尉周勃谈谈，绛侯周勃总是与我开玩笑，不重视我的话。
English: I often wanted to make these words clear to Lieutenant Zhou Bo, but he always joked with me and did not pay much attention to my words.

古文：君何不交驩太尉，深相结？ 
现代文：你为什么不和太尉多交往，加深交情？ 
English: Why don't you make friends with the captain and establish a close relationship?

古文：为陈平画吕氏数事。
现代文：陆贾又为陈平策划关于吕氏的事数件。
English: Next, Lu Sheng planned several ways for Chen Ping to deal with Lv.

古文：平用其计，乃以五百金为绛侯寿，厚县乐饮太尉，太尉亦报如之。
现代文：陈平采用了他的计谋，于是用五百金为绛侯周勃祝寿，与太尉欢饮，太尉也回报他。
English: Chen Ping adopted his trick, so he used five hundred gold to celebrate the birthday of Zhou Bo, drank with the captain, and the captain also rewarded him.

古文：两人深相结，吕氏谋益坏。
现代文：这样两个人的关系密切了，而吕氏的阴谋也更加遭到破坏。
English: As a result, the relationship between the two men became closer, and Lü's plot was further undermined.

古文：陈平乃以奴婢百人，车马五十乘，钱五百万，遗贾为食饮费。
现代文：陈平便用一百个奴婢、五十乘车马、五百万钱送给陆贾作为吃饭饮酒的费用。
English: Chen Ping then gave Lu Jia a hundred male and female slaves, fifty chariots and horses, and five million yuan as the cost of eating and drinking.

古文：贾以此游汉廷公卿间，名声籍甚。
现代文：陆买又用这些财物在朝廷的公卿中游说，名声因此越来越大。
English: Lu Bai also used these goods to lobby the court nobles in the imperial court, and his reputation was growing.

古文：及诛吕氏，立孝文，贾颇有力。
现代文：直到吕氏被诛杀，立孝文帝为皇帝，陆贾都是很出力的。
English: Until the Lv clan was killed and Emperor Xiaowen was established, Lu Jia was very powerful.

古文：孝文即位，欲使人之南越，丞相平乃言贾为太中大夫，往使尉佗，去黄屋称制，令比诸侯，皆如意指。
现代文：孝文帝即位，想派人出使南越，丞相陈平就上奏皇帝以陆买为太中大夫，出使南越，使尉佗放弃了帝号，同于诸侯，都符合朝廷的意思。
English: When Emperor Xiaowen ascended to the throne, he wanted to send someone to South Vietnam, and the prime minister, Chen Ping, appealed to the emperor to appoint Lu Mai as the grand vice-consul, to send someone to South Vietnam, and to have the emperor renounce the title of emperor, which was the same as the princes, all of which was in line with the intention of the imperial court.

古文：语在《南越传》。
现代文：这些事记录在《南越传》中。
English: in the "South Vietnam Story."

古文：陆生竟以寿终。
现代文：陆贾最后寿终。
English: Lu Jia finally passed away.

古文：朱建，楚人也。故尝为淮南王黥布相，有罪去，后复事布。
现代文：朱建，楚人，曾经作过淮南王黥布的丞相，因犯罪而逃离，后又再次追随黥布。
English: Zhu Jian, a native of Chu, once served as the prime minister of the Huainan king Zibo, fled because of crime, and then followed Zibo again.

古文：布欲反时，问建，建谏止之。布不听，听梁父侯，遂反。
现代文：黥布想反叛时，问朱建，朱建劝谏他不要反叛，但黥布不听，而听信梁父侯，于是反叛。
English: When Zibo wanted to rebel, he asked Zhu Jianrong, Zhu Jian advised him not to rebel, but Zibo did not listen, but listened to Liang Fuhou, and then rebelled.

古文：汉既诛布，闻建谏之，高祖赐建号平原君，家徙长安。
现代文：汉镇压了黥布，听说塞建曾劝阻蕴壶造，直担赐圭建号里厘君，全家迁往长安。
English: Han suppressed Zibo, and it was heard that Sai Jian had dissuaded Yunnan from making pottery, and directly gave Gui Jian the name Li Li Jun, and the whole family moved to Chang'an.

古文：为人辩有口，刻廉刚直，行不苟合，义不取容。
现代文：塞建为人善辩有才，性格廉洁、刚直，行为不同别人苟合，与人交往不随意附和。
English: Sai Jian is an eloquent and talented person, with a clean and upright personality. His behavior is different from others, and he doesn't like to mingle with others.

古文：辟阳侯行不正，得幸吕太后，欲知建，建不肯见。
现代文：辟阳侯行为不端正，得到吕太后的宠幸，他很想和朱建结交，朱建不肯见他。
English: Biyang Hou behaved improperly and was favored by Empress Dowager Lv. He very much wanted to make friends with Zhu Jian, but Zhu Jian refused to see him.

古文：及建母死，贫未有以发丧，方假貣服具。
现代文：到朱建母亲去世，因贫穷而没有钱办丧事，正借钱办丧服、丧具。
English: When Zhu Jian's mother died, due to poverty, he had no money to pay for the funeral. He was borrowing money to pay for the funeral clothes and equipment.

古文：陆贾素与建善，乃见辟阳侯，贺曰： 平原君母死。 
现代文：陆贾平素与基建交往友好，于是去见辟阳侯，祝贺道： 平原君的母亲死了。 
English: Lu Jiapingsu has friendly relations with the infrastructure, so he went to see Biyang Hou and congratulated him: Mr. Plains mother is dead.

古文：辟阳侯曰： 平原君母死，何乃贺我？ 
现代文：辟阳侯说： 平原君母亲死了，为什么向我祝贺？ 
English: Biyanghou said, "Plainland's mother is dead, why congratulate me?"

古文：陆生曰： 前日君侯欲知平原君，平原君义不知君，以其母故。
现代文：陆买说： 前几天君侯想和圭建交友，平原君坚持义这个原则而不见你，是因为他母亲的缘故。
English: Lu Mai said: A few days ago, Junhou wanted to make friends with Gui Jian, but Pingyuan Jun insisted on the principle of righteousness and did not see you because of his mother.

古文：今其母死，君诚厚送丧，则彼为君死矣。 
现代文：现在他母亲死了，你如果真在丧事中送厚礼，那么他就成为能为你死的好友了。 
English: Now that his mother has passed away, if you give him a gift for his mother's funeral, then he will definitely be willing to work hard for you.

古文：辟阳侯乃奉百金税，列侯贵人以辟阳侯故，往赙凡五百金。
现代文：辟阳侯于是送上了一百金的衣被。其他的诸侯及贵人因为辟阳君的缘故，也前往送去总共五百金的助丧钱。
English: Biyang then sent a one-hundred-gold quilt. Other lords and nobles also went to send a total of five hundred gold mourning money because of Biyang.

古文：久之，人或毁辟阳侯，惠帝大怒，下吏，欲诛之。
现代文：时间长了，有人诋毁辟阳侯，惠帝大怒，逮捕了辟阳侯，想杀死他。
English: After a long time, someone slandered Biyang Hou, and Emperor Hui became furious, arrested Biyang Hou, and wanted to kill him.

古文：太后惭，不可言。
现代文：太后很觉惭愧，却又无法自己去说。
English: The Empress Dowager felt very ashamed, but she couldn't say it herself.

古文：大臣多害辟阳侯行，欲遂诛之。
现代文：大臣们多对辟阳侯的行径深感不满，所以都想杀死他。
English: However, most of the ministers abhorred the vile acts of Bibianghou and wanted to take this opportunity to kill him.

古文：辟阳侯困急，使人欲见建。
现代文：辟阳侯又怕又急，派人求见塞建。
English: Fearing and anxious, Biyangou sent someone to ask to see Saijian.

古文：建辞曰： 狱急，不敢见君。 
现代文：塞建推辞说： 你的案子正在紧急关头，我不敢见你。 
English: "Your case is at a critical juncture, and I am afraid to see you," he said.

古文：建乃求见孝惠幸臣闳籍孺，说曰： 君所以得幸帝，天下莫不闻。
现代文：朱建于是求见孝惠帝的幸臣闺籍彊，说道： 你得到皇帝的宠幸，天下人没有不知道的。
English: Zhu Jian then asked to see Emperor Xiao Hui's favorite vassal, his daughter-in-law, and said, "There is no one in the world who does not know that you have been favored by the emperor.

古文：今辟阳侯幸太后而下吏，道路皆言君谗，欲杀之。
现代文：如今辟阳侯被太后宠幸而遭下狱，路上的人们都说是你向皇帝说了坏话，于是皇帝想杀死他。
English: Now, the Prince of Yang, who was favored by the Empress Dowager, has been arrested and imprisoned. People all over the city are saying bad things about you and want to kill you.

古文：今日辟阳侯诛，且日太后含怒，亦诛君。
现代文：今天辟阳侯被杀，明天太后恼怒，也会杀掉你。
English: Today a prince is killed, tomorrow the empress dowager will be angry and kill you.

古文：君何不肉袒为辟阳侯言帝？
现代文：你为什么不为辟阳侯在皇帝面前说好话？
English: Why didn't you speak well of him in front of the emperor?

古文：帝听君出辟阳侯，太后大驩。
现代文：如皇帝听了你的话，放出辟阳侯，太后会很高兴。
English: If the emperor listens to your words and releases Biyang Hou, the empress dowager will certainly be very happy.

古文：两主俱幸君，君富贵益倍矣。 
现代文：两个君主都宠幸你，那么你会加倍富贵的呀。 
English: If you are favored by two sovereigns, you will be twice as rich.

古文：于是闳籍孺大恐，从其计，言帝，帝果出辟阳侯。
现代文：于是闳籍孺很惊恐，听从了朱建的计策，对皇帝进言，皇帝果然释放了辟阳侯。
English: As a result, Zeng Quan was very alarmed, heeded Zhu Jian's strategy, and made a suggestion to the emperor. The emperor indeed released Biyang Hou.

古文：辟阳侯之囚，欲见建，建不见，辟阳侯以为背之，大怒。
现代文：辟阳侯要被囚禁时，想面见朱建，朱建不见他，辟阳侯以为塞建背弃了他，大怒。
English: When Biyang Hou was about to be imprisoned, he wanted to meet Zhu Jian, but Zhu Jian did not see him. Biyang Hou thought that Sai Jian had betrayed him, and he was furious.

古文：乃其成功出之，大惊。
现代文：等到他成功地出狱时才大吃一惊。
English: The real surprise came when he managed to get out of prison.

古文：吕太后崩，大臣诛诸吕，辟阳侯与诸吕至深，卒不诛。
现代文：吕太后死，大臣们要杀死所有吕氏，辟阳侯和吕氏交往很深，但最终没有被杀。
English: After Empress Dowager Lv's death, the ministers wanted to kill all Lv's, but Yang Hou and Lv were in close contact, but ultimately he was not killed.

古文：计画所以全者，皆陆生、平原君之力也。
现代文：计划所以成功的原因全是陆贾、平原君的努力所致。
English: It is thanks to the efforts of Lu Sheng and Pingyuan Jun that the Biyanghou Life Preservation Plan has been realized.

古文：孝文时，淮南厉王杀辟阳侯，以党诸吕故。
现代文：孝文帝时，淮南厉王杀死了辟阳侯，是因为他和吕氏结党的缘故。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xiaowen, Huainan Li Wang killed Biyang Hou because he and Lü had formed a party.

古文：孝文闻其客朱建为其策，使吏捕欲治。
现代文：孝文帝得知是朱建为他出谋划策，便派官吏去逮捕他，要治他的罪。
English: When Emperor Xiaowen learned that it was Zhu Jian who had advised him, he sent officials to arrest him and punish him.

古文：闻吏至门，建欲自杀。
现代文：听到吏已到门口，朱建想自杀。
English: Hearing that the officials had arrived at the door, Zhu Jian wanted to commit suicide.

古文：诸子及吏皆曰： 事未可知，何自杀为？ 
现代文：他的儿子和属吏都说： 事情怎么样还不知道，为什么自杀呢？ 
English: His son and officials said: "We still don't know what happened. Why did he commit suicide?

古文：建曰： 我死祸绝，不及乃身矣。 
现代文：朱建说： 我死了，灾祸也就没了，不会连累到你们身上。 
English: Zhu Jian said, "When I die, the calamity will be gone, and it will not burden you."

古文：遂自刭。
现代文：于是拔剑自到。
English: On the due date, she committed suicide and died.

古文：文帝闻而惜之，曰： 吾无杀建意也。 
现代文：文帝知道后惋惜地说： 我没有要杀朱建的打算呀。 
English: After learning of this, Emperor Wen said regretfully, "I had no intention of killing Zhu Jian."

古文：乃召其子，拜为中大夫。
现代文：于是召见朱建的儿子，拜他为中大夫。
English: In order to express consolation to his family, Emperor Wen summoned his son to the imperial court and appointed him as the imperial physician.

古文：使匈奴，单于无礼，骂单于，遂死匈奴中。
现代文：派他出使匈奴，匈奴单子无礼，他因骂匈奴单于，就死在匈奴中。
English: He was sent as an envoy to the Xiongnu, but the Xiongnu was rude to him, and he died among the Xiongnu because he cursed the Xiongnu.

古文：娄敬，齐人也。
现代文：娄敬，齐国人。
English: Sincerely, the people of Qi.

古文：汉五年，戍陇西，过雒阳，高帝在焉。
现代文：漠五年，戍守陇西，途经雒阳，高祖在那裹。
English: After five years in the desert, Gao Zu stayed in Shaanxi and passed through Shenyang, where Gao Zu grew up.

古文：敬脱挽辂，见齐人虞将军曰： 臣愿见上言便宜。 
现代文：娄敬解脱了车前牵引的横木，见到齐国人虞将军说： 我想拜见皇帝谈一件有意义的事。 
English: Zou Jing got rid of the beam that was pulling the front of the car, and when he saw the people of Qi, he said: I want to meet the emperor to talk about a meaningful matter.

古文：虞将军欲与鲜衣，敬曰： 臣衣帛，衣帛见，衣褐，衣褐见，不敢易衣。 
现代文：虞将军想给他换上华美的衣服，娄敬说： 我穿的是丝帛衣服，就以丝帛衣服拜见；穿的是粗布衣服，就以粗布衣服拜见，不必更换衣服。 
English: When General Yu wanted to change his clothes, Yu Jing said, "I am wearing silk clothes, so I will meet you in silk clothes. If I am wearing coarse cloth clothes, I will meet you in coarse cloth clothes, so there is no need to change clothes."

古文：虞将军入言上，上召见，赐食。
现代文：虞将军入宫向皇帝禀报，皇帝召见了他并赐给他食物。
English: General Yu entered the palace to report to the emperor, who summoned him and gave him food.

古文：已而问敬，敬说曰： 陛下都雒阳，岂欲与周室比隆哉？ 
现代文：过了一会儿皇帝问娄敬，娄敬说： 陛下在洛阳定都，是想和周王室比兴隆吗？ 皇帝说： 对。 
English: After a while, the emperor asked Yu Jing, Yu Jing said: Your Majesty is in Luoyang Dingdu, do you want to compete with the Zhou royal family? The emperor said: Yes.

古文：上曰： 然。 敬曰： 陛下取天下与周异。周之先自后稷，尧封之邰，积德累善十余世。
现代文：娄敬说： 陛下夺取天下和周王室不同。周的祖先是后稷，尧封他在邰，积善行德长达十几代。
English: Yu Jing said: His Majesty's conquest of the world is different from that of the Zhou royal family. Zhou's ancestor was Houyi, he was enthroned in Yan, and accumulated virtuous deeds for more than a dozen generations.

古文：公刘避桀居豳。
现代文：公刘躲避夏桀而居住到豳。
English: In order to avoid Xia Yao's tyranny, he came to live in Handan.

古文：大王以狄伐故，去豳，杖马箠去居岐，国人争归之。
现代文：大王因狄侵入的原因，离开了豳，提着马鞭子到岐居住，而国中之人却都争先归顺他。
English: Because of Di's invasion, the great king left Yunnan and went to live in Qi with a horse whip, but the people in the country were all rushing to obey him.

古文：及文王为西伯，断虞、芮讼，始受命，吕望、伯夷自海滨来归之。
现代文：到周文王为西伯时，由于他的美德而使虞人、芮人的争斗平息下来，开始接受使命后，吕望、伯夷从海滨来归。
English: By the time King Zhou Wen was Xibei, because of his virtue, he had calmed down the struggle between the Yujin and the Qin. After he began to accept the mission, Lvang and Bo Yi returned from the seashore.

古文：武王伐纣，不期而会孟津上八百诸侯，遂灭殷。
现代文：周武王讨伐商纣，不期而会集于孟津的有八百诸侯，于是消灭了商殷。
English: King Zhou Wu fought against the merchants, and eight hundred princes unexpectedly gathered in Mengjin, thus eliminating the merchants.

古文：成王即位，周公之属傅相焉，乃营成周都雒，以为此天下中，诸侯四方纳贡职，道里钧矣，有德则易以王，无德则易以亡。
现代文：周成王继位，周公等辅佐他，于是营建成周，定都于雒阳，以为雒阳为天下的中心，诸侯从四方纳贡述职，路途远近比较平均，有美德则容易称王，没有美德则容易灭亡。
English: Zhou Cheng Wang succeeded to the throne, Zhou Gong and others assisted him, so the camp was built in Zhou and the capital was set in Poyang, thinking that Poyang was the center of the world. Princes from the four directions paid tribute and resigned. The distance was relatively average, with virtue it was easy to become king, without virtue it was easy to perish.

古文：凡居此者，欲令务以德致人，不欲阴险，令后世骄奢以虐民也。
现代文：凡居住在此的人都要以贤德对待别人，不想依赖地势的险阻来保天下，而让后世骄横奢侈虐待人民。
English: All the people who live here should treat others with virtue, do not want to rely on the perils of the terrain to protect the world, and let future generations arrogantly abuse the people.

古文：及周之衰，分而为二，天下莫朝周，周不能制。
现代文：等到周衰落时，分裂出东周君、西周君，天下都不朝见周王，周王也不能控制他们。
English: When Zhou fell, East Zhoujun and West Zhoujun were split, and the whole world did not see the Zhou King, and the Zhou King could not control them.

古文：非德薄，形势弱也。
现代文：不是因为道德微薄，而是因为力量太弱了。
English: Not because of poor morals, but because the force is too weak.

古文：今陛下起丰沛，收卒三千人，以之径往，卷蜀汉，定三秦，与项籍战荥阳，大战七十，小战四十，使天下之民肝脑涂地，父子暴骸中野，不可胜数，哭泣之声不绝，伤夷者未起，而欲比隆成、康之时，臣窃以为不侔矣。
现代文：如今陛下从丰、沛起兵，招集士兵三千人，就用这些人一往直前，席卷了蜀汉地区，平定三秦，与项羽在荣阳会战，大战斗有七十次，小战斗有四十次，使天下百姓丧失生命，父与子的尸骨遍野，数不胜数，哭泣之声不绝于耳，战争的破坏还没有恢复，而又要和周的成康盛世相比美，我自以为不能相提并论。
English: Now, His Majesty has raised an army from Feng and Pei, and called up three thousand soldiers. He has used these people to go straight forward, swept the Shu Han region, pacified San Qin, and fought with Xiang Yu in Rongyang. There are seventy major battles and forty minor battles, causing the people of the world to lose their lives. The bones of fathers and sons are everywhere, countless. The sound of crying is incessant. The destruction of the war has not been restored. And it is beautiful compared to Zhou's prosperous age. I do not think I can compare.

古文：且夫秦地被山带河，四塞以为固，卒然有急，百万之众可具。
现代文：况且秦地被山带河，地形险要，突然有战事，百万大军可聚集起来。
English: Moreover, Qin was surrounded by mountains and rivers, the terrain was precarious, there was a sudden war, and a million-strong army could gather.

古文：因秦之故，资甚美膏腴之地，此所谓天府。
现代文：用旧有的条件，资源丰美、土地肥沃，可以成为天然府库。
English: With the old conditions, abundant resources and fertile land, it can become a natural prefecture.

古文：陛下入关而都之，山东虽乱，秦故地可全而有也。
现代文：陛下进入关中而以此为国都，华山以束虽有战乱，秦国的旧地仍可保全并占有。
English: His Majesty entered Guanzhong and used it as the national capital. Although there was war in Huashan and Sokou, the old land of Qin could still be preserved and occupied.

古文：夫与人斗，不搤其亢，拊其背，未能全胜。
现代文：如果与人发生战斗，不扼住他的咽喉、打击他的脊梁，不可能大获全胜。
English: If you get into a fight with someone and don't grab him by the throat and break his backbone, you're not going to win.

古文：今陛下入关而都，按秦之故，此亦搤天下之亢而拊其背也。 
现代文：如今陛下入关中而建国都，安抚秦的旧地，这也是扼天下的咽喉并打击它的脊梁呀。 
English: Now that His Majesty has entered the middle of the pass and established the national capital, appeasing the old land of Qin, this is also strangling the throat of the world and striking its backbone.

古文：高帝问群臣，群臣皆山东人，争言周王数百年，秦二世则亡，不如都周。
现代文：高帝问大臣们，大臣都是山东人，纷纷说周王统治长达数百年，而秦朝仅延至第二代，不如建都雒阳。
English: Emperor Gao asked the ministers, all of whom were from Shandong Province. They said that the reign of King Zhou lasted for hundreds of years, while the Qin Dynasty only lasted until the second generation. It would be better to build the capital in Shenyang.

古文：上疑未能决。
现代文：高帝犹豫而不能决定在哪儿定都。
English: The emperor hesitated.

古文：及留侯明言入关便，即日驾西都关中。
现代文：直到留侯张良明确说出应当进入关中，当日就起驾向西定都关中了。
English: It was not until Zhang Liang, a resident of Luhou, clearly stated that they should enter Guanzhong that they drove to the west of Dingdu and entered Guanzhong.

古文：于是上曰： 本言都秦地者娄敬，娄者刘也。 
现代文：于是皇上说： 最早说定都在秦地的人是娄敬， 娄，就是 刘 。 
English: Then the emperor said, "The first person to say that all the people in Qin were in Qin was Yu Jing, Yu, that is, Liu.

古文：赐姓刘氏，拜为郎中，号曰奉春君。
现代文：赐娄敬刘姓，拜他为郎中，封号奉春君。
English: He was given the surname of Liu, and he was given the title of Fengchun.

古文：汉七年，韩王信反，高帝自往击。
现代文：汉七年，韩王韩信反叛，高帝亲自率兵去攻打他。
English: In the seventh year of the Han Dynasty, King Han Xin of Han rebelled, and Emperor Gao personally led an army to attack him.

古文：至晋阳，闻信与匈奴欲击汉，上大怒，使人使匈奴。
现代文：到晋阳，听说韩信要联合匈奴共同攻打汉军，皇上大怒，派人出使匈奴。
English: When he arrived in Jinyang, he heard that Han Xin wanted to attack the Han army together with the Xiongnu. The emperor was furious and sent an envoy to the Xiongnu.

古文：匈奴匿其壮士肥牛马，徒见其老弱及羸畜。
现代文：匈奴把壮士和肥硕的牛马藏匿起来，衹看见老弱人和很瘦的牲畜。
English: The Xiongnu hid the strong men and the fat horses and oxen, but did not see the old and weak people and the very thin cattle.

古文：使者十蜚来，皆言匈奴易击。
现代文：使者来了十批，都说匈奴很容易打败。
English: Envoys came in ten batches, all saying that the Xiongnu would be easy to defeat.

古文：上使刘敬复往使匈奴，还报曰： 两国相击，此宜夸矜见所长。
现代文：皇上派刘敬再次前往匈奴，归来向皇上禀报说： 两国敌对打仗时，应该夸耀其所长。
English: The emperor sent Liu Jing to dispatch another envoy to the Xiongnu, and he returned with a report: The two countries are at war, and this is the time to show off and display one's strengths.

古文：今臣往，徒见羸胔老弱，此必欲见短，伏奇兵以争利。
现代文：如今我前往匈奴，衹看见瘦牲畜和老弱人，一定是故意显示短处，引诱我们上当，而埋伏奇兵来打败我们。
English: Now, when I go to the Xiongnu, I see thin cattle and old and weak people. They must be deliberately showing their shortcomings, luring us into a trap, and ambushing the strange soldiers to defeat us.

古文：愚以为匈奴不可击也。 
现代文：我认为匈奴不可攻击。 
English: I don't think the Huns can be attacked.

古文：是时汉兵以逾句注，三十余万众，兵已业行。
现代文：这时汉兵已北进，翻过句注山，三十余万兵士已经全部出动。
English: At this time, the Han soldiers had marched northward, and more than three hundred thousand soldiers had all been dispatched.

古文：上怒，骂敬曰： 齐虏！
现代文：皇上生气，骂刘敬说： 齐国的奴才!
English: The emperor was angry and scolded Liu Jing, saying, "You are a lackey of Qi!

古文：以舌得官，乃今妄言沮吾军！ 
现代文：靠一张口舌得了官位，现在又想用胡言乱语阻止我出兵。 
English: He got into office with a slip of the tongue, and now he's trying to use gibberish to stop me from sending troops.

古文：械系敬广武。
现代文：将刘敬带上枷锁，留在广武。
English: They used shackles to detain Liu Jing and held him in Guangwu County.

古文：遂往，至平城，匈奴果出奇兵围高帝白登，七日然后得解。
现代文：于是前往平城，匈奴果真出奇兵，将高帝围困在白登，七天后才得以解围。
English: So he went to Pingcheng, and the Xiongnu really made a surprise attack, besieging Gao Di in Baidu, and only seven days later they were able to break the siege.

古文：高帝至广武，赦敬，曰： 吾不用公言，以困平城。
现代文：高帝到广武，释放了刘敬，说： 我不采纳你的话，被围困在平城。
English: When Emperor Gao returned to Guangwu County, he pardoned Liu Jing and said to Liu Jing, "I did not listen to your advice, so I was besieged in Pingcheng."

古文：吾已斩先使十辈言可击者矣。 
现代文：我已经把那十批说可以进攻匈奴的人杀死了。 
English: I have already killed the ten groups of men who said they could attack the Huns.

古文：乃封敬二千户，为关内侯，号建信侯。
现代文：于是封刘敬二干户，作关内侯，号建值昼。
English: As a result, Liu Jing, the second-ranking official, was appointed as the governor of Guanzhong, with the title of Jianzhong.

古文：高帝罢平城归，韩王信亡入胡。
现代文：高帝从平城返回，韩王信逃入匈奴。
English: Emperor Han Gao withdrew from Pingcheng and returned to the imperial court, while Han Wangxin fled to Hudi.

古文：当是时，冒顿单于兵强，控弦四十万骑，数若北边。
现代文：这时，冒顿单于的兵力强大，能射骑兵四十万，数次进犯北方。
English: At this time, the military force of the attack was strong, with 400,000 archers and cavalry, and attacked the north several times.

古文：上患之，问敬。
现代文：皇上为此忧虑，问刘敬。
English: The emperor was worried about this, so he asked Liu Jing.

古文：敬曰： 天下初定，士卒罢于兵革，未可以武服也。
现代文：刘敬说： 天下刚刚平定，士兵被战争拖得精疲力尽，不能再用武力征服匈奴。
English: Liu Jing said: The world has just been pacified, the soldiers have been exhausted by the war, and they can no longer conquer the Xiongnu by force.

古文：冒顿杀人父代立，妻群母，以力为威，未可以仁义说也。
现代文：冒顿杀了他的父亲得单于之位，以群母为妻，凭靠武力施展威风，不能用仁义劝说他。
English: He killed his father at the drop of a hat to become the sole ruler, he married a group of women to gain power by force, and he could not persuade him with kindness and justice.

古文：独可以计久远子孙为臣耳，然陛下恐不能为。 
现代文：如果能够从长远计议，让他的子孙称臣，可是陛下恐怕不能这么做。 
English: If it were possible to make a long-term calculation and have his children and grandchildren become vassals, but I'm afraid His Majesty can't do that.

古文：上曰： 诚可，何为不能！
现代文：皇上说： 如果可能，为什么不能做？
English: The emperor said: If it is really feasible, why can't it be done!

古文：顾为奈何？ 
现代文：衹是怎么去做呢？ 
English: So how do you go about it?

古文：敬曰： 陛下诚能以適长公主妻单于，厚奉遗之，彼知汉女送厚，蛮夷必慕，以为阏氏，生子必为太子，代单于。
现代文：刘敬回答说： 陛下如能让嫡长公主嫁给单于为妻，赠给他丰厚的礼品，他知道汉公主为妻的厚意，匈奴必定会立为单于王后，生的儿子必为太子，以后会代为单于。
English: Liu Jing replied, "If Your Majesty can have the eldest princess marry the queen, and give him a rich gift, he knows the kindness of Princess Han as his wife, the Xiongnu will surely become the queen, and the son born will become the prince, and will later become the representative of the queen."

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：贪汉重币。
现代文：因为匈奴贪图汉的厚礼。
English: Because the Xiongnu coveted the Han's gifts.

古文：陛下以岁时汉所余彼所鲜数问遗，使辩士风喻以礼节。
现代文：陛下每年给匈奴单于多送几次礼品慰问，顺势派使者辩士有礼节地教导他们。
English: His Majesty sends gifts and condolences to the Xiongnu more than once a year, and dispatches envoys to instruct them politely.

古文：冒顿在，固为子婿；死，外孙为单于。
现代文：冒顿活着，单于当然是陛下的女婿，单于死了，则陛下的外孙就是单于。
English: If he is still alive, he is, of course, Your Majesty's son-in-law, and if he is dead, he is Your Majesty's grandson.

古文：岂曾闻孙敢与大父亢礼哉？
现代文：哪裹听说过外孙和外祖父对抗的呢？
English: Who ever heard of a grandchild and grandfather fighting?

古文：可毋战以渐臣也。
现代文：军队可以不用出征而在潜移默化中使匈奴臣服。
English: Without having to go to war, the army could subjugate the Huns by stealth.

古文：若陛下不能遣长公主，而令宗室及后宫诈称公主，彼亦知不肯贵近，无益也。 
现代文：如果陛下不愿派长公主，而让宗室中和后宫的人去冒称公主，他们也会知道，就不肯尊贵之，亲近之，那也就没有用处了。 
English: If your majesty does not want to send the eldest princess, but lets the people in the family and the harem pretend to be princesses, they will also know, and will not want to honor and be close to her, then there is no use.

古文：高帝曰： 善。 
现代文：高帝说： 好。 
English: After listening, Gao Di said: OK.

古文：欲遣长公主。
现代文：想派长公主去。
English: So they had to send the great princess to the Xiongnu.

古文：吕后泣曰： 妾唯以一太子、一女，奈何弃之匈奴！ 
现代文：吕后知道后，日夜哭泣，说： 我祇有一个儿子、一个女儿，为什么要把她扔到匈奴去呢! 
English: After knowing this, Lü Hou cried day and night, saying, "I only have one son and one daughter, why should I throw her away to the Xiongnu!"

古文：上竟不能遣长公主，而取家人子为公主，妻单于。
现代文：皇上最终不能派长公主，而选了一位家族中的女儿名为长公主，嫁给单于为妻。
English: In the end, the emperor could not send the eldest princess, but chose a daughter of the family, named the eldest princess, to marry into the family.

古文：使敬往结和亲约。
现代文：派刘敬前往缔结和亲之约。
English: He sent Liu Jing to conclude a peace treaty.

古文：敬从匈奴来，因言 匈奴河南白羊、楼烦王，去长安近者七百里，轻骑一日一夕可以至。
现代文：刘敬从匈奴归来，说： 匈奴居于黄河以南的白羊王、楼烦王两部，距离长安很近，仅七百里，骑马一日一夜就可到关中。
English: Liu Jing returned from the Xiongnu and said, "The Xiongnu live in the southern part of the Yellow River, in the two provinces of Baiyangwang and Louduiwang. The distance from Chang'an is very close, only seven hundred miles. You can ride a horse to Guanzhong in one day and one night.

古文：秦中新破，少民，地肥饶，可益实。
现代文：关中刚经过战争破坏，人口少，但土地肥沃，可以增加人口。
English: The Guanzhong area, which has just gone through the war, is still very desolate, with few people, but the land is fertile and can be gradually enriched by immigrants.

古文：夫诸侯初起时，非齐诸田，楚昭、屈、景莫与。
现代文：诸侯初起时，如果没有齐国的田氏，楚国的昭、屈、景氏等王族就不可能兴盛。
English: At the beginning of the reign of the princes, if there was no Tian clan in Qi, the royal families such as the Zhao, Qu and Jing clans in Chu would not have been able to flourish.

古文：今陛下虽都关中，实少人。
现代文：如今陛下虽然在关中定都，而人力却少。
English: Today, although His Majesty has built the capital in Guanzhong, there is actually a shortage of population.

古文：北近胡冠，东有六国强族，一日有变，陛下亦未得安枕而卧也。
现代文：北部靠近匈奴，束部有六国的宗族，势力强大，一旦发生兵变，陛下是不能高枕而卧的。
English: The north is close to the Xiongnu, and Sokube has clans from six countries, which are powerful. In the event of a mutiny, His Majesty would not be able to sleep soundly.

古文：臣愿陛下徙齐诸田，楚昭、屈、景、燕、赵、韩、魏后，及豪杰名家，且实关中。
现代文：我希望陛下迁徙齐国的田氏及楚昭、屈、景，燕、趟、韩、魏的后代宗族及豪强名门以充实关中。
English: I hope that the Tian clan and the descendants of Chu Zhao, Qu, Jing, Yan, Wai, Han and Wei, who migrated to Qi, will enrich Guanzhong.

古文：无事，可以备胡；诸侯有变，亦足率以东伐。
现代文：局势没有变动则可以防备匈奴，诸侯若叛乱，也足可以率领他们向东讨伐。
English: If there is no trouble at home, he can guard against the Huns; if there is turmoil in the vassal states, he can also lead them to fight in the East.

古文：此强本弱末之术也。 上曰： 善。 
现代文：这是增强政权基础的方法。 皇上说： 好。 
English: This was a way of strengthening the foundations of the regime, and the emperor said, "Good."

古文：乃使刘敬徙所言关中十余万口。
现代文：于是派刘邀负责将上述各个宗族大家迁徙到蛆申十余万口。
English: Therefore, Liu Ying was sent to be in charge of migrating the above-mentioned clans to more than 100,000 households in Jinshen.

古文：叔孙通，薛人也。
现代文：叔孙通，薛县人。
English: Uncle Sun Tong, from Xue County.

古文：秦时以文学征，待诏博士。
现代文：秦朝时因精通经术而被征召，为待诏博士。
English: At the time of the Qin Dynasty, he was called up for his proficiency in the study of the classics, and became a doctor of the imperial edict.

古文：数岁，陈胜起，二世召博士诸儒生问曰： 楚戍卒攻蕲入陈，于公何如？ 
现代文：几年后，陈胜起兵，秦二世召博士和各儒生问道： 楚地的戊卒攻下蕲县并进入了陈县，你们如何看待这件事？ 
English: A few years later, when Chen Sheng raised an army, Qin II summoned the doctors and asked the Confucian scholars: "The Wu soldiers from Chu conquered Min County and entered Chen County. How do you view this?

古文：博士诸生三十余人前曰： 人臣无将，将则反，罪死无赦。
现代文：博士和诸生三十多人向前说： 人臣不能作乱，作乱就是谋反，罪在不赦。
English: The doctor and more than thirty people said forward: The vassal cannot make a disturbance, to make a disturbance is to plot a rebellion, and the crime is unforgivable.

古文：愿陛下急发兵击之。 
现代文：愿陛下赶快发兵攻打叛军。 
English: May His Majesty hasten to send troops to attack the rebels.

古文：二世怒，作色。
现代文：秦二世大怒，变了脸色。
English: As soon as Qin II heard this, he was enraged and his face suddenly changed.

古文：通前曰： 诸生言皆非。
现代文：叔孙通向前说： 各位儒生说的都不对。
English: Uncle Sun Tong stepped forward and said, "All of you Confucian scholars are wrong.

古文：夫天下为一家，毁郡县城，铄其兵，视天下弗复用。
现代文：今天下合为一家，拆毁了城池，销毁了兵器，向天下表示不再使用。
English: Today, we have united as a family, demolished the castle, destroyed the weapons, and told the world that they will no longer be used.

古文：且明主在上，法令具于下，吏人人奉职，四方辐辏，安有反者！
现代文：况且有贤明的君主在上，法律政令推行于下，官吏人人尽职，四方都向着朝廷，怎么会有造的人呢!
English: Moreover, there is a wise monarch above, laws and decrees are implemented below, officials all do their duty, and all sides are facing the imperial court, how can there be a creative person!

古文：此特群盗鼠窃狗盗，何足置齿牙间哉？
现代文：这些人不过是偷鶸摸狗的盗贼罢了，何足挂齿呢？
English: These people are nothing more than dog-snatching thieves, so what's the big deal?

古文：郡守尉今捕诛，何足忧？ 
现代文：郡守、尉现正在捕杀他们，有什么可忧虑的呢？ 
English: The county governor and lieutenant are currently hunting them down, so what is there to worry about?

古文：二世喜，尽问诸生，诸生或言反，或言盗。于是二世令御史按诸生言反者下吏，非所宜言。
现代文：秦二世很高兴。问每一个儒生，他们有的说是谋反的，有的说是盗贼，于是秦二世命令御史将说造的人记下来并交给法官审讯，惩罚他们的错误言论。
English: Qin II was pleased. He asked every Confucian scholar whether they were rebels or thieves, so Qin II ordered the imperial historian to write down and hand over to the judge to punish their wrong speech.

古文：诸生言盗者皆罢之。
现代文：凡是说盗贼的书生都被罢免。
English: All the students who said they were thieves were expelled.

古文：乃赐通帛二十匹，衣一袭，拜为博士，通已出，反舍，诸生曰： 生何言之谀也？ 
现代文：赐给叔孙通二十匹帛，衣服一套，拜他为博士。叔孙通出来后又返回到学馆，儒生们说： 你为何说话那样阿谀逢迎呢？ 
English: He gave his great-uncle Tong twenty horses and a set of clothes, and worshipped him as a doctor. When Tong came out and returned to the school, the Confucian students said, "Why are you talking like that?

古文：通曰： 公不知，我几不免虎口！ 
现代文：叔孙通说： 你们不知道，我几乎也不能脱离虎口。 
English: Uncle Sun Tong said: You don't know, I can hardly get away from the tiger's mouth.

古文：乃亡去之薛，薛已降楚矣。
现代文：于是他逃到了薛县，薛县已归降楚了。
English: So he fled to Xue County, which had already surrendered to Chu.

古文：及项梁之薛，通从之。
现代文：项梁来到薛县，叔孙通跟从他。
English: Cao Liang came to Xue County, and his uncle and grandson followed him.

古文：败定陶，从怀王。
现代文：项梁在定陶战败，他又跟从怀王。
English: Cao Liang was defeated in Dingtao, and he followed King Huai.

古文：怀王为义帝，徙长沙，通留事项王，汉二年，汉王从五诸侯入彭城，通降汉王。
现代文：怀王做了义帝，迁徙到长沙郡，叔孙通留下辅佐项王。汉二年，汉王率五诸侯之兵进入彭城，叔孙通归降汉王。
English: King Huai became a righteous emperor and moved to Changsha County, leaving his uncle and grandson Tong as an assistant to King Xiang. In the second year of the Han Dynasty, King Han led the soldiers of five princes into Pengcheng, and his uncle and grandson Tong surrendered to King Han.

古文：通儒服，汉王憎之，乃变其服，服短衣，楚制。汉王喜。
现代文：叔孙通穿儒生的衣服，汉王很厌恶，于是他改变了衣服，穿短衣，楚人的款式，汉王很高兴。
English: Uncles and grandsons wear Confucian clothes, the Han king is disgusted, so he changed his clothes, wearing shorts, the style of Chu people, the Han king is very happy.

古文：通之降汉，从弟子百余人，然无所进，剸言诸故群盗壮士进之。
现代文：叔孙通归降汉王，跟随他的书生有一百多人，然而叔孙通没有引荐，衹推荐那些壮士和鲁莽草寇。
English: Uncle Sun Tong returned to the Han Dynasty and was followed by more than a hundred scholars. However, Uncle Sun Tong did not recommend him, but recommended those strong men and reckless grasshoppers.

古文：弟子皆曰： 事先生数年，幸得从降汉，今不进臣等，剸言大猾，何也？ 
现代文：弟子们都说： 事奉先生多年，有幸投奔汉王，现今不举荐臣等，专门推荐奸猾的人，为什么？ 
English: The disciples all said, "You have served me for many years, and you have the honor of serving the Han King. Now you don't recommend your vassals, but you specifically recommend treacherous people. Why?

古文：通乃谓曰： 汉王方蒙矢石争天下，诸生宁能斗乎？
现代文：叔孙通便说： 汉王正在以武力争夺天下，你们能去作战吗？
English: Uncle Sun Tong then said, "The King of Han is competing for the world by force. Can you go to fight?

古文：故先言斩将搴旗之士。诸生且待我，我不忘矣。 
现代文：所以先推荐勇猛杀敌的壮士，你们暂且等待我，我不会忘记你们的。 
English: Therefore, I would first like to recommend the heroes who bravely killed the enemy. Please wait for me, I will not forget you.

古文：汉王拜通为博士，号稷嗣君。
现代文：汉王拜叔孙通为博士，号稷嗣君。
English: Han Wang named his uncle Sun Tong as a doctor, and called him Xizhejun.

古文：汉王已并天下，诸侯共尊为皇帝于定陶，通就其仪号。
现代文：汉王统一天下，诸侯在定陶共同尊他为皇帝，叔孙通拟定朝廷礼仪及君臣职守称号。
English: After the unification of the Han Dynasty, the princes in Dingtao jointly honored him as the emperor, and his uncle and grandson worked out the imperial etiquette and the title of the monarch.

古文：高帝悉去秦仪法，为简易。
现代文：高帝删除了亡秦的苛刻的礼仪之法，实行的法令简单易行。
English: Emperor Gao eliminated the strict etiquette laws of the late Qin Dynasty, and the laws that were implemented were simple and easy to implement.

古文：群臣饮争功，醉或妄呼，拔剑击柱，上患之。
现代文：群臣喝酒争功，喝醉了就胡言，拔剑击柱，皇上很担忧。
English: The emperors were very worried about the group of courtiers who were drinking and competing for merit, talking nonsense when they were drunk, and striking the pillars with their swords.

古文：通知上亦厌之，说上曰： 夫儒者难与进取，可与守成。
现代文：叔孙通知道皇帝越来越对此事心烦，便劝说皇帝道： 那些书生不能与陛下进攻冲杀，但可以巩固国家。
English: Uncle Sun Tong knew that the emperor was getting more and more upset about this matter, so he persuaded the emperor: Those students can't attack and kill with His Majesty, but they can consolidate the country.

古文：臣愿征鲁诸生，与臣弟子共起朝仪。 
现代文：我愿意征集鲁国的一些书生，与我的弟子们共同草拟朝廷礼。 
English: I am willing to recruit some students from the State of Lu to work with my disciples to draft the Imperial Court Rite.

古文：高帝曰： 得无难乎？ 
现代文：高帝说： 制定礼仪不难吗？ 
English: Gao Di said: I'm afraid it will be as tedious and difficult as in the past, right?

古文：通曰： 五帝异乐，三王不同礼。
现代文：叔孙通说： 五帝有不同的乐制，三王有不同的礼仪。
English: Uncle Sun Tong said: The five emperors have different musical systems, and the three kings have different etiquette.

古文：礼者，因时世人情为之节文者也。
现代文：礼仪是根据当时的形势、人情风俗而制定的。
English: The etiquette is to formulate the rules of moderation or decoration for people according to the social conditions at that time.

古文：故夏、殷、周礼所因损益可知者，谓不相复也。
现代文：所以夏朝、殷商、周朝的礼仪沿袭、删改、增加的情况就可了解了，可以说都不相重复。
English: Therefore, the succession, deletion, and increase of the etiquette of the Xia, Yin, and Zhou dynasties can be understood, and it can be said that they are not duplicated.

古文：臣愿颇采古礼与秦仪杂就之。 
现代文：我希望吸取古代礼制和秦朝的仪式，参酌制定。 
English: I hope to learn from the ancient etiquette system and the Qin Dynasty's ceremonies, and participate in their formulation.

古文：上曰： 可试为之，令易知，度吾所能行为之。 
现代文：皇上说： 可以试着制定，务必使汉礼容易被了解，要考虑我能够实行它。 
English: The emperor said: I can try to do it, but I want to make it easy to understand and think about what I can do.

古文：于是通使征鲁诸生三十余人。鲁有两生不肯行，曰： 公所事者且十主，皆面腴亲贵。
现代文：于是叔孙通作为使者征集鲁国的儒生三十多人，其中有两位儒生不肯同行，说： 你所辅佐的已经有十位主人，你都当面奉承阿谀。
English: Therefore, his uncle and grandson, Tong, enlisted more than thirty Confucian scholars from Lu as emissaries. Two of them refused to accompany him, saying, "You have already assisted ten masters, and you have all flattered grandma to her face.

古文：今天下初定，死者未葬，伤者未起，又欲起礼乐。
现代文：如今天下刚刚安定，死的人还没埋葬，伤的人还没痊愈，又要制定礼乐。
English: For example, today, the country has just been pacified, the dead have not yet been buried, the disabled have not yet recovered, and the rules of etiquette have yet to be formulated.

古文：礼乐所由起，百年积德而后可兴也。
现代文：礼乐的兴起是由于百年积德呀。我们接受不了你所要我们做的事。
English: The rise of ceremonial music is due to centuries of virtue. We can't accept what you want us to do.

古文：吾不忍为公所为。
现代文：你所做的事不符合古道，我们不去。
English: We can't do this for you against our will.

古文：公所为不合古，吾不行。
现代文：你走吧，不要玷污了我们的品格。 
English: What you are doing is against the ancient law. We won't go.

古文：公往矣，毋污我！ 通笑曰： 若真鄙儒，不知时变。 
现代文：叔孙通笑着说： 你们真是迂腐不达世务的书呆子，不了解时势变化。 
English: Uncles and grandsons said with a smile: You are really pedantic nerds who are not up to the world affairs, and do not understand the changes in the current situation.

古文：遂与所征三十人西，及上左右为学者与其弟子百余人为绵蕞野外。习之月余，通曰： 上可试观。 
现代文：于是和所征集的三十人向西去，和高帝身边近臣中素有学术的人及叔孙通的弟子共一百余人在野外结扎茅草定礼仪之位，练习了一个多月，叔孙通说： 皇上可以试试看。 
English: So he went west with the thirty people he had gathered, and more than a hundred people, including well-known scholars among the courtiers around Emperor Gao, as well as disciples of Tong's uncle and grandson, practiced tying thatch in the field for more than a month. Tong said, "The emperor can try it.

古文：上使行礼，曰： 吾能为此。 
现代文：皇上行使礼仪后说： 我可以做。 
English: After performing the rite, the Emperor said, "I can do it."

古文：乃令群臣习肄，会十月。
现代文：于是命令群臣练习，习礼毕正赶上十月岁首。
English: So he ordered all the ministers to come and study. It happened to be October at the time, so they could actually rehearse for the New Year's morning assembly.

古文：汉七年，长乐宫成，诸侯群臣朝十月。
现代文：汉七年，长乐宫建成，诸侯群臣在十月都来朝拜。
English: In the seventh year of the Han Dynasty, Changle Palace was built, and all the princes and courtiers came to pay homage in October.

古文：仪：先平明，谒者治礼，引以次入殿门。廷中陈车骑戍卒卫官，设兵，张旗志。
现代文：仪礼：在天亮之前，谒者负责礼仪，将来朝者依次带进殿门，宫廷中设置车骑和戍卒、卫官，设置各种兵器和旌旗。
English: Ceremonial: Before dawn, the eunuchs are responsible for the etiquette, the future emperor is brought into the hall door in turn, the court is set up with chariots and cavalry, guards, and various weapons and banners.

古文：传曰 趋 。
现代文：传呼 趋 ，即急行进入。
English: Paging for approach, that is, the express train is entering.

古文：殿下郎中侠陛，陛数百人。
现代文：殿下台阶两旁站了几百个警卫。
English: As a result, all officials took their places, and officials from the lower echelons of the palace stood on both sides of the steps. There were several hundred people on the steps.

古文：功臣、列侯、诸将军、军吏以次陈西方，东乡；文官丞相以下陈东方，西乡。
现代文：在西面依次站着功臣、列侯、诸将、军吏，面向东；在东面站着文官丞相以下，面向西。
English: On the west side, the meritorious vassals, vassals, generals, and military officials stood in turn, facing east; on the east side, the civil servants and ministers stood, facing west.

古文：大行设九宾，胪句传。
现代文：大行令主持上朝礼仪，设立了九站司仪，高声传呼引群臣入殿。
English: Da Xing Rong presided over the morning ceremony, set up nine stations for the ceremony, and led the courtiers into the hall with a loud call.

古文：于是皇帝辇出房，百官执戟传警，引诸侯王以下至吏六百石以次奉贺。
现代文：于是皇上乘辇出房，百官执戟，传呼清道，引导诸侯王以下至六百石的官吏依次到皇帝面前奉贺。
English: As a result, the emperor came out of the room with the scepter, and the hundred officials held the scepter, calling for a clear path, and guiding the officials of up to six hundred koku below the princes and kings to the emperor in turn.

古文：自诸侯王以下莫不震恐肃敬。
现代文：诸侯王以下的人没有不惊恐肃敬的。
English: There is no one below the princes who does not stand in awe.

古文：至礼毕，尽伏，置法酒。
现代文：朝拜结束，大小官吏都伏在地上，摆设酒宴，都有严格的礼仪。
English: At the end of the morning worship, officials of all ranks prostrate themselves on the ground and hold a banquet, all with strict etiquette.

古文：诸侍坐殿下皆伏抑首，以尊卑次起上寿。
现代文：殿上的侍者都伏地低着头，按着尊卑依次起身向皇帝祝寿。
English: The attendants in the hall all bowed their heads and rose in turn to wish the emperor a happy birthday.

古文：觞九行，谒者言 罢酒 。
现代文：饮酒九次，谒者说： 宴会结束。 
English: After nine rounds of pouring, the host announces that the banquet is over.

古文：御史执法举不如仪者辄引去。
现代文：御史检举出违反礼仪的，就将他带走。
English: Finally, inspectors enforce the rules of etiquette, find those who do not comply with the rules of etiquette and take them away.

古文：竟朝置酒，无敢讙哗失礼者。
现代文：整个朝拜喝酒过程，没有敢喧哗违礼的。
English: Throughout the morning worship and drinking process, no one dared to make noise.

古文：于是高帝曰： 吾乃今日知为皇帝之贵也！ 
现代文：于是高帝说： 我现在才知道做皇帝的尊贵啊! 
English: Then Gaudi said: Now I know what it means to be an emperor!

古文：拜通为奉常，赐金五百斤。
现代文：拜叔孙通为奉常，赐给他五百斤金。
English: He made Sun Tong his personal attendant and gave him five hundred jin of gold.

古文：通因进曰： 诸弟子儒生随臣久矣，与共为仪，愿陛下官之。 
现代文：叔孙通于是向皇帝说： 这些弟子儒生跟随我很久了，和我共同制定礼仪，希望陛下能封给他们官。 
English: Uncle Sun Tong then said to the emperor: These disciples of Confucianism have been following me for a long time, and they have worked out the etiquette with me. I hope that His Majesty will give them official titles.

古文：高帝悉以为郎。
现代文：高帝全部封他们为郎。
English: Emperor Gao made them all retainers.

古文：通出，皆以五百金赐诸生。
现代文：叔孙通出来，把他所得的五百金都分给了儒生。
English: Uncle Sun Tong came out and distributed the 500 gold coins he had won to all the Confucian scholars.

古文：诸生乃喜曰： 叔孙生圣人，知当世务。 
现代文：儒生们高兴地说： 叔孙先生真是圣人，了解当今的世道。 
English: The Confucianism students said happily, "Uncle Sun is really a sage and understands today's world.

古文：九年，高帝徙通为太子太傅。
现代文：汉九年，高帝升叔孙通为太子太傅。
English: In the 9th year of the Han Dynasty, Gao Di Sheng's uncle Sun Tong became the crown prince.

古文：十二年，高帝欲以赵王如意易太子，通谏曰： 昔者晋献公以骊姬故，废太子，立奚齐，晋国乱者数十年，为天下笑。
现代文：十二年，高帝想立赵王如意为太子，叔孙通说： 过去晋献公因为骊姬的原因，废了太子，改立奚齐，晋国混乱了数十年，被天下人耻笑。
English: In the twelfth year, Emperor Gao wanted to make Zhao Wang Rongyi the crown prince. Uncle Sun Tong said: In the past, the crown prince was abolished for the reason of concubinage, and the crown prince was made concubine instead. Jin Province was in chaos for decades, and was ridiculed by the world.

古文：秦以不早定扶苏，故亥诈立，自使灭祀，此陛下所亲见。
现代文：秦朝因不早定扶苏为太子，胡亥用欺骗手段夺得帝位，自减秦朝，这是陛下亲自看见的。
English: The Qin Dynasty reduced itself from the Qin Dynasty because it did not appoint Fusu as the crown prince earlier, and Hu Hai used deception to seize the imperial throne, which was witnessed by His Majesty himself.

古文：今太子仁孝，天下皆闻之；吕后与陛下攻苦食啖，其可背哉！
现代文：如今太子忠孝仁义，天下人都知道；吕后与陛下茹苦含辛，粗茶淡饭，你哪裹能背弃她呢？
English: Now the prince's benevolence, righteousness, loyalty and filial piety are known to the whole world; Lu Hou and Her Majesty have gone through hardships and sufferings together, and have eaten coarse tea and light meals together. How can a husband and wife who share the same hardships turn their backs on her!

古文：陛下必欲废適而立少，臣愿先伏诛，以颈血污地。 
现代文：陛下如果一定要废长子而立少子，我愿先被杀死，用脖子的血涂红土地。 
English: Your Majesty, if it is necessary to abolish the eldest son and establish a younger son, I would like to be killed first and use the blood from my neck to paint the ground red.

古文：高帝曰： 公罢矣，吾特戏耳。 
现代文：高帝说： 你不要这样，我衹是开玩笑罢了。 
English: Gaudi said: Don't do that, I'm only joking.

古文：通曰： 太子天下本，本壹摇天下震动，奈何以天下戏！ 
现代文：叔孙通说： 太子是天下安定的根本，根本动摇了，天下就会混乱动荡，怎能用天下来开玩笑呢! 
English: Uncle Sun Tong said: The crown prince is the foundation of stability in the world. If the foundation is shaken, the world will be chaotic and turbulent. How can you joke with the heavens?

古文：高帝曰： 吾听公。 
现代文：高帝说： 我听从你的话。 
English: Gaudi said: I obey your words.

古文：及上置酒，见留侯所招客从太子入见，上遂无易太子志矣。
现代文：到皇上摆宴席时，见张良设计请来的四位老先生跟随太子进见皇上，皇上就不再有改换太子的打算了。
English: When it came to the Emperor's banquet, the four old gentlemen invited by Zhang Liang's design followed the Prince to see the Emperor, and the Emperor no longer had any intention of changing the Prince.

古文：高帝崩，孝惠即位，乃谓通曰： 先帝园陵寝庙，群臣莫习。 
现代文：高帝死，孝惠帝即位。于是对叔孙通说： 没有人熟悉先帝园陵寝庙的礼仪。 
English: When Emperor Gao died and Emperor Xiao Hui ascended the throne, he said to his great-uncle Tong: "No one is familiar with the etiquette of the former emperor's garden mausoleum.

古文：徙通为奉常，定宗庙仪法。
现代文：升叔孙通为奉常，制定宗庙的礼仪之法。
English: His uncle, Sun Tong, became the chief priest and established the rules of etiquette for the ancestral temple.

古文：乃稍定汉诸仪法，皆通所论著也。
现代文：汉朝制定的各种仪法都是叔孙先生论着的。
English: The various ceremonies and methods established by the Han Dynasty were all discussed by Uncle Sun.

古文：惠帝为东朝长乐宫，及间往，数跸烦民，作复道，方筑武库南，通奏事，因请间，曰： 陛下何自筑复道高帝寝，衣冠月出游高庙？
现代文：惠帝到束边的长乐宫去朝见太后，以及平时往来，都要惊扰老百姓，于是就作复道，刚开始在武库南动工时，叔孙先生向皇上奏事，问皇上： 陛下为什么从高帝陵寝架筑阁廊走道，每月备法驾，将高帝衣冠出游一次，展示在高庙中呢？
English: When Emperor Hui went to the Changle Palace in Sokubei to meet the empress dowager for the first time, as well as for his usual visits, he had to alarm the common people, so he made a second trip. When the construction of the southern part of the arsenal had just begun, Uncle Sun reported to the emperor and asked the emperor: Why did His Majesty build a gallery walkway from the bedstead of Emperor Gao's mausoleum, prepare a law car every month, and take Emperor Gao's crown on a trip once and display it in the high temple?

古文：子孙奈何乘宗庙道上行哉！ 
现代文：为什么让后世子孙在高帝庙道上行走呢？ 
English: Why let future generations of descendants walk on the Gao Di Temple Road?

古文：惠帝惧，曰： 急坏之。 
现代文：孝惠帝很惧怕，说： 赶快拆了它。 
English: Xiao Huidi was very afraid and said, "Dismantle it quickly."

古文：通曰： 人主无过举。
现代文：叔孙通说： 皇上不办错事。
English: Uncle Sun Tong said: The emperor never does anything wrong.

古文：今已作，百姓皆知之矣。
现代文：如今已经做了，百姓都知道。
English: Now it has been done, and the people know about it.

古文：愿陛下为原庙渭北，衣冠月出游之，益广宗庙，大孝之本。 
现代文：希望陛下再盖一座高帝庙在渭水之北，作为出游衣冠之庙，这样也能增加和扩大高帝宗庙的数量，这是大孝的根本。 
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will build another Gao Tei Temple in the north of Surabaya, as a temple of traveling clothes, which will also increase and expand the number of Gao Tei ancestral temples, which is the foundation of filial piety.

古文：上乃诏有司立原庙。
现代文：皇上于是下令让官员重建高帝庙。
English: The emperor issued a decree to let the relevant officials build a separate ancestral temple.

古文：惠帝常出游离宫，通曰： 古者有春尝果，方今樱桃熟，可献，愿陛下出，因取樱桃献宗庙。 
现代文：孝惠帝经常到离宫游览，叔孙通说： 古人到春天就进献水果，现在正是樱桃熟的时候，可以进献，希望陛下出游，趁势向宗庙进献樱桃。 
English: Emperor Xiao Hui often visited the Imperial Villa. Uncle Sun Tong said, "The ancients used to donate fruit in the spring. Now, when the cherries are ripe, they can be donated. I hope that His Majesty will travel and take advantage of the situation to donate cherries to the ancestral temple."

古文：上许之。
现代文：皇上同意这样做。
English: Emperor Jing agreed with this opinion.

古文：诸果献由此兴。
现代文：向宗庙献果品的礼仪由此兴起。
English: From then on, the ritual of offering various fruits flourished.

古文：赞曰：高祖以征伐定天下，而缙绅之徒聘其知辩，并成大业。
现代文：赞曰：汉高祖凭藉南征北伐夺取天下，而儒生们发挥了雄辩的才能，一同成就了统一天下的大业。
English: Zang said: the ancestors of the Han Dynasty conquered the world by virtue of the Southern Expedition and the Northern Expedition, and the Confucian students played an eloquent talent and together achieved the great cause of unification.

古文：语曰： 廊庙之枝材一木之材，帝王之功非一士之略 ，信哉！
现代文：《慎子》说： 庙宇的建成不是靠一个木材，帝王的功业也不是一个人的力量。 
English: "Shinko" said: The construction of a temple does not rely on a single piece of wood, and the emperor's work is not the power of a single person.

古文：刘敬脱挽辂而建金城之安，叔孙通舍枹鼓而立一王之仪，遇其时也。
现代文：确实如此呀!刘敬不拉车而劝高帝定都关中，使江山稳固，叔孙通放弃战阵之事而别创漠代礼仪，这是因为时机好呀。
English: That's right! Liu Jing did not pull the cart and advised Gao Di to set the capital in the center, so that the country would be stable. Uncle Sun Tong gave up the battle and did not create the desert etiquette. This was because the timing was good.

古文：郦生自匿监门，待主然后出，犹不免鼎镬。
现代文：郦食其躲起来为人看大门，是为了等待明君才出来呀，然而他仍不免被烹杀。
English: Pecking at it and hiding to watch the gate for people is to wait for Mingjun to come out, but he still cannot avoid being cooked to death.

古文：朱建始名廉直，既距辟阳，不终其节，亦以丧身。
现代文：朱建开始时性格刚正廉洁，一直不与辟阳侯结交，但由于不能终守节操，也因此而丧命。
English: Zhu Jian's character was upright and incorruptible at the beginning, and he never made friends with Biyang Hou, but because he could not always keep the discipline, he also died as a result.

古文：陆贾位止大夫，致仕诸吕，不受忧责，从容平、勃之间，附会将相以强社稷，身名俱荣，其最优乎！
现代文：陆贾官至大夫，但不为吕氏家族做官，无可责备，他联合陈平、周勃，依附将相以保卫国家政权，身份名望都很荣耀，是其中的佼佼者啊!
English: Lu Jia was a high-ranking official, but he did not work as an official for the Lu family. He was beyond reproach. He allied with Chen Ping and Zhou Bo, and depended on the generals to defend the state power. His status and reputation were glorious. He was the best!

