古文：凡度权量能，所以征远来近。
现代文：只要善于揣度权谋，衡量人的能力，就能吸引远近人才。
English: As long as you are good at calculating strategies and measuring people's abilities, you will be able to attract talent from near and far.

古文：立势而制事，必先察同异之计，别是非之语，见内外之辞，知有无之术；决安危之计，定亲疏之事；然后乃权量之。
现代文：要造成一种声势，使事情获得成功，就得先观察人们相同和不同之处，区别议论的是与非，了解对内对外的各种进言，掌握其真假，决定事关安危的计谋，确定与谁亲近和与谁疏远。然后再看看这样做的利弊得失。
English: To create a momentum and make things successful, we must first observe people's similarities and differences, distinguish between what is discussed and what is not, understand the various suggestions from inside to outside, grasp their truth and falsity, decide on the safe and dangerous strategy, determine who is close and who is distant, and then look at the pros and cons of doing so.

古文：其有隐括，乃可征、乃可求、乃可用。
现代文：衡量这些关系时，如果还有不清楚的地方，就要进行研究，进行探索，使之为我所用。
English: When measuring these relationships, if there is still something unclear, it is necessary to conduct research, explore, and make use of it.

古文：引钩钳之辞，飞而钳之。
现代文：借用引诱使对方说出真情，然后通过恭维来钳住对手。
English: Use seduction to get the other person to tell the truth, and then use flattery to get a hold on your opponent.

古文：钩钳之语，其说辞也，乍同乍异。
现代文：钩钳之语是一种游说辞令，其特点是忽同忽异。
English: The language of baiting is a kind of lobbying rhetoric, which is characterized by similarities and differences.

古文：其不可善者：或先征之，而后重累；或先重以累，而后毁之；或以重累为毁；或以毁为重累。
现代文：对于那些没法控制的对手，或者先对他们威胁利诱，然后再对他们反复试探；或者先对他们反复试探，然后再摧毁他们；或者在反复考验中，毁灭对方，或者把摧毁对方作为反复考验。
English: For those opponents who cannot be controlled, either threaten and entice them first, and then repeatedly test them; or repeatedly test them first, and then destroy them; or destroy each other in repeated tests, or destroy each other as repeated tests.

古文：其用或积财货、琦玮、珠玉、白璧、采邑以事之，或量能立势以钩之，或伺候见涧而钳之，其事用抵巇。
现代文：想要重用某些人时，可先赏赐财物、珠宝、玉石、白璧和封地，以便对他们试探；或者通过衡量其才能创造气氛，来吸引他们；或者通过寻找机会来控制对方，在这个过程中要运用抵之术。
English: When you want to reuse certain people, you can first reward them with wealth, jewelry, jade, pearls and fiefdoms in order to test them; or attract them by measuring their ability to create an atmosphere; or by looking for opportunities to control each other, in the process of using resistance.

古文：将欲用之于天下，必度权量能，见天时之盛衰，制地形之广狭，阻险之难易，人民货财之多少，诸侯之交孰亲孰疏，孰爱孰憎，心意之虑怀，审其意，知其所好恶，乃就说其所重，以飞钳之辞钩其所好，以钳求之。
现代文：运用 飞箝术 来治理天下，就必须考量人的权谋和才干，明察各种势力的兴亡盛衰，掌握地形的宽窄和山川险阻的难易，以及各国人口数量和经济状况，诸侯间交往中谁与谁亲密，谁与谁疏远，谁与谁友好，谁与谁相恶。要详细考察对方的愿望和想法，了解他们的好恶，然后从对方最看重的地方加以游说，先用 飞 的方法诱出对方爱好之所在。最后再用 钳 的方法控制住对方。
English: To use the art of flying kites to rule the world, it is necessary to consider people's strategies and talents, observe the rise and fall of various forces, grasp the breadth and narrowness of the terrain and the difficulties of mountains and rivers, as well as the population and economic conditions of various countries, and who is close to whom, who is distant from whom, who is friendly with whom, and who is hostile to whom in the interaction between princes. It is necessary to examine the wishes and thoughts of the other party in detail, understand their likes and dislikes, and then lobby them from the place that the other party values most. First, use the method of flying to lure out the other party

古文：用之于人，则量智能、权材力、料气势，为之枢机以迎之随之，以钳和之，以意宜之，此飞钳之缀也。
现代文：运用 飞钳术 游说他人，就要揣摩对方的智慧和才能，权衡对方的实力，估量对方的势气，然后以此为突破口与对方周旋，进而争取以 飞钳 之术达成妥协，有意识地适应对方。这就是妙用 飞箝 以控制他人的手段。
English: When using the art of flying a kite to lobby others, it is necessary to guess the other party's wisdom and talent, weigh the other party's strength, estimate the other party's momentum, and then use this as a breakthrough to negotiate with the other party, and then strive to use the art of flying a kite to reach a compromise and consciously adapt to the other party. This is a clever use of flying a kite to control others.

古文：用于人，则空往而实来，缀而不失，以究其辞。
现代文：运用 飞钳术 游说他人，就要用华美的辞藻套出对方的实情，保持联系，勿使失误，以便考究游说的辞令。
English: When using "flying kites" to lobby others, it is necessary to use beautiful words to expose the other side's truth, maintain contact, and avoid mistakes in order to study the lobbying rhetoric.

古文：可钳而纵，可钳而横；可引而东，可引而西；可引而南，可引而北；可引而反，可引而覆。
现代文：这样就可以把握关键实现合纵，也可以实现连横；也可以引而向东，也可以引而向西；可以引而向南，也可以引而向北；可以引而返还，也可以引而复去。
English: In this way, it is possible to grasp the key to achieve vertical connection, and it is also possible to achieve horizontal connection; it can also be led to the east, and it can also be led to the west; it can be led to the south, and it can also be led to the north; it can be led to return, and it can also be led to return.

古文：虽覆，能复不失其度。
现代文：虽然如此，还是要小心谨慎，不可丧失其节度。
English: Even so, one must be careful not to lose one's temper.

