古文：昔在黄帝，作舟车以济不通，旁行天下，方制万里，画野分州，得百里之国万区。
现代文：从前在黄帝时教导人们制作船和车来帮助到达道路不通的地方，黄帝也因而遍行天下，规划万里疆域，把田野划分为州，得到土地百里的国家有一万个区域。
English: Once upon a time, under the Yellow Emperor, people were taught to make boats and cars to help them get to places where there were no roads. As a result, the Yellow Emperor traveled all over the world, planning thousands of miles of territory, dividing fields into prefectures, and obtaining ten thousand regions for countries with a hundred miles of land.

古文：是故《易》称 先王建万国，亲诸侯 ，《书》云 协和万国 ，此之谓也。
现代文：因此《易经。北卦》上说 先王建立万国，亲近诸侯 ，《尚书。
English: Therefore, "I Ching. Bei Gua" said that the previous king established all countries and was close to the princes, "Shang Shu."

古文：尧遭洪水，怀山襄陵，天下分绝，为十二州，使禹治之。
现代文：尧时遭受到洪水灾害，山被包围，丘陵被水淹没，天下被分离隔绝，形成十二个州，派大禹去治水。
English: At the time of the flood disaster, the mountains were surrounded, the hills were flooded, and the country was separated and isolated, forming twelve states. Dayu was sent to control the water.

古文：水土既平，更制九州，列五服，任土作贡。
现代文：洪水被子定后，改为九州的区域制，分为五服，依照土地确定贡赋。
English: After the flood was determined, it was changed to the regional system of Kyushu, divided into five services, and the tribute was determined according to the land.

古文：曰：禹敷土，随山刊木，奠高山大川。
现代文：《尚书》上说：大禹把土地进行划分，顺着山势砍削树木作为路标，奠定了高山大河的基础。
English: "Shangshu" said: Dayu divided the land, cut trees along the mountain as a signpost, and laid the foundation for the Gaoshan River.

古文：冀州既载，壶口治梁及岐。
现代文：冀州：从壶口开始治理，然后又治理梁山以及岐山。
English: Jizhou: starting from Hukou, and then to Liangshan and Qishan.

古文：既修太原，至于岳阳。
现代文：太原治理好后，就一直治理到岳阳。
English: After the management of Taiyuan, it will be repaired to the south of Mount Taiyue.

古文：覃怀底绩，至于衡章。
现代文：覃怀一带的治理取得了成效，就又到横流入黄河的章水。
English: The governance of the Bohai area has achieved results, and it has come to Zhangshui, which flows into the Yellow River.

古文：厥土惟白壤。
现代文：这一带的土质是白壤。
English: The soil in this area is white.

古文：厥赋上上错，厥田中中。
现代文：这里的贡物所纳田租是九等中第一等的，还出产其他的品种，这里的土质是第五等。
English: The farmland rent here is the first in the nine grades, and other varieties are also produced. The soil quality here is the fifth grade.

古文：恒、卫既从，大陆既作。
现代文：恒水、卫水依从旧河道后，大陆泽就已经开始治理了。
English: After Hengshui and Weishui followed the old river channel, the Mainland Lake has begun to be managed.

古文：鸟夷皮服，夹右碣石，入于河。
现代文：鸟夷的人用兽皮制衣服，禹夹行在碣石的右边，进入黄河。
English: The people of Torii used animal skins to make clothes. Yu Jian walked on the right side of the rock and entered the Yellow River.

古文：泲、河惟兖州。
现代文：济水与黄河之间是兖州。
English: Between Jishui and the Yellow River is Ganzhou.

古文：九河既道，雷夏既泽，雍、沮会同，桑土既蚕，是降丘宅土。
现代文：黄河下游的九条支流既已疏通，雷夏泽已经汇成了大湖泽，雍水、沮水就在雷夏泽汇合，种植桑树的地方已经开始养蚕了，于是人们从山丘上下来在平地上居住。
English: The nine tributaries of the lower reaches of the Yellow River have already been dredged, the Leshiazhe has merged into a large lake, and the Yongshui and Deshui have merged in the Leshiazhe. The place where mulberry trees are planted has begun to raise silkworms, so people come down from the hills to live on the plain.

古文：厥土黑坟，草繇木条。
现代文：这里土质又黑又肥，草茂树直。
English: The soil here is dark and rich, the grass is thick and the trees are straight.

古文：厥田中下，赋贞，作十有三年乃同。
现代文：这里的田是第六等，贡物是第九等，耕作了十三年后才与其他州相同。
English: The fields here are 6th grade, the tribute is 9th grade, and it takes 13 years of cultivation to be the same as other states.

古文：厥贡漆丝，厥棐织文。
现代文：这里的贡物有漆和丝，还有用篚装着的彩绸。
English: The tributes here include lacquer and silk, as well as colored silk mounted in enamel.

古文：浮于泲、漯，通于河。
现代文：从济水、漯水乘船进入黄河。
English: Enter the Yellow River by boat from Jishui and Surabaya.

古文：海、岱惟青州。
现代文：大海和泰山之间是青州。
English: Between the sea and Mount Tai is Qingzhou.

古文：虫禺夷既略，惟、甾其道。
现代文：夷治理好之后，潍水和淄水也已经疏通了。
English: After the treatment of the riverbed, the floodwater and the riverbed have been dredged.

古文：厥土白坟，海濒广澙。
现代文：这里的土又白又肥，海边有一片宽阔的盐碱地。
English: The soil here is white and rich, and there is a wide salt plain by the sea.

古文：田上下，赋中上。
现代文：这里的田是第三等，所纳租赋是第四等。
English: The fields belong to the lower and upper classes, that is, the third class, and the taxation belongs to the middle and upper classes, that is, the fourth class.

古文：贡盐、絺，海物惟错，岱畎丝、枲、钅公、松、怪石，莱夷作牧，厥棐檿丝。
现代文：向朝廷进贡盐和绪，还有各种各样的海产品，泰山谷地的丝、臬、铅、松和怪石，莱夷一带可以放牧，这里的贡物是用筐装的柞蚕丝。
English: The salt and vinegar brought as tribute to the imperial court, as well as a variety of seafood, silk, cocoons, lead, pine and strange stones from the valley of Mount Tai. The area around Laiyi can be grazed. The tribute here is a basket of cocoon silk.

古文：浮于汶，达于泲。
现代文：贡品从汶水上船，到达济水再转黄河。
English: The tributes boarded the ship from Wenshui, arrived at Jishui and then made their way to the Yellow River.

古文：海、岱及淮惟徐州。
现代文：大海、泰山以及淮河之间是徐州。
English: Between the sea, Mount Tai and the Huai River is Xuzhou.

古文：淮、沂其乂，蒙、羽其艺。
现代文：淮河、沂水治理好后，蒙山、羽山一带就可进行种植了。
English: After the Huaihe River and the Lishui River are well managed, the areas around Mengshan and Hasan can be planted.

古文：大野既猪，东原厎平。
现代文：大壁泽既然已经蓄满了水，束原地区也得到了治理。
English: Now that the Okechizawa has been filled with water, the Sokuhara area has also been managed.

古文：厥土赤埴坟，草木渐包。
现代文：这这里的土是红色的，又粘又肥沃，草木丛生。
English: The soil here is red, sticky and fertile, thick with vegetation.

古文：田上中，赋中中。
现代文：这里的田是第二等，所纳租赋是第五等。
English: The fields here are second-class, and the rent paid is fifth-class.

古文：贡土五色，羽畎夏狄，峄阳孤桐，泗濒浮磬，淮夷蠙珠臮鱼，厥棐玄纤缟。
现代文：进贡的土是五色的，羽山的谷地是夏狄，蝉山的南坡产独特的桐木，泅水边有浮出的石头可以做磬，淮夷一带产王比珠和美鱼，这一带还有黑色的捆绸和白色的绢。
English: The soil of the tribute is five-colored, the valley of Mount Hasan is Shady, the southern slope of Mount Cicada produces unique paulownia wood, there are floating stones on the edge of the water to make rafts, the Huai'i area produces Wang Biju and beautiful fish, and this area also has black silk and white rafts.

古文：浮于淮、泗，达于河。
现代文：从淮水、泅水乘船到达黄回。
English: From Huai Shui and Surabaya, take a boat to Huangpu.

古文：淮、海惟扬州。
现代文：淮河、大海之间是扬州。
English: Between the Huai River and the sea is Yangzhou.

古文：彭蠡既猪，阳鸟逌居。
现代文：彭蠡已汇聚了大水，这裹就成了鸿雁的栖身之地。
English: Penghu has gathered a lot of water, which has become a refuge for wild geese.

古文：三江既人，震泽厎定，簜既敷，草夭木乔。
现代文：三江的水流入大海后，震泽也获得了平定。小竹和大竹遍地而生，草茂树高。
English: After the water of the Sanjiang River flowed into the sea, the tremors were also calmed down. Small and large bamboos sprung up everywhere, and the grass and trees were tall.

古文：厥土涂泥。
现代文：这裹土是潮湿的泥。
English: The soil is wet mud.

古文：田下下，赋下上错。
现代文：这里的田是第九等，所纳租赋是第七等，还夹杂着其他品类。
English: The fields here are 9th grade, the rent is 7th grade, and there are other categories mixed in.

古文：贡金三品，瑶、瑻、簜、齿、革、羽毛，鸟夷卉服，厥棐织贝，厥包橘、柚，锡贡。
现代文：进贡的物品是金、银、铜，瑶、琐、篠荡，齿、革、羽毛，乌夷穿着草编的衣服，这裹人们把捆布与贝放在筐子裹，把橘和柚包起来进贡。
English: The articles of tribute were gold, silver, copper, cormorants, pigeons, pigeons, teeth, leather, and feathers. The Wuyi wore grass-woven clothes. People wrapped bundles of cloth and shellfish in baskets, and wrapped oranges and yuzu fruits to pay tribute.

古文：均江海，通于淮、泗。
现代文：通过淮水、泅水而来。
English: They came via Huai Water and Surabaya Water.

古文：荆及衡阳惟荆州。
现代文：荆山之南衡山之北是荆州。
English: South of Mount Jing and north of Hengshan is Jingzhou.

古文：江、汉朝宗于海。
现代文：长江、汉水束流于海。
English: The Yangtze River and the Han River flow into the sea.

古文：九江孔殷，沱，灊既道，云梦土作乂。
现代文：长江经过荆山分为九条支流，沱水、潜水疏通以后，云梦的土地可加以耕作。
English: The Yangtze River passes through Mount Jing and is divided into nine tributaries. After dredging and diversion, the land of Yunmeng can be cultivated.

古文：厥土涂泥。
现代文：这裹土是潮湿的泥。
English: The soil is wet mud.

古文：田下中，赋上下。
现代文：这裹的农田是第八等，所纳租赋是第三等。
English: The farmland here is 8th grade and the rent is 3rd grade.

古文：贡羽旄、齿、革，金三品，杶、幹、栝、柏、厉、砥、砮、丹，惟箘簵、楛，三国厎贡厥名，包匦菁茅，厥棐玄纁玑组，九江纳锡大龟。
现代文：贡物有羽毛、齿、革，金、银、铜，饨、干、栝、柏，厉、砥、努、丹以及个镕、楛，三个诸侯国进贡他们的名产，包裹好了杨梅、菁茅，把彩色丝绸和一串串珍珠用筐子装好，九江就进贡大龟。
English: The tribute included feathers, teeth, leather, gold, silver, copper, rattan, dried rattan, rattan, cypress, birch, spruce, nutmeg and rattan. The three princely states paid tribute to their famous products, wrapped up the poplar and the cedar, packed the colored silk and a string of pearls in a basket, and the Jiujiang River paid tribute to the turtle.

古文：浮于江、沱、灊、汉，逾于洛，至于南河。
现代文：从长江、沱水、潜水、漠水乘船，越过洛水，到达南河。
English: From the Yangtze River, Surabaya, diving, desert water by boat, across the Luoshui, to the South River.

古文：荆、河惟豫州。
现代文：荆山和黄河之间是豫州。
English: Between Mount Jing and the Yellow River is Yuzhou.

古文：伊、洛、瀍、涧既入于河，荥、波既猪，道荷泽，被盟猪，厥土惟壤，下土坟垆。
现代文：伊水、雒水、泸水、涧水进入黄河后，荣、波蓄满了水，疏通了荷泽，在盟猪筑起堤防。这襄土质柔软，土的下面是肥沃的黑色硬土。
English: After the Yishui, Shishui, Shishui, Shishui entered the Yellow River, the Rong and Waves accumulated water, dredged the Luzhe, and built a dike in Menghu. The soil is soft, and the bottom of the soil is fertile black hard soil.

古文：田中上，赋错上中。
现代文：这裹的农田是第四等，所纳租赋是第二等，杂着第一等贡品。
English: The farmland here is fourth-class, the rent paid is second-class, mixed with first-class tribute.

古文：贡漆、枲、絺、纻、棐纤纩，锡贡磬错。
现代文：贡物是漆、臬、绋、纡、用筐装的绸和捆棉，还进贡治玉器的石头。
English: The tribute consisted of lacquer, enamel, enamel, enamel, silk in baskets and cotton bundles, as well as stones from the tribute jade ware.

古文：浮于洛，入于河。
现代文：从洛水乘船，到达黄河。
English: Take a boat from Luoshui to the Yellow River.

古文：华阳，黑水惟梁州。
现代文：华山之南与黑水之间是梁州。
English: Between the south of Huashan and Heishui is Liangzhou.

古文：岷、嶓既艺，沱、灊既道，蔡、蒙旅平，和夷厎绩。
现代文：岷山、幡冢山已能种植，沱水、潜水已被疏通，蔡水、蒙水已被平定，和夷得到了治理。
English: Mount Lushan and Mount Fanlushan have been able to be planted, floodplains and submerged areas have been dredged, Cai Shui and Meng Shui have been pacified, and Heyi has been governed.

古文：厥土青黎。田下上，赋下中三错。
现代文：这裹的土色青而捆疏，田是第七等，贡物是第八等；还杂有第七等和第九等。
English: The soil is blue and loose, the fields are 7th grade, and the tribute is 8th grade; there are also 7th grade and 9th grade mixed.

古文：贡璆、铁、银、镂、砮、磬、熊、罴、狐、狸、织皮。
现代文：贡物有谬、铁、银、镂、署、磬，熊、熊、狐、狸、织皮。
English: The tributes include a horse, an iron, a silver, a donkey, a horse, a donkey, a bear, a bear, a fox, a fox, and a leather weaver.

古文：西顷因桓是俫，浮于灊，逾于沔，入于渭，乱于河。
现代文：西顷山循着桓水的方向蜿蜒而来，从潜水乘船，越过沔水，到达渭水，横渡渭水而到黄河。
English: Xihaoshan came meandering along the direction of Huanshui, from diving by boat, over Surabaya, to Surabaya, across Surabaya and to the Yellow River.

古文：黑水、西河惟雍州。
现代文：黑水、西河之间是雍州。
English: Between Heishui and the West River is Yongzhou.

古文：弱水既西，泾属渭汭。
现代文：弱水已经向西而流动，泾水流入了渭水。
English: Weak water has been flowing to the west, and salty water has flowed into salty water.

古文：漆、沮既从，酆水逌同。
现代文：漆水、沮水顺从地流入泪水后，丰水也同样流入渭水。
English: After the lacquer water and the dejected water flowed into the tears obediently, the abundant water also flowed into the salty water.

古文：荆、岐既旅，终南、惇物，至于鸟鼠，原隰厎绩，至于猪野。
现代文：荆山、岐山治理完后，终南、惇物一直到鸟鼠山都得到了治理。
English: After Jingshan and Qishan were controlled, all the way to the end of the south, the stolen goods, and the bird-mouse mountain were controlled.

古文：三危既宅，三苗丕叙。
现代文：平原和洼地得到治理，一直到猪壁。三危山已可以居住了，三苗也获得了安定。
English: The plains and depressions have been managed, all the way to the pig wall. The three dangerous mountains have become habitable, and the three seedlings have also become stable.

古文：厥土黄壤。田上上，赋中下。
现代文：这里土是黄色的，这裹田是第一等，贡物是第六等。
English: The soil here is yellow, the field is first class, and the tribute is sixth class.

古文：贡球、琳、琅玕。
现代文：贡物是球、琳、琅歼。
English: The tributes are the ball, the reed, and the dragonfly.

古文：浮于积石，至于龙门西河，会于渭汭。
现代文：从积石山乘船，到了龙门、西河，从渭水北边逆流而上。
English: From Jishishan by boat, to Longmen, the West River, from the north side of Surabaya upstream.

古文：织皮昆仑、析支、渠叟，西戎即叙。
现代文：昆晌、析支、渠叟都织毛皮，西戎各族都安定顺从了。
English: Kunlun, Seizhi, and Quzhou all weave furs, and all the tribes in West Rift Valley are stable and obedient.

古文：道汧及岐，至于荆山，逾于河；壶口、雷首，至于大岳；厎柱、析城，至于王屋；太行、恒山，至于碣石，入于海。
现代文：开通了沂山和岐山，一直到达荆山，越过黄河；又开通壶口、雷首，一直到达大岳；开通了底柱、析城，一直到达王屋；开通了太行、恒山，一直到碣石，进入海河。
English: Opened the Lushan and Qishan, all the way to Jingshan, and crossed the Yellow River; opened the Hukou and Lei Shou, all the way to Datong; opened the base column and Secession, all the way to Wangya; opened the Taihang and Hengshan, all the way to Shishi, and entered the Haihe River.

古文：西倾、朱圉、鸟鼠，至于太华；熊耳、外方、桐柏，至于倍尾。
现代文：开通西倾、朱圉、乌鼠，一直到太华山；开通熊耳、外方、桐柏，一直到倍尾。
English: Open up Xiling, Zhuye, and Wuzhe, all the way to Taihuashan; open up Xiong'er, Gaifang, and Tongbai, all the way to Beibei.

古文：道嶓冢，至于荆山；内方，至于大别；崏山之阳，至于衡山，过九江，至于敷浅原。
现代文：疏通了皤冢山，到达荆山；开通了内方，到达大别山；开通了峭山的南面，到达衡山，经过九江，到达敷浅原。
English: It dredged the Lushan Mountain and reached the Jing Mountain; it opened the inner side and reached the Dabie Mountain; it opened the southern side of the steep mountain and reached the Hengshan Mountain, passed through the Jiujiang River and reached the shallow plain.

古文：道弱水，至于合藜，余波入于流沙。
现代文：疏通弱水，到达合藜山，支流流入流沙。
English: Dredge the weak water, reach the Hailu Mountain, and the tributary flows into the quicksand.

古文：道黑水，至于三危，入于南海。
现代文：疏通黑水，到达三危山，进入南海。
English: The dredge channeled the black water past the Three Dangerous Mountains and into the South China Sea.

古文：道河积石，至于龙门，南至于华阴，东至于厎柱，又东至于盟津，东过洛汭，至于大伾，北过降水，至于大陆，又北播为九河，同为逆河，入于海。
现代文：从积石山开始疏通黄河，到达龙门山，南到华阴山，束到底柱，又东流到盟津，向东经过洛水和黄河汇合的地方，到达大任山，向北经过降水，到达大陆，又向北分流为九河，汇合而成逆河，流入大海。
English: The Yellow River starts from Jishishishan Mountain, flows through Longmen Mountain, south to Huayin Mountain, and then flows east to Mengjin, eastward through the confluence of Luohu and the Yellow River, reaches Dairen Mountain, northward through precipitation, reaches the mainland, and then branches northward into the Nine Rivers, merges into the Back River, and flows into the sea.

古文：嶓冢道漾，东流为汉，又东为沧浪之水，过三澨，至于大别，南入于江，东汇泽为彭蠡，东为北江，入于海。
现代文：从蟠冢开始疏通漾水，向东流形成汉水，又向东成为沧浪的水流，经过三滋，到达大别山，向南流入长江，向东汇合成泽形成彭蠡，向东形成北江，进入大海。
English: Starting from the Yangtze River, the water of the Yangtze River was dredged, and the eastward flow formed the Han River, and the eastward flow became the water flow of the vicissitudes, passing through the Three Gorges, reaching the Dabie Mountains, flowing into the Yangtze River to the south, merging with the Yangtze River to the east to form the Penghu River, and forming the Beijiang River to the east to enter the sea.

古文：崏山道江，东别为沱，又东至于醴，过九江，至于东陵，江迤北会于汇，东为中江，入于海。
现代文：从婚山疏通长江，向东分流出沱江，又向东流到达醴水，经过九江，到达束陵，再向东斜着延伸到北，与淮河汇合，以束称为中江，流进大海。
English: The Yangtze River is dredged from the Wedding Mountain, flows eastward to the Minjiang River, flows eastward to the Surabaya River, passes through the Jiujiang River, reaches the Sokuling River, and then extends eastward diagonally to the north, merges with the Huaihe River, and is called the Middle River in Sokul, and flows into the sea.

古文：道沇水，东流为泲，入于河，轶为荥，东出于陶丘北，又东至于荷，又东北会于汶，又北东入于海。
现代文：疏导沈水，向东流称为沸，进入黄河，河水漫溢出来成为荣泽，从陶丘的北面向东流，又向东到达荷泽，又向东北与汶水汇合，再向北，然后转向束，流进大海。
English: The dredging of sinking water, the eastward flow is called boiling, enters the Yellow River, the river water overflows and becomes Rongze, flows eastward from the north of Tao Qiu, reaches Heze in the east, merges with Wen Shui in the northeast, and then flows northward, and then turns into a bundle and flows into the sea.

古文：道淮自桐柏，东会于泗、沂，东入于海。
现代文：从桐柏山开始疏导淮河，向东与泅水、沂水汇合，东流进入大海。
English: From Tongbai Mountain, the dredging of the Huai Water begins, and it meets the Surabaya Water and Surabaya Water to the east, and then flows into the sea to the east.

古文：道渭自鸟鼠同穴，东会于酆，又东至于泾，又东过漆、沮，入于河。
现代文：从乌鼠同穴开始疏导渭水，向东与酆水汇合，又向东到达泾水，再向东经过漆、沮，流进黄河。
English: The dredging of the Huangshui River started from the same hole as that of the Wuxi River, and it converged with the Huangshui River to the east, and then reached the Huangshui River to the east, and then flowed into the Yellow River to the east through the lacquer and sediment.

古文：道洛自熊耳，东北会于涧、瀍，又东会于伊，又东北入于河。
现代文：从熊耳开始疏导洛水，向东北同涧水，泸水汇合，又向东和伊水汇合，再向东北流入黄回。
English: From Xiong'er, it begins to divert Luoshui, flows northeast to Tongluoshui, merges with Luoshui, merges with Yishui to the east, and then flows into the Yellow River to the northeast.

古文：九州逌同，四奥既宅，九山刊旅，九川涤原，九泽既陂，四海会同。
现代文：九州之内已经平定，四方的土地已经可以居住了，九州的名山都已经削木立了路标可以通行了，九条河流都已疏通了水源，九个湖泽都已修筑了堤防，四海之内都可会同京师。
English: Kyushu has been pacified, the land in all four directions has become habitable, Kyushu's famous mountains have been cleared of trees and road signs have been erected, nine rivers have been dredged, nine lakes have been built, and all four seas can meet with Beijing.

古文：六府孔修，庶土交正，厎慎财赋，咸则三壤，成赋中国。
现代文：水、火、金、木、土、谷六府都治理得很好，各处的土地都要征收赋税，并且慎重地规定了财物赋税的多少，都是根据土地的上中下等级规定赋税。
English: The six prefectures of water, fire, gold, wood, earth and valley are all well governed, and taxes are levied on land everywhere, and the amount of property tax is carefully determined, and taxes are determined according to the upper, middle and lower levels of land.

古文：锡土姓： 祗台德先，不距朕行。 
现代文：把土地赐给诸侯，并随赐姓氏： 所敬养的人，是以德行作为先决条件，没有违抗我的措施的人们。 
English: Give the land to the lords, and with it the surnames: Those who are respected and raised are those who have not defied My measures, with virtue as a prerequisite.

古文：五百里甸服：百里赋内总，二百里内铚，三百里内戛服，四百里粟，五百里米。
现代文：距王城五百里的地区叫做甸服：一百里远的地方缴纳连秆谷物，二百里远的地方缴纳谷穗，三百里远的地方缴纳带稃的谷，四百里远的地方缴纳带壳的谷粒，五百里远的地方缴米。
English: The area five hundred miles away from the royal city is called Dianfu: one hundred miles away, the cattle pay for the grain, two hundred miles away pay for the ears of grain, three hundred miles away pay for the valley with stalks, four hundred miles away pay for the grains with shells, and five hundred miles away pay for the rice.

古文：五百里侯服：百里采，二百里男国，三百里诸侯。
现代文：甸服以外四周各五百里的叫侯服：其中最近甸服的一百里之地的地区是分封卿大夫的地方，二百里之内是分封男爵的地方，三百里以外的地方是分封诸侯的地方。
English: Five hundred li in all directions around the outside of Tienfu are called Houfu: the area of the hundred li of the nearest Tienfu is the place of the vassal lord, the area within two hundred li is the place of the vassal baron, and the area beyond three hundred li is the place of the vassal lord.

古文：五百里绥服；三百里揆文教，二百里奋武卫。
现代文：四周各五百里的区域为绥服：三百里远的地方考察天子的政教并加以推行，二百里远的地方奋扬武威保卫天子。
English: The five-hundred-mile regions on all sides of the country were in attendance: the three-hundred-mile-distant places came to investigate and implement the political and religious teachings of the Son of Heaven, and the two-hundred-mile-distant places fought bravely to defend the Son of Heaven.

古文：五百里要服：三百里夷，二百里蔡。
现代文：五百里要服：有三百里的地方实行平易的法令，有二百里的地方要遵守刑法。
English: Five hundred li have to obey: three hundred li have to implement simple laws, and two hundred li have to abide by criminal laws.

古文：五百里荒服：三百里蛮，二百里流。
现代文：五百里荒服：有三百里地的要用教化改变蛮性，有二百里地就任其流动。
English: Five hundred miles of barbarism: three hundred miles of barbarism must be changed with enlightenment, and two hundred miles of barbarism must be allowed to flow.

古文：东渐于海，西被于流沙，朔、南洎，声教讫于四海。
现代文：向东逐渐到达大海，向西覆盖到流沙，北方、南方一同波及，声威和教化深入到四海。
English: To the east, it gradually reaches the sea, to the west, it is covered with quicksand, and to the north and south, it spreads, and its influence and enlightenment reach far into the four seas.

古文：禹锡玄圭，告厥成功。
现代文：尧赐给大禹玄色的美玉，以表彰他治水大功告成。
English: The gong was given to Dayu Hongsei in recognition of his great achievements in water control.

古文：后受禅于虞，为夏后氏。
现代文：其后大禹又接受虞舜的惮让而为天子，称为夏后氏。
English: After that, Dayu also accepted the abdication of Yu Yao and became the son of heaven, known as the Xiao clan.

古文：殷因于夏，亡所变改。
现代文：商代承袭了夏朝制度，没有什么变革。
English: The Shang Dynasty inherited the Xia Dynasty system, and there was little change.

古文：周既克殷，监于二代而损益之，定官分职，改禹徐、梁二州合之于雍、青，分冀州之地以为幽、并。
现代文：周朝战胜殷朝后，借鉴殷、周二代的制度而加以增减，确定官位，分配职责，分别把夏禹设置的徐州和梁州并入雍州和青州，把冀州的地域分为幽州、并州。
English: After the victory of the Zhou Dynasty over the Yin Dynasty, the Zhou Dynasty increased and decreased the number of officials by drawing on the systems of the Yin Dynasty and the Tang Dynasty, determined the official ranks and assigned responsibilities, and merged the Xuzhou and Liangzhou set up by Xia Yu into the Yongzhou and Qingzhou, respectively, and divided the Jizhou region into Yuzhou and Bianzhou.

古文：故《周官》有职方氏，掌天下之地，辩九州之国。
现代文：所以《周礼》中有职方氏，掌管天下的土地，治理九州的各国。
English: Therefore, in "Zhou Li" there are officials who are in charge of the land of the world and govern the countries of Kyushu.

古文：东南曰扬州：其山曰会稽，薮曰具区，川曰三江，浸曰五湖；其利金、锡、竹箭；民二男五女；畜宜鸟兽，谷宜稻。
现代文：东南方叫扬州：其中的山名为会稽，大湖泽叫具区，大河叫三江，能引渠灌溉农田的湖叫五湖；这裹盛产金、锡、竹箭；民众的男女比例是二男五女；适合畜养鸟兽，谷类宜种稻子。
English: The south-east is called Yangzhou: the mountains in it are called Huanji, the great lakes and rivers are called Guo, the great rivers are called Sanjiang, and the lakes that can be drained to irrigate farmland are called Wuhu; it is rich in gold, tin, and bamboo arrows; the male-female ratio of the people is two men and five women; it is suitable for raising animals and birds, and it is suitable for grain to grow rice.

古文：正南曰荆州：其山曰衡，薮曰云梦，川曰江、汉，浸曰颍、湛；其利丹、银、齿、革；民一男二女；畜及谷宜，与扬州同。
现代文：正南方是荆州：其中的山叫衡山，湖泽叫云梦，大的河流有长江、汉水，能引渠灌溉农田的叫颖水、湛水；这裹盛产丹、银、齿、革；民众的男女比例是一男二女；适合畜养的兽类和种植的谷类，与扬州相同。
English: Directly to the south is Jingzhou: its mountains are called Hengshan, its lakes are called Yunmeng, and its major rivers are the Yangtze River and the Han River. The canals that can be used to irrigate farmland are called Yingshui and Zhanshui. It is rich in diamonds, silver, teeth, and leather. The male-female ratio of the population is one man to two women. The animals suitable for animal husbandry and the cereals grown are the same as Yangzhou.

古文：河南曰豫州：其山曰华，薮曰圃田，川曰荥、洛，浸曰波、溠；其利林、漆、丝枲；民二男三女；畜宜六扰，其谷宜五种。
现代文：黄河南面叫豫州：其中山叫华山，湖泽叫圃田，河流叫荣水、雒水，灌渠叫波水、湲水；这裹盛产林、漆、丝桌；民众的男女比例是二男三女；适合畜养马、牛、羊、猪、狗、鸡，谷类适合种黍、稷、菽、麦、稻。
English: The south side of the Yellow River is called Yuzhou: its mountains are called Huashan, its lakes are called Fudan, its rivers are called Rongshui and Shunshui, and its irrigation canals are called Boshui and Shunshui; it is rich in forests, lacquer, and silk table; the male-female ratio of the people is two men and three women; it is suitable for raising horses, cattle, sheep, pigs, dogs, and chickens, and cereals are suitable for planting alfalfa, alfalfa, alfalfa, wheat, and rice.

古文：正东曰青州：其山曰沂，薮曰孟诸，川曰淮、泗，浸曰沂、沭；其利蒲、鱼；民二男三女；其畜宜鸡、狗，谷宜稻、麦。
现代文：正东方叫青州：其中山叫沂山，湖泽叫孟诸，河流叫淮水、泅水，灌渠叫沂水、沭水；这裹盛产蒲和鱼；民众的男女之比二男三女；这裹最适合畜养鶸和狗，谷类适合种稻和麦。
English: The East is called Qingzhou: its mountains are called Lushan, its lakes are called Mengzhou, its rivers are called Huai Shui and Lushu, and its irrigation canals are called Lushu and Lushu; it is rich in fish and fish; the ratio of men to women is two men and three women; it is most suitable for raising donkeys and dogs, and cereals are suitable for growing rice and wheat.

古文：河东曰兖州：其山曰岱，薮曰泰野，其川曰河、泲，浸曰卢、濰；其利蒲、鱼；民二男三女；其畜宜六扰，谷宜四种。
现代文：黄河东面叫兖州：其中山叫岱山，湖泽叫泰壁，河流叫河和沸，灌渠叫卢水、潍水；这裹盛产蒲和鱼；此间的男女比例是二比三；适合畜养马、牛、羊、猪、狗、鸡，最适合种植黍、稷、稻、麦。
English: The east side of the Yellow River is called Luzhou: its mountains are called Lushan, its lakes are called Taibai, its rivers are called Hehe and Boiling, and its irrigation canals are called Lushui and Shishui; it is rich in fish and fish; the male-female ratio is two to three; it is suitable for raising horses, cattle, sheep, pigs, dogs, and chickens, and it is most suitable for planting alfalfa, alfalfa, rice, and wheat.

古文：正西曰雍州；其山曰岳，薮日弦蒲，川曰泾、汭，其浸曰渭，洛：其利玉、石；其民三男二女；畜宜牛、马，谷宜黍、稷。
现代文：正西面叫雍州：其中山名叫吴岳山，大湖叫弦蒲泽，河流叫泾水、油水，其中灌渠叫渭水、洛水；这裹盛产玉、石；民众的男女比例是三男二女；适合畜养牛、马，谷类宜种植黍、稷。
English: The west side is called Yongzhou: the mountain is called Wuyue Mountain, the large lake is called Zhenpu Lake, the rivers are called Xinshui and Yanshui, and the irrigation canals are called Xinshui and Luoshui. It is rich in jade and stone. The male-female ratio of the people is three men and two women. It is suitable for raising cattle and horses, and it is suitable for planting straw and barley for cereals.

古文：东北曰幽州：其山曰医无闾，薮曰豯养，川曰河、泲，浸曰菑、时；其利鱼、盐；民一男三女；畜宜四扰，谷宜三种。
现代文：东北叫幽州：其中山叫医无间，湖泽叫猴养，河流叫黄河、沸水，灌渠叫苗水、时水；这裹盛产鱼、盐；民众的男女比例是一男三女；适合畜养马、牛、羊、猪，谷类适合种植黍、稷、稻。
English: The northeast is called Yuzhou: its mountains are called Yiwu, its lakes are called Monkey Lake, its rivers are called Yellow River and Boiling Water, and its irrigation canals are called Seedling Water and Seasonal Water; it is rich in fish and salt; the male-female ratio of the population is one man and three women; it is suitable for raising horses, cattle, sheep, and pigs, and its cereals are suitable for growing millet, barley, and rice.

古文：河内曰冀州：其山曰霍，薮曰扬纡，川曰漳，浸曰汾、潞；其利松、柏；民五男三女；畜宜牛、羊，谷宜黍、稷。
现代文：黄河以内叫冀州：其中山名叫霍山，湖泽叫扬纡，河流叫漳水，灌渠叫汾水、潞水；遣裹盛产松、柏；民众的男女比例是五男三女；适合畜养牛、羊，谷类适合种植黍、稷。
English: Within the Yellow River is called Jizhou: its mountains are called Huoshan, its lakes are called Yangshuo, its rivers are called Shishui, and its irrigation canals are called Shishui and Shishui; it is rich in pines and cypresses; the male-female ratio of the population is five men to three women; it is suitable for raising cattle and sheep, and its cereals are suitable for growing millet and barley.

古文：正北曰并州：其山曰恒山，薮曰昭余祁，川曰虖池、呕夷，浸曰涞、易；其利布帛；民二男三女；畜宜五扰，谷宜五种。
现代文：正北面叫并州：其中山名叫恒山，湖泽叫昭篮翅，河流叫皇迤、妪娄，灌渠叫速丞、显丞；这裹盛产布帛；百姓男女比例是二男三女；适合畜养马、牛、羊、狗、猪，谷类适合种植黍、稷、菽、麦、稻。
English: The north-facing side is called Nianzhou: the mountain is called Hengshan, the lake is called Zhaofeng, the rivers are called Huancheng and Huancheng, and the irrigation canals are called Huancheng and Huancheng; it is rich in cloth production; the male-female ratio is two men and three women; it is suitable for raising horses, cattle, sheep, dogs, and pigs, and cereals are suitable for planting straw, straw, straw, wheat, and rice.

古文：而保章氏掌天文，以星土辩九州之地，所封封域皆有分星，以视吉凶。
现代文：周代设有保章氏一职掌管天象，以星宿之所在划分九州之地，诸侯所分封的疆域都有星宿与之对应，以观测星象来预知吉凶。
English: During the Zhou Dynasty, there was a Baozhang clan in charge of the celestial bodies, and the land of Kyushu was divided according to the location of the constellations. The territories assigned by the lords had constellations corresponding to the constellations, and it was possible to predict good or bad fortune by observing the constellations.

古文：周爵五等，而土三等：公、侯百里，伯七十里，子、男五十里。
现代文：周朝的爵位有五等，而分封土地却衹有三种等次：即公、侯爵土地百里，伯爵土地七十里，子、男爵土地五十里。
English: The peerage of the Zhou Dynasty had five grades, but the land allotted had three grades: that is, the land of the duke and marquis was 100 li, the land of the count was 70 li, and the land of the son and baron was 50 li.

古文：不满为附庸，盖千八百国。
现代文：不满五十里的是附属于诸侯的小国，大概有一千八百个小国。
English: Less than fifty miles away are the small states attached to the principalities. There are approximately 1,800 small states.

古文：而太昊、黄帝之后，唐、虞侯伯犹存，帝王图籍相踵而可知。
现代文：太吴、黄帝之后，唐、虞时侯爵和伯爵仍然存在，帝王的地图与户籍相继都可知道。
English: After the reigns of Emperor Taowu and Emperor Huangdi, the reigns of the Tang Dynasty and the reigns of the Marquis of Yuxi and the Count still exist, and the maps of the emperors and their household registrations can be known one after another.

古文：周室既衰，礼乐征伐自诸侯出，转相吞灭，数百年间，列国耗尽。
现代文：周朝衰落后，礼乐征伐由诸侯决定，一个一个地被吞并消灭，数百年间，各诸侯国被消灭殆尽。
English: After the decline of the Zhou Dynasty, the conquest of the ceremonial music was decided by the princes, and one by one they were swallowed up and destroyed. Over the course of hundreds of years, all the princely states were wiped out.

古文：至春秋时，尚有数十国，五伯迭兴，总其盟会。
现代文：到春秋时，尚有数十国，五国相继称霸，成为盟主。
English: By the spring and autumn, there were still dozens of countries, and five countries successively dominated and became the leader.

古文：陵夷至于战国，天下分而为七，合从连衡，经数十年。
现代文：渐渐地到了战国，天下分裂成七个国家，合纵连衡，经过了几十年。
English: Gradually to the Warring States period, the world was divided into seven countries, which were successively unified, after several decades.

古文：秦遂并兼四海。
现代文：秦朝于是吞并了四海。
English: The Qin Dynasty then annexed the four seas.

古文：以为周制微弱，终为诸侯所丧，故不立尺土之封，分天下为郡县，荡灭前圣之苗裔，靡有孓遗者矣。
现代文：认为周朝之衰败在于分封诸侯国，因此秦就不建立尺土的封国，把天下划分为郡县，扫荡消灭前代圣人的后代，没有一个剩下来的。
English: He believed that the decline of the Zhou Dynasty was due to the division of feudal states, so the Qin Dynasty did not establish a feudal state, divided the world into counties, and wiped out the descendants of the previous generation of saints. There was no one left.

古文：汉兴，因秦制度，崇恩德，行简易，以抚海内。
现代文：汉朝建立后，沿袭蠢朝的制度，推崇恩德，实行简单易行之法，用来安抚海内。
English: After the establishment of the Han Dynasty, it followed the system of the Stupid Dynasty, promoted benevolence, and implemented a simple and easy-to-implement law to appease China.

古文：至武帝攘却胡、越，开地斥境，南置交阯，北置朔方之州，兼徐、梁、幽、并夏、周之制，改雍曰凉，改梁曰益，凡十三部，置刺史。
现代文：到汉武帝时击退了胡人、越人，开辟土地，拓展疆域，在南方设置了交耻州，北方设置了朔方州，兼并了徐州、銮业、幽业，以与夏、周时制度相同，把雍蛆改为速州，把銮业改为益州，共十三部，设置刺史。
English: By the time of Emperor Hanwu, he had repelled the Hu people and the Yue people, opened up land, and expanded the territory. In the south, he set up the Shame State, in the north, he set up the Shuo Fang State, and annexed Xuzhou, Yinye, and Youye. With the same time system as the summer and the week, he changed Yongkang to Hezhou, and changed Yinye to Yizhou. A total of thirteen parts were set up, and the history was set up.

古文：先王之迹既远，地名又数改易，是以采获旧闻，考迹《诗》、《书》，推表山川，以缀《禹贡》、《周官》、《春秋》，下及战国、秦、汉焉。
现代文：先王的事迹已相隔很久远，地名又几次改变，因此便搜集旧有的传闻，考察《诗经》、《尚书》上的记载，根据山!加以推断，来连结《禹贡》、《周官》、《春秋》，向下直到战国、秦、汉。
English: The deeds of the former king have been separated by a long distance, and the place names have changed several times. Therefore, they collected old rumors, examined the records in the "Shijing" and "Shangshu," and inferred from the "Mountain!" to connect "Yugong," "Zhou Guan" and "Spring and Autumn" down to the Warring States, Qin and Han dynasties.

古文：京兆尹，故秦内史，高帝元年属塞国，二年更为渭南郡，九年罢，复为内史。
现代文：京兆尹，即秦朝的内史之地，高帝元年划归塞国，高帝二年改为渭南郡，高帝九年撤销，重新改为内史。
English: Jing Zhaoyun, that is, the place of the internal history of the Qin Dynasty, was transferred to Serbia in the first year of Gao Di, changed to Yinan County in the second year of Gao Di, revoked in the ninth year of Gao Di, and re-changed to internal history.

古文：武帝建元六年分为右内史，太初元年更为京兆君。
现代文：武帝建元六年分为右内史，太初元年改为京兆尹。
English: In the sixth year of Emperor Wu Jianyuan, it was divided into right internal history, and in the first year of the first century, it was changed to Jing Zhaoyun.

古文：元始二年，户十九万五千七百二，口六十八万二千四百六十八。
现代文：兀始二年有十九万五千七百零二户，有六十八万二千四百六十八人。
English: In the first two years, there were 195,702 households and 682,468 people.

古文：县十二：长安，高帝五年置。
现代文：下辖十二个县：长安县，高帝五年时设置。
English: Twelve counties under its jurisdiction: Chang'an County, established when Gao Di was five years old.

古文：惠帝元年初城，六年成。
现代文：惠帝元年开始筑城，惠帝六年完成。
English: Hui Di began to build the city in the first year of the year, and Hui Di completed it in six years.

古文：户八万八百，口二十四万六千二百。
现代文：有八万零八百户，二十四万六千二百人。
English: There are 80,800 households and 246,200 people.

古文：王莽曰常安。
现代文：王莽时称为常安。
English: Wang Mangshi was called Chang'an.

古文：新丰，骊山在南，故骊戎国。
现代文：新丰县，骊山在它的南面，以前是骊戎国。
English: Xinfeng County, with Mount Lushan to its south, was formerly known as Qiong Rong Province.

古文：秦曰骊邑。
现代文：秦朝叫骊邑。
English: The Qin Dynasty called it Qiming.

古文：高祖七年置。
现代文：高祖七年设置。
English: It is set seven years after the founding of the school.

古文：船司空，莽曰船利。
现代文：船司空县，王莽时叫船利。
English: The ship's steward of Ku County, Wang Mang, is called Funli.

古文：蓝田，山出美玉，有虎候山祠，秦孝公置也。
现代文：蓝田县，山中出产美玉，有虎候山祠，秦孝公时设置。
English: Lantian County, the mountains produce beautiful jade, there is a tiger hill shrine, set up by Qin Xiaogong.

古文：华阴，故阴晋，秦惠文王五年更名宁秦，高帝八年更名华阴。
现代文：华阴县，以前的阴晋，秦惠文王五年改名叫宁秦，高帝八年改名叫华阴。
English: Hua Yin County, formerly Yin Jin, was renamed Ning Qin by Qin Huiwen Wang five years ago, and renamed Hua Yin by Emperor Gao eight years ago.

古文：太华山在南，有祠，豫州山。
现代文：太华山在它的南面，有祭祠，是豫州的山。
English: On the south side of Mount Taihua, there is a sacrificial shrine. It is the highest mountain in Yuzhou.

古文：集灵宫，武帝起。莽曰华坛也。
现代文：集灵宫，武帝时建造，王莽时叫华坛。
English: Shiling Palace, built during the reign of Emperor Wu, was called Huatan during the reign of Wang Mang.

古文：郑，周宣王弟郑桓公邑。有铁官。
现代文：郑县，是周宣王弟郑桓公的邑地，有铁官。
English: Zheng County is the hometown of Zhou Xuan's younger brother, Zheng Huan, and has an iron official.

古文：湖，有周天子祠二所。
现代文：湖县，有周朝的天子祭祠二所。
English: In Huzhou County, there are two Tianzi Festival shrines of the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：故曰胡，武帝建元年更名湖。
现代文：所以叫湖，武帝建元年改名叫湖。
English: That's why it's called a lake. In the first year of Emperor Wu's reign, it was renamed a lake.

古文：下邽，南陵，文帝七年置。
现代文：下邦县，南陵县，文帝七年设置。
English: Xiaobang County, Nanling County, set up in the seventh year of Emperor Wen.

古文：沂水出蓝田谷，北至霸陵入霸水。
现代文：沂水从蓝田谷流出，向北到霸陵进入霸水。
English: Surabaya water flows out of the Lantian Valley and flows north to Bailing into Basing.

古文：霸水亦出蓝田谷，北入渭。
现代文：霸水也从蓝田谷流出，向北进入渭水。
English: The overflowing water also flows out of the Lantian Valley and flows north into Surabaya.

古文：古曰兹水，秦穆公更名以章霸功。视子孙。
现代文：古代叫兹水，秦穆公时改名用来彰明称霸之功，示耀子孙。
English: In ancient times, it was called Zhishui. When Qin Mu Gong changed his name, it was used to highlight the power of hegemony and show off his children and grandchildren.

古文：奉明，宣帝置也。
现代文：奉明县，宣帝时设置。
English: Fengming County, set up at the time of Emperor Xuan.

古文：霸陵，故芷阳，文帝更名。
现代文：霸陵县，是以前的芷阳，文帝时改名。
English: Baring County, formerly known as Fenyang, changed its name when Emperor Wen died.

古文：莽曰水章也。
现代文：王莽时叫水章。
English: Wang Mangshi calls for water.

古文：杜陵。
现代文：杜陵县。
English: Duling County.

古文：故杜伯国，宣帝更名。
现代文：是以前的杜伯国，宣帝时改名。
English: It was formerly known as Tubo Province, but changed its name when Emperor Xuan was proclaimed.

古文：有周右将军杜主祠四所。
现代文：有周右将军杜主祠四所。
English: There are four general Zhou Du main shrines.

古文：莽曰饶安也。
现代文：王莽时叫饶安。
English: Wang Mangshi called Rao An.

古文：左冯翊，故秦内史，高帝元年属塞国，二年更名河上郡，九年罢，复为内史。
现代文：左冯翊，即秦朝的内史之地，高帝元年属于塞国，高帝二年改名为河上郡，九年时撤销，重新改为内史。
English: Zuofeng County, that is, the place of the internal history of the Qin Dynasty, belonged to Serbia in the first year of the Gao Dynasty, and was renamed as Kawakami County in the second year of the Gao Dynasty. It was revoked in the ninth year and re-named as the internal history.

古文：武帝建元六年分为左内史，太初元年更名左冯翊。
现代文：武帝建元六年分为左内史，太初元年改名为左冯翊。
English: In the sixth year of Emperor Wu Jianyuan, it was divided into Zuo Inner History, and in the first year of the year, it was renamed Zuo Fengyu.

古文：户二十三万五千一百一，口九十一万七千八百二十二。
现代文：有二十三万五千一百零一产，九十一万七千八百二十二人。
English: There were 235,101 births and 917,822 deaths.

古文：县二十四：高陵，左辅都尉治。
现代文：下辖二十四县：高陵县，由左辅都尉治理。
English: Twenty-four counties under its jurisdiction: Goryeong County, governed by Left Assistant Governor.

古文：莽曰千春。
现代文：王莽时叫千春。
English: Wang Mangshi called Chiharu.

古文：栎阳，秦献公自雍徙。
现代文：橾阳县，秦献公时从雍城迁来。
English: Fenyang County, Qin Xian Gong moved from Yongcheng.

古文：莽曰师亭。
现代文：王莽时叫师亭。
English: Wang Mangshi called Shitei.

古文：翟道，莽曰涣。
现代文：翟道县，王莽时叫涣。
English: In Shantou County, Wang Mang is known as Shao.

古文：池阳，惠帝四年置。
现代文：池阳县，惠帝四年设置。
English: Chiyang County, Huidi four years set up.

古文：嶻山在北。
现代文：裁薛山在北面。
English: Mount Jiexue is in the north.

古文：夏阳，故少梁，秦惠文王十一年更名。
现代文：夏阳县，是以前的少梁，秦惠文王十一年改名。
English: Xiayang County, formerly known as Shaoliang, changed its name to Qin Huiwen Wang eleven years ago.

古文：《禹贡》梁山在西北，龙门山在北。
现代文：《禹贡》上记载的梁山在西北，龙门山在北面。
English: The Liangshan Mountain recorded in "Yugong" is in the northwest, and the Longmen Mountain is in the north.

古文：有铁官。
现代文：有铁官。
English: There are iron officials.

古文：莽曰冀亭。
现代文：王莽时叫冀亭。
English: Wang Mangshi called Ji Ting.

古文：衙，莽曰达昌。
现代文：衙县，王莽时叫达昌。
English: In Jixian County, Wang Mang was once called Dachang.

古文：粟邑，莽曰粟城，谷口，九嵏山在西。
现代文：粟邑县，王莽时叫粟城。谷口县，九叟山在西面。
English: Ao'i County, known as Ao-cheng when Wang Mang was there. Taniguchi County, with Mount Jiuye in the west.

古文：有天齐公五床山、仙人、五帝祠四所。
现代文：有天齐公、五牀山、价人、五帝祠四所。
English: There are four shrines of Tian Qigong, Wushan Mountain, Guanzhong and Five Emperors.

古文：莽曰谷喙。
现代文：王莽时叫谷喙。
English: Wang Mangshi called Gu Yao.

古文：莲勺，鄜，莽曰修令。
现代文：莲勺县，鄘县，王莽时叫脩令。
English: Lianchao County, Shixian County, Wangmanzhong is called Shuling.

古文：频阳。秦厉公置。
现代文：频阳县，秦厉公时设置。
English: Fanyang County, Qin Liguang time set.

古文：临晋，故大荔，秦获之，更名。
现代文：临晋县，是以前的大荔，秦朝取得了它，改了名。
English: Linjin County is the former Dali, the Qin Dynasty acquired it and changed its name.

古文：有河水祠。
现代文：有河水祠。
English: There is a small river shrine.

古文：芮乡，故芮国。
现代文：芮乡，是以前的芮国。
English: Minxiang is the former Min Gu.

古文：莽曰监晋。
现代文：王莽时叫监晋。
English: Wang Mangshi called Jianjin.

古文：重泉莽曰调泉。
现代文：重泉县，王莽时叫调泉。
English: In Shigeizumi County, Wang Mangshi is called Shosei.

古文：郃阳，礻殳祤，景帝二年置。
现代文：郃阳县，投栩县，景帝二年设置。
English: Shenyang County, Toutou County, Jingdi set up in two years.

古文：武城，莽曰桓城。
现代文：武城县，王莽时叫桓城。
English: Wucheng County, when Wang Mang was called Kancheng.

古文：沈阳，莽曰制昌。
现代文：沈阳县，王莽时叫制昌。
English: In Shenyang County, Wang Mangshi is called Xiechang.

古文：褱德，《禹贡》北条荆山在南，下有强梁原。
现代文：裹德县，《禹贡》北面列举的荆山在南面，下面有彊梁原。
English: In Shuide County, Jing Mountain, which is listed on the north side of "Yugong," is on the south side, and Qiliangyuan is below.

古文：洛水东南入渭，雍州浸。
现代文：洛水从东南流入渭水，是雍州的灌渠。
English: Luoshui flows from the southeast into Yanshui, which is the largest irrigation canal in Yongzhou.

古文：莽曰德驩。
现代文：王莽时叫德骥。
English: Wang Mangshi is called Decheng.

古文：徵，莽曰泛爱。
现代文：征县，王莽时叫泛爱。
English: During the county-seizing campaign, Wang Mang called Pan Ai.

古文：云陵。昭帝置也。
现代文：云陵县，昭帝时设置。
English: Yunling County, set up during the reign of Emperor Zhao.

古文：万年。高帝置。
现代文：万年县，高帝时设置。
English: Mannen County, established in the reign of Emperor Gao.

古文：莽曰异赤。
现代文：王莽时叫异赤。
English: Wang Mengshi's face turned red.

古文：长陵，高帝置。
现代文：长陵县，高帝时设置。
English: Changling County, established during the reign of Emperor Gao.

古文：户五万五十七，口十七万九千四百六十九。
现代文：有五万零五十七户，十七万九千四百六十九人。
English: There are 50,057 households and 179,469 people.

古文：莽曰长平。
现代文：王莽时叫做长平。
English: Wang Mangshi is called Changping.

古文：阳陵，故弋阳，景帝更名。
现代文：阳陵县，是以前的弋阳，景帝时改名。
English: Yangling County, formerly known as Fenyang, changed its name during the reign of Emperor Jing.

古文：莽曰渭阳。
现代文：王莽时叫渭阳。
English: Wang Mangshi is called Shenyang.

古文：云阳。
现代文：云阳县。
English: Yunyang County.

古文：有休屠、金人及径路神祠三所，越巫卯古襄阝祠三所。
现代文：有休屠、金人以及径路神祠三所，越地巫师舶郭祠三所。
English: There are three shrines of Xiu Tu, Jin Ren and the path, and three shrines of the wizards of Yueji.

古文：右扶风，故秦内史，高帝元年属雍国，二年更为中地郡。
现代文：右扶风，即秦朝的内史之地，高帝元年属于章邯之雍国，高帝二年改为中地郡。
English: Zuo Fu Feng, that is, the place of the internal history of the Qin Dynasty, belonged to Zhangye of Yongguo in the first year of Gao Di, and was changed to Zhongdi County in the second year of Gao Di.

古文：九年罢，复为内史。
现代文：高帝九年撤销，重新叫内史。
English: Gao Di revoked it nine years ago and renamed it Inner History.

古文：武帝建元六年分为右内史，太初元年更名主爵都尉为右扶风。
现代文：武帝建元六年分为右内史，太初元年把主爵都尉改名为右扶风。
English: In the sixth year of Emperor Wu's reign in the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, it was divided into the Right Inner History, and in the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, the Lord Lieutenant was renamed the Right Fu Feng.

古文：户二十一万六千三百七十七，口八十三万六千七十，县二十一：渭城，故咸阳，高帝元年更名新城，七年罢，属长安。
现代文：有二十一万六千三百七十七户，八十三万六千零七十人。辖二十一县：渭城县，是以前的咸阳，高帝元年改名叫新城，高帝七年撤销，划归长安。
English: There are 216,377 households and 8,360,70 people. It administers 21 counties: Shicheng County, formerly Xianyang, was renamed Xincheng in the first year of the Gao Dynasty, and was revoked in the seventh year of the Gao Dynasty and transferred to Chang'an.

古文：武帝元鼎三年更名渭城。
现代文：武帝元鼎三年改名叫渭城。
English: In the third year of Emperor Wu's reign, the name of the city was changed to Shicheng.

古文：有兰池宫。
现代文：有兰池宫。
English: There is Orchid Pond Palace.

古文：莽曰京城。
现代文：王莽时叫作京城。
English: Wang Mangshi called it Beijing.

古文：槐里，周曰犬丘，懿王都之。
现代文：槐里县，周时叫犬丘，懿王在这裹定都。
English: In Baili County, known as Inuka in the Zhou Dynasty, Shao Wang was the capital.

古文：秦更名废丘。
现代文：秦时改名为废丘。
English: In the Qin Dynasty, it was renamed Wasted Hill.

古文：高祖三年更名。
现代文：高祖三年又改名。
English: Gaozu changed his name again three years later.

古文：有黄山宫，孝惠二年起。
现代文：有黄山宫，孝惠二年建造。
English: There is Huangshan Palace, built by Xiao Hui in two years.

古文：莽曰槐治。
现代文：王莽时叫槐治。
English: Wang Mangshi is called Gongzhi.

古文：鄠，古国，有扈谷亭。
现代文：鄂县，是一个古国。有扈谷亭。
English: E County, is an ancient country. There is Shibuya Pavilion.

古文：扈，夏启所伐。
现代文：扈，夏启曾攻打过。
English: , Xia Qi once attacked Mt.

古文：酆水出东南，又有潏水，皆北过上林苑入渭。
现代文：酆水从它东南流出，还有淆水，都在北面经过上林苑流入渭水。
English: Surabaya water flows out of it to the southeast, and there is also confused water, all of which flows into Surabaya water in the north through Shanglin Court.

古文：有萯阳宫，秦文王起。
现代文：有责阳宫，秦文王时建造。
English: There is Guoyang Palace, which was built during the reign of King Qinwen.

古文：盩厔，有长杨宫，有射熊馆，秦昭王起。
现代文：签屋县，有长杨宫，有射熊馆，秦昭工时建造。
English: In Qieya County, there are Changyang Palace, Shooting Bear Pavilion, and Qin Zhaojing.

古文：灵轵渠，武帝穿也。
现代文：灵软渠，是武帝时凿通的。
English: It was Emperor Wu who chiseled through the flexible canal.

古文：斄，周后稷所封，郁夷，《诗》 周道郁夷 。
现代文：牦县，周时后稷所分封的。郁夷县，《诗》上有 周道郁夷 。
English: Zhou County, which was divided into Zhou and Houyi. Ikui County, which is mentioned in "Poetry" as Zhou Dao and Ikui.

古文：有汧水祠。
现代文：有沂水祠。
English: There is a water shrine.

古文：莽曰郁平。
现代文：王莽时叫郁乎县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Yuhu County.

古文：美阳，《禹贡》岐山在西北。
现代文：美阳县，《禹贡》中所说的岐山在它西北。
English: Miyang County, the Qishan mentioned in "Yugong" is in the northwest of it.

古文：中水乡，周文王所邑。
现代文：中水乡，是周大王建邑地的地方。
English: Zhongshui Township is the place where Zhou Da Wang built the township.

古文：有高泉宫，秦宣太后起也。
现代文：有高泉宫，秦宣太后建造。
English: There is Gaoquan Palace, built by Empress Dowager Qin Xuan.

古文：郿，成国梁首受渭，东北至上林入蒙笼渠。
现代文：郡县，成国渠首先接受渭水的水，东北到上林流入蒙笼渠。
English: County by county, the Chengguo Canal first receives water from the Xinshui River, and flows into the Mengcai Canal from the northeast to Shanglin.

古文：右辅都尉治。
现代文：属右辅都尉管理。
English: It is under the administration of the Right Assistant Captain.

古文：雍，秦惠公都之。
现代文：雍县，秦惠公在这裹定都。
English: Yong County, Qin Huigong is the capital here.

古文：有五畤，太昊、黄帝以下祠三百三所。
现代文：有五峙，太昊、黄帝以下祠三百零三所。
English: There are five watchtowers, and there are 303 ancestral halls from Emperor Taeho to Emperor Huangdi.

古文：橐泉宫，孝公起。
现代文：橐泉宫，孝公建造。
English: Jingsen Palace, built by Xiaogong.

古文：祈年宫，惠公起。
现代文：祈年宫，惠公建造。
English: Guinnian Palace, built by Huigong.

古文：棫阳宫，昭王起。
现代文：械阳宫，昭王建造。
English: Jianyang Palace, built by King Zhao.

古文：有铁官。
现代文：有铁官。
English: There are iron officials.

古文：漆，水在县西。
现代文：漆县，水流在县的西面。
English: In Urushi County, the water flow is in the west of the county.

古文：有铁官。
现代文：有铁官。
English: There are iron officials.

古文：莽曰漆治。
现代文：王莽时叫漆治。
English: Wang Mangshi called Urushi.

古文：栒邑，有豳乡，《诗》豳国，公刘所都。
现代文：枸邑县，有豳乡，即《诗》上所说的豳国，公刘在此定都。
English: Gongyi County, there is Gongxiang, that is, Gongguo mentioned in the "Poem," and Gongliu is the capital here.

古文：隃麋，有黄帝子祠。
现代文：喻麋县，有黄帝子祠。
English: In Yuqi County, there is the Huangdi Zi Ancestral Hall.

古文：莽曰扶亭。
现代文：王莽时叫扶亭。
English: Wang Mangshi called Futing.

古文：陈仓，有上公、明星、黄帝孙、舜妻育冢祠。
现代文：陈仓县，有上公、明星、黄帝的孙子、舜的妻子育的冢和祠。
English: Chencang County, there are Shangguo, star, Huangdi's grandson, Zou's wife and Zou's ancestral shrine.

古文：有羽阳宫，秦武王起也。
现代文：有羽阳宫，秦武王时建造。
English: There is Hanyang Palace, built during the reign of King Qin Wu.

古文：杜阳，杜水南入渭。
现代文：杜阳县，杜水从南面流入渭水。
English: In Duyang County, Du Shui flows into Surabaya from the south.

古文：《诗》曰 自杜 。莽曰通杜。
现代文：《诗》上说 自杜 王莽时叫通杜。
English: "Poetry" says that "Ziddu" was called "Tongdu" when Wang Mang was alive.

古文：氵幵，吴山在西，古文以为氵幵山。
现代文：淠县，吴山在西面，古代文字记载认为是沂山。
English: Lushan County, Wushan in the west, the ancient text records that it is Lushan.

古文：雍州山。
现代文：雍州山。
English: Mount Yongzhou.

古文：北有蒲谷乡弦中谷，雍州弦蒲薮。
现代文：北面有蒲谷乡弦中谷，雍州弦蒲薮。
English: In the north, there is Bagu Township, Zhenzhong Valley, and Yongzhou, Zhenbubao.

古文：汧水出西北，入渭。
现代文：沂水从西北流出，流入渭水。
English: Surabaya water flows from the northwest and flows into Surabaya.

古文：芮水出西北，东入泾。
现代文：芮水从西北流出，向东流入泾水。
English: Surabaya water flows out from the northwest and flows into Surabaya water to the east.

古文：《诗》芮阝尻，雍州川也。
现代文：是《诗》上所说的芮眠，是雍州的河流。
English: It is the "sleepy sleep" mentioned in the "Poem," and it is the river of Yongzhou.

古文：好畤，垝山在东。
现代文：好时县，跪山在东面。
English: In Hershey County, Mt. Kneeling is in the east.

古文：有梁山宫，秦始皇起。
现代文：有梁山宫，秦始皇时建造。
English: There is the Liangshan Palace, built during the reign of Qin Shi Huang.

古文：莽曰好邑。
现代文：王莽时叫做好邑。
English: Wang Mangshi said to do a good job.

古文：虢，有黄帝子、周文武祠。
现代文：虢县，有黄帝的儿子、周文王、周武王的祠。
English: In Handan County, there are the ancestral halls of the sons of the Yellow Emperor, King Zhouwen and King Zhouwu.

古文：虢宫，秦宣太后起也。
现代文：虢宣，由秦宣太后建造。
English: It was built by Empress Dowager Qin Xuan.

古文：安陵，惠帝置。
现代文：安陵县，夏至时设置。
English: Anling County, set at the summer solstice.

古文：莽曰嘉平。
现代文：互茬时叫嘉平。
English: When they fight, they call each other Jiaping.

古文：茂陵，武帝置。
现代文：茂陵县，武帝时设置。
English: Muryeong County, established at the time of Emperor Wu.

古文：户六万一千八十七，口二十七万七千二百七十七。
现代文：有六万一千零八十七户，二十匕万七千二日匕十匕入。
English: There were 61,087 households, up from 272,000 ten days earlier.

古文：莽曰宣城。
现代文：王莽时叫宣城。
English: Wang Mang called Xuancheng.

古文：平陵。昭帝置。
现代文：平陵鳖，啦时设置。
English: Hirabayashi-dori, La-time setting.

古文：莽曰广利。
现代文：盛时叫做龃。
English: In its prime, it was known as Tsumo.

古文：武功，太壹山，古文以为终南。
现代文：武功县。是丝山，古代文字记载认为是垄直山。
English: Wugong County. It is Silk Mountain, and ancient written records consider it to be Rongzhoushan.

古文：垂山，古文以为敦物。
现代文：垂旦，古文记载认为是敦物。
English: According to ancient records, it is thought to be a dragonfly.

古文：皆在县东。
现代文：都在县的束面。
English: They are all from Sokumen in the same prefecture.

古文：斜水出衙领山北，至眉阝入渭。
现代文：斜水从衙领山北面流出，到郧流入回丛。
English: The sloping water flows out of the north face of the Qilian Mountain and flows into the backbush at the end of the valley.

古文：褒水亦出衙领，至南郑入沔。
现代文：壹丛也流出面。领，到盐必流入迺丛。
English: The first bunch also flows out of the surface. In the end, the salt must flow into the second bunch.

古文：有垂山、斜水，褒水祠三所。
现代文：有垂山、斜水、褒水祠三所。
English: There are three shrines: the Hanging Mountain, the Slanting Water, and the Rewarding Water Shrine.

古文：莽曰新光。
现代文：王莽时叫做新光。
English: Wang Mangshi is called New Light.

古文：弘农郡，武帝元鼎四年置。
现代文：弘农郡，武帝元鼎四年始置。
English: Hongnong County was established in the fourth year of Emperor Wu's reign.

古文：莽曰右队。
现代文：王莽改名右队。
English: Wang Mang changed his name to Right Team.

古文：户十一万八千九十一，口四十七万五千九百五十四。
现代文：有十一万八干零九十一户，四十七万五千九百五十四口人。
English: There are 118,091 households with 4,759,054 people.

古文：有铁官，在黾池。
现代文：有铁官，在醒池。
English: There is an iron officer in Seike.

古文：县十一：弘农，故秦函谷关。
现代文：下辖十一县：弘农县，是以前童周的鱼查板。
English: Eleven counties under its jurisdiction: Hongnong County, formerly Tongzhou's fish inspection board.

古文：衙山领下谷，爥水所出，北入河。
现代文：衙山领下面有谷地，还丞从这襄流出，向北流入黄河。
English: There is a valley below the Lushan Mountains, from which the Huancheng River flows northward into the Yellow River.

古文：卢氏，熊耳山在东。伊水出，东北入雒，过郡一，行四百五十里。又有育水，南至顺阳入沔。
现代文：卢氏县，熊耳山在它束面，伊水从这里流出，向东北进入雒水，经过一个郡，行程四百五十里：还有育水，向南到顺阳流入沔水。
English: In Lu County, Mount Xiong'er is on its cusp, and the Yishui flows from here, northeast into the Surabaya, passing through a county, traveling four hundred and fifty miles: there is also the Yuxui, flowing south to Shunyang into the Surabaya.

古文：又有洱水，东南至鲁阳，亦入沔。
现代文：还有洱水，向东南到鲁阳，也流入沔水。
English: There is also Surabaya, to the southeast to Luyang, also flows into Surabaya.

古文：皆过郡二，行六百里。
现代文：都经过两个郡，行程六百里。
English: Both passed through two counties, a journey of six hundred miles.

古文：莽曰昌富。
现代文：王莽时叫昌富。
English: Wang Mangshi was called Changfu.

古文：陕，故虢国。
现代文：陕县，是以前的虢国。
English: Shaanxi is the former Shandong Province.

古文：有焦城，故焦国。
现代文：有焦墟，是以前的崖包。
English: There are scorch marks where the cliff used to be.

古文：北虢在大阳，东虢在荥阳，西虢在雍州。
现代文：王邀在左墨，塞蓝在茔堡，玺蓝在壅蛆。
English: Wang Zhaoying is in Zuoying, Xie Lan is in Zhucheng, and Indigo is in Handan.

古文：莽曰黄眉。
现代文：王菱时叫董旦。
English: Wang Lingshi is called Dong Dan.

古文：宜阳，在黾池有铁官也。
现代文：宜阳县，在幽有铁官。
English: Yiyang County, there is an iron official in Yu.

古文：黾池，高帝八年复黾池中乡民。
现代文：垦池县，高帝八年恢复咀池中乡的百姓。
English: Pu Chi County, Emperor Gao restored the people of Tsui Chih Chung Township in eight years.

古文：景帝中二年初城，徙万家为县。
现代文：景帝中二年开始筑城，迁徙万家人口到这裹，成为县。
English: In the second year of Kingdee Middle School, the construction of the city began, and the population of 10,000 families migrated to this area, becoming the county.

古文：穀水出穀阳谷，东北至穀城入雒。
现代文：谷水流出谷阳谷，向东北到谷城进入雒水。
English: The valley water flows out of Giyang Valley and flows northeast to Gucheng to enter Surabaya.

古文：莽曰陕亭。
现代文：王莽时叫陕亭。
English: Wang Mangshi is called Shaan Ting.

古文：丹水，水出上雒冢领山，东至析入钧。
现代文：丹水县，水从上雏摹主灿流出，向东到扭流入鱼眯。
English: In Danshui County, water flows out of the main channel of the upper shoal and flows into the shoal in an eastward direction.

古文：密阳乡，故商密也。
现代文：蜜凰塑，是以前的商密。
English: Meihuang Plastic is a former business secret.

古文：新安，《禹贡》涧水在东，南入雒。
现代文：新安县，《禹贡》上的涧水在东面，向南流入雒水。
English: In Xin'an County, the Surabaya on "Yugong" is in the east and flows south into the Surabaya.

古文：商，秦相卫鞅邑也。
现代文：商县，是秦国相卫鞅的邑地。
English: Shangxian County is the county seat of Qin State.

古文：析，黄水出黄谷，鞠水出析谷，俱东至郦入湍水。
现代文：析县，黄水流出黄谷，鞠水流出析谷，都向东到郦流入湍水。
English: In Seolle County, the yellow water flows out of the Yellow Valley, and the muddy water flows out of the Seolle Valley, both of which flow eastward into the Surabaya River.

古文：莽曰君亭。
现代文：王莽时叫君亭。
English: Wang Mangshi called Jun Ting.

古文：陆浑，春秋迁陆浑戎于此。
现代文：陆浑县，春秋时把陆浑戎迁到遣裹。
English: In the spring and autumn of Lufun County, the Lufun fishery was relocated to Yanwu.

古文：有关。
现代文：有关。
English: It's concerning.

古文：上雒。
现代文：上雒县。
English: Shangluo County.

古文：《禹贡》雒水出冢领山，东北至巩入河，过郡二，行千七十里，豫州川。
现代文：《禹贡》中的雒水从冢领山流出，东北到巩流入黄河，经过两个郡，行程一千零七十里，豫州河。
English: In "Yugong," the salty water flows out of the Qilian Mountains, flows into the Yellow River from the northeast to Gong, passes through two counties, travels 1,070 miles, and ends up in the Yuzhou River.

古文：又有甲水，出秦领山，东南至钖入沔，过郡三，行五百七十里。
现代文：还有卫真，从秦领山流出，向东南到馒地流入迈丞，经过三个郡，行程五百七十里。
English: There is also the Wei Zhen River, which flows out of Qinlian Mountain and flows into the Meizheng River to the southeast of Handan, passing through three counties and covering a distance of 570 miles.

古文：熊耳、获舆山在东北。
现代文：熊耳获舆山在东北面。
English: Mount Xiong'er is in the northeast.

古文：河东郡，秦置。
现代文：洞束郡，盏固始置。
English: Douzhu County, Zhengyi District.

古文：莽曰兆阳。
现代文：毖时改名挝。
English: He later changed his name to Lao.

古文：有根仓、湿仓。
现代文：有根仓、湿仓。
English: There are root cellars and wet cellars.

古文：户二十三万六千八百九十六，口九十六万二千九百一十二。
现代文：有二十三万六千八百九十六户，有几十六万二千九百一十二人。
English: There are 236,896 households and 662,912 people.

古文：县二十四：安邑，巫咸山在南，盐池在西南。
现代文：辖二十四县：安邑县，巫盛量在南面，盐迤在西南。
English: It administers 24 counties: Anyi County, Wusheng County in the south, and Yancheng in the southwest.

古文：魏绛自魏徙此，至惠王徙大梁。
现代文：垫缝从魏迁徙到这里，到蛊王时迁到大梁。
English: Cushion seams migrated here from the Wei Dynasty and migrated to the Qin Dynasty to the Great Wall.

古文：有铁官、盐官。
现代文：有铁官、盐官。
English: There are iron officials and salt officials.

古文：莽曰河东。
现代文：王莽时叫河东。
English: Wang Mangshi called out to Hedong.

古文：大阳，吴山在西，上有吴城，周武王封太伯后于此，是为虞公，为晋所灭。
现代文：大阳壁，星业在丙面，上面有昱垣，且亘逗封左伯后就在这襄，这裹就叫虞公，被晋国所灭。
English: On the wall of the sun, the star industry is on the C side, and there is a hedge on the top, and the long-suffering left aunt is here. This is called the Yugong, which was destroyed by the Jin state.

古文：有天子庙。
现代文：有天子庙。
English: There is a temple to the heavenly son.

古文：莽曰勤田。
现代文：王莽时叫勤田。
English: Wang Mangshi called out for Qingtian.

古文：猗氏，解，蒲反，有尧山、首山祠。
现代文：猗氏县，解县，蒲反县，有尧山、首山祠。
English: In Jinshi County, Jie County, and Putang County, there are Jinshan and Shoushan shrines.

古文：雷首山在南。
现代文：雷首山在南面。
English: Mt. Lei Shou is in the south.

古文：故曰蒲，秦更名。
现代文：所以叫蒲，秦时改名。
English: That's why he changed his name from Pu to Qin.

古文：莽曰蒲城。
现代文：王莽时叫蒲城。
English: Wang Mangshi's nickname was "Pucheng."

古文：河北，《诗》魏国，晋献公灭之，以封大夫毕万，曾孙绛徙安邑也。
现代文：河北县，是《诗》上的魏国，晋献公把它减掉了，用来分封大夫毕万，曾孙魏绛迁徙到安邑。
English: Hebei County was Wei Province in "Poetry." Jin Xiangong subtracted it and used it to award the title of doctor to Bi Wan. Wei Xuan's great-grandson migrated to Anyi.

古文：左邑，莽曰兆亭。
现代文：左邑县，王菱时叫；担皇。
English: Zuoyu County, Wang Ling when called; bearer of the emperor.

古文：汾阴，介山在南。
现代文：汾阴县，企业在南面。
English: Shuyin County, the enterprise is in the south.

古文：闻喜，故曲沃。
现代文：邀飓，是以前的迪达。
English: The invited hurricane is the former Dida.

古文：晋武公自晋阳徙此。
现代文：置逮公从置匮迁到逭裹。
English: As far as possible, it should be done in the daytime. Ochi Watanabe migrated from Ochi Salt to Yanbulai.

古文：武帝元鼎六年行过，更名。
现代文：亘适亘叠六年经过这裹，改名。
English: After six years of this, I changed my name.

古文：濩泽，《禹贡》析城山在西南。
现代文：濩泽县，《禹贡》中的析城山在西南。
English: In Heze County, the mountain in "Yugong" is in the southwest.

古文：端氏，临汾，垣，《禹贡》王屋山在东北，沇水所出，东南至武德入河，轶出荥阳北地中，又东至琅槐入海，过郡九，行千八百四十里。
现代文：端氐昼，坠溯，垣毖，《禹贡》上的王屋旦在东北，边丛从这裹流出，东南到!妪流入董回，溢出茔堡的北地中，又向东到琅槐流入大海，经过九个郡，行程有一千八百四十里。
English: The Wang Yatang on "Yugong" is in the northeast, the edge bushes flow out from this bundle, the southeast to! flows into Dong Hui, overflows into the north of the bunker, and flows east to  flows into the sea, passing through nine counties, with a journey of eighteen hundred and forty miles.

古文：皮氏，耿乡，故耿国，晋献公灭之，以赐大夫赵夙。
现代文：皮氏县，耿乡，是以前的耿国，晋献公消灭了它，用来赐给大夫趟夙。
English: Pishi County, Geng Township, is the former Geng Province. Jin Xian Gong eliminated it and used it to bestow the title of doctor.

古文：后十世献侯徙中牟。
现代文：这以后过了十代，到献侯时迁到中牟。
English: Ten generations have passed since then, and when it was time to dedicate the temple, it was moved to Nakamuro.

古文：有铁官，莽曰延平。
现代文：有铁官。王莽时叫延平。
English: There was an iron official. Wang Mangshi was called Yanping.

古文：长修，平阳，韩武子玄孙贞子居此。
现代文：长脩县，平阳县，韩武子玄孙贞子居住在这襄。
English: Nagatoro County, Pingyang County, Hanwu's great-great-grandson Sadako lived here.

古文：有铁官。
现代文：有铁官。
English: There are iron officials.

古文：莽曰香平。
现代文：王莽时叫香平。
English: Wang Mangshi called Shangping.

古文：襄陵。有班氏乡亭。
现代文：襄陵县，有班氏乡亭。
English: In Yangling County, there is the Ban's Township Pavilion.

古文：莽曰幹昌。
现代文：王莽时叫干昌。
English: Wang Mangshi is called Ganchang.

古文：彘，霍大山在东，冀州山，周厉王所奔。
现代文：彘县，霍大山在东面，冀州山，是周厉王所逃向的地方。
English: Jixian County, Huoda Mountain in the east, and Jizhou Mountain are the places to which Zhou Li Wang fled.

古文：莽曰黄城。
现代文：王莽时叫黄城。
English: Wang Mangshi called Huangcheng.

古文：杨，莽曰有年亭。
现代文：杨县，王莽时叫有年亭。
English: In Yang County, Wang Mangshi is called Yu Nian Ting.

古文：北屈，《禹贡》壶口山在东南。
现代文：北屈县，《禹贡》的壶口山在东南。
English: North Qu County, "Yugong"'s Mount Hukou is in the southeast.

古文：莽曰朕北。
现代文：王莽时叫朕北。
English: Wang Mangshi called me North.

古文：蒲子，绛，晋武公自曲沃徙此。
现代文：蒲子县，绛县，晋武公从曲沃迁到这裹。
English: Puzi County, Handan County, Jinwukong moved from Quwo to this area.

古文：有铁官。
现代文：有铁宫。
English: There are iron officials.

古文：狐讘，骐。
现代文：狐摄县，骐县。
English: Fuxing County, Handan County.

古文：侯国。
现代文：是侯国。
English: It is a vassal state.

古文：太原郡，秦置。
现代文：太原郡，秦国始置。
English: Taiyuan County, the beginning of Qin.

古文：有盐官，在晋阳。
现代文：有盐官，在晋阳。
English: There are salt officials in Jinyang.

古文：属并州。
现代文：属于并州刺史部。
English: It belongs to the merged state.

古文：户十六万九千八百六十三，口六十八万四百八十八。
现代文：有十六万九千八百六十三户，六十八万四百八十八人。
English: There are 169,863 households and 6,804,888 people.

古文：有家马官。
现代文：有家马官。
English: There is a family equestrian officer.

古文：县二十一：晋阳，故《诗》唐国，周成王灭唐，封弟叔虞。龙山在西北。
现代文：辖二十一县：晋阳县，以前的《诗》上叫唐国，周成土消灭了唐国，把他弟弟叔虞分封在遣裹。龙山在西北。
English: Twenty-one counties under its jurisdiction: Jinyang County, formerly called Tang Guo in the "Poem." Zhou Chengdu destroyed Tang Guo and sent his younger brother, Shugu, in exile. Longshan is in the northwest.

古文：有盐官。
现代文：有盐官。
English: There is a salt officer.

古文：晋水所出，东入汾。
现代文：晋水从遣裹流出，向东流入汾水。
English: The Jin water flows out of the Huanwu and flows eastward into the Xin water.

古文：葰人，界休，莽曰界美。
现代文：菝人县，界休县，王莽时叫界美。
English: Xingren County, Jieju County, Wang Mangzhou is called Jiemi.

古文：榆次，涂水乡，晋大夫知徐吾邑。
现代文：榆次县，在涂水乡，晋国大夫知徐吾的邑地。
English: Ganzi County, in Tuishui Township, the hometown of Jin Guo's doctor Zhi Xuguo.

古文：梗阳乡，魏戊邑。
现代文：梗阳乡，魏戊的邑地。
English: Fongyang Township, Weiwu County.

古文：莽曰大原亭。
现代文：王莽时叫大原亭。
English: Wang Mangshi called Ohara Pavilion.

古文：中都，于离，莽曰于合。
现代文：中都县，于离县，王莽时叫于合。
English: In Zhongdu County, when leaving the county, Wang Mang called for a meeting.

古文：兹氏，莽曰兹同。
现代文：兹氏县，王莽时叫兹同。
English: Zishi County, Wang Mangshi called Zidong.

古文：狼孟，莽曰狼调。
现代文：狼孟县，王莽时叫狼调。
English: Wolf Meng County, Wang Mang called wolf tune.

古文：邬，九泽在北，是为昭馀祁，并州薮。
现代文：邬县，九泽在它北面，造裹是昭余祁，并州的湖泽。
English: Jixian County, with Jiuzhaigou to the north, is made up of Zhaoyu County and Huzhou Lake.

古文：晋大夫司马弥牟邑。
现代文：晋大夫司马弥牟的邑地。
English: It is the hometown of Jin Daifu Simayimu.

古文：盂，晋大夫孟丙邑。
现代文：盂县，晋大夫孟丙的邑地。
English: Handan County, the hometown of Dr. Meng Ping, a doctor from Jin Province.

古文：平陶，莽曰多穰。
现代文：平陶县，王莽时叫多穣。
English: In Pingtao County, Wang Mangshi is called Daduo.

古文：汾阳，北山，汾水所出，西南至汾阴入河，过郡二，行千三百四十里，冀州浸。
现代文：汾阳县，有北山，汾水从逭襄流出，向西南到汾阴流入黄河，经过两个郡，行程一千三百四十里，是冀州的灌渠。
English: In Biyang County, there is the Beishan River. The water of the Biyang River flows from the Biyang River to the southwest to the Biyang River and flows into the Yellow River, passing through two counties with a journey of 1340 miles. It is the irrigation canal of Jizhou.

古文：京陵，莽曰致城。
现代文：京陵县，王莽时叫致城。
English: Jingling County, Wang Mangshi called for the city.

古文：阳曲，大陵，有铁官。
现代文：阳曲县，大陵县，有铁官。
English: Yangqu County and Daling County have iron officials.

古文：虑虒，阳邑，莽曰繁穰。
现代文：王莽时叫大宁。原平县，祁县，晋国大夫贾辛的邑地，王莽时叫示。
English: Wang Mengshi was called Daining. Wang Mengshi was from Yuanping County, Yixian County, the hometown of Jiaxin, the governor of Jin Province.

古文：广武。句注、贾屋山在北。
现代文：上艾县，有绵曼水，向东到蒲吾，流入摩池水。
English: In Shangai County, there is Mianman Water, which flows eastward to Pugu and flows into Mochi Water.

古文：都尉治。莽曰信桓。
现代文：虑质县，阳邑县，王莽时叫繁穣。
English: Qianqixia County, Yangyi County, Wang Mang is often called Fusty.

古文：上党郡，秦置，属并州。
现代文：上党郡，秦始置，属于并州。
English: Shangdang County, Qin Shi Jie, belongs to the merged state.

古文：有上党关、壶口关、石研关，天井关。
现代文：有上党关、壶口关。石研关、天井关。
English: There is the Upper Party Pass, the Jug Pass, the Stone Study Pass, and the Ceiling Pass.

古文：户七万三千七百九十八，口三十三万七千七百六十六。
现代文：有七万三千七百九十八户，三十三万七千七百六十六人。
English: There are 73,798 households and 337,766 people.

古文：县十四：长子，周史辛甲所封。
现代文：下辖十四县：长子县，周史辛甲所封的地方。
English: Fourteen counties under its jurisdiction: the eldest son county, the place where Zhou Shi Xin Jia was sealed.

古文：鹿谷山，浊漳水所出，东至邺入清漳。
现代文：有鹿谷山，溺漳水从这裹流出。向东到邺流入清漳。
English: There is Lugu Mountain. Drowning water flows out from here. It flows eastward into Qingyuan.

古文：屯留，桑钦言 绛水出西南，东入海 。
现代文：屯留县，桑钦说 绛水从西南流出，向东流入大海 。
English: In Tunliu County, Sanqin said that the floodwaters flowed from the southwest and flowed eastward into the sea.

古文：余吾，铜鞮，有上虒亭，下虒聚。
现代文：余吾县，铜千县，有上厌亭，下厩聚。
English: In Yugo County and Tongshen County, there are Shangyu Pavilion and Shimo Stables.

古文：沾，大黾谷，清漳水所出，东北至邑成入大河，过郡五，行千六百八十里，冀州川。
现代文：沾县，有大咀谷，清漳水从这裹流出，向东北到邑成流入黄河，经过五个郡，行程一千六百八十里。有冀州河。
English: In Jin County, there is the Tsui Valley, from which clear brackish water flows to the northeast to Ocheng, where it flows into the Yellow River, passing through five counties and traveling 1,680 miles. There is the Jizhou River.

古文：涅氏，涅水也。
现代文：涅氏县，涅水从这裹流出。
English: Neji County, Neji water flows from here.

古文：襄垣，莽曰上党亭。
现代文：襄垣县，王莽时叫上党亭。
English: In Xiangyuan County, Wang Mengshi went to the party pavilion.

古文：壶关，有羊肠阪。
现代文：壶关县，有羊肠版。
English: In Kuguan County, there is a sheep intestine version.

古文：沾水东至朝歌入淇。
现代文：沾水向东到朝歌流入淇水。
English: The dipping water flows eastward to the morning song into the gushing water.

古文：泫氏，杨谷，绝水所出，南至野王入沁。
现代文：泫氏县，有杨谷，绝水从这裹流出，向南到壁王流入沁。
English: In Jinshi County, there is Yanggu, and the permafrost water flows out of this swath and flows southward to Qianwang and into the Yangtze River.

古文：高都，莞谷，丹水所出，东南入泫水。
现代文：高都县，有莞谷，丹水从这裹流出，向东南流入泫水。
English: In Gaodu County, there is Guan Valley, from which Danshui flows out and flows into Surabaya to the southeast.

古文：有天井关。
现代文：有天井关。
English: There is a ceiling gate.

古文：潞，故潞子国。
现代文：潞县，是故潞子国。
English: Jixian County is the former Jiazi Province.

古文：陭氏，阳阿，穀远。
现代文：隋氏县，阳阿县，谷远县。
English: Sui County, Yang Ah County, Gu Yuan County.

古文：羊头山世靡谷，沁水所出，东南至荥阳入河，过郡三，行九百七十里。莽曰穀近。
现代文：有羊头山世靡谷，沁水从这裹流出，向东南方向到荣阳流入黄河，经过三个郡，行程九百七十里，王莽时叫谷近。
English: There is Shekou Mountain and Shimei Valley. Surabaya water flows out of this valley and flows into the Yellow River in the southeast direction to Rongyang, passing through three counties, traveling nine hundred and seventy miles. Wang Mangshi called the valley near.

古文：河内郡，高帝元年为殷国，二年更名。
现代文：河内郡，高帝元年叫殷国，高帝二年改为郡。
English: Hanoi County was called Yin Province in the first year of Emperor Gao, and changed to County in the second year of Emperor Gao.

古文：莽曰后队，属司隶。
现代文：王莽时改名后队校尉部，属于司隶。
English: When Wang Mang changed his name, he was assigned to the captain's department of the rear guard.

古文：户二十四万一千二百四十六，口百六万七千九十七。
现代文：有二十四万一千二百四十六户，一百零六万七千零九十七人。
English: There are 241,246 households and 1,067,097 people.

古文：县十八：怀，有工官。
现代文：下辖十八县：怀县，有工官。
English: Eighteen counties under its jurisdiction: Wai County, there are construction officials.

古文：莽曰河内。
现代文：王莽时改名河内。
English: Wang Mangshi changed his name to Hanoi.

古文：汲，武德，波，山阳，东太行山在西北。
现代文：汲县，武德县，波县，山阳县，在西北有束太行山。
English: Ku County, Wude County, Bo County, Sanyang County, in the northwest there is a bunch of Taihang Mountain.

古文：河阳，莽曰河亭。
现代文：河阳县，王莽时叫河亭。
English: In Heyang County, Wang Mangshi is called He Ting.

古文：州，共，故国。
现代文：州县，共县，是旧国。
English: County, county, county, is the old country.

古文：北山，淇水所出，东至黎阳入河。
现代文：有北山，淇水从这裹流出，向东到黎阳流入黄河。
English: There is the North Mountain, from which the water flows eastward to Liyang and flows into the Yellow River.

古文：平皋，朝歌，纣所都。
现代文：平皋县，朝歌县，纣王在这裹定都。
English: Pingyao County, Chaoga County, Shao Wang is the capital here.

古文：周武王弟康叔所封，更名卫。
现代文：周武王弟康叔所分有的封地，改名为卫。
English: The fief owned by Zhou Wu's younger brother, Kang Xiu, was renamed Wei.

古文：莽曰雅歌。
现代文：王莽时叫雅歌。
English: Wang Mangshi called for a song.

古文：脩武，温，故国，已姓，苏忿生所封也。
现代文：脩武县，温县，是旧国，都姓己，是苏忿生的封地。
English: Xiongwu County and Wenzhou County, both in the old country, are surnamed Ji, and are the fiefdoms of Su Gensheng.

古文：野王，太行山在西北。
现代文：壁王县，太行山在西北。
English: King County, Mount Taihang in the northwest.

古文：卫元君为秦所夺，自濮阳徙此。
现代文：卫元君被秦国所攻夺，从濮阳迁徙到这裹。
English: Wei Yuanjun was conquered by the Qin Dynasty and moved from Shenyang to this area.

古文：莽曰平野。
现代文：王莽时叫作平壁。
English: Wang Mangshi is called Pingbei.

古文：获嘉，故汲之新中乡，武帝行过更名也。
现代文：获嘉县，是以前汲地的新中乡，武帝经过时加以改名。
English: Hujia County was formerly Xinzhong Township, which was renamed when Emperor Wu passed by.

古文：轵，沁水，隆虑，国水东北至信成入张甲河，过郡三，行千八百四十里。
现代文：轵县，沁水县，隆虑县，国水向东北到信成流入张甲河，经过三个郡，行程一千八百四十里。
English: Xingxian, Lishui County, Longyan County, the national water flows into the Zhangjiahe River in the northeast to Xincheng, passing through three counties, traveling eighteen hundred and forty miles.

古文：有铁官。
现代文：有铁官。
English: There are iron officials.

古文：荡阴。
现代文：荡阴县。
English: Wangyin County.

古文：荡水东至内黄泽。
现代文：荡水向东到内黄泽。
English: The water swirled eastward to the Inner Yellow Lake.

古文：西山，羑水所出，亦至内黄入荡。
现代文：茇水从西山流出，也到内黄流入荡水。
English: Surge water flows out of the West Mountain, and also flows into the Inner Yellow Mountain.

古文：有羑里城，西伯所拘也。
现代文：有茇里城，西伯被拘留在这裹。
English: There is the city of Bali, where Xi Bo was detained.

古文：河南郡，故秦三川郡，高帝更名。
现代文：河南郡，即秦国的郡故地，高帝时改为今名。
English: Henan County, that is, the county hometown of Qin, changed its name to its current name during the reign of Emperor Gao.

古文：雒阳户五万二千八百三十九。
现代文：雒阳有五万二千八百三十九户。
English: There are 52,839 households in Shenyang.

古文：莽曰保忠信乡，属司隶也。
现代文：王莽时叫保忠信乡，属于司隶校尉部。
English: Wang Mang was called Baotong Xinxiang at the time, and belonged to the Sili Lieutenant's Department.

古文：户二十七万六千四百四十四，口一百七十四万二百七十九。
现代文：有二十七万六千四百四十四户，一百七十四万二百七十九人。
English: There were 276,444 households and 1,740,279 people.

古文：有铁官、工官。
现代文：有铁官、工官。
English: There are railway officials and construction officials.

古文：敖仓在荥阳。
现代文：敖仓在荣阳。
English: Kamakura is in Rongyang.

古文：县二十二：雒阳，周公迁殷民，是为成周。
现代文：下辖二十二县：雒阳县，周公迁移殷国百姓，因此叫成周。
English: Twenty-two counties under its jurisdiction: Fenyang County, Zhou Gong moved the people of Yin Province, so it was called Cheng Zhou.

古文：《春秋》昭公三十二年，晋合诸侯于狄泉，以其地大成周之城，居敬王。
现代文：《春秋》上记载昭公三十二年，晋在狄泉会合诸侯，因为它的面积比成周城的面积大，就让敬王居住。
English: "Spring and Autumn" records that in the 32nd year of King Zhaogong, the princes of Jin gathered in Diquan, and because its area was larger than that of Chengzhou City, they let King Kei live there.

古文：莽曰宜阳。
现代文：王莽时叫作宜阳。
English: Wang Mang was once called Yiyang.

古文：荥阳，卞水、冯池皆在西南。
现代文：荣阳暴系，卞水、冯池都在西南。
English: Rongyang violent system, Surabaya, Fengchi are in the southwest.

古文：有狼汤渠，首受泲，东南至陈入颍，过郡四，行七百八十里。
现代文：有狼汤渠，首先接受沸水的水，向东南到陈流入颖水，经过四个郡，行程七百八十里。
English: There is a wolf soup canal, which first receives water from boiling water, flows southeast to Chen and flows into Yingshui, passing through four counties, traveling seven hundred and eighty miles.

古文：偃师，尸乡，殷汤所都。
现代文：偃师县，有尸乡，是殷汤定都的地。
English: Jinshi County, with its cemetery, is the land of Yin Tangding.

古文：莽曰师成。
现代文：王莽时叫师成。
English: Wang Mangshi called Shicheng.

古文：京，平阴，中牟，圃田泽在西，豫州薮。
现代文：京县，乎阴县，中牟县，圃田泽在西面，是豫州的湖泽。
English: Jing County, Huyin County, Zhongmou County, and Pudian Lake in the west are the largest lakes in Yuzhou.

古文：有管叔邑，赵献侯自耿徙此。
现代文：有笺叔的邑地，赵献侯从耿迁到这裹。
English: Zhao Xianhou moved from Geng to this area, which is the hometown of his uncle, Zhao Xianhou.

古文：平，莽曰治平。
现代文：平县，王莽时改名治平。
English: In Ping County, Wang Mangshi changed his name to Zhi Ping.

古文：阳武，有博浪沙。
现代文：阳武县，有博狼沙。
English: In Yangwu County, there is Bo Wolf Sand.

古文：莽曰阳桓。
现代文：王莽时叫阳桓。
English: Wang Mangshi is called Yang Kan.

古文：河南，故郏鄏地。
现代文：河南县，是以前的郊、鄙地。
English: Henan County is a former suburb.

古文：周武王迁九鼎，周公致太平，营以为都，是为王城，至平王居之。
现代文：周武王迁移九鼎，周公迎来太平，营建作为都城，造就是王城，到平王时就居住在这裹。
English: King Zhou Wu moved Jiuding, Zhou Gong ushered in Taiping, built as a capital city, built a royal city, and lived here when he was king.

古文：缑氏，刘聚，周大夫刘子邑。
现代文：缑氏县，刘聚，是周大夫刘子的邑地。
English: Liuju, Jinshi County, is the hometown of Dr. Zhou Liuzi.

古文：有延寿城仙人祠。
现代文：有延寿城仙人祠。
English: There is the Yeonsu Castle Immortal's Shrine.

古文：莽曰中亭。
现代文：王莽时叫中亭。
English: Wang Mangshi called Zhongting.

古文：卷，原武，莽曰原桓。
现代文：卷县，原武县，王莽时叫原桓。
English: Zeng County, Yuanwu County, Wang Mang is called Yuan Kan.

古文：巩，东周所居。
现代文：巩县，东周所居住的地方。
English: Gong County, where Dong Zhou lived.

古文：穀成，《禹贡》瀍水出替亭北，东南入雒。
现代文：谷成县，《禹贡》上的泸水从营亭北面流出，向东南流入雒水。
English: In Gu Cheng County, the floodwaters on "Yugong" flowed out from the north side of the pavilion and flowed into the floodwaters to the southeast.

古文：故市，密，故国，有大騩山，潠水所出，南至临颍入颍。
现代文：故市县，密县，是旧有的国家。有大骁山，潠水从这裹流出，向南到临颖流入颖水。
English: The former counties, counties, and counties, are the old countries. There are large mountains, and the floodwaters flow out from here, flowing south to Linying and flowing into Yingshui.

古文：新成，惠帝四年置。
现代文：新城县，惠帝四年设置。
English: Xincheng County, Huidi four years set up.

古文：蛮中，故戎蛮子国。
现代文：蛮中，是以前的戎蛮子国。
English: In the middle of the barbarians, is the former country of the barbarians.

古文：开封，逢池在东北，或曰宋之逢泽也。
现代文：开封县，逢池在东北，有的说是宋国的逢泽。
English: Kaifeng County, Fengchi in the northeast, some say it is the Song Dynasty's Anze.

古文：成皋，故虎牢。
现代文：成皋县，是以前的虎牢。
English: Chenglu County, is the former tiger prison.

古文：或曰制。
现代文：又叫制。
English: He called for restraint again.

古文：苑陵，莽曰左亭。
现代文：苑陵县，王莽时叫左亭。
English: Yuanling County, Wang Mangshi called Zuoting.

古文：梁，狐聚，秦灭西周徙其君于此。
现代文：梁县，有思狐聚，秦灭西周后把它的君主迁到这裹。
English: Liang County, there is a fox gathering, the Qin Dynasty moved its monarchs here after the Western Zhou Dynasty.

古文：阳人聚，秦灭东周徙其君于此。
现代文：阳人聚，秦灭东周后把它的君主迁到这里。
English: Yangrenju, Qin Dynasty moved its monarchs here after the Eastern Zhou Dynasty.

古文：新郑。
现代文：新郑县。
English: Xinzheng County.

古文：《诗》郑国，郑桓公之子武公所国，后为韩所灭，韩自平阳徙都之。
现代文：《诗》上的郑国，是郑桓公的儿子武公所建立的国家，后来被韩国所灭，韩国从平阳迁到这裹定都。
English: According to the poem, Zheng Guo, the country founded by Zheng Huan's son Wukong, was later destroyed by Korea, which moved from Pingyang to this capital city.

古文：东郡，秦置。莽曰治亭。
现代文：东郡，秦始置，王莽时改名叫治亭。
English: Dong County, Qin Shi Jie, Wang Mang changed his name to Jiting.

古文：属兖州。
现代文：属于兖州刺史部。
English: It belongs to Zhangzhou.

古文：户四十万一千二百九十七，口百六十五万九千二十八。
现代文：有四十万一千二百九十七户，一百六十五万九千零二十八人。
English: There are 411,297 households and 1,659,028 people.

古文：县二十二：濮阳，卫成公自楚丘徙此。
现代文：辖二十二县：濮阳县，卫成公从楚丘迁到这襄。
English: Twenty-two counties under its jurisdiction: Fenyang County, where Wei Chenggong moved from Chuqiu.

古文：故帝丘，颛顼虚。
现代文：是以前的帝丘，颛顼时成为废墟。
English: It was the former Imperial Mansion, but it soon fell into ruins.

古文：莽曰治亭。
现代文：王莽时叫治亭。
English: Wang Mangshi is called Jiting.

古文：观，莽曰观治。
现代文：观县，王莽时叫观治。
English: Guan County, Wang Mang called Guan Zhi.

古文：聊城，顿丘，莽曰顺丘。
现代文：聊城县，顿丘县，王莽时叫顺丘。
English: Liaocheng County, Dongqiu County, Wang Mang is called Shunqiu.

古文：发干，莽曰戢楯。
现代文：发干县，王莽时叫戢循。
English: In Fagan County, Wang Meng called for a follow-up.

古文：范，莽曰建睦。
现代文：范县，王莽时叫建睦。
English: In Fan County, Wang Mang called Jianmu.

古文：茬平，莽曰功崇。
现代文：茬平县，王莽时叫功崇。
English: Suiping County, Wang Mang is called Gong Chong.

古文：东武阳，禹治漯水，东北至千乘入海，过郡三，行千二十里。
现代文：东武阳县，大禹治理漯水，使它向东北到千乘流入大海，经过三个郡，行程一千零二十里。
English: In Dongwuyang County, Dayu controlled the water of the Yunnan River, causing it to flow northeast to Qianren and into the sea, passing through three counties, a journey of 1,020 miles.

古文：莽曰武昌。
现代文：王莽时叫武昌。
English: Wang Mangshi is called Wuchang.

古文：博平，莽曰加睦。
现代文：博平县，王莽时叫加睦。
English: Boping County, Wang Mang is called Ga Moo.

古文：黎，莽曰黎治。
现代文：黎县，王莽时叫黎治。
English: Li County, Wang Mang is called Li Zhi.

古文：清，莽曰清治。
现代文：清县，王莽时叫清治。
English: Qing County, Wang Mang called Qing Zhi.

古文：东阿，都尉治。
现代文：束阿县，由都尉治理。
English: Sokcho County, governed by a lieutenant.

古文：离狐，莽曰瑞狐。
现代文：离狐县，莽时叫瑞狐。
English: It is called Ruihu when it is away from Fox County.

古文：临邑，有泲庙。
现代文：临邑县，有沸庙。
English: In Lin'yi County, there is a boil temple.

古文：莽曰穀城亭。
现代文：王莽时叫谷城亭。
English: Wang Mangshi called Gu Chengting.

古文：利苗，须昌，故须句国，大昊后，风姓。
现代文：利苗县，须昌县，是以前的须句国，大昊的后代，都姓风。
English: Limiao County, Suchang County, are the descendants of the former Suzhou country, Dahao, all surnamed Feng.

古文：寿良，蚩尤祠在西北泲上。
现代文：寿良县，蚩尤祠在西北的沸上。
English: In Shouliang County, Puyu Shrine is in the northwest boil.

古文：有朐城。
现代文：有朐城。
English: There's the city of Ying.

古文：乐昌，阳平，白马，南燕，南燕国，姞姓，黄帝后。
现代文：乐昌县，阳平县，白马县，南燕县，南燕国，都姓皓，黄帝的后代。
English: Lechang County, Yangping County, Baima County, Nanyan County, Nanyan Country, all surnamed Yu, descendants of the Yellow Emperor.

古文：廪丘。
现代文：廪丘县。
English: Mengqiu County.

古文：陈留郡，武帝元狩元年置。
现代文：陈留郡，武帝元狩元年设置。
English: Chenlu County, Wudiyuan County, set up in the first year.

古文：属兖州。
现代文：属于兖州刺史部。
English: It belongs to Zhangzhou.

古文：户二十九万六千二百八十四，口一百五十万九千五十。
现代文：有二十九万六千二百八十四户，一百五十万九干零五十人。
English: There are 2,996,284 households and 1,509,050 people.

古文：县十七：陈留，鲁渠水首受狼汤渠，东至阳夏，入涡渠。
现代文：辖十七县：陈留县，鲁渠水首先从狼汤渠接受水源，向东到阳夏，流入涡渠。
English: Seventeen counties under its jurisdiction: Chenliu County, the Lu canal water first receives water from the wolf soup canal, flows east to Yangxia, and flows into the vortex canal.

古文：小黄，成安，宁陵，莽曰康善。
现代文：小黄县，成安县，宁陵县，王莽时叫康善。
English: Xiaohuang County, Cheng'an County, Ningling County, Wang Mang is called Kangshan.

古文：雍丘，故杞国也，周武王封禹后东楼公。
现代文：雍丘县，是以前的杞国，周武王把它封给大禹的后代东楼公。
English: Yongqiu County is the former Shandong Province. King Zhou Wu gave it to Dayu's descendant Dongluo.

古文：先春秋时徙鲁东北，二十一世简公为楚所灭。
现代文：先在春秋时迁到鲁国的东北，到二十一代简公时就被楚国所减。
English: First, they moved to the northeast of Lu in the Spring and Autumn Period, and by the time of the twenty-first generation of Jian Gong, they were reduced to Chu.

古文：酸枣，东昏，莽曰东明。
现代文：酸枣县，束昏县，王莽时叫束明。
English: Suzu County, Sokom County, Wang Mang is called Sokom.

古文：襄邑，有服官，莽曰襄平。
现代文：襄邑县，有服官。王莽时叫襄平。
English: In Xiangyi County, there is a servant. Wang Mengshi is called Xiangping.

古文：外黄，都尉治。
现代文：外黄县，由都尉治理。
English: Waigao County, governed by a captain.

古文：封丘，濮渠水首受泲，东北至都关，入羊里水，过郡三，行六百三十里，长罗，侯国。
现代文：封丘县，濮渠水首先从济水接受水源，向东北到都关，进入羊里水，经过三个郡，行程六百三十里。长罗县，是诸侯国。
English: In Fengqiu County, the canal water first receives water from Jishui, and travels to the northeast to Duguan, entering Yangli Water, passing through three counties, a journey of 630 miles. In Changluo County, it is the state.

古文：莽曰惠泽。
现代文：王莽时叫惠泽。
English: Wang Mangshi is called Huizhe.

古文：尉氏，傿，莽曰顺通。
现代文：尉氏县，儒县，王莽时叫顺通。
English: Fei County, Ru County, Wang Mang called Shuntong.

古文：长垣，莽曰长固。
现代文：长垣县，王莽时叫长固。
English: In Nagagaki County, Wang Mang is called Changgu.

古文：平丘，济阳，莽曰济前。
现代文：平丘县，济阳县，王莽时叫济前。
English: Pingqiu County, Jiyang County, Wang Mang is called Jiqian.

古文：浚仪。
现代文：浚仪县。
English: Dongyi County.

古文：故大梁。
现代文：是以前的大梁。
English: It's the old girders.

古文：魏惠王自安邑徙此。
现代文：魏惠王从安邑迁到逭裹。
English: Wei Hui Wang moved from Anyi to Xuanwu.

古文：睢水首受狼汤水，东至取虑入泗，过郡四，行千三百六十里。
现代文：睢水首先从狼汤水接受水源，向东到取虑流入泅水，经过四个郡，行程一千三百六十里。
English: Surabaya was the first to receive water from Woltang, and it flowed into Surabaya from the east through four counties, a journey of 1,360 miles.

古文：颍川郡，秦置。
现代文：颖川郡，秦始置。
English: Qin Shi Jie, Yingchuan County.

古文：高帝五年为韩国，六年复故。
现代文：高帝五年叫韩国，次年又恢复原名。
English: In the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Gao, it was called Korea, and the following year it was restored to its original name.

古文：莽曰左队。
现代文：王莽时叫左队。
English: Wang Mangshi called for the left team.

古文：阳翟有工官。
现代文：阳翟有工官。
English: Impotence has a workman.

古文：属豫州。
现代文：属于豫州刺史部。
English: It belongs to Yuzhou.

古文：户四十三万二千四百九十一，口二百二十一万九百七十三。
现代文：有四十三万二千四百九十一户，二百二十一万九百七十三人。
English: There are 432,491 households and 2,211,973 people.

古文：县二十：阳翟，夏禹国。
现代文：辖二十县：阳翟县，是夏禹的诸侯国。
English: Jurisdiction of 20 counties: Yangshuo County, is Xia Yu's vassal state.

古文：周末，韩景侯自新郑徙此。
现代文：周朝后期，韩景侯从新郑迁到这裹。
English: In the late Zhou Dynasty, Han Jing Hou moved here from Xin Zheng.

古文：户四万一千六百五十，口十万九千。
现代文：有四万一千六百五十户，十万九干人。
English: There are 41,650 households and 109,000 people.

古文：莽曰颍川。
现代文：王莽时叫颖川。
English: Wang Mangshi called Yingchuan.

古文：昆阳，颍阳，定陵，有东不羹。
现代文：昆阳县，颖阳县，定陵县，有束不羹。
English: Kunyang County, Yingyang County, Dingling County, there are a bunch of them.

古文：莽曰定城。
现代文：王莽时叫定城。
English: Wang Mangshi called Dingcheng.

古文：长社，新汲，襄城，有西不羹。
现代文：长社县，新汲县，襄城县，有西不羹。
English: In Chosha County, Xinqu County, and Xiangcheng County, there is no western food.

古文：莽曰相城。
现代文：王莽时叫相城。
English: Wang Mangshi called Siangcheng.

古文：郾，郏，舞阳，颍阴，崇高，武帝置，以奉太室山，是为中岳。
现代文：郾县，郏县，舞阳县，颖阴县，亩高县，武帝时设置，用来奉祭太室山，造就是中岳。
English: It was set up at the time of Emperor Wu in the counties of Min, Min, Maiyang, Yingyin and Mu Gao, and was used to offer sacrifices to Mount Taimuro, which is also known as Zhongyue.

古文：有太室、少室山庙。
现代文：有太室、少室山庙。
English: There is a large room and a small room in the temple.

古文：古文以崇高为外方山也。
现代文：古代文字记载认为崇高就是外方山。
English: Ancient records say that Gaifang Mountain is sublime.

古文：许，故国，姜姓，四岳后，太叔所封，二十四世为楚所灭。
现代文：许县，是以前的诸侯国，姓姜，四岳的后代，太叔所分封，二十四代被楚所减。
English: Xu County is a former vassal state, surnamed Jiang, the descendants of the four mountains, assigned by the great uncle, the twenty-fourth generation was reduced by Chu.

古文：傿陵，户四万九千一百一，口二十六万一千四百一十八。
现代文：伪陵县，有四万九干一百零一户，二十六万一千四百一十八人。
English: In Huling County, there are 49,000 to 101,000 households and 261,418 people.

古文：莽曰左亭。
现代文：王莽时叫左亭。
English: Wang Mangshi called Zatei.

古文：临颍，莽曰监颍。
现代文：临颖县，王莽时叫监颖。
English: Lin Ying County, Wang Mang is called Jun Ying.

古文：父城，应乡，故国，周武王弟所封。
现代文：父城县，应乡，是以前的诸侯国，周武王的弟弟被分封在遣裹。
English: Chicheng County, Ying Township, was a former vassal state, and the younger brother of King Zhou Wu was sent there.

古文：成安，侯国也。
现代文：成安县，是诸侯国。
English: Cheng'an County is a vassal state.

古文：周承休，侯国，元帝置，元始二年更名郑公。
现代文：周承休县，是诸侯国，亘童时设置，亘丝二年改名叫塑公。
English: Zhoucheng County is a vassal state. It was established when Guan Tong was a child, and changed its name to Shougong two years later.

古文：莽曰嘉美。
现代文：王差时叫嘉美。
English: Wang Zhaishi called Jiamei.

古文：阳城，阳城山，洧水所出，东南至长平入颍，过郡三，行五百里。
现代文：阳城县，洧水从阳城山流出，向东南到长平流入垄丞，经过三个郡，行程五百里。
English: In Yangcheng County, Lishui flows from Yangcheng Mountain, flows southeast to Changping and flows into Renzheng, passing through three counties, traveling five hundred miles.

古文：阳乾山，颍水所出，东至下蔡入淮，过郡三，行千五百里，荆州浸。
现代文：题丞从阳干山流出，向东到下蔡流入淮水，经过三个郡，行程一千五百里，到荆州灌渠。
English: The Qizhen flows out of the Yanggang Mountains, flows eastward to the Lower Cai and flows into the Huai Shui, passing through three counties, traveling fifteen hundred miles, to the Jingzhou Irrigation Canal.

古文：有铁官。
现代文：有铁官。
English: There are iron officials.

古文：纶氏。
现代文：纶氏县。
English: Shinshi County.

古文：汝南郡，高帝置，莽曰汝汾。
现代文：汝南郡，高帝始置。王莽时改名汝汾。
English: Runan County, established by Emperor Gao. Wang Mangshi changed his name to Rong.

古文：分为赏都尉。
现代文：分离为赏都尉。
English: Separation is a reward captain.

古文：属豫州。
现代文：属于豫州刺史部。
English: It belongs to Yuzhou.

古文：户四十六万一千五百八十七，口二百五十九万六千一百四十八。
现代文：有四卜六万一千五百八十七户，二百五十九万六千一百四十八人。
English: There are 4,061,587 households and 2,596,148 people.

古文：县三十七：平舆，阳安，阳城，侯国。
现代文：辖三十七县：王翅，盟挝，腥挝，是侯国。
English: Thirty-seven counties are under its jurisdiction: Wang Ying, Miao Lao, and Ho Lao. It is a principality.

古文：莽曰新安。
现代文：王述时叫巡。
English: The king called for a guard while he was speaking.

古文：氵隐强，富波，女阳，鮦阳，吴房，安成，侯国。
现代文：汇强县，富波县，女阳县，鲷阳县，呈房县，安成县，是侯国。
English: Huiqiang County, Fubo County, Meiyang County, Fenyang County, Chengfang County, Ancheng County are the largest counties.

古文：莽曰至成。
现代文：王莽时叫至成。
English: Wang Mangshi called out to Cheng.

古文：南顿，故顿子国，姬姓。
现代文：南顿县，是以前的顿子国，都是姬姓。
English: Nantong County, formerly known as Tongzi Country, is all surnamed Ji.

古文：朗陵，细阳，莽曰乐庆。
现代文：朗陵县，捆阳县，王莽时叫乐庆。
English: Langling County, Buiyang County, Wang Mangshi is called Leqing.

古文：宜春，侯国。莽曰宣孱。
现代文：宜春县，是侯国，王莽时叫宣孱。
English: Yichun County is a princely state, and Wang Mang is called Xuan Xuan.

古文：女阴，故胡国。
现代文：女阴县，是以前的胡国。
English: Meiyin County is the former Hu Province.

古文：都尉治。
现代文：由都尉管理。
English: The lieutenant governs.

古文：莽曰汝坟。
现代文：王莽时叫汝坟。
English: Wang Mangshi called you a grave.

古文：新蔡，蔡平侯自蔡徙此，后二世徙下蔡。
现代文：新垩毖，蔓工堡从基迁到遣裹，二代后迁到王蔡。
English: In Xinyi, the Cranberry Castle was moved from the foundation to the enclosure, and two generations later it was moved to Wang Cai.

古文：莽曰新迁。
现代文：王莽时叫面迁。
English: Wang Mangshi called for face relocation.

古文：新息，莽曰新德。
现代文：新息县，王莽时叫新德。
English: Xinxi County, Wang Mang is called Xinde.

古文：濯阳，期思，慎阳，慎，莽曰慎治。
现代文：濯阳县，期思县，慎阳县，匿题，王菱时叫盐迨。
English: Maoyang County, Zhisi County, Shinyang County, anonymous, Wang Lingshi is called Yancheng.

古文：召陵，弋阳，侯国。
现代文：丑堕逊，士盟瑟，是侯国。
English: Ugly and degraded, weak and feeble, it is a vassal state.

古文：西平，有铁官。
现代文：西平县，有铁官。
English: Xiping County, there are iron officials.

古文：莽曰新亭。
现代文：王莽时叫新亭。
English: Wang Mangshi called Xin Ting.

古文：上蔡，故蔡国，周武王弟叔度所封。
现代文：上蔡县，是以前的蔡国，周武王的弟弟叔度被分封在这裹。
English: Shangcai County is the former Cai Guo. King Zhouwu's younger brother, Uncle Du, was imprisoned here.

古文：度放，成王封其子胡。十八世徙新蔡。
现代文：叔度被流放后，成王就封他的儿子胡，十八代后迁到新蔡。
English: After Uncle Du was exiled, Cheng Wang gave his son Hu the title, and eighteen generations later he moved to Xin Cai.

古文：浸，莽曰闰治。
现代文：面，艳时叫艳。
English: When it's bright, it's bright.

古文：西华，莽曰华望。
现代文：西华县，艳时叫塑。
English: Xihua County, when it is bright, it is called plastic.

古文：长平，莽曰长正。
现代文：昼芒瑟，艳时叫延。
English: The day is monsoonal, the bright time is cloudy.

古文：宜禄，莽曰赏都亭。
现代文：宜禄县，艳时叫绷。
English: In Yilu County, when it is bright, it is called bunting.

古文：项，故国。
现代文：更瑟，以前是侯国。
English: Kansai, formerly known as Hokoku.

古文：新郪，莽曰新延。
现代文：新鄯县，王莽时叫新延。
English: Xinyan County, Wang Mangshi is called Xinyan.

古文：归德，侯国。宣帝置。
现代文：归德县，是侯国，宣帝时设置。
English: Guide County was a vassal state established at the time of Emperor Xuan.

古文：莽曰归惠。
现代文：王莽时叫归惠。
English: Wang Mangshi shouted "return to benefit."

古文：新阳，莽曰新明。
现代文：新阳县，王莽时叫新明。
English: In Xinyang County, Wang Mang is called Xinming.

古文：安昌，侯国。
现代文：安昌县，是侯国。
English: Anchang County is a county.

古文：莽曰始成。
现代文：王莽时叫始成。
English: Wang Mangshi called Ji Cheng.

古文：安阳，侯国。
现代文：安阳题，是侯国。
English: Anyang is the name of the county.

古文：莽曰均夏。
现代文：王菱时叫塑墓。
English: Wang Lingshi called it a plastic tomb.

古文：博阳，侯国。
现代文：博阳县，是侯国。
English: Boyang County is a county.

古文：莽曰乐家。
现代文：旦菱时叫乐家。
English: Tan Ryosei is a musician.

古文：成阳，侯国。
现代文：成阳县，是侯国。
English: Chengyang County is a county.

古文：莽曰新利。
现代文：王莽时叫新利。
English: Wang Mangshi called Xinli.

古文：定陵。
现代文：定陵昼。
English: It's the middle of the day.

古文：高陵山，汝水出，东南至新蔡入淮，过郡四，行千三百四十里。
现代文：这丞从直堡山流出，向东南到题整流入进，经过四个郡，行程一千三百四十里。
English: This river flows out of Zhibao Mountain and flows into the south-east to Qidong, passing through four counties and traveling 1,340 miles.

古文：南阳郡，泰置。
现代文：南阳郡，秦始置。
English: Nanyang County, Qin Shi Jie.

古文：莽曰前队。
现代文：王莽时改名叫前队。
English: Wang Mangshi changed the name to the advance team.

古文：属荆州。
现代文：属于荆州刺史部。
English: It belongs to Jingzhou.

古文：户三十五万九千三百一十六，口一百九十四万二千五十一。
现代文：有三十五万九千三百一十六户，一百九十四万二千零五十一人。
English: There were three hundred fifty-nine thousand three hundred and sixteen households and nineteen hundred forty-two thousand five hundred and one people.

古文：县三十六：宛，故申伯国。
现代文：有三十六个县：宛县。是以前的申伯国。
English: There are thirty-six counties: Wan County. It is the former Shenbo Province.

古文：有屈申城。
现代文：有屈申城。
English: There is Kusshin Town.

古文：县南有北筮山。
现代文：县南有北筮山。
English: In the south of the county, there is Beibei Mountain.

古文：户四万七千五百四十七。
现代文：有四万七千五百四十匕户。
English: There are 47,540 households.

古文：有工官、铁官。
现代文：有工官、铁官。
English: There are construction officials and railway officials.

古文：莽曰南阳。
现代文：王莽时叫作南阳。
English: Wang Mangshi is called Nanyang.

古文：犨，杜衍，莽曰闰衍。
现代文：箪壁，杜衍县，毖时叫驰。
English: Yanbei, Duyan County, when it's snowing it's raining.

古文：酂，侯国，莽曰南庚。
现代文：塑题，是侯国。上菱时叫南庚。
English: The theme of the sculpture is Hou Guo. When he was in Shangling, he was called Nan Geng.

古文：育阳，有南筮聚，在东北。
现代文：育阳县，有南筮聚，在东北面。
English: In Yuyang County, there is Nanxunju, in the northeast.

古文：博山，侯国。
现代文：博山县，是侯国。
English: Boshan County is a county.

古文：哀帝置。
现代文：哀帝时设置。
English: It's set for when the emperor is mourned.

古文：故顺阳。
现代文：是以前的顺阳。
English: It is the former Shunyang.

古文：涅阳，莽曰前亭。
现代文：涅阳县，王莽时叫避。
English: Neyang County, Wang Mang called for help.

古文：阴，堵阳，莽曰阳城。
现代文：堕毖，堵阳县，王菱时叫匿越。
English: Wang Lingsong was called Yan Yue when he fell from the sky in Doyang County.

古文：雉，衡山，沣水所出，东至屋阝入汝。
现代文：筮胚，进水从衡山流出，向东到郦流入汝水。
English: In the embryonic stage, the inflow of water flows from Hengshan and flows into Ruishui to the east.

古文：山都，蔡阳，莽之母功显君邑。
现代文：山都县，蔡阳题，王茎的母亲功显君的邑地。
English: Shantou County, Caiyang County, the hometown of Wang Zu's mother Gong Xianjun.

古文：新野，筑阳，故穀伯国。
现代文：新野县，筑阳县，是以前的谷伯国。
English: Nino County, Chikuyo County, are the remnants of the former Kubo Province.

古文：莽曰宜禾。
现代文：王莽时叫作宜禾。
English: Wang Mangshi is called Yihe.

古文：棘阳，武当，舞阴，中阴山，瀙水所出，东至蔡入汝。
现代文：棘阳县，武当县，舞阴县，洒水从中阴山流出，向东到蔡流入汝水。
English: In Spineyang County, Wudang County, and Muyin County, the sprinkling water flows out of Zhongyin Mountain and flows eastward to Cai Riushui.

古文：西鄂，穰，莽曰农穰。郦，育水出西北，南入汉。
现代文：哪，越，盛时叫挝。曲，铋从西北流出，向南进入汉水。
English: Wo, Yue, Sheng is called Lao. Qu, Kun flows out of the northwest and flows south into the Han River.

古文：安众，侯国。
现代文：安众县，是侯国。
English: Anjong County is a county.

古文：故宛西乡。
现代文：是以前宛的西乡。
English: It was previously called Saigo.

古文：冠军，武帝置。
现代文：冠军县，武帝时设置。
English: Champion County, Wu Di set up.

古文：故穰卢阳乡、宛临駣聚。
现代文：是原来穣县的卢阳乡、宛县的临驰聚。
English: It was originally Luyang Township in Handan County and Linqi Township in Wan County.

古文：比阳，平氏，《禹贡》桐柏大复山在东南，淮水所出，东南至淮浦入海，过郡四，行三千二百四十里，青州川。
现代文：比阳县，平氏县，《禹贡》上的桐柏大复山在东南，进从造裹流出，向东南到继流入大海，经过四个郡，行程三千二二百四十里，到直业河。
English: Biyang County, Pingshi County, Tongbai Dafu Mountain on "Yugong" is in the southeast, advancing from Zouwu and flowing out, flowing southeast to the sea, passing through four counties, traveling three thousand two hundred and forty miles, to Zhiye River.

古文：莽曰平善。
现代文：旦菱时叫至差。
English: When the dragonfly calls, it is a bad omen.

古文：随，故国。
现代文：龃，旧有的侯国。
English: , the old Hokkoku.

古文：厉乡，故厉国也。
现代文：垦翅，是原先的屋国。
English: Gourd wing, is the original house country.

古文：叶，楚叶公邑。
现代文：越，是楚厘墓公的邑地。
English: Yue is the county seat of Chuli Tomb.

古文：有长城，号曰方城。
现代文：有长城，号称友越。
English: There is the Great Wall, known as the Yue Yue.

古文：邓，故国。
现代文：邓县，旧有的侯国。
English: Deng County, the old Hokkoku.

古文：都尉治。
现代文：由都尉管理。
English: The lieutenant governs.

古文：朝阳，莽曰厉信。
现代文：朝阳县，王莽时叫厉信。
English: In Chaoyang County, Wang Mangshi was called Lixin.

古文：鲁阳，有鲁山。
现代文：鲁阳县，有鲁山。
English: In Luyang County, there is Lu Mountain.

古文：古鲁县，御龙氏所迁。
现代文：古代的鲁县，是御龙氏迁移的地方。
English: Lu County in ancient times was the place where the Goryu clan migrated.

古文：鲁山，滍水所出，东北至定陵入汝。
现代文：鲁山，是溃水的发源地，东北到定陵流入汝水。
English: Lushan is the source of the burst water, and the water flows from the northeast to Dingling.

古文：又有昆水，东南至定陵入汝。
现代文：又有昆水，东南到定陵流入汝水。
English: There is also the Kunshui River, which flows southeast to Dingling and flows into the Rushui River.

古文：舂陵，侯国。
现代文：舂陵县，是侯国。
English: Fuling County is a county.

古文：故蔡阳白水乡。
现代文：以前是蔡阳的白水乡。
English: It used to be Cai Yang's Baishui Township.

古文：上唐乡，故唐国。
现代文：上唐乡，是以前的唐国。
English: Shangtang Township is the former Tang country.

古文：新都，侯国。
现代文：新都县，是侯国。
English: Xindu County is a county.

古文：莽曰新林。
现代文：王莽时叫新林。
English: Wang Mangshi called Xinlin.

古文：湖阳，故廖国也。
现代文：湖阳县，是以前的廖国。
English: Hoyang County is the former Liao Province.

古文：红阳，侯国。
现代文：红阳县，是侯国。
English: Hongyang County is a county.

古文：莽曰红俞。
现代文：王莽时叫红俞。
English: Wang Mangshi called the Red Kite.

古文：乐成，侯国。
现代文：乐成县，是侯国。
English: Lecheng County is a county.

古文：博望，侯国。
现代文：博望县，是侯国。
English: Bohang County is a county.

古文：莽曰宜乐。
现代文：土莽时叫宜乐。
English: When the country is reckless, it is called Yile.

古文：复阳，侯国。
现代文：复阳县。是侯国。
English: Foyang County. It is a county.

古文：故湖阳乐乡。
现代文：以前是塑墨的銮继。
English: Formerly, it was the successor of plastic ink.

古文：南郡，秦置，高帝元年更为临江郡，五年复故。
现代文：南郡，秦始置，高帝元年改为临江郡，高帝五年恢复原名。
English: Nan County, Qin Shi Jie, changed to Linjiang County in the first year of Gao Di, and the original name was restored in the fifth year of Gao Di.

古文：景帝二年复为临江，中二年复故。
现代文：景帝二年又重新改为临江，景帝中二年又恢复原名。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Jing, the name was changed back to Linjiang, and in the second year of the reign of Emperor Jing, the original name was restored.

古文：莽曰南顺。
现代文：王莽时叫南顺。
English: Wang Mangshi called Nan Shun.

古文：属荆州。
现代文：属荆州刺史部。
English: It belongs to Jingzhou.

古文：户十二万五千五百七十九，口七十一万八千五百四十。
现代文：有十二万五千五百七十九户，七十一万八千五百四十人。
English: There were 125,579 households and 7,185,540 people.

古文：有发弩官。
现代文：有发弩官。
English: There are eunuchs.

古文：县十八：江陵，故楚郢都，楚文王自丹阳徙此。
现代文：下辖十八个县：江陵县，以前楚国的郢都，楚文王从丹阳迁到这裹。
English: Under the jurisdiction of eighteen counties: Jiangling County, formerly the capital of Chu, King Chu Wen moved here from Danyang.

古文：后九世平王城之。
现代文：过九代后平王在这裹建城。
English: Nine generations later, King Gohira built a city here.

古文：后十世秦拔我郢，徙陈。
现代文：十代后秦国攻取郢都，迁到陈。
English: Ten generations later, Qin conquered the capital of Shu and moved it to Chen.

古文：莽曰江陆。
现代文：王莽时叫江陆。
English: Wang Mangshi called Jiang Lu.

古文：临沮，《禹贡》南条荆山在东北，漳水所出，东至江陵入阳水，阳水入沔，行六百里。
现代文：临沮县，《禹贡》上记载南面分布荆山在东北，漳水从这裹流出，向东到江陵流入阳水，阳水流入沔水，行程六百里。
English: In Lindu County, "Yugong" records that the southern distribution of Jing Mountain is in the northeast, and the salty water flows out from here, flowing eastward to Jiangling into Yangshui, and the Yangshui flows into the salty water, traveling six hundred miles.

古文：夷陵。都尉治。
现代文：夷陵县，由都尉治理。
English: Yiling County, governed by a captain.

古文：莽曰居利。
现代文：王莽时叫居利。
English: Wang Mangshi is called Gu Li.

古文：华容，云梦泽在南，荆州薮。
现代文：华容县，云梦泽在南面，是荆州的湖泽。
English: Huarong County, Yunmenze in the south, is a lake in Jingzhou.

古文：夏水首受江，东入沔，行五百里。
现代文：夏水首先从长江接受水源，向东流入沔水，行程五百里。
English: Summer water first receives water from the Yangtze River and flows eastward into the Bohai River, a journey of 500 miles.

古文：宜城，故鄢，惠帝三年更名。
现代文：宜城县，是以前的鄢县，惠帝三年改名。
English: Yicheng County, formerly Min County, changed its name to Huidi County three years ago.

古文：郢，楚别邑，故郢。
现代文：郢县，楚国的另外邑地。是以前的郢都。
English: Lushan County, another county of Chu, was the former capital of Lushan.

古文：莽曰郢亭。
现代文：王莽时叫郢亭。
English: Wang Mangshi is called Shanting.

古文：巳阝，当阳，中庐，枝江，故罗国。
现代文：县，当阳县，中庐县，枝江县，是原来的罗国。
English: counties, Dangyang County, Zhonglu County, and Yedang County, are the original Luo Province.

古文：江沱出西，东入江。
现代文：江沱水从西面流出，向东流入长江。
English: The water of the Yangtze River flows from the west and flows into the Yangtze River in the east.

古文：襄阳，莽曰相阳。
现代文：襄阳县，王莽时叫相阳。
English: Yangyang County, Wang Mang is called Xiangyang.

古文：编，有云梦官。
现代文：编县，有云梦的官员。
English: Hen County, officials with a dream.

古文：莽曰南顺。
现代文：王莽时叫南顺。
English: Wang Mangshi called Nan Shun.

古文：秭归，归乡，故归国。
现代文：秭归县，归乡，是原来的归国。
English: "Going back to the county, going back to the hometown" is the original return to the country.

古文：夷道，莽曰江南。
现代文：夷道县，王莽时叫江南。
English: In Yidu County, Wang Mang was called Jiangnan.

古文：州陵，莽曰江夏。
现代文：州陵县，王莽时叫江夏。
English: Zhuling County, Wang Mangshi is called Jiangxia.

古文：若，楚昭王畏吴。自郢徙此，后复还郢。
现代文：若县，楚昭王畏惧吴国，从郢都迁到这里，后来重新回到郢都。
English: When the county was young, King Chu Zhao was afraid of the State of Wu, so he moved here from Shidu and later returned to Shidu.

古文：巫，夷水东至夷道入江，过郡二，行五百四十里。
现代文：巫县，夷水向东到夷道流入长江，经过两个郡，行程五百四十里。
English: Wuxian, Yishui flows east to Yidu and flows into the Yangtze River, passing through two counties, traveling 540 miles.

古文：有盐官。
现代文：有盐官。
English: There is a salt officer.

古文：高成。
现代文：高成县。
English: Gaocheng County.

古文：洈山，洈水所出。东入繇。
现代文：流水从诡山流出，向东流入繇水。
English: Flowing water flows out of the mountain and flows into the river to the east.

古文：繇水南至华容入江，过郡二，行五百里。
现代文：繇水向南到华容流入长江，经过两个郡，行程五百里。
English: Surabaya water flows south to Huarong into the Yangtze River, passing through two counties, a journey of five hundred miles.

古文：莽曰言程。
现代文：王莽时叫言程。
English: Wang Mangshi called Yancheng.

古文：江夏郡，高帝置。
现代文：江夏郡，高帝始置。
English: Jiangxia County, Gao Di Zhi Jie.

古文：属荆州。
现代文：属于荆州刺史部。
English: It belongs to Jingzhou.

古文：户五万六千八百四十四，口二十一万九千二百一十八。
现代文：有五万六千八百四十四户，二十一万九千二百一十八人。
English: There are 56,844 households and 219,218 people.

古文：县十四：西陵，有云梦官。
现代文：有十四个县：西陵县，有云梦的官员。
English: There are fourteen counties: Xiling County, officials with a dream.

古文：莽曰江阳。
现代文：王莽时叫江阳。
English: Wang Mangshi called Jiangyang.

古文：竟陵，章山在东北，古文以为内方山。
现代文：竟陵县，章山在东北，古代文字记载认为是内方山。
English: Jinling County, Zhangshan is in the northeast, and ancient records consider it to be Inner Fangshan.

古文：郧乡，楚郧公邑。
现代文：郧乡，是楚国的郧公邑。
English: Handan Township is the Handan Township of Chu.

古文：莽曰守平。
现代文：王莽时叫守平。
English: Wang Mangshi called Shouping.

古文：西阳，襄，莽曰襄非。
现代文：西阳县，襄县，王莽时叫襄非。
English: Xiyang County, Xiang County, Wang Mang is called Xiang Fei.

古文：邾，衡山王吴芮都。
现代文：邾县，衡山王吴芮的都城。
English: Lushan County, the capital of Hengshan King Wu Xi.

古文：轪，故弦子国。
现代文：軑县，是原来的弦子国。
English: Jixian County is the original Zongzi Country.

古文：鄂，安陆，横尾山在东北。古文以为陪尾山。
现代文：鄂县，安陆县，横尾山在东北，古代文字记载认为是陪尾山。
English: E County, Anlu County, and Mount Yokoo are in the northeast, and ancient records consider them to be Mount Boao.

古文：沙羡，蕲春，鄳，云杜，下雉，莽曰闰光。
现代文：沙羡县，蕲春县，郾县，云杜县，下雉县，王莽时叫闰光。
English: Shaqen County, Hunchun County, Handan County, Yundu County, Lower Handan County, Wang Mangshi is called Yueguang.

古文：钟武。
现代文：钟武县。
English: Zhongwu County.

古文：侯国。
现代文：是侯国。
English: It is a vassal state.

古文：莽曰当利。
现代文：王莽时叫当利。
English: Wang Mangshi called Dangli.

古文：庐江郡，故淮南，文南十六年别为国。
现代文：庐江郡，是原来的淮南国，文帝十六年另立为国。
English: Minjiang County was originally part of Huainan Province, which was established as a separate country in the 16th year of the reign of Emperor Wen.

古文：金兰西北有东陵乡，淮水出。
现代文：金兰西北有束陵乡，淮水从这裹发源。
English: In the northwest of Jinlan, there is Sokuling Township, and the source of Huai Water is from here.

古文：属扬州。
现代文：属于扬州刺史部。
English: It belongs to the History Department of Yangzhou City.

古文：庐江出陵阳东南。北入江。
现代文：庐江从陵阳东南流出，向北流入长江。
English: The Lijiang River flows out of the southeast of Lingyang and flows north into the Yangtze River.

古文：户十二万四千三百八十三，口四十五万七千三百三十三。
现代文：有十二万四千三百八十三户，四十五万七千三百三十三人。
English: There were 124,383 households and 457,333 people.

古文：有楼船官。
现代文：有楼船官。
English: There is a ship's officer.

古文：县十二：舒，故国。
现代文：下辖十二个县：舒县，原来是侯国。
English: Twelve counties under its jurisdiction: Shu County, formerly Hou Guo.

古文：莽曰昆乡。
现代文：王莽时叫昆乡。
English: Wang Mangshi called Kunxiang.

古文：居巢，龙舒，临湖，雩娄，决水北至蓼入淮，又有灌水，亦北至蓼入决，过郡二，行五百一十里。
现代文：居巢县，龙舒县，临湖县，雩娄县，决水向：蓼流入淮河，又有灌水，也向北到蓼流入决水，经过两个郡，行程五百一十里。
English: In Juyao County, Longshu County, Linhu County and Longgang County, the water flowed into the Huai River in the direction of: Longgang, and there was flooding. The water also flowed north to Longgang, passing through two counties and traveling 510 miles.

古文：襄安，莽曰庐江亭也。
现代文：襄安县，王莽时叫庐江亭。
English: In Xiang'an County, Wang Mang was once called Lijiang Ting.

古文：枞阳，寻阳，《禹贡》九江在南，皆东合为大江。
现代文：枞阳县，寻阳县，《禹贡》上九江在南面，都在东面汇合形成长江。
English: Fenyang County, Xuanyang County, "Yugong" Upper Jiujiang River in the south, all converge in the east to form the Yangtze River.

古文：灊，天柱山在南。
现代文：潜县，天柱山在南面。
English: Kuching County, with Tianzhu Mountain to the south.

古文：有祠。
现代文：有祠。
English: There is a small shrine.

古文：沘山，沘水所出，北至寿春入芍陂。
现代文：沘水从沘山流出，向北到寿春流芍陂。
English: The water flows out of Lushan Mountain and flows northward to Shouchun Stream.

古文：睆，有铁官。
现代文：皖县，有铁官。
English: In Jixian County, there is an iron official.

古文：湖陵邑，北湖在南。
现代文：湖陵邑县，北湖在南面。
English: Hulingyur County, with the North Lake to the south.

古文：松兹。
现代文：松兹县。
English: Songz County.

古文：侯国。
现代文：是侯国。
English: It is a vassal state.

古文：莽曰诵善。
现代文：旦差时叫通姜。
English: When I'm late, I call Tong Jiang.

古文：九江郡，秦置，高帝四年更名为淮南园，武帝元狩元年复故。
现代文：九江郡，秦始置，高帝四年改名为淮南国，武帝元狩元年恢复原名。
English: Qin Shi Jie, Jiujiang County, was renamed Huainan Province in the fourth year of Emperor Gao's reign, and its original name was restored in the first year of Emperor Wu's reign.

古文：莽曰延平。
现代文：王莽时叫延平。
English: Wang Mangshi called Yanping.

古文：属扬州。
现代文：属于扬州刺史部。
English: It belongs to the History Department of Yangzhou City.

古文：户十五万五十二，口七十八万五百二十五。
现代文：有十五万零五十二户，七十八万零五百二十五人。
English: There are 150,052 households and 7,805,025 people.

古文：有陂官、湖官。
现代文：有陂官、湖官。
English: There are eunuchs and lake officials.

古文：县十五：寿春邑，楚考烈王自陈徙此。
现代文：有十五个县：寿春邑县，楚国考烈王从陈迁到这裹。
English: There are fifteen counties: Shuchunyi County, where King Korai of Chu moved from Chen.

古文：浚遒，成德，莽曰平阿。
现代文：浚遒县，成德县，王莽时叫平阿。
English: Dredge County, Chengde County, Wang Mang is called Ping'a.

古文：橐皋，阴陵，莽曰阴陆。
现代文：橐皋县，阴陵县，王莽时叫阴陆。
English: Min County, Yinling County, Wang Mang is called Yin Lu.

古文：历阳，都尉治。
现代文：历阳县，由都尉治理。
English: Liyang County, governed by a lieutenant.

古文：莽曰明义。
现代文：王莽时叫明义。
English: Wang Mangshi called Mingyi.

古文：当涂，侯国。
现代文：当涂县，是侯国。
English: Dangtu County is a county.

古文：莽曰山聚。
现代文：王莽时叫山聚。
English: Wang Mangshi called for a mountain gathering.

古文：钟离，莽曰蚕富。
现代文：钟离县，王莽时叫蚕富。
English: Zhongli County, Wang Mangshi called Silkworm Riches.

古文：合肥，东城，莽曰武城。
现代文：合肥县，束城县，王莽时叫武城。
English: Hefei County, Sokcheng County, Wang Mang is called Wucheng.

古文：博乡，侯国。
现代文：博乡县，是侯国。
English: Boxiang County is a county.

古文：莽曰扬陆。
现代文：王莽时叫扬陆。
English: Wang Mangshi called Yang Lu.

古文：曲阳，侯国。
现代文：曲阳县，是侯国。
English: Quyang County is a county.

古文：莽曰延平亭。
现代文：王莽时叫延平亭。
English: Wang Mangshi called Yanping Pavilion.

古文：建阳，全椒，阜陵。
现代文：建阳县，全椒县，阜陵县。
English: Jianyang County, Quanzhe County, Fulin County.

古文：莽曰阜陆。
现代文：王莽时叫阜陆。
English: Wang Mangshi is called Fu Lu.

古文：山阳郡。故梁。
现代文：山阳郡，以前是梁国。
English: Sanyang County, formerly Liang Province.

古文：景帝中六年别为山阳国。
现代文：景帝中六年另立为山阳国。
English: In the sixth year of Emperor Jing's middle school, it was established as Sanyang Province.

古文：武帝建元五年别为郡。
现代文：武帝建元五年另立为郡。
English: In the fifth year of Emperor Wu Jianyuan, it was separately established as a county.

古文：莽曰巨野。
现代文：王莽时叫钜野。
English: Wang Mengshi is known as "Wangye."

古文：属兖州。
现代文：属于兖州刺史部。
English: It belongs to Zhangzhou.

古文：户十七万二千八百四十七，口八十万一千二百八十八。
现代文：有十七万二千八百四十七户，八十万一千二百八十八人。
English: There are 172,847 households and 801,288 people.

古文：有铁官。
现代文：有铁官。
English: There are iron officials.

古文：县二十三：昌邑，武帝天汉四年更山阳为昌邑国。
现代文：下辖二十三个县：昌邑县，武帝天汉四年改山阳为昌邑国。
English: Under the jurisdiction of twenty-three counties: Changyi County, Wudi Tianhan changed Shanyang to Changyi Province in four years.

古文：有梁丘乡。
现代文：有梁丘乡。
English: There is Liangqiu Township.

古文：《春秋传》曰 宋、齐会于梁丘 。
现代文：《春秋传》说 宋、齐会盟于梁丘 。
English: "Spring and Autumn Legend" said that Song and Qi were allied in Liangqiu.

古文：南平阳，莽曰黾平。
现代文：南平阳县，王莽时叫咀平。
English: Nanpingyang County, Wang Mangshi called Tsui Ping.

古文：成武，有楚丘亭。
现代文：成武县，有楚丘亭。
English: Chengwu County, there is Chu Qiu Ting.

古文：齐桓公所城，迁卫文公于此。
现代文：齐桓公所建的城，把卫文公迁到遣裹。
English: The city built by Lord Qi Kuan moved Lord Weiwen to Yuanwu.

古文：子成公徙濮阳。
现代文：儿子成公迁到濮阳。
English: His son Cheng Gong moved to Shenyang.

古文：莽曰成安。
现代文：王莽时叫成安。
English: Wang Mangshi called Cheng An.

古文：湖陵，《禹贡》 浮于泗、淮，通于河 ，水在南。莽曰湖陆。
现代文：湖陵县，禹贡》 从泅水、淮水乘船到达黄河 ，水在南面，王莽时叫湖陆。
English: Huling County, Yugong "From Surabaya, Huai Shui by boat to the Yellow River, the water is in the south, Wang Mang is called Hulun.

古文：东缗，方与，橐，莽曰高平。
现代文：东翻县，方与县，橐县，王莽时叫高平。
English: Donghuang County, Fangye County, Handan County, Wangmanzhi is called Gaoping.

古文：巨野，大野泽在北，兖州薮。
现代文：钜壁县，大壁泽在北面，是兖州的湖泽。
English: Lushan County, Dajie Lake in the north, is the largest lake in Luzhou.

古文：单父，都尉治。
现代文：单父县，由都尉治理。
English: Single father county, governed by a lieutenant.

古文：莽曰利父。
现代文：王莽时叫利父。
English: Wang Mangshi's name was Li Fuzhong.

古文：薄，都关，城都，侯国。
现代文：薄县，都关县，城都县，是侯国。
English: Bo County, Duguan County, Chengdu County, is Hou Guo.

古文：莽曰城穀。
现代文：王莽时叫城谷。
English: Wang Mangshi called Chenggu.

古文：黄，侯国。
现代文：黄县，是侯国。
English: Huang County is a county.

古文：爰戚，侯国。
现代文：爰戚县，是侯国。
English: Gongqixian County is a county.

古文：莽曰戚亭。
现代文：王莽时叫戚亭。
English: Wang Mangshi called Qi Ting.

古文：郜成，侯国。
现代文：郜成县，是侯国。
English: Jiaocheng County is a county seat.

古文：莽曰告成。
现代文：王莽时叫告成。
English: When Wang Mang calls it's done.

古文：中乡，侯国。
现代文：中乡县，是侯国。
English: Zhongxiang County is a county.

古文：平乐，侯国。
现代文：平乐县，是侯国。
English: Pingle County is a county.

古文：包水东北至沛入泗。郑，侯国。
现代文：包丛向东北到迹流入回，脑，是侯国。
English: Pao Cong to the northeast to trace the inflow back, brain, is Hou Guo.

古文：瑕丘，甾乡，侯国。
现代文：瑕丘县，鱼乡县，是侯国。
English: Koecho County, Uosho County, is Hou Guo.

古文：栗乡，侯国。
现代文：栗乡县，是侯国。
English: Kurisho County is a kōkoku.

古文：莽曰足亭。
现代文：王莽时叫足亭。
English: Wang Mangshi called the foot pavilion.

古文：曲乡，侯国。
现代文：曲乡县，是侯国。
English: Quxiang County is a county.

古文：西阳，侯国。
现代文：西阳县。是侯国。
English: Xiyang County. It is a county seat.

古文：济阴郡，故梁。
现代文：济阴郡，是原来的梁国。
English: Jiyin County is the original Liang Province.

古文：景帝中六年别为济阴国。
现代文：景帝中六年另立为济阴国。
English: In the sixth year of Emperor Jing's middle school, it was separately established as Jilin Province.

古文：宣帝甘露二年更名定陶。
现代文：宣帝甘露二年改名叫定陶。
English: Xuan Di Kanlu changed its name to Ding Tao two years ago.

古文：《禹贡》荷泽在定陶东。
现代文：《禹贡》上的荷泽在定陶东面。
English: The lotus on "Yugon" is on the east side of Dingtao.

古文：属兖州。
现代文：属于兖州刺史部。
English: It belongs to Zhangzhou.

古文：户二十九万二十五，口百三十八万六千二百七十八。
现代文：有二十九万零二十五户，一百三十八万六千二百七十八人。
English: There are 2,902,025 households and 1,386,278 people.

古文：县九：定陶，故曹国，周武王弟叔振铎所封。
现代文：辖九个县：定陶县，是原来的曹国，周武王的弟弟叔振铎被分封在逭裹。
English: Nine counties under its jurisdiction: Dingtao County, the original state of Cao, where King Zhou Wu's younger brother, Uncle Zhen Qi, was imprisoned.

古文：《禹贡》陶丘在西南。
现代文：《禹贡》上的陶丘在西南面。
English: The ceramic mound on "Yugong" is in the southwest.

古文：陶丘亭。
现代文：有陶丘亭。
English: There is the Tao Qiu Pavilion.

古文：冤句。莽改定陶曰济平，冤句县曰济平亭。
现代文：冤句县，王莽时改定陶叫济平，冤句县叫济平亭。
English: In Wugu County, Wang Mang changed the name of Tao to Jiping, and Wugu County to Jiping Pavilion.

古文：吕都，莽曰祈都。
现代文：吕都县，王莽时叫祈都。
English: In Ludu County, Wang Mang is called Qidu.

古文：葭密，成阳，有尧冢灵台。
现代文：葭密县，成阳县，有尧帝的冢灵台。
English: In Jimi County and Chengyang County, there is Emperor Gong's tomb.

古文：《禹贡》雷泽在西北。
现代文：《禹贡》上的雷泽在西北。
English: The lightning on "Yugong" is in the northwest.

古文：鄄城，莽曰鄄良。
现代文：鄄城县，王莽时叫鄄良。
English: In Lucheng County, Wang Mang is called Ailiang.

古文：句阳，秺，莽曰万岁。
现代文：句阳县，诧县，王莽时叫万岁。
English: Guyang County, Sheng County, Wang Mengshu called "long live."

古文：乘氏。
现代文：乘氏县。
English: It is in Joishi County.

古文：泗水东南至睢陵入淮，过郡六，行千一百一十里。
现代文：泅水向东南到睢陵流入淮水，经过六个郡，行程一千一百一十里。
English: Surabaya water flows southeast to Fuling into Huai Shui, passing through six counties, a journey of eleven hundred and ten miles.

古文：沛郡。故秦泗水郡。
现代文：沛郡，即秦国的泅水郡。
English: Pei County, that is, Qin State's Surabaya County.

古文：高帝更名。
现代文：高帝时改为郡。
English: At the time of Emperor Gao, it was changed to County.

古文：莽曰吾符。
现代文：王莽时叫吾符。
English: Wang Mangshi called me.

古文：属豫州。
现代文：属于豫州刺史部。
English: It belongs to Yuzhou.

古文：户四十万九千七十九，口二百三万四百八十。
现代文：有四十万九千零七十九户，二百零三万四百八十人。
English: There are four hundred ninety-nine thousand seven hundred and seventy-nine households and two hundred thirty-four hundred and eighty people.

古文：县三十七：相，莽曰吾符亭。
现代文：辖三十七个县：相县，王莽时叫吾符亭。
English: Thirty-seven counties under its jurisdiction: Xiang County, Wang Mangshi called Wufu Ting.

古文：龙亢，竹，莽曰笃亭。
现代文：龙亢县，竹县，王莽时叫笃亭。
English: Longyu County, Zhixian County, Wangmanzhong is called Tutu Pavilion.

古文：穀阳，萧，故萧叔国，宋别封附庸也。向，故国。
现代文：谷阳县，萧县，是原来的萧叔国，宋时另立为附属于诸侯的小国。
English: Guiyang County, Xiao County, is the original Xiao Shu Country, and was separately established as a small country attached to the princes in the Song Dynasty.

古文：《春秋》曰 莒人入向 。
现代文：向县，旧侯国，《春秋》上说 莒人进入向国 。
English: Xiangxian County, the former vassal state, "Spring and Autumn" said that the Xiang people entered Xiangxian.

古文：姜姓，炎帝后。
现代文：姜姓，是炎帝的后代。
English: Jiang surname, is a descendant of Emperor Yan.

古文：铚，广戚，侯国。
现代文：绖县，广戚县，是侯国。
English: Jixian County, Guangqi County, is Hou Guo.

古文：莽曰力聚。
现代文：王莽时叫力聚。
English: Wang Mangshi called for a rally.

古文：下蔡，故州来国，为楚所灭，后吴取之，至夫差迁昭侯于此。
现代文：下蔡县，原来的州来国，被楚国所减，后来吴国攻取了它，到夫差时把昭侯迁到遣裹。
English: Lower Cai County, the original state to come to the country, was reduced by the State of Chu, and later the State of Wu conquered it, and moved the Zhaohong to Zhanbao when the husband was absent.

古文：后四世侯齐竟为楚所灭。
现代文：四世后侯国齐终于被楚国减掉。
English: After the fourth generation, Hou Guo Qi was finally reduced by the State of Chu.

古文：丰，莽曰吾丰。
现代文：丰县，王莽时叫吾丰。
English: Feng County, Wang Mang called Wu Feng.

古文：郸，莽曰单城。
现代文：郸县，王莽时叫单城。
English: Lixian County, Wang Mangshi is called Shancheng.

古文：谯，莽曰延成亭。
现代文：谯县，王莽时叫延成亭。
English: Yancheng County, Wang Mangshi called Yancheng Pavilion.

古文：蕲，■乡。
现代文：蕲县，罂乡。
English: Minxian, Minxiang.

古文：高祖破黥布。
现代文：高祖攻破黥布。
English: Gaozu breaks through the cocoon.

古文：都尉治。
现代文：由都尉治理。
English: The lieutenant governs.

古文：莽曰蕲城。
现代文：王莽时叫蕲城。
English: Wang Mangshi called Shicheng.

古文：工虫，莽曰贡。
现代文：烛县，王莽时叫贡。
English: In Candlestick County, the king calls for tribute when he is reckless.

古文：辄与，莽曰华乐。
现代文：辄与县，王莽时叫华乐。
English: and County, Wang Mang called Hua Le.

古文：山桑，公丘，侯国。
现代文：山桑县，公丘县，是侯国。
English: Shanxang County, Gongqiu County, is Hou Guo.

古文：故滕国，周懿王了错叔绣所封，三十一世为齐所灭。
现代文：是原来的滕国，周懿王的儿子错叔锈被分封在这裹，三十一代被齐国所灭。
English: It was the original Teng state. The son of King Zhou Enlai, the wrong uncle Rust, was encased here, and the thirty-first generation was destroyed by Qi.

古文：符离，莽曰符合。
现代文：符离县，王莽时叫符合。
English: If you are out of the county, you are out of the county.

古文：敬丘，侯国。
现代文：敬丘县，是侯国。
English: Jingqiu County is a county.

古文：夏丘，莽曰归思。
现代文：夏丘县，王莽时叫归思。
English: Xiaqiu County, Wang Mang is called Guisi.

古文：洨，侯国。
现代文：校县，是侯国。
English: The school district is a vassal state.

古文：垓下，高祖破项羽。
现代文：高祖在垓下打败项羽。
English: Gaozu defeated Xiang Yu under the yoke.

古文：莽曰育成，沛，有铁官。
现代文：王莽时叫育成。沛县，有铁官。
English: Wang Mengshi called nurturing. Pei County, there are iron officials.

古文：芒，莽曰博治。
现代文：芒县，王莽时叫博治。
English: In Mang County, Wang Mang is called Bo Zhi.

古文：建成，侯国。
现代文：建成县，是侯国。
English: Jiancheng County is a county town.

古文：城父，夏肥水东南至下蔡入淮，过郡工，行六百二十里。
现代文：城父县，夏肥水向东南到卜祭流入淮水，经过两个郡，行程六百二十里。
English: The Xiafeisui River flows southeast to Bu Festival and flows into the Huai Shui River, passing through two counties and traveling 620 miles.

古文：莽曰思善。
现代文：王莽时叫思善。
English: When the king is reckless, he is called wise.

古文：建平，侯国，莽曰田平。
现代文：建平县，是侯国。王莽时叫田平。
English: Jianping County is a princely state. Wang Mangxu was called Tianping.

古文：酂，莽曰赞治。
现代文：部县，王莽时叫费治。
English: In the ministry and county, Wang Mang is called Feiji.

古文：栗，侯国，莽曰成富。
现代文：栗县，是侯国。王莽时叫成富。
English: Li County is a county. Wang Mangshi is called Chengfu.

古文：扶阳，侯国。
现代文：扶阳县，是侯国。
English: Fuyang County is a county.

古文：莽曰合治。
现代文：王莽时叫合治。
English: Wang Mang is sometimes called He Zhi.

古文：高，侯国。
现代文：高县，是侯国。
English: Gao County is a county.

古文：高柴，侯国。
现代文：高柴县，是侯国。
English: Gaochai County is a county.

古文：漂阳，平阿，侯国。
现代文：漂阳县，平阿县，是侯国。
English: Fuyang County and Ping'a County are the largest counties.

古文：莽曰平宁。
现代文：王莽时叫平宁。
English: Wang Mangshi called Pingning County.

古文：东乡，临都，义成，祁乡。
现代文：东乡县，临都县，义成县，祁乡县。
English: Dongxiang County, Lindu County, Yicheng County, Minxiang County.

古文：侯国。
现代文：足侯国。
English: It is a vassal state.

古文：莽曰会谷。
现代文：王莽时叫盒墼。
English: Wang Mengshi called the box a cocoon.

古文：魏郡，高帝置。
现代文：魏郡，高帝始置。
English: Wei County, the beginning of Gao Di.

古文：莽曰魏城。
现代文：王莽时叫魏城。
English: Wang Mangshi called Wei Cheng.

古文：属冀州。
现代文：属于冀州刺史部。
English: It belongs to Jizhou.

古文：户二十一万二千八百四十九，口九十万九千六百五十五。
现代文：有二十一万二千八百四十九户，九十万九千六百五十五人。
English: There are 212,849 households and 909,655 people.

古文：县十八：邺，故大河在东北入海。
现代文：辖十八个县：邺县，原来的大河在它东北流入大海。
English: It has jurisdiction over eighteen counties: Min County, where the original great river flows into the sea in the northeast.

古文：馆陶，河水别出为屯氏河，东北至章武入海，过郡四，行千五百里。
现代文：馆陶县，河水分流形成屯氏河，东北到章武流入大海，经过四个郡，行程一千五百里。
English: In Guantao County, the river water flows to form the Tunji River, which flows into the sea from the northeast to Zhangwu, passing through four counties and traveling 1,500 miles.

古文：斥丘，莽曰利丘。
现代文：斥丘县，王莽时叫利丘。
English: Yanqiu County, Wang Mang is called Lixiu.

古文：沙，内黄，清河水出南。
现代文：沙县，内黄县，清河水从它南面流出。
English: Sha County, Neihuang County, Qinghe water flows out from the south of it.

古文：清渊，魏，都尉治。
现代文：清渊县，魏县，由都尉治理。
English: Qingyuan County and Wei County will be governed by captains.

古文：莽曰魏城亭。
现代文：王莽时叫魏城亭。
English: Wang Mangshi called Wei Cheng Ting.

古文：繁阳，元城，梁期，黎阳，莽曰黎蒸。
现代文：繁阳县，元城县，梁期县，黎阳县，王莽时叫黎蒸。
English: Shangyang County, Yuancheng County, Liangzhi County, Liyang County, Wangmanzhi is called Li Steam.

古文：即裴，侯国。
现代文：即裴县，是侯国。
English: That is, Pei County is a county.

古文：莽曰即是。
现代文：王莽时叫即是。
English: Wang Mang immediately shouted.

古文：武始，漳水东至邯郸入漳，又有拘涧水，东北至邯郸入白渠。
现代文：武始县，漳水向东到邯郸流入漳水，还有拘涧水，向东北到邯郸流渠。
English: In Wuxi County, the Yanshui River flows east to the Yanshui River, and the Guizhou Yanshui River flows northeast to the Yanshui River.

古文：邯会，侯国。
现代文：邯会县，是侯国。
English: Shanhui County is a county.

古文：阴安，平恩，侯国。
现代文：阴安县，平恩县，是侯国。
English: Yin'an County, Ping'an County, is Hou Guo.

古文：莽曰延平。
现代文：王莽时叫延平。
English: Wang Mangshi called Yanping.

古文：邯沟，侯国。
现代文：邯沟县，是侯国。
English: Gongou County is a county.

古文：武安。
现代文：武安县。
English: Wu'an County.

古文：钦口山，白渠水所出，东至列人入漳。
现代文：白渠水从钦口山发源，向东到列人流入漳水。
English: The white canal water originates from Qinqou Mountain and flows eastward to Lianren.

古文：又有浸水，东北至东昌入虖池河，过郡五。行六百一里。
现代文：还有写水，向东北到东昌流入库池河，经过五个郡，行程六百零一里。
English: There is also the Shisui River, which flows northeast to Dongchang and flows into the Kuqi River, passing through five counties and traveling six hundred and one miles.

古文：有铁官。
现代文：有铁官。
English: There are iron officials.

古文：莽曰桓安。
现代文：王莽时叫桓安。
English: Wang Mangshi's name was Kanan.

古文：巨鹿郡，秦置。
现代文：钜鹿郡，秦始置。
English: Qin Shiji, Elk County.

古文：属冀州。
现代文：属于冀州刺史部。
English: It belongs to Jizhou.

古文：户十五万五千九百五十一，口八十二万七千一百七十七。
现代文：有十五万五千九百五十一户，八十二万七千一百七十七人。
English: There were 155,951 households and 822,717 people.

古文：县二十：巨鹿，《禹贡》大陆泽在北。
现代文：辖二十个县：钜鹿县，《禹贡》上的大陆泽在北面。
English: It has jurisdiction over twenty counties: Elk County, the mainland lake on "Yugong" is in the north.

古文：纣所作沙丘台在东北七十里。
现代文：纣王所造的沙丘台在东北七十里。
English: The sand dunes built by King Zou are seventy miles to the northeast.

古文：南䜌，莽曰富平。
现代文：南织县，王莽时叫富平。
English: Nanwei County, Wang Mangshi called Fuping.

古文：广阿，象氏，侯国。
现代文：广阿县，象氏县，是侯国。
English: Guang'a County, Xiang's County, is the motherland.

古文：莽曰宁昌。
现代文：王莽时叫宁昌。
English: Wang Mangshi is called Ningchang.

古文：廮陶，宋子，莽曰宜子。
现代文：虞陶县，宋子县，王莽时叫宜子。
English: Yu Tao County, Song Zi County, Wang Mang is called Yizi.

古文：杨氏，莽曰功陆。
现代文：杨氏县，王莽时叫功陆。
English: Yang County, Wang Mang is called Gong Lu.

古文：临平，下典阳，都尉治。
现代文：临平县，下曲阳县，由都尉治理。
English: Linping County and lower Quyang County will be governed by captains.

古文：贳，■，莽曰秦聚。
现代文：赏县，郾县，王莽时叫秦聚。
English: It is called Qinju when you are in Baoxian, Jixian or Wangmanzhi.

古文：新市，侯国。
现代文：新市县，是侯国。
English: A new city and county is a new county.

古文：莽曰市乐。
现代文：王莽时叫市乐。
English: Wang Mangshi called Shi Le.

古文：堂阳，有盐官，尝分为经县。
现代文：堂阳县，有盐官。曾经分化为经县。
English: Doyang County, there are salt officials. Once differentiated into Jing County.

古文：安定，侯国敬武，历乡，侯国，莽曰历聚。
现代文：安定县，是侯国。敬武县，历乡县，是侯国。王莽时叫历聚。
English: Anding County, is a county. Jingwu County, Lixiang County, is a county. Wang Mangshi is called Liju.

古文：乐信，侯国。
现代文：乐信县，是侯国。
English: Lexin County is a county seat.

古文：武陶，侯国。
现代文：武陶县，是侯国。
English: Wutao County is a county.

古文：柏乡，侯国。
现代文：柏乡县，是侯国。
English: Baoxiang County is a county.

古文：安乡。
现代文：安乡县。
English: Anxiang County.

古文：侯国。
现代文：是侯国。
English: It is a vassal state.

古文：常山郡，高帝置。
现代文：常山郡，高帝始置。
English: Changshan County, the beginning of Gao Di.

古文：莽曰井关。
现代文：王莽改名为井关。
English: Wang Mang changed his name to Jinguan.

古文：属冀州。
现代文：属于冀州刺史部。
English: It belongs to Jizhou.

古文：户十四万一千七百四十一，口六十七万七千九百五十六。
现代文：有十四万一千七百四十一户，六十七万七千九百五十六人。
English: There are 141,741 households and 677,956 people.

古文：县十八：元氏，沮水首受中丘西山穷泉谷，东至堂阳入黄河。
现代文：辖十八个县：元氏县，沮水首先从中丘西山的穷泉谷接受水源，向东到堂阳流入黄河。
English: Under the jurisdiction of eighteen counties: Wonshi County, the floodwater first receives water from the poor spring valley of the West Mountain in Zhongqiu, and flows into the Yellow River to the east to Doyang.

古文：莽曰井关亭。
现代文：王莽时叫井关亭。
English: Wang Mangshi called Jiguan Pavilion.

古文：石邑，井陉山在西，洨水所出，东南至廮陶入泜。
现代文：石邑县，井陉山在西面，校水发源于此，向东南到虞陶流入泜水。
English: In Shiyi County, Jingye Mountain is in the west, and the school water originates here and flows southeast to Yutao into the water.

古文：桑中，侯国。
现代文：桑中县，是侯国。
English: Sangzhong County is a county.

古文：灵寿，中山桓公居此。
现代文：灵寿县，中山桓公居住在这裹。
English: Lingshou County, Zhongshan Kan Gong lives here.

古文：《禹贡》卫水出东北，江入虖池。
现代文：《禹贡》上的卫水从东北流出，向东流入库池。
English: The spring water on "Yugon" flows out of the northeast and flows into the reservoir to the east.

古文：蒲吾，有铁山。
现代文：蒲吾县，有铁山。
English: In Pugu County, there is an iron mountain.

古文：大白渠水首受绵曼水，东南至下曲阳入斯洨。
现代文：大渠水首先从绵曼水接受水源，向东南到下曲阳流入斯汶。
English: The large canal water first receives water from the Mianman Water and flows southeast to the lower Quyang and flows into the Swen.

古文：上曲阳，恒山北谷在西北。
现代文：上曲阳县，恒山的北谷在西北方向。
English: Shangquyang County, the north valley of Hengshan Mountain is in the northwest direction.

古文：有祠。
现代文：有祠。
English: There is a small shrine.

古文：并州山。
现代文：并州山。
English: and Mount Shuzhou.

古文：《禹贡》恒水所出，东入滱。
现代文：《禹贡》上的恒水从并州山流出，向东流淀水。
English: The constant water on "Yugong" flows out from the mountains of Binzhou, and the stagnant water flows eastward.

古文：莽曰常山亭。
现代文：王莽时叫常山亭。
English: Wang Mangshi called Changshan Pavilion.

古文：九门，莽曰久门。
现代文：九门县，王莽时叫久门。
English: Jiumen County, Wang Mang is called Jiumen.

古文：井陉，房子，赞皇山，济水所出，东至廮陶入泜。
现代文：井陉县，房子县，济水从赞皇山流出，向东到瘿陶流入泜水。
English: Jingye County, House County, Jishui flows out of Zhanhuang Mountain and flows into Jishui to the east of Sheduo.

古文：莽曰多子。
现代文：王莽时叫多子。
English: Wang Mangshi called Tashi.

古文：中丘，逢山长谷，渚水所出，东至张邑入偶。
现代文：中丘县，渚水从逢山长谷流出，向东到张邑流入醚。
English: In Zhongqiu County, spring water flows out of Fengshan Hase and flows into the Aether to the east of Zhangyi.

古文：莽曰直聚。
现代文：王菱时叫直塞。
English: Wang Lingshi called Dajie.

古文：封斯，侯国。
现代文：封斯县，是侯国。
English: Fens County is a county.

古文：关，平棘，鄗，世祖即位，更名高邑。
现代文：盟墨，垩棘县，鄗县，世祖即位，改名叫高邑。
English: Mengmo, Xizang County, Jixian County, the ancestor ascended to the throne, and changed its name to Gaoyu.

古文：莽曰禾成亭。
现代文：王莽时叫禾成亭。
English: Wang Mangshi called He Chengting.

古文：乐阳，侯国。
现代文：乐阳县，是侯国。
English: Leyang County is a county.

古文：莽曰畅苗。
现代文：王莽时叫畅苗。
English: Wang Mangshi called Changmiao.

古文：平台，侯国。
现代文：平台县，是侯国。
English: Platform County is a county.

古文：莽曰顺台。
现代文：王莽时叫顺台。
English: Wang Mangshi called Shunde.

古文：都乡，侯国。
现代文：都乡县，是侯国。
English: Township, county, it's a county.

古文：有铁官。
现代文：有铁官。
English: There are iron officials.

古文：莽曰分乡。
现代文：王莽时叫分乡。
English: Wang Mangshi called for the division of the village.

古文：南行唐。
现代文：南行唐县。
English: Head south to Tang County.

古文：牛饮山白陉谷，滋水所出，东至新市入虖池水。
现代文：滋水从牛饮山白陆谷流出，向东到新市流入库池。
English: The nourishing water flows out of Niu Jingshan Bailu Valley and flows into the reservoir to the east of Xincheng.

古文：莽曰延亿。
现代文：由都尉治理。王莽时叫延亿。
English: Governed by a captain. Wang Mangshu called Yanren.

古文：清河郡，高帝置。
现代文：清河郡，高帝始置。
English: Qinghe County, Gao Di Zhi Jie.

古文：莽曰平河。
现代文：王差时改名为王回。
English: Wang Zhaoxi changed his name to Wang Hui.

古文：属冀州。
现代文：属于冀州刺史部。
English: It belongs to Jizhou.

古文：户二十万一千七百七十四，口八十七万五千四百二十二。
现代文：有二十万一千七百七十四户，八十七万五千四百二十二人。
English: There were 217,774 households and 875,422 people.

古文：县十四：清阳，王都。
现代文：有十四个县：清阳县，是诸侯王的都城。
English: There are fourteen counties: Qingyang County, is the capital of the princes.

古文：东武城，绎幕，灵，河水别出为鸣犊河，东北至蓚入屯氏河。
现代文：束武城县，绎幕县，灵县，黄河水分流形成睦盐囤，向东北到蓝流入屯氏河。
English: In Sokmucheng County, Yizhimen County and Ling County, the Yellow River water flowed into the Tunji River from the northeast to the blue, forming the Mutsu Salt Flume.

古文：莽曰播。
现代文：王菱时叫播。
English: Wang Lingshi shouted.

古文：厝，莽曰厝治。
现代文：脑，盛时叫驰。
English: The brain is at its peak.

古文：鄃，莽曰善陆。
现代文：困，鶸时口褪。
English: Sleepy, sleepy, sleepy, sleepy.

古文：贝丘，都尉治。
现代文：旦丘县，由都尉治理。
English: Tanchiu County, governed by a lieutenant.

古文：信成，张甲河首受屯氏别河，东北至蓚入漳水，莎题，东阳，侯国。
现代文：信成县，张甲河首先接受屯氏支流，向东北到蓓流入漳水。熄题县，束阳县，是侯国。
English: In Xincheng County, the Zhangjiahe River first receives the Tunxi tributary and flows into the Ershui River in the northeast to the Yunnan Province.

古文：莽曰胥陵。
现代文：王蒌时叫置厘。
English: Wang Yuxi called out to Gui Li.

古文：信乡，侯国。
现代文：信乡县，是侯国。
English: Xinxiang County is a county.

古文：缭，枣强，复阳。
现代文：绫逊，面题，复腥题。
English: Sudoku, noodle puzzles, crossword puzzles.

古文：莽曰乐岁。
现代文：理时叫魈。
English: When it's right, it's right.

古文：涿郡，高帝置。
现代文：涿豳，龃始置。
English: , inset.

古文：莽曰垣翰。属幽州。
现代文：毖时叫艳，属于蝴刺史部。
English: She is a member of the Department of the History of the Butterfly.

古文：户十九万五千六百七，口七十八万二千七百六十四。
现代文：有十九万五千六百零七户，七十八万二千七百六十四人。
English: There are 195,607 households and 782,764 people.

古文：有铁官。
现代文：有铁官。
English: There are iron officials.

古文：县二十九：涿，桃水首受涞水，分东至安次入河。
现代文：下辖二十九个县：涿县，整眯首先从速接受水源，分流向东到宝这流入董回。
English: Twenty-nine counties under its jurisdiction: Handan County, the rectification of Handan was the first to immediately accept water sources, and the diversion flowed eastward to Baojing, which flowed into Dongbei.

古文：逎，莽曰逎屏，穀丘，故安，阎乡，易水所出，东至范阳入濡也。
现代文：迺题，毖时叫迢厦。谷丘县，故安县，昼丞从埋变流出，向东到茎荡流入迩，是莹业的灌渠。
English: Guqiu County, So'an County, the stream flows from the buried change, flows eastward to the stem and flows into the reed, is the irrigation canal of Yingye.

古文：并州浸。
现代文：水流也到翅昼流入迷。
English: Water also flows into the maze at midday.

古文：莽曰深泽。
现代文：南深泽县，范阳县，王茎时叫岖壁。
English: Minamifukasawa County, Fanyang County, Wangzhu is called Rugged Wall.

古文：易，广望，侯国。
现代文：趟，困，毖时叫皱。昼题，屋望题，是侯国。
English: Waking, sleepy, sleepy time is called wrinkle. Daytime theme, house-watch theme, is Hou Guo.

古文：鄚，莽曰言符。
现代文：翅胚，毖时叫宣笙。
English: Wing embryo, called Xuanwu when it is stillborn.

古文：高阳，莽曰高亭。
现代文：高阳县，理时叫直皇。
English: In Goyang County, the ruler is called the Emperor.

古文：州乡，侯国。
现代文：剑腿，是侯国。
English: Sword leg, is the motherland.

古文：安平，都尉治。
现代文：安平县，由都尉治理。
English: Anping County, governed by a lieutenant.

古文：莽曰广望亭。
现代文：旦菱时叫卢望皇。
English: At that time, he was called Emperor Rohang.

古文：樊舆，侯国。
现代文：翌越，是侯国。
English: Next is Yue, which is a county.

古文：莽曰握符。
现代文：旦菱时叫握笪。
English: When the dragonfly calls, shake the cocoon.

古文：成，侯国。
现代文：盛题，是侯国。
English: The main theme is the county.

古文：莽曰宜家。
现代文：王菱时叫宣塞。
English: Wang Lingshi called for a cease-fire.

古文：良乡，侯国。
现代文：良乡县，是侯国。
English: Liangxiang County is a county.

古文：垣水南东至阳乡入桃。
现代文：旦塞向南向东到垦眯流入塑眯。
English: The Danzai flows south to east to the Yangtze River and flows into the Yangtze River.

古文：莽曰广阳。
现代文：王茬时叫卢盐。
English: Wang Xizhi called Lu Yan.

古文：利乡，侯国。
现代文：利乡县，是侯国。
English: Lixiang County is a county seat.

古文：莽曰章符。
现代文：王茎时叫童笪。
English: The king's stalk is called Tongluo.

古文：临乡，侯国。
现代文：临乡县，是侯国。
English: Linxiang County is a county.

古文：益昌，侯国。
现代文：益昌县，是侯国。
English: Yichang County is a county.

古文：莽曰有袟。
现代文：王茎时叫直麸。
English: The king's stem is called the straight stem.

古文：阳乡，侯国。
现代文：阳乡县，是侯国。
English: Yangxiang County is a county.

古文：莽曰章武。
现代文：王菱时叫塑。
English: Wang Lingshi shouted "plastic."

古文：西乡，侯国。
现代文：西乡县，是侯国。
English: Xixiang County is a county.

古文：莽曰移风。
现代文：王菱时叫重担。
English: When the king is ill, the burden is lifted.

古文：饶阳，中水，武垣，莽曰垣翰亭。
现代文：饶阳县，史岖，武垣县，王菱时叫啦。
English: Raoyang County, Shigatse, Bukaki County, Wangling is calling.

古文：阿陵，莽曰阿陆。
现代文：阿陵县，旦查时叫阿陆。
English: Aling County, known as Alu at the time of investigation.

古文：阿武，侯国。
现代文：阿武县，是侯国。
English: Awu County is a Hokoku.

古文：高郭，侯国。
现代文：高郭县，是侯国。
English: Gaoguo County is a county.

古文：莽曰广堤。
现代文：王莽时叫广堤。
English: Wang Mangshi called Guangdi.

古文：新昌，侯国。
现代文：新昌县。是侯国。
English: Xinchang County. It is a county.

古文：勃海郡，高帝置。
现代文：勃海郡，高帝始置。
English: Bohai County, the beginning of Gao Di.

古文：莽曰迎河。属幽州。
现代文：王莽时叫迎河，属于幽州刺史部。
English: Wang Mangshi is called Yinghe and belongs to the Yuzhou Thistle History Department.

古文：户二十五万六千三百七十七，口九十万五千一百一十九。
现代文：有二十五万六千三百七十七户，九十万五千一百一十九人。
English: There are 256,377 households and 905,119 people.

古文：县二十六：浮阳，莽曰浮城。
现代文：有二十六个县：浮阳县，王莽时叫浮城。
English: There are twenty-six counties: Fuyang County, Wang Mangshi called Fucheng.

古文：阳信，东光，有胡苏亭。
现代文：阳信县，束光县，有胡苏亭。
English: In Yangxin County and Sokguang County, there is the Hu Su Pavilion.

古文：阜城，莽曰吾城。
现代文：阜城县，王莽时叫吾城县。
English: Fucheng County, called Wucheng County by Wang Mang.

古文：千童，重合，南皮，莽曰迎河亭。
现代文：千童县，重合县，南皮县，王莽时叫迎河亭。
English: Chidong County, Chonghe County, Nanpi County, Wang Mangshi called Yinghe Pavilion.

古文：定，侯国。
现代文：定县，是侯国。
English: Ding County is a county.

古文：章武，有盐官。
现代文：章武县，有盐官。
English: Zhangwu County, there are salt officials.

古文：莽曰桓章。
现代文：王莽时桓章。
English: Wang Mang Shikhan chapter.

古文：中邑，莽曰检阴，高成，都尉治也。
现代文：中邑县，王莽时叫检阴。高成县，由都尉治理。
English: In Zhongyi County, Wang Mangshi is called Jianyin. In Gaocheng County, he is governed by a captain.

古文：高乐，莽曰为乡。
现代文：高乐县，王莽时叫为乡县。
English: Gaole County, Wang Mang is called the township.

古文：参户，侯国。
现代文：参户县，是侯国。
English: Sanno County is a kōkoku.

古文：成平，虖池河，民曰徒骇河。
现代文：成千县，有摩池河，民间叫徒骇河。
English: In Chengcheng County, there is the Mochi River, which is popularly known as the Tujia River.

古文：莽曰泽亭。
现代文：王莽时叫泽亭县。
English: At the time of Wang Mang, it was called Zeting County.

古文：柳，侯国。
现代文：柳县，是侯国。
English: Liu County is a county.

古文：临乐，侯国。
现代文：临乐县，是侯国。
English: Linle County is a county.

古文：莽曰乐亭。
现代文：王莽时叫乐亭县。
English: At the time of Wang Mang, it was called Leting County.

古文：东平舒，重平，安次，脩市，侯国。
现代文：塞平舒县，重平县，安次县，脩市县，是侯国。
English: Saiping, Shuxu County, Chongping County, Anji County, and Handan City County are the largest counties.

古文：莽曰居宁。
现代文：王莽时叫居宁县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Guining County.

古文：文安，景成，侯国。
现代文：文安县，景成县，是侯国。
English: Wen'an County, Jingcheng County, is Hou Guo.

古文：束州，建成，章乡，侯国。
现代文：束州县，建成县，章乡县，是侯国。
English: Sokju County, Jiancheng County, Zhangxiang County are the largest counties.

古文：蒲领。
现代文：蒲领县。
English: Pule County.

古文：侯国。
现代文：是侯国。
English: It is a vassal state.

古文：平原郡，高帝置。
现代文：平原郡，高帝始置。
English: Plains County, Gao Di Zhi Jie.

古文：莽曰河平。
现代文：王莽时叫河平郡。
English: Wang Mangshi called Heping County.

古文：属青州。
现代文：属于青州刺史部。
English: It belongs to the Qingzhou History Department.

古文：户十五万四千三百八十七，口六十六万四千五百四十三。
现代文：有十五万四千三百八十七户，六十六万四千五百四十三人。
English: There are 154,387 households and 664,543 people.

古文：县十九：平原，有笃马河，东北入海，五百六十里。
现代文：下辖十九个县：平原县，有笃马河，向东北流入大海，行程五百六十里。
English: Nineteen counties under its jurisdiction: Plains County, with the Tuduma River flowing northeast into the sea, a journey of 560 miles.

古文：鬲，平当以为鬲津。
现代文：鬲县，平当认为是鬲津县。
English: It is generally believed to be Jiu County, but it is actually Jiujin County.

古文：莽曰河平亭。
现代文：王莽时叫河平亭。
English: Wang Mangshi called the river Ping Ting.

古文：高唐，桑钦言漯水所出。
现代文：高唐县，桑钦说漯水从逭裹流出。
English: In Gaotang County, Sanqin said salty water was flowing out of the reeds.

古文：重丘，平昌，侯国。
现代文：重丘县，平昌县，是侯国。
English: Chongqiu County, PyeongChang County, is the motherland.

古文：羽，侯国。
现代文：羽县，是侯国。
English: U County is a county.

古文：莽曰羽贞。
现代文：王莽时叫羽贞县。
English: At the time of Wang Mang, it was called Hazhen County.

古文：般，莽曰分明。
现代文：般县，王莽时叫分明县。
English: Ban County, Wang Mangshi called Bu Ming County.

古文：乐陵，都尉治。
现代文：乐陵县，都尉治理。
English: Leling County, governed by Lieutenant Wu.

古文：莽曰美阳。
现代文：王莽时叫美阳县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Miyang County.

古文：祝阿，莽曰安成。
现代文：祝阿县，王莽时叫安成县。
English: Wish Ah County, Wang Mang called Ancheng County.

古文：瑗，莽曰东顺亭。
现代文：瑗县，王莽时叫东顺亭县。
English: Min County was called Dongshunting County in Wang Mang's time.

古文：阿阳，漯阴。莽曰翼成。
现代文：阿阳县，漯阴县，王莽时叫翼成县。
English: Ayang County, Suyin County, Wang Mangshi called Yingcheng County.

古文：朸，莽曰张乡。
现代文：枋县，王莽时叫张乡县。
English: Zou County, called Zhangxiang County when Wang Mang was alive.

古文：富平，侯国。
现代文：富平县，是侯国。
English: Fuping County is a county seat.

古文：莽曰乐安亭。
现代文：王莽时叫乐安亭县。
English: At the time of Wang Mang, it was called Leanting County.

古文：安德，合阳，侯国。
现代文：安惠县，合阳县，是侯国。
English: Anhui County, Heyang County, is the largest county.

古文：莽曰宜乡。
现代文：王莽时叫宜乡县。
English: Wang Mang called Yixiang County.

古文：楼虚，侯国。
现代文：楼虚县，是侯国。
English: Louhu County is a county.

古文：龙额，侯国，莽曰清乡。
现代文：笼额县，是侯国。王莽时叫清乡县。
English: Neuge County is a county. Wang Mang called Qingxiang County.

古文：安。
现代文：安县。
English: An County.

古文：侯国。
现代文：是侯国。
English: It is a vassal state.

古文：千乘郡，高帝置。
现代文：干乘郡，高帝始置。
English: Gancheng County, Gao Di begins.

古文：莽曰建信。
现代文：王莽时改为建信郡。
English: Wang Mangshi changed it to Jianxin County.

古文：属青州。
现代文：属于青州刺史部。
English: It belongs to the Qingzhou History Department.

古文：户十一万六千七百二十七，口四十九万七百二十。
现代文：有十一万六千七百二十七户，四十九万零七百二十人。
English: There are 116,727 households and 4,907,720 people.

古文：有铁官、盐官、均输官。
现代文：有铁官、盐官、均翰官。
English: There are iron officials, salt officials, and equal opportunities officials.

古文：县十五：千乘，有铁官。
现代文：下辖十五个县：千乘县，有铁官。
English: Fifteen counties under its jurisdiction: Senjo County, with a railway official.

古文：东邹，湿沃，莽曰延亭。
现代文：束邹县，湿沃县，王莽时叫延亭县。
English: Sokcho County, Shumo County, Wangmanzhi County are called Yanting County.

古文：平安，侯国。
现代文：平安县，是侯国。
English: Ping'an County is a county.

古文：莽曰鸿睦。
现代文：王莽时叫鸿睦县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Hongmu County.

古文：博昌，时水东北至巨定入马车渎；幽州浸。
现代文：博昌县，时水向东北到钜定流入马车渎，是幽州的灌渠。
English: Bochang County, when the water flows to the northeast to Luding and flows into the carriage, is the irrigation canal of Yuzhou.

古文：蓼城，都尉治。
现代文：蓼城县，由都尉治理。
English: Lucheng County, governed by the captain.

古文：莽曰施武。
现代文：王莽时叫施武县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Shwu County.

古文：建信，狄，莽曰利居。
现代文：建信县，狄县，王莽时叫利居县。
English: Jianxin County, Di County, Wang Mang called Lijiu County.

古文：琅槐，乐安，被阳，侯国。
现代文：琅槐县，乐安县，被阳县，是侯国。
English: Handan County, Le'an County, and Byeongyang County are the largest counties.

古文：高昌，繁安。侯国。
现代文：高昌县，繁安县，是侯国。
English: Gaochang County and Shann'an County are the largest counties.

古文：莽曰瓦亭。
现代文：王莽时叫瓦亭县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Watting County.

古文：高宛，莽曰常乡。
现代文：高宛县，王莽时叫常乡县。
English: Gaowan County, Wang Mangshi called Changxiang County.

古文：延乡。
现代文：延乡县。
English: Yanxiang County.

古文：济南郡，故齐。
现代文：济南郡，是原来的齐国。
English: Jinan County is the original Qi Province.

古文：文帝十六年别为济南国。
现代文：文帝十六年另立为济南国。
English: In the 16th year of Emperor Wen, Jinan Province was established.

古文：景帝二年为郡。
现代文：景帝二年始置此郡。
English: Emperor Jing established this county in the second year of his reign.

古文：莽曰乐安。属青州。
现代文：王莽时叫乐安郡，属于青州刺史部。
English: Wang Mang was called Le'an County at the time, and belonged to the Qingzhou County History Department.

古文：户十四万七百六十一，口六十四万二千八百八十四。
现代文：有十四万零七百六十一户，六十四万二千八百八十四人。
English: There are 140,761 households and 642,884 people.

古文：县十四：东平陵，有工官、铁官。
现代文：有十四个县：束平陵县，有工官、铁官。
English: There are fourteen counties: Sokpingling County, there are engineering officials, railway officials.

古文：邹平，台，莽曰台治。
现代文：邹平县，台县，王莽时叫台治县。
English: Wuping County, Tai County, Wang Mang is called Taiji County.

古文：梁邹，土鼓，於陵，都尉治。
现代文：梁邹县，土鼓县，于陵县，由都尉治理。
English: Liangyao County, Dugu County, and Yuling County are governed by captains.

古文：莽曰於陆。
现代文：王莽时叫于陆县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Lu County.

古文：阳丘，般阳，莽曰济南亭。
现代文：阳丘县，般阳县，王莽时叫济南亭县。
English: Yangqiu County, Banyang County, Wang Mang is called Jinanting County.

古文：菅，朝阳，侯国。
现代文：菅县，朝阳县，是侯国。
English: Suga County, Chaoyang County, is a county.

古文：莽曰脩治。
现代文：王莽时叫脩治县。
English: Wang Mangshi is called Ganji County.

古文：历城，有铁官。
现代文：历城县，有铁官。
English: In Licheng County, there is a railway official.

古文：猇，侯国。
现代文：号县，是侯国。
English: county, it is the county.

古文：莽曰利成。
现代文：王莽时叫利成县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Licheng County.

古文：著，宜成。
现代文：着县，宜成县。
English: In the county, Yicheng County.

古文：侯国。
现代文：是侯国。
English: It is a vassal state.

古文：泰山郡，高帝置。
现代文：泰山郡，高帝时始置。
English: Taishan County, Gao Di was initially placed.

古文：属兖州。
现代文：属于兖州刺史部。
English: It belongs to Zhangzhou.

古文：户十七万二千八十六，口七十二万六千六百四。
现代文：有十七万二千零八十六户，七十二万六千六百零四人。
English: There are 172,086 households and 7,226,604 people.

古文：有工官。
现代文：有工官。
English: There are workmen.

古文：汶水出莱毋，西入济。
现代文：汶水从莱毋流出，向西流入济水。
English: The Wen Shui flows out of the Leizhe and flows westward into the Jishu.

古文：县二十四：奉高，有明堂，在西南四里；武帝元封二年造。
现代文：辖二十四个县：奉高县，有明堂，在西南面四里远的地方，武帝元封二年建造。
English: Twenty-four counties under its jurisdiction: Fenggao County, Youmingtang, four miles away in the southwest, built in the second year of Emperor Wu's Yuan Dynasty.

古文：有工官。
现代文：有工官。
English: There are workmen.

古文：博，有泰山庙。
现代文：博县，有泰山庙。
English: Bo County, with Mount Tai Temple.

古文：岱山在西北兖州山。
现代文：岱山在西北面，是兖州的山。
English: Mount Lushan is in the northwest, and is the highest mountain in Luzhou.

古文：茬，卢，都尉治。
现代文：茬县，卢县，由都尉治理。
English: Min County and Lu County will be governed by captains.

古文：济北王都也。
现代文：是济北王的都城。
English: It was the capital city of the King of Jibei.

古文：肥成，蛇丘，隧乡，故隧国。
现代文：肥成县，她丘县，隧乡，是以前的隧国。
English: Hicheng County, Taechuo County, and Tunnels Township are all former Tunnels.

古文：《春秋》曰 齐人歼于隧 也。
现代文：《春秋》上说 齐人在隧被歼灭 。
English: "Spring and Autumn" said that Qi people were annihilated in the tunnel.

古文：刚，故阐。莽曰柔。
现代文：刚县，是以前的阐地，王莽时叫柔县。
English: Gangxian is the former Yanshi, and Wangmanzhu is called Rongxian.

古文：柴，盖，临乐子山，洙水所出，西北至盖入池水。
现代文：柴县，盖县，洙水从临乐的子山流出，向西：盖县流入池水。
English: In Chai County, Gai County, and Ershui, water flows out of Linle's Ziyan. To the west, water flows into the pond in Gai County.

古文：又沂水南至下邳入泗，过郡五，行六百里，青州浸。
现代文：又有沂水向南到下邳县流入泅水，经过五个郡，行程六百里，是青州的灌渠。
English: In addition, Surabaya water flows southward to lower Surabaya County and flows into Surabaya, passing through five counties and traveling six hundred miles. It is the largest irrigation canal in Qingzhou.

古文：梁父，东平阳，南武阳，冠石山，治水所出，南至下邳入泗，过郡二，行九百四十里。
现代文：梁父县，束平阳县，南武阳县，治水从冠石山流出，向南到下邳县流入泅水，经过两个郡，行程九百四十里。
English: In Liangchih County, Sokpingyang County and Nanwuyang County, the flood control water flows out of Guanshishan and flows southward to Jiaozuo County and flows into Surabaya, passing through two counties and traveling nine hundred and forty miles.

古文：莽曰桓宣。
现代文：王莽时叫桓宣县。
English: Wang Mang was called Kuan Xuan County.

古文：莱芜，原山，甾水所出，东至博昌入泲，幽州浸。
现代文：莱芜县，甾水从原山流出。向东到博昌县流入沸水，是幽廾的灌渠。
English: In Laiwu County, brackish water flows out from the original mountain. Eastward to Bochang County, boiling water flows in. It is a secluded irrigation canal.

古文：又《禹贡》汶水出西南入泲。
现代文：又有《禹贡》上的汶水从西南流出，进入沸水。
English: There is also water from the south-west flowing into boiling water in "Yugong."

古文：汶水，桑钦所言。
现代文：汶水，就是桑钦所说的。
English: This is what Sanchin meant when he said, "Wen Shui."

古文：巨平，有亭亭山祠。
现代文：钜平县，有亭亭山祠。
English: In Fenping County, there is a pavilion-style mountain shrine.

古文：嬴，有铁官。
现代文：嬴县，有铁官。
English: In Jixian County, there is an iron official.

古文：牟，故国。
现代文：牟县，是以前的侯国。
English: Mu County is a former county.

古文：蒙阴，《禹贡》蒙山在西南，有祠。
现代文：蒙阴县，禹贡》上的蒙山在西南面，有祠。
English: In Mengyin County, Yugong, Mengshan Mountain is in the southwest, with an ancestral hall.

古文：颛臾国在蒙山下。
现代文：颛臾国在蒙山的下面。
English: Shan State is located below Mengshan Mountain.

古文：莽曰蒙恩。
现代文：王莽时叫蒙恩县。
English: Wang Mang called Meng En County.

古文：华，莽曰翼阴。
现代文：华县，王莽时叫翼阴。
English: In Hua County, Wang Mangshi is called Yingyin.

古文：宁阳。侯国。
现代文：宁阳县，是侯国。
English: Ningyang County is a county.

古文：莽曰宁顺。
现代文：王莽时叫宁顺县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Ningshun County.

古文：乘丘，富阳，桃山，侯国。
现代文：乘丘县，富阳县，桃山县，是侯国。
English: Rongqiu County, Fuyang County, and Momoyama County are huoguo.

古文：莽曰裒鲁。
现代文：王莽时叫裒鲁县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Yilu County.

古文：桃乡，侯国。
现代文：桃乡县，是侯国。
English: Taoxiang County is a county.

古文：莽曰鄣亭。
现代文：王莽时叫鄣亭县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Fengting County.

古文：式。
现代文：式县。
English: Shikigata.

古文：齐郡。秦置。
现代文：齐郡，秦时始置。
English: Qi County, the beginning of Qin Dynasty.

古文：莽曰济南。
现代文：王莽时叫济南郡。
English: Wang Mang called Jinan County.

古文：属青州。
现代文：属于青州刺史部。
English: It belongs to the Qingzhou History Department.

古文：户十五万四千八百二十六，口五十五万四千四百四十四。
现代文：有十五万四千八百二十六户，五十五万四千四百四十四人。
English: There are 154,826 households and 554,444 people.

古文：县十二：临淄，师尚父所封。
现代文：辖有十二个县：临淄县，师尚父的封地。
English: There are twelve counties under its jurisdiction: Linyi County, the fief of Master Shangfu.

古文：如水西北至梁邹入泲。
现代文：如水向西北到梁邹县流入沸水。
English: Such as water flowing into boiling water in the northwest to Liangyu County.

古文：有服官、铁官。
现代文：有服官、铁官。
English: There are servants and officers of iron.

古文：莽曰齐陵。
现代文：王莽时叫齐陵县。
English: At the time of Wang Mang, it was called Qiling County.

古文：昌国，德会水西北至西安入如。
现代文：昌国县，德会水向西北到西安流入如水。
English: In Changguo County, the German Water Association water flows like water from northwest to Xi'an.

古文：利，莽曰利治。
现代文：利县，王莽时叫利治县。
English: Li County, formerly known as Li Zhi County.

古文：西安，莽曰东宁。
现代文：西安县，王莽时叫东宁县。
English: Xi'an County, Wang Mang called Dongning County.

古文：巨定，马车渎水首受巨定，东北至琅槐入海。
现代文：钜定县，马车渎水首先从钜定接受水源，向东北到琅槐流入大海。
English: In Luding County, the carriage of polluted water first receives water from Luding and flows into the sea from the northeast to Handan.

古文：广，为山，浊水所出，东北至广饶入巨定。
现代文：广县，浊水从为山流出，向东北到广饶流入钜定。
English: In Guangxian County, the floodwater flows from Weishan to the northeast to Guangrao and then flows into Luding.

古文：广饶，昭南，临朐，有逢山祠。
现代文：广饶县，昭南县，临朐县，有逢山祠。
English: Guangrao County, Shonan County, Linyi County, Fengshan Temple.

古文：石膏山，洋水所出，东北至广饶入巨定。
现代文：鲎丞从互宜业流出，向东北到庐蓝昼流入堑定。
English: Huancheng flows out of the mutual benefit industry and flows into Heding in the northeast to Indigo Daylight.

古文：莽曰监朐。
现代文：王莽时叫监朐。
English: Wang Mangshi called the county jail.

古文：北乡，侯国。
现代文：北乡县，是侯国。
English: Beixiang County is a county.

古文：莽曰禺聚。
现代文：王莽叫禺聚县。
English: Wang Mang called Suiyu County.

古文：平广，侯国。
现代文：平广县，是侯国。
English: Pingguang County is a county.

古文：台乡。
现代文：台乡县。
English: Taixiang County.

古文：北海郡，景帝中二年置。
现代文：北海郡，景帝中元二年设郡。
English: Beihai County was established in the second year of the reign of Emperor Jing.

古文：属青州。
现代文：属于青州刺史部。
English: It belongs to the Qingzhou History Department.

古文：户十二万七千，口五十九万三千一百五十九。
现代文：有十二万七千户，五十九万三千一百五十九人。
English: There are 127,000 households and 593,159 people.

古文：县二十六：营陵，或曰营丘。
现代文：辖二十六个县：营陵县，有的叫营丘县。
English: There are 26 counties under its jurisdiction: Yingling County, and some are called Yingqiu County.

古文：莽曰北海亭。
现代文：王莽时叫北海亭县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Beihaiting County.

古文：剧魁，侯国。
现代文：剧魁县，是侯国。
English: Duankui County is a county.

古文：莽曰上符。
现代文：王莽时叫上符县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Shangfu County.

古文：安丘，莽曰诛郅。
现代文：安丘县，王莽时叫诛郅县。
English: Anqiu County, formerly known as Jixian County.

古文：瓡，侯国。
现代文：瓤县，是侯国。
English: Jixian County is a county.

古文：莽曰道德。
现代文：王莽时叫道德县。
English: Wang Mangshi called it Daode County.

古文：淳于，益，莽曰探阳。
现代文：淳于县，益县，王莽时叫探阳县。
English: Junyu County, Yixian County, Wangmanzhi County are called Tanyang County.

古文：平寿，剧，侯国。
现代文：平寿县，剧县，是侯国。
English: Pingshou County, Yunxian County, is the largest county.

古文：都昌，有盐官。
现代文：都昌县，有盐官。
English: In Duchang County, there is a salt official.

古文：平望，侯国。
现代文：平望县，是侯国。
English: Pingwang County is a county.

古文：莽曰所聚。
现代文：王莽时叫所聚县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Soju County.

古文：平的，侯国。
现代文：平的县，是侯国。
English: Ping's county is Hou Guo.

古文：柳泉，侯国。
现代文：栖泉县，是侯国。
English: Seisen County is a county.

古文：莽曰弘睦。
现代文：王莽时叫弘睦县。
English: Wang Mang called Hongmu County.

古文：寿光，有盐官。
现代文：寿光县，有盐官。
English: In Shouguang County, there is a salt official.

古文：莽曰翼平亭。
现代文：王莽时叫翼平亭县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Yuepingting County.

古文：乐望，侯国。
现代文：乐望县，是侯国。
English: Lewang County is a county.

古文：饶，侯国。
现代文：饶县，是侯国。
English: Rao County is a county.

古文：斟，故国，禹后。
现代文：斟县，原来的侯国，大禹的后代。
English: Wu County, the original vassal state, the descendants of Dayu.

古文：桑犊，覆甑山，溉水所出，东北至都昌入海。
现代文：桑犊县，溉水从覆甑山流出，向东北到都昌县流入大海。
English: In Mulberry County, the irrigation water flows out from the overlying Lushan Mountain and flows into the sea from the northeast to Duchang County.

古文：平城，侯国。
现代文：平城县，是侯国。
English: Pingcheng County is a county.

古文：密乡，侯国。
现代文：密乡县，是侯国。
English: The county of Misato is called Houkoku.

古文：羊石，侯国。
现代文：羊石县，是侯国。
English: Yangshi County is a county.

古文：乐都，侯国。
现代文：乐都县，是侯国。
English: Letu County is a county.

古文：莽曰拔垄。
现代文：王莽时叫拔垄县，有的作扶，有的作枝。
English: Wang Mangshi called Bajiao County, some as a support, some as a branch.

古文：石乡，侯国。
现代文：石乡县，是侯国。
English: Shixiang County is a county.

古文：上乡，侯国。
现代文：一作正乡县。上乡县，是侯国。
English: One is Zhengxiang County. Shangxiang County is Hou Guo.

古文：新成，侯国。
现代文：新成县，是侯国。
English: Xincheng County is a county.

古文：成乡，侯国。
现代文：成乡县，是侯国。
English: Chengxiang County is a county.

古文：莽曰石乐。
现代文：王莽时叫石乐县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Shile County.

古文：胶阳。
现代文：胶阳县。
English: Jiaoyang County.

古文：侯国。
现代文：是侯国。
English: It is a vassal state.

古文：东莱郡，高帝置。
现代文：东莱郡，高帝时始置。
English: Donglai County, Gao Di was placed at the beginning.

古文：属青州。
现代文：属于青州刺史部。
English: It belongs to the Qingzhou History Department.

古文：户十万三千二百九十二，口五十万二千六百九十三。
现代文：有十万三千二百九十二户，五十万二千六百九十三人。
English: There are 103,292 households and 502,693 people.

古文：县十七：掖，莽曰掖通。
现代文：辖有十七个县：掖县，王莽时叫掖通县。
English: It has jurisdiction over seventeen counties: Handan County, sometimes called Handong County.

古文：腄，有之罘山祠。
现代文：肿县，有之罘山祠。
English: In Ume County, there is a mountain shrine.

古文：居上山，声洋水所出。东北入海。
现代文：声洋水从居上山流出，向东北流入大海。
English: The sound-like water flows out of the mountain and flows into the sea to the northeast.

古文：平度，莽曰利卢。
现代文：平度县，王莽时叫利卢县。
English: Pingdu County, Wang Mangshi called Lilu County.

古文：黄，有莱山松林莱君祠。
现代文：黄县，有莱山的松林莱君祠。
English: In Huang County, there is the pine forest of Lai Mountain and Lai Jun Shrine.

古文：莽曰意母。
现代文：王莽时叫意母。
English: Wang Mangshi called for his mother.

古文：临朐，有海水祠。
现代文：临朐县，有海水祠。
English: In Linyi County, there is a seawater shrine.

古文：莽曰监朐。
现代文：王莽时叫监朐县。
English: Wang Mangshi called the county jail.

古文：曲成，有参山万里沙祠。
现代文：曲成县，有参山万里沙祠。
English: In Qucheng County, there is the Sanshan Great Sand Temple.

古文：阳丘山，治水所出，南至沂入海。
现代文：治水从阳丘山流出，向南到沂县流入大海。
English: The flood control water flows out of Yangqiu Mountain and flows into the sea as far south as Jixian County.

古文：有盐官。
现代文：有盐官。
English: There is a salt officer.

古文：牟平。莽曰望利。
现代文：牟平县，王莽时叫望利县。
English: Muping County was called Wangli County when Wang Mang was alive.

古文：东牟，有铁官、盐官。
现代文：东牟县，有铁官、盐官。
English: In Dongmou County, there are iron officials and salt officials.

古文：莽曰弘德。
现代文：王莽时叫弘德县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Hongde County.

古文：巾弦，有百支莱王祠。
现代文：帜县，有百支莱王祠。
English: In Yan County, there is the ancestral hall of King Baekje.

古文：有盐官。
现代文：有盐官。
English: There is a salt officer.

古文：育犁，昌阳，有盐官。
现代文：育犁县，昌阳县，有盐官。
English: There are salt officials in Yuxuan County and Changyang County.

古文：莽曰夙敬亭。
现代文：王莽时叫夙敬亭县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Su Jing Ting County.

古文：不夜，有成山日祠。
现代文：不夜县，有成山日祠。
English: In Buye County, there is Chengshan Sun Shrine.

古文：莽曰夙夜。
现代文：王莽时叫夙夜县。
English: Wang Mengshi called Shinya County.

古文：当利，有盐官。
现代文：当利县，有盐官。
English: In Dangli County, there is a salt official.

古文：莽曰东莱亭。
现代文：王莽时叫柬莱亭县。
English: At the time of Wang Mang, it was called Kamleting County.

古文：卢乡，阳乐，侯国。
现代文：卢乡县，阳乐县，是侯国。
English: Luxiang County, Yangle County, is Hou Guo.

古文：莽曰延乐。
现代文：王莽时叫延乐县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Yanle County.

古文：阳石，莽曰识命。
现代文：阳石县，王莽时叫识命县。
English: Yangshi County, called Zhiming County when Wang Mang was alive.

古文：徐乡。
现代文：徐乡县。
English: Xuxiang County.

古文：琅邪郡，秦置。
现代文：琅邪郡，秦时设郡。
English: Yuya County, Qin Shi County.

古文：莽曰填夷。
现代文：王莽时改为填夷郡。
English: At the time of Wang Mang, it was changed to Jieyi County.

古文：属徐州。
现代文：属于徐州刺史部。
English: It belongs to Xuzhou.

古文：户二十二万八千九百六十，口一百七万九千一百。
现代文：有二十二万八干九百六十户，一百零七万九千一百人。
English: There are between 228,000 and 960 households and 1,079,000 and 1,100 people.

古文：有铁官。
现代文：有铁官。
English: There are iron officials.

古文：县五十一：东武，莽曰祥善。
现代文：有五十一个县：束武县，王莽时叫祥喜县。
English: There are fifty-one counties: Sokwu County, Wangmanzhi called Xiangxi County.

古文：不其，有太一、仙人祠九所，及明堂。武帝所起。
现代文：不其县，有太一、传人祠九所，还有明堂，武帝时建造。
English: In his county, there are nine ancestral shrines, including Taichi and Chonin, as well as Myeongdong, which was built during the reign of Emperor Wu.

古文：海曲，有盐官。
现代文：海曲县，有盐官。
English: Haiqu County has a salt official.

古文：赣榆，朱虚，凡山，丹水所出，东北至寿光入海。
现代文：赣榆县，朱虚县，丹水从凡山流出，向东北到寿光县流入大海。
English: In Handan County and Zhuxu County, Danshui flows out from Fanshan and flows into the sea in the northeast to Shouguang County.

古文：东泰山，汶水所出，东至安丘入维。
现代文：汶水从东泰山流出，向东到安丘县流入维水。
English: The Wen Shui flows out of the East Taishan and flows into the Weishui to the east of Anqiu County.

古文：有三山、五帝祠。
现代文：有三山、五帝祠。
English: There are three mountains and five imperial shrines.

古文：诸，莽曰诸并。
现代文：诸县，王莽时叫诸并县。
English: Counties, Wang Mangshi called Zhuyan County.

古文：梧成，灵门，有高柘山。
现代文：梧成县，灵门县，有高泵山。
English: Wucheng County, Lingmen County, there are high pump mountains.

古文：壶山，浯水所出，东北入淮。
现代文：浯水从壶山流出，向束北流入淮水。
English: The molten water flows out of Mt. Jug and flows into the molten water to the north of Sokou.

古文：姑幕，都尉治。
现代文：姑幂县，都尉治理。
English: Gushan County, governed by the lieutenant.

古文：或曰薄姑。
现代文：有的叫薄姑县。
English: Some are called Bo Gu County.

古文：莽曰季睦。
现代文：王莽时叫季睦县。
English: Wang Mang called Ji Mu County at that time.

古文：虚水，侯国。
现代文：虚水县，是侯国。
English: Keshui County is a county.

古文：临原，侯国。
现代文：临原县，是侯国。
English: Linyuan County is a county.

古文：莽曰填夷亭。
现代文：王莽时叫填夷亭县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Jieyiting County.

古文：琅邪，越王句践尝治此，起馆台。
现代文：琅邪县，越王勾践曾在这裹统治过，建过馆台。
English: Yuanshan County, Yue Wang Gochan once ruled here and built a pavilion.

古文：有四时祠。
现代文：有四时祠。
English: There is a four o'clock shrine.

古文：祓，侯国。
现代文：祓县，是侯国。
English: Harae County is a Hokoku.

古文：柜，根艾水东入海。莽曰祓同。
现代文：柜县，根艾水向东流入大海，王莽时叫祓同县。
English: In Jian County, the water from the root of the mugwort flows into the sea to the east, and Wang Mangshi called the county.

古文：缶并，侯国。
现代文：鉼县，是侯国。
English: Jixian County is a county.

古文：邞，胶水东至平度入海。莽曰纯德。
现代文：郑县，胶水向东到平度县流入大海，王莽时叫纯德县。
English: Zheng County, eastward to Pingdu County, the glue flows into the sea, and Wang Mangshi is called Chunde County.

古文：雩叚，侯国。
现代文：雩睱县，是侯国。
English: Jixian County is a county.

古文：黔陬，故介国也。
现代文：黔陬县，是以前的介国。
English: Jixian County, formerly known as Jiangsu Province.

古文：云，侯国。
现代文：云县，是侯国。
English: Yun County is a county.

古文：计斤，莒子始起此，后徙莒。
现代文：计斤县，莒子开始建造，后来迁到莒县。
English: Jiujin County, Zizi began to build, and later moved to Zengxian.

古文：有盐官。
现代文：有盐官。
English: There is a salt officer.

古文：稻，侯国。
现代文：稻县，是侯国。
English: Daoxian is a county.

古文：皋虞，侯国。
现代文：皋虞县，是侯国。
English: Shanyu County, is the county seat.

古文：莽曰盈庐。
现代文：工莽时叫盈庐。
English: When it comes to being reckless, it's called Ying Zhou.

古文：平昌，长广，有莱山莱王祠。
现代文：平昌县，长广县，有莱山莱王祠。
English: In Pyeongchang County and Changguang County, there are Lai Mountain and Lai King Shrines.

古文：奚养泽在西，秦地图曰剧清池，幽州薮。
现代文：奚养泽在西面。秦国地图称为剧清池，是幽州的湖泽。
English: Qinyaizawa is in the west. The map of Qin is called Yuqing Pool, which is a lake in Yuzhou.

古文：有盐官。
现代文：有盐官。
English: There is a salt officer.

古文：横，故山，久台水所出，东南至东武入淮。
现代文：横县，久台水从故山流出，向东南到束武县流入淮水。
English: In Heng County, Jiutai Water flows out of the former mountain and flows into Huai Water in the southeast to Sokwu County.

古文：莽曰令丘。
现代文：王莽时叫令丘县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Lingqiu County.

古文：东莞，术水南至下邳入泗，过郡三，行七百一十里，青州浸。
现代文：东莞县，术水向南到下邳县流入泅水，经过三个郡，行程七百一十里，是青州的灌渠。
English: In Dongguan County, the Jiu Shui flows southward to Shimoqi County and flows into the Lishui River, passing through three counties and traveling 710 miles. It is the largest irrigation canal in Qingzhou.

古文：魏其，侯国。
现代文：魏其县，是侯国。
English: Weiqi County is a county.

古文：莽曰青泉。
现代文：王莽时叫青泉县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Qingquan County.

古文：昌，有环山祠。
现代文：昌县，有环山祠。
English: Chang County, there is a ring of mountain shrines.

古文：兹乡，侯国。
现代文：兹乡，是侯国。
English: Zixiang is a county.

古文：箕，侯国。《禹贡》濰水北至都昌入海，过郡三，行五百二十里，兖州浸也。
现代文：箕县，是侯国，《禹贡》上的潍水向北到昌都县流入大海，经过三个郡，行程五百二十里，是兖州的灌渠。
English: "Yugong" flows northward to Qamdo County and flows into the sea, passing through three counties and traveling 520 miles. It is the irrigation canal of Bozhou.

古文：椑，夜头水南至海。
现代文：稗县，夜头水向南流到大海。
English: In Jixian County, the night water flowed south to the sea.

古文：莽曰识命。
现代文：王莽时叫识命县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Zhiming County.

古文：高广，侯国。
现代文：高广县，是侯国。
English: Gaogang County is a county.

古文：高乡，侯国。
现代文：高乡县，是侯国。
English: Gaoxiang County is a county.

古文：柔，侯国。
现代文：柔县，是侯国。
English: Jo County is a county.

古文：即来，侯国。
现代文：即来县，是侯国。
English: Jorai County is a Hokoku.

古文：莽曰盛睦。
现代文：王莽时叫盛睦县。
English: At the time of Wang Mang, it was called Shengmu County.

古文：丽，侯国。
现代文：丽县，是侯国。
English: Lixian is a county.

古文：武乡，侯国。
现代文：武乡县，是侯国。
English: Wuxiang County is a county.

古文：莽曰顺理。
现代文：王莽时叫顺理县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Shunli County.

古文：伊乡，侯国。
现代文：伊乡县，是侯国。
English: Yixiang County is a county.

古文：新山，侯国。
现代文：新山县，是侯国。
English: Xinshan County is a county.

古文：高阳，侯国。
现代文：高阳县，是侯国。
English: Goyang County is a county.

古文：昆山，侯国。
现代文：昆山县，是侯国。
English: Kunshan County is a county.

古文：参封，侯国。
现代文：参封县，是侯国。
English: Sangfu County is a county.

古文：折泉，侯国。
现代文：折泉县，是侯国。
English: Oriizumi County is a Hokoku.

古文：折泉水北至莫入淮。
现代文：折泉水向北到莫县流入淮水。
English: The spring water flows northward to Mo County and flows into Huai Shui.

古文：博石，侯国。
现代文：博石县，是侯国。
English: Boshi County is a county.

古文：房山，侯国。
现代文：房山县，是侯国。
English: Fangshan County is a county.

古文：慎乡，侯国。
现代文：慎乡县，是侯国。
English: Shenxiang County is a county.

古文：驷望，侯国。
现代文：驷望县，是侯国。
English: Yiwang County is a county.

古文：莽曰泠乡。
现代文：王莽时叫泠乡县。
English: Wang Mengshi called Suixiang County.

古文：安丘，侯国。
现代文：安丘县，是侯国。
English: Anchu County is a county.

古文：莽曰宁乡。
现代文：王莽时叫宁乡县。
English: Wang Mang called Ningxiang County.

古文：高陵，侯国。
现代文：高陵县，是侯国。
English: Goryeong County is a county.

古文：莽曰蒲陆。
现代文：王莽时叫蒲陆县。
English: At the time of Wang Mang, it was called Pulu County.

古文：临安，侯国。
现代文：临安县，是侯国。
English: Lin'an County is a county.

古文：莽曰诚信。
现代文：王莽时叫诚信县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Sincerity County.

古文：石山。
现代文：石山县。
English: Ishiyama Prefecture.

古文：侯国。
现代文：是侯国。
English: It is a vassal state.

古文：东海郡，高帝置。
现代文：东海郡，高帝时设郡。
English: Donghae County, established by Emperor Gao.

古文：莽曰沂平。
现代文：王莽时改为沂平郡。
English: At the time of Wang Mang, it was changed to Suiping County.

古文：属徐州。
现代文：属于徐州刺史部。
English: It belongs to Xuzhou.

古文：户三十五万八千四百一十四，口百五十五万九千三百五十七。
现代文：有三十五万八千四百一十四户，一百五十五万九千三百五十七人。
English: There are 358,414 households and 1,559,357 people.

古文：县三十八：郯，故国，少昊后，盈姓。
现代文：有三十八个县：郯县，原来是侯国，少昊的后代，盈姓。
English: There are thirty-eight counties: Zou County, originally Hou Guo, descendants of Shao Hao, surnamed Ying.

古文：兰陵，莽曰兰东。
现代文：兰陵县，王莽时叫兰东县。
English: Lanling County was called Landong County when Wang Mang was alive.

古文：襄贲，莽曰章信。
现代文：襄贲县，王莽时叫章信县。
English: Xiangfan County was called Zhangxin County in Wang Mang's time.

古文：下邳，葛峄山在西，古文以为峄阳。
现代文：下邳县，葛蝉山在县西，古代文字记载认为是峄阳。
English: In Jiaozuo County, Mount Gezi is located in the western part of the county. According to ancient records, it is considered to be Shenyang.

古文：有铁官。
现代文：有铁官。
English: There are iron officials.

古文：莽曰闰俭。
现代文：王莽时叫闰俭县。
English: At the time of Wang Mang, it was called Yue Jian County.

古文：良成，侯国。
现代文：良成县，是侯国。
English: Liangcheng County is a county.

古文：莽曰承翰。
现代文：王莽时叫承翰县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Chenghan County.

古文：平曲，莽曰平端。
现代文：干曲县，王莽时叫平端县。
English: Ganqu County, Wang Mang called Pingduan County.

古文：戚，朐，秦始皇立石海上以为东门阙。
现代文：戚县，朐县，秦始皇在海上树立石头作为束门阙。
English: In Qixian County, Jixian County, Qin Shihuang set up stones on the sea to serve as bundles of locks.

古文：有铁官。
现代文：有铁官。
English: There are iron officials.

古文：开阳，故鄅国。
现代文：开阳县，是原来的鄗国。
English: Kaiyang County, is the original Shan State.

古文：莽曰厌虏。
现代文：王莽时叫厌虏县。
English: Wang Mengshi was once known as "Wang Rui County."

古文：费，故鲁季氏邑。
现代文：费县，是原来鲁国的季氏的邑地。
English: Feixian County was originally the home of the Ji clan in the State of Lu.

古文：都尉治。莽曰顺从。
现代文：由都尉治理，王莽时叫顺从县。
English: Governed by the captain, Wang Mangshu called Shunzhu County.

古文：利成，莽曰流泉。
现代文：利县，王莽时叫流泉县。
English: Li County, formerly known as Liuquan County.

古文：海曲，莽曰东海亭。
现代文：海曲县，王莽时叫东海亭县。
English: Haiqu County was called Donghaiting County in Wang Mang's time.

古文：兰祺，侯国。
现代文：兰祺县，是侯国。
English: Lancang County is a county.

古文：莽曰溥睦。
现代文：王莽时叫溥睦县。
English: Wang Mangshi was once called Minmu County.

古文：缯，故国。
现代文：缯县，原来是侯国。
English: Jixian County, formerly known as Hou Guo.

古文：禹后。
现代文：大禹的后代。
English: Descendants of Dayu.

古文：莽曰缯治。
现代文：王莽时叫缯治县。
English: Wang Mangshi is called Ganji County.

古文：南成，侯国。
现代文：南成县，是侯国。
English: Nancheng County is a county.

古文：山乡，侯国。
现代文：山乡县，是侯国。
English: Shanxiang County is a county.

古文：建乡，侯国。
现代文：建乡县，是侯国。
English: Jianxiang County is a county.

古文：即丘，莽曰就信。
现代文：即丘县，王莽时叫就信县。
English: Namely Qiu County, Wang Mangshi called Juxin County.

古文：祝其，《禹贡》羽山在南，鲧所殛。
现代文：祝其县，《禹贡》上的羽山在南面，是鲧被杀的地方。
English: Zhujizhi County, "Hasan" on the south side of the mountain, is the place where the cormorant was killed.

古文：莽曰犹亭。
现代文：王莽时叫犹亭县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Yuting County.

古文：临沂，厚丘，莽曰祝其亭。
现代文：临沂县，厚丘县，王莽时叫祝其亭县。
English: Linyi County, Huchuo County, Wang Mangshi called Zhuji Ting County.

古文：容丘，侯国。
现代文：容丘县，是侯国。
English: Yongqiu County is a county.

古文：祠水东南至下邳入泗。
现代文：祠水向东南到下邳流入泅水。
English: The water from the ancestral hall flows southeast to the lower moat and flows into the moat.

古文：东安，侯国。
现代文：束安县，是侯国。
English: Sokan County is a county.

古文：莽曰业亭。
现代文：王莽时叫业亭县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Yeeting County.

古文：合乡，莽曰合聚。
现代文：合乡县，王莽时叫合聚县。
English: Hexiang County is called Heju County by Wang Mang.

古文：承，莽曰承治。
现代文：承县，王莽时叫承治县。
English: Chengxian, Wang Mangxian is called Chengzhi County.

古文：建阳，侯国。
现代文：建阳县，是侯国。
English: Jianyang County is a county.

古文：莽曰建力。
现代文：王莽时叫建力县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Jianli County.

古文：曲阳，莽曰从羊。
现代文：曲阳县，王莽时叫从羊县。
English: Quyang County, Wang Mangshi called from Yang County.

古文：司吾，莽曰息吾。
现代文：司吾县，王莽时叫息吾县。
English: Sigo County, when Wang Mang called Sigo County.

古文：于乡，侯国。
现代文：于乡县，是侯国。
English: In townships and counties, it is the county.

古文：平曲，侯国。
现代文：平曲县，是侯国。
English: Pingqu County is a county.

古文：莽曰端平。
现代文：王莽时叫端平县。
English: Wang Mangshi called it Dangping County.

古文：都阳，侯国。
现代文：都阳县，是侯国。
English: Duyang County is a county.

古文：阴平，侯国。
现代文：阴平县，是侯国。
English: Yinping County is a county.

古文：郚乡，侯国。
现代文：郡乡县，是侯国。
English: Counties, townships, and counties are hokoku.

古文：莽曰徐亭。
现代文：王莽时叫徐亭县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Xuting County.

古文：武阳，侯国。
现代文：武阳县，是侯国。
English: Wuyang County is a county.

古文：莽曰弘亭。
现代文：王莽时叫弘亭县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Hongting County.

古文：新阳，侯国。
现代文：新阳县，是侯国。
English: Xinyang County is a county seat.

古文：莽曰博聚。
现代文：王莽时叫博聚县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Boju County.

古文：建陵，侯国。
现代文：建陵县，是侯国。
English: Jianling County is a county.

古文：莽曰付亭。
现代文：王莽时叫付亭县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Fuxiting County.

古文：昌虑，侯国。
现代文：昌虑县，是侯国。
English: Changxian County, is the county seat.

古文：莽曰虑聚。
现代文：王莽时叫虑聚县。
English: Wang Mengshi called Xianju County.

古文：都平。
现代文：都平县。
English: Tohei County.

古文：侯国。
现代文：是侯国。
English: It is a vassal state.

古文：临淮郡，武帝元狩六年置。
现代文：临淮郡，武帝元狩六年设。
English: Linhuai County, established in the sixth year of Emperor Wu's reign.

古文：莽曰淮平。
现代文：王莽时叫淮平郡。
English: Wang Mangshi called Huaiping County.

古文：户二十六万八千二百八十三，口百二十三万七千七百六十四。
现代文：有二十六万八千二百八十三户，一百二十三万七千七百六十四人。
English: There are 268,283 households and 1,237,764 people.

古文：县二十九：徐，故国，盈姓。
现代文：下有二十九个县：徐县，是原来的侯国。盈姓。
English: There are twenty-nine counties below: Xu County, is the original Hou Guo. Ying surname.

古文：至春秋时徐子章禹为楚所灭。
现代文：到春秋时徐子章禹被楚国减掉。
English: By the Spring and Autumn Period, Xu Zizhangyu was reduced by the State of Chu.

古文：莽曰徐调。
现代文：王莽时徐调县。
English: Wang Mang is from Xuchang County.

古文：取虑，淮浦，游水北入海。
现代文：取虑县，淮浦县，游水向北流入大海。
English: Toriyasu County, Huaipu County, the swimming water flows northward into the sea.

古文：莽曰淮敬。
现代文：王莽时叫淮敬县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Huaijing County.

古文：盱眙，都尉治。
现代文：盱眙县，由都尉治理。
English: Min County, governed by the captain.

古文：莽曰武匡。
现代文：王莽时叫武匡县。
English: Wang Mang called Wu Kuang County.

古文：厹犹，莽曰秉义。
现代文：公犹县，王莽时叫秉义县。
English: Gongyu County, Wang Mangshi called Bingyi County.

古文：僮，莽曰成信。
现代文：僮县，王莽时叫成信县。
English: Zou County, Wang Mangshi called Chengxin County.

古文：射阳。莽曰监淮亭。
现代文：射阳县，王莽时叫监淮亭县。
English: Shayang County, Wang Mang called the supervisor Huai Ting County.

古文：开阳，赘其，高山，睢陵，莽曰睢陆。
现代文：开阳县，赘其县，高山县，睢陵县，王莽时叫睢陆县。
English: Kaiyang County, Qiji County, Gaoshan County, Fuling County, Wang Mangshi called Qilu County.

古文：盐渎，有铁官。
现代文：盐渎县，有铁官。
English: In Yanchuang County, there is an iron official.

古文：淮阴，莽曰嘉信。
现代文：淮阴县，王莽时叫嘉信县。
English: Huaiyin County, formerly known as Jiaxin County.

古文：淮陵，莽曰淮陆。
现代文：淮陵县，王莽时叫淮陆县。
English: Huairing County was called Huailu County in Wang Mang's time.

古文：下相，莽曰从德。
现代文：下相县，王莽时叫从德县。
English: In Shimoaso County, Wang Mangshi called Congde County.

古文：富陵，莽曰■虏。
现代文：富陵县，王莽时叫棵虏县。
English: Fuling County, Wang Mangshi called Kekiru County.

古文：东阳，播旌，莽曰著信。
现代文：束阳县，播旌县，王莽时叫着信县。
English: Sokyang County, Banshu County, Wang Mangshi called Xin County.

古文：西平，莽曰永聚。
现代文：西平县，王莽时叫永聚县。
English: Xiping County, Wang Mang called Yongju County.

古文：高平，侯国。
现代文：高平县，是侯国。
English: Gaoping County is a county.

古文：莽曰成丘。
现代文：王莽时叫成丘县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Chengqiu County.

古文：开陵，侯国。
现代文：开陵县，是侯国。
English: Kailing County is a county.

古文：莽曰成乡。
现代文：王莽时叫成乡县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Chengxiang County.

古文：昌阳。侯国。
现代文：昌阳县，是侯国。
English: Changyang County is a county.

古文：广平，侯国。
现代文：广平县，是侯国。
English: Guangping County is a county.

古文：莽曰平宁。
现代文：王莽时叫平宁县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Pingning County.

古文：兰阳，侯国。
现代文：兰阳县，是侯国。
English: Lanyang County is a county.

古文：莽曰建节。
现代文：王莽时叫建节县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Jianjie County.

古文：襄平，侯国。
现代文：襄乎县，是侯国。
English: Xianghu County is a county.

古文：莽曰相平。
现代文：王莽时叫相平县。
English: Wang Mengshi called the Songping County.

古文：海陵，有江海会祠。
现代文：海陵县，有江海会祠。
English: In Hailing County, there is the Jianghai Shrine.

古文：莽曰亭间。
现代文：王莽时叫亭间县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Tingma County.

古文：舆，莽曰美德。
现代文：舆县，王莽时叫美德县。
English: My county, Wang Mangxing called Meide County.

古文：堂邑，有铁官。
现代文：堂邑县，有铁官。
English: Dongyi County, there are iron officials.

古文：乐陵。
现代文：乐陵县。
English: Leling County.

古文：侯国。
现代文：是侯国。
English: It is a vassal state.

古文：会稽郡，秦置。
现代文：会稽郡，秦时设郡。
English: Hui County and Qin County.

古文：高帝六年为荆国，十二年更名吴。
现代文：高帝六年为荆国，十二年改名为吴郡。
English: In the six years of Emperor Gao's reign, it was named Jing County, and in the twelfth year, it was renamed Wu County.

古文：景帝四年属江都。
现代文：景帝四年属于江都。
English: Jingdi has belonged to Jiangdu for four years.

古文：属扬州。
现代文：属于扬州刺史部。
English: It belongs to the History Department of Yangzhou City.

古文：户二十二万三千三十八，口百三万二千六百四。
现代文：有二十二万三千零三十八户，一百零三万二千六百零四人。
English: There are 223,038 households and 1,023,604 people.

古文：县二十六：吴，故国，周太伯所邑。
现代文：下有二十六个县：吴县，原是侯国，周太伯的邑地。
English: There are twenty-six counties below: Wuxian County, formerly Hou Guo, Zhou Tai Bo's hometown.

古文：具区泽在西，扬州薮，古文以为震泽。
现代文：具区泽在西面，是扬州的湖泽，古代文字记载是震泽。
English: Gu Guze in the west is a lake in Yangzhou, and the ancient text records it as Zhenze.

古文：南江在南，东入海，扬州川。
现代文：南江在南面，向东流入大海，是扬州的河流。
English: The Nanjiang River flows south and east to the sea. It is the longest river in Yangzhou.

古文：莽曰泰德。
现代文：王莽时叫泰德县。
English: At the time of Wang Mang, it was called Taide County.

古文：曲阿，故云阳，莽曰风美。
现代文：曲阿县，是原来的云阳县。王莽时叫风美县。
English: Qua County was originally Yunyang County. Wang Mangshi called it Fengmei County.

古文：乌伤，莽曰乌孝。
现代文：乌伤县，王莽时叫乌孝县。
English: Wusha County, Wang Mang called Wuxiao County.

古文：毗陵，季札所居。
现代文：毗陵县，是季札居住的地方。
English: Viling County, where Ji Zha lives.

古文：江在北，东入海，扬州川。
现代文：长江在北面，向东流入大海，是扬州的河流。
English: The Yangtze River is in the north and flows into the sea to the east. It is the longest river in Yangzhou.

古文：莽曰毗坛。
现代文：王莽时叫毗坛县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Vitan County.

古文：馀暨，萧山，潘水所出。东入海。
现代文：余暨县，潘水从萧山流出，向东流入大海。
English: In Yujing County, the Pan River flows out of Xiaoshan and flows into the sea to the east.

古文：莽曰馀衍。
现代文：王莽时叫余衍县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Yuyan County.

古文：阳羡，诸暨，莽曰疏虏。
现代文：阳羡县，诸暨县，王莽时叫疏虏县。
English: Yangsen County, Zhuji County, Wangmanzhi County and Shourui County.

古文：无锡，有历山，春申君岁祠以牛。
现代文：无锡县，有历山，春申君每年用牛来祭祀。
English: In Wuxi County, there is Leshan, and Chunshenjun is sacrificed with cattle every year.

古文：莽曰有锡。
现代文：王莽时叫有锡县。
English: At the time of Wang Mang, it was called Yuxi County.

古文：山阴，会稽山在南。上有禹冢、禹井，扬州山。
现代文：山阴县，会稽山在南面，上面有大禹的冢、大禹井，是扬州的山陵。
English: In Sanyin County, Mount Kechizan is in the south, with Dayu's Tomb and Dayu's Well on top. It is a mountain mausoleum in Yangzhou.

古文：越王勾践本国。
现代文：越王勾践的本国。
English: The home country of Yue Wang Kezhen.

古文：有灵文园。
现代文：有灵文园。
English: Yuling Garden.

古文：丹徒，馀姚，娄，有南武城，阖闾所起以候越。
现代文：丹徒县，余姚县，娄县，有南武城，阖间建造来监视越国。
English: Dantou County, Yuyao County, Handan County, Nanwu City, Handan built to monitor Yueguo.

古文：莽曰娄治。
现代文：王莽时叫娄治县。
English: Wang Mangshi is called Ganji County.

古文：上虞，有仇亭。
现代文：上虞县，有仇亭。
English: In Shangyu County, there is Kuchutei.

古文：柯水东入海。
现代文：柯水向东流入大海。
English: The water flows eastward into the sea.

古文：莽曰会稽。
现代文：王莽时叫会稽县。
English: Wang Mang called the county auditor.

古文：海盐，故武原乡。
现代文：海盐县，是原来的武原乡。
English: Haiyan County, is the original Wuhara Township.

古文：有盐官。
现代文：有盐官。
English: There is a salt officer.

古文：莽曰展武。
现代文：王莽时叫展武县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Zhanwu County.

古文：剡，莽曰尽忠。
现代文：剡县，王莽时叫尽忠县。
English: Min County, Wang Mangshi called Jianzhong County.

古文：由拳，柴辟，故就李乡，吴、越战地。
现代文：由拳县，柴辟，是原来的就李乡，吴、越作战的地方。
English: Yuken County, Zaibai, was originally the place where Li Xiang, Wu and Yue fought.

古文：大末，穀水东北至钱唐入江。
现代文：大末县，谷水向东北到钱唐县流入长江。
English: In Dashu County, the valley water flows into the Yangtze River in the northeast to Qiantang County.

古文：莽曰末治。
现代文：王莽时叫末治县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Suiji County.

古文：乌程，有欧阳亭。
现代文：乌程县，有欧阳亭。
English: In Wucheng County, there is Ouyang Pavilion.

古文：句章，渠水东入海。
现代文：句章县，渠水向东流入东海。
English: In Guzhang County, the canal water flows eastward into the East China Sea.

古文：馀杭，莽曰进睦。
现代文：余杭县，王莽时叫进睦县。
English: Yuhang County, Wang Mangshi called into Mutsu County.

古文：鄞，有镇亭，有鮚埼亭。
现代文：鄞县，有镇亭，有鲒堉亭。
English: In Handan County, there are Zhen Pavilion and Handan Pavilion.

古文：东南有天门水入海。
现代文：东南面有天门水流入大海。
English: To the southeast, Tianmen Water flows into the sea.

古文：有越天门山。
现代文：有越天门山。
English: There is Yue Tianmen Mountain.

古文：莽曰谨。
现代文：王莽时叫谨县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Zhenxian County.

古文：钱唐，西部都尉治。
现代文：钱唐县，由西部都尉治理。
English: Qiantang County, governed by the western captain.

古文：武林山，武林水所出，东入海，行八百三十里，莽曰泉亭。
现代文：武林水从武林山流出，向东流入大海，行程八百三十里。王莽时叫泉亭县。
English: Wulin water flows out of Wulin Mountain and flows eastward into the sea, traveling eight hundred and thirty miles. Wang Mangshi called Quan Ting County.

古文：鄮，莽曰海治。
现代文：邓县，王莽时叫海治县。
English: Deng County was called Haiji County when Wang Mang was alive.

古文：富春，莽曰诛岁。
现代文：富春县，王莽时叫诛岁县。
English: Fuchun County, formerly known as Shunling County.

古文：冶，回浦。
现代文：冶县，回浦县。
English: Ye County, back to Pu County.

古文：南部都尉治。
现代文：由南部都尉治理。
English: Governed by Captain Nambu.

古文：丹扬郡，故鄣郡。
现代文：丹扬郡，原来是鄣郡。
English: Danyang County, formerly Min County.

古文：属江都。
现代文：属于江都。
English: It belongs to Jiangdu.

古文：武帝元封二年更名丹扬。
现代文：武帝元封。年改名叫丹扬郡。
English: Emperor Wu was enthroned. The name was changed to Danyang County.

古文：属扬州。
现代文：属于扬州刺史部。
English: It belongs to the History Department of Yangzhou City.

古文：户十万七千五百四十一，口四十万五千一百七十。
现代文：有十万七千五百四十一户，四十万五千一百七十一人。
English: There were 107,541 households and 451,171 individuals.

古文：有铜官。
现代文：有铜官。
English: There's a copper.

古文：县十七：宛陵，彭泽聚在西南。
现代文：下有十七个县：宛陵县，彭泽聚在西南面。
English: There are seventeen counties: Wanling County, Pengze clustered in the southwest.

古文：清水西北至芜胡入江。
现代文：清水向西北到芜湖流入长江。
English: Clear water flows into the Yangtze River in a northwesterly direction to Wuhu.

古文：莽曰无宛。
现代文：王莽时叫无宛县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Muan County.

古文：於，江乘，莽曰相武。
现代文：于替县，江乘县，王莽时叫相武县。
English: Yu Ti County, Jiang Rong County, Wang Mang called Samu County.

古文：春穀，秣陵，莽曰宣亭。
现代文：春谷县，秣陵县，王莽时叫宣亭县。
English: Spring Valley County, Fuling County, Wang Mangshi called Xuanting County.

古文：故鄣，莽曰候望。
现代文：故鄣县，王莽时叫候望县。
English: Formerly Min County, Wang Mangshi was called Houwang County.

古文：句容，泾，丹阳，楚之先熊绎所封，十八世。文王徙郢。
现代文：句容县，泾县，丹阳县，楚国的祖先熊绎的封地，十八世后，文王迁到郢。
English: After the eighteenth generation, King Wen moved to the fiefdoms of his ancestors Xiong Yu in Jujong County, Min County, and Danyang County in Chu.

古文：石城，分江水首受江，东至馀姚入海，过郡二，行千二百里。
现代文：石城县，分江水首先从长江接受水源，向东到余姚县流入大海，经过两个郡，行程一千二百里。
English: In Shicheng County, the water of the Fenjiang River first receives water from the Yangtze River and flows into the sea eastward to Yuyao County, passing through two counties and traveling 1,200 miles.

古文：胡孰，陵阳，桑钦言淮水出东南，北入大江。
现代文：胡孰县，陵阳县，桑钦说淮水向东南方向流出，向北流入大江。
English: Huye County, Lingyang County, Sanqin said that the Huai River flows out to the southeast and flows north into the Yangtze River.

古文：芜湖，中江出西南，东至阳羡入海，扬州川。
现代文：芜湖县，中江向西南方向流出，向东到阳羡县流人大海，是扬州的河流。
English: In Wuhu County, the Middle River flows out to the southwest, and flows eastward to the sea in Yangxian County. It is the largest river in Yangzhou.

古文：黝，渐江水出南蛮夷中，东入海。
现代文：黝县，渐江水从南蛮夷中流出，向东流入大海。
English: In Jixian County, the water of the Yangtze River flows out of Nanmanyi District and flows into the sea to the east.

古文：成帝鸿嘉二年为广德王国。
现代文：成帝鸿嘉二年为广德王国。
English: Chengdi Hongjia was the Guangde Kingdom for two years.

古文：莽曰愬虏。
现代文：乇莽时叫恕虏县。
English: When it is reckless, it is called Shuriku County.

古文：溧阳，歙，都尉治。
现代文：溧阳县，歙县，由都尉治理。
English: Fenyang County and Handan County will be governed by captains.

古文：宣城。
现代文：宣城县。
English: Xuancheng County.

古文：豫章郡，高帝置。
现代文：豫章郡，高帝时设郡。
English: Yuanzhang County, established by Emperor Gao.

古文：莽曰九江。
现代文：王莽时叫九江郡。
English: Wang Mang called Jiujiang County.

古文：属扬州。户六万七千四百六十二，口三十五万一千九百六十五。
现代文：属于扬州刺史部：有六万七千四百六十二户，三十五万一千九百六十五人。
English: Belonging to the History Department of Yangzhou: there are 67,462 households and 351,965 people.

古文：县十八：南昌，莽曰宜善。
现代文：下有十八个县：南昌县，王莽时叫宜善县。
English: There are eighteen counties: Nanchang County, Wang Mangshi called Yishan County.

古文：庐陵，莽曰桓亭。
现代文：庐陵县，王莽时叫桓亭县。
English: Fuling County, called Hanting County when Wang Mang was alive.

古文：彭泽，《禹贡》彭蠡泽在西。
现代文：彭泽县，《禹贡》上的彭蠡泽在西面。
English: Pengze County, "Yugong" on the Penghu Lake in the west.

古文：鄱阳，武阳乡右十余里有黄金采。
现代文：鄱阳县，武阳乡西面卜多里有开采黄金的地方。
English: In Buyang County, west of Buyang Township, there is a place where gold is mined.

古文：鄱水西入湖汉。
现代文：鄱水向西流入湖汉。
English: Surabaya water flows westward into Hunan.

古文：莽曰乡亭。
现代文：王莽时叫乡亭县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Xiangting County.

古文：历陵，傅易山、傅易川在南，古文以为傅浅原。莽曰蒲亭。
现代文：历陵县，傅易山、傅易!在南面，占代文字记载认为是傅浅原，王莽时叫蒲亭县。
English: Liling County, Fuyi Mountain, Fuyi! In the south, the Zhan Dynasty text records that it is Fu Asahara, and Wang Mang is called Puting County.

古文：馀汗，馀水在北，至鄡阳入湖汉。
现代文：余汗县，余水在北面，到郎阳流入湖汉。
English: In Yuhan County, the remaining water is in the north and flows into Lake Han at Langyang.

古文：莽曰治干。
现代文：王莽时叫治干县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Jigang County.

古文：柴桑，莽曰九江亭。
现代文：柴桑县，王莽时叫九江亭县。
English: Chaisang County was called Jiujiangting County in Wang Mang's time.

古文：艾，修水东北至彭泽入湖汉，行六百六十里。
现代文：艾县，脩水向东北到彭泽县流入湖汉，行程六百六十里。
English: Ai County, Surabaya water flows into Hunan from the northeast to Pengze County, a journey of 660 miles.

古文：莽曰治翰。
现代文：王莽时叫治翰县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Zhihang County.

古文：赣，豫章水出西南，北入大江。
现代文：赣县。豫章水从西南流出，向北流入大江。
English: Yu County. Yuzhang water flows out from the southwest and flows north into the Yangtze River.

古文：新淦，都尉治。
现代文：新淦县，由都尉治理。
English: Xinlu County, governed by the captain.

古文：莽曰偶亭。
现代文：王莽时叫偶亭县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Yuting County.

古文：南城，盱水西北至南昌入湖汉。
现代文：南城县，盱水向西北到南昌流入湖汉。
English: In Nancheng County, Surabaya water flows into Hunan from the northwest to Nanchang.

古文：建成，蜀水东至南昌入湖汉。
现代文：建成县，蜀水向东到南昌县流入湖汉。
English: In Jiancheng County, the Shu River flows eastward to Nanchang County and flows into Hunan.

古文：莽曰多聚。
现代文：王莽时叫多聚县。
English: Wang Mangshi called for more gatherings in the county.

古文：宜春，南水东至新淦入湖汉。莽曰修晓。
现代文：宜春县，南水向东到新淦流入湖汉，王莽时叫脩晓县。
English: In Yichun County, the South Water flows eastward to Xinlu and flows into Hunan. Wang Mangshi called it Qixiao County.

古文：海昏，莽曰宜生。
现代文：海昏县，王莽时叫宜生县。
English: Haitong County was called Yisheng County when Wang Mang was alive.

古文：雩都，湖汉水东至彭泽入江，行千九百八十里。
现代文：雩都县，湖汉水向东到彭泽流入长江，行程一千九百八十里。
English: In Badu County, the water of Lake Han flows into the Yangtze River eastward to Pengze, a journey of nineteen hundred and eighty miles.

古文：鄡阳，莽曰预章。
现代文：枭阳县，王莽时叫豫章县。
English: Fenyang County, called Yuanzhang County by Wang Mang.

古文：南野，彭水东入湖汉。
现代文：南壁县，彭水向东流入湖汉。
English: In Nanbi County, the Pengshui River flows eastward into Lake Han.

古文：安平。
现代文：安平县。
English: Anping County.

古文：侯国。
现代文：是侯国。
English: It is a vassal state.

古文：莽曰安宁。
现代文：王莽时叫安宁县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Anning County.

古文：桂阳郡，高帝置。
现代文：桂阳郡，高帝时设郡。
English: Guiyang County, established by Emperor Gao.

古文：莽曰南平。
现代文：王莽时改为南平郡。
English: At the time of Wang Mang, it was changed to Nanping County.

古文：属荆州。
现代文：属于荆州刺史部。
English: It belongs to Jingzhou.

古文：户二万八千一百一十九，口十五万六千四百八十八。
现代文：有二万八干一百一十九户，十五万六千四百八十八人。
English: There were 28,019 households and 156,488 people.

古文：有金官。
现代文：设有金官。
English: There is also a financial officer.

古文：县十一：郴，耒山，耒水所出，西至湘南入湘。
现代文：下有十一个县：郴县，耒水从未山流出，向西南到湘南县流入湖泊。
English: There are eleven counties below: Handan County, Handan water flows out of the mountains and flows into lakes in the southwest to Shonan County.

古文：项羽所立义帝都此。
现代文：项羽所立的义帝建都于此。
English: The Yidite capital built by Xiang Yu is located here.

古文：莽曰宣风。
现代文：王莽时叫宣风县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Xuanfeng County.

古文：临武，秦水东南至浈阳入汇，行七百里。
现代文：临武县，秦水向东南到渍阳县流入汇水，行程七百里。
English: In Linwu County, Qinshui flows southeast to Zuoyang County and flows into Huisui, a journey of seven hundred miles.

古文：莽曰大武。
现代文：王莽时叫大武县。
English: Wang Mangshi was called Dawu County.

古文：便，莽曰便屏。
现代文：便县，王莽时叫便屏县。
English: Benxian County, Wang Mangxian called Benping County.

古文：南平，耒阳，春山，舂水所出，北至酃入湖，过郡二，行七百八十里。
现代文：南平县，耒阳县，舂水从舂山流出，向北到酃县流进大湖，经过两个郡，行程七百八十里。
English: Nanping County, Poyang County, the water flows out of Mount Lushan and flows north to Lushan County into the Great Lake, passing through two counties and traveling 780 miles.

古文：莽曰南平亭。
现代文：王莽时叫南平亭县。
English: Wang Mang called Nanpingting County.

古文：桂阳，汇水南至四会入郁，过郡二，行九百里。
现代文：桂阳县，汇水向南到四会县流入郁水，经过两个郡，行程九百里。
English: In Guiyang County, Huisui flows south to Sihui County and flows into Yushui, passing through two counties and traveling nine hundred miles.

古文：阳山，侯国。
现代文：阳山县，是侯国。
English: Yangshan County is a county.

古文：曲江，莽曰除虏。
现代文：曲江县，王莽时叫除虏县。
English: Qujiang County, once known as Wang Mang, is now called Jianru County.

古文：含洭，浈阳，莽曰基武。
现代文：含沤县，祯阳县，王莽时叫基武县。
English: Including Handan County, Handan Yang County, Wang Mang is called Keibu County.

古文：阴山。
现代文：阴山县。
English: Yinshan County.

古文：侯国。
现代文：是侯国。
English: It is a vassal state.

古文：武陵郡，高帝置。
现代文：武陵郡，高帝时设郡。
English: Wuling County, established by Emperor Gao.

古文：莽曰建平。
现代文：王莽时改为建平县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Jianping County.

古文：属荆州。
现代文：属于荆州刺史部。
English: It belongs to Jingzhou.

古文：户三万四千一百七十七，口十八万五千七百五十八。
现代文：有三万四千一百七十七户，十八万五千七百五十八人。
English: There are 34,177 households and 185,758 people.

古文：县十三：索，渐水东入沅。
现代文：下有十三个县：索县，渐水向东流入沅水。
English: There are thirteen counties below: So County, and the eastward flow of gradual water into Surabaya.

古文：孱陵，莽曰孱陆。
现代文：孱陵县，王莽时叫孱陆县。
English: Fuling County was called Fulu County when Wang Mang was alive.

古文：临沅。莽曰监元。
现代文：临沅县，王莽时叫监元县。
English: Linyi County, formerly known as Jianyuan County.

古文：沅陵，莽曰沅陆。
现代文：沅陵县，王莽时叫沅陆县。
English: Fuling County was called Fulu County when Wang Mang was alive.

古文：镡成，康谷水南入海。
现代文：铎成县，康谷水向南流入大海。
English: In Lucheng County, the Kanggu water flows south to the sea.

古文：玉山，潭水所出，东至阿林入郁，过郡二，行七百二十里。
现代文：潭水从玉山流出，向东到阿林县流入郁水，经过两个郡，行程百二十里。
English: The pond water flows out of Yushan and flows eastward to Aling County into Yushui, passing through two counties and traveling a hundred and twenty miles.

古文：无阳，无水首受故且兰，南入沅，八百九十里。
现代文：无阳县，无水首先从故且兰接受水源，向南流入沅水，行程八百九十里。
English: In Moyang County, the Mizu first receives water from Goyang and flows south to Surabaya, a journey of 890 miles.

古文：迁陵，莽曰迁陆。
现代文：迁陵县，王莽时叫迁陆县。
English: Qianling County, Wang Mangshi called Qianlu County.

古文：辰阳，三山谷，辰水所出，南入沅，七百五十里。
现代文：辰阳县，辰水从三山谷流出，向南流入沅水，行程匕百五!
English: In Chenyang County, the Chenyang River flows out of the Three Valleys and flows south into the Surabaya River, a journey of more than 150km!

古文：莽曰会亭。
现代文：一坚、乇莽时叫会亭县。
English: It is called Hueiting County when it is strong or reckless.

古文：酉阳，义陵，鄜梁山，序水所出，西入沅。
现代文：酉阳县，义陵县，序水发源于鄘梁山，向西流入沅水。
English: In Fenyang County and Yiling County, the sequence water originates from the Qiliang Mountain and flows westward into the Xinshui.

古文：莽曰建平。
现代文：王莽时叫建平县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Jianping County.

古文：佷山，零阳，充。
现代文：恨山县，零阳县，充县。
English: Henshan County, Liyang County, and Zeng County.

古文：酉原山，酉水所出，南至沅陵入沅，行千二百里。
现代文：酉原山是酉水的发源地，向南到沅陵县流入沅水，行程一千二百里。
English: Yuyuan Mountain is the source of the Yuanshui River, which flows southward to Fuling County, a journey of twelve hundred miles.

古文：历山，澧水所出，东至下隽入沅，过郡二，行一千二百里。
现代文：历山是澧水的发源地，向东到下隽流入沅水，经过两个郡，行程一千二百里。
English: Leshan is the birthplace of Surabaya. Surabaya flows eastward to the Lower Yangtze River, passing through two counties and traveling 1,200 miles.

古文：零陵郡，武帝元鼎六年置。
现代文：零陵郡，武帝元鼎六年设郡。
English: Luling County was established in the sixth year of Emperor Wu's reign.

古文：莽曰九疑。
现代文：王莽时改为九疑郡。
English: At the time of Wang Mang, it was changed to Jiuxi County.

古文：属荆州。
现代文：属于荆州刺史部。
English: It belongs to Jingzhou.

古文：户二万一千九十二，口十三万九千三百七十八。
现代文：有二万一千零九十二户，十：三万九千三百七十八人。
English: There were 21,092 households, with a total of 39,378 people.

古文：县十：零陵，阳海山，湘水所出，北至酃入江，过郡二，行二千五百三十里。
现代文：下有十个县：零陵县，阳海山是湘水的发源地，向北到酃县流入长江，经过两个郡，行程二千五百三十里。
English: There are ten counties below: Ziling County, Yanghaishan is the birthplace of Hunan water, flowing into the Yangtze River north to Yixian County, passing through two counties, traveling two thousand five hundred and thirty miles.

古文：又有离水，东南至广信入郁林，行九百八十里。
现代文：还有离水，向东南到广信流入郁林，行程九百八十里。
English: There is also a branch off the water, flowing southeast to Guangxin and into Yulin, a journey of nine hundred and eighty miles.

古文：营道，九疑山在南。
现代文：营道县，九疑山在南面。
English: Yingdao County, Jiuzi Mountain is in the south.

古文：莽曰九疑亭。
现代文：王莽时叫九疑亭县。
English: Wang Mang called Jiuzuting County.

古文：始安，夫夷，营浦，都梁，侯国。
现代文：始安县，夫夷县，营浦县，都梁县，是侯国。
English: Shi'an County, Fu'i County, Yingpu County, and Du Liang County are Hokkoku.

古文：路山，资水所出，东北至益阳入沅，过郡二，行千八百里。
现代文：路山是资水的发源地，向东北到益阳流入沅水，经过两个郡，行程一千八百里。
English: Lushan is the source of the mineral water, which flows northeast to Yiyang and flows into Surabaya, passing through two counties and traveling 1,800 miles.

古文：冷道，莽曰：泠陵。
现代文：泠道县，王莽时叫泠陵县。
English: Xindao County was called Fuling County in Wang Mang's time.

古文：泉陵。侯国。
现代文：泉陵县，是侯国。
English: Sengneung County is a county.

古文：莽曰溥闰，洮阳，莽曰洮治。
现代文：王莽时叫溥闰县。洮阳县，王莽时叫洮治县。
English: Wang Mengshi was called Qian Ye County. Poyang County, Wang Mengshi was called Ganji County.

古文：钟武。
现代文：钟武县。
English: Zhongwu County.

古文：莽曰钟桓。
现代文：王莽时叫钟桓瑟。
English: Wang Mangshi called Zhong Huan Si.

古文：汉中郡，秦置。
现代文：汉中郡，秦时设郡。
English: Hanzhong County, Qin Dynasty.

古文：莽曰新成。属益州。
现代文：王莽时叫新成郡，属于益州刺史部。
English: Wang Mang was called Xincheng County at the time and belonged to the History Department of Yizhou.

古文：户十万一千五百七十，口三十万六百一十四。
现代文：有十万一千五百七十户，三十万零六百一十四人。
English: There are one hundred and fifteen thousand five hundred and seventy households and three hundred and six hundred and fourteen people.

古文：县十二：西城，旬阳，北山，旬水所出，南入沔。
现代文：下辖十二个县：西城县，旬阳县，北山是旬水的发源地，向南流入沔水。
English: There are twelve counties under its jurisdiction: Xicheng County, Shunyang County. Beishan is the birthplace of Shunshui, and it flows south into Surabaya.

古文：南郑，旱山，池水所出，东北入汉。
现代文：南郑县，池水发源于旱山，向东北流入汉水。
English: In Nan Zheng County, the pond water originates from the Arid Mountains and flows into the Han River to the northeast.

古文：褒中，都尉治。
现代文：褒中县，由都尉治理。
English: Baozhong County, governed by the captain.

古文：汉阳乡。
现代文：有汉阳乡。
English: There is Hanyang Township.

古文：房陵，淮山，淮水所出，东至中庐入沔。
现代文：房陵县，淮水发源于淮山，向东到中庐流入沔水。
English: In Fangling County, Huai Shui originates from Huai Mountain and flows eastward to Zhongluo.

古文：又有筑水，东至筑阳亦入沔。
现代文：还有筑水，向东到筑阳也流入沔水。
English: There is also Tsukimizu, which flows into Surabaya as far east as Tsukiyama.

古文：东山，沮水所出，东至郢入江，行七百里。
现代文：束山，是沮水的发源地，向东到郢流入长江，行程七百里。
English: Sokshan is the source of the stagnant water, which flows into the Yangtze River from the east to Handan, a journey of seven hundred miles.

古文：安阳，鬵谷水出西南，北入汉。
现代文：安阳县，乔谷水向西南流出，向北进入汉水。
English: In Anyang County, Qiao Gu water flows out to the southwest and enters Han water to the north.

古文：在谷水出北，南入汉。
现代文：在谷水从北流出，向南流入汉水。
English: In the valley water flows out from the north and flows south into the Han River.

古文：成固，沔阳，有铁官。
现代文：成固县，沔阳县，有铁官。
English: Chenggu County and Fenyang County have railway officials.

古文：钖，莽曰钖治。
现代文：锡县，王莽时叫锡治县。
English: Xixian County was called Xiji County when Wang Mang was in power.

古文：武陵，上庸，长利。
现代文：武陵县，上庸县，长利县。
English: Wuling County, Shangyong County, Changli County.

古文：有郧关。
现代文：有旦困。
English: I'm so tired.

古文：广汉郡，高帝置。
现代文：广汉郡，高帝时设郡。
English: Guanghan County, established by Emperor Gao.

古文：莽曰就都。
现代文：王莽时改名就都县。
English: When Wang Mang changed his name, it became Du County.

古文：属益州。
现代文：属于益州刺史部。
English: It belongs to the History Department of Yishu County.

古文：户十六万七千四百九十九，口六十六万二千二百四十九。
现代文：有十六万七千四百九十九户，六十六万二千二百四十九人。
English: There are 167,499 households and 662,249 people.

古文：有工官。
现代文：有工官。
English: There are workmen.

古文：县十三：梓潼，五妇山，水所出，南入涪，行五百五十里。
现代文：下有十三个县：梓潼县，驰水发源于五妇山，向南流入涪水，行程五百五十里。
English: There are thirteen counties below: Zizhi County, Xishui originated from Wufu Mountain, flowing south into the Yishui, traveling 550 miles.

古文：莽曰子同。
现代文：王莽时叫子同县。
English: Wang Mangshi's son was born in the same county.

古文：汁方，莽曰美信。
现代文：汁方县，王莽时叫美信县。
English: Juifang County was called Meixin County at the time of Wang Mang.

古文：涪，有孱亭。
现代文：涪县，有孱亭。
English: In Handan County, there is Handan Pavilion.

古文：莽曰统睦。
现代文：王莽时叫统睦县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Tongmu County.

古文：雒，章山，雒水所出，南至新都谷入湔。
现代文：雒县，雒水发源于章山，向南到新都谷流入湔水。
English: In Handan County, Handan Water originates from Zhangshan and flows into Handan Water as far south as Xindu Valley.

古文：有工官。
现代文：有工官。
English: There are workmen.

古文：莽曰吾雒。
现代文：王莽时叫吾雒县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Wusong County.

古文：绵竹，紫岩山，绵水所出，东至新都北入雒。
现代文：绵竹县，绵水从紫岩山流出，向东到新都北入雒水。
English: In Mianzhu County, the water flows from Mount Ziyan and flows eastward to the north of the new capital.

古文：都尉治。
现代文：都尉治理。
English: The lieutenant governs.

古文：广汉，莽曰广信。
现代文：广汉县，王莽时叫广信县。
English: Guanghan County was called Guangxin County in Wang Mang's time.

古文：葭明，郪，新都，甸氐道，白水出徼外，东至葭明入汉。过郡一，行九百五十里。
现代文：葭明县，郑县，新都县，甸氐道县，白水流出境外，向东到葭明县流入汉水，经过一个郡，行程九百五十里。
English: In Yiming County, Zheng County, Xindu County, and Dianchi Road County, the white water flows out of the country and flows eastward to Yiming County into the Han River, passing through one county and traveling nine hundred and fifty miles.

古文：莽曰致治。
现代文：王菱时改名垫挝。
English: Wang Ling then changed his name to Mat Lao.

古文：白水，刚氐道，涪水出徼外，南至垫江入汉，过郡二，行千六十九里，阴平道。
现代文：白水县，刚氐道县，遣迷流出境外，向南到垫江流入汉水，经过两个郡，行程一千零六十九里。阴平道县。
English: In Baishui County and Gangcheng County, the fans flowed out of the country and flowed south to the Jiejiang River and into the Han River, passing through two counties and traveling 1,069 miles. Yinping County.

古文：北部都尉治。
现代文：由北部都尉治理。
English: Governed by the Northern Captain.

古文：莽曰摧虏。
现代文：王莽时改名壁厦题。
English: Wang Mangshi changed his name to Qiao Xiaqi.

古文：蜀郡，泰置。
现代文：蜀郡，秦时设郡。
English: Shu County, Qin Dynasty.

古文：有小江入，并行千九百八十里。
现代文：有小江流入，并行一千九百八十里。
English: There is a small river flowing in, running parallel for nineteen hundred and eighty miles.

古文：《禹贡》桓水出蜀山西南，行羌中，入南海。
现代文：《禹贡》上的桓水发源于蜀山的西南面，经过羌中，流入南海。
English: The flowing water in "Yugong" originates from the southwestern side of Mount Shu, passes through the middle of Yunnan Province, and flows into the South China Sea.

古文：莽曰导江。
现代文：王莽时叫导江。
English: Wang Mangshi called Guojiang.

古文：属益州。
现代文：属于益州刺史部。
English: It belongs to the History Department of Yishu County.

古文：户二十六万八千二百七十九，口百二十四万五千九百二十九。
现代文：有二十六万八千二百七十九户，一百二十四万五千九百二十九人。
English: There are 268,279 households and 1,245,929 people.

古文：县十五：成都，户七万六千二百五十六，有工官，郫，《禹贡》江沱在西，东入大江。
现代文：下有十五个县：成都县，有七万六千二百五十六产。有工官。郫县，《禹贡》上的江沱在西面，向东流入长江。
English: There are fifteen counties below: Chengdu County, with 76,256 farms. There are industrial officers. Handan County, "Yugong" on the Yangtze River in the west, flowing into the Yangtze River to the east.

古文：繁，广都，莽曰就都亭。
现代文：繁县，广都县，王莽时叫就都皇锤。
English: Traditional County, Guangdong County, Wang Mang, when called, are all imperial hammer.

古文：临邛，仆千水东至武阳入江，过郡二，行五百一十里。
现代文：临工口县，堡。工丞向东到毖盟墨流入垦丝，经过两个郡，行程五百一十里。
English: Linkoukou County, Fort. Gongzheng eastward to Fenmen ink flowed into Fenxi, passing through two counties, traveling 510 miles.

古文：有铁官、盐官。
现代文：有铁官、盐官。
English: There are iron officials and salt officials.

古文：莽曰监邛。
现代文：王莽时叫监工苏。
English: Wang Mangshi called the supervisor Su.

古文：青衣，《禹贡》蒙山溪大渡水东南至南安入渽。
现代文：青衣县，《禹贡》上的蒙山的溪流大渡水向东南到南安县流入溅水。
English: In Qingyi County, "Yugong," the stream of Mengshan Dadu Water flows southeast to Nan'an County and flows into the splashing water.

古文：江原，寿阝水首受江，南至武阳入江。
现代文：江原县，鄗水首先从长江接受水源，向南到武阳流入长江。
English: In Gangwon County, Surabaya first receives water from the Yangtze River and flows into the Yangtze River as far south as Wuyang.

古文：莽曰邛原。
现代文：王莽时叫邛原县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Suyuan County.

古文：严道，邛来山，邛水所出，东入青衣。
现代文：严道县，邛水发源于邛来山，向东流入青衣。
English: In Yandao County, Surabaya's water originates from Mount Surabaya and flows eastward into Qingyi.

古文：有木官。
现代文：有木官。
English: There are carpenters.

古文：莽曰严治。
现代文：王莽时叫严治县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Yanji County.

古文：绵虒，玉垒山，湔水所出，东南至江阳入江，过郡三，行千八百九十里。
现代文：绵魇县，湔水发源于玉垒山，向东南到江流入长江，经过三个郡，行程一千八百九十里。
English: In Mianye County, the Surabaya River originates from Yujiang Mountain, flows southeast to the Yangtze River, passes through three counties, and travels eighteen hundred and ninety miles.

古文：旄牛，鲜水出徼外，南入若水。
现代文：旄牛县，鲜水流出境外，向南流入若水。
English: In Yagyu County, fresh water flows out of the country, and fresh water flows into the south.

古文：若水亦出徼外，南至大莋入绳，过郡二，行千六百里。
现代文：若水也流出境外，向南到大榨县流入绳水，经过两个郡，行程一千六百里。
English: If the water also flows out of the country, it flows south to Daju County and flows into Zhanshui, passing through two counties and traveling 1,600 miles.

古文：徙，湔氐道，《禹贡》山昬山在西徼外，江水所出，东南至江都入海，过郡七，行二千六百六十里。
现代文：徙县，湔氐道县，禹贡》上的晤山在西境外，是江水的发源地，向东南到江都流入大海，经过七个郡，行程二千六百六十里。
English: Yue County, Xingdao County, and Yugong." Mount Heme rises in the west and is the source of the river. It flows into the sea in the southeast to Jiangdu, passing through seven counties and traveling 2,660 miles.

古文：汶江，渽水出徼外，南至南安，东入江，过郡三，行三千四十里。
现代文：汶江县，减水流出境外，向南到南安县，向东流入长江，经过三个郡，行程三干零四十里。
English: In Wenjiang County, the reduced water flows out of the country, southward to Nan'an County, and flows eastward into the Yangtze River, passing through three counties, a journey of three hundred and forty miles.

古文：江沱在西南，东入江。
现代文：江沱在西南，向东流入长江。
English: The Yangtze River is located in the southwest and flows into the Yangtze River in the east.

古文：广柔，蚕陵。
现代文：广柔县，蚕陵县。
English: Guangru County, Jialing County.

古文：莽曰步昌。
现代文：王莽时叫步昌县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Bu Chang County.

古文：犍为郡，武帝建元六年开。
现代文：犍为郡，武帝建元六年新开疆土设郡。
English: In the sixth year of Emperor Wu's reign, the first county was established in Xinjiang.

古文：莽曰西顺。
现代文：王莽时改为西顺郡。
English: At the time of Wang Mang, it was changed to Xishun County.

古文：属益州。
现代文：属于益州刺史部。
English: It belongs to the History Department of Yishu County.

古文：户十万九千四百一十九，口四十八万九千四百八十六。
现代文：有十万九千四百一十九户，四十八万九千四百八十六人。
English: There are 109,419 households and 489,486 people.

古文：县十二：豦道，莽曰僰治。
现代文：下有十二个县：荚道县，王莽时叫焚治县。
English: There are twelve counties below: Xindao County, Wang Mangshi called Tanji County.

古文：江阳，武阳，有铁官，莽曰戢成。
现代文：江阳县，武阳县，有铁官。王莽时叫戢成县。
English: Jiangyang County, Wuyang County, there are iron officials. Wang Mangshi called Lucheng County.

古文：南安，有盐官、铁官。
现代文：南安县，有盐官、铁官。
English: Nan'an County, there are salt officials and iron officials.

古文：资中，符，温水南至鄨入水，水亦南至鄨入江。
现代文：资中县，符县，温水向南到鳖县流入驸水，驸水也向南到鳖县流入长江。
English: In Zhizhong County and Fuxian County, warm water flows southward to Yixian County and flows into the Yangtze River, and the Yixian Water also flows southward to Yixian County.

古文：莽曰符信。
现代文：王莽时叫符信县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Fuxin County.

古文：牛鞞，南广，汾关山，符黑水所出，北至豦道入江。
现代文：牛鞟县，南广县，汾关山是符黑水的发源地，向北到焚道县流入长辽。
English: Niuqian County, Nanguang County, and Shiguan Mountain are the source of Fuhe black water, which flows northward to Qinduo County into Changliao.

古文：有大涉水，北至符入江，过郡三，行八百四十里。
现代文：还有大涉水，向北到符县流入长江，经过三个郡，行程八百四十里。
English: There is also a large wading, flowing north to Fu County into the Yangtze River, passing through three counties, traveling eight hundred and forty miles.

古文：汉阳，都尉治。
现代文：汉阳县，都尉治理。
English: Hanyang County, under the administration of Lt.

古文：山闟谷，汉水所出，东至入延。
现代文：汉水发源于山阖谷，向东到鳖县流入延水。
English: The Han River originates in the Shanshui Valley and flows eastward to Shixian County.

古文：莽曰新通。
现代文：王莽时叫新通县。
English: Wang Mang called Xintong County.

古文：存阝马阝，莽曰孱马阝。
现代文：郁鄢县，王莽时叫孱鄢县。
English: Ikuhata County, known as Ikuhata County when Wang Mang was alive.

古文：朱提，山出银。
现代文：朱提县，山中出产银子。
English: In the mountains of Juti County, silver is produced in large quantities.

古文：堂琅。
现代文：堂琅县。
English: Donglu County.

古文：越巂郡，武帝元鼎六年开。
现代文：越隽郡，武帝元鼎六年新开疆土设郡。
English: Yuexuan County was established in Xinjiang in the sixth year of Emperor Wu's reign.

古文：莽曰集巂。
现代文：王莽时改名集隽郡。
English: Wang Mangshi changed the name to Jimei County.

古文：属益州。
现代文：属于益州刺史部。
English: It belongs to the History Department of Yishu County.

古文：户六万一千二百八，口四十万八千四百五。
现代文：有六万一千二百零八户，四十万八千四百零五人。
English: There are 61,208 households and 484,050 people.

古文：县十五：邛都，南山出铜。
现代文：下有十五个县：邛都县，南山出产铜。
English: There are fifteen counties below: Xidu County, Nanshan produce copper.

古文：有邛池泽。
现代文：有邛池泽。
English: There is Tsukuda Ikezawa.

古文：遂久，绳水出徼外，东至豦道入江，过郡二，行千四百里。
现代文：遂久县，绳水流出境外，向东到焚道县流入长江，经过两个郡，行程一千四百里。
English: In Suiju County, the rope water flows out of the country and flows into the Yangtze River eastward to Tanido County, passing through two counties and traveling 1,400 miles.

古文：灵关道，台登，孙水南至会无入若，行七百五十里。
现代文：灵关道县，台登县，孙水向南到会无县流入若水，行程七百五十里。
English: Lingguan Road County, Taitung County, Sunshui flows south to Huizhou County and then flows into Ruoshui, a journey of 750 miles.

古文：定莋，出盐。
现代文：定榨县，出产盐。
English: Jiuzhaigou County, producing salt.

古文：步北泽在南。
现代文：步北泽在南面。
English: Bukitazawa is to the south.

古文：都尉治。
现代文：由都尉治理。
English: The lieutenant governs.

古文：会无，东山出碧。
现代文：会无县，东山出产碧千。
English: There is no county, but Higashiyama produces Bitchi.

古文：莋秦，大莋，姑复，临池泽在南。
现代文：榨秦县，大榨县，姑复县，临池泽在南面。
English: Juqin County, Daju County, Gufu County, Linchi Lake are in the south.

古文：三绛，苏示，尸二江在西北。
现代文：三绛县，苏示县，吕江在西北。
English: Samye County, Susi County, and Lijiang are in the northwest.

古文：阑，卑水，灊街，青蛉。
现代文：阑县，卑水县，濡街县，青蛉县。
English: Min County, Beishui County, Nu Jie County, Qingtao County.

古文：临池灊在北。
现代文：临池沟在北面。
English: Linchi ditch is in the north.

古文：仆水出徼外，东南至来惟入劳，过郡二，行千八百八十里。
现代文：仆水流出境外，向东南到来惟县流入劳水，经过两个郡，行程八百八十里。
English: The tributary water flows out of the country, arrives in southeastern Wei County and flows into the Laoshui River, passing through two counties, traveling eight hundred and eighty miles.

古文：有禺同山，有金马、碧鸡。
现代文：有禺同山，有金马，碧鸡。
English: There is a mountain of gourds, a golden horse, and a blue chicken.

古文：益州郡，武帝元封二年开。
现代文：益州郡，武帝元封二年新拓疆土设郡。
English: Yizhou County, a county established in Xinjiang in the second year of Emperor Wu's reign.

古文：莽曰就新。属益州。
现代文：王莽时叫就新郡，属于益州刺史部。
English: Wang Mangshi called it Juxin County, which belonged to the History Department of Yizhou.

古文：户八万一千九百四十六，口五十八万四百六十三。
现代文：有八万一千九百四十六户，五十八万四百六十三人。
English: There are 81,946 households and 580,463 people.

古文：县二十四：滇池，大泽在西，滇池泽在西北。
现代文：下有二十四个县：滇池县，大泽在西面，滇池泽在西北。
English: There are twenty-four counties below: Dianchi County, Osawa in the west, and Dianchi Lake in the northwest.

古文：有黑水祠。
现代文：有黑水祠。
English: There is a Black Water Shrine.

古文：双柏，同劳，铜濑，谈虏山，迷水所出，东至谈稿入温。
现代文：双柏县，同劳县，铜濑县，迷水发源于谈虏山，向东到谈橐县流入温水。
English: In Shuangbai County, Tonglao County, and Tonglu County, the stray water originates from Tangruishan Mountain and flows eastward into warm water in Tanglu County.

古文：连然，有盐官。
现代文：连然县，有盐官。
English: In Lianran County, there is a salt official.

古文：俞元，池在南，桥水所出，东至毋单入温，行千九百里。
现代文：俞元县，池水在南面，桥水发源地，向东到毋单县流入温水，行程一千九百里。
English: In Lianyuan County, the pond water is in the south, and the bridge water originates in the east and flows into the warm water in Zhouzhan County, a journey of nineteen hundred miles.

古文：怀山出铜。
现代文：怀山出产铜。
English: Copper is produced in Mount Huai.

古文：收靡，南山腊谷，涂水所出，西北至越巂入绳，过郡二，行千二十里。
现代文：收靡县，涂水发源于南山腊谷，向西北到越嵩县流入绳水，经过两个郡，行程一千零二十里。
English: Temei County, Tu Shui originates from the South Mountain Lahu Valley, flows northwest to Yue Song County and flows into Zhenshui, passing through two counties, traveling one thousand and twenty miles.

古文：穀昌，秦臧，牛兰山，即水所出，南至双柏入仆，行八百二十里。
现代文：谷昌县，秦臧县，即水发源于牛兰山，向南到双柏县流入仆水，行程八百二十里。
English: Guchang County, Qinhuangdao County, that is, the water originates from Niu Lan Mountain and flows southward to Shuangbai County, traveling 820 miles.

古文：邪龙，味，昆泽，叶榆，叶榆泽在东。
现代文：邪龙县，味县，昆泽县，叶榆县，叶榆泽在东面。
English: Yalong County, Aji County, Kunze County, Ye Kunze County and Ye Kunze are in the east.

古文：贪水首受青蛉，南至邪龙入仆，行五百里。
现代文：贪水首先从青蛉接受水源，向南到邪龙县流入仆水，行程五百里。
English: The river first receives water from Qingcheng and flows south to Yalong County, a journey of 500 miles.

古文：律高，西石空山出锡，东南盢町山出银、铅。
现代文：律高县，西面石空山出产锡，东南监町山出产银和铅。
English: In Rutgao County, Shikuchuzan Mountain in the west produces tin, while Juncoshan Mountain in the southeast produces silver and lead.

古文：不韦，云南，巂唐，周水首受徼外。
现代文：不韦县，云南县，隽唐县，周水首先从境外接受水源。
English: Buwei County, Yunnan County, Shantang County, and Zhoushui are the first to receive water from overseas.

古文：又有类水，西南至不韦，行六百五十里。
现代文：还有类水，向西南到不韦县，行程六百五十里。
English: There are also water-like rivers, which flow southwest to Buwei County, a journey of six hundred and fifty miles.

古文：弄栋，东农山，毋血水出，北至三绛南入绳，行五百一十里。
现代文：弄栋县，毋血水发源于束农山，向北到三绛县的南面流入绳水，行程五百一十里。
English: In Loudon County, the bloodless water originates from Shukunan Mountain, flows north to the south of Sanlu County and flows into the rope water, traveling 510 miles.

古文：比苏，贲古，北采山出锡，西羊人出银、铅，南乌山出锡。
现代文：比苏县，贲古县，北面采山出产锡，西面羊山出产银和铅，南面乌山出产锡。
English: In Bisu County and Yingu County, the mountains in the north produce tin, the mountains in the west produce silver and lead, and the mountains in the south produce tin.

古文：毋棳，桥水首受桥山，东至中留入潭，过郡四，行三千一百二十里。
现代文：毋掇县，桥水首先从桥山接受水源，向东到中留县流入潭水，经过四个郡，行程三千一百：二十里。
English: In Bohai County, Qiaoshui first receives water from Qiaoshan, flows eastward to Zhongliu County and flows into Tansui, passing through four counties, traveling 3,100: 20 miles.

古文：莽曰有棳。
现代文：王莽时叫有掇县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Yixing County.

古文：胜休，河水东至毋棳入桥。
现代文：胜休县，河水向东到毋裰县流入桥水。
English: In Shengxiu County, the river flows eastward to Bezhe County and flows into Qiaoshui.

古文：莽曰胜豦。
现代文：王莽时叫胜荚县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Shengkun County.

古文：健伶，来唯。
现代文：健伶县，来唯县。
English: Jianye County, Laiwei County.

古文：从阝虫山出铜。
现代文：从映山出产铜。
English: Copper is produced from Mount Eizan.

古文：劳水出徼外，东至麋泠入南海，过郡三，行三千五百六十里。
现代文：劳水流出境外，向东到麇泠县流入南海，经过三个郡，行程：千五百六十里。
English: The effluent flows out of the country, flows eastward to Min County and flows into the South China Sea, passing through three counties, the journey: fifteen hundred and sixty miles.

古文：牂柯郡，武帝元鼎六年开。
现代文：烊柯郡，武帝元鼎六年新开疆土设郡。
English: Jike County was a county established in Xinjiang in the sixth year of Emperor Wu's reign.

古文：莽曰同亭。
现代文：王莽时改名为同亭郡。
English: Wang Mangshi called Tongting County.

古文：有柱蒲关。
现代文：有柱蒲关。
English: There is a pillar at the end of the path.

古文：属益州。
现代文：属于益州刺史部。
English: It belongs to the History Department of Yishu County.

古文：户二万四千二百一十九，口十五万三千三百六十。
现代文：有二万四千二百一十九户，十五万三千三百六十人。
English: There were 24,219 households and 153,360 people.

古文：县十七：故且兰，沅水东南至益阳入江，过郡二，行二千五百三十里。
现代文：下辖十七个县：故且兰县，沅水向东南到益阳县流入长江，流经两个郡，行程二千五百三十里。
English: Seventeen counties under its jurisdiction: therefore, it is Lan County. Surabaya water flows into the Yangtze River to the southeast to Yiyang County, flowing through two counties, traveling 2530 miles.

古文：镡封，温水东至广郁入郁，过郡二，行五百六十里，不狼山，水所出，东入沅，过郡二，行七百三十里。
现代文：坛封县，温水向东到广郁流入郁水，经过两个郡，行程五百六十里。鳖县，鳖水发源于不狼山，向东流入沅水，经过两个郡，行程七百三十里。
English: In Tanfeng County, the warm water flows eastward to Guangyu and flows into Yushui, passing through two counties, traveling 560 miles. In Yuxian County, the warm water originates from Wulong Mountain and flows eastward into Yushui, passing through two counties, traveling 730 miles.

古文：漏卧，平夷，同并，谈指，宛温，毋敛，刚水东至潭中入潭。
现代文：漏卧县，平夷县，同并县，谈指县，宛温县，毋敛县，刚水向东到潭中县流入潭水：王莽时叫有敛县。
English: Leakage County, Pingyi County, Tongyuan County, Danzhi County, Wanwen County, Bezhuan County, Gangshui flows east to Tanzhong County and flows into Tansui: Wangmanzhi is called Yuzhuan County.

古文：莽曰有敛，夜郎，豚水东至广郁。都尉治。
现代文：夜郎县，豚水向东到广郁县。由都尉治理。
English: Yelang County, buttermilk eastward to Guangyu County. Governed by the captain.

古文：莽曰同亭。
现代文：王莽时叫同亭县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Tongting County.

古文：毋单，漏江，西随。麋水西受徼外，东至麋泠入尚龙溪，过郡二，行千一百六里。
现代文：毋单县，漏江县，西随县，麋水从西面接受境外水源，向东到麋泠县流入尚龙溪，经过两个郡，行程一千一百零六里。
English: Beside Zhanzhan County, Guojiang County, Xizhu County and Lishui County, Lishui receives foreign water sources from the west and flows into Shanglong Creek from the east to Lishui County, passing through two counties and traveling 1,106 miles.

古文：都梦，壶水东南至麋泠入尚龙溪，过郡二，行千一百六十里。
现代文：都梦县，壶水向东南到麋泠县流入尚龙溪，经过两个郡，行程一千一百六十里。
English: In Mengxian County, the kettle water flowed into Shanglongxi from the southeast to Yixian County, passing through two counties and traveling 1,160 miles.

古文：谈稿，进桑，南部都尉治。
现代文：谈稿县，进桑县，由南部都尉治理。
English: Danzhu County and Jinsang County are governed by the Southern Governor.

古文：有关。
现代文：有关口。
English: It's concerning.

古文：句町。
现代文：句町县。
English: Kuchimachi County.

古文：文象水东至增食入郁。
现代文：文象水向东到增食县流入郁水。
English: The Wenxiang River flows eastward to Zengshui County and flows into the Yushui River.

古文：又有卢唯水、来细水、伐水。
现代文：又有卢唯水、来细水、伐水。
English: There is also Lu Wei Shui, Lai Xiaoshui, and Falu Shui.

古文：莽曰从化。
现代文：王莽时叫从化县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Conghua County.

古文：县十一：江州，临江。
现代文：巴郡县，秦时设郡。属于益州刺史部。
English: Ba County, Qin Shi County. It belongs to the Yishu County History Department.

古文：莽曰监江。枳，阆中，彭道将池在南，彭道鱼池在西南，垫江，朐忍，容毋水所出，南入江。有橘官、盐官。
现代文：有十五万八千六百四十三户，七十万八干一百四十八人。下辖十一个县：江州县，临江县，王莽时叫监江县：枳县，阎中县，彭道将池在南面，彭道鱼池在西南。垫江县，朐忍县，容毋水的发源地，向南流入长江：有橘官、盐官。
English: There are 158,643 households, with 7.08 million to 1.488 million people. There are 11 counties under its jurisdiction: Jiangzhou County, Linjiang County, Guanjiang County, which was called Guanjiang County when Wang Mang was in charge: Handan County, Yanzhong County, Pengdao will pond in the south, Pengdao fish pond in the southwest. Matjiang County, Handan County, the source of water, flows southward into the Yangtze River: there are tangerine officials and salt officials.

古文：安汉，是鱼池在南。莽曰安新。
现代文：安漠县，是鱼池在南面：王莽时叫安新县。
English: Ammo County, is the fish pond in the south: Wang Mangshi called Anxin County.

古文：宕渠，符特山在西南。
现代文：宕渠县，符特山在西南。
English: Togo County, Mount Wutai in the southwest.

古文：氵朁水西南入江。
现代文：潜水向西南流入长江。
English: Dive southwest into the Yangtze River.

古文：不曹水出东北徐谷，南入灊。
现代文：不曹水向东北徐谷流出，向南流入泼水。
English: Caustic soda water flows out to the northeast of Xugu and flows into the south of the splashing water.

古文：鱼复，江关，都尉治。
现代文：鱼复县，江关，由都尉治理。
English: Yufu County, Jiangguan, governed by the captain.

古文：有橘官。
现代文：有橘官。
English: There is a Tangerine Officer.

古文：充国，涪陵。
现代文：充国县，涪陵县。
English: Chongguo County, Fuling County.

古文：莽曰巴亭。
现代文：王莽时叫巴亭县。
English: At the time of Wang Mang, it was called Batting County.

