古文：萧景先萧赤斧萧景先，南兰陵兰陵人，太祖从子也。
现代文：萧景先，南兰陵的兰陵人，是太祖萧道成的侄子。
English: Xiao Jingsian, a Lanling man from South Lanling, was the nephew of the great-grandfather Xiao Daochen.

古文：祖爰之，员外郎。
现代文：他的祖父萧爰之，曾做员外郎。
English: His grandfather, Xiao Xizhi, was a member of the Inner Circle.

古文：父敬宗，始兴王国中军。
现代文：他父亲萧敬宗，是始兴王国中军。
English: His father, Xiao Jingzong, was a general in the army of the Shixing Kingdom.

古文：景先少遭父丧，有至性，太祖嘉之。
现代文：萧景先少年丧父，性情纯厚，太祖赞赏他。
English: Xiao Jingsen was a boy who lost his father. He had a pure temperament, and his great-grandfather admired him.

古文：及从官京邑，常相提携。
现代文：等到太祖在京城做官，就经常提携他。
English: When his great-grandfather became an official in the capital, he often worked with him.

古文：解褐为海陵王国上军将军，补建陵令，还为新安王国侍郎，桂阳国右常侍。
现代文：脱去布衣就做了海陵王国上军将军，补建陵令，返京为新安王国侍郎，桂阳王国右常侍。
English: After stripping off his clothes, he became the general of the marching army of the Kingdom of Hailing, supplemented the order to build a mausoleum, and returned to Beijing as the attendant of the Kingdom of Xin'an and the right attendant of the Kingdom of Guiyang.

古文：太祖镇淮阴，景先以本官领军主自随，防卫城内，委以心腹。
现代文：太祖镇守淮阴，萧景先以本身官职领军主跟随太祖，承担城内防卫，太祖把他当作心腹委任。
English: The great-grandfather guarded Huaiyin, and Xiao Jing first followed the great-grandfather as the official leader of the army and took on the defense of the city. The great-grandfather appointed him as his confidant.

古文：除后军行参军，邛县令，员外郎。
现代文：除后军行参军，印县令，员外郎。
English: After leaving the army, he joined the army, and became a prefect of Ying County and a member of the Foreign Affairs Committee.

古文：与世祖款昵，世祖为广兴郡，启太祖求景先同行，除世祖宁朔府司马，自此常相随逐。
现代文：同世祖关系亲密，世祖为广兴郡太守，向太祖要求萧景先同他一起去，除世祖宁朔府司马，白这以后萧景先常常跟世祖一起。
English: He had a close relationship with his great-grandfather. The great-grandfather was the governor of Guangxing County, and he asked Xiao Jing to go with him first. In addition to the great-grandfather Ningshuo Fusima, Xiao Jing often went with his great-grandfather after that.

古文：世祖为镇西长史，以景先为镇西长流参军，除宁朔将军，随府转抚军中兵参军，寻除谘议，领中兵如故。
现代文：世祖做镇西长史，用萧景先做镇西长流参军，除宁朔将军，随府转抚军中兵参军，不久除授谘议，领中兵职依前未变。
English: The world's founder was Zhenxi Changshi, and Xiao Jing was the first to join the army from Zhenxi Changliu. In addition to General Ningshuo, soldiers from the army were transferred from the capital to join the army, and soon after the conferment of consultation, the position of leading soldiers remained unchanged.

古文：升明初，为世祖征虏府司马，领新蔡太守，随上镇盆城。
现代文：升明初年，为世祖征虏府司马，领新蔡太守，跟随世祖镇守盆城。
English: In the first year after his ascension to the throne, he became the ancestor of the Seizhunfu Sima, led the new Cai Taishou, and followed the ancestor of the Bincheng Zhengu.

古文：沈攸之事平，还都，除宁朔将军，骁骑将军，仍为世祖抚军中军二府司马，兼左卫将军。
现代文：沈攸之起兵发难事平定后，返回都城，除授宁朔将军，骁骑将军，仍然做世祖抚军中军二府司马，兼左卫将军。
English: After the difficulties caused by Shen Yu's army were settled, he returned to the capital, and in addition to being awarded the title of Ningshuo General and Zouqi General, he still served as the Second Prefectural Sima and General of the Left Division of the World Ancestor's Relief Army.

古文：建元元年，迁太子左卫率，封新吴县伯，邑五百户。
现代文：建元元年，迁太子左卫率，封新吴县伯，食邑五百户。
English: In the first year of Jianyuan, 500 households in food villages were moved from Prince Zizao to Baizhou in Wuxin County.

古文：景先本名道先，乃改避上讳。
现代文：萧景先本名道先，因避太祖道成名讳才改作景先。
English: Xiao Jingsen's original name was Dousen, but he changed it to Jingsen because he did not want to be famous like his great-grandfather.

古文：出为持节、督司州军事、宁朔将军、司州刺史，领义阳太守。
现代文：外任持节、督司州军事、宁朔将军、司州刺史，领义阳太守。
English: He held the posts of Jisetsu, Superintendent of the State Military, General of Ningshuo, Secretary of State, and Governor of Yiyang.

古文：是冬，虏出淮、泗，增司部边戍兵。
现代文：逭年冬天，魏虞出兵进、泗，于是增加司部边疆的守卫兵力。
English: In the winter of the year of the Rooster, Wei Yu sent troops to invade and plunder, thus increasing the strength of the border guards of the division.

古文：义阳人谢天盖与虏相构扇，景先言于督府，骠骑豫章王遣辅国将军中兵参军萧惠朗二千人助景先。
现代文：义阳人谢天盖与魏虏互相串通煽动，萧景先向督府说明，骠骑将军豫章王派遣辅国将军中兵参军蕉惠朗带二千人帮助萧景先。
English: The residents of Yiyang, Xie Tiange and Wei Krup, colluded and instigated each other. Xiao Jing first explained to the governor's office that the cavalry general, Yu Zhangwang, sent the general of the auxiliary country, the soldiers and the soldiers of the army, Ban Huilang, with two thousand people to help Xiao Jing first.

古文：惠朗依山筑城，断塞关隘，讨天盖党与。
现代文：萧惠朗依山修筑城墙，堵塞关隘，讨伐谢天盖的党羽。
English: Xiao Huilang built the city wall along the mountain, blocked the pass, and fought against the evil party.

古文：虏寻遣伪南部尚书頞跋屯汝南，洛州刺史昌黎王冯莎屯清丘。
现代文：魏虏不久派遣伪南部尚书额跋屯驻汝南，洛州刺史昌黎王迩莎屯驻清丘。
English: Wei Rui soon dispatched the pseudo-Southern Shang to settle in Runan, and Lozhou sent the scholar Changli Wang to settle in Qingqiu.

古文：景先严备待敌。豫章王又遣宁朔将军王僧炳、前军将军王应之、龙骧将军庄明三千人屯义阳关外，为声援。
现代文：萧景先周密准备，等待敌军来犯豫章王又遣宁朔将军王僧炳、前军将军王应之、龙骧将军庄明率三千人屯驻义阳关外，作为声援。
English: Xiao Jingxian made meticulous preparations, waiting for the enemy army to come and attack Yu Zhangwang, and sent Ningshuo General Wang Sangye, former army General Wang Yingzhi, Longyi General Zhuo Ming and 3,000 people stationed outside Yiyang Pass as solidarity.

古文：虏退，进号辅国将军。
现代文：魏虏撤退后，萧景先进宫为辅国将军。
English: After the retreat of the Wei army, Xiao Jing advanced to the palace as an auxiliary general.

古文：景先启称上德化之美。
现代文：萧景先启奏赞颂皇上用德义感化人。
English: Xiao Jingsen opened the concert with a hymn praising the emperor for inspiring people with virtue.

古文：上答曰： 风沦俗败，二十余年，以吾当之，岂得顿扫。幸得数载尽力救苍生者，必有功于万物也。
现代文：皇上回答说： 风气沉沦民俗败落已经二十余年，就凭我来抵挡，哪能够一下子就能扫除，幸而能够几年尽力挽救苍生，对于万物必有功效。
English: The emperor replied, "It has been more than twenty years since the decline of the morals and customs, and it is up to me to resist them. If I can do anything, I can sweep them away at once. Fortunately, if I can do my best to save sentient beings for several years, it will have an effect on all things.

古文：治天下者，虽圣人犹须良佐，汝等各各自竭，不忧不治也。 
现代文：治理天下的，即使是圣人，也还需要优秀的辅佐，你们各自竭力尽心，不愁天下治理不好。 
English: To govern the world, even if you are a saint, you still need excellent assistance. You should each do your best, without fearing that the world is not well governed.

古文：世祖即位，征为侍中，领左军将军，寻兼领军将军。
现代文：世祖即皇帝位，萧景先被征做诗中，领左军将军，随后又兼领军将军。
English: The ancestor is the emperor, and Xiao Jing was first enlisted as a general in the poem, leading the left army, and then also leading the army.

古文：景先事上尽心，故恩宠特密。
现代文：萧景先侍奉皇上尽力尽心，因此皇上对他特别恩宠。
English: Xiao Jingsen served the emperor as best as he could, so the emperor had a special favor for him.

古文：初西还，上坐景阳楼召景先语故旧，唯豫章王一人在席而已。
现代文：起初从西边返京，皇上坐在景阳楼上召萧景先谈论往事，惟有豫章王一人在席位作陪。
English: At first, returning to Beijing from the west, the emperor sat on the Jingyang Building and summoned Xiao Jingsen to talk about the past, but only Yu Zhangwang accompanied him in the seat.

古文：转中领军。
现代文：转任他为中领军。
English: He was transferred to be the middle leader.

古文：车驾射雉郊外行游，景先常甲仗从，廉察左右。
现代文：皇上车驾到郊外游玩射雉，萧景先经常披甲带仗跟随身后，左右查访。
English: The imperial car drove to the suburbs to play crossbow shooting, and Xiao Jingsen often followed behind, wearing armor, and visited both sides.

古文：寻进爵为侯。
现代文：时隔不久进爵为侯。
English: He was knighted shortly afterwards.

古文：领太子詹事，本官如故。
现代文：领太子詹事，原来官职依前未变。
English: Prince Consort Zhan Zhi, the original official position remains unchanged.

古文：遭母丧，诏超起为领军将军。
现代文：遭逢母丧后，皇上特下韶旨提前起用做领军将军。
English: After the death of his mother, the emperor issued a special order to advance his appointment as the leading general.

古文：迁征虏将军、丹阳尹。
现代文：迁征虏将军、丹阳尹。
English: Danyang Yin, the general in charge of relocating and conscripting the captives.

古文：五年，荒人桓天生引蛮虏于雍州界上，司部以北人情骚动。
现代文：永明五年，荒人桓天生引领蛮部和魏虏在雍州边界上骚扰，司部以北，人心骚动。
English: In the fifth year of the Yongming era, the barbarian Huan Tian Rong led the barbarians and the barbarians to harass on the border of Yongzhou. North of the division, the hearts of the people were agitated.

古文：上以景先谙究司土，诏曰： 得雍州刺史张瑰启事，蛮虏相扇，容或侵轶。
现代文：皇上认为萧景先熟悉司部一带，下诏说： 得到雍州刺史张瓖的禀告，蛮部与魏虏互相煽惑，也许会来袭击侵犯。
English: The emperor thought that Xiao Jingxian was familiar with the Shibu area, and issued the following edict: After receiving the obituary notice of the Yongzhou assassin Zhang Ye, the barbarians and Wei Krup incited each other, and may attack and encroach.

古文：蜂虿有毒，宜时剿荡。
现代文：蜂菌有毒，应及时剿灭。
English: The fungus is poisonous and should be destroyed in time.

古文：可遣征虏将军丹阳尹景先总率步骑，直指义阳。
现代文：可派征虏将军丹阳尹萧景先总率步骑，直指义阳。
English: You can send the conscript general Danyang Yin Xiao Jingsen to lead the cavalry, pointing straight at Yiyang.

古文：可假节，司州诸军皆受节度。 
现代文：可假节，司州诸军都受他节制调度。 
English: However, during the Chinese New Year, all the troops in Shizhou were subject to his restrained scheduling.

古文：景先至镇，屯军城北，百姓乃安，牛酒来迎。
现代文：萧景先到达镇治，屯军城北，百姓才安定下来，送来牛和酒迎接官军到来。
English: Xiao Jing arrived in Zhenzhi first, and the Tuenjun army arrived in the north of the city. Only then did the people settle down and send cattle and wine to welcome the arrival of the official army.

古文：军未还，遇疾，遗言曰： 此度疾病，异于前后，自省必无起理。
现代文：萧量先没有来得及回军，遇上患病，留下遗言说：这回患病，不同于以往，自觉不会再好起来。
English: Xiao Jiao did not have time to return to the army at first, and when he fell ill, he left his last words saying: This illness, unlike in the past, will not get better again.

古文：但夙荷深恩，今谬充戎寄，暗弱每事不称，上惭慈旨。
现代文：衹是一向承受深厚的恩泽，现在妄承军务的委托，懦弱每事不能称意，愧对仁慈君主的旨意。
English: He has always been the recipient of profound favors. Now, he has been entrusted with military affairs. He is too cowardly to do anything, and he is ashamed of the will of the benevolent monarch.

古文：便长违圣世，悲哽不知所言。
现代文：就要从此长辞圣世，悲伤哽咽，不晓得说些什么。
English: From now on, I want to say a long farewell to the world, choking with sadness, not knowing what to say.

古文：可为作启事，上谢至尊，粗申愚心。
现代文：就算启事吧，对上辞谢皇上，粗粗申述我的心曲。
English: Even if it's an announcement, thank the emperor for the resignation, and roughly express my heart.

古文：毅虽成长，素阙训范。贞等幼稚，未有所识。方以仰累圣明，非残息所能陈谢。
现代文：董毅虽说长大成人，一向缺少楷模的训教，董贞等尚处幼稚，不懂得什么，正要仰累圣明的皇上，非是奄奄一息的我能够陈述谢意的。
English: Although Dong Yi is an adult, he has always lacked exemplary training, and Dong Zhen and others are still naïve and do not know what to do. I can only express my gratitude to the emperor who is about to be tired of Shenming.

古文：自丁荼毒以来，妓妾已多分张，所余丑猥数人，皆不似事。
现代文：从遭受病痛以来，妓妾已多数分发了，余下一些丑陋的。都不像回事。
English: Since the illness, most of the prostitutes have been distributed, and the remaining ones are ugly. They don't look like anything.

古文：可以明月、佛女、桂支、佛儿、玉女、美玉上台，美满、艳华奉东宫。
现代文：可把明月、佛女、桂支、佛儿、玉女、美玉献给朝廷，美满、艳华供奉束宫。
English: The bright moon, the Buddha's daughter, the Katsura branch, the Buddha's child, the beautiful woman, and the beautiful jewel can be offered to the imperial court, and the beautiful woman and the beautiful jewel can be offered to the palace.

古文：私马有二十余匹，牛数头，可简好者十匹、牛二头上台，马五匹、牛一头奉东宫，大司马、司徒各奉二匹，骠骑、镇军各奉一匹。
现代文：私马二十多匹，牛几头，可以拣好的马十匹、牛二头上进朝廷，五匹马、一头牛供奉束宫，大司马、司徒各送二匹马，骠骑将军、镇军将军各送一匹马。
English: I have more than twenty horses, several cows, ten horses that can be picked up, two cows to go to the imperial court, five horses and one cow to be donated to the palace, two horses each from the chief steward and the chief steward, and one horse each from the cavalry general and the general of the town army.

古文：应私仗器，亦悉输台。
现代文：一应私有仗器，全数送往朝廷。
English: All of them were sent to the Imperial Court.

古文：六亲多未得料理，可随宜温恤，微申素意。
现代文：六亲大多未能料理，可以依据情况，给予体贴抚慰，稍微表达点意思。
English: Most of the six parents are unable to cook, so they can give thoughtful comfort and express a little meaning according to the situation.

古文：所赐宅旷大，恐非毅等所居，须丧服竟，可输还台。
现代文：所赐给的宅屋过于宽大，恐怕不是萧毅等所能居住的，须在服完丧后，送还朝廷。
English: The house he was given was too large for Xiao Yi and others to live in, so it had to be returned to the imperial court after the funeral.

古文：刘家前宅，久闻其货，可合率市之，直若短少，启官乞足。
现代文：刘家前的宅屋，早听说他要卖。可商量个价格买下，钱若短少，告诉官府请求补足。
English: The house in front of Liu's house, I heard that he wants to sell. You can negotiate a price to buy it. If you are short of money, tell the government to request a supplement.

古文：三处田勤作，自足供衣食。
现代文：有三处田产，勤恳耕作，自可供足衣食。
English: There are three fields, diligently cultivated, self-sufficient.

古文：力少，更随宜买粗猥奴婢充使。
现代文：人力少了，再适当买低贱的奴婢充作使唤。
English: When manpower is short, they buy lowly slaves to serve as servants.

古文：不须余营生。
现代文：不需要再多做营生。
English: I don't need to earn any more money.

古文：周旋部曲还都，理应分张，其久旧劳勤者，应料理，随宜启闻乞恩。 
现代文：部属调回都城理当分散打发，他们中那些时间长的、勤劳的，应当给予安排，适当禀告皇上请求恩浑。
English: Those subordinates who have been transferred back to the capital should be dispersed. Those of them who have been working for a long time and are diligent should be arranged to properly report to the emperor and ask for grace.

古文：卒，时年五十。
现代文：随后逝世，当时五十岁。
English: He died later, aged 50.

古文：上伤惜之，诏曰： 西信适至，景先奄至丧逝，悲怀切割，自不胜任。
现代文：皇上为他伤感惋惜，下诏说： 西边来信刚到，萧景先突然去世，心怀悲痛有如刀割，简直经受不了。
English: The emperor felt sad and sorry for him, and said in his next imperial edict: Just after the letter from the West arrived, Xiao Jingsi suddenly passed away, and his heart was as sad as if it had been cut by a knife, and he could hardly bear it.

古文：今便举哀。赙钱十万。布二百匹。 
现代文：现在举行哀悼，给与丧葬费钱十万，布二百匹。 
English: Now they are holding a mourning ceremony, offering 100,000 yuan in funeral expenses and 200 pieces of cloth.

古文：景先丧还，诏曰： 故假节征虏将军丹阳尹新吴侯景先，器怀开亮，干局通敏。
现代文：萧景先灵柩送回，皇帝又韶告说： 已故的假节征虏将军丹阳尹新吴侯景先，胸怀开朗器识明亮，办事才能通达快捷。
English: Xiao Jingsen's coffin was sent back, and the emperor also wrote an obituary saying: The late General Danyang Yinxin Wu Hou Jingsen, who was conscripted during the Chinese New Year, had a cheerful heart and a bright mind, and was able to get things done quickly.

古文：绸缪少长，义兼勋戚。
现代文：从年轻到年长都情意友好，在有功劳的皇族亲戚中情义卓著。
English: From young to old, they are affectionate and friendly, and they are outstanding among the meritorious royal relatives.

古文：诚著夷险，绩茂所司。
现代文：在艰险与和顺中显示诚信，在自己的职责中做出丰硕的成绩。
English: Demonstrate integrity in hardship and harmony, and make fruitful achievements in their duties.

古文：方升宠荣，用申任寄。奄至丧逝，悲痛良深。
现代文：正当受到荣耀，寄予重任的时候，忽然丧亡了，真正令人深深悲痛。
English: To lose him so suddenly, at a time when he was rightly being celebrated and given a great deal of responsibility, is truly heartbreaking.

古文：可赠侍中、征北将军、南徐州刺史。
现代文：可赠侍中、征北将军、南徐州刺史。
English: It can be given as a gift to a samurai, a general of the Northern Expedition, and a historian of Southern Xuzhou.

古文：给鼓吹一部。
现代文：给鼓吹一部。
English: Part of the trumpet band.

古文：假节、侯如故。
现代文：假节、侯职依前不变。
English: Holidays and duties will remain unchanged.

古文：谥曰忠侯。 
现代文：谧号为盅堡。 
English: After his death, his nickname was Zhonghou.

古文：子毅，以勋戚子，少历清官：太子舍人，洗马，随王友，永嘉太守，大司马谘议参军，南康太守，中书郎。
现代文：萧景先的儿子萧毅，因为是有功劳的皇族亲戚的儿子，年轻时就做了政事清简的官职。先后做太子舍人，洗马，随王友，永嘉太守，大司马谘议参军，南康太守，中书郎。
English: Xiao Yi, the son of Xiao Jingxian, because he was the son of a meritorious relative of the imperial family, when he was young, he did a simple government post. He successively became the prince's concubine, the horse washer, the king's friend, the Yongjia daimyo, the daimyo's horse was consulted to join the army, the Nankang daimyo, and the middle school teacher.

古文：建武初，为抚军司马，迁北中郎司马。
现代文：建武初年，为抚军司马，迁北中郎司马。
English: In the first year of the Jianwu era, he was transferred to the north as a military governor.

古文：虏动，领军守琅邪城。
现代文：魏虏南侵，萧毅领军守卫琅邪城。
English: Wei Rui invaded the south, and Xiao Yi led the army to guard the evil city.

古文：毅性奢豪，好弓马，为高宗所疑忌。
现代文：萧毅生性奢侈阔绰，喜好弓马，被高宗猜忌。
English: Xiao Yi was born with an extravagant and generous nature. He was fond of archery and horsemanship, and was distrusted by Gaozong.

古文：王晏事败，并陷诛之。
现代文：王晏事败后，连及诬陷并诛杀萧毅。
English: After Wang Yao's defeat, Lian Yi framed and killed Xiao Yi.

古文：遣军围宅，毅时会宾客奏伎，闻变，索刀未得，收人突进，挟持毅入与母别，出便杀之。
现代文：高宗派遣军队包围了他的住宅，当时萧毅正同宾客会聚欣赏歌舞，听说变故，找刀没找到，收捕的人冲进来了，挟持着萧毅进去同母亲告别，一出去便被杀害了。
English: Gao Zong sent an army to surround his house. At that time, Xiao Yi was gathering with guests to enjoy singing and dancing. Hearing that the situation had changed, he looked for a knife but couldn't find it. The arresting officers stormed in, took Xiao Yi into custody to say goodbye to his mother, and was killed as soon as he went out.

古文：萧赤斧，南兰陵人，太祖从祖弟也。
现代文：萧赤斧，南兰陵人，是太祖的同曾祖堂弟。
English: Xiao Chiax, a native of Nanlianling, was the great-great-grandfather's cousin.

古文：祖隆子，卫军录事参军。
现代文：他祖父名隆子，是卫军录事参军。
English: His grandfather, Takako, was a member of the Imperial Guard.

古文：父始之，冠军中兵参军。
现代文：他的父亲名叫始之，任冠军中兵参军。
English: His father's name was Hajime, and he was a champion soldier who joined the army.

古文：赤斧历官为奉朝请，以和谨为太祖所知。
现代文：萧赤斧出来做官任奉朝请，凭着平和谨慎，为太祖赏识。
English: Xiao Chiax came out to be an official at the request of the imperial court, and with peace and prudence, he appreciated the great-grandfather.

古文：宋大明初，竟陵王诞反广陵，赤斧为军主，隶沈庆之。围广陵城，攻战有勋，事宁，封永安亭侯，食邑三百七十户。
现代文：宋大明初年，竞陵王刘诞在广陵反叛，萧赤斧为军主，隶属沈庆之，包围广陵城，攻战有功勋，事态平定后，封永安亭侯，食邑三百七十户。
English: In the first year of Song Daming, King Liu Xizhong of Jingling rebelled in Guangling. Xiao Chiaxu was the commander and was subordinate to Shen Qingzhi. He encircled Guangling City and fought bravely. After the situation was stabilized, he was given Yongan Tinghou and 370 households in Shiyou.

古文：除车骑行参军，出补晋陵令，员外郎，丹阳令，还除晋熙王抚军中兵参军，出为建威将军、钱唐令。
现代文：除授车骑行参军，出京补任晋陵令，员外郎，丹杨令，返朝除授晋熙王抚军中兵参军，外任建威将军、钱唐令。
English: In addition to being awarded the car and riding to join the army, he went to Beijing to fill the post of Jinlinglingling, member of Wai Lang, and Danyangling, and returned to the DPRK to join the army in addition to the award of Jinxi Wangfujing, and was appointed as General Jianwei and Qian Tangling.

古文：迁正员郎。
现代文：迁正员郎。
English: He was transferred to a higher post.

古文：赤斧治政为百姓所安，吏民请留之，时议见许，改除宁朔将军。
现代文：萧赤斧治理政务能使百姓安定，吏民挽留他，被当时舆论称赞，改授宁朔将军。
English: Xiao Chiaxing's governance of government affairs could make the people stable, and the officials and the people retained him. He was praised by the public opinion at that time and was awarded the title of Ningshuo General.

古文：太祖辅政，以赤斧为辅国将军、左军会稽司马，辅镇东境。
现代文：太祖辅政时，以萧赤斧为辅国将军、左军会稽司马，辅佐镇守束部地方。
English: When the great-grandfather was a vice-governor, Xiao Chiax was the vice-governor, the secretary of the Left Army Association, and the vice-governor of the Sokube region.

古文：迁黄门郎，淮陵太守。
现代文：迁黄门郎，淮陵太守。
English: Qian Huangmenlang, Huairing governor.

古文：顺帝逊位，于丹阳故治立宫，上令赤斧辅送，至薨乃还。
现代文：从帝退位后，在丹阳先前的治所建立王宫，太祖让萧赤斧护送至丹阳，直到从帝死后才返回京城。
English: After the abdication of the emperor, the royal palace was built in the former capital of Danyang. Emperor Taizu had Xiao Chiaxing escorted to Danyang and did not return to the capital until after the emperor's death.

古文：建元初，迁武陵王冠军长史，骠骑司马，南东海太守，辅国将军并如故。
现代文：建元初年，迁武陵王冠军长史，骠骑司马，南束海太守，辅国将军一并如前未变。
English: In the first year of the first year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, the champion of Wuling Wang Changshi, the rider of Sima, the governor of Nanshukai, and the general of the auxiliary state all remained unchanged.

古文：迁长兼侍中，祖母丧去职。
现代文：迁长兼侍中，后因祖母丧而离职。
English: He was the chief of relocation and a chamberlain, but left the post after his grandmother's death.

古文：起为冠军将军、宁蛮校尉。
现代文：后起用做冠军将军、宁蛮校尉。
English: Later, he was used as a champion general and Captain Ningman.

古文：出为持节、督雍梁南北秦四州郢州之竟陵司州之随郡军事、雍州刺史，本官如故。
现代文：外任持节、督雍梁南北秦四州，郢州的竞陵、司州的随郡军事、雍州刺史，原本宫职依前未变。
English: The external posts of Jisetsu, Governor of Yongliang, North and South Qin, four prefectures, Jingling in Zhangzhou, Sui County Military in Shizhou, and Yongzhou History, the original palace duties remain unchanged.

古文：在州不营产利，勤于奉公。
现代文：他在州裹不经营自己的痊业利润，勤谨奉公。
English: He managed his own business profits in the state and diligently served the public.

古文：迁散骑常侍，左卫将军。
现代文：迁萧赤斧散骑常侍，左卫将军。
English: Qian Xiao Chiaxu strolling equerry, General of the Left Division.

古文：世祖亲遇与萧景先相比。
现代文：世祖对他的亲近信用可以和萧景先相比。
English: The closeness and trust of the founder to him can be compared to that of Xiao Jingsen.

古文：封南丰县伯，邑四百户。
现代文：封为南丰县伯，食邑四百户。
English: It covers 400 households in Bo, Nanfeng County.

古文：迁给事中，太子詹事。
现代文：迁给事中，太子詹事。
English: During the relocation process, Prince Zhan took the lead.

古文：赤斧夙患渴利，永明三年会，世祖使甲仗卫三厢，赤斧不敢辞，疾甚，数日卒，年五十六。
现代文：萧赤斧早就患了糖尿病，永明三年集会，世祖派萧赤斧披甲带仗保卫三厢，他不敢推辞，后病得厉害，数天就死丫，享年五十六岁。
English: Xiao Chiax had already been suffering from diabetes for a long time. At the Yongming Three-year Assembly, the ancestors sent Xiao Chiax to wear armor and fight to defend the Three Compartments. He did not dare to refuse, but became very ill and died a few days later, at the age of 56.

古文：家无储积，无绢为衾，上闻之，愈加惋惜。
现代文：死后他家中没有积蓄，连做被子的绢都没有，趔邑听说这种境况，更加惋惜。
English: After his death, his family had no savings, not even enough money to buy a quilt cover. Hearing about this, the town was even more saddened.

古文：诏赙钱五万，上材一具，布百匹，蜡二百斤。
现代文：韶赠丧葬钱五万，上等棺材一具，布百匹，蜡二百斤。
English: He donated 50,000 yuan in funeral money, a first-class coffin, 100 pieces of cloth, and 200 catties of wax.

古文：追赠金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：追赠金紫光禄大夫。
English: Dr. Jin Zi Guanglu as a follow-up gift.

古文：谥曰懿伯。
现代文：谧号为茎伯。
English: His nickname was Tsuchibaku.

古文：子颖胄袭爵。
现代文：儿子题皇袭封爵禄。
English: His son's imperial title and peerage followed.

古文：颖胄字云长，弘厚有父风。
现代文：萧颖胄字云长，为人宽厚，有他父亲的风范。
English: Xiao Yingqin is a long-winded, generous person, with the demeanor of his father.

古文：起家秘书郎。
现代文：开始做官为秘书郎。
English: He started his career as a secretary.

古文：太祖谓赤斧曰： 颖胄轻朱被身，觉其趋进转美，足慰人意。 
现代文：太祖对萧赤斧说： 颖胄要身着红色官服，行动起来会更觉漂亮，也可更遂人意。 
English: The great-grandfather said to Xiao Chiax: Ying Qi should wear a red official uniform, she will feel more beautiful and more attractive when she acts.

古文：迁太子舍人。遭父丧，感脚疾，数年然后能行。
现代文：迁萧颖胄为太子舍人乙遭逢父丧，又感染脚疾，经过几年然后才能行走。
English: Qian Xiao Yingqian, who was the prince's concubine, suffered the loss of her father and contracted a foot disease. It took several years before she was able to walk.

古文：世祖有诏慰勉，赐医药。
现代文：世祖曾有诏书慰问勉励，赏赐医药。
English: The ancestor of the world once received an imperial edict of condolence and encouragement and was rewarded with medicine.

古文：除竟陵王司徒外兵参军，晋熙王文学。
现代文：除授他为竟陵王司徒外兵参军，晋熙王文学。
English: In addition, he was awarded the honor of joining the army as a foreign soldier of the King of Jinling, the King of Jinxi Literature.

古文：颖胄好文义，弟颖基好武勇。世祖登烽火楼，诏群臣赋诗。
现代文：萧颖胄爱好文章义理，他的弟弟颖基爱好武艺勇力，世祖登烽火楼，诏请各朝臣赋诗。
English: Xiao Yingqian's favorite poet was Yili, his younger brother Yingji loved martial arts and bravery, the founder of the dynasty ascended to the throne, and each courtier was asked to compose a poem.

古文：颖胄诗合旨，上谓颖胄曰： 卿文弟武，宗室便不乏才。 
现代文：萧颖胄的诗称皇上的意，皇上对萧颖胄说： 卿学文弟习武，宗室中便不缺乏人才。 
English: Xiao Yingqian's poem is said to be the emperor's meaning, and the emperor said to Xiao Yingqian: "Sir, learn literature and brother, learn martial arts, there is no shortage of talent in the family."

古文：除明威将军、安陆内史。
现代文：除授萧颖胄为明威将军、安陆内史。
English: In addition to awarding Xiao Yingtao, General Mingwei and An Lu Naxi were also awarded.

古文：迁中书郎。
现代文：再迁为中书郎。
English: Moved again to Chushiro.

古文：上以颖胄勋戚子弟，除左将军，知殿内文武事，得入便殿。
现代文：皇上因为萧颖胄是有功劳的皇族子弟，除授他为左将军，知殿内文武事，可以出进便殿。
English: Because Xiao Yingyao was a meritorious member of the imperial family, the emperor awarded him the title of General of the Left, informed him of the palace's military affairs, and allowed him to enter and leave the hall.

古文：出为新安太守，吏民怀之。
现代文：出京任新安太守，新安吏民都感念他。
English: He went to Beijing to serve as the new governor of An, and the officials and people of An all miss him.

古文：隆昌元年，永嘉王昭粲为南徐州，以颖胄为南东海太守，行南徐州事。
现代文：隆昌元年，永嘉王昭粲为南徐州刺史，以萧颖胄为南束海太守，行南徐州事。
English: In the first year of Longchang, Yongjia Wang Zhaojun was appointed as the governor of South Xuzhou, and Xiao Yingxuan was appointed as the governor of South Sokha, and they conducted the affairs of South Xuzhou.

古文：转持节、督青冀二州军事、辅国将军、青冀二州刺史。
现代文：转持节、督青冀二州军事、辅国将军、宣冀二州刺史。
English: Transferring the festival, the governor of Qinghai-Hebei and the military of the two states, the general of the auxiliary state, and the history of the two states of Xuanxi and Hebei.

古文：不行，除黄门郎，领四厢直。
现代文：没有动身，除授黄门郎，领四厢值。
English: If you don't leave, you'll be given the rank of Huangmenlang, and you'll be given the rank of Shifeng.

古文：迁卫尉。
现代文：迁卫尉。
English: The transfer officer is leaving.

古文：高宗废立，颖胄从容不为同异，乃引颖胄预功。
现代文：高宗废旧君立新君，萧颖胄从从容容地不表赞同也不表异议，于是就拉拢萧颖胄参预此事。
English: Gao Zong discarded the old monarchy and established a new one. Xiao Yingyao did not express approval or objection, so he invited Xiao Yingyao to participate in this matter.

古文：建武二年，进爵侯，增邑为六百户。
现代文：建武二年，进爵为侯，增食邑为六百户。
English: In the second year of Jianwu, he was promoted to the peerage as a marquis, and the number of households in Zengshui County increased to 600.

古文：赐颖胄以常所乘白牜俞牛。
现代文：皇上把经常骑乘的白榆牛赏赐萧颖胄。
English: The emperor rewarded Xiao Yingyao with a white yakitori, which she often rode.

古文：上慕俭约，欲铸坏太官元日上寿银酒枪，尚书令王晏等咸称盛德。
现代文：高宗倡导俭朴，想把太官在元上寿的银酒铛熔铸掉，尚书令王晏等都夸赞说是盛美的事。
English: Gaozong advocated frugality and wanted to melt and cast away the eunuch's silver wine goblets from Yuan Shangshou, which was praised by Wang Xi and others as a splendid thing.

古文：颖胄曰： 朝廷盛礼，莫过三元。
现代文：萧颖胄说： 朝廷盛大礼仪，没有超过三元的。
English: Xiao Yingyao said: The imperial court has a grand etiquette, which does not exceed three yuan.

古文：此一器既是旧物，不足为侈。 
现代文：这一器用既然是原有的旧东西，就不能算是奢侈。 
English: Since this utensil is an original old thing, it cannot be considered a luxury.

古文：帝不悦，后预曲宴，银器满席。
现代文：皇帝不高兴。
English: The emperor was not pleased.

古文：颖胄曰： 陛下前欲坏酒枪，恐宜移在此器也。 
现代文：后来萧颖胄参加宫中私宴，看到满席银器，就说： 陛下前次想销熔银酒铛，恐怕应该移到这些器物上。 
English: Later, when Xiao Yingyao attended a private banquet at the palace and saw that the silverware was sold out, she said, "The last time Your Majesty wanted to sell molten silver wine goblets, I'm afraid you should have moved them to these items."

古文：帝甚有惭色。
现代文：皇帝颇有愧色。
English: Emperor Wu looked ashamed.

古文：冠军江夏王宝玄镇石头，以颖胄为长史，行石头戍事。
现代文：冠军江夏王宣直镇守互墨啦，任用芦塞噎为长史，行石头戍事。
English: The champion of Jiangxia, Wang Xuanzhong, and the town guards exchanged insults, and the appointment of Liusehong was a long history, and the story of the stone.

古文：复为卫尉。
现代文：复为卫尉。
English: He was reinstated as a lieutenant.

古文：出为冠军将军、庐陵王后军长史、广陵太守、行南兖州、府州事。
现代文：出京任冠军将军、庐陵王后军长史、卢陆太守、行卢蛮业府州事。
English: He went to Beijing as the champion general, the commander-in-chief of the Queen of Fuling, the governor of Lu Lu, and conducted the state affairs of the capital of Lu.

古文：是年虏动，扬声当饮马长江。
现代文：这年魏虏出兵南侵，扬言要饮马长江。
English: This year, Wei Rui sent troops to invade the south and threatened to drink the Yangtze River.

古文：帝惧，敕颖胄移居民入城，百姓惊恐，席卷欲南渡。颖胄以贼势尚远，不即施行，虏亦寻退。
现代文：皇帝惧怕，敕告芦题宣将居民迁移进城内，百姓为此惊慌害怕，收拾东西想南渡垦逗，盖题直觉得贼势尚远，没有立即实行，魏虏也随之撤退了。
English: The emperor was afraid, and told Lu Qi that the residents would be moved into the city. The people were panicked and afraid, and wanted to pack up and go south. Gao Qi felt that the invasion was still far away, and did not immediately implement it. Wei Ru also retreated.

古文：仍为持节、督南兖兖徐青冀五州诸军事、辅国将军、南兖州刺史。
现代文：他仍为持节、督直至、查、逮、直、冀五州诸军事、辅国将军、亩查业刺史。
English: He is still the military commander of the five states of Jizhou, the general of the auxiliary country, and the history of the mu investigation industry.

古文：和帝为荆州，以颖胄为冠军将军、西中郎长史、南郡太守、行荆州府、州事。
现代文：和帝为荆州刺史，以萧颖胄为冠军将军、西中郎长史、南郡太守、行荆州府、州事。
English: Emperor He is the history of Jingzhou, and Xiao Yingtao is the champion general, Xi Zhonglang Changshi, the governor of Nan County, the governor of Jingzhou Prefecture, and the state affairs.

古文：东昏侯诛戮群公，委任厮小，崔、陈败后，方镇各怀异计。
现代文：束昏侯诛戮群公，委任肖小，自从崔慧景、陈显达起兵反抗失败后，掌握一方兵权的军事长官各有各的打算。
English: Since Choe Hyuking and Chen Hsien Loong failed to raise an army to resist, the military commanders who hold military power have each had their own plans.

古文：永元二年十月，尚书令临湘侯萧懿及弟卫尉畅见害。先遣辅国将军、巴西梓潼二郡太守刘山阳领三千兵受旨之官，就颖胄共袭雍州。
现代文：永元二年十月，尚书令临湘侯萧懿及他弟弟卫尉萧畅被害，先派遣辅国将军、巴西梓潼二郡太守刘山阳率领三千兵领受旨意到官任，到萧颖胄那裹共同去袭取雍州。
English: In October of the second year of Yongyuan, Shang Shuling sent the auxiliary general, Liu Shanyang, the governor of the second county of Zizhi in Brazil, and three thousand soldiers to Xiao Yingbin to attack Yongzhou.

古文：雍州刺史梁王将起义兵，虑颖胄不识机变，遣使王天虎诣江陵，声云山阳西上，并袭荆、雍。
现代文：雍州刺史梁王将要发起义兵，担心萧颖胄不懂得随机应变，派遣王天虎到江陵来，说山阳西上，是要一并袭取荆州、雍州。
English: Liang Wang, the governor of Yongzhou, was going to raise a volunteer army, and he was worried that Xiao Yingyao did not know how to respond to the situation, so he sent Wang Tianhu to Jiangling, saying that he was going to attack Jingzhou and Yongzhou at the same time.

古文：书与颖胄，劝同义举。
现代文：并且把梁王的书信交舆萧颖胄，劝他共同举义。
English: He also handed over Liang Wang's letter to Liu Xiao Yingqian and advised him to jointly raise the banner of righteousness.

古文：颖胄意犹未决。
现代文：萧颖胄还未下定决心。
English: Xiao Yingyao has not yet made up her mind.

古文：初，山阳出南州，谓人曰： 朝廷以白虎幡追我，亦不复还矣。 
现代文：当初，刘山阳由南州出来时，对人说： 朝廷就是拿帝王诏令传信用的白虎幡来追我，我也不再返回了。 
English: At first, when Liu Shanyang came out of Nanzhou, he said to people: The imperial court is chasing me with the white tiger banner, which is used to convey the Emperor's edict, and I will not return.

古文：席卷妓妾，尽室而行。
现代文：他尽数带走妓妾，把家中东西也全都带走。
English: He took as many prostitutes and concubines as he could, as well as everything in his home.

古文：至巴陵，迟回十余日不进。
现代文：走到巴陵，又十多天迟迟不进。
English: When I got to Baling, I was delayed for more than ten days.

古文：梁王复遣天虎赍书与颖胄，陈设其略。
现代文：梁王复派王天虎送书信给萧颖胄，陈说他的计划。
English: Liang Wangfu sent Wang Tianhu to send a letter to Xiao Yingtao, telling him of his plan.

古文：是时或云山阳谋杀颖胄，以荆州同义举，颖胄乃与梁王定契，斩王天虎首，送示山阳。
现代文：这时有的说刘山阳要谋杀萧颖胄，因为荆州赞同举义，萧颖胄于是就同梁王暗中定下契约，斩下王天虎的首级，送给刘山阳看。
English: At this time, some people said that Liu Shanyang wanted to murder Xiao Yingyao, because Jingzhou agreed to raise righteousness, so Xiao Yingyao secretly made a contract with Liang Wang to cut off the head of Wang Tianhu and give it to Liu Shanyang.

古文：发百姓车牛，声云起步军征襄阳。
现代文：征发百姓的车、牛，扬言起动步军征讨襄阳。
English: They requisitioned people's cars and cattle, and threatened to launch a marching army to conquer Yangyang.

古文：十一月十八日，山阳至江津，单车白服，从左右数十人，诣颖胄，颖胄使前汶阳太守刘孝庆、前永平太守刘熙晔、铠曹参军萧文照、前建威将军陈秀、辅国将军孙末伏兵城内。
现代文：十一月十八日，刘山阳来到江陵，他穿着白衣服，衹带自己的一辆车、身边的几十人来拜访萧颖胄，萧颖胄派前汶阳太守刘孝庆、前永平太守刘熙皋、锁曹参军萧文照、前建威将军陈秀、辅国将军孙末带兵埋伏在城内。
English: On November 18, Liu Shanyang came to Jiangling. He was dressed in white, took his own car and dozens of people around him to visit Xiao Yingtao. Xiao Yingtao sent Liu Xiaoqing, the former governor of Wenyang, Liu Xizhao, the former governor of Yongping, Xiao Wenzhao, the former general of Jianwei, Chen Xiu, and Sun Mue, the auxiliary general, to ambush the soldiers in the city.

古文：山阳入门，即于车中乱斩之。
现代文：刘山阳进入城门，就在车内被乱刀砍死。
English: Liu Shanyang entered the city gate and was hacked to death with a machete in the car.

古文：副军主李元履收余众归附。
现代文：副军主李元履收服其余部众归附萧颖胄。
English: The vice-commander Li Yuanlu took charge and the rest of the troops were subordinated to Xiao Yingyao.

古文：遣使蔡道猷驰驿送山阳首于梁王，乃发教纂严，分部购募。
现代文：萧颖胄派蔡道猷由驿道骑快马送刘山阳的首级给梁王。于是发布文告、实行戒严，分部悬赏招募。
English: Xiao Yingtao sent Cai Daojun to deliver Liu Shanyang's head to Liang Wang by riding a fast horse. Therefore, he issued a proclamation, imposed martial law, and offered a reward for recruitment.

古文：东昏闻山阳死，发诏讨荆、雍。
现代文：东昏侯听说刘山阳死了，就颁诏书讨伐荆、雍二州。
English: When Dongdimou heard that Liu Shanyang had died, he issued an edict to fight against the cutting of cedar trees and Yong Erzhou.

古文：赠山阳宁朔将军、梁州刺史。
现代文：追赠刘山阳为宁朔将军、梁州刺史。
English: Liu Shanyang was posthumously awarded the titles of Ningshuo General and Liangzhou Historian.

古文：颖胄有器局，既唱大事，虚心委己，众情归之。
现代文：萧颖胄有才识和气度，倡导大事后，更是虚心克己，大众的心意都归向他。
English: Xiao Yingyao has talent and grace. After advocating major events, he is even more modest and self-restrained. The hearts of the public all go to him.

古文：加颖胄右将军，都督行留诸军事，置佐史，本官如故。
现代文：加萧颖胄右将军，都督行留诸军事，设置佐史，原本官职未变。
English: In addition to General Xiao Yingxuan Yu, the governor was retained in the military and set up as a military historian, but his original official position remained unchanged.

古文：西中郎司马夏侯详加征虏将军。
现代文：西中郎司马夏侯详加征虏将军。
English: Nishi-Naka no Roshi Masha Hou is shown in detail as a conscripted general.

古文：遣宁朔将军王法度向巴陵。
现代文：派遣宁朔将军王法度向巴陵进军。
English: Ningshuo General Wang Fadu was dispatched to march to Baling.

古文：颖胄献钱二十万，米千斛，盐五百斛。
现代文：萧颖胄献钱二十万，米千斛，盐五百斛。
English: Xiao Yingtao donated 200,000 yuan in money, 1,000 yuan worth of rice and 500 yuan worth of salt.

古文：谘议宗塞、别驾宗夬献谷二千斛，牛二头。换借富赀，以助军费。
现代文：谘议宗塞、别驾宗央献谷二千斛，牛二头换借富有人家的资财助作军费用途。
English: Zongzai was consulted, and Zongyang was persuaded to offer two thousand taels of grain and two head of cattle in exchange for the funds of a wealthy family to help pay for the military expenses.

古文：长沙寺僧业富，沃铸黄金为龙数千两，埋土中，历相传付，称为下方黄铁，莫有见者，乃取此龙，以充军实。
现代文：长沙寺僧业富有，曾浇铸数千两黄金做龙，沉埋土中，师徒相传，称为下方黄铁，没有人见遇，于是就收取了这条黄金龙充作了军费。
English: The monks of Changsha Temple were rich. They had cast thousands of two-carat gold dragons and buried them in the ground. The gold dragons were passed down from master to disciple. They were called the Lower Pyrite. No one had ever seen them, so they collected the gold dragons to pay for the military expenses.

古文：十二月，移檄：
现代文：十二月，传
English: In December, the

古文：西中郎府长史、都督行留诸军事、右军将军、南郡太守、南丰县开国侯萧颖胄，司马、征虏将军、新兴太守夏侯详告京邑百官，诸州郡牧守：
现代文：西中郎府长史、都督行留诸军事、右军将军、南郡太守、南丰县开国侯萧颖胄，司马、征虏将军、新兴太守夏侯详告京城百官，诸州郡牧守。
English: Nishinakurō, the prefectural governor, the military governor, the general of the right army, the governor of Minami County, the founding lord of Nanfong County, Xia Yingyao, Sima, the conscript general, the emerging governor of Xia, reported in detail to the hundred officials of Beijing and the governor of Zhouzhou County.

古文：夫运不常夷，有时而陂；数无恒剥，否极则亨。
现代文：运道不会长久平顺，有时也会堵塞；气数不会永远不利，坏到了极点就转为通达。
English: The transport channel will not be smooth for a long time, and sometimes it will be blocked; the gas number will not always be unfavorable, and when it is extremely bad, it will turn into access.

古文：昔商邑中微，彭、韦投袂；汉室方昏，虚、牟效节。
现代文：从前商邑中道衰微，彭、韦挥动衣袖决心奋发；汉室世道昏乱，朱虚侯刘章、束牟侯刘兴居为主效忠。
English: In the past, the merchants in the middle of the road were fading, and Peng and Wei waved their sleeves with determination to work hard; the Han dynasty was in a state of confusion, and Zhu Xuchang and Liu Xingju were the main loyalists.

古文：故风声永树，卜世长久者也。
现代文：所以好的风气能够播扬，就能预知国运长久。
English: Therefore, if a good culture can be spread, it can predict the long-term success of the national movement.

古文：昔我太祖高皇帝德范生民，功格天地，仰纬彤云，俯临紫极。
现代文：先前我太祖高皇帝品德能规范百姓，功劳可比天地，仰则编织红云，俯则临御帝王宫殿。
English: Previously, my great-great-great-grandfather Emperor Gao was able to standardize the people's moral character, and his merits were comparable to heaven and earth. When he was up, he was weaving red clouds, and when he was down, he was close to the imperial palace.

古文：世祖嗣兴，增光前业，云雨之所沾被，日月之所出入，莫不举踵来王，交臂纳贡。
现代文：世祖承嗣，前代业绩更加光大，凡云雨能沾盖，日月能照耀的地方，没有不动身来朝见、拥挤着交纳贡品的。
English: Heirs of the ancestors, the performance of the previous generation is even more brilliant. Wherever the clouds and rain can cover, and the sun and moon can shine, there is no immobility to see the morning, crowded to pay tribute.

古文：郁林昏迷，颠覆厥序，俾我大齐之祚，翦焉将坠。
现代文：郁林昏庸糊涂，颠倒了秩序，使我大齐的国统，从此中断坠落。
English: Yu Lin was dazed and confused, reversed the order, and made my national unification complete, thus interrupting the downfall.

古文：高宗明皇帝建道德之盛轨，垂仁义之至踪，绍二祖之鸿基，继三五之绝业。
现代文：高宗明皇帝建树道德的规范，垂示仁义的表率，继承二祖的宏伟基业，接续三皇五帝的中断的事业。
English: Emperor Gao Zongming established a moral standard, set an example of benevolence and righteousness, inherited the magnificent foundation of the two ancestors, and continued the interrupted cause of the three emperors and five emperors.

古文：昧旦丕显，不明求衣，故奇士盈朝，异人辐凑。若乃经礼纬乐之文，定鼎作洛之制，非云如醴之详，白质黑章之瑞，谅以则天比大，无德称焉。
现代文：天不亮就起床，天未全亮就像大明了一样，所以有奇异才华的人如同车辐凑向车轴一样聚满了朝廷至于规划礼乐的典章，建国立基的制度，庆云如醴的祥征，义兽骝虞的瑞兆，料想用天作标尺来比较大小，也无法称道他的德行。
English: He gets up before dawn, and before full dawn he is as bright as a beacon. Therefore, people with extraordinary talents have filled the imperial court like the spokes of a car approaching the axle. As for the planning of ceremonial music, the system of building a national foundation, the auspicious sign of celebrating the clouds, and the auspicious sign of worshipping the animals, it is impossible to praise his virtue if he wants to compare the size with a ruler made by heaven.

古文：而嗣主不纲，穷肆陵暴，十愆毕行，三风咸袭。
现代文：可是嗣主不遵其纲纪，大肆侵凌暴虐，三风十愆，古代伊尹劝太甲要戒除的恶习，他全都承袭实行。
English: However, the heir did not follow the rules and regulations, he abused and mistreated people, and he inherited and practiced all the bad habits that the ancient Yi Yin advised Tai Jia to get rid of.

古文：丧初而无哀貌，在戚而有喜容。
现代文：国丧初期他不显哀愁，忧伤期间他偏有欢笑。
English: At the beginning of the national mourning, he did not seem sad, but during the sadness, he tended to laugh.

古文：酣酒嗜音，罔惩其侮；谗贼狂邪，是与比周。遂令亲贤婴荼毒之诛，宰辅受菹醢之戮。
现代文：贪恋酒杯，嗜爱声乐，无法戒止他的侮弄。谗贼狂邪，结伙营私，于是使亲人贤臣遭逢惨酷的诛杀，宰相辅佐经受肉醢般的屠戮。
English: Greedy for wine glasses, fond of vocal music, unable to restrain his mockery. Thieves are mad, ganging up on each other, thus causing relatives and wise men to be killed in a cruel battle, and the prime minister Fu Xing to be slaughtered like meat.

古文：江仆射，萧、刘领军，徐司空，沈仆射，曹右卫，或外戚懿亲，或皇室令德，或时宗民望，或国之虎臣，并勋彰中兴，功比周、邵，秉钧赞契，受遗先朝。
现代文：江仆射，萧、刘领军，徐司空，沈仆射，曹右卫，或是外戚，或是至亲，或属皇室美德，或属一时民望所宗，或属国家勇武之臣，都在中兴时有显著功绩，可与申、邵比拟。
English: Jiang Fuxia, Xiao, Liu Lingjun, Xu Siku, Shen Fuxia, Cao Yuwei, whether they are relatives, or relatives, or belong to the royal virtue, or belong to the people's reputation for a while, or belong to the country's brave soldiers, all have significant achievements in ZTE, which can be compared with Shen and Shao.

古文：咸以名重见疑，正直贻毙，害加党族，虐及婴孺。
现代文：接受先朝遣命，执掌国政、辅佐赞理。全因名显位重而被猜疑，为人正直遭杀害，祸及族人亲友，甚而连小孩也不放过。
English: All of them were suspected because of their prominent positions, and were killed for their honesty, bringing misfortune to their relatives and friends, even children.

古文：曾无《渭阳》追远之情，不顾本枝歼落之痛。
现代文：竟然汲半点《渭阳》记怀往事的情感，不顾本枝歼落的痛楚。
English: He even half-remembered "Fenyang" with the emotion of remembering the past, regardless of the pain of the destruction of this branch.

古文：信必见疑，忠而获罪，百姓业业，罔知攸暨。
现代文：诚实必被猜疑，忠贞反而获罪，百姓危惧，不知怎样才好。
English: Honesty is suspect, loyalty is suspect, the people are afraid, and they don't know what to do.

古文：崔慧景内逼淫刑，外不堪命，驱土崩之民，为免死之计，倒戈回刃，还指宫阙。
现代文：崔慧景内被滥酷的刑法逼迫，外不能经受使命的催逼，指挥着离散的人，为了逃避死亡，掉转枪头，反向宫阙。
English: Cui Huiqing was persecuted by the cruel criminal law within, but could not withstand the urging of the mission outside. He commanded the scattered people, and in order to escape death, he turned the gun's head and reversed the palace.

古文：城无完守，人有异图。
现代文：京城没有完好的守备，人人另有打算。
English: The capital is not well-defended, and everyone has other plans.

古文：赖萧令君勋济宗祏，业拯苍氓，四海蒙一匡之德，亿兆凭再造之功。
现代文：幸赖萧令君建救助宗庙之功，立拯救黎民百姓之业，四海之内蒙受他匡扶的恩德，亿兆民众凭靠他再造的功劳。
English: We are grateful for Xiao Lingjun's contribution to the construction and rescue of the ancestral temple, the establishment of the cause of saving the people of Li, the benevolence of his support in the four seas, and the re-creation of billions of people thanks to him.

古文：江夏王拘迫威强，牵制巨力，迹屈当时，乃心可亮，竟不能内恕探情，显加鸩毒。
现代文：江夏王威逼豪强，牵制巨大力量，他的行为在当时被掩蔽，他的心迹却是清楚的，竞不宽恕窥探宝位的情况，公开把他毒害。
English: Jiangxia Wang Wei forced the heroic and strong, and restrained the huge power. His behavior was covered up at the time, but his intentions were clear. He did not condone the situation of spying on the throne, and publicly poisoned him.

古文：萧令君自以亲惟族长，任实宗臣，至诫苦言，朝夕献入，谗丑交构，渐见疏疑，浸润成灾，奄离怨酷。
现代文：萧令君自以为是亲族长者，随顺本性的君主同宗之臣，朝夕进言，苦苦劝诫。但是谗邪之徒交互作用，渐渐就疏远而猜疑他。进而浸润成灾，怨深被杀。
English: Xiao Lingjun thought of himself as a kindred elder, a subject of the same lineage as the monarch who followed his natural inclinations. He gave advice in the morning and evening and exhorted with great effort. However, the interaction between the evil-doers gradually alienated him and made him suspicious. Then the infiltration became a disaster, and he was killed with deep resentment.

古文：用人之功，以宁社稷，刈人之身，以骋淫滥。
现代文：用人的功效在使社稷安宁，残害人的性命，在逞一时的淫威。
English: The effect of employing people is to make the society peaceful and tranquil, to destroy people's lives, and to display momentary arrogance.

古文：台辅既诛，奸小竞用。梅虫儿、茹法珍妖忍愚戾，穷纵丑恶，贩鬻主威，以为家势，营惑嗣主，恣其妖虐。
现代文：主要辅佐大臣被诛杀，奸诈小人被任用，梅虫儿、茹法珍妖邪愚暴，行为丑恶放纵，贩卖君王声威，用来壮大自家势力，迷惑嗣主，肆无顾忌地施行他的妖邪行径。
English: The main assistant minister was killed, a treacherous villain was appointed, a worm, a ruffian, a demon, and a fool, who behaved in an ugly and indulgent manner, sold the king's reputation, used it to strengthen his own power, confused the heir, and recklessly carried out his evil deeds.

古文：宫女千余，裸服宣淫，孽臣数十，袒裼相逐。
现代文：宫内千余宫女，他强令脱光衣服，几十个孽障臣子也赤身裸体，男女互相追逐淫乐。
English: He forced more than a thousand princesses in the imperial court to strip naked. Dozens of vassals were also naked, and men and women chased each other for sexual pleasure.

古文：帐饮阛肆之间，宵游街陌之上，提挈群竖，以为欢笑。
现代文：有时在买卖交易的帐篷中饮酒，有时深夜在街衢或田间小路上游窜，带着那一伙奸徒，寻欢取乐。
English: Sometimes he drank in the tents of the traders, sometimes he roamed the streets and lanes of the fields late at night, with his band of ruffians, in search of amusement.

古文：刘山阳潜受凶旨，规肆狂逆，天诱其衷，即就枭翦。
现代文：刘山阳暗中接受居心险恶的旨意，倒行逆施，上天诱惑他的内心，让他自行就死。
English: Liu Shanyang secretly accepted the sinister intention of the mastermind, went against the grain, heaven tempted his heart, and let him die on his own.

古文：夫天生蒸民，树之以君，使司牧之，勿使失性。
现代文：天生众百姓，在他们中树立君主，让他执掌管理的责任。不使他们失去善良的本性。
English: Inherit the people, establish a monarch among them, let him hold the responsibility of management, and do not let them lose their good nature.

古文：岂有尊临宇县，毒遍黔首，绝亲戚之恩，无君臣之义，功重者先诛，勋高者速毙。
现代文：哪有以至尊驾临宇内，却使百姓遍受其害，断绝亲戚间的恩情，失却君臣间的义理，功大勋高的先遭诛杀。
English: Who came to the world with the highest honor, but caused the people to suffer from it, severed the affection between relatives, lost the principle of justice between princes and ministers, and was first killed for his great merits.

古文：九族内离，四夷外叛，封境日蹙，戎马交驰，帑藏既空，百姓已竭，不恤不忧，慢游是好。
现代文：在内九族背离，在外四夷反叛，封疆一天天收缩，战争频仍，库存空乏，百姓穷困，不抚恤也不忧愁，衹喜好这样的浪荡嬉游。
English: Nine ethnic groups within the country have left the country, four ethnic groups outside the country have rebelled, the closed territory is shrinking day by day, wars are still frequent, stocks are empty, the people are impoverished, they do not receive pensions and are not sad, and they like this kind of wandering and play.

古文：民怨于下，天惩于上，故荧惑袭月，孽火烧宫，妖水表灾，震蚀告沴。七庙阽危，三才莫纪，大惧我四海之命，永沦于地。
现代文：百姓在下怨恨，老天爷在上面生气，因此火星袭月，孽火烧宫，妖水表示灾祸，地震、日食、月食告知灾变的产生，祖宗七庙临近危险，天、地、人没有法度，真害怕四海的生命，永远沉沦于地下。
English: The people are resentful, and God is angry above. Therefore, Mars attacks the moon, evil fires burn the palace, evil water indicates disaster, earthquakes, solar eclipses, and lunar eclipses indicate the occurrence of cataclysms, the Seven Ancestral Temples are in danger, heaven, earth, and people have no laws. I am really afraid of the life of the four seas, and I will sink into the ground forever.

古文：南康殿下体自高宗，天挺英懿。
现代文：南康殿下是高宗嫡脉，天生英迈。
English: His Imperial Highness Prince Nankang is a direct descendant of Emperor Gao, and was born with good fortune.

古文：食叶之征，著于弱年，当璧之祥，兆乎绮岁。
现代文：幼年显露出食叶的征候，少年就有当国的预兆。亿兆百姓，都想奉戴。
English: Children show signs of eating leaves at an early age, and the boy has the omens of the country. Hundreds of trillions of people all want to serve.

古文：亿兆颙颙，咸思戴奉。且势居上游，任总连帅，家国之否，宁济是当。
现代文：而且占据上游有利形势，承担总连帅的重任，值此家国危难的时候，自当挺身救助。
English: Moreover, it occupies a favorable situation in the upstream, undertakes the important task of the commander-in-chief, and comes to the rescue when the country is in danger.

古文：莫府身备皇宗，忝荷顾托，忧深责重，誓清时难。
现代文：幕府是皇室宗亲，愧受嘱托，忧虑深远、职责重大，发誓清除灾难。
English: The shogunate was a relative of the imperial family. It was humbled to be entrusted with far-reaching concerns and heavy responsibilities, and it vowed to clean up the disaster.

古文：今命冠军将军、西中郎谘议、领中直兵参军、军主杨公则，宁朔将军、领中兵参军、军主王法度，冠军将军、谘议参军、军主庞飖，辅国将军、谘议参军、领别驾、军主宗夬，辅国将军、谘议参军、军主乐蔼等，领劲卒三万，陵波电迈，迳造秣陵。
现代文：现命冠军将军、西中郎谘议、领中直兵参军、军主杨公则，宁朔将军、领中兵参军、军主王法度，冠军将军、谘议参军、军主庞出，辅国将军、谘议参军、领别驾、军主宗夫，辅国将军、谘议参军、军主乐蔼等，率领强健精兵三万人，风驰电掣，直奔秣陵。
English: The current champion general, Xi Zhonglang consultation, leading the middle and direct soldiers to join the army, commander Yang Gongzhe, Ningshuo general, leading the middle and direct soldiers to join the army, commander Wang Fadu, champion general, consultation to join the army, commander Pangde, auxiliary country general, consultation to join the army, leading the farewell drive, commander Zoufu, auxiliary country general, consultation to join the army, commander Le Ai, etc., led 30,000 strong and fine soldiers, wind and lightning, straight to Fuling.

古文：冠军将军、领谘议、中直兵参军、军主蔡道恭，辅国将军、中直兵参军、右军府司马、军主席阐文，辅国将军、中直兵参军、军主任漾之，宁朔将军、中直兵参军、军主韩孝仁，宁朔将军、中直兵参军、军主朱斌，中直兵参军、军主宗冰之，建威将军、中直兵参军、军主朱景舒，宁朔将军、中直兵参军、军主庾域，宁远将军、军主庾略等，被甲二万，直指建业。
现代文：冠军将军、领谘议、中直兵参军、军主蔡道恭，辅国将军、中直兵参军、右军府司马、军主席阐文，辅国将军、中直兵参军、军主任漾之，宁朔将军、中直兵参军、军主韩孝仁，宁朔将军、中直兵参军、军主朱斌，中直兵参军、军主宗冰之，建威将军、中直兵参军、军主朱景舒，宁朔将军、中直兵参军、军主庾域，宁远将军、军主庾略等，率领甲士二万人，径直向建业进兵。
English: The champion general, the leader of the consultation, the middle-ranking soldier in the army, the commander Cai Dao-hong, the second-ranking general, the middle-ranking soldier in the army, the right-wing military bureau Sima, the chairman of the army, the second-ranking general, the middle-ranking soldier in the army, the director of the army Xizhi, the Ningshuo general, the middle-ranking soldier in the army, the commander Han Xiaojin, the Ningshuo general, the middle-ranking soldier in the army, the commander Zhu Bin, the middle-ranking soldier in the army, the commander Zong Bing, the general Jian Wei,

古文：辅国将军、武宁太守、军主邓元起，辅国将军、前军将军、军主王世兴等，铁骑一万，分趋白下。
现代文：辅国将军、武宁太守、军主邓元起，辅国将军、前军将军、军主王世兴等，率铁骑一万，急奔白下。
English: Deng Yuanzhi, the general of the Auxiliary Province, Wu Ning, the grand marshal, and the commander of the army, Wang Shixing, the general of the Auxiliary Province, the general of the former army, and the commander of the army, led ten thousand cavalry and rushed to Baixia.

古文：征虏将军、领司马、新兴太守夏侯详，宁朔将军、咨议参军、军主柳忱，宁朔将军、领中兵参军、军主刘孝庆，建威将军、军主、江陵令江诠等，帅组甲五万，骆驿继发。
现代文：征虏将军、领司马、新兴太守夏侯详，宁朔将军、谘议参军、军主柳忱，宁朔将军、领中兵参军、军主刘孝庆，建威将军、军主、江陵令江诠等，率领五万兵随后进发。
English: The conscript general, the leader Sima, the new governor Xia Houzhi, the Ningshuo general, the advisory to join the army, the army commander Liu Zhen, the Ningshuo general, the army commander Liu Xiaoqing, the Jianwei general, the army commander, the Gangneung leader Jiang Yan and so on, led 50,000 soldiers and then set off.

古文：雄剑高麾，则五星从流；长戟远指，则云虹变色。
现代文：雄剑高高一挥，五星跟着流转；长戟远远一指，云虹就随之变色。
English: When the male sword is waved high, the five stars follow it; when the long beak is waved far away, the rainbow changes color.

古文：天地为之矞皇，山渊以之崩沸。
现代文：天地为之辉煌，山因之崩塌，渊因之沸腾。
English: The heavens and the earth are resplendent, the mountains are collapsing because of it, and the abyss is boiling because of it.

古文：莫府亲贯甲胄，授律中权，董帅熊罴之士十有五万，征鼓粉沓，雷动荆南。
现代文：幕府亲着甲胄，统管中军，率领十五万如熊如熊的战士，出征的战鼓纷至沓来，如雷岛般响彻荆南。
English: The shogunate, in full armor, presided over the Chinese army, leading 150,000 soldiers like bears, and the drums of war were beating as loudly as Thunder Island.

古文：宁朔将军、南康王友萧颖达领虎旅三万，抗威后拒。
现代文：宁朔将军、南康王友萧颖达统领虎旅三万，抗威后拒。
English: Ningshuo General, Nankang Wangyou Xiao Yingda led the tiger brigade of thirty thousand, resisted and refused.

古文：萧雍州勋业盖世，谋猷渊肃，既痛家祸，兼愤国难，泣血枕戈，誓雪怨酷，精卒十万，已出汉川。
现代文：萧雍州有盖世功业，有敏捷深广的谋略，既为家祸痛恨，又为国难激愤，流着血泪，枕着戈矛，誓要雪恨，统率十万精兵，已经从汉!出发。
English: Xiao Yongzhou has made great achievements in the world, has a quick and profound strategy, not only hates the family misfortune, but also is enraged by the national misfortune, sheds blood and tears, carries a spear, vows to hate the snow, and leads a hundred thousand elite soldiers, has set out from Han!

古文：张郢州节义慷慨，悉力齐奋。
现代文：张郢州慷慨节义，全力奋发。
English: Zhang Yanzhou was generous and devoted to the festival.

古文：江州邵陵王、湘州张行事、王司州皆远近悬契，不谋而同，并勒骁猛，指景风驱。
现代文：江州邵陵王、湘州张行事、王司州都已远远近近张贴文告，不谋而合，都在统率骁勇的军队，朝着目的地迅速进军。
English: Shao Ling Wang of Jiangzhou, Zhang Xuan of Hunan, and Wang Zhizhou have all posted proclamations far and near, coinciding with each other. They are all leading brave troops and marching rapidly towards their destination.

古文：舟舰鱼丽，万里盖水，车骑云屯，平原雾塞。
现代文：大小战船如鱼一样，布满了万里水面，军车战马如云，塞满了郊原。
English: Large and small warships, like fish, covered thousands of miles of water, and military vehicles, like clouds, filled the countryside.

古文：以同心之士，伐倒戈之众，盛德之师，救危亡之国，何征而不服，何诛而不克哉！
现代文：依仗协力同心的士卒，讨伐随时打算投降的部众，凭仗美好德行的军队，挽救面临危亡的国家，能有什么征不服、诛不减的呢!
English: By relying on the concerted efforts of like-minded soldiers, by fighting against subordinates who are ready to surrender at any time, and by relying on an army of good and virtuous soldiers, to save a country facing peril, what can be refused and not reduced?

古文：今兵之所指，唯在梅虫儿、茹法珍二人而已。
现代文：现今军队矛头所指，衹在梅虫儿、茹法珍两人罢了。
English: As far as the army's spearhead is concerned, there are only two people, Mei Zueri and Ru Fa Zhen.

古文：诸君德载累世，勋著先朝，属无妄之时，居道消之运，受迫群竖，念有危惧。
现代文：诸位累世载德，前朝曾立功勋，遇上有意外灾祸的时候，处在倒霉的运道，受到群小的胁迫，有着危险惧怕的顾虑。
English: All of you, who have been virtuous for a long time, have made meritorious contributions to the previous government, and when you encounter unexpected disasters, you are in an unlucky path of fortune, are coerced by small groups, and have concerns about danger.

古文：大军近次，当各思拔迹，来赴军门。
现代文：我大军临近之时，应当各自想办法脱身，来投奔军门。
English: When our army is approaching, they should each find a way to escape and rush to the army gate.

古文：檄到之日，有能斩送虫儿、法珍首者，封二千户开国县侯。
现代文：檄文传到之日，如有能斩下梅虫儿、茹法珍的首级送来的人，将封他为二千户开国县侯。
English: On the day the edict arrived, if anyone could cut off the heads of Meizhuer and Rufaizhen, he would be made the head of 2,000 households in Kaigu County.

古文：若迷惑凶党，敢拒军锋，刑兹无赦，戮及宗族。
现代文：假如被奸凶党徒迷惑，赡敢抗拒我大军锋芒的，一定按刑律处治，决不赦免，杀戮时还要连及他的宗族。
English: If anyone is tricked by the treacherous partisans and dares to resist the sharp edge of our great army, he must be punished according to the criminal law, never pardoned, and his clan must also be killed.

古文：赏罚之信，有如曒日，江水在此，余不食言。
现代文：赏罚的诚信，就像明亮的太阳，畏江水在逭裹可以作证，我决不食言。
English: The sincerity of reward and punishment is like the bright sun, and the water of the river of fear can testify to it. I will never renege on my promise.

古文：遣冠军将军杨公则向湘州。
现代文：派遣冠军将军杨公则向湘州进军。
English: The champion general Yang Gong then marched to Hunan.

古文：王法度不进军，免官。
现代文：王法度屯兵不进，免去官职。
English: Wang Faduo did not enter the garrison and was dismissed from his post.

古文：公则进克巴陵，仍向湘州。
现代文：杨公则进军攻克巴陵后，继续向湘州进发。
English: After conquering Paling, Yang Gongze continued to advance towards Hunan.

古文：遣宁朔将军刘坦行湘州事。
现代文：派遣宁朔将军刘坦行湘州事。
English: Send Ningshuo General Liu Tan to Hunan Province.

古文：颖胄遣人谓梁王曰： 时月未利，当须来年二月。
现代文：萧颖胄派人对梁王说： 进兵的季节不利于我方，应该等待明年二月。
English: Xiao Yingyao sent a person to Liang Wang and said, "The enlistment season is not good for us. We should wait until next February to enlist.

古文：今便进兵，恐非良策。 
现代文：现在就进兵，恐非良策。 
English: Entering the army now may not be a good idea.

古文：梁王曰： 今坐甲十万，粮用自竭。
现代文：梁王说： 现今十万士卒如让其坐等，粮食物品也会用光。
English: Liang Wang said, "If we let 100,000 people sit and wait, we will run out of grain and food.

古文：况藉以义心，一时骁锐。
现代文：况且我们凭藉的是一颗正义之心，一时的骁勇锐气。
English: Moreover, what we rely on is a righteous heart, a momentary courage.

古文：且太白出西方，仗义而动，天时人谋，无有不利。
现代文：并且太白星出现西方，仗义而起，天时人谋，并没有什么不利。
English: Moreover, there is nothing unfavorable about the West emerging too suddenly, rising up in the name of righteousness, and making plans as the day unfolds.

古文：昔武王伐纣，行逆太岁，岂复待年月邪？ 
现代文：从前武王讨伐商纣，行为冲撞太岁，哪又等待过年月呢? 
English: In the past, King Wu used to fight disputes, and he was too old to act, so why did he wait for years?

古文：颖胄乃从。
现代文：萧颖胄于是依从。
English: Xiao Yingyao then complied.

古文：遣西中郎参军邓元起率众向夏口。
现代文：派遣西中郎参军邓元起率领部众进兵夏口。
English: Sending Nishinakuro to join the army, Deng Yuanqi led the troops to march into Natchou.

古文：三年正月，和帝为相国，颖胄领左长史，进号镇军将军。
现代文：永元三年正月，和帝为相国，萧颖胄领左长史，进爵号为镇军将军。
English: In the first month of the third year of the Yongyuan era, with the emperor as a partner country, Xiao Yingjun led the left long history, and the peerage was the general of the town army.

古文：于是始选用方伯。
现代文：于是开始选用各路诸侯之长。
English: So they began to use the heads of the various lords.

古文：梁王屡表劝和帝即尊号，梁州刺史柳惔、竟陵太守曹景宗并劝进。
现代文：梁王屡次上表劝和帝即皇帝尊号，梁州刺史椁恢、竟陵太守曹景宗也都劝和帝进尊号。
English: King Liang repeatedly made public appeals for the Emperor's honorific title of "He Di" (和帝), and Liangzhou Zishi and Cao Jingzong, the governor of the imperial mausoleum, also urged the Emperor's honorific title of "He Jin" (和帝进尊号).

古文：颖胄使别驾宗寔撰定礼仪，上尊号，改元，于江陵立宗庙、南北郊，州府城门悉依建康宫，置尚书五省，以城南射堂为兰台，南郡太守为尹。
现代文：萧颖宣让别驾宗央撰定礼仪，于是上尊号，改元，在江陵建立宗庙、南北郊祀之所，州府的城门全部依照建康宫格式，设置尚书五省，以城南射堂作为兰台，以南郡太守为尹。
English: Xiao Yingxuan asked the patriarch to compile the etiquette, so he changed the name of the temple and the era to establish a temple in Gangneung, a place of worship in the northern and southern suburbs, and the city gates of the state capital were all in accordance with the Jiankang Palace format, set up in five provinces, with the South City Hall as the lantern platform, and the South County Governor as Yin.

古文：建武中，荆州大风雨，龙入柏斋中，柱壁上有爪足处，刺史萧遥欣恐畏，不敢居之。
现代文：建武年间，荆州大风大雨，有龙进入柏斋中，在柱子上墙壁上留有脚爪印，当时刺史萧遥欣害怕，不敢在裹面居住。
English: During the Jianwu period, there was heavy wind and rain in Jingzhou, and a dragon entered Baizhaizhong, leaving footprints on the walls of the pillar. At that time, Xiao Yuxin was afraid and did not dare to live in Wucheng.

古文：至是以为嘉祐殿。
现代文：至此把它作了嘉佑殿。
English: At this point, it was changed to Kaya-dono.

古文：中兴元年三月，颖胄为侍中、尚书令，假节、都督如故。
现代文：中兴元年三月，萧颖宣为侍中、尚书令，假节、都督职依前未变。
English: In March of the first year of the Qing Dynasty, Xiao Yingxuan was appointed as an attendant and official secretary, and his duties as the head of the imperial court and governor-general remained unchanged.

古文：寻领吏部尚书，监八州军事，行荆州刺史，本官如故。
现代文：随后不久领吏部尚书，监八州军事，行荆州刺史，原本官职不变。
English: Soon after that, he was assigned to Shangshu of the Clerical Department, Jian of the Military Department of the Eight Provinces, and Jing of the Military History Department. His original official position remained unchanged.

古文：左丞乐蔼奏曰： 敕旨以军旅务殷，且停朝直。
现代文：左丞乐蔼上奏章说道： 皇上颁发诏旨，因为行军打仗事多，暂且停止朝值。
English: Sajo Le Eri said at the conclusion of the recital: The emperor issued an imperial decree, because there are many things to march and fight, temporarily suspending the imperial standard.

古文：窃谓匪懈于位，义昭夙兴，国容旧典，不可顿阙。
现代文：个人私下认为对于权位不懈怠，道理分明，应当夙兴夜寐，国家礼制仪节原有的法则，不能缺少。
English: Privately, individuals believe that there is no slackening in power, the reason is clear, it is necessary to rejuvenate the night sleep, and the original rules of the national etiquette and ceremonies cannot be lacking.

古文：与兼右丞江诠等参议，八座丞郎以下宜五日一朝，有事郎坐侍下鼓，无事许从实还外。 
现代文：与兼右丞江诠等参议，五曹尚书、一令、二仆射八座的丞郎以下官员适合五天一朝，有事郎官坐等下鼓，无事允许依照实际退回外面。 
English: With concurrently the right councilor Jiang Yan and other councillors, five councilors, one secretary, one secretary, two servants and eight councilors, the officials below the councilor are suitable for five days and one morning, if there is a problem, the officials will sit down and wait for the drum, and if there is no problem, they are allowed to return outside according to the actual situation.

古文：奏可。
现代文：奏议批覆可以。
English: The Emperor assents.

古文：梁王义师出沔口，郢州刺史张冲据城拒守。
现代文：梁王正义的军队出沔口，郢州刺史张冲据城拒守。
English: Liang Wang Zhengyi's army marched out of the city, and Zhang Chongzhen, the governor of Zhangzhou, refused to defend the city.

古文：杨公则定湘州，行事张宝积送江陵，率军会夏口。
现代文：杨公则克定湘州，行事张宝积送江陵，率军到夏口相会。
English: Yang Gongzi determined Hunan, Zhang Baozhi sent Jiangling, and led the army to meet in Xiakou.

古文：巴西太守鲁休烈、巴东太守萧惠训遣子璝拒义师。
现代文：巴西太守鲁休烈、巴东太守萧惠训派遣儿子萧璝抗拒正义之师。
English: The Empress Dowager of Brazil, Lu Xury, and the Empress Dowager of Padang, Xiao Huixun, sent their sons, Xiao Yu, to resist the righteous teacher.

古文：颖胄遣汶阳太守刘孝庆进峡口，与巴东太守任漾之、宜都太守郑法绍御之。
现代文：萧颖胄派汶阳太守刘孝庆进军峡口，与巴东太守任漾之、宜都太守郑法绍抵御他们。
English: Xiao Yingtao sent Liu Xiaoqing, the grand marshal of Wenyang, to march into the gorge, and the grand marshals of Badong and Yidu, Zheng Fashao, resisted them.

古文：时军旅之际，人情未安，颖胄府长史张炽从绛衫左右三十余人入千秋门，城内惊恐，疑有同异。
现代文：当时正处在行军用兵的时候，人们的心情没有安定，萧颖胄府长史张炽带领身穿绛衫的身边人三十多个，进千秋门，引起城内惊慌，怀疑有什么变故。
English: At that time, when the marching soldiers were marching, people's mood was not stable. Xiao Yingqin governor Zhang Glowing led more than 30 people around him wearing silk shirts into the Qianqiu Gate, causing panic in the city and suspicion that something had changed.

古文：御史中丞奏弹炽，诏以赎论。
现代文：御史中丞劾奏张炽的这一过错，诏答以赎论处。
English: The Imperial Historian Chujo impeached Zhang Zhao for this mistake, and the imperial edict punished him with expiation.

古文：颖胄弟颖孚在京师，庐陵人修灵祐窃将南上，于西昌县山中聚兵二千人，袭郡，内史谢篹奔豫章。
现代文：萧颖胄的弟弟萧颖孚在京城，庐陵人脩灵佑暗中打算南上，在西吕县的山裹聚集兵丁二千人，袭击郡治，内史谢篡逃奔豫章。
English: Xiao Yingfan's younger brother Xiao Yingfu was in Beijing, and the people of Fuling secretly planned to go south. They gathered two thousand soldiers in the mountains of Xilu County to attack Guanzhi, and secretly took refuge in Ben Yuzhang.

古文：颖孚、灵祐据郡求援，颖胄遣宁朔将军范僧简入湘州南道援之。
现代文：萧颖孚、脩灵违占据郡城求援。萧颖胄派遣宁朔将军范僧简进周业南道去援助他们。
English: Xiao Yingfu and Yao Lingyi occupied the county seat and asked for help. Xiao Yingyao sent the Ningshuo general Fan Sojan to Zhouye South Road to help them.

古文：僧简进克安成，仍以为辅国将军、安成内史。
现代文：造军取得室盛，于是授任他辅国将军、安成内史。
English: Muromori was given the task of building up the army, and he was then given the post of assistant to the national general, Yasunari Naishi.

古文：拜颖孚为冠军将军、庐陵内史。
现代文：拜萧颖孚为冠军将军、庐陵内史。
English: Bai Xiao Yingfu is the champion general, the history of Fuling.

古文：合二郡兵，出彭蠡口。
现代文：会合二郡兵力，出彭蠡日。
English: The combined forces of the two counties will leave Penghu on the same day.

古文：东昏侯遣军主彭盆、刘希祖三千人受江州刺史陈伯之节度，南讨二郡义兵，仍进取湘州。
现代文：东昏侯派遣军主彭盆、刘希祖带三千人接受丝州刺史陈伯之节制，向南去讨伐二郡的义兵，并要进取周州。
English: Dongwu marquis dispatched the army commander Peng Bin, Liu Xizou with three thousand people to accept the restraint of Si Zhou stabber Chen Bo, to go south to fight the two counties of volunteers, and to attack Zhou.

古文：南康太守王丹保郡应盆等。
现代文：南康太守王且保守本郡策应室涂等。
English: Nankang Taishuo Wang and the county's policy-making office are conservative.

古文：颖孚闻兵至，望风奔走。
现代文：萧颖孚听说对方的军队来了，便望风而逃。
English: When Xiao Yingfu heard that the other side's army was coming, he fled to the wind.

古文：前内史谢篹复还郡。
现代文：前内史谢簦又返回了郡治。
English: Former Naishi Shieh returned to Gunji.

古文：刘希祖至安成，攻战七日，城陷，范僧简见杀。
现代文：刘希祖到安成，攻城战斗了七天，安成城失陷，范僧简被杀。
English: Liu Xizou went to Ancheng and fought for seven days to besiege the city. Ancheng fell, and Fan Xiangjian was killed.

古文：希祖仍为安成内史。
现代文：刘希祖就任灵处内史。
English: The history of Liu Xizou's inauguration as the spiritual leader.

古文：颖孚收散卒据西昌，谢篹又遣军攻之，众败，奔湘州。
现代文：萧颖孚收集逃散的士卒占据西昌，谢篹又派军队来攻西昌，萧颖孚部众战败，逃奔湘州。
English: Xiao Yingfu gathered the soldiers who had fled and occupied Xichang. Xie Jun also sent troops to attack Xichang. Xiao Yingfu's troops were defeated and fled to Hunan.

古文：以颖孚为督湘东衡阳零陵桂阳营阳五郡、湘东内史、假节、将军如故。
现代文：以萧颖孚为督湘东衡阳零陵桂阳营阳五郡、湘东内史，假节、将军职依前未变。
English: With Xiao Yingfu as the governor of Hunan East Hengyang Mausoleum Guiyang Yingyang Five Counties, the history of Hunan East, festivals and military posts remain unchanged.

古文：寻病卒。
现代文：过了不久他就病死了。
English: He died of illness shortly afterwards.

古文：后修灵祐又合余众攻篹，篹复败走豫章，刘希祖亦以郡降。
现代文：后来脩灵佑又会合其余部众攻打谢箠，谢篹又败逃到豫章，刘希祖率郡投降。
English: Later, Yao Lingyou also gathered the rest of the troops to attack Xie Yao. Xie Yao was defeated and fled to Yuzhang. Liu Xizhu led the county to surrender.

古文：湘东内史王僧粲亦拒义，自称平西将军、湘州刺史，以南平镇军主周敷为长史，率前军袭湘州，去州百余里。
现代文：湘东内史王僧粲也抗拒义师，自称平西将军、湘州刺史，以南平镇军主周敷为长史，率领前军袭击湘州。
English: Xiangdong Inner History King Monk Xuan also resisted the righteous teacher, claiming to be the general of Pingxi, the stabbing history of Xiangzhou, and the head of Nanping Town Army, Zhou Jiki, was the long history, leading the front army to attack Xiangzhou.

古文：杨公则长史刘坦守州城，遣军主尹法略拒之，屡战不胜。
现代文：在距离渔业一百余里处屯驻。杨全主型长史刘坦守州城，派军主尹法略抗拒来犯敌军，多次战斗都未能取胜。
English: Yang Quan stationed himself more than a hundred miles away from the fishery. Liu Tan, Yang Quan's chief warlord, guarded the state capital, and sent his commander, Yin Faryao, to resist the invading enemy forces. They were unable to win many battles.

古文：及闻建康城平，僧粲散走，乃斩之。
现代文：等到听说建康城被平定，僧粲败逃，才斩杀了。
English: He waited until he heard that Jiankang City had been pacified and that the monks had fled in defeat before he killed them.

古文：南康太守王丹亦为郡人所杀。
现代文：南康太守王丹也被本郡的人杀掉了。
English: Wang Dan, the governor of Nankang, was also killed by people from this county.

古文：郢城降，义师众军东下。
现代文：郢城投降，义师众军向东进军。
English: Shicheng surrendered, and Yishi's army marched eastward.

古文：八月，鲁休烈、萧璝破汶阳太守刘孝庆等于峡口，巴东太守任漾之见杀，遂至上明，江陵大震。
现代文：八月，鲁休烈、萧璝在峡口破汶阳太守刘孝庆，巴东太守任漾被杀，于是就到达上明，江陵大为震动。
English: In August, Lu Xiuling and Xiao Yao were killed at the mouth of the gorge by Liu Xiaoqing, the governor of Wenyang, and Ren Yao, the governor of Badong, and thus arrived in Shangming, causing great turmoil in Jiangling.

古文：颖胄恐，驰告梁王曰： 刘孝庆为萧璝所败，宜遣杨公则还援根本。 
现代文：萧颖胄也恐慌了，骑马奔告梁王说： 刘孝庆被芦玺打败，应派杨公则返回援救江陵。 
English: Xiao Yingyao also panicked, riding to tell Liang Wang: Liu Xiaoqing was defeated by the reeds, Yang Gong should be sent back to rescue Jiangling.

古文：梁王曰： 公则今溯流上荆，鞭长之义耳。
现代文：梁王说： 公则现如今若是逆流而上荆州，那就是鞭长不及马腹的意思啊。
English: Liang Wang said: If the public interest is now going against the current and going up to Jingzhou, it means that the whip is not as long as the horse's belly.

古文：萧璝、鲁休烈乌合之众，寻自退散。
现代文：萧瓒、鲁休烈是乌合之众，不久自然会退散。
English: Xiao Yao and Lu Xurye are members of the rabble, and they will naturally disperse soon.

古文：政须荆州少时持重。
现代文：正需荆州自己持重一段时间。
English: It is time for Jingzhou to hold its own for a while.

古文：良须兵力，两弟在雍，指遣往征，不为难至。 
现代文：确需兵力，两位弟弟在雍州，指派人去征调，到来不难。 
English: If you really need reinforcements, my two younger brothers are in Yongzhou, and if you send someone to recruit them, they will easily arrive.

古文：颖胄乃追赠任漾之辅国将军、梁州刺史。
现代文：萧颖胄于是就追赠任漾之为辅国将军、凿州刺史。
English: As a result, Xiao Yingyao posthumously appointed him as a vice-governor and chiseled the history of the state.

古文：遣军主蔡道恭假节屯上明拒萧璝。
现代文：派遣军主基差尽假节进鞋上塱抵抗芦堡。
English: The commander of the dispatched army, Ji Chia, went on holiday to resist the Lucheng fortress.

古文：时梁王已平郢、江二镇。
现代文：这时梁王已平定郢、江二镇。
English: At this time, Liang Wang had already subdued Shao and Jiang Erzhen.

古文：颖胄辅帝出居上流，有安重之势。
现代文：萧颖胄辅佐和帝出居上游，有安重的形势。
English: Xiao Yingyao's assistant and the emperor's emigration to the upper reaches, there is a heavy situation.

古文：素能饮酒，啖白肉鲙至三升，既闻萧璝等兵相持不决，忧虑感气，十二月壬寅夜，卒。
现代文：他一向能喝酒，一次能吃白肉片多至三升，听到萧坟等的军队同他们相持不下，忧虑而感风寒，十二月壬寅夜裹，去世。
English: He had always been able to drink. He could eat up to three liters of white meat at a time. He could not bear to listen to Xiao Gu and other soldiers. He was worried and felt cold. He died on the night of December 6th.

古文：遗表曰： 臣疹患数日，不谓便至困笃，气息绵微，待尽而已。
现代文：遣下奏表说： 臣患病几天，不料竟至危重，呼吸微弱，等待命终罢了。
English: The dispatch said: "The minister has been ill for a few days, but unexpectedly he is critically ill, his breathing is weak, and he is just waiting for the end of his life.

古文：臣虽庸薄，忝籍葭莩，过受先朝殊常之眷，循宠砺心，誓生以死。
现代文：臣虽说平庸才薄，惭愧地凭藉如芦苇中的薄膜那样一点亲缘关系，受到先朝非比寻常的眷爱，因循宠信磨砺心性，誓以生死相报。
English: Although the vassal is mediocre, he is ashamed to rely on a little kinship, like a thin film in reeds, to be unusually favored by the previous dynasty. By following the favorite, he has sharpened his mind and vowed to repay the favor with his life.

古文：属皇业中否，天地分崩，总率诸侯，翼奉明圣。
现代文：遭逢皇王伟业中落，天地崩塌，我总领诸侯，尊奉辅佐圣明的君主。
English: Faced with the decline of the emperor's great career and the collapse of heaven and earth, I, the leader of the princes, honored and assisted the monarch of Shengming.

古文：赖社稷灵长，大明在运，故兵之所临，无思不服。
现代文：幸赖国家命运绵长，曰月在运，所以义师所到之处，没有不思服的。
English: Fortunately, the fate of the country is long, and it is said that the moon is in luck, so there is nothing to be convinced of wherever the righteous teacher goes.

古文：今四海垂平，干戈行戢，方希陪翠华，奉法驾，反东都，观旧物。
现代文：现在天下将要平定，兵器将要收藏，正希望陪伴皇帝仪仗，侍奉天子车驾，返归束都，观赏原先熟悉的景物。
English: Now the world will be pacified, weapons will be collected, and they are hoping to accompany the emperor to the ceremonial battle, serve the emperor's carriage, return to the capital, and enjoy the familiar scenery.

古文：不幸遘疾，奄辞明世，怀此深恨，永结泉壤。
现代文：不幸生病，突然告别清明的人世，带着这深深的遣憾，永远沉埋泉壤之下。
English: Unfortunate illness, sudden farewell to a clear life, with this deep regret, forever buried under the spring soil.

古文：窃惟王业至重，万机甚大，登之实难，守之未易。
现代文：私下认为皇王事业最重要，皇帝常处理的政务最重大，攀登上这基业实在难，保守这一基业很不容易。
English: Privately, he believes that the emperor's cause is the most important, and the government affairs that the emperor often deals with are the most important. It is really difficult to climb this foundation, and it is not easy to maintain this foundation.

古文：陛下富于春秋，当远寻祖宗创业艰难，殷鉴季末颠覆厥绪，思所以念始图终，康此兆庶。
现代文：陛下年富力强，应当远远追思祖宗创立基业的艰难，以末世颠覆其功业作为借鉴，考虑如何起始囤谋结果，使兆民康乐。
English: His Majesty, who is rich and powerful, should think about the difficulties of founding the foundation of his ancestors from afar, take the subversion of his work in the last days as a reference, and consider how to start planning the results to make the vast number of people happy.

古文：征东大将军臣衍，元勋上德，光赞天下，陛下垂拱仰成，则风流日化，臣虽万没，无所遗恨。 
现代文：征束大将军萧衍，大功大德，光赞天下，陛下衹需垂衣拱手仰头等待成功，那么风流日化，臣纵使万死，也没有遗恨了。 
English: Conscript general Xiao Yan, great merit, praised by the world, his majesty had to hang his clothes and bow his head to wait for success, then the trend of the day, even if the vassal died, there was no hatred left.

古文：时年四十。
现代文：萧颖胄死时四十岁。
English: Xiao Yingxuan was forty years old when she died.

古文：和帝出临哭。
现代文：和帝亲临哀哭。
English: The emperor himself came to mourn.

古文：诏赠侍中、丞相，本官如故。
现代文：诏赠侍中、丞相，原本官职依前不变。
English: The imperial edict bestowed the posts of vice-chancellor and chancellor of the exchequer, but the original posts remained unchanged.

古文：前后部羽葆鼓吹，班剑三十人。辒辌车，黄屋左纛。
现代文：前后部羽葆鼓吹，佩带饰有花纹的木剑三十人为仪仗，丧车，帝王用的车盖及帝王车衡左边的装饰物。
English: The front and rear parts are adorned with feathers, and thirty people are wearing wooden swords decorated with patterns for the ceremonial battle, the funeral car, the car cover used by the emperor, and the decorations on the left side of the imperial balance.

古文：梁王围建康城，住在石头，和帝密诏报颖胄凶问，秘不发丧。
现代文：梁王围困建康城，住在石头戍，和帝暗中传诏书告诉萧颖胄死的凶讯，他不予公开不发丧。
English: Liang Wang besieged Jiankang City, lived in a stone castle, and secretly told the emperor the terrible news of Xiao Yingyao's death in an imperial edict. He did not make it public and did not mourn.

古文：及城平，识者闻之，知天命之有在矣。
现代文：等到建尘撼平定，有见识的人听说这件事，知道天命所在了。
English: When the dust settles, people with insight will hear about this and know where the destiny lies.

古文：梁天监元年，诏曰： 念功惟德，历代所同，追远怀人，弥与事笃。
现代文：梁天监元年，有诏说： 追念功勋惟在德行，历代相同，追思前贤，更要把事情办得笃实。
English: In the first year of Liang Tianjun's reign, there was an imperial edict that said, "The only way to commemorate meritorious deeds is to be virtuous, which has been the same throughout the ages.

古文：齐故侍中、丞相、尚书令颖胄，风格峻远，器宇渊邵，清猷盛业，问望斯归。
现代文：查故世的侍中、丞相、尚书令萧颖胄，风格峻远，器宇博大，筹谋了盛大的事业，声誉名望之所归依。
English: Xiao Yingyao, a courtier, chancellor, and imperial secretary in the reign of Emperor Jia, had a far-reaching style, a broad mind, plotted a grand cause, and was the object of fame and renown.

古文：缔构义始，肇基王迹，契阔屯夷，载形心事。
现代文：起始参与缔构义举，为皇上业绩奠定基础，离散聚集，他的形象永远铭记心中。
English: At the beginning, he participated in the construction of the symbolic act, laid the foundation for the emperor's performance, gathered together, and his image will always be remembered in his heart.

古文：朕膺天改命，光宅区宇，望岱瞻河，永言增恸。
现代文：朕顺承天意更正符命，据有区宇，远望泰山、黄河，诉说怀抱更增哀伤。
English: I obeyed the will of heaven and corrected according to my destiny. According to some regions, I looked far and wide at Mount Tai and the Yellow River, and told them that embracing them would increase my sorrow.

古文：可封巴东郡公，邑三千户，本官如故。 
现代文：可封萧颖胄为巴束郡公，食邑三千户，原本官职依前不变。 
English: Xiao Yingyao can be appointed as the governor of Bachu County, which has 3,000 households. The original official position remains unchanged.

古文：丧还，今上车驾临哭渚次。
现代文：丧还时，现在的皇上车驾亲临江边哭迎。
English: At the time of his death, the current emperor drove his car to the riverside and wept.

古文：诏曰： 齐故侍中、丞相、尚书令颖胄葬送有期，前代所加殊礼，依晋王导、齐豫章王故事，可悉给。
现代文：诏告说： 齐已故侍中、丞相、尚书令萧颖胄葬送期间，前代加给的特殊礼遇，依照晋朝的王导；齐朝的豫章王先例，可以全部照给。
English: The edict said: During the funeral of Xiao Yingyao, the late attendant, chancellor, and imperial secretary of the Qi Dynasty, the special courtesy given by the previous generation can be given in accordance with the guidance of the king of the Jin Dynasty and the precedent of the king of the Qi Dynasty.

古文：谥曰献武。 
现代文：谧号为献武。 
English: His posthumous name was Kenmu.

古文：范僧简赠交州刺史。
现代文：范僧简追赠为交州刺史。
English: Fan Zengjian posthumously awarded as the history of Jiaozhou.

古文：史臣曰：魏氏基于用武，夏侯诸曹，并以戚族而为将相。
现代文：史臣曰：魏氏根基是建筑在武力上。夏侯氏及曹氏，都凭藉亲戚关系做了将相。
English: Shi Zhen said: The Wei clan is based on military force. The Xia Hou clan and the Cao clan have both made generals by virtue of their relatives.

古文：夫股肱为义，既有常然，肺腑之重，兼存宗寄。
现代文：股肱的涵义，早就是这样，肺腑的重要，兼存有对同宗的寄托。
English: The meaning of 股 is already like this, 肺 is important, and there is also a reliance on the same clan.

古文：丰沛之间，贵人满市，功臣所出，多在南阳。
现代文：丰沛之间，满街布有贵人，功臣的出处，大多在南阳。
English: Among the rich and affluent, the streets are full of noblemen, the source of heroes, mostly in Nanyang.

古文：夫贞干所以成务，非虚言也。
现代文：国有贤才是事业成就的原因，不是一句虚话。
English: State-owned talents are the reason for the success of the cause, not an empty phrase.

古文：赞曰：新吴事武，简在帝心。
现代文：赞曰：萧景先侍奉齐武帝忠心耿耿，是武帝用心简选的。
English: Zang said: Xiao Jingsen served the Qiwu Emperor loyally and wholeheartedly, and was selected by the Qiwu Emperor.

古文：南丰治政，迹显亡衾。
现代文：萧赤斧治理州郡的政绩，从他死后无绢做被一事显示出来了。
English: Xiao Chiaxu's achievements in the governance of the state and county have been shown by the fact that he has been doing well since his death.

古文：镇军茂绩，机识弘深，荆南立王，向义汉阴。
现代文：萧颖胄功绩丰茂。机谋深远宏大，在荆南扶立君王，在汉阴倡导义举。
English: Xiao Yingqin's achievements are abundant. His wit is far-reaching and grand, and he helped to establish a king in Jingnan and advocated a good deed in Hanyin.

