古文：陈轸为秦使于齐，过魏，求见犀首。
现代文：陈轸为秦国出使齐国，路过魏国，求见公孙衍。
English: Chen Xi was an envoy from Qin to Qi, passing through Wei to see Gongsun Yan.

古文：犀首谢陈轸。
现代文：公孙衍辞谢了陈轸。
English: The great-grandson bowed and thanked Chen Xi.

古文：陈轸曰： 轸之所以来者，事也。
现代文：陈轸说： 我之所以来，是有事情。
English: Chen Yao said, "I came here for a reason.

古文：公不见轸，轸且行，不得待异日矣。 
现代文：既然不见我，我就要走了，不可能再等到其他日子。 
English: Since you won't see me, I'm leaving. I can't wait another day.

古文：犀首乃见之。
现代文：公孙衍才会见了他。
English: It was only then that his son-in-law met him.

古文：陈轸曰： 公恶事乎?
现代文：陈轸说： 您讨厌政事吗？
English: Chen Yao said: Do you hate politics?

古文：何为饮食而无事?
现代文：为什么只是吃吃喝喝而不处理政事呢？ 
English: Why just eat and drink and not deal with politics?

古文：无事必来。 犀首曰： 衍不肖，不能得事焉，何敢恶事? 
现代文：公孙衍说： 衍不贤，不能得到事情，怎么敢厌恶政事呢？ 
English: Gongsun Yan said: "Yan is not virtuous, he can't get things, how dare he detest politics?

古文：陈轸曰： 请移天下之事于公。 
现代文：陈轸说： 请允许把天下的政事移交给您。 
English: Chen Yao said: Please allow me to hand over the world's political affairs to you.

古文：犀首曰： 奈何? 
现代文：公孙衍说： 怎么办呢？ 
English: Gongsunyan said, "What should we do?

古文：陈轸曰： 魏王使李从以车百乘使于楚，公可以居其中而疑之。
现代文：陈轸说： 魏王派李从率车百辆到楚国出使，您可以坐在其中的车上来使魏王疑惑。
English: Chen Yao said: The Wei king sent Li Zong to Chu with a hundred cars. You can sit on one of the cars to make the Wei king suspicious.

古文：公谓魏王曰： 臣与燕、赵故矣，数令人召臣也，曰无事必来。
现代文：公对魂王说： 臣下与燕国国君、赵国国君是故交，他们屡次派人邀请匿下，说没事时一定要来。
English: He said to the King of Soul, "My subjects are old friends with the Empress of Yan and the Empress of Zhao, and they have repeatedly sent invitations to me, saying that I must come if there is no problem.

古文：今臣无事，请谒而往。
现代文：观在臣下没事，请允许我前去拜见他们。
English: If there is nothing wrong with my subordinates, please allow me to go and see them.

古文：无久，旬、五之期。 
现代文：不会去很久，十天、五天就是期限。 
English: It won't take long, ten days, five days is the deadline.

古文：王必无辞以止公。
现代文：魏王一定没有话来阻止您。
English: Wei Wang must have no words to stop you.

古文：公得行，因自言于廷曰： 臣急使燕、赵，急约车为行具。  
现代文：您能够出行了，就在朝廷上自己说： 臣下有急事出使燕国、赵国，急需准备车辆整治行装。
English: When you were able to travel, you said to yourself in the imperial court: Your vassals have urgent matters to dispatch to Yan and Zhao, and urgently need to prepare vehicles for rectification and installation.

古文：犀首曰： 诺。 
现代文：公孙衍说： 好吧。 
English: Gongsunyan said, "Okay."

古文：谒魏王，王许之，即明言使燕、赵。
现代文：就去拜见了魏王，魏王答应了他，立即明确声明要出使燕国、赵国。
English: He went to visit Wei Wang. Wei Wang agreed to him and immediately made a clear statement that he would send envoys to Yan Guo and Zhao Guo.

古文：诸侯客闻之，皆使人告其王曰： 李从以车百乘使楚，犀首又以车三十乘使燕、赵。 
现代文：各诸侯国客居在魏国的人听说了这件事，都派人告诉他们的国君说： 李从率车百辆出使楚国，公孙衍又率车三十辆出使燕国、赵国。 
English: After hearing about this, the people of the various states who were staying in Wei all sent messengers to tell their sovereigns: Li Zong led 100 cars to send envoys to Chu, and Gongsun Yan led 30 cars to send envoys to Yan and Zhao.

古文：齐王闻之，恐后天下得魏，以事属犀首，犀首受齐事。
现代文：齐王听说后，唯恐结交魏国于其它诸侯之后，就把齐国的政事委托给公孙衍，公孙衍接受了齐国的政事。
English: After hearing this, King Qi, fearing that he would have to deal with Wei first, entrusted the political affairs of Qi to Gongsunyan. Gongsunyan accepted the political affairs of Qi.

古文：魏王止其行使。
现代文：魏王停止了公孙衍去出使。
English: The Wei king stopped Gongsunyan from sending envoys.

古文：燕、赵闻之，亦以事属犀首。
现代文：燕国、赵国听说后，也把政事交给了公孙衍。
English: After hearing this, Yan Guo and Zhao Guo also handed over political affairs to Gongsun Yan.

古文：楚王闻之，曰： 李从约寡人，今燕、齐、赵皆以事因犀首，犀首必欲寡人，寡人欲之。 
现代文：楚王听说后，说： 李从同寡人订了约，观在燕国、齐国、赵国都把政事交给了公孙衍，公孙衍一定想为寡人做事，寡人也想任用他。 
English: After hearing this, King Chu said: Li Zong made a contract with several people, and he saw that in Yan, Qi, and Zhao, the government affairs were handed over to Gongsunyan. Gongsunyan must have wanted to work for several people, and some people also wanted to appoint him.

古文：乃倍李从，而以事因犀首。
现代文：于是背弃了李从，而把政事交给了公孙衍。
English: So he turned his back on Li Cong and handed over the government to Gongsun Yan.

古文：魏王曰： 所以不使犀首者，以为不可。
现代文：魏王说： 寡人之所以不使用公孙衍的原因，是以为他不能胜任政事。
English: Wei Wang said: The reason why many people do not use Gongsunyan is that they think he is not competent in politics.

古文：令四国属以事。寡人亦以事因焉。 
现代文：观在能使四个国家把政事交给他，寡人也把政事交给他吧。 
English: If he can get four countries to hand over political affairs to him, then let others do the same.

古文：犀首遂主天下之事，复相魏。
现代文：公弥衍于是掌管天下的政事，又得到了魏国相国的官位。
English: As a result, Kuniyasu took control of the world's political affairs and received the official rank of Wei Guozhong (Minister of State).

