古文：经卒者，以经令分之为三分焉：左军苍旗，卒戴苍羽；右军白旗，卒戴白羽；中军黄旗，卒戴黄羽。
现代文：管理军队，就是依经手卒把军队区分为三军。左军用青旗，士兵戴青色羽毛；右军用白旗，士兵戴白色羽毛；中军用黄旗，士兵戴黄色羽毛。
English: The management of the army is to divide the army into three armies according to the manual. The left army has a blue flag and the soldiers wear blue feathers; the right army has a white flag and the soldiers wear white feathers; the Chinese army has a yellow flag and the soldiers wear yellow feathers.

古文：卒有五章：前一行苍章，次二行赤章，次三行黄章，次四行白章，次五行黑章。次以经卒，亡章者有诛。
现代文：士兵的标记有五种，第一行用青色标记，第二行用红色标记，第三行用黄色标记，第四行用白色标记，第五行用黑色标记，按此次序规定，管理士兵，遗失标记的，要给以惩罚。
English: There are five kinds of markings for soldiers. The first line is marked with cyan, the second line is marked with red, the third line is marked with yellow, the fourth line is marked with white, and the fifth line is marked with black. According to this order, soldiers should be managed, and those who lose the mark should be punished.

古文：前一五行，置章于首；次二五行，置章于项；次三五行，置章于胸；次四五行，置章于腹；次五五行，置章于腰。
现代文：第一个五行的标记佩在头上，第二个五行的标记佩在颈上，第三个五行的标记佩在胸前，第四个五行的标记佩在腹部，第五个五行的标记佩在腰间。
English: The first mark of five lines is put on the head, the second mark of five lines is put on the neck, the third mark of five lines is put on the chest, the fourth mark of five lines is put on the abdomen, and the fifth mark of five lines is put on the waist.

古文：如此，卒无非其吏，吏无非其卒。
现代文：这样，士兵就不会认错他的官长，官长也不会认错他的士兵。
English: In this way, the soldier will not misjudge his officer, and the officer will not misjudge his soldier.

古文：见非而不，见乱而不禁，其罪如之。
现代文：如果官长发现不属于自己的士兵而不加盘问，见到行列混乱而不加制止，就和犯错误的人同罪。
English: If officers find soldiers who are not their own and do not question them, if they see a disorderly procession and do not stop it, they are just as guilty as those who made the mistake.

古文：鼓行交斗，则前行进为犯难，后行为辱众。逾五行而前者有赏，逾五行而后者有诛。
现代文：开始进行格斗的时候，如果前行的奋勇前进，就是敢于战斗，后行的退缩不前，就是沾污军誉，超过前面五行而前进的有赏，越出后面五行而后退的就杀。
English: At the beginning of a fight, if the front line moves forward with courage, it is daring to fight; if the rear line retreats and does not move forward, it is tarnishing the military reputation; if the front line moves forward by more than five lines, it is rewarded; if the rear line moves backward by more than five lines, it is killed.

古文：所以知进退先后，吏卒之功也。
现代文：这些规定都是为了分清吏卒们进、退、先、后的功过是非。
English: These regulations are all for the purpose of distinguishing the merits and demerits of officials entering, leaving, leading and following.

古文：故曰： 鼓之，前如雷霆，动如风雨，莫敢当其前，莫敢蹑其后。 言有经也。
现代文：因此可以说，命令一下，军队前进就象雷霆那样迅速，冲击就象风雨那样猛烈，没有哪个敌人敢于在前面阻挡，也没有哪个敌人敢于在后面尾追，这就说明了经卒令的重大作用。
English: Therefore, it can be said that once the order is given, the army will advance as quickly as thunder, the impact will be as violent as wind and rain, and no enemy will dare to block in front, and no enemy will dare to chase behind, which shows the important role of the order.

