古文：房琯，河南人，天后朝正议大夫、平章事融之子也。
现代文：房琯，河南人。是天后朝正义大夫、平章事融的儿子。
English: Fang Yao, a native of Henan Province, is the son of the late Dr. Tian Cha Zhengyi and the late Dr. Ping Zhang Zhirong.

古文：琯少好学，风仪沉整，以门廕补弘文生。
现代文：琯少年时喜爱读书，风度仪表沉稳，由于家族庇荫补为弘文生。
English: When he was a boy, he liked to read, his demeanor and appearance were calm, and he became a student of literature because his family supported him.

古文：性好隐遁，与东平吕向于陆浑伊阳山中读书为事，凡十余岁。
现代文：性格喜爱隐遁，与东平吕平在陆浑伊阳山中读书做事，大约十几年。
English: He likes to be secluded, and has been studying and working with Dongping Lüping in Luhun Yiyang Mountain for about ten years.

古文：开元十二年，玄宗将封岱岳，琯撰《封禅书》一篇及笺启以献。
现代文：开元十二年，玄宗将加封泰山，琯撰写《封禅书》一篇及笺启献给皇上。
English: In the 12th year of the first century, Xuanzong sealed Mount Tai and wrote a "Book of Sealed Zen" and dedicated it to the emperor.

古文：中书令张说奇其才，奏授秘书省校书郎，调补同州冯翊尉。
现代文：中书令张说认为他是奇才，上奏授予他为秘书省校书郎。调整补充为同州冯翊尉。
English: Zhang said that he thought he was a genius, and he was awarded the title of secretary and provincial school librarian. He was adjusted and supplemented as the same state Feng Yingfei.

古文：无几去官，应堪任县令举，授虢州卢氏令，政多惠爱，人称美之。
现代文：不久去职，因适应担任县令，授予虢州卢氏县令，施政经常给予恩惠仁爱，人们都称颂赞美他。
English: He left the post shortly after, and because of his adaptability, he was appointed as the county magistrate of Luzhou, and was awarded the county magistrate of Luzhou. He often gave benevolence and benevolence in his administration, and people praised and praised him.

古文：二十二年，拜监察御史。
现代文：二十二年，升为监察御史。
English: In 1922, he was promoted to Inspector-General of History.

古文：其年坐鞫狱不当，贬睦州司户。
现代文：这年因为审讯不当，被贬为睦州司户。
English: This year, because of improper trial, he was relegated to the position of Mutsu no shushi.

古文：历慈溪、宋城、济源县令，所在为政，多兴利除害，缮理廨宇，颇著能名。
现代文：历任慈溪、宋城、济源县令，所在地方施政，往往兴利除害，管理天下，名声颇为显著。
English: Successive Cixi, Songcheng and Jiyuan county magistrates, who were in charge of local governance, were often interested in eliminating harm and managing the world, and their reputation was quite remarkable.

古文：天宝元年，拜主客员外郎。
现代文：天宝元年，升为主客员外郎。
English: In the first year of the Tenpo era, Sho became the chief guest attendant, Wairo.

古文：三年，迁试主客郎中。
现代文：三年后，升试主客郎中。
English: Three years later, he was promoted to host.

古文：五年正月，擢试给事中，赐爵漳南县男。
现代文：五年正月，提拔为给事中，赐予漳南县男爵位。
English: In the first month of the fifth year, he was promoted to the middle of the promotion, and was awarded the baronetcy of Yinan County.

古文：时玄宗企慕古道，数游幸近甸，乃分新丰县置会昌县于骊山下，寻改会昌为昭应县，又改温泉宫为华清宫，于宫所立百司廨舍。以琯雅有巧思，令充使缮理。
现代文：此时玄宗仰慕古道，数次幸游都城郊外，于是分开新丰县在骊山脚下设置会昌县，不久改会昌为昭应县。又改温泉宫为华清宫，在宫中修建百司官舍，由于琯设计巧妙，令其主要管理。
English: At this time, Xuanzong admired the ancient road and visited the outskirts of the capital several times. Therefore, he separated Xinfeng County and set up Huichang County at the foot of Lushan Mountain, and soon changed Huichang to Zhaoying County. He also changed the hot spring palace to Huaqing Palace, and built the Baishi official residence in the palace. Due to its clever design, it was mainly managed.

古文：事未毕，坐与李适之、韦坚等善，贬宜春太守。
现代文：事情还未做完，因为与李适之、韦坚等人友善，贬为宜春太守。
English: Things were not finished yet, because he was friendly with Li Shizhi, Wei Jian and others, he was demoted to Yichun governor.

古文：历琅邪、鄴郡、扶风三太守，所至多有遗爱。
现代文：历任琅笽、邺郡、扶风三个地方太守，所到之处都施以仁爱。
English: Successive governors of the three regions of Handan, Handan County and Fufeng have been benevolent wherever they went.

古文：十四年，征拜左庶子，迁宪部侍郎。
现代文：十四年升为左庶子，又迁宪部侍郎。
English: Fourteen years later, he was promoted to the position of the left illegitimate son, and then he was transferred to the position of the attendant of the Constitutional Department.

古文：十五年六月，玄宗苍黄幸蜀，大臣陈希烈、张倚等衔于失恩，不时赴难。
现代文：十五年六月，玄宗幸驾到蜀，大臣陈希烈、张倚等人衔恨于失宠，不想去蜀。
English: In June of the fifteenth year, Xuanzong was fortunate enough to drive to Shu. Minister Chen Xilei, Zhang Jie and others resented the loss of favor and did not want to go to Shu.

古文：琯结张均、张垍兄弟与韦述等行至城南十数里山寺，均、垍同行，皆以家在城中，逗留不进，琯独驰蜀路。
现代文：琯结交张均、张土自兄弟与韦述等人走到城南十数里山寺庙，均、土自同路，都以自己家在城中为由，逗留此地不再行进，琯独自一人驰进蜀路。
English: Zhang Jun, Zhang Tujie, Zhang Tujie's brother, and Wei Xiu, and others walked to the temple more than a dozen miles south of the city. All of them, including Tujie, stayed here on the grounds that their home was in the city and did not travel any further. Zhang Tujie drove into Shu Road alone.

古文：七月，至普安郡谒见，玄宗大悦，即日拜文部尚书、同中书门下平章事，赐紫金鱼袋。
现代文：七月，到普安郡谒见皇上，玄宗大喜，当天升为文部尚书、同中书门下平章事，赐予紫金鱼袋。
English: In July, when he went to Pu'an County to see the emperor, Xuanzong was overjoyed. On the same day, he was promoted to the Ministry of Education, and given a purple goldfish bag.

古文：从幸成都，加银青光禄大夫，仍与一子官。
现代文：跟随皇上到成都。加封银青光禄大夫，仍然是一名小官。
English: He followed the emperor to Chengdu. He was given the title of silver Qingguanglu doctor, but he was still a minor official.

古文：其年八月，与左相韦见素、门下侍郎崔涣等奉使灵武，册立肃宗。
现代文：这年八月，与左相韦见素、门下侍郎崔涣等人奉命出使灵武，册立肃宗。
English: In August of the same year, he was ordered to dispatch Lingwu, together with Zuo Wei Mingsu and his servant Choe Hee, to establish Su Sect.

古文：至顺化郡谒见，陈上皇传付之旨，因言时事，词情慷慨，肃宗为之改容。
现代文：房琯到达顺化郡拜见肃宗，陈述先皇留下的旨意，由于论时事，辞令情感慷慨激昂，肃宗为之动容。
English: Fong Liang arrived in Hue County to visit Su Zong and present the will left by the former emperor. Due to the current affairs, the speech was very emotional, and Su Zong was moved.

古文：时潼关败将王思礼、吕崇贲、李承光等引于纛下，将斩之，琯从容救谏，独斩承光而已。
现代文：此时潼关败将王思礼、吕崇贲、李承光等人被带到军旗下，将要被斩首。琯从容挽救进谏，仅仅只斩李承光了。
English: At this time, Wang Sili, Lü Chongyun, Li Chengguang and others who had been defeated at Shaoguan were brought to the military banner and were about to be beheaded. He calmly saved them and only beheaded Li Chengguang.

古文：肃宗以琯素有重名，倾意待之，琯亦自负其才，以天下为己任。
现代文：肃宗因为琯平时名声显赫，所以真诚地款待他。琯也凭借自己有才而自负，以天下为己任。
English: Su Zong treated him sincerely because he was famous in peacetime. He was also proud of his talent and took the world as his responsibility.

古文：时行在机务，多决之于琯，凡有大事，诸将无敢预言。
现代文：这时在机务的实施方面，多由琯决定。凡有国家大事，各位将领都不敢先发表意见。
English: At this time, in terms of the implementation of the mechanism, it is mostly decided by the generals. Whenever there is a national event, the generals do not dare to express their opinions first.

古文：寻抗疏自请将兵以诛寇孽，收复京都，肃宗望其成功，许之。
现代文：不久上疏皇上自荐带兵去消灭寇贼，收复东京，肃宗期望他能成功，同意了。
English: Soon after, Emperor Joso offered to lead an army to destroy the bandits and recapture Tokyo. Suzu agreed, hoping that he would succeed.

古文：诏加持节、招讨西京兼防御蒲潼两关兵马节度等使，乃与子仪、光弼等计会进兵。
现代文：下诏加封持节、招讨西京兼防御蒲潼两关兵马节度等使。于是与子仪、光弼等计划谋略进兵。
English: He issued the following edict, adding the seal-holding festival and inviting envoys from the two military and equestrian festivals of West Beijing and the defense of Buda. He then planned and strategized with Zi Yi and Guangyao to enter the army.

古文：琯请自选参佐，乃以御中史中丞邓景山为副，户部侍郎李揖为行军司马，中丞宋若思、起居郎知制诰贾至、右司郎中魏少游为判官，给事中刘秩为参谋。
现代文：琯请求自己选任参佐，于是以御史中丞邓景山为副职，户部侍郎李揖为行军司马，中丞宋若思、起居郎知制诰贾至、右司部中魏少游为判官，给事中刘秩为参谋。
English: Yao requested to be appointed as a councillor, so he chose the Vice-Minister of History, Middle Secretary Deng Jingshan as his deputy, the Household Department's chamberlain, Li Jun, as the marching steward, the Middle Secretary Song Ruxi, the Household Department's chamberlain, Wang Jia Zi, and the Right Department's middle secretary, Wei Shao You, as judges, and Liu Ritchi as the staff officer in charge of affairs.

古文：既行，又令兵部尚书王思礼副之。
现代文：已经行动了，琯又令兵部尚书王思礼为副职。
English: He has already acted, and he has also appointed the vice-minister of the Ministry of Military Affairs, Shangshuang Sili, to the vice-ministerial post.

古文：琯分为三军：遣杨希文将南军，自宜寿入；刘悊将中军，自武功入；李光进将北军，自奉天入。
现代文：琯将部队分为三军：派杨希文带领南军，从宜寿进入；刘折心带领中军，从武功进入；李光进带领北军，从奉天进入。
English: Zhai divided the troops into three armies: he sent Yang Xiwen to lead the Southern Army and enter from Yishou; Liu Weixin led the Central Army and entered from Wugong; Li Guangjin led the Northern Army and entered from Fengtian.

古文：琯自将中军，为前锋。十月庚子，师次便桥。
现代文：琯自己带领中军，作为前锋部队，十月庚子，部队驻扎在便桥。
English: He himself led the Chinese army, as a forward force, in October Geng Zi, the troops stationed in the bridge.

古文：辛丑，二军先遇贼于咸阳县之陈涛斜，接战，官军败绩。
现代文：辛丑，二军首先在咸阳县陈涛斜与贼军相遇，双方战斗，官军失败。
English: The Second Army first encountered the Kleptocratic Army in Chen Taoshan, Xianyang County. The two sides fought, and the government army was defeated.

古文：时琯用春秋车战之法，以车二千乘，马步夹之。既战，贼顺风扬尘鼓噪，牛皆震骇，因缚刍纵火焚之，人畜挠败，为所伤杀者四万余人，存者数千而已。
现代文：此时琯使用春秋车战的办法，用二千辆车，以马的步伐夹击，已经战斗，贼军顺风扬起尘土大声鼓噪，牛都惊慌害怕，用捆绑的绳子点火烧它们，人畜扰乱失败，被杀死烧伤的有四万多人，尚存的仅数千人而已。
English: At this time, they used the method of spring and autumn chariot battles, with two thousand vehicles, with the pace of horses, have been fighting, the bandits raised the dust with the wind and made a loud noise, the cattle were panicked and afraid, using the tied rope to ignite them, human and animal disturbance failed, more than forty thousand people were killed and burned, and only a few thousand people remained.

古文：癸卯，琯又率南军即战，复败，希文、刘悊并降于贼。
现代文：癸卯，琯又率领南军战斗，又失败，希文、刘折心一并向贼军投降。
English: Xiuwu and Yao led the Southern Army in battle, but failed again. Xiwen and Liu broke their hearts and surrendered to the bandits.

古文：琯等奔赴行在，肉袒请罪，上并宥之。
现代文：琯等人快马行进返回途中，袒肉请罪，皇上一并宽容他们。
English: On the way back, Zou and the others rode fast, pleaded guilty, and the emperor forgave them.

古文：琯好宾客，喜谈论，用兵素非所长，而天子采其虚声，冀成实效。
现代文：琯好宾客，喜欢谈论，用兵不是他的长处，而天子利用他的不切实际的名声，希望取得实效。
English: He is a good host and likes to talk. It is not his strength to use soldiers, but he uses his unrealistic reputation and hopes to achieve real results.

古文：琯既自无庙胜，又以虚名择将吏，以至于败。
现代文：琯自己没取得胜利，又以其虚的名声选择将吏，从而失败。
English: He failed because he did not win, and because he used his false reputation to choose his generals.

古文：琯之出师，戎务一委于李揖、刘秩，秩等亦儒家子，未尝习军旅之事。
现代文：琯这次出征，全部事委都让李揖、刘秩等人承担，秩等人也是儒家学者，没有从事过军旅的事情。
English: In this expedition, all the members of the State Affairs Commission let Li Zhen and Liu Chizhi take on the responsibility. Chizhi and others are also Confucian scholars and have not been engaged in military travel.

古文：琯临戎谓人曰： 逆党曳落河虽多，岂能当我刘秩等？ 
现代文：琯临战前对人说： 逆党所设障碍虽然很多，怎么能抵挡我们的刘秩等人。 
English: On the eve of the war, he said to the people: Although there are many obstacles set up by the adverse party, how can we resist our Liu Ritchi and others.

古文：及与贼对垒，琯欲持重以伺之，为中使邢延恩等督战，苍黄失据，遂及于败。
现代文：等到与贼军对垒，房琯想占据重要位置用来观察局势，让中使邢延恩等人督战，大旗纷纷倒下，于是就失败了。
English: When it came to the confrontation with the invaders, Fong Yao wanted to occupy an important position to observe the situation, let the middle envoy Yan Yan and others supervise the battle, and the flags fell one after another, so he failed.

古文：上犹待之如初，仍令收合散卒，更图进取。
现代文：皇上对待房琯仍然如初，仍然令他集中散兵，希望继续进取。
English: The emperor still treated Fusang the same way as before, still made him concentrate the scattered soldiers, and hoped to continue to forge ahead.

古文：会北海太守贺兰进明自河南至，诏授南海太守，摄御史大夫，充岭南节度使。
现代文：当时北海太守贺兰进明从河南到来，皇上授予他南海太守，辅助御史大夫，充当岭南节度使。
English: At that time, the governor of the North Sea, Helan Jinming, arrived from Henan, and the emperor awarded him the governor of the South Sea to assist the Imperial Historian and serve as the Lingnan Festival envoy.

古文：中谢，肃宗谓之曰： 朕处分房琯与卿正大夫，何为摄也？ 
现代文：贺兰进明中途辞别，肃宗对他说： 朕安排房琯为卿正大夫，为什么不辅助他呢？ 
English: He Lan Jinming said goodbye halfway through, Su Zong said to him: I have arranged for Fang Ye to be the doctor of Jing Zheng, why not assist him?

古文：进明对曰： 琯与臣有隙。 
现代文：进明回答说： 房琯与我之间有隔阂。 
English: Jinming replied, "There is a gap between Fang Yao and me.

古文：上以为然。
现代文：肃宗同意他的说法。
English: Tenshi thinks it makes sense.

古文：进明因奏曰： 陛下知晋朝何以至乱？ 
现代文：进明于是上奏说： 陛下了解晋朝为什么天下不太平吗？ 
English: Jinming then said: Your Majesty, do you understand why the world is not peaceful during the Jin Dynasty?

古文：上曰： 卿有说乎？ 
现代文：肃宗说： 卿有什么见解？ 
English: Suizong said: Sir, what is your opinion?

古文：进明曰： 晋朝以好尚虚名，任王夷甫为宰相，祖习浮华，故至于败。
现代文：进明说： 晋朝因为崇尚虚名，任王夷甫为宰相，沿袭浮华，所以最终导致失败。
English: Jinming said: The Jin Dynasty, because of its advocation of false fame, appointed Wang Yifu as prime minister, followed the pompous, so it eventually led to failure.

古文：今陛下方兴复社稷，当委用实才，而琯性疏阔，徒大言耳，非宰相器也。
现代文：现在陛下正在恢复社稷，理当任用有真才实学的人，但是房琯性情疏漏爱好摆阔，喜欢夸夸其谈，不是做宰相的材料。
English: Now that His Majesty is restoring the Shogunate, it is right to appoint people with real talent and real learning, but Fusang's temperament is negligent, he likes to show off, and he likes to talk too much. He is not the material to be the prime minister.

古文：陛下待琯至厚，以臣观之，琯终不为陛下用。 
现代文：陛下非常器重房琯，依我来看，房琯最终不应被陛下所任用。 
English: His Majesty is very critical of the Chamberlain, and in my opinion, the Chamberlain should not have been appointed by His Majesty.

古文：上问其故，进明曰： 琯昨于南朝为圣皇制置天下，乃以永王为江南节度，颍王为剑南节度，盛王为淮南节度，制云 命元子北略朔方，命诸王分守重镇 。且太子出为抚军，入曰监国，琯乃以枝庶悉领大籓，皇储反居边鄙，此虽于圣皇似忠，于陛下非忠也。
现代文：肃宗询问缘故，进明说： 房琯以前在南朝为先王撰令安置天下，于是以永王为江南节度，用颍王为剑南节度，用盛王为淮南节度，命令说： 令长子在北巡视朔方，命各王分别驻守重镇，况且太子出去作为抚军，进朝作为监国，房琯却以卑职来统领天下，皇储反而居处边壤，这看来虽然是忠诚先王，对陛下却不是忠诚的。
English: Su Zong inquired about the reason, and Jin Ming said, "Fang Zong used to issue orders for his predecessors in the Southern Dynasty to settle the country, so he used Yong Wang for the Southern Jiangsu Festival, Shao Wang for the Southern Jian Festival, and Sheng Wang for the Southern Huai Festival. The order said, "Let the eldest son patrol the northern part of the country, and order the kings to guard the important towns separately. Moreover, the prince should go out to lead the army and enter the country to supervise the country. However, Fang Zong used a low-ranking position to rule the world, while the crown prince lived on the border. It seems that although he was

古文：琯立此意，以为圣皇诸子，但一人得天下，即不失恩宠。
现代文：房琯这样的用意，是认为只要先皇诸子中有一人得天下，他都不会失去恩宠。
English: Fusang's intention was that as long as one of the first emperor's sons became emperor, he would not lose favor.

古文：又各树其私党刘秩、李揖、刘汇、邓景山、窦绍之徒，以副戎权。
现代文：又分别培植自己的私党刘秩、李揖、刘汇、邓景山、窦绍之流，让他们担任副职。
English: They also separately fostered their own private parties, such as Liu Ritchi, Li Wei, Liu Hui, Deng Jingshan, Dou Shao, and let them serve as deputy positions.

古文：推此而言，琯岂肯尽诚于陛下乎？
现代文：由此推论，房琯怎么能对陛下谒尽忠诚呢？
English: From this, how can Fang Yao be completely loyal to His Majesty?

古文：臣欲正衙弹劾，不敢不先闻奏。 
现代文：我正准备肃正衙府将房琯弹劾，不得不事先上奏皇上。 
English: I was preparing for the government to impeach Fang Xuan, and I had to appeal to the emperor in advance.

古文：上由是恶琯，诏以进明为河南节度、兼御史大夫。
现代文：皇上于是厌恶房琯，任命进明为河南节度，兼御史大夫。
English: As a result, the emperor disliked Fusang and appointed Jinming as Henan governor and imperial historian.

古文：崔圆本蜀中拜相，肃宗幸扶风，始来朝谒。
现代文：崔圆本来是蜀中拜相，肃宗幸驾扶风，崔圆于是来朝拜肃宗。
English: Originally, Cui Yuan was in Shuzhong to pay homage to the emperor, Su Zong was fortunate enough to ride the wind, so Cui Yuan came to the imperial court to pay homage to Su Zong.

古文：琯意以为圆才到，当即免相，故待圆礼薄。
现代文：房琯认为崔圆初来乍到，应当免去相职，所以对待崔圆很冷淡。
English: Fang Yao thought that since Cui Yuan was a newcomer, he should be exempted from the duty of the chief photographer, so he treated Cui Yuan very coldly.

古文：圆厚结李辅国，到后数日，颇承恩渥，亦憾于琯。
现代文：崔圆与李辅国结交深厚，来到后几天，颇受恩宠，也对房琯不满意。
English: Cui Yuan had a deep friendship with Li Shuo Guo. A few days after his arrival, he was quite favored, but he was also dissatisfied with Fang Yao.

古文：琯又多称病，不时朝谒，于政事简惰。
现代文：房琯又经常称病，不按时朝拜，对处理政事简单懈怠。
English: In addition, Fang Yao often called in sick, did not pay homage to the emperor on time, and simply slacked off in handling political affairs.

古文：时议以两京陷贼，车驾出次外郊，天下人心惴恐。
现代文：当时因两京沦陷议论纷纷，皇帝出城临时驻扎在外郊，天下人心惶惶不安，正是主忧臣辱的时候，此时房琯身为宰相，却毫无紧张意识。
English: At that time, due to the fall of the two capitals, there was a lot of discussion, the emperor left the city and temporarily stationed in the suburbs, the whole world was in turmoil. It was the time when the master was worried about the humiliation of the subject. At this time, Fong Yu was the prime minister, but he had no sense of tension.

古文：当主忧臣辱之际，此时琯为宰相，略无匪懈之意，但与庶子刘秩、谏议李揖、何忌等高谈虚论，说释氏因果、老子虚无而已。
现代文：只与庶子刘秩、谏议李揖、何忌等人高谈阔论，谈论释氏的前因后果，老子的虚无观点而已。
English: Only with the illegitimate son Liu Chizhi, Yu Yan Li, He Boi and others, they talk about the antecedents and consequences of the explanation, and the nothingness of Lao Zi's view.

古文：此外，则听董庭兰弹琴，大招集琴客筵宴。朝官往往因庭兰以见琯，自是亦大招纳货贿，奸赃颇甚。
现代文：此外，就听董庭兰弹琴，大规模设宴招待琴客，朝官往往通过庭兰拜见房琯，房琯这时也开始大肆收取贿赂，索取的赃物很多。
English: In addition, they listened to Dong Tinglan play the piano, and held a large-scale banquet to entertain the piano guests. The imperial officials often visited Fang Ye through Tinglan. At this time, Fang Ye also began to take bribes in large quantities, and there were many stolen goods.

古文：颜真卿时为大夫，弹何忌不孝，琯既党何忌，遽托以酒醉入朝，贬为西平郡司马。
现代文：颜真卿当时任大夫，批评何忌不孝，房琯与何忌结党，马上借口颜真卿酒醉入朝，将他贬为西平郡司马。
English: Yan Zhenqing, who was a doctor at the time, criticized He Jie for being unfilial, and Fusang and He Jie formed a party. They immediately used the excuse that Yan Zhenqing was drunk and went to the imperial court, and demoted him to Xiping County Magistrate.

古文：宪司又奏弹董庭兰招纳货贿，琯入朝自诉，上叱出之，因归私第，不敢预人事。
现代文：宪司又上奏批评董庭兰收取贿赂，房琯进朝辩解，皇上呵斥房琯退下，房琯于是回到私宅，不敢干涉人事问题。
English: The Registrar also criticized Dong Tinglan for taking bribes, and the Emperor rebuked him for withdrawing, and he returned to his private residence, not daring to interfere in personnel issues.

古文：谏议大夫张镐上疏，言琯大臣，门客受赃，不宜见累。
现代文：谏议大夫张镐上表皇上，房琯的大臣，门客受贿，不应该连累房琯。
English: It was suggested that Zhang Ye, the chief of the imperial court, and Fang Ye, the minister of the imperial court, should not be implicated in the bribery of Fang Ye.

古文：二年五月，贬为太子少师，仍以镐代琯为宰相。
现代文：至德二年五月，将房琯贬为太子少师，令张镐接替房琯任宰相。
English: In May of the following year, he demoted Fong Jie to the rank of prince's apprentice, and appointed Zhang Jie to succeed Fong Jie as prime minister.

古文：其年十一月，从肃宗还京师。
现代文：这年十一月，房琯跟随肃宗回到京师。
English: In November of that year, Fusang followed Suizong back to Beijing.

古文：犹以琯等妄自标持，假延浮称，虽周行具悉，恐流俗多疑，所以事必缕言，盖欲人知不滥。
现代文：十二月，获大赦。封官行赏，加封房琯金紫光禄大夫，又封为清河郡公。房琯既然不居要位，朝臣经常为他抱屈，房琯也经常自夸有文武才能，应当为国家献计献策，希望能承蒙恩宠，受到重用。又招揽宾客，朝夕盈门，有去过他家的人，又将房琯的言论在朝廷上公开传扬。房琯又经常称病，皇上非常不高兴。
English: In December, he was granted an amnesty. He was rewarded with an official seal, and he was additionally sealed as the doctor of Qinghe County. Since Fusang did not hold an important position, courtiers often complained about him. Fusang also often boasted that he had literary and military talents and should offer ideas for the country, hoping to receive grace and be reused. He also invited guests, and people who visited his house in the morning and evening spread Fusang's words openly in the imperial court. Fusang often called in sick, and the emperor was very unhappy.

古文：凡百卿士，宜悉朕怀。时邠州久屯军旅，多以武将兼领刺史，法度隳废，州县廨宇，并为军营，官吏侵夺百姓室屋以居，人甚弊之。
现代文：当时琯州长期驻扎军旅，大多用武将兼领刺史，法令制度遭到破坏，州县的官署房屋，都用来驻扎军队，官吏侵占夺取百姓的房屋用来自己居住，百姓都认为这是有害的。
English: At that time, military brigades were stationed in Zhangzhou for a long time, and most of them used military generals as leaders. The legal system was destroyed. The government buildings in counties and prefectures were used to station troops, and government officials occupied and seized people's houses to live in themselves. The people all thought this was harmful.

古文：琯到任，举陈令式，令州县恭守，又缉理公馆，僚吏各归官曹，颇著政声。
现代文：房琯到任，陈述法令制度，令州县严守法令，又治理调和公馆，让官吏各自回到官曹，人称他公正，其声誉显著。
English: When the chamberlain came to office, he stated the legal system, ordered the prefectures to strictly abide by the law, and managed to reconcile the public houses, so that the officials returned to the official Cao. People called him fair, and his reputation was remarkable.

古文：二年六月，诏褒美之，征拜太子宾客。
现代文：二年六月，皇帝褒奖称赞他，提拔为太子宾客。
English: In June of the second year, the emperor praised him and promoted him to the prince's guest.

古文：上元元年四月，改礼部尚书，寻出为晋州刺史。
现代文：上元元年四月，改任礼部尚书，不久出任为晋州刺史。
English: In April of the first year of Shangyuan, he was reassigned to the ceremonial department of Shangshu, and soon he was appointed as the Jinzhou scribe.

古文：八月，改汉州刺史。
现代文：八月，改任为汉州刺史。
English: In August, he was reappointed as the Hanzhou chief historian.

古文：琯长子乘，自少两目盲。
现代文：房琯的长子乘，从小双目失明。
English: Fang Yao's eldest son, Zeng, has been blind since childhood.

古文：时讨王丞宗于镇州，配河南府馈运车四千两，式表以凶旱，人贫力微，难以征发，宪宗可其奏，既免力役，人怀而安之。明年，移授宣歙池观察使。元和七年七月卒，赠左散骑常侍。张镐，博州人也。
现代文：房琯到汉州，赠送钱财给司马李锐，从而俩人交情深笃，房乘娶李锐的外甥女卢氏为妻，当时有人议论房琯没有应有的品行。宝应二年四月，提拔为特进、刑部尚书。在途中遭遇疾病，广德元年八月四日，死于阆州僧舍，终年六十七岁，追封为太尉。张镐，博州人。
English: In April of the second year of Baoying, he was promoted to the rank of "special promotion" and "penitentiary." On the way, he suffered from an illness, and on August 4 of the first year of the Guangde era, he died in a monastery in Zhangzhou, at the age of 67, and was posthumously promoted to the rank of "captain." Zhang Jun, a native of Bozhou.

古文：风仪魁岸，廓落有大志，涉猎经史，好谈王霸大略。
现代文：风度仪表伟岸，豁达胸怀大志，涉猎经史，喜爱谈论王霸大略。
English: Great manners, open-minded and ambitious, dabbles in history, likes to talk about Wangba.

古文：少时师事吴兢，兢甚重之。
现代文：年少时侍奉吴兢，兢非常器重他。
English: When he was young, he served Wu Jing, who held him in high regard.

古文：后游京师，端居一室，不交世务。
现代文：后来游历京师，身居一室，不与外人交往。
English: Later, he traveled to Beijing, lived in a single room, and did not socialize with outsiders.

古文：性嗜酒，好琴，常置座右。
现代文：嗜酒，喜欢弹琴，常放在座位右边。
English: Alcoholic, likes to play the piano, often placed on the right side of the seat.

古文：公卿或有邀之者，镐仗策径往，求醉而已。
现代文：公卿中有人邀请他，镐拿起拐杖径直前往，一醉方休。
English: One of the nobles invited him, and he picked up his crutch and went straight there, getting drunk.

古文：天宝末，杨国忠以声名自高，搜天下奇杰。
现代文：天宝末年，杨国忠凭藉声名，广集天下奇杰人才。
English: In the last years of Tianbao, Yang Guozhong gained fame and gathered a wide range of outstanding talents from around the world.

古文：闻镐名，召见荐之，自褐衣拜左拾遗。
现代文：听到镐的声名，召见后推荐他，从褐衣百姓升为左拾遗。
English: After hearing the fame of Zou, he was summoned and recommended him, and he was promoted from the brown-clad people to the left to collect relics.

古文：及禄山阻兵，国忠屡以军国事咨于镐，镐举赞善大夫来瑱可当方面之寄。
现代文：等到禄山倚仗兵权时，国忠多次就军事和国事询问镐，镐推举赞善大夫来王真可承担国家的寄托。
English: By the time Lushan assumed military power, Guozhong repeatedly inquired about military and national affairs, and recommended that the good doctor Lai Wang could truly assume the trust of the country.

古文：数月，玄宗幸蜀，镐自山谷徒步扈从。
现代文：几个月后，玄宗幸驾到蜀，镐从山谷徒步护从。
English: A few months later, Xuanzong was fortunate enough to drive to Shu, and Zou followed on foot from the valley.

古文：肃宗即位，玄宗遣镐赴行在所。
现代文：肃宗即位，玄宗派镐赶赴肃宗所在地。
English: Su Zong ascended to the throne, and the Xuanzong faction rushed to Su Zong's residence.

古文：镐至凤翔，奏识多有弘益，拜谏议大夫，寻迁中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：镐到了凤翔，奏议内容有很多好建议，升为谏议大夫，不久升为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: When he arrived at Fengxiang, the content of the report had many good suggestions, and he was promoted to the doctor of the report, and soon he was promoted to the attendant of the middle school and the subordinate of the middle school.

古文：时供奉僧在内道场晨夜念佛，动数百人，声闻禁外。镐奏曰： 臣闻天子修福，要在安养含生，靖一风化，未闻区区僧教，以致太平。
现代文：当时，皇上供奉僧侣在内道场，早晨夜晚念佛经，多达数百人，声音传出禁宫之外，镐上奏说： 臣听说天子修福的时候，需要心怀生命颐养，统一教化，没听说过区区僧教能够致国家于太平。
English: At that time, the emperor had hundreds of monks worshipping in the inner dojo, chanting Buddhist sutras in the morning and evening, and the sound was heard outside the Forbidden City. The emperor said: "Minister, I have heard that when the Son of Heaven cultivates, it is necessary to cherish life and have unified enlightenment. I have not heard that regional monasticism can bring peace to the country.

古文：伏愿陛下以无为为心，不以小乘而挠圣虑。 
现代文：诚恳地恭请陛下以无为为心，不要以小乘而阻挠圣上的思虑。 
English: Sincerely, I respectfully ask Your Majesty not to act in a frivolous manner, and not to obstruct your sacred thoughts with pettifogging.

古文：肃宗甚然之。
现代文：肃宗非常赞同。
English: Suzong agrees wholeheartedly.

古文：时方兴军戎，帝注意将帅，以镐有文武才，寻命兼河南节度使，持节都统淮南等道诸军事。
现代文：此时军事频繁，皇帝选择将帅，认为镐具有文武才略，不久任命兼河南节度使，持节统领淮南等路各军事务。
English: At this time, the military was frequent, and the emperor chose a general, believing that Zou had literary and military talent, and soon appointed him as the Henan Festival envoy, leading the military affairs of Huainan and other roads.

古文：镐既发，会张巡宋州围急，倍道兼进，传檄濠州刺史闾丘晓引兵出救。
现代文：镐已出发，适逢张巡围困宋州，情况紧急，于是快速奔进，传令濠州刺史闾丘晓出兵营救。
English: Luo had already set off, coincided with Zhang's patrol besieging Songzhou, the situation was urgent, so he quickly rushed forward, and ordered Luo Zhi Shi and Luo Qiu Xiao to rescue the soldiers.

古文：晓素愎戾，驭下少恩，好独任己。
现代文：晓平时刚愎自用，驾驭部下却很少抚慰，喜欢独断专行。
English: Xiao Xiao is usually stubborn and self-serving, but he rarely comforts his subordinates, and likes to act on his own.

古文：及镐信至，略无禀命，又虑兵败，祸及于己，遂逗留不进。
现代文：等到镐的信件来了，一点都没有服从的意思，又担心战事失败，将祸及自己，于是逗留不进攻。
English: When the letter arrived, he had no intention of obeying, and he was worried that if the war failed, it would be to his own detriment, so he stayed and did not attack.

古文：镐至淮口，宋州已陷，镐怒晓，即杖杀之。
现代文：镐到了淮口，宋州已经沦陷，镐对晓发怒，立即将他杖杀。
English: When he arrived at Huaikou, Songzhou had already fallen. He was angry with Xiao and immediately killed him with a cane.

古文：及收复两京，加镐银青光禄大夫，封南阳郡公，诏以本军镇汴州，招讨残孽。
现代文：等到收复两京，加授镐银青光禄大夫，封为南阳郡公，诏令以本军镇守汴州，招抚征伐残敌。
English: After the recovery of the two capitals, he was awarded the title of Doctor of Qing Guanglu and Nanyang County, and ordered to use his own army to defend Zhangzhou and recruit the remaining enemies.

古文：时贼帅史思明表请以范阳归顺，镐揣知其伪，恐朝廷许之，手书密表奏曰： 思明凶竖，因逆窃位，兵强则众附，势夺则人离。
现代文：此时贼帅史思明奏请以范阳城归顺朝廷，镐猜测这是假象，担心朝廷同意，写密信上奏说： 思明凶残，叛逆窃取皇位，兵势强大则众人依附，兵势弱小则众人离开。
English: At this time, the thief-commander-in-chief, Shih Siming, asked Fan Yangcheng to surrender to the imperial court. He suspected that this was an illusion and, fearing that the imperial court would agree, wrote a secret letter to the emperor, saying: Shih Ming is ferocious, a traitor steals the imperial throne, if the army is strong, everyone adheres, if the army is weak, everyone leaves.

古文：包藏不测，禽兽无异，可以计取，难以义招。
现代文：内心包藏不测，与禽兽没有什么不同，可以用计谋取胜，而难以将他义招。
English: They are no different from animals in that they can use tricks to win, but it is difficult to use them for good.

古文：伏望不以威权假之。 
现代文：希望不要以威权宽容他。 
English: I hope that he will not be tolerated as an authoritarian.

古文：又曰： 滑州防御使许叔冀，性狡多谋，临难必变，望追入宿卫。 
现代文：又说： 滑州防御史许叔冀，性情狡诈多谋，临到危急时肯定兵变，希望快速派入宿卫。 
English: He also said: the history of the defense of Slanting is that of Xu Shuji, he is cunning and resourceful, and in the event of a crisis, he is sure to mutiny, and hopes to be quickly sent to the home guard.

古文：肃宗计意已定，表入不省。
现代文：肃宗主意已定，对其奏表不察看。
English: Sozong's mind was made up, and he didn't look at his report card.

古文：镐为人简澹，不事中要。
现代文：镐为人简朴澹泊，不从事关键事情。
English: He is a simple man and does not engage in important matters.

古文：会有宦官自范阳及滑州使还者，皆言思明、叔冀之诚悫。
现代文：当时有宦官从范阳和滑州出使回来，都说思明、叔冀的诚意。
English: At that time, there were eunuchs who came back from Fanyang and Slanting, and they all said the sincerity of Siming and Shuji.

古文：肃宗以镐不切事机，遂罢相位，授荆州大都督府长史。
现代文：肃宗认为镐不切时机，于是罢免其相位，授予荆州大都督府长史。
English: Su Zong thought that it was not the right time, so he dismissed his consort and awarded him the title of Governor of Jingzhou.

古文：后思明、叔冀之伪皆符镐言。
现代文：后来思明、叔冀的假象正如镐所说那样。
English: Later, it occurred to me that the appearance of Uncle Ji was just as Yu had said.

古文：寻征为太子宾客，改左散骑常侍。
现代文：不久召为太子宾客，改为左散骑常侍。
English: He was soon invited to be a guest of the prince and changed to a left-hand riding equerry.

古文：属嗣岐王珍被诬告构逆伏法，镐买珍宅坐累，贬辰州司户。
现代文：嗣岐王珍被人陷害伏法，镐由于买珍的房宅受牵连，贬为辰州司户。
English: Wang Zhen, a descendant of Qi, was framed by someone to commit a crime, and because he was implicated in the purchase of Zhen's house, he was relegated to the position of the head of the family in Chenshu.

古文：代宗即位，推恩海内，拜抚州刺史。
现代文：代宗即位，在海内施行恩爱，升为抚州刺史。
English: Daizong ascended to the throne, practiced benevolence at home, and was promoted to Fuzhou prefect.

古文：迁洪州刺史、饶吉等七州都团练观察等使，寻正授江南西道都团练观察等使。
现代文：升洪州刺史、饶吉等七个州都团练观察等使，不久正授江南西道都团练观察等使。
English: Seven prefectures, including Shenghong, Shishi and Raojie, sent delegates to observe the group training, and soon the delegation was sent to observe the group training in the west of the Yangtze River.

古文：广德二年九月卒。
现代文：广德二年九月死去。
English: Guangde died in September of the following year.

古文：镐自入仕凡三年，致位宰相。
现代文：镐入仕途大约三年，官至宰相。
English: His career lasted about three years, and he rose through the ranks to become prime minister.

古文：居身清廉，不营资产，谦恭下士，善谈论，多识大体，故天下具瞻，虽考秩至浅，推为旧德云。
现代文：处事公正清廉，不积累资产，谦恭下士，善于谈论，多识大体，因而受天下人所瞩目，虽然官场经历很浅，仍可推为品德高尚的人。
English: They are fair and honest in their dealings, do not accumulate assets, are humble and courteous, are good at talking, and are generally knowledgeable. As a result, they have attracted the attention of the world. Although their experience in the official world is very shallow, they can still be promoted as people with high moral character.

古文：高适者，渤海蓚人也。父从文，位终韶州长史。适少濩落，不事生业，家贫，客于梁、宋，以求丐取给。
现代文：高适是渤海蓚人，高适少年时四处流落，没有固定的事去做，家境贫寒，客居在梁、宋两地，靠乞讨为生。
English: Gao Shih is a native of the Bohai Sea. When Gao Shih was a boy, he moved around a lot, had no fixed job to do, was from a poor family, lived as a guest in Liang and Song, and made a living by begging.

古文：天宝中，海内事干进者注意文词。
现代文：天宝年间，国内奉事于朝廷的人开始注重文词学问。
English: During the Tenpo era, people who served the imperial court in China began to pay attention to literature and literature.

古文：适年过五十，始留意诗什，数年之间，体格渐变，以气质自高，每吟一篇，已为好事者称诵。
现代文：高适年过五十，开始留心于诗词一类的事情，几年的时间过去了，高适的诗体风格渐渐有所变化，因文气朴实自成风格，每吟一篇，就被好事者称道传诵。
English: When Gao Kai passed the age of fifty, he began to pay attention to things such as poetry. As the years passed, Gao Kai's poetic style gradually changed. Because of the simple and self-contained style, every poem was praised and recited by good people.

古文：宋州刺史张九皋深奇之，荐举有道科。
现代文：宋州刺史张九认为他不同寻常，推荐他到道科。
English: Zhang Jiu, a Songzhou scholar, thought he was unusual and recommended him to the Daoist sect.

古文：时右相李林甫擅权，薄于文雅，唯以举子待之。
现代文：当时右相李林甫独揽大权，不重视文雅之学，只把高适作为一般推荐的人对待。
English: At that time, the Minister of the Right, Li Linfu, monopolized power, did not attach importance to the study of elegance, and only treated Gao Shu as a person recommended by the general public.

古文：解褐汴州封丘尉，非其好也，乃去位，客游河右。
现代文：高适被提为汴州封丘尉，他并不喜欢，于是离任，客游河右。
English: Gao Sui was promoted to Zhangzhou Fengqiu Lieutenant, he did not like it, so he left the post and traveled to Hezhou.

古文：河西节度哥舒翰见而异之。表为左骁卫兵曹，充翰府掌书记，从翰入朝，盛称之于上前。
现代文：河西节度使哥舒翰遇见了高适认为他是奇才，上表请任高适为左骁卫兵曹，充任哥舒翰府内的掌书记，跟随哥舒翰进入朝廷，哥舒翰在皇上面前极力称赞高适。
English: The Hexi Festival made Goshukhan meet Goshukhan, who thought he was a genius. The table above asked Goshukhan to appoint Goshukhan as the left guard sergeant, act as the secretary of Goshukhan's office, and follow Goshukhan into the imperial court. Goshukhan praised Goshukhan in front of the emperor.

古文：禄山之乱，征翰讨贼，拜适左拾遗，转监察御史，仍佐翰守潼关。
现代文：安禄山发动叛乱，皇上召令哥舒翰讨伐敌贼，授予高适为左拾遗，转任监察御史，仍然辅佐哥舒翰驻守潼关。
English: An Lushan launched a rebellion, the emperor summoned Goshukhan to fight against the enemy, awarded Goshukhan with the title of Left Relic Collector, transferred him to the position of Inspector of Imperial History, and still assisted Goshukhan in garrisoning Shaoguan.

古文：玄宗嘉之，寻迁侍御史。至成都，八月，制曰： 侍御史高适，立节贞峻，植躬高朗，感激怀经济之略，纷纶赡文雅之才。
现代文：待哥舒翰大战失败，高适从骆谷骑马朝西行，在返回的途中急速奔驰，到达河池郡，拜见玄宗，于是陈述潼关败亡的情况。玄宗赞扬他，不久升为侍御史。到达成都，八月皇上诏令说： 侍御史大夫高适，树立了坚贞的气节，自身气质高朗，心中常存有对各种规章制度的韬略思想，有着美好充足的文学才能。
English: After the defeat of the Battle of Goshukhan, Gao Shih rode from Luogu to the west, and on the way back, he sped rapidly. He reached Hechi County, met with Xuanzong, and then reported the situation of the defeat of Shaoguan. Xuanzong praised him, and soon rose to the position of imperial secretary. When he reached the capital in August, the emperor's edict said: "Imperial secretary Gao Shih, has established a steadfast temperament, his own temperament is lofty, he always has a vague idea of various rules and regulations in his heart, and has a beautiful and sufficient literary talent.

古文：长策远图，可云大体；谠言义色，实谓忠臣。
现代文：对于国家的长远规划，可以道出大体；言语正直品德端正，确确实实是忠臣。
English: For the country's long-term plan, it can be said in general; words are honest and moral, and they are truly loyal.

古文：宜回纠逖之任，俾超讽谕之职，可谏议大夫，赐绯鱼袋。 
现代文：高适理应担任纠逖一职，使他胜过讽谕之任。可任谏议大夫，赐给绯鱼袋。 
English: Gao Shili should hold the post of rectification, so that he is better than the post of ridicule. He can be appointed as a doctor of discussion and given a carp bag.

古文：适负气敢言，权幸惮之。
现代文：高适倚仗气节敢于发表见解，一时受到恩宠，权贵都害怕他。
English: The high and the mighty are afraid of him, for he dares to speak his mind, and is for the moment favoured.

古文：二年，永王璘起兵于江东，欲据扬州。
现代文：二年，永王瞞在江东发动军队，准备占据扬州。
English: Two years later, Yong Wangzhe launched an army in the east of the Yangtze River, preparing to occupy Yangzhou.

古文：初，上皇以诸王分镇，适切谏不可。
现代文：初，皇上让各位王分别镇守，高适恳切规劝皇上不能这样行事。
English: At the beginning, the emperor asked the kings to guard the town separately, and Gaozu earnestly advised the emperor not to do so.

古文：及是永王叛，肃宗闻其论谏有素，召而谋之。
现代文：待永王叛乱，肃宗听说高适的规劝有真情，就召见高适与他共同商议。
English: After Yongwang's rebellion, Su Zong heard that Gao Si's exhortation was sincere, and summoned Gao Si to consult with him.

古文：适因陈江东利害，永王必败。
现代文：高适于是陈述江东的利弊关系，肯定永王的反叛一定失败。
English: Gao Shi then stated the advantages and disadvantages of the Jiangdong, affirming that Yong Wang's rebellion would certainly fail.

古文：上奇其对，以适兼御史大夫、扬州大都督府长史、淮南节度使。
现代文：皇上对他的分析感到非常惊奇，任高适兼任御史大夫、扬州大都督府长史、淮南节度使。
English: The emperor was very surprised by his analysis. Ren Gaoxi concurrently served as the chief historian, the governor of Yangzhou, and the Huainan Festival envoy.

古文：诏与江东节度来瑱率本部兵平江淮之乱，会于安州。
现代文：诏令高适与江东节度使来王真率领本部兵士平定江淮的叛乱，在安州会合。
English: The emperor ordered Gao Shih and Wang Zhen, the envoy of the Jiangdong Festival, to lead the soldiers of the headquarters to quell the rebellion of Jianghuai and meet in Anzhou.

古文：后梓州副使段子璋反，以兵攻东川节度使李奂，适率州兵从西川节度使崔光远攻于璋，斩之。
现代文：师将渡过而永王被打败，于是在历阳招引季广琛。战争结束后，李辅国讨厌高适的敢言，在皇上面前诋毁高适，于是授高适为太子少詹事。不多日，蜀中大乱，高适出任为蜀州刺史，转到彭州。后来梓州副使段子璋反叛，用兵攻打东川节度使李奂，高适率领州兵跟随西川节度使崔光远攻打段子璋，杀了段子璋。
English: After the war, Li Yuxuo disliked Gao Sui's bold speech and slandered Gao Sui in front of the emperor, so Gao Sui was awarded the title of crown prince. Not long after, there was a great turmoil in Shu, and Gao Sui was appointed as the governor of Shu and transferred to Pengzhou. Later, the deputy envoy of Zizhou, Duan Zixuan, rebelled and attacked the Dongchuan Festival with soldiers, and Gao Sui led the National Guard to follow the Westchuan Festival to make Cui Guangyuan attack the Duan Festival and kill the Duan Festival.

古文：西川牙将花惊定者，恃勇，既诛子璋，大掠东蜀。
现代文：西川牙将花定，仗恃勇猛，杀了段子璋，又在东蜀大肆抢掠。
English: Nishikawa Kazuchika rose to prominence, fought bravely, killed Danzi, and plundered extensively in Eastern Shu.

古文：天子怒光远不能戢军，乃罢之，以适代光远为成都尹、剑南西川节度使。
现代文：天子对崔光远不能止息敌军非常愤怒，于是罢免崔光远，让高适代替崔光远任成都尹和剑南西川节度使。
English: The heavenly son was very angry that Cui Guangyuan could not stop the enemy army, so he dismissed Cui Guangyuan and let Gaoshu replace Cui Guangyuan as the delegate of Chengdu Yin and Jianan West River Festival.

古文：代宗即位，吐蕃陷陇右，渐逼京畿。
现代文：代宗即位，吐蕃占领了陇右，渐渐逼近京城所管辖的地区。
English: When the Daizong ascended the throne, the Tuoba occupied the right bank of the Yangtze River, gradually approaching the area under the jurisdiction of the capital.

古文：适练兵于蜀，临吐蕃南境以牵制之，师出无功，而松、维等州寻为蕃兵所陷。代宗以黄门侍郎严武代还，用为刑部侍郎，转散骑常侍，加银青光禄大夫，进封渤海县侯，食邑七百户。
现代文：代宗用黄门侍郎严武替代高适返回，用高适为刑部侍郎，转任散骑常侍，加封银青光禄大夫，升为渤海县侯，封地七百户。
English: The daimyos used the Yellow Gate attendant Yan Wu to replace Gao Sui to return, and used Gao Sui as the criminal department attendant, transferred to the horseback riding attendant, and was awarded the title of silver Qingguanglu doctor, and was promoted to the lord of Bohai County, with a fief of 700 households.

古文：永泰元年正月卒，赠礼部尚书，谥曰忠。适喜言王霸大略，务功名，尚节义。
现代文：永泰元年正月去世，追封礼部尚书。高适喜欢谈论称霸的策略，追求功名，崇尚节义。
English: Yongtai died in the first month of the first year of the year, and was posthumously awarded the title of ceremonial minister. Gaoshu liked to talk about the strategy of seeking hegemony, pursuing fame, and advocating festivals.

古文：逢时多难，以安危为己任，然言过其术，为大臣所轻。
现代文：他正逢此时多灾多难，于是以天下安危为己任，然而言不符合实际，被大臣们所看轻。
English: At this time, he was faced with many disasters and difficulties, so he took the world's safety and security as his responsibility. However, his words did not correspond to reality, and he was looked down upon by the ministers.

古文：累为籓牧，政存宽简，吏民便之。
现代文：高适多次为藩牧，所制定的法令宽宏简略，吏民熟习一切。
English: Gao Shih was the chief of the clan for many times. The laws he made were broad and simple, and the officials and people were familiar with everything.

古文：有文集二十卷。
现代文：他有文集二十卷。
English: Liu Xuanqiu has a collection of twenty volumes.

古文：其《与贺兰进明书》，令疾救梁、宋，以亲诸军；《与许叔冀书》，绸缪继好，使释他憾，同援梁、宋；《未过淮先与将校书》，使绝永王，各求自白，君子以为义而知变。
现代文：其中《与贺兰进明书》，建议急速挽救梁、宋，用来亲近各军；《与许叔冀书》，告知事先做好准备继承友好往来，使人解除对他人的怨恨，共同援救梁、宋；又有《未过淮先与将校书》，使永王断绝，各自求得明了。
English: Among them, "The Letter to Heran Jinming" proposed to quickly save Liang and Song, and was used to get close to the armies; "The Letter to Xu Shuji" advised to prepare in advance to inherit friendly exchanges, to relieve people of resentment against others, and to jointly rescue Liang and Song; and "The Letter to Huai and the officers" made Yong Wang break off, and each sought clarity.

古文：而有唐已来，诗人之达者，唯适而已。
现代文：君子认为是合宜的道德而去改变它，但有唐以来，诗人中豁达之人，只有高适罢了。
English: A gentleman thinks it is proper morality and tries to change it, but since the Tang Dynasty, the most open-minded of poets have only been high-minded.

古文：暢璀，河东人也。乡举进士。
现代文：畅璀，河东人。在乡考取进士。
English: Changyao, a native of Hedong. He passed the entrance examination in his hometown.

古文：天宝末，安禄山奏为河北海运判官。
现代文：天宝初年，安禄山上奏任他为河北海运判官。
English: In the first year of Tianbao, he was appointed as the judge of Hebei Shipping on the Anlu Mountain.

古文：三迁大理评事，副元帅郭子仪辟为从事。
现代文：三次升为大理评事，副元帅郭子仪征召他跟随自己。
English: He was promoted to the rank of Dali Commentator three times, and Vice-Marshal Guo Ziyi called him to follow him.

古文：至德初，肃宗即位，大收俊杰，或荐璀，召见悦之，拜谏议大夫。
现代文：至德初年，肃宗即位，广收俊杰人才，有人推荐璀，皇上召见他对其满意，升为谏议大夫。
English: In the first year of Sui Zong's reign, Sui Zong was enthroned, and received a wide range of talented people. Some people recommended him, and the emperor called him to see if he was satisfied with him. Sui Zong was promoted to the position of doctor.

古文：累转吏部侍郎。
现代文：多次转任吏部侍郎。
English: He was transferred several times to the position of a chamberlain.

古文：广德二年十二月，为散骑常侍、河中尹，兼御史大夫。
现代文：广德二年十二月，任散骑常侍、河中尹，兼任御史大夫。
English: In December of the second year of Guangde, he was appointed as a straggler, Kawachu Yin, and concurrently served as a doctor of history.

古文：永泰元年，复为左常侍，与裴冕并集贤院待制。
现代文：永泰元年，又任左常侍，与裴冕一并在集贤院待制。
English: In the first year of Yongtai, he was also appointed as the left attendant, and he and Fei Guanyin were detained at Jixianyuan.

古文：大历五年，兼判太常卿，迁户部尚书。
现代文：大历五年，兼任判太常卿，升为户部尚书。
English: In the fifth year of the lunar calendar, he was concurrently appointed to the post of Janta-Changgyeong, and was promoted to the post of household secretary.

古文：十年七月卒，赠太子太师。
现代文：十年七月死，赠予太子太师。
English: He died in July of the tenth year and was given to the Crown Prince and Grand Master.

古文：璀廓落有口才，好谈王霸之略，居职责成属吏。龊龊无过而已。
现代文：璀具有口才，喜欢谈论霸王战略，在职时总是责成属下官吏，拘谨无过失而已。
English: He is eloquent, likes to talk about the strategy of overpowering the king, and always instructs subordinate officials when he is on duty. He is punctilious without fault.

