古文：孔绍安，越州山阴人，陈吏部尚书奂之子。
现代文：孔绍安，越州山阴人，南朝陈时吏部尚书孔奂的儿子。
English: Kong Shao'an, a native of Yuezhou Shanyin, was the son of the Southern Dynasty's Chen Shi's official, Kong Xi.

古文：少与兄绍新，俱以文词知名。
现代文：少年时和哥哥孔绍新俱以文章知名。
English: When he was a boy, he and his brother Kong Shaoxin were both famous for their articles.

古文：十三，陈亡入隋，徙居京兆鄠县。
现代文：十三岁时，陈朝灭亡入隋朝，迁居京县。
English: At the age of thirteen, after the fall of the Chen Dynasty and the Sui Dynasty, he moved to Jing County.

古文：闭门读书，诵古文集数十万言，外兄虞世南叹异之。
现代文：绍安闭门读书，能背诵古文典集几十万字，表兄弟虞世南感叹称异。
English: Shao'an reads behind closed doors and can recite hundreds of thousands of words from ancient classics. His cousin Yu Shennan is impressed.

古文：绍新尝谓世南曰： 本朝沦陷，分从湮灭，但见此弟，窃谓家族不亡矣！ 
现代文：绍新曾对世南说： 本朝灭亡，分当朝没，只是看看我这个弟弟，私下以为家族不会灭亡了。 
English: Shao Xin once said to the world, "This dynasty is doomed, that dynasty is doomed. Just look at this younger brother of mine. Privately, I thought my family would not perish.

古文：时有词人孙万寿，与绍安笃忘年之好，时人称为孙、孔。
现代文：当时有个擅长文辞的孙万寿，与绍安友情笃厚为忘年之交，被当时的人并称为孙、孔。
English: At that time, there was a Sun Wanshou who was good at rhetoric, and his friendship with Shaoan was so thick that it was an unforgettable friendship. He was also called Sun and Kong by the people at that time.

古文：绍安大业末为监察御史。时高祖为隋讨贼于河东，诏绍安监高祖之军，深见接遇。
现代文：绍安大业末为监察御史，那时唐高祖还在河东为隋朝讨伐贼寇，诏命绍安监督高祖的军队，很得接纳遇合。
English: At that time, Tang Gaozu was still in Hedong for the Sui Dynasty to fight against banditry. He ordered Shao'an to supervise Gaozu's army, which was well received.

古文：及高祖受禅，绍安自洛阳间行来奔。
现代文：到高祖受禅即位时，绍安从洛阳隐秘地前去投奔。
English: When Emperor Gaozhu was enthroned, Shao'an secretly fled from Luoyang.

古文：高祖见之甚悦，拜内史舍人，赐宅一区、良马两匹、钱米绢布等。
现代文：高祖见他来很高兴，授予他内史舍人官职，赐给住宅一处、良马两匹，还有钱米绢布等物。
English: Gao Zu was very happy to see him, and gave him an official post in the Ministry of Civil Affairs, a house, two good horses, and money, rice, cloth and other things.

古文：时夏侯端亦尝为御史，监高祖军，先绍安归朝，授秘书监。
现代文：当时夏侯端也曾做御史，监高祖的军队，先于绍安归顺唐朝，授官秘书监。
English: At that time, Xia Houduan also served as imperial historian and overseer of Gaozu's army. He was the first to surrender to the Tang Dynasty after the fall of Shao'an, and he was also the overseer of the secretary for conferring official positions.

古文：绍安因侍宴，应诏咏《石榴诗》曰： 只为时来晚，开花不及春。 
现代文：绍安曾在一次陪侍皇帝的酒宴上应诏命吟咏《石榴诗》道： 只为时来晚，开花不及春。 
English: Once, at a wine banquet to accompany the emperor, Shao'an was ordered by the emperor to recite the "Pomegranate Poem," saying, "It's just that it's late, the flowers haven't bloomed until spring.

古文：时人称之。
现代文：得到当时人的称赞。
English: It was praised by people at the time.

古文：寻诏撰《梁史》，未成而卒。
现代文：不久诏命撰写《梁史》，书未撰成而先逝。
English: Soon after, he was ordered to write "The History of Liang," but he died before the book was completed.

古文：有文集五卷。
现代文：有文集五卷。
English: There are five volumes of the anthology.

古文：子祯，高宗时为苏州长史。
现代文：儿子孔祯，唐高宗时为苏州长史。
English: The son of Confucius, Tang Gaozong was the first governor of the Soviet Union.

古文：曹王明为刺史，不循法度，祯每进谏。明曰： 寡人天子之弟，岂失于为王哉！ 
现代文：曹王李明任州刺史，不遵守法令制度，孔祯常常进行规谏，李明说： 我是皇上的弟弟，哪里就会有失于为王呢！ 
English: Cao Wang Li Ming was appointed by the state to write history, he did not abide by the legal system, and Confucius often made regulations. Li Ming said: I am the emperor's younger brother, where will there be a loss of being king!

古文：祯曰： 恩宠不可恃，大王不奉行国命，恐今之荣位，非大王所保，独不见淮南之事乎？ 
现代文：孔祯说： 恩宠是不能依赖的，大王不奉行国法，恐怕今日的荣誉地位，不是大王所能保住的，难道没看到淮南王刘长的事吗？ 
English: Confucius said, "Grace cannot be relied on. The great king does not follow the laws of the country. I am afraid that today's honorable position is not something that the great king can maintain. Didn't you see what happened to Liu Chang, the king of Huainan?

古文：明不悦。
现代文：李明听后不高兴。
English: Li Ming was not happy after hearing this.

古文：明左右有侵暴下人者，祯捕而杖杀之。
现代文：李明身边有人欺凌虐待老百姓，孔祯就把这些人抓起来杖打而死。
English: Someone close to Li Ming bullied and abused the common people. Kong Yao grabbed these people and beat them to death with a cane.

古文：明后果坐法，迁于黔中，谓人曰： 吾愧不用孔长史言，以及于此！ 
现代文：李明后来果然获罪判刑，被贬谪到黔中，曾对人说： 我愧悔没有听孔长史的话，以至于有这样的下场！ 
English: Later, Li Ming was indeed convicted and sentenced, and was reduced to the lowest rank of prisoner. He once said to someone, "I regret that I did not listen to Kong Changshi's words and ended up like this!"

古文：祯累迁绛州刺史，封武昌县子。
现代文：孔祯后升任绛州刺史，封爵武昌县子。
English: After Kong Xi, he was promoted to the post of Zhangzhou Provincial Historian and given the title of Count of Wuchang County.

古文：卒，谥曰温。
现代文：死后谥号为温。
English: After his death, his posthumous name was Wen.

古文：子季诩，早知名，官至左补阙。
现代文：祯子孔季诩，早年知名，官做到左补阙。
English: Zongzi Kong Qian, well-known in his early years, became a top official.

古文：绍安孙若思。
现代文：绍安有个孙子叫孔若思。
English: Sha'an has a grandson named Kong Raushi.

古文：若思孤，母褚氏亲自教训，遂以学行知名。
现代文：若思从小丧父，母亲褚氏亲予教育训导，于是以学识品行知名。
English: He lost his father when he was a child, and his mother, Ms. Zou, personally gave him education and training, so he became famous for his knowledge and character.

古文：年少时，有人赍褚遂良书迹数卷以遗若思，唯受其一卷。
现代文：年少时，有人带了褚遂良的几卷书法遗墨送给他，他只接受了其中一卷。
English: When he was young, someone brought him several rolls of calligraphy ink left by Gong Suiliang, but he only accepted one of them.

古文：其人曰： 此书当今所重，价比黄金，何不总取？ 
现代文：这人说： 此种书法为今日人们所看重，价比黄金，为什么不全部收下？ 
English: This person said: This kind of calligraphy is valued by people today, and the price is better than gold. Why not accept all of them?

古文：若思曰： 若价比金宝，此为多矣！ 
现代文：若思说： 如果是价比黄金的话，我收下的就已经很多了！ 
English: If the price is comparable to gold, I have already received a lot!

古文：更截去半以还之。
现代文：又取出一半送还来人。
English: He also took out half of it and gave it back to the visitor.

古文：明经举，累迁库部郎中。
现代文：考中明经科，后升任库部郎中。
English: He passed the junior high school entrance examination in classics, and was later promoted to the junior high school of the treasury department.

古文：若思常谓人曰： 仕至郎中足矣！ 
现代文：若思曾对人说： 官做到郎中就足够了。 
English: Luo Si once said to people: It is enough for officials to be subordinates.

古文：至是持一石止水，置于座右，以示有止足之意。
现代文：从此将一石止水放置在座位右边，以表示止足不前的意思。
English: From now on, a stone will be placed on the right side of the seat to indicate the meaning of stopping.

古文：寻迁给事中。
现代文：不久转任给事中。
English: He was soon transferred to the middle of the case.

古文：中宗即位，敬晖、桓彦范等知国政，以若思多识故事，所有改革大事及疑议，多访于若思。
现代文：中宗即位，敬晖、桓彦范等人主持国政，因为若思了解很多旧日典章制度，所以凡有改革大事及疑惑难决的问题，多来向若思进行咨询。
English: Zhongzong ascended to the throne, and Jingyao, Kanehiko Fan and others presided over national affairs. Since Ruosi knew a lot about the old Japanese ceremonial system, he often consulted Ruosi on major reform events and difficult-to-resolve issues.

古文：再转礼部侍郎，出卫州刺史。
现代文：后又转任礼部侍郎，出京任卫州刺史。
English: Later, he was transferred to the position of Reibu-zamiro, and went to Kyoto to be appointed as the governor of the western part of Japan.

古文：先是，诸州别驾，皆以宗室为之，不为刺史致敬，由是多行不法。
现代文：在此之前，各州的别驾官职都用宗室的人担任，他们都不对刺史表示敬意，因此多做不法的事。
English: Prior to this, the posts of lieutenant governor in each state were held by family members, who did not show respect for the crown prince and therefore did more illegal things.

古文：若思至州，举奏别驾李道钦犯状，请加鞫讯。
现代文：若思到达卫州后，上奏别驾李道钦犯法的状书，请求加以审讯。
English: After arriving in Weizhou, Ruo Si filed a complaint against Li Daoqin for violating the law, requesting that he be put on trial.

古文：乃诏别驾于刺史致礼，自若思始也。
现代文：于是诏命别驾对刺史行礼表敬，这点是从若思开始的。
English: Therefore, the imperial edict ordered not to pay homage to the stabbing history, which began with Rausi.

古文：俄以清白称，加银青光禄大夫，赐绢百匹。
现代文：不久以廉洁方正著称，加官银青光禄大夫，赐绢绸一百匹。
English: Not long after, he was known for his incorruptible integrity. He was awarded the title of silver Qingguanglu doctor, and was given a hundred pieces of silk.

古文：时人以为口实。
现代文：历任汝州刺史、太子右谕德，封爵梁郡公。
English: Successive heads of Ruzhou include the Prince of Ruzhou, the Prince of Ruzhou, and the Duke of Liang County.

古文：贺德仁，越州山阴人也。
现代文：开元十七年去世，谥号为惠。贺德仁，越州山阴人。
English: He died in the seventeenth year of the first century, and his posthumous name was Hui. He Deren, a native of Yuezhou Shanyin.

古文：父朗，陈散骑常侍。
现代文：父亲贺朗，为南朝陈时散骑常侍。
English: His father, Herang, was a samurai who rode horseback during the Southern Dynasty.

古文：德仁少与从兄基俱事国子祭酒周弘正，咸以词学见称。时人语曰： 学行可师贺德基，文质彬彬贺德仁。 
现代文：德仁少年时与堂兄贺德基一同侍奉国子祭酒周弘正，都以词章学问被称赏，当时人说道： 学问操行可师法贺德基，词采华茂文质炳焕则数贺德仁。 
English: When Naruhito was a boy, he and his cousin, Hodeki, together served the national children's festival wine, Zhou Hongzheng, and were both praised for their knowledge of poetry. At that time, people said, "Hodeki can be a good teacher for his knowledge of poetry, but it is Hodeki who has the most beautiful poetry."

古文：德仁兄弟八人，时人方之荀氏。
现代文：德仁兄弟八人，当时人将他们比作荀氏 八龙 。
English: There were eight Naruhito brothers, and at the time they were likened to the eight dragons of the So clan.

古文：陈鄱阳王伯山为会稽太守，改其所居甘滂里为高阳里。
现代文：陈朝鄱阳王陈伯山为会稽郡太守，把他们所居住的甘滂里改名为高阳里。
English: Chen Bozhan, the king of the Qianyang Dynasty, was the governor of the Qianjing County, and they changed the name of the village they lived in to Gaoyang Village.

古文：德仁事陈，至吴兴王友。
现代文：德仁奉事陈朝，官职做到吴兴王友。
English: Naruhito served the Chen Dynasty, and Wu Xing Wangyou fulfilled his official duties.

古文：入隋，仆射杨素荐之，授豫章王府记室参军。
现代文：入隋朝，经仆射杨素举荐，授官豫章王府记室参军。
English: After entering the Sui Dynasty, he was recommended by his servant Yang Su to join the army.

古文：王以师资礼之，恩遇甚厚。
现代文：豫章王对他持待师之礼，恩惠知遇很深厚。
English: King Yuanzhang treated him with the courtesy of a teacher, and he was deeply blessed.

古文：及炀帝即位，豫章王改封齐王，又授齐王府属。
现代文：及至炀帝即位，豫章王改封为齐王，又授官齐王府属。
English: And when Emperor Qian ascended the throne, King Yuanzhang changed his title to King Qi, and was also awarded the title of Prince of Qi.

古文：及齐王获谴，府僚皆被诛责，唯德仁以忠谨免罪，出补河东郡司法。
现代文：到齐王获罪时，王府臣僚都受到惩罚，惟独德仁因忠诚谨慎免罪，出京补任河东郡司法官。
English: When King Qi was found guilty, all the ministers of the royal court were punished, except for Naruhito, who was exonerated because of his loyalty and prudence, and went to Beijing to take up the post of judicial officer of Hedong County.

古文：素与隐太子善，及高祖平京师，隐太子封陇西公，用德仁为陇西公友。
现代文：德仁一向与隐太子友善，到唐高祖平定京师后，隐太子封爵陇西公，便用德仁为陇西公友。
English: Naruhito had always been friendly with Prince Inzai. After Emperor Gaozu conquered the capital, Emperor Inzai made Naruhito a courtier of Prince Inzai and made him a courtier of Prince Inzai.

古文：寻迁太子中舍人，以衰老不习吏事，转太子洗马。
现代文：不久迁任太子中舍人，因衰老不习惯任官之事，转任太子洗马。
English: Soon after, he was transferred to the position of the prince's middle son, but because he was not used to being an official due to his old age, he was transferred to the position of the prince's washing horse.

古文：时萧德言亦为洗马，陈子良为右卫率府长史，皆为东宫学士。
现代文：当时萧德言也是洗马，陈子良为右卫率府长史，都是东宫学士。
English: At that time, Xiao Deyan was also a horse washer, and Chen Ziliang was the right guard leader and prefectural governor, both of whom were Donggong Baccalaureate.

古文：贞观初，德仁转赵王友。
现代文：贞观初，德仁转任赵王友。
English: At the beginning of Zhenguan, Naruhito was transferred to Zhao Wangyou.

古文：无几，卒，年七十余。
现代文：不久去世，享年七十余岁。
English: He died shortly afterwards, at the age of over seventy.

古文：有文集二十卷。
现代文：有文集二十卷。
English: Liu Xuanqiu has a collection of twenty volumes.

古文：有集十卷，又撰《后梁春秋》十卷。
现代文：德仁弟弟的儿子贺纪、贺詔，也以博学知名。高宗时，贺纪官职做到太子洗马，修撰《五礼》，贺詔官至率更令，兼太子侍读。
English: The sons of Naruhito's younger brother, He Ji and He Ju, are also well known for their erudition. During the reign of Emperor Gao, He Ji fulfilled his duties as an official and washed the prince's horse and compiled the "Five Rites," while He Ju was the highest-ranking official and also served as an attendant to the prince.

古文：郑世翼，郑州荥阳人也，世为著姓。
现代文：兄弟俩皆为崇贤馆学士，治学者引以为荣。郑世翼，郑州荥阳县人，世代为望族。
English: The two brothers are both graduates of the Chongxian Institute and are proud of their academic achievements. Zheng Shiying, a native of Zhengzhou's Poyang County, has been a member of a prestigious family for generations.

古文：祖敬德，周仪同大将军。
现代文：祖父郑敬德，为北周仪同大将军。
English: His grandfather, Zheng Jingde, was a general in the Northern Zhou Dynasty.

古文：父机，司武中士。
现代文：父亲郑机，曾任司武中士。
English: His father, Zheng Ji, was a former Sifu sergeant.

古文：世翼弱冠有盛名。武德中，历万年丞、扬州录事参军。
现代文：世翼二十岁即有盛名，武德年间，历任万年县丞、扬州录事参军。
English: At the age of twenty, he was already famous, and during the Wu De era, he joined the army as a county magistrate and Yangzhou recorder.

古文：数以言辞忤物，称为轻薄。
现代文：多次因言辞忤逆与人不和，被人称为轻薄。
English: He has been called frivolous many times because of his belligerent rhetoric.

古文：时崔信明自谓文章独步，多所凌轹；世翼遇诸江中，谓之曰： 尝闻 枫落吴江冷。  
现代文：当时崔信明自以为文章独步天下，多轻视侮辱他人。一次世翼在船行长江之中时遇到信明，对他说： 曾闻君 枫落吴江冷 的诗句。 
English: At that time, Cui Xinming thought that he was the only one in the world, and he despised insulting others. Once in a lifetime, he met Xinming when he was in the middle of the Yangtze River, and said to him: "I once heard the poem of "Maple Falls into the Wujiang River."

古文：信明欣然示百余篇。
现代文：信明欣然把自己百余篇诗稿给世翼看。
English: Nobuaki was happy to show his more than one hundred poems to the world.

古文：世翼览之未终，曰： 所见不如所闻。 
现代文：世翼还未将诗稿翻阅完就说： 所见不如所闻。 
English: The world wing has not yet finished reading the poem and said: What you see is not as good as what you hear.

古文：十七年，府废，出为湘潭令，卒。
现代文：随后把诗稿投入江中。信明无言以对，握楫划船离去。
English: Then he threw the poem manuscript into the river. Nobuaki was speechless, grabbed a raft and rowed away.

古文：文集十卷。崔信明，青州益都人也，后魏七兵尚书光伯曾孙也。
现代文：世翼于贞观年间因怨恨指斥而获罪，被流放州而死。世翼文集大多遗失，撰有《交游传》，颇流传于当时。崔信明，青州益都县人，后魏七兵尚书崔光伯曾孙。
English: During the Zhenguan era, Shiyou was convicted of hate speech and died in exile. Most of Shiyou's literary works were lost, including "Jiao You Zhen," which was widely circulated at the time. Cui Xunming, a resident of Yidu County, Qingzhou, was the great-grandson of Cui Guangbo, the author of the Later Wei Seven Soldiers.

古文：祖縚，北海郡守。
现代文：祖父崔纟舀，北海郡太守。
English: His grandfather, Cui Wei, was the governor of Beihai County.

古文：信明以五月五日日正中时生，有异雀数头，身形甚小，五色毕备，集于庭树；鼓翼齐鸣，声清宛亮。
现代文：信明五月五日太阳正当午时出生，有几只体形很小，五色生辉的奇异小雀，停歇在庭院里的树枝上，扇动羽翼齐声鸣啭，鸣声清亮宛转。
English: On the 5th of May, the sun was born at noon. Several small, brightly colored, strange little finches rested on the branches in the courtyard, flapping their wings and chirping in unison. The chirping was clear and far-reaching.

古文：隋太史令史良使至青州，遇而占之曰： 五月为火，火为《离》，《离》为文彩。
现代文：隋朝太史令史良出使到青州，正遇上这件事便预言道： 五月为火，火正像离卦，离则是光明有文彩。
English: Emperor Taishi of the Sui Dynasty ordered Shi Liang to be sent to Qingzhou, and when this happened, he predicted: May is fire, fire is like parting, and parting is bright and colorful.

古文：日正中，文之盛也。
现代文：日在正中，是文辞兴盛炳焕。
English: The sun is in the middle of the day, and the words are flourishing.

古文：又有雀五色，奋翼而鸣。
现代文：又有五色小雀，振翅鸣啼。
English: There are also small five-coloured finches, and the chirping of crickets.

古文：此兒必文藻焕烂，声名播于天下。
现代文：这个小孩将来一定是文章辞藻灿烂夺目，名声传扬于天下。
English: In the future, this child is sure to be brilliant and eye-catching, and his fame will spread all over the world.

古文：雀形既小，禄位殆不高。 
现代文：五色雀体形既然很小，俸禄官位大约不高。 
English: Since the five-colored sparrow body shape is small, the salary official rank is not high.

古文：及长，博闻强记，下笔成章。
现代文：待信明长大后，博闻强记，下笔成章。
English: When Nobuaki grows up, he wants to write his next book.

古文：乡人高孝基有知人之鉴，每谓人曰： 崔信明才学富赡，虽名冠一时，但恨其位不达耳！ 
现代文：同乡人高孝基有知人之明，常常对人说： 崔信明才华学问富赡，虽名声冠绝一时，只是怅恨他地位不显达！ 
English: Fellow villager Gao Xiaoji was very knowledgeable and often said to people: Cui Xinming was talented, learned and wealthy. Although he was famous for a short time, he was hated because his status was not high enough!

古文：大业中，为尧城令。窦建德僭号，欲引用之。
现代文：大业年间任尧城县令，窦建德自立为帝，想召引任用他。
English: During the reign of Daye, Dou Jiande was the county magistrate of Shicheng County. Dou Jiande became the emperor of his own accord and wanted to summon and appoint him.

古文：信明族弟敬素为建德鸿胪卿，说信明曰： 隋主无道，天下鼎沸，衣冠礼乐，扫地无余。
现代文：信明的族弟崔敬素为建德的鸿胪卿，劝说信明道： 隋朝君主暴虐无道，天下民怨沸腾，文明礼教，扫地以尽。
English: The younger brother of Nobuaki, Cui Jingsu, was the founder of Hongyuqing, and he persuaded Nobuaki: The Sui Dynasty monarch was ruthless in his tyranny, the world was seething with popular resentment, and civilization and etiquette had been swept away.

古文：兄遁迹下僚，不被收用，豫让所以不报范中行，只以众人遇我者也。
现代文：兄长隐居沉沦下位，不被收录任用，豫让所以不报答范氏中行氏，那是因为他们只以对待一般人态度来对待豫让。
English: The reason why the elder brother did not repay the Fan Zhongxing clan because he lived in seclusion and was relegated to a lower rank and was not recruited and appointed by the Fan Zhongxing clan was because they only treated the Fan Zhongxing clan with the attitude of treating ordinary people.

古文：夏王英武，有并吞天下之心，士女襁负而至者，不可称数。
现代文：夏王窦建德英明勇武，有并吞天下的雄心，男女老少投奔他的人不可胜数。
English: Xia Wang Dou Jiande is heroic and brave, with the ambition of annexing the world. There are countless men, women and children who have joined him.

古文：此时不立功立事，岂是见几而作者乎？ 
现代文：此时不立功立事，哪里是见机而行的人呢！ 
English: At this time, if you don't make a contribution, where are the opportunists?

古文：信明曰： 昔申胥海畔渔者，尚能固其节；吾终不能屈身伪主，求斗筲之职。 
现代文：信明说： 从前申包胥是个海边打鱼的人，尚且能坚守其节操，我终究不能屈身奉事伪主，以求低微的职位。 
English: Nobuaki said, "Once upon a time, Shin Pao-tao was a fisherman on the beach. Even though he was able to stick to his principles, in the end, I can't bow down and serve a false god in order to get a lowly position.

古文：遂逾城而遁，隐于太行山。
现代文：便翻城墙逃跑，隐居在太行山中。
English: He escaped over the city wall and lived in seclusion in the Taihang Mountains.

古文：贞观六年，应诏举，授兴世丞。
现代文：贞观六年应举中试，授官兴世县丞。
English: In the sixth year of Zhenguan, he passed the mid-term exam and was awarded the post of Xingshi County magistrate.

古文：撰《古文纪年新传》三十卷。
现代文：转任秦川县令，后去世。信明非常傲慢自夸，常常赋诗吟咏，自认为超过李百药，当时人多不予承认。
English: He was transferred to the post of Qinchuan County magistrate, and later passed away. Nobuaki was very arrogant and boastful, often reciting poetry and chanting, and considered himself to be better than Li Baiyao, which was not recognized by many people at the time.

古文：崔行功，恆州井陉人，北齐钜鹿太守伯让曾孙也，自博陵徙家焉。
现代文：又自负其门第家族，轻蔑侮辱天下士人望族，因此被世人所讥嘲。儿子崔冬日，则天帝时任黄门侍郎，被酷吏所杀害。崔行功，恒州井陉县人，北齐巨鹿郡太守崔伯让的曾孙，从博陵县迁家到此处。
English: He was also proud of his lineage, despised and insulted the world's scholars and respected families, and was therefore ridiculed by the world. His son, Cui Dongri, was the Emperor's attendant at the Yellow Gate at the time, and was killed by the cruel officials. Cui Xinggong, a native of Jingye County, Hengzhou, and the great-grandson of Cui Bojang, the governor of Julu County, North Qi, moved here from Boling County.

古文：行功少好学，中书侍郎唐俭爱其才，以女妻之。俭前后征讨，所有文表，皆行功之文。
现代文：行功年轻时好学不倦，中书侍郎唐俭爱慕他的才华，把女儿嫁给了他，唐俭前后征战讨伐，所有的文书表章，都是行功所写的文字。
English: When he was young, Gong was eager to learn and never tired of it. Tang Jian, the head of the Chinese Academy of Letters, admired his talent and married his daughter to him. Tang Jian went on campaigns before and after. All the official documents and seals were written by Gong.

古文：高宗时，累转吏部郎中。
现代文：高宗时，升任吏部郎中。
English: At the time of Gao Zong, he was promoted to the junior secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs.

古文：以善敷奏，尝兼通事舍人、内供奉。
现代文：因善于陈述奏进，曾兼通事舍人、内供奉。
English: Because he was good at presenting reports, he was also a mediator, a mediator, and a mediator.

古文：坐事贬为游安令，寻征为司文郎中。
现代文：因事获罪贬为游安县令，不久征召为司文郎中。
English: As a result of the crime, he was demoted to You'an County magistrate, and was soon drafted into the middle school of Sifeng Lang.

古文：当时朝廷大手笔，多是行功及兰台侍郎李怀俨之词。
现代文：当时朝廷的诏令文书，多是行功及兰台侍郎李怀俨的文词。
English: At that time, most of the imperial edict documents of the imperial court were the writings of Gong and Li Huaiqi, the chamberlain of the Lantai court.

古文：先是，太宗命秘书监魏征写四部群书，将进内贮库，别置雠校二十人、书手一百人。
现代文：在此之前，太宗命秘书监魏征撰写四部群书，准备收藏于皇室仓库时，另外添加了二十个人校对文字，一百人进行抄写。
English: Prior to this, when Guan Wei Zheng, the secretary of the Taizong, wrote four books and prepared to collect them in the royal warehouse, another 20 people proofread the text and 100 people copied it.

古文：征改职之后，令虞世南、颜师古等续其事。至高宗初，其功未毕。
现代文：魏征改任职务之后，又命令虞世南、颜师古等人继续完成这件事，而直到高宗初年，其编撰之功仍未告成。
English: After Wei Zheng changed his position, he also ordered Yu Shennan, Yan Shigu and others to continue to complete this matter, and until Gaozong's first year, his compilation work was still unfinished.

古文：显庆中，罢雠校及御书手，令工书人缮写，计直酬佣，择散官随番雠校。
现代文：显庆年间，罢免了那些校对文字以及抄写御书的人，而任命善长书法的人进行缮抄，计值酬劳，选择散官随即校对文字。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xianqing, those who proofread and copied the imperial edicts were removed from their posts, while those who were good at calligraphy were appointed to proofread and write the edicts. They were paid according to the value of their work.

古文：其后又诏东台侍郎赵仁本、东台舍人张文瓘及行功、怀俨等相次充使检校。又置详正学士以校理之，行功仍专知御集。
现代文：这之后又下诏命东台侍郎赵仁本、东台舍人张文馞以及行功、怀俨等人相继担任核查的工作，还设置详正学士进行校勘和整理，行功便专门分管帝王的集子。
English: After that, he issued an imperial edict ordering Zhao Renben, the East Taiwanese chamberlain, Zhang Wenyu, the East Taiwanese villager, as well as Xing Gong, Huai Yao and others to successively take on the work of verification. He also set up a detailed official for proofreading and sorting, and Xing Gong was specifically in charge of the emperor's collection.

古文：迁兰台侍郎。
现代文：转任兰台侍郎。
English: He was transferred to the post of Rantai chamberlain.

古文：咸亨中，官名复旧，改为秘书少监。
现代文：咸亨年间，官名恢复旧称，改为秘书少监。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xianheng, the official title was restored to the old name and changed to Secretary and Junior Supervisor.

古文：上元元年，卒官。
现代文：上元元年，逝世于任上。
English: He died in office in the first year of Shangyuan.

古文：有集六十卷。
现代文：有文集六十卷。
English: There are sixty volumes in the anthology.

古文：睿宗即位，追录旧恩，累赠礼部尚书。
现代文：哥哥的儿子崔玄日韦，另外有传。行功前后参与撰写了《晋书》及《文思博要》等书籍。
English: His brother's son, Cui Xuan Rihwei, is also said to have participated in the writing of "Jin Shu" and "Wen Si Bo Yao" and other books before and after his military service.

古文：子坚，别有传。杜易简，襄州襄阳人，周硖州刺史叔毗曾孙也。
现代文：同时的还有孟利贞、董思恭、元思敬等人，都以文章词采知名。杜易简，襄州襄阳人，北周硖州刺史杜叔田比的曾孙。
English: At the same time, there are also Meng Lizhen, Dong Sijong, and Yuan Sijian, who are all famous for their articles and words. Du Yijian, a native of Xiangzhou Xiangyang, is the great-grandson of the Northern Zhou Yongzhou statesman Du Shudianbi.

古文：九岁能属文，及长，博学有高名。姨兄中书令岑文本甚推重之。
现代文：九岁就能写文章，待长大后，学问广博有盛名，表兄中书令岑文本很推许尊重他。
English: He was able to write articles at the age of nine. When he grew up, he was well-known for his extensive knowledge. He was highly respected by his cousin.

古文：登进士第，累转殿中侍御史。
现代文：进士及第，后转任殿中侍御史。
English: He was promoted to Shinshi and Dai, and then transferred to the position of palace chamberlain.

古文：咸亨中，为考功员外郎。
现代文：咸亨年间，任考功员外郎。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xianheng, he was appointed as a gongjang wangro.

古文：时吏部侍郎裴行俭、李敬玄相与不叶，易简与吏部员外郎贾言忠希行俭之旨，上封陈敬玄罪状。
现代文：当时吏部侍郎裴行俭、李敬玄相互不和，易简与吏部员外郎贾言忠迎合裴行俭的意旨，上封事陈述李敬玄的罪状。
English: At that time, the secretary of the administrative department, Pei Xingjian, and Li Jingxuan were at odds with each other. Yi Jian and the secretary of the administrative department, Jia Yanzhong, catered to the intention of Pei Xingjian and submitted a criminal complaint against Li Jingxuan.

古文：高宗恶其朋党，左转易简为开州司马，寻卒。
现代文：高宗厌恶他们结为朋党，将易简贬为开州司马，不久去世。
English: Gao Zong detested them for forming a crony party and relegated Yi Jian to the position of Kaizhou Sima. He died soon after.

古文：易简颇善著述，撰《御史台杂注》五卷，文集二十卷，行于代。
现代文：易简很善于撰写文章，著有《御史台杂注》五卷、文集二十卷，流传于当时。
English: Yi Jian was very good at writing articles. He was the author of the five-volume "History Miscellaneous Notes" and a 20-volume anthology, which were circulated at the time.

古文：易简从祖弟审言。
现代文：易简堂弟杜审言。
English: Yi Jian's cousin Du Jinan.

古文：审言，进士举，初为隰城尉。
现代文：审言，进士科中举，初任隰城县尉。
English: He was an examiner, promoted to the middle rank in the entrance examination, and was the first lieutenant of Shicheng County.

古文：雅善五言诗，工书翰，有能名。
现代文：擅长做五言诗，工于书札，有才能，富有名声。
English: He is good at making five-character poems, works in calligraphy, has talent, and is famous.

古文：然恃才謇傲，甚为时辈所嫉。
现代文：然而他恃才傲物，很被当时人所嫉恨。
English: However, he was very talented and was very envied by the people of the time.

古文：乾封中，苏味道为天官侍郎，审言预选。试判讫，谓人曰： 苏味道必死。 
现代文：乾封年间，苏味道任天官侍郎，审言参与选官，试判完毕，审言对人说： 苏味道必死无疑。 
English: During the Qianfeng period, Su Tang was appointed as the attendant of the heavenly official, and the judge participated in the selection of the official. After the trial was completed, the judge said to the people: Su Tang will undoubtedly die.

古文：人问其故，审言曰： 见吾判，即自当羞死矣！ 
现代文：人们问他为什么，他说： 苏味道看见我的判文，自然就会羞死！ 
English: When people asked him why, he said: "If the Soviet people see my sentence, they will naturally die of shame!"

古文：又尝谓人曰： 吾之文章，合得屈、宋作衙官；吾之书迹，合得王羲之北面。 
现代文：又曾对人说： 我的文章，可以让屈原、宋玉做我的属官；我的书法墨迹，应得到王羲之北面称臣。 
English: He also once said to people: My articles can make Qu Yuan and Song Yu my subordinates; my calligraphy ink should be praised by Wang Qian.

古文：其矜诞如此。
现代文：他就是如此的傲慢夸诞。
English: He's just such a pompous ass.

古文：累转洛阳丞。
现代文：后转任洛阳县丞。
English: Later, he was transferred to the post of Luoyang County magistrate.

古文：坐事贬授吉州司户参军。又与州僚不叶，司马周季重与员外司户郭若讷共构审言罪状，系狱，将因事杀之。
现代文：因事获罪被贬为吉州司户参军，又与本州同僚不和，司马周季重与员外司户郭若讷一道罗织审言的罪状，把审言关进了监狱，准备借事端杀了他。
English: Because of the crime, he was relegated to the position of the secretary of the Jizhou household to join the army, and he did not get along with his colleagues in the state. Sima Zhou Jishong worked with Guo Rongna, a member of the external secretary of the household, to fabricate the crime of the judge, put the judge in prison, and prepared to kill him by taking advantage of the situation.

古文：既而季重等府中酣宴，审言子并年十三，怀刃以击之。
现代文：随即季重等人在州府中酣宴，审言的儿子杜并这时刚刚十三岁，怀中藏着利刃前来刺杀他们。
English: Immediately afterwards, Ji Chong and others held a banquet in the state capital. The judge's son, Du Nian, who was just thirteen years old at the time, came to assassinate them with a sharp blade hidden in his bosom.

古文：季重中伤死，而并亦为左右所杀。
现代文：季重受伤死去，杜并也被季重身边的人杀害。
English: Ji Chong was injured and died, and Du was also killed by people around Ji Chong.

古文：季重临死曰： 吾不知审言有孝子，郭若讷误我至此！ 
现代文：季重临死说道： 我不知道审言有这样的孝子，郭若讷害我到这种地步。 
English: On his deathbed, Ji Chong said, "I didn't know the judge had such a filial son. Guo Rongna has brought me to this point.

古文：审言因此免官，还东都，自为文祭并。
现代文：审言也因此事被免去官职。他回到东都，亲自写文章祭祀杜并。
English: He returned to Dongdu and personally wrote an article on the Duyun ritual.

古文：士友咸哀并孝烈，苏颋为墓志，刘允济为祭文。
现代文：士人亲友都哀悼杜并孝顺刚烈，苏廷页为他做墓志，刘允济为他写祭文。
English: The scholar's relatives and friends all mourned Du Xian, the filial and obedient hero. Su Tingpai wrote his epitaph, and Liu Yunji wrote a eulogy for him.

古文：后则天召见审言，将加擢用。问曰： 卿欢喜否？ 
现代文：后来武则天召见审言，准备加以提拔进用，问他道： 你喜欢吗？ 
English: Later, Wu Zetian was summoned to see the judge and was about to promote him. He asked him, "Do you like it?

古文：审言蹈舞谢恩。因令作《欢喜诗》，甚见嘉赏，拜著作佐郎。
现代文：审言蹈舞以表敬谢恩，遵诏命作《欢喜诗》，很被称许赞赏，拜官著作佐郎。
English: The reviewers bowed their heads in gratitude and complied with the emperor's order to write "The Poem of Joy," which was highly praised and appreciated. It was written by a worshiper of the emperor, Saro.

古文：俄迁膳部员外郎。
现代文：不久迁任膳部员外郎。
English: Soon after, he was transferred to be a member of the kitchen staff.

古文：神龙初，坐与张易之兄弟交往，配流岭外。
现代文：神龙初，因与张易之兄弟交往而获罪，流放岭南。
English: At the beginning of the Dragon Dynasty, he was punished for associating with Zhang Yi's brother and was exiled to Lingnan.

古文：寻召授国子监主簿，加修文馆直学士。
现代文：不久被召授官国子监主簿，兼修文馆直学士。
English: Soon after, he was called to be the chief official of the State Children's Supervision, and he also studied for a bachelor's degree at the Central Academy of Literature.

古文：年六十余卒。
现代文：六十多岁去世。
English: He died in his sixties.

古文：有文集十卷。
现代文：有文集十卷。
English: He has written ten volumes of anthologies.

古文：次子闲。
现代文：次子名杜闲。
English: The second son's name was Du闲.

古文：闲子甫，别有传。
现代文：杜闲有儿子杜甫，另外有传。
English: Du Xian had a son, Du Fu, and there is another legend.

古文：卢照邻，字升之，幽州范阳人也。
现代文：卢照邻字升之，幽州范阳人。
English: Lu Zhao is a neighbor of Sheng Zhi, Yuzhou Fan Yangren.

古文：年十余岁，就曹宪、王义方授《苍》、《雅》及经史，博学善属文。
现代文：十余岁就学于曹宪、王义方，听他们讲授《三苍》、《尔雅》以及经史书籍。博学善于写文章。
English: He learned from Cao Xian and Wang Yifang when he was more than ten years old. He listened to their lectures on "The Three Kings," "The Elegy" and books on history. Erudite and good at writing articles.

古文：初授邓王府典签，王甚爱重之，曾谓群官曰： 此即寡人相如也。 
现代文：开始出仕授官邓王府典谶。邓王很爱重他，曾对众官员说： 他就是我的司马相如。 
English: Deng Wangfu loved him very much, and once said to all the officials: "He is my Sima Xiangru."

古文：后拜新都尉。因染风疾去官，处太白山中，以服饵为事。
现代文：后任新都县尉，因染上风疾而辞去官职，住在太白山中，以服药为事。
English: Later, he resigned from the post of Xindu County Lieutenant due to contracting wind disease, living in the Taibai Mountains and taking medicine.

古文：后疾转笃，徙居阳翟之具茨山，著《释疾文》、《五悲》等诵。颇有骚人之风，甚为文士所重。
现代文：后来病情加重，迁居阳翟的具茨山，做《释疾文》、《五悲》等诗文，颇有骚人风调，很被文士们推重。
English: Later, as his illness worsened, he moved to Mount Guts, where he suffered from impotence, and wrote poems such as "Explanation of Illness" and "Five Paths," which had a rather riotous style and were highly valued by scribes.

古文：照邻既沉痼挛废，不堪其苦，尝与亲属执别，遂自投颍水而死，时年四十。
现代文：照邻病势沉重残废后，不能忍受病痛折磨，曾与亲人握手告别，而后自投颍水而死，当时年仅四十岁。
English: After being severely crippled by the illness of his neighbor, he could not bear the pain and torture of the disease. He shook hands with his relatives to say goodbye, and then threw himself into the water to die. At that time, he was only forty years old.

古文：文集二十卷。
现代文：有文集二十卷。
English: There are 20 volumes in the anthology.

古文：兄光乘，亦知名，长寿中为陇州刺史。
现代文：哥哥卢光乘，也有名于当时，长寿年间为陇州刺史。
English: His elder brother, Lu Guangzheng, was also famous at that time, and he was the longest-living person in the history of Ganzhou.

古文：杨炯，华阴人。
现代文：杨炯，华阴人。
English: Yang Mi, Hua Yin.

古文：伯祖虔威，武德中官至右卫将军。
现代文：伯祖杨虔威，武德年间官职做到右卫将军。
English: His great-grandfather Yang Qianwei was promoted to the post of General of the Right Division during the reign of Emperor Wu De.

古文：炯幼聪敏博学，善属文。
现代文：杨炯年幼时就聪明博学，善于写文章。
English: At a young age, Yang Mi was smart and erudite, and good at writing articles.

古文：若夫义取随时，则出称警，入称跸，乃汉国之旧仪，犹可以行于代矣。亦何取变周公之轨物，改宣尼之法度者哉！
现代文：应童子科举中试，称为神童，拜官校书郎，为崇文馆学士。仪凤年间，太常博士苏知己上表，对公卿以下的礼服，请求另立制度文饰。
English: He was called a child prodigy in the junior high school entrance examination for boys, a scholar in the official school, and a scholar in the Chongwen Academy. During the Yi and Feng years, Dr. Su Zhizhong was on the table, and he asked for a separate system of decoration for ceremonial dresses below the nobility.

古文：由是竟寝知几所请。
现代文：诏命有关官吏详加讨论，炯曾上表进献其不同主张。
English: The imperial edict ordered the relevant officials to discuss the matter in detail, and Zou presented his different views on the table.

古文：俄迁詹事司直。
现代文：苏知己的请求竟因此表而作罢。杨炯不久转任詹事司直。
English: As a result, Su's request was turned down. Yang Wei was soon transferred to Zhan's post.

古文：则天初，坐从祖弟神让犯逆，左转梓州司法参军。
现代文：武则天执政之初，因堂弟神让造反牵累获罪，贬为梓州司法参军。
English: At the beginning of the reign of Wu Zetian, because his cousin, Shen, was involved in the rebellion, he was charged with a crime and demoted to judicial participation in the army of Zizhou.

古文：秩满，选授盈川令。
现代文：任职期满，铨选授官盈川县令。
English: At the end of his term of office, he was elected to the post of Yingchuan County magistrate.

古文：如意元年七月望日，宫中出盂兰盆，分送佛寺，则天御洛南门，与百僚观之。
现代文：如意元年七月十五日，宫内拿出盂兰盆，分别送给佛寺，武则天亲临洛阳城南门，与百官观看盂兰盆会。
English: On the 15th day of the 7th month of the 1st year of Ruyi, the imperial court took out the pottery and gave it to the Buddhist temple. Wu Zetian himself came to the south gate of Luoyang City to watch the pottery meeting with hundreds of officials.

古文：炯献《盂兰盆赋》，词甚雅丽。
现代文：杨炯进献《盂兰盆赋》，词采颇为雅致清丽。
English: Yang Hui Jin presented "Bao Lan Bon Fu," the words are quite elegant and beautiful.

古文：炯至官，为政残酷，人吏动不如意，辄搒杀之。
现代文：杨炯上任，处理政务颇残酷，百姓官吏稍不如意，就被鞭打至死。
English: When Yang Hui took office, he dealt with government affairs quite cruelly. If the people were a little dissatisfied with the officials, they were whipped to death.

古文：又所居府舍，多进士亭台，皆书榜额，为之美名，大为远近所笑。
现代文：他所居住的官署宅第，许多进士家的亭台楼阁，他都要一一为写匾额，题上美好的名称，大为远近人士所哂笑。
English: The mansion of the government office where he lived, the pavilions of many noblemen's houses, he wanted to write a beautiful name on the subject, which was ridiculed by people near and far.

古文：无何卒官。
现代文：不久死于任上。
English: He died shortly after taking office.

古文：中宗即位，以旧僚追赠著作郎。
现代文：中宗即位，因为旧日幕僚的关系追赠著作郎。
English: Chuzo ascended to the throne, but because of the relationship between the old day's staff members, he bequeathed the throne to his son.

古文：文集三十卷。
现代文：有文集三十卷。
English: There are thirty volumes in the anthology.

古文：炯与王勃、卢照邻、骆宾王以文词齐名，海内称为王杨卢骆，亦号为 四杰 。
现代文：杨炯与王勃、卢照邻、骆宾王以诗文齐名，天下人称作王杨卢骆，也号称 四杰 。
English: Yang Hui and Wang Bo, Lu Zhao Neighbor and Luo Bin Wang are equally famous for their poetry. People all over the world call Wang Yang Lu Luo, also known as the Four Heroes.

古文：炯闻之，谓人曰： 吾愧在卢前，耻居王后。 
现代文：杨炯听说后，对人说： 我愧在卢前，而耻居王后。 
English: After hearing this, Yang Xuan said to the people: "I am ashamed to be in front of Lu, but I am ashamed to be a queen."

古文：当时议者，亦以为然。
现代文：当时谈论这事的人，也以为如此。
English: People who were talking about it at the time thought so, too.

古文：其后崔融、李峤、张说俱重四杰之文。
现代文：此后崔融、李峤、张说都看重四杰的文章。
English: Since then, Cui Rong, Li Qian and Zhang said that they all valued the articles of the four heroes.

古文：崔融曰： 王勃文章宏逸，有绝尘之迹，固非常流所及。
现代文：崔融说： 王勃宏阔俊逸，有超绝尘俗的意韵，本来就不是寻常之辈可以比拟的。
English: Cui Rong said: Wang Bo is broad and handsome, and has a super vulgar rhyme, which is not comparable to ordinary people.

古文：炯与照邻可以企之，盈川之言信矣！ 
现代文：杨炯与照邻还可以企及，杨盈川的话是可信的。 
English: Yang Hui and Zhao Bei can still be reached, and Yang Yingchuan's words are credible.

古文：说曰： 杨盈川文思如悬河注水，酌之不竭，既优于卢，亦不减王。 耻居王后 ，信然； 愧在卢前 ，谦也。 
现代文：张说说： 杨盈川的文思有如悬河注水，滔滔不绝，取之不尽，既比卢为优，也不比王差。 耻居王后 的话，的确可信； 愧在卢前 ，则是自谦之词。 
English: Zhang said, "Yang Yingchuan's writings are like the overflowing water of a river, inexhaustible and inexhaustible, both better than Lu and no worse than the king. The words of the queen of shame are indeed credible; the words of shame before Lu are self-effacing.

古文：开元中，说为集贤大学士十余年。常与学士徐坚论近代文士，悲其凋丧。
现代文：开元年间，张说做集贤大学士十多年，常常与学士徐坚谈论近代文士，对他们的丧亡感到悲伤。
English: During the first year of the 21st century, Zhang said that he had been a scholar of Jixian University for more than 10 years. He often talked about modern scribes with Xu Jian, a scholar, and was saddened by their loss.

古文：坚曰： 李赵公、崔文公之笔术，擅价一时，其间孰优？ 
现代文：徐坚说： 李赵公、崔文公的文章技艺，擅长一时，他们之中谁更好？ 
English: Xu Jian said: Li Zhao Gong and Cui Wen Gong's essay skills are good at one time, who is better among them?

古文：说曰： 李峤、崔融、薛稷、宋之问之文，如良金美玉，无施不可。
现代文：张说说道： 李峤、崔融、薛稷、宋之问的诗文，有如良金美玉，无论用在何处都好。
English: Zhang said, "The poems of Li Qian, Cui Rong, Xue Qian, and Song Zhihu are like good jewels, no matter where they are used.

古文：富嘉谟之文，如孤峰绝岸，壁立万仞，浓云郁兴，震雷俱发，诚可畏也，若施于廊庙，则骇矣！
现代文：富嘉谟的诗文，好比孤峰耸立于陡峭的崖岸，乌云翻滚，震雷齐发，的确让人敬畏，然若用于朝廷中，就太吓人了。
English: Fu Jia Mu's poem, like a lonely peak standing on a steep cliff, dark clouds rolling and thunderous, is indeed awe-inspiring, but if it is used in the court, it is too frightening.

古文：阎朝隐之文，如丽服靓庄，燕歌赵舞，观者忘疲，若类之风、雅，则罪人矣！ 
现代文：阎朝隐的诗文，有如丽服靓妆，燕赵歌舞，让观看的人忘了疲劳；如与《风》、《雅》相比，那就是罪人了。 
English: Yan Chaoyin's poems are like beautiful clothes and makeup, and Yan Zhao's songs and dances, which make viewers forget their fatigue; if compared with "Wind" and "Beauty," it is a sinner.

古文：问后进词人之优劣，说曰： 韩休之文，如大羹旨酒，雅有典则，而薄于滋味。
现代文：徐坚问后来擅长文辞者的优劣，张说说： 韩休的诗文，如肉汁美酒，雅致而有规范，然而滋味较少。
English: When Xu Jian asked about the merits and demerits of those who later excelled in literary dictionaries, Zhang said: Han Xiu's poetry, like gravy and wine, is elegant and standardized, but less flavorful.

古文：许景先之文，如丰肌腻理，虽穠华可爱，而微少风骨。
现代文：许景文的诗文，似女子丰腴滑泽的肌肤，虽禾农艳华美得可爱，却很少风骨。
English: Xu Jingwen's poem, like a woman's plump and smooth skin, although it is lovely and beautiful, it has little style.

古文：张九龄之文，如轻缣素练，实济时用，而微窘边幅。
现代文：张九龄的诗文，如轻盈柔薄的素绢，确实有利于社会功用，只是润饰稍差一点。
English: Zhang Jiuling's poems, such as the light and soft suqin, are indeed conducive to social functions, but the embellishment is a little worse.

古文：王翰之文，如琼怀玉斝，虽烂然可珍，而多有玷缺。 
现代文：王翰的诗文，有如琼杯玉盏，虽灿然晶莹值得珍爱，却有很多瑕玷。 
English: Wang Han's poetry is like a crystal goblet. Although it is bright and worth cherishing, it has many flaws.

古文：坚以为然。
现代文：徐坚同意张说的看法。
English: Xu Jian agreed with what Zhang said.

古文：虔威子德干，高宗末，历泽、齐、汴、相四州刺史，治有威名，郡人为之语曰： 宁食三斗蒜，不逢杨德干。 
现代文：杨炯伯祖杨虔威的儿子杨德干，高宗末年历任泽州、齐州、汴州、相州四州刺史，治理政事有威严之称，州人为此传说： 宁食三斗蒜，不逢杨德干。 
English: Yang Degan, the son of Yang Qianwei, the founder of the state of Yangshuo, and Gao Zong, who served as governor of the four states of Zezhou, Qizhou, Zhangzhou and Xiangzhou in the last years of Gao Zong's reign, are known for their dignified governance. As a result, the people of the state have a legend: "It is better to eat three cloves of garlic than to be Yang Degan."

古文：子神让，天授初与徐敬业于扬州谋叛，父子伏诛。
现代文：德干有儿子名神让，天授初与徐敬业一道于扬州谋反，父子二人被处死刑。
English: Deccan had a son, Myojin Zhan. Together with Xu Jingye, Tianzhuhu plotted a rebellion in Yangzhou. Both father and son were sentenced to death.

古文：王勃。字子安，绛州龙门人。
现代文：王勃字子安，绛州龙门人。
English: Wang Bozhi Zi'an, from Longmen, Ganzhou.

古文：祖通，隋蜀郡司户书佐。大业末，弃官归，以著书讲学为业。
现代文：祖父王通，隋代曾任蜀郡司户书佐，大业末年，弃官归隐，以著书讲学为业。
English: Grandfather Wang Tong, the Sui Dynasty once served as Shu County Manager of the House of the House of the House of the House of the House of the House of the House of the House of the House of the House of the House of the House of the House of the House of the House of the House of the House.

古文：依《春秋》体例，自获麟后，历秦、汉至于后魏，著纪年之书，谓之《元经》。
现代文：曾依照《春秋》体例，撰写起自《春秋》所止年代，经秦汉直到后魏时期的纪年体史书，叫作《元经》。
English: In accordance with the "Spring and Autumn" style, a chronological history book was written from the time when "Spring and Autumn" ended, through the Qin and Han dynasties to the post-Wei period, called "Yuan Jing."

古文：又依《孔子家语》、扬雄《法言》例，为客主对答之说，号曰《中说》。
现代文：又按照《孔子家语》、扬雄《法言》旧例，阐述王通与门徒的主客问答言论，称为《中说》。
English: Also, in accordance with the old examples of "Confucius's Family Language" and Yang Xiong's "Dharma Discourses," Wang Tong and his disciples' Q&A speech, called "Saying."

古文：皆为儒士所称。
现代文：两书都被儒生所称赞。
English: Both books were highly praised by Confucian scholars.

古文：义宁元年卒，门人薛收等相与议谥曰文中子。
现代文：义宁元年去世，门生薛收等人互相商议起谥号为文中子。
English: Yining died in the first year of the year, and his protégé Xue Jie and others discussed with each other to change the family name to Wenzhongzi.

古文：二子：福畤、福郊。
现代文：王通有两个儿子：王福畴、王福郊。
English: Wang Tong has two sons: Wang Fuzhong and Wang Fuzhong.

古文：勃六岁解属文，构思无滞，词情英迈，与兄勔、勮，才藻相类。
现代文：王勃六岁就会写文章，文思通达无碍，情词英迈出众，与哥哥王面力、王腜才思文采相当。
English: Wang Bo will write an article at the age of six. He is fluent in writing, and his love words are outstanding. He is comparable to his elder brothers Wang Mianli and Wang Xizai.

古文：父友杜易简常称之曰： 此王氏三珠树也。 
现代文：父亲的朋友杜易简常称赞他们说： 这是王家的三株树。 
English: His father's friend Du Yi Jian often praised them, saying, "This is the three-trunked tree of the royal family.

古文：勃年未及冠，应幽素举及第。
现代文：王勃还不到二十岁，就应幽素科举而中试。
English: Wang Bo was not yet twenty years old when he took the entrance examination for Yuxu Science Education.

古文：乾封初，诣阙上《宸游东岳颂》。
现代文：乾封初，赴皇帝殿庭进奉《宸游东岳颂》。
English: At the beginning of Qianfeng, he went to the emperor's palace to worship the "Ode to the Eastern Mountains."

古文：时东都造乾元殿，又上《乾元殿颂》。
现代文：当时东都洛阳建造乾元殿，他又进奉《乾元殿颂》。
English: At that time, the eastern capital of Luoyang built the Qianyuan Hall, and he continued to worship the "Song of Qianyuan Hall."

古文：沛王贤闻其名，召为沛府修撰，甚爱重之。
现代文：沛王李贤听到他的名声，招请他为沛王府修撰，很得爱重。
English: When Pei Wang Lixian heard of his fame, he invited him to write for Pei Wangfu. He was very fond of him.

古文：诸王斗鸡，互有胜负，勃戏为《檄英王鸡文》。
现代文：当时诸位王爷斗鸡赌博，各有胜负，王勃写了一篇游戏文字：《檄英王鸡文》。
English: At that time, all the princes played the game of cockfighting, and each of them won or lost. Wang Bo wrote a game text: "The King of the King of the King of the Chicken."

古文：高宗览之，怒曰： 据此是交构之渐。 
现代文：高宗看了后，发怒道： 写这样的文章分明是加剧众王相互间的构陷。 
English: After reading the article, Gao Zong became angry and said, "Writing such an article is clearly to aggravate the situation between the kings.

古文：即日斥勃，不令入府。
现代文：当天就赶走了王勃，不让他再进沛王府。
English: On the same day, Wang Bo was driven away, and he was not allowed to enter the Pei Wangfu again.

古文：久之，补虢州参军。
现代文：好长时间以后，才补授虢州参军官职。
English: It took a long time before he was awarded the post of Zhangzhou senator.

古文：勃恃才傲物，为同僚所嫉。
现代文：王勃恃才傲物，被同僚所忌恨。
English: The king of Burgundy was a proud man, hated by his colleagues.

古文：有官奴曹达犯罪，勃匿之，又惧事泄，乃杀达以塞口。
现代文：有个官府的奴隶曹达犯了罪，王勃把他藏了起来，后又怕事情泄露，便杀了曹达以塞口。
English: Cao Da, a slave of the government, committed a crime. Wang Bo hid him, and then, fearing that the matter would be leaked, he killed Cao Da with a plug.

古文：事发，当诛，会赦除名。
现代文：此事终于败露，本应判死刑，恰逢大赦，便被除名而免于一死。
English: The matter finally came to light. He should have been sentenced to death, but it coincided with an amnesty, so he was removed from the list and spared death.

古文：时勃父福畤为雍州司户参军，坐勃左迁交趾令。
现代文：当时王勃的父亲王福畴为雍州司户参军，受王勃牵累，贬官交趾县令。
English: At that time, Wang Bo's father, Wang Fuzhong, joined the army as the head of a household in Yongzhou. He was dragged down by Wang Bo and was demoted to the position of county magistrate.

古文：上元二年，勃往交趾省父，道出江中，为《采莲赋》以见意，其辞甚美。
现代文：上元二年，王勃到交趾去看望父亲，路经长江，写了一篇《采莲赋》以抒写情意，文辞很美。
English: In the second year of the Yuan Dynasty, Wang Bo went to Jiaozuo to visit his father. Passing through the Yangtze River, he wrote a "Lotus Picking" to express his feelings, the words are very beautiful.

古文：渡南海，堕水而卒，时年二十八。
现代文：在渡南海时，王勃落海溺水而死，当时年仅二十八岁。
English: While crossing the South China Sea, Wang Bo fell into the sea and drowned. He was only 28 years old at the time.

古文：苾，弱冠进士登第，累除太子典膳丞。
现代文：王腜，二十岁中进士，后任太子典膳丞。
English: Wang Yao, a 20-year-old junior high school student, later became Crown Prince Tenzenzenjo.

古文：长寿中，擢为凤阁舍人。
现代文：长寿年间，被提拔为凤阁舍人。
English: During his long life, he was promoted to the post of Fengge villager.

古文：时寿春王成器、衡阳王成义等五王初出阁，同日授册。
现代文：当时寿春王李成器、衡阳王李成义等五位王爷正要去封地做藩王，同一年予以册封。
English: At that time, five princes, including Shuchun King Licheng Ji and Hengyang King Licheng Yi, were going to the fief to become the king of the domain, and they were canonized in the same year.

古文：有司撰仪注，忘载册文。
现代文：主管官吏撰写礼仪制度，忘了写到册书上。
English: When the responsible officials wrote the etiquette system, they forgot to write it in the register.

古文：及百僚在列，方知阙礼，宰相相顾失色。
现代文：等到百官列于朝廷，才发现有缺于礼节，宰相相顾失色。
English: It wasn't until hundreds of officials were lined up at the imperial court that it was discovered that there was a lack of etiquette, and the prime minister lost his cool.

古文：苾立召书吏五人，各令执笔，口占分写，一时俱毕。词理典赡，人皆叹服。
现代文：王腜立即召集五个文书，吩咐他们各自执笔，由他口授，分头往册书上写，一会儿全部写毕，词采典雅富赡，人们都极为叹服。
English: Wang Yao immediately called together five clerks and ordered them to each write a letter, which he dictated to them, and they wrote them separately, one after the other, until they had written them all. The words were elegant and rich, and people were extremely impressed.

古文：寻加弘文馆学士，兼知天官侍郎。
现代文：不久加官弘文馆学士，兼知天官侍郎。
English: He was soon promoted to the rank of scholar of the Korean Literature Museum, and also became a courtier.

古文：苾颇任权势，交结非类。
现代文：王腜很看重权势，交结行为不端的人。
English: Wang Yao attaches great importance to power, and associates with people who behave improperly.

古文：万岁通天二年，綦连耀谋逆事泄，閟坐与耀善，并弟閟并伏诛。
现代文：万岁通天二年，綦连耀谋反事败露，王腜因与连耀友善而获罪，连弟弟王面力一起被处死刑。
English: In the second year of Wan Rong Tong Tian, Zhai Lianyao's conspiracy was exposed, Wang Yao was found guilty of being friendly with Lian Yao, and even his brother Wang Mianli was sentenced to death.

古文：閟累官至泾州刺史。
现代文：面力官职做到泾州刺史。
English: He worked hard at his official duties to make Zhangzhou's history.

古文：神龙初，有诏追复苾、閟官位。
现代文：神龙初，有诏命为已死的王腜、王面力恢复官位。
English: At the very beginning of the divine dragon, there was a decree to restore the official position to the dead Wang Yao and Wang Mianli.

古文：福畤，天后朝以子贵，累转泽州长史，卒。
现代文：王福畴，武则天朝因儿子而显贵，后转任泽州长史，死于任上。
English: Wang Fuzhong, Wu Zetian's son, rose to prominence in the imperial court. Later, he was transferred to the post of governor of Zhejiang Province and died in office.

古文：初，吏部侍郎裴行俭典选，有知人之鉴，见苾与苏味道，谓人曰： 二子亦当掌铨衡之任。 
现代文：当初，吏部侍郎裴行俭主持铨选之事，有知人之明，见过王腜与苏味道，就对人说： 王子、苏子也当执掌铨选官员的重任。 
English: At the beginning, the steward of the personnel department, Pei Xingjian, presided over the selection of officials. It was clear to his acquaintances that he had seen the taste of Wang Xi and Su Zi, and he said to people: The prince and Su Zi should also be in charge of the important task of selecting officials.

古文：李敬玄尤重杨炯、卢照邻、骆宾王与勃等四人，必当显贵。
现代文：李敬玄尤其看重杨炯、卢照邻、骆宾王与王勃四人，认为一定会显贵。
English: Li Jingxuan attaches particular importance to Yang Hui, Lu Zhaoqiang, Luo Bin Wang and Wang Bo, and believes that they will be distinguished.

古文：行俭曰： 士之致远，先器识而后文艺。
现代文：裴行俭说： 士人的致远，先须具备见识度量，而后才是写作方面的学问。
English: Pei Xingjian said, "In order for a scholar to go far, he must first have insight and measurement, and then he must have the knowledge of writing.

古文：勃等虽有文才，而浮躁浅露，岂享爵禄之器耶！
现代文：王勃等人虽有文才，而心性浮躁浅露，哪有能享爵禄的气度！
English: Although Wang Bo and others have literary talent, but their hearts are impetuous and shallow, how can they enjoy the grace of the peerage!

古文：杨子沉静，应至令长，余得令终为幸。 
现代文：杨子沉静，当能做到令长，其余能得到善终就是幸事。 
English: Yang Zi is calm. It is a blessing to be able to achieve a long life, and the rest can get a happy ending.

古文：果如其言。
现代文：后来的情形果然如他所说。
English: He really nailed it.

古文：勃文章迈捷，下笔则成，尤好著书。撰《周易发挥》五卷，及《次论》等书数部。勃亡后，并多遗失。
现代文：王勃写文章超迈迅捷，下笔则成，尤其喜好著述，撰有《周易发挥》五卷以及《次论》等几部书，王勃死后，多半都遗失了。
English: Wang Bo wrote articles very quickly, and his next stroke was perfect. He especially liked writing, and he wrote "Zhou Yi Yu" in five volumes and "Second Treatise" and several other books, most of which were lost after Wang Bo's death.

古文：有文集三十卷。
现代文：有文集三十卷。
English: Thirty volumes of the anthology have been handed down to posterity.

古文：勃聪警绝众，于推步历算尤精，尝作《大唐千岁历》，言唐德灵长千年，不合承周、隋短祚。
现代文：王勃聪明机敏过人，对于推算天文历法的学问尤为精通，曾作《大唐千岁历》，说唐朝美好的国运长达千年，不会承继北周、隋朝的短寿。
English: Wang Bo was extremely clever and astute. He was particularly proficient in the knowledge of calculating the astronomical calendar. He once wrote "The Great Tang Thousand-Year Calendar," saying that the Tang Dynasty's good fortune lasted for a thousand years and would not succeed the short life of the Northern Zhou and Sui Dynasties.

古文：其论大旨云： 以土王者，五十代而一千年；金王者，四十九代而九百年；水王者，二十代而六百年；木王者，三十代而八百年；火王者，二十代而七百年。
现代文：其论述主旨为： 以土德称王的朝代，传五十代享国一千年；以金德称王的，传四十九代享国九百年；以水德称王的，传二十代享国六百年；以木德称王的，传三十代享国八百年；以火德称王的，传二十代享国七百年。
English: The theme of the exposition is as follows: The dynasties of the kings of the earth and the kings of the earth are said to last for one thousand years for fifty generations; the kings of the kings of the kings of the kings of the kings of the kings of the kings of the kings of the kings of the kings of the kings of the kings of the kings of the kings of the kings of the kings of the kings of the kings of the kings of the kings of the kings of the kings of the kings of the kings of the kings of the kings of the kings of the kings of the kings of the kings of the kings of the kings of the kings of the kings of the kings of the kings of the kings

古文：此天地之常期，符历之数也。
现代文：这是天地间的定期，符合历法的数目。
English: This is a regular interval between heaven and earth, a number in accordance with the calendar.

古文：自黄帝至汉，并是五运真主。
现代文：从黄帝到汉代，一起是五运的真命天子。
English: From the Yellow Emperor to the Han Dynasty, together they are the true sons of fortune.

古文：五行已遍，土运复归，唐德承之，宜矣！
现代文：五行已历遍，复归于土运，唐代以德承此运是适宜的。
English: The Five Elements have been passed down through the ages, and it is appropriate to return to the local movement and carry on this movement with virtue in the Tang Dynasty.

古文：魏、晋至于周、隋，咸非正统，五行之沴气也，故不可承之。 
现代文：魏、晋直到北周、隋朝，都不是正统，是五行的灾害不祥之气所致，因此不能继承。 
English: The Wei and Jin dynasties, as well as the Northern Zhou and Sui dynasties, were not orthodox, but were caused by the disasters of the Five Elements, and therefore could not be inherited.

古文：大率如此。
现代文：大致如此。
English: That's about it.

古文：骆宾王，婺州义乌人。
现代文：骆宾王，婺州义乌人。
English: Luo Bin Wang, a native of Yiwu, Zhangzhou.

古文：少善属文，尤妙于五言诗，尝作《帝京篇》，当时以为绝唱。
现代文：青少年时便善于写作诗文，尤以五言诗为妙，曾作《帝京篇》，当时被称为绝唱。
English: When he was a teenager, he was good at writing poems, especially five-character poems. He once wrote the "Imperial Capital" poem, which was known as a swan song at the time.

古文：然落魄无行，好与博徒游。
现代文：然而他潦倒落魄品行不端，喜欢与赌徒交游。
English: However, he is a degenerate with a bad character and likes to mingle with gamblers.

古文：高宗末，为长安主簿。
现代文：高宗末年，任长安主簿。
English: In the last years of Gaozong's life, he served as the chief accountant of Chang'an.

古文：坐赃，左迁临海丞，怏怏失志，弃官而去。
现代文：因贪赃犯法，被贬谪为临海县丞，怏怏不得志，便弃官而去。
English: Due to corruption and breaking the law, he was demoted to Linhai County magistrate, but he did not want to be demoted, so he resigned and left.

古文：文明中，与徐敬业于扬州作乱。
现代文：文明年中，与徐敬业在扬州起兵反叛。
English: In the middle of the civilization, he and Xu Jingye rebelled in Yangzhou.

古文：敬业军中书檄，皆宾王之词也。
现代文：敬业军队中的各种文书，都是骆宾王所写。
English: All kinds of documents in the professional army were written by Luo Bin Wang.

古文：敬业败，伏诛，文多散失。
现代文：敬业失败后，被处死刑，文章大多散失。
English: He was sentenced to death after failing to engage in his profession, and most of his articles were lost.

古文：则天素重其文，遣使求之。
现代文：武则天向来看重骆宾王的文章，曾派人搜求他的作品。
English: Wu Zetian has always come to see the articles of Chongluo Binwang, and has sent people to search for his works.

古文：有兗州人郄云卿集成十卷，盛传于世。
现代文：有个兖州人郄云卿辑成十卷，盛传于当时。
English: There was a man from Zhangzhou, Zou Yunqing, who compiled it into ten volumes, and it was widely read at the time.

