古文：吕安国，广陵广陵人也。
现代文：吕安国，是广陵广陵人。
English: Lu'an Province, is Guangling Guangling people.

古文：宋大明末，安国以将领见任，隐重有干局，为刘勔所称。
现代文：宋大明末年，吕安国被任为将领，稳重能干，被刘劻夸赞。
English: At the end of the Song Dynasty, Lu An Guo was appointed as a general. He was steady and capable, and was praised by Liu Bei.

古文：泰始二年，勔征殷琰于寿春，安国以建威将军为勔军副。
现代文：泰始二年，刘劻讨伐在寿春的殷琰，吕安国以建威将军职衔作刘劻的副手。
English: In the second year of Taizhi, Liu Bei attacked Yin Qi in Shuchun, and Lu'an Province, with the title of General Jian Wei, served as Liu Bei's deputy.

古文：众军击破琰长史杜叔宝军于横塘，安国抄断贼粮道，烧其运车，多所伤杀。
现代文：大军在横塘击破殷琰长史杜叔宝的部众，吕安国抄断贼军的粮道，烧了他们的运粮车，杀伤很多。
English: In Hengtang, the large army defeated the subordinates of Yin Zhaochang Shi Du Shubao, Lu'an cut off the food supply route of the thief army, burned their grain trucks, and there were many casualties.

古文：琰众奔退，勔遣安国追之，先至寿春。
现代文：殷琰部众向后奔逃，刘劻派遣吕安国追击他们，吕安国先到寿春。
English: The Yin and Yang forces fled backwards, and Liu Bei sent Lu'an to chase after them. Lu'an arrived at Shuchun first.

古文：琰闭门自守，安国与辅国将军垣闳屯据城南，于是众军继至。
现代文：殷琰紧闭城门守护寿春，吕安国与辅国将军垣闳屯据城南，于是刘劻大军随后来到。
English: Yin Qi closed the city gate to guard Shuchun, and the generals of Lu'an and the auxiliary states were stationed in the south of the city, so Liu Bei's army followed.

古文：安国勋第一，封彭泽县男，未拜，明年，改封钟武县，加邑为四百户。
现代文：吕安国功劳第一，封彭泽县男，吕安国没有领受，第二年改封钟武县，另加食邑四百户。
English: He was the first to be awarded the title of Pengze County for meritorious service to the State of Lu'an, but the award was not accepted by the State of Lu'an. The next year, he was awarded the title of Zhongwu County, in addition to 400 households in the county.

古文：累至宁朔将军、义阳太守。
现代文：累升至宁朔将军、义阳太守。
English: He was successively promoted to Ningshuo general and Yiyang governor.

古文：四年，又改封湘南县男。
现代文：泰始四年，又改封湘南县男。
English: At the age of four, he was once again given the title of Shonan County man.

古文：虏陷汝南，司州失守，以安国为督司州诸军事、宁朔将军、司州刺史。
现代文：敌人攻陷汝南，司州失守，任用吕安国做都督司州诸军事、宁朔将军，司州刺史。
English: The enemy invaded the south of the Ryukyus, Sizhou was lost, and Lu'an was appointed as the military governor of Sizhou, the general of Ningshuo, and the governor of Sizhou.

古文：六年，义阳立州治，仍领义阳太守。
现代文：泰始六年，设立义阳州治，仍领义阳太守。
English: Six years after the establishment of the Yiyang prefecture, the Yiyang governor was still in power.

古文：稍迁右军将军，假辅师将军。
现代文：不久迁任右军将军，假辅师将军。
English: He was soon transferred to the post of general of the right army and then to the post of general of the auxiliary division.

古文：元徽二年，为晋熙王征虏司马，辅师将军如故。
现代文：元徽二年，做晋熙王征虏司马，辅师将军之职照旧未变。
English: In the 2nd year of the Yuan Dynasty, the duties of the Jinxi King's enlistment of Sima, the assistant general, remained unchanged.

古文：转游击将军。三年，出为持节、都督青兖冀三州缘淮前锋诸军事、辅师将军、兖州刺史。
现代文：转任游击将军元徽三年，外放任持节、都督青、兖、冀三州缘淮前锋诸军事、辅师将军、兖州刺史。
English: He was transferred to the guerrilla general Yuan Hui for three years, and was assigned to the military, auxiliary division general, and Zhangzhou stabbing history.

古文：明年，进号冠军将军，还为游击将军，加散骑常侍、征虏将军。
现代文：第二年封号晋升为冠军将军，再任游击将军，加散骑常侍、征虏将军。
English: In the second year, he was promoted to Champion General, re-appointed as Guerrilla General, and given the additional titles of Cavalryman and Conscript General.

古文：沈攸之事起，太祖以安国为湘州刺史，征虏将军如故。
现代文：沈攸之起兵反蕴迫盛的事发生后，左趄芦道毖以吕安国为挝州刺史，征虏将军之职依前未变。
English: After the occurrence of Shen You's uprising, Zuo Huludao chose Lu'an as the capital of Laos, and the position of the conscript general remained unchanged.

古文：先是王蕴罢州，南中郎将南阳王翙未之镇，蕴宁朔长史庾佩玉权行州事，朝廷先遣南中郎将中兵参军临湘令韩幼宗领军防州。
现代文：这以前挝蛆刺史王蕴因母丧罢职，南中郎将南区王刘彪又未到镇治，由王蕴的宁朔长史座周玉暂管理州衙事务，朝廷先派南中郎将中兵参军临湘令韩幼宗率领军队到州驻防。
English: Prior to this, the governor of Laos, Wang Yun, resigned due to the death of his mother. The governor of the southern region, Liu Biao, was also dismissed by the southern vice-governor. The governor of Ningshuo, Zhou Yu, temporarily managed the state affairs. The court first sent the vice-governor of the southern region, Han Youzong, to lead the army to the state garrison.

古文：沈攸之之难，二人各相疑阻，佩玉辄杀幼宗。
现代文：沈攸之的发难，使庾佩玉和韩幼宗互相猜疑，庾佩玉擅自杀了韩幼宗。
English: Shen Youzhi's difficulties made Zou Peiyu and Han Youzong suspicious of each other, and Zou Peiyu killed Han Youzong without permission.

古文：平西将军黄回至郢州，遣军主任候伯行湘州事，又杀佩玉。
现代文：平西将军黄回到郢州，派遣军主任候伯行使湘州刺史职权，又杀了庾佩玉。
English: General Huang Pingxi returned to Zhangzhou, dispatched military director Hou Bo to exercise the authority of stabbing history in Hunan, and killed Zou Peiyu.

古文：候伯与回同卫将军袁粲谋石头事，回令候伯水军乘舸往赴，会众军已至，不得入。
现代文：任候伯与黄回同卫将军袁粲共谋在石头城起兵反萧道成，黄回命令任候伯的水军乘船到石头城参战，正遇上萧道成的大军已到，没能进入石头城。
English: Ren Xubo conspired with Huang Hui's general Yuan Qi to raise an army against Xiao Daocheng in Stone Town. Huang Hui ordered Ren Xubo's navy to sail to Stone Town to join the war. However, Xiao Daocheng's army had already arrived and was unable to enter Stone Town.

古文：太祖令安国至镇，收候伯诛之。
现代文：太祖萧道成命令吕安国到湘州刺史任上，收捕任候伯并杀掉他。
English: The great-grandfather Xiao Daocheng ordered Lu'an to go to Hunan Province to assassinate him, arrest and kill him.

古文：寻进号前将军。
现代文：不久，吕安国进爵号为前将军。
English: He was soon promoted to the rank of general.

古文：建元元年，进爵，增邑六百户。
现代文：建元元年，又晋升爵位，食邑增至六百户。
English: In the first year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, he was promoted to the peerage again, and the food villages increased to six hundred households.

古文：转右卫将军，加给事中。
现代文：转任右卫将军，加给事中。
English: He was transferred to the post of General of the Right Division, and was added to the case.

古文：二年，虏寇边，上遣安国出司州，安集民户。
现代文：齐建元二年，敌寇侵犯边境，皇上派遣吕安国到司州，收抚安置百姓。
English: In the second year of Qi Jianyuan, the enemy invaded the border, and the emperor sent Lu'an to Sizhou to collect and resettle the people.

古文：诏曰： 郢、司之间，流杂繁广，宜并加区判，定其隶属。
现代文：韶旨说： 郢、司之间，流民混杂很多，应都加以区别，决定他们的隶属关系。
English: Zou Zi said, "There are a lot of mixed-up refugees among the cadres and officers. They should all be distinguished and their affiliation should be determined.

古文：参详两州，事无专任，安国可暂往经理。 
现代文：考察两州，这事都没有专任官，韶命吕安国暂到那襄经营管理。 
English: After inspecting the two prefectures, there was no full-time official in charge of the matter, so Lu'an State was forced to temporarily go there for operation and management.

古文：以本官使持节，总荆郢诸军北讨事，屯义阳西关。
现代文：吕安国以原有的官职持节、总理荆郢诸军北伐事，屯驻义阳西关。
English: Lu'an Province, with the original official position of holding the festival, Prime Minister Jing Yi led the army to the north, stationed in Yiyang Xiguan.

古文：虏未至，安国移屯沔口以俟应接。
现代文：敌军未到，吕安国移屯到沔口以便应接。
English: Before the arrival of the enemy army, Lu'an Province moved to the Hekou in order to meet it.

古文：改封湘乡。
现代文：后改封湘乡。
English: It was later renamed Hunan Township.

古文：世祖即位，授使持节、散骑常侍、平西将军、司州刺史，领义阳太守。
现代文：世祖萧赜即皇帝位，授使持节、散骑常侍、平西将军、司州刺史，领义阳太守。
English: The founder of the dynasty, Emperor Xiao Zhen, conferred the titles of Jichijie, Zangjie, Pingxi, Shizhou, and Yiyang.

古文：永明二年，徙都督南兖兖徐青冀五州诸军事、平北将军、南兖州刺史，仍为都督、湘州刺史。
现代文：永明二年，调都督南兖、兖、徐、青、冀五州诸军事、平北将军、南兖州刺史，仍做都督、湘州刺史。
English: In the second year of Yongming, he transferred the governors of the five prefectures of Nan'an, Fen'an, Xu'an, Qing'an, and Hebei to the military, the general of Pingbei, and the governor of Nan'an; he still served as the governor and the governor of Hunan.

古文：四年，湘川蛮动，安国督州兵讨之。
现代文：永明四年，湘川蛮暴动，吕安国督率州兵平定。
English: In the fourth year of the Yongming era, there was a violent riot in Xiangchuan, which was put down by the Governor of Lu'an Province and the National Army.

古文：有疾，征为光禄大夫，加散骑常侍。
现代文：有病，被征召做光禄大夫，加散骑常侍。
English: He was ill, and was called up to be a doctor of honor, and was made a samurai.

古文：安国欣有文授，谓其子曰： 汝后勿作袴褶驱使，单衣犹恨不称，当为朱衣官也。 
现代文：吕安国为能授给自己文职而高兴，对他的儿子说： 你今后不要穿军服被派去做武官，这与上朝时穿的朝服十分不相称，应该去做穿绯红色官服的文官。 
English: Lu'an Guo was happy to be given a civilian post and said to his son, "In the future, you should not wear a military uniform to be assigned as a military attaché. This is very incongruous with the imperial uniform worn during the last reign. You should be a civilian official wearing a scarlet official uniform."

古文：上遣中书舍人茹法亮敕安国曰： 吾恒忧卿疾病，应有所须，勿致难也。 
现代文：皇上派中书舍人茹法亮告诉吕安国说： 我经常为你的疾病担忧，有什么要求，不必为难。 
English: The emperor sent Zhufa Liang, a scholar from the Middle Kingdom, to Lu'an to say, "I often worry about your illness. If you have any request, don't be embarrassed.

古文：明年，迁都官尚书，领太子左率。
现代文：第二年升为都官尚书，领太子左率。
English: In the second year, he was promoted to the post of metropolitan official, leading the prince to the left.

古文：六年，迁领军将军。
现代文：永明六年，升任领军将军。
English: In the sixth year of Yongming, he was promoted to the leading general.

古文：安国累居将率，在朝以宿旧见遇。
现代文：吕安国长期官居将帅，朝廷以故旧老臣看待。
English: As a long-serving official and general of Lu'an Province, the imperial court regarded him as an old retainer.

古文：寻迁散骑常侍、金紫光禄大夫、兖州中正，给扶。
现代文：不久升任散骑常侍、金紫光禄大夫、兖州中正，赏给扶的礼遇。
English: He was soon promoted to the positions of strolling equerry, gold and purple doctor, and vice-governor of Bozhou, and was given the courtesy of an assistant.

古文：上又敕茹法亮曰： 吾见吕安国疾状，自不宜劳，且脚中既恒恶，扶人至吾前，于礼望殊成有亏，吾难敕之。
现代文：皇上又告诉茹法亮说： 我看吕安国的病状，不应该劳动，况且脚上总有毛病，搀扶他的人到我跟前，对于礼望颇有欠缺，我又难以告诉他。
English: The emperor also told Ruffalo: "I think the state of Lu's health is such that he should not have to work. Moreover, he always has problems with his feet. The people who help him to come to me are rather lacking in courtesy, and it is difficult for me to tell him.

古文：其人甚讳病，卿可作私意向，其若好差不复须扶人，依例入，幸勿牵勉。 
现代文：他那人很怕说病，你可以私下转达我的意向，他假如好歹不要人扶，可依例入朝，望不必勉强。 
English: He's afraid to call in sick. You can convey my intention privately. If he doesn't want anyone to help him, he can go to the palace as usual. There's no need to force him.

古文：八年，卒，年六十四。
现代文：永明八年死去，享年六十四岁。
English: Yongming died eight years ago, at the age of 64.

古文：赠使持节、镇北将军、南兖州刺史，常侍如故。
现代文：追赠使持节、镇北将军、卢查处刺史，常侍之职依旧不变。
English: The posthumous conferral of the title of Jichisai, the title of Zhenbei General, and the title of Luchasubi History, the position of the regular attendant remains unchanged.

古文：给鼓吹一部。
现代文：赐给一部鼓吹。谧号为尽堡。
English: Part of the trumpet band.

古文：谥肃侯。时旧将帅又有吴郡全景文，字弘达。
现代文：当时旧将帅又有吴郡人全景文，字弘达。
English: At that time, the old general Shuai and the people of Wuxi County had a panoramic view, and the word Hongda.

古文：少有气力，与沈攸之同载出都，到奔牛埭，于岸上息，有人相之： 君等皆方伯人，行当富贵也。 
现代文：年轻时就有气力，与沈攸之同船出京都，到查生埭，在岸上休息，有人给看相说： 你等都是一方诸侯之主的样子，很快就要富贵。 
English: When he was young, he had the strength to sail out of Kyoto with Shen You to Chasheng and rest on the shore. Someone said to him, "You both look like princes, and you will soon be rich and famous."

古文：景文谓攸之曰： 富贵或可一人耳，今言皆然，此殆妄言也。 
现代文：全景文对沈攸之说： 一人富贵或许可能，现在说都会富贵，这几乎是胡说。 
English: Panorama said to Shen Youlu: It is possible for one person to be rich, but it is almost nonsense to say that everyone will be rich.

古文：景文仍得将领为军主。
现代文：全景文还是得当将领任军主。
English: Panorama is still the general leading the army.

古文：孝建初，为竟陵王骠骑行参军，以功封汉水侯。
现代文：孝建初年做竞陵王骠骑行参军，因功封为汉水侯。
English: In his first year of service, Xiao Jian joined the army riding a Jingling Wangye, and was awarded the title of Han Shui Hou.

古文：除员外郎，积射将军。
现代文：拜授员外郎，积射将军。
English: Gairo, a member of the Confucius Institute, is a general.

古文：泰始二年，为假节、宁朔将军、冗从仆射、军主。
现代文：泰始二年，为假节、宁朔将军、冗从仆射、军主。
English: In the first two years of Taizhi, it was a false festival, Ningshuo general, Zhou follower, gunner, and military leader.

古文：随前将军刘亮讨破东贼于晋陵，除长水校尉，假辅国将军。
现代文：跟随前将军刘亮在晋陵讨平柬贼孔颛，授长水校尉，假辅国将军。
English: Follow the former general Liu Liang in Jinling to level the Cambodian thief Kong Qian, confer the rank of chief water officer, and pretend to be the general of the auxiliary country.

古文：北讨薛索儿于破釜，领水军断贼粮运。
现代文：向北在破釜讨伐薛索儿时，率领水军断绝敌人的粮草运输。
English: To the north, he led the navy to cut off the enemy's grain and grass transportation when breaking the cauldron to fight against Xue Sorong.

古文：仍随太祖于葛冢石梁，再战皆有功。
现代文：还随太祖萧道成到葛冢石梁，两战都有功劳。
English: He also followed the great-great-grandfather Xiao Daocheng to Gezheng Shiliang, and had merits in both wars.

古文：南贼相持未决，敕景文隶刘亮拒刘胡，攻围力战，身被数十创，除前军将军，封孝宁县侯，邑六百户。
现代文：当与南方贼寇相持不下时，萧道成卜敕书通知全景文隶属刘亮抵御刘胡，围困攻击时，全景文身受创伤几十处，被授予前军将军，封孝宁县侯，食邑六百户。
English: When he couldn't hold out against the southern bandits, Xiao Dao Chengbiao wrote a letter to inform that Panorama Wen belonged to Liu Liang and resisted Liu Hu. During the siege attack, Panorama Wen suffered dozens of injuries and was awarded the former army general, the fief of Xiaoning County, and 600 households in food villages.

古文：除宁朔将军，游击将军，假辅师将军，高平太守，镇军、安西二府司马，骁骑将军。
现代文：又授予宁朔将军，游击将军，假辅师将军，高平太守，镇军、安西二府司马，骁骑将军。
English: It was also awarded to the general of Ningshuo, the general of guerrilla warfare, the general of false auxiliary division, the governor of Gaoping, the general of town troops, the secretary of Anxi Second Prefecture, and the general of cavalry.

古文：元徽末，出为南豫州刺史、历阳太守，辅国将军如故。
现代文：元徽末年，外调做南豫州刺史、历阳太守，辅国将军之职依然未变。
English: At the end of the Yuan Dynasty, he was transferred to be the governor of Southern Yuzhou and the governor of Liyang, but his duties as the general of the auxiliary state remained unchanged.

古文：迁征虏将军、南琅邪济阴二郡太守、军主，寻加散骑常侍。
现代文：升任征虏将军、南琅邪济阴二郡太守，军主，不久加散骑常侍。
English: He was promoted to the position of conscript general, the governor of the two counties of Nanxun and Jiyin, the commander of the army, and soon became a cavalryman.

古文：建元元年，以不预佐命，国除，授南琅邪太守，常侍、将军如故。
现代文：建元元年，因为没能参预帮助萧道成建齐事，被撤除封国，授南琅邪太守，常侍、将军之职依旧不变。
English: In the first year of Jianyuan, because he could not participate in the preliminaries to help Xiao Dao to complete the construction, he was removed from the fiefdom, and was awarded the title of Nanzhangye Dazhong, but his duties as a regular attendant and general remained unchanged.

古文：迁光禄大夫，征虏将军、临川王征西司马、南郡太守。
现代文：升任光禄大夫，征虏将军、临川王征西司马、南郡太守。
English: He was promoted to Guanglu Doctor, Conscript General, Linchuan King, Western Sima, and Nan County Governor.

古文：还，累迁为给事中，光禄大夫。
现代文：回朝后，多次迁任，官至给事中，光禄大夫。
English: After returning to the imperial court, he was transferred several times, and eventually became a medical officer, Dr. Guanglu.

古文：永明九年，卒。
现代文：丞塱九年逝世。
English: He died nine years later.

古文：周山图，字季寂，义兴义乡人也。
现代文：周山图，字季寂，是义兴义乡人。
English: Zhou Shantou, also known as Ji Jia, is a righteous villager.

古文：少贫微，佣书自业。
现代文：年轻时家境贫寒地位卑下，租书攻读。
English: When he was young, he came from a poor family and was in a lowly position. He rented books to study.

古文：有气干，为吴郡晋陵防郡队主。
现代文：富有才干，做吴郡晋陵防郡队主。
English: Rich in talent, he is the team leader of Jinling County, Wuxi County.

古文：宋孝武伐太初，山图豫勋，赐爵关中侯。
现代文：宋孝武帝讨伐太初刘劬，周山图参与有功，赐爵为关中侯。
English: Emperor Song Xiaowu cracked down on Liu Bei at the beginning of the century, and Zhou Shantu was awarded the title of Guan Zhonghou.

古文：兖州刺史沈僧荣镇瑕丘，与山图有旧，以为己建武府参军。
现代文：兖州刺史沈僧荣镇守瑕丘，和周山固有老交情，让周山囤做自己的建武府参军。
English: Shen Zeng Rong, the chief of Shen Zeng Rong Town in Zhangzhou, guarded Kejiu, and had a long-standing friendship with Zhou Shan. He let Zhou Shan Rong join the army to build his own capital.

古文：竟陵王诞据广陵反，僧荣遣山图领二百人诣沈庆之受节度，事平论勋，为中书舍人戴明宝所仰。
现代文：竟陵王刘诞在庐睦反叛，沈僧茔派周山图领二百人到选庆之处接受调度，事后论功，被中书舍人戴明穴压抑。
English: In fact, the mausoleum king Liu Xing rebelled against Gongmu, and Shen Zengqi sent Zhou Shantu to lead 200 people to the place of election and celebration to accept the dispatch. He was later praised for his efforts, but was suppressed by the Chinese scholar Daiming An.

古文：泰始初，为殿中将军。
现代文：泰始初年，周山圆做殿中将军。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taizhi, Zhou Shanyuan became a general in the palace.

古文：四方反叛，仆射王彧举山图将领，呼与语，甚悦，使领百舸为前驱。
现代文：当时各地反叛，仆射王或荐举周山迩带兵，皇上召他来跟他谈话，皇上很满意，就派他率领一百条船做前锋。
English: At that time, there were rebellions all over the country, and the emperor summoned him to talk with him. The emperor was very satisfied and sent him to lead a hundred ships as the vanguard.

古文：与军主佼长生等攻破贼湖白、赭圻二城。
现代文：周山图与军主佼长生等攻破贼人的泌直、赵堑二城。
English: Zhou Shantou and the commander Jiao Changsheng defeated the thieves, including Jiu Zhi and Zhao Xuan, in the Second City.

古文：除员外郎，加振武将军。
现代文：旦山周被授员外郎，加振武将军。
English: Danzan Zhou was awarded the title of General Zhenwu.

古文：豫平浓湖，追贼至西阳还，明帝赏之，赐苑西宅一区。
现代文：参加乎定浓湖，追杀贼人直至西阳才返回，明帝嘉奖他，赏给苑西一片宅屋。
English: He took part in the Battle of Dingang Lake. He chased and killed a thief and did not return until sunset. Emperor Ming commended him and awarded him a house in the west of the garden.

古文：镇军将军张永征薛安都于彭城，山图领二千人迎运至武原，为虏骑所追，合战，多所伤杀。
现代文：镇军将军张永到彭城征讨薛安都，周山图带领二千人到武原迎军，被敌军骑兵追逐，经过激战，多有伤亡。
English: Zhang Yong, the general of the town army, went to Pengcheng to recruit Xue Andu, and Zhou Shantu led two thousand people to meet the army in Wuyuan. They were chased by the enemy cavalry. After a fierce battle, there were many casualties.

古文：虏围转急，山图据城自固，然后更结阵死战。突围出，虏披靡不能禁。
现代文：敌军围杀更转急迫，周山图先是据城自保，然后再布下阵来拼死战斗，突破包围冲杀出来，敌军被杀得纷纷败退势不能挡。
English: As the enemy's siege became more and more urgent, Zhou Shantou first secured the city, and then launched a desperate battle to break through the encirclement and rush out. The enemy was killed in succession, and the retreat could not be stopped.

古文：众称其勇，呼为 武原将 。
现代文：众人夸他勇猛，叫他作 武原将 。
English: People praised him for his bravery and called him a "warrior general."

古文：及永军大败，山图收散卒得千余人，守下邳城。
现代文：等到张永兵败，周山图收集失散士卒千余人，守住了下邳城。
English: After Zhang Yong's defeat, Zhou Shantou gathered more than a thousand lost soldiers and defended the city of Jiaozuo.

古文：还，除给事中、冗从仆射、直阁将军。
现代文：回京被授予给事中、冗从仆射、直合将军。
English: Returning to Beijing, he was awarded the titles of General of the Middle, General of the Long Service, General of the Foot Guards, and General of the Horse Guards.

古文：山图好酒多失，明帝数加怒诮，后遂自改。
现代文：周山图好酒常多失误，明帝屡屡生气讥诮责备，后来就自己改了。
English: Zhou Shantou often made many mistakes in making good wine, and Emperor Ming was often angry and scornful, and later he changed it himself.

古文：出为钱唐新城戍。
现代文：出京任钱唐新城戍。
English: He went to Beijing and was appointed to Qian Tang Xincheng.

古文：是时豫州淮西地新没虏，更于历阳立镇，五年，以山图为龙骧将军、历阳令，领兵守城。
现代文：这时豫州进迺一带刚刚陷落到敌人手中，衹有再在垦屋设立镇治，参垃五年，以且山迩为龙骧将军、历阳令，带领兵马守城。
English: At this time, the area around Henzhou Jinqiao had just fallen into the hands of the enemy, and the government was once again set up in Jinya. For the next five years, Shanqiao was the general of Longjing and the commander of Liyang, leading the soldiers and horses to defend the city.

古文：初，临海亡命田流自号 东海王 ，逃窜会稽鄞县边海山谷中，立屯营，分布要害，官军不能讨。
现代文：起初，魉海有个亡命徒田流，自称 东海王 ，逃窜到会稽鄞县边海山谷中，在各要塞屯营设寨，官军不能剿灭。
English: At first, there was an exiled Tutian line in Bohai, who called himself the King of the East Sea, fled to the coastal valley of Huiqi County, and set up camps in various fortresses. The government army could not be annihilated.

古文：明帝遣直后闻人袭说降之，授流龙骧将军，流受命，将党与出，行达海盐，放兵大掠而反。
现代文：明帝派遣直后闻人袭游说劝降丫他，授囡流为龙骧将军，田流接受任命后，率领党羽出来，走到海盐，放纵兵丁大肆抢掠而回。
English: Immediately after the Ming Emperor dispatched Wen, people attacked and lobbied to persuade him to abdicate, conferring the title of Longjing General on Yu Lulu. After Tian Lulu accepted the appointment, he led the party members out, went to Haiyan, indulged the soldiers to plunder and pillage, and returned.

古文：是冬，杀鄞令耿猷，东境大震。
现代文：这年冬天，杀鄞县令耿猷，东部地方大为震动。
English: In the winter of this year, the eastern region was greatly shaken by the murder of Geng Yao, the county magistrate.

古文：六年，敕山图将兵东屯浃口，广设购募。
现代文：塞丝六年，凰山迩奉命率兵东来屯驻浃旦，多方悬赏搜捕田流。
English: In the sixth year of Seth, Emperor Xuanzang was ordered to lead his soldiers eastward to settle in Shantang, and many parties offered rewards to search for Tianlu.

古文：流为其副暨挐所杀，别帅杜连、梅洛生各拥众自守。
现代文：田流被他的副手暨孥杀掉，别的头目杜连、梅洛生各自拥众自守。
English: Tian Liu was killed by his second-in-command, and the other ringleaders, Du Lian and Melosheng, were killed by their own supporters.

古文：至明年，山图分兵掩讨，皆平之。
现代文：到第二年，凰山迩分兵进剿，全都把他们荡乎了。
English: By the second year, when the detachment of troops from the Hwangshan District marched into the capital, they had all been swept away.

古文：豫章贼张凤，聚众康乐山，断江劫抄。
现代文：遂童贼人退凰在堡乐山收集人众拦江抢劫过往客商。
English: As a result, the child thieves retired to Castle Le Mountain to gather people to hold up the river and rob passing merchants.

古文：台军主李双、蔡保数遣军攻之，连年不禽。至是军主毛寄生与凤战于豫章江，大败。
现代文：官军军主奎双、蕴惺多次派兵进剿他们，几年未能擒获至此军主毛寄生在豫章江同灵凰作战，被张凤杀得大败。
English: The commander of the imperial army, Kui Shuang, sent troops to attack them many times, but they were unable to capture them for several years. The commander, Mao Parasite, fought with Linghuang in the Yuzhang River and was defeated by Zhang Feng.

古文：明帝复遣山图讨之。
现代文：明帝又派周山图征讨退凰。
English: Emperor Ming also sent Zhou Shantou to collect money for the return of the emperor.

古文：山图至，先羸兵偃众，遣幢主庞嗣厚遗凤，要出会聚，听以兵自卫，凤信之。
现代文：周山圆到后，先用病弱的士卒掩饰部众，派幢主尘姻给退凰送了份厚礼，邀请张凤出来聚会，听任其带兵丁保卫自己，张凤相信了他们。
English: After Zhou Shanyuan arrived, he first used sick soldiers to disguise his subordinates. He sent a large gift to the retired emperor, invited Zhang Feng to come out to the party, and allowed him to take soldiers to defend himself. Zhang Feng believed them.

古文：行至望蔡，山图设伏兵于水侧，击斩凤首，众百余人束首降。
现代文：张凤走到望蔡，周山图在水边埋设伏兵，张凤被伏兵击杀斩首，其余人众一百多人束手投降。
English: Zhang Feng walked to Wang Cai, Zhou Shantu set an ambush on the water's edge, Zhang Feng was killed and beheaded by the ambush, and the rest of the crowd of more than a hundred people surrendered.

古文：除宁朔将军、涟口戍主。
现代文：周山图被授予宁朔将军、涟口戍主。
English: Zhou Shantu was awarded the title of Ningshuo General and the title of Hukou Warlord.

古文：山图遏涟水筑西城，断虏骑路，并以溉田。
现代文：周山图阻遏涟水修筑西城，断绝敌寇骑兵通道，又利用这一工程引水灌溉农田。
English: Zhou Shantou built the West City by holding back floodwaters, cut off the enemy's cavalry passage, and used this project to divert water to irrigate farmland.

古文：元徽三年，迁步兵校尉，加建武将军。
现代文：元徽三年，迁步兵校尉，加建武将军。
English: In the third year of Yuanhui, he was transferred to an infantry lieutenant and became General Jianwu.

古文：转督高平下邳淮阳淮西四郡诸军事、宁朔将军、淮南太守。
现代文：转督高平、下邳、淮阳、淮西四郡诸军事、宁朔将军、淮南太守。
English: The four counties of Gaoping, Jiaozuo, Huaiyang and West Huaixi were transferred to military governors, with Ningshuo as the general and Huainan as the governor.

古文：盗发桓温冢，大获宝物。
现代文：有盗贼发掘桓温的墓冢，获得很多宝物。
English: Some thieves unearthed the tomb of Kuan Wen and obtained a lot of treasures.

古文：客窃取以遗山图，山图不受，簿以还官。
现代文：有人暗中拿来送给周山图，周山图不收受，记入账簿归缴官府。
English: Someone surreptitiously took it and gave it to Zhou Shantou. Zhou Shantou did not accept it, and it was recorded in the account book and turned over to the government.

古文：迁左中郎将。
现代文：迁左中郎将。
English: Transferred to the position of left middle captain.

古文：太祖辅政，山图密启曰： 沈攸之久有异图，公宜深为之备。 
现代文：太祖辅政时，周山图向太祖密报说： 沈攸之早有背叛的心思，您应当多加防患。 
English: When the great-grandfather was a vice-premier, Zhou Shantou secretly reported to the great-grandfather: Shen Youzhi had the idea of betrayal early on, you should take more precautions.

古文：太祖笑而纳之。
现代文：太祖笑着采纳了他的意见。
English: The great-grandfather accepted his opinion with a smile.

古文：武陵王赞为郢州，太祖令山图领兵卫送。
现代文：武陵王刘赞厉郢州刺史，太祖萧道成命周山图带兵护送。
English: The king of Wuling, Liu Zanli, wrote the history of Bozhou, and the great-grandfather Xiao Dao was escorted by Zhou Shantu with soldiers.

古文：世祖与晋熙王燮自郢下，以山图为后防。
现代文：世祖萧赜同晋熙王刘燮从郢州束下时，用周山图做后防。
English: When the founder of the dynasty, Xiao Yu, and the king of the Jin Dynasty, Liu Bei, came down from Zhangzhou, they used the Zhou mountain map to defend themselves.

古文：攸之事起，世祖为西讨都督，启山图为军副。
现代文：沈攸之反叛事发后，世祖做西讨都督，启用周山图做副手。
English: After the rebellion of Shen You, Shizhu became the governor of Xitun and appointed Zhou Shantu as his deputy.

古文：世祖留据盆城，众议以盆城城小难固，不如还都。
现代文：世祖留据盆城，大众意见认为盆城城太小，难以固守，不如返回京城。
English: The founder stayed in the castle, but the public opinion was that the castle was too small and hard to hold on to, so it would be better to return to the capital.

古文：山图曰： 今据中流，为四方势援，大众致力，川岳可为。
现代文：周山图说： 现今占据中流，可作四方声援，大家同心协力，有山隘水险可利用。
English: Zhou Shantu said: Now that we occupy the middle stream, we can make four-way solidarity, we all work together, and there are mountain and narrow water hazards to take advantage of.

古文：城隍小事，不足难也。 
现代文：城池地域小些是小事，不应当作难处。 
English: A smaller urban area is a small matter and should not be a problem.

古文：世祖使城局参军刘皆、陈渊委山图以处分事。
现代文：世祖让城局参军刘皆、陈渊委派周山图处理有关防务。
English: The founder of the dynasty had Liu Guan and Chen Yuan, both of whom had joined the army, appointed Zhou Shantu to handle the defense.

古文：山图断取行旅船板，以造楼橹，立水栅，旬日皆办。
现代文：周山图截取过往船板，用来建造了望敌军的无顶盖高台，设立水栅，衹十来天就全部办好了。
English: Zhou Shantou intercepted the passing shipboard and used it to build a roofless platform to watch the enemy army, set up a water gate, and it was all done in a few days.

古文：世祖甚嘉之。
现代文：世祖很称赞他。
English: The patriarch praised him highly.

古文：授前军将军，加宁朔将军，进号辅国将军。
现代文：授给前军将军，加宁朔将军，进爵号为辅国将军。
English: Awarded to the ex-army general, General Ganingshuo, with the knighthood of General of the Auxiliary State.

古文：攸之攻郢城，世祖令山图量其形势。山图曰： 攸之见与邻乡，亟同征伐，悉其为人。
现代文：沈攸之攻打郢城，世祖让周山闽估量形势，周山图说： 沈攸之正是近邻，屡次一同征战，了解他的为人。
English: Shen Youyou's attack on Lucheng, the patriarch asked Zhou Shanzhu to assess the situation. Zhou Shanzhu said: Shen Youyou is a close neighbor, we have fought together many times, and we know him as a person.

古文：性度险刻，无以结固士心。
现代文：他性情奸险度量狭小，无法团结部属同心协力。
English: His temperament is narrow, and he is unable to unite his subordinates to work together.

古文：如顿兵坚城之下，适所以为离散之渐耳。 
现代文：假若在坚固的城池之下屯兵围困，正可以作为离散人心的根由啊。 
English: If the garrison is besieged under a strong city, it can be used as the root cause of the dispersion of people's hearts.

古文：攸之既败，平西将军黄回乘轻舸从白服百余人在军前下缘流叫，盆城中恐，须臾知是回凯归乃安。
现代文：沈攸之败后，平西将军黄回乘快船带领一百多人在军营前沿河呼叫，盆城中人害怕，不多会儿知足黄回凯旋而归，才安定。
English: After the defeat of Shen You, the Pingxi general Huang Hui took a fast boat and led more than a hundred people to call out in the military camp of Qianfanghe. People in the basin were afraid, and it was not long before Huang Hui returned triumphantly and was stable.

古文：世祖谓山图曰： 周公前言，可谓明于见事矣。 
现代文：世祖对周山图说： 周公先前说的话，可说是明了事理。 
English: The ancestor said to Zhou Shantu: What Zhou Gong said earlier is quite clear.

古文：还都，太祖遣山图领部曲镇京城，镇戍诸军，悉受节度。
现代文：返京后，太祖萧道成派遣周山图带领部属镇守京城，镇戍各路兵马，全都受周山圆节制调度。
English: After returning to Beijing, the great-grandfather Xiao Daocheng dispatched Zhou Shantou to lead the subordinates to guard the capital city, and the soldiers and horses of all roads were dispatched by Zhou Shantou.

古文：迁游击将军，辅国如故。
现代文：迁游击将军，辅国将军照前未变。
English: The guerrilla generals were relocated, but the auxiliary generals remained unchanged.

古文：建元元年，封广晋县男，邑三百户。
现代文：建元元年，封广晋县男，食邑三百户。
English: In the first year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, there were 300 households in Jinshan County.

古文：出为假节、督兖青冀三州徐州东海朐山军事、宁朔将军、兖州刺史，百姓附之。
现代文：外放任假节、督兖、青、冀三州、徐州、东渣、朐山军事、宁朔将军、兖州刺史。深受百姓拥护。
English: They were allowed to go abroad for the holidays, and were deeply supported by the people of the three states of Duzhou, Qingdao, and Hebei, as well as Xuzhou, Dongjia, Lushan Military, Ningshuo General, and Zhangzhou.

古文：二年进号辅国将军。
现代文：建元二年，进爵为辅国将军。
English: In the second year of the first century, he was raised to the peerage as an auxiliary general.

古文：其秋，虏动，上策虏必不出淮阴，乃敕山图曰： 知卿绥边抚戎，甚有次第，应变算略，悉以相委。恐列丑未必能送死，卿丈夫无可藉手耳。 
现代文：秋天，敌寇侵犯边境，皇上预料敌寇一定不会越过淮阴，就敕文告诉周山图说： 晓得爱卿绥靖边陲安定部宗，很有程序，应变计谋办法方略，全权委托，所担心的是各丑类未必能够前来送死，使爱卿无可藉手罢了。 
English: In the autumn, when the enemy bandits invaded the border, the emperor expected that the enemy bandits would not cross Huaiyin, so he told Zhou Shantou: I know that the Ministry of Peace, Tranquility, and Stability has a lot of procedures, contingency plans, and full powers. What I am worried about is that all the ugly creatures may not be able to come and kill me, leaving Aiqing helpless.

古文：虏果寇朐山，为玄元度、卢绍之所破。
现代文：北虏果然侵犯朐山，被玄元度、卢绍之击败。
English: The North Korean invaders invaded Shaoshan and were defeated by Xuan Yuan and Lu Shao.

古文：虏于淮阳。
现代文：北虏袭扰淮阳。
English: The Northern Army attacked and besieged Huaiyang.

古文：是时淮北四州起义，上使山图自淮入清，倍道应赴。
现代文：遣时淮北四州起义，皇上命令周山图由淮入清，以加倍的速度尽快赶去接应。
English: At the time of the uprising of the four states in Huaibei, the emperor ordered Zhou Shantou to double the speed as soon as possible to respond.

古文：敕山图曰： 卿当尽相帅驭理，每存全重，天下事，唯同心力，山岳可摧。
现代文：告诉周山图说： 爱卿应当深明相帅统治的道理，遇事以全局为重，天下的事情，衹要大众心力相同，纵使是山岳也可以搬移。
English: He told Zhou Shantou: "Aiqing should be well aware of the principle of the rule of comrade-in-arms. In the event of an emergency, the overall situation is the most important. In the affairs of the world, the general public should have the same heart, even if it is a mountain, it can be moved.

古文：然用兵当使背后无忧虑；若后冷然无横来处，闭目痛打，无不摧碎。
现代文：但用兵时应当使得背后没有忧虑；假若从后面冷然不论横竖，闭着眼睛痛打，没有不摧碎的。
English: However, when using soldiers, there should be no worries behind them; if they are coldly beaten from behind, whether horizontally or vertically, with their eyes closed, there is nothing that will not be destroyed.

古文：吾政应铸金，待卿成勋耳。
现代文：我正要熔铸金碑，等待刻记你的成就功勋呢。
English: I'm about to cast a golden tablet, waiting to record your achievements.

古文：若不藉此平四州，非丈夫也。
现代文：假若不能藉此时机平定四州，不是男子漠。
English: If we can't take advantage of this opportunity to pacify the four states, it's not a waste of time.

古文：努力自运，勿令他人得上功。 
现代文：努力运筹，不要让别人得到这个大功。 
English: Work hard on operational planning, and don't let others get the credit.

古文：会义众已为虏所没，山图拔三百家还淮阴。
现代文：正逢起义人众被北虏扫没，周山图夺取了三百家起义点返回淮阴。
English: At the same time that the uprising people were swept away by the northern troops, Zhou Shantou captured three hundred uprising points and returned to Huaiyin.

古文：表移东海郡治涟口，又于石鳖立阳平郡，皆见纳。
现代文：上表奏请将束海郡治移到涟口，又在石鳖设立阳平郡，都被皇上采纳。
English: In the above petition, the request to move the administration of Sokhae County to Hekou and the establishment of Yangpyeong County in Shek Kip were both accepted by the emperor.

古文：世祖践阼，迁竟陵王镇北司马，带南平昌太守，将军如故。
现代文：世祖即皇帝位，周山图迁竟陵王镇北司马，带南平昌太守，将军照前未变。
English: The founder of the world is the emperor. Zhou Shanshan's relocation of the capital moved the tomb of Wang Zhen to Bei Sima, with Nan Pyeongchang as the governor, and the generals remained unchanged.

古文：以盆城之旧，出入殿省，甚见亲信。
现代文：因为与世祖同守盆撼的老交情，在殿省出进，很被亲近信用。
English: Because of his long-standing friendship with the founder, he is very close to and trusted in the province.

古文：义乡县长风庙神姓邓，先经为县令，死遂发灵。
现代文：义翅题垦凰庙神姓塑，原先当过县令，死后显灵。
English: The deity of the Phoenix Temple, Shou, was originally a county magistrate, and his spirit appeared after his death.

古文：山图启乞加神位辅国将军。
现代文：凰山凰禀报皇上请求给神位加封辅国将军爵号。
English: At the request of the emperor, Emperor Xuanzang of the State of Henan bestowed the title of General of the State of Henan on the god.

古文：上答曰： 足狗肉便了事，何用阶级为？ 
现代文：皇上回答说： 供足狗肉就完事，要阶级做什么用? 
English: The emperor replied, "It is enough to provide enough dog meat. What is the use of a class?

古文：转黄门郎，领羽林四厢直卫。
现代文：周山图转黄门郎，领羽林四厢直卫。
English: Zhou Shan is depicted as Huangmen Lang, and the leader, Lin Shifeng, is depicted as Zhongwei.

古文：山图于新林立墅舍，晨夜往还。
现代文：周山圆在堑述建设别墅住房，早晚来往。
English: Zhou Shanyuan is describing the construction of villa housing, and will come and go sooner or later.

古文：上谓之曰： 卿罢万人都督，而轻行郊外。自今往墅，可以仗身自随，以备不虞。 
现代文：皇上对他说： 你放下万人都督，随意到郊外行走，从今以后到别墅去，可随身白带武器，以备意外事情的发生。 
English: The emperor said to him, "You should give up being the ruler of all people and go to the suburbs at will. From now on, when you go to a villa, you can take a weapon with you in case something unexpected happens.

古文：及疾，上手敕参问，遣医给药。
现代文：等到患病，皇上亲手写信询问，派医送药。
English: When he fell ill, the emperor himself wrote a letter to inquire, and sent a doctor to deliver medicine.

古文：永明元年，卒，年六十四。
现代文：永明元年逝世，享年六十四岁。
English: Yongming died in the first year of the year, at the age of sixty-four.

古文：诏赐朝服一具，衣一袭。
现代文：皇上下韶赏赐朝服一套，衣一袭。
English: The emperors and empresses awarded a set of imperial robes.

古文：周盘龙，北兰陵兰陵人也。
现代文：周盘龙，是北兰陵兰陵人。
English: Zhou Panlong was a native of the northern province of Lanling.

古文：宋世土断，属东平郡。
现代文：宋法按土断法，即统一按居住地编著户口纳税服役的办法属东平郡。
English: Dongping County belongs to the Song law according to the land division method, that is, the method of uniformly compiling the household tax payment and service according to the place of residence.

古文：盘龙胆气过人，尤便弓马。
现代文：周盘龙胆气超过常人，尤其擅长骑马射箭。
English: Zhou Panlong is more daring than ordinary people, especially good at riding and archery.

古文：泰始初，随军讨赭圻贼，躬自斗战，陷阵先登。
现代文：蠢始初年，跟随大军讨伐鲈堑贼寇，亲身战斗，冲锋陷阵抢在前头。
English: At the beginning of the year, he followed the army to fight the bandits, fought personally, and rushed to the front.

古文：累至龙骧将军，积射将军，封晋安县子，邑四百户。
现代文：逐渐升任到龙骧将军，积射将军，封晋安县子，食邑四百户。
English: Gradually, he was promoted to the general of Longyu, the general of Zeshi, the son of Jinan County, and the 400 households of the food village.

古文：元徽二年，桂阳贼起，盘龙时为冗从仆射、骑官主、领马军主，随太祖顿新亭，与屯骑校尉黄回出城南，与贼对阵，寻引还城中，合力拒战。
现代文：元徽二年，宋桂阳王休范在寻阳起兵作乱，周盘龙当时是冗从仆射、骑官主、领马军主，跟随太祖萧道成驻兵新亭，与屯骑校尉黄回出城南同贼人对阵，不久引回城内，合力拒战。
English: In the second year of the Yuan Dynasty, King Xu Fan of Song and Guiyang raised an army in Huanyang and started a riot. At that time, Zhou Panglong was a tireless follower of Fu Sha, the head of the cavalry, and the leader of the cavalry army. He followed the great ancestor Xiao Dao to become a soldier stationed in Xinting. He and the cavalry captain Huang Hui went out to the south of the city to fight against the thieves. They were soon brought back to the city and joined forces to resist the war.

古文：事宁，除南东莞太守，加前军将军，稍至骁骑将军。
现代文：战事结束后，周盘龙被授予南东莞太守，加前军将军，随后升任骁骑将军。
English: After the end of the war, Zhou Panlong was awarded the governor of South Dongguan, the general of the former army, and then the general of the cavalry.

古文：升明元年，出为假节、督交广二州军事、征虏将军、平越中郎将、广州刺史，未之官，预平石头。
现代文：升明元年，外放任假节、督交广二州军事、征虏将军、平越中郎将、广州刺史，周盘龙未上任而参加平定石头城袁粲的叛乱。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, he participated in the suppression of the rebellion of the stone city Yuan Xuan without taking office, including the military of the two states in Guangzhou, the conscript general, the general of Ping Yue, the general of Guangzhou, and Zhou Panlong.

古文：二年，沈攸之平，司州刺史姚道和怀贰被征，以盘龙督司州军事、司州刺史，假节、将军如故。
现代文：升平二年，沈攸之的反叛被平定，司州刺史姚道和因怀有二心被征调，任周盘龙督司州军事、司州刺史、假节，将军之职照前不变。
English: In the second year of Shangping, Shen Youzhi's rebellion was put down, and the governor of Shizhou, Yao Daohe, was conscripted because of his double-mindedness. Zhou Panlong was appointed as the military governor of Shizhou, the governor of Shizhou, and the false festival, and the general's position remained unchanged.

古文：改封沌阳县。
现代文：改封沌阳县。
English: Chaoyang County was re-enclosed.

古文：太祖即位，进号右将军。
现代文：太祖萧道成即位，进爵号为右将军。
English: The great-grandfather, Xiao Daocheng, ascended the throne and received the title of Right General.

古文：建元二年，虏寇寿春，以盘龙为军主、假节，助豫州刺史垣崇祖决水漂渍。
现代文：建元二年，魏虏侵犯寿春，周盘龙为军主、假节，帮助豫州刺史垣崇祖决淝水冲灌浸淹敌兵。
English: In the second year of the first century, Wei Rui invaded Shuchun, Zhou Panlong was the military leader and the false festival, and helped Yuzhou to stab Shigaki Chongzu to break the water and flood the enemy soldiers.

古文：盘龙率辅国将军张倪马步军于西泽中奋击，杀伤数万人，获牛马辎重。
现代文：周盘龙率辅国将军张倪的马步军在西边沼泽地带奋勇击杀，杀伤敌军数万人，缴获大量牛马辎重物资。
English: Led by Zhou Panlong and Zhang Ni, general of the Auxiliary Army, the Horse Infantry Battalion fought bravely in the western swamp area, killing and wounding tens of thousands of enemy troops, and captured a large amount of cattle and horses and heavy materials.

古文：上闻之喜，诏曰： 丑虏送死，敢寇寿春，崇祖、盘龙正勒义勇，乘机电奋，水陆斩击，填川蔽野。
现代文：皇上听到这则消息非常高兴，下诏说： 丑虏送死，竟敢进犯我寿春，崇祖、盘龙正统率义勇之师，乘着有利时机，如雷电般从水上陆上斩杀搏击，敌寇尸首填塞河川、遮蔽山野。
English: The emperor was very pleased to hear this news, and issued the following edict: "Ugly robbers are put to death, how dare they attack my Shuchun, revered ancestors, Panlong orthodoxy led by a courageous teacher, taking advantage of a favorable opportunity, like lightning from the water to land to fight, the enemy's corpse clogged the rivers and covered the mountains.

古文：师不淹晨，西蕃克定。
现代文：大军没用多少时光，即克定了西蕃。
English: It didn't take much time for the large army to conquer Xidi.

古文：斯实将率用命之功，文武争伐之力。
现代文：这实是将帅效命的功劳，文武争伐的结果。
English: This is really the result of the efforts of the generals and the result of the struggle between literature and arms.

古文：凡厥勋勤，宜时铨序，可符列上。
现代文：大凡是他们的功劳，都应该及时据功劳大小，确定升迁，附列上报。 
English: If their merits are great, they should be promoted in a timely manner according to the size of their merits, and the report should be attached.

古文：盘龙爱妾杜氏，上送金钗镊二十枚，手敕曰 饷周公阿杜 。
现代文：周盘龙的爱妾杜氏，皇上送给金钗镊二十枚，而且手书 犒赏周公阿杜 。
English: Zhou Panlong's beloved concubine Du Shi, the emperor gave him twenty gold ingots, and a handwritten tribute to Zhou Gong Adu.

古文：转太子左率。
现代文：周盘龙改任太子左率。
English: Zhou Panlong was promoted to crown prince.

古文：改授持节，军主如故。
现代文：改授持节，军主之职依前未变。
English: The military commander's position remains unchanged.

古文：明年，虏寇淮阳，围角城。
现代文：第二年，魏虏侵犯淮阳，包围角城。
English: The following year, the Wei army invaded Huaiyang and besieged Jiaocheng.

古文：先是上遣军主成买戍角城，谓人曰： 我今作角城戍，我儿当得一子。 
现代文：在这之前皇上派遣军土成买戍守角城，成买对人说： 我现在做角城戍，我的儿子应能得到一个子。 
English: Prior to this, the emperor had sent an army of local peasants to defend Kakunodate. Chengmai said to the people: "I am building Kakunodate Castle, my son should be able to get a son."

古文：或问其故。买曰： 角城与虏同岸，危险具多，我岂能使虏不敢南向？
现代文：有的人问其缘故，成买说： 角城同魏虏处在同一岸边，具有诸多危险，我怎能使得魏虏不敢向南入侵。
English: Some people asked the reason, Chengmai said: "Kengcheng is on the same coast as Wei Krup, with many dangers, how can I make Wei Krup not dare to invade the south.

古文：我若不没虏，则应破虏。
现代文：我若不被魏虏吞没，就应打败魏虏。
English: If I am not swallowed up by Wei Rui, I should defeat Wei Rui.

古文：儿不作孝子，便当作世子也。 
现代文：这就是说我儿子不做孝子就会做个世子。 
English: That is to say, if my son is not a filial son, he will be a son of the world.

古文：至虏围买数重，上遣领军将军李安民为都督救之。
现代文：直到魏虏把成买包围了好几层，皇上派领军将军李安民为都督援救成买。
English: Until Wei Rui surrounded Chengmai for several layers, the emperor sent the leading general Li Anmin to rescue Chengmai for the governor.

古文：敕盘龙曰： 角城涟口，贼始复进，西道便是无贼，卿可率马步下淮阴就安民军。
现代文：皇上命令周盘龙说： 角城涟口处贼兵才又侵入，西路可能没有贼兵，你可以率领骑兵和步兵到淮阴归李领军处。
English: The emperor ordered Zhou Panlong to say, "The thief soldiers only invaded again at the entrance to the corner city. There may not be any thief soldiers on the west road. You can lead the cavalry and infantry to Huaiyin to the Li leader's office.

古文：钟离船少，政可致衣仗数日粮，军人扶淮步下也。 
现代文：钟离船只少，衹需带上物品器仗和几天的粮草，军队沿着淮河步行去。 
English: The clock is close to the ship, the raft needs to bring goods and equipment and several days of grain and grass, and the army walks along the Huai River.

古文：买与虏拒战，手所伤杀无数，晨朝早起，手中忽见有数升血，其日遂战死。
现代文：成买与魏虏拒战，亲手杀伤杀死无数敌兵。一天早晨起床，忽然看见手裹有几升血，那天于是就战死了。
English: Chengmai and Wei Rui refused to fight, killing and wounding countless enemy soldiers with their own hands. One morning, he got up and suddenly saw his hands covered with several liters of blood. That day, he died in battle.

古文：盘龙子奉叔单马率二百余人陷阵，虏万余骑张左右翼围绕之，一骑走还，报奉叔已没。盘龙方食，弃箸，驰马奋槊，直奔虏阵，自称 周公来！ 
现代文：周盘龙的儿子奉叔单马率二百多壮士突进魏军阵中，魏军万余骑拉开左右两翼将他们围住，一骑奔回，报告周奉叔陷殁阵中，周盘龙正在用饭，丢下筷子，跃马奋稍，直奔魏虏阵中，大吼 周公来了! 
English: Zhou Panlong's son Bongshu single-handedly led more than two hundred strong men into the Wei army, the Wei army more than a thousand riders pulled open the left and right wings to surround them, and rushed back, reporting that Zhou Bongshu was trapped in the battle, Zhou Panlong was eating, dropped his chopsticks, jumped a little, and ran straight into the Wei army, shouting Zhou Gong is coming!

古文：虏素畏盘龙骁名，即时披靡。
现代文：魏兵一向畏惧周盘龙骁勇，当时纷纷倒退。
English: The Wei soldiers had always been afraid of Zhou Pan's boldness, so they retreated one after another.

古文：时奉叔已大杀虏，得出在外，盘龙不知，乃冲东击西，奔南突北，贼众莫敢当。
现代文：这时周奉叔已大杀魏兵，得隙冲出阵外，周盘龙不晓得，就束冲西杀南奔北突，贼兵一概不敢阻挡。
English: At this time, Zhou Fengshu had already killed Wei soldiers, and rushed out of the line of fire when he had a chance. Zhou Panlong did not know, so he rushed west to kill southbound and northbound, and the robber soldiers did not dare to stop him.

古文：奉叔见其父久不出，复跃马入阵。
现代文：周奉叔见他父亲久未出阵，复又跃马突入阵中。
English: When Uncle Zhou Feng saw that his father had not been in the battle for a long time, he jumped into the battle.

古文：父子两匹骑，萦搅数万人，虏众大败。
现代文：父子两匹马，萦搅魏兵数万人，把魏虏大军杀得大败。
English: The father and son's two horses, Zou, stirred up tens of thousands of Wei soldiers and defeated the Wei army.

古文：盘龙父子由是名播北国。
现代文：由此周盘龙父子名扬北国。
English: As a result, Zhou Panlong and his son became famous in the north.

古文：形甚羸讷，而临军勇果，诸将莫逮。
现代文：周盘龙外表看来身体瘦弱而又言语迟钝，可是临阵打仗勇猛干练，诸将没有赶得上的。
English: On the outside, Zhou Panlong appears to be physically weak and speech-impaired, but he fights bravely and skillfully in battle, and the generals cannot catch up with him.

古文：永明元年，迁征虏将军、南琅邪太守。
现代文：永明元年，迁征虏将军、南琅邪太守。
English: In the first year of the Yongming era, the Conscript General and the Governor of Nanzhao Yadu were relocated.

古文：三年，迁右卫将军，加给事中。五年，转大司马，加征虏将军、济阳太守。
现代文：永明三年，迁右卫将军，加给事中永明五年，转大司马，加征虏将军、济阳太守。
English: In the third year of Yongming, General Yuwei was transferred, and in the middle of the matter, General Yongming was given an additional five years, and he was transferred to the position of major general, and he was also made the general of conscription and the governor of Jiyang.

古文：世祖数讲武，常令盘龙领马军，校骑骋槊。
现代文：世祖几次讲习武事，常令周盘龙领骑兵，比较骑术，操演长矛。
English: The founder of the world studied martial arts several times, often ordering Zhou Pan to lead the cavalry, compare riding skills, and practice spears.

古文：后以疾为光禄大夫。
现代文：周盘龙后来因病改任光禄大夫。
English: Zhou Panlong was later transferred to the post of Guanglu doctor due to illness.

古文：寻出为持节、都督兖州缘淮诸军事、平北将军、兖州刺史。
现代文：不久又外调为持节、都督兖删绿淮诸军事、平北将军、兖州刺史。
English: Soon, he was transferred to the military, the general of Pingbei and the historian of Zhangzhou.

古文：进爵为侯。
现代文：爵位晋升为侯。
English: He was promoted to marquis.

古文：角城戍将张蒲与虏潜相构结，因大雾乘船入清中采樵，载虏二十余人，藏伏惣下，直向城东门，防门不禁，仍登岸援白争门。
现代文：角城戍将张蒲，与魏虏暗中互相勾结，藉依大雾乘船进清中采割柴火，装载魏兵二十多人，把武器藏在一种叫作芳的竹器裹，一直开到城的束门外，城门防卫未能识破阻止，于是登上岸来，拔出兵刃争夺城门。
English: The dwarfs secretly colluded with Zhang Pu and the Wei troops. They sailed into the Qing Dynasty to harvest firewood by relying on the fog, loaded more than 20 Wei soldiers, hid the weapons in a kind of bamboo wrap called Fang, and drove all the way to the outside of the city's bundled gate. The defense of the city gate could not be detected and prevented, so they came ashore and pulled out their swords to fight for the city gate.

古文：戍主皇甫仲贤率军主孟灵宝等三十余人于门拒战，斩三人，贼众被创赴水，而虏军马步至城外已三千余人，阻堑不得进。
现代文：角城戍主皇甫仲贤率领军主孟灵穴等三十多人据门抗战，斩杀魏兵三人，其余贼兵被杀伤跳入水中，而这时魏虏骑兵步兵有三千多人已到城外，衹因护城壕堑阻隔不能前进。
English: More than 30 people, including the chief of the Cape Town garrison, Emperor Fu Zhongxian, led by the commander of the army, Meng Lingan, fought against the gate, killing three Wei soldiers, and the rest of the thieves were killed and jumped into the water. At this time, more than three thousand infantry of the Wei cavalry had left the city, and they could not advance due to the barrier of the moat.

古文：淮阴军主王僧庆等领五百人赴救，虏众乃退。
现代文：瞄军主王憎庆等率领五百将士赶到角拯救援，翘兵才退去。
English: Five hundred soldiers led by the chief of the aiming army, Wang Haoqing, rushed to the corner to rescue and assist, and the soldiers retreated.

古文：坐为有司所奏，诏白衣领职。
现代文：周盘龙因为有关官员奏参，皇上下韶免去官爵让他以平民身份管辖职事。
English: Zhou Panlong, because the relevant officials reported to him, the emperor exempted him from the official title and allowed him to supervise the duties as a civilian.

古文：八座寻奏复位。加领东平太守。
现代文：不久由五曹尚书、二仆射、一令号称八座联名奏请，才得恢复爵位。加领束平太守。
English: It wasn't long before his peerage was restored by the five emperors, Shoshu, Futakusa, and Iryo, who were known as the eight joint emperors.

古文：盘龙表年老才弱，不可镇边，求解职，见许。还为散骑常侍、光禄大夫。
现代文：周盘龙后来上表呈奏自己年纪大、才力弱小，不能镇守边防，恳请皇上解除他的职务，得到准许，返回朝廷为散骑常侍、光禄大夫。
English: Later, Zhou Panlong presented himself at the table as being too old and weak to guard the border, implored the emperor to relieve him of his duties, and received permission to return to the imperial court as a strolling attendant and doctor of Guanglu.

古文：世祖戏之曰： 卿著貂蝉，何如兜鍪？ 
现代文：世祖同周盘龙开玩笑说： 爱卿头戴貂蝉冠与兜鍪的感觉如何? 
English: The ancestor joked with Zhou Panlong: How does it feel for Ai Qing to wear a skull and crossbones crown and a helmet?

古文：盘龙曰： 此貂蝉从兜鍪中出耳。 
现代文：周盘龙回答说： 我这顶貂蝉冠可是从兜鍪中熬炼出来的啊。 
English: Zhou Panlong replied, "I made this crown of cicadas from a cocoon.

古文：十一年，病卒，年七十九。
现代文：永明十一年病逝，享年七十九岁。
English: Yongming passed away at the age of seventy-nine.

古文：赠安北将军、兖州刺史。
现代文：赠安北将军、兖州刺史。
English: He was given the title of General of Anbei Province and the title of General of Zhangzhou Province.

古文：子奉叔，勇力绝人，随盘龙征讨，所在为暴掠。
现代文：周盘龙儿子奉叔，为人勇猛力量超群，跟随周盘龙征战，所到之处均不免遭其凶暴掳掠。
English: Zhou Panlong's son, Uncle Feng, was a man of great bravery and strength. He followed Zhou Panlong into battle, and wherever he went, he was inevitably captured and plundered by his ferocity.

古文：世祖使领军东讨唐宇之，奉叔畏上威严，检勒部下，不敢侵斥。
现代文：世祖派他领兵征讨唐寓之，周奉叔畏怯皇上威严，检点自己管束部下，不敢侵犯百姓。
English: The ancestor sent him to lead the army to subjugate the Tang Dynasty. Zhou Fongshu was afraid of the emperor's majesty. He controlled his subordinates and did not dare to encroach on the people.

古文：为东宫直阁。
现代文：因而做了东宫直合。
English: As a result, the eastern palace was built in a straight line.

古文：郁林在西州，奉叔密得自进。及即位，与直阁将军曹道刚为心膂。
现代文：当郁林王萧昭业在西州时，周奉叔就私下里讨得郁林王的赏识，待到郁林王即皇帝位，周奉叔就同直合将军曹道刚一起做了他的心腹骨干。
English: When the King of Yulin, Xiao Zhaoye, was in Xizhou, Uncle Zhou Fenglu secretly won the appreciation of the King of Yulin. When the King of Yulin became the emperor, Uncle Zhou Fenglu, together with General Cao Daogang of Zhouga, became the backbone of his inner circle.

古文：道刚骁骑将军，加冠军将军；奉叔游击将军，加辅国将军：并监殿内直卫。
现代文：曹道刚为骁骑将军，加冠军将军；周奉叔为游击将军，加辅国将军：并监殿内直卫。
English: Cao Daogang was the cavalry general, plus the champion general; Zhou Fengshu was the guerrilla general, plus the general of the country: and the guard of the palace.

古文：少日，仍迁道刚为黄门郎，高宗固谏不纳。
现代文：没多久，就迁曹道刚为黄门郎，高宗萧鸾坚决谏阻依然不被采纳。
English: Not long after, Cao Daogang was transferred to Huangmenlang, and Gaozong Xiaoqi's resolute resistance was still not accepted.

古文：奉叔善骑马，帝从其学骑射，尤见亲宠，得入后宫。
现代文：周奉叔擅长骑马，皇帝跟周奉叔学习骑马射箭的技艺，周奉叔由此特别被皇帝亲近宠信，能够在后宫大内走动出进。
English: Uncle Zhou Fong was good at riding a horse, and the emperor learned horseback archery skills from Uncle Zhou Fong. As a result, Uncle Zhou Fong was particularly close to the emperor and was able to move around the harem.

古文：寻加领淮陵太守、兖州中正。
现代文：不久周奉叔加领淮陵太守、兖州中正。
English: Soon after, Zhou Fongxiu was made the governor of Huairing and the vice-governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：道刚加南濮阳太守。
现代文：曹道刚加南濮阳太守。
English: Cao Daogang was appointed as the governor of South Shiyang.

古文：隆昌元年，除黄门郎，未拜，仍出为持节、都督青冀二州军事、冠军将军、青州刺史。
现代文：隆昌元年，周奉叔除授黄门郎，周奉叔不肯接受任职命令，后来还是出京任持节、都督青冀二州军事、冠军将军、青州刺史。
English: In the first year of the Longchang era, Uncle Zhou Feng refused to accept the appointment order, and later he went to Beijing to hold the festival, the military governor of Qinghai and Hebei, the champion general, and the history of Qinghai and Hebei.

古文：时帝谋诛宰辅，故出奉叔为外援，除道刚中军司马、青冀二州中正，本官如故。
现代文：当时皇帝策划除掉辅佐朝廷的某些实权人物，特意将周奉叔调出作为外援，拜授曹道刚为中军司马、青冀二州中正，原来任的官职照前不变。
English: At that time, the emperor planned to get rid of certain real power figures who assisted the imperial court, and specifically transferred Zhou Fongzhu as foreign aid. Cao Daogang was awarded the title of Sima of the Chinese army and the title of Zhongzheng of the two states of Qinghai and Hebei. His original official position remained unchanged.

古文：奉叔就帝求千户侯，许之。
现代文：周奉叔向皇帝谋求做千户侯，皇上有意答应他。
English: Uncle Zhou Feng asked the emperor to make him the head of a thousand households, and the emperor willingly agreed.

古文：高宗辅政，以为不可，封曲江县男，三百户，奉叔大怒，于众中攘刀厉目，高宗说喻之，乃受。
现代文：但当时作为辅佐大臣的高宗萧鸾认为不应当，结果衹封曲江县男，食邑仅三百户，周奉叔非常生气，在众多群臣中横眉竖目地拔出刀来，经高宗对他解说一番，他才接受。
English: However, Gaozong Xiaohui, who was the assistant minister at that time, thought that it should not be done. As a result, a man from Qujiang County, with only three hundred households in the food village, was shackled. Uncle Zhou Fong was very angry. Among the many courtiers, he raised his eyebrows and pulled out a sword. After Gaozong explained to him, he accepted.

古文：奉叔辞毕将之镇，部伍已出。高宗虑其一出不可复制，与萧谌谋，称敕召奉叔于省内杀之，勇士数人拳击久之乃死。
现代文：周奉叔辞别完毕正要到镇守处上任，他的部属已动身出发，高宗担心他逭一出去将不能再制服他，就同萧谌设计，谎称皇上有旨召周奉叔到尚书省官署把他杀掉，好几个勇士用拳打击了很久才死去。
English: After Zhou Fengxiu's resignation, Zhuang was about to take office at the town guard office. His subordinates had already set off. Gaozong was worried that he would not be able to subdue Zhou Fengxiu once he left, so he devised a plan with Xiao Yan, falsely claiming that the emperor had ordered Zhou Fengxiu to go to the government office of Shangshu Province to kill him. Several warriors were beaten with fists for a long time before they died.

古文：启帝云 奉叔慢朝廷 。
现代文：萧鸾、萧谌向皇帝禀报说： 周奉叔轻慢朝廷。 
English: Xiao Yao and Xiao Yao reported to the emperor: Zhou Bongshu is disrespectful to the imperial court.

古文：帝不获已，可其奏。
现代文：皇帝不得已只好承认他俩的奏请。
English: As a last resort, Yu Lin Wang had no choice but to approve their performance.

古文：高宗废帝之日，道刚直阁省，萧谌先入户，若欲论事，兵人随后奄进，以刀刺之，洞胸死，因进宫内废帝。
现代文：高宗萧鸾废黜皇帝的那天，曹道刚正在合省当值，萧谌先进屋内，好像是要同他商量什么事的样子，手握兵器的人一拥而入，用刀刺进曹道刚的胸膛。戳了一个大洞，杀死了他，于是进入宫内宣布废黜皇帝。
English: On the day that Gaozong Xiaolu dethroned the emperor, Cao Daogang was on duty in the provincial capital. Xiaolu went into the house, as if to discuss something with him. People with weapons in their hands rushed in and stabbed Cao Daogang in the chest with a knife. They poked a big hole, killed him, and then entered the palace to announce the dethronement of the emperor.

古文：奉叔弟世雄，永元中为西江督护。
现代文：周奉叔的弟弟周世雄，永元年间，为西江督护。
English: Uncle Zhou's younger brother, Zhou Shixiong, was the governor of the Xijiang River during the Yongyuan era.

古文：陈显达事后，世雄杀广州刺史萧季敞，称季敞同逆，送首京师。
现代文：江州刺史陈显达起事失败后，周世雄杀了广州刺史萧季敞，声言萧季敞与陈颤达同谋篡逆，把萧季敞的首级送到京城。
English: After the failed uprising of Jiangzhou assassin Chen Xanda, Zhou Shixiong killed Guangzhou assassin Xiao Jichang, claiming that Xiao Jichang conspired with Chen Chulda to commit treason, and sent Xiao Jichang's head to Beijing.

古文：广州刺史颜翻讨杀之。
现代文：后周世雄又被广州刺史颜翻征讨杀掉了。
English: Later, Zhou Shixiong was killed by the Guangzhou assassins.

古文：王广之，字林之，沛郡相人也。
现代文：王广之字林之，沛郡相地人。
English: Wang Guangzhi Zhilin Zhi, a local resident of Pei County.

古文：少好弓马，便捷有勇力。
现代文：从小喜欢骑马射箭，动作便捷勇武有力。
English: He liked riding horses and archery from a young age. The movements were quick, daring and powerful.

古文：初为马队主。
现代文：起初做马队主。
English: At first he was the team leader.

古文：宋大明中，以功补本县令，殿中，龙骧，强弩将军，骠骑中兵，南谯太守。
现代文：宋大明年间因有功勋补任做本县令，殿中，龙骧，强弩将军，骠骑中兵，南谯太守。
English: During the Song Dynasty, because of his meritorious service, he was appointed to be the county magistrate, the palace, the dragon, the strong general, the cavalry, and the governor of Nanlu.

古文：泰始初，除宁朔将军、军主，隶宁朔将军刘怀珍征殷琰于寿春。
现代文：泰始初年，拜任宁朔将军、军主，在寿春征伐殷琰时隶属于宁朔将军刘怀珍。
English: In the first year of Taizhi, he was appointed as the general of Ningshuo and the commander of the army, and he was subordinate to the general of Ningshuo Liu Huaizhen during the Shouchun Conquest.

古文：琰将刘从筑垒拒守，台军相拒移日。
现代文：殷琰的部将刘从建筑堡垒拒守，堡垒内的军队拒守了很长时间。
English: Yan Xuan's troops kept Liu from building the fortress, and the troops inside the fortress resisted for a long time.

古文：琰遣长史杜叔宝领五千人运车五百乘援从。
现代文：殷琰派遣长史杜叔穴率领五千人、运输车辆五百乘来援助刘从。
English: Yin Rong dispatched five thousand people and five hundred transport vehicles led by Chief Shi Du Shuxuan to aid Liu Cong.

古文：怀珍遣广之及军主辛庆祖、黄回、千道连等要击于横塘。宝结营拒战，广之等肉薄攻营，自晡至日没，大败之，杀伤千余人，遂退，烧其运车。
现代文：刘怀珍派遣王广之及军主辛庆祖、黄回、千道连等在横塘进行截击杜叔寅安营扎寨进行拒战，王广之等攻管肉搏，从申时一直争战到日落，把杜叔宠等杀得大败，杀伤一千多人，杜叔卖只好撤退，王广之等把杜叔宝的运输车烧掉了。
English: Liu Huizhen dispatched Wang Guangzhi and the commanders Xin Qingzu, Huang Hui, and Qian Dao Lian to intercept Du Shujin's encampment in Hengtang to resist the war. Wang Guangzhi and others fought hand-to-hand combat from the time of Shen to the sunset, killing and wounding more than a thousand people. Du Shujing had to retreat, and Wang Guangzhi and others burned down Du Shubao's transport vehicle.

古文：从闻之，弃垒奔走。
现代文：刘从得到这些消息，衹得放弃堡垒逃跑。
English: Liu was so shocked by the news that he had to abandon the fortress and run away.

古文：时合肥城反，官军前后受敌，都督刘勔召诸军主会议。
现代文：那时合肥城也在反叛，官军腹背受敌，都督刘励召集诸军主会议。
English: At that time, Hefei City was also in rebellion, the government army suffered from the enemy, and the governor Liu Li convened a meeting of the military leaders.

古文：广之曰： 请得将军所乘马往平之。 
现代文：王广之说： 请将军能把乘坐的马给我骑着去平定合肥城。 
English: Wang Guangzhi said, "Please ask the general to give me a horse to ride to Hefei.

古文：勔以马与广之，广之去三日，攻克合肥贼。
现代文：刘勋就把自己的马给了王广之，王广之去了仅三天，就攻克了合肥城的叛贼。
English: Liu Xun gave his horse to Wang Guangzhi. Wang Guangzhi went for only three days and defeated the traitors in Hefei.

古文：仍随怀珍讨淮北。
现代文：又跟随刘怀珍讨伐淮北。
English: He also followed Liu Huai Zhen to fight against Huaibei.

古文：时明帝遣青州刺史明僧暠北征至三城，为沈文秀所攻。
现代文：当时宋明帝刘或派青州刺史明僧嵩北征到三城时，遭沈文秀攻击。
English: At that time, when Emperor Liu of Song and Ming sent the Qingzhou Shishi Ming monk Song Bei to march to Sancheng, he was attacked by Shen Wenshu.

古文：广之将步骑三千余人，缘海救之，俱引退。
现代文：王广之率领步兵骑兵三千多人，沿海边去救援明僧篙，使明僧嵩的人马全部撤回。
English: Wang Guangzhi led more than three thousand infantry and cavalry to go to the coast to rescue the Ming monks, so that all the Ming monks and horses were withdrawn.

古文：广之又进军袭文秀所置长广太守刘桃根，桃根弃城走。
现代文：王广之还进军偷袭沈文秀设置的长广太守铆根，刘桃根被迫弃城而逃。
English: Wang Guangzhi also marched to attack Changguang Taishu Hugen set up by Shen Wenshu, and Liu Taogen was forced to abandon the city and flee.

古文：军还，封安蛮县子，三百户。
现代文：王广之班师后被封为安蛮县子，食邑三百户。
English: Wang Guang's squadron was later awarded the title of Amman County, with more than 300 households.

古文：寻改蒲圻。
现代文：不久又改封蒲圻。
English: Soon after, he changed his seal to "蒲."

古文：除建威将军、南阳太守，不之官。
现代文：授建威将军、南隧太守，未到任。
English: General Jianwei and the governor of the South Tunnel did not arrive at their posts.

古文：除越骑校尉、龙骧将军、钟离太守。
现代文：又任越骑校尉，龙骧将军、钟离太守。
English: He was also appointed as the Viet Cavalry Captain, the Longjing General, and the Zhongli Governor.

古文：迁为左军将军，加宁朔将军、高平太守。
现代文：迁左军将军，加宁朔将军、高平太守。
English: General Qian Zuo, General Ganingshuo, and Governor Gao Ping.

古文：又除游击将军，宁朔如故。
现代文：又拜授游击将军，宁朔将军依旧未变。
English: He also conferred the title of guerrilla general, while General Ningshuo remained unchanged.

古文：加给事中，冠军将军。
现代文：加给事中，冠军将军。
English: Add to the mix, a championship general.

古文：讨宋建平，先登京口，改封宁都县子，五百户。
现代文：讨伐宋建平王刘景素，抢先攻入建垩王起兵地塞旦有功，改封宁都县子，食邑五百户。
English: He fought against the Song Dynasty Jianping King Liu Jingsu, and successfully entered the Jianbing King's military base of Sedan ahead of others. He changed his fief to Ningdu County, with 500 households.

古文：太祖废苍梧，出广之为假节、督徐州军事、徐州刺史、钟离太守，冠军如故。
现代文：齐太祖萧道成废黜废帝为苍梧王时，外调王广之为假节之职、督徐州军事、徐州刺史、钟离太守，冠军将军之职依前未变。
English: When Emperor Xiao Daocheng was dethroned and the deposed emperor became King Cangwu, Wang Guang was transferred to the position of the false festival, the military governor of Xuzhou, the military governor of Xuzhou, the governor of Zhongli, and the champion general. The position of the champion general remained unchanged.

古文：沈攸之事起，广之留京师，豫平石头，仍从太祖顿新亭，进号征虏将军。
现代文：沈攸之起兵反萧道成事发时，王广之留驻京师，参与平定石头城袁粲，继从太祖萧道成驻军新亭，进爵为征虏将军。
English: When the rebellion against Xiao Dao started by Shen You, Wang Guangzhi stayed in Beijing to participate in the pacification of the Stone Town of Yuancheng. He followed the great ancestor Xiao Dao to become the garrison of Xinting and was knighted as a conscript general.

古文：太祖诛黄回。回弟驷及从弟马、兄子奴亡逸。
现代文：太祖诛杀黄回，黄回的弟弟黄驷和堂弟黄马以及他哥哥的儿子黄奴逃跑了。
English: The great-grandfather killed Huang Hui, and Huang Hui's brother Huang Hui, cousin Huang Ma, and his brother's son Huang Niu ran away.

古文：太祖与广之书曰： 黄回虽有微勋，而罪过转不可容。
现代文：太祖给王广之写信说： 黄回虽说有点功劳，可是他的罪过转而达到不能容忍的地步。
English: The great-grandfather wrote to Wang Guangzhi: Although Huang Hui has some merit, his crime has reached an intolerable level.

古文：近遂启请御大小二舆为刺史服饰。吾乃不惜为其启闻，政恐得舆，复求画轮车。
现代文：近来竟然提出要求要驾御有大小二车厢的车作他刺史的服饰我就算不惜替他向皇上奏请，衹担心他得到有大小车厢的车后，又要要求画轮的车呢。
English: Recently, he even asked to drive a car with two large and two small carriages to make his historical costume. I would not hesitate to make a request to the emperor for him, but I am afraid that after he gets a car with large and small carriages, he will also ask for a car with a painting wheel.

古文：此外罪不可胜数，弟自悉之。
现代文：此外他的华过也是数不胜数的，兄弟你全都知道。
English: Besides, his merits are innumerable, brother, you know all about them.

古文：今启依法。 
现代文：现在也只好依法执行了。 
English: Now it has to be carried out in accordance with the law.

古文：令广之于江西搜捕驷等。
现代文：太祖命令王广之在江西搜捕黄驷等人。
English: The great-grandfather ordered Wang Guangzhi to search and arrest Huang Qi and others in Jiangxi.

古文：建元元年，进爵为侯，食邑千户。
现代文：建元元年，进爵为侯，食邑一千产。
English: In the first year of the Jianyuan era, he was ennobled as a marquis, and his food village produced a thousand products.

古文：转散骑常侍、左军将军。
现代文：转散骑常侍、左军将军。
English: The cavalry constables and left-wing generals dispersed.

古文：北虏动，明年，诏假广之节，出淮上。
现代文：魏虏侵齐，第二年，皇上下韶令王广之持节，出京屯驻淮上。
English: Wei Rui invaded Qi, and the next year, the emperor issued an imperial edict ordering Wang Guangzhi to hold the festival and leave Beijing for Huai Shang.

古文：广之家在彭、沛，启上求招诱乡里部曲，北取彭城，上许之。
现代文：王广之的家原在彭、沛一带，上表启奏皇上请求招募诱导家乡百姓部属反魏，北上夺取彭城，得到皇上批准。
English: Wang Guangzhi's hometown was in the area of Peng and Pei, and the above table revealed the emperor's request to recruit and induce the people of his hometown to be anti-Wei, and go north to seize Pengcheng, which was approved by the emperor.

古文：以广之为使持节、都督淮北军事、平北将军、徐州刺史。
现代文：皇上派王广之做使持节、都督淮北军事、平北将军、徐州刺史。
English: The emperor sent Wang Guang as the envoy to hold the festival, the military governor of Huaibei, the general of Pingbei, and the historian of Xuzhou.

古文：广之引军过淮，无所克获，坐免官。
现代文：王广之率领军队渡过淮河，没有获得什么战果，因此被免去官职。
English: Wang Guangzhi led the army across the Huai River, but did not achieve any results, so he was removed from office.

古文：寻除征虏将军，加散骑常侍、太子右率。
现代文：不久又授征虏将军，加散骑常侍、太子右率。
English: Soon after, he was given the title of General of Conscripts, as well as the titles of Cavalryman and Prince's Right-hand man.

古文：世祖即位，迁长沙王镇军司马，南东海太守，司徒司马，寻阳相，南新蔡太守，安陆王北中郎左军司马，广陵太守，将军如故。出为持节、都督徐州诸军事、徐州刺史，将军如故。
现代文：世祖即位，迁王广之为长沙王镇军司马，南束海太守，司徒司马，寻阳相，南新蔡太守，安陆王北中郎左军司马、广陵太守，将军之职依旧不变后又外任持节、都督徐州诸军事、徐州刺史，将军之职依旧不变。
English: The founding father ascended to the throne, and Wang Guang was transferred to the position of Changsha Wang Zhen Military Secretary, Nanshukai Military Governor, Szeto Military Secretary, Xingyang Minister, Nanshin Cai Military Secretary, Anlu Wang Bei Zhonglang Left Military Secretary, Guangling Military Secretary, the position of the general was still unchanged, and then he was appointed to hold the festival, the governor of Xuzhou Zhu Military, Xuzhou Zhishi, the position of the general was still unchanged.

古文：还为光禄大夫、左将军、司徒司马。
现代文：还朝后为光禄大夫、左将军、司徒司马。
English: Also appearing in the morning and evening are Doctor Guanglu, General Zuo, and Sma Sma.

古文：迁右卫将军，转散骑常侍，前将军。
现代文：迁右卫将军，转散骑常侍，前将车。
English: The general of the Right Division was transferred, the equestrian attendants were dispersed, and the chariot was brought forward.

古文：世祖见广之子珍国应堪大用，谓广之曰： 卿可谓老蚌也。 
现代文：世祖见王广之的儿广王珍国可以有大作为，对王广之说： 爱卿可说是怀珠的老蚌。 
English: The ancestor saw that Wang Guangzhi's son, Guang Wang Zhenguo, could do great things, and said to Wang Guangzhi: "Aiqing can be said to be the mother of pearl.

古文：广之曰： 臣不敢辞。 上大笑。
现代文：王广之说： 臣下不敢推辞 世祖听了哈哈大笑。
English: Wang Guangzhi said: "Vassals dare not refuse" The patriarch laughed out loud.

古文：除游击将军，不拜。
现代文：授予王广之游击将军，他没有接受任职命令。
English: Awarded to Wang Guangzhi, a guerrilla general, who did not accept the order to take office.

古文：十一年，虏动，假广之节，招募。
现代文：永明十一年，魏虏扬言伐齐，世祖令王广之持节，招募队伍。
English: In the eleventh year of the Yongming era, Wei Rui made a threat to make war with Qi, and Wang Guangzhi, the founder of the dynasty, held a festival to recruit troops.

古文：隆昌元年，迁给事中、左卫将军。
现代文：隆昌元年王广之迁给事中、左卫将军。
English: In the first year of the Longchang era, Wang Guang was transferred to General Zuo.

古文：时豫州刺史崔慧景密与虏通，有异志。
现代文：当时豫州刺史崔慧景暗中同魏虏联络，有反叛的心思。
English: At that time, Cui Huijing, the governor of Yuzhou, was secretly in contact with Wei Rui and had a rebellious mind.

古文：延兴元年，以广之为持节、督豫州郢州之西阳司州之汝南二郡军事、平西将军、豫州刺史。
现代文：延兴元年，以王广之为持节、督豫州郢州之西阳、司州之汝南：二郡军事、平西将军、豫州刺史。
English: In the first year of Yanxing, Wang Guang was appointed to hold the festival, and he was appointed to be the governor of Xiyang of Yuzhou and Runan of Shizhou: two counties of military, the general of Pingxi, and the historian of Yuzhou.

古文：预废郁林勋，增封三百户。
现代文：又因参预废黜萧昭业为郁林王有功，增封食邑三百户。
English: In addition, Xiao Zhaoye was awarded the title of "King of Yulin" for his participation in the preliminaries for the abolition of serfdom, and he was awarded the title of "Three Hundred Households of Yulin County."

古文：高宗诛害诸王，遣广之征安陆王子敬于江阳，给鼓吹一部。
现代文：高宗萧鸾要诛害太祖、世祖子孙诸王，派遣王广之到江阳征伐安陆王子敬，赐给一部鼓吹。
English: Gao Zong Xiaoqi wanted to harm the ancestors and descendants of the ancestors of the kings, and sent Wang Guangzhi to Jiangyang to conquer the Anlu princes and give them a part of the propaganda.

古文：事平，仍改授使持节、散骑常侍、都督江州诸军事、镇南将军、江州刺史。
现代文：事完后又改授王广之为使持节、散骑常侍、都督江州诸军事、镇南将军、江州刺史。
English: After the event was over, Wang Guangxing was awarded the title of Envoy of the Year of the Horse, Cavalryman of the Year, Military Governor of Jiangsu Province, General of Zhenan Province and Historian of Jiangsu Province.

古文：进封应城县公，食邑二千户。
现代文：进封应城县公，食邑二千户。
English: Jinfeng Yingcheng County Public Security Bureau, two thousand households in food villages.

古文：建武二年，虏围司州，遣广之持节督司州征讨解围。
现代文：建武二年，魏虏围攻司州，皇上派王广之持节督司州征讨，去解司州的围困。
English: In the second year of Jianwu, the Wei army besieged Sizhou, and the emperor sent Wang Guangzhi, the commander of the Sizhou expedition, to relieve the siege of Sizhou.

古文：广之未至百余里，虏退，乃还。
现代文：王广之进军还没到一百多里路，魏虏就闻风撤退了，王广之就班师了。
English: Wang Guangzhi's march did not reach more than a hundred miles, Wei Rui felt the wind and retreated, Wang Guangzhi fell into line.

古文：明年，迁侍中、镇军将军，给扶。
现代文：第二年，王广之迁侍中、镇军将军，赏给享受扶的仪礼。
English: In the second year, Wang Guangzhi, the general of the town army, was awarded the ceremony of enjoying support.

古文：四年，卒。
现代文：建武四年谢世。
English: Four years, dead.

古文：年七十三。
现代文：享年七十二岁。
English: He was 72 years old.

古文：追赠散骑常侍、车骑将军，谥曰壮公。
现代文：死后追赠散骑常侍、车骑将军，谧号为庄公。
English: After his death, he was posthumously awarded the title of sanshiki (free rider) and chariot and cavalry general. His posthumous name was Zhuangong.

古文：史臣曰：公侯扞城，守国之所资也。
现代文：史臣曰：公侯捍城，这些保卫疆土的人，是守卫国家社稷的凭藉。
English: Shichen said: the princes of Hancheng, these people who defend the territory, are the basis for guarding the national society.

古文：必须久习兵事，非一战之力。
现代文：必须长时间地熟习军事武艺，决不是靠某一次战斗就能成就的。
English: Military martial arts must be mastered over a long period of time and cannot be achieved in a single battle.

古文：安国等致效累朝，声勤克举，并识时变，咸知附托。
现代文：吕安国等能尽力报效累朝累代，声威到处便能获得胜利，并且都能审时度势，随机权变，择主依附。
English: Lu'an and other countries can try their best to repay the dynasties for their efforts, and Shenwei can win everywhere, and can judge the time and situation, random power change, and choose the master.

古文：盘龙骁勇，独冠三军，匈奴之惮飞将，曾不若也。
现代文：周盘龙作战骁勇独为三军之冠，漠代匈奴人所害怕的飞将军，竟然不如。英雄啊!
English: Zhou Panlong fought bravely for the crown of the three armies, and the general who was feared by the Huns in the desert was not as good as him. What a hero!

古文：壮矣哉！赞曰：安国旧将，协同迁社，同裨九江，翊从中夏。
现代文：赞曰：吕安国曾是前朝老将，协同太祖变更社稷，在九江辅助建功，随到中夏护卫。
English: Zang said: Lu'an Guo was a veteran of the former dynasty. He cooperated with his great-grandfather to change the social system, assisted in the construction of Jiujiang, and escorted the Central Xia Dynasty.

古文：盘龙杀敌，洞开胡马。
现代文：周盘龙洞穿胡马，英勇杀敌。
English: Zhou Pan Longdong pierced Huma and killed the enemy heroically.

古文：广之末年，旌旄骤把。
现代文：王广之暮年垂老，屡次把握帅旗。
English: At the end of his life, Wang Guang is getting old and has repeatedly grasped the banner of excellence.

