古文：凡人主之国小而家大，权轻而臣重者，可亡也。
现代文：凡属君主国家弱小而臣下封地强大的，君主权轻而臣下权重的，国家就可能灭亡。
English: Where the monarchical state is weak and the vassal fiefdoms are strong, and the sovereignty of the monarch is light and the power of the vassal is heavy, the country may perish.

古文：简法禁而务谋虑，荒封内而恃交援者，可亡也。
现代文：君主轻视法令而好用计谋，荒废内政而依赖国外援助的，国家可能灭亡。
English: If the monarch despises the law and prefers to use stratagems, if he abandons domestic affairs and relies on foreign aid, the country may perish.

古文：群臣为学，门子好辩，商贾外积，小民内困者，可亡也。
现代文：群臣喜欢私学，贵族子弟喜欢辩术，商人将财富囤积国外，百姓崇尚武力私斗的，国家可能灭亡。
English: If ministers like to study privately, if the sons of nobles like to debate, if merchants hoard wealth abroad, and if the people advocate armed struggle, the country may perish.

古文：好宫室台榭陂池，事车服器玩，好罢露百姓，煎靡货财者，可亡也。
现代文：君主喜好修建宫殿楼阁池塘，爱好车马服饰玩物，总是让百姓疲劳困顿，压榨挥霍百姓财物的，国家可能灭亡。
English: Monarchs like to build palaces, pavilions and ponds, love cars, horses, clothes and toys, always make the people tired and exhausted, squeeze and squander the people's property, and the country may perish.

古文：用时日，事鬼神，信卜筮而好祭祀者，可亡也。
现代文：办事挑选吉日良辰，敬奉鬼神，迷信卜筮，喜好祭神祀祖的，国家可能会灭亡。
English: If one chooses auspicious days, worships ghosts and deities, believes in superstition, and likes to worship ancestors, the country may perish.

古文：听以爵不以众言参验，用一人为门户者，可亡也。
现代文：君主听取意见只凭爵位的高低，而不去验证意见是否正确，只通过一个人来通报情况的，可能灭亡。
English: Monarchs who listen to opinions based only on the level of knighthood, without verifying whether the opinions are correct, and only through one person to inform the situation, may perish.

古文：官职可以重求，爵禄可以货得者，可亡也。
现代文：官职可以靠权势求得，爵禄可以用钱财买到，可能灭亡。
English: Office can be obtained by power and influence, peerage can be bought with money and wealth, and it is possible to perish.

古文：缓心而无成，柔茹而寡断，好恶无决而无所定立者，可亡也。
现代文：办事迟疑而没有成效，软弱怯懦而优柔寡断，好坏不分而无一定原则的，可能灭亡。
English: Hesitant and ineffectual, weak and cowardly and irresolute, indifferent and without principle, may perish.

古文：饕贪而无厌，近利而好得者，可亡也。
现代文：极度贪心而没有满足，追求财利而爱占便宜，可能灭亡。
English: He who is greedy and never satisfied, who pursues wealth and loves gain, will come to ruin.

古文：喜淫辞而不周于法，好辩说而不求其用，滥于文丽而不顾其功者，可亡也。
现代文：喜欢浮夸言辞而不合于法，爱好夸夸其谈而不求实用，迷恋华丽文采而不顾功效的，可能灭亡。
English: Those who are fond of pompous words and do not abide by the law, those who are fond of boastful talk and do not seek practicality, and those who are infatuated with ornate literature and do not care about efficacy, may perish.

古文：浅薄而易见，漏泄而无藏，不能周密而通群臣之语者，可亡也。
现代文：君主浅薄而轻易表露感情，泄露机密而不加隐藏，不能严密戒备而通报群臣言论的，可能灭亡。
English: A monarch who is shallow and easily shows his feelings, who divulges secrets without hiding them, and who fails to be on high alert and inform his subjects of his utterances, may perish.

古文：很刚而不和，愎谏而好胜，不顾社稷而轻为自信者，可亡也。
现代文：凶狠暴房而不随和，拒绝劝谏而自认高强，不顾国家安危而自以为是的，可能灭亡。
English: Those who are ferocious and violent but do not compromise, who refuse to be persuaded but consider themselves superior, and who are self-righteous regardless of the country's safety and security may perish.

古文：恃交援而简近邻，怙强大之救而侮所迫之国者，可亡也。
现代文：依仗盟国援助而怠慢邻国，倚仗强国支持而轻侮邻近小国的，可能灭亡。
English: Relying on the assistance of allies and neglecting its neighbors, relying on the support of powerful countries and despising small neighboring countries, it may perish.

古文：羁旅侨士，重帑在外，上间谋计，下与民事者，可亡也。
现代文：外来的侨居游士，把大量钱财存放在国外，上能参与国家机密，下能干预民众事务的，可能灭亡。
English: Foreign expatriates, who keep a large amount of money abroad, can participate in state secrets on the one hand, and interfere in people's affairs on the other, may perish.

古文：民信其相，下不能其上，主爱信之而弗能废者，可亡也。
现代文：民众只相信相国，下面不服从君主，君主又宠信相国而不能废弃他的，可能灭亡。
English: The people only believe in their country, and if they do not obey the monarch, and the monarch favors his country and cannot abandon him, he may perish.

古文：境内之杰不事，而求封外之士，不以功伐课试，而好以各问举错，羁旅起贵以陵故常者，可亡也。
现代文：国内的杰出人才不用，反而去搜罗国外的人士，不按照功劳考核政绩，而喜欢凭借名望任免官员，侨居游士升为高官而凌驾于本国原有大臣之上的，可能灭亡。
English: It may perish if it does not make use of outstanding talents at home, but instead searches for people from abroad, if it does not evaluate political achievements according to their merits, but likes to appoint and dismiss officials based on their fame, and if foreign expatriates are promoted to high-ranking officials and surpass the original ministers of the country.

古文：轻其嫡正，庶子称衡，太子未定而主即世者，可亡也。
现代文：轻视正妻嫡子，庶子和嫡子并重，太子还未确定而君主就去世了的，可能灭亡。
English: If the legitimate son of the legitimate wife, the illegitimate son and the legitimate son are despised, the prince is not yet determined and the monarch has died, it may perish.

古文：大心而无悔，国乱而自多，不料境内之资而易其邻敌者，可亡也。
现代文：君主狂妄自大而不思悔改，国家混乱还自我夸耀，不估计本国实力而轻视邻近敌国的，可能灭亡。
English: If a monarch is arrogant and unrepentant, if a country is chaotic and self-aggrandizing, if a country underestimates its own strength and despises a neighboring enemy country, it may perish.

古文：国小而不处卑，力少而不畏强，无礼而侮大邻，贪愎而拙交者，可亡也。
现代文：国小而不处卑位，力弱而不畏强势，没有礼仪而侮辱邻近大国，贪婪固执而不懂外交的，可能灭亡。
English: If a country is small, but not in a lowly position; if it is weak, but not afraid of a strong power; if it has no etiquette, but insults a neighboring great power; if it is greedy and obstinate, but does not understand diplomacy, it may perish.

古文：太子已置，而娶于强敌以为后妻，则太子危，如是，则群臣易虑者，可亡也。
现代文：太子已经确立，君主却又娶强大敌国的女子作为正妻，太子的地位就会危险，这样一来群臣就会变心；群臣变心的，可能灭亡。
English: The prince has already been established, but the monarch has married a woman from a powerful enemy country as his lawful wife. The position of the prince will be in danger, and as a result, the ministers will change their minds; if the ministers change their minds, they may perish.

古文：怯慑而弱守，蚤见而心柔懦，知有谓可，断而弗敢行者，可亡也。
现代文：胆小怕事而不敢坚持己见，问题早已发现而没有决心去解决，知道可以怎样做，但决定了又不敢去做的，可能灭亡。
English: If you are timid and afraid to stick to your opinion, if you have already found the problem but are not determined to solve it, if you know what you can do, but have decided but are afraid to do it, you may perish.

古文：出君在外而国更置，质太子未反而君易子，如是则国携；国携者，可亡也。
现代文：君主出国在外而国内另立君主，做人质的太子没有回国而君主又另立太子，这样国人就有二心；国人有二心的，可能灭亡。
English: If the monarch goes abroad and another monarch is installed at home, or if the hostage prince does not return home and the monarch installs another prince, then the Chinese people will have two hearts; if the Chinese people have two hearts, they may perish.

古文：挫辱大臣而狎其身，刑戮小民而逆其使，怀怒思耻而专习则贼生，贼生者，可亡也。
现代文：折磨污辱了大臣而又亲呢他，惩罚了小民而又反常地使用他，这些人心怀不满，不忘耻辱，而君主又和他们特别亲近，那么劫杀事件就会产生，劫杀事件产生的，可能灭亡。
English: If you torture and humiliate a minister and then kiss him, if you punish a commoner and then use him in an abnormal way, if these people are dissatisfied and do not forget the humiliation, and if the monarch is particularly close to them, then a robbery and murder will occur, and if a robbery and murder occurs, it may perish.

古文：大臣两重，父兄众强，内党外援以争事势者，可亡也。
现代文：两个大臣同时得到重用，君主亲戚人多势强，内结党羽外借交援来争权势的，可能灭亡。
English: Two ministers at the same time get heavy use, the monarch's relatives are more powerful, and those who fight for power by uniting the party and borrowing diplomatic assistance from abroad may perish.

古文：婢妾之言听，爱玩之智用，外内悲惋而数行不法者，可亡也。
现代文：听信婢妄的谗言，使用近臣的计谋，内外悲愤而一再干违法之事的，可能灭亡。
English: If one listens to the presumptuous reproach of a servant, uses the stratagem of a vassal, and repeatedly commits illegal acts out of grief and indignation both at home and abroad, one may perish.

古文：简侮大臣，无礼父兄，劳苦百姓，杀戮不辜者，可亡也。
现代文：简慢凌侮大臣，不知尊敬亲戚，劳累百姓，杀戮无辜的，可能灭亡。
English: He who insults and abuses his ministers, does not know how to respect his relatives, overworks his people, and slays the innocent, may perish.

古文：好以智矫法，时以行杂公，法禁变易，号令数下者，可亡也。
现代文：君主好用智巧改变法制，常用私行扰乱公事，法令不断改变，号令前后矛盾的，可能灭亡。
English: Monarchs are good at using cleverness to change the legal system, they often use private actions to disrupt public affairs, laws and regulations are constantly changing, and contradictory orders may perish.

古文：无地固，城郭恶，无畜积，财物寡，无守战之备而轻攻伐者，可亡也。
现代文：地形不险要，城墙不坚固，国家无积蓄，财物贫乏，没有防守和打仗的准备却轻易去进攻别国的，可能灭亡。
English: The terrain is not dangerous, the city walls are not strong, the country has no savings, the property is poor, there is no defense and preparation for war, but it is easy to attack other countries, it may perish.

古文：种类不寿，主数即世，婴兒为君，大臣专制，树羁旅以为党，数割地以待交者，可亡也。
现代文：王族短命，君主接连去世，小孩子当了国君，大臣专权，扶植外来游士作为党羽，经常割地来换取外援的，可能灭亡。
English: Royal families are short-lived, monarchs die one after another, children become sovereigns, ministers have absolute power, foreign wanderers are supported as party members, and those who often cut land in exchange for foreign aid may perish.

古文：太子尊显，徒属众强，多大国之交，而威势蚤具者，可亡也。
现代文：太子尊贵显赫，党徒人多势强，与许多大国交往密切，而个人威势过早具备的，可能灭亡。
English: The prince is distinguished and prominent, the party members are numerous and powerful, and they have close contacts with many big countries. However, if they have personal power too early, they may perish.

古文：变褊而心急，轻疾而易动发，心悁忿而不訾前后者，可亡也。
现代文：性情偏激而急躁，轻率而容易冲动，积忿易怒而不思前顾后的，可能灭亡。
English: Temper tempered and impetuous, rash and impulsive, quick to anger and not thinking ahead, may perish.

古文：主多怒而好用兵，简本教而轻战攻者，可亡也。
现代文：君主容易发怒而喜欢打仗，放松农耕而不注重军事的，可能灭亡。
English: The monarch who is quick to anger and fond of war, who relaxes agriculture and does not pay attention to military affairs, may perish.

古文：贵臣相妒，大臣隆盛，外藉敌国，内困百姓，以攻怨雠，而人主弗诛者，可亡也。
现代文：贵臣互相嫉妒，大臣权重势盛，在外凭借敌国，在内困扰百姓，以便攻击冤家对头，而君主不诛戮他们的，可能灭亡。
English: The nobles are jealous of each other, the power of the ministers is strong, they rely on the enemy country outside and trouble the people inside in order to attack their enemies, and if the monarch does not kill them, he may perish.

古文：君不肖而侧室贤，太子轻而庶子伉，官吏弱而人民桀，如此则国躁；国躁者，可亡也。
现代文：君主无能而他的兄弟贤能，太子势轻而庶子势强，官吏软弱而百姓不服管教，这样的话国家就会动荡不安；国家动荡不安，可能灭亡。
English: If the ruler is incompetent and his brother is capable, if the prince is weak and the illegitimate son is strong, if the officials are weak and the people do not submit to discipline, then the country will be unstable; the country is unstable and may perish.

古文：藏恕而弗发，悬罪而弗诛，使群臣阴赠而愈忧惧，而久未可知者，可亡也。
现代文：君主怀恨而不发作，搁置罪犯而迟迟不动刑，使群臣暗中憎恨而更加忧惧，因而长期不知结果如何的，可能灭亡。
English: Monarchs hold grudges but don't act on them, put criminals on hold but don't punish them, and make their courtiers secretly hate them and fear them even more. As a result, if they don't know what the outcome will be for a long time, they may perish.

古文：出军命将太重，边地任守太尊，专制擅命，径为而无所请者，可亡也。
现代文：带兵在外的统帅权势太大，驻守边疆的长官地位太高，独断专行，直接处事而不请示报告的，可能灭亡。
English: If the commander-in-chief who leads the troops abroad is too powerful, if the officers stationed in the border areas are too high-ranking, if they act arbitrarily, and if they deal with matters directly without requesting a report, they may perish.

古文：后妻淫乱，主母畜秽，外内混通，男女无别，是谓两主；两主者，可亡也，后妻贱而婢妾贵，太子卑而庶子尊，相室轻而典谒重，如此则内外乖；内外乖者，可亡也。
现代文：妻子淫乱，太后养奸，内外混杂串通，男女没有分别，这样就形成了两个权力中心；形成两个权力中心的，可能灭亡。正妻贱而婢妾贵，太子卑而庶子尊，执政大臣轻而通报官吏重，这样就会内外乖戾；内外乖戾的，可能灭亡。
English: An adulterous wife, the empress dowager having an adulterous affair, collusion within and without, and no distinction between men and women, thus forming two power centers; if two power centers are formed, it is possible to perish. If a legitimate wife is lowly and a concubine is high, if a prince is lowly and an illegitimate son is high, if a minister of state is lowly and a government official is high, then there will be discord within and without; if there is discord within and without, it is possible to perish.

古文：大臣甚贵，偏党众强，壅塞主断而重擅国者，可亡也。
现代文：大臣非常显贵，私党人多势强，封锁君主决定而又独揽国政的，可能灭亡。
English: The ministers are very prominent, the private party members are numerous and powerful, and those who block the monarch's decision and monopolize national politics may perish.

古文：私门之官用，马府之世绌，乡曲之善举者，可亡也。官职之劳废，贵私行而贱公功者，可亡也。
现代文：豪门贵族的家臣被任用，历代从军的功臣却被排斥，偏僻乡村里有善名的人得到选拔，在职官员的功劳反被抹杀，推崇私行而轻视公功的 ，可能灭亡。
English: The vassals of high-ranking aristocrats were appointed, but the military heroes of all ages were ostracized, people with good reputations in remote villages were selected, the merits of serving officials were obliterated, and those who praised private behavior and despised public service may perish.

古文：公家虚而大臣实，正户贫而寄寓富，耕战之士困，末作之民利者，可亡也。
现代文：国家空虚而大臣殷实，常住户贫穷而客居者富裕，农民战士困顿，而工商业者得利的，可能灭亡。
English: The country is empty, but the ministers are rich; the permanent residents are poor, but the sojourners are rich; the peasants and soldiers are in trouble, but the industrial and commercial people are profitable, and may perish.

古文：见大利而不趋，闻祸端而不备，浅薄于争守之事，而务以仁义自饰者，可亡也。
现代文：看到根本利益不去追求，知道祸乱的苗头不加戒备，带兵打仗的事懂得很少，而致力于用仁义粉饰自己的，可能灭亡。
English: If you do not pursue your fundamental interests, if you do not beware of the seeds of disaster, if you know very little about leading soldiers into battle, and if you are committed to covering yourself with benevolence and righteousness, you may perish.

古文：不为人主之孝，而慕瓜夫之孝，不顾社稷之利，而听主母之令，女子用国，刑馀用事者，可亡也。
现代文：不遵行君主的孝道，而仰慕一般人的孝道，不顾国家利益，而听从母后命令，女人当国，宦官掌权的，可能灭亡。
English: Those who do not follow the filial piety of the monarch, but admire the filial piety of the common people, do not care about the interests of the country, but obey the orders of the queen mother, women in power, eunuchs in power, may perish.

古文：辞辩而不法，心智而无术，主多能而不以法度从事者，可亡也。
现代文：夸夸其谈而不合法令，头脑聪明而缺乏策略，君主多才多艺而不按法度办事的，可能灭亡。
English: The talkative but not the lawful, the clever but not the strategic, the versatile but not the lawful, may perish.

古文：亲臣进而故人退，不肖用事而贤良伏，无功贵而劳苦贱，如是则下怨；下怨者，可亡也。
现代文：近臣得到进用而故臣却被辞退，无能得以重用而贤良却被埋没，无功的人地位显贵而劳苦的人地位卑下，这样臣民就要怨恨；臣民怨恨的，可能灭亡。
English: Close vassals are promoted while old vassals are dismissed, incompetents are promoted while the virtuous are buried, those who have done nothing are elevated while those who have worked hard are demoted. In this way, subjects will resent; those who resent may perish.

古文：父兄大臣禄秩过功，章服侵等，宫室供养大侈，而人主弗禁，则臣心无穷，臣心无穷者，可亡也。
现代文：父兄大臣的俸禄等级超过他们的功劳，旗帜车服超过规定的等级，宫室的供养太奢侈，而君主不加禁止，臣下的欲望就没有止境；臣下欲望没有止境的，可能灭亡。
English: The salary level of the father, brother and minister exceeds their merits, the flag, car and clothes exceed the specified level, the provision of the palace is too extravagant, and without the prohibition of the monarch, there is no end to the desires of the subjects; if there is no end to the desires of the subjects, they may perish.

古文：公胥公孙与民同门，暴慠其邻者，可亡也。亡征者，非曰必亡，言其可亡也。
现代文：皇亲国戚和普通百姓居住在一起，横行霸道欺压百姓的，国家可能灭亡。亡国的征兆，不是说国家一定灭亡，而是说它可能灭亡。
English: If the relatives of the emperor and the common people live together, and if they are domineering and oppress the people, the country may perish. The signs of the country's downfall do not mean that the country will definitely perish, but that it may perish.

古文：夫两尧不能相王，两桀不能相亡；亡王之机，必其治乱，其强弱相踦者也。
现代文：两个唐尧不能相互称王，两个夏桀不能相互灭亡；灭亡或称王的关键，必定取决于双方治乱强弱的不平衡。
English: Two Tang Dynasties cannot crown each other, and two Xia Dynasties cannot be destroyed by each other; the key to destruction or crowning must depend on the imbalance between the strength and weakness of both sides.

古文：木之折也必通蠹，墙之坏也必通隙。
现代文：树木折断一定由于蛀蚀，墙壁的倒塌一定是因为出现了裂缝。
English: Trees break because of erosion, walls collapse because of cracks.

古文：然木虽蠹，无疾风不折；墙虽隙，无大雨不坏。
现代文：然而树木虽然蛀蚀了，没有大风是无法折断的，墙壁虽然有了裂缝，没有出现大雨也不会倒塌。
English: However, although the trees are eroded, they cannot be broken without a strong wind, and although the walls have cracks, they will not collapse without heavy rain.

古文：万乘之主，有能服术行法以为亡征之君风雨者，其兼天下不难矣。
现代文：拥有完乘兵马的君主，如能运用法术作为暴风骤雨去摧毁那些已有灭亡征兆的国家君主，那么他要兼并天下就不难了！
English: If a monarch with a complete army and cavalry can use magic as a storm to destroy the monarchs of countries that have already shown signs of perishing, then it will not be difficult for him to annex the world!

