古文：沈众袁泌刘仲威陆山才王质韦载族弟翙
现代文：沈众，字仲师，吴兴武康人。祖父这曲在梁曲任特进。
English: Shen Zong, Zhaozhong teacher, Wu Xingwu Kangren. The grandfather of this piece is Liang Quren.

古文：沈众，字仲师，吴兴武康人也。
现代文：父亲选堕，在梁朝任给事黄门侍郎。
English: After his father's death, he was appointed to the post of Huangmen Chamberlain in the Liang Dynasty.

古文：祖约，梁特进。父旋，梁给事黄门侍郎。众好学，颇有文词，起家梁镇卫南平王法曹参军、太子舍人。是时，梁武帝制《千字诗》，众为之注解。
现代文：沈众爱好学习，言语文章很有词采，在梁朝以出任镇街南平王法曹参军、太子舍人起家。这时，梁武帝制作了《千字诗》，沈众为诗篇做了注解。
English: Shen Zong loved to study, and his verbal essays were very eloquent. He started his career in the Liang Dynasty as the legal assistant of the town of Nanping Wang, joined the army, and became a prince. At this time, Emperor Liang Wu produced "Thousand Character Poem," and Shen Zong made annotations for the poem.

古文：与陈郡谢景同时召见于文德殿，帝令众为《竹赋》，赋成，奏，帝善之，手敕答曰： 卿文体翩翩，可谓无忝尔祖。 
现代文：他和陈郡人谢景同时被召见于文德殿，梁武帝命令沈众作《竹赋》，赋写成后，呈上，梁武帝欣赏他所作的赋，亲手写诏书回话说： 你的文章风格飘扬，可以说无愧于你的祖父。 
English: At the same time, he and Chen County's Xie Jing were summoned to the Palace of Letters and Decrees. Emperor Liang Wu ordered Shen Zong to write the "Bamboo Fuxi." After the fuxi was completed, it was presented to him. Emperor Liang Wu appreciated the fuxi he had made and wrote a reply in his own hand: Your writing style is flamboyant, it can be said to be worthy of your grandfather.

古文：当阳公萧大心为郢州刺史，以众为限内记室参军。
现代文：当堡公萧大心任墨业刺史，用逸塞做限内记室参军。
English: The governor of the castle, Xiao Da Xin, was in charge of engraving the history of the industry, and used the cork stopper to make the limit of the office to join the army.

古文：寻除镇南湘东王记室参军。
现代文：不久任命为镇南湘束王记室参军。
English: He was soon appointed to join the army in the office of Zhenan Xiangzhuang.

古文：迁太子中舍人，兼散骑常侍。
现代文：升任太子中舍人，兼任散骑常侍。
English: He was promoted to the position of the prince's junior attendant, and also served as the prince's equestrian attendant.

古文：聘魏，还，迁骠骑庐陵王谘议参军，舍人如故。
现代文：沈众被委派前往西魏通问修好，回来后，升任骠骑庐陵王谘议参军，舍人的职务依旧担任。
English: Shen Zhong was appointed to go to the Western Wei Dynasty to ask for repairs, and when he returned, he was promoted to the position of riding on the king's horse to advise him to join the army, and he still held the position of healer.

古文：侯景之乱，众表于梁武，称家代所隶故义部曲，并在吴兴，求还召募以讨贼，梁武许之。
现代文：侯景叛乱时，沈众进言梁朝武帝，声称家族世代原来所统率的讲求节义的军队，都在吴兴，请求回去招募用来讨伐叛贼，梁武帝同意这样做。
English: During the rebellion of Houjing, Shen Zong made a suggestion to Emperor Wu of the Liang Dynasty, claiming that the army of righteousness that the family had commanded for generations was in Wuxing, and asked to go back and recruit to fight the traitors. Emperor Wu agreed to do so.

古文：及景围台城，众率宗族及义附五千馀人，入援京邑，顿于小航，对贼东府置阵，军容甚整，景深惮之。
现代文：到侯景围攻台越时，沈众率领自己宗族子弟和随从而来的部众共五千余人，进入京城救援，安顿在坐肮这个地方，对着叛贼的束府布置阵势，军容十分整齐，侯景非常害怕他们。
English: When Hou Jing besieged Ta Yue, Shen Zhuo led his sons and sons of the clan and a total of more than five thousand subordinates who came with them, entered the capital to rescue, settled in a dirty place, and set up a position opposite the traitor's Sokufu. The army was very neat, and Hou Jing was very afraid of them.

古文：梁武于城内遥授众为太子右卫率。
现代文：梁武帝在台球内远远地任命边塞为太子右卫率。
English: Emperor Liangwu appointed the border fortress as the prince's right guard.

古文：京城陷，众降于景。
现代文：京城失陷，沈众向侯景投降了。
English: The capital fell, and Shen surrendered to Houjing.

古文：景平，西上荆州，元帝以为太子中庶子、本州大中正。
现代文：景平乱被平定后，沈众往西逆辽而上去了荆州，元帝任用他为太子中庶子、本州大中正。
English: After the Jingping Rebellion was put down, Shen Zong traveled west to Liao and went up to Jingzhou. Emperor Yuan appointed him as the Prince's middle son and Honshu Daizhongzheng.

古文：寻迁司徒左长史。
现代文：不久升任司徒左长史。
English: He was soon promoted to the post of Stuzasachoshi.

古文：江陵陷，为西魏所虏，寻而逃还，敬帝承制授御史中丞。
现代文：江陵失陷时，他被西魏所俘虏，不久就逃回来了，敬帝秉承皇帝的旨意，任命他为御史中丞。
English: When Gangneung fell, he was captured by the Western Wei Dynasty. He soon escaped and returned to China. Emperor Jingdi appointed him as the Vice-Minister of History in accordance with the emperor's will.

古文：绍泰元年，除侍中，迁左民尚书。
现代文：绍泰元年，任命为侍中，升任左民尚书。
English: In the first year of Shao Tai, he was appointed as a chamberlain and promoted to the post of Zuomin Shangshu.

古文：高祖受命，迁中书令，中正如故。
现代文：高祖登位，升任中书令，中正的职务依旧担任。
English: Gao Zu ascended the throne and was promoted to the position of Zhongshirong, but still held the position of Zhongzheng.

古文：高祖以众州里知名，甚敬重之，赏赐优渥，超于时辈。
现代文：高祖因为沈众在国内有名望，非常敬重他，赏赐优厚，超过当时的有名人物。
English: Gao Zu, because of Shen Zhong's reputation in the country, respected him very much and rewarded him generously, surpassing the famous figures at that time.

古文：众性吝啬，内治产业，财帛以亿计，无所分遗。
现代文：沈众性格吝啬，家内所治产业，钱财布帛以亿计数，没有分送遇他人。
English: Shen Zong's character is stingy, the family-managed industry is worth hundreds of millions, and there is no distribution to others.

古文：其自奉养甚薄，每于朝会之中，衣裳破裂，或躬提冠屦。
现代文：沈众自己奉养十分俭省，每次在朝廷聚会之中，他的衣裳破烂裂开，或者亲自提着帽子和鞋子。
English: Shen Zong himself was very frugal in his upbringing. Every time he was at a court gathering, his clothes were torn and torn, or he personally carried his hat and shoes.

古文：永定二年，兼起部尚书，监起太极殿。
现代文：永定二年，兼任起部尚书，监管建造太极殿。
English: In the second year of Yongding, he also served as the head of the Ministry of Education, supervising the construction of the Taiji Temple.

古文：恒服布袍芒屩，以麻绳为带，又携干鱼蔬菜饭独啖之，朝士共诮其所为。
现代文：总是穿着布袍草鞋，用麻绳作为带子，又携带干鱼蔬菜饭食独自吃，朝廷中士大夫都讥讽他这种做法。
English: The sergeant-major of the imperial court ridiculed him for always wearing cloth robes and straw sandals, using hemp rope as a strap, and carrying dried fish and vegetables to eat alone.

古文：众性狷急，于是忿恨，遂历诋公卿，非毁朝廷。
现代文：沈众性情褊急不能受委屈，于是忿恨，便依次诽谤公卿大臣，责难诋毁朝廷。
English: Shen Zong's temperament was impatient and could not be wronged, so in anger, he slandered court nobles and ministers in turn, and accused and slandered the imperial court.

古文：高祖大怒，以众素有令望，不欲显诛之，后因其休假还武康，遂于吴中赐死，时年五十六。
现代文：高祖非常恼怒，因为沈众一直有名望受人景仰，高祖不愿意公开杀他，后来因为沈众休假回到武康，高祖于是命令沈众在吴中自杀了，时年五十六岁。
English: Gaozhu was very angry, because Shen Zhong had always been famous and admired. Gaozhu did not want to kill him openly. Later, because Shen Zhong returned to Wukan on leave, Gaozhu ordered Shen Zhong to commit suicide in Wuzhong, at the age of fifty-six.

古文：袁泌，字文洋，左光禄大夫敬之弟也。
现代文：袁泌字文洋，左光禄大夫袁敬的弟弟。
English: Yuan Jiezhi Wenyang, brother of Dr. Yuan Jing of the Left Guanglu Caves.

古文：清正有干局，容体魁岸，志行修谨。
现代文：清廉正直有办事的才能和气度，体貌雄伟，志向操行高尚谨慎。
English: He is clean and honest, has the ability and temperament to do things, has a majestic physique, and is noble and prudent in his aspirations.

古文：释褐员外散骑侍郎，历诸王府佐。
现代文：始任员外散骑侍郎，历任诸王府属吏。
English: He was the first non-royal samurai to be appointed to the post, and successively served as a subordinate official of various royal courts.

古文：侯景之乱，泌欲求为将。
现代文：侯景叛乱时，袁泌想请求担任将领。
English: When Hou Jing rebelled, Yuan Shuxu wanted to request to serve as a general.

古文：是时泌兄君正为吴郡太守，梁简文板泌为东宫领直，令往吴中召募士卒。
现代文：遣时直塑的哥哥室，星正任昱虽太守，梁简文帝任命直垫为束宫领直，命令他前往吴中招募士卒。
English: Emperor Liang Jianwen appointed Zhiming as the leader of the imperial court and ordered him to go to Wuzhong Middle School to recruit soldiers.

古文：及景围台城，泌率所领赴援。
现代文：到侯景围攻台球时，袁泌率领所部前往援救。
English: When Houjing besieged the billiard, Yuan Xiu led the headquarters to the rescue.

古文：京城陷，退保东阳，景使兵追之，乃自会稽东岭出湓城，依于鄱阳嗣王萧范。
现代文：京城失陷，撤退保守束阳，侯景派兵追赶他，袁泌就自盒稽塞虽出到进越，依附于鄱阳嗣王萧范。
English: After the fall of Beijing and the withdrawal of conservative Sokyang, Hou Jing sent soldiers to chase him, and Yuan Xiu, although he went out of the box to Jin Yue, adhered to Suyang's successor, Wang Xiao Fan.

古文：范卒，泌乃降景。
现代文：芦笺去世后，袁泌就投降了侯景。
English: After the death of Luhong, Yuan Seul surrendered to Houjing.

古文：景平，王僧辩表泌为富春太守，兼丹阳尹。
现代文：景平叛乱被平定后，王僧避上书朝廷任命室巡为富春太守，兼任丹阳尹。
English: After the rebellion of Jingping was suppressed, Wang Zengyu wrote to the imperial court to appoint Guan as Fuchun's governor-general, and also appointed Danyang Yin.

古文：贞阳侯僭位，以泌为侍中，奉使于齐。
现代文：贞阳侯僭位称帝，任用直垫为侍中，奉命出使变曲。
English: Zhengyang Houjun was enthroned as emperor, appointed Zhiming as an attendant, and was ordered to send Changyong.

古文：高祖受禅，王琳据有上流，泌自齐从梁永嘉王萧庄达琳所。
现代文：直担接受惮让时，王琳占据着垦红上游一带，袁泌自齐朝随从梁朝的永嘉王萧庄到达王琳那裹。
English: Wang Lin occupied the area in the upper reaches of Xinhong, while Yuan Xiu from Qi Dynasty followed Wang Xiaozhuang from Yongjia of Liang Dynasty to reach Wang Lin.

古文：及庄僭立，以泌为侍中、丞相长史。
现代文：到芦壁僭位自立为帝，任用袁泌为侍中、丞相长史。
English: He rose to the position of Emperor in the Reepiche Palace, and appointed Yuan Xiu as his Vice-Chamberlain and Minister of the Empire.

古文：天嘉二年，泌与琳辅庄至于栅口，琳军败，众皆奔散，唯泌独乘轻舟送庄达于北境，属庄于御史中丞刘仲威，令共入齐，然后拜辞而归，诣阙请罪，文帝深义之。
现代文：天嘉二年，袁泌与王壁辅佐萧墓到了栅口，王琳的军队战败，众人都奔逃失散，祇有袁泌独自乘坐小船送蕉蓝到北部边境，把萧蓝交给御史中丞玺岫盛，命令他和趸蓝一同前往变塑，然后跪拜辞行返回朝廷，前赴皇帝的殿庭承认罪过，文帝非常赞赏他的仁义。
English: In the second year of Tianjia, Yuan Zi and Wang Qibing assisted Xiao Tomb to reach the gate, Wang Lin's army was defeated, everyone fled and dispersed, only Yuan Zi alone took a small boat to send Banana Blue to the northern border, handed Xiao Blue to the Grand Historian Zhongzheng Xinsheng, ordered him and Indigo Blue to go to the transformation, and then kneeled and resigned to return to the imperial court, went to the emperor's palace to confess his sins, Emperor Wen greatly appreciated his benevolence.

古文：寻授宁远始兴王府法曹参军，转谘议参军，除通直散骑常侍，兼侍中，领豫州大中正。
现代文：不久任命为宁远始兴王府法曹参军，转任谘议参军，任命为通直散骑常侍，兼任侍中，领豫州大中正。
English: Soon, Ningyuan Shi Xing Wangfu was appointed as a legal officer to join the army, transferred to an advisory position to join the army, appointed as a regular attendant, also served as a junior attendant, and led the middle school of Yuzhou University.

古文：聘于周，使还，授散骑常侍，御史中丞，其中正如故。
现代文：派往旦曲通问修好，出使回来，任命为散骑常侍，御史中丞，他的中正职务依旧担任。
English: He sent Tang Qu Tong Rong to ask for a truce, and when he returned from his mission, he was appointed as a straggling equerry, Goshi Chujo, and he still held the position of Chujo.

古文：高宗入辅，以泌为云旗将军、司徒左长史。
现代文：高宗入朝辅佐后，任用袁泌为云旗将军、司徒左长史。
English: After Gao Zong became the assistant of the imperial court, Yuan Xiu was appointed as the general of the cloud banner, and Sittu Zuo as the chief historian.

古文：光大元年卒，年五十八。
现代文：立巳太元年去世，时年五十八岁。
English: He died in 1981, at the age of fifty-eight.

古文：临终戒其子蔓华曰： 吾于朝廷素无功绩，瞑目之后，敛手足旋葬，无得辄受赠谥。 
现代文：临终时告诫他的儿子重蔓茎说： 我对于朝廷一直没有立下功绩，死后，收殓尸体立即下葬，不要接受赠官谧号。 
English: On his deathbed, he admonished his son, saying, "I have never made any contribution to the imperial court. When I die, I want my body to be collected and buried immediately, and I don't want to be given an official title."

古文：其子述泌遗意，表请之，朝廷不许，赠金紫光禄大夫，谥曰质。
现代文：他的儿子遵照袁泌的遗愿，上书请求这样办，朝廷不同意，赠给袁泌金紫光禄大夫的官衔，谧号叫做质。
English: His son, in accordance with Yuan Xiu's last wish, sent a letter to request that this be done, but the court did not agree and gave Yuan Xiu the official title of Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor, and his nickname was Quality.

古文：刘仲威，南阳涅阳人也。
现代文：刘仲威是南阳涅阳入。
English: Liu Zhongwei is a Nanyang nirvana.

古文：祖虬，齐世以国子博士征，不就。
现代文：祖父塑幽，壹塑时朝廷以国子博士之职征召他，没有就任。
English: His grandfather, Shou Yu, was conscripted by the imperial court to the post of Kuniko doctor, but did not take up the post.

古文：父之迟，荆州治中从事史。
现代文：父亲刘之迟，做过塑凶治中从事史。
English: His father, Liu Zhizhi, was a history major in middle school.

古文：仲威少有志气，颇涉文史。
现代文：刘健盛年少时就有志气，广泛地涉猎文史知识。
English: When he was young, Liu Jiansheng had ambition and extensively dabbled in the knowledge of literary history.

古文：梁丞圣中为中书侍郎。
现代文：梁朝承圣年中任用为中书侍郎。
English: Liang Chosheng was appointed as the attendant of the Chinese classics in the middle of the year.

古文：萧庄伪署御史中丞，随庄入齐，终于鄴中。
现代文：在萧庄伪官署中任御史中丞，跟随萧庄进入齐朝，死于邺中。
English: He served as a member of the Shishi Chujo in the Xiaozhuang Pseudo-Official Office, followed Xiaozhuang into the Qi Dynasty, and died in the middle of the Warring States period.

古文：仲威从弟广德，亦好学，负才任气。
现代文：刘仲威从弟刘广德，也爱好学习，恃才任性。
English: Liu Zhongwei is a follower of his brother Liu Guangde. He also likes to study and is headstrong.

古文：父之亨，梁安西湘东王长史、南郡太守。
现代文：父亲刘之皇，凿塑时任安西泅塞王长史、卢邓太守。
English: Liu's father, Emperor Liu, chiseled Wang Changshi of Anxi and Lu Deng Taizhou, who were in office at the time.

古文：广德承圣中以军功官至给事黄门侍郎、湘东太守。
现代文：刘广德，丞圣年中因为军功官做到给事黄门侍郎、翅塞太守。
English: Liu Guangde, in the middle of the Holy Year, because the military meritorious officer did so well, he became the Yellow Gate attendant and the Wing Stop governor.

古文：荆州陷后，依于王琳。
现代文：翅业失陷后，依附于王壁。
English: After the collapse of the wing industry, it clung to Wangbi.

古文：琳平，文帝以广德为宁远始兴王府限外记室参军，仍领其旧兵。
现代文：王壁被平定后，塞童任命刘卢垄为宁远蓝墓王府限外记室参军，依旧统领他原有的军队。
English: After Wangbi was subdued, Sedong appointed Liu Luluan to join the army as the secretary of the Ningyuan Blue Tomb, and still commanded his original army.

古文：寻为太尉侯瑱湘州府司马，历乐山、豫章二郡太守，新安内史。
现代文：不久任命他为太尉侯填湘州府司马，历任乐山、邃童两个郡的太守，塞噬内史。
English: Soon after, he was appointed to fill the post of Hunan prefectural governor, and successively served as governor of two counties, Leshan and Shandong.

古文：光大中，假节、员外散骑常侍、云旗将军、河东太守。
现代文：达年中任命为假节、员外散骑常侍、云旗将军、河东太守。
English: In the middle of the year, he was appointed as a false festival, a non-commissioned horseback riding attendant, a cloud flag general, and the governor of Hedong.

古文：太建元年卒于郡，时年四十三，赠左卫将军。
现代文：太建元年死于郡中，时年四十三岁，赠给左卫将军的官衔。
English: Tai Jian died in the middle of the county in the first year of the year, at the age of forty-three, and was given the official title of General Zuo Wei.

古文：陆山才，字孔章，吴郡吴人也。
现代文：陆山才字王违，呈登呈人。
English: Lu Shan was the only one to go against the king's order and present himself to the emperor.

古文：祖翁宝，梁尚书水部郎。
现代文：祖父堕盏遗在梁朝任尚书水部郎。
English: His grandfather, Guozhan, was appointed as the Minister of Education and Water Resources in the Liang Dynasty.

古文：父泛，散骑常侍。
现代文：父亲陆迅，任散骑常侍。
English: His father, Lu Xun, was an equestrian.

古文：山才少倜傥，好尚文史，范阳张缵，缵弟绾，并钦重之。
现代文：陆山才少年时气度卓越豪迈，爱好文史，范坠人至继，退趱的弟弟张绾，都钦佩敬重他。
English: When Lu Shancai was a young boy, he was exceptionally heroic, loved literature and history, and his fan following was second to none. His younger brother Zhang Ye, who had retired from the priesthood, admired and respected him.

古文：起家王国常侍，迁外兵参军。
现代文：以出任王国常侍起家，升任外兵参军。
English: He started his career as a Kingdom regular attendant and was promoted to foreign soldier to join the army.

古文：寻以父疾，东归侍养。
现代文：不久因为父亲生病，往东回到家中侍候奉养。
English: Soon, because of his father's illness, he returned to his home in the east to wait on his father.

古文：承圣元年，王僧辩授山才仪同府西曹掾。
现代文：承圣元年，王僧辩任命陆山才为仪同府西曹掾。
English: In the first year after the enthronement of the saint, Wang Sangye appointed Lu Shancai to be the Western Prefect of the Jidong Prefecture.

古文：高祖诛僧辩，山才奔会稽依张彪。
现代文：高祖杀王僧辩后，陆山才逃到会稽依附张彪。
English: After Gao Zu killed Wang Sofen, Lu Shan fled to the auditorium to attach Zhang Biao.

古文：彪败，乃归高祖。
现代文：张彪失败，才归附高祖。
English: After Zhang Biao's defeat, it was transferred to Gao Zu.

古文：绍泰中，都督周文育出镇南豫州，不知书疏，乃以山才为长史，政事悉以委之。
现代文：绍泰年中，都督周文育出朝镇守南豫州，他不擅长文书和奏疏，于是任用陆山才为长史，政事全部委托给他。
English: In the middle of the Shao Tai Dynasty, Zhou Wen, the governor of Shao Tai, brought up a prince to guard the southern part of Henan Province. He was not good at writing and reciting, so he appointed Lu Shancai for a long time and entrusted all government affairs to him.

古文：文育南讨，克萧勃，擒欧阳頠，计画多出山才。
现代文：周文育往南讨伐，打败萧勃，捉住欧阳顿，计谋策划大多出自于陆山才。
English: Zhou Wenyu went to the south to fight, defeat Xiao Bo, and capture Ouyangdong. Most of the planning and plotting came from Lu Shancai.

古文：及文育西征王琳，留山才监江州事，仍镇豫章。
现代文：到周文育往西征伐王琳时，留陆山才监理江州政事，仍镇守豫章。
English: When Zhou Wenyu went to the west to conquer Wang Lin, he stayed in Lushan to supervise the political affairs of Jiangzhou, and still guarded Yuzhang.

古文：文育与侯安都于沌口败绩，余孝顷自新林来寇豫章，山才收合馀众，依于周迪。
现代文：周文育和侯安都在沌口战败时，余孝顷自新林来进犯豫章，陆山才收拢集合剩下的部众，依附于周迪。
English: When Zhou Wenyu and Hou An were both defeated in the Battle of Chaokou, Yu Xiaohe came from Xinlin to attack Yuzhang, and it was only when Lushan gathered the remaining members that he attached himself to Zhou Di.

古文：擒余孝顷、李孝钦等，遣山才自都阳之乐安岭东道送于京师。
现代文：周迪捉住了余孝顷、李孝钦等，派遣陆山才从都阳的乐安岭东道送他们去京城。
English: Zhou Di captured Yu Xiaoha, Li Xiaoqin, etc. and sent Lu Shancai to escort them from Le'anling in Duyang to Beijing.

古文：除中书侍郎。
现代文：陆山才被任命为中书侍郎。
English: It was Lu Shancai who was appointed as the secretary of the Chinese Academy of Letters.

古文：复由乐安岭绥抚南川诸郡。
现代文：又由乐安岭前去安抚南川诸郡。
English: He also went from Le'anling to pacify the Nanchuan counties.

古文：文育重镇豫章金口，山才复为贞威将军、镇南长史、豫章太守。
现代文：周文育重新镇守豫章金口，陆山才又被任命为贞威将军、镇南长史、豫章太守。
English: Zhou Wenyu was reappointed as the garrison commander of Yuzhang Jingu, and Lu Shancai was appointed as the general of Zhenan, the governor of Jinan, and the governor of Yuzhang.

古文：文育为熊昙朗所害，昙朗囚山才等，送于王琳。
现代文：周文育被熊昙朗害死后，熊昙朗囚禁了陆山才等人，送往王琳那裹。
English: After Zhou Wenyu was killed by Xiong Rong, Xiong Rong imprisoned Lushan Cai and others and sent them to Wang Lin.

古文：未至，而侯安都败琳将常众爱于宫亭湖，由是山才获反，除贞威将军、新安太守。
现代文：尚未到达，而侯安都在宫亭湖打败了王琳部将常众爱，因此陆山才得以返回，任命为贞威将军、新安太守。
English: He had not yet arrived, and Hou An Du defeated Wang Linbu at the Palace Lake to win the love of the people. Therefore, Lu Shan was able to return and was appointed as General Zhen Wei and the new governor of An.

古文：为王琳未平，留镇富阳，以捍东道。
现代文：因为王琳还未平定，留下镇守富阳，以保卫束道。
English: Because Wang Lin had not yet been subdued, he left the town guard of Fuyang to defend Sokudo.

古文：入为员外散骑常侍，迁宣惠始兴王长史，行东扬州事。
现代文：调入朝廷任员外散骑常侍，升任宣惠始兴王长史，管理束扬州政事。
English: He was transferred to the imperial court as a non-commissioned officer, and was promoted to the post of Xuan Hui Shi Xing Wang Changshi, and managed the political affairs of Yangzhou.

古文：侯安都讨留异，山才率王府之众从焉。
现代文：侯安都讨伐留异，坠山丈率领王府的军队随从前往。
English: Hou Andu fought against the dissenters, and Qian Shanjiao led the troops of the royal court to follow.

古文：异平，除明威将军、东阳太守。
现代文：留异被平定后，任命为明威将军、东阳太守。
English: After the dissidents were subdued, he was appointed Mingwei General and Dongyang Governor.

古文：入为镇东始兴王长史，带会稽郡丞，行东扬州事。
现代文：调入朝廷任命为镇束始兴王长史，兼任会稽锂丞，管理束扬州政事。
English: He was transferred to the imperial court and appointed as Zhenzoku Shixing Wang Changshi, concurrently serving as Clerk of the NPC, and managing the political affairs of Yangzhou.

古文：未拜，改授散骑常侍，兼度支尚书，满岁为真。
现代文：尚未就任，改任为散骑常侍，兼任度支尚书，满一年后授给实职。
English: He had not yet taken office, but he was appointed as a horseback riding attendant, concurrently holding the post of imperial secretary, and was given a full-time post after one year.

古文：高宗南征周迪，以山才为军司。
现代文：高宗往南征伐周迪，任用陆山才为军司。
English: Gao Zong went to the south to conquer Zhou Di, and appointed Lu Shancai as the military commander.

古文：迪平，复职。
现代文：周迪被平定后，陆山左恢复原职。
English: After Zhou Di was subdued, Lu Shan Zuo resumed his original post.

古文：余孝顷自海道袭晋安，山才又以本官之会稽，指授方略。
现代文：金耋堡从海上来袭击置窒，陆山才又以本身官职来到盒擅，指点传授计谋策略。
English: Jincheng Fortress was attacked from the sea, and only then did Lu Shan come to the box with his own official position to instruct the strategy.

古文：还朝，坐侍宴与蔡景历言语过差，为有司所奏，免官。
现代文：返回朝廷后，因为侍候皇上的宴席中和基景历在言语上有过失差错，被官吏告发，陆山才被免去官职。
English: After returning to the imperial court, Lu Shan was removed from his official post because he and Ji Jing Lian had made mistakes in their speech while serving the emperor's banquet, which was reported by officials.

古文：寻授散骑常侍，迁云旗将军、西阳武昌二郡太守。
现代文：不久任命为散骑常侍，升任云旗将军、西阳和武昌两个郡的太守。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as a knight errant, and was promoted to the general of Yunqi and the governor of Xiyang and Wuchang counties.

古文：天康元年卒，时年五十八。
现代文：天康元年去世，时年五十八岁。
English: Tian Kang died in the first year of the year, at the age of fifty-eight.

古文：赠右卫将军，谥曰简子。
现代文：赠给右卫将军官衔，谧号叫做简子。
English: He was given the official rank of Captain of the Right Guard, and his nickname was Janzi.

古文：王质，字子贞，右光禄大夫通之弟也。
现代文：王质字子贞，右光禄大夫王通的弟弟。
English: Wang Zi Zhen, the younger brother of Wang Tong, the doctor of the Right Light.

古文：少慷慨，涉猎书史。
现代文：少年时意气风发，涉猎群书史籍。
English: When he was a young boy, he was very spirited and read a lot of history books.

古文：梁世以武帝甥封甲口亭侯，补国子《周易》生，射策高第。
现代文：梁朝时以梁武帝外甥的资格封为甲口亭侯，补充进国子学做学习《周易》的学生，考试取得优秀成绩。
English: At the time of the Liang Dynasty, the nephew of Emperor Liangwu was awarded the title of Prince of Jiaokou, and he supplemented his education by studying "Zhou Yi" as a student. He obtained excellent results in the examination.

古文：起家秘书郎、太子舍人、尚书殿中郎。
现代文：以任秘书郎、太子舍人、尚书殿中郎起家。
English: He started his career as a secretary, a prince's page, and a junior high school teacher.

古文：遭母忧，居丧以孝闻。
现代文：遭遇母亲去世，服丧期间以守孝闻名。
English: When his mother died, he was known for his filial piety during the period of mourning.

古文：服阕，除太子洗马、东宫领直。
现代文：服丧期满，任命为太子洗马、束宫领直。
English: At the end of the mourning period, he was appointed as the prince to wash the horse and lead the procession.

古文：累迁中舍人、庶子。
现代文：连续升任中舍人、庶子。
English: He was successively promoted to the positions of middle son and son-in-law.

古文：太清元年，除假节、宁远将军，领东宫兵，从贞阳侯北伐。
现代文：太清元年，任命为假节、宁远将军，率领东宫军队，跟从贞阳侯向北征伐。
English: In the first year of the Taiqing Dynasty, he was appointed as the general of Fuxi and Ningyuan, led the Dongguan army, and followed Zhengyang to the north.

古文：及贞阳败绩，质脱身逃还。
现代文：到贞阳侯战败，王质脱身逃回来。
English: After Zhengyang was defeated, the royal hostage escaped and returned.

古文：侯景于寿阳构逆，质又领舟师随众军拒之。
现代文：侯景在寿阳叛乱，王质又率领水军随同大部队一起抗拒敌人。
English: Hou Jing rebelled in Shouyang, and the crown prince led the navy to resist the enemy together with a large force.

古文：景军济江，质便退走。
现代文：侯景的军队渡江，王质便撤退了。
English: Hou Jing's army crossed the river, and Wang Xi retreated.

古文：寻领步骑顿于宣阳门外。
现代文：不久他率领步兵和骑兵驻在宣阳门外。
English: Soon he led the infantry and cavalry stationed outside Xuanyang Gate.

古文：景军至京师，质不战而溃，乃翦发为桑门，潜匿人间。
现代文：侯景的军队到达京城，王质的部队不战就溃败了，他于是剪去头发做了和尚，秘密地藏匿在世问。
English: Hou Jing's army reached the capital, and the regent's troops were defeated without a fight. He then cut off his hair and became a monk, secretly hiding from the world.

古文：及柳仲礼等会援京邑，军据南岸，质又收合馀众从之。
现代文：到柳仲礼等会合援救京城，军队占据南岸时，王质又收拢集合自己剩余的部众跟随他们。
English: When Liu Zhongli and others gathered to rescue the capital, and the army occupied the south bank, the crown prince gathered his remaining followers to follow them.

古文：京城陷后，西奔荆州，元帝承制，以质为右长史，带河东太守。
现代文：京城失陷后，王质往西逃到荆州，元帝秉承皇帝的旨意，任用王质为右长史，兼任河东太守。
English: After the fall of Beijing, Wang Chao fled westward to Jingzhou. Emperor Yuan, adhering to the emperor's will, appointed Wang Chao as the Right Long History, and also served as the governor of Hedong.

古文：俄迁侍中。
现代文：不久升任侍中。
English: He soon promoted Fu Xuan to the position of chamberlain.

古文：寻出为持节、都督吴州诸军事、宁远将军、吴州刺史，领鄱阳内史。
现代文：接着调出朝廷任命为持节、都督吴州诸军事、宁远将军、吴州刺史，领鄱阳内史。
English: Next, the imperial court appointed Ji Jie, the military governor of Wuzhou, the general of Ningyuan, the history of Wuzhou, and the history of Linyang.

古文：荆州陷，侯瑱镇于湓城，与质不协，遣偏将羊亮代质，且以兵临之，质率所部度信安岭，依于留异。
现代文：荆州失陷，侯琐镇守于湓城，和王质不和，派遣偏将羊亮代替王质，而且用兵威胁他，王质率领自己的部队，越过信安岭，依附于留异。
English: After the fall of Jingzhou, Hou Zozhen held out in Lucheng, and did not get along with the royal hostage. He sent Yang Liang to replace the royal hostage, and threatened him with soldiers. The royal hostage led his troops across the Xin'an Mountains and clung to the dissident.

古文：文帝镇会稽，以兵助质，令镇信安县。
现代文：文帝镇守会稽时，用兵援助王质，命令他镇守信安县。
English: When reviewing the town guard meeting, Emperor Wen sent soldiers to aid the royal hostage and ordered him to guard Xin'an County.

古文：永定二年，高祖命质率所部逾岭出豫章，随都督周文育以讨王琳。
现代文：永定二年，高祖命令王质率领自己的部队越过信安岭前出豫章，随从都督周文育以讨伐王琳。
English: In the second year of Yongding, Gao Zu ordered the crown prince to lead his troops to cross the Xin'an Mountains and go to Yuzhang to follow the governor Zhou Wenyu to fight Wang Lin.

古文：质与琳素善，或谮云于军中潜信交通，高祖命周文育杀质，文育启请救之，获免。
现代文：王质和王琳一直友好，有人诬陷说王质在军中暗地裹传信给王琳互相勾结，高祖命令周文言杀王质，周文言陈述情况请求饶王质一命，得以免死。
English: The heir to the throne and Wang Lin have always been friendly. Some people falsely accused that the heir to the throne secretly wrapped a letter to Wang Lin in the army and colluded with each other. Gao Zu ordered Zhou Wenyan to kill the heir to the throne. Zhou Wenyan stated the situation and asked for the life of the heir to the throne to be spared.

古文：寻授散骑常侍、晋陵太守。
现代文：接着任命为散骑常侍、晋陵太守。
English: He was then appointed as a samurai on horseback and the governor of the imperial mausoleum.

古文：文帝嗣位，征守五兵尚书。
现代文：文帝登位，征调入朝廷署理五兵尚书。
English: Emperor Wen ascended to the throne, and five soldiers were transferred to the imperial court.

古文：高宗为扬州刺史，以质为仁威将军、骠骑府长史。
现代文：高宗做扬州刺史时，任用王质为仁威将军、骠骑府长史。
English: When Gao Zong was the Yangzhou prefectural governor, he appointed the regent as General Ren Wei and the prefectural governor as the commander of the cavalry.

古文：天嘉二年，除晋安太守。
现代文：天嘉二年，任命为晋安太守。
English: In the second year of Tianjia, he was appointed as the governor of Jin'an.

古文：高宗辅政，以为司徒左长史，将军如故。
现代文：高宗辅佐朝政时，任用王质为司徒左长史，将军的职务依然担任。
English: When Gao Zongfu was an aide to the imperial court, he was appointed as the regent of Sittu Zuo Changshi, but he still held the position of general.

古文：坐公事免官。
现代文：因为公事获罪被免除官职。
English: He was removed from office after being found guilty of misconduct in public office.

古文：寻为通直散骑常侍，迁太府卿、都官尚书。
现代文：不久任命为通直散骑常侍，升任太府卿、都官尚书。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as Tsuchida Sanzhi no Tsuneishi, promoted to Dafu-kyo, and to Tōkan Shōshū.

古文：太建二年卒，时年六十。
现代文：主建二年去世，时年六十岁。
English: The master builder died two years later, at the age of sixty.

古文：赠本官，谥曰安子。
现代文：赠给本来的官衔，谧号叫做叁三。
English: He was given his original official title, and his posthumous name was Shosan.

古文：韦载，字德基，京兆杜陵人也。
现代文：韦载字德基，京兆杜陵人。
English: Wei Zai Zi Deji, Jing Zha Du Ling Ren.

古文：祖叡，梁开府仪同三司，永昌严公。
现代文：祖父韦散，在梁朝时任开府仪同三司，封为永昌严公。
English: His grandfather, Wei San, held the position of Kaifu Yi Tong San Si during the Liang Dynasty, and was given the title of Yongchang Yan Gong.

古文：父政，梁黄门侍郎。
现代文：父亲韦政，在梁朝任黄门侍郎。
English: His father, Wei Zheng, was a Yellow Gate chamberlain in the Liang Dynasty.

古文：载少聪惠，笃志好学。
现代文：韦载少年时聪明有才智，专心致志爱好学习。
English: When he was a young boy, Wei Zai was smart and talented, and he loved to study.

古文：年十二，随叔父棱见沛国刘显，显问《汉书》十事，载随问应答，曾无疑滞。
现代文：年纪十二岁时，随同叔父韦棱去见沛国人刘显，刘显问了他《汉书》中的十件事，韦载随着所间应声对答，没有迟疑。
English: When he was 12 years old, he went with his uncle Wei Ren to meet Liu Xian, a citizen of Pei. Liu Xian asked him about the ten things in the "Hanshu," and Wei Zai answered without hesitation.

古文：及长，博涉文史，沉敏有器局。
现代文：到他长大了，广泛地涉猎文史知识，深沉敏睿有才识和度量。
English: By the time he grew up, he had extensively dabbled in literary and historical knowledge, and was profound, astute, talented and measured.

古文：起家梁邵陵王法曹参军，迁太子舍人、尚书三公郎。
现代文：以任梁朝邵陵王法曹参军起家，升任太子舍人、尚书三公郎。
English: He started his career as a legal assistant to King Shao Ling of the Liang Dynasty and rose to the rank of prince, and later became the third prince of Shangshu.

古文：侯景之乱，元帝承制以为中书侍郎。
现代文：侯景叛乱的时候，元帝秉承皇帝的旨意任用他为中书侍郎。
English: At the time of the rebellion of Hou Jing, the Yuan Emperor, adhering to the emperor's will, appointed him as the attendant of Chinese books.

古文：寻为建威将军、寻阳太守，随都督王僧辩东讨侯景。
现代文：接着任命为建威将军、寻阳太守，跟随都督王僧辩往东讨伐侯景。
English: Next, he was appointed as General Jian Wei and Grand Prince Huan Yang, and followed the governor Wang Soye to the east to fight against Houjing.

古文：是时僧辩军于湓城，而鲁悉达、樊俊等各拥兵保境，观望成败。
现代文：逭时王僧辩驻军于湓城，而鲁悉达、樊俊等人各自率领军队保守自己的地盘，等待战争的胜败情况。
English: At that time, Wang Sangye stationed his army in Handan, while Lu Sida, Gong Jun and others each led an army to protect their own territory and wait for the victory or defeat of the war.

古文：元帝以载为假节、都督太原、高唐、新蔡三郡诸军事、高唐太守。
现代文：元帝任用韦载为假节、都督太原高唐新蔡三郡诸军事、直庐太守。
English: Emperor Yuan appointed Wei Zai as a false festival, and the military of the three counties of Taiyuan Gao, Tang Xin and Cai, the governor of the capital, and the governor of Dajian.

古文：仍衔命喻悉达等令出军讨景。
现代文：于是领受命令晓谕叠悉达等人命令他们派出军队讨伐侯景。
English: As a result, Siddhartha and others who received the order ordered them to send an army to fight against Houjing.

古文：及大军东下，载率三郡兵自焦湖出栅口，与僧辩会于梁山。
现代文：到大军东下时，韦载率领三个郡的兵力从焦湖前出栅口，和王僧辩会合于梁山。
English: When the great army was heading east, Wei Zai led the troops of three counties out of the Jiaohu front gate and met with Wang Sangye in Liangshan.

古文：景平，除冠军将军、琅邪太守。
现代文：侯景被平定后，他被任命为冠军将军、琅邪太守。
English: After Houjing was subdued, he was appointed as the champion general and the governor of Shiyan.

古文：寻奉使往东阳、晋安，招抚留异、陈宝应等。
现代文：接着奉命出使前往东阳、晋安，招降安抚玺垦、速宣尘等人。
English: Then, he was ordered to go to Dongyang and Jin'an to recruit and pacify the people of Shao and Xuancheng.

古文：仍授信武将军、义兴太守。
现代文：于是童姜被任命为信武将军、义兴太守。
English: As a result, Tong Jiang was appointed as the General of Xinwu and the Governor of Yixing.

古文：高祖诛王僧辨，乃遣周文育轻兵袭载，未至而载先觉，乃婴城自守。
现代文：高祖杀王僧辩后，就派遣周文言率领轻装的士兵袭击童姜，尚未到达而皇盏已先有觉察，于是凭藉环绕的城墙加强自守。
English: After Gaozhu killed the king's monk, he sent Zhou Wenyan and his light-armed soldiers to attack Tongjiang. They had not yet arrived, but the emperor had already noticed, so he strengthened his defense with the help of the surrounding city wall.

古文：文育攻之甚急，载所属县卒并高祖旧兵，多善用弩，载收得数十人，系以长锁，命所亲监之，使射文育军，约曰十发不两中者则死，每发辄中，所中皆毙。
现代文：周文育对他攻得非常紧急，韦载所率领的县中的士兵都是高祖原来统率的士兵，大多数善于使用机械发射的弓，韦越收拢他们得到几十个人，给他们带上长锁，命令自己亲信的人监督他们，驱使他们射击周文育的军队，规定说十发不能两中的人就处死。因此每次发射都能击中，所有击中的都毙命了。
English: Zhou Fenyu attacked him very urgently. The soldiers in the county led by Wei Zeng were all soldiers of Gaozu's original command. Most of them were good at using mechanically launched bows. Wei Yue gathered dozens of them, gave them long locks, ordered his trusted people to supervise them, and drove them to shoot Zhou Fenyu's army. The regulation said that if ten shots could not hit two people, they would be executed. Therefore, every shot could hit, and all those hit were killed.

古文：文育军稍却，因于城外据水立栅，相持数旬。
现代文：周文宜的军队稍微退却，童载便在城外占据河流立起木栅，两军相持几十天。
English: Zhou Wenyi's army retreated slightly, and Tong Zai occupied the river outside the city and erected a wooden fence. The two armies held out for dozens of days.

古文：高祖闻文育军不利，乃自将征之，克其水栅。
现代文：高祖听到周文育军队不顺利的消息，就自己率领军队来征伐韦载，攻破他的水栅。
English: When Gaozu heard the news that Zhou Wenyu's army was not successful, he led his own army to conquer Weizai and break through his watchtower.

古文：仍遣载族弟翙赍书喻载以诛王僧辩意，并奉梁敬帝敕，敕载解兵。
现代文：便派遣韦载同宗族的弟弟韦翩带著书信来晓谕韦载杀王僧辩的道理，并且奉梁敬帝的命令，命令韦载停战。
English: He then sent Wei Zai's younger brother, Wei Pan, who belonged to the same clan, with a letter to explain the reason for Wei Zai's killing of Wang Sanbo, and ordered Wei Zai to stop fighting by order of Emperor Liang Jian.

古文：载得书，乃以其众降于高祖。
现代文：韦载得到书信，就带着他的部众向高祖投降了。
English: When Wei Zai received the letter, he and his men surrendered to Gaozu.

古文：高祖厚加抚慰，即以其族弟翙监义兴郡，所部将帅，并随才任使，引载恒置左右，与之谋议。
现代文：高祖给予优厚的抚慰，随即任用他的族弟韦翻监管义兴郡，韦载所部的将帅，都根据才能任命使用，高祖带着韦载总是把他安置在自己身边，和他谋划计议。
English: Gao Zu gave generous consolation, and then appointed his brother Wei Fuan to supervise Yixing County, and Wei Zai to be the commander of the headquarters, both of which were appointed and used according to their talents. Gao Zu and Wei Zai always placed him by his side, and discussed plans with him.

古文：徐嗣徽、任约等引齐军济江，据石头城，高祖问计于载，载曰： 齐军若分兵先据三吴之路，略地东境，则时事去矣。
现代文：徐嗣徽、任约等领着齐朝的军队渡江，占据了石头城，高祖向韦载询问对敌的计策，韦载说： 齐朝的军队如果分兵先行占据三吴的道路，侵占束边的国土，那么就大势已去啦。
English: Xu Shihui, Ren You and others led the Qi army across the Yangtze River and occupied Stone Town. Gao Zu asked Wei Zai about the strategy against the enemy. Wei Zai said: If the Qi army occupies the road of Sanwu first and invades the land of Shubei, then the momentum is gone.

古文：今可急于淮南即侯景故垒筑城，以通东道转输，别命轻兵绝其粮运，使进无所虏，退无所资，则齐将之首，旬日可致。 
现代文：现在可以紧急地在淮南即侯景从前军营的基础上筑城，以使柬边的道路通行能够转运输送，另外命令轻装的军队断绝敌人的粮食运输，使他们前进不能有所掳掠，退却不能得到供给，那么齐朝将领的头，十天便可得到。 
English: Now it is possible to urgently build a city in Huainan, that is, Houjing, on the basis of the former military camp, so that the road traffic on the Cambodian side can be transferred and transported. In addition, order the lightly armed troops to cut off the enemy's grain transportation, so that they can not be captured and plundered when advancing, and can not be supplied when retreating. Then the head of the Qi Dynasty general can be obtained in ten days.

古文：高祖从其计。
现代文：高祖听从了他的计策。
English: Gaozu followed his advice.

古文：永定元年，除和戎将军、通直散骑常侍。
现代文：永定元年，任命韦载为和戎将军、通直散骑常侍。
English: In the first year of the Yongding era, Wei Zai was appointed as the general of the Wa Rong army and the regular attendant of the Tsunzhi Zanzhong cavalry.

古文：二年，进号轻车将军。
现代文：永定二年，加封他为轻车将军。
English: In the second year of Yongding, he was awarded the title of light vehicle general.

古文：寻加散骑常侍、太子右卫率，将军如故。
现代文：接着加官散骑常侍、太子右卫率，将军的职务依旧担任。
English: After that, he was promoted to Sangi (free riding) regular attendant and Prince's bodyguard, but he still held the position of general.

古文：天嘉元年，以疾去官。
现代文：天嘉元年，因为有病不再担任官职。
English: In the first year of Tian Jia, because of illness, he no longer held an official position.

古文：载有田十馀顷，在江乘县之白山，至是遂筑室而居，屏绝人事，吉凶庆吊，无所往来，不入篱门者几十载。
现代文：韦载有田十余顷，在江乘县的白山，到这时候就在那裹建筑房屋居住下来，和外面的人事断绝来往，无论吉事凶事庆贺吊丧，都没有往来，几十年中没有人进入他的家门。
English: He owned more than 10 hectares of farmland and lived in a house in Baishan Township, Jiangren County, at that time. He cut off contact with the outside world. No matter whether it was good or bad, celebration or mourning, there was no contact. For decades, no one entered his home.

古文：太建中卒于家，时年五十八。
现代文：太建年中在家裹去世，时年五十八岁。
English: Tai Jian passed away at home at the age of fifty-eight.

古文：载族弟翙。
现代文：韦载同宗族的弟弟韦翩。
English: Wei Zai is the younger brother of the same clan as Wei Ping.

古文：翙字子羽，少有志操。
现代文：韦翩字子羽，少年时就有志向操守。
English: Wei Dian Zi Yu, when he was a boy, had the ambition to be a scholar.

古文：祖爱，梁辅国将军。
现代文：祖父韦爱，在梁朝任辅国将军。
English: His grandfather, Wei Ai, was a general in the Liang Dynasty.

古文：父乾向，汝阴太守。
现代文：父亲韦干向，任汝阴太守。
English: His father, Wei Gangxiang, was appointed as the de facto ruler of Ruyin.

古文：翙弱冠丧父，哀毁甚至，养母、抚孤兄弟子，以仁孝著称。
现代文：韦翩二十岁时父亲去世，居丧中十分悲伤以致身体受损，抚养母亲，抚育兄弟的遣孤，以仁义孝顺著称。
English: When Wei Ping was twenty years old, his father died. He was so sad during the funeral that his body was damaged. He raised his mother and raised his brother as an orphan. He was known for his benevolence and filial piety.

古文：高祖为南徐州刺史，召为征北参军，寻监义兴郡。
现代文：高祖做南徐州刺史时，召来韦翩任用为征北参军，接着监理盏里登政事。
English: When Gao Zu was making history in southern Xuzhou, he summoned Wei Ping to join the army for the Northern Expedition, and then oversaw the political affairs of the Northern Expedition.

古文：永定元年，授贞毅将军、步兵校尉。
现代文：丞宣元年，任命为贞毅将军、步兵校尉。
English: In the first year of the Joseon Dynasty, he was appointed as General Zhen Yi and an infantry lieutenant.

古文：迁骁骑将军，领硃衣直阁。
现代文：升任骁骑将军，领朱衣直合。
English: He was promoted to the post of general of cavalry, and his red collar and robe were straight.

古文：骁骑之职，旧领营兵，兼统宿卫。
现代文：骁骑将军的职务，原是率领军营中的士兵，兼统领在宫中值宿的警卫。
English: The duties of the equestrian general were originally to lead the soldiers in the camp, and also to command the guards on duty in the palace.

古文：自梁代已来，其任逾重，出则羽仪清道，入则与二卫通直，临轩则升殿侠侍。
现代文：自梁朝建立以来，骁骑将军的任务更加重要，皇帝从宫中出行时则负责羽饰旌旗之类的仪仗队和清除道路担任警戒的工作，进入宫廷则和二个警卫共同值班，当皇帝不坐正殿而来到殿前时则上殿左右侍奉。
English: Since the establishment of the Liang Dynasty, the task of the cavalry general has become more important. When the emperor travels from the palace, he is responsible for the guard of honor such as feather decorations and flags and clearing the road to act as a guard. When he enters the palace, he is on duty with two guards. When the emperor does not sit in the main hall and comes to the front of the hall, he serves around the hall.

古文：翙素有名望，每大事恒令侠侍左右，时人荣之，号曰 侠御将军 。
现代文：韦翩一直就有名望，皇帝每遇大事总是命令他在左右侍奉，当时人们觉得他很光荣，给他一个称号叫做 侠御将军 。
English: Wei Ping has always been famous. The emperor always ordered him to serve at his side in every major event. At that time, people thought he was very honorable and gave him a title called "Chivalrous General."

古文：寻出为宣城太守。
现代文：不久调出朝廷任命为宣城太守。
English: Soon after, he was summoned by the imperial court and appointed as the governor of Xuancheng.

古文：天嘉二年，预平王琳之功，封清源县侯，邑二百户。
现代文：天嘉二年，因为参与平定王琳的功劳，被封为清源县侯，食邑二百户。
English: In the second year of Tianjia, because of his participation in the pacification of Wang Lin, he was named the lord of Qingyuan County, with more than 200 households in the county.

古文：太建中卒官，赠明、霍、罗三州刺史。
现代文：太建年中在任上去世，赠给他明、霍、罗三州刺史的官衔。
English: Tai Jian died in office in the middle of the year, giving him the official title of Ming, Huo and Luo three states.

古文：子宏，字德礼，有文学，历官至永嘉王府谘议参军。
现代文：韦翩的儿子韦宏，字德礼，有文学修养，历任官职做到永嘉王府谘议参军。
English: Wei Hong, the son of Wei Ping, was a man of character and virtue, literate, and had served as an official in the Yongjia royal court.

古文：陈亡入隋。
现代文：陈朝灭亡进入隋朝。
English: After the death of the Chen Dynasty, they became subjects of the Sui Dynasty.

古文：史臣曰：昔邓禹基于文学，杜预出自儒雅，卒致军功，名著前代。
现代文：史臣曰：从前邓禹的根基在于文学，杜预出身是博学儒士，终于建立了军功，名字著称于前代。
English: Shichen said, "In the past, Deng Yu's foundation was in literature. Du Yu was born as an erudite Confucian, and finally established military merit. His name was famous in the previous generation.

古文：晋氏丧乱，播迁江左，顾荣、郗鉴之辈，温峤、谢玄之伦，莫非巾褐书生，晋绅素誉，抗敌以卫社稷，立勋而升台鼎。
现代文：西晋王朝司马氏同室操戈导致死丧祸乱，流荡迁徙到长江下游以束地区，这个时期顾荣、郗鉴逭一等人，温崤、谢玄这一类人，没有不是戴巾帧穿褐衣的卑贱书生，而成为插笏于带间的士大夫一直享有声誉，他们抗击敌人以保卫国家政权，建立功勋而升官做到三公。
English: During the Western Jin Dynasty, the Sima clan's fratricidal warfare led to death and disaster, and they wandered and migrated to the lower reaches of the Yangtze River in the Isshu region. During this period, people such as Gu Rong, Zou Jian I and others, Wen Ji and Xie Xuan, were not just lowly students wearing scarves and brown clothes, but they have always enjoyed a reputation for being a scholar and doctor in the middle of the band. They fought against the enemy to defend the state power, established merits and promoted to the Three Kingdoms.

古文：自斯以降，代有其人。
现代文：自那时以来。每个朝代都有这样的人。
English: There have been such people in every dynasty since then.

古文：但梁室沸腾，懦夫立志，既身逢际会，见仗于时主，美矣！
现代文：但梁朝王室动荡如水波涌起，使软弱无所作为的男子立下志向，既能亲身遇上这种机会，又能依靠当时英明的君主，真幸运呀!
English: But during the Liang Dynasty, the royal family was in a state of turmoil, which made weak and inactive men set their sights on the throne. It was fortunate that they were able to meet such an opportunity in person and rely on the then wise monarch.

