古文：二十五日，自阳朔东南渡头发舟，溯流碧莲峰下。
现代文：二十五日自阳朔东南的渡口码头开船，溯江流来到碧莲峰下。
English: On the 25th, the boat left from the ferry terminal in the southeast of Yangshuo, and the river flowed to the foot of Bilian Peak.

古文：由城东而北，过龙头山，自是石峰渐隐。
现代文：由城东往北行，经过龙头山，从这里起石峰渐渐隐去。
English: From the east of the city to the north, through Longtou Mountain, from here the stone peak gradually disappears.

古文：十里，古祚驿。
现代文：十里，到古柞释。
English: Ten miles to the ancient city of Xizhi.

古文：又十五里，始有四尖山在江左，其右亦起群尖夹江，是为水绿村。
现代文：又行十五里，这才有四座尖山出现在江左，江右也突起成群的尖峰夹住江流，这是水绿村。
English: After another fifteen miles, four sharp mountains appeared on the left side of the river, and on the right side of the river, groups of sharp peaks jutted out to catch the river flow. This is the water green village.

古文：又北七里，有岩在江之西岸，门甚高敞，东向临江。
现代文：又向北行七里，有个岩洞在江的西岸，洞口十分高敞，向东临江。
English: Another seven miles to the north, there is a rock cave on the west bank of the river, the cave entrance is very high and spacious, bordering the river to the east.

古文：由右腋深入，渐高而黑，久乃空濛，复东辟门焉。
现代文：从右侧深入进去，逐渐高起并黑下来，很久才变得空檬一片，东边又开启了一个洞口。
English: From the right side, it goes deep into the lava, gradually rises and darkens, and only after a long time does it become a lemon slice, and a hole opens on the east side.

古文：由岩左腋上登，其上前亘为台，后结一窦，有尼栖焉。
现代文：由岩洞的左侧上登，那上边前边横亘为平台，后面盘结成一个洞穴，有尼姑住在里边。
English: Climbing up from the left side of the cave, there is a platform in the front of the cave, and a cave in the back. There is a nun living inside.

古文：不环堵，不覆屋，因台置垣，悬梯为道，甚觉轩爽。
现代文：没有围墙，不盖屋顶，就着平台建了矮墙，悬挂着梯子作为通道，觉得非常高敞明亮。
English: There is no enclosure wall, no roof, but a low wall has been built on the platform, and a ladder has been hung as a passage. It feels very spacious and bright.

古文：窦后复深陷成峡，昏黑。
现代文：洞穴后方又深陷成峡谷，昏暗一片。
English: Behind the cave is a deep canyon, dark and gloomy.

古文：东下欲索炬深入，尼言无奇多险，固止之。
现代文：往东下去想要索取火把深入，尼姑说没有奇特之处，险阻很多，坚决阻止我。
English: When I wanted to go further east to ask for torches, the nun said that there was nothing unusual, there were many obstacles, and she resolutely stopped me.

古文：而雷声复殷殷促人，时舟已先移兴平，遂出洞。
现代文：而且雷声又隆隆催人，此时船已先一步移到兴平，便出了洞。
English: Moreover, the thunder roared loudly, and at this time, the ship had already moved to Xingping, and a hole appeared.

古文：由洞左循麓溯江，草深齐项，半里，达螺蛳峰下。
现代文：由洞左沿山麓溯江走，荒草深齐脖子，半里，到达螺狮峰下。
English: From the cave, walk left along the foot of the mountain to the river, the wild grass is as deep as your neck, half a mile, and you will reach the bottom of Conch Peak.

古文：其峰数盘而上，层累若螺蛳之形，而卓耸压于群峰，乃兴平东南水口山也。
现代文：此峰分数层盘绕而上，层层堆叠好似螺蜘的形状，而且高高耸起压过群峰，是兴平东南的水口山。
English: Minakuchiyama, located in the southeast of Xingping, is composed of several peaks that are coiled up and stacked in layers, resembling the shape of a spinning top.

古文：以前岩在其下，土人即指为螺蛳岩。
现代文：由于先前的那个岩洞在它下方，当地人就指认为螺蜘岩。
English: Locals refer to it as the Snail Rock because the previous cave is below it.

古文：余觉岩在螺峰之南，双岐低峰之麓，及入岩读碑，而后知其为蛟头，非螺蛳也。
现代文：我觉得岩洞在螺蜘峰的南面，位于分为两岔的低峰的山麓，到进岩洞读了碑文之后，这才知道它是蛟头岩，不是螺蜘岩。
English: I thought the cave was on the south side of Conch Peak, at the foot of a low mountain divided into two ridges. It was only after I entered the cave and read the inscription that I realized it was Shantou Rock, not Conch Rock.

古文：螺蛳以峰胜，蛟头以岩胜，螺蛳穹而上盘，蛟头垂而下络，不一山，亦不一名也。
现代文：螺狮峰以山峰取胜，蛟头岩以岩洞取胜，螺蜘峰隆起向上盘绕，蛟头岩低垂往下缠绕，不是一座山，也不是一个名字。
English: Conch Peak wins with its peak, Shantou Rock wins with its cave, Conch Peak rises and coils upwards, Shantou Rock hangs low and coils downwards. It is not a mountain, nor is it a name.

古文：绕螺蛳又二里，及舟，入半里，少舣兴平。
现代文：绕过螺狮峰又走二里，赶上船，行半里，暂时停靠在兴平。
English: Walk two more miles around Conch Peak, catch the boat, walk half a mile, and temporarily dock in Xingping.

古文：其地有溪自东北来，石山隙中，遥见巨岭亘列于内，即所趋恭城道也。
现代文：此地有溪水自东北流来，从石山缝中，远远望见有巨大的山岭横亘着排列在里面，就是通往恭城的道路了。
English: There is a stream here that flows from the northeast, and from the crevice of the stone mountain, you can see a huge mountain range stretching in the distance, which is the road to Gongcheng.

古文：崖上有室三楹，下临江渚，轩栏横缀，为此中所仅见，额曰 月到风来 ，字亦飞逸，为熊氏书馆。
现代文：山崖上有三间屋子，下临江中的小洲，栏杆横横的点缀着，是这一带所仅见的，匾额上写着 月到风来 ，字体也飞舞飘逸，是熊家的私塾。
English: There are three houses on the cliff, a small island in the lower part of the river, the railing is decorated horizontally, it is the only one seen in this area. On the plaque is written "月到風来" (the moon comes to the wind), the font is also fluttering, it is the private school of the Xiong family.

古文：余闯入其中，竟不见读书人也。
现代文：我闯入私塾中，竟然不见读书的人。
English: I broke into a private school and didn't see anyone studying.

古文：下舟已暮，又北二里而泊。
现代文：下船时天已晚，又往北行船二里才停泊下来。
English: It was too late to disembark, and the ship sailed north for another two miles before docking.

古文：后地师指画山北面隔江尖峰下水绕成坪处为吉壤，土愚人辄戕其母欲葬之。是夕峰坠，石压其穴，竟不得葬，因号其处为忤逆地。余所恨者，石坠时不并毙此逆也。
现代文：二十六日黎明开船，往西北三里，是横埠堡，又往北二里是画山。此山横列在漓江南岸，江水自北流来，到了此地向西折去，山体受到侵蚀，一半剖为陡削的悬崖；有石纹一层层交织在一起，绿树沿岸映衬，石质呈黄、红、青、白之色，各种色彩交错成花纹，上边有九个头，山之所以起名叫 画 ，是根据颜色而不是根据形状。
English: At dawn on the 26th, the ship set sail. Three miles to the northwest was Hengbu Castle, and two miles to the north was Painting Mountain. This mountain is lined up on the south bank of the Lijiang River. The river flows from the north, and when it reaches this place, it turns west. The mountain has been eroded, and half of it is carved into steep cliffs. There are layers of stone patterns intertwined, and the green tree coast is the background. The stone is yellow, red, blue, and white. Various colors are interlaced into patterns. There are nine heads on the top. The reason why the mountain is called Painting is based on color, not shape.

古文：舟人泊舟画山下晨餐。
现代文：船夫把船泊在画山下吃早餐。
English: The boatman moored the boat under the painting mountain to have breakfast.

古文：余遂登其麓，与静闻选石踞胜，上罨掩盖彩壁，下蘸绿波，直是置身图画中也。
现代文：我于是登上画山山麓，与静闻选了块岩石盘坐在这景色优美的地方，上方覆盖着彩色的石璧，下边蘸着绿色的水波，简直是置身于图画之中了。
English: So I climbed to the foot of the picturesque mountain, selected a rock plate with Jingwen and sat down in this beautiful place, covered with colored stones above and green waves below, I was literally in the middle of the picture.

古文：崖壁之半，有洞北向，望之甚深，上下俱无所着足。
现代文：崖壁的半中腰，有个洞向北，远望它非常深，上下都无处落脚。
English: Halfway down the cliff wall, there is a hole to the north. Looking far and wide, it is very deep, and there is nowhere to land.

古文：若缘梯缀级于石纹之间，非直空中楼阁，亦画里岩栖矣。
现代文：如果沿着石纹之间有梯子或石阶，不仅只是空中楼阁，也如置身在图画中隐居在岩穴中。
English: If there are ladders or stone steps between the stone lines, it is not only a castle in the air, but also like being in a picture secluded in a rock cave.

古文：又北一里，上小散滩。
现代文：返回来登上船，又向北行一里，上了小散滩。
English: Returned, boarded the boat, and sailed one mile north to a small beach.

古文：又北二里，上大散滩。
现代文：又往北二里，上了大散滩。
English: Another two miles to the north, on a large beach.

古文：又北七里为锣鼓滩，滩有二石象形，在东岸。
现代文：又往北七里是锣鼓滩，河滩上有两块岩石似大象的形状，在东岸。
English: Another seven miles north is Gonggu Beach. There are two elephant-shaped rocks on the beach, on the east bank.

古文：其处江之西涯，有圆峰端丽；江之东涯，多危岩突兀。
现代文：此处江的西岸，有座圆峰端庄秀丽；江的东岸，有很多高岩突兀。
English: Here, on the west bank of the river, there is a round peak that is stately and beautiful; on the east bank of the river, there are many high rocky outcrops.

古文：又北八里，过拦州。舟转西北向，又三里，为冠岩。
现代文：此山南面的岩洞中，有水从洞中流出，顺着突出的岩石向下飞洒坠入江中，势同悬空的瀑布。
English: In the cave on the south side of the mountain, water flows out of the cave, flying down along the protruding rocks and falling into the river, similar to a hanging waterfall.

古文：山上突崖层出，俨若朝冠。
现代文：冠岩就在它的北面，山上层层石崖突出来，俨然似上朝时戴的帽子。
English: The cap rock is just north of it, and the rock cliffs protrude from the top of the mountain, resembling the hat worn by the emperor.

古文：北面山麓，则穹洞西向临江，水自中出，外与江通。
现代文：北面的山麓，就有弯窿的洞穴向西临江，水从洞中派出来，外边与江流相通。
English: At the foot of the mountain to the north, there is a curved cave to the west of the river, the water is sent out from the cave, and the outside is connected to the river.

古文：棹舟而入，洞门甚高，而内更宏朗，壁间有临海王宗沐题诗，号敬所，嘉靖癸丑学宪。
现代文：划着船进去，洞口非常高，洞内更加宏大明朗，全部垂吊着钟乳石柱，可惜通水流的洞穴低低下伏，无从溯流远入。洞壁上有临海人王宗沐题的诗，诗不怎么好，当时跟着应和的有几十人，全都刻在洞壁上。
English: Rowing into the cave, the mouth of the cave is very high, the inside of the cave is more magnificent and clear, all hanging stalactite columns. Unfortunately, the cave through which the water flows is low-lying, and there is no way to follow the flow far into the cave. There is a poem on the wall of the cave by Wang Zong Mu, a man from the coast. The poem is not very good. At that time, there were dozens of people following him, all engraved on the cave wall.

古文：诗不甚佳，时属而和者数十人，吉人刘天授等。
现代文：观览玩赏了很久，划船出洞，望见隔江处群峰聚合，回想起先前在拦州见到的有穿洞的山应当对着它的正面，可惜山回水转，连它是哪些山峰也没能辩认出来。
English: After enjoying the view for a long time, I paddled out of the cave and saw the cluster of peaks at the estuary. I recalled that the mountain with a hole in it that I had previously seen in Baizhou should be facing its front. Unfortunately, the mountain turned back and forth, and I couldn't even identify which peaks it was.

古文：俱镌于壁。觇玩久之，棹舟出洞，溪回山转，矫首北见皎然一穴，另悬江东峰半，即近在冠岩之北。急呼舟人舣舟登岸，而令其以舟候于南田站。
现代文：不久，举头望见北边有一个明亮的山洞，另外悬在江东岸山峰的半山腰，就近在冠岩的北边。急忙呼叫船夫停船登岸，并叫他驾船在南田站等候。
English: Soon, he looked up and saw a bright cave to the north, and another hanging halfway up the mountainside of the peak on the east bank of the river, just north of the cap rock. He hurriedly called the boatman to stop the boat and told him to wait at Nantian Station.

古文：余乃望东北峰而趋，一里，抵山腋。
现代文：我于是望着东北方的山峰赶过去，一里，抵达山侧。
English: So I looked at the mountain peaks in the northeast and drove one mile to the side of the mountain.

古文：先践蔓凌巉，既乃伏莽穿棘，半里逾岭坳。
现代文：起先踏着草丛登上嵘岩，随即弯腰穿过丛莽荆棘，半里越过岭坳。
English: At first, I stepped on the grass and climbed up the rock, then I bent down and walked through the thorn bushes and crossed the ridge for half a mile.

古文：度明穴在东，而南面之崖绝不可攀，反循崖北稍下悬级，见有叠石阻隘者，知去洞不远矣。
现代文：估计那透亮的洞穴在东面，而南面的山崖悬绝不可攀，反身沿山崖往北稍稍走下悬空的石阶，见到有一处垒砌石块堵住隘口的地方，心知离洞不远了。
English: Estimating that the brightly lit cave was to the east, and that the cliff to the south was impossible to climb, I walked along the cliff to the north, down the suspended stone steps, and saw a place where stone blocks blocked the pass. I knew that I was not far from the cave.

古文：益北下，则洞果南透。
现代文：越往北下去，就果然见山洞穿透到南面。
English: The further north you go, the more you see the cave penetrating to the south.

古文：其山甚薄，上穹如合掌，中罅。
现代文：这座山非常薄，上部隆起如像合起来的手掌，中央裂开一道缝。
English: The mountain is very thin, with the upper ridge resembling the palm of a closed hand and a slit in the middle.

古文：北下俱巨石磊落，南则峭崖悬亘，故登洞之道不由南，而由北云。
现代文：北面下方全是累累巨石，南面便是悬崖悬空横亘着，所以登上洞去的路不由南面而从北面了。
English: To the north, there are huge boulders, and to the south, there is an overhanging cliff, so the path to the cave is not from the south, but from the north.

古文：洞右复有旁门复室，外列疏楞，中悬团柱，分帏裂隙，东北弥深，似昔有居者。
现代文：洞右又有旁洞和重叠的石室，外边罗列着稀疏的石棱，中间悬着圆柱，裂隙似分开的炜慢，向东北进去更深，似乎从前有人居住。
English: On the right side of the cave, there are side caves and overlapping stone chambers. On the outside, there are sparse stone edges, and a cylinder hangs in the middle. The cracks seem to be separate and deeper to the northeast. It seems to have been inhabited in the past.

古文：而洞北复时闻笑语声，谓去人境不远，以为从北取道，可近达南田。
现代文：洞北边又不时听到笑语之声，认为距有人的地方不远了，以为从北面取道，可以就近到达南田站。
English: On the north side of the cave, I heard the sound of laughter from time to time. I thought that it was not far from the place where there were people, and I thought that if I took the road from the north, I could reach Nantian Station nearby.

古文：时轰雷催雨，亟出明洞，北隅则巨石之隙，多累块丛棘，宛转数处，北望一茅甚迩近，而绝不可通。
现代文：此时轰轰雷声催雨，连忙出了透亮的山洞。在北隅巨石的缝隙间，有许多叠累着的石块和丛生的荆棘，曲曲折折走过几处，望见北边有一间茅屋很近，但绝对不可通行。
English: At this time, thunder and lightning made it rain, and we hurried out of the transparent cave. In the gap between the boulders in the northern corner, there were many stacked stones and thorns. We went through several twists and turns, and we could see a hut on the north side that was very close, but absolutely impassable.

古文：不得已，仍逾四坳，循前莽南下，幸雷殷而雨不至。
现代文：不得已，仍旧越过西面的山坳，沿着先前走过的丛莽往南下山，幸好雷声隆隆雨却没下下来。
English: Having no choice, I still crossed the mountains in the west and went down the mountain along the previously walked bushes. Fortunately, thunder and heavy rain did not fall.

古文：一里，转至西北隅，又得一洞。南北横贯。
现代文：一里路，转到西北隅，又见到一个洞，南北横向贯通。
English: One mile away, turn to the northwest corner, and you will see another hole, which runs horizontally from north to south.

古文：其北峰之麓，自冠岩来，此为北峰。
现代文：它北峰的山麓，北头也穿透了，但不怎么高敞。
English: It penetrates the foothills of the northern peak and the northern head, but it is not very spacious.

古文：北端亦透，而不甚轩豁。仍出南门，遂西北行平畴中。
现代文：仍出了南面的洞口，于是往西北行走在平旷的田野中。
English: I still came out of the cave entrance on the south side, so I walked northwest in the middle of a flat field.

古文：禾已将秀，而槁无滴水，时风雨忽至，余甚为幸之。
现代文：稻禾已将开花，可田干枯得没有一滴水，此时风雨忽然来临，我为此感到十分庆幸。
English: The rice plants were about to bloom, but the fields were so dry that there was not a single drop of water. At this time, the wind and rain suddenly came. I feel very fortunate for this.

古文：共四里抵南田驿，觅舟不得，遂濒江而北，又一里，乃入舟。
现代文：那在西面隔江屏风样矗立着的山，都是弯隆的石崖陡削的绝壁，在陆路上望它，更觉得山势峥嵘；东面就是石峰并立，后面衬托着高峻的峰峦。共走四里到达南田释，找船没找到，就濒江往北走，又行一里，才进了船。
English: The mountain that stands like a screen across the river to the west is all craggy stone cliffs and sheer cliffs. Looking at it on the road, it feels even more mountainous. To the east, there are stone peaks standing side by side, with a backdrop of steep peaks. I walked a total of four miles to reach Nan Tian Shi. When I couldn't find the boat, I walked north along the river and walked another mile before I got into the boat.

古文：舟人带雨夜行，又五里，泊于斗米、寸金二滩之间。
现代文：船夫在夜色里冒雨行船，又行五里，停泊在斗米、寸金二滩之间。
English: The boatman sailed in the rain at night, and went another five miles, anchored between the two beaches of Doumai and Xinjin.

古文：中夜仰视，萤阵烛山，远近交映。
现代文：半夜昂首远视，萤火虫组成的军阵照亮了山峦，远近交相映照。
English: In the middle of the night, looking far and wide, the army of fireflies lit up the mountains, reflecting the far and near.

古文：以至微而成极异，合众小而现大观，余不意山之能自绘，更无物不能绘也。
现代文：以非常微小的身躯而构成极奇异的景象，集合众小却现出宏大的景观，我没想到山都能够自己描绘自己，那就再没有什么东西不能描绘的了。
English: I didn't expect the mountains to be able to depict themselves, and then there would be nothing that couldn't be depicted.

古文：二十七日，昧爽出峡口，上寸金滩，二里至卖柴埠。
现代文：二十七日黎明时出了峡口，上了寸金滩，二里路来到卖柴埠。
English: At dawn on the 27th day, he went out of the gorge, got on the golden beach, and came to the firewood selling port two miles away.

古文：西面峰崖骈立，沉香堂在焉。
现代文：西面山峰石崖并立，沉香堂在那里。
English: In the west, the mountain peaks and cliffs stand side by side, and Shen Xiangtang is there.

古文：又西北三里，其北麓有洞嵌江，舟转而东，不及入。
现代文：又向西北行三里，山的北麓有洞嵌入江中，船转向东走，来不及进去。
English: Another three miles to the northwest, the northern foot of the mountain has a hole embedded in the river, the boat turned to the east, and it was too late to get in.

古文：东三里，至碧岩。
现代文：往东三里，到了碧岩。
English: Three miles to the east, to Biyan.

古文：其岩北向，石嘴啖江。
现代文：这个岩洞向北，石嘴饮吸着江水。
English: This cave faces north, and the rocky outcrop sucks in water from the river.

古文：其上削崖高悬，洞嵌其中，虽不甚深，而一楹当门，倚云迎水，帆樯拂其下，帏幄环其上，亦凭空掣远之异胜地也。
现代文：它的上方削崖高悬，洞嵌在当中，虽不怎么深，可一柱正当洞口，依傍着云雾迎着江流，船帆拂拭着它的下方，筛慢般的岩石环绕在它的上方，也是临空观览远景的奇异胜地。
English: The cliff above it hangs high, the cave is embedded in the middle, although it is not very deep, it can be a pillar of a legitimate cave mouth, along with the clouds, it faces the river flow, the sails brush the bottom of it, the rocks like a sieve slowly surround it above, and it is also a strange place to enjoy the distant view.

古文：于是北转五里，过豆豉井。
现代文：从这里往北转去五里，路过豆豉井。
English: From here, turn north for five miles, passing Doudoujing.

古文：又西北五里，至大墟，市聚颇盛，登市蔬面。
现代文：又往西北行五里，到大墟，集市村落十分兴盛，登岸买蔬菜面粉。
English: Another five miles to the northwest, to the Great Market, the market village is very prosperous, go ashore to buy vegetable flour.

古文：又西北五里，至横山岩。其岩东向，瞰流缀室，颇与碧岩似。
现代文：深处西头上去就深入到昏黑幽暗之中，深处往南下坠之处，全镶嵌着空洞，通明透亮 洞口在那下坠深处的东面，十分空阔，靠临江流，与前洞口并肩而立。
English: Deep in the west, it goes deep into the dark and gloomy, and deep in the south, where it falls, it is completely inlaid with holes, transparent and transparent. The cave entrance is on the east side of the lower fall, very wide, next to the river, and stands side by side with the front cave entrance.

古文：又北五里，为龙门塘。
现代文：又往北行五里，是龙门塘。
English: Another five miles north is Longmentang.

古文：又西五里，为新江口，又夜行十里而泊。
现代文：往南望横山岩，西面穿透顶峰，虽似乎是穿通的石洞，却无从往上登。又向西五里，是新江口，又在夜色中行船十里才停泊下来。
English: Looking to the south, we could see the rocks of Hengshan Mountain, and the west side penetrated the peak. Although it seemed to be a penetrating stone cave, it was impossible to climb up. Another five miles to the west was the mouth of Xinjiang River, and the ship traveled ten miles in the dark before anchoring.

古文：二十八日，昧爽刺舟，亟推篷，已过崖头山。
现代文：二十八日黎明撑船，急忙推开船篷，已过了崖头山。
English: At dawn on the 28th, the boat was propped up, the canopy was hastily opened, and the cliff-top mountain was passed.

古文：十余里，抵水月洞北城下，令顾仆随舟往浮桥，余同静闻过文昌门外，又西抵宁远门南。过南关桥。
现代文：十多里水路，抵达水月洞北的城下，命令顾仆随船前往浮桥，我同静闻经过文昌门外，又往西走到宁远门南边，过了南关桥。
English: After more than ten miles of waterway, we arrived at the foot of the city north of Shuiyue Cave, and ordered the attendant to follow the boat to the pontoon. I quietly listened to the passage of Wenchang Gate, and then went west to the south of Ningyuan Gate and passed the Nanguan Bridge.

古文：觅拓碑者，所拓犹无几，急促之。
现代文：找到拓碑的工匠，所拓的碑帖仍然没有几张，急切地催促他。
English: The craftsman who found the monument, still had few inscriptions, and urgently urged him to leave.

古文：遂由宁远门入，经靖藩城后门，欲入晤绀谷，询独秀游期，而后门闭，不得入。
现代文：于是由宁远门进城，经过靖江王城的后门，打算进去与给谷会面，询问游独秀峰的日期，可后门关闭着，不能进去。
English: So he entered the city through the Ningyuan Gate and passed through the back door of the Jingjiang King City, intending to go in to meet with Jiayu and inquire about the date of Yu Duxiu Peak, but the back door was closed and he couldn't get in.

古文：乃循其东出东江门，命顾仆以行囊入趋赵时雨寓，而其女出痘，遂携寓对门唐葵吾处。
现代文：于是顺着王城往东出了东江门，命令顾仆拿上行李进城赶到赵时雨的寓所，但他的女儿出痘，便到他寓所对门的唐葵吾之处。
English: So he went east along Wangcheng out of Dongjiangmen and ordered his attendants to take their luggage and rush into the city to Zhao Shiyu's apartment. However, his daughter came down with a pox, so he went to Tang Kwai Gou, which was on the opposite side of his apartment.

古文：闻融止已欲行，而石犹未取。
现代文：听说融止已打算动身，可石头还未取来。
English: It was said that he had planned to leave, but the stone had not yet been retrieved.

古文：饭后令静闻往觅之，至则已行，止留字云： 待八月间来取。 
现代文：饭后命令静闻前去找融止，到了却已经走了，只留下字条说： 等到八月间来取。 
English: After the meal, we were ordered to listen quietly before going to find a thawing stop, but when we arrived, it had already gone, leaving only a note saying: Wait until August to come and get it.

古文：殊可笑也。
现代文：真是可笑呀。
English: It's ridiculous.

古文：二十九日，令静闻由靖藩正门入晤绀谷。
现代文：二十九日命令静闻由靖江王城的正门进去会见纷谷。
English: On the 29th, Jinghan ordered Jinghan to go through the main gate of the Jingjiang Royal City to meet Shenggu.

古文：余同顾仆再出宁远门促拓碑者。
现代文：我同顾仆再次出宁远门催促拓碑的人。
English: I'm with the people who have come from far and wide to urge the removal of the monument.

古文：至是拓工始市纸携具为往拓计，余仍还寓。
现代文：到这时拓工才买来纸带上工具为前去拓碑做准备，我仍返回寓所。
English: By this time, the excavator had bought paper and brought tools to prepare for going to the monument, but I still returned to the apartment.

古文：午暑不堪他行，惟偃仰卧憩而已。
现代文：中午太炎热不能去别的地方，唯有躺下休息而已。
English: Midday is too hot to go anywhere but lie down and rest.

古文：下午，静闻来述，绀谷之言甚不着意。
现代文：下午，静闻前来述说，给谷的话十分不在意。
English: In the afternoon, Jingwen came to give a talk. He didn't care much about what Jiaya said.

古文：余初拟再至省，一登独秀，即往柳州，不意登期既缓，碑拓尚迟，甚怅怅也。
现代文：我起初准备再度到省城时，登一次独秀峰后，马上前往柳州，不料登峰的日期既已拖延，拓碑还要推迟，心中十分怅怅不乐。
English: At first, when I was preparing to go to the provincial capital again, I went to Liuzhou immediately after climbing the Duxiu Peak for the first time. Unexpectedly, the date of climbing the peak had been delayed, and the topography had to be postponed. I was very unhappy.

古文：三十日，余在唐寓。
现代文：三十日我在唐家寓所。
English: On the 30th, I was at Tang's apartment.

古文：因连日炎威午烁，雨阵时沛，既倦山踄，复厌市行。
现代文：因为连日来午日灼灼炎热威烈，阵雨不时暴淋，既厌倦去山中跋涉，又厌烦在街市中行走。
English: Because of the scorching heat of the afternoon sun for days on end, and the heavy showers from time to time, I was tired of trekking in the mountains and walking in the city.

古文：止令静闻一往水月洞观拓碑者，下午反命，明日当移拓龙隐云。
现代文：只是命令静闻一人前去水月洞观察拓碑的人，下午回来报告，明天应该会移到龙隐岩去拓了。
English: He just ordered one person to go to Shuiyue Cave to observe the monument, and come back in the afternoon to report that tomorrow they should move to Longyin Rock to excavate.

古文：六月初一日，在唐寓。
现代文：六月初一日在唐家寓所。
English: On the first day of June in the Tang family's apartment.

古文：是日暑甚，余姑憩不出。
现代文：这天异常炎热，我暂且休息不出门。
English: It's an unusually hot day, so I'm taking a break and not going out.

古文：闻绀谷以焚灵事与藩王有不惬，故欲久待。
现代文：听说给谷因为焚香祭灵的事与靖江王有不快之事，所以要等待很久。
English: I heard that because of the burning of incense and the offering of sacrifices to the spirits, there was some unpleasantness between Ji Valley and the King of Jingjiang, so we had to wait for a long time.

古文：而是时讹传衡、永为流寇所围，藩城亦愈戒严，余遂无意候独秀之登。
现代文：可此时谣传衡州、永州已被流寇包围了，王城也更加戒严，我便无意再等着去登独秀峰。
English: But at this time, rumors spread that Hengzhou and Yongzhou had been surrounded by bandits, and Wangcheng was even more under martial law. I had no intention of waiting any longer to climb Duxiu Peak.

古文：而拓者迁延索物，余亦不能待，惟陆务观碑二副先拓者，尾张少二字，令彼再拓，而彼复拓一付，反并去此张，及促再补，彼愈因循，遂迟吾行。初二日，令顾仆促拓工，而余同静闻再为七星、栖霞之游。
现代文：独秀山北面面临池水，西南两面的山麓，我都绕着走过它们的下方，西岩也已探察了两次，唯有东麓与绝顶未登上去过。它不同于其他山峰之处，只是亭台楼阁罢了。初二日叫顾仆去催促拓工，而我同静闻再去七星岩、栖霞洞游览。
English: The north face of Duxiu Mountain faces a pool of water, and the foothills on both sides of the southwest, I have walked around and passed under them. West Rock has also been explored twice, only the eastern foot and the very top have not been climbed. It is different from other mountain peaks, it is just a pavilion. On the first two days, Gu Maid was called to urge the excavation, and I went with Jingwen to visit Qixing Rock and Qixia Cave.

古文：由七星观左入岩洞 争奇门 乃曹能始所书者，即登级为碧虚阁。
现代文：由七星观左侧进入岩洞的 争奇门 ，字是曹能始书写的，即刻登上台阶是碧虚阁。
English: Entering the rock cave from the left side of the Seven Star View, the word "Shengqi Gate" was written by Cao Nengshi. Immediately ascending the steps is Bihu Ge.

古文：是阁在摘星亭之左，与七星洞前一片云同向， 一片云 三字乃巡抚都御史许如兰所书，字甚古拙。
现代文：此阁在摘星亭左方，与七星洞前的一片云同一方向，而在洞稍南，下走上登的人都要先经过这里。
English: This pavilion is on the left of the star-gathering pavilion, in the same direction as a cloud in front of the seven-star cave, and slightly south of the cave, and everyone who goes down and climbs up must first pass through here.

古文：而稍在其南，下登者先经焉。余昔游时急于七星，以为此轩阁不必烦屐齿，后屡经其下，见上有岩石倒垂，心艳之，至是先入焉。
现代文：我过去游览时急于去七星岩，认为此处轩阁不必麻烦移步前去，后来屡次经过它下方，见上面有岩石倒垂，心里喜爱它，到此时首先进去。
English: When I visited in the past, I was eager to go to Qixingyan, thinking that Xuange did not have to bother to move forward here. Later, I passed under it many times, saw the rock hanging upside down above, loved it in my heart, and went in first at this time.

古文：则其额为歙人吴国仕所题。 碧虚 之名，昔在栖霞，而今此复踵之。岂彼以亭，而此以阁耶？
现代文：就见它的匾额是款县人吴国仕题写的。 碧虚 的名称，从前在栖霞洞，而今天此处又沿袭了这个名字，莫非那是用于亭子，而此处是用于楼阁吗？
English: The name "Bihou" was once used for a pavilion in Qixia Cave, and the name is still used for this pavilion today.

古文：余啜茗其间，仰视阁为瓦掩，不见岩顶；既而转入玄武座后，以为石窟止此，而不意亦豁然透空，顶上仅高跨如梁。
现代文：我在阁中饮茶，仰视楼阁被瓦片遮住了，看不见岩洞顶；随后转入玄武座后，以为石窟仅到此处，可不料也是豁然通透，顶上仅岩石高高横跨如同桥梁。
English: I was drinking tea in the pavilion, looking up at the pavilion being covered by tiles, unable to see the top of the cave; then, after turning into the basalt, I thought that the grotto was only here, but unexpectedly it was also suddenly transparent, with only the rock at the top spanning like a bridge.

古文：若去其中轩阁，则前后通映，亦穿山月岩之类，而铺瓦叠户，令人坐其内不及知，可谓削方竹而淹断纹者矣。
现代文：如果去掉其中的轩阁，那么前后通明透亮，也是穿山、水月岩之类，但铺了瓦装上重重门窗，让人感到坐在其中不感到是岩洞，真如所说的把竹子削方来掩饰上面断裂的裂纹那样的事了。
English: If you remove the pavilion, then the front and back are clear and bright, and it is also a mountain, a water moon rock, but it is paved with tiles and equipped with a lot of doors and windows, so that people do not feel like sitting in a rock cave. It is really like cutting bamboo to cover up the cracks above.

古文：阁后透明之下，复垒石为垣，高与阁齐，以断出入。
现代文：楼阁后方透进亮光之处的下方，又用石块垒砌成墙垣，高处与楼阁平齐，以阻断行人出入。
English: At the back of the pavilion, below where the light penetrates, there is also a wall made of stone blocks, the height of which is level with the pavilion, to block pedestrian access.

古文：余讯其僧： 岩中何必叠瓦？ 
现代文：我询问这里的僧人： 岩洞中何必铺瓦？ 
English: I asked the monks here: Why do you need to lay tiles in a cave?

古文：曰： 恐风雨斜侵，石髓下滴。 
现代文：回答说： 担心风雨斜溅，石钟乳下滴。 
English: He replied, "I'm worried about the wind and rain splashing and the stone bell dropping.

古文： 阁后何必堵墙？ 
现代文： 楼阁后边何必堵上墙？ 
English: Why is there a wall at the back of the mansion?

古文：曰： 恐外多山岐，内难幽栖。 
现代文：答： 担心外边山上岔路多，洞内难以隐居。 
English: A: I'm worried that there are many paths on the mountain outside, and it's difficult to live in seclusion inside the cave.

古文：又讯： 何不移阁于岩后，前虚岩为门，以通出入；后倚阁为垣，以便居守，岂不名山面目，去室襟喉，两为得之！ 曰： 无钱粮。 
现代文：又讯问道： 为什么不把楼阁移建到岩洞后边，前边空出岩洞作为大门，以便通路出入；后面紧靠楼阁筑墙，以便居住防守，难道不是还名山的本来面目，把房屋迁离这要害之处，两者都各得其所！ 答： 没有钱粮。 
English: Another questioner asked: Why not relocate the pavilion to the back of the cave, the front side of the empty out of the cave as a gate to facilitate access; behind close to the pavilion to build a wall for living defense, is not the original face of the famous mountain, the house moved away from this key point, both have their place! Answer: There is no money grain.

古文：然则岩中之结构，岩后之窒塞，又枵腹画空而就者耶？
现代文：既然这样，岩洞中的建筑，岩洞后边的堵塞物，又是能饿着肚子在空中画成的吗？
English: In this case, can the building in the cave, the blockage behind the cave, be drawn in the air on an empty stomach?

古文：又讯： 垣外后山，从何取道？ 
现代文：又询间： 墙外的后山，从哪里取道去？ 
English: Another question: From the mountains behind the wall, where should we go?

古文：曰： 须南自大岩庵。 
现代文：必须往南从大岩庵走。
English: You have to walk south from Daiiwa-an.

古文：此庵即花桥北第一庵，庵僧自称为七星老庵，余向所入，见后有李丽弼碑者。
现代文：此庵就是花桥北面的第一座寺庵，庵里的僧人自称是七星老庵，我从前进去过，见到后边有李彦弼碑的地方。
English: This hermitage is the first temple hermitage on the north side of the Flower Bridge. The monks in the hermitage claim to be the seven-star hermitage. I went there from the front and saw the place with the monument to Li Yanjun behind.

古文：余颔之，遂出，仍登摘星，由一片云七星前洞。
现代文：我点头同意他，于是出来，仍登上摘星亭，由一片云进入七星岩前洞。
English: I nodded and agreed with him, so I came out, still boarded the star-gathering pavilion, and entered the Qixing Rock Front Cave from a cloud.

古文：北出后洞。洞右壁外崖之上，裂窍悬葩，云楞历乱。
现代文：由楼阁后面往东上登几十级台阶，见到一小块平地，岩石盘绕在其中。
English: After climbing dozens of steps from the back of the castle to the east, I saw a small flat area with rocks coiled around it.

古文：七人即《壶天观铭》所题名字，在栖霞者，其岁月俱为乙未二十八日。
现代文：于是向北出了后洞。洞右壁外面的山崖之上，石窍裂开，岩石如奇葩高悬，云状的石棱凌乱不堪。
English: As a result, the back hole came out to the north. On the cliff outside the right wall of the hole, the rock is cracked, the rock is hanging like a strange cocoon, and the cloud-like stone edges are messy.

古文：碧虚亭以唐郑冠卿入栖霞遇日华、月华二君赠诗，有 不因过去行方便，那得今朝会碧虚 之句，遂取以名亭，《石湖铭》中所云 名翁所命而我铭之 者也。
现代文：我急忙脱下衣服攀援而上，一连上去两层重叠着的石完，全都有门户排列窗权稀疏、莲花下垂筛慢飞扬的气势，它北面的下方就是栖霞洞呈弯隆状向西盘空而起了。洞外右壁上保存了些古代碑刻，有范文穆的《大成碧虚亭铭》，连同《将赴成都酌别七人》的题名都在其中。碧虚亭因为唐代郑冠卿进入栖霞洞遇见日华、月华二君赠诗，诗中有 不因过去行方便，哪能今朝会碧虚 的句子，便拿来命名亭子，是范石湖铭文中所说的 亭子是老先生命名的而我为它作了铭文 的地方了。
English: I hurriedly took off my clothes and climbed up to help. The two layers of overlapping stone, all of which have portals, are sparsely arranged, and the lotus flowers are drooping and slowly flying. Below it to the north is the Qixia Cave, which rises in a curved ridge to the west. Some ancient inscriptions have been preserved on the right wall outside the cave, including Fan Wenmu's "Dacheng Bihu Tingming," together with the title of "Will go to Chengdu seven people." Bihu Ting, because the Tang Dynasty Lord Zheng Guanqing entered the Qixia Cave, met Nichhua, and the Second Emperor of the

古文：今亭已废，而新安吴公借以名南岩之阁，不若撤南阁以亭此，则南岩不掩其胜，而此名亦宾其实，岂不快哉！
现代文：今天亭子已荒废，而新安人吴公借用来命名南岩的楼阁，不如撤掉南岩的楼阁来在此处建亭，那么南岩的胜景不会被遮住，而此名也就名符其实了，难道不痛快吗！
English: Today, the pavilion has been abandoned, and the Xin'an people Wu Gonglu borrowed the pavilion used to name Nan'an Rock. It is better to remove the pavilion of Nan'an Rock to build a pavilion here, then the scenery of Nan'an Rock will not be covered, and this name is true to its name. Isn't it delightful!

古文：盖此处岩洞骈峙者三：栖霞在北，而下透山之东西；七星在中，而曲透山之西北；南岩在南，而上透山之东西。
现代文：大体上此处的岩洞并列的有三个：栖霞洞在北面，而在下层穿透山的东西两面；七星岩居中，而弯弯曲曲通到山的西北面；南岩在南边，而在上层穿透山的东西两面。
English: In general, there are three parallel caves here: Qixia Cave is in the north, and the lower layer penetrates the east and west sides of the mountain; Qixing Rock is in the middle, and the curvature goes to the northwest side of the mountain; South Rock is in the south, and the upper layer penetrates the east and west sides of the mountain.

古文：故栖霞最远而幽暗，七星内转而不彻，南岩飞架而虚明。
现代文：所以栖霞洞最长而且幽暗，七星岩里面转来转去却不贯通，南岩飞架高空而且空虚明亮。
English: For this reason, Qixia Cave is the longest and darkest, Qixing Rock is round and round but not penetrable, and Nanyan Rock overhangs the sky and is empty and bright.

古文：三窍同悬，六门各异，可谓异曲同工，其奈南岩之碧虚阁，反以人掩何！
现代文：三个洞穴一同高悬，六个洞口各有不同，可说是异曲同工，无奈南岩的碧虚阁，反而人为地把它掩藏起来！
English: Three caves are hanging high together, six cave openings are different from each other, which can be said to be the same work, but the Bihu Pavilion of Nanyan Rock is artificially hidden!

古文：栖霞再北，又有朝云、高峙二岩，俱西向。
现代文：栖霞洞再往北，又有朝云岩、高峙岩两个岩洞，都朝向西方。
English: Qixia Cave is further north, and there are two caves, Chaoyun Rock and Gaojing Rock, both facing west.

古文：此七星西面之洞也，其数共五。
现代文：这是七星岩西面的洞了，它们的数目共有五个。
English: These are the caves on the western side of Qixing Rock. There are five of them in total.

古文：下栖霞，少憩寿佛寺，乃过七星观，遂南入大岩庵。
现代文：下了栖霞洞，在寿佛寺稍作歇息，于是走过七星观，便向南进入大岩庵。
English: After descending the Qixia Cave and taking a short break at the Shou Buddha Temple, I walked past the Seven Star View and then headed south to the Big Rock Hermitage.

古文：望南岩之后，山石丛薄，若可由庵外东北而登者。
现代文：远望南岩的后方，山石成丛密密层层，好像是可由庵外往东北登上去的样子。
English: Looking far and wide at the back of Nanyan, the mountains and rocks form a dense clump, as if it were possible to climb up from the outside of the hermitage to the northeast.

古文：时已过午，余曰： 何不了此而后中食。 
现代文：此时已过了中午，我说： 为什么不游完此地然后再吃中饭。 
English: By this time it was past midday and I said: why don't we finish swimming here and then have lunch.

古文：余遂从庵门右草坪中上，静闻就荫山门，不能从焉。
现代文：我于是从庵门右边的草坪中上去，静闻到山门下去遮荫，不能跟随了。
English: So I went up from the lawn to the right of the door of the hermitage, quietly smelled the mountain gate, went down to the shade, and could not follow.

古文：既抵山坳，草中复有石级，而右崖石上镌张孝祥《登七星山诗》，张维依韵和之。
现代文：抵达山坳之后，草丛中又有石阶，而右侧的崖石上刻有张孝祥的《登七星山诗》，张维依照韵脚应和他。
English: After arriving at the foot of the mountain, there are stone steps in the grass, and the right side of the cliff stone is engraved with Zhang Xiaoxiang's "Climbing the Seven Stars Mountain Poem." Zhang Wei should follow him according to the rhyme.

古文：共一里，再上，得坪一区，小石峰环列而拱之，薄若绡帷，秀分萼瓣。
现代文：共走一里，再往上，走到一块平地上，小石峰环列着拱卫它。石峰薄如纱帐，岩石如开放的花朵能分出花尊来。
English: We walked for a mile, and then further up, to a flat area, surrounded by small stone pinnacles. The stone pinnacles are thin as gauze, and the rocks are like open flowers that can separate flowers.

古文：其北壁棘莽中，亦有记，磨崖为凿穴者戕损不可读。
现代文：在它北壁的荆棘丛莽中，也有碑记，刻有文字的摩崖被凿洞的人破坏不能读了。
English: In the thorn bushes on its northern wall, there is also a monument. The inscribed cliff was destroyed by the diggers and can no longer be read.

古文：盖其处西即南岩透明之窦，为僧人窒垣断之者；北即七星之顶，与余峰攒而斗列者。
现代文：大概此处西边就是南岩透出亮光的洞穴，被僧人堵墙阻断之处；北面就是七星岩的峰顶，与其他山峰攒聚在一起争斗并列的地方。
English: Probably, to the west of here is the cave where light comes out of Nanyan, where it is blocked by a wall built by monks; to the north is the peak of Qixingyan, where it is gathered together with other peaks to fight and stand side by side.

古文：昔人上登七星，此其正道，而今则无问津者矣。
现代文：从前的人上登七星岩，这是通往那里的正道，可今天却无人问津了。
English: In the past, people climbed Qixing Rock, which is the right way to get there, but today no one is interested.

古文：觅道草中，有小径出东南坳中。
现代文：在草丛中找路，有条小径通到东南方的山坳中。
English: Looking for a way through the grass, there is a path that leads to the mountains in the southeast.

古文：从之，共一里，东南下山，得一岩，列众神焉，而不知其名。
现代文：顺着这条路走，共一里，往东南下山，见到一个岩洞，众神排列在其中，但不知道他们的名字。
English: After walking along this road for a total of one mile, heading south-east down the mountain, I saw a cave in which the gods were lined up, but I didn't know their names.

古文：下山而西，则曾公岩在望矣。
现代文：下山后往西行，则曾公岩在望了。
English: After descending the mountain and heading west, Zeng Gongyan was in sight.

古文：忽凉飙袭人，赤日减烈，则阴气自洞中出也。
现代文：忽然间凉风袭人，赤日减了威烈，原来是阴凉的气流从洞中吹出来。
English: Suddenly, a cool breeze hit the people, and the red sun lost its power. It turned out to be a cool airstream blowing out of the cave.

古文：此有玄风洞，余夙求之不得，前由栖霞入，将抵曾公，先过一隘口，忽寒风拂灯，至此又阴气薄日，信乎玄风当不外此，后来为曾公所掩耳，非二洞也。
现代文：此地有玄风洞，我过去找不到，先前由栖霞洞进去，将到达曾公岩时，先路过一个隘口，忽然寒风吹拂灯火，来到这里又阴风逼日，相信玄风洞应当不外就是此地，不过后来被曾公岩遮住罢了，不是两个洞。
English: There is a gale-force wind cave here, which I couldn't find in the past. I used to go in from Qixia Cave, but when I arrived at Zengong Rock, I first passed through a pass. Suddenly, a cold wind blew the lights, and when I got here, it was overcast. I believe that the gale-force wind cave should be here, but later it was just covered by Zengong Rock, not two holes.

古文：入洞，更采叶拂崖，观刘谊《曾公岩记》及陈倩等诗已，乃濯足涧水中。
现代文：进了洞，又采来树叶擦拭崖壁，观览刘谊的《曾公岩记》及陈倩等人的诗，读完后，就在涧水中洗脚。
English: After entering the cave, they collected leaves to wipe the cliff wall, watched Liu Yi's "Zeng Gongyan Ji" and the poems of Chen Qi and others, and washed their feet in the brackish water after reading.

古文：久之出，仰见岩石又有一洞在峰半，与列神之岩东西并峙。
现代文：很久以后出来，仰面见岩洞右边又有一个洞在山峰半中腰，与陈列神像的岩洞东西并列。
English: After a long time, I came out and looked up to see another cave on the right side of the cave, halfway up the mountain, side by side with the cave where the statues of gods are displayed.

古文：执入洞汲水者问之，曰： 此亦有洞，已不可登。 
现代文：拉住进洞来汲水的人打听它，说： 这里也有洞，已经不能登上去。 
English: The man who had been pulling at the hole to draw water inquired about it and said, "There is also a hole here, and it is no longer possible to climb up."

古文：余再问其故，其人不答去。
现代文：我再问其中的缘故，那人不回答便离开了。
English: When I asked why, the man didn't answer and left.

古文：余亟攀崖历莽而上，则洞口亦东南向如曾公岩。
现代文：我急忙攀着石崖经由丛莽上去，就见洞口也是朝向东南如同曾公岩。
English: I hurriedly climbed up the rock cliff through the bushes, and saw that the mouth of the cave was also facing southeast, like Zenggong Rock.

古文：初由石峡入，得平展处，稍转而北，其外复有龛东列，分楞叠牖，外透多明，内环重幄，若堂之有室焉。
现代文：起初由石峡中进去，遇到一处平坦舒展的地方，稍稍转向北去，那外边又有石完排列在东面，如分出窗楞，叠为窗口，外边透入多处亮光，里面岩石环绕如重重筛慢，好像堂屋里有内室一样。
English: At first, I entered the stone gorge, encountered a flat stretch of land, turned slightly to the north, and outside there were stones lined up on the east side, like a curtain, stacked as a window, outside there were many bright lights, and inside the rocks were surrounded like a sieve, as if there was an inner room in the hall.

古文：其后则穿门西入，门圆若圈，入其内，渐转渐深，而杳不可睹。
现代文：它后边便穿过石门向西进去，石门圆如圆圈，进入门内，渐渐转进渐渐幽深，昏暗得不能看清东西。
English: Behind it, he went through the stone door to the west, the stone door was round like a circle, he entered the door, and gradually turned into the dark, so dark that he couldn't see anything clearly.

古文：乃转而出，甫抵洞外，则一人亦攀隙历险而至，乃庆林观道士也。
现代文：于是转身而出，刚到洞外，就有一个人也攀着石缝历经险阻而来，是庆林观的道士。
English: So he turned around and went out. As soon as he reached the outside of the cave, there was a man who also climbed a stone crack and came through a dangerous obstacle. He was a Taoist of Qinglin Guan.

古文：见余独入，疑而踪迹跟随之，至则曰： 庆林古观，而今移门易向，遂多伤损，公必精青乌家言，乞为我指示。 
现代文：见我独自一人进洞，怀疑而跟踪进来，来到便说： 庆林观是古道观，而今观门迁动调换了方向，于是多有损伤，尊公必定精通风水术士的理论，求您为我指点指点。 
English: Seeing me enter the cave alone, he followed me suspiciously, and when he arrived, he said: "The Qinglin view is an ancient Taoist view, but now the view of the door has shifted and changed direction, so there are many injuries. Your excellency must be proficient in the theory of feng shui magicians. Please give me some pointers."

古文：余谢不敏，且问其岩何名，道者不告，强邀入观。
现代文：我以学识浅薄推辞，并且打听这个岩洞叫什么名字，道士不告诉，强行邀我进观。
English: I tried to excuse myself by saying that my knowledge was shallow, and asked what the name of the cave was, but the priest wouldn't tell me and forced me to go inside.

古文：甫下山，则静闻见余久不返，亦踵至焉。
现代文：刚下山，就见静闻因见我去了很久不见返回，也尾随而来了。
English: As soon as I came down from the mountain, I saw Jing Wen, who had followed me because she had not seen me for a long time.

古文：时已下舂，亟辞道者。
现代文：此时已是日落之时，急忙辞别道士。
English: At this time, it was already sunset, so he hurriedly bid farewell to the priest.

古文：道者送余出观前新易门，余再索其岩名，道者曰： 岩实无名。
现代文：道士送我出到道观前新换的门前时，我再次追问那个岩洞的名字，道士说： 岩洞其实没有名字。
English: When the Taoist sent me out to the newly changed door in front of the Taoist Temple, I again asked the name of the cave. The Taoist said: The cave actually has no name.

古文：昔有僧居此，皆以为不利于观，故去之而湮其路，公岂亦有意于此乎？
现代文：从前有和尚住在这里，都认为不利于道观，所以赶走了和尚并填塞了通往那里的路，尊公莫非也是有意于此地吗？
English: There used to be a monk living here, but they all thought it was not conducive to Taoism, so they drove away the monk and blocked the road leading there. Isn't it possible that he is also interested in this place?

古文：第恐非观中所宜耳。 
现代文：只恐怕对道观不利吧。 
English: I'm afraid it's not good for Taoism.

古文：余始悟其踪迹之意，盖在此不在彼也。
现代文：我这才明白了他跟踪而来的意思，原来为了这而不是他说的那个原因，便笑了一笑与他告别了。
English: Only then did I understand what he meant by following me. It turned out to be for this reason, not the one he said, so I smiled and said goodbye to him.

古文：一笑与别，已出花桥东街矣。
现代文：不久，出到花桥以东的街上了。
English: Soon, I was out on the street east of the Flower Bridge.

古文：盖此处岩洞骈峙者亦三：曾公在中，而下透于西；列神之岩在东上，而浅不旁通；庆林后岩在西上，而幽不能悉。
现代文：大体上此处的岩洞并列的也有三个：曾公岩在中间，而往下穿透到西边；陈列神像的岩洞在东面的上方，可很浅不旁通；庆林观后面的岩洞在西面的上方，却幽暗不能尽游。
English: Generally speaking, there are also three caves side by side here: Zenggong Rock is in the middle, and penetrates down to the west; the cave displaying the statue of God is above the east, but it is very shallow; the cave behind Qinglin View is above the west, but it is too dark to swim.

古文：然曾公与栖霞，前后虽分门，而中通实一洞。
现代文：然而曾公岩与栖霞洞前后虽然分别有洞口，但中间相通实际上是一个洞。
English: However, although Zenggongyan Cave and Qixia Cave have separate entrances, they are actually connected by a single hole.

古文：其北下与之同列者，又有二岩，亦俱东南向。
现代文：洞北面下方和洞并列的，又有两个岩洞，我从前游省春岩，先经过此处，也都是朝向东南。
English: To the north of the cave, below and parallel to the cave, there are two more caves. I passed through here first from Chunyang, Qianyu Province, and they are also facing southeast.

古文：此七星山东南面之洞也，其数亦共五焉。
现代文：这是七星山东南面的洞了，它们的数目也一共是五个。
English: This is a cave in the southeast of Qixing Mountain, and there are a total of five of them.

古文：若北麓省春三岩、会仙一洞，乃余昔日所游者，亦俱北向。
现代文：至于说北麓省春岩的三个岩洞、会仙岩一个岩洞，旁边又有一个浅洞，是我昔日游历过的，也全部向北。
English: As for the three caves in Chunyan, Hokuroku Province, and one cave in Huixianyan, and a shallow cave next to it, which I have visited in the past, they are all to the north.

古文：此七星山北面之洞也，其数亦共五焉。
现代文：这是七星山北面的洞了，它们的数目也一共是五个。
English: This is the cave on the north side of Qixing Mountain, and there are five of them altogether.

古文：既度花桥，与静闻就面肆中，以补午餐。
现代文：一座山总共找到十五个洞。过了花桥后，与静闻到面馆补吃午餐。
English: They found a total of fifteen holes in one mountain. After crossing the flower bridge, they went to a noodle restaurant for lunch.

古文：过浮桥返唐寓，则晚餐熟矣。
现代文：过了浮桥返回唐家寓所，却晚饭都熟了。
English: After crossing the pontoon bridge and returning to the Tang family's apartment, dinner was ready.

