古文：六月，遣兗州节度使刘鄩、华州节度使尹皓、崇州节度使温昭图、庄宅使段凝领军攻同州。
现代文：贞明六年六月，末帝遣兖州节度使刘寻阝、华州节度使尹皓、崇州节度使温昭图、庄宅使段凝领军攻打同州。
English: In June of the sixth year of the reign of Emperor Zhenming, the late emperor sent Liu Xingyao to the Bozhou Festival, Yin Qi to the Huazhou Festival, Wen Zhaotu to the Chongzhou Festival, and Zhuangzhu to the Duan Festival to lead the army to attack Tongzhou.

古文：先是，河中硃友谦袭陷同州，节度使程全晖单骑奔京师。
现代文：在这以前，河中朱友谦袭击占领了同州，同州节度使程全晖单骑逃往京师。
English: Prior to this, Zhu Youqian attacked and occupied Tongzhou in the middle of the river, and the Tongzhou Festival made Cheng Quanzhang flee to the Beijing Division alone.

古文：友谦以其子令德为同州留后，表求节旄，不允；既而帝虑友谦怨望，遂命兼镇同州，制命将下而友谦已叛，遣使求援于晋，故命将讨之。
现代文：朱友谦以他的儿子朱令德任同州留后，上表朝廷请求节旄，皇上不答应。不久末帝担心朱友谦心怀怨恨，就命他兼镇同州。诏令都准备下达而朱友谦已经反叛，派人向晋人求援，所以末帝任命将领征讨他。
English: After Zhu Youqian stayed in Tongzhou with his son Zhu Lingde, he petitioned the imperial court for the imperial decree, but the emperor did not agree. Soon, the last emperor was worried that Zhu Youqian was holding a grudge and ordered him to stay in Tongzhou. The imperial decree was ready to be issued, but Zhu Youqian had already rebelled and sent someone to the Jin people for help, so the last emperor appointed a general to recruit him.

古文：九月庚寅，以供奉官郎公远充契丹欢好使。
现代文：九月二日，以供奉官郎公远兼任契丹欢好使。
English: On September 2nd, he was accompanied by his vassal, Guoyuan, who also served as the envoy of goodwill to the Khitan people.

古文：晋王遣都将李嗣昭、李存审、王建及率师来援同州，战于城下。
现代文：晋王派都将李嗣昭、李存审、王建及领军前来救援同州，在同州城下交战。
English: Jin Wang sent Li Shizhao, Li Cunxin, Wang Jian and the leading troops to rescue Tongzhou and fought under Tongzhou Castle.

古文：我师败绩，诸将以余众退保华州罗文寨。
现代文：朝廷军队战败，众将领着残余部下退守华州罗文寨。
English: The imperial army was defeated, and the generals led the remaining subordinates to retreat to Luowenzhai, Huazhou.

古文：冬十月，陈州妖贼毋乙、董乙伏诛。
现代文：冬十月，陈州妖贼毋乙、董乙被诛杀。
English: In the winter of October, the traitors of Chenzhou, Bao B and Dong B, were beaten to death.

古文：陈州里俗之人，喜习左道，依浮屠氏之教，自立一宗，号曰 上乘 。
现代文：陈州乡俗之人，喜欢学习邪门歪道，依据佛教，自立一派，叫作 上乘 佛教。
English: The people of the folk customs of Chenzhou like to study the evil and crooked way, according to Buddhism, self-reliance, called the superior Buddhism.

古文：不食荤茹，诱化庸民，揉杂淫秽，宵聚昼散。
现代文：不食荤腥，诱惑教化平庸之民，混乱淫秽，晚上相聚，白天分散。
English: They don't indulge in debauchery, seduce and indoctrinate the common people, are chaotic and obscene, get together at night and disperse during the day.

古文：州县因循，遂致滋蔓。
现代文：州城县邑因相效仿，以致滋蔓发展。
English: The prefectural towns and counties have followed suit, which has led to the development of the vine.

古文：时刺史惠王友能恃戚籓之宠，动多不法，故奸惹之徒，望风影附。
现代文：当时刺史惠王朱友能自恃亲戚藩镇的宠威，动辄多干不法之事，所以奸邪诡诈之徒，投奔依附于他。
English: At that time, Zhu You, the king of the Shi Hui, was able to make himself the favorite of his relatives and the town, and often did many illegal things. Therefore, the treacherous and deceitful people rushed to attach themselves to him.

古文：毋乙数辈，渐及千人，攻掠乡社，长吏不能诘。
现代文：毋乙数人结为一党，逐渐发展到千人，攻击抢掠乡村里社，官吏不敢追究。
English: No matter how many people unite as a party, gradually growing to a thousand, attacking and looting rural villages, officials dare not investigate.

古文：是月，镇州大将王德明杀其帅王熔，自称留后，遣使来求援。
现代文：到这时朝廷出动禁军以及几州的部队合力追击，贼党溃败，活捉了毋乙等首领八十多人，带上桎梏押送到京城，全部在街市上处死。龙德元年二月，镇州大将王德明杀死他的主帅王，自称为留后，派使者前来求援。
English: At this time, the imperial court dispatched the forbidden army and the troops of several states to jointly pursue. The Kleptocracy was defeated, and more than eighty leaders were captured alive. They were taken to Beijing with the bailiff, and all of them were executed in the street market. In February of the first year of Longde, the Zhenzhou general Wang Deming killed his boss Wang, claiming to stay behind, and sent an envoy to ask for help.

古文：宰臣敬翔请许之，租庸使赵岩等以为不可，乃止。
现代文：宰臣敬翔请皇上答应他，租庸使赵岩等认为不能，才作罢。
English: The aide-de-camp, Keixiang, asked the emperor to agree to this, but Zhao Yan and others thought it was impossible, so they stopped.

古文：三月丁亥朔，祠部员外郎李枢上言： 请禁天下私度僧尼，及不许妄求师号紫衣。
现代文：三月一日，祠部员外郎李枢向皇上禀告： 请禁止天下私自度脱僧人尼姑，并不准妄自请求大师的称号和穿紫色衣服。
English: On March 1, Li Zu, a member of the ancestral hall, sent an obituary to the emperor: "Please forbid the world to get rid of monks and nuns, and do not allow yourself to ask for the title of master and wear purple clothes."

古文：如愿出家受戒者，皆须赴阙比试艺业施行，愿归俗者一听自便。 
现代文：如有自愿出家受戒的人，都须到京城比试造诣道行，愿意还俗的听其自便。 
English: If there are people who voluntarily become ordained, they must go to Beijing to try out the Taoist path and are willing to listen to their convenience.

古文：诏曰： 两都左右街赐紫衣及师号僧，委功德使具名闻奏。
现代文：诏令说 ：两都左右街赐与紫衣以及大师称号的僧人，根据功德具名造册上报朝廷。
English: The edict said: The monks who were given the purple robes and the title of master by the towns around the two capitals should be recorded and reported to the imperial court according to their merits.

古文：今后有阙，方得奏荐，仍须道行精至，夏腊高深，方得补填。
现代文：今后有缺，才能上奏推荐，仍须道行精深完备，年高德劭，才能补任。
English: In the future, if there is a shortage, in order to be recommended, it is still necessary to have a deep and complete practice, and a high moral character, in order to fill the position.

古文：每遇明圣节，两街各许官坛度七人。
现代文：每遇明圣节，两街各许官坛度脱七人。
English: Every time there is a Chinese New Year, seven officials from each of the two cities are purged.

古文：诸道如要度僧，亦仰就京官坛，仍令祠部给牒。
现代文：各道如要度脱僧人，也须上京来到官坛，仍令祠部给予名牒。
English: If they wanted to get rid of the monks, they had to go to Beijing and come to the government, but they still had to ask the ancestral hall to give them a certificate.

古文：可降封房陵侯。
现代文：朱友能逃走，据守陈州，诏令张汉杰率领部队前往征讨。
English: Zhu You was able to escape, but Chen Zhou held out and ordered Zhang Hanjie to lead the troops to attack.

古文：于戏！君臣之礼，彼有不恭；伯仲之恩，予垂立爱。
现代文：五月，兖州节度使、兼任河东道行营都招讨使刘寻阝去世。秋七月，陈州朱友能投降。
English: In May, Liu Huanqian, the festival envoy of Zhangzhou and the concurrent host of the river expedition, died. In autumn and July, Zhu Youneng of Chenzhou surrendered.

古文：顾兹轻典，岂称群情，凡在臣僚，当体朕意。 甲辰，制以特进、检校太傅、衡王友谅可封嗣广王。
现代文：十一日，末帝降诏贬封朱友能为房陵侯。十五日，诏令特进、检校太傅、衡王朱友谅可封为嗣广王。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the late emperor issued an imperial edict to demote Zhu You to the position of Fangling Marquis. On the 15th day, he issued an imperial edict to promote Zhu You to the position of special envoy, inspector of schools, and Prince of Heng to the position of heir of Guangwang.

古文：冬十月，北面招讨使戴思远攻德胜寨之北城，晋人来援，思远败于戚城。
现代文：冬十月，北面招讨使戴思远进攻德胜寨的北城，晋人前来救援，戴思远在戚城战败。
English: In the winter of October, the north side invited Dai Siyuan to attack the northern city of Deshengzhai, the Jin people came to the rescue, and Dai Siyuan was defeated in Qicheng.

古文：龙德二年春正月，戴思远率师袭魏州。
现代文：龙德二年春正月，戴思远领军袭击魏州。
English: In the first month of the second year of Longde Spring, Dai Siyuan led an army to attack Weizhou.

古文：时晋王方攻镇州，故思远乘虚以袭之，陷成安，而思远遂急攻德胜北城，晋将李存审极力拒守。
现代文：当时晋王正在攻打镇州，所以思远乘虚而入，攻陷成安，接着急攻德胜北城，晋将李存审极力拒守。
English: At that time, the Jin king was attacking Zhenzhou, so Siyuan took advantage of the opportunity and invaded Cheng'an, and then suddenly attacked Desheng North City. The Jin general Li Cunxiu tried his best to resist.

古文：二月，晋王以兵至，思远收军而退，复保杨村。
现代文：二月，晋王领兵来到，戴思远收军而退，再次固守杨村。
English: In February, Jin Wang came to lead the troops, and Dai Siyuan withdrew his troops and once again held fast to Yangcun.

古文：八月，段凝、张朗攻卫州，下之，获刺史李存儒以献。
现代文：八月，段凝、张朗攻打卫州，占领了它，俘获卫州刺史李存儒献上。
English: In August, Duan Rong and Zhang Lang attacked and occupied Weizhou, and captured the Weizhou scribe Li Cunru.

古文：戴思远又下淇门、共城、新乡等三县。
现代文：戴思远又攻下淇门、共城、新乡等三县。
English: Dai Siyuan also captured Qimen, Gongcheng, Xinxiang and other three counties.

古文：自是澶州之西、相州之南，皆为梁有，晋人失军储三分之一焉。
现代文：从此澶州以西，相州以南，都被梁朝占有，晋人失去军需储备的三分之一。
English: From then on, the western part of Zhangzhou and the southern part of Xiangzhou were occupied by the Liang Dynasty, and the Jin people lost one-third of their military reserves.

古文：龙德三年春三月，晋潞州节度留后李继韬遣使以城归顺。
现代文：龙德三年春三月，晋潞州节度留后李继韬派使者向梁朝请求献城投降。
English: In the spring and March of the third year of Longde, after the Jinshan Festival, Li Jizhe sent an envoy to the Liang Dynasty to request the surrender of the city.

古文：先是，继韬父嗣昭为潞州节度使，战殁于镇州城下，晋王欲以嗣昭长子继俦袭父位。
现代文：在这以前，李继韬的父亲李嗣昭为潞州节度使，战死在镇州城下，晋王想以李嗣昭的长子李继俦继承父亲的职位。
English: Prior to this, Li Jizhe's father, Li Shizhao, died in a battle at the foot of Zhenzhou Castle while serving as an envoy to the Lianzhou Festival. Jin Wang wanted to use Li Shizhao's eldest son, Li Jizhe, to succeed his father's position.

古文：继韬在潞州，即执继俦囚之，遣使来送款，仍以二幼子为质。
现代文：李继韬在潞州即抓住李继俦并囚禁他，派遣使者前来请降，并把他的两个小儿子送做人质。
English: Li Jizhe immediately seized Li Jizhe in Zhangzhou and imprisoned him, sent an envoy to ask him to surrender, and sent his two youngest sons as hostages.

古文：泽州刺史裴约不从继韬之谋，帝命董璋为泽州刺史，令将兵攻之。
现代文：泽州刺史裴约不顺从李继韬投降，末帝命董璋为泽州刺史，令他领兵攻打裴约。
English: Zhezhou's leader Pei You disobeyed Li Jizhe and surrendered. The late emperor ordered Dong Yu to be the leader of Zhezhou's leader Pei You and led his troops to attack Pei You.

古文：夏四月己巳，晋王即唐帝位于魏州，改天祐二十年为同光元年。
现代文：夏四月二十五日，晋王在魏州建立后唐国号，并即帝位，改天二十年为同光元年。
English: On the 25th day of the 4th month of the summer, after the establishment of the Kingdom of Jin in Weizhou, the name of Tang, and that is, the imperial throne, was changed to twenty years.

古文：闰月壬寅，唐军袭郓州，陷之。巡检使陈州刺史刘遂严，本州都指挥使燕颙奔归京师，皆斩于都市。
现代文：闰四月二十八日，后唐军队袭击郓州，占领了它，巡检使、前陈州刺史刘遂严和郓州都指挥使燕逃往京城，都被处死在大街上。
English: On the 28th day of the 4th month, the post-Tang army attacked Zhangzhou and occupied it. Liu Suiyan, the former inspector of Chenzhou, and Zhangzhou both commanded Yan to flee to Beijing. They were all executed on the street.

古文：五月，以滑州节度使王彦章为北面行营招讨使。
现代文：五月，以滑州节度使王彦章为北面行营招讨使。
English: In May, Wang Yanzhang was sent to the north to invite envoys on the occasion of the festival in Slum.

古文：辛酉，王彦章率舟师自杨村寨浮河而下，断德胜之浮梁。攻南城，下之，杀数十人。
现代文：十八日，王彦章率领舟船部队从杨村寨驾船沿黄河而下，切断德胜浮桥，进攻南城，占领了它，杀死数千人。
English: On the 18th, Wang Yanzhang led the boat troops from Yangcunzhai to sail down the Yellow River, cut off the Desheng floating bridge, attacked Nancheng, occupied it, and killed thousands of people.

古文：唐帝弃德胜之北城，并军保杨刘。
现代文：后唐庄宗李存勖放弃德胜北城，合军保卫杨刘城。
English: Later, Li Cunxu of Tangzhuangzong abandoned Desheng North City and joined forces to defend Yang Liu City.

古文：己巳，王彦章、段凝围杨刘城。
现代文：二十六日，王彦章、段凝包围杨刘城。
English: On the 26th, Wang Yanzhang and Duan Rong surrounded Yang Liucheng.

古文：六月乙亥，唐帝引军援杨刘，潜军至博州，筑垒于河东岸。
现代文：六月二日，后唐庄宗领军援救杨刘城，军队偷偷开到博州，在黄河东岸修筑堡垒。
English: On June 2nd, after Tangzhuangzong led the army to rescue Yang Liucheng, the army secretly drove to Bozhou to build a fortress on the east bank of the Yellow River.

古文：戊子，王彦章、杜晏球率兵急攻博州之新垒，不克，遂退保于邹口。
现代文：十五日，王彦章、杜晏球领兵急攻博州新筑堡垒，不能攻下，于是退守邹口。
English: On the fifteenth day, Wang Yanzhang and Du Xuanqiu led the troops to attack Bozhou Xinzhu Fort in a hurry, but they could not capture it, so they retreated to Hekou.

古文：秋七月丁未，唐帝引军沿河而南。王彦章弃邹口，复至杨刘。
现代文：秋七月五日，后唐庄宗引军沿黄河向南，王彦章放弃邹口又到杨刘城。
English: On the 5th day of the 7th month of autumn, after Tangzhuangzong led the army south along the Yellow River, Wang Yanzhang abandoned Hekou and went to Yang Liucheng.

古文：己未，自杨刘拔营退保杨村寨。
现代文：十七日，从杨刘城拔营退守杨村寨。
English: On the 17th, they withdrew from Yangcunzhai to Yangcunzhai.

古文：八月，以段凝代王彦章为北面行营招讨使。
现代文：八月，以段凝代替王彦章任北面行营招讨使。
English: In August, Deng Deng replaced Wang Yanzhang as the envoy to the north.

古文：戊子，段凝营于王村，引军自高陵渡河，复临河而还。
现代文：十七日，段凝在王村扎营，领军从高陵渡过黄河，收复临河而回。
English: On the 17th, Duan Jian set up camp in Wangcun. The leading troops crossed the Yellow River from Gaoling and returned to Linhe.

古文：董璋攻泽州，下之。
现代文：董璋进攻泽州，攻下了它。
English: Dong Xuan attacked Zhezhou and captured it.

古文：庚寅，唐帝军于胡城，先锋将康延孝率百骑奔于唐，尽泄其军机。
现代文：十九日，后唐庄宗驻军于朝城，先锋将康延孝率领一百骑兵投奔后唐，泄露了梁军全部军机。
English: On the 19th, Zhuangzong of the Later Tang garrisoned troops in the morning city. The vanguard sent Kang Yanxiao to the Later Tang with a hundred cavalry, revealing all the military aircraft of Liang's army.

古文：命滑州节度使王彦章率兵屯守郓之东境。
现代文：末帝命滑州节度使王彦章领兵屯守在郓州东境。
English: The late emperor ordered Wang Yanzhang to lead an army to garrison the eastern border of Ganzhou during the festival of Leshou.

古文：九月戊辰，彦章以众渡汶，与唐军遇于递防镇，彦章不利，退保中都。
现代文：九月二十七日，王彦章率领部队渡过汶水，与后唐军队在递坊镇遭遇，王彦章不利，退守中都。
English: On September 27th, Wang Hanzhang led his troops across the Wenshui River and encountered the post-Tang army in Difang Town. Wang Hanzhang was at a disadvantage and retreated to Zhongdu.

古文：冬十月辛未朔，日有食之。
现代文：冬十月一日，发生日蚀。
English: On the first day of October in winter, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：甲戌，唐帝引师袭中都，王彦章兵溃，于是彦章与监军张汉杰及赵廷隐、刘嗣彬、李知节、唐文通、王山兴等皆为唐人所获。
现代文：四日，后唐庄宗领兵袭击中都，王彦章军队溃败，于是王彦章与监军张汉杰以及赵廷隐、刘嗣彬、李知节、康文通、王山兴等人都被后唐军队俘获。
English: On the fourth day, Wang Yanzhang's army was routed by Zhuozong, the leader of the later Tang Dynasty, who attacked the Central Capital. Wang Yanzhang and his supervisors Zhang Hanjie, Zhao Tingyin, Liu Zhibin, Li Zhijie, Kang Wentong, Wang Shanxing and others were all captured by the later Tang Dynasty army.

古文：翼日，彦章死于任城。
现代文：后来，王彦章死在任城。
English: Later, Wang Yanzhang died in Rencheng.

古文：帝闻中都之败，唐军长驱将至，遣张汉伦驰驿召段凝于河上；汉伦坠马伤足，复限水潦，不能进。
现代文：末帝听到中都战役失败，唐军长驱而来，便派张汉伦驰马前往黄河边召回段凝，不料张汉伦在路上从马背上摔下来伤了脚，又被洪水所限，不能前行。
English: Hearing that the battle of Zhongdu was a failure and the Tang army was advancing, the late emperor sent Zhang Hanlun on horseback to the edge of the Yellow River to recall Duan Rong. However, Zhang Hanlun fell off his horse on the road and injured his foot. He was also limited by the flood and could not go forward.

古文：时禁军尚有四千人，硃圭请以拒唐军，帝不从，登建国门召开封尹王瓚，谓之曰： 段凝未至，社稷系卿方略。 
现代文：当时京师禁军还有四千人，朱王圭请求使用禁军抵拒唐军，末帝不听从，登上建国门召见开封尹王瓒，对他说： 段凝久久不来，国家就依赖于您的方略了。 
English: At that time, there were still four thousand people in the Beijing Division of the Forbidden Army. Zhu Wanggui requested the use of the Forbidden Army to resist the Tang Army. The last emperor did not listen. He boarded the Gate of the Founding of the People's Republic to summon the Kaifeng Yin Wangye and said to him: "If you do not come for a long time, the country will rely on your strategy."

古文：瓚即驱军民登城为备。
现代文：王瓒于是发动军民登上城墙做准备。
English: Wang Yao then mobilized soldiers and civilians to climb the city wall in preparation.

古文：或劝帝西奔洛阳，赵岩曰： 势已如是，一下此楼，谁心可保。 
现代文：有人劝末帝西奔洛阳，赵岩说： 形势已到这一地步，一离开这座楼，还有谁能靠得住？ 
English: Someone advised Zhao Yan to go to Luoyang at the end of the day, and Zhao Yan said: The situation has reached this stage. Once you leave this building, who else can you trust?

古文：乃止。
现代文：末帝才作罢。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：俄报曰： 晋军过曹州矣！ 
现代文：一会儿有报告说 ：唐军已过曹州了。 
English: Soon there was a report: the Tang army had passed Caozhou.

古文：帝置传国宝于卧内，俄失其所在，已为左右所窃迎唐帝矣。
现代文：末帝将传国宝放在卧室内，一下就不见了，已经被身边的人偷去迎接后唐皇帝了。
English: The last emperor put the national treasure in the bedroom, and it disappeared immediately. It had been stolen by the people around him to greet the Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty.

古文：帝召控鹤都将皇甫麟，谓之曰： 吾与晋人世仇，不可俟彼刀锯，卿可尽我命，无令落仇人之手。 
现代文：末帝召来控鹤都将皇甫麟，对他说： 我与太原晋人是世仇，不能死在他们的刀斧之下。您可以结束我的性命，不要让我落入他们的手中。 
English: The last emperor summoned the king of the cranes, Emperor Fulin, and said to him: I and Taiyuan Jin are sworn enemies, I cannot die under their swords and axes. You can end my life, don't let me fall into their hands.

古文：麟不忍，帝曰： 卿不忍，将卖我耶！ 
现代文：皇甫麟不忍心，末帝说： 您不忍心，就是要出卖我！ 
English: Emperor Fulin could not bear it, and the last emperor said: If you can't bear it, you should betray me!

古文：《册府元龟》作或解云 瑱 字， 一十一，十月一八 ，知此句 日 字因下文有 日 字而衍，今姑仍其旧。果以一十一年至十月九日亡。
现代文：皇甫麟举起刀准备自刎，末帝抱住他，因而相向大声痛哭。八日晚上，皇甫麟在建国楼的廊下向末帝进刀，末帝驾崩，皇甫麟随即自刎。
English: On the evening of the 8th, Emperor Fulin raised his sword and prepared to commit suicide. The last emperor hugged him, causing the two to weep loudly. On the evening of the 8th, Emperor Fulin stabbed the last emperor in the corridor of Jianguo Building. The last emperor died, and Emperor Fulin immediately committed suicide.

古文：唐帝初入东京，闻帝殂，怃然叹曰： 敌惠敌怨，不在后嗣。
现代文：天亮时，唐军攻打封丘门，王瓒相迎投降。唐庄宗李存勖入宫，末帝妃子郭氏号哭着迎拜。唐庄宗刚入汴京，听到末帝驾崩，怃然叹息说 ：对方的恩惠对方的仇怨，都不涉及他的后代。
English: At dawn, the Tang army attacked the Fengqiu Gate, and Wang Yixiang surrendered. Tangzhuangzong Li Cunxu entered the palace, and the last emperor's concubine Guo Shiqiao greeted him with tears. Tangzhuangzong had just entered Beijing when he heard that the last emperor had passed away, and he said with a loud sigh, "The other side's favors and the other side's grudges do not involve his descendants."

古文：朕与梁主十年对垒，恨不生见其面。 
现代文：我与梁主对阵十年，遗憾不能活着见他一面。 
English: I've been playing against Master Liang for ten years, and I regret not being able to see him alive.

古文：寻诏河南尹张全义收葬之，其首藏于太社。
现代文：即诏令河南尹张全义收葬末帝，将他首级藏在太社。
English: That is, he ordered Henan Yin Zhang Quan Yi to bury the last emperor and hide his head in Taisha.

