古文：人主之患在于信人，信人，则制于人。
现代文：君主的祸患在于相信别人。相信别人，就受到别人控制。
English: The bane of a prince is to trust others. To trust others is to be controlled by others.

古文：人臣之于其君，非有骨肉之亲也，缚于势而不得不事也。
现代文：臣子对于君主，没有骨肉之亲，只是迫于权势而不得不侍奉。
English: As far as the monarch is concerned, a vassal is not a flesh-and-blood relative, but is compelled by power to serve.

古文：故为人臣者，窥觇其君心也，无须臾之休，而人主怠傲处上，此世所以有劫君杀主也。
现代文：所以做臣子的，窥测君主的意图，没有一会儿停止过，而君主却懈怠傲慢地处于上位，这就是世上出现劫持杀害君主事件的原因。
English: That is why courtiers, spying on the intentions of the monarch, do not stop for a moment, while the monarch lazily and arrogantly takes the upper hand. This is the reason for the kidnapping and killing of monarchs in the world.

古文：为人主而大信其子，则奸臣得乘于子以成其私，故李兑传赵王而饿主父。
现代文：做君主而非常相信他的儿子，奸臣就能利用他的儿子来实现自己的私利，所以李兑辅助赵壬最终饿死了主父。
English: As a monarch, he believed in his son very much, and a treacherous vassal could use his son to achieve his own selfish interests, so Li Du assisted Zhao Ren and eventually starved his master to death.

古文：为人主而大信其妻，则奸臣得乘于妻以成其私，故优施传丽姬杀申生而立奚齐。
现代文：做君主而非常相信他的妻子，奸臣就能利用他的妻子来实现自己的私利，所以优施帮助丽姬杀死太子申生而改立奚齐。
English: As a monarch who believed in his wife very much, a treacherous vassal would be able to use his wife to achieve his own selfish interests, so You Shi helped Liji kill Prince Shen Sheng and replace him.

古文：夫以妻之近与子之亲而犹不可信，则其余无可信者矣。
现代文：即使是像妻子和儿子那样亲近的人还不可相信，其余人就没有可相信的了。
English: Even those as close as his wife and son are not to be trusted, and the rest are not to be believed.

古文：且万乘之主，千乘之君，后妃夫人、适子为太子者，或有欲其君之蚤死者。
现代文：再说，大大小小国家的君主，他们的原妻正配所生嫡子做了太子的，还有盼着自己的父君早死的。
English: Moreover, the monarchs of countries large and small, whose legitimate sons born to their former wives became princes, also hoped for their father's early death.

古文：何以知其然，夫妻者，非有骨肉之恩也，爱则亲，不爱则疏。
现代文：怎么知道会是这样的呢？妻子，没有骨肉的恩情，宠爱就亲近，不宠爱就疏远。
English: How did you know it would be like this? A wife, without the affection of flesh and blood, is close to her beloved, but distant if she does not love her beloved.

古文：语曰： 其母好者其子抱。 然则其为之反也，其母恶者其子释。
现代文：俗话说： 母亲美的，她的孩子受宠爱。 那么与此相反的话，就是母亲丑的，她的孩子被疏远。
English: As the saying goes: When a mother is beautiful, her children are loved, but when a mother is ugly, her children are shunned.

古文：丈夫年五十而好色未解也，妇人年三十而美色衰矣。
现代文：男子五十岁而好色之心不减弱，妇女三十岁美貌就衰减了。
English: A man's loveliness is not diminished at fifty; a woman's beauty is diminished at thirty.

古文：以衰美之妇人事好色之丈夫，则身见疏贱，而子疑不为后，此后妃夫人之所以冀其君之死者也。
现代文：用色衰的妇女侍奉好色的男子，自己就会被疏远卑视，而怀疑儿子不能成为继承人，这正是后妃夫人盼望君主早死的原因。
English: If you use a woman with an inferiority complex to serve a lustful man, you will be alienated and despised, and you will suspect that your son will not be able to become the heir. This is exactly the reason why the queen consort hopes for the early death of the monarch.

古文：唯母为后而子为主，则令无不行，禁无不止，男女之乐不减于先君，而擅万乘不疑，此鸩毒扼昧之所以用也。
现代文：只有当母亲做了太后而儿子做了君主以后，那时就会令无不行，禁无不止，男女乐事不减于先君在时，而独掌国家大权无疑，这正是用毒酒杀人、用勒索杀人事件产生的原因。
English: Only when the mother has become the empress dowager and the son has become the monarch, then there will be no limits, no prohibitions, no restrictions, no less fun for men and women than in the time of the former monarch, and there is no doubt that he will hold the power of the state. This is precisely the reason for the use of poisoned wine to kill people and the use of blackmail to kill people.

古文：故《桃左春秋》曰： 人主这疾死者不能处半。 ，人主弗知，则乱多资。
现代文：所以《桃左春秋》上说： 君主因病而死的不到半数。 君主不懂得这个道理，奸臣作乱就有了更多的凭借。
English: Therefore, it is said in "Mozu Shunju": Less than half of the monarchs die from illness. If the monarch does not understand this principle, the treacherous vassals will have more leverage to make trouble.

古文：故曰：利君死者众，则人主危。
现代文：所以说，认为君主死亡对自己有利的人多，君主就危险。
English: Therefore, if many people think that the death of the monarch is beneficial to them, the monarch is in danger.

古文：故王良爱马，越王勾践爱人，为战与驰。
现代文：所以王良爱马，越王勾践爱民，就是为了打仗和奔驰。
English: Therefore, Wang Liang loved horses and loved the people more than Wang Guozhang, just for the sake of fighting and galloping.

古文：医善吮人之伤，含人之血，非骨肉之亲也，利所加也。
现代文：医生善于吸吮病人的伤口，口含病人的污血，不是因为有骨肉之亲，而是因为利益所在。
English: The doctor is good at sucking the wound of the patient, the mouth contains the blood of the patient, not because of the flesh and blood, but because of the interests.

古文：故与人成舆，则欲人之富贵；匠人成棺，则欲人之夭死也。
现代文：所以车匠造好车子，就希望别人富贵；棺材匠做好棺材，就希望别人早死。
English: Therefore, if a car maker makes a good car, he hopes that others will be rich; if a coffin maker makes a good coffin, he hopes that others will die early.

古文：非舆人仁而匠人贼也，人不贵，则舆不售；人不死，则棺不买。
现代文：并不是车匠仁慈而棺材匠狠毒：别人不富贵，车子就卖不掉；别人不死，棺材就没人买。
English: It's not that car makers are benevolent and coffin makers are vicious: if you're not rich, you can't sell your car; if you don't die, no one will buy your coffin.

古文：情非憎人也，利在人之死也，故后妃、夫人太子之党成而欲君之死也，君不死，则势不重。
现代文：本意并非憎恨别人，而是利益就在别人的死亡上。所以后妃夫人、太了的私党结成了就会希望君主早死；如果君主不死，自己权势就不大。
English: The intention is not to hate others, but to benefit from the death of others. Therefore, the queen consort, too much of a private party, will hope for the early death of the monarch; if the monarch does not die, his power will not be great.

古文：情非憎君也，利在君之死也。
现代文：本意并非憎恨君主，而是利益就在君主的死亡上。
English: The intention was not to hate the monarch, but to profit from his death.

古文：故人主不可以不加心于利己死者。
现代文：所以君主不能不留心那些利在自己死亡的人。
English: So the monarch cannot help but be aware of those who would profit from his death.

古文：故日月晕围于外，其贼在内，备其所憎，祸在所爱。
现代文：所以日月外面有白色光圈环绕，毛病就在内部；防备自己所憎恨的人，祸害却来自所亲爱的人。
English: Therefore, the sun and moon are surrounded by a white halo on the outside, and the trouble is on the inside; beware of those you hate, but evil comes from those you love.

古文：是故明王不举不参之事，不食非常之食；远听而近视，以审内外之失，省同异之言以知朋党之分，偶参伍之验以责陈言之实；执后以应前，按法以治众，众端以参观。士无幸赏，无逾行，杀必当，罪不赦，则奸邪无所容其私。
现代文：所以明君不做没有验证过的事情，不吃不寻常的食物；打听远处的情况，观察身边的事情，从而考察朝廷内外的过失；研究相同的和不同的言论，从而了解朋党的区分，对比通过事实所作曲验证，从而责求臣下陈言的可靠性；拿事后的结果来对照事先的言行，按照法令来治理民众，根据各种情况来检验观察；官吏没有侥幸受赏的，没有违法行事的；诛杀的一定得当，有罪的不予赦免。这样一来，奸邪行为就无处容身了。
English: Therefore, Ming Jun does not do things that have not been verified, does not eat unusual food; inquires about the situation in the distance, observes the things around him, so as to examine the faults inside and outside the imperial court; studies the same and different statements, so as to understand the distinction between the friends and the party, compares and verifies through the composition of the facts, so as to require the reliability of the vassals' statements; uses the results of the event to compare the words and deeds in advance, governs the people according to the laws, and examines the observation according to various situations; officials are not rewarded by chance, and do not act illegally; the killing must be proper, and the

古文：徭役多则民苦，民苦则权势起，权势起则复除重，复除重则贵人富。苦民以富贵人，起势以藉人臣，非天下长利也。
现代文：徭役多，百姓就困苦；百姓困苦，臣下势力就发展起来；臣下势力发展起来，免除谣役和赋税的人就增多；免除徭役和赋税的人增多了，权贵就富有起来，君主坑害百姓而使权贵富有，就给臣下扩张势力提供了条件，这不符合国家的长远利益。
English: If there are more eunuchs, the people will suffer; if the people suffer, the power of the vassals will grow; if the power of the vassals grows, the number of people exempt from eunuchs and taxes will increase; if the number of people exempt from eunuchs and taxes increases, the powerful will become rich; if the monarch harms the people and makes the powerful rich, it will provide the conditions for the vassals to expand their power, which is not in line with the long-term interests of the country.

古文：故曰：徭役少则民安，民安则下无重权，下无重权则权势灭，权势灭则德在上矣。
现代文：所以说，徭役轻，百姓就安定；百姓安定，臣下就没有大权；臣下没有大权，他们的势力就消灭了；他们的势力消灭了，恩惠就全归君主了。
English: Therefore, it is said that if the yakuza is light, the people will be stable; if the people are stable, the vassals will not have great power; if the vassals do not have great power, their power will be destroyed; if their power is destroyed, the favor will all go to the monarch.

古文：今夫水之胜火亦明矣，然而釜鬵间之，水煎沸竭尽其上，而火得炽盛焚其下，水失其所以胜者矣。
现代文：现在看来，水能灭火的道理也够明白的了，然而用锅子把水和火隔开，水在上面沸腾以致烧干，而火在下面却烧得非常旺盛，这是因为水失去了灭火的条件。
English: Now it seems that the principle that water can extinguish fire is also quite clear. However, if water and fire are separated by a pan, the water boils on top and dries out, while the fire burns very vigorously below, this is because the water has lost the conditions for extinguishing fire.

古文：今夫治之禁奸又明于此，然法守之臣为釜鬵之行，则法独明于胸中，而已失其所以禁奸者矣。
现代文：现在拿治国措施中的禁止奸邪来说，道理比这更加明白了，但执法大臣起了锅子那样的阻隔作用，那么，法律只在君主心里明白，却已经失去了它得以禁奸的作用了。
English: Now, in the case of the prohibition of adultery in the measures of state governance, the reason is more clear than this, but the minister of law enforcement has played a blocking role like a pot, then, the law is only understood in the heart of the monarch, but it has lost its role of being able to prohibit adultery.

古文：上古之传言，《春秋》所记，犯法为逆以成大奸者，未尝不从尊贵之臣也。
现代文：在上古的传说中，在史书的记载里，违犯法律、叛逆作乱而篡权夺位的人，从没有不属于尊贵大臣的。
English: In the legends of the ancients, in the records of the history books, there has never been anyone who usurped power by violating the law, rebelling and creating turmoil, who did not belong to the honorable minister.

古文：然而法令之所以备，刑罚之所以诛，常于卑贱，是以其民绝望，无所告诉。
现代文：这样一来，法令要防备的，刑罚要惩办的，通常是地位低贱的人，因此百姓感到绝望，无处可去申诉冤屈。
English: As a result, those who should be protected by laws and punished by penalties are usually low-ranking people, so the people feel desperate and have nowhere to go to complain about their grievances.

古文：大臣比周，蔽上为一，阴相善而阳相恶，以示无私，相为耳目，以候主隙，人主掩蔽，无道得闻，有主名而无实，臣专法而行之，周天子是也。
现代文：大臣相互勾结，串通一气蒙骗君主，暗地里互相要好，表面上相互憎恶，以便表示没有私情。他们互相作为耳目，等待着钻君主的空子。君主受着蒙蔽，无从了解真情，有君主之名而无君主之实，大臣垄断法令而独断专行；周天子正是这样。
English: The ministers collude with each other, conspire to deceive the monarch, secretly like each other, and hate each other on the surface in order to show that they have no personal feelings. They use each other as eyes and ears, waiting to exploit the monarch's loophole. The monarch is blinded, unable to understand the truth, has the name of the monarch but not the reality of the monarch, and ministers monopolize laws and regulations and arbitrarily carry them out; this is exactly what Zhou Tianzi did.

古文：偏借其权势，则上下易位矣，此言人臣之不可借权势。
现代文：君主权势旁落，上下也就换了位置；这就是说，君主不能把自己的权势让给臣下。
English: When the power of the sovereign falls to one side, the upper and lower powers change places; that is to say, the sovereign cannot give up his power to his subjects.

