古文：黄帝问曰：六化六变，胜复淫治，甘苦辛咸酸淡先后，余知之矣。
现代文：黄帝问道：六气的正常生化和异常生化，胜气复气等淫邪致病及其主治原则，甘苦辛咸酸淡诸气味所化的情况，我已经知道了。
English: Huangdi asked: I already know about the normal and abnormal biochemistry of the six qi, the causes of diseases and their treatment principles, and the transformation of sweet, bitter, salty, sour and light odors.

古文：夫五运之化，或从天气，或逆天气，或从天气而逆地气，或从地气而逆天气，或相得，或不相得，余未能明其事。
现代文：关于五运主岁的气化，或与司天之气相顺，或与司天之气相逆，或与司天之气相顺而与在泉之气相逆，或与在泉之气相顺而与司天之气相逆，或主气客气相生，或主气客气相制，我还未能完全明了其中的道理。
English: I still haven't fully understood the reason for the transformation of the five auspicious years into gaseous years, which is either in harmony with the qi of the heaven, or in opposition to the qi of the heaven, or in harmony with the qi of the heaven and in opposition to the qi of the spring, or in harmony with the qi of the spring and in opposition to the qi of the heaven, or in harmony with the qi of the spring and in opposition to the qi of the heaven, or in harmony with the qi of the heaven and in opposition to the qi of the heaven, or in harmony with the qi of the heaven and in opposition to the q

古文：欲通天之纪，从地之理，和其运，调其化，使上下合德，无相夺伦，天地升降，不失其宜，五运宣行，勿乖其政，调之正味，从逆奈何？
现代文：我想通晓天气运行的纲纪，遵从地气变化的道理，调和五运的生成变化规律，使司天、在泉之气的功能相互应合，不要破坏各自的正常秩序，天地之气的升降不要失去正常规律，五运之气的布化运行，不致违背其应时的政令，根据运气的顺逆情况调之以五味，这些应当怎样才能做到呢？
English: I want to be familiar with the principles of weather operation, follow the principle of natural gas changes, and harmonize the generation and change laws of the five movements, so that the functions of the heaven and the spring of the spring of the spring of the spring of the spring of the spring of the spring of the spring of the spring of the spring of the spring of the spring of the spring of the spring of the spring of the spring of the spring of the spring of the spring of the spring of the spring of the spring of the spring of the spring of the spring of the spring of the spring of the spring of the spring of the spring of the spring of the spring of the spring of the spring of the spring of the spring

古文：岐伯稽首再拜对曰：昭乎哉问也！
现代文：岐伯拜了两拜回答道：这个问题提的很高明啊！
English: Qibo prayed for two days and answered: This question is very clever!

古文：此天地之纲纪，变化之渊源，非圣帝孰能穷其至理欤！
现代文：这是有关天气和地气问题的一个总纲，是万物变化的本源，若非圣明之帝，谁能够穷尽这些至理要道呢！
English: This is a summary of the weather and geomagnetic problems, is the source of change in all things, if not the Holy Emperor, who can exhaust these essentials!

古文：臣虽不敏，请陈其道，令终不灭，久而不易。
现代文：我对这个问题虽然领会不深，愿意讲述其中的道理，使它永远不致灭绝，能长期流传而不被更改。
English: Although I do not have a deep understanding of this issue, I am willing to tell the truth about it, so that it will never become extinct and can be passed on for a long time without being changed.

古文：帝曰：愿夫子推而次之，从其类序，分其部主，别其宗司，昭其气数，明其正化，可得闻乎？
现代文：黄帝说：希望先生把这些道理进一步推演，使其更加条理，根据天干地支的属类和排列的顺序，分析司天、在泉等所主的部位，分别每年主岁之气与各步之气，明了司天年运所属之气与常数，及正化邪化的变化情况等，可以听你进一步讲述吗？
English: Huang Di said: I hope that you can further deduce these principles and make them more systematic. According to the genera and order of arrangement of the heavenly stems, analyze the lord of the day, the spring and other master parts, respectively, the year's main wind and the wind of each step, understand the wind and constant of the day's year, and the changes in the positive and evil, etc. Can you listen to further explanation?

古文：岐伯曰：先立其年以明其气，金木水火土运行之数，寒暑燥湿风火临御之化，则天道可见，民气可调，阴阳卷舒，近而无惑，数之可数者，请遂言之。
现代文：岐伯说；首先要确立纪年的天干，明了主岁之气与金木水火土五运值年之数；然后根据地支，明了司天、在泉之气的寒暑燥湿风火六气的加临情况，这样自然界的变化规律就可以显露出来，人们就可以根据天道的规律调养身体，阴阳之气盛衰的道理也就浅近易知，不再疑惑。
English: Qibo said: First of all, it is necessary to establish the heavenly stem of the year, and understand the number of years of the main year's qi and the value of the five elements of gold, wood, water, fire and earth. Then, according to the branch of the earth, it is necessary to understand the position of the heavens, and the cold, hot, dry, humid, windy and fiery conditions of the spring qi. In this way, the laws of change in the natural world can be revealed, and people can raise their bodies according to the laws of the heavenly path. The reason for the rise and fall of the yin and yang qi is also easy to know, and

古文：帝曰：太阳之政奈何？
现代文：关于它的一般礼数可以加以推数的，我尽量讲给你听。
English: I'll do my best to tell you about its general number of salutations, which can be extrapolated.

古文：岐伯曰：辰戌之纪也。
现代文：黄帝说：太阳寒水值年的施政情况是怎样的呢？
English: Huang Di said: What is the situation of governance in the year of the sun and cold water?

古文：太阳，太角，太阴。壬辰，壬戌。
现代文：岐伯说：太阳寒水值年的施政在辰年与戌年。壬辰年、壬戌年。
English: Qibo said: The governance of the solar cold water year is in the year of the dragon and the year of the rooster. The year of the rooster and the year of the rooster.

古文：其运风，其化鸣紊启拆，其变振拉摧拔，其病眩、掉、目瞑。
现代文：太阳寒水司天，太阴湿土在泉。丁壬为木运，壬为阳年，故运为太角。
English: The sun and cold water rule the day, and the damp soil in the spring is too gloomy. Ding Ren is the year of the wood, Ren is the year of the sun, and hence the year of the cape.

古文：太角、少徵、太宫、少商、太羽。太阳，太徵，太阴。
现代文：客运与主运之气相同，气得正化。戊辰、戊戌年。太阳寒水司天，太阴湿土在泉。
English: Passenger transport is the same gas as the main transport, and the gas is normalized. Bosun, Bosun. The sun and cold water are in the sky, and it is too cloudy and wet in the spring.

古文：戊辰，戊戌，同正徵。
现代文：戊癸为火运，戊为阳年，故运为太徵。
English: The Year of the Fire Monkey, the Year of the Sun Monkey, and the Year of the Dragon Monkey.

古文：其运热，其化暄暑郁燠，其变炎烈沸腾，其病热郁。
现代文：火运虽然太过，但为司天之寒水所克，则此二年与火运平气相同。火运之气为热，其正常气化为温暑郁热，其反常变化为火炎沸腾，其致病为热邪郁滞。
English: Although the fire weather is too extreme, it is overcome by the cold water of the day, so this two years is the same as the fire weather. The fire weather is hot, its normal gasification is warm and hot, its abnormal change is hot and boiling, and its disease is fever and depression.

古文：太徵、少宫、太商、少羽、少角。
现代文：客运五步：初之运太徵，二之运少宫，三之运太商，四之运少羽，终之运太角。
English: There are five steps in passenger transportation: the first step is to recruit passengers, the second step is to attract young people, the third step is to attract merchants, the fourth step is to attract young people, and the last step is to attract tourists.

古文：太阳，太宫，太阴。甲辰岁会，甲戌岁会。
现代文：主运五步：初之运少角，二之运太徵，三之运少宫，四之运太商，终之运少羽。甲辰年、甲戌年，此二年既是岁会，又是同天符。
English: There are five steps in the main yun: the first is the yun shohaku, the second is the yun taechu, the third is the yun shogu, the fourth is the yun taishang, and the last is the yun shoyu. In the year of the rooster and the rooster, these two years are both the year-end meeting and the same day.

古文：其运阴埃，其化柔润重泽，其变震惊飘骤，其病湿、下重。
现代文：太阳寒水司天，太阴湿土在泉。甲已为土运，甲为阳年，故运为太宫。土运之气为阴雨，其正常气化为柔软、厚重、润泽，其反常变化为飘雨急骤、震撼、惊骇，其致病为湿邪下重。
English: The sun and cold water control the sky, and the earth is too cloudy and wet to be a spring. A is the earth movement, A is the year of the sun, so the movement is Tai Gong. The air of the earth movement is cloudy rain, its normal gasification is soft, thick and moist, its abnormal change is sudden rain, shock and shock, and its disease is heavy wetness.

古文：太宫、少商、太羽、太角、少徵。
现代文：客运五步：初之运太宫，二之运少商，三之运太羽，四之运少角，终之运太徵。
English: There are five steps in passenger transportation: the first step is to transport the palace, the second step is to transport the merchants, the third step is to transport the feathers, the fourth step is to transport the horns, and the last step is to transport the recruitment.

古文：太阳，太商，太阴。庚辰，庚戌。
现代文：主运五步：初之运太角，二之运少徵，三之运太宫，四之运少商，终之运太羽。庚辰年、庚戌年。
English: There are five steps in the main transport: the first transport is Taekwondo, the second transport is Little Recruit, the third transport is Taegu, the fourth transport is Little Trader, and the last transport is Taewu.

古文：其运凉，其化雾露萧飋，其变肃杀凋零，其病燥、背瞀、胷满。
现代文：太阳寒水司天，太阴湿土在泉。乙庚为金运，庚为阳年，故运为太商。金运之气为凉，其正常气化为雾露、萧瑟，其反常变化为肃杀、凋零，其致病为津液干燥、背沉重、胸满闷。
English: The sun and cold water rule the sky, and the earth is too cloudy and wet to be a spring. The year of the rooster is the year of the rooster, and the year of the rooster is the year of the rooster, and the year of the rooster is the year of the rooster, and the year of the rooster is the year of the rooster, and the year of the rooster is the year of the rooster, and the year of the rooster is the year of the rooster, and the year of the rooster is the year of the rooster, and the year of the rooster is the year of the rooster.

古文：太商、少羽、少角、太徵、少宫。
现代文：客运五步：初之运太商，二之运少羽，三之运太角，四之运少徵，终之运太宫。
English: There are five steps in passenger transportation: the first step is to transport too many passengers, the second step is to transport too few passengers, the third step is to transport too few passengers, the fourth step is to transport too few passengers, and the last step is to transport too few passengers.

古文：太阳，太羽，太阴。丙辰天符，丙戌天符。
现代文：主运五步：初之运少角，二之运太徵，三之运少宫，四之运太商，终之运少羽。丙辰年、丙戌年，此二年均为天符。
English: There are five steps in the main yun: the first is the yun shohaku, the second is the yun taechu, the third is the yun shogu, the fourth is the yun taishang, and the last is the yun shoyu.

古文：其运寒，其化凝惨凛冽，其变冰雪霜雹，其病大寒留于溪谷。
现代文：太阳寒水司天，太阴湿土在泉。丙辛为水运，丙为阳年，故运为太羽。水运之气寒冷肃杀，其正常气化为寒风凝结、凄惨、凛冽，其反常变化为冰雪霜雹，其致病为大寒留滞于筋肉关节空隙处。
English: The sun and cold water rule the day, and the earth is too cloudy and wet to be a spring. Hsin is the year of water transport, C is the year of the sun, and yang is the year of the water transport. The air of the water transport is cold and suffocating, and its normal gasification is cold wind condensation, miserable and harsh, and its abnormal change is ice and snow frost, and its cause of illness is the cold remaining in the muscle joint space.

古文：太羽、太角、少徵、太宫、少商。
现代文：客运五步：初之运太羽，二之运少角，三之运太徵，四之运少宫，终之运太商。
English: There are five steps in passenger transportation: the first step is to transport passengers, the second step is to transport passengers, the third step is to recruit passengers, the fourth step is to transport passengers, and the last step is to transport passengers.

古文：凡此太阳司天之政，气化运行先天，天气肃，地气静，寒临太虚，阳气不令，水土合德，上应辰星、镇星。
现代文：主运五步：初之运太角，二之运少徵，三之运太宫，四之运少商，终之运太羽。凡此辰年、戌年太阳司天之政，其气太过，先天时而至，太阳寒水司天，其气肃历，太阴湿土在泉，其气沉静，寒水之气临于太空，阳气不得施令，水土二气相合，以为功德，上应于水星与土星之光较强。
English: The five steps of the main transport: the first transport is too angular, the second transport is too small, the third transport is too palace, the fourth transport is too small, and the last transport is too feather. In this year and leap year, the sun rules the government of heaven, its qi is too much, it comes from the day before yesterday, the sun cold water rules the sky, its qi is solemn, it is too cloudy and wet in the spring, its qi is quiet, the cold water qi is in space, the yang qi cannot command, the water and earth qi are compatible, it is considered to be a merit, and the light of Mercury and Saturn

古文：其谷玄、黅，其政肃，其令徐。
现代文：其在谷类，应于黑色与黄色者生长良好，其司天之政严肃，其在泉之令徐缓。
English: In cereals, it should grow well in blacks and yellows, its government should be serious, and its rise should be slow.

古文：寒政大举，泽无阳焰，则火发待时。
现代文：由于寒水之政大起，阳气不得伸张，故湖泽中不见阳热的气焰升腾，火气则需等到其相应之时方能舒发。
English: Due to the cold water policy, the yang cannot expand, so there is no yang flame rising in the lake, and the fire needs to wait until its corresponding time before it can be relieved.

古文：少阳中治，时雨乃涯，止极雨散，还于太阴，云朝北极，湿化乃布，泽流万物，寒敷于上，雷动于下，寒湿之气，持于气交。
现代文：主气少阳居为三之气，因火气过胜，则应时之雨水穷尽不降；四之气在泉用事，雨水止极而云散，气还于太阴主令之时，云会于北极雨府之处，湿气乃得布化，万物为之润泽，太阳寒气布于高空，少阴雷火动而在下，寒湿之气则持续于气交之中。
English: The principal air is the three airs. As the fire air prevails, the rain of the time is exhausted and does not fall. The four airs are used in the spring, the rain stops and the clouds disperse. The air is also at the time of the yin and yang, the clouds will be in the arctic rain palace, the moisture will be clothed, and everything will be moisturized. The sun's cold air is spread high in the sky, the yin and yang are fiery and down, and the cold and wet air continues in the air exchange.

古文：民病寒湿，发肌肉萎、足痿不收、濡泻、血溢。
现代文：人们易患寒湿证，病发肌肉痿弱、两足痿软不收、大便泄泻、血液外溢等症。
English: People are prone to cold and wet symptoms, including weak muscles, limp legs, diarrhea, and blood leakage.

古文：初之气，地气迁，气乃大温，草乃早荣，民乃厉，温病乃作，身热、头痛、呕吐、肌腠疮疡。
现代文：初之气，主气为厥阴风木，客气为少阳相火，上年在泉之气迁移退位，温气大行，草木繁荣较早。人们易患时疫疠病，温热病发作，病发身热、头痛、呕吐、肌肤疮疡等症。
English: At the beginning of the year, the predominant qi was Jueyin wind and trees, and the minor qi was Shaoyang phase fire. Last year, the qi of the spring migrated and abdicated, the warm qi prevailed, and the plants and trees flourished earlier. People are susceptible to epidemic rickets, the onset of hyperthermia, the onset of fever, headache, vomiting, skin sores, and other diseases.

古文：二之气，大凉反至，民乃惨，草乃遇寒，火气遂抑。
现代文：二之气，主气为少阴君火，客气为阳明燥金，故凉气反而大行，阳气不得舒发，人们感到凄惨，草木因遇到寒凉之气，也不易生长，火气受到抑制。
English: The second qi, the main qi is less yin and more fire, the courtesy qi is more yang and more dry gold, so the cool qi prevails instead, the yang qi cannot be relieved, people feel miserable, the plants are not easy to grow due to the cold qi, and the fire qi is suppressed.

古文：民病气郁中满，寒乃始。
现代文：人们易患肝气郁而不舒，腹中胀满等病，寒气开始发生。
English: People are prone to liver depression and discomfort, abdominal distension and other diseases, and cold air begins to occur.

古文：三之气，天政布，寒气行，雨乃降。
现代文：三之气，主气为少阳相火，客气为太阳寒水，司天之气布其政令，寒气大行，雨乃降下。
English: There are three kinds of qi. The main qi is the lesser yang phase fire, the minor qi is the rising sun cold water, the chief qi is the ruling qi, the cold is rampant, and the rain is falling.

古文：民病寒，反热中、痈疽、注下、心热、瞀闷，不治者死。
现代文：人们易患寒病于外、热聚于内的病证，病发痈疽、下痢如注、心热、烦闷等病症，热郁于内易伤心神，若不及时治疗病多死亡。
English: People are prone to suffer from cold outside and hot inside diseases, such as gangrene, diarrhea, heartburn, and boredom, and if they are not treated in time, they will die.

古文：四之气，风湿交争，风化为雨，乃长，乃化，乃成。
现代文：四之气，主气为太阴湿土，客气为厥阴风木，风湿二气，交争于气交，湿得风气乃化为雨，万物乃得盛长、化育、成熟。
English: The four qi, the main qi is yin and damp soil, the courtesy qi is yin and windy trees, the two qi are rheumatic, and they fight with each other in the air, the wet qi turns into rain, and everything grows, grows and matures.

古文：民病大热，少气、肌肉萎、足痿、注下、赤白。
现代文：人们易患大热、少气、肌肉痿弱、两足痿软、下痢赤白等病。
English: People are prone to suffer from high fever, shortness of breath, weak muscles, weak legs, diarrhea and other diseases.

古文：五之气，阳复化，草乃长，乃化，乃成。民乃舒。
现代文：五之气，主气为阳明燥金，客气为少阴君火，阳气重新施化，草木之类又得盛长、化育而成熟，人们感到舒畅无病。
English: The five qi, the main qi is the sun, the light and the gold, the polite qi is the lesser yin and the greater fire, the yang qi is reincarnated, and the plants and trees are flourishing, growing and maturing, and people feel comfortable and disease-free.

古文：终之气，地气正，湿令行，阴凝太虚，埃昏郊野。
现代文：终之气，主气为太阳寒水，客气为太阴湿土，在泉之气，得其政令，湿气大行，阴寒之气凝集太空，尘埃昏暗，笼罩郊野。
English: The last gas, the main gas is the sun and cold water, the second gas is too dark and wet soil, the gas in the spring gets its order, the humidity is rampant, the cold gas condenses in space, the dust is dark and covers the countryside.

古文：民乃惨凄，寒风以至，反者孕乃死。
现代文：人们感到凄惨，若寒风骤至，则土气不胜，脾不得长养，此时妊娠多流产。
English: People feel miserable. If a cold wind suddenly arrives, then the local spirit is invincible, the spleen cannot be nourished, and at this time, pregnancy is more likely to miscarry.

古文：必折其郁气，先资其化源，抑其运气，扶其不胜，无使暴过而生其疾，食岁谷以全其真，避虚邪以安其正，故岁宜苦以燥之温之。
现代文：凡此太阳寒水司天之年，则火气郁而不行，必须折减其政郁之胜气，资助不胜之气，不要使运气太过而发生疾病，应当食用得岁气的谷类以保全真气，避免虚邪贼风以安定正气，宜食苦味以泻火，以燥治湿，以温治寒。
English: In this year of the sun and cold water, it is not possible for the fire spirit to be depressed. It is necessary to reduce the winning spirit of the political depression, support the losing spirit, do not make the luck too much and cause disease. It is necessary to eat the cereals that have the year spirit to preserve the true spirit, avoid the false and evil wind to stabilize the righteous spirit, and eat the bitterness to dampen the fire, treat the dryness with moisture, and treat the cold with warmth.

古文：适气同异，多少制之，同寒湿者燥热化，异寒湿者燥湿化，故同者多之，异者少之，用寒远寒，用凉远凉，用温远温，用热远热，食宜同法。
现代文：根据年运与司天在泉阴阳五行之气的同异裁定药食性味的多少而制之，运与气寒湿相同者燥热，其气强，可多用制其气之品；运与气寒湿不同者燥湿，其气微，可少用制其气之品。凡用寒性药品时，应避开寒气主令之时；用凉性药品时，应避开凉气主令之时；用温性药品时，应避开温气主令之时；用热性药品时，应避开热气主令之时，用饮食调养时，也应遵照这个原则，这是就一般情况而言。
English: According to the similarities and differences between the annual and seasonal weather and the five elements of the spring, yin, yang and qi, the amount of medicinal and edible flavors is determined. If the weather is the same as the cold and wet weather, it is hot and dry, and its qi is strong, and its qi products can be used more; if the weather is different from the cold and wet weather, it is dry and wet, and its qi is weak, and its qi products can be used less. When using cold medicines, avoid the cold weather; when using cool medicines, avoid the cool weather; when using warm medicines, avoid the warm weather; when using hot medicines, avoid the hot

古文：有假者反常。
现代文：若气候有反常变化时，就不必拘守这一原则。
English: If there are abnormal changes in the climate, there is no need to adhere to this principle.

古文：反是者病，所谓时也。帝曰：善。
现代文：若不遵守上述这些规律，就会导致疾病的发生，就是说要根据四时气候变化的具体情况，决定治疗原则。黄帝说：好。
English: If the above-mentioned rules are not observed, it will lead to the occurrence of disease, that is to say, the treatment principle should be determined according to the specific conditions of the four-hour climate change. Huang Di said: Good.

古文：阳明之政奈何？
现代文：阳明燥金值年的施政情况是怎样的呢？
English: What is the political situation in the year of Yang Ming's death?

古文：岐伯曰：卯酉之纪也。
现代文：岐伯说：阳明燥金施政在卯年与酉年。
English: Qi Bo said, "Yang Ming's gold-dust policy was implemented in the Year of the Rooster and the Year of the Rooster.

古文：阳明，少角，少阴，清热胜复同，同正商。丁卯岁会，丁酉。
现代文：丁卯年，为岁会；丁酉年。阳明燥金司天，少阴君火在泉。丁壬为木运，丁为阴年，故运为少角。
English: In the year of Dingwu, it is the Year of the Horse; in the year of Dingwu, it is the Year of the Horse; in the year of Yangming, it is the Year of the Rooster; in the year of Yin, it is the Year of the Dog; in the year of Yin, it is the Year of the Horse; in the year of Yin, it is the Year of the Horse; in the year of Yin, it is the Year of the Horse; in the year of Yin, it is the Year of the Horse.

古文：其运风清热。少角、太徵、少宫、太商、少羽。阳明，少徵，少阴，寒雨胜复同，同正商。
现代文：木运不及，则克我之金的清气乃为胜气，胜气之后，则我生之火的热来复，此二年胜复之气相同。由于木运不及，司天之燥金胜之，则金兼木化，反得其政，故同金运平气。
English: If the wood is not lucky, then the clear air of my gold is the winning air. After the winning air, the heat of my fire comes back. This is the same as the winning air of the past two years. Since the wood is not lucky, and the dry air of the heaven is the winning air, the gold is also wooded, but it has its own power, so it is calm with the gold.

古文：癸卯，癸酉。
现代文：凡此二年，运气为风，胜气为清，复气为热。
English: In the past two years, luck has been the wind, victory the clear air, and victory the heat.

古文：其运热寒雨。少徵、太宫、少商、太羽、太角。
现代文：客运五步：初之运少角，二之运太徵，三之运少宫，四之运太商，终之运少羽。
English: There are five steps in passenger transportation: the first step is to transport fewer people, the second step is to transport more people, the third step is to transport fewer people, the fourth step is to transport more people, and the last step is to transport fewer people.

古文：阳明，少宫，少阴，风凉胜复同。
现代文：主运五步与客运相同，起于少角，终于少羽。客运与主运之气相同，气得正化。
English: The five steps of the main transport are the same as the passenger transport, starting from a few corners and ending with a few feathers. The passenger transport is the same as the main transport, and the gas is normalized.

古文：己卯，己酉。
现代文：癸卯年、癸酉年，此二年俱为同岁会。
English: In the year of the rooster and in the year of the rooster, these two years are the same age group.

古文：其运雨风凉。
现代文：阳明燥金司天，少阴君火在泉。
English: The sun shines brightly in the morning, and the sun shines brightly in the evening.

古文：少宫、太商、少羽、少角、太徵。
现代文：戌癸为火运，癸为阴年，故运少徵。
English: is a fire year,  is a lunar year, so there is less luck.

古文：阳明，少商，少阴，热寒胜复同，同正商。
现代文：火运不及，则克我之水的寒气乃为胜气，胜气之后，则我生之土的雨气来复，此二年胜复之气相同。
English: If the fire is not lucky, then the coldness of my water is the winning air, and after the winning air, the rain of my native land comes back, and the winning air of these two years is the same.

古文：乙卯天符，乙酉岁会、太一天符，其运凉热寒。
现代文：由于火运不及，无力克金，司天之金气得政，故同金运平气。凡此二年，运气为热，胜气为寒，复气为雨。
English: Due to the fact that the fire luck is not enough, it is not able to beat the gold, and the Siten's gold energy is high, so it is flat with the gold luck. In these two years, the luck is hot, the victory is cold, and the victory is rain.

古文：少商、太羽、太角、少徵、太宫。
现代文：客运五步：初之运少徵，二之运太宫，三之运少商，四之运太羽，终之运少角。
English: There are five steps in passenger transportation: the first step is less recruitment, the second step is less palace, the third step is less merchants, the fourth step is less feathers, and the last step is less horns.

古文：阳明，少羽，少阴，雨风胜复同。
现代文：主运五步：初之运太角，二之运少徵，三之运太宫，四之运少商，终之运太羽。
English: There are five steps in the main transport: the first is the transport to Taicang, the second is the transport to Xiaoqiao, the third is the transport to Taigu, the fourth is the transport to Xiaoshan, and the last is the transport to Taiyu.

古文：辛卯，少宫同。
现代文：己卯年、己酉年。
English: In the year of the dog, in the year of the rooster.

古文：辛酉、辛卯，其运寒雨风。
现代文：阳明燥金司天，少阴君火在泉。甲已为土运，已为阴年，故运为少宫。
English: The sun is shining brightly, the gold is shining brightly, and the young yin is on fire. The year A has been the year of soil movement, and the year has been the year of yin, so the youth movement is the young palace.

古文：少羽、少角、太徵、少宫、太商。
现代文：土运不及，则克我之木的风气乃为胜气，胜气之后，则我生之金的凉气来复，此二年胜复之气相同。
English: If the fortune of the country is not good, then the spirit of the tree of victory is the spirit of victory. After the spirit of victory, the coolness of the gold of my birth comes back. The spirit of victory in these two years is the same.

古文：凡此阳明司天之政，气化运行后天，天气急，地气明，阳专其令，炎暑大行，物燥以坚，淳风乃治，风燥横逆，流于气交，多阳少阴，云趋雨府，湿化乃敷，燥极而泽。
现代文：凡此二年，运气为雨，胜气为风，复气为凉。
English: In the past two years, the luck is rain, the wind is wind, and the cold is cold.

古文：其谷白、丹，间谷命太者，其耗白甲品羽，金火合德，上应太白、荧惑。
现代文：客运五步：初之运少宫，二之运太商，三之运少羽，四之运太角，终之运少徵。
English: There are five steps in passenger transportation: the first step is to transport a small palace, the second step is to transport a large merchant, the third step is to transport a small feather, the fourth step is to transport a large horn, and the last step is to transport a small number.

古文：其政切，其令暴，蛰虫乃见，流水不冰。
现代文：其司天之政急切，其在泉之令急暴，蛰虫不欲归藏，流水不得结冰。
English: He who directs the affairs of heaven is in a hurry, he who directs the springs is violent, the maggots do not want to hide, and the running water cannot freeze.

古文：民病咳、嗌塞、寒热、发暴、振栗、癃闭。
现代文：人们易患咳嗽，咽喉肿塞，寒热发作急暴，振动寒溧，大小便不通畅等病。
English: People are prone to coughs, throat congestion, sudden attacks of cold and fever, shivering chills, incontinence and other diseases.

古文：清先而劲，毛虫乃死，热后而暴，介虫乃殃，其发暴，胜复之作，扰而大乱，清热之气，持于气交。
现代文：如果燥金清凉之气早至而急切，则属木的毛虫类乃死，如在泉之热气后至而急暴，则属金的介虫类乃受灾殃。胜气与复气发作急暴，正常的气候，被扰乱而不定，司天之清气与在泉之热气，持续于气交之内。
English: If the dry and cool air arrives early and is urgent, then the caterpillars of the wood are dead, if the hot air of the spring comes after the sudden storm, then the insects of the gold are plagued. The wind of victory and the wind of rebirth have a sudden storm, the normal climate is disturbed and uncertain, and the clear air of the sky and the hot air in the spring continue to be in the air.

古文：初之气，地气迁，阴始凝，气始肃，水乃冰，寒雨化。
现代文：初之气，主气为厥阴风木，客气为太阴湿土，上年在泉之气迁移退位，阳明司天燥金用事，阴气开始凝集，天气肃历，水乃结成冰，寒水之气化。
English: At the beginning of the year, the main qi was Jueyin wind and trees, and the secondary qi was too dark and wet soil. Last year, the qi of the spring migrated and abdicated, and the yang mingled with the gold, and the negative qi began to agglomerate. The weather was severe, the water froze into ice, and the cold water vaporized.

古文：其病中，热胀、面目浮肿、善眠、鼽、衂、嚏、欠、呕、小便黄赤甚则淋。
现代文：其发病为内热胀满，满面浮肿，善眠，鼻塞，衄血，喷嚏，呵欠，呕吐，小便赤黄甚则淋沥不通。
English: Its onset is swollen with internal heat, puffy face, good sleep, nasal congestion, coughing up blood, sneezing, yawning, vomiting, reddish-yellow urine and even leaking.

古文：二之气，阳乃布，民乃舒，物乃生荣。
现代文：二之气，主气为少阴君火，客气为少阳相火，二火用事，阳气乃布，人们感到舒适，万物开始生长繁荣。
English: The second qi, the main qi is the lesser yin and royal fire, the polite qi is the lesser yang and fire, the second fire is used for things, the yang qi is cloth, people feel comfortable, and all things begin to grow and prosper.

古文：厉大至，民善暴死。
现代文：若疫疠大行时，人们容易猝暴死亡。
English: In the event of a major epidemic, people are prone to sudden violent death.

古文：三之气，天政布，凉乃行，燥热交合，燥极而泽。
现代文：三之气，主气为少阳相火，客气为阳明燥金，司天之政乃布，凉气乃行，客气之燥气与主气之热气相互交合，燥气急则湿气复而润泽。
English: There are three kinds of qi. The principal qi is the lesser yang, the lesser fire; the minor qi is the lesser sun, the lesser fire; the minor qi is the lesser fire; the minor qi is the lesser fire; the minor qi is the lesser fire; the minor qi is the lesser fire; the minor qi is the lesser fire; the minor qi is the lesser fire; the minor qi is the lesser fire; the minor qi is the lesser fire; the minor qi is the lesser fire; the minor qi is the lesser fire; the minor qi is the lesser fire; the minor qi is the lesser fire; the minor qi is

古文：民病寒热。
现代文：人们易患寒热证。
English: People are susceptible to cold and heat symptoms.

古文：四之气，寒雨降，病暴仆、振栗、谵妄、少气、嗌干引饮，及为心痛、痈肿、疮疡、疟寒之疾、骨痿、血便。
现代文：四之气，主气为太阴湿土，客气为太阳寒水，水土气化，寒雨降下。发病为猝然仆倒，振动战栗，谵言妄语，少气，咽喉干燥的引饮，以及心痛，痈肿，疮疡，发为寒冷的疟疾，骨萎软，便血等病症。
English: Four kinds of qi, the main qi is too gloomy and wet soil, the minor qi is the sun's cold water, soil and water vaporization, and cold rain fall. The onset is sudden collapse, vibration and shivering, slurred speech, low qi, dry throat, and heartache, abscess, ulcer, cold malaria, bone atrophy, bloody stool and other diseases.

古文：五之气，春令反行，草乃生荣。
现代文：五之气，主气为阳明燥金，客气为厥阴风木，秋行春令，草木又得生长而繁荣。
English: There are five kinds of qi. The main qi is the sun, the moon, and the gold. The secondary qi is the wind, the trees, the autumn, and the spring. The plants and trees have to grow and flourish.

古文：民气和。
现代文：人们和平无病。
English: People are peaceful and disease-free.

古文：终之气，阳气布，候反温，蛰虫来见，流水不冰。
现代文：终之气，主气为太阳寒水，客气为少阴君火，在泉之气用事，阳气敷布，气反湿暖，蛰虫现于外面，流水不得结冰。
English: The final qi, the main qi is the cold water of the sun, the minor qi is the fire of the lesser yin, the minor qi is the fire of the spring, the yang qi is the bedding cloth, the anti-humidity qi is the warmth, the aphids are outside, and the running water must not freeze.

古文：民乃康平，其病温。
现代文：人们健康平安，阳气盛则易发温病。
English: People are healthy and safe, but if yang qi prevails, they are prone to fever.

古文：故食岁谷以安其气，食间谷以去其邪，岁宜以咸、以苦、以辛，汗之清之、散之，安其运气，无使受邪，折其郁气，资其化源。
现代文：因而在阳明司天之年，应当食用得岁气的谷类以安定正气，食用得间气的谷类，以去邪气，本年当用咸味、苦味、辛味的药物以汗之、清之、散之的方法进行治疗，安定其不胜之气的生化之源，不要使其受邪，折损其郁气，资生其化源。
English: Therefore, in the year of the Yang Ming Dynasty, it is necessary to eat cereals that have the year's qi to stabilize the positive qi, eat cereals with intermittent qi to remove the evil qi, and use salty, bitter and pungent drugs to treat this year with the methods of perspiration, purification and dispersion to stabilize the biochemical source of its invincible qi, do not let it be affected by evil, damage its depressed qi, and nurture its chemical source.

古文：以寒热轻重少多其制，同热者多天化，同清者多地化。用凉远凉，用热远热，用寒远寒，用温远温，食宜同法。
现代文：根据寒热的轻重，决定方宜的多少，若年运与在泉之热气相同时，应多用与在司天凉气相同之品；若年运与司天之凉气相同时，应多用与在泉之热气相同之品。用凉药时，应避开凉气主令之时；用热药时，应避开热气主令之时；用寒药时，应避开寒气主令之时；用温药时，应避开温气主令之时，用饮食调养时，也应遵照这个原则，这是就一般情况而言。
English: According to the severity of cold and heat, determine how much of the formula is appropriate. If the weather is the same as the heat in the spring, you should use more products that are the same as the cool air in the spring; if the weather is the same as the cool air in the spring, you should use more products that are the same as the hot air in the spring. When using cold medicine, you should avoid the time when the cool air is dominant; when using hot medicine, you should avoid the time when the hot air is dominant; when using cold medicine, you should avoid the time when the cold air is dominant; when using warm medicine, you should avoid the time when the warm air is dominant; when

古文：有假者反之，此其道也。
现代文：若气候有反常的变化时，就不必拘守这一原则，这是自然变化之道。
English: If there are abnormal changes in the climate, there is no need to adhere to this principle. This is the natural way of change.

古文：反是者，乱天地之经，扰阴阳之纪也。帝曰：善。
现代文：若违背了上述原则，就会扰乱天地阴阳的自然规律。黄帝说：好。
English: If you violate the above principles, you will disturb the natural laws of heaven, earth, yin and yang. Yellow Emperor said: "Good.

古文：少阳之政奈何？
现代文：少阳相火值年的施政是怎样的呢？
English: How is the governance of the Shao Yang phase of the fire year?

古文：岐伯曰：寅申之纪也。
现代文：岐伯说：少阳相火施政在寅年与申年。
English: Qi Bo said: "The Shao Yang and the fire are in the year of Yin and the year of Yin.

古文：少阳，太角，厥阴。
现代文：壬寅年、壬申年，此二年俱为同天府。少阳相火司天，厥阴风木在泉。
English: In the year of Renin and the year of Jinshin, these two years are the same as Tianfu. Shaoyang phase fire Siten, Jueyin wind and trees in the spring.

古文：壬寅，壬申。
现代文：丁壬为木运，壬为阳年，故运为太角。
English: Ding Ren is the year of wood, Ren is the year of the sun, and so Yun is the year of the cape.

古文：其运风鼓，其化鸣紊启坼，其变振拉摧拔，其病掉、眩、支胁、惊骇。
现代文：木运之气为风气鼓动，其正常气化为和风吹拂、万物鸣响、草木萌芽、绽放生机，其反常变化为大风震撼、摧毁、折拔，其致病为肢体振颤，头晕眩目，两胁支满，神魂惊骇。
English: The spirit of the Wood Festival is the inspiration of the ethos, its normal vaporization is the blowing of the wind, the ringing of all things, the germination of plants and trees, the blooming of vitality, its abnormal changes are the shock of the wind, the destruction, the plucking, its pathogenic is the limb tremor, dizziness, dizziness, the two supports are full, and the soul is shocked.

古文：太角、少徵、太宫、少商、太羽。
现代文：客运五步：初之运太角，二之运少徵，三之运太宫，四之运少商，终之运太羽。
English: There are five steps in passenger transportation: the first is to transport Taekwondo, the second is to transport less recruitment, the third is to transport Taegu, the fourth is to transport less merchants, and the last is to transport Taiyu.

古文：少阳，太徵，厥阴。
现代文：主运五步与客于相同，起于太角，终于太羽。
English: The five steps of the main transport are the same as those of the guests, starting from Tai Kok and ending with Tai Yu.

古文：戊寅天符，戊申天符。
现代文：客运与主运之气相同，气得正化。戊寅年、戊申年，此二年俱为天符。
English: The passenger transport and the main transport have the same qi, and the qi is normalized. In the year of Wu Yin and Wu Shen, these two years are all signs from heaven.

古文：其运暑，其化暄嚣郁燠，其变炎烈沸腾，其病上热郁、血溢、血泄、心痛。
现代文：少阳相火司天，厥阳风木在泉。
English: Xiaoyang phase fire heaven, Jueyang wind and trees in the spring.

古文：太徵、少宫、太商、少羽、少角。
现代文：戊癸为火运，戊为阳年，故运为太徵。
English: There are five steps in passenger transportation: the first step is to recruit passengers, the second step is to attract young people, the third step is to attract merchants, the fourth step is to attract young people, and the last step is to attract tourists.

古文：少阳，太宫，厥阴。甲寅，甲申。其运阴雨，其化柔润重泽，其变震惊飘骤，其病体重、胕肿、痞饮。
现代文：火运之气为暑热，其正常气化为火盛热郁，其反常变化为火炎沸腾，其致病为热郁于上，热甚迫血妄行则血溢、血泄，心痛。
English: The air of fire is hot, its normal gasification is hot and hot, its abnormal change is hot and boiling, its pathogenic is hot and hot, and the hot and hot delirium is bleeding, bleeding, and heartache.

古文：太宫、少商、太羽、太角、少徵。
现代文：客运五步：初之运太徵，二之运少宫，三之运太商，四之运少羽，终之运太角。
English: There are five steps in passenger transportation: the first step is to transport the palace, the second step is to transport the merchants, the third step is to transport the feathers, the fourth step is to transport the horns, and the last step is to transport the recruitment.

古文：少阳，太商，厥阴。庚寅，庚申，同正商。
现代文：主运五步：初之运少角，二之运太徵，三之运少宫，四之运太商，终之运少羽。
English: There are five steps in the main transport: the first is the transport of a small corner, the second is the transport of a large recruitment, the third is the transport of a small palace, the fourth is the transport of a large merchant, and the last is the transport of a small feather.

古文：其运凉，其化雾露清切，其变肃杀凋零，其病肩背胷中。
现代文：甲寅年、甲申年。
English: Year of the Goat, Year of the Goat.

古文：太商、少羽、少角、太徵、少宫。
现代文：少阳相火司天，厥阴风木在泉。甲已为土运，甲为阳年，故运为太宫。
English: There are five steps in passenger transportation: the first step is to transport too many passengers, the second step is to transport too few passengers, the third step is to transport too few passengers, the fourth step is to transport too few passengers, and the last step is to transport too few passengers.

古文：少阳，太羽，厥阴。丙寅，丙申。其运寒肃，其化凝惨凛冽，其变冰雪霜雹，其病寒，浮肿。太羽、太角、少徵、太宫、少商。凡此少阳司天之政，气化运行先天，天气正，地气扰，风乃暴举，木偃沙飞，炎火乃流，阴行阳化，雨乃时应，火木同德，上应荧惑、岁星。
现代文：凡此寅申少阳司天之政，其气太过，先天时而至，司天之气得其正化之位，厥阴风木在泉，其气扰动不宁，大风突然而起，草木卧倒，走石飞沙，少阳相火之气为之流行，岁半之前，为君火相火与太阴湿土行令之时，阴气流行，阳气布化，雨乃应时而降，少阳司天为火，厥阴在泉为木，木火相生，故同为功德，上应于火星与木星之光较强。
English: In all of this, the yin and yang of Shao Yang's government of heaven is too strong. It comes from the heavens ahead of time, and Shao Yang's qi is in the position of its rectification. The yin wind and trees are in the spring, and their qi is disturbed and restless. The wind suddenly rises, the grass is lying down, the stones are flying, and the sand is flying. The yin and yang of Shao Yang's government of heaven is popular. Before the age of one and a half, when Shao Yang's government of heaven was popular, the yang of heaven was clothed, and the rain should fall from time to time.

古文：其谷丹、苍，其政严，其令扰。
现代文：其在谷类应于赤色与青色者生长旺盛，其司天之政严厉，在泉之令扰动。
English: In cereals, it should grow vigorously in red and cyan, its administration is strict, and it is disturbed at the command of the spring.

古文：故风热参布，云物沸腾，太阴横流，寒乃时至，凉雨并起。
现代文：所以司天之热与在泉之风相参而敷布，云雾沸腾，流动不定，太阴湿土之气横行气交，寒气有时而至，则凉雨并起。
English: Therefore, the heat of the sky and the wind in the spring are intertwined, the clouds are boiling, the flow is uncertain, the air of the soil is too cloudy and moist, the cold air sometimes comes, and the cold rain also starts.

古文：民病寒中，外发疮疡，内为泄满，故圣人遇之，和而不争。
现代文：人们易患寒病于内，病发外部发生疮疡、内为泄泻胀满等病症，所以聪明圣智的人，遇到这种情况时，则调和而顺适之，不与之抗争。
English: People are prone to colds inside, sores outside the onset of the disease, swelling inside for diarrhea, and so on. Therefore, when encountering such a situation, smart and wise people will adjust and adapt, and will not fight against it.

古文：往复之作，民病寒热、疟、泄、聋、瞑、呕吐、上怫肿色变。
现代文：寒热之气，反复发作，人们易患寒热证，病发疟疾、泄泻、耳聋、目瞑、呕吐、胸部气郁胀肿而颜色改变等病症。
English: Cold and fever, recurrent attacks, people are prone to cold and fever, the onset of malaria, diarrhea, deafness, blindness, vomiting, chest gas bloating and swelling and color change and other diseases.

古文：初之气，地气迁，风胜乃摇，寒乃去，候乃大温，草木早荣。
现代文：初之气，主气为厥阴风木，客气为少阴君火，上年在泉之气，迁移退位，风气盛时则摇动不宁，主客二气木火相生，寒气乃去，气候大温，草木提早繁荣。
English: At the beginning of the year, the main spirit is the autumn wind and trees, the courtesy spirit is the less shadow and fire, the last year is the spring spirit, the migration and abdication, when the spirit is strong, the restlessness is shaken, the host and guest are fire and wood, the cold is gone, the climate is warm, and the plants and trees prosper early.

古文：寒来不杀，温病乃起，其病气怫于上，血溢、目赤、咳、逆、头痛、血崩、胁满、肤腠中疮。
现代文：有时寒气虽来但不能行其杀伐之令，温热病发生，其易患气郁于上焦证，病发为血液外溢、目赤、咳嗽、气逆、头痛、血崩、胁部胀满、皮肤肌腠生疮等症。
English: Sometimes, although the cold air comes, it cannot carry out its order of killing, and warm fever occurs, and it is prone to suffer from qi depression in the upper focal symptom, and the onset of the disease is blood overflow, red eyes, cough, qi inversion, headache, hemorrhage, swelling of the stress part, and skin abscess.

古文：二之气，火反郁，白埃四起，云趋雨府，风不胜湿，雨乃零，民乃康。
现代文：二之气，主气为少阴君火，客气为太阴湿土，火气反为湿土之气郁遏而不发，白色云埃四起，云气归于雨府，风气若不胜湿土之气，则雨水降下，人们身体安康。
English: There are two kinds of qi. The main qi is less yin and more fire. The polite qi is too yin and moist soil. The fire qi, on the other hand, is the damp soil qi that is suppressed but not emitted. White clouds rise everywhere. The cloud qi is attributed to the rain palace. If the qi is inferior to the damp soil qi, rain will fall and people will be healthy.

古文：其病热郁于上，咳、逆、呕吐、疮发于中、胷嗌不利、头痛、身热、昏愦、脓疮。
现代文：其易患热郁于上焦证，发病为咳嗽、气逆、呕吐、疮疡发生于内部、胸中与咽喉不利、头痛身热、昏愦不清、脓疮等症。
English: Its susceptibility to heat is concentrated in the epiglottis, the onset of which is coughing, qi inversion, vomiting, sores occur internally, chest and throat are unfavorable, headache, body heat, drowsiness, acne and other diseases.

古文：三之气，天政布，炎暑至，少阳临上，雨乃涯。
现代文：三之气，主气为少阳相火，客气亦为少阳相火，主客气同，司天之气施布政令，炎暑乃至，少阳相火上临，火气过甚，故雨水穷尽而不降。
English: Of the three qi, the main qi is the lesser yang phase fire, the polite qi is also the lesser yang phase fire, the main and polite qi are the same, the chief qi is to issue decrees, the heat is even, the lesser yang phase fire is coming, the fire qi is too much, so the rainwater is exhausted and does not fall.

古文：民病热中，聋、瞑、血溢、脓疮、咳、呕、鼽、衂、渴、嚏、欠、喉痹、目赤，善暴死。
现代文：人们易患热病在内，病发耳聋、目瞑、血外溢、脓疮、咳嗽、呕吐、鼻塞、衄血、口渴、喷嚏、呵欠、喉痹、目赤等病症，往往突然死亡。
English: People are prone to heat-related illnesses, including deafness, blurred vision, bloodshot eyes, acne, coughing, vomiting, nasal congestion, coughing up blood, thirst, sneezing, yawning, sore throat, and red eyes, and often die suddenly.

古文：四之气，凉乃至，炎暑间化，白露降，民气和平。
现代文：四之气，主气为太阴湿土，客气为阳明燥金，阳明主令，凉气乃至，炎暑之气间时而化，白露降下，人们和平无殃。
English: Four airs, the main air is too gloomy and damp, the courtesy air is the sun shining and drying gold, the sun shining and commanding, the cool air and even the hot air change from time to time, the white dew descends, and people are peaceful and harmless.

古文：其病满、身重。
现代文：其发病为胀满、身重等症。
English: Its onset is bloating, weight gain and other symptoms.

古文：五之气，阳乃去，寒乃来，雨乃降，气门乃闭，刚木早凋。
现代文：五之气，主气为阳明燥金，客气为太阳寒水，阳气乃去，寒气乃至，由于阳气敛藏，气门乃闭，刚硬的树木提早凋零。
English: Five qi, the main qi is the sun shining and drying gold, the courtesy qi is the sun cold water, the yang qi is to go, the cold qi is even, because the yang qi is concentrated, the valve is closed, and the hard trees wither early.

古文：民避寒邪，君子周密。
现代文：人们应避开寒邪，通晓养生之道者居处周密，以避寒气。
English: People should avoid the cold, and those who know how to keep healthy should live in a well-planned place to avoid the cold.

古文：终之气，地气正，风乃至，万物反生，霿雾以行。
现代文：终之气，主气为太阳寒水，客气为厥阴风木，在泉之气得其正化之位，风气乃至，万物反而有生发之施，雾气流行。
English: The final qi, the main qi is the cold water of the sun, the polite qi is the rising of the trees in the shade of the wind, and the qi of the spring is the place where it is rectified, and even the style, but everything has the gift of life, and the fog is popular.

古文：其病关闭不禁、心痛、阳气不藏而咳。
现代文：由于气机外泄，故其发病为应关闭者发而不能禁固、心痛、阳气不得收敛而咳嗽等症。
English: Due to the leakage of the gas engine, the onset of the disease is due to those who should be closed and can not be inhibited, heartache, yang gas can not be converged and cough and other symptoms.

古文：抑其运气，赞所不胜，必折其郁气，先取化源，暴过不生，苛疾不起，故岁宜咸、宜辛、宜酸，渗之泄之；渍之发之。
现代文：凡此少阳司天之年，必须抑制年运与司天的太过之气，赞助所不胜之气，折减其致郁的胜气，资助不胜之气的生化之源，则猝暴太过之气不能发生，重病可以不生。所以本岁当用咸味、辛味、酸味药物，用渗泄之法以清火；用浸渍之法以发汗。
English: In the Year of the Lesser Yang, it is necessary to suppress the excesses of the Year of the Horse and the Year of the Horse, sponsor the excesses of the Year of the Horse, reduce the excesses of the Year of the Horse, and support the biochemical sources of the excesses of the Year of the Horse. Sudden excesses of the Year of the Horse can not occur, and serious diseases can not be born. Therefore, this year should use salty, pungent, and sour drugs, use the method of excretion to clear the fire, and use the method of impregnation to sweat.

古文：观气寒温以调其过，同风热者多寒化，异风热者少寒化。
现代文：观察气候的寒热变化，以调治其太过之邪的邪气，若年运遇太角、太徵与岁气风热不同之年，应多用寒化之品；若年运遇太宫、太商、太羽与岁气风热不同之年，应少用寒化之品。
English: Observe the cold and heat changes of the climate to regulate the evil of its excessive evil. If the year of Tai Kok, Tai Zheng and the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the year of the

古文：用热远热，用温远温，用寒远寒，用凉远凉，食宜同法，此其道也。
现代文：用热性药品时，应避开热气主令之时；用温性药品时，应避开温气主令之时；用寒性药品时，应避开寒气主令之时；用凉性药品时，应避开凉气主令之时，用饮食调养时，也应遵照这个原则，这是就一般情况而言。
English: When using hot drugs, you should avoid the heat command; when using warm drugs, you should avoid the heat command; when using cold drugs, you should avoid the cold command; when using cool drugs, you should avoid the cool command; when using diet, you should also follow this principle, this is for the general situation.

古文：有假者反之。
现代文：若气候有反常变化时，就不必拘守这一原则。
English: If there are abnormal changes in the climate, there is no need to adhere to this principle.

古文：反是者病之阶也。帝曰：善。
现代文：若不遵守上述这些规律，就会导致疾病的发生。黄帝说：好。
English: If you do not follow the above rules, it will lead to the occurrence of disease. Huang Di said: Good.

古文：太阴之政奈何？
现代文：太阴湿土值年的施政是怎样的呢？
English: Too gloomy and wet, what is the policy of the year?

古文：岐伯曰：丑未之纪也。
现代文：岐伯说：太阴湿土施政在丑年与未年。
English: Qi Bo said: Too gloomy wet soil policy in the ugly year and the year.

古文：太阴，少角，太阳，清热胜复同，同正宫。丁丑，丁未。其运风清热。
现代文：丁丑年、丁未年。太阴湿土司天，太阳寒水在泉。丁壬为木运，丁为阴年，故运为少角。
English: Ding Ugly year, Ding Wei year. Too gloomy and wet Tusi day, the sun cold water in the spring. Ding Ren is a wood year, Ding is a cloudy year, and the old year is a small angle.

古文：少角、太徵、少宫、太商、少羽。太阴，少徵，太阳，寒雨胜复同。
现代文：木运不及，则克我之金的清气乃为胜气，清气之后，则我生之火的热来复，此二年胜复之气相同。
English: If the luck of the wood is not good, then the clean air of the gold I won is the winning air. After the clean air, the heat of the fire I started comes back. The winning air of these two years is the same.

古文：癸丑，癸未。其运热寒雨。
现代文：木运不及，无力克土，司天之气得政，故同土运平气。凡此二年，运气为风，胜气为清，复气为热。
English: Wood is not lucky enough, it is not strong enough to conquer the earth, and the spirit of the emperor is strong enough to win the government, so the spirit of the same country is calm. In these two years, luck is wind, victory is clear, and rejuvenation is hot.

古文：少徵、太宫、少商、太羽、太角。
现代文：客运五步：初之运少角，二之运太徵，三之运少宫，四之运太商，终之运少羽。
English: is a fire year,  is a lunar year, so there is less luck.

古文：太阴，少宫，太阳，风清胜复同，同正宫。
现代文：主运五步与客运相同，起于少角，终于少羽。客运与主运之气相同，气得正化。
English: The five steps of the main transport are the same as the passenger transport, starting from a few corners and ending with a few feathers. The passenger transport is the same as the main transport, and the gas is normalized.

古文：己丑太一天符，己未太一天符。
现代文：癸丑年，癸未年。太阴湿土司天，太阳寒水在泉。
English: Ugly year, wretched year. Too gloomy and wet weather, the sun cold water in the spring.

古文：其运雨风清。
现代文：戌癸为火运，癸为阴年，故运少徵。
English: is a fire year,  is a lunar year, so there is less luck.

古文：少宫、太商、少羽、少角、太徵。太阴，少商，太阳，热寒胜复同。
现代文：火运不及，则胜我之水的寒气乃为胜气，胜气之后，则我生之土的雨气来复，此二年胜复之气相同。
English: If the fire is not lucky, then the cold of the water that defeats me is the winning gas. After the winning gas, the rain of the land where I was born comes back. The winning gas of these two years is the same.

古文：乙丑，乙未。其运凉热寒。
现代文：凡此二年，运气为热，胜气为寒，复气为雨。
English: In the past two years, luck is hot, victory is cold, and victory is rain.

古文：少商、太羽、太角、少徵、太宫。
现代文：客运五步：初之运少徵，二之运太宫，三之运少商，四之运太羽，终之运少角。
English: There are five steps in passenger transportation: the first step is less recruitment, the second step is less palace, the third step is less merchants, the fourth step is less feathers, and the last step is less horns.

古文：太阴，少羽，太阳，雨风胜复同，同正宫。
现代文：客运五步：初之运少羽，二之运太角，三之运少徵，四之运太宫，终之运少商。
English: There are five steps in passenger transportation: the first step is to transport fewer feathers, the second step is to transport fewer horns, the third step is to transport fewer recruiters, the fourth step is to transport fewer couriers, and the last step is to transport fewer merchants.

古文：辛丑，辛未。其运寒雨风。少羽、少角、太徵、少宫、太商。
现代文：主运五步：初之运少角，二之运太徵，三之运少宫，四之运少商，终之运少羽。
English: There are five steps in the main transport: the first is to transport a small angle, the second is to transport too much, the third is to transport a small palace, the fourth is to transport a small merchant, and the last is to transport a small feather.

古文：凡此太阴司天之政，气化运行后天，阴专其政，阳气退避，大风时起，天气下降，地气上腾，原野昏霿，白埃四起，云奔南极，寒雨数至，物成于差夏。
现代文：凡丑未太阴司天之政，其气不及，后天时而至，太阴司天太阳在泉，其气皆阴，故阴专其令，阳气退避，时常有大风兴起，司天之气下降于地，在泉之气上腾于天，原野雾气昏暗，白色云埃四起，云奔于南极雨府，由于太阴湿土与太阳寒水主令，故寒雨频频降下，万物成熟于夏末秋初。
English: If the weather is not too gloomy, the government of heaven will not be strong enough, and the day after tomorrow will come. If the weather is too gloomy, the sun will be in the spring, and the weather will be gloomy, so the shade will be special, and the yang will retreat. There will often be strong winds. The government of heaven will fall to the ground, and the spring will rise to the sky. The fog in the field will be dim, and white clouds will rise everywhere. The clouds will rush to the Antarctic Rain Palace. Because the soil is too wet and the sun is cold, cold rain will fall frequently. All things mature in late summer and early autumn.

古文：民病寒湿，腹满、身䐜愤、胕肿、痞逆、寒厥、拘急。
现代文：人们易患寒湿证，病发腹部胀满、全身肿胀、浮肿、痞满气逆、寒气厥逆、筋脉拘急等症。
English: People are prone to cold and wet symptoms, including abdominal distension, swelling of the whole body, edema, gas inversion, cold gas inversion, and myocardial emergency.

古文：湿寒合德，黄黑埃昏，流行气交，上应镇星、辰星。
现代文：湿气与寒气相合以为功德，黄黑色尘埃昏暗，流行于气交之内，上则应于土星与水星之光较强。
English: Moisture and cold combine to create the effect, yellow-black dust is dim and prevalent in the atmosphere, while the light of Saturn and Mercury should be strong.

古文：其政肃，其令寂，其谷黅、玄。
现代文：司天之政严肃，在泉之令寂静，其在谷类应于黄色与黑色者生长旺盛。
English: The government of heaven is severe, the spring is silent, and it grows vigorously in yellow and black cereals.

古文：故阴凝于上，寒积于下，寒水胜火，则为冰雹，阳光不治，杀气乃行。
现代文：由于司天之阴气凝集于上，在泉之寒气积聚于下，寒水之气胜于火气，则为冰雹，阳光不得施治，阴寒肃杀之气乃行。
English: Because the gloom of the sky is concentrated on the top, the cold of the spring is accumulated on the bottom, and the cold water gas is better than the fire gas, it is hail, the sun can not be treated, and the gloomy and deadly gas is the line.

古文：故有余宜高，不及宜下，有余宜晚，不及宜早，土之利，气之化也，民气亦从之，间谷命其太也。
现代文：所以对于谷物的种植，太过之年应在高地，不及之年应在低地，在太过之年应晚，不及之年应早，这不仅要看土地条件是否有利，而且要根据气化的情况而定，人们对于养生之道，也必须适应这些情况，间谷则借间气太过而得以成熟。
English: Therefore, for the planting of cereals, the year of too much should be in the highlands, the year of not enough should be in the lowlands, the year of too much should be late, and the year of not enough should be early. This not only depends on whether the land conditions are favorable, but also depends on the gasification conditions. People must also adapt to these conditions for the way of life. The inter-valley is matured by the inter-valley.

古文：初之气，地气迁，寒乃去，春气正，风乃来，生布万物以荣，民气条舒，风湿相薄，雨乃后。
现代文：初之气，主气为厥阴风木，客气亦为厥阴风木，上年在泉之气，迁移退位，由于主客二气相同寒气乃去，春气得气化之正，风气乃来，生发之气布化，万物因而繁荣，人们感到条畅舒适，由于湿气为风气所迫，降雨较迟。
English: At the beginning of the year, the main wind is the Jueyin wind tree, the guest wind is also the Jueyin wind tree, the previous year's spring wind, the migration abdication, because the host and the guest have the same wind, the cold wind is gone, the spring wind is positive, the wind is coming, the wind is clothed, everything is prosperous, people feel smooth and comfortable, because the humidity is forced by the wind, the rainfall is late.

古文：民病血溢、筋络拘强、关节不利、身重、筋痿。
现代文：人们易患血液外溢，筋络拘急强直，关节不利，身体沉重，筋脉痿软等病症。
English: People are prone to blood spill, myofascial rigidity, unfavorable joints, heavy body, myofascial weakness and other diseases.

古文：二之气，大火正，物承化，民乃和。
现代文：二之气，主气为少阴君火，客气亦为少阴君火，主客二气相同，故火得气化之正，万物因而生化，人们也感到平和。
English: There are two kinds of qi. The master qi is the lesser yin fire, and the servant qi is the lesser yin fire. The master and guest qi are the same, so the fire is the right one to be vaporized. All things are thus biochemical, and people also feel peaceful.

古文：其病温、厉大行，远近咸若。
现代文：其发病为温病、疫疠大流行，远近的患者病皆相同。
English: Its onset is a temperature disease, epidemic, and epidemic, and the diseases of patients near and far are the same.

古文：湿蒸相薄，雨乃时降。
现代文：湿与热气相迫，雨水乃按时降下。
English: Humidity and heat are on a collision course, and rain is falling at the right time.

古文：三之气，天政布，湿气降，地气腾，雨乃时降，寒乃随之。
现代文：三之气，主气为少阳相火，客气为太阴湿土，司天之气布化，湿气乃降，地气上升，雨水应时降下，寒气随之而来。
English: There are three kinds of qi. The main qi is the weak yang phase fire, the polite qi is the strong yin moist soil, the moderating qi is the air cloth, the moisture is the fall, the earth qi is rising, the rain is falling, and the cold is coming.

古文：感于寒湿，则民病身重、胕肿、胷腹满。四之气，畏火临，溽蒸化，地气腾，天气否隔，寒风晓暮，蒸热相薄，草木凝烟，湿化不流，则白露阴布，以成秋令。
现代文：四之气主气为太阴湿土，客气为少阳相火，相火加临于主气之上，湿热合化，地气上升，与天气阻隔不通，早晚俱有寒风吹来，热气与寒气相迫，烟雾凝集于草木之上，湿化之气不得流动，则白露阴布，成为秋令。
English: The main qi of the four qi is too cloudy and wet soil, the secondary qi is too hot and too cold, the secondary qi is too hot and too cold, the secondary qi is added on top of the main qi, the moisture and heat are combined, the natural gas rises, and it cannot be separated from the weather, the cold wind blows in the morning and evening, the hot gas and the cold gas are close to each other, the smoke condenses on the grass and trees, and the humidified gas cannot flow, then the white dew is overcast, and it becomes autumn.

古文：民病腠理热、血暴溢、疟、心腹满热、胪胀，甚则胕肿。
现代文：人们易患腠理发热、血暴溢、疟疾、心腹满热、腹胀，甚则浮肿等病症。
English: People are prone to fever, hemorrhage, malaria, heartburn, bloating, and even edema.

古文：五之气，惨令已行，寒露下，霜乃早降，草木黄落，寒气及体，君子周密，民病皮腠。
现代文：五之气，主气为阳明燥金，客气亦为阳明燥金，凄惨寒凉之气以行，寒露降下，严霜提早降临，草木萎黄凋落，寒气侵及人体，善于养生的人们居处周密，人们易患皮肤腠理的病症。
English: The five qi, the main qi is yang ming dried gold, the courtesy qi is also yang ming dried gold, the miserable cold qi is in the line, the cold dew falls, the frost comes early, the grass withers and withers, the cold air invades the human body, the people who are good at health care are well-housed, and people are prone to skin diseases.

古文：终之气，寒大举，湿大化，霜乃积，阴乃凝，水坚冰，阳光不治。
现代文：终之气，主气为太阳寒水，客气亦为太阳寒水，寒气大起，湿气大化，霜乃聚积，阴气凝结，水结成坚冰，阳光不得施治。
English: The last gas, the main gas is the cold water of the sun, the second gas is also the cold water of the sun, the cold gas increases, the humidity increases, the frost accumulates, the shade condenses, the water freezes into ice, and the sun cannot be treated.

古文：感于寒，则病人关节禁固、腰脽痛，寒湿持于气交而为疾也。
现代文：感受到寒邪，则人们易患关节强急而活动不灵、腰部与臀部疼痛等病症，这是由于寒湿之气相持于气交所致。
English: When feeling the cold, people are prone to joint stiffness and stiffness, pain in the lower back and buttocks, etc. This is due to the cold and wet air being held in the air exchange.

古文：必折其郁气而取化源，益其岁气无使邪胜。
现代文：凡此太阴司天之年，必须折减其致郁的邪气，而取气不胜之气的生化之源，补益不及的岁气，不使邪气过胜。
English: In every year that is too gloomy, it is necessary to reduce the evil qi that causes depression, and the biochemical source of the invincible qi, the year-old qi that cannot be replenished, must not allow the evil qi to prevail.

古文：食岁谷以全其真，食间谷以保其精。
现代文：食用得岁气的谷类以保全其真气，食用得间气的谷类以保养精气。
English: Cereals with year-long qi should be eaten to preserve their qi, and those with inter-year qi should be eaten to preserve the qi.

古文：故岁宜以苦燥之、温之，甚者发之、泄之。
现代文：所以本年宜用苦味的药物，用燥性以去湿，用温性以去寒，甚则用发泄的方法以去湿邪。
English: Therefore, it is advisable to use bitter medicine this year, dryness to get rid of dampness, temperature to get rid of cold, and even venting to get rid of dampness.

古文：不发不泄则湿气外溢，肉溃皮拆而水血交流。
现代文：如果不发不泄，湿气向外溢出，则病发肌肉溃烂、皮肤破裂等症，而使水血交流。
English: If it is not released, and the moisture overflows to the outside, the disease will cause muscle ulceration, skin rupture and other symptoms, resulting in water-blood exchange.

古文：必赞其阳火，令御甚寒，从气异同，少多其判也。同寒者以热化，同湿者以燥化，异者少之，同者多之。
现代文：本年必须扶持其阳火，以令防御大寒，根据从气相交之属性的异同，以指定药物性味的多少，年运与岁气相同为寒性的，用热性之品；年运与岁气相同为湿性的，用燥性之品，异者少之，同者多之。
English: This year, it is necessary to support its yang fire to protect against the cold. According to the similarities and differences of the properties of the intersections of the gases, the amount of the drug taste is specified. The year of the year and the year of the year are the same as the cold, and the hot products are used; the year of the year and the year of the year are the same as the wet, and the dry products are used. The less the difference, the more the same.

古文：用凉远凉，用寒远寒，用温远温，用热远热，食宜同法。假者反之。此其道也，反是者病也。
现代文：用凉性药品时，应避开凉气主令之时；用寒性药品时，应避开寒气主令之时；用温性药品时，应避开温气主令之时；用热性药品时，应避开热气主令之时，用饮食调养时，也应遵照这个原则，这是就一般情况而言。
English: When using cool medicines, you should avoid the cold weather; when using cold medicines, you should avoid the cold weather; when using warm medicines, you should avoid the warm weather; when using hot medicines, you should avoid the hot weather; when using diet, you should also follow this principle, this is for the general situation.

古文：帝曰：善。
现代文：若气候有反常变化时，就不必拘守这一原则。
English: Emperor Jinwu said, "Very good."

古文：少阴之政奈何？
现代文：若不遵守上述这些规律，就会导致疾病的发生。黄帝说：好。
English: If you do not follow the above rules, it will lead to the occurrence of disease. Huang Di said: Good.

古文：岐伯曰：子午之纪也。
现代文：少阴君火值年的施政是怎样的呢？岐伯说：少阴君火施政在子年与午年。
English: What is the governance of Shouyin in the fire year? Qi Bo said: Shouyin's fire governance is at its peak in the year of the rooster and the year of the horse.

古文：少阴、太角、阳明。
现代文：壬子年、壬午年。少阴君火司天，阳明燥金在泉。
English: In the year of the dog, in the year of the rooster, in the year of the rooster, in the year of the rooster, in the year of the rooster, in the year of the rooster, in the year of the rooster.

古文：壬子、壬午。
现代文：丁壬为木运，壬为阳年，故运为太角。
English: Ding Ren is the year of wood, Ren is the year of the sun, and so Yun is the year of the cape.

古文：其运风鼓，其化鸣紊启拆，其变振拉摧拔，其病支满。
现代文：木运之气为风气鼓动，其正常气化为和风吹拂、万物鸣响、草木萌芽、绽放生机，其反常变化为大风震撼、摧毁、折拔，其致病为胁下支撑胀满。
English: The wind of the Wood Festival is the wind of inspiration, its normal gasification is the blowing of the wind, the ringing of all things, the germination of plants and trees, and the blooming of vitality, its abnormal changes are the wind shock, destruction, and plucking, and its cause of disease is the swelling of support under threat.

古文：太角、少徵、太宫、少商、太羽。
现代文：客运五步：初之运太角，二之运少徵，三之运太宫，四之运少商，终之运太羽。
English: There are five steps in passenger transportation: the first is to transport Taekwondo, the second is to transport less recruitment, the third is to transport Taegu, the fourth is to transport less merchants, and the last is to transport Taiyu.

古文：少阴、太徵、阳明。
现代文：主运五步与客运相同，起于太角，终于太羽。
English: The five steps of the main transport are the same as the passenger transport, starting from Tai Kok and ending in Tai Yu.

古文：戊子天符、戊午太一天符。
现代文：客运与主运之气相同，气得正化。戊子年，为天符年；戌午年，为太一天符年。
English: Passenger transport is the same as the main transport, and the gas is normalized. Wu Zi year is the year of the day of the sun, and the afternoon year is the year of the moon.

古文：其运炎暑，其化暄曜郁燠，其变灸烈沸腾，其病上热血溢。
现代文：少阴君火司天，阳明燥金在泉。戊癸为火运，戊为阳年，故运为太徵。火运之气为火炎暑热，其正常气化为温暖、光曜、郁热，其反常变化为火炎沸腾，其致病为热在上部，血液外溢。
English: Shouyin is the fire, the sun is the light, and the gold is in the spring. Wuzhen is the fire, wu is the year of the sun, and the old year is the year of the fire. The fire is hot and hot, and its normal gasification is warm, bright, and hot, and its abnormal change is hot and boiling, and its pathogenic heat is in the upper part, and the blood is spilled.

古文：太徵、少宫、太商、少羽、少角。
现代文：客运五步：初之运太徵，二之运少宫，三之运太商，四之运少羽，终之运太角。
English: There are five steps in passenger transportation: the first step is to recruit passengers, the second step is to attract young people, the third step is to attract merchants, the fourth step is to attract young people, and the last step is to attract tourists.

古文：少阴、太宫、阳明。甲子、甲午。
现代文：主运五步：初之运少角，二之运太徵，三之运少宫，四之运太商，终之运少羽。甲子年、甲午年。
English: There are five steps in the main transport: the first is the transport of Shao Kuan, the second is the transport of Taizhu, the third is the transport of Shao Gong, the fourth is the transport of Taishang, and the last is the transport of Shao Yu.

古文：其运阴雨，其化柔润时雨，其变震惊飘骤，其病中满身重。
现代文：少阴君火司天，阳明燥金在泉。甲已为土运，甲为阳年，故运为太宫。土运之气为阴雨，其正常气化为柔软、厚重、润泽，时常下雨，其反常变化为风飘雨骤、震撼惊骇，其致病为腹中胀满，肢体沉重。
English: Shou Yin Jun ignites the sky, Yang Ming dries the gold in the spring. A has been the earth movement, A is the year of the sun, so the movement is Taigu. The air of the earth movement is cloudy rain, its normal gasification is soft, heavy, moist, and it often rains, its abnormal changes are wind and rain, shock and shock, and its cause of illness is a full belly and heavy limbs.

古文：太宫、少商、太羽、太角、少徵。
现代文：客运五步：初之运太宫，二之运少商，三之运太羽，四之运少角，终之运太徵。
English: There are five steps in passenger transportation: the first step is to transport the palace, the second step is to transport the merchants, the third step is to transport the feathers, the fourth step is to transport the horns, and the last step is to transport the recruitment.

古文：少阴、太商、阳明。庚子、庚午，同正商。
现代文：乙庚为金运，庚为阳年，故运为太商。金运虽太过，但被司天相火所克，故同金运平气。
English: Yigong is the year of gold, and Geng is the year of the sun, so the year of gold is the year of Taishang. Although the year of gold is too much, it is suppressed by the fire of the heavens, so it is calm with the year of gold.

古文：其运凉劲，其化雾露萧飋，其变肃杀凋零，其病下清。
现代文：金运之气为凉，其正常气化雾露萧瑟，其反常变化为肃杀凋零，其致病则为清气在下。
English: The qi of jin yun is cool, its normal vaporization is foggy, its abnormal changes are withering and withering, and its disease-causing is clear gas under.

古文：太商、少羽、少角、太徵、少宫。
现代文：客运五步：初之运太商，二之运少羽，三之运太角，四之运少徵，终之运太宫。
English: There are five steps in passenger transportation: the first step is to transport too many passengers, the second step is to transport too few passengers, the third step is to transport too few passengers, the fourth step is to transport too few passengers, and the last step is to transport too few passengers.

古文：少阴、太羽、阳明。丙子岁会、丙午。
现代文：主运五步：初之运少角，二之运太徵，三之运少宫，四之运太商，终之运少羽。丙子年，为岁会年；丙午年。
English: The five steps of the main transport: the first transport is Shao Kok, the second transport is Tai Zheng, the third transport is Shao Gong, the fourth transport is Tai Shang, and the last transport is Shao Yu. C Zi year is the year of the year-end party; C Wu year.

古文：其运寒，其化凝惨栗冽，其变冰雪霜雹，其病寒下。
现代文：少阴君火司天，阳明燥金在泉。丙辛味水运，丙为阳年，故运为太羽。水运之气为寒，其正常气化凝敛凄惨，寒风凛冽，其反常变化为冰雪霜雹，其致病为寒气在下。
English: Shouyin is the fire god, Yangming is the gold in the spring. Bing is the spicy water transport, Bing is the year of the sun, so the transport is too feather. The air of the water transport is cold, its normal gasification and condensation is miserable, the cold wind is biting, its abnormal change is ice and snow and frost, and its disease is caused by cold air.

古文：太羽、太角、少徵、太宫、少商。
现代文：客运五步：初之运太羽，二之运少角，三之运太徵，四之运少官，终之运太商。
English: There are five steps in passenger transportation: the first step is to transport passengers, the second step is to transport passengers, the third step is to recruit passengers, the fourth step is to transport passengers, and the last step is to transport passengers.

古文：凡此少阴司天之政，气化运行先天，地气肃，天气明，寒交暑，热加燥，云驰雨府，湿化乃行，时雨乃降，金火合德，上应荧惑、太白。
现代文：主运五步：初之运太角，二之运少徵，三之运太宫，四之运少商，终之运太羽。凡此子午年少阴司天之政，其气太过，先天时而至，少阴司天，阳明在泉，在泉之气肃杀，司天之气光明，初之气，客气之寒，与上年终气少阳之暑相交，司天之热与在泉之燥气相加，云驰于雨府，湿化之气乃得流行，雨乃应时而降，金之燥气与火之热气相合，以为功德，上则火星与金星之光较强。
English: The five steps of the main transport: the first transport is Tai Kok, the second transport is Xiao Zheng, the third transport is Tai Gong, the fourth transport is Xiao Shang, and the last transport is Tai Yu. In this meridian year, Xiao Yin rules the government of heaven, and its qi is too much, the day before yesterday comes from time to time, Xiao Yin rules the day, Yang Ming is in the spring, and the qi of the spring is suffocating, the qi of the day before yesterday is bright, the qi of the day before yesterday is cold, and the qi of the day before yesterday is hot, and the qi of the day before

古文：其政明，其令切，其谷丹、白。
现代文：司天之政光明，在泉之气急切，其在谷类应于赤色与白色者。
English: The government of heaven is bright, the spirit of the spring is eager, and it is in the grain that red and white should prevail.

古文：水火寒热，持于气交而为病始也，热病生于上，清病生于下，寒热凌犯而争于中，民病咳、喘、血溢、血泄、鼽、嚏、目赤、眦疡、寒厥入胃、心痛、腰痛、腹大、嗌干、肿上。
现代文：水之寒气与火之热气相持于气交，为疾病发生的起因，热性病变发生在上部，凉性病变发生在下部，寒气与热气相互侵犯而争扰于中部，人们易患咳嗽，气喘，血液上溢或下泄，鼻塞，喷嚏，目赤，眼角疮疡，寒气厥逆入于胃部，心痛，腰痛，腹部胀大，咽喉干燥，上部肿胀等病症。
English: The cold air of water and the hot air of fire coexist in the air exchange, which is the cause of the disease. The thermal lesion occurs in the upper part, the cool lesion occurs in the lower part, the cold air and the hot air invade each other and fight in the middle, people are prone to cough, asthma, blood overflow or leakage, nasal congestion, sneezing, red eyes, eye sores, cold air invades the stomach, heartache, low back pain, abdominal distension, dry throat, upper swelling and other diseases.

古文：初之气，地气迁，燥将去，寒乃始，蛰复藏，水乃冰，霜复降，风乃至，阳气郁。
现代文：初之气，主气为厥阴风木，客气为太阳寒水，上年在泉之气迁移退位，少阳之暑气将要退去，寒冷之气始至，蛰虫重又归藏，水结为冰，霜又降下，主气之风受客气之影响而凛冽寒冷，阳气因而被郁不得宣发。
English: At the beginning of the year, the main wind is the jueyin wind and trees, the gentle wind is the cold water of the sun, the last year's spring wind migrates and abdicates, the hot wind of the lesser sun will recede, the cold wind arrives, the aphids return to their hiding place, the water freezes to ice, the frost falls again, the wind of the main wind is affected by the gentle wind and is cold, and the yang wind is depressed and cannot be announced.

古文：民反周密，关节禁固，腰脽痛。
现代文：人们反而居处周密，以避寒气，易患关节强硬、活动不灵、腰部与臀部疼痛等病症。
English: People, on the other hand, live in close quarters to avoid the cold, and are prone to stiff joints, poor mobility, and pain in the lower back and hips.

古文：炎暑将起，中外疮疡。
现代文：初之气后，炎暑之气即将发生，可致内部与外部疮疡的病症。
English: After the first qi, the hot qi is about to occur, which can cause internal and external ulcer diseases.

古文：二之气，阳气布，风乃行，春气以正，万物应荣，寒气时至。
现代文：二之气，主气为少阴君火，客气为厥阴风木，阳气乃得舒布，风气乃得流行；春气属于正化之令，万物亦当繁荣，寒气虽然有时而至，但因主客二气均属阳，所以人们仍然感到平和。
English: There are two kinds of qi. The master qi is the lesser yin, the prince of fire, the servant qi is the lesser yin, the wind tree, the yang qi is the cloth, and the custom is the fashion. The spring qi belongs to the order of rectification, and all things should be prosperous. Although the cold comes from time to time, people still feel peaceful because both the master and the guest qi are yang.

古文：民乃和，其病淋、目瞑、目赤、气郁于上而热。
现代文：其发病为小便淋沥，目视不清，两眼红赤等症，气郁于上部可发生热病。
English: Its onset is urinary leakage, blurred vision, red eyes and other symptoms, and fever can occur in the upper part.

古文：三之气，天政布，大火行，庶类蕃鲜，寒气时至。
现代文：三之气，主气为少阳相火，客气为少阴君火，司天之气布化，主客二气皆为火，所以大火流行，万物繁盛而鲜明，寒气有时而至。
English: There are three kinds of qi. The master qi is the fire of the lesser yang, the servant qi is the fire of the lesser yin, and the servant qi is the fire of the lesser yang. The master and guest qi are both fire, so the fire is popular, everything is prosperous and bright, and the cold sometimes comes.

古文：民病气厥心痛，寒热更作，咳、喘、目赤。
现代文：人们易患气厥逆而心痛的病症，寒热交替发作之时，则易患咳嗽、气喘、目赤等病症。
English: People are prone to suffer from diseases of shortness of breath and heartache. When colds and fevers alternate, they are prone to suffer from coughs, asthma, red eyes and other diseases.

古文：四之气，溽暑至，大雨时行，寒热互至。
现代文：四之气，主气为太阴湿土，客气亦为太阴湿土，暑湿俱至，大雨时常降下，寒热交互而至。
English: There are four types of weather. The main weather is too cloudy and wet, the pleasant weather is also too cloudy and wet, the hot weather is very humid, heavy rain often falls, and cold and hot weather interact.

古文：民病寒热，嗌干、黄瘅、鼽、衂、饮发。
现代文：人们易患寒热证，病发咽喉干燥、黄疸、鼻塞、衄血、水饮发作等病症。
English: People are prone to suffer from cold and fever symptoms, dry throat, jaundice, nasal congestion, blood stasis, and episodes of drinking water.

古文：五之气，畏火临，暑反至，阳乃化，万物乃生、乃长荣，民乃康。
现代文：五之气，主气为阳明燥金，客气为少阳相火，少阳之烈火降临，暑气反而又至，阳热之气生化，万物又出现生长繁荣景象，人们感到安康。
English: Five qi, the main qi is the sun shining and drying gold, the minor qi is the lesser yang and fire, the lesser yang's fierce fire comes down, the hot qi comes instead, the hot qi is biochemical, and all things have a growth and prosperity scene, and people feel at ease.

古文：其病温。
现代文：其发病为温病。
English: Its onset is fever.

古文：终之气，燥令行，余火内格，肿于上、咳、喘，甚则血溢。
现代文：终之气，主气为太阳寒水，客气为阳明燥金，燥气流行，由于燥金之收敛，使五之气的余火隔拒于内，不得外泄，易患肿于上部、咳嗽、气喘，甚则血液外溢等病症。
English: The final qi, the main qi is the cold water of the sun, the courtesy qi is the hot dry gold, and the dry gas is popular. Due to the convergence of the dry gold, the afterglow of the five qi is kept inside and cannot leak out. It is prone to swelling in the upper part, cough, asthma, and even blood spill and other diseases.

古文：寒气数举，则霿雾翳，病生皮腠，内舍于胁，下连少腹而作寒中。
现代文：若寒气时常发起，则雾气弥漫，其病多发于皮肤，如果邪气居于胁部，向下连及少腹，就发生内部寒冷的病症。
English: If the cold air is often initiated, then the mist is pervasive, and the disease is more likely to occur on the skin. If the evil air resides in the stress part, downwards and with a small belly, the disease of internal cold will occur.

古文：地将易也。
现代文：终之气之末，在泉之气将要改变。
English: At the end of the last breath, in the spring the breath will change.

古文：必抑其运气，资其岁胜，折其郁发，先取化源，无使暴过而生其病也。
现代文：凡此少阴司天之年，必须抑制其太过的运气，资助岁气所胜之气，折减其郁，先取化源，不要使其太过而发生疾病。
English: In this year of less yin and yang, it is necessary to restrain its excessive luck, support the spirit of victory, reduce its depression, take the chemical source first, and do not let it go too far and cause disease.

古文：食岁谷以全真气，食间谷以避虚邪，岁宜咸以软之而调其上，甚则以苦发之以酸收之而安其下，甚则以苦泄之。
现代文：食用得岁气的谷类以保全真气，食用得间气的谷类以避虚邪。本年宜用咸味药物以软化之而调其上部，甚则用苦味以发之；以酸味收之而安其下部，甚则以苦泄之。
English: It is advisable to use salty medicine this year to soften and adjust the upper part, and even use bitterness to release it; use sour medicine to calm the lower part, and even use bitterness to release it.

古文：适气同异而多少之，同天气者以寒清化，同地气者以温热化。
现代文：应根据年运与岁气的同异，而制定用多或用少，年运与司天之气同为热者用寒凉之品以化之；若年运与在泉之气同为凉者，用温热之品以化之。
English: It should be determined according to the same difference between the year of good luck and the year of qi, and more or less should be used. If the year of good luck and the year of qi are both hot, the cold product should be used; if the year of good luck and the year of qi in the spring are both cool, the warm product should be used.

古文：用热远热，用凉远凉，用温远温，用寒远寒，食宜同法。有假则反。
现代文：用热性药品时应避开热气主令之时，用凉性药品时应避开凉气主令之时，用温性药品时应避开温气主令之时，用寒性药品时应避开寒气主令之时，用饮食调养时，也应遵照这个原则，这是就一般情况而言。
English: When using hot medicines, you should avoid the hot weather, when using cold medicines, you should avoid the cold weather, when using warm medicines, you should avoid the warm weather, when using cold medicines, you should avoid the cold weather, and when using diet, you should also follow this principle, this is for the general situation.

古文：此其道也，反是者病作矣。
现代文：若气候有反常变化时，就不必拘守这一原则。
English: If there are abnormal changes in the climate, there is no need to adhere to this principle.

古文：帝曰：善。厥阴之政奈何？
现代文：若不遵守上述这些规律，就会导致疾病的发生。黄帝说：好。厥阴风木值年的施政情况是怎样的呢？
English: If you do not follow the above rules, it will lead to the occurrence of disease. Huang Di said: Good. What is the situation of governance in the Year of the Monkey?

古文：岐伯曰：巳亥之纪也。
现代文：岐伯说：厥阴风木值年施政在巳年与亥年。
English: Qibo said: the year of the dragon, the year of the dog, and the year of the boar.

古文：厥阴、少角、少阳，清热胜复同，同正角。
现代文：丁巳年、丁亥年，此二年俱为天符年。厥阴风木司天，少阳相火在泉。丁壬为木运，丁为阴年，故运为少角。
English: Ding Si Year, Ding Hai Year, these two years are all Tianfu Year. Jue Yin Wind Wood Heaven, Shao Yang Fire in Spring. Ding Ren is Wood Year, Ding is Yin Year, So Yun is Shao Ang.

古文：丁巳天符、丁亥天符。其运风清热。
现代文：木运不及，则克我之金的清气乃为胜气，胜气之后，则我生之火的热来复。凡此二年，运气为风，胜气为清，复气为热。
English: If the wood is not lucky, then the clean air of my gold is the winning air, and after the winning air, the heat of my fire comes back. In these two years, luck is the wind, the winning air is clear, and the reborn air is hot.

古文：少角、太徵、少宫、太商、少羽。
现代文：客运五步：初之运少角，二之运太徵，三之运少宫，四之运太商，终之运少羽。
English: There are five steps in passenger transportation: the first step is to transport fewer people, the second step is to transport more people, the third step is to transport fewer people, the fourth step is to transport more people, and the last step is to transport fewer people.

古文：厥阴、少徵、少阳，寒雨胜复同。
现代文：主运五步与客运相同，起于少角，终于少羽。客运与主运之气相同，气得正化。
English: The five steps of the main transport are the same as the passenger transport, starting from a few corners and ending with a few feathers. The passenger transport is the same as the main transport, and the gas is normalized.

古文：癸巳、癸亥。
现代文：癸巳年、癸亥年，此二年俱为同岁会。
English: In the year of the snake and the year of the boar, these two years are the same age group.

古文：其运热寒雨。
现代文：厥阴风木司天，少阳相火在泉。
English: Jueyin wind, wood and heaven, Shaoyang phase fire in the spring.

古文：少徵、太宫、少商、太羽、太角。
现代文：戌癸为火运，癸为阴年，故运少徵。
English: is a fire year,  is a lunar year, so there is less luck.

古文：厥阴、少宫、少阳，风清胜复同，同正角。
现代文：火运不及，则胜我之水的寒气乃为胜气，胜气之后，则我生之土的雨气来复，此二年胜复之气相同。凡此二年，运气为热，胜气为寒，复气为雨。
English: If the fire is not lucky, then the cold air of the water that defeats me is the winning air. After the winning air, the rain of the land where I was born comes back. The two years of winning air are the same. In all these two years, the luck is hot, the winning air is cold, and the second wind is rain.

古文：己巳、己亥。其运雨风清。少宫、太商、少羽、少角、太徵。
现代文：客运五步：初之运少徵，二之运太宫，三之运少商，四之运太羽，终之运少角。主运五步：初之运太角，二之运少徵，三之运太宫，四之运少商，终之运太羽。
English: There are five steps in passenger transportation: the first step is to transport fewer people, the second step is to transport more goods, the third step is to transport fewer merchants, the fourth step is to transport more feathers, and the final step is to transport fewer horns. There are five steps in main transportation: the first step is to transport more horns, the second step is to transport fewer people, the third step is to transport more palaces, the third step is to transport fewer merchants, the fourth step is to transport more feathers, and the final step is to transport fewer horns.

古文：厥阴、少商、少阳，热寒胜复同，同正角。
现代文：已巳年、已亥年。厥阴风木司天，少阳相火在泉。甲已为土运，已为阴年，故运为少宫。
English: It has been the year of the snake and the year of the boar. The yin wind, the wood, and the sky have come out, and the young sun and the fire are in the spring. A has been the soil movement, it has been a cloudy year, and it has been a young palace.

古文：乙巳、乙亥。其运凉热寒。
现代文：土运不及，则克我之木的风气乃为胜气，胜气之后，则我生之金的凉气来复，此二年胜复之气相同。
English: If the fortune of the country is not good, then the spirit of the tree of victory is the spirit of victory. After the spirit of victory, the coolness of the gold of my birth comes back. The spirit of victory in these two years is the same.

古文：少商、太羽、太角、少徵、太宫。厥阴、少羽、少阳，雨风胜复同。
现代文：由于土运不及，司天之木气胜之，则木兼土化，反得其政，故同土运平气。凡此二年，运气为雨，胜气为风，复气为清。客运五步：初之运少宫，二之运太商，三之运少羽，四之运太角，终之运少徵。
English: Due to the fact that the soil transport is not enough, the wood of the Siten wins, the wood and the soil become the same, but the government wins, so the soil transport is flat. In these two years, the luck is rain, the winning wind is wind, and the returning wind is clear. There are five steps in passenger transport: the first transport is Shogun, the second transport is merchant, the third transport is feather, the fourth transport is horn, and the final transport is less.

古文：辛巳、辛亥。其运寒雨风。少羽、少角、太徵、少宫、太商。
现代文：主运五步：初之运少角，二之运太徵，三之运少宫，四之运太商，终之运少羽。
English: There are five steps in the main transport: the first is the transport of a small corner, the second is the transport of a large recruitment, the third is the transport of a small palace, the fourth is the transport of a large merchant, and the last is the transport of a small feather.

古文：凡此厥阴司天之政，气化运行后天，诸同正岁，气化运行同天。
现代文：凡此巳亥年厥阴司天之政，其气不及，后天时而至。上述所说的同正角诸年，其气化情况，年运与司天之气相同，均为木运平气。
English: The year of the boar, the year of the horse, the year of the horse, the year of the horse, the year of the horse, the year of the horse, the year of the horse, the year of the horse, the year of the horse, the year of the horse, the year of the horse, the year of the horse, the year of the horse, the year of the horse, the year of the horse, the year of the horse, the year of the horse, the year of the horse, the year of the horse, the year of the horse, the year of the horse, the year of the horse, the year of the horse, the year of the horse, the year of

古文：天气扰，地气正，风生高远，炎热从之，云趋雨府，湿化乃行，风火同德，上应岁星、荧惑。
现代文：厥阴司天，少阳在泉，司天之气扰动，在泉之气正化，司天之风气，生于高远之处，在泉之炎热自下而从上，云归于雨府，湿化之气流行，司天之风气与在泉之火相合，以为功德，上则应于木星与火星之光较强。
English: Jueyin rules the day, Shao Yang rules the spring, Jie Tian's qi is disturbed, Jie Tian's qi is rectified, Jie Tian's ethos is born in high places, Jie Tian's heat is from below and from above, clouds belong to Yufu, humidifying qi is popular, Jie Tian's ethos is compatible with the fire in the spring, and is considered to be meritorious, and Jie Tian's ethos should be stronger than the light of Jupiter and Mars.

古文：其政挠，其令速，其谷苍、丹，间谷言太者，其耗文角、品羽。
现代文：司天之政扰动，在泉之令迅速，其在谷类应于青色与赤色者生长旺盛，间谷则为借间气太过而得成熟者，易耗损有纹的角虫和颜色淡的羽虫。
English: The disturbance of the celestial government is rapid at the command of the spring, and it grows vigorously in the cereals that should be blue and red, and in the inter-valley, those that are matured by inter-gas are too much, and the hornworms with stripes and the featherworms with light colors are easily lost.

古文：风燥火热，胜复更作，蛰虫来见，流水不冰，热病行于下，风病行于上，风燥胜复形于中。
现代文：风气燥气，火气热气，互为胜复，交替发作，蛰虫出现，流水不能结冰，热病容易发生在下半年，风病容易发生在上半年，风气与燥气交会发作则见于年中。
English: The wind is dry, the fire is hot, the two are mutually reinforcing, alternating attacks, aphids appear, running water cannot freeze, fever is likely to occur in the second half of the year, rheumatism is likely to occur in the first half of the year, and the intersection of wind and dry air is seen in the middle of the year.

古文：初之气，寒始肃，杀气方至。
现代文：初之气，主气为厥阴风木，客气为阴明燥金，寒气开始严厉，杀伐之气方来。
English: At the beginning of the year, the predominant wind is the Jueyin wind tree, the polite wind is the Yinming dry gold, the cold wind begins to be severe, and the killing wind comes.

古文：民病寒于右之下。
现代文：人们易患寒病于右侧下方。
English: People are more susceptible to colds on the lower right side.

古文：二之气，寒不去，华雪水冰，杀气施化，霜乃降，名草上焦，寒雨数至，阳复化。
现代文：二之气，主气为少阳君火，客气为太阳寒水，所以寒冷之气不去，雪花飘，水成冰，杀伐之气施化，霜乃降下，草类上部干燥，寒冷的雨水时常降下，阳气来复。
English: The second kind of qi, the main qi is Shao Yangjun fire, the courtesy qi is the cold water of the sun, so the cold qi does not go, the snowflakes float, the water turns into ice, the killing qi is transformed, the frost is falling, the upper part of the grass is dry, the cold rain often falls, and the yang qi returns.

古文：民病热于中。
现代文：人们易患里热证。
English: People are susceptible to heat stroke.

古文：三之气，天政布，风乃时举。
现代文：三之气，主气为少阳相火，客气为厥阴风木，司天之政布化，大风时起。
English: There are three kinds of qi. The main qi is the fire of the lesser yang, the minor qi is the wind of the greater yang, and the minor qi is the wind of the lesser yang.

古文：民病泣出、耳鸣、掉、眩。
现代文：人们易患两目流泪、耳鸣、抽搐、头晕目眩等病症。
English: People are prone to suffer from blurred vision, ringing in the ears, convulsions, dizziness and other conditions.

古文：四之气，溽暑湿热相薄，争于左之上。
现代文：四之气，主气为太阴湿土，客气为少阴君火，暑湿、湿热之气交争于司天之左间。
English: The four qi, the main qi is too cloudy and wet soil, the courtesy qi is less cloudy and more fire, and the hot and humid, humid and hot qi are in conflict between the left and right sides of the heaven.

古文：民病黄瘅而为胕肿。
现代文：人们易患黄疸病而为浮肿。
English: People are prone to jaundice and suffer from edema.

古文：五之气，燥湿更胜，沉阴乃布，寒气及体，风雨乃行。
现代文：五之气，主气为阳明燥金，客气为太阴湿土，燥气与湿气互有胜负，阴寒沉降之气乃得布化，寒气侵及人体，风雨流行。
English: Five kinds of air, the main air is sunny and dry, the second air is too cloudy and wet, the dry air and the wet air have mutual advantages and disadvantages, the cold and settled air has to be clothed, the cold air invades the human body, and the wind and rain are prevalent.

古文：终之气，畏火司令，阳乃大化，蛰虫出见，流水不冰，地气大发，草乃生，人乃舒，其病温、厉。
现代文：终之气，主气为太阳寒水，客气为少阳相火，由于少阳之烈火主令，阳气大化，蛰虫出现，流水不得结冰，地中阳气发泄，草类生长，人们也感到舒适，其发病则为温病、疫疠。
English: The final qi, the main qi is the cold water of the sun, and the minor qi is the fire of the weak yang phase. Due to the strong fire of the weak yang, the yang qi is enlarged, the aphids appear, the running water must not freeze, the yang qi in the ground is released, the grasses grow, and people feel comfortable. The disease is fever and epidemic.

古文：必折其郁气，资其化源，赞其运气，无使邪胜。
现代文：凡此厥阴司天之年，必须折减其致郁之气，资助不胜之气的生化之源，赞助其不及的运气，不要使邪气太胜。
English: In this year of yin and yang, it is necessary to reduce the depression-causing qi, support the biochemical source of invincible qi, support the luck that cannot be beaten, and do not make the evil qi too strong.

古文：岁宜以辛调上，以咸调下，畏火之气，无妄犯之。
现代文：本年宜用辛味以调治司天之风邪，用咸味以调治在泉之火邪，少阳相火其性尤烈，不可轻易触犯，应当慎重调治。
English: This year, it is advisable to use spicy to treat the wind of the day, and salty to treat the fire of the spring. The fire of the sun is particularly strong, and should not be easily violated, and should be carefully treated.

古文：用温远温，用热远热，用凉远凉，用寒远寒，食宜同法。有假反常。此之道也，反是者病。
现代文：用温性药品时，应避开温气主令之时；用热性药品时，应避开热气主令之时；用凉性药品时，应避开凉气主令之时；用寒性药品时，应避开寒气主令之时，用饮食调养时，也应遵照这个原则，这仅是就一般情况而言。
English: When using warm medicines, you should avoid the heat; when using hot medicines, you should avoid the heat; when using cool medicines, you should avoid the cold; when using cold medicines, you should avoid the cold; when using diet, you should also follow this principle, but only in general.

古文：帝曰：善。
现代文：若气候有反常变化时，就不必拘守这一原则。
English: Emperor Jinwu said, "Very good."

古文：夫子之言，可谓悉矣，然何以明其应乎？
现代文：这就是一般规律，若不遵守上述这些规律，就会导致疾病的发生。黄帝说：好。先生讲的，可以说是很详尽了，然而怎样才能知道它适应或不应呢？
English: This is the general rule, if you do not follow the above rules, it will lead to the occurrence of disease. Huang Di said: Good. What you said is very detailed, but how can you know if it is suitable or not?

古文：岐伯曰：昭乎哉问也！
现代文：岐伯说：你提的问题很高明啊！
English: Qibo said: Your question is very clear!

古文：夫六气者，行有次，止有位，故常以正月朔日平旦视之，覩其位而知其所在矣。
现代文：关于六气的问题，其运行有一定的次序，其终止有一定的方位，所以通常在正月初一日寅时进行观察，根据六气主时所在的位置，就可以知道其气是应或不应。
English: Regarding the issue of the six qi, its operation has a certain order, and its termination has a certain direction. Therefore, it is usually observed on the first day of the first month at the time of the first day of the first month. According to the location of the six qi master, it can be known whether its qi is appropriate or inappropriate.

古文：运有余，其至先，运不及，其至后，此天之道，气之常也。
现代文：年运太过的，其气先时而至，年运不及的，其气后时而至，这是自然气象的一般规律和六气的正常情况。
English: This is the general rule of natural meteorology and the normal situation of the six airs.

古文：运非有余，非不足，是谓正岁，其至当其时也。
现代文：若年运既非太过亦非不及的平气，谓之 正岁 ，其气正当其时而至。
English: If the luck of the year is neither too good nor too bad, it is called a positive year, and the luck comes at the right time.

古文：帝曰：胜复之气，其常在也，灾眚时至，候也奈何？
现代文：黄帝说：胜气和复气是经常存在的，灾害的发生，怎样能够测知呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "Victory and rejuvenation are always present. How can we detect the occurrence of disasters?

古文：岐伯曰：非气化者，是谓灾也。
现代文：岐伯说：不属正常气化的，就属于灾害。
English: Qi Bo said: If it is not normal gasification, it is a disaster.

古文：帝曰：天地之数，终始奈何？
现代文：黄帝说：司天、在泉之气的开始和终止是怎样的呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "Siten, what is the beginning and end of the qi in the spring?"

古文：岐伯曰：悉乎哉问也！
现代文：岐伯说：你问的很详细啊！
English: Qibo said: Your question is very comprehensive!

古文：是明道也。
现代文：这是关于气象变化规律应该知晓的问题。
English: This is a question about the laws of meteorological change that should be known.

古文：数之始，起于上而终于下，岁半之前天气主之，岁半之后地气主之，上下交互气交主之，岁纪毕矣。
现代文：司天在泉之数，开始于司天，终止于在泉，岁半以前，司天主其气；岁半以后，在泉主其气；天气地气相交之时，气交主其气，作为一年气数的纲领，乃尽于此。
English: The number of the gods in the spring begins with the gods, and ends with the gods in the spring. Before the year and a half, the gods control the air; after the year and a half, the gods control the air in the spring; when the weather and the air intersect, the air controls the air. As a program for the number of the gods in the year, this is all.

古文：故曰： 位明气月，可知乎。 
现代文：所以说： 司天在泉所主的方位既然明白了，那么六气所应于十二月就可以知晓了。 
English: Therefore, he said, since it is clear that the position of the Lord of Sity in the spring is clear, then the six qi should be known in December.

古文：所谓气也。
现代文：这就是六气分主六步的气数。
English: This is the number of qi in six steps of the six-qi divider.

古文：帝曰：余司其事，则而行之，不合其数，何也？
现代文：黄帝说：我负责这件事情，并按照这些原则去运用它，有时与实际的气数不完全符合，是什么原因呢？
English: Huang Di said, "I am in charge of this matter, and I use it according to these principles, but sometimes it does not fully correspond to the actual number of qi. What is the reason for this?"

古文：岐伯曰：气用有多少，化洽有盛衰，衰盛多少，同其化也。
现代文：岐伯说：岁气有太过不及的差别，四时主治的气化也有盛衰的不同，盛衰的多少与春、夏、长夏、秋、冬之气化相同。
English: Qi Bo said: There is too much difference between the years of qi, and the gasification of the four o'clock main also has different ups and downs. The ups and downs are more or less the same as the gasification of spring, summer, long summer, autumn and winter.

古文：帝曰：愿闻同化何如？
现代文：黄帝说：我愿你讲一下同化是怎样的呢？
English: Huang Di said: I would like to tell you what assimilation is like.

古文：岐伯曰：风温春化同，热曛昏火夏化同，胜与复同，燥清烟露秋化同，云雨昏暝埃长夏化同，寒气霜雪冰冬化同，此天地五运六气之化，更用盛衰之常也。
现代文：岐伯说：风温与春季之气化同，热曛昏火与夏季之气化同，胜气与复气的同化也是一样的，燥清烟露与秋季之气化同，云雨昏暝埃与长夏之气化同，寒气霜雪冰与冬季之气化同，这就是天地间五运六气之所以与运气互有胜衰的一般情况。
English: Qi Bo said: wind temperature is the same as the gasification of spring, hot wind and dim fire are the same as the gasification of summer, and the assimilation of wind and reactive gas is the same, and the gasification of dry and clear smoke and dew is the same as that of autumn, and the gasification of rain and mist is the same as that of summer, and the gasification of cold wind, frost, snow and ice is the same as that of winter. This is the general situation between heaven and earth, which is the reason why the five elements and the six elements are interdependent with luck.

古文：帝曰：五运行同天化者，命曰天符，余知之矣。
现代文：黄帝说：五运值年与司天之气同化的，叫作 天符 ，我已经知道了。
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "I already know that the Five Auspicious Events of the Year of the Horse are assimilated with the Qi of Heaven, and are called the Heavenly Symbols.

古文：愿闻同地化者何谓也？
现代文：我想听听五运与在泉之气同化是怎样的呢？
English: I would like to hear how the five movements and the assimilation of qi in the spring are?

古文：岐伯曰：太过而同天化者三，不及而同天化者亦三；太过而同地化者三，不及而同地化者亦三。此凡二十四岁也。
现代文：岐伯说：年运太过而与司天之气同化的有三，年运不及而与司天之气同化的也有三；年运太过而与在泉之气同化的有三，年运不及而于在泉之气同化的也有三，属于这类情况的共有二十四年。
English: Qibo said, "There are three years when the wind is too strong and they are assimilated with the wind of heaven, and there are three years when the wind is too weak and they are assimilated with the wind of heaven; there are three years when the wind is too strong and they are assimilated with the wind of the spring, and there are three years when the wind is too weak and they are assimilated with the wind of the spring. A total of twenty-four years belong to this kind of situation."

古文：帝曰：愿闻其所谓也？
现代文：黄帝说：请你把上述情况进一步加以说明。
English: Huang Di said: Please further explain the above situation.

古文：岐伯曰：甲辰、甲戌，太宫，下加太阴；壬寅、壬申，太角，下加厥阴；庚子、庚午，太商，下加阳明，如是者三。
现代文：岐伯说：甲辰、甲戌年，年运太宫，为土运太过，下加太阴湿土在泉；壬寅、壬申年，年运太角，为木运太过，下加厥阴风木在泉；庚子、庚午年，年运太商，为金运太过，下加阳明燥金在泉，像这类太过而同地化的情况有以上三种。
English: Qibo said: In the years of Jia Chen and Jia Xi, the year of the Dragon King was the year of too much soil, and the year of the Dragon King was the year of too much damp soil in the spring; in the years of the Dragon King and the Dragon King, the year of the Dragon King was the year of too much wood, and the year of the Dragon King and the year of the Dragon King was the year of too much merchants, and the year of the Dragon King was the year of too much money, and the year of the Dragon King and the year of the Dragon King was the year of too much sun, and the year of the Dragon King and the year of the Dragon King

古文：癸巳、癸亥，少徵，下加少阳；辛丑、辛未，少羽，下加太阳；癸卯、癸酉，少徵，下加少阴，如是者三。
现代文：癸巳、癸亥年，年运少徵，为火运不及，下加少阳相火在泉；辛丑、辛未年，年运少羽，为水运不及，下加太阳寒水在泉；癸卯、癸酉年，年运少徵，为火运不及，下半年加临少阴君火在泉，像这类不及而同地化的情况有以上三种。
English: In the Year of the Snake and the Year of the Rooster, the Year of the Snake and the Year of the Rooster, the Year of the Fire Rooster, the Year of the Fire Rooster, the Year of the Fire Rooster, the Year of the Fire Rooster, the Year of the Fire Rooster, the Year of the Fire Rooster, the Year of the Fire Rooster, the Year of the Fire Rooster, the Year of the Fire Rooster, the Year of the Fire Rooster, the Year of the Fire Rooster, the Year of the Fire Rooster, the Year of the Fire Rooster, the Year of the Fire Rooster, the Year of the Fire Rooster, the

古文：戊子、戊午，太徵，上临少阴；戊寅、戊申，太徵，上临少阳；丙辰、丙戌，太羽，上临太阳，如是者三。
现代文：戊子、戊午年，年运太徵，为火运太过，上临少阴君火司天；戊寅、戊申年，年运太徵，为火运太过，上临少阳相火司天；丙辰、丙戌年，年运太羽，为水运太过，上临太阳寒水司天，像这类太过而同天化的情况有以上三种。
English: In the years of wu zi and wu hu, the year of fortune is too auspicious, the fire is too strong, and the young yin is too strong; in the years of wu ying and wu shen, the year of fortune is too auspicious, the fire is too strong, and the young yang is too strong; in the years of wu xing and wu xing, the year of fortune is too feathery, the water is too strong, and the sun is too cold and the water is too strong; there are more than three kinds of situations like this.

古文：丁巳、丁亥，少角，上临厥阴；乙卯、乙酉，少商，上临阳明；己丑、己未，少宫，上临太阴，如是者三。
现代文：丁巳、丁亥年，年运少角，为木运不及，上临厥阴风木司天；乙寅、乙卯年，年运少商，为金运不及，上临阳明燥金司天；已丑、已未年，年运少宫，为土运不及，上临太阴湿土司天，像这类不及而同天化的情况有三种。
English: In the years of Ding Si and Ding Hai, the year of fortune is in the minor angle, the year of fortune is in the wood, and the year of fortune is in the wood; in the years of Yi Yin and Yi Wu, the year of fortune is in the merchant, and the year of fortune is in the gold, and the year of fortune is in the gold; in the years of Ya Xia and Ya Wei, the year of fortune is in the palace, and the year of fortune is in the earth, and the year of fortune is in the earth, and the year of fortune is in the earth, and the year of fortune is in the earth, and the year of fortune is in the earth, and

古文：除此二十四岁，则不加不临也。
现代文：除此二十四年之外的，就是年运与司天、在泉不加不临的年份。
English: In addition to this twenty-four years, it is the year of the year and the day of the year, the year when the spring does not come.

古文：帝曰：加者何谓？
现代文：黄帝说： 加 是什么意思呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "What does 'add' mean?"

古文：岐伯曰：太过而加同天符，不及而加同岁会也。
现代文：岐伯说：年运太过而与在泉相加的六年，是与天符相同；年运不及而与在泉相加的六年，是与岁会相同。
English: Qibo said, "The six years added to the spring when the luck of the year is too strong is the same as the heavenly charm; the six years added to the spring when the luck of the year is too weak is the same as the annual meeting."

古文：帝曰：临者何谓？
现代文：黄帝说： 临 是什么意思呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "What do you mean by'submit'?"

古文：岐伯曰：太过不及，皆曰天符，而变行有多少，病形有微甚，生死有早晏耳。
现代文：岐伯说：年运太过或年运不及，与司天相临，这十二年都是天符。然而年运有太过不及的不同，所以病情变化则有轻微与严重的差异，生死转归也有早晚的区别。
English: Qi Bo said: "The twelve years are all signs of heaven. However, there is a difference between the year of good luck and the year of bad luck, so there are slight and serious differences in the changes of the disease, and there is also a difference between life and death.

古文：帝曰：夫子言用寒远寒，用热远热，余未知其然也，愿闻何谓远？
现代文：黄帝说：先生说 用寒远寒，用热远热 ，我不明白其所以然，还想听听怎样叫做 远 呢？
English: Huang Di said, "My teacher said, 'Use cold to make cold, use heat to make hot,' but I don't understand why. I still want to know what is the meaning of 'far'?"

古文：岐伯曰：热无犯热，寒无犯寒，从者和，逆者病，不可不敬畏而远之，所谓时兴六位也。
现代文：岐伯说：用热性药品者不要触犯主时令之热，用寒性药品者不要触犯主时令之寒，适从这一原则就可以和平，违背这一原则就能导致疾病，所以对主时令之气不可不敬畏而有所忌惮，这就是所说的应时令而兴起的六步之气的方位。
English: Qi Bo said: Those who use hot medicines should not touch the heat of the main season, and those who use cold medicines should not touch the cold of the main season. Adhering to this principle can be peaceful, and violating this principle can lead to illness. Therefore, we must not be afraid of the main seasonal qi. This is the so-called six-step qi orientation that arises according to the season.

古文：帝曰：温凉何如？
现代文：黄帝说：温凉之气，应当怎样呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "What should be done with the warm and cool air?

古文：岐伯曰：司气以热，用热无犯；司气以寒，用寒无犯；司气以凉，用凉无犯；司气以温，用温无犯。
现代文：岐伯说：主时令之气为热的，用热性药品时不可触犯；主时令之气为寒的，用寒性药品时不可触犯；主时令之气为凉的，用凉性药品时不可触犯；主时令之气为温的，用温性药品时不可触犯。
English: Qi Bo said: The main season of qi is hot, and it cannot be violated when using hot medicines; the main season of qi is cold, and it cannot be violated when using cold medicines; the main season of qi is cool, and it cannot be violated when using cool medicines; the main season of qi is warm, and it cannot be violated when using warm medicines.

古文：间气同其主无犯，异其主则小犯之，是谓四畏，必谨察之。帝曰：善。
现代文：间气与主气相同的，不可触犯；间气与主气不相同的，可以稍稍犯之。由于寒热温凉四气，不可随意触犯，所以谓之 四畏 ，必须谨慎地加以观察。黄帝说：好。
English: Intermediate air, which is the same as the main air, cannot be violated; intermediate air, which is not the same as the main air, can be violated slightly. Since the cold, hot, warm, and cool four airs cannot be violated at will, they are called the four fears, and must be observed carefully. Huangdi said: Good.

古文：其犯者何如？
现代文：在什么情况下则可以触犯呢？
English: Under what circumstances can it be violated?

古文：岐伯曰：天气反时则可依时，及胜其主则可犯，以平为期而不可过，是谓邪气反胜者。
现代文：岐伯说：天气与主时令之气相反的，可以主时令之气为依据，客气胜过主气的，则可以触犯，以达到平衡协调为目的，而不可使之太过，这是指邪气胜过主气者而言。
English: Qi Bo said: If the weather is contrary to the main seasonal wind, it can be based on the main seasonal wind, and if the courtesy is better than the master wind, it can be violated, with the aim of achieving balance and coordination, but not too much, which means that the evil wind is better than the master wind.

古文：故曰： 无失天信，无逆气宜，无翼其胜，无赞其复，是谓至治。 
现代文：所以说： 不要误失了天气的信候，不要违逆了六气的相宜，不可帮助胜气，不可赞助复气，这才是最好的治疗原则。 
English: Therefore, he said: Don't miss the weather signals, don't go against the six qi, don't help to win the qi, don't help to restore the qi, this is the best treatment principle.

古文：帝曰：善。
现代文：黄帝说：好。
English: Emperor Jinwu said, "Very good."

古文：五运气行，主岁之纪，其有常数乎？
现代文：五运之气的运行与主岁之年，有一定的规律吗？
English: Is there a certain pattern between the operation of the five winds of fortune and the year of the Lord?

古文：岐伯曰：臣请次之。
现代文：岐伯说：让我把它排列出来，讲给你听吧：
English: Qibo said, "Let me put it in order and tell you:

古文：甲子、甲午岁：上少阴火，中太宫土运，下阳明金。
现代文：甲子年、甲午年：上为少阴君火司天；中为太宫土运太过；下为阳明燥金在泉。
English: In the year of the Goat, in the year of the Goat: the upper one is Shouyinjun Huushi Tian; the middle one is Taigong Doushun Taifeng; and the lower one is Yangming Drying Jinzhequan.

古文：热化二，雨化五，燥化四。所谓正化日也。
现代文：司天之气为热化，五运生数为二，表示不及；年运之气为雨化，五运生数为五，表示常生；在泉之气为燥化，五运生数为四，表示不及。
English: The qi of the heaven is heat, and the number of the five movements is two, indicating insufficient; the qi of the year is rain, and the number of the five movements is five, indicating permanent life; the qi of the spring is dry, and the number of the five movements is four, indicating insufficient.

古文：其化上咸寒，中苦热，下酸热，所谓药食宜也。
现代文：凡土运之年，均为上临下加之气无胜无复，都是所谓正化日。
English: In all the years of the earth movement, it was a combination of ups and downs, with no victory and no recovery. These are the so-called rectification days.

古文：乙丑、乙未岁：上太阴土，中少商金运，下太阳水，热化寒化胜复同。
现代文：其气化致病时，司天热化所致宜用咸寒，年运雨化所致宜用苦热，在泉燥化所致宜用酸温，这就是所谓适宜的药食性味。乙丑年、乙未年：上为少阴浊土司天；中为少商金运不及；下为太阳寒水在泉。
English: When its gasification causes illness, it is advisable to use salty cold to control the heat caused by the weather, bitter heat to control the heat caused by the rain, and acid temperature to control the heat caused by the spring. This is the so-called appropriate medicinal and edible taste. In the year of the Goat and in the year of the Goat: the top is less gloomy; the middle is less gloomy; the bottom is the sun cold water in the spring.

古文：所谓邪气化日也。
现代文：金运不及，则可出现热化的胜气与寒化的复气，丑年与未年相同。
English: Every year after the Year of the Dragon, there is no victory or revival. It is the so-called "Day of Rectification."

古文：灾七宫。湿化五，清化四，寒化六，所谓正化日也。
现代文：凡年运不及之年，如果出现胜气复气的，就是所谓邪化日。
English: In any year that is not lucky, if there is victory and revival, it is the so-called evil day.

古文：其化上苦热，中酸和，下甘热，所谓药食宜也。丙寅、丙申岁：上少阳相火，中太羽水运，下厥阴木。火化二，寒化六，风化三，所谓正化日也。
现代文：灾变在于卦象的西方七宫。司天之气为湿化，五运生数为五，表示常生；年运之气为清化，五运生数为四，表示不及；在泉之气为寒化，五运成数为六，表示太过。凡乙丑、乙未二年虽为年运不及，但如果遇到以上情况，就不出现胜气复气，都是所谓正化日。
English: The calamity lies in the western seven palaces of the Chinese zodiac. In the morning, the air of the sky is humidification, and the number of the five auspicious events is five, which indicates the permanent life; in the evening, the air of the year is purification, and the number of the five auspicious events is four, which indicates the insufficient life; in the morning, the air of the spring is cold weather, and the number of the five auspicious events is six, which indicates the excessive life. Although the second year of the ugly and the second year of the unlucky are the years of the unlucky life, but if the above situation is encountered, there will be no victory and

古文：其化上咸寒，中咸温，下辛温，所谓药食宜也。
现代文：其气化致病时，司天湿化所致宜用苦热，年运清化所致宜用酸和，在泉寒化所致宜用甘热，这就是所谓适宜的药食性味。
English: When its gasification causes disease, bitter heat should be used to control the humidity, acidity should be used to purify the year, and sweet heat should be used to cool the spring. This is the so-called appropriate medicinal and edible taste.

古文：丁卯、丁酉岁：上阳明金，中少角木运，下少阴火，清化热化胜复同。
现代文：丙寅年、丙申年：上为少阳相火司天；中为太羽水运太过；下为厥阴风木在泉。
English: In the year of Yin Yin and the year of Yin Yin: the upper one is Shao Yang phase fire and heaven; the middle one is Tai Yu water transport too; the lower one is Jue Yin wind and wood in the spring.

古文：所谓邪气化日也。灾三宫。燥化九，风化三，热化七，所谓正化日也。
现代文：司天之气为热化，五运生数为二，表示不及；年运之气为寒化，五运成数为六，表示太过；在泉之气为风化，五运生数为三，表示不及。凡年运太过之年，均无胜气复气，都是所谓正化日。
English: The qi of the heaven is heated, and the number of the five movements is two, indicating that it is not enough; the qi of the year is cold, and the number of the five movements is six, indicating that it is too much; the qi of the spring is weathered, and the number of the five movements is three, indicating that it is not enough.

古文：其化上苦小温，中辛和，下咸寒，所谓药食宜也。
现代文：其气化致病时，司天热化所致宜用咸寒，年运寒化所致宜用咸温，在泉风化所致宜用辛温，这就是所谓适宜的药食性味。
English: When its gasification causes disease, it is advisable to use salty cold to control the heat caused by the weather, salty warm to cause the cold of the year, and hot and spicy warm to cause the weathering of the spring. This is the so-called appropriate medicinal and edible taste.

古文：戊辰、戊戌岁：上太阳水，中太徵火运，下太阴土。
现代文：丁卯年，属岁会年；丁酉年：上为阳明燥金司天；中为少角木运不及；下为少阴君火在泉。
English: In the year of Dingwu, it is the year of the Year of the Horse; in the year of Dingwu, the top is the year of the Sun, the middle is the year of the Horse, and the bottom is the year of the Horse.

古文：寒化六，热化七，湿化五，所谓正化日也。
现代文：木运不及，则可出现清化的胜气与热化的复气。卯年与酉年相同，凡出现胜气复气的，就是所谓邪化日。
English: If the luck of the wood is not good, there may be a purification of the auspicious and a heat of the auspicious. The year of the rabbit is the same as the year of the rooster, and when the auspicious and the heat of the auspicious occur, it is the so-called evil day.

古文：其化上苦温，中甘和，下甘温，所谓药食宜也。己巳、己亥岁：上厥阴木，中少宫土运，下少阳相火，风化清化胜复同。
现代文：灾变的卦象在东方三宫。司天之气为燥化，五运成数为九，表示太过；年运之气为风化，五运生数为三，表示不及；在泉之气为热化，五运成数为七，表示太过。
English: Catastrophic gaga is like the three palaces in the East. The air of the heaven is dryness, and the number of five movements is nine, which means too much; the air of the year is weathering, and the number of five movements is three, which means too little; the air of the spring is heat, and the number of five movements is seven, which means too much.

古文：所谓邪气化日也。灾五宫。风化三，湿化五，火化七，所谓正化日也。
现代文：凡丁卯、丁酉二年虽为年运不及，但如果遇到以上情况，则不出现胜气复气，都是所谓正化日。
English: Although the two years of Dingwu and Dinghui are unlucky, if the above situation occurs, there will be no victory and rejuvenation, and they are all so-called positive transformation days.

古文：其化上辛凉，中甘和，下咸寒，所谓药食宜也。
现代文：其气化致病时，司天燥化所致宜用苦小温，年运风化所致宜用辛和，在泉热化所致宜用咸寒，这就是所谓适宜的药食性味。
English: When its gasification causes illness, it is appropriate to use bitter and lukewarm when it is caused by dry weathering, spicy and hot when it is caused by the weathering of the year, and salty and cold when it is caused by spring heating. This is the so-called appropriate medicinal and edible taste.

古文：庚午、庚子岁：上少阴火，中太商金运，下阳明金。
现代文：戊辰年、戊戌年：上为太阳寒水司天；中为太徵火运太过；下为太阴湿土在泉。
English: In the year of Bo Chen and the year of Bo Xie: the sun and cold water are at the top; the fire and wind are too strong in the middle; and the moist soil in the spring is too gloomy at the bottom.

古文：热化七，清化九，燥化九，所谓正化日也。
现代文：司天之气为寒化，五运成数为六，表示太过；年运之气为热化，五运成数为七，表示太过；在泉之气为湿化，五运生数为五，表示常生。
English: The weather in the north is cold, and the number of the five elements is six, which means it is too cold; the weather in the south is hot, and the number of the five elements is seven, which means it is too hot; the weather in the south is humid, and the number of the five elements is five, which means it is normal.

古文：其化上咸寒，中辛温酸温，所谓药食宜也。
现代文：凡年运太过之年，均无胜气复气，都是所谓正化日。
English: Every year after the Year of the Dragon, there is no victory or revival. It is the so-called "Day of Rectification."

古文：辛未、辛丑岁：上太阴土，中少羽水运，下太阳水，雨化风化胜复同。所谓邪气化日也。
现代文：其气化致病时，司天寒化所致宜用苦温，年运热化所致宜用甘和，在泉湿化所致宜用甘温，这就是所谓适宜的药食性味。
English: When its gasification causes disease, it is advisable to use bitter temperature caused by the cold weather, sweetness caused by the heat of the year, and sweet temperature caused by the humidification of the spring. This is the so-called appropriate medicinal and edible taste.

古文：灾一宫。雨化五，寒化一，所谓正化日也。
现代文：己巳年、己亥年：上为厥阴风木司天；中为少宫土运不及；下为少阳相火在泉。
English: In the year of the snake and the year of the boar: the top is the jueyin wind, the wood and the sky; the middle is the young palace, the soil is not lucky enough; the bottom is the young sun, the fire is in the spring.

古文：其化上苦热，中苦和，下苦热，所谓药食宜也。
现代文：土运不及，则可出现风化的胜气与清化的复气，巳年与亥年相同，凡出现胜气复气的，就是所谓邪化日。灾变的卦象在中央五宫。
English: If the luck of the earth is not good, then there can be a weathered auspiciousness and a purified auspiciousness. The year of the snake is the same as the year of the boar. If the auspiciousness and auspiciousness appear, it is the so-called evil day. The disastrous gaga elephant is in the central five palaces.

古文：壬申、壬寅岁：上少阳相火，中太角木运，下厥阴木。火化二，风化八，所谓正化日也。
现代文：司天之气为风化，五运生数为三，表示不及；年运之气为湿化，五运生数为五，表示常生；在泉之气为火化，五运成数为七，表示太过。凡己巳、己亥二年虽为年运不及，但如果遇到以上情况，就不出现胜气复气，都是所谓正化日。
English: Siten's qi is weathered, and the birth number of the five movements is three, indicating that it is not enough; the birth gas of the year is humidified, and the birth number of the five movements is five, indicating that it is perennial; the qi of the spring is cremated, and the birth number of the five movements is seven, indicating that it is too much. Although the year of the snake and the year of the boar are not enough, if the above situation is encountered, there will be no victory qi and rebirth qi, and they are all so-called positive transformation days.

古文：其化上咸寒，中酸和，下辛凉，所谓药食宜也。
现代文：其气化致病时，司天风化所致宜用辛凉，年运湿化所致宜用甘和，在泉火化所致宜用咸寒，这就是所谓适宜的药食性味。
English: When its gasification causes illness, it is appropriate to use spicy-cool when it is caused by weathering, sweet and salty when it is caused by humidification, and salty-cold when it is caused by spring cremation. This is the so-called appropriate medicinal and edible taste.

古文：癸酉、癸卯岁：上阳明金，中少徵火运，下少阴火，寒化雨化胜复同。
现代文：庚午年、庚子年，二年俱为同天符：上为少阴君火司天；中为太商金运太过；下为阳明燥金在泉。司天之气为热化，五运成数为七，表示太过；年运之气为清化，五运成数为九，表示太过；在泉之数为燥化，五运成数为九，表示太过。
English: In the year of the Rooster and the Rooster, the two years are all the same day: the upper one is the lesser yin and the lesser fire; the middle one is the greater merchant and the greater wealth; the lower one is the sun and the lesser gold in the spring. The air of the day of the ruler is heated, and the number of five movements is seven, which means too much; the air of the year is purified, and the number of five movements is nine, which means too much; the number of springs is dried, and the number of five movements is nine, which means too much.

古文：所谓邪气化日也。
现代文：凡年运太过之年，均无胜气复气，都是所谓正化日。
English: Every year after the Year of the Dragon, there is no victory or revival. It is the so-called "Day of Rectification."

古文：灾九宫。燥化九，热化二，所谓正化日也。其化上苦小温，中咸温，下咸寒，所谓药食宜也。
现代文：其气化致病时，司天热化所致宜用咸寒，年运清化所致宜用辛温，在泉燥化所致宜用酸温，这就是所谓适宜的药食性味。
English: When its gasification causes disease, it is advisable to use salty cold to control the heat caused by the weather, hot and cold to purify the year, and acid temperature to dry the spring. This is the so-called appropriate medicinal and edible taste.

古文：甲戌、甲辰岁：上太阳水，中太宫土运，下太阴土。
现代文：辛未年、辛丑年，二年俱为同岁会：上为太阴湿土司天；中为少羽水运不及；下为太阳寒水在泉。
English: In the bad year and the ugly year, the two years are the same age: the upper year is too gloomy and damp; the middle year is too little water; and the lower year is the sun cold water in the spring.

古文：寒化六，湿化五，正化日也。
现代文：水运不及，则可出现雨化的胜气与风化的复气。
English: If the water level is not high enough, there may be the phenomenon of rain-wetting and weathering.

古文：其化上苦热，中苦温，下苦温，药食宜也。
现代文：未年与丑年相同，凡出现胜气复气的，就是所谓邪化日。
English: The Year of the Goat is the same as the Year of the Ugly Goat. The day when the winning spirit is reborn is known as the Day of Corruption.

古文：乙亥、乙巳岁：上厥阴木，中少商金运，下少阳相火，热化寒化胜复同。
现代文：灾变的卦象在北方一宫。司天之气为雨化，五运生数为五，表示常生；年运和在泉之气均为寒化，五运生数为一，表示不及。
English: In the north of the country, there is a palace that is said to be in a state of cataclysm. The weather in the north is rainy, and the number of people born in the fifth lunar month is five, indicating a long life. The weather in the south is cold, and the number of people born in the fifth lunar month is one, indicating a short life.

古文：邪气化日也。
现代文：凡辛未、辛丑二年虽为年运不及，但如果遇到以上情况，就不出现胜气复气，都是所谓正化日。
English: Although all the years of bad luck and bad luck are unlucky, if the above situation occurs, there will be no victory and rejuvenation, and they are all so-called positive days.

古文：灾七宫。风化八，清化四，火化二，正化度也。其化上辛凉，中酸和，下咸寒，药食宜也。
现代文：其气化致病时，司天雨化所致宜用苦热，年运寒化所致宜用苦和，在泉寒化所致宜用苦热，这就是所谓适宜的药食性味。
English: When its gasification causes disease, it is advisable to use bitter heat caused by rain, bitter cold caused by cold weather, and bitter heat caused by cold spring. This is the so-called appropriate medicinal and edible taste.

古文：丙子、丙午岁：上少阴火，中太羽水运，下阳明金。
现代文：壬申年、壬寅年，二年俱为同天符：上为少阳相火司天；中为太角木运太过；下为厥阴风木在泉。
English: In the year of Jinshin and the year of Jinshin, the two years at the top are all the same day: the upper one is Shao Yang phase fire and heaven; the middle one is Taekwondo; and the lower one is Jue Yin wind and wood in the spring.

古文：热化二，寒化六，清化四，正化度也。
现代文：司天之气为火化，五运生数为二，表示不及；年运和在泉之气均为风化，五运成数为八，表示太过。
English: The qi of the heaven is cremation, and the number of the five movements is two, indicating that it is not enough; the qi of the year and the spring are weathering, and the number of the five movements is eight, indicating that it is too much.

古文：其化上咸寒，中咸热，下酸温，药食宜也。
现代文：凡年运太过之年，均无胜气复气，都是所谓正化日。
English: Every year after the Year of the Dragon, there is no victory or revival. It is the so-called "Day of Rectification."

古文：丁丑、丁未岁：上太阴土，中少角木运，下太阳水，清化热化胜复同。
现代文：其气化致病时，司天火化所致宜用咸寒，年运风化所致宜用酸和，在泉风化所致宜用辛凉，这就是所谓适宜的药食性味。癸酉年、癸卯年，二年俱为同岁会：上为阳明燥金司天；中为少徵火运不及；下为少阳君火在泉。
English: When its gasification causes illness, it is advisable to use salty cold for the cremation of the star, acid and cold for the weathering of the year, and spicy cold for the weathering of the spring. This is the so-called appropriate medicinal and edible flavor. In the year of the rooster and the year of the rooster, the two years are the same age: the top is the sun and the sky; the middle is the fire and the wind; the bottom is the fire and the spring.

古文：邪气化度也。
现代文：火运不及，则可出现寒化的胜气与雨化的复气。
English: Every year is unlucky, and when there is a change from good luck to bad luck, it is called "evil degree."

古文：灾三宫。雨化五，风化三，寒化一，正化度也。
现代文：酉年与卯年相同，凡出现胜气复气的，就是所谓邪化日。灾变发生在南方九宫。
English: The year of the rooster is the same as the year of the horse, and when the wind of victory is replaced by the wind of defeat, it is known as the day of evil. The disaster occurred in the Southern Jiu Palace.

古文：其化上苦温，中辛温，下甘热，药食宜也。
现代文：司天之气为燥化，五运成数为九，表示太过；年运和在泉之气均为热化，五运生数为二，表示不及。
English: The qi of the heaven is dryness, and the number of the five movements is nine, which is too much; the qi of the year and the spring are heat, and the number of the five movements is two, which is not enough.

古文：戊寅、戊申岁：上少阳相火，中太徵火运，下厥阴木。
现代文：凡癸酉、癸卯二年虽为年运不及，但如果遇到以上情况，就不出现胜气复气，都是所谓正化日。
English: Although the year of the rooster and the year of the rabbit are unlucky years, if the above situation is encountered, there will be no victory and rejuvenation, and they are all so-called positive transformation days.

古文：火化七，风化三，正化度也。其化上咸寒，中甘和，下辛凉，药食宜也。
现代文：其气化致病时，司天燥化所致宜用小温，年运热化所致宜用咸温，在泉寒化所致宜用咸寒，这就是所谓适宜的药食性味。
English: When its gasification causes disease, it is advisable to use low temperature for drying, salty temperature for heating, and salty cold for cooling. This is the so-called appropriate medicinal and edible taste.

古文：己卯、己酉岁：上阳明金，中少宫土运，下少阴火，风化清化胜复同。
现代文：甲戌年、甲辰年，二年既是岁会，又是同天符：上为太阳寒水司天；中为太宫土运太过；下为太阴湿土在泉。
English: In the years of Jiajing and Jichen, the two years are both the year of the year and the same day: the top is the sun, cold water, and the sky; the middle is the Taigong soil movement; and the bottom is the cloudy wet soil in the spring.

古文：邪气化度也。灾五宫。清化九，雨化五，热化七，正化度也。
现代文：司天之气为寒化，五运成数为六，表示太过；年运和在泉之气均为湿化，五运生数为五，表示常生。
English: The number of the five movements is six, indicating that it is too cold; the number of the annual movements and the spring movements are both humidification, and the number of the five movements is five, indicating that it is permanent.

古文：其化上苦小温，中甘和，下咸寒，药食宜也。
现代文：凡年运太过之年，均无胜气复气，都是所谓正化日。
English: Every year after the Year of the Dragon, there is no victory or revival. It is the so-called "Day of Rectification."

古文：庚辰、庚戌岁：上太阳水，中太商金运，下太阴土。寒化一，清化九，雨化五，正化度也。
现代文：其气化致病时，司天寒化所致宜用苦热，年运湿化所致宜用苦温，在泉湿化所致宜用苦温，这就是所谓适宜的药食性味。
English: When its gasification causes disease, the bitter heat caused by the cold weather should be used, the bitter heat caused by the humidity of the year should be used, and the bitter heat caused by the humidity of the spring should be used. This is the so-called appropriate medicinal taste.

古文：其化上苦热，中辛温，下甘热，药食宜也。
现代文：乙亥年、乙巳年：上为厥阴风木司天；中为少商金运不及；下为少阳相火在泉。
English: In the Year of the Boar and the Year of the Snake: the top is the year of the yin and yang; the middle is the year of less business and less money; and the bottom is the year of less sun and more fire.

古文：辛巳、辛亥岁：上厥阴木，中少羽水运，下少阳相火，雨化风化胜复同。
现代文：金运不及，则可出现热化的胜气与寒化的复气，亥年与巳年相同，凡出现胜气复气的，就是所谓邪化日。
English: If luck is not on your side, you can have a hotter auspicious day and a colder auspicious day. The year of the boar is the same as the year of the snake. If you have a good auspicious day and a bad auspicious day, it is called a bad auspicious day.

古文：邪气化度也。灾一宫。
现代文：灾变的卦象在西方七宫。
English: The story of the Cataclysm takes place in the Western Seven Palaces.

古文：风化三，寒化一，火化七，正化度也。
现代文：司天之气为风化，五运成数为八，表示太过；年运之气为清化，五运生数为四，表示不及；在泉之气为火化，五运生数为二，表示不及。
English: The qi of heaven is weathering, and the number of the five movements is eight, indicating too much; the qi of the year is purification, and the number of the five movements is four, indicating too little; the qi of the spring is cremation, and the number of the five movements is two, indicating too little.

古文：其化上辛凉，中苦和，下咸寒，药食宜也。
现代文：凡乙亥、乙巳二年虽为年运不及，但如果遇到以上情况，就不出现胜气复气，都是所谓正化度。
English: In spite of the fact that the year of the Rooster and the Year of the Snake are unlucky years, if you encounter the above situation, there will be no victory and rebirth, which is the so-called positive degree.

古文：壬午、壬子岁：上少阴火，中太角木运，下阳明金。热化二，风化八，清化四，正化度也。其化上咸寒，中酸凉，下酸温，药食宜也。
现代文：其气化致病时，司天风化所致宜用辛凉，年运清化所致宜用酸和，在泉火化所致宜用咸寒，这就是所谓适宜的药食性味。丙子年，为岁会年；丙午年：上为少阴君火司天；中为太羽水运太过；下为阳明燥金在泉。司天之气为热化，五运生数为二，表示不及；年运之气为寒化，五运成数为六，表示太过；在泉之气为清化，五运生数为四，表示不及。凡年运太过之年，均无胜气复气，都是所谓正化度。
English: In the case of illness caused by gasification, it is advisable to use hot and cold to control the weather, acid and cold to purify the year, and cold and salty to burn the spring. This is the so-called appropriate medicinal taste. In the year of the crab, it is the year of the year; in the year of the crab, it is the year of the year; in the year of the crab, it is the year of the year; in the year of the crab, it is the year of the year; in the year of the crab, it is the year of the year; in the year of the crab, it is the year of the year;

古文：癸未、癸丑岁：上太阴土，中少徵火运，下太阳水，寒化雨化胜复同。
现代文：其气化致病时，司天热化所致宜用咸寒，年运寒化所致宜用咸热，在泉清化所致宜用酸温，这就是所谓适宜的药食性味。丁丑年、丁未年：上为太阴湿土司天；中为少角木运不及；下为太阳寒水在泉。
English: When its gasification causes illness, it is advisable to use salty cold to control the heat caused by the weather, salty heat to control the cold caused by the year, and acid temperature to purify the spring. This is the so-called appropriate medicinal and edible taste. In the year of the goose and the year of the rooster: the top is too cloudy and wet; the middle is too cold for the little horn tree; the bottom is the cold water of the sun in the spring.

古文：邪气化度也。灾九宫。
现代文：木运不及，则可出现清化的胜气与热化的复气，丑年与未年相同。
English: If the luck of the wood is not good, then there may be a purifying auspiciousness and a rejuvenating auspiciousness, and the bad year is the same as the good year.

古文：雨化五，火化二，寒化一，正化度也。
现代文：年运不及，凡出现胜气复气的，就是所谓邪化度。
English: Every year is unlucky, and when there is a change from good luck to bad luck, it is called "evil degree."

古文：其化上苦温，中咸温，下甘热，药食宜也。
现代文：灾变发生在东方三宫。
English: The cataclysm occurred in the Eastern Three Kingdoms.

古文：甲申、甲寅岁：上少阳相火，中太宫土运，下厥阴木。火化二，雨化五，风化八，正化度也。
现代文：司天之气为雨化，五运生数为五，表示常生；年运之气为风化，五运生数为三，表示不及；在泉之气为寒化，五运生数为一，表示不及。
English: The qi of the siding is rain, and the number of five movements is five, indicating permanent life; the qi of the year is weather, and the number of five movements is three, indicating insufficient; the qi of the spring is cold, and the number of five movements is one, indicating insufficient.

古文：其化上咸寒，中咸和，下辛凉，药食宜也。
现代文：丁丑、丁未二年虽然年运不及，但如果遇到上述情况，均不出现胜气复气，都是所谓正化度。
English: Although Ding Chou and Ding Wei did not have good luck in the second year, if they encountered the above situation, they did not appear to be victorious and reinvigorated, and they were all so-called positive degrees.

古文：乙酉、乙卯岁：上阳明金，中少商金运，下少阴火，热化寒化胜复同。
现代文：其气化致病时，司天雨化所致宜用苦温，年运风化所致宜用辛温，在泉寒化所致宜用甘热，这就是所谓适宜的药食性味。
English: When its gasification causes disease, it is advisable to use bitter temperature to control the weathering caused by rain, hot temperature to control the weathering caused by weathering, and sweet heat to cause cold in the spring. This is the so-called appropriate medicinal and edible taste.

古文：邪气化度也。灾七宫。燥化四，清化四，热化二，正化度也。
现代文：戊寅年、戊申年，二年俱为天符年：上为少阳相火司天；中为太徵火运太过；下为厥阴风木在泉。司天和年运之气均为火化，五运成数为七，表示太过；在泉之气为风化，五运生数为三，表示不及。
English: In the year of Wu Yin and the year of Wu Shen, the two years are the years of the heavenly signs: the upper year is the year of the fire of the lesser sun; the middle year is the year of the fire of the lesser sun; the lower year is the year of the fire of the lesser sun; and the lower year is the year of the fire of the lesser sun; the lower year is the year of the fire of the lesser sun; the lower year is the year of the fire of the lesser sun; the lower year is the year of the fire of the lesser sun; the lower year is the year of the fire of the lesser sun; the lower year is the year of the fire of the

古文：其化上苦小温，中苦和，下咸寒，药食宜也。
现代文：凡年运太过之年，均无胜气复气，都是所谓正化度。
English: When its gasification causes illness, it is appropriate to use spicy cold caused by weathering, bitter cold caused by cold weather, and salty cold caused by spring cremation. This is the so-called appropriate medicinal and edible taste.

古文：丙戌、丙辰岁：上太阳水，中太羽水运，下太阴土。寒化六，雨化五，正化度也。其化上苦热，中咸温，下甘热，药食宜也。
现代文：其气化致病时，司天火化所致宜用咸寒，年运火化所致宜用甘和，在泉风化所致宜用辛凉，这就是所谓适宜的药食性味。
English: When its gasification causes illness, it is appropriate to use salty cold caused by the Siten cremation, sweetness caused by the Nianyun cremation, and bitter cold caused by the Quan weathering. This is the so-called appropriate medicinal and edible taste.

古文：丁亥、丁巳岁：上厥阴木，中少角木运，下少阳相火，清化热化胜复同。
现代文：已卯年、已酉年：上为阳明燥金司天；中为少宫土运不及；下为少阴君火在泉。土运不及，则可出现风化的胜气与清化的复气，卯年与酉年相同。
English: In the year of the Rooster, in the year of the Rooster: in the upper part, the sun shines brightly and the weather is fine; in the middle part, the Shogun's reign is short; in the lower part, the Shogun's reign is short, and the fire is in the spring. If the reign is short, then the weathered auspicious air and the purified rejuvenated air can appear, and the year of the Rooster is the same as the year of the Rooster.

古文：邪气化度也。
现代文：年运不及，凡出现胜气复气的，就是所谓邪化度。
English: Every year is unlucky, and when there is a change from good luck to bad luck, it is called "evil degree."

古文：灾三宫。
现代文：灾变的卦象在中央五宫。
English: Cataclysmic conundrums linger in the central five palaces.

古文：风化三，火化七，正化度也。其化上辛凉，中辛和，下咸寒，药食宜也。
现代文：司天之气为清化，五运成数为九，表示太过；年运之气为雨化，五运生数为五，表示常生；在泉之气为热化，五运成数七，表示太过。
English: The qi of the heaven is purification, and the number of the five movements is nine, which means too much; the qi of the year is rain, and the number of the five movements is five, which means permanent life; the qi of the spring is heat, and the number of the five movements is seven, which means too much.

古文：戊子、戊午岁：上少阴火，中太徵火运，下阳明金。热化七，清化九，正化度也。
现代文：凡已卯、已酉二年虽然年运不及，但如果遇到上述情况，均不出现胜气复气，都是所谓正化度。
English: In the past two years, although the year is not lucky, if the above situation is encountered, there will be no victory and rejuvenation, which is the so-called normalization degree.

古文：其化上咸寒，中甘寒，下酸温，药食宜也。
现代文：其气化致病时，司天清化所致宜用苦小温，年运雨化所致宜用甘和，在泉热化所致宜用咸寒，这就是所谓适宜的药食性味。
English: When its gasification causes disease, it is appropriate to use bitter and lukewarm when it is caused by the purification of the day, sweet and salty when it is caused by the precipitation of the year, and cold and salty when it is caused by the heating of the spring. This is the so-called appropriate medicinal and food taste.

古文：己丑、己未岁：上太阴土，中少宫土运，下太阳水，风化清化胜复同。
现代文：庚辰年、庚戌年：上为太阳寒水司天；中为太商金运太过；下为太阴湿土在泉。
English: In the year of Geng Chen and the year of Geng Xu: the sun and cold water are at the top; the merchants and money are too far away in the middle; and the wet soil in the spring is too gloomy in the bottom.

古文：邪气化度也。灾五宫。雨化五，寒化一，正化度也。
现代文：司天之气为寒化，五运生数为一，表示不及；年运之气为清化，五运成数为九，表示太过；在泉之气为雨化，五运生数为五，表示常生。
English: The qi of Si Tian is cold, and the number of the five movements is one, indicating insufficient; the qi of the year is purification, and the number of the five movements is nine, indicating too much; the qi of the spring is rain, and the number of the five movements is five, indicating permanent life.

古文：其化上苦热，中甘和，下甘热，药食宜也。
现代文：凡年运太过之年，均无胜气复气，都是所谓正化度。
English: All the years when the luck of the year is too much, there is no victory and rejuvenation, which is the so-called normalization degree.

古文：庚寅、庚申岁：上少阳相火，中太商金运，下厥阴木。火化七，清化九，风化三，正化度也。
现代文：其气化致病时，司天寒化所致宜用苦热，年运清化所致宜用辛温，在泉雨化所致宜用甘热，这就是所谓适宜的药食性味。辛巳年、辛亥年：上为厥阴风木司天；中为少羽水运不及；下为少阳相火在泉。水运不及，则可出现雨化的胜气与风化的复气，巳年与亥年相同。
English: When its gasification causes illness, bitter heat should be used to control the cold caused by the weather, bitter heat should be used to purify the weather, and sweet heat should be used to control the rain caused by the spring rain. This is the so-called appropriate medicinal and edible flavor. Harshness year, Xinhai year: the top is Jueyin wind and wood; the middle is less than water; the bottom is less than the sun and fire in the spring. If the water is not enough, there may be rain and weathering, and the year is the same as the year of boar.

古文：其化上咸寒，中辛温，辛凉，药食宜也。
现代文：年运不及，凡出现胜气复气的，就是所谓邪化度。
English: Every year is unlucky, and when there is a change from good luck to bad luck, it is called "evil degree."

古文：辛卯、辛酉岁：上阳明金，中少羽水运，下少阴火，雨化风化胜复同。邪气化度也。
现代文：灾变的卦象在北方一宫。司天之气为风化，五运生数为三，表示不及；年运之气为寒化，五运生数为一，表示不及；在泉之气为火化，五运成数为七，表示太过。
English: In the north of the country, there is a palace that is a symbol of disaster. The weather in the north is weathering, and the number of the five auspicious events is three, indicating that it is not enough; the weather in the south is cooling, and the number of the five auspicious events is one, indicating that it is not enough; the weather in the south is cremation, and the number of the five auspicious events is seven, indicating that it is too much.

古文：灾一宫。清化九，寒化一，热化七，正化度也。
现代文：凡辛巳、辛亥二年虽然年运不及，但如果遇到上述情况，均不出现胜气复气，都是所谓正化度。
English: Although the year of Xin Si and Xin Hai 2 is unlucky, if the above situation is encountered, there will be no victory and rejuvenation, which is the so-called positive degree.

古文：其化上苦小温，中苦和，下咸寒，药食宜也。
现代文：其气化致病时，司天风化所致宜用辛凉，年运寒化所致宜用苦和，在泉火化所致宜用咸寒，这就是所谓适宜的药食性味。
English: When its gasification causes illness, it is appropriate to use spicy cold caused by weathering, bitter cold caused by cold weather, and salty cold caused by spring cremation. This is the so-called appropriate medicinal and edible taste.

古文：壬辰、壬戌岁：上太阳水，中太角木运，下太阴土。
现代文：壬午年、壬子年：上为少阴君火司天；中为太角木运太过；下为阳明燥金在泉。
English: In the year of the dog, in the year of the rooster: the upper one is the year of the lesser yin, the year of the fire god; the middle one is the year of the great horned wood; and the lower one is the year of the bright sun, the year of the gold in the spring.

古文：寒化六，风化八，雨化五，正化度也。
现代文：司天之气为热化，五运生数为二，表示不及；年运之气为风化，五运成数为八，表示太过；在泉之气为清化，五运生数为四，表示不及。
English: The qi of the heaven is heat, and the number of the five movements is two, indicating that it is not enough; the qi of the year is weather, and the number of the five movements is eight, indicating that it is too much; the qi of the spring is purification, and the number of the five movements is four, indicating that it is not enough.

古文：其化上苦温，中酸温，下甘温，药食宜也。
现代文：司天之气为风化，五运成数为八，表示太过；年运和在泉之气均为火化，五运生数为二，表示不及。
English: The qi of Siten is weathering, and the number of the five movements is eight, indicating that it is too much; the qi of Nianyun and Hequan are cremated, and the number of the five movements is two, indicating that it is not enough.

古文：癸巳、癸亥：上厥阴木，中少徵火运，下少阳相火，寒化雨化胜复同。邪气化度也。
现代文：凡癸巳、癸亥二年虽然年运不及，但如果遇到上述情况，均不出现胜气复气，都是所谓正化度。
English: In spite of being unlucky in the year of the snake and the year of the boar, if they encounter the above-mentioned situation, they will not appear victorious and reinvigorated, and they are all so-called positive degrees.

古文：灾九宫。风化八，火化二，正化度也。其化上辛凉，中咸和，下咸寒，药食宜也。
现代文：其气化致病时，司天风化所致宜用辛凉，年运火化所致宜用咸和，在泉火化所致宜用咸寒，这就是所谓适宜的药食性味。
English: When its gasification causes disease, it is appropriate to use spicy cold caused by weathering, salty cold caused by cremation, and salty cold caused by spring cremation. This is the so-called appropriate medicinal and edible taste.

古文：凡此定期之纪，胜复正化，皆有常数，不可不察。
现代文：凡此五运六气之定期值年，胜气复气及正化邪化的不同变化，都有一定的规律可循，不可不加以考察。
English: All the different changes of the periodic value of the five movements and six qi, the winning qi, the reinstatement of qi and the rectification of evil qi, have a certain law to follow, and must be examined.

古文：故知其要者，一言而终，不知其要，流散无穷，此之谓也。帝曰：善。
现代文：所以说，有关五运六气的问题，只要掌握了它的要领，一句话就可以结束，不能掌握它的要领，则漫无边际，就是这个意思。黄帝说：好！
English: Therefore, when it comes to the question of the five elements of luck, as long as you have grasped the essentials of it, you can end with a sentence. If you cannot grasp the essentials of it, it is boundless, that is the meaning. Huang Di said: Good!

古文：五运之气亦复岁乎？
现代文：五运六气也会有复气之年吗？
English: Will the Year of the Five Elements also be the Year of the Six Elements?

古文：岐伯曰：郁极乃发，待时而作也。
现代文：岐伯说：五运之气郁到极点，就要爆发，不过需要等待一定的时机才能发作。
English: Qi Bo said, "When the mood of the Five Auspices is extremely depressed, it is about to break out, but it needs to wait for a certain time to occur.

古文：帝曰：请问其所谓也？
现代文：黄帝说：请问其中的道理是什么呢？
English: Huang Di said: What is the reason for this?

古文：岐伯曰：五常之气，太过不及，其发异也。
现代文：岐伯说：五运之气的太过年和不及年，其复气的发作是不一样的。
English: Qi Bo said: The five auspicious years of qi are too old and too young, and the onset of its revival is different.

古文：帝曰：愿卒闻之。
现代文：黄帝说：我想请你详尽地讲讲。
English: Huang Di said, "I hope you can tell me everything in detail."

古文：岐伯曰：太过者暴，不及者徐，暴者为病甚，徐者为病持。
现代文：岐伯说：太过者发作急暴，不及者发作徐缓，急暴者致病严重，徐缓者致病持续。
English: Qi Bo said: those who are too much will have a sudden attack, those who are not enough will have a slow attack, those who are violent will cause serious illness, and those who are slow will continue to cause illness.

古文：帝曰：太过不及，其数何如？
现代文：黄帝说：太过与不及的气化之数是怎样的呢？
English: Huang Di said: What is the number of gasification that is too much and too little?

古文：岐伯曰：太过者其数成，不及者其数生，土常以生也。
现代文：岐伯说：气太过，其气化之数为五行的成数；气不及的，其气化之数为五行的生数；惟有土运，不管太过不及，其气化之数，皆为生数。
English: Qi Bo said: If the qi is too much, the number of gasification is the number of five elements; if the qi is too little, the number of gasification is the number of five elements; but if the qi is too little, the number of gasification is the number of five elements; but if it is too much, the number of gasification is the number of five elements.

古文：帝曰：其发也何如？
现代文：黄帝说：五气郁而发作是怎样的呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "What is it like to be depressed and have a seizure?

古文：岐伯曰：土郁之发，岩谷震惊，雷殷气交，埃昏黄黑，化为白气，飘骤高深，击石飞空，洪水乃从，川流漫衍，田牧土驹。
现代文：岐伯说：土气郁而发作的情况是：山谷惊动，雷声震于气交，尘埃黄黑昏暗，湿气蒸发则化为白气，急风骤雨降于高山深谷，山崩石陷，撞击横飞，山洪暴发，大水随之而至，河流湖泊泛滥漫衍，土质破坏，水去之后，田土荒芜，只可牧畜而已。
English: Qi Bo said: the situation that occurs when the soil is depressed is: the valley is alarmed, the thunder is shaken by the air exchange, the dust is dark at dusk, the moisture evaporation is converted into white gas, the sudden wind and rain fall in the high mountain valley, the landslide and rockfall, the impact is flying, the flash flood occurs, the big water follows, the rivers and lakes are flooded, the soil quality is damaged, and after the water is gone, the fields are barren, and only livestock can be grazed.

古文：化气乃敷，善为时雨，始生始长，始化始成。
现代文：土郁发作，则土之化得以敷布，喜降应时之雨，万物开始生长化成。
English: When earth depression occurs, the transformation of soil can be spread, and when it rains, everything begins to grow and transform.

古文：故民病心腹胀，肠鸣而为数后，甚则心痛，胁䐜，呕吐，霍乱，饮发，注下，胕肿，身重。
现代文：湿气过胜则使人体水湿的运化受到影响，所以人们易患心腹部胀满，肠鸣增多，甚则心痛，胁部胀满，呕吐，霍乱，水饮发作，大便泄下如注，浮肿，身重等病症。
English: Excessive humidity affects the transport of water and moisture in the human body, so people are prone to heart and abdomen bloating, increased bowel sounds, extreme heartache, swelling of the diaphragm, vomiting, cholera, water drinking, stool leakage, edema, weight and other diseases.

古文：云奔雨府，霞拥朝阳，山泽埃昏，其乃发也，以其四气。
现代文：云气奔向雨府，早霞应贯于朝阳之处，尘埃昏暗，山泽不清，这就是土郁开始发作的现象，发作时间多在四之气主时的时候。
English: The clouds are rushing to the rainy capital, the morning haze should penetrate the place of the morning sun, the dust is dim, and the mountains and lakes are unclear. This is the phenomenon of the beginning of the onset of the muggy, and the onset time is mostly in the time of the four winds.

古文：云横天山，浮游生灭，怫之先兆。
现代文：发现云雾横贯于天空与山谷，或骤或散，忽生忽灭，浮动不定，乃是土郁将发的先兆。
English: It was found that clouds and fogs traversing the sky and valleys, either sudden or dispersed, fleeting and fleeting, and fluctuating, are a harbinger of the onset of drought.

古文：金郁之发，天洁地明，风清气切，大凉乃举，草树浮烟，燥气以行，霿雾数起，杀气来至，草木苍干，金乃有声。
现代文：金气郁而发作的情况是：天气清爽，地气明净，风清凉，气急切，凉气大起，草木之上轻浮着云烟，燥气流行，时常有雾气弥漫，肃杀之气至，草木干枯凋落，发为秋声。
English: The weather is crisp, the air is clear, the wind is cool, the air is eager, the cool air rises, the clouds float above the plants, the dry air is popular, there is often fog, the air is suffocating, the plants wither and fall, and the sound of autumn is heard.

古文：故民病咳，逆，心胁满引少腹，善暴痛，不可反侧，嗌干，面陈色恶。
现代文：燥气过胜则气化受到影响，所以人们易患咳嗽，气逆，心与胁部胀满牵引到小腹部，经常急剧疼痛，不能转动，咽喉干燥，面色如烟尘而难看等病症。
English: Gasification is affected by excessive dryness, so people are prone to coughing, gas inversion, heart and diaphragm are swollen and pulled to the small abdomen, often sharp pain, unable to turn, dry throat, face is sooty and unsightly and other diseases.

古文：山泽焦枯，土凝霜卤，怫乃发也，其气五。
现代文：山泽干枯，地面凝聚着如霜一样的卤碱，这就是金郁开始发作的现象，发作时间多在五之气主时的时候。
English: The mountains and rivers are dry, and the ground condenses halogen like frost. This is the phenomenon of the onset of gold depression. The onset time is mostly at the time of the rising of the five elements.

古文：夜零白露，林莽声凄，怫之兆也。
现代文：发现夜间降下白露，丛林深处风声凄凉，乃是金郁将发的先兆。
English: The discovery of white dew falling at night and the sound of the wind in the depths of the jungle is a harbinger of gloom.

古文：水郁之发，阳气乃辟，阴气暴举，大寒乃至，川泽严凝，寒雾结为霜雪，甚则黄黑昏翳，流行气交，乃为霜杀，水乃见祥。
现代文：水气郁而发作的情况是：阳气退避，阴气骤起，大寒的气候乃至，川流湖泽被严寒冻结，寒冷的雾气结为霜雪，甚则雾气黄黑昏暗遮避，流行于气交，而为霜雪肃杀之气，水乃预先发现某些征兆。
English: The conditions that occur when the water is dense are: the yang air retreats, the yin air suddenly rises, the cold weather even, the rivers and lakes are frozen by the cold, the cold fog condenses into frost and snow, and the fog is dark and dark at dusk. It is popular in the air exchange, and it is the frost and snow that kills the air, and the water is found in advance of certain signs.

古文：故民病寒客，心痛，腰脽痛，大关节不利，屈伸不便，善厥逆，痞坚，腹满。
现代文：所以人们易患寒气侵犯人体而心痛，腰部与臀部疼痛，大关节活动不灵，屈伸不便，善厥逆，痞坚，腹满等病。
English: Therefore, people are susceptible to cold invading the human body and causing heartache, pain in the lower back and buttocks, poor movement of large joints, inconvenience in flexion and extension, poor posture, stiff neck, full stomach and other diseases.

古文：阳光不治，空积沉阴，白埃昏暝而乃发也。其气二火前后。
现代文：阳气不得主治，阴气聚积于空中，白埃昏暗，这就是水郁开始发作的现象，发作时间，多在君火与相火即二之气主时的前后。
English: Yang qi cannot dominate, yin qi accumulates in the air, and white ash is dim. This is the phenomenon of the onset of melancholy. The onset time is mostly before and after the time of the king fire and the phase fire, which are the two main qi.

古文：太虚深玄，气犹麻散，微见而隐，色黑微黄，怫之先兆也。
现代文：发现太空之气散乱如麻，深远昏暗，隐约可见，颜色黑微黄，乃是水郁发的先兆。
English: The discovery that the atmosphere of space is dispersed like a gauze, far and dim, faintly visible, black and slightly yellow in color, is a harbinger of watery hair.

古文：木郁之发，太虚埃昏，云物以扰，大风乃至，屋发折木，木有变。
现代文：木气郁而发作的情况是：在空中尘埃昏暗，云雾飘动，大风乃至，房屋被掀顶，树木被折断，草木之类发生变化。
English: The situation that occurs when the air is thick with wood is: the dust is dark in the air, the clouds are fluttering, the wind is even strong, the houses are lifted, the trees are broken, and the plants and trees change.

古文：故民病胃脘当心而痛、上支两胁、鬲咽不通、食饮不下，甚则耳鸣，眩转，目不识人，善暴僵仆。
现代文：所以人们易患胃脘当心下处疼痛，向上撑两胁，咽噎阻隔不通，食饮难以咽下，甚则耳鸣，头目眩晕旋转，两眼辩不清人物，善突然僵直仆倒，等病。
English: Therefore, people are prone to stomach cramps, pain in the lower part of the heart, the two sides of the stomach are propped up, the pharynx is blocked, food and drink are difficult to swallow, and even tinnitus, dizziness, dizziness, dizziness, dizziness, dizziness, dizziness, dizziness, dizziness, dizziness, dizziness, dizziness, dizziness.

古文：太虚苍埃，天山一色，或气浊色，黄黑郁若，横云不起雨，而乃发也，其气无常。
现代文：太空中尘埃苍茫，天空和山脉同样颜色，或呈现浊气，色黄黑郁滞不散，云虽横于空中，而雨水不降，这就是木郁开始发作的现象，发作的时间不固定。
English: In space, there is a vast expanse of dust, the sky is the same color as the mountains, or there is argon gas, the color yellow and black is stagnant and does not disperse, although the cloud is in the air, and the rain does not fall, this is the phenomenon of the onset of woodworm, the time of onset is not fixed.

古文：长川草偃，柔叶呈阴，松吟高山，虎啸岩岫，怫之先兆也。
现代文：发现平野中的草皆低垂不起，柔软的树叶子皆背面翻转向外，高山之松被风吹作响，虎啸于山崖风峦之上，乃是木郁将发的先兆。
English: It was found that the grasses in the plains were low-hanging, the soft leaves of the trees were turned over on their backs, the mountain pines were blown by the wind, and the tigers roared on the top of the cliffs, which was a harbinger of the wood depression.

古文：火郁之发，太虚曛翳，大明不彰，炎火行，大暑至，山泽燔燎，材木流津，广厦腾烟，土浮霜卤，止水乃减，蔓草焦黄，风行惑言，湿化乃后。
现代文：火气郁而发作的情况是：太空中有黄赤之气遮避，太阳光不甚明亮，火炎流行，大暑乃至，高山湖泽似被火炎烧燎一样，木材流出液汁，高大的厅堂烟气升腾，地面上浮现出霜卤样物质，不流动的水减少，蔓草类焦枯干黄，风热炽盛使人们言语惑乱，湿之化气乃后期而至。
English: The conditions that occur when the fire is thick are: there is a yellow-red atmosphere in space, the sun is not very bright, the flame is prevalent, the heat is even, the alpine lakes seem to be burned by the flame, the wood flows out of the sap, the tall hall smoke rises, the ground surfaces with a frost halogen-like substance, the non-flowing water decreases, the vine grasses are scorched and yellow, the hot wind confuses people's speech, and the humidified gas is late.

古文：故民病少气，疮疡，痈肿，胁腹、胷背、面首、四肢䐜愤，胪胀，疡疿，呕逆，瘈瘲，骨痛，节乃有动，注下，温疟，腹中暴痛，血溢流注，精液乃少，目赤，心热，甚则瞀闷懊憹，善暴死。
现代文：所以人们易患少气，疮疡，痈肿，胁、腹、胸背、头面、四肢等部位胀满而溢，腹胀，疡痱，呕逆，筋脉抽搐，骨节疼痛而抽动，泄泻不止，温疟，腹中急剧疼痛，血外溢流注不止，精液减少，目赤，心中烦热，甚则昏晕、烦闷、懊恼等病症，容易突然死亡。
English: Therefore, people are prone to suffer from shortness of breath, sores, abscesses, pressure sores, swollen and overflowing abdomen, chest, back of the chest, head, and extremities, bloating, diarrhea, vomiting, muscle twitching, painful bone twitching, continuous diarrhea, malaria, sharp pain in the abdomen, continuous blood overflow, decreased semen, red eyes, heart fever, dizziness, drowsiness, chagrin, and sudden death.

古文：刻终大温，汗濡玄府，其乃发也，其气四。
现代文：每昼夜的百刻终尽之时，阳气来复体温大升，汗湿汗孔，这就是火郁开始发作的现象，发作的时间，多在四之气的时候。
English: At the end of each day and night, when the yang qi is compounded, the body temperature rises sharply, the sweat is moist and the sweat pores are formed. This is the phenomenon of the onset of heat exhaustion. The time of the onset is mostly in the time of the four qi.

古文：动复则静，阳极反阴，湿令乃化乃成，华发水凝，山川冰雪，焰阳午泽，怫之先兆也。
现代文：事物动极则静，阳极则阴，热极之后，湿气乃化乃成，花开之时又见水结成冰，山川出现冰雪，则火乃被郁于午时，见有阳热之气生于湖中，乃是火郁将发的先兆。
English: Things are dynamic and quiet, anode and negative, after the heat, moisture is transformed into moisture, water is frozen when the flower blooms, ice and snow appear in the mountains and rivers, fire is smothered in the afternoon, and hot air is born in the lake, which is a harbinger of smothering.

古文：有怫之应而后报也，皆观其极而乃发也。
现代文：五气之郁，必有先兆，而后乃发生报复之气，都是在郁极的时候，开始发作。
English: If you are depressed, there will be a precursor, and then the revengeful spirit will occur. It all begins to occur when you are extremely depressed.

古文：木发无时，水随火也。
现代文：木郁的发作，没有固定的时间；水郁的发作，在君、相二火主时的前后。
English: There is no fixed time for the onset of wood depression; the onset of water depression occurs before and after the time of jun and phase two fire lord.

古文：谨候其时，病可与期，失时反岁，五气不行，生化收藏，政无恒也。
现代文：细心的观察时令，发病的情况是可以预测的，失于正常的时令及岁气运行的规律，则五行之气运行错乱，生长化收藏的政令，也就不正常了。
English: Careful observation of the season, the incidence of the situation can be predicted. If the normal season and the law of the operation of the year qi are lost, the five elements of qi will run disorderly, and the order of growth and collection will not be normal.

古文：帝曰：水发而雹雪，土发而飘骤，木发而毁折，金发而清明，火发而曛昧，何气使然？
现代文：黄帝说：水郁而发为冰雪霜雹，土郁而发为飘雨，木郁而发为毁坏断折，金郁清爽明净，火郁而发为热气黄赤昏暗，这是什么气造成的呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "The watery element gives rise to snow and frost, the earthy element gives rise to rain, the woody element gives rise to destruction and fragmentation, the golden element gives rise to cleanliness and clarity, and the fiery element gives rise to heat, yellow, red, and darkness. What is the cause of these elements?

古文：岐伯曰：气有多少，发有微甚，微者当其气，甚者兼其下，徵其下气而见可知也。帝曰：善。
现代文：岐伯说：六气有太过不及的不同，发作时有轻微和严重的差别，发作轻微的只限于本气，发作严重的则兼见于其下承之气，由此气发的情况就可以知道了。黄帝说：好。
English: Qibo said, "The six qi are too different from each other, and there are slight and serious differences in the attacks. The minor attacks are limited to the original qi, and the serious attacks are also seen in the qi that is under it. From this, the state of the qi attack can be known." Huang Di said, "Good."

古文：五气之发，不当位者，何也？
现代文：五郁之气的发作，不在其应发之时，是什么道理呢？
English: What is the reason why the onset of depression does not occur when it should?

古文：岐伯曰：命其差。
现代文：岐伯说：这是属于时间上的差异。
English: Qibo said: This is a difference in time.

古文：帝曰：差有数乎？
现代文：黄帝说：这种差异，有日数吗？
English: Huang Di said: The four-hour climate changes, does its difference have a constant?

古文：岐伯曰：后皆三十度而有奇也。
现代文：岐伯说：差异都在应发时之后三十日有余。
English: Qi Bo said: The differences are all more than 30 days after the time of the incident.

古文：帝曰：气至而先后者何？
现代文：黄帝说：主时之气，来时有先后的不同，是什么原因呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "What is the reason for the difference in the timing of the Lord's breath?

古文：岐伯曰：运太过则其至先，运不及则其至后，此候之常也。
现代文：岐伯说：年运太过，气先时而至；年运不及，气后时而至，这属于正常的气候。
English: Qi Bo said: the weather is too bad, and the wind comes first; the weather is not good, and the wind comes later. This is a normal climate.

古文：帝曰：当时而至者，何也？
现代文：黄帝说：年运之气，正当应至之时而来的，属于什么呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "What does the luck of the year, which comes at the right time, belong to?

古文：岐伯曰：非太过非不及则至当时，非是者眚也。
现代文：岐伯说：没有太过和不及，则正当其时而至，不这样就要发生灾害。
English: Qibo said: "There is no such thing as too much or too little, it just comes at the right time. Otherwise, disasters will occur."

古文：帝曰：善。
现代文：黄帝说：好。
English: Emperor Jinwu said, "Very good."

古文：气有非时而化者，何也？
现代文：气有非其时而有其化的，是什么道理呢？
English: What is the reason why the qi changes from time to time?

古文：岐伯曰：太过者当其时，不及者归其己胜也。
现代文：岐伯说：太过者，其气化则正当其时；气不及的，其气化则归之于胜己者之所化。
English: Qibo said: Those who are too strong will be vaporized at the right time; those who are too weak will be vaporized by those who are better than them.

古文：帝曰：四时之气，至有早晏高下左右，其候何如？
现代文：黄帝说：四时之气，来时有早晚、高下、左右的不同，怎样测知呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "The qi at four o'clock is different in the morning and evening, high and low, and left and right. How can it be detected?

古文：岐伯曰：行有逆顺，至有迟速，故太过者化先天，不及者化后天。
现代文：岐伯说：气的运行有逆有顺，气之来至有快有慢。所以气太过的，气化先于天时；气不及的，气化后于天时。
English: Qi Bo said: The operation of qi has its ups and downs, and the arrival of qi has its fast and slow. Therefore, if the qi is too late, it will be vaporized before the time of day; if it is too late, it will be vaporized after the time of day.

古文：帝曰：愿闻其行何谓也？
现代文：黄帝说：我想听听关于气的运行情况是怎样的呢？
English: Huang Di said: I want to hear about the operation of qi, how is it?

古文：岐伯曰：春气西行，夏气北行，秋气东行，冬气南行。
现代文：岐伯说：春气生于东而西行，夏气生于南而北行，秋气生于西而东行，冬气生于北而南行。
English: Qi Bo said: Spring qi is born in the east and travels west, summer qi is born in the south and travels north, autumn qi is born in the west and travels east, and winter qi is born in the north and travels south.

古文：故春气始于下，秋气始于上，夏气始于中，冬气始于标；春气始于左，秋气始于右，冬气始于后，夏气始于前，此四时正化之常。
现代文：所以春气自下而升于上，秋气自上而降于下，夏气万物生长其热气布化于里，冬气冰冻封藏其寒气端始于表；春气在东故始于左，秋气在西故始于右，冬气在北故始于后，夏气在南故始于前，这就是四时正常气化的一般规律。
English: Therefore, the spring air rises from the bottom to the top, the autumn air from the top to the bottom, the summer air everything grows its hot air clothed in the middle, the winter air frozen sealed its cold air end begins at the table; the spring air in the east begins on the left, the autumn air in the west begins on the right, the winter air in the north begins after, the summer air in the south begins before, this is the general rule of normal gasification at four o'clock.

古文：故至高之地，冬气常在，至下之地，春气常在，必谨察之。帝曰：善。
现代文：所以，高原地带，气候严寒，冬气常在；低洼地带，气候温和，春气常在，必须根据不同的时间地点，仔细地加以考察。黄帝说：好。
English: Therefore, the plateau zone, where the climate is cold, often has winter air; the low-lying zone, where the climate is mild, often has spring air, must be carefully examined according to different time and place. Huang Di said: Good.

古文：黄帝问曰：五运六气之应见，六化之正，六变之纪，何如？
现代文：黄帝问道：五运六气变化应于所见的物象，其正常气化与反常的变化是怎样的呢？
English: Huang Di asked: The changes of the five elements of the Chinese Zodiac correspond to the objects seen. What is the difference between their normal gasification and abnormal changes?

古文：岐伯对曰：夫六气正纪，有化有变，有胜有复，有用有病，不同其候，帝欲何乎？
现代文：岐伯回答说：关于六气正常与反常的变化，有气化，有变化；有胜气，有复气；有作用，有病气，各有不同的情况，你想了解哪一方面的呢？
English: Qibo replied, "Regarding the normal and abnormal changes of the six qi, there is gasification, there is change; there is victory qi, there is rejuvenation qi; there is effect, there is disease qi, each has a different situation, what aspect do you want to understand?

古文：帝曰：愿尽闻之。
现代文：黄帝说：我想听你全面详尽地讲讲。
English: Huang Di said, "I want to listen to your comprehensive and detailed explanation."

古文：岐伯曰：请遂言之。
现代文：岐伯说：我尽量讲给你听吧。
English: Qibo said, "I'll try my best to tell you."

古文：夫气之所至也，厥阴所至为和平，少阴所至为暄，太阴所至为埃溽，少阳所至为炎暑，阳明所至为清劲，太阳所至为寒雰。
现代文：关于六气之所至，厥阴风木之气至时，则为平和；少阴君火之气至时，则为温暖；太阴湿土之气至时，则为尘埃湿润；少阳相火之气至时，则为火炎暑热；阳明燥金之气至时，则为清凉刚劲；太阳寒水之气至时，则为寒冷气氛。
English: With regard to the arrival of the six airs, when the air of the yin wind and wood arrives, it is peaceful; when the air of the yin fire arrives, it is warm; when the air of the moist soil arrives, it is damp; when the air of the yang fire arrives, it is hot and hot; when the air of the sun and dry gold arrives, it is cool and stiff; when the air of the sun and cold water arrives, it is a cold atmosphere.

古文：时化之常也。
现代文：这是四时正常气化的一般情况。
English: This is the general situation of normal gasification at 4 o'clock.

古文：厥阴所至为风府、为璺启；少阴所至为火府、为舒荣；太阴所至为雨府、为员盈；少阳所至为热府、为行出；阳明所至为司杀府、为庚苍；太阳所至为寒府、为归藏。
现代文：厥阴之气至，为风化之府，为物体破裂而开发；少阴之气至，为火化之府，为万物舒发繁荣；太阴之气至为雨化之府，为物体充盈圆满；少阳之气至为热化之府，为气化尽现于外；阳明之气至，为清化之府，为生发之气变更；太阳之气至，为寒化之府，为阳气敛藏。
English: The qi of the yang yang is the house of weathering, and is developed for the rupture of objects; the qi of the yang yang is the house of cremation, and is developed for the relaxation and prosperity of all things; the qi of the yin yang is the house of rain, and is developed for the fullness and perfection of objects; the qi of the yang yang is the house of heating, and is developed for the appearance of gas; the qi of the yang yang is the house of purification, and is developed for the change of gas; the qi of the sun is the house of cooling, and is developed for the accumulation of

古文：司化之常也。
现代文：这是六气司化的一般情况。
English: This is the general situation of the separation of the six elements.

古文：厥阴所至为生、为风摇；少阴所至为荣、为形见；太阴所至为化、为云雨；少阳所至为长、为蕃鲜；阳明所至为收、为雾露；太阳所至为藏、为周密。
现代文：厥阴之气至，为万物发生，为和风飘荡；少阴之气至，为万物繁荣，为形象显现；太阴之气至，为万物化育，为湿化云雨；少阳之气至，为万物盛长，为繁盛鲜明；阳明之气至，为收敛，为雾露之气；太阳之气至，为闭藏，为生机闭密。
English: The qi of yang is for all things to come into being, and for the wind to blow; the qi of yin is for all things to flourish, and for images to appear; the qi of yin is for all things to grow, and for clouds to rain; the qi of yang is for all things to flourish, and for prosperity to be bright; the qi of yang is for convergence, and for mist; and the qi of sun is for confinement, and for vitality to be dense.

古文：气化之常也。
现代文：这是六气所化的一般情况。
English: This is the general situation of the transformation of the six elements.

古文：厥阴所至为风生，终为肃；少阴所至为热生，中为寒；太阴所至为湿生，终为注雨；少阳所至为火生，终为蒸溽；阳明所至为燥生，终为凉；太阳所至为寒生，中为温。
现代文：厥阴之气至，为风气发生，厥阴之下，金气承之，故气终则肃杀；少阴之气至，为热气发生，少阴之中见为太阳，故其中为寒化；太阴之气至，为湿气发生，太阴之下，风气承之，风来湿化，故终则大雨如注；少阳之气至，为火气发生，相火之下，水气承之，故气终为湿热交蒸；阳明之气至，为燥气发生，其气终为金气大凉；太阳之气至，为寒气发生，太阳之中见为少阴，故其中温化。
English: When the wind blows from the west, it is called the wind, and when it blows from the east, it is called the wind, and when it blows from the west, it is called the wind, and when it blows from the east, it is called the wind, and when it blows from the west, it is called the wind, and when it blows from the east, it is called the wind, and when it blows from the west, it is called the wind, and when it blows from the east, it is called the wind, and when it blows from the west, it is called the wind, and when it blows from the east, it is called the wind, and when it blows from the west,

古文：德化之常也。
现代文：这是六气德化的一般情况。
English: This is the general situation of the gasification of merits.

古文：厥阴所至为毛化，少阴所至为翮化，太阴所至为倮化，少阳所至为羽化，阳明所至为介化，太阳所至为鳞化。
现代文：厥阴之气至，为毛虫类化育；少阴之气至，为翮虫类化育；太阴之气至，为倮虫类化育；少阳之气至，为羽虫类化育；阳明之气至，为介虫类化育；太阳之气至，为鳞虫类化育。
English: When the sky is overcast, the caterpillars grow; when it is overcast, the aphids grow; when it is overcast, the aphids grow; when it is overcast, the caterpillars grow; when it is overcast, the caterpillars grow; when it is overcast, the aphids grow; when it is overcast, the aphids grow; when it is overcast, the caterpillars grow; when it is overcast, the caterpillars grow; when it is overcast, the caterpillars grow; when it is overcast, the caterpillars grow; when it is overcast, the cater

古文：德化之常也。
现代文：这是气化功德的一般情况。
English: This is the general situation of the gasification of merits.

古文：厥阴所至为生化，少阴所至为荣化，太阴所至为濡化，少阳所至为茂化，阳明所至为坚化，太阳所至为藏化。
现代文：厥阴之气至则万物生发，故为生化；少阴之气至则万物繁荣，故为荣化；太阴之气至则万物湿润，故为濡化；少阳之气至则万物茂盛，故为茂化；阳明之气至则万物坚实，故为坚化；太阳之气至则万物闭藏，故为藏化。
English: The qi of yang is that all things are vigorous, so they are biochemical; the qi of yin is that all things are prosperous, so they are glorified; the qi of yin is that all things are moist, so they are wetted; the qi of yang is that all things are lush, so they are lush; the qi of yang is that all things are solid, so they are solidified; the qi of sun is that all things are hidden, so they are hidden.

古文：布政之常也。
现代文：这是六气施政的一般情况。
English: This is the general situation of the Six Airs administration.

古文：厥阴所至为飘怒大凉，少阴所至为大暄寒，太阴所至为雷霆骤注烈风，少阳所至为飘风燔燎霜凝，阳明所至为散落温，太阳所至为寒雪冰雹白埃。气变之常也。
现代文：厥阴风木之气至而太过，则为旋风怒狂，风木亢盛则金气承而制之，其气转为大凉；少阴君火之气至而太过，则为气非常炎热，火气亢盛则阴精承而制之，其气转为寒冷；太阴湿土之气至而太过，则为雷雨剧烈，湿土亢盛则风气承而制之，其气转为狂风；少阳相火之气至而太过，则为旋风及火热燔燎，火气亢盛则水气承而制之，其气转为霜凝；阳明燥金之气至而太过，则为万物散落，金气亢盛则火气承而制之，其气转为温暖；太阳寒水之气至而太过，则为寒雪冰雹，寒水亢盛则土气承而制之，其气转为白色尘埃。
English: If the wind of the yin wood is too strong, it is a furious whirlwind; if the wind of the yang wood is too strong, it is a cold wind; if the wind of the yang fire is too strong, it is a very hot wind; if the wind of the yang fire is too strong, it is a cold wind; if the wind of the yang wood is too strong, it is a violent thunderstorm; if the wind of the yang wood is too strong, it is a strong wind; if the wind of the yang fire is too strong, it is a whirlwind; if the wind of the yang fire is too strong, it is a hot wind

古文：厥阴所至为挠动、为迎随；少阴所至为高明焰、为曛；太阴所至为沉阴、为白埃、为晦暝；少阳所至为光显、为彤云、为曛；阳明所至为烟埃、为霜、为劲切、为凄鸣；太阳所至为刚固、为坚芒、为立。
现代文：这是六气反常变化的一般情况。厥阴风木之气至而太过，为物体扰动，为随风往来；少阴君火之气至而太过，为火焰高明，为空中有黄赤之气色；太阴湿土之气至而太过，为阴气沉滞，为白色尘埃，为晦暗不明；少阳相火之气至而太过，为虹、电等光显，为赤色之云，为空中有黄赤之色；阳明燥金之气至而太过，为烟尘，为霜冻，为刚劲急切，为凄惨之声；太阳寒水之气至而太过，为坚硬，为锋利，为挺立。
English: This is the general situation of the abnormal changes of the six qi. The qi of the yin wind and wood is too much, for the object to be disturbed, for the wind to come and go; the qi of the lesser yin and fire is too much, for the flame to be bright, for the sky to have a yellow-red color; the qi of the moist soil is too much, for the gloom to be stagnant, for the white dust, for the dimness to be unknown; the qi of the lesser yang phase of fire is too much, for the rainbow, the electric light, for the red clouds, for the yellow-red color in the air; the yang

古文：令行之常也。
现代文：这是六气行令的一般情况。
English: This is the general situation of the six qi decrees.

古文：厥阴所至为里急，少阴所至为疡胗、身热，太阴所至为积饮否隔，少阳所至为嚏、呕、为疮疡，阳明所至为浮虚，太阳所至为屈伸不利。
现代文：厥阴风木之气至而致病，为腹中拘急；少阴君火之气至而致病，为疮疡、皮疹、身热；太阴湿土之气至而致病，为水饮积聚、阻塞不通；少阳相火之气至而致病，为喷嚏、呕吐、疮疡；阳明燥金之气至而致病，为皮肤虛肿；太阳寒水之气至而致病，为关节屈伸不利。
English: The qi of the yin and yang winds and trees causes illness, causing anxiety in the abdomen; the qi of the yin and yang fire causes illness, causing sores, rashes, and body heat; the qi of the moist soil causes illness, causing water to accumulate and block; the qi of the yang and yang fire causes illness, causing sneezing, vomiting, and sores; the qi of the yang and yang dry gold causes illness, causing skin edema; the qi of the sun and cold water causes illness, causing unfavorable joint flexion and extension.

古文：病之常也。
现代文：这是六气致病的一般情况。
English: This is the general situation of the six qi causing illness.

古文：厥阴所至为支痛，少阴所至为惊惑、恶寒、战栗、谵妄，太阴所至为稸满，少阳所至为惊躁、瞀昧、暴病，阳明所至为鼽、尻阴股膝髀腨胻足病，太阳所至为腰痛。
现代文：厥阴风木之气至而致病，为肝气不舒，胁部支撑疼痛；少阴君火之气至而致病，为心神不宁，易惊而惑乱，恶寒，战栗，谵言妄语；太阴湿土之气至而致病，为脾气不运，蓄积胀满；少阳相火之气至而致病，为胆气被伤，易惊，躁动不安，昏晕闷昧，常突然发病；阳明燥金之气至而致病，为胃足阳明之经脉不适，鼻塞，臀部、阴部、大腿、膝、小腿、足等处发病；太阳寒水之气至而致病，为膀胱足太阳之经脉不适，发为腰痛。
English: The qi of the yin wind and wood causes illness, the qi of the liver is not comfortable, and the supporting part is painful; the qi of the lesser yin and fire causes illness, the mind is restless, easily startled and confused, chills, shudders, and speaks gibberish; the qi of the moist soil causes illness, the temper is unlucky, and the accumulation is full; the qi of the lesser yang phase of fire causes illness, the gallbladder is injured, easily startled, restless, dizzy and dull, and often has a sudden onset; the qi of the yangming and gold causes illness, the veins of the stomach

古文：病之常也。
现代文：这是六气致病的一般情况。
English: This is the general situation of the six qi causing illness.

古文：厥阴所至为緛戾，少阴所至为悲、妄、衂、蔑，太阴所至为中满、霍乱、吐下，少阳所至为喉痹、耳鸣、呕涌，阳明所至为皴揭，太阳所至为寝汗痉。
现代文：厥阴风木之气至而致病，为緛戾；少阴君火之气至而致病，为善悲，妄语，鼻出血，目眵；太阴湿土之气至而致病，为中满，霍乱，吐下；少阳相火之气至而致病，为喉痹，耳鸣，呕涌；阳明燥金之气至而致病，为皴揭；太阳寒水之气至而致病，为睡觉时发汗、痉挛。
English: The qi of the yin and yang winds and trees causes illness, which is radon; the qi of the yin and yang fire causes illness, which is compassion, delusion, nosebleed, and eyelid; the qi of the moist soil causes illness, which is fullness, cholera, and vomiting; the qi of the yang and yang fire causes illness, which is sore throat, ringing in the ears, and vomiting; the qi of the sun shining and drying gold causes illness, which is hiccups; the qi of the sun's cold water causes illness, which is sweating and itching when sleeping.

古文：病之常也。
现代文：这是六气致病的一般情况。
English: This is the general situation of the six qi causing illness.

古文：厥阴所至为胁痛、呕泄，少阴所至为语、笑，太阴所至为重、胕肿，少阳所至为暴注、瞤、瘛、暴死，阳明所至为鼽、嚏，太阳所至为流泄、禁止。
现代文：厥阴风木之气至而致病，为胁痛，呕吐泻利；少阴君火之气至而致病，为多言，善笑；太阴湿土之气至而致病，为身重，浮肿；少阳相火之气至而致病，为急剧泻利不止，肌肉抽搐，常突然死亡；阳明燥金之气至而致病，为鼻塞，喷嚏；太阳寒水之气至而致病，为大便泻利，津液之窍道闭止不通。
English: The qi of the yin wind and wood causes illness, and is good for pain, vomiting and diarrhea; the qi of the yin fire causes illness, and is good for talking and laughing; the qi of the moist soil causes illness, and is good for weight and swelling; the qi of the yang wind and fire causes illness, and is good for acute diarrhea, muscle twitching, and often sudden death; the qi of the yang light and dry gold causes illness, and is good for nasal congestion and sneezing; the qi of the sun's cold water causes illness, and is good for stool diarrhea, and is good for the secretion of the

古文：病之常也。
现代文：这是六气致病的一般情况。
English: This is the general situation of the six qi causing illness.

古文：凡此十二变者，报德以德，报化以化，报政以政，报令以令，气高则高，气下则下，气后则后，气前则前，气中则中，气外则外，位之常也。
现代文：凡此十二变者，六气作用为德者，那么万物以德回应它；六气作用为化者，那么万物以化回应它；六气作用为政者，那么万物以政回应它；六气作用为令者，那么万物以令回应它；气在上的则病位高；气在下的则病位低；气在中的则病位在中；气在外的则病位在外；这是六气致病之病位的一般情况。
English: According to these twelve transformations, when the six qi functions as virtue, all things respond to it with virtue; when the six qi functions as transmutation, all things respond to it with transmutation; when the six qi functions as government, all things respond to it with government; when the six qi functions as command, all things respond to it with command; when the six qi functions as up, the disease level is high; when the six qi functions as down, the disease level is low; when the six qi functions as in, the disease level is in; when the six qi functions as out, the disease level is out; this is the general situation of the six q

古文：故风胜则动，热胜则肿，燥胜则干，寒胜则浮，湿胜则濡泄甚则水闭胕肿，随气所在，以言其变耳。
现代文：所以风气胜者则动而不宁，热气胜者则肿，燥气胜者则干，寒气胜者则虚浮，湿气胜者则外泄，甚则水气闭滞而为浮肿，这是随着六气所在之处，以知其病变的情况。
English: Therefore, the winner of the wind is motionless and restless, the winner of the hot air is swollen, the winner of the dry air is dry, the winner of the cold air is vain, the winner of the wet air is leaking, and even the water vapor is stagnant and puffy. This is according to the location of the six gases to know the condition of the lesion.

古文：帝曰：愿闻其用也。
现代文：黄帝说：我想听听六气的作用是怎样的。
English: Huang Di said, "I want to hear about the role of the six qi."

古文：岐伯曰：夫六气之用，各归不胜而为化，故太阴雨化，施于太阳；太阳寒化，施于少阴；少阴热化，施于阳明；阳明燥化，施于厥阴；厥阴风化，施于太阴。
现代文：岐伯说：关于六气的作用，各自归之于被我克之气而以为气化。所以太阴的雨化，作用于太阳；太阳的寒化，作用于少阴；少阴的热化，作用于阳明；阳明的燥化，作用于厥阴；厥阴的风化，作用于太阴。
English: Qibo said, "Regarding the effects of the six qi, they are attributed to the fact that they were taken from the qi and thought to be vaporized. Therefore, the rain of the yin is applied to the sun; the cold of the sun is applied to the yin; the heat of the yin is applied to the yang; the drying of the yang is applied to the yin; and the weathering of the yin is applied to the yin.

古文：各命其所在以征之也。
现代文：各随其所在的方位以显示其作用。
English: Each one follows the direction of its location to show its function.

古文：帝曰：自得其位何如？
现代文：黄帝说：六气自得其本位的，是怎样的呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "How is it that the six elements obtain their own standard?

古文：岐伯曰：自得其位常化也。
现代文：岐伯说：六气自得其本位的，是正常的气化。
English: Qi Bo said: Six qi gets its standard from itself, it is normal gasification.

古文：帝曰：愿闻所在也。
现代文：黄帝说：我想听听六气本位的所在。
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "I want to hear where the Six Airs are located."

古文：岐伯曰：命其位而方月可知也。
现代文：岐伯说：确立了六气所居的位置，就可以知道它所主的方隅和时间了。
English: Qibo said, "Once the position of the six qi is established, it is possible to know its direction and time.

古文：帝曰：六位之气，盈虚何如？
现代文：黄帝说：岁气六步之位的太过不及是怎样的呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "What is it like to be less than six years old?"

古文：岐伯曰：太少异也。
现代文：岐伯说：太过和不及是不相同的。
English: Qi Bo said, "Too much and not enough are not the same."

古文：太者之至徐而常，少者暴而亡。
现代文：太过之气，来时缓慢而时间持续较长；不及之气，来时燥急而容易消失。
English: Excessive qi comes slowly and lasts for a long time; insufficient qi comes quickly and disappears easily.

古文：帝曰：天地之气盈虚如何？
现代文：黄帝说：司天与在泉之气的太过和不及是怎样的呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "What is the difference between the excess and deficiency of the qi in the spring?

古文：岐伯曰：天气不足，地气随之；地气不足，天气从之，运居其中而常先也。恶所不胜，归所同和，随运归从而生其病也。
现代文：岐伯说：司天之气不足时，在泉之气随之上迁；在泉之气不足时，司天之气从之下降；年运之气居于中间，若在泉之气上迁则运气先上迁，司天之气下降则运气先下降，所以年运之气的迁降，常在司天、在泉之先。
English: Qibo said: When the qi of the heaven is deficient, the qi of the spring moves up with it; when the qi of the spring is deficient, the qi of the heaven moves down from it; the qi of the year is in the middle. If the qi of the spring moves up, the luck moves up first, and if the qi of the heaven moves down, the luck moves down first. Therefore, the movement of the qi of the year is often ahead of the heaven and the spring.

古文：故上胜则天气降而下，下胜则地气迁而上。
现代文：年运不胜司天在泉之气时则相恶，年运与司天在泉之气相和时，则同归其化，随着年运与司天在泉之气所归从，而发生各种不同的病变。
English: When the wind of fortune does not prevail and the wind of heaven is in the air of the spring, it is bad. When the wind of fortune and the wind of heaven are in the air of the spring, they are the same. As the wind of fortune and the wind of heaven are in the air of the spring, various pathologies occur.

古文：多少而差其分，微者小差，甚者大差，甚则位易气交，易则大变生而病作矣。
现代文：所以司天之气太过时，则天气下降；在泉之气太过时，则地气上迁，上迁下降的多少，随着天地之气胜之多少，存在着一定的差异，气微则差异小，气甚则差异大，甚则可以改变气交的时位，气交时位改变时则有大的变化，疾病就要发作。
English: Therefore, if the qi of the heaven is too outdated, the weather will decline; if the qi of the spring is too outdated, the earth's qi will move up, and there will be a certain difference according to how much the earth's qi moves up and down, and how much the heaven and earth's qi wins. If the qi is weak, the difference will be small; if the qi is very weak, the difference will be large; if the qi is very strong, the time position of the qi can be changed; if the time position of the qi is changed, there will be a big change, and the disease will occur.

古文：《大要》曰： 甚纪五分，微纪七分，其差可见。 
现代文：《大要》上说： 差异大的有五分，差异小的有七分，这种差异就表现出来了。 
English: The "Summary" said: There are five points of large difference and seven points of small difference, and this difference is manifested.

古文：此之谓也。帝曰：善。
现代文：就是这个意思。黄帝说：好。
English: That's what it means. Huang Di said, "Good."

古文：论言热无犯热，寒无犯寒，余欲不远寒，不远热，奈何？
现代文：前面论述过用热品时，不要触犯主时之热；用寒品时，不要触犯主寒之寒。我想不避热不避寒，应当怎样呢？
English: In the previous discussion, when using hot products, do not offend the heat of the main season; when using cold products, do not offend the cold of the main season. If I do not avoid heat or cold, what should I do?

古文：岐伯曰：悉乎哉问也！
现代文：岐伯说：你问的很全面啊！
English: Qibo said: Your question is very comprehensive!

古文：发表不远热，攻里不远寒。
现代文：发表时可以不避热，攻里时可以不避寒。
English: When publishing, you can not avoid heat, and when attacking, you can not avoid cold.

古文：帝曰：不发不攻，而犯寒犯热何如？
现代文：黄帝说：不发表不攻里时而触犯了寒热会怎样呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "What would happen if you didn't announce that you would attack the enemy's position, but instead broke the cold and heat?

古文：岐伯曰：寒热内贼，其病益甚。
现代文：岐伯说：若寒热之气伤害于内，他的病就更加严重了。
English: Qi Bo said: If the cold and hot air hurt him inside, his illness would be more serious.

古文：帝曰：愿闻无病者何如？
现代文：黄帝说：我想听听无病的人会怎样呢？
English: Huang Di said, "I want to hear what will happen to people who are not ill."

古文：岐伯曰：无者生之，有者甚之。
现代文：岐伯说：无病的人，能够生病，有病的人会更加严重。
English: Qi Bo said: People who are not sick can get sick, and those who are sick will be more serious.

古文：帝曰：生者何如？
现代文：黄帝说：生病的情况是怎样的呢？
English: Huang Di said: What is the situation of getting sick?

古文：岐伯曰：不远热则热至，不远寒则寒至。
现代文：岐伯说：不避热时则热至，不避寒时则寒至。
English: Qi Bo said: If you do not avoid heat, you will be hot, and if you do not avoid cold, you will be cold.

古文：寒至则坚否、腹满、痛急、下利之病生矣。热至则身热、吐下、霍乱、痈疽、疮疡、瞀郁、注下、瞤、瘛、肿胀、呕、鼽、衂、头痛、骨节变、肉痛、血溢、血泄、淋闭之病生矣。
现代文：寒至则发生腹部坚硬，痞闷，胀满，疼痛急剧，下痢等病；热至则发生身热，呕吐下泻，霍乱，痈疽，疮疡，眼睛昏花，郁闷，泄下，肌肉抽动，筋脉抽搐，肿胀，呕吐，鼻塞，衄血，头痛，骨节改变，肌肉疼痛，血外溢或下泄，小便淋沥，癃闭不通等病。
English: At the cold solstice, the abdomen is hard, stuffy, swollen, painful, and diarrhea occurs; at the hot solstice, the body fever occurs, vomiting and diarrhea, cholera, gangrene, ulcers, eye floaters, depression, discharge, muscle twitching, myocardial twitching, swelling, vomiting, nasal congestion, blood stasis, headache, bone changes, muscle pain, blood spill or discharge, urination, obstruction, and other diseases.

古文：帝曰：治之奈何？
现代文：黄帝说：应当怎样治疗呢？
English: Huang Di asked: How to treat it?

古文：岐伯曰：时必顺之，犯者治以胜也。
现代文：岐伯说：主时之气，必须顺从之，触犯了主时之气时，可用相胜之气的药品加以治疗。
English: Qibo said, "The spirit of the master must be obeyed. When the spirit of the master is violated, it can be treated with the medicine of the spirit of victory."

古文：黄帝问曰：妇人重身，毒之何如？
现代文：黄帝问道：妇女怀孕，若用毒药攻伐时，会怎样呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor asked: What would happen to a pregnant woman if she was attacked with poison?

古文：岐伯曰：有故无殒，亦无殒也。
现代文：岐伯回答说：只要有应攻伐的疾病存在，则母体不会受伤害，胎儿也不会受伤害。
English: Qi Bo replied: As long as there is a disease to be attacked, the mother will not be harmed and the fetus will not be harmed.

古文：帝曰：愿闻其故，何谓也？
现代文：黄帝说：我想听听这是什么道理呢？
English: Huang Di said, "I want to hear the reason for this."

古文：岐伯曰：大积大聚，其可犯也，衰其大半而止，过者死。
现代文：岐伯说：身虽有妊，而有大积大聚这种病，是可以攻伐的，但是在积聚衰减一大半时，就要停止攻伐，攻伐太过了就要引起死亡。
English: Qi Bo said: Although the body is pregnant, and there is a large accumulation of this disease, it can be attacked, but when the accumulation decays by more than half, it is necessary to stop the attack. If the attack is too far, it will cause death.

古文：帝曰：善。
现代文：黄帝说：好。
English: Emperor Jinwu said, "Very good."

古文：郁之甚者，治之奈何？
现代文：郁病之严重者，应当怎样治疗呢？
English: How should people with severe depression be treated?

古文：岐伯曰：木郁达之，火郁发之，土郁夺之，金郁泄之，水郁折之,然调其气，过者折之，以其畏也，所谓泻之。
现代文：岐伯说：肝木郁的，宜吐而达之；心火郁的，宜汗而发之；脾土郁的，宜下而夺之；肺金郁的，宜解其表，利其小便而渗泄之；肾水郁的，宜制其冲逆，而折抑之，这样去调整五脏的气机，凡气太过的，就要折服其气，即用其所畏者折服之，就是所谓泻法。
English: Qi Bo said: If the liver is thick, it is appropriate to vomit and reach it; if the heart is hot, it is appropriate to sweat and release it; if the spleen is thick, it is appropriate to lower it and take it; if the lungs are golden, it is appropriate to dissolve its surface, and it is beneficial to urinate and excrete it; if the kidneys are dehydrated, it is appropriate to control its rush and suppress it, so as to adjust the qi of the five organs. If the qi is too much, it is necessary to subdue its qi, that is, to subdue it with its fear, which is the so-called laxative

古文：帝曰：假者何如？
现代文：黄帝说：假借之气致病，应当怎样治疗呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "If illness is caused by false qi, how should it be treated?"

古文：岐伯曰：有假其气则无禁也。
现代文：岐伯说：如果主气不足而有假借之气致病时，就不必要遵守 用寒远寒，用热远热 等禁忌法则了。
English: Qi Bo said, "If you lack self-discipline and use fake qi to cause illness, you don't need to follow the taboo rules such as using cold far away from cold, using heat far away from heat.

古文：所谓： 主气不足，客气胜也。 
现代文：这就是所说的： 主气不足，客气胜之 。
English: This is what is meant by the saying, "When pride is in short supply, courtesy prevails."

古文：帝曰：至哉圣人之道！
现代文：黄帝说：圣人的要道真伟大呀！
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "The sage's path is truly great!

古文：天地大化，运行之节，临御之纪，阴阳之政，寒暑之令，非夫子孰能通之！
现代文：关于天地的变化，运行的节律，运用的纲领，阴阳的治化，寒暑的号令，不是先生谁能通晓它！
English: Regarding the changes of heaven and earth, the rhythm of operation, the program of application, the cure of yin and yang, the call of cold and heat, it is not Mr. who can understand it!

古文：请藏之灵兰之室，署曰《六元正纪》，非斋戒不敢示，慎传也。
现代文：我想把它藏在灵兰书房中，署名叫《六元正纪》，不经过洗心自戒，不敢随意将其展示，不是诚心实意的人，不可轻易传授给他。
English: I would like to hide it in Ling Lan's study. It is signed "Six Yuan Zheng Ji" and I would not dare to show it to him without self-discipline. If you are not a sincere person, you should not easily teach it to him.

