古文：度朔君蒋子文葛祚虞道施顾邵陈氏女王表石人神圣姑陈敏费长房胡母班张诚之
现代文：度朔君蒋子文葛祚虞道施顾邵陈氏女王表石人神圣姑陈敏费长房胡母班张诚之
English: Du Shuo Jun, Jiang Zi, Wen Ge, Yan Yu Dao, Shigu, Shao, Chen's Queen, Table Stone Person, Sacred Aunt, Chen Min, Fei, Long House, Hu, Mother Class, Zhang Chengzhi

古文：度朔君袁绍在冀州，有神出河东，号度朔君，百姓为立庙。庙有主簿大福。
现代文：度朔君袁绍在冀州的时候，河东出了一个神人，自称度朔君，老百姓为他建了一座庙，庙里还有位主簿和大供桌香炉等。
English: When Du Shuo Jun Yuan Shao was in Jizhou, a godman appeared in Hedong, claiming to be Du Shuo Jun. The people built a temple for him, and there was also a master book and a large incense burner in the temple.

古文：陈留蔡庸为清河太守，过谒庙。
现代文：陈留县的蔡庸当时是清河郡太守，一次途经此地便进庙拜谒。
English: At that time, Cai Yong of Chenliu County was the governor of Qinghe County. Once he passed through this place, he went to the temple to pay homage.

古文：有子名道，亡已三十年。
现代文：他有个儿子叫蔡道，已经死去三十年了。
English: He had a son named Cai Dao, who has been dead for thirty years.

古文：度朔君为庸设酒曰：贵子昔来，欲相见。
现代文：度朔君设酒宴招待蔡庸，对他说：你的儿子早就来了，想与你相见。
English: Du Shuo Jun set up a banquet to invite Cai Yong and said to him: Your son has already come and wants to meet you.

古文：须臾子来。度朔君自云：父祖昔作兖州。
现代文：一会儿，蔡庸的儿子来了，度朔君自语道：他的父亲和祖父当年在兖州当州牧。
English: After a while, Cai Yong's son arrived, and Du Shuo Jun said to himself: His father and grandfather were state pastors in Zhangzhou that year.

古文：有人士母病往祷。
现代文：有个人因为母亲病重前去祈祷。
English: One man went to pray for his gravely ill mother.

古文：主簿云：君逢天士留待。
现代文：主簿说：度朔君正和天上的神仙见面。
English: The master book said: "Doshuo Jun is meeting with the heavenly immortal.

古文：闻西北有鼓声而君至。
现代文：这时，只听西北方一阵敲响度朔君回来了。
English: At this time, just listen to the sound of a knocking in the northwest and you will come back.

古文：须臾，一客来。着皂单衣，头上五色毛，长数寸。
现代文：一会儿进来位客人，穿黑单衣，头上长着好几寸长的五色毛。
English: After a while, a guest came in, dressed in a black singlet, with several inches of five-colored hair on his head.

古文：去，复一人着白布单衣，高冠，冠似鱼头，谓君曰：吾昔临庐山，食白李，忆之未久，已三千岁。
现代文：他走之后，又来了一个穿白单衣的客人，戴着高高的帽子，那帽子像鱼头似的。这人对度朔君说：我当年去庐山吃白李子，想起来好像没过多久，但实际上这已经是三千年前的事情了。
English: After he left, another guest arrived wearing a white singlet and a tall hat that looked like a fish head. The man said to Du Shuo Jun: "I went to Lushan to eat white plums that year. It doesn't seem like it took long to remember, but it actually happened three thousand years ago.

古文：日月易得，使人怅然。
现代文：斗转星移，日月如梭，使人怅然哪。
English: The stars move, the sun and the moon move, and people are amazed.

古文：君谓士曰：先来南海君也。
现代文：走后，度朔君对他说：先前来的那位是南海神君呵。
English: After leaving, Du Shuo said to him: "The one who came earlier is Nanhai Shenjun.

古文：士是书生，君明通五经，善《礼记》，与士论礼，士不如也。
现代文：这位是个书生。度朔君精通五经，钻研礼书，与这位文士论起礼来，文士还不如他呢。
English: He was a scholar. Du Shuo Jun was well versed in the Five Classics, studied the book of etiquette, and discussed etiquette with this scribe. The scribe was not as good as him.

古文：士乞救母病。
现代文：文士乞求他为自己的母亲治病。
English: The scribe begged him to cure his mother.

古文：君曰：卿所居东有故桥，人坏之。
现代文：度朔君说：你所住的房子东边有一座老桥，被人破坏了。
English: "There is an old bridge on the east side of the house where you live. It was destroyed by someone," said Du Shuo Jun.

古文：此桥所行，卿母犯之。能复桥，便差。
现代文：从这座桥上走了一趟，你母亲就犯病了，你如果能够把桥修复起来，老太太的病就会慢慢好的。
English: Your mother fell ill after walking across this bridge. If you can repair the bridge, the old lady's illness will gradually get better.

古文：曹公讨袁谭，使人从庙换千匹绢，君不与。
现代文：曹操讨伐袁绍之子袁谭时，派人到庙上换一千匹绢布，度朔君没有答应。
English: When Cao Cao was fighting Yuan Tan, the son of Yuan Shao, he sent someone to the temple to exchange a thousand pieces of embroidered cloth, but Du Shuo Jun did not agree.

古文：曹公遗张郃毁庙。
现代文：于是，曹操就派大将张郃来捣毁庙宇。
English: As a result, Cao Cao sent General Zhang Ye to destroy the temple.

古文：未至百里，君遗兵数万，方道而来。
现代文：不到一百里的地方，度朔君就调集数万兵马顺大道并排压来。
English: Less than a hundred miles away, Du Shuo Jun mobilized tens of thousands of soldiers and horses to press the Shun Avenue side by side.

古文：郃未达二里，云雾绕郃军，不知庙处。
现代文：张郃的部队未推进二里，他的兵马就被云雾缠裹起来，不知道庙在什么地方。
English: Zhang Xuan's troops did not advance two miles, and his soldiers and horses were caught up in the fog and did not know where the temple was.

古文：君语主簿：曹公气盛，宜避之。
现代文：度朔君对主簿说：曹操气势太盛，最好能够避开。
English: Du Shuo Jun said to the host: Cao Cao is too powerful, it is best to avoid him.

古文：后苏并邻家有神下，识君声，云：昔移入胡，阔绝三年。
现代文：后来，苏并邻居家有位神仙下凡，他分辨出度朔君的声音，说：当年我移居胡地，阔别三年。
English: Later, Su and a neighbor had a fairy descendant. He could distinguish Du Shuo Jun's voice and said, "That year I moved to Hudi and stayed away for three years.

古文：乃遣人与曹公相闻：欲修故庙，地衰不中居，欲寄住。
现代文：就派人向曹操传达要他修复旧庙，但因地力衰微，神君难以居住，先到我那里去吧。
English: He sent someone to tell Cao Cao that he should repair the old temple, but due to the weakening of the earth, it was difficult for the god to live there. Go to me first.

古文：公曰：甚善。
现代文：度朔君说：很好。
English: Du Shuo said, "It's very good.

古文：治城北楼以居之。
现代文：于是便被安顿在城北楼住。
English: As a result, he was settled in the north tower of the city.

古文：数日，曹公猎，得物，大如麂，大足，色白如雪，毛软滑可爱，公以摩面，莫能名也。
现代文：数天之后，曹操猎获一只怪物，像麂那么大，长着四只大脚，浑身像雪一样白，毛十分光滑可爱。曹操用那毛摩挲几下脸，顿时产生一种妙不可言的感觉。
English: A few days later, Cao Cao hunted down a monster, as big as a dragonfly, with four big feet, all white as snow, with very smooth and lovely fur. Cao Cao rubbed his face with the fur several times, and immediately had a wonderful feeling.

古文：夜闻楼上哭云：小儿出行不还。太祖拊掌曰：此物合衰也。
现代文：晚上，他们听到楼上有哭声，说：小儿出去就不知道回来曹操拍掌说：这东西真是该死了呵！
English: In the evening, they heard cries from upstairs, saying: "My child goes out and doesn't know when to come back." Cao Cao clapped his hands and said: "This thing really deserves to die!"

古文：晨将数百犬绕楼下。
现代文：第二天早晨，他们用几百条狗把这座楼包围起来。
English: The next morning, they surrounded the building with hundreds of dogs.

古文：犬得气，冲突内外。
现代文：狗们一闻到气味儿，就楼里楼外地奔突冲撞。
English: As soon as the dogs get a whiff of the scent, they rush around the building.

古文：见有物大如驴，自投楼下，犬杀之，庙神乃绝。
现代文：这时，只见一只像驴一样大的东西自己从楼上投到地上，恶狗们上前就把它咬死了。从此庙神度朔君便不见了。
English: At this time, I saw a thing as big as a donkey throw itself from the upper floor to the ground, and the evil dogs came forward and bit it to death. From this time on, the temple god Dushaku disappeared.

古文：蒋子文
现代文：蒋子文
English: Jiang Ziwen

古文：蒋子文，广陵人也。嗜酒好色，挑挞无度。常自谓青骨，死当为神。
现代文：蒋子文是广陵人，贪酒好色，轻薄放纵，自称身上有青骨，死后能够成神。
English: Jiang Ziwen is a Guangling person, greedy for alcohol, lascivious, frivolous and indulgent, claiming to have blue bones on his body, and to be able to become a god after death.

古文：汉末，为秣陵尉，逐贼至钟山下，贼击伤额，因解绶缚之，有顷遂死。
现代文：汉代末年他当上了秣陵县尉。一天，他率人追捕盗贼来到钟山脚下，被贼将额头击伤之后，解下自己的绶带紧急包扎，有顷，他便死了。
English: In the last years of the Han Dynasty, he became a lieutenant of Fuling County. One day, he led his men to chase a thief to the foot of Zhongshan Mountain. After being wounded in the forehead by the thief, he untied his umbilical cord for emergency bandaging. A moment later, he died.

古文：及吴先祖之初，其故吏见文于道，乘白马，执白羽，侍从如平生。
现代文：到孙权称帝不久，蒋子文原来手下的小吏在大道上见到了他。只见他骑着白马，拿着白羽扇，身后还跟着不少侍从，就像生前一样。
English: Not long after Sun Quan was proclaimed emperor, Jiang Ziwen's former henchmen saw him on the highway, riding a white horse, holding a white feather fan, and followed by many attendants, just like in his lifetime.

古文：见者惊走，文追之，谓曰：我当为此土地神，以福尔下民，尔可宣告百姓，为我立祠。不尔，将有大咎。
现代文：那小吏吓得拔腿就跑。蒋子文追上前去，对他说：我应当做这里的土地神，以福祐百姓。你可以向他们宣告此事，并让他们为我立庙；不然，将有大灾祸。
English: Jiang Ziwen caught up with him and said to him, "I should be the god of the land here and bless the people. You can announce this to them and let them build a temple for me; otherwise, there will be a great disaster."

古文：是岁夏，大疫，百姓辄相恐动，颇有窃祠之者矣。
现代文：这年夏天，瘟疫猖獗，老百姓们吓得奔走相告，不少人私自立庙祷告。
English: This summer, when the plague was rampant, people were so scared that they ran to tell others, and many people prayed in private.

古文：文又下巫祝：吾将大启祐孙氏，宜为吾立祠。不尔，将使虫入人耳为灾。
现代文：蒋子文又发布祝祷说：我将要竭诚开导并祐护孙权，他应当为我立庙；不然，我便让小虫子钻进人的耳朵里，让他们遭殃。
English: Jiang Ziwen also issued a blessing, saying, "I will wholeheartedly enlighten and help Sun Quan, and he should build a temple for me; otherwise, I will let small worms get into people's ears and make them suffer.

古文：俄而有小虫如鹿虻，入耳皆死，医不能治。
现代文：当即，就有像鹿虻一样的小虫从远处飞来，钻进谁的耳朵谁就死，请医生也治不了。
English: Immediately, there are small insects like deer ticks flying in from far away. If they get into someone's ear, they will die, and even a doctor can't cure them.

古文：百姓愈恐，孙主未之信也。又下巫祝：若不祀我，将又以大火为灾。
现代文：老百姓更加恐惧。孙权不相信，蒋子文又发布祝祷说：如果再不祭祀我，我将使这里闹大火灾。
English: The people were even more afraid. Sun Quan did not believe it, and Jiang Ziwen issued a blessing saying, "If you do not worship me again, I will make a big fire here."

古文：是岁，火灾大发，一日数十处，火及公宫，孙主患之。
现代文：这年，火灾频发，一天就有几十处报警。大火眼看就要烧到皇宫了，孙权有些担心，与手下商议对策。
English: This year, fires broke out frequently, with dozens of alarms going off in a single day. The blaze was on the verge of reaching the Imperial Palace. Sun Quan was worried and discussed countermeasures with his staff.

古文：议者以为鬼有所归，乃不为厉，宜有以抚之。
现代文：大家认为如果让鬼有个归宿，他就不会再这样肆虐胡为，所以最好应该安抚他一下。
English: People think that if you give a ghost a home, it won't be able to wreak such havoc, so it's best to appease it.

古文：于是使使者封子文为中都候，次弟子绪为长水校尉，皆加印授，为庙堂，转号钟山为蒋山。今建康东北蒋山是也。
现代文：于是，孙权便派人封蒋子文为中都侯，封他的二弟蒋子绪为长水校尉，全加印绶。接着，就建起一座庙堂，改称钟山为蒋山，现在建康东北的那座山便是。
English: As a result, Sun Quan sent people to appoint Jiang Ziwen as the Central Capital, and his second brother, Jiang Zixu, as the Changshui Lieutenant, and stamped them all. Next, a temple was built, and Zhongshan was renamed Jiangshan, which is now the mountain in the northeast of Jiankang.

古文：自是灾厉止息，百姓遂大事之。
现代文：从此，灾患自然就平息下去，老百姓们热热闹闹地祭祀了一番。
English: Since then, the disaster has naturally subsided, and the people have made a lot of sacrifices.

古文：陈郡谢玉，为琅邪内史。在京城。
现代文：陈郡有个叫谢玉的人，任琅幙县内史，住在京城里。
English: In Chen County, there is a person named Xie Yu, who is also the county historian and lives in the capital city.

古文：其年虎暴，杀人甚众。
现代文：那年他的家乡虎患暴起，伤害了许多人。
English: That year, a tiger epidemic broke out in his hometown, injuring many people.

古文：有一人，以小船载年少妇，以大刀插着船，挟暮来至。逻将出语云：此间顷来甚多草秽，君载细小，作此轻行，太为不易，可止逻宿也。
现代文：有一个人，用小船载着个少妇，并把大刀插在船头，傍晚来在此间，巡察官兵的头领说：这地方近来有许多野兽，你带着个年轻女子，就这样轻率而行，太危险了，先到我们的驻地住一夜吧。
English: A man came here in the evening, carrying a young woman in a skiff, with a great sword in the prow. The captain of the patrol said, "There have been a lot of wild beasts in this area lately. It's too dangerous for you and your young woman to travel so recklessly. You should spend the night at our station first."

古文：相问讯既毕，逻将适还去，其妇上岸，便为虎取去。其夫拔刀大唤，欲逐之。
现代文：相互询问了一番，那头领率部下先行。可那少妇刚一上岸，便被老虎叼走了，她的丈夫拔出刀来大喊大叫，想去追赶，可是哪里还有老虎的影子呢？
English: But no sooner had the young woman disembarked than she was snatched away by the tiger. Her husband pulled out his knife and shouted that he wanted to run after it, but where was the shadow of the tiger?

古文：先奉事蒋侯，乃唤求助。
现代文：没办法，他只好先进蒋山庙祭祀一番，向蒋子文请求救助。
English: There was nothing he could do, so he had no choice but to go to Jiangshan Temple first to offer sacrifices and ask Jiang Ziwen for help.

古文：如此当行十里，忽觉如有一黑衣人为之导，其人随之。
现代文：返回时，他刚走出十里地，忽然恍恍惚惚看见一个黑衣人在前面领路，他便随后而行。
English: When he returned, he had just walked ten miles when he suddenly saw a man in black leading the way in front of him, and he followed.

古文：当复二十里，见大树，既至一穴。
现代文：当走出二十里地的时候，看见一棵大树，树下有个洞穴。
English: When he walked twenty miles, he saw a big tree with a cave under it.

古文：虎子闻行声，谓其母至，皆走出，其人即其所杀之，便挟刀隐树住。
现代文：洞穴里的虎崽子听见响动，还以为是母亲回来了，全钻了出来。那人将它们一一杀死，便挟刀隐藏于树后。
English: The tigresses in the cave heard the noise and thought it was their mother returning, and they all came out. The man killed them one by one and hid the knife behind a tree.

古文：良久，虎方至，便下妇着地，到牵入穴，其人以刀当腰砍断之。虎既死，其妇故活，向晓能语。
现代文：良久，母虎才叼着那位少妇回来。它将少妇放到地上，倒退着往洞穴里钻，那人举刀上前，将母虎拦腰砍断，当即便死了，那少妇终于虎口脱生。
English: After a long time, the tigress came back with the young woman in her arms. She put the young woman on the ground and walked backwards into the cave. The man raised his knife and cut the tigress in half. When she was dead, the young woman finally escaped from the tiger's mouth.

古文：问之云虎：初取，便负着背上，临至而后下之。四体无他，止为草木伤耳。
现代文：天快亮的时候，她才能够讲话，对丈夫说：老虎刚把我叼走的时候，就把我背在它的身上，到这里之后才把我放下来，身体各部都完好如初，只是被草木刮出点小伤。
English: When it was nearly dawn, she was able to speak. She said to her husband: "When the tiger had just dragged me away, he carried me on his back. It was only after I got here that he put me down. All parts of my body are intact, except for some minor injuries from the grass.

古文：扶归还船。
现代文：丈夫扶她回到船上。
English: Her husband helped her back to the boat.

古文：明夜，梦一人语之云：蒋侯使助，汝知否？
现代文：第二天，那人梦见有个人对他说：蒋侯派人帮助了你，你知道吗？
English: The next day, the man dreamed that someone said to him: "Chiang Hou sent someone to help you, do you know?

古文：至家杀猪祠焉。
现代文：夫妻二人回到家中，杀了一口猪到蒋子文庙上祭祀。
English: The couple returned home and slaughtered a pig to offer as a sacrifice at the Jiang Ziwen Temple.

古文：会稽鄮县东野，有女子，姓吴，字望子，年十六，姿容可爱。
现代文：会稽郡鄮县东郊，有一个女子姓吴，字望子，刚满十六岁，姿容美貌可爱。
English: In the eastern suburb of Min County, Huiqi County, there is a woman surnamed Wu, also known as Wang Zi, who has just turned 16 years old. She is beautiful and lovely.

古文：其乡里有鼓舞解神者，要之便往。
现代文：她住的乡间里有个巫师，要望子到他家去一趟。
English: There was a wizard in the country where she lived, and he wanted her to go to his house.

古文：缘塘行半路，忽见一贵人，端正非常。
现代文：沿着池塘边走到半路上，她忽然看见一个贵人，非常端庄，仪表堂堂。
English: Halfway along the edge of the pond, she suddenly saw a gentleman, very dignified and well-groomed.

古文：贵人乘船，手力十余整顿。
现代文：这贵人乘着船，手下十余人，穿戴整齐。
English: The dignitary rode in a boat with more than ten of his men, all neatly dressed.

古文：令人问望子：欲何之？
现代文：他让人问望子想干什么，望子如实相告。
English: He had people ask him what he wanted to do, and he told them the truth.

古文：具以事对。贵人云：我今正往彼，便可入船共去。
现代文：贵人说：我今天正想往那里去，咱们一块坐船走吧。
English: The nobleman said, "I want to go there today. Let's take a boat together."

古文：望子辞不敢，忽然不见。
现代文：望子不敢推辞。刚上岸，贵人便不见了踪影。
English: She did not dare to refuse. As soon as she got ashore, there was no trace of the noblewoman.

古文：望子既拜神坐。
现代文：她心中诧异。急忙到蒋侯庙拜神。
English: Surprised, she hurried to Jiang Hou Temple to worship God.

古文：见向船中贵人，俨然端坐，即蒋侯像也。
现代文：这时，她看见刚才乘船的那位贵人，伊然端坐，原来竟是蒋子文的神像呵。
English: At this time, she saw that the dignitary who had just boarded the ship was sitting there, and it turned out to be Jiang Ziwen's statue.

古文：问望子来何迟，因掷两橘与之。
现代文：蒋子文问望子为什么来迟了，便把两个橘子扔进望子怀中。
English: Jiang Ziwen asked him why he was late, and threw two oranges into his arms.

古文：数数形见，遂隆情好。
现代文：他望着楚楚动人的望子，遂生喜爱之情，心有所欲，就从神座上走了下来。
English: He gazed at the very attractive son of hope, and then, feeling affectionate and desirous, he came down from the throne.

古文：心有所欲，辄空中下之，尝思噉鲙，一双鲜鲤，随心而至。
现代文：一次望子想吃鱼，一对鲜活的大鲤鱼就随心而至，从空中掉在面前。
English: One time, when his son wanted to eat fish, a pair of live eels came to him and fell from the sky in front of him.

古文：望子芳香，流闻数里，颇有神验，一邑共事奉。
现代文：望子的这段风流韵事，传播到十里八村，弄得妇幼皆知。见此庙颇有灵验，全县都来祭祀。
English: This episode of the love affair of the watchman spread to ten villages and eight villages, making it known to women and children. Seeing that this temple was quite effective, the whole county came to worship.

古文：经三年，望子忽生外意，神便绝往来。
现代文：一共过了三年，后来望子忽然生了外心，蒋子文便和她断了往来。
English: A total of three years passed, and then Mochi suddenly had an ectopic pregnancy, and Jiang Ziwen broke off contact with her.

古文：咸宁中，太常卿韩伯子某，会稽内史王蕴子某，光禄大夫刘耽子某，同游蒋山庙。
现代文：晋武帝咸宁年间，太常卿韩伯的儿子，会稽郡内史王蕴的儿子，光禄大夫刘耽的儿子，三人同游蒋山神庙。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xianning of the Jin Dynasty, the son of the Grand Vizier Han Bo, the son of the county auditor Shi Wangyun, the son of the Guanglu doctor Liu Tan, the three of them toured the Jiangshan Temple.

古文：庙有数妇人像，甚端正。
现代文：庙中有好几个妇人的神像，非常端庄秀美。
English: There are several statues of female deities in the temple, very dignified and beautiful.

古文：某等醉，各指像以戏相配匹。
现代文：见状，他们被迷醉了，各指其中一个调戏起来，说要与之成婚配等等。
English: According to the report, they were intoxicated, and each of them flirted with one of them, saying that they wanted to marry him, and so on.

古文：即以其夕，三人同梦，蒋侯遣传教相闻曰：家子女并丑陋，而猥垂荣顾，辄刻某日，悉相奉迎。
现代文：当天晚上，三人同时作了这样一个梦蒋子文派人传话说：我的这几个女儿都很丑陋，而你们却不怕辱没自己的身份，光顾垂爱。
English: That night, the three of them had a dream at the same time. Jiang Ziwen sent a messenger to say: "These daughters of mine are all very ugly, but you are not afraid to humiliate your status and patronize them.

古文：某等以其梦指适异常，试往相问，而果各得此梦，符协如一。
现代文：好吧，你们即刻定个日子，我将她们给各位送上门去。三人都觉得此梦十分怪异反常，相互一探问，果然都做了这样的梦，而且完全相同。
English: Well, you immediately set a date, I will send them to you. All three felt that this dream was very strange and abnormal, and when they asked each other, they all had such a dream, and it was exactly the same.

古文：于是大惧，备三牲，诣庙谢罪乞哀。
现代文：于是，他们十分恐惧，备下牛羊猪三牲，到庙上谢罪乞求原谅。
English: As a result, they were very afraid, prepared three sacrifices of cattle, sheep and pigs, and went to the temple to apologize and beg for forgiveness.

古文：又俱梦蒋侯亲来降己曰：君等既已顾之，实贪会对，克期垂及，岂容方更中悔！
现代文：当天晚上，他们又都梦见蒋子文亲自来对自己说：你们既然已经对她们产生了眷念之情，实际上就是想与她们匹配。如今，限定的日期已到，怎么容许中途反悔呢？
English: That same night, they all dreamed of Jiang Ziwen coming to them in person and saying to himself: Since you have already developed a fondness for them, you actually want to match with them. Now that the deadline has arrived, how can you allow a midway backtrack?

古文：经少时，并亡。
现代文：过了不长时间，这三个人都死了。
English: Moments later, all three were dead.

古文：刘赤父者，梦蒋侯召为主簿，期日促，乃往庙陈请。母老子弱，情事过切，乞蒙放恕。
现代文：有个叫刘赤父的人，梦见自己被蒋子文封为主簿。上任的日子日趋迫近，他便到庙上请罪并陈述说，家中母老子弱，生活负担十分沉重，乞求宽恕并放过自己。
English: A man named Liu Chiefu had a dream that he was appointed by Chiang Ziwen. As the day of his appointment approached, he went to the temple to plead guilty and stated that his mother and son were weak and the burden of life was very heavy. He begged for forgiveness and let himself go.

古文：会稽魏过，多材艺，善事神，请举过自代，因叩头流血。
现代文：会稽郡的魏过，多才多艺。善于祭祀神灵。刘赤父便举荐魏过代替自己做主簿，态度十分恳切，把头都磕出血来了。
English: Wei Kuan of Huijian County was multi-talented and good at offering sacrifices to the gods. Liu Chifu recommended Wei Kuan to replace him as the head of the family, and he was so sincere that he bled all over his head.

古文：庙祝曰：特愿相屈，魏过何人，而有斯举！
现代文：庙里管香火的人说：你特为此事受委屈，魏过到底是个什么人，值得你这样做呢？
English: The person in charge of incense in the temple said, "You are particularly aggrieved about this matter. Who is Wei Guo, and is he worthy of you doing this?"

古文：赤父固请，终不许，寻而父斧死焉。
现代文：刘赤父再三请求，终于没有被批准。很快，刘赤父就死了。
English: After repeated requests, Liu Chifu was not approved. Soon, Liu Chifu died.

古文：孙恩作逆时，吴兴分乱，一男子匆急突入蒋庙。
现代文：孙恩作乱时，吴兴兵荒马乱，一个男子匆忙中忽然闯入庙里。
English: During Sun En's rebellion, Wu Xing's army was in chaos, and a man in a hurry suddenly broke into the temple.

古文：始入门，木像弯弓射之，即卒。行人及守庙者无不皆见也。
现代文：刚一进门，那神像就弯弓向他射了一箭，他当场就死了，路上的行人和守庙的役差全看见了。
English: As soon as he entered the gate, the statue of the god shot an arrow at him with a curved bow. He died on the spot, and all the pedestrians on the road and the temple guards saw it.

古文：中书郎王长豫，有美名，父丞相导，至所珍爱，遇病转笃，导忧念特至，正在北床上坐，不食已积日。
现代文：中书郎王长豫，他的父亲是丞相王导，对他自然十分疼爱。
English: Chushiro Wang Changyu, whose father was the chancellor Wang Du, naturally loved him very much.

古文：忽见一人，行床甚壮，着铠持刀。
现代文：王长豫患病转重，王导十分忧愁。一天，他进屋探望，只见儿子坐在北床上，好几天没有吃东西了。
English: Wang Changyu became seriously ill, and Wang Du was very sad. One day, he visited the house and saw his son sitting on the north bed. He had not eaten for several days.

古文：王问：君是何人？
现代文：忽然，进来一个人，又高又棒，身穿铠甲手持刀。
English: Suddenly, a tall, handsome man wearing armor and holding a knife came in.

古文：答曰：仆是蒋侯也。
现代文：王导问他是什么人，回答说：我是蒋子文呵。
English: Wang Du asked him who he was, and he replied, "I am Jiang Ziwen."

古文：公儿不佳，欲为请命，故来耳。
现代文：你的儿子病危，我想请求为他保全生命，所以就来了。
English: Your son is critically ill, and I wanted to ask you to save his life, so I came.

古文：勿复忧。
现代文：你不要再担心了！
English: You don't have to worry anymore!

古文：王欣喜动容，即求食，食遂至数斗，内外咸未达所以。
现代文：王导欣喜动容。儿子王长豫马上要吃饭，一会儿就吃下了半斗米的饭。
English: Wang Duxin's face lit up with joy. His son Wang Changyu wanted to eat right away, and in a moment he had eaten half a bucket of rice.

古文：食毕，忽复惨然，谓王曰：中书命尽，非可救者。
现代文：相府内外全不知道怎么回事，他已经吃饱了。然而，他旋即又恢复了原状，神情惨然。蒋子文对王导说：中书郎的命已经到了尽头，没有办法可救了！
English: Both inside and outside the palace did not know what was going on, he had eaten enough. However, he immediately returned to his original state, looking miserable. Jiang Ziwen said to Wang Du: "Chongshulang's life has come to an end, there is no way to save him!"

古文：言终不见也。
现代文：他说完就不见了。
English: After he finished speaking, he disappeared.

古文：葛祚
现代文：葛祚
English: Kudzu

古文：葛祚，吴时衡阳太守。
现代文：葛祚这个人，是三国东吴的衡阳太守。
English: This man, Ge Xuan, was the governor of Hengyang in the Eastern Wu of the Three Kingdoms.

古文：郡境有大槎横水，能为妖怪，百姓为立庙。
现代文：衡阳郡境内，有一个大木筏子横在水上，兴妖作怪。老百姓没有办法，便为它修一座庙，过往行人均向它祭祀、祈祷。
English: In the territory of Hengyang County, there is a large wooden raft lying on the water, creating a monster. The people have no way, so they build a temple for it, and passers-by offer sacrifices and prayers to it.

古文：行旅祷祀，槎乃沈没，不者槎浮，则船为之破坏。
现代文：那木筏子才沉下去，否则浮在水面上了，过往的船只便遭到它的破坏。
English: The raft only sinks, otherwise it floats to the surface and wreaks havoc on passing ships.

古文：祚将去官，乃大具斤斧，将去民累。
现代文：这时，葛祚将离职而去，他想在临走之前为民解除这一忧患，便欲大动刀斧。
English: At this time, Ge Xuan was about to leave office. He wanted to solve this problem for the people before he left, so he wanted to take drastic measures.

古文：明日当至，其其，闻江中啕啕有人声。往视，槎移去，沿流下数里，驻湾中。
现代文：动手前夜，听见江里人声喧闹，葛祚带人去看，只见那木筏子竟然自己移动，顺流行了好几里地，停在一个湾子里。
English: On the eve of starting, he heard the noise of people in the river, and Ge Ying took people to see, only to see that the raft moved on its own, traveled several miles, and stopped in a bay.

古文：自此行者无复沈覆之患。
现代文：从此，过往船只再也不用担心被颠覆沉没了。
English: From then on, passing ships no longer had to worry about being capsized and sunk.

古文：衡阳人为祚立碑曰：正德祈禳，神木为移也。
现代文：衡阳的老百姓为葛祚立碑，上面写着：正德祈禳，神木为移也。
English: The people of Hengyang erected a monument to Ge Ying, on which was written: Zhengde prayed, and the sacred tree was moved.

古文：虞道施
现代文：虞道施
English: Yu Daoshi

古文：虞道施乘车出行。
现代文：虞道施乘着马车出门远行。
English: Yu Daoshi went on a long journey in a carriage.

古文：忽有一人着乌衣径来上车，云：令寄载十许里耳。
现代文：忽然，有一个穿黑衣服的人径直跳上车来，说：请你拉我走十几里吧。
English: Suddenly, a man dressed in black jumped straight onto the truck and said, "Please pull me for more than ten miles."

古文：道施试视此人，头上有光，口皆赤，面悉是毛，异之。
现代文：虞道施试探着看看这个人，只见他头上闪着光，嘴全是红的，满脸是毛，开始时就不敢打发他走。
English: Yu Daoshi probed to see this man, only to see his head shining, his mouth all red, his face full of hair. At first, he didn't dare to send him away.

古文：始时既不敢遣，行十里中，如言而去。临别，语道施曰：我是驱除大将军，感汝相容。
现代文：车行十多里路后，那人如他说的那样跳下车去，临别，对虞道施说：我是驱除邪恶的大将军，感谢你让我坐你的车。
English: After driving more than ten miles, the man, as he said, jumped out of the car and said goodbye to Yu Daoshi: "I am the general who drives away evil. Thank you for letting me ride in your car."

古文：赠银铎一双而灭。
现代文：说完，送给他一对银铎便没了踪影。
English: After that, a pair of silver ingots that had been given to him disappeared.

古文：顾邵
现代文：顾邵
English: Gu Shao

古文：顾邵为豫章，崇学校，禁淫祀，风化大行，历毁诸庙。
现代文：顾邵管理豫章郡的时候，兴学校，禁祭祀，渐渐形成风气，并把庙宇一个一个地拆毁。
English: When Gu Shao was in charge of Yuzhang County, he built a school, prohibited sacrificial rites, gradually formed a culture, and demolished the temples one by one.

古文：至庐山庙，一郡悉谏，不从。
现代文：当拆到庐山庙时，全郡上上下下都规劝他，他没有听，到底将那庙拆除了。
English: When it came to tearing down the Lushan Temple, the whole county tried to persuade him, but he didn't listen and tore down the temple after all.

古文：夜忽闻有排大门声，怪之，忽有一人，开阁迳前，状若方相，自说是庐君。
现代文：当天夜里，他忽然听见有敲大门的声音，正觉奇怪，匆匆进来一个人，推开门径直向他走来。那人长得凶恶可怕，如职掌驱鬼之官，自称是庐山神君。
English: In the night of the same day, he suddenly heard a knock on the door and was feeling strange when a man hurried in, pushed open the door and walked straight towards him. The man looked fierce and terrifying, like a high-ranking exorcist, and claimed to be the god of Lushan.

古文：邵独对之，要进上床。鬼即人坐。邵善《左传》，鬼遂与邵谈《春秋》，弥夜不能相屈。
现代文：顾邵独自与他对视了一会儿，就请他坐床，这鬼却像客人一样坐了下来，顾邵精通《左传》，那鬼随即跟他谈起来，整夜不得安歇。
English: Gu Shao looked at him alone for a while and invited him to sit on the bed, but the ghost sat down like a guest. Gu Shao is well versed in "Zhuan," and the ghost immediately began to talk to him and did not rest all night.

古文：邵叹其积辨。谓曰：传载晋景公所梦大厉者，古今同有是物也？
现代文：顾邵惊叹他知识丰富，能言善辩，对他说道：《左传》记载，晋景公所梦大厉者，从古到今都有这个东西呵。
English: Gu Shao marveled at his rich knowledge and eloquence, and said to him: "According to Zuo Zhuan, the great dreamers of Jinjing Public School have had this thing from ancient times to the present.

古文：鬼笑曰：今大则有之，厉则不然。
现代文：那鬼笑道：如今大则有之，厉则不然。
English: The ghost laughed and said, "Nowadays, big is one thing, and strong is another.

古文：灯火尽，邵不命取，乃随烧《左传》以续之。
现代文：这时，灯火燃尽了，顾邵也不再取，随即把《左传》烧着，继续同鬼谈话。
English: At this time, the lights burned out, Gu Shao did not take it anymore, and then he burned "Zhuan" and continued to talk to the ghost.

古文：鬼频请退，邵则留之。
现代文：鬼连连告退，顾邵却挽留他。
English: Gu Shao, however, retained him.

古文：鬼本欲凌邵，邵神气湛然，不可得乘。
现代文：那鬼本想凌辱顾邵，没想到顾邵正气浩然，使之无机可乘。
English: The ghost originally wanted to humiliate Gu Shao, but did not expect Gu Shao to be so magnanimous, so that he could take advantage of it.

古文：鬼反和逊，求复庙，言旨恳至。
现代文：这样一来，那鬼反倒变得和气恭逊起来，十分恳切地请求他把庙宇修复。
English: As a result, the ghost became very friendly and asked him very earnestly to repair the temple.

古文：邵笑而不答，鬼发怒而退。顾谓邵曰：今夕不能仇君，三年之内，君必衰矣。
现代文：顾邵笑而不答，鬼发怒而去，回头对他说：今天晚上没能向你报仇，三年之内，你必定得死，还是在这同一时刻。
English: Gu Shao laughed and did not answer. The ghost went away in anger and turned to him and said, "I was not able to take revenge on you tonight. In three years, you will surely die, even at this very moment."

古文：当因此时相报。邵曰：何事匆匆，且复留谈论。
现代文：顾邵说：什么事使你如此匆忙？再坐下谈一会儿吧！
English: Gu Shao said, "What's making you in such a hurry? Let's sit down and talk for a while!"

古文：鬼乃隐而不见。
现代文：那鬼却隐去踪影。
English: The ghost, however, disappeared.

古文：视门阁，悉闭如故。
现代文：顾邵看看门窗，全都关得紧紧的，还是原来的样子。
English: Gu Shao took a look at the doors and windows. They were all tightly closed and still looked the same.

古文：如期，邵果笃疾，恒梦见此鬼击之，并劝邵复庙。
现代文：三年之后的那个时刻到了，顾邵果然患了重病，总是梦见那鬼来打他，并劝他修复庙宇。
English: Three years later, the time came when Gu Shao fell seriously ill. He always dreamed of the ghost beating him and persuading him to repair the temple.

古文：邵曰：邪岂胜正？
现代文：顾邵说：邪怎能压正？
English: Gu Shao said, "How can evil crush righteousness?"

古文：终不听。后遂卒。
现代文：始终不听，后来便死了。
English: He never listened and later died.

古文：陈氏女
现代文：陈氏女
English: Chen's daughter

古文：乌伤陈氏有女，著屐上大枫树颠，了无危惧。
现代文：乌伤陈家有个女儿，穿着鞋爬到大枫树尖上，一点也不害怕，更没觉得有什么危险。
English: A daughter of the Chen family, wearing shoes, climbed to the top of a large maple tree. She was not afraid at all, nor did she feel any danger.

古文：顾曰：我应为神，今便长去。
现代文：她环顾四周，道：我应当成为神仙，今天就要永远离开这里了。
English: She looked around and said, "I'm supposed to be a fairy godmother, and today I'm leaving here forever."

古文：唯左苍右黄，当暂归耳。
现代文：只有左面是青色的右面却是黄色的，才可以暂时回来。
English: Only if the left side is blue and the right side is yellow can you temporarily return.

古文：家人悉出见之。拳手辞诀，于是飘耸轻越，极睇乃没。
现代文：家里人全跑出来看她，她抱拳拱手与大家诀别，然后耸身一跳，飘然而起。
English: All the family members ran out to see her. She said goodbye to everyone with a fist in her hand, then jumped up and flew away.

古文：人不了苍黄之意，每春辄以苍狗，秋黄狗。设祀树下也。
现代文：人们极目望去，直至没影为止。家里人不知道苍黄到底是什么意思，每年春天就用黑狗、秋天就用黄狗在树下祭祀她。
English: People stared at her until she was out of sight. The family did not know what "Changhuang" really meant, and every spring they sacrificed her under a tree with a black dog, and in autumn with a yellow dog.

古文：王表
现代文：王表
English: The King's Table

古文：临海罗阳县有神，自称王表。语言饮食，与人无异，然不见其形。
现代文：临海郡罗阳县有个神，自称王表，说话吃饭和人没什么两样，但是却看不见他的模样。
English: There is a god in Luoyang County, Linhai County, who calls himself Wang Table. He speaks and eats like a human, but you can't see his appearance.

古文：又一婢，名纺绩。
现代文：他还有一个婢女，叫纺绩。
English: He also has a handmaid, called a spinster.

古文：是月，遣中书郎李崇，赍辅国将军罗阳王印绶迎表。
现代文：这个月，皇帝派中书郎李崇把印绶送给辅国将这罗阳王迎接王表。
English: This month, the emperor sent Li Chong, a Chinese calligrapher, to send the seal to the auxiliary country to welcome the Luoyang king to the king's table.

古文：表随崇俱出，所历山川，辄遣婢与其神相闻。
现代文：王表随李崇一起出行，所经历的名山大川，江湖河流，他就派遣婢女与那里的神通报一声。
English: Wang Yibei traveled with Li Chong, and when he experienced the famous mountains, rivers and lakes, he sent his maidservant to inform the gods there.

古文：表至，权于苍龙门外为立第舍。
现代文：王表到了之后，暂且在苍龙门外为他建造了一套房舍。
English: After Wang Yibe arrived, a suite of apartments was temporarily built for him outside the Canglong Gate.

古文：表说水旱小事，往往有验。
现代文：王表预言一些旱涝之类的小事情。往往很灵验。
English: Wang table predicts some small things such as droughts and floods. It is often very effective.

古文：石人神
现代文：石人神
English: Stone deities

古文：石人神，在丰城县南。
现代文：石人神，在丰城县南边。
English: Shih Renshin, on the southern edge of Fengcheng County.

古文：其石状似人形。先在罗山下水中，流潦不没。
现代文：这块石头酷似人形，先前在罗山脚下的河中，洪水也不能将其淹没。
English: The stone, which resembles a human figure, had been floating in the river at the foot of Mount Luo and could not be submerged by the flood.

古文：后有人于水边浣衣，挂著左臂。
现代文：后来，有人在河边洗衣服。挂在了它的左臂。
English: Later, someone was washing clothes by the river, and a toad was hanging from its left arm.

古文：天忽大雨，雷电霹雳，石人臂折，走入山畔。
现代文：这时，天空忽然下起大雨，电闪雷鸣。石人的左臂被折断。
English: At this time, the sky suddenly began to rain heavily, lightning and thunder were heard. The left arm of the stone man was broken.

古文：时人异之，共立为祠，每有灵验，号曰石人神。
现代文：不久，它自己便从河中走到山边。当时，人们都感到惊异，共同为它修起个祠堂，常常显灵，于是大家便叫它石人神。
English: Soon, it walked from the river to the mountainside by itself. At that time, people were surprised and built an ancestral hall for it together. It often appeared as a spirit, so everyone called it a stone god.

古文：圣姑
现代文：圣姑
English: The Holy Mother

古文：吴兴郡界首，有洞庭山，山中圣姑祠庙在焉。
现代文：吴兴郡的边界上，有座洞庭山，山中有座圣姑祠庙。
English: On the border of Wuxing County, there is a Dongting Mountain, and in the mountain there is a nunnery temple.

古文：《吴志》曰：姑姓李氏，有道术，能履水行，其夫怒而杀之。
现代文：据《吴志》记载，圣姑原本姓李，有道术，能在水面上行走，她的丈夫一次发怒将她杀死了。
English: According to the "Wu Zhi" records, the holy aunt was originally surnamed Li, had Taoism, could walk on water, and her husband killed her in a fit of rage.

古文：自死至今，向七百岁，而颜貌如生，俨然侧卧。
现代文：从她死后到如今，已经七百年了，而容颜栩栩如生，很庄重地侧身躺着。
English: It is now seven hundred years since her death, and she lies solemnly on her side, looking very much alive.

古文：今每月一日沐浴，为除爪甲。
现代文：远远近近来祈祷的人，心诚者就可以到达庙前；心不诚者，大风便会使他的船头调转，怎么也到不了庙前。
English: He who prays far and near, if he is sincere, can reach the front of the temple; if he is not sincere, the wind will turn the bow of his boat and he will not reach the front of the temple.

古文：每日妆饰之，其形质柔弱，只如寝者。
现代文：现在，每月一日给圣姑沐浴，还要给她剪除指甲；每天都要为她化妆修饰一番。她体质极差，柔弱无骨，就像个正在睡觉的人。
English: Now, she has to bathe her one day a month, she has to have her nails clipped, she has to have her make-up touched up every day, she has a very bad constitution, she's weak and spineless, she's like a sleeping person.

古文：盖得道欤。
现代文：要知道，她已经真的成仙得道了呵。
English: You know, she has really become a saint.

古文：陈敏
现代文：陈敏
English: Chen Min

古文：陈敏，孙皓之世为江夏太守。
现代文：陈敏，在三国吴末帝孙皓当朝时任江夏郡太守。
English: Chen Min was the governor of Jiangxia County during the reign of Sun Yat-sen, the last emperor of the Three Kingdoms of Wu.

古文：自建业述职，闻宫亭庙神灵，枉帆过之，乞在任安稳，当上银杖一枝。
现代文：一次，他去京城建业述职回来，听说宫亭庙的神仙十分灵验，便专程驱船去了一趟，祈求任职期间平安无事，并许愿说将来送上一支银杖。
English: On one occasion, he went to Beijing to report for duty and when he returned, he heard that the gods of the palace temple were very powerful, so he made a special trip to the ship to pray for safety during his term of office, and made a wish that he would send a silver staff in the future.

古文：限既满，作杖，插竹为杆，以银度之。
现代文：任职期限已满，他用竹杆做了支手杖，然后镀上一层银。
English: When his term was up, he made a cane out of bamboo poles and plated it with silver.

古文：寻征为散骑常侍，还到江口，后宫亭送杖讫，即进路。
现代文：不久，他被封为散骑常侍，又来到江口，去宫亭庙送手杖。
English: Soon after, he was made a knight errant, and he came to Jiangkou to send a cane to the palace and temple.

古文：日晚，降神巫宣教曰：陈敏许我银杖，今以度银杖见与，使投水中，当送以还之。
现代文：当他们的船正行在途中，天黑下来，有位神巫自天而降，宣告般地说道：陈敏当年许愿说给我一支银手杖，今天却拿来一支镀银的竹杖送我，我要你把它投入水中，再复还给你。
English: When their ship was on its way and it was getting dark, a genie descended from the sky and announced, "Chen Min made a vow to give me a silver cane, but today he brought me a silver-plated bamboo cane. I want you to throw it into the water and then give it back to you."

古文：欺蔑之罪，不可容也。
现代文：但是，你对我的欺骗和蔑视之罪，是不能容忍的！
English: But your crime of deceit and contempt for me is intolerable!

古文：乃置杖浮水上，从流而北，其疾如飞，径到敏船前，徘徊不去。
现代文：说罢，他把那支镀银的竹手杖放在水面上，它便随水向北漂去而且像飞一样快。手杖径直奔到陈敏船前，徘徊不去。
English: With that, he placed the silver-plated bamboo cane on the surface of the water, and it drifted north with the water and as fast as it could fly. The cane went straight to Chen Min's boat and lingered there.

古文：敏惧，取之，遣小吏到庙逊谢。
现代文：陈敏害怕了，急忙取过手杖，派小吏到宫亭庙谢罪道歉。
English: Afraid, Chen Min quickly took his cane and sent a minor official to the palace temple to apologize.

古文：小吏既发，惊风卒至，涌浪滔天，敏舟倾。唯小吏四人独在。
现代文：小吏们刚一出发，狂风大作，波浪滔天，陈敏的大船翻入水中，只有那到庙上谢罪道歉的四名小吏幸免于难，其他人全死了。
English: As soon as the minor officials set off, the wind blew wildly, the waves were huge, and Chen Min's big boat overturned into the water. Only the four minor officials who went to the temple to apologize for their sins survived, and everyone else died.

古文：费长房
现代文：费长房
English: Fei Chang House

古文：费长房能使鬼神。
现代文：费长房这个人能够役使鬼神。
English: Fei Changfang is a person who can help ghosts and gods.

古文：后东海君见葛陂君，淫其夫人。
现代文：后来，东海的神君去见葛陂湖的神君，奸污了他夫人。
English: Later, the deity of the East Sea went to see the deity of the Gefen Lake and raped his wife.

古文：于是长房敕系三年，而东海大旱。
现代文：于是，费长房下令将东海神君拘囚三年。这样一来，东海一带遭受了特大旱灾。
English: As a result, Fei Changfang ordered that Donghai Shenjun be detained for three years. As a result, the East China Sea area suffered a major drought.

古文：长房至东海，见其请雨，乃敕葛陂君出之，即大雨也。
现代文：费长房来到东海，见百姓们纷纷求雨，就命葛陂神君出来施展威力，随即就下了一场大雨。
English: When Fei Changfang came to the East China Sea, he saw that the people were begging for rain, so he ordered Ge Ying Shengjun to come out and show his power, and a heavy rain immediately fell.

古文：胡母班
现代文：胡母班
English: Mother Goose Class

古文：胡母班曾至太山之侧，忽于树间。逢一绛衣驺，呼班云：太山府君召。
现代文：胡母班曾经到过泰山。他在山坡上的林木间遇见一位穿深红色衣服的主驾车马的官吏，召呼他说：泰山府的神君要见你。
English: Hu Muban once went to Mount Tai. He met an official dressed in crimson and driving a horse among the trees on the hillside. He called out to him, "The god of Mount Tai wants to see you."

古文：母班惊愕，逡巡未答，复有一驺出呼之。
现代文：胡母班愕然一惊，他迟疑不决，未作回答。
English: Hu Muban was stunned. He hesitated and did not answer.

古文：遂随行数十步，驺母班暂瞑。
现代文：又有一个主驾车马的官吏出来喊他，他只好跟着行进几十步。那官吏请胡母班暂时闭上眼睛。
English: Another official, who was driving the horse and cart, called out to him, and he had to walk a few dozen steps behind. The official asked Hu's mother to close her eyes for a moment.

古文：少顷，便见宫室，威仪甚严。
现代文：一会儿，当他睁开眼睛的时候，便看见了宫殿，这里的人都有严肃的容貌和庄重的举止。
English: After a while, when he opened his eyes, he saw the palace, and the people there had a serious look and a dignified demeanor.

古文：母班乃入阁拜谒。主为设食，语母班曰：欲见君无他，欲附书与女婿耳。
现代文：胡母班就从侧门入内拜见泰山神君，神君请他吃饭，并对他说：我想见你没有别的目的，只是求你捎封信给我的女婿。
English: Hu Muban went in through the side door to see Taishan Shenjun. Shenjun invited him to dinner and said to him, "I want to see you for no other purpose than to ask you to write a letter to my son-in-law."

古文：母班问女郎何在？
现代文：胡母班问他的女儿在什么地方？
English: Hu's mother asked him where his daughter was.

古文：曰：女为河伯妇。
现代文：回答说：我的女儿现在成了河神的妻子。
English: He answered, "My daughter is now the wife of the river god.

古文：母班曰：辄当奉书，不知何缘得达。
现代文：胡母班说：放心吧，我应该送这封信，但不知道怎样才能把它送到？
English: Hu Muban said: Don't worry, I should send this letter, but I don't know how to send it?

古文：答曰：今适河中流，便扣舟呼 青衣 ，当自有取书者。
现代文：神君说：现在，你到河的中流，就敲船喊婢女，便会有人主动把书信取走。
English: The god said: Now, when you get to the middle of the river, knock on the boat and call for the maid, and someone will take the initiative to take the letter away.

古文：母班乃辞出。
现代文：听罢，胡母班就告辞出来。
English: Listen, let's call it a day.

古文：昔驺复令闭目，有顷，忽如故道。
现代文：当初那位主驾车马的官吏又让他闭上眼睛。
English: The official who had been driving the horse asked him to close his eyes again.

古文：遂西行，如神言而呼青衣。须臾，果有一女仆出，取书而没。
现代文：一会儿，忽然像回到来时的路上，向西行去，来到河中流，胡母班睁开眼睛，照神君说的那样敲船喊婢女，果然，有一个女仆从水中走出来，接过书信便又回到水中。
English: For a moment, suddenly, as if returning to the way he had come, he went westward and came to the middle of the river. Hu's mother opened her eyes and, as the god had said, knocked on the boat and called for her maid. Sure enough, a maid came out of the water, took the letter and went back into the water.

古文：少顷复出云：河伯欲暂见君。
现代文：有顷，那女仆又钻出水面说：河神想见你一面。
English: Suddenly, the maid came out of the water again and said, "The river god wants to see you."

古文：婢亦请瞑目，遂拜谒河伯。河伯乃大设酒食，词旨殷勤。
现代文：她也让胡母班闭上眼睛。入水之后，胡母班拜见河神，河神大摆酒筵招待他，显得十分热情、殷勤。
English: She also asked Hu's classmates to close their eyes. After entering the water, Hu's classmates paid a visit to the river god. The river god invited him with a large wine goblet and appeared to be very warm and hospitable.

古文：临别，谓母班曰：感君远为致书，无物相奉。
现代文：临别，河神对胡母班说：感谢你远道而来为我送信，我也没有什么好东西相送的。
English: At the end of the farewell, the river god said to Hu Muban: Thank you for coming all the way to send me a message. I don't have anything good to send.

古文：于是命左右：取吾青丝履来。以贻母班。
现代文：于是，命手下人把他的青丝鞋取来，赠给胡母班。
English: As a result, his subordinates took away his blue silk shoes and gave them to Hu Muban.

古文：母班出，瞑然忽得还舟，遂于长安经年而还。
现代文：胡母班走出来的时候，眼睛一闭再一睁，便回到了船上。然后，他在长安住了一年才返回。
English: When Hu's mother class came out, he closed his eyes and opened them again, then returned to the ship. He then lived in Chang'an for a year before returning.

古文：至太山侧，不敢潜过，遂扣树，自称姓名，从长安还，欲启消息。
现代文：到泰山的时候，他未敢悄然而过，走进那片林子敲击树干，自报姓名后说：我刚从长安回来，想向神君回禀一下音信。
English: When he arrived at Mount Taishan, he did not dare to pass quietly, but walked into the forest and tapped on the trunk of a tree. After giving his name, he said, "I have just returned from Chang'an and would like to return a message to Shinkun."

古文：须臾，昔驺出，引母班如向法而进，因致书焉。府君请曰：当别遣报。
现代文：一会儿，当初那个主驾车马的官吏走出来，还像上次那样把他带进地府。因为他送信有功，神君又请他吃喝一顿，并说：我将对你另有报答。
English: After a while, the official who had been driving the chariot and horse came out and took him to the underworld, as he had done the last time. Because he had done a good job in sending the message, the god asked him to eat and drink, and said, "I will reward you in another way."

古文：母班语讫，如厕，忽见其父著械徒作，此辈数百人。
现代文：胡母班向神君述说完经过后，去厕所的时候，忽然看自己的父亲戴着镣铐在服刑做苦役。
English: After Hu's mother-in-law finished recounting the story to Shenjun, when she went to the toilet, she suddenly saw her father wearing shackles and doing hard labor.

古文：母班进拜流涕，问大人何因及此。
现代文：像他这样的人有好几百。胡母班扑向父亲，跪拜，哭道：您为什么落到这步田地？
English: There are hundreds of people like him. Hu Muban rushed to his father, bowed down, and cried: Why did you end up in this situation?

古文：父云：吾死不幸，见谴三年，今已二年矣！困苦不可处。
现代文：父亲说：我死之后便遭不幸，被判刑三年，今天已满二年，整日苦不堪言，简直没法活了！
English: My father said, "After my death, misfortune befell me. I was sentenced to three years in prison. Today, it has been two years. I have been in agony all day. I can't go on living!

古文：知汝今为明府所识。可为吾陈之，乞免此役，便欲得社公耳。
现代文：听说你受到神君的任用和赞赏，能不能为我陈述一下，并乞求免除我的苦役。这样一来，我就能做土地神了。
English: I have heard that you have been appointed and appreciated by the God-Emperor. Could you please make a statement for me and beg to be exempted from my hard labor. In this way, I will be able to be a land god.

古文：母班乃依教，叩头陈乞。
现代文：胡母班便照父亲说的那样，再次拜见神君，并替父亲陈述、乞求。
English: According to his father's words, Hu's mother went to see God again, and pleaded and begged for her father.

古文：府君曰：死生异路，不可相近，身无所惜。
现代文：神君说：生死不是同道，你不能够接近他呀。人的肉体是不值得怜惜的。
English: The god said, "Life and death are not the same, you cannot get close to him. The human body is not worthy of pity.

古文：母班苦请，方许之。
现代文：胡母班苦苦哀求，神君才答应下来。
English: Hu Moban begged hard, but the god only agreed.

古文：于是辞出。
现代文：胡母班从地府中走出。
English: Hu's class walks out of the dungeon.

古文：还家岁余，儿子死亡略尽。
现代文：回家一年多，孩子差不多死光了。
English: More than a year after returning home, the child is almost dead.

古文：母班惶惧，复诣太山，扣树求见。
现代文：他十分惶恐、惧怕，再次奔向泰山，敲树求见。
English: Terrified and afraid, he ran to Mount Tai again, knocking on trees and begging for help.

古文：昔驺遂迎之而见。
现代文：当年那位主驾车马的官吏迎接他走进地府，见到了神君。
English: The official who drove the horse and carriage that year greeted him as he entered the underworld and met the god.

古文：母班乃自说：昔辞旷拙，及还家，儿死亡至尽，今恐祸故未已，辄来启白，幸蒙哀救。
现代文：他自述说：当年离开这里之后，我就回到家中，一年多来孩子们全死亡了，我担心这祸事还没有完结，所以来此请你说明并开导。如蒙相救，乃我们全家之大幸！
English: He said to himself: "After I left here that year, I returned home. For more than a year, my children have all died. I am worried that this disaster is not over, so I have come here to ask you to explain and enlighten me. If we are saved, it will be a great blessing for our whole family!

古文：府君拊掌大笑曰：昔语君， 生死异路，不可相近 故也。
现代文：神君拍掌大笑道：当初我就对你说，生死不是同道，你不能够接近他。
English: Shinkun clapped his hands and laughed loudly, "I told you at the beginning that life and death are not the same, you cannot get close to him.

古文：即敕外召母班父，须臾至庭中，问之：昔求还里社，当为门户作福，而孙息死亡至尽，何也？答云：久别乡里，自忻得还，又遇酒食充足，实念诸孙，召而食之耳。于是代之。父涕泣而出。
现代文：这下怎么样？随即下令召见胡父。一会儿，胡母班之父来到庭中，神君问他：当初你请求回去当土地神，并为家里人造福，而现在你的孙儿们全死了，这是为什么？胡父回答说：久别乡里，终于回到家中，自然十分欣喜；又见酒饭丰盛，实在想念孙儿们，便召他们一块来吃，于是便都随我而来因此，泰山府君就让人代替了母班父亲的职位，老人哭泣着走了出去。
English: How about now? He immediately ordered to call Hu's father. After a while, the father of Hu's maternal class came to the courtyard, and the god asked him: At the beginning, you asked to go back to be the god of the land and benefit the family, but now your grandchildren are all dead. Why? Hu's father replied: After being away from the village for a long time, he finally returned home, and was naturally very happy. He also saw that the rice and wine were plentiful, and he really missed his grandchildren, so he invited them to eat together, so they all came with me. Therefore, the governor of Taishan Province had someone take the place of the maternal

古文：母班遂还，后有儿皆无恙。
现代文：胡母班当即到家中，从此以后，他生下的孩子再也不闹病闹灾了。
English: Hu's mother immediately went home, and since then, the child he gave birth to has never been ill again.

古文：张诚之
现代文：张诚之
English: Zhang Chengzhi

