古文：欧阳公《牡丹释名》云： 牡丹初不载文字，唐人如沈、宋、元、白之流，皆善咏花，当时有一花之异者，彼必形于篇什，而寂无传焉，唯刘梦得有咏鱼朝恩宅牡丹诗，但云一丛千朵而已，亦不云其美且异也。 
现代文：欧阳修《牡丹释名》说： 牡丹最初不见文字记载，唐人象沈铨期，宋之问，元稹、白居易等，都是咏花能手，当时有一种奇异的花，都要写入诗中。然而却没有人写牡丹。只有刘禹锡有歌咏鱼朝恩宅中牡丹诗，也只说它一丛千朵罢了，并没有夸它美丽和奇异。 
English: Ouyang Xiu, author of "The Peony: An Explanation of its Name," said: At first, there was no written record of the peony. The Tang people, such as the Qin Dynasty, the Song Dynasty, the Yuan Dynasty, the Bai Juyi, and so on, were all experts at arranging flowers. At that time, there was a strange flower that had to be written into a poem. However, no one wrote about the peony. Only Liu Yuxi had a poem about the peony in the Morning Glory House, and he only said that it was a bunch of thousands of flowers, and did not praise its beauty and strangeness.

古文：予按：白公集有《白牡丹》一篇十四韵，又《秦中吟》十篇，内《买花》一章，凡百言，云： 共道牡丹时，相随买花去。
现代文：我考查，白乐天集中有《白牡丹》一篇，共十四韵，又有《秦中吟》十篇，其中有《买花》一章，共一百字，说： 都说牡丹开花，买花人成队。
English: According to my research, the Bai Letian Collection has one piece of "White Peony" with a total of fourteen rhymes, and ten pieces of "Qin Zhongyin," including one chapter of "Buying Flowers" with a total of one hundred words, saying: They all say that peonies bloom, and flower buyers form a team.

古文：一丛深色花，十户中人赋。 
现代文：哪知一丛花，十户一年税。 
English: Who knew that one bunch of flowers would cost ten households a year's tax.

古文：而《讽谕乐府》有《牡丹芳》一篇，三百四十七字，绝道花之妖艳，至有 遂使王公与卿士，游花冠盖日相望 ， 花开花落二十日，一城之人皆若狂 之语。
现代文：他的《讽谕乐府》有《牡丹芳》一篇，三百四十七字，很讲花的妖艳，甚至有这样的句子： 竟使王公与卿士，看花车马多如云 。 牡丹花期二十日，满城争看如发狂。 
English: His "Caricature Music House" has a "Peony Fang" article, three hundred and forty-seven words, which is very about the beauty of flowers, and even has such a sentence: It actually made the prince and the noblemen see the floats and horses like clouds.

古文：又《寄微之百韵》诗云： 唐昌玉蕊会，崇敬牡丹期。 
现代文：又《寄微之百韵》诗说 唐昌观中玉蕊会，崇敬寺里牡丹期。 
English: In addition, the poem "A hundred rhymes in a microcosm" says that Tang Chang was in the middle of the Gyululju Association and revered the peonies in the temple.

古文：注： 崇敬寺牡丹花，多与微之有期。
现代文：自注： 崇敬寺正开牡丹花，常邀元微之去看。 
English: Note to self: The peonies are blooming at Chongye Temple, and I'm often invited to see them.

古文：又《惜牡丹》诗云： 明朝风起应吹尽，夜惜衰红把火看。 
现代文：又《惜牡丹》诗说： 明朝风起应吹尽，夜惜衰红把火看。 
English: In addition, the poem "Spare the Peony" says: In the morning, the wind should be blown out, and at night, the fire should be watched.

古文：《醉归盩厔》诗云：数日非关王事系，牡丹花尽始归来。 
现代文：《醉归盩厔》诗说： 数日非关王事系，牡丹花尽始归来。 
English: The poem "Drunken Return" says: A few days are not important, the peony flower will always return.

古文：元微之有《入永寿寺看牡丹》诗八韵，《和乐天秋题牡丹丛》三韵，《酬胡三咏牡丹》一绝，又有五言二绝句。
现代文：元微之有《入永寿寺看牡丹》诗八韵，《和乐天秋题牡丹丛》三韵，《酬胡三咏牡丹》一绝句，又有五言二绝句。
English: There are eight rhymes in the poem "Entering the Yongshou Temple to See the Peonies," three rhymes in the poem "Peony Bushes in Autumn," one sentence in the poem "A Tribute to Peonies" and two sentences in the poem "Five Words."

古文：许浑亦有诗云： 近来无奈牡丹何，数十千钱买一窠。 
现代文：许浑也有诗说： 近来无奈牡丹何，数十千钱买一窠。 
English: Xu Hun also has a poem that says: Recently, there is no choice but to buy peonies, tens of thousands of money to buy a bunch.

古文：徐凝云： 三条九陌花时节，万马千车看牡丹。 
现代文：徐凝说： 三条九陌花时节，万马千车看牡丹。 
English: Xu Geng said: "Peony viewing is a must-do activity during the Sanjo nine strange flowers season.

古文：又云： 何人不爱牡丹花，占断城中好物华。 
现代文：又说： 何人不爱牡丹花，占断城中好物华。 
English: He also said: How many people don't like peony flowers?

古文：然则元、白未尝无诗，唐人未尝不重此花也。
现代文：那么元、白不是没有牡丹诗，唐人也不是不重牡丹啊！
English: So Yuan and Bai are not without peony poetry, and the Chinese are not without heavy peonies!

