古文：天地设而民生之。
现代文：开天辟地之后人类诞生了。
English: After the creation of the world, human beings were born.

古文：当此之时也，民知其母而不知其父，其道亲亲而爱私。
现代文：在这个时候，人们只知道自己的母亲却不知道自己的父亲，他们处世的原则是爱自己的亲人，喜欢私利。
English: At this time, people only knew their mother but not their father, and their principle of life was to love their relatives and enjoy self-interest.

古文：亲亲则别，爱私则险。
现代文：爱自己的亲人，就会区别亲疏，喜欢谋求私利，就会心存邪恶。
English: If you love your relatives, you will distinguish between relatives and strangers. If you like to seek self-interest, you will have evil in your heart.

古文：民众，而以别、险为务，则民乱。
现代文：人多，又都区别亲疏，心存邪恶为自己，那人类就会混乱。
English: If there are many people, and they all discriminate between relatives and strangers, and harbor evil thoughts for themselves, then humanity will become chaotic.

古文：当此时也，民务胜而力征。
现代文：这个时期民众都尽力制服对方来竭力争夺财物，这样就发生的争斗。
English: During this period, people tried their best to subdue each other to compete for property, and fights broke out.

古文：务胜则争，力征则讼，讼而无正，则莫得其性也。
现代文：发生了争斗又没有一个正确的准则来解决，那人们就没有办法过正常生活。
English: If there's a fight and there's not a proper code to resolve it, then people can't live a normal life.

古文：故贤者立中正，设无私，而民说仁。
现代文：所以有道德的贤人确立了不偏不倚的正确标准，主张无私，因此人们喜欢仁爱这一准则。
English: Therefore, moral sages have established the correct standard of impartiality and advocated selflessness, so people like the principle of benevolence.

古文：当此时也，亲亲废，上贤立矣。
现代文：此时只爱自己亲人的狭隘思想被废除了，崇尚有才德之人的思想被确立了。
English: At this time, the narrow-minded idea of only loving one's own relatives was abolished, and the idea of advocating talented people was established.

古文：凡仁者以爱利为务，而贤者以相出为道。
现代文：凡是讲仁爱的人，都把爱护、方便别人当作自己的事务，而贤德的人把推举贤人当作自己的处世原则。
English: All those who speak of benevolence and love regard the care and convenience of others as their own affairs, while those who are virtuous regard the promotion of the wise as their principle of life.

古文：民众而无制，久而相出为道，则有乱。
现代文：人口众多，而没有制度，长期把推举贤人作为治理准则，就会发生混乱。
English: There is a large population, but there is no system, and long-term promotion of sages as a governance criterion will lead to chaos.

古文：故圣人承之，作为土地、货财、男女之分。
现代文：所以，圣人顺应当时社会的发展形势，制定了关于土地、财货、男女等的归属权。
English: Therefore, the sage, in accordance with the current social development situation, formulated the right of ownership of land, goods, men and women.

古文：分定而无制，不可，故立禁；禁立而莫之司，不可，故立官；官设而莫之一，不可，故立君。
现代文：名分确定了而没有制度不行，因此设立了法令；法令确立了而没有人来管理也不可，因此又设立了官职；官吏有了而没有人统一领导不行，所以设立了君主。
English: Names were fixed, but without a system it was not possible, so decrees were established; decrees were established, but without anyone to administer them it was not possible, so official positions were established; officials were established, but without a unified leadership it was not possible, so a monarch was established.

古文：既立君，则上贤废而贵贵立矣。
现代文：君主确立了崇尚贤德的思想就废除了，而尊重显贵的思想又树立了起来。
English: The monarch established the idea of advocating virtue and abolished it, while the idea of respecting dignitaries was established.

古文：然则上世亲亲而爱私，中世上贤而说仁，下世贵贵而尊官。
现代文：如此看来，远古时代人们爱自己的亲人而喜欢私利，中古时代人们推崇贤人而喜欢仁爱，近世人们的思想是推崇权贵而尊重官吏。
English: From this perspective, in ancient times, people loved their relatives and preferred self-interest, in the Middle Ages, people revered sages and preferred benevolence, and in modern times, people's thoughts were to respect dignitaries and officials.

古文：上贤者以道相出也，而立君者使贤无用也。
现代文：崇尚贤德的人，所遵循的原则是推举贤人，可是设立了君主的地位，使崇尚贤人的准则没有用了。
English: The principle followed by those who advocate virtue is to promote the wise, but the establishment of the position of the monarch has made the principle of advocating the wise useless.

古文：亲亲者以私为道也，而中正者使私无行也。
现代文：亲近亲人，是以自私自利为原则，而奉行不偏不倚的公正之道，使自私自利行不通了。
English: To be close to relatives is to take selfishness and self-interest as the principle, and to pursue an unbiased and fair way to make selfishness and self-interest unworkable.

古文：此三者非事相反也，民道弊而所重易也，世事变而行道异也。
现代文：这三个不同时代，不是做的事互相违背，而是人们原来遵循的规则有问题，所以人们原来重视的东西更改了，这是因为社会形势变了，而人们所要施行的标准也就不一样了。
English: In these three different eras, it is not that what people do contradicts each other, but that the rules that people originally followed have problems, so the things that people originally valued have changed. This is because the social situation has changed, and the standards that people want to implement are different.

古文：故曰：王道有绳。
现代文：所以说：统治天下的原则是有规律的。
English: Therefore, it is said that the principle of ruling the world is regular.

古文：夫王道一端，而臣道亦一端，所道则异，而所绳则一也。
现代文：君主统治天下的标准是一个方面，而大臣辅助君主治理天下的标准又是一个方面，他们所奉行的的原则不同，而他们所遵行的准则却只有一个。
English: The standard for the monarch to rule the world is one aspect, and the standard for the minister to assist the monarch to govern the world is another aspect. The principles they follow are different, but they follow only one standard.

古文：故曰：民愚，则知可以王；世知，则力可以王。
现代文：所以说民众愚笨，那么智慧就能称王天下；世上的人聪明，那么雄厚的实力就可称王天下。
English: Therefore, if the people are stupid, then wisdom can reign supreme; if the world's people are wise, then great power can reign supreme.

古文：民愚，则力有余而知不足；世知，则巧有余而力不足。
现代文：民众愚笨就会力量有余而智慧不足；世上的人聪慧，就智七有余有实力不足。
English: If the people are stupid, they will have too much strength and not enough wisdom; if the people in the world are intelligent, they will have too much wisdom and not enough strength.

古文：民之生，不知则学，力尽则服。
现代文：人的本性：不懂就要学，力量用尽了就会服输。
English: Human nature: if you don't understand, you must learn, and if you run out of strength, you will be defeated.

古文：故神农教耕而王天下，师其知也；汤、武致强而征诸侯，服其力也。
现代文：所以神农教会人们从事农业生产而称王天下，这是因为人们要学习他的智慧；商汤和周武王创造了强大的实力而征服了诸侯，这是屈服他的实力。
English: Ancient Shennong taught people to cultivate the fields and became the emperor of the world, because people wanted to learn from his wisdom. Shang Tang and King Zhou Wu created a powerful army and conquered the princes one day, because the princes succumbed to their power.

古文：夫民愚，不怀知而问；世知，无余力而服。
现代文：民众愚笨，心中没有知识，就要向别人请教；贡人聪明，可是当用尽力量时就会屈服。
English: The people are stupid, and have no knowledge in their hearts, so they must ask others for advice; the tributaries are clever, but when they run out of power, they will give in.

古文：故以王天下者并刑，力征诸侯者退德。
现代文：所以靠智慧称王天下的就会抛弃刑罚，用实力来征服诸侯的人就不用德政教化民众。
English: Therefore, those who rely on wisdom to be kings of the world will abandon punishment, and those who use strength to conquer the provinces will not need to use the German government to educate the people.

古文：圣人不法古，不脩今。
现代文：圣人不效法古代，也不局限于现状。
English: The sage does not follow the laws of antiquity, nor does he confine himself to the status quo.

古文：法古则后于时，脩今则塞于势。
现代文：效法古代就会落后于时代，局限于现状就会阻碍社会的发展。
English: Imitating the ancient times will lag behind the times, and limiting oneself to the status quo will hinder the development of society.

古文：周不法商，夏不法虞，三代异势，而皆可以王。
现代文：周朝不效法商朝，夏朝不效法虞舜时代。三代统治方式不同，却都能够称王天下。
English: The Zhou Dynasty did not follow the French and Chinese dynasties, and the Xia Dynasty did not follow the French and Chinese dynasties. Although the three dynasties ruled in different ways, they were all able to rule the world.

古文：故兴王有道，而持之异理。
现代文：所以建立王业有一定原则，而守住王业的办法却不相同。
English: Therefore, there is a certain principle to establish the royal industry, but the methods to keep the royal industry are different.

古文：武王逆取而贵顺，争天下而上让。其取之以力，持之以义。
现代文：周武王靠叛逆的方法夺取政权，却又顺从君主的原则来治理国家，用武力夺取天下，又崇尚谦让的仁德思想；周武王夺取天下靠的是暴力，守业靠的却是礼制。
English: King Zhou Wu seized power by rebellious means, but he governed the country in accordance with the principle of the monarch, using force to seize the world, and advocating the idea of humility and benevolence; King Zhou Wu seized the world by means of violence, but he protected his profession by means of etiquette.

古文：今世强国事兼并，弱国务力守，上不及虞、夏之时，而下不脩汤、武。
现代文：现在强国致力于用武力兼并别国，弱国所做的事是尽力防守，从远古来说赶不上虞、夏两个时代，而近古时代不遵循商汤、周武王的治国原则。
English: At present, the strong countries are committed to annexing other countries by force, and the weak countries are doing their best to defend themselves. From ancient times, they can't catch up with the times of Yu and Xia, and the ancient times do not follow the principles of governance of Shang Tang and King Zhou Wu.

古文：汤、武塞，故万乘莫不战，千乘莫不守。
现代文：像商汤、周武王那样统一天的方法补被抛弃了，所以有一万辆兵车的国家没有不打仗的，有一千辆兵车的国家没有不防守的。
English: Like Shang Tang and King Zhou Wu, the method of unifying one day was abandoned, so there is no country with ten thousand chariots that does not fight, and there is no country with one thousand chariots that does not defend.

古文：此道之塞久矣，而世主莫之能废也，故三代不四。
现代文：商汤、周武王统一天下的方法已经被塞堵很久了，可现在的君主没有谁能开启这些方法，因此，没有出现第四个像夏、商、周三代那样的朝代。
English: The methods of unification by Shang Tang and King Zhou Wu have been blocked for a long time, but no current monarch can open these methods, so there is no fourth dynasty like Xia, Shang and the Third Dynasty.

古文：非明主莫有能听也，今日愿启之以效。
现代文：不是英明的君主不能听进去我的这番话，今天我愿意用实际效果来说明这个道理。
English: It was not a wise prince who did not listen to my words, and today I would like to demonstrate this with practical results.

古文：古之民朴以厚，今之民巧以伪。
现代文：古代的民众淳朴又宽厚，现在的民众乖巧而虚伪。
English: The ancient people were simple and generous, the current people are well-behaved and hypocritical.

古文：故效于古者，先德而治；效于今者，前刑而法。
现代文：所以在古代有效的方法就是把用道德教化民众放在首位；现在治理国家有效的方法就是把法治放在前面而使用刑罚。
English: Therefore, the effective method in ancient times was to put the moral education of the people in the first place; now the effective method of governing the country is to put the rule of law in the first place and use criminal punishment.

古文：此俗之所惑也。
现代文：这个古今不同的治理方法世俗之人是不能理解的。
English: This ancient and modern difference in governance is incomprehensible to the layman.

古文：今世之所谓义者，将立民之所好，而废其所恶；此其所谓不义者，将立民之所恶，而废其所乐也。
现代文：现在社会上所说的不义，就是要确定民众所讨厌的，废除民众的所喜欢的。现在二者名实皆不同，不可以不弄明白。
English: What is now called injustice in society is to determine what the people hate and abolish what the people like. Now the two are different in name and reality, and it is necessary to understand them.

古文：二者名贸实易，不可不察也。立民之所乐，则民伤其所恶；立民之所恶，则民安其所乐。
现代文：确立民众所喜欢的，那么民众就会被他们所讨厌的东西伤害；确立民众所讨厌的，那民众就会享受他所喜欢的东西。
English: Establish what the people like, and the people will be hurt by what they dislike; establish what the people dislike, and the people will enjoy what they like.

古文：何以知其然也？
现代文：凭什么知道是这样呢？
English: How do you know that's the case?

古文：夫民忧则思，思则出度；乐则淫，淫则生佚。
现代文：人忧虑就思考，思考了做事就能合乎法度；人快乐就放荡，放荡了就会产生喜欢安逸的懒惰思想。
English: When people are anxious, they think, and when they think, they can do things in accordance with the law; when people are happy, they are dissolute, and when they are dissolute, they will produce lazy thoughts that like to be at ease.

古文：故以刑治则民威，民威则无奸，无奸则民安其所乐。
现代文：因此用刑罚治理民众就会畏惧，就不会有邪恶的事发生，没有邪恶的事发生，民众就可以享受他们的快乐了。
English: Therefore, if you use punishment to control the people, they will be afraid, there will be no evil, and if there is no evil, the people can enjoy their happiness.

古文：以义教则民纵，民纵则乱，乱则民伤其所恶。
现代文：用道义来教化就会放纵自己，民众放纵自己就会作乱，民众作乱就会被民众所讨厌的东西伤害。
English: If you use morality to educate, you will indulge yourself, if the people indulge themselves, they will make trouble, and if the people make trouble, they will be hurt by what the people hate.

古文：吾之所谓刑者，义之本也；而世所谓义者，暴之道也。
现代文：我所说的刑罚，就是实施道义的根本；而现在所说的义是暴乱的原因。
English: What I call punishment is the enforcement of a moral principle; what I now call justice is the cause of the riot.

古文：夫正民者，以其所恶，必终其所好；以其所好，必败其所恶。
现代文：治理民众的人，如果用他们所讨厌的东西去治理，最终民众一定能得到他们的喜欢的；如果用他们所喜欢的来治理，民众一定受害于他们讨厌的东西。
English: If those who govern the people are governed by what they hate, the people will eventually get what they like; if they are governed by what they like, the people will suffer from what they hate.

古文：治国刑多而赏少，故王者刑九而赏一，削国赏九而刑一。
现代文：政治修明的国家，刑罚多而赏赐少。政治混乱的国家，赏赐多而刑罚少。
English: In a country where the political situation is stable, the punishment is more and the reward is less. In a country where the political situation is chaotic, the reward is more and the punishment is less.

古文：夫过有厚薄，则刑有轻重；善有大小，则赏有多少。
现代文：所以成就王业的国家，刑罚有九分，赏赐有一分。削弱的国家，赏赐有九分，刑罚有一分。人的罪过有厚有薄，所以朝廷的刑罚有重有轻；人的善行有大有小，所以朝廷的赏赐有多有少。
English: Therefore, the country that has accomplished the king's inheritance has a nine-point penalty and a one-point reward. The country that has weakened has a nine-point reward and a one-point punishment. People's sins are thick and thin, so the court's punishment is heavy and light; people's good deeds are large and small, so the court's reward is more or less.

古文：此二者，世之常用也。
现代文：这两项是世人常用的法则。
English: These two are the most commonly used rules in the world.

古文：刑加于罪所终，则奸不去；赏施于民所义，则过不止。
现代文：但是刑罚加在人民已经犯了罪的时候，奸邪就不会断绝。赏赐用在人民所认为 义 的上面，那么犯罪的事就不能去掉。
English: But when the people have sinned, and iniquity shall abound, the punishment thereof shall not be taken away, and the reward of the righteous shall not be diminished.

古文：刑不能去奸而赏不能止过者，必乱。
现代文：刑罚不能除去奸邪，赏赐不能遏止罪过，国家必乱。
English: Punishment cannot remove the evil of treachery, reward cannot restrain the crime, and the country will be in turmoil.

古文：故王者刑用于将过，则大邪不生；赏施于告奸，则细过不失。治民能使大邪不生、细过不失，则国治。
现代文：因此，成就王业的国君，把刑罚用在人民将要犯罪的时候，所以大的奸邪才不产生；把赏赐用在告发犯罪方面，所以小的罪过也不致漏网，治理人民能够使大的奸邪不产生，使小的罪过不漏网，国家就治理好了。
English: Therefore, the prince who has accomplished his royal duty should use the punishment when the people are about to commit a crime, so that a great treachery will not occur; the reward should be used in the prosecution of crimes, so that small sins will not leak out, and the governance of the people can prevent great treachery from occurring, so that small sins will not leak out, and the country will be well governed.

古文：国治必强。
现代文：国家治，就必定强。
English: The rule of the state is necessarily strong.

古文：一国行之，境内独治。
现代文：一国这样做，他的国家就可以单独治安。
English: If one country does this, his country will be able to police itself.

古文：二国行之，兵则少寝。
现代文：两国这样做，战争就可以稍微停止。
English: If the two countries do this, the war can be stopped a little.

古文：天下行之，至德复立。
现代文：天下都这样做，最高的道德就会重新建立起来。
English: Do this everywhere, and the highest morality will be re-established.

古文：此吾以杀刑之反于德而义合于暴也。
现代文：所以我认为杀戮、刑罚能够归于道德，而 义 反倒合于残暴。
English: So I think that killing and punishment can be attributed to morality, while righteousness, on the contrary, is associated with cruelty.

古文：古者，民藂生而群处，乱，故求有上也。
现代文：古代人们聚集在一起群居，秩序混乱，所以要求有首领。
English: In ancient times, people gathered together to live in groups, and the order was chaotic, so they required a leader.

古文：然则天下之乐有上也，将以为治也。
现代文：如此看来，天下的人之所以愿意有首领，是为了追求天下安定。
English: From this perspective, the reason why people around the world are willing to have a leader is to pursue world stability.

古文：今有主而无法，其害与无主同；有法不胜其乱，与无法同。
现代文：现在有君主而没有法规，它的危害程度与没有君主相同；有了法规而不能制止混乱和没有法规相同。
English: There is now the same degree of mischief in having a prince, and no laws; in having laws, and not being able to restrain disorder, as in having no laws.

古文：天下不安无君，而乐胜其法，则举世以为惑也。
现代文：天下的人都不希望没有国君，却又喜欢超越他的法律约束，那么天下的人就都会感到不明白。
English: People all over the world do not want to be without a sovereign, but they like to go beyond his legal constraints, so people all over the world will feel confused.

古文：夫利天下之民者莫大于治，而治莫康于立君，立君之道莫广于胜法，胜法之务莫急于去奸，去奸之本莫深于严刑。
现代文：对天下民众来说没有比国家安全的益处大的事，而治理国家没有比确立君主的统治地位大的事。确立君主的原则没有比施行法治的意义大的；实施法治的任务，没有比除掉邪恶急需的了；去掉邪恶的根本没有比严厉刑罚更厉害的了。
English: There is no greater benefit to the people of the world than national security, and there is no greater thing to govern a country than to establish the dominance of the monarch; there is no greater significance to establish the principle of the monarch than to implement the rule of law; there is no more urgent task to implement the rule of law than to eliminate evil; there is no more severe punishment to eliminate evil.

古文：故王者以赏禁，以刑劝；求过不求善，藉刑以去刑。
现代文：所以称王天下的君主用刑罚归劝民众；追究民众的过错，不理会民众的善举，用刑罚除掉刑罚。
English: Therefore, the monarchs of the world use punishment to persuade the people; investigate the people's faults, ignore the people's good deeds, and use punishment to eliminate punishment.

