古文：嘉靖初年，北虏尝寇陕西，犯花马池，镇巡惶遽，请兵策应。
现代文：原文明世宗嘉靖初年，北方胡虏入侵陕西花马池，巡抚感到害怕，奏请朝廷派遣军队征讨。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Jiajing, the Northern Huns invaded Huama Lake in Shaanxi Province. The governor was afraid and asked the imperial court to send troops to investigate.

古文：事下九卿会议，本兵王宪以为必当发，否恐失事。
现代文：这件事世宗交给九卿商议。兵部尚书王宪认为应该出兵，否则恐怕来不及。
English: King Sejong gave the matter to the nine lords for deliberation. The commander of the military department, King Shoshu, thought that the troops should be sent out, otherwise it would be too late.

古文：众不敢异。
现代文：其他人都不敢有异议。
English: No one else dared to object.

古文：王琼时为冢宰，独不肯，曰： 我自有疏。 
现代文：只有王琼不同意，说： 我自己另有奏疏。 
English: Only Wang Qiong disagreed, saying: I myself have a different way of playing.

古文：即奏云： 花马池是臣在边时所区画，防守颇严，虏必不能入；纵入，亦不过掳掠；彼处自足防御，不久自退。
现代文：于是奏道： 花马池是微臣在边境时所规划修建的，防守工事非常坚强严密，胡虏一定侵入不了；就算侵入，也不过是掠夺少许财物而已，当地的兵力绝对足以防御，不用多少时间胡虏就会撤退。
English: He then recited: "Hanama-chi was planned and built by Weizhong when he was at the border. The defense works are very strong and strict, and the Khurus will definitely not be able to invade. Even if they invade, it will only be to plunder a little property. The local forces are absolutely sufficient for defense, and the Khurus will retreat in no time at all.

古文：若遣京军远涉边境，道路疲劳，未必可用，而沿途骚扰，害亦不细，倘至彼而虏已退，则徒劳往返耳。
现代文：如果派京师的军队长途跋涉到边境，只不过增加路途上的疲劳，未必有用，而且沿途对百姓的骚扰，危害也不浅。假使军队到达该地而胡虏已经退了，就只是徒劳往返而已。
English: If the army of the Beijing division is sent to the border, it will only increase the fatigue on the way, which is not necessarily useful, and the harassment of the people along the way is also harmful. If the army arrives at the place and the Huns have retreated, it is just a futile round trip.

古文：臣以为不发兵便。 
现代文：微臣认为不出兵才对。 
English: Weixin believed that it was better not to go to war.

古文：然兵议实本兵主之，竟发六千人，命二游击将之以往。
现代文：但由于出兵的事主要由兵部负责决定，最后还是派出六千名士兵，命令两名将领率领前往。
English: However, since the dispatch of troops was mainly decided by the Ministry of Military Affairs, six thousand soldiers were finally sent and two generals were ordered to lead them.

古文：至彰德，未渡河，已报虏出境矣。
现代文：军队到达彰德正待渡河，就传报胡虏已经出境了。
English: When the troops arrived in Changde and were waiting to cross the river, they were told that the Huns had already left the country.

古文：按晋溪在西北，修筑花马池一带边墙，命二指挥董其役。
现代文：王琼在西北修筑花马池一带的边墙，命令两名指挥负责督导。
English: Wang Qiong ordered two commanders to supervise the construction of the border wall around Huama Lake in the northwest.

古文：二指挥甚效力，边墙极坚，且功役亦不甚费，有羡银二千余，持以白晋溪。
现代文：两名指挥非常尽责，边墙也筑得非常坚固，而且费用也不太多，完成后尚有二千多两盈余的银子，来报告王琼。
English: The two commanders were very conscientious, the boundary wall was also built very solidly, and the cost was not too much. After completion, there were more than two thousand and two surplus silver to report to Wang Qiong.

古文：晋溪曰： 此一带城墙，实西北要害去处，汝能尽心了此一事，此琐琐之物何足问，即以赏汝。 
现代文：王琼说： 这一带边墙是防御西北最重要的设施，你们能尽心尽力完成这件事就很好，这些琐碎的财物我不过问，就赏给你们吧！ 
English: Wang Qiong said, "This area of the border wall is the most important facility for the defense of the northwest. If you can do your best to complete this matter, that's great. I don't care about these trivial belongings, just give them to you!"

古文：后北虏犯边，即遣二指挥提兵御之，二人争先陷阵，其一竟死于敌。
现代文：后来北方胡虏侵犯边区，就派这两名指挥带兵去抵御，两人争先冲锋陷阵，其中一名最后殉职。
English: Later, when the Northern Khuriks invaded the border region, they sent these two commanders and soldiers to defend it. The two rushed to the front, and one of them died in the end.

古文：晋溪筹边智略类如此。
现代文：王琼筹备边防的才智，其做法和功迹大概都和这种情形类似。
English: Wang Qiong's ingenuity in preparing for border defense, his practices and feats are probably similar to this situation.

古文：又晋溪总制三边时，每一巡边，虽中火亦费百金，未尝折干，到处皆要供具，烧羊亦数头，凡物称是。
现代文：另外，王琼镇守边境时，每次到阵地巡视，寻常的一餐，也要花费百两金子，所到的地方都要准备宴会的用具，宰杀好几头羊，差不多都是这样的花费，有这种规模。
English: In addition, when Wang Qiongzhen was guarding the border, every time he visited a position, an ordinary meal would also cost a hundred and two gold, and everywhere he went, he had to prepare banquet equipment and slaughter several sheep. Almost all of these expenses were of this scale.

古文：晋溪不数脔，尽撤去，散于从官，虽下吏亦沾及。故西北一有警，则人人效命。
现代文：王琼自己吃得不多，其余都分配给将领和士卒，连职位最低的小吏都分得了好处，所以西北地方一旦有战事，人人都乐于效命。
English: Wang Qiong himself did not eat much, the rest was distributed to generals and soldiers, and even the lowest-ranking minor officials received benefits, so once there is a war in the northwest, everyone is willing to serve.

古文：当时法网疏阔，故豪杰得行其意；使在今日，则台谏即时论罢矣。
现代文：当时法网疏漏，豪杰之士都能顺着自己的心志行事。假使在今日，谏议的官员马上就要加以弹劾，主事者甚至会被罢官。
English: At that time, the legal network was negligent, and the heroes could act according to their own wishes. Today, if the officials involved in the discussion were to be impeached immediately, the person in charge would even be dismissed.

古文：梅衡湘任播州监军，行时请帑金三千备犒赏之需，及事定，所费仅四百金，登籍报部，无分毫妄用。
现代文：梅衡湘任播州监军时，临行请公款三千万钱，准备犒赏士兵，整个任务完成后，却只花费了四百万钱，剩余的都如数报缴兵部，一点没有乱用。
English: When Mei Heng Xiang was in charge of supervising the army in Banzhou, he asked for 30 million yuan of public funds and prepared to reward soldiers. However, after the entire task was completed, only 4 million yuan was spent. The rest was reported to the military department as it was, and there was no misuse at all.

