古文：宋子曰：物象精华，乾坤微妙，古传今而华达夷，使后起含生，目授而心识之，承载者以何物哉？
现代文：宋先生说：世间万物的精华、天地的奥妙，从古流传至今，从中原抵达边疆，使后来人能够了然于心，那是用什么东西记载下来的呢？
English: Mr. Song said, "The essence of all things in the world, the secrets of heaven and earth, have been passed down from ancient times to the present, and have reached the frontier from the Central Plains, so that later people can understand it in their hearts. What was used to record it?

古文：君与民通，师将弟命，冯藉占占口语，其与几何？
现代文：君主与臣下交换意见，老师传授课业给学生，如果只是凭借喋喋不休的口头语言，那又能解决多少问题呢？
English: How many problems could be solved if the monarch exchanged views with his subjects, and the teacher imparted lessons to his pupils, if only by means of incessant verbal language?

古文：持寸符，握半卷，终事诠旨，风行而冰释焉。
现代文：但是只要有短短一张文符或者是半册课本，就能把有关事物的道理阐述清楚，就能使命令风行天下，疑难也会如同冰雪融化一样地消释。
English: But as long as there is a short piece of writing or half a textbook, the truth of the relevant things can be explained clearly, the order can be popularized, and the difficulties will be eliminated like the melting of ice and snow.

古文：覆载之间之藉有楮先生也，圣顽咸嘉赖之矣。
现代文：自从世上有了纸之后，聪明的人和愚钝的人都从中受益不浅。
English: Since paper came into the world, both smart and dumb people have benefited from it.

古文：身为竹骨为与木皮，杀其青而白乃见，万卷百家基从此起。
现代文：纸是以竹骨和树皮为原料造成的。除去树木的青色外层就造成了白纸，于是诸子百家的万卷图书才有了书写和印刷的物质基础。
English: Paper is made from bamboo bones and tree bark. Removing the bluish outer layer of trees creates white paper, which is how the millions of books in the world came to have a material basis for writing and printing.

古文：其精在此，而其粗效于障风、护物之间。
现代文：精细的纸用在这方面，而粗糙的纸则用来挡风和进行包装。
English: Fine paper is used for this purpose, while coarse paper is used for wind protection and packaging.

古文：事已开于上古，而使汉、晋时人擅名记者，何其陋哉！
现代文：造纸的事早在上古时就已经开始了，但却有人把它说成是汉、晋时由某个人所发明，这种见识是多么地浅陋啊！
English: Paper-making began in ancient times, but some people say that it was invented by someone in the Han and Jin dynasties. How shallow this view is!

古文：○纸料
现代文：纸料
English: Paper materials

古文：凡纸质用楮树皮与桑穰、芙蓉膜等诸物者为皮纸，用竹麻者为竹纸。
现代文：用楮树、桑树和木芙蓉的第二层皮等造的纸，叫做皮纸，用竹麻造出来的纸叫做竹纸。
English: Paper made from the second layer of bark of eucalyptus, mulberry and hibiscus is called leather paper, and paper made from bamboo and hemp is called bamboo paper.

古文：精者极其洁白，供书文、印文、柬启用；粗者为火纸、包裹纸。
现代文：制作精良的纸非常洁白，可以用来书写、印刷和制柬帖；粗糙的纸则用于制作火纸和包装纸。
English: Well-made paper is very white and can be used for writing, printing and embroidery; coarse paper is used to make fire paper and wrapping paper.

古文：所谓 杀青 ，以斩竹得名； 汗青 以煮沥得名； 筒 即已成纸名，乃煮竹成筒。
现代文：造纸过程中所谓的 杀青 就是从斩竹去青而得到的名称， 汗青 则是以煮沥而得到的名称， 简 就是指已经造好的纸。
English: In the papermaking process, the so-called "killing blue" is the name obtained from cutting bamboo to remove blue, and "sweating blue" is the name obtained by boiling pitch, which refers to the paper that has been made.

古文：后人遂疑削竹片以纪事，而又误疑韦编为皮条穿竹札也。
现代文：因为煮竹能成 简 和纸，后人于是就误认为削竹片可以记录事情，进而还错误地以为古代的书册都是用皮条穿编竹简而成的。
English: Because boiled bamboo can be used to make bamboo strips and paper, later generations mistakenly believed that cutting bamboo slices could record things, and further mistakenly thought that ancient books were made of bamboo strips woven with leather.

古文：秦火未经时，书籍繁甚，削竹能藏几何？
现代文：在秦始皇焚书以前，已经有很多书籍，如果纯用竹简，又能写下几个字呢？
English: Before Qin Shihuang burned books, there were already many books. If you use only bamboo slips, how many words can you write?

古文：如西番用贝树造成纸叶，中华又疑以贝叶书经典。
现代文：西域一带的人用贝树造成纸页，而我国中土的人士进而误传他们可以用贝树叶来书写经文。
English: People in the western part of the country used shellfish to make paper, while people in the central part of the country further misrepresented that they could use shellfish leaves to write scriptures.

古文：不知树叶离根即焦，与削竹同一可哂也。
现代文：他们不懂得树叶离根就会焦枯的道理，这跟削竹记事的说法是同样可笑的。
English: They don't understand that the leaves of a tree wither from the roots, which is just as ridiculous as cutting bamboo.

古文：○造竹纸
现代文：造竹纸
English: Bamboo paper

古文：凡造竹纸，事出南方，而闽省独专其盛。当笋生之后，看视山窝深浅，其竹以将生枝叶者为上料。
现代文：竹纸生产始于南方，以福建最为盛行。当竹笋长出来以后，先要到山沟里观察竹林的长势，那些要生枝叶的嫩竹是最上等的原料。
English: Bamboo paper production began in the south, with Fujian being the most popular. When the bamboo shoots grow out, the first thing to do is to go to the ravine to observe the growth of the bamboo forest. The tender bamboo that needs to grow branches and leaves is the best raw material.

古文：节界芒种，则登山斫伐。截断五七尺长，就于本山开塘一口，注水其中漂浸。
现代文：每年芒种时节到来后就可以上山砍竹，把竹竿截为长度为五到七尺的竹段，然后在山上挖一个塘，里面灌满水用来浸竹子。
English: After the arrival of the mango-planting season every year, you can go up the mountain to cut bamboo, cut the bamboo pole into bamboo segments with a length of five to seven feet, and then dig a pond on the mountain, which is filled with water to soak the bamboo.

古文：恐塘水有涸时，则用竹枧通引，不断瀑流注入。
现代文：为了避免水塘干涸，要用竹管引水，不断地向其中注入山上流下来的溪水。
English: In order to prevent the pond from drying up, it is necessary to use bamboo pipes to divert water and continuously inject stream water flowing down from the mountains into it.

古文：浸至百日之外，加功槌洗，洗去粗壳与青皮，其中竹穰形同苎麻样。
现代文：浸到一百天以上，把竹子取出来，用木棒不断捶打，洗掉粗壳和青皮，这个步骤就叫做 杀青 ，这时竹茎就会变得好像苎麻一样。
English: After being soaked for more than 100 days, the bamboo is taken out, beaten with a wooden stick, and the rough shell and green skin are washed off. This step is called "killing," and the bamboo stem will become like a nettle.

古文：用上好石灰化汁涂浆，入皇桶下煮，火以八日八夜为率。
现代文：接下来就是要用优质石灰调成灰浆，跟竹子一起放入木桶，煮上八天八夜。
English: The next step is to make a mortar with high-quality lime, put it in a wooden barrel with the bamboo, and boil it for eight days and nights.

古文：凡煮竹，下锅用径四尺者，锅上泥与石灰捏弦，高阔如广中煮盐牢盆样，中可载水十余石。
现代文：煮竹子的锅，直径约四尺，用黏土调石灰封固锅的边沿，使其高度和宽度类似于广东中部沿海地区煮盐的牢盆那样，里面可以装下十多石水。
English: A bamboo cooking pot with a diameter of about four feet. The rim of the pot is sealed with clay-mixed lime, making its height and width similar to that of a salt-cooking cell in the coastal areas of central Guangdong. It can hold more than ten liters of mineral water.

古文：上盖皇桶，其围丈五尺，其径四尺余。
现代文：上面盖上周长约一丈五尺、直径约四尺多的楻桶。
English: On the top of the lid is a gourd about five feet long and four feet in diameter.

古文：盖定受煮八日已足。
现代文：竹料加入锅和楻桶中，煮八天就足够了。
English: Bamboo materials are added to the pot and ladle, and it is enough to cook for eight days.

古文：歇火一日，揭皇取出竹麻，入清水漂塘之内洗净。
现代文：停止加热一天后，揭开楻桶，取出竹麻，放到清水塘里漂洗干净。
English: After the heating has been stopped for a day, open the bucket, take out the bamboo and wash it in a clean pond.

古文：其塘底面、四维皆用木板合缝砌完，以防泥污。
现代文：漂塘底部和四周都要用木板合缝砌好以防止沾染泥污。
English: The bottom of the floating pond and all around should be built with wooden boards sewn together to prevent contamination with mud.

古文：洗净，用柴灰浆过，再入釜中，其上按平，平铺稻草灰寸许。
现代文：竹麻洗净之后，用柴灰水浸透，再放入锅内按平，铺一寸左右厚的稻草灰。
English: After washing the bamboo and hemp, impregnate it with wood ash water, then put it in the pot and flatten it, and spread straw ash about one inch thick.

古文：桶内水滚沸，即取出别桶之中，仍以灰汁淋下。
现代文：煮沸之后，就把竹麻移入另一桶中，继续用草木灰水淋洗。
English: After boiling, the bamboo and hemp were transferred to another bucket and continued to be rinsed with grass and wood grey water.

古文：倘水冷，烧滚再淋。
现代文：草木灰水冷却以后，要煮沸再淋洗。
English: After the grassy ash water has cooled, it should be boiled and then rinsed.

古文：如是十余日，自然臭烂。
现代文：这样经过十多天，竹麻自然就会腐烂发臭。
English: In this way, after more than ten days, the bamboo hemp will naturally rot and stink.

古文：取出入臼受舂，舂至形同泥面，倾入槽内。
现代文：把它拿出来放入臼内舂成泥状，倒入抄纸槽内。
English: Take it out, put it in a mortar and pestle to form a paste, and pour it into the copying tray.

古文：凡抄纸槽，上合方斗，尺寸阔狭，槽视帘，帘视纸。
现代文：抄纸槽像个方斗，大小由抄纸帘而定，抄纸帘又由纸张的大小来定。
English: The copying tray is like a square bucket, the size of which is determined by the paper curtain, and the paper curtain is determined by the size of the paper.

古文：竹麻已成，槽内清水浸浮其面三寸许。入纸药水汁于其中，则水干自成洁白。
现代文：抄纸槽内放置清水，水面高出竹浆约三寸左右，加入纸药水汁，这样抄成的纸干后便会很洁白。
English: Place clear water in the paper-copying trough, with the bamboo pulp about three inches above the water surface, and add the paper potion water, so that the copied paper will be very white after drying.

古文：凡抄纸帘，用刮磨绝细竹丝编成。展卷张开时，下有纵横架框。
现代文：抄纸帘是用刮磨得极其细的竹丝编成的，展开时下面有木框托住。
English: The paper curtain is made of extremely finely scraped bamboo thread, and is supported by a wooden frame when unfolded.

古文：两手持帘入水，荡起竹麻入于帘内。
现代文：两只手拿着抄纸帘放进水中，荡起竹浆让它进入抄纸帘中。
English: Hold the paper curtain with two hands and put it in the water, and swish the bamboo pulp to make it enter the paper curtain.

古文：厚薄由人手法，轻荡则薄，重荡则厚。
现代文：纸的厚薄可以由人的手法来调控、掌握：轻荡则薄，重荡则厚。
English: The thickness of paper can be controlled and mastered by human methods: light is thin, heavy is thick.

古文：竹料浮帘之顷，水从四际淋下槽内。然后覆帘，落纸于板上，叠积千万张。
现代文：提起抄纸帘，水便从帘眼淋回抄纸槽；然后把帘网翻转，让纸落到木板上，叠积成千上万张。
English: When the paper curtain is lifted, water drips from the curtain eye back into the paper trough; then the curtain net is flipped over, allowing the paper to fall onto the wooden board, accumulating thousands of sheets.

古文：数满则上以板压。俏绳入棍。如榨酒法，使水气净尽流干。然后以轻细铜镊逐张揭起焙干。
现代文：等到数目够了时，就压上一块木板，捆上绳子并插进棍子，绞紧，用类似榨酒的方法把水分压干，然后用小铜镊把纸逐张揭起，烘干。
English: When the number is enough, a wooden board is pressed, a rope is tied and a stick is inserted, it is tightened, the water is squeezed dry using a method similar to wine pressing, and then the paper is lifted up piece by piece with a small gong and dried.

古文：凡焙纸先以土砖砌成夹巷地面，下以砖盖地面，数块以往，即空一砖。
现代文：烘焙纸张时，先用土砖砌两堵墙形成夹巷，底下用砖盖火道，夹巷之内盖的砖块每隔几块砖就留出一个空位。
English: When baking paper, first build two walls with clay bricks to form a sandwich lane, use bricks to cover the fire escape underneath, and leave a space every few bricks between the bricks in the inside of the sandwich lane.

古文：火薪从头穴烧发，火气从砖隙透巷外。砖尽热，湿纸逐张贴上焙干，揭起成帙。
现代文：火从巷头的炉口燃烧，热气从留空的砖缝中透出而充满整个夹巷，等到夹巷外壁的砖都烧热时，就把湿纸逐张贴上去焙干，再揭下来放成一叠。
English: The fire burns from the stove at the end of the alley, hot air seeps through the empty brick cracks and fills the entire alley. When the bricks on the outer wall of the alley are hot, the wet paper is put on and dried one by one, and then it is taken off and put in a pile.

古文：近世阔幅者名大四连，一时书文贵重。
现代文：近来生产一种宽幅的纸，名叫大四连，用来书写，显得贵重。
English: Recently, the production of a kind of wide-width paper, called large four-link, used for writing, has become valuable.

古文：其废纸洗去朱墨污秽，浸烂入槽再造，全省从前煮浸之力，依然成纸，耗亦不多。
现代文：等到它用废以后，废纸也可以洗去朱墨、污秽，浸烂之后入抄纸槽再造，因此节省了浸竹和煮竹等工序，依然成纸，损耗不多。
English: After it is used as waste, the waste paper can also be washed to remove the ink and dirt, and after soaking, it can be recycled into the waste paper tank. Therefore, the processes such as soaking bamboo and boiling bamboo are saved, and it is still made into paper with little loss.

古文：南方竹贱之国，不以为然，北方即寸条片角在地，随手拾取再造，名曰还魂纸。
现代文：南方竹子数量多而且价钱低廉，也就用不着这样做。北方即使是寸条片角的纸丢在地，也要随手拾起来再造，这种纸叫做还魂纸。
English: In the south, bamboo is plentiful and inexpensive, so there is no need to do this. In the north, even if an inch of paper is thrown on the ground, it must be picked up and re-made. This kind of paper is called soul paper.

古文：竹与皮，精与细，皆同之也。
现代文：竹纸与皮纸、精细的纸与粗糙的纸，都是用上述方法制造的。
English: Bamboo paper and leather paper, fine paper and coarse paper, are all made by the above method.

古文：若火纸、糙纸，斩竹煮麻，灰浆水淋，皆同前法。唯脱帘之后不用烘焙，压水去湿，日晒成干而已。
现代文：至于火纸与粗纸，斩竹、制取竹麻、用石灰浆、用稻草灰水淋洗等工序都和前面讲过的相同，只是脱帘之后不必再行烘焙，压干水分后放在阳光底下晒干就可以了。
English: As for the fire paper and coarse paper, the processes of cutting bamboo, making bamboo hemp, using lime paste, and rinsing with straw ash water are the same as those mentioned above. However, it is not necessary to bake again after removing the curtain. After pressing the water, it can be dried in the sun.

古文：盛唐时鬼神事繁，以纸钱代焚帛，故造此者名曰火纸。
现代文：盛唐时期，民间祭拜鬼神的活动很多，祭祀时烧纸钱而不再烧帛，因而这种纸叫火纸。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, there were a lot of folk activities to worship ghosts and gods. Paper money was burned during the rituals, but no longer the skulls. Therefore, this kind of paper was called fire paper.

古文：荆楚近俗，有一焚侈至千斤者。
现代文：湖南、湖北一带近来祭祀风气非常盛行，甚至到了一次浪费掉数千斤纸的地步。
English: In Hunan and Hubei provinces, the sacrificial ethos has recently been very popular, even to the point of wasting thousands of pounds of paper at a time.

古文：此纸十七供冥烧，十三供日用。
现代文：这种纸十分之七用在祭祀中，十分之三供人们日常使用。
English: Seven-tenths of this paper is used in religious rituals, and three-tenths is for everyday use.

古文：其最粗而厚者曰包裹纸，则竹麻和宿田晚稻稿所为也。
现代文：其中有一种最粗最厚的纸，名为包裹纸，是用竹料混上隔年晚稻的稻草制作的。
English: One of the coarsest and thickest types of paper, called wrapping paper, is made from bamboo mixed with late-season rice straw.

古文：若铅山诸邑所造柬纸，则全用细竹料厚质荡成。
现代文：而江西铅山等地出产的柬纸则完全用细竹料加厚抄成，用高价售卖，其中最上等的一种叫官柬纸，富贵人家用它来做名片。
English: However, the camelina paper produced in Jiangxi Lead Mountain and other places is completely made of thin bamboo material and sold at a high price. One of the best is called official camelina paper, which is used by rich people to make business cards.

古文：以射重价。最上者曰官柬，富贵之家通刺用之。其纸敦厚而无筋膜，染红为吉柬，则先以白矾水染过，后上红花汁云。
现代文：这种纸厚实而且没有粗筋，把它染红可以作为办喜事用的 吉帖 ，染色前要先用白矾水浸过，然后染上红花汁。
English: This kind of paper is thick and does not have coarse streaks. Dyeing it red can be used as a good luck charm for holding a happy event. Before dyeing, it must first be soaked with chalk water and then dyed with safflower juice.

古文：○造皮纸
现代文：造皮纸
English: Moulded paper

古文：凡楮树取皮，于春末夏初剥取。
现代文：剥取楮树皮是在春末夏初进行。
English: The birch bark is stripped in late spring and early summer.

古文：树已老者，就根伐去，以土盖之。
现代文：如果树太老，就在贴近根部的地方把它砍断，再用土盖上。
English: If the tree is too old, cut it close to the roots and cover it with soil.

古文：来年再长新条，其皮更美。
现代文：第二年又会生长出新树枝，它的皮会更好。
English: In the second year, new branches will grow, and its skin will be better.

古文：凡皮纸，楮皮六十斤，仍入绝嫩竹麻四十斤，同塘漂浸，同用石灰浆涂，入釜煮糜。
现代文：制造皮纸，用楮树皮六十斤，嫩竹麻四十斤，一起放在池塘里漂浸，然后再涂上石灰浆，放到锅里煮烂。
English: To make the paper, 60 catties of birch bark and 40 catties of tender bamboo hemp were soaked in a pond, then coated with lime mortar and boiled in a pot.

古文：近法省啬者，皮竹十七而外，或入宿田稻稿十三，用药得方，仍成洁白。
现代文：近来又出现了比较经济的办法，就是用十分之七的树皮和竹麻原料，用十分之三的隔年稻草制造，如果纸药水汁下的得当的话，纸质也会很洁白。
English: Recently, a more economical method has emerged, which is to use seven-tenths of the bark and bamboo and hemp raw materials, and three-tenths of the next year's straw. If the paper is properly prepared, the paper will be very white.

古文：凡皮料坚固纸。其纵文扯断绵丝，故曰绵纸，衡断且费力。
现代文：坚固的皮纸，扯断纵纹就像丝绵一样，因此又叫做绵纸，要想把它横向扯断更不容易。
English: Strong leather paper, tearing the longitudinal stripe is like silk, so it is also called cotton paper, and it is even more difficult to tear it horizontally.

古文：其最上一等，供用大内糊窗格者，曰棂纱纸。此纸自广信郡造，长过七尺，阔过四尺。
现代文：其中最好的一种叫做棂纱纸，这种纸是江西广信郡造的，长约七尺多，宽约四尺多。
English: One of the best is called crepe paper. This paper is made in Guangxin County, Jiangxi Province, and is about seven feet long and four feet wide.

古文：五色颜料先滴色汁槽内和成，不由后染。
现代文：染成各种颜色是先将色料放进抄纸槽内而不是做成纸后才染成的。
English: Dyeing into various colors is first dyed after the dye is put into the copying tray instead of being made into paper.

古文：其次曰连四纸，连四中最白者曰红上纸。
现代文：其次是连四纸，其中最洁白的叫做红上纸。
English: The next is the four-ply paper, of which the whitest is called red-covered paper.

古文：皮名而竹与稻稿参和而成料者，曰揭贴呈文纸。
现代文：还有名为皮纸而实际上是用竹子与稻草掺和制成的纸，叫做揭帖呈文纸。
English: There is also paper that is called "leather paper" but is actually made of bamboo mixed with straw. It is called "post-it note paper."

古文：芙蓉等皮造者统曰小皮纸，在江西则曰中夹纸。
现代文：以木芙蓉树皮为原料所制的皮纸，统称为 小皮纸 ，在江西则被称作 中夹纸 。
English: The paper made from the bark of the hibiscus tree is collectively known as small paper, and in Jiangxi it is called medium paper.

古文：河南所造，未详何草木为质，北供帝京，产亦甚广。
现代文：河南造的纸不知道是用的哪种原料制成，这种纸供京城人使用，产地十分广泛。
English: It is not known what kind of raw material is used to make the paper made in Henan. This kind of paper is used by people in Beijing and comes from a wide range of places.

古文：又桑皮造者曰桑穰纸，极其敦厚，东浙所产，三吴收蚕种者必用之。
现代文：还有用桑皮造的纸叫做桑穰纸，纸质特别厚，是浙江东部出产的，江浙一带收蚕种时都必定会用到它。
English: There is also paper made of mulberry leather called mulberry paper. The paper is particularly thick and is produced in eastern Zhejiang. It is definitely used when harvesting and planting silkworms in Jiangsu and Zhejiang.

古文：凡糊雨伞与油扇，皆用小皮纸。
现代文：糊雨伞和油扇则都要用小皮纸。
English: Small pieces of paper should be used to glue umbrellas and oil fans.

古文：凡造皮纸长阔者，其盛水槽甚宽，巨帘非一人手力所胜，两人对举荡成。
现代文：制造又长又宽的皮纸，所用的水槽要很宽、纸帘很大，一个人干不了，就需要两个人对抄。
English: To make a long and wide piece of leather paper, the sink used must be very wide and the paper curtain must be very large. If one person can't do it, it takes two people to copy.

古文：若棂纱，则数人方胜其任。
现代文：如果是棂纱纸，则需要好几个人才行。
English: If it is crepe paper, it takes several people to make it.

古文：凡皮纸供用画幅，先用巩水荡过，则毛茨不起。
现代文：凡是用来绘画和写条幅的皮纸，要先用明矾水浸过以后才不会起毛。
English: All leather paper used for painting and writing should be soaked in alum water before it is fluffed up.

古文：纸以逼帘者为正面，盖料即成泥浮其上者，粗意犹存也。
现代文：贴近竹帘的一面为纸的正面，因为料泥都浮在上面，纸的反面就比较粗。
English: The side closest to the bamboo curtain is the front of the paper, because the mud is floating on it, and the reverse side of the paper is thicker.

古文：朝鲜白︴纸，不知用何质料。
现代文：至于朝鲜的白纸，就不清楚是用什么原料制造的了。
English: As for North Korea's white paper, it is not clear what raw materials were used to make it.

古文：倭国有造纸不用帘抄者，煮料成糜时，以巨阔青石覆于炕面，其下火，使石发烧。然后用糊刷蘸糜，薄刷石面，居然顷刻成纸一张，一揭而起。其朝鲜用此法与否，不可得知。中国有用此法者亦不可得知也。
现代文：据说日本的造纸工序不用帘网，而是先把原料煮烂，选一块大而平坦的青石盖在坑上，下面点火加热，使青石升温，然后把煮烂的原料纸浆薄薄刷一层在石面上，待水气蒸干后，用手一揭，一张白纸就形成了，至于朝鲜是否也用这种方法造纸，不得而知，而中国是否也存在这种造纸方法，同样无法确定。
English: It is said that the Japanese papermaking process does not use a net, but first boils the raw material, selects a large and flat bluestone to cover the pit, lights a fire below to heat the bluestone, and then brushes a thin layer of the boiled raw material pulp on the stone surface. After the water vapor has evaporated, it is removed by hand and a piece of white paper is formed. As for whether North Korea also uses this method to make paper, it is unknown, and whether China also has this method of making paper is also uncertain.

