古文：客说春申君曰： 汤以亳，武王以鄗，皆不过百里以有天下。
现代文：有一个食客游说楚国的春申君黄歇说： 商汤王靠着亳京兴起，周武王靠着镐京兴起，两个地方都只不过百里大小，而两王却因它们而终于占有天下。
English: A diner who lobbied Chunshenjun Huang Xie of Chu said: Shang Tang Wang rose by Shijing, Zhou Wu Wang rose by Shijing, both places are only a hundred miles in size, but the two kings finally occupy the world because of them.

古文：今孙子，天下贤人也，君籍之以百里势。
现代文：现在荀子是天下的贤人，您竟想给他里土地的势力范围。
English: Now that Xunzi is the wisest man in the world, you want to give him a sphere of influence in the country.

古文：臣窃以为不便于君。
现代文：我私下认为对于您很不利，不知您以为如何？ 春申君说： 说得对。 
English: Privately, I think it is very unfavorable for you, I don't know what you think? Chunshen said: That's right.

古文：何如? 
现代文：于是就派人谢绝了荀子。
English: So they sent someone to refuse the mule.

古文：春申君曰： 善。 
现代文：荀子就离开楚国到了赵国。
English: He left Chu and went to Zhao.

古文：于是使人谢孙子，孙子去之赵，赵以为上卿。 客又说春申君曰： 昔伊尹去夏入殷，殷王而夏亡。
现代文：赵王封他为上卿。这时宾客又对春申君说： 从前有位伊尹离开夏地到了殷地，结果令殷王统一天下，而夏朝灭亡。
English: At this time, the guests also said to Chunshen, "Once upon a time, there was a certain Yi Yin who left the Xia Dynasty and went to the Yin Dynasty. As a result, the Yin Dynasty was unified and the Xia Dynasty was destroyed.

古文：管仲去鲁入齐，鲁弱而齐强。
现代文：管仲离开鲁国到了齐国，鲁国衰弱而齐国强盛了。
English: Guanzhong left the State of Lu to the State of Qi. The State of Lu became weak, while the State of Qi became strong.

古文：夫贤者之所在，其君未尝不尊，国未尝不荣也。
现代文：可见贤人在哪里，哪里的君王不能不显达，国家不能不荣耀。
English: You can see where the wise men are, where the king cannot fail to appear, and the country cannot fail to be glorified.

古文：今孙子，天下贤人也，君何辞之? 
现代文：现在荀子是天下的贤人，您怎么让他告辞而去？ 
English: Now Mule is the sage of the world, how can you let him go?

古文：春申君又曰： 善。 
现代文：春申君说： 说得对。 
English: Chunshen said: That's right.

古文：于是使人请孙子于赵。
现代文：于是春申君就派人到赵国请荀子。
English: As a result, Chunshen sent someone to Zhao to ask for a mule.

古文：孙子为书谢曰： 疠人怜王，此不恭之语也。
现代文：这时荀子就写了一封信辞谢说： 生癞的人还可怜被臣子杀死的国王，这虽然是一句很不礼貌的话，但不能不加思考。
English: At this time, the cripple wrote a letter of resignation, saying, "The lame man still pities the king who was killed by his vassal. Although this is a very impolite remark, it must not be thoughtlessly made.

古文：虽然，不可不审察也，此为劫弑死亡之主言也。
现代文：这是针对一般被臣子杀死的国君而说的。如果人主年轻又矜持自己的才能，又没有方法和手段识别奸邪的人，那么大臣就要专横跋扈独断专行。
English: This was said in reference to the sovereign, who was usually killed by a vassal. If the ruler is young and holds back his talent, and has no way and means to identify traitors, then the minister must be arbitrary.

古文：夫人主年少而矜材，无法术以知奸，则大臣主断国私以禁诛于己也，故弑贤长而立幼弱，废正适而立不义。春秋戒之曰： 楚王子围骋于郑，未出境，闻王病，反问疾，遂以冠缨绞王，杀之，因自立也。
现代文：为了禁绝自己的灾难，他们就要杀死有才能年长的君主，拥立年幼、体弱的君主，废弃正直的人，抬举不义的人。《春秋》告诫人们说： 楚国的王子围，到郑国去访问，还没等他走出境，就听说父王生病，于是他就返回来探问病情。不料却乘机用帽缨把楚王勒死，而自立为王。
English: In order to prevent their own disaster, they had to kill the talented older monarchs, support the young and weak monarchs, abandon the honest ones, and elevate the unjust ones. "Spring and Autumn" warned the people: The prince of Chu went to visit Zheng, but before he left the country, he heard that his father was ill, so he returned to inquire about the illness. Unfortunately, he took the opportunity to strangle King Chu with a hatpin, and became king.

古文：齐崔杼讨妻美，庄公通之。崔杼帅其君党而攻。
现代文：齐国崔杼夫人长得很美丽，齐庄公和她私通，崔杼率领家臣攻打庄公。
English: Lady Cui Wei of Qi was very beautiful. Prince Qizhuang had an affair with her. Cui Wei led his vassals to attack Prince Zhuang.

古文：庄公请与分国，崔杼不许；欲自刃于庙，崔杼不许。
现代文：庄公请求和他共分齐国，崔杼不答应；庄公又要求到祖庙去自杀，崔杼也不答应。
English: Zhuang Gong asked him to divide Qi with him, but Cui Gan did not agree; Zhuang Gong also asked to go to the ancestral temple to commit suicide, but Cui Gan did not agree.

古文：庄公走出，逾于外墙，射中其股，遂杀之，而立其弟景公。
现代文：却要庄公逃命，可他刚跳过外墙，崔杼就射中他的大腿，并杀了他，立庄公的弟弟景公为王。 
English: However, Zhuang Gong wanted to run for his life, but as soon as he jumped over the outer wall, Cui Gan shot him in the thigh and killed him, making Zhuang Gong's brother Jing Gong the king.

古文：近代所见：李兑用赵，饿主父于沙丘，百日而杀之；淖齿用齐，擢闵王之筋，悬于其庙梁，宿夕而死。
现代文：近来所看到的，李兑在赵国专擅朝政，在沙丘让赵主父饿了一百天终于困死他；淖齿在齐国掌权，竟然抽齐闵王的筋，然后把闵王挂在庙梁上，隔了一夜把闵王活活吊死。
English: As we have seen recently, Li Dui in Zhao specialized in imperial politics, and in the sand dunes he starved Zhao Shifu for a hundred days and finally trapped him to death; Zang Zeng took power in Qi, and even extracted the sinews of Zi Wang, and then hung Zi Wang on the temple beam, and hanged Zi Wang alive overnight.

古文：夫厉虽痛肿胞疾，上比前世，未至佼缨射股；下比近代，未至擢筋而饿死也。
现代文：因此说长癞疮即使是胎带的肿毒，但是如果往上和古代的帝王相比，还不至于被臣子用帽缨勒死，或者被臣子用箭射死；如果往下和近代帝王相比，也不至于被臣子抽筋吊死，更不会被臣子绝食活活饿死。
English: Therefore, it is said that even if acne is a swollen poison of the placenta, if it is compared with the ancient emperors, it will not be strangled by the courtiers with a hatpin or shot by the courtiers with an arrow; if it is compared with the modern emperors, it will not be hanged by the courtiers, and it will not be starved to death by the courtiers.

古文：夫劫弑死亡之主也，心之忧劳，形之困苦，必甚于疠矣。
现代文：可见被臣子杀害的君主，心神所受的忧劳和形体所受的痛苦，必定比生癞病的人还要厉害。
English: It can be seen that the monarch who was killed by a vassal must have suffered more mental and physical pain than a person with rickets.

古文：由此观之，疠虽怜王可也。 
现代文：由此看来，连生癞疮的人还可怜国王也有道理。 
English: From this point of view, it makes sense for people with acne to pity the king.

古文：因为赋曰： 宝珍隋珠，不知佩兮。
现代文：于是荀子在信尾附一首诗，写道 珍贵的隋侯珠，不知道佩戴。
English: So Zou Zi appended a poem to the end of the letter, writing: "Precious Sui Hou Zhu, I don't know how to wear it.

古文：袆布与丝，不知异兮，闾姝子奢，莫知媒兮。嫫母求之，又甚喜之兮。
现代文：皇家的龙袍和粗丝，不会分开。梁国的美女闾姝和郑国的美女子奢，没有谁迎娶，却向丑女嫫母求婚，又很喜爱。
English: The royal dragon robe and thick silk will not be separated. The beautiful maiden of Liang Province and the beautiful maiden of Zheng Province are not married, but they propose to the ugly maiden, and they are very fond of each other.

古文：以瞽为明，以聋为聪，以是为非，以吉为凶。
现代文：把瞎子说成眼光明亮，把聋子说成听觉灵敏，以是为非，以吉为凶。唉！
English: Saying that the blind are bright-eyed, and the deaf are sensitive-hearing, and so-and-so, and so-and-so. Alas!

古文：呜呼上天，易惟其同！ 诗曰： 上天甚神，无自瘵也。 
现代文：为什么好坏不分！ 《诗经》上说： 天神的眼睛最明亮，不要自取祸殃。 
English: Why is there no distinction between good and bad? The Book of Psalms says: The angels' eyes are the brightest, so don't bring misfortune on yourself.

