古文：黄帝曰：夫百病之所始生者，必起于燥温寒暑风雨、阴阳喜怒、饮食居处，气合而有形，得脏而有名，余知其然也。
现代文：黄帝说：各种疾病的发生，都是由于风、雨、寒、暑、燥、湿等外邪侵袭，或者由于性生活没有节制、喜怒过度等内伤所致，以及饮食和生活起居失常等非外非内原因引起。
English: Huang Di said: The occurrence of various diseases is due to the invasion of external evil such as wind, rain, cold, hot, dry and wet, or due to internal injuries such as unrestrained sex life, excessive emotions, and non-external and non-internal causes such as eating and living disorders.

古文：夫百病者，多以旦慧昼安，夕加夜甚，何也？
现代文：以上各种邪气相合侵入人体后，就会产生相应的病理表现，邪气传导到内脏后，会形成各种名称的疾病，这些内容我已经知道了。
English: After the above-mentioned evil gases combine and invade the human body, they will produce corresponding pathological manifestations. After the evil gases are transmitted to the internal organs, they will form diseases with various names. I already know these contents.

古文：岐伯曰：四时之气使然。黄帝曰：愿闻四时之气。
现代文：许多疾病，经常在早晨病情轻而病人精神清爽，中午病情安定，傍晚病情加重，夜间病情最重，这是为什么呢？岐伯说：这是由于四季气候变化造成的。
English: Many diseases, often in the morning the illness is light and the patient is refreshed, in the afternoon the illness is stable, in the evening the illness is aggravated, and at night the illness is the most severe. Why is this? Qi Bo said: This is due to the four-season climate change.

古文：岐伯曰：春生，夏长，秋收，冬藏，是气之常也，人亦应之，以一日分为四时，朝则为春，日中为夏，日入为秋，夜半为冬。
现代文：黄帝说：我想知道四季气候变化对人体影响的具体情况。岐伯说：春季阳气生发，夏季阳气旺盛，秋季阳气收敛，冬季阳气闭藏，这是四季中自然界阳气变化的一般规律，人体的阳气变化也与它相对应。把一天按照四季划分，早晨相当于春季，中午相当于夏季，傍晚相当于秋季，半夜相当于冬季。
English: Huang Di said: I want to know the specific situation of the impact of climate change on the human body in the four seasons. Qi Bo said: yang in spring, yang in summer, yang in autumn, yang in winter, this is the general rule of yang changes in nature in the four seasons, and yang changes in the human body also correspond to it. Dividing the day according to the four seasons, morning is equivalent to spring, noon is equivalent to summer, evening is equivalent to autumn, and midnight is equivalent to winter.

古文：朝则人气始生，病气衰，故旦慧；日中人气长，长则胜邪，故安；夕则人气始衰，邪气始生，故加；夜半人气入脏，邪气独居于身，故甚也。
现代文：半夜人体的阳气都深藏内脏，形体只有亢盛的邪气，所以夜半病情最重。黄帝又问：疾病在一天中的轻重变化，有时和上述情况不同，这是为什么呢？
English: In the middle of the night, the yang qi of the human body is deeply hidden in the internal organs, and the body is only full of evil qi, so the disease is the most severe in the middle of the night. Huang Di also asked: the severity of the disease changes during the day, sometimes different from the above situation, why is this?

古文：黄帝曰：有时有反者何也？岐伯曰：是不应四时之气，脏独主其病者，是必以脏气之所不胜时者甚，以其所胜时者起也。
现代文：岐伯答道：这类疾病不是因为六淫邪气所引发，而是由于某一内脏单独生了病，因此由内脏的盛衰主宰病情轻重的缘故，当某一内脏发病，在其五行属性被克制的时候病情最重，在其五行属性所克制的时候病情减轻。
English: Qi Bo replied, "This kind of disease is not caused by the six evil spirits, but by the fact that a certain internal organ is sick alone, so the rise and fall of the internal organ dominates the severity of the disease. When a certain internal organ is affected, the disease is the most severe when its five elements are restrained, and the disease is alleviated when its five elements are restrained.

古文：黄帝曰：治之奈何？
现代文：黄帝说：怎样进行治疗呢？
English: Huang Di said: How should the human body's clear gas and argon gas abnormalities be treated?

古文：岐伯曰：顺天之时，而病可与期。
现代文：岐伯答道：掌握并且顺应时间因素对疾病的影响进行正确的治疗，疾病就有治愈的希望。
English: Zibo replied: mastering and adhering to the influence of the time factor on the disease to carry out the correct treatment, the disease has the hope of cure.

古文：顺者为工，逆者为麤。
现代文：正确运用这个规律的，是高明的医生；违背这个规律的，是低劣的医生。
English: The clever doctor is the one who applies this rule correctly; the inferior doctor is the one who violates this rule.

古文：黄帝曰：善。
现代文：黄帝说：讲得好。
English: Huang Di said, "That was well said."

古文：余闻刺有五变，以主五输，愿闻其数。
现代文：我听说在针刺中有根据五种不同的病变情况，来针刺井、荥、输、经、合五输穴的情况，我想知道其中的规律。
English: I heard that there are five different types of lesions in acupuncture, including acupoints, fistulas, infusions, meridians and fused five-hole infusions. I would like to know the rules.

古文：岐伯曰：人有五脏，五脏有五变，五变有五输，故五五二十五输，以应五时。
现代文：岐伯答道：人体有五脏，五脏各有相应的面色、季节、日期、声音、味道的五种变化。
English: Qi Bo replied, "The human body has five internal organs, each of which has five corresponding changes in color, season, date, sound, and taste.

古文：黄帝曰：愿闻五变。岐伯曰：肝为牡藏，其色青，其时春，其音角，其味酸，其日甲乙。
现代文：五脏的各种变化分别选用井、荥、输、经、合五输穴，五脏各有五输穴所以共计二十五个腧穴，分别与春、夏、长夏、秋、冬五季相应。黄帝说：我想知道五脏的五种变化。岐伯答道：肝是属阳的内脏，在五色中主青，在季节中主春，在五音中主角，在五味中主酸，在日主甲、乙日。
English: The various changes of the five viscera are respectively selected from the well, gill, outflow, warp, and weft five outflow holes, and the five viscera each have five outflow holes, so there are a total of twenty-five gill holes, corresponding to the five seasons of spring, summer, long summer, autumn, and winter respectively. Huang Di said: I want to know the five changes of the five viscera. Qi Bo replied: The liver is a yang viscera, the main blue in the five colors, the main spring in the season, the main character in the five tones, the main acid in the five flavors, and the main A and B in

古文：心为牡藏，其色赤，其时夏，其日丙丁，其音徵，其味苦。
现代文：心是属阳的内脏，在五色中主赤，在季节中主夏，在日主丙、丁日，在五音中主徵，在五味中主苦。
English: The heart is the viscera belonging to the sun, the main red in the five colors, the main summer in the season, the main C and D in the day, the main feature in the five tones, and the main bitter in the five tastes.

古文：脾为牝藏，其色黄，其时长夏，其日戊己，其音宫，其味甘。
现代文：脾是属阴的内脏，在五色中主黄，在季节中主长夏，在日主戊、已日，在五音中主宫，在五味中主甘。
English: The spleen is the viscera of yin, the main yellow in the five colors, the main long summer in the season, the main e in the day, the main palace in the five tones, and the main sweetness in the five tastes.

古文：肺为牝藏，其色白，其音商，其时秋，其日庚辛，其味辛。
现代文：肺是属阴的内脏，在五色中主白，在五音中主商，在季节中主秋，在日主庚、辛日，在五味中主辛。
English: Lung is the viscera of Yin. It is the main white in the five colors, the main merchant in the five tones, the main autumn in the season, the main ginger in the day, the main spicy in the day, and the main spicy in the five tastes.

古文：肾为牝藏，其色黑，其时冬，其日壬癸，其音羽，其味咸。
现代文：肾是属阴的内脏，在五色中主黑，在季节中主冬，在日中主壬、癸日，在五音中主羽，在五味中主咸。
English: Kidney is the viscera of yin, the main black in the five colors, the main winter in the season, the main rhinoceros and rooster in the day, the main feather in the five tones, and the main salt in the five flavors.

古文：是为五变。
现代文：这就是五脏的五种变化。
English: These are the five changes in the five viscera.

古文：黄帝曰：以主五输奈何？
现代文：黄帝说：怎样根据五脏及其变化选用五输穴呢？
English: Huang Di said: How to choose the five infusion points according to the five viscera and their changes?

古文：脏主冬，冬刺井。
现代文：岐伯答道：五脏与冬相应，所以冬季应针刺井穴。
English: Qi Bo replied, "The five internal organs correspond to the winter, so the winter should be pricked with a needle.

古文：色主春，春刺荥。
现代文：五色与春季相应，所以春季应针刺荥穴。
English: The five colors correspond to the spring, so the spring should be pricked with a needle.

古文：时主夏，夏刺输。
现代文：五时与夏季相应，所以夏季应针刺输穴。
English: Five o'clock corresponds to the summer, so the summer should be acupuncture.

古文：音主长夏，长夏刺经。
现代文：五音与长夏相应，所以长夏应针刺经穴。
English: The five tones correspond to the Changxia, so the Changxia should be pierced with a needle.

古文：味主秋，秋刺合。
现代文：五味与秋季相应，所以秋季应针刺合穴。
English: The five flavors correspond to the autumn, so the autumn should be pricked with a needle.

古文：是谓五变，以主五输。
现代文：这就是五脏及其变化所选用的五输穴。
English: These are the five orifices selected for the five viscera and their changes.

古文：黄帝曰：诸原安和，以致六输？
现代文：黄帝说：六腑在井、荥、输、经、合之外，还有原穴，它是如何配合五时而形成六输穴呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "In addition to the six meridians of the well, the bowl, the outlet, the passage, and the junction, there is also the original hole. How does it cooperate with the five meridians to form the six outlet holes?

古文：岐伯曰：原独不应五时，以经合之，以应其数，故六六三十六输。
现代文：岐伯答道：原穴不单独与五时相配合，而是归属于本经的经穴来配合，这样六腑各有井、荥、输、原、经、合六输穴，共计有六六三十六个输穴。
English: Qibo replied, "The original hole does not match the five o'clock alone, but it matches the hole that belongs to this sutra. In this way, each of the six gongs has a well, a bowl, an outlet, an original, a sutra, and a combined six outlet holes, for a total of 6636 outlet holes.

古文：黄帝曰：何谓脏主冬，时主夏，音主长夏，味主秋，色主春？
现代文：黄帝说：什么叫做脏主冬、时主夏、音主长夏、味主秋、色主春呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said: What is the name of the main winter, the main summer, the main summer, the main autumn, and the main spring?

古文：愿闻其故。
现代文：我想知道其中的道理。
English: I want to know why.

古文：岐伯曰：病在脏者，取之井。
现代文：岐伯答道：疾病发生在内脏，邪气深，治疗时应取井穴。
English: Qi Bo replied: The disease occurs in the internal organs, the evil spirit is deep, and the well hole should be taken during treatment.

古文：病变于色者，取之荥。
现代文：疾病出现面色变化，治疗时应取荥穴。
English: When the disease appears, the complexion changes, and the fistula should be removed during treatment.

古文：病时间时甚者，取之输。
现代文：疾病时轻时重，治疗时应取输穴。
English: The disease is sometimes mild and sometimes severe, and the treatment should take the infusion hole.

古文：病变于音者，取之经。
现代文：疾病出现声音变化，治疗时应取经穴。
English: If there is a change in the sound of the disease, the acupoint should be removed during treatment.

古文：经满而血者，病在胃。及以饮食不节得病者，取之于合，故命曰味主合。
现代文：经脉盛满而有淤血的情况，疾病发生在胃，以及由于饮食不节所引起的病变，治疗时应取合穴，因为这些疾病都与饮食的五味有关，所以称为味主合穴。
English: If the menstrual vein is full and there is congestion, the disease occurs in the stomach, as well as the lesions caused by poor diet, the treatment should be taken at the acupoint, because these diseases are related to the five flavors of the diet, so it is called the taste master acupoint.

古文：是谓五变也。
现代文：这就是五变所表现的不同特征及五输穴相应的针刺法则。
English: This is the different characteristics of the five changes and the corresponding needling rule of the five injection holes.

