古文：白起者，郿人也。
现代文：白起，是郿地人。
English: Baiqi is a native of Shandong.

古文：善用兵，事秦昭王。
现代文：他善于用兵，奉事秦昭王。
English: He was good at using soldiers and served Qin Zhao Wang.

古文：昭王十三年，而白起为左庶长，将而击韩之新城。
现代文：昭王十三年，白起封为左庶长，带兵攻打韩国的新城。
English: In the thirteenth year of the reign of King Zhao, Bai Qifeng became the left subordinate commander and led the troops to attack Sincheng in Korea.

古文：是岁，穰侯相秦，举任鄙以为汉中守。
现代文：这一年，穰侯担任秦国的丞相。他举用任鄙做了汉中郡守。
English: In this year, Gong Hou served as the chancellor of Qin. He was appointed as the governor of Hanzhong County.

古文：其明年，白起为左更，攻韩、魏於伊阙，斩首二十四万，又虏其将公孙喜，拔五城。
现代文：第二年，白起又封为左更，进攻韩、魏两国联军，在伊阙交战，斩敌二十四万人，又俘虏了他们的将领公孙喜，拿下五座城邑。
English: In the following year, Baiqi was appointed as Zuo Geng again, attacked the allied forces of Korea and Wei, fought in Ili, killed 240,000 enemies, captured their general Gongsun Xi, and won five cities.

古文：起迁为国尉。
现代文：白起升为国尉。
English: Bai rose to the rank of lieutenant.

古文：涉河取韩安邑以东，到乾河。
现代文：他率兵渡过黄河夺取了韩国安邑以东直到干河的大片土地。
English: He led his troops across the Yellow River and seized a large area of land from the east of South Korea's Anyi to the Han River.

古文：明年，白起为大良造。
现代文：第三年，白起再封为大良造。
English: In the third year, Baiqi was re-crowned as a great builder.

古文：攻魏，拔之，取城小大六十一。
现代文：战败魏国军队，夺取了大小城邑六十一座。
English: Defeated the Wei army and captured at least sixty-one cities and towns.

古文：明年，起与客卿错攻垣城，拔之。
现代文：第四年白起与客卿错进攻垣城，随即拿了下来。
English: In the fourth year, Baiqi mistakenly attacked Kakicheng with Hakka, and immediately took it down.

古文：後五年，白起攻赵，拔光狼城。
现代文：此后的第五年上，白起攻打赵国，夺下了光狼城。
English: In the fifth year after that, Baiqi attacked Zhao Province and captured Guanglu City.

古文：後七年，白起攻楚，拔鄢、邓五城。
现代文：这以后的第七年，白起攻打楚国，占领了鄢、邓等五座城邑。
English: After this, in the seventh year, Bai attacked Chu Province and occupied five cities including Handan and Deng.

古文：其明年，攻楚，拔郢，烧夷陵，遂东至竟陵。
现代文：第二年，再次进攻楚国，占领了楚国都城郢，烧毁了楚国先王的墓地，一直向东到达竟陵。
English: In the second year, they attacked Chu again, occupied the capital of Chu, Chengdu, burned the cemetery of the first king of Chu, and went all the way east to Qingling.

古文：楚王亡去郢，东走徙陈。
现代文：楚王逃离郢都，向东奔逃迁都到陈。
English: The king of Chu fled from the capital of Shu and fled eastward to the capital of Chen.

古文：秦以郢为南郡。
现代文：秦国便把郢地设为南郡。
English: The State of Qin then set up Nan County.

古文：白起迁为武安君。武安君因取楚，定巫、黔中郡。
现代文：白起被封为武安君，他趁势攻取楚地，平定了巫、黔中两郡。
English: Baiqi was given the title of Wu'an Jun. He took advantage of the situation to invade Chu and pacified the two counties of Wuxi and Yuzhong.

古文：昭王三十四年，白起攻魏，拔华阳，走芒卯，而虏三晋将，斩首十三万。
现代文：昭王三十四年，白起进攻魏，拔取华阳，使芒卯败逃，并且俘获了赵、魏将领，斩敌十三万人。
English: In the thirty-fourth year of King Zhao, Bai Yu attacked Wei, took Huayang, defeated and made Meng Yu flee, and captured Zhao and Wei generals, killing 130,000 enemies.

古文：与赵将贾偃战，沈其卒二万人於河中。
现代文：当时，白起与赵国将领贾偃交战，把赵国两万士兵沉到黄河里。
English: At that time, Bai Qi was at war with the Zhao general Jia Jun and sank 20,000 Zhao soldiers into the Yellow River.

古文：昭王四十三年，白起攻韩陉城，拔五城，斩首五万。
现代文：昭王四十三年，白起进攻韩国的陉城，夺取了五个城邑，斩敌五万人。
English: In the forty-third year of King Zhaowang, he attacked the South Korean city of Ye, captured five cities and towns, and killed fifty thousand people.

古文：四十四年，白起攻南阳太行道，绝之。
现代文：四十四年，白起攻打韩国的南阳太行道，把这条通道堵死。
English: Forty-four years ago, they attacked South Korea's Nanyang Taigang Road in vain, blocking this passage to death.

古文：四十五年，伐韩之野王。野王降秦，上党道绝。
现代文：昭王四十五年，白起发兵进击韩国的野王城，野王投降，使韩国的上党郡同韩国的联系被切断。
English: In the 45th year of King Zhaowang, Baekje sent troops to attack the Korean city of Nongwang. Nongwang surrendered, and the connection between South Korea's Shangdang County and South Korea was severed.

古文：其守冯亭与民谋曰： 郑道已绝，韩必不可得为民。
现代文：上党郡守冯亭便同百姓们谋划说： 通往都城郑的道路被切断，韩国肯定不能管我们了。
English: The governor of Shangdang County, Feng Ting, plotted with the people, saying, "The road to the capital city, Zheng, has been cut off. South Korea will definitely not be able to control us."

古文：秦兵日进，韩不能应，不如以上党归赵。
现代文：秦国军队一天天逼进，韩国不能救应，不如把上党归附赵国。
English: Qin's army was advancing day by day, and South Korea was unable to respond. It would be better to annex Shangdang to Zhao.

古文：赵若受我，秦怒，必攻赵。
现代文：赵国如果接受我们，秦国恼怒，必定攻打赵国。
English: If Zhao accepts us, Qin will get angry and attack Zhao.

古文：赵被兵，必亲韩。
现代文：赵国遭到武力攻击，必定亲近韩国。
English: Zhao Guo was attacked by force, so it must be close to South Korea.

古文：韩赵为一，则可以当秦。 
现代文：韩、赵两国联合起来，就可以抵挡秦国。 
English: If the two countries of Han and Zhao unite, they can resist Qin.

古文：因使人报赵。
现代文：于是便派人通报赵国。
English: So they sent someone to inform Zhao Guo.

古文：赵孝成王与平阳君、平原君计之。平阳君曰： 不如勿受。
现代文：赵孝成王跟平阳君和平原君一起研究这件事，平阳君说： 不如不接受。
English: Zhao Xiaocheng Wang studied the matter with Pingyang Jun and Pingyuan Jun. Pingyang Jun said: It is better not to accept.

古文：受之，祸大於所得。 
现代文：接受它，带来的殃祸要比得到的好处大得多。 
English: Accepting it will bring more harm than good.

古文：平原君曰： 无故得一郡，受之便。 
现代文：平原君表示异议说： 平白得到一郡，接受它有利。 
English: Hirahara-kun objected, saying: Hirahara got a county for nothing, so it's advantageous to accept it.

古文：赵受之，因封冯亭为华阳君。
现代文：结果赵王接受了上党，就封冯亭为华阳君。
English: As a result, Zhao Wang accepted the offer and named Feng Ting as Huayangjun.

古文：四十六年，秦攻韩缑氏、蔺，拔之。
现代文：昭王四十六年，秦国攻占了韩国的缑氏和蔺邑。
English: In the 46th year of the reign of King Zhao, the Qin state conquered the South Korean Hwan clan and Hwan-eup.

古文：四十七年，秦使左庶长王龁攻韩，取上党。
现代文：昭王四十七年，秦国派左庶长王龁攻韩国，夺取了上党。
English: In the 47th year of King Zhao's reign, the Qin state sent the left subordinate leader Wang Qi to invade Korea and seize the upper party.

古文：上党民走赵。
现代文：上党的百姓纷纷往赵国逃。
English: People who joined the party fled to Zhao.

古文：赵军长平，以按据上党民。
现代文：赵国在长平屯兵，据以接应上党的百姓。
English: Zhao Guo stationed troops in Changping to meet the people of the party.

古文：四月，龁因攻赵。
现代文：四月，王龁借此进攻赵国。
English: In April, Wang Pi used this opportunity to attack Zhao.

古文：赵使廉颇将。
现代文：赵国派廉颇去统率军队。
English: Zhao sent Renpo to lead the army.

古文：赵军士卒犯秦斥兵，秦斥兵斩赵裨将茄。
现代文：秦赵两军士兵时有交手，赵军士兵侵害了秦军侦察兵，秦军侦察兵又斩了赵军名叫茄的副将，战事逐步扩大。
English: The soldiers of the two armies of Qin and Zhao sometimes fought. The soldiers of the Zhao Army encroached on the reconnaissance soldiers of the Qin Army, and the reconnaissance soldiers of the Qin Army also beheaded the vice-general of the Zhao Army named Zhao, and the war gradually expanded.

古文：六月，陷赵军，取二鄣四尉。
现代文：六月，秦军攻破赵军阵地，夺下两个城堡，俘虏了四个尉官。
English: In June, the Qin army broke through the Zhao army's position, seized two castles and captured four lieutenants.

古文：七月，赵军筑垒壁而守之。
现代文：七月，赵军高筑围墙，坚壁不出。
English: In July, the Zhao army built a high fence, but no solid wall emerged.

古文：秦又攻其垒，取二尉，败其阵，夺西垒壁。
现代文：秦军实施攻坚，俘虏了两个尉官，攻破赵军阵地，夺下西边的营垒。
English: The Qin army attacked the stronghold, captured two lieutenants, broke through the Zhao army's position, and captured the western camp.

古文：廉颇坚壁以待秦，秦数挑战，赵兵不出。
现代文：廉颇固守营垒，采取防御态势与秦军对峙，秦军屡次挑战，赵兵坚守不出。
English: Liankuo held fast to the camp and adopted a defensive posture to confront the Qin army. The Qin army repeatedly challenged the Zhao soldiers, but the Zhao soldiers could not hold out.

古文：赵王数以为让。
现代文：赵王多次指责廉颇不与秦军交战。
English: Zhao Wang repeatedly accused Liang Bo of not fighting with the Qin army.

古文：而秦相应侯又使人行千金於赵为反间，曰： 秦之所恶，独畏马服子赵括将耳，廉颇易与，且降矣。 
现代文：秦国丞相应侯又派人到赵国花费千金之多施行反间计，大肆宣扬说： 秦国最伤脑筋的，只是怕马服君的儿子赵括担任将领而已，廉颇容易对付，他就要投降了。 
English: In response, Qin Guozheng sent people to Zhao to spend a lot of money to carry out countermeasures, and loudly proclaimed that: The most nerve-wracking thing in Qin was that Ma Fuqun's son Zhao Bu served as a general, which was easy to deal with, and he was about to surrender.

古文：赵王既怒廉颇军多失亡，军数败，又反坚壁不敢战，而又闻秦反间之言，因使赵括代廉颇将以击秦。秦闻马服子将，乃阴使武安君白起为上将军。而王龁为尉裨将，令军中有敢泄武安君将者斩。
现代文：赵王早已恼怒廉颇军队伤亡很多，屡次战败，却又反而坚守营垒不敢出战，再加上听到许多反间谣言，信以为真，于是就派赵括取代廉颇率兵攻击秦军，秦国得知马服君的儿子充任将领，就暗地里派武安君白起担任上将军，让王龁担任尉官副将，并命令军队中有敢于泄露白起出任最高指挥官的，格杀勿论。
English: Zhao Wang had long been irritated and angered by the many casualties of the army of Lianpo, who had been defeated many times, but on the contrary, he held fast to the camp and did not dare to go to war. In addition, he heard many anti-foreign rumors and believed them to be true, so he sent Zhao Kuo to attack the Qin Army in place of Lianpo. When the Qin State learned that Ma Fuqun's son had been appointed as a general, he secretly sent Wu Anjun Baiqi to serve as a general, and let Wang Qi serve as a lieutenant-general, and ordered those in the army who dared to leak Baiqi to

古文：赵括至，则出兵击秦军。
现代文：赵括一到任上，就发兵进击秦军。
English: As soon as Zhao Kui took office, he sent troops to attack the Qin army.

古文：秦军详败而走，张二奇兵以劫之。
现代文：秦军假装战败而逃，同时布置了两支突袭部队逼进赵军。
English: The Qin army pretended to be defeated and fled, and at the same time arranged two raiding forces to force the Zhao army.

古文：赵军逐胜，追造秦壁。
现代文：赵军乘胜追击，直追到秦军营垒。
English: The Zhao army took advantage of the victory and pursued the Qin camp.

古文：壁坚拒不得入，而秦奇兵二万五千人绝赵军後，又一军五千骑绝赵壁间，赵军分而为二，粮道绝。
现代文：但是秦军营垒十分坚固，不能攻入，而秦军的一支突袭部队两万五千人已经切断了赵军的后路，另一支五千骑兵的快速部队楔入赵军的营垒之间，断绝了它们的联系，把赵军分割成两个孤立的部分，运粮通道也被堵住。
English: However, the Qin camp was very strong and could not be penetrated, while a raiding force of twenty-five thousand men from the Qin army had cut off the Zhao army's rear path, and another rapid force of five thousand cavalry wedged between the Zhao army's camp, breaking their connection, splitting the Zhao army into two isolated parts, and the grain transportation channel was also blocked.

古文：而秦出轻兵击之。赵战不利，因筑壁坚守，以待救至。
现代文：这时秦军派出轻装精兵实施攻击，赵军交战失利，就构筑壁垒，顽强固守，等待援兵的到来。
English: At this time, the Qin army sent light-armed soldiers to attack, and the Zhao army, having lost the battle, built barriers, stubbornly defended, and waited for the arrival of reinforcements.

古文：秦王闻赵食道绝，王自之河内，赐民爵各一级，发年十五以上悉诣长平，遮绝赵救及粮食。
现代文：秦王得知赵国运粮通道已被截断，他亲自到河内，封给百姓爵位各一级，征调十五岁以上的青壮年全部集中到长平战场，拦截赵国的救兵，断绝他们的粮食。
English: When King Qin learned that the grain transport channel of Zhao had been cut off, he personally went to Hanoi, conferred on the people titles of nobility of all levels, conscripted and transferred all young adults over the age of fifteen to the Changping battlefield, intercepted the rescuers of Zhao, and cut off their grain.

古文：至九月，赵卒不得食四十六日，皆内阴相杀食。
现代文：到了九月，赵国士兵断绝口粮已经四十六天，军内士兵们暗中残杀以人肉充饥。
English: By September, the soldiers of Zhao had been cut off from rations for forty-six days, and soldiers in the army secretly killed and ate human flesh to satisfy their hunger.

古文：来攻秦垒，欲出。
现代文：困厄已极的赵军扑向秦军营垒，发动攻击，打算突围而逃。
English: The beleaguered Zhao army rushed to the Qin camp, launched an attack, and planned to break out and escape.

古文：为四队，四五复之，不能出。
现代文：他们编成四队，轮番进攻了四、五次，仍不能冲出去。
English: They formed into four teams, took turns attacking four or five times, and still couldn't break out.

古文：其将军赵括出锐卒自搏战，秦军射杀赵括。
现代文：他们的将领赵括派出精锐士兵并亲自披挂上阵率领这些部下与秦军搏杀，结果秦军射死了赵括。
English: Their general Zhao Kuo sent elite soldiers and personally led these subordinates to fight and kill the Qin army. As a result, the Qin army shot and killed Zhao Kuo.

古文：括军败，卒四十万人降武安君。
现代文：赵括的部队大败，士兵四十万人向武安君投降。
English: Zhao Guan's troops were soundly defeated, and 400,000 soldiers surrendered to Wu Anjun.

古文：武安君计曰： 前秦已拔上党，上党民不乐为秦而归赵。
现代文：武安君谋划着说： 前时秦军拿下上党，上党的百姓不甘心作秦国的臣民而归附赵国。
English: Wu Anjun plotted and said: Previously, when the Qin Army took the Shang Party, the people of the Shang Party were not willing to be the subjects of Qin and attached to Zhao.

古文：赵卒反覆。非尽杀之，恐为乱。 
现代文：赵国士兵变化无常，不全部杀掉他们，恐怕要出乱子。 
English: Zhao soldiers are fickle. If you don't kill them all, there will be trouble.

古文：乃挟诈而尽阬杀之，遗其小者二百四十人归赵。
现代文：于是用欺骗伎俩把赵国降兵全部活埋了。只留下年纪尚小的士兵二百四十人放回赵国。
English: Therefore, they buried all the soldiers of Zhao who had surrendered alive by using deception. Only 240 soldiers who were still young were allowed to return to Zhao.

古文：前後斩首虏四十五万人。赵人大震。
现代文：此战前后斩首擒杀赵兵四十五万人，赵国上下一片震惊。
English: Before and after this battle, 450,000 Zhao soldiers were beheaded and killed, and the whole country of Zhao was shocked.

古文：四十八年十月，秦复定上党郡。
现代文：昭王四十八年十月，秦军再次平定上党郡。
English: In October of the 48th year of King Zhao, the Qin army once again conquered Shangdang County.

古文：秦分军为二：王龁攻皮牢，拔之；司马梗定太原。
现代文：以后，秦军兵分两路：王龁攻下皮牢，司马梗平定太原。
English: After that, the Qin soldiers were divided into two paths: Wang Qian conquered Pidong, and Sima Xie conquered Taiyuan.

古文：韩、赵恐，使苏代厚币说秦相应侯曰： 武安君禽马服子乎？ 
现代文：韩、赵两国十分害怕，就派苏代到秦国，献上丰厚的礼物劝说丞相应侯说： 武安君擒杀赵括了吗？ 
English: Han and Zhao were very afraid, so they sent a Soviet delegate to Qin to present a rich gift to persuade the corresponding marquis to say: Did Wu Anjun kill Zhao Guan?

古文：曰： 然。 
现代文：应侯回答说： 是。 
English: Ying Hou replied: Yes.

古文：又曰： 即围邯郸乎？ 
现代文：苏代又问： 就要围攻邯郸吗？ 
English: Sudai asked again: Do you want to besiege Kunming?

古文：曰： 然。 
现代文：应侯回答说： 是的。 
English: Ying Hou replied: Yes.

古文： 赵亡则秦王王矣，武安君为三公。
现代文：于是苏代说： 赵国灭亡，秦王就要君临天下了，武安君当封为三公。
English: So Sudai said, "If the Zhao Kingdom perishes, King Qin will ascend to heaven, and King Wu'an will become the Third Prince."

古文：武安君所为秦战胜攻取者七十馀城，南定鄢、郢、汉中，北禽赵括之军，虽周、召、吕望之功不益於此矣。
现代文：武安君为秦国攻占夺取的城邑有七十多座，南边平定了楚国的鄢、郢及汉中地区，北边俘获了赵括的四十万大军，即使历史上赫赫有名的周公、召公和吕望的功劳也超不过这些了。
English: Wu Anjun conquered more than 70 cities and towns for Qin. In the south, he pacified Zou, Zang and the central Hanzhong region of Chu. In the north, he captured the 400,000-strong army of Zhao Guan. Even the famous Zhou Gong, Zokong and Lvang in history could not surpass these achievements.

古文：今赵亡，秦王王，则武安君必为三公，君能为之下乎？
现代文：如果赵国灭亡，秦王君临天下，那么武安君位居三公是定而无疑的，您能屈居他的下位吗？
English: If the State of Zhao were to perish and the Qin Dynasty were to come to an end, then there is no doubt that Wu'an would be in the position of the Three Kingdoms. Can you take his place?

古文：虽无欲为之下，固不得已矣。
现代文：即使不甘心屈居下位，可已成事实也就不得不屈从了。
English: Even if you don't want to be relegated, the reality is that you have to give in.

古文：秦尝攻韩，围邢丘，困上党，上党之民皆反为赵，天下不乐为秦民之日久矣。
现代文：秦军曾进攻韩国，围击刑丘，困死上党，上党的百姓都转而归附赵国，天下百姓不甘作秦国臣民的日子已经很久了。
English: The Qin army once attacked Korea, besieged the execution mound, and trapped the Shang party. The people of the Shang party all turned to the Zhao state. The days when the people of the world were not willing to be the subjects of Qin have long passed.

古文：今亡赵，北地入燕，东地入齐，南地入韩、魏，则君之所得民亡几何人。
现代文：如果把赵国灭掉，它的北边土地将落入燕国，东边土地将并入齐国，南边土地将归入韩国、魏国，那么您所得到的百姓就没有多少了。
English: If the State of Zhao is eliminated, the land to the north of it will fall into the State of Yan, the land to the east will be incorporated into the State of Qi, and the land to the south will be incorporated into the State of Korea and the State of Wei, then you will not have many people left.

古文：故不如因而割之，无以为武安君功也。 
现代文：所以不如趁着韩国、赵国惊恐之机让它们割让土地，不要再让武安君建立功劳了。 
English: Therefore, it is better to take advantage of South Korea and Zhao Guo's panic to let them cede land, and not let Wu Anjun build credit.

古文：於是应侯言於秦王曰： 秦兵劳，请许韩、赵之割地以和，且休士卒。 
现代文：听了苏代这番话应侯便向秦王进言道： 秦国士兵太劳累了，请您应允韩国、赵国割地讲和，暂且让士兵们休整一下。 
English: After listening to Su Dai's words, Ying Hou said to Qin Wang: Qin soldiers are too tired, please allow South Korea and Zhao to make peace, and let the soldiers have a rest for a while.

古文：王听之，割韩垣雍、赵六城以和。
现代文：秦王听从了应侯的意见，割取了韩国的垣雍和赵国的六座城邑便讲和了。
English: The King of Qin listened to the opinion of Ying Hou, cut off Korea's Waki Yong and the six cities of Zhao, and then made peace.

古文：正月，皆罢兵。
现代文：正月，双方停止交战。
English: On New Year's Day, the two sides stopped fighting.

古文：武安君闻之，由是与应侯有隙。
现代文：武安君得知停战消息，自有想法，从此与应侯互有恶感。
English: After learning the news of the armistice, Mr. Wu An had his own ideas, and from then on, he and Mr. Ying Hou had a bad feeling towards each other.

古文：其九月，秦复发兵，使五大夫王陵攻赵邯郸。
现代文：这一年九月，秦国曾再次派出部队，命令五大夫王陵攻打赵国邯郸。
English: In September of the same year, Qin State once again sent troops and ordered the Five Great Kings to attack Zhao Guozhen.

古文：是时武安君病，不任行。
现代文：当时武安君有病，不能出征。
English: At that time, Wu Anjun was ill and could not go to the front.

古文：四十九年正月，陵攻邯郸，少利，秦益发兵佐陵。
现代文：昭王四十九年正月，王陵进攻邯郸，但战果很少，进展不大，秦国便增派部队帮助王陵继续进攻。
English: In the first month of the 49th year of King Zhao, the royal mausoleum was attacked, but the battle results were few and the progress was not great. Qin State then sent additional troops to help the royal mausoleum continue the attack.

古文：陵兵亡五校。
现代文：结果王陵部队损失了五个军营。
English: As a result, the imperial mausoleum troops lost five military camps.

古文：武安君病愈，秦王欲使武安君代陵将。
现代文：武安君病好了，秦王打算派武安君代替王陵统率部队。
English: King Wu'an recovered from his illness, and King Qin planned to send King Wu'an to lead the troops in place of Wang Ling.

古文：武安君言曰： 邯郸实未易攻也。
现代文：武安君进言道： 邯郸委实不易攻下。
English: Mr. Wu'an went on to say, "It's really not easy to take over the Party Central Committee.

古文：且诸侯救日至，彼诸侯怨秦之日久矣。
现代文：而且诸侯国的救兵天天都有到达的，他们对秦国的怨恨已积存很久了。
English: Moreover, the rescuers of the vassal states arrived every day, and their resentment of Qin had been accumulating for a long time.

古文：今秦虽破长平军，而秦卒死者过半，国内空。
现代文：现在秦国虽然消灭了长平的赵军，可是秦军死亡的士兵也超过了一半，国内兵力空虚。
English: Now, although Qin State has wiped out Changping's Zhao Army, more than half of the Qin Army's soldiers have died, leaving the country's armed forces empty.

古文：远绝河山而争人国都，赵应其内，诸侯攻其外，破秦军必矣。
现代文：远行千里越过河山去争夺别人的国都，赵军在城里应战，诸侯军在城外攻击，里应外合，内外夹击，战败秦军是必定无疑的。
English: Traveling thousands of miles across rivers and mountains to fight for other people's capitals, the Zhao army fought in the city, the princes' army attacked outside the city, the inside fought outside, and the inside and outside clamped down. The defeat of the Qin army is certain.

古文：不可。 
现代文：这个仗不能打。 
English: This battle cannot be fought alone.

古文：秦王自命，不行；乃使应侯请之，武安君终辞不肯行，遂称病。
现代文：秦王亲自下令，武安君不肯赴任；于是就派应侯去请他，但武安君始终推辞不肯赴任，从此称病不起。
English: The King of Qin personally ordered that Wu Anjun refuse to take up the post; he then sent an attendant to invite him, but Wu Anjun always refused to take up the post, saying that he was too ill to do so.

古文：秦王使王龁代陵将，八九月围邯郸，不能拔。
现代文：秦王只好改派王龁代替王陵统率部队，八、九月围攻邯郸，没能攻下来。
English: King Qin had no choice but to replace Wang Ling with Wang Qian, who led the troops. They besieged Qian in August and September, but failed to capture it.

古文：楚使春申君及魏公子将兵数十万攻秦军，秦军多失亡。
现代文：楚国派春申君同魏公子信陵君率领数十万士兵攻击秦军，秦军损失、伤亡很多。
English: Chu sent hundreds of thousands of soldiers led by Chunshenjun and Wei Gongzixinlingjun to attack the Qin army, and the Qin army suffered many losses and casualties.

古文：武安君言曰： 秦不听臣计，今如何矣！ 
现代文：武安君有了话说： 秦国不听我的意见，现在怎么样了！ 
English: Wu'an said, "Qin didn't listen to my advice. What's going on now?

古文：秦王闻之，怒，彊起武安君，武安君遂称病笃。
现代文：秦王听到后，怒火中烧，强令武安君赴任，武安君就称病情严重。
English: After hearing this, King Qin was furious and forced Wu Anjun to take the post. Wu Anjun said that he was seriously ill.

古文：应侯请之，不起。
现代文：应侯又请他，仍是辞不赴任。
English: The mayor invited him again, but he still refused to take up the post.

古文：於是免武安君为士伍，迁之阴密。
现代文：于是就免去武安君的官爵降为士兵，让他离开咸阳迁到阴密。
English: As a result, he removed Wu Anjun's official title and demoted him to a soldier, and let him leave Xianyang and move to Yimi.

古文：武安君病，未能行。
现代文：但武安君有病，未能成行。
English: However, Wu Anjun was ill and could not make the trip.

古文：居三月，诸侯攻秦军急，秦军数卻，使者日至。
现代文：过了三个月，诸侯联军攻击秦军更加紧迫，秦军屡次退却，报告失利情况的使者天天都有来的。
English: After three months, the allied forces of the princes attacked the Qin army more urgently. The Qin army repeatedly retreated, and emissaries came every day to report the defeat.

古文：秦王乃使人遣白起，不得留咸阳中。
现代文：秦王就派人驱逐白起，不能让他留在咸阳城里。
English: King Qin sent someone to expel Baiqi, and could not let him stay in Xianyang City.

古文：武安君既行，出咸阳西门十里，至杜邮。
现代文：武安君已经上路，走出咸阳西门十里路，到了杜邮。
English: Wu Anjun has set out on the road, walked out of Xianyang Ximen Shili Road, and arrived at Du Post.

古文：秦昭王与应侯群臣议曰： 白起之迁，其意尚怏怏不服，有馀言。 
现代文：秦昭王与应侯以及群僚议论说： 令白起迁出咸阳，他流露的样子还不满意，不服气，有怨言。 
English: Qin Zhao Wang discussed with Ying Hou and his colleagues, saying: When Li Baiqi moved out of Xianyang, he was not satisfied with his appearance, was not convinced, and had complaints.

古文：秦王乃使使者赐之剑，自裁。
现代文：秦王就派遣使者赐给他一把剑，令他自杀。
English: King Qin sent an envoy to give him a sword and told him to commit suicide.

古文：武安君引剑将自刭，曰： 我何罪于天而至此哉？ 
现代文：武安君拿着剑就要自刎，仰天长叹道： 我对上天有什么罪过竟落得这个结果？ 
English: Wu Anjun took his sword and was about to kill himself. He looked up to heaven and sighed: "What is my sin against heaven that I have ended up with this result?

古文：良久，曰： 我固当死。
现代文：过了好一会儿，说： 我本来就该死。
English: After a while, he said: I deserved to die.

古文：长平之战，赵卒降者数十万人，我诈而尽阬之，是足以死。 
现代文：长平之战，赵国士兵投降的有几十万人，我用欺诈之术把他们全都活埋了，这足够死罪了。 
English: In the Changping War, there were hundreds of thousands of Zhao soldiers who surrendered. I buried all of them alive by using deception, which is enough of a capital crime.

古文：遂自杀。
现代文：随即自杀。
English: Zhang Tang then committed suicide.

古文：武安君之死也，以秦昭王五十年十一月。
现代文：武安君死在秦昭王五十年十一月。
English: Wu Anjun died in November of the fiftieth year of Qin Zhao Wang.

古文：死而非其罪，秦人怜之，乡邑皆祭祀焉。
现代文：武安君死而无罪，秦国人都同情他，所以无论城乡都祭祀他。
English: Wu Anjun died without guilt, and the people of Qin sympathized with him, so they worshiped him in both urban and rural areas.

古文：王翦者，频阳东乡人也。
现代文：王翦，是频阳东乡人。
English: Wang Yao is a villager in the east of Fengyang.

古文：少而好兵，事秦始皇。
现代文：少年时就喜好军事，后来奉事秦始皇。
English: When he was a boy, he liked the military, and later served Qin Shi Huang.

古文：始皇十一年，翦将攻赵阏与，破之，拔九城，十八年，翦将攻赵。
现代文：始皇十一年，王翦带兵攻打赵国的阏与，不仅攻陷了它，还一连拿下九座城邑。始皇十八年，王翦领兵攻打赵国。
English: In the eleventh year of the First Emperor, Wang Hui led an army to attack the capital of Zhao, and not only conquered it, but also won nine cities and towns in a row. In the eighteenth year of the First Emperor, Wang Hui led an army to attack Zhao.

古文：岁馀，遂拔赵，赵王降，尽定赵地为郡。
现代文：一年多就攻取了赵国，赵王投降，赵国各地全部被平定，设置为郡。
English: After more than a year, Zhao Province was conquered, Zhao Wang surrendered, and all parts of Zhao Province were pacified and set up as counties.

古文：明年，燕使荆轲为贼於秦，秦王使王翦攻燕。
现代文：第二年，燕国派荆轲到秦国谋杀秦王，秦王派王翦攻打燕国。
English: In the second year, Yan sent Jing Yao to Qin to murder Qin King, and Qin King sent Wang Yao to invade Yan.

古文：燕王喜走辽东，翦遂定燕蓟而还。
现代文：燕王喜逃往辽东，王翦终于平定了燕国都城蓟胜利而回。
English: Yan Wangxi fled to the east of Liaodong, and Wang Yao finally defeated Yan's capital Chengdu and returned in triumph.

古文：秦使翦子王贲击荆，荆兵败。
现代文：秦王派王翦儿子王贲攻击楚国，楚军战败。
English: The King of Qin sent Wang Yao's son Wang Yao to attack the State of Chu, and the Chu army was defeated.

古文：还击魏，魏王降，遂定魏地。
现代文：掉过头来再进击魏国，魏王投降，最后平定了魏国各地。
English: He turned around and attacked Wei again, the Wei king surrendered, and finally leveled all parts of Wei.

古文：秦始皇既灭三晋，走燕王，而数破荆师。
现代文：秦始皇灭掉了韩、赵、魏三国，赶跑了燕王喜，同时多次战败楚军。
English: Qin Shihuang wiped out Han, Zhao, and Wei, drove out Yan Wangxi, and defeated the Chu army many times.

古文：秦将李信者，年少壮勇，尝以兵数千逐燕太子丹至於衍水中，卒破得丹，始皇以为贤勇。
现代文：秦国将领李信，年轻气盛，英勇威武，曾带着几千士兵把燕太子丹追击到衍水，最后打败燕军捉到太子丹，秦始皇认为李信贤能勇敢。
English: Li Xin, the general of Qin, was young and vigorous, brave and powerful. He once took several thousand soldiers to chase Prince Yan to the water, and finally defeated the Yan army to capture Prince Dan. The Qin Emperor believed that Li Xinxian could be brave.

古文：於是始皇问李信： 吾欲攻取荆，於将军度用几何人而足？ 
现代文：一天，秦始皇问李信： 我打算攻取楚国，由将军估计调用多少人才够？ 
English: One day, Qin Shi Huang asked Li Xin: I am planning to invade Chu, how many talents are enough to be summoned by the general?

古文：李信曰： 不过用二十万人。 
现代文：李信回答说： 最多不过二十万人。 
English: Li Xin replied, "No more than 200,000 people."

古文：始皇问王翦，王翦曰： 非六十万人不可。 
现代文：秦始皇又问王翦，王翦回答说： 非得六十万人不可。 
English: Qin Shihuang also asked Wang Yao, and Wang Yao replied: "We must have six hundred thousand people."

古文：始皇曰： 王将军老矣，何怯也！
现代文：秦始皇说： 王将军老喽，多么胆怯呀！
English: Qin Shihuang said: General Wang Laojun, how timid!

古文：李将军果势壮勇，其言是也。 
现代文：李将军真是果断勇敢，他的话是对的。 
English: General Lee was indeed decisive and courageous, and he was right.

古文：遂使李信及蒙恬将二十万南伐荆。
现代文：于是就派李信及蒙恬带兵二十万向南进军攻打楚国。
English: So he sent Li Xin and Meng Ye to march south with 200,000 soldiers to attack Chu.

古文：王翦言不用，因谢病，归老於频阳。
现代文：王翦的话不被采用，就推托有病，回到频阳家乡养老。
English: When Wang Yao's words were not accepted, he pretended to be ill and returned to his hometown of Fanyang to retire.

古文：李信攻平与，蒙恬攻寝，大破荆军。
现代文：李信攻打平与，蒙恬攻打寝邑，大败楚军。
English: Lixin attacked Pingyao, Mengniu attacked Xieyun, and the Chu army was soundly defeated.

古文：信又攻鄢郢，破之，於是引兵而西，与蒙恬会城父。
现代文：李信接着进攻鄢郢，又拿了下来，于是带领部队向西前进，要与蒙恬在城父会师。
English: Lixin then attacked Mengniu and took it back, so he led his troops westward to join forces with Mengniu in the city.

古文：荆人因随之，三日三夜不顿舍，大破李信军，入两壁，杀七都尉，秦军走。
现代文：其实，楚军正在跟踪追击他们，连着三天三夜不停息，结果大败李信部队，攻入两个军营，杀死七个都尉，秦军大败而逃。
English: As a matter of fact, the Chu army was pursuing them and did not stop for three days and three nights in a row. As a result, they defeated Li Xin's troops, broke into two military camps, killed seven captains, and the Qin army fled in defeat.

古文：始皇闻之，大怒，自驰如频阳，见谢王翦曰： 寡人以不用将军计，李信果辱秦军。
现代文：秦始皇听到这个消息，大为震怒，亲自乘快车奔往频阳，见到王翦道歉说： 我由于没采用您的计策，李信果然使秦军蒙受了耻辱。
English: When Qin Shi Huang heard this news, he was so furious that he personally took an express train to Fanyang. When he saw Wang Yao, he apologized and said, "Since I did not adopt your strategy, Li Xin has indeed brought disgrace to the Qin Army."

古文：今闻荆兵日进而西，将军虽病，独忍弃寡人乎！ 
现代文：现在听说楚军每天都在向西挺进，将军虽然染病，难道忍心抛弃我不管吗？ 
English: Now that I hear that the Chu army is advancing westward every day, even though the general is ill, can he bear to abandon me?

古文：王翦谢曰： 老臣罢病悖乱，唯大王更择贤将。 
现代文：王翦推辞说： 老臣病弱疲乏，昏聩无能，希望大王另择良将。 
English: Wang Yao said, "The old minister is sick, weak and tired, dizzy and incapable. I hope the king will choose another good general."

古文：始皇谢曰： 已矣，将军勿复言！ 
现代文：秦始皇再次表示歉意说： 好了，将军不要再说什么了！ 
English: Qin Shihuang apologized again and said, "All right, General, don't say anything more!

古文：王翦曰： 大王必不得已用臣，非六十万人不可。 
现代文：王翦说： 大王非要任用我，非六十万人不可。 
English: Wang Yao said, "The great king must appoint me, and there must be six hundred thousand people."

古文：始皇曰： 为听将军计耳。 
现代文：秦始皇说： 就听从将军的建议。 
English: Qin Shihuang said: Just follow the general's advice.

古文：於是王翦将兵六十万人，始皇自送至灞上。
现代文：于是王翦率领着六十万大军出发了，秦始皇亲自到灞上送行。
English: So Wang Yao led 600,000 troops and set out, and Qin Shi Huang personally went to Yao to see him off.

古文：王翦行，请美田宅园池甚众。
现代文：王翦临出发时，请求赐予许多良田、美宅、园林池苑等。
English: When Wang Xuanjin set out, he asked to be given many good fields, beautiful houses, gardens and ponds.

古文：始皇曰： 将军行矣，何忧贫乎？ 
现代文：秦始皇说： 将军尽管上路好了，何必担忧家里日子不好过呢？ 
English: Qin Shihuang said, "Even though the general is well on his way, why should he worry about life at home?

古文：王翦曰： 为大王将，有功终不得封侯，故及大王之乡臣，臣亦及时以请园池为子孙业耳。 
现代文：王翦说： 替大王带兵，即使有功劳也终究难以得到封侯赐爵，所以趁着大王特别器重我的时候，我也得及时请求大王赐予园林池苑来给子孙后代置份家产吧。 
English: Wang Yao said, "If you lead soldiers for the great king, even if there is merit, it is still difficult to get the title of marquis and knight. Therefore, when the great king especially values me, I must also timely request the great king to grant gardens and ponds to give future generations a share of the family property.

古文：始皇大笑。
现代文：秦始皇听了哈哈大笑起来。
English: Qin Shi Huang laughed out loud.

古文：王翦既至关，使使还请善田者五辈。或曰： 将军之乞贷，亦已甚矣。 
现代文：王翦出发后到了函谷关，又连续五次派使者回朝廷请求赐予良田。有人说： 将军请求赐予家业，也太过分了吧。 
English: After his departure, Wang Yao arrived at the Hanyu Pass, and sent envoys back to the imperial court five times in a row to request the granting of good rice fields. Some people said: The general's request to grant family inheritance is too much.

古文：王翦曰： 不然。
现代文：王翦说： 这么说不对。
English: Wang Yao said, "It's not right to say that."

古文：夫秦王怚而不信人。
现代文：秦王性情粗暴对人多疑。
English: King Qin had a rough temperament and was suspicious of people.

古文：今空秦国甲士而专委於我，我不多请田宅为子孙业以自坚，顾令秦王坐而疑我邪？ 
现代文：现在大王把全国的精锐武装都抽调给我指挥，我不用多多请求赏赐田宅给子孙们置份家产来表示自己出征的坚定意志，难道反过来要让秦王怀疑我吗？ 
English: Now that the great king has transferred the elite armed forces of the whole country to my command, I don't have to ask for a lot of rewards to give my children and grandchildren a share of the family property to express my firm will to go to war. Should I, in turn, make the Qin king doubt me?

古文：王翦果代李信击荆。
现代文：王翦终于代替李信进击楚国。
English: Wang Qian finally replaced Li Xin to invade Chu.

古文：荆闻王翦益军而来，乃悉国中兵以拒秦。
现代文：楚王得知王翦增兵而来，就竭尽全国军队来抗拒秦兵。
English: When King Chu learned that Wang Pi had increased the number of troops, he mobilized the entire national army to resist the Qin soldiers.

古文：王翦至，坚壁而守之，不肯战。
现代文：王翦抵达战场，构筑坚固的营垒采取守势，不肯出兵交战。
English: When Wang Hui arrived at the battlefield, he built a strong camp to take a defensive position and refused to send troops to fight.

古文：荆兵数出挑战，终不出。
现代文：楚军屡次挑战，秦军始终坚守不出。
English: The Chu army repeatedly challenged, but the Qin army was always unable to hold out.

古文：王翦日休士洗沐，而善饮食抚循之，亲与士卒同食。
现代文：王翦让士兵们天天休息洗浴，供给上等饭食抚慰他们，亲自与士兵同饮同食。
English: Wang Yao let the soldiers rest and bathe every day, provided them with first-class meals to soothe them, and personally ate and drank with the soldiers.

古文：久之，王翦使人问军中戏乎？
现代文：过了一段时间，王翦派人询问士兵中玩什么游戏？
English: After a while, Wang Yao sent someone to ask the soldiers what game they were playing.

古文：对曰： 方投石超距。 
现代文：回来报告说： 正在比赛投石看谁投得远。 
English: He came back with a report: They are throwing stones to see who can throw the farthest.

古文：於是王翦曰： 士卒可用矣。 
现代文：于是王翦说： 士兵可以派用了。 
English: So Wang Yao said, "The soldiers can be dispatched."

古文：荆数挑战而秦不出，乃引而东。
现代文：楚军屡次挑战，秦军不肯应战，就领兵向东去了。
English: The Chu army repeatedly challenged the Qin army, but the Qin army did not want to fight, so they led the army to the east.

古文：翦因举兵追之，令壮士击，大破荆军。
现代文：王翦趁机发兵追击他们，派健壮力战的兵丁实施强击，大败楚军。
English: Wang Qian took advantage of the opportunity to send troops to chase them, and sent soldiers of robust strength to carry out a strong attack, and defeated the Chu army.

古文：至蕲南，杀其将军项燕，荆兵遂败走。
现代文：追到蕲南，杀了他们的将军项燕，楚军最后败逃。
English: They chased them to the south of Yin, killed their general, Xiang Yan, and the Chu army finally fled in defeat.

古文：秦因乘胜略定荆地城邑。
现代文：秦军乘胜追击，攻占了楚国的城邑。
English: The Qin army took advantage of the victory to pursue and captured the cities and towns of Chu.

古文：岁馀，虏荆王负刍，竟平荆地为郡县。
现代文：一天后，俘虏了楚王负刍，最后平定了楚国各地设为郡县。
English: A day later, he captured the King of Chu, and finally settled the various regions of Chu as counties.

古文：因南征百越之君。
现代文：又乘势向南征伐百越国王。
English: He also took advantage of the situation to march south to attack the hundred Vietnamese kings.

古文：而王翦子王贲，与李信破定燕、齐地。
现代文：与此同时，王翦的儿子王贲，与李信攻陷平定了燕国和齐国各地。
English: At the same time, Wang Xuan's son Wang Xuan, together with Li Xun, conquered and leveled Yan and Qi provinces.

古文：秦始皇二十六年，尽并天下，王氏、蒙氏功为多，名施於後世。
现代文：秦始皇二十六年，兼并了所有的诸侯国，统一了天下，王将军和蒙将军的功劳最多，声名流传于后世。
English: In the 26th year of Qin Shihuang's reign, he annexed all the principalities and unified the world. Wang Zheng and Meng Zheng did most of the work, and their fame was passed down to future generations.

古文：秦二世之时，王翦及其子贲皆已死，而又灭蒙氏。
现代文：秦二世的时候，王翦和他的儿子王贲都已经去世，蒙恬也因被构陷而被诛杀。
English: At the time of Qin II, Wang Yao and his son Wang Yao had both died, and Meng Yao was also killed for being framed.

古文：陈胜之反秦，秦使王翦之孙王离击赵，围赵王及张耳钜鹿城。
现代文：陈胜起义反抗秦朝时，二世派王翦的孙子王离攻打赵国，把赵歇和张耳围困在钜鹿城。
English: When Chen Sheng revolted against the Qin Dynasty, the Second Emperor sent Wang Xuan's grandson Wang Li to attack Zhao and besieged Zhao Xie and Zhang Er in Elk City.

古文：或曰： 王离，秦之名将也。
现代文：当时有个人说： 王离，是秦朝的名将。
English: At that time, someone said: Wang Li is a famous general of the Qin Dynasty.

古文：今将彊秦之兵，攻新造之赵，举之必矣。 客曰： 不然。
现代文：现在他率领强大的秦军攻打刚刚建立的赵国，战胜它是必然的。一个过客说： 不是这样的。
English: Now he is leading the powerful Qin army to attack the newly established Zhao state, and defeat it is inevitable. A passerby said: This is not so.

古文：夫为将三世者必败。
现代文：说来做将领的世家到了第三代的必定要失败。
English: It is said that the third generation of generals must fail.

古文：必败者何也？
现代文：说他必定失败的原因是什么呢？
English: What is the reason for saying that he must fail?

古文：必其所杀伐多矣，其後受其不祥。
现代文：一定是他家杀的人太多了，他家的后代就要承受为恶的惩罚。
English: His family must have killed too many people, and his descendants will have to bear the punishment for evil.

古文：今王离已三世将矣。 
现代文：如今王离已是第三代将领了。 
English: Wang Liang is now the third generation of generals.

古文：居无何，项羽救赵，击秦军，果虏王离，王离军遂降诸侯。
现代文：过了不久，项羽救援赵国，攻打秦军，果然俘虏了王离，王离的军队就投降了诸侯军。
English: Soon after, Xiang Yu came to the rescue of Zhao, attacked the Qin army, and captured Wang Li. Wang Li's army surrendered to the vassal army.

古文：太史公曰：鄙语云 尺有所短，寸有所长 。
现代文：太史公说：俗话说 尺有短的时候，寸有长的时候。 
English: Tai Shikong said: As the saying goes, when the ruler is short, the ruler is long.

古文：白起料敌合变，出奇无穷，声震天下，然不能救患於应侯。
现代文：白起算计敌人能随机应变，计出不尽，奇妙多变，名震天下，然而却不能对付应侯给他制造的祸患。
English: From the very beginning, the enemy has been able to contrive random, inexhaustible, wondrously changeable, world-famous, yet unable to deal with the calamity that has been created for him.

古文：王翦为秦将，夷六国，当是时，翦为宿将，始皇师之，然不能辅秦建德，固其根本，偷合取容，以至筊身。
现代文：王翦作为秦国将领，平定六国，功绩卓著，在当时不愧是元老将军，秦始皇尊其为师，可是他不能辅佐秦始皇建立德政，以巩固国家根基，却苟且迎合，取悦人主，直至死去。
English: As a general of the Qin Dynasty, Wang Hui conquered six countries with outstanding achievements. At that time, he was a veteran general. The First Emperor of the Qin Dynasty respected him as a teacher. However, he could not help the First Emperor of the Qin Dynasty establish a virtuous government to consolidate the foundation of the country, but he meticulously catered to and pleased the people until his death.

古文：及孙王离为项羽所虏，不亦宜乎！
现代文：到了他的孙子王离被项羽俘虏，不也是理所当然的吗！
English: When his grandson, the king, was taken captive by Xiang Yu, it was only natural!

古文：彼各有所短也。
现代文：他们各有自己的短处啊。
English: They each have their own weaknesses.

