古文：齐宣王问曰： 交邻国有道乎？ 
现代文：齐宣王问道： 和邻国交往有什么讲究吗？ 
English: Qi Xuanwang asked: Is there anything particular about interacting with neighboring countries?

古文：孟子对曰： 有。
现代文：孟子回答说： 有的。
English: Mencius replied, "Yes.

古文：惟仁者为能以大事小，是故汤事葛，文王事昆夷；惟智者为能以小事大，故大王事獯鬻，勾践事吴。
现代文：只有有仁德的君主才能够以大国的身分侍奉小国，所以商汤侍奉过葛伯，周文王侍奉过昆夷。只有明智的君主才能够以小国的身分侍奉大国，所以周太王古公亶父侍奉过獯鬻族、越王勾践侍奉过吴王夫差。
English: Only a benevolent monarch can serve a small country as a big country, so Shang Tang served Ge Bo, and Zhou Wen Wang served Kunyi. Only a wise monarch can serve a big country as a small country, so Zhou Taigong served the Yi people, and Yue Wang served the Wu people.

古文：以大事小者，乐天者也；以小事大者，畏天者也。
现代文：以大国身分侍奉小国的，是以天命为乐的人；以小国身分侍奉大国的，是敬畏天命的人。
English: Those who serve a small country as a big country are those who enjoy destiny; those who serve a big country as a small country are those who fear destiny.

古文：乐天者保天下，畏天者保其国。
现代文：以天命为乐的人能够保有天下，敬畏天命的人能保有自己的国家。
English: Those who take pleasure in God's predestination can keep the world, and those who fear God's predestination can keep their own country.

古文：诗云： 畏天之威，于时保之。  
现代文：《诗经·周颂·我将》说： 畏惧上天的威灵，国家因此才能够安定。  
English: "Shijing·Zhousong·I will" says: Fear the will of heaven, so that the country can be stable.

古文：王曰： 大哉言矣！
现代文：宣王说： 先生说得太好了！
English: Mr. Xuanwang said, "What the teacher said was so good!

古文：寡人有疾，寡人好勇。 
现代文：不过，我有个毛病，就是逞强好勇。 
English: However, I have a problem, which is that I'm too cocky.

古文：对曰： 王请无好小勇。
现代文：孟子说： 那就请大王不要喜爱小勇。
English: Mencius said, "In that case, please ask the great king not to like Xiao Yong."

古文：夫抚剑疾视曰， 彼恶敢当我哉 ！
现代文：有的人动辄按剑瞪眼说： 他怎么敢抵挡我呢？ 
English: Some people would roll their eyes and say, "How dare he stand up to me?"

古文：此匹夫之勇，敌一人者也。
现代文：这只是匹夫之勇，只能与个人较量。
English: This is just the courage of a team, and can only be measured against an individual.

古文：王请大之！
现代文：大王请不要喜好这样的匹夫之勇！ 
English: Great King, please don't like such bravery!

古文：诗云： 王赫斯怒，爰整其旅，以遏徂莒，以笃周祜，以对于天下。 
现代文：《诗经·大雅·皇矣》说： 周文王义愤激昂，发令调兵遣将，把侵略莒国的敌军阻挡，增强了周人的福祉，没有辜负天下百姓的期望。 
English: "Shijing·Daya·Wangyue" said: King Zhou Wen was furious with indignation. He ordered the deployment of troops to block the invading enemy troops, enhanced the well-being of Zhou people, and did not live up to the expectations of the people around the world.

古文：此文王之勇也。
现代文：这是周文王的勇。
English: This is the story of Zhou Wenwang's courage.

古文：文王一怒而安天下之民。
现代文：周文王一怒便使天下百姓都得到安定。 
English: As soon as King Zhou Wen became angry, he brought stability to the people all over the world.

古文：书曰： 天降下民，作之君，作之师，惟曰其助上帝宠之。
现代文：《尚书》说： 上天降生了百姓，又替他们降生了君王，降生了老师，这些君王和老师的责任就是帮助上天来爱护老百姓。
English: "Shangshu" said: Heaven gave birth to the people, and for them, kings and teachers were born. The responsibility of these kings and teachers is to help Heaven protect the people.

古文：四方有罪无罪惟我在，天下曷敢有越厥志？ 
现代文：所以，天下四方的有罪者和无罪者，都由我来负责，普天之下有谁敢违背上天的意志起来作乱呢？ 
English: Therefore, I am responsible for the guilty and the innocent in all four corners of the world. Who in the whole world would dare to rebel against the will of heaven?

古文：一人衡行于天下，武王耻之。
现代文：所以，只要有一人在天下横行霸道，周武王便认为是自己的耻辱。
English: Therefore, as long as there is one person in the world who is domineering, King Zhou Wu considers it to be his own shame.

古文：此武王之勇也。
现代文：这是周武王的勇。
English: This is the courage of King Zhou.

古文：而武王亦一怒而安天下之民。
现代文：周武王也是一怒便使天下百姓都得到安定。
English: King Zhou Wu was also enraged and brought stability to the people all over the world.

古文：今王亦一怒而安天下之民，民惟恐王之不好勇也。 
现代文：如今大王要是也做到一怒便使天下百姓都得到安定，那老百姓唯恐大王不喜好勇了啊。 
English: Nowadays, if the great king could make the people all over the world stable with a single fury, then the people would be afraid that the great king would not like them.

