古文：张景蛇医山蜘蛛虫变蝎化虱建草法通登封士人
现代文：张景蛇医山蜘蛛虫变蝎化虱建草法通登封士人
English: Zhang Jing, snake doctor, mountain spider, insect, turning into a scorpion, turning into a grasshopper, building a grasshopper, teaching the Dharma, and becoming a scholar

古文：虱征壁镜大蝎红蝙蝠青蚨滕王图异峰寄居
现代文：虱征壁镜大蝎红蝙蝠青蚨滕王图异峰寄居
English: 征壁鏡大蝎红蝙蝠晉青滕王图异峰寄居

古文：异虫蝇壁鱼天牛虫白蜂窠毒蜂竹蜂水蛆水虫
现代文：异虫蝇壁鱼天牛虫白蜂窠毒蜂竹蜂水蛆水虫
English: Xenotuber fly wallfish taurine worm white bee sting poison bee bamboo bee water sting water bug

古文：抱抢避役蜳蝺灶马谢豹碎车虫度古雷蜞
现代文：抱抢避役蜳蝺灶马谢豹碎车虫度古雷蜞
English: Embrace, snatch, dodge, cook, maize, leopard, broken car, insect, old thunderbolt.

古文：腹育蛱蝶蚁蚁楼
现代文：腹育蛱蝶蚁蚁楼
English: Diaphragm butterfly ants anthill

古文：张景
现代文：张景
English: Zhang Jing

古文：平阳人张景者，以善射，为本郡裨将。
现代文：平阳人张景凭着擅长射箭的本领做了本郡的副将。
English: Zhang Jing, a native of Pingyang, became the vice-commander of the county with his skill in archery.

古文：景有女，始十六七，甚敏惠，其父母爱之，居以侧室。
现代文：张景有个女儿，才十六七岁，非常聪明。她的父母很疼爱她，让她住在旁边的屋子里。
English: Zhang Jing has a daughter who is only 16 or 17 years old and very smart. Her parents love her very much and let her live in the house next door.

古文：一夕，女独处其中，寝未熟，忽见轧其户者。
现代文：一天晚上，张女单独在屋里睡觉，还没睡熟，忽然听见一个人敲她的门，不一会儿就看见一个人进来。
English: One night, Zhang was sleeping alone in her room. She had not yet fallen asleep, when she suddenly heard someone knocking on her door, and soon saw someone enter.

古文：俄见一人来，被素衣，貌充而肥，自欹身于女之榻。
现代文：那人穿着白衣服，脸大而胖，把身体斜倚在张女床边。
English: The man, dressed in white, with a large, fat face, was reclining on the edge of the woman's bed.

古文：惧为盗，默不敢顾。
现代文：张女怕是强盗，默默地不敢转头看。
English: Zhang Niang was afraid of being robbed, and silently dared not turn around to look.

古文：白衣人又前迫以笑，女益惧，且虑为怪焉。
现代文：白衣人又上前微笑，张女更加害怕，而且疑心他是怪物。
English: The man in white stepped forward again and smiled. Zhang Ye was even more scared and suspected that he was a monster.

古文：因叱曰： 君岂非盗乎？不然，是他类也。 
现代文：于是斥责说： 您不是强盗？若不是的话，就不是人类。 
English: And he rebuked him, and said unto him, Art thou a robber? if not, thou art not a man.

古文：白衣者笑曰： 东选吾心，谓吾为盗，且亦误矣。谓吾为他类，不其甚乎！
现代文：白衣人笑道： 主人揣测我的心，说我是强盗，已经是错了，说我是人类之外的东西，不是更过分了吗？
English: The man in white laughed, "My master's speculation about my heart, saying that I'm a robber, is already wrong. Saying that I'm something other than human, isn't that even more excessive?"

古文：且吾本齐人曹氏子也，谓我美风仪，子独不知乎？
现代文：我本是齐国姓曹的人家的儿子，大家都说我风度仪表很美，您竟然不知道吗？
English: I am the son of a family with the surname of Cao in Qi Province. Everyone says that I have a beautiful demeanor. Don't you know that?

古文：子虽拒我，然犹寓子之舍耳。 
现代文：您虽然拒绝我，然而我还是要住在你的房子里。 
English: Even though you refuse me, I still want to live in your house.

古文：言已，遂偃于榻，且寝焉。
现代文：说完了，便仰卧在床上睡了。
English: After saying this, he fell asleep on his back on the bed.

古文：女恶之，不敢窃视，迨将晓方去。
现代文：张女很厌恶他，不敢偷看。将近天亮才走了。
English: Zhang Nian detested him very much and did not dare to peep. It was nearly dawn before he left.

古文：明夕又来，女惧益甚。
现代文：第二天晚上白衣人又来了，张女更加害怕。
English: The next night, the man in white came again, and Zhang Niu was even more scared.

古文：又明日，具事白于父。父曰： 必是怪也。 
现代文：又过了一天，张女把情况告诉了父亲。父亲说： 一定是怪物。 
English: A day later, Zhang told her father about the situation. "It must be a monster," he said.

古文：即命一金锥，贯缕于其末，且利铓，以授女。
现代文：就拿来一个金锥，在锥的一头穿上线，并把锥尖磨得很尖锐，把它交给了女儿。
English: And he took a golden spindle, and put a thread on the end of it, and sharpened the point of the spindle, and gave it to his daughter.

古文：教曰： 魅至，以此表焉。 
现代文：怪物果然很健谈。
English: The monster was certainly chatty.

古文：是夕又来，女强以言洽之，魅果善语。
现代文：快到半夜时，张女偷偷地把金锥插入怪物脖子中。
English: Close to midnight, Zhang secretly inserted a gold cone into the monster's neck.

古文：夜将半，女密以锥倳其项，其魅跃然大呼，曳缕而去。
现代文：那怪物大叫着跳起来，拖着线逃走了。第二天，张女告诉了父亲。
English: The monster screamed and jumped up, dragged the line and ran away. The next day, Zhang told her father.

古文：明日，女告父，命僮逐其迹，出舍数十步，至古木下，得一穴而绳贯其中。
现代文：父亲叫小男仆追寻他的足迹。出了房子数十步，到了古树的下面，看到一个洞，那根线就延伸到里面去了。
English: The father told the little servant to follow his footprints. He walked a few dozen steps outside the house, reached the bottom of an old tree, saw a hole, and the thread extended into it.

古文：乃穷之，深不数尺，果有一蛴螬，约尺余，蹲其中焉，锥表其项，盖所谓齐人曹氏子也。
现代文：于是沿着线往下挖，挖了不到数尺，果然有一只蛴螬约有一尺多长，蹲在那里，金锥就在它的脖子上。这就是那怪物所说的 齐国人姓曹人家的儿子 了。
English: So he dug down along the line, dug down less than a few feet, and sure enough, there was a centipede about more than a foot long, squatting there, with a gold cone on its neck. This is what the monster called the son of the Qi people surnamed Cao Renji.

古文：景即杀之，自此遂绝。
现代文：张景当即杀死了它，从此以后便没有事了。
English: Zhang Jing immediately killed it, and nothing happened after that.

古文：蛇医
现代文：蛇医
English: The snake doctor

古文：王彦威镇汴之二年，夏旱，时表王傅李玘过汴，因宴。
现代文：王彦威镇守开封的第二年夏天，天大旱。当时表王的师傅李玘路过开封，于是设宴款待。
English: In the summer of the second year of Wang Yanwei's guardianship of Kaifeng, there was a severe drought. At that time, the watch king's master Li Wei passed through Kaifeng, so he set up a banquet.

古文：王以旱为虑，李醉曰： 欲雨甚易耳，可求蛇医四头，十石瓮二，每瓮实以水，浮二蛇医，覆以木盖，密泥之，分置于闹处。
现代文：王彦威谈起对天旱的忧虑，李玘乘醉说道： 想要下雨很容易。可去找四只蝾螈，再找能装十石水的大瓮两个，每瓮装满水让两只蝾螈浮在水上，瓮上盖上盖儿，用泥封严，分别放到热闹的地方。
English: Wang Yanwei talked about his concerns about the drought, and Li Jizhen said drunkenly: "It's easy to make it rain. You can find four earthworms, then find two large earthworms that can hold ten kilos of water, fill each earthworm with water and let two earthworms float on the water, cover the earthworms with a lid, seal them tightly with mud, and place them separately in busy places.

古文：瓮前设席烧香，选小儿十岁已下十余，令执小青竹，昼夜更击其瓮，不得少辍。 
现代文：瓮前摆上酒席并烧香，选十岁以下的小孩十几个，叫他们手拿小青竹，白天晚上轮换着抽打那两只瓮，一会儿也不许停。 
English: Set up a banquet and burn incense in front of the cormorants, select a dozen children under the age of ten, ask them to hold small green bamboo, and take turns beating the two cormorants during the day and night, and do not stop for a moment.

古文：王如其言试之，一日两度雨，大注数百里。
现代文：王彦威按照他的话进行实验，果然一天下了两场雨，面积达数百里。
English: Wang Yanwei carried out the experiment according to his words, and indeed, two rains fell in one day, covering an area of hundreds of miles.

古文：旧说，龙与蛇师为亲家。
现代文：人们传说，龙跟蛇的师傅是亲家。
English: Legend has it that the dragon and snake master is a relative.

古文：山蜘蛛
现代文：山蜘蛛
English: The Mountain Spider

古文：相传裴旻山行，有山蜘蛛，垂丝如匹布，将及旻。
现代文：相传裴旻在山里走，看见山蜘蛛垂下的蛛网像一匹布一样大，快要触到斐旻了。
English: According to legend, Pei Yao was walking in the mountains when he saw a spider's web hanging down from a mountain spider. It was as big as a piece of cloth, and it was about to touch Fei Yao.

古文：旻引弓射却之，大如车轮，因断其丝数尺，收之。
现代文：斐旻拉开弓射退了山蜘蛛，见它像车轮那么大。于是弄断了几尺蛛网，收藏起来。
English: Figaro drew his bow and shooed away the mountain spider, seeing that it was as big as a wheel. So he broke off several feet of the spider's web and collected it.

古文：部下有金疮者，剪方寸贴之，血立止。
现代文：部下有被兵器打伤的伤口，剪下一寸见方的蛛网贴上，流血立刻就能停止。
English: If a subordinate has a wound caused by a weapon, he can cut an inch-square cobweb and stick it on, and the bleeding will stop immediately.

古文：虫变
现代文：虫变
English: Mutagenesis

古文：河南少尹韦绚，少时，尝于夔州江岸见一异虫。
现代文：河南少尹韦绚年轻时曾在夔州江边见过一只奇异的虫子。
English: When he was young, Yin Weiguan, a boy from Henan Province, saw a strange insect on the edge of the Zhangzhou River.

古文：初疑一棘刺，从者惊曰： 此虫有灵，不可犯之，或致风雨。 
现代文：刚看到时疑心是一根酸枣树的刺，随从吃惊地说： 这种虫子有灵性，不能触犯它，它能呼风唤雨。 
English: When he first saw it, he thought it was the thorn of a sour jujube tree. Surprised, the follower said, "This kind of worm has spirituality. You can't offend it. It can call for wind and rain."

古文：韦试令踏地惊之，虫飞，伏地如灭，细视地上，若石脉焉。
现代文：韦绚想试试，就叫人跺地吓唬它。虫子飞了，落地时好像消失了。仔细看地上，那虫子就像石头的纹理，好半天才渐渐隆起像原先那样。
English: Wei Huan wanted to try it, so he had someone scare it with a bang. The bug flew, and when it landed, it seemed to disappear. Looking closely at the ground, the bug was like the texture of stone, and it took a long time for it to gradually rise as it had before.

古文：良久渐起如旧，每刺上有一爪，忽入草，疾走如箭，竟不知何物。
现代文：这种虫每根刺上有一只爪子，忽然钻进草中，跑得像箭一样快，竟不知道是什么东西。
English: This insect, which has a claw on each thorn, suddenly burrows into the grass and runs as fast as an arrow, not knowing what it is.

古文：蝎化
现代文：蝎化
English: Scorpionization

古文：蝎负虫巨者，多化为蝎。
现代文：蝎子背上背的大虫子，多数变成蝎子。
English: A scorpion carries large worms on its back, most of which turn into scorpions.

古文：蝎子多负于背，段成式尝见一蝎负十余子，子色犹白，才如稻粒。
现代文：蝎子的幼虫大多由大蝎背着。段成式曾看过一只大蝎背着十多只幼蝎。这些幼蝎是白色的，只有稻粒大小。
English: The larvae of scorpions are mostly carried on the back of a large scorpion. Duan Chengshi once saw a large scorpion carrying more than ten young scorpions. These young scorpions are white and only the size of a grain of rice.

古文：又尝见张希复言，陈州古仓有蝎，形如钱，螫人必死，江南旧无。
现代文：又曾听张希复说，陈州的古老粮仓中有蝎子，形状像铜钱，螫了人，人必死。江南原来没有这种蝎子。
English: Zhang Xifu also said that there was a scorpion in an ancient granary in Chenzhou. It was shaped like a copper coin, and if it stung a person, the person would die. Originally, there was no such scorpion in the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：虱建草
现代文：虱建草
English: 建草

古文：旧说，虱虫症，饮赤龙所浴水则愈。
现代文：过去说，虱虫症需喝赤龙洗过澡的水才能好。
English: In the past, it was said that tapeworm disease could only be cured by drinking water that had been bathed in by the red dragon.

古文：虱恶水银，人有病虱者，虽香衣沐浴不能已，惟水银可去之。
现代文：虱子讨厌水银，人有因虱子咬而苦恼的，即使穿着有香味的衣服并且洗澡也不能好，只有水银可以治好。
English: Lice hate mercury. If a person is troubled by lice bites, even wearing scented clothes and taking a bath is not good. Only mercury can cure it.

古文：道士崔白言，荆州秀才张告，尝扪得两头虱。
现代文：有个道士崔白说，荆州秀才张告曾摸到两个头的虱子。
English: A Taoist priest, Cui Bai, said that Zhang Xucai, a scholar from Jingzhou, had once touched a two-headed louse.

古文：又有草生山足湿处，叶如百合，对叶独茎，茎微赤，高一二尺，名虱建草，能去虮虱。
现代文：又有一种草生长在山脚下湿润的地方，叶子像百合，叶是对生的，只有一根茎，茎是微红色，高有一二尺，名叫虱建草，它可以消灭虮虱。
English: There is also a kind of grass that grows in humid places at the foot of the mountain, the leaves are like lilies, the leaves are opposite, and there is only one stem. The stem is reddish, one or two feet high, and it is called Jiancao Grass. It can eliminate warts.

古文：法通
现代文：法通
English: Hōtō

古文：荆州有帛师号法通，本安西人，少于东天出家。
现代文：荆州有位大师号法通。原来是安西人，年轻时在东天出家。
English: In Jingzhou, there is a master practitioner of the Law. Originally from Anxi, he became a monk in Dongtian when he was young.

古文：言蝗虫腹下有梵字，或自天下来者。及忉利天梵天来。
现代文：法通说蝗虫肚子下面有梵文。这些蝗虫或许是从天上来的，或者是从忉利天梵天来的。
English: These locusts may have come from the sky, or they may have come from Brahma.

古文：西域验其字，作本天坛法禳之。
现代文：西域有人验看了那些字，作了 本天坛法 消灾。
English: Someone in the western region read those words and used the method of the Temple of Heaven to eliminate disasters.

古文：今蝗虫首有王字，固自可晓。
现代文：现在的蝗虫头上有 王 字，自然就可以明白了。
English: Today's locusts have the word "king" on their heads, so they will naturally understand.

古文：或言鱼子变，近之矣。
现代文：有的说蝗虫是鱼子变的，这种说法接近正确。
English: Some say that locusts are transformed into fish eggs, which is close to the truth.

古文：旧言虫食谷者，部吏所致，侵渔百姓，则虫食谷。
现代文：过去说蝗虫吃谷物是衙门中的官吏造成的：官吏侵害剥削百姓，蝗虫就吃谷物。
English: In the past, it was said that locusts eating grain was caused by officials in the government: officials abused and exploited the people, and locusts ate grain.

古文：虫身黑头赤，武官也；头黑身赤，儒吏也。
现代文：如果蝗虫身子黑色，头是红色，是武官；如果蝗虫头是黑色身子红色，则是文官。
English: If the body of the locust is black and the head is red, it is a military officer; if the head of the locust is black and the body is red, it is a civil officer.

古文：登封士人
现代文：登封士人
English: Dengfu Scholars

古文：唐尝有士人客游十余年，归庄，庄在登封县。
现代文：唐代曾有位读书人在外游历十多年，后来回到了家中的庄园。庄园在登封县。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, there was a reader who traveled abroad for more than ten years, and later returned to his family's manor. The manor is in Dengfeng County.

古文：夜久，士人睡未著。
现代文：有一天夜已经很深了，读书人还没睡着，忽然看见有个小火星从墙根下升起。
English: One night, when it was already very late and the reader was still awake, he suddenly saw a small planet rising from under the base of the wall.

古文：忽有星火发于墙堵下，初为萤，稍稍芒起，大如弹丸，飞烛四隅，渐低，轮转来往。
现代文：起先认为是萤火虫，渐渐地放出了光芒，大小像弹丸，后来飞起来照亮了屋子的四角，渐渐地又落下来，旋转着来来往往。
English: At first thought to be a firefly, it gradually released a beam of light, the size of a projectile, then flew up to illuminate the four corners of the room, and gradually fell down again, spinning back and forth.

古文：去士人面才尺余。细视光中，有一女子，贯钗，红衫碧裙，摇首摆臂，具体可爱。
现代文：这团光距离读书人的脸只有一尺多，仔细看那团光的中间，有一位女子，头发上插着钗，红衣绿裙，摇头摆臂形体完整，十分可爱。
English: This ball of light is just over a foot away from the reader's face. If you look closely at the center of the ball of light, you will see a woman with braids in her hair, a red dress and a green skirt, and a swinging arm. She has a perfect figure and is very cute.

古文：士人因张手掩获，烛之，乃鼠粪也，大如鸡栖子。
现代文：读书人于是张开手突然抓住了她。用灯照着一看，原来是一粒老鼠屎，大小像皂荚树的果实。
English: The reader then opened his hand and suddenly caught her. Looking at her with a lamp, it turned out to be a piece of mouse droppings, the size of the fruit of a soap birch tree.

古文：破视，有虫首赤身青，杀之。
现代文：剖开后，里面有一只红头黑身的虫子，读书人便杀死了它。
English: After opening it, there was a red-headed, black-bodied worm inside, and the reader killed it.

古文：虱征
现代文：虱征
English: 征

古文：相传人将死，虱离身。
现代文：相传人将要死的时候，虱子就离开那人身体。
English: When the heir is about to die, the lice leave the person's body.

古文：或云，取病者虱于床前，可以卜病。
现代文：有人说： 把病人身上的虱子放在床前，可以预测病情。
English: Some people say: If you put the patient's lice in front of the bed, you can predict the patient's condition.

古文：将差，虱行向病者，背则死。
现代文：病要好，虱子就爬向病人；反之，病人就会死。 
English: If the disease is better, the lice will crawl to the patient; otherwise, the patient will die.

古文：壁镜
现代文：壁镜
English: Wall mirror

古文：一日，江枫亭会，众说单方。
现代文：有一天，几个人在江枫亭聚会，众人谈论单方。
English: One day, several people gathered at Jiangfeng Pavilion, and everyone was talking about the one-way trip.

古文：段成式记治壁镜，用白矾。
现代文：段成式记下了治壁钱虫咬伤的单方是用白矾。
English: The one-sided use of egrets to treat insect bites was recorded in a paragraph.

古文：重访许君，用桑柴灰汁，三度沸，取汁，白矾为膏，涂疮口即差，兼治蛇毒。
现代文：段成式又重新访问了姓许的，才详细知道，用桑木灰滤汁，汁要烧开三回，用此汁跟白矾做成膏。把膏抹到疮口上就能治好，这种膏还能治蛇毒。
English: Duan Chengqi revisited Xu again, only to find out in detail that he used mulberry ash to filter the juice, which had to be boiled three times, and used this juice to make an ointment with egrets. Applying the ointment to the sores could cure them, and this ointment could also cure snake venom.

古文：自商邓襄州，多壁镜，毒人必死。
现代文：商、邓、襄州一带壁钱虫很多，人中其毒必死。
English: There are a lot of money worms in the areas of Shang, Deng and Xiangzhou, and their poison is fatal to humans.

古文：坐客或云，已年不宜杀蛇。
现代文：座中有的客人说，若逢巳年时不应该杀蛇。
English: Some guests at the banquet said that snakes should not be killed in the Year of the Snake.

古文：大蝎
现代文：大蝎
English: The Great Scorpion

古文：安邑县北门，县人云，有一蝎如琵琶大，每出来，不毒人，人犹是恐。
现代文：有个在安邑县北门住的人说，有一只蝎子像琵琶那么大。但每次出来，并不用毒汁害人，不过人们对它还是很恐惧。
English: A person who lives in Beimen, Anyi County, said that there is a scorpion as big as a lute, but every time it comes out, it does not use poisonous juice to harm people, but people are still very afraid of it.

古文：其灵积年矣红蝙蝠
现代文：因为不知这是一只活了多少年的蝎子，说不定它已经成了精呢。
English: Because I don't know how many years this scorpion has been alive, maybe it has already become a spirit.

古文：刘君云，南中红蕉花时，有红蝙蝠集花中，南人呼为红蝙蝠。
现代文：红蝙蝠刘君说，南方美人蕉开花时，有一种红蝙蝠停落在花中，南方人就把这种红蕉叫作红蝙蝠。
English: Red bat Liu Jun said that when the southern canna blooms, there is a kind of red bat that stays in the flower, and the southerners call this kind of red banana a red bat.

古文：青蚨
现代文：青蚨
English: Qingyuan

古文：青蚨似蝉而状稍大，其味辛，可食。
现代文：青蚨像蝉而样子比蝉稍大，它的味道辛辣，可以吃。
English: Qingtao looks like a cicada but is slightly larger than a cicada. Its taste is spicy and can be eaten.

古文：每生子，必依草叶，大如蚕子。
现代文：青蚨每产卵，一定使卵附在草叶上。卵大如蚕卵。
English: Every time a blue heron lays an egg, it must attach the egg to a blade of grass. The egg is as big as a silkworm's egg.

古文：人将子归，其母亦飞来，不以近远，其母必知处。
现代文：人把青蚨的幼虫拿回来，它的母亲也会飞来，不管远近，它的母亲都能找到幼蚨住的地方。
English: If you bring back the larvae of a green maggot, its mother will also come flying. No matter how far or near, its mother can find a place for the young maggot to live.

古文：然后各致小钱于巾，埋东行阴墙下，三日开之，即以母血涂之如前。
现代文：人们掌握了青蚨的特性后，就把小钱包在手巾中，埋在东边道旁日光照不着的墙下。三天后挖出，就用青蚨母亲的血涂在钱上。
English: After the people had mastered the characteristics of the artemisia, they wrapped the small purse in a hand towel and buried it under the wall on the east side of the road, where the sun does not shine. Three days later, they dug it out and painted the money with the blood of the mother of the artemisia.

古文：每市物，先用子，即子归母；用母者，即母归子。
现代文：每当买东西时，先用涂了血的钱，子钱会自己返回母钱处；若用母钱，母钱也会自动返回子钱处。
English: Whenever you buy something, first use the blood-stained money, and the daughter money will return to the mother money by itself; if you use the mother money, the mother money will automatically return to the daughter money.

古文：如此轮还，不知休息。
现代文：如此轮流返回，不知停止。
English: In this way, they take turns to return, and I don't know how to stop.

古文：若买金银珍宝，即钱不还。
现代文：如果买了金银珍宝，那钱就不回来了。
English: If you buy gold and silver treasures, that money will not come back.

古文：青蚨者，一名鱼伯。
现代文：青蚨另一名称叫鱼伯。
English: Another name for Qingtao is Yu Bo.

古文：滕王图
现代文：滕王图
English: Teng Wangtu

古文：一日，紫极宫会。秀才刘鲁封云，尝见滕王《蜂蝶图》。
现代文：有一天，士人们在紫极宫聚会，秀才刘鲁封说，曾经见过滕王的《蜂蝶图》。
English: One day, when the scholars gathered at the Purple Palace, the brilliant scholar Liu Lufeng said that he had once seen King Teng's "Butterfly Map."

古文：有名江夏斑，大海眼，小海眼，村里来，菜花子。
现代文：其中所画的蜂与蝶，有的名叫江夏斑，有的名叫大海眼，小海眼，还有的名叫村里来和菜花子的。
English: Some of the bees and butterflies depicted in the painting are named Jiang Xia Bian, others are named Haizhuan and Xiao Haizhu, and still others are named Cunli Lai and Cauliflower Seed.

古文：异蜂
现代文：异蜂
English: Different Bees

古文：异蜂，有蜂状如蜡蜂，稍大，飞劲疾。好圆裁树叶，卷入木窍及壁罅中作窠。
现代文：有一种奇特的蜂，样子像蜜蜂，但比蜜蜂稍大，飞起来快而有力，好把树叶裁成圆形，卷起来放入树洞或墙壁缝中做窝。
English: There is a strange kind of bee that looks like a honeybee, but is slightly larger than a honeybee. It flies quickly and powerfully, so that it can cut leaves into round shapes, roll them up and nest them in holes in trees or in crevices in walls.

古文：段成式尝发壁寻之，每叶卷中，实以不洁。或云，将化为蜜。
现代文：段成式曾经弄开墙壁寻找它，看见每个卷起来的叶子里，都充满不干净的东西，有人说，这些东西将会变成蜜。
English: The pharaoh had ripped open the walls to look for it, and saw that each rolled-up leaf was filled with something unclean, which, it was said, would turn into honey.

古文：寄居
现代文：寄居
English: Sojourn

古文：寄居之虫，如螺而有脚，形似蜘蛛。
现代文：寄居这种虫，像田螺却有脚，形状像蜘蛛。
English: This parasitic worm resembles a snail but has legs and is shaped like a spider.

古文：本无壳，入空螺壳中，载以行，触之缩足，如螺闭户也。
现代文：它本来没有壳，而是把身体置入空的螺壳中，带着壳爬行。如果碰着它，它就会把脚缩进壳里，像螺闭上门那样。
English: It doesn't have a shell, but it puts its body into an empty conch shell and crawls with the shell. If you touch it, it will retract its foot into the shell, like a snail closing a door.

古文：火炙之，乃出走，始知其寄居也。
现代文：用火烤它，它就爬出壳逃跑，这就可知它是寄居的。
English: If it is roasted with fire, and it comes out of its shell and flees, then it is a stranger.

古文：异虫
现代文：异虫
English: Foreign worms

古文：温会在江州，与宾客看打鱼。
现代文：温会在江州的时候，与宾客一起去看打鱼。
English: When Wen is in Jiangzhou, he will go fishing with his guests.

古文：渔子一人忽上岸狂走，温问之，但反手指背，不能语。
现代文：忽然一位打鱼的人从水里上岸狂跑起来。温会问他，渔人只是反手指着自己的后背，说不出话来。
English: Suddenly, a fisherman came ashore from the water and started to run wildly. Wen would ask him, but the fisherman just pointed to his back, unable to speak.

古文：渔者色黑，细视之，有物如黄叶，大尺余，眼遍其上，啮不可取。
现代文：这个打鱼的人皮肤黑，仔细看他身上，有个东西像黄树叶，有一尺多，上面有很多眼，咬住皮肤弄不下来。
English: This fisherman has dark skin. Look closely at his body. There is something like a yellow tree leaf, more than a foot long, with many eyes on it. You can't get it off by biting the skin.

古文：温令烧之，方落。
现代文：温会叫人用火烤才掉了下来。
English: Wen would ask someone to use fire to roast it before it fell down.

古文：每对一眼底，有嘴如钉。
现代文：它每一对眼的下面都有一个像钉子似的嘴。
English: It has a nail-like mouth below each pair of eyes.

古文：渔子出血数升而死。
现代文：打鱼人身上出了好几升血后就死了。
English: The fisherman died after losing several litres of blood.

古文：莫有识者。
现代文：没有人认识这种东西。
English: Nobody knows anything about it.

古文：蝇
现代文：蝇
English: Flies

古文：长安秋多蝇。
现代文：长安秋季苍蝇很多。
English: There are a lot of flies in Chang'an in autumn.

古文：段成式尝日读百家五卷，颇为所扰，触睫隐字，驱不能已。
现代文：段成式曾经每天读五卷诸子百家的书，很受苍蝇的干扰。
English: Duan Chengxing used to read five volumes of Zhuzihuangzhuang every day, and was often disturbed by flies.

古文：偶拂杀一焉，细视之，翼甚似蜩，冠甚似蜂。
现代文：有的苍蝇直碰睫毛，有的落在书上把字都挡住了，赶也赶不完。偶尔打死了一只，仔细观看，翅子很像蝉的薄翅，头很像蜂的头。
English: Some flies directly hit the eyelashes, some landed on the book and blocked the words, and I couldn't catch them all. Occasionally I killed one, watch it carefully, the wings are very similar to the thin wings of a cicada, and the head is very similar to the head of a bee.

古文：性察于腐，嗜于酒肉。按理首翼。
现代文：特性是专找腐烂的东西，特别喜欢的是酒和肉，经常按住脑袋和翅膀不断梳理。
English: Its characteristic is to search for rotting things. It is particularly fond of wine and meat. It constantly combs its head and wings by holding them down.

古文：其类有苍者声雄壮，负金者声清，听其声在翼也。
现代文：它们这类东西中带青黑色的声音雄壮，背上黄色的声音清脆，听它的声音是从翅膀中发出的。
English: The bluish-black call of this species is majestic, the yellow call on its back is crisp, and the sound it makes comes from its wings.

古文：青者能败物，巨者首如火。
现代文：青色的苍蝇能使东西腐败，大的蝇头像火一样红。
English: The blue fly can corrupt things, and the large fly's head is red like fire.

古文：或曰，大麻蝇，芋根所化。
现代文：有人说： 大麻蝇是芋根变成的。 
English: Some people say: Marijuana flies are turned into caterpillars.

古文：壁鱼
现代文：壁鱼
English: Wallfish

古文：壁鱼，补阙张周封言，尝见壁上白瓜子化为白鱼。
现代文：关于衣鱼，补阙官张周封说，他曾看见墙上的白瓜子变成了衣鱼。
English: Regarding the clothes fish, Zhang Zhoufeng, the supplementary eunuch, said that he had seen the white melon seeds on the wall turn into clothes fish.

古文：因知列子言朽瓜为鱼之义。
现代文：于是才懂得了列子所说的腐烂的瓜变成了鱼的含义。
English: Only then did I understand the meaning of "rotten melon turned into fish" mentioned by Reiko.

古文：天牛虫
现代文：天牛虫
English: Tian Niu Zhou

古文：天牛虫，黑甲虫也。
现代文：天牛虫是黑色甲虫。
English: Taurid beetles are black beetles.

古文：长安夏中，此虫或出于篱壁间，必雨。
现代文：长安仲夏时节，这种虫子有时出现在家园中，这就一定会下雨。
English: In Chang'an in the middle of summer, this kind of bug sometimes appears in homes, which is bound to cause rain.

古文：段成式七度验之，皆应。
现代文：段成式验证了七回，回回应验。
English: The sectional prototype was verified seven times, and the response was tested.

古文：白蜂窠
现代文：白蜂窠
English: White bee pupae

古文：白蜂窠，段成式修行里私第，果园数亩。
现代文：段成式修造了乡里私宅，拥有几亩果园。
English: He built a private house in the countryside in sections and owns several acres of orchards.

古文：壬戌年，有蜂如麻子，蜂胶土为巢，于庭前檐，大如鸡卵，色正白可爱。
现代文：壬戌那一年，发现有一种蜂如麻子儿大小，这种蜂在院子前面的屋檐下把土粘起来作成窝，有鸡蛋那样大，颜色纯白可爱。
English: In that year, a bee the size of a pimple was found. This bee made a nest under the eaves in front of the yard by sticking up soil. It was as big as an egg and had a lovely pure white color.

古文：家弟恶而坏之。
现代文：段成式的弟弟厌恶它，就把窝弄坏了。
English: The half-brother, disgusted, destroyed the nest.

古文：其冬，果叠钟手足。
现代文：那年冬天，果然屡次肿手肿脚。
English: That winter, my hands and feet swelled up several times.

古文：《南史》言宋明帝恶言白问。
现代文：《南史》上说宋明帝讨厌说建康城的白门。
English: "Southern History" said that Song Mingdi hated the white gate of Jiankang City.

古文：金楼子言子婚日，疾风雪下，帷幕变白，以为不祥。
现代文：金楼子说他儿子结婚那天，风急雪大，帐篷都成了白色，都认为不吉利。
English: Jin Louzi said that on the day of his son's wedding, there was a snowstorm, and the tents were all white, which was considered unlucky.

古文：抑知俗忌白久矣。
现代文：那么这就可以明白世俗忌讳白色已经很久了。
English: So you can see that it's been a secular taboo to be white for a long time.

古文：毒蜂
现代文：毒蜂
English: Poisonous wasps

古文：毒蜂。岭南有毒菌，夜明，经雨而腐，化为巨蜂。
现代文：五岭以南有种毒蘑菇，夜晚发光，经雨淋后就烂了，但却又变成大蜂子。
English: To the south of Wuling, there is a kind of poisonous mushroom. It glows at night and rots after being rained on, but it turns into a large bee.

古文：黑色，喙若锯，长三分余。
现代文：这种蜂黑色，嘴像锯一般，三分多长。
English: This bee is black, with a saw-like beak that is more than a third of the length.

古文：夜入人耳鼻中，断人心系。
现代文：夜晚进入人的耳朵鼻子里，能咬断人心的韧带。
English: It enters a person's ear and nose at night and can bite the ligament of a person's heart.

古文：竹蜂
现代文：竹蜂
English: Bamboo Bee

古文：蜀中有竹蜜蜂，好于野竹上结窠。
现代文：四川有一种竹蜜蜂，好在野竹上做窝。
English: There is a kind of bamboo bee in Sichuan that likes to nest on wild bamboo.

古文：窠大如鸡卵，有蒂，长尺许。
现代文：窝像鸡蛋那么大，窝上有蒂与竹相连，这根蒂有一尺多长。
English: The nest is as big as an egg, and there is a stem attached to the bamboo in the nest. This stem is more than a foot long.

古文：窠与蜜并绀色可爱，甘倍于常蜜。
现代文：窝与蜜都是青红色，很可爱，甜味是一般蜜的两倍。
English: Both the nest and the honey are bluish-red, very lovely, and the sweetness is twice that of ordinary honey.

古文：水蛆
现代文：水蛆
English: Water hyacinth

古文：水蛆，南中水溪涧中多此虫，长寸余，色黑。夏深，变为虻，螫人甚毒。
现代文：南方山间水沟里有很多水蛆，长有一寸多，颜色是黑的，夏天体色加深，变成虻，螫人很厉害。
English: There are a lot of otters in the ravines between the mountains in the south. They are more than an inch long and black in color. In summer, their body color deepens and they turn into tadpoles. They are very aggressive.

古文：水虫
现代文：水虫
English: Water bugs

古文：象浦，其川渚有水虫，攒木食船，数十日船坏。
现代文：象浦那里的河流和河里的沙洲中都有一种水虫。这种虫能钻木吃船，只要几十天船就会坏。
English: There is a kind of aquatic insect in the river and the sandbar in the river in Xiangpu. This insect can drill into wood and eat a boat, and the boat will be broken in just a few dozen days.

古文：虫甚细微。
现代文：这种虫的身体很细小。
English: The body of this insect is very small.

古文：抱抢
现代文：抱抢
English: Cuddle up

古文：水虫形似蛣蜣，大腹下有刺，有棘针，螫人有毒。
现代文：水虫形状像蜣螂，大肚子下面有刺，就像酸枣树的刺，螫了人以后人会中毒。
English: Hookworms are shaped like cockroaches, and have spines under their large bellies, like the spines of a sour jujube tree. After stinging a person, the person will be poisoned.

古文：避役
现代文：避役
English: Avoider

古文：南中有虫名避役，应一日十二辰。
现代文：南方有一种虫叫避役，跟一天中的十二个时辰相应。
English: In the south, there is a kind of insect called the dodder, which corresponds to the twelve hours of the day.

古文：其虫状如蛇医，脚长，色青赤，肉鬣。
现代文：那虫形状像蝾螈，爪子长，身体黑红色，脖子上的鬃是肉质的。
English: The insect is shaped like a centipede, with long claws, a black and red body, and a fleshy beak around its neck.

古文：暑月时见于篱壁间，俗见者多称意事。
现代文：夏季炎热的时候常在庭院中见到，按习惯说法见到它的人往往遇到称心的事。
English: It is often seen in courtyards in the summer heat, and those who see it, as the saying goes, are often in for a treat.

古文：其首倏忽更变，为十二辰状。
现代文：它的脑袋变化很快，变成十二属的形状。
English: Its head changes rapidly, taking on the shape of a dodecahedron.

古文：段成式再从兄寻常睹之。
现代文：段成式的再从兄常常看见。
English: He often saw the step-by-step comings and goings from his brother.

古文：蜳蝺
现代文：蜳蝺
English: 

古文：蜳蝺形如蝉，其子如虫，著草叶。
现代文：蜳蝺就是人们常说的青蚨，形状像蝉，它的幼虫附在草叶上生活。
English: The grasshopper is what people often call a green maggot. It is shaped like a cicada, and its larvae live attached to blades of grass.

古文：得其子则母飞来就之，煎食，辛而美。
现代文：拿走它的幼虫，它就自动飞来跟它的幼虫在一起。煎着吃，味道又辣又香。
English: Take away its larvae, and it will automatically fly to be with its larvae. It is fried and eaten, and its taste is spicy and fragrant.

古文：灶马
现代文：灶马
English: Stove horse

古文：灶马状如促织，稍大，脚长，好穴于灶侧。
现代文：灶马样子像蟋蟀，比蟋蟀稍大点，脚长，好在灶旁挖洞栖息。
English: The stove horse looks like a toad, slightly larger than a toad, with long legs, and is good at digging holes to roost next to the stove.

古文：俗言灶有马，足食之兆。
现代文：俗话说，灶有马是粮食足够吃的征兆。
English: As the saying goes, the presence of a horse in the kitchen is a sign that there is enough food.

古文：谢豹
现代文：谢豹
English: Xie Bao

古文：虢州有虫名谢豹，常在深土中，司马裴沈子尝掘穴获之。小类虾蟆，而圆如球。
现代文：虢州有种虫名叫谢豹，常住在深深的土中。司马裴沈的儿子曾挖洞得到了它，小得像蛤蟆，而且像球一样圆。
English: In Zhangzhou, there is a kind of worm called Xiebaogu, which often lives in deep soil. Sima Peishen's son once dug a hole to get it. It is as small as an earthworm and as round as a ball.

古文：见人，以前两脚交覆首，如羞状。
现代文：见了人，就用两只前爪交叉着盖着脑袋，像害羞的样子。
English: When it sees someone, it covers its head with its two front paws crossed, as if it is shy.

古文：能穴地如鼢鼠，顷刻深数尺。
现代文：它能像鼢鼠那样在地中打洞，不一会儿就能掘好几尺深。
English: It can burrow into the ground like a mole, digging several feet deep in no time.

古文：或出地，听谢豹鸟声，则脑裂而死，俗因名之。
现代文：有时爬到地面上，如果听到杜鹃鸟的叫声，就会脑袋裂开死去，人们因此给它命名为谢豹。
English: Sometimes it climbs to the ground, and if it hears the call of a cuckoo bird, it will crack its head open and die, which is why people named it the grey panther.

古文：碎车虫
现代文：碎车虫
English: Carworm

古文：碎车虫状如唧聊，苍色，好栖高树上，其声如人吟啸。
现代文：碎车虫形状像 知了 ，青黑色，喜欢栖息在高高的树上，它的叫声像人的叹息声。
English: The carworm is black and blue, shaped like a cicada, and likes to perch on tall trees. Its call sounds like a human sigh.

古文：终南有之。
现代文：终南山有这种昆虫。
English: This insect is endemic to Nanshan.

古文：度古则断。
现代文：度古有毒，鸡吃了就死。
English: Dugu is poisonous. Chickens will die if they eat it.

古文：常趁蚓，蚓不复动，乃上蚓掩之，良久蚓化，唯腹泥如涎。有毒，鸡食则死。俗呼土盅。
现代文：度古通常称为土盅。
English: Du Gu is commonly referred to as a mound.

古文：雷蜞
现代文：雷蜞
English: Thunderclap

古文：雷蜞大如蚓，以物触之，及蹙缩，圆转若鞠。
现代文：雷蜞像蚯蚓那样大，用东西一碰它，就收缩起来，盘曲得像一个球。
English: The thunderbolt is as big as a cricket, and when you touch it with something, it shrinks and curls up like a ball.

古文：良久引首，鞠形渐小，复如蚓焉。
现代文：好半天才伸出脑袋， 球 也渐渐变小，像一条蚯蚓了。
English: It wasn't long before it poked its head out, and the ball gradually became smaller, like a dragonfly.

古文：或云，啮人毒甚。
现代文：有人说，这东西咬人毒性很厉害。
English: Some people say that the bite of this thing is very toxic.

古文：腹育
现代文：腹育
English: Obstetric education

古文：蝉未脱时名腹育，相传言蛣蜣所化。
现代文：蝉未蜕皮时叫腹育，传说是蜣螂变成的。
English: When the cicada does not shed its skin, it is said to be pregnant. According to legend, it turns into a cockroach.

古文：秀才韦翾庄在杜曲，尝冬中掘树根，见腹育附于朽处，怪之。
现代文：秀才韦翾庄园在杜曲，曾经在冬天挖树根，看见腹育附在树根腐烂的地方，觉得很奇怪。
English: Once, while digging up the roots of a tree in winter, I found it very strange to see a maggot attached to the rotting root of the tree.

古文：村人言蝉固朽木所化也。
现代文：村里人说，蝉本来就是烂木头变成的。
English: Villagers say that cicadas were originally made of rotten wood.

古文：翾因剖一视之，腹中犹实烂木。
现代文：韦翾于是剖开一只腹育进行观察，腹中果然充满烂木头。
English: Wei Wei then cut open a wombat to observe, and the wombat was indeed full of rotten wood.

古文：蛱蝶
现代文：蛱蝶
English: Butterflies sing

古文：蛱蝶，尺蠖茧所化也。
现代文：蛱蝶是尺蠖茧变成的。
English: The chrysanthemum butterfly is transformed into a cormorant.

古文：秀才顾非熊少时，尝见郁栖中坏绿裙幅，旋化为蝶。
现代文：秀才顾非熊年轻时，曾看见粪土中的拆毁的绿色裙幅不一会儿工夫就变成了蝴蝶。
English: When he was young, the gifted Gu Feixiong saw a torn green skirt in the dung and it soon turned into a butterfly.

古文：工部员外郎张周封言，百合花合之，泥其隙，经宿，化为大蝴蝶。
现代文：工部员外郎张周封说，百合花用盒子装起来，用泥把缝隙抹严，经过一宿，就变成了大蝴蝶。
English: Zhang Zhoufeng, the son-in-law of a member of the engineering department, said that the lilies were packed in a box and the gaps were sealed with mud. After one night, they turned into big butterflies.

古文：蚁楼
现代文：蚁楼
English: Ant colony

