古文：杨恭懿杨恭懿，字元甫，奉元人。力学强记，日数千言，虽从亲逃乱，未尝废业。
现代文：杨恭懿字元甫，奉元人，自幼好学，记忆力强，每日能记诵数千言，随父母逃难亦不中辍。
English: Yang Gongyao, also known as "Yuan Fu" and "Bong Yuan," has been eager to learn since he was a child. He has a strong memory and can recite thousands of words every day. He did not drop out of school when his parents had to flee.

古文：年十七，西还，家贫，服劳为养。
现代文：十七岁时西还故乡，家贫，靠劳动为生，有暇即学，且无书不读，尤潜心于《易经》、《礼经》、《春秋》。
English: At the age of seventeen, Xi was still in his hometown, his family was poor, he lived by labor, he studied when he had free time, and he didn't read any books, especially he concentrated on "I Ching," "Song of Songs" and "Spring and Autumn."

古文：暇则就学，书无不读，尤深于《易》、《礼》、《春秋》，后得朱熹集注《四书》，叹曰： 人伦日用之常，天道性命之妙，皆萃此书矣。 
现代文：得朱熹《四书集注》，读后不禁感叹道： 论三纲五常、天道性命的道理，尽在此书。 
English: After reading Zhu Xi's "Four-Book Commentary," he couldn't help but sigh: "This book is all about the three principles, the five elements, and the heavenly way of life.

古文：父没，水浆不入口者五日，居丧尽礼。宣抚司、行省以掌书记辟，不就。
现代文：父亲逝世，恭懿按丧礼克尽孝道。宣抚司、行省召他掌书记之职，恭懿辞不就任。
English: After his father's death, Gong Li followed the funeral eulogy to fulfill his filial duty. He was appointed to the post of secretary by the Propaganda Department and the Provincial Government, but he did not take up the post.

古文：至元七年，与许衡俱被召，恭懿不至。
现代文：至元七年和十年，朝廷曾两度召他，均托病不出。
English: In the seventh and tenth years of the Yuan Dynasty, the imperial court summoned him twice, but he was unable to attend because of illness.

古文：十二年正月二日，帝御香殿，以大军南征，使久不至，命筮之，其言秘。
现代文：至元十一年，太子令中书省仿汉惠帝以谦卑言辞、舒适车辆聘请 四老 之礼聘请恭懿，丞相也遣郎中张元智致信劝说，这才至京师入见皇帝。
English: In the eleventh year of the Yuan Dynasty, the prince ordered Zhongshuo Province to emulate Han Emperor Hui with humble words and comfortable vehicles to hire four old men to hire Gong Li, and the prime minister also sent a letter to Zhang Yuanchi to persuade him. It was only then that the emperor came to Beijing.

古文：侍读学士徒单公履请设取士科，诏与恭懿议之。
现代文：世祖遣国王和童盛情欢迎，继又躬亲详细询问其家乡、氏族、师承以及子孙等各方面情况，关怀备至。十二年正月，侍读学士徒单公履奏请开科取士，世祖令恭懿参预筹划。
English: The patriarch sent a warm welcome to the king and Tong, and then inquired in detail about his hometown, clan, teachers, and descendants. In the first month of the 12th year, the attendant of the bachelor student solo performance was invited to become a scholar, and the patriarch was involved in the pre-planning.

古文：恭懿言： 明诏有谓：士不治经学孔孟之道，日为赋诗空文。
现代文：恭懿提出 ：圣上说过，士不学习经书孔孟之道，专好空泛的诗文，于事无益。
English: Gong Li said: As the saint said, it is of no use for a scholar not to study the way of Confucius and Mencius, and to specialize in vague poetry.

古文：斯言诚万世治安之本。
现代文：此话确为万代治国之本。
English: These words are indeed the foundation for the governance of the country for all generations.

古文：今欲取士，宜敕有司，举有行检、通经史之士，使无投牒自售，试以经义、论策。
现代文：今日要科举取士，宜令官府荐举那些行为检束，通经晓史之士，考试经义、策论。
English: Today, we need to select exam examiners. It is appropriate for the government to recommend examiners who are well-versed in history, the meaning of the sutras, and policy theory.

古文：夫既从事实学，则士风还淳，民俗趋厚，国家得才矣。 
现代文：既然学以致用，则风气淳厚，国家能得到真才实学的人。 
English: Now that learning is put to use, the culture is pure and the country can get people with real talent and real learning.

古文：奏之，帝善之。
现代文：世祖赞赏这一意见。
English: The Patriarch appreciates this opinion.

古文：臣等更造新历，一依前贤定论，推算皆改从实。
现代文：当时朝廷正要北征，恭懿又回家乡去了。至元十六年又奉诏入京，世祖命他于太史院修改历法。
English: At that time, the imperial court was about to embark on the Northern Expedition, and Gong Li went back to his hometown. In the 16th year of the Yuan Dynasty, he entered Beijing with an imperial edict, and the patriarch ordered him to revise the calendar at the Imperial Academy of History.

古文：今十九年历，自八月后，四月并大，实日月合朔之数也。
现代文：十七年二月，恭懿上书陈述修改历法的情形，说明旧的历法已不精确，现又创立新的《辛巳历》，比起旧历来要精确些，但还须每年做一次修正，经三十年后就差不多很精确了。
English: In February 17th, Gong Li submitted a letter stating the situation of the revision of the calendar, explaining that the old calendar was no longer accurate, and now a new "Hin Si Calendar" was created. It was more accurate than the old one, but it had to be revised once a year. After 30 years, it was almost very accurate.

古文：详见《郭守敬传》。是日，方列跪，未读奏，帝命许衡及恭懿起，曰： 卿二老，毋自劳也。 
现代文：又上《合朔议》，陈述自秦以来修改历法的经过，最后说： 臣等更造新历，是依据过去历法家们的定论，考察观测天象的运行情况，自至元十九年八月后，完全符合日月运行的日数。 
English: He also wrote the "Conclusion," which described the process of revising the calendar since the Qin Dynasty, and finally said: The reform of the new calendar by the ministers and others was based on the conclusions of the calendarists in the past, and the observation of the operation of the celestial bodies. Since August of the 19th century, it has been in full accordance with the number of days in which the sun and the moon operate.

古文：授集贤学士，兼太史院事。
现代文：世祖授为集贤学士兼太史院事。
English: He was awarded the title of Shixian Baccalaureate and Taiji Academy of History.

古文：十八年，辞归。
现代文：至元十八年，辞职归家。
English: In the 18th year of the Yuan Dynasty, he resigned and returned home.

古文：二十年，以太子宾客召；二十二年，以昭文馆学士、领太史院事召；二十九年，以议中书省事召。皆不行。
现代文：二十年召回为太子宾客，二十二年授任昭文馆学士，领太史院事。二十九年命参预中书省事，但他都一一推辞不赴任。
English: He was invited to be a guest of the crown prince for 20 years, was awarded a bachelor's degree from the Shōmonkan in 1922, and became a member of the Imperial Academy of History. In 1929, he was appointed to participate in the preparatory high school, but he refused to take up the post.

古文：三十一年，卒，年七十。
现代文：至元三十一年卒，享年七十岁。
English: He died at the age of seventy in the year of thirty-one.

古文：恂性颖悟，生三岁，家人示以书帙，辄识风、丁二字。
现代文：王恂字敬甫，中山唐县人。父王良，金末为中山府的一个小官吏，后弃官而潜心于宋之程颐、程颢兄弟之理学，对于天文律历无不精通，年九十二岁卒。
English: His father, Wang Liang, was a minor official of Zhongshan Prefecture. He later resigned from his post and devoted himself to the philosophy of Song Dynasty's Cheng Hui and Cheng Hui brothers. He was well-versed in the astronomical calendar and died at the age of 92.

古文：母刘氏，授以《千字文》，再过目，即成诵。
现代文：恂禀性聪悟，三岁就能识字，母刘氏教他读《千字文》，他过目成诵。
English: He is very intelligent and can read at the age of three. His mother, Ms. Liu, taught him to read "Thousand Characters" and he can recite it perfectly.

古文：六岁就学，十三学九数，辄造其极。
现代文：六岁开始上学，十三岁学习《九章算术》，造诣颇深。
English: He began to go to school at the age of six, and studied "Nine Chapters of Arithmetic" at the age of thirteen.

古文：岁己酉，太保刘秉忠北上，途经中山，见而奇之，及南还，从秉忠学于磁之紫金山。
现代文：定宗皇后元年，太保刘秉忠北上，途经中山，见恂甚为赏识。秉忠南还后，王恂即拜秉忠为师。
English: In the first year of the Empress Dingzong, Liu Bingzhong, the eunuch Liu Bingzhong, went to the north, passing through Zhongshan, and was greatly appreciated. After Bingzhong returned to the south, Wang Xi became a teacher of Bingzhong.

古文：癸丑，秉忠荐之世祖，召见于六盘山，命辅导裕宗，为太子伴读。
现代文：宪宗三年，秉忠推荐其给世祖，召见于六盘山，命为太子裕宗之伴读。
English: In the third year of Kenzong's reign, Bingzhong recommended him to his ancestor, summoned him to Liupanshan, and ordered him to accompany Prince Yuzong.

古文：中统二年，擢太子赞善，时年二十八。
现代文：中统二年，擢升为太子赞善，这时王恂已二十八岁。
English: In the second year of unification, he was promoted to Prince Zanzan. At that time, Wang Yao was 28 years old.

古文：三年，裕宗封燕王，守中书令，兼判枢密院事，敕两府大臣：凡有咨禀，必令王恂与闻。
现代文：三年，裕宗封燕王，为中书令，兼管枢密院事，令两府大臣：凡有禀报，必告诉王恂。
English: In the third year, Yu Zong, who held the title of Yan Wang, was the Clerk of the Privy Council and also in charge of the Privy Council, and ordered the two ministers: If there is any false report, they must tell Wang Xi.

古文：初，中书左丞许衡集唐、虞以来嘉言善政，为书以进。世祖尝令恂讲解，且命太子受业焉。
现代文：中书左丞许衡汇集唐、虞以来良言善政为书进呈皇上，世祖命恂讲解，且命太子以王恂为师。
English: In the middle of the book, Zu Rong Xu Heng compiled the good words and good policies since the Tang and Yu dynasties into a book and presented it to the emperor. The founder of the dynasty, Meituan, gave an explanation, and Meituan's prince was taught by Wang Meituan.

古文：又诏恂于太子起居饮食，慎为调护，非所宜接之人，勿令得侍左右。
现代文：又诏令恂慎重照顾太子饮食起居，凡是不当接触的人不准在太子左右。
English: In addition, the Emperor ordered the Empress Dowager to carefully take care of the Prince's diet and living, and anyone who had improper contact was not allowed to be around the Prince.

古文：恂言： 太子天下本，付托至重，当延名德与之居处。
现代文：恂说 ：太子是国家的根本，负有国家存亡的重任，当请德高望重的人与太子住在一起。
English: Zou said: The crown prince is the foundation of the country and bears the important responsibility of the country's survival. People with high moral standards should be invited to live with the crown prince.

古文：况兼领中书、枢密之政，诏条所当遍览，庶务亦当屡省，官吏以罪免者毋使更进，军官害人，改用之际，尤不可非其人。
现代文：何况太子兼领中书省枢密院两处政务，应当所有的诏令都必须看，一切政务都应一一过问，凡因犯罪而免官的人，不能再用，军官在更换之际尤不可选用那些不好的人。
English: What's more, the crown prince is also in charge of the two government affairs of the Privy Council of the People's Republic of China, the People's Republic of China and the People's Republic of China. Therefore, all imperial decrees must be read, and all government affairs should be examined one by one. Anyone who has been removed from office for a crime cannot be used again. In particular, when officers are replaced, those who are not good should not be used.

古文：民至愚而神，变乱之余，吾不之疑，则反覆化为忠厚。 
现代文：人民虽愚昧且信仰鬼神，但变乱之后，只要我们不存疑惧，他们反抗之心就会变为对朝廷忠厚之心。 
English: Although the people are ignorant and believe in ghosts and gods, after the turmoil, as long as we are not afraid, their resistance will become loyal to the imperial court.

古文：帝深然之。
现代文：这些话帝深以为然。
English: Xuanzong deeply felt justified.

古文：恂早以算术名，裕宗尝问焉。恂曰： 算数，六艺之一，定国家，安人民，乃大事也。 
现代文：恂早已以算术著名，裕宗向他求教，王恂说 ：算数只六艺之一，而定国家、安人民才是头等大事。 
English: Yao had long been famous for his arithmetic, and Yu Zong asked him for advice. Wang Yao said: arithmetic is only one of the six arts, but to determine the country and secure the people is the top priority.

古文：每侍左右，必发明三纲五常，为学之道，及历代治忽兴亡之所以然。
现代文：因此，他每当侍奉裕宗时，必阐述三纲五常、求学之道以及历代治乱兴亡的原因。
English: Therefore, whenever he served Yu Zong, he had to expound the three principles and five constants, the way to study, and the reasons for the rise and fall of the previous dynasties.

古文：又以辽、金之事近接耳目者，区别其善恶，论著其得失，上之。
现代文：又以为期不远的辽、金政事为例，区别其善恶，议论其得失，进呈皇太子。
English: He also took the not-so-distant Liao and Jin dynasties as examples, distinguishing their good and evil, discussing their gains and losses, and presenting the crown prince.

古文：裕宗问以心之所守，恂曰： 许衡尝言：人心如印板，惟板本不差，则虽摹千万纸皆不差；本既差，则摹之于纸，无不差者。 
现代文：裕宗问他关于修养心性的意义，恂说： 许衡曾说过，人心如印版，印版不错位，虽千万张纸也不会有差错；若印版错了，印在纸上没有不差错的。 
English: When Yu Zong asked him about the significance of cultivating one's mind, Yu said: Xu Heng once said that the human heart is like a printing plate, the printing plate is in the right place, even if there are millions of pieces of paper, there will be no error; if the printing plate is wrong, there is nothing printed on the paper that is not wrong.

古文：裕宗深然之。
现代文：裕宗深以为然。
English: Yu Zong was deeply convinced.

古文：诏择勋戚子弟，使学于恂，师道卓然。
现代文：帝挑选勋戚子弟拜王恂为师。
English: The emperor selected the honorable relative and disciple Wang Xi as his teacher.

古文：及恂从裕宗抚军称海，乃以诸生属之许衡，及衡告老而去，复命恂领国子祭酒。国学之制，实始于此。
现代文：恂随裕宗至称海抚慰军士，把所领学生交许衡教导，衡告老还乡后，还是令恂为国子祭酒主管国子生教育，国学之制实从此开始。
English: When he returned to his hometown, he was appointed as the head of the education of the sons and daughters of the state, and the establishment of the national education began.

古文：帝以国朝承用金《大明历》，岁久浸疏，欲厘正之，知恂精于算术，遂以命之。恂荐许衡能明历之理，诏驿召赴阙，命领改历事，官属悉听恂辟置。
现代文：世祖以本朝所沿用的金《大明历》不精确，知恂精于算术，命他修正。恂则荐举许衡，于是召衡赴朝领改历事，而参预的官员全由王恂安排。
English: The patriarch pointed out that the gold "Great Ming Calendar" used by the current dynasty was not accurate, and ordered him to revise it, knowing that Zou was good at arithmetic. Zou recommended that Xu Heng be raised, so he called Heng to go to the emperor to change the history, and the officials who participated were all arranged by Wang Zou.

古文：恂与衡及杨恭懿、郭守敬等，遍考历书四十余家，昼夜测验，创立新法，参以古制，推算极为精密，详在《守敬传》。
现代文：恂与衡及杨恭懿、郭守敬等，参考四十余家的历书，日夜观测天象，做精密推算，创立新历法，详见《郭守敬传》。
English: Gong and Heng, Yang Jiong, Guo Shoujing, and others, refer to more than forty family almanacs, observe celestial objects day and night, make precise calculations, and create a new calendar. For details, see "Guo Shoujing Biography."

古文：十六年，授嘉议大夫、太史令。
现代文：至元十六年，授王恂为嘉议大夫、太史令。
English: In the 16th year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was awarded the title of "Doctor of Honorable Mention" and "Grand Historian."

古文：十七年，历成，赐名《授时历》，以其年冬颁行天下。
现代文：十七年新历书编成，赐名为《授时历》，颁行天下。
English: Seventeen years later, a new calendar book was compiled and given the name "Giving the Calendar," which was issued all over the world.

古文：时刘秉忠、张文谦、张易、王恂同学于州西紫金山，荣使守敬从秉忠学。中统三年，文谦荐守敬习水利，巧思绝人。世祖召见，面陈水利六事：其一，中都旧漕河，东至通州，引玉泉水以通舟，岁可省雇车钱六万缗。
现代文：祖父郭荣精通五经、算术、水利。守敬先从刘秉忠为师，中统三年被张文谦推荐去学习水利，思维敏捷过人。世祖召见，守敬面陈水利六事：其一，由中都至通州之旧漕河，引玉泉水可通舟楫，进行漕运，每岁可节省雇车钱六万缗。
English: Guo Rong's grandfather was well-versed in the Five Classics, arithmetic, and water conservancy. Shou Jing first learned from Liu Bingzhong, and was recommended by Zhang Wenqian to study water conservancy in the third year of the CPC Central Committee. He was a quick thinker. Shou Jing learned six things about water conservancy: First, from Zhongdu to Tongzhou's old river, the water from Yuquan can be channeled by boat, and can be rowed, saving 60,000 baht of car rental money every year.

古文：通州以南，于兰榆河口径直开引，由蒙村跳梁务至杨村还河，以避浮鸡氵甸盘浅风浪远转之患。
现代文：通州以南，于蔺榆河口径直开渠引水，由蒙村跳梁务至杨村注入黄河，可避免浮鸡氵甸水浅流急和风浪之患。
English: To the south of Tongzhou, a straight canal is opened at the mouth of the Wei River to divert water, and it is injected into the Yellow River from Mengcun to Yangcun, which can avoid the problems of shallow water rapids and wind and waves.

古文：其二，顺德达泉引入城中，分为三渠，灌城东地。
现代文：其二，将顺德达泉引入城中，分为三渠，灌溉城东田地。
English: Secondly, Shunde Dada Spring will be introduced into the city and divided into three canals to irrigate the eastern fields of the city.

古文：其三，顺德沣河东至古任城，失其故道，没民田千三百余顷。
现代文：其三，顺德沣河东至古任城已失故道，淹没民田千三百余顷。
English: Thirdly, the area east of the Shunde Yangtze River to the ancient Rencheng has lost its way, and more than 1,300 hectares of farmland have been submerged.

古文：此水开修成河，其田即可耕种，自小王村经滹沱，合入御河，通行舟筏。
现代文：若将此水开修成河，既可得田耕种，又可自小王村经滹沱，合入御河，通行舟筏。
English: If this water were to be developed into a river, it would not only be possible to farm the land, but it would also be possible to travel from Xiaowang Village along the dike, join the Ohe River, and travel by boat.

古文：其四，磁州东北滏、漳二水合流处，引水由滏阳、邯郸、洺州、永年下经鸡泽，合入沣河，可灌田三千余顷。
现代文：其四，磁州东北滏、漳二水合流处，引水由滏阳、邯郸、氵名州、永年下经鸡泽，合入沣河，可灌田三千余顷。
English: Fourthly, at the confluence of the Northeast Fenwei and Fenwei waters of the Magnetic Province, the water is diverted from the Fenyang, Fenwei and Fenmei Provinces, and flows down through the Jize River and merges into the Fenwei River. It can irrigate more than 3,000 hectares of fields.

古文：其五，怀、孟沁河，虽浇灌，犹有漏堰余水，东与丹河余水相合。引东流，至武陟县北，合入御河，可灌田二千余顷。
现代文：其五，怀、孟之间沁河，浇灌左右两岸田地，犹有余水，使之东与丹河余水相合，再引向东流至武陟县北，合入御河，可灌田二千余顷。
English: Fifthly, the Lugu River between Huai and Meng, irrigates the fields on both sides of the river, and there is still water left, so that the east meets the remaining water of the Dan River, and then flows eastward to the north of Wuxi County, merges into the Ohe River, and can irrigate more than 2,000 hectares of fields.

古文：其六，黄河自孟州西开引，少分一渠，经由新、旧孟州中间，顺河古岸下，至温县南复入大河，其间亦可灌田二千余顷。
现代文：其六，黄河自孟州向西开渠引水，分一支渠，经由新、旧孟州中间，顺河的古岸而下，至温县南复入大河，其间亦可灌田二千余顷。
English: Sixth, the Yellow River from Mengzhou to the west opened a canal to divert water, separated into a canal, through the middle of the new and old Mengzhou, down the old bank of the river, to the south of Wenzhou County into the big river, during which more than two thousand hectares can be irrigated.

古文：每奏一事，世祖叹曰： 任事者如此，人不为素餐矣。 
现代文：每奏一事，世祖都点头称是，并说 ：办事的人都像这样，那就没有白吃俸禄的了。 
English: The patriarch nodded his assent to everything, and said, "People who work like this don't get paid for nothing."

古文：授提举诸路河渠。
现代文：于是授守敬提举诸路河渠。
English: As a result, all rivers and canals were awarded the title of honorable mention.

古文：四年，加授银符、副河渠使。
现代文：四年，加授银符，使任副河渠使。
English: Four years later, he was awarded a silver medal and appointed deputy river channel envoy.

古文：至元元年，从张文谦行省西夏。
现代文：至元元年，随张文谦至西夏。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, he followed Zhang Wenqian to Western Xia.

古文：先是，古渠在中兴者，一名唐来，其长四百里，一名汉延，长二百五十里，它州正渠十，皆长二百里，支渠大小六十八，灌田九万余顷。
现代文：西夏地方，古渠之在中兴者，一名唐来，其长四百里，一名汉延，长二百五十里。其他州郡主渠十条，皆长二百里，支渠大小六十八条，灌田九万余顷。
English: In the Western Xia region, among the ancient canals in Zhongxing, there is a Tanglai, with a length of 400 miles, and a Han Yan, with a length of 250 miles. In other prefectures, there are ten main canals, all 200 miles long, 68 branch canals, and more than 90,000 hectares of irrigation fields.

古文：兵乱以来，废坏淤浅。
现代文：但兵乱以来，这些河渠都被淤塞。
English: But since the insurgency, these canals have been blocked.

古文：守敬更立闸堰，皆复其旧。
现代文：守敬重新建立闸堰，使河网灌溉如往日一样。
English: Shoujing re-established the lock weir, so that the river network irrigation is the same as in the past.

古文：二年，授都水少监。守敬言： 舟自中兴沿河四昼夜至东胜，可通漕运，及见查泊、兀郎海古渠甚多，宜加修理。 
现代文：至元二年，郭守敬受任为都水少监，建议 ：自中兴乘船四昼夜至东胜，可进行漕运，沿河见查泊、兀郎海古渠甚多，应加以疏通。 
English: In the second year of the Yuan Dynasty, Guo Shoujing was appointed as the junior inspector of the capital's water supply. He suggested that the four-day and four-night boat ride from Zhongxing to Dongsheng could be carried out by rowing. There were many ancient canals along the river, such as the Qubao and the Qulanghai, which should be dredged.

古文：又言： 金时，自燕京之西麻峪村，分引卢沟一支东流，穿西山而出，是谓金口。
现代文： 金时，自燕京之西麻峪村，分引卢沟河水一支东流，穿西山而去，是谓金口。
English: At the time of the Jin Dynasty, the water of the Lugou River was diverted from the village of Nishi-Mashu in Yanjing and flowed eastward, passing through the western mountains. This is referred to as Jingu.

古文：其水自金口以东，燕京以北，灌田若干顷，其利不可胜计。
现代文：其水自金口以东，燕京以北，灌田若干顷，其利不可胜计。
English: Its water comes from east of Jinkou, north of Yanjing, and irrigates several hectares of fields. The benefits are incalculable.

古文：今若按视故迹，使水得通流，上可以致西山之利，下可以广京畿之漕。 
现代文：兵兴以来，地方守将以大石堵塞。如今应加以疏通，使上可收西山之利，下可以扩大至京畿的河道。 
English: Since the rise of the military, local governors have blocked the river with large boulders. Now it should be dredged, so that the upper river can receive the benefits of the western mountains, and the lower river can be expanded to Gyeonggi.

古文：又言： 当于金口西预开减水口，西南还大河，令其深广，以防涨水突入之患。 
现代文： 还应于金口之西预开一条浅水渠，西南通大河，以防涨水突入之患。 世祖认为这些建议都很好。
English: A shallow canal should also be opened in the west of Kinkow, with a large river flowing to the southwest, to prevent the danger of rising water rushing in.

古文：帝善之。十二年，丞相伯颜南征，议立水站，命守敬行视河北、山东可通舟者，为图奏之。
现代文：至元十二年，丞相伯颜南征，打算建立水运站，命守敬视察河北、山东一带可通舟行船的地方，绘图奏报。
English: In the 12th year of the Yuan Dynasty, the chancellor Bo Yan went on a southern expedition, intending to establish a water transport station. He visited places in Hebei and Shandong that could be reached by boat, and made a report.

古文：初，秉忠以《大明历》自辽、金承用二百余年，浸以后天，议欲修正而卒。
现代文：刘秉忠认为辽、金所行之《大明历》，已有二百余年，须加修正，但未付诸实行就去世了。
English: Liu Bingzhong believed that the "Great Calendar" made by Liao and Jin was more than two hundred years old and needed to be amended, but he died without putting it into practice.

古文：十三年，江左既平，帝思用其言，遂以守敬与王恂率南北日官，分掌测验推步于下，而命文谦与枢密张易为之主领裁奏于上，左丞许衡参预其事。
现代文：至元十三年，江南平定后，世祖想起了修改历法的事，命守敬与王恂领导南北天文官员，分头观测，命张文谦与枢密使张易总其成奏报，左丞相许衡参预其事。
English: In the 13th year of the Yuan Dynasty, after the south of the Yangtze River had been pacified, the founder of the dynasty remembered the matter of revising the calendar. Astronomical officials from the north and south, led by Wang Xi, observed separately, and Zhang Wenqian and Zhang Yi, a confidential envoy, composed a report, and Xu Heng, the left prime minister, participated in the matter.

古文：守敬首言： 历之本在于测验，而测验之器莫先仪表。
现代文：守敬首先认为 ：制定历法的基础在于观测，而观测首先要有仪表。
English: First of all, Shoujing believed that the basis for establishing a calendar is observation, and observation must first have instruments.

古文：历法之验，在于交会，作日月食仪。天有赤道，轮以当之，两极低昂，标以指之，作星晷定时仪。
现代文：今司天浑仪系宋代皇年间汴京所造，与此处天度不相符合，比量南北二极约差四度，仪表因年深日久，也有偏差。 
English: Today's Tianhun instrument, which was made in Beijing during the Song Dynasty, does not match the nature of this place. The ratio of the north and south poles is about four degrees, and the instrument is also biased due to its age.

古文：又作正方案、丸表、悬正仪、座正仪，为四方行测者所用。
现代文：他制作一系列天文仪器，计有简仪、高表、候极仪、浑天象、玲珑仪、仰仪、立运仪、证理仪、景符、窥几、日月食仪、星晷定时仪、正方案、丸表、悬正仪、座正仪等，用以观测天体运行、经纬度和日月食。
English: He produced a series of astronomical instruments, including a simple instrument, a high-precision instrument, an eclipsing instrument, an eclipsing instrument, an eclipsing instrument, a sun-moon eclipse instrument, a star-crossed timing instrument, a positive scheme, a round table, a hanging positive instrument, and a sitting positive instrument, which were used to observe celestial motion, longitude and latitude, and solar and lunar eclipses.

古文：又作《仰规覆矩图》、《异方浑盖图》、《日出入永短图》，与上诸仪互相参考。
现代文：还制作了《仰规覆矩图》、《异浑盖图》、《日出入永短图》。图与仪表互相参考。
English: In addition, the "Upper and Lower Overlap Diagram," "Different Cover Diagram" and "Sunrise and Setting and Short Duration Diagram" have been produced. The diagrams are cross-referenced with the instruments.

古文：十六年，改局为太史院，以恂为太史令，守敬为同知太史院事，给印章，立官府。
现代文：至元十六年，改局为太史院，以王恂为太史令，守敬为同知太史院事。
English: In the 16th year of the Yuan Dynasty, it was changed to Taishi-in, with Wang Xi as Taishi-ling and Shou Jing as Tongzhi Taishi-inji.

古文：及奏进仪表式，守敬当帝前指陈理致，至于日晏，帝不为倦。守敬因奏： 唐一行开元间令南宫说天下测景，书中见者凡十三处。
现代文：是年守敬进呈所制仪表，对世祖详加解说，奏称： 唐朝开元年间，僧一行令南宫说于南北各地设点观测，书中所见到的观测点有十三处。
English: During the first year of the Tang Dynasty, a group of monks ordered the Southern Palace to set up observation points in various parts of the north and south, and there are thirteen observation points seen in the book.

古文：今疆宇比唐尤大，若不远方测验，日月交食分数时刻不同，昼夜长短不同，日月星辰去天高下不同，即目测验人少，可先南北立表，取直测景。 
现代文：今我元朝疆域远比唐大，若不在远方进行观测，则不知日月交食分数时刻不同，昼夜长短之不同，日月星辰离天高下之不同。目测的人少，可先南北立表，取直测影。 
English: Today, the territory of the Yuan Dynasty is much larger than that of the Tang Dynasty. If you do not observe far away, you will not know that the time of the eclipse of the sun and the moon is different, the length of the day and night is different, and the stars of the sun and the moon are different from the height of the sky. There are fewer people who can observe visually, so you can first stand the table in the north and the south and take a direct measurement of the shadow.

古文：帝可其奏。
现代文：世祖批准了他的建议。
English: The patriarch approved his suggestion.

古文：遂设监候官一十四员，分道而出，东至高丽，西极滇池，南逾朱崖，北尽铁勒，四海测验，凡二十七所。
现代文：于是设监候官一十四员，分道至各地进行观测，东至高丽，西极滇池，南越朱崖，北至铁勒，四海之内设立观测点共二十七处。
English: As a result, fourteen inspectors-in-waiting were set up to conduct observations in various parts of the country. A total of twenty-seven observation points were set up in the four seas, from the east to Goryeo, from the west to Dianchi, from the south to Zhujiajiao, and from the north to Tiele.

古文：十七年，新历告成，守敬与诸臣同上奏曰：臣等窃闻帝王之事，莫重于历。自黄帝迎日推策，帝尧以闰月定四时成岁，舜在璇玑玉衡以齐七政。爰及三代，历无定法，周、秦之间，闰余乖次。西汉造《三统历》，百三十年而后是非始定。
现代文：至元十七年，新历告成，守敬与诸臣共同上书，其大意是：中国在西汉以前尚无历法，西汉制定了《三统历》；东汉有《四分历》；三国时期刘洪造《乾象历》；魏晋南北朝时期，姜岌制定《三纪甲子历》，何承天制定《元嘉历》，祖冲之制定《大明历》；隋代刘焯制定《皇极历》；唐代傅仁均制定《戊寅元历》，李淳风制定《麟德历》，僧一行制定《大衍历》，徐昂造《宣明历》。又二百三十六年之后，有宋代姚舜辅制定《纪元历》。
English: In the seventeenth year of the Yuan Dynasty, the new calendar was completed, and Shou Jing and his ministers jointly submitted a letter, the gist of which was: China had no calendar before the Western Han Dynasty. The Western Han Dynasty established the "Three-tiered Calendar"; the Eastern Han Dynasty had the "Four-point Calendar"; Liu Hong created the "Dry Elephant Calendar" during the Three Kingdoms period; during the Wei, Jin, and Northern and Southern Dynasties period, Jiang Rui established the "Three-tiered Jiazi Calendar," He Zheng Tian established the "Yuan Jia Calendar," and Zu Chong developed the "Great Bright Calendar"; the Sui Dynasty Liu Xi established the

古文：东汉造《四分历》，七十余年而仪式方备。又百二十一年，刘洪造《乾象历》，始悟月行有迟速。
现代文：前后一千一百八十二年中，历法经过了七十次修正，创造历法者有一十三家之多，每次修改创造，都是对天象的新认识。
English: In the past 1,182 years, the calendar has undergone 70 revisions, with as many as 13 calendars created. Each revision and creation is a new understanding of the celestial phenomenon.

古文：守敬于是比次篇类，整齐分杪，裁为《推步》七卷，《立成》二卷，《历议拟稿》三卷，《转神选择》二卷，《上中下三历注式》十二卷。
现代文：至元十九年，王恂卒，这时新编历法已付诸实行。郭守敬将观测、推算的材料，分类整理，撰成《推步》七卷、《立成》二卷、《历议拟稿》三卷、《转神选择》二卷、《上中下三历注式》十二卷。
English: By the 19th year of the Yuan Dynasty, when Wang Bing died, the new calendar method had been put into practice. Guo Shoujing classified and sorted the materials of observation and calculation into seven volumes of "Pushing," two volumes of "Rising," three volumes of "Calendar Proposal Draft," two volumes of "God's Choice" and twelve volumes of "Upper, Middle and Lower Three Calendars Annotation."

古文：二十三年，继为太史令，遂上表奏进。又有《时候笺注》二卷，《修改源流》一卷。其测验书，有《仪象法式》二卷，《二至晷景考》二十卷，《五星细行考五十卷》，《古今交食考》一卷，《新测二十八舍杂坐诸星入宿去极》一卷，《新测无名诸星》一卷，《月离考》一卷，并藏之官。
现代文：至元二十三年郭守敬继任太史令，上表进呈天文、历书，计有《时候笺注》二卷、《修改源流》一卷、《仪象法式》二卷、《二至晷景考》二十卷、《五星细行考》五十卷、《古今交食考》二卷、《新测二十舍杂坐诸星入宿去极》一卷、《新测无名诸星》一卷、《月离考》一卷。
English: In the 23rd year of the Yuan Dynasty, Guo Shoujing succeeded as the Taishi Ruling, and the above table presented astronomy and calendar books, including two volumes of "Time Annotation," one volume of "Modified Source," two volumes of "Dignity French Style," twenty volumes of "Two-to-Five Viewing," fifty volumes of "Five-Star Detailed Walking," two volumes of "Ancient and Modern Cross-Cultural Dining," one volume of "Newly Measured Twenty Stars Entering and Departing," one volume of "Newly Measured Unknown Stars," and one volume of "Moon Departure."

古文：二十八年，有言滦河自永平挽舟逾山而上，可至开平；有言泸沟自麻峪可至寻麻林。
现代文：至元二十八年，有人说滦河自永平挽舟逆水而上，可至开平；有人说泸沟自麻峪可至寻麻林。
English: In the 28th year of the Yuan Dynasty, some people said that the Lugu River could be reached from Yongping to Kaiping by rowing a boat against the water; some people said that the Lugu River could be reached from Matsuo to Huanmao.

古文：朝廷遣守敬相视，滦河既不可行，泸沟舟亦不通守敬因陈水利十有一事。
现代文：朝廷派守敬去考察，实际上是滦河既不能行舟，泸沟亦不通航。守敬因而陈奏水利十一事。
English: The imperial court sent Shoujing to investigate, but in fact, the Li River could not be navigated and the Li River ditch was not navigable. Therefore, Shoujing played eleven water conservancy events.

古文：其一，大都运粮河，不用一亩泉旧原，别引北山白浮泉水，西折而南，经瓮山泊，自西水门入城，环汇于积水潭，复东折而南，出南水门，合入旧运粮河。
现代文：其中之一是：大都运粮河道，不用一亩泉旧道，而可别引北山白浮泉水，先向西而后折向南，经瓮山泊，自西水门入城，汇于积水潭，再向东折而南，出南水门，合入旧运粮河。
English: One of them is: most of the grain transport channel, do not need a mu of spring old road, but do not pull the Beishan white floating spring water, first to the west and then turn to the south, through Shaoshan, from the West Water Gate into the city, converge at the reservoir, and then turn to the east and south, out of the South Water Gate, and merge into the old grain transport channel.

古文：每十里置一闸，比至通州，凡为闸七，距闸里许，上重置斗门，互为提阏，以过舟止水。
现代文：每十里置一闸，到通州沿河设七闸，各闸相距一里多。闸上设闸门闸板，借以截断流水，便于行船。
English: A lock is set up every ten miles, and seven locks are set up along the river up to Tongzhou. Each lock is more than a mile apart. Lock gates are set up on the locks to cut off the flow of water and facilitate navigation.

古文：帝览奏，喜曰： 当速行之。 
现代文：世祖看后大喜，令立即按规划进行。
English: The patriarch was overjoyed after seeing it and ordered that it be carried out immediately according to plan.

古文：于是复置都水监，俾守敬领之。
现代文：于是再设置都水监，使守敬主持该都水监的工作。
English: As a result, the Metropolitan Water Supervisor was set up again, with Shou Jing presiding over the work of the Metropolitan Water Supervisor.

古文：帝命丞相以下皆亲操畚锸倡工，待守敬指授而后行事。
现代文：又命丞相以下官员都携带工具去参加劳动，由守敬统一指挥。
English: He also ordered officials from the prime minister down to carry tools to participate in labor, under the unified command of Shou Jing.

古文：先是，通州至大都，陆运官粮，岁若干万石，方秋霖雨，驴畜死者不可胜计，至是皆罢之。
现代文：原来，通州至大都，陆运官粮，每岁若干万石，秋季多雨，运粮驴畜死者不可胜计。新河道开通后，不再陆运官粮了。
English: Originally, the official grain transported by land from Tongzhou to Dadu was tens of thousands of stone every year, and it rained a lot in autumn. The number of dead donkeys and animals transporting grain was incalculable. After the new river was opened, the official grain transported by land was no longer available.

古文：三十年，帝还自上都，过积水潭，见舳舻敝水，大悦，名曰通惠河，赐守敬钞万二千五百贯，仍以旧职兼提调通惠河漕运事。
现代文：至元三十年，世祖自上都至大都，路经积水潭，见满河船只首尾相连，十分高兴，题名为 通惠河 ，赐守敬钞万二千五百贯，并令他以原职兼管通惠河漕运事。
English: In the 30th year of the Yuan Dynasty, the ancestor traveled from Shangdu to Datu via Jishuitan and was very happy to see the Manhe River boats connected end to end. He named it Tonghui River, gave the guard a tribute of 12,500 kroner, and ordered him to concurrently manage the Tonghui River boat transport with his original job.

古文：守敬又言：于澄清闸稍东，引水与北霸河接，且立闸丽正门西，令舟楫得环城往来。
现代文：守敬又建议于澄清闸稍东，引水与北坝河相接，且设闸于丽正门西，使船只能环城往来通行。
English: Shoujing also suggested that the clarifying gate should be slightly east, the water diversion should be connected to the Beiba River, and the gate should be set at the west of the Lishengmen, so that the ship can only pass around the city.

古文：志不就而罢。
现代文：但这一规划未能实现。
English: However, this plan failed to materialise.

古文：三十一年，拜昭文馆大学士、知太史院事。
现代文：至元三十一年，守敬受任为昭文馆大学士、知太史院事。
English: In the 31st year of the Yuan Dynasty, Shou Jing was appointed as a scholar of the Shobunkwan University and an academician of the Chida Academy of History.

古文：大德二年，召守敬至上都，议开铁幡竿渠，守敬奏： 山水频年暴下，非大为渠堰，广五七十步不可。 
现代文：大德二年，召守敬至上都，商议开铁幡竿渠。守敬认为 山上洪水频年暴下，非修建宽五十或七十步的大渠堰不可 。
English: In the second year of Dadu, Shoujing was summoned to Shangdu to discuss the opening of an iron flagpole canal. Shoujing believed that floods on the mountain frequently occurred, and it was necessary to build a large canal weir with a width of fifty or seventy paces.

古文：执政吝于工费，以其言为过，缩其广三之一。
现代文：执政者不愿多投工费，说守敬是夸大其词，把渠堰的宽度缩小三分之一。
English: The ruling party did not want to invest more in construction costs, and said that it was an exaggeration to say that it was necessary to reduce the width of the canal weir by one third.

古文：明年大雨，山水注下，渠不能容，漂没人畜庐帐，几犯行殿。
现代文：第二年大雨，山洪注下，渠小不能容纳，淹没人畜屋舍，甚至几乎漫及行宫。
English: In the second year, heavy rain and mountain torrents poured down, and the small canal could not accommodate, flooding people's livestock houses, and even almost flooding the palace.

古文：成宗谓宰臣曰： 郭太史神人也，惜其言不用耳。 
现代文：成宗对宰相说 ：郭太史真是神人，可惜没有采纳他的意见。 
English: Chengzong said to the prime minister: Guo Taishi is really a godman, but it is a pity that his opinion was not adopted.

古文：七年，诏内外官年及七十，并听致仕，独守敬不许其请。
现代文：大德七年，诏朝廷内外官员，凡年满七十者，都可申请并批准退休，唯有守敬不许申请。
English: In the seventh year of the Great German Reign, it was decreed that all officials in and out of the imperial court who had reached the age of seventy could apply for and be approved for retirement. Only those who had reached the age of seventy were not allowed to apply.

古文：自是翰林太史司天官不致仕，定著为令。
现代文：从此以后，翰林、太史、司天官不退休，成为定制。
English: Since then, Hanlin, Taishi, and Sitenkan have not retired and have become custom-made.

古文：延祐三年卒，年八十六。
现代文：延三年，郭守敬寿终正寝，享年八十六岁。
English: Three years later, Guo Shou Jing Shou passed away at the age of 86.

古文：杨桓杨桓，字武子，兖州人。
现代文：杨桓字武子，兖州人，自幼聪敏。
English: Yang Huan, also known as Wu Zi, is from Zhangzhou and has been smart since he was a child.

古文：幼警悟，读《论语》至《宰予昼寝章》，慨然有立志，由是终身非疾病未尝昼寝。
现代文：读《论语》至《宰子昼寝章》，见孔子批评弟子宰予白天睡觉，是无用之材，有所感悟，下定决心：一生除非有病，否则决不白昼睡觉。
English: After reading "Analects" to "Zai Zi Napping Chapter" and seeing Confucius criticize his disciple Zai for sleeping during the day, he was impressed and made up his mind that he would never sleep during the day unless he was sick.

古文：弱冠为郡诸生，一时名公咸称誉之。
现代文：二十岁为本州郡儒生时，一些有名望的人交口称赞他。
English: When he was a twenty-year-old Confucian scholar in Honshu County, he was praised by some famous people.

古文：中统四年，补济州教授，后由济宁路教授召为太史院校书郎，奉敕撰《仪表铭》《历日序》，文辞典雅，赐楮币千五百缗，辞不受。
现代文：中统四年，任济州教授，后由济州路教授升为太史院校书郎，奉皇帝之命撰写《仪表铭》、《历日序》，文辞典雅。世祖赐他楮币千五百缗，他推辞不肯接受。
English: In the fourth year of the unified Korea, he was appointed as a professor of Jeju, and later he was promoted from a professor of Jeju-ro to a scribe of the Imperial History College. By order of the emperor, he wrote "Emblem" and "Chronological Order" with an elegant vocabulary. The founder of the Korean nation gave him 1,500 baht, which he refused to accept.

古文：迁秘书监丞。
现代文：又升为秘书监丞。
English: He was also promoted to secretary superintendent.

古文：至元三十一年，拜监察御史。
现代文：至元三十一年，拜为监察御史。
English: In the 31st year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was appointed as the inspector general of history.

古文：有得玉玺于木华黎曾孙硕德家者，桓辨识其文，曰 受天之命，既寿永昌 ，乃顿首言曰： 此历代传国玺也，亡之久矣。
现代文：有人从木华黎曾孙硕德家中得到一颗玉玺，杨桓认识玉玺上的印文是 受天之命，既寿永昌 ，肃然起敬地说： 这是历代传下来的国宝，丢失已久。
English: Someone got a jade figurine from the home of Mihuali's great-grandson Shuo De. Yang Huan recognized that the seal on the jade figurine said, "By Heaven's command, I live forever," and said with great respect, "This is a national treasure that has been passed down through the ages and has been lost for a long time."

古文：今宫车晏驾，皇太孙龙飞，而玺复出，天其彰瑞应于今日乎！ 
现代文：令皇上晏驾，皇太孙登基，这玉玺又出现，此乃上天降祥瑞。 
English: By the grace of the emperor, the great-grandson of the emperor ascended to the throne, this jade bracelet appeared again, this is the auspicious beginning of heaven.

古文：即为文述玺始末，奉上于徽仁裕圣皇后。
现代文：于是撰文叙述这块玉玺的来龙去脉，奉献于徽仁裕圣皇后。
English: Therefore, the author describes the ins and outs of this piece of jade ingot, dedicated to Empress Huizhen Yusheng.

古文：成宗即位，桓疏上时务二十一事：一曰郊祀天地；二曰亲享太庙，备四时之祭；三曰先定首相；四曰朝见群臣，访问时政得失；五曰诏儒臣以时侍讲；六曰设太学及府州儒学，教养生徒；七曰行诰命以褒善叙劳；八曰异章服以别贵贱；九曰正礼仪以肃宫庭；十曰定官制以省内外冗员；十一曰讲究钱谷以裕国用；十二曰访求晓习音律者以协太常雅乐；十三曰国子监不可隶集贤院，宜正其名；十四曰试补六部寺监及府州司县吏；十五曰增内外官吏俸禄；十六曰禁父子骨肉、奴婢相告讦者；十七曰定婚姻聘财；十八曰罢行用官钱营什一之利；十九曰复笞杖以别轻重之罪；二十曰郡县吏自中统前仕宦者，宜加优异；二十一曰为治之道宜各从本俗。
现代文：成宗即位，桓上疏陈奏当时应办的政务，共二十一事：一曰祭祀天地；二曰亲祭太庙备办四季祭品；三曰选任首相；四曰朝见群臣，询问当今政治之得失；五曰令儒臣按时向皇帝讲解经文；六曰设立太子学及各府州学校，教养学生；七曰表彰那些为国操劳成绩卓著的人；八曰规定礼服样式，借以区别贵贱；九曰讲求宫廷仪礼；十曰确定官吏编制，裁减多余之人；十一曰开辟财源，增加国库收入；十二曰访求精通音乐的人来制定宗庙祭礼的雅乐；十三曰国子监不可隶于集贤院；十四曰通过考试选拔来增补六部、寺、监及府、州、县的官员；十五曰增加朝廷内外官吏的俸禄；十六曰禁止父子、兄弟、奴婢相互告发；十七曰规定婚姻财礼；十八曰禁止用官钱做生意；十九曰恢复杖刑，借以区别罪过之轻重；二十曰对中统以前的郡县官吏加以优待；二十一曰各地政治要从本地民俗出发。
English: When Emperor Chengzong ascended the throne, Emperor Gansu and Emperor Jianxu had a total of 21 things to do. On the first day, they offered sacrifices to heaven and earth; on the second day, they held a family festival and prepared four seasons of offerings at the Great Temple; on the third day, they elected a prime minister; on the fourth day, they met with a group of courtiers to inquire about the gains and losses of the current politics; on the fifth day, they ordered a Confucian scholar to explain scriptures to the emperor on time; on the sixth day, they established a school for princes and schools in various prefectures to educate students; on the seventh day,

古文：疏奏，帝嘉纳之。
现代文：成宗对这些建议均予以采纳。
English: Chengzong accepted all of these suggestions.

古文：未几，升秘书少监，预修《大一统志》。
现代文：不久，杨桓又升为秘书少监，参加修纂《大一统志》。
English: Soon after, Yang Huan was promoted to the position of secretary and junior superintendent, and participated in the compilation of the "Daiyi Zongzhi."

古文：秩满归兖州，以赀业悉让弟楷，乡里称焉。
现代文：任期届满，回归兖州，将资产全让予弟杨楷，为乡里所称赞。
English: After his term of office expired, he returned to Zhangzhou and transferred all his assets to his brother Yang Kai, which was praised by the township.

古文：大德三年，以国子司业召，未赴，卒，年六十六。
现代文：大德三年，召为国子司业，但未到任就去世了，终年六十六岁。
English: Dade served three years and was called to the post of secretary of state, but he died before taking office, at the age of 66.

古文：桓为人宽厚，事亲笃孝，博览群籍，尤精篆籀之学。著《六书统》、《六书溯源》、《书学正韵》，大抵推明许慎之说，而意加深，皆行于世。
现代文：桓为人宽厚，孝顺父母，博览群书，尤精于篆文，著有《六书统》、《六书溯源》、《书学正韵》等书，大抵是阐发许慎的文字学，而意义更加深刻。这些书皆流行于世。
English: Huan was a generous person, dutiful to his parents, well-versed in books, and especially skilled in calligraphy. He was the author of books such as "Six Books of Calligraphy," "Six Books of Calligraphy," "Six Books of Calligraphy," etc. These books are popular in the world.

