古文：景宗下九年春正月丙寅，女直遣使来贡。
现代文：九年春正月初五，女真派使者前来进贡。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the ninth year of spring, Jurchen sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：二月庚子，宋遣使致其先帝遗物。
现代文：二月初九，宋派使者送来先皇帝遗物。
English: On the 9th day of the 2nd month, Song sent an envoy to bring back the emperor's relics.

古文：甲寅，以青牛白马祭天地。
现代文：二十三日，用青牛白马祭祀天地。
English: On the 23rd, heaven and earth were sacrificed with a young bull and a white horse.

古文：三月癸亥，耶律沙、敌烈献援汉之役所获宋俘。
现代文：三月初二，耶律沙、敌烈献上在援汉战斗中俘获的宋军俘虏。
English: On the second day of March, Yeludusha and the enemy soldiers presented the Song Army prisoners captured in the battle to aid Han.

古文：戊辰，诏以粟二十万斛助汉。
现代文：初七，诏令援助汉粟米二十万斛。
English: On the 7th day of the first month of the year, a decree was issued to provide 200,000 baht in aid for Chinese corn.

古文：夏五月庚午，汉遣使来谢，且以宋事来告。
现代文：夏五月初十，汉派使者前来致谢，并报告宋之国事。
English: On the 10th day of the 5th month of the summer, a Han envoy came to express thanks and report on the state affairs of the Song Dynasty.

古文：己丑，女直二十一人来请宰相、夷离堇之职，以次授之。
现代文：二十九日，女真部二十一人前来请求授予宰相、夷离堇职位，得到依次授予。
English: On the 29th, twenty-one members of the Ministry of Women's Affairs came to request the positions of Prime Minister and Empress Dowager, which were awarded to them in turn.

古文：六月丙辰，以宋王喜隐为西南面招讨使。
现代文：六月二十六日，以宋王喜隐为西南面招讨使。
English: On June 26th, an envoy was sent to the southwestern region with Song Wang Xiyin as the envoy.

古文：秋七月庚申朔，回鹘遣使来贡。
现代文：秋七月初一，回鹘派使者来进贡。
English: On the first day of the seventh month of autumn, Hui sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：甲子，宋遣使来聘。
现代文：初五，宋派使者来访。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Song sent an envoy to visit Cang.

古文：壬申，汉以宋侵来告。
现代文：十三日，汉因受宋侵略，前来奏报。
English: On the 13th, Han was invaded by Song and came to report.

古文：丙子，遣使助汉战马。
现代文：十七日，派使者送战马援助汉。
English: On the 17th, an envoy was sent to bring war horses to aid Han.

古文：八月，汉遣使进葡萄酒。
现代文：八月，汉派使者献上葡萄酒。
English: In August, the Chinese envoy presented wine.

古文：冬十月甲子，耶律沙以党项降酋可丑、买友来见，赐诏抚谕。
现代文：冬十月初七，耶律沙带着党项归降酋长可丑、买友前来晋见。皇上赐诏安抚晓谕他们。
English: On the 7th day of the 10th month of the winter, Jerusha came to the emperor with a party of subordinates, chiefs and merchants, and the emperor gave them an imperial edict to pacify them.

古文：丁卯，以可丑为司徒，买友为太保，各赐物遣之。
现代文：初十，任命可丑为司徒，买友为太保，分别赐给财物发送他们。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, he appointed Koguryo to be a tutor and Koyotomo to be a guardian, and sent them gifts.

古文：壬申，女直遣使来贡。
现代文：十五日，女真派使者进贡。
English: On the fifteenth day, Jurchen sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：乙酉，汉复遣使以宋事来告。
现代文：二十八日，汉再次派使者前来报告宋之国事。
English: On the 28th, Han again sent an envoy to report on the state affairs of Song.

古文：十一月丁亥朔，司天奏日当食不亏。
现代文：十一月初一，司天监奏称应当日食而未发生日食。
English: On the first day of November, the chief astronomer announced that there should be a solar eclipse, but no eclipse occurred.

古文：戊戌，吐谷浑叛入太原者四百馀户，索而还之。
现代文：十二日，吐谷浑四百余户居民叛逃入太原，吐谷浑前来索要，便归还之。
English: On the 12th, more than 400 residents of Tuyuhun defected to Taiyuan. Tuyuhun came to claim them, and they were returned.

古文：癸卯，祠木叶山。
现代文：十七日，祭祀木叶山。
English: On the seventeenth day, the worship of Mujiyama ended.

古文：乙巳，遣太保迭烈割等使宋。
现代文：十九日，派太保迭烈等出使宋国。
English: On the 19th, Emperor Taibao sent emissaries to Song.

古文：乙卯，汉复遣使以宋事来告。
现代文：二十九日，汉再度派使者奏告宋之国事。
English: On the 29th, Han again sent an envoy to report on the state affairs of Song.

古文：十二月戊辰，猎于近郊，以所获祭天。
现代文：十二月十二日，在近郊打猎，用俘获物祭天。
English: On the 12th day of the 12th month, they hunted in the suburbs and sacrificed to the gods with their prey.

古文：鵩十年春正月癸丑，如长泺。
现代文：十年春正月二十八日，车驾至长泊。
English: On the 28th day of the first month of the 10th year of Spring, I drove to Naganomari.

古文：二月庚午，阿萨兰回鹘来贡。
现代文：二月十五日，阿萨兰回鹘前来进贡。
English: On the 15th of February, the Asarans came to pay tribute.

古文：三月庚寅，祭显陵。
现代文：三月初六，祭祀显陵。
English: On the 6th day of the 3rd month, the funeral rites were held.

古文：夏四月丁卯，西幸。
现代文：夏四月十三日，西幸。
English: On the 13th day of the 4th month of summer, Saiko was born.

古文：己巳，女直遣使来贡。
现代文：十五日，女真派使者前来进贡。
English: On the fifteenth day, Jurchen sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：五月癸卯，赐女里死，遣人诛高勋等。
现代文：五月十九日，赐死女里，派人诛杀高勋等。
English: On May 19th, he ordered the death of his daughter and sent someone to kill Gao Xun.

古文：六月己未，驻跸沿柳湖。
现代文：六月初六，车驾暂驻于沿柳湖。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month.

古文：秋七月庚戌，享太祖庙。
现代文：秋七月二十七日，供祭品祭祀太祖庙。
English: On the 27th day of the 7th month of autumn, the offering of offerings to the ancestral temple began.

古文：九月癸未朔，平王隆先子陈哥谋害其父，车裂以徇。
现代文：九月初一，平王隆先之子陈哥谋害父亲，将陈哥车裂并示众。
English: On the first day of September, the son of Ping Wang Rongsen, Chen Goh, plotted to kill his father, smashed Chen Goh's car and paraded it before the public.

古文：是冬，驻跸金川。
现代文：这年冬天，出巡途中暂驻于金川。
English: In the winter of that year, he temporarily stayed in Kanagawa while on tour.

古文：鵩乾亨元年春正月乙酉，遣挞马长寿使宋，问兴师伐刘继元之故。
现代文：乾亨元年春正月初五，派挞马长寿出使宋国，责问兴师讨伐刘继元的原因。
English: On the 5th day of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st year of Qianheng, he sent an envoy to the Song Dynasty to ask Xing Shi about the reason for fighting Liu Jiyuan.

古文：丙申，长寿还，言 河东朔命，所当问罪。
现代文：十六日，长寿回朝，奏宋答复说： 河东王违抗天命，理应问罪。
English: On the 16th, when Changshou returned to the imperial court, So Song replied, "The King of Hedong disobeyed God's command and should be punished.

古文：若北朝不援，和约如旧，不然则战。 
现代文：如果北朝不援助他，宋辽和约仍旧有效，否则将不惜兵戎相见。 
English: If the Northern Dynasty did not help him, the Song and Liao peace treaty would still be valid, otherwise they would not hesitate to meet each other militarily.

古文：二月丁卯，汉以宋兵压境，遣使乞援。
现代文：二月十八日，汉因宋兵压境，派使者前来求援。
English: On February 18th, Han sent an envoy to ask for help because Song soldiers were pressing on the border.

古文：诏南府宰相耶律沙为都统、冀王敌烈为监军赴之；又命南院大王斜轸以所部从，枢密副使抹只督之。
现代文：诏令南府宰相耶律沙为都统、冀王敌烈为监军前往援救，又命南院大王耶律斜轸率部众随行，枢密副使抹只督战。
English: He ordered the chancellor of Nanfu, Yerusha, to go to the rescue for the capital and the prince of Ji to supervise the army. He also ordered the great king of the Southern Court, Yerushalayim, to accompany the troops, and the vice-minister of the privy council to supervise the battle.

古文：三月辛巳，速撒遣人以别部化哥等降，纳之。
现代文：三月初二，速撒派人引领别部化哥等前来降附，纳之。
English: On the second day of March, Hoso sent a person to lead the other brothers to come and accept it.

古文：丙戌，汉遣使谢抚谕军民，诏北院大王奚底、乙室王撒合等以兵戍燕。
现代文：初七，汉派使者前来感谢我国对其军民的安抚晓谕，诏令北院大王奚底、乙室王撒合等率兵卒守燕地。
English: On the 7th day of the first month, the Han Dynasty sent an envoy to thank China for its pacification of its military and people, and ordered the Great King of the Northern Court, Loudi, and the King of the Second Chamber, Sahai, to lead the soldiers to defend Yanchi.

古文：己丑，汉复告宋兵入境，诏左千牛卫大将军韩侼、大同军节度使耶律善补以本路兵南援。
现代文：初十，汉再次奏告宋兵侵入境内，诏令左千牛卫大将军韩亻孛、大同军节度使耶律善补率本路军南下驰援。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, the Han Dynasty once again reported that the Song soldiers had invaded its territory, and ordered General Han Xuan of the Left Qian Niu Guards and the Datong Army to send Ye Lu and his troops south to help.

古文：辛卯，女直遣使来贡。
现代文：十二日，女真派使者进贡。
English: On the twelfth day, Jurchen sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：丁酉，耶律沙等与宋战于白马岭，不利，冀王敌烈及突吕不部节度使都敏、黄皮室详稳唐筈皆死之，士卒死伤甚众。
现代文：十八日，耶律沙等在白马岭与宋军交战，失利。冀王敌烈及突吕不部节度使都敏、黄皮室详稳唐薚均战死，士卒死伤甚多。
English: On the 18th, Jerusha and others fought against the Song army in Baimaling and were defeated. Ji Wang, the enemy warrior, and Tu Lvbu, the military commander, caused the death of Du Min and Huang Bishuo, the military commander of the Tang Dynasty, and many soldiers were killed and injured.

古文：夏四月辛亥，汉以行军事宜来奏，卢俊自代州驰状告急。
现代文：夏四月初三，汉前来奏报军事情况，卢俊自代州送来文书告急。
English: On the third day of the fourth month of the summer, Han came to report on the military situation, and Lu Jun sent a letter from Daye Prefecture in an emergency.

古文：辛酉，敌烈来贡。
现代文：十三日，敌烈前来进贡。
English: On the 13th, the enemy came to pay tribute.

古文：五月己卯朔，宋兵至河东，汉与战，不利，刘继文、卢俊来奔。
现代文：五月初一，宋兵到达河东，汉与之交战，失利，刘继文、卢俊前来投奔我国。
English: On the first day of May, Song soldiers arrived in Hedong, Han fought with them and lost. Liu Jiwen and Lu Jun came to defect to China.

古文：六月，刘继元降宋，汉亡。
现代文：六月，刘继元降宋，汉亡。
English: In June, Liu Jiyuan surrendered to the Song Dynasty and died in the Han Dynasty.

古文：甲子，封刘继文为彭城郡王，卢俊同政事门下平章事。
现代文：十七日，皇上封刘继文为彭城郡王，卢俊为同政事门下平章事。
English: On the 17th, the emperor appointed Liu Jiwen as the king of Pengcheng County, and Lu Jun as a peer of the same government.

古文：宋主来侵。
现代文：宋主率军前来侵袭。
English: Song Zhen led the army to attack.

古文：丁卯，北院大王奚底、统军使萧讨古、乙室王撒合击之。
现代文：二十一日，北院大王奚底、统军使萧讨古、乙室王撒合等迎击。
English: On the twenty-first day, the king of the Northern Court, Loudi, and the unified army sent Xiao Tonggu and the king of the Second Chamber, Sahao to meet the attack.

古文：战于沙河，失利。
现代文：在沙河与宋军交战，失利。
English: He fought against the Song army in Shahe and lost.

古文：己巳，宋主围南京。
现代文：二十二日，宋主包围南京。
English: On the 22nd, Emperor Song surrounded Nanjing.

古文：丁丑，诏谕耶律沙及奚底、讨古等军中事宜。
现代文：三十日，将军中事宜用诏书告晓于耶律沙及奚底、讨古等。
English: On the 30th, the matter of the generals was announced by imperial rescript in Yerusha and Loudi, and discussed with the ancients.

古文：秋七月癸未，沙等及宋兵战于高梁河，少却；休哥、斜轸横击，大败之。
现代文：秋七月初六，耶律沙等与宋军交战于高梁河，稍事退却；休哥、斜轸拦腰截击，大败宋军。
English: On the 6th day of the 7th month of the autumn and the beginning of the 7th month, Yerusha and others fought with the Song Army in Gaoliang River and retreated a little; Xiu Ge and Xie Yao intercepted and defeated the Song Army.

古文：宋主仅以身免，至涿州，窃乘驴车遁去。
现代文：宋主仅以单身脱逃，到涿州，悄悄乘驴车逃走。
English: Mr. Song escaped only as a single man and fled to Zhangzhou in a donkey cart.

古文：甲申，击宋馀军，所杀甚众，获兵仗、器甲、符印、粮馈、货币不可胜计。
现代文：初七，攻击宋残余部队，所杀甚多，缴获兵仗、器甲、符印、粮馈、货币等不可胜计。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, they attacked the Song remnant troops, killed a lot, and captured countless soldiers, armor, seals, grain, and currency.

古文：辛丑，耶律沙遣人上俘获，以权知南京留守事韩德让、权南京马步军都指挥使耶律学古、知三司事刘弘皆能安人心，捍城池，并赐诏褒奖。
现代文：二十四日，耶律沙派人献上俘虏及财物，因权知南京留守事韩德让、权南京马步军都指挥使耶律学古、知三司事刘弘等均能安定民心，捍卫城池，一并赐诏褒奖。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, Yerusha sent people to present the captives and property, and because of the power of Yerusha to remain in Nanjing, Han Dejan and the power of Yerusha to command the Nanjing horse-marching army, Yerusha and Liu Hong were able to stabilize the people's hearts and defend the city, and together they gave the award.

古文：八月壬子，阻卜惕隐曷鲁、夷离堇阿里睹等来朝。
现代文：八月初五，阻卜惕隐曷鲁、夷离堇阿里睹等前来朝见。
English: On the 5th day of the 8th month of the lunar month, Dangboti, Hinkonglu, Yixiang, Alizhan and others came to see the emperor.

古文：乙丑，耶律沙等献俘。
现代文：十八日，耶律沙等献上俘虏。
English: On the 18th, Jerusha and others presented the captives.

古文：丙寅，以白马之役责沙、抹只，复以走宋主功释之；奚底遇敌而退，以剑背击之；撒合虽却，部伍不乱，宥之；冀王敌烈麾下先遁者斩之，都监以下杖之。
现代文：十九日，因白沙之役失利责备耶律沙、抹只，又因有击退宋主之功而宽释了他们；奚底遇敌军即退却，用剑背责打他；撒合虽然退却，但部队秩序不乱，得到宽宥。冀王敌烈部下率先逃跑者被斩首，都监以下军官受杖责。
English: On the 19th, because of the defeat in the Battle of Baisha, he reproached Yerusha and Madu and pardoned them because they had the merit of repelling the Lord of Song; when Loudi encountered the enemy army, he retreated and beat him with the back of his sword; although Sahao retreated, the order of the troops was not disordered and was pardoned. The first to escape from the enemy soldiers of King Ji was beheaded, and the officers below the governor were punished with the cane.

古文：壬申，宴沙、抹只等将校，赐物有差。
现代文：二十五日，设宴招待耶律沙、抹只等将领，赐给他们财物各若干。
English: On the twenty-fifth day they made a feast for Jerusha and Mattathias, the captains, and gave each of them a portion of the spoils.

古文：九月己卯，燕王韩匡嗣为都统，南府宰相耶律沙为监军，惕隐休哥、南院大王斜轸、权奚王抹只等各率所部兵南伐；仍命大同军节度使善补领山西兵分道以进。
现代文：九月初三，任命燕王韩匡嗣为都统，南府宰相耶律沙为监军，与惕隐休哥、南院大王斜轸、权奚王抹只等各自率所部南伐；同时命令大同军节度使善补率领山西兵马分道前进。
English: On the third day of early September, Yan Wang Han Kuanzhi was appointed as the governor of the capital, and the chancellor of Nanfu, Yerusha, was appointed as the supervisor of the army. He and Ti Yin Xiu Ge, the great king of the Southern Yuan Dynasty, and the great king of the Southern Yuan Dynasty, Shizhao, and the great king of the Southern Yuan Dynasty, Maduo, respectively led the southern expedition of the headquarters. At the same time, he ordered the Datong army to divide and make the Shanxi soldiers and horses advance.

古文：冬十月乙丑，韩匡嗣与宋兵战于满城，败绩。
现代文：冬十月十九日，韩匡嗣等与宋军在满城交战，失败。
English: In the winter of October 19th, Han Kuanzhi and others fought against the Song army in Mancheng, but failed.

古文：辛未，太保矧思与宋兵战于火山，败之。
现代文：二十五日，太保矧思与宋军在火山交战，击败宋兵。
English: On the 25th, Taibao Jingshi and the Song army fought in the volcano and defeated the Song soldiers.

古文：乙亥，诏数韩匡嗣五罪，赦之。
现代文：二十九日，下诏数落韩匡嗣五条罪状，并赦免了他。
English: On the 29th, the next imperial edict dropped five charges against Han Kuangzhi and pardoned him.

古文：十一月戊寅，宴赏休哥及有功将校。
现代文：十一月初二，宴饮赏赐休哥和有功将领。
English: On the second day of the first month of November, a banquet was held to reward retired generals and meritorious generals.

古文：乙未，南院枢密使兼政事令郭袭上书谏畋猎，嘉纳之。
现代文：十九日，南院枢密使兼政事令郭袭上书劝谏皇上节制田猎，皇上嘉许并纳其谏言。
English: On the 19th, Guo Qi, the envoy of the Privy Council of the Southern Yuan Dynasty and the political affairs, sent a letter to the emperor to advise him to restrict hunting and gathering, and the emperor appreciated and accepted his advice.

古文：辛丑，冬至，赦，改元乾亨。
现代文：二十五日，时逢冬至，大赦天下，改元乾亨。
English: On the 25th, at the time of the winter solstice, the emperor pardoned everyone and changed the era name to Qianheng.

古文：十二月乙卯，燕王韩匡嗣遥授晋昌军节度使，降封秦王。
现代文：十二月初十，遥授燕王韩匡嗣为晋昌军节度使，降封为秦王。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of December, Yan Wang Han Kuanzhi was appointed as the special envoy of the Jin and Chang armies, and was demoted to the rank of Qin King.

古文：壬戌，蜀王道隐南京留守，徙封荆王。
现代文：十七日，任命蜀王道隐为南京留守，改封为荆王。
English: On the 17th, Shu Wang Daoyin was appointed to stay in Nanjing and changed his title to Jing Wang.

古文：是冬，驻跸南京。
现代文：这年冬天，出巡途中暂驻于南京。
English: This winter, the troupe temporarily stayed in Nanjing while on tour.

古文：鵩二年春正月丙子朔，封皇子隆绪为梁王，隆庆为恒王。
现代文：二年春正月初一，封皇子耶律隆绪为梁王、隆庆为恒王。
English: On the first day of the first month of the second year of spring, the crown prince Yelu Rongxu was crowned King of Liang, and Rongqing was crowned King of Heng.

古文：丁亥，以惕隐休哥为北院大王，前枢密使贤适封西平郡王。
现代文：十二日，以惕隐休哥为北院大王，封前枢密使贤适为西平郡王。
English: On the twelfth day, Yitaiyin Xiuqiao became the Grand Prince of the Northern Court, and the former privy councilor Xian Xianqi became the king of Xiping County.

古文：二月戊辰，如清河。
现代文：二月二十四日，到清河。
English: February 24th, to Qinghe.

古文：三月丁亥，西南面招讨副使耶律王六、太尉化哥遣人献党项俘。
现代文：三月十四日，西南面招讨副使耶律王六、太尉化哥派人献上党项俘虏。
English: On March 14th, the southwestern side invited the deputy envoy, Yerut Wanglu, and the lieutenant, Huago, to send people to present the prisoners of the party.

古文：闰月庚午，有鸨飞止御帐，获以祭天。
现代文：闰三月二十七日，有鸨鸟飞来栖息于御帐之上，抓获它并用来祭天。
English: On the 27th day of leap March, an ostrich flew to perch on the throne, captured it and used it to offer it to the gods.

古文：夏四月庚辰，祈雨。
现代文：夏四月初八，祈雨。
English: On the eighth day of the fourth month in summer, pray for rain.

古文：戊子，清暑燕子城。
现代文：十六日，于燕子城避暑。
English: On the 16th, I spent the summer in Swallow Town.

古文：五月，雷火乾陵松。
现代文：五月，雷电击燃乾陵松树。
English: In May, lightning struck and burned pine trees in Qianling.

古文：六月己亥，喜隐复谋反，囚于祖州。
现代文：六月二十八日，喜隐再次谋反，被囚禁于祖州。
English: On June 28th, Xiying once again plotted a rebellion and was imprisoned in Zhou.

古文：秋七月戊午，王六等献党项俘。
现代文：秋七月十七日，王六等献上党项俘虏。
English: On the 17th day of the 7th month of autumn, Wang Liutai presented the captives to the party.

古文：八月戊戌，东幸。
现代文：八月二十八日，东幸。
English: August 28th, Dongxing.

古文：冬十月辛未朔，命巫者祠天地及兵神。
现代文：冬十月初一，命巫者祭祀天地及兵神。
English: On the first day of October in winter, the life sorcerers offer sacrifices to heaven and earth and the god of war.

古文：辛巳，将南伐，祭旗鼓。
现代文：十一日，将要南下征伐，祭祀旗鼓。
English: On the 11th day, there will be a southward expedition, and the drum will be sacrificed.

古文：癸未，次南京。
现代文：十三日，驻扎于南京。
English: On the 13th, it was stationed in Nanjing.

古文：丁亥，获敌人，射鬼箭。
现代文：十七日，俘得敌兵，以鬼箭射杀之。
English: On the 17th, he captured an enemy soldier and shot him with a ghost arrow.

古文：庚寅，次固安，以青牛白马祭天地。
现代文：二十日，到达固安，用青牛白马祭祀天地。
English: On the 20th, he arrived at Gu'an and sacrificed heaven and earth with a young ox and a white horse.

古文：己亥，围瓦桥关。
现代文：二十九日，进军包围瓦桥关。
English: On the 29th, they marched to encircle the Tile Bridge Pass.

古文：十一月庚子朔，宋兵夜袭营，突吕不部节度使萧干及四捷军详稳耶律痕德战却之。
现代文：十一月初一，宋军乘夜偷袭我军营地，突吕不部节度使萧干及四捷军详稳耶律痕德击退之。
English: On the first day of the first month of November, the Song army attacked our army camp at night, and the sudden attack made Xiao Gan and the four German armies fight back.

古文：壬寅，休哥败宋兵于瓦桥东，守将张师引兵出战，休哥奋击，败之。
现代文：初三，休哥于瓦桥关东面击败宋军，宋军守将张师率兵出战，休哥奋力迎击，击败之。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, Xiu Ge defeated the Song army on the east side of the shingle bridge pass. The Song army commander sent Zhang Division to fight, and Xiu Ge fought hard to meet and defeat it.

古文：戊申，宋兵阵于水南，休哥涉水击破之，追至莫州，杀伤甚众。
现代文：初九，宋兵列阵于河南岸，休哥渡河击破宋阵，追击直到莫州，杀死杀伤宋兵甚多。
English: At the beginning of the ninth month, the Song soldiers were lined up on the south bank of the river. Xiu Ge crossed the river and defeated the Song soldiers, pursued them to Mozhou, and killed and injured many Song soldiers.

古文：己酉，宋兵复来，击之殆尽。
现代文：初十，宋兵再度前来，出兵迎击，使之伤亡殆尽。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Song soldiers came again and sent troops to meet the attack, so that the casualties were exhausted.

古文：丙辰，班师。
现代文：十七日，班师。
English: On the 17th, the class teacher left.

古文：乙丑，还次南京。
现代文：二十六日，回到南京。
English: On the 26th, he returned to Nanjing.

古文：十二月庚午朔，休哥拜于越。
现代文：十二月初一，休哥被拜为于越。
English: On the first day of December, Xue Ge was worshipped as Yu Yue.

古文：大飨军士。
现代文：大举犒劳军士。
English: Well done to the hardworking sergeant.

古文：三年春二月丙子，东幸。
现代文：三年春正月初八，东幸。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the third year of spring, Dongxing.

古文：己丑，复幸南京。
现代文：二十一日，再次临幸南京。
English: On the 21st, he visited Nanjing again.

古文：三月乙卯，皇子韩八卒。
现代文：三月十八日，皇子韩八去世。
English: On March 18th, Prince Hanpachi passed away.

古文：辛酉，葬潢、土二河之间，置永州。
现代文：二十四日，将他安葬于潢、土二河之间，在葬地设置永州。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, he was buried between the two rivers, the Yangtze and the Tu, and Yongzhou was set up at the burial site.

古文：以秦王韩匡嗣为西南面招讨使。
现代文：任命秦王韩匡嗣为西南面招讨使。
English: Qin King Han Kuanzhi was appointed as the envoy to the southwest.

古文：夏五月丙午，上京汉军乱，劫立喜隐不克，伪立其子留礼寿，上京留守除室擒之。
现代文：夏五月初十，上京汉军叛乱，想劫持喜隐立为皇帝，没有成功，于是伪立其子留礼寿为帝，上京留守除室擒获之。
English: On the 10th day of the 5th month of the summer, the Han army rebelled in Beijing and tried to kidnap Xi Ying and install him as emperor. They were unsuccessful, so they falsely installed their son, Liu Lishou, as emperor, and captured him while he was away in Beijing.

古文：秋七月甲子，留礼寿伏诛。
现代文：秋七月二十九日，至蒲瑰坡。
English: On the 29th day of the 7th month of autumn, to Puji slope.

古文：冬十月，如蒲瑰坡。十一月辛亥，加除室同政事门下平章事。
现代文：十一月十七日，升任除室为同政事门下平章事。
English: On November 17th, he was promoted to the position of secretary-general.

古文：是月，以南院枢密使郭袭为武定军节度使。
现代文：同月，以南院枢密使郭袭为武定军节度使。
English: In the same month, Guo Gao, the envoy of the Southern Privy Council, was appointed as the envoy of the Wuding Army.

古文：十二月，以辽兴军节度使韩德让为南院枢密使。
现代文：十二月，以辽兴军节度使韩德让为南院枢密使。
English: In December, on the occasion of the Liao Xing Army Festival, Han Dezhen was appointed as the Privy Envoy of the Southern Yuan.

古文：四年春正月己亥，如华林、天柱。
现代文：四年春正月初六，至华林、天柱。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the fourth year of spring, to Hualin and Tianzhu.

古文：三月乙未，清明，与诸王大臣较射，宴饮。
现代文：三月初三，时值清明节。与诸大臣较量射艺，并宴饮。
English: On the third day of the third month of March, during the Qingming Festival, he competed in shooting with his ministers and had a banquet.

古文：夏四月，自将南伐。
现代文：夏四月，亲自统军南伐。
English: In the summer of April, he personally led the Southern Expedition.

古文：至满城，战不利，守太尉奚瓦里中流矢死。
现代文：至满城，交战失利，守太尉奚瓦里中流箭身亡。
English: After reaching Mancheng, the battle was lost, and the guarding officer, Second Lieutenant Xing Wali Zhongli, was killed by an arrow.

古文：统军使善补为伏兵所围，枢密使斜轸救免，诏以失备杖之。
现代文：统军使善补被伏兵包围，枢密使斜轸驰救，得免。诏令以疏于防备之罪杖责善补。
English: The unified army besieged and besieged Zenshu, and the imperial envoy, Xizhao, rushed to the rescue and was spared. The imperial edict punished Zenshu with the cane for the crime of being unprepared.

古文：五月，班师。清暑燕子城。
现代文：五月，班师，在燕子城避暑。
English: In May, the class teacher went to spend the summer in Swallow Town.

古文：秋七月壬辰，遣使赐喜隐死。
现代文：秋七月初三，派使者赐死喜隐。
English: On the third day of the seventh lunar month, he sent an envoy to grant death and rebirth.

古文：八月，如西京。
现代文：秋八月，至西京。
English: In the autumn and August, to Saikyo.

古文：九月庚子，幸云州。
现代文：九月十二日，临幸云州。
English: September 12, Linxing, Yunnan Province.

古文：甲辰，猎于祥古山，帝不豫。
现代文：十六日，出猎于祥古山，皇上病重。
English: On the 16th, he went hunting in the Xianggu Mountain, and the emperor fell seriously ill.

古文：壬子，次焦山，崩于行在。
现代文：二十四日，驻于焦山，在行宫驾崩。
English: On the 24th, he was stationed in Jiaoshan and passed away in Xinggu.

古文：年三十五，在位十三年。
现代文：时年三十五岁，在位十三年。
English: He was thirty-five years old and had been on the throne for thirteen years.

古文：遗诏梁王隆绪嗣位，军国大事听皇后命。
现代文：遗诏梁王隆绪即位，军国大事听从皇后命令。
English: Liang Wang Longxu ascended the throne, and the military and state affairs obeyed the queen's order.

古文：统和元年正月壬戌，上尊谥孝成皇帝，庙号景宗。
现代文：统和元年正月初五，奉上尊谥为孝成皇帝，庙号景宗。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the first year of the unification and the first year of the year, he was honored with the title of Emperor Xiaocheng, and the temple name was Jingzong.

古文：重熙二十一年，加谥孝成康靖皇帝。
现代文：重熙二十一年，加谥为孝成康靖皇帝。
English: In the twenty-first year of the reign of King Heung-hee, Emperor Kangjing succeeded to the throne.

