古文：臣闻： 不知而言，不智；知而不言，不忠。 
现代文：我听说： 不知道就发表意见，是不明智；知道了却不发表意见，是不忠诚。 
English: I've heard it said that it's unwise to express an opinion when you don't know, and it's disloyal not to express an opinion when you do know.

古文：为人臣不忠，当死；言而不当，亦当死。
现代文：作为臣子对君主不忠诚，该死；说话不合时宜，也该死。
English: As a vassal, if you are disloyal to the monarch, you deserve to die; if you speak out of turn, you also deserve to die.

古文：虽然，臣愿悉言所闻，唯大王裁其罪。
现代文：尽管这样，我还是愿意将我所见所听的全部讲出来，请大王裁断我进言之罪。
English: Nevertheless, I will tell of all that I have seen and heard, so that the king may judge me guilty of blasphemy.

古文：臣闻：天下阴燕阳魏，连荆固齐，收韩而成从，将西面以与秦强为难。
现代文：我听说：天下北燕南魏，连接楚国和齐国，纠合韩国而成合纵之势，打算向西与强大的秦国为敌。
English: I heard that the Northern Yan and the Southern Wei, connecting the states of Chu and Qi, and entangling Korea, formed a potential alliance, intending to move westward against the powerful state of Qin.

古文：臣窃笑之。
现代文：我私下觉得很好笑。
English: I can't help but laugh about this in private.

古文：世有三亡，而天下得之，其此之谓乎！
现代文：一个国家有三种灭亡途径，天下各诸侯国都具备了，说的大概就是现在六国合纵攻秦这种情况吧！
English: There are three ways for a country to perish, and all the principalities of the world have them. This is probably the situation of the six countries attacking Qin together!

古文：臣闻之曰： 以乱攻治者亡，以邪攻正者亡，以逆攻顺者亡 。
现代文：我曾听过这样的话： 用混乱的国家攻打安定的国家就会灭亡，用邪恶的国家攻打正义的国家就会灭亡，用倒行逆施的国家进攻顺乎天理的国家就会灭亡。 
English: I have heard it said: If you use a chaotic country to attack a stable country, you will perish; if you use an evil country to attack a righteous country, you will perish; if you use a perverted country to attack a righteous country, you will perish.

古文：今天下之府库不盈，囷仓空虚，悉其士民，张军数十百万，其顿首戴羽为将军断死于前不至千人，皆以言死。
现代文：如今各国诸侯的府库并不充足，粮仓空虚，还征发百姓，扩军数十百万，其中在将军面前叩头发誓要到前方冲锋陷阵决一死战的不下千人，都说不怕死。
English: Today, the treasuries of the princes of various countries are not sufficient, the granaries are empty, the people are still conscripted, and the army has expanded by tens of millions. Among them, no less than a thousand people, who have vowed to charge forward in front of the general and fight to the death, have said that they are not afraid of death.

古文：白刃在前，斧锧在后，而却走不能死也，非其士民不能死也，上不能故也。
现代文：但开战的时候，利刃当前，治罪的刑具在后，还是退却逃跑不能重逢拼死。不是这些士兵不能死战，而是六国君主不能使他们死战的缘故。
English: But when war comes, when the sword is ready and the scourge of crime lurks behind, retreat and flight cannot meet death. It is not that these soldiers cannot fight to the death, but that the monarchs of the six countries cannot make them fight to the death.

古文：言赏则不与，言罚则不行，赏罚不信，故士民不死也。
现代文：说要奖赏却不发放，说要惩罚却不执行，赏罚失信，所以士兵都不愿意去拼死。
English: Said to reward but not issued, said to punish but not implemented, reward and punishment dishonest, so soldiers are not willing to fight to the death.

古文：今秦出号令而行赏罚，有功无功相事也。
现代文：如今秦国公布法令严格施行赏罚，有功无功完全依照事实来定。
English: Nowadays, rewards and punishments are strictly enforced according to the laws promulgated by the State of Qin, and the merits and demerits are completely determined according to the facts.

古文：出其父母怀衽之中，生未尝见寇耳。闻战，顿足徒裼，犯白刃，蹈炉炭，断死于前者皆是也。
现代文：百姓自从脱离父母怀抱，生平还不曾见过敌人，但一听说打仗，跺脚赤膊，迎着利刃，赴汤蹈火，在战场血战而死的比比皆是。
English: People have never seen an enemy in their lives since they left their parents' arms, but as soon as they hear of war, they stomp their feet, go shirtless, face a sharp blade, go through fire and blood, and die on the battlefield.

古文：夫断死与断生者不同，而民为之者，是贵奋死也。
现代文：拼死和贪生不同，而百姓之所以愿意死战，这是因为他们崇尚舍生忘死的精神。
English: Fighting to the death is not the same as being greedy for life, and the reason why the people are willing to fight to the death is because they advocate the spirit of giving up life and forgetting death.

古文：夫一人奋死可以对十，十可以对百，百可以千，千可以对万，万可以克天下矣。
现代文：一人奋勇拼死可以抵挡十人，十个可以抵挡上百人，百人可以抵挡上千人，千人可以抵挡上万人，上万这样的人就可以攻取天下。
English: One person can resist ten people, ten people can resist a hundred people, a hundred people can resist a thousand people, a thousand people can resist ten thousand people, and ten thousand such people can conquer the world.

古文：今秦地折长补短，方数千里，名师数十百万。
现代文：如今秦国领土截长补短，方圆数千里，威名远扬的军队有几十上百万。
English: Today, Qin's territory is thousands of miles in circumference, and there are tens of millions of famous teachers.

古文：秦之号令赏罚，地形利害，天下莫若也。
现代文：秦国的法令赏罚严明，地理位置有利，天下没有一个国家比得上的。
English: The laws of Qin reward and punish severely, the geographical location is favorable, and there is no country in the world that can match it.

古文：以此与天下，天下不足兼而有也。
现代文：凭这些攻取天下，天下无需费力就可兼并占有。
English: Using this superior condition to compete with the world's princes, the whole world is not enough for Qin to annex.

古文：是故秦战未尝不克，攻未尝不取，所当未尝不破，开地数千里，此其大功也。
现代文：所以秦国作战没有不胜利的，攻城没有不夺取的，遇上抵抗的军队没有不被打败的，开辟封疆数千里，这是多大的成就。
English: Therefore, there is no war in Qin that is not victorious, there is no city that is not captured, there is no army that is not defeated in the face of resistance, and it is a great achievement to open up thousands of miles of closed territory.

古文：然而兵甲顿，士民病，蓄积索，田畴荒，囷仓虚，四邻诸侯不服，霸王之名不成。
现代文：但是就是这样强大的秦国，仍然是士兵疲惫，百姓困乏，积蓄用尽，田地荒芜，谷仓空虚，四邻诸侯都不归服，霸王大名不成。
English: However, such a powerful Qin state is still a tired soldier, a tired people, exhausted savings, barren fields, empty barns, four neighboring princes do not submit, and the overlord does not become famous.

古文：此无异故，其谋臣皆不尽其忠也。
现代文：这中间没有别的缘故，只是因为秦国谋臣都没有尽忠。
English: There was no other reason for this, but because Qin's advisors were not loyal.

古文：臣敢言之：往者齐南破荆，东破宋，西服秦，北破燕，中使韩、魏，土地广而兵强，战克攻取，诏令天下。
现代文：我斗胆进言：从前齐国南面打败楚军，东面击败宋国，西面迫使秦国顺服，北面击败燕国，居中役使韩、魏两国，领土广阔而兵力强盛，战无不胜，攻无不克，号令天下。
English: I dare to say: in the past, Qi defeated Chu in the south, Song in the east, Qin in the west, Yan in the north, and Han and Wei in the middle. The territory is vast and the military strength is strong. The war is invincible, the attack is all-encompassing, and the world is at your command.

古文：齐之清济浊河，足以为限；长城巨防，足以为塞。
现代文：齐国的济水、黄河，足以用作防线；长城、巨防，足以作为要塞。
English: The Jishui River and the Yellow River in Qi Province are enough to be used as defense lines; the Great Wall and the Great Wall are enough to be used as fortresses.

古文：齐，五战之国也，一战不克而无齐。
现代文：齐国曾经连续五次战胜其他国家，后来仅因一次战斗失利而濒于灭亡。
English: Qi once defeated other countries five times in a row, and later was on the verge of extinction after losing only one battle.

古文：由此观之，夫战者，万乘之存亡也。
现代文：由此看来，战争是一个国家存亡的根本。
English: From this perspective, war is fundamental to a country's survival.

古文：且闻之曰： 削迹无遗根，无与祸邻，祸乃不存。 
现代文：况且我听说这样的话； 砍树不要留根，不要靠近祸患，祸患就不会发生。 
English: Moreover, I have heard it said, Cut down a tree, but leave not the stump; approach not disaster, and there will be no disaster.

古文：秦与荆人战，大破荆，袭郢，取洞庭、五湖、江南，荆王君臣亡走，东服于陈。
现代文：秦军和楚军交战，大败楚军，击破鄂都，占领洞庭、五洛、江南一带，楚国君臣逃跑，在东面的陈城苟且设防。
English: The Qin army and the Chu army fought, defeated the Chu army, broke through the Edo, occupied Dongting, Wulao, and the south of the Yangtze River, the princes and ministers of Chu fled, and fortified Chencheng in the east.

古文：当此时也，随荆以兵，则荆可举；荆可举，则民足贪也，地足利也，东以弱齐、燕，中以凌三晋。
现代文：这个时候，用兵追歼楚军，就可占领楚国；既可占领楚国，楚民就足以归我所有，楚地就足以归我所用，向东面可进而削弱齐、燕，在中原可进而侵凌韩、赵、魏。
English: At this time, if I use soldiers to pursue and destroy the Chu army, I can occupy the state of Chu; if I can occupy the state of Chu, the people of Chu will be enough for me to own, and the land of Chu will be enough for me to use. To the east, I can further weaken Qi and Yan, and in the Central Plains, I can further invade Han, Zhao and Wei.

古文：然则是一举而霸王之名可成也，四邻诸侯可朝也，而谋臣不为，引军而退，复与荆人为和。令荆人得收亡国，聚散民，立社稷主，置宗庙，令率天下西面以与秦为难。
现代文：果能如此，那就是一举而可成就霸王之名，可使四邻诸侯都来朝拜。然而谋臣不这样做，却率领军队撤退，重新与楚人讲和，使楚人得以收复沦陷国土，聚集逃散百姓，重立社稷坛，设置宗庙，让他们统帅东方各国向西来和秦国作对。
English: If this could be done, then the name of the overlord could be achieved in one fell swoop, and the four neighboring lords could all come to worship. However, the advisers did not do this, but led the army to retreat, and made peace with the Chu people again, so that the Chu people could recover the fallen land, gather the scattered people, re-establish the shrine altar, set up the ancestral temple, and let them command the eastern countries to come west and fight against Qin.

古文：此固以失霸王之道一矣。
现代文：这的确是秦国第一次失去称霸天下的机会了。
English: This was indeed the first time that Qin lost the opportunity to dominate the world.

古文：天下又比周而军华下，大王以诏破之，兵至梁郭下。
现代文：合纵六国又紧密配合，驻军华阳之下，大王下诏击败他们，兵临大梁城下。
English: The allied six countries cooperated closely, the garrison under Huayang, the great king under Zhao defeated them, and the soldiers came under the Dalian Castle.

古文：围梁数旬，则梁可拔；拔梁，则魏可举；举魏，则荆、赵之意绝；荆、赵之意绝，则赵危；赵危而荆狐疑；此固以失霸王之道二矣。
现代文：包围大梁数十天，就可攻克大梁；攻克大梁，就可占领魏国；占领魏国，楚、赵联合的意图就无法实现了；楚、赵联合意图无法实现，赵国就危险了；赵国危险，楚国就会犹豫不决。
English: If the girders are encircled for dozens of days, the girders can be conquered; if the girders are conquered, Wei can be occupied; if Wei is occupied, the intention of Chu and Zhao to unite cannot be realized; if Chu and Zhao's joint intention cannot be realized, Zhao is in danger; if Zhao is in danger, Chu will hesitate.

古文：前者穰侯之治秦也，用一国之兵而欲以成两国之功，是故兵终身暴露于外，士民疲病于内，霸王之名不成。
现代文：这的确是秦国第二次失去称霸天下的机会了。先前穰侯治理秦国时，用一国的兵力而想建立两国的功业，因此士兵终身在野外艰苦作战，百姓在国内疲惫不堪，未能成就霸王之名。
English: This is indeed the second time that Qin has lost the opportunity to dominate the world. Previously, when the warlords ruled Qin, they wanted to use the military strength of one country to build the achievements of two countries. Therefore, the soldiers fought hard in the field for life, and the people were exhausted in the country, and failed to achieve the name of the overlord.

古文：此固以失霸王之道三矣。
现代文：这的确是秦国第三次失去称霸天下的机会了。
English: This is indeed the third time that Qin has lost the opportunity to dominate the world.

古文：赵氏，中央之国也，杂民所居也，其民轻而难用也。
现代文：赵国是处于天下之中央的国家，是杂民居住之地，国内百姓轻率且难以役使。
English: Zhao is a country in the center of the world, a place where miscellaneous people live, and the domestic people are imprudent and difficult to serve.

古文：号令不治，赏罚不信，地形不便，下不能尽其民力。
现代文：赵国的法令制度没有确立，赏罚执行不严，地形不利防守，又不能使下面的百姓尽力。
English: The legal system of Zhao was not established, the implementation of rewards and punishments was not strict, the terrain was not conducive to defense, and the people below could not be made to do their best.

古文：彼固亡国之形也，而不忧民萌，悉其士民军于长平之下，以争韩上党。
现代文：它本就处在亡国的形势下，仍不体恤百姓，征发全国百姓驻军在长平之下，来争夺韩国的上党。
English: It was already in the situation of losing the country, but it still did not have any sympathy for the people, and conscripted the whole country's people to garrison under Changping to compete for the top party in South Korea.

古文：大王以诏破之，拔武安。
现代文：大王您下令击败他们，占领了赵国的武安。
English: You, the great king, ordered to defeat them and occupied Wu'an in Zhao.

古文：当是时也，赵氏上下不相亲也，贵贱不相信也。
现代文：在这个时候，赵国君臣之间相互不能亲近，权贵与平民相互不信任。
English: At this time, Zhao's princes and ministers could not get close to each other, and the nobles and commoners distrusted each other.

古文：然则邯郸不守。
现代文：这样邯郸就会失守。
English: In this way, the cocoon will be lost.

古文：拔邯郸，管山东河间，引军而去，西攻修武，逾华，绛代、上党。
现代文：秦军攻取邯郸，包抄崤山以东和黄河、漳水之间的地区，引军而去，向西进攻修武，越过要塞羊肠，降服代郡、上党。
English: The Qin army captured Lushan, encircled the area east of Lushan and between the Yellow River and Surabaya, led the army away, attacked westward, crossed the fortress of Yangsi, and surrendered to the Dai County and Shang Party.

古文：代四十六县，上党七十县，不用一领甲，不苦一士民，此皆秦有也。
现代文：代郡四十六县，上党十七县，不用一兵一甲，不劳一个百姓，这些地方就都为秦国所有。
English: Forty-six counties of the deputies and seventeen counties of the upper party do not need one soldier and one soldier, and one people do not need to work. These places are all owned by Qin.

古文：以代、上党不战而毕为秦矣，东阳、河外不战而毕反为齐矣，中山、呼沲以北不战而毕为燕矣。
现代文：代郡、上党不经战斗就全部归秦国所有，东阳、滹沱河外不经交战而全归齐有，中山、滹沱河以北地区不经战斗而全归燕有。
English: Dayi County and Shangdang all became the property of Qin without a battle, Dongyang and the area outside the Min River all became the property of Qin without a battle, Zhongshan and the area north of the Min River all became the property of Yan without a battle.

古文：然则是赵举，赵举则韩亡，韩亡则荆、魏不能独立，荆、魏不能独立，则是一举而坏韩、蠹魏、拔荆，东以弱齐、燕，决白马之口以沃魏氏，是一举而三晋亡，从者败也。
现代文：这样赵国就被占领了；赵国被占领，韩国就灭亡了；韩国灭亡，楚、魏就不能独自存在；楚、魏不能独自存在，就是一举而摧毁了韩国、破坏了魏国、挟制了楚国，向东面进而削弱齐、燕，进而打开白马渡口来淹魏国，这是一举而消灭韩、赵、魏三国，合纵也就失败了。
English: In this way, Zhao was occupied; Zhao was occupied, South Korea was destroyed; South Korea was destroyed, Chu and Wei could not exist alone; Chu and Wei could not exist alone, that is, in one fell swoop, they destroyed South Korea, destroyed Wei, pinched Chu, and moved eastward to weaken Qi and Yan, and then opened the Baima Ferry to flood Wei. In one fell swoop, they destroyed South Korea, Zhao, and Wei, and the unification failed.

古文：大王垂拱以须之，天下编随而服矣，霸王之名可成。
现代文：大王本可安闲地等待着，天下诸侯一个个都跟着臣服了，霸王之名也就可以成就。
English: The great king could have waited in peace and quiet, all the princes of the world would have submitted one by one, and the name of the overlord could have been achieved.

古文：而谋臣不为，引军而退，复与赵氏为和。
现代文：然而谋臣不这样做，却率领军队撤退，又和赵人讲和。
English: However, the counselor did not do so, but led the army to retreat and made peace with the Zhao people.

古文：夫以大王之明，秦兵之强，弃霸王之业，地曾不可得，乃取欺于亡国。是谋臣之拙也。
现代文：凭大王的英明，秦国的强大，放弃霸王之业，土地还没得到，竞又被将灭的赵国欺骗，这是谋臣的笨拙。
English: Relying on the wisdom of the great king, the strength of the Qin state, giving up the occupation of the overlord, the land has not yet been obtained, and being deceived by the Zhao state, which will be destroyed, this is the clumsiness of the strategist.

古文：且夫赵当亡而不亡，秦当霸而不霸，天下固以量秦之谋臣一矣。
现代文：再说赵国应当灭亡而不灭亡，秦国应当称霸而不称霸，天下一定凭此估量秦国的谋臣，这是一。
English: Furthermore, Zhao should perish but not perish, Qin should dominate but not dominate, and the world must judge Qin's strategists by this.

古文：乃复悉士卒以攻邯郸，不能拔也，弃甲兵弩，战竦而却，天下固已量秦力二矣。
现代文：接着竞又征调全部兵力去攻打邯郸，不但没能攻下，还丢掉盔甲兵器，战栗地退却，天下一定凭此估量秦国的武力，这是二。
English: Next, they sent all their forces to attack and fight against Qin. Not only did they fail to capture it, but they also threw away their armored weapons and retreated in fear. The world must use this to estimate the strength of Qin. This is the second.

古文：军乃引而复，并于孚下，大王又并军而至，与战不能克之也，又不能反，军罢而去，天下固量秦力三矣。
现代文：于是把军队带了回来，汇合在李下一带，大王又派来了援军，参与战斗而不能打败敌人，又不能撤回，军队疲困而退兵，天下一定凭此估量秦国的实力，这是三。
English: So he brought the army back, and they converged in the lower reaches of the Li River. The great king also sent reinforcements. They took part in the battle, but they could not defeat the enemy, nor could they withdraw. The army was exhausted and withdrew. The world must use this to estimate the strength of Qin. This is the third.

古文：内者量吾谋臣，外者极吾兵力。
现代文：内部估量到我国的谋臣，外部耗尽了我国的兵力。
English: On the inside, he saw through the strategists of Qin, and on the outside, he saw through the soldiers of Qin.

古文：由是观之，臣以为天下之从，几不能矣。
现代文：由此看来，我认为六国的合纵，差不多不难了。
English: From this point of view, I think that the merger of the six countries is almost not difficult.

古文：内者，吾甲兵顿，士民病，蓄积索，田畴荒，囷仓虚；外者，天下皆比意甚固。
现代文：国内，我士兵困顿，百姓疲弊，积蓄用尽，田地荒芜，谷仓空虚；国外，六国都怀着合纵的牢固信念。
English: Domestically, our soldiers are in trouble, the people are exhausted, savings are exhausted, fields are barren, barns are empty; abroad, the six countries all have a firm belief in unification.

古文：愿大王有以虑之也。
现代文：希望大王切实考虑这些形势。
English: It is hoped that the king will seriously consider these situations.

古文：且臣闻之曰： 战战栗栗，日慎一日，苟慎其道，天下可有。 
现代文：况且我还听说： 畏惧戒备，一天比一天谨慎。如能谨慎地遵循治理的原则，就可以得到天下。 
English: Moreover, I have heard it said, "Beware, be on your guard, and be more careful every day. If you can carefully follow the principles of governance, you can gain the world."

古文：何以知其然也？
现代文：怎么知道是这样的呢？
English: How do you know that's the case?

古文：昔者纣为天子，将率天下甲兵百万，左饮于淇溪，右饮于洹溪，淇水竭而洹水不流，以与周武王为难。
现代文：从前纣做天子，准备率天下的百万军队，东到淇溪饮水，西到洹溪饮水，淇溪的水喝干了洹溪也喝得断流了，用这样强大的军队来和周武王交战。
English: Once upon a time, he was the son of heaven, ready to lead the world's million-strong army. He went east to drink water from Qi Creek, and west to drink water from Fenxi Creek. When the water from Qi Creek dried up, he drank so much from Fenxi Creek that the stream was cut off. He used such a powerful army to fight against King Zhou.

古文：武王将素甲三千，战一日，而破纣之国，禽其身，据其地而有其民，天下莫伤。
现代文：武王率领素服甲士三千，作战一天，就攻破了国都，活捉了纣王，占据他的领土，拥有了他的人民，天下没有人同情他。
English: King Wu led three thousand plain-clothed knights in a one-day battle, and broke through the capital, captured the king alive, occupied his territory, and possessed his people. No one in the world sympathized with him.

古文：知伯率三国之众以攻赵襄主于晋阳，决水而灌之三月，城且拔矣，襄主钻龟筮占兆，以视利害，何国可降。
现代文：智伯统率三家大军攻打晋阳的赵襄子，决开晋水河堤灌城三个月，城快要攻破了，襄子通过卜筮占卦来推测利害吉凶，看哪一家军队可以投降。
English: Zhibo led three large armies to attack Zhao Xiangzi in Jinyang. They broke the dam of the Jinshui River and poured water into the city for three months. The city was about to be breached. Xiangzi used divination to predict the fortunes and see which army could surrender.

古文：乃使其臣张孟谈。
现代文：便派自己的家臣张孟谈出使。
English: He then sent his vassal Zhang Meng as envoy.

古文：于是乃潜行而出，反知伯之约，得两国之众，以攻知伯，禽其身，以复襄主之初。
现代文：张孟谈因此秘密出城，使韩、魏背弃了与智伯订立的盟约，争取到韩、魏两家的军队来一同反攻智伯，活捉了智伯本人，从而恢复了赵襄子原来的势力。
English: As a result, Zhang Mengdan secretly left the city, causing Han and Wei to renege on the alliance they had made with Zhibo. He managed to get the armies of Han and Wei to counterattack Zhibo together, and captured Zhibo himself alive, thereby restoring Zhao Xiangzi's original power.

古文：今秦地折长补短，方数千里，名师数十百万。
现代文：如今秦国领土截长补短，方圆数千里，名师有数十百万之众。
English: Today, Qin's territory is thousands of miles in circumference, and there are tens of millions of famous teachers.

古文：秦国之号令赏罚，地形利害，天下莫如也。
现代文：秦国的法令赏罚严明，地理位置有利，天下没有一个国家比得上的。
English: The laws of Qin reward and punish severely, the geographical location is favorable, and there is no country in the world that can match it.

古文：此与天下，可兼而有也。
现代文：凭这些攻取天下，可以兼并占有天下。
English: With these to conquer the world, you can annex and occupy the world.

古文：臣昧死愿望见大王，言所以破天下之从，举赵，亡韩，臣荆、魏，亲齐、燕，以成霸王之名，朝四邻诸侯之道。
现代文：我冒死盼望见到大王，论说用来破坏天下合纵，攻取赵国，灭掉韩国，使楚、魏前来臣服，让齐燕前来投靠，进而成就霸王的名声，叫四邻诸侯向秦朝拜的策略。
English: I risked my life in the hope of seeing the great king, and discussed the strategy that was used to destroy the world, conquer Zhao, destroy Korea, make Chu and Wei come to submit, let Qi Yan come to take refuge, and then achieve the reputation of the overlord and make the four neighboring princes worship Qin.

古文：大王诚听其说，一举而天下之从不破，赵不举，韩不亡，荆、魏不臣，齐、燕不北，霸王之名不成，四邻诸侯不朝，大王斩臣以徇国，以为王谋不忠者也。
现代文：大王果真听取我的策略，一举而天下合纵不能离散，赵不能攻取，韩不能灭亡，楚、魏不能臣服，齐、燕不来投靠，霸王之名不能成就，四邻诸侯不来朝拜的话，大王你可以将我杀死并将我的尸首示众，以此作为替大王谋划不能尽忠的人的前诫。
English: The great king truly listened to my strategy. In one fell swoop, the world cannot be separated, Zhao cannot be conquered, Han cannot be destroyed, Chu and Wei cannot be subjugated, Qi and Yan will not come to help, and the name of the overlord cannot be achieved. If the four neighboring princes do not come to worship, the great king can kill me and show my corpse to the public as a warning to those who cannot be loyal to the great king.

