古文：夫圣贤之书，教人诚孝，慎言检迹，立身扬名，亦已备矣。
现代文：古代圣贤们的书籍，主要教导人们要忠诚孝顺，言语要谨慎，行为要检点，建功立业使名播扬等道理，这些已经说得非常的详细全面了。
English: The books of the ancient sages mainly teach people to be loyal and filial, to be cautious in speech, to be prudent in behavior, to make achievements and make their names known, etc. These have been said in great detail and comprehensively.

古文：魏、晋已来，所著诸子，理重事复，递相模学，犹屋下架屋，床上施床耳。
现代文：魏晋以来，阐述古代圣贤思想的书，类似的道理重复，内容非常接近，这就好比屋内再建造一个屋子，床上再放上一张床一样，显得多馀且无用。
English: Since the Wei and Jin dynasties, the books that expound the thoughts of ancient sages have repeated similar principles, and the content is very close. This is like building another room inside the house and putting another bed on the bed. It seems superfluous and useless.

古文：吾今所以复为此者，非敢轨物范世也，业以整齐门内，提撕子孙。
现代文：我如今再写一部类似的《家训》，并非是敢于给大家在办事为人处世方面作什么规范，只是作为整顿家风，警醒子孙后代罢了。
English: I am now writing a similar "family training" again, not because I dare to give everyone some kind of standard in terms of doing things and dealing with the world, but only as a way to rectify the family style and alert future generations.

古文：夫同言而信，信其所亲；同命而行，行其所服。
现代文：同样的一句话，因为是亲近的人说出来的就相信；同样的命令，因为是佩服的人发出的就会执行。
English: The same sentence, because it is uttered by someone close, is believed; the same order, because it is issued by someone admired, is carried out.

古文：禁童子之暴谑，则师友之诫不如傅婢之指挥，止凡人之斗阋，则尧、舜之道不如寡妻之诲谕。
现代文：禁止小孩的胡闹嬉笑，师友的劝诫不如婢女的命令；阻止兄弟间的打闹争吵，尧舜的教导还不如妻子的劝解。
English: Forbidding children to play and laugh, the exhortation of a mentor is not as good as the order of a maid; to prevent quarrels between brothers, the instruction of a wife is not as good as the persuasion of a wife.

古文：吾望此书为汝曹之所信，犹贤于傅婢寡妻耳。
现代文：我希望这《家训》这本书能被你们所遵信，希望它能胜过婢女对幼童、妻子对丈夫所起的作用。
English: And I hope that this book of the law shall be unto you for a memorial, and that it shall be better than a maid unto her young children, and a wife unto her husband.

古文：吾家风教，素为整密。
现代文：我家的门风家教，向来严谨细密。
English: My family's style of homeschooling has always been rigorous and meticulous.

古文：昔在龆龀，便蒙诱诲；每从两兄，晓夕温凊，规行矩步，安辞定色，锵锵翼翼，若朝严君焉。
现代文：在我小的时候，就受到诱导教诲。每天跟随两位兄弟，早晚孝顺侍奉双亲，言语平和，举止端正，大方得体，恭敬有礼小心翼翼，就像朝见威严的君王一样。
English: When I was a child, I was taught to follow my two brothers every day, to serve my parents morning and evening with filial piety, to speak peacefully, to behave well, to be generous and decent, to be respectful and courteous, and to be careful, just like a dignified king.

古文：赐以优言，问所好尚，励短引长，莫不恳笃。
现代文：父母经常劝勉鼓励我们，询问我们的爱好，督促我们改正缺点，引导优点我们发扬自己的，都既恳切又恰当。
English: Parents often exhort and encourage us, inquire about our hobbies, urge us to correct our shortcomings, guide our strengths, and promote ourselves, all of which are earnest and appropriate.

古文：年始九岁，便丁荼蓼，家涂离散，百口索然。
现代文：我九岁的时候，父亲去世，家道衰落，全家离散零落。
English: When I was nine years old, my father died, my family fell apart, and the whole family was scattered.

古文：慈兄鞠养，苦辛备至；有仁无威，导示不切。
现代文：兄长抚养我，极其辛苦，但是他仁爱而少威严，对我引导启示也不那么严切。
English: My elder brother raised me with great difficulty, but he was benevolent and not overbearing, and his guidance and revelation to me were not so strict.

古文：虽读《礼》、《传》，微爱属文，颇为凡人之所陶染，肆欲轻言，不修边幅。
现代文：我当时虽也诵读《周礼》、《春秋左传》，对写文章也，很大程度有一些兴趣，但因为与平庸之人相交受到影响，欲望放纵，言语轻率，且不修边幅。
English: At that time, although I also read "Weekly Rituals" and "Spring and Autumn" and had a great deal of interest in writing articles, I was influenced by the intercourse with mediocre people, indulged in desires, spoke rashly, and was unkempt.

古文：年十八九，少知砥砺，习若自然，卒难洗荡。
现代文：到十八九岁，才稍加磨砺，但已习惯成自然，短时间内很难改掉。
English: At the age of eighteen or nineteen, it takes a bit of polishing, but it has become natural and it is difficult to change it in a short time.

古文：二十已后，大过稀焉；每常心共口敌，性与情竞，夜觉晓非，今悔昨失，自怜无教，以至于斯。
现代文：到二十岁以后，大的过错很少发生，但还是常常心是口非，善性与私情相矛盾，晚上才发现白天的错误，今天才悔恨昨天犯下的过失，自己常叹息由於缺乏教育，这都是因为自己从小缺乏教育才会走到这一地步。
English: After the age of twenty, big mistakes rarely occur, but often the heart is duplicitous, the good nature contradicts the personal feelings, the mistakes of the day are only found in the evening, the mistakes committed yesterday are only regretted today, and they often sigh due to lack of education. This is because they lack education since childhood.

古文：追思平昔之指，铭肌镂骨，非徒古书之诫，经目过耳也。
现代文：回想起平生的意愿志趣，这种体会刻骨铭心；绝不仅仅是把古书上的告诫听一遍看一遍就能体会得到的。
English: The experience of recalling one's life-long aspiration is unforgettable; it is by no means something that can be experienced just by reading and listening to the exhortation in the old book.

古文：故留此二十篇，以为汝曹后车耳。
现代文：所以写下这二十篇文字，给你们作为鉴戒。
English: Therefore I am writing these twenty sayings to you as a warning.

