古文：上亲郊郊庙，册文皆曰 恭荐歳事 。
现代文：皇上亲临南郊，参加祭天、太庙祭祖的典礼，写在典册上的祷祝文字都称 恭荐岁事 。
English: The emperor himself came to the southern suburbs to participate in the ceremony of the Festival of the Ancestors of the Temple of Heaven and the Temple of Heaven. The prayers written in the handbook are called "Anniversary."

古文：先景灵宫，谓之 朝献 ；次太庙，谓之 朝飨 ；末乃有事于南郊。
现代文：先到景灵宫荐享，称之为 朝献 ；然后到太庙行祭，称之为 朝飨 ；最后才到南郊祭天。
English: First, it is recommended to go to the Jingling Palace, which is called the morning offering; then to the Great Temple, which is called the morning meal; and finally to the southern suburb, which is called the day of sacrifice.

古文：予集《郊式》时，曾预讨论，常疑其次序，若先为尊，则郊不应在庙后；若后为尊，则景灵宫不应在太庙之先。
现代文：我在编集《南郊式》时，曾参与讨论，每每怀疑这三项典礼的次序：如果以先祀者为尊，则祭天的郊祀不应在祭祖的庙祀之后；如果以后祀者为尊，则景灵宫之祀又不应在太庙之前。
English: When I was compiling "Southern Suburbs," I participated in discussions, and I always doubted the order of these three ceremonies: if the first worshiper is revered, then the suburban worship of the gods should not be after the temple worship of the ancestors; if the later worshiper is revered, then the worship of the Jingling Temple should not be before the Great Temple.

古文：求共所从来，盖有所因。
现代文：考察这种次序的由来，它原是有所因袭的。
English: Examining the origin of this order, it turns out that there is a reason for it.

古文：按唐故事，凡有事地上帝，则百神皆预遣使祭告，唯太清宫、太庙则皇帝亲行。
现代文：按唐朝的旧制，凡是祭祀上天，则对众多神庙都预先派遣使者祭告，只有太清宫、太庙的祭祀，皇帝才亲自参加。
English: According to the old system of the Tang Dynasty, whenever a sacrifice was offered to the heavens, an emissary was dispatched in advance to announce the sacrifice to numerous temples. Only the sacrifices of the Taiqing Palace and the Tai Temple were attended by the emperor in person.

古文：其册祝皆曰 取某月某日有事于某所，不敢不告。 
现代文：所有典册祷祝文字都称： 定于某月某日，到某处行祭，不敢不祷告于神灵。 
English: All the prayer and blessing texts in the manuals say: "Set aside a certain day in a certain month, go to a certain place for a festival, and do not dare not to pray to the gods."

古文：宫、庙谓之 奏告 ，余皆谓之 祭告 。唯有事于南郊，方为 正祠 。
现代文：太清宫、太庙的祭祀称为 奏告 ，其余诸神庙称为 祭告 ，只有南郊之祀才是按规定进行的正式大典礼。
English: The rites of the Taiqing Palace and the Grand Temple are called "reporting," and the rest of the temples are called "reporting." Only the rites of the Southern Suburbs are the official grand ceremonies according to regulations.

古文：至天宝九载，乃下诏曰：  告 者，上告下之词。
现代文：至天宝九载，却又下诏说： 所谓 告 ，本是在上位者对下属谈话的用词。
English: Nine years later, however, he issued another edict: The so-called "give notice" was originally a term for a superior to speak to a subordinate.

古文：今后太清宫宜称 朝献 ，太庙称 朝飨 。 
现代文：今后太清宫的祭礼应该称为 朝献 ，太庙的祭礼称为 朝飨 。 
English: In the future, the festival of the Taiching Palace should be called the morning offering, and the festival of the Taimiao should be called the morning meal.

古文：自此遂失 奏告 之名，册文皆为 正祠 。
现代文：自此以后， 奏告 的名目就不用了，太清宫、太庙的典册祝文遂皆与按规定进行的郊祀大礼无别。
English: Since then, the name of the report is no longer needed, and the books of congratulations of the Taichung Palace and the Taichung Grand Temple are all the same as the suburb worship ceremony carried out according to regulations.

古文：正衙法座，香木为之，加金饰，四足，堕角，其前小偃，织藤冒之。
现代文：正衙的法座，是由香木制成，再用黄金装饰，四条腿，圆角，它的前部略为凹陷，座面上覆盖着藤织物。
English: The seat of the throne is made of fragrant wood, decorated with gold, four legs, rounded corners, its front is slightly sunken, and the seat is covered with rattan fabric.

古文：每车驾出幸，则使老内臣马上抱之，曰 驾头 。
现代文：每当皇帝出巡，就让一个老太监在马上抱着它，称为 驾头 。
English: Whenever the emperor went on a tour, he had an old eunuch carry him on a horse, which was called a "chauffeur."

古文：辇后曲盖谓之 筤 。两扇夹心，通谓之 扇筤 。
现代文：皇上车驾后的曲盖称为 筤 ，左右两柄扇子夹着筤，总称为 扇筤 。
English: The curved cover after the imperial carriage is called the fan, and the two fans on the left and right hold the fan, which is called the fan.

古文：皆绣，亦有销金者，即古之华盖也。
现代文：扇和筤上都绣有花纹，有的扇筤所绣的花纹还是用金线绣的，这就是古代的 华盖 。
English: Both the fan and the fan cover are embroidered with patterns, and some fan cover embroidered patterns are still embroidered with gold thread, which is the ancient "Hua Gai."

古文：唐翰林院在禁中，乃人主燕居之所，玉堂、承明、金銮殿皆在其间。
现代文：唐代翰林院设置在皇宫内，是皇帝平日的休闲之所，浴堂殿、承明殿、金銮殿都在翰林院的附近。
English: The Tang Dynasty Hanlin Courtyard was located in the Imperial Palace and was the emperor's place of leisure on weekdays. The bath hall, the Chengming Hall, and the Golden Pavilion were all near the Hanlin Courtyard.

古文：应供奉之人，自学士已下，工伎群官司隶籍其间者，皆称翰林，如今之翰林医官、翰林待诏之类是也。
现代文：所有在翰林院供职的官员，自学士以下，以及各技艺部门的人隶属本院的，都可称为翰林，就好比现在的翰林医官、翰林待诏之类都是。
English: All officials serving in the Hanlin Academy, from the bachelor level and below, as well as people in various technical departments affiliated with the academy, can be called Hanlin, just like the current Hanlin medical officer, Hanlin waits for the emperor and the like.

古文：唯翰林茶酒司止称 翰林司 ，盖相承阙文。
现代文：只有翰林茶酒司，现在只称翰林司，大约是因为习俗相沿而省略的。
English: Only the Hanlin Tea and Wine Company, now known as the Hanlin Tea and Wine Company, was omitted, probably because of the similarity in customs.

古文：唐制，自宰相而下，初命皆无宣召之礼，惟学士宣召。
现代文：唐朝制度，自宰相以下官员，新任命时都没有皇帝传旨入使就职的礼节，唯独会宣召学士。
English: In the Tang Dynasty system, officials from the Prime Minister downwards did not have the courtesy of the emperor's order to the envoy when they were newly appointed. Only the bachelor would be called up.

古文：盖学士院在禁中，非内臣宣召，无因得入，故院门别设復门，亦以其通禁庭也。
现代文：这是由于学士院地处皇宫内，除非皇帝派宦官传旨召入，否则就不能入内任职。所以学士院门另设有旁门，也是为了以此门连通皇帝居住的殿庭。
English: This is due to the fact that the Academy is located in the Imperial Palace, and unless the emperor sends eunuchs to summon them, they cannot enter and serve in the palace. Therefore, the door of the Academy has another side door, also in order to connect the courtyard where the emperor lives with this door.

古文：又学士院北扉者，为其在浴堂之南，便于应召。
现代文：学士院又开有北门，是因为该院在浴堂之南，便于应召。
English: The academy also has a north gate, because the academy is south of the bathhouse, making it easy to be summoned.

古文：今学士初拜，自东华门入，至左承天门下马；待诏、院吏自左承天门双引至门。此亦用唐故事也。
现代文：现在新任命的学士，由东华门进入，到左承天门下马听命，然后由院中两吏人一前一后引至东上閤门下，这也是用唐代旧制的典故。
English: Now, the newly appointed bachelor enters from the Donghua Gate, dismounts at the Zuo Cheng Tian Gate and obeys orders, and then is led by two officials in the courtyard to the East Shangyuan Gate, which is also an allusion to the old system in the Tang Dynasty.

古文：唐宣召学士，自东门入者，彼时学士院在西掖，故自翰林院东门赴召，非若今之东华门也。
现代文：不过唐代传旨召学士而由东门进入，是因为那时学士院在西掖门内，所以要从翰林院东门赴召，这个东门并非如现在的东华门。
English: However, in the Tang Dynasty, the call for bachelors came from the east gate, because at that time the academy was in the west gate, so they had to go from the east gate of the Hanlin Academy. This east gate was not like the present Donghua Gate.

古文：至如挽铃故事，亦缘其在禁中，虽学士院吏，亦止于玉堂门外，则其严密可知。
现代文：至于唐代学士院设置铃索的故事，也因为该院在皇宫内，即使是院中吏人也只在本院正厅的门外活动，则本院森严禁密的程度可知。
English: As for the story of the bungee cord set up in the Tang Dynasty Academy, since the academy was located in the imperial palace, even the officials of the academy only operated outside the main hall of the academy, it can be seen that the academy was strictly forbidden to be secretive.

古文：如今学士院在外，与诸司无异，亦设铃索，悉皆文具故事而已。
现代文：如今学士院在皇宫之外，与朝廷各机构无异，而也设置铃索，都不过是徒具形式的文饰故事而已。
English: Today, outside the palace, the academy is no different from the institutions of the imperial court, and the setting up of the cableway is nothing more than an ornamental story in an empty form.

古文：学士院玉堂，太宗皇帝曾亲幸。至今唯学士上日许正坐，他日皆不敢独坐。
现代文：学士院玉堂，太宗皇帝曾亲自临视，至今只有学士上任之日才被允许坐到大堂的正座上，其他日子都不敢擅自坐上去。
English: In the Great Hall of the Academy of the Bachelors, Emperor Taizong once personally visited, so far only the day when the bachelors took office was allowed to sit on the main seat in the lobby, and they did not dare to sit on it without permission on other days.

古文：故事：堂中设视草台，每草制，则具衣冠据台而坐。
现代文：根据旧例，堂上有起草文件用的台子，学士每起草诏制，即穿戴好官服端坐于台前。
English: According to the old practice, there is a table for drafting documents in the hall, and every time a bachelor drafts an edict, he must wear an official uniform and sit in front of the table.

古文：今不復如此，但存空台而已。
现代文：现在不再这样做，就只剩一个空台子了。
English: If we don't do that now, we're just going to have an empty table.

古文：玉堂东承旨子窗格上有火然处。
现代文：玉堂东面翰林学士承旨的閤子，窗格上有一块被火烧灼过的地方。
English: On the east side of the Jade Hall, there is a lattice designed by Hanlin, and there is a place on the window pane that has been burned by fire.

古文：太宗尝夜幸玉堂，苏易简为学士，已寝，遽起，无烛具衣冠，宫嫔自窗格引烛入照之。
现代文：太宗曾夜间来到玉堂，苏易简为学士，已经睡下而匆忙起床，无烛火照明穿戴官服，随从太宗的宫女就从窗格子里伸进蜡烛给他照明。
English: Emperor Taizong once came to the Jade Hall at night. Su Yizhen, a scholar, had already fallen asleep and got up in a hurry. He wore official clothes without candlelight. The concubine of Emperor Taizong put a candle in the window to light it for him.

古文：至今不欲更易，以为玉堂一盛事。
现代文：至今学士院不打算更换这扇被烧灼过的窗子，以为它代表了玉堂的一件盛事。
English: To this day, the Academy has no intention of replacing the burnt window, believing that it represents a great event in the Great Hall.

古文：东西头供奉官，本唐从官之名。
现代文：东、西头供奉官，原本是唐代从官的名号。
English: The east and west ends were dedicated to officials, which was originally the name of officials in the Tang Dynasty.

古文：自永微以后，人主多居大明宫，别置从官，谓之 东头供奉官 。
现代文：自永徽年间以后，皇上常居住在大明宫，在大明宫另外设置从官，称为 东头供奉官 。
English: From the Yonghui era onwards, the emperor often resided in the Daiming Palace, and an attendant was also set up in the Daiming Palace, known as the Dongtou offering officer.

古文：西内具员不废，则谓之 西头供奉官 。
现代文：而西边大内的原有从官也不废除，称为 西头供奉官 。
English: However, the original attendant of the West Side University was not abolished, and was called the West Head Attendant.

古文：唐制，两省供奉官东西对立，谓之 蛾眉班 。
现代文：唐代制度，中书、门下两省的供奉官东西对立，称作 蛾眉班 。
English: The Tang Dynasty system, in which the central government and the two subordinate provinces were in opposition to each other, was called the Moth-Eyed Class.

古文：国初，供奉班于百官前横列。
现代文：本朝初年，供奉官在百官之前横列。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taizong, the officiating officials were lined up in front of hundreds of officials.

古文：王溥罢相为东宫，一品班在供奉班之后，遂令供奉班依旧分立。
现代文：王溥由宰相改任太子太保时，一品班在供奉班的后面，朝廷于是下令供奉班依旧东西对立。
English: When Wang Qian was transferred from the post of prime minister to the post of the prince's bodyguard, the first class was at the back of the offering class. The court then ordered that the offering class remain in opposition to the east and west.

古文：庆历贾安公为中丞，以东西班对拜为非礼，復令横行。
现代文：庆历年间，贾昌朝担任中丞时，他认为东西班互相作揖不符合礼法，朝廷又下令供奉官横列。
English: During the Qing Dynasty, when the Jia Chang Dynasty served as the middle commander, he believed that the East-West classes were not in line with the etiquette, and the court ordered the officials to line up.

古文：至今初叙班分立；百官班定，乃转班横行；参罢，復分立；百官班退，乃出。
现代文：现今供奉官在殿外初叙班的时候，东西分立；百官上殿重新排好班次后，供奉官又改为横列；参拜皇帝完毕后，供奉官又重新东西分立；百官分班退出大殿后，供奉官才出殿。
English: Nowadays, when the votive offering officials are on their first shift outside the hall, the east and west are separated; after the hundred officials go up to the hall, the votive offering officials are rearranged; after the emperor's visit, the votive offering officials are separated again; after the hundred officials leave the hall, the votive offering officials come out of the hall.

古文：参用旧制也。
现代文：这种方式是参用了以前的制度。
English: This is a continuation of the previous system.

古文：中国衣冠，自北齐以来，乃全用胡服。
现代文：中国的衣冠服饰，自北齐以来，便全用北方少数民族的服制。
English: Since the Northern Qi Dynasty, clothing in China has been entirely based on the dress code of the northern ethnic minorities.

古文：窄袖、绯绿短衣、长靿靴、有鞢带，皆胡服也。
现代文：袖子窄瘦、或红或绿的短上衣、长筒靴、带有装饰蹀躞的腰带，这些都是北方少数民族的服饰。
English: Skinny-sleeved, red or green jackets, jackboots, belts with decorative buckles - these are the clothes of the northern minorities.

古文：窄袖利于驰射，短衣、长靿皆便于涉草。
现代文：袖子窄瘦便于驰射，短上衣、长筒靴都方便跋涉草地。
English: The narrow and thin sleeves are convenient for sprinting, and the short jacket and boots are convenient for trudging through the grass.

古文：胡人乐茂草，常寝处其间，予使北时皆见之。虽王庭亦在深荐中。
现代文：北方少数民族喜欢茂盛的草地，经常居处其间，我出使辽国时都曾亲眼看到，即使他们的王庭也在深草之中。
English: The northern ethnic minorities like lush meadows and often live in them. When I was on a mission to Liaoning Province, I saw with my own eyes that even their royal court was in the deep grass.

古文：予至胡庭日，新雨过，涉草，衣裤皆濡，唯胡人都无所沾。
现代文：我到辽国王庭时，正碰上刚下过雨，此时过草地，衣裤都沾湿了，只有辽人都无沾湿。
English: When I arrived at King Liao's court, it had just rained, and I was walking through the meadow. My clothes and pants were wet. Only Liao people were not wet.

古文：带衣所垂蹀躞，盖欲佩带弓剑、帉帨、算囊、刀砺之类。
现代文：他们腰带上所缀的蹀躞，大概是为了佩带弓剑、手巾、算袋、刀子和磨石之类东西的。
English: The scabbards on their belts were probably used to carry things like bows and swords, handkerchiefs, satchels, knives and grindstones.

古文：自后虽去蹀躞，而犹存其环，环所以衔蹀躞，如马之鞧根，即今之带銙也。
现代文：后来虽然去掉了蹀躞，而仍然保存着蹀躞的环。这种环是用来衔着蹀躞的，就像马车上络马股的革带上的套环，也就是现在腰带上的銙。
English: Later, although the yoke was removed, the ring of the yoke was still preserved. This ring was used to hold the yoke, like the sleeve on the leather belt of the horse's crotch in the carriage, which is now the yoke on the belt.

古文：天子必以十三环为节，唐武德贞观时犹尔。
现代文：天子的腰带必以十三环作为分节的装饰，唐初武德、贞观年间也还是这样。
English: The belt of the Son of Heaven must be decorated with thirteen rings as subsections, and this was also the case during the years of martial arts and chastity in the early Tang Dynasty.

古文：开元之后，虽仍旧俗，而稍褒博矣。
现代文：开元年间以后，虽然因袭了旧的习俗，而腰带变得稍稍宽大起来。
English: After the first year of the year, although due to the old custom, the belt became slightly wider.

古文：然带钩尚穿带本为孔，本朝加顺折，茂人文也。幞头一谓之四脚，乃四带也。
现代文：但带钩还是在腰带前端穿孔固定的，而本朝添加分等级的挞尾，表示礼制文明的意味就更浓厚了。幞头，又叫 四脚 ，就是四条带子。
English: However, the hook is still fixed with a perforation at the front end of the belt, and the appendix with a graded grade added this morning means that the meaning of the etiquette civilization is even stronger.

古文：二带系脑后垂之，二带反系头上，令曲折附顶，故亦谓之 折上巾 。
现代文：两条带子系在脑后下垂；另两条带子由下巴颏下折返，系于头顶上，所以幞头又叫 折上巾 。
English: Two straps hang down from the back of the head; the other two straps are folded back from under the chin and tied at the top of the head, so the skull cap is also called the folded scarf.

古文：唐制，唯人主得用硬脚。
现代文：唐朝制度，只有人主的幞头能用金属线支撑的硬脚。
English: In the Tang Dynasty system, only the owner's steamed bread could have a hard foot supported by a metal wire.

古文：晚唐方镇擅命，始僭用硬脚。
现代文：晚唐时，地方镇守官专擅权力，开始僭越本分而用硬脚。
English: At the end of the Tang Dynasty, local town guards began to abuse their power and overstep their bounds.

古文：本朝幞头有直脚、局脚、交脚、朝天、顺风，凡五等。唯直脚贵贱通服之。
现代文：本朝的幞头，有叫做直脚、局脚、交脚、朝天、顺风的五种，只有直脚的一种是不论贵贱都通行服用的。
English: There are five kinds of steamed bread in this country, which are called straight leg, square leg, round leg, morning sky, and tail wind. Only the straight leg is commonly used by both the rich and the poor.

古文：又庶人所戴头巾，唐人亦谓之 四脚 ，盖两脚系脑后，两脚系颔下，取其服劳不脱也。无事则反系于顶上。
现代文：又老百姓所戴的头巾，唐人也称之为 四脚 。大抵两条带子系于脑后，两条带子系于下巴颏下，是为了在劳作时幞头不致脱落；若无事时，则都反系于头顶上。
English: In addition, the headscarves worn by the common people are also called "four feet" by the Chinese. Usually, two bands are tied behind the head, and two bands are tied under the chin, so that the headband does not fall off when working; if there is no problem, they are tied on the top of the head.

古文：今人不復系颔下，两带遂为虚设。
现代文：今人通行直脚而不复系于下巴颏下，则前面的两条带子都成为无用的设置。
English: If a person walks with a straight foot and does not tie it under the chin, then the two front straps become useless.

古文：予及史馆检讨时，议枢密院劄子问宣头所起。
现代文：我刚兼任史馆检讨时，参与讨论枢密院札子所问宣头文件的来历。
English: When I was working as a reviewer at the National Museum of History, I was involved in a discussion about the provenance of the Xuan Tou documents, which had been questioned by the Privy Council.

古文：余按唐故事，中书舍人职堂语诏，皆写四本：一本为底，一本为宣。
现代文：我考察唐代旧事，中书舍人职掌起草诏诰，都写成四份，其中一份为底本，一份为宣本。
English: When I examined the old records of the Tang Dynasty, I found that the imperial edict was written in four copies, one of which was the original and one of which was the preamble.

古文：此 宣 谓行出耳，未以名书也。
现代文：这个 宣 本指由宫廷颁行出来，在初并未用作文件的名称。
English: This 宣本 means issued by the court and was not initially used as the name of the document.

古文：晚唐枢密使自禁中受旨，出付中书，即谓之 宣 。
现代文：晚唐枢密使自宫廷中领受皇帝旨意，出而交付中书省，即称之为 宣 。
English: In the late Tang Dynasty, the imperial envoy received the emperor's will from the court and delivered it to the Central Literature Department, which was called Xuan.

古文：中书承受，录之于籍，谓之 宣底 。
现代文：中书省承受之后，抄录一份于文件簿，就称之为 宣底 。
English: After being accepted by the Ministry of Culture and Literature, a copy is copied in the document book, and it is called "Xuan Di."

古文：今史馆中尚有故《宣底》二卷，如今之《圣语簿》也。
现代文：现在史馆中还保存有《梁宣底》二卷，就像现在的 圣语簿 。
English: There are still two volumes of Liang Xuan Di preserved in the history museum, just like the current holy book.

古文：梁朝初置崇仁院，专行密命。至后唐庄宗復枢密使，使郭崇韬、安重诲为之，始分领政事，不关由中书直行下者谓之 宣 ，如中书之 敕 。小事则发头子，拟堂贴也。
现代文：后梁初置崇政院，专掌传达皇帝的机密诏命；至后唐庄宗恢复枢密院，使郭崇韬、安重诲为枢密使，枢密院才开始分领军政大权。当时枢密院传达皇帝旨意的文件不经由中书省，而直接颁行于下级部门的，就称为 宣 ，如同中书省所颁行的 敕 ；至于较小的事体，则由枢密院发头子，中书省拟堂帖。
English: At that time, the documents of the Privy Council that conveyed the emperor's will without going through the Central Literature Department, but were issued directly to lower-level departments, were called 宣, just like the  issued by the Central Literature Department; as for smaller matters, they were issued by the head of the Privy Council, the Central Literature Department拟堂帖.

古文：至今枢密院用宣及头子，本朝枢密院亦用劄子。
现代文：至今枢密院仍用宣及头子。
English: To this day, the Privy Council still uses the title of "chief."

古文：但中书劄子，宰相押字在上，次相及参政以次向下；枢密院劄子，枢长押字在下，副贰以次向上：以此为别。
现代文：本朝枢密院也用札子，但中书省的札子，宰相的签名画押在上面，名次在后的宰相及参知政事的签名画押依次向下排列；枢密院的札子，则长官的签名画押在下面，副长官的签名画押依次向上排列，以此与中书省的札子相区别。
English: The Privy Council of this dynasty also used stamps, but unlike the stamps of the Song and Song dynasties, the stamps of the Song and Song dynasties were stamped with the signature of the prime minister on the top, and the signatures of the prime minister and councillors on the bottom, and the stamps of the Privy Council were stamped with the signatures of the prefects on the bottom, and the signatures of the vice-prefects on the top.

古文：头子唯给驿马之类用之。
现代文：枢密院的头子，只在供给驿马之类的小事情上使用。
English: Head of the Privy Council, only used for minor matters such as the provision of draught horses.

古文：百官于中书见宰相，九卿而下，即省吏高声唱一声 屈 ，则趋而入。
现代文：朝廷百官拜见宰相于中书省，凡各部门长官以下的官员，待中书省吏人高喊一声 屈躬 ，即小碎步趋前进入。
English: Hundreds of officials from the imperial court came to see the prime minister at the General Administration of Press and Publication. All officials below the level of department heads bowed as soon as the officials of the General Administration of Press and Publication shouted, that is, they walked forward in small steps.

古文：宰相揖及进茶，皆抗声赞喝，谓之 屈揖 。
现代文：宰相向来者作揖并上茶水，司仪都高唱口号，称为 屈揖 。
English: Traditionally, the prime minister made the tea and served the tea, and the master of ceremonies sang the slogan aloud, which is known as "Kyu-Ren."

古文：待制以上见，则言 请某官 ，更不屈揖，临退仍进汤，皆于席南横设百官之位，升朝则坐，京官已下皆立。
现代文：有待制以上衔名的高级官员来见，则吏人只传 请某官 ，更不行屈揖之礼，而直到会见结束前还不断上茶。会见时，宰相都在座席的南面横向设置百官的座位，来者若为升朝官则坐，若为京官以下官员则站立。
English: If a high-ranking official with the above-mentioned title comes to meet, the officials will only invite a certain official, not to mention bowing, and tea will continue to be served until the end of the meeting. At the meeting, the prime ministers all set up the seats of the hundred officials horizontally on the south side of the seat. If the visitor is a court official, he will sit, and if he is an official from Beijing, he will stand.

古文：后殿引臣寮，则待制已上宣名拜舞；庶官但赞拜，不宣名，不舞蹈。
现代文：皇帝在后殿接见臣僚，凡有待制以上衔名的官员都自报官职姓名并行拜舞之礼；其余众官则但行拜见礼，既不自报官职姓名，也不舞蹈。
English: The emperor received his ministers in the rear hall. All officials with the above-mentioned titles were required to report their official names and perform a salute; the remaining officials, however, performed a salute, neither reporting their official names nor dancing.

古文：中书略贵者，示与之抗也。上前则略微者，杀礼也。
现代文：百官在中书省见宰相礼仪较简，略显得受到尊重，这是表示同为朝廷官员的身份是平等的；在皇帝面前则礼仪较繁，身份略显得低微，这是根据礼制规定而降低等次的做法。
English: In China's Book Province, the etiquette of the prime minister is relatively simple and slightly respected, which means that the status of the imperial officials is equal; in front of the emperor, the etiquette is more complex and the status is slightly low, which is the practice of lowering the order according to the rules of etiquette.

古文：唐制，丞郎拜官，即笼门谢。
现代文：唐代的旧制，丞郎拜官后，要到笼门答谢。
English: According to the old system of the Tang Dynasty, after the eulogy, it was necessary to go to the cage door to give thanks.

古文：今三司副使已上拜官，则拜舞于子阶上；百官拜于阶下，而不舞蹈。
现代文：现今三司副使以上的官员拜官，就在子阶上跪拜、舞蹈；这以下的官员拜官后，就在子阶下跪拜，但不舞蹈。
English: Nowadays, when officials above the rank of vice-commander of the Third Division of the General Staff pay homage, they kneel and dance on the podium; when officials below this rank pay homage, they kneel under the podium, but do not dance.

古文：此亦笼门故事也。
现代文：这也是沿用唐代笼门谢恩的旧制。
English: This is also the same old system that was used in the Tang Dynasty.

古文：学士院第三厅学士子，当前有一巨槐，素号 槐厅 。
现代文：翰林学士院的第三厅，因为学士閤子的正前面有一棵巨大的槐树，一向号称 槐厅 。
English: The third hall of the Hanlin Academy has always been known as the Dragonfly Hall, because there is a huge eucalyptus tree right in front of the Academy's dragonfly.

古文：旧传居此者，多至入相。学士争槐厅，至有抵彻前人行李而强据之者。
现代文：旧时相传住过此閤的学士后来多至入为宰相，所以诸学士争槐厅，以致有到任即强行搬出前任者的行李而占据此阁的。
English: According to the old legend, most of the scholars who lived in this pavilion later became prime ministers, so the scholars fought for the throne room, so that when they took office, they forcibly removed the luggage of their predecessors and occupied this pavilion.

古文：余为学士时，目观此事。
现代文：我做翰林学士时，曾亲眼看到过这样的事。
English: I have seen this with my own eyes when I was a scholar of Hanlin.

古文：《集贤院记》： 开元故事，校书官许称学士 。
现代文：《集贤院记》记载： 开元间的旧制，凡校书官都可称为 学士  。
English: "Jixian Academy Records" records: According to the old system between the founding of the Yuan Dynasty, all school scribes could be called academicians.

古文：今三馆职事，皆称 学士 ，用开元故事也。
现代文：现在担任三馆职事者都被称为 学士 ，用的还是唐开元间的旧制。
English: Now, all the officials of the three museums are called academicians, using the old system between the Tang Dynasty and the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：馆阁新书净本有误书处，以雌黄涂之。
现代文：馆阁校书重新缮写誊清的定本，遇有书写错误的地方，即以雌黄涂抹误字。
English: In the case of a mistake, erroneous words will be erased with a brush.

古文：尝校改字之法：刮洗则伤纸，纸贴之又易脱，粉涂则字不没，涂数遍方能漫灭。
现代文：我曾考察比较改字的方法，用刀刮削擦拭则容易伤纸破损，用纸贴住误字则又容易脱落；用铅粉涂抹则不容易盖住误字，要涂好几遍才能使误字漫灭。
English: I have examined the methods of changing the word. Scraping and wiping with a knife is easy to damage the paper, and sticking the misspelled word with paper is easy to fall off. Applying lead powder is not easy to cover the misspelled word, and it takes several times to make the misspelled word disappear.

古文：唯雌黄一漫则灭，仍久而不脱。
现代文：只有用雌黄涂抹，则一涂即能漫灭误字，且所涂久不脱落。
English: Only if it is smeared with yellowness, the erroneous characters can be erased with a single application, and the coating will not come off for a long time.

古文：古人谓之铅黄，盖用之有素矣。
现代文：古人以其与铅粉并称 铅黄 ，可见雌黄的使用是久有来历的。
English: The ancients called it "lead yellow" together with lead powder, and it can be seen that the use of female yellow has a long history.

古文：余为鄜延经略使日，新一厅，谓之五司厅。
现代文：我在担任鄜延经略使时，新建了一处办事机构，叫做五司厅。
English: When I served as the Vice-Minister of the State Council, I built a new office, called the Fifth Division Office.

古文：延州正厅乃都督厅，治延州事；五司厅治鄜延路军事，如唐之使院也。
现代文：延州府的正厅是都督厅，治理延州的事务；五司厅治理鄜延路的军务，有如唐代的节度使等机构。
English: The main office of Yanzhou Prefecture is the Governor's Office, which manages the affairs of Yanzhou; the Fifth Division Office manages the military affairs of Qianyan Road, similar to the Tang Dynasty's Festival Envoy and other institutions.

古文：五司者，经略、安抚、总管、节度、观察也。
现代文：所谓 五司 ，指的是经略司、安抚司、总管司、节度司、观察司。
English: The so-called Five Departments refer to the Department of Strategy, the Department of Pacification, the Department of General Administration, the Department of Strategy, and the Department of Observation.

古文：唐制、方镇绵带节度、观察、处置三使。
现代文：唐代制度，凡方镇长官皆带节度使、观察使、处置使的职名。
English: According to the Tang Dynasty system, all the township magistrates had the titles of chief magistrate, chief observer, and chief disposer.

古文：今节度之职，多归总管司；观察归安抚司；处置归经略司。
现代文：现在节度使的职权多归于总管司，观察使的职权归于安抚司，处置使的职权归于经略司。
English: At present, the powers of the dispatching envoy mostly belong to the General Administration Department, the powers of the observation envoy belong to the Pacification Department, and the powers of the disposition envoy belong to the Economic Strategy Department.

古文：其节度、观察两案，并支掌推官、判官，今皆治州事而已。
现代文：其中节度、观察两个机构及其所属的幕职支掌官、推官、判官，如今都仅仅治理州事而已。
English: Among them, the two institutions of discipline and observation and their subordinate officials, supervisors, and judges are now only governing state affairs.

古文：经略、安抚司不置佐官，以帅权不可更不专也。
现代文：经略司、安抚司不设置副职，是因为地方的军事统领之权不可不专擅。
English: The reason why the Economic Strategy Division and the Pacification Division do not have deputy positions is that the power of local military command must be exclusive.

古文：都总管、副总管、钤辖、都监同签书，而皆受经略使节制。
现代文：都总管、副总管、钤辖、都监虽共同签署军事文书，却都受经略使的节制。
English: Although the chief magistrate, deputy chief magistrate, magistrates and supervisors of the capital jointly signed the military document, they were all restrained by the magistrate.

古文：银台司兼门下封驳，乃给事中之职，当隶门下省，故事乃隶枢密院。
现代文：银台司兼管门下省的封驳事务，这是给事中的职责，所以银台司应当隶属门下省，然而旧制却隶属枢密院。
English: The Bank of Taiwan also manages the sealing affairs of the subordinate provinces, which is the responsibility given in the matter, so the Bank of Taiwan should be subordinate to the subordinate provinces, but the old system is subordinate to the Privy Council.

古文：下寺监皆行劄子；寺监具申状，虽三司，亦言 上银台 。
现代文：银台司行文到寺监都采用札子，寺监向它行文则用申状，即使三司向它行文也称 上银台 。
English: When a Gindaiji wrote to a temple overseer, he used a paper ticket, but when a temple overseer wrote to him, he used a petition. Even if three Gindaiji wrote to him, it was called Shanggindai.

古文：主判不以官品，初冬独赐翠毛锦袍。
现代文：银台司的主管不论官品高低，初冬时朝廷都要赏赐他翠毛锦袍。
English: At the beginning of winter, the imperial court would bestow upon the director of the Bank of Taiwan, no matter how high or low his official rank, a green brocade robe.

古文：学士以上，自从本品。
现代文：如果任主管的是学士以上的官员，那么就根据他原来的官品进行赏赐。
English: If the supervisor is an official with a bachelor's degree or higher, then he will be rewarded according to his original official rank.

古文：行案用枢密院杂司人吏，主判食枢密厨，盖枢密院子司也。
现代文：处理公务时如果使用的是枢密院非主要官署的官员，则主管按枢密院的级别发给伙食补助，实际上是枢密院的下属机构。
English: If a non-principal officer of the Privy Council is used for official business, the head of the meal allowance is allocated according to the level of the Privy Council, which is actually a subordinate body of the Privy Council.

古文：前世藏书，分隶数处，盖防水火散亡也。
现代文：前代国家藏书，都隶属于几个地方，这是为了防止因水、火灾害而散亡。
English: In the previous generation, the national collection of books was subordinated to several localities, in order to prevent it from being dispersed by water and fire disasters.

古文：今三馆、秘阁，凡四处藏书，然同在崇文院。
现代文：现在三馆、秘阁的藏书共有四处，然而都在崇文院中。
English: At present, there are four collections of books in the three museums and the secret cabinets, but they are all in the Chongwen Academy.

古文：其间官书，多为人盗窃，士大夫家往往得之。
现代文：其间国家图书多被人盗窃，士大夫之家往往可以得到。
English: In the meantime, most of the national books have been stolen, and the house of the shidafu can often be obtained.

古文：嘉祐中，置编校官八员，杂雠四馆书。给吏百人，悉以黄纸为大册写之。自此私家不敢辄藏。
现代文：嘉祐年间，朝廷置编校书籍官八员，以四馆之书互相校雠，并配给书写吏等百余人，将所校之书全部以黄纸缮写装订成大册的书本，从此私家才不敢擅自收藏。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jia Yu, the imperial court appointed eight officials to compile school books, and they used books from four libraries to cross-check each other. They also assigned more than a hundred scribes and other people to write all the school books on yellow paper and bind them into large volumes of books. From then on, private individuals did not dare to collect books without permission.

古文：校雠累年，仅能终昭文一馆之书而罢。
现代文：不过这次校雠持续了好几年，仅能校完昭文馆一馆的书籍就停止了。
English: However, this school strike lasted for several years, and only the books that could be finished at the Shouwen Library were stopped.

古文：旧翰林学士地势清切，皆不兼他务。
现代文：旧时翰林学士地位清贵亲近，都不兼任其他事务。
English: In the old days, the status of Hanlin Bachelors was noble and close, and they did not take on other responsibilities.

古文：文馆职任，自校理以上，皆有职钱，唯内外制不给。
现代文：文馆的职任，自校理以上，都有贴职钱，只有内外两制官不添给。
English: The posts of the library, from school superintendent and above, all have post money, only the internal and external officials do not add to it.

古文：杨大年久为学士，家贫，请外，表词千余言，其间两联曰： 虚忝甘泉之从臣，终作莫敖之馁鬼。  从者之病莫兴，方朔之饥欲死。 
现代文：杨大年久为学士，家境清贫，请求外任地方官，其章表达千余言。其中有两联文字说到： 空占着甘泉宫侍从之臣的职位，最终却成为像若敖氏一样的饿鬼；孔子的随从弟子们病饿得不能起，东方朔也渐渐饥饿得要死。 
English: Yang Dainian, who had been a bachelor for a long time, and whose family was poor, requested an outside local official, whose chapter expressed more than a thousand words. Among them, there were two sets of words that said: He occupied the position of a servant of the Gansu Palace, but eventually became a hungry ghost like the Ruo Yi clan; Confucius's followers disciples were too sick to get up, and Dongfang Shuo was also gradually starving to death.

古文：京师百官上日，唯翰林学士敕设用乐，他虽宰相，亦无此礼。
现代文：京师百官上任之日，只有翰林学士奉旨设宴可以用乐舞，其他官员，即使是宰相，也没有这种礼仪。
English: On the day when hundreds of officials in Beijing took office, only Hanlin Biao, who was ordered to hold a banquet, could use music and dance. Other officials, even the prime minister, did not have this etiquette.

古文：优伶并开封府点集。
现代文：宴会所用的乐工和歌舞艺人，都由开封府指定招集。
English: The musicians and song and dance artists used for the banquet are all recruited by the Kaifeng government.

古文：陈和叔除学士时，和叔知开封府，遂不用女优。
现代文：陈和叔复为翰林学士，当时他权知开封府事，遂不用歌舞女艺人。
English: Chen He Shufu was a scholar of Hanlin, and at that time he had the power to open the government, so he did not need female singers and dancers.

古文：学士院敕设不用女优，自和叔始。
现代文：学士院奉旨设宴不用女艺人，自和叔开始。
English: According to the order of the Academy, the banquet does not require female entertainers, starting with Uncle Ho.

古文：礼部贡院试进士日，设香案于阶前，主司与举人对拜，此唐故事也。
现代文：礼部贡院考试进士之日，在阶前设置香案，主持贡举的官员与参加考试的举人对拜，这也是唐朝旧制。
English: On the day of the entrance examination of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies, incense was set up in front of the steps, and the officials who presided over the tribute paid homage to the exam takers, which was also the old system of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：所坐设位供张甚盛，有司具茶汤饮浆。
现代文：举人所坐的考位，一应物品的供给陈设甚为排场，有关部门还给准备茶水和饮料。
English: In the examination room where everyone was seated, the supply of goods was very well displayed, and the relevant departments also prepared tea and drinks.

古文：至试学究，则悉彻帐幕毡席之类，亦无茶汤，渴则饮砚水，人人皆黔其吻。
现代文：至于学究科的考试，则帐幕毡席之类的用品全都撤去，也没有茶水，考生渴了就喝研墨用的水，以致人人都染黑了嘴巴。
English: As for the academic examination, all the supplies such as tents and tables were removed, and there was no tea. When the candidates were thirsty, they drank the water used for studying ink, so that everyone's mouth was blackened.

古文：非故欲困之，乃防毡幕及供应人私传所试经义。
现代文：这并不是要故意与考生为难，而是为了防止有人利用毡幕和送水的人私下传递所考的经义。
English: This is not to deliberately embarrass the candidates, but to prevent anyone from using the screen and the water-carrier to privately pass on the meaning of the examination.

古文：盖尝有败者，故事为之防。
现代文：因为以往曾有这样做而败露的，所以现在要事事为之防备。
English: Because in the past there have been cases of this happening and being discovered, so now we have to guard against it at all costs.

古文：欧文忠有诗： 焚香礼进士，彻幕待经生。 
现代文：欧阳文忠曾有诗说： 焚香礼进士，彻幕待经生。 
English: Ouyang Wenzhong once said in a poem: "Incense-burning ceremony to enter the priesthood is like waiting to be born."

古文：以为礼数重轻如此，其实自有谓也。
现代文：以为对待二者礼数上的轻重如此悬殊，其实这中间自有原因。
English: I thought that there was such a disparity in the importance of the number of courtesies between the two, but in fact there is a reason for this.

古文：嘉祐中，进士奏名讫，未御试，京师妄传 王俊民为状元 ，不知言之所起，人亦莫知俊民为何人。
现代文：嘉祐年间，贡院奏上进士名册后，尚未殿试，京师已妄传王俊民将为状元。这种传言不知是从哪里来的，人们也不知道王俊民为何人。
English: During the Jiayu era, after the roster of candidates was announced by the Tribute Academy, but before the palace test, the Beijing division had falsely rumored that Wang Junmin would be the winner. This rumor does not know where it came from, and people do not know who Wang Junmin is.

古文：及御试，王荆公时为知制诰，与天章阁待制杨乐道二人为详定官。
现代文：等到殿试时，王荆公当时为知制诰，与天章阁待制杨乐道二人同为详定官。
English: When it came to the palace test, Wang Jing Gong was the intellectual, and he and Yang Le Dao, who was a member of Tianzhangge, were both detailed officials.

古文：旧制，御试举人，设初考官，先定等第；復弥之以送覆考官，再定等第；乃付详定官，发初考官所定等，以对覆考之等：如同即已；不同，则详其程文，当从初考或从覆考为定，即不得别立等。
现代文：按以往的制度，殿试举人设初考官先阅试卷，确定合格者的等次；再封弥试卷，送覆考官审核，进一步确定等次；然后才交付详定官，拆封看初考官所定的等次，以与覆考官所定的等次对照，如果二者相同就不再变动，如果不同就再详阅不同者的试卷，或从初考官所定，或从覆考官所定，均不得另外确定等次。
English: According to the previous system, the primary examiner first read the examination paper to determine the rank of the qualified person; then sealed the examination paper and sent it to the re-examiner for review to further determine the rank; then it was handed over to the detailed examiner, unsealed to see the rank determined by the primary examiner to compare it with the rank determined by the re-examiner. If the two are the same, they will not change, and if they are different, they will re-read the examination paper of the different person. Either from the primary examiner or from the re-examiner, the rank cannot be determined separately.

古文：是时，王荆公以初、覆考所定第一人皆未允当，于行间别取一人为状首。杨乐道守法，以为不可。
现代文：其时王荆公以为初考、覆考所定的第一人都不允当，欲从名册上另外取一人为状头；杨乐道坚持旧有的法规，不同意这样做。
English: At that time, Wang Jing Gong thought that the first person determined by the preliminary examination and the re-examination was not acceptable, and wanted to take another person from the roster as the head; Yang Le Dao insisted on the old regulations and did not agree to do so.

古文：议论未决，太常少卿朱从道时为封弥官，闻之，谓同舍曰： 二公何用力争，从道十日前已闻王俊民为状元，事必前定。
现代文：二人的争议还没有结果，太常少卿朱从道这时为封弥官，闻知此事，就对同掌封弥的人说： 二公何必要力争，我在十天前就已听说王俊民为状元。
English: The dispute between the two men had not yet come to an end. At that time, Shaoqing Zhu Congdao was the official in charge of sealing the mass. When he heard about this, he said to the person who was also holding the mass: "Why do the two princes need to fight? I heard ten days ago that Wang Junmin was the winner.

古文：二公恨自苦耳。 
现代文：其事必然是预先定下来的，二公只不过自寻烦恼罢了。 
English: The matter must have been predetermined, and the two princes have only brought trouble on themselves.

古文：既而二人各以已意进禀，而诏从荆公之请。
现代文：稍后二人各以自己的意见进呈禀奏皇上，而皇上诏令采取荆公的意见。
English: Later, the two of them each presented their own opinions to the emperor, and the emperor ordered that Jing Gong's opinion be adopted.

古文：及发封，乃王俊民也。
现代文：等到发榜，状元果然是王俊民。
English: When the list was released, the winner was indeed Wang Junmin.

古文：详定官得别立等，自此始，遂为定制。
现代文：详定官得以另立进士名次由这次开始，后来遂成为定例。
English: This was the first time that the detailed officials were able to set up a separate ranking of candidates, and later it became a regular practice.

古文：选人不得乘马入宫门。
现代文：选人不能乘马入宫门。
English: Candidates cannot enter the palace gate on horseback.

古文：天圣中，选人为馆职，始欧阳永叔、黄鉴辈，皆自左掖门下马入馆，当时谓之 步行学士 。
现代文：天圣年间，以选人担任馆职，始于欧阳修、黄鉴等人，他们都自左掖门下马入馆，当时称他们为 步行学士 。
English: During the Tian Sheng years, the selection of people to serve as curators began with Ouyang Xiu, Huang Jian and others. They all entered the museum from Zuoying Gate. At that time, they were called "walking scholars."

古文：嘉祐中，于崇文院置编校局，校官皆许乘马至院门。
现代文：嘉祐年间，在崇文院设置编校局，校官都允许乘马至院门。
English: During Jiayu's time, the editorial office was set up at Chongwen Academy, and school officials were allowed to ride horses to the gate of the academy.

古文：其后中书五房置习学公事官，亦缘例乘马赴局。
现代文：后来中书五房设置习学公事官，他们也按惯例可以乘马到官署。
English: Later, the fifth room of the Central Library was set up to train civil servants, who could also take a horse to the government office according to the usual practice.

古文：车驾行境，前驱谓之队，则古之清道也。
现代文：皇上的车驾出行时，队伍的前驱，即古代的清道。
English: When the emperor travels by car, the forerunner of the team, that is, the ancient clear road.

古文：其次卫仗，卫仗者，视阑入宫门法，则古之外仗也。
现代文：其次是卫仗。卫仗，对照阑入宫门法，就是古代的外仗。
English: The second is the imperial guard. The imperial guard, in contrast to the "entering the palace" ceremony, was an ancient foreign war.

古文：其中谓之禁围，如殿中仗。
现代文：队伍的中间部分称为禁围，就是殿中仗。
English: The middle part of the team is called the siege, that is, the battle in the hall.

古文：《天官》： 掌舍，无宫，则供人门。 
现代文：《周礼·天官·掌舍》说： 没有宫殿，就让人站立着代表门。 
English: "Zhou Li, Tian Guan, Palms" said: If there is no palace, let people stand at the representative door.

古文：今谓之 殿门天武官 ，极天下长人之选八人。
现代文：今天这样的人称为 殿门天武官 ，从天下挑选八名个子最高的人。
English: Today, such a person is called a "Temple Gate Heavenly Military Attaché," who selects the eight tallest people in the world.

古文：上御前殿，则执钺立于紫宸门下；行幸则为禁围门，行于仗马之前。
现代文：皇上到前殿坐朝时，这八个人就持钺站立在紫宸门下；皇上出行的时候，他们就站立在禁卫门下，他们行走在仪仗、马队的前面。
English: When the emperor came to the front hall to sit for the imperial court, these eight people would stand under the Shishimoto gate holding a scepter; when the emperor traveled, they would stand under the gate for the imperial guards, and they would walk in front of the ceremonial guards and horse cavalcade.

古文：又有衡门十人，队长一人，选诸武力绝伦者为之。
现代文：还有衡门十人，队长一人，挑选武艺超群的人担任。
English: There are also ten Hengmen, one captain, and a selection of martial arts supermen.

古文：上御后殿，则执檛东西对立于殿前，亦古之虎贲、人门之类也。
现代文：皇上往后殿听政时，他们执挝东西对立在殿前，这就是古代称为虎贲、人门的人了。
English: When the emperor went to the back hall to listen to the government, they opposed the east and west in front of the hall. This is the person who was called the tiger cub and the human gate in ancient times.

古文：余尝购得后唐闵帝应顺元年案检一通，乃除宰相刘昫兼判三丝堂检。
现代文：我曾经购买过后唐闵帝应顺元年时期的一通档案，乃是除授宰相刘昫兼任三司堂的档案。
English: I once purchased an archive from the first year of the reign of Emperor Ying Shun after the Tang Dynasty. It was the archive of the prime minister Liu Bei, who also served as the third secretary of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：前有拟状云： 具官刘昫。
现代文：档案前面还有拟好的奏状说： 具官刘昫。
English: In front of the file, there is also a prepared petition saying: "Attention, official Liu Ye.

古文：右，伏以刘昫经国才高，正君志切，方属体元之运，实资谋始之规。
现代文：右，拜伏奏上，以刘昫有治国的才能，辅佐帝王的心意真切，正逢陛下登基而应该效仿天地建立功德时，实际上也依赖于他初始的谋划经营。
English: On the right, on the bow and arrow, with Liu Bei's ability to govern the country as the role, and the emperor's sincere intention to assist, just as His Majesty ascended the throne and should follow the heavens and the earth to establish merit, in fact, it also depends on his initial planning and operation.

古文：宜注宸衷，委司判计，渐期富庶，永赞圣明。
现代文：陛下应该厚重于他，委任他监管三司事并掌管财政，期待国家可以逐步富裕起来，永远辅佐圣明的天子治理天下。
English: His Majesty should be more important than him, appoint him to supervise the three departments and take charge of finance, expect the country to gradually become rich, and always assist the heavenly son of the Holy Light to govern the world.

古文：臣等商量，望授依前中书侍郎，兼吏部尚书、同中书门下平章事，充集贤殿大学士，兼判三司，散官勋封如故，未审可否？
现代文：臣等商议，希望可以依照刘昫旧职中书侍郎拜授，并兼任吏部尚书、同中书门下平章事，充集贤殿大学士，兼管三司的事宜，其勋爵俸禄等都和之前一样，不知道适当与否？
English: Ministers and others discussed, hoping to be able to follow Liu Ye's former position as the secretary of the middle school, and also serve as the secretary of the administrative department, the secretary of the middle school, the secretary of the middle school, the secretary of the middle school, the secretary of the middle school, the secretary of the middle school, the secretary of the middle school, the secretary of the middle school, the secretary of the middle school, the secretary of the middle school, the secretary of the middle school, the secretary of the middle school, and the secretary of the middle school.

古文：如蒙允许，望付翰林降制处分，谨录奏闻。 
现代文：如果蒙恩被允许，希望即刻付翰林学士院编撰进制书施行，谨录这个奏折以奏闻陛下。 
English: If I am allowed, I hope to immediately pay the Hanlin Academy to compile and implement the book, and record this piece of music as a report to His Majesty.

古文：其后有制书曰： 宰臣刘昫，右，可兼判三司公事，宜令中书门下依此施行。
现代文：之后还有制书说： 宰臣刘昫，右，可以兼任三司事宜，应该让中书门下依此来施行。
English: After that, there was also a book-making saying: Vice-Minister Liu Ye, right, can concurrently serve as the three departments, and it should be allowed to be implemented according to this.

古文：付中书门下，準此。
现代文：付中书门下，准此。
English: Under the door of the middle school, follow this.

古文：四月十日。 
现代文：四月十日。 
English: April 10th.

古文：用御前新铸之印。与今政府行遣稍异。
现代文：制书使用的是唐闵帝登基之后新铸的印玺，和现在政府颁布的制书稍微有些不同。
English: The newly minted seal money after the enthronement of Tang Xuan Di was used for book production, which is slightly different from the book production promulgated by the current government.

古文：本朝要事对禀，常事拟进入，画可然后施行，谓之 熟状 。
现代文：本朝重要的事宜要面对面地奏禀皇帝，平常的一些事情则是拟好奏状送进去，皇帝认可后就可以施行，称为 熟状 。
English: Important matters of the dynasty had to be reported to the emperor face-to-face, while some ordinary matters were sent in a prepared report, which could be implemented after the emperor's approval, known as a "ripe report."

古文：事速不及待报，则先行下，具制草奏知，谓之 进草 。
现代文：等不及上奏的事情，就可以先让部下实施，然后再拟好奏状禀报皇帝，称为 进草 。
English: If you can't wait for something to be announced, you can have your subordinates implement it first, and then prepare a report to report to the emperor, known as "chirimasu."

古文：熟状白纸书，宰相押字，他执政具姓名。
现代文：熟状要使用白纸书写，宰相画押签字，其他的执政官则是一起签名。
English: The letter should be written on white paper, signed by the prime minister and co-signed by the other consuls.

古文：进草即黄纸书，宰臣、执政皆于状背押字。
现代文：进草则使用黄纸书写，宰相、执政大臣都需要在奏状的背面签字画押。
English: Jincho is written on yellow paper, and both the prime minister and the ruling minister are required to sign and stamp the back of the petition.

古文：堂检，宰、执皆不押，唯宰属于检背书日，堂吏书名用印。
现代文：对于政事堂的档案，宰相、执政大臣都不需要画押，只需要宰相的属官在档案背面签上日期，其他的主管人员一起署名并盖上政事堂的印。
English: For the archives of the State Great Hall of the People, neither the prime minister nor the minister in power need to affix the seal. It is only necessary for the prime minister's subordinate to sign the date on the back of the archive, and other responsible personnel to sign together and stamp the seal of the State Great Hall of the People.

古文：此拟状有词，宰相押检不印，此其为异也。
现代文：我买到的这一通档案上面有骈体文词，宰相在文件上画押签字而不使用政事堂的印章，这是和一般拟状所不同的地方。
English: The file I bought had words in italics on it, and the prime minister stamped his signature on the document without using the seal of the government building, which is different from the usual imitation.

古文：大率唐人风俗，自朝廷下至郡县，决事皆有词，谓之判，则书判科是也。
现代文：大概唐人的风俗，上至朝廷下至郡县，决断事情的时候都会使用骈体文词，此称为 判词 ，也就是书判科考试时所使用的文体。
English: It is probably the custom of the Tang people, from the imperial court down to the county, to use 體文词 when deciding things. This is called 判词, which is the style used in the book-judging exam.

古文：押检二人，乃冯道、李愚也。
现代文：这通档案中押字的有两个人，便是宰相冯道和李愚。
English: There are two people in this file, namely the Prime Minister Feng Dao and Li Yu.

古文：状检瀛王亲笔，甚有改窜勾抹处。
现代文：档案是瀛王冯道的亲笔，有很多处改动、勾抹。
English: The file was written by King Gong Feng Dao himself, with many changes and deletions.

古文：按《旧五代史》： 应顺元年四月九日已卯，鄂王薨。
现代文：根据《旧五代史》记载：应顺元年四月九日己卯， 鄂王薨。
English: According to the "History of the Old Five Dynasties," it is recorded that on April 9th of the first year of the Heian period, Ji Wu (己卯) and Hwang Yu (鄂王) were born.

古文：庚辰，以宰相刘昫判三司。 
现代文：庚辰，以宰相刘昫判三司。 
English: Geng Chen, with Prime Minister Liu Bei as the three judges.

古文：正是十日，与此检无差。
现代文：所写的日期正好是四月十日，和这通档案没什么出入。
English: It is dated April 10 and is consistent with the dossier.

古文：宋次道记《开元宰相奏请》、郑畋《凤池稿草》、《拟状注制集》悉多用四六，皆宰相自草。
现代文：宋次道曾经记载《开元宰相奏请》以及郑畋《凤池稿草》《拟状注制集》等都用了很多四六文字，都是宰相亲自起草的。
English: Song Zidao once recorded that "Kaiyuan Prime Minister's Invitation" and Zheng Yao's "Phoenix Pond Draft" and "Likeness Commentary Collection" all used a lot of forty-six characters, and were all drafted by the prime minister himself.

古文：今此拟状，冯道亲笔，盖故事也。
现代文：而今的这封拟状，乃是冯道亲笔所写，看来也是沿袭了旧制的缘故。
English: However, the present copy, which was written by Feng Dao himself, also seems to have followed the old system.

