古文：睿宗诸子○皇帝宪惠庄太子捴惠文太子范惠宣太子业隋王隆悌睿宗六子：昭成顺圣皇后窦氏生玄宗，肃明顺圣皇后刘氏生让皇帝，宫人柳氏生惠庄太子，崔孺人生惠文太子，王德妃生惠宣太子，后宫生隋王隆悌。
现代文：唐睿宗有六子，昭成顺圣皇后窦氏生玄宗，肃明顺圣皇后刘氏生让皇帝，宫人柳氏生惠庄太子，崔孺人生惠文太子，王德妃生惠宣太子，后宫生隋王隆悌。
English: Tang Ruizong had six sons, Zhaocheng Shunsheng Empress Dou gave birth to Xuanzong, Su Ming Shunsheng Empress Liu gave birth to Emperor Zhang, the palace attendant Liu gave birth to Prince Huizhuang, Cui Wei gave birth to Prince Wen, Wang Defei gave birth to Prince Huixuan, and the harem attendant Sui King Longyi gave birth.

古文：让皇帝宪，本名成器，睿宗长子也。
现代文：让皇帝李宪，本名成器，是睿宗的长子。
English: Emperor Zhang Li Xian, whose real name was Cheng Ji, was the eldest son of Emperor Ruizong.

古文：初封永平郡王。
现代文：开始封永平郡王。
English: He began to be called Yongping County King.

古文：文明元年，立为皇太子，时年六岁。
现代文：文明元年，立为皇太子，当时他才六岁。
English: He was only six years old when he became crown prince in the first year of civilization.

古文：及睿宗降为皇嗣，则天册授成器为皇孙，与诸弟同日出阁，开府置官属。
现代文：到睿宗降为皇嗣，武则天册授成器为皇孙，与他的五个弟弟同一天离朝廷到封地做藩王，开建府署，设置僚属。
English: Zu Ruizong was demoted to the position of imperial heir, and Wu Zetian was given the title of imperial grandson. Together with his five younger brothers, he left the imperial court on the same day to become the lord of a fief, to build a government office, and to set up subordinates.

古文：长寿二年，改封寿春郡王，仍却入阁。长安中，累转左赞善大夫。加银青光禄大夫。
现代文：长寿二年，改封寿春郡王，长安年中，调任左赞善大夫，加银青光禄大夫之荣誉职。
English: In the second year of longevity, he was awarded the title of King of Shuchun County, and in the middle of Chang'an, he was transferred to the honorary position of Zuo Zanzan Doctor, and the honorary position of Qingguanglu Doctor was added.

古文：中宗即位，改封蔡王，迁宗正员外卿，加赐实封四百户，通旧为七百户。
现代文：中宗即位，改封蔡王，升任宗正员外卿，加赐实封四百户，加上原来的共七百户。
English: When Chuzong ascended the throne, he changed his title to King Cai and was promoted to the position of Zongzheng member of the Foreign Ministry. He was also given the title of 400 households, adding to the original total of 700 households.

古文：成器固辞不敢当大国，依旧为寿春郡王。
现代文：成器坚决辞谢表示不敢当大国，依旧为寿春郡王。
English: Chengchi resolutely said that he did not dare to be a big country, and he is still the king of Shuchun County.

古文：唐隆元年，进封宋王。
现代文：景云元年，晋封李成器为宗王。
English: In the first year of the Jingyun Dynasty, Li Chengqi was crowned as the king.

古文：其月，睿宗践祚，拜左卫大将军。
现代文：同一月，睿宗登位，李成器授左卫大将军之职。
English: In the same month, Ruizong ascended to the throne, and Li Chengji was awarded the post of General of the Left Division.

古文：时将建储贰，以成器嫡长，而玄宗有讨平韦氏之功，意久不定。
现代文：当时将要立皇位继承人，因李成器是嫡长子，而玄宗又有讨平韦氏的大功，故久久不能定。
English: At that time, the heir to the throne was to be established, since Lee Seung Gi was the eldest legitimate son, and Hyunjong had made great contributions to leveling the Wei clan, so it could not be determined for a long time.

古文：成器辞曰： 储副者，天下之公器，时平则先嫡长，国难则归有功。
现代文：李成器辞让说： 储君，是国家的职位，太平时节就以嫡长子为先，国难之时就应归于有功的。
English: Li Chengji relented and said, "Custodian is a state position. In times of peace, the eldest son should be the first, and in times of national calamity, it should be awarded to those who have rendered meritorious service.

古文：若失其宜，海内失望，非社稷之福。
现代文：若处理不当，就海内失望，这不是国家吉祥事。
English: If it is mishandled, China will be disappointed. This is not a national auspicious event.

古文：臣今敢以死请。 
现代文：臣斗胆以死请求不要立我为储君。 
English: The vassal dared to plead with death not to make me crown prince.

古文：累日涕泣固让，言甚切至。
现代文：李成器成天涕泣坚决辞让，言语很恳切。
English: With tears streaming down his face, Li Chengji resolutely refused to concede. His words were very sincere.

古文：时诸王、公卿亦言楚王有社稷大功，合居储位。
现代文：当时，诸王和公卿也说平王李隆基有社稷大功，适合做储君。
English: At that time, the kings and nobles also said that the Ping Wang, Li Longji, had made great contributions to society and was suitable to be the crown prince.

古文：睿宗嘉成器之意，乃许之。
现代文：睿宗很赞赏成器的心意，就同意了。
English: Ruizong was very appreciative of the inventor's intention and agreed.

古文：玄宗又以成器嫡长，再抗表固让，睿宗不许。乃下制曰： 左卫大将军、宋王成器，朕之元子，当践副君。以隆基有社稷大功，人神佥属，由是朕前恳让，言在必行。
现代文：李隆基又以成器是长兄又一次上表固让，睿宗不许，就下诏 ：左卫大将军、宋王成器，朕的长子，本当立为储君，但以三子李隆基有社稷大功，人神共睹，由此，我以其诚心让位，言在必行。
English: Once again, Li Longji said that his eldest brother, Song Wangcheng, should be the next emperor, but Ruizong would not allow it, so he issued the following edict: My eldest son, Song Wangcheng, the general of the Western Wei Dynasty, should be the next emperor, but my third son, Li Longji, has made great contributions to society, which is obvious to all. Therefore, with my sincerity, I will step down and do what I have to do.

古文：天下至公，诚不可夺。
现代文：天下大公，诚不可夺。
English: Honesty is priceless.

古文：爰符立季之典，庶协从人之愿。成器可雍州牧、扬州大都督、太子太师，别加实封二千户。赐物五千段、细马二十匹、奴婢十房、甲第一区、良田三十顷。 
现代文：从天人之愿，立隆基为储君，成器为雍州牧、扬州大都督、太子太师，另外加实封三千户，赐五色绸五千段，细马二十匹，奴婢十户，大住宅一区，良田三十顷。 
English: According to God's will, Longji was appointed as the crown prince, and Chengwu as the Yongzhou herdsman, the Yangzhou grand governor, and the crown prince. In addition, three thousand households were sealed, five thousand pieces of five-colored silk were given, twenty fine horses, ten households of servants and maids, one large residential area, and thirty hectares of good farmland.

古文：其年十一月拜尚书左仆射，寻迁司徒，其太师、都督并如故。
现代文：这一年十一月，拜尚书左仆射，不久又任司徒。太师，都督之职如故。
English: In November of the same year, he was promoted to the position of Baishangshu Zuopujiao, and soon he was appointed to the position of Jito. Daishi, the post of the governor-general, remains unchanged.

古文：明年，表让司徒，拜太子宾客，兼扬州大都督如故。
现代文：第二年，李成器上表辞让司徒之职，拜太子宾客，兼扬州大都督如故。
English: In the second year, Li Chengji said that he would give him the post of sutra, invite the crown prince as a guest, and remain the governor of Yangzhou.

古文：时太平公主阴有异图，姚元之、宋璟等请出成器及申王成义为刺史，以绝谋者之心。由是成器以司徒兼蒲州刺史。
现代文：当时，太平公主阴有异图，姚元之、宋王景等请求调出李成器和申王李成义为刺史，来断绝有异图者的心，由此，李成器以司徒兼蒲州刺史。
English: At that time, the Taiping Princess Yin had a different view, and Yao Yuanzhi, Song Wangjing and others requested that Li Chengwu and Shen Wang Li Chengyi be transferred as the stabbing history to break the hearts of those who had a different view. As a result, Li Chengwu stabbed history with Stu and Puzhou.

古文：玄宗尝制一大被长枕，将与成器等共申友悌之好，睿宗知而大悦，累加赏叹。
现代文：玄宗曾制了一床被和长枕，将与成器等共申兄弟亲情，睿宗得知，非常高兴，大加赞叹。
English: Xuanzong once made a bed quilt and a pillow, and will share a brotherly relationship with the finished product. Ruizong was very happy to learn this and was greatly impressed.

古文：先天元年八月，进封司空。
现代文：先天元年八月，晋封成器为司空。
English: In August of the year before yesterday, he was promoted to the rank of Siku.

古文：及玄宗讨平萧至忠、岑羲等，成器又进位太尉，依旧兼扬州大都督，加实封一千户。
现代文：到玄宗讨平萧至忠、岑羲等，成器又晋位任太尉，依旧兼扬州大都督之职，又加实封一千户。
English: When Xuanzong defeated Xiao Zhizhong and Zou, Chengqi was promoted to the rank of captain, and still held the post of Yangzhou grand governor, adding another thousand households.

古文：月余，加授开府仪同三司，其太尉、扬州大都督并停。
现代文：一月余，加授开府仪同三司，太尉和扬州大都督之职并停。
English: In January, he was awarded the additional post of Kaifu Yi, and the posts of Sanji, Taifu, and Yangzhou Grand Governor were also suspended.

古文：开元初，历岐州刺史，开府如故。
现代文：开元初年，历任岐州刺史、开府如故。
English: In the first year of the founding of the Republic of China, the successors of the history of Qizhou and the founding of the capital remained unchanged.

古文：四年，避昭成皇后尊号，改名宪，封为宁王，实封累至五千五百户。又历泽？泾等州刺史。
现代文：开元四年，避昭成皇后的尊号，改名为宪，封为宁王，实封加起来有五千五百户，又历任泽、泾二州刺史。
English: In the fourth year of the first century, the honorific title of the Empress Yuzhaoxing was changed to the name of the Constitution, and the title was changed to King Ning. In total, there were five thousand and five hundred households with the actual title, and the history of the Zhe and the two states.

古文：初，玄宗兄弟圣历初出閤，列第于东都积善坊，五人分院同居，号 五王宅 。
现代文：当初，玄宗兄弟在圣历初年搬出宫廷居住，五人分院同居，号五王宅。
English: At first, the Hyunjong brothers moved out of the palace to live in the first year of the sacred calendar, and the five of them lived together in a branch house called the Five Kings' House.

古文：大足元年，从幸西京，赐宅于兴庆坊，亦号 五王宅 。
现代文：大足元年，随武则天到长安，赐给在兴庆坊的宅第，也称五王宅。
English: In the first year of the Great Foot, he followed Wu Zetian to Chang'an and was given a mansion in Xingqingfang, also known as the Five Kings' Mansion.

古文：及先天之后，兴庆是龙潜旧邸，因以为宫。
现代文：到先天年以后，兴庆坊是玄宗皇帝住过的宅第，因此这宅第就成了宫。
English: After the year before yesterday, Xingqingfang was the residence of Emperor Xuanzong, so this residence became the palace.

古文：宪于胜业东南角赐宅，申王捴、岐王范于安兴坊东南赐宅，薛王业于胜业西北角赐宅，邸第相望，环于宫侧。
现代文：李宪在胜业东南角赐宅，申王扌为、岐王范在安兴坊东南赐宅，薛王业在胜业的西北角赐宅，府邸相望，环绕于宫的四周。
English: Li Xian was given a residence in the southeast corner of Shenye, Shen Wang Xuanwei and Qi Wang Fan were given residences in the southeast corner of Anxingfang, and Xue Wangye was given a residence in the northwest corner of Shenye. The residences face each other and are surrounded by the palace.

古文：玄宗于兴庆宫西南置楼，西面题曰花萼相辉之楼，南面题曰勤政务本之楼。
现代文：唐玄宗在兴庆坊的西南置楼，西面题的是：花萼相辉之楼；南面题的是：勤政务本之楼。
English: Tang Xuan Zong built a building in the southwest of Xingqingfang. On the west side, the theme is: the building of Calypso; on the south side, the theme is: the building of diligence.

古文：玄宗时登楼，闻诸王音乐之声，咸召登楼同榻宴谑，或便幸其第，赐金分帛，厚其欢赏。诸王每日于侧门朝见，归宅之后，即奏乐。纵饮，击球斗鸡，或近郊从禽，或别墅追赏，不绝于岁月矣。
现代文：唐玄宗经常登楼，听到诸王府的乐声，便召他们登楼同榻宴饮，有时就亲自到他们宅第，赐金分帛，给他们最大快乐和赏赐，诸王每天在侧门朝见，归宅之后，吃酒作乐、击毽斗鸡，或者到近郊追逐鸟兽，或者在别墅作乐，天天不断。
English: Tang Xuan Zong often went upstairs, and when he heard the music of the royal palaces, he invited them to go upstairs to share a banquet. Sometimes he personally went to their homes, gave them gold and money, and gave them the greatest happiness and reward. The kings met every day at the side gate, and after returning home, they drank wine and played music, played chicken fights, or went to the suburbs to chase birds and beasts, or played music in the villa, every day.

古文：游践之所，中使相望，以为天子友悌，近古无比，故人无间然。
现代文：游玩所到之处，中使相望，都认为天子兄弟之间友爱，近古无比，彼此之间无隔阂。
English: Everywhere they go, the Chinese envoys look at each other, and they all think that the friendship between the heavenly sons and brothers is unparalleled in recent times, and there is no gap between them.

古文：玄宗既笃于昆季，虽有谗言交构其间，而友爱如初。
现代文：唐玄宗对兄弟的友情特深，即使有谗言挑拨离间，但仍友爱如初。
English: Tang Xuan Zong's friendship with his brother is very deep. Even if there are insults to sow discord, they still love each other as before.

古文：宪尤恭谨畏慎，未曾干议时政及与人交结，玄宗尤加信重之。
现代文：李宪尤其恭谦小心，从不干议时政，也不与人交结，唐玄宗也特别信任看重。
English: Li Xian was especially respectful and careful, never interfering in current affairs, nor did he socialize with people. Tang Xuan Zong also placed great trust in him.

古文：尝与宪及岐王范等书曰： 昔魏文帝诗云： 西山一何高，高处殊无极。
现代文：玄宗曾给他和岐王范等写信，说： 过去魏文帝有诗云： 西山一何高，高处殊无极。
English: Xuanzong once wrote a letter to him and King Fan of Qi, saying: In the past, Emperor Weiwen had a poem: "No matter how high the West Mountain is, the height is extraordinary."

古文：上有两仙童，不饮亦不食。
现代文：上有两仙童，不饮亦不食。
English: Above are two fairy children, neither eating nor drinking.

古文：赐我一丸药，光耀有五色。
现代文：赐我一丸药，光耀有五色。
English: Give me a pill that glows in five colors.

古文：服药四五日，身轻生羽翼。 
现代文：服药四五日，身轻生羽翼。 
English: After taking the medicine for four or five days, his body became light and he was able to fly.

古文：朕每思服药而求羽翼，何如骨肉兄弟天生之羽翼乎！
现代文：朕每想到服药而求羽翼，哪里赶得上骨肉兄弟间的羽翼呢？
English: Every time I think of taking medicine and ask for wings, where can I get the wings between brothers?

古文：陈思有超代之才，堪佐经纶之务，绝其朝谒，卒令忧死。
现代文：陈思王有超人之才，能辅佐国家大事，但不让他朝见谒拜，终使忧死。
English: Chen Si Wang had superhuman talent and was able to support national affairs, but he was not allowed to attend the funeral and eventually died of grief.

古文：魏祚未终，遭司马宣王之夺，岂神丸之效也！
现代文：魏的国运未襄，却遭司马宣王夺权，哪里是神丸之效；舜是大圣人，不记弟弟象的恶行而亲九族，九族和睦，百姓守纪安宁。
English: Wei's national movement had not yet begun, but Sima Xuan Wang seized power, where is the effect of God's bullet; Zou is a great saint, and does not remember the evil deeds of his brother Xiang, but is close to nine ethnic groups. The nine ethnic groups are in harmony, and the people keep discipline and tranquility.

古文：虞舜至圣，拾象傲之愆以亲九族，九族既睦，平章百姓，此为帝王之轨则，于今数千岁，天下归善焉。朕未尝不废寝忘食钦叹者也，顷因余暇，妙选仙经，得此神方，古老云 服之必验 。
现代文：这是帝王的行为准则，到今天已数千年，天下的人都走上了善道，朕一想到这些，就废寝忘食，感叹不已。前一段时间因稍有余暇，妙选仙经，发现这一神方，古老云 服之必验 。
English: This is the emperor's code of conduct. Today, thousands of years have passed, and people all over the world have embarked on the path of goodness. When I think about this, I lose sleep, forget to eat, and sigh incessantly. Some time ago, because I had some spare time, I carefully selected the Immaculate Conception Sutra and discovered this divine method, which is a must-try for the ancient clouds.

古文：今分此药，愿与兄弟等同保长龄，永无限极。 
现代文：今分此药，愿我们兄弟同保长寿，永无极限。 
English: Now that we have this medicine, may our brothers and sisters enjoy a long and healthy life with no limit.

古文：宪，开元九年兼太常卿。
现代文：李宪在开元九年兼任太常卿。
English: In the ninth year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, Li Xian also served as the First Secretary of the Central Military Commission.

古文：十四年，停太常卿，依旧为开府仪同三司。
现代文：十四年，停太常卿职，依旧是开府仪同三司。
English: Fourteen years have passed since he ceased to hold the position of Tai Changqing, but he is still the ceremonial head of the government and the third secretary.

古文：二十一年，复拜太尉。
现代文：二十一年，又拜太尉。
English: Twenty-one years later, he was promoted to second lieutenant.

古文：二十八年冬，宪寝疾，上令中使送医药及珍膳，相望于路，僧崇一疗宪稍瘳，上大悦，特赐绯袍鱼袋，以赏异崇一。
现代文：二十八年冬，李宪卧病在床，玄宗令中使送医药和珍膳，接连不断。僧崇一治疗李宪的病，渐渐好转，玄宗非常高兴，特赐僧崇一绯袍鱼袋，奖赏。
English: In the winter of the 28th year, Li Xian was sick in bed. Xuanzong sent medicine and precious meals one after another. Monk Chongyi treated Li Xian's illness and gradually improved. Xuanzong was very happy and specially gave Monk Chongyi a robe and a fish bag as a reward.

古文：时申王等皆先薨，唯宪独在，上尤加恩贷。
现代文：当时，申王等都先死，只有李宪独在，玄宗特别加以关怀。
English: At that time, Shen Wang and others all died first, only Li Xian was left alone, and Xuanzong paid special attention to him.

古文：每年至宪生日，必幸其宅，移时宴乐。
现代文：每年到李宪的生日，一定亲自去庆贺，在一起宴乐。
English: Every year when it comes to Li Xian's birthday, I will definitely go to celebrate in person and have fun together.

古文：居常无日不赐酒酪及异馔等，尚食总监及四方有所进献，食之稍甘，即皆分以赐之。
现代文：过不了几天都要赐酒酪及奇珍佳肴。四方所进献的，只要自己吃了觉得味美的，马上就赐给李宪。
English: Within a few days, they would all give him wine, cheese, and rare delicacies. Whatever the four parties contributed, as long as he found it delicious, he would immediately give it to Li Xian.

古文：宪尝奏请年终录付史馆每年至数百纸。
现代文：李宪曾写的奏表年终整理付史馆留存，每年达数百页。
English: The report card that Li Xian once wrote, which amounts to hundreds of pages each year, has been preserved by the National History Museum.

古文：二十九年冬，京城寒甚，凝霜封树，时学者以为《春秋》 雨木冰 即此是，亦名树介，言其象介胄也。宪见而叹曰： 此俗谓树稼者也。谚曰： 树稼，达官怕。 
现代文：开元二十九年冬，京城特别寒冷，凝结的霜封树，当时学者认为《春秋》中所说的 雨水冰 就是这种状况，也称之为树介，说的是它好像介胄，李宪见此景而叹道： 这就是民间所说的树稼，谚语说： 树稼，达官怕。 
English: In the winter of the 29th year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, the capital was particularly cold, and the condensed frost sealed the trees. At that time, scholars believed that the rainwater ice mentioned in the "Spring and Autumn" was this situation, also known as the tree bush, saying that it was like a bush. Li Xian saw this scene and sighed: This is what the people call the tree bush. The proverb says: The tree bush is afraid of government officials.

古文：必有大臣当之，吾其死矣。 
现代文：必定有大臣承受灾难，我恐怕要死了。 
English: There must be a minister for disaster. I'm afraid I'm going to die.

古文：十一月薨，时年六十三。
现代文：这年十一月死，享年六十三。
English: He died in November of that year, aged 63.

古文：茂行若此，易名是凭，自非大号，孰副休烈。按谥法推功尚善曰 让 ，德性宽柔曰 让 ，敬追谥曰让皇帝，宜令所司择曰备礼册命。
现代文：玄宗知死讯，号啕痛哭，左右都掩涕。第二天，玄宗下诏，追怀其高尚品德 ，能以位让，存则能用成其节，殁则当表其贤 ， 谦以自牧，乐以为善 。非最高名号，哪能副其实。 谥法推功尚善曰让，德行宽柔曰让，敬追谥让皇帝，当令有司择日备礼册命 。
English: The next day, Emperor Xuanzong issued an edict: to pursue his noble character, if he can give up his position, then he can use it to become a saint; if not, then he should show his virtue; if he is humble and self-disciplined, then he is good; if he is not the highest name, then he cannot be true; if he is good at promoting virtue, then he should give up; if he is virtuous and gentle, then he should give up; if he is an emperor, then he should pursue virtue; if he is not the highest name, then he should not be true; if he is not the highest name, then he should not be true; if

古文：宪长子汝阳郡王璡又上表恳辞，盛陈先意，谦退不敢当帝号，手制不许。
现代文：李宪的长子汝阳郡王李又上表恳辞，陈述父亲之意，谦退不敢当帝号，玄宗不许。
English: Li Xian's eldest son, Ruyang County's Wang Li, also sent a letter of resignation, stating his father's intention, that he would not dare to be emperor, and that he would not allow Xuanzong.

古文：及册敛之日，内出御衣一副，仍令右监门大将军高力士赍手书置于灵座之前，其书曰：
现代文：到册封之日，内府出御衣一套，令右监门大将军高力士送玄宗亲笔手书放在灵座之前。
English: On the day of the book's sealing, the Naifu issued a set of imperial robes and ordered the General of the Right Division of the Imperial Guard, Koryoshi, to send a handwritten letter from Emperor Xuanzong to be placed in front of the reliquary.

古文：又制追赠宪妃元氏为恭皇后，祔葬于桥陵之侧。
现代文：又追赠宪妃元氏为恭皇后，合葬于桥陵之侧。
English: She was also posthumously given the title of Qiong Empress by Princess Xianfei of the Yuan Dynasty, and they were buried together at the side of the bridge mausoleum.

古文：及将葬，上遣中使敕璡等务令俭约，送终之物，皆令众见。
现代文：到下葬的时候，玄宗遣中使告谕李等务必节俭，送终之物，不要特殊。
English: At the time of burial, the envoy sent by Xuanzong told Li and others to be frugal, and not to give special things for the funeral.

古文：所司请依诸陵旧例，圹内置千味食。监获使、左仆射裴耀卿奏曰： 尚食所料水陆等味一千余种，每色瓶盛，安于藏内，皆是非时瓜果及马牛驴犊麞鹿等肉，并诸药酒三十余色。仪注礼料，皆无所凭。
现代文：有司准备依旧例，墓穴内放千味食一，监护使、左仆射裴耀卿上奏说山珍海味千余种，每色瓶，安放墓穴内，都不是时令物品。 天恩每次申明让帝生前习惯，务令俭约，凡在礼外所加之物，恐怕让帝在九泉之下也会不安。
English: The preparation was the same as before, a thousand kinds of delicacies were placed in the tomb, and the guardian and left-hand servant, Sho Pei Yaoqing, reported that there were more than a thousand kinds of mountain and sea delicacies, and each color bottle placed in the tomb was not a seasonal item.

古文：伏望依礼减省，以取折衷。 
现代文：伏望依礼减省。 
English: Fubo follows the etiquette of less is more.

古文：制从之。及发引，时属大雨，上令庆王泽已下泥中步送十数里，制号其墓为惠陵。
现代文：玄宗听从，到出殡抬出灵柩时，正下大雨，玄宗派庆王李潭下泥中步送十数里，给他墓命名为惠陵。
English: Xuanzong obeyed, and when the funeral was held and the coffin was carried out, it was raining heavily. Xuanzong sent Qing Wang Li Tan to walk in the mud for more than ten miles, and named his tomb Huiling.

古文：有子十一人。
现代文：李宪有十子，都历官封袭。
English: Li Xian had ten sons, all of whom became officials.

