古文：王者所佩在德，德在利民，民在顺上。
现代文：君王佩带的应该是德。佩德在于利民，利民才能使民顺从主上。
English: The ruler should wear virtue. Virtue lies in benefiting the people, and only by benefiting the people can the people be obedient to the Lord.

古文：合为在因时，应事则易成。
现代文：当做的事要抓住时机，顺应事理就容易办成。
English: When it is time to do something, you should seize the opportunity, and it is easy to do things according to the principle.

古文：谋成在周，长有功在力多。
现代文：计谋的成功在于考虑得全面而长远，功绩大在于协同用力。
English: The success of the strategy lies in the fact that it is comprehensive and long-term, and the great achievement lies in the synergy.

古文：昌大在自克，不过在数惩。
现代文：昌盛强大在于克制自我，不犯过失在于多次警戒。
English: Prosperity and strength lie in self-restraint, and not committing mistakes lies in multiple vigilance.

古文：不困在豫慎，见祸在未形。
现代文：不受困穷，在于预先谨慎，发现祸害要在未产生之前。
English: The way out of trouble is to be forewarned, to see the evil before it comes.

古文：除害在能断，安民在知过，用兵在知时，胜大患在合人心。
现代文：消除祸害在于能够果断，安定百姓在于知过就改。用兵打仗在于掌握时机，战胜大祸在于迎合人心。
English: To eliminate the scourge is to be able to be decisive, to stabilize the people is to know and change, to fight with soldiers is to grasp the opportunity, and to overcome the great disaster is to cater to the people.

古文：殃毒在信疑，孽子在听内，化行在知和，施舍在平心。
现代文：受害遭殃在于轻信可疑之言，使嫡子遭孽是听了嬖妾的话。教化的推行在于懂得不用粗暴，施惠赦罪在于心地平正。
English: Suffering and calamity lie in the credulity of doubtful words, causing the legitimate son to suffer is to listen to the words of the concubine. The implementation of indoctrination lies in knowing how not to be rude, and the granting of grace and forgiveness of sin lies in the peace of mind.

古文：不幸在不闻其过，福在受谏，基在爱民，固在亲贤。
现代文：遭遇不幸，在于不知自己的过错，得到幸福，在于能接受劝谏。为政的根本在于爱民，地位稳固在于亲近贤臣。
English: To meet with misfortune is to be unaware of one's own faults, to obtain happiness is to be able to accept advice. The foundation of politics is to love the people, and a stable position is to be close to wise men.

古文：祸福在所密，利害在所近，存亡在所用，离合在出命。
现代文：遭祸还是得福，在于与谁亲密；得利还是受害在于与谁亲近。生存还是灭亡，在于任用什么样的人；人心的向背在于发布什么样的命令。
English: Misfortune or good fortune depends on who you are close to; gain or loss depends on who you are close to; survival or destruction depends on what kind of person you appoint; the turning point of the human heart depends on what kind of order you issue.

古文：尊在慎，威安在恭己，危亡在不知时。见善而怠，时至而疑，亡正处邪，弗能居此，得失之方也，不可不察。
现代文：受人尊重在于慎施威力，保持安定在于对人谦恭，遭受危亡在于不明天时。 见善事而懈怠不做，时机到了而犹疑不决，舍弃正大而处于邪道，这样就不能安居了。这些，是得与失的技巧，不可不仔细观察。
English: To be respected is to wield power with prudence, to maintain stability is to be courteous to others, to suffer peril is to face an uncertain future, to see a good deed and fail to do it, to hesitate when the time comes, to abandon righteousness and take a wrong path, and thus to be unable to live a peaceful life. These are the skills of gain and loss, and must be carefully observed.

