古文：金寇犯阙，銮舆南幸。
现代文：原文宋朝金人进犯京师，皇帝跑到南方。
English: In the Song Dynasty, the Jin people invaded Beijing, and the emperor fled to the south.

古文：贼退，以宗公汝霖尹开封。
现代文：金人退兵后，宗汝霖奉命任开封府尹。
English: After Jinren retired from the army, Zong Rulin was appointed to the post of Kaifeng Fuyin.

古文：初至，而物价腾贵，至有十倍于前者。
现代文：初到开封时，开封物价暴涨，价钱几乎要比以前贵上十倍，百姓叫苦连天。
English: When I first arrived in Kaifeng, the prices in Kaifeng skyrocketed. The prices were almost ten times more expensive than before, and the people were very upset.

古文：郡人病之，公谓参佐曰： 此易事，自都人率以饮食为先，当治其所先，缓者不忧于平也。 
现代文：宗汝霖对诸僚属说： 要平抑物价并非难事，先从日常饮食开始，等民生物资价格平稳后，其他的物价还怕不回跌吗？ 
English: Zong Rulin said to his colleagues: It is not difficult to stabilize prices. First, start with daily meals. After the prices of people's living resources are stable, will other prices fall back?

古文：密使人问米麦之值，且市之。计其值，与前此太平时初无甚增。
现代文：于是暗中派人到市集购买米面，回来估算分量和价格，和以前太平时相差无几。
English: So they secretly sent someone to the market to buy rice noodles, and came back with an estimate of the weight and price, which was almost the same as in the previous Taiping era.

古文：乃呼庖人取面，令作市肆笼饼大小为之，乃取糯米一斛，令监军使臣如市沽酝酒，各估其值，而笼饼枚六钱，酒每觚七十足。出勘市价，则饼二十，酒二百也。
现代文：于是召来府中厨役，命他制作市售的各种大小尺寸的糕饼，另外取来一斛糯米，然后命人到市集购买一斛糯米所能酿成的酒，结果得到一个结论，每块糕饼的成本是六钱，每觚酒是七十钱，但一般市价却是糕饼二十钱，酒二百钱。
English: So he called in the head cook and ordered him to make commercially available cakes of various sizes. In addition, he fetched a bushel of rice, and then ordered the cook to go to the market to buy the wine that could be made from a bushel of rice. As a result, he came to the conclusion that the cost of each cake was six yuan, and each jug of wine was seventy yuan, but the general market price was twenty yuan for cakes and two hundred yuan for wine.

古文：公先呼作坊饼师至，讽之曰： 自我为举子时来京师，今三十年矣，笼饼枚七钱，而今二十，何也，岂麦价高倍乎？ 
现代文：宗汝霖首先召来坊间制饼的师傅，质问他说： 从我中举人后入京，到今天已经三十年了。当初每块糕饼七钱，现在却涨到二十钱。这是什么原因，难道是谷价高涨了好几倍？ 
English: First of all, Zong Rulin called the master of the bakery workshop and asked him: "It has been thirty years since I brought people to Beijing. Originally, each piece of cake was seven yuan, but now it has risen to twenty yuan. What is the reason for this? Is it because the price of grain has risen several times?

古文：饼师曰： 自都城经乱以来，米麦起落，初无定价，因袭至此，某不能违众独减，使贱市也。 
现代文：糕饼师傅说： 自从京师遭逢战火后，米麦的涨跌并没有一定，但糕饼价却一直高居不下，我也不能扰乱市场，独自降价。 
English: The pastry chef said: Since the Beijing Division was hit by the war, the rise and fall of rice and wheat has not been certain, but the price of pastries has remained high. I can't disrupt the market and lower the price alone.

古文：公即出兵厨所作饼示之，且语之曰： 此饼与汝所市重轻一等，而我以目下市直，会计薪面工值之费，枚止六钱，若市八钱，则有二钱之息，今为将出令，止作八钱，敢擅增此价而市者，罪应处斩。且借汝头以行吾令也。 
现代文：宗汝霖命人拿出厨役所做的糕饼，对那名师傅说： 这饼和你所卖饼的重量相同，而我以现今成本加上工资重新计算后，每块糕饼的成本是六钱，如果卖八钱，那么就有二钱的利润，所以从今天开始我下令，每块糕饼只能卖八钱，敢擅自加价者就判死罪，现在请借我你项上人头，执行我的命令。 
English: Zong Rulin ordered someone to take out the cake made by the cook and said to the master: This cake is the same weight as the cake you sold, and after I recalculated it with today's cost plus salary, the cost of each cake is six dollars. If you sell it for eight dollars, then there will be a profit of two dollars. So from today I ordered that each cake can only be sold for eight dollars. Anyone who dares to increase the price without permission will be sentenced to death. Now please lend me your head and carry out my order.

古文：明日饼价仍旧，亦无敢闭肆者。
现代文：说完下令处斩。第二天，饼价回复旧价，也没有任何一家商户敢罢市。
English: The next day, the price of cakes returned to the old price, and not a single merchant dared to go on strike.

古文：次日呼官沽任修武至，讯之曰： 今都城糯米价不增，而酒值三倍，何也？ 
现代文：再隔一天，宗汝霖召来掌官酒买卖的任修武，对他说： 现在京师糯米价格并没有涨，但酒价却涨了三倍，是什么原因呢？ 
English: A day later, Zong Rulin summoned Ren Xiuwu, the head of the liquor trade, and said to him: "Nowadays, the price of glutinous rice in Beijing has not risen, but the price of liquor has tripled. What is the reason for this?

古文：任恐悚以对曰： 某等开张承业，欲罢不能。而都城自遭寇以来，外居宗室及权贵亲属私酿甚多，不如是无以输纳官曲之值与工役油烛之费也。 
现代文：任修武惶恐的答道： 自从京师遭金人入侵后，皇室及一般民间酿私酒的情形很猖獗，不加价无法缴纳官税及发放工人工资、油水等开支费用。 
English: Ren Xiuwu replied with trepidation: Since the Beijing division was invaded by the Jin people, the situation of the imperial family and the general folk brewing illegal liquor is very rampant, and it is impossible to pay official taxes and pay workers' wages, oil and water and other expenses without price increases.

古文：公曰： 我为汝尽禁私酿，汝减值百钱，亦有利入乎？ 
现代文：宗汝霖说： 如果我为你取缔私酒，而你减价一百钱，是否还有利润呢？ 
English: Zong Rulin said, "If I ban bootleg liquor for you, and you reduce the price by one hundred yuan, will there still be a profit?

古文：任叩额曰： 若尔，则饮者俱集，多中取息，足办输役之费。 
现代文：任修武叩头说： 如果真能取缔私酒，那么民众都会向我买酒，薄利多销，应该足够支付税款及其他杂支开销。 
English: Ren Xiuwu, a henchman, said: "If we can really ban bootlegging, then the public will buy wine from me. If we make a small profit, it should be enough to pay taxes and other miscellaneous expenses.

古文：公熟视久之，曰： 且寄汝头颈上，出率汝曹即换招榜，一觚止作百钱，是不患乎私酝之搀夺也! 
现代文：宗汝霖审视他许久后，说： 你这颗脑袋暂且寄在你脖子上，你赶紧带着你的手下，换贴公告酒价减一百钱，那你所担心的私酒猖獗情形，就不会再危害你了。 
English: After examining him for a long time, Zong Rulin said: If you take your head off and put it on your neck for the time being, if you quickly take your subordinates with you, and change the notice to announce that the price of liquor will be reduced by one hundred yuan, then the rampant situation of bootlegging that you are worried about will no longer harm you.

古文：明日出令： 敢有私造曲酒者，捕至不问多寡，并行处斩。 
现代文：于是酿私酒者纷纷自动捣毁酒器。第二天，宗汝霖贴出告示： 凡敢私自酿酒者，一经查获，不论数量多寡，一律处斩。 
English: The next day, Zong Rulin posted a notice: Anyone who dares to brew their own wine will be executed as soon as they are caught, regardless of the quantity.

古文：于是倾糟破觚者不胜其数。数日之间，酒与饼值既并复旧，其他物价不令而次第自减，既不伤市人，而商旅四集，兵民欢呼，称为神明之政。
现代文：短短几天之内，饼与酒都恢复旧价，而其他的物价也纷纷下跌，既不干扰市场交易，更吸引四地商人云集，百姓不禁推崇为 神明之政 。
English: Within just a few days, the old prices of bread and wine were restored, while other prices also fell in succession, which did not interfere with market transactions, but attracted merchants from four places to gather, and the people could not help but respect it as a divine policy.

古文：时杜充守北京，号 南宗北杜 云。
现代文：当时杜充守北京，人称 南宗北杜 。
English: At that time, Du Chong was in charge of Beijing and was known as Nanzong Bei Du.

古文：借饼师头虽似惨，然禁私酿、平物价，所以令出推行全不费力者，皆在于此。
现代文：宗汝霖借糕饼师傅人头的做法，虽然看来有些残忍，但日后能禁酿私酒、平稳物价，命令得以完全彻底执行，毫不费力，都是因为有这事例在先。
English: Although it may seem a bit cruel, Zong Rulin's practice of taking the lead from the pastry chef made it possible to ban bootleg liquor and stabilize prices in the future, and the order could be completely and thoroughly implemented without any effort, all because of this precedent.

古文：亦所谓权以济难者乎？
现代文：这也正是所谓的 权以济难 。
English: This is precisely the so-called "power to the rescue."

古文：当湖冯汝弼《祐山杂说》云： 甲辰凶荒之后，邑人行乞者什之三，逋负者什之九。
现代文：当湖人冯汝弼在《祐山杂记》中记载：甲辰荒年过后，城中十人中就有三人靠乞讨度日，而无力缴税租者更高达九成。
English: When Feng Ruxuan, a Laker, recorded in "Yu Mountain Miscellany": After the Jia Chen famine, three out of ten people in the city lived by begging, and those unable to pay taxes and rents were as high as 90%.

古文：明年，本府赵通判临县催征，命选竹板重七斤者，拶长三寸者，邑人大恐，或诳行乞者曰： 赵公领府库银三千两来赈济，汝何不往？ 
现代文：府城赵通判到县城催讨租税，城中百姓大为恐慌，有人故意散播谣言说： 赵公从府库中领取了三千两纹银，用来赈济县城百姓，我们何不赶快去赵府领救济呀？ 
English: Zhao Tong, the prefectural capital, was ordered to go to the county capital to collect taxes. The people in the city panicked. Some people deliberately spread rumors saying: Zhao Gong received three thousand taels of silver from the prefectural treasury to help the people in the county capital. Why don't we go to Zhao Fule for relief?

古文：行乞者更相传播，须臾数百人相率诣赵。
现代文：乞丐们口耳相传，不一会儿，就有好几百人相继前往赵的住处。
English: Word of the beggars spread by word of mouth, and soon hundreds of people were heading to Zhao's residence.

古文：赵不容入，则叫号跳跃，一拥而进，逋负者随之，逐隶人，毁刑具，呼声震动。
现代文：赵命人驱赶群众，乞丐们大声叫跳，一拥而上，而欠税者也随之跟进，一时殴打属隶，毁坏公物，喊声震天。
English: Zhao gave the order to drive away the crowd. The beggars shouted and jumped and rushed up, and the tax defaulters followed, beating their relatives, destroying public property, and shouting at the sky.

古文：赵惶惧莫知所措。
现代文：赵这才心惊害怕，不知该如何是好。
English: Zhao was so shocked and scared that he didn't know what to do.

古文：余与上莘辈闻变趋入，赵意稍安，延入后堂。
现代文：我与赵上莘听说有暴动就急忙入城，赵这才稍感安心，请我们进入后堂。
English: When Zhao Shangyao and I heard that there was a riot, we hurried into the city. This made Zhao feel a little more at ease, and he invited us into the back hall.

古文：则击门排闼，势益猖獗。
现代文：而聚集的群众却不停地拍击大门，大声吼叫，声势更加猖獗。
English: But the crowd that had gathered kept on banging on the doors, shouting loudly, and their voices became even louder.

古文：问欲何为，行乞者曰： 求赈济。 
现代文：问他们的目的，乞丐说： 要求救济！ 
English: Asked their purpose, the beggars said: To ask for relief!

古文：逋负者曰： 求免征。 
现代文：欠税者说： 要求免除课税。 
English: Tax defaulters say: Demand tax exemption.

古文：赵问为首者姓名，余曰： 勿问也，知其姓名，彼虑后祸，祸反不测，姑顺之耳。 
现代文：赵问他们带头者的姓名，我劝赵不要追问： 知道带领者的姓名，万一带头者顾虑官府日后追究，反而会为自己带来灾祸，现在不如暂时答应他们的要求。 
English: Zhao asked them the name of the leader, I advised Zhao not to ask: Knowing the name of the leader, if the leader is worried about being investigated by the government in the future, it will bring disaster to himself, it is better to temporarily agree to their request.

古文：于是出免征牌，及县备豆饼数百以进，未及门辄抢去，行乞者率不得食。
现代文：于是赵命人贴出免课税的告示，并且准备了数百枚豆饼。豆饼才运到门口，就被民众抢取一空，大部分的乞丐仍然分不到食物。
English: As a result, Zhao ordered someone to put up a tax-free notice and prepared hundreds of bean cakes. The bean cakes were only delivered to the door and were snatched up by the public. Most of the beggars still do not get any food.

古文：抵暮，余辈出，则号呼愈甚，突入后堂矣!
现代文：快近傍晚时，群众的吼叫声愈来愈大，最后突破防卫闯入后堂。
English: As evening approached, the roar of the crowd grew louder and louder, and they finally broke through the defense and broke into the back hall.

古文：赵虑有他变，逾墙宵遁。自是民颇骄纵无忌。
现代文：赵怕发生其他暴动，就趁夜翻墙逃逸，自此暴民益发骄纵，难以约束。
English: Fearing other riots, Zhao took advantage of the night to escape over the wall. Since then, the mob has become more and more arrogant and difficult to control.

古文：又二月，太守郭平川应奎推为首者数人于法，即惕然⑤相戒，莫敢复犯矣。
现代文：两个月后，太守郭平川将为首的暴民绳之以法后，其他暴民也就开始自我约束，不敢再任意滋事。
English: Two months later, after the grand marshal Guo Pingchuan brought the leader of the mob to justice, other rioters began to discipline themselves and no longer dared to cause trouble.

古文：向使赵不严刑，未必致变；郭不正法，何由弭乱？
现代文：当初如果赵用严刑镇压，或许不致产生暴动；而郭平川不将为首的暴民正法，暴乱就没有平息的一天。
English: At the beginning, if Zhao had used severe punishment to suppress, there might not have been a riot; and if Guo Pingchuan had not led the mob to rectify the law, the riot would not have subsided for a day.

古文：宽严操纵，唯识时务者知之。 
现代文：如何能切确掌握宽严间的尺度，就只有深识时务者才能体会认识了。
English: Only those who are well-versed in current affairs can understand how to accurately grasp the scale between the broad and the strict.

