古文：太祖圣神恭肃文武孝皇帝，姓郭氏，邢州尧山人也。
现代文：太祖圣神恭肃文武皇帝郭威，邢州尧山人。父简，在晋当顺州刺史。
English: Emperor Guo Wei, a native of Lushan, Zhangzhou, and his father, Jian, made history in Shandong and Shunzhou.

古文：父简，事晋为顺州刺史。刘仁恭攻破顺州，简见杀，子威少孤，依潞州人常氏。
现代文：刘仁恭攻破顺州，简被杀，子威年少成孤儿，依靠潞州人常氏。
English: Liu Rengong invaded Shunzhou, Jane was killed, Zi Wei became an orphan at a young age, relying on Zhangzhou people.

古文：潞州留后李继韬募勇敢士为军卒，威年十八，以勇力应募。
现代文：潞州留后李继韬募勇士为军卒，威十八岁，以勇力应募。
English: After staying in Zhangzhou, Li Jizhe recruited brave soldiers for the army, and at the age of eighteen, he responded to the recruitment with courage.

古文：为人负气，好使酒，继韬特奇之。
现代文：为人争强好胜，酒后任性闹事，继韬特别奇怪和重视他。
English: He is a competitive person, a wayward troublemaker after drinking, and his successor is particularly strange and attaches great importance to him.

古文：威尝游于市，市有屠者，常以勇服其市人。
现代文：威曾在市上游玩，市里有个屠户，常常以勇气使市民佩服。
English: Wei used to play in the market. There was a butcher in the city who often impressed the citizens with his courage.

古文：威醉，呼屠者，使进几割肉，割不如法，叱之。屠者披其腹示之曰： 尔勇者，能杀我乎？ 
现代文：威喝醉了酒，叫屠户割肉，屠户没按威说的办法割，威大声斥责，屠户拍着腹部说： 你勇敢，敢来杀我吗？ 
English: Wei got drunk and asked the butcher to cut the meat. The butcher did not cut the meat according to Wei's instructions. Wei loudly reprimanded the butcher. The butcher patted Wei's stomach and said, "You are brave. Do you dare to kill me?"

古文：威即前取刀刺杀之。一市皆惊，威颇自如。
现代文：威立即取刀杀了他，市民都惊恐，威却跟平常一样。
English: Wei immediately took a knife and killed him, the citizens were terrified, but Wei was the same as usual.

古文：为吏所执，继韬惜其勇，阴纵之使亡，已而复召置麾下。
现代文：被吏捉拿，继韬珍惜他的勇敢，秘密放了，叫他逃跑，不久又召回部下。
English: He was captured by officials, but his stepmother treasured his bravery, secretly released him, told him to escape, and soon recalled his subordinates.

古文：继韬叛晋附于梁，后庄宗灭梁，继韬诛死，其麾下兵悉隶从马直，威以通书算补为军吏。
现代文：继韬叛晋归梁，后来庄宗灭梁，继韬被处死，部下兵隶属从马直，威因懂得书算升为军吏。
English: Zhuangzong defeated Liang, and Liang was executed. The subordinate soldiers were subordinated to Ma Zhi, and Wei was promoted to military officer because he knew how to read and calculate.

古文：好读《阃外春秋》，略知兵法，后为侍卫军吏。
现代文：喜欢读《阃外春秋》，略知兵法，后当侍卫军吏。
English: He liked to read "Spring and Autumn Outside of Xing," knew a little about military tactics, and later served as a guard officer.

古文：汉高祖为侍卫亲军都虞候，尤亲爱之。后高祖所临镇，尝以威从。
现代文：汉高祖当侍卫亲军都虞候，特别亲近他，后来高祖每移镇，都叫威跟随。
English: Hanzo Gao's ancestor was especially close to him when he was an attendant guard of the imperial army. Later, Gao Zu was called to follow Wei whenever he moved to a new town.

古文：契丹灭晋，汉高祖起兵太原，即皇帝位，拜威枢密副使。
现代文：契丹灭晋，汉高祖起兵太原，即帝位，升威当枢密副使。
English: Khitan killed Jin, Han Gaozhu raised an army to Taiyuan, that is, the imperial throne, and rose to the position of Privy Vice-Minister.

古文：乾祐元年正月，高祖疾大渐，以隐帝托威及史弘肇等。
现代文：乾祐元年正月，高祖病重，以隐帝托付威和史弘肇等人。
English: In the first month of the first year of Qian Yu, Gao Zu was seriously ill, and entrusted the Emperor to Wei and Shi Hongzhao and others.

古文：隐帝即位，拜威枢密使。
现代文：隐帝即位，升威为枢密使。
English: Emperor Hakuin ascends to the throne and is promoted to the position of Privy Councilor.

古文：是岁三月，河中李守贞、永兴赵思绾、凤翔王景崇相次反，隐帝遣白文珂、郭从义、常思等分讨之，久皆无功。
现代文：当年三月，河中李守贞、永兴赵思绾、凤翔王景崇接连造反，隐帝派白文珂、郭从义、常思等分别讨伐，久而都无功。
English: In March of that year, Li Shuzhen, Yongxing Zhao Sijun and Fengxiang Wang Jingsong rebelled successively, and Emperor Yin sent Bai Wenke, Guo Zongyi and Chang Si to fight separately, but all of them were unsuccessful.

古文：隐帝谓威曰： 吾欲烦公可乎？ 
现代文：隐帝对威说 ：我想请你出征可否？ 
English: Emperor Inchi said to Wei: May I ask you to go to the front?

古文：威对曰： 臣不敢请，亦不敢辞，惟陛下命。 
现代文：威回答说： 臣不敢请求，也不敢推辞，听陛下的命令。 
English: Wei replied, "The vassal dares not ask, nor does he dare refuse, to obey your majesty's order.

古文：乃加拜威同中书门下平章事，使西督诸将。
现代文：升威同中书门下平章事，派他去督促诸将。
English: Sheng Wei sent him to urge the generals to make peace with Zhong Shumen.

古文：威居军中，延见宾客，褒衣博带，及临阵行营，幅巾短后，与士卒无异；上所赐予，与诸将会射，恣其所取，其余悉以分赐士卒，将士皆欢乐。
现代文：威在军中，接见宾客时穿着宽宽的衣服、长长的带子，但到临阵行军作战，他穿短衣短巾，和士卒没有区别；上面赐给的东西由众将随便拿，余下的都分赐给士卒，将士都欢乐。
English: In the army, when Wei received guests, he wore a wide robe and a long belt, but when he went to battle, he wore a short robe and a short scarf, which was no different from the soldiers. What was given above would be taken by the crowd, and the rest would be given to the soldiers. The soldiers were all happy.

古文：威至河中，自栅其城东，思栅其南，文珂栅其西，调五县丁二万人筑连垒以护三栅。
现代文：威到河中，自己立栅在城东，常思栅在他的南边，文珂栅在他西边，调五县民工二万人筑垒连接三栅。
English: When Wei came to the middle of the river, he built a fence on the east side of the city, a fence on the south side of the city, and a fence on the west side of the city. He dispatched 20,000 migrant workers from five counties to build a barrier to connect the three fences.

古文：诸将皆谓守贞穷寇，破在旦夕，不宜劳人如此，威不听。
现代文：诸将都认为守贞已是穷途末路很快就会攻破他，不应该如此劳民，威不听。
English: The generals all thought that keeping chastity was a dead end, that he would soon be defeated, and that they should not make the people work so hard and not listen to them.

古文：已而守贞数出兵击坏连垒，威辄补之，守贞辄复出击，每出必有亡失。
现代文：不久守贞多次出兵击破连垒，威都及时修好。守贞再出攻击，每次都有伤亡。
English: Soon, Shuzhen sent out troops several times to break the blockhouse, and they all repaired it in time. Shuzhen attacked again, and there were casualties each time.

古文：久之，城中兵食俱尽，威曰： 可矣！ 
现代文：时间久了，城中兵粮都没有了，威说： 可大举进攻了！ 
English: After a long time, there was no more food for the soldiers in the city. Wei said, "Let's attack in a big way!"

古文：乃治攻具，为期日，四面攻之，破其罗城，守贞与妻子自焚死，思绾、景崇相次降。
现代文：制造攻城器具，约定日期，四面进攻，攻破外城，守贞与妻自焚而死，思绾、景崇相继投降。
English: They made siege equipment, set a date, attacked from four directions, broke through the outer city, Shuzhen and his wife died of self-immolation, and Shizhen and Jingsong surrendered one after another.

古文：隐帝劳威以玉带，加检校太师兼侍中，威辞曰： 臣事先帝，见功臣多矣，未尝以玉带赐之。 
现代文：隐帝用玉带奖赏郭威，加检校太师兼侍中，威推辞说： 我侍奉先帝，见的功臣很多，没见过用玉带赏赐的。 
English: Emperor Yin rewarded Guo Wei with a jade belt, and Guo Wei, who was also a proctor of the school and an attendant, said: I served the former emperor and saw many meritorious people, but I have never seen anyone rewarded with a jade belt.

古文：因言： 臣幸得率行伍，假汉威灵以破贼者，岂特臣之功，皆将相之贤，有以安朝廷，抚内外，而馈饷以时，故臣得以专事征伐。 
现代文：又说： 我侥幸能率军队，借汉威望攻破贼兵，这不仅是臣的功劳，也是将相们的贤能，能安定朝廷，抚慰内外，粮饷供应及时，所以臣能专心作战。 
English: He also said: I was fortunate enough to lead the army and use the prestige of the Han Dynasty to defeat the bandits. This is not only the merit of the minister, but also the ability of the generals to stabilize the court, soothe the inside and outside, and timely supply of grain and straw, so the minister can concentrate on the war.

古文：隐帝以威为贤，于是悉召杨邠、史弘肇、苏逢吉、禹珪、窦贞固、王章等皆赐以玉带，威乃受。
现代文：隐帝认为威很贤良，于是对杨、史弘肇、苏逢吉、苏禹皀、窦贞固、王章等都赐给玉带，威才接受。
English: Emperor Yin thought that Wei was very virtuous, so he gave the jade belt to Yang, Shi Hongzhao, Su Fengji, Su Yuqi, Dou Zhenggu, Wang Zhang, etc., and Wei accepted it.

古文：威又推功大臣，请加爵赏，于是加贞固司空，逢吉司徒，禹珪、邠左右仆射。
现代文：威又把功劳推给大臣，请加爵赏，于是加贞固司空，逢吉司徒，禹皀、为左、右仆射。
English: Wei also pushed the credit to the minister, asking for a knighthood, so he added Zhenggu Siku, Feng Jisi Tuo, Ufan, for the left and right minions.

古文：已而又曰： 此特汉廷亲近之臣耳。
现代文：不久又说 ：这都是汉廷亲近的臣子啊！
English: He soon added: "These are all courtiers who are close to the court!

古文：汉诸宗室、天下方镇，外暨荆、浙、湖南，皆未及也。 
现代文：汉宗室、天下方镇、外暨荆、浙、湖南，都没赏到呀。 
English: Han Zongshu, Tiancheng Fangzhen, Waizhong, Jing, Zhejiang, Hunan, have not been appreciated.

古文：由是滥赏遍于天下。
现代文：因此滥赏遍天下。
English: As a result, there is a glut of awards all over the world.

古文：是冬，契丹寇边，威以枢密使北伐，至魏州，契丹遁。
现代文：这一年冬天，契丹侵犯边境，威以枢密使北伐，到魏州，契丹逃遁。
English: In the winter of that year, the Khitan invaded the border, threatened to send the Northern Expedition with the Privy Council, and fled to Weizhou.

古文：三年二月，师还。
现代文：乾三年二月，回师。
English: In February of the following year, he returned to his teacher.

古文：四月，拜威鄴都留守、天雄军节度使，仍以枢密使之镇。
现代文：四月任命威当邺都留守、天雄军节度使，仍当枢密使出镇。
English: In April, he appointed Wei Danggu to stay behind and be the envoy of the Tianxiong Army, but he still left the town as a privy envoy.

古文：宰相苏逢吉以谓枢密使不可以籓镇兼领，与史弘肇等固争。
现代文：宰相苏逢吉认为藩镇不能兼当枢密使，史弘肇等坚持让郭威兼当。
English: The prime minister, Su Fengji, believed that a hanzhen could not be a privy councilor at the same time, and Shi Hongzhao and others insisted that Guo Wei be both.

古文：久之，卒以枢密使行，诏河北诸州皆听威节度。
现代文：后来还是兼任枢密使出镇，下诏河北各州都听威节度。
English: Later, he also served as a privy envoy to the town, and all the states of Hebei obeyed his orders.

古文：隐帝与李业等谋，已杀史弘肇等，诏镇宁军节度使李弘义杀侍卫步军指挥使王殷于澶州，又诏侍卫马军指挥使郭崇杀威及宣徽使王峻于魏。
现代文：隐帝与李业等谋划，已经杀了史弘肇等人，下诏叫镇宁军节度使李弘义杀侍卫步军指挥使王殷于澶州，又下诏叫侍卫马军指挥使郭崇杀威及宣徽使王峻于魏州。
English: According to the plan of Emperor Ying and Li Ye, Shi Hongzhao and others had already been killed, and the next edict called for the Zhenning Army Festival to make Li Hongzhao kill Wang Yin, the commander of the Foot Guards Army, in Ganzhou, and the next edict called for the commander of the Horse Guards Army to make Guo Chongzhai and the Emperor's Emblem to make Wang Jun in Weizhou.

古文：诏书先至澶州，弘义恐事不果，反以诏书示殷，殷与弘义遣人告威。
现代文：诏书先到澶州，弘义怕事情办不成，反而把诏书给王殷看，王殷和弘义派人告诉郭威。
English: The imperial edict went to Zhangzhou first, but Hongyi was afraid that the matter would not be completed. Instead, he showed the imperial edict to Wang Yin. Wang Yin and Hongyi sent someone to tell Guo Wei.

古文：已而诏杀威、峻使者亦驰骑至，威匿诏书，召枢密使院吏魏仁浦谋于卧内。
现代文：不久诏杀威，峻的使者也到了，威把诏书藏起来，召枢密使院吏魏仁浦入卧室商议。
English: Soon after the edict was issued, an envoy from the emperor also arrived. Emperor Wei hid the edict and called the imperial envoy Wei Rimpura into his bedroom for discussion.

古文：仁浦劝威反，教威倒用留守印，更为诏书，诏威诛诸将校以激怒之，将校皆愤然效用。
现代文：仁浦劝威造反，教威利用留守大印重新制造假诏书，诏威诛杀众将校来激怒大家，将校都很气愤，愿为郭威效力。
English: Inpu advised Guo Wei to rebel, and Guo Wei took advantage of Guo Wei's absence to re-create a fake imperial edict, and Guo Wei killed many officers to infuriate everyone. The officers were very angry and willing to work for Guo Wei.

古文：十一月丁丑，威遂举兵渡河。隐帝遣开封尹侯益、保大军节度使张彦超、客省使阎晋卿等率兵拒威，又遣内养脱觇威所向。
现代文：十一月十四日，威率兵渡河，隐帝派开封尹侯益、保大军节度使张彦超、客省使阎尽卿等率兵抗拒郭威，又派内养龙马脱侦察威的动向。
English: On November 14th, he crossed the river with his soldiers in high spirits. Emperor Yin sent Zhang Yanchao and Yan Jianqing to Kaifeng to resist Guo Wei, as well as Yin Houyi, Zhang Yanchao, and Yan Jianqing to Baoding, and sent Naiyang Longmatte to investigate Wei Wei's movements.

古文：脱为威所得，威乃附脱奏请缚李业等送军中。
现代文：龙马脱被威军抓住，威叫脱奏请皇帝把李业等人缚送军中。
English: Long Mat was caught by Wei's army, and Wei asked the emperor to bind Li Ye and others and send them to the army.

古文：隐帝得威奏，以示业等，业等皆言威反状已白，乃悉诛威家属于京师。
现代文：隐帝拿着郭威奏章给李业等人看，业等都说郭威的反状已明，就把郭威在京的家属全部杀死。
English: Emperor Yin took Guo Wei's music to Li Ye and others to see. Ye and others all said that Guo Wei's antithesis was clear, so he killed all of Guo Wei's family members in Beijing.

古文：庚辰，威至滑州，义成军节度使宋延渥叛于汉来降。
现代文：十七日威至滑州，义成军节度使宋延渥叛汉来降。
English: On the seventeenth day of Wei to Leshou, the Yicheng Army Festival made Song Yanwo rebel against Han.

古文：壬午，犯封丘。
现代文：十九日，进攻封丘。
English: On the 19th, the attack to seal the hill began.

古文：甲辰，及泰宁军节度使慕容彦超战于刘子陂，彦超败，奔于兗州。郭允明反，弑隐帝于赵村。
现代文：二十一日，在刘子陂战败泰宁军节度使慕容彦超，彦超逃奔兖州。郭允明反，弑隐帝于赵村。
English: On the twenty-first day, the defeat of the Taining Army by Liu Zihong caused Murong Yanchao and Yanchao to flee to Ganzhou. Guo Yunming, on the other hand, was in Zhao Village.

古文：丙戌，威入京师，纵火大掠。
现代文：二十三日，威到京城，纵火大掠。
English: On the 23rd, Wei came to the capital and started a large-scale arson attack.

古文：戊子，率百官朝太后于明德门，请立嗣君。
现代文：二十五日率百官在明德门朝见太后，请求立嗣君。
English: On the 25th, hundreds of officials went to see the empress dowager at the Mingde Gate and asked her to set up an heir.

古文：太后下令：文武百寮、六军将校，议择贤明，以承大统。
现代文：太后下令：文武百官、六军将校，商议选择贤明人才以继大统。
English: The empress dowager issued an order: A hundred civil and military officials and officers of the six armed forces should discuss the selection of a wise person to succeed the emperor.

古文：庚寅，威率百官诣明德门，请立武宁军节度使赟为嗣。
现代文：二十七日，威率百官到明德门，请立武宁军节度使刘斌贝为嗣。
English: On the 27th, hundreds of dignitaries came to the Mingde Gate to ask the Wu Ning Army to make Liu Binbei the heir.

古文：遣太师冯道迎赟于徐州。
现代文：派太师冯道到徐州去迎接斌贝。
English: He sent Feng Dao to Xuzhou to meet Bin Bei.

古文：辛卯，请太后临朝听政，以王峻为枢密使，翰林学士、尚书兵部侍郎范质为副使。
现代文：二十八日，请太后临朝听政，用王峻为枢密使，翰林学士、尚书兵部侍郎范质为副使。
English: On the 28th, the empress dowager was invited to the imperial court to listen to the government, with Wang Jun as the envoy, and Han Lin, a scholar, and Shang Shuxu, the attendant of the military department, as the deputy envoy.

古文：十二月甲午朔，威北伐契丹，军于滑州。癸丑，至澶州而旋。
现代文：十二月一日，威北伐契丹，驻军滑州。二十日，至澶州回师。
English: On December 1st, Wei Beiwakidan, stationed in Slate. On the 20th, returned to Zhangzhou.

古文：王峻遣郭崇以骑七百逆刘赟于宋州，杀之，其将巩廷美、杨温为赟守徐州。
现代文：王峻派郭崇率七百骑兵在宋州迎住刘斌贝把他杀掉，斌贝部将巩廷美、杨温守徐州。
English: Wang Jun sent seven hundred cavalry led by Guo Chong to meet Liu Binbei in Songzhou and kill him. Binbei's troops were led by Gong Tingmei and Yang Wen to defend Xuzhou.

古文：戊午，次皋门，汉宰相窦贞固、苏禹珪来劝进。
现代文：二十五日，到皋门，汉宰相窦贞固、苏禹皀来劝进。
English: On the 25th, Han chancellors Dou Zhenggu and Su Yuyuan came to Qimen to persuade them to enter.

古文：庚申，太后制以威监国。
现代文：二十七日，太后下制用威为监国。
English: On the 27th, the Empress Dowager used her power to supervise the country.

古文：广顺元年春正月丁卯，皇帝即位，大赦，改元，国号周。
现代文：广顺元年正月五日，郭威即帝位，大赦，改元，国号周。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the first year of Guangshun, Guo Wei, that is, the throne, amnesty, change of era, and the country name week.

古文：己巳，上汉太后尊号曰昭圣皇太后。
现代文：七日，上汉太后尊号曰昭圣皇太后。
English: On the seventh day, the honorific title of the Shanghan Empress Dowager was changed to "Empress Dowager Zhaosheng."

古文：戊寅，汉刘崇自立于太原。
现代文：十六日，汉刘崇自立于太原。
English: On the 16th, Han Liu Chong became independent in Taiyuan.

古文：己卯，冯道为中书令。
现代文：十七日，任冯道为中书令。
English: On the seventeenth day, Feng Dao was appointed as the Chinese Calligrapher.

古文：二月辛丑，西州回鹘使都督来。
现代文：二月九日，西州回鹘使都督来。
English: On February 9th, the governor of Xizhou was sent by the Hui Dynasty.

古文：丁未，契丹兀欲遣使袅骨支来。
现代文：十五日，契丹兀欲派使者马衣骨支来。
English: On the fifteenth day, Khitan wanted to send an envoy to the horse-clothed bone branch.

古文：癸丑，寒食，望祭于蒲池。
现代文：二十一日，寒食节，望祭于蒲池。
English: On the 21st, the cold food festival, the memorial service was held in Kamuchi.

古文：丁巳，尚书左丞田敏使于契丹。
现代文：二十五日，派尚书左丞田敏出使契丹。
English: On the 25th, he sent Shangshu Zuozhong Tianmin to dispatch Qidan.

古文：回鹘使摩尼来。
现代文：回鹘使者摩尼来。
English: Come back to me, messenger Mani.

古文：三月甲戌，武宁军节度使王彦超克徐州。
现代文：三月十三日，武宁军节度使王彦超攻克徐州。
English: On March 13th, Wang Yanchao was sent to conquer Xuzhou by the Wu Ning Army.

古文：夏四月甲午，立夫人董氏为德妃。
现代文：四月三日，立夫人董氏为德妃。
English: On April 3, Ms. Dong, the designated wife, became the Empress of Germany.

古文：五月辛未，追尊祖考为皇帝，妣为皇后：高祖璟谥曰睿和，庙号信祖，祖妣张氏谥曰睿恭；曾祖谌谥曰明宪，庙号僖祖，祖妣申氏谥曰明孝；祖蕴谥曰翼顺，庙号义祖，祖妣韩氏谥曰翼敬；考谥曰章肃，庙号庆祖，妣王氏谥曰章德。
现代文：五月十日，追尊祖考为皇帝，妣为皇后：高祖王景谥曰睿和，庙号信祖，祖妣张氏谥曰睿恭；曾祖谌谥曰明宪，庙号僖祖，祖妣申氏谥曰明孝；祖蕴谥曰翼顺，庙号义祖，祖妣韩氏谥曰翼敬；考谥曰章肃，庙号庆祖，妣王氏谥曰章德。
English: On the 10th day of the fifth month, the emperor and the empress were named after the venerable ancestors: the great-great-great-grandfather, King Jing, was named Ruihe; the temple was named Xunzu; the ancestor, Zhang, was named Ruiqong; the great-great-grandfather, Zeng, was named Ming Xian; the temple was named Ruizu; the ancestor, Shen, was named Ming Xiao; the ancestor, Guan, was named Qingshun; the temple, Yizhu; the ancestor, Han, was named Qingshong; the ancestor, Gao, was named Zhang Su; the

古文：六月辛亥，范质及户部侍郎判三司李穀为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：六月二十一日，任范质及户部侍郎判三司李为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: On June 21st, Ren Guanzheng and the Household Attendant judged that Sanji Li was the Chushu Attendant and the same Chushu Gate Lower Hei Chapter.

古文：窦贞固、苏禹珪罢。
现代文：窦贞固、苏禹皀罢相。
English: Dou Zhenggu and Su Yuqi are no longer together.

古文：癸丑，范质参知枢密院事。
现代文：二十三日，范质参知枢密院事。
English: On the 23rd, he became a member of the Privy Council.

古文：丁巳，宣徽北院使翟光鄴为枢密副使。
现代文：二十七日，任宣徽北院使翟光邺为枢密副使。
English: On the 27th, the Northern Court of Xuanhui appointed Gong Guangyao as the Privy Vice-Envoy.

古文：秋七月戊寅，幸王峻第。
现代文：七月十八日，到王峻家。
English: On July 18th, he went to Wang Jun's home.

古文：八月壬寅，契丹来归赵莹之丧。
现代文：八月十八日，契丹将晋相赵莹的尸体送回中原安葬。
English: On August 18th, Khitan sent the body of Jinsang Zhao Ying back to Zhongyuan for burial.

古文：冬十月丙午，汉人来讨，攻自晋州。
现代文：十月十八日，北汉军从晋州来讨伐。
English: On October 18th, the Northern Han Army came from Jinzhou to fight.

古文：十一月，王峻及建雄军节度使王彦超拒之。
现代文：十一月，王峻及建雄军节度使王彦超去抵抗。
English: In November, Wang Jun and Jianxiong's army marched to Wang Yanchao to resist.

古文：十二月，慕容彦超反。
现代文：十二月，慕容彦超反叛。
English: In December, Murong Yan rebelled.

古文：二年春正月甲子，侍卫步军都指挥使曹英为兗州行营都部署。
现代文：广顺二年正月七日，派侍卫步军都指挥使曹英为兖州行营都部署。
English: On the 7th day of the 1st month of the 2nd year of Guangshun, Cao Ying was ordered by the commander of the Guards and Foot Troops to make camp in Bozhou.

古文：庚午，高丽王昭使其广评侍郎徐逢来。
现代文：十三日，高丽王昭使者广评侍郎徐逢来。
English: On the 13th, the envoy of King Zhao of Goryeo, Xu Feng, came.

古文：二月庚寅，府州防御使折德扆克岢岚军。
现代文：二月四日，府州防御使折德攻克岢岚军。
English: On February 4th, the Fuzhou defense forces led by Oride defeated the Han army.

古文：三月丁巳朔，寒食，望祭于郊。
现代文：三月一日，寒食节，望祭于郊外。
English: On March 1st, the cold food festival, the festival is held in the suburbs.

古文：戊辰，内客省使郑仁诲为枢密副使，翟光鄴罢。
现代文：十二日，任内客省使郑仁诲为枢密副使，翟光邺罢职。
English: On the 12th, Zheng Renya, the ambassador of the guest province, was appointed as the vice-ambassador of the Privy Council, and Yu Guangyao resigned.

古文：夏五月庚申，东征，李穀留守东都，郑仁诲为大内都点检。
现代文：五月五日，东征，李谷留守东都，郑仁诲为大内都点检。
English: On May 5, the Eastern Expedition, Li Gu stayed in the Eastern Capital, and Zheng Renya was sent to the Inner Capital for inspection.

古文：癸亥，次曹州，赦流罪以下囚。
现代文：八日，到曹州，赦流放罪以下囚犯。
English: On the 8th, he went to Caozhou and pardoned and exiled the following prisoners.

古文：乙亥，克兗州。
现代文：二十日，攻克兖州。
English: On the 20th, he conquered Zhangzhou.

古文：壬午，赦兗州。
现代文：二十七日，赦兖州。
English: On the 27th, he pardoned Zhangzhou.

古文：六月乙酉朔，幸曲阜，祠孔子。庚子，至自兗州。
现代文：六月一日，到曲阜，祭孔子。十六日，从兖州回到京城。
English: On June 1, he went to Qufu to celebrate Confucius, and on the 16th, he returned to Beijing from Zhangzhou.

古文：秋九月乙丑，太仆少卿王演使于高丽。
现代文：九月十二日，派太仆少卿王演出使高丽。
English: On September 12th, he sent his valet, Shaoqing Wang, to perform the role of Goryeo.

古文：契丹寇边。
现代文：契丹侵犯边境。
English: Khitan encroachment on the border.

古文：三年春正月乙卯，麟州刺史杨重训叛于汉，来附。
现代文：广顺三年正月四日，麟州刺史杨重训叛北汉来归附。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the third year of Guangshun, Yang Chongxun, the governor of Linshou, rebelled against the Northern Han Dynasty and was annexed.

古文：闰月丙戌，回鹘使独呈相温来。
现代文：闰正月五日，回鹘使者独呈相温来。
English: On the 5th day of the first month of the leap year, the envoys of the Hui Dynasty showed a unique warmth.

古文：二月甲子，贬王峻为商州司马。
现代文：二月十四日，贬王峻为商州司马。
English: On February 14, Wang Jun was demoted to Shangzhou Sima.

古文：三月甲申，封荣为晋王。
现代文：三月五日，封柴荣为晋王。
English: On March 5, Feng Chai Rong was crowned King of Jin.

古文：丙戌，郑仁诲罢。
现代文：七日，郑仁诲罢职。
English: On the seventh day, Zheng Renren resigned.

古文：己丑，棣州团练使王仁镐为左卫大将军、枢密副使。
现代文：十日，任棣州团练使王仁镐为右卫大将军、枢密副使。
English: On the 10th, Wang Rensheng was appointed as the commander of the Bozhou Rehearsal Team, and became the right guard general and the confidential deputy envoy.

古文：夏六月，大雨，水。
现代文：六月，大雨、水灾。
English: June, heavy rain, floods.

古文：秋七月，契丹卢台军使张藏英来奔。
现代文：七月，契丹卢台军使张藏英来访。
English: In July, Zhang Zangying, the envoy of the Khitan-Lutai army, paid a visit.

古文：九月，吐浑党富达等来。
现代文：九月，吐浑党富达等来。
English: In September, the Tuhun Party Fidelity and others came.

古文：冬十月庚申，冯道为奉迎神主使。
现代文：十月十三日，冯道为奉迎神主使。
English: On October 13th, Feng Dao became the chief envoy of Feng Ying Shen.

古文：十一月癸未，党项使吴帖磨五等来。
现代文：十一月七日，党项使者吴忄占磨五等来。
English: On November 7th, the party's emissary, Wu Hao, came from Zhanma Fifth Class.

古文：十二月戊申，四庙神主至自西京，迎之于西郊，祔于太庙。
现代文：十二月，四庙神主从西京迁到京城，到西郊迎接，安放到太庙。
English: In December, the deities of the four temples were moved from West Beijing to the capital, greeted in the western suburbs, and placed in the Great Temple.

古文：壬申，杀天雄军节度使王殷。
现代文：二十六日，杀天雄军节度使王殷。
English: On the 26th day of the month, Wang Yin, the commander of the Tianxiong Army, arrived.

古文：乙亥，享于太庙。
现代文：二十九日，祭太庙。
English: On the 29th, the temple held a festival.

古文：显德元年春正月丙子朔，有事于南郊，大赦，改元，群臣上尊号曰圣明文武仁德皇帝。戊寅，罢鄴都。
现代文：显德元年正月一日，在南郊祭天，大赦，改元，群臣上尊号曰圣明文武仁德皇帝。三日，取消邺都。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first year of Xiande, in the southern suburb, the festival of heaven, amnesty, change of era, and the title of the superior of the group of ministers was called the Holy Mingwen Emperor Wu Rende. On the third day, the capital was cancelled.

古文：丙戌，镇宁军节度使郑仁诲为枢密使。
现代文：十一日，使命镇宁军节度使郑仁诲为枢密使。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Zheng Renyou was appointed as a special envoy with the mission of pacifying the Ningjun Army.

古文：壬辰，端明殿学士、户部侍郎王溥为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事，王仁镐罢。
现代文：十七日，任端明殿学士、户部侍郎王溥为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。王仁镐罢职。
English: On the 17th, Wang Rong, a scholar of the Ming Dynasty and a servant of the household, was appointed as a servant of the Chinese Academy of Letters and a member of the Chinese Academy of Letters. Wang Rong resigned from his post.

古文：是日，皇帝崩于滋德殿。
现代文：当天，皇帝死于滋德殿。
English: On the same day, the emperor died in the Zide Palace.

