古文：其馀不知不载。哀太子大器字仁宗，简文嫡长子也。中大通四年，封宣城郡王。
现代文：哀太子萧大器字仁宗，他是简文帝的嫡长子。中大通四年，被封为宣城郡王。
English: He was the eldest legitimate son of Emperor Jianwen, and was crowned the king of Xuancheng County for four years.

古文：太清二年十月，侯景寇建邺，敕太子爲台内大都督。
现代文：太清二年十月，侯景入侵建邺，皇帝令太子为台内大都督。
English: In October of the second year of the Taiching Dynasty, Houjing invaded Jianye, and the emperor made the prince the grand governor of Taichung.

古文：三年五月，简文即位。
现代文：三年五月，简文帝即位。
English: In May of the third year, Emperor Jianwen ascended the throne.

古文：六月丁亥，立爲皇太子。
现代文：六月初三，立大器为皇太子。
English: On the third day of the sixth month, the crown prince was crowned.

古文：大宝二年八月，景废简文，将害太子。
现代文：大宝二年八月，侯景废了简文帝，准备加害太子。
English: In August of the second year of Dabao, Hou Jing abolished Emperor Jianwen and prepared to harm the prince.

古文：时景党称景命召之，太子方讲老子，将下床而刑人掩至。
现代文：当时侯景的同党宣称侯景要召见太子，太子正在讲《老子》，刚准备下床而行刑的人突然来到。
English: At that time, Hou Jing's fellow party members claimed that Hou Jing wanted to summon the crown prince. The crown prince was talking about "Lao Zi," and the person who was just about to get out of bed and carry out the execution suddenly arrived.

古文：太子顔色不变，徐曰： 久知此事，嗟其晚耳。 
现代文：太子神色不变，和缓地说： 久知有这种事，只是叹其来得晚罢了！ 
English: The crown prince's expression did not change, and he said slowly: "I've known about this for a long time, I'm just sad that it's come so late!

古文：刑者将以衣带绞之，太子曰： 此不能见杀。 
现代文：行刑者准备用衣带来绞死他，太子说： 这个一时杀不死。 
English: As the executioner prepared to hang him with a belt, the prince said: "This one can't be killed instantly.

古文：乃指系帐竿下绳，命取绞之而绝。
现代文：便指着系帐竿下面的绳子，让他们取下后绞了他死去。
English: He then pointed to the rope tied underneath the pole and told them to take it off and hang him to death.

古文：时年二十八。
现代文：当时只有二十八岁。
English: He was only twenty-eight at the time.

古文：太子性宽和，兼神用端嶷，在贼中每不屈意。
现代文：太子性情宽和，同时神情庄重，在贼寇面前总是毫不屈服。
English: The prince is amiable and at the same time dignified. He never gives in to the bandits.

古文：左右窃问其故，答曰： 贼若未须见杀，虽复陵傲呵叱，其终不敢言。
现代文：左右暗暗地问他是什么原因，他回答说： 贼寇如果还不打算杀我，哪怕我再怎么傲慢和叱责他们，他们也不敢说什么。
English: Secretly asking him what the reason was, he replied: "If the bandits don't intend to kill me, they won't dare to say anything, no matter how arrogant I am or how much I scold them.

古文：若见害时至，虽一日百拜，无益于死。 
现代文：如果被害的时间到了，即使你对他们一天百拜，也不能免死。 
English: If it's time for the damage to be done, even if you worship them a hundred times a day, you can't avoid death.

古文：问者又曰： 官今忧逼而神貌怡然，未喻此意。 
现代文：问他的人又说： 您如今身受忧患的煎熬而神情快乐，不知道是什么原因。 
English: His questioner added: "You are now in the throes of depression and you look happy, I don't know why.

古文：答曰： 吾自度死必在贼前，若诸叔外来，平夷羯寇，必前见杀，然后就死。
现代文：他回答说： 我自己估计肯定死在敌人之前，如果几位叔叔从外面攻打过来，杀平贼寇，贼人必定在此之前先杀了我，然后他们再去死。
English: He replied: I myself estimate that I will certainly die before the enemy. If several uncles attack from the outside and kill the bandits, the bandits will certainly kill me first, and then they will die.

古文：若其遂开拓上流，必先见杀，后取富贵。
现代文：如果他们要开拓上游地区，也必定先把我杀掉，然后取得富贵。
English: If they want to explore the upstream areas, they must kill me first, and then get rich.

古文：何能以无益之愁，横忧必死之命。 
现代文：何必以毫无益处的烦愁，来担忧这条必定死亡的生命呢？ 
English: Why worry about this mortal life with useless worries?

古文：景之西上，携太子同行，及败归，船往往相失。
现代文：侯景西上作战时，携带太子同行，当他失败而归的时候，船只往往相互散失。
English: When Hou Jing went to the west to fight, he carried the prince with him. When he failed to return, the ships often lost track of each other.

古文：所乘船入枞阳浦，舟中腹心并劝因此入北。
现代文：太子所乘的船进入了枞阳浦，船上的太子心腹都劝他乘机逃到北面去。
English: The prince's boat entered Poyangpo, and all of the prince's confidants on the boat urged him to take the opportunity to flee to the north.

古文：太子曰： 自国家丧败，志不图生。
现代文：太子说： 自从国家沦丧败亡，我就不打算活着。
English: The prince said: "Since the fall of the country, I don't plan to live.

古文：主上蒙尘，宁忍违离。
现代文：皇上蒙受耻辱，我怎么忍心离开他。
English: How can I bear to leave the Emperor after the disgrace he has suffered?

古文：吾今若去，乃是叛父，非谓避贼。
现代文：我今天如果跑掉，就是背叛父亲，并不是避开贼寇。
English: If I run away today, I would be betraying my father, not avoiding the bandits.

古文：天下岂有无父之国。 
现代文：天下岂有无父的国家。 
English: For what nation is there that hath not a father?

古文：便涕泗鸣咽，命即前进。
现代文：说完便呜咽哭泣，泪流满面，他下令船只立即前进。
English: With a whimper, sobbing and tears streaming down his face, he ordered the boat to move immediately.

古文：贼以太子有器度，每惮之。
现代文：贼人因为太子有器度，总是很害怕他。
English: Thieves are always very afraid of the prince because of his cunning.

古文：恐爲后患，故先及祸。
现代文：因为怕他成为后患，所以先害死了他。
English: They killed him first because they were afraid he would be the next victim.

古文：承圣元年四月，追諡哀太子，祔太庙阴室。
现代文：承圣元年四月，追谥为哀太子，附祭于太庙的阴室。
English: In April of the first year after the enthronement of the saint, a memorial service was held for the late crown prince in the mortuary room of the Imperial Temple.

