古文：太史公曰：匈奴绝和亲，攻当路塞；闽越擅伐，东瓯ō请降。
现代文：太史公说：匈奴断绝和亲，攻击我正当要道的边塞，闽越凭借武力，擅自攻伐东瓯，致使东瓯请降服。
English: Tai Shikong said: The Huns broke off the peace treaty and attacked the border fortress of my rightful way. They invaded Donglu by force and attacked Donglu without authorization, causing Donglu to surrender.

古文：二夷交侵，当盛汉之隆，以此知功臣受封侔于祖考矣。
现代文：这两支外夷不断地侵扰边境，即使是我大汉最昌盛的时候也是如此，由此可以推知功臣受封之多，当与高祖开国时相等。
English: These two foreign invaders constantly invaded the border, even when the Han Dynasty was at its most prosperous. From this, it can be inferred that the number of meritorious vassals was equal to that of Gao Zu at the time of the founding of the country.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么会这样呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：自《诗》《书》称三代 戎狄是膺，荆荼是征 ，齐桓越燕伐山戎，武灵王以区区赵服单于，秦缪用百里霸西戎，吴楚之君以诸侯役百越。
现代文：自从《诗经》《尚书》记称夏、商、周三代 抵御抗击北方的戎狄，讨伐惩罚南方的荆舒 以来，齐桓公曾越过燕国攻打山戎，赵武灵王以小小的赵国降服了匈奴的单于，秦穆公依靠百里奚称霸西戎，吴、楚两国的国君以诸侯的身份而能役使百越。
English: Since the "Shijing" and "Shangshu" recorded that Xia, Shang, and the three dynasties resisted and fought against the northern army of Di, and fought and punished the southern army of Jing and Shu, King Qi Huan once crossed the Yan country to attack Mount Rong, King Zhao Wuling conquered the Hun's Shan Yu with the small Zhao country, King Qin Mu Rong dominated West Rong by relying on the Bai Lihong, and the sovereigns of the two countries of Wu and Chu were able to serve the Bai Yue with the status of princes.

古文：况乃以中国一统，明天子在上，兼文武，席卷四海，内辑亿万之众，岂以晏然不为边境征伐哉！
现代文：何况是一个统一的国家，有圣明的天子在位，又具备文武之才，志在平定四方，使国内亿万民众都和睦相处，安居乐业，怎么会面对外夷的侵扰安然无事，不去经营边疆进行讨伐呢？
English: What's more, a unified country, with the Son of Heaven on the throne, and possessing literary and military talents, aspires to pacify the four directions, so that the hundreds of millions of people in the country can live in harmony and live and work in peace. How can it face the invasion of foreigners safely, and not operate the frontier to carry out the crusade?

古文：自是后，遂出师北讨强胡，南诛劲越，将卒以次封矣。
现代文：从此以后，我大汉就出兵北方，征讨凶悍的匈奴，又出兵南方，消灭了强大的南越，建立军功的将士们也都依次受到了封赏。
English: From then on, my great-grandfather sent troops to the north to fight the fierce Xiongnu, and also sent troops to the south to destroy the powerful South Vietnam. The soldiers who established military merit were also rewarded in turn.

古文：后进好事儒者褚先生曰：太史公记事尽于孝武之事，故复修记孝昭以来功臣侯者，编于左方，令后好事者得览观成败长短绝世之适，得以自戒焉。
现代文：后进好事的儒者褚先生说：太史公记事到孝武帝之世为止，所以我又撰记孝昭帝以后功臣封侯的情况，编于左方，目的在于使后世之人能从中看到功臣们功业成败，享国长短，侯位有的传世有的绝封的必然之理，吸取教训，引以为戒。
English: Mr. Zou, the Confucianist, who is a latecomer to good deeds, said: "Tai Shi Gong recorded the events up to the time of Emperor Xiaowu, so I also wrote about the situation of the knighthood of meritorious vassals after Emperor Xiao Zhao, compiled on the left. The purpose is to enable future generations to see the success or failure of the merits of the meritorious vassals, enjoy the length of the country, the inevitability of some hereditary titles and some absolute titles, learn lessons and take them as a warning.

古文：当世之君子，行权合变，度时施宜，希世用事，以建功有土封侯，立名当世，岂不盛哉！
现代文：当世的君子或者能不守常规而随机应变，或者能审察时世的变化而采取适宜的措施，或者能迎合世俗得到重用，从而建立功业，受封侯爵，拥有封地，在当世扬名，好不兴盛至极啊！
English: Today's gentleman can either be unconventional and adapt at random, or can examine the changes of the times and take appropriate measures, or can cater to the mundane and be reused, thus establishing a career, be awarded a marquis, have a fief, and be famous in the present world, so why not prosper to the extreme!

古文：观其持满守成之道，皆不谦让，骄蹇争权，喜扬声誉，知进不知退，终以杀身灭国。
现代文：然而看他们用来保全功业的举动，又都不谦虚谨慎，全是骄傲自满，争权夺利，喜欢宣扬自己的名声，只知前进，不知应该留有退路，最终都因犯罪被杀，封国随之灭绝。
English: However, looking at the actions they used to preserve their achievements, they were not modest and prudent, they were all proud and complacent, competed for power and profit, liked to promote their own reputation, only knew how to move forward, and did not know whether they should leave a way out. In the end, they were all killed for crimes, and the vassal state was extinguished.

古文：以三得之，及身失之，不能传功于后世，令恩德流子孙，岂不悲哉！
现代文：依靠上述三种途径得到的侯位，在自己这一代就丢掉了，不能把功业传给后代，使子孙们也能享受恩德，这难道不是十分可悲的吗？
English: Relying on the above-mentioned three ways to get the position, in his own generation, he lost it, and could not pass on the work to future generations, so that future generations could also enjoy the grace. Isn't it very sad?

古文：夫龙雒侯曾为前将军，世俗顺善，厚重谨信，不与政事，退让爱人。
现代文：那龙雒侯曾经担任前将军这一官职，他能够顺应世俗，行善积德，为人忠厚诚信，不干预政事，遇事退让，处处爱护他人。
English: He was able to conform to the world, do good and accumulate virtue, be a loyal and honest person, not interfere in politics, concede in times of trouble, and love others everywhere.

古文：其先起于晋六卿之世。
现代文：他的祖先本是春秋时晋国的六卿之一。
English: His ancestor was originally one of the six nobles of Jin.

古文：有土君国以来，为王侯，子孙相承不绝，历年经世，以至于今，凡百余岁，岂可与功臣及身失之者同日而语之哉？
现代文：自从拥有国土成为诸侯以来，子孙相继为王为侯，子孙代代相传，从未断绝，经历了许多年岁和世代，直至如今，算起来已有一百多年了，这又哪里能与自身在世之时就失去爵位的功臣们同日而语呢？
English: Since owning the land and becoming princes, the descendants have successively been kings and princes, passed down from generation to generation, never broken, experienced many years and generations, until now, it has been more than a hundred years, and how can this be the same as the heroes who lost their peerage when they were alive?

古文：悲夫，后世其诫之！
现代文：真是可悲啊，后世的人们要引以为戒啊！
English: What a sad state of affairs. People of future generations should take this as a warning!

