古文：恒先之初，迥同太虚。虚同为一，恒一而止。
现代文：天地混沌之初，道还是太虚一气，分不清天地，只是迷迷茫茫一片，也看不清它是黑还是白，它神妙变化，充塞着整个宇宙，精光静静的流洒。
English: At the beginning of the chaos of heaven and earth, the Tao was still too ethereal, and heaven and earth were indistinguishable. It was just a confused mess, and it was not clear whether it was black or white. It changed miraculously, filling the entire universe, and shining quietly.

古文：湿湿梦梦，未有明晦。
现代文：它没有始因而生，存于万物之中也没有因由。
English: It has no beginning and no cause, and it exists in all things without any cause.

古文：神微周盈，精静不熙。
现代文：它没有形状，平等普同不可描述。
English: It has no shape, it is uniform and indescribable.

古文：古未有以。万物莫以。
现代文：它是博大无比的，天不能覆盖它，地不能容载它。
English: It is incomparably vast, the sky cannot cover it, and the earth cannot contain it.

古文：古无有刑，太迥无名。
现代文：无论是最小的还是最大的事物，都产生于它。
English: Whether it is the smallest or the largest thing, it all comes from it.

古文：天弗能复，地弗能载。
现代文：它满溢于四海之内外，在阴暗处不会霉烂，在烈火阳焰中也不会枯焦。
English: It overflows within and without the four seas. It will not rot in the shade, nor will it be scorched in the blazing sun.

古文：小以成小，大以成大。
现代文：道是不变的，但却在主导着万物的变化。
English: The Tao is unchanging, yet it dominates the change of all things.

古文：盈四海之内，又包其外。在阴不腐，在阳不焦。
现代文：虫、鸟、鱼、兽等等的生存，都是道在起作用呀！
English: The survival of insects, birds, fish, beasts, and so on, is all the work of the Tao!

古文：一度不变，能适规侥。鸟得而蜚，鱼得而流，兽得而走。万物得之以生，百事得之以成。人皆以之，莫知其名。
现代文：任何事情，也只有顺服于道的运化而运化，才有成功的可能。人们都凭借着 道 生活，却不知它的名号，人们都在遵循着 道 去做事，却又看不见它的形状。 一 是它的名号，这也不过是一个虚设。
English: People live by the Tao, but they don't know its name; people do things according to the Tao, but they can't see its shape; and its name is nothing but an illusion.

古文：人皆用之，莫见其刑。一者其号也。
现代文：无是它的根，中和则是它作用的关键。道是高深而不可审察的，也无法测量。
English: Nothing is its root, and neutralization is the key to its function. The Tao is profound and cannot be examined or measured.

古文：虚其舍也，无为其素也，和其用也。
现代文：它既显明又广大，既说不出它的名，又看不见它的形。
English: It is both obvious and vast, and neither its name nor its form can be seen.

古文：是故上道高而不可察也，深而不可则也。
现代文：它是独立无二的，永不会被任何事物所改变。
English: It is unique and will never be changed by anything.

古文：显明弗能为名，广大弗能为刑，独立不偶，万物莫之能令。
现代文：天地阴阳、春夏秋冬、星辰日月、上下一气，微虫飞舞，分别得之于道，道也不会因此增多。 道 坚强而不会溃败，柔弱却不会被转化。
English: Heaven and earth, yin and yang, spring, summer, autumn and winter, the stars, the sun, the moon, the wind, and the insects are all derived from the Tao, and the Tao will not increase as a result.The Tao is strong and will not be defeated, but it will not be transformed.

古文：天地阴阳，时日月，星辰云气规行侥重动，戴根之徒，皆取生，道弗为益少；皆反焉，道弗为益多。
现代文：它的中心精神，一般人是无法领会的，它的终极目标，一般人也难以实现。只有圣人才能在无形之道中看出有形之道，在无声之道里听出有声之道，在虚静之道内觉出道之实在，然后，他能进入太虚，与天地之精气相通。他与道合二为一、它们相互融合，周流不止。
English: Its central spirit is incomprehensible to ordinary people, and its ultimate goal is difficult for ordinary people to achieve. Only a sage can see the tangible way in the intangible way, hear the audible way in the silent way, and feel the reality of the way in the empty and quiet way. Then, he can enter the void and communicate with the essence of heaven and earth. He is one with the way, they are integrated with each other, and the circulation is endless.

古文：坚强而不，，柔弱而不可化。
现代文：这种人可以说明白了万物之本体。
English: Such a person can clarify the essence of all things.

古文：精微之所不能至，稽极之所不能过。
现代文：明哲之人能观察到宇宙的深远之处。他能知道别人不知道的事情，得到别人不能得到的东西。
English: A wise person can observe the far reaches of the universe. He can know things that others do not know, and obtain things that others cannot obtain.

古文：故唯圣人能察无刑，能听无。知虚之实，后能大虚。
现代文：这样的人，可以说对微妙的东西有很深的洞察力。
English: Such a person can be said to have a deep insight into subtle things.

古文：乃通天地之精，通同而无间，周袭而不盈。
现代文：圣人具有这种察微知末的能力，天下就会归顺他。没有什么好，也无所谓坏，这里只有 道心 。
English: A sage has this ability to see the smallest details, and the whole world will submit to him. There is nothing good, and there is nothing bad, there is only the moral heart.

古文：服此道者，是胃能精。
现代文：圣王能运用它，百姓就不会感到迷惑。
English: If the holy king can use it, the people will not be bothered.

古文：明者固能察极，知人之所不能知，人服人之所不能得。
现代文：圣王能达到虚极之境，百姓就会变得静穆。这样，上下之人都能与道同行。
English: If the holy king can reach the ultimate state of emptiness, the people will become tranquil. In this way, people from all walks of life can walk with the Way.

古文：是胃察稽知□极。圣王用此，天下服。
现代文：圣明之主应无贪欲，让百姓安身立命各得其所，那么人们就不会因分配不公发生争斗。
English: The holy Lord should not be greedy, and let the people settle down and get their own place, then people will not fight because of unfair distribution.

古文：无好无亚。上用□□而民不麋惑。
现代文：他能给事物以恰当的名称，则万物就各安其位。
English: If he can give things their proper names, everything will fall into place.

古文：其分，而万民不争。
现代文：一个人，不要因为管治很严就勤勉用力，也不要因为发生动乱就变得松懈。
English: A person should not be diligent and hard-working because the governance is very strict, nor should he become slack because of the occurrence of turmoil.

古文：授之以其名，而万物自定。不为治劝，不为乱解。
现代文：道，广大无边，人们既然触及了它，就不必再去追求；道，精深细微，人们既然已知其奥秘，就不必再梦想着收获。
English: The Tao is vast and boundless. Once people have touched it, they no longer need to pursue it. The Tao is subtle and subtle. Once people know its secrets, they no longer need to dream about the harvest.

古文：广大弗务，及也。
现代文：道是不变的，能够探知道的根本，就能以少知多，以正治畸。
English: The Tao is unchanging. If you can explore the fundamentals of knowledge, you will be able to know more with less, and correct mistakes with correctness.

古文：深微弗索，得也。
现代文：从而达到前可知远古之事，后可预测将来事理的精要。
English: Thus, the essence of ancient things can be known in the past, and the essence of future things can be predicted in the future.

古文：□为一而不化。得道之本，握少以知多。
现代文：只要我们持守大 道 ，秉执法度，那么就可以实现天下的大一统。
English: As long as we keep to the high road and uphold the rule of law, then we can achieve the unification of the world.

古文：得事之要，操正以政畸。前知大古，后□精明。
现代文：我们观察远古探索道的原始，再看看我们的现在，又推之于将来，就会懂得 道 的本体是怎么回事了。
English: If we observe the origin of the ancient exploration path, then look at our present, and push it into the future, we will understand what the essence of the path is all about.

