古文：昔者，桓公问管仲曰： 寡人请问度地形而为国者，其何如而可？ 
现代文：从前，桓公曾问管仲说： 请问勘察地势建立都城的工作，应如何进行为好？ 
English: Once upon a time, Emperor Kuan had asked Guanzhong: "How should the work of surveying the terrain and establishing a capital city be carried out?

古文：管仲对曰： 夷吾之所闻，能为霸王者，盖天子圣人也。
现代文：管仲回答说： 就我所知，能成王霸之业的，都是天下的圣人。
English: Guanzhong replied, "As far as I know, all the saints in the world can become kings and tyrants.

古文：故圣人之处国者，必于不倾之地，而择地形之肥饶者。乡山，左右经水若泽。内为落渠之写，因大川而注焉。
现代文：圣人建设都城，一定选在平稳可靠的地方，又是肥饶的土地，靠着山，左右有河流或湖泽，城内修砌完备的沟渠排水，随地流入大河。
English: The sages who built the capital city must have chosen a stable and reliable place, a fertile land, close to the mountains, with rivers or lakes on the left and right, and a well-built ditch for drainage in the city, flowing into the big river anywhere.

古文：乃以其天材、地之所生，利养其人，以育六畜。
现代文：这样就可以利用自然资源和农业产品，既供养国人，又繁育六畜。
English: In this way, it is possible to use natural resources and agricultural products to both feed the people of the country and breed livestock.

古文：天下之人，皆归其德而惠其义。乃别制断之，州者谓之术，不满术者谓之里。
现代文：天下的人们，都可以受到他的德惠。如果加以区划，不够 州 的叫作 术，不够 术 的叫作 里 。
English: People all over the world can benefit from his benevolence. If they are divided into regions, they are called insufficient states, insufficient states, and insufficient states.

古文：故百家为里，里十为术，术十为州，州十为都，都十为霸国。
现代文：所以，百家为里，十里为术，十术为州，十州为都，十都为霸国。
English: Therefore, a hundred families are a village, ten villages are an art, ten arts are a prefecture, ten prefectures are a capital, and ten capitals are a hegemony.

古文：不如霸国者，国也。
现代文：不到霸国规模的，是一般诸侯国。
English: Less than the size of a hegemonic power, is a general vassal state.

古文：以奉天子，天子有万诸侯也，其中有公侯伯子男焉。
现代文：就拥戴天子的情况来说，天子可以有上万个诸侯国，其中分公侯伯子男五等。
English: As far as the situation of holding the heavenly son is concerned, the heavenly son can have tens of thousands of vassal states, among which there are five sub-vassal states.

古文：天子中而处，此谓因天之固，归地之利。
现代文：天子是居于中央的，因为这可以利用全国的自然资源，征收全国的土地财利。
English: The Son of God lives in the center, because this can utilize the natural resources of the whole country, and collect the land profits of the whole country.

古文：内为之城，城外为之郭，郭外为之土阆，地高则沟之，下则堤之，命之曰金城。
现代文：都城建设应当是内修 城 ，外修 郭 ，郭外筑护城壕：地势高则挖沟，地势低则筑堤。这才配称作牢不可破的城池。
English: The construction of the capital city should be the inner construction of the city, the outer construction of the castle, and the outer construction of the moat: the high ground is dug, and the low ground is built. This is worthy of being called an unbreakable castle.

古文：树以荆棘，上相穑著者，所以为固也。
现代文：城墙上种植荆棘，使之交错纠结，用来加固城墙。
English: Thorns were planted on the city wall to make it interlaced and tangled, and were used to strengthen the city wall.

古文：岁修增而毋已，时修增而毋已，福及孙子，此谓人命万世无穷之利，人君之葆守也。
现代文：每年都不断地增修，每季也不断增修，使之造福于子孙后代，这关系着人民生命万世无穷的利益，也是对人君的保障。
English: It is continuously renovated every year and every season, so that it will benefit future generations. This is related to the eternal interests of the people's lives and is also a guarantee for the people.

古文：臣服之以尽忠于君，君体有之以临天下，故能为天下之民先也。
现代文：大臣管好都城效忠于国君，国君凭借都城以统治天下，所以能成为天下百姓的根本。
English: The minister manages the capital well and is loyal to the sovereign. The sovereign rules the world by virtue of the capital, so it can become the foundation of the people of the world.

古文：此宰之任，则臣之义也。
现代文：这项建设都城的工作，既是宰相的职责，也是所有大臣的义务。
English: This work of building a capital city is both the responsibility of the Prime Minister and the obligation of all ministers.

古文：故善为国者，必先除其五害，人乃终身无患害而孝慈焉。 
现代文：善治国者，还必须先除去五害，人们才可以终身免除祸患而做到父慈子孝。 
English: Those who govern the country well must also first eliminate the five evils, so that people can be exempted from the evils for life and achieve filial piety.

古文：桓公曰： 愿闻五害之说。 
现代文：桓公说； 我想听听五害的内容。 
English: I want to hear about the five evils.

古文：管仲对曰： 水，一害也；旱，一害也；风雾雹霜，一害也；厉，一害也；虫，一害也。此谓五害。
现代文：管仲回答说： 水是一害，旱是一害，风雾雹霜是一害，瘟疫是一害，虫是一害。这叫作五害。
English: Guanzhong replied, "Water is harmful, drought is harmful, wind, fog and frost are harmful, plague is harmful, and insects are harmful. These are called the five harms.

古文：五害之属，水最为大。
现代文：五害之中，以水害为最大。
English: Among the five harms, water damage is the largest.

古文：五害已除，人乃可治。 
现代文：清除五害，人民就可以治理好。 
English: Eliminate the five evils, and the people will be able to govern well.

古文：桓公曰， 愿闻水害。 
现代文：桓公说： 那我就先听水害的内容。 
English: Kaneko said, "Then I'll listen to the water damage first."

古文：管仲对曰： 水有大小，又有远近。
现代文：管仲回答说： 水有大小，又有远近。
English: Guanzhong replied, "The water varies in size and is far and near.

古文：水之出于山，而流入于海者，命曰经水；水别于他水，入于大水及海者，命曰枝水；山之沟，一有水一毋水者，命曰谷水；水之出于他水沟，流于大水及海者，命曰川水；出地而不流者，命曰渊水。
现代文：从山里发源，流入大海的，叫作 经水 ；从其它河流中分出来， 流入大河或大海的，叫作 枝水 ；在山间沟谷，时有时无的，叫作 谷水 ；从地下发源，流入大河或大海的，叫作 川水 ；由地下涌出而不外流的，叫作 渊水 。
English: The water that originates in the mountains and flows into the sea is called running water; the water that is separated from other rivers and flows into a large river or the sea is called branch water; the water that is intermittent in mountain valleys is called valley water; the water that originates underground and flows into a large river or the sea is called river water; and the water that gushes out of the ground without flowing out is called abyssal water.

古文：此五水者，因其利而往之可也，因而扼之可也，而不久常有危殆矣。 
现代文：这五种水，都可以顺着它的流势来引导，也可以对它拦截控制，但隔不多久，常常会发生灾害。 
English: These five kinds of water can be guided along its flow potential, and can also be intercepted and controlled, but they are not long apart, and disasters often occur.

古文：桓公曰： 水可扼而使东西南北及高乎？ 
现代文：桓公说： 水，可以拦截控制而使它流往东西南北，以至流往高处么？ 
English: Can water be intercepted and controlled to flow from east to west, north to south, and even to high altitudes?

古文：管仲对曰： 可。
现代文：管仲回答说： 可以。
English: Guanzhong replied: Yes.

古文：夫水之性，以高走下则疾，至于石；而下向高，即留而不行，故高其上。
现代文：水的性质，如从高处往下流就快，以至于把石头冲走；而从下面往上走，就停而不行。
English: The nature of water is such that if it flows down from a high place, it is so fast that it washes away the stones; but if it goes up from below, it cannot be stopped.

古文：领瓴之，尺有十分之三，里满四十九者，水可走也。乃迂其道而远之，以势行之。
现代文：所以，把上游水位提高，用瓦器引导下来，瓦器每尺有十分之三向下倾斜，水就可以急行满四十九里。然后使水迂回流到更远的地方，顺应其流势往高处。
English: Therefore, the upstream water level should be raised and guided down with a tiled vessel. The tiled vessel is inclined downward by three-tenths of a foot, and the water can rush for forty-nine miles. Then the water should be diverted to a farther place and follow its flow to a higher place.

古文：水之性，行至曲必留退，满则后推前，地下则平行，地高即控，杜曲则捣毁。
现代文：水的性质，走到曲折的地方，就停而后退，满了，后面就推向前进，地低则走得平稳，地高就发生激荡，地势曲折就将冲毁土地。
English: The nature of water is such that when it reaches a tortuous place, it stops and recedes, when it is full, it pushes forward, when it is low, it goes smoothly, when it is high, it is agitated, and when it is tortuous, it will wash away the land.

古文：杜曲激则跃，跃则倚，倚则环，环则中，中则涵，涵则塞，塞则移，移则控，控则水妄行；水妄行则伤人，伤人则困，困则轻法，轻法则难治，难治则不孝，不孝则不臣矣。
现代文：如地势过于曲折，水流就会跳跃，跳跃则偏流，偏流则打旋，打旋则集中，集中则泥沙沉淀，泥沙沉淀则水道淤塞，水道淤塞则河流改道，河流改道则水流激荡，水流激荡则河水妄行，妄行则伤人，人伤则贫困，贫困则轻慢法度，轻慢法度则难于治理，难于治理则行为不善，行为不善就不服从统治了。
English: If the terrain is too tortuous, the water flow will jump, the jump will be deflection, the deflection will be spinning, the spinning will be concentrated, the concentration will be sedimentation, the sedimentation will be waterway blockage, the waterway blockage will be river diversion, the river diversion will be water flow agitation, the water flow agitation will be river delirium, the delirium will be injury, the injury will be poverty, the poverty will be laxity, the laxity will be difficult to control, the difficult to control will be bad behavior, and the bad behavior will not obey the rule.

古文：故五害之属，伤杀之类，祸福同矣。
现代文：所以，五害之类，与杀人伤人一样，其祸患是相同的。
English: Therefore, the five evils are the same as the killing and wounding.

古文：知备此五者，人君天地矣。 
现代文：懂得防备五害，人就可以主宰天地了。 
English: If you know how to prevent the five evils, you can dominate the world.

古文：桓公曰： 请问备五害之道？ 
现代文：桓公说： 请问防备五害的办法。 
English: Kanko said, "Please tell me how to prevent the five evils."

古文：管子对曰： 请除五害之说，以水为始。
现代文：管仲回答说： 消除五害，以水害为先。
English: Guanzhong replied, "Eliminate the five harms, starting with the water damage."

古文：请为置水官，令习水者为吏：大夫、大夫佐各一人，率部校长、官佐各财足。
现代文：请设置水官，委派熟悉治水的人负责；任命大夫和大夫佐各一人，统率校长、官佐和各类徒隶。
English: Please set up water officials, appoint people who are familiar with water control to be responsible; appoint a doctor and a doctor's assistant each to lead the principal, officials and all kinds of subordinates.

古文：乃取水左右各一人，使为都匠水工。
现代文：然后挑选水官的左右部下各一人，用为水工头领。
English: Then, one person from each of the left and right subordinates of the water officer is selected to be the head of the waterworks.

古文：令之行水道、城郭、堤川、沟池、官府、寺舍及州中，当缮治者，给卒财足。
现代文：派他们巡视水道、城郭、堤坝、河川、官府、官署和州中，凡应当修缮的地方，就拨给士卒、徒隶修缮。
English: They were sent to inspect waterways, fortresses, dams, rivers, government offices, government departments and prefectures, and any areas that should be repaired were assigned to soldiers and apprentices to repair.

古文：令曰：常以秋岁末之时，阅其民，案家人比地，定什伍口数，别男女大小。
现代文：还发布命令说：每当秋后，要对民间普查，检查户口和土地，核实人口数量，并分别统计男女老幼的人数。
English: It also issued an order saying: Whenever after the autumn, it is necessary to conduct a non-governmental census, check the household registration and land, verify the population, and separately count the number of men, women and children.

古文：其不为用者辄免之，有锢病不可作者疾之，可省作者半事之。
现代文：不能从事治水劳动的，免役；久病不能服役的，按病人处理；只能少做的，按半劳力处理。
English: Those who cannot engage in water control work shall be exempted from service; those who cannot serve due to long-term illness shall be treated as patients; those who can only do less work shall be treated as part-time workers.

古文：并行以定甲士，当被兵之数，上其都。
现代文：经过普遍调查来选定各地的甲士，作为服兵役的总人数，上报于 都水官 。
English: After a general survey to select soldiers from all over the country, as the total number of military service, reported to the Metropolitan Water Bureau.

古文：都以临下，视有余不足之处，辄下水官。
现代文：都水官就依此下去视察，如看到人数有余或人数不足，就通知下级的水官。
English: The metropolitan water officer will inspect accordingly, and if he sees that there are too many people or not enough people, he will inform the lower-level water officer.

古文：水官亦以甲士当被兵之数，与三老、里有司、伍长行里，因父母案行。
现代文：下级的水官也把选定的甲士作为征兵的人数，会同三老、里有司、伍长等到里中具体调查，最后还要与被征者的父母协同查定。
English: The lower-ranking naval officers also took the number of selected soldiers as the number of conscripts, and conducted a detailed investigation with the three elders, the lieutenant, the corporal, and the lieutenant, and finally cooperated with the parents of the conscripts.

古文：阅具备水之器，以冬无事之时。
现代文：至于查看治水的工具，要在冬闲时进行准备。
English: As for the tools for checking the water control, they should be prepared during the winter break.

古文：笼、臿、板、筑，各什六，土车什一，雨輂什二。食器两具，人有之，铜藏里中，以给丧器。
现代文：土筐、锹、夹板、木夯，每什准备六件，土车每什准备一辆，防雨车篷每什两部，食器要求每人两套，保存在里内，以备损坏遗失。
English: Six earthenware baskets, pestles, splints, and wooden stakes are prepared for each item, one earthenware cart is prepared for each item, two rainproof canopies are prepared for each item, and two sets of tableware are required for each person, which should be kept inside in case of damage or loss.

古文：后常令水官吏与都匠，因三老、里有司、伍长案行之。
现代文：以后要经常命令治水官吏与工匠头领依靠三老、里有司、伍长等技规定检查。
English: In the future, water control officials and craftsmen leaders should always be ordered to rely on the three old men, there are officers, corporals and other technical regulations to check.

古文：常以朔日始，出具阅之，取完坚，补弊久，去苦恶。
现代文：经常于每月初一日开始，去查看所准备的工具，留取完好坚实的，修补残破老旧的，淘汰质量粗劣的。
English: It often starts on the first day of the month, to check the prepared tools, to keep the intact and solid ones, to repair the old and broken ones, and to discard the poor quality ones.

古文：常以冬少事之时，令甲士以更次益薪，积之水旁。
现代文：经常在冬闲的时候，派甲士轮流采集木柴，积放在水旁。
English: Often, during the winter holidays, the cadets take it in turns to collect firewood and store it by the water.

古文：州大夫将之，唯毋后时。
现代文：州大夫率领完成此事，千万不可耽误。
English: There must be no delay in completing this matter under the leadership of the State Medical Officer.

古文：其积薪也，以事之已；其作土也，以事未起。
现代文：积累木柴，在农事完结以后；修筑堤坝，在春耕开始以前。
English: Accumulating firewood, after the completion of farming; building a dam, before the start of spring ploughing.

古文：天地和调，日有长久，以此观之，其利百倍。
现代文：此时天气睛和，白昼较长，就这些条件看，好处极大。
English: At this time, the weather is fine and the day is long, so in these conditions, the benefits are great.

古文：故常以毋事具器，有事用之，水常可制，而使毋败。
现代文：所以经常在没有水害的时候备好器材，有事及时使用，水可以常被控制，并使之没有危害。
English: Therefore, it is often necessary to prepare equipment when there is no water damage, and use it in time when there is something to do. Water can often be controlled and made harmless.

古文：此谓素有备而豫具者也。 
现代文：这就叫作平素有准备而防患于未然了。 
English: It's called being prepared and anticipating.

古文：桓公曰： 当何时作之？ 
现代文：桓公说； 应当在什么时候动工呢？ 
English: When should the construction start?

古文：管子曰： 春三月，天地乾燥，水纠列之时也。
现代文：管仲说： 在春季三月份里，天气干燥，是水少流细的时节。
English: Guanzhong said: In the spring of March, the weather is dry, and it is a season with little water flow.

古文：山川涸落，天气下，地气上，万物交通。
现代文：此时山河干涸水少，天气渐暖，寒气渐消，万物开始活动。
English: At this time, the mountains and rivers dry up and there is less water, the weather gradually warms up, the cold gradually disappears, and all things begin to move.

古文：故事已，新事未起，草木荑生可食。
现代文：旧年的农事已经做完，新年农事尚未开始，草木的幼芽已经可以食用。
English: The old year's agricultural work has been completed, the new year's agricultural work has not yet begun, and the young shoots of plants and trees are already edible.

古文：寒暑调，日夜分，分之后，夜日益短，昼日益长。
现代文：天气的寒热逐渐调和，昼夜的长短也开始均分。均分后，夜间一天比一天短，白天一天比一天长。
English: The cold and heat of the weather were gradually reconciled, and the length of day and night began to be evenly divided. After the equal division, the night became shorter day by day, and the day became longer day by day.

古文：利以作土功之事，土乃益刚。
现代文：这时有利于做土工上事，因为堤土会日益坚实。
English: At this time, it is beneficial to do earthworks, because the embankment soil will become increasingly solid.

古文：令甲士作堤大水之旁，大其下，小其上，随水而行。
现代文：可以派可以甲士在河边修筑堤坝，堤的基础要宽，上面要窄。使长堤沿河而行。
English: You can send a cavalryman to build a dike on the river. The foundation of the dike should be wide and the top should be narrow. Make the long dike go along the river.

古文：地有不生草者，必为之囊。
现代文：在附近的不毛之地。一定要挖出水库。
English: In the nearby barren land. Be sure to dig out the reservoir.

古文：大者为之堤，小者为之防，夹水四道，禾稼不伤。
现代文：大水库修堤，小水库修防，使堤防围绕水库四周，以防止伤害庄稼。
English: Large reservoirs should be dammed, small reservoirs should be protected, and the dams should surround the reservoirs to prevent damage to crops.

古文：岁埤增之，树以荆棘，以固其地，杂之以柏杨，以备决水。
现代文：大堤要年年进行修补，堤身上要种植荆棘灌木，以便加固堤土。还要间种柏、杨等高大树木，防止洪水冲决。
English: The large dike needs to be repaired every year, and thorn bushes should be planted on the dike to strengthen the dike soil. Tall trees such as cypress and poplar should also be planted to prevent flooding.

古文：民得其饶，是谓流膏，令下贫守之，往往而为界，可以毋败。
现代文：人民在这里还可以得到好处，简直象一潭流动的脂膏。守堤工作派贫户去做，依次给他们划好地段，以保持河堤不坏。
English: The people can also get benefits here, just like a pool of flowing grease. Poor households are assigned to work on the embankment, and they are successively allocated a good site to keep the river embankment from deteriorating.

古文：当夏三月，天地气壮，大暑至，万物荣华，利以疾杀草薉，使令不欲扰，命曰不长。
现代文：至予在夏季三个月里，自然界变化强烈，大暑来到，万物茂盛。
English: During the three months of summer, the natural world undergoes strong changes, the heat comes, and everything flourishes.

古文：不利作土功之事，放农焉，利皆耗十分之五，土功不成。
现代文：应做好农田除草。政令不要干扰农事，征发劳役也不可时间过长。这时不利于做土工工事，因为它妨害农事，徒花费一半工费，土工也无成就。
English: It is necessary to do a good job of weeding farmland. The government should not interfere with farming, and the labor service should not be too long. At this time, it is not conducive to doing earthwork, because it interferes with farming, only half of the cost is spent, and there is no achievement in earthwork.

古文：当秋三月，山川百泉踊，下雨降，山水出，海路距，雨露属，天地凑汐。
现代文：在秋季三月，山川百泉涌水，大雨降，山洪发，入海路远水难疏泄，秋雨连绵，天地呈凝合状态。
English: In the autumn of March, the mountains and rivers are full of water, heavy rain falls, flash floods occur, distant water entering the sea is difficult to drain, autumn rain is continuous, and the world is in a state of condensation.

古文：利以疾作，收敛毋留，一日把，百日餔。
现代文：此时应抓紧秋收，使之颗粒归仓。所谓 收割一天，食用百日 。
English: At this time, we should pay close attention to the autumn harvest, so that the granules can be returned to the warehouse. The so-called harvest one day, edible one hundred days.

古文：民毋男女，皆行于野。
现代文：人民无分男女，都要到田间劳动。
English: The people, both men and women, have to go to the fields to work.

古文：不利作土功之事，濡湿日生，土弱难成。
现代文：此时不利作土工工事，因潮湿之气日生，土质松软难成。
English: At this time, it is unfavorable to do geotechnical work, because of the humid atmosphere, the soil is soft and difficult to form.

古文：利耗什分之六，土工之事亦不立。
现代文：徒花费十分之六的工费，十工之事也无成就。
English: If you spend six-tenths of the cost, you won't get ten-tenths done.

古文：当冬三月，天地闭藏，暑雨止，大寒起，万物实熟。
现代文：在冬季三个月里，天地收闭。暑雨止。太冷到，万物实熟。
English: In the three months of winter, heaven and earth are closed. The heat and rain stop. It is too cold, and everything is ripe.

古文：利以填塞空郄，缮边城，涂郭术，平度量，正权衡，虚牢狱，实廥仓，君修乐，与神明相望。
现代文：此时应补修屋舍，修缮边防城寨，修理城墙道路，调正度量衡，处理狱中罪犯，蓄积草料粮食，以及君主举行娱乐活动和祭神。
English: At this time, houses should be repaired, border fortifications should be repaired, city walls and roads should be repaired, weights and measures should be adjusted, criminals in prison should be dealt with, grass and grain should be stored, and the monarch should hold entertainment and worship.

古文：凡一年之事毕矣，举有功，赏贤，罚有罪，迁有司之吏而第之。
现代文：由于一年之事全告完成，还应当表彰有功，赏贤惩罪，升迁官吏而提高他们的等级。
English: Since the one-year report has been completed, it is also necessary to commend the meritorious, reward the virtuous and punish the criminal, and promote officials and raise their level.

古文：不利作土工之事，利耗什分之七，土刚不立。
现代文：此时不利做土工工事，徒花费十分之七的工费，而土冻难成。
English: At this time, it is unfavorable to do earthwork, which only costs seven-tenths of the cost, and soil freezing is difficult.

古文：昼日益短，而夜日益长，利以作室，不利以作堂。
现代文：此时昼愈短而夜愈长，天寒利在室内劳动，甚至在外堂都不适宜。
English: At this time, the shorter the day and the longer the night, it is not appropriate for Tian Shan Li to work indoors, even in the hall.

古文：四时以得，四害皆服。 
现代文：把一年四季的事情安排得当，其它四害也都可以制服了。 
English: Arrange things properly all year round, and the other four evils can be subdued.

古文：桓公曰： 寡人悖，不知四害之服奈何？ 
现代文：桓公说： 寡人愚笨，还不知道制服其它四害应怎么办？ 
English: Prince Kan said, "Many people are stupid and don't know what to do about the other four evils.

古文：管仲对曰： 冬作土功，发地藏，则夏多暴雨，秋霖不止。
现代文：管仲回答说： 冬天若动土工，散发地藏，则夏多暴雨，秋天也霖雨不止。
English: Guanzhong replied: If the earthworks are carried out in winter, the ground will be covered with soil, and there will be heavy rain in summer and continuous rain in autumn.

古文：春不收枯骨朽脊，伐枯木而去之，则夏旱至矣。
现代文：春天若不把枯骨朽尸掩埋好，不把枯木砍伐掉。则夏旱就会来临。
English: If you don't bury the dead bones and corpses in the spring, and don't cut down the dead trees, the summer drought will come.

古文：夏有大露原烟，噎下百草，人采食之伤人。
现代文：夏天有大露和大瘴凝聚在植物上，吃了就会伤人。
English: In summer, large dewdrops and maggots condense on the plants, and if eaten, they can hurt people.

古文：人多疾病而不止、民乃恐殆。
现代文：民多疾病而不止，就会恐慌不安。
English: When people have more than one illness, they get panicky.

古文：君令五官之吏，与三老、里有司、伍长行里顺之，令之家起火为温，其田及宫中皆盖井，毋令毒下及食器，将饮伤人。
现代文：国君要派出各部门的官吏偕同三老、里有司、伍长等到各里训话，命令百姓各家生火蒸煮食物；地里、院里都要盖井。并不使毒气沾污食器，防止饮水伤人。
English: The sovereign should send officials from various departments to visit each village to give lectures, ordering the people to make a fire in each house to cook food; wells should be dug in the fields and courtyards. Poison gas should not be allowed to contaminate tableware, and drinking water should be prevented from injuring people.

古文：有下虫伤禾稼。
现代文：还要注意发生虫灾毁伤庄稼的事情。
English: Also pay attention to the occurrence of insect damage to crops.

古文：凡天灾害之下也，君子谨避之，故不八九死也。
现代文：大凡发生天灾，治国者谨慎组织预防，十之八九不会死人。
English: In the event of a natural disaster, the country's leaders should carefully organize prevention, and in nine cases out of ten, no one will die.

古文：大寒、大暑、大风、大雨，其至不时者，此谓四刑。
现代文：至于太冷、大热、大风、大雨，凡是不合节令发生的，叫作 四刑 。
English: As for too cold, too hot, too windy, too rainy, anything that happens out of season is called the four punishments.

古文：或遇以死，或遇以生，君子避之，是亦伤人。
现代文：有的遇上就死，有的则幸存。治国者即使谨慎组织预防，也难免伤人。
English: Some die in the encounter, some survive. Even if the rulers carefully organize prevention, it is inevitable that they will hurt people.

古文：故吏者所以教顺也，三老、里有司、伍长者，所以为率也。
现代文：所以，官吏是应当做好教训工作的，三老、里有司；伍长等人是要做好示范工作的。
English: Therefore, officials should do a good job of teaching lessons, and the three elders and the magistrate should do a good job of demonstration.

古文：五者已具，民无愿者，愿其毕也：故常以冬日顺三老、里有司、伍长，以冬赏罚，使各应其赏而服其罚。
现代文：做好了防止五害的工作，人民就没有更多要求了，因为要求已经满足。所以要经常利用冬天训练三老、里有司和伍长们，并最后定出赏罚，使他们有功者必得其赏，有过者也受其罚。
English: Having done the work of preventing the five evils, the people have no more demands, because the demands have been met. Therefore, it is necessary to regularly use the winter to train the three elders, subordinates and commanders, and finally determine the rewards and punishments, so that those who have meritorious deeds must receive their rewards, and those who have exceeded their duties must also be punished.

古文：五者不可害，则君之法犯矣。
现代文：五害不能为祸，国君的法令就无人违犯了。
English: Five evils do not make a calamity, so no one has violated the sovereign's decree.

古文：此示民而易见，故民不比也。 
现代文：因为这项政绩显而易见，百姓就不在下面结党营私了。 
English: Because this political achievement is obvious, the people will not form a party below.

古文：桓公曰： 凡一年之中十二月，作土功，有时则为之，非其时而败，将何以待之？ 
现代文：桓公说： 在一年的十二个月，施工动土，只有合乎季节才能做，不合季节则不成，应怎样常年进行准备呢？ 
English: Huan Gong said: In the twelve months of the year, construction and ground-breaking can only be done in accordance with the season, but not in accordance with the season. How should preparations be made all year round?

古文：管仲对曰： 常令水官之吏，冬时行堤防，可治者章而上之都。
现代文：管仲回答说； 要经常派治水官吏在冬天就视查堤防，发现需要修治的问题即时具文向都水官报告。
English: Guanzhong replied: It is necessary to regularly send water control officials to inspect the dike in winter, and if they find problems that need to be repaired, they should immediately report to the water control officials in writing.

古文：都以春少事作之。
现代文：都水官一般是定在春季事少的时节修堤的。
English: Metropolitan water officials generally schedule levee repairs in the spring, when there are fewer incidents.

古文：已作之后，常案行。
现代文：但河堤做成以后，则经常进行检验。
English: However, after the embankment is built, it is regularly inspected.

古文：堤有毁作，大雨，各葆其所，可治者趣治，以徒隶给。
现代文：河堤若发生毁坏时，如遇到大雨，就派人分段保护，需要修补之处就抓紧修补，拨给徒隶充役完成其事。
English: If there is damage to the river embankment, if there is heavy rain, they will send people to protect it in sections. If it needs to be repaired, it will be repaired immediately, and it will be assigned to the subordinates to complete the work.

古文：大雨，堤防可衣者衣之。冲水，可据者据之。
现代文：大雨中，堤防需要覆盖就及时覆盖；冲水时，堤防需要屯堵就组织力量屯堵。
English: In heavy rain, if the embankment needs to be covered, it will be covered in time; when the water is flushed, if the embankment needs to be blocked, it will be blocked.

古文：终岁以毋败为固。
现代文：一年到头以保持堤防不坏为治水工作的成效。
English: Throughout the year, the effectiveness of the flood control work is to keep the dike intact.

古文：此谓备之常时，祸何从来？
现代文：这也是所谓 平时有备，祸从何来？ 
English: This is also known as being prepared in peacetime. Where did the disaster come from?

古文：所以然者，独水蒙壤，自塞而行者，江河之谓也。
现代文：其所以如此，是因为浊水经常夹带着泥土，自身运行就经常淤塞河道，江、河都是这样的。
English: The reason for this is that brackish water often carries mud, and its own movement often silted up river channels. Rivers and streams are like this.

古文：岁高其堤，所以不没也。
现代文：还要常年加高堤坝，以便不被淹没。
English: We also have to raise the dike all the time, so as not to be flooded.

古文：春冬取土于中，秋夏取土于外，浊水入之不能为败。 
现代文：春冬两季在河内取土加高，秋夏在河外取土加高，浊水来临也就不会毁坏了。 
English: In the spring and winter, soil is taken and raised in Hanoi, and in the autumn and summer, soil is taken and raised outside the river, and when the flood comes, it will not be destroyed.

古文：桓公曰： 善。
现代文：桓公说： 好啊！
English: Kan said, "That's great!

古文：仲父之语寡人毕矣，然则寡人何事乎哉？
现代文：仲父给我讲的是够全面了，可是我能做些什么呢？
English: What the mediator told me was comprehensive enough, but what can I do?

古文：亟为寡人教侧臣。 
现代文：替我快把这些道理教给左有大臣们。 
English: Quickly teach these principles to the left-wing ministers for me.

