古文：宋子曰：金木受攻而物象曲成。
现代文：宋先生说：金属和木材经过加工而成为各式各样的器物。
English: Mr. Song said: Metal and wood are processed into all kinds of utensils.

古文：世无利器，即般、亻垂安所施其巧哉？
现代文：假如世界上没有优良的器具，即便是鲁班和倕这样的能工巧匠，又将如何施展他们精巧绝伦的技艺？
English: If there were no fine tools in the world, how would even such skilled craftsmen as Luban and Zou demonstrate their exquisite skills?

古文：五兵之内，六乐之中，微钳锤之奏功也，生杀之机泯然矣。
现代文：弓矢、殳、矛、戈、戟五种兵器及钟、镈、镯、铙、铎、錞六种乐器，如果没有钳子和锤子发挥作用，它们也就难以制作成功了。
English: There are five kinds of weapons, including bow and arrow, crossbow, spear, club, and pestle, and six kinds of musical instruments, including bell, gong, gong, gong, gong, gong, gong, and gong. If the pestle and hammer do not play a role, it will be difficult to make them successful.

古文：同出洪炉烈火，大小殊形。重千钧者系巨舰于狂渊。轻一羽者透绣纹于章服。
现代文：同样出自熔炉烈火，诸种器物大小形状却各不一样：有重达千钧的能在狂风巨浪中系住大船的铁锚，也有轻如羽毛的可在礼服上刺绣出花样的小针。
English: Also from the furnace fire, all kinds of objects are different in size and shape: there are iron anchors weighing thousands of pounds that can tie a large ship in strong winds and waves, and there are small needles as light as feathers that can embroider patterns on dresses.

古文：使冶铸鼎之巧，束手而让神功焉。
现代文：在这由锤锻五金所铸就的奇功面前，连冶铸钟鼎的技巧也为之逊色了。
English: In the face of this miraculous feat cast by hammer-forged hardware, even the skills of casting bell triplets are inferior.

古文：莫邪、干将，双龙飞跃，毋其说亦有征焉者乎？
现代文：莫邪、干将两把名剑，挥舞起来就如同双龙飞跃，这个传说大概也有它的根据吧！
English: Two famous swords, wielded like a pair of dragons leaping, this legend probably has its basis!

古文：○治铁
现代文：治铁
English: Zhi Tie

古文：凡治铁成器，取已炒熟铁为之。先铸铁成砧，以为受锤之地。
现代文：铁制器具是由生铁炼成的熟铁做成的。先将铁铸成砧，作为承受敲打的垫座。
English: Iron utensils are made of wrought iron from pig iron. First, the iron is cast into ingots as a cushion to withstand beating.

古文：谚云 万器以钳为祖 ，非无稽之说也。
现代文：俗话说得好 万器以钳为祖 ，并不是没有根据。
English: As the saying goes, all things are descended from the earthworm, and this is not without reason.

古文：凡出炉熟铁名曰毛铁。受锻之时，十耗其三为铁华、铁落。若已成废器未锈烂者名曰劳铁，改造他器与本器，再经锤煅，十止耗去其一也。
现代文：刚出炉的熟铁，叫做毛铁，锻打时有一部分就会变成铁花和氧化铁皮而耗损三成；已经被丢弃却没有锈烂的铁器叫做毛铁，用它做成别的或者原样的铁器，锤锻时只会损耗掉一成。
English: Freshly baked, mature iron is called pig iron, and when it is forged, a part of it will turn into iron flowers and iron oxide skin and wear out 30%. Ironware that has been discarded but has not rusted is called pig iron, and it is used to make other or original ironware, and only one-tenth of it will be lost when hammered.

古文：凡炉中炽铁用炭，煤炭居十七，木炭居十三。
现代文：熔铁炉中所用的炭，其中煤炭约占十分之七，木炭约占十分之三。
English: Of the charcoal used in a smelting furnace, coal accounts for about seven-tenths and charcoal for about three-tenths.

古文：凡山林无煤之处，锻工先择坚硬条木烧成火墨。其炎更烈于煤。
现代文：山区没有煤的地方，锻工便选用坚硬的木条烧成坚炭，火焰比煤更加猛烈。
English: In mountainous areas where there is no coal, blacksmiths use hard wood strips to burn into hard coal, and the flames are more intense than coal.

古文：即用煤炭，也别有铁炭一种，取其火性内攻，焰不虚腾者，与炊炭同形而有分类也。
现代文：煤炭当中有一种叫做铁炭的，特点是燃烧起来火焰并不明显但是温度很高，它与通常烧饭所用的煤形状相似，但是用途不同。
English: Among the coals, there is a kind called iron coal, which is characterized by the fact that the flame is not obvious when it burns, but the temperature is very high. It is similar in shape to the coal usually used for cooking, but it has a different use.

古文：凡铁性逐节粘合，涂上黄泥于接口之上，入火挥槌，泥滓成枵而去，取其神气为媒合。
现代文：把铁逐节接合起来，要在接口处涂上黄泥，烧红后立即将它们锤合，这时泥渣就会全部飞掉。这里只是利用它的 气 来作为媒介。
English: The iron is joined together section by section, and the interface is to be coated with yellow mud. After it is red-hot, it is hammered together immediately, at which time all the slag will fly away. Here, only its gas is used as a medium.

古文：胶结之后，非灼红斧斩，永不可断也。
现代文：锤合之后，要不是烧红了再砍开的话，它是永远不会断的。
English: After hammering, if it is not burned red and then cut, it will never break.

古文：凡熟铁、钢铁已经炉锤，水火未济，其质未坚。
现代文：熟铁或者钢铁烧红锤锻之后，由于水火还未完全配合起来并且相互作用，因此质地还不够坚韧。
English: After the wrought iron or steel is forged with a red hammer, the water and fire are not fully coordinated and interact, so the texture is not tough enough.

古文：乘其出火时，入清水淬之，名曰健钢、健铁。
现代文：趁它们出炉时将其放进清水里淬火，这便是人们所说的 健钢 和 健铁 。
English: When they come out of the kiln, they are placed in clean water and quenched, which is what people call "healthy steel" and "healthy iron."

古文：言乎未健之时，为钢为铁，弱性犹存也。
现代文：这就是说，在钢铁淬火之前它在性质上还是软弱的。
English: That is to say, before the steel is quenched, it is still weak in nature.

古文：凡焊铁之法，西洋诸国别有奇药。
现代文：至于焊铁的方法，西方各国另有一些特殊的焊接材料。
English: As for the method of soldering iron, Western countries also have some special welding materials.

古文：中华小焊用白铜末，大焊则竭力挥锤而强合之，历岁之久终不可坚。
现代文：我国在小焊时用白铜粉作为焊接材料；进行大的焊接时，则是尽力敲打使之强行接合。然而过了一些年月后，接口也就脱焊而不牢固了。
English: In our country, white copper powder is used as a welding material in small welding; when large welding is carried out, it is beaten as much as possible to make it forcibly joined. However, after some years, the interface is also desoldered and not solid.

古文：故大炮西番有锻成者，中国惟恃冶铸也。
现代文：因此，在西方只是部分大炮是锻造而成的，而中国的大炮则完全是靠铸造而成的。
English: Therefore, in the West, only a part of the cannon is forged, while the Chinese cannon is completely made by casting.

古文：○斤斧
现代文：斤斧
English: KIN AXE

古文：凡铁兵薄者为刀剑，背厚而面薄者为斧斤。
现代文：铁制的兵器中，薄一些的叫刀或剑，背厚而刃薄的则称为斧或砍刀。
English: Among weapons made of iron, the thinner ones are called swords or swords, while those with thick backs and thin blades are called axes or machetes.

古文：刀剑绝美者以百炼钢包裹其外，其中仍用无钢铁为骨。
现代文：质量最好的刀剑，其表面上包的是百炼钢，而里面却仍然是用熟铁作为骨架。
English: The best quality swords are covered with hundreds of steels on the surface, but the inside is still made of wrought iron as a skeleton.

古文：若非钢表铁里，则劲力所施即成折断。
现代文：如果不采用这种钢面铁骨的结构的话，刀在用力过猛时就会折断或损伤。
English: If you do not use this steel-faced steel structure, the knife will break or be damaged when the force is too strong.

古文：其次寻常刀斧，止嵌钢于其面。即重价宝刀可斩钉截凡铁者，经数千遭磨砺，则钢尽而铁现也。
现代文：通常使用的刀、斧，只是在其表面上嵌钢，即使是能够斩钉截铁的贵重宝刀，在磨过几千次以后，也还是会把外边的钢磨光而露出里面的熟铁来。
English: Commonly used knives and axes only have steel embedded on their surfaces. Even if it is a valuable precious knife that can cut and sharpen iron, after grinding it thousands of times, it will still polish the outer steel and expose the inside of the cooked iron.

古文：倭国刀背阔不及二分许，架于手指之上不复欹倒，不知用何锤法，中国未得其传。
现代文：产自日本的一种刀，其刀背还不到两分宽，但架在手指上却不会倾倒，不知那是怎样锤打出来的，而且这种技术也还未曾传到中国来。
English: A knife made in Japan has a back that is less than two-tenths of an inch wide, but it does not tip over on the fingers. I do not know how it was hammered, and this technology has not yet been introduced to China.

古文：凡健刀斧皆嵌钢、包钢，整齐而后入水淬之。
现代文：凡是健刀健斧，都要先进行嵌钢或者包钢，修整之后再放进水里淬火。
English: When sharpening a knife or axe, it is necessary to first embed the steel or wrap the steel, and then put it into the water for quenching after trimming.

古文：其快利则又在砺石成功也。
现代文：要让它变得锋利，则需要在磨石上多下功夫。
English: To make it sharp, more work needs to be done on the grindstone.

古文：凡匠斧与椎，其中空管受柄处，皆先打冷铁为骨，名曰羊头，然后热铁包裹，冷者不粘，自成空隙。
现代文：锻打斧头和铁椎装木柄的中空管子，先要锻打一条铁模当做冷骨，然后把烧红的铁包在这条名叫 羊头 的铁模上敲打。冷铁模不会粘住热铁，取出来后自然形成中空管子。
English: To forge a hollow tube with an axe and a wooden handle, first forge an iron mold as a cold bone, and then beat the red-hot iron on this iron mold called the sheep's head. The cold iron mold will not stick to the hot iron, and will naturally form a hollow tube after being removed.

古文：凡攻石椎日久四面皆空，熔铁补满平填，再用无弊。
现代文：打石用的锤子用久了四面都会凹陷下去，用熔铁水补平后就可以继续使用了。锄镈
English: If you use a hammer for breaking stone for a long time, it will sink on all four sides, and you can continue to use it after leveling it with molten iron water.

古文：○锄镈凡治地生物，用锄、镈之属，熟铁锻成，熔化生铁淋口，入水淬健，即成刚劲。
现代文：凡是开垦土地、种植庄稼这些农活儿，都要使用锄和宽口锄这类农具。它们的锻造方法是：先用熟铁锻打成形，再把熔化后的生铁淋在锄口，经过淬火之后，就变得非常坚韧。
English: All agricultural work, such as reclaiming land and planting crops, requires the use of agricultural tools such as ploughs and wide-mouthed ploughs. Their forging method is: first forged with wrought iron, then the molten pig iron is poured into the mouth of the plough, and after quenching, it becomes very tough.

古文：每锹、锄重一斤者，淋生铁三钱为率，少则不坚，多则过刚而折。
现代文：锻造的最佳比例是锹、锄每重一斤淋上生铁三钱，生铁淋少了不够刚硬，而生铁淋多了又会过于硬脆而容易折断。
English: The best ratio for forging is that the ingot and crucible are sprinkled with pig iron at a rate of three yuan per kilogram of weight. If the pig iron is not sprinkled enough, it will not be hard enough, and if the pig iron is sprinkled too much, it will be too hard and brittle and easy to break.

古文：○鎈
现代文：锉
English: 

古文：凡铁鎈纯钢为之，未健之时钢性亦软。
现代文：锉刀是用纯钢制成的，在淬火之前，它的钢质锉坯还是比较软的。
English: The reamer is made of pure steel, and before quenching, its steel ingot is still relatively soft.

古文：以已健钢钅斩划成纵斜文理，划时斜向入，则文方成焰。
现代文：要先用经过淬火的硬钢小凿，在锉坯的表面上开出成排的纵纹及斜纹，并且凿的时候要自倾斜的方向下刀，出来的纹沟才能有火焰般的锋芒。
English: It is necessary to first use a small hardened steel chisel that has been quenched to carve out rows of longitudinal and oblique lines on the surface of the billet, and when chiseling, the knife should be lowered from the inclined direction, so that the grooves that come out can have a flame-like sharpness.

古文：划后浇红，退微冷，入水健。
现代文：凿好纹路后将其烧红，取出后稍微再冷却一下，便可入水淬火，最后即成锉刀。
English: After chiseling a good groove, it will be red-hot. After taking it out and cooling it a little, it can be quenched in water, and finally it will become a scythe.

古文：久用乖平，入水退去健性，再用钅斩划。
现代文：锉刀使用的时间久了，其表面就会变得平滑，此时应将其放回火中使钢质变软，然后再凿出新的沟纹。
English: After the cutter has been used for a long time, its surface will become smooth. At this time, it should be put back into the fire to soften the steel, and then chisel out new grooves.

古文：凡鎈开锯齿用茅叶鎈，后用快弦鎈。治铜钱用方长牵鎈，锁钥之类用方条鎈，治骨角用剑面鎈。治木末则锥成圆眼，不用纵斜文者，名曰香鎈。
现代文：每种锉刀都有不同的用处，开锯齿时先用三角锉，然后使用半圆锉；修平铜钱时用方长牵锉；加工锁和钥匙等工具时要用方条锉；加工骨角时使用剑面锉，也就是朱熹在《大学》中注解中提到的所谓 锡 ；加工本器时则会用到香锉这种锉的锉面上没有成排的纵、斜纹，而是锥上了许多细小的圆眼。
English: Each type of milling cutter has different uses. When cutting serrated teeth, a triangular cutter is used first, and then a semicircular cutter is used; when flattening copper money, a square cutter is used; when processing tools such as locks and keys, a square cutter is used; when processing bone corners, a sword-shaped cutter is used, that is, the so-called "tin" mentioned by Zhu Xi in the commentary of "University"; when processing this tool, a champagne cutter is used. This type of cutter does not have rows of vertical and diagonal lines on the cutter surface, but has many small round eyes.

古文：○锥凡锥熟铁锤成，不入钢和。
现代文：开锉纹时，应先把盐、醋与羊角粉拌和，涂上后再凿。
English: When opening the hoop, you should first mix the salt, vinegar and goat horn powder, apply it and then chisel it.

古文：治书编之类用圆钻，攻皮革用扁钻。
现代文：锥锥子是用熟铁捶打成的，不必再向里边添加钢。装订书刊之类的东西用的是圆钻，穿缝皮革等用的是扁钻。
English: A cone is made with a well-seasoned anvil, and there is no need to add steel to the inside. Round drills are used for things such as binding books, and flat drills are used for sewing leather.

古文：梓人转索通眼、引钉合木者，用蛇头钻。
现代文：木匠转绳钻孔以便钉合木板时，则要用蛇头钻。
English: When a carpenter drills a hole with a swivel rope in order to nail a board, he has to use a coiled drill.

古文：其制颖上二分许，一面圆，一面剜入，傍起两棱，以便转索。
现代文：蛇头钻的钻头有二分长，一面为圆弧形，两面挖有空位，旁边起两个棱角，以便于蛇头钻转动时更容易钻入。
English: The bit of the vise drill has a two-part length, one side is arc-shaped, two sides are dug with vacancies, and two corners are raised next to it, so that it is easier to drill in when the vise drill rotates.

古文：治铜叶用鸡心钻，其通身三棱者名旋钻，通身四方而末锐者名打钻。
现代文：钻铜片用的是鸡心钻，鸡心钻身上有三条棱的叫旋钻，钻身四方末端尖的叫做打钻。
English: The core drill bit is used to drill the copper sheet. The drill bit with three edges on the core drill bit is called a rotary drill bit, and the drill bit with a four-sided tip is called a hammer drill bit.

古文：○锯
现代文：锯
English: Sawing

古文：凡锯熟铁锻成薄条，不钢，亦不淬健。
现代文：做锯片时，应把熟铁锻打成薄铁条。
English: When making a saw blade, the wrought iron should be forged into a thin iron strip.

古文：出火退烧后，频加冷锤坚性，用鎈开齿。
现代文：它既不用加钢也不用经过淬火的工序，只需把薄铁条烧红降温之后，不断施以捶打，使它的韧性增加，然后再用锉刀开齿。
English: It does not need to add steel or go through the process of quenching, just after the thin iron strip is red-hot and cooled, it is continuously beaten to increase its toughness, and then cut with a scythe.

古文：两头衔木为梁，纠篾张开，促紧使直。
现代文：使用锯子时，将其两端的短木柄作为锯把，中间接上一条横木作为梁，再用竹片纠扭以使锯弓张开，之后继续拉紧，就能使锯条伸直。
English: When using a saw, use the short wooden handle at both ends as a saw handle, connect a crossbeam in the middle as a beam, twist it with a piece of bamboo to open the saw bow, and then continue to tighten it to straighten the saw bar.

古文：长者刮木，短者截木，齿最细者截竹。
现代文：长锯可用来剖开木料，短锯则用来截断木料，最细的锯齿适用于锯竹子。
English: A long saw can be used to cut wood, a short saw is used to cut wood, and the finest serrated teeth are suitable for sawing bamboo.

古文：齿钝之时，频加鎈锐而后使之。
现代文：当锯齿变钝以后，可以用锉刀把锯齿一个一个再次磨得锋利，便可接着再用。
English: When the serrated teeth become blunt, you can use a scythe to sharpen the serrated teeth one by one and then use them again.

古文：○刨
现代文：刨
English: Shaved

古文：凡刨磨砺嵌钢寸铁，露刃秒忽，斜出木口之面，所以平木，古名曰准。
现代文：刨子是把一寸宽的嵌钢铁片磨得锋利，斜向插入木刨壳中，稍微露出点刃口，用来刨平木料。刨的古名叫做 准 。
English: A planer is a one-inch-wide embedded steel blade that is sharpened and inserted diagonally into the wood planer shell, slightly exposing the cutting edge, used to plan the wood. The ancient name of the planer is called "quasi."

古文：巨者卧准露刃，持木抽削，名曰推刨，圆桶家使之。
现代文：大的刨子是仰卧露出点刃口的，木料用手拿着在它的刃口上抽削，这种刨叫做推刨，制圆桶的木工经常用到它。
English: A large planer is lying on its back with the point of the blade exposed. The wood is taken by hand and scraped on the edge of the planer. This planer is called a push planer. It is often used by woodworkers who make barrels.

古文：寻常用者横木为两翅，手执前推。
现代文：平常用的刨子，则在刨身穿上一条横木，像一对翅膀，手执横木往前推。
English: The planer, which is commonly used for planing, has a crossbar attached to the planer, like a pair of wings, and the handle pushes the crossbar forward.

古文：梓人为细功者，有起线刨，刃阔二分许。
现代文：精细的木工还备有起线刨，这种刨子的刃口宽二分。
English: The fine woodworker also has a starting plane, the blade of which is two minutes wide.

古文：又刮木使极光者名蜈蚣刨，一木之上，衔十余小刀，如蜈蚣之足。
现代文：还有一种叫做蜈蚣刨，刨壳上装有十几把小刨刀，好像蜈蚣的足，能把木面刮得极为光滑。
English: There is also a kind called a planer, which is equipped with more than a dozen small planers on the planer shell, like the legs of a dragonfly, which can scrape the wood surface extremely smooth.

古文：○凿
现代文：凿
English: chisel

古文：凡凿熟铁锻成，嵌钢于口，其本空圆，以受木柄。
现代文：凿子是用熟铁锻造成的，是在刀口上嵌钢，凿身为圆形，中间留有孔洞，用来方便装进木柄。
English: The chisel is made of wrought iron. Steel is embedded in the blade, the chisel body is round, and a hole is left in the middle for easy fitting into the wooden handle.

古文：斧从柄催，入木透眼，其末粗者阔寸许，细者三分而止。
现代文：用斧头敲击凿柄，凿子的刃就能方便插入木料而凿成孔。凿子的刃宽的一寸，窄的约三分。
English: By striking the handle of the chisel with an axe, the blade of the chisel can be easily inserted into the wood to make a hole. The blade of the chisel is one inch wide and about three minutes narrow.

古文：需圆眼者则制成剜凿为之。
现代文：如果要凿成圆孔，则要另外制造弧形刃口的 剜凿 来进行。
English: If you want to chisel a round hole, you need to make another round chisel with a curved edge.

古文：○锚
现代文：锚
English: Anchoring

古文：凡舟行遇风难泊，则全身系命于锚。
现代文：每当船只在水上航行遇到大风没有办法靠岸的时候，它的安全就完全依靠锚了。
English: Whenever a ship sailing on the water encounters high winds and is unable to dock, its safety depends entirely on the anchor.

古文：战船、海船有重千钧者，锤法先成四爪，以次逐节接身。
现代文：战船或者海船的锚，有的重量达到上万斤。它的锻造方法是先锤成四个铁爪子，然后再把它们一个一个接在锚身上。
English: The anchor of a warship or seagoing ship, some of which weigh tens of thousands of pounds, is forged by hammering four iron claws into it, and then attaching them one by one to the anchor.

古文：其三百斤以内者用径尺阔砧，安顿炉傍，当其两端皆红，掀去炉炭，铁包木棍夹持上砧。
现代文：三百斤以内的铁锚，可以先在炉旁安一块直径一尺的砧，当锻件的接口两端都已烧红了，便拨开炉炭，用包着铁皮的木棍的一端把它们夹到砧上锤接。
English: For iron anchors weighing up to 300 kg, a piece of ingot with a diameter of one foot can be placed next to the furnace. When both ends of the forging have been red-hot, remove the furnace charcoal and use one end of the iron-covered wooden stick to clip them onto the ingot and hammer them together.

古文：若千斤内外者则架木为棚，多人立其上共持铁链。两接锚身，其末皆带巨铁圈链套，提起捩转，咸力锤合。
现代文：如果是一千斤左右的铁锚，则要先搭建一个木棚，让许多人都站在棚上，一齐握住铁链，铁链的另一端套住锚身两端的大铁环，把锚吊起来并按需要使它转动，众人合力把锚的四个铁爪逐个锤合上去。
English: If it is an iron anchor of about one thousand pounds, then a wooden shed should be built first, so that many people stand on the shed, hold the chain together, the other end of the chain covers the large iron ring at both ends of the anchor body, hoist the anchor and rotate it as needed, and everyone works together to hammer the four iron claws of the anchor one by one.

古文：合药不用黄泥，先取陈久壁土筛细，一人频撒接口之中，浑合方无微罅。
现代文：接铁用的 合药 不是黄泥，而用筛过的旧墙泥粉，由一个人将它不断地撒在接口上，一起与铁质锤合，这样，接口就不会有微隙了。
English: It is not yellow mud, but sifted old wall mud powder, which is continuously sprinkled on the interface by a person, and hammered together with iron, so that the interface will not have a micro gap.

古文：盖炉锤之中，此物其最巨者。
现代文：在炉锤工作中，锚算是最大的锻造物件了。
English: In the work of the hammer, the anchor is the largest forged object.

古文：○针
现代文：针
English: Needle

古文：凡针先锤铁为细条。用铁尺一根，锥成线眼，抽过条铁成线，逐寸剪断为针。
现代文：造针首先要把熟铁锤成细条，另外在铁尺上钻出小孔作为线眼，然后将细铁条从铁尺的孔里抽出来，这样就做成了铁线。把铁线一寸一寸地剪断后，便成为针坯。
English: To make a needle, the first thing to do is to hammer the iron into thin strips. In addition, a small hole is drilled on the iron ruler as a thread eye, and then the thin iron bar is pulled out of the hole of the iron ruler, thus making an iron wire. After cutting the iron wire inch by inch, it becomes a needle blank.

古文：先鎈其末成颖，用小槌敲扁其本，钢锥穿鼻，复鎈其外。然后入釜，慢火炒熬。
现代文：加工针坯时，要先把铁线的一端锉尖，然后用小锤将其另一端敲扁，并用硬锥在上面钻出针鼻，之后还需把针的周围锉平，便可放入锅里用慢火炒熬。
English: When processing a needle blank, it is necessary to first sharpen one end of the iron wire, then use a small hammer to flatten the other end, and use a hard cone to drill a needle nose on it. After that, it is also necessary to flatten the surrounding of the needle, and then it can be put into a pot and slowly boiled.

古文：炒后以土末入松木火矢，豆豉三物罨盖，下用火蒸。
现代文：炒过后，用泥粉、松木炭和豆豉这三种东西将其盖住，再用火蒸。
English: After stir-frying, it is covered with mud powder, pine charcoal and cardamom, and then steamed.

古文：留针二三口插于其外，以试火候。
现代文：留出二三根针插在外面以便观察火候。
English: Leave a couple of needles sticking out to see how hot it is.

古文：其外针入手捻成粉碎，则其下针火候皆足。
现代文：当外面的针已经完全氧化到用手指便能捻成粉末时，就说明下面被盖住的针的火候已经足够了。
English: When the outer needle has completely oxidized to the point that it can be twisted into powder with your fingers, it means that the covered needle is hot enough.

古文：然后开封，入水健之。
现代文：揭开封盖后，再经过入水淬火的工序，针便制成了。
English: After the lid was opened, the needle was made through the process of water quenching.

古文：凡引线成衣与刺绣者，其质皆刚。惟马尾刺工为冠者，则用柳条软针。
现代文：凡是缝衣服和刺绣时所用的针都比较硬，只有福州附近马尾镇的工人做帽子时所用的针才比较软，名叫柳条软针。
English: All the needles used for sewing clothes and embroidery are relatively hard, only the needles used by workers in Mawei Town near Fuzhou to make hats are relatively soft, called wicker soft needles.

古文：分别之妙，在于水火健法云。
现代文：它们之间软硬的区别，主要来自于淬火的方法不同。
English: The soft and hard difference between them mainly comes from the different methods of quenching.

古文：○治铜
现代文：治铜
English: 治銅

古文：凡红铜升黄而后熔化造器，用砒升者为白铜器，工费倍难，侈者事之。
现代文：红铜添加锌就可以炼成黄铜，再熔化以后才能制造成各种器物。如果加上砒霜等配料冶炼，便可以得到白铜。白铜加工困难，成本也很高，只有阔气的人家才用到它。
English: Red copper can be smelted into brass by adding zinc, and can be smelted into various utensils after smelting. If ingredients such as arsenic are smelted, white copper can be obtained. White copper is difficult to process and the cost is very high, and only rich people use it.

古文：凡黄铜，原从炉甘石升者不退火性受锤；从倭铅升者出炉退火性，以受冷锤。
现代文：由炉甘石升炼而成的黄铜，熔化后要趁热敲打。如果是其中加入锌而锤炼成的，则要在熔化后经过冷锤。
English: Brass, which is refined from calamine, should be beaten with a hot hammer after melting. If zinc is added to it, it should be hammered with a cold hammer after melting.

古文：凡响铜入锡参和成乐器者，必圆成无焊。
现代文：铜和锡的合金叫做响铜，可以用来做乐器，制造时要用完整的一块加工而不能只是由几部分焊接而成。
English: The alloy of copper and tin is called sonorous copper, which can be used to make musical instruments. When manufacturing, it is necessary to use a complete piece of processing and not just welded from several parts.

古文：其余方圆用器，走焊、炙火粘合。
现代文：至于其他的方形或者圆形的铜器，就可以进行走焊或者加温黏合。
English: As for other square or round copperware, it can be welded or heat-bonded.

古文：用锡末者为小焊，用响铜末者为大焊。若焊银器，则用红铜末。
现代文：小件的焊接是用锡粉做焊料，大件的焊接则要用响铜做焊料。焊接银器则要用红铜粉作焊料。
English: The soldering of small parts is made of tin powder, the soldering of large parts is made of sonorous copper, and the soldering of silverware is made of red copper powder.

古文：凡锤乐器，锤钲不事先铸，熔团即锤。锤镯与丁宁，则先铸成圆片，然后受锤。
现代文：关于部分乐器的制造方法：锣不必经过铸造，是在金属熔成一团之后再精心敲打而成；铜鼓和丁宁，就要先铸成圆片，然后再进行敲打而成。
English: Regarding the manufacturing methods of some musical instruments: cymbals do not have to be cast, but are made by carefully beating the metal after it has been melted into a ball; copper drums and dowels must first be cast into discs, and then beaten.

古文：凡锤钲、镯皆铺团于地面。
现代文：无论是锤锣还是锤铜鼓，都要把铜块或铜片铺在地上进行敲打。
English: Whether it is a hammer or a hammer-and-copper drum, it is necessary to spread the copper block or copper sheet on the ground to beat it.

古文：巨者众共挥力，由小阔开，就身起弦声，俱从冷锤点发。其铜鼓中间突起隆炮，而后冷锤开声。
现代文：其中大的铜块或者铜片还要众人齐心合力敲打才行。铜块或铜片由小逐渐展阔，冷件敲打会从物体本身发出类似于弦乐的声音。在铜鼓中心要打出一个突起的圆泡，然后再用冷锤敲定音色。
English: A large piece of copper or a sheet of copper requires everyone to work together to beat it. The piece of copper or sheet of copper gradually expands from small to large, and the cold hammering emits a string-like sound from the object itself. A protruding bubble should be made in the center of the copper drum, and then the tone should be hammered with a cold hammer.

古文：声分雌与雄，则在分厘起伏之妙。重数锤者，其声为雄。
现代文：声音分为高低两种，关键在于圆泡的厚薄及深浅的细微差别：一般而言，重打数锤的声调比较低，而轻打数锤的声调比较高。
English: The sound is divided into high and low, and the key lies in the subtle differences in the thickness and depth of the bubbles: in general, the tone of the heavy hammer is relatively low, while the tone of the light hammer is relatively high.

古文：凡铜经锤之后，色成哑白，受鎈复现黄光。
现代文：铜质经过敲打以后，表层会变成哑白色而无光泽，但是经过锉工加工之后又呈现黄色而恢复光泽了。
English: After the copper has been hammered, the surface layer will become dull white and dull, but after the hammering process, it will turn yellow and regain its luster.

古文：经锤折耗，铁损其十者，铜只去其一。
现代文：敲打时铜的损耗量，只是铁器损耗量的十分之一。
English: The loss of copper during hammering is only one-tenth of the loss of iron.

古文：气腥而色美，故锤工亦贵重铁工一等云。
现代文：铜有腥味而色泽美观，所以说铜匠要比铁匠高出一等。
English: Copper has a pungent smell and a beautiful color, so the coppersmith is superior to the blacksmith.

