古文：吕太后者，高祖微时妃也，生孝惠帝、女鲁元太后。
现代文：吕太后是高祖微贱时的妻子，生了孝惠帝和女儿鲁元太后。
English: Empress Dowager Lv was Gao Zu's wife when he was a lowly peasant. She gave birth to Emperor Xiao Hui and his daughter Empress Dowager Lu Yuan.

古文：及高祖为汉王，得定陶戚姬，爱幸，生赵隐王如意。
现代文：等到高祖做汉王时，在定陶得到戚姬，很是宠爱，生了赵隐王如意。
English: When Gao Zu became the king of Han, he got a relative in Dingtao, who was very fond of him, and Zhao Yin Wang Rongyi was born.

古文：孝惠为人仁弱，高祖以为不类我，常欲废太子，立戚姬子如意，如意类我。
现代文：孝惠帝为人仁慈柔弱，高祖认为不像自己，常常想废掉太子，另立戚姬的儿子如意，认为如意和自己相似。
English: Emperor Xiao Hui was a kind and gentle man. Gao Zu thought that he was not like himself. He often wanted to abolish the crown prince and set up Ruyi, the son of Ruyi's cousin, as his successor. He thought that Ruyi was similar to himself.

古文：戚姬幸，常从上之关东，日夜啼泣，欲立其子代太子。
现代文：戚姬受到宠幸，常常跟随高祖前往关东，日夜哭泣，想立她的儿子为太子，取代原来的太子。
English: Chihi was favored and often followed Gaozu to Kanto, crying day and night, wanting to make her son the crown prince to replace the original crown prince.

古文：吕后年长，常留守，希见上，益疏。
现代文：吕后年龄大了，经常留守，很少见到高祖，关系日益疏远。
English: Lv Guo is old, often stays away, rarely sees Gao Zu, and the relationship is increasingly estranged.

古文：如意立为赵王後，几代太子者数矣，赖大臣争之，及留侯策，太子得毋废。
现代文：如意封为赵王后，有好多次几乎取代太子，幸亏大臣们诤谏，再加上留侯的计策，太子才没有被废掉。
English: If she were to be crowned Queen Zhao, she would almost replace the crown prince many times. Fortunately, thanks to the efforts of the ministers, coupled with the strategy of staying on, the crown prince was not abolished.

古文：吕后为人刚毅，佐高祖定天下，所诛大臣多吕后力。
现代文：吕后为人刚强坚毅，辅助高祖平定天下，诛杀大臣，多是得力于吕后。
English: Lyu Hou was a strong and resolute person. He assisted Gao Zu in pacifying the country and fought and killed the minister, and most of his strength came from Lyu Hou.

古文：吕后兄二人，皆为将。
现代文：吕后有两个哥哥，都是将军。
English: Luguo had two older brothers, both of whom were generals.

古文：长兄周吕侯死事，封其子吕台为郦侯，子产为交侯；次兄吕释之为建成侯。
现代文：大哥周吕侯殉职，封他的儿子吕台为郦侯，吕产为交侯；二哥吕释之封为建成侯。
English: The eldest brother, Zhou Luhou, died in office, and his son, Lüdai, was given the title of Shunhou (侯), Lüsang was given the title of Jiaohou (交侯), and the second brother, Lü Xizhi, was given the title of Jiaojinghou (建成侯).

古文：高祖十二年四月甲辰，崩长乐宫，太子袭号为帝。
现代文：高祖十二年四月二十五日，死于长乐宫，太子沿袭了高祖的年号继位称帝。
English: Gaozu died at Changle Palace on April 25 of the 12th year of his reign. The crown prince followed Gaozu's year of succession and became emperor.

古文：是时高祖八子：长男肥，孝惠兄也，异母，肥为齐王；馀皆孝惠弟，戚姬子如意为赵王，薄夫人子恆为代王，诸姬子子恢为梁王，子友为淮阳王，子长为淮南王，子建为燕王。
现代文：这时高祖有八个儿子：长子刘肥，是孝惠帝的哥哥，与孝惠帝不同母，封为齐王；其余的都是孝惠帝的弟弟，戚姬的儿子刘如意封为赵王，薄夫人的儿子刘恒封为代王，其他姬妾生的儿子刘恢封为梁王，刘友封为淮阳王，刘长封为淮南王，刘建封为燕王。
English: At this time, Gao Zu had eight sons: the eldest son, Liu Fei, was the elder brother of Xiao Hui, and had a different mother from Xiao Hui, and was named Qi Wang; the rest were the younger brothers of Xiao Hui, Liu Ruyi, the son of Qi Ji, was named Zhao Wang, Liu Hengfeng, the son of Mrs. Bo, was the acting king, and the sons of other concubines were named Liang Wang, Liu Youfeng, Huaiyang King, Liu Changfeng, Huainan King, and Liu Jianfeng, Yan Wang.

古文：高祖弟交为楚王，兄子濞为吴王。
现代文：高祖的弟弟刘交封为楚王，哥哥的儿子刘濞封为吴王。
English: Gaozu's brother Liu Jiaofeng was the King of Chu, and his brother's son Liu Qifeng was the King of Wu.

古文：非刘氏功臣番君吴芮子臣为长沙王。
现代文：非刘氏子弟功臣番君吴芮的儿子吴臣封为长沙王。
English: Wu Zhenfeng, the son of Guanjun Wu Zhen, the son of Guanjun Wu, the son of Guanjun Wu, the son of Guanjun Wu Zhenfeng, the son of Guanjun Wu Zhenfeng, the son of Guanjun Wu Zhenfeng, the son of Guanjun Wu Zhenfeng, became the king of Changsha.

古文：吕后最怨戚夫人及其子赵王，乃令永巷囚戚夫人，而召赵王。
现代文：吕后最怨恨戚夫人和她的儿子赵王，就下命令把戚夫人囚禁在永巷，而又召赵王来都城。
English: Queen Lv most resented her cousin and her son, Zhao Wang, so she issued an order to imprison her cousin in Yongxiang and summon Zhao Wang to the capital.

古文：使者三反，赵相建平侯周昌谓使者曰： 高帝属臣赵王，赵王年少。
现代文：使者往返了好几次，赵相建平侯周昌对使者说： 高帝把赵王托付给我，赵王年龄还小。
English: The envoy went back and forth several times. Zhao Xiangjianping Hou Zhouchang said to the envoy: Emperor Gao entrusted Zhao Wang to me. Zhao Wang is still young.

古文：窃闻太后怨戚夫人，欲召赵王并诛之，臣不敢遣王。
现代文：听说太后怨恨戚夫人，想把赵王召去一起杀死，我不敢遣送赵王。
English: I heard that the empress dowager held a grudge against her relative and wanted to kill Zhao Wang together with her. I didn't dare to send Zhao Wang.

古文：王且亦病，不能奉诏。 
现代文：况且赵王也病了，不能奉诏前往。 
English: Moreover, Zhao Wang was also ill and unable to travel.

古文：吕后大怒，乃使人召赵相。
现代文：吕后大怒，就派人召赵相来都城。
English: Lv Guo was furious and sent someone to summon Zhao Xiang to the capital.

古文：赵相徵至长安，乃使人复召赵王。
现代文：赵相被召至长安，就派人再去召赵王。
English: When Zhao Xiang was summoned to Chang'an, he sent someone to summon Zhao Wang.

古文：王来，未到。
现代文：赵王来了，还没有到达都城。
English: Zhao Wang has arrived, but he hasn't reached the capital yet.

古文：孝惠帝慈仁，知太后怒，自迎赵王霸上，与入宫，自挟与赵王起居饮食。
现代文：孝惠帝为人仁慈，知道太后发怒，亲自到霸上迎接赵王，和赵王一起回到宫里，与赵王同饮食，共起居。
English: Emperor Xiaowei was a benevolent person. He knew that the empress dowager was angry, so he went to meet King Zhao in person. He returned to the palace with King Zhao, and they ate and lived together.

古文：太后欲杀之，不得间。
现代文：太后想要杀害赵王，找不到机会。
English: The empress dowager wanted to kill King Zhao, but couldn't find an opportunity.

古文：孝惠元年十二月，帝晨出射。
现代文：孝惠帝元年十二月，孝惠帝早晨出去射猎。
English: In December of the first year of Emperor Xiao Hui's reign, Emperor Xiao Hui went out shooting in the morning.

古文：赵王少，不能蚤起。
现代文：赵王年龄小，不能早起。
English: Zhao Wang is too young to get up early.

古文：太后闻其独居，使人持酖饮之。
现代文：太后听说赵王单独一人在家，就派人拿着毒酒给他喝。
English: When the empress dowager heard that Zhao Wang was home alone, she sent someone to bring him poisoned wine to drink.

古文：犁明，孝惠还，赵王已死。
现代文：等到天亮，孝惠帝回来，赵王已经死了。
English: When Xiao Hui returned at dawn, Zhao Wang was already dead.

古文：於是乃徙淮阳王友为赵王。
现代文：于是就把淮阳王刘友迁为赵王。
English: As a result, Liu You, the king of Huaiyang, was moved to Zhao Wang.

古文：夏，诏赐郦侯父追谥为令武侯。
现代文：夏天，下诏追溢郦侯的父亲为令武侯。
English: In the summer, the father of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the

古文：太后遂断戚夫人手足，去眼，煇耳，饮瘖药，使居厕中，命曰 人彘 。
现代文：太后砍断了戚夫人的手脚，挖掉她的眼睛，用火熏烧她的耳朵，又给她喝哑药，让她住在厕所里，起了个名字叫 人彘 。
English: The queen mother cut off her cousin's hands and feet, gouged out her eyes, burned her ears with fire, gave her dumb pills, and made her live in the toilet, and gave her a name, Ren Ren.

古文：居数日，乃召孝惠帝观人彘。
现代文：过了几天，就让孝惠帝去观看人彘。
English: A few days later, Xiao Huidi was allowed to watch the parade.

古文：孝惠见，问，乃知其戚夫人，乃大哭，因病，岁馀不能起。
现代文：孝惠帝看到后，经过询问，才知道这是戚夫人，于是就放声大哭，由此得了病，一年多不能起来。
English: After seeing it, and after making inquiries, Xiao Huidi knew that it was his relative's wife, so he burst into tears. As a result, he fell ill and could not get up for more than a year.

古文：使人请太后曰： 此非人所为。
现代文：他派人去见太后说： 这不是人所做的事情。
English: He sent someone to see the Empress Dowager and said, "This is not something that people do.

古文：臣为太后子，终不能治天下。 
现代文：我作为太后的儿子，终归没有脸面治理天下。 
English: As the son of the empress dowager, I finally have no face to rule the world.

古文：孝惠以此日饮为淫乐，不听政，故有病也。
现代文：从此孝惠帝天天饮酒逸乐，不去听理朝政，所以身患疾病。
English: From then on, Emperor Xiao Hui drank alcohol every day for pleasure and did not listen to reason and politics, so he fell ill.

古文：二年，楚元王、齐悼惠王皆来朝。
现代文：二年，楚元王、齐悼惠王都来朝见。
English: In the second year, King Chu Yuan and King Qi Yi Hui both came to see the emperor.

古文：十月，孝惠与齐王燕饮太后前，孝惠以为齐王兄，置上坐，如家人之礼。
现代文：十月，孝惠帝和齐王在太后面前设宴饮酒，孝惠帝认为齐王是兄长，安排在上首的位置，如同普通百姓的礼节。
English: In October, Emperor Xiaowei and King Qi held a banquet and drank alcohol in front of the empress dowager. Emperor Xiaowei considered King Qi to be his elder brother and placed him at the head of the table, just like the etiquette of ordinary people.

古文：太后怒，乃令酌两卮酖，置前，令齐王起为寿。
现代文：太后很生气，就让人倒了两杯毒酒，放在前面，要齐王起来饮酒祝寿。
English: The empress dowager was very angry, so she had someone pour two glasses of poisoned wine and put them in front of her, telling the king to get up and drink to celebrate his birthday.

古文：齐王起，孝惠亦起，取卮欲俱为寿。
现代文：齐王站起来，孝惠帝也站了起来，拿过酒杯想一起向太后祝寿。
English: Qi Wang stood up, Xiao Hui Di also stood up, took a glass of wine and wanted to congratulate the empress dowager together.

古文：太后乃恐，自起泛孝惠卮。
现代文：太后大为惊慌，亲自起来倒掉孝惠帝杯子里的酒。
English: The empress dowager was greatly alarmed and personally got up to pour out the wine from the cup of Emperor Xiao Hui.

古文：齐王怪之，因不敢饮，详醉去。
现代文：齐王感到奇怪，就不敢喝下这杯酒，假装酒醉走开了。
English: Qi Wang felt strange and did not dare to drink the glass of wine. He pretended to be drunk and walked away.

古文：问，知其酖，齐王恐，自以为不得脱长安，忧。
现代文：后来一问，才知道是毒酒，齐王很害怕，自以为不能从长安脱身，心里非常忧虑。
English: When he asked about it later, he learned that it was poisoned wine. King Qi was very scared. He thought he would not be able to escape from Chang'an, and he was very worried.

古文：齐内史士说王曰： 太后独有孝惠与鲁元公主。
现代文：齐内史士劝齐王说： 太后只生有孝惠帝和鲁元公主。
English: The Qin historian advised King Qi: The empress dowager had only two children, Prince Xiao Hui and Princess Lu Yuan.

古文：今王有七十馀城，而公主乃食数城。
现代文：如今你拥有七十多个城邑，而公主才只有几座食邑。
English: Now you have more than seventy towns, while the princess has only a few food towns.

古文：王诚以一郡上太后，为公主汤沐邑，太后必喜，王必无忧。 
现代文：你如果把一个郡献给太后，作为公主的汤沐邑，大后一定会高兴，你也一定没有什么可忧虑的了。 
English: If you dedicate a county to the empress dowager, as a princess's souvenir, the empress dowager will surely be happy, and you will have nothing to worry about.

古文：於是齐王乃上城阳之郡，尊公主为王太后。
现代文：于是齐王就献上了城阳郡，尊崇公主为王太后。
English: As a result, King Qi offered up Chengyang County and revered the princess as the empress dowager.

古文：吕后喜，许之。乃置酒齐邸，乐饮，罢，归齐王。
现代文：吕后很高兴，答应了齐王的请求，就在齐王官邸摆酒设宴，高高兴兴地喝了一席酒，酒宴结束后，让齐王返回了封国。
English: Queen Lyu was very happy. She agreed to King Qi's request and held a banquet with wine at King Qi's residence. She happily drank a bowl of wine. After the banquet, she allowed King Qi to return to his fief.

古文：三年，方筑长安城，四年就半，五年六年城就。
现代文：三年，开始修筑长安城，四年，修完了一半，五年六年，全部完工。
English: In three years, the construction of Chang'an City began, in four years, half of the construction was completed, and in five or six years, all of the construction was completed.

古文：诸侯来会。
现代文：诸侯来京城会聚。
English: Princes came to gather in Kyoto.

古文：十月朝贺。
现代文：十月，诸侯向皇帝朝贺。
English: In October, the princes sent their greetings to the emperor.

古文：七年秋八月戊寅，孝惠帝崩。
现代文：七年秋天八月十二日，孝惠帝去世。
English: In the autumn of the seventh year, on August 12th, Xiao Huidi passed away.

古文：发丧，太后哭，泣不下。
现代文：发丧时，太后干哭，但不流眼泪。
English: When mourning, the empress dowager cries, but does not shed tears.

古文：留侯子张辟彊为侍中，年十五，谓丞相曰： 太后独有孝惠，今崩，哭不悲，君知其解乎？ 
现代文：留侯的儿子张辟疆做侍中，当时十五岁，他对丞相说： 太后只有孝惠帝这么一个儿子，现在去世了，她哭得并不悲伤，你知道其中的缘故吗？ 
English: Liu Hou's son, Zhang Bijian, who was a chamberlain, was fifteen years old at the time, and he said to the prime minister: The empress dowager had only one son, Xiao Huidi, who has now passed away. She was not sad when she cried. Do you know the reason?

古文：丞相曰： 何解？ 
现代文：丞相说： 是什么缘故？ 
English: The prime minister said: "For what reason?

古文：辟彊曰： 帝毋壮子，太后畏君等。
现代文：张辟疆说： 皇帝没有成年的儿子，太后惧怕你们这些大臣。
English: Zhang Bijian said, "The emperor has no adult son, and the empress dowager is afraid of you ministers.

古文：君今请拜吕台、吕产、吕禄为将，将兵居南北军，及诸吕皆入宫，居中用事，如此则太后心安，君等幸得脱祸矣。 
现代文：你现在请求拜吕台、吕产、吕禄为将军，统帅南北军，等到吕氏一帮人都进入朝廷，在朝廷中掌握实权，你们这些大臣才能摆脱灾难。 
English: You are now asking Bay Rudei, Lyu Sang and Lyu Lu to become generals and command the North and South armies. You ministers will only be able to get rid of the disaster when Lyu's group enters the imperial court and holds real power.

古文：丞相乃如辟彊计。
现代文：丞相按照张辟彊的计策去做了。
English: The prime minister followed Zhang Bijun's strategy and did it.

古文：太后说，其哭乃哀。
现代文：太后很高兴，她的哭声才哀痛起来。
English: The Queen Mother was so happy that she began to cry.

古文：吕氏权由此起。
现代文：吕氏的权势从此开始崛起。
English: From then on, the power of the Lü clan began to rise.

古文：乃大赦天下。九月辛丑，葬。
现代文：对天下实行大赦。九月五日，安葬了孝惠帝。
English: On September 5, Emperor Xiao Hui was laid to rest.

古文：太子即位为帝，谒高庙。
现代文：太子即位做了皇帝，拜谒高祖的陵庙。
English: The crown prince ascended the throne as emperor and paid homage at Gaozu's mausoleum.

古文：元年，号令一出太后。
现代文：元年，朝廷的号令全部出自太后。
English: In the first year of the year, all the proclamations of the imperial court came from the Empress Dowager.

古文：太后称制，议欲立诸吕为王，问右丞相王陵。
现代文：太后代行皇帝的职权，打算封吕氏子弟为王，先询问右丞相王陵。
English: The great-great-grandson of the emperor, intending to crown the son of the Lü clan as king, first inquired about the imperial mausoleum of the minister of the right.

古文：王陵曰： 高帝刑白马盟曰 非刘氏而王，天下共击之 。
现代文：王陵说： 高帝杀白马和大臣们盟誓说： 不是刘氏子弟而称王的，天下人一起消灭他。 
English: Wang Ling said: Emperor Gao killed the White Horse, and the ministers swore: If anyone claims to be king but is not a son of the Liu clan, the whole world will destroy him together.

古文：今王吕氏，非约也。 
现代文：现在封吕氏子弟为王，是违背盟誓的。 
English: To crown the son of the Lü clan as king now is a violation of the oath.

古文：太后不说。
现代文：太后很不高兴。
English: The Queen Mother was not happy.

古文：问左丞相陈平、绛侯周勃。
现代文：询问左丞相陈平、绛侯周勃。
English: Ask the Left Minister Chen Ping and the Warlord Zhou Bo.

古文：勃等对曰： 高帝定天下，王子弟，今太后称制，王昆弟诸吕，无所不可。 
现代文：周勃等人回答说： 高帝平定天下，封子弟为王，如今太后临朝称制，封弟兄和吕氏子弟为王，没有什么不可以的。 
English: Zhou Bo and others replied: Emperor Gao had pacified the world and made his son the king. Now, Empress Dowager Lin is praising the system and has made her brother and Lu's son the king. There is nothing wrong with this.

古文：太后喜，罢朝。
现代文：太后高兴起来，退朝回宫。
English: The empress dowager was delighted and returned to the palace.

古文：王陵让陈平、绛侯曰： 始与高帝啑血盟，诸君不在邪？
现代文：王陵责备陈平、绛侯说： 当初和高帝献血盟誓，难道你们不在场吗？
English: Wang Ling reproached Chen Ping and Zhou Hou, saying, "In the beginning, you swore to donate blood to Emperor Gao. Weren't you present?

古文：今高帝崩，太后女主，欲王吕氏，诸君从欲阿意背约，何面目见高帝地下？ 
现代文：现在高帝死了，太后以女主临朝，意欲封吕氏子弟为王，你们纵使想要阿谀逢迎，背弃盟誓，但死后有什么脸面到九泉之下去见高帝？ 
English: Now that Emperor Gao is dead, the empress dowager, with her lady-in-waiting at court, wants to crown the son of the Lv clan as king. Even if you want to be flattered and break your oaths, what kind of face would you have after death to go down to Nine Springs to see Emperor Gao?

古文：陈平、绛侯曰： 於今面折廷争，臣不如君；夫全社稷，定刘氏之後，君亦不如臣。 
现代文：陈平、绛侯说： 今天在太后面前公开反对，当朝力争，我们不如你；要说保全国家，安定刘氏后代的君王地位，你又不如我们了。 
English: Chen Ping and Yan Hou said: Today, in the presence of the empress dowager, we are not as good as you when we openly oppose and fight for the dynasty; when it comes to preserving the country and stabilizing the royal status of Liu's descendants, you are not as good as us.

古文：王陵无以应之。
现代文：王陵无言以对。
English: Wang Ling was speechless.

古文：十一月，太后欲废王陵，乃拜为帝太傅，夺之相权。
现代文：十一月，太后想要罢免王陵，就拜他为皇帝的太傅，剥夺了他的丞相职权。
English: In November, when the empress dowager wanted to dismiss Wang Ling, she called him the emperor's daifu and stripped him of his position as chancellor.

古文：王陵遂病免归。
现代文：于是，王陵称说有病，免官回家。
English: As a result, Wang Ling claimed to be ill and was discharged to return home.

古文：乃以左丞相平为右丞相，以辟阳侯审食其为左丞相。
现代文：然后以左丞相陈平为右丞相，以辟阳侯审食其为左丞相。
English: Then Chen Ping, the minister of the left, became the minister of the right, and Bi Yanghou, the minister of the left, became the minister of the left.

古文：左丞相不治事，令监宫中，如郎中令。
现代文：左丞相不管理政务，让他监督宫中的事情，好像郎中令一样。
English: The left-hand minister did not manage the affairs of state, leaving him to supervise the affairs of the palace, as if he were a junior vassal.

古文：食其故得幸太后，常用事，公卿皆因而决事。
现代文：因此，审食其受到太后的宠幸，常常决断政务，公卿大臣都依靠他来决定重要的事情。
English: As a result, he was favored by the empress dowager and often decided on government affairs, and the ministers of the court relied on him to decide important matters.

古文：乃追尊郦侯父为悼武王，欲以王诸吕为渐。
现代文：接着又追尊郦侯的父亲为悼武王，打算以此作为封吕氏子弟为王的开端。
English: Next, he also paid tribute to the prince's father to mourn King Wu, intending to use this as the beginning of crowning the son of the Lü clan as king.

古文：四月，太后欲侯诸吕，乃先封高祖之功臣郎中令无择为博城侯。
现代文：四月，太后打算封吕氏子弟为侯，就先封高祖的功臣郎中令冯无择为博城侯。
English: In April, when the empress dowager planned to make Lu's younger son a marquess, she first made Gao Zu's meritorious vassal's younger brother, Feng Muzhuo, the marquess of Bo.

古文：鲁元公主薨，赐谥为鲁元太后。
现代文：鲁元公主死了，赐谥为鲁元太后。
English: When Princess Lu Yuan died, she was given the title of Empress Dowager Lu Yuan.

古文：子偃为鲁王。
现代文：她的儿子被封为鲁王。
English: Her son was named the King of Lu.

古文：鲁王父，宣平侯张敖也。
现代文：鲁王的父亲就是宣平侯张敖。
English: Lu Wang's father was Xuanping Marquis Zhang Xuan.

古文：封齐悼惠王子章为硃虚侯，以吕禄女妻之。
现代文：封齐悼惠王的儿子刘章为朱虚侯，把吕禄的女儿嫁给他。
English: Fong Qi mourned Hui Wang's son Liu Zhang as Zhu Hui Hou and married Lu Lu's daughter to him.

古文：齐丞相寿为平定侯。
现代文：齐丞相齐寿被封为平定侯。
English: Qi Chengxiang and Qi Shou were given the title of Pingding Hou.

古文：少府延为梧侯。
现代文：少府阳成延被封为梧侯。
English: Yang Chengyan, a minor prefect, was given the title of Gou.

古文：乃封吕种为沛侯，吕平为扶柳侯，张买为南宫侯。
现代文：接着就封吕种为沛侯，吕平为扶柳侯，张买为南宫侯。
English: Next, Liusheng was given the title of Pei Hou, Lüping was given the title of Fu Liu Hou, and Zhang Mai was given the title of Nan Gong Hou.

古文：太后欲王吕氏，先立孝惠後宫子彊为淮阳王，子不疑为常山王，子山为襄城侯，子朝为轵侯，子武为壶关侯。
现代文：太后想要封吕氏子弟为王，先立孝惠帝后宫所生的儿子刘彊为淮阳王，刘不疑为常山王，刘山为襄城侯，刘朝为织侯，刘武为壶关侯。
English: The empress dowager wanted to crown the son of the Lü clan as king, and Liu Xuan, the son of Emperor Xiao Hui's harem, was crowned king of Huaiyang, Liu was undoubtedly the king of Changshan, Liu Shan was the lord of Xiangcheng, Liu Chao was the lord of Weihai, and Liu Wu was the lord of Juguan.

古文：太后风大臣，大臣请立郦侯吕台为吕王，太后许之。
现代文：太后以微言示意大臣，大臣请求封郦侯吕台为吕王，太后答应了。
English: The empress dowager signaled to the minister in a weak voice. The minister requested that Prince Lüdai be crowned King Lüdai, and the empress dowager agreed.

古文：建成康侯释之卒，嗣子有罪，废，立其弟吕禄为胡陵侯，续康侯後。
现代文：建成康侯吕释之去世，袭封的儿子有罪，被废黜了，封他的弟弟吕禄为胡陵侯，承继康侯。
English: After the death of Jiancheng Kanghou Lv Xizhi, his son Guanfeng was found guilty and deposed, and his brother Lulu was appointed as Huling Hou, the successor of Kanghou.

古文：二年，常山王薨，以其弟襄城侯山为常山王，更名义。
现代文：二年，常山王死了，让他的弟弟襄城侯刘山为常山王，改名叫义。
English: Two years later, the King of Changshan died, and his brother Liu Shan, the lord of Xiangcheng, became the King of Changshan and changed his name to Yi.

古文：十一月，吕王台薨，谥为肃王，太子嘉代立为王。
现代文：十一月，吕王吕台死了，谥为肃王，太子吕嘉代立为王。
English: In November, King Lütai of Lü died and was succeeded by King Su, while his son Prince Lü Jia became king.

古文：三年，无事。
现代文：三年，没有发生重大的事情。
English: For three years, nothing significant happened.

古文：四年，封吕嬃为临光侯，吕他为俞侯，吕更始为赘其侯，吕忿为吕城侯，及诸侯丞相五人。
现代文：四年，封吕媭为临光侯，吕他为俞侯，吕更始为赘其侯，吕忿为吕城侯，此外又封诸侯丞相五人为侯。
English: In four years, Lv Ying was named Lin Guang Hou, Lv Ying Hou, Lv Geng Shi Hou, Lv Ren Hou, and Lv Cheng Hou. In addition, five princes and prime ministers were named Lv Ying Hou.

古文：宣平侯女为孝惠皇后时，无子，详为有身，取美人子名之，杀其母，立所名子为太子。
现代文：宣平侯的女儿为孝惠皇后的时候，没有儿子，假装怀孕在身，抱来一个美人生的儿子称作自己生的儿子，然后杀死了孩子的母亲，立这个孩子为太子。
English: When Emperor Xuanping's daughter, Empress Xiao Hui, had no son, she pretended to be pregnant, brought in a beautiful son whom she called her own son, then killed the child's mother and made this child the crown prince.

古文：孝惠崩，太子立为帝。
现代文：孝惠帝死了，太子即位为皇帝。
English: Emperor Xiao Hui died, and the prince ascended the throne as emperor.

古文：帝壮，或闻其母死，非真皇后子，乃出言曰： 后安能杀吾母而名我？
现代文：皇帝长大了，听说他的亲生母亲已经死了，他不是皇后所生，便放出话来说： 母后怎么能杀死我的生身之母而把我称作她的儿子？
English: When the emperor grew up, he heard that his real mother had died and that he was not born to the queen, and he said, "How could the queen mother kill my real mother and call me her son?"

古文：我未壮，壮即为变。 
现代文：我还没有长大，长大了就要造她的反。 
English: I haven't grown up yet, and when I do, I'm going to rebel against her.

古文：太后闻而患之，恐其为乱，乃幽之永巷中，言帝病甚，左右莫得见。
现代文：太后听到这话，深为忧虑，怕他叛变，就把他幽禁在永巷中，说是皇帝病得很厉害，左右的侍臣也见不到皇帝。
English: When the empress dowager heard this, she was deeply worried and, fearing that he would rebel, she confined him to Yongxiang. She said that the emperor was very ill, and that the attendants around him could not see the emperor.

古文：太后曰： 凡有天下治为万民命者，盖之如天，容之如地，上有欢心以安百姓，百姓欣然以事其上，欢欣交通而天下治。
现代文：太后说： 凡是能统治天下万民的人，要像天一样覆盖一切，像地一样容纳万物，皇帝怀有欢爱的心情来抚慰百姓，百姓快乐地事奉皇帝，上下感情欣然交融，天下就能大治。
English: The Empress Dowager said, "Anyone who can rule all the people under the heaven should cover everything like the heaven, and accommodate everything like the earth. The emperor should have a loving heart to comfort the people, the people should serve the emperor happily, and the feelings of the upper and lower levels should be blended, and the world can be governed well."

古文：今皇帝病久不已，乃失惑惛乱，不能继嗣奉宗庙祭祀，不可属天下，其代之。 
现代文：现在皇帝久病不愈，以至于迷惑昏乱，不能作皇帝的继承人来奉祀宗庙，把天下托付给他是不可以的，应该找人取而代之。 
English: Now the emperor has been ill for a long time, so much so that he is confused and confused. He cannot be the emperor's heir to worship the ancestral temple. Entrusting the world to him is unacceptable. Someone should be found to replace him.

古文：群臣皆顿首言： 皇太后为天下齐民计所以安宗庙社稷甚深，群臣顿首奉诏。 
现代文：大臣们都叩头说： 皇太后为了天下百姓的利益，安定宗庙社稷，考虑得真是深远，我们全体叩头，奉行你的诏令。 
English: The ministers all kowtowed and said, "For the benefit of the people of the world, the Empress Dowager came up with the idea of stabilizing the Imperial Family, temples, and shrines. This was a truly far-reaching consideration. We all kowtowed and followed your edict."

古文：帝废位，太后幽杀之。
现代文：皇帝被废除了，太后暗中杀害了他。
English: The emperor was deposed and the empress dowager murdered him in secret.

古文：五月丙辰，立常山王义为帝，更名曰弘。
现代文：五月十一日，立常山王刘义为皇帝，改名叫弘。
English: On May 11, Liu Yi, the king of Changshan, was proclaimed emperor and changed his name to Hong.

古文：不称元年者，以太后制天下事也。
现代文：不改年号称元年，是因为太后专制天下大事。
English: The year without change is known as the first year of the year, because the empress dowager's autocracy was a major event.

古文：以轵侯朝为常山王。
现代文：以轵侯刘朝为常山王。
English: With Liu Zhou as the king of Changshan.

古文：置太尉官，绛侯勃为太尉。
现代文：设置太尉这一官职，以绛侯周勃为太尉。
English: The official post of captain was established, with Zhou Bo as captain.

古文：五年八月，淮阳王薨，以弟壶关侯武为淮阳王。
现代文：五年八月，淮阳王死了，封他的弟弟壶关侯刘武为淮阳王。
English: In August of the fifth year, King Huaiyang died, and his younger brother Liu Wu, Prince of Juguan, was named King of Huaiyang.

古文：六年十月，太后曰吕王嘉居处骄恣，废之，以肃王台弟吕产为吕王。
现代文：六年十月，太后说吕王吕嘉平常骄横放纵，废掉了他，以肃王吕台的弟弟吕产为吕王。
English: In October of the sixth year, the empress dowager said that the king of Lü, Lü Jia, was usually arrogant and indulgent, and abolished him, making the brother of the king of Su, Lü Tai, the king of Lü.

古文：夏，赦天下。
现代文：夏天，大赦天下。
English: In summer, there is a general amnesty.

古文：封齐悼惠王子兴居为东牟侯。
现代文：封齐悼惠王的儿子刘兴居为东牟侯。
English: Liu Xingju, Hui Wang's son, was posthumously named Dongmou.

古文：七年正月，太后召赵王友。
现代文：七年正月，太后召赵王刘友来都城。
English: In the first month of the seventh year, the empress dowager summoned Zhao Wang Liuyou to the capital.

古文：友以诸吕女为受后，弗爱，爱他姬，诸吕女妒，怒去，谗之於太后，诬以罪过，曰： 吕氏安得王！
现代文：刘友娶了吕氏的女儿为王后，不喜欢她，而喜欢其他的姬妾。这个吕氏的女儿心怀嫉妒，气愤地走了，到太后那里说他的坏话，诬告他犯了罪恶，说赵王说过 吕氏怎么能封王！
English: Liu You married Lv's daughter as his queen, and disliked her, preferring other concubines. This Lv's daughter, jealous and angry, went to the empress dowager and spoke ill of him, falsely accusing him of committing a crime, saying that Zhao Wang had said how could Lv be crowned king!

古文：太后百岁後，吾必击之 。
现代文：太后百岁以后，我一定消灭他们 。
English: After the empress dowager is a hundred years old, I will definitely exterminate them.

古文：太后怒，以故召赵王。
现代文：太后大怒，因此召赵王来都城。
English: The empress dowager was furious and summoned King Zhao to the capital.

古文：赵王至，置邸不见，令卫围守之，弗与食。
现代文：赵王来到都城，把他安置在官邸，不接见他，命令卫士围困起来不给他吃的东西。
English: King Zhao came to the capital, put him in the official residence, did not receive him, and ordered the guards to surround him and not give him anything to eat.

古文：其群臣或窃馈，辄捕论之，赵王饿，乃歌曰： 诸吕用事兮刘氏危，迫胁王侯兮彊授我妃。
现代文：他的臣属有的偷偷地给他送饭吃，就抓来论罪。赵王饿了，就唱起歌来： 诸吕专权啊，刘氏岌岌可危；胁迫王侯啊，硬要我娶吕氏女为妃。
English: When King Zhao was hungry, he sang a song: "Authoritarian powers, the Liu clan is in danger; coercive princes, force me to marry a Lu princess."

古文：我妃既妒兮诬我以恶，谗女乱国兮上曾不寤。
现代文：我妃嫉妒啊，诬蔑我犯了罪恶；谗女乱国啊，皇上竟然不明白。
English: My wife is jealous, she has slandered me and committed a crime; my wife has ruined the country, and the emperor doesn't understand.

古文：我无忠臣兮何故弃国？
现代文：我无忠臣啊，否则为什么我失去了自己的封国？
English: I have no loyal vassals, otherwise why did I lose my fiefdom?

古文：自决中野兮苍天举直！
现代文：自杀荒野啊，苍天办事可要主持公道！
English: Oh, suicide wilderness, may the heavens act justly!

古文：于嗟不可悔兮宁蚤自财。
现代文：唉呀无可后悔啊，宁愿早点刎颈自裁。
English: Alas, I have no regrets. I would rather have cut my own throat earlier.

古文：为王而饿死兮谁者怜之！
现代文：为王而饿死啊，有谁怜悯我！
English: To starve for the king! Who will have pity on me?

古文：吕氏绝理兮讬天报仇。 
现代文：吕氏无理啊，只好托上天为我报仇。 
English: Lv Shi is unreasonable, so I had to rely on heaven to take revenge for me.

古文：丁丑，赵王幽死，以民礼葬之长安民冢次。
现代文：十八日，赵王被幽禁致死，采用一般民众的礼仪把他埋葬在长安百姓的坟墓旁边。
English: On the 18th, Zhao Wang was confined to death, and he was buried next to the tombs of the people of Chang'an according to the etiquette of the general public.

古文：己丑，日食，昼晦。
现代文：三十日，日食，白天昏暗。
English: On the 30th day, the sun will be eclipsed, and the daytime will be dark.

古文：太后恶之，心不乐，乃谓左右曰： 此为我也。 
现代文：太后很厌恶，心里闷闷不乐，就对左右随侍人员说： 这是因为我的缘故吧。 
English: The empress dowager was disgusted and unhappy in her heart, so she said to the attendants on her right and left, "Is it because of me?"

古文：二月，徙梁王恢为赵王。
现代文：二月，迁徒梁王刘恢为赵王。
English: In February, Liu Hui, the King of Liang, was transferred to Zhao.

古文：吕王产徙为梁王，梁王不之国，为帝太傅。
现代文：吕王吕产迁徒为梁王，梁王不去封国就任，留在都城做皇帝的太傅。
English: King Lyu was the son of an emigrant, King Liang. King Liang did not go to the country to take office, but stayed in the capital to serve as the emperor's taifu.

古文：立皇子平昌侯太为吕王。
现代文：立皇帝的儿子昌平侯刘太为吕王。
English: The emperor's son, Changping Hou Liu, became King Lu.

古文：更名梁曰吕，吕曰济川。
现代文：把梁改名为吕，吕改名为济川。
English: Liang was renamed Lv, and Lv was renamed Jichuan.

古文：太后女弟吕嬃有女为营陵侯刘泽妻，泽为大将军。
现代文：太后的妹妹吕媭有一个女儿为营陵侯刘泽的妻子，刘泽为大将军。
English: The empress dowager's sister, Lv Ying, had a daughter who was the wife of Liu Ze, the lord of Yingling. Liu Ze was a general.

古文：太后王诸吕，恐即崩後刘将军为害，乃以刘泽为琅邪王，以慰其心。
现代文：太后封吕氏子弟为王，害怕自己死后刘将军作乱，便以刘泽为琅邪王，来宽慰他的心。
English: The Empress Dowager crowned the son of the Lü clan as king, and fearing that General Liu would make trouble after her death, she consoled his heart by appointing Liu Zhe as the evil king.

古文：梁王恢之徙王赵，心怀不乐。
现代文：梁王刘恢被迁徙到赵国称王，心里很不高兴。
English: Liang Wang Liu Wei was very unhappy when he was moved to Zhao to be crowned king.

古文：太后以吕产女为赵王后。
现代文：太后把吕产的女儿作为赵王的王后。
English: The empress dowager made Liusang's daughter the queen of King Zhao.

古文：王后从官皆诸吕，擅权，微伺赵王，赵王不得自恣。
现代文：王后的随侍官员都是吕氏家族的人，他们专权用事，暗中监视赵王，赵王不能力所欲为。
English: The officials accompanying the queen were all members of the Lu family. They used their exclusive power to secretly monitor King Zhao, who was not able to do whatever he wanted.

古文：王有所爱姬，王后使人酖杀之。
现代文：赵王有一个宠爱的姬妾，王后派人使用毒酒把她杀害了。
English: King Zhao had a favorite concubine. The queen sent someone to use poisoned wine to kill her.

古文：王乃为歌诗四章，令乐人歌之。
现代文：于是赵王作了诗歌四章，让乐工歌唱。
English: So Zhao Wang composed four chapters of poetry and asked the musicians to sing.

古文：王悲，六月即自杀。
现代文：赵王深为悲伤，在六月就自杀了。
English: Grief-stricken, Zhao Wangcheng committed suicide in June.

古文：太后闻之，以为王用妇人弃宗庙礼，废其嗣。
现代文：太后听到这件事，认为赵王为了女人背弃了祖宗的礼教，不再让他的后代继承王位。
English: When the empress dowager heard about this, she thought that King Zhao had abandoned the ancestral etiquette for the sake of a woman, and would no longer allow his descendants to inherit the throne.

古文：宣平侯张敖卒，以子偃为鲁王，敖赐谥为鲁元王。
现代文：宣平侯张敖死了，因为他的儿子张偃为鲁王，所以赐给张敖的谥号为鲁元王。
English: Zhang Ye, the lord of Xuanping, died. Because his son Zhang Ye was the king of Lu, the nickname given to Zhang Ye was Lu Yuan Wang.

古文：秋，太后使使告代王，欲徙王赵。
现代文：秋天，太后派遣使者告诉代王，想要把他迁徒到赵地为王。
English: In autumn, the empress dowager sent an envoy to tell the acting king that she wanted to transfer him to Zhao to become king.

古文：代王谢，原守代边。
现代文：代王谢绝了，希望守卫代国边地。
English: The acting king declined, hoping to guard the country's borders on his behalf.

古文：太傅产、丞相平等言，武信侯吕禄上侯，位次第一，请立为赵王。
现代文：太傅吕产、丞相陈平等人都说，武信侯吕禄的侯位在上，次序排列在第一，请立为赵王。
English: Grand Prince Liusang and Prime Minister Chen Pingliang both said that the court rank of Prince Lulu of Wuxin was the highest, ranking first in the order, so please set him up as King Zhao.

古文：太后许之，追尊禄父康侯为赵昭王。
现代文：太后答应了，追尊吕禄的父亲康侯为赵昭王。
English: The empress dowager consented, and Zhao Zhaowang became the successor to Lulu's father, Kang Hou.

古文：九月，燕灵王建薨，有美人子，太后使人杀之，无後，国除。
现代文：九月，燕灵王刘建死了，他有一个美人生的儿子，太后派人杀死了这个儿子，燕灵王没有后嗣，王国被废除了。
English: In September, Yanling Wang Liu Jian died. He had a beautiful son, the Empress Dowager sent someone to kill this son. Yanling Wang had no heir, and the kingdom was abolished.

古文：八年十月，立吕肃王子东平侯吕通为燕王，封通弟吕庄为东平侯。
现代文：八年十月，立吕肃王的儿子东平侯吕通为燕王，封吕通的弟弟吕庄为东平侯。
English: In October of the eighth year, the son of King Lv Su, Dongping marquis Lv Tong, was named Yan Wang, and Lv Tong's brother, Lv Zhuang, was named Dongping marquis.

古文：三月中，吕后祓，还过轵道，见物如苍犬，据高后掖，忽弗复见。
现代文：三月，吕后举行祓祭，回来路过轵道，看见一个东西好像黑狗，盘踞在高后的腋下，忽然又看不到了。
English: In March, Lvou held an exorcism festival. When he returned, he was passing by the road and saw a thing that looked like a black dog, which was hiding under Lvou's armpit. Suddenly, he could no longer see it.

古文：卜之，云赵王如意为祟。
现代文：占卜后，说是赵王如意作祟。
English: After divination, it was said that King Zhao had caused the curse.

古文：高后遂病掖伤。
现代文：于是高后腋下得了毛病。
English: As a result, she developed a problem with her underarm after high school.

古文：高后为外孙鲁元王偃年少，蚤失父母，孤弱，乃封张敖前姬两子，侈为新都侯，寿为乐昌侯，以辅鲁元王偃。
现代文：高后因为外孙鲁元王张偃年幼，过早地失去了父母，孤零零的，势力薄弱，就封张敖前妾的两个儿子为侯，张侈封为新都侯，张寿封为乐昌侯，以此来辅助鲁元王张偃。
English: After high school, because the grandson of Lu Yuan Wang Zhang Ye was young, lost his parents prematurely, lonely, and weak, he appointed the two sons of Zhang Ye's former concubine as marquesses, Zhang Rui as the new capital marquess, and Zhang Shufeng as the Lechang marquess, in order to assist Lu Yuan Wang Zhang Ye.

古文：及封中大谒者张释为建陵侯，吕荣为祝兹侯。
现代文：又封中大谒者张释为建陵侯，吕荣为祝兹侯。
English: In addition, Zhang Xie, a member of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China, was awarded the title of Jianling Hou (建陵侯) and Lü Rong the title of Zhuzi Hou (祝兹侯).

古文：诸中宦者令丞皆为关内侯，食邑五百户。
现代文：那些在宫中由宦官担任的令、丞，都封为关内侯，每人食邑五百户。
English: Those who were eunuchs in the imperial court were given the title of Kansai no kuni, and each of them was given a fief of 500 households.

古文：七月中，高后病甚，乃令赵王吕禄为上将军，军北军；吕王产居南军。
现代文：七月，高后病情恶化，就命令赵王吕禄为上将军，统率北军；吕王吕产统率南军。
English: In July, after Gao's illness worsened, he ordered Zhao Wang Lulu to be the senior general and lead the Northern Army; Lyu Wang Lulu led the Southern Army.

古文：吕太后诫产、禄曰： 高帝已定天下，与大臣约，曰 非刘氏王者，天下共击之 。
现代文：吕太后告诫吕产、吕禄说： 高帝平定天下后，和大臣们约定，说是 不是刘氏子弟而称王的，天下人一起消灭他 。
English: Empress Dowager Lv admonished Lv Sheng and Lv Lu, saying: After Emperor Gao had pacified the country, he made an agreement with his ministers, saying that anyone who claimed to be the king but was not a son of the Liu clan would be eliminated together with the rest of the world.

古文：今吕氏王，大臣弗平。
现代文：如今吕氏为王，大臣们愤愤不平。
English: Now Lv is king, and ministers are outraged.

古文：我即崩，帝年少，大臣恐为变。
现代文：我就要死了，皇帝年龄还小，恐怕大臣们要发动叛乱。
English: I am about to die, the emperor is still young, and I am afraid that the ministers will start a rebellion.

古文：必据兵卫宫，慎毋送丧，毋为人所制。 
现代文：你们一定要掌握军队，保卫宫廷，千万别给我送丧，不要被人所制。 
English: You must control the army and protect the court. Don't send me to the funeral and don't be controlled by others.

古文：辛巳，高后崩，遗诏赐诸侯王各千金，将相列侯郎吏皆以秩赐金。
现代文：八月一日，高后死了，留下诏书赏赐诸侯王每人黄金一千斤，将、相、列侯、郎吏都根据秩位赏赐黄金。
English: On August 1, Gao Hou died, leaving behind an edict to reward the princes with one thousand jin of gold each, and to reward the generals, lords, vassals, and courtiers with gold according to their ranks.

古文：大赦天下。
现代文：大赦天下。
English: Amnesty for the whole world.

古文：以吕王产为相国，以吕禄女为帝后。
现代文：以吕王吕产为相国，以吕禄的女儿为皇后。
English: King Lv of Lv as the fatherland, and Lv Lu's daughter as the queen.

古文：高后已葬，以左丞相审食其为帝太傅。
现代文：高后埋葬以后，以左丞相审食其为皇帝的太傅。
English: After the burial of Gao Hou, he was crowned as the emperor's grand tutor by the left prime minister.

古文：硃虚侯刘章有气力，东牟侯兴居其弟也。皆齐哀王弟，居长安。
现代文：朱虚侯刘章很有力气，东牟侯刘兴居是他的弟弟，他们都是齐哀王的弟弟，住在长安。
English: Zhu Wuhou Liu Zhang is very powerful, Dongwuhou Liu Xingju is his younger brother, they are both younger brothers of Qie Wang and live in Chang'an.

古文：当是时，诸吕用事擅权，欲为乱，畏高帝故大臣绛、灌等，未敢发。
现代文：当时，吕氏一伙人专权用事，想要作乱，但畏惧昔日高帝的大臣绛侯、灌婴等人，没有敢于发动。
English: At that time, a group of people led by the Lü family tried to make trouble by using their monopoly of power, but the ministers such as Zhou Hou and Guan Yu, who were afraid of the former Emperor Gao, did not dare to start a riot.

古文：硃虚侯妇，吕禄女，阴知其谋。
现代文：朱虚侯的妻子是吕禄的儿女，暗中知道他们的阴谋。
English: Zhu Xuhou's wife is the daughter of Lu Lu and secretly knows about their plot.

古文：恐见诛，乃阴令人告其兄齐王，欲令发兵西，诛诸吕而立。
现代文：他怕被杀害，就私下派人告诉他的哥哥齐王，想让他发兵西进，诛除吕氏子弟而自立为帝。
English: Fearing that he would be killed, he secretly sent someone to tell his brother, King Qi, that he wanted him to send an army to the west, remove Lü's younger brother, and establish himself as emperor.

古文：硃虚侯欲从中与大臣为应。
现代文：朱虚侯打算和大臣们在内与齐王相呼应。
English: Zhu Xuhong and his ministers intended to echo King Qi's words.

古文：齐王欲发兵，其相弗听。
现代文：齐王想要发兵，他的丞相不肯相从。
English: King Qi wanted to send troops, but his prime minister did not want to go along.

古文：八月丙午，齐王欲使人诛相，相召平乃反，举兵欲围王，王因杀其相，遂发兵东，诈夺琅邪王兵，并将之而西。
现代文：八月二十六日，齐王准备派人杀死丞相，丞相召平反叛，打算举兵围攻齐王，齐王乘机杀死了他的丞相，于是发兵东进，采用欺诈的方法夺取了琅邪王的军队，两支军队都由他统率着向西进军。
English: On August 26th, King Qi was preparing to send someone to kill the prime minister. The prime minister called for a counter-rebellion and planned to raise an army to besiege King Qi. King Qi took the opportunity to kill his prime minister, so he sent an army to the east, using fraudulent methods to capture the army of the evil king. Both armies were led by him and marched west.

古文：语在齐王语中。
现代文：这件事记载在《齐悼惠王世家》中。
English: This event is recorded in the "Tribute to the Wang Family."

古文：齐王乃遗诸侯王书曰： 高帝平定天下，王诸子弟，悼惠王王齐。
现代文：齐王写信给诸侯王说： 高帝平定天下，封子弟为王，悼惠王封在齐地为王。
English: King Qi wrote a letter to the princes saying: Emperor Gao has pacified the world, enthroned his son as king, and eulogized King Hui as king in Qi.

古文：悼惠王薨，孝惠帝使留侯良立臣为齐王。
现代文：悼惠王去世，孝惠帝派留侯张良立我为齐王。
English: To mourn the death of King Hui, Emperor Xiao Hui sent Zhang Liang to stay and made me the king of Qi.

古文：孝惠崩，高后用事，春秋高，听诸吕，擅废帝更立，又比杀三赵王，灭梁、赵、燕以王诸吕，分齐为四。
现代文：孝惠帝去世，高后执政，她年纪大了，听从吕氏一伙人的意见，擅自废立皇帝，又接连杀害了三个赵王，废除了梁国、赵国、燕国，用来封吕氏子弟为王，齐国也被瓜分为四块。
English: After the death of Emperor Xiao Hui, Gao Po took over the government. She was very old, and she listened to the opinions of a group of people from the Lü clan, and arbitrarily abolished the emperor. She also killed three Zhao kings in succession, abolished the Liang, Zhao and Yan kingdoms, and used them to crown Lü's son as king. Qi was also divided into four parts.

古文：忠臣进谏，上惑乱弗听。
现代文：忠臣进言劝诫，高后迷惑昏乱，不肯接受。
English: The loyal vassal gave advice and exhortation, but Gao Hou was bewildered and confused, and refused to accept.

古文：今高后崩，而帝春秋富，未能治天下，固恃大臣诸侯。而诸吕又擅自尊官，聚兵严威，劫列侯忠臣，矫制以令天下，宗庙所以危。
现代文：如今高后去世，而皇帝年龄还小，不能治理天下，只有依赖大臣、诸侯，而吕氏一伙人擅自尊崇自己的职位，聚集军队，以壮威严，胁迫列侯忠臣，假借诏命，号令天下，因此刘氏宗庙倾危。
English: Now Gao Guo has passed away, and the emperor is still young and cannot rule the world. He can only rely on ministers and princes, while the Lv clan is proud of its position, gathers an army, uses its grandeur to coerce princes and loyal subjects, and pretends to use imperial edicts to rule the world. As a result, Liu's ancestral temple is in danger.

古文：寡人率兵入诛不当为王者。 
现代文：我率领军队到朝廷去除掉那些不应当为王的人。 
English: I led an army to the court to remove those who should not be king.

古文：汉闻之，相国吕产等乃遣颍阴侯灌婴将兵击之。
现代文：汉朝廷听到了这一消息，相国吕产等人就派遣颖阴侯灌婴带领军队去攻打齐王。
English: The Han imperial court heard the news, and sent Yingying Hou Guanzhong and his army to attack King Qi.

古文：灌婴至荥阳，乃谋曰： 诸吕权兵关中，欲危刘氏而自立。
现代文：灌婴到了荥阳，就和人商量说： 吕氏一伙人在关中控制了军队，想要消灭刘氏而自立为皇帝。
English: When Guanzhong arrived in Fenyang, he consulted with others and said, "A group of Lu family members took control of the army in Guanzhong. They wanted to eliminate the Liu family and set themselves up as emperor.

古文：今我破齐还报，此益吕氏之资也。 
现代文：如果现在我打垮齐国的军队回去复命，这就更加壮大了吕氏的势力。 
English: If I now defeat Qi's army and return to fulfill my mission, this will further strengthen the power of the Lü clan.

古文：乃留屯荥阳，使使谕齐王及诸侯，与连和，以待吕氏变，共诛之。
现代文：于是灌婴屯兵荥阳，派使者告谕齐王和各国诸侯。要同他们联合在一起，等待吕氏叛乱，共同除掉吕氏。
English: Therefore, he sent an envoy to tell King Qi and the princes of various countries to unite with them, wait for the rebellion of the Lü family, and jointly eliminate the Lü family.

古文：齐王闻之，乃还兵西界待约。
现代文：齐王听到这个消息后，就把军队撤回到齐国的西部边界，等待消息，按约行事。
English: After King Qi heard the news, he withdrew his army to the western border of Qi, waited for the news, and acted according to the agreement.

古文：吕禄、吕产欲发乱关中，内惮绛侯、硃虚等，外畏齐、楚兵，又恐灌婴畔之，欲待灌婴兵与齐合而发，犹豫未决。
现代文：吕禄、吕产想要在关中发动叛乱，但是在内害怕绦侯、朱虚侯等人，在外畏惧齐国、楚国的军队，又担心灌婴叛变，准备等到灌婴的军队与齐国的军队交兵后再发动叛乱。
English: Lulu and Lussang wanted to launch a rebellion in Guanzhong, but they were afraid of Zeng Hou, Zhu Xiu Hou and others inside, and they were afraid of the armies of Qi and Chu outside. They were also worried about Guan Yu's mutiny, and they were prepared to wait until Guan Yu's army had a battle with the army of Qi before launching a rebellion.

古文：当是时，济川王太、淮阳王武、常山王朝名为少帝弟，及鲁元王吕后外孙，皆年少未之国，居长安。
现代文：这时，名义上是少帝弟弟的济川王刘太、淮阳王刘武、常山王刘朝，和吕后外孙鲁元王，都因年幼没有就国，住在长安。
English: At this time, Jichuan King Liu Taoru, Huaiyang King Liu Wu, Changshan King Liu Zha, and Lu's grandson Lu Yuan, who was nominally the younger brother of the young emperor, all lived in Chang'an because they were too young to go to the country.

古文：赵王禄、梁王产各将兵居南北军，皆吕氏之人。
现代文：赵王昌禄、梁王吕产各自统兵住在南北军，他们都是吕氏的人。
English: Zhao Wang Changlu and Liang Wang Lushan had their respective generals live in the North and South armies, and they were both from the Lv clan.

古文：列侯群臣莫自坚其命。
现代文：列侯群臣没有人感到一定能保全自己的性命。
English: None of the vassals felt sure that they could save their own lives.

古文：太尉绛侯勃不得入军中主兵。
现代文：太尉绛侯周勃不能进入军营掌握兵权。
English: Second Lieutenant Gong Hou Zhou Bo cannot enter the military camp to seize military power.

古文：曲周侯郦商老病，其子寄与吕禄善。
现代文：曲周侯郦商年老多病，他的儿子郦寄和吕禄相友好。
English: Qu Zhou Hou Yi Shang was old and sickly, and his son Mi Ying was friendly with Lu Lu.

古文：绛侯乃与丞相陈平谋，使人劫郦商。令其子寄往绐说吕禄曰： 高帝与吕后共定天下，刘氏所立九王，吕氏所立三王，皆大臣之议，事已布告诸侯，诸侯皆以为宜。
现代文：绛侯就和丞相陈平商量计策，派人劫持郦商，让郦寄去欺骗吕禄说： 高帝和吕后共同平定天下，刘氏被封了九个王，吕氏被封了三个王，都是大臣们议定的，这件事情已经向诸侯通告，诸侯都认为是妥当的。
English: The princes discussed the strategy with the prime minister, Chen Ping, and sent someone to kidnap the merchants and send them to deceive Lu Lu, saying: Emperor Gao and Empress Lu jointly pacified the world, the Liu clan was crowned with nine kings, and the Lu clan was crowned with three kings, all of which were agreed upon by the ministers. This matter was reported to the princes, and the princes all thought it was appropriate.

古文：今太后崩，帝少，而足下佩赵王印，不急之国守籓，乃为上将，将兵留此，为大臣诸侯所疑。
现代文：如今太后死了，皇帝年幼，而你佩带赵王印，不赶快回国守卫国土，却身为上将军，率领军队留在这里，被大臣和诸侯所猜疑。
English: Now the empress dowager is dead, the emperor is young, and you wear the Zhao Wangyin, do not hurry to return to defend the country, but as a general, lead the army to stay here, and are suspected by ministers and princes.

古文：足下何不归印，以兵属太尉？
现代文：你何不归还将军印，把军队交给太尉？
English: Why don't you return the military seal and hand over the army to the captain?

古文：请梁王归相国印，与大臣盟而之国，齐兵必罢，大臣得安，足下高枕而王千里，此万世之利也。 
现代文：并请梁王归还相国印绶，和大臣们订立盟约，前往自己的封国，这样齐王必然息兵，大臣能够安定，你可以高枕无忧，称王千里，这有利于子孙万代。 
English: He also asked Liang Wang to return the seal money of the other country, and to conclude a covenant with the ministers and go to his own fiefdom. In this way, Qi Wang will certainly calm down the soldiers, the ministers can be stable, and you can sleep well, saying Wang Qianli, which is beneficial to future generations.

古文：吕禄信然其计，欲归将印，以兵属太尉。
现代文：吕禄很相信郦寄的建议，准备交还将军印，把军队归属太尉。
English: Lu Lu believed in the suggestion and was ready to hand over the military seal and assign the army to the captain.

古文：使人报吕产及诸吕老人，或以为便，或曰不便，计犹豫未有所决。
现代文：派人去告诉吕产和吕氏宗族中的老人，他们有的认为妥当，有的说是不妥当，犹犹豫豫，主意没有决定下来。
English: They sent someone to tell the old people in the Liusheng and Lv clan clans that some of them thought it was appropriate, some said it was inappropriate, they hesitated, and the idea was not decided.

古文：吕禄信郦寄，时与出游猎。
现代文：吕禄很相信郦寄，时常和他出去游猎。
English: Lulu is a great believer in Miao Ying, and often goes out hunting with him.

古文：过其姑吕嬃，嬃大怒，曰： 若为将而弃军，吕氏今无处矣。 
现代文：有一次经过姑母吕媭家，吕媭大怒，说： 你身为将军而放弃军队，吕氏宗族将无安身立命的地方了。 
English: Once, when passing by the home of his aunt Lv Ying, Lv Ying flew into a rage and said: You, as a general, have abandoned the army, and the Lv clan will have no place to live.

古文：乃悉出珠玉宝器散堂下，曰： 毋为他人守也 
现代文：于是拿出全部珠玉宝器抛散堂下，说： 不要替别人看守这些东西了。 
English: Then he took out all the jewels and treasures and threw them out of the room, saying: "Don't guard these things for others.

古文：左丞相食其免。
现代文：左丞相审食其被罢免。
English: He was removed from his post as minister of justice.

古文：八月庚申旦，平阳侯窋行御史大夫事，见相国产计事。
现代文：八月十日早晨，代行御史大夫职务的平阳侯曹窋，会见相国吕产商量事情。
English: On the morning of August 10th, Pingyang Hou Cao Wei, who was acting as chief historian, met with his Chinese counterpart Liusang to discuss the matter.

古文：郎中令贾寿使从齐来，因数产曰： 王不蚤之国，今虽欲行，尚可得邪？ 
现代文：郎中令贾寿去齐国出使回来，指责吕产说： 你不早些去自己的封国，现在即使想走，还能走得了吗？ 
English: His brother-in-law ordered Jia Shou to return from his mission to Qi, accusing Lü Yuan and saying, "You didn't go to your own fief earlier. Even if you wanted to go now, can you still go?

古文：具以灌婴与齐楚合从，欲诛诸吕告产，乃趣产急入宫。
现代文：他把灌婴与齐、楚联合起来，准备诛除吕氏宗族的事情全部告诉了吕产，催促吕产急速进入宫廷。
English: He united Gan Zi with Qi and Chu, told Liusang everything about the preparations to eliminate the Lv clan, and urged Liusang to quickly enter the court.

古文：平阳侯颇闻其语，乃驰告丞相、太尉。
现代文：平阳侯听到了这些话，就骑马跑去报告了丞相和太尉。
English: When Pingyang Hou heard these words, he ran on horseback to report to the prime minister and the captain.

古文：太尉欲入北军，不得入。
现代文：太尉想要进入北军，但无法进去。
English: The captain wanted to join the Union Army, but couldn't get in.

古文：襄平侯通尚符节。乃令持节矫内太尉北军。
现代文：襄平侯纪通主管符节，太尉就让他持节假传诏令，使太尉进入北军。
English: When Xiangping Hou Jitong was in charge of the festival, the captain asked him to hold a fake proclamation, so that the captain could enter the Northern Army.

古文：太尉复令郦寄与典客刘揭先说吕禄曰： 帝使太尉守北军，欲足下之国，急归将印辞去，不然，祸且起。 
现代文：太尉又让郦寄和典客刘揭先劝告吕禄说： 皇帝派太尉统率北军想让你去自己的封国，赶快归还将军印，离开这里，不然的活，将要发生大祸。 
English: The captain also let Liu Jie, the messenger and the guest of honor, advise Lu Lu first, saying: The emperor sent the captain to lead the Northern Army to want you to go to your own fiefdom, quickly return and return the military seal, leave here, otherwise, there will be a big disaster.

古文：吕禄以为郦兄不欺己，遂解印属典客，而以兵授太尉。
现代文：吕禄认为郦寄不会欺骗自己，就解下将军印交给典客，把兵权送给了太尉。
English: Lu Lu believed that the envoy would not deceive himself, so he removed the seal of the general and gave it to the envoy, and gave the military power to the captain.

古文：太尉将之入军门，行令军中曰： 为吕氏右襢，为刘氏左襢。 
现代文：太尉掌握兵权后进入军门，下令军中说： 拥护吕氏的袒露右臂，拥护刘氏的袒露左臂。 
English: After the captain seized the military power, he entered the gate of the army and ordered the army to say: "Support the right arm of Lu, support the left arm of Liu."

古文：军中皆左衤亶为刘氏。
现代文：军中士卒都袒露左臂，拥护刘氏。
English: Army sergeant soldiers all bare their left arms to show their support for Liu.

古文：太尉行至，将军吕禄亦已解上将印去，太尉遂将北军。
现代文：太尉来到北军时，将军吕禄也已经解下将军印离开了，于是太尉统率了北军。
English: When the captain came to the Northern Army, General Lulu had already removed the seal of generalship and left, so the captain led the Northern Army.

古文：然尚有南军。
现代文：然而还有南军没有控制。
English: However, there was still no Confederate control.

古文：平阳侯闻之，以吕产谋告丞相平，丞相平乃召硃虚侯佐太尉。
现代文：平阳侯听到了贾寿对吕产说的一些话，把吕产的阴谋告诉了丞相陈平，丞相陈平就找来朱虚侯协助太尉。
English: Pingyang marquis heard some words said by Jia Shou to Liusan, and told the conspiracy of Liusan to the prime minister Chen Ping. The prime minister Chen Ping then called Zhu Xiu marquis to assist the captain.

古文：太尉令硃虚侯监军门。
现代文：太尉让朱虚侯监守营门。
English: The captain asked Zhu Huxuo to guard the gate.

古文：令平阳侯告卫尉： 毋入相国产殿门。 
现代文：派平阳侯告诉卫尉： 不要让相国吕产进入殿门。 
English: He sent Pingyang marquis to tell the guard lieutenant: Don't let the sister-country Lussang enter the palace gate.

古文：吕产不知吕禄已去北军，乃入未央宫，欲为乱，殿门弗得入，裴回往来。
现代文：吕产不知道吕禄已经离开北军，就进入未央宫，想要作乱，但是没有办法进入殿门，在那里来回徘徊。
English: Not knowing that Lulu had already left the Northern Army, Lyu Sang entered the Weiyang Palace, intending to start a riot, but he was unable to enter the palace gate and wandered back and forth.

古文：平阳侯恐弗胜，驰语太尉。
现代文：平阳侯担心不能取胜，骑马跑去，把情况告诉了太尉。
English: Fearing that he could not win, Pingyang Hou ran on horseback and told the captain about the situation.

古文：太尉尚恐不胜诸吕，未敢讼言诛之，乃遣硃虚侯谓曰： 急入宫卫帝。 
现代文：太尉还怕战胜不了吕氏一伙人，因此没有敢公开宣言诛灭吕氏，就调遣朱虚侯，对他说： 赶快进入宫廷保护皇帝。 
English: The captain was also afraid that he would not be able to defeat Lu's group, so he did not dare to make a public declaration to destroy Lu, so he dispatched Zhu Xuhou and told him: "Hurry into the palace to protect the emperor."

古文：硃虚侯请卒，太尉予卒千馀人。
现代文：朱虚侯要一些兵力，太尉拨给他士卒一千多人。
English: Zhu Xuhou asked for some troops, and the captain assigned more than a thousand soldiers to him.

古文：入未央宫门，遂见产廷中。
现代文：朱虚侯进入未央宫大门，看见吕产在宫廷中。
English: Zhu Xuhong entered the gate of the Weiyang Palace and saw Liusang in the court.

古文：日餔时，遂击产。
现代文：黄昏的时候，就进击吕产，吕产逃走了。
English: At dusk, they attacked Liusang, and Liusang fled.

古文：产走，天风大起，以故其从官乱，莫敢斗。
现代文：天空刮起了大风，因此吕产的随从官吏一片混乱，不敢抵抗。
English: A gale blew up in the sky, so the officials accompanying Liusang were in a state of confusion and did not dare to resist.

古文：逐产，杀之郎中府吏厕中。
现代文：朱虚侯追赶吕产，把他杀死在郎中令官府的厕所里面。
English: Zhu Huxu chased after Liusang and killed him in the toilet of his brother-in-law's government office.

古文：硃虚侯已杀产，帝命谒者持节劳硃虚侯。硃虚侯欲夺节信，谒者不肯，硃虚侯则从与载，因节信驰走，斩长乐卫尉吕更始。
现代文：朱虚侯已经杀死了吕产，皇帝派谒者持节慰劳朱虚侯，朱虚侯想要把节信夺过来，谒者不答应，朱虚侯就和他一起乘车，利用节信驱车飞奔，杀了长乐宫卫尉吕更始。
English: Zhu Xuhong had already killed Lv Sheng. The emperor sent an envoy to console Zhu Xuhong on the festival. Zhu Xuhong wanted to take over the festival letter. The envoy did not agree. Zhu Xuhong took a car with him, used the festival letter to drive the car, and killed the Changle Palace guard Lv Changshi.

古文：还，驰入北军，报太尉。
现代文：回来时，驱车进入北军，报告了太尉。
English: When he returned, he drove into the Union army and reported to a captain.

古文：太尉起，拜贺硃虚侯曰： 所患独吕产，今已诛，天下定矣。 
现代文：太尉起身向朱虚侯拜贺说： 我们所担心的只是吕产，现在已经把他杀死，天下大局已定。 
English: The captain stood up and said to Zhu Xuhou Bai He: What we were worried about was Liusang. Now we have killed him, and the overall situation has been decided.

古文：遂遣人分部悉捕诸吕男女，无少长皆斩之。
现代文：随即派人分别把吕氏男男女女逮捕起来，无论老少，全部处死。
English: Then they immediately sent people to arrest the men and women of the Lv men and women separately, regardless of age, and all of them were executed.

古文：辛酉，捕斩吕禄，而笞杀吕嬃。
现代文：九月十一日，捕获吕禄斩首，用鞭子和棍棒打死了吕媭。
English: On September 11, Lu Lu was captured, beheaded, and Lv Yu was beaten to death with a whip and a club.

古文：使人诛燕王吕通，而废鲁王偃。
现代文：派人诛杀了燕王吕通，废黜了鲁王张偃。
English: He sent people to kill Yan Wang Luitong and deposed Lu King Zhang Ye.

古文：壬戌，以帝太傅食其复为左丞相。
现代文：九月十二日，又以皇帝的太傅审食其为左丞相。
English: On September 12th, he was appointed as the Emperor's Taifu and appointed as the Minister of the Left.

古文：戊辰，徙济川王王梁，立赵幽王子遂为赵王。
现代文：九月十八日，迁徙济川王为梁王，立赵幽王的儿子刘遂为赵王。
English: On September 18, the migrated King Jichuan became King Liang, and Liu, the son of the established King Zhao, became King Zhao.

古文：遣硃虚侯章以诛诸吕氏事告齐王，令罢兵。
现代文：派遣朱虚侯刘章把诛除吕氏的事情告诉齐王，让他撤回军队。
English: He sent Zhu Xuhou Liu Zhang to tell King Qi about the expulsion of the Lv clan, and asked him to withdraw his army.

古文：灌婴兵亦罢荥阳而归。
现代文：灌婴的军队也从荥阳罢兵到都城。
English: Guanzhong's army also marched from Shenyang to the capital.

古文：诸大臣相与阴谋曰： 少帝及梁、淮阳、常山王，皆非真孝惠子也。
现代文：大臣们私下互相商量说： 少帝和梁王、淮阳王、常山王，都不真正是孝惠帝的儿子。
English: The ministers privately discussed with each other and said: The young emperor and King Liang, King Huaiyang, and King Changshan are not really the sons of Emperor Xiao Hui.

古文：吕后以计诈名他人子，杀其母，养後宫，令孝惠子之，立以为後，及诸王，以彊吕氏。
现代文：吕后使用诈骗手段把别人的儿子称作孝惠帝的儿子，杀掉孩子的母亲，养育在后宫，让孝惠帝当作自己的儿子，立为皇帝的继承人和封为诸王，以此来加强吕氏的势力。
English: Queen Lyu used fraudulent means to strengthen the power of the Lyu clan by calling someone else's son the son of Emperor Xiao Hui, killing the child's mother, raising him in the harem, and making Emperor Xiao Hui his own son, making him the emperor's heir and crowning him king.

古文：今皆已夷灭诸吕，而置所立，即长用事，吾属无类矣。
现代文：现在已经全部消灭了吕氏宗族，如果让他们所立的人当皇帝，等到长大掌权，我们这些人就要被杀戮无遗。
English: Now that the entire Lu clan has been wiped out, if the man they made emperor grows up and takes power, we will all be killed.

古文：不如视诸王最贤者立之。 
现代文：不如从诸王中选择一个最贤明的立为皇帝。 
English: It would be better to choose the wisest of the kings and make him emperor.

古文：或言 齐悼惠王高帝长子，今其適子为齐王，推本言之，高帝適长孙，可立也 。
现代文：有的说 齐悼惠王是高帝的长子，现在他的嫡子为齐王，从亲疏嫡庶方面探本求源，齐王是高帝的嫡长孙，可以立为皇帝 。
English: Some people say that Qi Rong Hui Wang was the eldest son of Emperor Gao, and now his legitimate son is Qi Wang, and he is searching for the source from the aspect of estrangement. Qi Wang is the legitimate eldest grandson of Emperor Gao, and can be established as the emperor.

古文：大臣皆曰： 吕氏以外家恶而几危宗庙，乱功臣今齐王母家驷，驷钧，恶人也。即立齐王，则复为吕氏。 
现代文：大臣们都说： 吕氏以外戚的身份作恶，几乎倾危刘氏宗庙，摧残功臣。现在齐王母亲娘家的驷钧，是个坏人，如果立齐王为皇帝，就会再出现一个吕氏。 
English: The ministers all said: "As a relative of someone other than the Lü clan, he committed evil deeds, almost endangered the ancestral temple of the Liu clan, and destroyed meritorious soldiers. Now, King Qi's maternal uncle is a bad person. If King Qi is made emperor, there will be another Lü clan.

古文：欲立淮南王，以为少，母家又恶。
现代文：想立淮南王，又认为他年轻，母亲的娘家也很凶恶。
English: He wanted to become the king of Huainan, but he thought he was too young and his mother's family was evil.

古文：乃曰： 代王方今高帝见子，最长，仁孝宽厚。
现代文：大家就说： 代王是高帝现今在世的儿子之一，行次最长，为人仁孝宽厚。
English: Everyone said, "The acting king is one of the sons of Emperor Gao who is alive today. He has the longest line of succession and is a benevolent, filial and generous person."

古文：太后家薄氏谨良。
现代文：太后薄氏的家族谨慎善良。
English: Empress Dowager Bo's family is discreet and kind.

古文：且立长故顺，以仁孝闻於天下，便。 
现代文：而且立行次最长的本来就是名正言顺，再加上代王以仁孝播闻天下，立为皇帝是完全妥当的。 
English: Moreover, the emperor with the longest line of succession was originally named Zhenzhen Shun. Coupled with the fact that the reigning king was known throughout the world for his benevolence and filial piety, it was entirely appropriate for him to become emperor.

古文：乃相与共阴使人召代王。
现代文：于是就一起暗地里使人召代王来都城。
English: So they conspired to have the king summoned to the capital.

古文：代王使人辞谢。
现代文：代王派人辞谢。
English: The king's representative sent a letter of resignation.

古文：再反，然後乘六乘传。後九月晦日己酉，至长安，舍代邸。
现代文：使者第二次去迎接，然后代王才乘着六匹马拉着传车，闰九月月底己酉这一天，到达了长安，住在代王的官邸。
English: The envoy went to meet him for the second time, and only then did the king-in-waiting, riding a carriage pulled by six horses, arrive in Chang'an on this day at the end of September, and live in the king-in-waiting's official residence.

古文：大臣皆往谒，奉天子玺上代王，共尊立为天子。
现代文：大臣们都前往拜见，向代王献上天子印玺，一致尊立代王为天子。
English: The ministers all went to pay their respects, presented the emperor's seal to the acting king, and unanimously declared the acting king to be the emperor.

古文：代王数让，群臣固请，然後听。
现代文：代王一再推让，大臣们坚持自己的请求，代王终于答应了。
English: The acting king repeatedly made concessions, the ministers insisted on their request, and the acting king finally agreed.

古文：东牟侯兴居曰： 诛吕氏吾无功，请得除宫。 
现代文：东牟侯刘兴居说： 诛除吕氏我没有功劳，请让我来清理宫廷。 
English: Liu Xingju, the Prince of Dongmou, said: "I have no merit in getting rid of the Lü clan. Please let me clean up the court."

古文：乃与太仆汝阴侯滕公入宫，前谓少帝曰： 足下非刘氏，不当立。 
现代文：他就和太仆汝阴侯滕公进入宫内，上前对少帝说： 你不是刘氏的人，不应当立为皇帝。 
English: He went into the palace with his great-great-grandson, Ruyin Houtengong, and said to the young emperor: "You are not a member of the Liu clan, and should not be made emperor.

古文：乃顾麾左右执戟者掊兵罢去。
现代文：于是回头命令少帝左右执戟的侍卫放下武器离开。
English: So he turned around and ordered the young emperor's bodyguards to put down their weapons and leave.

古文：有数人不肯去兵，宦者令张泽谕告，亦去兵。
现代文：有几个人不肯放下武器，宦官的首领张泽去讲了讲，他们也放下了武器。
English: A few people refused to lay down their weapons. Zhang Ze, the leader of the eunuchs, went to talk to them, and they also laid down their weapons.

古文：滕公乃召乘舆车载少帝出。
现代文：滕公就叫来车驾载着少帝出了宫廷。
English: Teng Gong called a car to drive the young emperor out of the court.

古文：少帝曰： 欲将我安之乎？ 
现代文：少帝说： 想把我拉到哪里去？ 
English: The young emperor said, "Where do you want to take me?"

古文：滕公曰 出就舍。 
现代文：膝公说： 出去住。 
English: My father-in-law said: Go and live there.

古文：舍少府。
现代文：少帝被安置在少府住宿。
English: Xiao Di was placed in accommodation in Xiaofu.

古文：乃奉天子法驾，迎代王於邸。
现代文：接着使用天子的法驾，去代王官邪迎接代王。
English: Then, using the Law of the Son of Heaven, he went to meet the king.

古文：报曰： 宫谨除。 
现代文：向代王报告说： 宫内已经清理过了。 
English: She reported to the king: The palace has been cleaned.

古文：代王即夕入未央宫。
现代文：代王当天晚上进入未央宫。
English: On the evening of the same day, the crown prince entered the Miang Palace.

古文：有谒者十人持戟卫端门，曰： 天子在也，足下何为者而入？ 
现代文：有十名谒者持戟守卫正门，说： 天子在这里，你进去干什么？ 
English: Ten men with halberds guarded the main gate, saying, "Son of God, what are you doing here?

古文：代王乃谓太尉。
现代文：代王把情况告诉了太尉。
English: The acting king informed the captain of the situation.

古文：太尉往谕，谒者十人皆掊兵而去。
现代文：太尉前往作了说明，十名谒者都放下武器走开了。
English: The captain went to explain, and all ten men put down their weapons and walked away.

古文：代王遂入而听政。
现代文：代王随即入宫听理政事。
English: The crown prince then entered the palace to attend to government affairs.

古文：夜，有司分部诛灭梁、淮阳、常山王及少帝於邸。
现代文：夜间，官吏分头把梁王、淮阳王、常山王和少帝杀死在官邸。
English: During the night, officials separately killed King Liang, King Huaiyang, King Changshan and the young emperor at the official residence.

古文：代王立为天子。
现代文：代王立为天子。
English: The king became the son of heaven.

古文：二十三年崩，谥为孝文皇帝。
现代文：在位二十三年去世，谥为孝文皇帝。
English: He died after 23 years on the throne and was succeeded by Emperor Xiaowen.

古文：太史公曰：孝惠皇帝、高后之时，黎民得离战国之苦，君臣俱欲休息乎无为，故惠帝垂拱，高后女主称制，政不出房户，天下晏然。
现代文：太史公说：孝惠皇帝和高后时期，百姓脱离了战国年代的苦难，皇帝和大臣们都想休养生息，无为而治，所以孝惠皇帝垂衣拱手，高后以女主代行皇帝职权，政事不出门户，天下安宁。
English: Taishikong said: During Emperor Xiaohui's and Empress Gao's reigns, the people were freed from the hardships of the Warring States period. The emperor and his ministers wanted to rest and recuperate, and did nothing, so Emperor Xiaohui abdicated, and Empress Gao assumed the duties of the emperor, and no political affairs occurred, and the country was at peace.

古文：刑罚罕用，罪人是希。
现代文：很少使用刑罚，罪人寥寥无几。
English: Punishments are rarely used and the guilty are few.

古文：民务稼穑，衣食滋殖。
现代文：百姓勤于耕种，衣食不断增多。
English: The people are diligent in farming, and their food and clothing are constantly increasing.

古文：高祖犹微，吕氏作妃。
现代文：汉高祖刚刚起事的时候，吕雉就成为他的妻子了。
English: When Emperor Gaozu had just risen to power, Lv Yao became his wife.

古文：及正轩掖，潜用福威。
现代文：等到平定天下，吕后就暗地里作威作福了。
English: By the time the country was pacified, Luguo had secretly become arrogant and self-serving.

古文：志怀安忍，性挟猜疑。置鸩齐悼，残彘戚姬。孝惠崩殒，其哭不悲。
现代文：吕后是个内心坚忍的人，性格残暴多疑，用毒酒毒害齐王刘肥，又残忍的把戚妃砍断手脚叫做人彘，等到惠帝死了，吕后假哭确并不悲伤。
English: Queen Lyu was a patient person at heart. She had a cruel and suspicious personality. She poisoned the king of Qi, Liu Hui, with poisoned wine, and cruelly cut off the hands and feet of her cousin, calling her a human centipede. When Emperor Hui died, Queen Lyu's fake tears were not sad.

古文：诸吕用事，天下示私。
现代文：任用自己的同姓亲戚，私据天下。
English: I am the best in the world at appointing my relatives with the same surname.

古文：大臣菹醢，支孽芟夷。祸盈斯验，苍狗为菑。
现代文：杀死大臣，剪除刘氏诸王后子嗣，祸害百姓，民不聊生。
English: Kill the minister, cut off Liu's sons and daughters, harm the people, and the people do not want to live.

