古文：苏绰，字令绰，武功人，魏侍中则之九世孙也。
现代文：苏绰，字令绰，武功人。魏侍中苏则的九世孙。
English: Su Qiao, Zhiling Qiao, Wu Gongren. He was the ninth generation descendant of the Wei general Su Ze.

古文：累世二千石。
现代文：他们家各代都有人食俸禄二千石。
English: Each generation of their family has received a stipend of 2,000 koku.

古文：父协，武功郡守。
现代文：他的父亲苏协，任武功郡的太守。
English: His father, Su Xie, was the governor of Wugong County.

古文：绰少好学，博览群书，尤善算术。
现代文：苏绰从小酷好学习，博览群书，尤工于算术。
English: Su Kao was good at learning from an early age. He was well-versed in books, especially in arithmetic.

古文：从兄让为汾州刺史，周帝饯于都门外。
现代文：他的从兄苏让任汾州刺史，周文帝宇文泰在京城城门外替他饯行。
English: His brother-in-law, Su Zhanren, wrote the history of Zhangzhou, and Zhou Wendi Yu Wentei walked in his place outside the city gate of Beijing.

古文：临别，谓曰： 卿家子弟之中，谁可任用者？ 
现代文：临分别时问： 你们家的子弟，谁可以被任用？ 
English: At parting, I asked: Which of your sons can be appointed?

古文：让因荐绰。
现代文：苏让推荐了苏绰。
English: Su Zhan recommended Su Qiao.

古文：周文乃召为行台郎中。
现代文：宇文泰便任他为行台郎中。
English: Uwentai then appointed him as one of Gyotai's retainers.

古文：在官岁余，未见知。
现代文：在任上一年多，没有被重用。
English: In office for more than a year, has not been reused.

古文：然诸曹疑事，皆询于绰而后定。
现代文：然而同僚们遇到疑难问题，都向他询问，然后再决定。
English: However, when colleagues have difficult questions, they all ask him and then decide.

古文：所行公文，绰又为之条式。
现代文：颁发的公文，他也为之规定格式。
English: He also prescribes the format for official documents to be issued.

古文：台中咸称其能。
现代文：行台中都称赞他的才能。
English: His talent has been praised in the industry.

古文：周文与仆射周惠达论事，惠达不能对，请出外议之。
现代文：宇文泰与仆射周惠达商议事情，惠达不能拿出意见，请求到外面与别人商量一下。
English: Yu Wentai and his servant Zhou Huida discussed the matter. Huida could not come up with an opinion and asked to go outside to discuss with others.

古文：乃召绰，告以其事，绰即为量定。
现代文：他找来苏绰，告知事情的原委，苏绰马上向他谈出看法。
English: He called Su Qiao to inform the original committee of the matter, and Su Qiao immediately told him his opinion.

古文：惠达入呈，周文称善，谓曰： 谁与卿为此议者？ 
现代文：惠达入内呈报，宇文泰认为很好，问： 谁给你出的这个主意？ 
English: Huida went inside to present the report, and Wu Wentai thought it was very good, and asked: Who gave you this idea?

古文：惠达以绰对，因称其有王佐才。
现代文：惠达回答是苏绰，并称赞他有辅助天子的才干。
English: Huida replied that it was Su Qiao, and praised him for his ability to assist Tianzi.

古文：周文曰： 吾亦闻之久矣。 
现代文：宇文泰说 ：我也很早就听说过他了。 
English: "I've heard about him for a long time," says Uwentai.

古文：寻除著作佐郎。
现代文：不久，命他为著作郎。
English: Soon, he was called to be a scribe.

古文：属周文与公卿往昆明池观渔，行至城西汉故仓地，顾问左右，莫有知者。
现代文：宇文泰与公卿大臣前往昆明池看捕鱼，走到城西西汉的仓库故址，问左右这是什么地方，没有人知道。
English: Yu Wentai and the Minister of Justice went to Kunming Pool to watch the fishing, walked to the former site of the warehouse in the west of the city, and asked around what kind of place it was. No one knew.

古文：或曰： 苏绰博物多通，请问之。 
现代文：有人说： 苏绰博通文物，请问问他。 
English: Some people said: Su Zhe Broad Cultural Relics, please ask him.

古文：周文乃召绰问，具以状对。
现代文：宇文泰召来苏绰询问，他详细回答。
English: Su Qiao was summoned by Yu Wentai for questioning, and he answered in detail.

古文：周文大悦，因问天地造化之始，历代兴亡之迹。
现代文：宇文泰非常高兴，因而问他天地万物形成的开始，历代兴起败亡的过程。
English: Yu Wentai was very happy, so he asked him about the beginning of the formation of heaven and earth, and the process of the rise and fall of all ages.

古文：绰既有口辩，应对如流。
现代文：他善于辞令，应对如流。
English: He's a smooth talker.

古文：周文益嘉之，乃与绰并马徐行至池，竟不设网罟而还。
现代文：宇文泰更喜欢他，与他并马慢慢行到昆明池，竟忘记设网捕鱼就回来了。
English: Uwentai preferred him, and slowly walked with him to Kunming Pond, but he forgot to set up a fishing net and came back.

古文：遂留绰至夜，问以政道，卧而听之。
现代文：又把他留下来直谈到深夜，询问他为政之道，躺在那里认真听他讲述。
English: He also kept him up late into the night, quizzing him on politics and lying there listening intently.

古文：绰于是指陈帝王之道，兼述申、韩之要。
现代文：苏绰于是陈说兴国立业的道理，并阐述申子和韩非子学说的要旨。
English: Su Qiao then expounded the principle of rejuvenating the national cause, and expounded the essence of the teachings of Shen Zi and Han Feizi.

古文：周文乃起，整衣危坐，不觉膝之前席。
现代文：宇文泰听着便起身，正襟危坐，不自觉地用膝盖趋向前面。
English: Upon hearing this, Uwentai got up, sat up straight, and involuntarily moved forward with his knees.

古文：语遂达曙不厌。
现代文：两人说到天明也不知道疲倦。
English: Both of them said that they did not feel tired even at the crack of dawn.

古文：诘朝，谓周惠达曰： 苏绰真奇士，吾方任之以政。 
现代文：第二天上朝，宇文泰对周惠达说： 苏绰真是一个奇才，我要让他从政。 
English: In the morning of the next day, Yu Wentai said to Zhou Huida: Su Qiao is really a prodigy, I want him to go into politics.

古文：即拜大行台左丞，参典机密。
现代文：立即授予他大行台左丞，让他参与国家的机密。
English: He was immediately given the title of Grand Gangdae Zuojo, allowing him to be involved in state secrets.

古文：自是宠遇日隆。
现代文：从此，宇文泰对他宠爱日益隆重。
English: Since then, he has been increasingly favored by Uwentai.

古文：绰始制文案程式，硃出墨入，及计帐、户籍之法。
现代文：他开始制定文案上的各种格式，以及记帐、户籍的统计方法。
English: He began to develop various formats for copywriting, as well as statistical methods for accounting and household registration.

古文：大统三年，齐神武三道入寇，诸将咸欲分兵御之，独绰意与周文同。遂并力拒窦泰，擒之于潼关。
现代文：大统三年，高欢率三路人马入侵西魏，将领们都主张分兵抗御。只有苏绰与宇文泰的意见相同，让军队全力对付窦泰一路，在潼关将他俘获。
English: In the third year of the Great Reunification, there were three invasions of the Western Wei Dynasty, and the generals all advocated the division of troops to resist. Only Su Qiao and Yu Wentai shared the same opinion, and let the army deal with Dou Tai all the way, and captured him in Shaoguan.

古文：封美阳县伯。
现代文：朝廷封苏绰为美阳县伯。
English: The imperial court named Su Zhuo as the top official of Meiyang County.

古文：十一年，授大行台度支尚书，领著作，兼司农卿。
现代文：大统十一年，封他为大行台度支尚书，负责著作，兼司农卿。
English: In the 11th year of the Great Reunification, he was given the title of Da Xing Tai Duo Shi Shang Shu (大行台度支尚書), responsible for writing, and also the Secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture.

古文：周文方欲革易时政，务弘强国富人之道，故绰得尽其智能，赞成其事。
现代文：宇文泰想改革政治，志在弘扬强国富民之道，所以苏绰能尽情发挥他的智慧才能。
English: Uven Tai wanted to reform politics, and aspired to promote the way of strengthening the country and enriching the people, so Su Zhuo was able to give full play to his wisdom and talent.

古文：减官员，置二长，并置屯田以资军国。
现代文：他赞成宇文泰的改革，主张减少官员，设置二长，并实行屯田以供给军队。
English: He was in favour of the reform of Uwentai, advocating the reduction of officials, the establishment of two chiefs, and the implementation of military garrisons to supply the army.

古文：又为六条诏书，奏施行之。
现代文：又起草了六条诏书，奏报朝廷施行。
English: He also drafted six imperial decrees, which were reported to the imperial court for implementation.

古文：凡理人之体，当先理已心，心者一身之主，百行之本。
现代文：其一是 先修心 ，他说： 凡是要治理人的身体，应首先治理自己的内心。内心是一身的主宰，所有行为的根本。
English: One is to cultivate the mind first, he said: If you want to govern a person's body, you should first govern your own heart. The heart is the master of the body and the foundation of all actions.

古文：心不清静，则思虑妄生。
现代文：内心不清静，则各种思虑就会产生。
English: If the mind is not calm, all kinds of worries will arise.

古文：思虑妄生，则见理不明。见理不明，则是非谬乱。
现代文：各种思虑产生了，则对道理认识得就不清楚，对道理认识不清楚，是非就会混淆。
English: If various concerns arise, the understanding of the truth will be unclear, and if the understanding of the truth is unclear, right and wrong will be confused.

古文：是非既乱，则一身不能自理，安能理人也？
现代文：是非混淆，连自己都不能管得住，怎么能治理别人呢？
English: Are they so confused that they cannot even govern themselves? How can they govern others?

古文：是以理人之要，在于清心而已。
现代文：所以，治理别人的关键在于清静自己的内心。
English: Therefore, the key to governing others is to be calm in one's heart.

古文：夫所谓清心者，非不贪货财之谓，乃欲使心气清和，志意端静。
现代文：所谓清静自己的内心，不是指不贪取财货，而是使心境清静平和，志操端正静谧。
English: The so-called quieting of one's heart does not mean not to be greedy for wealth and goods, but to make one's mood calm and peaceful, and one's spirit upright and tranquil.

古文：心和志静，则邪僻之虑无因而作。
现代文：心境平和，志操清静，邪念就无法产生。
English: If one's state of mind is peaceful and one's aspiration is clear, evil thoughts cannot arise.

古文：邪僻不作，则凡所思念无不皆得至公之理。
现代文：邪念没有产生，那么他所考虑的无不都是至大至公的道理。
English: If evil thoughts do not arise, then everything he considers is the greatest and most public principle.

古文：率至公之理以临其人，则彼下人孰不从化？
现代文：用至大至公的道理治理别人，下面的人谁不洗心向化？
English: Govern others with the principle of the greatest and the most public, the people below who do not wash their hearts?

古文：是以称理人之本，先在理心。
现代文： 其次还在于治理自身。君主的身体是百姓的圭表，是国家的标的。
English: Secondly, it lies in the governance itself. The monarch's body is the people's guidebook and the country's standard.

古文：其次又在理身。凡人君之身者，乃百姓之表，一国之的也。表不正，不可求直影；的不明，不可责射中。今君身不能自理，而望理百姓，是犹曲表而求直影也；君行不能自修，而欲百姓修行者，是犹无的而责射中也。
现代文：圭表不正，就不可能得到直的影子；标的不明，就不可能要求人们射中，如果君主自身还不能自理，而去治理百姓，就好像圭表弯曲，而却要求影子顺直；君主的道德不能培养，而却想让百姓培养道德，就好像没有标的却要求人们射中目标一样。
English: If the watch is not right, it is impossible to get a straight shadow; if the target is not clear, it is impossible to ask people to hit it. If the monarch himself cannot take care of himself, but governs the people, it is as if the watch is bent, but asks the shadow to be straight; the monarch's morality cannot be cultivated, but wants the people to cultivate morality, just as if there is no target, but asks people to hit the target.

古文：故为人君者，必心如清水，形如白玉，躬行仁义，躬行孝悌，躬行忠信，躬行礼让，躬行廉平，躬行俭约，然后继之以无倦，加之以明察。
现代文：所以做国君的，必定要心如清水，形如白玉，躬行仁义，躬行孝悌，躬行忠信，躬行礼让，躬行廉洁公平，躬行勤俭节约，然后再加上不知疲倦，加上明察秋毫。
English: Therefore, to be a sovereign, one must have a heart like clear water, shaped like a white jade, practice benevolence and righteousness, practice filial piety, practice loyalty, practice courtesy, practice honesty and fairness, practice diligence and thrift, and then add tirelessness, and add discernment.

古文：天地之性，唯人为贵。明其有中和之心，仁恕之行，异于木石，不同禽兽，故贵之耳。然性无常守，随化而迁。
现代文：再用这八条去训诫别人，人们才会对你畏惧而又敬爱，把你作为准则去仿效。 其二是 敦教化 ，他说： 人的性情不会固定不变，常随教化而改变。
English: If you use these eight precepts to discipline others, people will fear and respect you and follow you as a standard.The second is to avoid indoctrination, he said: People's dispositions are not fixed and invariable, but often change with indoctrination.

古文：化于敦朴者则质直，化于浇伪者则浮薄。
现代文：用淳厚质朴的品德去教育导化，则会变得质朴正直；用浅薄虚伪的品质去教育导化，则会变得浮泛薄劣。
English: If you use a pure and simple moral quality to guide your education, you will become simple and honest; if you use a shallow and hypocritical quality to guide your education, you will become superficial and inferior.

古文：浮薄者则衰弊之风，质直者则淳和之俗。
现代文：浮泛薄劣则是世道衰败的风气，质朴正直则是世道淳厚祥和的风俗。
English: Flamboyance, thinness and inferiority are the customs of a decadent world, while simplicity and honesty are the customs of a chaste and peaceful world.

古文：衰弊则祸乱交兴，淳和则天下自治。
现代文：衰败则祸乱交替兴起，淳厚则天下自然就会大治。
English: If the country is decadent, disasters and disorders will arise alternately, and if the country is prosperous, the country will be governed well.

古文：夫化者，贵能扇之以淳风，浸之以太和，被之以道德，示之以朴素。
现代文：自古国家的安危兴亡，无不由教化所定。 教化，贵在能够鼓动淳厚的风尚，传播祥和的气息，布施道德的恩泽，昭示朴素的习气。
English: Since ancient times, the safety, prosperity and death of a country have all been determined by enlightenment. Enlightenment is valuable in that it can encourage a sober style, spread a peaceful atmosphere, bestow moral grace, and show a simple habit.

古文：使百姓亹亹，日迁于善，邪伪之心，嗜欲之性，潜以消化，而不知其所以然，此之谓化也。
现代文：能使百姓勤勉忙碌，天天向善。邪恶虚伪的心思，贪婪嗜欲的性情，会潜移默化，逐渐改正，而自己却不知不觉，这样就是所谓的教化。
English: It can make the people diligently busy and do good every day. The evil and hypocritical mind, the greedy and lustful temperament, will gradually change and gradually correct themselves, but they are not aware of it. This is the so-called enlightenment.

古文：然后教之以孝悌，使人慈爱；教之以仁顺，使人和睦；教之以礼义，使人敬让。
现代文：然后教育他们孝敬父母，热爱兄弟，使之仁慈友爱；教育他们仁义和顺，使之团结和睦；教育他们懂得礼仪道德，使之互敬互让。
English: Then teach them to respect their parents, love their brothers and sisters, make them kind and friendly; teach them to be kind and obedient, make them united and harmonious; teach them to understand etiquette and morality, make them respect each other.

古文：慈爱则不遗其亲，和睦则无怨于人，敬让则不竞于物。
现代文：仁慈友爱就不会遗漏任何一个人不去亲近，和睦团结就不会怨恨别人，互敬互让就不会争夺抢掠。
English: Benevolence and fraternity will not miss any one not to be close, harmony and unity will not resent others, mutual respect and mutual concession will not compete for plunder.

古文：三者既备，则王道成矣。
现代文：三者都具备了，那么治理天下的天道就形成了。
English: If all three are available, then the heavenly way of governing the world is formed.

古文：此之谓教也。
现代文：这就是所说的教化。 
English: This is called indoctrination.

古文：夫衣食所以足者，由于地利尽。
现代文：其三是 尽地利 ，他说： 人们的衣食之所以能得到满足，是由于地尽其利。
English: The third is to make the best of the situation, he said: People's food and clothing can be satisfied because they make the best of the situation.

古文：地利所以尽者，由于劝课有方。
现代文：土地之所以能尽其利，是由于劝课农桑有方。
English: The reason why the land can do its best is due to the fact that there is a way to persuade farmers.

古文：主此教者，在乎牧守令长而已。
现代文：负责这项任务的，是各级地方长官啊。
English: Local governors at all levels are responsible for this task.

古文：人者冥也，智不自周，必待劝教然后得尽其力。
现代文：百姓们是昏冥的，自己思考得不周严，必须劝戒教育才能尽他们的力量从事农桑。
English: The people are dim-witted, they do not think carefully, and they must be exhorted and educated in order to do their best in farming.

古文：诸州郡县，每至岁首，必戎敕部人，无问少长，但能操持农器者，皆令就田，垦发以时，勿失其所。
现代文：各州郡县的守土官吏每到一年伊始，一定要告诫所辖百姓，不管年纪大小，只要能拿动农具的，都要下田，按时垦田种植，不要丧失农时。
English: At the beginning of every year, the soil conservation officials of all states, counties and counties must warn the people under their jurisdiction that no matter how old they are, as long as they can handle farm tools, they must go to the fields and plant the fields on time, so as not to lose farming time.

古文：及布种既讫，嘉苗须理，麦秋在野，蚕停于室，若此之时，皆宜少长悉力，男女并功，若扬汤救火，寇盗之将至，然后可使农夫不失其业，蚕妇得就其功。
现代文：播种完毕，禾苗需要管理，小麦登场，秋苗长在地里，蚕放在屋里，此时男女老幼都应该努力，那紧张的情形就像用水救火，就好像强盗将要到来。这样才可以使农夫不失去他们的本业，蚕妇能够完成她们的工作。
English: When the sowing is completed, the seedlings need to be managed, the wheat is on the scene, the autumn seedlings grow in the ground, and the silkworms are placed in the house. At this time, both men and women should work hard. The tense situation is like using water to put out a fire, as if a robber is about to arrive. This is the only way for farmers not to lose their business, and for the silkworms to complete their work.

古文：若游手怠惰，早归晚出，好逸恶劳，不勤事业者，则正长牒名郡县，守令随事加罚，罪一劝百。
现代文：如果游手好闲，晚出早归，好逸恶劳，不尽力从事农桑的，里正家长将他们的名字报到郡县，郡守县令随时予以惩罚。
English: If they are idle, go out late and come back early, are lazy, and do not do their best to engage in agricultural work, their parents should report their names to the county, and the county magistrate will punish them at any time.

古文：此则明宰之教也。
现代文：惩处一人，教育千百，这是明达智慧的地方长官的职责啊。
English: Punish one person, educate thousands, this is the duty of a local magistrate who is knowledgeable and wise.

古文：夫百亩之田，必春耕之，夏种之，秋收之，然后冬食之。此三时者，农之要月也。
现代文： 田地必须春耕，夏种，秋收，然后冬天才能食用。春、夏、秋这三时，是农夫重要的月份。
English: The fields must be cultivated in spring, sown in summer, harvested in autumn, and then eaten in winter. Spring, summer, and autumn are important months for farmers.

古文：若失其一时，则谷不可得而食。
现代文：如果失掉其中的一个时机，就无法得到谷物而会没有吃的。
English: If you miss one of those opportunities, you don't get the grain and you don't eat.

古文：故先王之戒曰： 一夫不耕，天下必有受其饥者；一妇不织，天下必有受其寒者。 
现代文：所以先王告诫百姓说： 一个农夫不种田，天下必然有人受饿；一个农妇不织布，天下必定有人挨冻。 
English: Therefore, the former king warned the people, "If a farmer does not farm, there must be people starving in the world; if a farmer's wife does not weave cloth, there must be people freezing to death in the world."

古文：若此三时，不务省事，而令人废农者，是则绝人之命，驱以就死然。
现代文：如果在这三个时候不明白它们的重要，让农夫们不能务农，是断绝普天下人的性命，赶他们去死。
English: If you do not understand the importance of these three times, if you do not allow farmers to farm, you are cutting off the lives of people all over the world and driving them to death.

古文：单劣之户，及无牛之家，劝令有无相通，使得兼济。
现代文：那些没有劳力，没有耕牛的人家，要劝他们互通有无，使得相互周济。
English: Those who have no labor and no oxen should be persuaded to exchange what they have for what they do not have, so that they can help each other.

古文：如不能尔，则必陷于刑辟矣。其四，擢贤良，曰：天生蒸黎，不能自化，故必立君以理之。人君不能独理，故必置臣以佐之。
现代文： 为政不要过于琐碎，琐碎了就引起人们厌烦；劝课农桑不能过于简单，简单了人们就会懈怠。善于为政的官吏，必须根据时机而确定繁与简。所以《诗经》上说 ：既不刚烈，又不柔软，颁布的政令合适宽缓，各种福气都会到来。 
English: Politics should not be too trivial; if it is too trivial, people will get bored; the exhortation to the peasants should not be too simple; if it is too simple, people will slack off. Officials who are good at politics must determine the complexity and simplicity according to the occasion. Therefore, the "Book of Songs" says: it is neither stiff nor soft, the promulgated decree is appropriate and gentle, and all kinds of blessings will come.

古文：上自帝王，下及列国，置臣得贤则安，失贤则乱，此乃自然之理，百王不能易也。
现代文：如果不是这样，则一定会成为滥施刑罚，杀害无辜的暴政。 其四是 擢贤良 ，他说：
English: If not, it will surely become a tyranny of indiscriminate punishment and killing of the innocent. The fourth is to promote the virtuous, he said:

古文：今刺史县令，悉有僚吏，皆佐助之人也。
现代文： 现在的刺史、县令，都有幕僚官吏，这些都是辅助人员。
English: Present-day magistrates and prefectural governors have staff officers, all of whom are auxiliary personnel.

古文：刺史府官则命于天朝；其州吏以下，并牧守自置。
现代文：刺史、太守都是由朝廷任命；州中的吏役以下的人都由刺史和太守自己选用。
English: Sashishi and Taishou were both appointed by the imperial court; people below the rank of shushu officials were selected by Sashishi and Taishou themselves.

古文：自昔以来，州郡大夫，但取门资，多不择贤良；末曹小吏，唯试刀笔，并不问志行。
现代文：自古以来，州郡中的僚佐，只看他们的门第出身，大多不选择贤能的人；选拔低级小吏，只测试他的笔墨文字，并不考虑他们的道德节操。
English: Since ancient times, most of the provincial and county officials did not choose the most capable people, but only looked at their lineage. They only tested the pen and ink of low-level officials, and did not consider their moral integrity.

古文：此乃未之思也，非适理之论。
现代文：今后选拔人才，应当不受门第出身的限制，主要看他个人的才干。
English: In the future, the selection of talents should not be limited by their family background, but should mainly depend on their personal talents.

古文：所以然者，古人有言；明主聿兴，不降佐于昊天；大人基命，不擢才于后土。
现代文： 今天负责铨选人才的官吏，大多说自己管辖的地方没有贤能的人才，不知道应该举荐谁。这是不高明的看法，是毫无道理的见解。我之所以这样认为，古人说过：英明的君主振兴国家，并不要苍天送给他人才；道德高尚的人受命任事，不向土神和地神那里拔擢人才。
English: Today, most of the officials in charge of selecting talents say that there are no talented people in the places under their jurisdiction, and they do not know whom to recommend. This is not a clever view, it is an unreasonable view. The reason why I think so is that the ancients said: Wise monarchs revitalize the country, and do not want the heavens to give talents to others; people with high morals are appointed to do things, and do not select talents from the gods of the earth and the gods of the earth.

古文：常引一世之人，理一世之务。
现代文：他们常任用一个时代的人才，去治理一代的政务。
English: They always use the talents of an era to govern the government affairs of a generation.

古文：故殷、周不待稷、契之臣，魏、晋无假萧、曹之佐。
现代文：所以，殷代和周代不等待后稷和契、尧、舜的大臣，魏、晋也不需假借萧何、曹参的帮助。
English: Therefore, the ministers of the Yin and Zhou dynasties did not wait for the successors of the Wei and Jin dynasties, Wei and Jin did not need to borrow the help of Xiao He and Cao San.

古文：仲尼曰： 十室之邑，必有忠信如丘者焉。 
现代文：孔子说： 十家之中，就必定会有像我这样忠诚和守信用的人。 
English: Confucius said, "Among ten families, there is bound to be someone like me who is loyal and trustworthy."

古文：岂有万家之都，而云无士？
现代文：哪有拥有万户的都城，而却说没有人才呢？
English: Where is the capital city that has millions of households, but claims to have no talent?

古文：但求之不勤，择之不审，或授之不得其所，任之不尽其材，故云无耳。
现代文：只是寻求得不勤奋，选择得不审慎，或授予的官职不得其所，任用的职务不能使他们施展才华，所以才推说没有人才。
English: It is only because they are not diligently sought after, or their choice is not prudent, or the office they are given does not suit them, or the position they are appointed to does not allow them to use their talents, that they are said to be talentless.

古文：古人云： 千人之秀曰英，万人之英曰俊。 
现代文：古人说： 千人之秀曰英，万人之英曰俊。 
English: The ancients said: "The most outstanding among a thousand is called Ying, and the most outstanding among ten thousand is called Jun."

古文：今之智效一官，行闻一邦者，岂非近英俊之士也？
现代文：今天那些靠智慧效命官职，行为在一方声名播远的，难道不是类似英俊杰出的人才吗！
English: Aren't today's officials, who rely on their wisdom and whose actions are widely known, similar to handsome and outstanding talents?

古文：但能勤而审之，去虚取实，各得州郡之最而用之，则人无多少，皆足化矣。
现代文：只要能勤勉而慎重地去寻找，去掉虚饰去追求实际，认真选拔州郡中最优秀的人才而加以任用，不管有多少，都可以教化人民，谁能说没有人才？
English: As long as we can diligently and prudently search for, remove the frills to pursue reality, carefully select the best talents in the state and county and appoint them, no matter how many, we can educate the people, who can say that there is no talent?

古文：孰云无贤！夫良玉未剖，与瓦石相类；名骥未驰，与驽马相杂。
现代文： 美玉未经雕琢，与瓦片和石头十分相似；好马没有奔驰，与劣马没有什么不同。
English: Beauty is uncut, much like shingle and stone; a good horse is no better than a bad horse.

古文：及其剖而莹之，驰而试之，玉石驽骥，然后始分。
现代文：等到将玉石雕凿磨光，骑上好马奔腾跳跃，美玉与石头，好马与劣马才能分开。
English: Wait until the jade carving is chiseled and polished, ride a good horse to gallop and jump, beautiful jade and stone, good horse and bad horse can be separated.

古文：彼贤士之未用也，混于凡品，竟何以异。要任之以事业，责之以成务，方与彼庸流较然不同。
现代文：那些贤能的人才没有使用，与平庸的人混杂一起，也没有什么两样，要交给他们事业，让他们担负任务，才能看出他们与那些平庸之徒完全不同。
English: Those talented people are not used, mixed with mediocre people, there is no difference, to give them the cause, let them take on the task, to see that they are completely different from those mediocrities.

古文：或吕望之屠钓，百里奚之饭牛，宁生之扣角，管夷吾之三败，当此之时，悠悠之徒，岂谓其贤？及升王朝，登霸国，积数十年，功成事立，始识其奇士也。
现代文：古代的吕尚垂钓，百里奚喂牛，宁戚扣打牛角唱歌，管仲三战三退的时候，那些凡夫俗子却怎么也不会说他们有无比贤能的才干；等他们进入朝堂，掌握重任，用数十年功夫，建立了不朽的事业，才会认识到他们是有奇异才能的人才。
English: In ancient times, when Lushan was fishing, Bailiyao was feeding cattle, Ningzizhong was beating bull horns and singing, and Guanzhong was fighting three wars and retreating three times, those ordinary people would not say that they had incomparable talents; until they entered the imperial court, mastered heavy tasks, and built an immortal cause with decades of effort, they would only realize that they were people with extraordinary talents.

古文：于是后世称之，不容于口。
现代文：于是后世人称赞他们的声音不绝于口。
English: As a result, the world has been praising them ever since.

古文：若识此理，则贤可求，士可择。得贤而任之，得士而使之，则天下之理，何向而不可成也？然善官人者，必先省其官。
现代文：人才必定从不出名到声名大振，功业必定一点点积累才能辉煌远大，哪有不委任给他职务他就能成功，不发挥他的才能他就能使事业兴旺发达？ 然而，要善于选拔官吏，一定首先精简官吏的数目。
English: A man's talent must never be famous to be famous, his work must be a little bit of accumulation to be brilliant and far-reaching, how can he succeed without assigning him a post, and he can make his career flourish without exerting his talent? However, to be good at selecting officials, we must first streamline the number of officials.

古文：官省，则善人易充。
现代文：官吏数目少，则贤能的人容易充任。
English: If the number of officials is small, then it is easy for a capable person to fill the post.

古文：善人易充，则事无不理。
现代文：贤能的人充任，事情就没有办不好的。
English: If a capable person is put in charge, nothing will go wrong.

古文：官烦，则必杂不善之人。
现代文：官吏数量多，必定会混杂进去不善良不贤能的人。
English: A large number of officials will inevitably be mixed with people who are not good or virtuous.

古文：杂不善之人，则政必有得失。
现代文：混杂一些不善良不贤能的人，则政治一定会遭受损失。
English: If some bad and incompetent people are mixed in, politics will definitely suffer losses.

古文：故语曰： 官省则事省，事省则人清；官烦则事烦，事烦则人浊。 
现代文：所以有人说： 官少则事少，事少则人纯洁；官多则事多，事多则人员混杂。 
English: Therefore, some people say: less officials means fewer things, and fewer things mean purer people; more officials means more things, and more things mean a mixture of people.

古文：清浊之由，在于官之烦省。
现代文： 选拔人才的道路不是只有一条，然而获得时要慎重，任用时必须试用和考察，从他的住家到他的乡党邻里，都要调查访问，那么，对这个人的情况就会很清楚，贤与不贤就能区别开来。 其五是 恤狱讼 ，他说：
English: There is more than one way to select talents, but one must be prudent when acquiring talents, must try and inspect when appointing, and must investigate and visit from his home to his township party neighborhood, then the situation of this person will be very clear, and it will be able to distinguish between the virtuous and the wicked.

古文：又当深思远大，念存德教。先王之制曰：与杀无辜，宁赦有罪；与其害善，宁其利淫。
现代文： 要先用辞听、色听、气听、身听、目听五种方法审理案情，再参验证据，认真观察当事人的表情行迹，仔细识别案件的细节，使罪恶无所隐瞒，罪犯一定能够抓获。然后根据各种情况量刑，轻重都很恰当。 先王的制度规定：与其杀死无辜，宁可赦免有罪的人；与其危害善良，宁可利于邪恶。
English: It is necessary to first use five methods of hearing, listening, listening, listening, listening, and listening to the case, and then examine the evidence, carefully observe the facial expressions and movements of the parties, carefully identify the details of the case, so that the crime has nothing to hide and the criminal can be caught. Then, according to various circumstances, the severity of the sentence is appropriate. The system of the former king stipulates: rather than killing the innocent, it is better to pardon the guilty; rather than endangering the good, it is better to benefit the evil.

古文：明必不得中，宁滥舍有罪，不谬害善人也。
现代文：公开惩罚不一定准确，宁肯舍弃那些有罪的人不管，也不轻易伤害好人。
English: Public punishment is not necessarily accurate, preferring to abandon those who are guilty, rather than easily hurt good people.

古文：今之从政者则不然，深文巧劾，宁致善人于法，不免有罪于刑。
现代文：今天从政执法的人都不是这样。他们搬弄法律条文，罗织周纳，巧为弹劾，陷人于罪。宁肯使好人受法律惩处，也不让有罪的人免于刑戮。
English: Today's politicians and law enforcers are not like that. They manipulate the legal provisions, weave excuses, cleverly use impeachment, and trap people in crime. They would rather have good people punished by the law than allow the guilty to escape punishment.

古文：所以然者，非皆好杀人也，但云为吏宁酷，可免后患。
现代文：他们之所以这样，不是因为都喜好杀人，只是认为官吏严酷，可免去种种后患。
English: The reason for this is not that they all like to kill, but that they think that officials are harsh and can avoid all kinds of sequelae.

古文：此则情存自便，不念至公，奉法如此，皆奸人也。
现代文：这些人根据自己的感情任意处治无辜，不考虑公正无私。这样奉行法律的人，都是邪恶的小人。
English: These people arbitrarily punish the innocent according to their own feelings, without considering fairness and selflessness. People who follow the law in this way are evil villains.

古文：若深奸巨猾，伤化败俗，悖乱人伦，不忠不孝，故为背道，杀一利百，以清王化，重刑可也。
现代文： 如果是老奸巨滑，伤风败俗，背逆人伦，不忠不孝，故意犯罪的大恶大奸，杀一儆百，以使帝王的教化能够纯洁清静，施用重刑也是可以的。
English: If the traitor is slippery, corrupt, unethical, disloyal, unfilial, and a deliberate criminal, it is necessary to kill a hundred times, so that the emperor's enlightenment can be pure and quiet, and it is also possible to impose heavy punishment.

古文：识此二途，则刑政尽矣。其六，均赋役，曰：
现代文：懂得以上两个方面，那么刑政就算很完善了。 其六是 均赋役 ，他说：
English: If you understand the above two aspects, then the criminal justice system is considered to be very complete.

古文：圣人之大宝曰位。何以位，曰仁。何以聚人，曰财。
现代文： 国家如果没有钱财，就不能保存，所以三王五霸以来都有征税的制度。
English: If a country doesn't have money, it can't be saved, so there has been a taxation system since the Three Kingdoms and Five Dynasties.

古文：明先王必以财聚人，以仁也。
现代文：虽然赋税的轻重程度不一样，而作用却是相同的。
English: Although the importance of taxation is different, the effect is the same.

古文：今寇逆未平，军国费广，虽未遑减省，以恤人瘼，然宜令平均，使下无怨。
现代文：现在敌寇还没有平定，军务与国政的开支十分浩大，虽然无法减少，以体恤人民的疾苦，然而也应该在征收时平均，使百姓没有怨言。
English: Now that the enemy invaders have not been subdued, the military and state affairs expenditure is very huge. Although it cannot be reduced, in order to sympathize with the people's suffering, it should also be levied at the time of collection, so that the people have no complaints.

古文：平均者，不舍豪强而征贫弱，不纵奸巧而困愚拙，此之谓均也。
现代文：平均，就是不放过豪强地主，只征收贫弱无告的百姓们的赋税；不放纵奸刁巧伪的人，而加征那些诚实朴拙的平民。
English: On average, that is, do not let go of the powerful landlords, only collect taxes from the poor and weak people who do not report; do not indulge the treacherous and cunning people, but tax those honest and simple civilians.

古文：故圣人曰： 盖均无贫。 然财货之生，其功不易。
现代文： 征收租税时虽然有粗略的规定，然而，斟酌交税人的贫富情况而确定缴纳赋税的多少、顺序的先后，都由家长里正提议，由太守县令决定。
English: Although there are rough regulations for tax collection, the amount of tax to be paid and the order in which it should be paid are determined by the parents and decided by the county magistrate, taking into account the wealth and poverty of the taxpayer.

古文：惟帝敬厥始，慎厥终，以跻日新之德，则我群臣，敢不夙夜对扬休哉！
现代文：如果斟酌得宜，就会政情通达，百姓喜悦；如果处理不当，就会使官吏行奸作弊，百姓叫苦连天。 
English: If it is properly handled, the political situation will be transparent and the people will be happy; if it is handled improperly, it will cause officials to commit treason and cheat, and the people will be miserable.

古文：惟兹大谊，未光于四表，以迈种德，俾九域幽遐，咸昭奉元后之明训，率迁于道，永膺无疆之休。 帝曰： 钦哉。 
现代文：宇文泰对他起草的六条诏书非常重视，常常放在座位的右边。又命令百官们熟读背诵，各地的刺史、太守、县令不熟悉六条诏书和计帐的，不能做官。自从西晋以来，文风竞为浮华绔丽，以后相沿成习。宇文泰想革除弊端，利用魏帝祭祀宗庙，群臣聚集的机会，命苏绰起草《大诰》，奏报天子施行。《大诰》行文朴实，内容丰赡，天子御批 钦哉 。
English: Uwentai attached great importance to the six edicts he drafted and often placed them on the right side of the seat. He also ordered the officials to memorize and recite them. Those who were not familiar with the six edicts and accounts could not serve as officials. Since the Western Jin Dynasty, the style of writing was flashy and beautiful, and later became a habit. Uwentai wanted to eliminate the drawbacks and took advantage of the opportunity for Wei Emperor to worship the ancestral temple and gather a group of ministers. He ordered Su Qiao to draft the "Great Edict" and submit it to Tianzi for implementation. The "Great Edict" was written in a simple style, with rich

古文：自是之后，文笔皆依此体。
现代文：从此以后，文章都按这种格式。
English: Articles have followed this format ever since.

古文：绰性俭素，不事产业，家无余财。
现代文：苏绰性情节俭，不经营家产，家中没有多余的钱财。
English: Su Qiao is frugal by nature. He does not manage the family property, and there is no extra money in the family.

古文：以海内未平，常以天下为已任。
现代文：因海内尚未平静，他常把天下的事作为自己的责任。
English: As the situation at home was not yet calm, he often regarded the affairs of the world as his own responsibility.

古文：博求贤俊，共弘政道，凡所荐达，皆至大官。
现代文：他广求贤才俊杰，共同弘扬为政之道。凡是他举荐的人才，都升到很高的官位。
English: He widely solicited talents and promoted the way of politics. All the talents he recommended were promoted to high official positions.

古文：周文亦推心委任，而无间言焉。
现代文：宇文泰也与他推心置腹，委以重任，从没有别的想法。
English: Yu Wentai also put his heart and soul into working with him, entrusting him with important tasks, and never had any other ideas.

古文：或出游，常预署空纸以授绰，若须有处分，则随事施行。
现代文：宇文泰如果外出巡游，常把预先签署姓名的空纸交给苏绰，如果有需要处理的事情，他就可以随时施行。
English: If Yu Wentai is out on a tour, he often hands over a blank piece of paper with his name signed in advance to Su Qiao. If there is anything that needs to be dealt with, he can do it at any time.

古文：及还，启知而已。
现代文：回来后，苏绰只需让他知道就行了。
English: When he comes back, Su Qiao only needs to let him know.

古文：绰常谓为国之道，当爱人如慈父，训人如严师。
现代文：苏绰常说治国的方法，应当像慈父一样爱护百姓，像严师一样教育百姓。
English: Su Qiao often said that the way to govern the country should be to love the people like a loving father and educate the people like a strict teacher.

古文：每与公卿议论，自昼达夜，事无巨细，若指诸掌。
现代文：每次与公卿大臣议论朝政，从白天到夜晚，事无巨细，都了如指掌。
English: Every time he discussed the politics of the Imperial Court with court nobles and ministers, he knew every detail from day to night.

古文：积思劳倦，遂成气疾。十二年，卒于位，时年四十九。
现代文：由于过度劳累，便积成疾病，大统十三年在官位上去世，享年四十九岁。
English: Due to overwork, he developed an illness, and died at the age of forty-nine, thirteen years after his accession to the throne.

古文：周文痛惜之，哀动左右。
现代文：宇文泰十分悲痛惋惜，哀伤的情绪感动了周围的人。
English: Yu Wentai was very sad and regretful, and the sad mood moved the people around him.

古文：及将葬，乃谓公卿等曰： 苏尚书平生谦退，敦尚俭约。
现代文：苏绰即将埋葬时，他对朝臣们说： 苏尚书平生谦逊退让，崇尚勤俭简朴。
English: When Su Qiao was about to be buried, he said to the courtiers: Su Shangshu was always humble and conceded, advocating diligence, frugality and simplicity.

古文：吾欲全其素志，便恐悠悠之徒，有所未达；如其厚加赠谥，又乖宿昔相知之道。
现代文：我想成全他平生的志愿，又恐怕庸碌之徒不能理解；如果给他优厚的馈赠和崇高的封号，又违背了过去我们相知相近的友谊。
English: I want to fulfill his lifelong wish, and I am afraid that a mediocre person cannot understand it; if I give him a generous gift and a noble seal, it will violate our close friendship in the past.

古文：进退惟谷，孤有疑焉。 
现代文：我进退维谷，拿不定主意。 
English: I'm in a quandary, I can't make up my mind.

古文：尚书令史麻瑶越次而进曰： 或晏子，齐之贤大夫，一狐裘三十年。
现代文：尚书令史麻瑶越过座位进前说 ：过去的晏子，是齐国贤能的大臣，一件狐皮衣服穿了三十年。
English: Shang Shuling ordered Shi Maojuan to step forward over the seat and said, "In the past, the mule was a wise minister of the State of Qi, who wore a fox skin garment for thirty years.

古文：及其死也，遣车一乘。齐侯不夺其志。
现代文：他死后埋葬，齐主只派了一辆车，为的是不辱没他平生的志向。
English: When he died and was buried, the lord of Qi sent only one car, so as not to humiliate his lifelong aspiration.

古文：绰既操履清白，廉挹自居，愚谓宜从俭约，以彰其美。 
现代文：苏绰既然操行清白，谦让自居，我认为葬事应当从简，以表彰他的美德。 
English: Since Su Qiao acted innocently and humbly, I think the funeral should be simple, in recognition of his virtues.

古文：周文称善，因荐瑶于朝廷。
现代文：宇文泰认为他说得很对，因而举荐麻瑶到朝廷。
English: Uwentai thought that he was right, so he recommended Mochi to the imperial court.

古文：及绰归葬武功，唯载，以布车一乘。
现代文：苏绰归葬家乡武功时，只用一辆用布幔围起的车运载他的遗体。
English: When Su Qiao buried his hometown martial arts hero, he only used a car surrounded by cloth to carry his body.

古文：周文与群公，皆步送出同州郭外。
现代文：宇文泰与公卿大臣都步行送出同州的城郭以外。
English: Both Uwentai and the noble minister were sent out of the castle of the same state on foot.

古文：周文亲于车后酹酒而言曰： 尚书平生为事，妻子兄弟不知者，吾皆知之。
现代文：宇文泰亲自在灵车后斟酒祭告说 ：尚书您平生做的事情，妻子兄弟不知道的，我都知道。
English: Uwentai personally poured wine after the hearse and said, "Shang Shu, I know all the things you have done in your life that your wife and brothers don't know.

古文：惟尔知吾心，吾知尔意。
现代文：只有你知道我的心，我了解你的意。
English: Only you know my heart, and I know your mind.

古文：方欲共定天下，不幸遂舍吾去，奈何！ 
现代文：本想共同平定天下，不幸你舍下我离去，我该怎么办？ 
English: Originally, we wanted to pacify the world together. Unfortunately, you abandoned me and left. What should I do?

古文：因举声恸哭，不觉卮坠于手。
现代文：因而放声大哭，不觉酒杯从手中失落。
English: As a result, she burst into tears and lost the glass from her hand.

古文：至葬日，又遣使祭以太牢，周文自为其文。
现代文：埋葬的那一天，又派人送去牛、羊、猪三牲祭祀他，宇文泰又亲自起草了祭文。
English: On the day of his burial, someone was sent to sacrifice three animals - a cow, a sheep, and a pig - in his honor, and he personally drafted the sacrificial text.

古文：绰又著佛性论、七经论，并行于世。
现代文：苏绰写了《佛性记》、《七经论》，都在世上流布传播。
English: Su Qiao wrote "Buddha's Character" and "Seven Classics," both of which have been spread around the world.

古文：周明帝二年，以绰配享文帝庙廷。
现代文：周明帝二年，让他配飨周文帝的庙庭。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Zhou Ming, he was appointed to decorate the temple garden of Emperor Zhou Wen.

古文：子威嗣。威字无畏。
现代文：苏威，字无畏，苏绰之子。
English: Su Wei, the word fearless, the son of Su Cao.

古文：少有至性，五岁丧父，哀毁有若成人。
现代文：他从小就性情淳厚，五岁时丧父，悲哀痛苦的情形和成年人一样。
English: He was a good-natured child, and when his father died when he was five years old, his grief and pain were the same as that of an adult.

古文：周文帝时，袭爵美阳县公，仕郡功曹。
现代文：宇文泰在世时，他继承父爵为美阳县公。
English: When he was alive, he succeeded his father as the governor of Miyang County.

古文：大冢宰宇文护见而礼之，以其女新兴公主妻焉。
现代文：大冢宰宇文护见到他后给他以礼遇，把女儿新兴公主嫁给他。
English: After seeing him, the Grand Empress Dowager Uwen gave him a courtesy and married his daughter, the emerging princess, to him.

古文：威见护专权，恐祸及已，逃入山。
现代文：他见宇文护专擅大权，恐怕殃及自身，便逃入山中。
English: He fled into the mountains, fearing for his own safety, when he saw that Umenokor had gained exclusive control.

古文：为叔父所逼，卒不获免。
现代文：由于叔父的逼迫，他才回来。
English: He only came back because of his uncle's persecution.

古文：武帝亲总万机，拜稍伯下大夫。
现代文：然而仍经常住在山中的寺院中，以读书为最大乐事。武帝亲政，封他为稍伯下大夫。
English: However, he still often lived in a temple in the mountains, with reading being his greatest pleasure. Emperor Wu was personally in charge of the government and appointed him as a slightly junior doctor.

古文：前后所授，并辞疾不拜。
现代文：前后授给他的官职，他都以有病辞退不受。
English: He could not be dismissed from any of the posts he was given on the grounds that he was ill.

古文：有从父妹适河南元世雄。
现代文：他的从父的妹妹嫁给河南的元世雄。
English: His paternal sister married a man from Henan named Yuan Shixiong.

古文：世雄先与突厥有隙，突厥入朝，请世雄及其妻子，将甘心焉。
现代文：世雄过去与突厥有矛盾，突厥人与周朝通好，请求得到元世雄和他的妻子才能甘心。
English: In the past, Shixiong had conflicts with the Turks. The Turks were on good terms with the Zhou Dynasty and were only willing to receive Yuan Shixiong and his wife.

古文：宣帝嗣位，就拜开府。
现代文：北周便将世雄夫妇送给突厥。
English: Northern Zhou then gave the Shixiong couple to the Turks.

古文：隋文帝为丞相，高颎屡言其贤，亦素重其名，召入卧内，与语大悦。
现代文：苏威知道突厥人贪财好利，便卖掉田产家宅，花尽所有的钱将世雄夫妇赎回，人们都称赞他的轻财好义。杨坚任丞相，高赹多次夸奖苏威的贤能。杨坚平时也很敬重他的名望，将他召入自己的卧室内，与他交谈后非常高兴。
English: Su Wei knew that the Turks were greedy and profiteering, so he sold his farmland and house, and spent all the money to redeem the Shixiong couple. People praised his light wealth and righteousness. Yang Jian was the prime minister, and Gao Wei praised Su Wei's ability many times. Yang Jian also respected his reputation in peacetime, called him into his bedroom, and was very happy after talking to him.

古文：居月余，威闻禅代之议，遁归田里。
现代文：住了一个多月，他听说杨坚要接受北周的禅让，便逃归乡村。
English: After living there for more than a month, he heard that Yang Jian was going to accept Northern Zhou's offer of Zen, so he fled back to the countryside.

古文：高颎请追之。帝曰： 此不欲预吾事，且置之。 
现代文：高赹请求将他追回，杨坚说： 这是因为他不愿意参与我的事，暂且让他在乡间住一段。 
English: Gao Yao requested to bring him back, Yang Jian said: This is because he does not want to participate in my business, let him live in the countryside for a while.

古文：及受禅，征拜太子少保，追赠其父邳国公，以威袭焉。
现代文：杨坚受禅称帝，征拜他为太子少保，追赠他的父亲为邳国公，让他继承爵位。
English: Yang Jian received the title of emperor from Zen, he was enlisted as a prince's minor protector, and his father was posthumously awarded the title of Duke of Shandong, allowing him to inherit the title.

古文：俄兼纳言，威上表陈让，优诏不许。
现代文：不久又命他兼纳言，他全都上表辞让，朝廷下诏不允许。
English: Soon after, he was ordered to make concessions, but he refused to do so. The imperial court did not allow it.

古文：帝尝与文献皇后对觞，召威及高颎、杨素、广平王雄四人，谓曰： 太史言朕祚运尽于三年，朕忧懑，故举此酒耳。
现代文：隋文帝曾与文献皇后对饮，召苏威、高赹、杨素、广平王杨雄四人同饮，对他们说： 太史说我的命运只能当三年皇帝，我很忧虑，所以举行这次酒宴。
English: Sui Emperor Wen once had a drink with the Empress of Literature, and invited Su Wei, Gao Wei, Yang Su, and Guangping King Yang Xiong to drink together. He said to them: "Tai Shi said that my fate can only be an emperor for three years. I am worried, so I held this wine banquet.

古文：今欲营南山险处，与公等固之，以观时变，将如何？ 
现代文：现在想营造南山险要的地方，将来遇到事变与你们一起固守那里，以观察时局的变化，怎么样？ 
English: What if you want to build a place in Nanshan that is at risk now, and in the event of an incident in the future, you can stay there together to observe the changes in the current situation?

古文：威进曰： 周文修德，旋地动之灾；宋景一言，退法星三舍。
现代文：苏威进谏说： 周文王修养道德，还有地震灾害的发生；宋景公对人慈爱，一句话就使他生病的法星退避三舍。
English: Su Wei Jinqi said: Zhou Wenwang cultivated morality, and the occurrence of earthquake disasters; Song Jinggong was kind to people, and one word made his sick Fa Xing retreat.

古文：愿陛下恢崇德度，享天之休。
现代文：愿陛下崇尚道德，享受上天赐予的美。
English: May His Majesty uphold morality and enjoy the beauty bestowed by heaven.

古文：若弃德恃险，同舟之人，谁非敌国！
现代文：如果放弃道德，一味凭借险要自固，原来与你同舟共济的人，也会成为你的仇敌。
English: If you abandon morality and rely on danger to strengthen yourself, the people who were originally in the same boat with you will also become your enemies.

古文：纵南山之岨，安足固哉？ 帝善其言，属之以酒。
现代文：纵有南山的险阻，怎么能够使你保国全身呢？ 
English: Even if there is the perilous obstacle of Nanshan, how can you make your whole body protect the country?

古文：初，威父绰在魏，以国用不足，为征税法，颇称为重。
现代文：隋文帝很赞成他的话，敬他一杯酒。早先，苏威的父亲苏绰在西魏时因国家用度不足，创议制定征税法，很为朝廷重视。
English: Emperor Sui approved of his words and toasted him with a glass of wine. Earlier, Sui Wei's father, Su Chu, had proposed the enactment of a tax law due to insufficient state expenditure during the Western Wei Dynasty, which was highly valued by the imperial court.

古文：既而叹曰： 所为者正如张弓，非平世法也。
现代文：不久他叹息说 ：我所创立的征税法正好像拉开的弓，不是安定社会的方法。
English: Soon he sighed and said: The taxation law I created is just like a drawn bow, not a way to stabilize society.

古文：后之君子，谁能驰乎？ 
现代文：以后的君子，谁能将这把拉开的弓弦松弛下来呢？ 
English: Future gentlemen, who will be able to loosen this stretched bowstring?

古文：威闻其言，每以为己任。
现代文：苏威听到这句话后，常常把减少赋税作为自己的责任。
English: When Su Wei heard this, he often took it as his responsibility to reduce taxes.

古文：至是，奏减赋役，务从轻典，帝悉从之。
现代文：这时，便奏请朝廷减少赋税和劳役，务必按照典章制度制定赋役标准，隋文帝都接受了。
English: At this time, he asked the imperial court to reduce taxes and labor service, and be sure to formulate the standard of service in accordance with the award system. Sui Emperor Wen accepted both.

古文：渐见亲重，与高颎参掌朝政。
现代文：他逐渐被隋文帝亲近和重用，与高赹一起掌管朝政。
English: He was gradually close to and used by Emperor Sui Wen, and together with Gao Pi, he was in charge of the imperial government.

古文：威见宫中以银为幔钩，因盛陈节俭之美，谕帝。
现代文：他见宫中用银子做幔帐的挂钩，因而极力陈说节俭的好处以劝谕隋文帝。
English: He saw that the palace used silver as a peg for the loan account, so he tried his best to persuade the Sui Emperor by explaining the benefits of thrift.

古文：帝为改容，雕饰旧物，悉命除毁。
现代文：隋文帝听了感动得脸色都变了，一切旧有的装饰，都命令除掉。
English: Emperor Sui was so moved by what he heard that his face changed, and he ordered all the old decorations to be removed.

古文：帝尝怒一人，将杀之。
现代文：隋文帝曾恼恨一个人，准备把他杀死。
English: Sui Emperor Wen had a grudge against someone and was about to kill him.

古文：威入阁进谏，不纳。帝怒甚，将自出斩之。
现代文：苏威入宫劝谏，隋文帝不听，更加恼怒，要出去亲自将那人杀掉。
English: Su Wei entered the palace to persuade him, but Emperor Sui did not listen and became even more angry. He wanted to go out and kill the man himself.

古文：威当前不去，帝避之而出。威又遮止帝，帝拂衣入。
现代文：苏威挡住他的去路，隋文帝躲闪着出了宫殿，苏威又拦住了他，他一甩衣袖回到殿内。
English: Su Wei blocked his path, Sui Wen Di dodged out of the palace, Su Wei stopped him again, and he returned to the palace with a flick of his sleeve.

古文：良久，乃召威谢曰： 公能若是，吾无忧矣。 
现代文：过了很久，召见苏威并感谢他说： 你能这样大胆谏阻，我今后就没有忧虑了。 
English: After a long time, he summoned Su Wei and thanked him, saying, "If you can boldly resist like this, I won't have any worries in the future."

古文：于是赐马二匹、钱十余万。
现代文：于是赐给他两匹马，十多万钱。
English: So he gave him two horses and more than a hundred thousand dollars.

古文：岁余，寻复兼大理卿、京兆尹、御史大夫，本官悉如故。
现代文：过了一年多，命他兼大理卿、京兆尹、御史大夫，原来的官职照旧。
English: After more than a year, he was appointed to the posts of Dariching (大理卿), Jingzhoyin (京兆尹) and goshi daifu (御史大夫), but his original posts remained unchanged.

古文：持书侍御史梁毗劾威兼领五职，安繁恋剧，无举贤自代心。
现代文：持书侍御史梁毗弹劾他身兼五职，陷于繁苛的公务之中，又不举荐贤能代替自己。
English: Shi Liangvi, the attendant with the book, impeached him for holding five posts, being caught up in arduous official duties, and not recommending a competent person to replace himself.

古文：帝曰： 苏威朝夕孜孜，志存远大，举贤有阙，何遽迫之。 
现代文：隋文帝说 ：苏威天天孜孜不倦，志向远大，举荐贤能暂时缺失，何必太着急。 
English: Sui Wen Di said: Su Wei works tirelessly every day, has great aspirations, and temporarily lacks the ability to recommend, so why worry too much.

古文：顾谓威曰： 用之则行，舍之则藏，唯我与尔有是夫！ 
现代文：他又对苏威说 ：被任用就施行自己的主张，不被任用就退而隐居，只有我与你才能这样啊！ 
English: He also said to Su Wei: "If you are appointed, you should carry out your own ideas. If you are not appointed, you should withdraw and live in seclusion. Only I and you can do this!"

古文：因谓朝臣曰： 苏威不遇我，无以措其言；我不得苏威，何以行其道？
现代文：他又对朝臣们说 ：苏威如不遇上我，就无法落实他说过的话；我如果没有苏威，怎么去实现自己的主张呢？
English: He also said to his courtiers: "If Su Wei does not meet me, he will not be able to implement what he said; if I do not have Su Wei, how can I realize my own ideas?"

古文：杨素才辩无双，至若斟酌古今，助我宣化，非威匹也。
现代文：杨素的才能举世无双，如果让他根据古代和今天的情况，宣布道德，推行教化，却不是苏威的对手。
English: Yang Su's talent is unparalleled in the world. If he is allowed to proclaim morality and carry out enlightenment according to the situation in ancient times and today, he is no match for Su Wei.

古文：苏威若逢乱世，商山四皓，岂易屈哉！ 
现代文：苏威如果遭逢乱世，就连汉初商山中的四个年纪高迈的隐士，也不会轻易使他折服啊！ 
English: If Su Wei were to encounter a turbulent world, even the four elderly hermits in the merchant mountains at the beginning of the Han Dynasty would not easily subdue him!

古文：其见重如此。未几，拜刑部尚书，解少保、御史大夫官。
现代文：不久，他被任命为刑部尚书，解除了少保、御史大夫的职务。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as the head of the Criminal Investigation Department, and was relieved of his duties as a junior security guard and chief historian.

古文：后京兆尹废，检校雍州别驾。
现代文：这时，他与高赹同心协力，赞助朝政，大小事情无不运筹谋划。
English: At this time, he and Gao Jun made a concerted effort to sponsor the imperial government, and made plans for all matters large and small.

古文：时高颎与威同心，协赞政刑，大小无不筹之，故革运数年，天下称平。
现代文：所以参政数年，天下太平。
English: That is why he has been in politics for several years and the country is at peace.

古文：俄转户部尚书，纳言如故。
现代文：不久转任户部尚书，纳言官职不变。
English: Soon after, he was transferred to the Household Division of the Ministry of Education, but his official position as Nagan remained unchanged.

古文：属山东诸州人饥，帝令威振恤之。
现代文：山东各州百姓发生饥荒，隋文帝命他前往赈恤。
English: When famine struck the people of Shandong Province, Emperor Wen of the Sui Dynasty ordered him to go to Bingye.

古文：迁吏部尚书，兼领国子祭酒。
现代文：他又迁任吏部尚书，兼领国子祭酒。
English: In addition, he was transferred to the post of director of the Imperial Household Agency and concurrently served as the head of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：隋承战争之后，宪章踳驳。
现代文：隋朝建立在长期战乱之后，法律制度杂乱无章。
English: The Sui Dynasty was established after a long period of war, and the legal system was chaotic.

古文：帝令朝臣厘改旧法，为一代通典，律令格式多威所定。世以为能。
现代文：隋文帝命朝臣们整顿改革旧的法典，形成一代新的法典，法律制度的格式大多由苏威确定，人们都认为他很有才能。
English: Emperor Sui ordered courtiers to rectify and reform the old code and form a new generation of codes. The format of the legal system was mostly determined by Su Wei, and people all thought he was very talented.

古文：九年，拜尚书右仆射。
现代文：开皇九年，他被封为尚书右仆射。
English: In the ninth year of the emperor's reign, he was given the title of Shangshu Rongfei.

古文：其年，以母忧去职，柴毁骨立。
现代文：这一年，因母亲去世离职，哀毁骨立，朝廷不断下诏慰勉。
English: In this year, due to the death of his mother, he left office, mourned and grieved, and the imperial court continued to issue an edict of consolation.

古文：敕勉谕殷勤，未几，起令视事。固辞，优诏不许。
现代文：不久，命他复职任事，他坚持辞绝，朝廷下诏不允许。
English: Soon, he was ordered to resume his duties, but he insisted on resigning, which was not allowed by the imperial court.

古文：明年，帝幸并州，命与高颎同总留事。
现代文：第二年，隋文帝巡视并州，命他与高赹留下总理京城事务。
English: In the second year, Emperor Sui Wen inspected the annexation of the state and ordered him and Gao Wei to leave the affairs of the capital to the prime minister.

古文：俄追诣行在所，使决人讼。
现代文：不久他也到并州隋文帝的住所，处理讼案。
English: Soon, he also went to the residence of Emperor Wen of Anhui Province to deal with the lawsuit.

古文：寻令持节巡抚江南，得以便宜从事。
现代文：没过多时，朝廷命他持节巡抚江南，授予他相机处理一切事务而不需奏报朝廷的权力。
English: Before too long, the imperial court ordered him to become the governor of the southern part of the Yangtze River, granting him the power to handle all affairs without having to report to the imperial court.

古文：过会稽，逾五岭而还。
现代文：他经过会稽，翻越五岭然后回来。
English: He went through the audit, climbed over the Wuling and then came back.

古文：江表自晋已来，刑法疏缓，代族贵贱，不相陵越。平陈之后，牧人者尽改变之，无长幼悉使诵五教。
现代文：江南自从东晋以来刑法废弛。隋朝平定南陈之后，地方长官尽力改变法纪松弛的情况，无论男女老幼，都让他们背诵父义、母慈、兄友、弟恭、子孝等五种礼义。
English: After the Sui Dynasty conquered Nanchen, local governors tried their best to change the situation of lax laws and regulations. All men and women, young and old, were made to recite five kinds of etiquette, including fatherly righteousness, motherly kindness, brotherly friendship, brotherly respect, and filial piety.

古文：威加以烦鄙之辞，百姓嗟怨。
现代文：苏威又加上一些繁琐的辞藻，百姓们都为此叫苦连天。
English: Su Wei also added some cumbersome words and phrases, and the people are crying out for this.

古文：使还，奏言江表依内州责户籍。
现代文：他回到朝廷，奏报江南应按内地州郡整顿户籍。
English: He returned to the imperial court and reported that Jiangnan should rectify the household registration according to the counties of the inland states.

古文：上以江表初平，召户部尚书张婴，责以政急。
现代文：隋文帝认为江南刚刚平定，召来户部尚书张婴，批评苏威为政太急。
English: Emperor Sui Wen thought that the southern part of the Yangtze River had just been pacified, and summoned the head of the household, Shangshu Zhang, to criticize Sui Wei for being too hasty in politics.

古文：时江南州县又论言欲徙之入关，远近惊骇。
现代文：这时江南各州县又谣传朝廷要将他们迁移到关中，远近的百姓都惊恐不安。
English: At this time, there were rumors that the imperial court was going to relocate them to Guanzhong in various prefectures in the south of the Yangtze River. People near and far were terrified.

古文：饶州吴世华起兵为乱，生脔县令，啖其肉。
现代文：饶州的吴世华起兵作乱，将县令活活用刀一块块割死，将他的肉吃掉。
English: Wu Shihua of Raozhou started a riot, cut the county magistrate to death with a knife, and ate his flesh.

古文：于是旧陈率土毕反，执长吏，抽其肠而杀之，曰： 更使侬诵五教邪！ 
现代文：于是，陈朝原有的国土上的百姓全部起来造反，活捉了长史，抽去肠子将他杀死，说： 你还让我们背诵五教吗？ 
English: As a result, all the people on the original land of the Chen Dynasty rebelled, captured Long Shi alive, and killed him by extracting his intestines, saying, "Do you still want us to recite the Five Teachings?"

古文：寻诏内史令杨素讨平之。
现代文：不久，朝廷命内史令杨素将叛乱讨平。
English: Soon after, the imperial court ordered Yang Su to quell the rebellion.

古文：时突厥都蓝可汗屡为患，复令威至可汗所。威子夔以公子盛名，引致宾客，四海士大夫多归之。时议乐，夔与国子博士何妥各有所持。
现代文：苏威的儿子苏夔以公子的身份享有盛名，罗致宾客，天下的士大夫大多归附。当时讨论礼乐，他与国子博士何妥各有不同的意见，于是二人各持己见。
English: Su Wei's son, Su Shi, who enjoyed a reputation as a gentleman, invited Luo to be his guest, and most of the world's scholars and doctors agreed. At that time, when discussing ceremonial music, he and Dr. Guo Zi He Tuo had different opinions, so the two held their own opinions.

古文：于是夔、妥各为一议，使百僚署其所同。朝廷多附威，同夔者十八九。
现代文：朝廷让群臣们署名表决同意谁的意见，群臣们大多趋附苏威，因而，赞同苏夔的人十个中就有八九。
English: The imperial court asked the courtiers to sign and vote on whose opinion they agreed with, and most of the courtiers tended to support Su Wei. Therefore, 89 out of ten people agreed with Su Shi.

古文：妥恚曰： 吾席间函丈四十余年，反为昨暮兒之所屈也！ 
现代文：何妥愤怒地说 ：我作为师长讲学四十多年，反而被这个后生屈服！ 
English: He said angrily: I have been lecturing as a teacher for more than forty years, but I have been bowed down by this posterity!

古文：遂奏威与礼部尚书卢恺、吏部侍郎薛道衡、尚书右丞王弘、考功侍郎李同和等为朋党，省中呼王弘为世子，李同和为叔，言二人如威子弟。
现代文：他便奏劾苏威与礼部尚书卢恺、吏部侍郎薛道衡、尚书右丞王弘、考功侍郎李同和等人结为朋党，台省中都喊王弘为太子，称李同和为叔父，说二人就像苏威家的子弟。
English: He then accused Su Wei of forming a friendship party with the minister of ceremony, Wang Hong, and the minister of examination, Li Tonghe, as well as the minister of ceremony, Lu Wei, the minister of ceremony, Xue Daoheng, the minister of ceremony, Wang Hong, and the minister of examination, Li Tonghe. The people of Taiwan all called Wang Hong the prince, Li Tonghe the uncle, and said that the two were like the children of the Su Wei family.

古文：复言威以曲道任其从父弟彻、肃等罔冒为官。
现代文：又说苏威靠不正当的手段任用他的从父的弟弟苏彻、苏肃等为官。
English: It was also said that Su Wei used improper means to appoint his father's younger brothers, Su Che and Su Su, as officials.

古文：又国子学请黎阳人王孝逸为书学博士，威属卢恺，以为其府参军。
现代文：另外，国子学聘请黎阳人王孝逸为书学博士，苏威却让卢恺将王孝逸安排到他的尚书府任参军。
English: In addition, Kuniko Gakuin hired Wang Xiaoyan from Liyang as a doctor of calligraphy, but Su Wei let Lu Xi arrange for Wang Xiaoyan to join the army at his Shang Shufu.

古文：上令蜀王秀、上柱国虞庆则等杂按之，事皆验。
现代文：隋文帝命蜀王杨秀、上柱国虞庆则等人调查，事情全部属实。
English: The Sui Emperor ordered Shu Wang Yang Xiu, Shang Zhuan Guo Yu Qing Zi and others to investigate, and everything was true.

古文：帝以宋书谢晦传中朋党事令威读之。
现代文：隋文帝把《宋书》中《谢晦传》里的有关朋党的文章让苏威读。
English: The Sui Emperor asked Su Wei to read the articles about the party in the "Song of Song" in the "Biography of Xie Yu."

古文：威惧，免冠顿首。
现代文：他非常恐惧，脱下帽子叩首。
English: Terrified, he took off his hat and bowed his head.

古文：帝曰： 谢已晚矣！ 
现代文：隋文帝说： 谢罪已经晚了！ 
English: Sui Emperor Wen said: It's too late to repent!

古文：于是免威官爵，以开府就第。
现代文：于是，下令免去他的官爵，让他以开府的身份回家。
English: As a result, he ordered to remove his title and let him return home as the head of the government.

古文：知名之士，坐威得罪者百余人。
现代文：朝中知名的人士受苏威牵连的有一百多人。
English: More than a hundred well-known people in North Korea and China have been implicated by Su Wei.

古文：未几，帝曰： 苏威德行者，但为人误耳。 
现代文：不久，隋文帝说 ：苏威是一个有道德的人，只是他被别人蒙蔽了。 
English: Soon, Emperor Sui Wen said: Su Wei was a moral person, but he was deceived by others.

古文：命之通籍。
现代文：命将他的名字记在皇宫门外。
English: He had his name inscribed outside the palace gates.

古文：岁余，复爵邳公，拜纳言。
现代文：一年多后，他恢复爵位为丕阝公，被封为纳言。
English: A little more than a year later, he was restored to his title of Shigong and was given the title of Nagan.

古文：从祠太山，坐不敬免。
现代文：跟随隋文帝到泰山祭祀，坐罪不敬被免去官职。
English: He followed Emperor Sui Wen to Mount Tai for a religious ceremony, and was removed from his official post for contempt.

古文：俄而复位。
现代文：不久又恢复官位。
English: He was soon reinstated.

古文：帝谓群臣曰： 世人言苏威诈清，家累金玉，此妄言也。
现代文：隋文帝对群臣说： 人们说苏威假装清廉，实则家中有许多金玉，这是毫无根据的说法。
English: Sui Wen Di said to his courtiers: People say that Su Wei pretends to be clean, but in fact there are many gold and jewels in his home. This is an unfounded assertion.

古文：然其性狠戾，不切世要，求名太甚，从己则悦，违之必怒，此其大病耳。 
现代文：然而他的性情凶狠暴戾，不切实际，追求功名的心情太重，对顺从他的人就喜欢，违背他的人就记恨，这是他最大的缺点。 
English: However, his temperament is fierce, impractical, and the pursuit of fame is too heavy. He likes those who obey him and hates those who disobey him. This is his biggest shortcoming.

古文：仁寿初，复拜尚书右仆射。
现代文：仁寿初年，又任命他为尚书右仆射。
English: In the first year of his benevolent life, he also appointed him as Shangshu's right-hand man.

古文：帝幸仁寿宫，以威总留事。
现代文：隋文帝到仁寿宫，任他为总留事。
English: Emperor Sui Wen went to Renshou Palace and appointed him as the chief secretary.

古文：及帝还，御史奏威职事多不理。
现代文：隋文帝回来后，御史奏劾他多有失职。
English: After the return of Emperor Sui Wen, the Imperial Historian impeached him for dereliction of duty.

古文：帝怒，诘责威。威谢，帝亦止。
现代文：隋文帝发怒，质问并指责他，他连忙谢罪，隋文帝才止息怒火。
English: Sui Wen Di was furious, questioned and accused him, he quickly apologized, Sui Wen Di only stopped his anger.

古文：炀帝嗣位，上将大起长城之役，威谏止之。
现代文：炀帝即位，准备大举修复长城，苏威进谏劝阻。
English: Emperor Qian ascended the throne and prepared to repair the Great Wall on a large scale, but Su Wei tried to dissuade him.

古文：高颎、贺若弼之诛也，威坐相连免官。
现代文：高赹、贺若弼被朝廷诛杀，他也被牵连免去官职。
English: Gao Yao and He Ruo Yao were killed by the imperial court, and he was also implicated and removed from office.

古文：岁余，拜鲁郡太守，修羽仪。
现代文：过了一年多，被任命为鲁郡太守，特许他排列仪仗。
English: After more than a year, he was appointed as the governor of Lu County, with special permission to arrange ceremonial battles.

古文：召拜太常卿。
现代文：不久将他召回朝廷，授予太常卿。
English: He was soon recalled to the Imperial Court and given the title of Tai Changqing.

古文：从征吐谷浑，进拜右光禄大夫。
现代文：他跟从征讨吐谷浑，晋位为右光禄大夫。
English: He followed in the footsteps of Tokugawa Hun, and was promoted to Ukokoroku hakase.

古文：岁余，复为纳言，与左翊卫大将军宇文述、黄门侍郎裴矩、御史大夫裴蕴、内史侍郎虞世基参掌朝政，时人称为五贵。
现代文：一年多后，又任纳言，与左翊卫大将军宇文述、黄门侍郎裴矩、御史大夫裴蕴、内史侍郎虞世基参掌朝政，人们称他们为五贵。
English: More than a year later, he was also appointed Nagan, along with Zuo Wei Daishogun (Major General of the Left Division of Inner Palace Guards) Wu Wenshu, Huangmen waiter Baikang, imperial historian Baikang, and imperial historian waiter Yu Shiji, all of whom were referred to as the Five Noblemen.

古文：明年，从征辽东，领右御卫大将军。
现代文：炀帝征讨辽东，他以原来的官职兼右武卫大将军，被进晋为光禄大夫，赐爵为房陵侯，不久晋爵为房陵公。
English: Emperor Qian conquered Liaodong, and he was promoted to Guanglu Doctor, given the title of Fangling Marquis, and soon promoted to Fangling Prince.

古文：杨玄感之反，帝引威于帐中，惧见于色，谓曰： 此小兒聪明，得不为患邪？ 
现代文：他以年老为理由提出辞职，未被允许。杨玄感反叛，炀帝将他召进军帐中，脸上现出恐惧的颜色，问他： 这个小子很聪明，能不能造成大的祸患？ 
English: He submitted his resignation on the grounds of old age, but was not allowed to leave. Yang Xuan felt rebellious, and Emperor Qian called him into the military account, his face showing the color of fear, and asked him: This kid is very smart, can he cause a big disaster?

古文：威曰： 粗疏非聪明者，必无虑，但恐浸成乱阶耳。 
现代文：他回答： 粗疏的人并不聪明，您千万不要忧虑。只是怕今后蔓延成为祸乱的根源。 
English: He replied, "Rough people are not smart, so don't worry about it. Just be afraid that it will spread and become a source of trouble in the future."

古文：威见劳役不已，百姓思乱，以此微欲讽帝。帝竟不悟。
现代文：他见不断劳役百姓，人人思乱，因此想劝谕炀帝，炀帝竟不醒悟。
English: He saw that people were constantly working, and everyone was confused, so he wanted to advise Emperor Xuan, but Emperor Xuan did not wake up.

古文：从还，至涿郡，诏威安抚关中，以其孙尚辇直长儇副。
现代文：隋军征辽返回，来到涿郡，朝廷命他到关中安抚百姓，让他的孙子尚辇直长苏儇做他的副手。
English: When the Sui army led by Zheng Liao returned to Gu County, the imperial court ordered him to go to Guanzhong to pacify the people, and let his grandson, Shang Shizhong Su, be his deputy.

古文：威子鸿胪少卿夔先为关中简黜大使。
现代文：他的儿子鸿胪少卿苏夔这之前已任关中简黜大使。
English: His son, Hongtao Shaoqing Su, had previously served as the ambassador of Guanzhong Jianye.

古文：一家三人，俱使关右，三辅荣之。
现代文：一家三口人都出使关中，三秦之地的百姓都替他们感到荣耀。
English: All three members of the family were sent to Guanzhong, and the people of Sanqin felt honored for them.

古文：岁余，帝手诏曰： 玉以洁润，丹紫莫能渝其质；松表岁寒，霜寻莫能凋其采。
现代文：过了一年多，炀帝亲手写诏书说 ：玉因洁净而润泽，红色和紫色也不能改变她的品质；松靠寒冷衬托，严霜冷雪不能凋谢她的风采。
English: After more than a year, Emperor Qian wrote an imperial edict in his own hand, saying: Jade is moist because it is clean, and red and purple cannot change its quality; pine relies on cold as a foil, and frost and snow cannot fade its style.

古文：可谓温仁劲直，性之然乎。
现代文：真可称得上温和仁厚刚劲正直，本性使她们成为这个样子啊。
English: They are really gentle, kind, tough and honest. It is their nature that makes them this way.

古文：房公威，先后旧臣，朝之宿齿，栋梁社稷，弼谐朕躬，守文奉法，卑身率礼。
现代文：房公苏威，是前后两代帝王的旧臣，朝中的元老，国家的栋梁。他辅弼我治理朝政，奉公守法，屈身遵礼。
English: Fonggong Su Wei is the former vassal of two generations of emperors, the elder statesman of the dynasty, and the pillar of the country. He assisted me in governing the dynasty, obeying the law, and bowing down.

古文：昔汉之三杰，辅惠帝者萧何；周之十乱，佐成王者邵奭。
现代文：过去汉代的萧何、张良、韩信三个英杰，辅助惠帝的是萧何；西周有十位治理乱世的名臣，帮助成王治理朝政的是邵公。
English: Xiao He, Zhang Liang, and Han Xin were the three heroes of the Han Dynasty in the past. Xiao He assisted Hui Di; Xi Zhou had ten famous ministers to govern the chaotic world, and Shao Gong helped Cheng Wang to govern the court.

古文：国之宝器，其在得贤。
现代文：国家最珍贵的宝物就在于得到贤能的人才。
English: The country's most precious treasure lies in the acquisition of talented people.

古文：参璟台阶，具瞻斯允。
现代文：他处理一切事物都公允恰当。
English: He handled everything fairly and appropriately.

古文：虽事藉论道，终期献替，铨衡时和，朝寄为重。
现代文：虽然多次凭借事情论述道理，都能毫无保留地提出自己的意见，权衡事情的轻重，都以朝廷为重。
English: Although he has repeatedly argued the case on the basis of events, he can put forward his own opinions without reservation, and weigh the importance of the matter, all of which are based on the imperial court.

古文：可开府仪同三司，余并如故。 
现代文：可授予开府仪同三司，其余官职不变。 
English: The title of Kaifu can be awarded to the same three divisions, and the remaining posts remain unchanged.

古文：威当时尊重，朝臣莫与为比。
现代文：他当时受到朝廷的重视，朝臣们没有能与他相比的。
English: He was held in high esteem by the imperial court at the time, and his courtiers were second to none.

古文：后从幸雁门。为突厥所围，朝廷危惧。
现代文：后来他跟随炀帝到达雁门，炀帝被突厥人包围，朝廷十分震惊。
English: Later, he followed Emperor Gong to the Wild Goose Gate. Emperor Gong was surrounded by Turks, and the imperial court was very shocked.

古文：帝欲轻骑溃围而出。威谏曰： 城守则我有余力，轻骑则彼之所长。
现代文：炀帝想轻骑突围而去，他劝谏说： 坚守城池则我们绰有余力，轻骑奔驰则是敌方的特长。
English: Emperor Qian wanted to ride lightly to break out of the encirclement. He advised Emperor Qian: We have more than enough strength to hold on to the city, but riding lightly is the enemy's specialty.

古文：陛下万乘主，何宜轻脱！ 
现代文：陛下是大国的君主，怎么能轻易离去？ 
English: Your Majesty is the sovereign of a great country. How can you leave so easily?

古文：帝乃止。
现代文：炀帝才停止突围的念头。
English: Emperor Wu then gave up.

古文：突厥俄亦解围去。
现代文：突厥人不久也撤围离去。
English: The Turks soon withdrew as well.

古文：车驾次太原，威以盗贼不止，劝帝还京师，深根固本，为社稷计。
现代文：炀帝到达太原，苏威认为盗贼不断出没，劝炀帝返回京城，以便为了国家培植根本。
English: When Emperor Zhou arrived in Taiyuan, Su Wei thought that thieves were constantly haunting, and advised Emperor Zhou to return to the capital in order to cultivate the root for the country.

古文：帝初从之，竟用宇文述等议，遂往东都。
现代文：炀帝开始同意，后来竟听从宇文述等人的建议，便驻跸东都。
English: Emperor Yao agreed at first, but later heeded the advice of Yu Wenshu and others and settled in the eastern capital of Yao.

古文：天下大乱，威知帝不可匡正，甚患之。
现代文：这时天下动乱，他知道炀帝已不能救正，因而甚为忧虑。
English: At this time, the world was in turmoil, and he knew that Emperor Gong could no longer save it, so he was very worried.

古文：属帝问盗贼事。宇文述曰： 盗贼信少，不足为虞。 
现代文：一次，炀帝问盗贼的情况，宇文述答道： 盗贼的确很少，不足为虑。 
English: On one occasion, Emperor Qian inquired about the situation of thieves, and Yu Wenshu replied: There are indeed very few thieves, so there is nothing to worry about.

古文：威不能诡对，以身隐殿柱。
现代文：苏威不能违心回答，便躲在柱子后面。
English: Su Wei could not answer against his will, so he hid behind the pillar.

古文：帝呼问之。威曰： 臣非职司，不知多少，但患其渐近。 帝曰： 何谓也？ 
现代文：炀帝喊着他的名字询问，他说： 我不是负责这方面职责的，所以不知道盗贼的多少，只是忧虑贼寇离我们越来越近。 炀帝问 ：是什么意思？ 
English: Shao Di shouted his name and inquired, he said: I am not in charge of this responsibility, so I do not know how many thieves there are, but I am worried that the thieves are getting closer and closer to us.

古文：威曰： 他日贼据长白山，今者近在荥阳、汜水。 
现代文：他回答 ：过去贼寇占据长白山，现在已近在荥阳、汜水了。 
English: He replied, "In the past, the bandits occupied Changbai Mountain, but now they are close to Shenyang and Surabaya.

古文：帝不悦而罢。
现代文：炀帝不高兴地退去。
English: Sejong was not happy and gave up.

古文：属五月五日，百僚上馈，多以珍玩，威献尚书一部，微以讽帝。
现代文：五月五日这一天，百官馈赠给炀帝的礼物大多是珍奇玩好，苏威却献上《尚书》一部，略加讽喻。
English: On the day of May 5th, most of the gifts presented to Emperor Gong by the officials were rare and fun, but Su Wei presented a part of "Shang Shu" with a little irony.

古文：帝弥不平。
现代文：炀帝意更不平。
English: The emperor was even more displeased.

古文：后复问伐辽东事，威对顾赦群盗，遣讨高丽，帝益怒。
现代文：后来又问他讨伐辽东的事情，他都对答： 希望大赦天下盗贼，派他们去攻打高丽。 炀帝更加恼怒。
English: Later, he asked him about the crusade against Liaodong, and he answered: I hope the world will pardon the thieves and send them to attack Goryeo. Emperor Yao became even more angry.

古文：御史大夫辈蕴希旨，令御史张行本，奏威昔在高阳典选，滥授人官，怯畏突厥，请还京师。
现代文：御史大夫裴蕴迎合炀帝的旨意，命御史张行本弹劾苏威过去在高阳铨选官吏，滥授官职，惧怕突厥，请求返回京城等罪状。
English: In order to meet the wishes of Emperor Gao, the imperial historian Baekhyun ordered the imperial historian Zhang Xingbin to impeach Su Wei for the crimes of selecting officials in Gaoyang in the past, indiscriminately conferring official positions, fearing Turks, and requesting to return to Beijing.

古文：帝令案其事，乃下诏曰： 威立性朋党，好异端，怀挟诡道，徼幸名利，诋诃律令，谤讪台省。
现代文：炀帝命审理这件事，便下诏说： 苏威树立朋党，喜好异端，胸中常怀诡诈，贪取名利，诋毁律令，污蔑朝廷。
English: Emperor Qian ordered the case to be tried, and issued the following edict: Su Wei set up a crony party, liked heresy, always harbored treachery in his heart, coveted fame and fortune, slandered the imperial edict, and slandered the imperial court.

古文：昔岁薄伐，奉述先志，凡预切问，各尽胸臆，而威不以开怀，遂无对命。启沃之道，其若是乎！ 
现代文：过去征讨辽东，是遵奉先帝遗志，凡是参与议论的朝臣都各抒胸臆，而苏威却不直抒己见。陈述善道以启迪帝王的道理难道就像他这样吗？ 
English: In the past, the conquest of Liaodong was in accordance with the last wishes of the former emperor. All the courtiers who participated in the discussion expressed their opinions, but Su Wei did not directly express his own opinion. Is it like him to present the principle of the good way to enlighten the emperor?

古文：于是除名。
现代文：于是将他免官除名。
English: As a result, he was removed from his post and expelled.

古文：后月余，人有奏威与突厥阴图不轨。
现代文：过了一个多月，有人奏告他与突厥勾结。
English: More than a month later, he was accused of colluding with the Turks.

古文：大理簿责威。威自陈精诚不能上感，瑕爨屡彰，罪当万死。
现代文：大理寺主簿斥责他，他陈说自己精诚之心不能感动天子，瑕疵却不断出现，实在是罪该万死。
English: The head librarian of Dali Temple reprimanded him. He said that his sincere heart could not move the Son of Heaven, but the flaws kept appearing. It was a crime worthy of death.

古文：帝悯而释之。
现代文：炀帝怜悯他，将他释放。
English: Emperor Xuan took pity on him and released him.

古文：其年，从幸江都宫。帝将复用威，裴蕴、虞世基奏言昏耄赢疾，帝乃止。
现代文：这一年，他随炀帝到达江都，炀帝想重新任用他，裴蕴、虞世基奏报他昏聩多病，炀帝才停止。
English: In the same year, he accompanied Emperor Xuan to Jiangdu. Emperor Xuan wanted to reappoint him, but Pei Yun and Yu Shiji reported that he was dizzy and ill. Emperor Xuan only stopped the appointment.

古文：宇文化及弑逆，以威为光禄大夫、开府仪同三司。
现代文：宇文化及杀死炀帝，命苏威为光禄大夫，开府仪同三司。
English: U Culture and killed Emperor Gong, ordered Su Wei to be the doctor of Guanglu, and the opening ceremony of the three departments.

古文：化及败，归于李密。
现代文：宇文化及失败，他又归附李密。
English: Yu culture and failure, he was attached to Li Mi.

古文：密败，归东都，越王侗以为上柱国、邳公。
现代文：李密失败，他到东都洛阳，越王杨侗封他为上柱国、邳公。
English: When Li Mi failed, he went to Luoyang, the eastern capital, and the king of Yue, Yang Zhen, made him the head of the pillar country and the prince of the state.

古文：王世充僭号，署太师。
现代文：王世充称帝，他又被任命为太师。
English: Wang Shichong was proclaimed emperor, and he was also appointed Grand Master.

古文：威自以隋室旧臣，遭逢丧乱，所经之处，皆与时消息，以求容免。
现代文：他自认为是隋朝旧臣，遭逢动乱，所到之处都随着时局的变化而变化，以求得到宽免。
English: He thought of himself as an old vassal of the Sui Dynasty. He was subjected to turmoil, and the places he went to changed with the changes in the current situation, in order to be pardoned.

古文：及太宗平世充，坐于东都阊阖门内，威请谒见，称老病不能拜起。
现代文：唐太宗平定王世充以后，坐在东都阊阖门内，苏威请求谒见，自称年迈多病，不能叩拜。
English: After Emperor Taizong of Tang had subdued Wang Shichong, he was sitting in the East Tudor Gate. Su Wei asked to see him, claiming that he was too old and sick to bow.

古文：上遣人数之曰： 公隋朝宰辅，政乱不能匡救，遂令品物涂炭，君弑国亡。
现代文：太宗派人斥责他说： 你是隋朝的宰相，朝政混乱却不能救治，使得生灵涂炭，君死国亡。
English: A person from the Tai sect rebuked him: "You are the prime minister of the Sui Dynasty, but you can't cure the chaos of the court and government, which makes the living and the dead suffer and the country perish.

古文：见李密、世充皆拜伏舞蹈。
现代文：看见李密、王世充，你都拜伏称臣，高兴得手舞足蹈。
English: When you saw Li Mi and Wang Shichong, you bowed down to them and danced with joy.

古文：今既老病，无劳相见。 
现代文：现在既然老迈多病，不烦劳见面。 
English: Now that the old man is very ill, I don't bother to see him.

古文：寻入长安，至朝堂请见，高祖又不许。
现代文：他不久进入长安，又到朝堂请求接见，高祖李渊也不同意。
English: He soon entered Chang'an and went to the imperial court to request an audience, but Emperor Gaozu Li Yuan did not agree.

古文：终于家，时年八十二。
现代文：他死在家里，时年八十二岁。
English: He died at home, aged 82.

古文：威行己清俭，以廉慎见称。
现代文：苏威行为清静俭约，以廉洁谨慎著称。
English: Su Wei behaved quietly and frugally, and was known for his integrity and prudence.

古文：然每至公议，恶人异已，虽或小事，必固争之。
现代文：然而每到朝臣们讨论时政时，他却厌恶别人与自己的意见不同，虽然是小事情，也一定固执地争论。
English: However, whenever he came to discuss current affairs with courtiers, he disliked the fact that others had different opinions from his own. Even if it was a small matter, he would always stubbornly argue.

古文：时人以为无大臣之体。
现代文：人们他认为没有大臣的体统。
English: People think he doesn't have the stature of a minister.

古文：所修格令章程，并行于当世，颇伤烦碎，论者以为非简久之法。
现代文：他所修订的法令章程都颁行于世，但颇为繁琐细碎，评论者认为不是长久能实行的法律。
English: The laws and regulations he amended have all been promulgated, but they are rather cumbersome and detailed, and critics believe that they are not long-term laws.

古文：及大业末年，尤多征役，至于论功行赏，威每承望风旨，辄寝其事。
现代文：大业末年，朝廷多次征伐和役使百姓，每到论功行赏时，他都秉承炀帝的意思，常隐瞒这些事。
English: In the last years of the Taiei era, the imperial court made many attempts to conquer and enslave the people. Whenever it came to discussing the rewards for meritorious deeds, he always adhered to the will of Emperor Xuan and often concealed these things.

古文：时群盗蜂起，郡县有奏闻者，又诃诘使人，令减贼数，故出师攻讨，多不克捷。
现代文：当时群盗四起，郡县有表章奏报朝廷。他都呵斥各地的使者，命他们奏报时减少贼寇的数目。所以朝廷派兵征讨，大多不能获胜。
English: At that time, there were four groups of bandits, and each county had a representative to report to the imperial court. He rebuked emissaries from all over the country and ordered them to reduce the number of bandits when reporting. Therefore, the imperial court sent soldiers to negotiate, and most of them could not win.

古文：由是遂致败乱，为物议所讥。
现代文：因此，他被众人所议论讥笑。
English: As a result, he was talked about and mocked by everyone.

