古文：容以七尺为期，貌合两仪而论。
现代文：凡是观人形貌，观姿容以七尺身躯为限度，看面貌则以两只眼睛来评断。
English: When looking at the appearance of a human being, the seven-foot body is the limit for looking at the appearance, and the two eyes are used to judge the appearance.

古文：胸腹手足，实接五行；耳目口鼻，全通四气。相顾相称，则福生；如背如凑，则林林总总，不足论也。
现代文：人的胸腹手足，都与五行金、木、水、火、土相互关系，都有它们的某种属性特征；人的耳目口鼻，都和四气即春、夏、秋、冬四时之气相互贯通，也具有它们的某种属性和特征。
English: The human chest, abdomen, hands and feet are all interrelated with the five elements of gold, wood, water, fire and earth, and all have certain attributes and characteristics. The human ears, eyes, mouth and nose are all interconnected with the four qi, that is, the qi of spring, summer, autumn and winter, and also have certain attributes and characteristics.

古文：容贵 整 ， 整 非整齐之谓。短不豕蹲，长不茅立，肥不熊餐，瘦不鹊寒，所谓 整 也。
现代文：人体的各个部位，如果相互照应、匹配，彼此对称、协调，那么就会为人带来福分，而如果相互背离或彼此拥挤，使相貌显得乱七八糟支离破碎，其命运就不值一提了。
English: The various parts of the human body, if they correspond and match each other, if they are symmetrical and coordinated with each other, will bring happiness to people, but if they deviate from each other or crowd each other, making the appearance look chaotic and fragmented, their fate is not worth mentioning.

古文：背宜圆厚，腹宜突坦，手宜温软，曲若弯弓，足宜丰满，下宜藏蛋，所谓 整 也。五短多贵，两大不扬，负重高官，鼠行好利，此为定格。他如手长于身，身过于体，配以佳骨，定主封侯；罗纹满身，胸有秀骨，配以妙神，不拜相即鼎甲矣。
现代文：脚背要丰厚饱满，脚心要空，空到能藏下鸡蛋则佳，这也是所谓的 整 。五短身体虽看似不甚了了，却大多地位高贵，两腿长得过分的长往往命运不佳。一个人走起路来如同背了重物，那么此人必定有高官之运，走路若像老鼠般步子细碎急促，两眼又左顾右盼且目光闪烁不定者，必是贪财好利之徒。这些都是固定格局，屡试不爽。还有其他的格局：如两手长于上身，上身比下身长，再有着一副上佳之骨，那么一定会有公侯之封。再如皮肤细腻柔润，就好像绫罗布满全身。胸部骨骼又隐而不现，文秀别致，再有一副奇佳的神态的话，日后必然志向远大。
English: The soles of the feet should be plump and full, the center of the feet should be empty, and it is better to be empty enough to hide an egg, which is also called whole. Although the five short bodies seem to be not very good, they are mostly noble, and the legs that are too long are often not good. If a person walks as if he is carrying a heavy object, then he must have the luck of a high-ranking official. If he walks like a mouse with a fine and quick step, and his two eyes look left and right and his eyes flicker, he must be a greedy person. These are fixed patterns, which are not easy to try. There are other patterns:

古文：貌有清、古、奇、秀之别，总之须看科名星与阴骘纹为主。科名星，十三岁至三十九岁随时而见；阴骘纹，十九岁至四十六岁随时而见。
现代文：人的面貌之相有清秀、古朴、奇伟、秀致的分别。这四种相貌主要以科名星和阴骘纹为主去辨别，科名星在十三岁到三十九岁这段时间随时都可以看到，阴骘纹，在十九岁到四十六岁这段时间也可随时看见。
English: The four types of facial features are distinguished as handsome, quaint, marvelous, and exquisite. These four types of facial features are mainly distinguished by facial markings and pubic folds. The facial markings can be seen at any time between the ages of 13 and 39, and the pubic folds can be seen at any time between the ages of 19 and 46.

古文：二者全，大物也；得一亦贵。
现代文：阴骘纹和科名星这两样都俱备的话，将来会成为人物，能够得到其中一样，也会富贵。
English: If you have both yin and yang and famous stars, you will become a person in the future, and if you can get one of them, you will be rich.

古文：科名星见于印堂眉彩，时隐时见，或为钢针，或为小丸，尝有光气，酒后及发怒时易见。
现代文：科名星显现在印堂和眉彩之间，有时会出现，有时又隐藏不现，形状有时像钢针，有时如小球，是一种红光紫气。
English: The scientific name star appears between the hallmark and the eyebrow color, sometimes appearing, sometimes hidden, sometimes shaped like a steel needle, sometimes like a small ball, is a reddish purple gas.

古文：阴骘纹见于眼角，阴雨便见，如三叉样，假寐时最易见。
现代文：在喝酒之后和发怒时容易看见，阴骘纹出现在眼角之处，遇到阴天或下雨天便能看见，像三股叉的样子。在人快要睡着的时候最容易看见。
English: It's easy to see after drinking and when angry. The crow's feet appear in the corners of the eyes. If it's cloudy or rainy, you can see them, like a three-pronged fork. It's easiest to see when you're about to fall asleep.

古文：得科名星者早荣，得阴骘纹者迟发。
现代文：有科名星者，少年时就会发达荣耀，有阴骘纹者，发迹的时间要晚一些。
English: Those who have famous stars in science will have developed glory when they are young, and those who have yin and yang markings will have a later time to make their mark.

古文：二者全无，前程莫问。
现代文：两者都没有的话，前程就别问了。
English: If you don't have both, don't ask about the future.

古文：阴骘纹见于喉间，又主生贵子；杂路不在此路。目者面之渊，不深则不清。
现代文：另外，阴骘纹若现于咽喉部位，主人喜得贵子。若阴骘纹出现在其他部位，则不能这样断定，也就是不一定会得贵子。
English: In addition, if the pubic folds appear in the throat area, the owner is pleased with the baby. If the pubic folds appear in other areas, it cannot be determined in this way, that is, it is not certain to have a baby.

古文：鼻者面之山，不高则不灵。
现代文：人的眼睛如同面部的两方水潭，神气不深沉含蓄，面部就不会清朗明爽。
English: A person's eyes are like the two sides of the face. If the aura is not deep and subtle, the face will not be clear and bright.

古文：口阔而方禄千种，齿多而圆不家食。
现代文：鼻子如同支撑面部的山脉，鼻梁不挺拔，准头不丰园，面部就不会现机灵聪慧之气。
English: The nose is like a mountain range that supports the face. If the bridge of the nose is not straight and the nose is not level, the face will not have the spirit of cleverness.

古文：眼角入鬓，必掌刑名。
现代文：嘴巴宽阔又方正，主人有享千钟之福禄，牙齿细小而圆润，适合在外地发展事业。
English: The mouth is wide and square, the owner has enjoyed thousands of hours of good fortune, the teeth are small and rounded, suitable for developing a career in a foreign country.

古文：顶见于面，终司钱谷：出贵征也。
现代文：两眼秀长并插至鬓发处者，必掌司法大权，秃发谢顶而使头与面额相连，无限界，能掌财政大权。
English: He who has two good eyes and can insert them into the hairpin, will be in charge of judicial power. He who has a bald head and can connect his head with the denomination, has no limit and can be in charge of financial power.

古文：舌脱无官，橘皮不显。
现代文：口吃者无官运。面部肌肤粗糙如桔子皮的人不会发达。
English: Stutterers have no official rank. People with facial skin as rough as orange peel will not be developed.

古文：文人有伤左目，鹰鼻动便食人：此贱征也。
现代文：文人若左眼有伤那么文星陷落而无所作为。鼻子如鹰嘴的人，必定内心阴险狠毒，喜欢伤人，后面这些都是贫贱的征兆。
English: If a literati has an injury to the left eye, then the literary star falls and does nothing. A person with a nose like an eagle's beak must have a sinister and vicious heart and like to hurt people. These are all signs of poverty.

