古文：是日质明，含元殿前阶基栏槛坏损三十余间，压死卫士十余人。
现代文：德宗本纪贞元四年春正月一日是朔日。皇上驾临丹凤楼，大赦天下，死罪以下都加以赦免。这天天刚亮，含元殿台基前面栏杆损坏三十余间，压死卫士十多人。
English: On the first day of the first month of spring in the 4th year of the reign of Emperor Dezong bin Qizhen, it was the New Year's Day. The emperor arrived at the Danfeng Tower and granted a general amnesty to the world, pardoning all crimes below the death penalty. At first light that day, more than 30 railings in front of the foundation of the Yuan Hall were damaged, and more than ten guards were crushed to death.

古文：京师地震，辛亥又震，壬子又震。
现代文：京师地震，二日又地震，三日又地震。
English: There was an earthquake in Beijing, another earthquake on the second day, and another earthquake on the third day.

古文：壬戌，以左龙武大将军王栖曜为麟州刺史、鄜州刺史、鄜坊丹延节度使。
现代文：十三日，以左龙武大将军王栖曜为麟州刺史？坊、丹、延节度使。
English: On the 13th, General Wang Xiyou of the Zalongwu Army was appointed as the envoy of Linshou to send envoys to Shifang, Dan and Yan.

古文：丁卯，京师地震，戊辰又震，庚午又震。
现代文：十八日，京师地震，十九日京师又地震，二十一日京师又地震。
English: On the 18th, the Beijing Earthquake, on the 19th, another earthquake, and on the 21st, another earthquake.

古文：以宣武军行营节度使刘昌为泾州刺史、四镇北庭行军泾原等州节度使。
现代文：以宣武军行营节度使刘昌为泾州刺史、四镇、北庭行军节度使、泾州、原州节度使。
English: The festival of the Xuanwu army's march made Liu Chang the chief historian of Zhangzhou, the festival of the march of the four towns and Beiting, the festival of Zhangzhou and Yuanzhou.

古文：癸酉，京师地震。
现代文：二十四日，京师地震。
English: On the 24th, there was an earthquake in Kyoto.

古文：甲戌，以华州潼关节度使李元谅兼陇右节度使、临洮军使。
现代文：二十五日，以华州、潼关节度使李元谅兼任陇右节度使、临洮军使。
English: On the 25th, Li Yuanpeng was appointed as the envoy of Huazhou and Shandong provinces, and concurrently as the envoy of Shandong and Linyi provinces.

古文：乙亥，地震，金、房尤甚，江溢山裂，庐舍多坏，居人露处。
现代文：二十六日，地震，金、房两地尤其厉害，江水漫涨，大山崩裂，房屋大多损坏，居民露宿。
English: On the 26th, an earthquake hit Jin and Fang counties particularly hard. The river rose and the mountain collapsed. Most of the houses were damaged, and the residents were forced to live in the open.

古文：陈留雨木如大指，长寸余，有孔通中，下而植于地，凡十里许。
现代文：陈留下雨是下木头像大指头，长一寸多，中间有孔可通，从天上直接插在地上，总计有十多里长。
English: The piece of wood Chen left behind is like a big finger, more than an inch long, with a hole in the middle, directly inserted into the ground from the sky, with a total length of more than ten miles.

古文：辛巳，李泌以京官俸薄，请取中外给用除陌钱，及阙官俸外一分职田、额内官俸，及刺史执刀司马军事等钱，令户部别库贮之，以给京官月俸，令御史中丞窦参专掌之。
现代文：二月二日，李泌因为京官薪俸太少，请求收取朝中内外供给的除陌钱，以及空缺官员薪俸外的一分禄米田、收取额内官俸，以及刺史、执刀司马军事等钱，令户部用另外的库房贮存，以此来供给京官的月俸钱，命令御史中丞窦参专人掌握。
English: On February 2, Li Xiu, because the salary of the Beijing official was too small, requested that the household department store the monthly salary of the Beijing official in a separate warehouse to supply the monthly salary of the Beijing official, and ordered the official historian to handle it.

古文：岁得钱三百万贯，谓之户部别处钱，朝臣岁支不过五十万，常有二百余万以资国用。
现代文：每年得钱三百万贯，叫做户部别外钱，朝廷臣子每年支出不过五十万，常常有二百多万以资助国家取用。
English: Every year, they receive three million yuan, which is called foreign money from the household department. The annual expenditure of the court retainers is only 500,000 yuan, and often more than 2 million yuan is used to subsidize the state.

古文：壬午，地震，甲申又震，乙酉又震，丙申又震。
现代文：二月三日，地震，五日又地震，六日又地震，十七日地震。
English: On February 3rd, an earthquake, on the 5th another earthquake, on the 6th another earthquake, on the 17th an earthquake.

古文：甲辰，太仆郊牛生犊六足，又豕生两首四足。
现代文：二十五日，太仆在郊外养的牛生小牛六个脚，另外猪生下一个两头四脚的小猪。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, a cow raised by the servants in the suburbs gave birth to a six-legged calf, and another pig gave birth to a two-headed four-legged piglet.

古文：筑延喜门北复道属永春门。
现代文：建筑延喜门北边的架空的通道连接着永春门。
English: An overhead passageway on the north side of the Yanxi Gate building connects it to the Yongchun Gate.

古文：泾原刘昌复筑连云堡。
现代文：泾原刘昌再次建筑连云堡。
English: Former Premier Liu Chang builds Lianyungang again.

古文：戊辰，鹿入京师市门。
现代文：二十九日，鹿跑入京师市门。
English: On the 29th, the deer ran into the gate of Jingshi.

古文：甲寅，地震。
现代文：三月六日，地震。
English: March 6th, earthquake.

古文：宴群臣于麟德殿，设《九部乐》，内出舞马，上赋诗一章，群臣属和。
现代文：皇上在麟德殿宴请群臣，设《九部乐》，从官拿出会跳舞的马，皇上赋诗一章，群臣连接和诗。
English: The emperor held a banquet for his courtiers at the Lin De Palace. "Nine Part Music" was played, officials brought out dancing horses, the emperor composed a poem, and the courtiers sang the poem.

古文：己未，地震。
现代文：十一日，地震。
English: On the 11th, there was an earthquake.

古文：丁卯，有司条奏省官，其左右常侍、太子宾客请依前置四员，从之。
现代文：十九日，有关官员逐条上奏给中书门下省的官员，左右常侍、太子宾客请按照先前仍旧设置四人，中书门下省同意了。
English: On the 19th, the relevant officials made a report to the officials of the provinces under the auspices of the Chinese Academy of Sciences one by one. The regular attendants on the left and right and the guests of the prince were asked to set up four people as before, and the provinces under the auspices of the Chinese Academy of Sciences agreed.

古文：庚午，地震。
现代文：二十二日，地震。
English: On the 22nd, an earthquake.

古文：诏泾原刘昌于平凉会盟所收被害将士骸骨，葬于浅水原，为二冢，立石堠志之，题曰怀忠冢。
现代文：皇上诏令泾原刘昌在平凉会盟处所收被杀害将士的尸骨，安葬在浅水原，做两个坟墓，立石头做标志记载里程，题曰 怀忠冢 。
English: The emperor decreed that the remains of Liu Chang, who was killed and collected at the Pingliang Association, be buried in a shallow plain, with two graves and a stone marker to record the mileage, with the title "Huai Zhongyuan."

古文：辛未，地震。
现代文：二十三日，地震。
English: On the 23rd, an earthquake.

古文：中书省梧树有鹊以泥为巢。
现代文：中书省梧桐树有喜鹊以泥筑巢。
English: There are magpies building nests with mud in the sycamore trees of China's Shandong Province.

古文：癸巳，以太子左庶子暢悦为桂管观察使。
现代文：四月十六日，以太子左庶子畅悦为桂管观察使。
English: On April 16th, Etsuko's illegitimate son, Kanetsu, became a Katsura observation envoy.

古文：改左右射生为左右神威军。
现代文：改左右射生将为左右神威军。
English: The left and right shooters will be the left and right Shenwei troops.

古文：福建兵乱，逐观察使吴诜。
现代文：福建兵变，驱逐了观察使吴诜。
English: Fujian mutiny, expelled the observer Wu Gan.

古文：丁未，陇右李元谅筑良原城。
现代文：三十日，陇右李元谅筑良原城。
English: On the thirtieth day of the month, 右李元谅筑良原城.

古文：丁巳，右龙武统军张伯仪卒。
现代文：五月十日，右龙武统军张伯仪去世。
English: On May 10, Zhang Bo Yi, the leader of the Right Dragon United Front Army, passed away.

古文：辛酉，以吉州刺史张庭为安南都护、本管经略使。
现代文：十四日，以吉州刺史张庭为安南都护、本管经略使。
English: On the 14th, Zhang Ting, the governor of Jizhou Province, was appointed as the guardian of the capital of Annam and the chief economic envoy.

古文：升郓州为大都督府。
现代文：升郓州为大都督府。
English: Shengzhu is the largest prefectural capital.

古文：壬戌，加置谏议大夫八员，分中书四员为右，门下四员为左。检校左庶子萧复卒于饶州。
现代文：十五日，增加设置谏议大夫八员，分中书四员为右，门下四员为左，检校左庶子萧复在饶州去世。
English: On the fifteenth day, eight members of the advisory committee were added, four members of the middle school were assigned to the right, four members of the lower school were assigned to the left, and Xiao Fu, the left child of the inspection, died in Raozhou.

古文：丙寅，地震，丁卯，又震。
现代文：十九日，地震，二十日又地震。
English: On the 19th, an earthquake, and on the 20th, another earthquake.

古文：月犯岁星。
现代文：月亮侵犯岁星。
English: The moon-criminal Jupiter.

古文：辛未，太子宾客吴凑为福建观察使。
现代文：二十四日，太子宾客吴凑为福建观察使。
English: On the 24th, the prince's guest, Wu Qian, became the Fujian observer.

古文：乙亥，荧惑、岁、镇三星聚营室，凡二十日。
现代文：二十八日，荧惑星、岁星、镇星三星聚集在营室星，总计聚集了二十天。
English: On the 28th, the three stars of the fluorescent planet, the year star and the town star gathered in the camp star, and gathered for a total of 20 days.

古文：是月，吐蕃寇泾、邠、宁、庆、鄜等州，焚彭原县，边将闭城自固。
现代文：这月，吐蕃入侵泾？宁、庆、麟等州，焚烧了彭原县，边防守将关闭城门巩固自己。
English: This month, Tubo invaded Shandong, Ningxia, Qingdao, Lin and other provinces, burned Pengyuan County, and the border defense will close the gate to consolidate itself.

古文：贼驱人畜三万计，凡二旬而退。
现代文：贼兵驱赶走了人及牲畜约计有三万，总计二十天才退兵。
English: The bandits drove away about 30,000 people and livestock, and it took them a total of 20 days to withdraw.

古文：吐蕃入寇以秋冬，今盛暑而来，华人陷蕃者道之也。
现代文：吐蕃以前入侵在秋天或冬天，现今盛夏前来，是由于陷入吐蕃的中原人引导的。
English: The pied flycatcher used to invade in autumn or winter, but now it comes in midsummer, led by the Central Plains people who have fallen into the pied flycatcher.

古文：六月丁丑，鄂岳观察使李竦卒。
现代文：六月一日，鄂岳观察使李竦去世。
English: On June 1st, Li Jun passed away after the observation of Mt. E.

古文：乙酉，以尚书左丞杜祐为陕州长史、陕虢观察使。
现代文：九日，以尚书左丞杜佑为陕州长史、陕虢观察使。
English: On the 9th, Shangshuzhong Duyou was appointed as the governor of Shaanxi Province and the observation envoy of Shaanxi Province.

古文：征夏县处士先除著作郎阳城为谏议大夫。
现代文：征调夏县有德才而不愿作官的先前曾经任过著作郎的阳城为谏议大夫。
English: Yangcheng, a virtuous man from Xia County who was reluctant to become an official and had previously worked as a writer, was appointed as the doctor of deliberation.

古文：城以褐衣诣阙，上赐之章服而后召。
现代文：阳城身穿粗布衣服到朝廷，皇上赐给他有图文等级标志的礼服而后召见他。
English: Yangcheng wore a coarse cloth to the imperial court. The emperor gave him a ceremonial dress with a pictorial and textual rank symbol and then summoned him.

古文：乙丑，桂管都防御观察使暢悦卒。
现代文：十三日，桂管都防御观察使畅悦去世。
English: On the 13th day of the month, the Guizhou Defense Observation Team killed Chang Rong.

古文：乙未，以谏议大夫何士干为鄂、岳、沔、蕲、黄等州都团练观察使。
现代文：十九日，以谏议大夫何士干为鄂、岳、沔、蕲、黄等州都团练观察使。
English: On the 19th, Dr. He Shigang of the Ministry of Education and Culture was appointed as the observation envoy for the group training in the provinces of Hubei, Yue, Fujian, Fujian and Huangshan.

古文：乙亥，封皇子、皇弟邕王謜等七人为王，兼卿、监、祭酒等官。
现代文：二十三日，封皇子、皇弟邕王李讠原等七人为王，并且兼任为卿、监、祭酒等大官。
English: On the 23rd, seven people, including the crown prince, the prince's younger brother, the king, and Li Yibuan, became the king, and also served as high-ranking officials such as the lord, the prison warden, and the celebrant.

古文：癸卯，荧惑退行入羽林。
现代文：二十七日，荧惑星倒退进入羽林星。
English: On the 27th, the fluorescent planet retreated into Haulin.

古文：秋七月庚戌，以左金吾将军张献甫为邠宁节度使；陈许防御兵马使韩全义检校工部尚书，充长武城及诸军行营节度使。
现代文：秋七月五日，以左金吾将军张献甫为宁节度使，陈许防御兵马使韩全义任检校工部尚书，充任长武城及诸军行营节度使。
English: On the 5th day of the 7th month of autumn, Zhang Xianfu, the general of Zuo Kingu, was appointed as Ning's festival envoy, and Han Quan Yi, the general of Chen Xu's defense troops and horses, was appointed as the inspector of the school inspection department, and served as the festival envoy of Changwu City and the army camp.

古文：癸丑，邠宁军因韩游瑰受代，惮张献甫之严，乘其无帅，纵兵大掠，仍胁监军杨明义奏请范希朝为帅。
现代文：八日，宁军因为韩游瑰受权代管，原来害怕张献甫太严厉，不敢为非作歹，现在乘张献甫不在，放纵军队，大肆抢劫，仍旧威胁监军杨明义，要他上奏朝廷请范希朝来宁军当大帅。
English: On the eighth day, the Ning Army was entrusted with the power of administration because of Han Yuqi. Originally, they were afraid that Zhang Xianfu was too strict and did not dare to do anything wrong. Now, taking advantage of Zhang Xianfu's absence, they indulged the army, looted extensively, and still threatened Yang Mingyi, the supervisor of the army, and asked him to appeal to the court to invite Fan Xichang to be the general of the Ning Army.

古文：都虞候杨朝晟斩其乱首二百余人，方定。
现代文：都虞候杨朝晟斩了为首闹事的二百人，军队才安定。
English: It was only after Yang Zhaohui, the prefect of the capital, had beheaded the two hundred people who had led the riot that the army became stable.

古文：朝命仍以希朝副献甫。
现代文：朝廷命令仍旧以张献甫为宁节度使，以范希朝为副。
English: The imperial court still ordered Zhang Xianfu to be Ning's festival envoy, with Fan Xichang as his deputy.

古文：己未，奚、室韦寇振武军。
现代文：十四日，奚、室韦等蕃军入侵振武军。
English: On the 14th, the Shan and Shumwei armies invaded the Zhenwu army.

古文：壬戌，诏以太尉、中书令、西平郡王李晟长子愿为银青光录大夫、太子宾客，赐勋上柱国，与晟门并列戟。
现代文：七日，皇上诏令以太尉、中书令、西平郡王李晟长子李愿为银青光禄大夫、太子宾客，赐勋为上柱国，与李晟的军门一样都列戟守卫。
English: On the seventh day, the emperor decreed that the eldest son of the king of Xiping County, Li Xuan, would be the doctor of silver and light, the guest of the prince, and awarded the honor of the upper pillar country. Like Li Xuan's military gate, they were all lined up to guard.

古文：乙丑，以前抚州刺史戴叔伦为容州刺史、兼御史中丞、本管经略使。
现代文：二十日，以前任抚州刺史戴叔伦为容州刺史、兼御史中丞、本管辖区经略使。
English: On the 20th, Dai Shulun, who was previously appointed as the Fuzhou chief secretary, became the Yongzhou chief secretary, concurrently the vice-chairman of the general secretary, and the special economic envoy of this jurisdiction.

古文：丁丑，以兵部尚书崔汉衡为晋州刺史、晋慈隰观察使。
现代文：二十二日，以兵部尚书崔汉衡为晋州刺史、晋、慈、隰观察使。
English: On the 22nd, Cui Hanheng, a senior official of the Ministry of Military Affairs, was appointed as the observation envoy of Jin, Jin, Zi and Zou.

古文：壬申，诏： 嗣王、郡王朝会，班位在本官班之上。
现代文：二十七日，皇上下诏曰 ：嗣王、郡王早朝朝见皇帝，排班位次应在本来官位之上，因为他的爵位是王。
English: On the 27th, the emperor issued an edict saying: "The crown prince and the county prince should see the emperor early in the morning. The order of precedence should be higher than the original official rank, because his title is king."

古文：左右庶子准令在左右丞侍郎之下、诸司四品之上，今在少卿之下，非也，宜改之。 
现代文：左右庶子准许他们班次应在左右丞、左右侍郎之下，诸司四品之上，现在反而在少卿之下，不对，应该加以改正。 
English: The left and right illegitimate children were allowed to be in the same class as the left and right junior vassals and the right and left junior vassals, but now they are in the same class as the junior vassals. This is not right and should be corrected.

古文：乙亥，以苏州刺史孙晟为桂州刺史、桂管观察使。
现代文：三十日，以苏州刺史孙晟为桂州刺史、桂管观察使。
English: On the 30th, Sun Yat-sen, the governor of Suzhou, was appointed as the governor of Guizhou and the Guizhou observation envoy.

古文：荆河自陕州至河阴，水色如墨，流入汴口，至汴州，一宿而复。
现代文：荆河从陕州至河阴，水色像墨，流入汴口，到汴州，一夜水又返回。
English: The water color of the Jing River is like ink from Shaanxi to Hebei. It flows into Hekou, flows into Luzhou, and then flows back again overnight.

古文：又汴郑管内乌皆入田绪、李纳之境，衔柴为城，方十余里，高二三尺，绪、纳恶而去之，信宿复如之，乌口皆流血。
现代文：另外，汴郑管辖区内乌鸦都进入了田绪、李纳的境内。口衔木柴做城，方圆十多里，高二、三尺，田绪、李纳大为厌恶而将乌鸦赶走，隔了一夜又回来筑城，乌鸦口在流血。
English: In addition, the crows in the jurisdiction of Yu Zheng all entered the territory of Tianxu and Li Na. The mouth is made of firewood, the circumference is more than ten miles, the high school is two or three feet, Tianxu and Li Na are disgusted and drive the crows away, and after one night they come back to build the city, the crow's mouth is bleeding.

古文：八月，以权判吏部侍郎吉中孚为中书舍人。
现代文：八月，以暂时代理吏部侍郎这个较低职务的吉中孚为中书舍人。
English: In August, Ji Zhongfu, who was temporarily assigned to the lower position of the secretary of the administrative department, was appointed as the secretary of the middle school.

古文：乙酉，检校司徒、兼太子太师、汧国公李勉薨。
现代文：十日，检校司徒、兼太子太师、汗干国公李勉去世。
English: On the 10th, the inspector of the school, the prince and the prince's teacher, and the Khan Khan, Li Min, passed away.

古文：甲午，京师地震，其声如雷。
现代文：十九日，京师地震，声音如雷。
English: On the 19th, there was an earthquake in Beijing, and the sound was like thunder.

古文：九月丙午，诏： 比者卿士内外，左右朕躬，朝夕公门，勤劳庶务。
现代文：九月三日，皇上下诏道： 近来公卿、士、朝廷内外官员，辅助朕，公门早晚勤劳政务。
English: On September 3, the emperor issued an imperial edict: "Recently, nobles, officials, and officials inside and outside the imperial court have come to assist me, and the public servants have been working hard on government affairs morning and evening.

古文：今方隅无事，烝庶小康，其正月晦日、三月三日、九月九日三节日，宜任文武百僚选胜地追赏为乐。
现代文：现在边疆无事，黎民已达小康，现在我决定，正月最后一天、三月三日、九月九日三个节日，应该任文武百官选择风景优美的地方给他们赏赐，让他们欢乐。
English: Now that there is no trouble on the border and the people of Lai have achieved a little prosperity, I have now decided that on the last day of the first month, March 3rd and September 9th, the three festivals, the civil and military officials should be allowed to choose a beautiful place to reward them and make them happy.

古文：每节宰相及常参官共赐钱五百贯文，翰林学士一百贯文，左右神威、神策等军每厢共赐钱五百贯文，金吾、英武、威远诸卫将军共赐钱二百贯文，客省奏事共赐钱一百贯文，委度支每节前五日支付，永为常式。 
现代文：每次节日宰相及定时入朝之官共赐钱五百贯，翰林学士一百贯，左右神威、神策军等军每一厢赐钱五百贯，金吾、英武、威远等各卫将军共赐钱二百贯，外地来中书省门下省奏事的官员共赐钱一百贯，委任度支部门每次节前五日支付，永远成为定规。 
English: Each festival, the prime minister and the officials who regularly enter the imperial court will give a total of 500 kroner, the scholars of Hanlin will give 100 kroner, the armies of the left and right divine powers and divine powers will give 500 kroner per compartment, the generals of the guards such as Kingu, Yingwu, and Wei Yuan will give 200 kroner, the officials who come to the provinces under the Ministry of Education and Culture will give 100 kroner, and the appointed branch departments will pay five days before each festival, and it will always be a fixed rule.

古文：戊申，晋慈隰观察使崔汉衡加都防御使名。
现代文：四日，晋、慈、隰观察使崔汉衡加给都防御使名义。
English: On the fourth day, Jin, Ci, and Zou observed Cui Hanheng and gave him the title of the capital defense envoy.

古文：癸丑，赐百僚宴于曲江亭，仍作《重阳赐宴诗》六韵赐之。
现代文：九日，皇上赐百官在曲江亭宴会，仍旧作重阳赐宴诗六韵十二句赐给群臣。
English: On the 9th day, the emperor gave a banquet to hundreds of officials at Qujiang Pavilion, and still made a heavy sun-giving banquet poem with six rhymes and twelve sentences to give to the ministers.

古文：群臣毕和，上品其优劣，以刘太真、李纾为上等，鲍防、于邵为次等，张濛、殷亮等二十人又次之。唯李晟、马燧、李泌三宰相之诗不加优劣。
现代文：群臣作诗奉和完毕，皇上评价群臣诗之优劣，以刘太真、李纾之诗为上等，鲍防、于邵为次等，张氵蒙、殷亮等二十人又次一等，只有李晟、马燧、李泌三宰相之诗不加优劣的评定。
English: After the poems of the group of ministers were presented to the emperor, the emperor evaluated the merits and demerits of the poems of the group of ministers, with the poems of Liu Taizhen and Li Xi as the highest grade, Bao Bao and Yu Shao as the second grade, and Zhang Yimeng, Yin Liang and other twenty people as the second grade. Only the poems of the three prime ministers, Li Xi, Ma Xi and Li Jie, were not rated as superior or inferior.

古文：庚申，吐蕃寇邠、宁、坊等州。
现代文：十六日，吐蕃入侵、宁、坊等州。
English: On the 16th, Tubo invaded Ning, Fang and other prefectures.

古文：冬十月，诏中书门下选常参官曾为牧宰有理行者以名闻。
现代文：冬十月，皇上诏令中书省门下省选拔常参官中曾经做过州牧守而且善于治理的人向皇上报告。
English: In the winter of October, the emperor issued a decree to report to the emperor those who had once served as provincial pastors and were good at governance among the provincial selection officials under the Ministry of Education.

古文：宰臣奏于颀、董晋等十二人前任有治迹，诏颀等于左右丞各言政要，左右丞条奏，上乃御宣政殿亲试其言而后用之。
现代文：宰相等人上奏说于颀、董晋等十二人先前任郡守州牧时治政有成绩，诏令于颀等人在尚书左丞、尚书右丞的厅堂里各人陈述治理地方的施政要领。尚书左丞、尚书右丞然后按照情况逐条上奏，皇上于是驾到宣政殿亲自考核他们的治政的论述而后使用他们。
English: The prime minister and others reported to the emperor that twelve people, including Yu Xi and Dong Jin, who had previously served as county governors and state pastors, had made achievements in governance. The emperor ordered Yu Xi and others to each present the essentials of local governance in the hall of Shang Shuzhong and Shang Shuzhong. Shang Shuzhong and Shang Shuzhong then reported to the emperor one by one according to the situation. The emperor then drove to the Xuan Zheng Palace to personally examine their discussion of governance and then use them.

古文：宰臣李泌请中和节日令百官进农书，司农献穜之种，王公戚里上春服，士庶以刀尺相问遗，村社作中和酒，祭勾芒以祈年谷，从之。
现代文：十二日，以右神策将军李长荣为河阳三城怀州团练使，赐名为元。十四日，回纥公主率领侍从六十多人、马三千匹前来迎接咸安公主，皇上命令刑部尚书关播送咸安公主返回回纥。十二月八日，少府监李观去世。贞元五年春正月一日是朔日。十二日，宰相李泌请求在中和节日让百官进献农书，司农卿献上禾童、衸的种子，王公外戚献上春服；士子和庶民百姓以剪刀和尺互相赠送准备裁剪衣服，乡村做中和酒；祭祀古代主管树木的神以祈求谷子丰收，皇上同意了。
English: On the 12th, General Li Chang Rong of the Right Divine Providence was named as the training envoy of the Huai Zhou Regiment in the three cities of Heyang, and was given the name Yuan. On the 14th, Princess Huizhou led the attendants from more than 60 people and 3,000 horses to meet Princess Haman, and the emperor ordered the criminal department to send Princess Haman back to Huizhou. On December 8, the young prefect Li Gu passed away. The first day of the first month of spring in the fifth year of Zhenyuan was the new moon. On the 12th, Prime Minister Li Xiu requested that hundreds of officials should donate agricultural books on the Chinese New

古文：丁卯，右散骑常侍宜城县子柳浑卒。
现代文：二十四日，右散骑常侍宜城县子柳浑去世。
English: On the 24th, Ziliuhun, a right-hand rider and a regular attendant of Yicheng County, passed away.

古文：二月己丑，贬京兆尹郑叔则为永州长史。
现代文：二月十六日，贬京兆尹郑叔则为永州长史。
English: On February 16th, the deposed governor of Beijing, Yin Zhengshu, became the permanent governor.

古文：戊戌，以沧景留后程怀直为沧景观察使。
现代文：二十五日，以沧景留后程怀直为沧景观察使。
English: On the 25th, Cheng Huai Zhi, who stayed behind to observe the vicissitudes, was appointed as the observer of the vicissitudes.

古文：庚子，以大理卿董晋为门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事；以御史中丞窦参为中书侍郎、平章事兼转运使；以户部尚书，依前度支转运副使。
现代文：二十七日，以大理卿董晋为门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事；以御史中丞窦参为中书侍郎、平章事兼转运使；以户部侍郎班宏为户部尚书，仍依先前为度支转运副使。
English: On the 27th, he appointed Daliqing Dong Jin as a subordinate attendant and Taira Shoshoji as a subordinate chushim; he appointed Mishi Chujo Douzen as a subordinate chushim attendant and Taira Shoshoji as a transfer envoy; he appointed Hukubei attendant Banhong as Hukubei Shoshoji, and he continued to be the vice-envoy of Doushi transfer envoy as before.

古文：三月甲辰，中书侍郎、同平章事李泌卒。
现代文：三月二日，中书侍郎、同平章事李泌去世。
English: On March 2nd, Li Xiu, the chief secretary of the Chinese Academy of Letters, and Tongping Zhangji passed away.

古文：乙卯，以兵部郎中姚南仲为御史中丞，司农卿薛珏为京兆尹，以大理卿李速为黔州刺史、黔州观察使。
现代文：十三日，以兵部郎中姚南仲为御史中丞，司农卿薛珏为京兆尹，以大理卿李速为黔州刺史、黔州观察使。
English: On the 13th, Yao Nanzhong, the son of the Minister of Military Affairs, was appointed as the Vice-President of History, Xue Yao, the Minister of Agriculture, was appointed as the Vice-President of History, and Dali Sir Li Hao was appointed as the Vice-President of History and the Vice-President of Observation of Zhangzhou.

古文：癸亥，以资州刺史庞复为安南都护、本管经略使。
现代文：二十一日，以资州刺史庞复为安南都护、本管辖区经略使。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Zizhou's Zhangshi Pangfu was appointed as the guardian of the capital of Annan and the special envoy of this jurisdiction.

古文：丙寅，贬礼部侍郎刘太真为信州刺史。
现代文：二十四日，贬礼部侍郎刘太真为信州刺史。
English: On the 24th, Liu Taizhen, a waiter of the ceremonial club, became the history of Shinshu.

古文：以给事中杜黄裳为河南尹。
现代文：以给事中杜黄裳为河南尹。
English: Du Huangxiang is said to be Henan Yin.

古文：戊辰，诏以李怀光外孙燕八八为左卫率府胄曹参军，赐姓名曰李承绪，仍赐钱千贯，俾自营居业。
现代文：二十六日，皇上诏令以李怀光的外孙燕八八为左卫率府胄曹参军，赐姓名曰李承绪，又赐钱一千贯，使他自己营业谋生。
English: On the 26th, the emperor issued an imperial edict to appoint Li Huai Guang's grandson Yan 88 as the left guard to lead the government to join the army, giving him the name Li Chengxu, and giving him a thousand yuan to make his own business and earn a living.

古文：夏四月乙未，以太子少师萧昕为工部尚书，致仕，给半禄、料，永为常式。
现代文：夏四月二十三日，以太子少师萧昕为工部尚书，辞了官以后，供给一半俸禄，一半的食料钱，永久作为常规。
English: On the 23rd day of the 4th month of the summer, Xiao Zi, a minor teacher of Etheric, was promoted to Shang Shu of the Ministry of Industry. After resigning from the post, he was provided with half of the salary and half of the food money, as a permanent rule.

古文：初致仕官只给半禄，无料，上加之以待老臣，半料自昕始也。
现代文：当初，辞职官员只给一半俸禄，没有食料钱，皇上增加以恩待老臣，给一半食料钱从萧昕开始。
English: At first, the resigning officials only gave half of the salary, but no food money. The emperor increased the favors to the old minister, and started to give half of the food money to Mao Xiaoqi.

古文：五月戊辰，宋州麦一茎九岐者百余本。
现代文：五月二十七日，宋州小麦一根茎上有九个穗子，共有一百多棵。
English: On May 27th, there were nine ears of corn on a stalk of Songzhou wheat, a total of more than a hundred trees.

古文：六月乙未，以光禄卿裴腆为桂管观察使。
现代文：六月二十四日，以光禄卿裴腆为桂管观察使。
English: On June 24th, Guangluqing Pei Jun was appointed as the Guizhou Observation Envoy.

古文：秋七月，以嗣滕王湛然为太子宾客、入回纥使。
现代文：秋七月，以嗣滕王湛然为太子宾客，作为赴回纥的使者。
English: In autumn and July, Prince Teng Wang's heir, Tanran, was the prince's guest, as an envoy to Huizhou.

古文：八月辛未，以同州刺史窦觎为户部侍郎。
现代文：八月二日，以同州刺史窦觎为户部侍郎。
English: On August 2nd, he was appointed as a household attendant by the governor of the same prefecture, Doo Yeon.

古文：九月壬戌，诏褚遂良已下至李晟等二十七，图形于凌烟阁，以继国初功臣之像。
现代文：九月二十三日，皇上诏令，从褚遂良以下到李晟等二十七人，画图像在凌烟阁，来继承开国初期画功臣像的遗风。
English: On September 23rd, the emperor issued an imperial edict, ordering 27 people, from Gong Suiliang to Li Qian, to paint images at Lingyakou, to carry on the tradition of painting heroes in the early days of the founding of the People's Republic of China.

古文：冬十月丙午，西川韦皋奏与东蛮合力大破吐蕃于故巂州，擒其将臧遮遮。
现代文：冬十月，西川韦皋上奏与东蛮合力在原来的辒州大破吐蕃，活捉吐蕃将领臧遮遮。
English: In the winter of October, Nishikawa Wei and Dongban worked together to destroy the spade in the original Zhangzhou, and captured the spade alive.

古文：自是吐蕃挫锐，竟复巂州。
现代文：从此吐蕃的锐气被挫，终于收复了辒州。
English: From then on, the vigor of Tubo was frustrated, and finally recovered Zhangzhou.

古文：庚午，百僚请复徽号，不允。
现代文：二日，百官请求恢复徽号，皇上不同意。
English: On the second day, a hundred officials requested the restoration of the emblem, but the emperor did not agree.

古文：己丑，易定节度使、检校司空、平章事张孝忠以擅出兵袭蔚州，降检校司空为左仆射。
现代文：二十一日，易定节度使、检校司空、平章事张孝忠因为擅自出兵袭击蔚州，降检校司空为左仆射。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, because Zhang Xiaozhong sent troops to attack Ulshu without authorization, the inspector of the inspection of the school, the inspector of the inspection of the school, and the inspector of the inspection of the school were demoted.

古文：桂管观察、御史中丞孙晟卒。
现代文：桂管观察使、御史中丞孙晟去世。
English: Gui Guan Observer, Historian Sun Zheng passed away.

古文：癸巳，以户部侍郎窦觎为扬州长史、兼御史大夫、淮南节度使。
现代文：二十五日，以户部侍郎窦觎为扬州长史、兼御史大夫、淮南节度使。
English: On the 25th, Dou Yu, a chamberlain of the Household Division, was appointed as Yang's prefectural governor of history, concurrently the imperial governor of history, and Huainan's festival envoy.

古文：十二月庚午，回纥汨咄录长寿天亲昆伽可汗卒。
现代文：十二月三日，回纥汨咄禄长寿天亲加可汗去世。
English: On December 3, the Long-Lived Relative and Khan passed away.

古文：辛未，以淮南节度使杜亚为东都留守、畿汝州都防御使，兵部侍郎裴谞为河南尹，司农卿李翼为陕虢都防御观察使。
现代文：四日，以淮南节度使杜亚为东都留守、畿、汝州都防御使，兵部侍郎裴氵胥为河南尹，司农卿李翼为陕虢都防御使、观察使。
English: On the 4th, on the occasion of the Huainan Festival, Duya was appointed as the defense envoy for Dongdu, Gii and Ruzhou, the military secretary Pei Jun was appointed as the defense envoy for Henan, and the secretary of agriculture Li Ying was appointed as the defense envoy and observer for Shaanxi and Fujian.

古文：壬申，以陕虢观察使杜祐检校礼部尚书，兼扬州长史、淮南节度使。
现代文：五日，以陕虢观察使杜佑任检校礼部尚书，兼扬州长史、淮南节度使。
English: On the fifth day, Du You was appointed as the inspector of the school's etiquette department with the observation of Shaanxi and Fujian, as well as the governor of Yangzhou and the governor of Huainan.

古文：六年春正月戊辰朔。
现代文：贞元六年春正月一日是朔日。
English: The first day of the first month of spring in the sixth year of the Zhengyuan era is the new year's day.

古文：戊申，大雪。
现代文：十一日，下大雪。
English: On the 11th, it snowed heavily.

古文：二月戊辰朔，百僚会宴于曲江亭，上赋《中和节群臣赐宴》七韵。
现代文：二月一日是朔日，百官在曲江亭宴会，皇上赋《中和节群臣赐宴》七韵十四句诗。
English: The first day of February was the New Year's Day. Hundreds of officials held a banquet at the Qujiang Pavilion. The emperor wrote a seven-rhyme, fourteen-sentence poem entitled "The Mid-Autumn Festival Banquet for the Subjects."

古文：是日，百僚进《兆人本业》三卷，司农献黍粟各一斗。
现代文：这一天，百官进上《兆人本业》三卷，司农官员献上黍米粟米各一斗。
English: On this day, hundreds of officials entered the three volumes of "Trillion People's Business," and officials of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs presented one bucket of glutinous rice each.

古文：岐州无忧王寺有佛指骨寸余，先是取来禁中供养，乙亥，诏送还本寺。
现代文：岐州无忧王寺有一寸多长的佛指骨，先前曾取来在宫中供养，八日，皇上诏令送还本寺。
English: The Buddha's phalanx, which is more than an inch long, was previously taken to the palace for maintenance. On the 8th, the emperor sent it back to the temple.

古文：珍戌，以中书舍人陆贽权兵部侍郎。
现代文：十九日，以中书舍人陆贽暂代兵部侍郎。
English: On the 19th, Lu Yao, who had abandoned Chinese calligraphy, became the provisional Hyobu chamberlain.

古文：甲午，以吏部侍郎刘滋为吏部尚书。
现代文：二十七日，以吏部侍郎刘滋为吏部尚书。
English: On the 27th, Liu Shizhu, a chamberlain of the cadres, was appointed as the secretary of cadres.

古文：丁酉，王武俊守隶州将赵镐以郡归李纳，武俊怒，以兵攻之。
现代文：三十日，王武俊部下守棣州的将领赵镐率棣州归附了李纳，王武俊大怒，率兵攻打李纳。
English: On the 30th, Wang Wujun's subordinate, the general Zhao Jun, who was guarding Zhangzhou, led the troops to annex Zhangzhou to Li Na. Wang Wujun was furious and led the troops to attack Li Na.

古文：三月庚子，百僚宴于曲江亭，上赋《上巳诗》一篇赐之。
现代文：三月三日，百官在曲江亭宴会，皇上赋《上巳诗》一篇以赐给百官。
English: On March 3rd, at a banquet held at Qujiang Pavilion, the emperor bestowed a copy of "Shang Si Poem" to the officials.

古文：壬寅，浑瑊自河中来朝。
现代文：五日，珲王咸从河中前来朝见。
English: On the fifth day, King Ham came from the river to see the emperor.

古文：戊午，牂柯蛮来朝。
现代文：二十一日，柯蛮前来朝见。
English: On the 21st, Ke Man came to see me in the morning.

古文：甲子，以旱，日色如血，无光。
现代文：二十七日，因为干旱，日色血红，无光亮。
English: On the 27th, because of the drought, the sun was blood red and there was no light.

古文：夏四月甲辰，大风雷。
现代文：夏闰四月八日，大风大雷。
English: On the 8th day of the 4th lunar month, there was a strong wind and thunder.

古文：闰月庚申，太白、辰星聚东井。
现代文：二十四日，太白星、辰星聚集在东井星。
English: On the 24th, Taibai Star and Chensing Star gathered in Dongjing Star.

古文：戊午，始雨。
现代文：二十二日，才开始下雨。
English: On the 22nd, it started to rain.

古文：五月丙寅朔，上御紫宸受朝。
现代文：五月一日是朔日，皇上驾到紫宸殿接受朝贺。
English: The first day of May was New Year's Day, and the Emperor drove to Shishinden to receive morning greetings.

古文：上以是月一阴生，臣子道长，父子必以是朔面焉，故取朔日受朝。壬午，以宁州刺史范希朝为单于大都护、麟胜节度使。
现代文：十七日，以宁州刺史范希朝为单于大都护、麟胜节度使。
English: On the 17th, with the help of Fan Xichang, a famous Ningzhou poet, he was sent to Daduo and Linsheng.

古文：是夏，淮南、浙东西、福建等道旱，井泉多涸，人渴乏，疫死者众。
现代文：这年夏天，淮南、浙东、浙西、福建等道旱灾，井水泉水大多干枯，人们干渴缺水，害瘟疫死的人很多。
English: This summer, droughts hit Huainan, East Zhejiang, West Zhejiang, Fujian and other provinces, most wells and springs dried up, people were thirsty and short of water, and many people died of the plague.

古文：秋七月丙寅，淮南节度使窦觎卒。
现代文：秋七月二日，淮南节度使窦觎去世。
English: On the 2nd day of the 7th month of autumn, Dou Jun passed away.

古文：癸酉，复呼亲王母曰太妃，公主母曰太仪。
现代文：九日，皇上再次呼亲王之母曰太妃，呼公主母曰太仪。
English: On the 9th, the Emperor once again called the Prince's mother "Taifei" and the Princess's mother "Taiyi."

古文：八月丁未，工部尚书致仕鲍防卒。
现代文：八月十四日，工部尚书鲍防辞官后去世。
English: On August 14, Shangshu Bao of the Ministry of Industry and Commerce died after resigning from his post.

古文：九月乙丑，收诸道进奏院官印，悉毁之。
现代文：九月二日，把各道进奏院官员的官印全部收回毁掉。
English: On September 2nd, the official seals of all officials entering the Song Academy were taken back and destroyed.

古文：己卯，诏： 十一月八日，有事于南郊太庙，行从官吏将士等，一切并令自备食物。
现代文：十六日，皇上下诏曰： 十一月八日在南郊太庙祭祀，陪同而行的从官将吏士兵等人，一切都令他们自备食物。
English: On the 16th, the Emperor issued an edict: On November 8th, there will be a ceremony at the Southern Suburbs Imperial Temple, accompanied by officials, generals, soldiers, etc. They are all required to bring their own food.

古文：其诸司先无公厨者，以本司阙职物充。
现代文：各司先前没有公厨，以本司缺职的官员物资补充。
English: Previously, each division did not have a public chef, and officials who were absent from their duties in this division were supplemented with supplies.

古文：其王府官，度支量给廪物。
现代文：王府各官，由度支根据实情供给食物。
English: All officials of the royal court should be provided with food according to the actual situation.

古文：其仪仗礼物，并仰御史撙节处分。 
现代文：关于仪仗礼物，都仰仗御史节省处理。 
English: With regard to ceremonial gifts, it all depends on how you handle it.

古文：冬十月己亥，文武百僚京城道俗抗表请徽号，上曰： 朕以春夏亢旱，粟麦不登，朕精诚祈祷，获降甘雨，既致丰穰，告谢郊庙。
现代文：冬十月七日，文武百官、京城中俗人和道士坚决上表请求皇上加徽号，皇上道 ：朕由于春夏干旱，粟、麦无收，朕精诚祈祷，获得上天降下甘雨，既然已经丰收，朕向太庙禀告。
English: On the 7th day of October in winter, hundreds of civil and military officials, laymen and Taoists in Beijing resolutely petitioned the emperor to add the emblem. The emperor said, "Due to the drought in spring and summer, there was no harvest of millet and wheat. I prayed earnestly and obtained the rain from heaven. Since there was a good harvest, I reported to the Imperial Temple.

古文：朕倘因礼祀而受徽号，是有为为之。
现代文：朕倘因为祭祀天神而接受徽号，这是有所为才去做的，这就不好了。
English: If I accept the badge because I am a great worshiper of the gods, it is because I have something to do, and that is not good.

古文：勿烦固请也。 
现代文：不要麻烦你们坚决请求啊！ 
English: Don't bother with your entreaties!

古文：辛亥，回纥吊祭使、鸿胪卿郭锋复命，回纥遣达北勒梅录将军来，告九姓回纥登里逻没密施俱录忠贞昆伽可汗之丧。
现代文：十九日，回纥吊祭使、鸿胪卿郭锋返回京师向皇上报告吊祭回纥可汗的情况。回纥派遣达北勒梅录将军前来，报告九姓回纥登里逻没密施俱录忠贞加可汗之丧事情况。
English: On the 19th, Guo Feng, the emissary of the Uighur hanging ceremony, returned to Beijing to report to the emperor the situation of the hanging ceremony of the Uighur khan. The Uighurs sent General Dabai Le Mei Luo to report the funeral situation of the nine surnames Uighur Dengli Luo Ming Shi Qu Luo Zhongzheng and Khan.

古文：十一月庚午，日南至，上亲祀昊天上帝于郊丘。
现代文：十一月八日，冬至日，皇上亲自在郊外圆丘祭祀昊天上帝。
English: On November 8th, the winter solstice, the emperor himself went to a round mound in the suburbs to offer sacrifices to the God of Heaven.

古文：礼毕还宫，御丹凤楼宣赦，见禁囚徒减罪一等，立仗将士及诸军兵，赐十作万段匹。
现代文：礼毕回宫，驾到丹凤楼宣布大赦，被囚禁的犯人减罪一等。在殿庭及宫门站立守卫的仪仗将士及各军兵，赐给他们十八万匹绸缎。
English: After returning to the palace, he drove to the Danfeng Tower to announce an amnesty, and the prisoners were reduced to the first class. The ceremonial soldiers and soldiers who stood guard in the palace courtyard and the palace gate were given 180,000 silk cocoons.

古文：今后刺史、县令以四考为限。
现代文：今后刺史、县令以四次考核为限度。
English: In the future, the history and county ordinance will be limited to four assessments.

古文：青州李纳以棣州还王武俊，并其兵士三千。
现代文：青州李纳把棣州归还给王武俊，连他的三千兵士一并归还。
English: Qingzhou Li Na returned Zhangzhou to Wang Wujun, together with his three thousand soldiers.

古文：是岁，吐蕃陷北庭都护府，节度使杨袭古奔西州。
现代文：这年，吐蕃攻陷我北庭都护府，节度使杨袭古奔逃到西州。
English: In that year, Tubo invaded and occupied the capital of the Northern Court, and Yang Hegu fled to Xizhou.

古文：回纥大相颉干迦斯绐袭古，请合军收复北庭，乃杀袭古，安西因是阻绝，唯西州犹固守之。
现代文：回纥宰相颉干迦斯欺骗杨袭古，请求与他联合军队攻击回纥，收复北庭，杨袭古听信了，结果回纥杀了杨袭古，安西从此与中原断绝不通，惟有一个西州固守着。
English: Uighur chancellor Uighur Khan Qas deceived Yang Huigu and asked him to join forces with him to attack Uighur and recover the Northern Court. Yang Huigu listened, and as a result, Uighur Khan killed Yang Huigu. Since then, Anxi has never communicated with the Central Plains, but one western state has been adhered to.

古文：回纥亦为吐蕃所逼，取浮图川，乃迁部落羊马于牙帐之南以避之。
现代文：回纥也被吐蕃所逼迫，被吐蕃攻占了浮图川，回纥只有迁徙部落羊马到牙帐之南而躲避他们。
English: The Uyghurs were also persecuted by the Tuyghurs. The Tuyghurs conquered the Futu River, and the Uyghurs only avoided them by migrating to the south of Tibet.

古文：七年春正月壬戌朔。
现代文：贞元七年春正月一日是朔日。
English: The first day of the first month of spring in the seventh year of the Zhengyuan era was the new year's day.

古文：己巳，襄王僙薨。
现代文：八日，襄王李亻黄去世。
English: On the 8th, the King of Xiangyang, Li Shuguang, passed away.

古文：庚辰，以湖南观察使裴胄为洪州刺史、江西观察使，以常州刺史李衡为御史中丞。
现代文：十九日，以湖南观察裴胄为洪州刺史、江西观察使，以常州刺史李衡为潭州刺史、湖南观察使。
English: On the 19th, Hunan observer Pei Hao was appointed as Hongzhou historian and Jiangxi observer, and Changzhou historian Li Heng was appointed as Tanzhou historian and Hunan observer.

古文：二月己巳，泾原帅刘昌复筑平凉城。
现代文：蔡州设置汝南县。黑衣大食国派遣使者前来朝贡。
English: Caizhou set up Runan County. The black-clad big-eating country sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：城去故原州一百五十里，本原之属县，地当御戎之冲要。
现代文：以中书舍人韩皋为御史中丞。二月七日，泾原大帅刘昌再次修筑平凉城。城距离旧原州城一百五十里，本来这里是原州的下属县，地形正当抵御戎狄的交通要道。
English: On February 7th, Liu Chang, the commander-in-chief of the Yuan Dynasty, started to rebuild Pingliang City. The city is 150 miles away from the former Wuzhou City. Originally, it was a subordinate county of Wuzhou. The topography was right to resist the military invasion. It was an important transportation route.

古文：昌复浃辰而功毕，分兵戍之，边患稍弭。
现代文：刘昌再次用了十二天时间将城墙筑好，然后分兵把守，边疆的祸患才渐渐平息。
English: Liu Chang once again took twelve days to build the city wall, and then divided the army to guard it, and the border disaster gradually subsided.

古文：庚子，侍中浑瑊自河中来朝。
现代文：九日，侍中浑王咸从河中前来朝见。
English: On the ninth day, the chamberlain, Hun Wang Ham, came from the river to see the emperor.

古文：三月辛酉，陈许节度使曲环奏请权停当道冗官，待一二后，民力稍给，则复之。
现代文：三月一日，陈许节度使曲环上奏请求暂时停止在职的闲散官员，等待一二年以后，民力渐渐能够供给，再来恢复。
English: On March 1st, Chen Xu Jiedu made a request to temporarily suspend the idle officials on duty. After waiting for one or two years, the people's power will gradually be able to supply, and then resume.

古文：壬戌，左龙武统军戴休颜卒。
现代文：二日，左龙武统军戴休颜去世。
English: On the second day, Dai Xiuyan, the leader of the Left Dragon United Front Army, passed away.

古文：甲子，泾原节度使刘昌筑胡谷堡，改名彰义堡。
现代文：四日，泾原节度使刘昌建筑胡谷堡，后改名为彰义堡。
English: On the 4th, the Day of the Dragon King, Liu Chang built the Hutu Fort, which was later renamed the Changyi Fort.

古文：堡在平凉西三十五里，亦御戎之要。
现代文：这个堡在平凉城西边三十五里地方，也是抵御戎狄的交通要道。
English: This castle is located 35 miles west of Pingliang City, and is also a major transportation route for resisting the military.

古文：壬申，诏： 顷来赐衣，文彩不常，非制也。
现代文：十二日，皇上下诏曰： 近来赐给朝臣衣服，文彩不符合常规，这不符合制度。
English: On the 12th, the Emperor issued an edict saying: Recently, clothing given to courtiers does not conform to the norm, it does not conform to the system.

古文：朕今思之，宜有定制，节度使宜以鹘衔绶带，观察使宜以雁衔威仪。 
现代文：朕现在想来，应该有定规，节度使的衣服应该以鹘鸟口衔绶带的文彩，观察使应该有大雁衔威仪绶带的文彩。 
English: Now that I think about it, there should be a set of rules, and the clothes made by the festival should have the color of the ostrich's mouth and the ribbon, and the clothes made by the observation should have the color of the wild goose's mouth and the ribbon.

古文：威仪，瑞草也。
现代文：威仪，是吉祥的草。
English: Dignity is an auspicious grass.

古文：关辅牛疫死，十亡五六。
现代文：关中畿辅京城附近耕牛害瘟疫死亡十分之五六。
English: In Guanzhong, Kifu, and the vicinity of the capital city, the death rate from the plague caused by ploughing cattle is 56 out of 10.

古文：上遣中使以诸道两税钱卖牛，散给畿民无牛者。
现代文：皇上派遣太监为使者，把各道收的两税钱买牛，散发给京城附近民众没有牛的农民。
English: The emperor sent eunuchs as envoys to buy cattle with the two tax money collected from each province and distribute it to farmers near the capital who did not have cattle.

古文：辛巳，诏神威、神策六军将士自相讼，军司推劾；与百姓相讼，委府县推劾；小事移牒，大事奏取处分，军司、府县不得相侵。
现代文：二十一日，皇上诏令曰：神威、神策六军将士自己内部打官司，由军中司法官员追究他的罪状；如果军人与百姓打官司，就委托府、县究其罪状；小事情就发送公文报告，大事情上奏朝廷给予解决。军队司法部门、府、县不得互相侵扰。
English: On the 21st, the Emperor's edict said: "Shenwei and Shenke, soldiers of the Sixth Army, should conduct their own internal lawsuits, and the military judicial officials should investigate their criminal charges; if soldiers and civilians engage in lawsuits, they should entrust the prefectural and county governments to investigate their criminal charges; small matters should be reported in official documents, and large matters should be reported to the Imperial Court for resolution. The judicial departments of the military, prefectural and county governments should not interfere with each other.

古文：癸未，义武军节度使、检校司空、平章事张孝忠卒。
现代文：二十三日，义武军节度使、检校司空、平章事张孝忠去世。
English: On the 23rd, Zhang Xiaotong, the festival envoy of the Volunteer Army, the inspector of the school, and the general Zhang Xiaotong passed away.

古文：己未，安南首领杜英翰叛，攻都护府，都护高正平忧死。
现代文：夏四月十日，以太子太师辞官的萧昕去世。汴州贡献白马。二十九日，安南首领杜英翰叛变，攻打安南都护府，都护高正平忧愤而死。
English: On the 10th day of the 4th month of the summer, Xiao Zhen, the eunuch-teacher-dictator, passed away. Zhangzhou contributed a white horse. On the 29th day, the leader of Annan, Du Yinghan, rebelled and attacked the Annan tutelary capital, and the tutelary Gao Zhengping died of grief and anger.

古文：五月庚申朔，上御宣政殿见百官，从新制也。
现代文：五月一日是朔日，皇上驾到宣政殿会见百官，这是依照新的制度。
English: The first day of May was the New Year's Day, and the Emperor drove to the Hall of State to meet with hundreds of officials, which was in accordance with the new system.

古文：辛未，置柔远军于安南都护府。甲申，端王遇薨。
现代文：十二日，在安南都护府设置柔远军。二十五日，端王李遇去世。
English: On the 12th, the Zhuoyuan Army was set up in the Annan Capital Protection Area. On the 25th, King Duan Li Yu passed away.

古文：许州献白乌。
现代文：许州贡献白马。
English: Xuzhou contributed a white horse.

古文：戊子，以衡州刺史齐映为桂管观察使。
现代文：二十九日，以衡州刺史齐映为桂管观察使。
English: On the 29th, Hengzhou Jishi Qiying was appointed as the Guizhou Observation Envoy.

古文：六月庚子朔。
现代文：六月一日是朔日。
English: June 1st is New Year's Day.

古文：乙巳，太常卿崔纵卒。
现代文：十六日，太常卿崔纵去世。
English: On the 16th, Grand Admiral Cui Zongxuan passed away.

古文：秋七月庚午，以信州刺史郑叔则为福建观察使。
现代文：秋七月十一日，以信州刺史郑叔则为福建观察使。
English: On the 11th day of the 7th month of autumn, the Fujian Observer was sent to Shinshu.

古文：癸酉，上幸章敬寺，赋诗九韵，皇太子与群臣毕和，题之寺壁。
现代文：十四日，皇上驾到章敬寺，赋诗九韵十八句，皇太子与群臣全部作诗奉和，然后将诗题写到寺壁上。
English: On the 14th, the emperor drove to Zhangjing Temple, where he composed a poem of nine rhymes and eighteen sentences. The crown prince and his ministers all composed poems and then wrote the title of the poem on the temple wall.

古文：戊寅，以邕王謜为义武军节度使、易定观察等大使，以定州刺史张升云为留后。
现代文：十九日，以邕王讠原为义武军节度使、易定观察使，以定州刺史张升云为留后。
English: On the 19th, Gong Wang Qianyuan was appointed as the festival envoy of the volunteer army, Yiding observation envoy, and Zhang Shengyun, the chief historian of Dingzhou, as the remaining envoy.

古文：庚辰，以虔州刺史赵昌为安南都护、经略招讨使。
现代文：二十一日，以虔州刺史赵昌为安南都护、经略招讨使。
English: On the twenty-first day, Zhao Chang, the governor of Qianzhou, was appointed as the guardian of the capital of Annan and the envoy of the envoy.

古文：八月己丑，以翰林学士归从敬为工部尚书。
现代文：八月一日，以翰林学士归从敬为工部尚书。
English: On August 1st, it was announced that Hanlin Bachelors would be promoted to the Ministry of Industry.

古文：甲午，给事中郑瑜为中书舍人。
现代文：六日，给事中郑瑜为中书舍人。
English: On the 6th, Zheng Yu resigned from the Chinese Academy of Letters.

古文：丙申，贬宗正卿李翰为雅王傅；翰林学士陆贽为兵部侍郎。罢学士。
现代文：八日，贬宗正卿李翰为雅王傅；翰林学士陆贽为兵部侍郎，罢免学士。
English: On the 8th, Zongzheng Zhengqing Li Han was demoted to Ya Wang Fu; Hanlin Baccalaureate Lu Yao was demoted to Heibu Zhilong, and the Baccalaureate was removed.

古文：庚戌，夏州奏开延化渠，引乌水入库狄泽，溉田二百顷。
现代文：二十二日，夏州上奏请求开凿延化渠，引乌水进入库狄泽，灌溉田地二百顷。
English: On the 22nd, Xiazhou submitted a request to dig and extend the canal, divert black water into Kudize, and irrigate 200 hectares of fields.

古文：九月庚申，兵部尚书致仕马炫卒。
现代文：九月二日，辞职的兵部尚书马炫去世。
English: On September 2nd, the resigned military commander Shang Shumaxuan passed away.

古文：冬十月癸丑，每御延英令诸司官长二人奏本司事。
现代文：冬十月二十六日，皇上每次驾到延英殿命令各司长官二人上奏本司工作。
English: On the 26th day of winter in October, the emperor ordered the directors of each division to report to him every time they arrived at Yan Ying Palace.

古文：寻又敕常参官每一日二人引对，访以政事，谓之巡对。
现代文：不久，皇上又命令固定参见皇上的官员每天二人在皇帝召见询问时答对，皇上咨询政事，把这叫做巡对。
English: Before long, the emperor also ordered that two of the emperor's officials should answer correctly every day when summoned by the emperor for questioning, and that the emperor should consult on political affairs. This was called the inspection.

古文：十一月乙丑，令常参官趋朝入阁，不得奔走。
现代文：十一月九日，命令固定朝见皇上的官员快步进朝廷入阁，不得奔跑。
English: On November 9th, the officials who were to see the emperor were ordered to walk briskly into the imperial court and into the cabinet, and were not allowed to run.

古文：周亲已下丧者禁惨服，朝会须服本色绫袍金玉带。
现代文：最亲近的人去世禁止穿浅色大丧服，朝见皇帝须穿本色绫缎袍金玉带。
English: It is forbidden to wear light-colored mourning clothes after the death of the closest person, and the emperor must wear a real-colored imperial robe with a gold band.

古文：丁酉，以前福建观察使吴凑为陕州长史、陕虢观察使。
现代文：十二月十一日，以前任福建观察使吴凑为陕州长史、陕虢观察使。
English: On December 11, Wu Qian, the former Fujian observation envoy, became the governor of Shaanxi Province and the Shaanxi and Fujian observation envoy.

古文：是冬无雪。
现代文：这年冬天无雪。
English: There was no snow this winter.

古文：八年春正月丙辰朔。
现代文：贞元八年春正月一日是朔日。
English: The first day of the first month of spring in the eighth year of the Jōgen era is the new year's day.

古文：癸酉，罢桂管经略招讨使。
现代文：十八日撤销桂管经略招讨使。
English: On the 18th, the Guizhou Provincial Party Committee revoked the invitation.

古文：二月丁亥，许州人李狗兒持杖入含元殿，击栏槛，又格擒者。
现代文：二月二日，许州人李狗儿手持棍棒进入含元殿，打坏了栏杆，又打擒捉他的宫中卫士。
English: On February 2, Li Guer from Huzhou entered the Hall of Han Yuan with a club in his hand, broke the railing, and beat up the palace guards who were trying to arrest him.

古文：诛之。
现代文：终将李狗儿杀死。
English: He eventually killed Li Gang'er.

古文：庚子，京师雨土。
现代文：十五日，京师地方下雨下了黄土。
English: On the 26th, a large amount of earth fell in Kyoto.

古文：己酉，吏部尚书李纾卒。
现代文：二十四日，吏部尚书李纟予去世。
English: On the twenty-fourth day of the month, the head of the personnel department, Shangshu Li, passed away.

古文：乙丑，山南东道节度使、检校户部尚书嗣曹王皋薨。
现代文：三月十一日，山南东道节度使、检校户部尚书嗣曹王李皋去世。
English: On March 11th, Cao Wang Lijun, the host of the festival in Shannan and the successor of Cao Wang Lijun, passed away.

古文：庚午，宣武军节度使、司徒、平章事刘玄佐卒。
现代文：十六日，宣武军节度使、司徒、平章事刘玄佐去世。
English: On the 16th, Liu Xuanzu, the commander of the Xuanwu Army, died.

古文：癸酉，剑南西川节度使韦皋奏请，有当道闲员官吏，增其俸禄，从之。
现代文：十九日，剑南西川节度使韦皋上奏请求，有些闲散官已经在职当权，应增加他们的薪俸，皇上听从了。
English: On the 19th, the Jian'nan Xichuan Festival made Wei Xuan request that some idle officials already in power should increase their salaries, and the emperor obeyed.

古文：己亥，以湖南观察使李衡为洪州刺史、江西观察使。
现代文：二十一日，以湖南观察使李衡为洪州刺史、江西观察使。
English: On the 21st, Li Heng, the Hunan Observation Envoy, became the Hongzhou Observation Envoy and the Jiangxi Observation Envoy.

古文：襄州军乱，掠府库民财殆尽，都将徐诚斩其乱首杨清潭，方止。
现代文：襄州军扰乱地方，抢掠府库及人民财物几乎抢光，都将徐诚将制造混乱的叛首杨清潭斩首，骚乱才停止。
English: The Xiangzhou army disrupted the localities, looted the government treasury and the people's property almost completely, and Xu Cheng decapitated Yang Qingtan, the rebel leader who created the chaos, before the riots stopped.

古文：丙子，以荆南节度使樊泽为襄州刺史、山南东道节度使，以江西观察使裴胄为江陵尹、荆南节度使。
现代文：二十二日，以荆南节度使樊泽为襄州刺史、山南东道节度使、以江西观察使裴胄为江陵尹、荆南节度使。
English: On the 22nd, with the Jingnan Festival, Heze was appointed as the top historian of Xiangzhou, Shannan as the host festival, with the observation of Jiangxi, Pei Yu was appointed as the Jiangling Yin, and Jingnan as the festival.

古文：以户部尚书班宏判度支，户部侍郎张滂为诸道盐铁转运使。
现代文：以户部尚书班宏兼任职务较低的度支使，户部侍郎张滂为各道盐铁转运使。
English: The head of the household department, Shang Shubanhong, also served as a lower-ranking deputy, while the head of the household department, Zhang Xi, served as a transfer agent for salt and iron.

古文：己卯，以陕虢观察使吴溱为汴州刺史、宣武军节度、汴宋等州观察使。
现代文：二十五日，以陕虢观察使吴凑为汴州刺史、宣武军节度使、汴州、宋州观察使。
English: On the 25th, with the observation of Shaanxi and Fujian, Wu Qian was appointed as the chief historian of Fujian, the festival envoy of the Xuanwu army, and the observation envoy of Fujian and Songzhou.

古文：辛巳，以同州刺史姚南仲为陕虢观察使。
现代文：二十七日，以同州刺史姚南仲为陕虢观察使。
English: On the 27th, Yao Nanzhong, the governor of the same prefecture, was appointed as the Shaanxi and Fujian observation envoy.

古文：壬午，以左庶子李充为京兆尹，以苏州刺史齐抗为潭州刺史、湖南观察使。
现代文：二十八日，以左庶子李充为京兆尹，以苏州刺史齐抗为潭州刺史、湖南观察使。
English: On the 28th, he appointed his left illegitimate son, Li Chong, as the Beijing Zhaoyun, and Suzhou Zhi Shi Qi as the Tanzhou Zhi Shi and Hunan Observation Envoy.

古文：夏四月丁丑，贬左金吾大将军嗣虢王则之为昭州司马，左谏议大夫、知制诰吴通玄为泉州司马，给事中窦申道州司马。
现代文：夏四月三日，贬左金吾大将军嗣虢王李则之为昭州司马，左谏议大夫、知制诰吴通玄为泉州司马，给事中窦申为道州司马。
English: On the 3rd day of the 4th month of the summer, the dethroned Great General of the Left Jingu, King Li, the heir to the throne, was appointed as the Sima of Zhaozhou, the doctor of the Left Jingu Council and the chancellor Wu Tongxuan was appointed as the Sima of Quanzhou, and Dou Shen was appointed as the Sima of Daozhou.

古文：戊子，以雅王傅李翰为金吾卫大将军。
现代文：四日，以雅王傅李翰为金吾卫大将军。
English: On the fourth day, Ya Wangfu Lihan was appointed as the general of King Wuwei.

古文：翰前为窦参所恶贬官，至是参败，上遽召翰，口授将军，便令金吾仗上事，翌日除书方下。
现代文：李翰先前被窦参所陷害被贬，到现在窦参失宠，皇上马上召见李翰，授予他为将军，命令他到金吾卫仪仗队去上任，到第二天任命书才下达。
English: Previously, Li Han was framed and demoted by Dou Sang, but now Dou Sang is out of favor. The emperor immediately summoned Li Han, appointed him as a general, and ordered him to go to the King's Guard of Honor to take office. The appointment letter was not issued until the next day.

古文：庚寅，以汴州长史刘士宁为汴州刺史、宣武军节度使。
现代文：六日，以汴州长史刘士宁为汴州刺史、宣武军节度使。
English: On the 6th, Liu Shining, the governor of Zhangzhou, was appointed as the official representative of Zhangzhou and the Xuanwu Army.

古文：时吴凑行次汜水，闻其有变而还。
现代文：当时吴凑行到汜水驻扎，听说汴州刺史、宣武军节度使的任命有了变化而后返回。
English: At that time, Wu went to Surabaya to stay, heard that there was a change in the appointment of the governor of Surabaya and the commander of the Xuanwu army, and then returned.

古文：乙未，贬中书侍郎、平章事窦参为郴州别驾，窦申景州司户。
现代文：十一日，贬中书侍郎、平章事窦参为郴州别驾，贬窦申为景州司户。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Zhongshu Shujirang and Pingzhang Zhidou were demoted to the status of Zhangzhou Biejie, and Doudou Shen was demoted to the status of Gyeongju Shihu.

古文：寻杖杀申。
现代文：不久就用棍杖打杀了窦申。
English: He soon killed Dou Sheng with a cane.

古文：诸窦皆贬。
现代文：所有姓窦的官员都遭贬。
English: All officials with the surname Dou were demoted.

古文：以尚书左丞赵憬、兵部侍郎陆贽为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：以尚书左丞赵憬、兵部侍郎陆贽为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: Zhao Jing, the left-hand student of Shang Shuxu, and Lu Wei, the attendant of the military department, were the attendants of the middle school, and the disciple of the middle school was Hei Zhangji.

古文：丁酉，韦皋请十二而税，以给官吏，从之。
现代文：十三日，韦皋请求按十分之二抽税，以此税收供给官吏，皇上同意了。
English: On the 13th, Wei Wei requested that a tax of two-tenths of a percent be levied to provide officials with tax revenue, and the emperor agreed.

古文：丙午，以东都、河南、淮南、江南、岭南、山南东道两税等物，令户部侍郎张滂主之；以河内、河东、剑南、山南西道等财，户部尚书、判度支班宏主之。
现代文：二十二日，以东都、河南、淮南、江南、岭南、山南东道春秋两次税收等财物，命令户部侍郎张滂主管；以河内、河东、剑南、山南西道等春秋两税财物，由户部尚书、兼任较低职务的度支使班宏主管。
English: On the 22nd, with Dongdu, Henan, Huainan, Jiangnan, Lingnan and Shannan as the host of the Spring and Autumn taxation and other assets, he ordered the head of the Household Department, Zhang Xuan; with the Spring and Autumn taxation and assets such as Hanoi, Hedong, Jian'nan and Shannan West Road, he ordered the head of the Household Department, Shangshu, who also served as a lower position, to send Banhong.

古文：一遵大历故事，如刘晏、韩滉分掌焉。
现代文：一律按大历年间旧例，像刘晏、韩分管度支一样。
English: All of them will be based on the old calendar year, just like Liu Bei and Han Biao.

古文：给事中韦夏卿左迁常州刺史，坐交诸窦也。
现代文：给事中韦夏卿贬为常州刺史。他犯了与所有姓窦官员交往而连累的罪。
English: As a result, Wei Xiaqing was relegated to a footnote in the history of Changzhou. He committed the crime of associating with all officials with the surname Dou.

古文：是月，吐蕃寇灵州。
现代文：这月，吐蕃入侵灵州。
English: This month, Tuvalu invaded Lingzhou.

古文：五月乙卯朔，上御宣政殿受朝。
现代文：五月一日是朔日，皇上驾到宣政殿接受朝拜。
English: The first day of May was New Year's Day, and the Emperor drove to the Imperial Palace to receive worship.

古文：丙辰，初增税京兆青苗亩三钱，以给掌闲广骑。
现代文：二日，开始增加税收，京兆地方青苗每亩征税三钱。以此供给换班休息的宿卫弓广骑。
English: On the second day, the tax began to increase, and the young seedlings in the Beijing-Shanghai area were taxed 3 yuan per mu. In this way, the guards who were on shift rest were provided with bows and arrows.

古文：戊午，以光禄少卿崔穆为黔州观察使。
现代文：四日，以光禄少卿崔穆为黔州观察使。
English: On the 4th, Guanglu Shaoqing Cui Mu was appointed as the observation envoy of Zhangzhou.

古文：己未，大风，吹坏庐舍、门阙。
现代文：六日，大风，吹坏了民间房屋和宫门。
English: On the sixth day, a strong wind blew down the folk houses and the palace gate.

古文：丙寅，以大理卿王翃为福建观察使。
现代文：十三日，以大理卿王罖为福建观察使。
English: On the 13th, Dalicheng Wang Qi was appointed as the Fujian Observer.

古文：戊辰，初令授台省官者各具举主于授官诏。
现代文：十五日，开始命令已授予台省长官的人各人在授官诏上具体写上举荐者的姓名。
English: On the 15th, an order was issued to the people who had appointed the governor of Taiwan to write the name of the person who recommended them on the official award.

古文：先是郎官缺，左右丞举之，御史缺，大夫、中丞举之，诏书不具所举。
现代文：先前郎官缺，由尚书左丞、尚书右丞推荐；御史缺，由御史大夫、御史中丞推荐，诏书不具体写上由何人所举荐。
English: In the past, the lack of a vassal was recommended by Shoshu Sojo and Shoshu Ujo; the lack of a vassal was recommended by Shidafu and Shizuchujo, but the imperial edict did not specify who made the recommendation.

古文：及赵憬、陆贽为相，建议郎官不宜专于左右丞，宜令尚书、丞、郎各举其可，诏书具所举官名，御史亦如之，异日考殿最以举主能否。
现代文：等到赵憬、陆贽为宰相，建议郎官不适宜专门由尚书左丞和尚书右丞推荐，也应该让尚书、丞、郎各人举荐可以担当的人，诏书详细写明举荐者的官名人名，举荐御史也像这样，在其他日子考核官员时，从考核成绩最好和殿后两方面可以看出推荐者贤能还是不贤能。
English: When Zhao Jia and Lu Wei became prime ministers, it was not appropriate for the recommendation of officials to be made exclusively by Shang Shuxu Zu Rong and Shang Shuxu Yu Rong. Shang Shuxu, Ju Rong and Lang should also be allowed to recommend the person who can be in charge, and the official and celebrity names of the recommenders should be written in detail in the edict. The history of the recommendation is also like this. When assessing officials on other days, it can be seen whether the recommenders are competent or incompetent from the two aspects of the best assessment results and the back of the hall.

古文：从之。癸酉，平卢淄青节度使、检校司徒、平章事李纳卒。
现代文：所举荐得人，那么就升迁举荐者以表示对进贤者的赏赐；所举非人，那么就贬斥举荐者以表示对进贤无能的官员处罚，皇上同意了。二十日，平卢、淄青节度使、检校司徒、平章事李纳去世。
English: The emperor agreed that if the recommendation was made by a person, then the person who made the recommendation would be promoted as a reward for those who made progress; if the recommendation was not made by a person, then the person who made the recommendation would be reprimanded as a punishment for incompetent officials. On the 20th, Pinglu, Gongqing Setsudou, Kengaku Sito, and Pingzhangji Li Na passed away.

古文：癸未，前太仆少卿刘士干有罪赐死，刘玄佐养子也。
现代文：三十日，前任太仆少卿刘士干有罪被赐死，他是刘玄佐的养子。
English: On the 30th, Liu Shigang, the former servant of Liu Xuan, was found guilty and sentenced to death. He was the adopted son of Liu Xuan.

古文：六月，吐蕃寇泾州。
现代文：六月，吐蕃入侵泾州。
English: In June, the Tuoba invaded Zhangzhou.

古文：秋七月甲寅朔，户部尚书、判度支萧国公班宏卒。
现代文：秋七月一日是朔日，户部尚书、兼任较低职务度支使的萧国公班宏去世。
English: On the first day of autumn in July, which was the new year's day, Xiao Guokong Banhong, the head of the household and also a lower-ranking official, passed away.

古文：以桂管观察使齐映为洪州刺史、江西观察使；以翰林学士归崇敬为兵部尚书，致仕。
现代文：以桂管观察使齐映为洪州刺史、江西观察使；以翰林学士归崇敬为兵部尚书，归崇敬辞官。
English: Qi Ying, the Guizhong Observer, is the Hongzhou Historian and the Jiangxi Observer; Hanlin, the Scholar, is revered as the Military Historian and the Dictator.

古文：辛巳，大雨。
现代文：二十八日，大雨。
English: On the 28th, it rained heavily.

古文：八月乙丑，以天下水灾，分命朝臣宣抚赈贷。
现代文：八月三日，因为天下水灾，分别命朝廷大臣安抚救济。
English: On August 3rd, because of the floods around the world, the Minister of the Imperial Court was separately ordered to pacify and provide relief.

古文：河南、河北、山南、江淮凡四十余州大水，漂溺死者二万余人。
现代文：河南、河北、山南、江淮总计四十多州大水，冲漂淹死了两万多人。
English: A total of more than forty states in Henan, Hebei, Shannan and Jianghuai were flooded, and more than twenty thousand people drowned.

古文：辛卯，以青州刺史李师古为郓州大都督府长史、平卢淄青等州节度观察海运陆运、押新罗渤海两蕃等使。
现代文：九日，以青州刺史李师古为郓州大都督府长史、平卢、淄、青等州节度使、观察使、海运使、陆运使、监管新罗、渤海两蕃大使。
English: On the 9th, Li Shigu, the governor of Qingzhou, was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou, Pinglu, Handan, Qingzhou and other states as the festival envoy, observation envoy, maritime envoy, land transport envoy, and supervision of Silla and Bohai.

古文：丁未，诏以岁凶罢九日赐宴。
现代文：二十五日，皇上诏令由于荒年撤销九日赐宴。
English: On the 25th, the Emperor issued a decree to cancel the banquet on the 9th due to the bad weather.

古文：九月丁巳，韦皋攻吐蕃之维州，获蕃将论莽热以献。
现代文：九月五日，韦皋攻取了吐蕃之维州，活捉吐蕃将论莽热奉献给朝廷。
English: On September 5th, Wei Wei captured the Vizhou of Tu Wei, and captured Tu Wei alive and dedicated it to the imperial court.

古文：贬太子宾客于邵江州别驾，寻卒。
现代文：贬太子宾客于邵为江州别驾，不久，于邵去世。
English: The dethroned crown prince invited Yu Shao to Jiangzhou for a farewell visit. Shortly after, Yu Shao passed away.

古文：乙亥，以太子宾客薛珏为岭南节度使。
现代文：二十三日，以太子宾客薛珏为岭南节度使。
English: On the 23rd, Ethereal's guest, Xue Qi, served as the Lingnan Festival envoy.

古文：冬十月己亥，追封故皇弟遐为均王。
现代文：冬十月十七日，追封已故世皇弟李遐为均王。
English: In winter, on October 17th, the late emperor's younger brother, Li Xi, was posthumously crowned as King Jun.

古文：庚戌，复命金吾置门籍。
现代文：二十八日，又命令在金吾衙门设置出入宫门的名籍。
English: On the 28th, he also ordered that the names of those entering and leaving the palace be recorded at the King's Gate.

古文：十一月壬子朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：十一月一日是朔日，有日蚀。
English: The first day of November is New Year's Day, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：己巳，贬左庶子姜公辅泉州别驾。
现代文：十八日，贬右庶子姜公辅为泉州别驾。
English: On the 18th, Jiang Gongfu, the illegitimate son of the right, was expelled from Quanzhou.

古文：严震奏破吐蕃于芳州。
现代文：严震上奏说在芳州攻破吐蕃。
English: Severe tremors are said to have shattered the city of Tujing in Fangzhou.

古文：壬申，诏自今死刑勿决，先杖。
现代文：二十一日，皇上诏令，从今以后死刑犯人不先斩首，而要先行用杖打而后斩首。
English: On the twenty-first day, the emperor decreed that from now on, death-row prisoners should not be beheaded first, but should first be beaten with a cane and then beheaded.

古文：常参官在外除授及分司假宁往来，并给券。 
现代文：十二月九日，皇上诏令，赐给遭水灾的县缺乏断绝粮食的人户三十万石米。二十六日，以给事中李巽为潭州刺史、湖南观察使。
English: On December 9, by imperial edict, 300,000 koku of rice was given to the households in flood-stricken counties that were short of food. On the 26th, Li Qian was appointed as Tanzhou historian and Hunan observation envoy.

古文：从之。甲戌，牂柯、室韦、靺鞨皆使朝贡。
现代文：闰十二月二十四日，柯、室韦、革末革曷都派遣使者前来朝贡。
English: On the 24th day of the 12th lunar month, Ke, Shuwae, and GeMutGechi sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：九年春正月庚辰朔，朝贺毕，上赋《退朝观仗归营诗》。
现代文：贞元九年春正月一日是朔日，群臣朝贺已毕，皇上赋《退朝观仗归营诗》。
English: The first day of the first month of spring in the ninth year of the Zhengyuan era was the new year's day. The morning greetings of the courtiers were over, and the emperor gave the poem "Returning to the Court, Watching the Battle, and Returning to Camp."

古文：乙酉，剑南东川节度使王叔邕来朝。
现代文：六日，剑南东川节度使王叔邕前来朝见。
English: On the 6th, the Jian'nan Dongchuan Festival made Wang Shuxuan come to see the emperor.

古文：癸卯，初税茶，岁得钱四十万贯，从盐铁使张滂所奏。
现代文：二十四日，开始收茶叶税，每年得钱四十万贯，这是听从盐铁使张滂上奏的意见。
English: On the 24th, the tea tax began to be collected, with an annual income of 400,000 Korean won. This was in accordance with the advice of the salt and iron minister Zhang Xuan.

古文：茶之有税，自此始也。
现代文：茶叶有税，从这里开始。
English: There is a tax on tea, starting from here.

古文：甲辰，禁卖剑铜器。
现代文：二十五日，禁止出卖剑和铜器。
English: On the 25th, the sale of swords and bronze objects was prohibited.

古文：天下有铜山，任人采取，其铜官买，除铸镜外，不得铸造。
现代文：天下有铜山，任人采取，采得的铜由官府买下，百姓除铸造镜子外，不得铸造别的东西。
English: There are copper mines all over the world, which can be taken by anyone. The mined copper is bought by the government, and the people are not allowed to cast anything other than mirrors.

古文：二月庚戌朔。
现代文：二月一日是朔日。
English: February 1st is New Year's Day.

古文：先是宰相以三节赐宴，府县有供帐之弊，请以宴钱分给，各令诸司选胜宴会，从之。
现代文：先前宰相在三个节日赐宴会，府县有供设帷帐负担的弊端，请求以宴会钱分给府县，命令各司衙门选择优美地方宴会，皇上听从了。
English: Previously, the prime minister had given banquets on three festivals, and the prefectures had the disadvantage of being burdened with setting up the curtains. He requested that the banquet money be distributed to the prefectures, and ordered the priests to choose beautiful local banquets. The emperor obeyed.

古文：是日中和节宰相宴于曲江亭，诸司随便，自是分宴焉。
现代文：这天是中和节，宰相在曲江亭宴会，各司随便选择优美景地，从此中和节分开宴会。
English: This day is the Mid-Autumn Festival. The Prime Minister is holding a banquet at the Qujiang Pavilion. Each department can choose a scenic spot and hold a banquet on the Mid-Autumn Festival.

古文：易定留守张升云为义武军节度使。辛酉，诏复筑盐州城。贞元三年，城为吐蕃所毁，自是塞外无堡障，犬戎入寇，既城之后，边患息焉。
现代文：易定留守重新建筑盐州城。贞元三年，盐州城被吐蕃所摧毁，从此塞外无堡垒障碍，犬戎入侵，盐州建城墙之后，边患就停息了。
English: In the third year of Zhengyuan, Yanzhou City was destroyed by the Tibetan mastiff. From then on, there was no barrier outside the fortress, and the dogs invaded. After Yanzhou built the city wall, the border troubles stopped.

古文：三月己亥，以驾部郎中、知制诰张式为虢州刺史。
现代文：三月二十一日，以驾部郎中、知制诰张式为虢州刺史。
English: On March 21st, the history of Zhangzhou was written in the style of Zhuozhang, with Zhuozhang as the driver and Zhuozhang as the driver.

古文：夏四月辛酉，地震，有声如雷，河中、关辅尤甚，坏城壁庐舍，地裂水涌。
现代文：夏四月十三日，地震，震声如雷，河中、关中畿辅尤其厉害，毁坏了城墙墙壁和房子，土地崩裂，地下水涌出。
English: On the 13th day of the 4th month of summer, there was an earthquake with a thunderous sound. It was particularly strong in Hechu, Guanzhong and Kiyofu. It destroyed the city walls and houses, the land cracked, and groundwater gushed out.

古文：五月庚申，废诸州府执刀。
现代文：五月三日，废除各州府执刀。
English: On May 3rd, the execution of swords by prefectures was abolished.

古文：甲辰，以义成军节度使、检校右仆射贾耽为左仆射、同中书门下平章事，以尚书左丞卢迈本官同平章事。
现代文：二十七日，以义成军节度使、检校右仆射贾耽为左仆射、同中书门下平章事，以尚书左丞卢迈以本官兼任同平章事。
English: On the 27th, Yi Chengjun was appointed as the festival envoy, and Jia Tan, the right-hand man of the inspection team, was appointed as the left-hand man of the inspection team, and Xia Ping was appointed as the secretary of the middle school, and Lu Mai, the left-hand man of the inspection team, was appointed as the secretary of the middle school.

古文：以郑州刺史李融为滑州刺史、义成军节度使。
现代文：以郑州刺史李融为滑州刺史、义成军节度使。
English: Li Rong, the military historian of Zhengzhou, was appointed as the military historian of Nanzhou and the military governor of Yicheng.

古文：乙巳，韦皋奏，遣军出西山，破吐蕃峨和城、定廉城、通鹤军，凡平堡五十余所。
现代文：二十八日，韦皋上奏，已派军出西山，攻破吐蕃峨和城、定廉城、通鹤军，总计铲平敌堡垒五十余所。
English: On the twenty-eighth day, Wei Xuan made a speech, and sent his army out of the West Mountain, defeating the forces of Tu Gaohe, Dinglian and Tonghe, and leveling more than fifty enemy fortresses in total.

古文：是日以蕃俘器仗来献。
现代文：这天，把吐蕃俘虏、缴获的器仗前来贡献。
English: On this day, the captives and captured equipment of the Tuyun came to contribute.

古文：丙戌，以门下侍郎、平章事董晋为礼部尚书，罢知政事。
现代文：以门下侍郎、平章事董晋为礼部尚书，罢免参知政事。
English: He appointed his subordinate chamberlain, Taira no Shoji, Dong Jin, to be the ceremonial secretary, and dismissed Sanchi no Seiji.

古文：甲寅，加韦皋检校右仆射，以司农少卿裴延龄为户部侍郎、判度支。
现代文：六月七日，加给韦皋检校右仆射官衔，以司农少卿裴延龄为户部侍郎、兼任职务较低的度支使。
English: On June 7th, Wei Yanqian School was given the official title of Right Servant and Shooter, and Pei Yanling, the Junior Secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture, was appointed as the Household Attendant and also served as a lower-ranking Shishi.

古文：庚申，以给事中李衡为户部侍郎、诸道盐铁转运使。
现代文：六月十三日，以给事中李衡为户部侍郎、诸道盐铁转运使。
English: On June 13th, Li Heng was appointed as the household attendant and the envoy to transport salt and iron from one place to another.

古文：秋七月己未，敕县令以四考为限，无替者宜至五考。庚子，以信州刺史孙公器为邕管经略使。
现代文：秋七月十九日，皇上命令县令以四次考试为限度。二十四日，以信州刺史孙公器为邕管经略使。
English: On the 19th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the emperor ordered the county to limit the examination to four times, and on the 24th day, Shinshu Scribe Sun Gongqi was appointed as the vice-governor.

古文：故事，宰相秉笔决事，每人十日一易。
现代文：按旧例，宰相拿笔断决事情，每人十天轮换一次。
English: According to the old practice, the prime minister takes a pen to decide things, and each person is rotated once every ten days.

古文：至是贾耽、赵憬、陆贽、卢迈同平章政事，百僚有所关白，更相让而不言。
现代文：到此贾耽、赵憬、陆贽、卢迈都任同平章事，百官有什么禀报，四人互相谦让而不表态。
English: At this point, Jia Tan, Zhao Jing, Lu Wei, and Lumai were all appointed to the same level, and the four of them were modest and did not make a statement.

古文：始诏令旬日秉笔，后诏每日更秉笔。
现代文：开始皇上诏令每位宰相拿笔十天断决政事，后来皇上又诏令每天换一位宰相拿笔断决政事。
English: At first, the Emperor issued a decree ordering each prime minister to take a pen for ten days to decide political affairs. Later, the Emperor issued another decree ordering a new prime minister to take a pen every day to decide political affairs.

古文：剑南西山羌女国王汤立志、哥邻王董卧庭、白狗王罗陀匆、弱水王董避和、逋租王弟邓告知、南水王侄尚悉曩等六国君王，自来朝贡。
现代文：剑南、西山羌、女国王、汤立志、哥邻王董卧庭、白狗王罗陀匆、弱水王董避和、逋租王弟邓告知、南水王侄尚悉曩等六国君王，亲自前来朝贡。
English: The kings of six countries, including Jian Nan, Xishan Yao, Empress Dowager, Tang Li Zhi, Brother-Neighbor King Dong Lie Ting, White Dog King Luo Dacun, Weak Water King Dong Yu He, Son-in-law King Brother Deng Ting, and Nanshui King's nephew Shang Siyuan, came to pay tribute in person.

古文：六国初附吐蕃，韦皋击西山讨吐蕃，故六蛮内附，各授官秩遣之。
现代文：六国当初归附吐蕃，韦皋出西山讨伐吐蕃，所以六蛮蕃归附，皇上给各人授予官职俸禄送他们归国。
English: The Six Kingdoms were originally attached to Tubo, and Wei Kun went out of the West Mountain to fight against Tubo. Therefore, the Six Barbarian Provinces were attached, and the emperor gave each person an official salary to send them back to the country.

古文：八月庚戌，太尉、中书令、西平郡王李晟薨，赠太师，废朝五日。
现代文：八月四日，太尉、中书令、西平郡王李晟去世，赠太师衔，皇上停止上朝五天。
English: On August 4th, Li Xi, the first lieutenant, the second secretary, and the king of Xiping County, passed away and was given the title of grandmaster. The emperor did not ascend to the throne for five days.

古文：己巳，皇太子长男广陵王淳纳妃郭氏。
现代文：二十三日，皇太子的大儿子广陵王李淳接纳妃子郭氏。
English: On the 23rd, the eldest son of the crown prince, Guangling Wang Li Chun, accepted the concubine Guo.

古文：九月己卯，罢九日宴，以太师晟丧也。
现代文：九月三日，撤销九日的宴会，因为是太师李晟丧事的缘故。
English: On September 3, the banquet on the 9th was canceled, because it was the funeral of Grand Master Li Xi.

古文：冬十月己酉，侍中马燧对于延英。
现代文：冬十月三日，侍中马燧在延英殿对答问话。
English: On the 3rd day of October in winter, Ma Yu, the chamberlain, answered questions at Yan Ying Dian.

古文：燧足疾，诏令不拜，行仆于地，命宦者扶持之。
现代文：马燧脚有毛病，皇上诏令不必跪拜，马燧行走仆倒在地，皇上命太监扶持他。
English: There was a problem with the horse's hoof, and the emperor decreed that he did not have to kneel. The horse fell to the ground as he walked, and the emperor ordered the eunuch to support him.

古文：止谓之曰： 前日卿与太尉晟俱来，今公独至。 
现代文：皇上对他说道 ：前次您与太尉李晟一起来，现在却只您一个人来了。 
English: The Emperor said to him, "Last time you came with Lieutenant Li Yan, but now you have come alone."

古文：因歔欷泣下。
现代文：皇上因而感叹流泪。
English: The Emperor was moved to tears.

古文：及燧退，上送及阶。
现代文：等到马燧退朝，皇上送他一直到台阶。
English: The emperor waited until the horse had retired and walked him all the way to the steps.

古文：癸酉，环王国献犀牛，上令见于太庙。
现代文：二十七日，环王李国献犀牛，皇上令他在太庙献上。
English: On the 27th, the ring king, Li Guo, offered a rhinoceros, and the emperor ordered him to offer it in the Great Temple.

古文：十一月乙酉，日南至，上亲郊圆丘。
现代文：十一月十日，冬至日，皇上亲自在圆丘祭祀天地。
English: On November 10, the day of the winter solstice, the emperor himself went to the round mound to offer sacrifices to heaven and earth.

古文：是日还宫，御丹凤楼，制曰： 朕以寡德，祗膺大宝，励精理道，十有五年。
现代文：这天回宫，驾到丹凤楼，下诏曰 ：朕因为薄德，荣幸地登上皇位，励精图治，一十五年。
English: On this day, he returned to the palace, drove to the Danfeng Building, and issued the following edict: "I am honored to ascend the imperial throne because of my poor virtue, and I will work hard to govern for fifteen years."

古文：夙夜惟寅，罔敢自逸，小大之务，莫不祗勤。
现代文：朕昼夜兢兢业业，不敢贪图安逸，小小大大的事务，莫不辛勤工作。
English: I work diligently day and night, dare not covet ease, small and large affairs, there is no hard work.

古文：皇灵怀顾，宗社垂祐，年谷丰阜，荒服会同，远至迩安，中外咸若。
现代文：祖先关怀眷顾，宗社垂福，年谷丰登，八羌宾服，远方的国家归附，邻近的边疆安定，朝中内外都顺从。
English: Ancestor care and benevolence, prosperity of the family and society, prosperous years, eight-star guest dress, annexation of distant countries, stability of neighboring frontiers, and obedience both inside and outside the DPRK.

古文：永惟多祐，实荷玄休。
现代文：朕常想多福多，想承受长久的吉庆。
English: I always want to have more than enough, and I want to receive long-term happiness.

古文：是用虔奉礼章，躬荐郊庙，克展因心之敬，获申报三之诚。
现代文：因此虔诚地奉行礼教和祖宗的制度，亲自在郊外祭祀天地，希望能够展现我敬仰的孝心，获得申明报答祖先的诚意。
English: Therefore, I devoutly follow the system of rituals and ancestors, and personally sacrifice heaven and earth in the suburbs, hoping to show my revered filial piety and earn the sincerity of the ancestors.

古文：庆感滋深，悚惕惟励，大福所赐，岂独在予，思与万方，均其惠泽，可大赦天下。 
现代文：福庆与感应确实深沉，深深警惕，勉励自己，祖先赐给的幸福，难道独独在我一身？朕想与万方百姓，共同享受这个恩泽，可以大赦天下。 
English: The blessings and inspiration are indeed profound, I am deeply vigilant, and I encourage myself. Is the happiness given by my ancestors only for me? I want to enjoy this grace together with people from all over the world, and I can forgive the world.

古文：辛卯，华州潼关镇国军、陇右节度使李元谅卒于良原，以其部将阿史那叙统元谅之众，戍良原。
现代文：十六日，华州潼关镇国军、陇右节度使李元谅在良原去世，以他的部将阿史那叙统率李元谅的部众，在良原驻守。
English: On the 16th, Li Yuanpeng died in Liangwon at the instigation of the Shuguang Town National Army of Huazhou and the Shuguang Festival. Li Yuanpeng's subordinates, led by his subordinate General Ashinaso, were stationed in Liangwon.

古文：仍令御史一人为监试。
现代文：二十七日，河南尹、东都留守裴讠胥去世。
English: On the 27th, Henan Yin and Dongdu left Pei Yao to die.

古文：如授官后政事能否，委御史台、观察使以闻，而殿最举主。
现代文：二十九日，皇上诏令在冬天推荐官员，应该让尚书丞、尚书郎在中书省大厅谘询被荐者，考核对政务理解情况，考核他们对政务是否通晓以及他们历任政事的政绩，评定为三等，并且要记上荐举者的姓名。
English: On the 29th, the Emperor issued an imperial edict to recommend officials in winter. Shang Shujo and Shang Shuro should be asked to consult the recommended person in the hall of the Ministry of Education and Culture, assess their understanding of government affairs, assess whether they are familiar with government affairs and their political achievements in past government affairs, and be rated as third-class, and the name of the recommender should be recorded.

古文：十二月丙午朔，制： 今后使府判官、副使、行军已下，使罢后，如是检校试五品以上官，不合集于吏部选，任准罢使郎官、御史例，冬季闻奏。 
现代文：仍旧令御史一人为监试。如果授予官职后，他办政事能与不能，委任御史台、观察使将情况报告朝廷，而且要报告考核他为上等官员者的举荐者姓名，报告考核政绩殿后者官员的举荐者姓名。十二月一日是朔日。
English: If, after being appointed to an official post, he is unable or unable to carry out government affairs, he shall appoint a goshidai, an observer, to report the situation to the Imperial Court, and shall also report the name of the person who recommended him as a superior official, and the name of the person who recommended the latter official to the Hall of Governmental Merit. The first day of December is New Year's Day.

古文：丙辰，宣武军乱，逐节度使刘士宁。
现代文：十一日，宣武军发动骚乱，驱逐了节度使刘士宁。
English: On the 11th day, the Xuanwu army launched a riot and expelled Liu Shining, the commander of the festival.

古文：壬戌，以通王谌为宣武军节度使，以宣武军节度副使李万荣为汴州刺史、宣武军节度、汴宋等州观察留后。
现代文：十七日，以通王谌为宣武军节度使，以宣武军节度副使李万荣为汴州刺史、宣武军节度使、汴州、宋州观察留后。
English: On the 17th, Tong Wangtao was appointed as the festival envoy of the Xuanwu Army, and Li Wanrong, the deputy festival envoy of the Xuanwu Army, was appointed as the secretary of Zhangzhou, and the festival envoy of the Xuanwu Army stayed in Zhangzhou and Songzhou for observation.

古文：朔方灵盐节度副大使、太子少师、检校左仆射、馀姚郡王杜希全卒。
现代文：朔方、盐灵节度副大使、太子少师、检校左仆射、余姚郡王杜希全去世。
English: Shuo Fang, Yanling, Vice-Ambassador of the National Day of the People's Republic of China, Taizi, Junior Teacher of the People's Republic of China, and Yuyao County King Du Xi Quan passed away.

古文：十年春正月乙亥朔。
现代文：贞元十年春正月一日是朔日。
English: The first day of the first month of spring in the 10th year of Zhengyuan is the new year's day.

古文：乙酉，以虔王谅为朔方灵盐丰节度大使，以朔方等道行军司马李栾为留后。
现代文：十一日，以虔王李谅为朔方、灵盐、丰州节度大使，以朔方等道行军司马李栾为留后。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Li Peng, the king of piety, was appointed as the ambassador of the Shao Fang, Lingyan, and Fengzhou Festival, and Li Yao, the secretary of the Shao Fang and other marching troops, was left behind.

古文：壬辰，南诏异牟寻大破吐蕃于神川，使来献捷。
现代文：十八日，南诏异牟寻在神川大破吐蕃，使者前来朝廷献捷报。
English: On the 18th, Nanzhao Yimou was looking for a way to break the deadlock in Jinchuan, and an emissary came to the imperial court to report the victory.

古文：己亥，昭义节度使、检校司空平章事李抱真请降官，乃授检校左仆射。
现代文：二十五日，昭义节度使、检校司空、平章事李抱真请求降低自己的官职，于是授予他检校左仆射。
English: On the 25th, Li Bozhen, the envoy of the Shouyi Festival, the inspector of the inspection of the school, and the secretary of the inspection of the school, requested to reduce his official position, so he was awarded the inspection of the school.

古文：时抱真病，巫祝言宜降爵，故有是请。
现代文：当时李抱真患病，巫祝说应该降低官职爵位，所以才有降官的请求。
English: At that time, Li Baozhen was ill, and Wuzhu said that the official title and rank should be reduced, so there was a request for a demotion.

古文：二月丙午，以瀛州刺史刘澭为秦州刺史、陇右经略军使、理普润县，仍以普润军为名。
现代文：二月三日，以瀛州刺史刘雍为秦州刺史、陇右经略军使，治理普润县，仍以普润军为名称。
English: On February 3, Liu Yong, the governor of Zhangzhou Province, was appointed as the governor of Qin Province and the military envoy of Zhangzhou Province, and governed Purun County, still using the name of Purun Army.

古文：乙卯，以给事中齐抗为河南尹。
现代文：十二日，以给事中齐抗为河南尹。
English: On the 12th, Henan Yin took the lead in the matter.

古文：乙丑，义成军节度使、郑滑观察使李融卒。
现代文：二十二日，义成军节度使、郑滑观察使李融去世。
English: On the 22nd, Li Rong, the military envoy of the Yicheng Army and the observer of Zhenglu, passed away.

古文：丁卯，诏： 君臣之际，义莫重焉，每闻薨殂，良深悼恻。
现代文：二十四日，皇上下诏曰 ：君臣之间的关系，义最重大，每听到有人去世，深感悲痛。
English: On the 24th, the Emperor issued the following edict: "Relationships between monarchs and ministers are of the utmost importance. Whenever I hear of the death of someone, I feel deep sorrow.

古文：应文武朝臣薨卒者，其月俸、料宜全给，仍更准本官一月俸料，以为赙赠。 
现代文：当文武朝臣去世的人，他的月薪、俸料应该全给，另外更准许给本官一月的薪俸、俸料以作为赠送。 
English: When a Monmu courtier dies, his monthly salary should be paid in full, and in addition, it is permitted to give the official a month's salary as a gift.

古文：三月乙亥，黄雾四塞，日无光。
现代文：三月二日，黄雾四面布满，日色无光。
English: On March 2nd, the yellow fog was all over the place, and the sun was not shining.

古文：以华州刺史李复为滑州刺史、义成军节度使。
现代文：以华州刺史李复为滑州刺史、义成军节度使。
English: Li Fu, the military historian of Huazhou, was appointed as the military historian of Nanzhou and the military governor of Yicheng.

古文：沧州程怀直来朝，赐安业坊宅，妓一人，复令还镇。
现代文：沧州程怀直前来朝见，赐给他安业坊住宅、妓女一人，令他返回沧州镇守。
English: Cangzhou Cheng Huai came straight to see him in the morning, gave him a safe house and a prostitute, and ordered him to return to Cangzhou Town.

古文：庚辰，南诏异牟寻攻收吐蕃铁桥已东城垒一十六，擒其王五人，降其民众十万口。
现代文：七日，南诏异牟寻攻打收复吐蕃铁桥以东一十六个城堡，活捉吐蕃王五个，民众归降的十多万口。
English: On the seventh day, Nanzhao Yimou attacked and captured 16 castles east of the Tuyun Iron Bridge, captured five Tuyun kings alive, and more than 100,000 people surrendered.

古文：壬申，以同州刺史卢征为华州刺史、潼关防御、镇国军等使。
现代文：十九日，以同州刺史卢征为华州刺史、潼关防御使、镇国军使。
English: On the 19th, Tongzhou Zhishuluzheng was appointed as Huazhou Zhishi, Shaoguan Defense Envoy, and Zhenguo Military Envoy.

古文：辛丑，以延州刺史李如暹所部蕃落赐名曰安塞军，以如暹为军使。
现代文：二十六日，以延州刺史李如暹所统辖蕃兵部队赐名为安塞军，以李如暹为安塞军使。
English: On the 26th, the troops under the command of Li Ruxi of Yanzhou Zhishi were named the Ansai Army, with Li Ruxi as the Ansai military envoy.

古文：夏四月戊辰，地震，癸丑复震。
现代文：夏四月初六日，地震，十一日，又地震。
English: On the 6th day of the 4th lunar month, there was an earthquake. On the 11th day, there was another earthquake.

古文：恆州奏见巨人迹。
现代文：恒州上奏说见到巨人的足迹。
English: Hengzhou Shangluo said he saw the giant's footprints.

古文：以云南告捷使高细龙为左武卫将军。
现代文：以云南告捷使高细龙为左武卫将军。
English: With Yunnan's victory, Gao Shilong became Zuo Wei's general.

古文：是月，太白昼见。
现代文：这月，太白星白昼出现。
English: This month, a very white star appeared in the daytime.

古文：有大鸟飞集宫中，食杂骨。
现代文：有大鸟飞集宫中，吃杂乱碎骨。
English: There are large birds that fly into the palace and eat all the broken bones.

古文：是春霖雨，罕有晴日。
现代文：这年春天，连续下雨，很少有晴天。
English: This spring, it rained continuously, and there were few sunny days.

古文：六月壬寅朔。昭义军节度使、检校左仆射、同中书门下平章事、义阳王李抱真卒，诏以其将王延贵权知昭义军事。
现代文：六月一日是朔日，昭义军节度使、检校左仆射、同中书门下平章事、义阳王李抱真去世。皇上诏令以李抱真的部将王延贵暂时代理主持昭义军事务。
English: The first day of June was the New Year's Day. Li Bozhen, the king of Yiyang, passed away. Li Bozhen's subordinate, Wang Yangui, was appointed by the emperor to temporarily preside over the affairs of the Shouyi Army.

古文：癸丑，以祠部郎中袁滋兼御史中丞，为册南诏使。
现代文：十二日，以祠部郎中袁滋兼任御史中丞，册封为南诏国的使者。
English: On the twelfth day, Yuan Zhi, the steward of the ancestral hall, also served as the steward of history, and was appointed as the messenger of Nanzhao.

古文：甲寅，以辰州刺史房孺复为容管经略使。
现代文：十三日，以辰州刺史房孺复为容管经略使。
English: On the thirteenth day, with the help of the Chenzhou Jishi Chamber of Commerce and Industry.

古文：丙寅，韦皋奏西山峨和城击破吐蕃城栅，斩首二千八百级。
现代文：二十五日，韦皋上奏说在西山峨和城攻破了吐蕃城栅栏，斩吐蕃首级二千八百个。
English: On the 25th, Wei Wei reported in his report that he had broken through the fence of Tubo Castle in the western mountain town of Ehe, and had cut off 2,800 pieces of Tubo daggers.

古文：庚午，度支使裴延龄兼灵、盐等州盐池井榷使。
现代文：二十九日，度支使裴延龄兼任灵、盐等州井榷使。
English: On the 29th, Pei Yanling, the governor of Du, also served as the governor of Ling, Yan and other counties.

古文：辛未晦，有水鸟集于左藏库，是夜暴雨，大风折木。
现代文：三十日是晦日，有大批水鸟集中在左藏库，这晚大暴雨，大风吹断了树木。
English: The 30th was the last day of the year, and a large number of waterbirds were concentrated in the left reservoir. That night, there was a heavy rainstorm, and the wind blew down the trees.

古文：秋七月壬申朔，以邕朔，以邕王謜为昭义军节度使，以昭义军押衙王延贵为潞府左司马，充昭义节度留后，赐名虔休。
现代文：秋七月一日是朔日，以邕王李讠原为昭义军节度使，以昭义军管理仪仗侍卫的押衙官王延贵为潞府左司马，充任昭义节度留后，赐名为虔休。
English: The first day of autumn in July was the New Year's Day, with the king of Shao, Li Shibuan, as the commander of the festival of the Shao Yi Army, and the escorting officer of the Shao Yi Army, Wang Yangui, who managed the guard of honor, as the left secretary of the Shao government. After serving as the Shao Yi Festival, he was given the name Qian Xiu.

古文：抱真别将权知洺州事元谊不悦虔休为留后，据洺州叛，阴结田绪。
现代文：李抱真的另外一位部将，暂时代理主持氵名州事务的将领元谊不乐意虔休为昭义留后，占据氵名州叛乱，暗中勾结田绪。
English: Another of Li Bozhong's subordinates, General Yuan Rong, who was temporarily acting as acting chairman of the affairs of Renmei Province, was not willing to leave Renmei for Zhao Yi, but took over the Renmei Province rebellion and secretly colluded with Tian Xu.

古文：庚辰，赐南诏异牟寻金印银窠，其文曰 贞元册南诏印 。
现代文：九日，赐给南诏国异牟寻金印银窠，金印上文字是 贞元册南诏印 。
English: On the 9th, a gold and silver seal was given to Nan Zhao Guo Yimou, and the gold seal was inscribed with the words "Zhao Yuan Shu Nan Zhao Xin."

古文：先是，吐蕃以金印授南诏，韦皋因其旧而请之。
现代文：先前，吐蕃以金印授给南诏，韦皋因为印太旧而向朝廷请求另外赐给。
English: Previously, Nanzhao had been awarded the golden seal by Tu Wei, but Wei Wei asked the imperial court to give him another one because he was too old.

古文：汴州军乱，攻节度留后李万荣，不胜而溃，万荣悉捕斩其孥。
现代文：汴州军队骚乱，攻打节度留后李万荣，但乱军大败崩溃，李万荣将他们全部捕获，将他们及其妻子儿女一齐斩首。
English: The Zhangzhou army rioted, attacking Li Wan Rong after the festival, but the rebels were defeated and collapsed. Li Wan Rong captured them all and beheaded them and their wives and children together.

古文：己亥，前汴州节度使刘士宁宜于郴州安置，饮州守镇黄少卿叛，攻邕管经略使孙公器，又陷钦、横、浔、贵等州。
现代文：二十八日，前任汴州节度使刘士宁应贬到郴州安置。钦州守镇黄少卿叛乱，攻打邕管经略使孙公器，又攻陷钦、横、浔、贵等州。
English: On the 28th, Liu Shining, the predecessor of the Bozhou Festival, was demoted to Bozhou and resettled there. Huang Shaoqing, the governor of Bozhou, rebelled against Sun Gongyi, the governor of Bozhou, and invaded the provinces of Bozhou, Hebei, Fujian and Guizhou.

古文：吐蕃大将论乞髯、阳没藏、悉诺硉以其家内附，授归义将军。
现代文：吐蕃大将论乞髯、阳没藏、悉诺肆带领家族人等归附唐朝，授予他们为归义将军。
English: On the other hand, General Tu Youyou, Yang Matsuo, and Xian Nozang led their families to join the Tang Dynasty and were awarded the title of Guiyi Generals.

古文：因置四品已下武官，以授四夷归附者，仍定怀化大将军已下俸钱。
现代文：因此设置四品以下武官，以此授予四边少数民族归附的人，仍然确定他们的待遇为怀化大将军以下的薪俸钱。
English: Therefore, the establishment of military attachés below the fourth grade, which is awarded to the people who are affiliated with the ethnic minorities of the four sides, still determines that their treatment is the salary money below General Huaihua.

古文：九月辛未朔，以袁州刺史董镇为邕管经略使。
现代文：九月一日是朔日，以袁州刺史董镇为邕管经略使。
English: The first day of September is the New Year's Day, with Yuanzhou Zhishi Dongzhen as the leading economic envoy.

古文：戊子，赐百僚九日宴，上赋诗赐之。
现代文：十八日，赐给百官九日重阳宴会，皇上赋诗赐给他们。
English: On the 18th day, the 9th day of the double sun banquet was given to the hundred officials, and the emperor gave them poems.

古文：辛卯。南诏献铎槊、浪人剑、吐蕃印八纽。
现代文：二十一日，南诏贡献铎朔木、浪人剑、吐蕃印八纽。
English: On the twenty-first day, Nanzhao contributed a pair of saplings, a ronin sword, and a pair of paddles.

古文：戊戌，定州张升云改名茂昭。
现代文：二十八日，定州张升云改名为茂昭。
English: On the 28th, Dingzhou Zhang Shengyun changed its name to Maozhao.

古文：冬十月癸卯，御宣政殿，试贤良方正、能直言极谏等举人。
现代文：冬十月三日，皇上驾到宣政殿，考试贤良方正、能直言极谏等两科举人。
English: On the 3rd of October in winter, the emperor drove to the Xuancheng Palace and held an examination to select people in two subjects, including the virtuous and upright, and those who could speak plainly.

古文：壬戌，刑部尚书刘滋卒。
现代文：二十二日，刑部尚书刘滋去世。
English: On the 22nd, Liu Zhi, the head of the Criminal Investigation Department, passed away.

古文：十一月乙酉，诸道盐铁转运使张滂为卫尉卿，以浙西观察使王纬为诸道盐铁转运使。
现代文：十一月十六日，各道盐铁转运使张滂为卫尉卿，以浙西观察使王纬为诸道盐铁转运使。
English: On November 16th, Zhang Qian was appointed as the deputy commander of the salt and iron transport of each road, and Wang Wei was appointed as the salt and iron transport of each road with the observation of western Zhejiang.

古文：庚寅，秘书监致仕穆宁卒。
现代文：二十一日，已辞官的原秘书监穆宁去世。
English: On the 21st, the former secretary, Jian Muning, who had already resigned, passed away.

古文：十二月庚子朔。
现代文：十二月一日是朔日。
English: The first day of December is New Year's Day.

古文：壬戌，贬中书侍郎、平章事陆贽为太子宾客。
现代文：二十三日，贬中书侍郎、平章事陆贽为太子宾客。
English: On the 23rd, the disgraced chancellor's secretary, Taira no Shoshoji, became the prince's guest.

古文：十一年春正月庚午朔。
现代文：贞元十一年春正月一日是朔日。
English: The first day of the first month of spring in the eleventh year of Zhengyuan is the New Year's Day.

古文：乙亥，岭南节度使薛珏卒。
现代文：六日，岭南节度使薛珏去世。
English: On the 6th day of the Lingnan Festival, Xue Yao passed away.

古文：乙未，以秘书少监王础为黔中经略观察使，卫尉少卿武少仪为邕管经略使。
现代文：二十六日，以秘书少监王础为黔中经略观察使，卫尉少卿武少仪为邕管经略使。
English: On the 26th, the secretary, Junior Warden Wang Zong, was appointed as the middle-ranking official observer, and the guard lieutenant, Junior Secretary Wu Shao Yi, was appointed as the middle-ranking official observer.

古文：丙申，以邕管经略使王锷为广州刺史、岭南节度使。
现代文：二十七日，以邕管经略使王锷为广州刺史、岭南节度使。
English: On the 27th, Wang Qi was appointed as the Guangzhou chief historian and the Lingnan festival envoy.

古文：二月癸卯，以衢州刺史李若初为福建观察使。
现代文：二月五日，以衢州刺史李若初为福建观察使。
English: On February 5th, Li Ruochu, the envoy of the Fujian Observer, arrived in Zhangzhou.

古文：乙巳，岫渤海大钦茂之子嵩为渤海郡王、忽汗州都督。
现代文：七日，皇上册封渤海大钦茂之子嵩为渤海郡王、忽汗州都督。
English: On the seventh day, the emperor granted Song, the son of Bokkai Daqinmao, the title of King of Bokkai County and Governor of Bukhan Prefecture.

古文：乙卯，于泾州彰信堡置潘原县。
现代文：十七日，以泾州彰信堡设置潘原县。
English: On the 17th, Panyuan County was set up with Zhangxin Fort in Zhangzhou.

古文：甲子，九姓回纥骨咄禄昆伽奉诚可汗卒。
现代文：二十六日，九姓回纥汨咄禄加奉诚可汗去世。
English: On the 26th, Bongcheng Khan, who was born with nine surnames, passed away.

古文：三月庚午，司徒兼侍中马燧以疾请罢侍中，不许。
现代文：三月二日，司徒兼侍中马燧因为疾病请求罢免侍中一职，皇上不许。
English: On March 2nd, because of his illness, the Emperor did not allow Stuto and Ma Jun, who was also an attendant, to be removed from his position as an attendant.

古文：辛未，赐宰臣两省供奉官宴于曲江亭。
现代文：三日，皇上赐给宰辅大臣及中书、门下两省供奉官员在曲江亭宴会。
English: On the third day, the Emperor gave a banquet at Qujiang Pavilion to the Vice-Minister of Foreign Affairs, the Minister of the People's Republic of China, and the officials of the two provinces.

古文：乙丑，以吏部侍郎郑瑜为河南、淮南水陆转运使。
现代文：二十一日，以吏部侍郎郑瑜为河南、淮南水陆转运使。
English: On the twenty-first day, Zheng Yu, the secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, was appointed as the Henan and Huainan Water and Land Transportation Envoy.

古文：丙申，诸州准例荐隐居丘园不求闻达蔡广成等九人，各授试官，令给公乘，到京日量才叙用。
现代文：二十八日，各州准许他们按旧例举荐隐居山丘园林不求做官成名的蔡广成等九人，各个授予官职试用，命令给他们乘公家车的权利，到京师后再量才录用。
English: On the 28th, the states allowed them to follow the old practice of recommending nine people, including Cai Guangcheng, who lived in seclusion in the hills and gardens and did not seek fame as an official. Each of them was granted a probationary official position and ordered to give them the right to take a public car. They would not be hired until they reached Beijing.

古文：夏四月，旱。壬戌，贬太子宾客陆贽为忠州别驾，京兆尹李充信州长史，卫尉卿张滂汀州长史。
现代文：夏四月，干旱，二十五日，贬太子宾客陆贽为忠州别驾，贬京兆尹李充为信州长史，贬卫尉卿张滂为汀州长史。
English: In the dry summer of April, on the 25th, the guest of the crown prince, Lu Wei, was named the governor of Chungju, the governor of Jing, Zhaoyun, and Lichong was named the governor of Xin, and the governor of Wei, Zhang Ye, was named the governor of Ting.

古文：癸亥，以兵部侍郎韩皋为京兆尹。
现代文：二十六日，以兵部侍郎韩皋为京兆尹。
English: On the 26th, Han Zheng, a waiter of the military department, was cast as Jing Zhaoyun.

古文：甲子，赐南诏敕书，始列中书三官奉宣行，复旧制也。丙寅，幽州刘济奏大破奚王啜剌等六万余众。
现代文：二十九日，幽州刘济上奏说大破奚王啜剌六万多部众。
English: On the 29th, Liu Jie of Yuzhou made a report saying that more than 60,000 people had been killed.

古文：五月丁卯朔。
现代文：五月一日是朔日。
English: May 1st is New Year's Day.

古文：庚午，命有司虑囚，旱故也。
现代文：四日，皇上命有关部门审查并记录囚徒的罪状，这是因为干旱的原因。
English: On the fourth day, the emperor ordered the relevant departments to review and record the prisoners' crimes. This was due to the drought.

古文：丁丑，以宣武留后李万荣为汴州刺史、宣武节度副使、知节度事。
现代文：十一日，以宣武留后李万荣为汴州刺史、宣武节度副使、主持节度使事。
English: On the 11th day, after staying in Xuanwu, Li Wan Rong was appointed as the secretary of Zhangzhou, the deputy envoy of Xuanwu Festival, and the presiding envoy of the festival.

古文：以昭义军节度留后王虔休为潞州大都督府长史、昭义军节度副大使、知节度事、管内度支营田、潞泽磁邢洺观察使。
现代文：以昭义军节度留后王虔休为潞州大都督府长史、昭义军节度副大使、主持节度使、管内度支使、营田使、潞、泽、磁、邢、氵名观察使。
English: Wang Qianxiu, who stayed behind after the Shouyi Army Festival, served as the governor of Zhangzhou, the deputy ambassador of the Shouyi Army Festival, the presiding festival envoy, the inner-district festival envoy, the Yingtan envoy, and the observation envoys of the Shou, Ze, Magnet, Shou, and Shen.

古文：又以朔方留后李栾为灵州大都督府长史、朔方灵盐丰夏四州受降定远城天德军节度副大使、知节度事、管内度支营田观察押蕃落等使。
现代文：又以朔方留后李栾为灵州大都督府长史、朔方、灵、盐、丰、夏四州及受降城、定远城、天德军节度副大使、主持节度事管内度支使、营田使、观察使、押蕃落使。
English: In addition, after Shuo Fang's stay, Li Qian became the governor of Lingzhou, Shuo Fang, Ling, Yan, Feng, Xia four states and the city of surrender, Dingyuan City, the deputy ambassador of the Tiande Army Festival, the internal affairs department of the festival, the Yingtan envoy, the observation envoy, and the ousting envoy.

古文：甲申，以河东节度使、检校工部尚书、太原尹李自良卒。
现代文：十八日，河东节度使、检校工部尚书、太原尹李自良去世。
English: On the 18th day of the month, Yang Shu of the inspection department and Taiyuan Yin Li Ziliang of the Hedong Festival died.

古文：庚寅，遣使册九姓回纥腾里罗羽录没密施合胡六骨咄禄毗伽怀信可汗。
现代文：二十四日，皇上派遣使者册封九姓回纥腾里罗羽录没密施合胡六骨咄禄伽怀信可汗。
English: On the 24th, the emperor sent an envoy to confer the title of Khan on nine surnames.

古文：癸巳，以通王谌为河东节度使，以河东行军司马李悦为河东节度营田观察留后、北都副留守。
现代文：二十七日，以通王李谌为河东节度使，以河东行军司马李悦为河东节度使、营田使、观察留后、北都副留守。
English: On the 27th, Tong Wang Lijun was appointed as the envoy to the Hedong Festival, and Ma Liyue, the chief of the marching troops to the east of the river, was appointed as the envoy to the Hedong Festival, the envoy to Yingtan, the observer, and the deputy to the northern capital.

古文：甲午，初铸河东监军印。
现代文：二十八日，开始铸造河东监军印。
English: On the 28th, the casting of the "Hedong Supervision Military Seal" began.

古文：监军有印，自王定远始也。
现代文：监军有印，从王定远开始。
English: The overseer of the army has a seal, starting with Wang Dingyuan.

古文：六月，河阳献白乌。
现代文：六月，河阳献白乌鸦。
English: In June, Hayang offered white crows.

古文：甲辰，晋慈隰观察使崔汉衡卒。
现代文：八日，晋、慈、隰观察使崔汉衡去世。
English: On the eighth day, Jin, Ci, and Zou observed the death of Cui Hanheng.

古文：癸丑，以绛州刺史姚齐梧为晋慈隰都防御观察使。
现代文：十七日，以绛州刺史姚齐梧为晋、慈、隰都防御观察使。
English: On the 17th, Yao Qiwu, the governor of Zhangzhou, was appointed as the defense observation envoy for Jin, Ci and Handan.

古文：秋七月丙寅朔，右谏议大夫阳城为国子司业。
现代文：秋七月一日是朔日，右谏议大夫阳城为国子司业。
English: The first day of autumn in July is the New Year's Day. Yangcheng, the right-hand man of the Council of State, is appointed as the Secretary of State.

古文：河东监军王定远配流崖州，坐专杀也。
现代文：河东监军王定远发配充军到崖州，犯了擅自杀人的法。
English: Wang Dingyuan, the military inspector of Hedong, dispatched troops to Yazhou and committed the law of involuntary suicide.

古文：辛卯，江西观察使、洪州刺史齐映卒。
现代文：二十六日，江西观察使、洪州刺史齐映去世。
English: On the 26th, Jiangxi Observation Envoy, Hongzhou Zhang Shi Qiying passed away.

古文：八月辛亥，司徒兼侍中、北平郡王马燧薨，赠太傅。
现代文：八月十七日，司徒兼侍中、北平郡王马燧去世，赠太傅衔。
English: On August 17th, King Ma Jun of Peiping County, a scholar and chamberlain, passed away and was given the title of Taifu.

古文：丙辰，以楚州刺史路寰为洪州刺史、江西观察使。
现代文：二十二日，以楚州刺史路寰为洪州刺史、江西观察使。
English: On the 22nd, with Chuzhou's Zhishi Road as the Hongzhou Zhishi and Jiangxi Observation Envoy.

古文：闰月己丑，国子司业裴澄表上《乘舆月令》十一卷，《礼典》十二卷。
现代文：闰八月二十五日，国子司业裴澄上表奉上《乘舆月令》十二卷，《礼典》十二卷。
English: On the 25th day of the 8th month of the leap year, the Secretary of State, Ye Peizhen, presented the 12 volumes of "Using the Order of the Moon" and the 12 volumes of "Ceremony."

古文：九月己卯，赐宰臣两省供奉官宴于曲江，赋诗六韵赐之。
现代文：九月二十一日，赐宰辅大臣和中书、门下两省供奉官在曲江宴会，皇上赋六韵十二句诗赐给他们。
English: On September 21st, the Emperor gave the Vice-Minister of the Central Government, the Minister of the People's Commissariat of Foreign Affairs, and the two provincial officials under him a banquet in Qujiang. The Emperor gave them twelve poems in six rhymes.

古文：丁巳，加韦皋统押近界诸蛮及西山八国、云南安抚等使。
现代文：二十三日，加给韦皋统领监管近界诸蛮夷及西山八国、云南安抚等使。
English: On the 23rd, Wei Wei was given the leadership of supervising the barbarians in the near abroad and the envoys to pacify the West Mountain Eight Kingdoms and Yunnan.

古文：沧州大将程怀信逐其帅程怀直。
现代文：沧州大将程怀信驱逐他的主帅程怀直。
English: Cangzhou General Cheng Huaixin expelled his coach Cheng Huai Zhi.

古文：冬十月丁丑，以虔王谅为横海军节度大使，以兵马使程怀信为留后。
现代文：冬十月十四，以虔王谅为横海军节度大使，以兵马使程怀信为留后。
English: In the winter of October 14th, with King Kian as the ambassador of the Navy Festival, Cheng Huixin as the messenger of the soldiers and horses stayed behind.

古文：十一月丙申，日南至，不受朝贺，以司徒马燧葬也。
现代文：十一月三日，冬至，不接受朝贺，因为安葬司徒马燧。
English: On November 3rd, the winter solstice, morning greetings are not accepted because of the funeral of Shtumalov.

古文：辛丑，太常定马燧谥曰 景武 ，上曰： 景，太祖谥，改庄武可也。 
现代文：八日，太常确定马燧的谥号曰景武，皇上说： 景，这是太祖的谥号，改景武为庄武就可以了。 
English: On the eighth day, Emperor Taizong determined that the family name of Ma Xi was Jingwu, and the emperor said: Jing, this is the family name of the great-grandfather, it is enough to change Jingwu to Zhuangwu.

古文：己酉，潭州献赤乌。
现代文：十六日，潭州献上赤色乌鸦。
English: On the 16th, Tanzhou presented a red crow.

古文：十二月戊辰，上猎苑中，戎多杀，止行三驱之礼，劳士而还。
现代文：十二月五日，皇上在皇宫宫苑中打猎，禁戒多杀，只是行使三次驱赶野兽之礼而不杀，使士兵劳累而回。
English: On December 5th, the emperor went hunting in the courtyard of the imperial palace. He did not kill many animals, but only performed the ritual of driving away the wild animals three times without killing them, causing the soldiers to return exhausted.

古文：十二年春正月甲午朔。
现代文：贞元十二年春正月一日是朔日。
English: The first day of the first month of spring in the twelfth year of Zhengyuan is the new year's day.

古文：庚子，元谊、李文通率洺州兵五千、民五万家东奔田绪。
现代文：七日，元谊、李文通率领氵名州兵五千人，人民五万家往东去投奔田绪。
English: On the seventh day, Yuan Rong and Li Wentong led five thousand soldiers of the Shennai National Guard, and fifty thousand people went to the east to join Tianxu.

古文：壬子，以前沧州节度使程怀直为左龙武统军。
现代文：十九日，以前任沧州节度使程怀直为左龙武统军。
English: On the 19th, Cheng Huai Zhi, the former Cangzhou Party Secretary, became the leader of the Left Dragon Military Unification Army.

古文：乙丑，成德军节度使、检校司徒、兼侍中浑瑊兼中书令；兴元节度使严震、魏博田绪、西川韦皋并加检校左右仆射、中书门下平章事。
现代文：二月三日，成德军节度使、检校司徒、兼侍中浑王咸兼中书令；兴元节度使严震、魏博田绪、西川韦皋都加给检校左右仆射、同中书门下平章事的职衔。
English: On February 3, Hunwang Xian, the commander of the Chengde Army, was appointed as the festival envoy, the inspector of the school, and the attendant of the middle school; the Xingyuan festival was assigned to Jian Zhen, Wei Bo Tian Xu, and Nishikawa Wei Xuan, and they were given the titles of the inspector of the school, the inspector of the school, and the inspector of the school.

古文：于是方镇皆叙进兼官。
现代文：从此，方镇官员都议进兼官。
English: Since then, Fangzhen officials have all been promoted to concurrent posts.

古文：上制《贞元广利药方》五百八十六首，颁降天下。
现代文：皇上亲自制定《贞元广利药方》五百八十六首，颁布天下。
English: The emperor personally formulated the "Zhongyuan Guangli Pharmaceutical Prescription" of 586 chapters and promulgated it to the world.

古文：三月癸巳。
现代文：三月一日是朔日。
English: March 1st is New Year's Day.

古文：甲午，韦皋奏收降蛮七千户，得吐蕃所赐金字告身五十五片。
现代文：韦皋上奏说，收复归降的蛮夷七千户，得到吐蕃所给的委任官职的金字文凭五十五片。
English: Wei Wei said in his report that he had recaptured 7,000 barbarian households that had surrendered and received 55 pieces of gold-lettered diplomas for official positions given by Tu Wei.

古文：乙巳，以户部侍郎裴延龄为户部尚书。
现代文：十三日，以户部侍郎裴延龄为户部尚书。
English: On the thirteenth day of the month, the household secretary, Pei Yanling, was appointed as the household secretary.

古文：戊申，以兵部尚书董晋充东都留守、判东都尚书省、东畿汝州都防御使。
现代文：十六日，以兵部尚书董晋充任东都留守，兼任较低职务的东都尚书省、东畿汝州都防御使。
English: On the 16th, Dongdu Shangshuo, Donggui Ruzhou, and Dongdu Shangshuo were left behind, with Dongdu Shangshuo, Donggui Ruzhou, and Donggui Ruzhou all serving as defense attachés.

古文：四月壬戌朔。
现代文：四月一日是朔日。
English: April 1 is New Year's Day.

古文：戊辰，左右十军使奏：去年冬车驾幸诸营，欲于银台亭子门外立碑以纪圣迹。
现代文：七日，十个左右军使上奏，去年冬天皇上车驾到达各营，想到银台亭子门外立碑以纪念皇上留下的圣迹。
English: On the seventh day, about ten military envoys arrived. Last winter, the emperor got on a car and drove to each battalion. I thought of erecting a monument outside the gate of the Gindai Pavilion to commemorate the sacred monument left by the emperor.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上听从了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：庚午、魏情节度使、度支营田观察使，检校左仆射、平章事、魏州长史、驸马都尉、雁门郡王田绪卒。
现代文：九日，魏博节度使、度支使、营田使、观察使、检校左仆射、平章事、魏州长史、驸马都尉、雁门郡王田绪去世。
English: On the 9th, Wei Bo Festival Delegate, Provincial Delegate, Yingtian Delegate, Observation Delegate, School Inspector Zuo Fusha, Ping Zhangji, Wei Governor Shi, Xi Ma Du Fu, and Wang Tianxu of Ganmen County passed away.

古文：庚辰，上降诞日，命沙门、道士加文儒官讨论三教，上大悦。
现代文：十九日，是皇上诞生的日子，命令和尚、道士加上文官中的儒家讨论儒、道、佛三教，皇上大喜。
English: On the 19th, the day of the emperor's birth, he ordered the monks, Taoists, and Confucianists among the civil servants to discuss the three religions of Confucianism, Taoism, and Buddhism. The emperor was overjoyed.

古文：五月辛卯朔。
现代文：五月一日是朔日。
English: May 1st is New Year's Day.

古文：丙申，邠宁节度使张献甫卒。
现代文：六日，宁节度使张献甫去世。
English: On the sixth day, Ning Jiedu caused Zhang Xianfu to pass away.

古文：甲辰，以邠宁都虞候杨朝晟为邠州刺史、邠宁、庆节度使。
现代文：十四日，以宁都虞侯杨朝晟为州刺史？宁、庆节度使。
English: On the 14th, Yang Zhaohui, the governor of Yining, was appointed as the provincial envoy to record the history of Yining and celebrate the festival.

古文：银夏节度使韩潭让新授礼部尚书，乞雪崔宁，许其家收葬。
现代文：银夏节度使韩潭让出所授予的礼部尚书，请求为崔宁昭雪冤屈，同意他家中收尸埋葬。
English: On the Silver Summer Festival, Han Tan relinquished the award of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies, and asked for the redress of grievances for Cui Ning, and agreed to receive and bury the body at his home.

古文：丁已，驸马郭暖、王士平、暧弟煦暄，坐代宗忌辰饮宴，贬官归第。
现代文：二十七日，驸马郭暧、王士平、暧弟郭煦、郭暄，犯了代宗去世日期饮酒宴会的法，贬官回家。
English: On the 27th, Guo Ma, Wang Shiping, and his younger brothers Guo Zheng and Guo Zheng broke the law of drinking banquets on the date of the death of the daimyō and returned home.

古文：六月壬戌，故驩州司户窦参，许其家收葬。
现代文：六月三日，已故州司户窦参，同意他家收尸安葬。
English: On June 3rd, Dou Sang, the late sheriff of the county, agreed to allow his family to receive and bury his body.

古文：乙丑，初置左右护军中尉监、中护军监，以授宦官。
现代文：六日，开始设置左右护军中尉监、中护军监，以此授予太监。
English: On the 6th, the establishment of the left and right guard lieutenant supervisors and middle guard supervisors began, which was awarded to the eunuchs.

古文：以左右神策军使窦文场、霍仙鸣为左右神策护军中尉监，以左右神威军使张尚进、焦希望为左右神威中护军监。
现代文：以左右神策军使窦文场、霍仙鸣为左右神策护军中尉监，以左右神威军使张尚进、焦希望为左右神威中护军监。
English: Dou Wenchang and Huo Xianming were appointed as lieutenant supervisors of the left and right divine protection forces respectively, and Zhang Shangjin and Jiao Hope were appointed as supervisors of the left and right divine protection forces respectively.

古文：辛巳，宣歙观察使、宣州刺史刘赞卒。
现代文：二十二日，宣歙观察使、宣州刺史刘赞去世。
English: On the 22nd, Liu Zan, Xuancheng's observer and Xuanzhou's magistrate, passed away.

古文：七月乙未，以东都留守、兵部尚书董晋检校左仆射、同中书目门下平章事、汴州刺史、宣武军节度使、宋亳颍观察使。
现代文：七月六日，以东都留守、兵部尚书董晋任检校左仆射、同中书门下平章事、汴州刺史、宣武军节度使、宋、亳、颍州观察使。
English: On July 6th, they all stayed behind in the East, and Shang Shudong Jin of the Military Department was appointed as the left attendant of the inspection of the school, Shao, Ping Zhangji of the same middle school, Shizhou Shishi, Xuanwu Army Festival Envoy, Song, Zou, and Shanzhou Observation Envoy.

古文：时李万荣病，万荣子乃自署为兵马使，军人又逐乃，汴州乱，故命董晋帅之。
现代文：当时李万荣患病，万荣之子李自己任为兵马使，军人又驱赶李，汴州混乱，所以命令董晋作大帅。
English: At that time, Li Wan Rong was ill, Li Wan Rong's son Li himself was appointed as the military envoy, the soldiers drove Li away, and Zhangzhou was in chaos, so he ordered Dong Jin to be the general.

古文：以太子宾客为东都留守、判东都尚书省事、东畿汝都防御使。
现代文：以太子宾客王罖为东都留守兼任较低官职的东都尚书省事、东畿、汝都防御使。
English: With the prince's guest, Wang Qian, as the Dongdu, the Dongdu Shangshu Provincial Affairs, Donggi, and Youdu Defense Envoys, who stayed in Dongdu and concurrently held lower official positions.

古文：是日，汴州节度使李万荣卒。
现代文：这天，汴州节度使李万荣去世。
English: On this day, the Zhangzhou Festival caused the death of Li Wanrong.

古文：八月辛未朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：八月一日是朔日，有日蚀。
English: The first day of August is New Year's Day, and there will be a solar eclipse.

古文：己巳，以前魏博节度副使田季安为魏州长史、魏博节度观察等使。
现代文：十一日，以前任魏博节度副使田季安为魏州长史、魏博节度使、观察使。
English: On the 11th, Tian Ji'an, the former deputy envoy of the Wei Bo Festival, was appointed as the governor of Wei, the Wei Bo Festival envoy, and the observation envoy.

古文：庚午，增修望仙门，广夹城、十王宅、六王宅。
现代文：十二日，增加修建望仙门，修宽夹城，扩建十王宅、六王宅。
English: On the 12th, the construction of the Wangxian Gate was increased, the width of the city was widened, and the Ten Kings' House and the Six Kings' House were expanded.

古文：癸酉，以虢州刺史崔衍为宣、歙、池观察使，以乞髯子汤忠义为归德将军。
现代文：十五日，以虢州刺史崔衍为宣、歙、池观察使。以乞髯之子汤忠义为归德将军。
English: On the fifteenth day, the observation envoys of Xuan, Yao, and Chi were sent to Zhangzhou Jinshi Cuiyan, and Tang Zhongyi, the son of a beggar, was sent as the general to return to Germany.

古文：丙子，以汝州刺史陆长源为宣武行军司马。
现代文：十八日，以汝州刺史陆长源为宣武行军司马。
English: On the 18th, Lu Changyuan, a military historian from Ruzhou, was appointed as the leader of the military propaganda march.

古文：丙戌，门下侍郎、平章事赵憬薨。
现代文：二十八日，门下侍郎、平章事赵憬去世。
English: On the 28th, Zhao Jia, a servant of the disciple, Ping Zhangji, passed away.

古文：九月甲午，以河东行军司马李景略为丰州刺史、天德军丰州西受降城都防御使。
现代文：九月六日，以河东行军司马李景略为丰州刺史、天德军丰州西受降城都防御使。
English: On September 6, Ma Li Jingliao, the secretary of the army marching to the east of the river, was appointed as the historian of Fengzhou, and the Tiande Army was sent to the west of Fengzhou to defend the city.

古文：丙午，户部尚书、判度支裴延龄卒。
现代文：十八日，户部尚书、兼任度支使裴延龄去世。
English: On the 18th, the head of the household, Shangshu, and the concurrent chief of staff, Pei Yanling, passed away.

古文：庚戌，幸鱼藻宫，即日还内。
现代文：二十二日，皇上驾到鱼藻宫，当天回宫。
English: On the 22nd, the emperor drove to the Fish Algae Palace and returned to the palace the same day.

古文：壬子，吐蕃寇庆州。
现代文：二十四日，吐蕃入侵庆州。
English: On the 24th, the Tuoba invaded Gyeongju.

古文：冬十月壬戌，诏以京畿旱，放租税。
现代文：冬十月五日，皇上诏令因为京城附近干旱，免除租税。
English: On the 5th day of October in winter, the Emperor issued a decree exempting taxes due to the drought near the capital.

古文：甲戌，谏议大夫崔损、给事中赵宗儒并同中书门下平章事，俱赐金紫。
现代文：十七日，谏议大夫崔损、给事中赵宗儒都任同中书门下平章事，都赐予金印紫绶。
English: On the 17th, Dr. Cui Jia and Dr. Zhao Zongru, both of whom were in charge of the matter, were awarded the Gold Seal and Purple Ribbon.

古文：以少府监崔穆为晋州刺史、晋慈隰观察使。
现代文：以少府监崔穆为晋州刺史、晋、慈、隰观察使。
English: Choi Mu, a minor prefectural inspector, was appointed as the observation envoy for Jin, Jin, Ci, and Zou.

古文：十一月辛卯，昭义王虔休造《诞圣乐曲》以献。
现代文：十一月四日，昭义王虔休制《诞圣乐曲》献给朝廷。
English: On November 4, Shouyi Wang Qian composed the "Christmas Hymn" and dedicated it to the imperial court.

古文：十二月己未，大雪平地二尺，竹柏多死。
现代文：十二月二日，平地大雪二尺深，竹子、柏树大多冻死。
English: On December 2nd, the snow was two feet deep on the plain, and most of the bamboo and cypress trees froze to death.

古文：环王国所献犀牛，甚珍爱之，是冬亦死。
现代文：环王国所贡献的犀牛，皇上非常珍爱，这年冬天也冻死了。
English: The rhinoceros contributed by the Ring Kingdom was very precious to the emperor, and it also froze to death this winter.

古文：上著《刑政箴》一首。
现代文：皇上作《刑政箴》诗一首。
English: The emperor wrote a poem called "The Penal Code."

古文：癸未，回纥、南诏、剑南西山国女国王并朝贺。
现代文：二十六日，回纥、南诏、剑南西山国女国王都前来朝贺。
English: On the 26th, the Empresses of Huizhou, Nanzhao, and Jianan and Xishan all came to pay their respects.

古文：十三年春正月戊子朔。
现代文：贞元十三年春正月一日是朔日。
English: The first day of the first month of spring in the 13th year of Zhengyuan is the new year's day.

古文：庚寅，太子少师致仕关播卒。
现代文：三日，辞官的太子少师关播去世。
English: On the third day, the dictionary's prince, Shoshi Seki, passed away.

古文：壬寅，吐蕃赞普遣使修好，塞上以闻，上以犬戎负约，不受其使。
现代文：十五日，吐蕃赞普派遣使者前来结成友好，塞上以此情况报告朝廷，皇上因为犬戎曾经负约，不接待修好的使者。
English: On the fifteenth day, Tubo Zampu sent an envoy to come and make friends, and reported to the imperial court that the emperor would not receive the repaired envoy because the dog had broken the contract.

古文：东都尚书省火。
现代文：东都尚书省失火。
English: A fire has broken out in the eastern province of Shangshu.

古文：二月丁巳，赐宰臣、两省供奉官宴于曲江亭。
现代文：二月一日，皇上赐给宰辅大臣及中书门下两省供奉官在曲江亭宴会。
English: On February 1, the Emperor gave a banquet at Qujiang Pavilion to the Vice-Minister and the two provincial officials under the Chinese Academy of Letters.

古文：乙亥，度支郎中苏弁为户部侍郎、判度支，兵部郎中王绍判户部。
现代文：十九日，度支郎中苏弁为户部侍郎，兼任较小职务的度支使，兵部郎中王绍兼户部事。
English: On the 19th, Dudoshiro Chūsuben was appointed as the Household Attendant, and concurrently held the lesser position of the Dowager Empress Dowager, and Hyobusho Chūsuro Wang Shō concurrently held the position of Household Minister.

古文：三月戊子，造会庆亭于麟德殿前。
现代文：三月二日，在麟德殿前建造会庆亭。
English: On March 2, a celebration pavilion was built in front of the Lin De Hall.

古文：乙巳，以福建都团练使李若初为明州刺史、浙东观察使，以婺州刺史柳冕为福建观察使。
现代文：十九日，以福建都团练使李若初为明州刺史、浙东观察使，以婺州刺史柳冕为福建观察使。
English: On the 19th, Li Ruochu, who trained with the Fujian Capital Regiment, was appointed as the Mingzhou Historian and the East Zhejiang Observer, and Li Guorong, who trained with the Zhangzhou Historian and the East Zhejiang Observer, was appointed as the Fujian Observer.

古文：夏四月壬戌，上幸兴庆宫龙堂祈雨。
现代文：夏四月七日，皇上驾到兴庆宫龙堂求雨。
English: On the 7th day of the 4th month of summer, the emperor drove to the Dragon Hall of the Xingqing Palace to pray for rain.

古文：庚辰，以陕虢都防御观察转运等使姚南仲为滑州刺史、义成军节度、郑滑观察使。
现代文：十日，下大雪。十五日，义成军节度使、郑滑观察使、营田使、检校左仆射、滑州刺史李复去世。二十四日，以大理卿于由页为陕州长史、陕虢观察使。
English: On the 10th, it snowed heavily. On the 15th, Li Fu, the envoy to the Yicheng Military Festival, the Zhenglu observation envoy, the Yingtian envoy, the left-handed archer of the inspection school, and the slash of the slash of the slash, passed away. On the 24th, the governor of Shaanxi Province and the observation envoy of Shaanxi and Fujian Province were named Dali Sir Yu Yuyu.

古文：五月丙戌朔，韦皋收复巂州，画图来上。
现代文：五月一日是朔日，韦皋收复辒州，画图形前来奉上。
English: The first day of May is the New Year's Day. Wei Wei recovered Bozhou and drew a picture to present to the emperor.

古文：壬子，以库部郎中、翰林学士郑余庆为工部侍郎、知吏部选事。
现代文：二十七日，以库部郎中、翰林学士郑馀庆为工部侍郎，主持吏部科举选拔之事。
English: On the 27th, Zheng Yuqing, a junior member of the treasury department and a scholar of Hanlin, was appointed as a steward of the engineering department and presided over the selection of cadres.

古文：六月己卯朔，以衡州刺史陈云为邕管经略使。
现代文：六月一日是朔日，以衡州刺史陈云为邕管经略使。
English: The first day of June is the New Year's Day, with Chen Yun, the chief historian of Hengzhou, as the delegate.

古文：辛巳，引龙首渠水自通化门入，至太清宫前。
现代文：二十七日，引龙首渠的水从通化门进入，到太清宫前。
English: On the 27th, the water of the first canal leading the dragon entered from the Tonghua Gate and came to the front of the Taiqing Palace.

古文：壬午，韦皋奏于巂州破吐蕃，生擒大笼官七人，马畜器械不可胜纪。
现代文：二十八日，韦皋上奏在辒州攻破吐蕃，活捉大笼官七人，马、牛等牲畜、武器器械不可胜记。
English: On the 28th, Wei Xuan Shangqo defeated the Tu Yu in Zhangzhou, and captured seven big cage officials alive. Horses, cattle and other livestock, weapons and equipment are unforgettable.

古文：秋七月丙戌，宰相卢迈请告累月，四表避相位，是日，命宰臣问疾于卢迈私第。
现代文：秋七月三日，宰相卢迈连月请求告假，四次上表请求让出宰相之职位，这天，皇上命令宰辅大臣在卢迈私人住宅探问他的病情。
English: On the 3rd day of the 7th month of the autumn, when the Prime Minister, Rumaila, had been requesting leave of absence for months on end, and had requested to be relieved of the post of Prime Minister four times, the Emperor ordered the Vice-Minister to inquire about his condition at Rumaila's private residence.

古文：己丑，右神策中尉霍仙鸣病，赐马十匹，令于诸寺斋僧。
现代文：六日，右神策中尉霍仙鸣患病，皇上赐马十匹，命令在各个寺庙向和尚布施斋饭。
English: On the sixth day, Lieutenant Huo Xianming of the Right Divine Defense Force fell ill, and the emperor gave him ten horses and ordered him to give Buddhist monks a meal at each temple.

古文：壬辰，浚湖渠、鱼藻池，深五尺。
现代文：九日，疏通湖、渠、鱼藻池，挖深五尺。
English: On the 9th, the lake, canal and algae pond were dredged, digging to a depth of five feet.

古文：乙未，地震。
现代文：十二日，地震。
English: In the morning, an earthquake occurred.

古文：甲辰，以兵部郎中、判户部王绍为户部侍郎。
现代文：二十一日，以兵部郎中兼任较低职务户部事的王绍为户部侍郎。
English: On the twenty-first day of the year, Wang Shao, who was a middle-ranking Hyobusho and concurrently held a lower position in the Household Ministry, was appointed as the Household Minister.

古文：乙丑，诏今后嗣王薨葬，所司并供卤簿，永为常式。
现代文：二十二日，皇上诏令，今后嗣王死后安葬，有关部门都要供应仪仗队，永远作为常规。
English: On the 22nd, the emperor decreed that in the future, after the death and burial of the king, the relevant departments should provide an honor guard, which will always be the norm.

古文：八月丁巳，诏京兆尹韩皋修昆明池石炭、贺兰两堰兼湖渠。
现代文：八月四日，皇上诏令京兆尹韩皋修建昆明池石炭、贺兰两堰，兼修湖、渠。
English: On August 4, the emperor issued an imperial edict to Emperor Jingzha Yinhan to build the Kunming Lake Coal Mine and the Helan Weir, and also to repair the lake and canal.

古文：壬午，容管经略使房孺复卒。
现代文：二十九日，容管经略使房孺复去世。
English: On the 29th day of the month, the situation was slightly better, and Fang Xuanfu passed away.

古文：九月己丑，卢迈恳让相位，乃授太子宾客。
现代文：九月七日，卢迈恳求让出宰相职位，于是授予他为太子宾客。
English: On September 7th, Lumai pleaded to give up the post of prime minister, so he was awarded as a guest of the crown prince.

古文：辛卯九日，宴宰臣百官于曲江，上赋诗以赐之。
现代文：九日，皇上在曲江宴请宰辅大臣和百官，皇上赋诗赠送臣下。
English: On the 9th, the Emperor invited the Vice-Minister and hundreds of officials to a banquet in Qujiang. The Emperor presented poems to his vassals.

古文：己未，江西观察使路寰卒。
现代文：十三日，江西观察使路寰去世。
English: On the 13th, Jiangxi Observation Center announced the death of Lu Yao.

古文：甲辰，升定州为大都督府。
现代文：二十二日，定州升格为大都督府。
English: On the 22nd, Dingzhou was upgraded to the status of a major prefectural capital.

古文：以湖南观察使李巽为江州刺史、江西观察使，以礼部侍郎吕渭为潭州刺史、湖南观察使。
现代文：以湖南观察使李巽为江州刺史、江西观察使，以礼部侍郎吕渭为潭州刺史、湖南观察使。
English: With the observation of Hunan, Li Qian became the chief historian of Jiangsu Province and the chief historian of Jiangxi Province. With the observation of Hunan, Li Qian became the chief historian of Tanzhou Province and the chief historian of Hunan Province.

古文：冬十月癸丑朔，以前滁州刺史房济为容管经略使。
现代文：冬十月一日为朔日，以前任滁州刺史房济为容管经略使。
English: The first day of October in winter is the New Year's Day. Formerly, Zhangzhou Zhishi Fuzhi was a minor official in charge of health management.

古文：丙辰，黔中观察使奏： 溪州人户诉，被前刺史魏从琚于两税外，每年加进硃砂一千斤、水银二百驮，户民疾苦，请停。 
现代文：四日，黔中观察使上奏 ：溪州人诉说，被前任刺史魏从琚在春秋两税以外，每年加进朱砂一千斤，水银二百驮，户民疾苦，请求停止。 
English: On the 4th day of the month, the observation of the middle of the month was performed: the people of Xizhou said that the predecessor, Shi Wei, had added a thousand pounds of cinnabar and two hundred pounds of mercury to the spring and autumn tax every year, and the households were suffering, and asked to stop.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上听从了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：淮西吴少诚擅开淘刁河、汝河，诏使不能禁。
现代文：淮西吴少诚擅自开凿淘刀河、汝河，诏令不能禁止。
English: The imperial edict cannot prohibit Wu Shao-cheng of West Huai from digging up the Taosha River and the Ye River without permission.

古文：庚寅，诏诸道州府应贞元八年至十一年两税及榷酒钱，在百姓腹内者，总五百六十万七千贯，并除放。
现代文：二十一日，宰相贾耽因疾病回避宰相职位，皇上不允许他让位。二十五日，徐泗节度使张建封前来朝见，皇上特别嘉许，第二天，皇上在延英殿召见答对。十二月二十九日，右龙武统军韩游瑰去世。
English: On the twenty-first day, Prime Minister Jia Tan avoided the post of prime minister due to illness, and the emperor did not allow him to give up his position. On the twenty-fifth day, Xu Xi Jiedu asked Zhang Jianfeng to come to the Imperial Court for a meeting, and the emperor gave him a special commendation. The next day, the emperor summoned him to meet and answer questions at Yan Ying Palace. On December 29th, Han Yougui of the Right Dragon Wusong Army died.

古文：甲午，敕： 比来朝官或相过从，金吾皆上闻。
现代文：贞元十四年春正月一日是朔日。十三日，皇上诏令曰： 近来朝廷官员有的互相来往，金吾衙门都向上报告。
English: The first day of the first month of the spring of the 14th year of the Zhengyuan was the New Year's Day. On the 13th, the emperor's edict said: Recently, officials of the imperial court have had some mutual contacts, and all of them reported to the emperor.

古文：其间如是亲故，或尝同僚，伏腊岁时，须有还往，亦人伦常礼，今后不须奏闻。 
现代文：这些人中间有些是亲戚朋友，有些曾经是同僚，夏天的伏日，冬天的腊日，一年中的节日，必然有些往还，这也是人伦的常礼，今后不必奏闻。 
English: Some of these people are relatives and friends, some used to be colleagues. The summer's "Fu" day, the winter's "Lashi" day, and the festivals of the year will inevitably have some return visits. This is also a common courtesy of human relations, and there is no need to report it in the future.

古文：因张建封奏议也。
现代文：这是因为张建封上奏建议也。
English: This is because Zhang Jianfeng's suggestion was also rejected.

古文：二月壬子朔。
现代文：二月一日是朔日。
English: February 1st is New Year's Day.

古文：戊午，上御麟德殿，宴文武百僚，初奏《破陈乐》，遍奏《九部乐》，及宫中歌舞妓十数人列于庭。
现代文：七日，皇上驾到麟德殿，宴请文武百官，开始奏《破阵乐》，然后全部奏《九部乐》，以及宫中歌舞妓女十多人在庭中排列歌舞。
English: On the seventh day, the emperor drove to the Linde Palace, invited a hundred officials to the banquet, began to play "Broken Band Music," and then all played "Nine Part Music," and more than ten court prostitutes lined up in the courtyard to sing and dance.

古文：先是上制《中和乐舞曲》，是日奏之，日晏方罢。
现代文：先前皇上制《中和乐舞曲》，这天奏这个乐曲，一直到夜晚才停止。
English: Previously, the Emperor's system "Zhonghe Music and Dance" was played, and this day this music was played, and it did not stop until night.

古文：比诏二月一日中和节宴，以雨雪，改用此日。
现代文：本来诏令二月一日中和节宴会，因为下大雪，所以改在七日这天。
English: Originally, it was decreed that the banquet would be held on February 1st, but due to heavy snowfall, it was changed to the 7th.

古文：上又赋《中春麟德殿宴群臣诗》八韵，群臣颁赐有差。
现代文：皇上又赋《中春麟德殿宴群臣诗》八韵十六句，对群臣颁给的东西，按等级各有差别。
English: The emperor also wrote "The Mid-Spring Banquet of the Lin De Hall and the Poem for the Group of Courtiers" with eight rhymes and sixteen sentences. The things given to the courtiers differed according to their rank.

古文：乙亥，赐光蔡节度曰彰义军。
现代文：二十四日，赐光蔡节度为彰义军。
English: On the 24th, the Zhaiguang Cai Festival was held to honor the rebels.

古文：三月丙申，右神策行营节度、凤翔陇右观察使、检校尚书右仆射、凤翔尹邢君牙卒。
现代文：三月十六日，右神策行营节度、凤翔陇右观察使、检校尚书右仆射、凤翔尹邢君牙去世。
English: On March 16th, Feng Xiang, Feng Xiang, Feng Xiang, Feng Xiang, Feng Xiang, Feng Xiang, Feng Xiang, Feng Xiang, Feng Xiang, Feng Xiang, Feng Xiang, Feng Xiang, Feng Xiang, Feng Xiang, Feng Xiang, Feng Xiang, Feng Xiang, Feng Xiang, Feng Xiang, Feng Xiang,

古文：以右神策将军张昌为凤翔尹、右神策行营节度、凤翔陇右节度使，仍改名敬则。
现代文：以右神策将军张昌为凤翔尹、右神策行营节度、凤翔陇右节度使，仍旧改名为敬则。
English: With the Right Divine Providence General Zhang Chang as Feng Xiang Yin, Right Divine Providence Campaign Commander, and Feng Xiang Xing as Right Divine Providence Commander, the name was still changed to Keizi.

古文：夏四月乙丑，以左谏议大夫、平章事崔损为修奉八陵使。
现代文：夏四月十五日，以左谏议大夫、平章事崔损为修建八陵墓使者，先前昭陵寝殿被火所焚烧。
English: On the 15th day of the 4th month of the summer, the eight mausoleums were built under the leadership of Zuo Jianli Doctor and Ping Zhang Jizhi Cui Zao. Previously, the bed chamber of the Zhaoling was burned by fire.

古文：先是昭陵寝殿为火所焚，至是献、昭、乾、定、泰五陵各造屋三百八十间，桥、元、建三陵据阙补造。五月庚辰朔。
现代文：至此献、昭、乾、定、泰五个陵寝各造屋三百八十间，元、桥、建三座陵寝据缺少情况补造。五月一日是朔日。
English: So far, the five mausoleums of Xian, Zhao, Qian, Ding and Tai have built 380 rooms each, and the three mausoleums of Yuan, Qiao and Jian have been built to make up for the lack of mausoleums. May 1 is the New Year's Day.

古文：甲午，前东都留守、东畿汝都防御使、检校吏部尚书杜亚卒。
现代文：十五日，前任东都留守、东畿、汝都防御使、检校吏部尚书杜亚去世。
English: On the 15th, Shang Shuduya, the former defense attaché of Dongdu, Donggi and Youdu, and the inspector of schools, passed away.

古文：丙午，户部侍郎、判度支苏弁为太子詹事。
现代文：二十七日，户部侍郎兼任较低职务度支使的苏弁为太子詹事。
English: On the 27th, Su Ben, a steward of the household who also served as a lower-ranking envoy, became Prince Janzhi.

古文：上特召度支郎中于于延英，兼御史中丞，赐金紫，令判度支。
现代文：皇上特别在延英殿召见度支郎中于丕页，让他兼任御史中丞，赐给金印紫绶，让他仍兼任较低职务的度支使。
English: In particular, the emperor summoned Du Shi Lang from Yan Ying Dian to visit him, and made him concurrently serve as Vice-Minister of History, and gave him the Golden Seal and Purple Ribbon, so that he could still concurrently serve as a lower-ranking Du Shi Lang.

古文：闰月庚申，以左神策行营节度韩全义为夏州刺史，兼盐、夏、绥、银节度使，以代韩潭。
现代文：闰五月十一日，以左神策行营节度韩全义为夏州刺史，兼任盐、夏、绥、银节度使，以他代替韩潭。
English: On the 11th day of leap May, Han Chuan-yi, the chief of the festival of Zuo Sheng Zhaojing Camp, was appointed as the official historian of Xia Prefecture. He also served as the chief of the salt, summer, silk and silver festivals, replacing Han Tan.

古文：甲子，贬太子詹事苏弁为汀州司户，兄赞善大夫衮为永州司户，兄赞善大夫衮为永州司户，前京兆府士曹冕为信州司户。
现代文：十五日，贬太子詹事苏弁为汀州司户，兄赞善大夫苏衮贬为永州司户，前任京兆府士曹冕为信州司户。六月二十五日，太子宾客卢迈去世。
English: On the 15th, the dethroned prince Zhan Zhi Su Ben was dethroned as the steward of Dingzhou, his brother Zanzan Dr. Su Xi was dethroned as the steward of Yongzhou, and the former Jingzhao prefectural official Cao Guan was dethroned as the steward of Shinshou. On June 25th, the prince's guest Rumi passed away.

古文：六月癸卯，太子宾客卢迈卒。
现代文：二十七日，因为旱灾年成不好，拿出太仓之粟米来救济灾民。
English: On the 27th, because the drought year was not a good one, they took out Taicang's millet rice to help the victims.

古文：乙巳，以旱俭，出太仓粟赈贷。秋七月，以吉州刺史杜春为邕管经略使。
现代文：秋七月，以吉州刺史杜春为邕管经略使。
English: In the autumn and July, he was appointed as a special envoy by the governor of Kishu Province, Shishi Duchun.

古文：乙卯，贬京兆尹韩皋为抚州司马。
现代文：八日，贬京兆韩皋为抚州司马。
English: On the 8th, he demoted Jingzhao Hanqi to Fuzhou Sima.

古文：召右金吾将军吴凑于延英，面授京兆尹，即令入府府视事。
现代文：皇上在延英殿召见右金吾将军吴凑，当面授他为京兆尹，马上命令他入京兆府上任工作。
English: The emperor summoned Wu Qian, the Right King's general, at the Yan Ying Palace, and personally awarded him the title of Generalissimo, and immediately ordered him to take up his duties at the Generalissimo's Office.

古文：是夏，热甚。
现代文：这年夏天，很热。
English: This summer, it was very hot.

古文：壬申，以给事中、中书门下平章事赵宗儒为太子左庶子，以左谏议大夫、平章事崔损为门下侍郎、平章事，以工部侍郎郑余庆为中书侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：二十五日，以给事中、同中书门下平章事赵宗儒为太子左庶子，以左谏议大夫、平章事崔损为门下侍郎、平章事，以工部侍郎郑馀庆为中书侍郎、同平章事。
English: On the 25th, Zhao Zongru, a middle-ranking official and a subordinate of the middle-ranking official of the same title, was named the prince's left illegitimate child, Zuo Ying, a doctor of consultation, and Cui Zao, a middle-ranking official of the same title, were named the subordinate attendants and the middle-ranking official of the same title, and Zheng Yuqing, a attendant of the Ministry of Industry, was named the middle-ranking official of the same title and the same title of the same title.

古文：左神策护军中尉霍仙鸣卒。
现代文：左神策护军中尉霍仙鸣去世。
English: Lieutenant Huo Xianming of the Left Divine Protection Force passed away.

古文：丁丑，以宦者第五守亮代仙鸣为中尉。
现代文：三十日，以太监第五守亮代替霍仙鸣为中尉。
English: On the 30th, the fifth etheric supervisor, Shou Liang, replaced Huo Xianming as lieutenant.

古文：己卯，左右神策置统军，品秩奉给视六军统军例。
现代文：八月二日，左右神策军设置统军，品级俸禄比照六军旧例。
English: On August 2nd, the Left and Right Divisions of the Shen Zhe Army set up a unified army, and the rank and salary were the same as that of the Six Armies.

古文：甲午，崔损修奉八陵寝宫毕，群臣于宣政殿行称贺。
现代文：十七日，崔损奉命修建好了八陵寝宫，群臣到宣政殿祝贺。
English: On the 17th, Cui Zi was ordered to complete the construction of the eight mausoleums, and the courtiers came to Xuancheng Palace to congratulate him.

古文：浙西观察使、润州刺史王纬卒。
现代文：浙西观察使、润州刺史王纬去世。
English: West Zhejiang Observation Envoy, Runzhou Jishi Wang Wei passed away.

古文：九月丁未朔。
现代文：九月一日是朔日。
English: September 1st is New Year's Day.

古文：己酉，山南东道节度使、检校尚书右仆射、襄州刺史樊泽卒。
现代文：三日，山南东道节度使、检校尚书右仆射、襄州刺史樊泽去世。
English: On the third day, the host of the Shannan Festival, the inspector of the school, Shangshu Yudu, and the Xiangzhou clerk, Suze, passed away.

古文：乙卯，以同州刺史崔宗为陕州大都督府长史、陕虢观察水陆转运使，以浙东观察李若初为润州刺史、浙西观察使及诸道盐铁转运使，又以常州刺史裴肃为越州刺史、浙东观察使。
现代文：九日，以同州刺史崔宗为陕州大都督府长史、陕虢观察使、水陆转运使，以浙东观察使李若初为润州刺史、浙西观察使及各道盐铁转运使。又以常州刺史裴肃为越州刺史、浙东观察使。
English: On the 9th, Tongzhou's Zhang Cui Zong was appointed as the governor of the capital of Shaanxi Province, the observation envoy of Shaanxi and Fujian, and the land and water transportation envoy of Shaanxi Province; Li Ruochu was appointed as the observation envoy of East Zhejiang Province, the observation envoy of Runzhou Province, the observation envoy of West Zhejiang Province, and the salt and iron transportation envoy of all provinces; and Changzhou's Zhang Pei Su was appointed as the observation envoy of Yue Province and the observation envoy of East Zhejiang Province.

古文：丙辰，以陕虢观察使于頔为襄州刺史、山南东道节度使。
现代文：十日，以陕虢观察使于由页为襄州刺史、山南东道节度使。
English: On the 10th, with the observation of Shaanxi and Fujian, Yu Yu Page was appointed as the chief historian of Xiangzhou and the host of the festival in Shannan.

古文：丁卯，杞王倕薨。
现代文：二十一日，杞王李亻垂去世。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the Dragon King, Li Yat-tu, passed away.

古文：以太常卿杜确为同州刺史、本州防御、长春宫使。
现代文：以太常卿杜确为同州刺史、本州防御使、长春宫使。
English: Du Zhengyi, the Tai Changqing, was the governor of the same province, the defense envoy of the province, and the envoy of the Changchun Imperial Palace.

古文：癸酉，谏议大夫田登奏言： 兵部武举人持弓挟矢，数千百人入皇城，恐非所宜。 
现代文：二十七日，谏议大夫田登上奏道 ：兵部武举人拿着弓挟着箭，数千人进入皇城，恐怕不大适宜。 
English: On the twenty-seventh day of the month, Dr. Tian went up to the imperial palace to deliver a speech, saying, "I am afraid that it is not appropriate for thousands of soldiers to enter the imperial city with bows and arrows.

古文：上闻之瞿然，乃命停武举。
现代文：皇上听说后心惊，于是命令停止在京城武举考核。
English: The emperor was shocked when he heard about it, so he ordered to stop the military examination in the capital.

古文：冬十月癸酉，以岁凶谷贵，击太仓粟三十万石，开场粜以惠民。
现代文：冬十月七日，因为年成不好，谷物太贵，拿出太仓粟米三十万石，开场卖米以对人民施加恩惠。
English: In winter, on October 7th, because the harvest was not good and the grain was too expensive, he took out 300,000 koku of poppy seed rice from Taicang and started to sell rice in order to give the people favors.

古文：庚子，夏州韩全义奏破吐蕃盐州。
现代文：二十四日，夏州韩全义上奏说攻破了吐蕃盐州。
English: On the 24th, the Xiazhou Han Chuanyi made a speech saying that it had broken through the Tuyun Yanshou.

古文：十一月己未，韦皋进《开西南蛮事状》十卷，叙开复南诏之由。
现代文：十一月十四日，韦皋奉上《开西南蛮事状》十卷，内容是叙述恢复南诏的原因。
English: On November 14th, Wei Zheng submitted a ten-volume "Report on the Events in Southwest China," which described the reasons for the restoration of Nanzhao.

古文：十二月戊子，太子少师致仕郢国公韦伦卒。
现代文：十二月十三日，辞官的太子少师郢国公韦伦去世。
English: On December 13th, the prince's young apprentice, Wang Guogong Weiren, passed away.

古文：癸酉，出东都含嘉仓粟七万石，开场粜以惠河南饥民。
现代文：十八日，拿出东都含嘉仓粮米七万石，开场卖米，对河南饥民施加恩惠。
English: On the 18th, Dongdu took out 70,000 kilos of grain and rice, including Jia Cang, and began to sell rice, giving a boon to the starving people in Henan.

古文：己亥，南诏异牟寻遣使贺正旦。
现代文：二十四日，南诏国异牟寻派遣使者前来祝贺元旦。
English: On the 24th, Nan Zhaoguo sent an envoy to congratulate the New Year's Day.

古文：明州镇将栗锽杀刺史卢云。
现代文：明州镇守将领杀了刺史卢云。
English: The Mingzhou Town Marshal led the way in killing Jian Shluyun.

古文：十五年春正月丙午朔。
现代文：贞元十五年春正月一日是朔日。
English: The first day of the first month of spring in the 15th year of the Zhengyuan era is the new year's day.

古文：甲寅，雅王逸薨。
现代文：九日，雅王李逸去世。
English: On the 9th, Ya Wang Li Yat passed away.

古文：甲戌，浙西观察使李若初卒。
现代文：二十九日，浙西观察使李若初去世。
English: On the 29th day of the month, Li Ruochu passed away.

古文：二月，罢中和节宴会，年凶故也。
现代文：二月，撤销中和节宴会，因为年成不好的原因。
English: In February, the banquet for the Mid-Autumn Festival was cancelled due to the bad harvest.

古文：丁丑，宣武军节度使、检校左仆射、平章事、汴州刺史董晋卒。
现代文：三日，宣武军节度使、检校左仆射、平章事、汴州刺史董晋去世。
English: On the third day, Xuanwu Jun's festival envoy, school inspector Zuofu shot, Ping Zhangji, and Zhangzhou stabber Dong Jin passed away.

古文：乙酉，以行军司马陆长源检校礼部尚书、汴州刺史、御史大夫、宣武军节度度支营田、汴宋亳颍观察等使。
现代文：十一日，以行军司马陆长源任检校礼部尚书、汴州刺史、御史大夫、宣武军节度使、度支使、营田使、汴、宋、亳、颍等州观察使。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Marching Division Ma Lu Changyuan was appointed as the inspector of the school's etiquette department, the official inspector of Bozhou, the official inspector of the history department, the official inspector of the Xuanwu Army, the official inspector of the Bozhou Army, the official inspector of the Bozhou Army, the official inspector of the Bozhou Army, the official inspector of the Bozhou Army, the official inspector of the Bozhou Army, the official inspector of the Bozhou Army, the official inspector of the Bozhou Army, the official inspector of the B

古文：以常州刺史李锜为润州刺史、浙西观察使及诸道盐铁转运使。
现代文：以常州刺史李钅奇为润州刺史、浙西观察使及各道盐铁转运使。
English: The Changzhou surveyor Li Rongqi was appointed as the surveyor for Runzhou, the surveyor for western Zhejiang, and the surveyor for salt and iron transportation in all provinces.

古文：是日，汴州军乱，杀陆长源及节度判官孟叔度、丘颖，军人脔而食之。
现代文：这天，汴州军队发生骚乱，杀了节度使陆长源及节度判官孟叔度、丘颖，军队分割他们的肉来吃。
English: On this day, a riot occurred in the Zhangzhou army, killing Lu Changyuan, the commander of the festival, and Meng Shudu and Qiu Ying, the judges of the festival, and the army divided their meat to eat.

古文：监军俱文珍以宋州刺史刘逸准久为汴之大将，以书招之，俾静乱。
现代文：监军俱文珍认为宋州刺史刘逸准长期为汴州之大将，以书信召见他，以使他平定暴乱。
English: The inspector of troops, Qu Wenzhen, thought that Liu Yizhong, the Songzhou general, had been the general of Zhangzhou for a long time, and summoned him by letter to help him quell the riot.

古文：乙丑，以宋州刺史刘逸准检校工部尚书、兼汴州刺史、宣武军节度使，仍赐名全谅。
现代文：十五日，以宋州刺史刘逸准为检校工部尚书、兼汴州刺史、宣武军节度使，仍然赐名为全谅。
English: On the 15th, Liu Yizhun, the Songzhou scholar Liu Yizhun, was appointed as the inspector of the inspection department of the inspection department of the inspection department of the inspection department of the inspection department of the inspection department of the inspection department of the inspection department of the inspection department of the inspection department of the inspection department of the school.

古文：乙未，裴肃奏于台州擒栗锽以献，斩于独柳树。
现代文：二十一日，裴肃上奏说在台州活捉了栗钅皇献给朝廷，将栗钅皇在独柳树斩首。
English: On the twenty-first day, Pei Su reported that he had captured the Chestnut Emperor alive in Taizhou and presented him to the imperial court. He then beheaded the Chestnut Emperor in a willow tree.

古文：癸卯，罢三月群臣宴赏，岁饥也。
现代文：二十九日，撤销三月三日赏给群臣的宴会，因为这年是荒年。
English: On the 29th, the banquet given to the ministers on March 3rd was cancelled because it was a bad year.

古文：出太仓粟十八万石，粜于京畿诸县。
现代文：拿出太仓米十八万石，在京城附近各县发卖。
English: Take out 180,000 koku of rice from Taicang and sell it in counties near Beijing.

古文：三月甲寅，吴少诚寇唐州，杀监军邵国朝，掠居民千余而去。
现代文：三月三日，吴少诚入侵唐州，杀了监军邵国朝，掳掠居民一千多人而去。
English: On March 3, Wu Shaocheng invaded Tangzhou, killed the supervising army of Shao Guochang, and abducted more than a thousand residents.

古文：丁巳，以度支郎中、兼中丞于为户部侍郎，依前判度支。
现代文：十三日，以度支郎中、兼中丞于丕页为户部侍郎，仍依先前兼任度支使。
English: On the 13th, Kudoshiro junior high school and junior high school students were appointed as household attendants in Shibuya, and continued to serve as Kudoshisho as before.

古文：戊午，昭义军节度使、检校工部尚书王虔休卒。
现代文：十四日，昭义军节度使、检校工部尚书王虔休去世。
English: On the 14th, Shao Yijun's festival envoy, Shang Shu Wang Qian Xiu of the school inspection department passed away.

古文：戊辰，以河阳三城节度使李元为潞州长史、昭义军节度、泽潞磁邢洺观察使，以河阳节度押衙衡济为怀州刺史、河阳三城怀州节度使。
现代文：二十四日，以河阳三城节度使李元为潞州长史、昭义军节度使、泽、潞、磁、邢、氵名观察使，以河阳节度管理仪仗侍卫的衡济为怀州刺史、河阳三城怀州节度使。
English: On the 24th, Li Yuan was appointed as the governor and historian of Heyang and the governor and historian of the three cities of Heyang, the governor and historian of the three cities of Heyang, the governor and historian of the three cities of Heyang, the governor and historian of the three cities of Heyang, the governor and historian of the three cities of Heyang, the governor and historian of the three cities of Heyang, the governor and historian of the three cities of Heyang, the governor and historian of the three cities of Heyang, and the governor and historian of the three cities of Heyang.

古文：辛未，太子少师致仕于颀卒。
现代文：二十七日，辞官的太子少师于颀去世。
English: On the 27th day of the month, the prince of the dictionary died.

古文：壬申，于易州满城县置永清军。
现代文：二十八日，在易州满城县设立永清军。
English: On the 28th, the Yongqing Army was established in Mancheng County, Yizhou.

古文：癸酉，令江淮岁运米二百万石。
现代文：二十九日，命令江、淮每年运米二百万石。
English: On the 29th, Jiang and Huai were ordered to transport 2 million koku of rice per year.

古文：虽有是命，然岁运不过四十万石。
现代文：虽然有这道命令，然而运米不超过四十万石。
English: Despite this order, however, rice shipments did not exceed 400,000 koku.

古文：四月丁丑，以久旱，令阴阳人法术祈雨。
现代文：四月三日，因为长久干旱，命令阴阳人施法术祈祷下雨。
English: On April 3, because of the long drought, the Yin and Yang people were ordered to cast spells and pray for rain.

古文：壬午，内侍省加置内给事二员。
现代文：八日，内侍省增加设置内给事二员。
English: On the 8th, the Ministry of the Interior increased the number of staff assigned to the case by two.

古文：癸未，以安州刺史伊慎为安黄节度营田观察使。
现代文：九日，以安州刺史伊慎为安黄节度使、营田使、观察使。
English: On the 9th, Anshu Shishi Isen was appointed as Anhuang's delegate, Yingtan's delegate, and observer's delegate.

古文：庚寅，应京城内外诸军县镇职员官，见共五万八千二百七十一人，宜令每人赐粟一石。
现代文：十六日，曾在京城内外诸军、诸县、诸镇职事官员，现在共有五万八千二百七十一人，应该令每人交出粟米一石。
English: On the 16th, officials who had served in the army, counties, and towns inside and outside of Beijing, now totaling 58,271, were ordered to hand over one stone of corn each.

古文：乙未，特进、兵部尚书归崇敬卒。
现代文：二十一日，特进、兵部尚书归崇敬去世。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Shang Shuzhong of the Special Expeditionary Force and the Military Department passed away.

古文：五月甲辰朔。
现代文：五月一日是朔日。
English: May 1st is New Year's Day.

古文：戊辰，宗正卿嗣吴王巘薨。
现代文：二十五日，宗正卿嗣吴王李山献去世。
English: On the 25th, Zong Zhengqing's successor Wu Wang Lishan Xian passed away.

古文：六月己卯，黔中观察使、御史中丞王础卒。
现代文：六月六日，黔中观察使、御史中丞王础去世。
English: On June 6th, Wang Jing, the observation envoy of the Central Military Commission of the Republic of China, passed away.

古文：癸巳，山南西道节度使、检校尚书左仆射、平章事严震卒。
现代文：二十日，山南西道节度使、检校尚书左仆射、平章事严震去世。
English: On the 20th day of the month, the festival envoy of Shannan West Road, the inspector of the school, Shangshu Zuopu, and Ping Zhang passed away.

古文：秋七月乙巳，以兴州刺史、兴元都虞候严砺为兴元尹、兼御史大夫、山南西道节度度支营田观察等使。
现代文：秋七月三日，以兴州刺史、兴元都虞候严砺为兴元尹、兼御史大夫、山南西道节度使、度支使、营田使、观察使。
English: On the 3rd day of the 7th month of autumn, with the names of Xingzhou Sashishi and Xingyuan Dudu Guo, Yan Qi was appointed as Xingyuan Yin, concurrently the chief historian, and the delegate to the Western Shannan Province, the delegate to the Western Shannan Province, the delegate to the Western Shannan Province, the delegate to the Western Shannan Province, the delegate to the Western Shannan Province, the delegate to the Western Shannan Province, the delegate to the Western Shannan Province, the delegate to the Western Shannan Province, the delegate to the Western Shannan Province, the delegate to the Western Shannan Province, the delegate to the Western Shannan

古文：丙午，故唐安公主赐谥曰庄穆。
现代文：四日，已故唐安公主赐谥号曰 庄穆 。
English: On the 4th, the late Princess Tang An bestowed the name Zhuangmu.

古文：公主赐谥，自唐安始也。
现代文：公主赐谥号，从唐安公主开始。
English: The princesses gave their names, starting with Princess Tang An.

古文：丁未，以王础卒，废朝一日。
现代文：五日，因为王础去世，停止上朝一天。
English: On the fifth day, because Wang Qiuzhu passed away, the procession stopped for one day.

古文：观察使卒废朝，自础始也。
现代文：观察使去世而停止上朝，从王础开始。
English: Observation caused the death and stopped the last dynasty, starting with Wang Juxing.

古文：戊午，贬谏议大夫苗拯万州刺史，左拾遗李繁播州参军，以私议除拜严砺不当而无章疏，而伪言累上疏故也。
现代文：十六日，贬谏议大夫苗拯为万州刺史，贬左拾遗李繁为播州参军，因为他们私自议论任命严砺不恰当然而却没有上奏章，而且假称累次上奏，由于这个原因而贬官。
English: On the 16th, Miao Zheng was demoted to be a member of the military history of Wanzhou, and Li Xiang was demoted to be a member of the military history of Banzhou. They were demoted because they had privately discussed the appointment of Yan Xuan as inappropriate and natural, but they did not play the chapter, and they pretended to have played the chapter repeatedly. For this reason, they were demoted.

古文：郑、滑大水。
现代文：郑、滑大水。
English: Zheng, slip large water.

古文：八月壬申朔。丙申，陈许节度使、检校尚书右仆射、许州刺史曲环卒。
现代文：八月一日是朔日，二十五日，陈许节度使、检校尚书右仆射、许州刺史曲环去世。
English: August 1st is the New Year's Day. On the 25th, Chen Xu Xidu's envoy, inspector of the school, Shangshu Upu Xie, and Xu Zhi Shi Qu Huan passed away.

古文：丁酉，以洋州刺史韦士宗为黔中观察使。
现代文：二十六日，以洋州刺史韦士宗为黔中观察使。
English: On the 26th, the middle-school observation envoy was the Yangzhou scholar Shwe Shizong.

古文：辛酉，以大理评事宣武军都知兵马使韩弘检校工部尚书，兼汴州刺史、御史大夫、宣武军节度使。
现代文：九月五日，以陈许兵马使、前陈州刺史上官氵兑为许州刺史、陈许节度使。吴少诚阴谋叛逆渐渐严重，他攻陷了临颍，进攻包围许州。九月九日，宣武军节度使、检校工部尚书、汴州刺史刘全谅去世。九月二十日，以大理评事宣武军都知兵马使韩弘任检校工部尚书，兼汴州刺史、御史大夫、宣武军节度使。
English: On September 5th, Chen Xu was appointed as the envoy of soldiers and horses, and Chen Xu was appointed as the envoy of troops and horses, and Chen Xu was appointed as the envoy of festivals. Wu Shaocheng's conspiracy and rebellion became increasingly serious, and he attacked and besieged Linyi. On September 9th, the envoy of festivals of the Xuanwu army, the inspector of schools, and the inspector of Zhangzhou died. On September 20th, Han Hong was appointed as the inspector of schools, the inspector of schools, the inspector of history, and the inspector of festivals of the Xuanwu army.

古文：冬十月己丑，邕王謜薨。
现代文：冬十月十九日，邕王李讠原去世。
English: On the 19th day of October in winter, the king of the Yao Dynasty, Li Yuyuan, passed away.

古文：吏部侍郎奚陟卒。
现代文：吏部侍郎奚陟去世。
English: The secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs passed away.

古文：十一月乙巳，冬至，罢朝会，兵兴也。
现代文：十一月五日，冬至，撤销朝会，因为起兵打仗的原因。
English: On November 5th, the winter solstice, the Imperial Diet was dissolved because of the outbreak of war.

古文：壬子，襄州于頔奏，于朗山破淮西贼三千人。
现代文：十二日，襄州于由页上奏，在朗山破淮西贼三千人。
English: On the 12th, Xiangzhou Yu Yu played on the page, breaking three thousand Huai Xi thieves in Langshan.

古文：十二月庚午，朔方等道副元帅、河中绛州节度使、检校司徒、兼奉朔中书令浑瑊薨。
现代文：十二月一日，朔方等道副元帅、河中、绛州节度使、检校司徒、兼中书令浑王咸去世。
English: On December 1, Hun Wang Xian, vice-marshal of the Shuo Fang Road and other roads, delegate to the festivals of Hechu and Zhangzhou, inspector of schools, and middle school secretary, passed away.

古文：乙未，战淮西贼于小溵河，王师不利，诸军自溃。
现代文：二十六日，在小氵殷河与淮西贼作战，王师不利，各军自己崩溃。
English: On the 26th, in the battle with the Huaixi bandits in Xiaoyan Yinhe, Wang Shih was at a disadvantage, and each army collapsed on its own.

古文：丁酉，以同州刺史杜确为河中尹、河中绛州观察使。
现代文：二十八日，以同州刺史杜确为河中尹、河中绛州观察使。
English: On the 28th, Tongzhou's top official, Du Cheng, was appointed as the observation envoy for Yin and Zhangzhou.

古文：十六年春正月庚子朔。
现代文：贞元十六年春正月一日是朔日。
English: The first day of the first month of spring in the 16th year of Zhengyuan is the new year's day.

古文：乙巳，恆冀、定州、许、河阳四镇之师与贼战，皆不利而退。
现代文：六日，恒冀、定州、许、河阳四镇的军队与贼人作战，都不利而退军。
English: On the sixth day, the armies of the four towns of Hengji, Dingzhou, Xu, and Heyang fought against the thieves, but they were all unfavorable and withdrew.

古文：南诏献《奉圣乐舞曲》，上阅于麟德殿前。
现代文：南诏国贡献《奉圣乐舞曲》，皇上在麟德殿前阅览。
English: Nanzhao contributed "Bong Sheng Le Danzhong," which was read by the emperor in front of the Lin De Hall.

古文：二月己酉，以左神策行营、银夏节度等使韩全义为蔡州行营招讨使，陈许节度使上官涚副之。
现代文：二月十七日，以左神策行营、银夏节度使韩全义为蔡州行营招讨使，陈许节度使上官氵兑为副。
English: On February 17th, with Zuo Sheng planning to go to the camp and the Silver Summer Festival, Han Quan Yi was invited to go to the camp in Caizhou, and Chen Xu Festival made Shangguan Xingwei as deputy.

古文：己丑，左龙武统军程怀直卒。
现代文：二十一日，左龙武统军程怀直去世。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the leader of the Left Dragon Army, Cheng Huai-Zhi, passed away.

古文：己酉，华州刺史、潼关防御、镇国军使卢征卒。
现代文：三月十一日，华州刺史、潼关防御使、镇国军使卢征去世。
English: On March 11th, Lu Zheng, the defense envoy of Huazhou, Shaoguan, and Zhenguo, passed away.

古文：壬子，以尚书右丞袁滋为华州刺史、潼关防御、镇国军使。
现代文：十四日，以尚书右丞袁滋为华州刺史、潼关防御使、镇国军使。
English: On the 14th, Yuan Zhi (尚書右丞) was appointed as the governor of Huazhou, the defense envoy of Shaoguan, and the military envoy of Zhenguo.

古文：夏四月丁亥，黔中知宴设吏傅近逐观察使韦士宗。
现代文：夏四月十九日，黔中牙将傅近驱逐观察使韦士宗。
English: On the 19th day of the 4th month of the summer, Wei Shizong, a middle-ranking official of the State Council, came to expel Fu Xian as an observer.

古文：己丑，以义成军节度使姚南仲为右仆射。
现代文：二十一日，以义成军节度使姚南仲为右仆射。
English: On the 21st day of the month, Yao Nanzhong was appointed as the right-hand man of the Yicheng Army.

古文：以权知新罗国事金俊邕袭祖开府检校太尉、鸡林州都督、新罗国王。
现代文：以暂时代理主持新罗国事的金俊邕继承他祖父开府检校太尉、鸡林州都督、新罗国王的职务。
English: Kim Junsuk, who is temporarily acting as acting president of Silla, succeeds his grandfather, who was the inspector of the capital, the governor of Jilin Province, and the king of Silla.

古文：辛卯，以义成军行军司马卢群为滑州刺史、兼御史中丞、义成军节度使。
现代文：二十三日，以义成军行军司马卢群为滑州刺史、兼御史中丞、义成军节度使。
English: On the 23rd, Ma Luqun, the military commander of the Yicheng Army, was appointed as the governor of the state of Gansu, the vice-governor of the state of Gansu, and the festival envoy of the Yicheng Army.

古文：壬申，检校兵部尚书、京兆尹吴凑卒。
现代文：二十四日，检校兵部尚书、京兆尹吴凑去世。
English: On the 24th day of the month, the inspector of the school, Shang Shu of the military department and Jing Zhao Yin Wu Qian passed away.

古文：五月戊戌朔，以雨罢朝。庚戌，韩全义与蔡贼将吴少诚战于溵水南，王师败绩。
现代文：五月三日，因为大雨而罢朝，十三日，韩全义与贼将吴少诚在氵殷水之南作战，王师大败崩溃。
English: On May 3, because of the heavy rain, Han Quan Yi marched to the capital, and on the 13th, Han Quan Yi fought with the thief Wu Shao Cheng in the south of Suiyanshui, and Wang Shida suffered a crushing defeat.

古文：徐泗濠节度使、检校尚书右仆射、徐州刺史张建封卒。
现代文：徐、泗、濠节度使、检校尚书右仆射、徐州刺史张建封去世。
English: Zhang Jianfeng, Xuzhou chief of the Xuzhou, Shandong, and Fujian provincial governors, and the inspector of the Xuzhou inspection school, Zhang Jianfeng died.

古文：壬子，徐州军乱，不纳行军司马韦夏卿，迫建封子愔为留后。
现代文：十五日，徐州军队骚乱，不容纳行军司马韦夏卿，逼建封的儿子张忄音为留后。
English: On the 15th, the Xuzhou army rioted, not accommodating the marching sergeant Maweshia, forcing Jianfeng's son Zhang Yuyin to stay behind.

古文：丙寅，韦士宗却入黔州。
现代文：二十九日，韦士宗退入黔州。
English: On the 29th, Wei Shizong retreated to Ganzhou.

古文：丁卯，以吏部侍郎顾少连为京兆尹。
现代文：三十日，以吏部侍郎顾少连为京兆尹。
English: On the 30th, Gu Shorian, a chamberlain of the cadre department, was appointed as Keizhoin.

古文：六月丙午，郓州李师古、淮南杜祐并加同平章事，以祐兼领徐、泗、濠节度，以前虢州参军张愔起复骁卫将军，兼徐州刺史、御史中丞、本州团练使、知徐州留后。
现代文：六月十九日，郓州李师古、淮南杜佑都加给平章事的职衔，以杜佑兼任徐、泗、濠三州节度使，以前任虢州参军张忄音重新起用为骁卫将军，兼徐州刺史、御史中丞、本州团练使、主持徐州留后的工作。
English: On June 19, Bozhou Li Shigu and Huainan Du You were both given the title of Pingzhang affairs, with Du You also serving as the festival envoy of the three states of Xu, Handan and Handan. Zhang Yuyin, who had previously joined the army in Bozhou, was re-appointed as the general of Xianwei, and also served as the chief historian of Xuzhou, the chief historian, and the regimental training envoy of Honshu, and presided over the work after staying in Xuzhou.

古文：秋七月，湖南观察使吕渭卒。
现代文：秋七月，湖南观察使吕渭去世。
English: In the autumn of July, the Hunan observation caused the death of Lv Ying.

古文：八月癸酉，以河中尹王囗为潭州刺史、湖南观察使。
现代文：八月七日，以河中尹王□为潭州刺史、湖南观察使。
English: On August 7th, Yin Wang from Hanzhong was appointed as the Tangzhou chief historian and Hunan observation envoy.

古文：九月，宥吴少诚。
现代文：九月，宽恕了吴少诚。
English: In September, he pardoned Wu Shaocheng.

古文：驸马都尉郭暧卒。
现代文：驸马都尉郭暧去世。
English: Captain Guo Jun passed away.

古文：义成军节度使卢群卒。
现代文：义成军节度使卢群去世。
English: Lu Qun died at the festival of the Volunteer Army.

古文：丙午，前太常卿裴郁卒。
现代文：十一日，前任太常卿裴郁去世。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the former First Secretary Pei Yu passed away.

古文：戊辰，以左丞李元素为滑州刺史、兼御史大夫、义成军节度使。
现代文：十三日，以左丞李元素为滑州刺史、兼御史大夫、义成军节度使。
English: On the 13th, Zojo Lee was appointed as the governor of the state of Gyeongsangbuk-do, the governor of Gyeongsangbuk-do, and the military governor of Gyeongsangbuk-do.

古文：庚戌，贬中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事郑余庆为郴州司马，户部侍郎、判度支于为泉州司户。
现代文：十五日，贬中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事郑馀庆为郴州司马，贬户部侍郎、兼任较低职务的度支使于丕页为泉州司户。
English: On the fifteenth day, Zheng Yuqing, who had been demoted from the position of middle school secretary and junior high school teacher, was promoted to the position of the secretary of Quanzhou, and Yu Yu, who had been demoted from the position of the secretary of the household department and also held a lower position, was promoted to the position of the secretary of Quanzhou.

古文：以户部侍郎王绍判度支，以户阅郎中崔从质为户部侍郎。
现代文：以户部侍郎王绍兼任较低职务的度支使，以户部郎中崔从质为户部侍郎。
English: Wang Shao, the steward of the household, also served as the lower-ranking imperial envoy, and Choi Congye, the steward of the household, served as the steward of the household.

古文：癸酉，吴少诚贼迫官军溵水砦下营，韩全义退保陈州，诸军散还本道，官军不振。
现代文：十八日，吴少诚贼兵迫使官军在氵殷水砦扎营，韩全义退保陈州，各军散归本道，官军气势不振。
English: On the 18th, Wu Shaocheng's bandits forced the government army to set up camp at the Shu'an Water Fort. Han Quan Yi withdrew to defend Chenzhou. All the armies dispersed and returned to their original path. The government army was weak.

古文：以河南少尹张式为河南尹、水陆转运使。
现代文：以河南少尹张式为河南尹、水陆转运使。
English: Henan Minor Yin Zhang style was used as Henan Yin, Water and Land Transport Envoy.

古文：庚申，以太常卿齐抗为中书侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：二十五日，以太常卿齐抗为中书侍郎、同平章事。
English: On the 25th, Ether Changqing Qi Rong was promoted to the position of Chushushushijiro and Tongping Shoji.

古文：癸亥，以虔王谅为徐州节度使，张愔为留后。
现代文：二十八日，以虔王谅为徐州节度使，张忄音为节度留后。
English: On the 28th, King Piety was appointed as the envoy of the Xuzhou Festival, and Zhang Yinyin was left behind as the festival.

古文：冬十月辛未，兴元严砺希监军旨，诬奏流人通州别驾崔河图，长流崖州，赐死，人士伤之。
现代文：冬十月六日，兴元严砺迎合监军旨意，上奏诬告发配的通州别驾崔河图有罪，结果将他远远地流放到崔州，赐他自杀，人们为此而伤感。
English: On the 6th of October in winter, Xingyuan Yanjun complied with the order of the military overseer and made a false accusation against Tongzhou Beidou Cuihetu. As a result, he was exiled far away to Cuizhou and allowed him to commit suicide. People were saddened by this.

古文：吴少诚引兵归蔡州，上表待罪。
现代文：吴少诚引兵归还蔡州，上表章愿等待处理。
English: Wu Shaocheng led the troops to return to Caizhou, and the above table chapter is willing to wait for processing.

古文：戊子，诏雪吴少诚，复其官爵。
现代文：二十三日，皇上诏令为吴少诚洗雪罪过，恢复他的官职爵位。
English: On the 23rd, the emperor issued an imperial edict to absolve Wu Shaocheng of his wrongdoing and restore his official title.

古文：乙丑，河东节度使、检校礼部尚书、太原尹、兼御史大夫、北都留守李悦卒。
现代文：二十四日，河东节度使、检校礼部尚书、太原尹、兼御史大夫、北都留守李悦去世。
English: On the 24th day of the month, Li Yue, the keeper of the Hedong Festival, the head of the school inspection and ceremonial department, Taiyuan Yin, and the superintendent of history, died in Beijing.

古文：甲午，以河东行军司马郑儋检校工部尚书、太原尹、河东节度使。
现代文：二十九日，以河东行军司马郑儋为检校工部尚书、太原尹、河东节度使。
English: On the 29th, Shang Shu, Taiyuan Yin, and Hedong Festival Envoy of the Inspection Department of the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, led by Ma Zhengyao, the Secretary of the East River Marching Army.

古文：十一月癸卯，泗州、濠州宜隶淮南观察使。
现代文：十一月九日，泗州、濠州应隶属淮南观察使。
English: On November 9, Zhangzhou and Zhangzhou should be subordinated to Huainan Observation Mission.

古文：戊申，以太府卿韦渠牟为太常寺卿。
现代文：十四日，以太府卿韦渠牟为太常寺卿。
English: On the 14th, Wei Quimu, the governor of Tai Prefecture, became the governor of Taiji Temple.

古文：十二月戊寅，罢吏部复考判官及礼部别头贡举。
现代文：十二月十四日，撤销吏部重复考核裁判的官员以及礼部另外项目的科举考试。
English: On December 14th, the decision of the Ministry of Personnel to repeat the assessment of officials and the Ministry of Etiquette's examination of another project were revoked.

古文：十七年春正月甲午朔。
现代文：贞元十七年春正月一日是朔日。
English: The first day of the first month of spring in the seventeenth year of King Jeongjo is the new year's day.

古文：甲寅，韩全义自蔡州行营还，诏归镇华州。
现代文：二十一日，韩全义从蔡州行营回归，皇上诏令他回归华州镇守。
English: On the twenty-first day, Han Quan Yi returned from a campaign in Caizhou, and the emperor ordered him to return to the town of Huazhou.

古文：二月癸巳朔，赐群臣宴于曲江亭，上赋《中和节赐宴曲江诗》六韵赐之。
现代文：二月十六日是朔日。皇上在曲江亭赐给群臣宴会，皇上赋《中和节赐宴曲江诗》六韵十二句以赐给他们。
English: February 16th was the New Year's Day. The emperor gave a banquet to the courtiers at the Qujiang Pavilion. The emperor gave them the "Mid-Autumn Festival Banquet Qujiang Poem" with 12 lines.

古文：丁酉，雨雹。
现代文：五日，下冰雹。
English: On the fifth day, hail fell.

古文：己亥，雨霜。
现代文：七日，下霜。
English: On the seventh day, there was frost.

古文：戊申夜，雷震，雨雹。
现代文：十六日夜，雷声震动，下冰雹。
English: On the night of the 16th, thunder shook and hail fell.

古文：庚戌，大雨兼雹。
现代文：十八日，大雪兼冰雹。
English: On the 18th, there was heavy snow and hail.

古文：三月乙丑，赐群臣宴于曲江亭。
现代文：三月三日，皇上在曲江亭赐群臣宴会。
English: On March 3, the emperor held a banquet for his courtiers at Qujiang Pavilion.

古文：己巳，黔中观察使韦士宗复为三军所逐。
现代文：七日，黔中观察使韦士宗再次被三军所驱逐。
English: On the seventh day, Wei Shizong was once again expelled by the three armies.

古文：癸酉，衢州刺史郑式瞻进绢五千匹，银二千两，上曰： 式瞻犯赃，已诏御史按问，所进宜付左藏库。 
现代文：十一日，衢州刺史郑式瞻进献绢五千匹，银二千两，皇上道 ：郑式瞻犯了贪污罪，已经诏令御史审查讯问，他所缴的绢、银应该交付左藏库。 
English: On the 11th day of the month, Zheng Shizhan, the governor of Zhangzhou, donated 5,000 horses and 2,000 taels of silver. The emperor said, "Zheng Shizhan has committed the crime of corruption. He has been ordered by the emperor to be examined and interrogated. The horses and silver he donated should be handed over to the left bank."

古文：丁丑，省天下州府别驾、司马、田曹、参军；京兆、河南、太原三府外，诸府判司双曹者省一。
现代文：十五日，撤销天下州府之别驾、司马、田曹、参军的职务；京兆、河南、太原三府之外，各府判司有两名的减少一员。
English: On the 15th, the posts of deputy, secretary, field marshal, and member of the army in all prefectures were revoked; in addition to the three prefectures of Beijing, Zhao, Henan, and Taiyuan, each prefecture had two judges reduced by one.

古文：夏四月丁未，始命驸马及郡县主婿无子者，养男不用母廕。
现代文：夏四月十六日，开始命令驸马及郡主、公主为县主而丈夫无儿子的人，养一个养子，不能因母亲的职位而得官。
English: On the 16th day of the 4th month of the summer, he began to order those who had no son to raise an adopted son, and those who were county lords and princesses, and whose husbands had no son, could not be promoted because of their mother's position.

古文：辛亥，以谏议大夫裴佶为黔中观察使。
现代文：二十日，以谏议大夫裴佶为黔中观察使。
English: On the 20th, Dr. Pei Hao, a doctor of Chinese medicine, was appointed as the middle-school observation envoy.

古文：五月壬戌朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：五月一日是朔日，有日食。
English: The first day of May is New Year's Day, and there will be a solar eclipse.

古文：乙酉，邠宁节度使、检校工部尚书、邠州刺史杨朝晟卒。
现代文：二十四日，宁节度使、检校工部尚书、州刺史杨朝晟去世。
English: On the 24th, Yang Zhaohui, the Ning Festival Envoy, Shang Shu of the School Inspection Department, and the State Secretary Yang Chaohui passed away.

古文：丙戌，以工部侍郎赵植为广州刺史、兼御史大夫、岭南节度使。
现代文：二十五日，以工部侍郎赵植为广州刺史、兼御史大夫的职衔、岭南节度使。
English: On the 25th, Zhao Zhi, the chamberlain of the Ministry of Industry, was appointed as the Guangzhou chief historian, concurrently holding the title of chief historian, as well as the Lingnan festival envoy.

古文：六月戊戌，以定平镇兵马使李朝寀校工部尚书，兼邠州刺史、朔方邠宁庆节度使；以中官杨志廉为右神策护军中尉。
现代文：六月七日，以定平镇兵马使李朝宀采为检校工部尚书，兼州刺史、朔方？宁、庆三州节度使。以太监杨志廉为右神策护军中尉。
English: On June 7th, Li Zhaojun, the military commander of Dingping Town, was appointed as the inspector of the inspection department of the school. He was also the inspector of the festival of the three states of Zhishi, Shuo Fang, Ning and Qing. Yang Zhilian, the ether monitor, was the lieutenant of the Right Divine Protection Army.

古文：浙西人崔善真诣阙上书，论浙西观察使李锜罪状。
现代文：浙西人崔善真到朝廷上书，揭发浙西观察使李钅奇的罪状。
English: Cui Shanzhen, a citizen of West Zhejiang Province, sent a letter to the imperial court, exposing the crimes of Li Rongqi, the instigator of the Western Zhejiang observation.

古文：上览奏不悦，令械善真送于李锜。
现代文：皇上看了崔善真的的揭发不高兴，命令将崔善真带上枷锁送给李钅奇。
English: The emperor was not happy to see Cui Shanzhen's exposure, and ordered that Cui Shanzhen be sent to Li Rongqi in chains.

古文：为凿坑待善真，既至，和械推而埋之。
现代文：李钅奇则凿好土坑等待崔善真，崔到了以后，李钅奇将他连同枷锁一齐推下坑去活埋。
English: Li Rongqi dug a pit and waited for Cui Shanzhen. After Cui arrived, Li Rongqi pushed him down the pit together with the shackles to bury him alive.

古文：由是锜恣横叛。
现代文：从此李钅奇越发放纵叛逆。
English: From then on, Li Lanqi issued more and more long-range rebellions.

古文：己酉，以邠宁兵马使高固为邠州刺史、兼御史大夫、邠宁庆节度使。
现代文：十八日，以宁兵马使高固为州刺史、兼御史大夫衔？宁、庆节度使。
English: On the 18th, Gao Gu, a high-ranking envoy of the Ning Army and the Ning Horse, was appointed as the State Historian and the Grand Historian.

古文：丁巳，成德军节度使、恆冀深赵德棣观察等使、恆州大都督府长史、检校太尉、中书令、琅邪郡王王武俊薨，赠太师，谥曰忠烈。
现代文：二十六日，成德军节度使及恒、冀、深、赵、德、棣观察使、恒州大都督府长史、检校太尉、中书令、琅笽王王武俊去世，赠太师衔，谥号曰忠烈。
English: On the 26th, Chengde Military Festival Delegate and Heng, Ji, Sheng, Zhao, De, Zou Observation Delegate, Governor of Hengzhou Grand Duchy, Inspector Lieutenant, Clerk of the Chinese Academy of Letters, King of Zhai Wang Wujun passed away, was awarded the title of Grand Master, and his posthumous name was Zhongliao.

古文：秋七月戊寅，吐蕃寇盐州。
现代文：秋七月十八日，吐蕃入侵盐州。
English: On the 18th day of the 7th month of autumn, the Tuoba invaded Yanzhou.

古文：辛巳，以前成德军节度副使、检校工部尚书、知恆府事、清河郡王王士真起复授恆州长史，充成德军节度使。
现代文：二十一日，以前任成德军节度副使、检校工部尚书、主持恒府事、清河郡王王士真重新起用授予恒州长史、充任成德军节度使。
English: On the 21st, Wang Wanshizhen of Qinghe County, who had previously served as deputy festival envoy of the Chengdu German Army, head of the inspection and construction department of the Chengdu German Army, and presided over the affairs of the Chengdu German Army, was reappointed to serve as the festival envoy of the Chengdu German Army.

古文：乙酉，太常卿韦渠牟卒。
现代文：二十五日，太常卿韦渠牟去世。
English: On the 25th, Grand Duke Wei Quimu passed away.

古文：己丑，吐蕃陷麟州，杀刺史郭锋，毁城垒而去。
现代文：二十九日，吐蕃攻陷麟州，杀刺史郭锋、毁坏城墙而去。
English: On the 29th, Tubo invaded Linzhou, assassinated Shi Guofeng, and destroyed the city wall.

古文：八月戊午，以河东行军司马严绶检校工部尚书、兼太原尹、御史大夫、河东节度使。
现代文：八月二十八日，以河东行军司马严绶任检校工部尚书衔、兼太原尹、御史大夫、河东节度使。
English: On August 28th, Ma Yanjun, the secretary of the army marching to Hedong, was appointed as the inspector of the school inspection department, and also as Taiyuan Yin, the chief historian, and the Hedong Festival envoy.

古文：九月壬戌，韦皋奏大破吐蕃于雅州。
现代文：九月三日，韦皋上奏说大破吐蕃于雅州。
English: On September 3rd, Wei Wei said in his report that the Great Patriotic War broke out in Yazhou.

古文：戊辰，群臣宴曲江，上赋《九日赐宴曲江亭诗》六韵赐之。
现代文：九日，群臣在曲江宴会，皇上赋《九日赐宴曲江亭诗》六韵十二句赐给群臣。
English: On the 9th, the courtiers held a banquet at Qujiang. The emperor gave the courtiers the six-rhyme twelve-sentence poem "The Nine-Day Banquet at Qujiang Pavilion."

古文：丁丑，礼部尚书李齐运卒。
现代文：十八日，礼部尚书李齐运去世。
English: On the 18th, Li Qi Yun, the head of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies, passed away.

古文：冬十月，加韦皋检校司徒、中书令，封南康郡王，赏破吐蕃功也。
现代文：冬十月，加给韦皋以检校司徒、中书令衔，封南康郡王，这是赏赐他打败吐蕃的功劳。
English: In the winter of October, Wei Wei was given the title of school inspector, the title of Chinese calligrapher, and the title of King of Nankang County, which was a reward for his achievement in defeating Tubo.

古文：戊午，盐州刺史杜彦先委城奔庆州。
现代文：二十九日，盐州刺史杜彦先弃城逃奔向庆州。
English: On the 29th, Shi Shi Du Yan abandoned the city and fled to Gyeongju.

古文：辛未，宰相贾耽上《海内华夷图》及《古今郡国县道四夷述》四十卷。
现代文：十一月十三日，宰相贾耽献上《海内华夷图》及《古今郡国县道四夷述》四十卷。
English: On November 13th, Prime Minister Jia Tan presented the forty volumes of "Hainai Huaying Map" and "An Account of the Ancient and Modern Counties, Provinces and Counties."

古文：甲戌，翰林侍诏戴少平死十六日复生。
现代文：十六日，翰林待诏戴少平死去十六天又复活。
English: On the sixteenth day, Hanlin waited for Dai Shao Ping to die, and he was resurrected on the sixteenth day.

古文：庚戌，以京兆尹顾少连为吏部尚书，以吏部侍郎韦夏卿为京兆尹。
现代文：十二月二十二日，以京兆尹顾少连为吏部尚书，以吏部侍郎韦夏卿为京兆尹。
English: On December 22nd, Jing Zhaoyun Gu Shorian was appointed as the secretary of the personnel department, and Wei Xiaqing, the chamberlain of the personnel department, was appointed as the secretary of the personnel department.

古文：淮南节度使杜祐进《通典》，凡九门，共二百卷。
现代文：淮南节度使杜佑奉上《通典》，总计九门，共二百卷。
English: During the Huainan Festival, Du You was presented with a total of nine volumes of the "Compendium," a total of 200 volumes.

古文：十八年春正月戊午朔，大雨雪，罢朝贺。
现代文：贞元十八年春正月一日是朔日，下大雪，免朝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of spring in the 18th year of the Zhengyuan, it was the new year's day. It was snowing heavily, so there was no morning greeting.

古文：乙丑，骠国王遣使悉利移来朝贡，并献其国乐十二曲与乐工三十五人。
现代文：八日，骠国王派遣使者悉利移来朝贡，并献上他们的国乐十二曲与乐工三十五人。
English: On the eighth day, the king sent an envoy to Sili to pay tribute, and presented twelve pieces of their national music and thirty-five musicians.

古文：乙亥，韦皋以所擒蕃相论莽热来献。
现代文：十八日，韦皋以所擒捉的吐蕃宰相论莽热前来贡献。
English: On the 18th day of the month, Wei Wei made a contribution to the discussion on the hot topic of the prime minister of Tubo.

古文：庚辰，以常州刺史贾全为越州刺史、浙东观察使。
现代文：二十三日，以常州刺史贾全为越州刺史、浙东观察使。
English: On the 23rd, Jia Quan, the Changzhou chief historian, was appointed as the Yuezhou chief historian and the East Zhejiang observation envoy.

古文：二月戊子朔，赐群臣宴于马璘之山池。
现代文：二月一日是朔日，皇上在马瞞之山池赐群臣宴会。
English: February 1st was New Year's Day, and the emperor gave a banquet to his retainers in the mountains and ponds of Mache.

古文：三月癸未，以剑南东川行军司马李康为梓州刺史、兼御史大夫、剑南东川节度使。
现代文：三月七日，以剑南东川行军司马李康为梓州刺史、兼御史大夫、剑南东川节度使。
English: On March 7, Ma Li Kang, the secretary of the Jinan Dongchuan March, was appointed as the Azusa chief historian, concurrently the chief historian, and the Jianan Dongchuan festival envoy.

古文：乙丑，赐群臣宴于马璘之山池。
现代文：九日，皇上在马瞞之山池赐群臣宴会。
English: On the 9th, the emperor gave a banquet to his retainers in the mountains and ponds of Mache.

古文：己巳，以蕲州刺史郑绅为鄂州刺史、鄂岳蕲沔观察使。
现代文：十三日，以蕲州刺史郑绅为鄂州刺史、鄂、岳、蕲、沔观察使。
English: On the 13th, Zheng Sheng, the Bozhou chief historian, was appointed as the observation envoy of the Bozhou chief historian, the Bozhou chief historian, the Bozhou chief historian, the Bozhou chief historian and the Bozhou chief historian.

古文：癸酉，以浙东团练副使齐总为衢州刺史，总以横赋进奉希恩，给事中许孟容封还制书。
现代文：十七日，以浙东团练副使齐总为衢州刺史，齐总以横赋奉献皇帝迎合皇上意旨。给事中许孟容认为齐总并无政绩，升官不当，乃封存诏书，还给皇上。
English: On the 17th, the deputy envoy of the East Zhejiang Regimental Training Corps, Qi Zong, was appointed as the official historian of Zhangzhou. Qi Zong paid tribute to the emperor to meet the emperor's intention. In the matter, Xu Meng Rong believed that Qi Zong had no political achievements and the promotion was improper. The imperial decree was sealed and returned to the emperor.

古文：丙戌，以河中行军司马郑元为河中尹、兼御史大夫、河中绛节度使。
现代文：三十日，以河中行军司马郑元为河中尹、兼御中史大夫、河中、绛节度使。
English: On the 30th, Zheng Yuan, the commander of the cavalry marching in the middle of the river, was appointed as the Yin of the middle of the river, the doctor of history of the middle of the river, and the envoy of the middle of the river.

古文：五月癸亥，以窦群为左拾遗。
现代文：五月八日，以窦群为左拾遗。
English: On May 8th, the sinusoidal group was identified as the left fossil.

古文：庚辰，以祠部员外郎裴泰为检校兵部郎中，充安南都护、本管经略使。
现代文：二十五日，以祠部员外郎裴泰为检校兵部郎中，充任安南都护、本管辖区经略使。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, Pei Tai, a member of the ancestral hall, was appointed as the vice-minister of the military department of the inspection school, and served as the guardian of the capital of Annam and the deputy governor of this jurisdiction.

古文：六月癸巳，以吏部尚书顾少连为兵部尚书、东都留守、东都畿汝防御使。
现代文：六月八日，以吏部尚书顾少连为兵部尚书、东都留守、东都畿、汝防御使。
English: On June 8th, Gu Shao Lian was appointed as the Defense Minister of the Ministry of Military Affairs, the Defense Minister of the Eastern Capital, the Defense Minister of the Eastern Capital, and the Defense Minister of the Eastern Capital.

古文：前东都留守、检校礼部尚书王翃卒。
现代文：前任东都留守、检校礼部尚书王罖去世。
English: His predecessor, Dongdu, was absent, and the head of the proctoring department, Shangshu Wang Yao, passed away.

古文：秋七月庚辰，蔡、申、光三州春水夏旱，赐帛五万段，米十万石，盐三千石。
现代文：秋七月二十六日，蔡、申、光三州春天发大水，夏天干旱，皇上赐绸缎五万段，米十万石，盐三千石。
English: On the 26th day of the 7th month of autumn, Cai, Shen, and Guang, the three states in the spring had heavy water, and the summer was dry. The emperor gave them 50,000 pieces of silk and satin, 100,000 kilos of rice, and 3,000 kilos of salt.

古文：八月壬寅，以邕管经略使徐申为广州刺史、岭南节度使。
现代文：八月十八日，以邕管经略使徐申为广州刺史、岭南节度使。
English: On August 18th, Xu Shen was appointed as the chief historian of Guangzhou and the chief envoy of the Lingnan Festival.

古文：甲辰，以岭南节度掌书记、试大理评事张正元为邕州刺史、御史中丞、邕管经略使，给事中许孟容以非次迁授，封还诏书。
现代文：二十日，以岭南节度使的职务掌书记、试大理评事张正元为邕州刺史、御史中丞、邕管经略使。给事中许孟容认为张正元不是按级提拔，把诏书封起来送还皇上。
English: On the 20th, Zhang Zhengyuan was appointed as the secretary-in-charge and examiner-critic of the Lingnan Festival, and was also appointed as the secretary-general, secretary-general and deputy secretary-general of the Lingnan Festival. Xu Mengrong thought that Zhang Zhengyuan was not promoted according to his rank, so he sealed the imperial edict and sent it back to the emperor.

古文：丁未，以户部侍郎、判度支王绍为户部尚书、判度支。
现代文：二十三日，以户部侍郎、兼任较低职务的度支使王绍为户部尚书、兼管职务较低的度支使。
English: On the 23rd, Wang Shao, who had been appointed as the steward of the household department and also held a lower position, was appointed as the secretary of the household department and also held a lower position.

古文：九月乙卯朔，以太常少卿杨凭为潭州刺史、湖南观察使。
现代文：九月一日是朔日，以太常少卿杨凭为潭州刺史、湖南观察使。
English: September 1st is the New Year's Day, and Yang Biao, the Ether Chang Shaoqing, is the history of Tanzhou and the observation envoy of Hunan.

古文：赐群臣宴于马璘山池，上赋《九日赐宴诗》六韵赐之。
现代文：九日，在马瞞山池皇上赐群臣宴会，皇上赋《九日赐宴诗》六韵十二句赐给群臣。
English: On the 9th, the emperor gave a banquet to the courtiers in the mountains and ponds of Mache, and the emperor gave the courtiers the "9th Day Banquet Poem" with 12 verses and 6 rhymes.

古文：冬十月丁亥，以刑部尚书王锷为淮南节度副使兼行军司马。
现代文：冬十月四日，以刑部尚书王锷为淮南节度副使兼行军司马。
English: On the 4th of October in winter, the Vice-Minister of Huainan Festival and the Sima of the marching army were Shangshu Wangyao from the Criminal Law Department.

古文：己酉，鄜坊丹延节度使、检校礼部尚书王栖耀卒。
现代文：二十六日，坊、丹、延节度使、检校礼部尚书王栖耀去世。
English: On the 26th day of the month, Fang, Dan, Yan, the festival delegate, and the proctor of the school inspection ceremony, Wang Xiyao, passed away.

古文：十一月丙辰，以同州刺史刘公济为鄜州刺史、鄜坊丹延节度使。
现代文：十一月三日，以同州刺史刘公济为州刺史？坊、丹、延节度使。
English: On November 3, Liu Gongji, the provincial secretary of the same province, was appointed as the provincial secretary of the provinces of Shifang, Dan and Yan.

古文：十二月乙巳，贬大理卿李正臣为卫尉少卿，正臣为御史弹劾下狱，不堪其辱而死。
现代文：十二月二十二日，贬大理卿李正臣为卫尉少卿，李正臣被御史弹劾下狱，不能忍受侮辱而死。
English: On December 22nd, Li Zhengchen was demoted from the title of Grand Secretary to the title of Junior Secretary of the Imperial Guards. Li Zhengchen was impeached and sent to prison by the Emperor. He could not bear the humiliation and died.

古文：戊申，黎州蛮、牂柯使入朝。
现代文：二十五日，黎州蛮、柯使者入朝。
English: On the 25th, the envoys of Leshouman and Ke came to the imperial court.

古文：十九年春正月癸丑朔。
现代文：贞元十九年春正月一日是朔日。
English: The first day of the first month of spring in the 19th year of Zhengyuan is the new year's day.

古文：二月壬午朔，赐宴马璘山池。
现代文：二月一日是朔日，皇上在马瞞山池赐群臣宴会。
English: February 1st was the New Year's Day, and the emperor gave a banquet to his vassals in Macheizanchi.

古文：丁亥，修含元殿。
现代文：六日，修缮含元殿。
English: On the 6th, the renovation including the main hall began.

古文：赐安黄节度曰奉义军。
现代文：赐安黄节度的军队名曰奉义军。
English: The name of the army that bestows the Anhuang Festival is the Fengyi Army.

古文：丙申，以桂管留后韦武为桂州刺史、桂管观察使。
现代文：十五日，以桂管留后韦武为桂州刺史、桂管观察使。
English: On the 15th, Wei Wu, who stayed in Guizhou after the Guizhou Guizhou Guizhou Guizhou Guizhou Guizhou Guizhou Guizhou Guizhou Guizhou Guizhou Guizhou Guizhou Guizhou Guizhou.

古文：己亥，安南经略使裴泰为州将王季元所逐。
现代文：十八日，安南经略使裴泰被州中将领王季元所驱逐。
English: On the 18th, Annan had Pei Tai ousted by State Vice-Admiral Wang Jiyuan.

古文：甲辰，淮南节度使杜祐来朝。
现代文：二十三日，淮南节度使杜佑前来朝见。
English: On the 23rd, the Huainan Festival made Du You come to see the emperor.

古文：其献祖、懿祖祔于德明、兴圣之庙，每禘祫年就本室飨之。
现代文：三月一日是朔日，以杜佑任检校司空、同中书门下平章事、太清宫使。
English: The first day of March was the New Year's Day, and Du You was appointed as the inspector of the school, the deputy secretary of the school, the deputy secretary of the school, and the palace envoy of the Qing Dynasty.

古文：乙亥，以司农卿李实为京兆尹。
现代文：以淮南行军司马王锷任检校尚书右仆射，兼任扬州大都督府长史、淮南节度使。二十四日，以司农卿李实为京兆尹。
English: On the 24th, the Secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, Li Si, was appointed as the Jing Zhaoyun.

古文：夏四月乙未，泾原节度使刘昌奏请移行原州于平凉城，从之。
现代文：夏四月十五日，泾原节度使刘昌上奏请求把行原州移到平凉城，皇上同意了。
English: On the 15th day of the 4th month of the summer, the Yuyuan Festival made Liu Chang appeal for the request to move Xingyuan County to Pingliang City, and the emperor agreed.

古文：戊戌，百官以祔庙毕，蹈舞称贺。五月辛亥，荆南节度使、检校工部尚书、江陵尹裴胄卒。
现代文：五月二日，荆南节度使、检校工部尚书、江陵尹裴胄去世。
English: On May 2, Jingnan's festival envoy, Shangshu of the school inspection department, and Jiangling Yin Peiqi passed away.

古文：乙未，以荆南行军司马裴筠为江陵尹、兼御史大夫、荆南节度使。
现代文：十日，以荆南行军司马裴筠为江陵尹、兼御史大夫、荆南节度使。
English: On the 10th, Ma Peiqi, the secretary of the Jingnan marching army, was appointed as the Jiangling Yin, concurrently the chief historian, and the Jingnan Festival envoy.

古文：甲子，四镇北庭行军泾原节度使、检校右仆射、泾州刺史刘昌卒。
现代文：十五日，四镇、北庭行军、泾原节度使、检校右仆射、泾州刺史刘昌去世。
English: On the fifteenth day, Liu Chang, commander of the Four Towns, the North Court March, the Gongyuan Festival envoy, the school inspector, the right-handed archer, and the Gongzhou stabber, died.

古文：甲戌，以泾原节度留后段祐为泾州刺史、兼御史大夫、四镇北庭行军泾原节度使。
现代文：二十五日，以泾原节度留后段佑为泾州刺史、兼御史大夫、四镇、北庭行军泾原节度使。
English: On the 25th day of the month, he stayed behind to serve as the chief historian of Zhangzhou, as well as the chief historian, and as the envoy of the Zhangyuan Festival to march to the four towns and Beiting.

古文：乙亥，吐蕃遣使论频热入朝。
现代文：二十六日，吐蕃派遣使者论频热入朝。
English: On the 26th, Tubo sent an envoy to the DPRK.

古文：甲辰，以陈许行军司马刘昌裔检校工部尚书，兼许州刺史、陈许节度使。
现代文：六月十六日，以陈许行军司马刘昌裔任检校工部尚书，兼许州刺史、陈许节度使。
English: On June 16th, with Chen Xu marching army secretary Ma Liu Changxiong as the inspector of the school construction department, and Chen Xu as the state historian and Chen Xu as the festival delegate.

古文：自正月至是未雨，分命祈祷山川。
现代文：从正月到现在未下雨，皇上命官员分头祈祷山川。
English: From the first month of the year until now, it has not rained, and officials appointed by the emperor have been praying for the mountains and rivers.

古文：秋七月戊午，以关辅，罢吏部选、礼部贡举。
现代文：秋七月十日，因为关中和京城附近是荒年，撤销吏部选拔官吏和礼部的科举考试。
English: On the 10th day of the 7th month of autumn, because Guanzhong and the vicinity of Beijing were in a bad year, the examination for selecting officials for the Ministry of Civil Affairs and the Ministry of Etiquette was cancelled.

古文：己未，中书侍郎、平章事齐抗为太子宾客，病免也。
现代文：十一日，中书侍郎、平章事齐抗为太子宾客，这是因为他患病才免职的。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Chushushushijiro and Taira no Shosho were invited as guests of the Crown Prince. He was relieved of his duties due to illness.

古文：甲戌，雨。
现代文：二十六日，开始下雨。
English: On the 26th, it rained.

古文：乙亥，尚书右仆射姚南仲薨。
现代文：二十七日，尚书右仆射姚南仲去世。
English: On the 27th, Shang Shuxu's right-hand man Yao Nanzhong passed away.

古文：贷京畿民麦种。八月乙未，大雨霖。
现代文：朝廷借贷麦种给京城附近的民众。八月十七日，大雨不止。
English: The Imperial Court lends wheat seeds to people near the capital. On August 17th, heavy rain continues.

古文：冬十月乙未，以太子宾客韦夏卿为东都留守、东都畿汝都防御使。
现代文：冬十月十八日，以太子宾客韦夏卿为东都留守、东都畿、汝都防御使。
English: On the 18th day of October in winter, the Etherchild's guest, Lord Wei Xia, left Dongdu, and went to Dongdu, Gyeonggi, and Ye for defense.

古文：闰月丁巳，门下侍郎、同平章事崔损卒。
现代文：闰十月十日，门下侍郎、同平章事崔损去世。
English: On the 10th day of leap October, Tongping Zhangji Cui Jia, a servant of his disciple, passed away.

古文：十一月戊寅朔，以盐州兵马使李兴干为盐州刺史，许专达于上，不隶夏州。
现代文：十一月一日是朔日，以盐州兵马使李兴干为盐州刺史，皇上同意他专门向朝廷报告情况而不隶属于夏州。
English: November 1 was the New Year's Day, and Li Xinggan, the envoy of the Yanzhou Terracotta Warriors and Horses, was appointed to write the history of Yanzhou. The emperor agreed that he would report the situation to the imperial court and not be affiliated with Xiazhou.

古文：丙午，振、武、麟、胜节度使范希朝来朝。
现代文：二十九日，振武、麟、胜节度使范希朝前来朝见。
English: On the 29th, Zhenwu, Lin and Sheng Jiedu sent Fan Xichang to see the emperor.

古文：戊午，以振武行军司马阎巨源检校工部尚书，兼单于大都护、振武麟胜节度使。
现代文：十二月十一日，以振武行军司马阎巨源任检校工部尚书、兼单于大都护、振武、麟、胜节度使。
English: On December 11th, Ma Yan Jiuyuan, the secretary of the Zhenwu Marching Army, was appointed as the inspector of the inspection department of the school, and also served as the envoy to Dadu, Zhenwu, Lin and Sheng.

古文：庚申，以太常卿高郢为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：十三日，以太常卿高郢为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 13th, Ether Changqing Gao Jiong was appointed as the attendant of the Chinese Academy of Letters, and He Ping was appointed as the disciple of the Chinese Academy of Letters.

古文：壬申，监察御史崔薳入台近，不练故事，违式入右神策军。上怒，笞四十，配流崖州。
现代文：二十五日，监察御史崔入御史台时间较短，不熟悉规章制度，违背规章擅自进入右神策军；皇上大怒，打崔四十板子，发配到崖州。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, the supervising magistrate Cui entered the magistracy for a short time, was not familiar with the rules and regulations, and violated the rules and regulations to enter the Right Divine Policy Army without authorization; the emperor was furious, beat Cui with forty boards, and sent him to Yazhou.

古文：二十年春正月丁丑朔。
现代文：贞元二十年春正月一日是朔日。
English: The first day of the first month of spring in the 20th year of Zhengyuan is the new moon day.

古文：丙申，天德军防御团练使、丰州刺史李景略卒，以其判官任迪简代领其任。
现代文：二十日，天德军防御团练使、丰州刺史李景略去世，以他的判官任迪简代替他的职务。
English: On the 20th day of the month, Li Jingliao, the training envoy of the Tian De Army Defense Regiment and the Fuzhou magistrate Li Jingliao passed away, and his magistrate Ren Dijian took his place.

古文：己亥，以鄜、坊、丹、延节度使刘公济为工部尚书，以其行军司马裴玢代领其任。
现代文：二十三日，以、坊、丹，延节度使刘公济为工部尚书，以他的行军司马裴玢代替他的节度使职务。
English: On the 23rd, Liu Gongji was appointed as the official secretary of the Ministry of Industry and Commerce, and his marching secretary Ma Peiqi was appointed as the official secretary of the Ministry of Industry and Commerce.

古文：二月丙午朔，罢中和节宴，岁俭也。
现代文：二月一日是朔日，撤销中和节宴会，这是因为年成不好。
English: February 1 is the New Year's Day, and the banquet of the Mid-Autumn Festival has been cancelled. This is because the year is not good.

古文：庚戌，大雷震，雨雹。
现代文：五日，大雷震动，下冰雹。
English: On the fifth day, thunder shook and hail fell.

古文：三月甲申，以吐蕃赞普卒，废朝。
现代文：三月九日，因为吐蕃赞普去世，免去上朝。
English: On March 9th, he was excused from going to the Shang Dynasty due to the death of Thubten Zhanpu.

古文：己亥，以国子祭酒赵昌为安南都护、御史大夫、本管经略使。
现代文：二十四日，以国子祭酒赵昌为安南都护、御史大夫、本管经略使。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, Zhao Chang, the son of the state, was appointed as the guardian of the capital of Annam, the chief historian, and the chief administrator.

古文：夏四月辛酉，太子宾客齐抗卒。
现代文：夏四月十七日，太子宾客齐抗去世。
English: On the 17th day of the 4th month of the summer, the prince's guest Qi Gang passed away.

古文：丙寅，吐蕃使臧河南观察使论乞冉等五十四人来朝贡。
现代文：二十二日，吐蕃派遣臧河南观察使论乞冉等五十四人前来朝贡。
English: On the 22nd, 54 people, including Tu Youyou, who was sent by Tu Youyou to Henan as an observer, came to pay tribute.

古文：陈许节度赐号忠武军。
现代文：陈许节度赐号为忠武军。
English: Chen Xu Jiedu was given the title of loyal military.

古文：五月甲戌朔，罢御宣政殿。
现代文：五月一日是朔日，皇上撤销驾临宣政殿的打算。
English: The 1st of May was a new day, and the Emperor cancelled his plan to visit the Imperial Palace.

古文：乙亥，以史馆修撰、秘书监张荐为工部侍郎、兼御史大夫，充入吐蕃吊祭使。
现代文：二日，以史馆修撰、秘书监张荐为工部侍郎、兼御史大夫，充当进入吐蕃吊祭使。
English: On the second day, Zhang Sheng, an editor of the History Museum and a supervisor of the secretary, was appointed as a chamberlain of the engineering department and also as a doctor of history, acting as an envoy to the hanging ceremony in Tubo.

古文：七月癸酉朔，大雨雹。
现代文：七月一日是朔日，下冰雹。
English: The first day of July is New Year's Day, and there is hail.

古文：辛卯，福建观察使柳冕奏置万安监牧于泉州界，置群牧五，悉索部内马牛羊近万头匹，监史主之。
现代文：十九日，福建观察使柳冕上奏请求在泉州界设置万安监牧，安置大牧场五个，全部索取部族内马万匹、牛羊万头，让万安监牧的监官主持、管理。
English: On the 19th, Fujian observation made Liu Guanyin appeal for the establishment of Wan'an overseer in the Quanzhou border, the placement of five large pastures, all requesting 10,000 horses, cattle and sheep in the tribe, and let the overseer of Wan'an overseer preside and manage.

古文：八月戊申，以房州刺史郄士美为黔中观察使。
现代文：八月六日，以房州刺史郄士美为黔中观察使。
English: On August 6th, the middle school observation envoy was Fangzhou Jishi Jimei.

古文：己未，以昭义兵马使卢从史为检校工部尚书，兼潞州长史、昭义军节度、泽潞磁邢洺观察使。
现代文：十七日，以昭义兵马使卢从史为检校工部尚书，兼潞州长史、昭义军节度使、泽、潞、磁、邢、氵名观察使。
English: On the 17th, Lu Congshi, the inspector of the inspection department, was appointed as the inspector of the inspection department of the inspection department of the inspection department of the inspection department of the inspection department of the inspection department of the inspection department of the inspection department of the inspection department of the inspection department.

古文：九月庚辰，赐群臣宴于马璘山池。冬十月甲辰，于景州南皮县置唐昌军。
现代文：九月九日，在马瞞山池赐群臣宴会。冬十月三日，在景州南皮县设置唐昌军。
English: On September 9th, he gave a banquet to his vassals in Macheizhanchi. In winter, on October 3rd, he set up the Tang Chang Army in Nanpi County, Jingzhou.

古文：辛亥，易定节度使张茂昭来朝。
现代文：十日，易定节度使张茂昭前来朝见。
English: On the tenth day of the festival, Zhang Maozhao came to see Yi Ding.

古文：十一月丁酉，以监察御史李程、秘书正字张聿、蓝田县尉王涯并为翰林学士。
现代文：十一月二十六日，以监察御史李程、秘书正字张聿、蓝田县尉王涯都为翰林学士。
English: On November 26th, Li Cheng, Supervisor of the History Department, Zheng Zi Zhang, Secretary, and Wang Ya, Lieutenant of Lantian County, were awarded the title of Hanlin Scholar.

古文：十二月，吐蕃、南诏、日本国并遣使朝贡。
现代文：十二月，吐蕃、南诏、日本国都派遣使者朝贡。
English: In December, Tubo, Nanzhao, and Japan all sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：庚午，以桂管防御使颜证为桂州刺史、桂管观察使。
现代文：二十九日，以桂管防御使颜证为桂州刺史、桂管观察使。
English: On the 29th, the defense of Guizhou and the observation of Guizhou and Guizhou were made.

古文：二十一年春正月辛未朔，御含元殿受朝贺。
现代文：贞元二十一年春正月一日朔，皇上驾到含元殿接受朝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of spring in the twenty-first year of the Zhengyuan era, the emperor drove to the Hanyuan Hall to receive morning greetings.

古文：是日，上不康。
现代文：这天，皇上身体不适。
English: On this day, the Emperor became unwell.

古文：丙子，以浙东观察判官凌准为翰林学士，癸巳，会郡臣于宣政殿，宣遗诏：皇太子宜于柩前即位。
现代文：六日，以浙东观察判官凌准为翰林学士。二十三日，在宣政殿会见群臣，宣读遗诏：皇太子应在灵柩前即皇帝位。
English: On the 6th, Ling Jun, the judge of the Zhejiang East Observation Court, was appointed as the Hanlin Scholar. On the 23rd, he met with his ministers at the Xuancheng Palace and read out his last will and testament: the crown prince should be the emperor before the coffin.

古文：是日，上崩于会宁殿，享寿六十四。
现代文：这天，皇上在会宁殿去世，享年六十四岁。
English: On this day, the Emperor died at the age of sixty-four in the Hoenning Palace.

古文：甲午，迁神柩于太极殿。
现代文：二十四日，把皇帝的灵柩迁到太极殿。
English: On the 24th, the emperor's coffin was moved to the Taiji Hall.

古文：丙申，发丧，群臣缟素。
现代文：二十六日，发布丧事，群臣全部穿素衣戴孝。
English: On the 26th, the funeral was announced, and all the courtiers wore plain clothes.

古文：皇太子即位。
现代文：皇太子即皇帝位。
English: The crown prince is the emperor.

古文：永贞元年九月丁卯，群臣上谥曰神武孝文，庙号德宗。
现代文：永贞元年九月一日，群臣上谥号曰神武孝文，庙号德宗。
English: On September 1st, the first year of Yongzheng, the senior vassals were given the posthumous name of Jinwu Xiaowen and the temple name of Dezong.

古文：十月己酉，葬于崇陵，昭德皇后王氏祔焉。
现代文：十月十四日，安葬在崇陵，昭德皇后王氏在崇陵附祭。
English: On October 14th, she was buried in the mausoleum, and Zhao De's Empress Wang was given a memorial service in the mausoleum.

