古文：窦群，字丹列，京兆金城人。
现代文：窦群的字叫丹列，京兆府金城县人。
English: Dou Qun's character is called Dan Li, and he is from Jincheng County, Beijing.

古文：父叔向，以诗自名，代宗时，位左拾遗。
现代文：他父亲窦叔向，因诗写得好出名，代宗时，任左拾遗。
English: His father, Dou Shuxiang, was famous for his well-written poems. When he was the heir to the throne, he was left to collect his inheritance.

古文：群兄弟皆擢进士第，独群以处士客隐毘陵。
现代文：窦群的哥哥弟弟们都考中了进士，只有他住在毗陵当隐士。
English: Dou Qun's older brothers and younger brothers all passed the entrance examination, but only he lived in Viling as a hermit.

古文：母卒，啮一指置棺中，庐墓次，终丧。
现代文：他母亲去世时，他咬断自己一根指头放到棺材里，在墓边搭棚子住到守丧期满。
English: When his mother died, he bit off one of his own fingers and placed it in the coffin, and lived in a shed next to the grave until the end of the mourning period.

古文：从卢庇传啖助《春秋》学，著书数十篇。
现代文：他跟随卢庇传授啖助的《春秋》学说，撰写了几十卷书。
English: He followed the "Spring and Autumn" doctrine taught and assisted by Lu Bi and wrote dozens of books.

古文：苏州刺史韦夏卿荐之朝，并表其书，报闻，不召。
现代文：苏州刺史韦夏卿向朝廷推荐他，并呈报了他撰写的书，报告送到朝廷后，没召见他。
English: Lord Suzhou recommended him to the imperial court, and submitted a report on the book he had written. After the report was sent to the imperial court, they did not summon him.

古文：后夏卿入为京兆尹，复言之德宗，擢为左拾遗。
现代文：后来韦夏卿进朝廷任京兆尹，又推荐他，德宗任命他为左拾遗。
English: Later, Wei Xiaqing entered the imperial court as Jing Zhaoyun, and recommended him, and Dezong appointed him as Zuo Zhi Rong.

古文：时张荐持节使吐蕃，乃迁群侍御史，为荐判官，入见帝曰： 陛下即位二十年，始自草茅擢臣为拾遗，何其难也？
现代文：当时张荐被派出使吐蕃，就提升他为侍御史，任张荐的判官。他进宫去见皇帝时说： 皇上登基后二十年，才从民间提升我当拾遗官，是多么艰难哪？
English: At that time, Zhang Xian was sent as an envoy to Tibet, and he was promoted as a courtier and appointed as Zhang Xian's judge. When he entered the palace to see the emperor, he said: Twenty years after the emperor ascended to the throne, I was promoted from the people to be the official to collect the remains. How difficult is it?

古文：以二十年难进之臣为和蕃判官，一何易？ 
现代文：用二十年难当官的臣子当和蕃判官，太轻率了吧？ 
English: Is it too hasty to use a courtier who has been in office for twenty years as the arbiter of peace?

古文：帝壮其言，不遣。
现代文：皇帝认为他说得对，就没派他去。
English: The emperor thought he was right and did not send him.

古文：王叔文党盛，雅不喜群，群亦忄幸忄幸不肯附。欲逐之，韦执谊不可，乃止。
现代文：王叔文集团得势时，都不喜欢他，他也愤恨不肯依附他们，他们想把他赶出朝廷，韦执宜不同意，才算了。
English: When the Wang Shouwen clique gained power, they didn't like him at all. He also resented them and refused to follow them. They wanted to drive him out of the imperial court. Wei Xiyi didn't agree, and that was that.

古文：群往见叔文曰： 事有不可知者。 
现代文：他去见王叔文说： 事情有难以预料的。 
English: He went to see Wang Shouwen and said, "Things are unpredictable.

古文：叔文曰： 奈何？ 
现代文：王叔文说 ：你指什么？ 
English: Wang Shouwen said: What do you mean?

古文：曰： 去年李实伐恩恃权，震赫中外，君此时逡巡路傍，江南一吏耳。
现代文：他说 ：过去李实仗着有权和受宠，威风震动朝廷内外，您那时在路边徘徊，只是江南一名小官。
English: He said, "In the past, Li Si enjoyed power and favor, and his prestige shook both inside and outside the imperial court. At that time, you were wandering on the side of the road, just a minor official in the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：今君又处实之势，岂不思路傍复有如君者乎？ 
现代文：现您又有了李实的权势，难道不想想路边还有像您这样的人吗？ 
English: Now that you have the power of Li Si again, don't you want to think that there are still people like you on the roadside?

古文：叔文悚然，亦卒不用。
现代文：王叔文虽感到惊讶，但终于没任用他。
English: Although Wang Shouwen was surprised, he finally did not appoint him.

古文：宪宗立，转膳部员外郎，兼侍御史知杂事。
现代文：宪宗即位，调他当膳部员外郎，兼任侍御史知杂事。
English: When Emperor Genso ascended the throne, he was assigned to be a member of the kitchen staff, and also served as an attendant.

古文：出为唐州刺史。
现代文：后又调出京城任唐州刺史。
English: Later, he was transferred from Beijing to Tangzhou.

古文：节度使于頔闻其名，与语，奇之，表以自副。
现代文：节度使于由页听说了他的名字，和他谈话，认为他是奇才，任命他为副手。
English: When the governor heard his name and talked to him, he thought he was a genius and appointed him as his deputy.

古文：武元衡、李吉甫皆所厚善，故召拜吏部郎中。
现代文：武元衡、李吉甫都和他要好，因此把他召去任吏部郎中。
English: Both Wu Yuanhei and Li Jifu were friendly with him, so they called him to serve as a member of the cadre.

古文：元衡辅政，荐群代为中丞。
现代文：武元衡当权，推荐他代替自己任御史中丞。
English: Take Motohira assumed power and recommended him to replace himself as goshi chujo.

古文：群引吕温、羊士谔为御史，吉甫以二人躁险，持不下。
现代文：他推荐吕温、羊士谔任御史，李吉甫认为这两个人急躁、不正派，没有批准。
English: He recommended Lyu Wen and Yang Shijian for the post of imperial historian, but Li Jifu thought that these two men were impetuous and dishonest and did not approve.

古文：群忮狠，反怨吉甫。
现代文：他怀恨在心，反而恨李吉甫了。
English: He harbored hatred in his heart and hated Li Jifu instead.

古文：吉甫节度淮南，群谓失恩，因挤之。
现代文：李吉甫任淮南节度使时，他以为李吉甫失宠，就算计李吉甫。
English: When Li Jifu served as Huainan's ceremonial envoy, he thought that Li Jifu had fallen out of favor.

古文：陈登者，善术，夜过吉甫家，群即捕登掠考，上言吉甫阴事。
现代文：陈登擅长星象，夜晚去过李吉甫家，他就把陈登抓来拷打，诬告李吉甫有密谋。
English: Chen Deng was good at astrology. When he visited Li Jifu's house at night, he arrested and tortured Chen Deng and falsely accused Li Jifu of plotting.

古文：宪宗面覆登，得其情，大怒，将诛群，吉甫为救解，乃免，出为湖南观察使。
现代文：宪宗亲自审问陈登核查，知道了实情，很生气，要杀窦群，李吉甫帮忙劝解，才免去了死罪，调他出朝廷任湖南观察使。
English: Xianzong personally interrogated Chen Dengguang, learned the truth, was very angry, wanted to kill Douqun, Li Jifu helped to persuade, only to be spared the death penalty, transferred him out of the court to serve as Hunan observation envoy.

古文：改黔中。会水坏城郛，调溪洞群蛮筑作，因是群蛮乱，贬开州刺史。
现代文：后又调到黔中，遇上洪水冲坏了城墙，他调各地少数民族来筑城，为这少数民族叛乱了，他因此被贬为开州刺史。
English: Later, he was transferred to Luzhong. When a flood damaged the city wall, he transferred ethnic minorities from all over the country to build the city, and rebelled for this ethnic minority. As a result, he was relegated to the history of Kaizhou.

古文：稍迁容管经略使。
现代文：后略升官任容管经略使。
English: Later, he was promoted slightly and appointed as a vice-minister of economy.

古文：召还，卒于行，年五十五，赠左散骑常侍。
现代文：此后召他回京，在路上去世了，享年五十五岁，赠官为左散骑常侍。
English: After that, he was called back to Beijing, where he died on the way, at the age of fifty-five. He was awarded the title of Zuo Sanzhijishi.

古文：群狠自用，果于复怨。
现代文：他刚愎自用，喜欢报复别人。
English: He's hard-nosed and likes to get back at people.

古文：始召，将大任之，众皆惧，及闻其死，乃安。
现代文：当初召他回京，皇上想重用他，大家都害怕，到听说他死了，才安心了。
English: At first, he was called back to Kyoto, the emperor wanted to use him again, everyone was afraid, and they were relieved to hear that he was dead.

古文：元稹节度武昌，奏巩自副，卒。刘栖楚，其出寒鄙。
现代文：他哥哥窦常、窦牟，弟弟窦庠、窦巩，都任郎官，善于写诗歌文章，写了《联珠集》在当时流传，当时人称赞他们五兄弟像五大行星那样都有名气。刘栖楚出身贫贱。
English: His elder brothers Dou Chang and Dou Mou, and younger brothers Dou Xuan and Dou Gong, all served as his vassals. They were good at writing poetry, and it was said at the time that they had written the "Joint Pearl Collection," and people praised their five brothers as being as famous as the five planets. Liu Qi Chu was born poor.

古文：为镇州小吏，王承宗奇之，荐于李逢吉，繇邓州司仓参军擢右拾遗。
现代文：当镇州小官时，王承宗认为他是奇才，推荐给李逢吉，从邓州司仓参军升任右拾遗。
English: When he was a minor official of Zhenzhou, Wang Chengzong thought he was a genius and recommended him to Li Fengji, and he was promoted to the post of Right Reverend.

古文：逢吉之罢裴度、逐李绅，皆嗾而为奸者。
现代文：李逢吉罢免裴度的宰相，赶走李绅，都指使他干坏事。
English: Li Fengji dismissed Pei Du's prime minister, and drove away Li Sheng, all of which pointed to him doing bad things.

古文：敬宗立，视朝常晏，数游畋失德。
现代文：敬宗即位，上朝常较晚，多次游玩打猎不合君德。
English: When Emperor Keizong ascended to the throne, he was late in the morning, and it was not proper for him to go hunting several times.

古文：栖楚谏曰： 惟前世王者初嗣位，皆亲庶政，坐以待旦。
现代文：刘栖楚进谏说 ：前代皇帝刚即位，都亲自管理朝政，早起坐着等待早朝。
English: Liu Qi Chujing said: The previous emperor had just ascended the throne, and he personally managed the court politics. He got up early and sat waiting for the early morning.

古文：陛下新即位，安卧寝内，日晏乃作。
现代文：皇上刚登基，安稳地睡在宫里，很晚才起来。
English: The emperor had just ascended the throne and was sleeping peacefully in the palace. He woke up very late.

古文：大行殡宫密迩，鼓吹之声日闻诸朝。
现代文：先帝的灵柩就在附近，奏乐的声音在朝廷每天都听得到。
English: The coffin of the former emperor is nearby, and the sound of music can be heard every day in the imperial court.

古文：且宪宗及先帝皆长君，朝夕恪勤，四方犹有叛者。
现代文：宪宗皇帝和先帝都是年长当皇帝，成天谨慎勤勉，各地还有叛乱的。
English: Emperor Kenzong and the previous emperor were both elderly when they became emperors, cautious and diligent all day long, and there were rebellions all over the country.

古文：陛下以少主，践祚未几，恶德流布，恐福祚之不长也。
现代文：皇上年轻当皇帝，刚刚登基，坏名声传出去了，我担心帝位不能长久。
English: The emperor was young when he became emperor, he had just ascended the throne, and his bad reputation had spread. I was worried that his reign would not last long.

古文：臣以谏为官，使陛下负天下讥，请碎首以谢。 
现代文：我靠进谏当官，让皇上被全国人非议，请求撞碎脑袋来表歉意。 
English: I took advantage of my position as an official to make the emperor be criticized by the whole country, and I asked him to apologize by smashing his head.

古文：遂额叩龙墀，血被面。
现代文：于是就用前额在皇帝殿前叩击，血流满面。
English: So he struck his forehead in front of the emperor's palace, and blood streamed down his face.

古文：李逢吉传诏： 毋叩头，待诏旨。 
现代文：李逢吉传诏令说： 不要叩头了，等候诏令。 
English: Li Fengji issued an edict saying, "Don't kowtow, wait for the edict."

古文：栖楚捧首立，帝动容，扬袂使去。
现代文：他捧着头站着，皇帝被感动了，挥手要他下殿。
English: He stood with his head in his hands. The emperor was moved and waved for him to leave the palace.

古文：栖楚曰： 不听臣言，臣请死于此。 
现代文：他说： 您不听取我的话，我就请求死在这里。 
English: He said, "If you don't listen to me, I'll ask to die here."

古文：有诏尉谕，乃出。
现代文：皇帝下诏安慰开导他，他才出殿去了。
English: The emperor issued an edict to comfort and enlighten him, and he went out of the palace.

古文：迁起居郎，辞疾归洛。
现代文：后升任起居郎，因病辞官回到洛阳。
English: He was later promoted to kijiro, but due to illness he resigned and returned to Luoyang.

古文：后谏官对延英，帝问： 向廷争者在邪？ 
现代文：后来谏官在延英殿被皇帝召见，皇帝问道： 以前在朝廷上和我争执的那个人还在吗？ 
English: Later, the eunuch was summoned by the emperor at the Yan Ying Palace. The emperor asked: Is the person who used to argue with me at the court still there?

古文：以谏议大夫召。
现代文：召他去任谏议大夫。
English: He was called to the post of chief medical officer.

古文：未几，宣授刑部侍郎。
现代文：不久，宣诏任命他为刑部侍郎。
English: Soon after, an imperial edict was issued appointing him as an attendant of the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：故事，侍郎无宣授者，逢吉喜助己，故不次任之。
现代文：按惯例，侍郎没有宣诏任命的，李逢吉喜欢他帮助自己，因此不按惯例任命他。
English: According to the usual practice, Li Fengji liked the fact that the attendant had not been appointed by proclamation, so he did not appoint him according to the usual practice.

古文：数月，改京兆尹，峻诛罚，不避权豪。
现代文：几个月后，他调任京兆尹。执法严厉，不怕权贵。
English: A few months later, he was transferred to Jing Zhaoyun. He enforced the law strictly and was not afraid of the powerful.

古文：先是，诸恶少窜名北军，凌藉衣冠，有罪则逃军中，无敢捕。
现代文：此前，一些无赖青年在北军中挂名，欺负士人，犯了罪就逃到军队里，没有人敢去抓。
English: Previously, some ruffian youths had made their names in the Northern Army and bullied the soldiers. When they committed crimes, they fled to the army, and no one dared to catch them.

古文：栖楚一切穷治，不阅旬，宿奸老蠹为敛迹。
现代文：他穷究惩办所有人，不到一个月，惯犯老滑头都不敢犯法了。
English: He investigated and punished everyone, and in less than a month, the habitual criminals no longer dared to break the law.

古文：一日，军士乘醉有所凌突，诸少年从旁噪曰： 痴男子，不记头上尹邪？ 
现代文：有一天，兵将们乘着喝醉酒在欺负人，一些年青人在旁边喊道： 蠢汉子们，不怕上司京兆尹了吗？ 
English: One day, when the generals were drunk and bullying people, some young people nearby shouted: "Stupid men, aren't you afraid of your boss, Jing Zhaoyun?

古文：然其性诡激，敢为怪行，乘险抵戏，若无顾藉，内实恃权怙宠以干进。
现代文：但他性格古怪偏激，敢做奇异的举动，在危险的情况下钻营，好像无所畏惧，内心实际是仗着权势和受宠想升官。
English: But his character is eccentric and eccentric, he dares to do strange things, he drills in dangerous situations, he seems fearless, but in his heart he actually wants to be promoted by virtue of his power and favor.

古文：诣宰相，厉色慢辞，韦处厚恶之，出为桂管观察使。
现代文：他到宰相那里去，容貌傲慢言语不恭敬，韦处厚讨厌他，把他调出朝廷任桂管观察使。
English: When he went to see the prime minister, his appearance was haughty and his speech disrespectful. The Wei government detested him and transferred him out of the imperial court to serve as Guizhou observation envoy.

古文：卒，赠左散骑常侍。
现代文：后去世了，赠官为左散骑常侍。
English: He later passed away, and the bestowal officer was the left horseback riding attendant.

古文：张又新，字孔昭，工部侍郎荐之子。
现代文：张又新的字叫孔昭，是工部侍郎张荐的儿子。
English: Zhang Yanzhong's new name was Kong Zhao. He was the son recommended by Zhang Ruo, a chamberlain of the Ministry of Industry.

古文：元和中，及进士高第，历左右补阙。
现代文：元和年间，考进士中了高等。当过左、右补阙。
English: During the Yuan and He years, he passed the junior high school entrance examination, and served as a left and right assistant magistrate.

古文：性倾邪。
现代文：生性偏激，不正派。
English: Violent by nature, dishonest by nature.

古文：李逢吉用事，恶李绅，冀得其罪，求中朝凶果敢言者厚之，以危中绅。
现代文：李逢吉当权，讨厌李绅，想发现他的罪状，就搜罗朝廷中凶恶、泼辣、敢说话的人附和罪名，来搞垮李绅。
English: Li Fengji, who was in power, hated Li Sheng, and wanted to find out what he was guilty of, so he gathered all the vicious, hot-tempered and outspoken people in the imperial court to bring down Li Sheng.

古文：又新与拾遗李续、刘栖楚等为逢吉搏吠所憎，故有 八关十六子 之目。
现代文：张又新和李续、刘栖楚等人为李逢吉攻击他讨厌的人，因此有 八大将十六个儿子 的说法。
English: Zhang Yuxin, Li Zhaoyi, Liu Qichu and others are said to be Li Fengji's attack on people he dislikes, so there are sixteen sons of the eight generals.

古文：敬宗立，绅贬端州司马，朝臣过宰相贺，阍者曰： 止，宰相方与补阙语，姑伺之。 
现代文：敬宗即位，李绅被贬任端州司马，朝中臣子到宰相府去道贺，守门人说： 别进去，宰相正和补阙谈话，请稍候。 
English: When Emperor Keizong ascended to the throne, Li Sheng was demoted to the position of Danzhou Sima. When a vassal of Emperor Gaozong went to the Prime Minister's Office to offer congratulations, the gatekeeper said, "Don't go in, the Prime Minister is talking to Zhu Xi, please wait a moment."

古文：及又新出，流汗揖百官曰： 端溪之事，窃不敢让。 
现代文：到张又新出来，流着汗对大家行礼说： 端溪的事，我不敢推让功劳。 
English: When Zhang came out again, he was sweating profusely and bowed to everyone, saying, "I dare not take credit for what happened in Duanxi.

古文：人皆辟易畏之。
现代文：人们都害怕躲开他。
English: People are afraid to avoid him.

古文：寻转祠部员外郎。
现代文：不久调任祠部员外郎。
English: He was soon transferred to be a member of the ancestral hall.

古文：尝买婢迁约，为牙侩搜索陵突，御史劾举，逢吉庇之，事不穷治。
现代文：曾因买婢女违约，遭市场掮客搜查侮辱，御史弹劾他，但李逢吉庇护，事情就没有追究。
English: Once, for breach of contract in buying a maidservant, he was searched and insulted by market brokers. The Emperor impeached him, but Li Fengji protected him, and the matter was not investigated.

古文：及逢吉罢，领山南东道节度，表又新为行军司马。
现代文：到李逢吉罢相，任山南东道节度使，任命他为行军司马。
English: When Li Fengji retired, he was appointed as the envoy of the Shannan Host Festival and appointed him as the marshal of the march.

古文：坐田伾事，贬汀州刺史。
现代文：后为田亻丕事被判罪，贬任汀州刺史。
English: Later, he was convicted for the Tian'an incident and was demoted to the post of Tingzhou chief historian.

古文：李训有宠，又新复见用，迁刑部郎中，为申州刺史。
现代文：李训受宠信，他又被任用，升任刑部郎中、申州刺史。
English: Li Xun was favored, he was appointed again, promoted to the vice-minister of the Ministry of Justice, Shenzhou Sashihong.

古文：训死，复坐贬。
现代文：李训被处死，他又牵连贬官。
English: Li Xun was put to death, and he was implicated in the demotion.

古文：终左司郎中。
现代文：后来官当到左司郎中。
English: Later, he was assigned to Sasiro Junior High School.

古文：又新善文辞，再以谄附败，丧其家声云。
现代文：据说他善于写文章，两次因巴结别人栽跟头，把家庭的名声都搞坏了。
English: It is said that he was good at writing articles, and twice ruined the family's reputation by flattering others.

古文：杨虞卿，字师皋，虢州弘农人。
现代文：杨虞卿的字叫师皋，虢州弘农县人。
English: Yang Yuqing's Chinese name is Shi Yu, and he is from Hongnong County, Zhangzhou.

古文：父宁，有高操，谈辩可喜。
现代文：他父亲杨宁，有高尚的节操，擅长言谈论辩。
English: His father, Yang Ning, was a man of noble integrity, good at speech and debate.

古文：擢明经，调临涣主簿，弃官还夏，与阳城为莫逆交。
现代文：杨宁考中了明经科，调任临涣县主簿，他离职回到夏县，和阳城是知心朋友。
English: Yang Ning was transferred to the Linyi County chief accountant after he passed the examination of the Ming Dynasty. He left the post and returned to Xia County. He and Yangcheng are close friends.

古文：德宗以谏议大夫召城，城未拜，诏宁即谕，与俱来。
现代文：德宗召阳城任谏议大夫，阳城没接受，有诏命杨宁去劝说，就和他一起来了。
English: Dezong invited Yangcheng to serve as his advisor, but Yangcheng did not accept. He had the imperial command to persuade Yangning, so Yangcheng came with him.

古文：陕虢观察使李齐运表置幕府。
现代文：陕虢观察使李齐运召他到府中任职。
English: The observation of Shaanxi and Fujian made Li Qi call him to serve in the government.

古文：齐运入为京兆尹，表奉先主簿，拜监察御史，坐累免。
现代文：李齐运进京任京兆尹，任命他为奉先县主簿，后任监察御史，受连累免官。
English: Li Qiyun went to Beijing to take up the post of Jing Zhaoyun, appointed him as the chief official of Fengxian County, and later as the inspector of imperial history, but he was relieved of his duties.

古文：顺宗初，召为殿中侍御史，终国子祭酒。
现代文：顺宗初年，召进京任殿中侍御史，去世时任国子祭酒。
English: In the first year of Shunzong's reign, he was summoned to the Imperial Palace in Beijing to serve the Emperor, and at the time of his death, he was in charge of the Kuniko Matsuri Sake.

古文：虞卿第进士、博学宏辞，为校书郎。
现代文：杨虞卿考中了进士和博学宏辞科，任校书郎。
English: Yang Yuqing took the entrance examination of the advanced scholar and the erudite macro-diction, and was appointed as the school scribe.

古文：抵淮南，委婚币焉，会陈商葬其先，贫不振，虞卿未尝与游，悉所赍助之。
现代文：他到淮南去送娶亲聘礼，遇到陈商埋葬长辈，穷得没办法，杨虞卿没和他交往过，将带去的财物都用来帮助他。
English: He went to Huainan to give a wedding gift, met Chen Shang to bury his elders, and was too poor to do anything. Yang Yuqing had never been in contact with him, and used all the belongings he brought to help him.

古文：擢累监察御史。
现代文：后多次升官任监察御史。
English: He was later promoted several times to the post of inspector general.

古文：穆宗初立，逸游荒恣，虞卿上疏曰： 乌鸢遭害仁鸟逝，诽谤不诛良臣进。
现代文：穆宗刚登基，游乐没有节制，杨虞卿上奏说 ：乌鸦和鹰被打死，凤凰就飞走了，提意见的不杀头忠臣就来了。
English: As soon as Mu Zong ascended to the throne, there was no restraint on entertainment. Yang Yuqing recited: The crow and the eagle were killed, the phoenix flew away, and the loyal subject who did not kill came to give advice.

古文：臣敢冒诛献瞽言。
现代文：我斗胆冒死罪提出浅陋的看法。
English: I dare to commit the capital crime of expressing a shallow opinion.

古文：臣闻尧、舜以天下为忧，不以位为乐。
现代文：我听说尧、舜为百姓担忧，而不视在位为乐事。
English: I have heard that Zou and Zou are worried about the people, and do not regard being in power as a pleasure.

古文：况今北虏方梗，西戎弗靖，两河有疮痏之虞，五岭罹氛厉之役。
现代文：何况现在与回纥不和，吐蕃又没制服，河北、河南有藩镇战乱，五岭又遭受凶灾。
English: What's more, there is now discord with the Uighurs, the Tibetans don't have uniforms, there are clan and town wars in Hebei and Henan, and the Wuling Mountains have suffered terrible disasters.

古文：人之疾苦积下，朝之制度莫脩。
现代文：人民痛苦增加，朝廷制度不健全。
English: The people's sufferings increased, and the imperial court system was not sound.

古文：边亡见储，国用浸屈，固未可以高枕而息也。
现代文：边境没有储备，国家用度逐渐不足，确实不能高枕无忧。
English: There are no reserves at the border, and the country's consumption is gradually insufficient, so we really can't rest easy.

古文：陛下初临万几，宜有忧天下心。
现代文：皇上刚登皇位，应有为全国操劳的心愿。
English: The emperor has just ascended the throne, and he should have the desire to work for the whole country.

古文：当日见辅臣公卿百执事，垂意以问，使四方内外灼有所闻。
现代文：当天就召见宰相和百官，认真询问，使朝中和各地都清楚知道。
English: On the same day, he summoned the prime minister and hundreds of officials to inquire earnestly, so that the DPRK and all regions would know clearly.

古文：而听政六十日，入对延英，独三数大臣承圣问而已，它内朝臣偕入齐出，无所咨询。
现代文：但皇上临朝六十天了，八次在延英殿召见，只有三五个大臣受到询问，其他进内廷的朝臣同进同出，没有询问。
English: However, sixty days after the Emperor's enthronement, he was summoned eight times to appear at Yan Ying Palace. Only three to five ministers were questioned, while other courtiers who entered the inner court went in and out at the same time, and were not questioned.

古文：谏臣盈廷，忠言不闻，臣实羞之。
现代文：谏官满朝，不能进忠言，我确实感到羞愧。
English: I really feel ashamed that I am a eunuch all my life and cannot become a loyal adviser.

古文：盖主恩疏而正路塞也。
现代文：皇上恩宠少言路就堵塞了。
English: The emperor's favor is blocked with a few words.

古文：公卿大臣宜朝夕燕见，则君臣情接而治道得矣。
现代文：公卿宰相应早晚在内廷朝见，君主和臣子的感情就融洽了，就能知道治理的好办法了。
English: Accordingly, the Kugyo-zai would meet with the Imperial Court at the Inner Court in the morning and evening, and the feelings of the monarch and the courtier would be in harmony, and they would know the best way to govern.

古文：今宰臣四五人，或顷刻侍坐，鞠躬陨越，随旨上下，无能往来，此繇君太尊、臣太卑故也。
现代文：现四五位宰相，偶尔侍奉皇上坐一会儿，行礼之后，按要求进退，不能交谈，这是因为皇上太威严，臣下太卑微。
English: At present, there are four or five prime ministers, who occasionally serve the emperor and sit for a while. After bowing, they advance and retreat as required, and cannot converse. This is because the emperor is too majestic, and his vassals are too humble.

古文：公卿列位，虽陟降清地，曾未奉优眷、承下问。
现代文：大臣上朝，虽置身朝廷，竟没被您看一眼、问一句。
English: When the minister came to the Imperial Court, although he was in the presence of the Imperial Court, you did not look at him or ask him a single question.

古文：虽陛下神圣如五帝，犹宜周爰顾逮，惠以气色，使支体相成，君臣昭明。
现代文：即使皇上像五帝一样圣明，也应争取大家的帮助，听取意见，让大家感到亲切，使君臣能相辅相成，互相了解。
English: Even if the emperor is as holy as the five emperors, he should also seek everyone's help, listen to opinions, make everyone feel intimate, so that the monarchs and ministers can complement each other and understand each other.

古文：陛下求治于宰相，宰相求治于臣等，进忠若趋利，论政若诉冤，此而不治，无有也。
现代文：皇上要求宰相帮助治理，宰相要求我们帮助治理，使大家进忠言像为自己谋利，谈政事像为自己诉说冤屈一样，这样还治理不好，从未有过。
English: The emperor asked the prime minister to help him govern, and the prime minister asked us to help him govern, so that everyone acted as if they were seeking their own benefit, and talked about politics as if they were complaining about their own grievances. This is not good governance, and it has never happened before.

古文：自古天子居危思安之心同，而居安虑危之心则异，故不得皆为圣明也。 
现代文：古代皇帝身处危亡都想太平，太平时节却不一定想到危亡，所以不是所有君主都圣明。 
English: The ancient emperors thought of peace when they were in danger of death, but they did not necessarily think of danger in times of peace, so not all monarchs were saintly.

古文：时又有衡山布衣赵知微，亦上书指言帝倡优在侧，驰骋无度，内作色荒，外作禽荒。
现代文：当时还有衡山县平民赵知微，也上奏指出皇帝亲近艺人，游猎没节制，贪图女色，迷恋田猎。
English: At that time, there was also Zhao Zhiwu, a commoner from Hengshan County, who also pointed out that the emperor was close to entertainers, hunted without restraint, coveted women, and was obsessed with field hunting.

古文：辞颇危切，帝诏宰相尉谢。
现代文：话说得很尖锐、恳切，皇帝下诏命宰相安慰感谢。
English: The words were very sharp and earnest, and the emperor issued an edict ordering the prime minister to console and thank him.

古文：宰相因是贺天子纳谏，然不能用也。
现代文：宰相为这祝贺皇帝能听劝谏，但皇帝没重用他。
English: The prime minister congratulated the emperor for listening to his advice, but the emperor did not use him again.

古文：俄诏行劳西北边。
现代文：不久他奉诏慰问西北边境。
English: Soon after, he sent a message of condolence to the northwestern border.

古文：还，迁侍御史，改礼部员外郎、史馆脩撰。
现代文：归来，升任侍御史，后调任礼部员外郎、史馆修撰。
English: After his return, he was promoted to the position of Samurai Historian, and later he was transferred to the position of Ceremonial Department member, Wairo, and Historian.

古文：进吏部。
现代文：又提升到吏部任职。
English: He was also promoted to the personnel department.

古文：会曹史李賨等鬻伪告，调官六十五员，赃千六百万以上，虞卿发其奸，賨等系御史府。
现代文：遇到曹史李躴等人卖假委任状，提升官员六十五人，得赃款一千六百万文以上，杨虞卿揭发了他们的罪行，李躴等人被关进了御史台。
English: Cao Shi, Li Wei and others sold fake commission letters, promoted 65 officials, and received more than 16 million yuan in bribes. Yang Yuqing exposed their crimes, and Li Wei and others were imprisoned in the Imperial Palace.

古文：而虞卿亲吏尝受二百万，亡命，私奴受三十万，虞卿缚奴送狱。
现代文：但杨虞卿的侍从曾接受两百万文，逃跑了，他的奴仆接受了三十万文，杨虞卿把奴仆捆起来送进监狱。
English: However, Yang Yuqing's servant once accepted two million yuan and ran away, his servant accepted three hundred thousand yuan, and Yang Yuqing tied up the servant and sent him to prison.

古文：三司严休复、高釴、韦景休杂推，賨等皆诛死。
现代文：三司使严休复、高钅弋、韦景修共同审讯，李宗贝等人都被处死。
English: The three departments jointly interrogated Yan Hui Fu, Gao Yu and Wei Jingxiu, and Li Zongbei and others were all executed.

古文：虞卿坐不检下免官。
现代文：杨虞卿被判对手下人管束不严免去了官职。
English: Yang Yuqing was convicted of lax supervision of subordinates and removed from office.

古文：李宗闵、牛僧孺辅政，引为右司郎中、弘文馆学士。
现代文：李宗闵、牛僧孺当宰相，推荐他任右司郎中、弘文馆学士。
English: Li Zongyao and Niu Zangyao became prime ministers, and he was recommended to be the junior secretary of the Right Division of the CPC Central Committee and the academician of the Hongwen Academy.

古文：再迁给事中。
现代文：两次升官后任给事中。
English: After two promotions, he was assigned to the middle of things.

古文：虞卿佞柔，善谐丽权幸，倚为奸利。
现代文：杨虞卿谄媚温和，善于说笑话附合权贵，倚仗他们做坏事谋利。
English: Yang Yuqing is charming and gentle, good at telling jokes and befriending the rich and powerful, relying on them to do bad things for profit.

古文：岁举选者，皆走门下，署第注员，无不得所欲，升沈在牙颊间。
现代文：每年参加科举的人，都到他家来，要求录取和任官，没有不成功的，只需他一开口。
English: Every year, people who take part in the imperial examinations come to his house and ask to be admitted and appointed officials. They are not unsuccessful. All he has to do is open his mouth.

古文：当时有苏景胤、张元夫，而虞卿兄弟汝士、汉公为人所奔向，故语曰： 欲趋举场，问苏、张；苏、张犹可，三杨杀我。 
现代文：当时这样做的还有苏景胤、张元夫，但杨虞卿和兄弟杨汝士、杨汉公找的人更多，所以流传说 ：想进考场，先找苏、张，苏、张还好说，三杨要杀我。 
English: At that time, Su Jingyin and Zhang Yuanfu also did this, but Yang Yuqing and his brothers Yang Rushi and Yang Hankong were looking for more people, so the legend went: If you want to enter the examination hall, first look for Su, Zhang, Su, Zhang is okay to say, Sanyang wants to kill me.

古文：宗闵待之尤厚，就党中为最能唱和者，以口语轩轾事机，故时号 党魁 。
现代文：李宗闵对他特别好，他是宗派中最会兴风作浪的，一句话就能褒贬人和事，因此当时被称为宗派首领。
English: Lee Tsung-I was especially kind to him. He was the sect leader who could stir up trouble the most. He was able to praise and criticize people and things with just one sentence. Therefore, he was known as the sect leader at that time.

古文：德裕之相，出为常州刺史。
现代文：李德裕任宰相，把他贬出朝廷任常州刺史。
English: Li Deyu was appointed prime minister, and he was ousted from the imperial court to become the governor of Changzhou.

古文：宗闵复入，以工部侍郎召，迁京兆尹。
现代文：后李宗闵又进朝廷任宰相，召他任工部侍郎，又升任京兆尹。
English: Later, Li Zongji also entered the imperial court to serve as prime minister, called him to serve as a chamberlain of the work department, and was promoted to the post of Jing Zhaoyun.

古文：太和九年，京师讹言郑注为帝治丹，剔小儿肝心用之。
现代文：大和九年，京城谣传郑注给皇帝炼丹，要挖小孩肝和心做药。
English: In the ninth year of the Yamato era, the capital city rumor has it that Zheng Chuan gave the emperor alkaloid to dig up the child's liver and heart to make medicine.

古文：民相惊，扃护儿曹。
现代文：百姓害怕，都把小孩关在家里。
English: People are scared and keep their children at home.

古文：帝不悦，注亦内不安，而雅与虞卿有怨，即约李训奏言： 语出虞卿家，因京兆驺伍布都下。 
现代文：皇帝不高兴，郑注也心里不安，又一向和杨虞卿有仇，就叫李训上奏说 ：这话是从杨虞卿家里传出来，通过京兆尹侍从传播到民间的。 
English: The emperor was not happy, Zheng Zhu was also uneasy in his heart, and he had always had a grudge against Yang Yuqing, so he asked Li Xun to recite: This saying came from the home of Yang Yuqing, and was spread to the people through the attendants of Jing Zhaoyun.

古文：御史大夫李固言素嫉虞卿周比，因傅左端倪。
现代文：御史大夫李固言一向讨厌杨虞卿结党营私，因此附和作证。
English: The chief historian, Li Guogan, had always hated Yang Yuqing's party-building, so he agreed to testify.

古文：帝大怒，下虞卿诏狱。
现代文：皇帝很生气，将杨虞卿关进奉诏令关押的监狱。
English: The emperor was very angry and put Yang Yuqing in a prison under the command of the emperor.

古文：于是诸子弟自囚阙下称冤，虞卿得释，贬虔州司户参军，死。
现代文：这时他的弟弟儿子们把自己捆起来到皇宫前喊冤，杨虞卿被释放了，贬任虔州司户参军，后去世了。
English: At this time, his younger brothers and sons tied themselves up and went to the front of the imperial palace to appeal for justice. Yang Yuqing was released, he was demoted to the position of secretary of the Qianzhou household, he joined the army, and then he died.

古文：咸通后，在台省方镇率十余人。
现代文：他儿子杨知退、杨知权、杨坛、杨堪，弟弟杨汉公，都考中了进士。
English: His sons, Yang Zhitui, Yang Zhiquan, Yang Tan, Yang Kan, and his brother, Yang Hankong, all passed the entrance examination.

古文：张宿者，本寒人，自名诸生。
现代文：杨汉公官职最高。张宿本是贫贱的人，自己考取了生员。
English: Yang Han is the highest-ranking public official. Zhang Shukhong is a poor man, and he himself was selected as a trainee.

古文：宪宗为广陵王时，因张茂宗荐尉，得出入邸中，诞谲敢言。
现代文：唐宪宗当广陵王时，通过张茂宗推荐，能进出王府，他怪诞狡诈敢说话，到唐宪宗代行国政时，从百姓提升为左拾遗。
English: When Tang Xianzong was the king of Guangling, he was able to enter and leave the royal palace through the recommendation of Zhang Maozong, and he dared to speak strangely and cunningly. When Tang Xianzong was in charge of state affairs, he was promoted from the people to the left to collect relics.

古文：及监抚，自布衣授左拾遗，交通权幸，四方赂遗满门。数召对，不能慎密，坐漏禁中语，贬郴丞十余年。
现代文：他交结权贵幸臣，各地的贿赂堆了一屋。皇帝多次召见他，他不能保守机密，因泄露皇帝在宫中说的话被判罪，贬任郴县丞十多年。
English: The emperor summoned him many times, he could not keep secrets, he was convicted of leaking what the emperor said in the palace, and he was demoted to the position of county magistrate for more than ten years.

古文：累迁比部员外郎。
现代文：他多次升官后任比部员外郎。
English: He was promoted several times and later became a member of the senior management team.

古文：宰相李逢吉数言其狡谲不可信，白为濠州刺史，宿上疏自言，留不遣。
现代文：宰相李逢吉多次说他狡诈不能信任，建议任命为濠州刺史，他上奏表白，就留下没有派去。
English: Prime Minister Li Fengji repeatedly said that he was cunning and could not be trusted, and suggested that he be appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou. However, he did not send him after he made a confession.

古文：帝欲以为谏议大夫，逢吉曰： 谏议职要重，当待贤者。
现代文：皇帝想任命他为谏议大夫，李逢吉说 ：谏议大夫职务重要，应留待贤人。
English: The emperor wanted to appoint him as the chief adviser to the emperor. Li Fengji said, "The position of the chief adviser to the emperor is important and should be left to a wise man."

古文：宿细人，不可使污是官。
现代文：张宿是小人，不能糟踏了这官职。
English: Zhang Yue is a villain, he can't abuse his official position.

古文：陛下必用之，请先去臣乃可。 
现代文：皇上一定要任用他，请先将我免职才行。 
English: The Emperor must appoint him. Please remove me from my post first.

古文：帝不悦。
现代文：皇帝不高兴了。
English: Gao Di was not happy to hear this.

古文：后逢吉罢，诏权知谏议大夫，宰相崔群、王涯同请曰： 谏议大夫，前世或自山林、擢行伍任之者，然皆道义卓异于时。
现代文：后来李逢吉免相，有诏命他代理谏议大夫，宰相崔群、王涯都议论说 ：谏议大夫，前代有从民间、军队中提拔担任的，但都是德行特别优异的。
English: Later, Li Fengji was removed from the post of prime minister, and he was ordered by imperial edict to act as the chief adviser to the prime minister. The prime ministers Cui Qun and Wang Ya both commented, "The previous generation of chief advisers to the prime minister were promoted from the people and the military, but they were all exceptionally virtuous."

古文：今宿望轻，若待以不次，未足以宠，适以累之也。 
现代文：现张宿威望不够，如不按常规提拔，不能表示宠信，只会拖累他。 
English: The current Zhang Shuku's prestige is not enough. If he is not promoted according to the rules, he cannot show favoritism, which will only drag him down.

古文：请授他官，不听，使中人宣授焉。
现代文：请求授予他别的官职。皇帝不听从，派宦官宣布了任命。
English: The emperor did not listen to the request to give him another post, and sent a eunuch to announce the appointment.

古文：宿怨执政不与己，乃日肆谗甚，与皇甫镈相附离，多中伤正人君子。
现代文：张宿怨恨宰相们不容纳自己，就每天大肆进谗言设密谋，和皇甫相勾结，伤害了很多直臣和贤人。
English: Zhang Suku resented the chancellors for not being able to contain themselves, and every day he made a lot of insults and conspiracies, and colluded with the emperor's father-in-law, hurting a lot of ministers and wise men.

古文：耆志健而望高，急于立名。
现代文：元和末年，他出使到淄青，李师道愿意割让地盘派儿子进京侍从皇帝，后又反悔了。
English: At the end of the Yuan Dynasty, he was sent to Jiaqing, and Li Shidao was willing to cede the territory to send his son to Beijing to serve the emperor, but later he repented.

古文：是时，王承宗以常山叛，朝廷厌兵，耆杖策诣淮西行营谒裴度，且言愿得天子一节驰入镇，可掉舌下之。
现代文：皇帝又派他去，他在路上得急病去世了，赠官为秘书监。柏耆有纵横家的本领，他的父亲柏良器，是当时有声威的将领。柏耆有志向抱负，急着想建立功名。当时，王承宗占据常山郡反叛，朝中大臣不想动武，柏耆骑着马到淮西军营中去拜访裴度，并说希望得到皇上一个任命赶赴镇州，可以凭口才招降他。
English: The emperor sent him there again, but he died of sudden illness on the way, and was given the post of secretary-supervisor. Baekhyun had the ability to be a leader, and his father, Baek Ryangki, was a respected general at the time. Baekhyun was ambitious and anxious to establish a reputation. At that time, Wang Chengzong was in rebellion in Changshan County, and the Minister of the Middle Kingdom did not want to use force. Baekhyun rode to the Huaixi military camp to visit Baidu, and said that he hoped to get an appointment from the emperor to rush to Zhenzhou, and could recruit him by word of mouth.

古文：度为言，乃以左拾遗往。
现代文：裴度为他转达后，皇帝就任命他以左拾遗身份出使。
English: After Baidu conveyed it for him, the emperor appointed him as the envoy to collect the relics.

古文：既至，以大谊动承宗，至泣下。
现代文：他去后，用仁义打动了王承宗，以至于流下了眼泪。
English: After he left, Wang Chengzong was so moved by his kindness that he shed tears.

古文：乃请献二州，以二子入质。
现代文：王承宗于是请求献出两个州，派两个儿子到京城做抵押。
English: Wang Chengzong then requested the donation of two states and sent his two sons to the capital as collateral.

古文：真擢耆左拾遗，由是声震一时。
现代文：皇帝正式任命柏耆为左拾遗，他因为这一时很有名气。
English: The emperor officially appointed him as Zuo Zhi Yi, and he became famous for this.

古文：迁起居舍人。
现代文：后升任起居舍人。
English: Later, he was promoted to the post of chief householder.

古文：王承元徙义成军，遣谏议大夫郑覃往慰成德军，赉缗钱百万。
现代文：王承元调任义成军统领，朝廷派谏议大夫郑覃去慰问成德军，并赏赐一百万贯钱。
English: Wang Chengyuan was appointed as the commander of the Yicheng Army, and the imperial court sent the doctor Zheng Qi to console the German army, and awarded one million yuan.

古文：赉未至，举军哗议，穆宗遣耆谕天子意，众乃信悦。
现代文：赏钱没送去，全军都议论纷纷，唐穆宗派柏耆去宣布皇帝的旨意，大家才信服高兴了。
English: The reward money was not sent, and the whole army discussed it one after another. The Tangmu sect sent Baoji to announce the emperor's will, and everyone was convinced and happy.

古文：转兵部郎中、谏议大夫。
现代文：他后来调任兵部郎中、谏议大夫。
English: Later, he was transferred to the position of Hyobusho-ro-chu (Junior Secretary of the Ministry of Military Affairs) and Sangyo-dokufu (Senior Advisor to the Prime Minister).

古文：太和初，李同捷反，诏两河诸镇出兵，久无功。
现代文：大和初年，李同捷反叛了，皇帝下诏命河北、河南各镇派兵征讨，长期没能平定。
English: In the first year of the Yamato era, Li Tongjie rebelled, and the emperor issued an edict ordering all the towns in Hebei and Henan to send soldiers to quell the rebellion, which could not be quelled for a long time.

古文：乃授耆德州行营诸军计会使，与判官沈亚之谕旨。
现代文：于是任命柏耆为德州大营诸军计会使，和判官沈亚之同去宣布皇帝旨意。
English: Therefore, he appointed Baojun as the commander of the Texas Grand Army and the Military Strategy Committee, and together with the judge Shen Ya to announce the emperor's will.

古文：会横海节度使李祐平德州，同捷穷，请降，祐使大将万洪代守沧州，同捷未出也，耆以三百骑驰入沧，以事诛洪，与同捷朝京师。
现代文：遇上横海节度使李佑攻占了德州，李同捷兵败，请求投降。李佑派大将万洪代替他驻守沧州，李同捷没有出城，柏耆率三百名骑兵进入沧州，找借口杀死了万洪，和李同捷一起去京城朝拜。
English: On the occasion of the Cross-Strait Festival, Li You conquered Texas. Li Tongjie was defeated and asked for surrender. Li You sent General Wanhong to guard Cangzhou in his place. Li Tongjie did not leave the city. Baodi led three hundred cavalrymen into Cangzhou, found an excuse to kill Wanhong, and went to Beijing to worship with Li Tongjie.

古文：既行，谍言王廷凑欲以奇兵劫同捷，耆遂斩其首以献。
现代文：上路后，有探子报告说王廷凑想出其不意派兵劫持李同捷，柏耆就杀死李同捷献上他的头。
English: After setting out on the road, a scout reported that Wang Ting came up with the idea of sending soldiers to kidnap Li Tongjie, and Baodi killed Li Tongjie and offered his head.

古文：诸将嫉耆功，比奏攒诋，文宗不获已，贬耆循州司户参军、亚之南康尉。
现代文：众将妒忌柏耆的功劳，都上奏章攻击他，唐文宗不得已，贬柏耆为循州司户参军、沈亚之为南康县县尉。
English: The generals were envious of Baojun's achievements and attacked him in their proclamations. Tang Wenzong, as a last resort, demoted Baojun to the position of county magistrate of Xuzhou and Shen Ya to the position of county lieutenant of Nankang County.

古文：宦人马国亮谮耆受同捷先所得王稷女及奴婢珍赀。
现代文：宦官马国亮诬蔑柏耆接受了李同捷以前得到的王稷的女儿和奴仆婢女、珍宝。
English: The eunuch Ma Guoliang slandered Baojun for accepting Wang Yao's daughter, slave, and precious treasure that Li Tongjie had previously obtained.

古文：初，祐闻耆杀洪，大惊，疾遂剧。
现代文：当初，李佑听说柏耆杀死了万洪，很吃惊，病就加重了。
English: At first, Li You was surprised to hear that Bo Xuan had killed Wan Hong, and his illness worsened.

古文：帝曰： 祐若死，是耆杀之。 
现代文：皇帝说： 李佑如果去世，就等于是柏耆杀死了他。 
English: The emperor said, "If Li You died, it would be the same as if Bao Tong killed him."

古文：至是，积前怒，诏长流爱州，赐死。
现代文：到这时，加上先前的怒气，下诏又贬为爱州长流参军，后杀死了他。
English: At this time, in addition to the previous anger, the next edict was reduced to the love of the governor to join the army, and then killed him.

