古文：纥石烈志宁仆散忠义徒单合喜纥石烈志宁，本名撒曷辇，上京胡塔安人。
现代文：纥石烈志宁本名纥石烈撒曷辇，上京胡塔安人。
English: Zou Shi Leshining's real name was Zou Shi Leshan, and he was from Hu Ta'an in Beijing.

古文：自五代祖太尉韩赤以来，与国家世为甥舅。
现代文：从第五代祖先太尉韩赤以来，他家族世代为国舅。
English: He has been the uncle of his family for generations since the fifth generation of his ancestor, Second Lieutenant Han Chak.

古文：父撒八，海陵时赐名怀忠，为泰州路颜河世袭谋克，转猛安，尝为东平尹、开远军节度使。
现代文：其父纥石烈撒八，海陵王时被赐名纥石烈怀忠，为泰州路颜河世袭谋克，转为猛安，曾经任东平尹、开远军节度使。
English: His father, Zhi Shi Li Saba, was given the name Zhi Shi Li Huai Zhong when he was the king of Hailing. He was a hereditary adviser to Luyanhe, Taizhou, and later became the governor of Meng'an. He once served as an envoy to the Dongping Yin and Kaiyuan military festivals.

古文：志宁沉毅有大略，娶梁王宗弼女永安县主，宗弼于诸婿中最爱之。
现代文：纥石烈志宁沉稳坚毅有雄才大略，娶梁王完颜宗弼的女儿永安县主为妻，完颜宗弼在各个女婿中，最爱他。
English: He married the daughter of King of Liang, King Yan, the lord of Yong'an County. He loved her the most among his sons-in-law.

古文：皇统间，为护卫。
现代文：皇统年间，纥石烈志宁做护卫。
English: During the period of imperial rule, Zou Shi Retshinin served as an escort.

古文：海陵以为右宣徽使，出为汾阳军节度使，入为兵部尚书，改左宣徽使、都点检，迁枢密副使，开封尹。
现代文：海陵王任命他为右宣徽使，离开朝廷后做汾阳军节度使，回朝后又做兵部尚书，改任左宣徽使、都点检，升为枢密副使、开封尹。
English: King Hailing appointed him as the right heraldic envoy, and after leaving the imperial court, he became the festival envoy of the Shenyang Army, and after returning to the imperial court, he became the secretary of the military department, changed to the left heraldic envoy, and was promoted to the vice-minister of the privy council, Kaifeng Yin.

古文：契丹撒八反，枢密使仆散忽土、北京留守萧赜、西京留守萧怀忠皆以征讨无功，坐诛。
现代文：契丹撒八谋反，枢密使仆散忽土、北京留守萧赜、西京留守萧怀忠都因为讨伐无功，被定罪杀死。
English: The Khitan instigated eight rebellions, the imperial envoy Dosan Kutsudo, the Beijing resident Xiao Yao, and the West Beijing resident Xiao Huai Zhong were all convicted and killed for their ineffectual efforts.

古文：于是，志宁为北面副统，与都统白彦敬，以北京、临潢、泰州三路军讨之。
现代文：在这种情况下，纥石烈志宁任北面副统，与都统白彦敬带北京、临潢、泰州三路军队前去讨伐。
English: Under these circumstances, Zou Shi Retshinin was appointed as the vice-commander of the north side, and together with Bai Yan, the commander of the capital, he led the three armies of Beijing, Linyi and Taizhou to fight.

古文：志宁至北京，而海陵伐宋已渡淮。
现代文：纥石烈志宁到达北京，而海陵王皇帝攻打宋朝已经渡过淮河。
English: Zou Shi Li Zhining arrived in Beijing, while Emperor Hailing attacked the Song Dynasty and had already crossed the Huai River.

古文：彦敬、志宁闻世宗有异志，乃阴结会宁尹完颜蒲速赉、利涉军节度使独吉义，将攻之。
现代文：白彦敬、纥石烈志宁听说世宗有夺取皇位的计谋，于是联合会宁尹完颜蒲速赉、利涉军节度使独吉义，准备攻打世宗。
English: Bai Yanjing and Zheishi Leshining heard that Shizong had a plot to seize the imperial throne, so the federation of Ning Yin and Guan Yan hurriedly made preparations to attack Shizong.

古文：而世宗已即位，使石抹移迭、移剌曷补来招，彦敬、志宁杀其使者九人。
现代文：世宗即皇帝位后，派石抹移迭、移剌曷补前去招抚他们，白彦敬、纥石烈志宁杀了九个使者。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Sejong, he sent Shishi to appease them, and Bai Yanjing and Shishi Retshinin killed nine envoys.

古文：世宗使完颜谋衍来伐，众不肯战，乃与彦敬俱降。
现代文：金世宗派完颜谋衍去攻打他们，他们的士兵多数不愿打仗，于是纥石烈志宁与白彦敬都投降了金世宗。
English: The Kim Sect faction tried every trick in the book to attack them, but most of their soldiers were unwilling to fight, so both Zou Shih and Bai Yanjing surrendered to the Kim Sect.

古文：世宗问曰： 正隆暴虐，人望既绝，朕以太祖之孙即大位。
现代文：金世宗问他们说： 正隆年间的皇帝暴虐，人们对他失去了希望，朕以太祖孙子的身份即皇帝位。
English: Kim Sejong asked them, "The emperor was so tyrannical during the Jeongryong era that people lost hope in him, and I ascended to the throne as his grandchild.

古文：汝杀我使者，又不能为正隆死节，恐为人所图，然后来降。
现代文：你杀了我派去的使者，又不能为海陵皇帝死节，恐怕被人图谋，然后才来投降我。
English: You killed the envoy I sent, but you couldn't do it for the death of Emperor Hailing. I'm afraid someone will try to do it for you, and only then will you surrender to me.

古文：朕今杀汝等，将何辞？ 
现代文：朕现在杀了你们，你们将有什么话可说？ 
English: If I kill you now, what will you say?

古文：彦敬未有以对，志宁前奏曰： 臣等受正隆厚恩，所以不降，罪当万死。 
现代文：白彦敬没有回答，纥石烈志宁上前奏说： 我们受过海陵王的厚待，所以不投降，罪该万死。 
English: Bai Yanjing did not answer, and Zou Shi Li Zhining prefaced by saying: We have been treated well by King Hailing, so we do not surrender, and the crime deserves death.

古文：上曰： 汝辈初心亦可谓忠于所事，自今事朕，宜勉忠节。 
现代文：皇帝说 ：开始时你的心也可谓忠于自己所做的事业，从现在为朕工作，应当勉励并保持忠节。 
English: The emperor said, "In the beginning, your heart may be said to be loyal to the cause you are doing. From now on, when you work for me, you should encourage and remain loyal.

古文：世宗使紥八招窝斡，紥八乃劝之，遂称帝。
现代文：金世宗派扎八招安窝斡，而扎八反而劝窝斡反叛，于是窝斡称皇帝。
English: The Kim Sect sent Zhaba to persuade Anwo, but Zhaba instead persuaded Wodu to rebel, so Wodu became emperor.

古文：世宗使右副元帅完颜谋衍征之，志宁以临海节度使，都统右翼军。
现代文：金世宗派右副元帅完颜谋衍讨伐他，纥石烈志宁任临海节度使，都统右翼军。
English: The Right Vice-Marshal of the Jin Sect, Guan Yan, plotted to overthrow him, and Zou Shi, Li Zhining, was appointed as the envoy of the Linhai Festival to unify the right-wing army.

古文：窝斡败于长泺，西走，志宁追及于霿河。
现代文：窝斡在长泺被打败，向西逃跑，纥石烈志宁追击到駒雨松河。
English: Wo Miao was defeated in Nagatoro and fled westward, while Zangshi Leshining pursued him to the Koma Uematsu River.

古文：贼已先渡，依岸为阵，毁桥岸以为阻。
现代文：叛军已经先渡过河，依据河岸作为阵地，并毁坏桥梁来阻止追军。
English: The rebels had crossed the river first, taking up positions along the riverbank and destroying bridges to stop the pursuit.

古文：志宁与贼夹河，为疑兵，与万户夹谷清臣、徒单海罗于下流涉渡。
现代文：纥石烈志宁与叛军隔河相望，于是派出一部分兵扮做疑兵，他与万户夹谷清臣、徒单海罗从下游渡过河。
English: Shishi Retshinin stood across the river from the rebels, so he sent some of his soldiers to pose as suspicious soldiers. He crossed the river from the lower reaches with Banyu Zhegu Qingchen and Tutanhai Luo.

古文：已渡，前有支港岸斗绝，其中泥泞，乃束柳填藉，士卒毕济。
现代文：过河后，前边有个大泥泞坑，于是把柳条捆成捆填它，士兵都过去了。
English: After crossing the river, there was a big muddy pit in front of them, so they filled it with bundles of wicker, and the soldiers passed by.

古文：行数里，得平地，将士方食，贼奄至。
现代文：走了几里，遇到一块平地，将士于是吃饭，叛军忽然到达。
English: After walking for several miles, they came across a flat piece of land, whereupon the generals had dinner, and the rebels suddenly arrived.

古文：贼据南冈，三驰下志宁阵。
现代文：叛军占据南冈，三次冲到纥石烈志宁军队中。
English: The rebels occupied Nangang, and three times they rushed into the army of Zou Shi Leshining.

古文：阵坚，力战，流矢中左臂，战自若。
现代文：纥石烈志宁阵地很牢固，他奋力指挥作战，流箭射中了左臂，他仍然很镇静。
English: Zou Shi Lezhining's position was very strong, he struggled to command the battle, the arrow hit his left arm, he was still very calm.

古文：贼据上风纵火，乘烟势驰击。
现代文：叛军从上风放火，乘着烟雾攻击。
English: Rebels set fires from the wind and use the smoke to attack.

古文：志宁步军继至，转战十余合，火益炽，风烟突人，不可当。
现代文：纥石烈志宁的步军赶到，大战十余回合，火越烧越旺，风烟袭人不可阻挡。
English: The foot soldiers of Zhi Shi Li Zhining arrived, and the battle lasted for more than ten rounds. The fire became more and more fierce, and the wind and smoke were unstoppable.

古文：会雨作，风烟乃熄，遂奋击，大破之。
现代文：适逢天下雨，火势才熄，于是他们奋力作战，大破叛军。
English: The fire only went out when it rained, so they fought hard and defeated the rebels.

古文：于是，元帅谋衍、右监军福寿不急击贼，久无功，右丞仆散忠义请自讨贼，而志宁击贼有功，上以忠义代谋衍，志宁代福寿，封定国公，使蒲察通至军中宣谕之。
现代文：此时，元帅完颜谋衍、右监军完颜福寿不急速攻击敌军，很久没有立功，右丞仆散忠义请求自己前去讨伐叛军，而纥石烈志宁攻击叛军有功，皇帝用仆散忠义代替完颜谋衍的职务，纥石烈志宁代替完颜福寿的职务，并被封为定国公，派蒲察通到军队中去宣旨。
English: At this time, Marshal Guan Yan Muyan and Right Supervisor Guan Yan Fu Shou did not quickly attack the enemy army, and did not do any meritorious service for a long time. The right-hand man, Minxuan Zhongyi, asked himself to go and fight the rebels, and Zou Shi Liuzhining did a good job in attacking the rebels. The emperor used Minxuan Zhongyi to replace the post of Guan Yan Muyan, and Zou Shi Liuzhining replaced the post of Guan Yan Fu Shou, and was named the king of the country, and sent Puchatong to the army to announce the order.

古文：贼略懿州界，陷灵山、同昌、惠和三县，睥睨北京。
现代文：叛军侵略懿州边界，攻下灵山、同昌、惠和三县，觊觎北京。
English: The rebels invaded the border of Bozhou, captured Lingshan, Tongchang and Huihe counties, and marched on Beijing.

古文：会土河水涨，贼不得渡，乃西趋三韩县。
现代文：这时恰好土河涨水，叛军不能渡过，于是向西奔赴三韩县。
English: At this time, the earth river happened to rise, and the rebels could not cross it, so they rushed west to Sanhan County.

古文：志宁方追蹑之，元帅忠义与贼遇于花道，军颇失利。贼见志宁踵其后，不敢乘胜，遂西走。
现代文：纥石烈志宁正在追赶叛军时，元帅仆散忠义在花道与叛军相遇，战况不利，叛军见纥石烈志宁在后边追击，于是他不敢乘胜而战，而是向西逃去。
English: When Zhisheng Retshinin was chasing the rebels, the marshal's servant, San Zhongyi, met the rebels in Huaduo. The war situation was unfavorable. The rebels saw Zhisheng Retshinin chasing behind, so he did not dare to fight for victory, but fled to the west.

古文：是时，大军马瘦弱，不堪追袭，诸将欲止军勿追。
现代文：这时，军队中的马匹瘦弱，不堪再追击敌军，诸将想停止追击。
English: At this time, the horses in the army were too weak to chase the enemy, and the generals wanted to stop the chase.

古文：志宁获贼候人，知贼自选精锐，与老小辎重分道，期山后会集，可击其辎重。
现代文：纥石烈志宁俘捉到叛军的哨兵，知道了叛军选拔精锐部队，与老小辎重部队分道而行，按照约定时间在山后会合，这样可以攻击叛军的辎重部队。
English: Zou Shi Li Zhining captured a rebel sentry, learned that the rebels were selecting elite troops, and parted ways with the old small heavy troops to meet at the back of the mountain according to the agreed time, so that they could attack the rebels' heavy troops.

古文：忠义以为然，遂过移马岭，进及袅岭西陷泉。
现代文：仆散忠义认为是这样，于是越过移马岭，进军到袅岭西的陷泉。
English: Duxan Zhongyi thought so, so he crossed the Shima Mountains and marched into the trapped springs west of the Kunling Mountains.

古文：贼见左翼据南冈为阵，不敢犯。
现代文：叛军见左翼南岗阵地被官军占据，不敢进犯。
English: When the rebels saw that the left-wing Nangang position was occupied by the government army, they did not dare to attack.

古文：右翼万户乌延查剌击贼少却，志宁与夹谷清臣等击之，贼众大败，涉水走。
现代文：右翼万户乌延查剌攻击叛军没有攻下，纥石烈志宁与夹谷清臣等攻击叛军，叛军大败，渡水而逃。
English: The right-wing Wanyan Uyen Chao attacked the rebels but failed to capture them, while Zou Shi Retshinin and Jiaotong Qingchen attacked the rebels. The rebels were soundly defeated and fled across the water.

古文：窝斡母徐辇举营由落括冈西去，志宁追及之，尽获其辎重，俘五万余人，杂畜不可胜计。
现代文：窝斡的母亲徐辇全营由落括冈向西走，纥石烈志宁追击他们，全部截获了他们的辎重，俘虏五万多人，牲畜不计其数。
English: The whole battalion of the mother of Wo-yu, Xu Yao, marched westward from Lopu-ganggang, and Shi Shi Liuzhining pursued them, intercepted all of their baggage, captured more than fifty thousand people, and countless livestock.

古文：伪节度使六，及其部族皆降。
现代文：六个伪节度使，及其部族都投降了。
English: The six false emissaries and their tribes all surrendered.

古文：窝斡走奚中，至七渡河，志宁复败之。
现代文：窝斡逃往奚中，到七渡河，纥石烈志宁又打败了他。
English: Wo Rong fled to Shizhong, and on the seventh crossing of the river, Shishi Renzhinin defeated him again.

古文：贼过浑岭，入于奚中。
现代文：叛军越过浑岭，进到奚境内。
English: The rebels crossed the Hunling Mountains and entered the territory of Quzhou.

古文：志宁获贼将稍合住，释弗杀，许以官赏，纵之归，约以捕窝斡自效。
现代文：纥石烈志宁俘获了叛军将领稍合住，没有杀他而是释放了他，并许给他官职和奖赏，稍合住走后又回到纥石烈志宁军中，并愿意效力捕捉窝斡。
English: Shishi Retshinin captured a rebel general, but did not kill him, but released him, and promised him an official post and reward. After a short stay, he returned to Shishi Retshinin's army, and was willing to work to capture Houyu.

古文：稍合住既去，见窝斡，秘不言见获事，乃反间奚人于窝斡曰： 陷泉失利，奚人有贰志，不可不察。 
现代文：稍合住到了叛军中，见到窝斡，只字不提自己被俘之事，反而对窝斡离间奚地人说： 陷泉失利，奚地人对你不忠，不可不防备。 
English: After living among the rebels for a while, when he saw Hou Yu, he did not mention the fact that he had been captured, but instead said to Hou Yu, "If you are defeated, the people of Shandong will be disloyal to you. You must be prepared."

古文：当是时，窝斡屡败，其下亦各有心，稍合住乃与贼帅神独斡执窝斡，诣右都监完颜思敬降。
现代文：而此时，窝斡屡败，他的部下也各怀异志，稍合住于是与叛军统帅神独斡捉拿窝斡，到右都监完颜思敬军去投降。
English: At this time, Wo Yuxuan suffered repeated defeats, and his subordinates also harbored different ideas, so they lived together for a while, and then they captured Wo Yuxuan with the rebel commander, and went to the right capital to surrender after Yan Si paid tribute to the army.

古文：志宁与万户清臣，宗宁、速哥等，追捕余党至燕子城，尽得所畜善马，因至抹拔里达之地，悉获之。
现代文：纥石烈志宁与万户夹谷清臣、宗宁、速哥等，追击拘捕叛军余党到燕子城，全部俘获了敌军的畜牲和好马，等追到抹拔里达之地，全部俘虏了敌军。
English: Shishi Retshinin, together with Banju Jigoku, Kiyotomi, Sonin, Hayato, and others, chased and arrested the remaining rebels to Yanzi City, captured all the enemy's livestock and good horses, and chased them to the land of Magbadida, and captured all the enemy troops.

古文：逆党既平，入朝，为左副元帅，赐以玉带。
现代文：叛党平定后，纥石烈志宁进朝任左副元帅，皇帝赐给他玉带一条。
English: After the rebels were subdued, Zou Shi Reshining entered the imperial court as the left deputy marshal, and the emperor gave him a jade belt.

古文：经略宋事，驻军睢阳，都元帅忠义居南京，节制诸军。
现代文：纥石烈志宁巡视宋朝事宜，驻军睢阳，都元帅仆散忠义居住南京，节制各路大军。
English: Shishi Retshinin inspected the affairs of the Song Dynasty, stationed troops in Fenyang, and the capital marshal Minzhan Zhongyi lived in Nanjing, restraining large armies from all directions.

古文：宋将黄观察据蔡州，杨思据颍昌。
现代文：宋朝将领黄观察占据蔡州，杨思占据颍昌。
English: Song Dynasty generals Huang Xing occupied Caizhou and Yang Si occupied Fuchang.

古文：志宁使完颜王祥复取蔡州，黄观察遁去。
现代文：纥石烈志宁派完颜王祥又攻取蔡州，黄观察逃跑。
English: After Yan Wangxiang's completion of the Jinshi Liushi Ning faction, he also captured Caizhou, and Huang observation fled.

古文：完颜襄攻颍州，拔之，获杨思。
现代文：完颜襄攻打颍州，攻下了它，俘获了杨思。
English: After Yan Xiang attacked Zhangzhou, he captured it and captured Yang Si.

古文：乃移牒宋枢密使张浚，使依皇统以来旧式，浚复书曰： 谨遣使者至麾下议之。 
现代文：于是金军通牒宋朝枢密使张浚，让他用金朝皇统年间以来的制度。张浚回信说 ：谨派使者到你军中讨论此事。 
English: As a result, the Jin army sent a message to the Song dynasty's confidential envoy Zhang Jun, asking him to use the system that had been in place since the reign of the Jin dynasty. Zhang Jun wrote back, "I have the honor to send an envoy to your army to discuss this matter."

古文：是时，宋得窝斡党人括里、紥八，用其谋攻灵璧、虹县，都统奚挞不也叛入于宋，遂陷宿州。
现代文：这时，宋朝获得窝斡同党人括里、扎八，用他们的计谋进攻灵璧、虹县，都统奚挞不也叛逃到宋朝，于是攻下宿州。
English: At this time, the Song Dynasty won the support of the party members Bu Li and Zhaba, and used their stratagems to attack Ling Bi and Hongxian. They all defected to the Song Dynasty, and then attacked Suizhou.

古文：括里等谋曰： 北人恃骑射，战胜攻取。
现代文：括里等献计说 ：金人倚仗骑马射箭，去战胜攻取。
English: The bracketed strategy says: the gold man relies on horse riding and archery to win the battle.

古文：今夏月久雨，胶解，弓不可用。 
现代文：现在夏天雨多，胶被融化，弓箭不能用。 
English: Now it rains a lot in summer, the glue is melted, and the bows and arrows cannot be used.

古文：故李世辅与之来攻宿州。
现代文：所以李世辅与他来进攻宿州。
English: Therefore, Li Shiyu came to attack Shuzhou with him.

古文：归德尹术甲撒速、宿州防御使乌林答剌撒、万户温迪罕速可、裴满娄室，不守约束，不肯坚壁俟大军，辄出与战，由是军败，城陷。
现代文：归德尹术甲撒速、宿州防御使乌林答剌撒、万户温迪罕速可、裴满娄室，不遵守规定，不肯坚壁等待大军，而出城与李世辅作战，因此被打败，城池沦陷。
English: Ulin answered Caesar, Wanyu Wendi answered Caesar, Pei Man answered Caesar, did not comply with regulations, refused to wait for a large army, and went out to fight with Li Shifu, so he was defeated and the city fell.

古文：剌撒尝遣人入宋界贸易，交通李世辅，受其赂遗，久之，事觉，伏诛。
现代文：乌林答剌撒曾经派人到宋朝境内贸易，同李世辅来往，接受了李世辅的馈赠，很久后，这事被发现，乌林答剌撒被杀。
English: Wulingda Caesar once sent people to trade in the Song Dynasty, met with Li Shifu, and accepted gifts from Li Shifu. Long after this was discovered, Wulingda Caesar was killed.

古文：谋克赛一坐故知不举，除名。
现代文：谋克赛一因为知情不报，被除名。
English: Mok Kesei was removed from the list for not reporting his knowledge.

古文：挞不也母斡里懒，缘坐当死，上曰： 挞不也背国弃母，杀之何益？朕闵其老。 
现代文：挞不也母亲斡里懒，因为连坐应该被杀死，皇帝说： 挞不也背叛国家丢下母亲，杀了她也没有什么好处，我怜悯她老了。 
English: The emperor said, "My mother was too lazy to mediate, because Lian Zang should have been killed. I betrayed the country and left my mother behind. Killing her would not have done any good. I pity her now that she is old."

古文：遂原其死。
现代文：于是赦免了她的死罪。
English: So she was pardoned of her capital crime.

古文：诏撒速、剌撒、速可、娄室各杖有差，撒速、剌撒仍解职。
现代文：皇帝诏令分别杖打术甲撒速、乌林答剌撒、温迪罕速可、裴满娄室等，术甲撒速、乌林答剌撒被解职。
English: Emperor Zhao decreed that Zhuge Zasao, Wulin Taizao, Wendy Han Taizao, Pei Man Taizao and so on should be removed from their posts.

古文：世辅自以为得志，日与括里、紥八置酒高会。
现代文：李世辅自以为得志，每天同括里、扎八喝酒聚会。
English: Li Shifu considered himself a successful person, and held eight drinking parties at the same time every day.

古文：志宁以精兵万人，发自睢阳，趋宿州。中使来督军，志宁附奏曰： 此役不烦圣虑，臣但恐世辅遁去耳。 
现代文：纥石烈志宁率领一万精兵，从睢阳出发，奔向宿州，中使前来督军，纥石烈志宁让他附带上奏说： 这次战役不用劳烦皇帝考虑，我只是担心李世辅逃跑。 
English: Shushi Retshinin led ten thousand elite soldiers, starting from Shenyang and running to Suzhou. The middle envoy came to supervise the army. Shushi Retshinin asked him to attach a report saying: This battle does not need to bother the emperor. I'm just worried about Li Shifu's escape.

古文：世辅闻志宁军止万人，甚易之，曰： 当令十人执一人也。 
现代文：李世辅听说纥石烈志宁只有一万人军队，很轻视他，并说 ：应当是十个人对一个人。 
English: When Li Shiyu heard that Zou Shi only had 10,000 soldiers, he despised him and said, "It should be ten men against one man."

古文：括里等问候人所见上将旗帜，知是志宁，谓世辅曰： 此撒合辇监军也，军至万人，慎毋轻之。 
现代文：括里等问哨兵，哨兵说见到了上将的旗帜，知道那就是纥石烈志宁，他对李世辅说： 这次是撒合辇做监军，军队虽只到一万人，但也不能掉以轻心。 
English: In parenthesis, he asked the sentinel. The sentinel said that he saw the flag of the admiral and knew that it was Zou Shih Lai Shining. He said to Li Shiyu: This time, it is Sahakian who is supervising the army. Although the army is only up to ten thousand people, it should not be taken lightly.

古文：大定三年五月二十日，志宁将至宿州，乃令从军尽执旗帜，驻州西为疑兵，三猛安兵驻州南。
现代文：大定三年五月二十日，纥石烈志宁快到宿州，于是命令跟从的军队都打出旗帜，驻扎在宿州西当作疑兵，三猛安的军队驻扎在宿州南边。
English: On the 20th day of the 5th month of the 3rd year of the Daedong era, Zheishi Retshinin arrived in Suzhou, and ordered his troops to display their banners and be stationed in the west of Suzhou as suspected soldiers, while the troops of the three fierce ants were stationed in the south of Suzhou.

古文：志宁自以大军驻州东南，厄其归路。
现代文：纥石烈志宁亲自率领大军，驻扎在宿州东南，阻断李世辅的退路。
English: personally led a large army, stationed in the southeast of Suzhou, to block Li Shisui's retreat.

古文：世辅望见州西兵旌旗蔽野，果谓大军在州西，而谓东南兵少不足虑，先击之。
现代文：李世辅看见宿州西边的军队旗帜掩盖住了田野，果然以为大部队在宿州西边，而认为宿州东南的军队少不值得担心，于是先攻击他们。
English: Seeing the flags of the army on the west side of Chofu covering the fields, Li Shifu thought that the main army was on the west side of Chofu, and thought that the army in the southeast of Chofu was not worth worrying about, so he attacked them first.

古文：以步骑数万，皆执盾，背城为阵，外以行马捍之。
现代文：李世辅指挥几万步骑兵，都拿着盾牌，背城作战，外面用跑马保卫他的部队。
English: Li Shifu commanded tens of thousands of infantry and cavalry, all holding shields, fighting behind the city, and protecting his troops with galloping horses.

古文：使别将将兵三千，出自东门，欲自阵后攻志宁军，万户蒲查击败之。
现代文：他又让别将带三千兵，从东门出去，想亲自去攻纥石烈志宁的部队，万户蒲查打败了李世辅。
English: He also asked the general to take three thousand soldiers and go out from the east gate, and wanted to personally attack the troops of Shanshi Leshining. Wanyu Pucha defeated Li Shiyu.

古文：右翼万户夹谷清臣为前行，撤毁行马，短兵接战，世辅军乱，诸将乘之，追杀至城下。
现代文：右翼部队万户夹谷清臣为先锋部队，他撤换骑兵，短兵相接，李世辅军队大乱，诸将乘势追击，一直追杀到宿州城下。
English: The right-wing troops led by Banyu Jigoku Kiyotomi were the vanguard troops. He replaced the cavalry, the short-soldiers met, Li Shiyu's army was in turmoil, and the generals took advantage of the situation to pursue them all the way to the castle town of Suzu.

古文：是夕，世辅尽按败将，将斩之，其统制常吉惧而来奔，尽得城中虚实。
现代文：这天夜里，李世辅捆住所有的败将，准备斩首，他的统制常吉害怕而投奔到纥石烈志宁军中，金军获得了城中的所有情况。
English: On this night, Li Shifu tied up all the defeated generals and prepared to behead them. His regent Changjie was afraid and ran to the army of Zou Shi Leshining. The Golden Army gained all the situation in the city.

古文：明日，世辅悉兵出战，骑兵居前，志宁使夹谷清臣当之。
现代文：第二天，李世辅带领所有兵力出城作战，骑兵为前锋，纥石烈志宁派夹谷清臣前去抵挡他。
English: The next day, Li Shifu led all the troops out of the city to fight, with the cavalry as the vanguard, and Zou Shi Li Shining sent Zhegu Qingcheng forward to resist him.

古文：世辅别将以五六千骑为一队，与清臣遇，清臣踵击之，宋将不能反旆。
现代文：李世辅另外一队五六千骑兵与夹谷清臣遭遇，夹谷清臣跟在后边攻击他们，宋朝军队不能还击。
English: Another team of five or six thousand cavalrymen led by Li Shifu encountered Jie Gu Qingchen. Jie Gu Qingchen followed behind and attacked them. The Song Dynasty army could not fight back.

古文：志宁麾诸军力战，世辅复大败，走者自相蹈藉，僵尸相枕，争城门而入。门填塞，人人自阻，遂缘城而上。我军自濠外射之，往往堕死于隍间。杀骑士万五千，步卒三万余人。
现代文：纥石烈志宁指挥各路军队奋力作战，李世辅又被打得大败，逃跑的士兵相互践踏，尸体一条压着一条，他们争着从城门里往城中进，城门被堵塞，阻挡了进人，于是士兵爬城墙进城，金军在护城河对岸用箭射杀，许多宋兵中箭掉到干涸的护城河中摔死，此役杀了李世辅的骑兵一万五千，步兵三万多人。
English: Shanshi Ledzhinin commanded all the armies to fight hard. Li Shiyou was defeated again. The fleeing soldiers trampled on each other, crushing the bodies one by one. They fought to enter the city from the city gate. The city gate was blocked, blocking people from entering. So the soldiers climbed the city wall to enter the city. The gold army was shot with arrows on the opposite bank of the moat. Many of the Song soldiers died when their arrows fell into the dry moat. This battle killed 15,000 of Li Shiyou's cavalry and more than 30,000 of his infantry.

古文：世辅乘夜脱走。
现代文：李世辅乘着夜色逃走。
English: Li Shifu fled under the cover of night.

古文：明日，夹谷清臣、张师忠追及世辅，斩首四千余，赴水死者不可胜计，获甲三万，他兵仗甚众。
现代文：第二天，夹谷清臣、张师忠追到了李世辅，杀了四千多人，跳到水里溺死的不计其数，俘获铠甲三万套，其他的兵器很多。
English: The next day, Tsetsuya Kiyotomi and Zhang Shizhong chased Li Shiyu, killed more than four thousand people, jumped into the water and drowned countless people, captured thirty thousand sets of armor, and many other weapons.

古文：上以御服金线袍、玉吐鹘、宾铁佩刀，使移剌道就军中赐之。
现代文：金皇帝拿出御服金线袍、玉吐鹘、宾铁佩刀，派移剌道到军队赏赐给纥石烈志宁。
English: Emperor Jin took out the imperial robes of gold thread, the jade spittoon, and the pentel saber, and sent his emissaries to the army to reward the flint relic.

古文：凡有功将士，猛安、谋克并如陕西迁赏，蒲辇进官三阶、重彩三端、绢六匹，旗鼓笛手、吏人各赐钱十贯。
现代文：凡是有功的将士、猛安、谋克一同到陕西升迁受赏，蒲辇进升三级官阶，得彩绸三端、绢六匹，旗手鼓手笛手、小官员各赏十贯钱。
English: All meritorious soldiers, Meng'an and Mokke went to Shaanxi together to be promoted and rewarded, and the paddlefish was promoted to the third level of official ranks, and the three ends of the colored silk and six cormorants were awarded, and the flag bearer, drummer, flautist and minor officials were awarded ten yuan each.

古文：诏志宁曰： 卿虽年少，前征契丹战功居最，今复破大敌，朕甚嘉之。 
现代文：皇帝诏令纥石烈志宁说： 你虽年少，前去讨伐契丹战功最大，现在又打败了最大的敌人，朕特别地嘉奖你。 
English: The emperor issued a decree to Zou Shi Leshining, saying: Although you are young, you have made the greatest contribution to the war against the Khitan, and now you have defeated the greatest enemy. I especially commend you.

古文：宋人议和不能决，都元帅仆散忠义移军泰和，志宁移军临涣，遂渡淮，徒单克宁取盱眙、濠、庐、和、滁等州。
现代文：宋朝同金朝议和没有定下来，都元帅仆散忠义移军到泰和，纥石烈志宁移军到临涣，于是渡过淮河，徒单克宁攻下盱眙、濠、庐、和、滁等州。
English: When the Song Dynasty and the Kim Dynasty did not reach a peace agreement, the generalissimo's servant, Marshal San Zhongyi, moved his army to Taihe, and the generalissimo's servant, Shi Li Zhining, moved his army to Linyi. They then crossed the Huai River, and the generalissimo conquered the provinces of Handan, Handan, Handan, Handan, and Handan.

古文：宋人惧，乃决意请和。使者六七往反，议遂定，宋世为侄国，约岁币二十万两、匹。魏杞奉誓书入见，复通好。
现代文：宋朝害怕，于是决定乞求和解，派使者往返六七次，议和才被定下来，宋朝世代做侄国，盟约规定每年向金朝进贡银二十万两、绢二十万匹，魏杞奉誓约进见金朝，于是又和好了。
English: The Song Dynasty was afraid, so it decided to beg for reconciliation. It sent envoys back and forth six or seven times to discuss peace before it was settled. The Song Dynasty had been a nephew country for generations, and the treaty stipulated that it would pay tribute of 200,000 taels of silver and 200,000 taels of horses to the Kim Dynasty every year. Wei Wei made a vow to visit the Kim Dynasty, so they reconciled again.

古文：志宁还军睢阳，上以御服、玉佩刀、通犀御带赐之。
现代文：纥石烈志宁撤军到睢阳，皇帝用御服、玉佩刀、通犀御带赏赐给他。
English: Zhai Shi Li Zhining withdrew his army to Fenyang. The emperor rewarded him with imperial robes, a jade sword, and an imperial sash.

古文：诏曰： 灵璧、虹县、宿州兵士死者，朕实闵焉。
现代文：皇帝下诏说： 灵璧、虹县、宿州牺牲的士兵，朕实在怜悯。
English: The emperor issued an edict saying, "I really pity the soldiers who died in Lingbi, Hongxian and Shuzhou.

古文：宜归葬乡里，官为赍送，人赙钱三十贯。 
现代文：应该把他们送到故乡安葬，官府送给他们财物，每人给钱三十贯。 
English: They should be sent to their hometowns for burial, the government should give them money and gifts, and each of them should be given 30 yuan.

古文：凤翔尹孛术鲁定方以下猛安谋克，官为致祭。
现代文：凤翔尹孛术鲁定方率领下面的猛安谋克，代表官府前去奠祭。
English: Feng Xiang, Yin Xun, and Lu Ding led the following Meng'an conspiracy, and went to the offering ceremony on behalf of the government.

古文：定方赙银五百两、重彩二十端，猛安三百贯，谋克二百贯，蒲里衍一百贯，权猛安二百贯，权谋克一百五十贯，权蒲里衍七十贯。
现代文：孛术鲁定方送给五百两白银、二十端彩绸，猛安送钱三百贯，谋克送钱二百贯，蒲里衍一百贯，权猛安二百贯，权谋克一百五十贯，权蒲里衍七十贯。
English: Lu Dingfang gave him five hundred and two silver and twenty pieces of colored silk, Meng An gave him three hundred talents, Mok Ke gave him two hundred talents, Buri Yan gave him one hundred talents, Quan Meng An gave him two hundred talents, Quan Mok Ke gave him one hundred and fifty talents, and Quan Buri Yan gave him seventy talents.

古文：五年三月，忠义朝京师，志宁驻军南京。
现代文：大定五年三月，仆散忠义到京城朝拜，纥石烈志宁驻军南京。
English: In March of the 5th year of Dading, Dousan Zhongyi went to the capital to pay homage, and Shishi Retshinin stationed troops in Nanjing.

古文：五月，志宁召至京师，拜平章政事，左副元帅如故。
现代文：五月，纥石烈志宁被召到京城，授予平章政事，仍为左副元帅。
English: In May, Zou Shi Retshinin was summoned to the capital, awarded the title of Pingzhang, and still became the left deputy marshal.

古文：志宁复还军，赐玉束带，上曰： 卿壮年能立功如此，朕甚嘉之。
现代文：纥石烈志宁班师回朝，皇帝说： 你壮年就能立如此之大功，朕很嘉奖你。
English: When Zou Shi's disciple Li Zhining returned to the imperial court, the emperor said, "You can accomplish such a great feat at your age. I highly commend you."

古文：南服虽定，日月尚浅，须卿一往规画。 
现代文：南方边疆虽被平定，但时间不长，需要你去规划管理。 
English: Although the southern border has been pacified, the time is not long, and you need to plan and manage.

古文：六年二月，志宁还京师，拜枢密使。
现代文：大定六年二月，纥石烈志宁又回到京城，授予枢密使。
English: In February of the sixth year of Dading, Zangshi Retshinin returned to Beijing and was awarded the title of privy envoy.

古文：七年十一月八日，皇太子生日，宴群臣于东宫，志宁奉觞上寿，上悦，顾谓太子曰： 天下无事，吾父子今日相乐，皆此人力也。 
现代文：大定七年十一月八日，是皇太子的生日，在东宫大宴群臣，纥石烈志宁向太子进酒祝寿，皇帝很高兴，对太子说 ：天下没有乱事，我们父子今天才能互相欢乐，这都是这个人的力量。 
English: On November 8th, the Crown Prince's birthday, in the 7th year of Dading, at a grand banquet of ministers in the East Palace, Zou Shi Leshi Ning made a toast to the Crown Prince. The emperor was very happy and said to the Crown Prince, "There is no chaos in the world. Our father and son can only be happy with each other today. This is all the power of this man."

古文：使太子取御前玉大杓酌酒，上手饮志宁，即以玉杓及黄金五百两赐之。
现代文：皇帝让太子拿他前面的玉杓斟酒，皇帝端给纥石烈志宁喝，后就用玉杓及五百两黄金赏赐给纥石烈志宁。
English: The emperor asked the prince to take the jade gong in front of him and pour the wine. The emperor brought the wine to Zou Shi Lingshining, and then rewarded Zou Shi Lingshining with the jade gong and five hundred taels of gold.

古文：以第十四女下嫁志宁子诸神奴，八年十月，进币，宴百官于庆和殿。
现代文：皇帝把他的第十四个女儿嫁给纥石烈志宁的儿子纥石烈诸神奴，大定八年十月，进献彩礼，皇帝在庆和殿大宴百官。
English: The emperor married his fourteenth daughter to the son of Shishirenshinin, Shishirenshin, in October of the eighth year of the Great Lent. The emperor held a grand banquet for hundreds of officials at the Qinghe Hall.

古文：皇女以妇礼谒见，志宁夫妇坐而受之，欢饮终日，夜久乃罢。
现代文：皇帝的女儿用妇礼拜见，纥石烈志宁夫妇坐着受礼，宴饮一整天，夜里才停止。
English: The emperor's daughter paid her respects with a women's prayer, and the Zou Shi Lai Shining couple sat and received the salute, feasting all day and only stopping at night.

古文：九年，拜右丞相。
现代文：大定九年，纥石烈志宁被授予右丞相。
English: In the ninth year of Dading, Zou Shi Retshinin was awarded the title of Minister of the Right.

古文：十一年，代宗叙北征。
现代文：大定十一年，他代替宗叙北伐。
English: In the eleventh year of Dading, he went to the Northern Expedition in place of Zongxu.

古文：既还，遣使者迎劳，赐以弓矢、玉吐鹘。
现代文：回朝时，金世宗皇帝派使者前去迎候慰劳，赏赐给他弓箭、玉吐鹘。
English: When he returned to the imperial court, Emperor Jin Shizong sent an emissary to greet him, and gave him a bow and arrow and a jade spittoon.

古文：入见，上慰劳良久。
现代文：他进朝拜见皇帝，皇帝慰劳了他很长时间。
English: He went to pay his respects to the emperor, who consoled him for a long time.

古文：是日，封广平郡王，复遣使就第慰劳之。
现代文：这一天，他被封为广平郡王，皇帝又派使者到他的家里慰劳他。
English: On this day, he was named the king of Guangping County, and the emperor sent an envoy to his home to console him.

古文：皇太子生日，宴群臣于东宫，以玉带赐志宁，上曰： 此梁王宗弼所服者，故以赐卿。 
现代文：皇太子生日那天，皇帝在东宫宴会群臣，用玉带赏赐给纥石烈志宁，皇帝说 ：这是梁王宗弼所佩的玉带，所以赏赐给你。 
English: On the day of the crown prince's birthday, the emperor held a banquet at the East Palace for his courtiers, and presented a jade belt to Shanshi Retshinin. The emperor said, "This is the jade belt worn by King Liang Zongyao, so I am awarding it to you."

古文：郊祀覃恩，从征护卫，皆有赐，进封金源郡王。
现代文：冬至皇帝到南郊祭祀天恩，随从前去的人及护卫，都有赏赐，纥石烈志宁被进封为金源郡王。
English: The winter solstice emperor went to the southern suburbs to offer sacrifices to the gods, and the people and guards who went with him were rewarded. Zou Shi Leshining was crowned the king of Jinyuan County.

古文：十二年，志宁有疾，中使看问，日三四辈。疾亟，赐金丹三十粒，诏曰： 此丹未尝以赐人也。 
现代文：大定十二年，纥石烈志宁有病，皇帝派人去看望问候，每天三四次，他的病情加重，皇帝赏赐他十三颗金丹，并诏书他说 ：这种金丹我从来没有赏赐给人。 
English: In the twelfth year of Dading, Zou Shi Lingshining was ill, and the emperor sent someone to visit and greet him three or four times a day. As his illness worsened, the emperor awarded him thirteen pieces of gold and decreed, "I have never awarded this kind of gold to anyone."

古文：使者至，志宁已不能言，但稽首而已。
现代文：使者到，纥石烈志宁已不能说话，只是叩头谢恩。
English: When the messenger arrived, Zou Shi Leshining could no longer speak, but only bowed his head in thanks.

古文：是岁，薨。
现代文：这一年，纥石烈志宁死了。
English: He died that year.

古文：上辍朝，临其丧，行哭而入，哀动左右。
现代文：他死时皇帝停朝前去吊丧，边哭边走进纥石烈志宁的灵堂，皇帝的悲哀感动了左右。
English: When he died, the emperor paused to mourn. While weeping, he walked into the shrine of Shishi Retshinin. The emperor's grief moved everyone around him.

古文：将葬，上致祭，见陈甲柩前，复恸哭之。
现代文：准备埋葬时，皇帝前去祭奠，见到灵柩后又大声痛哭。
English: When the burial was being prepared, the emperor went to pay his respects. After seeing the coffin, he wept loudly.

古文：赙银千五百两、重彩五十端、绢五百匹，葬事祠堂，皆从官给，谥武定。
现代文：皇帝送给他银一千五百两、彩绸五十端、绢五百匹作为葬礼用，埋葬及祠堂修建的费用，都从官府拨给，谥号武定。
English: The emperor gave him 1,500 taels of silver, 50 taels of colored silk, and 500 horses for the funeral, and the expenses for the burial and the construction of the ancestral hall were all allocated by the government. His posthumous name was Wu Ding.

古文：十五年，图像衍庆宫。
现代文：大定十五年，纥石烈志宁的图像被画于衍庆宫。
English: In the 15th year of Dading, the image of Zou Shi Retshining was painted in Yanqing Palace.

古文：志宁妻永安县主妒甚，尝杀孕妾，及志宁薨后，诸神奴兄弟皆病亡，世宗甚惜之，遣使谕永安县主曰： 丞相有大功三，先朝旧臣，惟秦、宋二王功大，余不及也。
现代文：纥石烈志宁的妻子永安县主的嫉妒心很强，曾经杀死了纥石烈志宁的孕妾，等到纥石烈志宁死后，纥石烈诸神奴的兄弟都病死了，金世宗很可怜她，派使者诏谕永安县主说 ：丞相有很多大功，先朝的旧臣，除了秦、宋二王，其余的都不如他。
English: The wife of Jieshi Leshining, the lord of Yong'an County, was very jealous. She once killed Jieshi Leshining's pregnant concubine. After Jieshi Leshining's death, all of Jieshi Leshining's god-slave brothers died of illness. King Jin Shizong took pity on her and sent an envoy to tell the lord of Yong'an County: "The prime minister has done a lot of great deeds. The old ministers of the previous dynasty, except for the Qin and Song kings, were all inferior to him.

古文：今养其孽子，当如亲子视之。 
现代文：现在他的儿子活着，应当把他当作亲儿子看待。 
English: Now that his son is alive, he should be treated as his own son.

古文：二十二年，上问宰臣： 仆散忠义、纥石烈志宁孰愈？ 
现代文：大定二十二年，皇帝问宰臣： 仆散忠义、纥石烈志宁哪一个功劳更大？ 
English: In the 22nd year of Dading, the emperor asked his aide-de-camp, "Which one has done the greater service, Dousan Tadayoshi or Shishi Retshinin?"

古文：尚书左丞襄奏曰： 忠义兵权精致，此其所长也。 
现代文：尚书左丞完颜襄上奏说： 仆散忠义领兵有方，这是他的长处。 
English: Shang Shuzhu Zuoxiao finished his speech and said: "Duxuan is loyal and has the ability to lead soldiers. This is his strength.

古文：上曰： 不然。
现代文：皇帝说 ：不是这样。
English: The emperor said, "That is not so."

古文：志宁临敌，身先士卒，勇敢之气，自太师梁王未有如此人者也。 
现代文：纥石烈志宁遇到敌人，身先士卒，他的勇敢气概从太师梁王以来没有像他这样的人。 
English: Zou Shi Retshinin encountered the enemy, leading the way, his bravery since the great master Liang Wang, there is no one like him.

古文：明昌五年，配享世宗庙廷。
现代文：明昌五年，纥石烈志宁配享金世宗庙廷的祭祀。
English: In the fifth year of the Ming and Chang dynasties, Zhang Hao enjoyed the temple ritual of the Jin Sect.

古文：仆散忠义，本名乌者，上京拔卢古河人，宣献皇后侄，元妃之兄也。
现代文：仆散忠义本名仆散乌者，上京拔卢古河人。他是宣献皇后的侄子，元妃的哥哥。
English: Dousan Zhongyi, whose real name was Dousan Wu, came to Beijing from the Lugu River. He was the nephew of the proclamation queen and the elder brother of the former empress.

古文：高祖斡鲁补。
现代文：其高祖父是仆散斡鲁补。
English: His great-great-grandfather was a courtier.

古文：曾祖班睹。
现代文：曾祖父是仆散班睹。
English: My great-grandfather was a minstrel.

古文：祖胡阑。
现代文：祖父是仆散胡阑。
English: My grandfather was a minion of Hu Yao.

古文：父背鲁，国初世袭谋克，婆速路统军使，致仕。
现代文：父亲是仆散背鲁，为金朝建国时的世袭谋克，婆速路统军使，直至退休。
English: His father was a minion of Sanbei Lu, a hereditary strategist for the founding of the Kim dynasty, and his mother was a high-ranking military envoy until her retirement.

古文：忠义魁伟，长髯，喜谈兵，有大略。
现代文：仆散忠义身材魁伟，长髯飘飘，喜爱谈论兵事，有雄才大略。
English: Dousan Zhongyi is a tall man with a long beard. He likes to talk about military affairs and is very talented.

古文：年十六，领本谋克兵，从宗辅定陕西，行间射中宋大将，宋兵遂溃，由是知名。
现代文：十六岁时，他率领本谋克的士兵，跟随完颜宗辅平定陕西，行军时他射中宋朝大将，宋朝军队于是败溃，仆散忠义因此出名。
English: At the age of sixteen, he led the soldiers of the plan and followed Yan Zongfu to subdue Shaanxi. When he was marching, he shot the general of the Song Dynasty. The Song Dynasty army was then defeated, and thus, Dousan Zhongyi became famous.

古文：帅府录其功，承制署为谋克。
现代文：帅府记录了他的功劳，按制度签署他为谋克。
English: The Superintendent's Office recorded his achievement and signed him as a coach according to the system.

古文：宗弼再取河南，表荐忠义为猛安。
现代文：完颜宗弼再次进攻河南，上表举荐仆散忠义为猛安。
English: After Yan Zonglu attacked Henan again, the above-mentioned recommendation of Minzhan Zhongyi came as a great relief.

古文：攻冀州，先登，攻大名府，以本部兵力战，破其军十余万，赏以奴婢、马牛、金银、重彩。
现代文：攻打冀州时仆散忠义首先登城，攻打大名府时他率本部士兵奋力作战，打败十多万宋军，赏给他奴婢、马牛、金银、彩缎。
English: When attacking Jizhou, the servant San Zhongyi was the first to enter the city, and when attacking the Daimyo-fu, he led the soldiers of the headquarters to fight hard, defeated more than 100,000 Song Army, and awarded him slaves, horses, cattle, gold and silver, and colored gongs.

古文：从宗弼渡淮攻寿、庐等州，宗弼称之曰： 此子勇略过人，将帅之器也。 
现代文：仆散忠义跟随完颜宗弼渡过淮河攻打寿、庐等州，完颜宗弼称赞他说 ：这个人勇略过人，是做将帅的材料。 
English: After Yan Zongqi crossed the Huai River to attack Shou, Handan and other provinces, Duxuan Zhongyi followed him. Yan Zongqi praised him and said, "This man is a daredevil and is the material for a great general."

古文：赏马五匹、牛一百五十头、羊五百口，领亲军万户，超宁远大将军，承其父世袭谋克。
现代文：赏给他马五匹、一百五十头牛、五百只羊，为领亲军万户，一跃升为宁远大将军，继承他父亲的世袭谋克。
English: He was rewarded with five horses, one hundred and fifty head of cattle, and five hundred sheep, and was promoted to general of Ningyuan, inheriting his father's inheritance.

古文：皇统四年，除博州防御使，公余学女直字，及古算法，阅月，尽能通之。
现代文：皇统四年，仆散忠义任博州防御使，他工作之暇学习女真文字及古代算术，一个月后，全部精通。
English: In the fourth year of imperial rule, his servant, Zan Zhongyi, served as Boshou defense envoy. In his spare time, he studied the Jurchen alphabet and ancient arithmetic. A month later, he was proficient in all of them.

古文：在郡不事田猎、燕游，以职业为务，郡中翕然称治。
现代文：他在郡中不打猎，不游玩，整天做好本职工作，郡中被治理得很安定。
English: He does not hunt or play in the county, he does his job all day long, and the county is very stable.

古文：忽一夕阴晦，囚徒谋为反狱。仓猝间，将校皆惶骇失措，忠义从容，但使守更吏挝鼓鸣角。囚徒以为天且晓，不敢出，自就桎梏。
现代文：忽然在一个阴晦的夜晚，囚犯们逃狱，仓促中，将校们都惊慌失措，仆散忠义很从容，只是派守更的官吏打鼓吹号，囚犯以为天将亮，不敢向外跑，自己回到狱中。
English: Suddenly, on a gloomy night, the prisoners escaped from the prison. In their haste, the officers panicked. The guards were calm, but sent more officials to play the trumpet. The prisoners thought it was dawn, and did not dare to run outside, so they returned to the prison.

古文：及考，郡民诣阙愿留，诏从之。
现代文：等到考核他，郡中人民到官府请他留下，皇帝批准了。
English: When he was evaluated, the people of the county went to the government to ask him to stay, and the emperor approved.

古文：八年，改同知真定尹，兼河北西路兵马都总管，迁西北路招讨使，入为兵部尚书。
现代文：皇统八年，仆散忠义改任同知真定尹、兼河北西路兵马都总管，升为西北路招讨使，进到朝廷为兵部尚书。
English: In the eighth year of imperial unification, the servant, San Zhongyi, was reassigned to the position of Tongzhi Zhending Yin, and also became the head of the West Hebei Military and Horse Corps, and was promoted to the northwest road recruiting and dispatching envoy, and entered the imperial court as the military secretary.

古文：仆散忽土尝与海陵篡立，恃势陵傲同列，忠义因会饮众辱之，海陵不悦，出为震武军节度使。
现代文：仆散忽土曾经参与海陵王篡夺皇位，由此他仰仗海陵王而傲视同事，仆散忠义因在一个酒宴上当众侮辱了他，海陵王不高兴，把仆散忠义赶出朝廷做震武军节度使。
English: Dokusan Kudo once participated in the usurpation of the imperial throne by King Hailing, as a result of which he looked up to King Hailing and disdained his colleagues. King Hailing was not happy with Dokusan Tadayoshi because he insulted him in public at a wine banquet, and drove him out of the imperial court to be the messenger of the Shinsengumi.

古文：火山贼李铁枪乘暑来攻，忠义单衣从一骑迎击之，射杀数人，贼乃退。
现代文：火山盗贼李铁枪乘着夏天前来进攻，仆散忠义穿着单衣只带一个随从骑马迎头攻击，射死了几个人，盗贼于是退却。
English: Li Tiegun, a volcano thief, came to attack in the summer. Dressed in a singlet, with only one follower on horseback, he attacked head-on and shot several people. The thief then retreated.

古文：改临洮尹，兼熙秦路兵马都总管。
现代文：他改任临洮尹，兼熙秦路兵马都总管。
English: He was transferred to the post of Linyi Yin, and also became the general manager of the Qin Road Terracotta Army.

古文：海陵召至京师谓之曰： 洮河地接吐蕃、木波，异时剽害良民，州县不能制。
现代文：海陵王把仆散忠义召到京城对他说 ：洮河同吐蕃、木波接壤，他们时时剽劫残害良民，州县不能安定。
English: King Hailing summoned his servant Zan Zhongyi to the capital city and said to him, "Baohe shares a border with Tubo and Mubo. They constantly rob and harm the good people. The state and county cannot be stable."

古文：汝宿将，故以命汝。 
现代文：你是一员老将，所以命令你前去。 
English: You're a veteran, so you're ordered forward.

古文：赐条服、玉具、佩刀。
现代文：仆散忠义被赏赐条服、玉具、佩刀。
English: Dousan's loyalty was rewarded with a strip of clothing, a jewel, and a sword.

古文：阅再考，徙平阳尹，再徙济南尹。
现代文：等到再次考核他，他被迁任平阳尹，再迁任济南尹。
English: When he was re-evaluated, he was transferred to Pingyang Yin and then to Jinan Yin.

古文：以本官为汉南路行营副统制，伐宋，克通化军。
现代文：他带此职做汉南路行营副统制，攻打宋朝，打败通化军。
English: He took this position as deputy commander of the Hannan Road, attacked the Song Dynasty, and defeated the Tonghua Army.

古文：世宗立，海陵死扬州，罢兵入朝京师，拜尚书右丞。
现代文：金世宗做了皇帝，海陵王死在扬州，仆散忠义撤兵到京城朝拜，任尚书右丞。
English: Kim Sejong became emperor, Haering Wang died in Yangzhou, and his vassal Tadayoshi withdrew his troops to the capital to pay homage. He was appointed as the second-in-command.

古文：移剌窝斡慄号，兵久不决。
现代文：移剌窝斡冒用皇帝的尊号，金军攻打他很久没有攻下。
English: He used the honorific title of the emperor, and the Golden Army did not attack him for a long time.

古文：右副元帅完颜谋衍既败之于霿河，乃拥众，贪卤掠，不追讨，而纵其子斜哥暴横军中，士卒不用命。
现代文：右副元帅完颜谋衍在駒雨松河打败了移剌窝斡，于是众人拥着他，他贪掠夺，不追击窝斡，又放任他的儿子移剌斜哥在军中暴虐横行，士兵们不听他的命令。
English: Right Vice-Marshal Guan Yan defeated Shifu Wo Yang at the Koma Uzumatsu River, so the people embraced him. He was greedy for plunder, did not pursue Wo Yang, and allowed his son Shifu Xiang to run rampant in the army. The soldiers did not listen to his orders.

古文：贼得水草善地，官军踵其遗余，水草乏，马益弱，贼轶出山西，久无功。忠义请曰： 契丹小寇，不时殄灭，致烦圣虑。
现代文：叛军得到好的水草地，金军在后追击，马只能吃残留的水草，战马越来越瘦弱，叛军逃出山西，完颜谋衍很久没有立功，仆散忠义说： 契丹小贼寇，用不了多长时间就能消灭他，这不用皇帝担忧。
English: The rebels got good water meadows, the gold army chased after them, the horses could only eat the remaining water weeds, the war horses were getting thinner and thinner, the rebels escaped from Shanxi, and they did not do any good deeds for a long time, and the servant said loyally: Khitan petty thief, it will not take long to eliminate him, do not worry about the emperor.

古文：臣闻主忧臣辱，愿效死力除之。 
现代文：我听说君主担忧是做臣的耻辱，我愿意出死力消灭叛军。 
English: I have heard it said that it is a disgrace for a minister to worry the sovereign, and I am willing to do my utmost to destroy the rebels.

古文：世宗大悦。
现代文：金世宗很高兴。
English: Kim Sejong was delighted.

古文：即召还谋衍，勒归斜哥本贯。
现代文：皇帝金世宗立即召回完颜谋衍，勒令完颜斜哥改除恶习。
English: Emperor Kim Sejong immediately recalled Kangyan Muyan and ordered Kangyan Xiangge to get rid of his bad habits.

古文：拜忠义平章政事，兼右副元帅，封荣国公，赐以御府貂裘、宾铁吐鹘弓矢大刀、具装对马及安山铁甲、金牌，诏曰： 军中将士有犯，连职之外并以军法从事，有功者依格迁赏。 
现代文：任命仆散忠义为平章政事，兼右副元帅，封为荣国公，赏赐给他御府貂皮衣，镔铁吐鹘弓箭大刀、具装对马及安山铁甲、金牌，皇帝下诏说： 军中将士有违犯军规的，皆军法惩治，有功的依照规定升迁奖赏。 
English: He appointed his servant, San Zhongyi, to the post of Pingzhang Political Affairs, concurrently Vice-Marshal of the Right, and named him the Prince of Glory. He rewarded him with the Emperor's sable fur coat, the hammered iron spit, the bow and arrow sword, the tooled horse and the Anshan iron armor, and a gold medal. The emperor issued a decree saying: If there is a violation of the military regulations, all the generals in the army will be punished according to the military law, and those who are meritorious will be promoted according to the regulations.

古文：诏诸将士曰： 兵久驻边陲，蠹费财用，百姓不得休息。
现代文：皇帝下诏诸将士说 ：部队长久地驻守边疆，耗费财物，老百姓也不能休养生息。
English: The emperor issued an edict to the soldiers, saying, "The troops have been stationed at the frontier for a long time, consuming wealth and resources, and the common people cannot rest and recuperate.

古文：今以右丞忠义为平章政事、右副元帅，宜同心戮力，无或弛慢。 
现代文：现在用右丞仆散忠义为平章政事、右副元帅，应该同心协力，不应有所懈怠。 
English: Now, with the right-hand man San Zhongyi as the political affairs and the right-hand deputy marshal, we should work together and should not slacken.

古文：忠义至军，贼陷灵山、同昌、惠和等县，阵而西行。
现代文：仆散忠义到达军中，叛军攻陷了灵山、同昌、惠和等县，然后向西走。
English: After the rebel army captured Lingshan, Tongchang, Huihe and other counties, they marched westward.

古文：忠义追之，及于花道，宗亨为左翼，宗叙为右翼，与贼夹河而阵。
现代文：仆散忠义追击叛军，在花道追上了叛军，宗亨作为左翼，宗叙作为右翼，与叛军隔河对阵。
English: Dousan loyally chased the rebels and caught up with the rebels at Huaduo. Zongheng, as the left wing, and Zongxu, as the right wing, confronted the rebels across the river.

古文：贼渡河，先攻左翼，偏败，右翼救之，贼引去。
现代文：叛军渡过河，先进攻仆散忠义的左翼部队，出乎意料的是左翼被打败，右翼前去救援，叛军撤走。
English: The rebels crossed the river and advanced to attack and disperse the loyal left-wing troops. Unexpectedly, the left wing was defeated, the right wing went to the rescue, and the rebels withdrew.

古文：窝斡乃以精锐自随，以羸兵护其母妻辎重由别道西走，期于山后会集。
现代文：窝斡于是让精锐部队跟着自己，让弱兵保护他的母亲妻子辎重从其他的道路向西去，然后按约定时间在山后会合。
English: Wo then ordered the elite troops to follow him, and the weaker soldiers to protect his mother and wife, Zou Chong, from other roads to the west, and then meet at the back of the mountain at the agreed time.

古文：追复及于袅岭西陷泉。
现代文：仆散忠义在袅岭西的陷泉又追上了叛军。
English: In the trapped spring west of the Fuling Mountains, the rebel army was once again overtaken by Zhongyi's vassals.

古文：与贼遇，时昏雾四塞，跬步莫睹物色，忠义祷曰： 狂寇肆暴，杀戮无辜，天不助恶，当为开霁。 
现代文：与叛军相遇，这时黄昏大雾四起，半步之外就看不见东西，仆散忠义祈祷说： 狂寇肆暴，残杀无辜，天如不帮助邪恶，就应当把雾驱开。 
English: Encountering the rebels, at this time, the dusk fog rose in all directions, making it impossible to see anything more than half a step away. Dousan loyally prayed and said, "Crazy bandits are rampaging, killing innocents. If heaven does not help evil, it should drive away the fog."

古文：奠已，昏雾廓然。
现代文：祭奠完毕，大雾果然散去。
English: After the memorial service, the fog did indeed dissipate.

古文：及战，忠义左据南冈，为偃月阵，右迤而北，大败之，获其弟袅，俘生口三十万，获杂畜十余万，车帐金珍以钜万计，悉分诸军。
现代文：等到双方作战，仆散忠义在左边占据南冈，摆出偃月阵，右边绵延向北，大败了叛军，俘虏移剌窝斡的弟弟，活捉三十万军队，获得牲畜十多万，车帐金珍不计其数，把它们全部分给各军。
English: By the time the two sides were engaged in battle, Dousan Zhongyi had occupied Nangang on the left and set up a crescent moon formation, while the right side extended to the north. He had defeated the rebels, captured the younger brother of Guo Wuyang, captured 300,000 troops alive, obtained more than 100,000 livestock, and countless carts and money, all of which were given to each army.

古文：贼走趋奚地，遣将追蹑，至七渡河，又败之。
现代文：少数漏网叛军逃向奚地，仆散忠义派大将追击，到七渡河，又打败了叛军。
English: A few rebels who had slipped through the net fled to Handan, and the general of the Loyalists pursued them and defeated the rebels again at Qidu River.

古文：既逾浑岭，复进军袭之，望风奔溃，遁入奚中，降者相属于路。
现代文：金军过了浑岭，又进军攻袭叛军，叛军望风而溃，逃到奚境内，叛军纷纷在路上投降。
English: After crossing the Hunling Mountains, the Chinese army attacked the rebels. The rebels fled to the territory of Handan, and the rebels surrendered on the way.

古文：诏忠义曰： 卿材能素著，果能大破贼众，朕甚嘉之。
现代文：皇帝下诏给仆散忠义说 ：你的才能平常就很显著，能大破叛军，朕很高兴。
English: The emperor issued an edict to his loyal servant, saying, "Your talent is usually very conspicuous. I am very pleased that you were able to defeat the rebels.

古文：今遣劳卿，如朕亲往。
现代文：现在派人前去慰劳你，就像朕去一样。
English: Now send someone to comfort you, as I will.

古文：赐卿御衣、及骨睹犀具佩刀、通犀带等。
现代文：赏赐你御衣、及骨睹犀具佩刀、通犀带等。
English: He will reward you with clothing, bone brooms, a sword, a sash, and so on.

古文：就以俘获，均散军士。 
现代文：把俘获的东西，均匀分给士兵。 
English: Divide the spoils equally among the soldiers.

古文：窝斡既败，遂入于奚中。
现代文：移剌窝斡被打败后，逃到了奚境。
English: After she was defeated, she fled to Xizhou.

古文：高忠建败奚于栲栳山，移剌道取抹白诸奚之家，抹白奚乃降，窝斡势益弱。
现代文：高忠建在栲栳山打败奚人，移剌道攻下抹白各奚的家，抹白各奚于是投降，移剌窝斡的力量越来越弱。
English: Gao Zhongjian defeated the Lushan people in the Lushan Mountains, and the Lushan Road was captured by the house of the Mupai people. The Lushan people then surrendered, and the power of the Lushan people became weaker and weaker.

古文：纥石烈志宁获贼将稍合住，纵之使归，约以捕窝斡自赎，仍许以官赏。
现代文：纥石烈志宁俘获叛军将领稍合住，又把他放回去，约定用计策逮捕窝斡来赎罪，并答应给他官和奖赏。
English: Zou Shi Leshi Ning captured the rebel general and put him back, and agreed to use stratagems to arrest Hou Yu to atone for his sins, and promised to give him a position and reward.

古文：稍合住与其党，执窝斡诣完颜思敬降。
现代文：稍合住同其他人一起，捉拿窝斡到完颜思敬军中投降。
English: He lived together with others for a while, and surrendered to the invading army.

古文：契丹平。
现代文：契丹平定了。
English: Khitan has been pacified.

古文：忠义朝京师，拜尚书右丞相，改封沂国公，以玉带赐之。
现代文：仆散忠义到京城朝拜，被授予尚书右丞相，改封沂国公，世宗用玉带赏赐他。
English: Dousan Tadayoshi went to the capital to pay homage, and was awarded the title of Minister of the Right of the Emperor, changed his title to Prince of Shikoku, and rewarded with a jade belt by the emperor.

古文：自海陵遇弑，大军北还，而窝斡鸱张，命将徂征。
现代文：自从海陵王被杀，金军北撤，窝斡更嚣张，皇帝命令前去讨伐他。
English: Since the murder of King Hailing and the northward retreat of the Golden Army, Wo Yuxuan became more and more arrogant, and the emperor ordered him to go and fight him.

古文：及窝斡败，其党括里、紥八奔入于宋，宋人用其谋，侵掠边鄙，攻取泗、寿、唐、海州。
现代文：等到窝斡被打败，他的同党括里、扎八逃到宋朝，宋人用他们的计谋，侵略金朝边疆，攻下了泗、寿、唐、海州等地。
English: When Wo Yuxuan was defeated, his fellow party members Bulgari and Zhaba fled to the Song Dynasty. The Song people used their stratagems to invade the frontiers of the Jin Dynasty, and seized the provinces of Min, Shou, Tang, and Haizhou.

古文：于是，宋主传位于宗室子甗，是为宋孝宗，虽尝遣使来，而欲用敌国礼。
现代文：在这个时候，宋朝皇帝传位给宗室儿子赵礨，这就是宋孝宗，他虽然曾经派使者来往金朝，却想用对待敌国的礼节对待金朝。
English: At this time, the emperor of the Song Dynasty passed the throne to the son of the family, Zhao Wei, this is Song Xiaozong, although he had sent envoys to the Kim Dynasty, he wanted to treat the Kim Dynasty with the etiquette of an enemy country.

古文：世宗以纥石烈志宁经略宋事，制诏忠义以丞相总戎事，居南京节制诸将，时大定二年也。
现代文：金世宗用纥石烈志宁巡视边疆，下诏仆散忠义用丞相的身份管理部队的事，住南京节制各军，这时是大定二年。
English: It was the second year of Taejong when Kim Sejong inspected the frontiers with the commanding officer Seongseok Ryongjin and issued an edict to his servant Sang Chung-il to manage the troops as the prime minister, and live in Nanjing to control the troops.

古文：忠义将行，陛辞，上谕之曰： 彼若归侵疆，贡礼如故，则可罢兵。 
现代文：仆散忠义准备前往军中就职，到朝中向皇帝辞行，皇帝告谕他说： 他们如果归还了侵略我们的边疆，贡礼像过去一样，就可以罢兵。 
English: When he was about to take up his post in the army, he went to the capital and tendered his resignation to the emperor. The emperor told him, "If they return our invaded borderlands and pay tribute as they did in the past, we can call off the troops."

古文：既至南京，简阅士卒，分屯要害，戒诸将严守备。
现代文：仆散忠义到达南京后，检阅军队，把军队分开防守各个要塞，告诫诸将严加防备。
English: After arriving in Nanjing, Dousan Zhongyi inspected the troops, separated the troops to defend each fortress, and warned the generals to be on high alert.

古文：使左副元帅志宁移牒宋枢密使张浚，其略曰： 可还所侵本朝内地，各守自来画定疆界，凡事一依皇统以来旧约，帅府亦当解严。
现代文：同时他派左副元帅纥石烈志宁通牒宋朝枢密使张浚，上面大略写道： 偿还侵略本国的土地，各自遵守本来划定的疆界，大小事都依照皇统以来的老盟约，帅府应当解除威严。
English: At the same time, he sent Left Vice-Marshal Zou Shih Li Zhining to deliver an ultimatum to Zhang Jun, the Song Dynasty's confidential envoy, which roughly read: Repay the land of the invasion of the country, each side should abide by the originally delineated boundaries, and all matters, large and small, should be in accordance with the old covenant since the imperial system, and the general's office should be relieved of its authority.

古文：如必欲抗衡，请会兵相见。 
现代文：如果一定想对抗，请用军队相见。 
English: If you really want to fight, please meet me with the army.

古文：宋宣抚使张浚复书志宁曰： 疆埸之一彼一此，兵家之或胜或负，何常之有，当置勿道。
现代文：宋朝宣抚使张浚回复文书给纥石烈志宁说 ：疆场的这儿或那儿，兵家的胜或负，没有常规，说不出道理。
English: Zhang Jun, who was sent by the Song Dynasty to reply to Zou Shi, said: "Whether the battlefield is here or there, whether the soldiers win or lose, there is no rule, there is no reason.

古文：谨遣官僚，敬造麾下议之。 
现代文：谨派官吏，前往您军中议论此事。 
English: I'd like to send an official to your army to discuss the matter.

古文：是时，已复泗、寿、邓州，请隳其城，迁其民于宿、亳、蔡州，上曰： 三州本吾土也，得之则已。 
现代文：这时，金军已收复了泗、寿、邓州，仆散忠义请求毁坏这些城，把里面的百姓迁往宿、亳、蔡州。皇帝说 ：泗、寿、邓三州本来就是我们的土地，得到了就算了。 
English: At this time, the Golden Army had recovered Handan, Shou, and Dengzhou, and Dousan Loyalty requested to destroy these cities and relocate the people inside them to Shuku, Shou, and Caizhou. The emperor said: Handan, Shou, and Dengzhou were originally our lands, and it didn't matter if we got them.

古文：忠义使将士择善水草休息，且牧马，俟来岁取淮南。
现代文：仆散忠义让将士选择水草好的地方休整，等到了明年去攻打淮南。
English: Dousan Zhongyi let the soldiers choose a place with good water and plants to rest and wait until next year to attack Huainan.

古文：初，世宗诏诸将由泗、寿、唐邓三道进发，宋人闻之，即自方城、叶县以来田野皆烧夷之，使无所刍牧。
现代文：始初，金世宗诏令诸将由泗、寿、唐、邓三道进军出发，宋朝人听说后，即把方城、叶县一带田野烧得干干净净，使金军无法割草喂马。
English: At the beginning, the Emperor of the Jin Dynasty issued an edict to march from the three provinces of Yunnan, Shou, Tang and Deng. When the Song Dynasty heard about it, they burned the fields around Fangcheng and Ye County, so that the Jin Army could not cut grass to feed horses.

古文：忠义命唐、邓道军刍牧许、汝间。
现代文：仆散忠义命令唐、邓道的军在许、汝两地之间割草喂马。
English: Du Xuan ordered the armies of Tang and Deng Dao to cut the grass and feed the horses between Xu and Ru.

古文：三年，忠义入奏事，遂以丞相兼都元帅。
现代文：大定三年，仆散忠义进朝上奏，于是任他为丞相兼都元帅。
English: In the third year of the Taisho era, his vassal Tadayoshi entered the imperial court to play, and he was appointed chancellor and marshal of the capital.

古文：无何，还军中。
现代文：不久，又回到军中。
English: He soon returned to the army.

古文：忠义与宋相持日久，虑夏久雨，弓力易减，宋或乘时见攻，豫选劲弓万张于别库。
现代文：仆散忠义与宋军相持很久，考虑到夏天多雨，弓箭的力量减退，宋军有可能会乘机来攻袭，于是预先挑选了一万张弓及箭放在另外的军库中。
English: He had a long-standing grudge against the Song army. Considering the rainy summer and the declining power of bows and arrows, the Song army might take the opportunity to attack, so he pre-selected 10,000 bows and arrows and placed them in another arsenal.

古文：及自汴赴阙议事，次浚州，宋将李世辅果掩取灵璧、虹县，遂陷宿州。
现代文：等到仆散忠义从汴京前往宫廷议事，临时驻扎在时，宋将李世辅果然突然攻取灵璧、虹县，于是夺取了宿州。
English: When Li Shiyu, the general of the Song Dynasty, was temporarily stationed there while his attendant, Zhongyi, was on his way from Beijing to attend court proceedings, Li Shiyu suddenly captured Lingbi and Hongxian, and then captured Suzhou.

古文：忠义使人还汴，发所贮劲弓给志宁军，与宋人战，遂大捷，竟复宿州。
现代文：仆散忠义派人回到汴京，把贮藏的强弓及箭拨给纥石烈志宁军，和宋军作战，于是大获全胜，收复了宿州。
English: His vassal Zhongyi sent someone back to Beijing to allocate the stored strong bows and arrows to the Jinshi Liushining Army to fight against the Song Army. As a result, he won a complete victory and regained Suzhou.

古文：忠义还，以书责宋。
现代文：仆散忠义回到汴京，写信责备宋朝。
English: After returning to Beijing, Dousan Zhongyi wrote a letter to the Song Dynasty.

古文：宋同知枢密院事洪遵、计议官卢仲贤，遣使二辈持与志宁书及手状，归海、泗、唐、邓州所侵地，约为叔侄国。
现代文：宋朝同知枢密院事洪遵、计议官卢仲贤，派二个使者前去送给纥石烈志宁信及手状文书，愿意归还海、泗、唐、邓州所侵略的土地，金宋两国结盟为叔侄国。
English: The Song Dynasty sent two emissaries to present a letter and a handwritten document to Zou Shi, Li Zhining, with the same name as the Privy Council member Ji Hong Zun and the councillor Lu Zhongxian. They were willing to return the land invaded by Hai, Zou, Tang and Dengzhou. The two countries of the Jin and Song Dynasties were allied as an uncle and nephew country.

古文：报书期十一月使入境，宋又使人来言，礼物未备，请俟十二月行成。
现代文：得到消息说宋朝使者十一月才能入境，这时宋朝又派人来说，礼物还未备齐，等到十二月才能动身前来。
English: Having received the news that the Song emissary would not be able to enter the country until November, the Song Dynasty sent another emissary to say that the gifts were not yet ready and that they would not be able to come until December.

古文：忠义以其事驰奏，请定书式，且言宋书如式，则许其入界，如其不然，势须遣还本国，复禀其主，若是往复，动经七八十日，恐误军马进取。
现代文：仆散忠义把这些事快马报奏皇帝，请求决定文书的格式，并且说宋朝的文书如果符合格式要求，就让他入境，否则，就把他们的使者遣回去，再禀告他们的君主，如果像这样反复往返，需要七八十天，恐怕耽误了军队的进攻。
English: Du Xuan Zhongyi quickly reported these matters to the emperor, requesting a decision on the format of the document, and said that if the Song Dynasty's document met the format requirements, he would let him enter the country, otherwise, he would send their envoy back and report to their monarch. If it took seventy or eighty days to go back and forth like this, I'm afraid it would delay the army's attack.

古文：世宗以诏谕之曰： 若宋人归疆，岁币如昔，可免奉表称臣，许世为侄国。 
现代文：金世宗皇帝下诏对他说 ：如果宋朝归还我们的边疆，像过去一样进贡，可以免去他奉表称臣，许他世代为侄国。 
English: Emperor Kim Sejong issued an edict to him, saying, "If the Song Dynasty restores our borderlands and pays tribute to us as it did in the past, we can exempt him from being a vassal and allow him to be a nephew country for generations to come."

古文：忠义乃贻书宋人，前后凡七，宋人他托未从。
现代文：仆散忠义于是写信给宋朝，前后共七次，宋朝借故不从。
English: Therefore, Zhu Xuan Zhongyi wrote to the Song Dynasty a total of seven times, but the Song Dynasty refused to comply.

古文：忠义移大军压淮境，遣志宁率偏师渡淮，取盱眙、濠、庐、和、滁等州，宋人惧。
现代文：仆散忠义调动大部队压向淮河边，派纥石烈志宁率领部分军队渡过淮河，攻下了盱眙、濠、庐、和、滁等州，宋人害怕。
English: Zhongyi mobilized a large force to push toward the Huaihe River, and sent Zou Shi Li Zhining to lead a part of the army across the Huaihe River to capture the provinces of Handan, Handan, Handan, Handan and Handan. The Song people were afraid.

古文：而世宗意天下厌苦兵革，思与百姓休息，诏忠义度宜以行。
现代文：而金世宗考虑天下人讨厌战争，要让老百姓休养生息，于是诏令仆散忠义忖度适时进军。
English: However, Kim Sejong considered that the people of the world hated war and wanted to let the people rest and recuperate, so he issued an edict ordering his servants to march in a timely manner.

古文：四年正月，忠义使右监军宗叙入奏，将近暑月，乞俟秋凉进发。
现代文：大定四年正月，仆散忠义派右监军宗叙进朝上奏说，现在快到暑天了，请求等到秋天凉爽时再进军。
English: In the first month of the fourth year of Dading, Zong Xujin, the right overseer of the loyalist army, said in the morning report that it was about to be hot, and asked to wait until the autumn when it was cool.

古文：诏从之。
现代文：皇帝批准了他的奏章。
English: He complied.

古文：宋使胡昉敢以右仆射汤思退书来，宋称侄国，不肯加世字。
现代文：宋朝使者胡窻拿着右仆射汤思退的书信到金军，上写宋朝愿意称侄国，却不肯加 世 字。
English: The envoy of the Song Dynasty, Hu Rong, took the letter from his right-hand man, Shao Tang Siqi, to the Golden Army. The letter said that the Song Dynasty was willing to call itself a nephew country, but refused to add the word "world."

古文：忠义执昉留军中，答其书，使使以闻。
现代文：仆散忠义把胡窻扣留在军中，他给宋朝回信，并让皇帝金世宗知道这件事。
English: He wrote back to the Song Dynasty and let Emperor Jin Shizong know about it.

古文：诏曰： 行人何罪，遣胡昉还国。
现代文：金世宗皇帝下诏说： 使者没有罪，送胡窻回国。
English: Emperor Kim Sejong issued an edict saying, "The envoy is not guilty, send Hoo Min back to the country."

古文：边事从宜措画。 
现代文：边界的事要从容解决。 
English: The border issue should be resolved calmly.

古文：八月，诏忠义曰： 前请俟秋凉进发，今已八月，复俟何时？ 
现代文：八月，皇帝金世宗下诏仆散忠义说 ：前时请求等到秋凉时进军，现在已经是八月了，又要等到何时？ 
English: In August, Emperor Kim Il-sung issued an edict to his attendant, Sun Chung-i, saying, "Previously, we asked you to wait until the cool of autumn to march. Now it is August. When should we wait?

古文：先是，忠义乞增金、银牌，上曰： 太师梁王兼数职，未尝增也。 
现代文：对此，仆散忠义请求增加金、银牌，皇帝说 ：太师梁王身兼数职，也没有增加金银牌。 
English: In response, the Emperor's attendant, Liang Wang, requested that the gold and silver medals be increased. The Emperor replied that the Grand Master Liang Wang held several positions, and the gold and silver medals were not increased.

古文：至是增都元帅金牌一、银牌二十，左右副元帅金牌各一、银牌各十，左右监军金牌各一、银牌各六，左右都监金牌各一、银牌各四，三路都统府银牌各二。
现代文：至此给都元帅增加一枚金牌、二十枚银牌，左右副元帅各一枚金牌、十枚银牌，左右监军各一枚金牌、六枚银牌，左右都监各一枚金牌、四枚银牌，三路都统府各二枚银牌。
English: So far, one gold medal and twenty silver medals have been added to the capital marshal, one gold medal and ten silver medals to the left and right deputy marshals, one gold medal and six silver medals to the left and right supervisors, one gold medal and four silver medals to the left and right supervisors, and two silver medals to each of the three prefectures.

古文：乃定南界官员、百姓归附迁赏格。
现代文：于是还决定了南边边界的官员、老百姓归附的奖赏。
English: As a result, the reward to be paid by officials and ordinary people on the southern border was also decided.

古文：元帅府获宋谍人符忠。
现代文：元帅府逮捕了宋朝的间谍符忠。
English: The marshal's office arrested Song Dynasty spy Fu Zhong.

古文：忠前尝至中都，大兴府官诘问，忠执文据，及与泗州防御判官张德亨知识，由是获免，厚谢德亨，德亨受之。
现代文：符忠以前曾经到过中都，大兴府官员查办审问过他，符忠拿出证件，又同泗州防御判官张德亨认识，因此获释，他厚礼答谢张德亨，张德亨接受了。
English: Fu Zhong had been to the capital before, the Daxingfu officials had investigated and interrogated him, Fu Zhong took out his documents, and knew Zhang Deheng, the defense judge of Zhangzhou, so he was released. He thanked Zhang Deheng, and Zhang Deheng accepted.

古文：忠具款服，乃奏其事于朝，于是，大兴少尹王全解职，德亨除名。
现代文：符忠此次一五一十承认了自己的罪状，元帅府把此事上奏给朝廷，于是，大兴少尹王全被解职，张德亨被除名。
English: This time, Fuzhong confessed his guilt in 1510, and the marshal's office reported the matter to the imperial court. As a result, Daxing Shao Yin Wangquan was dismissed, and Zhang Deheng was expelled.

古文：和议始于张浚，中更洪遵、汤思退，及徒单克宁败宋魏胜于十八里庄，取楚州，世宗下诏进师，于是宋知枢密院周葵、同知枢密院事王之望书一一如约，和议始定。
现代文：宋金议和时张浚是宋第一个使者，中间替换为洪遵、汤思退，等到徒单克宁在十八里庄打败宋朝魏胜，攻取了楚州，金世宗诏令金军进军，在这种情况下宋朝枢密院周葵、同知枢密事王之望写信同意盟约，至此宋金议和才决定下来。
English: Zhang Jun was the first envoy of the Song Dynasty at the time of the Song-Jin Treaty. He was replaced by Hong Zun and Tang Siyi in the middle. It wasn't until Tu Han Kening defeated the Song Dynasty and Wei Sheng in the 18th Li Zhuang and captured Chuzhou that the Emperor of the Jin Dynasty ordered the Jin Army to march. Under these circumstances, the Privy Council of the Song Dynasty, Zhou Kui, and the privy councilor Wang Zhwang agreed to the treaty in a letter. It was only then that the Song-Jin Treaty was decided.

古文：宋遣试礼部尚书魏杞，崇信军、承宣使康湑，充通问国信使，取到宋主国书式，并国书副本，宋世为侄国，约岁币为二十万两、匹，国书仍书名再拜，不称 大 字。
现代文：宋朝派遣礼部尚书魏杞、崇信军承宜使康蔍，充通国信使，拿着宋朝君主的国家文书及其副本，上写宋世代做侄国，每年进贡二十万两银、二十万匹绢，国书上仍写着再拜，却不称 大 字。
English: The Song Dynasty dispatched the ceremonial department Shang Shu Wei Wei, the Chongxin Army succeeded the appropriate envoy Kang Shu, and the messenger of the country, holding the national document of the Song Dynasty monarch and its copy, wrote that the Song Dynasty was a nephew country, with an annual tribute of 200,000 taels of silver and 200,000 taels of horses. The national book still wrote that it was time to bow again, but it was not a big word.

古文：大定五年正月，魏杞、康湑入见，其书曰： 侄宋皇帝甗谨再拜致书于叔大金圣明仁孝皇帝阙下。 
现代文：大定五年正月魏杞、康蔍到金朝拜见，文书上写： 侄宋朝皇帝赵礨，谨再拜致文书给叔叔大金圣明仁孝皇帝阁下。 
English: In the first month of the fifth year of Dading, Wei Zheng and Kang Zheng went to pay homage to the Kim dynasty, and the document wrote: Nephew of the Song Dynasty Emperor Zhao Zheng, I would like to pay homage to the document to my uncle, the Great Kim Emperor Sheng Ming Ren Xiao.

古文：魏杞还，复书 叔大金皇帝 不名，不书 谨再拜 ，但曰 致书于侄宋皇帝 ，不用尊号，不称阙下。
现代文：魏杞回宋朝，金朝写给宋朝的文书不用 叔大金皇帝 的名字，也不写 谨再拜 ，只写 致文书给侄子宋朝皇帝 ，不用宋的尊号，不用阁下。
English: Wei Wei returned to the Song Dynasty, and the documents written by the Jin Dynasty to the Song Dynasty did not use the name of the uncle of the Jin Emperor, nor did they write "I respectfully bow again," but only wrote the documents to the nephew of the Song Dynasty Emperor, without using the honorific title of Song, without using Your Excellency.

古文：和好已定，罢兵，诏天下。
现代文：宋金和好已经定下，金朝撤兵，诏谕天下。
English: The Song and Jin dynasties have made peace, and the withdrawal of troops by the Kim dynasty has been decreed.

古文：以左副都点检完颜仲为报问国信使，太子詹事杨伯雄副之。
现代文：金任左副都点检完颜仲为报问国信使，太子詹事杨伯雄为副职。
English: Yan Zhong was appointed as the messenger to report the state, and Prince Zhan Zhi Yang Boxiong was appointed as the deputy.

古文：忠义奏官军一十七万三千三百余人，留马步军一十一万六千二百屯戍。
现代文：仆散忠义上奏皇帝政府的军队十七万三千三百多人，可以留下骑兵步兵十一万六千二百人戍边。
English: The army of the emperor's government, consisting of more than 173,300 men, was dispatched by the loyal vassal, leaving behind only 116,200 cavalry and infantry.

古文：上曰： 今已许宋讲好，而屯戍尚多，可除旧军外，选马一万二千，阿里喜称是，步军虞候司军共选一万五千，及签军一万，与旧军通留六万。
现代文：皇帝说 ：现在已和宋朝和好，留下戍边的军队还太多，可以留下原来的驻军外，再选一万二千骑兵，阿里喜很称此任，步兵虞候司军共选一万五千，及签军一万，与原来的驻军共留六万人。
English: The emperor said, "Now that we have made peace with the Song Dynasty, there are still too many troops left behind. We can leave the original garrison, and choose another twelve thousand cavalrymen. Alixi is very famous for this appointment. He chose a total of fifteen thousand infantrymen and ten thousand soldiers, leaving a total of sixty thousand with the original garrison.

古文：富强丁多者摘留，贫难者阿里喜官给，富者就用其奴。其存留马步军于河北东西、大名府、速频、胡里改、会宁、咸平府、济州、东京、曷速馆等路军内，约量拣取。
现代文：戍边留下的骑兵步兵在河北东西、大名府、速频、胡里改、会宁、咸平府、济州、东京、曷速馆等路军中适量挑选。
English: The cavalry and infantry left behind by the Lop Nur were selected in appropriate quantities from the road armies of Hebei, Dongsi, Daimyo, Kofang, Hulicai, Hoeryong, Hampyeong, Jeju, Tokyo, and Lop Nur.

古文：其西南、西北招讨司，临潢府、泰州、北京、婆速、曷懒、山东东西路，并行放还。 
现代文：其他的西南、西北招讨司，临潢府、泰州、北京、婆速、曷懒、山东东西路的军队，一并让他们回来。 
English: Other southwestern and northwestern recruiting stations, Linyi, Taizhou, Beijing, Bodao, Lazy, Shandong East-West Road troops, let them come back together.

古文：诏近侍局使裴满子宁佩金牌，护卫丑底、符宝祗候驼满回海佩银牌，谕诸路将帅，以宋国进到岁币银绢二十万两、匹，尽数给与见存留及放散军充赏。
现代文：皇帝下诏近侍局命裴满子宁佩金牌，护卫丑底、符宝祗候礥满回海佩带银牌，并诏谕各路将帅，用宋朝进贡的二十万两银、二十万匹绢，全部发给留守戍边和撤回的军队用作奖赏。
English: The Emperor issued an edict to the Board of Attendants, ordering Pei Manzi to wear a gold medal, and the guards to wear a silver medal, and ordered the generals to use the 200,000 taels of silver and 200,000 horses brought by the Song Dynasty to reward the troops who stayed behind and withdrew.

古文：押军猛安谋克年老有劳绩者，量与除授。
现代文：曾经越过边界打仗的人，每人给二匹绢、二两银，没有越过边界作战的人，每人二两银、一匹绢。阿里喜一匹绢，谋克加倍，猛安比谋克多一倍。
English: Those who had crossed the border to fight were each given two horses and two taels of silver. Those who had not crossed the border to fight were each given two taels of silver and a horse. Ali was given a horse and a tael, Mukherjee twice as much, and Mokherjee twice as much.

古文：又诏曰： 其令一路全罢者，先发遣之。 赐忠义玉束带。
现代文：监军猛安谋克年老有功的，适量奖赏。又赏赐仆散忠义玉束带。
English: The supervisor Meng'an planned to reward the old and meritorious with an appropriate amount of reward. He also rewarded the servants with the loyalty and righteousness jade belt.

古文：三月，诏曰： 如大军已放还，丞相忠义宜先还，左副元帅志宁、右监军宗叙留驻南京，余官非急用者并勒还任。 
现代文：三月，皇帝下诏说： 如果大军已经在撤退，丞相仆散忠义应撤退，左副元帅纥石烈志宁、右监军宗叙留驻南京，其余的官员不急任用的一并勒令撤退。 
English: In March, the emperor issued an edict saying: If the great army has already retreated, the prime minister's servant, San Zhongyi, should withdraw, the left deputy marshal, Zou Shi, and the right supervisor, Zong Xiu, should remain in Nanjing, and the remaining officials who are not urgently appointed should also be ordered to withdraw.

古文：忠义朝京师，上劳之曰： 宋国请和，偃兵息民，皆卿力也。 
现代文：仆散忠义到京城朝拜，皇帝慰劳他说 ：宋朝请求和解，军队休整百姓生息，都是你的力量。 
English: The emperor consoled him by saying, "The Song Dynasty's request for reconciliation, the army's rest and the people's livelihood are all your strength.

古文：拜左丞相，兼都元帅。
现代文：于是授予他为左丞相，兼都元帅。
English: As a result, he was awarded the title of Minister of the Left and Marshal of the Capital.

古文：大定初，事多权制，诏有司删定，上谓宰臣曰： 凡已奏之事，朕尝再阅，卿等毋怀惧。朕于大臣，岂有不相信者？
现代文：大定初年，皇帝对宰臣说： 凡是已经上奏的事，朕再看一次，你们不要担心害怕。朕对于大臣，岂有不相信的？
English: In the first year of the Great Schism, the emperor said to his vice-minister: "I will look again at everything that has already been reported. Don't worry or be afraid. Do I not believe the minister?

古文：但军国事，不敢轻易，恐或有误也。 
现代文：但是军国之事，不敢轻易处理，恐怕有的处理有错误。 
English: However, military affairs are not something to be handled lightly, and I'm afraid some of them have been handled incorrectly.

古文：忠义对曰： 臣等岂敢窃意陛下，但智力不及耳。
现代文：仆散忠义回答说： 我们岂敢暗地里怀疑陛下，只是智力不如您罢了。
English: Dousan Tadayoshi replied, "We would not dare to secretly doubt Your Majesty, but our intelligence is not as good as yours."

古文：陛下留神万几，天下之福也。 
现代文：陛下日理万机，是天下的福气。 
English: Your Majesty is blessed with the ability to adjust to the world.

古文：大定六年正月，忠义有疾，上遣太医诊视，赐以御用药物，中使抚问，相继于道。
现代文：大定六年正月，仆散忠义有病，皇帝派太医前去诊断，赐给他御用药物，不时派人前去问候。
English: In the first month of the sixth year of Dading, the emperor sent an eminent doctor to diagnose the illness of his servant, and gave him the royal medicine. From time to time, he sent people to greet him.

古文：二月，薨。
现代文：二月，仆散忠义死去。
English: In February, Dousan Tadayoshi died.

古文：上亲临哭之恸，辍朝奠祭，赙银千五百两、重彩五十端、绢五百匹。
现代文：皇帝亲自前去，哭的很悲痛，并停朝奠祭他，送给他一千五百两白银、五十端彩绸、五百匹绢帮助办丧事。
English: The emperor himself went there, weeping with great sorrow, and stopped the imperial offering to him, and gave him fifteen hundred taels of silver, fifty pieces of colored silk, and five hundred donkeys to help with the funeral.

古文：世宗将幸西京，复临奠焉。
现代文：金世宗将去西京，又亲自前去奠祭。
English: Kim Sejong will go to Saikyo, and will personally go to the memorial service.

古文：命参知政事唐括安礼护丧事，凡葬祭从优厚，官为给之。
现代文：皇帝命令参知政事唐括安礼护卫丧事，凡葬祭都从优办理，官府拿钱。
English: The emperor ordered the prefectural governors and political officials of the Tang Dynasty to escort the funeral. All funerals were handled with excellence, and the government took the money.

古文：大宗正丞竟充敕祭使，中都转运副使王震充敕葬使，百官送葬，具一品仪物，建大将旗鼓，送至坟域。
现代文：大宗正丞竟为充敕祭使，中都转运副使王震为充敕葬使，百官送葬，准备一品的仪节和物器，设立大将旗帜战鼓，送到坟地。
English: Daizong Zhengzheng was appointed as the funeral envoy, and Wang Zhen, the vice-envoy of Zhongdu Transshipment, was appointed as the funeral envoy. Hundreds of officials attended the funeral, prepared a variety of ceremonies and objects, set up the general's flag and war drums, and sent them to the cemetery.

古文：谥武庄。
现代文：谥号武庄。
English: His nickname is Wuzhuang.

古文：忠义动由礼义，谦以接下，敬儒士，与人极和易，侃侃如也。
现代文：仆散忠义言行很有礼节，谦虚对待手下的人，尊敬儒士，对人极和蔼，从容不迫的样子。
English: He is very courteous in his words and deeds, treats his subordinates with modesty, respects Confucianism, is extremely kind to others, and has a relaxed demeanor.

古文：善御将士，能得其死力。
现代文：他善于领导将士，将士也愿意为他出死力。
English: He is good at leading soldiers, and soldiers are willing to die for him.

古文：及为宰辅，知无不言。
现代文：等到他为宰辅，知无不言。
English: Wait until he's the assistant manager, he'll say anything.

古文：自汉、唐以来，外家多缘恩戚以致富贵，又多不克其终，未有兼任将相功名始终如忠义者。
现代文：自汉、唐以来，外姓人大多因为是皇戚而富裕显贵，多数又不能到最后，没有人兼任将帅和丞相，功利名声始终都像仆散忠义的。
English: Since the Han Dynasty and the Tang Dynasty, most people with foreign surnames have been rich and distinguished because they are imperial relatives, and most of them cannot go to the end. No one has served as commander-in-chief and prime minister at the same time.

古文：十一年，诏曰： 故左丞相忠义族人，及昭德皇后亲族，人材可用者，左副点检乌古论元忠体察以闻。 
现代文：大定十一年，皇帝下诏说 ：已故左丞相仆散忠义的同族人，及昭德皇后的亲族，有可用的人才，左副点检乌古论元忠去考察报告上来。 
English: In the eleventh year of Dading, the emperor issued an imperial edict saying, "If there are any talented people from the same ethnic group as the late Zojo (Minister of the Left), Zosan Tadayoshi, and the relatives of Empress Zhao De, they should go and investigate and report on the ancient theory of Yuanzhong.

古文：二十一年，上思忠义功，勒铭墓碑。
现代文：大定二十一年，皇帝思念仆散忠义的功劳，命令为他雕刻一块墓碑。
English: In the twenty-first year of Dading, the emperor thought about the loyal service of his servant and ordered a tombstone to be carved for him.

古文：泰和元年，图像衍庆宫，配享世宗庙廷。
现代文：泰和元年，仆散忠义的图像被画在衍庆宫，分配他享受世宗庙廷的祭祀。
English: In the first year of the Taihe era, his portrait was hung in the Yanqing Palace, and the imperial edict was displayed in the temple court of King Sejong.

古文：子揆，别有传。徒单合喜，上京速苏海水人也。
现代文：徒单合喜，是上京速苏海水人。
English: He is a member of the Beijing-based Haisu Seawater People's Association.

古文：父蒲涅，世袭猛安。
现代文：其父徒单蒲涅，世袭猛安。
English: His father, Tsuchidanpunye, inherited the family fortune.

古文：合喜魁伟，膂力过人，一经闻见，终身不忘。
现代文：徒单合喜身材魁伟，臂力过人，一听到见到某事，都终生不忘。
English: Tochan Hexi is a tall man with a powerful arm. When he hears or sees something, he will never forget it.

古文：天辅间，从金源郡王娄室为紥也，甚爱之。
现代文：天辅年间，跟从金源郡王娄室为扎也，娄室很喜欢他。
English: During the Tenshu era, he followed Wang Shishu of Jinyuan County, and the Shishu liked him very much.

古文：天会六年，以功为谋克，寻领娄室亲管猛安。
现代文：天会六年，他凭借功劳为谋克，不久统领娄室的亲管猛安。
English: After six years of heavenly reunion, he won the victory by virtue of his merits, and soon became the head of the imperial family.

古文：元帅府闻其才，命权左翼军事。
现代文：元帅府听说了他的才能，命令他暂时代理左翼军事。
English: The marshal's office heard about his talent and ordered him to temporarily act as a left-wing military.

古文：皇统二年，为陇州防御使。
现代文：皇统二年，徒单合喜任陇州防御使。
English: In the second year of imperial unification, Tushanhe Xi was appointed as the defense envoy of Zhangzhou.

古文：以兵十五人败宋兵二百于高陵，以兵五百人败宋兵二千于秦州，以兵八百人败宋兵三千五百于凤翔。
现代文：他在高陵用十五个士兵打败二百宋兵，在秦州用五百士兵打败二千宋兵，在凤翔用八百士兵打败三千五百宋兵。
English: He defeated two hundred Song soldiers with fifteen soldiers in Gaoling, two thousand Song soldiers with five hundred soldiers in Qinzhou, and three thousand five hundred Song soldiers with eight hundred soldiers in Fengxiang.

古文：以二谋克拒饶风关，宋兵二千来夺其关口，奋击败之，诸军乃得过险。
现代文：他用二谋克的力量守饶风关，二千宋兵来夺关，他奋力作战打败了宋兵，这样各路军队才得以通过关口险要。
English: He used the power of the two-pronged attack to defend the Rao Pass, and two thousand Song soldiers came to seize the pass. He fought hard and defeated the Song soldiers, so that all the armies could pass through the pass.

古文：迁平凉尹，再徙临洮、延安尹。
现代文：徒单合喜升为平凉尹，第二次调升临洮、延安尹。
English: He was promoted to Pingliangyin for the first time, and to Linyi and Yan'anyin for the second time.

古文：是时，关、陕以西，初去兵革，百姓多失业，合喜守之以静，民多还归者。
现代文：这时，关、陕以西，刚结束战争，百姓多失业，徒单合喜保卫此地使其安静，百姓大多回来了。
English: At this time, Guan, Shaanxi and the west, just after the end of the war, the people are mostly unemployed, and they are happy to defend this place and keep it quiet. Most of the people have returned.

古文：天德二年，为元帅左都监，陕西统军使。
现代文：天德二年，徒单合喜任元帅左都监，陕西统军使。
English: In the second year of Tiande, Tu Shan He Xi was appointed Marshal Zuo Duan, Shaanxi Unification Envoy.

古文：贞元二年，以本官兼河中尹。
现代文：贞元二年，在做元帅都监、陕西统军使的同时兼河中尹。
English: In the second year of Zhenyuan, while serving as marshal and inspector of the capital and envoy of the Shaanxi unified army, he also served as Kechu Yin.

古文：正隆六年，为西蜀道兵马都统。
现代文：正隆六年，任西蜀道兵马都统。
English: For six years, Zhenglong served as the head of the West Shuxi Military Region.

古文：世宗即位，以手诏赐合喜曰： 岐国失道，杀其母后，横虐兄弟，流毒兆庶。
现代文：金世宗即皇帝位，用手诏赐徒单合喜说： 岐国失道，杀其母后，横虐兄弟，涂炭百姓。
English: Kim Sejong, i.e. the emperor, used his hand to give the disciples a list of blessings, saying: "Qi Guo lost his way, killed his mother, abused his brothers, and blackened the people."

古文：朕惟太祖创业之艰难，勉膺大位。
现代文：朕考虑太祖创业的艰难，努力接受了皇位。
English: Considering the difficulties of my grandfather's business, I tried my best to accept the throne.

古文：卿之子弟皆自军中来归，卿国家旧臣，岂不知天道人事？
现代文：你的儿子弟弟都从军中来归属，你是国家的老臣，难道不知道天道人心？
English: Your sons and brothers all come from the military, and you are a veteran of the country. Don't you know the heart of the people?

古文：卿军不多，未宜深入，当领军屯境上。
现代文：你的军队不多，不宜孤军深入，应当领军防守边疆。
English: Your army is not many, it is not appropriate to go deep alone, you should lead the army to defend the frontier.

古文：陕右重地，非卿无能措画者。
现代文：陕右重地，非你不能施行规划。
English: If you don't plan, you can't execute.

古文：俟兵革既定，即当召卿，宜自勉之。 
现代文：等到战争停止后，立即召你，你应该自勉。 
English: Wait until the war is over, you will be summoned immediately. You should restrain yourself.

古文：大定二年，复为陕西路统军使。
现代文：大定二年，徒单合喜又任陕西路统军使。
English: In the second year of Dading, Tuchan Hexi was also appointed as the envoy of the Shaanxi Road Union.

古文：未几，改元帅右都监。
现代文：不久，改为元帅右都监。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to Marshal of the Right.

古文：表陈伐宋方略，诏许以便宜从事。
现代文：他上表陈述攻打宋朝的计划策略，皇帝下诏允许他灵活从事。
English: He presented the plan and strategy to attack the Song Dynasty, and the emperor issued an edict allowing him to flexibly engage in the attack.

古文：转左都监。
现代文：转为左都监。
English: He was transferred to the post of Left Metropolitan Supervisor.

古文：破宋兵于华州。
现代文：他在华州打败宋兵。
English: He defeated Song Bing in Huazhou.

古文：是时宋吴璘侵古镇，分据散关、和尚原、神叉口、玉女潭、大虫岭、石壁寨、宝鸡县，兵十余万，陷河州、镇戎军。
现代文：这时，宋朝吴瞞侵犯古镇，分别占据散关、和尚原、神叉口、玉女潭、大虫岭、石壁寨、宝鸡县等地，有十多万兵力，攻破了河州、镇戎军。
English: At this time, the Song Dynasty and the Wu Dynasty invaded the ancient town, and occupied Sanguan, Monchohara, Shenzhaikou, Yujiantan, Dashuiling, Shibeizhai, Baoji County and other places respectively, with more than 100,000 troops, and defeated the Hezhou and Zhen troops.

古文：合喜乞济师，诏以河南兵万人益之。
现代文：徒单合喜请求援兵，皇帝诏令用河南一万兵力前去增援。
English: Heki requested reinforcements, and the emperor ordered ten thousand troops from Henan Province to reinforce him.

古文：合喜遣丹州刺史赤盏胡速鲁改以兵四千守德顺，吴璘以二十万人围之。
现代文：徒单合喜派丹州刺史赤盏胡速鲁改用四千兵力守德顺，吴瞞用二十万人包围了德顺。
English: Instead of protecting Deshun with four thousand troops, Danzhou Zhishi Chakkan Hu Sauru, who was sent by Tushan Hexi, surrounded Deshun with two hundred thousand men.

古文：统军都监石抹迭勒将兵万人，破宋兵于河州，还过德顺，驻兵平凉，求益兵于合喜，以解德顺之围。
现代文：统军都监石抹迭勒率一万兵力，在河州打败宋兵，他撤军经过德顺，驻兵平凉，向徒单合喜请求增加兵力，以解德顺之围。
English: He defeated the Song soldiers in Heshou. He withdrew his army through Deshun and stationed his soldiers in Pingliang. He asked Hechi to increase his troops in order to relieve the siege of Deshun.

古文：合喜遣万户完颜习尼列、大良顺，宁州刺史颜盏门都各将本部兵，合二万人，以顺义军节度使乌延蒲离黑统押之，与迭勒会。
现代文：徒单合喜派万户完颜习尼列、大良顺、宁州刺史颜盏门都各率本部兵力，总共二万人，以顺义军节度使乌延蒲离黑统帅监督，前去与石抹迭勒会师。
English: Tushan Hexi dispatched a total of 20,000 troops from Wanhu, Guanzhong, Yanxi, Nili, Daliashun, Ningzhou, Zhishi and Yanqianmen to the headquarters of the Shunyi Army, and ordered Wu Yanpu to leave the supervision of the commander-in-chief of the Shunyi Army and go to join the division.

古文：吴璘闻之，使偏将将兵五千人来迎，前锋特里失乌也、奚王和尚击败之，追至德顺城南小溪边，璘自将大军蔽冈阜而出，乌也等驰击之，迭勒、蒲离黑继至，并力战，日已暮，两军不相辨，乃解。
现代文：吴瞞听说后，派偏将率五千兵前去迎战，金朝先锋部队特里失乌也、奚王和尚打败了他们，并追到德顺城南小溪边，这时吴瞞率领大部队从土山后边出来，特里失乌也前去进攻他，石抹迭勒、蒲离黑这时赶到，联手作战，太阳落下去了，辨不清是金军还是宋军，这时才停止战斗。
English: After Wu Xie heard about this, he sent his general to go to war with 5,000 soldiers. The vanguard troops of the Kim dynasty, the Trifu and the Wu, were defeated by the Shao Wang and the Monk, and chased them to the side of the creek south of Deshun. At this time, Wu Xie led a large army from the back of the hill. The Trifu and the Wu also went to attack him. At this time, Shi Erding and Bu Lianghe arrived and fought together. The sun went down, and it was not clear whether it was the Golden Army or the Song Army. Only then did they stop fighting.

古文：已而璘报云： 宋主遣使至，两国讲和，请各罢兵。 
现代文：不久，吴瞞通报金朝说： 宋朝君主派使臣到了，两国讲和，请各自撤兵。 
English: Soon after, Wu Zhe informed the Kim dynasty, saying: The Song dynasty monarchist envoys have arrived, the two countries are at peace, please withdraw your troops.

古文：璘遂遁去。
现代文：吴瞞军于是撤走。
English: The Wu army then withdrew.

古文：蒲离黑亦引军还。
现代文：蒲离黑军也撤退了。
English: The Puyi Black Army also retreated.

古文：自宋兵围城，至是凡四十余日乃解。
现代文：自宋兵围德顺城，至此四十多天才解围。
English: Since the Song Dynasty soldiers besieged Deshun City, it has taken more than forty days to lift the siege.

古文：初，德顺在围中，押军猛安温敦蒲里海身先士卒，力战未尝少挫，及救兵至，围解，蒲里海之功为多。
现代文：始初，德顺城被包围之时，押军猛安温敦蒲里海身先士卒，奋力作战很少折兵损将，等救兵到达解围后，温敦蒲里海的功劳最多。
English: At the beginning, when Deshun was besieged, Wyndon Buri Hai was the first to lead the rushing army, fighting hard and rarely losing soldiers. After the rescuers arrived to relieve the siege, Wyndon Buri Hai had the most merit.

古文：顷之，吴璘复来犯陕西州郡，兵十余万。
现代文：不久，宋朝吴瞞又来侵犯陕西的州郡，带十多万军队。
English: Soon after, the Song Dynasty and the Wu Dynasty invaded the prefectures and counties of Shaanxi with more than 100,000 troops.

古文：诏以兵七千益合喜兵，号二万人，庆阳尹乌延蒲辖奴、延安尹高景山分领之。
现代文：皇帝诏令用七千兵力去增援徒单合喜，号称二万人，分别让庆阳尹乌延蒲辖奴、延安尹高景山率领。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict to use seven thousand troops to reinforce the followers of Hapi, known as twenty thousand, led by Qingyang Yin Wu Yanbu and Yan'an Yin Gao Jingshan respectively.

古文：彰化军节度使璋、通远军节度使乌延吾里补、宁州刺史移剌高山奴、京兆少尹宗室泥河、恩州刺史完颜谋良虎，皆备军前任使。
现代文：彰化军节度使完颜璋、通远军节度使乌延吾里补、宁州刺史移刺高山奴、京兆少尹宗室泥河、恩州刺史完颜谋良虎，都准备军队前去。
English: Changhua's military festival has completed the painting, Tongyuan's military festival has completed the painting of Wu Yanwuri, Ningzhou's military festival has completed the painting of Gaoshan Niu, Beijing's military festival has completed the painting of Xiaoyin Zongshu Dihe, and Enzhou's military festival has completed the painting of Mu Lianghu, all of which are ready for the army to go.

古文：宋人驱率商、虢及华山、南山之民五万人，来围华州。
现代文：宋朝人驱使率领商、虢及华山、南山的百姓五万人，来围攻华州。
English: The Song Dynasty drove 50,000 people, led by merchants, eunuchs, and people from Huashan and Nanshan, to besiege Huazhou.

古文：押军万户裴满挼剌欲坚壁守之，猛安移剌沙里剌曰： 宋兵虽多，半是居民，不习战，不如击之。 
现代文：押军万户裴满扌妥刺想坚壁守城，猛安移刺沙里刺说： 宋兵虽多，但一半是百姓，他们不熟悉如何打仗，不如去攻击他们。 
English: Pei Manchu, who wanted to defend the city, said: Although there are many Song soldiers, half of them are civilians. They don't know how to fight, so it's better to attack them.

古文：于是挼剌以骑兵千人败宋前锋，追至其大军，亦败之，斩首五千余级。
现代文：于是裴满扌妥刺率一千骑兵打败了宋军的先锋部队，追击到宋军的大部队，也打败了他们，杀五千多人。
English: Therefore, Pei Manchu defeated the vanguard force of the Song Army with a thousand cavalry, pursued the large force of the Song Army, and also defeated them, killing more than five thousand people.

古文：已而，璋败宋姚良辅军于原州，宋戍军自宝鸡以西，至于大虫岭，皆自散关遁去。
现代文：不久，完颜璋在原州打败宋朝的姚良辅军，宋朝从宝鸡以西，到大虫岭的戍边部队，都从散关逃去。
English: Soon after, Yan Xuan defeated the Song Dynasty's Yao Liangyu Army in Yuanzhou. The Song Dynasty's border troops from Baoji in the west to Dashuiling in the east all fled from Sankuan.

古文：顷之，吴璘闻赤盏胡速鲁改、乌延蒲里黑军已去德顺，率兵号二十万，复据德顺，陷巩州、临洮府。
现代文：不久以后，吴瞞听说赤盏胡速鲁改、乌延蒲里黑军队已经离开德顺，他率领号称二十万人的军队，又占据了德顺，攻陷了巩州、临洮府。
English: Not long after, Wu Xie heard that the Red Army of Hu Shihlu and Wu Yan Buri had left Deshun. He led an army of 200,000 men, occupied Deshun, and captured Gongzhou and Linyi.

古文：临洮少尹纥石烈骚洽死之，诏赠官一阶，赐钱五百贯。
现代文：临洮少尹纥石烈骚洽战死，皇帝下诏赠他一级官，赏赐五百贯钱。
English: Linyi Shosho Yinqin Shi Rongchao died in the battle. The emperor gave him a first-class official and rewarded him with five hundred crowns.

古文：合喜以璋权都统，习尼列权副统，将兵二万攻之。
现代文：徒单合喜任命完颜璋暂时做都统，习尼烈暂时任副统，率二万兵力去攻打吴瞞宋军。
English: After appointing Yan Xuan as the provisional leader of the Central Government, Xi Nili as the provisional vice-leader of the Central Government, he led twenty thousand troops to attack the Wu Xie Song Army.

古文：连战，宋兵虽败，璘恃其众，不肯去，分其兵之半，守秦州。
现代文：连续作战，宋兵虽然被打败，但吴瞞仗恃兵多，不肯离去，并分一半的兵力去守秦州。
English: In the continuous war, although Song soldiers were defeated, Wu concealed the fact that he had more soldiers, refused to leave, and sent half of his troops to defend Qinzhou.

古文：合喜乃自行，驻水洛城，东自六盘山，西抵石山头，分兵守之，当德顺、秦州之两间，断其饷道，璘乃引去。
现代文：徒单合喜于是自己前行，驻军水洛城，东自六磐山，西到石山头，分兵守卫，阻挡住德顺、秦州之间的道路，断绝宋军的军饷路，吴瞞于是撤兵而去。
English: Tushan and Hexi then marched ahead on their own. They garrisoned Shuilocheng, from Liupanshan in the east to Shishantou in the west, guarding the road between Deshun and Qinzhou, and cutting off the Song army's supply route. Wu Xie then withdrew his troops.

古文：都统璋、副统习尼列邀击宋经略使荆皋，自上八节至甘谷城，杀数千人。
现代文：都统完颜彰、副统习尼列阻击宋朝经略使荆皋，从上八节到甘谷城，杀了宋几千人。
English: Du Tong Xuan Yan Zhang, deputy leader Xi Ni Lie blocked the Song Dynasty's attempt to overthrow the Qing Dynasty, and went to Gan Gu City from the 8th day of the 7th month, killing several thousand people in the Song Dynasty.

古文：习尼列擒宋将朱永以下将校十二人。
现代文：习尼列擒捕了宋将朱永以及手下将校总共十二人。
English: Xi Jinping arrested Song general Zhu Yong and a total of twelve of his officers.

古文：宋张安抚守德顺，亦弃城遁，胡速鲁改邀击之，所杀过半，擒将校十余人，遂复德顺州。
现代文：宋朝张安抚守德顺，也弃城而逃，胡速鲁改阻击他，杀了他一半人，并擒捕了十多个将校军官，于是收复了德顺州。
English: During the Song Dynasty, Zhang Anfu guarded Deshun, but also abandoned the city and fled. Hu Shiluo blocked him, killed half of his men, and captured more than ten officers, thus recovering Deshun Prefecture.

古文：宋之守秦州者，亦自退。
现代文：宋朝守卫秦州的人，也自己撤退走。
English: The Song Dynasty's defenders of Qinzhou also withdrew on their own.

古文：高景山定商、虢，宗室泥河取环州。
现代文：高景山平定了商、虢两地，宗室完颜泥河攻下了环州。
English: Gao Jingshan leveled the two places of Shang and Zou, and Zoshu finished Yan Dihe and conquered Huanzhou.

古文：于是，临洮、巩、秦、河、陇、兰、会、原、洮、积石、镇戎、德顺、商、虢、环、华等州府一十六尽复之，陕西平。
现代文：于是，临洮、巩、秦、河、陇、兰、会、原、洮、积石、镇戎、德顺、商、虢、环、华等十六个州府都收复了，陕西被平定。
English: As a result, 16 prefectures including Linyi, Gong, Qin, He, Handan, Lan, He, Yuan, Handan, Zhishan, Zhen Rong, Deshun, Shang, Handan, Huan, and Hua were recovered, and Shaanxi was pacified.

古文：诏书奖谕，赐以玉带。
现代文：皇帝诏书奖励，赏赐给徒单合喜玉带。
English: Emperor's edict award, awarded to Tu Shan He Xi Yuping.

古文：诏陕西将士，猛安，阶昭毅以下迁两资，昭武以上迁一资。
现代文：下诏陕西将士，猛安，官阶在昭毅以下的晋升两级官禄，官阶昭武以上的晋升一级官禄。
English: In the following edict, Shaanxi soldiers, Meng'an, with ranks lower than that of Zhao Yi, were promoted to two-level ranks, and those with ranks higher than that of Zhao Wu were promoted to one-level ranks.

古文：谋克，阶六品以下迁两资，五品以上迁一资。
现代文：谋克，官阶在六品以下的晋升两级官禄，五品以上的晋升一级官禄。
English: According to the plan, officials below the sixth grade will be promoted to the second grade, and those above the fifth grade will be promoted to the first grade.

古文：押军猛安，阶昭武以上者迁一资，昭毅以下、武义以上迁两资，昭信以下，女直人迁宣武，余人迁奉信，无官者，女直人授敦信，余人授忠武。
现代文：押军猛安，官阶在昭武以上的晋升一级官禄，昭毅以下、武义以上的晋升两级官禄，昭信以下的，女真人升为宣武，其余的人升为承信，没官职的，女真人授予昭信，其余的人授予忠武。
English: When the army was in a strong position, those with a rank higher than Shouwu were promoted to the first rank, those with a rank lower than Shouyi were promoted to the second rank, those with a rank higher than Wuyi were promoted to the third rank, those with a rank lower than Shoushin were promoted to Xuanwu, those with a rank lower than Shoushin were promoted to Shoushin, those without a rank were promoted to Shoushin, those with a rank lower than Shoushin were promoted to Shoushin, and those without a rank were promoted to Shoushin.

古文：押军谋克，武功以下、忠显以上迁两资，忠勇以下，女直人迁昭信，余人迁忠显，无官者，女直人授忠显，余人授忠翊。
现代文：押军谋克，武功以下、忠显以上晋升两级官禄，忠勇以下，女真人升为昭信，其余的人升忠显，没有官职的，女真人授予忠显，其余的人授予忠翊。
English: To encourage troops to fight bravely, those with military merit or less, and those with loyalty and valor or more, were promoted to two-level official ranks; those with loyalty and valor or less, were promoted to Shoshin, and the rest were promoted to loyalty and valor; those without official positions were awarded to loyalty and valor, and the rest were awarded to loyalty and valor.

古文：正军，有官者迁一资，无官者授两资。
现代文：正军，有官职的人晋升一级官禄，没官职的人给两级官禄。
English: In the regular army, those with official positions were promoted to first-level official ranks, and those without official positions were given two-level official ranks.

古文：猛安赏银五十两、重彩五端、绢十匹，权、正同之。
现代文：猛安赏五十两银、五端彩绸、十匹绢，暂代官同正式的相同。
English: Meng'an was awarded fifty taels of silver, five ends of colored silk, and ten horses. The provisional post was the same as the official one.

古文：正军人给钱三十贯，阿里喜十贯。
现代文：正军人给三十贯，阿里喜给十贯钱。
English: The regular soldiers gave him 30 yuan, while Ali Xi gave him 10 yuan.

古文：战没军官、军士、长行，赠官赐钱有差。
现代文：战死的军官、军士、长行，分不同等级赠官赐钱。
English: Officers, sergeants, and non-commissioned officers who died in battle were awarded money according to their rank.

古文：五年，置陕西路统军使，兼京兆尹。
现代文：大定五年，金朝设置陕西路统军使，徒单合喜任统军使兼京兆尹。
English: In the fifth year of Dading, the Kim dynasty set up the Shaanxi Road Unification Envoy, and Tochan He Xi served as the Unification Envoy and Jing Zhaoyun.

古文：元帅府移治河中府。
现代文：元帅府移管河中府。
English: The field marshal's office was transferred to Kawanaka-fu.

古文：统军使璋朝辞，上曰： 合喜年老，以陕西军事委卿，凡镇防利害，可访问合喜也。 
现代文：统军使完颜璋朝拜辞别，皇帝说： 徒单合喜年纪大了，把陕西军事委托给你，凡是镇守上的事，可以请教徒单合喜。 
English: At the end of Yan Xun's farewell speech, the emperor said: "I am old enough to entrust the military affairs of Shaanxi to you. In all matters concerning the defense of the town, you can ask the believers to entrust the military affairs to you.

古文：七年，入为枢密副使，改东京留守，赐以衣带、佩刀，诏曰： 卿年老，以此职优佚，宜勉之。 
现代文：大定七年，徒单合喜进朝任枢密副使，改任东京留守，皇帝赏赐给他衣服玉带、佩刀，并告知他说 ；你年纪大，用这样的职务来优待你，使你安逸，你应自勉。 
English: In the seventh year of Dading, Tushan Hegi Jin was appointed as a Privy Vice-Envoy to the Imperial Court, and was assigned to stay in Tokyo. The emperor gave him clothes, a jade belt, and a sword, and told him, "You are old, use this position to treat you well, make you comfortable, and you should be self-disciplined."

古文：九年，入为平章政事，奏睿宗收复陕西功数事，上嘉纳之，藏之秘府。
现代文：大定九年，入朝为平章政事，上奏睿宗收复陕西的战功几件事，皇帝高兴地接受了，并把它藏在秘府。
English: In the ninth year of Dading, the emperor was pleased to receive several items of the war exploits of Shang Song Ruizong in the recovery of Shaanxi, which was a political matter for Pingzhang when he entered the imperial court, and he hid them in the secret palace.

古文：封定国公。
现代文：徒单合喜被封为定国公。
English: Tushan Hexi was made the ruler of Dingguo.

古文：十一年，薨。
现代文：大定十一年，徒单合喜死去。
English: In the eleventh year of Dading, Tushan Heki passed away.

古文：上方击球，闻讣遂罢。
现代文：当时皇帝正在打球，听到讣告后就停止了。
English: The emperor was playing golf at the time and stopped after hearing the obituary.

古文：有司致祭，备礼以葬。
现代文：有司前去祭奠，准备礼品安葬。
English: A priest went to pay his respects and prepare gifts for the burial.

古文：赙银一千二百五十两及重彩币帛。
现代文：官府送给他家一千二百五十两白银及彩绸钱帛等帮助他家办丧事。
English: The government gave his family one thousand two hundred and fifty-two pieces of silver and colored silk money bags to help his family deal with the funeral.

古文：二十一年，上念其功，迁其孙三合武功将军，授世袭本猛安曷懒若窟申谋克。
现代文：大定二十一年，皇帝思念他的功劳，提拔他的孙子徒单三合为武功将军，授世袭本猛安曷懒若窟申为谋克。
English: In the twenty-first year of Dading, the emperor thought about his merits, promoted his grandson, Tushan Sanhe, to general of martial arts, and conferred the hereditary title of "Mammoth, Peace, Laziness, and Death" on him.

古文：泰和元年，配享世宗庙廷。
现代文：泰和元年，徒单合喜配享世宗庙廷祭祀。
English: In the first year of the Taihe era, the Tang Anli ceremony was combined with the Shosei Sect temple and court rituals.

