古文：孙子曰： 若欲知兵之情，弩矢其法也。
现代文：孙膑说：如果想要明白用兵之道，去体会弩弓发射的道理就行了。
English: Sun Yat-sen said: If you want to understand the way of using soldiers, it is enough to understand the principle of firing a crossbow.

古文：矢，卒也。弩，将也。
现代文：箭就好比士兵，弩弓就如将领，用弩弓射箭的人就是君王。
English: An arrow is like a soldier, a bow is like a general, and he who shoots an arrow with a bow is a king.

古文：发者，主也。矢，金在前，羽在后，故犀而善走。前今治卒则后重而前轻，阵之则辨，趣之敌则不听，人治卒不法矢也。
现代文：箭的结构是金属箭头在前，羽毛箭翎在后，所以箭能锐利、迅速并且射得远，现今用兵却是后重而前轻，这样用兵布阵，只能造成混乱，而去攻打敌军则会调动不灵，问题就在用兵的人不去效法射箭的道理。
English: The structure of the arrow is that the metal arrowhead is in front, and the feather arrowhead is behind, so the arrow can be sharp, fast and shoot far. Nowadays, the use of soldiers is heavy behind and light in front. Such a deployment of soldiers can only cause confusion, and it will not be effective to attack the enemy. The problem is that the person who uses soldiers does not follow the principle of archery.

古文：弩者，将也。
现代文：弩弓就好比是将领。
English: A bow and arrow is like a general.

古文：弩张柄不正，偏强偏弱而不和，其两洋之送矢也不壹，矢虽轻重得，前后适，犹不中将之用心不和得，犹不胜敌也。
现代文：开弓射箭时，弓把没有摆正，用力过强或过弱不能及时察觉，弓两端发箭的力量就不一致，即使箭头和箭尾的轻重是合适的，前后顺序也没有颠倒，还是不能射中目标。这个道理在用兵中也是一样，尽管士兵配置得当，但将领不和，仍然不能战胜敌军。
English: When opening a bow and shooting an arrow, the handle of the bow is not placed correctly, the force is too strong or too weak to be detected in time, the strength of the arrows fired from both ends of the bow is not consistent, even if the weight of the arrowhead and the arrowhead is appropriate, the order is not reversed, still can not hit the target. This principle is the same in the use of soldiers, although the soldiers are properly arranged, but the generals are not at peace, still can not defeat the enemy.

古文：矢轻重得，前适，而弩张正，其送矢壹，发者非也，犹不中招也。
现代文：如果箭头和箭尾的轻重得宜，前后顺序也正确，同时开弓时也把得很正，整张弓的发射力量也协调一致，但是射箭的人不得要领，不能正确发射，也还是不能射中目标。
English: If the weight of the arrowheads and arrow tails is appropriate, the sequence is correct, and the opening of the bow is also very correct, and the firing power of the whole bow is coordinated, but the archer is not essential, can not fire correctly, and still can not hit the target.

古文：卒轻重得，前兵犹不胜敌也。故曰，弩之中彀合于四，兵有功将也，卒也，□也，故曰，兵胜敌也，不异于弩之中招也。
现代文：这就好比用兵时，士兵配五得当，将领也协力同心，而君王却不能正确使用这支军队，那也照样不能战胜敌军。所以说，箭射中目标的条件是箭、弩弓、射箭人和目标四项全都符合要求，而军队要战胜敌军，也必须士兵配五得当，将领之间同心协力，君王能正确使用军队。
English: This is just like in the case of using soldiers, the soldiers should be well matched and the generals should make concerted efforts, but if the king cannot use the army correctly, he will not be able to defeat the enemy army. Therefore, the condition for the target to be hit by the arrow is that the arrow, the bow and arrow, the archer and the target all meet the requirements, and for the army to defeat the enemy army, the soldiers must also be well matched and the generals should make concerted efforts, and the king should be able to use the army correctly.

古文：此兵之道也。所循以成道，知其道者，兵有功，主有名。
现代文：由此可见，用兵战胜敌军，和用箭射中目标没有任何不同。
English: It can be seen that defeating the enemy with soldiers is no different from hitting the target with arrows.

