古文：郑桓公友者，周厉王少子而宣王庶弟也。
现代文：郑桓公友是周厉王的小儿子，周宣王的弟弟。
English: Zheng Huan Gongyou was the youngest son of King Zhou Li and the younger brother of King Zhou Xuan.

古文：宣王立二十二年，友初封于郑。
现代文：宣王即位二十二年，友才被封到郑地。
English: In the 22nd year of King Xuan's reign, Youcai was sent to Zheng.

古文：封三十三岁，百姓皆便爱之。
现代文：封了三十三年，百姓都喜爱他。
English: After thirty-three years of imprisonment, the people all loved him.

古文：幽王以为司徒。
现代文：幽王任命他为司徒。
English: Yu Wang appointed him as a tutor.

古文：和集周民，周民皆说，河雒之间，人便思之。
现代文：他使周朝百姓和睦相处，百姓都十分高兴，黄河、洛水流域的人们都思念他。
English: He made the people of the Zhou Dynasty live in harmony. The people were very happy. People in the Yellow River and Luoshui River basins all miss him.

古文：为司徒一岁，幽王以襃后故，王室治多邪，诸侯或畔之。於是桓公问太史伯曰： 王室多故，予安逃死乎？ 
现代文：在他做司徒一年的时候，因为幽王宠爱褒姒，朝迁政事废弃不顾，问题积重难返，有些诸侯背叛了幽王，于是桓公询问太史伯说： 王室灾难深重，我怎么才能死里逃生呢？ 
English: When he had been a steward for a year, because Yue Wang loved Baodi, the imperial reshuffle abandoned political affairs, and the problems piled up, some princes betrayed Yue Wang, so Huan Gong asked Taishi Bo: The royal family is in deep trouble, how can I escape death?

古文：太史伯对曰： 独雒之东土，河济之南可居。 
现代文：太史伯回答说： 只有洛水东、黄河南可以安居。 
English: Taishi Bo replied, "Only those east of Luoshui and south of the Yellow River can live safely."

古文：公曰： 何以？ 
现代文：桓公问： 为什么？ 
English: Kan Gong asked: Why?

古文：对曰： 地近虢、郐，虢、郐之君贪而好利，百姓不附。
现代文：太史伯回答说： 那一带邻近虢国、郐国、虢国、郐国的国君既贪婪又喜好占小便宜，百姓不顺从他们。
English: Taishi replied, "The rulers of the neighboring countries, such as Shan, Shan, Shan, Shan, are greedy and like to take advantage of others, and the people do not obey them.

古文：今公为司徒，民皆爱公，公诚请居之，虢、郐之君见公方用事，轻分公地。
现代文：现在，您是司徒，百姓都热爱您，您如真的请求住在那一带，虢国、郐国国君看到您正当权，会很容易地分给您土地。
English: Now that you are a citizen of Szczecin, the people all love you, and if you really request to live in that area, the country and the ruler of the country will see your legitimate right and will easily give you land.

古文：公诚居之，虢、郐之民皆公之民也。 公曰： 吾欲南之江上，何如？ 
现代文：您如真的住在那一带，虢国、郐国的百姓都是您的百姓了。 桓公： 我想到南边的长江流域住，怎么样？ 
English: If you really live in that area, then the people of Min Guo and Min Guo are your people.Han Gong: I want to live in the Yangtze River basin in the south, how about it?

古文：对曰： 昔祝融为高辛氏火正，其功大矣，而其於周未有兴者，楚其後也。
现代文：太史回答说： 过去祝融替高辛氏掌管火，功劳甚大，但他的后代在周朝也没有兴盛起来，楚国就是他的后代。
English: Taishi replied: In the past, Zhu Rong was in charge of the fire for Gao Xin, and he did a great deal of work, but his descendants did not prosper in the Zhou Dynasty, and the State of Chu was his offspring.

古文：周衰，楚必兴。
现代文：周王室衰弱，楚国一定兴盛。
English: If the Zhou royal family is weak, the state of Chu will surely prosper.

古文：兴，非郑之利也。 
现代文：楚国如果兴盛，对郑国绝对没有好处。 
English: If the state of Chu prospers, it will be of absolutely no benefit to the state of Zheng.

古文：公曰： 吾欲居西方，何如？ 
现代文：桓公说； 我想住在西方，怎么样？ 
English: I want to live in the West, how about it?

古文：对曰： 其民贪而好利，难久居。 
现代文：太史伯回答说： 那里的百姓既贪婪又好利，难以久居。 
English: Taishi replied, "The people there are greedy and avaricious, and it is difficult to stay there for a long time.

古文：公曰： 周衰，何国兴者？ 
现代文：桓公说： 周王室衰弱，哪国将兴盛呢？ 
English: Prince Kan said, "If the Zhou royal family weakens, which country will prosper?"

古文：对曰： 齐、秦、晋、楚乎？
现代文：太史伯回答说： 齐、秦、晋、楚吧？
English: Taishi Bo replied: Qi, Qin, Jin, Chu, right?

古文：夫齐，姜姓，伯夷之後也，伯夷佐尧典礼。
现代文：齐国，姓姜，是伯夷的后代，伯夷曾辅助尧掌管仪制度。
English: Qi Guo, surnamed Jiang, was a descendant of Bo Yi, who had assisted in the establishment of the imperial system.

古文：秦，嬴姓，伯翳之後也，伯翳佐舜怀柔百物。
现代文：秦国，姓嬴，是伯翳的后代，伯翳曾辅助舜使很多部落顺服。
English: Qin, surnamed Zou, was a descendant of Bo Zou, who assisted Zou in subjugating many tribes.

古文：及楚之先，皆尝有功於天下。
现代文：至于楚国祖先，也都曾为天下人建立了功业。
English: As for the ancestors of the State of Chu, they also established great achievements for the people of the world.

古文：而周武王克纣後，成王封叔虞于唐，其地阻险，以此有德与周衰并，亦必兴矣。 桓公曰： 善。 
现代文：周武王战胜纣王后，成王把唐封给叔虞，那里山川险阻，凭这些有德的后代与衰弱的周室并存，晋国也一定能兴盛了。 桓公说： 好吧。 
English: King Zhou Wu defeated Queen Zou, and Cheng Wang gave the Tang Dynasty to his uncle Zhou, where mountains and rivers were dangerous. With these virtuous descendants coexisting with the weak Zhou family, Jin Province would surely prosper. Huan Gong said: Okay.

古文：於是卒言王，东徙其民雒东，而虢、郐果献十邑，竟国之。
现代文：于是急速向幽王请示，把他的百姓迁移到洛水东部，虢、郐国国君果然向他贡献出十座城邑，他终于建立了郑国。
English: Therefore, he quickly asked Yu Wang for permission to relocate his people to the eastern part of Luoshui. The sovereigns of the two countries actually offered him ten cities, and he finally established Zheng.

古文：二岁，犬戎杀幽王於骊山下，并杀桓公。
现代文：二年，犬戎在骊山下杀死了幽王，也杀死了桓公。
English: Two years later, Injun Rong killed King Yoo and King Kan at the foot of Lushan Mountain.

古文：郑人共立其子掘突，是为武公。
现代文：郑人拥立桓公的儿子掘突，这是武公。
English: Zheng supported the son of Emperor Kan, Houttu, who became Emperor Wu.

古文：武公十年，娶申侯女为夫人，曰武姜。
现代文：武公于十年，娶了申侯的女儿做夫人，叫武姜。
English: In the tenth year of King Wu's reign, he married Shen Hou's daughter, Wu Jiang.

古文：生太子寤生，生之难，及生，夫人弗爱。
现代文：武姜生下太子寤生，生时是难产，等到生下后，夫人不喜欢寤生。
English: When Wu Jiang gave birth to the prince's twins, it was difficult to give birth. After the birth, his wife did not like the twins.

古文：後生少子叔段，段生易，夫人爱之。
现代文：后来武姜又生下小儿子叔段，生段时是顺产，夫人十分喜爱叔段。
English: Later, Wujiang gave birth to the youngest son, Shuang Duan. It was a normal delivery, and his wife loved Shuang Duan very much.

古文：二十七年，武公疾。夫人请公，欲立段为太子，公弗听。
现代文：二十七年，武公生病了，夫人向武公请求，想立段为太子，武公未答应。
English: In the 27th year, Prince Wu fell ill. His wife asked Prince Wu to make Duan the crown prince, but Prince Wu did not agree.

古文：是岁，武公卒，寤生立，是为庄公。
现代文：当年，武公逝世了，寤生即位，这是庄公。
English: In that year, King Wu passed away, and his son ascended the throne. This was King Zhuang.

古文：庄公元年，封弟段於京，号太叔。
现代文：庄公于元年，把他的弟弟叔段封到京城，号称太叔。
English: In the first year of the year, Zhuang Gong sent his younger brother, Duan Xiu, to the capital. He was known as "Uncle Yu."

古文：祭仲曰： 京大於国，非所以封庶也。 
现代文：祭仲说： 京城大于国都，不可以封给弟弟。 
English: Said Saichu: The capital is greater than the national capital, and it is not permissible to give it to a younger brother.

古文：庄公曰： 武姜欲之，我弗敢夺也。 
现代文：庄公说： 武姜想这样，我不敢反对。 
English: Zhuang Gong said, "If Wu Jiang wants to do this, I dare not oppose it.

古文：段至京，缮治甲兵，与其母武姜谋袭郑。
现代文：叔段到了京，整顿军备，与他的母亲武姜阴谋袭击郑都。
English: Uncle Duan arrived in Beijing, reorganized the armament, and plotted with his mother Wu Jiang to attack Zhengdu.

古文：二十二年，段果袭郑，武姜为内应。
现代文：二十二年，叔段果然袭击了郑都，武姜做内应。
English: Twenty-two years later, Uncle Du indeed attacked Zhengdu, and Wujiang responded in kind.

古文：庄公发兵伐段，段走。伐京，京人畔段，段出走鄢。
现代文：庄公派军攻打叔段，段逃跑公又攻打京城，京城的人们都背叛了叔段，叔段面对无奈逃跑到鄢。
English: Zhuang Gong sent an army to attack Uncle Duan, but Duan fled and attacked the capital. The people of the capital betrayed Uncle Duan, and Uncle Duan had no choice but to flee to Handan.

古文：鄢溃，段出奔共。
现代文：鄢邑的百姓溃逃了。叔段不得已逃亡到共国。
English: The people of Zouyun fled. Uncle Duan had no choice but to flee to the mainland.

古文：於是庄公迁其母武姜於城颍，誓言曰： 不至黄泉，毋相见也。 
现代文：于是庄公把他的母亲武姜迁徙到城颍，发誓说： 不到黄泉，不与她见面。 
English: So Zhuang Gong moved his mother, Wujiang, to the citadel, vowing that he would not see her again until he went to the underworld.

古文：居岁馀，已悔思母。
现代文：过了一年多，庄公又后悔自己说过的话，很想念母亲。
English: After more than a year, Zhuang Gong regretted what he had said and missed his mother very much.

古文：颍谷之考叔有献於公，公赐食。
现代文：颍谷的考叔向庄公献礼，庄公赐给她食物。
English: Shibuya's Kousuke presents a gift to Shogun, who gives her some food.

古文：考叔曰： 臣有母，请君食赐臣母。 
现代文：考叔说： 我有老母，请您把食物赐给我的母亲吧。 
English: Uncle Kao said, "I have an old mother. Please give the food to my mother."

古文：庄公曰： 我甚思母，恶负盟，柰何？ 
现代文：庄公说： 我很思念我的母亲，但又厌恶违背誓言，怎么办呢？ 
English: Zhuang said, "I miss my mother very much, but I hate to break my oath. What should I do?"

古文：考叔曰： 穿地至黄泉，则相见矣。 
现代文：考叔说： 控条地道到有泉水处，你们母子就可见面了。 
English: Uncle Kao said, "You can meet your mother and son when you go through the control bar to the spring water.

古文：於是遂从之，见母。
现代文：于是庄公依照他的办法，终于见到母亲。
English: As a result, Zhuang Gong finally saw his mother according to his plan.

古文：二十四年，宋缪公卒，公子冯奔郑。
现代文：二十四年，宋缪公逝世，公子冯逃到郑国。
English: Twenty-four years later, Song Miao died, and his son Feng fled to Zheng.

古文：郑侵周地，取禾。
现代文：郑国侵夺周室田地，攫取了田里的庄稼。
English: Zheng invaded the fields of Zhumuro and seized the crops in the fields.

古文：二十五年，卫州吁弑其君桓公自立，与宋伐郑，以冯故也。
现代文：二十五年，卫国州吁杀死了自己的国君桓公即位，与宋国联合讨伐郑国，因为郑国接纳了公子冯的缘故。
English: In the 25th year of the reign of Emperor Wei, Emperor Zhou Xu killed his own sovereign, Emperor Huan, who had just ascended to the throne, and together with Emperor Song, they jointly attacked Emperor Zheng, because Emperor Zheng accepted Prince Feng.

古文：二十七年，始朝周桓王。桓王怒其取禾，弗礼也。
现代文：二十七年，郑君才朝拜周桓王，桓王对郑攫取庄稼一事很生气，没有按礼仪对待他。
English: In the 27th year, Zheng Jun only paid homage to King Zhou Huan. King Huan was very angry with Zheng Jun for taking crops and did not treat him according to etiquette.

古文：二十九年，庄公怒周弗礼，与鲁易祊、许田。
现代文：二十九年，庄公生气周桓王没有礼遇自己，故意用祊与鲁国交换了靠近许国的鲁国的田地。
English: In the 29th year, Zhuang Gong was angry that King Zhou Huan did not treat him with courtesy, and he deliberately exchanged the fields of Lu Province, which was close to Xu Province, with Lu Province.

古文：三十三年，宋杀孔父。
现代文：三十三年宋国杀死了孔父。
English: Thirty-three years ago, Song killed Confucius.

古文：三十七年，庄公不朝周，周桓王率陈、蔡、虢、卫伐郑。
现代文：三十七年，庄公不朝拜周桓王，桓王率领陈、蔡、虢、卫国讨伐郑国。
English: In the 37th year, King Zhuang did not pay homage to King Zhou Huan, and King Huan led Chen, Cai, Yao, and Wei to invade Zheng.

古文：庄公与祭仲、高渠弥发兵自救，王师大败。祝聸射中王臂。
现代文：庄公和祭仲、高渠弥出兵迎击，大败桓王的军队，祝聸射中了桓王的手臂。
English: Zhuang Gong, Saizhong and Gao Juya sent troops to meet the attack, defeating King Kan's army, and Zhu Yao shot King Kan's arm.

古文：祝聸请从之，郑伯止之，曰： 犯长且难之，况敢陵天子乎？ 
现代文：祝聸请求继续追击桓王，郑庄公阻止他说： 侵犯长者尚且要遭到责难，何况欺辱天子呢？ 
English: Zhu Xi asked him to continue pursuing King Huan, but Zheng Zhuanggong stopped him, saying, "Violating the elders is reprehensible, but what about insulting the Son of Heaven?

古文：乃止。
现代文：于是祝聸才停止追击。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：夜令祭仲问王疾。
现代文：庄公深夜派祭仲询问桓王的箭伤。
English: Late in the night, Zhuang Gong sent a messenger to inquire about King Kan's arrow wound.

古文：三十八年，北戎伐齐，齐使求救，郑遣太子忽将兵救齐。
现代文：三十八年，北戎讨伐齐国，齐国派使者向郑国求援，郑国派太子忽领军救援齐国。
English: In the 38th year, the Northern Army fought against the State of Qi, the State of Qi sent an envoy to the State of Zheng to ask for help, and the State of Zheng sent Prince Hu to lead the army to rescue the State of Qi.

古文：齐釐公欲妻之，忽谢曰： 我小国，非齐敌也。 
现代文：齐公想把女儿嫁给太子忽。忽辞谢说： 我国是个小国，不宜和齐大国相匹配。 
English: Qigong wanted to marry his daughter to Prince Qiu. Qigong said: Our country is a small country, it is not suitable to match with the big countries of Qi.

古文：时祭仲与俱，劝使取之，曰： 君多内宠，太子无大援将不立，三公子皆君也。 
现代文：当时，祭仲与太子在一起，规劝太子答应娶亲，说： 我们郑国国君有很多宠爱的姬妾，太子得不到太国的援助将不能即位，三位公子都可以成为国君。 
English: At that time, Saizhong was with the prince and persuaded the prince to agree to marry, saying: We, Zheng Guo Guo Jun, have many favorite concubines. If the prince does not receive the assistance of the great country, he will not be able to ascend the throne. All three princes can become the king.

古文：所谓三公子者，太子忽，其弟突，次弟子亹也。
现代文：祭仲所说的三位公子，有太子忽，及他的弟弟突，小弟弟子亹。
English: The three nobles mentioned by Saichu were Prince Kuchu, his younger brother Tsuchu, and his younger disciple Shun.

古文：四十三年，郑庄公卒。
现代文：四十三年，郑庄公逝世。
English: In 43 years, Zheng Zhuang Gong passed away.

古文：初，祭仲甚有宠於庄公，庄公使为卿；公使娶邓女，生太子忽，故祭仲立之，是为昭公。
现代文：当初，祭仲很受庄公宠信，庄公让他作上卿，庄公让祭仲为自己迎娶了邓国美女，生下了太子忽，所以祭仲立忽为君，这就是昭公。
English: At the beginning, Saizhong was very favored by Zhuang Gong. Zhuang Gong made him a noble. Zhuang Gong let Saizhong marry the beautiful woman from Deng Guo and give birth to Prince Huo. So, Saizhong made Huo his prince. This is Zhaogong.

古文：庄公又娶宋雍氏女，生厉公突。
现代文：庄公又曾娶宋国的雍氏女子，生下厉公突。
English: Zhuang Gong also married a woman from the Yong Dynasty in the Song Dynasty, and they had a son named Li Gongtuo.

古文：雍氏有宠於宋。
现代文：雍氏女子很受国君宠爱。
English: The women of the Yong family are very much loved by the sovereign.

古文：宋庄公闻祭仲之立忽，乃使人诱召祭仲而执之，曰： 不立突，将死。 
现代文：宋庄公听说祭仲拥立忽，就派人把祭仲骗来逮捕了他，威胁他说： 不立突为君，将处死你。 
English: When Song Zhuang Gong heard that Saizhong supported the uprising, he sent someone to trick Saizhong into arresting him, threatening him: "If you don't stand up for yourself, you will be executed."

古文：亦执突以求赂焉。
现代文：宋国君也逮捕了突求取贿赂。
English: Song Guojun also arrested Xu for soliciting bribes.

古文：祭仲许宋，与宋盟。
现代文：祭仲答应了宋国，并与宋国君盟誓。
English: Saizhong agreed with Song and swore an oath with Song Guojun.

古文：以突归，立之。
现代文：他准备带着突回国，拥立突为国君。
English: He is preparing to return to his country with Tso and to become the country's ruler.

古文：昭公忽闻祭仲以宋要立其弟突，九月丁亥，忽出奔卫。
现代文：昭公忽听说祭仲因宋国的要挟拥立自己的弟弟突为国君，九月丁亥日，忽逃到了卫国。
English: Zhaogong suddenly heard that Zhaozhong, due to the threat of the Song Dynasty, suddenly appointed his younger brother as the sovereign. In September, on Dinghai Day, he suddenly fled to the defense of the country.

古文：己亥，突至郑，立，是为厉公。
现代文：己亥日，突来到郑都即位，这是厉公。
English: On the day of Ji Hai, Zheng Du suddenly ascended to the throne, which was a great achievement.

古文：厉公四年，祭仲专国政。
现代文：厉公四年，祭仲专权。
English: In the fourth year of Liguo, the exclusive right to hold the festival came to an end.

古文：厉公患之，阴使其婿雍纠欲杀祭仲。
现代文：厉公提心此事，暗中让祭仲的女婿纠杀死祭仲。
English: Li Gong took the matter to heart and secretly had Saizhong's son-in-law kill Saizhong.

古文：纠妻，祭仲女也，知之，谓其母曰： 父与夫孰亲？ 
现代文：雍纠的妻子是祭仲的女儿，她知道此事后，问母亲： 父亲与丈夫哪一位更亲。 
English: Yong Guo's wife is the daughter of Saizhong. When she learned about this, she asked her mother: Which father is closer to her husband?

古文：母曰： 父一而已，人尽夫也。 
现代文：母亲说： 父亲只有一个，丈夫却可以有很多选择的！ 
English: My mother said: There is only one father, but a husband can have many choices!

古文：女乃告祭仲，祭仲反杀雍纠，戮之於市。
现代文：祭仲女就把此事告诉了祭仲，祭仲反而杀死了雍纠，并暴尸于闹市上。
English: Ms. Saizhong told this to Mr. Saizhong, who in turn killed Ms. Yonggang and dumped her body in the busy market.

古文：厉公无柰祭仲何，怒纠曰： 谋及妇人，死固宜哉！ 夏，厉公出居边邑栎。
现代文：厉公对祭仲无可奈何，对雍纠却很生气，说： 与妇人商量，死本来就活该了， 夏季，厉公被赶到边界的栎邑居住。
English: Li Gong couldn't help but be angry with Saizhong, but he was very angry with Yong Guan. He said, "If I had consulted with my wife, I would have deserved to die. In the summer, Li Gong was forced to live in the border town of Yaoyu.

古文：祭仲迎昭公忽，六月乙亥，复入郑，即位。
现代文：祭仲迎来了昭公忽，六月乙亥日，忽又回到郑都即位了。
English: The festival ushered in the reign of King Zhaogong, and suddenly, on the day of the Chinese New Year in June, he returned to Zhengdu and ascended the throne.

古文：秋，郑厉公突因栎人杀其大夫单伯，遂居之。
现代文：秋季，郑厉公依靠邑的人杀死了栎邑大夫单伯，于是就定居在栎邑。
English: In the autumn, Zheng Liguang relied on the people of the village to kill the doctor of the village, Shanbo, and then settled in the village.

古文：诸侯闻厉公出奔，伐郑，弗克而去。
现代文：诸侯们听说厉公逃跑了，就讨伐郑国，但没有战胜郑国就离去了。
English: When the lords heard that Liguo had fled, they attacked Zheng, but left without defeating Zheng.

古文：宋颇予厉公兵，自守於栎，郑以故亦不伐栎。
现代文：宋国赠给厉公很多军队，让他在栎邑坚守防备，郑国因此也不再讨伐邑。
English: Song Dynasty gave many troops to Liguo, so that he could keep a strong defense in Ye, and Zheng therefore no longer besieged Ye.

古文：昭公二年，自昭公为太子时，父庄公欲以高渠弥为卿，太子忽恶之，庄公弗听，卒用渠弥为卿。
现代文：昭公二年，从昭公做太子时，父亲庄公就想拜高渠弥为上卿，太子忽厌恶高渠弥，庄公不听忽的意见，终于让渠弥做了卿。
English: In the second year of Shoko's reign, when Shoko became the crown prince, his father, Zhuangong, wanted to make Gaokuya a high-ranking nobleman. The prince suddenly detested Gaokuya, and Zhuangong did not listen to Shoko's advice, and finally made Kukuya a high-ranking nobleman.

古文：及昭公即位，惧其杀己，冬十月辛卯，渠弥与昭公出猎，射杀昭公於野。
现代文：等到昭公即位，渠弥担心昭公杀害自己，冬季十月辛卯日，渠弥与昭公出外打猎，在郊野射杀了昭公。
English: When Shoko came to the throne, Kukuya was worried that Shoko would kill himself. On a cold winter day in October, Kukuya went hunting with Shoko and shot Shoko in the countryside.

古文：祭仲与渠弥不敢入厉公，乃更立昭公弟子亹为君，是为子亹也，无谥号。
现代文：祭仲与渠弥不敢接纳厉公，便改立昭公的弟弟子亹做国君，就称子亹，他没有谥号。
English: Saicho and Kuchiya did not dare to accept Riko, so they changed the name of Riko to Shoko's younger brother, Shoko's disciple, Shoko, and called him Shoko. He did not have a nickname.

古文：子亹元年七月，齐襄公会诸侯於首止，郑子亹往会，高渠弥相，从，祭仲称疾不行。
现代文：子亹元年七月，齐襄公在首止会合诸侯，郑子亹赴会，高渠弥辅佐，跟从子亹前往，祭仲借口有病没去。
English: In July of the first year of Zixuan, Prince Qixiang went to the first meeting of the princes. Zheng Zixuan went to the meeting, and Gao Quiya, assistant to Zixuan, followed Zixuan. Zixuan did not go on the pretext of illness.

古文：所以然者，子亹自齐襄公为公子之时，尝会斗，相仇，及会诸侯，祭仲请子亹无行。
现代文：祭仲之所以这样做，是因为在齐襄公做公子时，子亹曾经与他相斗过，双方结仇，等到诸侯相会时，祭仲请求子亹不要去。
English: The reason why Saichu did this was because when Qixiang was a prince, Zixuan had fought with him, and the two sides had a feud. When the princes met, Saichu asked Zixuan not to go.

古文：子亹曰： 齐彊，而厉公居栎，即不往，是率诸侯伐我，内厉公。
现代文：子亹说： 齐国强大，厉公又住在栎，假使我不去，齐就会率领诸侯攻打我，并让厉公回到国都。
English: Zi Yao said, "Qi's country is powerful, and Li Gong lives in Handan. If I don't go, Qi will lead the princes to attack me, and let Li Gong return to the capital.

古文：我不如往，往何遽必辱，且又何至是！ 
现代文：我不如前往，去了为什么一定受辱呢，而且，又为何一定落到象你所设想的那步田地呢！ 
English: I might as well go. Why should I be humiliated, and why should I end up in a place like the one you are imagining?

古文：卒行。
现代文：子亹终于前往了。
English: Finally, the young egrets set off.

古文：於是祭仲恐齐并杀之，故称疾。
现代文：祭仲担心齐国会杀死子亹及随从，所以声称有病。
English: Saichu was worried that Qi would kill Zi Yan and his followers, so he claimed to be ill.

古文：子亹至，不谢齐侯，齐侯怒，遂伏甲而杀子亹。
现代文：子亹到了首止，也未向齐侯道歉，齐侯十分生气，就设下伏兵杀死了子亹。
English: When Zi Xuan reached the end of his first term, he did not apologize to Qi Hou. Qi Hou was very angry and set an ambush to kill Zi Xuan.

古文：高渠弥亡归，归与祭仲谋，召子亹弟公子婴於陈而立之，是为郑子。
现代文：高渠弥逃回了郑国，与祭仲商议，把子亹的弟弟公子婴从陈国叫来拥立成国君，这是郑子。
English: Gao Juya fled back to Zheng Guo, discussed with Saizhong, and called Zixuan's younger brother Gongzibang from Chen Guo to support and become the ruler of the country. This is Zheng Zi.

古文：是岁，齐襄公使彭生醉拉杀鲁桓公。
现代文：这一年，齐襄公让公子彭生趁鲁公酒醉摧折其肋骨杀死了鲁桓公。
English: That year, Prince Qixiang let his son Peng Sheng take advantage of Lu Gong's drunkenness to break his ribs and kill Lu Huan Gong.

古文：郑子八年，齐人管至父等作乱，弑其君襄公。
现代文：郑子八年，齐国管至父等人作乱，杀死了自己的国君襄公。
English: In the eighth year of Zheng Zi's reign, Qi Guo Guan, his father and others rioted and killed their own sovereign, Prince Xiang.

古文：十二年，宋人长万弑其君湣公。
现代文：十二年，宋国人万长杀死了自己的国君湣公。
English: In the twelfth year of the Song Dynasty, a man named Wanchang killed his own sovereign, Shao Gong.

古文：郑祭仲死。
现代文：这年，郑国祭仲去世了。
English: In the same year, Zheng Guosai Zhong passed away.

古文：十四年，故郑亡厉公突在栎者使人诱劫郑大夫甫假，要以求入。
现代文：十四年，从前随郑厉公突逃亡在栎邑的人派人诱骗动持了大夫甫假，要挟甫帮助厉公回国都复位。
English: In the 14th year, the people who had fled with Zheng Liguang in the previous year sent someone to entice and manipulate the doctor Fufu, and blackmailed Fufu to help Liguang return to the country and restore the throne.

古文：假曰： 舍我，我为君杀郑子而入君。 
现代文：甫假说： 赦免我，我替你杀死郑子让你回到国都。 
English: He said, "Forgive me, I will kill Zheng Zi for you and let you return to the capital."

古文：厉公与盟，乃舍之。
现代文：厉公与他订立盟约后，才释放了他。
English: Li Gong only released him after he made a covenant with him.

古文：六月甲子，假杀郑子及其二子而迎厉公突，突自栎复入即位。
现代文：六月甲子日，甫假杀死了郑子和他的两个儿子，并迎来厉公突，突从栎又回来即位。
English: On June 1st, Emperor Fu killed Zheng Zi and his two sons, and ushered in the reign of Li Gongtu, who came back from exile to take the throne.

古文：初，内蛇与外蛇斗於郑南门中，内蛇死。
现代文：当初，在郑都南门城内有一条蛇与城外一条蛇争斗，城内的蛇死去。
English: At first, there was a fight between a snake inside the city of Zhengdu South Gate and a snake outside the city, and the snake inside the city died.

古文：居六年，厉公果复入。
现代文：过了六年，厉公果然又回来了。
English: Six years later, Mr. Li returned.

古文：入而让其伯父原曰： 我亡国外居，伯父无意入我，亦甚矣。 
现代文：厉公回到郑都后就责备自己的伯父原说： 我失去了国家到都外居住，伯父却无意接纳我，也太过分了。 
English: After Li Gong returned to Zhengdu, he blamed his uncle and said: I lost my country and went to live outside the capital, but my uncle had no intention of accepting me, which was too much.

古文：原曰： 事君无二心，人臣之职也。
现代文：原说： 事奉国君不能有二心，这是做人臣的本分。
English: He originally said, "A minister cannot have two hearts. This is the duty of a minister."

古文：原知罪矣。 
现代文：我知道罪过了。 
English: I know I have sinned.

古文：遂自杀。
现代文：说完竟自杀身亡。
English: Zhang Tang then committed suicide.

古文：厉公於是谓甫假曰： 子之事君有二心矣。 
现代文：厉公于是又对甫假说： 你事奉国君有二心。 
English: Li Gong then said to Fuxue: You have two hearts for serving the sovereign.

古文：遂诛之。
现代文：于是杀死了他。
English: So they killed him.

古文：假曰： 重德不报，诚然哉！ 
现代文：临死甫假后悔地说： 对郑子的大德不去报答而有此下场，实在是应该啊！ 
English: On his deathbed, he said regretfully, "I shouldn't have rewarded Zheng Zi's great virtue and ended up like this.

古文：厉公突後元年，齐桓公始霸。
现代文：厉公突复位后元年，齐桓公开始称霸。
English: In the first year after the sudden reinstatement of Ligong, Qi Kuan Gong began to dominate.

古文：五年，燕、卫与周惠王弟穨伐王，王出奔温，立弟穨为王。
现代文：五年，燕国、卫国与周惠王的弟弟颓一起讨伐周惠王，惠王逃到温，弟弟颓即位为周王。
English: In the fifth year, Yan Guo, Wei Guo and Zhou Hui Wang's younger brother Yan fought Zhou Hui Wang together. Hui Wang fled to Wen, and his younger brother Yan took the throne as Zhou Wang.

古文：六年，惠王告急郑，厉公发兵击周王子穨，弗胜，於是与周惠王归，王居于栎。
现代文：六年，惠王向郑国告急，厉公率军攻打周王子颓，未打胜，于是厉公与周惠王一起撤回郑国，惠王住在栎。
English: In the sixth year, King Hui was in a hurry to go to Zheng Guo. Li Gong led an army to attack Prince Zhou of Qi, but did not win. Therefore, Li Gong and King Zhou Hui withdrew to Zheng Guo together, and King Hui stayed in Qi.

古文：七年春，郑厉公与虢叔袭杀王子穨而入惠王于周。
现代文：七年的春天，郑厉公与虢叔共同袭击杀死了王子颓，护送惠王到周都。
English: In the spring of the seventh year, Zheng Liguang and his uncle Zou jointly attacked and killed Prince Zou, and escorted Hui Wang to Zhou.

古文：秋，厉公卒，子文公踕立。
现代文：秋季，厉公逝世，儿子文公踕即位。
English: In autumn, Liguo died, and his son, Wen Gongjun, ascended to the throne.

古文：厉公初立四岁，亡居栎，居栎十七岁，复入，立七岁，与亡凡二十八年。
现代文：厉公刚刚即位四年，就逃到栎居住，在栎住了十七年，又回到郑都，在位七年，与逃亡的时间加在一起总共二十八年。
English: Just four years after his accession to the throne, Li Gong fled to live in Handan. He stayed in Handan for seventeen years, and then returned to Zhengdu, where he reigned for seven years, adding up to a total of twenty-eight years.

古文：文公十七年，齐桓公以兵破蔡，遂伐楚，至召陵。
现代文：文公十七年，齐桓公率军打败了蔡国，于是攻打楚国，一直打到召陵。
English: In the seventeenth year of King Wen, the army led by Prince Qi Huan defeated the State of Cai, and then attacked the State of Chu, fighting all the way to Zhaoling.

古文：二十四年，文公之贱妾曰燕姞，梦天与之兰，曰： 余为伯鯈。
现代文：二十四年，文公有一个名叫燕姞的贱妾，梦到天帝给她一株兰草说： 我是伯鯈。
English: In the twenty-fourth year, Wenguang had a concubine named Yan Xuan, who dreamed that the Heavenly Emperor gave her an orchid and said: I am Bo Xuan.

古文：余，尔祖也。
现代文：我是你的祖先。
English: I am your ancestor.

古文：以是为而子，兰有国香。 
现代文：用这株兰草做你的儿子，兰草有浓烈醇正的香气。 
English: Use this orchid to make your son, the orchid has a strong, mellow aroma.

古文：以梦告文公，文公幸之，而予之草兰为符。
现代文：燕姞把此梦告诉文公，文公便与她同房了。并赠送她兰草作为凭证。
English: Yan Xuan told this dream to Wen Gong, and Wen Gong shared a room with her. He also presented her with an orchid as a certificate.

古文：遂生子，名曰兰。
现代文：于是燕姞生下了一个儿子，取名为兰。
English: So the tern gave birth to a son, named Lan.

古文：三十六年，晋公子重耳过，文公弗礼。
现代文：三十六年，晋公子重耳路过郑国，郑文公没有礼待他。
English: Thirty-six years ago, Prince Jin passed by Zheng Guo with his ear to the ground. Zheng Wengong did not treat him with courtesy.

古文：文公弟叔詹曰： 重耳贤，且又同姓，穷而过君，不可无礼。 
现代文：文公的弟弟叔詹说： 重耳是贤人，又与咱们同姓，受穷困经过您处，您不能对他无礼。 
English: Uncle Zhan, Wenguo's younger brother, said, "Chong E is a wise man, and he has the same surname as us. He went through hardships with you. You can't be rude to him.

古文：文公曰： 诸侯亡公子过者多矣，安能尽礼之！ 
现代文：文公说： 诸侯中逃亡的公子路过此处的有很多，怎么都能按礼招待他们呢！ 
English: Wenguang said, "There are many fugitive lords among the princes who have passed by here. How can we invite them with proper etiquette?"

古文：詹曰： 君如弗礼，遂杀之；弗杀，使即反国，为郑忧矣。 
现代文：叔詹说： 您如果不礼待他，就杀死他，不杀，他假使返回国内，就是郑国的忧患了。 
English: Uncle Zhan said: If you treat him disrespectfully, kill him. If you don't kill him, if he returns to the country, it will be a sorrow for Zhengzhou.

古文：文公弗听。
现代文：文公不听从叔詹的意见。
English: Wen Gong did not listen to Uncle Zhan's advice.

古文：三十七年春，晋公子重耳反国，立，是为文公。
现代文：三十七年的春天，晋公子重耳返回晋国，即位了，这就是晋文公。
English: In the spring of the 37th year, Prince Jin returned to the State of Jin and ascended the throne. This was Prince Jinwen.

古文：秋，郑入滑，滑听命，已而反与卫，於是郑伐滑。
现代文：秋季，郑国攻入滑国，滑国唯郑命是听，不久，滑国又亲附卫国，于是郑国又攻打滑国。
English: In the autumn, Zheng invaded the State of Nian, and the State of Nian only obeyed Zheng's order. Soon, the State of Nian attached itself to defend the State of Nian, so Zheng attacked the State of Nian again.

古文：周襄王使伯馃请滑。郑文公怨惠王之亡在栎，而文公父厉公入之，而惠王不赐厉公爵禄，又怨襄王之与卫滑，故不听襄王请而囚伯馃。
现代文：周襄王让伯服替滑国说情，郑文公怨恨惠王曾逃到栎，是文公的父亲厉公护送惠王回朝复位的，但惠王却没有赏赐厉公爵位俸禄，又怨恨襄王亲附卫国，滑国，所以文公不听从襄王为滑国的说情反而囚禁了伯服。
English: Zhou Xiang Wang asked Bofu to intercede on behalf of the State of Nanning. Zheng Wengong resented that Hui Wang had fled to Nanning. It was Wengong's father, Li Gong, who escorted Hui Wang back to the North to restore the throne. However, Hui Wang did not reward Prince Li with a salary. He also resented that Prince Xiang had accompanied and defended the State of Nanning. Therefore, Wengong did not listen to the intercession of King Xiang for the State of Nanning, but instead imprisoned Bofu.

古文：王怒，与翟人伐郑，弗克。
现代文：襄王十分生气，联合翟人攻打郑国，没有获胜。
English: Xiang Wang was very angry. He and his followers attacked Zheng Guo, but did not win.

古文：冬，翟攻伐襄王，襄王出奔郑，郑文公居王于氾。
现代文：冬季，翟人攻打周襄王，襄王逃到郑国，郑文公让襄王住在池。
English: In the winter, the Huns attacked King Zhou Xiang. King Xiang fled to Zheng. King Zheng allowed King Xiang to live in the pond.

古文：三十八年，晋文公入襄王成周。
现代文：三十八年，晋文公把周襄王送回成周。
English: In the 38th year, King Jinwen sent King Zhou Xiang back to Cheng Zhou.

古文：四十一年，助楚击晋。
现代文：四十一年，郑国帮助楚国攻击晋国。
English: In 41, Zheng Guo helped Chu Guo attack Jin Guo.

古文：自晋文公之过无礼，故背晋助楚。
现代文：因晋文公当年路过郑，郑对他无礼，所以郑国背叛晋国帮助楚国。
English: Because Jinwen Gong passed by Zheng that year, Zheng was rude to him, so Zheng betrayed Jin and helped Chu.

古文：四十三年，晋文公与秦穆公共围郑，讨其助楚攻晋者，及文公过时之无礼也。
现代文：四十三年，晋文公与秦缪公共同包围郑都，讨伐郑君帮助楚国攻打晋国，以及文公路过郑君的无礼罪行。
English: In 433, Jin Wengong and Qin Miao jointly encircled Zhengdu, fought against Zhengjun, helped Chu attack Jin, and the disrespectful crime of Wen Highway passing Zhengjun.

古文：初，郑文公有三夫人，宠子五人，皆以罪蚤死。
现代文：当初，郑文公有三位夫人，五个宠爱的儿子，都因罪早死。
English: At first, Zheng Wengong had three wives and five beloved sons, all of whom died prematurely as a result of their crimes.

古文：公怒，溉逐群公子。
现代文：郑文公厌恶子瑕，赶走了各位公子。
English: Zheng Wengong abhorred defects and drove away all the nobles.

古文：子兰奔晋，从晋文公围郑。
现代文：子兰逃到晋国，跟从晋文公包围郑都。
English: Zilan fled to Jin Province and followed Jin Wengong to encircle Zhengdu.

古文：时兰事晋文公甚谨，爱幸之，乃私於晋，以求入郑为太子。
现代文：当时子兰事奉晋文公很恭敬，晋文公十分宠幸他。他在晋暗中活动，借机要求回郑做太子。
English: At that time, Zilan served Jinwengong very respectfully, and Jinwengong was very pleased with him. He was active in Jinwengong and took the opportunity to ask Zheng to be the prince.

古文：晋於是欲得叔詹为僇。
现代文：晋国这时想得到叔詹并杀死他。
English: At this time, Jin wanted to get Uncle Zhan and kill him.

古文：郑文公恐，不敢谓叔詹言。詹闻，言於郑君曰： 臣谓君，君不听臣，晋卒为患。
现代文：郑文公很害怕，不敢对叔詹说，叔詹听到这个情况，告诉郑君说： 我曾对您说，要杀死重耳，您却不听从我的意见，晋国终于成为我国的忧患了。
English: Zheng Wenguang was very scared and did not dare to tell Uncle Zhan. Uncle Zhan heard this and told Zheng Jun, "I told you that I wanted to kill Jie Er, but you did not listen to my advice. Jin Guo has finally become a problem for our country."

古文：然晋所以围郑，以詹，詹死而赦郑国，詹之原也。 
现代文：可是晋国之所以包围郑都就是因为我，我死了而能赦免郑国，这是我的心愿。 
English: However, the reason why Jin surrounded Zhengdu was because of me. It is my wish to be able to pardon Zhengdu after I die.

古文：乃自杀。
现代文：于是叔詹自杀了。
English: He killed himself.

古文：郑人以詹尸与晋。
现代文：郑人把叔詹尸首送给晋国。
English: Zheng Ren sent Uncle Zhan's body to Jin Province.

古文：晋文公曰： 必欲一见郑君，辱之而去。 
现代文：晋文公说： 一定想见一下郑君，污辱他后再离去。 
English: Jin Wenkong said: I definitely want to meet Zheng Jun, insult him, and then leave.

古文：郑人患之，乃使人私於秦曰： 破郑益晋，非秦之利也。 
现代文：郑人担心这件事，就派人私下对秦国说： 打败了郑国对晋国有好处，并非对秦国有利。 
English: Zheng was worried about this, so he sent someone to say to Qin in private: Defeating Zheng is good for Jin, but not for Qin.

古文：秦兵罢。
现代文：秦军听后才撤军。
English: After hearing this, the Qin army withdrew.

古文：晋文公欲入兰为太子，以告郑。
现代文：晋文公送子兰到郑国做太子，借机通报了郑国。
English: Jinwen sent Zilan to Zheng to be crown prince, and took the opportunity to inform Zheng.

古文：郑大夫石癸曰： 吾闻姞姓乃后稷之元妃，其後当有兴者。子兰母，其後也。
现代文：郑国大夫石癸说： 我听说姓姞的女儿是后稷的元配，她的后裔应当有兴发的，子兰的母亲就是他的后裔。
English: Dr. Zheng Guodong said, "I heard that the daughter surnamed Zou is the wife of Hou Yi, and her descendants should be well-born. Zilan's mother is his descendant.

古文：且夫人子尽已死，馀庶子无如兰贤。
现代文：况且夫人的儿子都已不在世了，剩下的儿子没有比得上兰贤能的。
English: Moreover, her husband's sons are all dead, and the remaining sons are no match for Lan Xiangang.

古文：今围急，晋以为请，利孰大焉！ 
现代文：现在晋国包围郑都很急迫，晋国替子兰请求回郑，没有比这个条件更好的了！ 
English: Now, Jin's encirclement of Zheng is very urgent. Jin requests Zilan to return to Zheng. There is no better condition than this!

古文：遂许晋，与盟，而卒立子兰为太子，晋兵乃罢去。
现代文：于是郑国答应了晋国，与晋国订立盟约，终于立子兰为太子，晋军才撤走。
English: As a result, Zheng Guo agreed to Jin Guo, signed a treaty with Jin Guo, and finally made Zilan the crown prince before the Jin army withdrew.

古文：四十五年，文公卒，子兰立，是为缪公。
现代文：四十五年，郑文公逝世了，子兰即位，这是缪公。
English: In 45 years, Zheng Wengong passed away, and Zilan ascended to the throne. This is Miao Gong.

古文：缪公元年春，秦缪公使三将将兵欲袭郑，至滑，逢郑贾人弦高诈以十二牛劳军，故秦兵不至而还，晋败之於崤。
现代文：缪公元年的春天，秦缪公派三位将军率军想攻打郑国，到了滑国，遇上郑国商人弦高，弦高诈称奉郑君之命用十二头牛犒劳秦劳，所以秦军没再继续进军就回国了，晋军在崤打败秦军。
English: In the spring of the year of Miao, Qin Miao sent three generals to lead the army to attack Zheng. When they arrived in Nian, they met Zheng merchant Zheng Gao. Zheng Gao fraudulently claimed that he was ordered by Zheng to use twelve oxen to work for Qin, so the Qin army did not continue to march and returned to China. The Jin army defeated the Qin army in Zhai.

古文：初，往年郑文公之卒也，郑司城缯贺以郑情卖之，秦兵故来。
现代文：当初，郑文公逝世后，郑国都城的卫戍官缯贺把郑国的内情出卖给秦国，所以秦军才来攻打郑国。
English: At first, after the death of Zheng Wengong, the military governor of the capital city of Zheng sold the inside information of Zheng to Qin, so the Qin army came to attack Zheng.

古文：三年，郑发兵从晋伐秦，败秦兵於汪。
现代文：三年，郑国派军跟从晋国攻打秦国，在汪打败秦军。
English: Three years later, Zheng sent an army to attack Qin from Jin and defeated the Qin army in Wang.

古文：往年楚太子商臣弑其父成王代立。
现代文：楚国太子商臣杀死了自己的父亲成王即位。
English: The prince of Chu and merchant killed his own father and ascended to the throne.

古文：二十一年，与宋华元伐郑。
现代文：二十一年，楚国与宋国华元攻打郑国。
English: In the twenty-first year, Chu and Song attacked Zheng.

古文：华元杀羊食士，不与其御羊斟，怒以驰郑，郑囚华元。宋赎华元，元亦亡去。
现代文：华元宰羊犒劳士兵，却未给自己的驾车者羊斟肉食，羊斟恼怒把车赶到郑国，郑国囚禁了华元，宋国用重金赎回华元而华元早已逃走。
English: Hua Yuan slaughtered the sheep to reward the soldiers, but did not give his driver the sheep. The sheep drove the car to Zheng Guo in anger. Zheng Guo imprisoned Hua Yuan. Song Guo ransomed Hua Yuan with heavy money, but Hua Yuan had already fled.

古文：晋使赵穿以兵伐郑。
现代文：晋国让赵穿率军攻打郑国。
English: Jin let Zhao lead his army to attack Zheng.

古文：二十二年，郑缪公卒，子夷立，是为灵公。
现代文：二十二年，郑缪公逝世，儿子夷即位，这是灵公。
English: Twenty-two years later, Zheng Miao died, and his son Yi ascended to the throne.

古文：灵公元年春，楚献鼋於灵公。
现代文：灵公元年的春天，楚国献给灵公鼋。
English: In the spring of the year of Ling, Chu was dedicated to Ling Gongyu.

古文：子家、子公将朝灵公，子公之食指动，谓子家曰： 佗日指动，必食异物。 
现代文：子家、子公将要朝拜灵公，子公的食指颤动了一下，对子家说： 我的手指曾动过，一定要吃珍异食物了。 
English: Zi Jia and Zi Gong are going to worship Ling Gong. Zi Jia's index finger trembled a little, and he said to Zi Jia: My finger has moved, I must eat rare food.

古文：及入，见灵公进鼋羹，子公笑曰： 果然！ 
现代文：等到入宫后，见到灵公进食鼋汤，子公笑道： 果然如此。 
English: After he entered the palace, he saw the prince eating soup. The prince smiled and said, "That's right."

古文：灵公问其笑故，具告灵公。
现代文：灵公问子公为何笑，子公把以上情况告诉了灵公。
English: Ling Gong asked Zi Gong why he was laughing. Zi Gong told Ling Gong the above situation.

古文：灵公召之，独弗予羹。子公怒，染其指，尝之而出。
现代文：灵公叫他过去，却唯独没把汤给他喝，子公很生气，手指在汤里沾了一下尝了尝就出了宫。
English: Ling Gong called him over, but he did not give him the soup to drink. Zi Gong was very angry. He dipped his finger in the soup, tasted it, and left the palace.

古文：公怒，欲杀子公。
现代文：灵公很生气，想杀死子公。
English: Ling Gong was very angry and wanted to kill Zi Gong.

古文：子公与子家谋先。
现代文：子公与子家商义先下手。
English: Zi Gong and Zi Jia Shangyi attacked first.

古文：夏，弑灵公。
现代文：夏季，他们杀死了灵公。
English: In the summer, they killed Reigo.

古文：郑人欲立灵公弟去疾，去疾让曰： 必以贤，则去疾不肖；必以顺，则公子坚长。 
现代文：郑人想立灵公的弟弟去疾，去疾谦让说： 一定让贤能的人即位，而我去疾无才能；一定按长少顺序即位，那么公子坚比我年长。 
English: Zheng Rong wanted to make Ling Gong's younger brother go to the illness, go to the illness, and let him say: I must let the virtuous person ascend to the throne, and I will go to the illness without talent; I must ascend to the throne according to the order of seniority, then the prince is older than me.

古文：坚者，灵公庶弟，去疾之兄也。
现代文：坚是灵公的弟弟，去疾的哥哥。
English: Jian is the younger brother of the spiritual father, the elder brother of the illness.

古文：於是乃立子坚，是为襄公。
现代文：于是就立了子坚为君，这是襄公。
English: So he set up Zi Jian as his regent, this is Xiang Gong.

古文：襄公立，将尽去缪氏。
现代文：襄公即位后，将要把缪氏家族斩尽杀绝。
English: After Prince Xiang ascended the throne, he was going to exterminate the Miao family.

古文：缪氏者，杀灵公、子公之族家也。去疾曰： 必去缪氏，我将去之。 
现代文：缪氏是杀死灵公的子公的家族。去疾说： 一定要杀死缪氏家族，我也将要离开郑国了。 
English: The Miao clan is the family of the son of the man who killed the spirit prince. He said, "I will definitely kill the Miao family, and I will also leave Zhengguo."

古文：乃止。
现代文：襄公这才停止。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：皆以为大夫。
现代文：并任命缪氏都为大夫。
English: and appointed Miao Shidu as a doctor.

古文：襄公元年，楚怒郑受宋赂纵华元，伐郑。
现代文：襄公元年，楚国生气郑国接受了宋国贿赂释放了华元，攻打郑国。
English: In the year of Xiang, Chu was angry that Zheng accepted Song's bribe to release Huayuan and attacked Zheng.

古文：郑背楚，与晋亲。
现代文：郑国背叛楚国，与晋国亲近。
English: Zheng Guo betrayed Chu Guo and became close to Jin Guo.

古文：五年，楚复伐郑，晋来救之。
现代文：五年，楚国又攻打郑国，晋国来救助郑国。
English: Five years later, Chu attacked Zheng again, and Jin came to Zheng's rescue.

古文：六年，子家卒，国人复逐其族，以其弑灵公也。
现代文：六年，子家去世，郑都的人们又赶出了子家家族，因为他杀死了灵公。
English: Six years later, his son died, and the people of Zhengdu drove out his family again, because he had killed his godfather.

古文：七年，郑与晋盟鄢陵。
现代文：七年，郑国与晋国在鄢陵结盟。
English: In the seventh year, Zheng and Jin formed an alliance at Fuling.

古文：八年，楚庄王以郑与晋盟，来伐，围郑三月，郑以城降楚。
现代文：八年，楚庄王因为郑国与晋国结盟，来讨伐郑国，包围郑都三个月，郑国献出国都投降了楚国。
English: In the eighth year, the king of Chu Zhuang, because of the alliance between Zheng and Jin, came to fight against Zheng, surrounded Zheng for three months, and Zheng surrendered to Chu.

古文：楚王入自皇门，郑襄公肉袒掔羊以迎，曰： 孤不能事边邑，使君王怀怒以及弊邑，孤之罪也。
现代文：楚王从皇门入了城，郑襄公脱去上衣露出胳膊手牵着羊迎接楚王说： 我不能在边城事奉您，让您生气地来到我国国都，这是我的罪过。
English: King Chu entered the city from the imperial gate. Zheng Xianggong took off his shirt and bared his arms to lead the sheep to meet King Chu and said: I can't serve you in the border city and let you come to the capital of our country in anger. This is my sin.

古文：敢不惟命是听。
现代文：我不敢唯命是听。
English: I don't take orders.

古文：君王迁之江南，及以赐诸侯，亦惟命是听。
现代文：你把我流放到江南，把郑赐给诸侯，我也唯命是听。
English: If you banish me to the south of the Yangtze River and give Zheng to the princes, I will do as you say.

古文：若君王不忘厉、宣王，桓、武公，哀不忍绝其社稷，锡不毛之地，使复得改事君王，孤之原也，然非所敢望也。
现代文：如果君王没有忘记周厉王、周宣王、郑桓公、郑武公，可怜他们，不忍心断绝他们的祭礼，您就给我不毛之地，使我又能够事奉你，这是我的愿望，可是我不是敢有所希望。
English: If the king does not forget King Zhou Li, King Zhou Xuan, King Zheng Huan, and King Zheng Wu, if he pities them and does not have the heart to cut off their rites, then you will give me a fertile land so that I can serve you again. This is my wish, but I do not dare to hope.

古文：敢布腹心，惟命是听。 
现代文：我只不过冒昧地表露我的真心，对您将唯命是听。 
English: I only ventured to reveal my true heart, and to you I will be obedient.

古文：庄王为卻三十里而後舍。
现代文：庄王为些让军队退却三十里后驻扎下来。
English: Zhuang Wang ordered the troops to retreat thirty miles and then camped down.

古文：楚群臣曰： 自郢至此，士大夫亦久劳矣。
现代文：楚国大臣们说： 我们千里迢迢人郢来到这里，官兵们也长久地劳苦了。
English: The ministers of the State of Chu said: We have traveled thousands of miles to come here, and the officers and soldiers have also worked hard for a long time.

古文：今得国舍之，何如？ 
现代文：现在已经打下的国家又放弃，为什么？ 
English: Countries that have already been defeated are now giving up, why?

古文：庄王曰： 所为伐，伐不服也。
现代文：庄王说： 我们之所以讨伐，是讨伐不驯服的国君。
English: Zhuang Wang said, "The reason why we are crusading is because we are crusading against an unruly sovereign.

古文：今已服，尚何求乎？ 
现代文：今天人家已经服服贴贴了，还有什么要求的呢？ 
English: Today, people have already obeyed, what else is required?

古文：卒去。
现代文：楚军终于撤去。
English: The Chu army finally withdrew.

古文：晋闻楚之伐郑，发兵救郑。
现代文：晋国听说楚国攻打郑国，派军救援。
English: Jin heard that Chu attacked Zheng and sent troops to help.

古文：其来持两端，故迟，比至河，楚兵已去。
现代文：晋军出发时，晋国意见不统一，犹不决所以来迟了，等到到了黄河，楚军已经离去。
English: When the Jin army set out, the opinions of the Jin country were not unified, so they were late. By the time they reached the Yellow River, the Chu army had already left.

古文：晋将率或欲渡，或欲还，卒渡河。
现代文：晋国将帅有的想渡河追击，有的想班师回国，但终于渡过黄河。
English: Some Jin generals wanted to cross the river to pursue, and some wanted to return to the country, but finally crossed the Yellow River.

古文：庄王闻，还击晋。
现代文：庄王听说后，反转身攻击晋军。
English: After hearing this, Zhuang Wang turned around and attacked the Jin army.

古文：郑反助楚，大破晋军於河上。
现代文：郑国反而帮助楚国，在黄河上把晋军打得大败。
English: Zheng, on the other hand, helped Chu and defeated the Jin army on the Yellow River.

古文：十年，晋来伐郑，以其反晋而亲楚也。
现代文：十年，晋国又来攻打郑国，因为它反对晋却亲近楚国。
English: Ten years later, Jin attacked Zheng again because it opposed Jin but was close to Chu.

古文：十一年，楚庄王伐宋，宋告急于晋。
现代文：十一年前，楚庄王讨伐宋国，宋国向晋国告急。
English: Eleven years ago, the king of Chuzhuang invaded Song, and Song was in a hurry to invade Jin.

古文：晋景公欲发兵救宋，伯宗谏晋君曰： 天方开楚，未可伐也。 
现代文：晋景公想派军救助宋国，伯宗进谏晋君说： 上天正兴助楚国，不能攻打楚。 
English: When Jin Jing Gong wanted to send an army to rescue Song, Bozong Jinqi Jinjun said, "Heaven is helping Chu, we cannot attack Chu."

古文：乃求壮士得霍人解扬，字子虎，诓楚，令宋毋降。
现代文：晋国于是找到一位壮士是霍国人解扬，字子虎。
English: Jin Province then found a strong man who was a native of Huo, Xie Yang, who was called Zizihu.

古文：过郑，郑与楚亲，乃执解扬而献楚。
现代文：晋国让解扬欺骗楚国，让宋国不要投降，解扬路过郑国，郑国和楚国关系亲密，就逮捕解扬献给楚国。
English: Jin State let Xie Yang deceive Chu State, let Song State not surrender, Xie Yang passed by Zheng State, Zheng State and Chu State have a close relationship, and arrested Xie Yang for Chu State.

古文：楚王厚赐与约，使反其言，令宋趣降，三要乃许。於是楚登解扬楼车，令呼宋。
现代文：楚王赏赐给解扬一份厚礼并与他立约，让他说反话，叫宋国赶快投降，楚王多次要挟解扬，解扬才勉强答应。
English: King Chu rewarded him with a generous gift and made a contract with him, asking him to say the opposite, to make Song quickly surrender. King Chu repeatedly threatened to dismiss Yang, and only reluctantly agreed to dismiss him.

古文：遂负楚约而致其晋君命曰： 晋方悉国兵以救宋，宋虽急，慎毋降楚，晋兵今至矣！ 
现代文：于是楚王让解扬登上观望敌军的巢车，让他向宋军喊话。但解扬竟违背与楚人的相约，传达了晋君给他的命令，大声喊： 晋国正聚集全国的军队来援救宋国，宋国虽然形势紧迫，但千不要投降楚国，晋军马上就要赶到了！ 
English: As a result, the King of Chu let Qie Yang board the nesting car to watch the enemy army, and let him call out to the Song army. However, Qie Yang actually violated the agreement with the Chu people, conveyed the order given to him by the Jin ruler, and shouted: Jin is gathering the army of the whole country to rescue Song. Although the situation in Song is urgent, don't surrender to Chu, the Jin army is about to arrive!

古文：楚庄王大怒，将杀之。
现代文：楚王一听非常生气，将要杀死解扬。
English: Upon hearing this, King Chu was very angry and was going to kill Cho Yang.

古文：解扬曰： 君能制命为义，臣能承命为信。
现代文：解扬说： 国君以制定命令为本分，臣民以执行命令为讲信用。
English: Xie Yang said: The sovereign takes it as his duty to formulate orders, and the subjects take it as their duty to execute orders.

古文：受吾君命以出，有死无陨。 
现代文：我接受我国国君的命令出国办事，宁死也不以让君命受损。 
English: I accept the order of the sovereign of our country to go abroad to work, and I would rather die than let the sovereign's life be damaged.

古文：庄王曰： 若之许我，已而背之，其信安在？ 
现代文：庄王说： 那么，你已经答应了我，尔后又背叛，你的信用在哪儿呢？ 
English: Zhuang Wang said: Well, you have promised me, and then betrayed me, where is your trust?

古文：解扬曰： 所以许王，欲以成吾君命也。 
现代文：解扬说： 我所以答应您，就是想用来完成我国国君的命令。 
English: He said, "The reason I promised you is that I want to use it to fulfill the order of our sovereign.

古文：将死，顾谓楚军曰： 为人臣无忘尽忠得死者！ 
现代文：解扬将要受刑时，回头对楚军说： 做人臣的不要忘记竭尽忠诚尔后去死！ 
English: When Xie Yang was about to be sentenced, he turned to the Chu army and said: "As a vassal, don't forget to be loyal and then die!"

古文：楚王诸弟皆谏王赦之，於是赦解扬使归。
现代文：楚王的弟弟们都进谏楚王赦免解扬，于是楚王赦免了他，让他回晋国。
English: All of King Chu's younger brothers were pardoned by King Chu, so King Chu pardoned him and let him return to Jin.

古文：晋爵之为上卿。
现代文：晋国授予他上卿。
English: Jin awarded him the title of Shangqing.

古文：十八年，襄公卒，子悼公晞立。
现代文：十八年，襄公逝世，儿子悼公即位。
English: In the 18th year, Prince Xiang died, and his son, Prince Miao, ascended to the throne.

古文：悼公元年，鄦公恶郑於楚，悼公使弟睔於楚自讼。
现代文：悼公元年，许灵公到楚国中伤郑国，悼公便让弟弟去楚自我申辩。
English: In the year of mourning, Xu Linggong went to Chu to slander Zheng, and the mourner asked his brother to go to Chu to defend himself.

古文：讼不直，楚囚睔。
现代文：申辩不成功，楚国囚禁了。
English: His plea was unsuccessful, and he was imprisoned by the state of Chu.

古文：於是郑悼公来与晋平，遂亲。
现代文：于是郑悼公来晋讲和两国言归于好。
English: As a result, Zheng Yigong came to Jin and the two countries reconciled.

古文：睔私於楚子反，子反言归睔於郑。
现代文：与楚国子反有交情，子反说情把放回郑国。
English: He had a friendly relationship with the son of Chu Kunzong, but the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son.

古文：二年，楚伐郑，晋兵来救。
现代文：二年，楚国攻打郑国，晋军来救助。
English: In the second year, Chu attacked Zheng, and Jin came to the rescue.

古文：是岁，悼公卒，立其弟睔，是为成公。
现代文：当年，悼公逝世，郑国立悼公的弟弟，这是成公。
English: In that year, Eiko passed away, and Zheng Kunitachi mourned his younger brother, which was Seiko.

古文：成公三年，楚共王曰 郑成公孤有德焉 ，使人来与盟。成公私与盟。
现代文：成公三年，楚共王说： 对郑成以来说，我是有恩德的。 便派人来郑与成公订立盟约。
English: In the third year of Chenggong, the king of Chu said, "I have been grateful to Zheng Chenggong ever since." So he sent someone to Zheng Chenggong to make a covenant.

古文：秋，成公朝晋，晋曰 郑私平於楚 ，执之。
现代文：成公暗中与楚国结盟了。秋季，成公朝拜晋国，晋说： 郑国暗中与楚讲和了 ，逮捕了成公。
English: Chenggong secretly allied with Chu. In autumn, Chenggong paid homage to Jin. Jin said, "Zheng secretly made peace with Chu and arrested Chenggong."

古文：使栾书伐郑。
现代文：并派栾书攻打郑国。
English: He also sent Yanshu to attack Zheng.

古文：四年春，郑患晋围，公子如乃立成公庶兄繻为君。
现代文：四年的春季，郑国担心晋国来包围，公子如便立成公的哥哥做国君。
English: In the spring of the fourth year, Zheng Guo was worried that Jin Guo would come to encircle him, so he made his brother Zhu Ruzhi the ruler of the country.

古文：其四月，晋闻郑立君，乃归成公。
现代文：当年四月，晋国听说郑国又立了新君，就让成公回国了。
English: In April of that year, when Jin heard that Zheng had appointed a new prince, he let Chenggu return to the country.

古文：郑人闻成公归，亦杀君繻，迎成公。
现代文：郑人听说成公回国，又杀死了迎接成公。
English: When Zheng heard that Chenggong had returned to China, he killed Zou to welcome Chenggong.

古文：晋兵去。
现代文：晋军撤去。
English: The Jin army withdrew.

古文：十年，背晋盟，盟於楚。
现代文：十年，郑国背叛了与晋国的盟约，与楚国结了盟。
English: Ten years later, Zheng betrayed the treaty with Jin and formed an alliance with Chu.

古文：晋厉公怒，发兵伐郑。
现代文：晋厉公很生气，派军攻打郑国。
English: Jin Li Gong was very angry and sent troops to attack Zheng Guo.

古文：楚共王救郑。
现代文：楚共王救助了郑国。
English: Chu Gongwang saved Zheng Guo.

古文：晋楚战鄢陵，楚兵败，晋射伤楚共王目，俱罢而去。
现代文：晋楚在鄢陵交战，楚军失败了，晋军射伤楚共王的眼睛，双方才停战离去。
English: Jin Chu fought in Fuling, the Chu army failed, the Jin army shot the eyes of the King of Chu, and the two sides ended the war and left.

古文：十三年，晋悼公伐郑，兵於洧上。
现代文：十三年，晋悼公攻打郑国，驻军在洧上。
English: In the thirteenth year of the Jin Dynasty, Emperor Jimmu attacked Zheng and garrisoned his army in Yujing.

古文：郑城守，晋亦去。
现代文：郑军据城守卫，晋军也离去了。
English: Zheng's army guarded the city, and Jin's army also left.

古文：十四年，成公卒，子恽立。是为釐公。
现代文：十四年，成公逝世，儿子挥即位，这是釐公。
English: Fourteen years later, Cheng Gong died, and his son Wai ascended to the throne. This was the beginning of Zeng Gong.

古文：釐公五年，郑相子驷朝釐公，釐公不礼。
现代文：釐公五年，郑国国相子驷朝拜釐公，釐公没有礼遇他。
English: In his fifth year, Zheng Guo, Zheng Guo's son-in-law, came to pay homage to Zheng Guo. Zheng Guo did not treat him with courtesy.

古文：子驷怒，使厨人药杀釐公，赴诸侯曰 釐公暴病卒 。
现代文：子驷十分生气，让厨师用毒药杀死了釐公，向诸侯们报丧说 釐公患了急证病故。 
English: Zi Gan was very angry and had the cook kill Zi Gong with poison, and reported to the lords that Zi Gong had died of an emergency illness.

古文：立釐公子嘉，嘉时年五岁，是为简公。
现代文：立釐公儿子嘉，嘉当年五岁，这是简公。
English: Lixun Gong's son Jia, Jia was five years old, this is Jian Gong.

古文：简公元年，诸公子谋欲诛相子驷，子驷觉之，反尽诛诸公子。
现代文：简公元年，公子们商议想杀死国相子驷，子驷发觉了，反而把公子们全部杀死了。
English: In the year of our Lord, the nobles discussed killing the son of the king, but the son of the king found out and killed all the nobles.

古文：二年，晋伐郑，郑与盟，晋去。
现代文：二年，晋国讨伐郑国，郑国与晋国结为盟好，晋国才离去。
English: In the second year, Jin attacked Zheng, Zheng and Jin made an alliance, and Jin finally left.

古文：冬，又与楚盟。
现代文：冬季，郑国又与楚国订立盟约。
English: In the winter, Zheng again concluded a treaty with Chu.

古文：子驷畏诛，故两亲晋、楚。
现代文：子驷害怕被杀，所以又亲近晋又亲近楚。
English: Zixuan is afraid of being killed, so he is both close to Jin and close to Chu.

古文：三年，相子驷欲自立为君，公子子孔使尉止杀相子驷而代之。
现代文：三年，宰相子驷想自己立为国君，公子子孔派尉止杀死了宰相子驷代替了他。
English: In the third year, the prime minister Zou Yan wanted to be crowned king, and Prince Kong sent an officer to kill the prime minister Zou Ran to replace him.

古文：子孔又欲自立。
现代文：子孔又想自立为国君。
English: Zi Kong also wants to become the sovereign himself.

古文：子产曰： 子驷为不可，诛之，今又效之，是乱无时息也。 
现代文：子产说： 子驷自立是不行的，所以你杀了他，今天你又仿效他，这样，内乱就没有平息的那一天了。 
English: Zi Yuan said: "It is not possible for Zi Yuan to stand on his own, so you killed him, and today you are following his example, so there will never be a day when the civil strife will cease."

古文：於是子孔从之而相郑简公。
现代文：于是子孔听从了子产的意见，仍然只做了郑简公的国相。
English: As a result, Zikong listened to the opinion of his children and still only made Zheng Jiangong the minister of state.

古文：四年，晋怒郑与楚盟，伐郑，郑与盟。
现代文：四年，晋国生气郑国与楚国订立盟约，攻打郑国，郑国又与晋国结盟。
English: In the fourth year, Jin was angry with Zheng and made an alliance with Chu to attack Zheng. Zheng then made an alliance with Jin.

古文：楚共王救郑，败晋兵。
现代文：楚共王救援郑国，打败了晋军。
English: Chu Gongwang rescued Zheng Guo and defeated the Jin army.

古文：简公欲与晋平，楚又囚郑使者。
现代文：简公想和晋国讲和，楚国又囚禁了郑国使者。
English: Jian Gong wanted to make peace with the State of Jin, and the State of Chu imprisoned the envoy of the State of Zheng.

古文：十二年，简公怒相子孔专国权，诛之，而以子产为卿。
现代文：十二年，简公对国相子孔专揽大权很愤慨，杀死了子孔，让子产做上卿。
English: In the twelfth year, Jian Gong was very indignant at the fact that the state's son-in-law, Kong, monopolized great power. He killed Kong and made his son-in-law Shangqing.

古文：十九年，简公如晋请卫君还，而封子产以六邑。
现代文：十九年，简公到晋，给卫君说情让他回国，并把六个邑封给子产。
English: In the 19th year, Jian Gong went to Jin, pleaded with Wei Jun to let him return to China, and gave six townships to his children.

古文：子产让，受其三邑。
现代文：子产辞让，只接受了三个邑。
English: His son resigned and accepted only three townships.

古文：二十二年，吴使延陵季子於郑，见子产如旧交，谓子产曰： 郑之执政者侈，难将至，政将及子。
现代文：二十二年，吴国派延陵季子到郑国，延陵季子与子产一见如故，对子产说： 郑国执政的人多邪行，灾难将要降临，大权将落到你手中。
English: In 1922, Yanling Ji Zi was sent by the State of Wu to Zheng. Yanling Ji Zi and Zifang saw each other as before, and said to Zifang: Many people in power in Zheng are evil, disaster will come, and great power will fall into your hands.

古文：子为政，必以礼；不然，郑将败。 
现代文：你如果当政，一定按仪治国；否则，郑国将惨败。 
English: If you are in power, you must govern the country according to the etiquette; otherwise, Zheng Guo will fail miserably.

古文：子产厚遇季子。
现代文：子产厚遇了季子。
English: The child's birth was a great success.

古文：二十三年，诸公子争宠相杀，又欲杀子产。
现代文：二十三年，各位公子竞争宠爱互相残杀，又想杀死子产。
English: Twenty-three years later, the boys compete in killing each other and trying to kill their father.

古文：公子或谏曰： 子产仁人，郑所以存者子产也，勿杀！ 
现代文：有的公子进谏说： 子产是仁爱之人，郑之所以能生存就是因为子产，千万不要杀死他！ 
English: Some noblemen said: Zheng is a benevolent person. The reason why Zheng can survive is because of Zheng. Don't kill him!

古文：乃止。
现代文：公子们才罢手。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：二十五年，郑使子产於晋，问平公疾。
现代文：二十五年，郑国派子产到晋国，询问平公的病情。
English: In 25 years, Zheng Guo sent his son to Jin Guo to inquire about Ping Guo's illness.

古文：平公曰： 卜而曰实沈、台骀为祟，史官莫知，敢问？ 
现代文：平公问： 我占卜后说是实沈、台骀作崇，史官不了解他们的来历，冒昧地请问他们是什么神？ 
English: Ping Gong asked: I said after divination that it was Shisheng and Taizhou that were worshipped. The historian did not understand their origin, so I ventured to ask what gods they were.

古文：对曰： 高辛氏有二子，长曰阏伯，季曰实沈，居旷林，不相能也，日操干戈以相征伐。后帝弗臧，迁阏伯于商丘，主辰，商人是因，故辰为商星。迁实沈于大夏，主参，唐人是因，服事夏、商，其季世曰唐叔虞。 
现代文：子产回答说： 高辛氏有两个儿子，长子叫阏伯，二子叫实沈，两人住在大森林里，互相不容，每天拿着干戈互相征伐，尧帝不喜欢他们，于是让伯迁到商丘住，主持祭祀辰星，商人因此沿袭下来，所以辰星称为商星，尧帝让实沈到大夏住，主持祭祀参星，唐人因此沿袭下来，服侍夏朝、商朝，唐的末世君主叫唐叔虞。
English: The offspring replied: The Gaoxin clan has two sons. The eldest son is named Zhou Bo, and the second son is named Si Shen. The two live in a large forest and do not tolerate each other. They fight each other with sticks every day. Emperor Gao did not like them, so he had Bo move to Shangqiu to live and preside over the sacrifice of the Star of the Star of the Star of the Star of the Star of the Star of the Star of the Star of the Star of the Star of the Star of the Star of the Star of the Star of the Star of the Star of the Star.

古文：当武王邑姜方娠大叔，梦帝谓己： 余命而子曰虞，乃与之唐，属之参而蕃育其子孙。 
现代文：当武王夫人邑姜正怀大叔时，曾梦见天帝对夫人说： 我让你的儿子叫虞，就把唐封给他，委托他祭祀参星，在那里繁育后代。 
English: When King Wu's wife, O Jiang, was pregnant with her uncle's child, she had a dream in which the Heavenly Emperor said to his wife, "If I name your son Yu, I will give him the title of Tang, entrust him with the sacrificial rites of Samxing, and raise his descendants there."

古文：及生有文在其掌曰 虞 ，遂以命之。
现代文：等到大叔生出后，手掌心的纹理象 虞 字，于是用虞命名了。
English: After my uncle was born, the texture of the palm of his hand resembled the Chinese character for "yu," so he named it after the Chinese character for "yu."

古文：及成王灭唐而国大叔焉。
现代文：等到周成王灭亡了唐后，就把唐封给了大叔。
English: After Zhou Cheng Wang's death in Tang Dynasty, he gave the Tang Dynasty seal to his uncle.

古文：故参为晋星。 
现代文：所以参星是晋国的星宿。
English: Therefore, Sanxing is the star city of Jin.

古文：由是观之，则实沈，参神也。
现代文：从这了解到，实沈是参星神。
English: From this, it is understood that the real Shen is the star god.

古文：昔金天氏有裔子曰昧，为玄冥师，生允格、台骀。
现代文：过去金天氏有个叫昧的后裔，做水官长，生了允格、台骀。
English: In the past, the Jintian clan had an obscure descendant who was a chief water official and gave birth to Yungge and Taiyu.

古文：台骀能业其官，宣汾、洮，障大泽，以处太原。
现代文：台骀能继承前辈的官职，很好地疏通了汾水、洮水，给大泽修筑堤防，住在太原。
English: The Taiwans were able to inherit the official posts of their predecessors, and they did a good job of dredging the Surabaya and Surabaya waters, building a dike for Ozawa, and living in Taiyuan.

古文：帝用嘉之，国之汾川。
现代文：颛顼帝因此嘉奖了他，把汾水封给他。
English: Emperor Xian therefore rewarded him by giving him the title of Emperor of Xian.

古文：沈、姒、蓐、黄实守其祀。
现代文：沈、姒、蓐、黄国实际掌管着他的祭祀。
English: Shem, Ham, Japheth, and Japheth are actually in charge of his sacrificial rites.

古文：今晋主汾川而灭之。
现代文：现在，晋国统治了汾水流域，灭亡了这一带的国家。
English: Now, Jin ruled the Surabaya basin and destroyed the country in this area.

古文：由是观之，则台骀，汾、洮神也。
现代文：从这里看，台骀是汾水、洮水神。
English: Seen from here, Taiwan is the god of water.

古文：然是二者不害君身。山川之神，则水旱之菑禜之；日月星辰之神，则雪霜风雨不时禜之；若君疾，饮食哀乐女色所生也。 
现代文：可是，这两位神灵都不会危害您的身体，对于山河神，在发生水旱灾时应祭祀，对于日月星辰神，在雪霜风雨不按时令来到时应祭祀；您有病，那是饮食哀乐女色所造成的。 
English: However, neither of these two deities will harm your body. For the gods of the mountains and rivers, sacrifices should be made in the event of floods and droughts. For the gods of the sun, moon, and stars, sacrifices should be made when snow, frost, wind, and rain do not come at the right time. If you are ill, it is caused by eating, drinking, and women.

古文：平公及叔乡曰： 善，博物君子也！ 
现代文：平公及叔向到子产这番议论后称赞说： 对，您真不愧为知识渊博的君子！ 
English: After the discussion, Ping Gong and his uncle praised him and said, "Yes, you are truly a knowledgeable gentleman!

古文：厚为之礼於子产。
现代文：送给子产丰厚的礼物。
English: It is a rich gift to give to the offspring.

古文：二十七年夏，郑简公朝晋。
现代文：二十七年的夏天，郑简公去朝拜晋君。
English: In the summer of the 27th year, Zheng Jian Gong went to pay homage to Jin Jun.

古文：冬，畏楚灵王之彊，又朝楚，子产从。
现代文：冬季，郑国怕楚灵王强大，又朝拜楚国，子产都跟从了。
English: In winter, Zheng Guo feared that King Chuling would become powerful, and he worshipped Chu Guo, and all his children followed him.

古文：二十八年，郑君病，使子产会诸侯，与楚灵王盟於申，诛齐庆封。
现代文：二十八年，郑君生病，派子产会见诸侯，与楚灵王在申订立盟约，楚王杀死了齐国庆封。
English: In the 28th year, Zheng Jun fell ill. He sent his sons to meet with the princes and made a covenant with King Chuling in Shen. King Chuling killed Qiguo Qingfeng.

古文：三十六年，简公卒，子定公宁立。
现代文：三十六年，简公逝世了，儿子定公宁即位。
English: In 36 years, Jian Gong died, and his son Ding Gongning ascended to the throne.

古文：秋，定公朝晋昭公。
现代文：秋季，定公朝拜了晋昭公。
English: In autumn, Dingong paid homage to Jin Zhaogong.

古文：定公元年，楚公子弃疾弑其君灵王而自立，为平王。
现代文：定公元年，楚国公子弃疾杀死了国君灵王自立为君，这是平王。
English: In the year of the fixed calendar, the prince of the state of Chu renounced his illness and killed the king of the country, the king of spirits, and became the king himself. This was the king of peace.

古文：欲行德诸侯。归灵王所侵郑地于郑。
现代文：平王想在诸侯中做仁义道德之事，把灵王侵占郑国的土地都还给了郑国。
English: King Ping wanted to do the most benevolent, righteous and moral thing among the princes, and returned the land that King Ling had occupied to Zheng.

古文：四年，晋昭公卒，其六卿彊，公室卑。
现代文：四年，晋昭公逝世了，晋国的六卿强盛起来，国家力量减弱了。
English: In four years, Jin Zhaogong passed away, the Six Lords of Jin flourished, and the power of the state weakened.

古文：子产谓韩宣子曰： 为政必以德，毋忘所以立。 
现代文：子产对韩宣子说： 执掌政权一定凭仁义道德，不要忘记政权巩固的原因。 
English: Zi Yuan said to Han Xuan Zi, "To hold power, you must rely on benevolence, righteousness, and morality. Don't forget the reasons for consolidating power.

古文：六年，郑火，公欲禳之。
现代文：六年，郑国发生火灾，定公想祭祷消灾。
English: Six years ago, a fire broke out in Zheng Guo, and Ding Gong wanted to make a prayer to put out the fire.

古文：子产曰： 不如修德。 
现代文：子产说： 不如修行德政。 
English: Zi Yuan said: It is better to practice moral government.

古文：八年，楚太子建来奔。
现代文：八年，楚国太子建逃到郑国。
English: Eight years later, Prince Jian of Chu fled to Zheng.

古文：十年，太子建与晋谋袭郑。
现代文：十年，太子建与晋国商议袭击郑国。
English: Ten years later, Prince Jian negotiated with Jin to attack Zheng.

古文：郑杀建，建子胜奔吴。
现代文：郑国杀死了太子建，太子建的儿子逃到吴国。
English: Zheng killed Prince Jian, and Prince Jian's son fled to Wu.

古文：十一年，定公如晋。
现代文：十一年，定公到了晋国。
English: In the eleventh year, Dingong arrived in Jin.

古文：晋与郑谋，诛周乱臣，入敬王于周。
现代文：晋与郑商议，杀死周王室作乱的臣子，送敬王回周。
English: Jin discussed with Zheng to kill the Zhou courtier who had caused the disturbance and send the king back to Zhou.

古文：十三年，定公卒，子献公虿立。
现代文：十三年，定公逝世了，儿子献公虿即位。
English: In the thirteenth year, Sadako died, and her son ascended the throne.

古文：献公十三年卒，子声公胜立。
现代文：献公十三年逝世，儿子声公胜即位。
English: He died after 13 years of dedication to the emperor, and his son Shoko Shose ascended to the throne.

古文：当是时，晋六卿彊，侵夺郑，郑遂弱。
现代文：正在这时候，晋国六卿强盛了，侵夺郑国领土，郑于是衰落了。
English: It was at this time that the Six Lords of the Jin Dynasty became powerful and invaded the territory of Zheng. Zheng then declined.

古文：声公五年，郑相子产卒，郑人皆哭泣，悲之如亡亲戚。
现代文：声公五年，郑国相子产逝世，郑人都哭泣，悲悼他如同悲悼自己的亲人。
English: Five years after the death of Zheng Guo, Zheng Guo's son-in-law, Zheng Guo wept and mourned him as if he were his own relative.

古文：子产者，郑成公少子也。
现代文：子产是郑成公的小儿子。
English: The child is the youngest son of Zheng Chenggong.

古文：为人仁爱人，事君忠厚。
现代文：为人仁慈关怀别人，事奉君王忠诚老实。
English: Be kind and considerate to others, and serve the king faithfully and honestly.

古文：孔子尝过郑，与子产如兄弟云。
现代文：孔子曾经路过郑国，与子产亲如兄弟。
English: Confucius once passed through Zhengzhou, and he was like a brother to his son.

古文：及闻子产死，孔子为泣曰： 古之遗爱也！ 
现代文：听到子产死去，孔子悲哭道： 子产的仁爱，真是古代的遗风啊！ 
English: Upon hearing of the death of Zibo, Confucius cried out in grief: "The benevolence of Zibo is really a relic of ancient times!

古文：八年，晋范、中行氏反晋，告急於郑，郑救之。
现代文：八年，晋国的范氏、中行氏反叛晋国，晋向郑国告急，郑国救助他们。
English: In the eighth year, the Fan and Zhongxing clans of Jin rebelled against Jin, and Jin went to Zheng for help, and Zheng rescued them.

古文：晋伐郑，败郑军於铁。
现代文：晋国因而攻打郑国，在铁把郑军打得大败。
English: As a result, Jin attacked Zheng and inflicted a crushing defeat on Zheng's army.

古文：十四年，宋景公灭曹。
现代文：十四年，宋景公亡了曹国。
English: Fourteen years ago, Song Jinggong died in Cao.

古文：二十年，齐田常弑其君简公，而常相於齐。
现代文：二十年，齐国田常杀死了自己的国君简公，田常做了齐国国相。
English: Twenty years ago, Tian Chang of Qi killed his own sovereign, Jian Gong, and Tian Chang became the minister of state of Qi.

古文：二十二年，楚惠王灭陈。
现代文：二十二年，楚惠王灭亡了陈国。
English: In the 22nd year, King Chu Hui destroyed the State of Chen.

古文：孔子卒。
现代文：孔子逝世了。
English: Confucius died the same year.

古文：三十六年，晋知伯伐郑，取九邑。
现代文：三十六年，晋国知伯讨伐郑国，攻取了九个城邑。
English: In the 36th year of the Jin Dynasty, Zhibo led a crusade against Zheng and captured nine cities and towns.

古文：三十七年，声公卒，子哀公易立。
现代文：三十七年，声公逝世了，儿子哀公即位。
English: In the thirty-seventh year, Shoko died, and his son Aiko ascended the throne.

古文：哀公八年，郑人弑哀公而立声公弟丑，是为共公。
现代文：哀公八年，郑人杀死了哀公立了声公的弟弟丑为国君，这是共公。
English: In the eighth year of Aiko, Zheng killed Aiko's younger brother, Ugly, who had become the ruler of the country. This was the beginning of communism.

古文：共公三年，三晋灭知伯。
现代文：共公三年，三晋消灭了知伯。
English: After three years of communism, the Third Jin Dynasty eliminated Chibo.

古文：三十一年，共公卒，子幽公已立。
现代文：三十一年，共公逝世了，儿子幽公即位。
English: In the 31st year, Gongong died, and his son Yu Gong ascended to the throne.

古文：幽公元年，韩武子伐郑，杀幽公。
现代文：幽公元年，韩武子讨伐郑国，杀死了幽公。
English: In the year of Yu, Han Wuzi attacked Zheng and killed Yu Gong.

古文：郑人立幽公弟骀，是为繻公。
现代文：郑人立了幽公的弟弟为国君，这是公。
English: Zheng Ren made Yu Gong's younger brother the ruler of the country. This was the end of Yu Gong.

古文：繻公十五年，韩景侯伐郑，取雍丘。
现代文：公十五年，韩景侯讨伐郑国，攻取了雍丘。
English: In his fifteenth year of reign, Han Jinghong invaded Zheng and captured Yongqiu.

古文：郑城京。
现代文：郑国修筑了京城。
English: Zheng Guo built the capital city.

古文：十六年，郑伐韩，败韩兵於负黍。
现代文：十六年，郑国讨伐韩国，在负黍打败了韩军。
English: Sixteen years ago, Zheng Guo attacked South Korea and defeated the Korean army at the Battle of Zhouzhuang.

古文：二十年，韩、赵、魏列为诸侯。
现代文：二十年，韩、赵、魏成为诸侯国。
English: Twenty years later, Han, Zhao, and Wei became vassal states.

古文：二十三年，郑围韩之阳翟。
现代文：二十三年，郑国包围了韩国的阳翟。
English: In 233, Zheng surrounded South Korea's Yongbyon.

古文：二十五年，郑君杀其相子阳。
现代文：二十五年，郑君杀死了国相阳。
English: Twenty-five years ago, Zheng Jun killed Guo Xiangyang.

古文：二十七，子阳之党共弑繻公骀而立幽公弟乙为君，是为郑君。
现代文：二十七年，子阳的党羽一起杀死了公骀，立了幽公的弟弟乙为国君，这是郑君。
English: In the 27th year, Ziyang's partisans killed Zang Gongjun together and made Yugong's younger brother B the ruler of the country. This is Zheng Jun.

古文：郑君乙立二年，郑负黍反，复归韩。
现代文：郑君乙即位两年，被郑国占领的负黍的人反叛，使负黍回归韩国。
English: Two years after Zheng Junyi's accession to the throne, the people who had been occupied by Zheng rebelled and made them return to Korea.

古文：十一年，韩伐郑，取阳城。
现代文：十一年，韩国讨伐郑国，夺下了阳城。
English: In the eleventh year, South Korea invaded Zheng and captured Yangcheng.

古文：二十一年，韩哀侯灭郑，并其国。
现代文：二十一年，韩哀侯灭亡了郑国，吞并了郑国。
English: In 1921, Han Yehou defeated and annexed Zheng Guo.

古文：太史公曰：语有之， 以权利合者，权利尽而交疏 ，甫瑕是也。
现代文：太史公说：常言道， 依靠权势与利害关系结合在一起的人，当权势利害终结时，关系也就疏远了 ，甫瑕正是这样。
English: Taishigong said: As the saying goes, those who rely on power and interests to stay together, when the power and interests end, the relationship will be alienated, and this is precisely the defect.

古文：甫瑕虽以劫杀郑子内厉公，厉公终背而杀之，此与晋之里克何异？
现代文：甫瑕虽然劫持杀害郑子并接纳厉公回国为君，但是厉公最终抛弃了他并将他杀害，这种做法与晋国的里克有什么区别呢？
English: Although he kidnapped and killed Zheng Zi and accepted Li Gong back to China as his prince, Li Gong eventually abandoned him and killed him. What is the difference between this practice and the Rick of Jin?

古文：守节如荀息，身死而不能存奚齐。
现代文：但是像荀息那样坚守节操，即便身死也没能保住傒齐。
English: However, he adhered to the discipline like a hawk, and even if he died, he couldn't keep it up.

古文：变所从来，亦多故矣！
现代文：因为变乱的产生，也是有着诸多原因的呀！
English: Because the emergence of turmoil also has many causes!

