古文：武德九年冬，突厥颉利、突利二可汗以其众二十万，至滑水便桥之北，遣酋帅执矢思力入朝为觇，自张声势云： 二可汗总兵百万，今已至矣。 
现代文：武德九年冬天，突厥颉利、突利二位首领率领二十万士兵，长驱直入到渭水便桥以北。他们派将领执矢思力入朝面见皇帝，执矢思力虚张声势地说： 二位可汗一共有兵马百万之众，现在已到了京师。 
English: In the winter of the 9th year of Wude, the two leaders of the Turkic Khari and the Turkic Khari led 200,000 soldiers and drove straight to the north of the Surabaya Bridge. They sent generals to see the emperor face to face, and said with bravado: The two khans have a total of one million soldiers and horses, and have now arrived in Beijing.

古文：乃请返命。太宗谓曰： 我与突厥面自和亲，汝则背之，我无所愧，何辄将兵入我畿县，自夸强盛？
现代文：唐太宗说： 我已与突厥和亲，你们如今却背叛我，我无所愧疚，而你们为什么兴师京城，还自夸强盛？
English: Tang Taizong said: I have made peace with the Turks, but now you are betraying me. I have nothing to be ashamed of. But why did you build the capital and boast of your strength?

古文：我当先戮尔矣！ 
现代文：我要先杀了你。 
English: I'll kill you first.

古文：思力惧而请命。
现代文：思力吓得连忙请求饶命。
English: Scared, Si Li quickly pleaded for his life to be spared.

古文：萧瑀、封德彝等请礼而遣之，太宗曰： 不然。
现代文：萧瑀、封德彝等大臣连忙劝止，建议对他以礼相待，并将他遣返回突厥。
English: Xiao Jun, Feng Dejun and other ministers hurried to dissuade him, suggesting that he be treated with courtesy and sent back to Turkey.

古文：今若放还，必谓我惧。 
现代文：唐太宗执意不肯，说： 不行，如果把他遣返，他们一定会认为我害怕了。 
English: Tang Taizong stubbornly refused, saying, "No, if I send him back, they'll think I'm scared."

古文：乃遣囚之。
现代文：于是下令把他囚禁起来。
English: And he commanded him to be shut up.

古文：太宗曰： 颉利闻我国家新有内难，又闻朕初即位，所以率其兵众直至于此，谓我不敢拒之。
现代文：唐太宗对大臣们说： 颉利听说大唐最近国内有难，又欺我刚刚继位。所以率军直逼长安城下，以为我不敢抵抗。
English: Emperor Taizong of Tang said to his ministers, "Kenri heard that Datang was recently experiencing difficulties in the country, and that I had just succeeded to the throne. Therefore, he led his army straight to the foot of Chang'an Castle, thinking that I would not dare to resist.

古文：朕若闭门自守，虏必纵兵大掠。
现代文：我如果关闭城门自守，他们必定大肆践踏中原。
English: If I close the gates to protect myself, they will surely trample the Central Plains.

古文：强弱之势，在今一策。
现代文：局势是强是弱，在于今日的决策。
English: Whether the situation is strong or weak depends on today's decisions.

古文：朕将独出，以示轻之，且耀军容，使知必战。
现代文：我决定单独出城，以示对他们的轻视之意，并且炫耀我们的兵力，让他们知道战争是不可避免的。
English: I decided to go out of the city alone to show my contempt for them and to show off our forces to let them know that war was inevitable.

古文：事出不意，乖其本图，制服匈奴，在兹举矣。 
现代文：使他们出其不意，挫败他们的计划，制伏匈奴，在此一举了。 
English: To take them by surprise, to frustrate their plans, to subdue the Huns, all in one fell swoop.

古文：遂单马而进，隔津与语，颉利莫能测。
现代文：话毕，便骑马来到突厥兵驻地，隔着河对他们喊话，让颉利摸不清虚实。
English: After the speech, he rode to the Turkish garrison and shouted to them across the river, so that Meli could not tell what was true and what was false.

古文：俄而六军继至，颉利见军容大盛，又知思力就拘，由是大惧，请盟而退。
现代文：不久，大唐六军相继到达，颉利看到大唐兵力如此强盛，又得知执矢思力被囚禁，因而异常惊恐，于是请求签定和约，并很快撤了军。
English: Soon, the six armies of the Great Tang arrived one after another. Seeing the great strength of the Tang army, and learning that Zheya Sili was imprisoned, he was extremely frightened, so he asked to sign a peace treaty and quickly withdrew his army.

古文：贞观初，岭南诸州奏言高州酋帅冯盎、谈殿阻兵反叛。诏将军蔺謩发江、岭数十州兵讨之。
现代文：贞观初年，岭南各州县上奏告发高州统帅冯盎、谈殿起兵反叛，唐太宗下诏令将军蔺謩调动江南、岭南几十个州县的士兵讨伐。
English: In the first year of Zhenguan, all the prefectures and counties in Lingnan reported to the emperor that the commander-in-chief of Gaozhou, Feng Ang, had rebelled, and Emperor Taizong ordered the general to mobilize soldiers from dozens of prefectures and counties in the south of the Yangtze River and Lingnan.

古文：秘书监魏征谏曰： 中国初定，疮痍未复，岭南瘴疬，山川阻深，兵运难继，疾疫或起，若不如意，悔不可追。
现代文：秘书监魏徵进谏劝止说： 中原刚刚获得太平，天下疮痍满目。岭南地区又多瘴疠，山川险阻，士兵行军非常困难，如果达不到预期目的，后悔就来不及了。
English: Secretary Supervisor Wei Zhengjin said: "The Central Plains have just achieved peace, and the world is full of devastation. The southern part of Lingnan is also very rugged, with many mountains and rivers, and it is very difficult for soldiers to march. If they do not achieve the expected goal, it will be too late to regret it.

古文：且冯盎若反，即须及中国未宁，交结远人，分兵断险，破掠州县，署置官司。
现代文：并且，冯盎如果真的造反，必然使中原地区不得安宁，他可以勾结南方少数民族，分兵据守险要之地，攻城略地，设置州府。
English: Moreover, if Feng Un really rebelled, he would inevitably make the Central Plains region restless. He could collude with the southern ethnic minorities, divide the army to defend the critical places, attack the city, and set up the state capital.

古文：何因告来数年，兵不出境？
现代文：这么多年一直都有人上奏告他叛乱，为什么却不见他的一兵一卒攻出岭南呢？
English: For so many years, people have been calling him a rebel, but why haven't we seen a single one of his soldiers leave Lingnan?

古文：此则反形未成，无容动众。陛下既未遣使人就彼观察，即来朝谒，恐不见明。今若遣使，分明晓谕，必不劳师旅，自致阙庭。 
现代文：既然陛下还没派使者前去查明虚实，只听岭南地方官的一面之词，就去攻打他，恐怕不明智，现在如果派人去打探，弄清真相，必然不会兴师动众，还可以使他自己上朝述职。 
English: Since His Majesty has not yet sent an envoy to find out the truth, I am afraid it is not wise to listen to only one side of the words of the Lingnan local official and attack him. Now, if you send someone to investigate and find out the truth, it will certainly not attract people, and you can also make him report to the government.

古文：太宗从之，岭表悉定。
现代文：唐太宗接受了这个意见，岭南地区于是避免了一次战火之灾。
English: Emperor Taizong accepted this suggestion, and the Lingnan region avoided a war.

古文：侍臣奏言： 冯盎、谈殿往年恒相征伐，陛下发一单使，岭外帖然。 
现代文：事后，一位侍臣上奏说： 冯盎和谈殿多年来一直相互作战，陛下只派了一个使者，就使岭南地区获得了太平。 
English: After the event, a courtier reported: "The Feng Ang Peace Palace has been at war with each other for many years. His Majesty sent only one envoy to bring peace to the Lingnan region.

古文：太宗曰： 初，岭南诸州盛言盎反，朕必欲讨之，魏征频谏，以为但怀之以德，必不讨自来。
现代文：唐太宗也说： 当初岭南的地方官盛传冯盎要叛乱，我决心讨伐。是魏徵上书劝阻了我，认为应该采取仁德的策略，不经过战争他必定会自己来朝说明情况。
English: Tang Taizong also said: At the beginning, the local officials in Lingnan spread rumors that Feng Ang wanted to rebel, and I was determined to fight against it. It was Wei Zheng's petition that dissuaded me, believing that a benevolent strategy should be adopted. Without a war, he would certainly come to the DPRK to explain the situation.

古文：既从其计，遂得岭表无事，不劳而定，胜于十万之师。 
现代文：我听从了他的建议，结果不动一兵一卒而岭南获得安宁，其效果真是胜过十万大军的威力啊。 
English: I followed his advice, and as a result, without moving a single soldier, Lingnan gained peace, and the effect was truly better than the power of a hundred thousand armies.

古文：乃赐征绢五百匹。
现代文：于是赏赐魏徵绢五百匹。
English: So Wei was rewarded with 500 horses.

古文：贞观四年，有司上言： 林邑蛮国，表疏不顺，请发兵讨击之。 
现代文：贞观四年，主管大臣报告说： 南方的林邑国，上疏的言辞不恭顺，请陛下发兵讨伐他们。 
English: In the fourth year of Zhenguan, the minister in charge reported: Lin's country in the south, Shangzo's words are not respectful, please His Majesty send troops to fight them.

古文：太宗曰： 兵者凶器，不得已而用之。故汉光武云： 每一发兵，不觉头须为白。 
现代文：唐太宗说： 出兵讨伐破坏性太大。不到万不得已不要采用，所以汉光武帝说： 每次发兵都会使我的头发变白。 
English: Tang Taizong said: Sending troops to fight is too destructive. Don't use it unless absolutely necessary, so Han Guangwu said: Every time I send troops, my hair turns white.

古文：自古以来穷兵极武，未有不亡者也。
现代文：自古以来穷兵黩武的人，没有不自取灭亡的。
English: Since ancient times, there has never been a person who fought bravely and selflessly without self-destruction.

古文：苻坚自恃兵强，欲必吞晋室，兴兵百万，一举而亡。
现代文：苻坚自恃兵力强大，发誓要吞并晋朝，一次就出兵百万之众，结果一举而亡。
English: Zou Jian boasted that his army was strong, vowed to annex Jin Dynasty, and dispatched one million soldiers at a time. As a result, Zou Jian died in one fell swoop.

古文：隋主亦必欲取高丽，频年劳役，人不胜怨，遂死于匹夫之手。
现代文：隋炀帝也一定要攻破高丽，多年征战劳役不断，老百姓苦不堪言，他终于死于小人之手。
English: The Sui and Qian Dynasties also had to break through Goryeo. For many years, there was constant conscription and forced labor, and the common people suffered terribly. He finally died at the hands of a villain.

古文：至如颉利，往岁数来侵我国家，部落疲于征役，遂至灭亡。
现代文：至于突厥颉利，几年来他多次进犯中原，部落成员被战事弄得疲惫不堪，终于也灭亡了。
English: As for the Turkic Kheli, for several years he repeatedly invaded the Central Plains, the tribe members were exhausted by the fighting, and finally perished.

古文：朕今见此，岂得辄即发兵？
现代文：有这些前车之鉴，我怎能轻易出战呢？
English: With these precedents, how can I easily go to war?

古文：但经历山险，土多瘴疬，若我兵士疾疫，虽克剪此蛮，亦何所补？
现代文：况且到南方作战，要翻越崇山峻岭，那里又流行瘴疠，如果士兵们被传染上，即使战胜了南蛮，又于事何补呢？
English: Moreover, to fight in the south, you have to climb over high mountains and there is a plague of scabies. If soldiers are infected, even if they defeat the barbarians from the south, what good will it do?

古文：言语之间，何足介意！ 
现代文：何况，南蛮林邑只是在言语之间流露不满，又何必太在意呢？ 
English: What's more, Nanba Lin County is only expressing dissatisfaction between words, so why should they care too much?

古文：竟不讨之。
现代文：于是决定不讨伐林邑。
English: As a result, it was decided not to fight the logging of Lim Eup.

古文：贞观五年，康国请归附。时太宗谓侍臣曰： 前代帝王，大有务广土地，以求身后之虚名，无益于身，其民甚困。
现代文：贞观五年，康国请求归顺，唐太宗对侍臣们说： 前代的帝王，很多都喜好疆域辽阔，以求为自己博得身后的虚名，这样做既对自己无益，也使百姓劳顿不堪。
English: In the fifth year of Zhenguan, when Kangguo requested to surrender, Tang Taizong said to his courtiers: Many emperors of the previous generation liked vast territories in order to gain a false reputation for themselves. Doing so was not only unprofitable for themselves, but also caused the people to be overworked.

古文：假令于身有益，于百姓有损，朕必有为，况求虚名而损百姓乎？
现代文：如果是对自己有益，但对老百姓有害的事情，我决不会做，何况是因为贪虚名而损害百姓的利益呢？
English: If it is beneficial to myself, but harmful to the people, I will never do it, let alone harm the interests of the people because of greed and vanity?

古文：康国既来归朝，有急难不得不救；兵行万里，岂得无劳于民？
现代文：康国如果归顺了我朝，他们有难我们就不得不援救。到那里要行军万里之遥，怎么可能不劳师动众呢？
English: If Kangguo surrendered to our dynasty, we would have to come to their rescue if they were in trouble. How is it possible to march thousands of miles to a place without having to work hard to motivate the people?

古文：若劳民求名，非朕所欲。所请归附，不须纳也。 
现代文：如果为求虚名而使士兵劳顿，我是不会情愿的。
English: I wouldn't like it if I made the soldiers work too hard in order to gain a false reputation.

古文：贞观十四年，兵部尚书侯君集伐高昌，及师次柳谷，候骑言： 高昌王麴文泰死，克日将葬，国人咸集，以二千轻骑袭之，可尽得也。 
现代文：关于他们归顺的要求，我不接受。 贞观十四年，兵部尚书侯君集讨伐高昌，把兵士驻扎在柳谷，侦察说： 高昌王麹文泰听说大唐兵临城下，非常害怕，不知所措，不久就病发身亡。
English: I do not accept the demand that they surrender. In the 14th year of Zhenguan, the warlord Shang Shuhong assembled his army to attack Gaochang and stationed his soldiers in Liuguan. The scout said: Gaochang's King Wen Tai heard that the Great Tang soldiers were approaching the city. He was very scared and at a loss, and soon fell ill and died.

古文：副将薛万均、姜行本皆以为然。
现代文：过些时候他将被安葬，高昌的国民将齐集在一起，到时候用两千骑兵去袭击，定能一举拿下。 
English: In a little while he will be buried, and the people of Gaochang will gather together, and when the time comes, they will attack with two thousand cavalry, and they will surely be able to take it in one fell swoop.

古文：君集曰： 天子以高昌骄慢，使吾恭行天诛。
现代文：副将薛万均、姜行本都赞同他的计策，侯君集却说： 皇上因为高昌骄傲轻慢，所以派我诛灭他们。
English: Vice-commanders Xue Wanjun and Jiang Xingben both agreed with his strategy, but Hou Junji said, "The emperor sent me to destroy Gaochang because they are proud and careless."

古文：乃于墟墓间以袭其葬，不足称武，此非问罪之师也。 
现代文：如果趁他们国葬期间去偷袭，不足以表现大唐的威武，更不能表明我们是讨伐罪人的正义之师。 
English: It is not enough to show the might of the Great Tang Dynasty if you make a surprise attack during their state funeral, nor can you show that you are a righteous teacher who fights against sinners.

古文：遂按兵以待葬毕，然后进军，遂平其国。
现代文：于是按兵不动，等他们葬礼结束了才出兵征讨，不久就平定了高昌。
English: As a result, the soldiers did not move, and waited until their funeral was over before sending troops to collect, and Gaochang was soon pacified.

古文：贞观十六年，太宗谓侍臣曰： 北狄世为寇乱，今延陀倔强，须早为之所。
现代文：贞观十六年，唐太宗对侍臣说： 北狄历来凶残，时常制造叛乱，现在薛延陀很不安分，应该早日处置他们。
English: In the 16th year of Zhenguan, Tang Taizong said to his courtiers: Bei Di has always been ferocious, often creating rebellions. Now Xue Yantuo is very restless, and they should be dealt with as soon as possible.

古文：朕熟思之，惟有二策：选徒十万，击而虏之，涤除凶丑，百年无患，此一策也。
现代文：我仔细考虑了两个策略。选派十万精兵，讨伐虏获他们，铲除凶残丑恶之徒，可确保百年没有祸患，这是一策。
English: I have carefully considered two strategies. It is a strategy to select 100,000 elite soldiers, fight and capture them, and eradicate the cruel and ugly people to ensure that there will be no disaster for a hundred years.

古文：若遂其来请，与之为婚媾。
现代文：另外，如果满足他们的请求，与之通婚，又将怎么样呢？
English: Moreover, if their request is granted and they marry, what will happen?

古文：朕为苍生父母，苟可利之，岂惜一女！
现代文：我乃百姓的父母，如果可以有利于天下，出嫁一个女儿又何足惜！
English: I am the people's parent, if I can be beneficial to the world, what a pity to marry off a daughter!

古文：北狄风俗，多由内政，亦既生子，则我外孙，不侵中国，断可知矣。
现代文：北狄的风俗，有很多和我们相同的地方，如果有了后代，就是我的外孙，他不会侵犯中原，这是肯定的。
English: The customs of the Northern Di have a lot in common with ours. If there is a descendant, that is, my grandchild, he will not invade the Central Plains, that is certain.

古文：以此而言，边境足得三十年来无事。举此二策，何者为先？ 
现代文：由此可确保边境三十年太平无事。这两个计策，哪一个好呢？ 
English: This would ensure peace on the border for 30 years. Which of these two strategies is better?

古文：司空房玄龄对曰： 遭隋室大乱之后，户口太半未复，兵凶战危，圣人所慎，和亲之策，实天下幸甚。 
现代文：司空房玄龄说： 隋末大乱之后，中原百姓死伤过半，还没恢复元气，战争是很危险残酷的，圣明的人对此都很谨慎。和亲的策略，如果能实施，实在是万民之大幸啊。 
English: "After the chaos at the end of the Sui Dynasty, more than half of the Central Plains people were killed or injured and have yet to recover. The war was very dangerous and cruel, and the people of Shengming were very cautious about it. The strategy of amity, if it can be implemented, is really a great blessing for all people."

古文：贞观十七年，太宗谓侍臣曰： 盖苏文弑其主而夺其国政，诚不可忍。
现代文：贞观十七年，唐太宗对侍臣说： 盖苏文杀害了他的主子，夺去政权，是可忍，孰不可忍。
English: In the seventeenth year of Zhenguan, Emperor Taizong of Tang said to his attendants: "Gai Suwen killed his master and seized power. This can be tolerated, but it must not be tolerated."

古文：今日国家兵力，取之不难，朕未能即动兵众，且令契丹、靺鞨搅扰之，何如？ 
现代文：现在用大唐的兵力去平定他们并不难，如果我按兵不动，命令契丹、靺鞨去搅乱他们，怎么样？ 
English: Now it is not difficult to use the forces of the Great Tang Dynasty to pacify them. What if I hold my ground and order the Khitan and the Yao to disturb them?

古文：房玄龄对曰： 臣观古之列国，无不强陵弱，众暴寡。
现代文：房玄龄说： 我发现古代的国家，无不以强凌弱，以众克寡。
English: Fong Xuanling said: I found that in ancient countries, the strong used to dominate the weak, and the weak used to dominate the strong.

古文：今陛下抚养苍生，将士勇锐，力有余而不取之，所谓止戈为武者也。
现代文：现在，陛下含养天下苍生，将士骁勇善战，国力如此强盛却不实行武攻，这是化干戈为玉帛啊。
English: Now, your majesty, you nurture all living beings in the world, you train soldiers to be brave and good at war, and your national strength is so strong, yet you do not carry out an armed attack. This is turning a stalemate into a victory.

古文：昔汉武帝屡伐匈奴，隋主三征辽左，人贫国败，实此之由，惟陛下详察。 
现代文：过去汉武帝多次征讨匈奴，隋炀帝三次攻打辽东，国破家亡，由此产生。请陛下详察。 
English: In the past, Emperor Hanwu conquered the Xiongnu many times, and Emperor Sui and Qian attacked Liaodong three times, resulting in the destruction of the country. Your Majesty, please take a closer look.

古文：太宗曰： 善！ 
现代文：唐太宗说： 你说的不错。 
English: Tang Taizong said: You are right.

古文：贞观十八年，太宗以高丽莫离支贼杀其主，残虐其下，议将讨之。谏议大夫褚遂良进曰： 陛下兵机神算，人莫能知。
现代文：贞观十八年，唐太宗因为高丽国的莫离支弑杀君主，残暴地对待下属，所以和众大臣商议讨伐，谏议大夫褚遂良进谏说： 陛下神机妙算，平庸的人不能了解您的谋略，过去隋末天下纷争，陛下平定了贼寇，以及北狄对边境的侵犯。
English: In the 18th year of Zhenguan, Emperor Taizong of Tang negotiated with his ministers for a crusade against the Koryo kingdom, because the Koryo supported and killed the monarch, and treated his subordinates cruelly. The doctor of the discussion, Yu Suiliang Jinjun, said: "Your Majesty is so clever, mediocre people can't understand your strategy. In the past, there were disputes between the Sui Dynasty and the end of the world. Your Majesty quelled the bandits, as well as North Korea's invasion of the border.

古文：昔隋末乱离，克平寇难，及北狄侵边，西蕃失礼，陛下欲命将击之，群臣莫不苦谏，惟陛下明略独断，卒并诛夷。
现代文：西方少数民族对大唐失礼，陛下要出兵打击，臣子们没有谁不苦苦劝阻。只有陛下圣明，远见卓识，一一诛死了异族。
English: Western ethnic minorities were disrespectful to the Great Tang Dynasty, His Majesty wanted to send troops to fight them, and there was no one among his courtiers who did not work hard to dissuade him. Only His Majesty was wise and far-sighted, and killed all the foreigners.

古文：今闻陛下将伐高丽，意皆荧惑。
现代文：现在听说陛下要讨伐高丽，我感到很疑惑。
English: Now that I hear that His Majesty wants to invade Korea, I am very puzzled.

古文：然陛下神武英声，不比周、隋之主，兵若渡辽，事须克捷，万一不获，无以威示远方，必更发怒，再动兵众。
现代文：然而陛下英明神勇，是隋代的君主无法相比的。可是，士兵们一旦渡过辽河，必须速战速决，万一有点闪失，不仅无法向远方异族显示朝廷的神威，陛下必定因此更加生气，再次兴师动众。
English: However, once the soldiers crossed the Liao River, they had to make a quick decision. In the unlikely event of a slip-up, they would not only be unable to show the prestige of the imperial court to the distant foreign people, but His Majesty would surely be even more angry and once again inspire the masses.

古文：若至于此，安危难测。 
现代文：如果到了这种地步，国家的安危就难以预料了。 
English: If it gets to this point, it will be difficult to predict the security of the country.

古文：太宗然之。
现代文：唐太宗认为他的话很有道理。
English: Tang Taizong thought his words were very reasonable.

古文：贞观十九年，太宗将亲征高丽，开府仪同三司尉迟敬德奏言： 车驾若自往辽左，皇太子又监国定州，东西二京，府库所在，虽有镇守，终是空虚，辽东路遥，恐有玄感之变。
现代文：贞观十九年，唐太宗将出征高丽，开府仪同三司尉迟敬德上奏说： 陛下如果亲征辽东，皇太子现在又在定州监国，东西二京是国库重地，虽然都设有官府、兵库，只有兵士把守，但终归很空虚，辽东又路途遥远，恐怕会出现隋炀帝亲征高丽时，杨玄感趁机起兵围攻东都的变故。
English: In the 19th year of Zhenguan, Emperor Taizong of the Tang Dynasty set out to conquer Goryeo. Kaifu Yi and Third Lieutenant Chi Jingde made the following report: "Your Majesty, if you personally conquer Liaodong, the crown prince is now supervising the country in Dingzhou. East and West Beijing are important places for the national treasury. Although there are government offices and military depots, they are guarded only by soldiers, but in the end they are very empty. Liaodong is also a long way away. I am afraid that there will be a change when Emperor Sui personally conquers Goryeo. Yang Xuan sensed an opportunity to besiege

古文：且边隅小国，不足亲劳万乘。
现代文：并且，高丽乃边远的小国，何劳陛下亲自征讨。
English: Moreover, Korea is a small country far away, so it is not difficult for His Majesty to collect the tax in person.

古文：若克胜，不足为武，倘不胜，翻为所笑。
现代文：如果取胜，也不足以显示大唐的神勇，倘若失败，岂不贻笑世人？
English: If they win, it will not be enough to show the courage of the Great Tang Dynasty. If they fail, will they not be laughed at by the world?

古文：伏请委之良将，自可应时摧灭。 
现代文：我请求陛下委派良将去征讨，自然可将他们摧毁。 
English: I ask Your Majesty to send good generals to collect them, so that they can be destroyed.

古文：太宗虽不从其谏，而识者是之。
现代文：唐太宗没有采纳他的意见，但是他的建议赢得了当朝一些有识之士的赞许。
English: Emperor Taizong did not adopt his opinion, but his suggestion won the approval of some insightful people in the dynasty.

古文：礼部尚书江夏王道宗从太宗征高丽，诏道宗与李勣为前锋，及济辽水克盖牟城，逢贼兵大至，军中佥欲深沟保险，待太宗至，徐进。
现代文：礼部尚书江夏人王道宗跟随唐太宗征伐高丽，唐太宗命王道宗和李为先锋。他们渡过辽水，攻克了盖牟城之后，敌军大举进攻，军中有人建议挖深沟以求保险，等唐太宗到了，再慢慢攻打他们。
English: Wang Daozong, a native of Jiangxia, followed Tang Taizong in the conquest of Korea, and Tang Taizong ordered Wang Daozong and Li to be the vanguard. After they crossed the Liao Shui and conquered Gaimu City, the enemy attacked in a big way. Some people in the army suggested digging a deep ditch for insurance, and wait for Tang Taizong to arrive, and then slowly attack them.

古文：道宗议曰： 不可，贼赴急远来，兵实疲顿，恃众轻我，一战可摧。
现代文：王道宗坚决反对，说： 不行，敌军远道而来，士兵已经疲惫不堪了，他们倚仗人马多，所以轻视我们。其实，一次战斗就可以摧毁他们。
English: Wang Daozong firmly objected, saying, "No, the enemy army has come from far away, the soldiers are exhausted, they rely on many people, so they despise us. In fact, they can be destroyed in one battle."

古文：昔耿弇不以贼遗君父，我既职在前军，当须清道以待舆驾。 
现代文：汉时，耿弇不把敌军留给汉光武帝处置。我们既然是先锋，就应当清除敌人，为陛下开路，等待他的到来。 
English: During the Han Dynasty, Geng Xuan did not leave the enemy army at the disposal of Emperor Han Guangwu. Since we are the vanguard, we should clear the enemy, open the way for His Majesty, and wait for his arrival.

古文：李勣大然其议。
现代文：李非常赞同他的意见。
English: Li strongly agreed with his opinion.

古文：乃率骁勇数百骑，直冲贼阵，左右出入，勣因合击，大破之。
现代文：于是王道宗率领几百名骁勇善战的骑兵，径向敌人的阵地冲去，加上李的接应，左右出击，大败敌军。
English: As a result, Wang Daozong led several hundred brave and skillful cavalrymen, rushed to the enemy's position, and together with Li's response, attacked left and right, and defeated the enemy army.

古文：太宗至，深加赏劳。
现代文：唐太宗不久赶来，对他们大加赞赏和犒劳。
English: Emperor Taizong of Tang soon arrived and lavished praise and rewards on them.

古文：道宗在阵损足，帝亲为针灸，赐以御膳。
现代文：王道宗在战斗中伤了脚，唐太宗亲自替他针灸治疗，还赐给他御膳。
English: Wang Daozong injured his foot in the battle, Tang Taizong personally treated him with acupuncture and moxibustion, and also gave him a meal.

古文：太宗《帝范》曰： 夫兵甲者，国家凶器也。
现代文：唐太宗在他作的《帝范》一书里写道： 武器、铠甲是国家的凶器。
English: Tang Taizong wrote in his book "Imperial Fan": Weapons and armor are the deadly weapons of the state.

古文：土地虽广，好战则民凋；中国虽安，忘战则民殆。
现代文：即使疆域辽阔，穷兵黩武也会使民生凋敝。中原虽然平静，但忽略战备百姓就会懈怠。
English: Even if the territory is vast, poor soldiers will make the people's livelihoods wither. Although the Central Plains are calm, the people will slack off if they ignore the preparations for war.

古文：凋非保全之术，殆非拟寇之方，不可以全除，不可以常用。
现代文：民生凋敝不是保全国家的办法，懈怠更不是御敌的策略。武装既不可完全解除，又不可经常使用。
English: Destroying people's livelihoods is not a way to preserve the country, and slacking off is not a strategy against the enemy. Armament can neither be completely disarmed nor used frequently.

古文：故农隙讲武，习威仪也；三年治兵，辨等列也。
现代文：因此百姓农闲时，应讲习武艺，以彰显大唐的威仪；三年练兵，以辨别等级位次。
English: Therefore, when the people are idle, they should study martial arts to highlight the dignity of the Great Tang Dynasty; three years of military training to distinguish the rank.

古文：是以勾践轼蛙，卒成霸业；徐偃弃武，终以丧邦。
现代文：他礼敬怒蛙，终于成其霸业。徐偃放弃武功，依赖文德，后来周穆命令楚侯将他灭掉。
English: He bowed to the angry frog, and finally became its hegemony. Xu Xi gave up martial arts and relied on literature. Later, Zhou Mu ordered Chu Hou to eliminate him.

古文：何也？
现代文：这是为什么呢？
English: What is it for?

古文：越习其威，徐忘其备也。
现代文：就是因为越王加强武功，徐偃忘记战备。
English: It was because King Yue strengthened his martial arts that Xu Xi forgot to prepare for battle.

古文：孔子曰： 以不教民战，是谓弃之。 
现代文：孔子说： 不教民战事，是自我放弃，将国家拱手让给别人。 
English: Confucius said, "If you don't teach the people how to fight, you are giving up yourself and handing the country over to others."

古文：故知弧矢之威，以利天下，此用兵之职也。 
现代文：因此要知道，练习弓箭是为了安定天下，这就是用兵的作用。 
English: Therefore, you should know that practicing bow and arrow is to stabilize the world, which is the role of using soldiers.

古文：贞观二十二年，太宗将重讨高丽。是时，房玄龄寝疾增剧，顾谓诸子曰： 当今天下清谧，咸得其宜，惟欲东讨高丽，主为国害。吾知而不言，可谓衔恨入地。 
现代文：贞观二十二年，唐太宗将征讨高丽，当时大臣房玄龄卧病在家，病情越来越重，他对儿子们说： 当今天下太平无事，每个人都各得其所，而陛下却要讨伐高丽，这是老百姓的隐患，我如果知道它的危害却不指出来，就会抱恨终生的。 
English: In the 22nd year of Zhenguan, Emperor Taizong will invade Goryeo. At that time, Minister Fong Xuanling was ill at home, and his condition was getting worse and worse. He said to his sons: Today is a peaceful time, everyone has their own place, but Your Majesty wants to invade Goryeo. This is a hidden danger for the common people. If I knew its harm but did not point it out, I would hold a grudge for life.

古文：遂上表谏曰：
现代文：于是上疏唐太宗：
English: So Shang So Tang Taizong said:

古文：臣闻兵恶不戢，武贵止戈。
现代文：我听说兵器不宜常用，而武力贵在消歇。
English: I have heard that weapons should not be used frequently, and that the value of force is diminishing.

古文：当今圣化所覃，无远不暨。
现代文：当今，皇上的恩德泽被四方，无所不及。
English: Today, Emperor Ndeze is surrounded on all sides and can do anything.

古文：上古所不臣者，陛下皆能臣之；所不制者，皆能制之。
现代文：古代不能臣服的异族，陛下都使他们归顺了；古代不能够攻克的国家，陛下无不所向披靡。
English: Foreign nations that could not be conquered in ancient times, Your Majesty has made them submit; countries that could not be conquered in ancient times, Your Majesty has conquered them all.

古文：详观古今，为中国患害，无过突厥。遂能坐运神策，不下殿堂，大小可汗，相次束手，分典禁卫，执戟行间。
现代文：纵观历史，成为中原祸患的，首推突厥，而陛下却能运筹帷幄，不下朝堂，就使突厥大小可汗俯首称臣。
English: Throughout history, the Turks were the first to become the scourge of the Central Plains, but His Majesty was able to maneuver and, without going to the imperial court, made the Turkic khans bow their heads and declare themselves to be his vassals.

古文：其后延陀鸱张，寻就夷灭，铁勒慕义，请置州县，沙漠已北，万里无尘。
现代文：充当宫禁的宿卫，持戟于行伍之间，后来延陀鸱张的乱世枭雄，也败于大唐的神威之下，铁勒讲求信义，于是朝廷在那里设置州县。大漠以北，再也没有战争的尘烟。
English: He served as the palace's night watchman, keeping watch between the marching troops, and later, as the hero of the turbulent times, he was defeated by the grandeur of the Great Tang Dynasty. Tiller asked for loyalty, so the court set up prefectures and counties there. North of the desert, there was no more smoke of war.

古文：至如高昌叛涣于流沙，吐浑首鼠于积石，偏师薄伐，俱从平荡。
现代文：至于高昌在流沙的叛乱，吐浑在积石进退不定，陛下只派遣了一个偏师，就将他们一一平定。
English: As for Gaochang's rebellion in the quicksand, and Tuban's in the rocks, His Majesty dispatched only a partial division to subdue them one by one.

古文：高丽历代逋诛，莫能讨击。
现代文：高丽人历代叛乱，没有谁可以征服。
English: The Goryeo people have rebelled throughout the ages, and no one can conquer them.

古文：陛下责其逆乱，杀主虐人，亲总六军，问罪辽碣。
现代文：陛下怪罪他们谋反作乱，杀死国君，鱼肉百姓，亲自统率六军，进伐辽东，向他们兴师问罪。
English: His Majesty accused them of plotting rebellion and disorder, killing the sovereign and the common people, and personally led six armies to invade Liaodong and interrogate them.

古文：未经旬日，即拔辽东，前后虏获，数十万计，分配诸州，无处不满。
现代文：不过一旬，就攻克辽东，前后俘虏的敌军，达到十万之多，把他们发配到各州充军，都人满为患。
English: However, as soon as they conquered Liaodong, they captured as many as one hundred thousand enemy troops, and sent them to the states to join the army, and they were all overcrowded.

古文：雪往代之宿耻，掩崤陵之枯骨，比功校德，万倍前王。此圣主所自知，微臣安敢备说。
现代文：洗刷了过去的耻辱，掩埋了阵亡将士的遗骨。与古代帝王的功德相比，陛下胜过他们何止万倍。这是陛下都很清楚的，我不必多说。
English: Washed away the shame of the past, buried the remains of fallen soldiers. Compared with the merits of ancient emperors, His Majesty has surpassed them thousands of times. His Majesty is well aware of this, I don't need to say more.

古文：且陛下仁风被于率土，孝德彰于配天。
现代文：陛下仁德散布四方，孝敬之德齐于高天。
English: His Majesty's benevolence spreads in all directions, and the virtue of filial piety is as high as the heavens.

古文：睹夷狄之将亡，则指期数岁；授将帅之节度，则决机万里。
现代文：看到四邻外族将要灭亡，就能估算要几年的时间，因此，即便在万里之遥的边关也能决断军务。陛下决策于万里之外，却能稳操胜券。
English: Seeing that the four neighboring foreign nations were about to perish, he was able to estimate that it would take several years. Therefore, he was able to decide on military affairs even at the border thousands of miles away. His Majesty made decisions thousands of miles away, but he was able to win.

古文：屈指而候驿，视景而望书，符应若神，筭无遗策。
现代文：在士兵中提拔将士，在凡夫中选择俊才。即使是远方异族的一个使者，陛下也能过目不忘，更何况一个小官的名字，陛下只要询问一次就能记牢。
English: He promotes soldiers from soldiers and selects talents from ordinary people. Even if it is an envoy from a distant foreign nation, His Majesty will not forget it, not to mention the name of a minor official. His Majesty can remember it as long as he asks once.

古文：擢将于行伍之中，取士于凡庸之末。远夷单使，一见不忘；小臣之名，未尝再问。
现代文：陛下一箭可以射穿七札，六钧重的弓可以一下拉满，加之陛下喜欢阅读古代典籍，著述文章，书法超过钟繇、张芝，文笔胜过贾谊、司马相如。陛下文风劲健，作文章自然文采飞扬，下笔如神。
English: His Majesty's arrow can pierce seven cards, and his six-pronged bow can be pulled full at once. In addition, His Majesty likes to read ancient classics, literary articles, calligraphy is superior to Zhong Xi and Zhang Zhi, and writing is superior to Jia Yi and Sima Xiang. His Majesty's literary style is vigorous, his writing is naturally literary, and his penmanship is like a god.

古文：箭穿七札，弓贯六钧。加以留情坟典，属意篇什，笔迈钟、张，词穷贾、马。
现代文：陛下对百姓仁慈宽厚，对群臣注重礼数，能倾听逆耳的忠言，好生恶杀，禁止过度捕杀鱼类和牲畜，恩德普及自然万物。
English: His Majesty is kind and generous to the people, pays attention to the number of courtesies for his courtiers, is able to listen to disobedient advice, likes to kill, forbids the excessive killing of fish and livestock, and spreads kindness to all natural things.

古文：臣心识昏愦，岂足论圣功之深远，谈天德之高大哉？
现代文：陛下不惜屈尊，亲自为被流箭射伤的大将军李思摩吮血，亲自到魏徵的灵堂祭拜，为战争中牺牲的将士痛哭，哀恸之情震动六军。
English: His Majesty did not hesitate to condescend, personally shed blood for the general Li Sima, who was wounded by a stray arrow, and personally went to the Wei Zheng's chapel to worship, weeping for the soldiers who died in the war, and the six armies were shaken with grief.

古文：陛下兼众美而有之，靡不备具，微臣深为陛下惜之重之，爱之宝之。
现代文：还亲自背柴填充道路，此情足以感动天地。陛下重视黎民的生命，细心审察各种案件。
English: He also personally carried firewood to fill the road, which was enough to move heaven and earth. His Majesty attaches great importance to the lives of the Lebanese people and carefully examines all cases.

古文：《周易》曰： 知进而不知退，知存而不知亡，知得而不知丧。 
现代文：我心智愚钝，有何资格谈论陛下的大恩大德、大仁大义，只是略表自己的无限爱戴崇敬之情罢了。《周易》上写道： 知道前进也应知道后退，知道生存也应知道死亡，知道获得也应知道失去。 
English: My dull mind is not qualified to talk about His Majesty's great benevolence and great benevolence, it is just a brief expression of my infinite love and reverence. "Zhou Yi" wrote: To know how to advance is also to know how to retreat, to know how to survive is also to know how to die, to know how to gain is also to know how to lose.

古文：又曰： 知进退存亡，而不失其正者，其惟圣人乎！ 
现代文：还写道： 知道前进和后退、生存和死亡的道理，而不失分寸尺度的，只有圣人啊。 
English: He also wrote: Only a sage knows the principles of advancing and retreating, living and dying, without losing an inch of scale.

古文：由此言之，进有退之义，存有亡之机，得有丧之理，老臣所以为陛下惜之者，盖谓此也。
现代文：因此，前进之中包含着后退的因素，生存之中隐藏着死亡的阴影，获得之中存在着失去的可能，我之所以为陛下担忧的原因，正在于此。
English: It is for this reason that I fear for His Majesty, for in progress there is regression, in survival there is the shadow of death, in gain there is the possibility of loss.

古文：《老子》曰： 知足不辱，知止不殆。 
现代文：《老子》说： 知道满足就不会耻辱，知道停止就不会困顿。 
English: "Lao Zi" said: "If you know how to be satisfied, there will be no shame, and if you know how to stop, there will be no difficulty."

古文：臣谓陛下威名功德，亦可足矣；拓地开疆，亦可止矣。
现代文：我认为，陛下的威名功德，已经很高了，开拓的疆域，已经够广阔了。
English: I think that His Majesty's prestige and merits are already high, and the territory he has opened up is already broad enough.

古文：彼高丽者，边夷贱类，不足侍以仁义，不可责以常理。
现代文：高丽国，乃边远的异族，不可以用仁义对待他们，不可以用常理来要求他们。
English: The Koryo Kingdom is a distant foreign nation, and it is not possible to treat them with benevolence and righteousness, and it is not possible to make demands of them with common sense.

古文：古来以鱼鳖畜之，宜从阔略。必欲绝其种类，深恐兽穷则搏。
现代文：自古以来，把它当做鱼鳖来畜养，应该对它缓简略些，如果一定要灭绝这一族类，我非常担心，它会像野兽被逼得无路可走时那样拼死反扑。
English: From time immemorial it has been kept as a bait fish, and should be treated with some leniency. If this species is to be exterminated, I very much fear that it will fight back like a cornered animal.

古文：且陛下每决死囚，必令三覆五奏，进素食，停音乐者，盖以人命所重，感动圣慈也。
现代文：陛下每次处决死囚，一定要让三番五次地奏报，并且吃素食、停音乐，都是因为人命关天，感动了陛下的圣慈之心。
English: Every time His Majesty executes a death row inmate, he must have it reported three to five times, and eat vegetarian food and stop the music, all because human life is at stake, which moved His Majesty's merciful heart.

古文：况今兵士之徒，无一罪戾，无故驱之于战阵之间，委之于锋刃之下，使肝脑涂地，魂魄无归，令其老父孤儿、寡妻慈母，望轊车而掩泣，抱枯骨而摧心，足变动阴阳，感伤和气，实天下之冤痛也。
现代文：况且，现在的士兵，没有谁有罪过，无缘无故让他们投身战火之中，使他们肝脑涂地，成为无家可归的冤魂：让他们的妻儿老小，望着灵车痛哭流涕，抱着尸骨捶胸顿足，这足以使山河失色，天怒人怨，实在是天底下最惨痛的事情啊。
English: Moreover, none of today's soldiers are guilty of throwing themselves into the heat of battle without a reason, turning them into homeless ghosts, leaving their wives and children weeping bitterly at the hearse, hugging the bones and beating their chests, which is enough to discolor the mountains and rivers.

古文：且兵，凶器；战，危事，不得已而用之。
现代文：并且，兵器是凶险的用具，战争是危险的事情，不到万不得已，不可动用。
English: Moreover, weapons are dangerous tools, and war is a dangerous business. They should not be used unless absolutely necessary.

古文：向使高丽违失臣节，而陛下诛之可也；侵扰百姓，而陛下灭之可也；久长能为中国患，而陛下除之可也。
现代文：如果高丽失掉了臣子的礼节，陛下要诛杀它是可以的；如果它侵犯了百姓，陛下要灭掉它，也是可以的；如果因为它长期以来是中原的心腹之患，陛下要铲除它，也是可以的。
English: If Goryeo has lost the etiquette of a vassal, it is permissible for His Majesty to fight and kill it; if it has violated the people, it is permissible for His Majesty to exterminate it; if it has long been a thorn in the side of the Central Plains, it is permissible for His Majesty to eradicate it.

古文：有一于此，虽日杀万夫，不足为愧。
现代文：如果其中有一个理由成立，哪怕一日杀一万个敌寇，也不值得内疚。
English: If one of the reasons is true, even if you kill ten thousand enemy invaders a day, it is not worth feeling guilty.

古文：今无此三条，坐烦中国，内为旧主雪怨，外为新罗报仇，岂非所存者小，所损者大？
现代文：可是现在三条罪状都不成立，却要给中原百姓增添无尽的痛苦和烦恼，对内为其旧主雪冤，对外为新罗报仇，这难道不是所得者小，所失者大吗？
English: But now, none of the three charges are true, but they want to add endless pain and trouble to the Central Plains people, to avenge the grievances of their former masters at home and Silla abroad. Isn't this a small gain and a big loss?

古文：愿陛下遵皇祖老子止足之诫，以保万代巍巍之名。
现代文：但愿陛下遵照老子 知止为足 的警戒，以确保万代崇高的美名。
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will heed the warning of Lao Tzu to remain calm and steady, so as to ensure a noble reputation for generations to come.

古文：发霈然之恩，降宽之大诏，顺阳春以布泽，许高丽以自新，焚凌波之船，罢应募之众，自然华夷庆赖，远肃迩安。
现代文：发恩降诏，顺天布泽，给高丽以改过自新的机会，烧掉战船，停止征兵，这样各民族人民自然庆幸，远近都得安宁。
English: He graciously issued the edict of abdication, followed the will of heaven, gave Korea a chance to reform and renew itself, burned the warships, and stopped conscription. In this way, the people of all ethnic groups naturally rejoiced and enjoyed peace in the near and far.

古文：臣老病三公，朝夕入地，所恨竟无尘露，微增海岳。
现代文：为臣年老多病，活不了几天了，遗憾的是不能对国家做出微薄的贡献。
English: My father-in-law is old and sick, and he has only a few days to live. Unfortunately, he cannot make a small contribution to the country.

古文：谨罄残魂余息，豫代结草之诚。
现代文：在此谨尽最后一点心意，权且作为为臣死后报答陛下的知遇之恩。
English: Here, I would like to make one last point, as a way of repaying His Majesty's kindness after his death.

古文：倘蒙录此哀鸣，即臣死骨不朽。
现代文：如果陛下垂恩，听得进老臣临终的话，那么为臣死有何憾呢？
English: If His Majesty is gracious enough to listen to the dying words of an old retainer, then what is there to regret about the death of a retainer?

古文：太宗见表，叹曰： 此人危笃如此，尚能忧我国家。 
现代文：太宗看了这篇奏书，感叹道： 此人病危到这种地步还能为国家担忧。 
English: Taizong read this report and lamented: This man is so ill that he can still worry about the country.

古文：虽谏不从，终为善策。
现代文：虽然没有接纳，但还是认为他的意见是治国的善策。
English: Although he did not accept it, he still considered his opinion to be a good strategy for governing the country.

古文：贞观二十二年，军旅亟动，宫室互兴，百姓颇有劳弊。
现代文：贞观二十二年，朝廷战争频仍，又大兴土木，老百姓感到不堪重负。
English: In the 22nd year of Zhenguan, the imperial court was still frequently at war, and large-scale civil engineering was carried out. The common people felt overburdened.

古文：充容徐氏上疏谏曰：
现代文：宫中的女官充容徐氏上疏说：
English: The lady-in-waiting in the palace, Zhenrong Xu, said:

古文：贞观已来，二十有余载，风调雨顺，年登岁稔，人无水旱之弊，国无饥馑之灾。
现代文：贞观以来，二十多年来风调雨顺，五谷丰收，国家没有水旱之灾，百姓没有饥荒的祸患。
English: Since Zhenguan, for more than 20 years, the weather has been good, the grain harvest has been plentiful, the country has not suffered from floods and droughts, and the people have not suffered from famine.

古文：昔汉武帝，守文之常主，犹登刻玉之符；齐桓公，小国之庸君，尚涂泥金之事。
现代文：过去，汉武帝沿用汉文帝休养生息的制度，但后来还是到泰山封禅，把功业敬告上天；齐桓公，是一个小国的平庸之君，也行封禅之事，以显示他们的文治武功。
English: In the past, Emperor Hanwu followed the system of rest and recuperation of Emperor Hanwen, but later he still went to Mount Tai to seal Zen and announce his achievements to the heavens; King Qi Kuan, a mediocre prince of a small country, also performed the sealing of Zen to show their martial arts skills.

古文：望陛下推功损己，让德不居。
现代文：希望陛下不要居功自傲，有大功而不居，有大德而能让。
English: I hope that His Majesty will not be proud of his achievements, that he will not dwell on his great achievements, and that he will be able to let go of his great virtues.

古文：亿兆倾心，犹阙告成之礼；云、亭伫谒，未展升中之仪。
现代文：亿万人民仰戴，仍未行告成的大典；云亭二山待谒，仍未肯亲行祭天的仪式。
English: The great ceremony revered by hundreds of millions of people has yet to take place; the two mountains are waiting to be conquered, and they are still unwilling to personally perform the ceremony of worshiping heaven.

古文：此之功德，足以咀嚼百王，网罗千代者矣。然古人有云： 虽休勿休。 
现代文：这样的功德，足以光辉万代，流芳永久。然而古人说： 天下虽然太平，但不可放纵情欲。 
English: However, the ancients said: Although the world is peaceful, one should not indulge in lust.

古文：良有以也。守初保末，圣哲罕兼。
现代文：能谨小慎微，兢兢业业，古来圣哲也很少有人能做到。
English: Since ancient times, few sages have been able to be prudent and conscientious.

古文：是知业大者易骄，愿陛下难之；善始者难终，愿陛下易之。
现代文：这就可以明白功业盛大的人容易骄傲，善始容易善终难，愿陛下使它容易保持。
English: It can be seen that people with great achievements are prone to pride. Good beginnings are easy, but good endings are difficult. May His Majesty make it easy to maintain.

古文：窃见顷年以来，力役兼总，东有辽海之军，西有昆丘之役，士马疲于甲胄，舟车倦于转输。
现代文：我看见，近年来战火不断，东边有辽海之战，西边有昆丘之役，士兵、战马都苦不堪言，战船兵车也很艰难地在运转输送。
English: I saw that in recent years, there have been continuous wars. In the east, there was the Battle of the Liao Sea, and in the west, there was the Battle of Kunqiu. The soldiers and war horses were miserable, and the warships and troop carriers were also difficult to operate and transport.

古文：且召募役戍，去留怀死生之痛，因风阻浪，人米有漂溺之危。
现代文：并且征途迢迢，将士赴边和离开战场，都怀有生离死别的切肤之痛。并且路途坎坷，风高浪急，人员和粮米随时有葬身鱼腹的危险。
English: And the journey is long, the soldiers go to the other side and leave the battlefield, all with the pain of life and death. And the road is bumpy, the wind is high and the waves are rapid, and the personnel and grain are in danger of being buried in the fish's belly at any time.

古文：一夫力耕，年无数十之获；一船致损，则倾覆数百之粮。
现代文：一个农夫辛勤耕种，一年不过有几十担的收成，可一遇到翻船，顷刻间几百担粮食就会化为乌有。
English: A farmer diligently cultivates, but has only dozens of carts of harvest a year, but when a shipwreck occurs, hundreds of carts of grain will be destroyed in an instant.

古文：是犹运有尽之农功，填无穷之巨浪；图未获之他众，丧已成之我军。
现代文：这就等于把有限的收成填入无边的大海，贪图未到手的胜利反而丢失了自己的人马。
English: This is tantamount to filling the limited harvest into the boundless sea, coveting victory without getting it, but losing their own men and horses.

古文：虽除凶伐暴，有国常规，然黩武玩兵，先哲所戒。
现代文：虽然铲除顽敌是国家的职责，但穷兵黩武，也是先哲们极力避免的。
English: Although it is the duty of the state to eradicate the inveterate enemy, it is also the duty of the sages to avoid resorting to military force.

古文：昔秦皇并吞六国，反速危祸之基；晋武奄有三方，翻成覆败之业。岂非矜功恃大，弃德轻邦，图利忘害，肆情纵欲？
现代文：过去秦始皇吞并了六国，可是却加速了他自身的灭亡；晋武帝拥有三方之地，却转眼败亡，这难道不是因为他们居功自傲、放弃仁德、轻视国家、图谋利益、忘记祸患、放纵恣情的结果吗？
English: In the past, Qin Shihuang annexed six countries, but accelerated his own demise; Emperor Jinwu owned three countries, but was defeated in the blink of an eye. Isn't this the result of their taking credit, abandoning benevolence, despising the country, seeking profits, forgetting disasters, and indulging arbitrary feelings?

古文：遂使悠悠六合，虽广不救其亡；嗷嗷黎庶，因弊以成其祸。
现代文：所以天地虽大也不能挽救其灭亡，劳苦百姓因无法生活而群起造反。
English: Therefore, although heaven and earth are great, they cannot save its demise. The toiling people revolted en masse because they could not live.

古文：是知地广非常安之术，人劳乃易乱之源。愿陛下布泽流人，矜弊恤乏，减行役之烦。
现代文：因此，国土广袤并非就是国家安宁的保证，人民劳顿是国家动乱的源头，希望陛下对老百姓施加恩惠，减轻他们的劳役负担，让老百姓享受到朝廷恩德的雨露。
English: Therefore, the vastness of the country is not a guarantee of national tranquility. The people's fatigue is the source of national turmoil. I hope that His Majesty will grant favors to the people, reduce their labor burden, and let the people enjoy the blessings of the imperial court.

古文：增雨露之惠。妾又闻为政之本，贵在无为。
现代文：为妾又听说治政的根本贵在无为。
English: As a concubine, I also heard that the fundamental value of governance lies in doing nothing.

古文：窃见土木之功，不可遂兼。
现代文：私下以为土木工程不可连续不断地进行。
English: Privately, I thought that civil engineering projects could not be carried out continuously.

古文：北阙初建，南营翠微，曾未逾时，玉华创制，非惟构架之劳，颇有功力之费。
现代文：北边门楼刚建好，就在南边建翠微宫，没过多久又要建玉华宫，这不只是浪费材料，对人力也是一个很大的浪费。
English: As soon as the north gate was built, the south gate was built, and soon the Jade Palace was to be built. This is not only a waste of materials, but also a great waste of manpower.

古文：虽复茅茨示约，犹兴木石之疲，假使和雇取人，不无烦扰之弊。
现代文：虽一再表示建筑要低标准力求俭约，还是需要伐木采石，即使用官费雇工，也不免烦扰百姓。
English: Although he has repeatedly said that the construction should be of a low standard and strive to be frugal, it is still necessary to cut wood and quarry stone. Even if workers are hired at government expense, it will inevitably annoy the people.

古文：是以卑宫菲食，圣王之所安；金屋瑶台，骄主之为丽。
现代文：要知道简陋的宫室和粗淡的茶饭是圣明的君主所安心受用的，而金碧辉煌的殿堂只有骄逸的君主才认为是美丽的。
English: It should be known that the humble palace room and the coarse tea and rice are safe for the enlightened monarch, while the resplendent hall of fame is only considered beautiful by the proud monarch.

古文：故有道之君，以逸逸人；无道之君，以乐乐身。
现代文：所以有道的君主是以休养生息使百姓安适；没有道德的君主是以淫乐享受来满足自己的情欲。
English: Therefore, a virtuous monarch is to make the people comfortable with rest and recuperation; a monarch without morals is to satisfy his lust with lewd enjoyment.

古文：愿陛下使之以时，则力不竭矣；用而息之，则心斯悦矣。
现代文：但愿陛下使用民力有所节制，那么他们的力气就不会用完了，在用了力气之后给他们以休息的机会，那么他们心里就会感到高兴了。
English: May His Majesty use the people's strength with moderation, so that they will not run out of strength, and give them a chance to rest after using strength, so that they will feel happy in their hearts.

古文：夫珍玩技巧，为丧国之斧斤；珠玉锦绣，实迷心之酖毒。
现代文：珍奇的玩物和浮华的技巧就像是使国家败亡的刀斧，珠玉的摆设和华丽的服饰就像是使人心惑乱的毒酒。
English: Curious playthings and flashy tricks are like knives and axes that bring about the downfall of the country, and jeweled ornaments and gorgeous clothing are like poisoned wine that disturbs people's minds.

古文：窃见服玩鲜靡，如变化于自然，职贡奇珍，若神仙之所制，虽驰华于季俗，实败素于淳风。
现代文：为妾发现陛下的衣服和玩物应有尽有，而且千姿百态、变化多端。别人进献的奇珍异宝玲珑剔透，犹如神仙制造的一般。虽说竞求华丽为时俗所难免，实际上却败坏了淳朴的社会风尚。
English: His Majesty's clothes and playthings are found in abundance for his concubine, and they come in a myriad of shapes and variations. The rarities and treasures presented by others are exquisite, as if made by gods. Although the pursuit of splendour is unavoidable in this day and age, it actually corrupts the simple social customs.

古文：是知漆器非延叛之方，桀造之而人叛；玉杯岂招亡之术，纣用之而国亡。
现代文：要知道漆器并不是产生叛离的东西，夏桀加以制造却导致了民心离叛，玉杯也不是招灾惹祸的东西，商纣加以使用却导致了国败身亡。
English: It is important to know that lacquerware is not something that causes defection, but the manufacture of lacquerware by Xia Yao has led to the defection of the people's hearts, and the jade cup is not something that invites disaster, but the use of lacquerware by merchants has led to the defeat of the country and death.

古文：方验侈丽之源，不可不遏。
现代文：经验证明，奢侈华丽的苗头，不可不加以遏制。
English: Experience has proved that the seeds of extravagance and gaudiness must be contained.

古文：夫作法于俭，犹恐其奢；作法于奢，何以制后？
现代文：再说创始时节俭，还唯恐其后流于奢侈，创始时就奢侈，那将如何制约后代？
English: Besides, if you are frugal at the time of founding, you should be afraid that it will lead to extravagance later. If you are extravagant at the time of founding, how will that restrict future generations?

古文：伏惟陛下，明照未形，智周无际，穷奥秘于麟阁，尽探赜于儒林。
现代文：为妾伏地而想，陛下明察秋毫，高瞻远瞩，深入钻研古代典籍，虚心征询儒林学士。
English: For the sake of his concubine Voldemort, his majesty carefully observes everything, has a far-sighted vision, thoroughly studies ancient classics, and humbly consults with scholars of Confucianism.

古文：千王治乱之踪，百代安危之迹，兴亡衰乱之数，得失成败之机，固亦包吞心府之中，循环目围之内，乃宸衷久察，无假一二言焉。
现代文：千王百代治乱安危的踪迹，兴衰存亡得失成败。的原因，无疑也已包含于心中，循环于眼前，为陛下所早已洞察，用不着为妾再说什么。
English: For a thousand generations of emperors, there is a trail of chaos and danger, rise and fall, survival, success and failure. The reasons, no doubt, are already contained in the heart, circulating in front of the eyes, have long been discerned by His Majesty, and there is no need to say anything more for the concubine.

古文：惟知之非难，行之不易，志骄于业著，体逸于时安。
现代文：只是知道这个道理并不困难，但实行起来却很不容易。往往是因为功业卓著而志趣骄逸，天下太平而贪图享乐。
English: It is not difficult to know this principle, but it is not easy to put it into practice. It is often because of outstanding achievements and pride, the world is peaceful and greedy for pleasure.

古文：伏愿抑志裁心，慎终成始，削轻过以添重德，择今是以替前非，则鸿名与日月无穷，盛业与乾坤永泰！
现代文：希望陛下克制己欲，善始慎终，改掉小毛病以光大道德，用今天的优点取代以前的过错，这样，陛下的英名就可以与日月齐辉，大业就可以与乾坤共存了！
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will restrain his ego, be prudent in the beginning and prudent in the end, correct minor faults with great morality, and replace previous mistakes with today's advantages. In this way, His Majesty's reputation can shine with the sun and the moon, and the great cause can coexist with the universe!

古文：太宗甚善其言，特加优赐甚厚。
现代文：太宗非常赞赏这些意见，特地厚加赏赐。
English: Emperor Taizong appreciated these opinions very much and rewarded them in a special way.

