古文：张衡字平子，南阳西鄂人也。
现代文：◆张衡传，张衡字平子，南阳西鄂县人。
English: ◆Zhang Heng Chuan, Zhang Heng Zi Ping Zi, was born in Nanyang, Xi'an County.

古文：世为著姓。
现代文：世为大姓。
English: The world's most famous family name.

古文：祖父堪，蜀郡太守。
现代文：祖父张堪，曾任蜀郡太守。
English: His grandfather, Zhang Kan, was once the governor of Shu County.

古文：衡少善属文，游于三辅，因入京师，观太学，遂通《五经》，贯六艺。
现代文：张衡少年时会做文章，曾在三辅游学，因入京师，观太学，通《五经》六艺。
English: When Zhang Heng was a boy, he would write articles. He had studied in Sanfu, and since he went to Beijing, he had studied Confucianism, and was familiar with the "Five Classics" and six arts.

古文：虽才高于世，而无骄尚之情。
现代文：虽才高于世，没有骄傲之情。
English: Although he is above the world, he has no pride.

古文：常从容淡静，不好交接俗人。
现代文：平常从容淡泊，不爱与俗人相交。
English: He usually keeps a low profile and does not like to mingle with the common people.

古文：永元中，举孝廉不行，连辟公府不就。
现代文：和帝永元年间，被推举为孝廉，不去，公府几次征召不就。
English: During the reign of Emperor Yongzheng, he was selected as a filial son, but he did not go, and he was called up by the government several times.

古文：时天下承平日久，自王侯以下，莫不逾侈。
现代文：当时，国家太平已久，自王侯以下，没有不奢侈过度的。
English: At that time, the country had been at peace for a long time. From the prince down, there was nothing but extravagance.

古文：衡乃拟班固《两都》，作《二京赋》，因以讽谏。
现代文：张衡于是学班固《两都》，作《二京赋》，用以讽谏。
English: Zhang Heng then made "Two Capital Cities" and "Two Capital Cities" for the class, which were used to make satirical jokes.

古文：精思傅会，十年乃成。
现代文：殚精竭思十年才作成。
English: It took ten years of hard work to create it.

古文：文多，故不载。
现代文：文多，故不写在这里。
English: A lot, so I won't write about it here.

古文：大将军邓骘奇其才，累召不应。
现代文：大将军邓骘赞赏他的才华，多次征召，他不应。
English: General Deng Yu appreciated his talent and repeatedly called him up. He should not have been drafted.

古文：衡善机巧，尤致思于天文、阴阳、历算。
现代文：张衡长于机械，特别用心于天文、阴阳、历算。
English: Zhang Heng is good at machinery, especially at astronomy, yin and yang, and calendars.

古文：常耽好《玄经》，谓崔瑷曰： 吾观《太玄》，方知子云妙极道数，乃与《五经》相拟，非徒传记之属，使人难论阴阳之事，汉家得天下二百岁之书也。
现代文：平常爱扬雄的《太玄经》，对崔瑗说 ：我看《太玄》，才知道子云妙极道数，可与《五经》相比，不仅仅是传记一类，使人论辩阴阳之事，汉朝得天下二百年来的书啊。
English: He said to Cui Yong, who usually loved Yang Xiong's "Tao Xuan Jing," "I read "Tao Xuan" only to know that the number of Ziyun and Myouji can be compared with the "Five Classics," which is not just a biography, but a book that has been used for two hundred years by the Han Dynasty to discuss yin and yang.

古文：复二百岁，殆将终乎？
现代文：再二百年，《太玄经》就会衰微吗？
English: In another two hundred years, will the "Tai Xuan Jing" decline?

古文：所以作者之数，必显一世，常然之符也。
现代文：因为作者的命运必显一世，这是当然之符验。
English: Because the fate of the author will be revealed only once, this is a natural corroboration.

古文：汉四百岁，《玄》其兴矣。 
现代文：汉朝四百年之际，《玄》学还要兴起来的呢。 
English: At the time of the 400th anniversary of the Han Dynasty, the study of "Xuan" is still on the rise.

古文：安帝雅闻衡善术学，公车特征拜郎中，再迁为太史令。
现代文：安帝早就听说张衡善术学，公车特征拜为郎中，再升为太史令。
English: An Di had long heard that Zhang Heng was a good student of art, and he was promoted to the rank of Tai Shi Ling.

古文：遂乃研核阴阳，妙尽琁机之正，作浑天仪，著《灵宪》、《算罔论》，言甚详明。
现代文：于是研究阴阳，精通天文历法，作浑天仪，著《灵宪》、《算罔论》，写得挺详细明白。
English: As a result, he studied yin and yang, mastered the astronomical calendar, made an armillary sphere, and wrote "Spiritual Constitution" and "Theory of Calculation," which are very detailed and clear.

古文：曾不慊夫晋、楚，敢告诚于知己。
现代文：帝初年，再调动，又为太史令。张衡不羡慕当世的功名富贵，所担任官位，往往多年不得迁升。
English: In the first year of his reign, he was transferred again, and became the Grand Historian. Zhang Heng did not envy the fame and wealth of the present world, and the official positions he held were often not allowed to be moved for many years.

古文：阳嘉元年，夏造候风地动仪。
现代文：自离史官，五年又回到原职。于是设客问体，作《应问》以表明自己的心迹。阳嘉元年，又造候风地动仪。
English: He left the post of historian and returned to his original position five years later. So he set up a guest to ask questions, and made "Asking Questions" to show his intentions. In the first year of the Yang Jia era, he also created a weather vane.

古文：以精铜铸成，员径八尺，合盖隆起，形似酒尊，饰以篆文山龟鸟兽之形。
现代文：用精铜铸成，圆径八尺，顶盖突起，形如酒樽，用篆文山龟鸟兽的形象装饰。
English: It is cast from fine copper, eight feet in diameter, with a protruding top lid, shaped like a wine barrel, and decorated with the image of a mountain tortoise, bird and beast.

古文：中有都柱，傍行八道，施关发机。
现代文：中有大柱，傍行八道，安关闭发动之机。
English: In the middle, there is a main column and eight surrounding sub-columns connected by a crane.

古文：外有八龙，首衔铜丸，下有蟾蜍，张口承之。
现代文：外有八条龙，每条龙口衔铜丸，下面有蟾蜍，张口接丸。
English: Outside, there are eight dragons, each dragon's mouth has a bronze ball, below there is a beak, and the mouth is open to receive the ball.

古文：其牙机巧制，皆隐在尊中，覆盖周密无际。
现代文：牙机巧制，都隐藏樽中，覆盖周密，无缝隙。
English: The corkscrews are cleverly made, all hidden in the barrels, covered thoroughly, with no gaps.

古文：如有地动，尊则振龙机发吐丸，而蟾蜍衔之。振声激扬，伺者因此觉知。
现代文：如果地动，樽就使龙摇动起来，机发，龙就吐丸，丸入蟾蜍口中，发出激扬之声，守者因此知道地动了。
English: If the earth moved, the keg would make the dragon shake, and the dragon would spit out the ball, and the ball would fall into the mouth of the jar, and the keeper would know that the earth had moved.

古文：虽一龙发机，而七首不动，寻其方面，乃知震之所在。
现代文：虽然一龙发机，而其余七龙之头不动，找到龙动的地方，就知道地震发生的方向。
English: Although a dragon sets off an engine, and the heads of the remaining seven dragons do not move, if you find the place where the dragon moves, you will know the direction in which the earthquake occurred.

古文：验之以事，合契若神。自书典所记，未之有也。
现代文：经过试验，与所设制，符合如神，自从有书籍记载以来，是没有过的。
English: After the test, with the system set up, in line with the gods, since there are books, there has never been.

古文：尝一龙机发而地不觉动，京师学者咸怪其无征，后数日驿至，果地震陇西，于是皆服其妙。
现代文：曾经一龙机发，地不觉动，京师的学者都责怪不足信，几天之后，送信人来了，果然地震陇西，于是都服其神妙。
English: Once upon a time, there was an earthquake and the earth did not move, and scholars of the Beijing division all blamed the lack of letters. A few days later, the sender came, and the earthquake was indeed in Shaanxi, so they were all amazed.

古文：自此以后，乃令史官记地动所从方起。
现代文：自此之后，就令史官记载地动发生的地方。
English: Since then, historians have recorded the place where the earthquake occurred.

古文：时，政事渐损，权移于下，衡因上疏陈事曰：
现代文：当时，政事渐衰，权柄被臣下操纵。张衡于是上疏陈事。
English: At that time, political affairs were on the wane, and power was being manipulated by vassals. Zhang Heng therefore decided to step down.

古文：伏惟陛下宣哲克明，继体承天，中遭倾覆，龙德泥蟠。
现代文：说： 皇上聪明俊哲，耿承天命，不幸作太子时，废为济阴王，龙德未升。
English: He said, "The emperor was clever and talented, and he followed the will of heaven. Unfortunately, when he became the crown prince, he was dethroned as the king of Jiyin, and he never ascended to the throne of Longde.

古文：今乘云高跻，磐桓天位，诚所谓将隆大位，必先倥偬之也。
现代文：现在乘云在上，不进天位，真是所谓将登大位，必先穷困吧。
English: Now that we are riding on the clouds, if we do not enter the heavenly kingdom, it is really the so-called ascension to the throne, and we must first be impoverished.

古文：亲履艰难者知下情，备经险易者达物伪。
现代文：亲身经过艰难的，了解下情，饱经险易的，明白事物的真伪。
English: He has personally experienced the difficult, understands the situation, has been through the perilous, and understands the truth and falsity of things.

古文：故能一贯万机，靡所疑惑，百揆允当，庶绩咸熙。宜获福祉神祗，受誉黎庶。
现代文：所以能够处理万机，无所疑惑。措施适当，各行各业，都很协调，应该受到天神降福，平民百姓的爱戴。
English: Therefore, it is able to deal with all kinds of machines without any doubt. The measures are appropriate, and all walks of life are very coordinated. It should be blessed by the gods and loved by the common people.

古文：而阴阳未和，灾眚屡见，神明幽远，冥鉴在兹。
现代文：而阴阳未和，灾祸屡见。神明虽深远，却暗暗地看着。
English: But if yin and yang are not at peace, disasters are common. Although the gods are far away, they watch silently.

古文：福仁祸淫，景响而应，因德降休，乘失致咎，天道虽远，吉凶可见，近世郑、蔡、江、樊、周广、王圣，皆为效矣。
现代文：仁则得福，淫则得祸，如影的随形，声的应响。因德降善，以失获罪，天道虽远，吉凶可见。近世郑众、蔡伦、江京、樊丰、周广、王圣，都是明显的例子。
English: Benevolence brings good luck, while lust brings bad luck. They follow each other like shadows and respond to each other's voices. Goodness is degraded by virtue, and sin is gained by loss. Although the heavenly way is far away, good and evil can be seen. In modern times, Zheng Zong, Cai Lun, Jiang Jing, Hao Feng, Zhou Guang, and Wang Sheng are all obvious examples.

古文：故恭俭畏忌，必蒙祉祚，奢淫诌慢，鲜不夷戮，前事不忘，后事之师也。
现代文：所以谨慎小心，一定得福，骄奢谄媚，很少不遭杀身的。前事不忘，后事之师也。
English: Therefore, be cautious and careful, be sure to be blessed, be proud and charming, and rarely be killed. Do not forget the past, but also the teacher of the future.

古文：夫情胜其性，流遁忘反，岂唯不肖，中才皆然。
现代文：至于情胜其性，随流忘反，岂止不肖之人，中才也都如此。
English: As far as the nature of love is concerned, those who go with the flow and forget the opposition are not only unsightly, but also the middle-aged people.

古文：苟非大贤，不能见得思义，故积恶成衅，罪不可解也。
现代文：如果不是大贤，不能见得思义，所以积恶成罪，罪不可免。
English: If you are not a great sage, you will not be able to attain righteousness. Therefore, you will accumulate evil and commit sin. Sin is unavoidable.

古文：向使能瞻前顾后，援镜自戒，则何陷于凶患乎！
现代文：假使能瞻前顾后，以往事为戒，那怎么会遭到祸害呢！
English: If you can look ahead and behind, and let the past be a warning, how can you be harmed?

古文：贵宠之臣，众所属仰，其有愆尤，上下知之。
现代文：贵宠之臣，众目所视，有什么罪过，上下的人都知道。
English: Your favorite vassal, in the eyes of the public, is guilty of something, and everyone knows about it.

古文：褒美讥恶，有心皆同，故怨讟溢乎四海，神明降其祸辟也。
现代文：奖善罚恶，人同此心。所以怨恨满盈，神明就会降下罪祸。
English: Rewarding good and punishing evil, people are of the same mind. Therefore, resentment abounds, and the gods will bring down evil.

古文：顷年雨常不足，思求所失，则《洪范》所得 僭恒阳若 者也。
现代文：近年雨常不足，考求所失，即《洪范》所说的君行有过错，则常阳顺之，常阳则多旱。
English: In recent years, the rain is often insufficient, and the search for what is lost, that is, the "Hong Fan" said that the ruler is at fault, then the Changyang is favorable, and the Changyang is more dry.

古文：惧群臣奢侈，昏逾典式，自下逼上，用速咎征。
现代文：要警惕群臣奢侈，不守范例，自下逼上，加速罪咎征兆的到来。
English: It is necessary to be wary of the extravagance of ministers, not following the example, forcing from below, and accelerating the arrival of the signs of guilt.

古文：又前年京师地震土裂，裂者威分，震者人扰也。
现代文：又前年京师地震土裂，裂是意味着威分，震是意味着有人捣乱。
English: And the previous year, the earthquake in Beijing caused the ground to crack. Cracking means danger, and shaking means someone is causing trouble.

古文：君以静唱，臣以动和，威自上出，不趣于下，礼之政也。
现代文：君用静唱，则臣以动和之，威自上出，不出于下，这是国家的制度。
English: The sovereign sings quietly, while the subject moves and harmonizes. The authority comes from above, not from below. This is the system of the state.

古文：窃惧圣思厌倦，制不专已，思不忍割，与众共威。
现代文：我耽心皇上怕麻烦，政令不一人独揽，恩爱不忍割弃，与众共威。
English: I'm worried that the emperor is afraid of trouble. No one person has the power to make all the decisions, and no one person has the power to share the power with everyone else.

古文：威不可分，德不可共。
现代文：威不可分，德不可共。
English: Dignity is indivisible, morality is inseparable.

古文：《洪范》曰： 臣有作威作福玉食，害于而家，凶于而国。 
现代文：《洪范》说： 臣有作威作福玉食，害于而家，凶于而国。 
English: "Hong Fan" said: The vassal has the arrogance to make a fortune, which is harmful to the family and harmful to the country.

古文：天鉴孔明，虽疏不失。
现代文：老天在上看得明白，虽远不误。
English: Heaven knows, but it's not far off.

古文：灾异示人，前后数矣，而未见所革，以复往悔。自非圣人，不能无过。
现代文：灾异的出现，前后几次了，而未见改革，反悔过去，人非圣贤，不能没有过错。
English: The emergence of disasters, back and forth several times, but no reform, regret the past, people are not sages, can not be without fault.

古文：愿陛下思惟所以稽古率旧，勿令刑德八柄，不由天子。
现代文：愿皇上考古循旧，莫使刑德八柄，不由天子。
English: I hope that the emperor will follow the ancient practice of archaeology, and that he will not allow the punishment of the eight elements to be carried out by the son of heaven.

古文：若恩从上下，事依礼制，礼制修则奢僭息，事合宜则无凶咎。
现代文：如果恩从上下，事依礼制，礼制完备，奢侈越轨的事止，凡事处理适当，就无罪凶。
English: If the grace is from above and below, the matter is in accordance with the etiquette, the etiquette is complete, the extravagance is out of line, and everything is handled appropriately, there is no culprit.

古文：然后神望允塞，灾消不至矣。
现代文：然后神灵所希望的都得到满足，灾异就消除了。 
English: Then all the gods' wishes were fulfilled, and the disaster was eliminated.

古文：初，光武善谶，及显宗、肃宗因祖述焉。
现代文：起先，光武好谶。显宗、肃宗继承祖说。
English: At first, Guangwu was a good disciple. Xian Zong and Su Zong inherited the ancestor's teachings.

古文：自中兴之后，儒者争学图纬，兼复附以訞言。
现代文：自中兴以后，儒生争学图纬，更复附以妖言。
English: Since ZTE, the Confucianism students have been competing with each other, and even resorting to gossip.

古文：衡以图纬虚妄，非圣人之法，乃上疏曰：
现代文：张衡认为图纬虚妄，不是圣人之法。于是上疏。
English: Zhang Heng thought that the map was false and not the law of a saint. So he went up the path.

古文：臣闻圣人明审律历以定吉凶，重之以卜筮，杂之以九宫，经天验道，本尽于此。
现代文：说 ：我听说圣人明析天文历法以定吉凶，加以卜筮，杂用九宫，测度天象，检验道理，尽在于此。
English: He said, "I have heard that sages analyzed the astronomical calendar to determine good and bad luck, added divination, used the nine palaces, measured the heavenly bodies, and tested the truth.

古文：或观星辰逆顺，寒燠所由，或察龟策之占，巫觋之言，其所因者，非一术也。
现代文：有的观看星辰逆顺，寒热所由；有的考察龟策的占卜，巫觋之所说，他们凭借的不止一术。
English: Some watch the stars and wonder what causes the cold and heat; others study the divination of the tortoise and the hare, and, as the wise man said, they rely on more than one trick.

古文：立言于前，有征于后，故智者贵焉，谓之谶书。
现代文：前面说的，后面证实，所以聪明之士，以此为贵。叫做谶书。
English: What was said before is confirmed later, which is why smart people value it. It's called the "Book of Revelations."

古文：谶书始出，盖知之者寡。
现代文：谶书开始流行，知道的不多。
English: I don't know much about it.

古文：自汉取秦，用兵力战，功成业遂，可谓大事，当此之时，莫或称谶。
现代文：自汉取代秦，用兵力战，功成业就，可说是大事。这时无人说谶。
English: Since the Han Dynasty replaced the Qin Dynasty, it can be said that it is a great event to use military force to fight and achieve success. At this time, no one said a word.

古文：若夏侯胜、眭孟之徒，以道术立名，其所述著，无谶一言。
现代文：如夏侯胜、睦孟等，以道术立名，他们的著述，没有谶字。
English: For example, Xia Hossheng, Mutsu Meng and others made a name for themselves with Taoism, but their writings were not censored.

古文：刘向父子领校秘书，阅定九流，亦无谶录。
现代文：刘向父子领校秘书，审定九流，也对谶没有记录。
English: Liu Xiang, the father and son of the school secretary, certified the ninth stream, and there is no record of the second stream.

古文：成、哀之后，乃始闻之。
现代文：成、哀以后，才开始听说谶这回事。
English: It was not until after the victory and the mourning that I began to hear about it.

古文：《尚书》尧使鮌理洪水，九载绩用不成，鮌则殛死，禹乃嗣兴。
现代文：《尚书》载尧使鲧治洪水，九年不成，鲧被处死，禹才继起。
English: "Shangshu" recorded that it took him nine years to control the flood, and he was executed, only to be succeeded by Yu.

古文：而《春秋谶》云 共工理水 。
现代文：而《春秋谶》说 ：共工理水。 
English: But "Spring and Autumn Festival" says: "Cooperation is the key to success."

古文：凡谶皆云黄帝伐蚩尤，而《诗谶》独以为 蚩尤败，然后尧受命 。
现代文：凡谶都说黄帝伐蚩尤，而《诗谶》独以为 蚩尤败，然后尧受命 。
English: Everyone said that the Yellow Emperor was defeated, but the "Poem" thought that he was defeated, and then he was ordered.

古文：《春秋元命包》中有公输班与墨翟，事见战国，非春秋时也。
现代文：《春秋元命包》中有公输班与墨翟，事情发生战国，不是春秋时期。
English: In "Spring and Autumn Original Life Package," there is a public transport class and a inkwell, and the story takes place in the Warring States period, not the Spring and Autumn period.

古文：又言 别有益州 。
现代文：又说 别有益州 。
English: He also said, "Don't be a welfare state."

古文：益州之置，在于汉世。其名三辅诸陵，世数可知。
现代文：设置益州在武帝时，其名三辅诸陵，世代可知。
English: When Yishu was set up under Emperor Wu, its name, the Three Auxiliary Mausoleums, was known for generations.

古文：至于图中讫于成帝。
现代文：至于图谶中止于成帝。
English: As for Tu Wei, it was discontinued in Chengdi.

古文：一卷之书，互异数事，圣人之言，势无若是，殆必虚伪之徒，以要世取资。
现代文：一卷书中，数事互异，圣人之言，不会如此。大概是虚伪之徒，借此求世取财。
English: In one book, several things are different, in the words of a sage, it will not be so. Probably a hypocrite, through which to seek the world for money.

古文：往者侍中贾逵摘谶互异三十余事，诸言谶者皆不能说。
现代文：以前侍中贾逵指出谶互相矛盾三十余事，一群说谶的人都不能解释。
English: In the past, the chamberlain Jia Wei pointed out that there were more than thirty things that contradicted each other, and a group of people who said that they could not explain.

古文：至于王莽篡位，汉世大祸，八十篇何为不戒？
现代文：至于王莽篡位，这是汉朝的大祸，八十篇为什么不戒呢？
English: As for Wang Mang's usurpation of the throne, this was a great calamity for the Han Dynasty. Why didn't the eighty chapters stop it?

古文：则知图谶成于哀、平之际也。
现代文：这就可知图谶成于哀平之世啊！
English: This can be seen from the fact that the picture is set in the world of mourning!

古文：且《河洛》、《六艺》，篇录已定，后人皮傅，无所容篡。
现代文：且《河流》、《六艺》，篇目已定，后人强相附会，不容妄有加增。
English: Moreover, "River" and "Six Arts" have already been determined, and future generations will be strongly attached to them, and it is not allowed to increase them.

古文：永元中，清河宋景遂以历纪推言水灾，而伪称洞视玉版。
现代文：永元中，清河人宋景用历纪推言水灾，而假托洞视玉版所见。
English: In the Yongyuan period, Song Jing, a man from Qinghe, used the chronology to predict floods, but he saw what the jade plate saw through the false supporting hole.

古文：或者至于弃家业，入山林。后皆无效，而复采前世成事，以为证验。
现代文：有的至于弃家业，走入山林，后都无效，又搜集前世的成事，作为证验。
English: For some, abandoning the family business and going into the mountains and forests are not valid afterwards, and they also collect their previous life's accomplishments as verification.

古文：至于永建复统，则不能知。
现代文：至顺帝废而复位，就不知道了。
English: I don't know what will happen when Emperor Shun is deposed and reinstated.

古文：此皆欺世罔俗，以昧势位，情伪较然，莫之纠禁。
现代文：这都是欺世骗俗，蒙昧势位，其情虚伪，清清楚楚，却没有人纠禁。
English: This is all deception, obscurity, hypocrisy, and clear-cut, but no one interdicts.

古文：且律历、封候、九宫、风角，数有征效，世莫肯学，而竞称不占之书。
现代文：律历、卦候、九宫、风角，屡有效验，没有人学，而争说谶纬之书。
English: The Ruling Calendar, the Eight Trigrams, the Nine Palaces, and the Wind Angle have been repeatedly validated, and no one has studied them, but they are disputed books.

古文：譬犹画工。恶图犬马而好作鬼魅，诚以实事难形，而虚伪不穷也。
现代文：譬如画工，厌恶画犬马，而喜欢作鬼魅，这是因为具体的事物难于形容，而鬼魅虚伪无形，画起来容易。
English: A painter, for example, dislikes painting dogs and horses, but likes to make ghosts, because concrete things are difficult to describe, while ghosts are false and invisible, so they are easy to draw.

古文：宜收藏图谶，一禁绝之，则朱紫无所眩，典籍无瑕玷矣。
现代文：应该收藏图谶，禁止流行，则是非不致混淆，坏书也没有了。 
English: Picture books should be collected, fads should be banned, right and wrong should not be confused, and there should be no bad books.

古文：后迁侍中，帝引在帷幄，讽议左右。
现代文：后升侍中，帝把他引入深宫，讽议左右。
English: Later, when he became an attendant, the emperor brought him to the Deep Palace, where they had an ironic discussion.

古文：尝问衡天下所疾恶者。
现代文：曾经问张衡，天下所痛恶的是什么。
English: Zhang Heng was once asked what is the most hated thing in the world.

古文：回志朅来从玄諆，获我所求夫何思！永和初，出为河间相。
现代文：顺帝永和初，出为河间相。
English: At the beginning of Shunde Yonghe, he appeared as a river deity.

古文：时国王骄奢，不遵典宪；又多豪右，共为不轨。
现代文：当时河间王骄奢淫逸，不遵守法纪；又有不少豪强之徒，纠集一起捣乱。
English: At that time, the king of Kawama was arrogant, extravagant and licentious, and did not abide by laws and regulations; there were also many brave and strong people who gathered together to make trouble.

古文：衡下车，治威严，整法度，阴知奸党名姓，一时收禽，上下肃然，称为政理。
现代文：张衡到任，树威严，整理法度，暗中探得奸党名姓，一时收捕，上下肃然，以政治清廉著称。
English: When Zhang Heng took office, he was a dignified man, tidied up the legal system, secretly found out the names of the traitors, arrested them all at once, and was known for his political integrity.

古文：视事三年，上书乞骸骨，征拜尚书。
现代文：任职三年，上书请求退职归家。征拜尚书。
English: After serving for three years, he submitted a letter requesting to retire and return home.

古文：年六十二，永和四年卒。
现代文：年六十二，永和四年卒。
English: He was sixty-two years old and four years out of the Edo period.

古文：著《周官训诂》，崔瑗以为不能有异于诸儒也。
现代文：著《周官训诂》，崔瑗认为与诸儒没有什么不同的地方。
English: In his book "Zhou Guan Xun," Cui Yao believes that there is nothing different from Confucianism.

古文：又欲继孔子《易》说《彖》、《象》残缺者，竟不能就。
现代文：又想继孔子《易》补正《彖》、《象》的残缺，始终没有完成。
English: He also wanted to follow Confucius' "Yi" to correct the defects of "Chi" and "Zhe," but it was never completed.

古文：所著诗、赋、铭、七言、《灵宪》、《应闲》、《七辩》、《巡诰》、《悬图》凡三十二篇。
现代文：所著诗、赋、铭、七言、《灵宪》、《应间》、《七辩》、《巡诰》、《悬图》，共三十二篇。
English: His works include poems, fusas, epitaphs, seven sayings, "Ling Xian," "Ying Ma," "Seven Arguments," "Cruise," and "Suspended Map," totaling thirty-two pieces.

古文：永初中，谒者仆射刘珍、校书郎刘騊駼等著作东观，撰集《汉记》，因定汉家礼仪，上言请衡参论其事，会并卒，而衡常叹息，欲终成之。
现代文：安帝永初中，谒者仆射刘珍、校书郎刘马余等著作东观，撰集《汉记》，因定汉家礼仪，上言请张衡参加讨论，适刘珍、刘马余逝世，张衡平居叹息，想完成这件事。
English: At Andiyong Junior High School, Liu Zhen and Liu Ma Yu, the school's scribes, wrote Dongguan and compiled "Han Ji," and because of the Han family etiquette, Zhang Heng was invited to participate in the discussion. When Liu Zhen and Liu Ma Yu died, Zhang Hengping sighed and wanted to complete the matter.

古文：及为侍中，上疏请得专事东观，收捡遗文，毕力补缀。
现代文：及为侍中，上疏请得在东观专门收检遗文，全力补缀。
English: And as a chambermaid, Shang Su was invited to Dongguan to receive and inspect the relics, and do his best to complete the decoration.

古文：又条上司马迁、班固所叙与典籍不合者十余事。
现代文：又条上司马迁、班固所记与典籍不合的十余事。
English: In addition, there are more than ten things that are inconsistent with the classics, such as boss Ma Qian and Ban Gu.

古文：又以为王莽本传但应载篡事而已，至于编年月，纪灾祥，宜为元后本纪。
现代文：又认为王莽本传，只应记载篡夺皇位而已，至于编年月，记灾祥，应作《元后本纪》。
English: It is also believed that Wang Mang's biography should only record the usurpation of the imperial throne. As for the compilation of dates and the record of calamities, it should be "Genpo Hongji."

古文：又更始居位，人无异望。
现代文：又更始居位，人民没有什么异议。
English: The people had no objection to this.

古文：光武初为其将，然后即真，宜以更始之号建于光武之初。
现代文：光武初为其将，后来才即位，应该把更始之号建在光武之前。
English: Guangwu was the commander at the beginning, but ascended to the throne later. It is necessary to build the beginning of a new era before Guangwu.

古文：书数上，竟不听。
现代文：上书数次，没采纳。
English: It was submitted several times, but was not accepted.

古文：及后之著述，多不详典，时人追恨之。
现代文：后来的著述，多不详见于典籍，时人感到遗憾。
English: Later writings, most of which are not detailed, are found in classics, and people at the time felt regret.

古文：论曰：崔瑗之称平子曰 数术穷天地，制作侔造化 。
现代文：史官评说：崔瑗称赞平子说： 数术穷究天地的奥妙，制作的技巧，与自然同工。 
English: Historian's comment: Cui Yao praised Ping Zi, saying: "He studied the secrets of heaven and earth in mathematics, and worked with nature in production techniques.

古文：斯致可得而言欤！
现代文：这种造诣可以说说吗？
English: Can this accomplishment be said to be complete?

古文：推其围范两仪，天地无所蕴其灵；运情机物，有生不能参其智。
现代文：考其研究天地，天地的灵气无所蕴蓄；用心机械，没有人能比得上他的智慧。
English: In his study of heaven and earth, there is no accumulation of the aura of heaven and earth; no one can match his wisdom.

古文：故知思引渊微，人之上术。记曰： 德成而上，艺成而下。 
现代文：所以人深微的思想，达到了智思的顶点。《礼记》说： 德成而上，艺成而下。 
English: Therefore, people's profound thoughts have reached the peak of wisdom. "Li Ji" said: Virtue is up, and art is down.

古文：近推形<= :,;:;:;:;:;:;:;:!;:;:;:;:;:;:;:;:;:;:;:;: >筭</>，远抽深滞。不有玄虑，孰能昭晰？
现代文：考量他的智思，难道能说它仅仅是一种艺能吗？
English: Considering his intelligence, can it be said that it is merely an artistic ability?

