古文：陆子隆，字兴世，吴郡吴人也。
现代文：陆子隆字兴世，吴郡吴人。
English: Lu Zilong Zi Xing Shi, Wu County Wu people.

古文：祖敞之，梁嘉兴令。
现代文：祖父陆敞之，梁朝时任嘉兴县令。
English: His grandfather, Lu Changzhi, was the Jiaxing County magistrate during the Liang Dynasty.

古文：父悛，封氏令。
现代文：父亲陆悛，任封氏县令。
English: His father, Lu Yao, was appointed county magistrate of Fuxi County.

古文：子隆少慷慨，有志功名。
现代文：陆子隆少年时意气风发，有志于功名。
English: When Lu Zilong was a boy, he was full of energy and aspired to be famous.

古文：起家东宫直后。
现代文：担任束宫直后起家。
English: He started his family immediately after serving as Sokonomiya.

古文：侯景之乱，于乡里聚徒。
现代文：侯景叛乱时，陆子隆在家乡聚集徒众。
English: When Houjing rebelled, Lu Zilong gathered followers in his hometown.

古文：是时张彪为吴郡太守，引为将帅。
现代文：这时张彪任吴郡太守，引用为将帅。
English: At this time, Zhang Biao was appointed the governor of Wu County and cited as a general.

古文：彪徙镇会稽，子隆随之。
现代文：张彪迁徙镇守会稽，陆子隆跟随着他。
English: Zhang Biao migrated to the town guard association, and Lu Zilong followed him.

古文：及世祖讨彪，彪将沈泰、吴宝真、申缙等皆降，而子隆力战败绩，世祖义之，复使领其部曲，板为中兵参军。
现代文：到世祖讨伐张彪时，张彪的部将沈泰、吴实真、申缙等都投降，而陆子隆奋力战斗失败了，世祖善待他，又让他统率自己的军队，委任为中兵参军。
English: When the founder of the world fought against Zhang Biao, Zhang Biao's subordinates, including Shen Tai, Wu Shizhen, and Shen Qi, all surrendered, while Lu Zilong fought hard and failed. The founder of the world treated him kindly and allowed him to command his own army, appointing him as a middle-ranking soldier to join the army.

古文：历始豊、永兴二县令。
现代文：历任始丰、永兴两个县的县令。
English: Successive governors of Shifeng and Yongxing counties.

古文：世祖嗣位，子隆领甲仗宿卫。
现代文：世祖继承帝位，陆子隆率领披甲执兵的卫士在宫中值宿警卫。
English: The ancestor succeeded to the throne, and Lu Zilong led the guards of the armored soldiers on guard duty in the palace.

古文：寻随侯安都拒王琳于栅口。
现代文：接着随侯安都抗拒王琳于栅口。
English: Next, Wang Lin followed Hou Andu to the gate.

古文：王琳平，授左中郎将。
现代文：王琳被平定后，任命为左中郎将。
English: After Wang Lin was subdued, he was appointed General of the Left Middle Army.

古文：天嘉元年，封益阳县子，邑三百户。
现代文：天嘉元年，封为益阳县子，食邑三百户。
English: In the first year of Tianjia, it was assigned to Yiyang County, with 300 households in the food village.

古文：出为高唐郡太守。
现代文：调出朝廷任高唐郡太守。
English: He was transferred from the imperial court to serve as the governor of Gaotang County.

古文：二年，除明威将军、庐陵太守。
现代文：天嘉二年，任命为明威将军、庐陵太守。
English: In the second year of Tianjia, he was appointed as the Mingwei general and the governor of Fuling.

古文：时周迪据临川反，东昌县人修行师应之，率兵以攻子隆，其锋甚盛。
现代文：当时周迪占据临川造反，东昌县人脩行师响应，率兵进攻陆子隆，他的势头非常盛大。
English: At that time, Zhou Di occupied the Linchuan Rebellion, and the Dongchang County People's Liberation Army responded by leading troops to attack Lu Zilong. His momentum was very great.

古文：子隆设伏于外，仍闭门偃甲，示之以弱。
现代文：陆子隆设埋伏于城外，于是紧闭城门偃旗息甲，表现出弱势。
English: Lu Zilong set up an ambush outside the city, so he closed the city gate, raised the flag and retreated, showing weakness.

古文：及行师至，腹背击之，行师大败，因乞降，子隆许之，送于京师。
现代文：等脩行师到达，腹背攻击他，脩行师大败，因而乞求投降，陆子隆同意他投降，将他送于京师。
English: When Min Xing's division arrived and attacked him from the rear, Min Xing's division suffered a crushing defeat and begged for surrender. Lu Zilong agreed to his surrender and sent him to the Beijing division.

古文：四年，周迪引陈宝应复出临川，子隆随都督章昭达讨迪。
现代文：天嘉四年，周迪引领陈实应又出临川，陆子隆跟随都督章昭达讨伐周迪。
English: In the fourth year of Tian Jia, Zhou Di led Chen Shiying to go to Linchuan again, and Lu Zilong followed the governor Zhang Zhaoda to fight Zhou Di.

古文：迪退走，因随昭达逾东兴岭，讨陈宝应。
现代文：周迪退走，陆子隆因而随章昭达翻越东兴岭，讨伐陈宝应。
English: Zhou Di retreated, so Lu Zilong followed Zhang Zhaoda to cross the Dongxing Mountains to fight Chen Baoying.

古文：军至建安，以子隆监郡。
现代文：军队到达建安，用陆子隆监理郡中政事。
English: When the army arrived in Jian'an, Lu Zilong was put in charge of supervising the county's internal affairs.

古文：宝应据建安之湖际以拒官军，子隆与昭达各据一营，昭达先与贼战，不利，亡其鼓角，子隆闻之，率兵来救，大破贼徒，尽获昭达所亡羽仪甲仗。
现代文：陈实应占据建安的湖边以抗拒朝廷军队，陆子隆和章昭达各据有一营，章昭达先和叛贼战斗，不利，丢失了军中的鼓角，陆子隆听到这消息，率兵来救援，大破叛贼徒众，全部收获章昭达所丢失的羽毛装饰的旌旗和兵器。
English: Chen Shih should occupy the lakeside of Jian'an to resist the imperial army. Lu Zilong and Zhang Zhaoda each had a battalion. Zhang Zhaoda first fought against the traitors and lost the army's drum horns. Lu Zilong heard the news and led the troops to rescue, smash the traitors and harvest all the feather-decorated banners and weapons lost by Zhang Zhaoda.

古文：晋安平，子隆功最，迁假节、都督武州诸军事，将军如故。
现代文：晋安平定，陆子隆功劳最大，升任假节、都督武州诸军事，将军一职依旧担任。
English: After the subjugation of Jin and An dynasties, Lu Zilong made the greatest contribution, and was promoted to the position of False Festival, the military governor of Wuzhou, and still held the position of general.

古文：寻改封朝阳县伯，邑五百户。
现代文：接着改封朝阳县伯，食邑五百户。
English: Then it was moved to 500 households in Bo, Chaoyang County.

古文：废帝即位，进号智武将军，加员外散骑常侍，馀如故。
现代文：废帝登位，给陆子隆加封号称智武将军，加官员外散骑常侍，其余职务跟从前一样担任。
English: The deposed emperor ascended to the throne, and Lu Zilong was given the title of General Zhiwu, as well as the title of non-commissioned officer and non-commissioned officer, and the rest of his duties were the same as before.

古文：华皎据湘州反，以子隆居其心腹，皎深患之，频遣使招诱，子隆不从，皎因遣兵攻之，又不能克。
现代文：华皎占据湘州造反，因为陆子隆所居是他心腹之地，华皎非常忧虑，一再派遣使者招求引诱，陆子隆不顺从，华皎因此派兵进攻他，又不能取胜。
English: Hua Tuo occupied Hunan to rebel, because Lu Zilong lived in the land of his confidant. Hua Tuo was very worried and repeatedly sent emissaries to invite and entice Lu Zilong. Lu Zilong did not obey, so Hua Tuo sent troops to attack him, but could not win.

古文：及皎败于郢州，子隆出兵以袭其后，因与王师相会。
现代文：到华皎战败于郢州，陆子隆出兵袭击他的后面，因而和帝王之师相会合。
English: When Lu Zilong was defeated in the Battle of Bozhou, Lu Zilong sent troops to attack his rear, and thus met with the emperor's division.

古文：授持节、通直散骑常侍、都督武州诸军事，进爵为侯，增邑并前七百户。
现代文：任命为持节、通直散骑常侍、都督武州诸军事，进封爵号为侯，增加食邑和以前的一共七百户。
English: He was appointed as the military governor of Wuzhou, and was given the title of marquis. He increased the number of towns and villages to a total of 700.

古文：寻迁都督荆、信、祐三州诸军事、宣毅将军、荆州刺史，持节、常侍如故。
现代文：接着升任都督荆信佑三州诸军事、宣毅将军、荆州刺史，持节、常侍依旧担任。
English: Next, Jing Xinyu, the military governor of the three states, Xuan Yi, the general, Jing Zhou, the historian, the festival, and the regular attendant were still in office.

古文：是时荆州新置，治于公安，城池未固，子隆修建城郭，绥集夷夏，甚得民和，当时号为称职。
现代文：这时荆州新设置，治所设于公安，城池不坚固，陆子隆修建城郭，安抚异族和汉族，很能与民和睦相处，当时称作称职。
English: At this time, Jingzhou was newly set up, the government office was set up in the public security, the city was not strong, Lu Zilong built the castle, pacified the foreign and Han people, and was able to get along well with the people. At that time, he was called competent.

古文：三年，吏民诣都上表，请立碑颂美功绩，诏许之。
现代文：三年，官吏和民众到京城上书朝廷，请求立碑颂扬赞美陆子隆的功绩，诏令许可立碑。
English: Three years later, officials and citizens went to the capital to write to the imperial court, requesting the erection of a monument to praise the achievements of Lu Zilong, and the imperial edict permitted the erection of the monument.

古文：太建元年，进号云麾将军。
现代文：太建元年，加封号云麾将军。
English: In the first year of the Tai Jian era, he was given the additional title of General Yun Qi.

古文：二年卒，时年四十七。
现代文：太建二年去世，当时年纪四十七岁。
English: Tai Jian died two years later at the age of forty-seven.

古文：赠散骑常侍，谥曰威。
现代文：赠给散骑常侍的官衔，谧号叫作威。
English: Riding attendants were given away, and the nickname prevailed.

古文：子之武嗣。
现代文：儿子陆之武继承。
English: He was succeeded by his son, Riku no Takeshi.

古文：之武年十六，领其旧军，随吴明彻北伐有功，官至王府主簿、弘农太守，仍隶明彻。
现代文：陆之武年纪十六岁，统领陆子隆原有的军队，跟随吴明彻北伐有功劳，官做到王府主簿、弘农太守，仍然隶属吴明彻。
English: Lu Zhiwu was 16 years old. He led the original army of Lu Zilong, followed Wu Mingche in the Northern Expedition, and achieved great achievements. He served as the chief official of the royal palace and the governor of Hongnong. He was still subordinate to Wu Mingche.

古文：明彻于吕梁败绩，之武逃归，为人所害，时年二十二。
现代文：吴明彻在吕梁战败，陆之武逃回，被人谋害，当时年纪二十二岁。
English: Wu Mingcher was defeated in Luliang, Lu Zhowu fled back and was assassinated. He was 22 years old at the time.

古文：子隆弟子才，亦有干略，从子隆征讨有功，除南平太守，封始兴县子，邑三百户。
现代文：陆子隆弟弟陆子才，亦有才干谋略，随从陆子隆征战讨伐有功，任命为南平太守，封始兴县子，食邑三百户。
English: Lu Zilong's younger brother, Lu Zicai, was also a talented strategist. He followed Lu Zilong's campaign and fought bravely. He was appointed the governor of Nanping, the county seat of Fengshi Xing County, and had 300 households.

古文：从吴明彻北伐，监安州，镇于宿预。
现代文：随从吴明彻北伐，监理安州政事，镇守于宿预。
English: He followed Wu Mingche on the Northern Expedition, supervised Anzhou's political affairs, and served as the town guard in Shukuhaku.

古文：除中卫始兴王咨议参军，迁飙猛将军、信州刺史。
现代文：任命为中卫始兴王谘议参军，升任飙猛将军、信州刺史。
English: He was appointed as the middle guard to advise Prince Shi Xing Wang to join the army, promoted to the soaring general, and became the history of Shinshu.

古文：太建十三年卒，时年四十二，赠员外散骑常侍。
现代文：太建十三年去世，当时年纪四十二岁。赠给员外散骑常侍官衔。
English: Tai Jian died thirteen years later, at the age of forty-two. He was given the rank of non-commissioned officer.

古文：钱道戢，字子韬，吴兴长城人也。
现代文：钱道戢字子韬，吴兴长城人。
English: Qian Dao, Zi Zi, Wu Xing from the Great Wall.

古文：父景深，梁汉寿令。
现代文：父亲钱景深，任梁朝汉寿令。
English: His father, Qian Jingshen, was appointed Liang Dynasty Han Shouling.

古文：道戢少以孝行著闻，及长，颇有干略，高祖微时，以从妹妻焉。
现代文：钱道戢少年时因孝顺的操行著称，到成年后，很有才干谋略，高祖地位低微时，将从妹嫁给他。
English: Qian Daoxuan was famous for his filial piety when he was a boy. When he became an adult, he was very talented in strategy. When Gao Zu's status was low, his younger sister would marry him.

古文：从平卢子略于广州，除滨江令。
现代文：钱道戢随从平定卢子略于广州，任命为滨江县令。
English: Qian Daoxuan followed Pingding Luzi to Guangzhou and was appointed as the governor of Binjiang County.

古文：高祖辅政，遣道戢随世祖平张彪于会稽，以功拜直阁将军，除员外散骑常侍、假节、东徐州刺史，封永安县侯，邑五百户。
现代文：高祖辅佐朝政时，派遣钱道戢随世祖平定张彪于会稽，因有功封为直合将军，任命为员外散骑常侍、假节、东徐州刺史，封永安县侯，食邑五百户。
English: When Gao Zu assisted the imperial government, he sent Qian Daojun to accompany his ancestor Pingding Zhang Biao to audit the meeting, and because he was awarded the title of General Zhaohai, he was appointed as a non-commissioned officer, a roving attendant, a false festival, a historian of East Xuzhou, a feudal lord of Yong'an County, and 500 households of food villages.

古文：仍领甲卒三千，随侯安都镇防梁山，寻领钱塘、馀杭二县令。
现代文：仍率领兵士三千人，随侯安都镇守防卫梁山，接着领钱塘、余杭二县县令。
English: He still led three thousand soldiers, followed Hou Andu Town to defend Liangshan, and then led Qiantang and Yuhang two counties.

古文：永定三年，随世祖镇于南皖口。
现代文：永定三年，随世祖镇守于南皖口。
English: Yongding three years, with the world's first town guard in the South Gate.

古文：天嘉元年，又领剡令，镇于县之南岩，寻为临海太守，镇岩如故。
现代文：天嘉元年，又领剡县县令，镇守于县的南岩，接着任临海太守，镇守南岩跟从前一样。
English: In the first year of Tianjia, he also received the county order of Jixian County, and served as the town guard of Nanyan in the county, and then served as the Linhai governor, and the town guard of Nanyan was the same as before.

古文：侯安都之讨留异也，道戢帅军出松阳以断其后。
现代文：侯安都讨伐留异，钱道戢统率军队出松阳以断绝留异的后路。
English: Hou Andu fought against the dissidents, Qian Dao led the army out of Songyang to cut off the dissident's back way.

古文：异平，以功拜持节、通直散骑常侍、轻车将军、都督东西二衡州诸军事、衡州刺史，领始兴内史。
现代文：留异被平定。因功任命为持节、通直散骑常侍、轻车将军、都督东西二衡州诸军事、衡州刺史，领始兴内史。
English: Due to his merits, he was appointed as Jisetsu, Tsunetsu Sanzhijishi, Light Vehicle General, Governor of the Eastern and Western Regions, Military Governor of Hengshu Province, Military Governor of Hengshu Province, and Leader of the Inner History of Shixing.

古文：光大元年，增邑并前七百户。
现代文：光大元年，增加食邑和从前的一共七百户。
English: In the first year of Guangda, the number of food villages increased to a total of seven hundred households.

古文：高宗即位，征欧阳纥入朝，纥疑惧，乃举兵来攻衡州，道戢与战，却之。
现代文：高宗登位，征召欧阳纥入朝，欧阳纥疑虑惧怕，于是率领军队来进攻衡州，钱道戢和他作战，退敌。
English: Gao Zong ascended to the throne and summoned Ouyang Xuan to the imperial court. Ouyang Xuan hesitated and was afraid, so he led the army to attack Hengzhou. Qian Daojun fought with him and defeated the enemy.

古文：及都督章昭达率兵讨纥，以道戢为步军都督，由间道断纥之后。
现代文：到都督章昭达率领军队讨伐欧阳纥时，以钱道戢为步军都督，由小道前往切断欧阳纥的后路。
English: When the governor Zhang Zhaoda led the army to fight Ouyang Xuan, he took Qian Daobao as the governor of the marching army and went from the trail to cut off Ouyang Xuan's back road.

古文：纥平，除左卫将军。
现代文：欧阳纥被平定，钱道戢被任命为左卫将军。
English: Ouyang Xuan was subdued and Qian Daoxuan was appointed as the General of the Left Division.

古文：太建二年，又随昭达征萧岿于江陵，道戢别督众军与陆子隆焚青泥舟舰，仍为昭达前军，攻安蜀城，降之。
现代文：太建二年，又随章昭达征伐萧归于江陵，钱道戢另外督率众军和陆子隆一同焚毁青泥舟舰，仍作为章昭达前军，进攻安蜀城，守军投降。
English: In the second year of the Tai Jian period, Qian Daojun led the army and Lu Zilong together to burn down the Qingdao ship, still as Zhang Zhaoda's former army, attacked Anshu City, and the defenders surrendered.

古文：以功加散骑常侍、仁武将军，增邑并前九百户。
现代文：因功加官散骑常侍、仁武将军，增加食邑和以前的一共九百户。
English: As a result of his efforts, the number of officials, horseback riding attendants, and benevolent generals was increased, and the number of food villages increased to a total of nine hundred households.

古文：其年，迁仁威将军、吴兴太守。
现代文：逭年，升任仁威将军、吴兴太守。
English: In the year of the Rooster, he was promoted to General Ren Wei and Wu Xing became the de facto ruler.

古文：未行，改授使持节、都督郢、巴、武三州诸军事、郢州刺史。
现代文：尚未起行，改为使持节、都督郢巴武三州诸军事、郢州刺史。
English: It has not yet started, but it has been changed to the Jiji Festival, the military of the three states of the capital city of Bawu, and the history of Bawu.

古文：王师北讨，道戢与仪同黄法抃围历阳。
现代文：朝廷军队往北讨伐，钱道戢和仪同黄法抃围攻历扰。
English: The imperial army marched northward, and Qian Dao, He Yi and Huang Fao were besieged.

古文：历阳城平，因以道戢镇之。
现代文：历垦困平定后，便用饯：曲镇守它。
English: After the siege was over, the town was defended with the use of the :曲.

古文：以功加云麾将军，增邑并前一千五百户。
现代文：因功加封云麾将军，增加食邑和以前的一共一千五百户。
English: As a result of his efforts, he was awarded the title of General Yun Qi, and the number of food villages increased to the previous total of 1,500 households.

古文：其年十一月遘疾卒，时年六十三。
现代文：这年十一月生病去世，当时年纪六十三岁。
English: He died of illness in November of that year, at the age of 63.

古文：赠本官，谥曰肃。
现代文：赠给本身官衔，谧号叫做肃。
English: He gave himself an official title, and his posthumous name is Shu.

古文：子邈嗣。
现代文：儿子钱邈继承。
English: His son Qian Ye succeeded him.

古文：骆牙，字旗门，吴兴临安人也。
现代文：骆牙字旗门，吴兴临安人。
English: Luo Ya Zi Qimen, Wu Xing Lin An Ren.

古文：祖秘道，梁安成王田曹参军。
现代文：祖父坚丝差，任梁朝安成王田曹参军。
English: His grandfather was so poor that he was allowed to join the army by Liang Chaoancheng Wang Tian Cao.

古文：父裕，鄱阳嗣王中兵参军事。
现代文：父亲曼溢，任鄱阳嗣王中兵参军事。
English: His father, Man Yue, served as a soldier in the military in the reign of King Yang Zi.

古文：牙年十二，宗人有善相者，云： 此郎容貌非常，必将远致。 
现代文：骆牙十二岁时，同族中有会看相的人，说 这个少年容貌不同平常，必将才能大成 。
English: When Luo Ya was twelve years old, some people in his family who knew how to read faces said that this boy's appearance was different from the ordinary, and he would surely be able to become a great man.

古文：梁太清末，世祖尝避地临安，牙母陵，睹世祖仪表，知非常人，宾待甚厚。
现代文：梁朝太清末年，世祖曾经避难到临安这地方，骆牙的母亲陵氏，见了世祖仪表，知道是不寻常的人，以宾客之礼相待非常优厚。
English: At the end of the Liang Dynasty and the Qing Dynasty, the founder of the world took refuge in Lin'an. Luo Ya's mother, Ling, saw the appearance of the founder and knew that he was an unusual person, and treated him very generously as a guest.

古文：及世祖为吴兴太守，引牙为将帅，因从平杜龛、张彪等，每战辄先锋陷阵，勇冠众军，以功授真阁将军。
现代文：到世祖任吴兴太守，引领骆牙用为将帅，因而随从平定杜鑫、张彪等，每次战斗总是冲锋陷阵，勇猛列于诸军首位，因功授直合将军。
English: Wu Xing, the founder of the dynasty, was appointed as the de facto ruler, leading Luo Ya to be used as a general, so he followed Pingding Du Xin, Zhang Biao, etc. Every battle was always a charge, bravely ranked first in the army, and was awarded the title of General Zhihe for his merits.

古文：太平二年，以母忧去职。
现代文：太平二年，因为母亲逝世去职。
English: Two years after the Taiping Rebellion, he left his post because his mother died.

古文：世祖镇会稽，起为山阴令。
现代文：世祖镇守会稽时，起用为山阴县令。
English: When the Shizu Town Guard Association was audited, it was used as the Shanyin County Order.

古文：永定三年，除安东府中兵参军，出镇冶城。
现代文：永定三年，任命为安束府中兵参军，前往镇守冶城。
English: In the third year of Yongding, he was appointed as a middle-ranking soldier of Anzacfu to join the army and went to the garrison of Yecheng.

古文：寻从世祖拒王琳于南皖。
现代文：接着随从世祖抗拒王琳于南皖。
English: Next, Wang Lin followed the ancestor to resist in Nanlu.

古文：世祖即位，授假节、威虏将军、员外散骑常侍，封常安县侯，邑五百户。
现代文：世祖登位，任命为假节、威虏将军、员外散骑常侍，封常安县侯，食邑五百户。
English: The founder ascended to the throne, and was appointed as a false festival, a tyrant general, a non-commissioned officer riding horseback, a county magistrate of Chang'an County, and 500 households of food villages.

古文：寻为临安令，迁越州刺史，馀并如故。
现代文：接着任临安县令，升任越州刺史，其余职务依旧担任。
English: Then he was appointed as the Lin'an County magistrate, promoted to the Yuezhou County magistrate, and still held the remaining positions.

古文：初，牙母之卒也，于时饥馑兵荒，至是始葬，诏赠牙母常安国太夫人，谥曰恭。
现代文：起初，骆牙母亲去世，那时正遭饥馑兵荒，到逭时才安葬，韶令赠给骆牙母亲常安国太夫人的称号，谧号叫做恭。
English: At first, Luo Ya's mother died. At that time, she was suffering from famine and war. She was buried when she was very old. The imperial order gave Luo Ya's mother the title of Lady Chang'an Guotai, and her nickname was Gong.

古文：迁牙为贞威将军、晋陵太守。
现代文：升任骆牙为贞威将军、晋陵太守。
English: Luo Ya was promoted to General Zhenwei and became the governor of Jinling.

古文：三年，以平周迪之功，迁冠军将军、临川内史。
现代文：三年，因平定周迪的功绩，升任冠军将军、临川内史。
English: Three years later, due to his achievements in suppressing Zhou Di, he was promoted to champion general, Lin Chuanai Shi.

古文：太建三年，授安远将军、衡阳内史，未拜，徙为桂阳太守。
现代文：太建三年，任命为安远将军、衡阳内史，未就任，调任桂阳太守。
English: In the third year of Tai Jian, he was appointed as General Anyuan and Hengyang Inner Historian, but he did not take office and was transferred to Guiyang Governor.

古文：八年，还朝，迁散骑常侍，入直殿省。
现代文：太建八年，回到朝廷，升任散骑常侍，进入宫殿中的官署办公。
English: Eight years later, he returned to the imperial court, was promoted to the rank of a knight-errant, and entered the palace to work in the government office.

古文：十年，授豊州刺史，馀并如故。
现代文：太建十年，任命为丰州刺史，其余职务都依旧担任。
English: After ten years of Tai Jian, he was appointed as the chief historian of Fengzhou, and he still held the rest of his positions.

古文：至德二年卒，时年五十七。
现代文：至德二年去世，当时年纪五十七岁。
English: He died two years later at the age of fifty-seven.

古文：赠安远将军、广州刺史。
现代文：赠给安远将军、广州刺史的官衔。
English: Presented to General Anyuan, the official title of Guangzhou stabbing history.

古文：子义嗣。
现代文：儿子骆义继承。
English: His son Luo Yi succeeded him.

古文：史臣曰：陆子隆、钱道戢，或举门愿从，或旧齿树勋，有统领之才，充师旅之寄。
现代文：史臣曰：陆子隆、钱道戢，或有全家愿意随从，或有德望的耆旧帮助建立功勋，他们有统领的才干，能担负战争的重任。
English: Shichen said: Lu Zilong, Qian Daojun, or the whole family is willing to follow, or there is a virtuous old man to help build a meritorious service, they have the ability to command and can shoulder the heavy responsibility of war.

古文：至于受任籓屏，功绩并著，美矣！
现代文：至于受任保卫国家，功绩都卓著，美啊!
English: As for being appointed to defend the country, your achievements are outstanding, you beauty!

古文：骆牙识真有奉，知世祖天授之德，盖张良之亚欤？
现代文：骆牙见识真切又能遵照实行，知道世祖具有上天授予的道德，岂不仅次于张良吗?
English: Can Luo Ya not only be second to Zhang Liang if he can truly see and follow the practice, and knows that the ancestors have the morality bestowed by heaven?

古文：牙母智深先觉，符柏谷之礼，君子知鉴识弘远，其在兹乎！
现代文：骆牙的母亲智识深远先行觉悟，符合柏谷接纳重耳、汉武帝的礼节，有才德的人知道明识弘大深远，就表现在这裹呀!
English: Luo Zha's mother's profound knowledge preceded her enlightenment, which is in line with the etiquette of Kashi Valley's acceptance of heavy ears and Han Emperor Wu. Talented people know that knowledge is broad and far-reaching, and it is manifested in this wrap!

