古文：僧辩字君才，学涉该博，尤明左氏春秋。言辞辩捷，器宇肃然，虽射不穿劄，而有陵云之气。
现代文：僧辩字君才，学问广博，尤其精通《左氏春秋》，能言善辩，神态严正，虽然射箭穿不透铠甲，但有凌云壮志。
English: The monk was a talented debater and a scholar with a wide range of knowledge. He was especially proficient in "The Spring and Autumn of Zuo Shi." He was a good debater and had a serious demeanor. Although archery could not penetrate armor, he had a strong will.

古文：元帝爲江州刺史，僧辩随府爲中兵参军。
现代文：梁元帝萧绎作荆州刺史时，僧辩在他的官署里作中兵参军。
English: When Emperor Xiaoyan of the Liangyuan Dynasty was writing the history of Jingzhou, a monk was arguing in his government office for soldiers to join the army.

古文：时有安成望族刘敬躬者，田间得白蛆化爲金龟，将销之，龟生光照室，敬躬以爲神而祷之。
现代文：当时安成地方有世家大族刘敬躬，在田间捡到的白蛆变成了金龟，正要把它融化了，金龟突然发出光亮照耀室内，敬躬以为是神而对它祈祷。
English: At that time, there was a large family in Ancheng, Liu Jingwu. The egret he found in the field had turned into a golden turtle. He was about to melt it, when the golden turtle suddenly emitted light and shone in the room. He thought it was a god and prayed to it.

古文：所请多验，无赖者多依之。
现代文：后来向它请的愿多能应验，生活无着的人多来投靠他。
English: Later, more wishes could be granted to him, and more people who had nothing to live for came to rely on him.

古文：平生有德有怨者必报，遂谋作乱，远近回应。
现代文：刘敬躬势力发展起来以后，他对有恩有仇的人都一一还报，后来就打算作乱，远近各处纷纷响应。
English: After Liu Jingwu's influence developed, he reported back to everyone who had a grudge against him. Later, he planned to start a riot, and people from far and wide responded.

古文：元帝命中直兵参军曹子郢讨之，使僧辩袭安成。
现代文：萧绎派中直兵参军曹子郢镇压他，派王僧辩袭击安成。
English: Xiao Yuanyuan sent the middle-ranking soldier Cao Ziqi to suppress him, and sent Wang Sangye to attack Ancheng.

古文：子郢既破其军，敬躬走安成，僧辩禽之。
现代文：子郢击败刘敬躬的军队后，敬躬逃到安成，被僧辩擒获。
English: After Zixuan defeated Liu Jingwu's army, Jingwu fled to Ancheng and was captured by Sangye.

古文：又讨平安州反蛮，由是以勇略称。
现代文：僧辩又镇压了安州造反的蛮人，因此以勇武有谋略闻名。
English: Sangye also suppressed the barbarians who rebelled in Anzhou, so he is famous for his bravery and strategy.

古文：元帝除荆州，僧辩爲贞毅府谘议参军，代柳仲礼爲竟陵太守。
现代文：萧绎为徐州刺史，僧辨作贞毅府谘议参军，代柳仲礼为竟陵太守。
English: Xiao Yuanzhi was the governor of Xuzhou, Zeng Bing was the adviser of Zhenyi Prefecture to join the army, and Liu Zhongli was the governor of Jingsiling.

古文：及侯景反，元帝命僧辩总督舟师一万赴援。
现代文：等侯景造反，萧绎命令僧辩总督水军一万援救建康。
English: When Houjing rebelled, Xiao Yu ordered the governor of Sanyuan to send ten thousand naval troops to rescue Jiankang.

古文：及至，台城陷没，侯景悉收其军实而厚加绥抚，遣归竟陵。
现代文：等赶到，建康台城已被攻陷，侯景假借已被他控制的武帝的命令，把他的军队物资全部扣留而厚加安抚，遣返他们回竟陵。
English: When they arrived, the city of Jiankangdae had already been conquered, and Hou Jing, on the pretext of an order from Emperor Wu, whom he already controlled, detained all of his army's supplies, pacified them, and repatriated them back to Chongling.

古文：于是倍道兼行，西就元帝。
现代文：于是僧辩日夜兼程，西归萧绎。
English: As a result, the monk went on a day-and-night journey of debate, returning to the West in a daze.

古文：元帝承制，以爲领军将军。
现代文：萧绎承武帝旨讨伐侯景，委任他为领军将军。
English: Emperor Xiaoyan decided to fight against Houjing and appointed him as the leading general.

古文：及荆、湘疑贰，元帝令僧辩及鲍泉讨之。
现代文：及至萧绎和他侄子萧誉火并，令王僧辩和鲍泉去讨伐萧誉。
English: And to Xiao Yu and his nephew Xiao Yu, and ordered Wang Sofen and Bao Quan to fight against Xiao Yu.

古文：时僧辩以竟陵间部下皆劲勇，犹未尽来，意欲待集然后上顿。与泉俱入，使泉先言之，泉入不敢言。元帝问僧辩，僧辩以情对。
现代文：当时僧辩因为他在竟陵的部下都是精兵，还没有到齐，想等部下到齐再出发，就和鲍泉一块儿去进见萧绎，让鲍泉先说，进宫以后鲍泉却不敢说，萧绎问僧辩，僧辩告诉他自己的想法。
English: At that time, Sangye, because his subordinates at Jingling were all elite soldiers, had not yet arrived, and wanted to wait for his subordinates to arrive before setting off, so he and Bao Quan went to see Xiao Yu together. Let Bao Quan speak first, but after entering the palace, Bao Quan did not dare to speak. Xiao Yu asked Sangye, and Sangye told him his thoughts.

古文：元帝性忌，以爲迁延不去，大怒厉声曰： 卿惮行拒命，欲同贼邪？
现代文：萧绎生性猜忌，认为他是故意拖延不走，大怒喝斥道： 你害怕出征违抗命令，想勾结贼人吗？
English: Xiao Yuans natural suspicion that he was deliberately delaying his departure, he shouted angrily: Are you afraid to go to the front to defy orders, do you want to collude with thieves?

古文：今唯死耳。 
现代文：今天非杀你不可！ 
English: I have to kill you today!

古文：僧辩对曰： 今日就戮甘心，但恨不见老母。 
现代文：僧辩回答说： 今天死了也甘心，只是遗憾没见老母一面。 
English: Sangye replied, "I am willing to die today, but I regret not having seen my mother's face.

古文：帝自斫之，中其髀，流血至地，闷绝，久之方苏。
现代文：萧绎亲自动手砍他，砍中他的腿，血流了一地，昏迷过去，很久才苏醒过来。
English: Xiao Yu personally cut him, cut his leg, blood flowed all over the place, went into a coma, and woke up after a long time.

古文：即送廷尉，并收其子侄并系之。
现代文：把他交付廷尉，并把他的子侄都抓了起来。
English: He was handed over to the bailiff and his nephews were arrested.

古文：其母脱簪珥待罪，帝意解，赐以良药，故不死。
现代文：他母亲摘下身上的饰物等待被处罚。萧绎后来气消了，赐给他好药，因此没有送命。
English: His mother took off his ornaments and waited to be punished. Xiao Yu later lost her temper and gave him a good medicine, so he did not die.

古文：会岳阳军袭江陵，人情搔扰。
现代文：碰上这时岳阳王萧鮞为救他兄弟萧誉而发兵袭击江陵，人心惶惶。
English: At this time, Yueyang King Xiao Yao, in order to save his brother Xiao Ren, sent troops to attack Jiangling. People were panicked.

古文：元帝遣就狱出僧辩以爲城内都督。
现代文：萧绎派人到狱中放出僧辩，委任他为城内都督。
English: Xiao Yu sent someone to the prison to release Sofen and appointed him as the city's governor.

古文：俄而岳阳奔退，而鲍泉力不能克长沙，帝命僧辩代之。
现代文：不久萧鮞败逃，而鲍泉打不下萧誉所据的长沙，萧绎就派僧辩代替他。
English: Soon, Xiao Yao was defeated and fled, and Bao Quan could not beat Changsha, which was the basis of Xiao Yao's reputation, and Xiao Yu sent a monk to replace him.

古文：僧辩仍部分将帅，并力攻围，遂平湘土。
现代文：僧辩于是指挥将帅，合力围攻，平定了湘州地面。
English: Wang Sangye then deployed military forces, dispatched generals, and the whole army attacked the city together, thus leveling Hunan.

古文：还复领军将军。
现代文：回师以后仍作领军将军。
English: After his return, Wang Sangye was appointed as the leading general.

古文：侯景浮江西寇，军次夏首。
现代文：侯景率军乘船溯江而上进犯西部，驻扎在夏首。
English: The army led by Hou Jing marched westward along the Liao River by boat, and the army was stationed in Xia Shou.

古文：僧辩爲大都督，军次巴陵。
现代文：僧辩为大都督，驻军巴陵。
English: Sofen was the grand governor, and the garrison was at Baling.

古文：景既陷郢城，将进寇荆州，于是缘江屯戍望风请服。
现代文：侯景攻破郢城后，准备进犯荆州，这时沿江驻军望风而降。
English: After Houjing defeated Lucheng, he was preparing to attack Jingzhou. At this time, the garrison along the river looked forward to the wind and descended.

古文：僧辩并沈公私船于水，分命衆军乘城固守，偃旗卧鼓，安若无人。
现代文：僧辩把所有官民船只都沉到江里，分派兵士们上城固守，偃旗息鼓，安静得好像是空城。
English: Sangye sank all the government and civilian ships into the river, and sent soldiers to defend the city. The city was quiet as if it were empty.

古文：翌日，贼衆济江，轻骑至城下，谓城中曰： 语王领军，何不早降？ 僧辩使答曰： 大军但向荆州，此城自当非碍。
现代文：第二天，贼兵渡江，派轻骑到城下，对城中说： 告诉王领军，为什么不早投降？ 僧辩使人回答说： 你们只管到荆州去，这城对你们没有妨碍。
English: The next day, the robber soldiers crossed the river, sent light cavalry to the city, and said to the city: Tell the king to lead the army, why not surrender early?

古文：僧辩百口在人掌握，岂得便降。 
现代文：我家里百十口都在人家手心里，怎能随便投降呢？ 
English: I have more than a hundred king-monk debaters in my possession, how can I surrender at will?

古文：景军肉薄苦攻，城内同时鼓噪，矢石雨下，贼乃引退。
现代文：侯景军肉搏苦攻，城里同时擂鼓呐喊，矢石如雨下，贼军退走。
English: The Houjing army fought hard, and the city was shouting and beating drums at the same time. The arrows fell like rain, and the thief army retreated.

古文：元帝又命平北将军胡僧佑率兵援僧辩。
现代文：元帝又命平北将军胡僧率兵援僧辩。
English: Emperor Yuan also ordered the general of the North, Hu Zeng, to lead the troops to support the debate.

古文：是日，贼复攻城不克，又爲火舰烧栅，风不便，自焚而退。
现代文：那天，贼军又攻城不克，就用火船烧守军栅栏，风向不对，烧了自己退兵回去。
English: That day, when the bandits attacked the city again, he used a fire boat to burn the military fence. The wind was in the wrong direction, so he burned himself and retreated.

古文：有流星堕其营中，贼徒大骇，相顾失色。
现代文：有流星坠落在侯景营内，贼军非常惊怕，吓得面面相觑变了脸色。
English: A meteor crashed into the Houjing Camp, and the bandits were so scared that they looked at each other and turned pale.

古文：贼帅任约又爲陆法和所禽，景乃烧营夜遁，旋军夏首。
现代文：贼军的将领任约又被陆法和俘获，于是侯景就烧了自己的营寨夜间逃走，回兵驻在夏首。
English: The general of the bandit army was about to be captured by the law of the land and captured, so Hou Jing burned his camp and fled at night, and the returning soldiers were stationed in Xia Shou.

古文：元帝以僧辩爲征东将军、开府仪同三司、江州刺史，封长宁县公，命即率巴陵诸军沿流讨景。
现代文：萧绎委任僧辩为征东将军、开府仪同三司、江州刺史，封长宁县公，命令他立刻率领众军沿江而下讨伐侯景。
English: Xiao Yuanzhong appointed Sofen as General of the Expedition to the East, Kaifu Yi Tong San Si, Jiangzhou Zhishi, and appointed him as the governor of Changning County, and ordered him to immediately lead the army down the river to fight against Houjing.

古文：攻拔鲁山，仍攻郢，即入罗城。
现代文：僧辩攻克鲁山，于是进攻郢州，很快攻入罗城。
English: The monk argued about conquering Kru Shan, so he attacked Luzhou and soon entered Luocheng.

古文：又有大星如车轮坠贼营，去地十丈变成火，一时碎散。
现代文：这时有颗车轮般大小的流星坠落到侯景军营内，离地十丈时变成了火球，然后一下爆裂炸开。
English: At this time, a meteor the size of a car wheel fell into the Houjing military camp, turned into a fireball when it was ten meters above the ground, and then exploded.

古文：有龙自城出，五色光曜，入城前鹦鹉洲水中。
现代文：城里又飞出一条龙，闪耀着五色光彩，落进城前鹦鹉洲水里。
English: Another dragon flew out of the city, shining with five colors, and fell into the water of the city's former Parrot Island.

古文：景闻之，倍道归建邺。
现代文：侯景听说此事，兼程赶回建邺。
English: When Hou Jing heard about this, he made a side trip back to Jianye.

古文：贼帅宋子仙等困蹙，求输郢城，身还就景。
现代文：贼军将领宋子仙等人走投无路，请求献城，而放他们回侯景那里。
English: Song Zixian, the general of the invading army, and others were at a dead end. They asked for the surrender of the city and were allowed to return to Houjing.

古文：僧辩僞许之。
现代文：僧辩假意答应。
English: The monk reluctantly agreed.

古文：子仙谓爲信然，浮舟将发，僧辩命杜龛鼓噪掩至，大破之，禽子仙、丁和等送江陵。元帝命生钉和舌脔杀之。
现代文：子仙信以为真，上船将要启航，僧辩派杜龛擂鼓呐喊杀到，大破侯景军，擒获子仙、丁和等人送回江陵，萧绎下令用钉子钉住丁和的舌头用刀碎割了他。
English: Zixianxin believed it to be true that the ship was about to set sail, and the cuckoo drums of the debate faction shouted and shouted until they killed it, defeated the Houjing army, captured Zixian, Dinghe and others and sent them back to Gangneung. Xiao Yu ordered to nail Dinghe's tongue and cut him with a knife.

古文：郢州既平，僧辩进师寻阳。
现代文：郢州平定后，僧辩向寻阳进军。
English: After the suppression of Bozhou, Sangye marched to Xuanyang.

古文：军人多梦周何二庙神云： 吾已助天子讨贼。 
现代文：很多军士都梦见周、何二庙的神灵说： 我已经帮助天子讨贼。 
English: Many soldiers dreamed of Zhou, and the gods of the two temples said: I have helped the son of heaven to catch the thief.

古文：自称征讨大将军，并乘朱航。
现代文：还自称征讨大将军，都乘坐红色舰船。
English: They also claimed to be recruiting a great general, and all of them rode on a red ship.

古文：俄而反曰： 已杀景。 
现代文：很快又返回说： 已经杀了侯景。 
English: He soon returned and said, "I have killed Houjing."

古文：同梦者数十百焉。
现代文：同作这梦的有上百人。
English: More than a hundred people had the same dream.

古文：元帝加僧辩侍中、尚书令、征东大将军。
现代文：萧绎加封僧辩为侍中、尚书令、征东大将军。
English: Xiao Yuanzhang and Feng Sangye were appointed as chamberlains, Shang Shuling, and General of the Eastern Expedition.

古文：僧辩频表劝进，并蒙优答。
现代文：僧辩屡次上表劝萧绎称帝，都受到萧绎善言婉拒。
English: Sofen repeatedly urged Xiao Yu to proclaim himself emperor, but Xiao Yu politely refused.

古文：于是发江州直指建邺，乃先命南兖州刺史侯瑱袭南陵、鹊头等戍，并克之。
现代文：大军从江州出发直指建邺，先命南兖州刺史侯王真偷袭南陵、鹊头等驻军处，都一一攻克。
English: The large army set out from Jiangzhou and headed straight for Jianye, and Wang Zhen secretly attacked Nanling, Shantou and other garrisons, and conquered them one by one.

古文：先是，陈武帝率衆五万出自南江，前军五千行至盆口。
现代文：起先，陈武帝陈霸先率兵五万从南江出发，前军五千行至盆口。
English: At first, Chen Wudi Chen Ba's vanguard of fifty thousand soldiers set out from the Nanjiang River, and the vanguard of five thousand marched to the mouth of the basin.

古文：陈武名盖僧辩，僧辩惮之。
现代文：霸先名气比僧辩大，僧辩有点儿怕他。
English: He is more famous than Sangye, and Sangye is a little afraid of him.

古文：既至盆口，与僧辩会于白茅洲爲盟。于是升坛歃血，共读盟文，辞气慷慨，皆泪下沾衿。
现代文：等到了盆口，两人在白茅洲会盟。于是登坛歃血，共读盟文，言辞慷慨激昂，二人都泪下沾衣。
English: When it came to the potluck, the two made a covenant in Whitemouth. So they went up to the altar to shed blood, read the covenant together, and their words were impassioned. Both of them were in tears.

古文：及发鹊头，中江而风浪，师人咸惧。
现代文：等从鹊头出发时，船到江心起了风浪，军士们都很害怕。
English: When they set out from Shantou, the ship encountered rough seas in the middle of the river, and the soldiers were very scared.

古文：僧辩再拜告天曰： 僧辩忠臣，奉辞伐罪，社稷中兴，当使风息；若鼎命中沦，请从此逝。 
现代文：僧辩下拜祷告上天说： 僧辩是朝廷忠臣，奉王命讨伐有罪之人，如社稷能够中兴，就让风停下来；如果朝廷命该覆灭，就让我一死了之。 
English: At the end of the debate, he prostrated himself and prayed to the heavens, saying, "I am a loyal subject of the imperial court, and I have been ordered by the king to fight against the guilty. If society can help me, then let the wind stop. If the imperial court's order is to be overturned, then let me die."

古文：言讫风止，自此遂泛安流。
现代文：说完风就停了，从此一帆风顺。
English: After saying that, the wind stopped and it was smooth sailing from then on.

古文：有群鱼跃水飞空引导，贼望官军上有五色云，双龙挟舰，行甚迅疾。
现代文：有鱼群跃出水面在空中滑翔为他们引路，贼兵望见官军上空有五色彩云，还有双龙挟舰，船行如飞。
English: A school of fish leapt out of the water and glided in the air to guide them. The thief soldiers saw the five-colored clouds above the government army, as well as the double dragon pincers, and the ships were flying.

古文：景自出战于石头城北，僧辩等大破之。
现代文：侯景亲自出战于石头城北，被僧辩等人打得大败。
English: Hou Jing himself went to fight in the north of Stone Town and was soundly defeated by the monks and others.

古文：卢晖略闻景战败，以石头城降。僧辩引军入据之。
现代文：卢晖略听说侯景战败，献石头城投降，僧辩引军进驻。
English: Lu Xunliao heard that Houjing was defeated, offered Stone Town to surrender, and Sangye led an army to enter the city.

古文：景走朱方，僧辩命衆将入据台城。
现代文：侯景逃往朱方，僧辩命众将占领台城。
English: Hou Jing fled to Zhufang, and the monk ordered the crowd to occupy Taicheng.

古文：其夜军人失火烧太极殿及东西堂。
现代文：当夜，军人失火烧了太极殿和东西堂。
English: That night, soldiers accidentally set fire to the Taiji Hall and the East and West Hall.

古文：僧辩虽有灭贼之功，而驭下无法，军人卤掠，驱逼居人。
现代文：僧辩虽有灭侯景的功劳，但不能管理部下，军人到处掳掠驱赶居民。
English: Although Sangye had the merit of exterminating Houjing, he could not manage his subordinates, and soldiers plundered and drove away residents everywhere.

古文：都下百姓父子兄弟相哭，自石头至于东城，被执缚者，男女裸露，衵衣不免。
现代文：京城中百姓阖家号哭，从石头城到东城，被抓走的百姓，男女衣服都被剥光，连贴身内衣也不留下。
English: From Stone Town to Dongcheng, the people who were taken away, both men and women, were stripped naked, not even leaving their underwear.

古文：缘淮号叫，翻思景焉。
现代文：沿淮河一带哭声遍地，竟使百姓反而又想念侯景。
English: Crying was heard everywhere along the Huai River, which made the people miss Houjing.

古文：僧辩命侯瑱、裴之横东追景，僞行台赵伯超自吴松江降侯瑱，瑱送至僧辩，僧辩谓曰： 卿荷国重恩，遂复同逆，今日之事，将欲如何。 
现代文：僧辩命侯王真、裴之横向东追杀侯景，伪行台赵伯超在吴松江降侯王真，侯王真把他送交给僧辩。僧辩对他说： 你受国家重恩，却伙同叛贼，今天这事情，你说怎么办呢。 
English: Sofen ordered Hou Wangzhen and Baizhong to go east and kill Houjing. The counterfeiter Zhao Bochao brought down Hou Wangzhen in Wusongjiang, and Hou Wangzhen handed him over to Sofen. Sofen said to him, "You are favored by the state, but you are a traitor. What do you think about this matter today?"

古文：因命送江陵。
现代文：于是命令把他解送江陵。
English: Wang Sangyan ordered someone to escort Zhao Bochao to the scene.

古文：伯超既出，僧辩顾坐客曰： 朝廷昔唯知有赵伯超，岂识王僧辩乎。
现代文：伯超被押出去后，僧辩环视座中的客人说： 朝廷从前只知道有赵伯超，哪里知道有王僧辨呢。
English: After Bo Chao was pushed out, the guests in the debate circle said: The court only knew about Zhao Bo Chao before, but where did they know about Wang Sangyan?

古文：社稷既倾，爲我所复，人之兴废，亦复何常。 
现代文：国家已经覆亡，被我复兴起来，那么人的贵贱祸福，有个什么准呢？ 
English: The country has fallen, and I have revived it, so what is the standard for a person's high or low fortune or misfortune?

古文：宾客皆前称叹功德，僧辩戄然，乃谬答曰： 此乃圣上威德，群帅用命，老夫虽滥居戎首，何力之有焉。 
现代文：宾客们都上前称颂他的功德，僧辩感到失言而害怕，就谎称： 这都是圣上的威德，将帅们效力，老夫虽充数当了主帅，又有什么功劳呢。 
English: The guests all came forward to praise his merits, but he was afraid of making a slip of the tongue, so he lied and said: "It's all sacred virtue, generals are effective, and even though the old man has become the commander-in-chief, what merit does he have?

古文：于是逆寇悉平。
现代文：侯景之乱被全部平定。
English: The Houjing Rebellion was completely put down.

古文：元帝即位，授镇卫将军、司徒，加班剑二十人，改封永宁郡公，侍中、尚书令如故。
现代文：梁元帝萧绎即位，委任王僧辩为镇卫将军、司徒，加班剑仪仗二十人，改封永宁郡公，侍中、尚书令职务不变。
English: Emperor Xiaoyan of the Liangyuan Dynasty ascended to the throne, and appointed Wang Sofen as the general of the garrison and the head of the guard. Twenty people worked overtime for the ceremonial sword fight. He was given the title of the governor of Yongning County, and his posts as the chamberlain and the secretary remained unchanged.

古文：先是，天监中沙门释宝志爲谶云： 太岁龙，将无理。
现代文：起先，天监年间和尚宝讠志有谶语说： 太岁龙，将无理。
English: At first, during the time of the celestial prison, the monk Baozhuangzhi had a saying: "If you are too old, there will be no reason."

古文：萧经霜，草应死。
现代文：萧经霜，草应死。
English: When the frost has passed, the grass dies.

古文：馀人散，十八子。 
现代文：余人散，十八子。 
English: The rest dispersed, leaving eighteen children.

古文：时言萧氏当灭，李氏代兴。
现代文：当时人们说萧氏要灭亡，李氏代而兴起。
English: At that time, people said that the Xiao clan would perish and the Li clan would rise in its place.

古文：及湘州贼陆纳等攻破衡州刺史丁道贵，而李洪雅又自零陵称助讨纳。
现代文：到后来湘州贼人陆纳等人攻衡州战败刺史丁道贵，而李洪雅又从零陵出兵，声称帮助讨伐陆纳。
English: Later, Lu Na, the robber of Hunan, and others attacked and defeated Ding Daogui in Hengzhou, and Li Hongya sent troops from Jiling, claiming to help fight Lu Na.

古文：既而朝廷未达其心，诏征僧辩就宜丰侯循南征，爲都督东上诸军事。
现代文：朝廷摸不透他的心思，下诏征调王僧辩隶属宜丰侯萧循南征，作都督统率东部的军事。
English: The imperial court couldn't fathom his thoughts, so he issued an edict calling for the transfer of Wang Sofen, who was subordinate to the Yifeng Lord Xiao Qian, to lead the Southern Expedition as the military governor of the eastern region.

古文：以陈武帝爲都督西下诸军事。
现代文：让陈霸先作都督统率西部军事。
English: Let Chen Ba first serve as the governor and lead the western military.

古文：先是，陈武让都督于僧辩，僧辩不受，故元帝分爲东西都督而俱南讨焉。
现代文：起先，陈霸先把都督职位让王僧辩，僧辩不接受，所以元帝就分设东西二都督而共出兵南征。
English: At first, Chen Ba first offered the post of governor-general to Wang Sangye, but he did not accept it, so Emperor Yuan set up two governors-general for the east and west and sent troops to the south.

古文：寻而洪雅降纳，纳以爲应符，于是共议拜洪雅爲大将军，尊事爲主。
现代文：不久李洪雅投降陆纳，陆纳以为李洪雅应了以前的符命，于是与众人共议拜洪雅为大将军，尊奉他为君主。
English: Soon Li Hongya surrendered to Lu Na. Lu Na thought that Li Hongya had fulfilled his previous mission, so he discussed with everyone to worship Hongya as a great general and respect him as a monarch.

古文：洪雅乘平肩大舆，伞盖、鼓吹，羽仪悉备，翼从入长沙城。
现代文：洪雅乘坐平肩大车，纟散盖、鼓吹、羽仪等皇家仪仗齐备，前呼后拥进入长沙城。
English: Hongya rode on a flat-shouldered carriage, and royal ceremonials such as cormorant scattering, trumpeting, and feather ceremony were prepared, and they entered Changsha City.

古文：时纳等据车轮，夹岸爲城，士卒皆百战之馀，器甲精严，徒党勇锐，蒙冲斗舰，亘水陵山。
现代文：当时陆纳等人占据车轮江，夹岸筑城，士卒都是身经百战，器甲精良，党徒勇悍，各种战船遮蔽江面。
English: At that time, Lu Na and others occupied the Zhulun River, built a city on the bank, the soldiers were all experienced in hundreds of battles, the armor was excellent, the party members were brave, and various warships covered the river.

古文：时天日清明，初无云雾，军发之际，忽然风雨，时人谓爲泣军，百姓窃言知其败也。
现代文：当时天气晴朗，没有一点儿云雾，军队要出发时，忽然风雨骤起，当时人们称之为 泣军 ，百姓们私下都说陆纳要败亡。
English: At that time, the weather was fine, there was not a single cloud or fog. When the army was about to set out, the wind and rain suddenly arose. At that time, people called it the "crying army," and the people said in private that Lu Na was about to be defeated.

古文：三月庚寅，有两龙自城西江中腾跃升天，五色分明，遥映江水。
现代文：三月二十八，有两条龙从城西江中腾跃升天，五色分明，遥遥倒映在江面上。
English: On March 28th, two dragons leapt from the west of the city into the sky. They were five-colored and reflected far away on the surface of the river.

古文：百姓咸仰面目之，父老或聚而悲，窃相谓曰： 地龙已去，国其亡乎。 
现代文：百姓都仰面观看，父老们有人聚在一起伤心，相互私语说： 地龙已经走了，恐怕国家要亡了。 
English: The people all looked up. Some fathers and grandfathers gathered together in grief, whispering to each other: "The dragon has gone, I'm afraid the country is going to die."

古文：初，纳造大舰，一名曰三王舰者，邵陵王、河东王、桂阳嗣王三人并爲元帝所害，故立其像于舰，祭乙太牢，加其节盖羽仪鼓吹，每战辄祭之以求福。
现代文：开初，陆纳造大舰，有一条名叫三王舰的，邵陵王萧纶、河东王萧誉、桂阳嗣王萧忄造三人都被元帝害死，所以把他们的像立在舰船上，用太牢祭祀，给它们加节盖羽仪鼓吹等帝王仪仗，每临战都要先祭奠他们以求保佑。
English: At the beginning of the year, Lu Na built a large ship, and there was a ship called the Three Kings Ship. Shaoling King Xiaojun, Hedong King Xiaoyuan, Guiyang King Xiaojun, all three were killed by the Yuan Emperor. Therefore, their images were placed on the ship, and they were sacrificed with the Taiji Temple, and they were decorated with feathers and feathers, and other imperial ceremonial battles were preached. Every time there was a battle, they had to be sacrificed first to seek blessing.

古文：又造二舰，一曰青龙舰，一曰白虎舰，皆衣以牛皮，并高十五丈，选其中尤勇健者乘之。
现代文：又造有二舰，一名青龙舰，一名白虎舰，都蒙上牛皮，各高十五丈，挑选军中格外勇健的乘坐。
English: In addition, two ships were built, a blue dragon ship and a white tiger ship, both covered with cowhide, each 15 meters high, to select the most courageous soldiers to ride.

古文：僧辩惮之，稍作连城以逼焉。
现代文：僧辩不敢与之交锋，便陆续筑连城进逼贼兵。
English: Sangye didn't dare to fight against them, so he successively built several castles to force the robbers out.

古文：贼不敢交锋，并怀懈怠。
现代文：贼兵见不敢与他们交锋，都放松了警觉。
English: Seeing that the robber soldiers did not dare to fight them, they all relaxed their vigilance.

古文：僧辩因其无备，亲执旗鼓以诫进止，群贼大败，归保长沙。
现代文：僧辩趁他们没有防备，亲自执掌旗鼓督战，贼兵大败，退回长沙自保。
English: Taking advantage of their unpreparedness, Sangye personally led the banner and drum battle, defeated the thief soldiers, and returned to Changsha for self-protection.

古文：僧辩乃命筑垒围之，而自出临视。
现代文：僧辩于是命令筑垒围困，并亲临前沿视察。
English: So, Sangye ordered to build a siege and inspect the frontline in person.

古文：贼知不设备，其党吴藏、李贤明等蒙楯直进，僧辩尚据胡床不爲之动，指麾勇敢，遂斩贤明，贼乃退归。
现代文：贼兵见他没有防备，其党羽吴藏、李贤明等人以盾蔽身直扑过来，僧辩在折叠椅上稳坐不动，指挥军士抵御，斩了李贤明，贼兵才退了回去。
English: The bandits saw that he was unprepared, and his followers Wu Zang, Li Xianming and others covered themselves with shields and rushed straight at him. The monk sat firmly on the folding chair, commanded the sergeant to resist, and beheaded Li Xianming. Only then did the bandits retreat.

古文：初，陵纳作逆，以王琳爲辞,云 若放琳则自服 。
现代文：当初，陆纳造反，以王琳为借口，说： 如果放了王琳就自动降服了。 
English: At first, Lu Na rebelled, using Wang Lin as an excuse, saying: If you release Wang Lin, you will automatically surrender.

古文：时衆军未之许，而武陵王纪拥衆上流，内外骇惧。
现代文：当时各路军马都没有答应他，而武陵王萧纪拥兵长江上游，内外恐惧。
English: At that time, all the armies and horses did not agree to him, and Wuling King Xiao Ji supported the soldiers in the upper reaches of the Yangtze River, causing fear both at home and abroad.

古文：元帝乃遣琳和解之，湘州乃平。
现代文：元帝就派王琳去和解陆纳，湘州平定。
English: Emperor Yuan sent Wang Lin to reconcile Lu Na and pacify Hunan.

古文：因被诏会衆军西讨。寻而武陵败绩。
现代文：于是僧辩受命令合众军西征，不久武陵王兵败。
English: As a result, Soyeon was ordered to lead the United Front Army to the west, and he was soon defeated by the army of King Muryeong.

古文：是时，齐遣郭元建谋袭建邺，又遣其大将东方老等继之。
现代文：当时，北齐派郭元建打算偷袭建邺，又派大将东方老等人作后续。
English: At that time, Guo Yuanjian of the Northern Qi faction planned to attack Jianye by stealth, and sent General Dongfang Lao and others to follow up.

古文：陈武帝闻之，驰报江陵。元帝即诏僧辩急下赴援。
现代文：陈武帝听说，派人飞马到江陵向梁元帝报告，元帝当下诏僧辩紧急赴下游援救。
English: Chen Wu Di heard that someone sent Pegasus to Gangneung to report to Liang Yuan Di, and the former emperor immediately sent an urgent request to the downstream for rescue.

古文：僧辩次姑孰，即留镇焉。先命豫州刺史侯瑱筑垒于东关以拒北军，征吴郡太守张彪、吴兴太守裴之横会瑱而大败之。
现代文：僧辩驻军姑孰，就留下来镇守，先命豫州刺史侯王真在东关筑垒抵御北军，又征调吴郡太守张彪、吴兴太守裴之横会合侯王真而大败北军。
English: The monk Gu Wei, who was stationed in Gu Ye, stayed behind to guard the town. He first ordered the governor of Yuzhou, Hou Wang Zhen, to build a fortress in Dongguan to resist the Northern Army. He also conscripted Zhang Biao, the governor of Wu County, and Wu Xing, the governor of Beiyang, to join forces with Hou Wang Zhen and defeated the Northern Army.

古文：僧辩振旅归建邺。
现代文：僧辩整饬部队回到建邺。
English: Sofen rectification troops returned to Jianye.

古文：承圣三年二月，诏以僧辩爲太尉、车骑大将军。
现代文：承圣三年二月，元帝下诏委任僧辩为太尉、车骑大将军。
English: In February of the third year of his ordination, Emperor Yuan issued an imperial edict appointing Sofen to the posts of captain and general of cavalry.

古文：顷之丁母忧。
现代文：不久他母亲去世。
English: His mother died soon after.

古文：母姓魏氏，性甚安和，善于绥接，家门内外莫不怀之。
现代文：他母亲姓魏，性情很安详和气，善于待人接物，家门内外没有人不怀念他。
English: His mother, surnamed Wei, had a calm and gentle disposition and was good at dealing with people. No one inside or outside the family missed him.

古文：初，僧辩下狱，母流泪徒行，将入谢罪，元帝不与相见。时贞惠世子有宠，母诣合自陈无训，涕泗呜咽，衆并矜之。
现代文：当初，僧辩被关在牢里，母亲流泪徒步而行，要入宫谢罪，元帝不见她，当时元帝的儿子贞惠世子萧方诸受恩宠，他母亲到他那里自言教子无方，痛哭流涕，在场的人都很同情他。
English: At the beginning, Sangye was locked up in prison. His mother walked on foot in tears, wanting to enter the palace to offer thanks. The Yuan Emperor did not see her. At that time, the Yuan Emperor's son, Zhengyi's heir, Xiao Fangzhu, was favored. His mother went to him and told herself that there was nothing she could do for her godson, weeping bitterly. The people present were very sympathetic to him.

古文：及僧辩罪免，母深相责厉，辞色俱严。
现代文：等僧辩得到赦免，他母亲严厉地责备了他，声色俱厉。
English: When Sofen was pardoned, his mother scolded him severely, her voice rising to a crescendo.

古文：虽克复旧都，功盖宇宙，母恒自谦损，不以富贵骄物，朝野称之，谓爲明哲妇人。
现代文：虽然僧辩克复了旧都，功盖天下，他母亲却总是谦虚恭谨，不因富贵而傲视别人，朝内外的人们都称颂她，说她是个明智的女人。
English: Although the monk Debate defeated and regained the old capital, his mother was always modest and respectful, and did not look down on others because of her wealth. People inside and outside the court praised her, saying that she was a wise woman.

古文：及亡，甚见湣悼，且以僧辩勋重，故丧礼加焉。
现代文：等她死时，很被大家怀念哀悼，况且因为僧辩功高，因此丧礼特别隆重。
English: When she died, she was greatly missed and mourned by everyone, and the funeral was particularly grand because of her great contribution to monasticism.

古文：命侍中、谒者监护丧事，諡曰贞敬太夫人。
现代文：元帝命侍中、谒者监护丧事，赠谥为 贞敬太夫人 。
English: The former emperor ordered the attendant and the eunuch to supervise the funeral, and presented the eunuch to Lady Zhengying.

古文：灵柩将归建康，又遣谒者至舟渚吊祭。
现代文：灵柩将要归葬建康时，又派谒者到码头吊祭。
English: When the coffin was about to be transported back to Jiankang, the emperor also sent an eunuch to the river bank next to the ship transporting the coffin to hang the offering. He ordered his left-hand servant, Shao Wangmo, to write an offering saying:

古文：其年十月，魏遣兵及梁王察合衆将袭江陵，元帝征僧辩于建邺，爲大都督、荆州刺史。
现代文：那年十月，西魏派兵与梁王萧鮞合兵要袭击江陵，元帝派人到建邺征调王僧辩，委任他为大都督、荆州刺史。
English: In October of that year, the Western Wei Dynasty sent soldiers to attack Jiangling together with Liang Wang Xiaohui. The former emperor sent people to Jianye to recruit Wang Sangfei and appointed him as the grand governor and Jingzhou chief historian.

古文：未至，而荆州已灭。
现代文：僧辩救兵未到，而荆州已破，元帝被杀。
English: Monk Ye did not come to the rescue, but Jingzhou had already been defeated, and Emperor Yuan was killed.

古文：及敬帝初即梁王位，僧辩预援立功，承制进骠骑大将军、中书监、都督中外诸军事、录尚书。
现代文：等敬帝初即梁王位，僧辩因为拥立有功，受命晋位骠骑大将军、中书监、都督中外诸军事、录尚书。
English: At the beginning of Emperor Jing's reign, Emperor Liang ascended to the throne. Because of his meritorious service in upholding the throne, he was ordered to be promoted to the general of the cavalry, the chief librarian, the military governor of China and other countries, and the recorder of records.

古文：与陈武帝参谋讨伐。
现代文：与陈武帝参与谋划讨伐之事。
English: and Chen Wu Di participated in the planning of the crusade.

古文：时齐文宣又纳贞阳侯明以爲梁嗣，与僧辩书，并贞阳亦频与僧辩书，论还国继统之事。僧辩不纳。
现代文：当时齐文宣帝高洋又收纳被俘的贞阳侯萧渊明作为梁朝嗣主，为此给僧辩去信，萧渊明也多次给僧辩写信，谈论回国继帝位的事，僧辩不接受。
English: At that time, Emperor Qianwen Xuan and Emperor Gaoyang also accepted the captive Zhengyang marquis Xiao Yuanming as the heir of the Liang Dynasty, for which reason he sent a letter to Sofen. Xiao Yuanming also wrote to Sofen many times, talking about returning to China to succeed the throne, which Sofen did not accept.

古文：及贞阳与齐上党王高涣至东关，散骑常侍裴之横军败，僧辩遂谋纳贞阳，仍书定君臣之礼。
现代文：等萧渊明和齐上党王高涣到了东关，梁散骑常侍裴之横军败，僧辩这才打算接纳萧渊明回国，于是写信定下君臣的名分。
English: When Xiao Yuanming and the high-ranking party king Gao Jun arrived in Dongguan, and Liang Sanzhong, the regular attendant of Pei, was defeated, the monk argued that this was the time to accept Xiao Yuanming's return to China, so he wrote a letter to determine the rank of the next monarch.

古文：因遣第七子显、显所生刘并弟子珍往充质，遣左户尚书周弘正至历阳迎明。又遣吏部尚书王通送啓，因求以敬帝爲皇太子。
现代文：派遣第七个儿子王显、王显的儿子王刘和他弟弟的儿子王珍到齐国充任人质，派左户尚书周弘正到历阳迎接萧渊明，又派吏部尚书王通送去信函，请求把敬帝作为皇太子。
English: He sent Wang Xian, the seventh son of Wang Xian, Wang Liu, the son of Wang Xian, and Wang Zhen, the son of Wang Xian's younger brother, to serve as hostages in Qi. He also sent Zhaodou Shangshu Zhouhongzheng to Liyang to meet Xiao Yuanming, and sent Zhaodou Shangshu Wang Tong to send a letter requesting that Emperor Qian be made the crown prince.

古文：明报书许之。
现代文：渊明回信答应。
English: Yuanming replied in the affirmative.

古文：僧辩遣使送质于邺，贞阳求度卫士三千。僧辩虑其爲变，止受散卒千人而已，并遣龙舟法驾往迎。
现代文：僧辩派使者送人质到邺城。萧渊明要求有齐国三千卫士渡江护送，僧辩怕生变故，只许跟随散兵千人，并派龙舟和皇帝的车驾去迎接。
English: Sangye sent an envoy to escort the hostages to Lucheng. Xiao Yuanming demanded that three thousand guards from Qi escort them across the river. Sangye, fearing the worst, was only allowed to follow a thousand scattered soldiers, and sent a dragon boat and the emperor's chariot to meet them.

古文：贞阳济江之日，僧辩拥烜中流，不敢就岸，末乃同会于江宁浦。
现代文：萧渊明渡江那天，僧辩的船停在江心，不敢靠北岸，等都过江后才在江宁浦会合。
English: On the day of Xiao Yuanming's crossing of the river, the monks' boat stopped in the middle of the river, not daring to approach the north bank. They waited until they had all crossed the river before meeting in Jiangningpu.

古文：明践位，授僧辩大司马，领太子太傅、扬州牧，馀如故。
现代文：渊明即帝位，委任僧辩为大司空，兼任太子太傅、扬州牧，其他官职不变。
English: Yuanming was enthroned as emperor, and appointed Sofen as the Grand Empress Dowager, concurrently serving as the Crown Prince and Yangzhou Patriarch, with other official positions remaining unchanged.

古文：陈武帝时爲司空、南徐州刺史，因自京口举兵袭之。
现代文：陈武帝当时为司空、南徐州刺史，于是从京口举兵偷袭。
English: At that time, Chen Wudi was writing history for Siku and South Xuzhou, so he raised an army from Beijing to make a surprise attack.

古文：僧辩常处石头城，是日视事，军人已踰城北而入，南门又白有兵来。
现代文：僧辩经常住在石头城内，当天正在办公，陈武帝的兵士已从北面越城而入。南门也报告有兵杀到。
English: Sangye, who often lived in the stone city, was at work that day when Emperor Chen Wu's soldiers entered the city from the north. Soldiers were also reported to have arrived at the south gate.

古文：僧辩与子頠遽走出合，计无所出，乃据南门楼拜请求哀。
现代文：僧辩和他儿子王危页赶紧从屋里跑出来，无计可施，就在南门楼上拜请哀求。
English: Sangye and his son Wang Huizhe hurriedly ran out of the house. There was nothing they could do, so they begged and pleaded at the south gate.

古文：陈武纵火焚之，方共頠下就执。
现代文：陈武帝下令放火，他才和儿子下来就擒。
English: Chen Wu Di gave the order to set fire, and only then did he and his son come down to sleep.

古文：陈武谓曰： 我有何辜，公欲与齐师赐讨。 
现代文：陈武帝问他说： 我有什么罪过，你要和齐国军队来打我？ 
English: Chen Wudi asked him, "What is my sin, why do you want to fight me with the Qi army?"

古文：又曰： 何意全无防备。 
现代文：又问： 你怎么一点防备也没有？ 
English: He also asked: How come you were not at all prepared?

古文：僧辩曰： 委公北门，何谓无备？ 
现代文：僧辩说： 委托你守北门，怎么说没有防备呢。 
English: The monk argued: entrusting you to guard the north gate, how can you say there is no defense?

古文：是夜，及子頠俱被绞杀。
现代文：当夜，和他儿子王危页都被用绳子勒死。
English: That night, he and his son Wang Guizhe were both strangled with a rope.

古文：初，僧辩平建邺，遣陈武守京口，推以赤心，结廉、蔺之分。且爲第三子頠许娶陈武章后所生女，未昏而僧辩母亡，然情好甚密，其长子顗屡谏不听。
现代文：当初，僧辩平定建邺，派陈武帝镇守京口，对他推心置腹，结下廉颇、蔺相如那样的情分，并且为第三个儿子王危页许下娶陈武帝章皇后所生女儿的婚事，未等成婚僧辩母亲去世，虽未成婚，但关系很密切。
English: At the beginning, Sofen Pingding Jianye sent Chen Wudi to guard the capital city of Beijing. He put his heart and soul into him, and forged a relationship with him that was both honest and loyal. For his third son, Wang Huizhe, he promised to marry the daughter born to the empress of Chen Wudi Zhang. Sofen's mother died before the marriage was consummated. Although they were not married, they were very close.

古文：至是，会江淮人报云 齐兵大举至寿春 ，僧辩谓齐军必出江表，因遣记室参军江旰以事报陈武，仍使整舟舰器械。
现代文：他的儿子王危页屡次劝他防备他都不听。这次，碰上江淮等地报告说： 齐兵大举进犯到了寿春。 僧辩认为齐军一定会渡江南下，就派记室参军江旰把这情况通知陈武帝，叫他修整船舰器械。
English: His son, Wang Huizhe, repeatedly advised him to be prepared, but he did not listen. This time, when he came across the Yangtze River and the Huai River, and other places, he reported: The Qi army made a large-scale invasion to Shuchun. The monk argued that the Qi army would certainly cross the Yangtze River to the south, so he sent the recording room to the military commander of the Yangtze River to inform Chen Wudi of this situation and ask him to repair the ship's equipment.

古文：陈武宿有图僧辩志，乃闻命，留旰城中，衔枚而进。
现代文：陈武帝早有算计僧辩的心思，听到这消息，就把江旰留在城中，他悄悄带兵衔枚而进，偷袭石头城。
English: Emperor Chen Wudi had long had the mind of a calculating monk, and when he heard this news, he left Jiang Chen in the city. He quietly led an army into the city and secretly attacked Stone City.

古文：知谋者唯侯安都、周文育而已，外人但谓江旰徵兵扞北。
现代文：知道计划的只有侯安都、周文育，别人只以为是江旰来调兵防御北边。
English: Only Hou Andu and Zhou Wenyu knew about the plan, while others only thought that it was Jiang Chen who had sent troops to defend the north.

古文：安都舟舰将趣石头，陈武控马未进。
现代文：安都的舰船将要到石头城下，而陈武帝这时却控马不前。
English: Andu's ships were about to sail under the stone castle, but Chen Wu Di held back.

古文：安都大惧，乃追陈武骂曰： 今日作贼，事势已成，生死须决，在后欲何所望？
现代文：安都非常惊怕，赶到陈武帝跟前骂道： 今天作贼，已经造成了事实，生死关头必须赶快决断，在后边拖着还想等什么？
English: Ann was very frightened, rushed to Chen Wu Di and scolded: Today's thief has already caused a fact, the moment of life and death must be decided quickly, dragging behind, what do you want to wait for?

古文：嗣産爲陈武军所禽，辞色不挠而死。
现代文：如果事情失败了都得死，走在后头就能免了砍头吗？ 陈武帝不好意思地说： 安都在训斥我啊。 
English: If things fail, we all have to die, but if we walk behind, can we avoid having our heads chopped off? Embarrassed, Chen Wudi said, "An is reprimanding me."

古文：任约、王晔得北归。
现代文：这才敢进兵，于是便擒获了僧辩。
English: Only then did he dare to join the army, whereupon he won the monk's debate.

古文：羊侃字祖忻，泰山梁父人也。
现代文：当时寿春竟没有齐军，又不是陈武帝使用了诡计，恐怕是上天的安排吧。羊侃，字祖忻，是泰山梁父人。
English: At that time, Shouchun did not have a unified army, and it was not Emperor Chen who used trickery, I am afraid it was God's arrangement. Yang Kan, also known as Zhu Xi, was the father of Taishan Liang.

古文：父祉，北史有传。
现代文：父亲为羊祉，《北史》中有传。
English: His father was a sheepherder, according to the "Northern History."

古文：侃少而瑰伟，身长七尺八寸，雅爱文史。
现代文：羊侃从小长得很魁伟，身高七尺六寸，特别喜爱文史。
English: From a young age, Yang Kan was very tall, with a height of seven feet six inches. He especially loved literature and history.

古文：弱冠随父在梁州立功，初爲尚书郎，以力闻。
现代文：不到二十岁他就跟随父亲在梁州立有战功，初次出任尚书郎，以气力而闻名。
English: Less than twenty years old, he followed his father in Liang State, where he had military service. He first served as Shang Shuro, and was known for his strength.

古文：魏帝常谓曰： 郎官谓卿爲虎，岂羊质虎皮乎？
现代文：魏帝曾经对他说： 郎官们都说你是老虎，莫非是披着虎皮的羊吗？
English: Emperor Wei once said to him: "The officials all say that you are a tiger, but are you a sheep in a tiger's skin?

古文：试作虎状。 
现代文：试装一次老虎的样子出来。 
English: Try it on once and it will come out looking like a tiger.

古文：侃因伏，以手抉殿没指。
现代文：羊侃便伏在地上，用手挖掘殿上的硬地，直挖到一指多深。
English: Yang Kan prostrated himself on the ground and dug into the hard ground above the hall with his hands, digging as deep as his fingertips.

古文：魏帝壮之，赐以珠剑。
现代文：魏帝很赞赏他的壮勇，赐给他珍珠装饰的宝剑。
English: Emperor Wei appreciated his bravery and gave him a pearl-decorated sword.

古文：正光中，秦州羌莫折念生据州反，仍遣其弟天生攻陷岐州，寇雍州。
现代文：魏孝明帝正光年间，秦州羌人莫折念生占据秦州反叛，并派他的弟弟莫折天生攻陷了岐州，又进犯雍州。
English: During the reign of Emperor Zhengguang of the Wei Xiao Ming Dynasty, Qin Zhou Xiangren tried his best to occupy the rebellious Qin State, and sent his younger brother to invade Qizhou and Yongzhou.

古文：侃爲偏将，隶萧宝寅往讨之，射杀天生，其衆即溃。
现代文：羊侃作为偏将，隶属萧宝寅前去讨伐，他射死了莫折天生，天生的部众溃败。
English: As a partial general, Yang Kan, who was subordinate to Xiao Baoying, went to the crusade. He shot and killed his natural born subordinates and was defeated.

古文：以功爲征东大将军、东道行台，领泰山太守，进爵钜平侯。
现代文：由于战功，羊侃被封为征东大将军、东道行台，领泰山太守，晋爵为钜平侯。
English: As a result of his war exploits, Yang Kan was awarded the titles of General of the Expedition to the East, Host of the Conquest of Taiyuan, Governor of Mount Tai, and Prince of Suiping.

古文：初，其父祉恒使侃南归，侃至是将举济、河以成先志。
现代文：早先，羊侃的父亲羊祉一直要叫羊侃回南方去，到这时羊侃准备带着河、济一带地区归附南方，以实现先人的意愿。
English: Earlier, Yang Kan's father, Yang Shi, had always wanted to tell Yang Kan to go back to the south. At this time, Yang Kan was ready to take the areas around He and Jie to the south to realize the wishes of the ancestors.

古文：其从兄兖州刺史敦密知之，据州拒侃，侃乃率精兵三万袭之，不克，仍筑十馀城以守之。
现代文：他的堂哥兖州刺史羊敦暗中知道了，便以所占州城抗拒羊侃，羊侃率领精兵三万袭击兖州，未能攻克，就修建十多座城垒来防守。
English: His cousin, Zhangzhou Zhi Shi Yang Dun, secretly knew about it and used the occupied state capital to resist Yang Kan. Yang Kan led 30,000 elite soldiers to attack Zhangzhou, but failed to conquer it, so he built more than ten fortresses to defend it.

古文：梁朝赏授一与元法僧同。
现代文：梁朝对羊侃的赏赐和授职和元法僧完全相同。
English: Liang Dynasty's reward and investiture of Yang Kan was exactly the same as that of the former monk.

古文：魏帝闻之，使授侃骠骑大将军、司徒、泰山郡公，长爲兖州刺史。
现代文：魏帝知道后，让授给羊侃骠骑大将军、司徒、泰山郡公，长久担任兖州刺史。
English: After Emperor Wei knew about it, he gave the award to Yang Kan, the grand general of cavalry, to Stow, the county magistrate of Taishan, and he served as the chief historian of Zhangzhou for a long time.

古文：侃斩其使。
现代文：羊侃斩了魏帝派来的使者。
English: Yang Kan beheaded the emissary sent by Emperor Wei.

古文：魏人大骇，令仆射于晖率衆十万及高欢、尔朱阳都等相继而至。栅中矢尽，南军不进，乃夜溃围而出。
现代文：魏人大惊，便命令仆射于晖带领十万军队和高欢、尔朱阳都等人相继到达，羊侃军营中箭已射完，南军又没有到达，羊侃便在夜间突围而走。
English: The Wei people were taken aback, so they ordered the general to lead a hundred thousand troops and Gao Huan, Er Zhuyang and others to arrive one after another. Yang Kan had finished shooting arrows in the military camp, but the Southern Army did not arrive, so Yang Kan broke out of the encirclement at night.

古文：一日一夜，乃出魏境。
现代文：走了一天一夜，才走出魏国地界。
English: It took a day and a night to walk out of the territory of Wei.

古文：至渣口，衆尚万余人，马二千匹。
现代文：到达渣口时，羊侃的部众还有一万多人，马二千匹。
English: When they arrived at Zekkou, there were still more than ten thousand people and two thousand horses.

古文：将入南，士卒竟夜悲歌，侃乃谢曰； 卿等怀土，幸适去留。 
现代文：当准备进南方时，士卒们整夜唱着悲伤的歌曲。羊侃便拜谢了他们之后说： 你们都怀念故土，请任意选择离开或留下。 
English: When preparing to enter the south, the soldiers sang sad songs all night. Yang Kan thanked them and said: You all miss your homeland, please choose to leave or stay.

古文：各拜辞而去。
现代文：士卒们都拜辞他以后才离去。
English: The soldiers bowed to him before leaving.

古文：侃以大通三年至建邺，授徐州刺史，并其兄默及三弟忱、给、元皆拜刺史。
现代文：羊侃在大通三年到了建邺，被任命为徐州刺史，他的哥哥羊默和三个弟弟羊忱、羊给、羊元都被任命为刺史。
English: Yang Kan, who arrived in Jianye from Datong three years ago, was appointed as the chief historian of Xuzhou. His elder brother, Yang Miao, and his three younger brothers, Yang Zhen, Yang Jia, and Yang Yuan, were all appointed as chief historians.

古文：侃封高昌县侯，累迁太子左卫率，中。
现代文：羊侃被封为高昌县侯，累迁任太子左卫率、侍中。
English: Yang Kan was made the marquess of Gaochang County, and successively served as the prince's left guard and a chamberlain.

古文：车驾幸乐游苑，侃预宴。
现代文：皇帝驾幸乐游苑，羊侃参与这次宴会。
English: The emperor drove to the Happy Fun Amusement Park, and the sheep participated in the banquet.

古文：时少府奏新造两刃矟成，长二丈四尺，围一尺三寸。
现代文：这时，少府送上新造成的两刃槊，长二丈四尺，围一尺三寸。
English: At this time, Shofu presented a newly created two-edged sword, two feet long and four feet long, with a circumference of one foot and three inches.

古文：帝因赐侃河南国紫骝令试之。
现代文：梁武帝便赐给羊侃河南国出产的紫骝马，让他骑上一试。
English: Emperor Liangwu then gave Yang Kan a purple horse produced in Henan Province, and let him try riding it.

古文：侃执矟上马，左右击刺，特尽其妙。观者登树。
现代文：羊侃执槊上马以后，左右进击刺杀，极尽其妙，观看的人都爬满树上。
English: After Yang Kan got on his horse, he attacked and stabbed people left and right. It was amazing. People were climbing all over the trees to watch.

古文：帝曰： 此树必爲侍中折矣。 
现代文：梁武帝说： 这棵树肯定因为侍中而断了。 
English: Emperor Liangwu said: This tree must have been cut down because of the attendants.

古文：俄而果折，因号此矟爲折树矟。
现代文：过了一会儿，这棵树果然折断了，于是就将这把槊称为 折树槊 。
English: After a while, the tree did indeed break, so they called the axe the "broken tree axe."

古文：北人降者，唯侃是衣冠馀绪，帝宠之踰于他者，谓曰： 朕少时捉矟，形势似卿，今失其旧体，殊觉不奇。 
现代文：北人前来归降的人中，只有羊侃是衣冠士族的后代，梁武帝对他的宠爱超过了其他人，他对羊侃说： 我年轻时用槊，模样很像你，如今已失去旧模样了，便觉得不奇特了。 
English: Of the northerners who came to surrender, only Yang Kan was a descendant of the Yi Guanzhong clan. Emperor Liang Wu favored him more than the others. He said to Yang Kan, "When I was young, I used a broom and looked very much like you. Now that I have lost my old appearance, I don't find it strange."

古文：上又制武宴诗三十韵示侃，侃即席上应诏。
现代文：皇帝又写了《武宴诗》三十韵给羊侃看，羊侃立即在席上应诏。
English: The emperor also wrote a "martial banquet poem" of thirty rhymes for Yang Kan to read, and Yang Kan immediately responded at the banquet.

古文：帝览曰： 吾闻仁者有勇，今见勇者有仁，可谓邹、鲁遗风，英贤不绝。 
现代文：皇帝看后说： 我只听说仁者有勇，如今见勇者有仁，可说是邹、鲁之地的遗风，所以英贤人物不绝。 
English: After reading it, the emperor said, "I only heard that the benevolent have courage, but now I see that the brave have benevolence. It can be said to be the legacy of the land of Lu and Lu, so there is no end to the wise men.

古文：是日诏入直殿省，啓尚方仗不堪用。
现代文：当天传旨让他进入宫中值日，羊侃上奏说卫士使用的武器不能用。
English: On the same day, an order was sent for him to enter the palace on duty, and he was told that the weapons used by the guards could not be used.

古文：上大怒，坐者非一。
现代文：皇上大怒，因此而坐罪的不止一人。
English: The emperor was furious, and more than one person was punished for this.

古文：及侯景作逆，果弊于仗粗。
现代文：当侯景叛乱时，果然由于器仗粗劣而误事。
English: When Houjing rebelled, it was indeed a mistake due to the poor quality of the weapons.

古文：后迁都官尚书，尚书令何敬容用事，与之并省，未尝游造。
现代文：后来羊侃迁任都官尚书，当时尚书令何敬容主持政事，羊侃和他同在一省，却从未去交游拜访。
English: Later, Yang Kan was transferred to Shang Shu, the governor of the capital. At that time, Shang Shu ordered He Jing Rong to preside over political affairs. Yang Kan and he were in the same province, but they never went to visit each other.

古文：左卫兰钦同侍宫宴，词色少交，侃于坐折之曰： 小子！
现代文：左卫兰钦和羊侃一起在宫中侍宴，说话略有争执，羊侃便在座上折辱他说： 小子！
English: The left guard Lanqin and Yang Kan had a banquet together in the palace. They had a slight argument, and Yang Kan insulted him at the table, saying: "Kid!

古文：汝以铜鼓买朱异作父，韦粲作兄，何敢无宜适。 
现代文：你用铜鼓买了朱异当父亲，韦粲当长兄，怎么敢讲这种不适宜的话！ 
English: You bought Zhu Rong as a father and Wei Xuan as an elder brother with a bronze drum. How dare you say such inappropriate words!

古文：朱时在席。
现代文：朱异当时也在酒宴上。
English: Zhu Yi was also at the party at the time.

古文：后华林法会，钦拜谢于省中。
现代文：后来参加华林园法会，兰钦到尚书省向羊侃谢罪。
English: Later, he attended the Huarinyuan Fa Conference, and went to Shangshu Province to express his thanks to the sheep.

古文：王铨谓钦曰： 卿能屈膝廉公，弥见尽美；然羊公意犹未释，容能更置一拜？ 
现代文：王铨对兰钦说： 你能够向廉颇公屈膝谢罪，更见出你的大美；但是羊公心中还未释然，能不能再拜谢一次？ 
English: Wang Yao said to Lan Qin, "You can bend your knees to the corrupt official to thank him for his sin, and even see your great beauty; but the shepherd's heart is still not relieved, can you thank him again?

古文：钦从之。
现代文：兰钦听从了他。
English: Lanchin obeyed him.

古文：宦者张僧胤尝候侃，侃曰： 我床非阉人所坐。 
现代文：宦官张僧胤曾经去问候羊侃，羊侃说： 我的床不是阉人所能坐的。 
English: The eunuch Zhang Soyin once went to greet Yang Kan, and Yang Kan said, "My bed is not for eunuchs to sit on.

古文：竟不前之。
现代文：竟不肯让他走上前去。
English: refused to let him go forward.

古文：时论美其贞正。
现代文：当时人议论都赞美羊侃忠贞正直。
English: At that time, people praised Yang Kan for his loyalty and honesty.

古文：太清元年，爲侍中，会大举北侵，以侃爲冠军将军，监作寒山堰事。
现代文：太清元年，羊侃任侍中，当时正准备大举北伐，朝廷任命羊侃为冠军将军，监修寒山堰事宜。
English: In the first year of the Qing Dynasty, Yang Kan was an attendant, and at that time he was preparing for a large-scale Northern Expedition. The court appointed Yang Kan as the champion general to supervise the construction of the Cold Mountain Dam.

古文：堰立，侃劝元帅贞阳侯明乘水攻彭城，不见纳。
现代文：寒山堰修成之后，羊侃劝元帅贞阳侯萧渊明用水攻彭城，不被采纳。
English: After the construction of the Cold Mountain Dam, Yang Kan advised the marshal Zhengyang Hou Xiao Yuanming to attack Pengcheng with water, which was not accepted.

古文：既而魏援大至，侃频言乘其远来可击，旦日又劝出战，并不从。
现代文：后来魏军增援大批来到，羊侃又多次建议乘魏军远来尚未安定，可立即出击，第二天早晨又劝他出战，但均不被听从。
English: Later, a large number of reinforcements from the Wei army arrived, and Yang Kan repeatedly suggested that the Wei army was far from stable and could attack immediately. The next morning, he was advised to go to war, but he was not listened to.

古文：侃乃率所领顿堰上。
现代文：羊侃便率领他的部队驻扎在寒山堰上。
English: Yang Kan then led his troops and stationed them on the cold mountain weir.

古文：及衆军败，侃结阵徐还。
现代文：当梁军失败时，羊侃所率领的部队结成阵营徐徐而回。
English: When Liang's army failed, the troops led by Yang Kan formed a camp and slowly marched back.

古文：二年，复爲都官尚书。
现代文：二年，羊侃又任都官尚书。
English: Two years later, Yang Kan was again appointed to the post of metropolitan official.

古文：侯景反，攻陷历阳，帝问侃讨景之策。
现代文：侯景反叛，攻陷历阳后，梁武帝向羊侃询问讨伐侯景的计谋。
English: After the rebellion of Houjing and the fall of Liyang, Emperor Liang Wu asked Yang Kan about the strategy of fighting against Houjing.

古文：侃求以二千人急据采石，令邵陵王袭取寿春，使景进不得前，退失巢窟，乌合之衆，自然瓦解。
现代文：羊侃请求派二千人紧急占领采石，令邵陵王攻取寿春，使侯景前进不得，退则失去巢穴，乌合之众，自然就会土崩瓦解。
English: Yang Kan requested that two thousand people be urgently sent to occupy the quarry, so that Shao Ling Wang would attack Shouchun, so that Houjing would not be able to advance, and if he retreated, he would lose his nest, and the crowd would naturally collapse.

古文：议者谓景未敢便逼都，遂寝其策。
现代文：但在商议时许多人认为侯景不敢立即进犯都城，因而羊侃的建议便被搁置下来。
English: However, during the deliberation, many people thought that Hou Jing did not dare to attack the capital immediately, so Yang Kan's suggestion was shelved.

古文：令王质往。
现代文：朝廷派王质前去。
English: The court sent the royal hostage away.

古文：侃曰： 今兹败矣。 
现代文：羊侃说： 现在肯定失败了。 
English: Yang Kan said: Now it has definitely failed.

古文：乃令侃率千馀骑顿望国门。
现代文：朝廷于是让羊侃率领一千多骑兵镇守在望国门。
English: The imperial court then let Yang Kan lead more than a thousand cavalry to guard the town at the Mokguk Gate.

古文：景至新林，追侃入副宣城王都督城内诸军事。
现代文：侯景到达新林时，朝廷又派人追回羊侃入朝作为副职协助宣城王都督城内诸军事。
English: The defeated army arrived at Sai Yeon, and the troops of the military in the city, who had recovered the shovel and dug it into the city, were assisted by the governor of the city, King Seonjo.

古文：时景既卒至，百姓竞入，公私混乱，无复次序。
现代文：当时因为侯景突然来到，百姓们争先恐后地入城，官民双方都十分混乱，不再有秩序。
English: At that time, because of the sudden arrival of Houjing, the people scrambled to enter the city, both the government and the people were very confused, and there was no longer order.

古文：侃乃区分防拟，皆以宗室间之。
现代文：羊侃便划分区域进行防御，都由皇室在其间参加防卫事宜。
English: Therefore, Yang Kan differentiated and guarded them, and they were all monitored by the people of the family.

古文：军人争入武库，自取器甲，所司不能禁，侃命斩数人方得止。
现代文：当时军队争先进入武库，自己去取武器盔甲，有关方面不能制止，羊侃下令斩了几个人，这才得以平静下来。
English: At that time, the army rushed into the arsenal and went to get weapons and armor on their own. The relevant parties could not stop them. Yang Kan ordered the beheading of several people, and only then was it able to calm down.

古文：是时梁兴四十七年，境内无事，公卿在位，及闾里士大夫莫见兵甲。
现代文：这时梁朝已建立了四十七年，境内平安无事，公卿们各安其位，连乡间的士大夫们也都没有见到兵器甲仗。
English: At this time, the Liang Dynasty had been established for forty-seven years, there was no trouble in the country, the nobles were safe in their respective positions, and even the village officials did not see the battle of weapons.

古文：贼至卒迫，公私骇震。
现代文：贼兵突然来到，官府和民众都十分震惊。
English: The government and the public were shocked by the sudden arrival of the bandits.

古文：时宿将已尽，后进少年并出在外，城中唯有侃及柳津、韦黯。
现代文：当时有作战经验的老将都没有了，后起的年轻将领都在外镇守，城里只有羊侃和柳津、韦黯。
English: At that time, the veterans with combat experience were all gone, and the young generals who came up later were all guarding outside the town, and only Yang Kan, Liu Jin and Wei Ying were in the city.

古文：津年老且疾，黯懦而无谋，军旅指撝，一决于侃，胆力俱壮，简文深仗之。
现代文：柳津年老而且有病，韦黯懦弱而无谋略，军队的指挥，全由羊侃决定。羊侃胆量气力都壮盛，简文帝十分依赖他。
English: Liu Jin was old and ill, Wei Ying was weak and without a strategy, and the command of the army was entirely decided by Yang Kan. Yang Kan was full of courage and strength, and Emperor Jianwen was very dependent on him.

古文：及贼逼城，衆皆凶惧，侃僞称得外射书，云 邵陵、西昌侯已至近路 ，衆乃少安。
现代文：当贼寇进逼都城时，民众都十分恐惧。羊侃宣称得到外面射进来的书信，说是 邵陵王、西昌侯军队已近都城 ，众人心情才稍为安定。
English: When the thieves broke into the capital city, the people were very afraid. Yang Kan claimed to have received a letter from outside, saying that King Shao Ling and the Xichang army had approached the capital city, and everyone's mood was slightly stable.

古文：贼攻东掖门，纵火甚盛。
现代文：贼寇进攻东掖门，放火焚烧，火势很旺。
English: Thieves attacked the East Gate, set it on fire and burned it. The fire was very strong.

古文：侃以水沃灭火，射杀数人，贼乃退。
现代文：羊侃用水浇灭火焰，并射死了几个人，贼寇才后退。
English: Yang Kan doused the flames with water and shot several people before the bandits retreated.

古文：加侍中、军师将军。
现代文：朝廷加封他为侍中、军师将军。
English: He was also appointed to the posts of chamberlain and general of the army.

古文：有诏送金五千两、银万两、绢万匹赐战士。
现代文：又有诏书送来黄金五千两、白银一万两、绢一万匹用来赏赐战士们。
English: There was also a decree to send 5,000 taels of gold, 10,000 taels of silver, and 10,000 horses to reward the soldiers.

古文：侃辞不受，部曲千馀人并私加赏赉。
现代文：羊侃全都推辞不肯接受，羊侃自己的部众一千多人他都自己取出财物来赏赐他们。
English: Yang Kan refused to accept all the refusals, and he took more than a thousand of his followers to reward them with his own wealth.

古文：贼爲尖顶木驴攻城，矢石所不能制。
现代文：敌人又制造了尖顶木驴来攻城，箭和石块都没有办法制止。
English: The enemy also made a pointed wooden donkey to attack the city, and there was no way to stop it with arrows or stones.

古文：侃作雉尾炬，施铁镞，以油灌之，掷驴上焚之俄尽。
现代文：羊侃便制作了雉尾炬，安上铁箭头，用油浇灌后，扔到木驴上，一会儿，木驴全被烧光。
English: Yang Kan then made an iris tail torch, attached iron arrows, doused with oil, and threw it on the donkey. In a moment, the donkey was completely burned.

古文：贼又东西起二土山以临城，城中震骇。
现代文：敌人又建起东西两座土山，紧靠台城，城中人十分惊慌。
English: The enemy also built two earthen mounds, one to the east and the other to the west, close to Taicheng. People in the city were very panicked.

古文：侃命爲地道，潜引其土山，不能立。
现代文：羊侃又派人挖地道，一直暗通到土山底下，使土山建造不成。
English: Yang Kan also sent someone to dig a tunnel, all the way to the bottom of the mound, so that the mound could not be built.

古文：贼又作登城楼车，高十馀丈，欲临射城中。
现代文：敌军又制造登城楼车，高达十多丈，准备从车上往城中射箭。
English: The enemy also built a tower car, more than ten stories high, and prepared to shoot arrows into the city from the car.

古文：侃曰： 车高堑虚，彼来必倒，可卧而观之。 
现代文：羊侃说： 楼车太高而壕沟虚软，来时必然倾倒，我们可以躺在这里观看。 
English: Yang Kan said, "The carriage is too high and the trench is weak. When it comes, it will inevitably topple over. We can lie here and watch.

古文：及车动果倒，衆皆服焉。
现代文：当登楼车一动起来，果然就倒掉了，众人都十分佩服他的先见之明。
English: When the elevator started moving, it toppled over, and everyone admired his foresight.

古文：贼既频攻不捷，乃筑长围。
现代文：敌军因连续进攻不能得胜，便修建起长围围城。
English: Since the bandits could not win by frequent attacks, they built a long enclosure.

古文：朱异、张绾议出击之。
现代文：朱异、张绾商议出击。
English: Zhu Yi and Zhang Ye negotiated and attacked.

古文：帝以问侃，侃曰： 不可，贼多日攻城，既不能下，故立长围，欲引城中降者耳。
现代文：皇帝询问羊侃，羊侃说： 不行，敌人多日攻城，没能攻下，所以修建起长围，是想要招引城内人出去投降的。
English: The emperor asked Yang Kan, and Yang Kan said, "No, the enemy besieged the city for many days and failed to capture it, so they built a long perimeter to lure the people inside the city to surrender."

古文：今击之，出人若少，不足破贼；若多，则一旦失利，门隘桥小，必大致挫衄。 
现代文：如今出击，假如出动人数过少，不能击败敌人；如果出动得多的话，一旦交战失利，门过于狭窄而桥又太小，必定大受挫伤。 
English: If you attack now, if the number of people is too small, you cannot defeat the enemy; if you attack more, once the battle is lost, the door is too narrow and the bridge is too small, you must be greatly frustrated.

古文：不从，遂使千余人出战。
现代文：皇帝不听，便派一千多人出战。
English: The emperor did not listen and sent more than a thousand men to fight.

古文：未及交锋，望风退走，果以争桥赴水，死者太半。
现代文：还未交战，这些人就望风退走，果然因为争先恐后地挤桥而落入水中，死掉大半人。
English: Even before the battle, these people retreated to the wind, and indeed, because of the scramble to squeeze the bridge, they fell into the water, and most of them died.

古文：初，侃长子鷟爲景所获，执来城下示侃。
现代文：早先，羊侃的长子羊族鸟已被侯景抓去，侯景将他带到城下给羊侃看。
English: Earlier, Yang Kan's firstborn sheep bird had been caught by Hou Jing, who took him to the outskirts of the city to show him.

古文：侃谓曰： 我倾宗报主，犹恨不足，岂复计此一子。
现代文：羊侃说： 我全宗族人以死来报答皇上，仍恨不足，又怎么会舍不得这一个儿子。
English: Yang Kan said: My whole clan has rewarded the emperor with death, but it is still not enough, how can I begrudge this one son.

古文：幸早杀之。 
现代文：请早些杀了他。 
English: Please kill him sooner.

古文：数日复持来，侃谓鷟曰： 久以汝爲死，犹在邪？
现代文：过了几天，侯景又将羊族鸟带来，羊侃便对儿子说： 我以为你久已死去，怎么还活着？
English: A few days later, Hou Jing brought the sheep bird again, and Yang Kan said to his son: I thought you had died a long time ago, how are you still alive?

古文：吾以身许国，誓死行阵，终不以尔而生进退。 
现代文：我以身报国，誓死于战场，最终也不会因为你而影响我的进退。 
English: I pledge allegiance to my country, and I swear to die on the battlefield. In the end, I cannot decide my advancement or retreat because of your life or death.

古文：因引弓射之。
现代文：于是他拉开弓射箭。
English: So he shot him with his bow.

古文：贼以其忠义，亦弗之害。
现代文：敌人因为羊侃忠义过人，也没有加害于羊族鸟。
English: The enemy did not harm the sheep birds because the sheep are extremely loyal.

古文：景遣仪同傅士哲呼侃与语，曰： 侯王远来问讯天子，何爲闭拒不时进纳？
现代文：侯景又派仪同傅士哲喊羊侃出来说话，傅士哲对羊侃说： 侯王从远方前来问候皇上，为什么闭门拦阻不让他马上进去？
English: Hou Jing also sent Yi to speak with Fu Shizhe, calling for Yang Kan to come out. Fu Shizhe said to Yang Kan: Hou Wang came from afar to greet the emperor, why did you close the door to prevent him from entering immediately?

古文：尚书国家大臣，宜啓朝廷。 
现代文：尚书是国家的大臣，应当启奏朝廷。 
English: Shangshu is a minister of the state, he should inform the imperial court.

古文：侃曰： 侯将军奔亡之后，归命国家，重镇方城，悬相任寄，何所患苦，忽致称兵，岂有人臣而至于此。
现代文：羊侃说： 侯将军出奔之后，归附国家，以重兵镇守一方，朝廷给予很大信任和期望，又有什么苦恼，忽然举兵前来，岂有为人臣子而这样做事？
English: Yang Kan said, "After General Hou ran away, he attached himself to the country and guarded the country with a heavy army. The imperial court gave him great trust and expectations. What was the trouble of suddenly raising an army? Did he do this as a vassal?

古文：吾不能妄受浮说，开门揖盗。 
现代文：我不能听你的虚妄说辞，开门揖盗。 
English: I can't listen to your bullshit, open-door bullshit.

古文：士哲曰： 在北之日，久挹风猷，愿去戎服，得一相见。 
现代文：傅士哲说： 我在北方的时候，久闻您谦和的品格，希望您能够脱一次戎服，让我得以和您相见。 
English: Fu Shizhe said: When I was in the north, I had long heard about your humble character. I hope you can take off your military uniform once so that I can meet you.

古文：侃爲免胄，士哲瞻望久之而去，其爲北人所钦慕如此。
现代文：羊侃于是为他脱下甲胄，傅士哲瞻望了很久才离去。他被北人敬仰到这种程度。
English: Yang Kan then took off his armor for him, and Fu Shizhe gazed at him for a long time before leaving. He was revered by the North to such an extent.

古文：后大雨，城内土山崩，贼乘之垂入，苦战不能禁。
现代文：后来下大雨，城内的土山崩塌，敌人趁此机会即将攻入城内，战士们苦战许久仍难以阻挡。
English: Later, it rained heavily, the earth and mountains inside the city collapsed, and the enemy took advantage of this opportunity to enter the city. The soldiers fought hard for a long time, but it was still difficult to stop them.

古文：侃乃令多掷火，爲火城以断其路，徐于城内筑城，贼不能进。
现代文：羊侃便让人多扔火把，烧成火城断绝敌军前进的道路，随后在城内筑城，敌军没法进入。
English: Yang Kan then had people throw more torches, burn it into a fiery city to cut off the enemy's way forward, and then build a city inside the city, so that the enemy could not enter.

古文：寻以疾卒于城内，赠侍中、护军将军。
现代文：不久，羊侃因病而死于城内，赠为侍中、护军将军。
English: Soon after, Yang Kan died in the city due to illness, and was presented as an attendant and escort general.

古文：子球嗣。
现代文：他的儿子羊球继承了他。
English: His son, Yangqiu, succeeded him.

古文：侃少雄勇，膂力绝人，所用弓至二十石，马上用六石弓。
现代文：羊侃从小勇猛强壮，气力无人可比。他所用的弓拉到二十石重，骑在马上用的是六石的强弓。
English: From a young age, Yang Kan was brave, fierce and strong, with strength that no one could match. The bow he used weighed up to twenty stone, and he rode a horse with a six-stone strong bow.

古文：尝于兖州尧庙蹋壁，直上至五寻，横行得七迹。
现代文：他曾经在兖州的尧庙塌壁上垂直上行五寻多高，横走七脚印宽。
English: He once walked vertically up the collapsed wall of the Qimiao Temple in Luzhou, reaching a height of five meters and a width of seven feet.

古文：泗桥有数石人，长八尺，大十围。
现代文：泗河桥有几个石人，每个高八尺，大十围。
English: There are several stone figures, each eight feet tall and ten feet wide, on the bridge over the Li River.

古文：侃执以相击，悉皆破碎。
现代文：羊侃将它们提起来互相碰击，全都撞得粉碎。
English: The sheep lift them up and knock them against each other, smashing them all to pieces.

古文：性豪侈，善音律，自造采莲、棹歌两曲，甚有新致。
现代文：他性情豪放，很精于音律，曾经自己制作了《采莲》、《棹歌》两支曲子，很是新鲜别致。
English: He has a boisterous temperament and is very good at melody. He once composed two pieces of music, "Lotus Picking" and "Song of Songs," which are very fresh and unique.

古文：姬妾列侍，穷极奢靡。
现代文：姬妾排列成行侍候，极尽奢侈。
English: The concubines line up to wait on the bride and groom in the utmost luxury.

古文：有弹筝人陆太喜着鹿角爪，长七寸。
现代文：有位弹筝的人陆太喜戴着鹿角爪，长七寸。
English: There is a kite-player, Lu Taishi, who wears antler claws and is seven inches long.

古文：舞人张净琬腰围一尺六寸，时人咸推能掌上舞。
现代文：一位舞女名叫张净琬，腰围只有一尺六寸，当时人都说她能作掌上舞。
English: A dancer named Zhang Jingyao, with a waist circumference of only one foot six inches, was said to be able to perform a palm dance.

古文：又有孙荆玉能反腰帖地，衔得席上玉簪。
现代文：又有一位名叫孙荆玉的能够反身弓腰贴到地上，衔起席上的玉簪。
English: There was also a man named Sun Jingyu, who could bend his body backwards and stick his waist to the ground to pick up the jade bowl on the table.

古文：敕赉歌人王娥儿，东宫亦赉歌者屈偶之，并妙尽奇曲，一时无对。
现代文：皇帝送给他歌女王娥儿，太子也送他一位歌女叫屈偶之，两人都能唱出极为奇妙的歌曲，当时没有人能够相比。
English: The emperor rewarded him with the singer Wang Er, and the prince also rewarded him with the singer Ren Qu, both of whom could sing the most wonderful songs. At that time, no one could match them.

古文：初赴衡州，于两艖滏起三间通梁水斋，饰以珠玉，加之锦缋，盛设帷屏，列女乐。
现代文：初往衡州时，用两只船搭成三间通梁的水斋，用珠玉进行装饰，再加以织成花纹的锦帛，大举张设帷幕屏幛，陈列女乐。
English: When he first went to Henzhou, he used two boats to build a three-beam raft, decorated it with jewels, then wove it into a patterned brocade, set up a large curtain screen, and displayed women's music.

古文：乘潮解缆，临波置酒，缘塘傍水，观者填咽。
现代文：他乘潮起时解开缆绳，临水设下酒宴，塘沿的水旁，挤满了观看的人。
English: He took advantage of the rising tide to untie the cable and set up a wine banquet next to the water. The waterside of the pond was crowded with people watching.

古文：大同中，魏使阳斐与侃在北尝同学，有诏命侃延斐同宴。
现代文：大同年间，魏国派来的使者阳斐在北边时曾经和羊侃是同学，皇帝下诏让羊侃接待阳裴并一同赴宴。
English: In the same year, Yang Fei, an envoy sent by Wei, was once a classmate of Yang Kan when he was in the north. The emperor issued a decree to let Yang Kan receive Yang Pei and go to the banquet together.

古文：宾客三百馀人，食器皆金玉杂宝，奏三部女乐。
现代文：当时有宾客三百多人，食器都是金玉等各种宝物制成的，演奏有三部女乐。
English: At that time, there were more than three hundred guests, the dishes were all made of gold and other treasures, and there were three pieces of women's music.

古文：至夕，侍婢百余人俱执金花烛。
现代文：到天黑时，侍从女婢一百多人都手执金花烛。
English: By nightfall, more than a hundred servants and maids were holding golden candles in their hands.

古文：侃不饮酒而好宾游，终日献酬，同其醉醒。
现代文：羊侃不喝酒而喜欢游玩，成天设宴招待，和阳裴同醉同醒。
English: Yang Kan doesn't drink but likes to play around. He hosts banquets all day long, and gets drunk and wakes up with Yang Pei.

古文：性宽厚，有器局。
现代文：羊侃性情宽厚，有器度。
English: Yang Kan has a generous disposition and is well-mannered.

古文：尝南还至涟口置酒，有客张孺才者，醉于船中失火，延烧七十馀艘，所燔金帛不可胜数。
现代文：南归之后，他曾在涟口设酒宴请客人，有位客人名叫张孺才的，醉酒以后船上失火，牵连烧掉七十多艘船，烧坏的金帛不计其数。
English: After returning to the south, he once held a wine banquet in Hekou to invite guests. One guest, named Zhang Yucai, was so drunk that his boat caught fire, resulting in the burning of more than 70 boats and countless burnt gold ingots.

古文：侃闻聊不挂意，命酒不辍。
现代文：羊侃知道以后毫不在意，让客人不停地继续饮酒。
English: Knowing this, Yang Kan didn't care at all and let the guests continue drinking.

古文：孺才惭惧自逃，侃慰喻使还，待之如旧。
现代文：张孺才自觉羞愧和恐惧而自行逃走，羊侃派人去安慰他并让他回来，仍然像以前那样对待他。
English: Zhang Xuan only felt shame and fear and ran away on his own. Yang Kan sent someone to comfort him and let him come back, still treating him as before.

古文：第三子从字子鹏，随侃台内，城陷，窜于阳平。
现代文：羊侃的第三个儿子羊昆鸟，字子鹏。他随羊侃在台城内，当城陷没时，逃到阳平。
English: Yang Kan's third son, Yang Kunjie, also known as Zi Peng, followed him to Taicheng and fled to Yangping when the city fell.

古文：侯景以其妹爲小妻，呼还待之甚厚，以爲库真都督。
现代文：侯景将羊昆鸟的妹妹当小老婆。让羊昆鸟回京，并给他十分丰厚的待遇，任命他为库真都督。
English: Hou Jing treated Yang Kunjiao's younger sister as his little wife. He let Yang Kunjiao return to Beijing, and gave him very generous treatment, appointing him as the governor of Kuzhen.

古文：及景败，从密图之，乃随其东走。
现代文：当侯景失败之后，羊昆鸟暗地准备杀掉他，便跟随他向东逃跑。
English: When Houjing failed, the sheep Kunjiao secretly prepared to kill him, and then followed him to the east to escape.

古文：景于松江战败，惟馀三舸，下海欲向蒙山。
现代文：侯景在松江战败后，只剩下三条船，便下海准备逃往蒙山。
English: After Hou Jing was defeated in Songjiang, he only had three boats left, so he went to sea to prepare to flee to Mengshan.

古文：会景昼寝，从语海师： 此中何处有蒙山，汝但听我处分。 
现代文：正值侯景白天休息时，羊昆鸟对船工说： 这里哪有什么蒙山，你只管听我安排。 
English: When Houjing was taking a break during the day, Yang Kunjie said to the boatman: "There is no Mengshan here, you just listen to my arrangements."

古文：遂直向京口，至胡豆洲，景觉，大惊。
现代文：便让船只直开向京口。当船行至胡豆洲时，侯景觉察了，大惊。
English: So he had the ship sail directly to the capital. When the ship arrived at Houdoushou, Hou Jing noticed and was shocked.

古文：问岸上，云 郭元建犹在广陵 。
现代文：问岸上人，说是 郭元建仍在广陵 。
English: People on the shore said that Guo Yuanjian was still in Guangling.

古文：景大喜,将依之。
现代文：侯景大喜，准备前去依靠他。
English: Hou Jing was overjoyed and prepared to go ahead and rely on him.

古文：从拔刀叱海师使向京口。
现代文：羊昆鸟拔刀命令船工将船驶向京口。
English: Yang Kunzhu pulled out a knife and ordered the shipwright to sail the ship to Beijing.

古文：从与王元礼、谢答仁弟葳蕤，并景之昵也，三人谓景曰： 我等爲王百战百胜，自谓无敌，卒至于此,岂非天乎。
现代文：羊昆鸟和王元礼、谢答仁的弟弟谢葳蕤，都是侯景最亲近的人，这三个人对侯景说： 我们为大王作战，百战百胜，自以为天下无敌，而今竟至如此，岂非天意吗？
English: Yang Kunjie, Wang Yuanli, and Xie Dairen's younger brother, Xie Yao, were the closest people to Houjing. These three people said to Houjing: "We fought for the great king, won many battles, and thought we were invincible. And now it's come to this, isn't it the will of heaven?

古文：今就王乞头以取富贵。 
现代文：如今向大王求取头颅以谋富贵。 
English: Now he's asking for the king's head to get rich.

古文：景欲透水，从抽刀斫之。
现代文：侯景准备跳水逃跑，羊昆鸟拔刀砍去。
English: Hou Jing prepared to jump into the water to escape, while Yang Kunjiao drew his sword and slashed away.

古文：景乃走入船中，以小刀抉船。
现代文：侯景便转身跑入船中，用小刀挖船。
English: Hou Jing then turned and ran into the boat, digging out the boat with a knife.

古文：从以矟入刺杀之。
现代文：羊昆鸟到船中用槊刺死了他。
English: Sheep Kunjie went into the boat and stabbed him to death with a pickaxe.

古文：景仆射索超世在别船，葳蕤以景命召之，斩于京口。
现代文：侯景的仆射索超世坐在另一艘船上，谢葳蕤假传侯景的命令将他召来，斩于京口。
English: Hou Jing's henchman Shozo Chosei was sitting on another ship, and Xie Jun falsely transmitted Hou Jing's order to summon him and behead him at the capital's entrance.

古文：元帝以从爲青州刺史，封昌国县侯，又领东阳太守。
现代文：梁元帝任命羊昆鸟为青州刺史，封爵昌国县侯，又兼领东阳太守。
English: Emperor Liang Yuan appointed Yang Kunjiao as the prefect of Qingzhou, the lord of Changguo County, and the governor of Dongyang.

古文：征陆纳，加散骑常侍，除西晋州刺史。
现代文：攻打陆纳时，加封散骑常侍，任西晋州刺史。
English: When attacking Lu Na, he was assigned to be a cavalryman of Jiafeng Sanzhiyi, and served as the chief historian of West Jinzhou.

古文：破郭元建于东关，迁东晋州刺史。
现代文：羊昆鸟在东关打败了郭元建，并改任东晋州刺史。
English: Sheep Kunjie defeated Guo Yuanjian in Dongguan, and was appointed as East Jinzhou chief historian.

古文：承圣三年，西魏围江陵，从赴援不及。
现代文：承圣三年，西魏围攻江陵，羊昆鸟赶来救援，未能赶上。
English: In the third year after the enthronement, the Western Wei Dynasty besieged Jiangling, and the sheep Kunjie rushed to the rescue, but failed to catch up.

古文：从王僧愔征萧勃于岭表，闻僧辩败，乃还，爲侯瑱所破，遇害，年二十八。
现代文：他跟从王僧忄音在岭表征讨萧勃，听说王僧辩败亡，便回兵，被侯王真击败而遇害，年纪只有二十八岁。
English: He went to the ridge with Wang Xiangyin to demonstrate against Xiao Bo. When he heard that Wang Xiangyin was defeated, he returned to the army and was defeated and killed by Hou Wangzhen. He was only twenty-eight years old.

古文：羊鸦仁字孝穆，泰山钜平人也。
现代文：羊鸦仁，字孝穆，是泰山钜平人。
English: Yang Rongren, also known as Xiaomu, is a Tai Shan Xingping person.

古文：少骁勇，仕郡爲主簿。
现代文：他从小骁勇善战，出任本郡主簿。
English: He fought bravely from a young age and served as the county's chief accountant.

古文：并通中，率兄弟自魏归梁，封广晋侯。
现代文：普通年间，他带领兄弟们自魏来归附梁朝，受封为广晋侯。
English: In ordinary years, he led his brothers from Wei to attach to the Liang Dynasty, and was named Guangjin Hou.

古文：征伐青、齐间，累有功绩，位至都督、北司州刺史。
现代文：在攻打青州、齐州时，屡立战功，被任命为都督、北司州刺史。
English: In the attack on Qingzhou and Qizhou, he repeatedly distinguished himself in battle and was appointed as the governor of the capital and the governor of North Sichuan.

古文：及侯景降，诏鸦仁督土州刺史桓和之、仁州刺史湛海珍等趣县瓠应接。
现代文：侯景归降时，朝廷诏令羊鸦仁总督土州刺史桓和之、仁州刺史湛海珍等前往悬瓠接应。
English: When Hou Jing returned to China, the imperial court ordered Yang Guoren, the governor of Tuzhou, Jishi Huanhe, and the governor of Renzhou, Jishi Zhanhaizhen, to come to meet him.

古文：景至，仍爲都督、司豫二州刺史，镇县瓠。
现代文：侯景到南方以后，羊鸦仁仍任都督、司州豫州二州刺史，镇守悬瓠。
English: After Hou Jing went to the south, Yang Guoren still served as the capital, the governor of Shizhou, the governor of Yuzhou, the governor of the two states, and the town guard.

古文：会侯景败于涡阳，魏军渐逼，鸦仁恐粮运不继，遂还北司，上表陈谢。
现代文：这时侯景在涡阳失败，魏军进逼悬瓠，羊鸦仁担心粮食接应不上，便回到北司州，并上表朝廷陈述情况并谢罪。
English: At this time, Hou Jing failed in the whirlwind, the Wei army advanced and forced him to surrender, and Yang Rongren was worried that the grain would not be received, so he returned to Beishizhou, and reported the situation to the imperial court and apologized.

古文：帝大怒鸦仁，鸦仁惧，顿军于淮上。
现代文：武帝对羊鸦仁大为恼怒，羊鸦仁很害怕，将军队驻扎在淮上。
English: Emperor Wu was very angry with Yang Rongren. Yang Rongren was very scared and stationed his army on Huai Rong.

古文：及侯景反，鸦仁率所部入援。
现代文：当侯景反叛时，羊鸦仁率领本部人马入京救援。
English: When Hou Jing rebelled, Au Ren led his troops to aid the imperial court.

古文：太清二年，景既背盟，鸦仁乃与赵伯超及南康王会理共攻贼于东府城，反爲贼败。
现代文：太清二年，侯景已违背盟约，羊鸦仁便和赵伯超以及南康王萧会理一起攻打敌人所占的东府城，但反被敌人所败。
English: In the second year of the Taiching Dynasty, Hou Jing had already violated the covenant, and Yang Rong Ren, Zhao Bo Chao, and Nankang Wang Xiao Huili together attacked Dongfu City, which was occupied by the enemy, but were defeated by the enemy.

古文：台城陷，景以爲五兵尚书。
现代文：台城沦陷后，侯景委任他为五兵尚书。
English: After the fall of Taichung, Hou Jing appointed him as the commander of the five soldiers.

古文：鸦仁常思奋发，谓所亲曰： 吾以凡流，受宠朝廷，竟无报效，以答重恩。
现代文：羊鸦仁经常想要奋发精神，有所作为，他对所亲信的人说： 我本是个平庸之辈，受朝廷恩宠，竟无以报效，以答重恩。
English: Raven often wanted to cheer up and said to those close to him: I am a mediocre generation, I have been favored by the imperial court, but I have not returned the favor, so I would like to thank you.

古文：今若以此终，没有馀责。 
现代文：如今就这样而终的话，死而尚有余责。 
English: If this is how it ends now, there's more to come.

古文：因泣下，见者伤焉。
现代文：说完便掉下泪来，见到的人都大为感伤。
English: When she finished, she burst into tears, and everyone who saw her was deeply moved.

古文：三年，出奔江西，将赴江陵，至东莞，爲故北徐州刺史荀伯道子晷所害。
现代文：太清三年，出奔江西，准备前往江陵，到达东莞时，被原北徐州刺史荀伯道的儿子荀晷杀害。
English: In the third year of the Taiqing Dynasty, he went to the west of Jiangxi Province, preparing to go to Jiangling. When he arrived in Dongguan, he was killed by the son of the former North Xuzhou chief, Zibo Dao.

古文：临死以报效不终，因而泣下。
现代文：临死时，他仍以自己报效不终而潸然泪下。
English: When he was on the verge of death, he burst into tears because he still felt that his service was not over.

古文：后鸦仁兄子海珍知之，掘晷父伯道并祖及所生母合五丧，各分其半骨，共棺焚之，半骨杂他骨，作五袋盛之，铭袋上曰 荀晷祖父母某之骨
现代文：后来，羊鸦仁哥哥的儿子羊海珍得知情况，便挖开荀晷的父亲荀伯道、他祖父母以及生母共五个死者的坟墓，各取出一半骸骨，放在一起和棺材同时烧掉，又用剩余的一半尸骨加上别的乱七八糟的骨头混在一起，分别装入五只袋子，在袋子的表面上写着 荀晷祖父母某人之骨 。
English: Later, when Yang Hai Zhen, the son of Yang Guoren's brother, learned of the situation, he dug up the graves of five dead people, including Yang's father, Zibo Dao, his grandparents, and his biological mother. He took out half of the skeletons, put them together with the coffin and burned them at the same time. He mixed the remaining half of the bones with other jumbled bones, and separately put them into five bags. On the surface of the bag was written "the bones of someone's grandparents."

古文：鸦仁子亮，侯景乱后移至吴州刺史，随王琳，以名将子见礼甚隆。
现代文：羊鸦仁的儿子羊亮，侯景之乱后移任吴州刺史，他跟随王琳，因为是名将之子而很受礼重。
English: Yang Liang, the son of Yang Guoren, was transferred to Wuzhou Shishi after the Houjing Rebellion. He followed Wang Lin, and was highly respected because he was the son of a famous general.

古文：爲人多酒无赖，酒醉爲阉竖所杀。
现代文：但他为人喜欢喝酒耍无赖，酒醉之后被宦官杀死。
English: But he liked to drink and play the ruffian, and after getting drunk he was killed by a eunuch.

