古文：抱朴子曰： 玄者，自然之始祖，而万殊之大宗也。
现代文：抱朴子说：玄妙的大道，是自然的始祖，万事万物的本原。
English: He said: "The mysterious road is the ancestor of nature, the origin of all things.

古文：眇眛乎其深也，故称微焉。
现代文：它幽深渺茫，所以称之为 微 ；它悠远绵莽，所以称之为 妙 。
English: It is deep and dim, so it is called micro; it is distant and reckless, so it is called myo.

古文：绵邈乎其远也，故称妙焉。其高则冠盖乎九霄，其旷则笼罩乎八隅。
现代文：玄道的崇高，就像那峨冠覆盖在九天之上，玄道的空旷，就像巨笼环罩于八方之外。
English: The loftiness of the causeway is like the crown covering the nine heavens, and the emptiness of the causeway is like a giant cage encircling the eight directions.

古文：光乎日月，迅乎电驰。
现代文：它比日月光明，比闪电疾速。
English: It is brighter than the sun and moon, and faster than lightning.

古文：或倏烁而景逝，或飘滭而星流，或滉漾於渊澄，或雰霏而云浮。
现代文：时而闪现，好似光影浮动；时而飘移，又似流星疾行；时而荡漾，好比深渊清澄；时而纷飞，又胜游云悠浮。
English: Sometimes flashing, like light and shadow floating; sometimes drifting, like a meteor speeding by; sometimes rippling, like a clear abyss; sometimes flying, like clouds floating by.

古文：因兆类而为有，讬潜寂而为无。
现代文：玄道，可因其附于万物之上而呈现为 有 ，又可因其其寄寓于幽深清寂之中而转化为 无 。
English: The Mysterious Path can appear as something because it is attached to all things, or it can be transformed into nothing because it dwells in the depths of silence.

古文：沦大幽而下沈，凌辰极而上游。
现代文：其沦落到大幽国则向下沉潜，凌越过北极星则向上游移。
English: When it falls to the Great Silent Land, it sinks and dives downwards, but when it crosses the North Star, it swims upstream.

古文：金石不能比其刚，湛露不能等其柔。
现代文：即使是坚硬的金石也不如它刚劲，即使是浓厚的露珠也不如它轻柔。
English: Even a hard stone is not as strong as it, and even a thick dewdrop is not as soft as it.

古文：方而不矩，圆而不规。
现代文：说它方，却不能用矩尺来衡量；说它圆，却不能用圆规来测度。
English: If it is square, it cannot be measured with a ruler; if it is round, it cannot be measured with a compass.

古文：来焉莫见，往焉莫追。
现代文：它来的时候不可见，去的时候不可追。
English: When he comes, do not look for him, and when he goes, do not pursue him.

古文：乾以之高，坤以之卑，云以之行，雨以之施。
现代文：天因它而高峻，地因它而低下，云因它而浮行，雨因它而降临。
English: By it the heavens are lifted up, by it the earth is stretched out, by it the clouds are carried along, and by it the rain falls.

古文：胞胎元一，范铸两仪，吐纳大始，鼓冶亿类，佪旋四七，匠成草昧，辔策灵机，吹嘘四气，幽括冲默，舒阐粲尉，抑浊扬清，斟酌河渭，增之不溢，挹之不匮，与之不荣，夺之不瘁。
现代文：它孕育元气，创造天地，化育出原始，又冶炼出万物，回旋着星宿，培养出混沌，驾驭着机关，鼓动着四时的天气，囊括了淡泊怡静之志，抒发出鲜明浓盛之情。玄道能遏制污浊，扬发清明，增减黄河，损益渭水。增加它，不会显得盈溢；耗损它，不会显得贫乏；给予它，不会显得旺盛；剥夺它，不会显得憔悴。
English: It gives birth to vitality, creates heaven and earth, transmutes and nurtures the primitive, and smelts all things, revolves around the stars, cultivates chaos, drives the organs, encourages the four o'clock weather, embraces the aspiration of calm and tranquility, and expresses a vivid and rich feeling. Xuan Dao can curb pollution, promote clarity, increase and decrease the Yellow River, and reduce losses and profits. Increase it, it will not appear overflowing; consume it, it will not appear poor; give it, it will not appear vigorous; deprive it, it will not appear salty.

古文：故玄之所在，其乐不穷。玄之所去，器弊神逝。
现代文：所以玄道所在之处，其乐无穷；玄道不在之所，则精神破弊，精神消亡。
English: Therefore, where there is a secret path, the joy is endless; where there is no secret path, the spirit is broken and the spirit dies.

古文：夫五声八音，清商流徵，损聪者也。
现代文：那五声八音，清新的商曲，流畅的徵调，是损伤挺立的罪魁。
English: The pentatonic scale, fresh commercial music, and smooth tuning are the main culprits of standing upright.

古文：鲜华艳采，彧丽炳烂，伤明者也。
现代文：那艳丽的色彩，夺目的光华，却有如损害听力的祸首。
English: That bright color, dazzling brilliance, but it's like the cause of hearing damage.

古文：宴安逸豫，清醪芳醴，乱性者也。
现代文：那安逸的宴席，快乐的聚会，清澈的酒浆，芳香的玉液，是扰乱本性的毒药。
English: That comfortable banquet, happy party, clear wine, fragrant jade, is a poison that disturbs nature.

古文：冶容媚姿，铅华素质，伐命者也。
现代文：妖艳的容貌，妩媚的身姿，化妆的脂粉，洁白的丽质，是砍伐生命的利斧。
English: The glamorous appearance, the charming figure, the powdered makeup, the white beauty, is the axe for cutting down life.

古文：其唯玄道，可与为永。
现代文：只有得道的人，才能与玄道一起永存。
English: Only those who have attained the Way can co-exist eternally with the Hidden Way.

古文：不知玄道者，虽顾眄为生杀之神器，唇吻为兴亡之关键，绮榭俯临乎云雨，藻室华绿以参差。
现代文：那些不懂玄道的人，即使是回首注目，也会冲犯生死的机关，尽管只是口唇的动作，也会触动兴亡的键钮。华丽的台榭高耸入云，华丽的屋宇参差排列。
English: Those who do not understand the secret path, even if they look back and pay attention, will offend the organs of life and death. Even if it is just a movement of the lips, it will also touch the button of rise and fall. Gorgeous pedestals soar into the clouds, gorgeous buildings are unevenly arranged.

古文：组帐雾合，罗幬云离。
现代文：哀婉的箫声飞凌于红霞之中，翠羽的帷盖飘荡于碧波之上。
English: The mournful sound of crickets soars above the red haze, the curtain of green feathers floats above the turquoise waves.

古文：西毛陈於閒房，金觞华以交驰，清弦嘈囋以齐唱，郑舞纷䋴蜲，哀箫鸣以凌霞，羽盖浮於涟漪，掇芳华於兰林之囿，弄红葩於积珠之池，登峻则望远以忘百忧，临深则俯揽以遗朝饥，入宴千门之焜熀，出駈朱轮之华仪。然乐极则哀集，至盈必有亏。
现代文：在那兰林宫的花园里去采摘芳香的鲜花，在那积珠殿的湖池中去玩欣赏绿肥红透的奇葩。登高望远，则忘却诸般忧愁；俯拾枝蔓，则充实早间饥肠。入室欢宴聚会，成千雕门上流光溢彩；出门飞马驰骋，朱轮华车前仪仗威严。然而，快乐到极限，悲哀则汇集而至；盈满至顶点，亏损必接踵而来。
English: To pick fragrant flowers in the garden of the Lanlin Palace, to play in the lake of the Pearl Palace, to enjoy the wonderful green and red. To climb high and far, you will forget all kinds of sorrows; to pick up branches, you will fill the morning hunger. The entrance banquet party, the thousands of carved doors are bright and colorful; to go out, the Pegasus gallops, the Zhu Lianhua carriage is dignified. However, happiness to the limit, sadness comes together; full to the top, losses will follow.

古文：故曲终则叹发，燕罢则心悲也。
现代文：所以欢乐的歌曲终了时，就会哀叹顿发，欢快的宴会结束时，则会心情悲凉。
English: Therefore, when the happy song ends, it will be lamented, and when the cheerful banquet ends, it will be sad.

古文：寔理势之攸召，犹影响之相归也。
现代文：这是自然法则的必然趋势，就像影子与形体、回声与喊叫永相伴随，永不分离。
English: This is the inevitable trend of the law of nature, just as shadows and shapes, echoes and shouts are always accompanied and never separated.

古文：彼假借而非真，故物往若有遗也。
现代文：那种种欢愉原本就是虚幻不实的，所以必然情随景迁，终将怅然若失。
English: Those kinds of pleasures were originally illusory and unreal, so inevitably, with the change of scenery, they will eventually be lost.

古文：夫玄道者，得之乎内，守之者外，用之者神，忘之者器，此思玄道之要言也。
现代文：玄道，从内在而得到，靠外在来持守；善于运用玄道的人则可畅达其精神，而忘却玄道则只会拘泥于形体。这是思索如何真正掌握玄道的主要秘诀。
English: This is the main secret of thinking about how to truly master the secret path. The secret path is obtained from the inside and maintained by the outside. Those who are good at using the secret path can reach their spirit, while those who forget the secret path will only stick to the form.

古文：得之者贵，不待黄钺之威。体之者富，不须难得之货。
现代文：凡真正掌握玄道者则显贵，不必借用黄钺以显威风；体会到玄道者富有，不必凭借罕见的财货以示贵重。
English: Those who have truly mastered the occult are distinguished, and do not need to borrow the yellow scepter to show their prestige; those who have experienced the occult are rich, and do not need to show their value by means of rare goods.

古文：高不可登，深不可测。
现代文：真正得道者是高不可攀，深不可测的。
English: A true adept is unattainable and unfathomable.

古文：乘流光，策飞景，凌六虚，贯涵溶。
现代文：他可乘驭流动的光线，鞭策飞扬的虚影，凌驾上下四方，贯穿浩瀚宇宙。
English: He can harness the flowing light, whip the flying shadow, overpower the four directions, and penetrate the vast universe.

古文：出乎无上，入乎无下。
现代文：可高至无极，深入幽冥。
English: It can be as high as infinity and as deep as the dark.

古文：经乎汗漫之门，游乎窈眇之野。
现代文：经行于无边无际的门楣，游荡在幽暗玄妙的四野。
English: Passing through the boundless gateway, wandering in the dark and mysterious four fields.

古文：逍遥恍惚之中，倘佯彷彿之表。咽九华於云端，咀六气於丹霞。
现代文：在那迷茫不清，唯恍唯惚中逍遥；在那迷迷朦朦，仿仿佛佛中徜徉；在那云端吮吸日月的精华，在那红霞之中咀嚼天地元气。
English: In that bewilderment, only in a trance; in that bewilderment dimly, as if in a Buddha's cocoon; sucking the essence of the sun and moon at the end of the cloud, chewing the heavenly air in the red haze.

古文：俳徊茫昧，翱翔希微，履略蜿虹，践跚旋玑，此得之者也。
现代文：徘徊于无形无迹之中，翱翔在不见不闻之际，脚踏着蜿蜒的彩虹，足登着北斗七星。
English: Wandering in the formless void, soaring unseen and unheard, stepping on the sinuous rainbow, climbing the Big Dipper.

古文：其次则真知足，知足者则能肥遁勿用，颐光山林。
现代文：这便是真正掌握玄道者所达到的境界。次一等的是真正知足者。这种人能够隐遁而不为世用，韬光养晦于山林之中。
English: This is the realm reached by those who have truly mastered the mystic path. Next in rank are those who are truly content. Such people can live in seclusion and not be of any use to the world. They can hide in the mountains and forests.

古文：纡鸾龙之翼於细介之伍，养浩然之气於蓬荜之中。繿缕带索，不以贸龙章之暐晔也。
现代文：他收拢鸾凤蛟龙般的翅膀而处于卑贱的地位，身置于破弊的茅舍，颐养浩然正气。他宁肯身穿褴褛的衣衫以草绳系腰，也不愿意用它来交换光彩辉煌的龙袍。
English: He tucked his dragon-like wings into a lowly position, placed himself in a corrupt hut, and nurtured a magnificently righteous spirit. He would rather wear a shabby shirt and tie a grass rope around his waist than exchange it for a brilliant dragon robe.

古文：负步杖筴，不以易结驷之骆驿也。
现代文：他宁愿背负重物以竹杆为手杖徒步而行，也不愿意用它来换取来往不绝的马车。
English: He would rather carry heavy loads on his back and walk with a bamboo pole as a cane than exchange it for a constant stream of horse-drawn carriages.

古文：藏夜光於嵩岫，不受他山之攻。沈鳞甲於玄渊，以违钻灼之灾。
现代文：把夜光碧玉藏于高山之中，以避免他山之石的雕琢；将灵龟的甲壳沉于幽深的渊潭，以避免钻孔火烧的祸害。
English: To hide the luminous jasper in the high mountains to avoid the carving of his mountain stone; to sink the carapace of the spirit turtle in the deep abyss to avoid the scourge of drilling fire.

古文：动息知止，无往不足。
现代文：动静知道节制，则无往而不利。
English: When movement and stillness know moderation, there is no future but disadvantage.

古文：弃赫奕之朝华，避偾车之险路。
现代文：抛弃光彩照人的晨花，避开覆车的险路。
English: Abandon the dazzling morning flowers and avoid the dangerous road of overtaking.

古文：吟啸苍崖之閒，而万物化为尘氛。
现代文：低音高呼于青崖之上，静观万物化为尘土空气。
English: The bass chants above the blue cliff, quietly watching everything turn into dusty air.

古文：怡颜丰柯之下，而朱户变为绳枢。
现代文：到茂密的树林中修身，旁观富贵之家破落为贫寒之家。
English: To the thick woods to recuperate, to watch the house of the rich fall to the house of the poor.

古文：握耒甫田，而麾节忽若执鞭。
现代文：在田中执农具耕作，将军权在握的将军鄙视为手执皮鞭的奴仆。
English: In Tanaka, they use agricultural tools to farm, and despise the generals who hold military power as slaves with whips in their hands.

古文：啜荈漱泉，而太牢同乎藜藿。
现代文：吃粗饭饮泉水，把牛羊猪等佳肴视为野菜粗食。
English: Eat coarse rice and drink spring water, and regard delicacies such as cattle, sheep and pigs as vegetable coarse food.

古文：泰尔有馀欢於无为之场，忻然齐贵贱於不争之地。
现代文：泰然自若，在 无为 的氛围里享尽欢乐；怡然自得，于 不争 的心境中混同贵贱。
English: Calmly self-assured, enjoy the joy in the atmosphere of inaction; pleasantly self-satisfied, in the indisputable state of mind, mixed with high and low.

古文：含醇守朴，无欲无忧，全真虚器，居平味澹。
现代文：含涵醇厚，持守朴素，没有贪欲，没有忧愁，保全真率，漠视外物，居处平庸，体味淡漠。
English: It is mellow and rich in content, keeps to simplicity, has no greed, no sorrow, preserves truthfulness, is indifferent to external things, lives in a mediocre place, and has a bland taste.

古文：恢恢荡荡，与浑成等其自然。
现代文：坦坦荡荡，与浑然的玄道一样自然。
English: It's as natural as the serene back roads.

古文：浩浩茫茫，与造化钧其符契。
现代文：浩浩茫茫，与天地自然达到默契。
English: The vastness of the vastness of the vastness of the vastness of the vastness of the vastness of the vastness of the vastness of the vastness of the vastness.

古文：如闇如明，如浊如清，似迟而疾，似亏而盈。
现代文：似乎幽暗，又似光明，好像浑浊，又好像清澈；似乎迟缓，却又迅速，看似亏损，却又盈溢。
English: It seems to be dark, but it seems to be bright, it seems to be cloudy, but it seems to be clear; it seems to be slow, but it is fast, it seems to be a loss, but it is overflowing.

古文：岂肯委尸祝之坐，释大匠之位，越樽俎以代无知之庖，舍绳墨而助伤手之工。
现代文：怎能抛弃主祭的身份，抛弃大匠的地位，而越过樽俎去代替无知的厨师，或者丢弃绳墨去帮助伤手的工人呢？
English: How can one give up being a priest, give up being a master, and go over the barrel to replace an ignorant cook, or give up rope and ink to help a worker with an injured hand?

古文：不以臭鼠之细琐，而为庸夫之忧乐。
现代文：不因为像臭老鼠似的细琐利禄，而像凡夫那样喜怒哀乐。
English: Not because of petty trifles like a stinking rat, but because of joys and sorrows like an ordinary man.

古文：藐然不喜流俗之誉，坦尔不惧雷同之毁。
现代文：傲然不喜欢世俗的称誉，坦然不畏惧众口一词的低回。
English: Arrogantly dislikes worldly accolades, and is not afraid of the public's low opinion of him.

古文：不以外物汩其至精，不以利害污其纯粹也。
现代文：不会因为身外之物而扰乱了他至真至朴的精神，不会由于利害关系而污染他纯洁的胸襟。
English: He will not let external things disturb his pure and simple spirit, and he will not let personal interests pollute his pure mind.

古文：故穷富极贵，不足以诱之焉，其馀何足以悦之乎？
现代文：极度的富有，显赫的地位，都不足以引诱他，其他的名利又怎能使他欢喜呢。
English: Neither extreme wealth nor a prominent position is enough to tempt him, and how can other fame and fortune make him happy?

古文：直刃沸镬，不足以劫之焉，谤讟何足以戚之乎？
现代文：锋利的刀刃，沸腾的鼎镬，不足以胁迫于他，那些诽谤与谗言又怎能引起他的忧惧不安呢？
English: Sharp blades and boiling cauldrons are not enough to coerce him. How can those slanders and insults arouse his fear and anxiety?

古文：常无心於众烦，而未始与物杂也。
现代文：他从来对烦恼都是无动于衷，从来不曾与外物有一丝相混杂。
English: He has always been indifferent to his troubles, and has never been mixed with anything foreign.

古文：若夫操隋珠以弹雀，舐秦痔以属车，登朽缗以探巢，泳吕梁以求鱼，旦为称孤之客，夕为狐鸟之馀。
现代文：拿隋侯的宝珠去射击鸟雀，舔舐秦王的痔疮以获取车马，攀援枯朽的树枝去掏鸟窝，在湍急的吕梁河里去捞鱼虾，早上还是称孤道寡的人，傍晚却沦为狐狸和鸟儿的残剩的食物。
English: Taking the precious beads of the Sui princes to shoot birds and finches, licking the hemorrhoids of the Qin kings to obtain chariots and horses, climbing the withered branches to dig bird nests, and fishing for fish and shrimp in the fast-flowing Luliang River. In the morning, they are still lonely people, but in the evening they are reduced to the leftover food of foxes and birds.

古文：栋挠餗覆，倾溺不振，盖世人之所为载驰企及，而达者之所为寒心而凄怆者也。
现代文：横梁折断，鼎翻食覆，倾覆沉溺，一蹶不振。大致说来，这就是庸俗之辈盲目奔走，倾心追慕的；但这恰是通达得道者感到心寒和可悲之所在。
English: The beam is broken, the top is overturned, the bottom is overturned, the top is lost, and the bottom is lost. Roughly speaking, this is what the vulgar people are blindly running after and yearning for; but this is exactly where the enlightened people feel cold and sad.

古文：故至人嘿韶夏而韬藻棁。
现代文：所以懂得玄道的至人使《韶》《夏》一类华丽的音乐沉默，将有文采的柱子遮掩暗藏起来。
English: Therefore, those who know the way to the entrance will silence the gorgeous music such as "" and "夏" and hide the pillars of literature.

古文：奋其六羽於五城之墟，而不烦衔芦之卫。
现代文：他们像鸿雁振动着翅膀翱翔于昆仑五域的废墟之上，而不需要口衔芦苇以自卫。
English: They soar above the ruins of the five regions of Kunlun like wild geese with vibrating wings, and do not need the mouth of the reed to defend themselves.

古文：翳其鳞角乎勿用之地，而不恃曲穴之备。
现代文：他们像蛰龙隐藏鳞角而不用，而没有必要凭借洞穴去防备。
English: Like dragons, they hide their horns rather than use them, and there is no need to protect themselves with caves.

古文：俯无倨鵄之呼，仰无亢极之悔，人莫之识，邈矣辽哉！ 
现代文：他们处于上位时，没有倨傲鹞鹰般的咋呼，他们失去上位时，也不会有像亢龙般悔恨，没有人能真正理解这种境界，因为玄道渺邈而又空阔！
English: When they are at the top, they do not have the arrogance of the eagle, and when they lose the top, they will not have the remorse of the dragon. No one can really understand this realm, because the secret path is vague and empty!

