古文：张苍，阳武人也，好书律历。
现代文：张苍，河南阳武人，喜好文书、音律历法。
English: Zhang Cang, a Yangwu person from Henan Province, is fond of writing and the musical rhythm calendar.

古文：秦时为御史，主柱下方书。
现代文：秦朝时任御史，主管天下户籍图册。
English: During the Qin Dynasty, he served as imperial historian and was in charge of various documents and archives in the palace.

古文：有罪，亡归。
现代文：因为触犯法律逃回家乡。
English: He later fled home because of the crime.

古文：及沛公略地过阳武，苍以客从攻南阳。
现代文：当沛公行军路过阳武时，张苍以宾客身份跟从沛公攻打南阳。
English: When Pei Gong attacked the city and bypassed Yangwu, Zhang Cang followed Pei Gong to attack Nanyang as a guest.

古文：苍当斩，解衣伏质，身长大，肥白如瓠，时王陵见而怪其美士，乃言沛公，赦勿斩。
现代文：张苍正要被问斩，解下衣服伏在刑具砧板上，显出身材高大，肌肉肥白如瓠瓜，当时王陵看到张苍，非常奇怪这个美士，于是告诉沛公，赦免不处斩刑。
English: Zhang Cang was about to be beheaded, he took off his clothes and lay down on the chopping board, revealing his tall stature and muscles as white as a melon. At that time, Wang Ling saw Zhang Cang and was very surprised by this handsome man, so he told Pei Gong that there would be no amnesty for beheading.

古文：遂西入武关，至咸阳。
现代文：于是西入武关，到达咸阳。
English: As a result, they entered Wuguan in the west and reached Xianyang in the east.

古文：沛公立为汉王，入汉中，还定三秦。
现代文：沛公当了汉王，进入汉中，又回军平定三秦地带。
English: Pei Gong was crowned King of Han, entered Han Middle, and soon subdued San Qin.

古文：陈馀击走常山王张耳，耳归汉。汉以苍为常山守。
现代文：陈余赶走了常山王张耳，张耳投奔汉王，汉王派张苍任常山郡守。
English: Chen Yu drove away Zhang Er, the king of Changshan, Zhang Er defected to the Han king, and the Han king appointed Zhang Cang as the governor of Changshan County.

古文：从韩信击赵，苍得陈馀。
现代文：跟随韩信攻打赵国，张苍俘获陈余。
English: He followed Han Xin to attack Zhao, and Zhang Cang captured Chen Yu.

古文：赵地已平，汉王以苍为代相，备边冠。
现代文：赵国地区平定下来，汉王任张苍为代国相，防备边地盗贼。
English: After the Zhao region was pacified, the Han king appointed Zhang Cang as the acting minister of state to guard against foreign thieves.

古文：已而徙为赵相，相赵王耳。
现代文：不久迁为赵国相，为赵王张耳丞相。
English: Soon after, he was transferred to the post of Zhao Guozhongguo, assisted by Zhao Wang Zhang Er.

古文：耳卒，相其子敖。
现代文：张耳去世，张苍为其子张敖丞相。
English: Zhang Er passed away, and Zhang Cang was succeeded by his son, Zhang Xuanzheng.

古文：复徙相代。
现代文：后来又改任代国丞相。
English: He was later reappointed acting chancellor.

古文：燕王臧荼反，苍以代相从攻荼有功，封为北平侯，食邑千二百户。
现代文：燕王臧荼反叛，张苍以代国相身份随大军攻臧莱有功，封为北平侯，食邑一千二百户。
English: Yan Wangqi rebelled, Zhang Cang, as the acting minister of state, led the great army to conquer Kunlai, and was awarded the title of Beiping Hou, with 1,200 households.

古文：迁为计相，一月，更以列侯为主计四岁。
现代文：张苍改计相，过了一个月，更以列侯为主计四年。
English: Later, Zhang Cang was promoted to the position of finance manager, and changed to the position of chief accountant as a vassal, which he held for four years.

古文：是时，萧何为相国，而苍乃自秦时为柱下御史，明习天下图书计籍，又善用算律历，故令苍以列侯居相府，领主郡国上计者。
现代文：当时萧何任相国，而张苍从秦朝时就当柱下御史，熟悉天下图册户籍，又善于计算历法，因此让张苍以列侯身份在相府任职，主管郡国送来的簿书。
English: At that time, Xiao He served as the imperial secretary, while Zhang Cang had served as the imperial secretary since the Qin Dynasty. He was familiar with the household registers of the world and was good at calculating the calendar. Therefore, Zhang Cang served as a vassal in the imperial secretary's office and was in charge of the books and records sent by the county.

古文：黥布反，汉立皇子长为淮南王，而苍相之。
现代文：黥布反叛，汉朝立皇子刘长为淮南王，张苍为淮南国相。
English: Zibo rebelled, and the Han Dynasty established Prince Liu Chang as King of Huainan, and Zhang Cang as Minister of State of Huainan.

古文：十四年，迁为御史大夫。
现代文：任职十四年，提升为御史大夫。
English: Fourteen years later, Zhang Cangsheng became the chief historian.

古文：周昌者，沛人也。
现代文：周昌，沛郡人。
English: Zhou Chang, from Pei County.

古文：其从兄苛，秦时皆为泗水卒史。
现代文：他的堂兄周苛与他都是秦朝的泗水卒史。
English: His cousin, Zhou Cao, and he were both scholars of Surabaya during the Qin Dynasty.

古文：及高祖起沛，击破泗水守监，于是苛、昌以卒史从沛公，沛公以昌为职志，苛为客。
现代文：当汉高祖在沛县起兵时，击败泗水郡守、郡监，于是周苛、周昌兄弟二人以卒史身份投靠了沛公，沛公以周昌为掌旗手，周苛为帐下宾客。
English: When Han Gaozu raised an army in Pei County, he defeated the Surabaya County Governor and County Supervisor, so the two brothers Zhou Cao and Zhou Chang, as graduates of history, supported Pei Gong. Pei Gong used Zhou Chang as the flag bearer, and Zhou Cao as a guest.

古文：从入关破秦。
现代文：随军入关减秦。
English: Following the army into the customs, Qin was reduced.

古文：沛公立为汉王，以苛为御史大夫，昌为中尉。
现代文：沛公立为汉王，以周苛为御史大夫，周昌为中尉。
English: Pei Gongguo was the King of Han, Zhou Cao was the Grand Historian, and Zhou Chang was the Lieutenant.

古文：汉三年，楚围汉王荥阳急，汉王出去，而使苛守荥阳城。
现代文：汉三年，楚军把汉王包围在荣阳，情况危急，汉王逃出后，让周苛坚守荣阳。
English: In the third year of the Han Dynasty, the Chu army encircled the Han king in Rongyang. The situation was critical. After the Han king escaped, Zhou Cao insisted on defending Rongyang.

古文：楚破荥阳城，欲令苛将，苛骂曰： 若趣降汉王！
现代文：楚军攻破荣阳，打算任周苛为将军，周苛斥骂说： 你赶快投降汉王!
English: The Chu army broke through Rongyang and planned to appoint Zhou Cao as general. Zhou Cao scolded and said: You should quickly surrender to King Han!

古文：不然，今为虏矣！ 
现代文：不然的话，今天你就要当俘虏! 
English: Otherwise, today you will be a prisoner!

古文：项羽怒，亨苛。
现代文：项羽大怒，烹杀周苛。
English: Xiang Yu was furious and prepared to kill Zhou Cao.

古文：汉王于是拜昌为御史大夫。
现代文：汉王于是任命周昌为御史大夫。
English: The Han king then appointed Zhou Chang as the imperial historian.

古文：常从击破项籍。
现代文：常常跟从汉王击败项羽。
English: Zhou Chang often followed Han Wang and defeated Xiang Yu's army many times.

古文：六年，与萧、曹等俱封，为汾阴侯。
现代文：汉六年，周昌舆萧何、曹参等人同时受封，为汾阴侯。
English: In the 6th year of the Han Dynasty, Zhou Changmyo, Xiao He, Cao San and others were also given the title, and became the princes of Yin.

古文：苛子成以父死事，封为高景侯。
现代文：周苛之子周成由于父亲死难，封为高景侯。
English: Zhou Cao's son, Zhou Cheng, was given the title of Gao Jing Hou (高景侯) due to his father's death.

古文：昌为人强力，敢直言，自萧、曹等皆卑下之。
现代文：周昌刚强正直，敢于直言，从萧何、曹参以下官员对他都谨小慎微，言词卑下。
English: Zhou Changqiang is honest and courageous, and dares to speak frankly. Officials from Xiao He and Cao San to him are cautious and humble.

古文：昌尝燕入奏事，高帝方拥戚姬，昌还走。
现代文：周昌曾在高帝宴饮时奏事，高帝正在拥抱戚姬，周昌退走。
English: Zhou Chang once made a speech at a banquet for Emperor Gao. When Emperor Gao was embracing his relative, Zhou Chang retreated.

古文：高帝逐得，骑昌项，上问曰： 我何如主也？ 
现代文：高帝追赶出来抓住周昌，骑在周昌脖子上问道： 我是怎样的君主? 
English: Gao Di chased and caught Zhou Chang, rode on Zhou Chang's neck and asked: What kind of monarch am I?

古文：昌仰曰： 陛下即桀、纣之主也。 
现代文：周吕仰起头说： 陛下就是桀、纣之主。 
English: Zhou Lyu raised his head and said, "Your Majesty is the master of the dragonfly, dragonfly."

古文：于是上笑之，然尤惮昌。
现代文：于是皇上笑起来，然而还是很怕他。
English: Then the Emperor laughed, but he was still very much afraid of him.

古文：及高帝欲废太子，而立戚姬子如意为太子，大臣固争莫能得，上以留侯策止。
现代文：当时高帝想废太子，立戚姬之子如意为太子，大臣们坚持劝谏争辩，都没有成功，皇上由于留侯张良的计策才作罢。
English: At that time, Emperor Gao wanted to depose the crown prince and install the son of Qi Ji as the crown prince. The ministers insisted on persuading and arguing, but they were unsuccessful. The emperor only gave up because of Zhang Liang's strategy.

古文：而昌庭争之强，上问其说，昌为人吃，又盛怒，曰： 臣口不能言，然臣期期知其不可。
现代文：然而周昌在朝廷之上极力争辩，皇上问他的理由，周昌有吃缺陷，又十分愤怒，说： 臣自知不能讲出来，然而臣期期知其不可。
English: However, Zhou Chang tried his best to argue with the imperial court, and the emperor asked him why. Zhou Chang, who had an eating disorder and was very angry, said: The vassal knows that he cannot speak out, but the vassal must know.

古文：陛下欲废太子，臣期期不奉诏。 
现代文：陛下想废太子，臣期期不接受诏命。 
English: If His Majesty wants to abolish the position of crown prince, he will not accept the imperial edict.

古文：上欣然而笑，即罢。
现代文：皇上欣然而笑，便停止了废太子一事。
English: The Emperor laughed with delight and stopped talking about the deposed crown prince.

古文：吕后侧耳于东箱听，见昌，为跪谢曰： 微君，太子几废。 
现代文：吕后在束厢室侧耳偷听，见到周昌后，下跪拜谢，说： 没有您强争，太子差一点就被废了。 
English: Lv Hou was eavesdropping in the casket room. When she saw Zhou Chang, she knelt down to thank him and said, "Without your forceful struggle, the crown prince was almost eliminated."

古文：是岁，戚姬子如意为赵王，年十岁，高祖忧万岁之后不全也。
现代文：这一年，戚姬之子如意为赵王，才十岁，高祖担心自己死后他不能自保。
English: This year, his cousin's son, Ruyi Zhao Wang, was only ten years old. Gaozu was worried that he would not be able to protect himself after his death.

古文：赵尧为符玺御史，赵人方与公谓御史大夫周昌曰： 君之史赵尧年虽少，然奇士，君必异之，是且代君之位。 
现代文：赵尧当时任符玺御史，赵人方舆公对御史大夫周昌说： 您的下属赵尧，年纪虽然很小，却是个奇才，您一定要特别关照他，将来要由他代替您的职务。 
English: At that time, Zhao Wei was appointed as Fuyao's imperial historian. Zhao Renfang told the imperial historian Zhou Chang: Your subordinate Zhao Wei, although he is very young, is a genius. You must take special care of him. In the future, he will replace your position.

古文：昌笑曰： 尧年少，刀笔吏耳，何至是乎！ 
现代文：周昌笑着说： 赵尧年少，是个刀笔小吏，何至于这般抬高他。 
English: Zhou Chang said with a smile: Zhao Wei is young and is a petty official, why elevate him like this.

古文：居顷之，尧侍高祖，高祖独心不乐，悲歌，群臣不知上所以然。
现代文：不久，赵尧侍奉高祖，高祖独自闷闷不乐，哼着悲歌，群臣都不知道皇上为什么这样。
English: Before long, Zhao Wei was serving Gao Zu. Gao Zu was alone, sullen and unhappy, humming a sad song. The courtiers didn't know why the emperor was like this.

古文：尧进请问曰： 陛下所为不乐，非以赵王年少，而戚夫人与吕后有隙，备万岁之后而赵王不能自全乎？ 
现代文：赵尧进来请安，问道： 陛下之所以不高兴，是不是因为赵王年少，戚夫人又与吕后不和，担心您万岁之后赵王不能自保呀? 
English: Zhao Yao came in to ask for peace and asked: Is the reason why His Majesty is unhappy because King Zhao is young and his relative is not getting along with Empress Lv, and he is worried that King Zhao will not be able to protect himself after you pass away?

古文：高祖曰： 我私忧之，不知所出。 
现代文：高祖说： 我私下担心，不知用什么计策。 
English: Gaozu said, "I'm worried in private, I don't know what to do.

古文：尧曰： 陛下独为赵王置贵强相，及吕后、太子、群臣素所敬惮者乃可。 
现代文：赵尧说： 陛下衹要为赵王安排一个尊贵坚强的相，他是吕后、太子、群臣一向尊敬畏惧的人就可以了。 
English: Zhao Yao said, "Your Majesty, I want to arrange an honorable and strong consort for King Zhao. He can be the one that the Empress Dowager, the prince, and the courtiers have always respected and feared.

古文：高祖曰： 然。
现代文：高祖说： 是这样。
English: Gaozu said, "That's right."

古文：吾念之欲如是，而群臣谁可者？ 
现代文：我想的也是这办法，然而群臣谁可以呢? 
English: I'm thinking about it this way, but with all the courtiers, who can take on this responsibility?

古文：尧曰： 御史大夫昌，其人坚忍伉直，自吕后、太子及大臣皆素严惮之。
现代文：赵尧说： 御史大夫周昌，其人坚强正直，从吕后、太子以下及大臣平时都怕他。
English: Zhao Wei said: Zhou Chang, the chief historian, is a strong and honest person, and people from Lvou, the crown prince and below, as well as ministers, are afraid of him in normal times.

古文：独昌可。 
现代文：衹有周昌可以。 
English: If you have Zhou Chang, you can do it.

古文：高祖曰： 善。 
现代文：高祖说道： 好。 
English: Gaozu said, "Good."

古文：于是召昌谓曰： 吾固欲烦公，公强为我相赵。 
现代文：于是召周昌说： 我必须烦劳你的大驾，你一定要为我去当赵相。 
English: So he summoned Zhou Chang and said, "I have to bother you, you must be my Zhao Xiang."

古文：昌泣曰： 臣初起从陛下，陛下独奈何中道而弃之于诸侯乎？ 
现代文：周昌哭泣着说： 臣从一开始就追随陛下，陛下为什么要单单把我抛弃到诸侯王国去呢? 
English: Zhou Chang wept and said, "I have followed Your Majesty from the very beginning. Why did Your Majesty abandon me to the realm of princes?

古文：高祖曰： 吾极知其左迁，然吾私忧赵，念非公无可者。
现代文：高祖说： 我很清楚这是贬了你的官，然而我暗自担心赵王，想来想去非你不能当此任。
English: Gaozu said, "I know very well that this demeans your position, but I'm secretly worried about King Zhao. If you think about it, you can't hold this position.

古文：公不得已强行！ 
现代文：你还是不要推辞，勉强自己前去赴任吧! 
English: Still, don't refuse, just force yourself to go and take up the post!

古文：于是徙御史大夫昌为赵相。
现代文：于是迁御史大夫周昌任赵相。
English: As a result, the imperial historian Zhou Chang was transferred to Zhao Xiang.

古文：既行久之，高祖持御史大夫印弄之，曰： 谁可以为御史大夫者？ 
现代文：周昌走后很久，高祖拿着御史大夫印抚摸着说： 谁能担任御史大夫呢? 
English: After Zhou Chang left, after a long period of time, Gao Zu held the official seal of the Imperial Historian in his hand, gently caressing it and saying: Who is the most suitable candidate for the Imperial Historian?

古文：孰视尧曰： 无以易尧。 
现代文：仔细看了看赵尧说： 没有人能代替赵尧了。 
English: After taking a closer look at Zhao Yao, he said, "No one can replace Zhao Yao.

古文：遂拜尧为御史大夫。
现代文：于是拜赵尧为御史大夫。
English: As a result, Bai Zhaoqi became the chief historian.

古文：尧亦前有军功食邑，及以御史大夫从击陈豨有功，封为江邑侯。
现代文：赵尧以前也有军功，领有食邑，又以御史大夫身份随军攻打陈稀有功，封为江邑侯。
English: In the past, Zhao Wei also had military achievements and food villages, until he followed the attack on Chen Yu with the post of imperial historian, and was awarded the title of Jiangyuan.

古文：高祖崩，太后使使召赵王，其相昌令王称疾不行。
现代文：高祖驾崩，太后派使臣召赵王入京，赵相周昌让赵王说有病不能前往。
English: Gao Zu passed away, the empress dowager sent an envoy to summon Zhao Wang to Beijing, Zhao Xiang Zhouchang told Zhao Wang that he was ill and could not go.

古文：使者三反，昌曰： 高帝属臣赵王，王年少，窃闻太后怨戚夫人，欲召赵王并诛之。
现代文：使臣第三次返回来到赵国，周昌说： 高帝把赵王交给臣来保护，王年纪小，听说太后怨戚夫人，想召赵王杀掉他。
English: When the envoy returned to Zhao for the third time, Zhou Chang said: Emperor Gao handed Zhao Wang over to the envoy for protection. Wang was young, and I heard that the Empress Dowager had a grudge against her relative and wanted to call Zhao Wang to kill him.

古文：臣不敢遣王，王且亦疾，不能奉诏。 
现代文：臣不敢送走赵王，赵王又有病，不能接受诏命前往。 
English: The minister did not dare to send Zhao Wang away. Zhao Wang was ill again and could not accept the imperial order to go.

古文：太后怒，乃使使召赵相。
现代文：太后大怒，于是派使臣召赵相。
English: The empress dowager was furious, so she sent an envoy to summon Zhao Xiang.

古文：相至，谒太后，太后骂昌曰： 尔不知我之怨戚氏乎？
现代文：赵相到京，拜谒太后，太后骂周昌说： 你不知道我恨戚氏吗?
English: When Zhao Xiang arrived in Beijing, he paid homage to the Empress Dowager, who scolded Zhou Chang and said, "Don't you know that I hate my relative?

古文：而不遣赵王！ 
现代文：竟然不把赵王送来! 
English: They didn't even send Zhao Wang!

古文：昌既被征，高后使使召赵王。
现代文：周昌被征召来京后，高后就派使臣召赵王。
English: After Zhou Chang was conscripted to come to Beijing, Gao Po sent an envoy to summon Zhao Wang.

古文：王果来，至长安月余，见鸩杀。
现代文：赵王果然来京，到长安一个多月，就被毒死。
English: Zhao Wang did indeed come to Beijing, but after more than a month in Chang'an, he was poisoned to death.

古文：昌谢病不朝见，三岁而薨，谥曰悼侯。
现代文：周昌因病辞谢不上朝，三年后去世，谧号悼侯。
English: Due to illness, Zhou Chang did not thank the emperor for his resignation, and died three years later.

古文：传子至孙意，有罪，国除。
现代文：传侯爵至子，又到孙周意，触犯了法律，除去侯国。
English: According to the marquis's own son, and at the behest of Sun Zhou, he violated the law and removed the principality.

古文：景帝复封昌孙左车为安阳侯，有罪，国除。
现代文：景帝又封周昌孙周左车为安阳侯，因犯罪，除去侯国。
English: Emperor Jing also sealed Zhou Changson Zhou Zuoqi as the Anyang marquis, and removed him from the marquisate for committing a crime.

古文：初，赵尧既代周昌为御史大夫，高祖崩，事惠帝终世。
现代文：当初，赵尧代替周昌为御史大夫之后，高祖驾崩，侍奉惠帝直到驾崩。
English: At first, Zhao Wei replaced Zhou Chang as imperial historian, and after Gao Zu passed away, he served Emperor Hui until his death.

古文：高后元年，怨尧前定赵王如意之画，乃抵尧罪，以广阿侯任敖为御史大夫。
现代文：高后元年，高后怨恨赵尧提出保护赵王如意的计策，于是定赵尧罪，让广阿侯任敖为御史大夫。
English: In the first year of Gao Hou's reign, Gao Hou's resentment of Zhao Yao led him to come up with a plan to protect King Zhao as he wished. As a result, Zhao Yao was found guilty and Guang A Hou was appointed as the imperial historian.

古文：任敖，沛人也，少为狱吏。
现代文：任敖，沛郡人，年轻时当狱卒。
English: Ren Qi, a native of Pei County, worked as a jailer when he was young.

古文：高祖尝避吏，吏系吕后，遇之不谨。
现代文：高祖曾逃避官吏追捕，官吏捉走了吕后，对吕后有轻薄举动。
English: Gaozu had evaded the pursuit of officials, but the officials captured Lvow, and treated Lvow in a frivolous manner.

古文：任敖素善高祖，怒，击伤主吕后吏。
现代文：任敖向来看重高祖，大怒，击伤看管吕后的小吏。
English: But Ren Xuan had always been very close to Gao Zu. Seeing this scene, he was very angry and wounded the prison guard who was in charge of Lyu Guo.

古文：及高祖初起，敖以客从为御史，守丰二岁。
现代文：当高祖开始起兵时，任敖以宾客身份随从直担，当了御史，坚守丰旦二年。
English: When Gao Zu began to raise an army, Ren Hao followed him as a guest, and became an Imperial Historian, holding fast to Fudan for two years.

古文：高祖立为汉王，东击项羽，遨迁为上党守。
现代文：直塑当了选王，向东进击项羽，任敖升为上党郡守。
English: Zhi Gang became the king of the election, marched eastward to attack Xiang Yu, and was promoted to Shangdang County Governor.

古文：陈豨反，敖坚守，封为广阿侯，食邑千八百户。
现代文：陈稀反叛，任敖坚守，封为广阿侯，食邑一千八百户。
English: Chen Xixi rebelled, Ren Xuan held fast, and was given the title of Guang A Hou. There were 1,800 households in the food village.

古文：高后时为御史大夫，三岁免。
现代文：高后时任御史大夫。三年罢免。
English: After graduating from high school, he was appointed as a doctor of history. He was dismissed three years later.

古文：孝文元年薨，谥曰懿侯。
现代文：孝文帝元年去世，谧号懿侯。
English: Emperor Xiaowen died in the first year of the year, and his posthumous name was Hou.

古文：传子至曾孙越人，坐为太常庙酒酸不敬，国除。
现代文：侯爵传给儿子，又传到曾孙任越人，因犯太常庙祭酒味酸不敬罪，除去侯国。
English: The marquis was passed down to his son, and then to his great-grandson, Ren Yue, who was removed from the marquisate for committing the crime of disrespecting the temple festival.

古文：初任敖免，平阳侯曹窋代敖为御史大夫。
现代文：当初，任敖罢免，平阳侯曹茁代替任敖为御史大夫。
English: At first, Ren Rong was dismissed, and Pingyang Hou Cao Zang replaced Ren Rong as chief historian.

古文：高后崩，与大臣共诛诸吕。
现代文：高后驾崩，与大臣共同诛灭吕氏家族。
English: After Gao's death, he and the minister jointly annihilated the Lv family.

古文：后坐事免，以淮南相张苍为御史大夫。
现代文：后因触犯法律被罢官，任淮南相张苍为御史大夫。
English: Later, he was removed from office for violating the law, and appointed Zhang Cang, the Huainan party secretary, as the chief historian.

古文：苍来绛侯等尊立孝文皇帝，四年，代灌婴为丞相。
现代文：张苍与绛侯周勃等尊立孝文皇帝，四年，代替灌婴为丞相。
English: Zhang Cang and his vassal Zhou Bo established Emperor Xiaowen, and for four years, he served as chancellor instead of Guan Yu.

古文：汉兴二十余年，天下初定，公卿皆军吏。苍为计相时，绪正律历。
现代文：汉朝建立二十多年，天下刚刚平定，公卿官吏都是军官，张苍任计相时，绪正历法。
English: The Han Dynasty had been established for more than 20 years, the country had just been pacified, and the nobles and officials were all military officers. Zhang Cangren was in charge of calculating the phase of the moon, and he was the founder of the Gregorian calendar.

古文：以高祖十月始至霸上，故因秦时本十月为岁首，不革。
现代文：由于高祖十月到达霸上，所以继续使用秦时十月为岁首的历法，不加变更。
English: Since Gaozhu arrived at the Hegemony in October, he continued to use the calendar of Qin Dynasty with October as the beginning of the year, without any change.

古文：推五德之运，以为汉当水德之时，上黑如故。
现代文：推算五行运转，认为漠处在水德之际，崇尚黑色，和秦朝一样。
English: Estimating the operation of the five elements, it is believed that the desert is at the time of water virtue, advocating black, just like the Qin Dynasty.

古文：吹律调乐，入之音声，及以比定律令。
现代文：调整律管乐声，定下乐律，制定法律、条令。
English: Zhang Cang also played the melody pipe, adjusted the melody to make it fit into five voices and eight tones, and deduced others from this to formulate the melody.

古文：若百工，天下作程品。
现代文：就像工匠度量标准，定出制作器具的规矩。
English: And from this, the measurement standards for various utensils were developed to serve as the standard for all craftsmen in the world.

古文：至于为丞相，卒就之。故汉家言律历者本张苍。
现代文：最后官至丞相之位。因此，汉朝讲律历者都以张苍为标准。
English: He was the last official to reach the position of chancellor. Therefore, the Han Dynasty scholars of the Ritsuryo calendar all used Zhang Cang as the standard.

古文：苍凡好书，无所不观，无所不通，而尤邃律历。
现代文：张苍喜好图书，没有不阅读的，也无所不通，尤其精通音律历法。
English: Zhang Cang likes books, does not read, and is well-versed in everything, especially in the phonological calendar.

古文：苍德安国侯王陵，及贵，父事陵。
现代文：张苍为感激安国侯王陵救命之恩，到显贵之后，把王陵当父亲一样侍奉。
English: Zhang Cang was grateful for the grace of saving the life of Wang Ling, the Prince of An Province, and after he became a dignitary, he served Wang Ling like a father.

古文：陵死后，苍为丞相，洗沐，常先朝陵夫人上食，然后敢归家。
现代文：王陵去世以后，张苍任丞相，休假的时候，常常先去看望陵夫人，并侍奉其吃饭，然后才回家。
English: After Wang Ling's death, Zhang Cang served as chancellor. When he was on vacation, he would often visit Mrs. Ling first and serve her dinner before returning home.

古文：苍为丞相十余年，鲁人公孙臣上书，陈终始五德传，言 汉土德时，其符黄龙见，当改正朔，易服色 。
现代文：张苍为丞相十余年，鲁国人公孙臣上书，陈述五行终始传递次序，说汉当上德之时，应该与黄龙出现相兆应，应该更改一年开始的月份，改换祭祀服装颜色。
English: After Zhang Cang had been chancellor for more than ten years, Sun Qian, a citizen of the State of Lu, submitted a letter, stating the order of transmission of the five elements from beginning to end, saying that when Han became emperor, it should coincide with the appearance of the Yellow Dragon, the month at the beginning of the year should be changed, and the color of the sacrificial clothing should be changed.

古文：事下苍，苍以为非是，罢之。
现代文：事情交由张苍处理，张苍以为不对，废止不办。
English: The matter was handed over to Zhang Cang to deal with. Zhang Cang thought it was wrong and refused to cancel it.

古文：其后黄龙见成纪，于是文帝召公孙臣以为博士，草立土德时历制度，更元年。
现代文：后来，黄龙在成纪出现，于是文帝召公孙臣为博士，草立土德、历法制度，改元年。
English: Later, Huanglong appeared in Chengji, so Emperor Wen summoned Gongsun Zhen as a doctor to draft the local ethics and calendar system, and changed the first year of the year.

古文：苍由此自绌，谢病称老。苍任人为中候，大为奸利，上以为让，苍遂病免。
现代文：张苍由此自贬，声称年老有病，张苍保举了一个中候官，大行奸邪谋利之事，皇上责备张苍，张苍于是因病免官。
English: As a result, Zhang Cang belittled himself, claiming that he was old and ill. Zhang Cang Bao promoted him to a middle-ranking official, and the emperor rebuked Zhang Cang for conspiring evil and seeking profit. Zhang Cang was then removed from his post due to illness.

古文：孝景五年薨，谥曰文侯。
现代文：孝景五年去世，谧号文侯。
English: Five years after the death of Xiao Jing, his posthumous name was changed to Wen Hou.

古文：传子至孙类，有罪，国除。
现代文：侯位传子直至孙张类，因犯罪，废除侯国。
English: The descendants of the prince-electors, up to the time of Sun Zhang, abolished the prince-electorates because of their crimes.

古文：初苍父长不满五尺，苍长八尺余，苍子复长八尺，及孙类长六尺余。
现代文：当初，张苍的父亲身高不满五尺。张苍身高八尺，张苍的孩子又是身高八尺，到他的孙子张类时身高六尺多。
English: At first, Zhang Cang's father was less than five feet tall. Zhang Cang was eight feet tall, Zhang Cang's child was eight feet tall, and his grandson Zhang Rui was more than six feet tall.

古文：苍免相后，口中无齿，食乳，女子为乳母。
现代文：张苍免相位后，口中牙齿已经没有了，吃人乳，让妇女为乳母。
English: After Zhang Cang was released from the phase, the teeth in his mouth were no longer there, he ate human milk, and let women be nannies.

古文：妻妾以百数，尝孕者不复幸。
现代文：妻妾成群，凡是怀孕了的就不再受宠爱。
English: His wives and concubines are numerous, numbering around a hundred, and anyone who has been pregnant and given birth is no longer favored.

古文：年百余岁乃卒。
现代文：活了一百岁左右才去世。
English: He lived for about a hundred years before he died.

古文：著书十八篇，言阴阳律历事。
现代文：著书十八篇，讲述阴阳、音律、历法之事。
English: He has written eighteen books on yin and yang, music, and the calendar.

古文：申屠嘉，梁人也。
现代文：申屠嘉，梁人。
English: Shen Tuo Jia, Liang Ren.

古文：以材官蹶张从高帝击项籍，迁为队率。
现代文：以强壮弓弩手身份随从高童攻打堕型，后升为一队之长。
English: As a strong archer, he followed the high school children to attack the fallen type, and later became the leader of the first team.

古文：从击黥布，为都尉。
现代文：随从高帝攻打黥布，任部尉。
English: He followed Gao Di to attack Zibo and was appointed as a lieutenant.

古文：孝惠时，为淮阳守。
现代文：孝惠帝时，任淮阳郡守。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xiao Hui, he was promoted to Huaiyang County Governor.

古文：孝文元年，举故以二千石从高祖者，悉以为关内侯，食邑二十四人，而嘉食邑五百户。
现代文：孝文元年，推举原来二千石级官员跟随高帝出征的人。全部赐爵关内侯，受封者食邑二十四人，而申屠塞食邑五百户。
English: In the first year of Xiaowen, the officials of the original 2,000-koku class who followed Gao Di to go to war were elected. All of them were given the title of Guan Nei Hou, and those who received the title were 24 households, while 500 households in Shen Tu Ce were given the title.

古文：十六年，迁为御史大夫。
现代文：十六年，升为御史大夫。
English: Sixteen years later, he was promoted to chief historian.

古文：张苍免相，文帝以皇后弟窦广国贤有行，欲相之，曰： 恐天下以吾私广国。 
现代文：张苍被免去丞相职务之后，文帝因为皇后弟宝广国有贤德品行，打算任为丞相，又说： 恐怕天下人说我以私亲偏向广国。 
English: After Zhang Cang was removed from the post of chancellor, Emperor Wen, because the empress's younger brother Bao Guangguo had a virtuous character, planned to appoint him as chancellor, and said: I am afraid that the world will say that I am biased towards Guangguo.

古文：久念不可，而高帝时大臣余见无可者，乃以御史大夫嘉为丞相，因故邑封为故安侯。
现代文：考虑很久认为不可，而高帝时健在的大臣没有人可以担任，于是任命御史大夫申屠嘉为丞相，用他原食邑之名封为故安堡。
English: He considered for a long time that it was impossible, and there was no minister alive at the time of Emperor Gao who could serve, so he appointed the Imperial Historian Shen Tu Jia as the prime minister, and used his title of the original food town as the former Anburg.

古文：嘉为人廉直，门不受私谒。
现代文：申屠嘉品质廉洁正直，在家中不接受私人拜访。
English: Shen Tu Jia is a person of integrity and honesty, and does not accept personal visits at home.

古文：是时，太中大夫邓通方爱幸，赏赐累巨万。
现代文：当时太中大夫邓通正受宠爱，赏赐累积上亿钱。
English: At that time, Taichung's Dr. Deng Tong was the favorite and was rewarded with hundreds of millions of dollars.

古文：文帝常燕饮通家，其宠如是。
现代文：文帝常在闲暇的时候去邓通家饮酒，受宠如此深厚。
English: Emperor Wen often went to Deng Tong's house to drink alcohol in his spare time, and he was so deeply favored.

古文：是时，嘉入朝而通居上旁，有怠慢之礼。
现代文：这寺申屠嘉入朝，邓通常居皇上旁边，有怠慢失礼之状。
English: This temple is said to have been built when Emperor Shen Tuo entered the imperial court, and Deng usually stayed next to the emperor, which is a form of negligence and disrespect.

古文：嘉奏事毕，因言曰： 陛下幸爱群臣则富贵之，至于朝廷之礼，不可以不肃！ 
现代文：申屠嘉一卜奏完毕，随即说道： 陛下宠爱群臣便让他们富贵，至于朝廷礼仪，不可以不严肃! 
English: After Shen Tu Jia finished playing, he immediately said: His Majesty favors the courtiers and makes them rich, as for the court etiquette, it must be serious!

古文：上曰： 君勿言，吾私之。 
现代文：皇上说： 您不要说了，我私下告诫他。 
English: The emperor said, "Please don't say any more, I just prefer Deng Tong."

古文：罢朝坐府中，嘉为檄召通诣丞相府，不来，且斩通。
现代文：退朝后，申屠嘉坐在丞相府，亲自写下檄文召邓通来府，不来的话，立即处斩邓通。
English: After retiring, Shen Tu Jia sat in the prime minister's office and personally wrote down a letter to call Duntong to come to the office. If he did not come, Duntong would be immediately executed.

古文：通恐，入言上。
现代文：邓通恐惧，入朝告诉皂上。
English: Dunton fear, into the morning to tell the soap opera.

古文：上曰： 汝第往，吾今使人召若。 
现代文：皇上说： 你衹管去，我马上派人召你出来。 
English: The emperor said, "Go ahead, I'll send someone to call you out."

古文：通至丞相府，免冠，徒跣，顿首谢嘉。
现代文：邓通到了丞相府，脱帽赤脚，叩头向申屠嘉谢罪。
English: Deng Tong arrived at the prime minister's office, took off his hat and bare feet, and bowed to Shen Tu Jia Xie.

古文：嘉坐自如，弗为礼，责曰： 夫朝廷者，高皇帝之朝廷也，通小臣，戏殿上，大不敬，当斩。
现代文：申屠嘉照常坐定自如，没有行待客之礼，斥贞说： 朝廷这个地方，是高皇帝的朝廷，塑迪一个小臣，嬉戏殿上，是最大的不敬，应当斩首。
English: Shen Tu Jia, as usual, sat at ease, did not bow to the guests, and rebuked Zhen, saying: This place of the imperial court is the imperial court of Emperor Gao, Shoudi is a vassal, playing in the palace is the greatest disrespect, and should be beheaded.

古文：史今行斩之！ 
现代文：丞相史去执行斩刑! 
English: Prime Minister Joseph Go to carry out the beheading!

古文：通顿首，首尽出血，不解。
现代文：邓通叩头，头部都流出鲜血，仍然没有停来。
English: Dang Tong bowed his head, blood streamed from his head, but Shen Tu Jia still did not say that he would spare him.

古文：上度丞相已困通，使使持节召通，而谢丞相： 此语弄臣，君释之。 
现代文：皇上估计丞相已经惩罚了邓通，便派使臣手持符节召回邓通，向丞相致谢，说： 这个人是我的戏弄之臣，您放了他吧。 
English: The emperor estimated that the prime minister had already punished Dunton, so he sent an envoy to recall Dunton, holding a rune, to thank the prime minister, saying: This man is my teasing minister, you can let him go.

古文：邓通既至，为上泣曰： 丞相几杀臣。 
现代文：邓通到了殿上，向皇上哭泣，说： 丞相差一点杀了臣。 
English: When Duntong arrived at the palace, he cried to the emperor and said, "The prime minister almost killed the minister."

古文：嘉为丞相五岁，文帝崩，孝景即位。
现代文：申屠嘉任丞相五年，文帝驾崩，景帝即位。
English: Shen Tuo Jia served as chancellor for five years, Emperor Wen passed away, and Emperor Jing ascended to the throne.

古文：二年，晁错为内史，贵幸用事，诸法令多所请变更，议以適罚侵削诸侯，而丞相嘉自绌所言不用，疾错。
现代文：第二年，晁错任内史，被皂上赏识受到重用，他提议改变了许多项法令，又建议处罚削弱诸侯势力。然而丞相申屠嘉却自行贬退，讲的话也不被采纳，十分痛恨晁错。
English: In the second year, he proposed to change many laws and decrees, and also proposed to punish and weaken the power of the princes. However, the prime minister, Shen Tu Jia, declined on his own, and his words were not accepted, and he hated him very much.

古文：错为内史，门东出，不便，更穿一门，南出。
现代文：晁错任内史，出入东门，有所不便，就另开一门，从南面出入。
English: If it is inconvenient to enter or leave the east gate, open another gate and enter from the south.

古文：南出者，太上皇庙堧垣也。
现代文：从南面出入，正经太上皇庙内墙之外、外墙之内的空地。
English: It enters and exits from the south, passing through the open space inside the outer wall and outside the inner wall of the Imperial Palace.

古文：嘉闻错穿宗庙垣，为奏请诛错。
现代文：申屠嘉听说晁错穿过宗庙墙，准备奏请杀晁错。
English: Shen Tu Jia had heard that the dragonfly had passed through the wall of the ancestral temple, and was preparing to play the song "Kill the Dragonfly."

古文：客有语错，错恐，夜入宫上谒，自归上。
现代文：有宾客提前告诉了晁错，晁错恐惧，深夜入宫进见皇上，主动向皇上认罪。
English: A guest told the emperor in advance about his mistake, his fear of making a mistake, entered the palace late at night to see the emperor, and took the initiative to confess to the emperor.

古文：至朝，嘉请诛内史错。
现代文：第二天上朝，申屠嘉奏请杀内史晁错。
English: In the morning of the next day, Shen Tuo and Jia Suo requested to kill Neishi.

古文：上曰： 错所穿非真庙垣，乃外堧垣，故冗官居其中，且又我使为之，错无罪。 
现代文：皇上说： 晁错打开的不是真的庙墙，是内墙之外的外墙，因此散官可以居住其中，何况又是我让他这样做，晁错无罪。 
English: The emperor said, "It was not the real temple wall that was opened by mistake, it was the outer wall outside the inner wall, so the officials could live in it. Besides, I let him do it. The mistake is not a crime."

古文：罢朝，嘉谓长史曰： 吾悔不先斩错乃请之，为错所卖！ 
现代文：退朝后，申屠嘉对长史说： 我后悔何不先斩后奏，反被晁错出卖。 
English: After retiring from the imperial court, Shen Tuo Jia said to Changshi: "I regret that I didn't make the first move, but was betrayed by Zou.

古文：至舍，因呕血而死。
现代文：回到家中，就吐血而死。
English: When he got home, he vomited blood and died.

古文：谥曰节侯。
现代文：谧号节侯。
English: 号节侯.

古文：传子至孙臾，有罪，国除。
现代文：侯爵传到儿子，到孙申屠臾，因犯罪废除了爵位封地。
English: The marquis passed down to his son, to Sun Shen Tuoqi, who abolished the title of nobility and the fief due to crime.

古文：自嘉死后，开封侯陶青、桃侯刘舍及武帝时柏至侯许昌、平棘侯薛泽、武强侯庄青翟、商陵侯赵周，皆以列侯继踵，齿齿廉谨，为丞相备员而已，无所能发明功名著于世者。
现代文：自从申屠嘉死后，开封侯陶青、桃侯刘舍及武帝时柏至侯许昌、平棘侯薛泽、武彊侯庄青翟、商陵侯赵周，都以列侯的身份继任丞相，他们严肃、廉洁、谨慎，但仅仅是充数的丞相人员而已，没有什么发明建树称着于世的。
English: Since the death of Shen Tu Jia, Kaifeng Hou Tao Qing, Tao Hou Liu She and Emperor Wu Shi Bai to Hou Xu Chang, Pingxiao Hou Xue Ze, Wuzhong Hou Zhuang Qingqi, Shangling Hou Zhao Zhou, have all succeeded to the post of prime minister as vassals of the prince. They are serious, honest and prudent, but they are only a sufficient number of prime ministers. There are no inventions that are famous in the world.

古文：赞曰：张苍文好律历，为汉名相，而专遵用奉之《颛顼历》，何哉？
现代文：赞曰：张苍表面上喜欢历法，成了汉朝名相，然而只推重奎朝的《颛顼历》，为什么呢？
English: Zhang Cang liked the calendar on the surface and became a famous figure of the Han Dynasty. However, he only emphasized the "Diamond Calendar" of the Qui Dynasty. Why?

古文：周昌，木强人也。
现代文：旦旦，坚强正直如木石。
English: Dan Dan, strong and honest as a rock.

古文：任敖以旧德用。
现代文：鱼遨因保护旦丘的旧恩见用。
English: However, his appointment was made possible by the fact that he had been kind to Lü Guo in the past.

古文：申屠嘉可谓刚毅守节，然无术学，殆与萧、曹、陈平异矣。
现代文：申屠嘉可以说是刚毅守节操，然而不学无术，见识不如盖何、姜参、速垩等人。
English: Shen Tu Jia can be said to be a man of fortitude and discipline, but he has not learned any skills, and his knowledge is not as good as that of Ge He, Jiang Zhen, and Hao Yao.

