古文：吴山陆树声瞿景淳田一俊黄凤翔余继登冯琦王图翁正春刘应秋唐文献李腾芳蔡毅中公鼐罗喻义姚希孟许士柔顾锡畴吴山，字曰静，高安人。
现代文：吴山，字曰静，高安人。
English: Wushan, the word is Jing, Gaoan people.

古文：嘉靖十四年进士及第，授编修。
现代文：嘉靖十四年进士及第，初任编修。
English: He entered the priesthood in the 14th year of the Jiajing Dynasty and became the first editor-in-chief.

古文：累官礼部左侍郎。
现代文：经多次提升后做了礼部左侍郎。
English: After several promotions, he became the left attendant of the ceremonial department.

古文：三十五年，改吏部。
现代文：三十五年，改任吏部职。
English: Thirty-five years later, he was transferred to the position of librarian.

古文：寻代王用宾为礼部尚书。
现代文：不久取代王用宾担任礼部尚书。
English: He soon replaced Wang Yibin as the head of the etiquette department.

古文：明年，加太子太保。
现代文：第二年加官为太子太保。
English: The next year, he was promoted to Crown Prince Taibo.

古文：山与严嵩乡里。
现代文：吴山与严嵩是同乡。
English: Wushan is Yan Song's hometown.

古文：嵩子世蕃介大学士李本饮山，欲与为婚姻。
现代文：严嵩的儿子严世蕃通过大学士李本与吴山饮酒，想与吴山结为姻亲。
English: Yan Shiyan, the son of Yan Song, drank alcohol with Wu Shan through Li Ben, a university scholar, and wanted to marry Wu Shan.

古文：山不可，世蕃不悦而罢。
现代文：吴山不同意，严世蕃不高兴而作罢。
English: Wushan disagreed, and Yan Shixuan was not happy and gave up.

古文：帝欲用山内阁，嵩密阻之。
现代文：世宗想任用吴山为内阁大臣，严嵩暗加阻挠。
English: Sejong wanted to appoint Wu Shan as a cabinet minister, but Yan Song secretly obstructed him.

古文：府丞朱隆禧者，考察罢官，献方术，得加礼部侍郎。
现代文：府丞朱隆禧，考察后被罢官，他贡献方术，又被加封为礼部侍郎。
English: The prefectural chancellor, Zhu Rongxi, was removed from his post after the inspection. He contributed to the art of strategy, and was also appointed as a ceremonial attendant.

古文：及卒请恤，山执不与。
现代文：死后向朝廷请求抚恤，吴山坚决不给。
English: After his death, he asked the imperial court for a pension, but Wu Shan resolutely refused to give it.

古文：裕、景二邸并建，国本未定。
现代文：裕、景两座王府一起兴建，太子还没确定。
English: Yu and Jing built two royal residences together, but the prince has not yet been determined.

古文：三十九年冬，帝忽谕礼部，具景王之藩仪。
现代文：嘉靖三十九年冬天，世宗忽然告诉礼部，陈述景王的藩仪。
English: In the winter of the 39th year of Jiajing, Shizong suddenly told the ritual department to recite the ritual of King Jing.

古文：嵩知帝激于郭希颜疏，欲觇人心，讽山留王。
现代文：严嵩知道皇帝是因郭希颜的奏疏而激动，想观察一下人心，暗示吴山挽留景王。
English: Yan Song knew that the emperor was excited by Guo Xiyan's poor performance and wanted to observe people's hearts, suggesting that Wushan retain King Jing.

古文：山曰： 中外望此久矣 ，立具仪以奏，王竟之藩。
现代文：吴山称 ，全国对此盼望已久 ，立即详细订好礼仪规格交了上去，景王最终到达藩地。
English: Wu Shan said that the whole country has been looking forward to this for a long time, immediately ordered the etiquette specifications in detail and handed them over, and King Jing finally arrived at the domain.

古文：司礼监黄锦尝窃语山曰： 公他日得为编氓幸矣；王之藩，非帝意也。 
现代文：司礼监黄锦曾偷偷对吴山说 ：您以后能做编氓就是幸事；景王前往藩地，不是皇帝的心意。 
English: The ceremonial supervisor Huang Jin once secretly said to Wu Shan: "It is a blessing that you can be a gangster in the future; it is not the emperor's intention for King Jing to go to the domain.

古文：明年二月朔，日当食，微阴。
现代文：第二年二月初一，正有日蚀，微微阴暗。
English: On the first day of February of the following year, there was a solar eclipse, and it was slightly gloomy.

古文：历官言： 日食不见，即同不食。 
现代文：历官称： 看不到日蚀，就如同没有日蚀。 
English: Officials said: "If you can't see the eclipse, it's like there's no eclipse."

古文：嵩以为天眷，趣部急上贺，侍郎袁炜亦为言。
现代文：严嵩认为是上天对本朝廷的钟爱，催促礼部赶紧祝贺皇帝，侍郎袁炜也这么认为。
English: Yan Song thought that it was God's love for this imperial court, and urged the ceremonial department to congratulate the emperor as soon as possible. His attendant Yuan Xi also thought so.

古文：山仰首曰： 日方亏，将谁欺耶？ 
现代文：吴山仰首高呼 ：太阳刚刚虚亏，将欺骗谁呢？ 
English: Wu Shan raised his head and shouted: The sun has just lost money, who will it deceive?

古文：仍救护如常仪。
现代文：仍然恭谦地维护正常的礼仪。
English: Still respectfully maintaining proper etiquette.

古文：帝大怒，山引罪。
现代文：世宗大为恼怒，吴山认罪。
English: Sejong was very angry, and Wushan pleaded guilty.

古文：帝谓山守礼无罪，而责礼科对状。
现代文：世宗称吴山维护礼制没有罪过，却指责礼科的奏章。
English: Shizong said that Wushan was not guilty of upholding the etiquette, but criticized the etiquette of the song.

古文：给事中李东华等震惧，劾山，请与同罪。
现代文：给事中李东华等人震惊、惧怕，弹劾吴山，请求与他一起治罪。
English: During the incident, Li Donghua and others were shocked and afraid, impeached Wu Shan, and asked to be punished together with him.

古文：帝乃责山卖直沽名，停东华俸。
现代文：于是皇帝指责吴山故作正直，沽取名利，停止了李东华的俸禄。
English: As a result, the emperor accused Wu Shan of pretending to be honest and taking advantage of fame and fortune, and stopped Li Donghua's salary.

古文：嵩言罪在部臣。
现代文：严嵩称这是部臣的罪过。
English: Yan Song said that this was the fault of his subordinates.

古文：帝乃贳东华等，命姑识山罪。
现代文：世宗赦免了李东华等人，命令暂且记着吴山的罪过。
English: Shizong pardoned Li Donghua and others and ordered that Wu Shan's sins be temporarily remembered.

古文：吏科梁梦龙等见帝怒山甚，又恶专劾山，乃并吏部尚书吴鹏劾之。
现代文：吏科梁梦龙等人看到皇帝很恼怒吴山，又不满足于专门弹劾吴山，于是连同吏部尚书吴鹏一起弹劾。
English: Liang Menglong and others saw that the emperor was very angry with Wushan and was not satisfied with just impeaching Wushan, so they impeached him together with Shangshu Wu Peng, the head of the personnel department.

古文：诏鹏致仕，山冠带闲住。
现代文：诏令吴鹏退职，吴山以官员身份休闲。
English: The emperor ordered Wu Peng to retire and Wu Shan to take a rest as an official.

古文：时皆惜山而深快鹏之去。
现代文：当时人都惋惜吴山却为吴鹏的离去深感痛快。
English: At that time, people felt sorry for Wu Shan, but felt deeply happy for Wu Peng's departure.

古文：穆宗即位，召为南京礼部尚书，坚辞不赴，卒，赠少保，谥文端。
现代文：穆宗即位，召见他任命为南京礼部尚书，他坚决推辞不上任。去世后，追赠少保，谥号文端。
English: When Mu Zong ascended to the throne, he was summoned to be appointed as the head of the Nanjing Ceremonial Department, but he resolutely refused to take up the post. After his death, he was posthumously awarded the title of Junior Protector, and his posthumous name was Monduan.

古文：陆树声，字与吉，松江华亭人。
现代文：陆树声，字与吉，松江华亭人。
English: Lu Shusheng, Zi Youji, Songjiang Huating.

古文：初冒林姓，及贵乃复。
现代文：最初冒用林姓，当官后才恢复陆姓。
English: He initially assumed the surname Lin, but changed it back to Lu after he became an official.

古文：家世业农。
现代文：家人世代务农。
English: Family members have been farming for generations.

古文：树声少力田，暇即读书。
现代文：陆树声少年时躬耕田亩，闲暇就读书。
English: When Lu Shusheng was a boy, he worked hard to cultivate acres of land, and read books in his spare time.

古文：举嘉靖二十年会试第一。
现代文：嘉靖二十年会试，他考取第一名。
English: Jiajing twenty years of the exam, he won the first place.

古文：选庶吉士，授编修。
现代文：挑选任庶吉士，授职为编修。
English: He was selected to be appointed to the post of deputy editor, and the post of editor was conferred on him.

古文：三十一年，请急归。
现代文：三十一年，遭遇父亲的丧事，请求立即回乡。
English: At the age of thirty-one, after the death of his father, he asked to return to his hometown immediately.

古文：遭父丧，久之，起南京司业。未几，复请告去。
现代文：很久之后启用任南京司业。不久，又请求辞官。
English: After a long time, he was appointed to the post of Nanjing Division. Soon, he asked to resign.

古文：起左谕德，掌南京翰林院。
现代文：再启用为左谕德，负责南京翰林院。
English: Later, he was put in charge of the Nanjing Hanlin Academy.

古文：寻召还春坊，不赴。
现代文：不久，诏令他返回京师春坊教育太子，不赴任。
English: Soon after, he was ordered by the emperor to return to Beijing Shunfang to educate the crown prince, but he did not take up the post.

古文：久之，起太常卿，掌南京祭酒事。
现代文：很久之后，又启用他为太常卿，负责南京国子监的祭酒事务。
English: A long time later, he was appointed to the position of Tai Changqing, in charge of the sacrificial wine affairs of Nanjing Guozijian.

古文：严敕学规，著条教十二以励诸生。
现代文：他严格学规，撰写了十二条教规以便激励诸生。
English: He was a strict disciplinarian and wrote the 12 precepts in order to inspire sentient beings.

古文：召为吏部右侍郎，引病不拜。
现代文：朝廷召他为吏部右侍郎，他称病不上任。
English: The imperial court called him to be the right hand man of the administrative department, but he said that he was ill and would not take up the post.

古文：隆庆中，再起故官，不就。
现代文：隆庆年间，再次启用任原来的官职，不就职。
English: During the Longqing era, he was reinstated in his former official position, but did not take office.

古文：神宗嗣位，即家拜礼部尚书。
现代文：神宗即位，派人到他家中封他为礼部尚书。
English: When Shinshu ascended the throne, he sent someone to his home to make him the head of the etiquette department.

古文：初，树声屡辞朝命，中外高其风节。
现代文：起初，陆树声屡次推辞朝廷的委任，朝廷内外都认为他的风节很高。
English: At first, Lu Shuxuan repeatedly refused to be appointed by the imperial court. Both inside and outside the imperial court, he was considered to be very popular.

古文：遇要职，必首举树声，唯恐其不至。
现代文：遇上重要的职位，必定首先举荐陆树声，唯恐他不到任。
English: In the event of an important position, Lu Shuxing must be recommended first, lest he not be appointed.

古文：张居正当国，以得树声为重，用后进礼先谒之。
现代文：张居正主持国政，以得到陆树声的辅佐为重，以后生拜见先生的礼节拜见他。
English: Zhang Jiusheng presided over state affairs, with the emphasis on getting the assistance of Lu Shusheng. Later, he was greeted with the etiquette of a gentleman.

古文：树声相对穆然，意若不甚接者，居正失望去。
现代文：陆树声严肃地接待了张居正，好像不肯接受，张居正失望而去。
English: Lu Shuxing received Zhang Juzheng solemnly, but he seemed unwilling to accept, and Zhang Juzheng left disappointed.

古文：一日，以公事诣政府。见席稍偏，熟视不就坐，居正趣为正席。
现代文：一天，他因公事到内阁中去，看见座位稍稍偏斜，他盯了很久而不就座，张居正赶紧替他扶正座位。
English: One day, he went to the cabinet for business and saw that the seat was slightly tilted. He stared for a long time and did not sit down. Zhang Ju was rushing to straighten the seat for him.

古文：其介介如此。
现代文：他的性格就是这样耿直。
English: That's just the way he is.

古文：北部要增岁币，兵部将许之，树声力争。
现代文：北部要增加岁币，兵部将要应允，陆树声极力争辩。
English: The north wants to increase the annual allowance, the military will agree, and the voices of the land and trees will vigorously argue.

古文：岁终，陈四方灾异，请帝循旧章，省奏牍，慎赏赉，防壅蔽，纳谠言，崇俭德，揽魁柄，别忠邪。
现代文：年终，陈述四方的灾情，请求皇帝遵循旧章，察看奏书文牍，慎重赏赐，防止被人蒙蔽，采纳正直的劝谏，推崇节俭，总揽权柄，识别忠良邪恶。
English: At the end of the year, state the disaster situation of the four sides, and request the emperor to follow the old chapter, inspect the record, carefully reward, prevent being blinded by others, adopt honest advice, promote thrift, seize power in general, and identify good and evil.

古文：诏皆嘉纳。
现代文：诏令全部接受。
English: The edict was accepted in its entirety.

古文：万历改元，中官不乐树声，屡宣诣会极门受旨，且频趣之。
现代文：万历改换年号，宦官对陆树声不满，屡次召他到会极门接受圣旨，并不断催促他。
English: When the calendar was changed, the eunuchs were dissatisfied with Lu Shuxuan's voice and repeatedly summoned him to the Great Gate to accept the edict, and constantly urged him.

古文：比趋至，则曹司常事耳。
现代文：等他到了那里，却尽是些寻常的事。
English: When he gets there, it's all business as usual.

古文：树声知其意，连疏乞休。
现代文：陆树声知道他们的心思，接连上奏请求退休。
English: Lu Shusheng knew their thoughts, and successively asked them to retire.

古文：居正语其弟树德曰： 朝廷行相平泉矣。 
现代文：张居正对他的弟弟陆树德说 ：朝廷将让平泉为相臣。 
English: Zhang Juzheng said to his brother Lu Shude: The imperial court will make Hiraizumi a minister.

古文：平泉者，树声别号也。
现代文：平泉，是陆树声的别号。
English: Hiraizumi is another name for the sound of the land and trees.

古文：树声闻之曰： 一史官，去国二十年，岂复希揆席耶？
现代文：陆树声听说后称 ：一名史官，脱离国政二十年，难道还希求宰相之位吗？
English: After hearing Lu Shuxin's voice, he said: A historian who has been out of national politics for twenty years, does he still hope to become prime minister?

古文：且虚拘何益。 
现代文：拘泥虚名有何益。 
English: There is no benefit in sticking to a false name.

古文：其冬，请愈力，乃命乘传归。
现代文：当年冬天更是执意请求回乡，于是指令他乘坐驿车回乡。
English: In the winter of that year, he was even more adamant in his request to return to his hometown, so he ordered him to take a tuk-tuk back to his hometown.

古文：辞朝，陈时政十事，语多切中，报闻而已。
现代文：辞别的时候，陈述了十件时政。话语大多很中肯，神宗答复知道了。
English: At the time of his departure, he stated ten current affairs. Most of the words were very pertinent, and Shinshu's reply was known.

古文：居正就邸舍与别，问谁可代者。
现代文：张居正到邸舍与他告别，询问谁能替代他。
English: Zhang Ju is going to the mansion to say goodbye to him and ask who can replace him.

古文：举万士和、林燫。
现代文：他推举万士和、林火廉。
English: He is a man of peace and a man of peace.

古文：比出国门，士大夫倾城追送，皆谢不见。
现代文：当他离开京都城门，士大夫们倾城追送，他都谢绝不见。
English: When he left the gates of Kyoto, the scholars and doctors followed him to the city, but he was nowhere to be seen.

古文：树声端介恬雅，翛然物表，难进易退。
现代文：陆树声品行端正耿介恬雅，洒脱，一表人材，难于进用而易于退职。
English: Lu Shu's voice and behavior are upright, Geng Jie is elegant, easy-going, and a first-class talent. He is difficult to employ and easy to retire.

古文：通籍六十余年，居官未及一纪。
现代文：在官籍六十多年，却没做到十二年的官。
English: He has been an official for more than 60 years, but has not been an official for more than 12 years.

古文：与徐阶同里，高拱则同年生。
现代文：与徐阶是同乡，与高拱同年出生。
English: He was born in the same year as Gao Gong.

古文：树声诫毋就馆选，随以行人终养。
现代文：他们两人相继主持国政，他都称病不出任官职。受张居正推举，也始终没有依附他。
English: Both of them successively presided over state affairs, and he said that he was ill and would not take office. He was elected by Zhang Jiusheng, and he never depended on him.

古文：诏给月俸，异数也。
现代文：回乡后，依然按定制供粮薪，加封他为太子少保，一再派人问候。
English: After returning to his hometown, he still provided grain and salary according to custom, sealed him as a minor prince, and repeatedly sent greetings.

古文：树声年九十七卒。
现代文：陆树声终年九十七岁。
English: Lu Shusheng is ninety-seven years old.

古文：赠太子太保。谥文定。
现代文：追赠太子太保，谥号文定。
English: He was posthumously given the title of Prince Taibo and the posthumous name of Wenzing.

古文：彦章有节概，官至南京刑部侍郎。瞿景淳，字师道，常熟人。
现代文：瞿景淳，字师道，常熟人。
English: Gongjing Jun, a calligrapher, is a frequent acquaintance.

古文：八岁能属文。
现代文：八岁就能做文章。
English: An eight-year-old can write an article.

古文：久困诸生间，教授里中自给。
现代文：长期困于诸生之中，靠在乡里教授为生。
English: For a long time, he was trapped in the midst of the living, and made a living by teaching in the countryside.

古文：嘉靖二十三年，举会试第一，殿试第二，授编修。
现代文：嘉靖二十三年，考取会试第一名，殿试第二名，授职为编修。
English: In the 23rd year of Jiajing, he won the first place in the entrance examination and the second place in the hall examination, and was awarded the post of editor.

古文：郑王厚烷以言事废，徙凤阳。
现代文：郑王厚烷因为议论事务被废黜，迁居凤阳。
English: Zheng Wang Houxuan was deposed because of controversial affairs and moved to Fengyang.

古文：景淳奉敕封其子载堉为世子，摄国事。
现代文：瞿景淳奉敕令加封郑王的儿子载培为世子，负责封国事务。
English: By the order of Gongjing Jun, King Zheng's son Zhaopei was made the heir to the throne, and he was responsible for sealing the country.

古文：世子内惧，赆重币，景淳却之。
现代文：世子内心惧怕，赠送给景淳大量钱财，瞿景淳推辞了。
English: The godson was afraid in his heart and gave a large amount of money to Jing Jun, but Jing Jun refused it.

古文：时恭顺侯吴继爵为正使，已受币，惭景淳，亦谢不纳。
现代文：当时恭顺侯吴继爵任正使，已经收受钱财，因景淳而自感惭愧，也推辞不接受。
English: At that time, Gongshun Ren Zheng, the successor of Lord Wu, had already received money and felt ashamed because of Jing Chun, and did not accept his resignation.

古文：既而语景淳曰： 上遣使密诇状，微公，吾几中法。 
现代文：不久对景淳说 ：皇上派使者秘密侦察，如果不是您，我差点中计。 
English: He soon said to Kagejun, "The Emperor sent an envoy to secretly investigate. If it wasn't for you, I almost got caught up in the plot."

古文：满九载，迁侍读，请急归。
现代文：满九年考绩，升为侍读，他请求马上回乡。
English: After nine years of performance evaluation, he was promoted to attendant, and he asked to return to his hometown immediately.

古文：江南久苦倭，总督胡宗宪师未捷。
现代文：江南长期苦于倭祸，总督胡宗宪出师未捷。
English: Jiangnan has long suffered from the Japanese disaster, and Governor Hu Zongxian has not been successful.

古文：景淳还京，谒大学士严嵩。
现代文：瞿景淳返回京城，拜见大学士严嵩。
English: He returned to Beijing to visit Yan Song, a university scholar.

古文：嵩语之曰： 倭旦夕且平。
现代文：严嵩对他说 ：倭寇旦夕间就能平息。
English: Yan Song said to him, "The Japanese invaders can be pacified in the evening."

古文：胡总督才足办，南中人短之，何也？ 
现代文：胡总督的才干足以胜任，南方的人看不起他，为什么？ 
English: Governor Hu is talented enough to be competent. People in the south look down on him. Why?

古文：景淳正色曰： 相公遥度之耳。
现代文：瞿景淳严肃地回答： 相公是遥作猜度。
English: Gongjing Jun replied solemnly: The match is a remote guess.

古文：景淳自南来，目睹倭患。
现代文：景淳从南方来，目睹倭患。
English: Jing Jun came from the south to witness the disaster.

古文：胡君坐拥十万师，南中人不得一安枕卧。
现代文：胡君拥有十万人的部队，南方人得不到一夜的安睡。
English: Hu Jun has a hundred thousand troops, and the people in the south can't get a good night's sleep.

古文：相公不欲闻，谁为言者？ 
现代文：相公不想听，谁报告呢？ 
English: My husband-in-law doesn't want to listen, so who is going to tell him?

古文：嵩愕然谢之。
现代文：严嵩惊愕并感谢了他。
English: Yan Wei was stunned and thanked him.

古文：历侍读学士，掌院事。
现代文：瞿景淳逐渐升任侍读学士，负责翰林院事务。
English: Gongjing Jun was gradually promoted to the post of attendant bachelor, responsible for the affairs of the Hanlin Academy.

古文：改太常卿，领南京祭酒事，就迁吏部右侍郎。
现代文：改任太常卿，负责南京祭酒的事务，又升为吏部右侍郎。
English: He was transferred to the position of Tai Changqing, responsible for the affairs of the Nanjing Festival Liquor, and was also promoted to the position of the Right Attendant of the Administration Department.

古文：隆庆元年，召为礼部左侍郎。
现代文：隆庆元年，召见并任命他为礼部左侍郎。
English: In the first year of the Longqing era, he was summoned and appointed as the Left Attendant of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：万历中举进士，官至湖广提学佥事。
现代文：负责《永乐大典》的总校工作，兼任翰林院学士，领取二品的俸禄，侍从经筵，编篆嘉靖实录。
English: He was in charge of the work of the headmaster of the "Yongle Grand Ceremony," concurrently served as a bachelor of the Hanlin Academy, received a two-product salary, was an attendant of the secretary, and compiled the Zou Jiajing Record.

古文：亦以刚正闻。
现代文：疾病发作，多次奏请赐其回乡。
English: Illness struck, and he repeatedly asked to be allowed to return home.

古文：子式耜，别有传。田一俊，字德万，大田人。
现代文：第二年去世。追赠礼部尚书，谥号文懿。田一俊，字德万，大田人。
English: He died the following year. Posthumously, he was given the posthumous title of Reibu Shosho, posthumously, he was given the posthumous title of Buncho.

古文：隆庆二年会试第一。
现代文：隆庆二年，考取会试第一名。
English: In the second year of Longqing, he won the first place in the examination.

古文：选庶吉士，授编修，进侍讲。
现代文：选为庶吉士，授职为编修，晋升侍讲。
English: He was selected as an associate professor, given the post of editor, and promoted to assistant lecturer.

古文：万历五年，吴中行攻张居正夺情，赵用贤等继之，居正怒不测。
现代文：万历五年，吴中行攻击张居正守丧不满期强行出仕，赵用贤等人继续攻击，张居正怒不可遏。
English: After five years, Wu Zhongxing attacked Zhang Jizheng and forced him to serve during the period of dissatisfaction. Zhao Yixian and others continued to attack, and Zhang Jizheng's anger could not be contained.

古文：一俊偕侍讲赵志皋、修撰沈懋学等疏救，格不入。
现代文：田一俊与侍讲赵志皋、修撰沈懋学等人上奏挽救，均被阻拦。
English: Tian Yatjun and the attendant speakers, Zhao Zhixuan and Shuxian Shen Yue, and others, were prevented from performing.

古文：乃会王锡爵等诣居正，陈大义。
现代文：于是会同王锡爵等人到张居正处，陈述大义。
English: Therefore, together with Wang Xizhe and others, they went to Zhang Jiu's residence to present their case.

古文：一俊词尤峻，居正心嗛之。
现代文：田一俊的话语最为尖锐，张居正心中憎恶他。
English: Tian Yizhun's words were the sharpest, and Zhang Juzheng hated him in his heart.

古文：未几，志皋等皆逐，一俊先请告归，获免。
现代文：不久，赵志皋等人都被放逐，田一俊事先奏请回乡，得以幸免。
English: Soon after, Zhao Zhixuan and the others were exiled, but Tian Yijun was spared because he had requested to return to his hometown in advance.

古文：居正殁，起故官。
现代文：张居正去世后，他官复原职。
English: After Zhang Juzheng's death, he was reinstated.

古文：屡迁礼部左侍郎，掌翰林院。
现代文：晋升礼部左侍郎，负责翰林院。
English: He was promoted to the left attendant of the Ceremonial Department and was in charge of the Hanlin Academy.

古文：寿民乃变姓名避之金华山。
现代文：以疾病请求辞官回乡，还没动身就去世了。
English: Due to illness, he asked to return to his hometown, but passed away before he could leave.

古文：国变乃归，不复出。
现代文：田一俊孤身清苦，家中没有多余的资产。
English: Tian Yatun is single and destitute, with no extra assets at home.

古文：黄凤翔，字鸣周，晋江人。
现代文：皇帝追赠他为礼部尚书。黄凤翔，字鸣周，晋江人。
English: The emperor posthumously presented him with a book of etiquette. Huang Fengxiang, Zi Ming Zhou, Jinjiang people.

古文：隆庆二年进士及第，授编修。
现代文：隆庆二年的进士及第，授职编修。
English: In the second year of Longqing, he became a scholar and the first to be awarded the post of editor.

古文：教习内书堂，辑前史宦官行事可为鉴戒者，令诵习之。
现代文：在内书堂任教习，辑录前代宦官可作告诫借鉴的事，指令他们朗诵研习。
English: He taught in the inner study hall, compiling a list of things that the previous eunuchs could use as a warning and instructing them to recite and study.

古文：《世宗实录》成，进修撰。
现代文：《世宗实录》撰成，晋升为修撰。
English: Compiled "Sejong Jitsuroku" and promoted to Shoseki.

古文：万历五年，张居正夺情，杖诸谏者。
现代文：万历五年，张居正服丧未满期，强出为官，杖责诸位劝谏者。
English: After five years of hard work, Zhang Ju, who was still in mourning, was forced to become an official.

古文：凤翔不平，诵言于朝，编纂章奏，尽载诸谏疏。
现代文：黄凤翔心中不平，诉之于朝，编纂奏章的时候，收录全部谏言奏疏。
English: Huang Fengxiang felt uneasy and complained to the government. When compiling the musical score, he included all the speeches in the musical score.

古文：及居正二子会试，示意，凤翔峻却之。
现代文：张居正两个儿子参加会试时，请他关照，黄凤翔严辞拒绝了。
English: When Zhang Juzheng's two sons took the entrance examination, he asked Huang Fengxiang to take care of them. Huang Fengxiang refused.

古文：当主南畿试，以王篆欲私其子，复谢不往。
现代文：他本当主持南畿的考试，因为王篆想为儿子徇私，他就推辞不去。
English: He really presided over the examination in Nanki, but because Wang Yao wanted to do something for his son, he refused to go.

古文：屡迁南京国子祭酒。
现代文：升任南京国子祭酒。
English: It was promoted to Nanjing National Children's Festival liquor.

古文：省母归，起补北监。
现代文：回乡探望母亲，而后起用为北京国子祭酒。
English: He went back to his hometown to visit his mother, and later used it as Beijing Guozi Festival wine.

古文：时方较刻《十三经注疏》，凤翔言： 顷陛下去《贞观政要》，进讲《礼经》，甚善。
现代文：当时校刻《十三经注疏》，黄凤翔奏称 ：近来陛下去掉《贞观政要》，讲诵《礼经》，很好。
English: At that time, the school engraved "The Commentary on the Thirteen Classics," and Huang Fengxiang said: "Recently, Your Majesty has taken down "The Virtue of Chastity" and recited "The Book of Rites," which is very good.

古文：陛下读曾子论孝曰敬父母遗体，则当思珍护圣躬。
现代文：陛下阅读曾子论孝，称敬重父母所给的生命，就应当思虑珍惜爱护圣上的身体。
English: Your Majesty, after reading about the filial piety of the great-grandson and the importance of respecting the life given by one's parents, should carefully cherish and protect the sacred body.

古文：诵《学记》言学然后知不足，则当思缉熙圣学。
现代文：阅读《学记》所言，学习之后知道不足，就应当思虑光明圣学。
English: After reading the "Record of Learning," it is said that after learning and knowing the insufficiencies, one should contemplate the bright light of sacred learning.

古文：察《月令》篇以四时敷政、法天行健，则可见圣治之当勤励。
现代文：考察《月令》，依四季时序行政事，效法自然的刚健不息，就可以知道圣王之治当勤奋上进。
English: Examining the "Lunar Calendar," the administrative affairs according to the four-season time sequence, and following the example of natural perseverance, it can be known that the rule of the holy king should be diligently advanced.

古文：绎《世子》篇陈保傅之教、齿学之仪，则可见皇储之当早建豫教。 
现代文：探究《世子》篇中陈述保傅的教导、幼学的仪礼，就会注意到皇储应当早点进行教育。 
English: If you study the teachings of Bao Fu and the rites of preschool, which are described in the "Sezi" article, you will notice that the crown prince should start his education early.

古文：疏入，报闻。
现代文：奏疏呈入，答复知道了。
English: The report has been submitted, and the reply has been received.

古文：寻擢礼部右侍郎。
现代文：不久，他晋升为礼部右侍郎。
English: Soon, he was promoted to the position of the Right Attendant of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：洮、河告警，抗疏言： 多事之秋，陛下宜屏游宴，亲政事，以实图安攘。
现代文：洮、河地区传来警报，他又大胆奏疏： 多事之秋，陛下应当放弃游赏宴乐，亲临政事，以便真正消除祸患，求得安宁。
English: Alarms were heard in the Minhe area, and he boldly announced: In the autumn of many things, His Majesty should give up the enjoyment of the banquet and attend the political affairs in person, so as to truly eliminate the scourge and seek peace.

古文：为今大计，惟用人、理财二端。
现代文：现在最重要的事是用人、理财。
English: The most important thing now is to employ people and manage finances.

古文：宋臣有言： 平居无极言敢谏之臣，则临难无敌忾致命之士。 
现代文：宋代有大臣说： 平常没有敢大胆劝谏的大臣，那么遇上祸乱就没有勇敢御敌的将士。 
English: A minister in the Song Dynasty said: Usually, there is no minister who dares to boldly advise, so in the event of calamity, there is no brave soldier against the enemy.

古文：邹元标直声劲节，铨司特拟召用。
现代文：邹元标直言有气节，选官部门特意准备招用。
English: Xuan Yuanbiao is outspoken, and the selection department is specially preparing to recruit him.

古文：其他建言迁谪，如潘士藻、孙如法亦拟量移，而疏皆中寝。
现代文：其他因谏言遭到贬官，如潘士藻、孙如法也应考虑，但奏疏滞留宫中没有回应。
English: Other officials who were demoted due to slander, such as Pan Shimo and Sun Rufa, should also be considered, but there was no response from the palace.

古文：士气日摧，言路日塞。平居只怀禄养交，临难孰肯捐躯为国家尽力哉？
现代文：结果士气一天天低落，言路一天天淤塞，平常只留恋爵位，培养交情，遇上危难则不肯捐躯为国竭尽全力。
English: As a result, morale is low day by day, speech is blocked day by day, usually only nostalgia for a knighthood, cultivating friendships, in the event of a crisis, they are not willing to sacrifice their lives for the country.

古文：昔宋艺祖欲积缣二百万易辽人首，太宗移内藏上供物为用兵养士之资。
现代文：过去宋太祖想聚积二百万匹细绢，换取辽国人的首级；太宗拿出内府贮藏的供物，作为用兵养士的资财。
English: In the past, Emperor Taizong of the Song Dynasty wanted to accumulate two million fine yakitori in exchange for the heads of the people of Liao; Emperor Taizong took out the offerings stored in the inner palace as resources for raising soldiers.

古文：今户部岁进二十万，初非旧额，积成常供。
现代文：现在户部每年供奉二十万两白银，开始并非旧有的定额，渐渐却成了经常性的供给。
English: Now, the head of the household donates 200,000 taels of silver every year. At first, it was not the old quota, but gradually it has become a regular supply.

古文：陛下富有四海，奈何自营私蓄！
现代文：陛下拥有四海的财富，怎么还自己经营储蓄？
English: His Majesty has the wealth of the four seas, so how can he manage his own savings?

古文：窃见都城寺观，丹碧荧煌，梵刹之供奉，斋醮之祈禳，何一不糜内帑。
现代文：试看都城的寺观，丹碧荧煌，梵刹的供奉，斋祭的供品，哪一项不耗费内府钱财？
English: Take a look at the city's temples, temples, temples, offerings, offerings, which one does not cost the government money?

古文：与其要福于冥漠之鬼神，孰若广施于孑遗之赤子。 
现代文：与其向阴间的鬼神求幸福，不如广泛地施恩于幸存的华夏赤子。 
English: Instead of seeking happiness from the ghosts and gods of the underworld, it is better to be generous to the surviving Chinese babies.

古文：帝不能用。
现代文：神宗没能采纳。
English: Emperor Shun disobeyed.

古文：廷臣争建储，久未得命，帝谕阁臣以明春举行。
现代文：朝廷大臣们争论立太子的事，久久没有结果，神宗指令内阁大臣们明年春天进行办理。
English: The ministers of the imperial court argued over the matter of the crown prince's investiture, but there was no result for a long time. Shinso ordered the cabinet ministers to handle the matter next spring.

古文：大学士王家屏出语礼部，凤翔与尚书于慎行、左侍郎李长春以册立仪上。
现代文：大学士王家屏告诉了礼部，黄凤翔与尚书于慎行、左侍郎李长春将册封的仪礼呈书皇上。
English: Wang Jiaping, a university scholar, told the ceremonial department that Huang Fengxiang and Shang Shuxiang would present the formalities of the investiture to the emperor.

古文：帝怒，俱夺俸，意复变。
现代文：神宗发怒，全部剥夺了他们的俸禄，考虑再做变更。
English: Enraged, Shenzong completely deprived them of their salaries and considered making changes.

古文：凤翔又疏争，不报，遂请告去。
现代文：黄凤翔又上奏争辩，没有答复，便请求辞官。
English: Huang Fengxiang argued again, and when there was no response, he asked for a dismissal.

古文：二十年，礼部左侍郎韩世能去，张一桂未任而卒，复起凤翔代之。
现代文：万历二十年，礼部左侍郎韩世能离职，张一桂未上任就去世了，神宗再次启用黄凤翔接替此职。
English: After twenty years, Han Shimen, the left attendant of the ceremonial department, left his post, Zhang Yikui died before taking office, and Shenzong once again appointed Huang Fengxiang to take over this position.

古文：寻改吏部，拜南京礼部尚书。
现代文：不久，改任吏部职，授任南京吏部尚书。
English: Soon after, he was appointed to the post of librarian and given the title of Nanjing librarian.

古文：世能尝使朝鲜，赠遗一无所受。余继登，字世用，交河人。
现代文：以赡养亲人的名义回乡。再次官封原职时，他以年老极力推辞。后来，母亲去世，就不再出仕，死于家中。天启初年，谥号文简。余继登，字世用，交河人。
English: He returned to his hometown in the name of supporting his relatives. When he was appointed to his original post again, he strongly refused to do so on the grounds of old age. Later, his mother passed away, he no longer served and died at home. In the first year of the Apocalypse, his nickname was Wen Jian. Yu Jiden, a character used throughout the ages, was a river crosser.

古文：万历五年进士。
现代文：万历五年的进士。
English: After five years of hard work, he was promoted to sergeant.

古文：改庶吉士，授检讨。
现代文：改封庶吉士，授职为检讨。
English: He was reappointed to the position of deputy kishi, and the review of the awarding of the position is now over.

古文：与修《会典》成，进修撰，直讲经筵。
现代文：参与撰修《会典》，晋升修撰，入宫讲授经书。
English: He participated in the writing of the "Society Code," was promoted to the position of scribe, and entered the Imperial Palace to teach scriptures.

古文：寻进右中允，充日讲官。
现代文：不久，提升为右中允，充任日讲官。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to Uchujujo-yon and appointed as a Japanese lecturer.

古文：时讲筵久辍，侍臣无所纳忠。
现代文：当时经筵进讲长期停顿，侍臣没有办法向皇上讲忠言。
English: At that time, there was a long pause in the Emperor's speech, and there was no way for the courtier to speak to the Emperor.

古文：继登与同官冯琦共进《通鉴》讲义，傅以时政缺失。
现代文：余继登与同官冯琦一起呈递《通鉴》的讲义，告诫时政缺陷、失误。
English: Together with his colleague Feng Jun, Yu Jiden presented a handout of the "Comprehensive Guide," admonishing the shortcomings and mistakes of the current government.

古文：历少詹事兼侍读学士，充正史副总裁。
现代文：历任少詹事兼侍读学士，充当正史副总裁。
English: He has served as vice-president of official history.

古文：已，擢詹事，掌翰林院。
现代文：事后晋升为詹事负责翰林院。
English: He was later promoted to the post of Zhan responsible for Hanlin Hospital.

古文：两宫灾，偕诸讲官引《洪范五行传》切谏。
现代文：两宫受灾，与诸位讲官援引《洪范五行传》诚挚劝谏。
English: The two palaces were affected by the disaster, and he and the lecturers quoted "Hong Fan Wuxing Biography" to earnestly advise.

古文：不报。
现代文：没有答复。
English: It didn't make the papers.

古文：进礼部右侍郎。
现代文：晋升礼部右侍郎。
English: Promoted to the position of the Right Attendant of the Ceremonial Department.

古文：二十六年，以左侍郎摄部事。
现代文：万历二十六年，他以左侍郎身份负责礼部事务。
English: In the 26th year of Wanli, he assumed the position of Zuozhirou and was in charge of ceremonial affairs.

古文：陕西、山西地震，南都雷火，西宁钟自鸣，绍兴地涌血。
现代文：陕西、山西发生地震，南京遭雷火，西宁的钟不敲自鸣，绍兴地下涌淌血水。
English: An earthquake occurred in Shaanxi and Shanxi, Nanjing was hit by lightning, the clock in Xining stopped chiming, and blood gushed underground in Shaoxing.

古文：继登于岁终类奏，因请罢一切诛求开采之害民者。
现代文：余继登在此年底分类上奏，顺便恳请罢除一切害民的苛刻开采之事。当时未被采纳。
English: At the end of this year, Yu Jian made a report on the classification, and by the way, he implored the removal of all harmful people's harsh mining. At that time, it was not adopted.

古文：时不能用。雷击太庙树，复请帝躬郊祀、庙享，册立元子，停矿税，撤中使。
现代文：雷击了太庙的树，再次请求皇上亲自到京郊祭祀、祭庙，册立嫡长子，停征矿税，撤除宦官使者。
English: Lightning struck the tree of the Imperial Temple, and he once again asked the emperor to personally go to the suburbs of Kyoto to offer sacrifices and temples, to register the eldest son, to suspend the collection of mineral taxes, and to remove the eunuch emissaries.

古文：帝优诏报闻而已。
现代文：神宗下优诏答复知道了。
English: The Emperor's reply is now known.

古文：旋擢本部尚书。
现代文：不久晋升为本部尚书。
English: He was soon promoted to the head office of Shosho.

古文：时将讨播州杨应龙。
现代文：当时准备讨伐播州杨应龙。
English: At that time, they were preparing to fight against Banzhou Yang Yinglong.

古文：继登请罢四川矿税，以佐兵食。
现代文：余继登奏请罢免四川的矿税，用来资助士兵的粮饷。
English: Yu Jidong appealed for the cancellation of Sichuan's mining tax, which was used to subsidize soldiers' rations.

古文：复上言： 顷者星躔失度，水旱为沴，太白昼见，天不和也。
现代文：并再次上奏 ：近来星迹失度，水旱相继为害，白天看见太白星，上天不和顺啊。
English: And again: Recently, the stars have lost their brightness, floods and droughts have caused damage one after another, the stars are too white to see during the day, and the sky is not harmonious.

古文：凿山开矿，裂地求砂，致狄道山崩地震，地不和也。
现代文：凿山开矿，裂地求砂，导致狄道地方山崩地震，地气不和顺啊。
English: Chiseling mountains to open mines, cracking the ground to find sand, leading to landslides and earthquakes in Dido, the earth's atmosphere is not harmonious.

古文：闾阎穷困，更加诛求，帑藏空虚，复责珠宝，奸民蚁聚，中使鸱张，中外壅隔，上下不交，人不和也。
现代文：百姓穷困，再加苛求，钱财空乏，又索求珠宝，奸民像蚂蚁般聚集，太监嚣张，朝廷内外阻隔，上下没有交流，人心不和睦啊。
English: The people are impoverished, and they are demanding more and more, the money is empty, and they are asking for jewelry, the villains are gathering like ants, the eunuchs are arrogant, the imperial court is separated inside and outside, there is no communication between the upper and lower levels, and the hearts of the people are not harmonious.

古文：戾气凝而不散，怨毒结而成形，陵谷变迁，高卑易位，是为阴乘阳、邪干正、下叛上之象。
现代文：凶暴的气息凝聚不散，结成怨毒之形，山陵河谷变迁，高低易位，这是阴气压阳气、邪气干扰正气、下级背叛上级的气象。
English: The atmosphere of ferocity is not dispersed, but is concentrated into the form of grudge, the mountains and valleys change, and the high and low change places. This is the weather of yin and yang, evil interfering with righteousness, and the inferior betraying the superior.

古文：臣子不能感动君父，言愈数愈厌，故天以非常之变，警悟陛下，尚可恬然不为意乎？ 
现代文：我不能感动皇上，劝谏越多皇上越厌烦，所以苍天就用非常的变故，警戒提醒陛下，陛下又对此还能恬然不有所作为吗？ 
English: I can't move the Emperor, and the more I try to persuade him, the more the Emperor gets fed up, so the Heavens have warned His Majesty with a very unexpected turn of events. Can His Majesty still do nothing about this?

古文：帝不省。
现代文：神宗仍不理会。
English: The emperor did not listen.

古文：继登自署部事，请元子册立冠婚。
现代文：余继登亲自部署部中事务，奏请册立太子并加冠完婚。
English: Yu Jidong personally deployed the affairs of the Ministry of the People's Republic of China, petitioned for the registration of the crown prince and crowned the marriage.

古文：疏累上，以不得请，郁郁成疾。
现代文：多次上疏，因为恳请无效，忧郁成疾。
English: Repeatedly, because entreaty is ineffective, melancholy becomes a disease.

古文：每言及，辄流涕曰： 大礼不举，吾礼官死不瞑目！ 
现代文：每当谈及此事，就流泪说 ：大礼不举行，我作为礼官死不瞑目。 
English: Whenever he spoke about the matter, he would shed tears and say, "If the grand ceremony does not take place, I, as a ceremonial officer, will be heartbroken."

古文：病满三月，连章乞休，不许。
现代文：患病三个月，接连上奏请求退休，神宗不同意。
English: After being ill for three months, he repeatedly requested retirement, but Shinzō did not agree.

古文：请停俸，亦不许。
现代文：恳请停止俸禄，也不被批准。
English: He pleaded for his salary to be stopped, but this was not approved.

古文：竟卒于官。
现代文：最终死于任上。
English: He eventually died in office.

古文：赠太子少保，谥文恪。
现代文：追赠太子少保，谥号文恪。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of Junior Protector of the Crown Prince.

古文：继登朴直慎密，寡言笑。
现代文：余继登朴实、正直，办事慎重、严密，很少言谈、嬉笑。
English: Yu Jideng is down-to-earth, honest, prudent and strict in his work, and rarely talks or laughs.

古文：当大事，言议侃侃。
现代文：遇上大事，谏议侃侃而发。
English: In the event of a major event, they start arguing.

古文：居家廉约。
现代文：居家廉洁。
English: They are clean at home.

古文：学士曾朝节尝过其里，蓬蒿满径。
现代文：学士曾朝节曾到过他家，庭径长满蓬蒿。
English: The bachelor Zeng Zhaojie once visited his home during the morning festival, and the garden path was covered with moss.

古文：及病革，视之，拥粗布衾，羊毳覆足而已。
现代文：当他病重，去探视他，见他身盖粗布被，用羊皮盖着脚部。
English: When he was seriously ill, he went to visit him and found him wrapped in a thick blanket with a sheepskin covering his feet.

古文：幼子应诸生试，夫人请为一言，终不可。
现代文：他的小儿子参加童生考试，夫人请他出面讲一句话，他最终没有答应。
English: His youngest son was taking a kindergarten exam, and his wife asked him to come up and say a few words, but he ultimately did not agree.

古文：冯琦，字用韫，临朐人。
现代文：冯琦，字用韫，临朐人。
English: Feng Xuan, the characters with Xuan, Lin Xuan people.

古文：幼颖敏绝人。
现代文：幼时聪敏绝伦。
English: He was exceptionally bright as a child.

古文：年十九，举万历五年进士，改庶吉士，授编修。
现代文：十九岁，考取万历五年的进士，改任庶吉士，授职编修。
English: At the age of nineteen, he passed the entrance examination of five years of Wanli, and was appointed to the post of deputy goshi, and was assigned to edit.

古文：预修《会典》成，进侍讲，充日讲官，历庶子。
现代文：参与修成《会典》，晋升为侍讲，充任日讲官，任过庶子。
English: He participated in the revision of the "Charter," was promoted to an assistant lecturer, served as a Japanese lecturer, and served as an illegitimate child.

古文：三王并封议起，移书王锡爵力争之。
现代文：一并加封三王的议论兴起，他投书王锡爵与他极力争辩。
English: At the same time, the debate on the addition of the three kings arose, and he wrote to King Xizhe to argue with him.

古文：进少詹事，掌翰林院事。
现代文：晋升为少詹事，负责翰林院的事务。
English: He was promoted to Shao Zhanji, responsible for the affairs of the Hanlin Academy.

古文：迁礼部右侍郎，改吏部。
现代文：调任礼部右侍郎，改任吏部职。
English: He was transferred to the position of the Right Attendant of the Ceremonial Department, and then to the position of the Clerical Department.

古文：莅政勤敏，力抑营竞，尚书李戴倚重之。
现代文：处理政务勤奋敏捷，极力抑制钻营投机的人，尚书李戴很器重他。
English: He is a diligent and quick-witted person in handling government affairs, and tries his best to restrain the speculation of the drilling camp. Shangshu Li Dai values him very much.

古文：二十七年九月，太白、太阴同见于午；又狄道山崩，平地涌大小山五。
现代文：万历二十七年九月，太白星、太阴星同时在午时出现；又值狄道发生山崩，平地隆起大小五座山丘。
English: In September of the 27th month of the lunar calendar, a white star and a dark star appeared at the same time at noon. At the same time, a landslide occurred in Dido, and the flat land was uplifted by five large and small hills.

古文：琦草疏，偕尚书戴上言：
现代文：冯琦草拟奏章，与尚书李戴一起劝谏：
English: Feng Yingcao wrote a draft of the movement, and together with Shangshu Li Dai, he advised Wu:

古文：近见太阴经天，太白昼见，已为极异。
现代文： 近来目睹太阴星经过天宇，太白星白天出现，已非常奇异。
English: Recently, it has been very strange to see a very dark star pass through the sky, and a very white star appear during the day.

古文：至山陷成谷，地涌成山，则自开辟以来，惟唐垂拱中有之，而今再见也。
现代文：至于山陷成谷，地隆为山，自从开天辟地，只有唐垂拱中有过此事，而现在却又见到了。
English: As for mountains sinking into valleys and ridges turning into mountains, since the heavens and the earth were created, this has only happened in the Tang Dynasty, and now it is happening again.

古文：窃惟上天无私，惟民是听。
现代文：暗自思虑上天的无私，只听百姓的。
English: Secretly thinking about God's selflessness, listening only to the people.

古文：欲承天意，当顺民心。
现代文：想禀承天意，应当顺应民心。
English: If you want to carry out God's will, you should follow the will of the people.

古文：比来天下赋额，视二十年以前，十增其四。
现代文：如天下的赋税数额，比二十年前，增加四成。
English: For example, the amount of taxes paid worldwide has increased by 40% compared to 20 years ago.

古文：而民户殷足者，则十减其五。
现代文：但百姓中富足的，却减少五成。
English: But the wealth of the people has fallen by 50 per cent.

古文：东征西讨，萧然苦兵。
现代文：东征西讨，人们苦于兵事。
English: The Eastern Expedition and the Western Expedition, people are struggling with military affairs.

古文：自矿税使出，而民间之苦更甚。
现代文： 自从派出了矿税使，则民间的苦痛更甚。
English: Since the mining tax inspectors were dispatched, the suffering of the people has become even worse.

古文：加以水旱蝗灾，流离载道，畿辅近地，盗贼公行，此非细故也。
现代文：加上水旱蝗灾，流民充塞道路，京城地区盗贼公然出现，这不是小小的变故。
English: Coupled with floods, droughts, locust plagues, displaced people clogging the roads, and thieves openly appearing in the capital area, this is no small change.

古文：诸中使衔命而出，所随奸徒，动以千百。
现代文：各位宦官使者领命出京师，随从奸诈之徒，动辄成百上千。
English: All eunuch emissaries were ordered to go to the capital and follow the traitors, with hundreds of them at a time.

古文：陛下欲通商，而彼专困商；陛下欲爱民，而彼专害民。
现代文：陛下想通商，他们却专门困禁商业。陛下想爱护百姓，他们却专门残害百姓。
English: Your majesty wants to do business, but they only want to stop business. Your majesty wants to protect the people, but they only want to kill the people.

古文：盖近日神奸有二：其一工伺上意，具有成奏，假武弁上之；其一务剥小民，画有成谋，假中官行之。
现代文：近日有两种奇怪的奸诈事：其一，工于窥察陛下的心思，撰成奏章，假借武弁之手呈上；其二，致力盘剥平民，先有谋略，假借宦官之手施行。
English: Recently, there have been two strange cases of treachery: first, an attempt to spy on His Majesty's thoughts, with a report prepared and presented under the guise of a military commander; second, an effort to exploit the common people, with a plan prepared in advance and carried out under the guise of a eunuch.

古文：运机如鬼蜮，取财尽锱铢。
现代文：如鬼怪般运用机巧，锱铢之财也尽皆夺取。
English: Like a ghost, they use their cunning to seize all the money.

古文：远近同嗟，贫富交困。
现代文：远近人一样叹息，贫富者均陷困境。
English: People near and far are sighing, the rich and poor are in trouble.

古文：贫者家无储蓄，惟恃经营。
现代文：贫穷者家中没有储蓄，只有靠小本经营。
English: Poor families have no savings and have to manage on a shoestring.

古文：但夺其数钱之利，已绝其一日之生。
现代文：但仍然夺取他们几钱的小利，断绝他们一天的生资。
English: But they still robbed them of a few pennies of small profits and cut off their livelihood for a day.

古文：至于富民，更蒙毒害。
现代文：至于富人，更加蒙受毒害。
English: As for the rich, they are even more poisoned.

古文：或陷以漏税窃矿，或诬之贩盐盗木。
现代文：或者诬陷他们漏税、偷矿，或者诬陷他们贩盐、盗木。
English: Or they are framed for tax evasion or mine theft, or they are framed for selling salt or stealing wood.

古文：布成诡计，声势赫然。
现代文：布下诡计，声势赫然吓人。
English: The ruse is in full swing.

古文：及其得财，寂然无事。
现代文：等到夺取了钱财，就静寂得无事一般。
English: After the money was taken, there was nothing but silence.

古文：小民累足屏息，无地得容。
现代文：小百姓吃尽苦却不敢声张，无地容身。
English: The little people have suffered a lot, but they dare not speak out. They have no place to live.

古文：利归群奸，怨萃朝宁。
现代文：好处被群奸得到，怨恨汇聚朝廷。
English: The benefit was obtained by a group of traitors, and resentment gathered in the imperial court.

古文：夫以刺骨之穷，抱伤心之痛，一呼则易动，一动则难安。
现代文：因刺骨般的贫穷，怀抱伤心的痛楚，一人呼唤就容易暴动，一旦暴动就难以平息。
English: Because of the biting poverty and the pain of grief, it is easy for one person to call for a riot, and once a riot occurs, it is difficult to quell.

古文：今日犹承平，民已汹汹，脱有风尘之警，天下谁可保信者？
现代文：现在依旧平安，百姓却怨恨汹汹，假若有不测之变，天下有谁来保护？
English: Now it is still safe, but the people are bitterly resentful. If there is an unforeseen change, who in the world will protect them?

古文：夫哱拜诛，关白死，此皆募民丁以为兵，用民财以为饷。
现代文：口孛拜被杀，关白死去，这都是招募百姓壮丁当兵，用百姓的钱财做粮饷的结果。
English: The death of Guan Bai and the killing of Guo Zhibai were all the result of recruiting young people as soldiers and using the people's money to buy grain.

古文：若一方穷民倡乱，而四面应之，于何征兵，于何取饷哉！
现代文：如果一方的穷苦百姓倡导暴乱，而且四面的民众响应，国家从哪里征兵，从哪里取得军饷？
English: If the poor people on one side advocate riots, and the people on all sides respond, from where will the country recruit soldiers, and from where will it obtain military pay?

古文：陛下试遣忠实亲信之人，采访都城内外，闾巷歌谣，令一一闻奏，则民之怨苦，居然可睹。
现代文：陛下不妨派遣忠实、亲信的人，采访都城内外，里巷的歌谣，让他们一一报告，那么百姓的怨忿、困苦，就可以目睹。
English: His Majesty might as well send loyal and trusted people to interview singers in and out of the capital, in and around the alleys, and let them report one by one, so that the people's resentment and hardships can be witnessed.

古文：天心仁爱，明示咎徵，诚欲陛下翻然改悟，坐弭祸乱。
现代文：上天心性仁爱，明确宣告责罚，真的是想要陛下猛然觉悟，消除祸乱。
English: The benevolence of God's disposition, and the clear announcement of punishment, really want His Majesty to suddenly realize and eliminate the calamity.

古文：乃礼部修省之章未蒙批答，而奸民搜括之奏又见允行。如纳何其贤妄说，令遍解天下无碍官银。
现代文： 礼部修身自省的奏章没被批复，而奸人搜括民财的奏章却又被同意施行，像采纳何其贤的胡言，命令全部解送全国滞留官银。
English: The report of the Ministry of Ceremonies on self-cultivation and self-examination has not been approved, but the report of the traitors on the collection of people's wealth has been approved to be implemented. It is like adopting the nonsense of He Jian and ordering the release of all the detained government money across the country.

古文：夫四方钱谷，皆有定额，无碍云者，意盖指经费羡余。
现代文：四方的钱谷，都有定额，所谓滞留，意思大概是指经费的节余。
English: All four sides of the valley of money have quotas, the so-called detention, meaning probably refers to the savings of funds.

古文：近者征调频仍，正额犹逋，何从得羡？
现代文：近来征调频繁，正额尚且不够，哪来的剩余？
English: Recently, there have been frequent requisitions and transfers, and the regular amount is still not enough. Where does the surplus come from?

古文：此令一下，趣督严急，必将分公帑以充献。
现代文：这道命令一下达，催促紧急，必然会分割公款来充数。
English: As soon as this order arrives, it is urgent and urgent, and public funds will inevitably be allocated to replenish it.

古文：经费罔措，还派民间，此事之必不可者也。
现代文：经费筹措无着，还是加派到民间，这种事是必定不能做的。
English: If the financing is not available, it will still be assigned to the people, which is something that must not be done.

古文：又如仇世亨奏徐鼐掘坟一事，以理而论，乌有一墓藏黄金巨万者？
现代文：又如仇世亨奏疏徐鼐掘坟墓的事，照理说，没有一座坟墓埋藏着万两铜钱。
English: Another example is the case of the grave digging by Xu Xuan, the enemy of the world, according to the theory, there is not a single grave buried with ten thousand and two copper coins.

古文：借使有之，亦当下抚按核勘。
现代文：假使有，也应当下令抚按核实、勘探。
English: If there is, it should also be ordered to be verified and explored.

古文：先正其盗墓之罪，而后没墓中之藏。
现代文：先确定他们盗墓的罪行，而后没收墓中的藏宝。
English: First, the crime of grave robbing is determined, and then the treasure in the grave is confiscated.

古文：未有罪状未明，而先没入赀财者也。
现代文：没有罪状不明，先没收资财的事。
English: There is no such thing as an unspecified crime, only the confiscation of assets.

古文：片纸朝入，严命夕传，纵抱深冤，谁敢辨理？
现代文：早上递入片纸，晚上传出严令，纵然抱有深重的冤屈，谁敢辩论道理？
English: In the morning a piece of paper is handed in, in the evening a stern order is issued, even if there are serious grievances, who dares to debate the truth?

古文：不但破此诸族，又将延祸多人。
现代文：不但使这些家族破败，还将波及很多人。
English: It's not just going to devastate these families, it's going to affect so many people.

古文：但有株连，立见败灭。
现代文：一旦受株连，立刻就会家破人亡。
English: Once a family member is arrested, the family will be broken up immediately.

古文：辇毂之下，尚须三覆，万里之外，止据单词，遂令狡猾之流，操生杀之柄。
现代文：在京城尚且经过多次审议，万里之外却只根据一面之词。于是使狡猾的人，掌握了生杀大权。
English: After many deliberations in the capital, it was based on only one side of the story thousands of miles away. Thus, a cunning person seized the power of life and death.

古文：此风一倡，孰不效尤？
现代文：这种风气一兴起，谁不效法？
English: With this kind of culture on the rise, who wouldn't follow suit?

古文：已同告缗之令，又开告密之端。
现代文：已经下达奖励生发隐匿缗钱的命令，又开启告密的风气。
English: An order has been issued to reward the generation and concealment of stolen money, and a culture of whistleblowing has begun.

古文：臣等方欲陈诉，而奸人之奏又得旨矣。
现代文：我们刚想陈诉，而奸人的奏章又获得御旨。
English: We just wanted to file a complaint, but the fraudster's report was approved.

古文：五日之内，搜取天下公私金银已二百万。
现代文：五天之内，已经搜取了天下二百万两公私金银。
English: Within five days, two million taels of public and private gold and silver have been collected from all over the world.

古文：奸内生奸，例外创例。
现代文：奸诈之中又生奸诈，事例之外又创事例。
English: Treachery begets treachery, and example begets example.

古文：臣等前犹望其日减，今更患其日增，不至民困财殚激大乱不止。
现代文：我们先前希望它们一天天减少，现在更加忧虑它们一天天地增加，不使百姓困苦，钱财竭尽，激发起大乱不会终止。
English: We had hoped that they would decrease day by day, but now we are even more worried that they will increase day by day, causing hardship to the people, exhausting money and resources, and triggering turmoil.

古文：伏望陛下穆然远览，亟与廷臣共图修弭，无令海内赤子，结怨熙朝，千秋青史，贻讥圣德。
现代文：希望陛下严肃思虑将来，紧急与朝廷大臣共同修漏补缺，不要让海内的赤子聚结怨忿于盛朝，千秋青史留下对圣德的讥讽。 
English: I hope that His Majesty will seriously think about the future and urgently work with the ministers of the Imperial Court to make up for the shortcomings. Don't let the babies in the sea gather resentment against the Ming Dynasty, and leave behind the ridicule of sanctity in the history of the ages.

古文：不报。
现代文：神宗没有答复。
English: It didn't make the papers.

古文：寻转左侍郎，拜礼部尚书。
现代文：不久，他转任左侍郎，受任礼部尚书。
English: Soon after, he was transferred to the position of Left Attendant and was appointed to the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：帝将册立东宫，诏下期迫，中官掌司设监者以供费不给为词。
现代文：神宗将要册立东宫太子，诏令时间紧迫，执掌监司的宦官以供给经费不足为借口。
English: Emperor Shenzong was about to appoint the Crown Prince of the Eastern Court, and the time was pressing. The eunuch in charge of the procuratorate used the excuse of insufficient funds.

古文：琦曰： 今日礼为重，不可与争。 
现代文：冯琦道： 今天礼仪为重，不可与他们争辩。 
English: Feng Jundao: Today, etiquette is important, so you can't argue with them.

古文：其弟户部主事瑗适辇饷银四万出都，琦立追还，给费，事乃克济。
现代文：他的弟弟户部主事冯瑗刚好运送四万两饷银出京城，冯琦立即将他追回，提供经费，事情才得以办成。
English: His younger brother, the head of the household department, Feng Hao, just happened to transport forty thousand two hundred taels of silver out of Beijing. Feng Hao immediately tracked him down and provided funds so that the matter could be completed.

古文：三十年，帝有疾，谕停矿税，既而悔之。
现代文：万历三十年，神宗患病，下令停止征收矿税，不久又后悔了。
English: After thirty years, Shinso fell ill, ordered to stop collecting mineral taxes, and soon regretted it.

古文：琦与同列合疏争，且请躬郊庙祭享，御殿受朝，不纳。
现代文：冯琦与同僚们联合上奏争辩，并且恳请皇帝亲自到郊庙祭祀，上殿受理朝拜，皇帝不接纳。
English: Feng Yu and his colleagues jointly raised a dispute, and implored the emperor to personally go to the suburb temple to offer sacrifices, and to accept the worship in the upper hall. The emperor did not accept it.

古文：湖广税监陈奉以虐民撤还，会陕西黄河竭，琦言辽东高淮、山东陈增、广东李凤、陕西梁永、云南杨荣，肆虐不减于奉，并乞征还，皆不报。
现代文：湖广税监陈奉因为虐待百姓被撤回，陕西的黄河干涸，冯琦谏言辽东的高淮、山东的陈增、广东的李凤、陕西的梁永、云南的杨荣，肆虐的程度不低于陈奉，请求将他们一起撤回，神宗都没有答复。
English: The Hukang tax inspector Chen Bong was withdrawn for abusing the people, the Yellow River in Shaanxi dried up, Feng Yujun Gao Huai in Liaodong, Chen Zeng in Shandong, Li Feng in Guangdong, Liang Yong in Shaanxi, Yang Rong in Yunnan, the degree of violence is not lower than Chen Bong, the request to withdraw them together, Shenzong did not answer.

古文：南京守备中官邢隆请别给关防征税，琦不可，乃以御前牙关防给之。
现代文：南京守备宦官邢隆请求另外给关防征税，冯琦不同意，就把御前牙关防税给了他。
English: Yulong, the eunuch in charge of the defense of Nanjing, asked for an additional tax to be levied on customs and defense, but Feng Ye did not agree, so he gave him the imperial customs and defense tax.

古文：时士大夫多崇释氏教，士子作文，每窃其绪言，鄙弃传注。
现代文：当时士大夫多信奉佛教，士人写作往往吸取佛教之意，而鄙弃经书的传注。
English: At that time, most scholars believed in Buddhism, and scholars often drew on the meaning of Buddhism in their writings, but despised the transmission of scriptures.

古文：前尚书余继登奏请约禁，然习尚如故。
现代文：前任尚书余继登奏请约束、禁止，然而习俗风尚如故。
English: His predecessor, Shang Shuxu, followed suit by restricting and prohibiting the performance, but the custom remained unchanged.

古文：琦乃复极陈其弊，帝为下诏戒厉。
现代文：冯琦又极力陈述它的弊端，皇帝下诏戒止。
English: Feng Xuan also vigorously stated its drawbacks, and the emperor issued an edict to stop it.

古文：琦明习典故，学有根柢。
现代文：冯琦熟习典故，学习有根底。
English: Feng Yu is familiar with allusions, and has a solid foundation for learning.

古文：数陈谠论，中外想望丰采，帝亦深眷倚。
现代文：多次陈述正直的言论，朝廷内外都希望看到他的风采，皇帝也很眷恋、倚重他。
English: He repeatedly made honest statements, and both inside and outside the court wanted to see his style. The emperor was also very fond of him and relied on him.

古文：内阁缺人，帝已简用朱国祚及琦。
现代文：内阁缺人，神宗已经选用了朱国祚和冯琦。
English: The cabinet is short of people, and Shenzong has already selected Zhu Guojun and Feng Jun.

古文：而沈一贯密揭，言二人年未及艾，盖少需之，先用老成者。
现代文：但是沈一贯秘密上书，称他们两人的年纪不大，不妨稍过一段时间再说，先任用年长者。
English: But Shen always secretly wrote a letter, saying that the two of them were not very old, and that it would be better to wait a little longer and use the older one first.

古文：乃改命沈鲤、朱赓。
现代文：于是改任沈鲤、朱赓。
English: As a result, he was reassigned to the posts of Shen Qi and Zhu Xi.

古文：琦素善病，至是笃。
现代文：冯琦一向有病，因此更加沉重。
English: Feng Jun has always been ill, so it's even more difficult.

古文：十六疏乞休，不允。
现代文：十六次奏疏请求退休，皇帝不同意。
English: For the sixteenth time, the Emperor did not agree to Sonoso's request to retire.

古文：卒于官，年仅四十六。
现代文：死于任上，年仅四十六岁。
English: He died in office at the age of 46.

古文：遗疏请厉明作，发章奏，补缺官，推诚接下，收拾人心。
现代文：遗下奏疏请求皇帝严肃明理之作，发下奏疏，补充空缺的官职，对下面的臣民表示诚意，收拢人心。
English: He left a petition asking the emperor to make a serious and reasonable work, issue a petition to supplement the vacant official post, express sincerity to the following subjects, and win the hearts of the people.

古文：语极恳挚。
现代文：语言很恳切诚挚。
English: The language is earnest and sincere.

古文：钟羽正称 子咸信道忘仕则漆雕子，循经蹈古则高子羔 云。王图，字则之，耀州人。
现代文：神宗对他悼念、惋惜。追赠太子少保。天启初年，谥号文敏。王图，字则之，耀州人。
English: Shinso mourned and regretted him. He was posthumously given the title of Prince Shōhō. In the first year of the Apocalypse, he was given the posthumous name of Monmin. Wangtu, Zesetsu, a native of Yōshū.

古文：万历十一年进士。
现代文：万历十一年的进士。
English: An eleven-year-old trainee.

古文：改庶吉士，授检讨，以右中允掌南京翰林院事。
现代文：改任庶吉士，授职为检讨，任右中允负责南京翰林院的事务。
English: He was reappointed as the second-in-command, the appointment was subject to review, and he was put in charge of the affairs of the Nanjing Hanlin Academy.

古文：召充东宫讲官。 妖书 事起，沈一贯欲有所罗织，图其教习门生也，尽言规之。
现代文：受召见并被任命为东宫讲官。 妖书 事件发生，沈一贯想将一些人罗织进去，王图是他教习的门生，极力规劝他。
English: He was summoned to the East Palace and appointed as a lecturer.The Occult Book When the incident occurred, Shen always wanted to lure some people in. Wang Tu was his disciple, and he tried his best to persuade him.

古文：累迁詹事，充日讲官，教习庶吉士。进吏部右侍郎，掌翰林院。
现代文：他渐渐升任詹事，担当日讲官，教导庶吉士，又晋升为吏部右侍郎，负责翰林院。
English: He gradually rose to the post of Zhanji, in charge of the Japanese lecturer, taught the officiating priest, and was promoted to the right hand man of the cadre department, responsible for the Hanlin Academy.

古文：兄国方巡抚保定，廷臣附东林及李三才者，往往推毂图兄弟。
现代文：他的哥哥王国，正巡抚保定。依附东林党和李三才的朝廷大臣，往往推崇王图兄弟。
English: His elder brother, Wang Guo, was the governor of Baoding. The ministers of the imperial court, who supported the Donglin Party and Li Sancai, often praised the Wang Tu brothers.

古文：会孙丕扬起掌吏部，孙玮以尚书督仓场，皆陕西人，诸不悦图者，目为秦党。
现代文：遇上孙丕扬出山负责吏部，孙玮以尚书身份总管仓场，他们都是陕西人。所有不喜欢王图的人，都被看作是秦党。
English: When they met, they were both from Shaanxi Province. Sun Qiangyang was in charge of the personnel department, and Sun Yao was in charge of the warehouse department. All those who did not like Wang Tu were regarded as Qin Party members.

古文：而是时郭正域、刘曰宁及图并有相望。
现代文：而此时郭正域、刘日宁和王图均有名望。
English: At this time, Guo Zhengwei, Liu Rining and Wang Tu were all famous.

古文：正域逐去，曰宁卒，时论益归图。
现代文：郭正域遭驱逐，刘日宁去世了，当时的舆论更加倾向王图。
English: Guo Zhengwei was expelled, Liu Rining died, and the public opinion at that time was more inclined to Wang Tu.

古文：叶向高独相久，图旦夕且入阁，忌者益众。
现代文：叶向高独掌阁权很久，王图早晚要进入内阁，对他忌恨的人更加多了。
English: Ye Xianggao has been in sole charge of the cabinet for a long time, Wang Tu will sooner or later enter the cabinet, and there are more people who hate him.

古文：适将京察，恶东林及李三才、王元翰者，设词惑丕扬，令发单咨是非，将阴为钩党计。
现代文：恰恰要进行京察，憎恨东林党以及李三才、王元翰的人，造谣迷惑孙丕扬，下令发放文函咨询是非，准备暗中作为钩引党徒的计谋。
English: He just wanted to inspect Beijing, hated the Donglin Party and the people of Li Sancai and Wang Yuanhan, spread rumors to confuse Sun Xuanyang, ordered the issuance of a letter to consult the rights and wrongs, and secretly prepared a plan to entice party members.

古文：图急言于丕扬，止之，群小大恨。
现代文：王图赶紧劝告孙丕扬，终止了此事。众小人大为恼恨。
English: Wang Tu quickly advised Sun Xiangyang and terminated the matter. The villains were very angry.

古文：初，图典庚戌会试。
现代文：起初，王图主管庚戌年的会试。
English: At first, Wang Tu was in charge of Geng Xuan's audition.

古文：分校官汤宾尹欲私韩敬，与知贡举吴道南盛气相诟谇。
现代文：分校官汤宾尹想对韩敬徇私，与知贡举吴道南大动肝火互相辱骂。
English: Tang Bin Yin, a branch official of the school, wanted to abuse Han Jing and insult him, and he and Zhigong held a heated exchange with Wu Dao Nan Dai.

古文：比出闱，道南欲劾，以图沮而止。
现代文：等到离开试场，吴道南准备弹劾宾尹，因为王图阻止而作罢。
English: By the time he left the testing ground, Wu Daonan was ready to impeach Bin Yin, but stopped because Wang Tu prevented it.

古文：王绍徽者，图同郡人，宾尹门生也，极誉宾尹于图，而言道南党欲倾宾尹并及图，宜善为计。
现代文：王绍徽，是王图同乡，也是宾尹的门生，在王图面前极力赞美宾尹，而称吴道南的同伙想倾覆汤宾尹和王图，应该好自谋划。
English: Wang Shaohui, a fellow villager of Wang Tu and a protégé of Bin Yin, praised Bin Yin in front of Wang Tu, and said that if Wu Daonan's associates wanted to overthrow Tang Bin Yin and Wang Tu, they should make their own plans.

古文：图正色却之，绍徽怫然去。
现代文：王图严肃地回绝了他，王绍徽很不高兴地离去。
English: Wang Tu sternly rebuffed him, and Wang Shaohui left very unhappy.

古文：时宾尹已为祭酒，其先历翰林京察，当图注考，思先发倾之。
现代文：当时汤宾尹已经做了国子监祭酒，他先任翰林京察，当王图注考的时候，他想先发难倾覆王图。
English: At that time, Tang Bin Yin had already made the national son of the overseer of the sacrificial wine. He first appointed Han Lin to inspect the capital. When Wang Tu was annotated, he wanted to overthrow Wang Tu first.

古文：乃与绍徽计。令御史金明时劾图子宝坻知县淑抃赃私巨万。
现代文：于是与王绍徽谋划，指令御史金明时弹劾王图担任宝坻知县的儿子王淑扌卞私藏巨额钱财。
English: So he plotted with Wang Shaohui and ordered Wang Shu's son, Wang Shu's son, Wang Shu's son, Wang Shu's son, Wang Shu's son, Wang Shu's son, to secretly hide huge amounts of money.

古文：且谓国素疾李三才，图为求解，国怒詈之，图遂欲以拾遗去国。
现代文：并称王一向厌恶李三才，王图替他寻求和解的办法，王国怒骂了他，王图就想以纠正帝王过失的名义让王国离职。
English: He also said that Wang had always disliked Li Sancai, and that Wang Tuo had sought reconciliation for him. Wang Tuo wanted to remove Wang Guo from office in the name of correcting the emperor's mistakes.

古文：国兄弟抗章力辩，忌者复伪为淑抃劾国疏，播之邸抄。
现代文：王图兄弟上奏极力辩解，憎恨他的人又伪造王淑扌卞弹劾王国的奏章，由邸抄传播。
English: Wang Tu's brothers strenuously defended Wang Tu's appeal, and those who hated him forged Wang Shu's appeal to impeach the kingdom, which was copied and disseminated by the residence.

古文：图上疏言状，帝为下诏购捕，乃已。
现代文：王图上奏陈述情况，皇帝替他下诏令追缴，才平息。
English: Wang Tu reported the situation, and the emperor issued an imperial edict to recover the money for him. Only then did the situation calm down.

古文：及考察，卒注宾尹不谨，褫其官，明时亦被黜。
现代文：等到考察的时候，最终评注汤宾尹不谨慎，革除他的官职，金明时也被罢黜。
English: At the time of the investigation, the final comment was that Tang Bin Yin was not prudent, and he was dismissed from his post, and Jin Ming Shi was also dismissed.

古文：由是其党大噪。
现代文：因此其党徒大为哗然。
English: As a result, his followers were in an uproar.

古文：秦聚、奎朱一桂、郑继芳、徐兆魁、高节、王万祚、曾陈易辈，连章力攻图。
现代文：秦聚奎、朱一桂、郑继芳、徐兆魁、高节、王万祚、曾陈易等人，接连上奏极力攻击王图。
English: Qin Jukui, Zhu Yigui, Zheng Jifang, Xu Zhaokui, Gao Jie, Wang Wanzhong, Zeng Chen Yi and others successively attacked Wang Tu.

古文：图亦连章求去，出郊待命。
现代文：王图也接连上奏请求离职，在京郊等待指令。
English: Wang Tu also successively requested to leave the post, waiting for instructions in the suburbs of Beijing.

古文：温诏屡慰留，坚卧不起，九阅月始予告归。国亦乞休去，未几卒。
现代文：皇帝多次下达温和的诏令对他安慰与挽留，他坚持卧病不起，经过多月才准许他回乡，王国也请求退休，不久去世。
English: The emperor repeatedly issued gentle decrees to comfort and retain him. He insisted on being bedridden, and it took many months before he was allowed to return to his hometown. The kingdom also asked him to retire, and he died soon after.

古文：四十五年京察，当事者多宾尹、绍徽党，以拾遗落图职。
现代文：万历四十五年，进行京察，负责的多是汤宾尹、王绍徽的党羽，以有人谏其过失的名义解除了王图的官职。
English: In the 45th year of Wanli, the Beijing inspection was carried out, and most of the responsible party members were Tang Binyin and Wang Shaohui, and Wang Tu was dismissed from his official post in the name of someone accusing him of negligence.

古文：服阕，召为礼部右侍郎，协理詹事府。
现代文：天启三年，皇帝召见他并官复原职。晋升礼部尚书，协助负责詹事府。
English: In the third year of the Apocalypse, the emperor summoned him and reinstated his post. He was promoted to the Ministry of Ceremonies, and assisted in the management of Zhan Shifu.

古文：道卒。赠礼部尚书。
现代文：第二年，魏忠贤的党羽刘弘先弹劾王图，于是被剥夺官籍。不久去世。
English: The following year, Wei Zhongxian's henchman Liu Hongxian impeached Wang Tu, and he was stripped of his official status. He died soon after.

古文：天启初，追谥文简。
现代文：崇祯初年，追赠为太子太保，谥号文肃。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, he was posthumously granted the title of Crown Prince Taibo, and his posthumous name was Bunsu.

古文：翁正春，字兆震，侯官人。
现代文：翁正春，字兆震，侯官人。
English: Weng Zhengchun, Zhaozhen, Houkanren.

古文：万历中，为龙溪教谕。
现代文：万历中期，担任龙溪教谕。
English: In the middle of the Wanli period, he served as the leader of Longxi.

古文：二十年，擢进士第一，授修撰，累迁少詹事。
现代文：万历二十年，考中进士第一名，授职为修撰，升任少詹事。
English: In the 20th year of the Wanli era, he won the first place in the junior high school entrance examination, and was promoted to Shao Zhanji.

古文：三十八年九月，拜礼部左侍郎，代吴道南署部事。
现代文：万历三十八年九月，被任命为礼部左侍郎，代替吴道南负责礼部事务。
English: In September of the 38th year of Wanli, he was appointed as the left attendant of the ceremonial department, replacing Wu Daonan in charge of ceremonial department affairs.

古文：十一月，日有食之，正春极言阙失，不报。
现代文：十一月，出现日蚀，翁正春极力陈述朝廷的过失，皇帝没有答复。
English: In November, when a solar eclipse occurred, Weng Zhengchun vigorously stated the fault of the imperial court, but the emperor did not reply.

古文：明年秋，万寿节，正春献八箴：曰清君心，遵祖制，振国纪，信臣僚，宝贤才，谨财用，恤民命，重边防。
现代文：第二年秋天，万寿节，翁正春提出八点劝告：即清净君王的心绪，遵循祖制，振奋国家纲纪，信赖臣僚，珍重贤才，节俭开支，体恤百姓，重视边防。
English: In the autumn of the following year, on the Day of Longevity, Weng Zhengchun proposed an eight-point exhortation: that is, purify the king's mood, follow the ancestral system, invigorate the national discipline, trust the ministers, cherish the talents, be frugal in spending, sympathize with the people, and attach importance to border defense.

古文：帝不省。
现代文：皇帝并不省悟。
English: The emperor did not listen.

古文：吉王翊銮请封支子常源为郡王。
现代文：吉王翊銮奏请册封他的旁系儿子常源任郡王。
English: Ji Wang Xinsao requested that his collateral son, Changyuan, be named the county king.

古文：正春言翊銮之封在《宗藩条例》已定之后，其支庶宜止本爵。
现代文：翁正春称翊銮受封在《宗藩条例》已经确立之后，他的旁系庶子只能限于该爵位。
English: Weng Zhengchun said that after the "Shu Han Regulations" had been established, his collateral illegitimate son could only be limited to this title.

古文：乃授镇国将军。
现代文：于是授任他为镇国将军。
English: As a result, he was appointed as the town's general.

古文：王贵妃薨，久不卜葬，正春以为言。
现代文：王贵妃去世，许久不占卜葬地时宜，翁正春因此谏言。
English: Wang Guifei passed away, and for a long time, it was not appropriate to divine the burial place, so Weng Zhengchun made a speech.

古文：命偕中官往择地，得吉。
现代文：皇帝命令宦官去选择墓地，选取吉地。
English: The emperor ordered the eunuch to choose a cemetery and choose a good place.

古文：中官难以烦费，正春勃然曰： 贵妃诞育元良，他日国母也，奈何以天下俭乎？ 
现代文：宦官认为麻烦费事，翁正春发怒道 ：贵妃生育了太子，以后是国母，为什么让天下俭朴待她？ 
English: The eunuch thought the trouble was too much, and Weng Zhengchun became angry and said, "Your empress has given birth to a prince, and will later be the mother of the nation. Why should the world treat her so frugally?

古文：奏上，报可。
现代文：启奏皇帝，答复可以。
English: The report was submitted, and the return was approved.

古文：代王欲废长子鼎渭，立次子鼎莎，朝议持二十余年。
现代文：代王想废黜长子鼎渭，册立次子鼎沙，朝廷议论持续了二十多年。
English: The crown prince wanted to depose the eldest son Ding Yao and install the second son Ding Sha. The discussion in the imperial court lasted for more than 20 years.

古文：正春集众议上疏，鼎渭卒得立。
现代文：翁正春汇集众多意见上奏，鼎渭最终被册立。
English: Weng Zhengchun collected a lot of opinions on the performance, and the grand finale was finally recorded.

古文：琉球中山王遣使入贡，正春言： 中山已入于倭，今使臣多倭人，贡物多倭器，绝之便；否亦宜诏福建抚臣量留土物，毋俾入朝。 
现代文：琉球中山王派遣使者朝贡，翁正春称： 中山王已归附倭寇，现在的使者多是倭国人，贡物大都是倭国的器皿，断绝与其往来比较好；要不也可以令福建的地方官约略留下一些土产，不要让他们到京都朝贡。 
English: Ryukyu's King Nakasane sent emissaries to pay tribute, Weng Zhengchun said: King Nakasane has been annexed by the Japanese pirates, and most of the current emissaries are Japanese, and most of the tributes are Japanese vessels, so it is better to cut off contacts with them; alternatively, Fujian's local officials can be left with some local products, so that they do not have to pay tribute to Kyoto.

古文：帝是之。
现代文：皇帝对此表示赞同。
English: The emperor thought it was right.

古文：四十年，进士邹之麟分校乡试，私举子童学贤，为御史马孟祯等所发。
现代文：万历四十年，进士邹之麟分管乡试，对举人童学贤徇私，被御史马孟祯等人告发。
English: After forty years of hard work, Jin Shizhen Zilin was assigned to be in charge of the township examination, and he was accused of teaching children to be virtuous. He was denounced by Goshima Mengqi and others.

古文：正春议黜学贤，谪之麟，而不及主考官。
现代文：翁正春提议废黜童学贤，贬斥邹之麟，却不涉及主考官。
English: Weng Zhengchun proposed the dethronement of Tong Tong Xuexian and the denunciation of Gong Zilin, but did not involve the chief examiner.

古文：给事中赵兴邦、亓诗教因劾正春徇私。
现代文：给事中赵兴邦、亓诗教于是弹劾翁正春徇私。
English: Zhao Xingbang and Zou Shiyu then impeached Weng Zhengchun for slandering me.

古文：正春求去，不许。
现代文：翁正春请求辞官，皇帝不同意。
English: Weng Zhengchun asked to resign, but the emperor did not agree.

古文：顷之，言官发汤宾尹、韩敬科场事。
现代文：不久，言官告发汤宾尹、韩敬在科举考场上的罪行。
English: Not long after, the spokesman denounced Tang Bin Yin and Han Jing for their crimes at the entrance examination.

古文：正春坐敬不谨，敬党大恨。
现代文：翁正春治韩敬不恭谨的罪名，韩敬的党羽很恼恨。
English: Weng Zhengchun punished Han Jing for being disrespectful, and Han Jing's followers were very angry.

古文：诗教复劾正春，正春疏辩，益求去。
现代文：亓诗教再次弹劾翁正春，翁正春上奏争辩，更加恳求辞官。
English: Gong Shi Jiao once again impeached Weng Zhengchun. Weng Zhengchun argued and pleaded with the judge.

古文：帝虽慰留，然自是不安其位。
现代文：皇帝虽然安慰挽留了他，他却从此不安心自己的职位。
English: Although the emperor consoled him and kept him, he was no longer sure of his position.

古文：寻改吏部，掌詹事府，以侍养归。
现代文：不久，改派到吏部，负责詹事府，以侍养的名义回乡。
English: Soon, he was reassigned to the personnel department, in charge of the Zhanzhi Prefecture, and returned to his hometown in the name of a servant.

古文：天启元年，起礼部尚书，协理詹事府事。
现代文：天启元年，出任礼部尚书，协助掌管詹事府的事务。
English: In the first year of Tianqi, he served as the ceremonial secretary and assisted in managing the affairs of Zhanzhi Prefecture.

古文：抗论忤魏忠贤，被旨谯责。
现代文：言论逆拂了魏忠贤，被皇帝下旨责备。
English: The remarks backfired on Wei Zhongxian, who was reprimanded by the emperor.

古文：明年，御史赵胤昌希指劾之，正春再疏乞归。
现代文：第二年，御史赵胤昌迎合上级而弹劾他，翁正春再度上奏请求辞官回乡。
English: In the second year, the chief secretary Zhao Yanchang pandered to his superiors and impeached him, and Weng Zhengchun again petitioned the resignation to return to his hometown.

古文：帝以正春尝为皇祖讲官，特加太子少保，赐敕驰传，异数也。
现代文：皇帝因为翁正春曾担任皇祖的讲官，特意加封他为太子少保，赐与敕令乘驿车驰归。
English: Because Weng Zhengchun had served as a lecturer for the emperor's ancestors, the emperor specially added him as a minor prince, and gave him the order to return by carriage.

古文：时正春年逾七十，母百岁，率子孙奉觞上寿，乡闾艳之。
现代文：当时翁正春已经年过七十，母亲百岁，他率领子孙孝敬老母，乡里人都赞美他。
English: At that time, Weng Zhengchun was over seventy years old, and his mother was a hundred years old. He led his children and grandchildren to cherish his old mother, and the villagers all praised him.

古文：未几，卒。崇祯初，谥文简。
现代文：不久，他去世了，崇祯初年，谥号文简。
English: Soon after, he passed away. In the first year of his reign, he was nicknamed "Wen Jian."

古文：正春风度峻整，终日无狎语。
现代文：翁正春的风度峻肃，整天没有轻慢的话。
English: Weng Zhengchun's demeanor is austere, and there is nothing frivolous throughout the day.

古文：倦不倾倚，暑不裸裎，目无流视。
现代文：疲倦了不东斜西靠，暑天不裸露身体，眼睛不四处张望。
English: If you are tired, don't lean back, don't expose your body in hot weather, and don't look around.

古文：见者肃然。
现代文：看见他的人无不肃然起敬。
English: Everyone who saw him was awestruck.

古文：明一代，科目职官冠廷对者二人；鼐以典史，正春以教谕云。
现代文：整个明朝，科目的官吏在廷对中称雄的有两人：即典史曹鼎，教谕翁正春。
English: Throughout the Ming Dynasty, there were two officials in the imperial court who excelled in subjects: the immediate history Cao Ding, and the teacher Weng Zhengchun.

古文：刘应秋，字士和，吉水人。
现代文：刘应秋，字士和，吉水人。
English: Liu Yingqiu, a poet and a man of auspicious water.

古文：万历十一年进士及第，授编修，迁南京司业。
现代文：万历十一年进士及第，授职为编修，晋升南京司业。
English: In the eleventh year of Wanli, he was promoted to the first and second grade, and was assigned to be an editor and promoted to the Nanjing Division.

古文：十八年冬，疏论首辅申时行言： 陛下召对辅臣，谘以边事，时行不能抒诚谋国，专事蒙蔽。
现代文：万历十八年冬天，上书评论及首辅申时行说 ：陛下召见辅佐大臣面议，询问边防的事务，申时行不能坦诚地为国家谋划，专门隐瞒弊害。
English: In the winter of the 18th year of the Wanli calendar, the comment on the letter and the chief assistant to Shin Shigyo said: His Majesty summoned the assistant minister for face-to-face discussion and inquired about the affairs of border defense. Shin Shigyo could not honestly plan for the country and specifically concealed the harm.

古文：贼大举入犯，既掠洮、岷，直迫临、巩，覆军杀将，频至丧败，而时行犹曰 掠番 ，曰 声言入寇 ，岂洮、河以内，尽皆番地乎？
现代文：敌贼大举进犯，已经劫掠了洮、岷，又直逼临、巩，覆灭我军，杀我将领，我们败绩频传，而申时行依然说 劫掠番地 ，说 敌寇扬言要侵略了 ，难道洮、河以南，都是番地吗？
English: The enemy bandits have made a large-scale attack. They have already plundered,, and are directly approaching  Gong, annihilating our army and killing our leader. Our defeats are frequent, but Shin Shigyo still says, "They have plundered Banchi," says, "The enemy bandits are threatening to invade." Isn't, south of the river, all Banchi?

古文：辅臣者，天子所与托腹心者也。
现代文：辅佐大臣，是天子所依托的心腹。
English: The Vice-Minister of Foreign Affairs is a close confidant of the Emperor.

古文：夫士风高下，关乎气运，说者谓嘉靖至今，士风三变。
现代文：辅佐大臣先做隐瞒，还责备众位僚属什么？所以近日的敌情，有按臣奏疏而不闻督抚报告，有督抚报告而枢密大臣不入奏。士风的高下，关系到国家的气运，我认为嘉靖到现在，士风有三次变化。
English: The Vice-Minister of the Vice-Council first did a cover-up, and also accused all the colleagues of what? Therefore, the recent hostile situation, according to the report of the vassal, but did not listen to the report of the superintendent, and the report of the superintendent, but the minister of the privy council did not enter the report. The level of the warrior style is related to the national fortune, I think that Jiajing has three changes in the warrior style so far.

古文：一变环境严嵩之黩贿，而士化为贪。
现代文：第一次变化是严嵩贪吞贿赂，士风变得贪婪。
English: The first change was that Yan Song was greedy for bribes, and the scholarly style became greedy.

古文：再变于张居正之专擅，而士竞于险。
现代文：第二次变化是张居正专权，士风竟尚邪恶刻薄。
English: The second change is the absolute power of Zhang Juzheng, and the scholarly style is still evil and mean.

古文：至于今，外逃贪黩之名，而顽夫债帅多出门下；阳避专擅之迹，而芒刃斧斤倒持手中。
现代文：现在，外无贪婪之名，而贪婪的大夫、行贿的将帅大都由他们的门下产生；表面上要避免专权的嫌疑，而手中却倒握锋利的斧斤。
English: Now, there is no such thing as greed, but greedy doctors and bribing generals are mostly produced under their doors; on the surface, they want to avoid suspicion of autocracy, but in their hands they hold a sharp axe.

古文：威福之权，潜移其向；爱憎之的，明示之趋。
现代文：威严福佑的权柄，暗地改变了归属；爱憎的对象，就是明确昭示的取向。
English: The authority of majesty and blessing has secretly changed the attribution; the object of love and hate is the clearly revealed orientation.

古文：欲天下无靡，不可得也。 
现代文：想国家不糜烂，不可得救呀。 
English: If you don't want the country to rot, you can't save it.

古文：语并侵次辅王锡爵。
现代文：话语又触及了次辅王锡爵。
English: The discourse also touched on the Second Assistant King Xizhe.

古文：时主事蔡时鼎、南京御史章守诚亦疏论时行。
现代文：当时的主事蔡时鼎、南京御史章守诚也上奏评论申时行。
English: Cai Shiding, who was in charge at the time, and Nanjing historian Zhang Shucheng also commented on the petition.

古文：并留中。
现代文：奏章都被留在宫中。
English: All the musical scores were left in the palace.

古文：应秋寻召为中允，充日讲官。
现代文：刘应秋不久被任命为中允，充任日讲官。
English: Liu Yingqiu was soon appointed as Zhongyong, acting as a Japanese lecturer.

古文：历右庶子、祭酒。
现代文：历任右庶子、国子监祭酒。
English: Successive successors, including his son-in-law, son-in-law, and son-in-law, have supervised the production of sake.

古文：二十六年，有撰《忧危竑议》者，御史赵之翰以指大学士张位，并及应秋。
现代文：万历二十六年，有人撰写《忧危议》，御史赵之翰就指责大学士张位，并涉及刘应秋。
English: In the 26th year of the Wanli calendar, someone wrote "The Worry and Danger Debate," and the imperial historian Zhao Zhikhan accused Zhang Yi, a university scholar, and involved Liu Yingqiu.

古文：所司言应秋非位党，宜留。
现代文：所司称刘应秋不是张位的党羽，应该留用。
English: The directorate said that Liu Yingqiu is not a party member of Zhangyi, and should be retained.

古文：帝命调外，应秋遂辞疾归。
现代文：神宗命令将他调出京城，刘应秋称病辞官回乡。
English: Shenzong ordered him to be transferred out of Beijing, and Liu Yingqiu called in sick to return to his hometown.

古文：初，御史黄卷索珠商徐性善赇，不尽应，上章籍没之。
现代文：起初，御史黄卷索取珠宝商徐性善的贿赂，没有全部满足，启奏借口没收了他的财资。
English: At first, Mr. Huang demanded a bribe from the jeweler Xu Shongshen, but was not fully satisfied, and confiscated his money and resources under the pretext of opening the concert.

古文：应秋詈卷启天子好利之端。
现代文：刘应秋责备黄卷开启了天子好利的先例。
English: Liu Yingqiu reproached Huang Zhuan for setting a precedent of taking advantage of others.

古文：男子诸龙光奏讦李如松，至荷枷大暑中。
现代文：有个名叫诸龙光的男子上奏揭发李如松，被罚在大暑天戴枷。
English: A man named Zhu Longguang exposed Li Ru Song and was punished with shackles on a hot day.

古文：取吉安、临江，加詹事兼兵部左侍郎。
现代文：刘应秋称一狂妄之人上书，何必置他于死地？
English: Liu Yingqiu wrote a letter calling him an arrogant person. Why put him to death?

古文：同升已羸疾，日与士大夫讲忠孝大节，闻者咸奋，以廷麟请，抚南、赣，十二，月卒于赣州。唐文献，字元徵，华亭人。
现代文：当时的大臣都闲游养性，只有刘应秋喜欢讥讽评论时事，因此遭憎恨，最终被罢黜。回乡几年后去世。崇祯年间，赠封为礼部侍郎，谥号文节。唐文献，字元征，华亭人。
English: At that time, the ministers were idle. Only Liu Yingqiu liked to make sarcastic comments on current affairs, so he was hated and eventually ousted. He died a few years after returning to his hometown. During the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, he was awarded the title of ceremonial attendant, the nickname Wenjie. Tang literature, character Yuan Zheng, Huatei people.

古文：万历十四年进士第一。
现代文：万历十四年的进士第一。
English: After fourteen years of hard work, he was promoted to the first rank.

古文：授修撰，历詹事。
现代文：授职为修撰，历任詹事。
English: The awarding of posts is a matter of training, and the successors are all the same.

古文：沈一贯以 妖书 事倾尚书郭正域，持之急。
现代文：沈一贯借 妖书 事件倾轧尚书郭正域，行事很急切。
English: Shen has always borrowed the occult book, and the incident is still in the realm of the book, and he is acting very urgently.

古文：文献偕其僚杨道宾、周如砥、陶望龄往见一贯曰： 郭公将不免，人谓公实有意杀之。 
现代文：唐文献与同僚杨道实、周如砥、陶望龄去拜会沈一贯道： 郭公如果不被赦免，人们说您实际上有意要杀死他。 
English: Tang Literature and colleagues Yang Doushi, Zhou Ruto, and Tao Wangling went to visit Shen Gangwen, who said: If Guo Gong is not pardoned, people say that you actually intend to kill him.

古文：一贯踞跼艴，酹地若为誓者。
现代文：沈一贯拘束不敢放纵，洒酒于地如发誓一般。
English: Shen has always been restrained and does not dare to indulge, sprinkling wine on the ground as if swearing.

古文：文献曰： 亦知公无意杀之也，第台省承风下石，而公不早讫此狱，何辞以谢天下。 
现代文：唐文献说 ：我们也知道您没有杀他的意思，只是台省官员乘机落井下石，而您不早些了结这桩案子，用什么来向天下人谢罪？ 
English: The Tang Dynasty document said: We also know that you did not intend to kill him, but the Taiwanese officials took the opportunity to undermine the case. If you do not settle this case earlier, what will you use to apologize to the world?

古文：一贯敛容谢之。
现代文：沈一贯郑重地感谢了他们。
English: Shen always thanked them solemnly.

古文：望龄见朱赓不为救，亦正色责以大义，愿弃官与正域同死。
现代文：陶望龄见朱赓不予救援，也严肃地对其晓以大义，愿意弃官与郭正域一起去死。
English: When Tao Wangling saw that Zhu Xi would not be rescued, he also solemnly told him that he was willing to give up his post and go with Guo Zhengwei to die.

古文：狱得稍解。
现代文：案狱稍稍得以缓解。
English: The prison sentence was slightly reduced.

古文：然文献等以是失政府意。
现代文：然而唐文献等人因此失掉政府的信任。
English: However, Tang Literature and others lost the government's trust as a result.

古文：久之，拜礼部右侍郎，掌翰林院事。
现代文：此后很久，才任礼部右侍郎，负责翰林院的事务。
English: It was not until much later that he was appointed as the Right Attendant of the Ceremonial Department, responsible for the affairs of the Hanlin Academy.

古文：初，文献出赵用贤门，以名节相矜许。
现代文：起初，唐文献出自赵用贤的门下，因为名节矜持而受赞许。
English: At first, Tang literature was written under the tutelage of Zhao Yingxian, who was praised for his restraint.

古文：同年生给事中李沂劾张鲸被廷杖，文献掖之出，资给其汤药。
现代文：同龄的给事中李沂弹劾张鲸反遭廷杖，唐文献将他扶持出宫，资助他汤药。
English: In a case of the same age, Li Yu impeached Zhang Jiali, but was beaten by the imperial scepter. Tang literatures supported him to leave the palace and subsidized his medicine.

古文：荆州推官华钰忤税监逮下诏狱，文献力周旋，得无死。
现代文：荆州推官华钰拂逆了税监被逮捕，投入诏狱，唐文献替他周旋，得以不死。
English: The Jingzhou magistrate Hua Xihu rebelled against the tax inspector and was arrested and sent to the imperial prison. Tang literatures intervened on his behalf and he was able to survive.

古文：笃嗜王守仁说，所宗者周汝登。
现代文：负责翰林的时候，遇上考察，执政想庇护一个人，他坚持不同意。
English: When he was in charge of Hanlin, he encountered an inspection, and the government wanted to shelter a person, but he insisted on disagreeing.

古文：与弟奭龄皆以讲学名。卒谥文简。
现代文：后来他死于任上。赠封为礼部尚书，谥号文恪。
English: Later, he died in office. He was awarded the title of Shosho of the Ministry of Ceremonies and the posthumous title of Monk.

古文：李腾芳，字子实，湘潭人。
现代文：李腾芳，字子实，湘潭人。
English: Li Tengfang, a real character, from Hunan.

古文：万历二十年进士。
现代文：万历二十年，考中进士。
English: After twenty years of hard work, he passed the junior high school entrance examination.

古文：改庶吉士。
现代文：改职庶吉士。
English: I'm so glad I changed jobs.

古文：好学，负才名。
现代文：好学习，享有才名。
English: Good at studying, enjoy the fame.

古文：三王并封旨下，腾芳为书诣朝房投大学士王锡爵略言： 公欲暂承上意，巧借封王，转作册立。
现代文：并封三王的圣旨下达，李腾芳去朝房投书大学士王锡爵。大意是说 ：您想暂时秉承皇帝的旨意，巧妙地借助封王，转换为册立。
English: After the imperial edict of the three kings was issued, Li Tengfang went to the imperial palace to submit a letter to the imperial court judge Wang Xizhe. The meaning is: You want to temporarily adhere to the emperor's will, cleverly using the imperial edict to convert it into a document.

古文：然恐王封既定，大典愈迟。
现代文：然而恐怕封王经确定后，大典会更迟。
English: However, I am afraid that the grand ceremony will start later after the king is confirmed.

古文：他日公去而事坏，罪公始谋，何辞以解？
现代文：日后待您离去后事情败坏了，追究您开始谋划的罪行，您用什么话来解释？
English: What words do you use to explain that later, after you left, things went wrong and you were prosecuted for the crimes you had begun to plan?

古文：此不独宗社忧，亦公子孙祸也。 
现代文：这不单单是宗庙社稷的忧虑，也关系到您子孙的祸福。 
English: This is not only a concern for the family temple community, but is also related to the fate of your children and grandchildren.

古文：锡爵读未竟，遽牵衣命坐，曰： 诸人詈我，我何以自明？
现代文：王锡爵还没有读完，就客气地请他就座，问： 众人责备我，我怎么样才能自己明了？
English: Wang Xizhe had not yet finished reading, so he politely invited him to sit down and asked: People blame me, how can I understand it myself?

古文：如子言，我受教。
现代文：像你所说的，我接受指点。
English: Like you said, I'm open to suggestions.

古文：但我疏必亲书，谓子孙祸何也？ 
现代文：但是我的奏疏必定亲自撰写，怎么谈得上子孙的祸患呢？ 
English: But my sonography must be written by myself, how can I talk about the scourge of my descendants?

古文：腾芳曰： 外廷正以公手书密揭，无由知其详，公乃欲藉以自解。
现代文：李腾芳回答 ：外廷正是因您的手书而秘密上报的，没理由了解详情，您仍然想借此自我解释。
English: Li Tengfang replied: It was because of your handwriting that the court secretly reported it. There is no reason to know the details. You still want to use this to explain yourself.

古文：异日能使天子出公手书示天下乎？ 
现代文：他日能让天子将您的手书昭于天下吗？ 
English: Will you one day allow God to reveal your handwriting to the world?

古文：锡爵怃然泪下，明日遂反并封之诏。
现代文：王锡爵茫然自失落下了眼泪，第二天就反对并封的诏书。
English: Wang Xizhe was at a loss and shed tears. The next day, he opposed the imperial edict of annexation.

古文：屡迁左谕德。
现代文：多次迁官后，升任左谕德。
English: After being transferred several times, he was promoted to Zuozukude.

古文：腾芳与山顾天飐善。
现代文：李腾芳与昆山顾天友好。
English: Li Tengfang is friendly with Kunshan Gu Tian.

古文：天飐险诐无行，为世所指名，被劾去，腾芳亦投劾归。
现代文：顾天邪僻而无德行，被世人指责，遭弹劾罢官，李腾芳也上奏辞官回乡。
English: He was accused by the world, impeached and dismissed. Li Tengfang also returned to his hometown as a diplomat.

古文：时遂有顾党、李党之目。
现代文：于是当时有顾党、李党的说法。
English: As a result, at that time, there was a saying of Gu Party and Li Party.

古文：诏论朝士擅去者罪，贬腾芳太常博士。
现代文：皇帝下诏追究朝臣擅自离职之罪，将李腾芳贬为太常博士。
English: The emperor issued an edict to investigate the crime of a courtier leaving his post without permission, and relegated Li Tengfang to the position of Taizhang Doctor.

古文：三十九年京察，复以浮躁谪江西都司理问。
现代文：万历三十九年的京察，又因浮躁的罪名降职为江西都司理问。
English: After thirty-nine years of Beijing inspection, he was demoted to the post of Jiangxi Metropolitan for impetuous charges.

古文：稍迁行人司正，历太常少卿，掌司业事。
现代文：稍后升任行人司正，历任太常少卿，负责司业的事务。
English: Later, he was promoted to the post of Pedestrian Secretary, and successively held the post of Junior Secretary, responsible for the affairs of the department.

古文：光宗立，擢少詹事，署南京翰林院。
现代文：光宗即位，他晋升为少詹事，负责南京翰林院。
English: When Emperor Guangzong ascended to the throne, he was promoted to Shao Zhanji and was in charge of the administration of Nanjing Hanlin Academy.

古文：旋拜礼部右侍郎，教习庶吉士。
现代文：不久，任命为礼部右侍郎，教导庶吉士。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as the Right Attendant of the Ceremonial Department, teaching the children of commoners.

古文：御史王安舜劾腾芳骤迁。
现代文：御史王安舜弹劾李腾芳骤然升迁。
English: Wang Anya, the Minister of History, impeached Li Tengfang and suddenly promoted him.

古文：腾芳辞位，熹宗不许，竟以省母归。
现代文：李腾芳辞职，熹宗不允许，最终他以探视母亲的名义回乡。
English: Li Tengfang resigned, Shanzong did not allow it, and eventually he returned to his hometown in the name of visiting his mother.

古文：天启初，以故官协理詹事府，寻改吏部左侍郎。
现代文：天启初年，官复原职协助管理詹事府，不久改任吏部左侍郎。
English: In the first year of Tianqi, he was reinstated as an official to assist in the management of Zhanshifu, and soon he was appointed as the left attendant of the personnel department.

古文：丁内艰，加礼部尚书以归。
现代文：遭父母之丧，加封为礼部尚书后回乡。
English: After the death of his parents, he returned to his hometown with the additional title of Vice-Minister of Ceremonies.

古文：魏忠贤恶腾芳与杨涟同乡。
现代文：魏忠贤厌恶李腾芳与杨涟同乡。
English: Wei Zhongxian detested Li Tengfang and Yang Xuan, his fellow countrymen.

古文：御史王际逵因论腾芳被察骤起，丁忧进官，皆非制。
现代文：御史王际逵便疏议李腾芳在京察中骤然升职的事，在父母的丧期升官，都不合乎法度。
English: It is against the law for the Imperial Historian Wang Zhiqi to discuss the sudden promotion of Li Tengfang in the Beijing Inspection and the promotion during the period of the parents' death.

古文：遂削夺。
现代文：于是削夺了他的官职。
English: As a result, he lost his official position.

古文：崇祯初，再以尚书协理詹事府。
现代文：崇祯初年，又以尚书身份协助负责詹事府。
English: In the first year of Chongzhen, he also assisted Zhan Shifu in the capacity of Shangshu.

古文：京师戒严，条画守御，多称旨，代何如宠掌部事。
现代文：京师戒严，谋划守御，大多称皇帝的意旨。代替何如龙负责部中事务。
English: The Beijing division of martial law, planning and guarding, mostly known as the emperor's will. In place of what kind of dragon is responsible for the affairs of the department.

古文：卒官。
现代文：死于任上。
English: He later died in office.

古文：赠太子太保。
现代文：赠封太子太保。
English: He was posthumously given the title of Crown Prince Taibo.

古文：蔡毅中，字宏甫，光山人。
现代文：蔡毅中，字宏甫，光山人。
English: In Cai Yi, the characters are Hong Fu and Guang Shan Ren.

古文：祖凤翘，平阳同知。
现代文：祖父蔡凤翘，平阳同知。
English: Grandfather Cai Fengge, known to Pingyang.

古文：父光，临洮同知。
现代文：父亲蔡光，临洮同知。
English: His father, Cai Guang, knew Linyi.

古文：毅中五岁通《孝经》。
现代文：蔡毅中五岁就通晓《孝经》。
English: At the age of five, Cai Yi was familiar with the "Filial Piety Sutra."

古文：父问： 读书何为？ 对曰： 欲为圣贤耳。 
现代文：父亲问 ：为什么读书？ 他答复 ：想成为圣贤。 
English: His father asked: Why are you studying? He replied: I want to be a saint.

古文：万历二十九年第进士，改庶吉士，授检讨。
现代文：万历二十九年，考中进士，改任庶吉士，授职检讨。
English: In the 29th year of the Manchurian calendar, he was promoted to the middle school entrance examination, and was reassigned to the second grade, and the awarding of the post was reviewed.

古文：时矿税虐民，毅中取《祖训》、《会典》诸书禁戒矿税者，集为二卷，注释以上。
现代文：当时矿税监虐待百姓，蔡毅中选取《祖训》、《会典》来禁戒矿税监，收集成二卷，注释后呈上。
English: At that time, the mining tax inspector abused the people. Cai Yi selected "Ancestor's Teaching" and "Charter" to forbid the mining tax inspector, collected into two volumes, annotated and submitted.

古文：大学士沈鲤于毅中为乡先达，与首辅沈一贯不相能。
现代文：大学士沈鲤对于蔡毅中来说为乡里先贤，沈鲤与首辅沈一贯不和。
English: For Cai Yizhong, college graduate Shen Yao is the village sage. Shen Yao and his chief aide Shen Yao have always been at odds.

古文：而温纯参政河南，器毅中于诸生。
现代文：而温纯任河南参政，在诸生中器重蔡毅中。
English: However, Wen Chunlin participated in politics in Henan Province, and was the most influential among all living people.

古文：至是为都御史，疏侵一贯。
现代文：至此温纯担任都御史，奏疏犯了沈一贯。
English: So far, Wen Chun has served as the Metropolitan Historian, and it has been consistent for Shen to play a negligent role.

古文：一贯疑出毅中手，为鲤地，衔之，遂用计典，镌秩去。
现代文：沈一贯怀疑是出自蔡毅中之手，是为沈鲤争势力，心里忌恨他。
English: Shen always suspected that it was from the hands of Cai Yi, and hated him in his heart.

古文：起麻城丞。
现代文：于是沈一贯乘考察之便，削其官职而去。
English: As a result, Shen took advantage of the inspection and left his post.

古文：旋以行人司副召擢尚宝丞。
现代文：后起任麻城县丞。旋即以行人司副使身份被召见，提升为尚宝丞。
English: After that, he was appointed as a magistrate of Machigata County. He was immediately summoned as a deputy commissioner of the Pedestrian Division and promoted to a magistrate.

古文：移疾归。
现代文：又因病回乡。
English: Due to illness, he returned to his hometown.

古文：四十五年，以浮躁镌秩。
现代文：万历四十五年，因为浮躁被削去官职。
English: After forty-five years, because of impetuousness, he was stripped of his official position.

古文：天启初，大起废籍，补长芦盐运判官。
现代文：天启初年，大量起用前朝被废除官籍的人员，他补任长芦盐运判官。
English: In the first year of Tianqi, a large number of officials who had been abolished by the previous government were appointed, and he was appointed as the judge of the Changlu Salt Transportation.

古文：屡迁国子祭酒，擢礼部右侍郎，仍领祭酒事。
现代文：升任国子监祭酒，晋升礼部右侍郎，仍然负责祭酒的事务。
English: He was promoted to the post of Kuniko supervisor of the ritual sake, promoted to the right hand man of the ceremonial department, and is still responsible for the affairs of the ritual sake.

古文：杨涟劾魏忠贤得严旨，毅中率其属抗疏言：
现代文：杨涟弹劾魏忠贤遭熹宗严加叱责，蔡毅中率自己的部属上奏争辩：
English: Yang Hui's impeachment of Wei Zhongxian was severely reprimanded by Gongzong, and Cai Yi led his subordinates to argue:

古文：学校者，天下公议所从出也。
现代文： 学校，是天下公论产生的地方。
English: The school is the place where the world's public opinion is generated.

古文：臣正与诸生讲 为君难 一书，忽接杨涟劾忠贤疏，合监师生千有余人，无不鼓掌称庆。
现代文：我正向诸生们讲授 为君难 这本书，忽然接到杨涟弹劾魏忠贤的奏疏，合计学监师生一千多人无不拍手称快。
English: I was lecturing on the book "Difficult for Kings" to students, when I suddenly received the transcript of Yang Xuan's impeachment of Wei Zhongxian. All in all, more than a thousand supervisors, teachers and students clapped their hands and applauded.

古文：乃皇上不下其奏于九卿，而谓一切朝政皆亲裁，以奸珰为忠，代之受过，合监师生无不扪心悉叹不已也。
现代文：皇上不将他的奏疏下发给九卿，却称一切朝政都要亲自裁决，视奸诈的宦官为忠良，代他们受过，全体国子监师生无不扪心忧愁叹息。
English: The emperor did not send his report to the nine nobles, but said that all court politics should be personally adjudicated. He regarded the treacherous eunuchs as loyal and suffered on their behalf. All the tutors, teachers and students were saddened and sighed.

古文：臣惟三代以后，汉、隋、唐、宋诸君，其受权珰之害与处权珰之法，载在《通鉴》。
现代文：我思虑三代之后，汉、隋、唐、宋的诸位君主，他们受当权宦官的祸害和处置当权宦官的办法，《通鉴》都有记载。
English: After three generations, I thought about the emperors of the Han, Sui, Tang, and Song dynasties. Their suffering from the scourge of eunuchs in power and their methods of dealing with eunuchs in power are all recorded in the "Comprehensive Study."

古文：我朝列圣受权珰之害与处权珰之法，载在实录。
现代文：我们朝代的诸位圣君遭受当权宦官的祸害与处置当权宦官的办法，实录中都有记载。
English: All the saints of our dynasty who suffered the scourge of the eunuchs in power and the methods of dealing with the eunuchs in power are recorded in the record.

古文：臣皆不必多言。
现代文：我都不必多说。
English: I don't have to say much.

古文：但取至近至亲如武宗之处刘瑾、神宗之处冯保二事，愿皇上遵之。
现代文：只选取至近至亲的，如武宗处置刘瑾，神宗处置冯保这两件事例，希望皇上遵循此法。
English: Only the closest relatives were selected, such as Wu Zong's treatment of Liu Ye and Shen Zong's treatment of Feng Bao. I hope that the emperor will follow this law.

古文：瑾在武宗左右，言听计从，一闻诸臣劾奏，夜半自起，擒而杀之。
现代文：刘瑾在武宗的左右，言听计从，武宗一听到大臣们的弹劾奏章，就半夜起身，抓住后杀了他。
English: As soon as Wu Zong heard the ministers' impeachment report, he got up in the middle of the night, grabbed him and killed him.

古文：神宗临御方十龄，保左右扶持，尽心竭力。
现代文：神宗登基刚十岁，冯保在左右扶持，尽心竭力。
English: Shenzong had just ascended to the throne at the age of ten, and Feng Bao supported him left and right, doing his best.

古文：既而少作威福，台省劾奏，未闻举朝公疏，神祖遂不动声色而戍保于南京。
现代文：后来稍逞威作福，台省上奏弹劾，还没听到全朝廷大臣的奏疏，神宗就不动声色地让冯保去戌守南京。
English: Later, after a bit of arrogance, Taiwan Province filed an impeachment, and before hearing the report from all the ministers of the imperial court, Shenzong reluctantly let Feng Bao go to guard Nanjing.

古文：今忠贤无保之功，而极瑾之恶。
现代文： 现在魏忠贤没有冯保般的功绩，却极尽刘瑾的罪恶。
English: Now Wei Zhongxian does not have the merits of Feng Bao, but he has committed the sins of Liu Xuan.

古文：二十四罪，无一不当悉究。
现代文：二十四条罪状，没有一条不该追究。
English: Twenty-four charges, none of which should not be pursued.

古文：举朝群臣欲于朝罢，跪以候旨，忠贤遂要皇上入宫，不礼群臣。
现代文：全朝的大臣们想在朝见后，跪地等待圣旨，魏忠贤却要皇上进后宫，不礼遇群臣。
English: The ministers of the whole dynasty wanted to kneel and wait for the imperial edict after seeing the emperor, but Wei Zhongxian wanted the emperor to enter the harem, which was disrespectful to the ministers.

古文：今又欲于视学之日，群臣及太学诸生面叩陈请矣，而皇上漫不经意。
现代文：现在又想在皇上视学之日，群臣和太学的诸生当面叩拜陈书请求皇上，但是皇上却漫不经心。
English: Now, on the day of the emperor's inspection of the school, the courtiers and the scholars would like to ask the emperor to worship Chen Shu in person, but the emperor is careless.

古文：数日以来，但有及忠贤者，留中不发，如此蒙蔽，其中宁可测哉！
现代文：几天来，只要涉及魏忠贤的奏疏，都留在宫中没有下发，这样隐瞒遮蔽，其中的情形能猜测吗？
English: For several days, as long as the records of Wei Zhongxian were involved, they were left in the palace without being issued, thus concealing the cover-up. Can you guess the situation?

古文：乞将涟疏发九卿科道从公究问，即不加刘瑾之诛，而以处冯保之法惩之，则恩威并著，与神祖媲美矣。
现代文：请将杨涟的奏疏下发给九卿科道公开追究问询，即使不像刘瑾那般诛杀，却按冯保的办法惩处，则皇上恩威并举，与神宗相媲美。 
English: Please send Yang Xuan's report to Jiuqing Science and Technology to publicly investigate and inquire. Even if it is not as fierce as Liu Xuan, but it is punished according to Feng Bao's method, then the emperor's grace is comparable to that of Shenzong.

古文：疏入，忠贤戟手大訽。
现代文：奏疏送入宫中，魏忠贤扬手大骂。
English: When Song Suo was sent to the palace, Wei Zhongxian lashed out.

古文：毅中乃再疏乞归，不许。
现代文：蔡毅中便一再上奏请求回乡，熹宗不同意。
English: Cai Yizhong repeatedly appealed to him to return to his hometown, but Xizong did not agree.

古文：已，嗾其党劾罢之。
现代文：此后，魏忠贤唆使党羽弹劾并罢免了蔡毅中。
English: After that, Wei Zhongxian instigated the party to impeach and remove Cai Yizhong.

古文：毅中有至性。
现代文：蔡毅中很有孝心。
English: There is a lot of filial piety in Cai Yi.

古文：四岁父病，吁天请代。
现代文：四岁时父亲生病，他呼天请求代替受难。
English: When he was four years old, his father fell ill, and he cried out to the heavens for help.

古文：公车时，闻母丧，一恸呕血数升，终丧断酒肉，不入内寝。
现代文：参加会试时，听到母亲去世，悲痛得呕吐了几升鲜血，整个服丧期禁绝酒肉，不进内室就寝。
English: When he was taking part in the audition, he heard that his mother had passed away, and he vomited several liters of blood out of grief. During the entire period of mourning, he abstained from eating and drinking, and went to bed without entering the inner room.

古文：方母病，盛夏思冰，盂水忽冻。
现代文：母亲刚患病，盛夏天想冰块，盂中的水突然冰冻。
English: My mother had just fallen ill and was craving ice cubes in the height of summer when the water in her urn suddenly froze.

古文：庐居，有紫芝、白鸟、千鸦集墓之异。
现代文：守丧时结庐而居，有紫芝、白鸟、千鸦聚集坟墓的奇观。
English: During the mourning period, they live in a cocoon, and there is a spectacle of purple grass, white birds, and thousands of crows gathering at the grave.

古文：卒，赠礼部尚书。
现代文：他去世后，被追赠礼部尚书。
English: After that, he passed away, and the bestowal of an official title became a ceremonial post.

古文：公鼐，字孝与，蒙阴人。
现代文：公鼐，字孝与，蒙阴人。
English: He is a public-spirited, filial-hearted, and gloomy person.

古文：曾祖奎跻，湖广副使。
现代文：曾祖父公奎跻，是湖广副使。
English: His great-grandfather, Gong Kui, was a vice-envoy to Hubei Province.

古文：父家臣，翰林编修。
现代文：父亲公家臣，是翰林编修。
English: His father was a courtier and Hanlin was an editor.

古文：鼐举万二十上九年进士，改庶吉士，授编修。
现代文：公鼐考取万历二十九年的进士，改任庶吉士，授职为编修。
English: He was awarded the title of "Junior Scholar of the 29th Year of Wanli" by the public examination, and changed his title to "Junior Scholar of the 29th Year of Wanli."

古文：屡迁左谕德，为东宫讲官。
现代文：升任左谕德，担任东宫的讲官。
English: He was promoted to Zuo Kuide and served as a lecturer at the East Palace.

古文：进左庶子，引疾归。
现代文：晋升为左庶子，称病回乡。
English: He was promoted to the position of the second son, but claimed to be ill and returned to his hometown.

古文：光宗立，召拜祭酒。
现代文：光宗登基，召见并任命他为国子监祭酒。
English: Guangzong ascended to the throne, summoned and appointed him as the son of the country to supervise the sacrificial wine.

古文：熹宗进鼐詹事，乃上疏曰： 近闻南北臣僚，论先帝升遐一事，迹涉怪异，语多隐藏。
现代文：熹宗时提拔他任詹事，他上奏说： 近来听说南北的臣僚，议论先帝去世之事，迹象怪异，话语大都隐晦。
English: When Emperor Xizong promoted him to the post of Zhanji, he reported: "Recently, I have heard that ministers from the north and south are discussing the death of the former emperor. The signs are strange, and the words are mostly obscure.

古文：恐因委巷之讹传，流为湘山之稗说，臣窃痛焉。
现代文：担心它在里巷中讹传，成为湘山野录类的稗说，我暗暗痛心于此事。
English: I am worried that it will spread in the alleys and become a legend of the Xiangshan Mountains. I am secretly saddened by this.

古文：皇祖在昔，原无立爱之心。
现代文：皇祖过去健在，原本没有册立爱子的心思。
English: The emperor's ancestor was alive in the past, but he did not have the heart to register his love for his son.

古文：只因大典迟回，于是缴还册立之后，有三王并封之事，《忧危竑议》之后，有国本攸关之事。
现代文：只因为大典很迟，因此在回头考虑册立事以后，有了同时分封三王的事。《忧危议》以后，出现与国家根本相关连的事情。
English: It was only because the grand ceremony was very late that, after looking back to consider the establishment of the record, there was the matter of the three kings being appointed at the same time. After the "worry and danger discussion," there was a matter fundamentally related to the country.

古文：迨庞、刘之邪谋，张差之梃击，而逆乱极矣。
现代文：等到庞、刘的邪恶阴谋，张差的廷击案，但逆乱已到了极点。
English: Wait until the evil plot of Pang and Liu, the Ting attack case of Zhang Zha, but the rebellion has reached the extreme.

古文：臣尝备员宫僚，目睹狂谋孔炽，以归向东宫者为小人，不向东宫者为君子，尽除朝士之清流，阴翦元良之羽翼，批根引蔓，干纪乱常。
现代文：我曾经担当宫中幕僚，目睹了狂妄阴谋的酝酿，认为归向东宫的是小人，不归向东宫的是君子。全部清除清廉的朝廷大臣，暗地除去太子的羽翼。追索勾连，干扰政纪祸乱纲常。
English: I was once in charge of the palace staff, witnessed the concoction of arrogant conspiracies, and believed that those who returned to the East Palace were villains, and those who did not return to the East Palace were gentlemen. All the corrupt imperial ministers were purged, and the prince's wings were secretly removed. The collusion was pursued, and the political discipline was disturbed.

古文：至今追想，犹为寒心。
现代文：现在回想起来，依然寒心。
English: Looking back now, I still feel cold.

古文：夫臣子爱君，存其真不存其伪。
现代文：大臣爱戴君主，保存真实不容虚伪。
English: The minister loves the monarch, and preserving the truth does not allow for hypocrisy.

古文：今实录纂修在即，请将光宗事迹，别为一录。
现代文：现在即将编纂实录，请求将光宗的事迹，另编一部。
English: Now, a factual record is about to be compiled, and a request has been made to compile another part of the story of Guangzong.

古文：凡一月间明纶善政，固大书特书；其有闻见异词及宫闱委曲之妙用，亦皆直笔指陈，勒成信史。
现代文：所有在一月份的明纶善政，应该大书特书；对于那些听见的不同说法及后宫委曲的奥妙之事法，也都应直笔指责、陈述，编成信史。
English: All the good policies that were revealed in January should be written up in a special book; for those different opinions that were heard and the mysterious methods of the harem committee, they should also be directly criticized, stated, and compiled into a history of belief.

古文：臣虽不肖，窃敢任之。 
现代文：我虽然不贤，窃思自己敢于担当此任。 
English: Although I am not virtuous, I secretly think that I dare to assume this post.

古文：疏入，不许。
现代文：奏疏呈入宫中，皇帝不同意。
English: The emperor did not approve of Sonosu's entry into the imperial court.

古文：天启元年，鼐以纪元甫及半载，言官获谴者至十余人，上疏切谏，并规讽辅臣。
现代文：天启元年，公鼐因为改元才达半年，言官就有十多人遭谴责，上奏诚恳劝谏，并且规劝讽刺辅佐大臣。
English: At the dawn of the first year of the 21st century, it had only been half a year since the change of the era, and more than ten officials had been reprimanded, earnestly exhorted, and advised to satirize the Vice-Minister.

古文：忤旨，谯责。
现代文：违背了圣旨，遭责备。
English: He violated the sacred will and was rebuked.

古文：寻迁礼部右侍郎，协理詹事府，充实录副总裁。
现代文：不久调任礼部右侍郎，协助掌管詹事府，担任实录副总裁。
English: He was soon transferred to the position of the Right Attendant of the Ministry of Ceremonies, assisted in the management of the Janzhi Prefecture, and served as the Vice President of Jitsuroku.

古文：鼐好学博闻，磊落有器识。
现代文：公鼐好学见闻广博，磊落有器量见识。
English: He is eager to learn, has a wide range of knowledge, and is a good judge of character.

古文：见魏忠贤乱政，引疾归。
现代文：看到魏忠贤祸乱政纲，称病回乡。
English: Seeing Wei Zhongxian's disastrous and chaotic political program, he said that he was sick and returned to his hometown.

古文：初，廷议李三才起用不决，鼐飏言曰： 今封疆倚重者，多远道未至。
现代文：起初，廷议起用李三才没有裁决，公鼐扬言说： 现在封封疆倚重的人，大都路途遥远没有到任。
English: At first, the court did not rule on the appointment of Li San, and the public prosecutor threatened to say: Most of the people who now attach great importance to the sealing of the frontiers have not arrived at the post for a long time.

古文：三才猷略素优，家近辇毂，可朝发夕至也。 
现代文：李三才一向以谋略见长，家临近京师，早上发出命令他晚上就可以赶到。 
English: Li Sancai had always been a good strategist. His home was close to the capital, and he would issue orders in the morning so that he could arrive in the evening.

古文：侍郎邹元标趣使尽言，以言路相持而止。
现代文：侍郎邹元标促使他极力陈述，因为言路执持而终止。
English: The waiter, Yan Yuanbiao, urged him to make a statement, but he ended up sticking to his word.

古文：后御史叶有声追论鼐与三才为姻，徇私妄荐，遂落职闲住。
现代文：后来御史叶有声论说公鼐与李三才为姻亲，徇私妄自举荐，于是被削职在家闲居。
English: Later, there was a rumor that Gongjun and Li Sancai were in-laws, and Gongjun arrogantly recommended himself to Li Sancai. As a result, he was relieved of his duties and stayed idle at home.

古文：未几卒。
现代文：不久去世。
English: He died soon after.

古文：崇祯初，复官赐恤，谥文介。
现代文：崇祯初年，恢复官职赏赐抚恤，谥号文介。
English: In the first year of Chongzhen, he resumed his official position and was awarded a pension.

古文：罗喻义，字湘中，益阳人。
现代文：罗喻义，字湘中，益阳人。
English: Luo Yuyi, Zi Xiangzhong, Yi Yangren.

古文：万历四十一年进士。
现代文：万历四十一年的进士。
English: Forty-one years of service.

古文：改庶吉士，授检讨。
现代文：改任庶吉士，授职为检讨。
English: He was reappointed to the position of deputy kishi, and the review of the awarding of the position is now over.

古文：请假归。
现代文：请假回乡。
English: He asked for leave to return to his hometown.

古文：天启初还朝，历官谕德，直经筵。
现代文：天启初年返回朝廷，历任谕德，负责经筵讲席。
English: He returned to the Imperial Court in the first year of Tenki, and successively held various posts in the Imperial Court, and was in charge of the eulogy lecture.

古文：六年擢南京国子祭酒。
现代文：天启六年，提升为南京国子祭酒。
English: In the sixth year of the Apocalypse, it was promoted to the Nanjing Kuniko Festival.

古文：诸生欲为魏忠贤建祠，喻义惩其倡者，乃已。
现代文：诸生想替魏忠贤建造祠堂，罗喻义惩罚了倡议者，平息了此事。
English: The sentient beings wanted to build an ancestral hall for Wei Zhongxian, but Luo Yuyi punished the proponents and settled the matter.

古文：忠贤党辑东林籍贯，湖广二十人，以喻义为首。
现代文：魏忠贤的党羽收集东林党人的籍贯，湖广有二十多人，以罗喻义为首。
English: Wei Zhongxian's followers collected the genealogy of Donglin's party members, and there were more than twenty people in Huguang, with Luo Yuyi at the head.

古文：庄烈帝嗣位，召拜礼部右侍郎，协理詹事府。
现代文：庄烈帝继位，召见并委任他为礼部右侍郎，协助负责詹事府。
English: Emperor Zhuangde ascended to the throne, summoned and appointed him as the Right Attendant of the Ceremonial Department, and assisted him in taking charge of the Zhan Shifu.

古文：寻充日讲官，教习庶吉士。
现代文：不久充当日讲官，教导庶吉士。
English: He soon became a lecturer on the day, teaching young children.

古文：喻义性严冷，闭户读书，不轻接一客。
现代文：罗喻义性情严肃冷峻，闭门读书，不轻易接见一名客人。
English: Luo Yuyi's temperament is serious and cold, he reads books behind closed doors, and does not easily receive a guest.

古文：后见中外多故，将吏不习兵，锐意讲武事，推演阵图献之。
现代文：后来目睹朝廷内外多变故，将领官吏不知兵事，便积极讲授军事知识，将研究的布阵图呈献上去。
English: Later, witnessing the internal and external vicissitudes of the imperial court, generals and officials do not know military affairs, they actively teach military knowledge and present the layout map of the study.

古文：帝为褒纳。
现代文：庄烈帝接纳并嘉奖了他。
English: Emperor Zhuangde accepted and rewarded him.

古文：以时方用兵，而督抚大吏不立军府，财用无所资，因言： 武有七德，丰财居其一。
现代文：因为当时正有战事，但是督抚大吏没有设立军府，没有钱财资助，于是他说： 武备有七项德行，丰富财资是其中之一。
English: Because there was a war going on at the time, but the military governor did not set up a military office and did not have money and financial support, so he said: There are seven virtues of arms and equipment, and rich in financial resources is one of them.

古文：正饷之外，宜别立军府，朝廷勿预知。
现代文：正式的粮饷之外，应该另外设立军府，朝廷不必预先知道。
English: In addition to the official granary, a separate military office should be established, and the imperial court does not need to know about it in advance.

古文：飨士、赏功、购敌，皆取给于是。 
现代文：犒劳士卒、奖赏军功、收买敌人，都从此提取给养。 
English: To reward laborers, to reward military exploits, and to bribe the enemy, all of which have been extracted from this supply.

古文：又极陈车战之利。
现代文：又极力陈述车战的好处。
English: It also makes a strong case for the benefits of chariot racing.

古文：帝下军府议于所司，令喻义自制战车。
现代文：庄烈帝将设军府的提案下达给所司，命令罗喻义自己制造战车。
English: Emperor Zhuang Liang sent the proposal to establish a military government to the commander and ordered Luo Yuyi to build his own chariot.

古文：喻义复上言按亩加派之害，而以战车营造职在有司，不肯奉诏。
现代文：罗喻义又上奏按亩加征赋税的弊害，并认为营造战车的职责在有司，不愿意遵循诏令。
English: Luo Yuyi also mentioned the drawbacks of increasing the tax per mu, and believed that the responsibility for building the chariot was in the department, and was not willing to follow the edict.

古文：帝不悦，疏遂不行。
现代文：庄烈帝不高兴，奏疏便没有施行。
English: Emperor Zhuang was not happy, and the abdication was not carried out.

古文：明年九月，进讲《尚书》，撰《布昭圣武讲义》。
现代文：第二年九月讲授《尚书》，撰写了《布昭圣武讲义》。
English: In September of the following year, he lectured on "Shang Shu" and wrote "Buzhao Shenwu Lectures."

古文：中及时事，有 左右之者不得其人 语，颇伤执政；末陈祖宗大阅之规，京营之制，冀有所兴革。
现代文：其中涉及当时的事情，有 左右侍从者用非其人 的话，大大触犯了执政者；结尾陈述了先朝祖宗阅兵的规章，京营的体制，希望做些革新。
English: It deals with the events of that time, and some attendants on the right and left have greatly offended the ruling party by using inappropriate words. At the end, the regulations of the military parade of the previous dynasty, the system of the Beijing camp, and the hope to make some innovations are stated.

古文：呈稿政府，温体仁不怿，使正字官语喻义，令改。
现代文：书稿呈交政府，温体仁不高兴。派正字官告诉罗喻义，命令他修改。
English: When the manuscript was submitted to the government, Wen Tianzhen was not happy. He sent the official to tell Luo Yuyi and ordered him to revise it.

古文：喻义造阁中，隔扉诮体仁。
现代文：罗喻义拜访内阁，隔着门扇讥讽温体仁。
English: Luo Yuyi visits the cabinet, and sneers at Wen Tianzhen through the door.

古文：体仁怒，上言： 故事，惟经筵进规，多于正讲，目讲则正多规少。
现代文：温体仁恼怒，上奏说 ：过去的规矩，只有经筵的规劝，多于正讲，日讲则正课多规劝少。
English: Warm body and benevolent anger, insinuating: the past rules, only the exhortation of the teacher is more than the main lecture, and the Japanese lecture is more than the main lecture and less than the exhortation.

古文：今喻义以日讲而用经筵之制，及令删改，反遭其侮，惟圣明裁察。 
现代文：现在罗喻义以日讲的身份却行经筵的制度，等到命令他删改，反而遭到他的侮辱，只希望皇上明察裁决。 
English: Now Luo Yuyi, in his capacity as a Japanese speaker, is subject to the imperial edict system. When he is ordered to make corrections, he is insulted instead. He only hopes that the emperor will review the ruling.

古文：遂下吏部议。
现代文：于是庄烈帝下达给吏部评议。
English: Therefore, Emperor Zhuangde issued an order to the cadre department for review.

古文：喻义奏辨曰： 讲官于正文外旁及时事，亦旧制也。
现代文：罗喻义上奏辩解 ：讲官在正文之外从旁论及时事，也是旧制。
English: On the other hand, the old system, in which lecturers discussed current events outside of the main text, was also used.

古文：臣展转敷陈，冀少有裨益。
现代文：我辗转陈述，希望有点裨益。
English: I am making a statement in the hope that it will be of some use.

古文：体仁删去，臣诚恐愚忠不获上达，致忤辅臣。
现代文：温体仁却将其删去，我的确担心愚忠不能传递给圣上，才导致触犯辅臣。
English: However, Wenzhizhen deleted it, and I was indeed worried that the foolish loyalty could not be passed on to the saint, which led to the offending aide.

古文：今稿草具在，望圣明省览。 
现代文：现在正稿与草稿都在，希望皇上予以浏览。 
English: Both the original and the draft are now available, and I hope the Emperor will read them.

古文：吏部希体仁指，议革职闲住，可之。
现代文：吏部倾向温体仁，议论将罗喻义革职让他闲居，庄烈帝同意了。
English: The cadre department was inclined to be lukewarm, and there was talk of dismissing Luo Yu from his post and letting him live in idleness. Emperor Zhuang agreed.

古文：喻义雅负时望，为体仁所倾，士论交惜。
现代文：罗喻义在当时素负声望，被温体仁倾轧，士子们的议论中都很惋惜。
English: At that time, Luo Yuyi had a negative reputation and was despised by the gentry, which was regretted by the scholars in their discussions.

古文：濒行乞恩，请乘传，帝亦报可。
现代文：临行时请求皇上恩赐，请求让他乘坐驿车，庄烈帝也答复可以。
English: When he was about to leave, he asked the emperor for a gift, asking him to take a carriage. Zhuang Rongdi also replied that he could.

古文：家居十年，卒。
现代文：他在家居住了十年后去世。
English: He died after living in the house for ten years.

古文：姚希孟，字孟长，吴县人。
现代文：姚希孟，字孟长，吴县人。
English: Yao Xi Meng, surnamed Meng Chang, from Wuxian County.

古文：生十月而孤，母文氏励志鞠之。
现代文：出生十个月就失去了父亲，母亲文氏立志养育他。
English: He lost his father when he was ten months old, and his mother, Ms. Moon, decided to raise him.

古文：稍长，与舅文震孟同学，并负时名。
现代文：年纪稍大点，与舅舅文震孟同学，同时享有名气。
English: A little older, he was a classmate of his uncle, Wen Zhen Meng, and was also famous.

古文：举万历四十七年进士，改庶吉士。
现代文：考中万历四十七年的进士，改任庶吉士。
English: He was promoted to Jinshi in the 47th year of Wanli in the middle school examination, and was reappointed to Jinshi.

古文：座主韩爌、馆师刘一景器之。
现代文：座主韩火广、馆师刘一火景器重他。
English: The chairperson, Han Huiguang, and the librarian, Liu Yi, held him in high esteem.

古文：两人并执政，遇大事多所咨决。
现代文：韩、刘两人一起执政，遇上大事大都向他咨询裁定。
English: Han and Liu govern together and consult him on most major decisions.

古文：天启初，震孟亦取上第，入翰林，甥舅并持清议，望益重。
现代文：天启初年文震孟也高中进士，进入翰林院，外甥舅舅一起主持清议，声望更高。
English: At the beginning of the new year, Wen Zhen Mengya entered the high school and entered the Hanlin Academy. His nephew and uncle presided over the clear discussion together, and his reputation was higher.

古文：寻请假归。
现代文：不久，他请假回乡。
English: Soon after, he took a leave of absence to return to his hometown.

古文：四年冬还朝，赵南星、高攀龙等悉去位，党祸大作，希孟郁郁不得志。
现代文：天启四年冬天，返回朝廷，赵南星、高攀龙等人都已离职，党祸盛行，姚希孟郁郁不得志。
English: In the winter of the fourth year of the Apocalypse, when he returned to the imperial court, Zhao Nansing, Gao Panglong and others had all left their posts, the party disaster was prevalent, and Yao Xi Meng was despondent.

古文：其明年，以母丧归。
现代文：第二年他因母亲去世而回乡。
English: The following year, his mother died and he returned to his hometown.

古文：甫出都，给事中杨所修劾其为缪昌期死党，遂削籍。
现代文：才出京城，给事中杨所修弹劾他是缪昌期的死党，就削夺了他的官籍。
English: He had just left Beijing when Yang Shoshu impeached him for being a staunch supporter of Miao Chang and stripped him of his official registration.

古文：魏忠贤败，其党倪文焕惧诛，使使持厚贿求解，希孟执而鸣之官。
现代文：魏忠贤被惩处后，他的党羽倪文焕担心被诛杀，派人拿着厚礼贿赂他请求和解，姚希孟抓住他并报告了官府。
English: After Wei Zhongxian was punished, his henchman Ni Wenhuan, fearing that he would be killed, sent someone to bribe him with a heavy gift to request a settlement. Yao Ximeng caught him and reported him to the government.

古文：崇祯元年，起左赞善。
现代文：崇祯元年，出任左赞善。
English: In the first year of the Chongzhen era, he served as Zuo Zanzeng.

古文：历右庶子，为日讲官。
现代文：历任右庶子，担当日讲官。
English: Successive right illegitimate son, in charge of the Japanese lecturer.

古文：三年秋，与谕德姚明恭主顺天乡试。
现代文：三年秋天，与谕德姚明恭主持顺天的乡试。
English: In the autumn of the third year, with the instruction of Deyao Mingqiong, he presided over Shun Tian's village test.

古文：有武生二人冒籍中式，给事中王猷论之，遂获谴。
现代文：有两名武生冒充别籍被录取，给事中王猷疏论此事，于是遭到谴责。
English: There were two students who were admitted to the school pretending to be from other schools, but Wang Yao was accused of being absent-minded in discussing the matter.

古文：希孟雅为东林所推。韩爌等定逆案，参其议。
现代文：姚希孟很受东林党人推崇，韩火广等人审定叛逆的案件，他参加了评议。
English: Yao Ximeng is highly respected by Donglin Party members, and he participated in the review of the case of Han Huiguang and others.

古文：群小恶希孟，谋先之。
现代文：那些人厌恶姚希孟，密谋先整治他。
English: Those people detested Yao Ximeng and plotted to rectify him first.

古文：及华允诚劾温体仁、闵洪学，两人疑疏出希孟手，体仁遂借冒籍事修隙，拟旨覆试，黜两生下所司，论考官罪，拟停俸半年。
现代文：等到华允诚弹劾温体仁、闵洪学时，两人怀疑奏疏出自姚希孟之手，温体仁就借冒籍的事件制造矛盾，拟定旨意进行复试，罢黜两位武生，交给有关部门处理，追究考官的罪行，拟定停他半年的俸禄。
English: When Hua Yuncheng impeached Wen Tizhen and Hao Hongxue, the two suspected that the delay was caused by Yao Ximeng. Wen Tizhen created a contradiction by using the incident of impersonation, drafted a will to conduct a second examination, dismissed the two students, handed it over to the relevant departments, investigated the examiner's crime, and proposed to suspend his salary for half a year.

古文：体仁意未慊，令再拟。
现代文：温体仁意犹未尽，下令再做拟定。
English: The warm-hearted benevolence was still not exhausted, and he ordered that it be drafted again.

古文：希孟时已迁詹事，乃贬二秩为少詹事，掌南京翰林院。
现代文：姚希孟当时已经升任詹事，就贬降两级为少詹事，负责南京翰林院。
English: At that time, Yao Ximeng had already been promoted to Zhanji, but he was demoted two levels to Shao Zhanji, responsible for Nanjing Hanlin Academy.

古文：寻移疾归，家居二年，卒。
现代文：不久称病回乡，在家居住两年后去世。
English: He soon returned to his hometown, claiming to be ill, and died after living at home for two years.

古文：许士柔，字仲嘉，常熟人。
现代文：许士柔，字仲嘉，常熟人。
English: Xu Shiro, nicknamed Zhongjia, is a frequent acquaintance.

古文：天启二年进士。
现代文：天启二年的进士。
English: Entered the priesthood in the second year of the Apocalypse.

古文：改庶吉士，授检讨。
现代文：改任庶吉士，授职检讨。
English: He was reappointed to the position of deputy kishi, and the review of the awarding of the position is now over.

古文：崇祯时，历迁左庶子，掌左春坊事。
现代文：崇祯年间，历任左庶子，负责左春坊的事务。
English: During the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, successive emperors of Zuo family were responsible for the affairs of Zuo Chunfang.

古文：先是，魏忠贤既辑《三朝要典》，以《光宗实录》所载与《要典》左，乃言叶向高等所修非实，宜重修，遂恣意改削牴牾《要典》者。
现代文：在此之前，魏忠贤已经编辑了《三朝要典》，因《光宗实录》的记载和《要典》相矛盾，于是称叶向高等人所编撰的不真实，应该重新撰写，恣意篡改删削与《要典》相抵触的地方。
English: Prior to this, Wei Zhongxian had already edited the "Three Dynasties Guidebook," and since the records of the "Gwangjong Record" contradicted the "Guidebook," he said that it was untrue that Ye Xiang was compiled by high-ranking people, and that it should be rewritten, arbitrarily altering and deleting the parts that contradicted the "Guidebook."

古文：崇祯改元，毁《要典》而所改《光宗实录》如故。
现代文：崇祯改元，烧毁了《要典》，而被篡改的《光宗实录》如故。
English: Chongzhen changed the original and burned the "Important Text," but the altered "True Record of the Guangzong School" is still in existence.

古文：六年，少詹事文震孟言： 皇考实录为魏党曲笔，当改正从原录。 
现代文：崇祯六年，少詹事文震孟奏称： 先帝实录是魏党的曲笔之作，应当改正依照原来的实录。 
English: In the sixth year of Chongzhen, Shao Zhanji Wenzhen Mengsuo said: The previous emperor's record is the work of the Wei Party, and it should be corrected according to the original record.

古文：时温体仁当国，与王应熊等阴沮之，事遂寝。
现代文：当时温体仁当权，与王应熊等人暗中阻挠，事情便沉寂下来。
English: At that time, Wen Tianzhen was in power, and he and Wang Yingxiong and others secretly obstructed, and things fell silent.

古文：士柔愤然曰： 若是，则《要典》犹弗焚矣。 
现代文：许士柔愤然地说： 如此，则《要典》也不必焚毁。 
English: Xu Shijo said indignantly: In this way, the "Manual" does not have to be burned.

古文：乃上疏曰： 皇考实录总记，于世系独略。
现代文：于是上奏说 ：先帝的实录的总记，唯独省略了世系。
English: Therefore, the prelude said: The summary of the records of the former emperor, except that the lineage was omitted.

古文：皇上娠教之年，圣诞之日，不书也。
现代文：皇上孕育的年份，诞生的日期，没有记载。
English: There is no record of the year of the emperor's conception or the date of his birth.

古文：命名之典，潜邸之号，不书也。
现代文：命名的大典，养育的府邸名号，没有记载。
English: There is no record of the naming ceremony or the name of the residence where he was raised.

古文：圣母出何氏族，受何封号，不书也。
现代文：皇上的母亲出自哪个家族，封号什么，没有记载。
English: There is no record of which family the emperor's mother came from, or what her seal number was.

古文：此皆原录备载，而改录故削之者也。
现代文：这些都是原实录详细记载的，而篡改的实录有意删除了。
English: All of this was recorded in detail in the original transcript, while the altered transcript was intentionally deleted.

古文：原录之成，在皇上潜邸之日，犹详慎如彼。
现代文：原实录的修成，在皇上进入养育府邸的日子，犹且详细慎重如此。
English: The revision of the original record dates back to the days when the emperor entered the residence to raise his children, and it is carefully detailed.

古文：新录之进，在皇上御极之初，何以率略如此，使圣朝父子、母后、兄弟之大伦，皆暗而不明，缺而莫考。
现代文：新实录的呈奉，在皇上登基之初，怎么如此粗略草率，使本朝的皇父子、母后、兄弟等大伦，都含混不明，空缺而不做考察。
English: The presentation of the new record, at the beginning of the emperor's enthronement, was so rough and hasty, so that the emperor's father and son, mother, brothers and sisters of this dynasty were vague and unclear, and the vacancy was not investigated.

古文：其于信史谓何？ 疏上，不省。
现代文：它怎么称得上是信史？ 奏疏皇帝，庄烈帝并未省悟。
English: How can it be called a history of belief? The Emperor Zhuang didn't think about it.

古文：体仁令中书官检穆宗总记示士柔，士柔具揭争之曰： 皇考实录与列圣条例不同。
现代文：温体仁命令中书官将穆宗总记出示给许士柔看，许士柔详细做揭文与他争辩 ：先帝的实录与列位先圣的条例不同。
English: Wen Tizhen ordered the scribe to show the general record of Mu Zong to Xu Shijo, and Xu Shijo made a detailed disclosure to argue with him: The record of the former emperor is different from the regulations of the first saint.

古文：列圣在位久，登极后事，编年排纂，则总记可以不书。
现代文：列位先圣在位时间长，登基后的事，编年的排比编纂，总记可以不做书写。
English: The reign of the first-ranked saint is long, things after the enthronement, the chronology of the chronology, and the general record can not be written.

古文：皇考在位仅一月，三后诞育圣躬皆在未登极以前，不书之总记，将于何书也？
现代文：先帝在位一个月，三位太后养育圣上都是在皇帝没有登基之前，不记录在总记，将记录在什么书中？
English: The previous emperor reigned for one month, and the three empresses were all raised before the emperor ascended to the throne. This is not recorded in the general record, but in what book?

古文：穆庙大婚之礼，皇子之生，在嘉靖中，故总记不载，至于册立大典，编年未尝不具载也。
现代文：穆庙大婚的礼仪，生育皇子，在嘉靖年间，所以总记没有记载，至于册立大典，编年没有不详细记载的。
English: The ceremonial of the great wedding of the Mu Temple and the birth of the prince were first recorded in the Jiajing period, so there is no record in the general chronicle. As for the establishment of the grand ceremony, the chronicle does not have a detailed record.

古文：皇考一月易世，熹庙之册立当书，皇上之册封独不当书乎？ 
现代文：先帝在位仅一个月就辞世，熹庙的册立应该记载，皇上的册封唯独不应该记载吗？ 
English: The former emperor died only a month into his reign. Should the founding of the Anhui Temple be recorded? Shouldn't the emperor's enthronement alone be recorded?

古文：体仁怒，将劾之，为同列沮止。
现代文：温体仁发怒，准备弹劾他，被同僚阻止了。
English: He became angry and prepared to impeach him, but was stopped by his colleagues.

古文：士柔复上疏曰： 累朝实录，无不书世系之例。
现代文：许士柔又上奏说 ：各朝的实录，没有不记载世系的例子。
English: Xu Shijo went on to say: There is no record of each dynasty, there is no example of not recording the lineage.

古文：臣所以抉擿改录，正谓与累朝成例不合也。
现代文：我所以选择抉发篡改实录事，正是因它与各朝的既定例制不相吻合。
English: That is why I chose to tamper with the actual record, precisely because it does not coincide with the established case system of each dynasty.

古文：孝端皇后，皇考之嫡母也，原录具书保护之功，而改录削之，何也？
现代文：孝端皇后是先帝的嫡亲母亲，原实录详细记载了她保护先帝的功绩，而修改的实录删去了，为什么？
English: Empress Takahata was the legitimate mother of the former emperor. The original record detailed her achievements in protecting the former emperor, but the revised record has been deleted. Why?

古文：当日国本几危，坤宁调护，真孝慈之极则，顾复之深恩，史官不难以寸管抹摋之，此尤不可解也。 
现代文：当时，太子差点儿不保，坤宁皇后调理保护，真是达到孝义、慈善的最高准则，父母养育的深厚恩情，史官轻易就用笔将它们抹杀了，这最不可理解。 
English: At that time, the crown prince was almost not protected, and the protection of Queen Kunning was the highest standard of filial piety and charity, and the deep gratitude of the parents' upbringing. The historian easily erased them with a pen. This is most incomprehensible.

古文：疏上，报闻。
现代文：奏疏呈上，庄烈帝答复知道了。
English: When the report was submitted, Zhuang Riedi knew the answer.

古文：体仁滋不悦。
现代文：温体仁更加不高兴。
English: Wen Tingren was even more unhappy.

古文：会体仁嗾刘孔昭劾祭酒倪元璐，因言士柔族子重熙私撰《五朝注略》，将以连士柔。
现代文：遇上温体仁教唆刘孔昭弹劾祭酒倪元璐，就称许士柔的族子许重熙私自撰写《五朝注略》，准备株连许士柔。
English: When Wen Tianzhen instigated Liu Kongzhao to impeach Ni Yuan Rong, Xu Shigehiro, the son of Xu Shijou, wrote "Five Dynasties Commentary" to prepare for the succession of Xu Shijou.

古文：士柔亟以《注略》进，乃得解。
现代文：许士柔赶紧将《注略》呈献上去，才得以解脱。
English: Xu Shiro hurriedly submitted the "Commentary" before she was able to free herself.

古文：寻出为南京国子祭酒。
现代文：不久，出京担任南京国子监祭酒。
English: Soon after, he went to Beijing to serve as the Nanjing provincial overseer of the festival.

古文：体仁去，张至发当国，益谋逐士柔。
现代文：温体仁离职，张至发当权，更加谋划驱逐许士柔。
English: Wen Tizhen left office, Zhang Zhi took power, and made more plans to expel Xu Shijo.

古文：先是，高攀龙赠官，士柔草诏词送内阁，未给攀龙家。
现代文：在此之前，高攀龙被追赠官职，许士柔拟草稿送交内阁，没有发给高攀龙家里。
English: Prior to this, Gao Panglong was posthumously given an official position, and Xu Shi sent a soft draft to the cabinet, but did not send it to Gao Panglong's family.

古文：故事，赠官诰，属诰敕中书职掌。
现代文：旧制，追赠官职的诰令，属于诰敕中书负责。
English: Under the old system, the imperial edict of posthumous promotion was the responsibility of the imperial chancellor.

古文：崇祯初，褒恤诸忠臣，翰林能文者或为之，而中书以为侵官。
现代文：崇祯初年，对各位忠臣的褒扬、抚恤，翰林中能够行文的人有时行使了此事，而中书认为这是侵犯了官职权限。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, people who were able to write sometimes praised and gave pensions to their loyal subjects, which was considered to be a violation of official authority.

古文：崇祯三年禁诰文骈俪语。
现代文：崇祯三年，禁止诰令中使用骈体、华丽的语句。
English: In the past three years, the Supreme People's Proclamation has prohibited the use of fictitious characters and ornate sentences.

古文：至是攀龙家请给，去士柔草制时数年矣，主者仍以士柔前撰文进。
现代文：到此高攀龙的家人请求追赠，离许士柔草拟诰令已有几年，主事的人仍然将许士柔先前的撰文呈入。
English: The family of Gao Panglong came here to request a posthumous gift. It has been several years since Xu Shizhu wrote the will, but the person in charge still submitted Xu Shizhu's previous writings.

古文：中书黄应恩告至发诰语违禁，至发喜，劾士柔，降二级调用。
现代文：中书黄应恩告诉张至发，法令的语言违反了禁令，至发很高兴，弹劾许士柔，将他降了两级官阶调用。
English: Zhongshu Huang Ying'en told Zhang Zhifa that the language of the decree violated the ban, Zhifa was very happy, impeached Xu Shiro, reduced him by two ranks and called him.

古文：司业周凤翔抗疏辩曰： 词林故事，阁臣分属撰文，或手加详定，或发窜改，未有径自纠参者也。
现代文：司业周凤翔上奏争辩说： 词林的旧制，内阁大臣份内是撰写文字，或者亲自详细审定，或者进行篡改，没有亲自纠劾的。
English: Chief Secretary Zhou Fengxiang argued: In the old system of the word forest, cabinet ministers were responsible for writing the words, or personally verifying them in detail, or making alterations, but did not personally correct them.

古文：诰敕用宝，岁有常期，未有十年后用宝进呈，吹求当制者也。
现代文：诰书敕令用御印，每年有固定的时间，没有十年之后加盖御印呈献，并追求现在的制度的。
English: There is a fixed time every year for the imperial seal to be used in the imperial edict, and the imperial seal is affixed to the imperial edict after ten years, and the current system is pursued.

古文：赠诰专属中书，崇祯三年所申饬，未有追咎元年之史官，诋为越俎者也。 
现代文：赠封诰令专归中书负责，是崇祯三年才开始强调，没有谁追究崇祯元年的史官，将他们责骂为越俎代庖的人。 
English: It was only in the third year of the reign of Emperor Chongzhen that it began to be emphasized that the awarding of the imperial seal was the exclusive responsibility of Zhongshu. No one pursued the historians of the first year of the reign of Emperor Chongzhen and scolded them as the people of the Yue and Tang dynasties.

古文：不报。
现代文：没有答复。
English: It didn't make the papers.

古文：士柔寻补尚宝司丞，迁少卿，卒。
现代文：许士柔不久补任尚宝司丞，升任少卿，直至去世。
English: Soon after, Xu Shirou was promoted to the post of Shang Bao Si Rong, and was promoted to the post of Junior Secretary until his death.

古文：子琪诣阙辨诬，乃复原官。赠詹事兼侍读学士。
现代文：他的儿子到朝门申辩冤枉之事，于是才给士柔恢复原来官职，追赠詹事兼侍读学士。
English: His son went to the imperial court to plead the case of injustice, so Shiro was restored to his original official position and posthumously awarded a bachelor's degree.

古文：顾锡畴，字九畴，昆山人。
现代文：顾锡畴，字九畴，昆山人。
English: Gu Xizang, Zi Jiu Zang, Kunshan people.

古文：年十三，以诸生试南京，魏国公以女女之。
现代文：十三岁的时候，以诸生身份参加南京的考试，魏国公将女儿许配给他。
English: When he was thirteen years old, he took an exam in Nanjing as a layman, and the Grand Duke of Wei promised his daughter to him.

古文：第万历四十七年进士，改庶吉士，授检讨。
现代文：考取万历四十七年进士，改任庶吉士，授职为检讨。
English: In the 47th year of the Manchurian calendar, he passed the entrance examination and was promoted to the rank of junior goshi. The awarding of the post was subject to review.

古文：天启四年，魏忠贤势大炽，锡畴偕给事中董承业典试福建，程策大有讥刺。
现代文：天启四年，魏忠贤的势力嚣张，顾锡畴与给事中董承业负责福建的考试，科举的示范文章大加讥讽。
English: In the fourth year of the Apocalypse, the influence of Wei Zhongxian was rampant, and Dong Chengye, who was in charge of the examination in Fujian, was in charge of the examination, and the demonstration article of the imperial examination was ridiculed.

古文：忠贤党遂指为东林，两人并降调。
现代文：魏忠贤的党羽指责他们是东林党人，两人被一起降职。
English: Wei Zhongxian's followers accused them of being Donglin Party members, and they were both demoted.

古文：已，更削籍。
现代文：最后，被削夺官籍。
English: Finally, he was stripped of his official status.

古文：崇祯初，召复故官。
现代文：崇祯初年，又召见他，官复原职。
English: In the first year of his reign, he was summoned again and restored to his post.

古文：历迁国子祭酒。
现代文：升任国子监祭酒。
English: He was promoted to the position of Kokushi Jikkan Sake.

古文：疏请复积分法，礼官格不行。
现代文：奏请恢复积分法，礼官阻挠不让施行。
English: He requested the restoration of the integral method, but the etiquette official blocked it from being implemented.

古文：锡畴复申言之，且请择监生为州县长。
现代文：顾锡畴又申诉此事，并请求选择监生担任州县长官。
English: Gu Xizeng also appealed the matter and requested that the probationer be selected to serve as the prefect of the prefecture.

古文：已，请正从祀位次，进士为国子博士者得与考选。
现代文：此后，奏请订正陪祭祀者的位次，担当国子博士的进士能参与考核、录用。
English: After that, it was requested to revise the rank of the officiant, and the person in charge of Dr. Kuniko could participate in the assessment and recruitment.

古文：帝并允行。
现代文：皇帝都同意了。
English: The emperor agreed.

古文：省亲归，乞在籍终养。
现代文：探亲回乡，请求在家乡度过一生。
English: to visit relatives back home and ask to spend the rest of his life in his hometown.

古文：母服除，起少詹事，进詹事，拜礼部左侍郎，署部事。
现代文：母亲的丧期满后，起用为少詹事，晋升詹事，加封礼部左侍郎，负责部中事务。
English: After the expiration of his mother's mourning period, he was appointed as a junior official, promoted to a senior official, and given the title of the left attendant of the Ministry of Ceremonies, responsible for the affairs of the Ministry.

古文：帝尝召对，问理财用人。
现代文：皇帝曾经召见他面商国事，询问理财用人的问题。
English: The emperor once summoned him to attend to state affairs and inquire about financial management and employment.

古文：锡畴退，列陈用人五失，曰铨叙无法，文网太峻，议论太多，资格太拘，鼓舞未至。
现代文：顾锡畴告退后，陈述了用人方面的五点失误，称： 考察选官没有法度，文网太严峻，议论太多，太拘泥于资格，对人没有鼓动作用。
English: After Gu Xizeng stepped down, he made a statement on the five mistakes in employing people, saying: There is no legal basis for inspecting the selection of officials, the literature network is too severe, there is too much discussion, it is too rigidly based on qualifications, and it does not have an agitating effect on people.

古文：请先令用人之地一清其源。 精心鉴别，随才器使，一善也。
现代文：请使先用人的地方一一清正源流。精心鉴别，依照才能任用，这是好处一。
English: Please make the place of the previous employer one by one clear. Carefully identify, according to the ability to appoint, this is the first benefit.

古文：赦小过而不终废弃，二善也。
现代文：赦免小过失而不完全废弃，这是好处二。
English: Pardoning minor offenses without completely abandoning them is the second benefit.

古文：省议论而专责成，三善也。
现代文：减少议论而专门责其成事之效这是好处三。
English: This is the third advantage of reducing the discussion and entrusting it with the effect of accomplishing things.

古文：拔异才而不拘常格，四善也。
现代文：选择奇异的人材而不拘泥于平常的规章，这是好处四。
English: There are four advantages to choosing unusual people rather than sticking to the usual rules.

古文：急奖励而宽督责，五善也。 
现代文：积极奖励而宽缓督察、责备，这是好处五。 
English: Positive reward and lenient supervision, blame, this is the benefit of five.

古文：末极陈耗财之弊，仍归本于用人。
现代文：最后极力陈述耗靡钱财的弊端，仍然归其根源在于用人。
English: Finally, it was strongly stated that the drawbacks of consuming money and money are still rooted in the employment of people.

古文：帝善其奏。
现代文：皇帝对他的奏疏称好。
English: The emperor was pleased with his performance.

古文：杨嗣昌疏请抚流寇，有 乐天者保天下 及 善战服上刑 语。
现代文：杨嗣昌奏疏请求招抚流寇，其中有 乐天者保天下 和 善战者服上刑 的话。
English: Yang Shichang made a request to appease the roving bandits, including the words "those who are happy will save the world" and "those who are good at fighting will serve a sentence."

古文：锡畴抗言此诸侯交邻事，称引不伦，与嗣昌大忤。
现代文：顾锡畴争辩，称这是诸侯间交战的事情，引用不合伦理，与杨嗣昌相违逆。
English: Gu Xizang argued, saying that this was a matter of warring between princes, citing unethical, contrary to Yang Shichang.

古文：嗣昌秉政，诸词臣多攻之，嗣昌颇疑锡畴。
现代文：杨嗣昌主持政务，诸位言官都攻击他，杨嗣昌很怀疑顾锡畴。
English: Yang Shichang is in charge of government affairs, and all of you officials are attacking him. Yang Shichang is very suspicious of Gu Xizhong.

古文：会驸马都尉王昺有罪，锡畴拟轻典，嗣昌构之，遂削其籍。
现代文：遇上驸马都尉王籨犯罪，顾锡畴准备从轻发落，杨嗣昌诬陷他，便削夺了他的官籍。
English: When Gu Xi Zeng was about to be punished for the crime committed by his subordinate Wang Yao, Yang Shichang falsely accused him and stripped him of his official status.

古文：十五年，廷臣交荐，召还。
现代文：崇祯十五年，朝廷大臣交相举荐，皇帝召他回朝。
English: In the fifteenth year of the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, the Minister of the Imperial Court recommended him to the Emperor, and the Emperor called him back to the Imperial Court.

古文：御史曹溶、给事中黄云师复言其不当用。
现代文：御史曹溶、给事中黄云师又称不应该任用他。
English: Huang Yun Shi also said that he should not be appointed.

古文：帝不听，起为南京礼部左侍郎。
现代文：皇帝不听，任命他为南京礼部左侍郎。
English: The emperor did not listen and appointed him as the Left Attendant of the Nanjing Ceremonial Department.

古文：福王立，进本部尚书。
现代文：福王立位，他晋升为本部尚书。
English: When King Fu was enthroned, he was promoted to be the head of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：时尊福恭王为恭皇帝，将议庙祀，锡畴请别立专庙。
现代文：当时尊奉福恭王为恭皇帝，准备商议庙祀，顾锡畴奏请另外设立专门的庙宇。
English: At that time, they venerated King Fukong as the Emperor Gong, and they were preparing to discuss the temple worship, and they asked for the establishment of a special temple.

古文：俄请补建文帝庙谥、景皇帝庙号及建文朝忠臣赠谥，并从之。
现代文：不久，请求增补建文帝的庙祀谥号、景皇帝的庙号和建文朝忠臣的赠封与谥号，皇帝都依从了他。
English: Soon, he asked for the addition of Emperor Jianwen's temple name, Emperor Jing's temple name, and the titles and names of loyal subjects of the Jianwen Dynasty, and the emperor complied.

古文：东平伯刘泽清言： 宋高宗即位南京，即以靖康二年五月为建炎元年，从民望也。
现代文：东平伯刘泽清称 ：宋高宗在南京即位，立刻在靖康二年五月确立建炎纪元，遵从民众的愿望。
English: Dongping Mayor Liu Zeqing said: Song Gaozong ascended the throne in Nanjing, and immediately established the era of building a fire in May of the second year of Jingkang, in accordance with the wishes of the people.

古文：乞以今岁五月为弘光元年。 
现代文：我请求从今年五月改为弘光纪元。 
English: I request that it be changed to Hongguang era from May this year.

古文：锡畴言明诏已颁，不可追改，乃已。
现代文：顾锡畴明确地说诏令已经颁布，不能追悔更改，才作罢。
English: Gu Xijiang explicitly said that the edict had been issued and could not be changed without regret.

古文：时定大行皇帝庙号为思宗，忻城伯赵之龙言 思 非美称，援证甚核，锡畴亦以为然，疏请改定。
现代文：当时确定大行皇帝的庙号为思宗，忻城伯赵之龙称 思 不是美称，引经据典核证，顾锡畴也认为如此，上奏请求更改。
English: At that time, it was determined that the temple name of Emperor Da Xing was Shizong. Zhao Zhulong, the mayor of Shicheng, said that Shizong was not a beautiful name, citing the source certificate. Gu Xizang also thought so, and requested a change.

古文：大学士高弘图以前议自己出，力持之，遂寝。
现代文：大学士高弘图因为前面的提议是自己提出的，极力坚持，于是事情沉寂。
English: Because the previous proposal was proposed by himself, the university scholar Gao Hongtu insisted on it, so things were quiet.

古文：温体仁之卒也，特谥文忠，而文震孟、罗喻义、姚希孟、吕维祺皆不获谥。
现代文：温体仁去世，特别谥号文忠，而文震孟、罗喻义、姚希孟、吕维祺都没有获得谥号。
English: Wen Tizhen passed away, especially the nickname Wen Zhong, while Wen Zhen Meng, Luo Yuyi, Yao Xi Meng, and Lu Wei Wei did not get the nickname.

古文：锡畴言： 体仁得君，行政最专且久，其负先帝，罪大且深，乞将文忠之谥，或削或改，而补震孟诸臣，庶天下有所劝惩。 
现代文：顾锡畴称： 温体仁获得皇帝信任，行使政令最为专横而且长久，他对先帝所负的罪最大而且深重，请求将文忠谥号，或者删削或者更改，而增补文震孟等大臣的谥号，使普天下奖惩有度。 
English: Gu Xizhong said: Wen Tizhen gained the emperor's trust, exercised the most arbitrary and long-term decrees, and his crime against the former emperor was the greatest and most serious. He requested that the surname of Wen Zhong be deleted or changed, and that the surnames of ministers such as Wen Zhen and Meng be added, so that the whole world would reward and punish.

古文：报可。
现代文：答复可以。
English: Reimbursement agreed.

古文：遂谥诸人，削体仁谥。
现代文：于是增补诸臣的谥号，剥夺了温体仁的谥号。
English: As a result, the posthumous names of the ministers were added, and the posthumous names of the gentiles were taken away.

古文：吏部尚书张慎言去位，代者徐石麒未至，命锡畴摄之。
现代文：吏部尚书张慎言离职，顶替的人徐石麒没有到任，皇帝命令顾锡畴负责事务。
English: The person in charge of the personnel department, Shangshu Zhang Shengen, left the post, and the person who replaced him, Xu Shijun, did not arrive at the post. The emperor ordered Gu Xizhong to take charge of affairs.

古文：时马士英当国，锡畴雅不与合。
现代文：当时马士英掌握国政，顾锡畴一向与他不和。
English: At that time, Ma Shih-ying was in charge of state affairs, and Gu Xi-cheng was always at odds with him.

古文：给事中章正宸、熊汝霖劾之，遂乞祭南海去。
现代文：给事中章正宸、熊汝霖弹劾他，于是他请求到南海去祭祀而离去。
English: Zhang Zhengqi and Xiong Rulin impeached him, so he asked to go to the South China Sea to make a sacrifice and left.

古文：明年春，御史张孙振力颂体仁功，请复故谥。
现代文：第二年春天，御史张孙振极力颂扬温体仁的功绩，请求恢复他原来的谥号。
English: In the spring of the following year, Grand Historian Zhang Sun Zhen tried his best to extol the merits of Wen Tianzhen and requested that his original nickname be restored.

古文：遂勒锡畴致仕。
现代文：便勒令顾锡畴退休。
English: He then ordered Gu Xizhong to retire.

古文：南都失守，锡畴乡邑亦破。
现代文：南都失守，顾锡畴的乡里也被攻占。
English: The southern capital was lost, and the countryside of Gu Xi Jiao was also occupied.

古文：时方遭父丧，间关赴闽。
现代文：当时正遭遇父亲的丧期，他由小路赴福建。
English: At that time, he was facing the time of his father's death, and he took a side road to Fujian.

古文：唐王命以故官，力辞不拜，寓居温州江心寺。
现代文：唐王命令他就任原职，他极力推辞，在温州江心寺寓居。
English: Emperor Tang ordered him to take up his original post, but he refused and lived in Wenzhou's Jiangxin Temple.

古文：总兵贺君尧挞辱诸生，锡畴将论劾。
现代文：总兵贺君尧鞭挞侮辱诸生，顾锡畴打算对他进行弹劾。
English: He Jun, the commander-in-chief of the soldiers, insulted the sentient beings with whip and scourge, and Gu Xizang planned to impeach him.

古文：君尧夜使人杀之，投尸于江。
现代文：贺君尧乘夜色派人杀害了他，将尸体投入江中。
English: He Junzhen killed him and threw his body into the river.

古文：温人觅之三日，乃得棺殓。
现代文：温州人寻找了多天，才将他入棺葬殓。
English: The people of Wenzhou searched for him for many days before burying him in a coffin.

