古文：起昭阳大渊献二月，尽阏逢困敦闰月，凡一年有奇。
现代文：起昭阳大渊献二月，尽阏逢困敦闰月，凡一年有奇。
English: Zhi Zhaoyang Dayuan is dedicated to the second month of the year, which is the month of the Leap Moon. Every year is special.

古文：昭宗圣穆景文孝皇帝下之上天复三年二月，壬申朔，诏： 比在凤翔府所除官，一切停。 
现代文：唐昭宗天复三年二月壬申朔，昭宗颁布诏令： 近来在凤翔府任命的官员，全部解除职务。 
English: In February of the third year of the Tang Zhaozong's reign, Zhaozong issued an edict: All officials recently appointed in Fengxiang were relieved of their duties.

古文：时宦官尽死，淮河东监军张承业、幽州监军张居翰、清海监军程匡柔、西川监军鱼全禋及致仕严遵美，为李克用、刘仁恭、杨行密、王建所匿得全，斩他囚以应诏。
现代文：这时，宦官都被杀死，只有河东监军张承业、幽州监军张居翰、清海监军程匡柔、西川监军鱼全，以及退休家居的原枢密使严遵美，被李克用、刘仁恭、杨行密、王建藏匿起来，斩了其他囚犯来应付诏令，才保存了性命。
English: At this time, the eunuchs were all killed. Only Zhang Chengye, the overseer of the Hedong Army, Zhang Juhan, the overseer of the Yuzhou Army, Cheng Kuangrou, the overseer of the Qing Sea Army, Yu Quan, the overseer of the West River Army, and Yan Zunmei, the former privy councilor who retired home, were hidden by Li Kegui, Liu Rengong, Yang Xingmi, and Wang Jian, and killed other prisoners to deal with the edict, and saved their lives.

古文：甲戌，门下侍郎、同平章事陆扆责授沂王傅、分司。
现代文：甲戌，门下侍郎、同平章事陆受责降补沂王傅分司。
English: Armor Bearer, Servant of the Disciples, and Tongping Zhang were ordered to be demoted to the position of sub-branch of King Fu.

古文：车驾还京师，赐诸道诏书，独凤翔无之。
现代文：昭宗回到京师后，给各道颁赐诏书，唯独凤翔节度使李茂贞没有。
English: After Zhaozong returned to Beijing, he issued an edict to all the provinces, but Li Maozhen was not satisfied with Fengxiang's edict.

古文：扆曰： 茂贞罪虽大，然朝廷未与之绝，今独无诏书，示人不广。 
现代文：陆说： 李茂贞的罪恶虽然重大，但朝廷并没有与他决绝；现在唯独不给他颁赐诏书，给人看着不宽大为怀。 
English: Lu said: Although Li Maozhen's crime is serious, the imperial court has not broken up with him. Now, however, they are refusing to issue an imperial edict to him, giving the impression that they are not being lenient.

古文：崔胤怒，奏贬之。
现代文：崔胤勃然大怒，奏请将陆贬斥了。
English: Cui Yan flew into a rage and rebuked Lu.

古文：宫人宋柔等十一人皆韩全诲所献，及僧、道士与宦官亲厚者二十馀人，并送京兆杖杀。
现代文：宫人宋柔等十一人都是韩全诲献进宫的，以及和尚、道士与宦官亲近交深的二十余人，一并送交京兆尹乱杖打死。
English: Eleven people, including the palace attendant Song Rong, who had been dedicated to the palace by Han Quanzhang, and more than 20 people, including monks, Taoists, and eunuchs, were sent to Jing Zhaoyun to be clubbed to death.

古文：上谓韩偓曰： 崔胤虽尽忠，然比卿颇用机数。 
现代文：昭宗对韩说： 崔胤虽然竭尽忠诚，但比你多用心机权术。 
English: Zhaozong said to Han: Although Cui Yan is loyal to the end, he is more interested in tactics than you are.

古文：对曰： 凡为天下者，万国皆属之耳目，安可以机数欺之！
现代文：韩回答说： 凡治理天下的人，万国都耳目专注，哪里能够用心机权术欺骗蒙蔽他们呢！
English: Han replied: "Whoever governs the world, the eyes and ears of all nations are focused. How can they be blinded by trickery and deception?

古文：莫若推诚直致，虽日计之不足，而岁计之有馀也。 
现代文：不如推心置腹直接了当，这样，虽然按日计算不充足，但按年计算就有剩余了。 
English: It is better to be direct and direct, so that although the daily calculation is not sufficient, there is a surplus in the annual calculation.

古文：丙子，工部侍郎、同平章事苏检，吏部侍郎卢光启，并赐自尽。
现代文：丙子，工部侍郎、同平章事苏检，吏部侍郎卢光，一并被赐令自杀。
English: Bing Zi, the chamberlain of the engineering department, Tong Ping Zhang, the secretary of the Soviet Inspection, and Lu Guang, the chamberlain of the administration department, were ordered to commit suicide.

古文：丁丑，以中书侍郎、同平章事王溥为太子宾客、分司，皆崔胤所恶也。
现代文：丁丑，中书侍郎、同平章事王溥降补太子宾客、分司。他们都是崔胤憎恨的人。
English: Ding Yuxi, the attendant of the Central Library, Tongping Zhangji Wang, the guest of the Crown Prince, and the branch manager. They were all hated by Cui Yan.

古文：戊寅，赐硃全忠号回天再造竭忠守正功臣，赐其僚佐敬翔等号迎銮协赞功臣，诸将硃友宁等号迎銮果毅功臣，都头以下号四镇静难功臣。
现代文：戊寅，朝廷赐朱全忠号 回天再造竭忠守正功臣 ，赐他的属官敬翔等人号 迎銮协赞功臣 、诸将朱友宁等人号 迎銮果毅功臣 、都头以下号 四镇静难功臣 。
English: According to Wu Yin, the imperial court gave Zhu Quanzhong the title of "return to heaven, re-create, be loyal, and be a meritorious subject," gave his subordinate officers such as Qixiang the title of "welcome and praise meritorious subject," generals such as Zhu Youning the title of "welcome and praise meritorious subject," and commanders such as Du Du Du the title of "four calm and difficult meritorious subjects."

古文：上议褒崇全忠，欲以皇子为诸道兵马元帅，以全忠副之。
现代文：昭宗与群臣商议嘉奖尊崇朱全忠，想要任命皇子担任诸道兵马元帅，以朱全忠担任副职。
English: Akimune discussed with his courtiers about honoring and praising Zhu Quanzhong, and wanted to appoint the prince as the marshal of the armies of all realms, with Zhu Quanzhong as his deputy.

古文：崔胤请以辉王祚为之，上曰： 濮王长。 
现代文：崔胤请让辉王李祚担任诸道兵马元帅，昭宗说： 濮王居长。 
English: Choi In asked King Hui to appoint King Li Yao as the marshal of the armies and horses of all the realms, and Emperor Zhaozong said: King Yao is the commander.

古文：胤承全忠密旨，利祚冲幼，固请之。己卯，以祚为诸道兵马元帅。
现代文：崔胤秉承朱全忠的秘密旨意，以李祚年幼于己有利，坚决请求以李祚为元帅。己卯，昭宗任命李祚为诸道兵马元帅。
English: Adhering to the secret intention of Zhu Quanzhong, Cui Yin took advantage of Li Xi's young age and firmly requested that Li Xi be made a marshal. Therefore, Zhaozong appointed Li Xi as the marshal of the armies of all realms.

古文：庚辰，加全忠守太尉，充副元帅，进爵梁王。以胤为司徒兼侍中。
现代文：庚辰，昭宗加封朱全忠署太尉，充任诸道兵马副元帅，进爵梁王，任命崔胤为司徒兼侍中。
English: Geng Chen, Zhaozong, and Zhu Quanzhong were promoted to the rank of lieutenant, and served as deputy marshals of the armies and horses of various provinces. Liang Wang was promoted to the peerage, and Cui Yin was appointed as an attendant and chamberlain.

古文：胤恃全忠之势，专权自恣，天子动静皆禀之。
现代文：崔胤仗恃朱全忠的势力，独揽朝政，恣意妄为，皇上的行止动静都要禀报他。
English: Cui Yan fought against the forces of Zhu Quanzhong, monopolized the court politics, acted arbitrarily, and the emperor's actions and movements had to be reported to him.

古文：朝臣从上幸凤翔者，凡贬逐三十馀人。
现代文：扈从昭宗前去凤翔的大臣，降低官职和放逐外地的共三十余人。
English: From Zhaozong to Fengxiang, more than 30 ministers were demoted and exiled.

古文：刑赏系其爱憎，中外畏之，重足一迹。
现代文：朝廷的刑罚、赏赐都取决于他的爱憎，朝廷内外的官吏都惧怕他，重足而立不敢妄动。
English: The imperial court's punishments and rewards all depended on his likes and dislikes. Officials both inside and outside the court were afraid of him and stood on their feet, not daring to move.

古文：以敬翔守太府卿，硃友宁领宁远节度使。
现代文：朝廷任命敬翔署太府卿，朱友宁兼任宁远节度使。
English: The imperial court appointed Zhu Youning as the secretary of the Ningyuan Festival and Zhu Youning as the director of the Department of Reverence for the Xiang.

古文：全忠表苻道昭同平章事，充天雄节度使，遣兵援送之秦州，不得至而还。
现代文：朱全忠上表奏请以符道昭为同平章事，充任天雄节度使，派遣军队护送往秦州赴任；没能到达而返回。
English: Zhu Quanzhong asked Fu Do Zhao to act as an envoy of Tianxiong, and sent an army to escort him to Qinzhou; however, he failed to arrive and returned.

古文：初，翰林学士承旨韩偓之登进士第也，御史大夫赵崇知贡举。
现代文：当初，翰林院学士承旨韩考中进士的时侯，御史大夫赵崇任主考官。
English: At the beginning, when Hanlin Academy's bachelor Zongzhi was a candidate for the Korean entrance examination, the chief examiner was Dr. Zhao Chong.

古文：上返自凤翔，欲用偓为相，偓荐崇及兵部侍郎王赞自代。
现代文：昭宗自凤翔返回后，想要用韩任宰相，韩推荐赵崇及兵部侍郎王赞代替自己。
English: After Akimune's return from Fengxiang, he wanted to appoint Han as prime minister, and Han recommended Zhao Chong and Wang Zan, the attendant of the military department, to replace him.

古文：上欲从之，崔胤恶其分己权，使硃全忠入争之。
现代文：昭宗想依从，崔胤恨他们分享自己的权力，就让朱全忠入宫争辩反对。
English: Zhaozong wanted to obey, and Cui Yan hated them sharing their power, so he let Zhu Quanzhong enter the palace to argue against it.

古文：全忠见上曰： 赵崇轻薄之魁，王赞无才用，韩偓何得妄荐为相！ 
现代文：朱全忠进见昭宗说： 赵崇是轻佻浮薄之首，王赞没有才能，韩怎么能随便保荐他们做宰相！ 
English: Zhu Quanzhong met with Zhaozong and said: Zhao Chong is a frivolous leader, Wang Zan has no talent, how can Han casually sponsor them to be prime minister!

古文：上见全忠怒甚，不得已，癸未，贬偓濮州司马。
现代文：昭宗见朱全忠愤怒得很，无可奈何，于癸未将韩贬为濮州司马。
English: When Akimune saw that Zhu Quanzhong was very angry, he had no choice but to demote Han to the position of Zhangzhou Sima.

古文：上密与偓泣别，偓曰： 吻人非复前来之比，臣得远贬及死乃幸耳，不忍见篡弑之辱！ 
现代文：昭宗秘密地与韩哭着告别，韩说： 这个人不能再与从前相比了，我能够被贬往远离京师的地方任职到死就是幸运了，不忍心看见篡位杀君的屈辱！ 
English: Zhaozong secretly bade farewell to Han with tears. Han said, "This man can no longer be compared with the past. I am lucky to be able to be relegated to a place far away from the capital to serve until death. I can't bear to see the humiliation of usurping and killing you!"

古文：己丑，上令硃全忠与李茂贞书，取平原公主。
现代文：己丑，昭宗叫朱全忠给李茂贞去信，要接回平原公主。
English: As ugly as he was, Zhaozong asked Zhu Quanzhong to write to Li Maozhen to take back the Plain Princess.

古文：茂贞不敢违，遽归之。
现代文：李茂贞不敢违抗，急忙将平原公主送回。
English: Li Maozhen did not dare to disobey and hurriedly sent the Plain Princess back.

古文：壬辰，以硃友裕为镇国节度使。
现代文：壬辰，朝廷任命朱友裕为镇国节度使。
English: In Imjin, the imperial court appointed Zhu Youyu as the town's state festival envoy.

古文：乙未，全忠奏留步骑万人于故两军，以硃友伦为左军宿卫都指挥使，又以汴将张廷范为宫苑使，王殷为皇城使，蒋玄晖充街使。
现代文：乙未，朱全忠奏请留步、骑兵一万人在原神策左右两军营署，以朱友伦担任左军宿卫都指挥使，又任命汴州将领张廷范为宫苑使，王殷为皇城使，蒋玄晖充会街使。
English: At the same time, Zhu Quanzhong was asked to stay behind, and 10,000 cavalrymen were sent to the two military camps around the original strategy. Zhu Youlun was appointed as the commander of the left army, and Zhang Tingfan was appointed as the palace envoy, Wang Yin was appointed as the imperial city envoy, and Jiang Xuanqun was appointed as the street envoy.

古文：于是全忠之党布列遍于禁卫及京辅。
现代文：于是，朱全忠的党羽布列遍及宫禁宿防及京辅各处。
English: As a result, Zhu Quanzhong's party spread throughout the palace and all parts of Beijing.

古文：戊戌，全忠辞归镇，留宴寿春殿，又饯之于延喜楼。
现代文：戊戌，朱全忠告辞回大梁，昭宗先在寿春殿设宴挽留，又在延喜楼为他饯行。
English: Wuzhen and Zhu Quan advised him to resign from the Great Beam, but Zhaozong first held a banquet at Shushun Temple and then went to Yanxi Tower to see him off.

古文：上临轩泣别，令于楼前上马。
现代文：昭宗亲临楼前长廊与朱全忠哭着告别，并命他在楼前上马。
English: Zhaozong personally went to the promenade in front of the building to bid a tearful farewell to Zhu Quanzhong and ordered him to mount a horse in front of the building.

古文：上又赐全忠诗，全忠亦和进；又赐《杨柳枝辞》五首。
现代文：昭宗又赐诗给朱全忠，朱全忠也和诗呈进，又赐《杨柳枝词》五首。
English: Zhaozong also gave poems to Zhu Quanzhong, Zhu Quanzhong also presented poems, and also gave five poems of "Yang Liu Zhi Ji."

古文：百官班辞于长乐驿。
现代文：文武官员在长乐驿列班辞别。
English: The officials of the Ministry of Education and Culture and the People's Armed Forces bid farewell to each other in the Changle line.

古文：崔胤独送至霸桥，自置饯席，夜二鼓，胤始还入城。上复召对，问以全忠安否，置酒奏乐，至四鼓乃罢。
现代文：崔胤独自送至霸桥，自摆酒席饯行，到晚上二更时侯，崔胤才回城；昭宗又召入询问朱全忠平安与否，并摆酒奏乐，到四更方散。
English: Cui Yan was sent alone to Baqiao, and he set up a banquet for himself. It was not until the evening of the second day that Cui Yan returned to the city. Zhaozong was also called in to inquire whether Zhu Quanzhong was safe or not, and he set up a banquet for himself and played music.

古文：以清海节度使裴枢为门下侍郎、同平章事，硃全忠荐之矣。
现代文：朝廷任命清海节度使裴枢为门下侍郎、同平章事，是朱全忠举荐的。
English: It was Zhu Quanzhong who recommended that the imperial court appoint Qinghai Jiedu to make Pei Zu a subordinate attendant and peer.

古文：李克用使者还晋阳，言崔胤之横，克用曰： 胤为人臣，外倚贼势，内胁其君，既执朝政，又握兵权。
现代文：李克用的使者自京师回到晋阳，讲述崔胤专横霸道的情形，李克用说： 崔胤身为人臣，在外倚靠强贼的势力，在内胁迫自己的君主，既主持朝政，又掌握兵权。
English: Li Kegui's emissary returned to Jinyang from Beijing to tell the story of Cui Yin's tyrannical behavior. Li Kegui said: Cui Yin is a vassal, relying on the power of strongmen outside, and coercing his monarch inside, both presiding over the government and controlling military power.

古文：权重则怨多，势侔则衅生，破家亡国，在眼中矣。 
现代文：权力过重就结怨多，势均力敌就要生出事端，破家亡国，近在眼前了！ 
English: Too much power breeds too much resentment. An equal-opportunity enemy is bound to cause an accident, ruin a family and ruin a country. It's just around the corner!

古文：硃全忠将行，奏： 克用于臣，本无大嫌，乞厚加宠泽，遣大臣抚慰；俾知臣意。 
现代文：朱全忠将要起身回大梁，奏称： 李克用对我来没有大的仇怨，恳求皇上对他厚加恩宠，派遣大臣前去安慰，使他知道我的心意。 
English: Zhu Quanzhong will get up and return to the girdle, saying: Li Ke did not have a great grudge against me, implored the emperor to give him a lot of grace, sent a minister to comfort him, and let him know my heart.

古文：进奏吏以白克用，克用笑曰： 贼欲有事淄青，畏吾掎其后耳！ 
现代文：河东进奏吏将朱全忠的话禀报李克用，李克用大笔道： 这强贼想要进攻淄青，怕我在后面牵制他罢了！ 
English: Hedong marching band officials reported Zhu Quanzhong's words to Li Ke, and Li Ke used a large pen to say: This strong thief wants to attack Bitumen, I'm afraid I'll hold him back!

古文：三月，戊午，硃全忠至大梁。
现代文：三月戊午，朱全忠回到大梁。
English: On the afternoon of March 3, Zhu Quanzhong returned to Daliang.

古文：王师范弟师鲁围齐州，硃友宁引兵击走之。
现代文：王师范的弟弟王师鲁围攻齐州，朱友宁率兵将他打跑。
English: Wang Shifan's younger brother Wang Shilu besieged Qizhou, and Zhu Youning led an army to drive him away.

古文：师范遣兵益刘鄩军，友宁击取之。
现代文：王师范派兵增加刘的兵力，朱友宁率兵攻击打败援兵。
English: Wang Shifan sent troops to increase Liu's forces, and Zhu Youning led the troops to attack and defeat the reinforcements.

古文：由是兗州援绝，葛从周引兵围之。
现代文：因此，兖州援兵断绝，葛从周率兵包围了兖州。
English: As a result, the reinforcements from Bozhou were cut off, and Ge Cong and his soldiers surrounded Bozhou.

古文：友宁进攻青州；戊辰，全忠引四镇及魏博兵十万继之。
现代文：朱友宁进攻青州；戊辰，朱全忠统率四镇及魏博的军队十万人，继续开往青州。
English: Zhu Youning attacked Qingzhou; Wu Chen, Zhu Quanzhong led the four towns and Weibo's army of 100,000 people, and continued to drive to Qingzhou.

古文：淮南将李神福围鄂州，望城中积荻，谓监军尹建峰曰： 今夕为公焚之。 
现代文：淮南将领李神福围攻鄂州，望见城中堆积着荻草，对监军尹建峰说： 今天晚上为您把它焚烧了。 
English: When Li Shenfu, the general of Huainan, besieged Ezhou, he saw the rushes piled up in the city and said to the supervisor of the army, Yin Jianfeng, "I burned it for you tonight."

古文：建峰未之信。
现代文：尹建峰还不相信。
English: Yin Jianfeng still doesn't believe it.

古文：时杜洪求救于硃全忠，神福遣部将秦皋乘轻舟至滠口，举火炬于树杪。洪以为救兵至，果焚获以应之。
现代文：当时，杜洪向朱全忠求救，李神福派遣部将秦皋乘轻舟到滠口，在树林上举起火炬，杜洪以为救兵到了，果然焚烧荻草来接应。
English: At that time, Du Hong asked Zhu Quanzhong for help. Li Shenfu's dispatching department took Qin Yu by light boat to the estuary and held up a torch in the woods. Du Hong thought that the rescuers had arrived and actually burned the reeds to respond.

古文：夏，四月，己卯，以硃全忠判元帅府事。
现代文：夏季，四月己卯，朝廷任命朱全忠总管元帅府事务。
English: In the summer, in April, the imperial court appointed Zhu Quanzhong as the head of the Marshal's Office.

古文：知温州事丁章为木工李彦所杀，其将张惠据温州。
现代文：知温州事丁章被木工李彦杀死，他的将领张惠占据温州。
English: Ding Zhang, the governor of Wenzhou, was killed by the woodworker Li Yan, and his general Zhang Hui occupied Wenzhou.

古文：王师范求救于淮南，乙未，杨行密遣其将王茂章以步骑七千救之，又遣别将将兵数万攻宿州。
现代文：王师范向淮南节度使杨行密求救。乙未，杨行密派遣他的部将王茂章率领步兵、骑兵七千人前往援救，又遣别将率兵数万人攻打宿州。
English: Wang Shifan asked Yang Xingmi for help at the Huainan Festival. In the evening of the same day, Yang Xingmi sent his general Wang Maozhang with 7,000 infantry and cavalry to the rescue, and sent tens of thousands of soldiers to attack Shuzhou.

古文：全忠遣其将康怀英救宿州，淮南兵遁去。
现代文：朱全忠派遣他的部将康怀英率兵援救宿州，淮南军队逃跑了。
English: Zhu Quanzhong sent his general Kang Huaiying and his army to rescue Shuzhou, but the Huainan army fled.

古文：杨行密遣使诣马殷，言硃全忠跋扈，请殷绝之，约为兄弟。
现代文：杨行密派遣使者去见马殷，说朱全忠专横跋扈，请马殷与他断绝交往，约定结为兄弟。
English: Yang Xingmi sent an envoy to see Ma Yin, saying that Zhu Quanzhong was domineering, and asked Ma Yin to break off contact with him and make an agreement to become brothers.

古文：湖南大将许德勋曰： 全忠虽无道，然挟天子以令诸侯，明公素奉王室，不可轻绝也。 
现代文：湖南大将许德勋说： 朱全忠虽然无道，但是他挟天子以令诸侯，您向来尊奉王室，不可轻易与他绝交。 
English: General Xu Deshun of Hunan Province said: Although Zhu Quanzhong is a scoundrel, he has blackmailed the princes. You have always respected the royal family, and you should not easily break off diplomatic relations with him.

古文：殷从之。
现代文：马殷听从了。
English: Yin Zhong could do as he said.

古文：杜洪求救于硃全忠，全忠遣其将韩勍将万人屯滠口，遣使语荆南节度使成汭、武安节度使马殷、武贞节度使雷彦威，令出兵救洪。
现代文：杜洪向朱全忠求救，朱全忠派遣他的部将韩率领一万军队驻扎滠口，派遣使者前告诉荆南节度使成、武安节度使马殷、武贞节度使雷彦威，叫他们出兵救援杜洪。
English: Du Hong appealed to Zhu Quanzhong for help. Zhu Quanzhong dispatched his general Han Tong, who led ten thousand troops stationed in Hekou. Before dispatching the envoys, he told Jing Nan Jie to send Cheng, Wu An Jie to send Ma Yin, and Wu Zhen Jie to send Lei Yanwei, and asked them to send troops to rescue Du Hong.

古文：汭畏全忠之强，且欲侵江、淮之地以自广，发舟师十万，沿江东下。
现代文：成畏惧朱全忠的强大，并且想要侵占江、淮之地来扩张自己的地盘，于是派遣水师十万，沿江东下。
English: He feared the power of Zhu Quanzhong and wanted to expand his territory by encroaching on the lands of the Huai River and the Yangtze River, so he dispatched 100,000 sailors to sail eastward along the Yangtze River.

古文：汭作巨舰，三年而成，制度如府署，谓之 和州载 ，其余谓之 齐山 、 截海 、 劈浪 之类甚众。
现代文：成制造巨舰，三年才完工，规模法度如同府第官署，叫做 和州载 ，其余叫做 齐山 、 截海 、 劈浪 之类的很多。
English: It takes three years to build a giant ship, and the scale regulations are the same as those of the prefectural government. It is called "Wazhou," and the rest are called "Qishan," "Cut the Sea," "Cut the Waves" and many others.

古文：掌书记李珽谏曰： 今每舰载甲士千人，稻米倍之，缓急不可动也。
现代文：掌书记李劝告说： 现在每舰载甲士一千人，稻米又多一倍，有个缓急，不能移动。
English: Chief Secretary Li advised: Now each ship carries a thousand soldiers, and rice is twice as much. There is a priority, and it cannot be moved.

古文：吴兵剽轻，难与角逐；武陵、长沙，皆吾仇也；岂得不为反顾之虑乎！
现代文：吴兵敏捷轻快，难与角逐。武陵雷彦威、长沙马殷都是我们的仇敌，怎么能不考虑后顾之忧呢！
English: Wu soldiers are quick and nimble, difficult to compete with. Wuling Lei Yanwei and Changsha Ma Yin are our enemies, how can we not consider the worries of the future!

古文：不若遣骁将屯巴陵，大军与之对岸，坚壁勿战，不过一月，吴兵食尽自遁，鄂围解矣。 
现代文：不如派遣勇猛的将领驻守巴陵，大军与之隔岸相对，坚守壁垒不出战，不过一个来月，吴兵食尽就会自己退走，鄂州就解围了。 
English: It would be better to send brave generals to guard Baling, with a large army on the opposite side of the river, hold fast to the barrier and not fight, but in the next month, Wu soldiers will retreat on their own when they run out of food, and Ezhou will be relieved.

古文：汭不听。
现代文：成没有听从。
English: Cheng didn't listen.

古文：珽，憕之五世孙也。
现代文：李是李的五世孙。
English: Lee is the fifth generation of Lee's grandchildren.

古文：王建出兵攻秦、陇，乘李茂贞之弱也，遣判官韦庄入贡，亦修好于硃全忠。
现代文：王建乘李茂贞势力削弱的时机，出兵进攻秦州、陇州，并派遣判官韦庄到京师进献物品，也向朱全忠谋求和好。
English: Wang Jian took advantage of the opportunity when Li Maozhen's power weakened to send troops to attack Qinzhou and Zhangzhou, and sent the judge Wei Zhuang to Beijing to present goods, and also to seek reconciliation with Zhu Quanzhong.

古文：全忠遣押牙王殷报聘，建与之宴。
现代文：朱全忠派遣押牙王殷前回访，王建设宴招待。
English: Zhu Quanzhong sent Oshi Wang Yin to pay a return visit, and Wang was invited to a banquet.

古文：殷言： 蜀甲兵诚多，但乏马耳。 
现代文：王殷说： 蜀地的兵士确实众多，只是缺少马匹罢了。 
English: Wang Yin said: There are indeed many soldiers in Shu, but they lack horses.

古文：建作色曰： 当道江山险阻，骑兵无所施。
现代文：王建变了脸色说： 蜀地道路险恶，山河阻隔，骑兵没有施展之处。
English: Wang Jian changed his face and said, "The roads in Shu are dangerous, the mountains and rivers are obstacles, and there is no place for the cavalry to show off.

古文：然马亦不乏，押牙少留，当共阅之。 
现代文：然而马匹也不缺少，押牙稍留时日，当共同检阅一番。 
English: However, there is no shortage of horses, so we will have to spend some time examining them together.

古文：乃集诸州马，大阅于星宿山，官马八千，私马四千，部队甚整。
现代文：于是，王建调集各州的马匹，在星宿山举行大规模检阅，计官马八千匹，私马四千匹，部队非常整齐。
English: As a result, Wang Jian mobilized horses from all the states and held a large-scale inspection in Xingju Mountain, counting eight thousand official horses and four thousand private horses. The troops were very neat.

古文：殷叹服。
现代文：王殷赞叹佩服。
English: Wang Yin was full of admiration.

古文：建本骑将，故得蜀之后，于文、黎、维、茂州市胡马，十年之间，遂及兹数。
现代文：王建本来是骑兵将领，所以在取得蜀地以后，就往文州、黎州、维州、茂州一带购买胡地出产的马匹，十年之间，就达到了这个数目。
English: Wang Jian was originally a cavalry general, so after acquiring Shu, he went to Wenzhou, Lizhou, Wizhou, and Maozhou to buy horses produced in the Hudi area, and within ten years, he reached this number.

古文：五月，丁未，李克用云州都将王敬晖杀刺史刘再立，叛降刘仁恭。
现代文：五月丁未，李克用属下的云州都将王敬晖杀死刺史刘再立，叛变投降刘仁恭。
English: In May of the same year, Li Ke used his subordinate Yunnan to kill Wang Jingyao, assassinate Liu Zairi, and mutiny and surrender Liu Rengong.

古文：克用遣李嗣昭、李存审将兵讨之。
现代文：李克用派遣李嗣昭、李存审率兵讨伐。
English: Li Ke used the dispatch of Li Shizhao and Li Cunxin to lead the troops in the crusade.

古文：仁恭遣将以兵五万救敬晖，嗣昭退保乐安，敬晖举众弃城而去。
现代文：刘仁恭派遣将领带兵五万救援王敬晖，李嗣昭退兵保卫乐安，王敬晖率众弃城逃走。
English: Liu Rengong sent a general with 50,000 soldiers to rescue Wang Jingyao, Li Shizhao withdrew to protect Le'an, and Wang Jingyao led the crowd to abandon the city and flee.

古文：先是，振武将契苾让逐戍将石善友，据城叛。嗣昭等进攻之，让自燔死。
现代文：在这以前，振武将领契让驱逐防守的将领石善友，据城叛乱，李嗣昭等率兵攻伐，契让自焚而死。
English: Prior to this, the Zhenwu general Qizhan expelled the defending general Shi Shengyou, the city rebelled, Li Shizhao led the troops to attack, and Qizhan self-immolated and died.

古文：复取振武城，杀吐谷浑叛者二千馀人。克用怒嗣昭、存审失王敬晖，皆杖之，削其官。
现代文：李嗣昭等又夺取振武城，杀死叛乱的吐谷浑二千余人，李克用恼怒李嗣昭、李存审没有能够擒杀王敬晖，将他们杖责，并削去官职。
English: Li Shizhao and others also seized Zhenwu City and killed more than two thousand people of the rebellious Tuguan Hun. Li Ke used the anger of Li Shizhao and Li Cunxin to kill Wang Jingyao, and punished them and removed them from their official positions.

古文：成汭行未至鄂州，马殷遣大将许德勋将舟师万馀人，雷彦威遣其将欧阳思将舟师三千馀人会于荆江口，乘虚袭江陵，庚戌，陷之，尽掠其人及货财而去。
现代文：荆南节度使成率军东下，还没有到鄂州，武安节度使马殷派遣部将许德勋率领水军一万余人，武贞节度使雷彦威派遣部将欧阳思率领水军三千余人在荆江口会合，乘虚突袭江陵，庚戌将江陵攻克，尽掠人口及货财而去。
English: The Jing Nan Festival made the Cheng Rui Army go east, but it has not yet reached Ezhou. The Wu An Festival made Ma Yin's dispatching department send Xu Deshun to lead more than ten thousand sailors. The Wu Zhen Festival made Lei Yanwei's dispatching department send Ou Yang Si to lead more than three thousand sailors to meet at the mouth of the Jing River. They took advantage of the opportunity to raid Jiangling. Geng Bi conquered Jiangling, plundered the population and goods, and left.

古文：将士亡其家，皆无斗志。
现代文：成的将士家亡财空，都没有了斗志。
English: As a result, the generals' families were left penniless and bereft of morale.

古文：李神福闻其将至，自乘轻舟前觇之，谓诸将曰： 彼战舰虽多而不相属，易制也，当急击之！ 
现代文：淮南将领李神福听说成率领水师将要到达，就亲自乘着轻舟前去察看，对各位将领说： 他们的战舰虽多，但彼此不相连续，容易制伏，应当急速发兵攻击！ 
English: When Li Shenfu, the general of Huainan, heard that the leading sailors of Chengdu were about to arrive, he personally went to inspect them in a light boat and said to the generals: Although their warships are many, they are not continuous with each other, they are easy to subdue, and they should quickly send troops to attack!

古文：壬子，神福遣其将秦裴、杨戎将众数千逆击汭于君山，大破之，因风纵火，焚其舰，士卒皆溃，汭赴水死，获其战舰二百艘。
现代文：壬子，李神福派遣部将秦裴、杨戎率众数千人在洞庭湖君山迎击，把成打得大败，趁着风势放火焚烧成的舰只，将士争相逃散，成投湖淹死，缴获成的战舰二百艘。
English: In Imzi, the dispatching department of Li Shenfu led thousands of people including Qin Pei and Yang Rong to attack Junshan in Dongting Lake. They were defeated, and the ships that took advantage of the wind were set on fire and burned. The soldiers scrambled to escape, drowned in the lake, and captured 200 warships.

古文：韩勍闻之，亦引兵去。
现代文：韩听到此讯，也退兵离去。
English: When Han heard the news, he also left the army.

古文：许德勋还过岳州，刺史邓进忠开门具牛酒犒军，德勋谕以祸福，进忠遂举族迁于长沙。
现代文：许德勋返回途中路过岳州，刺史邓进忠大开城门，准备牛酒饮食慰劳将士，许德勋告诉他祸福利害，邓进忠于是带领全族迁往长沙。
English: On the way back, Xu Dezhun passed through Yuezhou. Deng Jinzhong opened the gate of the city and prepared beef wine and food to comfort the laborers. Xu Dezhun told him about the calamity and welfare damage. Deng Jinzhong then led the whole family to move to Changsha.

古文：马殷以德勋为岳州刺史，以进忠为衡州刺史。
现代文：马殷任命许德勋为岳州刺史，邓进忠为衡州刺史。
English: Ma Yin appointed Xu Deshun as the governor of Yuezhou and Deng Jinzhong as the governor of Hengzhou.

古文：雷彦威狡狯残忍，有父风，常泛舟焚掠邻境，荆、鄂之间，殆至无人。
现代文：雷彦威狡诈残忍，和他的父亲一样，常泛舟焚掠邻镇，江陵和武昌军军部鄂州之间被劫掠得无人。
English: Lei Yanwei was cunning and cruel, and like his father, he often raided and plundered the neighboring towns. Between Jiangling and Ezhou, the military department of Wuchang Army, no one was plundered.

古文：李茂贞畏硃全忠，自以官为尚书令，在全忠上，累表乞解去。
现代文：李茂贞畏硃全忠，自以官为尚书令，在全忠上，累表乞解去。
English: Li Maozhen was afraid of being loyal to the whole country. She considered herself to be a high-ranking official and begged to be relieved of her duties.

古文：诏复以茂贞为中书令。
现代文：诏复以茂贞为中书令。
English: The imperial rescript cited Mao Zhen as the author of the edict.

古文：崔胤奏： 左右龙武、羽林、神策等军名存实亡，侍卫单寡；请每军募步兵四将，每将二百五十人，骑兵一将百人，合六千六百人，选其壮健者，分番侍卫， 从之。
现代文：崔胤上奏说： 今左右龙武、羽林、神策等军名存实亡，宫中侍卫势单力薄，人手不足。请陛下准许招募新军，每军设置步兵统领四将，每将二百五十人，骑兵一将一百人，共六千六百人，从中选择健壮者，分班轮流侍从护卫。 
English: Cui Yin said in his report: Around now, the military names of Long Wu, Ulin, and Shen Zhe are all dead and gone, and the palace guards are weak and understaffed. I would like to ask Your Majesty to allow the recruitment of new troops, and to set up four generals to command the infantry in each army, with two hundred and fifty generals each, and one hundred cavalry generals, for a total of six thousand and six hundred people, and to select able-bodied people from among them to take turns to serve as guards.

古文：令六军诸卫副使、京兆尹郑元规立格召募于市。
现代文：昭宗批准。命令六军诸卫副使、京兆尹郑元规订立标准在街市召募
English: Zhaozong approved. He ordered the deputy envoys of the six armies of Zhuwei and Jingzhao Yin Zhengyuan to set up standards for recruiting in the streets.

古文：硃全忠表颍州刺史硃友恭为武宁李度使。
现代文：朱全忠上表秦请任命颖州刺史朱友恭为武宁节度使。
English: Zhu Quanzhong, on behalf of the Qin Dynasty, please appoint Yingzhou chief Zhu Youqiong as the chief envoy of the Wu Ning Festival.

古文：硃友宁攻博昌，月馀不拔。
现代文：宁远节度使朱友宁进攻博昌，一个多月没有攻克。
English: Ningyuan's strictness made Zhu Youning attack Bochang, which was not conquered for more than a month.

古文：硃全忠怒，遣客将李捍往督之。
现代文：朱全忠大怒，派遣客将刘捍前往监督。
English: Zhu Quanzhong was furious and sent a guest to supervise Liu Han.

古文：捍至，友宁驱民丁十馀万，负木石，牵牛驴，诣城南筑土山，既成，并人畜木石排而筑之，冤号声闻数十里。
现代文：刘捍到后，朱友宁驱赶壮丁十余万人，背负木石，牵着牛驴，到城南修筑土山。土山筑成以后，连同人畜木石排列在一起填土捣实，喊冤号哭之声传出数十里。
English: After Liu Han arrived, Zhu Youning drove more than one hundred thousand strong men, carrying stones and wood on their backs and leading oxen and donkeys, to the south of the city to build a mound. After the mound was built, they lined up together with people, animals and stones to fill the soil, and the cries of injustice were heard for dozens of miles.

古文：俄而城陷，尽屠之。
现代文：即刻破都昌城，把城内男女老少全部杀死。
English: Immediately destroy Duchang City and kill all the men, women and children in the city.

古文：进拔临淄，抵青州城下，遣别将攻登、莱。
现代文：随后进兵攻克临淄，抵达青州城下，派遣别将率兵攻打登州、莱州。
English: Subsequently, the marching troops conquered Linyi, arrived under the city of Qingzhou, and dispatched soldiers to attack Dengzhou and Laizhou.

古文：淮南将王茂章会王师范弟莱州刺史师诲攻密州，拔之，斩其刺史刘康乂，以淮海都游奕使张训为刺史。
现代文：淮南将领王茂章会同王师范的弟弟莱州刺史王师诲进攻密州，将城攻破，杀死刺史刘康义，并以淮海都游弈使张训为密州刺史。
English: Huainan general Wang Maozhang, together with Wang Shifan's younger brother, Laizhou general Wang Shizhi, attacked Mizhou, broke through the city, killed Liu Kangyi, and made Zhang Xun the general of Mizhou.

古文：六月，乙亥，汴兵拔登州。
现代文：六月乙亥，汴州军队攻克登州。
English: In June, the Bozhou army invaded Dengzhou.

古文：师范帅登、莱兵拒硃友宁于石楼，为两栅。
现代文：王师范率领登州、莱州军队，在石楼抵抗朱友宁，树立两道栅栏。
English: Wang Shifan led the troops of Dengzhou and Laizhou to resist Zhu Youning in the stone tower and set up two fences.

古文：丙子，夜，友宁击登州栅，栅中告急，师范趣茂章出战，茂章案兵不动。
现代文：丙子夜里，朱友宁率兵攻击登州栅，栅内情况紧急，王师范催促王茂章出战，王茂章按兵不动。
English: In the middle of the night, Zhu Youning led his troops to attack Dengzhou Gate. The situation inside the gate was urgent. Wang Shifan urged Wang Maozhang to go to war, but Wang Maozhang did not move.

古文：友宁破登州栅，进攻莱州栅。
现代文：朱友攻破登州栅，进攻莱州栅。
English: Zhu You broke through Dengzhou Grate and attacked Laizhou Grate.

古文：比明，茂章度其兵力已疲，乃与师范合兵出战，大破之。
现代文：天快明时，王茂章估计朱以宁的兵力己经疲惫，才与王师范合兵出战，把朱友宁的军队打得大败。
English: At dawn, Wang Maozhang estimated that Zhu Yining's army was exhausted, so he joined forces with Wang Shifan and defeated Zhu Youning's army.

古文：友宁旁自峻阜驰骑赴敌，马仆，青州将张士枭斩之，传首淮南。
现代文：朱友宁从旁侧高峻的土山上纵马出击敌人，马失前蹄倒下，青州将领张士将他斩首，传首淮南示众。
English: Zhu Youning mounted his horse to attack the enemy from the side of a steep hill. The horse lost its front hoof and fell down. The Qingzhou general Zhang Shih beheaded him and sent his head to Huainan to be displayed to the public.

古文：两镇兵逐北至米河，俘斩万计，魏博之兵殆尽。
现代文：平卢、淮南两镇军队追击败走的敌人到米河，俘获斩杀敌人以万计，魏博军队几乎完了。
English: The armies of Pinglu and Huainan chased the defeated enemy to the Mi River, captured and killed tens of thousands of enemies, and the Wei Bo army was almost complete.

古文：全忠闻友宁死，自将兵二十万昼夜兼行赴之。
现代文：朱全忠听说朱友宁死了，亲自率领二十万大军日夜兼行奔赴救援。
English: When Zhu Quanzhong heard that Zhu Youning had died, he personally led two hundred thousand soldiers to rush to the rescue day and night.

古文：秋，七月，壬子，至临朐，命诸将攻青州。
现代文：秋季，七月壬子，朱全忠率军到临朐，命令各将领攻打青州。
English: In the autumn, in July, Zhu Quanzhong led his army to Linyi and ordered his generals to attack Qingzhou.

古文：王师范出战，汴兵大破之。
现代文：王师范率兵出战，被汴州军打得大败。
English: Wang Shifan led his troops into battle and was soundly defeated by the Zhangzhou Army.

古文：王茂章闭垒示怯，伺汴兵稍懈，毁栅而出，驱驰疾战，战酣退坐，召诸将饮酒，已而复战。
现代文：王茂章闭垒不出表示怯懦，侦察汴州军队稍微懈怠，率兵毁栅冲出，驰驱快攻，打得尽兴，退回坐下，召集诸将饮酒，不久又冲出奋战。
English: Wang Maozhang did not close the base to show cowardice, and the reconnaissance of the Zhangzhou army was a little slack. He led the soldiers to rush out of the gate, drove the fast attack, played with great pleasure, returned to sit down, gathered the generals to drink, and soon rushed out to fight.

古文：全忠登高望见之，问降者，知为茂章，叹曰： 使吾得此人为将，天下不足平也！ 
现代文：朱全忠登高观战望见他，问投降的人，知道是王茂章，叹说： 假使我能得以此人做将领，天下就不够我平定了！ 
English: Zhu Quanzhong climbed to the top of the tower to watch the battle, looked up to see him, asked those who had surrendered, knew it was Wang Maozhang, and sighed, "If I could have this man as a general, the world would not be enough, I have been pacified!"

古文：至晡，汴兵乃退。
现代文：黄昏时分，汴州军队才撤退。
English: At dusk, the Zhangzhou troops began to retreat.

古文：茂章度众寡不敌，是夕，引军还。
现代文：王茂章估计敌众我，不能取胜，当天晚上就率领军队回淮南。
English: Wang Maozhang estimated that the enemy could not win, and led the army back to Huainan that evening.

古文：全忠遣曹州刺史杨师厚追之，及于辅唐。
现代文：朱全忠派遣曹州刺史杨师厚率兵追赶，直到辅唐。
English: Zhu Quanzhong dispatched Caozhou assassin Yang Shihuang and his soldiers to chase them until they reached Fu Tang.

古文：茂章命先锋指挥使李虔裕将五百骑为殿，虔裕殊死战，师厚擒而杀之。
现代文：王茂章命令先锋指挥使李虔裕率领五百骑兵殿后，与追兵拼死战斗，杨师厚将李虔裕擒获杀死。
English: Wang Maozhang ordered the vanguard commander to make Li Qianyu lead five hundred cavalry, and after a fierce battle with the pursuing soldiers, Yang Shihou captured and killed Li Qianyu.

古文：师厚，颍州人也。
现代文：杨师厚是颍州人。
English: Yang Shihou is from Zhangzhou.

古文：张训闻茂章去，谓诸将曰： 汴人将至，何以御之？ 
现代文：密州刺史张训听说王茂章离去，对各位将领说： 汴州军将要到达，用什么抵御呢？ 
English: After hearing that Wang Maozhang had left, Zhang Xun, the chief historian of Mizhou, said to the generals: "The Zhangzhou Army is about to arrive, how can we defend ourselves?

古文：诸将请焚城大掠而归。
现代文：诸将请求焚烧城池，大掠财物而回淮南。
English: They will request to burn the city and return to Huainan with plundered property.

古文：训曰： 不可。 
现代文：张训说： 不能这样做。 
English: Zhang Xun said, "You can't do that.

古文：封府库，植旗帜于城上，遣羸弱居前，自以精兵殿其后而去。
现代文：于是，封闭府库，在城上树立旗帜，然后让老弱兵士在前，自己率领精兵断后而离去。
English: As a result, he closed the treasury, set up a flag on the city, and then let the old and weak soldiers go ahead, while he led the elite soldiers and left behind.

古文：全忠遣左踏白指挥使王檀攻密州，既至，望旗帜，数日乃敢入城。
现代文：朱全忠派遣左踏白指挥使王檀攻打密州，到达以后，望见城上旗帜，过了数日才敢进城。
English: Zhu Quanzhong dispatched Zuo Baibai to command Wang Danzhong to attack Mizhou. After arriving, he saw the flag on the city and dared to enter the city after a few days.

古文：见府库城邑皆完，遂不复追。
现代文：王檀见府库、城邑全都完好，就不再追赶。
English: When Wang Dan saw that all the government buildings and cities were intact, he no longer pursued them.

古文：训全军而还。
现代文：张训全军回到淮南。
English: Zhang Xun's entire army returned to Huainan.

古文：全忠以檀为密州刺史。
现代文：朱全忠以王檀担任密州刺史。
English: Zhu Quanzhong and Wang Dan served as the leaders of the history of Misshou.

古文：丁卯，以山南西道留后王宗贺为节度使。
现代文：丁卯，朝廷任命山南西道留后王宗贺为节度使。
English: Dingwu, the imperial court appointed Wang Zonghe as the festival envoy after he stayed in the western part of Shannan Province.

古文：睦州刺史陈询叛钱镠，举兵攻兰溪，镠遣指挥使方永珍击之。
现代文：睦州刺史陈询背叛钱，率兵进攻兰溪，钱派遣指挥使方永珍率兵前去攻打陈询。
English: Mutsuzhou assassinated Chen Enquiry and betrayed Qian. Qian led troops to attack Lanxi. Qian dispatched commander Fang Yongzhen and led troops to attack Chen Enquiry.

古文：武安都指挥使杜建徽与询连姻，镠疑之，建徽不言。
现代文：武安都指挥使杜建徽与陈询是姻亲，钱怀疑他，杜建徽不辩解。
English: Du Jianhui and Chen Enquiry are in-laws, Qian suspected him, Du Jianhui did not defend.

古文：会询亲吏来奔，得建徽与询书，皆劝戒之辞，镠乃悦。
现代文：恰巧陈询的亲信属吏前来投奔，钱得到杜建微给陈询的书信，都是劝告陈询改过的话，钱这才喜悦。
English: A close confidant of Chen Ying, who happened to be a subordinate official of Chen Ying, came to take refuge. Qian was delighted to receive Du Jianwei's letter to Chen Ying, which advised Chen Ying to make amends.

古文：建徽从兄建思谮建徽私蓄兵仗，谋作乱。
现代文：杜建徽的堂兄杜建思诬陷杜建徽私自贮备兵器，阴谋作乱。
English: Du Jianhui's cousin, Du Jiansi, framed Du Jianhui for secretly stockpiling weapons and plotting to create turmoil.

古文：镠使人索之，建徽方食，使者直入卧内，建徽不顾，镠以是益亲重之。
现代文：钱派人前去搜索，杜建徽正在吃饭，使者径直进入卧室搜查，杜建徽毫不顾忌，钱因此更加亲近推重他。
English: Qian sent someone to search, Du Jianhui was having dinner, the messenger went straight into the bedroom to search, Du Jianhui did not hesitate, Qian therefore pushed him closer.

古文：八月，戊辰朔，硃全忠留齐州刺史杨师厚攻青州，身归大梁。
现代文：八月戊辰朔，朱全忠留下齐州刺史杨师厚攻打青州，自己回大梁。
English: In August, Zhu Quanzhong left Yang Shihou to attack Qingzhou and returned to Daliang.

古文：庚辰，加西川节度使西平王王建守司徒，进爵蜀王。
现代文：庚辰，朝廷给西川节度使西平王王建加官署司徒，进爵蜀王。
English: Geng Chen, the imperial court gave the West River Festival to the King of Xiping, the King of Xiping, the King of Xiping, the King of Xiping, and the King of Shu.

古文：前渝州刺史王宗本言于王建，请出兵取荆南。
现代文：前渝州刺史王宗本向王建进言，请出兵攻取荆南。
English: Wang Jian was advised by Wang Zong, the Prince of Zhi Shi in the former Yu Prefecture, to send troops to invade Jingnan.

古文：建从之，以宗本为开道都指挥使，将兵下峡。
现代文：王建听从，任命王宗本为开道都指挥使，率兵船下三峡。
English: Wang Jian obeyed, appointed Wang Zongben as the commander of the opening of the capital, and led the troops to sail under the Three Gorges.

古文：初，宁国节度使田頵破冯弘鐸，诣广陵谢杨行密，因求池、歙为巡属，行密不许。
现代文：当初，宁国节度使田打败冯弘铎，前往广陵告谢淮南节度使杨行密，因有功要求把池州、歙州作为自己的巡视属地，杨行密没有答应。
English: At the beginning, the Ningguo Festival Commander Tian defeated Feng Hongyi and went to Guangling to tell the Southern Huai Festival Commander Yang Xingmi that Yang Xingmi did not agree to take Chizhou and Zhangzhou as his patrol territory because of his meritorious service.

古文：行密左右下及狱吏，皆救赂于頵，頵怒曰： 吏知吾将下狱邪！ 
现代文：杨行密左右的人以及狱吏，都向田索要财物，田勃然大怒说： 你狱吏知道我将要下狱吗！ 
English: People around Yang Xingmi, as well as the prison guards, all demanded money from Tian. Tian flew into a rage and said, "Do you prison guards know that I'm going to prison?"

古文：及还，指广陵南门曰： 吾不可复入此矣！ 
现代文：等到回去的时侯，田指着广陵的南门说： 我不能再入此城了！ 
English: When waiting to go back, Tian pointed to the south gate of Guangling and said: "I can't enter this city anymore!

古文：頵兵强财富，好攻取。行密既定淮南，欲保境息民，每抑止之，頵不从。
现代文：田兵强财富，喜好攻战夺取；杨行密己经平定淮南，想要保境安民，往往加以压抑制止，田不从。
English: Tian soldiers are strong and rich, and they like to attack and capture; Yang Xingxin has pacified Huainan, and wants to protect the border and the people, and often suppresses them, but Tian does not obey.

古文：及解释钱镠，頵尤恨之，阴有叛志。
现代文：等到杨行密与钱亲善友好，田就更加恨他，暗中己有背叛杨行密的志向。
English: When Yang Xingmi became friendly with Qian, Tian hated him even more and secretly had the intention of betraying Yang Xingmi.

古文：李神福言于行密曰： 頵必反，宜早图之。 
现代文：李神福向杨行密进言说： 田一定要谋反，应当尽早设法应付。 
English: Li Shenfu said to Yang Xingmi: Tian must rebel and should try to deal with it as soon as possible.

古文：行密曰： 頵有大功，反状未露，今杀之，诸将人人自危矣！ 
现代文：杨行密说： 田有大功劳，谋反的行迹没有暴露，现在杀他，各位将官就要人人自危了！ 
English: Yang Xingmi said, "Tian has done a great service, and his treasonous deeds have not been exposed. If you kill him now, you generals will all be in danger!"

古文：頵有良将曰康儒，与頵谋议多不合，行密知之，擢儒为庐州刺史。
现代文：田有个良将叫康儒，与田商议事情经常意见不合，杨行密知道这情况以后，擢升康儒为庐州刺史。
English: Tian had a good general named Kang Ru, and they often disagreed with Tian on matters of negotiation. After Yang Xingmi knew this situation, he promoted Kang Ru to be the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：頵以儒为贰于己，族之。
现代文：田以为康儒对自己有二心，将他全族杀死。
English: Tian thought that Kangru had a grudge against him and killed his entire family.

古文：儒曰： 吾死，田公亡无日矣！ 
现代文：康儒说： 我死了，田公灭亡就没有几天了！ 
English: Confucius said: I am dead, Tian Gong's demise is only a few days away!

古文：頵遂与润州团练使安仁义同举兵，仁义悉焚东塘战舰。
现代文：田于是与润州团练使安仁义一同起兵，安仁义全部焚烧了杨行密停在扬州东塘的战舰。
English: Tian then raised an army together with An Renyi, the commander of the Runchu Regiment, and An Renyi burned all of Yang Xingmi's warships that were docked in Dongtang, Yangzhou.

古文：頵遣二使诈为商人，诣寿州约奉国节度使硃延寿，行密将尚公乃遇之，曰： 非商人也。 
现代文：田派遣两个使者假装商人，往寿州邀约奉国节度使朱延寿，杨行密的将领尚公遇见他们，说： 不是商人。 
English: Tian sent two emissaries pretending to be merchants to Shoushou to invite them to the festival of national service to make Zhu Yanshou. Yang Xingmi's general Shang Gong met them and said, "They are not merchants.

古文：杀一人，得其书，以告行密。
现代文：杀死一人，搜得田给朱延寿的书信，把这情况告诉杨行密。
English: He killed one person, found Tian's letter to Zhu Yanshou, and told this to Yang Xingmi.

古文：行密召李神福于鄂州，神福恐杜洪邀之，宣言奉命攻荆南，勒兵具舟楫。及暮，遂沿江东下，始告将士以讨田頵。
现代文：杨行密从鄂州召回李神福，李神福担心杜洪进行拦击，扬言奉命攻打荆南，准备武器船只；等到日落的时侯，就沿长江顺流东下，这才告诉将士前去讨伐田。
English: Yang Xingmi recalled Li Shenfu from Ezhou. Fearing Du Hong's attack, Li Shenfu threatened to attack Jingnan on his orders and prepared weapons ships. When the sun set, he sailed eastward along the Yangtze River. Only then did he tell the general to go and fight the logging.

古文：己丑，安仁义袭常州，常州刺史李遇逆战，极口骂仁义，仁义曰： 彼敢辱我，必有备。 
现代文：己丑，安仁义袭击常州，常州刺史李遇迎战，开口极力大骂安仁义，安仁义说： 他敢辱骂我，一定有准备。 
English: As ugly as he was, An Renyi attacked Changzhou, and Changzhou stabbed him. When Li met him, he opened his mouth to abuse An Renyi. An Renyi said: If he dares to abuse me, he must be prepared.

古文：乃引去。
现代文：于是带领军队退走。
English: And with that, they whisked him away.

古文：壬辰，行密以王茂章为润州行营招讨使，击仁义，不克，使徐温将兵会之。
现代文：壬辰，杨行密任命王茂章为润州行营招讨使，攻击安仁义，没有攻克，派徐温率兵会同攻击。
English: In Imjin, Yang Xingmi appointed Wang Maozhang as the recruiting envoy for the Rongzhou campaign, attacked Anrenyi, failed to conquer, and sent Xu Wen and his soldiers to attack together.

古文：温易其衣服旗帜，皆如茂章兵，仁义不知益兵，复出战，温奋击，破之。
现代文：徐温改换所率军队的衣服旗帜，都像王茂章的军队，安仁义不知道对方增加了军队，再次出战，徐温奋力攻击，把安仁义打败。
English: The clothes and flags of the army led by Xu Wen's reformatory were all like Wang Maozhang's army. An Renyi did not know that the other side had increased the number of troops and went to war again. Xu Wen fought hard to attack and defeat An Renyi.

古文：行密夫人，硃延寿之姊也。
现代文：杨行密的夫人是朱延寿姐姐。
English: Yang Xingmi's wife is Zhu Yanshou's sister.

古文：行密狎侮延寿，延寿怨怒，阴与田頵通谋。
现代文：杨行密轻慢侮辱朱延寿，朱延寿怨恨愤怒，暗中与田串通策划反叛。
English: Yang Xingmi carelessly insulted Zhu Yanshou, Zhu Yanshou was resentful and angry, and secretly colluded with Tian to plan the rebellion.

古文：頵遣前进士杜荀鹤至寿州，与延寿相结，又遣至大梁告硃全忠，全忠大喜，遣兵屯宿州以应之。
现代文：田派遣前进士杜荀鹤到寿州，与朱延寿相互交结；又遣杜荀鹤到大梁告诉朱全忠，朱全忠大喜，派兵驻扎宿州来接应。
English: Tian sent the forerunner Du Yanzhu to Shuzhou to meet with Zhu Yanshou; Du Yanzhu also sent Du Yanzhu to Daliang to tell Zhu Quanzhong that Zhu Quanzhong was very happy and sent troops to be stationed in Shuzhou to meet him.

古文：荀鹤，池州人也。
现代文：杜荀鹤是池州人。
English: Cuckoo cranes are native to Chishu.

古文：杨师厚屯临朐，声言将之密州，留辎重于临朐。
现代文：杨师厚驻兵临朐，声言将要前往密州，把器械粮草等留在临朐。
English: Yang Shihou stationed soldiers in Linyi, claiming that he would go to Mizhou and leave the equipment, grain and grass in Linyi.

古文：九月，癸卯，王师范出兵攻临朐，师厚伏兵奋击，大破之，杀万馀人，获师范弟师克。
现代文：九月癸卯，王师范出兵进攻临朐，杨师厚伏兵奋力攻击，把王师范打得大败，击杀一万余人，擒获王师范的弟弟王师克。
English: At the end of September, Wang Shifan sent troops to attack Linyi, and Yang Shihou's army attacked vigorously. Wang Shifan was defeated, more than 10,000 people were killed, and Wang Shike, Wang Shifan's younger brother, was captured.

古文：明日，莱州兵五千救青州。
现代文：第二天莱州军队五千人救援青州，杨师厚进行拦击。
English: The next day, five thousand Laizhou troops came to the rescue of Qingzhou, and Yang Shihou led a counterattack.

古文：师厚邀击之，杀获殆尽，遂徙寨抵其城下。
现代文：将莱州军队几乎全部杀死擒获，于是将营寨移到青州城下。
English: He killed and captured almost all of the Laizhou army, and then moved the camp to the city of Qingzhou.

古文：硃延寿谋颇泄，杨行密诈为目疾，对延寿使者多错乱所见，或触柱仆地。
现代文：朱延寿串通田计划略有泄露，杨行密知道后假装患了眼病，对朱延寿的使者经常认错人，或者撞着柱子扑倒在地。
English: Zhu Yanshou's plan to collude with Tian slightly leaked, Yang Xingmi pretended to have an eye disease after he knew about it, and Zhu Yanshou's emissaries often misidentified people, or crashed into pillars and fell to the ground.

古文：谓夫人曰： 吾不幸失明，诸子皆幼，军府事当悉以授三舅。 
现代文：杨行密对夫人朱氏说： 我不幸失明，诸子幼小，军府的事情应当全部交给三舅管理。 
English: Yang Xingmi said to his wife Zhu: I am unfortunately blind, my children are small, and the affairs of the military government should all be managed by my third uncle.

古文：夫人屡以书报延寿，行密又自遣召之，阴令徐温为之备。
现代文：朱夫人屡次给朱延寿写信告诉他。杨行密又自己派人召唤朱延寿到广陵来，暗中却命令徐温为他做好防备。
English: Mrs. Zhu repeatedly wrote to Zhu Yanshou to tell him. Yang Xingmi also sent someone to summon Zhu Yanshou to Guangling, but secretly ordered Xu Wen to prepare for him.

古文：延寿至广陵，行密迎及寝门，执而杀之。
现代文：朱延寿到广陵，杨行密迎到卧室门口，将他逮捕并杀死。
English: Zhu Yanshou went to Guangling, Yang Xingmi greeted him at the door of his bedroom, arrested him and killed him.

古文：部兵惊扰，徐温谕之，皆听命，遂斩延寿兄弟，黜硃夫人。
现代文：朱延寿的部下将士惊慌扰乱，徐温晓谕他们，全都听从命令。于是，斩杀朱延寿的兄弟，并把朱夫人废黜。
English: Zhu Yanshou's subordinates panicked and disturbed the soldiers, and Xu Wen told them that they all obeyed the order. Therefore, he killed Zhu Yanshou's brother and deposed Mrs. Zhu.

古文：初，延寿赴召，其妻王氏谓曰： 君此行吉凶未可知，愿日发一使以安我！ 
现代文：起初，朱延寿应杨行密的召请前去广陵，他的妻子王氏对他说： 您此行的吉凶未卜，希望每天派一个使者来给我报平安！ 
English: At first, Zhu Yanshou went to Guangling at the invitation of Yang Xingmi. His wife Wang said to him: "The fate of your trip is uncertain. I hope you will send a messenger to me every day to tell me that you are safe!"

古文：一日，使不至，王氏曰： 事可知矣！ 
现代文：一天，使者没有到来，王氏说： 事情己经可以知道了！ 
English: One day, when the messenger did not arrive, Mr. Wang said, "The matter is already known!

古文：部分僮仆，授兵阖门，捕骑至，乃集家人，聚宝货，发百燎焚府舍，曰： 妾誓不以皎然之躯为仇人所辱。 
现代文：于是布置家僮仆役，发给兵器，把大门关闭；杨行密派来捉人的骑兵一到，王氏就召集家人，把珍宝财物聚积一起，点燃很多火炬焚烧府舍，王氏说： 我发誓不把自己洁白无瑕的躯体让仇人玷辱。 
English: As soon as the cavalry sent by Yang Xingmi to capture the people arrived, Wang gathered his family members, gathered the treasures and property together, and lit many torches to burn the government house. Wang said, "I swear not to let my pure white and flawless body be defiled by the enemy."

古文：赴火而死。
现代文：于是投火自焚而死。
English: He then set himself on fire and died.

古文：延寿用法严，好以寡击众，尝遣二百人与汴兵战，有一人应留者，请行，延寿以违命，立斩之。
现代文：朱延寿执法严厉，喜好以少击多，曾经派二百人与朱全忠的汴州军队作战，有一个应该留下的人，请求前往，朱延寿以违抗命令，将他立即斩首。
English: Zhu Yanshou enforced the law strictly, preferring to do more with less. He once sent two hundred men to fight Zhu Quanzhong's Zhangzhou army. One man who should have stayed asked to go, but Zhu Yanshou disobeyed the order and immediately beheaded him.

古文：田頵袭升州，得李神福妻子，善遇之。神福自鄂州东下，頵遣使谓之曰： 公见机，与公分地而王；不然，妻子无遗！ 
现代文：宁国节度使田袭击升州，俘获李神福的妻儿，待他们很好，李神福从鄂州东下，田派遣使者前去对他说： 您看机会行事，与您分地称王，不然的话，您的妻儿难以存活！ 
English: During the Ning Festival, Tian attacked Shengzhou, captured Li Shenfu's wife and son, and treated them well. When Li Shenfu came down from the east of Huzhou, Tian sent an envoy to him and said, "If you see an opportunity, you should act accordingly, otherwise, your wife and son will not survive!"

古文：神福曰： 吾以卒伍事吴王，今为上将，义不以妻子易其志。
现代文：李神福说： 我以兵卒身份侍奉吴王，今为上将，道义上不能因为妻儿改变志向。
English: Li Shenfu said: I served King Wu as a soldier, and now I am a general. Morally, I cannot change my ambition because of my wife and children.

古文：頵有老母，不顾而反，三纲且不知，乌足与言乎！ 
现代文：田有老母，毫不顾念而反叛，连君为臣纲、父为子纲、夫为妻纲尚且不知道，哪里值得与他说！ 
English: Tian You's old mother rebelled without a second thought. Even if you are a vassal, father, son, husband or wife, you still don't know what is worth talking to him about!

古文：斩使者而进，士卒皆感励。
现代文：于是，将使者杀死，率兵前进，士兵全都感动振奋。
English: As a result, he killed the messenger and led the soldiers forward. The soldiers were all moved and excited.

古文：頵遣其将王檀、汪建将水军逆战。
现代文：田派遣他的部将王坛、汪建率领水军迎战。
English: Tian sent his subordinate Wang Tan and Wang Jian to lead the naval forces into battle.

古文：丁未，神福至吉阳矶，与坛、建遇。坛、建执其子承鼎示之，神福命左右射之。
现代文：丁未，李神福到达吉阳矶，与王坛、汪建相遇，王坛、汪建拿他的儿子李承鼎给他看，李神福命令左右的人放箭射他。
English: Before Ding Wei, Li Shenfu arrived at Jiyang Key, and met Wang Tan and Wang Jian. Wang Tan and Wang Jian took his son Li Chengding to show him. Li Shenfu ordered the people around him to shoot arrows at him.

古文：坛、建楼船大列火炬，神福令军中曰： 望火炬则击之。 
现代文：李神福对诸将说： 他们人多，我们人少，应当用奇兵取胜。 傍晚，合兵作战，李神福假装打败，带领战船逆流而逃，王坛、汪建率船排列着大量火炬，李神福命令中军说： 望见火炬就攻击。 
English: Li Shenfu said to the generals: They are more numerous, we are fewer in number, and we should use our extraordinary soldiers to win. In the evening, when the two armies fought together, Li Shenfu pretended to be defeated and led the warships to flee against the current. Wang Tan and Wang Jian led the ships lined up with a large number of torches. Li Shenfu ordered the Chinese army to say: If you see a torch, attack.

古文：坛、建军皆灭火，旗帜交杂，神福因风纵火，焚其舰，坛、建大败，士卒焚溺死者甚众。
现代文：王坛、汪建的军队全都熄灭火炬，旗帜交错杂乱，李神福趁着风势放火，焚烧敌舰，王坛、汪建大败，士兵烧死淹死的很多。
English: The armies of Wang Tan and Wang Jian all extinguished their torches, the flags were interlaced and disorderly, Li Shenfu took advantage of the wind to set fire and burn enemy ships, Wang Tan and Wang Jian were defeated, and many soldiers were burned and drowned.

古文：戊申，又战于皖口，坛、建仅以身免。
现代文：戊申，双方又在皖口交战，王坛、汪建仅以身免。
English: Wushin, the two sides also fought at the mouth of the estuary. Wang Tan and Wang Jian only escaped with their lives.

古文：获徐绾，行密以槛车载之，遗钱镠。镠剖其心以祭高渭。
现代文：李神福擒获徐绾，杨行密用槛车载着他，送给镇海节度使钱；钱将徐绾的心挖出，用来祭奠高渭。
English: Li Shenfu Yao won Xu Yao, Yang Xingmi carried him in a sleigh and gave the money to Zhenhai Jiedu; the money dug out Xu Yao's heart and used it to pay tribute to Gao Yao.

古文：頵闻坛、建败，自将水军逆战，神福曰： 贼弃城而来，此天亡也！ 
现代文：田听说王坛、汪建失败，亲自率领水军前去迎战。李神福说： 贼弃城前来，这是上天要他灭亡啊！ 
English: When Tian heard that Wang Tan and Wang Jian had failed, he personally led the navy to go to war. Li Shenfu said: "If a thief abandons the city and comes, this is God's will for him to perish!"

古文：临江坚壁不战，遣行告行密，请发步兵断其归路。
现代文：于是临江坚守壁垒，不与田决战，一而派遣使者报告杨行密，请求派遣步兵断绝田的归路。
English: As a result, Linjiang held fast to the barrier and did not engage in a decisive battle with Tian. Instead, it sent an envoy to report to Yang Xingmi and request that he send infantry to cut off Tian's return route.

古文：行密遣涟水制置使台濛将兵应之。
现代文：杨行密得到报告，立即派遣涟水制置使台率领步兵前去接应。
English: When Yang Xingmi received the report, he immediately dispatched the Surabaya army to lead the infantry.

古文：王茂章攻润州，久未下，行密命茂章引兵会濛击頵。
现代文：王茂章进攻润州，很久没有攻下，杨行密又命令王茂章带领军队前去会同台攻击田。
English: Wang Maozhang attacked Rongzhou, but did not capture it for a long time. Yang Xingmi also ordered Wang Maozhang to lead the army to attack Tian together.

古文：辛亥，汴将刘重霸拔棣州，执刺史邵播，杀之。
现代文：辛亥，汴州将领刘重霸攻克棣州，逮住刺史邵播，将他杀死。
English: In Xinhai, Zhangzhou general Liu Chongba conquered Zhangzhou, captured the assassin Shao Fan, and killed him.

古文：甲寅，硃全忠如洛阳，遇疾，复还大梁。
现代文：甲寅，朱全忠到洛阳，患了病，又回大梁。
English: A Yin, Zhu Quanzhong went to Luoyang, fell ill, and returned to Daliang.

古文：戊午，王师范遣副使李嗣业及弟师悦请降于杨师厚，曰： 师范非敢背德，韩全诲、李茂贞以硃书御札使之举兵，师范不敢违。 
现代文：戊午，平卢节度使王师范派遣副使李嗣业及弟弟王师悦向杨师厚请求投降，说： 师范不是胆敢背弃大德，韩全诲、李茂贞用皇上朱笔写的信札命令我发兵，师范不敢违反。 
English: In the afternoon of the Pinglu Festival, Wang Shifan sent the deputy envoy Li Siye and his brother Wang Shiyu to Yang Shihou to request his surrender, saying: "Shifan did not dare to betray the great virtue, Han Quanzhang and Li Maozhen ordered me to send troops with a letter written with the emperor's red pen, and Shifan did not dare to violate it.

古文：仍请以其弟师鲁为质。
现代文：并请求用他的弟弟王师鲁作为人质。
English: He also asked that his brother Wang Shilu be used as a hostage.

古文：时硃全忠闻李茂贞、杨崇本将起兵逼京畿，恐其复劫天子西去，欲迎车驾都洛阳，乃受师范降，选诸将使守登、莱、淄、棣等州，即以师范权淄青留后。
现代文：当时朱全忠听说李茂贞、杨崇本将要起兵进逼京畿，恐怕他们再次劫持昭宗西去凤翔，想要迎接昭宗建都洛阳，于是接受了王师范投降，选择诸将守卫登、莱、淄、棣等州，当即以王师范暂时为淄表留后。
English: At that time, Zhu Quanzhong heard that Li Maozhen and Yang Chongben were going to raise an army to force Gyeonggi, and feared that they would once again kidnap Zhaozong Xi and go to Fengxiang to welcome Zhaozong's capital Luoyang. Therefore, he accepted Wang Shifan's surrender, and selected generals to guard Deng, Lai, Handan, Handan and other provinces, and immediately kept Wang Shifan temporarily as his deputy.

古文：师范仍言先遣行军司马刘鄩将兵五千据兗州，非其自专，愿释其罪。亦遣使语鄩。
现代文：王师范并说明先前遣行军司马刘率兵五千占据兖州，不是他擅自做主，希望宽免他的罪过；也派遣使者告诉刘。
English: Wang Shifan also explained that it was not he who took the initiative to occupy Zhangzhou with 5,000 soldiers, but that he hoped to be forgiven for his sins; he also sent an envoy to tell Liu.

古文：田頵闻台濛将至，自将步骑逆战，留其将郭行頵以精兵二万及王坛、汪建水军屯芜湖，以拒李神福。
现代文：宁国节度使田頵听说台将要到达，亲自统帅步、骑兵迎战，留下他的部将郭行率领二精锐部队及王坛、汪建的水军驻扎芜湖，来抵抗李神福。
English: The Ningguo Festival made Tian Xuan hear that the table would arrive, and he personally led the infantry and cavalry to meet the battle, leaving his subordinate Guo Xing to lead the two elite troops and Wang Tan and Wang Jian's naval forces stationed in Wuhu to resist Li Shenfu.

古文：觇者言： 濛营寨褊小，才容二千人。 
现代文：侦控敌情的人说： 台的营寨狭小，才容纳二千人。 
English: The person monitoring the situation said: Taiwan's encampment is small and can only accommodate 2,000 people.

古文：頵易之，不召外兵。
现代文：田轻视台，不召集外地的军队。
English: Tian despised the station and did not call up foreign troops.

古文：濛入頵境，番陈而进，军中笑其怯，濛曰： 頵宿将多谋，不可不备。 
现代文：台进入田的地界，把军队分为数部轮番阵前进，军中有人笑他怯懦，台说： 田是久经战阵的老将，足智多谋，不能不防备。 
English: The table entered Tian's territory and divided the army into several rotating formations. Some in the army laughed at his cowardice. The table said: Tian is a veteran who has been in battle for a long time. He is resourceful and cannot but be prepared.

古文：冬，十月，戊辰，与頵遇于广德。濛先以杨行密书遍赐頵将，皆下马拜受。濛因其挫伏，纵兵击之，頵兵遂败。
现代文：冬季，十月戊辰，台与田在广德相遇，台先把杨行密的书信遍赐田的各位将领，各将都下马叩拜领受；台趁着田的将士士气受到摧挫，发兵攻击，田的军队于是失败。
English: In the winter, in October at the hour of the wolf, Taiwan and Tian met in Guangde. Taiwan first gave Yang Xingmi's letters to all of Tian's generals, and each general dismounted and bowed to receive them. Taiwan took advantage of the demoralization of Tian's generals and sent troops to attack, and Tian's army failed.

古文：又战于黄池，兵交，濛伪走，頵追之，遇伏，大败，奔还宣州城守，濛引兵围之。
现代文：又在黄池作战，军队一交战，台假装逃走，田率兵追赶，遇到埋伏，被打得大败，逃奔回宣州，闭城防守，台率领军队包围宣州。
English: They also fought in Huangchi, the army engaged in a battle, Taiwan pretended to flee, Tian led the troops to chase, encountered an ambush, was defeated, fled back to Xuanzhou, closed the city for defense, and led the troops to surround Xuanzhou.

古文：頵亟召芜湖兵还，不得入。
现代文：田紧急召回芜湖的军队，但不能入城。
English: Tian urgently recalled Wuhu's army, but failed to enter the city.

古文：郭行悰、王坛、汪建及当涂、广德诸戍皆帅其众降。
现代文：郭行、王坛、汪建及当涂、广德等地的驻防将都率众投降。
English: The garrison commanders of Guo Xing, Wang Tan, Wang Jian, Dang Tu and Guang De all surrendered.

古文：行密以台濛已破田悰，命王茂章复引兵攻润州。
现代文：杨行密因台己经打败田，命令王茂章又率领军队前去攻打润州。
English: Yang Xingmi, because Taiwan had already defeated Tian, ordered Wang Maozhang to lead the army to attack Runzhou.

古文：初，夔州刺史侯矩从成汭救鄂州，汭死，矩奔还。
现代文：当初，夔州刺史侯矩随从荆南节度使成援救鄂州，成兵败淹死，侯矩逃回夔州。
English: At the beginning, the prince of Zhangzhou, Hou Rui, followed Jingnan Jiedu to rescue Ezhou. He was defeated and drowned, and Hou Rui fled back to Zhangzhou.

古文：会王宗本兵至，甲戌，矩以州降之，宗本遂定夔、忠、万、施四州。
现代文：适逢开道都指挥使、前渝州刺史王宗本率兵到达夔州，甲戌，侯矩献州投降，王宗本于是平定夔、忠、万、施四州。
English: At the time of the opening of the capital, Wang Zongben, commander of the commander of the commander of the commander of the commander of the commander of the commander of the commander of the commander of the commander of the commander of the commander of the commander of the commander of the commander of the commander of the commander of the commander of the commander of the commander of the commander of the commander of the commander of the commander of the commander of the commander of the commander of the commander of the commander of the commander of the commander of the commander of the commander of the commander of the commander of the commander of the commander of the commander of the commander of the commander of the commander of the commander of the commander of the commander of the commander

古文：王建复以矩为夔州刺史，更其姓名曰王宗矩。
现代文：西川节度使王建仍以侯矩为夔州刺史，给他改姓名叫王宗矩。
English: The Nishikawa Festival made Wang Jian change his name to Wang Zongri, although he still referred to himself as Hou Rui.

古文：宗矩，易州人也。
现代文：王宗矩是易州人。
English: Wang Zongrui is from Yizhou.

古文：蜀之议者，以瞿唐，蜀之险要，乃弃归、峡，屯军夔州。建以宗本为武泰留后。
现代文：议事的蜀人认为瞿唐峡是蜀地的险竣要冲，于是舍弃归、峡二州，驻王建任命王宗本为武泰留后。
English: The people of Shu, who were involved in the dispute, believed that the Shu-Tang Gorge was the most dangerous place in Shu, so they abandoned the return to the gorge and the two states, and appointed Wang Zongben to stay in Wu Tai.

古文：武泰军旧治黔州，宗本以其地多瘴疠，清徙治涪州，建许之。
现代文：武泰军的旧治所在黔州，王宗本因当地潮湿高温，经常流行传染病，请将治所迁到涪州，王建答应了他。
English: The former headquarters of the Thai army in Wuchang was located in Ganzhou. Due to the high humidity and temperature, Wang Zongben often suffered from infectious diseases. He was asked to move the headquarters to Ganzhou. Wang Jian agreed.

古文：葛从周急攻兗州，刘鄩使从周母乘板舆登城，谓从周曰： 刘将军事我不异于汝，新妇辈皆安居，人各为其主，汝可察之。 
现代文：葛从周急攻兖州，刘让葛从周的母亲乘坐板车登上城楼，对葛从周说： 刘将军侍奉我不比你差，你的妻子等也都安居，人各为其主，你可以详细察看。 
English: Ge Zhou hurriedly attacked Zhangzhou. Liu asked Ge Zhou's mother to take Ge Zhou up to the city tower in a flat car. He said to Ge Zhou, "General Liu, I am no worse than you in my service. Your wife and others are also living safely. Everyone is their own master. You can take a closer look."

古文：从周歔欷而退，攻城为之缓。
现代文：葛从周抽噎叹息而退，攻城因此延缓。
English: Ge withdrew from Zhou convulsively and with a sigh, and the siege was delayed.

古文：鄩悉简妇人及民之老疾不足当敌者出之，独与少壮者同辛苦，分衣食，坚守以扞敌。
现代文：刘挑选妇人及年老有病不能御敌的人，让他们全都出去，只与年轻力壮者同辛苦，分衣食，坚守城池来抵御敌人；号令整齐严肃，军队不做残暴的事，百姓全都安定。
English: Liu selected the women and the old and sick who could not resist the enemy, let them all go out, only with the young and strong toil, share clothes and food, hold the city to resist the enemy; the orders are neat and serious, the army does not do cruel things, and the people are all stable.

古文：号令整肃，兵不为暴，民皆安堵，久之，外援既绝，节度副使王彦温逾城出降，城上卒多从之，不可遏。
现代文：过了一段时间，外援已经继绝，节度副使王彦温越过城墙出去投降，城上的兵卒多跟随他去，不能制止。
English: After a period of time, foreign aid had been exhausted, and Wang Yanwen, the deputy envoy of the governor, went over the city wall to surrender. Many soldiers on the city followed him and could not stop him.

古文：鄩遣人从容语彦温曰： 军士非素遣者，勿多与之俱。 
现代文：刘派人不慌不忙地告诉王彦温说： 不是你向来差遣的军士，不要多让他们与你一同去。 
English: Liu sent an unhurried message to Wang Yanwen, saying, "These are not the soldiers you have always sent, don't let them go with you.

古文：又遣人徇于城上曰： 军士非素遣从副使而敢擅往者，族之！ 
现代文：又派人在城上巡示说： 不是向来派遣跟随节度副使而擅自前往的军士，把他的全族杀死！ 
English: They also sent someone to patrol the city and said, "Don't you always send a sergeant to accompany the vice-envoy of the Diet and kill his whole family!

古文：士卒皆惶惑不敢出。
现代文：士兵听后，全都恐惧疑惑，不敢出城。
English: When the soldiers heard this, they were all afraid and doubtful, and did not dare to leave the city.

古文：敌人果疑彦温，斩之城下，由是众心益固。
现代文：敌人果然怀疑王彦温，把他在城下斩首，因此，众心更加稳定。
English: The enemy indeed suspected Wang Yanwen and beheaded him at the foot of the castle. As a result, the hearts of the people became more stable.

古文：及王师范力屈，从周以祸福谕之，鄩曰： 受王公命守此城，一旦见王公失势，不俟其命而降，非所以事上也。 
现代文：等到王师范屡次被汴州军队打败，葛从周用祸福得失晓示他，刘说： 我受王公的命令守卫此城，一旦看见王公失去权势，不等他的命令就投降，不是用来侍奉尊上的态度。 
English: When Wang Shifan was repeatedly defeated by the Zhangzhou army, Ge Zhou used misfortune and fortune to make him lose consciousness, Liu said: I am ordered by the prince to guard this city. Once I see the prince lose power, I will surrender without waiting for his order. This is not an attitude to serve the emperor.

古文：及师范使者至，丁丑，始出降。
现代文：等到王师范劝降的使者到来之后，刘才于丁丑出城投降。
English: After the arrival of Wang Shifan's emissary to persuade him to surrender, Liu finally went out of the city to surrender.

古文：从周为具赍装，送鄩诣大梁。
现代文：葛从周为刘备办行装，送他前往大梁。
English: Ge prepared and loaded Liu from Zhou and sent him to Daliang.

古文：鄩曰： 降将未受梁王宽释之命，安敢乘马衣裘乎！ 
现代文：刘说： 降将没有得到梁王宽大释放的命令，哪里敢骑马穿裘呢！ 
English: Liu said: "He will not get the order of Liang Wang's lenient release, how dare he ride a horse and wear a coat!

古文：乃素服乘驴至大梁。
现代文：于是穿着囚犯的衣服骑驴到大梁。
English: So he rode a donkey to the girders, dressed as a prisoner.

古文：全忠赐之冠带，辞；请囚服入见，不许。
现代文：朱全忠赏赐给他衣冠腰带，刘推辞；请求穿着囚服进见，朱全忠不允许。
English: Zhu Quanzhong rewarded him with a gown, crown and belt, but Liu declined; he asked to wear prison clothes to the trial, but Zhu Quanzhong did not allow it.

古文：全忠慰劳，饮之酒，辞以量小。
现代文：朱全忠慰劳刘，让他饮酒，刘以量小推辞。
English: Zhu Quanzhong consoled Liu Lao and let him drink alcohol, but Liu refused to drink more.

古文：全忠曰： 取兗州，量何大邪！ 
现代文：朱全忠说： 你夺取兖州，量多么大啊！ 
English: Zhu Quanzhong said, "You have captured Zhangzhou, what a huge amount!

古文：以为元从都押牙。
现代文：于是任命刘为元从都押牙。
English: As a result, Liu Weiyuan was appointed to succeed Du Azusa.

古文：是时四镇将吏皆功臣、旧人，鄩一旦以降将居其上，诸将具军礼拜于廷，鄩坐受自如，全忠益奇之。
现代文：这时，四镇的将领官吏都是朱全忠的功臣、旧人，刘一旦以降将高居于他们之上，诸将都行军礼在公堂上叩拜。刘坐着受礼，神态如常，朱全忠更加惊奇。
English: At this time, the generals and officials of the four towns were all Zhu Quanzhong's meritorious soldiers and old men, and Liu would be higher than them from now on. All the generals marched in military salute and bowed in the public hall. Liu sat and received the salute with his usual demeanor, and Zhu Quanzhong was even more surprised.

古文：未几，表为保大留后。
现代文：过了不久，就上表奏请任命刘为保大留后。
English: Soon after, Liu was appointed to the post of vice-chancellor.

古文：葛从周久病，全忠以康怀英为泰宁节度使代之。
现代文：葛从周长期患病，朱全忠命康怀英为泰宁节度使，代替他。
English: Ge Zhou has been ill for a long time, and Zhu Quanzhong's loyalist Kang Huaiying is Taining's ceremonial envoy to replace him.

古文：辛巳，宿卫都指挥使硃友伦与客击球于左军，坠马而卒。
现代文：辛巳，宿卫都指挥使朱友伦在左军与客人击，掉下马来摔死。
English: Suddenly, the commander of the guards ordered Zhu Yulun to fight with the guests in the left army, fall off the horse and fall to his death.

古文：全忠悲怒，疑崔胤故为之，凡与同戏者十馀人尽杀之，遣其兄子友谅代典宿卫。
现代文：朱全忠悲痛愤怒，怀疑是崔胤故意搞的，凡与朱友伦一同玩耍的十余人全部杀死，派遣他哥哥的儿子朱友谅代管皇宫中的直宿警卫。
English: Zhu Quanzhong was grief-stricken and angry. He suspected that Cui Yin had done it on purpose. He killed all of the more than ten people who had played with Zhu Youlun, and sent his brother's son, Zhu Youyuan, to be in charge of the guards at the palace.

古文：山南东道节度使赵匡凝遣兵袭荆南，朗人弃城走，匡凝表其弟匡明为荆南留后。
现代文：山南东道节度使赵匡凝派遣军队袭击荆南，朗州人弃城逃走；赵匡凝上表请以他的弟弟赵匡明担任荆南留后。
English: Shannan's hosting of the festival caused Zhao Kuangning to send troops to attack Jingnan, and the people of Langzhou abandoned the city and fled; Zhao Kuangning then asked his brother Zhao Kuangming to stay in Jingnan.

古文：时天子微弱，诸道财赋多不上供，惟匡凝兄弟委输不绝。
现代文：当时昭宗势微力弱，各道的贡品赋税多不缴纳，只有赵匡明兄弟派人运送京师，从不间断。
English: At that time, the power of the Zhaozong was weak, and tributes from various provinces were mostly not paid. Only the Zhao Kuangming brothers sent people to transport the capital division, and they never stopped.

古文：杨行密求兵于钱镠，镠遣方永珍屯润州，从弟镒屯宣州。又遣指挥使杨习攻睦州。
现代文：淮南节度使杨行密向镇海节度使钱请求派兵援助，钱派遣方永珍率兵驻扎润州，堂弟钱镒率兵驻扎宣州，又派遣指挥使杨习率兵攻打睦州。
English: Huainan Jiedu sent Yang Xingmi to Zhenhai Jiedu to ask Qian Qian to send troops for assistance. Qian Qian sent Fang Yongzhen to station troops in Runzhou, his cousin Qian Qian to station troops in Xuanzhou, and sent a commander to send Yang Xi to attack Muzhou.

古文：凤翔、邠州屡出兵近京畿，硃全忠疑其复有劫迁之谋，十一月，发骑兵屯河中。
现代文：凤翔节度使李茂贞、州静难节度使李继徽屡次出兵逼近京畿，朱全忠怀疑他们又有劫持昭宗迁往凤翔的图谋，于十一月派遣骑兵驻扎河中。
English: The Fengxiang Festival made Li Maozhen and the State Tranquility Festival made Li Jihui repeatedly send troops to approach Gyeonggi. Zhu Quanzhong suspected that they had another plan to kidnap and relocate Zhaozong to Fengxiang, and sent cavalry to be stationed in Hezhong in November.

古文：十二月，乙亥，田頵帅死士数百出战，台濛阳退以示弱。
现代文：十二月乙亥，宁国节度使田率领敢死队数百人出战，台假装退走表示软弱。
English: In December of the second year of the Heian period, the Ningguo Festival brought hundreds of Tian-led death squads into battle. Taiwan pretended to retreat to show its weakness.

古文：頵兵逾濠而斗，濛急击之。
现代文：田的军队越过护城河战斗，台急速反击。
English: Tian's army fought across the moat, and Taiwan quickly counterattacked.

古文：頵不胜，还走城，桥陷坠马，斩之，其众犹战，以頵首示之，乃溃，濛遂克宣州。
现代文：田不能取胜，往回逃跑进城，桥梁陷落，掉下马来，被斩首。田的敢死队仍在战斗，见到田的首级，这才溃散，台于是攻克宣州。
English: Unable to win, Tian fled back to the city, the bridge fell, he fell off his horse and was beheaded. Tian's death squads were still fighting when they saw Tian's severed head and dispersed, and Taiwan then conquered Xuanzhou.

古文：初，行密与頵闾里，少相善，约为兄弟，及頵首至广陵，行密视之泣下，赦其母殷氏，行密与诸子皆以子孙礼事之。
现代文：当初，杨行密与田同乡里，年轻时相好，结为兄弟。等到田的首级送到广陵，杨行密看着不禁潸然泪下。于是，杨行密赦免田的母亲殷氏，并与自己的儿子们以子孙之礼侍奉她。
English: At first, Yang Xingmi lived in the same village as Tian, they were friends when they were young, and became brothers. When Tian's head was sent to Guangling, Yang Xingmi couldn't help but burst into tears. Therefore, Yang Xingmi pardoned Tian's mother, Yin, and served her with his sons as descendants.

古文：行密以李神福为宁国节度使，神福以杜洪未平，固让不拜。
现代文：杨行密任命李神福为宁国节度使，李神福因杜洪还没有平定，坚决辞让，没有接受。
English: Yang Xingmi appointed Li Shenfu as Ningguo's ceremonial envoy, but Li Shenfu resolutely refused to accept the appointment because Duhong had not yet been pacified.

古文：宣州长史合肥骆知祥善治金谷，观察牙推沈文昌为文精敏，尝为頵草檄骂行密，行密以知祥为淮南支计官，文昌为节度分推。
现代文：宣州长史合肥骆知祥善于管理钱粮，观察牙推沈文昌作文精致敏捷，曾经为田起草檄文大骂杨行密。杨行密骆知祥为淮南支计官，沈文昌为节度牙推。
English: Hefei Governor Xiang Luo Zhixiang is good at managing money and grain, observing Shen Wenchang's delicate and agile composition, and once drafted a letter to Yang Xingmi for the field. Yang Xingmi Luo Zhixiang is Huainan's chief accountant, and Shen Wenchang is a strict disciplinarian.

古文：文昌湖州人也。
现代文：沈文昌是湖州人。
English: Shen Wenchang is from Huzhou.

古文：初，頵每战不胜，辄欲杀钱传瓘，其母及宣州都虞候郭师从常保护之。
现代文：当初，田多次攻战都不能取胜，就想杀死钱传，他的母亲及宣州都虞候郭师从经常保护他。
English: At first, Tian could not win many battles, so he wanted to kill Qian Chuan. His mother and Guo Shi, the governor of Xuanzhou, always protected him.

古文：师从，合肥人，頵之妇弟也。
现代文：郭师从是合肥人，田的妻弟。
English: Guo Shi is from Hefei and is Tian's brother-in-law.

古文：頵败，传瓘归杭州，钱镠以师从为镇东都虞候。
现代文：田失败被杀，钱传回杭州，钱任命郭师从为镇东都虞候。
English: Tian failed and was killed, the money was sent back to Hangzhou, and the money was used to appoint Guo Shizhen as the mayor of the town's eastern capital.

古文：辛巳，以礼部尚书独孤损为兵部侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：辛巳，朝廷任命礼部尚书独孤损为兵部侍郎、同平章事。
English: Soon after, the Imperial Court appointed Reibu no Shosho as Hyobu no Jiro and Tongpei no Shoji.

古文：损，及之从曾孙也。
现代文：独孤损是独孤及的从曾孙。
English: The only loss is the loss of a great-great-grandson.

古文：中书侍郎兼户部尚书、同平章事裴贽罢为左仆射。
现代文：中书侍郎兼户部尚书、同平章事裴枢被免职降为左仆射。
English: Chusho's attendant and also the head of the household, Shosho, and Tongpei's aide, Baizhu, were removed from their posts and demoted to the role of left-hand servants.

古文：左仆射致仕张浚居长水，王师范之举兵，浚豫其谋。
现代文：告老退休的左仆射张浚住在长水，平卢节度使王师范当初发兵进攻朱全忠，张浚曾参与谋划。
English: The retired left-hand servant Zhang Jun lived in Changshui. The Pinglu Festival caused Wang Shifan to attack Zhu Quanzhong. Zhang Jun had participated in the planning.

古文：硃全忠将谋篡夺，恐浚扇动籓镇，讽张全义使图之。
现代文：朱全忠将篡夺帝位，恐怕张浚煽动藩镇反对，就示意佑国节度使张全义设法除掉他。
English: Zhu Quanzhong will usurp the imperial throne, I am afraid that Zhang Jian will incite the opposition of the towns and villages, so I suggest that you bless the country and let Zhang Quanzhong try to get rid of him.

古文：丙申，全义遣牙将杨麟将兵诈为劫盗，围其墅而杀之。
现代文：丙申，张全义派遣牙将杨麟率兵假装劫盗，包围张浚的别墅，把他杀死。
English: Bishen, Zhang Quanyi dispatched Yang Lin, commander of the Fang Army, to surround Zhang Jun's villa and kill him, pretending to be a robber.

古文：永宁县吏叶彦素为浚所厚，知麟将至，密告浚子格曰： 相公祸不可免，郎君宜自为谋。 
现代文：永宁县吏叶彦一直受到张浚的厚待，知道杨麟将要到来，秘密告诉张浚的儿子张格说： 相公祸不可免，你应当自己谋求生路。 
English: Ye Yan, the Yongning County official, had always been treated well by Zhang Jun. Knowing that Yang Lin was about to arrive, he secretly told Zhang Jun's son Zhang Ge, saying, "The scourge of justice is unavoidable. You should seek your own way of survival."

古文：谓格曰： 汝留则俱死，去则遗种。 
现代文：张浚对张格说： 你留下来就要一同死，逃走还可以传种接代。 
English: Zhang Jun said to Zhang Ge: If you stay, you will die together. If you run away, you can still pass on the seed.

古文：格哭拜而去，叶彦帅义士三十人送之渡汉而还，格遂自荆南入蜀。
现代文：张格哭着拜辞而去，叶彦率领义士三十人护送他渡过汉水而返回，张格于是自荆南入蜀。
English: Zhang Ge cried and bowed as he left. Ye Yan led 30 loyalists to escort him across the Han River and back. Zhang Ge then went from Jingnan to Shu.

古文：卢龙节度使刘仁恭习知契丹情伪，常选将练兵，乘秋深入，逾摘星岭击之，契丹畏之。
现代文：卢龙节度使刘仁恭熟悉契丹的情况，常选将练兵，趁着秋季深入，越过摘星岭发动攻击，契丹惧怕。
English: The Lulong Festival made Liu Rengong familiar with the situation of the Khitan. He would often choose to train soldiers and take advantage of the autumn to launch an attack across the Jizhong Mountains. The Khitan were afraid.

古文：每霜降，仁恭辄遣人焚塞下野草，契丹马多饥死，常以良马赂仁恭买牧地。
现代文：每到霜降，刘仁恭就派人焚烧塞下野草，契丹的马多饿死，契丹常用良马贿赂刘仁恭来买牧地。
English: Every time the frosts came, Liu Renkong would send someone to burn the weeds, and the Khitan's horses would starve to death. The Khitan often used good horses to bribe Liu Renkong to buy grazing land.

古文：契丹王邪律阿保机遣其妻兄述律阿钵将万骑寇渝关，仁恭遣其子守光戍平州，守光伪与之和，设幄犒飨于城外，酒酣，伏兵执之以入。
现代文：契丹王耶律阿保机派遣他的妻兄述律阿钵率领一万骑兵侵犯渝关，刘仁恭派遣他的儿子对刘守光驻守平州。刘守光假装与述律阿钵和好，在城外设置帐篷，犒劳招待他；酒喝得正畅快，埋伏的兵士把述律阿钵抓入城中，契丹部众大哭。
English: The Khitan king, Yerut Abochir, sent his brother-in-law, Surut Ayyub, to invade Yuguan with 10,000 cavalry, and Liu Rengong sent his son, Liu Shuguang, to defend Pingzhou against Liu Shuguang. Liu Shuguang pretended to make peace with Surut Ayyub, set up a tent outside the city, and worked hard to entertain him. They were drinking wine, and the ambushed soldiers caught Surut Ayyub inside the city, and the Khitan troops cried loudly.

古文：虏众大哭，契丹以重赂请于仁恭，然后归之。
现代文：契丹王用丰厚的财物向刘仁恭请求，然后得以返归。
English: The Khitan king asked Liu Rengong for a large sum of money, and then he was able to return.

古文：初，崔胤假硃全忠兵力以诛宦官，全忠既破李茂贞，并吞关中，威震天下，遂有篡夺之志。
现代文：当初，崔胤借助朱全忠的兵力来诛杀宦官，朱全忠已经打败李茂贞，并吞了关中，声威震动天下，于是有篡夺帝位的志向。
English: At first, Cui Yan used Zhu Quanzhong's troops to kill the eunuch. Zhu Quanzhong had already defeated Li Maozhen and swallowed Guanzhong, and his fame shook the world, so he had the ambition to usurp the throne.

古文：胤惧，与全忠外虽亲厚，私心渐异，乃谓全忠曰： 长安密迩茂贞，不可不为守御之备。
现代文：崔胤大惧，与朱全忠表面上虽然亲厚，内心里渐渐背离，于是对朱全忠说： 长安靠近李茂贞，不可不做守御的准备。
English: Cui Yan was greatly afraid, and although he was close to Zhu Quanzhong on the surface, he gradually deviated inwardly, so he said to Zhu Quanzhong: Chang'an is close to Li Maozhen, it is necessary to prepare for defense.

古文：六军十二卫，但有空名，请召募以实之，使公无西顾之忧。 
现代文：六军十二卫，只有空名，请召募补足，使您没有西顾的忧虑。 
English: The Six Armies and Twelve Guards are only empty names. Please call for reinforcements so that you do not have to worry about looking westward.

古文：全忠知其意，曲从之，阴使麾下壮士应募以察其变。
现代文：朱全忠知道他的意图，勉强依从他，暗地里让部下壮士应募来观察他的变化。
English: Zhu Quanzhong knew his intention, reluctantly obeyed him, and secretly let his subordinates enlist to observe his changes.

古文：胤不之知，与郑元规等缮治兵仗，日夜不息。
现代文：崔胤不知道其中的情由，与郑元规等整治兵器，日夜不停。
English: Cui Yan did not know the reason for this, and he and Zheng Yuanbai and other rectification weapons kept working day and night.

古文：及硃友伦死，全忠益疑胤，且欲迁天子都洛，恐胤立异。
现代文：等到宿卫都指挥使朱友伦摔死，朱全忠更加怀疑崔胤，并且想劫持昭宗迁都洛阳，恐怕崔胤另立异论阻止。
English: By the time the guards had made Zhu Youlun fall to his death, Zhu Quanzhong was even more suspicious of Cui Yin, and wanted to kidnap and move the capital of the Zhaozong to Luoyang. I'm afraid Cui Yin was prevented from setting up another dissent.

古文：昭宗圣穆景文孝皇帝下之上天祐元年
现代文：天祐元年
English: In the first year of Tenyu

古文：春，正月，全忠密表司徒兼侍中、判六军十二卫事、充盐铁转运使、判度支崔胤专权乱国，离间君臣，并其党刑部尚书兼京兆尹、六军诸卫副使郑元规、威远军使陈班等，皆请诛之。
现代文：春季正月，朱全忠上密表揭发司徒兼侍中、判六军十二卫事、充盐铁转运使、判度支崔胤专权乱国，离间君臣，连同他的党羽刑部尚书兼京兆尹、六军诸卫副使郑元规，威远军使陈班等，奏请全部处死。
English: In the first month of spring, Zhu Quanzhong issued a secret order to execute all of the following: Zhu Quanzhong denounced Zhu Quanzhong as a member of the imperial guard and a chamberlain, sentenced Zhu Quanzhong to be one of the twelve guards of the Sixth Route Army, sent Zhu Quanzhong to transport salted iron, sentenced Zhu Quanzhong to support Cui Yin in his dictatorship and to ruin the country, separated Zhu Quanzhong from his vassals, and together with Zhu Quanzhong, he ordered Shang Shu and Jing Zhaoyun to be members of the party's criminal investigation department, Zheng Yuanjie to be

古文：乙巳，诏责授胤太子少傅、分司，贬元规循州司户，班凑州司户。
现代文：乙巳，昭宗颁布诏令，谴责并改授崔胤为太子少傅、分司，贬郑元规为循州司户，陈班为溱州司户。
English: At this time, Emperor Zhaozong issued an imperial edict, condemning and reclassifying Cui Yan as the prince's junior tutor and branch secretary, demoting Zheng Yuanbai as the county magistrate and Chen Ban as the county magistrate.

古文：丙午，下诏罪状胤等。以裴枢判左三军事、充盐铁运使，独孤捐判右三军事、兼判度支。胤所募兵并纵遣之。以兵部尚书崔远为中书侍郎，翰林学士、左拾遗柳璨为右谏议大夫，并同平章事。
现代文：丙午，昭宗颁下诏令，公布崔胤等的罪状；任命裴枢判左三军事、充盐铁转运使，独孤损判右三军事、兼判度支；崔胤召募的兵士一并放走遣返；任命兵部尚书崔远为中书侍郎，翰林学士、左拾遣柳璨为右谏议大夫，都为同平章事。
English: In the afternoon of the 3rd day of the 4th month, Zhaozong issued an edict, announcing the charges against Cui Yan and others; appointed Pei Zu to be the third military officer on the left and the salt-filled iron transport envoy to be the third military officer on the right, and the third military officer on the right to be the third military officer on the left and the third military officer on the right to be the third military officer on the right; the soldiers recruited by Cui Yan were released and repatriated together; appointed the military secretary Shang Shuxu Cui Yuan as the secretary of the Chinese Academy of Letters, and Han Lin Baccalaureate and Zuo Shux

古文：璨，公绰之从孙也。
现代文：柳璨是柳公绰的从孙。
English: Liu Yao is the great-grandson of Liu Gongqiao.

古文：戊申，硃全忠密令宿卫都指挥使硃友谅以兵围崔胤第，杀胤及郑元规、陈班并胤所亲厚者数人。
现代文：戊申，朱全忠密令宿卫都指挥使朱友谅率兵包围崔胤的住宅，杀死崔胤及郑元规、陈班以及崔胤的亲信数人。
English: Wushin, Zhu Quanzhong ordered the guards to surround Choi Tan's house, killing Choi Tan and several of Choi Tan's close associates.

古文：初，上在华州，硃全忠屡表请上迁都洛阳，上虽不许，全忠常令东都留守佑国军节度使张全义缮修宫室。
现代文：当初，昭宗在华州，朱全忠屡次上表请昭宗迁都洛阳，昭宗虽然没有允许，朱全忠却常令东都留守佑国军节度使张全义缮修宫室。
English: At the beginning, Zhaozong was in Huazhou, and Zhu Quanzhong repeatedly petitioned Zhaozong to move the capital to Luoyang. Although Zhaozong did not allow it, Zhu Quanzhong often ordered Dongdu to stay for the National Day holiday to let Zhang Quanzhong renovate the palace.

古文：全忠之克邠州也，质静难军节度使杨崇本妻子于河中。
现代文：朱全忠攻克州的时候，将静难军节度使杨崇本的妻子作为人质留在河中。
English: When Zhu Quanzhong invaded Kezhou, he left Yang Chongben's wife as a hostage in the river.

古文：崇本妻美，全忠私焉，既而归之。
现代文：杨崇本的妻子容貌美丽，朱全忠与她通奸，不久把她归还杨崇本。
English: Yang Chongben's wife was beautiful. Zhu Quanzhong committed adultery with her and soon returned her to Yang Chongben.

古文：崇本怒，使谓李茂贞曰： 唐室将灭，父何忍坐视之乎！ 
现代文：杨崇本知情大怒，派遣使者对李茂贞说： 唐室将要灭亡，父亲怎么忍心坐视唐室灭亡呢！ 
English: Yang Chong, knowing this, flew into a rage and sent an envoy to Li Maozhen saying, "The Tang dynasty is about to perish, how can my father bear to watch the Tang dynasty perish!"

古文：遂相与连兵侵逼京畿，复姓名为李继徽。
现代文：于是，杨崇本与李茂贞联合出兵侵逼京畿，又恢复姓名为李继徽。
English: As a result, Yang Chongben and Li Maozhen jointly sent troops to invade and force Gyeonggi, and restored the surname Li Jihui.

古文：己酉，全忠引兵屯河中。
现代文：己酉，朱全忠率兵驻扎河中。
English: Zhu Quanzhong and his soldiers were stationed in the middle of the river.

古文：丁巳，上御延喜楼，硃全忠遣牙将寇彦卿奉表，称邠、歧兵逼畿甸，请上迁都洛阳。及下楼，裴枢已得全忠移书，促百官东行。
现代文：丁巳，昭宗在延禧楼，朱全忠派遣牙将寇彦卿捧着奏表，称州、岐州的军队已经逼近京城管区，请昭宗迁都洛阳；等到昭宗下楼，裴枢已经收到朱全忠迁都的文书，催促文武百官东行。
English: At that time, Akimune was in Yanxi Building, and Zhu Quanzhong dispatched his toothed general, Kou Yanqing, with a report form, saying that the troops from Zhu and Qizhou had approached the capital district, and asked Akimune to move the capital to Luoyang; when Akimune went downstairs, Baizhu had already received the document from Zhu Quanzhong to move the capital, and urged hundreds of civil and military officials to go east.

古文：戊午，驱徙士民，号哭满路，骂曰： 贼臣崔胤召硃温来倾覆社稷，使我曹流离至此！ 
现代文：戊午，被驱赶迁徙的士人百姓，号哭满路，大骂道： 贼臣崔胤召朱温前来颠覆社稷，使我们颠沛流离到这种地步！ 
English: In the afternoon, the displaced scholars and commoners cried all the way and cursed loudly: "The traitor Cui Yan called Zhu Wen to come and subvert the social order, causing us to be displaced to this extent!"

古文：老幼繦属，月馀不绝。
现代文：扶老携幼鱼贯而行，一个多月没断。
English: The old man and the young fish have been swimming continuously for more than a month.

古文：壬戌，车驾发长安，全忠以其将张廷范为御营使，毁长安宫室百司及民间庐舍，取其材，浮渭河而下，长安自此遂丘墟矣。
现代文：壬戌，昭宗从长安出发，朱全忠任命他的部将张廷范为御营使，拆毁长安的宫室、官署及民间房舍，取出木材，抛入渭河之中，顺黄河漂浮东下，长安自此成为废墟了。
English: According to the legend, Zhaozong set out from Chang'an, and Zhu Quanzhong appointed his minister Zhang Tingfan as his envoy. He demolished the palace, government offices and private houses in Chang'an, took out the wood, threw it into the Wei River, and floated down the Yellow River to the east. Chang'an has since become a ruin.

古文：全忠发河南、北诸镇丁匠数万，令张全义治东都宫室，江、浙、湖、岭诸镇附全忠者，皆输货财以助之。
现代文：朱全忠征发河南、河北各镇民夫工匠数万人，命令东都留后张全义建造东都宫室，江、浙、湖、岭诸镇归附朱全忠的，都运送钱物到洛阳来帮助修建。
English: Zhu Quanzhong conscripted and dispatched tens of thousands of craftsmen and artisans from towns in Henan and Hebei, ordered the eastern capital to stay behind and Zhang Quanzhi to build the eastern capital's palace. Towns in Jiang, Zhejiang, Hunan and Lingnan that were annexed by Zhu Quanzhong sent money and goods to Luoyang to help with the construction.

古文：甲子，车驾至华州，民夹道呼万岁，上泣谓曰： 勿呼万岁，朕不复为汝主矣！ 
现代文：甲子，昭宗到达华州，百姓夹道呼万岁，昭宗哭着对他们说： 不要呼万岁，朕不再是你们的君主了！ 
English: A son, Zhaozong arrived in Huazhou, and the people shouted "long live" in unison. Zhaozong cried and said to them: "Don't shout "long live," I am no longer your ruler!

古文：馆于兴德宫，谓侍臣曰： 鄙语云： 纥干山头冻杀雀，何不飞去生处乐。 
现代文：当晚，昭宗在兴德宫住宿，对侍臣说： 俗语说： 纥干山头冻得要死的山雀，为什么不飞到能够活的地方去快乐。 
English: That night, Shozong stayed at the Xingde Palace and said to his vassal: As the saying goes, "If a titmouse in the mountains is freezing to death, why not fly to a place where it can live and be happy."

古文：朕今漂泊，不知竟落何所！ 
现代文：朕今东奔西走，行止无定，不知道究竟流落到哪里！ 
English: I'm running around now, not sure where I'm going, not sure where I'm going!

古文：因泣下沾襟，左右莫能仰视，二月，乙亥，车驾至陕，以东都宫室未成，驻留于陕。
现代文：因此哭湿了衣襟，左右的人不能抬头仰视。二月乙亥，昭宗到达陕州，因为东都洛阳的宫室还没有建成，就在陕州停留暂住。
English: As a result, his collar was wet from crying, and those around him could not look up. In February of the Year of the Boar, Zhaozong arrived in Shaanxi Province, and since the palace of Luoyang, the eastern capital, had not yet been built, he stayed in Shaanxi Province for a while.

古文：丙子，全忠自河中来朝，上延全忠入寝室见何后，后泣曰： 自今大家夫妇委身全忠矣！ 
现代文：丙子，朱全忠从河中前来朝见，昭宗邀请朱全忠进寝室见何皇后，何皇后哭着说： 自今我们夫妇托身给全忠了！ 
English: Zhi Zi, Zhu Quanzhong came from the middle of the river to see her in the morning. Zhaozong invited Zhu Quanzhong into the bedroom to see the Empress He. The Empress He cried and said, "From now on, my husband and I have entrusted ourselves to Quanzhong!"

古文：甲申，立皇子祯为端王，祁为丰王，福为和王，禧为登王，祐为嘉王。
现代文：甲申，昭宗立皇子李祯为端王，李祈为丰王，李福为和王，李禧为登王，李为嘉王。
English: Jiashen, the prince of Zhaozongli, Li Xuan, was the king of Huan, Li Qi was the king of Feng, Li Fu was the king of He, Li Xi was the king of Deng, and Li was the king of Jia.

古文：上遣间使以御札告难于王建，建以邛州剌史王宗祐为北路行营指挥使，将兵会凤翔兵迎车驾，至兴平，遇汴兵，不得进而还。
现代文：昭宗派遣密使拿着亲笔信札向西川节度使王建通报危难。王建以邛州刺史王宗为北路行营指挥使，率兵会同凤翔的军队迎接昭宗，到达兴平后，遭遇汴州军队，不能前进而返回。
English: Zhaozong sent a secret envoy with a handwritten letter to the Xichuan Festival to inform Wang Jian of the danger. Wang Jian took the Bozhou general Wang Zong as the commander of the North Road campaign, and led the troops to meet Zhaozong with Fengxiang's army. After arriving in Xingping, he encountered the Bozhou army, could not advance and returned.

古文：建始自用墨制除官，云 俟车驾还长安表闻。 
现代文：王建开始自用墨笔手令任命官员，说： 等候陛下回到长安再上表奏报。 
English: Wang Jian began to appoint officials with his own ink pen, saying: Wait for His Majesty to return to Chang'an before submitting the report.

古文：三月，丁未，以硃全忠兼判左、右神策及六军诸卫事。
现代文：三月丁未，昭宗任命朱全忠兼判左右神策军及六军诸卫事。
English: In March of the same year, Emperor Zhaozong appointed Zhu Quanzhong to be both the commander of the Eastern and Western Divisions and the commander of the Six Armies.

古文：癸丑，全忠置酒私第，邀上临幸。
现代文：癸丑，朱全忠在私宅摆设酒筵，邀请昭宗前去赴宴。
English: Outraged, Zhu Quanzhong set up a drinking bowl in his private residence and invited Zhaozong to a banquet.

古文：乙卯，全忠辞上，先赴洛阳督修宫室。
现代文：乙卯，朱全忠辞别昭宗，先往洛阳去监督修建宫室。
English: Second, Zhu Quanzhong said goodbye to Zhaozong and first went to Luoyang to supervise the construction of the palace.

古文：上与之宴群臣，既罢，上独留全忠及忠武节度使韩建饮，皇后出，自捧玉卮以饮全忠，晋国夫人可证附上耳语。
现代文：昭宗与他一同宴请群臣，宴会散后，昭宗只留下朱全忠及忠武节度使韩建继续饮酒，何皇后走出，亲自捧着玉杯请朱全忠喝，晋国夫人可证贴着昭宗耳朵说话。
English: After the banquet was over, he left only Zhu Quanzhong and Zhongwu Jiedu to continue drinking, while the Empress He came out with a jade cup to invite Zhu Quanzhong to drink. The wife of Jin Guo could be seen whispering into the ear of Zhu Quanzhong.

古文：建蹑全忠足，全忠以为图己，不饮，阳醉而出。
现代文：韩建踩朱全忠的脚，朱全忠以为暗算自己，便不喝，假装喝醉而离去。
English: Han Jian stepped on Zhu Quanzhong's foot. Thinking that Zhu Quanzhong was plotting against him, he didn't drink, pretended to be drunk and left.

古文：全忠奏以长安为佑国军，以韩建为佑国节度使，以郑州刺史刘知俊为匡国节度使。
现代文：朱全忠奏请将长安改为佑国军，任命韩建为佑国节度使，任命郑州刺命名刘知俊为匡国节度使。
English: Zhu Quanzhong requested that Chang'an be changed to Yu Guo Jun, Han Jian be appointed as Yu Guo Jie, and Liu Zhijun be appointed as Kuang Guo Jie.

古文：丁巳，上复遣间使以绢诏告急于王建、杨行密、李克用等，令纠帅籓镇以图匡复，曰： 朕至洛阳，则为所幽闭，诏敕皆出其手，朕意不复得通矣！ 
现代文：丁巳，昭宗又派遣密使以绢写诏令向王建、杨行密、李克用等告急，命令他们纠集统帅藩镇来设法匡复国家，诏令说： 朕到洛阳，就被朱全忠幽禁了，诏令敕书都出自他的手，朕意不再能够传达了！ 
English: At the same time, Emperor Zhaozong also sent a secret envoy to Wang Jian, Yang Xingmi, Li Kegui and others to express their urgency by writing a secret imperial edict, ordering them to gather the generals of the provinces and towns to try to restore the country. The imperial edict said: "When I came to Luoyang, I was imprisoned by Zhu Quanzhong. The imperial edicts were all written by him. I can no longer convey my thoughts!"

古文：杨行密遣钱传撩及其妇并顾全武归钱塘。
现代文：淮南节度使杨行密遣送钱传及他的妻子并顾全武回钱塘。
English: Huainan Festival made Yang Xingmi send money to his wife and Gu Quanwu returned to Qiantang.

古文：以淮南行军司马李神福为鄂岳招讨使，复将兵击杜洪。
现代文：杨行密以淮南行军司马李神福为鄂岳招讨使，再次率兵攻击杜洪。
English: Yang Xingmi used Ma Li Shenfu, the secretary of the Huainan marching army, as a recruiting envoy for Etu, and once again led the troops to attack Duhong.

古文：硃全忠遣使诣行密，请舍鄂岳，复修旧好。
现代文：朱全忠派遣使者谒见杨行密，请他舍弃鄂岳，恢复旧时的友好。
English: Zhu Quanzhong sent an envoy to see Yang Xingmi, asking him to give up Mount E and restore the old friendship.

古文：行密报曰： 俟天子还长安，然后罢兵修好。 
现代文：杨行密答复说： 等天子回到长安，然后停止攻战重修和好。 
English: Yang Xingmi replied, "Wait for the Son of Heaven to return to Chang'an, and then stop fighting and restore peace."

古文：夏，四月，辛巳，硃全忠奏洛阳宫室已成，请车驾早发，表章相继。
现代文：夏季，四月辛巳，朱全忠奏报洛阳宫室已经建成，请昭宗车驾早日出发，表章接连不断，一再催促。
English: In the summer, in April, Zhu Quanzhong announced that the Luoyang palace room had been completed, and asked Zhaozong to drive out as soon as possible, and repeatedly urged him to do so.

古文：上屡遣宫人谕以皇后新产，未任就路，请俟十月东行。
现代文：昭宗屡次派遣宫人告诉他皇后刚生婴儿，不能登路，请等到十月东去洛阳。
English: Zhaozong repeatedly sent courtiers to tell him that the queen's newborn baby could not go on the road, please wait until October to go to Luoyang.

古文：全忠疑上徘徊俟变，怒甚，谓牙将寇彦卿曰： 汝速至陕，即日促官家发来。 
现代文：朱全忠怀疑昭宗故意徘徊不前等待事变，勃然大怒，对牙将寇彦卿说： 你速到陕州，即日催促天子出发前来！ 
English: Zhu Quanzhong suspected that Zhaozong was deliberately stalling and waiting for things to change. He flew into a rage and said to the commander of the imperial army, Qiao Yanqing: "You should hurry to Shaanxi and urge Tianzi to leave on the same day!"

古文：闰月，丁酉，车驾发陕。壬寅，全忠逆于新安。
现代文：闰四月丁酉，昭宗从陕州出发；壬寅，朱全忠迎于新安。
English: In April, Ding Xi and Zhaozong set out from Shaanxi; in June, Zhu Quanzhong arrived in Xin'an.

古文：上之在陕也，司天监奏： 星气有变，期在今秋，不利东行。 
现代文：昭宗在陕州的时候，司天监曾经奏称： 星气有变化，时间在今年秋天，东行不利。 
English: When Zhaozong was in Shaanxi, Siyuan once said: "There is a change in the astral atmosphere, the time is this autumn, and it is not good to go east.

古文：故上欲以十月幸洛。
现代文：所以昭宗想要在十月前往洛阳。
English: That's why he wants to go to Luoyang in October.

古文：至是，全忠令医官许昭远告医官使阎祐之、司天监王墀、内都知韦周、晋国夫人可证等谋害元帅，悉收杀之。
现代文：到这个时候，朱全忠命医官许昭远告发医官使阎之、司天监王墀、内都知韦周、晋国夫人可证等谋害元帅朱全忠，于是把他们全都拘捕杀死。
English: At this time, Zhu Quanzhong's medical officer, Xu Zhaoyuan, reported to the medical officer that Yan Zhi, Siyuan Wang Qian, Nai Du Zhi Wei Zhou, and Jin Guo's wife were plotting to kill the marshal Zhu Quanzhong, so they were all arrested and killed.

古文：癸卯，上憩于谷水。
现代文：癸卯，昭宗在水边休息。
English: Meanwhile, Shozon is resting by the water's edge.

古文：自崔胤之死，六军散亡俱尽，所馀击球供奉、内园小儿共二百馀人，从上而东。
现代文：自崔胤被杀之后，六军全都逃散，余下的击球供奉、内园小儿共二百余人，跟从昭宗来东行。
English: After Cui Yan was killed, the six armies all fled, and the remaining batting tributes and children from the inner garden, a total of more than two hundred people, followed Zhaozong to the east.

古文：全忠犹忌之，为设食于幄，尽缢杀之。
现代文：朱全忠还忌恨他们，就在帷幄中为他们设置食物，把他们全部勒死。
English: Zhu Quanzhong still hated them, so he placed food for them in the curtains and strangled them all.

古文：豫选二百馀人大小相类者，衣其衣服，代之侍卫。
现代文：预先挑选大小相似的二百余人，穿上他们的衣服，代替他们侍从护卫。
English: More than 200 people of similar size were pre-selected, dressed in their clothes, and replaced by bodyguards.

古文：上初不觉，累日乃寤。
现代文：昭宗开始没有察觉，过了几天才发觉。
English: At first, Akimune didn't notice it, but it took him a few days to figure it out.

古文：自是上之左右职掌使令皆全忠之人矣。
现代文：从此，昭宗左右的管事调遣全是朱全忠的人了。
English: From then on, all the administrators around Zhaozong were Zhu Quanzhong's men.

古文：甲辰，车驾发谷水，入宫，御正殿，受朝贺。
现代文：甲辰，昭宗从水出发，进入皇宫升座正殿，接受朝驾。
English: Jia Chen and Zhaozong set out from the water, entered the imperial palace, ascended to the main hall, and accepted the morning ride.

古文：乙巳，御光政门，赦天下，改元。更命陕州曰兴唐府。诏讨李茂贞、杨崇本。
现代文：乙巳，昭宗至光政门，大赦天下，改年号为天元年，将陕州改名为兴唐府；颁布诏令讨伐李茂贞、杨崇本。
English: At that time, Emperor Zhaozong of the Guangzheng Dynasty pardoned the world, changed the year name to Tianyuan, renamed Shaanxi Province to Xingtang Prefecture, and issued a decree to crack down on Li Maozhen and Yang Chongben.

古文：戊申，敕内诸司惟留宣徽等九使外，馀皆停废，仍不以内夫人充使。
现代文：戊申，敕命宫内各司只留宣徽两院、小马坊、丰德库、御厨、客省、阁门、飞龙、庄宅等九使外，其余都停止废除，仍旧不让内夫人充任各司使。
English: According to Wushin, all the departments in the palace were only left with nine envoys, including the two houses of Xuanhui, Xiao Ma Fang, Fengde Library, Imperial Kitchen, Guest Ministry, Courtyard Gate, Flying Dragon, Mansion House, and so on. The rest were stopped from being abolished, and they still did not allow the wife of the emperor to serve as the envoy of each department.

古文：以蒋玄晖为宣徽南院使兼枢密使，王殷为宣徽北院使兼皇城使，张廷范为金吾将军、充街使，以韦震为河南尹兼六军诸卫副使，又征武宁留后硃友恭为左龙武统军，保大节度使氏叔琮为右龙武统军，典宿卫，皆全忠之腹心也。
现代文：任命蒋玄晖为宣徽南院使兼枢密使，王殷为宣徽北院使兼皇城使，张廷范为金吾将军、充任街使；任命韦震为河南尹兼六军诸卫副使；双征召武宁留后未友恭为左龙武统军，保大节度使氏叔琮为右龙武统军，主管宫中值宿警卫。
English: He appointed Jiang Xuanqian as the envoy of the Southern Yuan of Xuanhui Province and the envoy of the Privy Council, Wang Yin as the envoy of the Northern Yuan of Xuanhui Province and the envoy of the Imperial City, Zhang Tingfan as the general of Kingu and the acting envoy of the streets; appointed Wei Zhen as the deputy envoy of Yin of Henan Province and the guards of the Sixth Army; and after recruiting Wu Ning, he appointed Wei Youqong as the left dragon military commander, and Baodao Jiedu as the right dragon military commander, and was in charge of the guards on duty in the palace.

古文：癸丑，以张全义为天平节度使。
现代文：他们都是朱全忠的心腹亲信。癸丑，朝廷任命张全义为天平节度使。
English: They were all close confidants of Zhu Quanzhong. Ironically, the imperial court appointed Zhang Quanzhong as the envoy of Tianping Festival.

古文：乙卯，以全忠为护国、宣武，宣义、忠武四镇节度使
现代文：乙卯，朝廷任命朱全忠为护国、宣武、宣义、忠武四镇节度使。
English: In addition, the imperial court appointed Zhu Quanzhong as the guardian of the country, the proclamation of martial law, the proclamation of righteousness, and the festival envoy of the four towns of Zhongwu.

古文：镇海、镇东节度使越王钱镠求封吴越王，朝廷不许。
现代文：镇海、镇东节度使越王钱求封吴越王；朝廷没有应允。
English: The Zhenhai and Zhendong festivals made King Qian of Yue ask for the crown of King Wu of Yue; the imperial court did not agree.

古文：硃全忠为之言于执政，乃更封吴王。
现代文：朱全忠在主管官员面前为钱说情，于是改封钱为吴王。
English: Zhu Quanzhong pleaded for Qian in front of the competent officials, so he changed Qian's title to Wu Wang.

古文：更命魏博曰天雄军。
现代文：朝廷将魏博改名为天雄军。
English: The imperial court renamed Weibo as Tianxiong Army.

古文：癸亥，进天雄节度使长沙郡王罗绍威爵鄴王。
现代文：癸亥，天雄节度使长沙郡王罗绍威进爵为邺王。
English: The Tianxiong Festival made the king of Changsha County, Luo Shaowei, into a knight of the King of Zhai.

