古文：十有八年春，晋侯、卫世子臧伐齐。
现代文：十八年春季，晋侯、卫国世子臧共同发兵进攻齐国。
English: In the spring of the 18th year of the Jin Dynasty, the princes of Jin and the heirs of Emperor Wei jointly sent troops to attack Qi.

古文：公伐杞。
现代文：宣公攻打杞国。
English: The proclamation to attack and subjugate the country began.

古文：夏四月。
现代文：夏季四月，无事。
English: In the summer, in April, nothing.

古文：秋七月，邾人戕鄫子于鄫。
现代文：秋季七月，邾国人在鄫国戕杀鄫子。
English: In the autumn of July, the people of Yunnan killed a mule in Yunnan.

古文：甲戌，楚子旅卒。
现代文：甲戌日，楚庄公去世。
English: On Armor Day, Chu Zhuang Gong passed away.

古文：公孙归父如晋。
现代文：公孙归父去晋国。
English: The great-grandson returned to his father and went to Jin.

古文：冬十月壬戌，公薨于路寝。
现代文：冬季十月壬戌日，宣公去世。
English: In the winter of October, Xuan Gong passed away.

古文：归父还自晋，至笙，遂奔齐。
现代文：归父从晋国回来，到达笙地，又逃到齐国。
English: Guifu returned from Jin Province, arrived in Shunde, and then fled to Qi Province.

古文：十八年春，晋侯、卫大子臧伐齐，至于阳穀。齐侯会晋侯盟于缯，以公子彊为质于晋。
现代文：十八年春季，晋景公、卫国的太子臧共同发兵进攻齐国，到达阳穀，齐顷公与晋景公在缯地会见订立盟约，齐国派公子彊在晋国作为人质。晋军回国。
English: In the spring of the 18th year, Prince Jinjing and the prince of the defense of the country, Yao, jointly sent troops to attack Qi, and arrived in Yanggu. Prince Qi and Prince Jinjing met and signed a covenant in Handan, and Qi sent Prince Yao as a hostage in Jin. Jin troops returned to China.

古文：晋师还，蔡朝、南郭偃逃归。
现代文：蔡朝、南郭偃逃回国内。
English: Cai and Nanguo fled back to China.

古文：夏，公使如楚乞师，欲以伐齐。
现代文：夏季，鲁宣公的使者到楚国请求出兵，想要进攻齐国。
English: In the summer, Lu Xuanguo's emissaries went to Chu to request the dispatch of troops and wanted to attack Qi.

古文：秋，邾人戕鄫子于鄫。
现代文：秋季，邾国人在鄫国戕杀鄫子。
English: In autumn, the people of Yunnan kill the pheasants in Yunnan.

古文：凡自虐其君曰弑，自外曰戕。
现代文：凡从国内杀死他们国君叫做 弑 ，从国外来人杀的叫做 戕 。
English: Those who kill their sovereigns from within the country are called, and those who kill people from abroad are called.

古文：楚庄王卒。楚师不出。
现代文：楚庄王去世，楚军不能出兵。
English: The king of Chu Zhuang died, and the Chu army could not send troops.

古文：既而用晋师，楚于是乎有蜀之役。
现代文：不久鲁国就利用晋军攻打齐国，楚国因此而有蜀地的战役。
English: Soon, the State of Lu used the Jin army to attack the State of Qi, and the State of Chu therefore had the Battle of Shudi.

古文：公孙归父以襄仲之立公也有宠，欲去三桓以张公室。
现代文：公孙归父由于他父亲襄仲立了鲁宣公，而受到宣公宠信，他想要去掉孟孙、叔孙、季孙这 三桓 ，以伸张公室的权力。
English: He wanted to get rid of Monsun, Uncles, Uncles, Uncles, Uncles, Uncles, Uncles, Uncles, Uncles, Uncles, Uncles, Uncles, Uncles, Uncles, Uncles, Uncles, Uncles, Uncles, Uncles, Uncles, Uncles, Uncles, Uncles, Uncles, Uncles, Uncles, Uncles, Uncles, Uncles, Uncles, Uncles, Uncles, Uncles, Uncles, Uncles, Uncles, Uncles, Uncles.

古文：与公谋而聘于晋，欲以晋人去之。
现代文：他和宣公策划以后就到晋国去聘问，想要用晋国人的力量来去掉三桓。
English: After plotting with Xuan Gong, he went to Jin Province to solicit questions, hoping to use the power of the Jin people to get rid of Sankuan.

古文：冬，公薨。
现代文：冬季，宣公逝世。
English: In the winter, Xuan Gong passed away.

古文：季文子言于朝曰： 使我杀適立庶，以失大援者，仲也夫。 
现代文：季文子在朝廷上说： 让我杀死嫡子立了庶子以失掉强大的援助的，就是襄仲啊！ 
English: In the imperial court, Jiwenzi said, "The one who made me kill my legitimate son and have an illegitimate son in order to lose powerful assistance is Xiangzhong!"

古文：臧宣叔怒曰： 当其时不能治也，后之人何罪？
现代文：臧宣叔发怒说： 当时不能治罪，他的后人有什么罪？
English: Yu Xuanshu said angrily: At that time, it was not possible to punish crimes, so what are the crimes of his descendants?

古文：子欲去之，许请去之。 
现代文：您要去掉他，许就请求去掉他。 
English: You want to get rid of him, then ask to get rid of him.

古文：遂逐东门氏。
现代文：于是就把襄仲的家族东门氏驱逐出国。
English: As a result, he expelled Xiang Zhong's family, the Dongmen clan, from the country.

古文：子家还，及笙，坛帷，复命于介。
现代文：公孙归父回国，到达笙地，用帷幕遮住土坛，向他的副手举行复命的礼节。
English: When Gongsun returned to China after his father's death, he arrived at the burial ground, covered the dirt floor with a curtain, and performed the etiquette of returning the life to his deputy.

古文：既复命，袒、括发，即位哭，三踊而出。
现代文：复命完了，脱去外衣，以麻束发，回到自己的位置痛哭，顿脚三次退出。
English: After his life was restored, he took off his coat, wore his hair in a ponytail, returned to his position, wept bitterly, and abruptly left three times.

古文：遂奔齐。
现代文：于是就逃亡到齐国。
English: At that time, he fled to Qi.

古文：书曰： 归父还自晋。 
现代文：《春秋》记载说 归父还自晋 ，是对他表示赞许。
English: "Spring and Autumn" records that Jin Jin returned to his father, which was a compliment to him.

