古文：夫心术之动远矣，文情之变深矣，源奥而派生，根盛而颖峻，是以文之英蕤，有秀有隐。
现代文：文学创作的运思活动无边无际，作品的内容也就变化无穷。源远就流长，根深就叶茂，所以优秀的作品，有 隐 、 秀 两种特点。
English: The intellectual activity of literary creation is boundless, and the content of the work is also endless. The source is far and the flow is long, the roots are deep and the leaves are thick, so excellent works have both hidden and beautiful characteristics.

古文：隐也者，文外之重旨者也；秀也者，篇中之独拔者也。隐以复意为工，秀以卓绝为巧。斯乃旧章之懿绩，才情之嘉会也。
现代文：所谓 隐 ，就是含有字面意义以外的内容；所谓 秀 ，就是文章中特别突出的句子。 隐 以内容丰富为工巧， 秀 以卓越独到为精妙：这是古代作品创造的美绩，作者才华的集中反映。
English: The so-called "hidden" is that it contains content other than the literal meaning; the so-called "show" is the sentence that is particularly prominent in the article. "Hidden" with rich content is skillful, "show" with excellence and uniqueness is exquisite: This is a great achievement created by ancient works, a concentrated reflection of the author's talent.

古文：夫隐之为体，义生文外，秘响旁通，伏采潜发，譬爻象之变互体，川渎之韫珠玉也。故互体变爻，而化成四象；珠玉潜水，而澜表方圆。
现代文： 隐 的特点，是意义产生在文辞之外，含蓄的内容可以使人触类旁通，潜藏的文采在无影无形中生发，这就如同《周易》卦爻的 互体 变化，也好似江河之中有珠玉蕴藏， 互体 和爻位的变化，就形成《周易》中的四种卦象；珠玉潜藏在水中，就引起方圆不同的波澜。
English: The characteristic of hiddenness is that the meaning is produced outside the words, the implicit content can make people touch the class by-pass, and the latent literature is born in the shadowless and invisible. This is like the inter-body change of "Zhou Yi" Gua Zi. It is also like that there are jewels in the river, and the changes of inter-body and anchor position form the four kinds of Gua Zi in "Zhou Yi"; the jewels are hidden in the water, causing waves of different sizes.

古文：始正而末奇，内明而外润，使玩之者无穷，味之者不厌矣。
现代文：这种作品初读起来感到正常，最后才发现它的奇妙；其含意明确，表现形式却很圆润，这就使人玩味无穷，百读不厌了。
English: This kind of work feels normal when you first read it, only to find it strange in the end; its meaning is clear, but its expression is very rounded, which makes people play with it endlessly, and they never get tired of reading it.

古文：彼波起辞间，是谓之秀。
现代文： 秀 的特点，就如文辞中涌出的波峰。
English: The characteristics of Xiu are like the crest of a wave surging out of the literature.

古文：纤手丽音，宛乎逸态，若远山之浮烟霭，娈女之靓容华。
现代文：它像纤丽的手奏出佳音，表达了宛然在目的超逸情态；又若远山缥缈的云烟，像美女妆饰的容貌。
English: It is like a delicate hand playing a beautiful note, expressing the transcendental state of being in the goal; and the clouds of distant mountains, like the appearance of a beautiful woman's makeup.

古文：然烟霭天成，不劳于妆点；容华格定，无待于裁熔；深浅而各奇，穠纤而俱妙，若挥之则有馀，而揽之则不足矣。
现代文：但云烟乃自然形成，不须人工妆点；人的容颜形貌有定，也无须强加修饰。天然的云烟，或深或浅都各有奇态；天生的容颜，浓妆淡抹都各得其妙。如能发扬其天然，就奇妙有余；要是加以雕饰，反而奇妙不足了。
English: But clouds of smoke are formed naturally, without the need for artificial make-up; the human face has a fixed shape and does not need to be embellished. Natural clouds of smoke, whether deep or shallow, all have their own peculiarities; natural looks, heavy makeup and light makeup are all wonderful. If you can develop its naturalness, it is more than wonderful; if it is carved, it is not enough to be wonderful.

古文：夫立意之士，务欲造奇，每驰心于玄默之表；工辞之人，必欲臻美，恒匿思于佳丽之乡。
现代文：作者在立意上，力求创造奇特，常常在沉静中进行极度地深思；在创造工巧的文辞上，一定要达于尽善尽美，经常沉迷在美好的辞藻中思索。
English: In terms of intention, the author strives to create strangeness, and often thinks deeply in silence; in the creation of skillful words, he must achieve perfection, and often indulge in beautiful words.

古文：呕心吐胆，不足语穷；锻岁炼年，奚能喻苦？
现代文：作者苦思呕出了心胆，还不足说明其用心的艰难；说成年累月地熬炼，又怎能形容其写作的困苦？
English: The author's painstaking efforts and courage are not enough to explain the difficulties of his efforts; how can the hardships of his writing be described by saying that he has been training for months and months?

古文：故能藏颖词间，昏迷于庸目；露锋文外，惊绝乎妙心。
现代文：这样写来，就可把独特的意义潜藏在文辞之中，而使平庸的读者迷惑不解；显露于文辞之外的锋芒，使高明的读者惊叹叫绝。
English: In this way, the unique meaning can be hidden in the words, and the mediocre readers will be puzzled; the sharpness revealed outside the words will make the sophisticated readers marvel.

古文：使酝藉者蓄隐而意愉，英锐者抱秀而心悦。
现代文：性格醖藉的人，读到含蓄之处十分满意；性格明锐的人，读到独特的句子非常喜悦。
English: People with a shy personality are very satisfied when they read connotations; people with a sharp personality are very pleased to read unique sentences.

古文：譬诸裁云制霞，不让乎天工；斫卉刻葩，有同乎神匠矣。
现代文：如果描写云霞，并不逊色于自然之美；刻绘花草，也无异于神力的巧匠了。
English: If you describe clouds and haze, you are not inferior to the beauty of nature; if you draw flowers and plants, you are no different from a skillful craftsman.

古文：若篇中乏隐，等宿儒之无学，或一叩而语穷，句间鲜秀，如巨室之少珍，若百诘而色沮：斯并不足于才思，而亦有愧于文辞矣。
现代文：要是作品缺乏含蓄，就像老书生没有学识，有的读之一目了然；如果没有突出挺拔的句子，就像富贵之家缺少珍宝，有的细加推敲便黯然失色：这都由于作者才力不足，也有愧于从事文学创作。
English: If a work lacks subtlety, it is like an old scholar who lacks knowledge, and some reading is obvious; if there are no prominent sentences, it is like a rich family lacking treasures, and some detailed elaboration is eclipsed: this is due to the author's lack of talent and is also unworthy of literary creation.

古文：将欲征隐，聊可指篇∶古诗之离别，乐府之长城，词怨旨深，而复兼乎比兴。
现代文：要想证验含蓄，可以举出几篇例证：如《古诗十九首》中的《行行重行行》，乐府古辞的《饮马长城窟行》，都是文辞哀怨，意旨深厚，并且兼用比兴方法。
English: If you want to verify the connotation, you can cite a few examples: For example, the "line, line, line" in the "Nineteen Ancient Poems" and the "drinking horse, Great Wall cave line" in the "Ancient Rhymes" are both mournful and profound, and both use the comparison method.

古文：陈思之《黄雀》，公干之《青松》，格刚才劲，而并长于讽谕。
现代文：又如曹植的《野田黄雀行》，刘桢的《赠从弟》，都写得格调刚健，才力雄劲，并长于婉转曲折地进行讽谏。
English: For example, Cao Zhi's "Noda Yellow Sparrow" and Liu Xi's "Gift of a Subordinate Brother" are both written with a robust style, strong talent, and are good at twists and turns.

古文：叔夜之《赠行》，嗣宗之《咏怀》，境玄思澹，而独得乎优闲。
现代文：嵇康的《赠行》，阮籍的《咏怀》，境界深远，思想淡泊，独具清闲高逸的情趣。
English: Gongkang's "Gifting" and Ruan Zi's "Caring" are far-reaching, light-hearted, and have a unique sense of leisure and relaxation.

古文：士衡之疏放，彭泽之豪逸，心密语澄，而俱适乎壮采。
现代文：陆机的疏放，陶渊明的豪逸，心思细密，语言明净，都创造了富丽的文采。
English: The freedom of the land machine, the courage of Tao Yuanming, the meticulousness of his thoughts, and the clarity of his language have all created a rich literary style.

古文：如欲辨秀，亦惟摘句 常恐秋节至，凉飙夺炎热 ，意凄而词婉，此匹妇之无聊也； 临河濯长缨，念子怅悠悠 ，志高而言壮，此丈夫之不遂也； 东西安所之，徘徊以旁皇 ，心孤而情惧，此闺房之悲极也； 朔风动秋草，边马有归心 ，气寒而事伤，此羁旅之怨曲也。
现代文：要想辨别秀句，也只有选取一些例句：如 常常害怕秋天到来，凉风驱散了炎热的天气 ，情意悲伤而文词婉转，这是写一个普通妇女的哀愁心情。 在河边洗着长长的帽带，想到你的远离而忧思无尽 ，情意高远而言辞有力，这是抒发大丈夫不顺意的心情。 深夜不眠，或东或西，何处可去？只得在原地徘徊，游移不定 ，心情孤寂而畏惧，这是写闺中妇女极度悲伤的感情。 寒冷的北风翻卷着秋草，边塞的战马怀念着家乡 ，气氛凄凉而其事感伤，这是戍卒久留他乡的哀怨之作。
English: If you want to distinguish good sentences, you can only choose some examples: For example, I am often afraid of the arrival of autumn, the cool wind dispelled the hot weather, the meaning is sad and the wording is euphemistic, this is to write the sad mood of an ordinary woman, washing a long hatband by the river, thinking of your distance and endless sorrow, the meaning is high and far-reaching, the words are powerful, this is to express the mood that is okay or not. late at night, sleepless, or east or west, where can I go? I have to wander in the same place, wandering uncertainly, feeling lonely and afraid, this is to write the extremely sad feelings

古文：凡文集胜篇，不盈十一，篇章秀句，裁可百二。
现代文：大凡一个集子最优秀的作品，还不到十分之一；一篇文章中最突出的句子，也只有百分之二。
English: Less than one-tenth of the best work in a collection is original, and only two percent of the most salient sentences in an article.

古文：并思合而自逢，非研虑之所课也。
现代文：这种极少的篇章和秀句，都是思考得当而自然形成，并不是苦心推究得来的。
English: This kind of very few chapters and excellent sentences are formed naturally with proper thinking, and are not the result of painstaking investigation.

古文：或有晦塞为深，虽奥非隐，雕削取巧，虽美非秀矣。
现代文：有的以隐晦不顺畅为深奥，虽然深奥但不是含蓄；有的以刻意雕琢求得工巧，虽然工巧但不是秀句。
English: Some are profound with subtle and not smooth, although profound but not implicit; some are skillful with deliberate carving, although skillful but not a good sentence.

古文：故自然会妙，譬卉木之耀英华；润色取美，譬缯帛之染朱绿。
现代文：由此可见，自然形成的巧妙，就如草木闪耀着光华；由修饰文辞而造成美好，就像丝绸染上了红绿彩色。
English: Thus it can be seen that the naturally formed ingenuity shines like the grass and trees; the beauty created by the modified words is like silk dyed with red and green colors.

古文：朱绿染缯，深而繁鲜；英华曜树，浅而炜烨。
现代文：大红大绿染成的丝绸，颜色浓郁而过分鲜艳；光华闪耀于草木，颜色浅淡而光彩明丽。
English: Silk dyed red and green, the color is rich and overly bright; brilliance shines in the grass, the color is light and bright.

古文：隐篇所以照文苑，秀句所以侈翰林，盖以此也。
现代文：含蓄的篇章之所以能照亮文坛，独特的秀句之所以能光大艺苑，就是这个原因。
English: This is the reason why a subtle chapter can illuminate the literary world, and why a unique sentence can light up the art world.

古文：赞曰∶
现代文：总结：
English: What is this word? Summary:

古文：文隐深蔚，馀味曲包。
现代文：深厚的作品富有不显露的文采，包含着婉转曲折的无穷余味。
English: The profound work is rich in understated elegance and contains an endless aftertaste of gentle twists and turns.

古文：辞生互体，有似变爻。
现代文：这种文辞也像《周易》中卦爻的变化，可以产生其义无常的 互体 。
English: This kind of wording is also similar to the changes of Gua Zi in "Zhou Yi," which can produce its impermanent "mutual body."

古文：言之秀矣，万虑一交。
现代文：独特挺拔的秀句，要千思万虑中才有一句。
English: It takes a lot of thought to come up with a unique, bold, and beautiful sentence.

古文：动心惊耳，逸响笙匏。
现代文：这种惊心动魄的句子，如奏匏笙，高超无比。
English: This kind of thrilling sentence, such as playing the gong, is incomparable.

