古文：十年春，公会晋侯、宋公、卫侯、曹伯、莒子、邾子、滕子、薛伯、杞伯、小邾子、齐世子光会吴于柤。
现代文：十年春季，襄公与晋侯、宋公、卫侯、曹伯、莒子、邾子、滕子、薛伯、杞伯、小邾子、齐国的世子光在柤地会见。
English: In the spring of the tenth year, Prince Xiang met with Prince Jin, Prince Song, Prince Wei, Prince Cao, Prince Zizi, Prince Zizi, Prince Tengzi, Prince Xue, Prince Zibo, Prince Xiao Zizi, and the Heir of the State of Qi in Handan.

古文：夏五月甲午，遂灭偪阳。
现代文：夏季五月甲午日，灭掉偪阳。
English: On the afternoon of the first day of the fifth month in summer, it will wipe out Shenyang.

古文：公至自会。
现代文：襄公从柤地回到鲁国。
English: Wen Gong returns from Xincheng.

古文：楚公子贞、郑公孙辄帅师伐宋。
现代文：楚国的公子贞、郑国的公孙辄率领军队攻打宋国。
English: Prince Zizhen of Chu and Prince Sun Yat of Zheng led armies to attack Song.

古文：晋师伐秦。
现代文：晋国军队攻打秦国。
English: The Jin army attacked Qin.

古文：秋，莒人伐我东鄙。
现代文：秋季，莒国人攻打我国东面边境。
English: In the autumn, the Chinese attacked the eastern border of our country.

古文：公会晋侯、宋公、卫侯、曹伯、莒子、邾子、齐世子光、滕子、薛伯、杞伯、小邾子伐郑。
现代文：襄公与晋侯、宋公、卫侯、曹伯、莒子、邾子、齐世子光、滕子、薛伯、杞伯、小邾子一起出兵攻打郑国。
English: Prince Xiang, together with Prince Jin, Prince Song, Prince Wei, Prince Cao, Prince Zizi, Prince Zizi, Prince Qi, Prince Xiziguang, Prince Tengzi, Prince Xue, Prince Zibo, and Prince Xiao Zizi, sent troops to attack Zheng.

古文：冬，盗杀郑公子斐、公子发、公孙辄。
现代文：冬季，叛贼杀死了郑国的郑公子斐、公子发、公孙辄。
English: In the winter, the traitors killed Zheng Gongzifai, Gongzifa and Gongsun Yao of Zheng.

古文：戍郑虎牢。
现代文：诸侯军队戍守郑国虎牢这座城池。
English: The armies of the feudal lords guarded the fortress of Zhengguo.

古文：楚公子贞帅师救郑。
现代文：楚国的公子贞楚军援救赵国。
English: The noble sons of the Chu Kingdom, the Zhenchu Army, came to the rescue of the Zhao Kingdom.

古文：公至自伐郑。
现代文：襄公从攻打郑国的战场回来。
English: Prince Xiang returned from the battlefield of the attack on Zheng.

古文：十年春，会于柤，会吴子寿梦也。三月癸丑，齐高厚相大子光以先会诸侯于钟离，不敬。
现代文：十年春季，鲁襄公和晋悼公、宋平公、卫献公、曹成公、莒子、邾子、滕子、薛伯、杞伯、小邾子、齐国太子光在柤地会见，这是为了会见吴王寿梦。三月二十六日，齐国的高厚作为太子光的相礼，和诸侯在钟离先行会见，表现出不恭敬。
English: In the spring of the 10th year, Prince Lu Xiang met with Prince Jin Rong, Prince Song Ping, Prince Wei Xian, Prince Cao Cheng, Prince Zizi, Prince Niu, Prince Tengzi, Prince Xue Bo, Prince Niu Bo, Prince Xiao Niu Zi, and the Crown Prince of Qi Guang in Handan, in order to meet with King Shou Meng of Wu. On March 26, Gao Hou of Qi, as the matchmaker of the Crown Prince Guang, met with the princes in Zhongli ahead of time, showing disrespect.

古文：士庄子曰： 高子相大子以会诸侯，将社稷是卫，而皆不敬，弃社稷也，其将不免乎？ 
现代文：士庄子说： 高子作为太子的相礼会见了诸侯，应当捍卫他们的国家，但却表现出不严肃，这是丢弃国家，恐怕将会不免于祸吧！ 
English: Shizhuangzi said: Takako, as the prince's consort, met with the princes. He should have defended their country, but he showed that he was not serious. This is abandoning the country. I'm afraid he will not be spared from disaster!

古文：夏四月戊午，会于柤。
现代文：夏季，四月初一日，诸侯在柤地会见。
English: In the summer, on the first day of April, the feudal lords would meet in Shunde.

古文：晋荀偃、士匄请伐偪阳，而封宋向戌焉。
现代文：晋国的荀偃、士匄请求进攻偪阳而把它作为向戌的封邑。
English: The Xiongnu and Shiwu of Jin requested to attack Fenyang and use it as a fief for Xiangwu.

古文：荀罃曰： 城小而固，胜之不武，弗胜为笑。 
现代文：荀罃说： 城小而坚固，攻下来不算勇敢，攻它不下被人讥笑。 
English: Zou said, "The city is small but strong. It is not brave to attack it, and people will laugh at it.

古文：固请。
现代文：荀偃等人坚决请求。
English: et al. made a firm request.

古文：丙寅，围之，弗克。
现代文：初九日，包围偪阳，不能攻克。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, they surrounded Fenyang and were unable to conquer it.

古文：孟氏之臣秦堇父辇重如役。偪阳人启门，诸侯之士门焉。
现代文：孟氏的家臣秦堇父用人力拉了装备车到达战地，偪阳人打开城门，诸侯的将士乘机进攻。
English: Meng's vassal Qin Yu's father used manpower to pull the equipment vehicle to reach the battlefield, the people of Shenyang opened the city gate, and the princes' soldiers took the opportunity to attack.

古文：县门发，郰人纥抉之以出门者。
现代文：内城的人把闸门放下，郰县长官纥双手举门，把进攻城里的将士放出来。
English: The people in the inner city put down the gate, and the county magistrate lifted the gate with both hands and let the attacking soldiers out.

古文：狄虒彌建大车之轮而蒙之以甲以为橹，左执之，右拔戟，以成一队。
现代文：狄虒弥把大车轮子立起来，蒙上皮甲作为大盾牌，左手拿着它，右手拔戟，领兵单成一队。
English: Demetrius set up the chariot wheels, covered them with leather armor to serve as a large shield, held it in his left hand, drew the halberd with his right hand, and led the soldiers into a single line.

古文：孟献子曰： 《诗》所谓 有力如虎 者也。 
现代文：孟献子说： 这就是《诗》所说的 像老虎一样有力气 的人啊。 
English: Meng Xianzi said, "This is the man who is as powerful as a tiger, as the poem says.

古文：主人县布，堇父登之，及堞而绝之。
现代文：偪阳的守城人把布挂下来，秦堇父拉着布登城，刚到墙垛，守城人就把布割断。
English: The keepers of the city of Shenyang hung the cloth down, and Qin Yu's father pulled the city of Buden. As soon as they reached the city wall, the keepers cut the cloth.

古文：队则又县之，苏而复上者三。
现代文：秦堇父跌落在地，守城人又把布挂下来。
English: Qin Yu's father fell to the ground, and the city guard hung the cloth down again.

古文：主人辞焉，乃退，带其断以徇于军三日。
现代文：秦堇父醒起来重新上去，这样三次，守城人表示钦佩他的勇敢，不再挂布。这才退兵，把割的布做了带子在军内游行示众三天。
English: The guard would apologize to Father Tsuen, only for him to return, boasting in the army with a piece of cloth, for three days in a row.

古文：诸侯之师久于偪阳，荀偃、士匄请于荀曰： 水潦将降，惧不能归，请班师！ 
现代文：诸侯的军队在偪阳很久了，荀偃、士匄请示荀罃说： 快下雨了，恐怕到时不能回去，请您退兵吧。 
English: The armies of the lords had been in Shenyang for a long time, and the eunuchs and scholars begged them to leave, saying, "It's about to rain, and I'm afraid we won't be able to go back by then. Please leave the army."

古文：知伯怒，投之以机，出于其间，曰： 女成二事而后告余。余恐乱命，以不女违。
现代文：荀罃发怒，把弩机向他们扔过去，机从两个人中间飞过，说： 你们把这两件事情办成了再来跟我说话，原来我恐怕意见不一而扰乱了军令，所以不违背你们。
English: The stork flew into a rage and threw the stork at them. The stork flew between the two of them and said, "You have accomplished these two things. Come and talk to me again. I am afraid that I have disturbed the military order by disagreeing with you, so I will not disobey you."

古文：女既勤君而兴诸侯，牵帅老夫以至于此，既无武守，而又欲易余罪，曰： 是实班师，不然克矣。 
现代文：你们既已使国君勤劳而发动了诸侯的军队，牵着我老头子到了这里，既没有坚持进攻，而又想归罪于我，回去说： 就是他下令退兵。不这样，攻下来了。 
English: Now that you have made the sovereign diligently mobilize the armies of the princes, and have brought me, the old man, here, now that you have not insisted on attacking, and yet want to blame me, go back and say: It was he who ordered the retreat. Otherwise, it was attacked.

古文：余羸老也，可重任乎？
现代文：我已经衰老了，还能再承担一次罪责吗？
English: I'm getting old, can I take the blame again?

古文：七日不克，必尔乎取之！ 
现代文：七天攻不下来，一定要取你们的脑袋！ 
English: If we can't take it in seven days, we'll take your heads!

古文：五月庚寅，荀偃、士匄帅卒攻偪阳，亲受矢石。甲午，灭之。
现代文：五月初四日，荀偃、士匄率领步兵攻打偪阳，亲身受到箭和石块的攻击，初八日，灭亡了偪阳。
English: On the 4th day of the 5th month of the year, Shao and Shih led the infantry to attack Poyang. They were attacked by arrows and stones. On the 8th day of the month, Poyang was destroyed.

古文：书曰 遂灭偪阳 ，言自会也。
现代文：《春秋》记载说 遂灭偪阳 ，说的是从柤地盟会以后就进攻了偪阳。
English: "Spring and Autumn" recorded that they finally destroyed Fenyang, saying that they attacked Fenyang after the Fenyang League.

古文：以与向戌，向戌辞曰： 君若犹辱镇抚宋国，而以偪阳光启寡君，群臣安矣，其何贶如之？
现代文：把偪阳封给向戌。向戌辞谢说： 如果还承蒙君王安抚宋国，而用偪阳来扩大寡君的疆土，下臣们就安心了，还有什么比得上这样的赐予呢？
English: He gave the fief of Shenyang to Xiang Yu. Xiang Yu thanked him and said, "If we can still be grateful to the king for pacifying the Song Dynasty, and use Shenyang to expand the territory of the oligarchy, our vassals will be at ease. What else can compare to such a gift?"

古文：若惠赐臣，是臣兴诸侯以自封也，其何罪大焉？
现代文：如果专门赐给下臣，那就是下臣发动诸侯的军队而为自己求得封地了，还有什么罪过比这再大呢？
English: If it is specifically given to a vassal, it means that the vassal has unleashed the armies of the lords to obtain a fief for himself. What sin is greater than this?

古文：敢以死请。 
现代文：谨以一死来请求。 
English: I'm asking for one death.

古文：乃予宋公。
现代文：于是就把偪阳给了宋平公。
English: So he gave Shenyang to Song Pingguo.

古文：宋公享晋侯于楚丘，请以《桑林》。
现代文：宋平公在楚丘设宴招待晋悼公，请求使用《桑林》之乐舞。
English: Song Ping Gong held a banquet in Chu Qiu to invite Jin Yue Gong and requested the use of "Mulberry Grove" music and dance.

古文：荀辞。
现代文：荀罃辞谢。
English: Thank you for your resignation.

古文：荀偃、士匄曰： 诸侯，宋、鲁于是观礼。
现代文：荀偃、士匄说： 诸侯中的鲁国、宋国，在那里可以参观礼仪。
English: Gong and Shijun said, "Among the princes of the Lu and Song dynasties, you can visit the etiquette there.

古文：鲁有禘乐，宾祭用之。
现代文：鲁国有禘乐，在招待贵宾和举行大祭的时候用它。
English: Gongle is the national music of the country, and it is used to invite dignitaries and hold grand festivals.

古文：宋以《桑林》享君，不亦可乎？ 
现代文：宋国使用《桑林》之舞招待国君，不也是可以的吗？ 
English: Isn't it okay for the Song Dynasty to use the "Mulberry Grove" dance to invite the sovereign?

古文：舞师题以旌夏，晋侯惧，而退入于房。
现代文：开始舞蹈，乐师手举旌夏之旗率领乐队进来，晋悼公害怕而退入房里。
English: At the start of the dance, the musicians came in leading the band, waving the banner of the Summer Festival. Jin Weigong was afraid and retreated into the room.

古文：去旌，卒享而还。
现代文：宋国人去掉旌夏，使这次宴会顺利结束，晋悼公方才回国。
English: The Song people got rid of Lixia, so that the banquet ended successfully, and the tributes to the emperor only returned to the country.

古文：及著雍，疾。
现代文：到达著雍，晋悼公生病。
English: Arriving in Yong, Jin Weigong fell ill.

古文：卜，《桑林》见。
现代文：占卜，从卜兆里见到桑林之神。
English: Divination, seeing the god of the mulberry forest from Bu Zhaoli.

古文：荀偃、士匄欲奔请祷焉。荀不可，曰： 我辞礼矣，彼则以之。
现代文：荀偃、士匄想要奔回宋国请求祈祷，荀罃不同意，说： 我们已经辞去这种礼仪了，他们还是要用它。
English: Zhai and Shifu wanted to rush back to Song to ask for prayers, but Zhai disagreed, saying, "We have given up this kind of etiquette, they still want to use it."

古文：犹有鬼神，于彼加之。 
现代文：如果有鬼神，会把灾祸加在他们身上的。 
English: If there are ghosts and gods, they will bring disaster on them.

古文：晋侯有间，以偪阳子归，献于武宫，谓之夷俘。
现代文：晋悼公病愈，带了偪阳子回国，奉献于武宫，把它称为夷人俘虏。
English: After Jin Weikong recovered from his illness, he returned to China with Zhai Yangzi and dedicated it to the Imperial Palace, calling it the Emigrant Prisoner.

古文：偪阳，妘姓也。
现代文：偪阳，是姓妘的一族统治的。
English: Fenyang was ruled by a family with the surname Zou.

古文：使周内史选其族嗣，纳诸霍人，礼也。
现代文：晋悼公派周朝的内史选择妘姓宗族的族嗣，让他们居住在霍人地方，这是合于礼的。
English: The internal history of the Zhou Dynasty of the Jin and Miao Dynasties selected the heirs of the Yi family and let them live in the Huo people's place, which is in line with etiquette.

古文：师归，孟献子以秦堇父为右。
现代文：鲁军回国，孟献子让秦堇父做车右。
English: When the Lu army returned to China, Meng Xianzi let Qin Yu's father drive the car on the right.

古文：生秦丕兹，事仲尼。
现代文：秦堇父生了秦丕兹，拜孔子为师。
English: Qin Hui's father gave birth to Qin Huizi, who followed Confucius as his teacher.

古文：六月，楚子囊、郑子耳伐宋，师于訾毋。
现代文：六月，楚国的子囊、郑国的子耳进攻宋国，军队驻扎在訾毋。
English: In June, the Zizang of Chu and the Zhe of Zheng attacked the Song, and the army was stationed in Zibo.

古文：庚午，围宋，门于桐门。
现代文：十四日，包围宋国，攻打桐门。
English: On the 14th, they encircled Song and attacked Tongmen.

古文：晋荀罃伐秦，报其侵也。
现代文：晋国的荀罃进攻秦国，这是为了报复秦国的入侵。
English: Jin's Zou attacked Qin in retaliation for Qin's invasion of Zou.

古文：卫侯救宋，师于襄牛。
现代文：卫献公救援宋国，军队驻在襄牛。
English: Wei Xian Gong rescues Song, troops stationed in Xiang Niu.

古文：郑子展曰： 必伐卫，不然，是不与楚也。
现代文：郑国的子展说： 一定要进攻卫国。不这样，就是不亲附楚国了。
English: Zheng's son Zhan said, "We must attack the motherland. If we don't, we won't be close to Chu."

古文：得罪于晋，又得罪于楚，国将若之何？ 
现代文：得罪了晋国，又得罪了楚国，国家怎么办？ 
English: If we offend Jin and Chu, what will the country do?

古文：子驷曰： 国病矣！ 
现代文：子驷说： 国家已经很困乏了。 
English: Zixuan said: The country is already very poor.

古文：子展曰： 得罪于二大国，必亡。
现代文：子展说： 得罪了两个大国，一定灭亡。
English: Zotan said, "If you offend two great nations, you will surely perish."

古文：病不犹愈于亡乎？ 
现代文：困乏，不还比灭亡强一些吗？ 
English: Is it not better to be poor than to be dead?

古文：诸大夫皆以为然。故郑皇耳帅师侵卫，楚令也。
现代文：大夫们都认为子展的话说得对，所以郑国的皇耳入侵卫国，这是出于楚国的命令。
English: The doctors all thought that Zicheng's words were right, so the imperial ear of Zheng invaded the motherland, which was an order from the state of Chu.

古文：孙文子卜追之，献兆于定姜。
现代文：孙文子为追逐郑国军队占卜，把卜兆献给定姜。
English: Sun Wenzi used divination to chase the Zheng army, and dedicated the divination sign to Ding Jiang.

古文：姜氏问《繇》。
现代文：定姜问繇辞怎么样。
English: Ding Jiang asked how the speech was.

古文：曰： 兆如山陵，有夫出征，而丧其雄。 
现代文：孙文子说： 繇辞是： 卜兆如同山陵，有人出国征伐，丧失他们的英雄。  
English: Sun Wenzi said: The saying is: omens are like mountains, some people go abroad to conquer and lose their heroes.

古文：姜氏曰： 征者丧雄，御寇之利也。
现代文：定姜说： 征伐而丧失英雄，这是有利于抵御敌人的。
English: Ding Jiang said, "It is beneficial to resist the enemy to lose heroes in a campaign.

古文：大夫图之！ 
现代文：大夫考虑一下！ 
English: Doctor, think about it!

古文：卫人追之，孙蒯获郑皇耳于大丘。
现代文：卫国人追逐郑国军队，孙蒯在犬耳俘虏了郑将皇耳。
English: The defenders of the country chased the Zheng army, and Sun Yat-sen captured the Zheng general Wang Er in Kun'er.

古文：秋七月，楚子囊、郑子耳伐我西鄙。
现代文：秋季七月，楚国的子囊、郑国的子耳联军入侵我国西部边境。
English: In the autumn of July, the Zizang of Chu and the Zili of Zheng invaded the western border of our country.

古文：还，围萧，八月丙寅，克之。
现代文：回国，包围萧地。八月十一日，攻克萧地。
English: After returning to China, he besieged Xiaodi. On August 11, he conquered Xiaodi.

古文：九月，子耳侵宋北鄙。
现代文：九月，子耳入侵宋国北部边境。
English: In September, Zi Er invaded the northern border of Song.

古文：孟献子曰： 郑其有灾乎！
现代文：孟献子说： 郑国恐怕有灾祸吧！
English: Meng Xianzi said: I'm afraid there will be a disaster in Zhengguo!

古文：师竞已甚。
现代文：军队争战太过分了。
English: The military is overstretched.

古文：周犹不堪竞，况郑乎？
现代文：周天子还经不起经常用兵，何况郑国呢？
English: Zhou Tianzi can't afford to constantly use soldiers, and what about Zheng Guo?

古文：有灾，其执政之三士乎！ 
现代文：有灾祸，恐怕会在执政的三位大夫身上吧！ 
English: Woe betide the three doctors in power!

古文：莒人间诸侯之有事也，故伐我东鄙。
现代文：莒国人钻了诸侯有战事的空子，所以进攻我国东部边境。
English: The Chinese drilled a hole in the warring lords, so they attacked the eastern border of our country.

古文：诸侯伐郑。齐崔杼使大子光先至于师，故长于滕。
现代文：诸侯发兵攻打郑国，齐国的崔杼让太子光先到达军队里，所以排在滕国前面。
English: The princes sent troops to attack Zheng, and the prince of Qi, Cui Zhen, was the first to arrive in the army, so he was in front of Teng.

古文：己酉，师于牛首。
现代文：二十五日，军队驻扎在牛首。
English: On the 25th, the army was stationed in Niu Xiu.

古文：初，子驷与尉止有争，将御诸侯之师而黜其车。
现代文：当初，子驷和尉止有争执，在将要抵御诸侯军队的时候减少了尉止的兵车。
English: At first, there was a dispute between Zibo and Fuzhou, and Fuzhou's troop car was reduced when it was about to resist the provincial army.

古文：尉止获，又与之争。
现代文：尉止俘虏了敌人，子驷又和他争夺功劳。
English: The lieutenant captured the enemy, and the son competed with him for the credit.

古文：子驷抑尉止曰： 尔车，非礼也。 
现代文：子驷压抑尉止说： 你的战车太多不合礼制。 
English: "Your chariots are too many and it's not polite," said Lieutenant Zixu.

古文：遂弗使献。
现代文：于是就不让他献俘虏。
English: So he was not allowed to sacrifice captives.

古文：初，子驷为田洫，司氏、堵氏、侯氏、子师氏皆丧田焉。
现代文：当初，子驷疏通田里的水沟，司氏、堵氏、侯氏、子师氏都丧失了土田。
English: In the beginning, the Tsukuda clan, the Tou clan, the Hou clan, and the Shishi clan all lost their land because of the water ditch in the field of Zou Zou.

古文：故五族聚群不逞之人，因公子之徒以作乱。
现代文：所以五个宗族聚集了一伙不得志的人凭借了公子的族党以发动叛乱。
English: Therefore, the five clans gathered a group of people who were not willing to use the clan party of the nobles to launch a rebellion.

古文：于是子驷当国，子国为司马，子耳为司空，子孔为司徒。
现代文：这时候子驷掌握国政，子国做司马，子耳做司空，子孔做司徒。
English: At this time, Zixu was in charge of state affairs, Ziguo was Sima, Zi Er was Sikuo, and Zikong was Sitoru.

古文：冬十月戊辰，尉止、司臣、侯晋、堵女父、子师仆帅贼以入，晨攻执政于西宫之朝，杀子驷、子国、子耳，劫郑伯以如北宫。
现代文：冬季，十月十四日，尉止、司臣、侯晋、堵女父、子师仆率领叛乱分子进入，早晨在西宫的朝廷上攻打执政，杀死了子驷、子国、子耳，劫持郑简公到了北宫。
English: In the winter, on October 14th, the rebels led by Yi Zhi, Si Zhen, Hou Jin, Dou Niang, and Zi Shifu entered and attacked the government in the morning at the court of the West Palace, killed Zi Xuan, Zi Guo, and Zi Er, and kidnapped Zheng Jiang to the North Palace.

古文：子孔知之，故不死。
现代文：子孔事先知道这件事，所以没有死。
English: The hole knew this in advance, so it didn't die.

古文：书曰 盗 ，言无大夫焉。
现代文：《春秋》记载说 盗 ，这是说没有大夫参预这次叛乱。
English: "Spring and Autumn" records that "robbery," which means that no doctor participated in this rebellion.

古文：子西闻盗，不儆而出，尸而追盗，盗入于北宫，乃归授甲。臣妾多逃，器用多丧。
现代文：子西听说有叛乱，不设警戒就出来了，收了他父亲子驷的尸骨就去追赶叛乱分子。叛乱分子进入北宫，子西就回去，召集甲兵，但是家臣和妾婢多数已经逃走，器物也已经大多丢失。
English: When Zixi heard about the rebellion, he went out without warning, collected the bones of his father Zixi and chased the rebels. When the rebels entered the North Palace, Zixi went back and gathered armored soldiers, but most of his vassals and concubines had already fled, and most of his belongings had been lost.

古文：子产闻盗，为门者，庀群司，闭府库，慎闭藏，完守备，成列而后出，兵车十七乘，尸而攻盗于北宫。
现代文：子产听说有叛乱，设置守门的警卫，配齐所有的官员，关闭档案库，慎重收藏，完成防守设备，把士兵排成行列以后才出来，有战车十七辆。子产先收他父亲尸骨然后在北宫攻打叛乱分子，子?
English: Zibo heard that there was a rebellion, set up guards to guard the gate, equipped all the officials, closed the archives, carefully collected, completed the defensive equipment, lined up the soldiers before coming out, and had seventeen chariots. Zibo first collected his father's bones and then attacked the rebels in the North Palace, son?

古文：子帅国人助之，杀尉止、子师仆，盗众尽死。
现代文：率领国内的人们帮助他，杀了尉止、子师仆，这伙叛乱分子全部被杀死。
English: He led the people of the country to help him, killed the lieutenant and the apprentice, and all the rebels were killed.

古文：侯晋奔晋。堵女父、司臣、尉翩、司齐奔宋。
现代文：侯晋逃亡到晋国，堵女父、司臣、尉翩、司齐逃亡到宋国。
English: Hou Jin fled to Jin Province, and his father-in-law, Sichen, Ye Ping, and Si Qi fled to Song Province.

古文：子孔当国，为载书，以位序，听政辟。
现代文：子孔掌握国政，制作盟书，规定官员各守其位、听取执政的法令。
English: Zi Kong took control of state affairs, made alliance documents, and stipulated that officials should keep their positions and listen to the ruling decrees.

古文：大夫、诸司、门子弗顺，将诛之。
现代文：大夫、官员们、卿的嫡子不肯顺从，子孔准备加以诛杀。
English: Doctors, officials and the lord's legitimate son refused to obey, and Zikong prepared to fight and kill them.

古文：子产止之，请为之焚书。
现代文：子产劝阻他，请求烧掉盟书。
English: His son tried to dissuade him and asked him to burn the treaty.

古文：子孔不可，曰： 为书以定国，众怒而焚之，是众为政也，国不亦难乎？ 
现代文：子孔不同意，说： 制作盟书用来安定国家，大伙发怒就烧了它，这是大伙当政，国家不也很为难了吗？ 
English: Zi Kong disagreed, saying, "The alliance document was made to stabilize the country, but everyone got angry and burned it. This is everyone in power, isn't the country in trouble?

古文：子产曰： 众怒难犯，专欲难成，合二难以安国，危之道也。
现代文：子产说： 大伙怒气难于触犯，专权的愿望难于成功，把两件难办的事合在一起来安定国家，这是危险的办法。
English: Zi Yuan said: People's anger is difficult to offend, the desire for autocracy is difficult to succeed, and it is a dangerous way to combine two difficult things to stabilize the country.

古文：不如焚书以安众，子得所欲，众亦得安，不亦可乎？
现代文：不如烧掉盟书来安定大家，您得到了所需要的东西，大伙也能够安定，不也是可以的吗？
English: Wouldn't it be better to burn the alliance agreement to stabilize everyone, you got what you needed, everyone can also be stable, isn't that okay?

古文：专欲无成，犯众兴祸，子必从之。 
现代文：专权的愿望不能成功，触犯大伙会发生祸乱，您一定要听我的话。 
English: The desire for autocracy will not succeed. If you offend everyone, disaster will occur. You must listen to my words.

古文：乃焚书于仓门之外，众而后定。
现代文：于是就在仓门外边烧掉了盟书，大伙这才安定下来。
English: So they burned the treaty right outside the barn door, and that's when everyone settled down.

古文：诸侯之师城虎牢而戍之。晋师城梧及制，士鲂、魏绛戍之。
现代文：诸侯的军队在虎牢筑城并且戍守，晋国军队在梧地和制地筑城，士鲂、魏绛戍守。
English: The armies of the feudal lords built and garrisoned their cities in the Tiger Stronghold, the armies of the Jin Dynasty built their cities in the Wu and Zhe regions, and the Shifu and Wei armies garrisoned their cities.

古文：书曰 戍郑虎牢 ，非郑地也，言将归焉。
现代文：《春秋》记载说 戍郑虎牢 ，不是郑国的领土而这样记载，这是说将要归还给郑国了。
English: "Spring and Autumn" records that 郑虎牢, not the territory of Zheng, is recorded in this way, which means that it will be returned to Zheng.

古文：郑及晋平。
现代文：郑国和楚国讲和。
English: Zheng and Chu made peace.

古文：楚子囊救郑。
现代文：楚国的子囊救援郑国。
English: The son of Chu rescues Zheng.

古文：十一月，诸侯之师还郑而南，至于阳陵，楚师不退。
现代文：十一月，诸侯联军环绕郑国然后往南，到达阳陵，楚军不退。
English: In November, the allied forces of the princes encircled Zheng and then headed south, reaching Yangling. The Chu army did not retreat.

古文：知武子欲退，曰： 今我逃楚，楚必骄，骄则可与战矣。 
现代文：知武子想要退兵，说： 现在我们避开楚军，楚军必然骄傲，骄傲了就可以和他们打仗了。 
English: Chimuko wanted to leave the army and said: Now we are avoiding the Chu army. The Chu army is bound to be proud, and when they are proud, we can fight them.

古文：栾黡曰： 逃楚，晋之耻也。
现代文：栾黡说： 避开楚军，这是晋国的耻辱。
English: Zou said, "Avoiding the Chu army is a disgrace to Jin."

古文：合诸侯以益耻，不如死！
现代文：会和诸侯来增加耻辱，不如一死。
English: It would be better to die than to join the lords and increase the disgrace.

古文：我将独进。 
现代文：我打算单独进军。 
English: I intend to march alone.

古文：师遂进。
现代文：军队就往前推进。
English: So the army pushed forward.

古文：己亥，与楚师夹颍而军。
现代文：十六日，和楚军隔着颍水相对而驻扎下来。
English: On the 16th, they stationed themselves across Surabaya from the Chu army.

古文：子曰： 诸侯既有成行，必不战矣。
现代文：郑将子?说： 诸侯已经完成了退兵准备，一定不会作战了。
English: Zheng Shouzi said, "The princes have completed their preparations for withdrawing, and they will definitely not fight.

古文：从之将退，不从亦退。
现代文：顺从他们要退兵，不顺从他们也要退兵。
English: If you obey them, you will be discharged, and if you disobey them, you will be discharged.

古文：退，楚必围我。
现代文：他们退兵，楚国必然包围我们。
English: If they retreat, we will be surrounded by Chu.

古文：犹将退也。不如从楚，亦以退之。 
现代文：同样是要退兵，不如顺从楚国，用这样的办法让他们退兵。 
English: They also want to withdraw their troops, so it is better to obey the State of Chu and let them withdraw their troops in this way.

古文：宵涉颍，与楚人盟。
现代文：郑军夜里渡过颍水，和楚国人结盟。
English: Zheng's army crossed the Surabaya River at night and allied with the people of Chu.

古文：栾黡欲伐郑师，荀不可，曰： 我实不能御楚，又不能庇郑，郑何罪？
现代文：栾黡想要攻打郑国军队，荀罃不同意，说： 我们实在不能抵抗楚军，又不能保护郑国，郑国有什么罪？
English: He wanted to attack the Zheng army, but he disagreed, saying, "We really can't resist the Chu army, and we can't protect Zheng. What is Zheng guilty of?"

古文：不如致怨焉而还。
现代文：不如把怨恨奉送给楚国然后回去。
English: It would be better to give the grudge to Chu and then go back.

古文：今伐其师，楚必救之，战而不克，为诸侯笑。克不可命，不如还也！ 
现代文：现在攻打他们的军队，楚国必然救援他们。作战不能胜利，就被诸侯笑话，胜利不能肯定，不如回去吧。 
English: If we attack their army now, the State of Chu will inevitably come to their rescue. If we cannot win the battle, we will be ridiculed by the lords. If we cannot be sure of victory, we might as well go back.

古文：丁未，诸侯之师还，侵郑北鄙而归。
现代文：二十四日，诸侯的军队撤退，攻打了郑国的北部边境然后回国。
English: On the 24th, the troops of the princes retreated, attacked the northern border of Zheng and then returned home.

古文：楚人亦还。
现代文：楚国人也退兵回国。
English: The Chu people also withdrew and returned to the country.

古文：王叔陈生与伯舆争政。
现代文：王叔陈生和伯舆争夺政权，周灵王赞助伯舆。
English: Uncle Wang Chen Sheng and Bo Myou vied for power, while King Zhou Ling supported Bo Myou.

古文：王右伯舆，王叔陈生怒而出奔。
现代文：王叔陈生发怒而逃亡。
English: Wang Uncle Chen Sheng flew into a rage and fled.

古文：及河，王复之，杀史狡以说焉。
现代文：到达黄河，周灵王让他官复原位，杀了史狡以让他高兴。
English: Arriving at the Yellow River, King Zhou Ling restored him to his original position and killed Shi Qiu to make him happy.

古文：不入，遂处之。
现代文：王叔陈生不回成周，就住在黄河边上。
English: If Uncle Wang Chen Sheng does not return to Chengdu, he will live on the edge of the Yellow River.

古文：晋侯使士匄平王室，王叔与伯舆讼焉。
现代文：晋悼公派士匄调和王室的争端，王叔陈生和伯舆提出争讼。
English: The Jin and Qing emperors sent officials to mediate the dispute between the royal family, and Uncle Wang, Chen Sheng, and Baoyu filed a lawsuit.

古文：王叔之宰与伯舆之大夫瑕禽，坐狱于王庭，士匄听之。
现代文：王叔的家臣头子和伯舆的大夫瑕禽在周天子的朝廷上争论是非，士匄听取他们的诉讼。
English: The head vassal of Uncle Wang and the doctor of Baiwu, Guan Yu, argued the rights and wrongs in the court of Zhou Tianzi, and the judges listened to their lawsuit.

古文：王叔之宰曰： 筚门闺窦之人而皆陵其上，其难为上矣！ 
现代文：王叔的家臣头子说： 柴门小户的人都要陵驾于他上面的人，上面的人就很难处了。 
English: Uncle Wang's chief retainer said, "People in small households in Zhaimen all have a grudge against those above them, and those above them are difficult to deal with.

古文：瑕禽曰： 昔平王东迁，吾七姓从王，牲用备具。王赖之，而赐之骍旄之盟，曰： 世世无失职。 若筚门闺窦，其能来东底乎？
现代文：瑕禽说： 从前平王东迁，我们七姓人家跟随周天子，牺牲全都具备，天子信赖他们，而赐给他们用赤牛祭神的盟约，说： 世世代代不要失职 如果是柴门小户，他们能够来到东方而住下来吗？
English: Guilty birds said: Once upon a time, King Ping moved to the East, and our seven families followed Zhou Tianzi. They all had sacrifices to make. Tianzi trusted them and gave them a covenant to worship God with red oxen. He said: Don't fail to do your duty for generations to come. If they are small households in Zhaimen, can they come to the East and live there?

古文：且王何赖焉？
现代文：而且天子又怎么信赖他们呢？
English: And how can the Son of God trust them?

古文：今自王叔之相也，政以贿成，而刑放于宠，官之师旅，不胜其富。吾能无筚门闺窦乎？
现代文：现在自从王叔把持周政权，政事用贿赂来完成，而把执行法律的责任放在宠臣身上。官员中的师和旅，阔气得没有办法，这样，我们能够不是柴门小户吗？
English: Now, since Uncle Wang has taken over the Zhou regime, using bribery to accomplish political affairs, and placing the responsibility of enforcing the law on his favorite vassals, the officers and officials among the officials have no way to be generous. In this way, can we not be a small household in Zhaimen?

古文：唯大国图之！
现代文：请大国考虑一下！
English: Please, big countries, think about it!

古文：所左，亦左之。 
现代文：下面的人就不能有理，那么什么叫做公正呢？ 
English: People below cannot be justified, so what is justice?

古文：使王叔氏与伯舆合要，王叔氏不能举其契。
现代文：士匄说： 天子所赞助的，寡君也赞助他；天子所不赞助的，寡君也不赞助他。 就让王叔和伯舆对证讼辞，王叔拿不出他的文件来。
English: The magistrate said, "He who is sponsored by the Son of Heaven is sponsored by no prince; he who is not sponsored by the Son of Heaven is not sponsored by no prince." So he asked Uncle Wang and Uncle Bo to argue the case, but Uncle Wang could not produce his documents.

古文：王叔奔晋。不书，不告也。
现代文：王叔逃亡到晋国，《春秋》所以没有记载，这是由于没有通告鲁国的缘故。
English: Uncle Wang fled to Jin Province, which is why there is no record in "Spring and Autumn." This is due to the fact that Lu Province was not notified.

古文：单靖公为卿士，以相王室。
现代文：单靖公做了卿士以辅助王室。
English: Shan Jing Gong was made a noble to assist the royal family.

