古文：初十日未明发舟，晓霞映江，从篷底窥之，如行紫丝步帐中，彩色缤纷，又是江行一异景也。
现代文：初十日天未明开船，朝霞映在江中，从船篷底下窥视江水，如同行走在紫色的丝织筛帐中，彩色缤纷，又是江中行船的一种奇异景色了。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, we set sail before dawn. The morning sky was reflected in the middle of the river. We peered at the river water from under the boat's canopy. It was as if we were walking in a purple silk screen. The colors were colorful. It was a strange view of sailing in the river.

古文：随西山南向溯流十里，外转而东北行，迂曲者又十里，始转而南又十里，望白石山亭峙东南，甚近。
现代文：顺着西山向南溯流行十里，向外转向东北行，迂回曲折地又行了十里，这才转向南又行十里，望见白石山亭亭玉立在东南方，很近。
English: I followed the West Mountain to the south for ten miles, turned outward to the northeast, took another ten miles in a roundabout way, and then turned south for another ten miles. I could see the Shiroishi Mountain Pavilion standing in the southeast, very close.

古文：于是转而西北，是为大湾。
现代文：于是转向西北，这是大湾。
English: So we turned northwest, and this is the Great Bay.

古文：又西十里过牛栏村。
现代文：又往西十里经过牛栏村。
English: Another ten miles to the west passed through the village of Niuhuan.

古文：转而南，复转而西，又十五里而暮。
现代文：转向南，再转向西，又行十五里天黑下来。
English: Turn to the south, then turn to the west, and go another fifteen miles until it gets dark.

古文：又乘月行五里，宿于镇门。
现代文：又乘月色行船五里，住宿在镇门。
English: They also took a five-mile boat ride in the moonlight and stayed at the town gate.

古文：是夕月明如昼，共行六十里。
现代文：这天夜晚月色如同白昼，共行船六十里。
English: That night, the moon was as bright as day, and the boat traveled sixty miles.

古文：十一日，未曙而行。
现代文：十一日天未露曙光便行船。
English: On the eleventh day, they set sail before dawn.

古文：二十里，白沙，又五里登涯。
现代文：二十里，到白沙，又行五里登上岸。
English: Twenty miles to Baisha, and another five miles to the shore.

古文：由小路北行，一里得大路，稍折而东，渡雷冲桥。
现代文：由小路往北行，一里遇上大路，稍折向东，越过雷冲桥。
English: From the small road to the north, one mile to the main road, a slight turn to the east, over the Lei Chong Bridge.

古文：从桥东小岐北望石峰而行，涉一溪，行苍莽中。
现代文：从桥东岔出的小路向北面的石峰而行，涉过一溪，行走在苍茫的原野中。
English: The path leading from the east of the bridge heads towards the stone peak to the north, wading through a stream and walking in the middle of a vast field.

古文：四里抵小石峰下，复透一峰峡，又三里抵罗丛岩，岩门南向。
现代文：四里后抵达小石峰下，再穿越过山峰下的峡谷，又走三里到达罗丛岩，洞口向南。
English: After four miles, we arrived at the foot of the small stone peak, then we crossed the canyon under the peak, and walked another three miles to the Luo Conglomerate, the cave mouth to the south.

古文：邦人黎霄鸾，乡贡进士，有记曰： 东南望白石洞天，西北接狮子、凤巢之秀，艮案峙其前，太平拥其后。 既至，日犹未午，一面索炬同道者游，一面令具餐焉。
现代文：本朝人黎霄莺，是乡贡进士，有碑记说： 东南与白石山的洞天相望，西北连接着狮子山、凤巢山的秀色，良案山耸峙在它的前方，太平山拥立在它后面， 来到之后，日色还未到中午，一面找火把同道士游洞，一面命令备餐。
English: This dynasty's Li Xiaojun was a member of the township of Gongjin. There is a monument that says: The southeast faces the cave sky of Baishi Mountain, and the northwest connects the beauty of Lion Mountain and Fengchaoshan. Liangke Mountain stands in front of it, and Taiping Mountain stands behind it. After arriving, the sun was not yet noon, and while searching for torches with Taoist monks, he ordered the preparation of meals.

古文：盖兹岩前有东西两门，内有东西两洞。
现代文：此洞前边有东西两个洞口，洞内有东西两个洞。
English: There are two openings in front of the hole and two holes inside the hole.

古文：西洞之内，倏夹倏开，倏穹而高盘，倏垂而下覆，顶平若幕，裂隙成纹；至石形之异，有叠莲盘空，挺笋森立者，亦随处点缀，不颛以乳柱见奇也。
现代文：西洞之内，忽而狭窄忽而开阔，忽而高高弯曲着弯隆而起，忽而低低下垂履盖，洞顶平得如筛幕，裂缝形成花纹；至于岩石形态的异状，有如重叠的莲花盘结在空中，挺拔的石笋森然竖立的，也是随处点缀着，不专门是以钟乳石柱见奇。
English: Inside the West Cave, the cave is at times narrow, at times wide, at times high and curved, at times sloping, at times low and hanging. The top of the cave is as flat as a screen, and the cracks form patterns. As for the unusual shape of the rock, it is like overlapping lotus flowers in the air, and upright stalagmites stand upright, and are also dotted everywhere. It is not peculiar to see stalactite columns.

古文：西洞既穷，道者复携炬游东洞。
现代文：东面石崖上有洞穴并排迸裂开，急忙登上去，就见有三个洞口，连在一起朝向北方，可下方没有台阶。
English: On the eastern cliff, there are caves side by side, and if you hurry to climb up, you will see three openings, connected to the north, but there are no steps below.

古文：其内夹而不宽，高而无岐，石纹水涌，流石形如劈翅，而莲柱乳笋，亦复不汎一般。游毕，下洞底，循故道出。
现代文：道士说： 从那里边向西上登到黑暗的夹道中，有路可以出去，但是越上去越窄，不如仍从前洞出去。 游完，下到洞底，顺原路出来。
English: The Taoist said: From there, climb westward to the dark passage, there is a way to go out, but the more you go up, the narrower it is, it is better to go out from the front hole. After swimming, go down to the bottom of the cave and follow the original path out.

古文：饭于道者，复束炬为水洞、龙洞游。
现代文：在道士那里吃了饭，重又捆了火把去游水洞、龙洞。
English: They ate meals with Taoist monks, and then bundled up their torches to go swimming in water caves and dragon caves.

古文：水洞在山西南隅，其门南向，中宽数亩，潭水四际，潴而不流，其深不测，而渊碧如黛；其外浅处，紫碧浮映，想为日光所烁也。
现代文：水洞在山的西南隅，洞口向南，洞中有几亩宽，潭水漫到四周，积而不流，水深不可测，深碧如青黑色的颜料；那外边浅的地方，紫绿色浮动映照，想来是被日光照射所致。
English: The water cave is in the southwest corner of the mountain, the mouth of the cave is to the south, the width of the cave is a few mu, the pool water is all around, the accumulation does not flow, the water depth is immeasurable, the deep blue is like a blue-black pigment; the shallow place outside, the purple-green floating reflection, is thought to be caused by sunlight.

古文：洞左右俱有重崖回环潭上，可循行以入。
现代文：洞左右都有重重山崖回绕在深潭上，可以顺着走进去。
English: Mountains and cliffs surround the lake on both sides of the cave, so you can walk into it.

古文：及抵潭际，则崖插底而路旁绝，出洞，循西麓北转而东，又得龙洞。
现代文：及来到水潭边时，有石崖插到潭底而旁边的路断了，上方没有岔洞，不知水洞在什么地方到头。出洞后，沿西麓往北转向东，又找到龙洞。
English: When I came to the edge of the pool, there was a rock cliff at the bottom of the pool and the road next to it was broken. There was no cave above, and I did not know where the water cave ended. After leaving the cave, I turned north along the west foot to the east, and found the dragon cave again.

古文：洞在山西北隅，其门北向，中有水夹，其上片石东西交叠，成天生桥焉。
现代文：我说： 此地深深地低伏着，虽然距洞顶十分遥远，不过由洞口往南出去，估计离水洞不远，或许是水洞中的光，由水中深处映照过来，浮在木筏上的人只往上面看，没有领悟到光线是从水中反射出来的罢了。
English: I said: This place is deep and low, although it is very far from the top of the cave, but it goes south from the mouth of the cave. It is estimated that it is not far from the water cave. Perhaps it is the light in the water cave, reflected from the depths of the water. People floating on the raft only look up, not realizing that the light is reflected from the water.

古文：南入约半里，亦有深潭一泓，潴水莫测，大更逾于水洞，洵神龙之渊宅也。出龙洞。
现代文：如果是山灵水怪，哪有自古以来不休息一下的呢？ 于是重新点亮火把出了龙洞。
English: If it's a mountain spirit water monster, which one hasn't taken a break since ancient times? So they re-lit the fire and went out of the dragon cave.

古文：即西逾石梁，西南望山坳行。
现代文：辞别道士，立即往西越过石桥，向西南望着山坳行。
English: After bidding farewell to the priest, he immediately crossed the stone bridge to the west and walked along the ridge looking southwest.

古文：皆土山漫衍，三里，辄不得路。
现代文：都是土山绵延，行三里，就找不到路了。
English: It's all dirt and mountains stretching for three miles, and you can't find your way.

古文：乃漫向西南升陟垄坂，五里始得路。
现代文：于是漫无目的地向西南爬升在土陇山坡间，五里后才找到路。
English: As a result, he climbed aimlessly to the southwest between the slopes of the mound, and only found his way after five miles.

古文：乃随向西南一里，度一石梁，又一里得村聚，是为厚禄，有公馆焉。
现代文：于是顺着路向西南行一里，越过一座石桥，又走一里到了村落，这是厚禄，有客馆在这里。
English: So I followed the road one mile to the southwest, crossed a stone bridge, and walked another mile to the village. This is Houluo, there is a guest house here.

古文：厚禄西南，乃往贵县大道；厚禄之北为安禄营，乃浔州所从来者，余从间道出厚禄后山，已过安禄，而南欲趋平碣，尚三十里，中无人烟可以托宿。
现代文：由厚禄向西南行，是通往贵县的大道；厚禄的北面是安禄营，是从得州来的路。我从近道走到厚禄的后山，已过了安禄营，可想向南赶去平褐，还有三十里，中途没有人烟可以投宿。
English: From Hulun to the southwest, it is a highway to Guixian; to the north of Hulun is Anlu Camp, which is the road from Dezhou. I walked from the shortcut to the back mountain of Hulun. I have passed Anlu Camp, but I want to go south to Pinghuang. There are still thirty miles to go, and there is no one to stay with.

古文：土人劝余返安禄宿铺中，时日才下舂，余不能违也。
现代文：当地人劝我返回安禄营住宿在店铺中，此时太阳才西斜，我不能违拗了。
English: The locals advised me to go back to Anlu Camp and stay in a shop. The sun had just set, so I couldn't resist.

古文：安碌营有营兵数十家，以宿客为业。罗丛岩西北有崇山横亘，东北自浔之西山，西南自贵之北山，二山两角高张，东西相距百四十里，中间峰峦横亘，翠环云绕，颇似大容。
现代文：罗丛岩西北有崇山峻岭横亘着，东北自得州的西山，西南自贵县的北山，两座山如两只角高高张着，东西相距一百四十里，中间峰峦横亘，翠色环绕，云雾缭绕，很像大容山。
English: In the northwest of Luo Congyan, there are high mountains and steep ridges. In the northeast, there is the West Mountain of Zizhou, and in the southwest, there is the North Mountain of Zigu County. The two mountains are like two high horns. The east and west are one hundred and forty miles apart. In the middle, there are peaks and ridges. They are green and surrounded by clouds. They are very similar to Mount Dayong.

古文：贵县之倚北山，犹郁林之于大容西岭；浔州之倚西山，犹容县之于大容东峰：皆东西突耸两角，而中则横亘焉。
现代文：大概大容山是郁江南面条形的山脉，隔在绣江、郁江两江之间；而此山是郁江北面条形的山脉，隔在黔江、郁江两江之间。贵县背靠北山，就像郁林州背靠大容山西岭一样；得州背靠西山，就如容县背靠大容山东峰一样：都是在东西两头突起耸出的两只角，而中间却横亘着山脉。
English: Dairong Mountain is probably a noodle-shaped mountain range in the south of the Yujiang River, separated between the Xujiang River and the Yujiang River; and this mountain is a noodle-shaped mountain range in the north of the Yujiang River, separated between the Minjiang River and the Yujiang River. Guizhou is backed by the North Mountain, just as Yulin State is backed by the West Ridge of the Dairong Mountain; Dezhou is backed by the West Mountain, just as Rong County is backed by the East Peak of the Dairong Mountain: both are two horns protruding from the east and west, while mountains stretch across the middle.

古文：第大容较近，而中有北流县界其间；兹山较远，而别无县治，惟安禄营为中界。
现代文：只是大容山东西有八十里，较近些，而中间有北流县隔在其中；此山较远，而且没有别的县城，仅有安禄营作为中界。
English: However, the east and west sides of Dalong Mountain are eighty miles, which is relatively close, and there is Beilu County in the middle; this mountain is far away, and there is no other county seat, only Anlu Camp as the middle boundary.

古文：安禄东有土山，脉由大山东北分支南下。
现代文：安禄营东面有土山，山脉由大山在东北分出支脉向南下延。
English: To the east of Anlu Camp, there are hills, and the mountains branch off from the mountains in the northeast and extend southward.

古文：第大山自西南趋东北，土山自东北转西南，南抵浔、贵滨江诸山而止。其中夹成大坞，映带甚遥，平畴广溪，迤逦西南矣。
现代文：只是大山自西南趋向东北，土山自东北转向西南，两列山之间夹成大山坞，互相衬托十分遥远，平旷的田野，宽广的溪流，道巡流向西南。
English: Just mountains from the southwest to the northeast, hills from the northeast to the southwest, sandwiched between two rows of mountains into a large dock, set against each other very far away, flat fields, wide streams, road traffic flow to the southwest.

古文：十二日平明，自安禄西南行田塍间。
现代文：十二日拂晓，自安禄营向西南行走在田野间。
English: At dawn on the 12th, I walked from Anlu Camp to the south-west through the fields.

古文：四里，南越山冈，西下二里为飘村，聚落不及厚禄三之一，而西望大山之下，则村落累累焉。
现代文：四里，向南越过山冈，往西下走二里是飘村，村落大小不及厚禄的三分之一，可向西望去的大山下，却有村落层层叠叠的。
English: Four miles to the south, over the mountain, and two miles to the west, is the village of Floating Village. The village is less than a third of the size of Hulun, but under the large mountain that can be seen to the west, there are villages stacked on top of each other.

古文：又西南四里，过一小桥，于是皆沮洳之境，两旁茅草弥望，不复黍苗芃芃矣。
现代文：又向西南行四里、走过一座小桥，从这里起都是泥沼之地，两旁茅草弥漫无际，不再有茂盛的禾苗了。
English: Another four miles to the south-west, over a small bridge, and from here it's all boggy ground, with endless thatch on both sides, and no more lush grass seedlings.

古文：又一里，过临征桥，乃南逾冈陇。
现代文：又走一里，过了临征桥，于是向南越过土冈。
English: I walked another mile, passed the Linsen Bridge, and then went south over the hill.

古文：又西南三里，有碑大书为 贵县东界 。
现代文：又往西南行三里，有块碑大写着 贵县东界 。
English: Another three miles to the southwest, there is a monument with the words "the eastern boundary of Guizhou County" written in capital letters.

古文：又西南渐向冈陇，而草蔂一望如故。
现代文：又往西南渐渐走向山冈土陇之间，而荒草藤葛一眼望去依然如故。
English: It gradually moved to the southwest between the mountains and hills, while the wild grass and rhododendrons remained the same.

古文：又八里，直抵石山下，是为平碣营。先是，由飘村南望，右大山，左土岭，两界夹持，遥遥西南去，大山长后西突而起，土山短渐南杀焉。
现代文：又行八里，径直抵达石山下，这是平褐营、这之前，由飘村往南望去，右边是大山，左边为土岭，两列山相夹对峙，远远向西南延伸而去，大山绵长后面向西突起，土山短些渐渐往南降低。
English: After another eight miles, I arrived directly at the foot of the stone mountain, which was Pinghuoying. Before that, I looked south from the village of Wafting. On the right was a large mountain, and on the left was a mound. Two rows of mountains were facing each other, extending far to the southwest. The large mountain was long and protruded to the west, and the short earthen hill was gradually descending to the south.

古文：而两界之中，有石山点点，青若缀螺，至是而道出其间。
现代文：而两列山之电，有石山点点，山色青青，好像螺蛔壳点缀着，走到这里，道路经过这些石山之间。
English: And the two lines of mountains, there are stone mountains dotted, mountain blue, as if dotted with snail shells, go here, the road passes between these stone mountains.

古文：平碣亦在冈阜上，有营兵数家，墟舍一环。
现代文：平竭营也是在土冈之上，有几家营兵，一圈赶集用的房屋。
English: Hiraku camp is also on the hill, there are several battalions, a circle of houses used for gathering.

古文：就饭于卖浆者，恐前路无人烟也。
现代文：到卖酒的人家吃了饭，是担心前边路上没有人烟。
English: I went to eat at the house of the person who was selling alcohol, because I was worried that there would be no one on the road ahead.

古文：平碣之东，石峰峭方，曰大岩山，有岩甚巨，中容数千人。
现代文：平褐营的东面，石峰峭立，叫做大岩山，有个岩洞十分巨大，洞中可容纳数千人。
English: On the east side of Pinghuangying, there is a rocky peak called the Great Rock Mountain. There is a huge cave that can accommodate thousands of people.

古文：其南又突小山，低而长，上有横架之石，若平桥高悬，其下透明。
现代文：它南边又突起一座小山，山势又低又长，山上有块横架的岩石，如平坦的桥面高悬着，它下边透出亮光。
English: To the south of it rises another hill, low and long, on which there is a cross-beam of rock, suspended like a flat bridge, which lets in light from below.

古文：小山之西，平碣之南，为马鞍山，亦峭耸而起，此皆平碣之近山也。
现代文：小山的西面，平褐营的南边，是马鞍山，也是陡峭地耸起，这些都是平褐营近处的山。
English: To the west of the hill, to the south of Pinghuoying, is Ma'anshan, also steeply rising, these are the mountains near Pinghuoying.

古文：南望有骈若笔架、锐若卓锥者，在数里之外。
现代文：向南望去，有座并立如笔架、尖得好像高高直立的锥子样的山，在儿里之外。
English: Looking to the south, there is a mountain standing side by side like a pen holder, pointed like a tall upright cone, outside the village.

古文：望之而趋，三里，度石梁，为石弄桥。
现代文：望着此山赶去，三里，越过石桥，是石弄桥。
English: Looking at this mountain, three miles, over a stone bridge, is a stone bridge.

古文：又南十余里，直抵南望诸峰之麓，有一第舍在路右突阜上，曰劈竹铺。
现代文：又向南走十多里，直达在南面相望群峰的山麓，有一座府第在路右突出的土山上，叫做劈竹铺。
English: I walked more than ten miles to the south, straight to the foot of the mountains that overlook each other in the south. There is a prefecture on the dirt hill protruding on the right side of the road, called Tepchiku-Pu.

古文：眺路左诸峰，分岐竞异，执途人而问之，始知即贵县之东山也。
现代文：眺望路左的群峰，分出支峰争奇斗异，拉住路上的人打听，才知就是贵县的东山了。
English: Looking at the group of peaks to the left of the road, branching off the peaks to fight over the strange, pulling people on the road to inquire, only to know that it is the East Mountain of Guizhou County.

古文：按此，则履光乃一人，其一名特进，非衔也。
现代文：它西北面大山到头之处高耸而起的山，就是贵县的北山了。
English: The towering mountain to the northwest of it is the North Mountain of Guizhou.

古文：明秀挺拔。盖四山惟北为崇峦峻脊，而东、西、南三山俱石峰森立。
现代文：据志书，贵县有东、西、南、北四座山，而东山在县城以东二十里，是两个姓何的人隐居之处，明秀挺拔。大体上四座山唯有北山是高峻的冈峦和山脊，而东、西、南三座山全是森然耸立的石峰。
English: According to the history book, Guixian has four mountains in the east, west, south and north, and Dongshan, which is 20 miles east of the county seat, is a place where two people surnamed He live in seclusion, and they are outstanding. In general, the four mountains, except the North Mountain, are high ridges and ridges, while the three mountains in the east, west and south are all towering stone peaks.

古文：东山亚于南而轶超过于西。
现代文：东山低于南山却超过西山。
English: Dongshan is lower than Nanshan but higher than Xishan.

古文：西北一峰如妇人搭帔披肩簪花，俗呼为新妇岩。
现代文：西北面一座山峰如女人搭着披肩头插鲜花，一般人称为新妇岩。
English: A mountain peak in the northwest looks like a woman wearing a shawl with fresh flowers, commonly known as the New Woman's Rock.

古文：中峰石顶分裂，如仙掌舒空，又如二人并立，今人即指为二何化名。
现代文：中峰的石顶分裂开来，如仙人的手掌伸展在空中，又像两个人并肩而立，今天的人们就指认为是两个姓何的变化成的，并用二何来起名。
English: The stone top of the middle peak splits apart, like the palm of a cactus stretching in the air, and like two people standing side by side. People today refer to it as the result of the change of two surnames, and use two names to name it.

古文：然兹山耸拨自奇，何必摹形新妇，托迹化人也！
现代文：然而此山高耸挺拔自成奇景，何必比拟成新媳妇的形状，假托是人变成的呢！
English: However, this towering mountain is a marvel in itself, so why compare it to the shape of a new daughter-in-law, assuming that it is a person!

古文：其南支渐石化为土，峰化为冈，逶迤西南。
现代文：它南面的支脉岩石逐渐变为泥土，山峰变为冈峦，透巡延向西南。
English: The rock of its southern branch gradually turns into mud, the mountain peaks turn into ridges, and it curves to the southwest.

古文：循其右行，共九里，为黄岭。
现代文：沿峰右行，共走九里，是黄岭。
English: Go right along the peak, walk a total of nine miles, it is Huangling.

古文：其南面土冈尽处，始见村聚倚冈，室庐高列。
现代文：它南面土冈到头之处，这才见到村落靠着山冈，房屋高高地排列着。
English: To the south of it, where the earth mound ends, you can see the village leaning against the hill, with houses lined up high.

古文：其北隅平洼中，复立一小石峰，东望如屋脊横列，两端独耸；西眺则擎芝偃盖，怪状纷错。
现代文：它北隅平坦的洼地中，又立着一座小石峰，往东望去如屋脊一样横列着，两头独自耸起；向西眺望则如高举的灵芝倒卧的伞盖，怪模怪样纷纷交错。
English: In the flat depression at its northern corner, there is also a small stone peak. Looking to the east, it is lined up like a roof, with the two ends rising independently; looking to the west, it is like a reclining umbrella cover held aloft by a reishi, with strange patterns interlaced.

古文：又西南一里。路右复突一石峰，高耸当关，如欲俯瞰行人者。
现代文：又向西南走一里，路右又突起一座石峰，高高耸立挡住关口，好似俯瞰行人的样子。
English: Another mile to the south-west, another stone peak rises on the right of the road, towering over the pass, as if overlooking the pedestrians.

古文：从此东北，石峰遂尽，遥望南山数点，又青青前列矣。
现代文：从此往东北去，石峰终于到了尽头，遥望南山有几点影子，又青青地排列在前方了。
English: From here, we went to the northeast, and the stone peak finally came to an end. Looking at Nanshan in the distance, there were a few shadows, and they lined up in front of us.

古文：又二里，度一石梁，其水势石状与劈竹同。
现代文：又行二里，走过一座石桥，这里的水势和岩石的形状与劈竹铺的相同。
English: After another two miles, I walked across a stone bridge, where the water level and the shape of the rocks were the same as those in the bamboo grove.

古文：又五里，则路两旁皆巨塘潴水，漾山潆郭。
现代文：又走五里，就见路两旁都是巨大的水塘蓄着水，荡漾着山影潇绕着城郭。
English: After walking another five miles, I saw huge reservoirs of water on both sides of the road, rippling around the castle in the shadow of the mountains.

古文：又一里，过接龙桥。
现代文：又是一里，过了接龙桥。
English: It's another mile past the Dragon Bridge.

古文：叠石塘中，以通南北，乃堤而非桥也。
现代文：这是在水塘中堆砌的石块，以便南北通行，是堤而不是桥。
English: It is a pile of stones in a pond, built to allow passage from north to south. It is a dike, not a bridge.

古文：于是居聚连络。
现代文：从这里起居民聚居连接不断。
English: From here on, residents live together and are constantly connected.

古文：又西一里，由贵县东门抵南门，则大江在其下矣。
现代文：又向西一里，由贵县东门走到南门，就见大江在城下了。
English: Another mile to the west, from the East Gate of Guizhou County to the South Gate, you will see the big river flowing under the city.

古文：下午下舡，蒲暮放舟，乘月西行，十五里而泊。
现代文：静闻与顾仆搭乘的船，已先一步停泊在南门很久了。下午下到船中，傍晚开船，乘着月光往西行，行船十五里便停泊下来。
English: The boat that Jing Huan and his servant were on had been anchored at Nanmen for a long time. In the afternoon, they went down to the boat, and in the evening, they sailed west by moonlight, and anchored after a journey of fifteen miles.

古文：十三日未明而发。
现代文：十三日天未明便开船。
English: On the thirteenth day, they set sail before dawn.

古文：十里，西抵西山之南，转向南行。
现代文：十里，往西抵达西山的南面，转向南行。
English: Ten miles west to the south of Xishan, turn south.

古文：五里，转向东行，十里，是为宋村。
现代文：五里后，转向东行，十里，这是宋村。
English: After five miles, turn eastbound, ten miles, this is Songcun.

古文：由贵县南至南山十里，由南山至宋村十里，而舟行屈曲，水路倍之。
现代文：由贵县向南到南山有十里，由南山到宋村有十里，但乘船行走弯弯曲曲，水路多走一倍。
English: It is ten miles southward from Guixian to Nanshan, and ten miles from Nanshan to Songcun, but the boat trip is tortuous, and the water route takes twice as long.

古文：先，余拟一至贵县，即往宿南山，留顾仆待舟，令其俟明晨发。
现代文：先前，我打算一到贵县，立刻前往南山住宿，留顾仆等在船上，令他等到明早开船。
English: Previously, I planned to go to Nanshan for accommodation as soon as I arrived in Guixian. I would keep my servant waiting on the boat and make him wait for the boat to leave in the morning.

古文：及余至；而舟且泊南门久矣。
现代文：等我到贵县时，船已停泊在南门很久了。
English: By the time I arrived in Guizhou, the ship had been anchored at Nanmen for a long time.

古文：余别欲觅舟南渡。舟人云： 舟且连夜发。 
现代文：我打算另外找船往南渡，船夫说： 船将连夜行。 
English: I was going to look for another boat to cross to the south, but the boatman said: The boat will sail all night.

古文：阻余毋往。
现代文：阻拦我不要去。
English: Don't stop me from going.

古文：余谓： 舟行屈曲，当由南山间道相待于前，不知何地为便？ 舟人复辞不知，盖恐迟速难期，先后有误耳。
现代文：我说： 乘船走曲曲弯弯，我将由南山的近路走在前边相等，不知什么地方方便？  船夫又推辞不知道，大概是担心快慢难以约定，先后到达相错罢了。
English: I said: If I take the boat, I will take the shortcut from Nanshan and walk in front of it. I don't know where it is convenient? The boatman also said that he didn't know, probably because he was worried that it was difficult to agree on the speed, and it was just a mistake to arrive successively.

古文：及发舟，不过十余里而泊。
现代文：到开船时，不过走了十多里便停泊下来。
English: When it was time to set sail, however, it traveled more than ten miles and then anchored.

古文：今过宋村，时犹上午，何不往宿南山，至此登舟也？
现代文：今天路过宋村，时间还是上午，为何不去南山住宿，到此地再登船呢？
English: Today, passing Songcun, the time is still in the morning, why not go to Nanshan for accommodation, and then board the ship here?

古文：至是，舟转西南，挂帆十里，转东南，仍纤十五里，复南挂帆行，五里，西转，是为瓦亭堡。
现代文：到了这里，船转向西南，挂上帆行了十里，转向东南，仍用纤绳拉着行了十五里，再挂上帆向南行，五里，向西转，这是瓦亭堡。
English: At this point, the ship turned to the south-west, set sail for ten miles, turned to the south-east, still pulled by a rope for fifteen miles, then set sail to the south, five miles, turned west, this is Wattensburg.

古文：其北涯有石突江若蹲虎，其南涯之内，有山横列焉。
现代文：江北岸有块岩石突向江中好像蹲着的猛虎，江南岸以内，有山横向排列。
English: On the north bank of the river, there is a rock protruding into the middle of the river like a crouching tiger. On the south bank of the river, there are mountains lined up horizontally.

古文：又十五里，则夹江两山并起，舟溯之人。
现代文：又行十五里，就有两座山夹住江流并排耸起，船溯流入山。
English: After another fifteen miles, there are two mountains sandwiching the river, rising side by side, and the boat flows into the mountains.

古文：又五里而暮，乘月行十里，泊于香江驿。
现代文：又行五里天黑下来，乘着月色行船十里，停泊在香江绎。
English: Another five-mile trip in the dark, riding a moon-colored boat for ten miles, anchored in the Xiangjiang River.

古文：十四日五鼓挂帆行，晨过乌司堡，已一十里矣，是为横州界。
现代文：十四日五更时挂上帆开船，清晨经过乌司堡，已走过十里路了，这里是横州境内。
English: At five o'clock on the 14th, we set sail and sailed. In the early morning, we passed Ussburg and had already traveled ten miles. This was in the territory of Yokosuka.

古文：东风甚利，午过龙山滩，又四十里矣。
现代文：刮东风船十分顺风，中午经过龙山滩，又是四十里了。
English: The ship had a very favorable wind blowing from the east. At noon, it passed the Longshan Beach, another forty miles away.

古文：滩上即乌蛮滩，有马伏波庙。
现代文：河滩上就是乌蛮滩，有座马伏波庙。
English: On the beach is the Uban Beach, and there is a horse-drawn carriage temple.

古文：滩高溜急，石坝横截，其上甚艰。
现代文：滩高流急，有石坝横截江流，上到上面非常艰难。
English: The beach is high and the current is rapid. There is a stone dam across the river. It is very difficult to get to the top.

古文：既上，舟人献神庙下，少泊后行。
现代文：上去之后，船夫在神庙下献祭，稍作停泊之后便动身。
English: After going up, the boatman offered a sacrifice under the temple, moored for a bit and then set off.

古文：西北五里，为乌蛮驿。
现代文：往西北行五里，是乌蛮骚。
English: Heading northwest for five miles, it's a wild ride.

古文：又南十里，则石山峥嵘立江右，为凤凰山。
现代文：又向南十里，就见有座石山峥嵘地矗立在江右，是凤凰山。
English: Another ten miles to the south, I saw a stone mountain standing on the right side of the river. It was the Phoenix Mountain.

古文：自过贵县西山，山俱变土，至是石峰复突而出。
现代文：自从过了贵县的西山，山全变成土山，到了这里石峰再一次突立而出。
English: After passing the West Mountain of Guizhou County, the whole mountain turned into a dirt mountain, and here the stone peak once again stood out.

古文：其双崖壁立、南嵌江中者，即凤凰岩也。
现代文：那一双石崖似墙壁样矗立、在南边嵌入江中的，就是凤凰岩了。
English: That pair of stone cliffs standing like a wall, embedded in the middle of the river on the south side, is Phoenix Rock.

古文：又南二里为麻埠，日已西昃。
现代文：又向南二里是麻埠，日已西斜。
English: Two miles to the south is Asabu, and the sun is setting.

古文：余欲留宿其处为凤凰游，而村氓皆不肯停客，徘徊久之而去。
现代文：我想留宿在此处准备去游凤凰岩，可村民们都不肯留客，徘徊了很久才离开。
English: I wanted to stay here to prepare for a tour of Phoenix Rock, but the villagers refused to stay, lingering for a long time before leaving.

古文：又西十里，其处有山高突江左，其上有洞曰道君岩，下有村曰谢村。
现代文：又向西行十里，此处有山高突在江左，山上有个洞叫道君岩，山下有村庄叫谢村。
English: Another ten miles to the west, there is a mountain high rise to the left of the river, there is a cave on the mountain called Daojun Rock, and there is a village called Xiecun at the foot of the mountain.

古文：日色已暮，而其山去江尚远，亦不及停。
现代文：天色已晚，但那座山离江还远，也来不及停船。
English: It was late in the day, but the mountain was still far away from the river, and it was too late to stop the boat.

古文：又南五里，曰白沙堡，又乘月行五里而泊，是夜月明如昼。
现代文：又向南五里，叫白沙堡，又乘月色行五里才停泊下来。这一夜月光明亮如白昼。
English: Another five miles to the south, called Baisha Castle, and another five miles by moonlight before anchoring down. This night the moon was as bright as day.

古文：乌蛮滩在横州东六十里，上有乌蛮山、马伏波庙。
现代文：乌蛮滩在横州东面六十里，上面有乌蛮山、马伏波庙。
English: Wuban Beach is sixty miles east of Hengzhou, with Wuban Mountain and Ma Fubo Temple above it.

古文：《志》谓： 昔有乌蛮人居此，故名。 
现代文：志书说： 从前有乌蛮住在此地，所以起这个名字。 
English: The book says: Once upon a time, there was a barbarian living in this place, hence the name.

古文：余按：乌浒蛮在贵县北，与此不相及。
现代文：我考察，乌浒蛮在贵县北部，与此不相干。
English: As far as I can see, it has nothing to do with the fact that Wushan is located in the northern part of your county.

古文：而庙前有碑，乃嘉靖二十九年知南宁郡王贞吉所立。
现代文：可庙前有块碑，是嘉靖二十九年南宁府知府王贞吉立的。
English: However, there is a monument in front of the temple, which was erected by Wang Zhengyi, the governor of Nanning, in the 29th year of Jiajing.

古文：谓： 乌蛮非可以渎前古名贤之祠，易名起敬滩。 
现代文：说： 乌蛮之名是不能用来裹读古代名贤祠堂的，改名叫起敬滩。 
English: He said, "The name of Wuban can't be used to cover the ancestral hall of the ancient great men, so it should be renamed as Keidan.

古文：大碑深刻，禁人旧称，而呼者如故。
现代文：大碑深深地刻着，禁止人们使用旧称，可称呼的人依然如故。
English: The great monument is deeply engraved, forbidding people to use the old name, and the people who can be called are still the same.

古文：余遍观庙中碑甚多，皆近时诸宦其地者；即王文成《上滩诗》亦不在。
现代文：我遍观庙中，碑刻很多，都是近代在此地为官的人题的；就是王文成的《上滩诗》也不在其中。
English: In the temples I have visited, there are many inscriptions, all of which are the themes of people who have served as officials in this place in modern times; even Wang Wencheng's "Shangtan Poem" is not among them.

古文：而庙外露立一碑，为宋庆历丙戌年知横州任粹所撰，张居正所书。
现代文：而庙外露天里立着一块碑，是宋代庆历丙戌年横州知州任粹撰文，张居正书写的。
English: In the open air outside the temple, there is a monument, which was written by Zhang Juzheng in the Song Dynasty in the year of Qing Lippun.

古文：碑古字遒。
现代文：碑制古朴字迹遒劲。
English: The ancient and simple writing on the monument is very powerful.

古文：碑言： 粹初授官时，奉常二卿刘公以诗见送，有 乌岩积翠贯州图 之句。
现代文：碑文说： 任粹起初被授予官职时，太常寺少卿刘公拿诗见赠，有 乌岩积翠贯州图 的句子。
English: The inscription says: When Ren Zi was first appointed to an official post, Liu Gong, the Shaoqing of Taizhong Temple, presented him with a poem, which contained the sentence "Wu Yan Jie Cui Guanzhou Map."

古文：抵任即觅之，不得也。
现代文：到任后就马上寻找此地，找不到。
English: I looked for this place immediately after taking office, but I couldn't find it.

古文：遍询之父老，知者曰： 今乌蛮山即乌岩山也，昔伪刘擅广五代十国，刘隐在两广建立南汉权政，以讳易其称，至今不改。 
现代文：向父老乡亲四处打听，知道的人说： 今天的乌蛮山就是乌岩山了，从前伪刘政权占据广州时，因为避讳改了它的名，相沿至今。 
English: I asked my father and fellow villagers everywhere, and those who knew said: Today's Wuban Mountain is Wuyan Mountain. In the past, when the pseudo-Liu regime occupied Guangzhou, it changed its name because of shunning, and it has remained the same ever since.

古文：夫蛮乃一方丑彝，讳亦一时僭窃，遂令名贤千古庙貌，讹袭此名，亟宜改仍其旧。
现代文：蛮是一个地方丑恶的夷族，避讳也是一时之间非正统窃位之事，竟然让名贤流传千古的庙宇，错误地沿用此名，应当鱼待改变仍用它的旧称。
English: It is quite a place of ugly barbarians, shunning is also a matter of unorthodox theft between time, and even let the eminent men and women pass down the temples of thousands of years, mistakenly continue to use this name, should be changed still use its old name.

古文：闻者皆曰： 诺。 
现代文：听话的人都说： 对。 
English: The obedient people all said, "Yes."

古文：遂为之修庙建碑，以正其讹。 其意与王南宁同。
现代文：于是为它修庙树碑，用来纠正这个错误、 他的意思与南宁王知府的相同。
English: Therefore, he repaired the temple stele for it to correct this mistake. His intention was the same as that of the Nanning prefectural government.

古文：而王之易为起敬，不若仍其旧更妙。
现代文：但王贞吉把它改为起敬滩，不如仍沿用它的旧称更妙。
English: However, Wang Zhengyi changed it to Qiqingtan, it is better to still use its old name.

古文：十五日五鼓挂帆，十五里，清江。
现代文：十五日五更挂帆起航，十五里，到清江。
English: On the fifteenth day of the fifth month, they set sail and sailed fifteen miles to Qingjiang.

古文：有江自江左入大江。
现代文：有条江自江左侧流入大江。
English: The Yujo River flows into the Oe River from the left side of the river.

古文：又二十里，抵横州南门，犹上午也。
现代文：又行二十里，抵达横州城南门，还是上午。
English: After another twenty miles, we arrived at the South Gate of Hengzhou City, still in the morning.

古文：横州城在大江东北岸，大江自西来，抵城而东南去，横城临其左。
现代文：横州城在大江东北岸上，大江自西流来，到城下便向东南流去，横州城滨临江左岸。
English: Hengzhou City is on the northeast bank of the Yangtze River. The Yangtze River flows from west to east and then flows southeast under the city. Hengzhou City is on the left bank of the Yangtze River.

古文：南十五里曰宝华，在城东南隅。
现代文：州城濒江的两道城门，虽在南面俯瞰江流，可实际上是面向西南方。
English: The two gates of the state capital on the river, although overlooking the river in the south, actually face the southwest.

古文：宝华山有寿佛诗，乃建文君遁迹之地。二山皆土山逶迤，而宝华最高，所谓 秀出城南 是也。
现代文：城附近有南、北两列山：北面七里是古钵山，在城西北角；南面十五里的叫宝华山，在城东南角。两座山靓是透巡而去的土山，而宝华山最高，所谓的 秀出城南 就是指它了。
English: There are two mountains to the north and south near the city: seven miles to the north is Mount Gushan, in the northwest corner of the city; fifteen miles to the south is called Mount Baohua, in the southeast corner of the city. The two mountains are muddy mountains, and Mount Baohua is the highest. The so-called south of the city refers to it.

古文：宋守徐安国诗。时州守为吾郡诸楚余，名士翘。有寄书者，与郁林道顾东曙家书俱置箧中，过衡州时为盗劫去。
现代文：此时的州官是我们府的诸楚徐，有寄给他的信，与郁林道顾东曙的家信一同放在竹箱中，路过衡州时被强盗抢了去。
English: At this time, the prefectural official was Zhu Chuxu from our prefecture. There was a letter sent to him, which was placed in a bamboo box together with the letter from the family of Yu Lin Daogu Dongshu. When passing through Hengzhou, it was snatched by robbers.

古文：故前在郁，今过横，俱得掉头而去。
现代文：所以先前在郁林，今天路过横州，都只得掉头而去。
English: So previously in Yulin, today passing through Hengzhou, all had to turn around and go.

古文：余入城，饭于市，乃循城傍江而东，二里，抵下渡。
现代文：好像是造物主假借这些强盗的手，以保全我始终不见长官的面的节义，不敢偷偷仿效殷洪乔。这天是中秋节。
English: It's as if the Creator is using the hands of these robbers to ensure that I never see the face of the chief, so that I don't dare to secretly imitate Yin Hongqiao. This day is the Mid-Autumn Festival.

古文：横州有三渡：极西者在州门外，为上渡；极东者在下流东转处北极庙前，为下渡；而中渡在其中。渡南岸，遂登山坡而入。
现代文：我把行李及两个病人送入去南宁的船二我进了城，在街中吃了饭，于是沿城墙紧靠江流往东走，二里，抵达下渡。渡到南岸，是去宝华山的路，于是登山坡入山。
English: I put my luggage and two patients on a boat to Nanning.2 I entered the city, ate a meal in the city, and then walked along the city wall close to the river flow to the east, two miles, arriving at Shidadu.Crossing to the south bank is the way to Baohua Mountain, so the mountain slope enters the mountain.

古文：其道甚大，共二里，透入岭半，其内山环成峒。
现代文：这条道十分宽大，共行二里，穿越进山岭半山腰，岭内山环绕成桐。
English: This road is very wide, a total of two miles, passing through the mountains into the mountainside, and the mountains within the mountains surround Chengdong.

古文：由峒东北行，有小径，二十里可抵凤凰山。
现代文：由蛔往东北行，有条小径，二十里路可到达凤凰山。
English: From Handan to the northeast, there is a trail, and the twenty-mile road can reach the Phoenix Mountain.

古文：已而复随峡南行，共五里，乃由右岐南复登岭。
现代文：随即又顺着峡谷往南行，共五里，便由右边的岔道向南再次登岭。
English: Then I followed the canyon to the south for a total of five miles, and then climbed the ridge again from the right fork to the south.

古文：一里南下，又一里过蒙氏山庄，又一里，乃东向入山。
现代文：一里后往南下行，又走一里经过蒙氏山庄，又走一里，便向东进山。
English: After one mile, they went south, and after another mile, they passed the Mengshi Villages, and after another mile, they entered the mountains to the east.

古文：又二里，过山下村居，予以为即宝华寺也。
现代文：又行二里，路过山下的村庄，我以为就是宝华寺了。
English: After another two miles, I passed through a village at the foot of the mountain, and I thought it was Baohua Temple.

古文：披丛入之，而后知寺尚在山半。
现代文：拨开草丛进到村里，然后才知寺庙还在半山腰。
English: We pushed through the bushes and entered the village, only to find out that the temple was still halfway up the mountain.

古文：渡涧拾级，又半里，得寺。
现代文：渡过山涧沿石阶上登，又走半里，到了寺前。
English: Crossed the ridge, climbed up the stone steps, and walked half a mile to the front of the temple.

古文：日才下午，而寺僧闭门，扣久之，乃得入。
现代文：时光才是下午，但寺中的僧人关着门，敲了很久的门，才得以进去。
English: It was only afternoon, but the monks in the temple closed the door and knocked for a long time before they were able to enter.

古文：其寺西向，寺门颇整，题额曰 万山第一 。
现代文：这个寺院向西，寺门十分整齐，匾额上题写着 万山第一 。
English: This temple faces west, the temple gate is very neat, and the inscription on the plaque reads "The First in the World."

古文：字甚古劲，初望之，余忆为建文君旧题，及趋视之，乃万历末年里人施怡所立。
现代文：字迹十分古朴遒劲，最初望见它，我记起是建文帝从前的题字，到赶过去细看时，原来是万历末年本乡人施怡所立的匾。
English: The handwriting is very simple and vigorous. When I first saw it, I remembered that it was the former inscription of Emperor Jianwen. When I hurried over to take a closer look, it turned out to be a coffin erected by local villager Shi Yi at the end of the Wanli era.

古文：盖施恰建门而新其额，第书己名而并设建文之迹；后询之僧，而知果建文手迹也。
现代文：大概是施怡修建寺门便把这块匾额换成新的，只写上自己的名字并一同放上建文帝的墨迹；后来向僧人询问此事，了解到果然是建文帝的手迹。我说： 应宣扬一下它。 僧人说： 是是。 
English: It was probably Shi Yi who replaced this plaque with a new one when he built the temple gate, writing only his own name and placing Emperor Jianwen's ink along with it; later, he asked a monk about it and learned that it was indeed Emperor Jianwen's handwriting. I said, "It should be publicized." The monk said, "Yes, it is."

古文：余谓 宜表章之。 僧 唯唯。 寺中无他遗迹，惟一僧守户，而钟磬无声。问所谓山后瀑布，僧云： 坠自后岭，其高百丈。
现代文：寺中没有其他遗迹，仅有一个僧人守门，而钟罄都悄然无声。询问所谓的山后瀑布，僧人说： 瀑布自后岭上下坠，高百丈。
English: There are no other remains of the temple, only a monk guards the door, and the bell is silent.Asked about the so-called mountain waterfall, the monk said: The waterfall falls down from the back ridge and is hundreds of meters high.

古文：而峡为丛木所翳，行之无蹊，望之不见，惟从岭而上，可闻其声耳。 
现代文：但峡谷被丛林遮住了，要走到那里没有路，远望它又看不见，唯有从岭上上去，可听到瀑布声而已。 
English: But the canyon is hidden by the jungle, there is no road to get there, you can't see it from far away, but you can hear the waterfall from the ridge.

古文：余乃令僧炊于寺，而独曳杖上岭，直造其顶。
现代文：我于是命令僧人在寺中做饭，便独自一人拄着手杖上岭，直达山顶。
English: I then ordered the monks to cook in the temple, so I walked up the ridge alone with a cane and reached the top of the mountain.

古文：而风声瀑声，交吼不止，瀑终不见。
现代文：然而只听到风声瀑布声，交相吼叫不停，始终看不见瀑布。
English: However, we only heard the sound of the wind and the waterfall, and we couldn't see the waterfall.

古文：乃下返寺。
现代文：从岭南下行五十里，就是灵山县了。
English: Fifty miles downstream from Lingnan is Lingshan County.

古文：寺后冈上，见积砖累累。
现代文：只得下山返回寺中。寺后的山冈上，见有累累堆积着的砖。
English: I had to go down the mountain to return to the temple. On the hill behind the temple, I saw bricks piled up.

古文：还问之，僧曰： 此里人杨姓者，将建建文帝庙，故庀备具材以待耳。 
现代文：回来问和尚，僧人说： 这是一个姓杨的本乡人，要建建文帝庙，所以准备材料等待着。 唉！
English: When he came back and asked the monk, the monk said, "This is a local villager with the surname Yang, and he wants to build a temple to Emperor Wen, so he is waiting for the materials to be prepared.

古文：吁！施怡最新而掩其迹，此人追远而创其祠，里阈之间，智愚之相去何霄壤哉！
现代文：施怡最后翻新却掩盖了建文帝的遗迹，此人追忆先代而创建他的祠堂，同一乡里之间，智愚之间相差为什么会有天地之别呢！
English: Shi Yi's final renovation has covered up the relics of Emperor Jianwen, who created his ancestral hall in memory of his predecessor. Why is there a world of difference between the same village and between the wise and the foolish?

古文：既而日落西陲，风吼不息，浮云开合无定。
现代文：不久日落西边，狂风怒吼不停，浮云开合不定。
English: Soon the sun set in the west, the wind howled incessantly, and the clouds drifted in and out.

古文：顷之而云痕忽破，皓魄当空。
现代文：顷刻间云层忽然破开，皎月当空。
English: In an instant, the clouds suddenly parted and the crescent moon appeared in the sky.

古文：参一出所储酝酒醉客，佐以黄蕉丹柚。
现代文：参一拿出储藏着的美酒来给客人醉饮，用黄色的香蕉和红色的袖子佐酒。
English: The maitre d' brought out the wine from the store to get the guests drunk, using a yellow banana and a red sleeve to accompany the wine.

古文：空山寂静，玉宇无尘，一客一僧，漫然相对，洵可称群玉山头，无负我一筇秋色矣。
现代文：空旷山野中寂静无声，琼玉般的宇宙洁净无尘，一个客人一个和尚，海阔天空地相对交谈，真正可称得上是群玉山头，不辜负我一根笨竹手杖，这片秋色了。
English: The silence and stillness in the open mountain, the jade-like universe clean and dust-free, a guest and a monk, conversing with each other across the vast sky, can truly be said to be a group of jade mountains, living up to my one clumsy bamboo cane, this autumn color.

古文：十六日早饭于宝华。
现代文：十六日在宝华寺吃早饭。
English: On the 16th, I had breakfast at the Bohola Temple.

古文：下山五里，出大路，又五里，出峒前岭。
现代文：下山行五里，走上大路，又走五里，到了桐前的山岭。
English: I walked five miles down the mountain, onto the main road, and then another five miles until I reached the mountains of Tongzheng.

古文：望东北凤凰诸石峰在三十里外，令人神飞。
现代文：远望东北凤凰山的诸石峰在三十里开外，令人神魂飞动。
English: The stone peaks of the northeastern Phoenix Mountain are thirty miles away, making the soul fly.

古文：而屡询路远，不及往返，南宁舟定于明日早发，遂下山。
现代文：但屡次打听都说路远，来不及往返，去南宁的船定在明日绝早出发，只好下了山。
English: However, after repeated inquiries, they all said that it was a long way to go and there was not enough time to make the round trip. The boat to Nanning was scheduled to leave very early tomorrow, so they had to go down the mountain.

古文：西五里抵州门，由上渡渡江入舟。
现代文：向西五里抵达州城城门，由上渡渡江进了船。
English: Five miles to the west, we arrived at Shuzhencheng Gate, and boarded the ship from Shangdu Ferry.

古文：十七日平明发舟，雨色凄凄，风时顺时逆。
现代文：十七日黎明开船，雨色凄凄，风时顺时逆。
English: We set sail at dawn on the 17th. The rain was terrible, and the wind blew in the opposite direction.

古文：舟西南行三十里，江口有小水自江南岸入，江名南江。
现代文：船向西南行三十里，江口有条小江从江南岸流进江中，名叫南江。
English: The ship sailed 30 miles to the southwest. At the mouth of the river, a small river flowed from the south bank of the river into the middle of the river. It was called the South River.

古文：不一烷濯，一舟交垢而不之顾。
现代文：船转向北行，又走十里到达陈步江，钦州的盐全部是从这里运出去的。船停泊在北岸。这一天共行船四十里。
English: The ship turned north and traveled another ten miles to the Chenbu River, from which all the salt in Qinzhou was shipped. The ship anchored on the north shore. On this day, the ship traveled a total of forty miles.

古文：十八日晨餐始发舟。
现代文：十八日早餐后才开船。
English: On the 18th, the ship did not sail until after breakfast.

古文：初犹雨色霏霏，上午乃霁。
现代文：起初还雨势霏霏，上午才晴开。
English: It rained heavily at first, but cleared up in the morning.

古文：舟至是多西北行，而风亦转逆。
现代文：船到这里多半往西北行，而风也变为逆风。
English: Once here, the boat is likely to head northwest, and the wind will turn into a headwind.

古文：山至是皆土山缭绕，无复石峰嶙峋矣。
现代文：山到这里都是缭绕的土山，不再有嶙峋的石峰了。
English: The mountains here are all rolling hills, and there are no longer any rocky peaks.

古文：二十里，飞龙堡，又十里，东陇堡，又五里，泊于江之左岸。
现代文：大体上自从驶入郁江，唯有凤凰山是石崖并立俯瞰江流，其余皆是土山了。行二十里，到飞龙堡，又是十里，到东陇堡，又五里，停泊在江的左岸。
English: In general, since sailing into the Yujiang River, only the Phoenix Mountain is a stone cliff overlooking the river, and the rest are earthen hills. It is twenty miles to go, ten miles to the Dragon Castle, and five miles to the East Castle, anchored on the left bank of the river.

古文：其处在火烟驿下流五里土山之上，有盘石平亘，若悬台中天，擎是向空，亦一奇也。
现代文：此处在火烟释下游五里，土山之上有块盘子状的岩石，平平地横亘着，好似高悬的平台，把这块岩石高高举向半天之中，也是一处奇观。
English: Here, five miles downstream from the fire, there is a plate-shaped rock on top of the earthen hill. It lies flat, like a high-hanging platform, and it is also a wonder to lift this rock high into the middle of the sky.

古文：是日行三十五里。
现代文：这一天行船三十五里。
English: On this day, the boat traveled thirty-five miles.

古文：十九日平明行。
现代文：十九日黎明行船。
English: We set sail at dawn on the 19th.

古文：五里过火烟驿，是为永淳县界。
现代文：五里后经过火烟骤，这里是永淳县的辖境。
English: Five miles later, through the smoke plume, here is the jurisdiction of Yongchun County.

古文：于是舟转北行，历十二矶焉。
现代文：从这里船转向北行，经过十二矶。
English: From here, the boat turns north and passes through the Twelve Mountains.

古文：矶在江右涯，盘石斜叠，横突江畔。
现代文：石矶在江右岸，盘踞的岩石斜着堆叠而起，横突到江畔。
English: The rocks are on the right bank of the river. The jagged rocks are stacked diagonally and jut out sideways onto the riverbank.

古文：盖自横以来，山石色皆赭黯，形俱盘突，无复玲珑透削之状矣。
现代文：大体上从横州以来，山石的颜色都是褚红色与深黑色，山势全是呈盘子状突起，不再有玲珑剔透陡削的形状了。
English: In general, since Hengzhou, the colors of the rocks have been crimson red and deep black, and the mountains are all plate-like protrusions, no longer with exquisite and steeply-sharpened shapes.

古文：共十五里，绿村。
现代文：共行十五里，到绿村。
English: Together they walked fifteen miles to the village of Midori.

古文：舟转东北，又十里，三洲头。
现代文：船转向东北，又行十里，到三洲头。
English: The ship turned to the northeast and sailed another ten miles to the head of the three continents.

古文：又五里，高村，转而东南，乃挂帆焉。
现代文：又五里，到高村，转向东南，于是挂上帆。
English: After another five miles, they reached Takamura, turned southeast, and set sail.

古文：三里，复转东北，又五里，转而东。
现代文：三里，再次转向东北，又行五里，转向东。
English: Three miles, turn to the northeast again, and go five miles, turn to the east.

古文：又二里，抵永淳之南门而泊。
现代文：又行二里，抵达永淳县城的南门便停泊下来。
English: After another two miles, they arrived at the South Gate of Yongchun County, where they anchored.

古文：是日行四十五里。
现代文：这一天行船四十五里。
English: On this day, the boat traveled forty-five miles.

古文：永淳踞挂榜山而城。
现代文：永淳高踞在挂榜山上筑城。
English: Yongjun High School students are building a city on Hangbang Mountain.

古文：郁江自西北来，直抵山下，始东折而南，仍环南门西去。
现代文：郁江自西北流来，直达山下，这才由东折向南流，仍环绕过南门往西流去。
English: The Iku River flows from the northwest, straight to the foot of the mountain, only to turn from the east to the south, still flowing around the south gate to the west.

古文：当城之西，只一脊过脉，脊北则来江，脊环则去江，相距甚近。
现代文：正当县城的西面，只有一条山脊延伸而过的山脉，山脊北边是流来的江水，山脊南面就是流去的江水，相距很近。
English: Just to the west of the county seat, there is only a mountain ridge stretching across the mountains. On the north side of the ridge is the flowing river water, and on the south side of the ridge is the flowing river water. The distance is very close.

古文：脊之东北，石崖圆亘，峙为挂榜山，而城冒覆盖其上，江流四面环之，旁无余地。
现代文：山脊的东北方，石崖圆圆地盘亘着，耸立起来形成挂榜山，而城覆盖在山头上，江流四面环绕城池，四旁没有空地。
English: In the northeast of the ridge, there is a round stone cliff, towering up to form a hanging hill, while the city is covered on the top of the mountain, the river flows around the city, and there is no open space on all sides.

古文：二十日舟泊而候人，上午始行。
现代文：二十日船停着等人，上午才出发。
English: On the 20th, the boat stopped to wait for someone, and only set off in the morning.

古文：乃北绕永淳之东，旋西绕其北，几环城之四隅，始西北行。
现代文：于是向北绕过永淳的东面，旋即向西绕到城北，几乎环绕过城的四角，这才往西北行。
English: So he went north around the east side of Yongchun, then immediately west around the north of the city, almost around the four corners of the city, before heading northwest.

古文：十五里，鹿颈堡，已过午，始转而西，乃挂帆焉。
现代文：十五里，到鹿颈堡，已过了中午，开始转向西行，于是挂上帆。
English: Fifteen miles to Deer Neck, it was past noon, and we began to turn west, so we set sail.

古文：于是两岸土山复出，江中有当流之石。
现代文：从此地起两岸土山再次出现，江中有迎着水流的岩石。
English: From here, the hills on both sides of the river reappear, and there are rocks in the river that face the current.

古文：五里，西南行。
现代文：五里，向西南行。
English: Five miles, heading southwest.

古文：又十五里，伶俐水，有埠在江北岸，舟人泊而市薪。
现代文：又行十五里，到伶俐水，有码头在江北岸，船夫停船去买柴。
English: Another fifteen miles, to Surabaya, there is a dock on the north bank of the river, the boatman stops the boat to buy firewood.

古文：风雨骤至，迨暮而止。
现代文：风雨骤然来临，到天黑才停。
English: The wind and rain came suddenly and didn't stop until dark.

古文：复行五里而泊。
现代文：又行船五里才停泊。
English: It took another five miles for the ship to dock.

古文：是日行四十里。
现代文：这一天行船四十里。
English: It was a forty-mile boat ride that day.

古文：二十一日鸡再鸣即行，五里而曙。
现代文：二十一日鸡鸣两遍立即行船，五里后天才亮。
English: On the twenty-first day, the rooster crowed twice, and the boat immediately set sail. It was five miles before dawn.

古文：西南二十里，过大虫港，有港口在江北岸。
现代文：往西南行二十里，经过大虫港，有港口在江北岸。
English: Twenty miles to the southwest, past Ohmushi Port, there is a port on the north bank of the river.

古文：转而南五里，又西五里，午过留人峒，有石耸立江右，宛若妇人招手留房者。
现代文：转向南行五里，又向西五里，中午经过留人炯，有岩石耸立在江右，宛如女人招手留人住宿的模样。
English: Five miles to the south and five miles to the west, at noon, I passed through a campground, and there was a rock standing on the right side of the river. It looked like a woman beckoning people to stay.

古文：石当山回水曲处，故曰峒，又北曲而西，五里，过蓑衣滩，又十里，转而北行，则八尺江自西来人。
现代文：岩石正当山回水曲之处，所以称为酮。又往北弯向西行，五里，经过蓑衣滩。又行十里，转向北行，就见八尺江从西面流来汇入郁江。
English: The rock is at the right place of the mountain loop, so it is called Keto. Then, it curves to the north and heads west for five miles, passing the Yuyi Beach. After another ten miles, it turns to the north, and the Yasaka River flows from the west and flows into the Yujiang River.

古文：八尺之北，大江之西，巡司名八尺，驿又名黄范。
现代文：八尺江自钦州发源，船可通到上思州。八尺江的北面，大江的西边，有巡检司名叫八尺，释站名又叫黄花释。
English: The Yashaku River originates from Qinzhou, and boats can travel to Shangshi. On the north side of the Yashaku River and on the west side of the Big River, there is a patrol station called Yashaku, and the name of the release station is also called Huanghua Release.

古文：宿于左峰。
现代文：在左岸山峰下停宿。
English: We stopped at the foot of the peaks on the left bank.

古文：二十二日平明，由黄范北行五里，上乌洴滩。
现代文：二十二日黎明，由黄花释向北行五里，上行乌碰滩。
English: At dawn on the 22nd, from Huanghuaxi to the north, five miles, upstream to the Black Sand Beach.

古文：江流至滩分一支西出八尺。
现代文：江水流到此滩分出一条支流向西流到八尺。
English: The water of the river flows to this beach, and a tributary flows westward to eight feet.

古文：舟上滩，始转而西，渐复西南。
现代文：船上了河滩，开始转向西行，渐渐又转向西南。
English: The boat hit the beach and began to head west, gradually turning southwest.

古文：二十里，有土山兀出北岸，是为清秀山，上有浮屠五级出青松间，乃南宁东南水口也：又西五里，为私盐渡。
现代文：二十里，有土山突起在北岸，这是清秀山，山上有座五层高的佛塔在青松间露出来，是南宁东南方的河口。又向西五里，是私盐渡。
English: Twenty miles away, there is a dirt hill protruding on the north shore, which is Qingxiu Mountain. On the mountain, a five-story-high pagoda stands out among the green pine trees. It is the estuary of the southeast of Nanning. And five miles to the west, it is Shiyandu.

古文：又西五里，上一滩，颇长，有石突江西岸小山之上，下有尖座，上戴一顶如帽，是为豹子石。
现代文：又向西五里，上一个河滩，很长，有岩石突立在江西岸的小山之上，下边有个尖尖的底座，上方戴着顶盖如像帽子，这是豹子石。
English: Another five miles to the west, the last beach, long, with rocks protruding above the hill on the west bank of the river, below there is a pointed base, above wearing a cap like a hat, this is leopard stone.

古文：舟至是转而北，又十里过白湾，山开天阔，夹江多聚落，始不似遐荒矣。
现代文：船来到这里转向北，又行十里过了白湾，山开天阔，沿江两岸村落很多，这才不似边远荒野了。
English: When the boat came here, it turned north and traveled another ten miles past Baiwan. The mountains are open to the sky, and there are many villages on both sides of the river. This is not like a remote wilderness.

古文：转而南三里，为坪南，江南岸村聚甚盛。
现代文：转向南行三里，是坪南，江南岸村庄集市十分繁荣。
English: Turning southbound three miles, it is Pingnan. The village market on the south bank of the Yangtze River is very prosperous.

古文：又西三里，泊于亭子渡。
现代文：又向西三里，停泊在亭子渡。
English: Another three miles to the west, moored at the pavilion.

古文：二十三日昧爽行，五里，抵南宁之西南城下。
现代文：二十三日黎明行船，五里，到达南宁府城的西南城墙下。
English: At dawn on the 23rd, the ship sailed five miles and arrived at the southwestern city wall of Nanning.

古文：九月初九日西过镇北桥关帝庙，西行三里，抵横塘，东望望仙坡东西相距，于是西折行五里，望罗秀已在东北，路渐微。
现代文：九月初九日向西过了镇北桥的关帝庙，往西行三里，抵达横塘，向东望去望仙坡东西相隔。于是折向西行五里，望见罗秀山已在东北，路渐渐变小。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month of the year, I passed the Guan Di Temple in the north bridge of the town to the west, traveled three miles to the west, arrived in Hengtang, and looked east to see the east-west separation of Xianpo. Then I turned five miles to the west and saw that Mount Luo Xiu was in the northeast, and the road gradually became smaller.

古文：稍前始得一溪，溪水小于武江，而急流过之。
现代文：稍前走才遇到一条溪流，溪水比武江小，可水流湍急超过它。
English: After walking a little further, I came across a stream. The stream is smaller than the Wujiang River, but the water flow is faster than it.

古文：渡溪始北行，二里，西去为申墟道，北去为罗赖村，已直逼西山东麓矣。
现代文：渡过溪开始往北行，二里，向西去是到申墟的路，往北去是罗赖村，已直逼西山东麓了。
English: After crossing the stream, we began to head north. Two miles to the west was the road to Shen Hui, and to the north was Luo Lai Village. We had already reached the eastern foot of Xishan Mountain.

古文：返转东北又二里，过赤土村之西，有小水自西而东潆山麓，绕赤土下中墟。
现代文：反身转向东北又走二里，路过赤土村的西边，有小河自西流向东潇绕着山麓，绕过赤土村下流到中墟。
English: Turn around to the northeast and walk two miles, passing the west side of the red soil village, there is a small river flowing from west to east around the foot of the mountain, bypassing the lower reaches of the red soil village to the middle market.

古文：越涧登山，越小山一重，内成田峒。
现代文：越过山涧登山，越过一重小山，山内形成田酮。
English: Climbing over a mountain ridge, climbing over a small hill, forming a ridge in the mountain.

古文：又越峒过小桥而上，其路复大。
现代文：又越过田炯走过小桥上行，这路又变大了。
English: After crossing the rice paddies, we walked over a small bridge and went up. The road got bigger again.

古文：路左有寺，殿阁两重甚整，望之无人，遂贾余勇先直北跻岭。
现代文：路左有寺庙，两层殿阁十分整齐，望过去寺中无人，于是鼓足剩余的勇气先径直向北登岭。
English: There is a temple on the left of the road, the two-storey pavilion is very neat, looking over there is no one in the temple, so I mustered up the remaining courage and went straight to the north ridge.

古文：岭西有涧，重山自西高峰来，即马退山夹而成者。
现代文：岭西有条山洞，重重山峰自西高峰延伸而来，就是马退山相夹形成的。
English: There is a cave on the west side of the ridge, and many peaks extend from the west peak, which is formed by the Mawei Mountains.

古文：一里，登越山坳，盖大山西北自思恩来，东西环绕如城，迤逦自西南走东北，而西南最高者为马退。
现代文：一里，登越山坳。大略大山从西北的思恩府延伸而来，东西两列环绕如城墙，道透巡迄自西南走向东北，而西南方的最高峰是马退山。
English: The roughly large mountain extends from the northwestern Shine Prefecture, the east and west are surrounded by two lines like city walls, and the highway patrol goes from the southwest to the northeast, and the highest peak in the southwest is Mount Mawei.

古文：又东，骈峰杂突，皆无与为并。
现代文：又向东行，骄立的山峰杂乱地突起，都没有能与它相比的。
English: And to the east, towering mountain peaks jut out chaotically, none of which can compare to it.

古文：而罗秀在其东，联络若一山，而峰岫错落，路亦因之。
现代文：而罗秀山在它东面，连接在一起好像一座山，但峰峦错落，路也顺着它走。
English: On the other hand, Mount Luo Xiu is to the east of it, connected together like a mountain, but the peaks are staggered, and the road also follows it.

古文：路抵中峰，忽分为二：左向西北者，为武缘道；右走直北者，为下山间道。
现代文：路到达中峰，忽然分为两条：左边通向西北的，是去武缘县的路；右边走向正北的，是下山的近路。
English: When the road reaches the middle peak, it suddenly divides into two: the one to the northwest on the left is the road to Wujiang County; the one to the due north on the right is the shortcut down the mountain.

古文：二道界一峰于中，则罗秀绝顶也。
现代文：二条道中间隔着一座山峰，就是罗秀山的绝项了。
English: In the middle of the two roads, there is a mountain peak, which is the peak of Mount Luo Xiu.

古文：时余未识二道所从，坐松阴待行人，过下午而无一至者。
现代文：此时我不知两条道通往何处，坐在松树树荫下等待过路人，过了下午却无一人来到。
English: At this time I did not know where the two roads lead to, sitting in the shade of pine trees waiting for passers-by, but after the afternoon no one came.

古文：以右道幽地，从之北出拗，而见其下岭，乃谋返辕，念峰顶不可不一登，即从其处南向上。
现代文：以为右边的路是幽深僻静之地，顺着它向北走出山坳，但见它下岭去，只得考虑返回去。心想峰顶不可不登上去一次，立即从此处向南上登。
English: I thought that the road on the right was a deep and secluded place, and followed it north out of the mountains, but when I saw it go down the ridge, I had to consider going back. I thought that I must climb the peak once, and immediately climb south from here.

古文：其顶西接马退，东由黄范北走宾州。
现代文：峰顶西面连着马退山，东面由黄花释往北走向宾州。
English: The west side of the peak is connected to the horse retreating mountain, and the east side is released from the yellow flower and goes north to Pennsylvania.

古文：盖其脉自曲靖东山而来，经永宁、泅城、思恩至此，东至于宾，乃南峙为贵县北山，又东峙为浔州西山，而始尽焉，南宁之脉，自罗秀东分支南下，冈陀蜿蜒数里，结为望仙坡，郡城倚之。
现代文：大概这里的山脉是自曲靖东山延伸而来，经永宁州：洒城州、思恩府到此地，向东达于宾州，便在南面耸峙为贵县的北山，又在东面耸峙为得州的西山，而后才到了尽头。南宁府的山脉，从罗秀山东面分出支脉南下，冈峦蜿蜒数里，盘结为望仙坡，府城就靠着它。
English: Presumably, the mountains here extend from Qujing East Mountain, passing through Yongning Prefecture, Shencheng Prefecture, and Sion Prefecture to this place, reaching Pennsylvania to the east, then rising to the south as the North Mountain of Guixian County, and rising to the east as the West Mountain of Texas, and then reaching the end. The mountains of Nanning Prefecture, branching out from the east side of Mount Luo Xiu southward, the hills meander for several miles, coiled as the Wuxian slope, and the capital city is next to it.

古文：又东分支南下，结为青山，为一郡水口。
现代文：又在东面分出支脉南下，盘结为青山，是一府的河口。
English: In the east, a branch runs southward, coiling into a mountain range, forming the estuary of Isshu.

古文：青山与马退东西对峙，后环为大围，中得平壤，相距三十里，边境开洋，曾无此空阔者。
现代文：青山与马退山东西对峙，后面环绕成一个大圆圈，中间有平地，相距三十里，边界开阔，从来没有如此空阔的地方。
English: Aoyama and Mt.Matei face each other from east to west, and are surrounded by a large circle in the back. There is flat land in the middle, and they are thirty miles apart. The border is wide open, and there has never been such an empty place.

古文：从顶四望，惟北面重峰丛突，万瓣并簇，直连武缘，然皆土山杂沓，无一石峰界其间，故青山豹子遂为此巨擘。
现代文：从峰顶四面望去，唯有北面重重山峰成丛突起，似万千花瓣并列成簇，一直连到武缘，然而都是杂沓的土山，没有一座石峰列在其间，所以青山的豹子石便成了此地的第一峰。
English: Looking from the four sides of the peak, only the north side is covered with peaks protruding in clumps, like thousands of petals lined up in clusters, all the way to Wuyuan. However, they are all mixed soil mountains, and there is no stone peak among them, so the leopard stone of Qingshan has become the first peak in this place.

古文：从顶西下武缘道，坳间北望，寥寂皆无可停宿处。
现代文：从峰顶向西下到去武缘的路上， 从山坳间向北望去，空旷荒寂全无可停留住宿之处。
English: On the way to Wuyan from the peak to the west, looking north from the foothills, there is no place to stay.

古文：乃还从岐约一里下，从路旁人罗秀寺，空无人，为之登眺徘徊。
现代文：于是返回来从岔道约下走一里，从路旁走入罗秀寺，空寂无人，为此登楼徘徊眺望。
English: So when I came back, I walked about a mile down from the main road and walked into the Luoshu Temple from the side of the road. It was empty and deserted, so I wandered upstairs to have a look.

古文：又一里，下至前田峒，由其左循大道，共二里，抵赤土村，宿于陆氏。
现代文：又走一里，下到先前走过的田桐，由它左侧沿大道行，共走二里，到达赤土村，寄宿在姓陆的人家。
English: I walked another mile, down to the previously walked field and along the avenue on the left side of it. I walked a total of two miles to reach the red soil village, where I stayed at the home of a man named Lu.

