古文：《齐民要术》：旱稻用下田，白土胜黑土，非言下田胜高原，但夏停水者，不得禾、豆、麦；稻田种，虽涝亦收。
现代文：《齐民要术》：旱稻适合种植在低洼地带，白色土壤比黑色土壤要好。并不是说下田比高原地好，而是因为夏季积水的下田，无法种植禾、豆、麦，而稻种在下田，就算遇到水灾也会有收成。
English: "Qiming Yaoshu": Dry rice is suitable for planting in low-lying areas, and white soil is better than black soil. This is not to say that the lower field is better than the plateau, but because the lower field is waterlogged in summer, it is impossible to grow grain, beans, and wheat, while rice seeds in the lower field will have a harvest even if there is a flood.

古文：所谓彼此俱获，不失地利故也。
现代文：这样便可使高田和下田，都可以有收获，不致丧失地利。
English: In this way, both Takada and Shimoda can reap benefits without losing their positions.

古文：下田种者，用功多；高原种者，与禾同等也。
现代文：低田种稻，费工较多；高田种稻，所费人工和种禾同样多。
English: Lowland rice cultivation requires more labor; Takada rice cultivation requires as much labor as wheat cultivation.

古文：凡下田停水处，燥则坚垎，胡格反，土干也。
现代文：凡是积水的低洼地，干涸后，土壤必然会板结坚垎；胡格反，土壤干结。
English: All water-logged low-lying land, after drying up, the soil will inevitably become hard and stiff; on the contrary, the soil will become dry.

古文：湿则污泥，难治而易荒，墝，口交反。埆音谷。而杀种。
现代文：水湿时，地必泥泞。既难耕种，又极容易草荒；地既墝口交反埆音谷，又极为杀种。
English: When the water is wet, the ground will be muddy. It is difficult to cultivate, and it is very easy to become barren. The ground is not only muddy, but also very destructive.

古文：其春耕者，杀种尤甚。
现代文：春天翻耕的土地，杀种现象更加严重。
English: On land ploughed in spring, the killing of seeds is even more serious.

古文：故宜五、六月暵之，以拟大麦。
现代文：故应在五六月间，进行暵地，准备种大麦。
English: Therefore, ploughing should be carried out between May and June to prepare for planting barley.

古文：时水涝，不得纳种者，九月中复一转，至春种稻，万不失一。
现代文：如果到了种麦时，水涝尚未退去，不能种植的，到九月中旬再翻耕一遍，等到来春种稻，必会万无一失。
English: If, when it comes to planting wheat, the water hyacinth has not yet retreated, and it cannot be planted, it will be ploughed over again by the middle of September, and it will be safe to plant rice in the spring.

古文：春耕者，十不收五，盖误人耳。
现代文：到了春天才来翻地，种十次不一定能够有五次收成，买在是误人。
English: It takes until spring to turn the soil, and it is not necessarily possible to have five harvests from ten sowings. It is a mistake to buy in.

古文：凡种下田，不问秋夏，候水尽地白背时，速耕、杷、劳，杷，白驾反。
现代文：种低洼地，不论是秋天还是夏天，只要水耗尽、地面泛白色时，便要赶快翻耕，杷磨、劳平，杷，白驾反。
English: When cultivating low-lying land, whether it is autumn or summer, as long as the water is exhausted and the ground is white, it is necessary to quickly plough, hoe, level, hoe and hoe.

古文：频烦令熟。
现代文：应频繁地翻耕，使土壤柔熟。
English: The soil should be ploughed frequently to make it soft and ripe.

古文：过燥则坚，过雨则泥，所以宜速耕也。
现代文：过于干燥会使地坚硬，雨水过多会使地泥泞，故应赶快翻耕。
English: Too dry will make the ground hard, too much rain will make the ground muddy, so it should be turned over quickly.

古文：二月半种稻为上时，三月为中时，四月初及半为下时。
现代文：二月中旬种稻是上等农时，三月为中等农时，四月初至四月中旬为下等农时。
English: In mid-February, rice planting is the upper-level agricultural time, in March it is the middle-level agricultural time, and from early April to mid-April it is the lower-level agricultural time.

古文：渍种如法，哀令开口，耧耩埯种之；耩，故项反。
现代文：按照常法浸种，捂好，让种子发芽，利用耧耩埯种；耩，故项反。
English: According to the usual method, soak the seeds, sprout well, let the seeds germinate, and use the seed of the earthworm.

古文：埯，乌感反。
现代文：埯，乌感反。
English: I feel disgusted and repulsed.

古文：裢种者，省种而生科，又胜掷者。
现代文：耧耩镌种的，可节省种子，科丛茂盛，比撒播的要好。
English: If you sow sparingly, you can save seeds. If you sow sparingly, you can save seeds. If you sow sparingly, you can save seeds.

古文：即再遍劳。
现代文：紧接着再摩劳一遍。
English: Immediately after that, do it again.

古文：若岁寒早种，虑时晚，即不渍种，恐芽焦也。
现代文：若遇上春寒，又怕误了农时，希望早种，便可不必浸种，以免使稻种的嫩芽冻焦枯。
English: If it is cold in the spring, and you are afraid of missing the farming season and want to plant early, you do not have to soak the seeds, so as not to freeze and scorch the shoots of the rice seeds.

古文：其土黑坚强之地，种未生前遇旱者，欲得令牛羊及人践履之；湿则不用一迹人也。
现代文：坚硬的黑土地，种子已播下，还未出苗就遇到天气干旱，最好让牛羊和人到田中去践踏；如果土地湿润，便应让田中连一个脚印、蹄迹都不要有。
English: If the soil is hard and black, and the seeds have already been sown, but the weather is dry before the seedlings emerge, it is best to let the cattle, sheep and people go to the field to trample on it. If the land is wet, the field should not have even one footprint or hoofprint.

古文：稻既生，犹欲令人践垄背。
现代文：稻出苗后，还要叫人在垄背上践踏一次。
English: After the rice plants have sprouted, people should also trample them on the ridges.

古文：践者，茂而多实也。
现代文：践踏过的，生长茂盛，结实也多。
English: Cacti that have been trampled grow luxuriantly and are more robust.

古文：苗长三寸，杷、劳而锄之；锄唯欲速。
现代文：稻苗长到三寸高，便要进行杷磨、劳平，然后耘锄；一定要及时锄草。
English: When the rice seedlings grow to three inches high, it is necessary to carry out hoeing, leveling, and then hoeing; it is necessary to hoe the grass in time.

古文：稻苗性弱，不能扇草，故宜数锄之。
现代文：稻苗性柔弱，不可被杂草遮盖，所以要频繁地锄。
English: Rice seedlings are tender and cannot be covered by weeds, so they should be watered frequently.

古文：每经一雨，辄欲杷、劳。
现代文：每下过一次雨，便要杷劳一遍。
English: Every time it rains, you have to do it all over again.

古文：苗高尺许则锋。
现代文：稻苗一尺左右高时，应当用锋锄。
English: When the rice seedlings are about one foot high, they should be pruned with a sharp rake.

古文：古农器。
现代文：锋，古代农具。
English: Feng, an ancient agricultural tool.

古文：天雨无所作，宜冒雨薅之。
现代文：遇天下雨，其他农活干不成，可冒雨到稻田中去薅草。
English: In case of rain, other farm work can not be done, but you can go to the paddy fields in the rain to weed.

古文：科大，如概者，五六月中霖雨时，拔而栽之。
现代文：稻科长大了，如过密，可在五六月间，趁霖雨天气，拔起来栽到别处。
English: If the paddy has grown too thick, it can be pulled up and planted elsewhere in May or June, taking advantage of the rainy weather.

古文：栽法：欲浅；令其根须四散则滋茂。
现代文：栽法：入土要浅，让须根向四面散开，便会生长茂盛。
English: planting method: the soil should be shallow, and the roots should be allowed to spread out on all sides, so that it will grow luxuriantly.

古文：深而直下者，聚而不科。
现代文：如果栽得深，将根直着插入土中，稻苗便会聚拢在一起，不易发科。
English: If it is planted deep and the roots are inserted straight into the soil, the rice seedlings will be gathered together, and it will not be easy to sprout.

古文：其苗长者，亦可捩去叶端数寸，勿伤其心也。
现代文：拔栽时，如苗过长，也可将叶的顶端捩掉数寸；注意不要伤了苗心。
English: When uprooting, if the seedling is too long, the tip of the leaf can also be pried off a few inches; be careful not to hurt the heart of the seedling.

古文：入七月不复任栽。
现代文：入七月以后，便不可再拔苗移栽。
English: After the beginning of July, it is no longer possible to transplant seedlings.

古文：七月百草成；时晚故也。
现代文：七月间百草皆长成，已为时太晚。
English: By July, it's too late.

古文：其高田种者，不求极良，唯须废地。
现代文：若在地势高的田种稻，并不要求土地多么肥美，唯独要求种在废地上。
English: If rice is grown in high-altitude fields, it does not require how fertile the land is, but only that it is planted on waste land.

古文：过良，则苗折；废地则无草。
现代文：土地太肥沃，容易倒伏，废地的好处是没有草。
English: The land is too fertile, it is easy to collapse, and the advantage of waste land is that there is no grass.

古文：亦秋耕，杷、劳令熟。
现代文：同样要秋耕、耙、劳，令地柔熟。
English: In the same way, autumn ploughing, hoeing and labor should be carried out to make the land soft and ripe.

古文：至春，黄场始章反纳种。
现代文：来年春天，黄场始章反下种。
English: In the spring of next year, the yellow field will begin to grow.

古文：不宜湿下。
现代文：不适宜湿种。
English: Not suitable for wet seeds.

古文：余法悉与下田同。
现代文：其余作务的方法，皆与地势低的田相同。
English: The rest of the work is done in the same way as in the low-lying fields.

