古文：起阏逢阉茂，尽玄黓执徐，凡十九年。始皇帝下二十年
现代文：起，止秦始皇帝下二十年
English: Emperor Qin Shi Huang for twenty years.

古文：荆轲至咸阳，因王宠臣蒙嘉卑辞以求见，王大喜，朝服，设九宾而见之。
现代文：荆轲抵达秦国都城咸阳，通过秦王嬴政的宠臣蒙嘉，以谦卑的言词求见秦王，秦王嬴政大喜过望，穿上君臣朝会时的礼服，安排朝会大典迎见荆轲。
English: Jing Jie arrived in Qin's capital city of Xianyang, and through Qin's favorite minister Meng Jia, he humbly asked to see the Qin king. Qin's king Jie Zheng was overjoyed, put on the ceremonial dress for the imperial court, and arranged a grand ceremony to welcome Jing Jie.

古文：荆轲奉图以进于王，图穷而匕首见，因把王袖而揕之；未至身，王惊起，袖绝。
现代文：荆轲手捧地图进献给秦王，图卷全部展开，匕首出现，荆轲乘势抓住秦王的袍袖，举起匕首刺向他的胸膛。但是未等荆轲近身，秦王嬴政已惊恐地一跃而起，挣断了袍袖。
English: Holding a map in his hand, Jing Ye presented it to King Qin. The picture scroll was fully unfolded, and a dagger appeared. Jing Ye seized King Qin's robe sleeve and raised the dagger to stab him in the chest. However, before Jing Ye could get close, King Qin Yuanzheng jumped up in fright and broke the robe sleeve.

古文：荆轲逐王，王环柱而走。
现代文：荆轲随即追逐秦王，秦王绕着柱子奔跑。
English: Jing Yao immediately chased Qin Wang, Qin Wang ran around the pillar.

古文：群臣皆愕，卒起不意，尽失其度。
现代文：这时，殿上的群臣都吓呆了，事发仓猝，大出意料，群臣全都失去了常态。
English: The ministers were in a daze of fear, an unexpected event suddenly occurred, and everyone lost their normal state.

古文：而秦法，群臣侍殿上者不得操尺寸之兵，左右以手共搏之，且曰： 王负剑！ 
现代文：秦国法律规定，在殿上侍从的群臣不得携带任何武器。因此大家只好徒手上前扑打荆轲，并喊道： 大王，把剑推上背！ 
English: According to the laws of Qin, the attendants of the courtiers in the palace were not allowed to carry any weapons. Therefore, they had no choice but to beat the thorns with their bare hands and shouted: Great King, put your sword on your back!

古文：负剑，王遂拔以击荆轲，断其左股。
现代文：秦王嬴政将剑推到背上，便剑套倾斜，剑柄向前，即拔出剑来回击荆轲，砍断了他的左大腿。
English: Qin King Yongzheng pushed the sword to his back, then the sword sheath tilted, the hilt moved forward, that is, he pulled out the sword and hit Jingyao back and forth, cutting off his left thigh.

古文：荆轲废，乃引匕首擿王，中铜柱。
现代文：荆轲肢体残废无法再追，便把匕首向秦王投掷过去，但却击中了铜柱。
English: Jing Yao's limbs were crippled and he could no longer chase, so he threw the dagger at Qin Wang, but it hit the bronze pillar.

古文：自知事不就，骂曰： 事所以不成者，以欲生劫之，必得约契以报太子也！ 
现代文：荆轲知道行刺之事已无法完成，就大骂道： 此事所以不能成功，只是想活捉你以后强迫你订立契约，归还所兼并的土地，以此回报燕太子啊！ 
English: Jing Yao knew that the assassination could not be completed, so he cursed loudly: "This matter cannot succeed, I just want to capture you alive and then force you to sign a contract to return the annexed land in return for Prince Yan!"

古文：遂体解荆轲以徇。
现代文：由是，荆轲被分尸示众。
English: As a result, Jing Yao's body was dismembered and displayed to the public.

古文：王于是大怒，益发兵诣赵，就王翦以伐燕，与燕师、代师战于易水之西，大破之。
现代文：秦王为此勃然大怒，增派军队去到赵国，随王翦的大军攻打燕国。秦军在易水以西与燕军和代王的军队会战，大破燕、代之兵。
English: King Qin was so enraged that he sent more troops to Zhao and followed Wang Yao's large army to attack Yan. The Qin army fought with Yan's army and the king's army west of Yishui, defeating Yan and his soldiers.

古文：始皇帝下二十一年
现代文：秦始皇帝下二十一年
English: Twenty-one years after the Qin Dynasty

古文：冬，十月，王翦拔蓟，燕王及太子率其精兵东保辽东，李信急追之。
现代文：冬季，十月，秦将王翦攻克燕都蓟城，燕国国君和太子姬丹率精兵向东图保辽东，秦将李信领兵急追。
English: In the winter, in October, Qin general Wang Qian conquered the city of Yantou, Yan Guo Guojun and Prince Hidan led the elite soldiers to the east to protect Liaodong, and Qin general Li Xin led the troops in hot pursuit.

古文：代王嘉遗燕王书，令杀太子丹以献。
现代文：代王赵嘉送信给燕王，要他杀太子丹献给秦王。
English: The acting king, Zhao Jia, sent a letter to Yan Wang, asking him to kill the prince Dan and dedicate it to Qin Wang.

古文：丹匿衍水中，燕王使使斩丹，欲以献王，王复进兵攻之。
现代文：太子丹这时躲藏在衍水一带，燕王即派使节往衍水杀了太子丹，准备把他的头颅献给秦王嬴政。但秦王再次发兵攻燕。
English: At that time, Prince Dan was hiding in the area of Yunshui. King Yan sent an envoy to Yunshui to kill Prince Dan and prepare to offer his head to Qin King Hezhen. However, Qin King sent troops to attack Yan again.

古文：王贲伐楚，取十馀城。
现代文：秦将王贲进攻楚国，攻陷十多座城。
English: Qin attacked the kingdom of Chu, capturing more than ten cities.

古文：王问于将军李信曰： 吾欲取荆，于将军度用几何人而足？ 
现代文：秦王嬴政询问将军李信说： 我想要夺取楚国，根据你的推测，需要出动多少人的军队才够？ 
English: Qin Wang Yanzheng asked General Li Xin, "I want to seize the State of Chu. According to your estimation, how many troops do I need to send?

古文：李信曰： 不过用二十万。 
现代文：李信说： 不过用二十万人。 
English: Li Xin said, "However, let's use 200,000 people."

古文：王以问王翦，王翦曰： 非六十万人不可。 
现代文：秦王嬴政又询问王翦，王翦说： 非六十万人的大军不可。 
English: Qin King Hezheng also asked Wang Yao, and Wang Yao said, "An army of six hundred thousand men is a must."

古文：王曰： 王将军老矣，何怯也！ 
现代文：秦王说： 王将军已经老了，怎么如此胆怯啊！ 
English: King Qin said, "General Wang is already old, why is he so timid?"

古文：遂使李信、蒙恬将二十万人伐楚；王翦因谢病归频阳。
现代文：便派李信、蒙恬率领二十万人进攻楚国。王翦于是称病辞职，返回故乡频阳。
English: Li Xin and Meng Ye then sent 200,000 people to attack Chu. Wang Ye then resigned, saying he was ill, and returned to his hometown of Fanyang.

古文：始皇帝下二十二年
现代文：秦始皇帝下二十二年
English: Twenty-two years after the Qin Dynasty

古文：王贲伐魏，引河沟以灌大梁。
现代文：秦将王贲率军征伐魏国，引汴河的水灌淹魏国都城大梁。
English: Qin general Wang Xi led his army to conquer Wei, and the water of the Wei River flooded the girders of the capital of Wei.

古文：三月，城坏。魏王假降，杀之，遂灭魏。
现代文：三月，大梁城垣塌毁，魏王魏假投降，为秦军杀死。魏国灭亡。
English: In March, the great beam of the city wall collapsed, the Wei king Wei Wei surrendered and was killed by the Qin army. The Wei state was destroyed.

古文：王使人谓安陵君曰： 寡人欲以五百里地易安陵。 
现代文：秦王嬴政遣人去通知安陵君说： 我想要用五百里的土地换你的安陵国。 
English: The Qin king sent an envoy to Anling to inform him: "I want to exchange five hundred miles of land for your Anling country.

古文：安陵君曰： 大王加惠，以大易小，甚幸。
现代文：安陵君说： 大王您施加恩惠给我，用大换小，真是太幸运了。
English: Anling said, "Your Majesty, I am so lucky that you have shown me so much favor.

古文：虽然，臣受地于魏之先王，愿终守之，弗敢易。 
现代文：但虽然如此，我这小国的土地是受封于魏国上代国君的，我愿意终生守护它，不敢交换！ 
English: But in spite of this, the land of my small country was sealed by the last emperor of Wei. I am willing to guard it for the rest of my life, I dare not exchange it!

古文：王义而许之。
现代文：秦王嬴政赞许他奉守道义，便应允了他的请求。
English: The Qin king, Qian Zheng, approved of his adherence to morality and justice, and agreed to his request.

古文：李信攻平舆，蒙恬攻寝，大破楚军。
现代文：秦将李信进攻平舆，蒙恬攻击寝，大败楚军。
English: Qin sent Li Xin to attack Pingwu, while Mengye attacked and defeated the Chu army.

古文：信又攻鄢郢，破之，于是引兵而西，与蒙恬会城父，楚人因随之，三日三夜不顿舍，大败李信，入两壁，杀七都尉；李信奔还。
现代文：李信再攻鄢郢，攻克了该城，于是率军西进，到城父与蒙恬的队伍会合。楚军趁机尾随在后，三天三夜不停宿休息，反击中大败李信的军队，攻入秦军的两个营地，斩杀了七个都尉。李信率残部逃奔回秦国。
English: Li Xin then attacked Qin and conquered the city, so he led his army westward and went to the city father to meet with the team of Qin. The Chu army took advantage of the opportunity to follow behind, and rested for three days and three nights. Li Xin's army, which was defeated in the counterattack, broke into two camps of the Qin army and killed seven captains. Li Xin led the remnants to flee back to Qin.

古文：王闻之，大怒，自至频阳谢王翦曰： 寡人不用将军谋，李信果辱秦军。
现代文：秦王嬴政闻讯，暴跳如雷，亲自前往频阳向王翦道歉说： 我没有采用将军你的计策，而李信果然使秦军蒙受了耻辱。
English: Upon hearing the news, Qin Wang Xizheng flew into a rage and personally went to Fenyang to apologize to Wang Xizheng, saying: I did not adopt the general's strategy, and Li Xin did indeed bring disgrace to the Qin army.

古文：将军虽病，独忍弃寡人乎！ 
现代文：现在将军你虽然患病，但难道就忍心抛下我不管吗？ 
English: Now, General, although you are ill, can you bear to leave me alone?

古文：王翦谢病不能将，王曰： 已矣，勿复言！ 
现代文：王翦仍推辞道： 我实在病得不能领兵打仗了。 秦王嬴政说： 好啦，不要再这么说了！ 
English: Wang Yao still prevaricated, saying, "I am really too ill to lead soldiers into battle." Qin Wang Yao Zheng said, "All right, don't say that again!

古文：王翦曰： 必不得已用臣，非六十万人不可！ 
现代文：王翦说： 如果不得已一定要用我的话，非用六十万人的军队不可！ 
English: Wang Yao said, "If I have to use my words, I must use an army of 600,000 men!"

古文：王曰： 为听将军计耳。 
现代文：秦王嬴政答道： 就听从将军你的主张行事吧。 
English: Qin Wang Xizheng replied: Just listen to the general and act according to your suggestion.

古文：于是王翦将六十万人伐楚。
现代文：于是王翦率领六十万大军征伐楚国，秦王亲自送行到霸上。
English: As a result, Wang Qian led 600,000 troops to conquer Chu, and the Qin King personally escorted them to Hegang.

古文：王送至霸上，王翦请美田宅甚众。王曰： 将军行矣，何忧贫乎！ 
现代文：王翦请求秦王赏赐他相当多的良田美宅。秦王说： 你就出发吧，为什么还要担心日后贫穷呀！ 
English: Wang Yao asked the King of Qin to reward him with a considerable number of good fields and beautiful houses. The King of Qin said: Just go ahead, why worry about poverty in the future!

古文：王翦曰： 为大王将，有功，终不得封侯，故及大王之向臣，以请田宅为子孙业耳。 
现代文：王翦说： 身为大王您的将领，虽立下战功，但最终仍不能被封侯，所以趁着大王现在正看重我，请求赏赐田宅，好为子孙留下产业啊。 
English: Wang Yao said, "As a great king and your general, although I have made great achievements in war, I still can't be given a title of nobility. Therefore, taking advantage of the fact that the great king is now valuing me, I would like to request that he reward me with a farmhouse so that I can leave an inheritance for my children and grandchildren."

古文：王大笑。
现代文：秦王嬴政听后大笑不止。
English: Qin Wang Xizheng laughed uncontrollably after hearing the joke.

古文：王翦既行，至关，使使还请善田者五辈。
现代文：王翦率军开拔，抵达武关，又陆续派遣五位使者向秦王嬴政请求赏赐良田。
English: Wang Hui led the army to march and arrived at Wuguan, and successively sent five envoys to Qin Wang Huizheng to request the reward of good fields.

古文：或曰： 将军之乞贷亦已甚矣！ 
现代文：有人说： 将军您向秦王求讨东西也已是太过分了吧！ 
English: Some people said: General, it is too much for you to ask for something from King Qin!

古文：王翦曰： 不然。
现代文：王剪答道： 不是这样。
English: Wang Yao said, "It's not right to say that."

古文：王怚中而不信人，今空国中之甲士而专委于我，我不多请田宅为子孙业以自坚，顾令王坐而疑我矣。 
现代文：大王心性粗暴而多猜忌，如今将国中的武装士兵调拨一空，专门托付给我指挥，我若不借多求赏赐田宅为子孙谋立产业，表示坚决为大王效力，大王反倒要无缘无故地对我有所怀疑了啊。 
English: The great king is of a rough and suspicious nature, and now he has allocated all the armed soldiers in the country to me and entrusted me with the command. If I do not ask for more rewards and provide fields and houses for my children and grandchildren, and express my determination to work for the great king, the great king will have suspicions about me for no reason.

古文：始皇帝下二十三年
现代文：秦始皇帝下二十三年
English: Twenty-three years after the Qin Dynasty

古文：王翦取陈以南至平舆。
现代文：秦将王翦率大军取道陈丘以南抵达平舆。
English: Qin general Wang Hui led a large army south of Chenqiu and arrived in Pingwu.

古文：楚人闻王翦益军而来，乃悉国中兵以御之；王翦坚壁不与战。
现代文：楚国人闻讯王翦增兵而来，便出动国中的全部兵力抵抗秦军。王翦下令坚守营寨不与楚军交锋。
English: When the people of Chu heard that Wang Pi had increased the number of troops, they mobilized all the troops in the country to resist the Qin army. Wang Pi ordered to hold the camp and not to clash with the Chu army.

古文：楚人数挑战，终不出。
现代文：楚人多次到营前挑战，秦军始终也不出战。
English: The Chu people repeatedly came to the front of the camp to challenge, but the Qin army never went to war.

古文：王翦日休士洗沐，而善饮食，抚循之；亲与士卒同食。
现代文：王翦每天让士兵休息、洗沐，享用好的饮食，安抚慰问他们，并亲自与他们共同进餐。
English: Every day, Wang Yao let the soldiers rest, wash, enjoy good food, comfort them, and personally dine with them.

古文：久之，王翦使人问： 军中戏乎？ 
现代文：这样过了很长一段时间，王翦派人打听： 军中进行什么嬉戏啊？ 
English: After this had been going on for a long time, Wang Yao sent someone to inquire: Are there any gaming activities going on in the military camp?

古文：对曰： 方投石、超距。 
现代文：回答说： 军士们正在玩投石、跳跃的游戏。 
English: "The sergeants are playing rock-throwing, jumping games," he replied.

古文：王翦曰： 可用矣！ 
现代文：王翦便说： 这样的军队可以用来作战了。 
English: Wang Yao then said, "This kind of army can be used for fighting."

古文：楚既不得战，乃引而东。
现代文：此时楚军既然无法与秦军交锋，就挥师向东而去。
English: At this time, since the Chu army could not clash with the Qin army, they waved their division to the east.

古文：王翦追之，令壮士击，大破楚师，至蕲南，杀其将军项燕，楚师遂败走。
现代文：王翦即率军尾追，令壮士们发起突击，大败楚军，直至蕲县之南，斩杀楚国将军项燕，楚军于是溃败逃亡。
English: Wang Qian immediately led the army to chase the tail, so that the strong men launched a surprise attack, defeated the Chu army, until the south of the county, killed the Chu general Xiang Yan, and the Chu army was routed and fled.

古文：王翦因乘胜略定城邑。
现代文：王翦乘胜夺取并平定了楚国的一些城镇。
English: Wang Qian took advantage of the victory to seize and pacify some towns in Chu.

古文：始皇帝下二十四年
现代文：秦始皇帝下二十四年
English: Twenty-four years under Emperor Qin Shi Huang

古文：王翦、蒙武虏楚王负刍，以其地置楚郡。
现代文：秦将王翦、蒙武俘获了楚国国君芈负刍，在楚地设置楚郡。
English: The Qin general Wang Qian and the Mengwu captured the prince of Chu and set up Chu County in Chu.

古文：始皇帝下二十五年
现代文：秦始皇帝下二十五年
English: Twenty-five years under Qin Shi Huang

古文：大兴兵，使王贲攻辽东，虏燕王喜。
现代文：秦国大举兴兵，派王贲率兵进攻辽东，俘获了燕国国君姬喜。
English: Qin State raised a large army and sent Wang Xi to attack Liaodong with his soldiers, and captured Yan's prince, Jixi.

古文：臣光曰：燕丹不胜一朝之忿以犯虎狼之秦，轻虑浅谋，挑怨速祸，使召公之庙不祀忽诸，罪孰大焉！
现代文：臣司马光曰：燕太子丹不能忍受一时的激忿而去冒犯如狼似虎的秦国，虑崐事轻率，谋划浅薄，以致挑起怨恨，加速了灭亡之祸，使供奉燕国始祖召公的宗庙祭祀忽然中断，罪过没有比这个更大的了！
English: The courtier Sima Guang said: Prince Yan Dan could not bear the momentary anger and offended the wolf-like tiger of Qin. He was careless and thoughtless, and his plan was shallow, which provoked resentment and accelerated the calamity of destruction. It caused the worship of Yan's ancestor Zhao Gong's ancestral temple to be suddenly interrupted. There is no greater sin than this!

古文：而论者或谓之贤，岂不过哉！
现代文：而评论的人有的还把太子丹说成是德才兼备的人，这难道不是太过分了吗！
English: And some commentators have even described Prince Dan as a man of both virtue and talent. Isn't that going too far?

古文：夫为国家者，任官以才，立政以礼，怀民以仁，交邻以信。
现代文：对于治理国家的人来说，任命有才能的人为官，按照礼制确立政策法规，以仁爱之心安抚百姓，凭借信义结交邻邦。
English: For those who govern the country, appoint talented people as officials, establish policies and regulations in accordance with the etiquette, pacify the people with benevolence, and make friends with neighbors by virtue of good faith.

古文：是以官得其人，政得其节，百姓怀其德，四邻亲其义。
现代文：如此，官员由有才干的人担任，政事得到礼教的节制，百姓人心归向他的德行，四邻亲近友善他的恪守信义。
English: In this way, officials are held by talented people, government affairs are restrained by etiquette, the people's hearts are drawn to his virtues, and his neighbors are close and friendly.

古文：夫如是，则国家安如磐石，炽如焱火。触之者碎，犯之者焦，虽有强暴之国，尚何足畏哉！
现代文：这样，国家则会安如磐石，炽如火焰，触犯它的一定被撞得粉碎，挨着它的一定被烧得焦头烂额。似此，即便是有强暴的敌国存在，又有什么值得畏惧的呢！
English: In this way, the country will be as safe as a rock and as fiery as a flame. If you touch it, you will be smashed to pieces, and if you stand next to it, you will be burned to a crisp. So, even if there is a violent enemy country, what is there to fear?

古文：丹释此不为，顾以万乘之国，决匹夫之怒，逞盗贼之谋，功隳身戮，社稷为墟，不亦悲哉！
现代文：太子丹放弃这条路不走，反而用万辆战车的大国去排解个人的私愤、炫耀盗贼式的谋略，结果是功名被毁坏、身命遭杀戮，江山社稷化作废墟，这难道不是很令人悲痛的事吗！
English: Prince Dan did not abandon this path, but instead used the great power of ten thousand chariots to resolve his personal private anger and show off his thieving strategy. As a result, his reputation was destroyed, his life was killed, and the country and society were reduced to ruins. Isn't this a very sad thing!

古文：夫其膝行、蒲伏，非恭也；复言、重诺，非信也；糜金、散玉，非惠也；刎首、决腹，非勇也。
现代文：跪着前进，伏地而行，并不表示恭敬；言必行，重承诺，并不表示守信义；过度耗费金钱，散发玉器，并不表示施恩惠；自割颈部，自剖肚腹，并不表示勇敢。
English: To advance on one's knees and walk on the ground does not indicate respect; to keep one's word and honor one's promises does not indicate keeping one's word; to spend money excessively and distribute jade objects does not indicate granting favors; to cut one's own neck and cut one's own stomach does not indicate bravery.

古文：要之，谋不远而动不义，其楚白公胜之流乎！
现代文：这种种问题的关键在于，只顾眼前利益不能深谋远虑而行动不合乎礼义，似此不过是楚国的为复仇而丧生的白公胜之流罢了！
English: The key to these kinds of problems lies in the fact that it is impolite to act without forethought, considering only the immediate interests. It seems that this is nothing more than the stream of white knights who lost their lives for revenge in Chu!

古文：荆轲怀其豢养之私，不顾七族，欲以尺八匕首强燕而弱秦，不亦愚乎！
现代文：荆轲心怀报答太子姬丹豢养的私情，不顾及全家七族之人会受牵连，想要用一把短小的匕首使燕国强大、秦国削弱，这难道不是愚蠢之极吗！
English: Is it not the height of folly for Jing Xuan to want to use a short dagger to make Yan's country strong and Qin's country weak without considering that the whole family of the seven ethnic groups will be implicated?

古文：故扬子论之，以要离为蛛蝥之靡，聂政为壮士之靡，荆轲为刺客之靡，皆不可谓之义。
现代文：所以扬雄对此评论说，要离的死是蜘蛛、蝥虫一类的死，聂政的死是壮士一类的死，荆轲的死是刺客一类的死，这些都不能算作 义 。
English: Therefore, Yang Xiong commented on this, saying that the death to be departed from is the death of a spider and a tapeworm, the death of Ying Zheng is the death of a strong man, and the death of Jing Yao is the death of an assassin, none of which can be counted as righteousness.

古文：又曰： 荆轲，君子盗诸！ 
现代文：他又说： 荆轲，按君子的道德观念来看，是类如盗贼之辈了。 
English: He also said, "Jing Tong, according to the gentleman's moral concept, is like a generation of thieves.

古文：善哉！
现代文：此话说得好啊！
English: That's a great way to put it!

古文：王贲攻代，虏代王嘉。
现代文：秦将王贲率军攻代，俘获代王赵嘉。
English: Qin general Wang Hui led an army to attack and capture the acting king, Zhao Jia.

古文：王翦悉定荆江南地，降百越之君，置会稽郡。
现代文：秦将王翦全部平定楚国长江以南的地区，降服百越的首领，设置了会稽郡。
English: Qin subdued all the regions south of the Yangtze River in the State of Chu, subdued the leaders of more than a hundred provinces, and set up the county of Heji.

古文：五月，天下大酺。
现代文：五月，秦国命令特许全国举行大规模的聚会宴饮。
English: In May, the whole world gathers for feasting.

古文：初，齐君王后贤，事秦谨，与诸侯信；齐亦东边海上。
现代文：当初，齐国的君王后贤惠有才干，使齐国能小心周到地侍奉秦国，对其他各诸侯国奉守信义。齐国东靠大海，不与秦国相邻。
English: At the beginning, the queen of Qi, Qian Hui, was talented, so that Qi could serve Qin carefully and conscientiously, and keep faith with other vassal states. Qi is east of the sea and is not adjacent to Qin.

古文：秦日夜攻三晋、燕、楚，五国各自救，以故齐王建立四十馀年不受兵。
现代文：而那时秦国日夜不停地进攻韩、赵、魏、燕、楚等国，这五国分别忙于调兵自救，无暇他顾，所以齐王田建即位四十多年未遭逢过战乱。
English: At that time, Qin attacked Han, Zhao, Wei, Yan, Chu and other countries day and night. These five countries were busy with mobilizing troops for self-rescue and had no time to pay attention to him, so Qi Wang Tianjian's accession to the throne did not encounter war for more than forty years.

古文：及君王后且死，戒王建曰： 群臣之可用者某。 
现代文：君王后即将去世时，告诫田建说： 群臣中可以任用的是某某。 
English: When the empress was about to die, he admonished Tian Jian and said, "Among the courtiers, only so-and-so can be appointed.

古文：王曰： 请书之。 君王后曰： 善！ 
现代文：田建说： 请让我把名字写下来。 君王后说： 好吧。 
English: Tian Jian said, "Please let me write down your name," and the queen said, "Okay."

古文：王取笔牍受言，君王后曰； 老妇已忘矣。 
现代文：但等到齐王取来笔和木牍，准备记下她的话时，君王后却说： 我已经忘记了。 
English: But when King Qi took out a pen and a wooden dowel and prepared to write down her words, the Empress Dowager said, "I have already forgotten."

古文：君王后死，后胜相齐，多受秦间金。
现代文：君王后去世后，后胜出任齐国的相国，他大量接受秦国为挑拨齐国君臣关系而施给他的金银财宝。
English: After the death of the empress dowager, Hou Sheng served as Qi's consort, and he received a large amount of gold, silver and treasure from Qin in order to instigate the relationship between Qi's monarchs and subjects.

古文：宾客入秦，秦又多与金。客皆为反间，劝王朝秦，不修攻战之备，不助五国攻秦，秦以故得灭五国。
现代文：而齐国的宾客进入秦国时，秦国又给以重金，使这些宾客回国后都反过来为秦国说话，劝说齐王去朝拜秦王，不必整治、修建用作攻战的防备设施，不要去援助那五个国家进攻秦国。秦国也即因此得以灭掉了五国。
English: And when the guests from Qi entered Qin, Qin gave them a large sum of money, so that these guests, after returning home, would in turn speak for Qin and persuade the king of Qi to pay homage to the king of Qin, not to repair and build defensive facilities for offensive warfare, and not to assist the five countries to attack Qin. Qin was also able to eliminate the five countries.

古文：齐王将入朝，雍门司马前曰： 所为立王者，为社稷耶，为王耶？ 王曰： 为社稷。 
现代文：齐王将要动身往咸阳朝拜秦王嬴政，齐国的雍门司马迎上前说： 齐国所以要设立国君，是为了国家，还是为了国君自己啊？ 齐王说： 是为国家。 
English: King Qi was about to set out for Xianyang to pay homage to Qin King Hezhen. The Yongmen Sima of Qi stepped forward and said, "Is it for the sake of the country, or for the sake of the king himself, that Qi should set up a sovereign?" King Qi said, "It is for the sake of the country."

古文：司马曰： 为社稷立王，王何以去社稷而入秦？ 
现代文：司马道： 既然是为了国家才设立君王，那您为什么还要离开自己的国家而到秦国去呢？ 
English: Sima said, "Since you set up a king for the country, then why do you want to abandon the country and go to Qin?"

古文：齐王还车而反。
现代文：齐王于是下令掉转车头返回王宫。
English: King Qi then turned around and went back to the palace.

古文：即墨大夫闻之，见齐王曰： 齐地方四千里，带甲数百万。
现代文：即墨大夫闻讯进见齐王说： 齐国国土方圆数千里，军队数百万。
English: When Dr. Zhimo heard the news, he went to see King Qi and said, "The country of Qi is thousands of miles in circumference and has millions of troops.

古文：夫三晋大夫皆不便秦，而在阿、鄄之间者百数；王收而与之百万人之众，使收三晋之故地，即临晋之关可以入矣。
现代文：现韩、赵、魏三国的官员都不愿接受秦国的统治，逃亡在阿城、甄城之间的有数百人。大王您将这些人收拢起来，交给他们百万之多的兵士，让他们去收复韩、赵、魏三国旧日的疆土，如此，就是秦国的临晋关也可以进入了。
English: The current officials of Han, Zhao, and Wei are unwilling to accept the rule of Qin. There are hundreds of people who have fled between Acheng and Zhencheng. You, the great king, have gathered these people together and given them more than a million soldiers, so that they can recover the old territory of Han, Zhao, and Wei. In this way, even the Jin Pass of Qin can be entered.

古文：鄢郢大夫不欲为秦，而在城南下者百数，王收而与之百万之师，使收楚故地，即武关可以入矣。
现代文：楚国鄢郢的官员们不愿受秦国驱使，逃匿在南城之下的有数百人。大王您将这些人聚集起来，交给他们百万人的军队，让他们去收复楚国原来的土地，如此，即便是武关也可以进入了。
English: The officials of Chu Kokuyo did not want to be driven by Qin, and hundreds of people fled and hid under Nancheng. You, the Great King, gathered these people together and gave them a million-man army to recover the original land of Chu, so that even the Wuguan could enter.

古文：如此，则齐威可立，秦国可亡，岂特保其国家而已哉！ 
现代文：这样一来，齐国的威望得以树立，秦国则可被灭亡，这又岂只是保全自己的国家而已！ 
English: In this way, the prestige of Qi could be established, while that of Qin could be destroyed, and this was just to preserve their own country!

古文：齐王不听。
现代文：但是齐王不接受这一建议。
English: King Qi did not listen.

古文：始皇帝下二十六年
现代文：秦始皇帝下二十六年
English: Twenty-six years after the Qin Dynasty

古文：王贲自燕南攻齐，猝入临淄，民莫敢格者。
现代文：秦将王贲率军从燕国向南进攻齐国，突然攻入都城临淄，齐国国民中没有敢于抵抗的。
English: Qin general Wang Qian led an army from Yan to the south to attack Qi, and suddenly invaded the capital city of Linyi. No one in Qi dared to resist.

古文：秦使人诱齐王，约封以五百里之地。
现代文：秦国派人诱降齐王，约定封给他五百里的土地，齐王于是便投降了。
English: Qin State sent someone to entice King Qi to surrender, and agreed to give him 500 miles of land. King Qi then surrendered.

古文：齐王遂降，秦迁之共，处之松柏之间，饿而死。
现代文：但是秦国却将他迁移到共地，安置在松柏之间，最终被饿死。
English: However, Qin moved him to common land, placed him among pine trees, and he eventually starved to death.

古文：齐人怨王建不早与诸侯合从，听奸人宾客以亡其国，歌之曰： 松耶，柏耶，住建共者客耶！ 
现代文：齐国人埋怨君王田建不早参与诸侯国的合纵联盟，而却听信奸佞、宾客的意见，以致使国家遭到灭亡，故为此编歌谣说： 松树啊，柏树啊！使田建迁住共地饿死的，是宾客啊！ 
English: The people of Qi complained that the king, Tian Jian, did not participate early enough in the alliance of the principalities, but listened to the opinions of the traitors and guests, so that the country was destroyed. Therefore, they made up songs to say: Pine tree, cypress tree! It was the guests who made Tian Jian move to the common land and starve to death!

古文：疾建用客之不详也。
现代文：恨田建任用宾客不审慎考察。
English: It means that he hates Wang Jian for using guests without paying attention to the examination.

古文：臣光曰：从衡之说虽反覆百端，然大要合从者，六国之利也。
现代文：臣司马光曰：合纵、连横的学说虽然反复无常，但其中最主要的是，合纵符合六国的利益。
English: Minister Sima Guang said: Although the doctrines of vertical and horizontal integration are capricious, the most important of them is that vertical integration is in the interests of the six countries.

古文：昔先王建万国，亲诸侯，使之朝聘以相交，飨宴以相乐，会盟以相结者，无他，欲其同心戮力以保国家也。
现代文：从前，先王封立大量封国，亲近爱抚各国诸侯，使他们通过拜会、探访来增进相互交往，用酒宴招待他们以增进欢乐友好，实行会盟而增进团结联合，不为别的，就是希望他们能同心协力共保国家。
English: Once upon a time, the late king granted a large number of fiefs, befriended and caressed the princes of various countries, so that they could enhance mutual exchanges through meetings and visits, invited them to wine banquets to enhance happiness and friendship, and implemented alliances to enhance solidarity and unity, for no other reason than to hope that they could work together to jointly safeguard the country.

古文：向使六国能以信义相亲，则秦虽强暴，安得而亡之哉！
现代文：假使当初六国能以信义相互亲善，那么秦国虽然强暴，六国又怎么能被它所灭亡掉呢！
English: Assuming that the six countries can be friendly to each other in good faith at the beginning, then although Qin is violent, how can the six countries be destroyed by it?

古文：夫三晋者，齐、楚之籓蔽；齐、楚者，三晋之根柢；形势相资，表里相依。
现代文：韩、赵、魏三国是齐、楚两国的屏障，而齐、楚两国则是韩、赵、魏三国的基础，它们形势上相依托，表里间相依赖。
English: The three countries of Han, Zhao and Wei are the barrier between Qi and Chu, while Qi and Chu are the foundation of Han, Zhao and Wei. They support each other and depend on each other.

古文：故以三晋而攻齐、楚，自绝其根柢也；以齐、楚而攻三晋，自撤其籓蔽也。
现代文：所以韩、赵、魏三国进攻齐、楚，是自断根基；而齐、楚两国征伐韩、赵、魏三国，则是自撤屏障。
English: Therefore, the three countries of Han, Zhao, and Wei attacking Qi and Chu is a self-severing foundation; while the two countries of Qi and Chu conquering Han, Zhao, and Wei is a self-withdrawal barrier.

古文：安有撤其籓蔽以媚盗，曰 盗将爱我而不攻 ，岂不悖哉！
现代文：可哪里有自己拆毁屏障以讨好盗贼，还说 盗贼将会爱惜我而不攻击我 的，这难道不是荒谬得很吗？
English: But isn't it absurd that anyone would tear down a barrier to please a thief, saying that the thief would take pity on me and not attack me?

古文：王初并天下，自以为德兼三皇，功过五帝，乃更号曰 皇帝，命为 制 ，令为 诏 ，自称曰 朕 。
现代文：秦王嬴政刚刚兼并六国，统一天下，自认为兼备了三皇的德行，功业超过了五帝，于是便改称号为 皇帝 ，皇帝出命称 制书 ，下令称 诏书 ，皇帝的自称为 朕 。
English: Qin King Baizheng had just annexed six countries and unified them. He thought that he possessed the virtues of the three emperors and his achievements exceeded those of the five emperors, so he changed his title to Emperor. The emperor issued an order to call it "Book-making," issued an order to call it "Decree," and the emperor called himself "I."

古文：追尊庄襄王为太上皇。
现代文：追尊父亲庄襄王为太上皇。
English: Emperor Taizhongzhuang is crowned as the last emperor.

古文：制曰： 死而以行为谥，则是子议父，臣议君也，甚无谓。
现代文：并颁布制书说： 君王死后依据他生前的行为加定谥号，这是儿子议论父亲，臣子议论君王，实在没意思。
English: And issued a book, saying: after the death of the king, according to his actions during his lifetime, a nickname was added. This is a son talking about his father, a vassal talking about the king. It's really not interesting.

古文：自今以来，除谥法。
现代文：从今以后，废除为帝王上谥号的制度。
English: From now on, abolish the system of imperial surnames.

古文：朕为始皇帝，后世以计数，二世、三世至于万世，传之无穷。 
现代文：朕为始皇帝，后继者以序数计算崐，称为二世皇帝、三世皇帝，以至万世，无穷尽地传下去。 
English: I am the first emperor, and the successors are counted by the ordinal number of, called the second emperor, the third emperor, and even the world, and are passed on endlessly.

古文：初，齐威、宣之时，邹衍论著终始五德之运；及始皇并天下，齐人奏之。
现代文：当初，齐威王、齐宣王的时候，邹衍研究创立了金、木、水、火、土终而复始的 五德相运 学说。到了始皇帝合并天下时，齐国人将此说奏报给他。
English: At the beginning, during the reigns of King Qi Wei and King Qi Xuan, Zou Yan studied and founded the theory of the Five Germanic Elements, which states that gold, wood, water, fire, and earth all return to the same place. When the First Emperor unified the country, the people of Qi reported this theory to him.

古文：始皇采用其说，以为周得火德，秦代周，从所不胜，为水德。
现代文：始皇采纳了这套学说，认为周朝是火德，秦取代周，从火不能胜水来推算，秦应是水德。
English: The first emperor adopted this set of doctrines, believing that the Zhou Dynasty was fire and virtue, and that Qin replaced Zhou. It was deduced that fire could not defeat water, and that Qin should be water and virtue.

古文：始改年，朝贺皆自十月朔；衣服、旌旄、节旗皆尚黑，数以六为纪。
现代文：于是开始下令更改岁历，新年朝见皇帝与庄贺典礼都从十月初一开始，以十月初一为元旦；衣服、旗帜、符节等都崇尚用黑色；计数以六为一个单位。
English: Therefore, he began to order the change of the calendar. The New Year's morning meeting with the emperor and the Zhuanghe ceremony both began at the beginning of October, with the first day of October as New Year's Day. Clothes, flags, symbols, etc. are all advocated to use black; the number of six is a unit.

古文：丞相绾等言： 燕、齐、荆地远，不为置王，无以镇之。
现代文：丞相王绾说： 燕、齐、楚三国的故地距都城咸阳过于遥远，不在那里设置侯王，便不能镇抚。
English: Wang Xi, the chancellor, said: The ancestral lands of Yan, Qi, and Chu are too far away from the capital Xianyang. If you don't set up a governor there, you can't pacify it.

古文：请立诸子。 
现代文：因此请分封诸位皇子为侯王。 
English: Therefore, I would like to ask all the princes to be crowned as princes.

古文：始皇下其议。
现代文：始皇帝将这一建议交给大臣评议。
English: The first emperor passed on their suggestion for discussion.

古文：廷尉斯曰： 周文、武所封子弟同姓甚众，然后属疏远，相攻击如仇雠，周天子弗能禁止。
现代文：廷尉李斯说： 周文王、周武王分封子弟族人非常多，他们的后代彼此疏远，相互攻击如同仇敌，周天子也无法加以制止。
English: The courtier Li said: There are many descendants of Zhou Wen Wang and Zhou Wu Wang. Their descendants are estranged from each other and attack each other as enemies. Zhou Tianzi cannot stop them.

古文：今海内赖陛下神灵一统，皆为郡、县，诸子功臣以公赋税重赏赐之，甚足易制，天下无异意，则安宁之术也。
现代文：现在四海之内，仰仗陛下的神灵而获得统一，全国都划分为郡和县，对各位皇子及有功之臣，用国家征收的赋税重重给予赏赐，这样即可以非常容易地进行控制，使天下人对秦朝廷不怀二心，才是安定国家的方略。
English: Now, within the four seas, relying on the deities of His Majesty to achieve unification, the whole country is divided into counties and counties, and the princes and meritorious vassals are rewarded with the taxes levied by the state. In this way, it is very easy to control, so that the people of the world do not have any ambivalence towards the Qin Dynasty. This is the strategy for a stable country.

古文：置诸侯不便。 
现代文：分封诸侯则不适宜。 
English: It is not appropriate to have feudal lords.

古文：始皇曰： 天下共苦战斗不休，以有侯王。
现代文：始皇说： 天下人都吃尽了无休止的战争之苦，全是因为有诸侯王存在的缘故。
English: The first emperor said: The people of the world have exhausted the suffering of endless war, all because of the existence of princes.

古文：赖宗庙，天下初定，又复立国，是树兵也；而求其宁息，岂不难哉！
现代文：今日依赖祖先的在天之灵，使天下初步平定，假若又重新封侯建国，便是自己招引兵事、培植战乱，似此而想求得宁静、养息，岂不是极困难的事情吗？
English: Today, we rely on the spirit of our ancestors in heaven to initially pacify the world. If we were to establish a new feudal state, it would mean that we would have to recruit soldiers and instigate wars. Would it not be extremely difficult to maintain peace and tranquility like this?

古文：廷尉议是。 
现代文：廷尉的主张是对的。 
English: The courtier's advice was right.

古文：分天下为三十六郡，郡置守、尉、监。
现代文：始皇帝于是下令把全国划分为三十六个郡，每个郡设置郡守、郡尉、监御史。
English: The first emperor then ordered that the whole country be divided into 36 counties, with a county governor, county lieutenant, and supervisor of history in each county.

古文：收天下兵聚咸阳，销以为锺鐻、金人十二，重各千石，置宫廷中。
现代文：又下令收缴全国民间所藏的兵器，运送汇集到咸阳，熔毁后铸成大钟和钟架，以及十二个铜人，各重千石，放置在宫庭中。
English: He also ordered the confiscation of weapons stored by civilians across the country, which were transported to Xianyang and melted down to make a large bell and bell stand, as well as twelve bronze men, each weighing a thousand stones, placed in the palace courtyard.

古文：一法度、衡、石、丈尺。徙天下豪杰于咸阳十二万户。
现代文：并统一法制和度量衡，将各地富豪十二万户迁徙到咸阳置于朝廷的监控下。
English: And unified the legal system and weights and measures, moving 120,000 wealthy households from all over the country to Xianyang and placing them under the supervision of the imperial court.

古文：诸庙及章台、上林皆在渭南。
现代文：秦王朝祭祀祖先、神佛的宗庙等处所和章台宫、上林苑都设在渭水南岸。
English: The mausoleums of the kings of Qin, Zhangdai and Shanglinyuan are all on the southern shore of Surabaya.

古文：每破诸侯，写放其宫室，作之咸阳北阪上，南临渭，自雍门以东至泾、渭，殿屋、复道、周阁相属，所得诸侯美人、钟鼓以充入之。
现代文：而秦国每征服一个国家，就摹画、仿照该国的宫室，在咸阳城北的山坡上同样建造一座。如此南临渭水，自雍门向东至泾水、渭水相交处，宫殿屋宇、天桥、楼阁相连接，所获得的各国美女、钟鼓等乐器都安置在里边。
English: For every country conquered by the Qin Dynasty, they also built a palace on the hillside north of Xianyang City, which was painted and modeled after the palace of that country. Thus, the palace buildings, skybridges, and pavilions were connected south of Surabaya, from Yongmen to the east to the intersection of Surabaya and Surabaya, and the beautiful women, bells, drums, and other musical instruments obtained from various countries were placed inside.

古文：始皇帝下二十七年
现代文：秦始皇帝下二十七年
English: The 27th year of the reign of Emperor Qin Shi Huang

古文：始皇巡陇西、北地，至鸡头山，过回中焉。
现代文：始皇帝出巡陇西、北地，到鸡头山而还，经过回中宫。
English: The First Emperor went on a cruise to the west and the north, and returned to the Jitou Mountain, passing back to the Middle Palace.

古文：作信宫渭南，已，更命曰极庙。
现代文：在渭水南岸兴建长信宫，竣工后改名为极庙宫。
English: Changxin Palace was built on the south bank of Surabaya. After completion, it was renamed Jiujiang Temple Palace.

古文：自极庙道通骊山，作甘泉前殿，筑甬道自咸阳属之，治驰道于天下。
现代文：从极庙筑路通到骊山，兴造甘泉宫前殿，修筑甬道连接咸阳，又以咸阳为中心筑驰道通往全国各地。
English: From the Pole Temple, build a road to Lushan, build the front hall of Ganquan Palace, build a road connecting Xianyang, and build a road leading to all parts of the country with Xianyang as the center.

古文：始皇帝下二十八年
现代文：秦始皇帝下二十八年
English: In the 28th year of the reign of Qin Shi Huang

古文：始皇东行郡、县，上邹峄山，立石颂功业。
现代文：始皇帝出巡东部各郡、县，登上邹地的峄山，树立石碑赞颂秦朝的功勋业绩。
English: The First Emperor went on a tour of the eastern counties and counties, climbed Mount Lushan in Lushan, and erected a stone monument to praise the achievements of the Qin Dynasty.

古文：于是召集鲁儒生七十人，至泰山下，议封禅。
现代文：召集过去鲁地崇信儒学的文人七十名，到泰山下商议祭祀天地的封禅之事。
English: Seventy literati who believed in Confucianism in ancient Ludi were summoned to the foot of Mount Tai to discuss the matter of enshrining heaven and earth.

古文：诸儒或曰： 古者封禅，为蒲车，恶伤山之土石、草木；扫地而祭，席用菹秸。 
现代文：诸儒生中有的说： 古时候的君王封禅，用蒲草裹住车轮，不愿伤害山上的土石草木；扫地祭祀时所使用的席都是用草编成的。 
English: Some of the Confucian scholars said: In ancient times, emperors would wrap the wheels of their chariots with rushes, not wanting to harm the rocks and trees on the mountain. The seats used in the sweeping ceremony were made of grass.

古文：议各乖异。
现代文：各人的议论很不相同。
English: The arguments are very different.

古文：始皇以其难施用，由此绌儒生。而遂除车道，上自太山阳至颠，立石颂德；从阴道下，禅于梁父。
现代文：始皇帝认为众人所说的很难实际采用，便因此而贬退儒生；并且下令开通车道，从泰山南麓上到顶峰，竖立石碑歌颂自己的功德，又从泰山北面顺道而下，到梁父山祭地。
English: The first emperor thought that what many people said was difficult to actually adopt, so he belittled Confucianism; and ordered the opening of the driveway from the southern foot of Mount Tai to the peak, erected a stone monument to praise his own merits, and from the northern face of Mount Tai down the road to the Liangchishan festival site.

古文：其礼颇采太祝之祀雍上帝所用，而封藏皆秘之，世不得而记也。
现代文：祭祀仪式颇采用秦国古时在雍城由太祝令主持的祭祀上天的形式。而怎样封土埋藏却全都保密，世人无法获悉并记录下来。
English: The sacrificial rites are very much in the form of the sacrifices to the heavens that were presided over by the Grand Empress Dowager in Yongcheng in the ancient times of Qin. However, how the soil was sealed and buried was all kept secret, and the world was unable to learn about it and record it.

古文：于是始皇遂东游海上，行礼祠名山、大川及八神。
现代文：始皇帝随即又向东出游沿海各地，祭礼名山大川及天、地、兵、阴、阳、月、日、四时八神。
English: The First Emperor then traveled eastward to various places along the coast, and celebrated the famous mountains and rivers, as well as the gods of heaven, earth, soldiers, yin, yang, moon, sun, and the four seasons.

古文：始皇南登琅邪，大乐之，留三月，作琅邪台，立石颂德，明得意。
现代文：然后南登琅邪山，兴致勃勃，在那里逗留了三个月，还建造琅邪台，立石碑颂德，表明自己得天下之意。
English: Then, he went to the south to climb Shiyajian Mountain, full of enthusiasm, and stayed there for three months. He also built a Shiyajian platform and erected a stone monument to praise virtue, to show that he had won the will of the world.

古文：初，燕人宋毋忌、羡门子高之徒称有仙道、形解销化之术，燕、齐迂怪之士皆争传习之。
现代文：当初，燕国人宋毋忌、羡门子高一类人声称世上有一种成仙之道、人老死后尸解骨化升天的法术，燕国、齐国的迂腐、怪异之士都争相传授和学习。
English: At the beginning, people from Yan'an, such as Song Zibo and Enmen Zigao, claimed that there was a way to become a immortality, a spell to ascend to heaven after death, and the pedantic and strange people from Yan'an and Qi all competed to teach and learn.

古文：自齐威王、宣王、燕昭王皆信其言，使人入海求蓬莱、方丈、瀛洲，云此三神山在勃海中，去人不远。
现代文：从齐威王、宣王到燕昭王都相信他们的话，派人到海上寻求蓬莱、方丈、瀛洲三座神山，据说这三仙山在渤海之中，距离人间并不遥远。
English: From King Qiwei and King Xuan to King Yan Zhao, they all believed in their words and sent people to the sea to search for the three sacred mountains of Penglai, Hojo and Luzhou. It is said that these three sacred mountains are in the Bohai Sea, not far from the human world.

古文：患且至，则风引舡去。
现代文：只是凡人将要到达，风就把船吹走了。
English: But a mortal was about to arrive, and the wind blew the boat away.

古文：尝有至者，诸仙人及不死之药皆在焉。
现代文：不过也曾有人到过这三山，看见各位神仙和长生不死的药均在那里。
English: However, there were also people who visited these three mountains and saw that all the immortals and the elixir of life were there.

古文：及始皇至海上，诸方士齐人徐市等争上书言之，请得齐戒与童男女求之。
现代文：待到始皇帝出游海滨时，通晓神仙方术的人如故齐国人徐等纷纷争着上书谈这些事，请求准许斋戒清心洁身素食后率领童男童女往海上寻求神山。
English: When the First Emperor went to the seaside for a trip, people who were familiar with the art of divination, such as the late Qi Guozhong Xu, fought to write about these things, requesting permission to fast, cleanse the heart, cleanse the body, eat vegetarian food, and lead the boys and girls to the sea to seek the sacred mountain.

古文：于是遣徐市发童男女数千人入海求之。
现代文：始皇于是派遣徐征发数千名童男女入海求仙。
English: The first emperor then sent Xu Zhengfa and thousands of boys and men into the sea to seek immortality.

古文：舡交海中，皆以风解，曰： 未能至，望见之焉。 
现代文：但是，船行海上后却均因风势不顺而返航。不过他们仍然说： 虽没能到达仙山，可是已经望见了。 
English: However, after sailing on the sea, they all turned back because of the bad wind. However, they still said: Although they did not reach Fairy Mountain, they have already seen it.

古文：始皇还，过彭城，斋戒祷祠，欲出周鼎泗水，使千人没水求之，弗得。
现代文：始皇帝还归咸阳途中经过彭城，举行斋戒，祈祷祭祀，想要打捞沉没在泗水中的周鼎。故而遣一千人潜入泗水寻找，结果毫无所得。
English: The First Emperor also passed through Pengcheng on his way back to Xianyang, held fasting, prayer and sacrifice, and wanted to salvage Zhou Ding, which had sunk in Surabaya. Therefore, he sent a thousand people to dive into Surabaya to look for it, but the result was nothing.

古文：乃西南渡淮水，之衡山、南郡。
现代文：于是，始皇又向西南渡过淮水，到达衡山、南郡；再泛舟长江，抵湘山，祭祀湘君。
English: So he walked to the southwest, crossed Huai Shui, and went to Hengshan and Nan County.

古文：浮江至湘山祠，逢大风，几不能渡。上问博士曰： 湘君何神？ 
现代文：适逢大风，几乎不能渡过湘水。始皇问博士道： 湘君是什么神仙啊？ 
English: Due to the high winds, it was almost impossible to cross the Xiangshui River. The first emperor asked the doctor: What kind of immortal is Xiangjun?

古文：对曰： 闻之：尧女，舜之妻，葬此。 
现代文：博士回答： 听说她是尧帝的女儿，舜帝的妻子，死后就葬在这里。 
English: The doctor replied, "I heard that she was the daughter of Emperor Qian, the wife of Emperor Qian, and was buried here after her death.

古文：始皇大怒，使刑徒三千人皆伐湘山树，赭其山。
现代文：始皇大怒，令三千名被判刑服劳役的罪犯将湘山的树木砍伐殆尽，裸露出赤红的土壤和石块。
English: Enraged, the first emperor ordered three thousand convicts sentenced to hard labor to cut down all the trees in Mount Xiangshan, exposing the red soil and rocks.

古文：遂自南郡由关武归。
现代文：然后从南郡经武关返回咸阳。
English: It then returned to Xianyang from Nan County via Wuguan.

古文：初，韩人张良，其父、祖以上五世相韩。
现代文：早先，韩国人张良的父亲、祖父曾经做过五代韩相。
English: Earlier, the father and grandfather of the Korean Zhang Liang had been five generations of Korean ministers.

古文：及韩亡，良散千金之产，欲为韩报仇。
现代文：乃至韩国灭亡，张良尽散千金家产，想要为韩国报仇。
English: Even after Korea's demise, Zhang Liang spent all of his family's money to seek revenge for Korea.

古文：始皇帝下二十九年
现代文：秦始皇帝下二十九年
English: The 29th year of the reign of Qin Shi Huang

古文：始皇东游，至阳武博浪沙中，张良令力士操铁椎狙击始皇，误中副车。
现代文：始皇帝出巡东方，抵达阳武县的博浪沙时，张良让大力士手持铁锤袭击始皇，但却误中随天子车驾而行的副车。
English: When the First Emperor went on a tour of the East and arrived at Bo Langsha in Yangwu County, Zhang Liang had Hercules attack the First Emperor with a hammer, but he accidentally hit the second car that was driving with the celestial chariot.

古文：始皇惊，求，弗得；令天下大索十日。
现代文：始皇大惊失色，想抓刺客却未能擒到，于是下令全国进行十天的大搜捕。
English: The first emperor was shocked and disgraced. He wanted to catch the assassin but couldn't, so he ordered a ten-day nationwide manhunt.

古文：始皇遂登之罘，刻石；旋，之琅邪，道上党入。
现代文：始皇帝随后登上之罘山，刻石颂德。归途中前往琅邪，取道上党回到咸阳。
English: The first emperor then ascended the Lushan Mountain and carved a stone to praise virtue. On his way back, he went to Shiji and took the party on the way back to Xianyang.

古文：始皇帝下三十一年
现代文：秦始皇帝下三十一年
English: The 31st year of the reign of Emperor Qin Shi Huang

古文：使黔首自实田。
现代文：始皇帝下令全国百姓向朝廷自报所占土地的数额。
English: The First Emperor ordered the people of the whole country to report to the imperial court the amount of land they occupied.

古文：始皇帝下三十二年
现代文：秦始皇帝下三十二年
English: in the 32nd year of the reign of Qin Shi Huang

古文：始皇之碣石，使燕人卢生求羡门，刻碣石门。
现代文：始皇帝出巡抵达碣石，派故燕国人卢生求访仙人羡门。
English: The First Emperor arrived in Shanshi on a tour and sent the late Yan Guozhong Lu Sheng to visit the Immortal Envy Gate.

古文：坏城郭，决通堤坊。
现代文：又在碣石山门刻碑文歌功颂德。拆毁城郭，决通堤防。
English: He also carved an inscription in praise of his achievements on the gate of Zhishishan Mountain. He demolished the city walls and broke through the embankment.

古文：始皇巡北边，从上郡入。
现代文：此后始皇帝巡视北部边境，从上郡返回都城。
English: The first emperor patrolled the northern border and returned to Xianyang from Shang County.

古文：卢生使入海还，因奏《录图书》曰： 亡秦者胡也。 
现代文：卢生受派遣入海寻仙后归来，随即抄录《录图书》上的谶语，上写： 使秦朝灭亡的是 胡 。 
English: When Lu Sheng returned after being sent to the sea to search for immortals, he immediately copied the slang on the "Recorded Books" and wrote: It was Hu who brought about the downfall of the Qin Dynasty.

古文：始皇乃遣将军蒙恬发兵三十万人，北伐匈奴。
现代文：奏报给始皇。始皇便派将军蒙恬率三十万大军，向北征伐匈奴。
English: The report was sent to the First Emperor. The First Emperor then sent General Meng Ye to lead a 300,000-strong army to the north to conquer the Xiongnu.

古文：始皇帝下三十三年
现代文：秦始皇帝下三十三年
English: Thirty-three years under Emperor Qin Shi Huang

古文：发诸尝逋亡人、赘婿、贾人为兵，略取南越陆梁地，置桂林、南海、象郡；以谪徙民五十万人戍五岭，与越杂处。
现代文：秦朝廷征召那些曾经逃亡的人、因贫穷而入赘女家的男子、商贩等入伍当兵，攻掠夺取南越的陆梁地，设置了桂林、南海、象郡等郡；并将受贬谪的人五十万流放到五岭守边，与南越的本地人杂居一处。
English: The Qin court conscripted those who had once fled, men who had joined their wives' families due to poverty, merchants, etc. to enlist as soldiers, invaded and seized the land of South Vietnam, and set up counties such as Guilin, Nanhai, and Xiang County; and exiled half a million of the despised people to the Wuling border, where they mixed with the local people of South Vietnam.

古文：蒙恬斥逐匈奴，收河南地为四十四县。
现代文：秦将蒙恬率军驱逐斥退匈奴人，收复了黄河以南地区，设置四十四个县。
English: Qin Mengniu led the army to expel the Huns, recovered the area south of the Yellow River, and set up forty-four counties.

古文：筑长城，因地形，用制险塞。起临洮至辽东，延袤万馀里。
现代文：接着就修筑长城，凭借地形而建，用以控制险关要塞，起自临洮，直至辽东，绵延一万多里。
English: Then they built the Great Wall, which was built by virtue of the terrain to control dangerous fortresses, stretching more than ten thousand miles from Linyi to Liaodong.

古文：于是渡河，据阳山，逶迤而北。
现代文：蒙恬于是又领兵渡过黄河，占据阳山，向北曲折前进。
English: Meng Qi then led his troops across the Yellow River, occupied Yangshan, and made tortuous progress northward.

古文：暴师于外十馀年。蒙恬常居上郡统治之，威振匈奴。
现代文：军队在野外扎营风餐露宿十余年，蒙恬则常驻上郡指挥军队，威震匈奴。
English: The army camped and camped in the open for more than ten years, and the Mongols permanently commanded the army in Shang County, dominating the Xiongnu.

古文：始皇帝下三十四年
现代文：秦始皇帝下三十四年
English: in the thirty-fourth year of the reign of Qin Shi Huang

古文：谪治狱吏不直及覆狱故、失者，筑长城及处南越地。
现代文：秦朝廷将徇私枉法、知人有罪却释放出狱、无罪却下狱的司法官吏处罚流放去修筑长城，或到南越地区守边。
English: The Qin court punished and exiled the judicial officials who broke the law for personal gain, released a friend from prison even though he was guilty, and released a friend from prison even though he was innocent, to build the Great Wall or to guard the border in South Vietnam.

古文：丞相李斯上书曰： 异时诸侯并争，厚招游学。
现代文：丞相李斯上书说： 过去诸侯国纷争，以高官厚禄招徕游说之士。
English: The Minister of Justice, Li Si, said in a letter: In the past, when states and provinces were at loggerheads, high-ranking officials and high salaries were used to recruit lobbyists.

古文：今天下已定，法令出一，百姓当家则力农工，士则学习法令。
现代文：现在天下已定，法令统一出自朝廷，百姓理家就要致力于耕田做工，读书人就要学习法令规章。
English: Now the world has been determined, the unification of laws and regulations comes from the imperial court, the common people must be committed to working in the fields, and the readers must learn the laws and regulations.

古文：今诸生不师今而学古，以非当世，惑乱黔首，相与非法教。人闻令下，则各以其学议之，入则心非，出则巷议，夸主以为名，异趣以为高，率群下以造谤。
现代文：但今日的儒生却不学习现代事务，只知一味地效法古代，并借此非议现实，蛊惑、扰乱民众，相互非难指责现行制度，并以此教导百姓；闻听命令颁下，就纷纷根据自己的学说、主张妄加评议，入朝时口是心非，出朝后便街谈巷议，夸饰君主以提高自己的声望，标新立异以显示自己的高明，煽动、引导一些人攻击诽谤国家法令。
English: However, today's Confucians do not study modern affairs. They only know how to imitate the ancients, and use this to criticize reality, bewitch and disturb the people, blame each other for the current system, and teach the people in this way. When they hear and listen to orders issued, they will make arbitrary comments according to their own doctrines and propositions. When entering the court, they will talk about the merits and demerits, and after leaving the court, they will talk about the streets. They will praise the monarch to increase their reputation, set a new standard to show their brilliance, and incite and guide some people to attack and defame the national laws and regulations.

古文：如此弗禁，则主势降乎上，党与成乎下。
现代文：这种情况如不禁止，就势必造成君主的权势下降，臣下结党纳派活动蔓延民间。
English: This situation is not prohibited, at the top, the authority of the monarch is reduced, and at the bottom, partisans are formed to collude with each other.

古文：禁之便！
现代文：唯有禁止这些才有利于国家！
English: Only a ban on these will benefit the country!

古文：臣请史官非秦记皆烧之；非博士官所职，天下有藏《诗》、《书》、百家语者，皆诣守、尉杂烧之。有敢偶语《诗》、《书》，弃市；以古非今者族；吏见知不举，与同罪。令下三十日，不烧，黔为城旦。
现代文：因此我建议史官将除秦国史记之外的所有史书全部烧毁；除博士官按职责收藏书外，天下凡有私藏《诗》、《书》、诸子百家著作的人，一律按期将所藏交到郡守、郡尉处，一并焚毁；有敢于相对私语谈论《诗》、《书》的处死；借古非今的诛杀九族；官吏发现这种事情而不举报的与以上人同罪；此令颁布三十天后仍不将私藏书籍烧毁的，判处黥刑，并罚处修筑长城劳役的城旦刑。
English: Therefore, I suggest that the historians should burn all the historical books except the historical records of Qin; except for the doctoral officials who collect books according to their duties, all the people in the world who have private collections of "poems," "books" and the works of hundreds of scholars should submit their collections to the county governors and county lieutenants on schedule and burn them together; those who dare to talk about "poems" and "books" in relative whispers should be put to death; nine ethnic groups should be killed with the help of ancient and modern methods; officials who find such a thing and do not report it are guilty of the same crime as the above people; those who still do not burn

古文：所不去者，医药、卜筮、种树之书。
现代文：不予焚烧的，是医药、占卜、种植的书。
English: The books that are not allowed to be burned are books on medicine, divination, and planting.

古文：若欲有学法令，以吏为师。 
现代文：如果想要学习法令，应以官吏为师。 
English: If you want to learn the law, you can study with officials.

古文：制曰： 可。 
现代文：始皇下制令说： 可以。 
English: The Emperor's order said: Let's play.

古文：魏人陈馀谓孔鲋曰： 秦将灭先王之籍，而子为书籍之主，其危哉！ 
现代文：故魏国人陈馀对孔子的八世孙孔鲋说： 秦朝廷将要毁灭掉前代君王的书籍，而你正是书籍的拥有人，这实在是太危险了！ 
English: Therefore, Chen Yu, a citizen of Wei, said to Confucius' eighth-generation grandson, Confucius Yu: The Qin court is going to destroy the books of the previous kings, and you are the owner of the books. This is really too dangerous!

古文：子鱼曰： 吾为无用之学，知吾者惟友。
现代文：孔鲋说： 我所治的是一些看来无用的学问，真正了解我的只有朋友。
English: Confucius said, "I have studied some seemingly useless knowledge, and only my friends really know me.

古文：秦非吾友，吾何危哉！
现代文：秦朝廷并不是我的朋友，我会遇到什么危险呀！
English: The Qin court is not my friend, what danger will I encounter!

古文：吾将藏之以待其求；求至，无患矣。 
现代文：我将把书籍收藏好，等待着有人征求，一旦来征求，我也就不会有什么灾难了。 
English: I will keep my books well, waiting for someone to ask for them, and if they do, I will not have any disasters.

古文：始皇帝下三十五年
现代文：秦始皇帝下三十五年
English: Thirty-five years under Qin Shi Huang

古文：使蒙恬除直道，道九原，抵云阳，堑山堙谷千八百里，数年不就。
现代文：始皇帝派蒙恬负责开通大道，从九原直到云阳，挖掘大山，填塞峡谷，长达一千八百里，几年没有完工。
English: The first emperor, Pai Mengyao, was responsible for opening the highway, from Jiuhara to Yunyang, excavating mountains and filling canyons, up to eighteen hundred miles long, and it was not completed for several years.

古文：始皇以为咸阳人多，先王之宫廷小，乃营作朝宫渭南上林苑中，先作前殿阿房，东西五百步，南北五十丈，上可以坐万人，下可以建五丈旗，周驰为阁道，自殿下直抵南山，表南山之颠以为阙。
现代文：始皇认为都城咸阳的人口过多，而先代君王营造的宫廷又嫌小，便命人在渭南上林苑中建筑宫殿，先修前殿阿房宫，长宽东西五百步，南北五十丈，上面可坐一万人，下面则能竖立五丈高的旗帜，周围是车马驰行的天桥，从前殿下直达南山，在南山的顶峰建牌楼作为标志。
English: The first emperor thought that the population of the capital city of Xianyang was too large, and the palace built by the previous monarchs was too small, so he ordered people to build a palace in the middle of the forest garden in southern Fujian. First, the front hall of the A Fang Palace was built. It was 500 meters long and wide from east to west, 50 meters high from north to south, and could seat 10,000 people. Below, a five-meter-high flag could be erected. It was surrounded by a flyover for horses and chariots. From the former royal palace, it reached Nanshan, and a gate tower was built at the peak of Nanshan as a symbol.

古文：为衤复道，自阿房渡渭，属之咸阳，以象天极阁道、绝汉抵营室也。
现代文：又筑造天桥，从阿房渡过渭水，与咸阳城相接，由此象征天上的北极星、阁道星横越银河抵达营室宿。
English: In addition, a flyover was built to cross the Surabaya River from Afang to connect with Hamyang City, symbolizing that the North Star and the Pleiades crossed the Milky Way to reach the camp.

古文：隐宫、徒刑者七十馀万人，乃分作阿房宫或作骊山。
现代文：征发遭受宫刑和判处其他徒刑的囚犯七十万人，分别修筑阿房宫或建造骊山始皇帝陵墓。
English: 700,000 prisoners who had been subjected to palace punishment and sentenced to other prison terms were conscripted to build the Afang Palace or the Mausoleum of the First Emperor of Shaoshan respectively.

古文：发北山石椁，写蜀、荆地材，皆至；关中计宫三百，关外四百馀。
现代文：并凿掘用作套棺的北山的石料，采伐蜀、荆两地的木材，都先后运到。在关中兴建宫殿计有三百座，关外营造宫殿四百多座。
English: The stone from the North Mountain, which was used to make coffins, was excavated, and the wood from the two regions of Shu and Jing was harvested and transported to Guanzhong. A total of three hundred palaces were built in Guanzhong, and more than four hundred palaces were built outside Guanzhong.

古文：于是立石东海上朐界中，以为秦东门。
现代文：于是在东海郡的朐县界内刻立巨石，作为秦王朝东部的大门。
English: Therefore, a huge stone was carved within the boundaries of Jixian County in Donghai County to serve as the eastern gate of the Qin Dynasty.

古文：因徙三万家骊邑，五万家云阳，皆复不事十岁。
现代文：又将三万家迁移到骊邑，五万家迁移至云阳，均免除十年的赋税徭役。
English: In addition, 30,000 households will be relocated to Yeupyeong and 50,000 households will be relocated to Yunyang, both of which will be exempted from paying taxes for 10 years.

古文：卢生说始皇曰： 方中：人主时为微行以辟恶鬼。
现代文：卢生劝说始皇帝道： 有一种方法，这就是皇帝不时地暗中秘密出行，借此躲避恶鬼。
English: Lu Sheng persuaded the First Emperor, saying, "There is a way, and that is for the Emperor to secretly travel from time to time to avoid the evil spirits.

古文：恶鬼辟，真人至。
现代文：而避开了恶鬼，神仙真人便会来到。
English: But if you avoid the evil spirits, the immortals will come.

古文：愿上所居宫毋令人知，然后不死之药殆可得也。 
现代文：故此希望您所居住的宫室不要让别人知道，然后不死之药大概才可以得到！ 
English: Therefore, I hope that you do not let others know the palace where you live, and then you can probably get the elixir of life!

古文：始皇曰： 吾慕真人。 
现代文：始皇说： 我敬慕真人！ 
English: The first emperor said: I admire real people!

古文：自谓 真人 ，不称 朕 。
现代文：于是就自称 真人 ，不再称 朕 。
English: As a result, he claimed to be a real person, no longer calling himself "I."

古文：乃令咸阳之旁二百里内宫观二百七十，衤复道、甬道相连，帷帐、钟鼓、美人充之，各案署不移徙。
现代文：并下令咸阳城周围二百里内的二百七十处宫殿楼台，都用天桥、甬道相连接，帷帐、钟鼓及美女充斥其间，各自按布署登记，不作迁移。
English: He also ordered that the 270 palace terraces within 200 miles around Xianyang City, all connected by skybridges and causeways, be filled with curtains, bells and drums and beautiful women, each registered according to their location, and not relocated.

古文：行所幸，有言其处者，罪死。
现代文：始皇巡行到某处居住下来，有敢于透露出他的驻地的，即获罪处死。
English: If anyone divulges the location of the place, he shall be put to death.

古文：始皇幸梁山宫，从山上见丞相车骑众，弗善也。
现代文：始皇帝曾前往梁山宫，从山上望见丞相李斯的随行车马非常多，很不赞许。
English: The first emperor once went to the Liangshan Palace. From the mountain, he could see the chariots and horses of the accompanying chancellor Li Si, which was very disapproved of.

古文：中人或告丞相，丞相后损车骑。
现代文：宦官近臣中有人将这事告诉了李斯，李斯随即减少了他的车马。
English: One of the eunuch's courtiers told Li Si about this, and Li Si immediately reduced his number of horses and chariots.

古文：始皇怒曰： 此中人泄吾语！ 
现代文：始皇愤怒地说： 这一定是宫中人泄露了我的话！ 
English: The First Emperor said angrily, "Someone in the palace must have leaked my words!"

古文：案问，莫服，捕时在旁者，尽杀之。
现代文：于是审问随从人员，但是没有人承认。始皇就下令捉拿当时在场的人，全部杀掉。
English: The attendants were then interrogated, but no one confessed. The first emperor then gave the order to capture everyone who was present at the time and kill them all.

古文：自是后，莫知行之所在。
现代文：从此以后，再也没有人知道始皇到了什么地方。
English: From then on, no one knew where the first emperor had gone.

古文：群臣受决事者，悉于咸阳宫。
现代文：群臣中凡有事情要奏报并接受皇帝裁决的，便全都到咸阳宫等候。
English: All the courtiers who had something to report and accept the emperor's ruling went to Xianyang Palace to wait.

古文：侯生、卢生相与讥议始皇，因亡去。
现代文：侯生、卢生相互讥讽、评议始皇帝的暴戾，并因此逃亡而去。
English: Hou Sheng and Lu Sheng mocked each other and commented on the First Emperor's brutality, and thus fled.

古文：始皇闻之，大怒曰： 卢生等，吾尊赐之甚厚，今乃诽谤我！
现代文：始皇闻讯勃然大怒，说： 卢生等人，我尊敬他们，并重重地赏赐他们，现在竟然敢诽谤我！
English: Upon hearing the news, the First Emperor flew into a rage, saying, "Lu Sheng and the others, I respect them and have rewarded them greatly, and now they dare to slander me!

古文：诸生在咸阳者，吾使人廉问，或为妖言以乱黔首。 
现代文：这些人在咸阳的，我曾派人去查访过，其中有的人竟妖言惑众！ 
English: I once sent someone to investigate these people in Xianyang, and some of them were actually using satanic language to deceive the public!

古文：于是御史悉案问诸生。
现代文：于是令御史逮捕并审问所有的儒生。
English: Therefore, Emperor Go-Shi ordered the arrest and interrogation of all Confucian scholars.

古文：诸生传相告引，乃自除犯禁者四百六十馀人，皆坑之咸阳，使天下知之，以惩后；益发谪徙边。
现代文：儒生们彼此告发，始皇帝就亲自判处违法犯禁的人四百六十余名，把他们全部在咸阳活埋了。还向全国宣扬，让大家都知道这件事，以惩戒后世。同时谪罚更多的人流放到边地戍守。
English: The Confucians denounced each other, and the first emperor personally sentenced more than four hundred and sixty people who violated the law and the ban, and buried them all alive in Xianyang. He also preached to the whole country, so that everyone knew about this matter, in order to discipline future generations. At the same time, he punished more people and exiled them to the periphery.

古文：始皇长子扶苏谏曰： 诸生皆诵法孔子。
现代文：始皇的长子扶苏为此规劝道： 那些儒生们全诵读并效法孔子的言论。
English: Fu Su, the eldest son of the first emperor, advised: "Those Confucians should all recite and follow the words of Confucius.

古文：今上皆重法绳之，臣恐天下不安。 
现代文：而今您全部用重法惩处他们，我担心天下会因此不安定。 
English: Now you are all punishing them severely, and I am worried that the world will become unstable.

古文：始皇怒，使扶苏北监蒙恬军于上郡。
现代文：始皇大为恼火，派扶苏赴上郡去监督蒙恬的军队。
English: The first emperor was very annoyed and sent Fuso to Shang County to supervise the army.

古文：始皇帝下三十六年
现代文：秦始皇帝下三十六年
English: 36th year of the reign of Qin Shi Huang

古文：有陨石于东郡。
现代文：有陨石坠落在东郡。
English: A meteorite fell in Dong County.

古文：或刻其石曰： 始皇死而地分。 
现代文：有人于石上刻字说： 始皇帝死而土地分。 
English: Someone engraved on the stone: "The First Emperor died and the land was divided."

古文：始后使御史逐问，莫服；尽取石旁居人诛之，燔其石。
现代文：始皇于是派御史逐个查问当地的人，但是没人承认此事是自己干的。
English: The first emperor then sent the imperial historian to question the local people one by one, but no one admitted that they had done it themselves.

古文：迁河北榆中三万家；赐爵一级。
现代文：始皇便下令将居住在陨石附近的人全部捉拿处死，并焚化了那块石头。
English: The first emperor then ordered all the people living near the meteorite to be captured and executed, and the stone was burned.

古文：始皇帝下三十七年
现代文：秦朝廷迁移三万户到北河以北、榆中一带垦殖，每户授爵位一级。
English: The Qin Dynasty moved 30,000 households to the north of the Beihe River and the area of Yuzhong, and each household was awarded a first-class knighthood.

古文：冬，十月，癸丑，始皇出游；左丞相斯从，右丞相去疾守。
现代文：秦始皇帝下三十七年冬季，十月，癸丑，始皇帝出游，左丞相李斯陪同前往，右丞相冯去疾留守咸阳。
English: In the winter of the thirty-seventh year of the reign of Qin Shi Huangdi, in October, the first emperor went on a trip, accompanied by the left minister Li Si, and the right minister Feng Dexia stayed in Xianyang.

古文：始皇二十馀子，少子胡亥最爱，请从；上许之。
现代文：始皇有二十多个儿子，小儿子胡亥最受宠爱，他要求随父皇出游，获始皇准许。
English: The first emperor had more than twenty sons, and the youngest son, Hu Hai, was the most favored. He asked to travel with his father and was granted permission by the first emperor.

古文：十一月，行至云梦，望祀虞舜于九疑山。
现代文：十一月，始皇帝一行到达云梦，向着九疑山遥祭葬在那里的舜帝。
English: In November, the First Emperor and his entourage arrived at Yunmen and headed for the distant Nine Doubts Mountain to pay homage to Emperor Gong, who was buried there.

古文：浮江下，观藉柯，渡海渚，过丹杨，至钱唐，临浙江。
现代文：然后乘船顺长江而下，观览籍柯，渡经海渚，过丹阳，抵钱唐，到达浙江边。
English: Then take the boat down the Yangtze River, watch the Qizhi Ke, pass the Haizhu, pass Danyang, enter Qiantang, and reach the edge of Zhejiang.

古文：水波恶，乃西百二十里，从峡中渡。
现代文：因钱塘江潮波涛汹涌，便向西行驶一百二十里，从富阳与分水之间的狭窄处渡江。
English: Due to the rough tide of the Qiantang River, they drove one hundred and twenty miles to the west, crossing the river from the narrow place between Fuyang and the watershed.

古文：上会稽，祭大禹，望于南海；立石颂德。
现代文：随之始皇登上会稽山，祭祀禹帝，遥望南海，刻立巨石歌功颂德。
English: Subsequently, the first emperor ascended Mount Hechi, worshipped Emperor Yu, gazed at the South China Sea from afar, and carved a huge stone to sing the praises of virtue.

古文：还，过吴，从江乘渡。并海上，北至琅邪、罘。
现代文：然后起驾返回，归途中经过吴地，从江乘县渡过长江，沿海北上，抵达琅邪、之罘。
English: Then I drove back, passing through Wudi on the way back, crossing the Yangtze River from Jiangren County, heading north along the coast, and arriving at Yuya and Zhiyuan.

古文：见巨鱼，射杀之。
现代文：始皇看见大鱼，即发箭将鱼射杀。
English: When the first emperor saw the big fish, he shot it with an arrow.

古文：遂并海西，至平原津而病。
现代文：接着又沿海西行，到了平原渡口后便病倒了。
English: He then travelled west along the coast, and fell ill after reaching the Plain Ferry.

古文：始皇恶言死，群臣莫敢言死事。
现代文：始皇帝很厌恶谈论 死 ，因此群臣中没有人敢于提关于死的事。
English: The First Emperor detested the word "death," and none of his courtiers dared to mention it.

古文：病益甚，乃令中军府令行符玺事赵高为书赐扶苏曰： 与丧，会咸阳而葬。 
现代文：待到他病势更加沉重时，才命中车府令、兼掌符玺事务的赵高写诏书给长子扶苏说： 参加丧事处理，灵柩到咸阳后安葬。 
English: When his illness became more serious, Zhao Gao, who was in charge of the carriage and funeral affairs, wrote an edict to his eldest son, Fusu, saying: "Participate in the funeral proceedings, and bury the coffin after it arrives in Xianyang."

古文：书已封，在赵高所，未付使者。
现代文：诏书已封好，但却搁置在赵高处，没有交给使者送出。
English: The imperial edict had been sealed, but it was left on Zhao Gao's desk and was not handed over to the emissary.

古文：秋，七月，丙寅，始皇崩于沙丘平台。
现代文：秋季，七月，丙寅，始皇在沙丘宫平台驾崩。
English: In the autumn, in July, He Yin, the first emperor, passed away on the platform of the Sand Hill Palace.

古文：丞相斯为上崩在外，恐诸公子及天下有变，乃秘之不发丧，棺载辒凉车中，故幸宦者骖乘。
现代文：丞相李斯因皇帝在都城外病逝，唯恐各位皇子及天下发生什么变故，于是就秘不发丧，将棺材停放在能调节冷暖的凉车中，由始皇生前最宠信的宦官在车的右边陪乘。
English: Because the emperor died of illness outside the capital, the chancellor, Li Si, was afraid of what would happen to the princes and the world, so he secretly did not mourn, parked the coffin in a cool car that could regulate the temperature, and was accompanied by the eunuch who was the favorite of the first emperor on the right side of the car.

古文：所至，上食、百官奏事如故，宦者辄从车中可其奏事。
现代文：所到一地，上呈餐饭、百官奏报事务与过去一样，宦官即从车中接受并批复奏事。
English: As in the past, the eunuchs received the meal and the report from the eunuchs in the same place, and the eunuchs accepted the report from the car.

古文：独胡亥、赵高及幸宦者五六人知之。
现代文：只有胡亥、赵高及受宠幸的宦官五六个人知道内情。
English: Only Hu Hai, Zhao Gao and five or six lucky eunuchs know the inside story.

古文：初，始皇尊宠蒙氏，信任之。
现代文：当初，始皇帝尊重宠爱蒙氏兄弟，颇信任他们。
English: At first, the First Emperor respected and liked the Meng brothers and trusted them.

古文：蒙恬任在外将，蒙毅常居中参谋议，名为忠信，故虽诸将相莫敢与之争。
现代文：蒙恬在外担任大将，蒙毅则在朝中参与商议国事，称为忠信大臣，即便是高级将领或丞相，也没有敢与他们一争高低的。
English: Meng Rong served as a general outside, while Meng Yi participated in the discussion of state affairs in the DPRK and China, known as the Minister of Loyalty. Even high-ranking generals or prime ministers did not dare to compete with them.

古文：赵高者，生而隐宫，始皇闻其强力，通于狱法，举以为中车府令，使教胡亥决狱，胡亥幸之。
现代文：赵高一生下来就被阉割了。始皇听说他办事能力很强，且通晓刑法，便提拔他担任了中车府令，并让他教小儿子胡亥学习审理判决诉讼案。胡亥非常宠爱他。
English: Zhao Gao was castrated as soon as he was born. The first emperor heard that he had a strong ability to do business and was familiar with criminal law, so he promoted him to the post of Zhongche prefectural governor, and asked him to teach his youngest son Hu Hai to learn to adjudicate litigation cases. Hu Hai was very fond of him.

古文：赵高有罪，始皇使蒙毅治之；毅当高法应死。始皇以高敏于事，赦之，复其官。
现代文：赵高曾经犯下大罪，始皇派蒙毅惩治他。蒙毅认为赵高依法应被处死，但始皇因赵高办事灵活而赦免了他，并恢复了他的官职。
English: Zhao Gao once committed a serious crime, and the first emperor sent Meng Yi to punish him. Meng Yi believed that Zhao Gao should be executed according to law, but the first emperor pardoned him because Zhao Gao was flexible and restored his official position.

古文：赵高既雅得幸于胡亥，又怨蒙氏，乃说胡亥，请诈以始皇命诛扶苏而立胡亥为太子。
现代文：赵高既然素来得到胡亥的宠幸，恰又怨恨蒙氏兄弟，便劝说胡亥，让他诈称始皇遗诏命杀掉扶苏，立胡亥为太子。
English: Since Zhao Gao had always been favored by Hu Hai and resented the Meng brothers, he persuaded Hu Hai to falsely claim that the First Emperor's will ordered him to kill Fusu and make Hu Hai the crown prince.

古文：胡亥然其计。
现代文：胡亥同意了赵高的计策。
English: Hu Hai agreed to Zhao Gao's plan.

古文：赵高曰： 不与丞相谋，恐事不能成。 
现代文：赵高又说： 这件事如果不与丞相合谋进行，恐怕不能成功。 
English: Zhao Gao also said: If this matter is not carried out in collusion with the prime minister, I am afraid it will not succeed.

古文：乃见丞相斯曰： 上赐长子书及符玺，皆在胡亥所。
现代文：随即会见丞相李斯，说： 皇上赐给扶苏的诏书及符玺都在胡亥那里。
English: He then met with the prime minister, Ri Si, and said, "The imperial edict and the seal given to Fu Su by the emperor are both in Hu Hai's possession.

古文：定太子，在君侯与高之口耳。
现代文：定立太子之事只在您我口中的一句话罢了。
English: The matter of the enthronement of the crown prince is just a word in your mouth and mine.

古文：事将何如？ 
现代文：这件事将怎么办呢？ 
English: What do you think should be done about this?

古文：斯曰： 安得亡国之言！
现代文：李斯说： 怎么能够说这种亡国的话呀！
English: Liz said: "How can you say such things about ruining the country!

古文：此非人臣所当议也！ 
现代文：此事不是我们这些为人臣子的人所应当议论的啊！ 
English: This is not the sort of thing that should be discussed by a courtier!

古文：高曰： 君侯材能、谋虑、功高、无怨、长子信之，此五者皆孰与蒙恬？ 
现代文：赵高道： 您的才能、谋略、功勋、人缘以及获扶苏的信任，这五点全部拿来与蒙恬相比，哪一点比得上他呢？ 
English: Zhao Gaodou: Your talent, strategy, merits, popularity, and the trust of Fuxu, all of these five points are compared with Meng Ye, which point is comparable to him?

古文：斯曰： 不及也。 
现代文：李斯回答： 都比不上他。 
English: Rees replied: "You can't beat him.

古文：高曰： 然则长子即位，必用蒙恬为丞相，君侯终不怀通侯之印归乡里明矣！
现代文：赵高说： 既然如此，那么只要扶苏即位，就必定任用蒙恬为丞相，您最终不能怀揣通侯的印信返归故乡的结局已经是显而易见的了！
English: Zhao Gao said: Since this is the case, as long as Fu Su ascends to the throne, he will certainly appoint Meng Ye as the prime minister. The outcome of you not being able to return to your hometown with the imperial seal is already obvious!

古文：胡亥慈仁笃厚，可以为嗣。
现代文：而胡亥仁慈忠厚，是可以担当皇位继承人的。
English: But Hu Hai is kind and loyal, and can be the heir to the throne.

古文：愿君审计而定之！ 
现代文：希望您慎重地考虑一下，作出定夺！ 
English: I hope you will think about it carefully and make a decision!

古文：丞相斯以为然，乃相与谋，诈为受始皇诏，立胡亥为太子。更为书赐扶苏，数以不能辟地立功，士卒多耗，反数上书，直言诽谤，日夜怨望不得罢归为太子，将军恬不矫正，知其谋，皆赐死，以兵属裨将王离。
现代文：丞相李斯听后认为赵高说的有理，便与他共同谋划，诈称接受了始皇的遗诏，立胡亥为太子，又篡改始皇给扶苏的诏书，指斥他多年来不能开辟疆土、创立功业，却使士卒大量伤亡，并且数次上书，直言诽谤父皇，日日夜夜地抱怨不能获准解除监军职务，返归咸阳当太子；而将军蒙恬不纠正扶苏的过失，并参与和了解扶苏的图谋。
English: After listening to Zhao Gao's speech, Premier Li Si thought that it was reasonable, so he and Zhao Gao jointly planned to fraudulently claim that they had accepted the last will and testament of the First Emperor and made Hu Hai the crown prince. They also tampered with the last will and testament of the First Emperor to help the Soviet Union, accusing him of not being able to open up the territory and create achievements for many years, but causing a large number of casualties to soldiers. They also wrote several times, slandering their father the Emperor, and complaining day and night that they could not be allowed to discharge their duties as supervisors and return to Xianyang to be the crown prince.

古文：扶苏发书，泣，入内舍，欲自杀。
现代文：因此令他们自杀，将兵权移交给副将王离。扶苏接到诏书，哭泣着进入内室，打算自杀。
English: Therefore, he ordered them to commit suicide and transferred military power to Vice Admiral Wang Li. Upon receiving the edict, Fu Su entered the inner room, weeping, intending to commit suicide.

古文：蒙恬曰： 陛下居外，未立太子；使臣将三十万众守边，公子为监，此天下重任也。
现代文：蒙恬说： 陛下在外地，并未确立谁是太子。他派我率领三十万军队镇守边陲，令您担任监军，这乃是天下的重任啊。
English: Meng Yao said, "Your Majesty is out of the country and has not established who is the crown prince. He has sent me to lead 300,000 troops to guard the border and make you the supervisor of the troops. This is a very important task for the whole world."

古文：今一使者来，即自杀，安知其非诈！
现代文：现在仅仅一个使者前来传书，我们就自杀，又怎么能知道其中不是有诈呢？
English: Now, if just one messenger comes to deliver a letter, we will commit suicide, and how can we know that there is no fraud?

古文：复请而后死，未暮也。 
现代文：让我们再奏请证实一下，然后去死也不晚呀。 
English: Let's play it again, please confirm, and then it's not too late to die.

古文：使者数趣之。扶苏谓蒙恬曰： 父赐子死，尚安复请！ 
现代文：但是使者多次催促他们自行了断，扶苏于是对蒙恬说： 父亲赐儿子死，还哪里需要再请示查实呢！ 
English: But the emissary repeatedly urged them to break off on their own, and Fuxu then turned to Mengyao and said: A father gave his son to die, what need is there to ask for further verification?

古文：即自杀。
现代文：随即自杀。
English: He immediately committed suicide and died.

古文：蒙恬不肯死，使者以属吏，系诸阳周。更置李斯舍人为护军，还报。
现代文：蒙恬不肯死，使者便将他交给官吏治罪，囚禁在阳周；改置李斯的舍人担任护军，然后回报李斯、赵高。
English: Meng Yao refused to die, so the envoy handed him over to officials to be punished and imprisoned in Yang Zhou; Li Si's lackeys were reassigned to serve as bodyguards, and then Li Si and Zhao Gao were returned.

古文：胡亥已闻扶苏死，即欲释蒙恬。
现代文：胡亥这时已听说扶苏死了，便想释放蒙恬。
English: At this time, Hu Hai had already heard that Fusu had died, so he wanted to release Meng Rong.

古文：会蒙毅为始皇出祷山川，还至。赵高言于胡亥曰： 先帝欲举贤立太子久矣，而毅谏以为不可，不若诛之！ 
现代文：恰逢蒙毅代替始皇外出祈祷山川神灵求福后返回，赵高即对胡亥说： 始皇帝想要荐举贤能确定你为太子已经很长时间了，可是蒙毅一直规劝他，认为不可如此。
English: When Meng Yi went out to pray for blessings on behalf of the First Emperor, Zhao Gao immediately said to Hu Hai: "It has been a long time since the First Emperor wanted to recommend you as crown prince, but Meng Yi has been advising him that this is not possible.

古文：乃系诸代。
现代文：现在不如就把蒙毅杀掉算了！ 
English: Might as well kill Meng Yi now!

古文：遂从井陉抵九原。
现代文：于是逮捕了蒙毅，将他囚禁到代郡。皇室车队于是从井陉抵达九原。
English: As a result, Meng Yi was arrested, and he was imprisoned in Dai County. The royal motorcade then traveled from Jingyao to Jiuhara.

古文：会暑，辒车臭，乃诏从官令车载一石鲍鱼以乱之。
现代文：当时正值酷暑，装载始皇遗体的凉车散发出恶臭，胡亥等便指示随从官员在车上装载一石鲍鱼，借鱼的臭味混淆腐尸的气味。
English: At that time, it was very hot, and the hearse carrying the remains of the first emperor emitted a foul smell. Hu Hai and others then instructed the officials to load a stone of abalone on the car, and the smell of the fish confused the smell of the corpse.

古文：从直道至咸阳，发丧。
现代文：从直道抵达咸阳后，发布治丧的公告。
English: After arriving in Xianyang from the direct route, a public notice of mourning was issued.

古文：太子胡亥袭位。
现代文：太子胡亥继承了皇位。
English: Prince Hu Hai succeeded to the throne.

古文：九月，葬始皇于骊山，下锢三泉；奇器珍怪，徙藏满之。
现代文：九月，将始皇安葬在骊山皇陵，把铜熔化后灌入，堵塞住地下深处的水。崐又运来各种奇珍异宝，藏满墓穴。
English: In September, the first emperor was buried in the Lushan Imperial Mausoleum, and the copper was melted and poured in to block the water deep underground.

古文：令匠作机弩，有穿近者辄射之。
现代文：还下令工匠制作带有机关的弓弩，遇到穿入靠近墓穴的人，即自动射杀。
English: He also ordered craftsmen to make a crossbow with a mechanism that would automatically shoot anyone who came near the tomb.

古文：以水银为百川、江河、大海，机相灌输。
现代文：用水银做成百川、江河、大海，以机械灌注输送。
English: A hundred rivers, streams and seas were made of mercury and transported by mechanical perfusion.

古文：上具天文，下具地理。
现代文：墓穴顶部布有天文图象，底部设置地理模型。
English: The top of the tomb is covered with astronomical images, and a geographical model is set at the bottom.

古文：后宫无子者，皆令从死。
现代文：后宫嫔妃凡未生子女的，令她们全部陪葬。
English: If the imperial concubine had any unborn children, they were all buried with her.

古文：葬既已下，或言工匠为机藏，皆知之，藏重即泄。
现代文：下葬以后，有人说工匠们制造隐藏的机械装置，知道其中的全部秘密，如果他们再作第二重机关，就会将其中的秘密泄露出去。
English: After the burial, it was said that the craftsmen made a hidden mechanism, knew all the secrets of it, and if they were a secondary organ, they would reveal the secrets of it.

古文：大事尽，闭之墓中。
现代文：于是待送终的大事完毕后，那些工匠即被尽数封闭在墓穴中。
English: Therefore, after the great matter of being sent to the end was completed, those craftsmen were sealed in the tomb.

古文：二世欲诛蒙恬兄弟。二世兄子子婴谏曰： 赵王迁杀李牧而用颜聚，齐王建杀其故世忠臣而用后胜，卒皆亡国。
现代文：二世皇帝胡亥想要杀掉蒙恬兄弟二人，他哥哥的儿子子婴规劝说： 赵王赵迁杀李牧而用颜聚，齐国田建杀他前代的忠臣而用后胜，结果最终都亡了国。
English: The second emperor, Hu Hai, wanted to kill the two Mengye brothers, and his brother's son, Zi Fang, persuaded him: Zhao Wang Zhao killed Li Mu and used Yan Ju, Qi Guotian Jian killed his previous generation's loyal vassal and used Hou Sheng, and the result was that they all eventually lost their country.

古文：蒙氏，秦之大臣谋士也，而陛下欲一旦弃去之。
现代文：蒙恬兄弟是秦国的重臣、谋士，陛下却打算一下子就把他们抛弃、除掉。
English: The Mengye brothers were the chief vassals and advisers of the Qin State, but His Majesty planned to abandon and eliminate them all at once.

古文：诛杀忠臣而立无节行之人，是内使群臣不相信，而外使斗士之意离也。 
现代文：似此诛杀忠臣而扶立节操品行不端的人，是在内失去群臣的信任，在外使将士们意志涣散啊！ 
English: To kill a loyal retainer like this and promote a person who has been unruly and has misbehaved is to lose the trust of the retainers at home, and to make the soldiers lose their will abroad!

古文：二世弗听，遂杀蒙毅及内史恬。
现代文：但是二世不听从劝告，随即杀掉了蒙毅，并要杀内史蒙恬。
English: However, the second did not listen to the advice, and immediately killed Meng Yi, and wanted to kill Neishi Meng Yao.

古文：恬曰： 自吾先人及至子孙，积功信于秦三世矣。
现代文：蒙恬说： 我们蒙家自我的先人起直至子孙，在秦国建立功业和忠信已经三代了。
English: Meng Yao said: We Meng family, from our ancestors to our children and grandchildren, have been building achievements and loyalty in Qin for three generations.

古文：今臣将兵三十馀万，身虽囚系，其势足以倍畔。
现代文：如今我领兵三十多万，身体虽然被囚禁，但我的势力仍然足以进行反叛。
English: Today, I am the leader of more than 300,000 soldiers. Although I am physically imprisoned, I am still strong enough to rebel.

古文：然自知必死而守义者，不敢辱先人之教，以不忘先帝也。 
现代文：可是我知道自己必定得死却还是要奉守节义，是因为我不敢辱没祖先的教诲，并表示我不忘先帝的大恩大德啊！ 
English: But I know that I must die, but I still want to observe the festival, because I dare not disgrace the teachings of my ancestors, and say that I do not forget the great kindness of the former emperor!

古文：乃吞药自杀。
现代文：于是即吞服毒药自杀身亡。
English: He then committed suicide by swallowing poison.

古文：扬子《法言》曰：或问： 蒙恬忠而被诛，忠奚可为也？ 
现代文：扬雄《法言》曰：有人问： 蒙恬赤胆忠心却被杀掉了，忠诚还有什么用呢？ 
English: Yang Xiong's "Dharma Saying" says: Some people ask: If one's loyalty is killed, what is the use of loyalty?

古文：曰： 壍山，堙谷，起临洮，击辽水，力不足而尸有馀，忠不足相也。 
现代文：回答说： 开山填谷修筑长城，西起临洮，东接辽水，威力不足而造成的尸体却有余，蒙恬的这种忠诚是不足为辅助君王的。 
English: He replied: "Building the Great Wall, from Linyi in the west to Liaoshui in the east, opening up mountains and filling valleys, there are more than enough corpses caused by lack of power. This loyalty of the prisoners is not enough to assist the king.

古文：臣光曰：秦始皇方毒天下而蒙恬为之使，恬不仁可知矣。
现代文：臣司马光曰：秦始皇正荼毒天下时，蒙恬甘受他的驱使，如此蒙恬的不仁义是可知的了。
English: Vassal Sima Guang said: When Qin Shi Huang was poisoning the world, he was driven by Meng Yao, so Meng Yao's unkindness is understandable.

古文：然恬明于为人臣之义，虽无罪见诛，能守死不贰，斯亦足称也。
现代文：但是蒙恬明白为人臣子所应守的道义，虽然没有罪而被处死，仍能够宁死忠贞不渝，不生二心，故而这也是很值得称道的了。
English: However, Meng Xuan clearly understood the moral principles that should be observed by a courtier, and although he was executed without a crime, he was still able to die a faithful and loyal man, without a second thought, so this is also very commendable.

古文：二世皇帝上
现代文：二世皇帝上
English: Emperor Go-Daigo the Second

古文：二世皇帝上元年
现代文：秦二世皇帝上元年
English: Emperor Qin II in the first year of the new year

古文：冬，十月，戊寅，大赦。
现代文：冬季，十月，戊寅，实行大赦。
English: Winter, October, Wu Yin, the implementation of the amnesty.

古文：春，二世东行郡县，李斯从；到碣石，并海，南至会稽；而尽刻始皇所立刻石，旁著大臣从者名，以章先帝成功盛德而还。
现代文：春季，二世向东出巡郡县，李斯随从前往。
English: In the spring, the second generation went to the east to inspect counties, and Li Si accompanied them.

古文：夏，四月，二世至咸阳，谓赵高曰： 夫人生居世间也，譬犹骋六骥过决隙也。
现代文：一行人到达碣石后，又沿海南下至会稽。途中，二世将始皇帝过去所立的刻石全部加刻上了字，并在旁边刻上随从大臣的名字，以此表彰先帝的丰功盛德，然后返回。夏季，四月，二世抵达咸阳对赵高说： 人生在世，就犹如驾着六匹骏马飞奔过缝隙一般的短促。
English: On the way, the second son engraved all the carved stones set up by the first emperor in the past, and engraved the name of the accompanying minister next to it, in recognition of the great merits of the former emperor, and then returned.In the summer, in April, the second son arrived in Xianyang and said to Zhao Gao: "A life in this world is like driving six horses through a gap.

古文：吾既已临天下矣，欲悉耳目之所好，穷心志之所乐，以终吾年寿，可乎？ 
现代文：我既已经统治天下，就想要尽享我的耳目所喜闻、乐见的全部东西，享尽我心意中所喜欢的任何事物，直到我的寿命终结，你认为这行吗？ 
English: Do you think it is right for me, now that I have become the ruler of the world, to enjoy all that my eyes can see, all that my ears can hear, and all that my heart can desire, until the end of my days?

古文：高曰： 此贤主之所能行，而昏乱主之所禁也。
现代文：赵高说： 这是贤能的君主能做而昏庸暴乱的君王不能做的事情。
English: Zhao Gao said: This is what a virtuous monarch can do and what a foolish and violent monarch cannot do.

古文：虽然，有所未可。臣请言之：夫沙丘之谋，诸公子及大臣皆疑焉；而诸公子尽帝兄，大臣又先帝之所置也。
现代文：虽然如此，还有不可做的地方，请让我来陈述一下：沙丘夺权之谋，诸位公子和大臣都有所怀疑。而各位公子都是您的哥哥，大臣又都是先帝所安置的。
English: Nevertheless, there is still something that cannot be done, let me state this: Your lords and ministers, all of whom are your brothers, and your ministers, all of whom were installed by the former emperor, are suspicious of the dune's plot to seize power.

古文：今陛下初立，此其属意怏怏皆不服，恐为变。
现代文：如今陛下刚刚即位，这些公子臣僚正怏怏不服，恐怕会发生事变。
English: Now, Your Majesty, you have just ascended to the throne, and these people are full of resentment, and I'm afraid they're going to cause trouble.

古文：臣战战栗栗，唯恐不终，陛下安得为此乐乎！ 
现代文：我尚且战战栗栗，生怕不得好死，陛下又怎么能够这样享乐呀！ 
English: I still shudder, I am afraid of dying, how can His Majesty enjoy himself like this!

古文：二世曰： 为之奈何？ 
现代文：二世道： 那该怎么办呢？ 
English: Second generation: Then what should we do?

古文：赵高曰： 陛下严法而刻刑，令有罪者相坐，诛灭大臣及宗室；然后收举遗民，贫者富之，贱者贵之。
现代文：赵高说： 陛下应实行严厉的法律、残酷的刑罚，使有罪的人株连他人，这样可将大臣及皇族杀灭干净，然后收罗提拔遗民，使贫穷的富裕起来，卑贱的高贵起来，并把先帝过去任用的臣僚全都清除出去，改用陛下的亲信。
English: Zhao Gao said, "Your Majesty should implement strict laws and cruel punishments, so that the guilty will be punished along with others. In this way, you can wipe out the ministers and the royal family, then recruit and promote the survivors, make the poor rich and the lowly noble, and remove all the ministers appointed by the former emperor and replace them with your Majesty's intimates.

古文：尽除去先帝之故臣，更置陛下之所亲信者，此则阴德归陛下，害除而奸谋塞，群臣莫不被润泽，蒙厚德，陛下则高枕肆志宠乐矣。
现代文：这样一来，他们就会暗中感念您的恩德；祸害被除掉，奸谋遭堵塞，群臣没有不蒙受您的雨露润泽、大恩厚德的。如此，陛下就可以高枕无忧，纵情享乐了。
English: In this way, they will secretly feel your benevolence; the scourge will be eliminated, the treachery will be blocked, and the ministers will not be deprived of your dew and moisture and great benevolence. In this way, Your Majesty can sleep well and indulge in pleasure.

古文：计莫出于此。 
现代文：再没有比这个更好的计策了！ 
English: There is no better strategy than this!

古文：二世然之。乃更为法律，务益刻深，大臣、诸公子有罪，辄下高令鞠治之。
现代文：二世认为赵高说得有理，于是便修订法律，务求更加严厉苛刻，凡大臣、各位公子犯了罪，总是交给赵高审讯惩处。
English: The second generation thought that Zhao Gao was right, so they amended the law to make it more severe. Whenever a minister or noblemen committed a crime, they were always handed over to Zhao Gao for trial and punishment.

古文：于是公子十二人僇死咸阳市，十公主矺死于杜，财物入于县官，相连逮者不可胜数。
现代文：就这样，有十二位皇子在咸阳街市上被斩首示众，十名公主在杜县被分裂肢体而死，他们的财产全部充公。受牵连被逮捕的人更是不可胜数。
English: In this way, twelve princes were publicly beheaded in Xianyang Street Market, ten princesses were dismembered and died in Du County, and all of their property was confiscated. The number of people who were implicated and arrested is countless.

古文：公子将闾昆弟三人囚于内宫，议其罪独后。
现代文：公子将闾兄弟三人被囚禁在内宫，单单搁置到最后才议定罪过。
English: The prince had the three brothers imprisoned in the inner palace, and they agreed on the crime only after it was put on hold until the very end.

古文：二世使使令将闾曰： 公子不臣，罪当死！
现代文：二世派使臣去斥令将闾说： 你不尽臣子的职责，罪该处死！
English: The second generation sent an envoy to reprimand him, saying: "You are not fulfilling your duties as a vassal. Your crime deserves death!"

古文：吏致法焉。 
现代文：由行刑官执法吧！ 
English: Let the executioner enforce the law!

古文：将闾曰： 阙廷之礼，吾未尝敢不从宾赞也，廊庙之位，吾未尝敢失节也，受命应对，吾未尝敢失辞也，何谓不臣？
现代文：将闾说： 在宫廷的礼仪中，我未曾敢不听从司仪人员的指挥；在朝廷的位次上，我未曾敢超越本分违背礼节；受皇上的命令应对质询，我未曾敢言辞失当说过什么错话，这怎么叫作不尽为臣子的职责啊？
English: "In the palace etiquette, I have never dared to disobey the command of the master of ceremonies; in the court rank, I have never dared to go beyond my duty and violate etiquette; under the emperor's order to respond to questioning, I have never dared to say anything inappropriate, how can this be called not fulfilling the duties of a courtier?

古文：愿闻罪而死！ 
现代文：希望听你们说说我的罪过然后再去死！ 
English: I want to hear about my sins and then die!

古文：使者曰： 臣不得与谋，奉书从事。 
现代文：使臣说： 我不与你作什么商量，只奉诏书行事！ 
English: The messenger said, "I can't be part of the pre-planning, I'm just following orders."

古文：将闾乃仰天大呼 天 者三，曰： 吾无罪！ 
现代文：将闾于是便仰天大呼三声 天 ，说： 我没有罪！ 
English: So the captain cried out to heaven with a loud voice, saying, "I am not guilty!

古文：昆弟三人皆流涕，拔剑自杀。
现代文：兄弟三人都痛哭流涕，随即拔剑自杀。
English: All three brothers cried bitterly and then drew their swords to commit suicide.

古文：宗室振恐。
现代文：整个皇室均为此震惊恐惧。
English: The family room is shaken with fear and anxiety.

古文：公子高欲奔，恐收族，乃上书曰： 先帝无恙时，臣入则赐食，出则乘舆，御府之衣，臣得赐之，中厩之宝马，臣得赐之。
现代文：公子高打算逃亡，但又害怕株连族人，因此上书说： 先帝未患病时，我入宫便赐给我饮食，外出便赐给我乘车，先帝内府的衣服，我得到赏赐，宫中马厩里的宝马，我也得到赏赐。
English: Gongzigao planned to escape, but he was afraid of the Zhu Lian people, so he wrote a letter saying: When the former emperor was not ill, I was given food and drink when I entered the palace, I was given a ride when I went out, I was rewarded with clothes from the former imperial household, and I was also rewarded with a BMW from the stables in the palace.

古文：臣当从死而不能，为人子不孝，为人臣不忠。
现代文：我本应跟随先帝去死，却没能这样做。似此作为儿子便是不孝，作为臣子便是不忠。
English: I should have died with the former emperor, but I didn't. This was my lack of filial piety as a human being, and my disloyalty as a vassal.

古文：不孝不忠者，无名以立于世，臣请从死，愿葬骊山之足。
现代文：不孝不忠的人是没有资格生存在世上的。因此我请求随同先帝去死，愿被葬在骊山脚下。
English: Those who are unfilial and disloyal have no right to live in this world. Therefore, I ask to die with the former emperor, and I would like to be buried at the foot of Mount Lushan.

古文：唯上幸哀怜之！ 
现代文：希望陛下垂怜。 
English: I hope His Majesty will have mercy on me.

古文：书上，二世大说，召赵高而示之，曰： 此可谓急乎？ 
现代文：书上给了二世，二世高兴异常，召见赵高，给他看公子高的上书，说： 这可以算是急迫无奈了吧？ 
English: The letter was given to Nisei, and Nisei was overjoyed. He summoned Zhao Gao, showed him the letter from Gongzi Gao, and said, "This can be considered a desperate situation, can't it?"

古文：赵高曰： 人臣当忧死而不暇，何变之得谋！ 
现代文：赵高道： 作为臣子担心死亡还来不及呢，哪里能有空闲图谋什么造反的事呀！ 
English: Zhao Gao said, "How can ministers plot to rebel when they are worried about their own death all day long?

古文：二世可其书，赐钱十万以葬。
现代文：二世随即允准了公子高的上书，并赐给他十万钱作为安葬费。
English: The second generation then immediately allowed the prince to write a letter, and gave him one hundred thousand yuan as funeral expenses.

古文：复作阿房宫。尽征材士五万人为屯卫咸阳，令教射。
现代文：二世下令重新营修阿房宫，又尽行征调五万名身强力壮的人去咸阳驻防守卫，让他们教习射御。
English: The second emperor ordered to rebuild the Afang Palace, and conscripted as many as 50,000 able-bodied men to be stationed in Xianyang to guard the palace and teach the emperor how to shoot.

古文：狗马禽兽当食者多，度不足，下调郡县，转输菽粟、刍稿。皆令自赍粮食；咸阳三百里内不得食其谷。
现代文：这批人和狗马禽兽要消耗的粮食很多，估计会供不应求，二世便下令到郡县中调拨，转运输送豆类、谷物、饲草、禾秆到都城，但规定押运民夫都自带口粮，同时还下令咸阳城三百里之内不准食用这批谷物。
English: This group of people, dogs, horses, and animals consume a lot of grain, and it is estimated that the supply will exceed the demand. The Second Emperor then ordered to transfer the transportation of beans, grains, fodder grass, and straw to the capital, but stipulated that the escorting people should bring their own rations. At the same time, he also ordered that the grain should not be eaten within three hundred miles of Xianyang City.

古文：秋，七月，阳城人陈胜、阳夏人吴广起兵于蕲。
现代文：秋季，七月，阳城人陈胜、阳夏人吴广在蕲县聚众起兵。
English: In the autumn, in July, Chen Sheng from Yangcheng and Wu Guang from Yangxia gathered to raise an army in Handan County.

古文：是时，发闾左戍渔阳，九百人屯大泽乡，陈胜、吴广皆为屯长。
现代文：当时，秦王朝征召闾左贫民百姓往渔阳屯戍守边，九百人途中屯驻在大泽乡，陈胜、吴广均被指派为屯长。
English: At that time, the Qin Dynasty conscripted the left-behind poor people to go to Yuyang to guard the border, and 900 people were stationed in Dazhe Township on the way. Chen Sheng and Wu Guang were both appointed as garrison commanders.

古文：会天大雨，道不通，度已失期。
现代文：恰巧遇上天降大雨，道路不通，推测时间已无法按规定期限到达渔阳防地。
English: It just so happened that there was heavy rain all over the world and the roads were impassable. They estimated that they had missed the deadline for reaching Yuyang.

古文：失期，法皆斩。
现代文：而按秦法规定，延误戍期，一律处斩。
English: After the specified period, according to the provisions of the law, they should all be beheaded.

古文：陈胜、吴广因天下之愁怨，乃杀将尉，召令徒属曰； 公等皆失期当斩，假令毋斩，而戍死者固什六七。
现代文：于是陈胜、吴广便趁着天下百姓生计愁苦、对秦的怨恨，杀掉押送他们的将尉，召集戍卒号令说： 你们都已经延误了戍期，当被杀头。即使不被斩首，因长久在外戍边而死去的本来也要占到十之六七。
English: Therefore, Chen Sheng and Wu Guang took advantage of the world's people's sorrowful livelihoods and resentment against Qin to kill the captain who was escorting them. They called together the executioners and gave the order: "You have all delayed the execution, so you should be beheaded. Even if you are not beheaded, those who die because they have been on the outer rim of the rim for a long time should account for 67 out of 10.

古文：且壮士不死则已，死则举大名耳！
现代文：何况壮士不死则已，要死就图大事！
English: What's more, even if a great man does not die, he will do great things when he dies!

古文：王侯将相宁有种乎！ 
现代文：王侯将相难道是天生的吗！ 
English: Is it natural for a prince to be a general?

古文：众皆从之。
现代文：众人全都响应。
English: Everyone listened to Smalen.

古文：乃诈称公子扶苏、项燕，为坛而盟，称大楚；陈胜自立为将军，吴广为都尉。
现代文：陈胜、吴广便诈以已死的扶苏和故楚国的大将项燕为名，培土筑坛，登到上面宣布誓约，号称 大楚 。陈胜自立为将军，吴广为都尉。
English: Chen Sheng and Wu Guang then fraudulently took the names of the deceased Fusu and the late general Xiang Yan of Chu, cultivated soil, built an altar, climbed to the top to announce the oath, and called themselves Big Chu. Chen Sheng became a general, and Wu Guang became a captain.

古文：攻大泽乡，拔之。收而攻蕲，蕲下。
现代文：起义军随即攻陷大泽乡，接着招收义兵扩军，进攻蕲。
English: The insurgents then attacked and captured Osawa Township, and then recruited volunteers to expand the army and attack Tsuru.

古文：乃令符离人葛婴将兵徇蕲以东，攻铚、酂、苦、柘、谯，皆下之。
现代文：蕲夺取后，即令符离人葛婴率军攻掠蕲以东地区，相继攻打？苦、柘、谯等地，全都攻下了。
English: He dispatched Fu Liangren, Ge Ying and his soldiers to capture Yishan County, Yishu District, and to attack Yunnan, Zheng, Ku, Yunnan, Yunnan and other counties, all of which were conquered.

古文：行收兵，比至陈，车六七百乘，骑千馀，卒数万人。
现代文：义军沿路招收人马，等到抵达陈地时，已有战车六七百辆，骑兵千余，步兵数万人。
English: The rebels recruited men and horses along the way, and by the time they reached Chenchi, they had six or seven hundred chariots, more than a thousand cavalry, and tens of thousands of infantry.

古文：攻陈，陈守、尉皆不在，独守丞与战谯门中，不胜；守丞死，陈胜乃入据陈。
现代文：当攻打陈城时，郡守和郡尉都不在，只有留守的郡丞在谯楼下的城门中抵抗义军，不能取胜，郡丞被打死。陈胜于是领兵入城，占据了陈地。
English: When Chencheng was attacked, neither the county governor nor the county lieutenant were present. Only the remaining county magistrate resisted the rebels in the gate under the gatehouse. He could not win, and the county magistrate was killed. Chencheng then led his troops into the city and occupied Chenji.

古文：初，大梁人张耳、陈馀相与为刎颈交。
现代文：当初，大梁人张耳、陈馀结为同生死、共患难的朋友。
English: At the beginning, Zhang Er and Chen Yu Jie, both of whom were great men, were friends who shared the same life and death and shared the same hardships.

古文：秦灭魏，闻二人魏之名士，重赏购求之。
现代文：秦国灭魏时，听说两个人是魏国的名士，便悬重赏征求他们。
English: When the Qin Dynasty conquered the Wei Dynasty, they heard that the two men were famous figures in the Wei Dynasty, so they offered them a large reward.

古文：张耳、陈馀乃变名姓，俱之陈，为里监门以自食。
现代文：张耳、陈馀于是改名换姓，一起逃到了陈地，充任里门看守来糊口。
English: Zhang Er and Chen Yu then changed their names and fled to Chen Di together, working as guards at the inner gate to make a living.

古文：里吏尝以过笞陈馀，陈馀欲起，张耳蹑之，使受笞。
现代文：管理里巷的官吏曾经因陈馀出了小过失而鞭笞他，陈馀想要与那官吏抗争，张耳踩他的脚，让他接受鞭笞。
English: The official in charge of the alley had whipped Chen Yu for a minor offense. Chen Yu wanted to fight the official, so Zhang Er stepped on his foot and let him take the whipping.

古文：吏去，张耳乃引陈馀之桑下，数之曰： 始吾与公言何如？
现代文：待那小官离开后，张耳将陈馀拉到桑树下，数落他说： 当初我是怎么对你说的？
English: After waiting for the minor official to leave, Zhang Er pulled Chen Yu under the mulberry tree and asked him: "What did I say to you at the beginning?

古文：今见小辱而欲死一吏乎！ 
现代文：现在遇上一点小的侮辱，就想跟一个小官吏拼命啊！ 
English: Now, when I encounter a small insult, I want to fight tooth and nail with a minor official!

古文：陈馀谢之。
现代文：陈馀为此道了歉。
English: Chen Yu apologized for this.

古文：陈涉既入陈，张耳、陈馀诣门上谒。
现代文：及至陈胜率义军已进入陈地，张耳、陈馀便前往陈胜的驻地通名求见。
English: By the time Chen Sheng led the rebels into Chen's territory, Zhang Er and Chen Yu had gone to Chen Sheng's residence to see him.

古文：陈涉素闻其贤，大喜。
现代文：陈胜一向听说他俩很贤能，故而非常高兴。
English: Chen Sheng had always heard that the two of them were very capable, so he was very happy.

古文：陈中豪杰父老请立涉为楚王，涉以问张耳、陈馀。
现代文：恰逢陈地中有声望的地方人士和乡官请求立陈胜为楚王，陈胜就拿这件事来询问张耳、陈馀的意见。
English: At the same time, some local dignitaries and township officials in Chen Di requested that Chen Sheng be appointed as the King of Chu. Chen Sheng took this opportunity to ask Zhang Er and Chen Yu for their opinions.

古文：耳、馀对曰： 秦为无道，灭人社稷，暴虐百姓。
现代文：二人回答说： 秦王朝暴乱无道，兼灭别人的国家，残害百姓。
English: The two replied, "The Qin Dynasty is ruthless in rioting, destroying other people's countries and brutalizing the people.

古文：将军出万死之计，为天下除残也。
现代文：而今您冒万死的危险起兵反抗的目的，就是要为天下百姓除害啊。
English: And now you are risking your life and limb to raise an army to resist, the purpose of which is to eliminate harm for the people of the world.

古文：今始至陈而王之，示天下私。
现代文：现在您才到达陈地即要称王，是向天下人显露您的私心。
English: Now, just after the battle of Chenchi, they claim to be the king, showing their selfishness in front of the world.

古文：愿将军毋王，急引兵而西。遣人立六国后，自为树党，为秦益敌。
现代文：因此希望您不要称王，而是火速率军向西，派人去扶立六国国君的后裔，替自己培植党羽，以此为秦王朝增树敌人。
English: Therefore, I hope that you will not call yourself a king, but send your rapid-fire army to the west, send people to help establish the descendants of the sovereigns of the six countries, and cultivate party members for yourself, so as to create more enemies for the Qin Dynasty.

古文：敌多则力分，与众则兵强。
现代文：秦的敌人多了，兵力就势必分散，大楚联合的国家多了，兵力就必然强大。
English: The more enemies Qin had, the more its forces would be dispersed. The more countries allied with the Great Chu, the more powerful its forces would be.

古文：如此，则野无交兵，县无守城，诛暴秦，据咸阳，以令诸侯。
现代文：这样一来，在野外军队不必交锋，遇到县城没有兵为秦守城。铲除残暴的秦政权，占据咸阳，以号令各诸侯国。
English: As a result, the army did not have to fight in the field, and when there were no soldiers in the county town, Qin guarded the city. Eradicate the brutal Qin regime, occupy Xianyang, and order the vassal states.

古文：诸侯亡而得立，以德服之，如此则帝业成矣。
现代文：灭亡的诸侯国得到复兴，您施德政使它们服从，您的帝王大业就完成了！
English: The various vassal states were able to be restored after their demise, and they were inspired by grace. If this can be done, then the emperor's great cause will be successful.

古文：今独王陈，恐天下懈也。 
现代文：如今只在一个陈县就称王，恐怕会使天下人斗志松懈了。 
English: Now that only one Chen County has been crowned king, I am afraid that the world's fighting spirit will be slackened.

古文：陈涉不听，遂自立为王，号 张楚 。
现代文：陈胜不听从这一意见，即自立为楚王，号称 张楚 。
English: Chen Sheng did not listen to this opinion, that is, he became the king of Chu, known as Zhang Chu.

古文：当是时，诸郡县苦秦法，争杀长吏以应涉。
现代文：在那时，各郡县的百姓都苦于秦法的残酷苛刻，因此争相诛杀当地长官，响应陈胜。
English: At that time, the people of all counties were suffering from the cruelty and harshness of the Qin law, so they competed to kill local officials in response to Chen Sheng.

古文：谒者使从东方来，以反者闻。
现代文：秦王朝的宾赞官谒者从东方归来，把反叛的情况奏报给二世。
English: The Binzan official of the Qin Dynasty returned from the East and reported the situation of the rebellion to the Second Emperor.

古文：二世怒，下之吏。
现代文：二世勃然大怒，将谒者交给司法官吏审问治罪。
English: The second generation flew into a rage and handed the man over to judicial officials for interrogation and punishment.

古文：后使者至，上问之，对曰： 群盗鼠窃狗偷，郡守、尉方逐捕，今尽得，不足忧也。 
现代文：于是，以后回来的使者，二世向他们询问情况，他们便回答说： 一群盗贼不过是鼠窃狗偷之辈，郡守、郡尉正在追捕他们，现在已经全部抓获，不值得为此忧虑了。 
English: So the second envoy, who came back later, asked them about the situation, and they replied: A group of thieves are nothing more than rat and dog thieves, the county governor and the county lieutenant are chasing them, and now they have all been caught, so it's not worth worrying about.

古文：上悦。
现代文：二世即颇为喜悦。
English: The second generation is very happy.

古文：陈王以吴叔为假王，监诸将以西击荥阳。
现代文：陈胜任命吴广为代理楚王，督率众将领向西攻击荥阳。
English: Chen Sheng appointed Wu Guang as the acting king of Chu, and he led the generals to attack Fenyang in the west.

古文：张耳、陈馀复说陈王，请奇兵北略赵地。
现代文：张耳、陈馀又劝说陈胜，请出奇兵向北攻取原来赵国的土地。
English: Zhang Er and Chen Yu also persuaded Chen Sheng to send a special force to the north to conquer the land of the original Zhao Kingdom.

古文：于是陈王以故所善陈人武臣为将军，邵骚为护军，以张耳、陈馀为左、右校尉，予卒三千人，徇赵。
现代文：于是，陈胜便任命他过去的好友、陈地人武臣为将军，邵骚为护军，张耳、陈馀为左、右校尉，拨给士卒三千人，攻取故赵国的土地。
English: As a result, Chen Sheng appointed his past friends, the Chen people, Wu Sheng as general, Shao Shao as escort, Zhang Er and Chen Yu as left and right lieutenants, and assigned three thousand soldiers to conquer the land of the former Zhao country.

古文：陈王又令汝阴人邓宗徇九江郡。
现代文：陈胜又令汝阴人邓宗率军攻略九江郡。
English: Chen Sheng also ordered the Ruyin man Deng Zong to lead the army to capture Jiujiang County.

古文：当此时，楚兵数千人为聚者不可胜数。
现代文：这时，楚地数千人为一支的军队，数不胜数。
English: At this time, it is impossible to count exactly how many thousands of Chu rebels had gathered.

古文：葛婴至东城，立襄强为楚王。
现代文：葛婴到达东城后，立襄强为楚王。
English: Ge Ying arrived in Dongcheng and supported Xiang Qiang as the King of Chu.

古文：闻陈王已立，因杀襄强还报。
现代文：后来闻悉陈胜已立为楚王，就杀了襄强返回陈县奏报。
English: Later, when he learned that Chen Sheng had been established as the king of Chu, he killed Xiang Qiang and returned to Chen County to report.

古文：陈王诛杀葛婴。
现代文：但陈胜仍然将葛婴杀掉了。
English: But Chen Sheng still killed the baby goat.

古文：陈王令魏人周市北徇魏地。
现代文：陈胜令周率军向北攻取故魏国的土地。
English: Chen Sheng ordered the Wei people to go to the north of Zhou City to capture the place that originally belonged to Wei.

古文：以上蔡人房君蔡赐为上柱国。
现代文：任命上蔡人、封号 房君 的蔡赐为上柱国。
English: Cai Zhen, known as Shang Cai Ren, and Cai Zhe, known as Fang Jun, were appointed as Shang Cai Guo.

古文：陈王闻周文，陈之贤人也，习兵，乃与之将军印，使西击秦。
现代文：陈胜听说周文是陈地德才兼备的人，通晓军事，便授给他将军的印信，命他领兵向西进攻秦王朝。
English: When Chen Sheng heard that Zhou Wen was a man of both virtue and talent and was familiar with military affairs, he gave him the general's seal and ordered him to lead the army to the west to attack the Qin Dynasty.

古文：武臣等从白马渡河，至诸县，说其豪杰，豪杰皆应之。
现代文：武臣等人从白马津渡过黄河，分赵各县，劝说当地有声望的人士，这些地方人士都纷纷响应。
English: Wu Zhen and others crossed the Yellow River from Baima Jin, divided Zhao into counties, and persuaded local celebrities, and these local people responded in succession.

古文：乃行收兵，得数万人。号武臣为武信君。
现代文：武臣等便沿途收取兵众，得数万人，武臣号称为 武信君 。
English: The samurai vassals and others collected soldiers along the way, gaining tens of thousands of people, and the samurai vassal's name was Takenobu.

古文：下赵十馀城。馀皆城守。
现代文：武臣的大军接连攻下故赵国的十几个城市，其他的城市都固守不降。
English: The great army of samurai successively conquered more than a dozen cities in the former Zhao Kingdom, and the other cities did not surrender.

古文：乃引兵东北击范阳。
现代文：武臣便率军向东北攻击范阳。
English: So he led his troops to the northeast to attack Fanyang.

古文：范阳蒯彻说武信君曰： 足下必将战胜而后略地，攻得然后下城，臣窃以为过矣。
现代文：范阳人蒯彻劝武信君说： 您一定要先打胜仗而后才扩大地盘，先进攻得手然后才取得城市，我私下里认为这是一个错误。
English: Fan Yang's people strongly advised Wu Xinjun to say: You must first win the war and then expand the territory, advance the attack and then acquire the city. I secretly think this is a mistake.

古文：诚听臣之计，可不攻而降城，不战而略地，传檄而千里定，可乎？ 
现代文：您若果真听从我的计策，就可以不进攻便使城市投降，不作战便能夺取土地，传送一篇征召、声讨的文书，便可使千里之地平定，如此行吗？ 
English: If you can follow my strategy, you can subdue the cities without attacking, seize the land without fighting, and let you pacify the vast land as long as you issue a conscription notice, okay?

古文：武信君曰： 何谓也？ 
现代文：武臣说： 你说的是什么意思呀？ 
English: Takenobu said, "What are you referring to?"

古文：彻曰： 范阳令徐公，畏死而贪，欲先天下降。
现代文：蒯彻道： 范阳县令徐某，怕死且贪得无厌，他想在别的县之前投降。
English: Zou Chie said: Xu, the leader of Fanyang County, was afraid of death and greedy. He wanted to surrender before other counties.

古文：君若以为秦所置吏，诛杀如前十城，则边地之城皆为金城、汤池，不可攻也。
现代文：您若认为徐某是秦王朝所任用的官吏，就如同杀戮前面那十城的秦朝官员一样杀了他，那么边地所有的城市都将固若金汤，无法攻克了。
English: If you think that Xu Mou is an official appointed by the Qin Dynasty, just as the Qin Dynasty officials of the ten cities before the killing killed him, then all the cities in the outlying areas will be solid and invincible.

古文：君若赍臣侯印以授范阳令，使乘硃轮华毂，驱驰燕、赵之郊，即燕、赵城可毋战而降矣。 
现代文：假如您送给我侯印，让我授给范阳县令，使他乘坐王侯显贵所乘的车子，驱驰在旧燕、赵国的城外，那么燕、赵地的城市就可不战而降了。 
English: If you were to give me the seal of the Prince of Yan and Zhao, and let me grant Fan Yang County's order to Zhu Xi, so that he could ride in the car of the Prince of Yan and Zhao, and drive outside the city of the old Yan and Zhao, then the city of Yan and Zhao could be surrendered without a fight.

古文：武信君曰： 善！ 
现代文：武臣说： 好吧！ 
English: Takeomi said, "Okay!

古文：以车百乘、骑二百、侯印迎徐公。
现代文：即拨给蒯彻一百辆车、二百名骑兵及君侯的印信去迎接徐县令。
English: A total of one hundred cars, two hundred cavalrymen and the prince's seal were immediately allocated to meet the Xu County's order.

古文：燕、赵闻之，不战以城下者三十馀城。
现代文：燕、赵旧地风闻此消息后，不战便举城投降的就有三十余个城市。
English: After Yan and Zhao heard the news, more than 30 cities surrendered without a fight.

古文：陈王既遣周章，以秦政之乱，有轻秦之意，不复设备。
现代文：陈胜已经派出了周文的部队，便因秦王朝的政治混乱，而生有轻视秦的意思，不再设置防备。
English: Chen Sheng had already dispatched Zhouwen's troops, and because of the political turmoil of the Qin Dynasty, he had the intention of despising Qin and no longer set up defenses.

古文：博士孔鲋谏曰： 臣闻兵法： 不恃敌之不我攻，恃吾不可攻。 
现代文：博士孔鲋规劝说： 我听兵法上说： 不依靠敌人不来攻我，而是仰仗我之不可以被攻打。 
English: Confucius said, "I have heard it said in the Art of War, 'Don't rely on the enemy not to attack you, but rely on yourself not to be attacked.'

古文：今王恃敌而不自恃，若跌而不振，悔之无及也。 
现代文：如今您凭借敌人不来进攻，而不依靠自己设防不怕为敌所攻，一旦遭遇挫折不能奋起，则悔恨也来不及了。 
English: Now you rely on the enemy not to attack, and do not rely on yourself to set up defenses and are not afraid of being attacked by the enemy. Once you encounter setbacks and cannot rise up, it is too late to regret.

古文：陈王曰： 寡人之军，先生无累焉。 
现代文：陈胜说： 我的军队，就不必烦劳先生您操心了。 
English: Chen Sheng said, "My army, you don't have to worry, sir.

古文：周文行收兵至关，车千乘，卒数十万至戏，军焉。
现代文：周文沿路收取兵众到达函谷关，已是战车千辆，士卒几十万，至戏亭，驻扎了下来。
English: Zhou Wen received the soldiers along the road and arrived at the Hanyu Pass. There were already a thousand chariots and hundreds of thousands of soldiers, and they went to the theater and stationed themselves there.

古文：二世乃大惊，与群臣谋曰： 奈何？ 
现代文：二世这时才大惊失色，连忙与群臣商议说： 怎么办啊？ 
English: At this time, the second emperor was shocked and disgraced, and hurriedly discussed with his courtiers, saying, "What should we do?

古文：少府章邯曰： 盗已至，众强，今发近县，不及矣。
现代文：少府章邯道： 盗贼已临城下，人多势强，现在征调附近各县的军队抵抗，已经来不及了。
English: Shoufu Zhangjun said: The thieves have reached the outskirts of the city, the number of people is large and the power is strong. Now it is too late to conscript the army of the nearby counties to resist.

古文：骊山徒多，请赦之，授兵以击之。 
现代文：不过发配在骊山服营建劳作的夫役很多，请赦免他们，并授给他们兵器去迎击敌军。 
English: However, there are many laborers assigned to the construction of the Lushan Garment Camp. Please pardon them and give them weapons to fight against the enemy.

古文：二世乃大赦天下，使章邯免骊山徒、人奴产子，悉发以击楚军，大败之。周文走。
现代文：二世于是下令大赦天下，命章邯免除骊山的刑徒、奴婢所生之崐子不能充当战士的限制，将他们全部征发去攻打楚军，大败周文的军队，周文逃跑。
English: The second emperor then ordered a general amnesty for the whole country, exempted the prisoners of Lushan from the restriction that the sons of slaves could not serve as soldiers, conscripted them all to attack the Chu army, defeated Zhouwen's army, and Zhouwen fled.

古文：张耳、陈馀至邯郸，闻周章却，又闻诸将为陈王徇地还者多以谗毁得罪诛，乃说武信君令自王。
现代文：张耳、陈馀抵达邯郸，听到周文撤退的消息，又闻悉为陈胜攻城掠地后归还的众将领，多因谗言陷害而获罪，遭到诛杀，便劝说武臣，让他自己称王。
English: Zhang Er and Chen Yu arrived in Handan, heard the news of Zhou Wen's retreat, and learned that the generals who returned to Handan after Chen Sheng attacked the city and plundered the land, were mostly guilty of slander and frame-up, and were killed in battle, so they persuaded the vassals to let him proclaim himself king.

古文：八月，武信君自立为赵王，以陈馀为大将军，张耳为右丞相，邵骚为左丞相；使人报陈王。
现代文：八月，武臣自立为赵王，任命陈馀为大将军，张耳为右丞相，邵骚为左丞相，并派人报知陈胜。
English: In August, Emperor Wu established himself as King Zhao, appointed Chen Yu as grand general, Zhang Er as minister of the right and Shaoshu as minister of the left, and sent someone to report Chen Sheng.

古文：陈王大怒，欲尽族武信君等家而发兵击赵。
现代文：陈胜大怒，想要尽灭武臣等人的家族，发兵攻打赵王。
English: Chen Sheng flew into a rage and wanted to wipe out the families of the samurai retainers and others, so he sent troops to attack King Zhao.

古文：相国房君谏曰： 秦未亡而诛武信君等家，此生一秦也；不如因而贺之，使急引兵西击秦。 
现代文：柱国房君蔡赐规劝道： 秦王朝尚未灭亡就杀武臣等人的家族，这是使又一个秦王朝复生啊。不如趁此庆贺他为王，令他火速率军向西进攻秦。 
English: Column Guofangjun Cai Jie advised: The Qin Dynasty has not yet perished, so killing the families of warriors and other people is bringing another Qin Dynasty back to life. It would be better to take advantage of this to celebrate him as king and have his rapid-fire army attack Qin to the west.

古文：陈王然之，从其计，徙系武信君等家宫中，封张耳子敖为成都君，使使者贺赵，令趣发兵西入关。
现代文：陈胜认为说得有理，便听从他的计策，把武臣等人的家属迁移到宫中软禁起来，封张耳的儿子张敖为成都君，派使者前去祝贺赵王即位，催促他赶快发兵向西入函谷关。
English: Chen Sheng thought that this was reasonable, and he followed his strategy. He moved the families of the warriors and other people to the palace and put them under house arrest. He made Zhang Er's son Zhang Ye the prince of Chengdu, sent an envoy to congratulate King Zhao on his accession to the throne, and urged him to quickly send troops to the west to enter Hanzhong Pass.

古文：张耳、陈馀说赵王曰： 王王赵，非楚意，特以计贺王。
现代文：张耳、陈馀劝赵王武臣说： 您在赵地称王，并非楚王陈胜的本意，所以祝贺您称王，不过是个权宜之计。
English: Zhang Er and Chen Yu advised Zhao Wang Wushen, saying, "It was not the intention of Chu King Chen Sheng for you to be crowned king in Zhao, so I congratulate you on being crowned king, but it was only a temporary measure.

古文：楚已灭秦，必加兵于赵。
现代文：一旦楚灭掉了秦，必定要发兵攻打赵国。
English: If Chu wanted to destroy Qin, it would certainly send troops to attack.

古文：愿王毋西兵，北徇燕、代，南收河内以自广。
现代文：因此希望您不要向西出兵，而是领兵往北攻占旧燕地、代地，向南收取河内，以此扩大自己的地盘。
English: It was hoped that the king would not send troops to the west, but would conquer Yan and Dai Provinces in the north, and Hanoi in the south, in order to expand the country's territory.

古文：赵南据大河，北有燕、代，楚虽胜秦，必不敢制赵；不胜秦，必重赵。
现代文：这样一来，赵国南面可以扼守黄河，北面有燕、代旧地可为声援，楚即便战胜了秦，也肯定不敢制约赵国。楚如果不能胜秦，赵国的分量就必然加重。
English: In this way, the south side of Zhao can hold the Yellow River, and the north side has Yan and the old place can be solidarity. Even if Chu defeats Qin, it will certainly not dare to restrict Zhao. If Chu cannot defeat Qin, the weight of Zhao will inevitably increase.

古文：赵乘秦、楚之敝，可以得志于天下。 
现代文：如此，赵国乘秦、楚两家疲惫衰败之机崛起，即可以得行己志，达到统治天下的目的了。 
English: In this way, Zhao Guo took advantage of the opportunity of the exhaustion and decline of the Qin and Chu dynasties to rise, which meant that he could pursue his own ambition and achieve the goal of ruling the world.

古文：赵王以为然，因不西兵，而使韩广略燕，李良略常山，张黡略上党。
现代文：赵王认为说得不错，于是便不向西进军，而是派韩广领兵夺取燕国故土，李良攻取常山，张夺取上党。
English: Zhao Wang thought they were right, so he did not send troops to the west, but sent Han Guang to seize Yan's land, Li Liang to seize Changshan, and Zhang Ye to seize Shangdang.

古文：九月，沛人刘邦起兵于沛，下相人项梁起兵于吴，狄人田儋起兵于齐。
现代文：九月，沛人刘邦在沛起兵，下相人项梁在吴起兵，狄人田儋在齐国旧地起兵。
English: In September, Liu Bang, a Pei person, raised an army in Pei, Xiang Liang, a lower-ranking person, raised an army in Wu, and Tian Yao, a Di person, raised an army in the old land of Qi.

古文：刘邦，字季，为人隆准、龙颜，左股有七十二黑子。
现代文：刘邦，字季，为人高鼻梁、眉骨突起如龙额，左大腿上有七十二颗黑痣。
English: Liu Bang, nicknamed Ji, has a high nose bridge, a brow bone protruding like a dragon's forehead, and seventy-two black moles on his left thigh.

古文：爱人喜施，意豁如也。常有大度，不事家人生产作业。
现代文：对人友爱宽厚，喜欢施舍财物给人，心胸开阔，素来有远大的志向，不安于从事平民百姓的日常耕作。
English: He is kind and generous to others, likes to give alms to people, is open-minded, has always had lofty aspirations, and is not afraid to engage in the daily farming of the common people.

古文：初为泗上亭长，单父人吕公，好相人，见季状貌，奇之，以女妻之。
现代文：起初，刘邦担任泗水亭长，单父县人吕公，喜爱给人相面，看见刘邦的形状容貌，认为很不寻常，便将女儿嫁给了他。
English: At first, Liu Bang served as the head of the Surabaya Pavilion. His single father, Lu Gong, a native of Surabaya County, liked to meet people face to face. When he saw the shape and appearance of Liu Bang, he thought it was very unusual and married his daughter to him.

古文：既而季以亭长为县送徒骊山，徒多道亡。
现代文：不久，刘邦以亭长身分奉县里委派遣送被罚服营建劳作的夫役到骊山去，途中许多夫役逃亡。
English: Not long after, Liu Bang, acting as the chief of the pavilion, was dispatched by the county party committee to send the forced laborers who had been fined to Lushan. On the way, many forced laborers fled.

古文：自度比至皆亡之，到丰西泽中亭，止饮，夜，乃解纵所送徒曰： 公等皆去，吾亦从此逝矣！ 
现代文：刘邦据此推测待到骊山时人已经都跑光了，于是便在行至丰乡西面的泽中亭后，停下来休息饮酒，到了晚上即释放所送的夫役们说： 你们都走吧，我也从此逃命去了！ 
English: Liu Bang surmised from this that by the time he reached Lushan, everyone had run away. So, after traveling to the Zezhong Pavilion on the west side of Fengxiang, he stopped to rest and drink. In the evening, he released the servants he had sent and said: You all go, I have also fled for my life!

古文：徒中壮士愿从者十馀人。
现代文：夫役中年轻力壮的汉子愿意跟随他的有十余人。
English: The young and strong man in the husband role has more than ten people willing to follow him.

古文：刘季被酒，夜径泽中，有大蛇当径，季拔剑斩蛇。
现代文：刘邦喝醉了，夜间从小道走进湖沼地，遇到一条大蛇挡在道上，他随即拔剑斩杀了大蛇。
English: Liu Bang was drunk. At night, he walked into the marshland from the path and encountered a large snake blocking the path. He immediately drew his sword and killed the snake.

古文：有老妪哭曰： 吾子，白帝子也，化为蛇，当道。今赤帝子杀之！ 
现代文：一位老妇夫哭着说： 我的儿子是白帝的儿子啊，化为蛇，挡在小道上，而今却被赤帝的儿子杀了！ 
English: An old woman cried and said: My son is the son of the White Emperor, turned into a snake, blocking the path, and now he has been killed by the son of the Red Emperor!

古文：因忽不见。
现代文：说罢就忽然不见了踪影。
English: After saying this, he suddenly disappeared.

古文：刘季亡匿于芒、砀山泽岩石之间，数有奇怪；沛中子弟闻之，多欲附者。
现代文：刘邦随后逃亡、隐藏在芒、砀的山泽中，这山泽间于是常常出现怪异现象。沛县中的年轻人闻讯后，大都想要去归附他。
English: Liu Bang then fled and hid in the mountains of Meng and Shao, and strange phenomena often occurred between the mountains. After hearing the news, most young people in Peixian wanted to join him.

古文：及陈涉起，沛令欲以沛应之。掾、主吏萧何、曹参曰： 君为秦吏，今欲背之，率沛子弟，恐不听。
现代文：及至陈胜起兵，沛县县令打算举城响应，主吏萧何、狱掾曹参说： 您身为秦朝官吏，现在想要背叛朝廷，以此率领沛县的青年，恐怕他们不会听从您的号令。
English: When Chen Sheng raised an army, the county magistrate of Peixian County planned to rally the city to respond, and the chief officials Xiao He and the jailer Cao San said: You are an official of the Qin Dynasty, and now you want to betray the imperial court and lead the young people of Peixian County in this way. I am afraid they will not obey your orders.

古文：愿君召诸亡在外者，可得数百人，因劫众，众不敢不听。 
现代文：望您把那些逃亡在外的人召集起来，可得数百人，借此威胁大众，众人便不敢不服从了。 
English: If you call together those who have fled abroad, you will get hundreds of them, and by this means you will threaten the people, and they will not dare to disobey.

古文：乃令樊哙召刘季。刘季之众已数十百人矣。
现代文：县令于是便命樊哙去召刘邦来见，这时刘邦的部众已有百十来人了。
English: The county magistrate sent a messenger to summon Liu Ji, and Liu Ji's team has grown to nearly 100 people.

古文：沛令后悔，恐其有变，乃闭城城守，欲诛萧、曹。
现代文：县令事后很懊悔，担心召刘邦等人来会发生什么变故，就下令关闭城门，防守城池，并要诛杀萧何、曹参。
English: The county magistrate was very remorseful afterwards, worried about what would happen if Liu Bang and others were summoned, so he ordered to close the city gate, defend the city, and kill Xiao He and Cao San.

古文：萧、曹恐，逾城保刘季。
现代文：萧、曹二人大为惊恐，翻过城去投奔刘邦以求自保。
English: Xiao He and Cao San were afraid and climbed over the city wall to cling to Liu Ji.

古文：刘季乃书帛射城上，遗沛父老，为陈利害。
现代文：刘邦便在绸绢上草就一书，用箭射到城上，送给沛县的父老，陈说利害关系。
English: Liu Bang then wrote a letter on the silk scarf, shot it with an arrow to the city, and sent it to Peixian's parents. Chen said that there was a conflict of interest.

古文：父老乃率子弟共杀沛令，开门迎刘季，立以为沛公。
现代文：父老们便率领年轻一辈一起杀掉了县令，敞开城门迎接刘邦，拥立他为 沛公 。
English: The fathers and grandfathers led the younger generation to kill the county magistrate, open the city gate to welcome Liu Bang, and support him as Pei Gong.

古文：萧、曹等为收沛子弟，得二三千人，以应诸侯。
现代文：萧何、曹参为刘邦召集沛县青年，得三千人，以此响应诸侯抗秦。
English: Xiao He and Cao San gathered 3,000 young people from Pei County for Liu Bang, in response to the anti-Qin movement of the princes.

古文：项梁者，楚将项燕子也，尝杀人，与兄子籍避仇吴中。
现代文：项梁是故楚国大将项燕之子，因曾经杀过人，与他哥哥的儿子项羽逃到吴中躲避仇家。
English: Xiang Liang is the son of Xiang Yan, the late general of Chu. Because he once killed someone, he and his brother's son Xiang Yu fled to Wuzhong to avoid the enemy.

古文：吴中贤士大夫皆出其下。
现代文：吴中有声望的士人能都在项梁之下，不及他。
English: In Wu, all the prestigious scholars and scholars are below him, inferior to him.

古文：籍少时学书，不成，去；学剑，又不成。
现代文：项羽少年时学习识字和写字，学不成即抛开了，去习练剑法击刺之术，又未学成。
English: He learned to read and write when he was a young boy, but abandoned it when he couldn't, and went to practice swordsmanship and stabbing, but didn't succeed.

古文：项梁怒之。籍曰： 书，足以记名姓而已！
现代文：项梁为此非常生气，项羽说： 识字写字，记名姓就行了！
English: Xiang Liang was very angry about this, and Xiang Yu said: Just be literate and write, and remember names!

古文：剑，一人敌，不足学。
现代文：学剑也不过是只能抵挡一人，不值得去学。
English: Learning to use a sword is no more than learning to fend off one person. It's not worth learning.

古文：学万人敌！ 
现代文：要学就学那可以抵抗万人的本事！ 
English: If you want to learn, learn the skill that can resist everyone!

古文：于是项梁乃教籍兵法，籍大喜；略知其意，又不肯竟学。
现代文：项梁因此便教授项羽兵法，项羽喜不自胜，但是在略知兵法大意之后，又不肯学下去。
English: As a result, Cao Liang began to teach Cao Yu the Art of War. Cao Yu was overjoyed, but after learning a little about the art of war, he refused to continue.

古文：籍长八尺馀，力能扛鼎，才器过人。
现代文：项羽身长八尺多，力能独自举鼎，才干、器度超过了一般人。
English: Xiang Yu is more than eight feet tall. He has the strength to lift the crown on his own, and his talent and poise exceed those of the average person.

古文：会稽守殷通闻陈涉起，欲发兵以应涉，使项梁及桓楚将。
现代文：会稽郡郡守殷通听到陈胜起兵抗秦的消息后，想要发兵响应陈胜，便令项梁和桓楚指挥所发动的兵马。
English: After hearing the news of Chen Sheng raising an army to resist the Qin, Yin Tong, the county governor of Hui County, wanted to send an army to respond to Chen Sheng, so he ordered Xiang Liang and the soldiers and horses launched by the Huanchu command post.

古文：是时，桓楚亡在泽中。
现代文：这时，桓楚正亡命江湖之中。
English: At this time, Kancho was in the midst of his life.

古文：梁曰： 桓楚亡，人莫知其处，独籍知之耳。 
现代文：项梁说： 桓楚在逃亡中，没有人晓得他在什么地方，只有项羽知道他的行踪。 
English: Xiang Liang said: Huan Chu died in hiding. People don't know his whereabouts, only Xiang Qi knows.

古文：梁乃出诫籍持剑居外，复入，与守坐，曰： 请召籍，使受命召桓楚。 
现代文：项梁就嘱咐项羽持剑候在外面，自己又进去与郡守同坐，说： 请您召见项羽，让他接受命令去召回桓楚。 
English: Xiang Liang ordered Xiang Yu to hold his sword and wait outside. He went in and sat with the county governor, saying, "Please summon Xiang Yu, and let him accept the order to recall Kan Chu."

古文：守曰： 诺。 
现代文：殷通说： 好吧。 
English: Yin Tong said: Okay.

古文：梁召籍入。
现代文：项梁唤项羽入内受命。
English: Xiang Liang called Xiang Zheng to come in.

古文：须臾，梁眴籍曰 可行矣！ 
现代文：不一会儿，项梁向项羽使了个眼色说： 可以动手了！ 
English: After a while, Xiang Liang winked at Xiang Yu and said, "Let's get started!"

古文：于是籍遂拔剑斩守头。
现代文：项羽随即拔剑斩下了殷通的头。
English: He immediately drew his sword and cut off Yin Tong's head.

古文：项梁持守头，佩其印绶。
现代文：项梁手提郡守的头颅，佩带上郡守的官印。
English: Cao Liang held the head of the county magistrate and wore the official seal of the county magistrate.

古文：门下大惊，扰乱。籍所击杀数十百人，一府中皆慑伏，莫敢起。
现代文：郡守的侍从护卫们见状惊慌失措，混乱不堪，被项羽所击杀的有百十来人，一府之人都吓得趴在地上，没有一个敢于起身的。
English: The attendants and guards of the county magistrate panicked and were in a state of confusion. More than a hundred people were killed by Xiang Yu. Everyone in the county was terrified and lay on the ground. No one dared to get up.

古文：梁乃召故所知豪吏，谕以所为起大事，遂举吴中兵，使人收下县，得精兵八千人。
现代文：项梁随后便召集他从前熟悉的有势力的强干官吏，把所以要起事反秦的道理宣告给他们知晓，即征集吴中的兵员，命人收取郡下所属各县丁壮，得精兵八千人。
English: Subsequently, Cao Liang called together the powerful and capable officials he was familiar with in the past, and announced to them the reason for the anti-Qin uprising, that is, to recruit soldiers from Wuzhong, to order people to collect Ding Zhuang from the counties under the county, and to obtain eight thousand elite soldiers.

古文：梁为会稽守，籍为裨将，徇下县。
现代文：项梁自己做了会稽郡郡守，以项羽为副将，镇抚郡属各县。
English: Xiang Liang himself became the county governor of the county, with Xiang Yu as vice-commander, and the county of Zhenfu belonged to each county.

古文：籍是时年二十四。
现代文：项羽此时年方二十四岁。
English: At this time, Xiang Yu was 24 years old.

古文：田儋者，故齐王族也。
现代文：田儋是故齐国国君田氏的族人。
English: Tian Yao is a member of the Kimda clan in the former Qi Province.

古文：儋从弟荣，荣弟横，皆豪健，宗强，能得人。
现代文：他的堂弟田荣，田荣的弟弟田横，都势力雄厚，家族强盛，颇能博得人心。
English: His cousin, Tian Rong, and Tian Rong's younger brother, Tian You, are both powerful, and the family is prosperous and able to win the hearts of the people.

古文：周市徇地至狄，狄城守。
现代文：楚将周市带兵巡行占领地方到达了狄县，狄县闭城固守。
English: Chu led the Zhou troops in a parade and reached the occupied area of Di County. The closed city of Di County was firmly defended.

古文：田儋详为缚其奴，从少年之廷，欲谒杀奴，见狄令，因击杀令，而召豪吏子弟曰： 诸侯皆反秦自立。
现代文：田儋假意将他的奴仆捆绑起来，让一伙年轻人跟着来到县衙门，想要进见县令，报请准许杀奴。待见到狄县县令时，田儋即趁势击杀了他，随后召集有声望有权势的官吏和青年说： 各诸侯都反叛秦朝自立为王了。
English: On the pretext of tying up his slaves, Tian Xuan let a group of young men follow him to the county government gate. They wanted to see the county magistrate and ask for permission to kill the slaves. When they saw the county magistrate, Tian Xuan immediately took advantage of the situation and killed him. He then gathered prestigious and powerful officials and young people and said: All the princes have rebelled against the Qin Dynasty and have become kings.

古文：齐，古之建国也；儋，田氏，当王！ 
现代文：齐国是古时候就受封建立的国家。我田儋，是齐王田氏族人，应当为齐王！ 
English: Qizhou is a country that has been established since ancient times. I, Tianyao, a member of the Qizhou clan, should be the king of Qizhou!

古文：遂自立为齐王，发兵以击周市。
现代文：于是即自封为齐王，发兵攻击周市。
English: As a result, Tian Xuan established himself as the king of Qi, and raised an army to attack Zhou.

古文：周市军还去。
现代文：周市的军队退还。
English: Zhou's army retreated.

古文：田儋率兵东略定齐地。
现代文：田儋随即率军向东攻取、平崐定了旧齐国的土地。
English: Tian Xuan immediately led the army to the east to conquer and level the land of the former Qi.

古文：韩广将兵北徇燕，燕地豪杰欲共立广为燕王。
现代文：赵国将领韩广带兵往北攻掠故燕国的土地。燕地有势力的豪强打算共同拥立韩广为燕王。
English: Zhao Guo will lead Han Guang and his army to the north to attack and plunder the land of the former Yan Guo. The powerful of Yan Guo intend to jointly support Han Guang as the king of Yan.

古文：广曰： 广母在赵，不可！ 
现代文：韩广说： 我的母亲尚在赵国，不可这么做。 
English: Han Guang said: My mother is still in Zhao Province, she cannot do this.

古文：燕人曰： 赵方西忧秦，南忧楚，其力不能禁我。
现代文：燕地的人说： 赵国正西边担忧秦国的威胁；南面忧虑楚国的威胁，它自己的力量已不能禁止我们。
English: Yan said: Zhao Guo is now worried about Qin in the west and Chu in the south. Its power cannot restrict us.

古文：且以楚之强，不敢害赵王将相之家，赵独安敢害将军家乎！ 
现代文：况且以楚国的强大，还不敢杀害赵王将相的家属，赵国难道就敢加害您的家属吗？ 
English: Moreover, with the strength of the State of Chu, it did not dare to kill the family members of Zhao Wang Jiaxiang. Would the State of Zhao dare to harm your family members?

古文：韩广乃自立为燕王。
现代文：韩广于是就自立为燕王。
English: Han Guang then became the king of swallows.

古文：居数月，赵奉燕王母家属归之。
现代文：过了几个月，赵国即将韩广的母亲和家属送回了燕国。
English: A few months later, Zhao Jun escorted Yan Wang's mother and family back to Yan's country.

古文：赵王与张耳、陈馀北略地燕界，赵王间出，为燕军所得，燕囚之，欲求割地；使者往请，燕辄杀之。
现代文：赵王武臣与张耳、陈馀在燕国边界处夺取土地。
English: Zhao Wang Wuxin, Zhang Er and Chen Yu seized land at the border of Yan.

古文：有厮养卒走燕壁，见燕将曰： 君知张耳、陈馀何欲？ 
现代文：武臣抽空悄悄外出，被燕军俘获。燕国将他囚禁起来，想据此要求赵国割让土地。
English: Wuxin sneaked out and was captured by Yan's army. Yan's state imprisoned him and wanted to use this as a basis to demand that Zhao cede the land.

古文：曰： 欲得其王耳。 
现代文：赵国的使者赴燕请求放人，都被燕国杀了。
English: Yan Zheng replied: It was just Zhao Wang who wanted to save them.

古文：赵养卒笑曰： 君未知此两人所欲也。
现代文：这时，赵军有一个火夫跑到燕军的营地，进见燕将说： 您知道陈耳、陈馀想要什么吗？ 
English: At this time, a fireman from Zhao's army ran to the camp of Yan's army. When he saw Yan, he said: Do you know what Chen Er and Chen Yu want?

古文：夫武臣、张耳、陈馀，杖马棰下赵数十城，此亦各欲南面而王，岂欲为将相终已邪？
现代文：燕将答道： 只是想要得到他们的国王罢了。 赵军火夫笑着说： 您并不知道这两个人所要的是什么啊。武臣、张耳、陈馀，持马鞭，唾手攻克故赵国的数十城，张、陈二人也是各自想要面向南称王，哪里会甘心于一辈子做将相啊！
English: Yan Zheng replied, "They just want to get their king." Zhao Junhu smiled and said, "You don't know what these two people want. Wu Zhen, Zhang Er, and Chen Yu, with horsewhips, conquered dozens of cities in the former Zhao Kingdom with their bare hands. Zhang and Chen both want to face south to claim their kingships. Who would be willing to be a warlord for the rest of their lives?"

古文：顾其势初定，未敢参分而王，且以少长先立武臣为王，以持赵心。
现代文：不过是因为大势初定，不敢即三分土地自立为王，故暂且按年龄的长幼，先立武臣为王，以此安定赵国的民心。
English: However, because the general trend was initially determined, he did not dare to make the three-point land independent as the king, so for the time being, according to the age of the eldest and youngest, he first set the warrior as the king, in order to stabilize the hearts of the people of Zhao.

古文：今赵地已服，此两人亦欲分赵而王，时未可耳。
现代文：现在赵地已经平定顺服了，这两人便也想分赵国土地而称王，只是时机尚未成熟罢了。
English: Now that Zhao has been pacified and the people have been subdued, these two men want to divide up Zhao and declare themselves kings, but the time is not yet ripe.

古文：今君乃囚赵王，此两人名为求赵王，实欲燕杀之，此两人分赵自立。
现代文：而今您正好囚禁了赵王，此二人名为求释赵王，实则想让燕国将赵王杀掉，以使他们俩分赵国而自立。
English: And now you happen to have imprisoned King Zhao. These two people, whose names are "requesting the release of King Zhao," actually want Yan Guo to kill King Zhao, so that the two of them can divide Zhao Guo and become independent.

古文：夫以一赵尚易燕，况以两贤王左提右挈而责杀王之罪？
现代文：一个赵国尚且不把燕国放在眼里，更何况两个贤能的国君相互扶持，来声讨您杀害赵王的罪行啊。
English: A country like Zhao would not even consider a country like Yan, let alone two powerful kings supporting each other to denounce your crime of killing King Zhao.

古文：灭燕易矣！ 
现代文：如此，灭掉燕国是很容易的了！ 
English: In this way, it is easy to wipe out Yan's country!

古文：燕将乃归赵王，养卒为御而归。
现代文：燕军将领于是便归还赵王，由那位火夫驾车送他返回了赵国。
English: The general of Yan's army then returned Zhao Wang, and the fireman drove him back to Zhao.

古文：周市自狄还，至魏地，欲立故魏公子宁陵君咎为王。
现代文：周市从狄县还楚，到达故魏国土地时，想要立故魏国公子宁陵君魏咎为王。
English: When Zhou Shi arrived in the land of the former Wei Dynasty from Di County, he wanted to make the prince of the former Wei Dynasty, Ningling Jun Wei Wei, the king.

古文：咎在陈，不得之魏。魏地已定，诸侯皆欲立周市为魏王。
现代文：但魏咎恰巧在陈县陈胜那里，不能到魏地来，而魏地已经平定，诸侯便都想立周市为魏王。
English: However, Wei Wei happened to be in Chen County, Chen Sheng, and could not come to Wei, and Wei has been pacified, the princes wanted to establish Zhou as the king of Wei.

古文：市曰： 天下昏乱，忠臣乃见。
现代文：周市说： 天下昏乱，忠臣即出现。
English: Zhou Shi said: When the world is in chaos, you can see the loyalty of loyal subjects.

古文：今天下共畔秦，其义必立魏王后乃可。 
现代文：如今天下共同反叛秦王朝，依此道义，必定要立故魏国国君的后裔才行。 
English: If today we jointly rebel against the Qin Dynasty, in accordance with this moral principle, we must establish the descendants of the former Wei sovereigns.

古文：诸侯固请立市，市终辞不受；迎魏咎于陈，五反，陈王乃遣之，立咎为魏王，市为魏相。
现代文：诸侯坚持请求拥立周市，周市最终还是推辞不接受，派人往陈县迎取魏咎，往返五次，陈胜才将魏咎送还，立他为魏王，周市担任魏相。
English: The princes insisted on their request to support Zhou, but Zhou ultimately did not accept the refusal, and sent a person to Chen County to meet Wei Wei. They went back and forth five times before Chen Sheng sent Wei Wei back, appointed him as Wei King, and Zhou as Wei Minister.

古文：是岁，二世废卫君角为庶人，卫绝祀。
现代文：这一年，二世将卫国国君卫角废黜为平民，卫国灭亡。
English: In the same year, the second emperor deposed the ruler of the protectorate, Weikang, to become a commoner, and the protectorate was destroyed.

