古文：武大烈，临潼人。
现代文：武大烈，临潼人。
English: Wu Dairen, a native of Linyi.

古文：举天启七年乡试。崇祯中，授永宁知县。
现代文：天启七年乡试中举，崇祯年间授永宁知县。
English: In the seventh year of the apocalypse, the township exam was held, and Yongning County was awarded the first place.

古文：奸人倚万安郡王恣不法，大烈痛惩之。
现代文：奸人仗万安郡王之势，恣意为非作歹，大烈予以痛惩。
English: The traitor is the king of Wan'an County, and he will be severely punished for any wrongdoing.

古文：十三年十二月，李自成自南阳陷宜阳，知县唐启泰被害，遂攻永宁。
现代文：十三年十二月，李自成自南阳攻陷宜阳，杀知县唐启泰，进攻永宁。
English: In December of the 13th year, Li Zicheng invaded Yiyang from Nanyang, killed Tang Qitai of Zhixian County, and attacked Yongning.

古文：大烈与乡官四川巡抚张论协力捍御。
现代文：大烈与乡官四川巡抚张论协力捍御。
English: He vigorously defended it with the help of Zhang Xuan, the inspector of Sichuan.

古文：论殁，子吏部郎中鼎延及从父治中讃继之。
现代文：张论战死，其子吏部郎中张鼎延及叔父治中张赞来到永宁。
English: Zhang Den died in the war, and his son Zhang Dingyan and uncle Zhang Zhan came to Yongning.

古文：有狱囚勾贼入，都司马有义弃城走。
现代文：有奸人勾结义军入城，都司马有义弃城逃走。
English: A traitor entered the city in collusion with the rebel army, and Do Sima Yi abandoned the city and fled.

古文：大烈、鼎延等固守三日，贼夜半登城，执大烈。
现代文：大烈、鼎延等固守三日。义军于夜半登城，捉住了大烈。
English: Dali and Ding Yan held out for three days. The rebels entered the city in the middle of the night and captured Dali.

古文：自成以同乡欲活之，大烈不屈，索印又不予，乃燔灼以死。
现代文：自成念同乡之谊，有意不杀他，劝他投降，大烈不屈。要他交出县印，他也不肯，把他活活烧死。
English: He deliberately did not kill him, persuaded him to surrender, and fiercely refused to give in. When he was asked to hand over the prefectural seal, he refused to do so and was burned alive.

古文：汝人立庙祀之。盛以恒，潼关卫人。
现代文：一同被害的还有张赞及其子国学生张祚延、主簿魏国辅、教谕任维清、守备王正已、百户孙世英及方安王采钅轻。
English: Also among the victims were Zhang Zhan and his student Zhang Xuanyan, Wei Guofei, Ren Weiqing, Guo Bei Wang Zhengya, Baihu Sun Shiying, and Fang'an Wang Zheyu.

古文：崇祯十三年举人。知商城县。
现代文：盛以恒，潼关卫人。崇祯十三年举人，授商城县知县。
English: Sheng Yihe, the guardian of Shaoguan. In the thirteenth year of the reign of Chongzhen, he was the first person to be awarded the title of Shangcheng County.

古文：视事月余，流贼突至，却之。
现代文：以恒到任一个多月，农民义军攻商城，被他击退。
English: More than a month after he took office, peasant rebels attacked the commercial city and were repulsed by him.

古文：明年，张献忠陷襄阳，邻境大恐。
现代文：第二年，张献忠攻陷襄阳，邻境大为恐慌。
English: The next year, Zhang Xianzhong invaded Xiangyang, causing panic in the neighborhood.

古文：以恒已迁开封同知，将行，士民恳留之，乃登陴，与乡官杨所修、洪胤衡、马刚中、段增辉共城守。
现代文：这时，以恒已奉命调开封同知，启程之际，商城士民恳切挽留。于是以恒与乡官杨所修、洪胤衡、马刚中、段增辉共登城守御。
English: At this time, when the merchants in the mercantile city were about to leave, Ip Heng, who had been ordered to transfer the fief to his colleague, earnestly stayed behind. Therefore, Ip Heng and the township officials Yang Shoshu, Hong Yin Heng, Magang Zhong and Duan Zenghui jointly ascended the castle to guard it.

古文：二月中，贼奄至，适雨雪，守者冻馁不能战。
现代文：二月中，义军进至城下，时逢大雨大雪，守城士卒又冻又饿，不能战斗。
English: In mid-February, the rebels marched into the city, when there was heavy rain and snow. The defenders were cold and hungry and unable to fight.

古文：天启中，州县长吏殉难者，率赠京卿，荫锦衣世职，赐祭葬，有司建祠。
现代文：以恒督率家兵射敌十七人坠马。义军大怒，全力攻城，箭中以恒右颊，从北城突入。以恒家兵巷战，都战死，以恒被俘，辱骂不屈，被肢解而死。
English: The rebel army was enraged and attacked the city with all their might, with Heng's right cheek being hit by an arrow as they entered the city from the north. Heng's soldiers fought in the streets and were all killed, while Heng was captured, verbally abused and dismembered to death.

古文：崇祯初，改荫国子生，俾之出仕，而京卿之赠如故，至是始改赠外僚云。
现代文：其孙盛觉及典史吕维显、教谕曹维正都死。十五年七月，赠以恒副使。
English: His grandson, Sheng Jue, his scribe, Lü Wei Xian, and his preceptor, Cao Wei Zheng, all died. In July of the fifteenth year, he was presented with the post of deputy envoy to Heng.

古文：颜日愉，字华阳，上虞人。
现代文：颜日愉，字华阳，浙江上虞人。
English: Yan Rijiyun, Zi Huayang, Zhejiang Shangyu people.

古文：万历中，举于乡。
现代文：万历中乡试举人。
English: Wanli Zhongxiang tried to nominate people.

古文：崇祯初，除知叶县，有惠政，为上官所恶，劾罢。
现代文：崇祯初年授叶县知县，政治清平，但为上级所恶，被劾罢官。
English: In the first year of his reign, he was awarded the title of Jubei County, Zhixian County, and his politics were peaceful. However, he was hated by his superiors and was impeached and dismissed.

古文：部民争诣阙讼冤，乃获叙用。
现代文：该县百姓到朝廷为他申冤，才被任用。
English: The people of the county went to the imperial court to seek redress for him, and only then was he appointed.

古文：后为静宁知州。
现代文：后为静宁知州。
English: It was followed by Jingning and Chizhou.

古文：罗贼乱，驰请固镇五道兵合剿。
现代文：罗汝才领导农民起义，日愉忙请固镇五道兵合剿，自己先率敢死队数人去招安。
English: It was Luo Rucai who led the peasants' uprising, and he hastily invited the soldiers of the five provinces of Guzhen to join forces, and he led several members of the death squad to recruit.

古文：而先率敢死士数人招谕之，贼弛备，遂遣精卒捣其营，贼仓皇溃，斩数百级。黎明，五道兵继至，复大破之。
现代文：义军因而松弛戒备。日愉遣精锐兵猝攻义军大营。义军没有防备仓皇退走。第二天清晨，固镇五道兵至，又大败义军。
English: As a result, the rebels relaxed their guard. Nichiyu sent elite soldiers to suddenly attack the rebel camp. The rebels retreated in disarray. The next morning, soldiers from five provinces arrived in Gozhen and defeated the rebels again.

古文：事闻，赠太仆卿。
现代文：日愉因功升开封同知。
English: The matter was reported to the capital, and he was posthumously awarded the title of Taihoku-kyo.

古文：贼既不得志去，遂纵掠旁近州县。
现代文：这时农民起义烽火漫天，上级认为南阳为要冲之地，荐任日愉为知府。
English: At this time, the peasants' uprising was in full swing, and the superiors considered Nanyang to be the place to rush, recommending that Nichiyu be appointed as the prefect.

古文：其冬再围南阳，攻陷之，参议艾毓初死焉。
现代文：日愉在南阳大办守城战具，人心稍安。崇祯十四年五月，义军突然发起对南阳的进攻，百余人冒雨登城。日愉顽强抵抗，城虽保住，但他战死。
English: In May of the 14th year of Chongzhen, the rebels suddenly launched an attack on Nanyang, and more than a hundred people braved the rain to enter the city. Nichiyu strongly resisted, and although the city was saved, he died in battle.

古文：毓初，字孩如，米脂人，户部侍郎希淳曾孙也。
现代文：朝廷赠太仆寺卿。艾毓初，字孩如，米脂人，户部侍郎艾希淳之曾孙。
English: The Imperial Court presented him with the title of Dafu-ji-kyo. Ai Yucho, nicknamed "Kidzoru," is the great-grandson of the great-great-grandson of Aichi Atsushi, a household servant.

古文：崇祯四年进士。授内乡知县。
现代文：崇祯四年进士，授内乡知县。
English: In four years, he was promoted to the rank of knight and awarded the title of Inner Township and County.

古文：生长边陲，习战事。
现代文：毓初生长边疆，习于战事。
English: He grew up on the frontier and was accustomed to warfare.

古文：六年冬，流寇来犯。埋大炮名 滚地龙 者于城外，城中燃线发之，贼死无算，遂解去。
现代文：崇祯六年冬，农民起义军进攻内乡，毓初将 滚地龙 大炮置于城外，在城内燃线发炮，义军死伤无数，解围而去。
English: In the winter of the sixth year of Chongzhen, the peasant uprising rebels attacked the inland villages. At the beginning of the year, the Rolling Dragon cannon was placed outside the city, and the cannon was fired inside the city. The rebels suffered countless deaths and injuries, and left the siege.

古文：内乡与领邑淅川多深山邃谷，为盗窟，民居懔懔。
现代文：内乡与邻县淅川多高山深谷，为义军盘踞之地，居民惶惶不安。
English: Uchisho and neighboring counties in the mountainous valley of Shukawa, where the insurgents are entrenched, have residents on edge.

古文：毓初至，为设守备，民得少安。
现代文：毓初到任后，设防守御，民心稍安。
English: After he took office at the beginning of the year, he set up a defense committee, and the people's minds were somewhat reassured.

古文：明年冬，唐王聿键上言： 祖制，亲王所封地，有司早晚必谒见。
现代文：崇祯七年冬，唐王聿键上书说 ：祖制：亲王的封地，地方官吏早晚必谒见。
English: In the winter of the seventh year of the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, the emperor of Tang wrote on the key: "Ancestral system: the fief of the prince, local officials will see you sooner or later."

古文：今艾毓初等皆不谒。 
现代文：今艾毓初等都不来拜见。 
English: Now Ai Weiwei Primary School doesn't even come to visit.

古文：帝怒，悉逮下法司，而敕礼部申典制。
现代文：帝大怒，把他们都逮捕交司法衙门审理，令礼部重申朝廷典章制度。
English: Enraged, the emperor had them all arrested and brought to trial, and ordered the Ministry of Ceremonies to reaffirm the imperial proclamation system.

古文：已而王被逮，毓初获补官。
现代文：其后唐王被捕，毓初得以补官。
English: After that, Tang Wang was arrested, and he was able to be promoted to the position at the beginning of the 19th century.

古文：屡迁至右参议，分守南阳，与日愉却贼有功。
现代文：后调任右参议，分守南阳，与颜日愉抗敌有功。
English: Later, he was transferred to the post of Right Counselor, and he guarded Nanyang and fought against the enemy successfully.

古文：自成用宋献策计，欲取南阳以图关中，复率大众来寇。毓初偕总兵官猛如虎等坚守。
现代文：李自成用宋献策之计，欲取南阳以图关中，于是再率大军攻南阳，毓初与总兵官猛如虎等坚守。
English: Li Zicheng used the strategy proposed by Song Dynasty to take Nanyang in the middle of the map, so he again led a large army to attack Nanyang. At the beginning of the year, he and the commander-in-chief fiercely defended the city.

古文：贼徵之不出，胁以死，镌其背曰： 誓不从贼 ，遂呕血而死。
现代文：义军攻入南门，正在此时总督杨文岳援军赶到，义军只得退走。文岳走后，义军再攻城，守军粮尽援绝，毓初题诗于城楼，自缢而死。
English: The rebels entered the south gate, just at this time, Governor Yang Wenyue's reinforcements arrived, and the rebels had to retreat. After Wenyue left, the rebels attacked the city again, the defenders ran out of food, and died of self-immolation.

古文：刘振之，字而强，慈谿人。
现代文：南阳知县姚运熙、主簿门迎恩、训导杨气开都被杀。刘振之，字而强，浙江慈溪人。
English: Yao Yunxi of Nanyangzhi County, the main bookkeeper Meng Ying'en, and the tutor Yang Qikai were all killed. Liu Zhenzhi, a strong character, was from Cixi, Zhejiang.

古文：性刚方，敦学行，乡人严重之。
现代文：性情刚毅，致力于学习和道德修养，乡人都敬重他。
English: He has a strong character, is dedicated to study and moral cultivation, and is respected by the villagers.

古文：崇祯初，举于乡，以教谕迁鄢陵知县。
现代文：崇祯初年中举，从教谕升鄢陵知县。
English: In the first year of Chongzhen, it was promoted to Lingzhi County from Jiaozhu.

古文：十四年十二月，李自成陷许州。
现代文：崇祯十四年十二月，李自成攻陷许州。
English: In December of the 14th year of Chongzheng, Li Zicheng invaded and occupied Huzhou.

古文：知州王应翼被害，都司张守正，乡官魏完真，诸生李文鹏、王应鹏皆死。
现代文：知州王应翼被害，都司张守正，乡官魏完真，生员李文鹏、王应鹏都死。
English: Wang Yingyi of Chizhou was killed, the governor Zhang Shuzheng, the township official Wei Kanzhen, and the residents Li Wenpeng and Wang Yingpeng all died.

古文：自许以南无坚城。
现代文：自许州以南无能坚守之城。
English: The city that can't hold out south of Zhouzhou.

古文：有奸人素通贼，倡言城小宜速降，振之怒叱退之。
现代文：有奸人素与李自成相通，扬言许州城小，以速降为好。振之愤怒地骂走了这个人。
English: There was a traitor who was in communication with Li Zicheng, and he threatened to reduce the size of Xuzhou City and speed up the pace. Zhenzhi angrily scolded this person.

古文：典史杜邦举曰： 城存与存，亡与亡，人臣大义，公言是。 
现代文：典史杜邦举表示 ：城存与存，城亡与亡，此人臣之大义，公言极是。 
English: Denshi DuPont said: "The existence and existence of the city, the death and death of the city, the great justice of this vassal, the maxim is extremely true.

古文：振之乃与集吏民共守。
现代文：振之与吏民共守许州。
English: Zhenzhi and the officials and people jointly guarded Xuzhou.

古文：贼大至，城陷，振之秉笏坐堂上。
现代文：义军至，城被攻破，振之持笏坐于公堂上。
English: When the rebels arrived and the city was breached, Zhen Zhi sat in the public hall holding a scepter.

古文：贼索印，不与，缚置雪中三日夜，骂不绝口，乱刃交下乃死。
现代文：义军要他交出印来，振之不肯，被捆绑置于雪中三日三夜，仍骂口不绝，终为乱刀杀死。
English: The rebels wanted him to hand over the seal, but he refused to do so. He was tied up and left in the snow for three days and three nights. He was still verbally abused, and was eventually killed with a sword.

古文：初，振之书一小简，藏箧中，每岁元旦取视，辄加纸封其上。
现代文：振之曾写一小简，藏于一个小书箱内，每年元旦必取出来看，看后又放在书箱并加上封条。
English: Zhenzhi once wrote a short story, which was hidden in a small bookcase. Every New Year's Day, he had to take it out and read it. After reading it, he put it back in the bookcase and added a seal.

古文：侄敦华亦遇害。栋赠太仆卿，爵太仆少卿。
现代文：振之死后，家人把书箱打开，取出小简，上面写着 不贪财、不好色、不畏死 三句话，表示其志向。
English: After Zhen Zhi's death, his family opened the bookcase and took out a small booklet. On it was written, "Don't be greedy for money, don't be a womanizer, don't be afraid of death" - three sentences that expressed his aspirations.

古文：关永杰，字人孟，巩昌卫人。
现代文：朝廷赠振之光禄寺丞。关永杰，字人孟，陕西巩昌卫人。
English: The imperial court gave Zhen Guanglu Temple to Zhen Guanglu, Guan Yongjie, Zhaozhong Meng, and Shaanxi Gongchang Wei.

古文：世官百户。
现代文：家世代为百户。
English: There are 100 generations in a family.

古文：永杰好读书，每遇忠义事，辄书之壁。
现代文：永杰好读书，每遇忠义事便立即写在墙壁上。
English: Yongjie likes to read, and whenever he encounters a matter of loyalty, he immediately writes it on the wall.

古文：状貌奇伟，类世人所绘壮缪侯像。
现代文：永杰相貌魁伟，如同世人所绘之壮缪侯关云长。
English: Yongjie's appearance is majestic, just like the great warrior Guan Yunchang painted by the world.

古文：崇祯四年会试入都，与侪辈游壮缪祠。
现代文：崇祯四年入京都参加会试，与同辈人游关帝祠。
English: Four years later, when he entered Kyoto to take the entrance exam, he visited the Guan Di Temple with his peers.

古文：有道士前曰： 昨梦神告： 吾后人当有登第者，后且继我忠义，可语之。  
现代文：有道士上前来说道 ：昨夜梦见神人告诉我： 吾后人当有进士及第者，而且以后继承我忠义，可告诉他。  
English: A Taoist came forward and said, "Last night I dreamt of a godman and he told me, 'My descendants should have a priest and a disciple, and they should inherit my loyalty. You can tell him that.'"

古文：永杰愕然，颇自喜。
现代文：永杰颇为惊异，且沾沾自喜。
English: Yongjie was surprised and pleased with himself.

古文：已果登第，授开封推官，强植不阿，民畏爱之。
现代文：其后永杰果然中进士，授开封推官。永杰为官刚直不阿，百姓敬畏他。
English: After that, Yongjie was indeed promoted to middle-ranking official, and was awarded the title of magistrate. Yongjie was an upright official, and the people feared him.

古文：忧归，起官绍兴。
现代文：亲丧，服孝期满，起用在绍兴为官，后调兵部主事。
English: After the death of a close relative and the expiration of the period of filial piety, he was appointed as an official in Shaoxing, and then transferred to be in charge of the military department.

古文：迁兵部主事，督师杨嗣昌荐其才，请用之军前，乃擢睢陈兵备佥事，驻陈州。陈故贼冲，岁被蹂躏，永杰日夜为儆备。
现代文：督师杨嗣昌见他有才干，举荐用于军前，升为睢陈兵备佥事，驻于陈州。陈州原为农民起义军进攻目标，永杰日夜防备。
English: Superintendent Yang Shichang saw his talent, recommended him for military service, and promoted him to the post of Chen soldier and stationed him in Chenzhou. Chenzhou was originally the target of attack by the peasant uprising army, and Yongjie was on guard day and night.

古文：十五年二月，李自成数十万众来攻，永杰与知州侯君擢、乡官崔泌之、举人王受爵等率士民分堞守。
现代文：崇祯十五年二月，李自成率数十万大军攻陈州，永杰与知州侯君擢、乡官崔沁之、举人王受爵等率士民分守。
English: In February of the 15th year of Chongzheng, Li Zicheng led hundreds of thousands of troops to attack Chenzhou, and Yongjie and Chizhou Houjun Zhan, township official Cui Yanzhi, and Qiu Ren Wang were knighted.

古文：贼遣使说降，斩其头，悬之城上。
现代文：义军派人来劝降，永杰斩来使，将其头挂在城头上。
English: The rebels sent someone to persuade him to surrender, and Yongjie beheaded the envoy and hung his head on the top of the castle.

古文：贼怒，攻破之，永杰格杀数贼，身中乱刃而死。
现代文：义军大怒，一举攻下陈州。永杰在战中为乱刀杀死。
English: The rebel army was enraged and captured Chenzhou in one fell swoop. Yongjie was killed in the battle by a stray sword.

古文：君擢，字际明，成安人，起家举人。
现代文：朝廷赠永杰光禄寺卿。任栋，陕西永寿人，由贡生进莱州通判。
English: The imperial court presented Yong Jie with the title of Keeper of the Guanglu Temple. Ren Dong, a Shaanxi Yong Shou man, was allowed to enter Laizhou by Gong Sheng.

古文：城围时，身先士卒，运木石击贼，城濠皆满。
现代文：崇祯四年，李自成等反明，攻莱州，栋协助知府朱万年守御。
English: In the four years of Chongzhen, Li Zicheng and others opposed Ming and attacked Laizhou, and Dong assisted the prefectural government of Zhu to defend it for ten thousand years.

古文：后被缚，骂不绝口死。泌之，鹿邑人。
现代文：万年与巡抚谢琏为义军所捕，栋与同知寇化、掖县知县洪恩火召助大帅杨御蕃合力抗拒。莱州解围，任栋论功晋升官阶，调为保定监军佥事。
English: For ten thousand years, he and the governor Xie Jun were arrested by the rebels, and Dong and his comrade, Yang Mi Yao, resisted the encroachment of the guerrillas, and Yang Mi Yao, the commander-in-chief of Shixian County, was summoned to help. When the siege of Laizhou was lifted, Dong was promoted to a higher rank for his meritorious service, and he was transferred to the post of the military inspector of Baoding.

古文：进士。
现代文：十四年随总督杨文岳南征。
English: In 14 years, he accompanied Governor Yang Wenyu on the Southern Expedition.

古文：行次林县，闻京师陷，将赴南京，至东明，率壮士百余骑还讨林县伪官。
现代文：鸣皋镇之捷，栋也有功。不久又与总兵虎大威相继破义军于平峪和邓州。十五年正月，随大军解开封之围。
English: Dong also contributed to the victory of Mingyuan Town. Soon, he and the whole army defeated the rebels in Pingyao and Dengzhou in succession. In the first month of the 15th year, the siege was lifted with the army.

古文：遇贼，战败被执。
现代文：随即又取得郾城大捷。
English: It was followed immediately by the great victory of Penang.

古文：伪官释其缚，屡说之降，不从，毙之狱。
现代文：又随大军援开封，左良玉在朱仙镇被义军打得大败，栋极力抵御义军的追杀，阵亡。
English: In addition, with the support of the large army, Kaifeng, Zu Liangyu was defeated by the rebels in Zhuxian Town, and he tried his best to resist the pursuit of the rebels and died in battle.

古文：王世琇，字昆良，清苑人。
现代文：朝廷赠太仆寺卿。王世琇，字昆良，保定府清苑县人。
English: The Imperial Court presented him with the title of Taipo Jiaqing. Wang Shijun, surnamed Kunliang, was from Qingyuan County, Baoding Prefecture.

古文：崇祯十年进士。授归德推官，迁工部主事。
现代文：崇祯十年进士，授归德推官，调工部主事。
English: After ten years of service, he was promoted to the post of returning officer and became the head of the engineering department.

古文：十五年二月，李自成陷陈州，乘胜犯归德。
现代文：十五年二月，李自成攻陷陈州，乘胜进攻归德。
English: In February of the fifteenth year, Li Zicheng captured Chenzhou and returned to Germany after the successful attack.

古文：世琇将行，僚属邀共守，慨然曰： 久官其地，临难而去之，非谊也。 
现代文：世琇将启程赴工部就任，其部属约他共守归德，世琇慨然同意，并且说： 我在此长期为官，临难而去，是不应该的。 
English: Shifu will leave for the Ministry of Works to take office, and his subordinates are about him to return to morality. Shifu reluctantly agrees, and says: I have been an official here for a long time, and it is not right to leave in the face of difficulties.

古文：遂与同知颜则孔、经历徐一源、商丘知县梁以樟、教谕夏世英、里居尚书周士朴等誓众坚守。
现代文：于是与同知颜则孔、经历徐一源、商丘知县梁以樟、教谕夏业英、居家尚书周士朴等，向群众宣誓坚守。
English: Therefore, together with Zekong Tongzhiyan, Xu Yiyuan, Liang Yixuan, Shangqiu Zhixian, Xia Yeying, Zhou Shipu, and others, they swore to the masses.

古文：贼攻围七日，总督侯恂家商丘，其子方夏率家众斩关出，伤守者，众遂乱。
现代文：义军围攻七日，总督侯恂家在商丘，其子侯方夏率家丁斩关而出，杀伤守城的人，守军混乱，义军乘机而入。
English: On the seventh day of the siege by the rebels, the governor Hou Yingjia was in Shangqiu, and his son Hou Fangxia and his son Ding Zengguan went out, killing and wounding the defenders of the city, the defenders were in chaos, and the rebels took the opportunity to enter.

古文：贼乘之入，世琇、则孔并遇害。
现代文：世琇、则孔均遇害。
English: Shizhao and Zekong were both killed.

古文：讹传土寇剽掠，篆出御之，陷阵死。篆，胶州人，起家任子。李贞佐，字无欲，安邑人。
现代文：则孔女闻父死也自缢。在这次归德守城战斗中被义军杀死的明朝官员及举人、贡生、官生、国子生等共一百一十余人。李贞佐，字无欲，山西安邑人。
English: More than one hundred and ten people, including Ming Dynasty officials, vassals, tributary students, government officials, and sons and daughters of the state, were killed by the rebels in this battle to return to the German-held city. Li Zhenza, a native of Shanxi's Anyi.

古文：少受业同里曹于汴之门，以学行著，后举于乡。
现代文：年少时拜同乡曹于汴为师，以学问、品行称著于世，后中乡举。
English: When he was young, he was taught by his countryman Cao Yuxuan, who was famous in the world for his learning and conduct. Later, he was promoted to middle township.

古文：崇祯十四年除知郏县。
现代文：崇祯十四年为郏县知县。
English: In the 14th year of the Chongzhen era, it became the largest county in Jixian County.

古文：初，李自成焚掠至郏，土寇导之，害前令邵可灼。
现代文：在此之前，李自成曾攻陷郏县，杀县令邵可灼。
English: Prior to this, Li Zicheng had invaded Min County and ordered Shao Kegui to kill the county.

古文：贞佐至，则练乡兵，括土寇财充饷，时出郊劳耕者，月课士。
现代文：贞佐到任后，训练乡兵，没收本县反明人家的财产以充军饷。时常到城外去了解农民情况，每月为本县士子讲课。
English: After taking office, Zhenzua trained the local soldiers, confiscated the property of the anti-Ming people in the county to fill the military pay. He often went outside the city to understand the situation of farmers, and gave lectures to the scholars in the county every month.

古文：邑有姊妹二人抗贼死，拜其冢，祀以少牢。
现代文：本县有姊妹二人因反对义军而死，贞佐在她们的墓前举行祭祀。
English: In this prefecture, two sisters died as a result of their opposition to the rebel forces, and Sadako held a memorial service in front of their graves.

古文：民王锡胤有孝行，造庐礼之。士民大悦。
现代文：民王锡胤有孝行，贞佐到他家中去拜望，士民大悦。
English: People's King Xiyan had filial piety, Zhenza went to his home to pay a visit, and the people were very pleased.

古文：明年二月，自成复来寇，贞佐集众死守。
现代文：崇祯十五年二月，李自成又攻郏县，贞佐率士民死守。
English: In February of the fifteenth year of Chongzhen, Li Zicheng again attacked Gong County, and Zhenza led the soldiers and people in a desperate defense.

古文：时中州举人尽节者，南阳张凤翷、王明物，洛阳张民表，永城夏云醇，商城余容善，光州王者琯，光山胡植，嵩县王翼明，并骂贼死。鲁世任，字愧尹，垣曲人。
现代文：朝廷赠河南佥事。鲁世任，字愧尹，山西垣曲人。
English: Anecdotes from Henan, presented by the imperial court. Lu Shiren, also known as Guan Yin, was a folk singer from Shanxi Province.

古文：性端方，事亲孝。
现代文：品行端正，孝敬父母。
English: Be of good moral character and show filial piety to parents.

古文：从安邑曹于汴学，又交绛州辛全，学日有闻。
现代文：拜安邑曹于汴为师，又与绛州的辛全结交，学问日增。
English: Cao Yuxuan of Bai'an was his teacher, and he also made friends with Xinquan of Ganzhou, and his knowledge increased day by day.

古文：天启末举于乡。
现代文：天启末中乡举。
English: At the end of the apocalypse, Zhongxiang was raised.

古文：崇祯十年知郑州，建天中书院，集士子讲肄其中，远近从学者千人。
现代文：崇祯十年为郑州知州，在那里建 天中书院 ，集士子于其中讲学。远近来学习的千人。
English: For ten years, he lived in Chizhou, Zhengzhou, where he built the Tianzhong Academy and gathered scholars to give lectures, attracting thousands of students from near and far.

古文：十三年秋，给事中范士髦荐世任及临城诸生乔己百、内丘太原通判乔中和于朝，称为德行醇儒，堪继薛瑄、陈献章之后。
现代文：十三年秋，给事中范士髦荐举世任及临城生员乔己百、内丘大原通判乔中和于朝廷，称之为 德行醇儒 ，可认为是继承了薛蠧、陈献章的学问道德，希望朝廷重用。
English: In the autumn of the thirteenth year, in the matter, Fan Shixiao recommended the world-renowned and Lincheng students Qiao Zi Bao and Neiqiu Ohara Tong to judge Qiao Zhonghe in the imperial court, calling it a virtuous and mellow, can be considered to have inherited the learning and morality of Xue Yao and Chen Xianzhang, hoping to reuse the imperial court.

古文：祖仕，刑部郎中，以诤大礼廷杖。
现代文：但范士髦的举荐奏疏并未进呈于皇帝。崇祯十五年，农民起义军进攻郑州，世任统率民兵抵御，战败自刎而死。
English: However, Fan Shixiao's recommendation was not presented to the emperor. In the 15th year of Chongzhen, the peasant uprising attacked Zhengzhou, and Shiren led the militia to resist. He was defeated and died of self-immolation.

古文：后与定李福达狱，下吏遣戍。
现代文：士民在天中书院设灵位祭祀。刘禋，字诚吾，陕西中部人。
English: The scholars and commoners held a spiritual sacrifice at the Tianzhong Academy. Liu Wei, also known as Chengwu, was from central Shaanxi.

古文：穆宗朝起太仆少卿，不就。
现代文：祖父刘仕，曾任刑部郎中，因大礼事谏诤，违背皇帝旨意，受到廷杖。
English: Liu Shi's grandfather, who had been a vice-minister of the Ministry of Justice, was punished by the imperial scepter for violating the emperor's will.

古文：父尔完，历知商丘、名山，有学行。
现代文：父亲刘尔完，历任商丘、名山知县。
English: His father, Liu Ergan, was successively mayor of Shangqiu and Meishan County.

古文：禋性孝，母殁于名山，四千里扶榇，过剑阁云栈，以肩任之。
现代文：禋孝敬父母。母殁于名山县，他扶灵柩归葬，行程四千里，过剑阁走栈道，他亲自把母亲灵柩抬过去。
English: He paid his respects to his parents. His mother's coffin was buried in Meishan County, and he carried the coffin on a 4,000-mile journey, passing through Jiange and walking along the mountain path. He personally carried his mother's coffin.

古文：父少寐，爱听《史记》，禋每夕朗诵，俟父熟寝乃已，崇祯四年，贼陷中部，禋负父走免。
现代文：父亲休息时爱听《史记》，他每晚为父诵读，直到父亲熟睡为止。崇祯四年，农民起义军攻陷中部县，禋背着父亲逃走。
English: When his father was resting, he liked to listen to "Histories," and he read for his father every night until his father was sound asleep. In the fourth year of the Song Dynasty, the Peasants' Revolt Army invaded Chubu County and fled with his father.

古文：十四年由乡举授登封知县。
现代文：崇祯十四年，由乡试举人而授登封知县。
English: In the 14th year of the Chongzhen Emperor's reign, he was awarded the title of Fengchi County after being selected by the township.

古文：土寇为乱，禋练壮士，且守且战，寇不敢近。十五年，李自成陷其城，禋被缚。
现代文：当地人民反对朝廷，他训练壮士，且守且战。崇祯十五年，李自成攻陷登封，禋被俘。
English: The local people opposed the imperial court, he trained strong men, and kept fighting. In the fifteenth year of the reign of Chongzhen, Li Zicheng invaded and conquered Dengfeng, and Zou was captured.

古文：自成以同郡故欲降之，禋叱曰： 岂有奕世清白吏肯降贼耶！ 
现代文：自成看他是同乡，劝他归降。
English: Seeing that he was a fellow villager, he persuaded him to surrender.

古文：自成义之，遣贼将反覆说，禋执弥厉，乃见杀。
现代文：禋不肯，破口大骂。自成还是派人反复劝说，坚持不肯，终被杀。
English: Zou refused and cursed loudly. Zicheng sent someone to persuade him repeatedly, but he persisted and was eventually killed.

古文：赠佥事。
现代文：赠佥事。
English: It's a gift.

古文：荫长，吴桥人。
现代文：何燮，字中理，福建晋江人。
English: He Ying, Zhi Zhong Li, Fujian Jinjiang people.

古文：并由乡举。
现代文：乡试中举。
English: Township test middle school.

古文：崇祯中，知亳州。
现代文：崇祯年间为亳州知州。
English: During the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, it was known as Zhangzhou and Chizhou.

古文：州自八年后，寇贼交横，益以饥馑，民死徙过半。
现代文：该州自崇祯八年以后，多次受到农民起义军的攻击，加上饥荒，百姓死或逃走者已过半数。
English: In the eight years since Chongzhen, the state has been repeatedly attacked by peasant insurgents, coupled with famine, and more than half of the people have died or fled.

古文：燮尽心拊循，营战守具甚备。
现代文：燮尽心安抚，修缮军械防备义军的攻击。
English: He did his best to placate and repair the military equipment to prevent the attack of the rebels.

古文：未几，山东、河南土寇迭至，燮战卢家庙，生擒贼魁二人，刳其肠示众，抚降者数千人。
现代文：不久，山东、河南人民纷纷起义，进攻亳州。燮在卢家庙与义军交战，擒获义军首领二人，将他们剖腹示众。
English: Soon, the people of Shandong and Henan revolted one after another and attacked Zhangzhou. Zhang fought with the rebels in Lujia Temple, captured two leaders of the rebels, and disemboweled them.

古文：县故无城，渊持戟至龟山寺力斗，殪数人。
现代文：崇祯十五年二月，李自成攻陷河南，居民望风而逃，亳州成为一座空城，不能守。义军至，捉住了何燮，劝他投降。
English: In February of the 15th year of the Chongzhen Emperor, Li Zicheng invaded Henan, the residents fled at the sight of the wind, and Bozhou became an empty city that could not be defended. The rebels arrived, captured He Qi, and persuaded him to surrender.

古文：贼骇欲遁，会马蹶被执，奋骂而死。渊，永年人，起家贡生。
现代文：燮不肯，大肆辱骂义军。义军断其足，剖其胸，示众三日。
English: He refused and insulted the rebels. The rebels cut off his feet and dissected his chest and paraded him for three days.

古文：赵兴基，云南太和人。
现代文：接着义军又攻克霍丘、灵璧、盱眙。赵兴基，云南太和人。
English: Next, the rebels conquered Hoxha, Lingbi, Zhao, Zhao Xingji, and Yunnan Taihe people.

古文：崇祯初，以乡举通判庐州。
现代文：崇祯初年，以举人授庐州通判。
English: In the first year of Chongzheng, he was awarded the first prize of the Zhangzhou Comprehensive Award.

古文：贺一龙、左金王等五部据英、霍二山，暑入秋出以为常。
现代文：农民起义军贺一龙、左金王等五部，占据英山、霍山二县山区，夏入秋出。
English: He Yilong, Zuo Jinwang and other five units of the Peasants' Revolt Army occupied the mountainous areas of Yingshan and Huoshan counties from summer to autumn.

古文：督师杨嗣昌遣监军佥事杨卓然招之，受侮而返。
现代文：督师杨嗣昌遣监军佥事杨卓然去招安，受侮辱而返。
English: Superintendent Yang Shichang sent to supervise the troops. Yang Zhuoran went to invite peace, but was insulted and returned.

古文：十四年六月袭陷英山，知县高在飖抗贼死。
现代文：崇祯十四年六月，义军攻陷英山县城，杀知县高在岑。
English: In June of the 14th year of Chongzhen, the rebel army captured the county seat of Yingshan and killed Gao Zheqi of Zhixian.

古文：十二月陷潜山，知县李胤嘉、典史沈所安素苛急，奸民导贼执之，并不屈死。
现代文：十二月，义军攻陷潜山县。知县李胤嘉、典史沈所安素来对百姓十分苛刻，义军将他一一处死。
English: In December, the rebels captured Kuchiyama County. The leaders of Ji County, Li Yingjia and Fenshi Shen Soan, had always been very harsh on the people, and the rebels put them to death one by one.

古文：所安子亦死焉。十五年，张献忠为左良玉所败，走与诸部合，遂以三月攻舒城。
现代文：十五年，张献忠为左良玉所败，与其他义军汇合，于三月攻舒城。
English: Fifteen years later, Zhang Xianzhong was defeated by Zuo Liangyu and joined forces with other rebels to attack Shucheng in March.

古文：逾月城陷，改为得胜州，据之。
现代文：经一个月的围攻，终破其城，将舒城改名为得胜州，作为义军根据地。
English: After a month of siege, the city was finally destroyed, and Shucheng was renamed Tesheng Prefecture as a base for the rebels.

古文：遣其党分掠旁邑，游骑日抵庐州城下。
现代文：然后分头进攻附近各县，直抵庐州城下。
English: Then they attacked the nearby counties separately, reaching the city of Zhangzhou.

古文：兴基与知府郑履祥、经历郑元绶、合肥知县潘登贵、指挥同知赵之璞、里居参政程楷分门守。
现代文：兴基与知府郑履祥、经历郑元绶、合肥知县潘登贵、指挥同知赵之璞、居乡参政程楷分门防守。
English: Xingji and the prefectural governor Zheng Luxiang, experienced Zheng Yuanqi, Hefei Zhixian Pan Denggui, the commander Zhao Zhixuan, and the local politician Cheng Kaibun defended the gate.

古文：监司蔡如蘅贪戾，民不附，贼谍满城中不能知。
现代文：监司蔡如蘅贪婪暴戾，百姓怨恨，故为义军传送消息。
English: Supervisor Cai Ruxuan was greedy and violent, and the people resented him, so he sent messages to the rebels.

古文：五月，提学御史徐之垣以试士至，献忠遣其徒伪为诸生，袭儒冠以入，夜半举炮，城中大扰。
现代文：提学御史徐之垣来庐州主持对生员的考试，献忠遣其部属穿着儒服，打扮成生员潜入城中，夜半发炮，城中大惊。
English: Xu Zhiqi, a senior scholar, came to Zhangzhou to preside over the examination of students, and sent his subordinates to sneak into the city dressed in Confucian clothes and disguised as students. In the middle of the night, a gun was fired, and the city was shocked.

古文：之垣、如蘅及履祥、登贵并缒城走。
现代文：之垣、如蘅及履祥、登贵等用长绳从城上缒下来逃走。
English: Nogaki, Rurouni, Rukisho, and Nobuyoshi used long ropes to abseil down from the castle and escape.

古文：兴基时守水西门，闻变，挺刃下戍楼与斗，斩数人，被创死。
现代文：兴基守水西门，闻知形势变化，持刀下城楼与义军战斗，斩数人，终为义军杀死。
English: Xingji was guarding the west gate of the water, when he heard that the situation had changed, he went down to the castle with a knife to fight the rebels, cut several people, and finally killed the rebels.

古文：元绶、楷共守南薰门，元绶力斗死，楷不屈死。
现代文：郑元绶、程楷守南熏门、赵之璞守东门，均被义军攻陷杀死。
English: Zheng Yuanzhang, Cheng Kai, who guarded the South Qianmen Gate, and Zhao Zhixuan, who guarded the East Gate, were all killed by the rebels.

古文：之璞守东门，巷战死。贼乘势连陷含山、巢县、庐江及无为、六安，又陷太湖。
现代文：义军乘胜攻下含山、巢县、庐江、无为、六安、太湖等地。许文岐，字我西，浙江仁和人。
English: The rebel army took advantage of the victory to invade and conquer the areas including Shan, Chaoxian, Minjiang, Wuwei, Lu'an, Taihu, Xuwenqi, the western part of Zhejiang Province, and Renhe.

古文：知县杨春芳、典史陈知训、教谕沈鸿起、训导娄懋履并死焉。
现代文：祖父许子良，曾为巡抚贵州右佥都御史，父亲许联枢，曾任广西左参政。文岐于崇祯七年中进士，授南京职方郎中。
English: His grandfather, Xu Ziliang, was once the governor of Guizhou, and his father, Xu Lianchu, was once a politician in Guangxi. Wenqi entered the priesthood at the age of seven and was awarded the title of Nanjing Vocational Middle School.

古文：庐州城池高深。八年春，贼百方力攻，知府吴太朴坚守不下。
现代文：江北农民起义烽火遍地，文岐辅助尚书范景文进行防御，景文十分倚重于他。后调任黄州知府，在与义军交战中，曾射杀义军首领一只虎，夺大旗而还。
English: The peasant uprisings in northern Jiangsu Province spread like wildfire, and Wenqi assisted Shangshu Fan Jingwen in the defense. Jingwen was very dependent on him. Later, he was transferred to the governor of Huangzhou. During a battle with the rebels, he shot a tiger, the leader of the rebels, and captured a large flag.

古文：后屡犯，终不得志，至是以计得之。
现代文：狱中有判重刑的囚徒七人，文岐放他们回去省亲，规定时间回狱，这七人果然守约，于是请求上官宽免其罪。
English: There were seven prisoners with heavy sentences in the prison. Wenqi released them to go back and visit their relatives, and set a time for them to return to prison. These seven people kept their promise, so they asked the superior officer for forgiveness.

古文：履祥、登贵惧罪，委之兴基。
现代文：崇祯十三年，调任下江防道副使，驻蕲州。
English: In the thirteenth year of Chongzhen, he was transferred to the position of deputy envoy of the Lower River Defense Road, stationed in Zhangzhou.

古文：总督史可法察其冤以闻，乃治守令罪，而赠兴基河南佥事，楷光禄卿，元绶亦赠恤。
现代文：义军贺一龙、蔺养成等部聚集于蕲州、黄州一带，文岐严密防备。义军张雄飞部南渡长江，文岐命游击杨富去袭击，烧毁义军船只，迫使义军放弃这次渡江计划。
English: He Yilong, Zou Yacheng and other members of the rebel army gathered in Luzhou and Huangzhou, and Wenqi was on high alert. Zhang Xiongfeib of the rebel army crossed the Yangtze River to the south, and Wenqi ordered the guerrilla Yang Fu to attack, burn the rebel ships, and force the rebel army to abandon the crossing plan.

古文：方贼攻舒城，县令适以忧去，里居编修胡守恒与游击孔廷训督民兵共守。
现代文：巡抚宋一鹤将文岐这次军功上报于朝廷。副将一龙善用兵，文岐很器重他。曾共宿一帐中，半夜军中呼喊，文岐说： 这是奸人想乘夜逃跑。 
English: The governor Song Yihe reported Wenqi's military exploits to the imperial court. Vice-commander Yilong made good use of soldiers, and Wenqi held him in high esteem. Once, when they were staying in the same room, the soldiers shouted at midnight, and Wenqi said: "It's a traitor who wants to escape by night."

古文：会游击纵所部淫掠，士民遂叛降贼。城将陷，悍卒杀守恒。
现代文：仍卧床不动。天明，有叛兵百余夺门西逃，一龙追捕而尽杀之，全军肃然。
English: Still lying in bed, he did not move. At dawn, more than a hundred rebels seized the gate and fled to the west. They were pursued by a dragon and killed. The whole army was stunned.

古文：事闻，赠少詹事，谥文节。
现代文：朝廷闻知，赠文岐太仆寺卿。
English: The Imperial Court heard about it and gave it to Monki Taipo Jikei.

