古文：呜呼！
现代文：唉！
English: Alas!

古文：世道衰，人伦坏，而亲疏之理反其常，干戈起于骨肉，异类合为父子。
现代文：世道衰落，人伦败坏，因而亲疏之间的伦理违反了常规，骨肉之间大动干戈，异姓之人成了父子。
English: With the decline of the world and the corruption of human ethics, the ethics between relatives and strangers violated the norm, the flesh and blood fought with each other, and people with different surnames became father and son.

古文：开平、显德五十年间，天下五代而实八姓，其三出于丐养。
现代文：开平、显德五十年之间，更换了五个朝代而实际上有八个姓氏，其中三个出于收养的兑子。
English: During the fifty years between Kaiping and Xiande, five dynasties were replaced and there were actually eight surnames, three of which were adopted.

古文：盖其大者取天下，其次立功名、位将相，岂非因时之隙，以利合而相资者邪！
现代文：其中最得势的获取天下，其次的建立功名、位居将相，难道不是藉助于时代的空隙，因利益相同而互相依赖利用吗！
English: Isn't it true that the most powerful of them gained the world, and the second-ranked established their fame and position by taking advantage of the gap of the times, and because of the same interests, they depended on each other?

古文：唐自号沙陀，起代北，其所与俱皆一时雄杰虣武之士，往往养以为兒，号 义兒军 ，至其有天下，多用以成功业，及其亡也亦由焉。
现代文：唐自称沙陀，起自代北地区，唐主所结交的都是一代雄杰，又往往收为义子，号称 义儿军 ，争夺天下之时，大多利用他们来成就功业，等到灭亡之时也还是因为这些人。
English: Tang claimed to be a satrapy. Since the northern region of the dynasty, all the friends of the Tang lord were a generation of heroes, and they were often adopted as loyal sons, known as the "Righteous Army." When competing for the world, most of them used them to accomplish their work, and when they died, it was also because of these people.

古文：太祖养子多矣，其可纪者九人，其一是为明宗，其次曰嗣昭、嗣本、嗣恩、存信、存孝、存进、存璋、存贤。
现代文：唐太祖的养子很多，其中能够记述的有九人：首先是唐明宗，其次是李嗣昭、李嗣本、李嗣恩、李存信、李存孝、李存进、李存璋、李存贤。
English: There are many adopted sons of Tang Taizu, of which nine can be described: the first is Tang Mingzong, followed by Li Shizhao, Li Shibun, Li Shien, Li Cunxin, Li Cunxiao, Li Cunjin, Li Cunxu, and Li Cunxian.

古文：作《义兒传》。
现代文：作《义儿传》。
English: He wrote "The Story of a Righteous Child."

古文：○李嗣昭李嗣昭，本姓韩氏，汾州太谷县民家子也。
现代文：李嗣昭，原本姓韩，是汾州太谷县百姓家的儿子。
English: Li Shizhao, whose original surname was Han, was the son of a peasant family in Taigu County, Ganzhou.

古文：太祖出猎，至其家，见其林中郁郁有气，甚异之，召其父问焉。
现代文：唐太祖外出打猎，到他家，见他家树林中弥漫有云气，觉得很奇怪，召他的父亲询问。
English: Tang Taizu went out to hunt, went to his home, saw that there was a cloud in the woods of his home, felt very strange, and called his father to inquire.

古文：父言家适生兒，太祖因遗以金帛而取之，命其弟克柔养以为子。
现代文：他的父亲说家里刚生下个儿子，唐太祖于是送给他金银绸帛而把婴儿带走，让他的弟弟李克柔收养作儿子。
English: His father said that a son had just been born in the family, so Tang Taizu gave him gold and silver silk brocade and took the baby away, letting his brother Li Ke Rou adopt him as his son.

古文：初名进通，后更名嗣昭。嗣昭为人短小，而胆勇过人。
现代文：最初取名叫李进通，后来改名叫李嗣昭，李嗣昭长得矮小，但胆魄勇力超过常人。
English: He was originally named Li Chintong, and later changed his name to Li Shizhao. Li Shizhao is short, but his courage exceeds that of an ordinary person.

古文：初喜嗜酒，太祖尝微戒之，遂终身不饮。
现代文：开初喜好喝酒，唐太祖曾略微劝诫他，于是终身不饮酒。
English: At the beginning, he liked to drink, but Tang Taizu had a little bit of advice for him, so he didn't drink for life.

古文：太祖爱其谨厚，常从用兵，为衙内指挥使。
现代文：唐太祖喜欢他的恭谨忠厚，常常让他跟随着出兵打仗，任衙内指挥使。
English: Emperor Taizu liked his respectful and loyal attitude. He often let him go to war with him, and appointed him as the commander of the imperial army.

古文：陕州王珙与其兄珂争立于河中，遣嗣昭助珂，败珙于猗氏，获其将三人。
现代文：陕州王珙和他的哥哥王珂在河中争位，太祖派李嗣昭帮助王珂，在猗氏打败了王珙，俘获他的三个将领。
English: In Shaanxi Province, Wang Yao and his brother Wang Ke fought for the throne in the middle of the river. The great-grandfather sent Li Shizhao to help Wang Ke. He defeated Wang Yao and captured three of his generals from the Shao clan.

古文：梁军救珙，嗣昭又败之于胡壁堡，执其将一人。
现代文：梁军救援王珙，李嗣昭又在胡壁堡打败他们，抓获他们的一个将领。
English: Liang's army rescued Wang Yao, and Li Shizhao defeated them again at Hubi Fort and captured one of their generals.

古文：光化元年，泽州李罕之袭潞州以降梁，梁遣丁会应罕之，嗣昭与会战含山，执其将一人，斩首三千级，遂取泽州。二年，晋遣李君庆攻梁潞州，君庆为梁所败，太祖鸩杀君庆，嗣昭攻克之。
现代文：光化元年，泽州李罕之袭取潞州向梁投降，梁派丁会接应李罕之，李嗣昭和丁会在含山作战，抓获他们一个将领，杀敌三千人，于是攻取泽州光化二年，晋派李君庆进攻梁的潞州，李君庆被梁打败，太祖用毒酒杀死李君庆，李嗣昭攻克潞州。
English: In the first year of the Gwanghwa era, Li Han of Zhezhou attacked and took Bozhou and surrendered to Liang. Liang sent Ding to meet Li Han, and Li Shao Ding fought in the mountains. They captured a general and killed three thousand enemies. Then, in the second year of the Gwanghwa era, Jin sent Li Junqing to attack Liang's Bozhou, Li Junqing was defeated by Liang, Taizu killed Li Junqing with poisoned wine, and Li Shizhao conquered Ke Bozhou.

古文：三年，出山东，取梁洺州，梁太祖自将攻之，遣葛从周设伏于青山口。
现代文：三年，从山东出兵，攻取梁涪州，梁太祖亲自率兵进攻他们，派葛从周在青山口设下伏兵。
English: Three years later, troops were dispatched from Shandong to conquer Liang Bozhou. Liang Taizu personally led the troops to attack them, and sent Ge Zhou to set up an ambush at Qingshankou.

古文：嗣昭闻梁太祖自来，弃城走，前遇伏兵，因大败。
现代文：李嗣昭听说梁太祖亲自前来，弃城逃跑，在路途和伏兵遭遇，因而大败。
English: Li Shizhao heard that Liang Taizu came in person, abandoned the city and ran away. On the way, he encountered an ambush and suffered a great defeat.

古文：天复元年，梁破河中，执王珂，取晋、绛、慈、隰，因大举击晋，围太原。嗣昭日以精骑出击梁兵，会大雨，梁军解去。晋汾州刺史李瑭叛降梁军，梁军已去，嗣昭复取汾州，斩瑭。
现代文：天复元年，梁攻破河中，抓获王珂，攻取晋、绛、慈、隰各州，于是大举出兵攻打晋，包围太原，李嗣昭每天派精锐的骑兵出击梁军，碰上大雨，梁军解围离去晋汾州刺史李瑭反叛向梁车投降，梁军离开后，李嗣昭又攻取汾州，斩杀李瑭。
English: In the first year of the Restoration of Heaven, Liang broke through the middle of the river, captured Wang Ke, and captured the provinces of Jin, Yao, Ci, and Yao. He then sent troops to attack Jin and encircle Taiyuan. Li Shizhao sent elite cavalry to attack Liang's army every day. When it rained heavily, Liang's army broke the siege and went to Jin and Shizhou. Li Shizhao rebelled and surrendered to Liang Che. After Liang's army left, Li Shizhao also captured Shizhou and killed Li Shizhao.

古文：遂出阴地，取慈州，降其刺史唐礼。
现代文：于是从阴地出兵，攻取慈州，使其刺史唐礼投降。
English: As a result, troops were dispatched from the underworld to conquer Cizhou and force it to surrender to Tang.

古文：又取隰州，降其刺史张瑰。
现代文：又攻取隰州，使其刺史张瓖投降。
English: He also captured Zhangzhou, forcing Zhangye to surrender.

古文：是岁，梁军西犯京师，围凤翔，嗣昭乘间攻梁晋、绛，战平阳，执梁将一人。
现代文：这年，梁军向西侵犯京师，包围凤翔，李嗣昭乘机进攻梁的晋、绛二州，在平阳作职，抓获梁将一人。
English: In this year, Liang's army invaded the Beijing Division to the west and encircled Fengxiang. Li Sizhao took the opportunity to attack Liang's Jin and Shu two states, and worked in Pingyang, capturing one Liang general.

古文：进攻蒲县。梁硃友宁、氏叔琮以兵十万迎击之，嗣昭等败走，友宁追之，晋遣李存信率兵迎嗣昭，存信又败。
现代文：进攻蒲县，梁朱友宁、氏叔琮率领十万士兵迎战他们，李嗣昭等人败逃，朱友宁追击，晋派李存信率兵迎接李嗣昭，李存信又被打败。
English: In the attack on Pu County, Liang Zhu Youning and Uji Shuxuan led 100,000 soldiers to meet them, Li Shizhao and others fled, Zhu Youning pursued, Jin sent Li Cunxin to lead the troops to meet Li Shizhao, and Li Cunxin was defeated again.

古文：梁军遂围太原，而慈、隰、汾州复入于梁。太祖大恐，谋走云州，李存信等劝太祖奔于契丹，嗣昭力争以为不可，赖刘太妃亦言之，乃止。
现代文：梁军于是包围太原，而慈、隰、汾三州又归于梁，唐太祖十分恐惧，策划逃到云州，李存信等人劝唐太祖逃到契丹，李嗣昭奋力争执认为不可以，幸好刘太妃也这样说，纔作罢。
English: Liang's army then encircled Taiyuan, and the three states of Cixi, Yunnan and Shandong were returned to Liang. Tang Taizu was very afraid and planned to flee to Yunnan. Li Cunxin and others advised Tang Taizu to flee to Qidan. Li Shizhao fought hard to argue that it was not possible. Fortunately, Liu Taifei also said the same thing, stop pretending.

古文：嗣昭昼夜出奇兵击梁军，梁军解去，嗣昭复取汾、慈、隰。
现代文：李嗣昭昼夜不停地出奇兵攻打梁军，梁军解围离去，李嗣昭又攻取汾、慈、隰三州。
English: Li Shizhao kept attacking Liang's army day and night with extraordinary soldiers, Liang's army broke the siege and left, and Li Shizhao also captured the three states of Niu, Ci, and Niu.

古文：是岁，镇、定皆已绝晋而附梁。
现代文：这时，镇、定二州都已和晋断绝交往而归附梁。
English: At this time, the town and the two prefectures of Ding had already severed contact with Jin and were annexed by Liang.

古文：晋外失大国之援，内亡诸州，仍岁之间，孤城被围者再。
现代文：晋在外失去大国的援助，在内损失许多州县，连年之内，孤城两次被围。
English: Jin lost the aid of great powers abroad, including the loss of many prefectures and counties. Within a few years, Lucheng was besieged twice.

古文：于此时，嗣昭力战之功为多。
现代文：在这时，李嗣昭奋力作战功劳最大。
English: At this time, Li Shizhao made the greatest contribution to the war effort.

古文：天祐三年，与周德威攻梁潞州，降丁会，以嗣昭为昭义军节度使。
现代文：天佑三年，和周德威进攻梁潞州，使丁会投降，任李嗣昭为昭萎里节度使。
English: Three years later, with God's blessing, Zhou Dewei attacked Liangbanzhou, forced the Dinghui to surrender, and appointed Li Shizhao as the envoy of the Zhaowaili Festival.

古文：梁遣李思安将兵十万攻潞，筑夹城以围之。
现代文：梁派李思安率领十万军队进攻潞州，修筑夹城包围潞州。
English: Liang sent Li Si'an to lead 100,000 troops to attack Zhangzhou and build a fortress to encircle Zhangzhou.

古文：梁太祖遣人招降嗣昭，嗣昭斩其使者，闭城拒守，逾年，庄宗始攻破夹城。
现代文：梁太祖曾派人招降李嗣昭，李嗣昭杀掉使臣，关闭城门坚守，过了一年，唐庄宗纔攻破夹城。
English: Liang Taizu once sent someone to recruit Li Shizhao to surrender, Li Shizhao killed the envoy, closed the city gate and held on, and a year later, Tangzhuang Zongyi conquered the city.

古文：嗣昭完缉兵民，抚养甚有恩意。
现代文：李嗣昭保全安抚士兵百姓，优抚赡养很有恩德。
English: Li Shizhao's preservation and pacification of soldiers and the people, and his excellent care and support are very benevolent.

古文：梁、晋战胡柳，晋军败，周德威战死。
现代文：梁、晋在胡柳会战，晋军战败，周德威阵亡。
English: Liang and Jin fought a battle in Hu Liu, the Jin army was defeated, and Zhou Dewei was killed.

古文：庄宗惧，欲收兵还临濮，嗣昭曰： 梁军已胜，旦暮思归。
现代文：唐庄宗害怕，想收兵返回临濮，李嗣昭说： 梁军打胜了。日夜想回家。
English: Tang Zhuangzong was afraid and wanted to gather his troops and return to Linyi. Li Shizhao said: Liang's army has won. I want to go home day and night.

古文：吾若收军，使彼休息，整而复出，何以当之？
现代文：如果我们收兵，让他们休息，他们休整之后再出战，我们拿什么去抵挡？
English: If we withdraw our troops and let them rest, and they go to war again after they have rested, what will we use to resist?

古文：宜以精骑挠之，因其劳乏，可以胜也。 庄宗然之。
现代文：应当用精锐的骑兵骚扰他们，趁他们劳累疲乏，可以取胜 唐庄宗同意了。
English: Tang Zhuangzong agreed that they should be harassed with elite cavalry, taking advantage of their exhaustion to win.

古文：是时，梁军已登无石山，庄宗遣嗣昭转击山北，而自以银枪军趋而曰： 今日之战，得山者胜！ 
现代文：这时，梁军已登上无石山，唐庄宗派李嗣昭辗转攻打山北，而亲自率银军赴战并呼喊说： 今天的战斗，攻占无石山的人取胜！ 
English: At this time, Liang's army had already ascended the Muxishan Mountain, and the Tangzhuang sectarian Li Zhi Zhaohui turned to attack the north of the mountain, while he personally led the silver army to battle and shouted: Today's battle, those who capture the Muxishan Mountain win!

古文：晋军皆争登山，梁军遽下，阵于山西，晋军从上急击，大败之。
现代文：晋军都争相登山，梁军急速下山，在山的西面布阵，晋军从山上猛攻，大败梁军。
English: Jin's army all scrambled to climb the mountain, Liang's army rapidly descended the mountain and formed a line on the west side of the mountain. Jin's army stormed from the mountain and defeated Liang's army.

古文：于是晋城德胜矣。
现代文：于是晋在德胜筑城。
English: As a result, Jin built a city in Desheng.

古文：周德威死，嗣昭权知幽州，居数月，以李绍宏代之。
现代文：周德威死后，李嗣昭代理知幽州，过了几个月，派李绍宏代替他。
English: After Zhou Dewei's death, Li Shizhao became the acting governor of Zhiyuzhou. A few months later, he sent Li Shaohong to replace him.

古文：嗣昭将去，幽州人皆号哭闭关遮留之，嗣昭夜遁，乃得去。
现代文：李嗣昭快要离去，幽州人都哭泣着关闭城门挽留他，李嗣昭晚上悄悄出走，纔得以离去。
English: Li Shizhao was about to leave, the people of Yuzhou were crying and closing the city gate to hold him back. Li Shizhao quietly left in the evening, and Zou was able to leave.

古文：十九年，从庄宗击契丹于望都，庄宗为契丹围之数十重，嗣昭以三百骑决围，取庄宗以出。
现代文：十九年，随唐庄宗在望都攻打契丹，唐庄宗被契丹包围几十层，李嗣昭率三百骑兵冲破包围，救唐庄宗出围。
English: In the 19th year, with Tang Zhuangzong attacking Khitan in Wangdu, Tang Zhuangzong was surrounded by dozens of layers of Khitan, and Li Shizhao led three hundred cavalry to break through the siege and rescue Tang Zhuangzong from the siege.

古文：是时，晋遣阎宝攻张文礼于镇州，宝为镇人所败，乃以嗣昭代之。
现代文：逭时，晋派间实在镇州攻打张文礼，间寅被镇州人打败，于是用李嗣昭代替间宝。
English: At that time, the Jin faction attacked Zhang Wenli in Zhenzhou, while the Zhenzhou faction defeated the Zhenzhou faction, so Li Shizhao was used to replace Bao.

古文：镇兵出掠九门，嗣昭以奇兵击之，镇军且尽，馀三人匿破垣中，嗣昭驰马射之，反为贼射中脑，嗣昭顾中矢尽，拔矢于脑，射杀一人，还营而卒。
现代文：镇州军队出城抢掠九门，李嗣昭用奇兵攻打他们，镇州军队快被杀尽，剩下的五个人藏在破墙中，李闹昭驰马射他们，反而被贼军射中头，李嗣昭见箭袋中设有箭了，从头上拔下箭，射死一人，回到军营就死了。
English: The Zhenzhou army went out of the city to loot the Nine Gates. Li Shizhao attacked them with the Wizards. The Zhenzhou army was about to be killed. The remaining five people hid in the broken wall. Li Zhaozhao galloped to shoot them, but was shot in the head by the thief army. Li Shizhao saw that there was an arrow in the quiver, pulled the arrow from his head, shot one person, and died when he returned to the barracks.

古文：嗣昭诸子，继俦长而懦，其弟继韬囚之以自立，庄宗方与梁兵相持河上，不暇究其事，因即以为昭义军留后。
现代文：李嗣昭的各个儿子中，李继俦是长子但很懦弱，他的弟弟李继韬把他囚禁起来自立为主帅，唐庄宗止和梁军在黄河相持不下，役有时间追究这事，因而就任命他为昭义车节度留后。
English: Among the sons of Li Shizhao, Li Jizhe was the eldest but very weak. His younger brother Li Jizhe imprisoned him and became the head coach. Tangzhuang Zongzhi and Liang Jun couldn't stand each other in the Yellow River. The general had time to investigate this matter, so he appointed him as the successor of Zhao Yihe Festival.

古文：继韬委其政于魏琢、申蒙，琢等常教继韬反，继韬未决。
现代文：李继韬把政务交托给魏琢、申蒙，魏琢等人常常唆使李继韬反叛，李继韬迟疑不决。
English: Li Jixuan entrusted government affairs to Wei Tuo and Shen Meng. Wei Tuo and others often instigated Li Jixuan to rebel, and Li Jixuan hesitated.

古文：庄宗在魏，以事召监军张居翰、节度判官任圜。
现代文：唐庄宗在魏州，因事召监军张居翰、节度判官任圜。
English: Tang Zhuangzong in Weizhou, due to the matter, summoned the supervisor Zhang Juhan, and the judge of the festival, Renjun.

古文：琢等以谓庄宗召居翰等问继韬事，继韬且见诛，因以语趣之，继韬乃遣其弟继远入梁，梁末帝即拜继韬同中书门下平章事。
现代文：魏琢等人认为唐庄宗召张居翰等人是询问李继韬的事，李继韬将被诛杀，于是用话语激李继韬反叛，李继韬于是派他的弟弟李继远去梁，梁末帝当即拜李继韬为同中书门下平章事。
English: Wei Taku and others thought that Tangzhuang Zongzhao, Zhang Juhan and others were inquiring about Li Jizhe, Li Jizhe would be killed, so he used words to provoke Li Jizhe to rebel. Li Jizhe then sent his brother Li Jiyuan to Liang, and Liang Mucai immediately worshiped Li Jizhe as a peerage.

古文：居数月，庄宗灭梁，继韬将走契丹，会赦至，乃已，因随其母朝于京师，继远谏曰： 兄为臣子，以反为名，复何面以见天子？
现代文：过了几个月，唐庄宗消灭梁，李继韬准备逃到契丹，正好赦书到达，纔作罢，于是跟着他的母亲去京师朝拜，李继速谏阻说： 哥哥你是臣子，有反叛的罪名，又有什么脸面朝见天子呢？
English: After a few months, Tang Zhuangzong annihilated Liang, and Li Jizhe was preparing to flee to Khitan. Just as the pardon letter arrived, Li Jizhe stopped working, so he followed his mother to Beijing to pay homage. Li Jizhe said: Brother, you are a courtier, guilty of rebellion, and what face do you have to face the Son of God?

古文：且潞城坚而仓廪实，不如闭城坐食积粟，以延岁月，愈于往而就戮也。 
现代文：何况潞州城坚固而仓库充实，不如关闭城门坐吃存粮，来延续岁月，比去京师遭杀好。 
English: Moreover, Zhangzhou City is solid and the warehouse is full. It is better to close the city gate to sit and eat stored grain to prolong the years than to go to Beijing to be killed.

古文：继韬不听。
现代文：李继韬不听。
English: Li Jizhe did not listen.

古文：继韬母杨氏，善畜财，平生居积行贩，至赀百万。
现代文：李继韬的母亲杨氏，善于积聚财富，一生居家积财外出贩卖，以至于家财百万。
English: Li Jizhe's mother, Ms. Yang, was good at accumulating wealth. She spent her whole life accumulating wealth at home and selling it abroad, so that her family's wealth reached millions.

古文：当嗣昭为梁围以夹城弥年，军用乏绝，杨氏之积，盖有助焉。
现代文：当李嗣昭被梁军筑夹城包围一年多时，缺乏军饷，杨氏的积蓄，多有救助。
English: When Li Shizhao was besieged by Liang's army for more than a year, there was a shortage of military pay, and the Yang family's savings were mostly used for relief.

古文：至是，乃赍银数十万两至京师，厚赂宦官、伶人，宦官、伶人皆言： 继韬初无恶意，为奸人所误耳。 
现代文：到适时，就带着几十万两银子到京师，重金贿赂宦官、乐师，宦官、乐师们都说： 李继韬原来没有恶意，被坏人所误罢了。 
English: When the time was right, he brought several hundred thousand taels of silver to the capital to bribe eunuchs and musicians. The eunuchs and musicians all said, "Li Jizhe did not have any malicious intent, he was just misled by a bad person."

古文：杨夫人亦以赂谒刘皇后，刘皇后为言： 嗣昭功臣，宜蒙恩贷。 
现代文：杨夫人也用贿赂拜见刘皇后，刘皇后为她说话： 李嗣昭是功臣，应当受到恩意宽恕。 
English: Mrs. Yang also bribed her way into the presence of Empress Liu, who spoke for her: Li Shizhao is a meritorious vassal and should be graciously forgiven.

古文：由是庄宗释继韬。
现代文：因此唐庄宗放了李继韬。
English: Therefore, Tangzhuangzong released Li Jizhe.

古文：尝从猎，宠倖无间。
现代文：曾跟随唐庄宗打猎，宠幸他无猜疑。
English: He once went hunting with Tang Zhuozong. Fortunately, he had no suspicions.

古文：李存渥尤切齿，数诋责之，继韬怀不自安，复赂宦官、伶人求归镇，庄宗不许。
现代文：李存渥特别切齿憎恨李继韬，多次诋毁责备他，李继韬心怀不安，又贿赂宦官、乐师请求回到节镇，唐庄宗不答应。
English: Li Cunwo particularly hated Li Jizhe with his teeth and repeatedly slandered and blamed him. Li Jizhe was uneasy and bribed eunuchs and musicians to request to return to Jiezhen. Tang Zhuangzong did not agree.

古文：继韬阴使人告继远，令起变于军中，冀天子遣己往安缉之，事泄，斩于天津桥。
现代文：李继韬暗中派人告诉李继远，让他在军中作乱，希望天子派自己去平定，事情败露，在天津桥处斩。
English: Li Jiyuan secretly sent someone to tell Li Jiyuan to make a disturbance in the army, hoping that God would send him to quell it. The matter was discovered, and Li Jiyuan was beheaded at Tianjin Bridge.

古文：其二子尝为质于梁，庄宗破梁得之，抚其背曰： 尔幼，犹能佐其父反，长复何为乎？ 
现代文：他的两个儿子曾作为人质扣留在梁，唐庄宗消灭梁捉到他们，拍着他们的背说： 你们这样小，就能够帮助你们的父亲反叛，长大了又做什么呢？ 
English: His two sons had been held as hostages in Liang. When Tang Zhuangzong annihilated Liang, he caught them, patted them on the back and said: You are so small that you can help your father rebel. What will you do when you grow up?

古文：至是因并诛之。
现代文：于是一并杀掉。
English: So they killed them together.

古文：即遣人斩继远，以继俦知潞州事。
现代文：随即派人杀掉李继远，任命李继俦知潞州事。
English: He then sent someone to kill Li Jiyuan and appointed Li Jizhong as the new governor.

古文：已而召继俦还京师，继俦悉取继韬妓妾珍玩，而不时即路。
现代文：不久，召李继俦回京师，李继俦收取李继韬的所有歌妓家妾珍宝，而没有按时上路。
English: Soon, Li Jizhe was called back to Beijing. Li Jizhe received all the treasures of Li Jizhe's prostitute concubine, but did not go on the road on time.

古文：其弟继达怒曰： 吾兄父子诛死，而大兄不仁，利其赀财，淫其妻妾，吾所不忍也！ 
现代文：他的弟弟李继达发怒说： 我的哥哥父子都被诛杀，而大哥不仁义，贪图他的财产，奸淫他的妻妾，这是我不能容忍的! 
English: His brother, Li Jida, said angrily, "My brother and father were both beaten to death, and my elder brother is uncharitable, covets his property, and fornicates with his wife and concubine. This is intolerable to me!"

古文：乃服缞麻，引数百骑坐戟门，使人入杀继俦。
现代文：于是穿上线麻孝服，率领几百骑兵坐守于戟门，派人进去杀掉李继俦。
English: So he put on the filial piety uniform and led several hundred cavalry to sit guard at the gate and sent someone to kill Li Jizhen.

古文：节度副使李继珂募市人千馀攻继达，继达走城外，自刭死。
现代文：节度副使李继珂招募一千多人进攻李继达，李继达逃到城外，自到而死。
English: The vice-commander of the city, Li Jike, recruited more than a thousand people to attack Li Jida. Li Jida fled to the outskirts of the city and died there.

古文：嗣昭七子，至明宗时，子继能坐笞杀其母主藏婢，婢家告变，言继能反，与其弟继袭皆见杀，惟一子继忠仅免。
现代文：李嗣昭有七个儿子，到唐明宗时，儿子李继能因打死了他母亲的主管收藏的奴婢，奴婢家人上告变乱，说李继能反叛，和弟弟李继袭都被杀，只有一个儿子李继忠幸免。
English: Li Shizhao had seven sons. When he came to Tang Mingzong, his son Li Jizhong killed his mother's slave, who was in charge of the collection. The slave's family sued for mutiny, saying that Li Jizhong had rebelled. Both he and his brother Li Jizhong were killed. Only one son, Li Jizhong, survived.

古文：继忠家于晋阳，杨氏所积馀赀犹巨万，晋高祖自太原起兵，召契丹为援，契丹求赂，高祖贷于继忠以取足。
现代文：李继忠住在晋阳，杨氏积聚剩下的财产还有数万，晋高祖从太原起兵，召契丹支援，契丹索取贿赂，晋高祖向李继忠借贷以便凄够。
English: Li Jizhong lives in Jinyang, the Yang clan has accumulated tens of thousands of the remaining property, the Shinggao ancestor raised an army from Taiyuan, called on the Khitan for support, the Khitan asked for bribes, and the Shinggao ancestor borrowed money from Li Jizhong.

古文：○嗣本嗣本，本姓张氏，雁门人也。
现代文：晋高祖登位，很感谢他，任命为沂、棣、单三州刺史，开运年问死。杨氏一生积聚财产，李嗣昭父子三人都依赖她。
English: When Emperor Gaozu ascended to the throne, she was very grateful to him, and was appointed as the crown prince of the three states of Min, Qu and Shan. She died in the first year of her reign. Ms. Yang accumulated property throughout her life, and Li Shizhao and his three sons all depended on her.

古文：世为铜冶镇将。
现代文：李嗣本，原姓张，是雁门人。世代任铜冶镇将官。
English: Li Siben, originally surnamed Zhang, is a native of Ganmen. He has been the general of Tongye Town for generations.

古文：嗣本少事太祖，太祖爱之，赐以姓名，养为子。
现代文：李嗣本年轻时跟随唐太祖，唐太祖很喜爱他，赐给他姓名，收养为儿子。
English: When he was young, Li Shiben followed Tang Taizu. Tang Taizu loved him very much, gave him his name, and adopted him as his son.

古文：从击居庸关，以功迁义兒军使。
现代文：跟随攻打居庸关，因战功升任义儿军使。
English: Following the attack on Juyongguan, he was promoted to the post of military envoy to Yili for his war service.

古文：从破王行瑜，迁威远军使。
现代文：跟随攻破王行瑜，升任威远军使。
English: After defeating Wang Xingyu, he was promoted to the military envoy of Wiyuan.

古文：从攻罗弘信，以先锋兵破汤阴。
现代文：跟随攻打罗弘信，率领先锋军攻破汤阴。
English: He followed Luo Hongxin's attack and led the vanguard army to break through Tangyin.

古文：从庄宗破潞州夹城。
现代文：跟随唐庄宗攻破潞州夹城。
English: Follow Tangzhuangzong to break through the city of Zhangzhou.

古文：累以战功迁代州刺史、云州防御使、振武节度使，号威信可汗。
现代文：多次因战功升任代州刺史、云州防御使、振武节度使，号称威信可汗。
English: He was repeatedly promoted to the posts of Daizhou Military Historian, Yunnan Defense Envoy, and Zhenwu Special Envoy due to his war exploits. He was known as Wixin Khan.

古文：天祐十三年，从庄宗击刘鄩于故元城，下洺、磁诸州，六月，还军振武。
现代文：天佑十三年，随唐庄宗在旧元城攻打刘郡，攻克洛、磁各州，六月，回师振武。
English: In the 13th year of the Heaven's Blessing, he followed Tang Zhuozong to attack Liu County in the old Yuancheng, and attacked Khloh and Magangzhou. In June, he returned to Zhenwu.

古文：契丹入代北，攻蔚州，嗣本战殁。
现代文：契丹军队侵入代北，攻打蔚州，李嗣本阵亡。
English: The Khitan army invaded northern Daejeon and attacked Ulsan. Ri Sipon was killed in the battle.

古文：○嗣恩嗣恩，本姓骆，吐谷浑部人也。
现代文：李嗣恩，原本姓骆，吐谷浑部族人。
English: Li Shiong, originally surnamed Luo, is a member of the Tuyugun tribe.

古文：少事太祖，能骑射，为铁林军将，稍以战功迁突阵指挥使，赐姓名，以为子。
现代文：年轻时跟随唐太祖，擅长骑马射箭，任铁林军将，逐渐因战功升任突阵指挥使，赐给姓名，收养为儿子。
English: When he was young, he followed Tang Taizu. He was good at riding horses and shooting arrows. He was a general of the Tielin Army. Gradually, due to his war service, he was promoted to the commander of the assault force. He was given a name and adopted as a son.

古文：从败康怀英于河西，迁左厢马军都指挥使。
现代文：跟随唐太祖在河西打败康怀英，升任左厢马军都指挥使。
English: He followed Tang Taizu in defeating Kang Huaiying in Hexi and was promoted to commander of the Left Wing Horse Army.

古文：从李嗣昭援硃友谦于河中，与梁兵力战，槊中其口，战不已。
现代文：跟随李嗣昭在河中援救朱友谦，和梁军奋力作战，长矛刺中他的嘴，仍不停战。
English: He followed Li Shizhao to rescue Zhu Youqian in the middle of the river and fought hard against Liang's army. A spear pierced his mouth, but he still kept fighting.

古文：迁辽州刺史。
现代文：升任辽州刺史。
English: Promoted to the post of Liaozhou chief historian.

古文：从庄宗入魏，迁天雄军马步都指挥使。
现代文：跟随唐庄宗攻入魏州，升任天雄军马步都指挥使。
English: He followed Tang Zhuangzong to invade Weizhou and was promoted to the commander of the Tianxiong Army.

古文：刘鄩攻太原，兵趣乐平，嗣恩从后追之，自佗道先入太原以守。
现代文：刘郡进攻太原，军队赶赴乐平，李嗣恩从后边追击，从别的路先进太原防守。
English: Liu County attacked Taiyuan, the army rushed to Leping, Li Shiong pursued from the rear, and advanced from other roads to defend Taiyuan.

古文：鄩兵去，嗣恩亦以兵会庄宗于魏，从战于莘。
现代文：刘郡的军队离去，李嗣恩也率兵在魏州和唐庄宗会师，跟随在莘州作战。
English: Liu County's army left, and Li Shiong also led the troops in Wei Prefecture and Tangzhuang Zonghui Division, followed by the battle in Ganzhou.

古文：迁代州刺史、石岭关已北都知兵马使、振武节度使。
现代文：升任代州刺史、石岭关以北都知兵马使、振武节度使。
English: He was promoted to the post of Daishu Sashishi, the post of Tochi Terracotta Warriors and Horses Envoy north of Shilinguan, and the post of Zhenwu Setsudo Envoy.

古文：天祐十五年，卒于太原。
现代文：天佑十五年，死于太原。
English: By the grace of God, he died in Taiyuan fifteen years later.

古文：追赠太尉。
现代文：追赠为太尉。
English: He was forced to give up his rank of captain.

古文：○存信存信，本姓张氏，其父君政，回鹘李思忠之部人也。
现代文：李存信，原本姓张，他的父亲张君政，是回鹊李思忠部族的人。
English: Li Cunxin, originally surnamed Zhang, and his father Zhang Junzheng, were members of the Hui Li Sizhong tribe.

古文：存信少善骑射，能四夷语，通六蕃书。
现代文：李存信年轻时揎长骑马射箭，会蕃夷语言，精通蕃族文字。
English: When Li Cunxin was young, he rode a horse and shot arrows. He knew the Yi language and was proficient in the Yi script.

古文：从太祖起代北，入关破黄巢，累以功为马步军都指挥使，遂赐姓名，以为子。
现代文：随唐太祖在代北起兵，进关攻破黄巢，累次因功任命为马步军都指挥使，于是赐给姓名，收养作儿子。
English: With Tang Taizu, he raised an army on behalf of the north, broke through the Yellow Nest, and was repeatedly appointed as the commander of the horse-walking army, so he was given a name and adopted as a son.

古文：存信与存孝俱为养子，材勇不及存孝，而存信不为之下，由是交恶，存孝所为，存信每沮激之，存孝卒得罪死。
现代文：李存信和李存孝都是养子，才智勇力不如李存孝，但李存信并不甘心在他之下，由此关系恶化，李存孝做的事，李存信每每败坏阻遏，李存孝终于获罪而死。
English: Both Li Cunxin and Li Cunxiao were adopted sons. They were not as talented as Li Cunxiao, but Li Cunxun was not willing to be under him. As a result, the relationship deteriorated. What Li Cunxiao did, Li Cunxun blocked every time, and Li Cunxiao was finally convicted and died.

古文：而存信数从征伐，以功领郴州刺史。
现代文：而李存信多次跟随唐太祖外出征伐，因功领郴州刺史。
English: Li Cunxin, on the other hand, followed Tang Taizu out to conquer many times, and became famous for his contribution to the history of Bozhou.

古文：太祖遣将兵救硃宣，存信屯于莘县，为罗弘信所击，存信败，亡太祖子落落。
现代文：唐太祖派他率兵救援朱宣，李存信屯驻在莘县，受到罗弘信的攻击，李存信被打败，丢失唐太祖的儿子落落。
English: Emperor Taizu sent him and his soldiers to rescue Zhu Xuan. Li Cunxin was stationed in Luo County. He was attacked by Luo Hongxin. Li Cunxin was defeated and lost his son.

古文：后从太祖讨刘仁恭，大败于安塞。
现代文：后来随唐太祖讨伐刘仁恭，在安塞大败。
English: Later, he fought against Liu Renkong with Emperor Tang Taizu and was defeated in Ansei.

古文：太祖大怒，顾存信曰： 昨日吾醉，公不能为我战邪？
现代文：唐太祖大怒，看着李存信说： 昨天我喝醉了，你不能继续为我打仗吗？
English: Tang Taizu flew into a rage, looked at Li Cunxin and said: I was drunk yesterday, can't you continue to fight for me?

古文：古人三败，公已二矣。 
现代文：古人亦只能受三败之辱，你已经两次了。 
English: The ancients could only suffer the ignominy of three defeats. You have already failed twice.

古文：将杀之，存信叩头谢罪而免。
现代文：将要杀他，李存信叩头认罪幸免一死。
English: They were going to kill him, but Li Cunxin kowtowed and pleaded guilty and was spared death.

古文：由是大惧，常称疾，天复二年卒，年四十一。
现代文：因此十分恐惧，常常称说有病，天复二年死亡，年龄四十一岁。
English: As a result, he was very fearful, often said to be ill, and died two years later at the age of 41.

古文：○存孝存孝，代州飞狐人也。本姓安，名敬思。
现代文：李存孝是代州飞狐人。原来姓安，名敬思。
English: Li Cunxiao is a flying fox from Daizhou. His original surname is An, and his given name is Jing Si.

古文：太祖掠地代北得之，给事帐中，赐姓名，以为子，常从为骑将。
现代文：唐太祖征讨代北时得到他，让他在营帐中服役，赐给他姓名，作为养子，常常作为骑将跟随唐太祖。
English: He was given to Emperor Taizu when he went to conquer the north on behalf of Emperor Taizu. He served in the camp and was given his name. As an adopted son, he often followed Emperor Taizu as a cavalryman.

古文：文德元年，河南张言袭破河阳，李罕之来归晋，晋处罕之于泽州，遣存孝与薛阿檀、安休休等以兵七千助罕之还击河阳。
现代文：文德元年，河南张言袭击攻破河阳，李罕之前来投归晋，晋把李罕之安置在泽州，派李存孝和薛阿檀、安休休等人率匕千士兵协助李罕之还击河阳。
English: In the first year of the Wende era, Henan Zhangyan attacked and broke through Heyang. Li Han previously came to Jin to return to Jin. Jin placed Li Han in Zezhou and sent Li Cunxiao, Xue Adan, An Xiu Xiu and others with thousands of soldiers to assist Li Han to fight back against Heyang.

古文：梁亦遣丁会、牛存节等助言。
现代文：梁也派丁会、牛存节等人协助张言。
English: Liang also sent Dinghui, Niu Cunjie and others to assist Zhang Yan.

古文：战于温县，梁军先扼太行，存孝大败，安休休被执。
现代文：在温县作战，梁军首先扼制住太行山，李存孝大败，安休休被俘。
English: In the battle in Wen County, Liang's army first suppressed Taihang Mountain, Li Cunxiao was defeated, and Anxiu was captured.

古文：是时，晋已得泽、潞，岁出山东，与孟方立争邢、洺、磁，存孝未尝不在兵间。
现代文：这时，晋已得到泽、潞二州，每年都出兵山东，和孟方立争夺邢、沼、磁三州，李存孝都在军队中。
English: At this time, the Jin Dynasty had gained two provinces, Ze and Qian, and sent troops to Shandong every year. They were competing with the Meng Dynasty for the three provinces, Qian, Numa, and Jiaozhou. Li Cunxiao was in the army.

古文：方立死，晋取三州，存孝功为多。明年，潞州军乱，杀李克恭以归唐，梁遣李谠攻李罕之于泽州，存孝以骑兵五千救之。梁军呼罕之曰： 公常恃太原以为命，今上党已归唐，唐兵大集，围太原，沙陀将无穴以自处，公复谁恃而不降乎？ 
现代文：孟方立死后，晋攻取三个州，李存孝的功劳最大第二年，潞州兵变，杀死李克恭归附唐，梁派李谠在泽州进攻李罕之，李存孝率五千骑兵救援梁军对李罕之呼喊说： 你常常仗恃太原以活命，如今上党已归附唐，府军大量聚集包围太原，沙陀人将没有巢穴安身，你又依仗谁而不投降呢？ 
English: After the death of Meng Fangli, Jin conquered three states. Li Cunxiao's greatest achievement was in the second year. Zhangzhou mutinied, killed Li Keqong and annexed to Tang. Liang sent Li Zhe to attack Li Han in Zhezhou. Li Cunxiao led five thousand cavalry to rescue Liang's army and shouted to Li Han: You often fought for Taiyuan to survive, but now the upper party has been annexed to Tang. The government army has gathered in large numbers to surround Taiyuan. The Satao people will have no nest to settle down. Who do you rely on and not surrender?

古文：存孝以精骑五百绕梁栅而呼曰： 我沙陀之求穴者，待尔肉以食军，可令肥者出斗！ 
现代文：李存孝率领五百精骑，绕梁军栅栏呼喊说： 我是沙陀族寻求巢穴安身的人，等着拿你们的肉给军队吃，可以让胖子出战！ 
English: Li Cunxiao led five hundred elite horsemen and rode around the military fence shouting, "I am a member of the Shado tribe seeking a safe haven, waiting to take your meat for the army to eat, so that the fat man can go to war!"

古文：梁骁将邓季筠引军出战，存孝舞槊擒之，李谠败走，追击至马牢关。
现代文：梁骁将邓季筠率军出战，李存孝挥舞畏矛擒获了他，李谠败逃，存孝追击到马牢关。
English: Liang Kun led Deng Jizhe's army into battle, Li Cunxiao captured him by brandishing a spear, Li Cunxu fled in defeat, and Cunxiao chased him to Maduoguan.

古文：还攻潞州，唐以孙揆为潞州节度使，揆儒者，以梁卒三千为卫，褒衣大盖，拥节先驱。
现代文：回军进攻潞州。唐任命孙揆为潞州节度使，孙揆是儒生，以梁军三千人为护卫，儒服车盖都很宽大，带着符节走在前面。
English: The Tang appointed Sun Yat-sen as the chief envoy to the festival in Ganzhou. Sun Yat-sen was a Confucian, and he was escorted by three thousand Liang soldiers. The covers of the Confucian uniforms were very large, and they walked in front of him with symbols.

古文：存孝以三百骑伏长子西崖谷间，伺揆军过，横击断之，擒揆以归。
现代文：李存孝派三百骑兵埋伏在长子西面崖谷中，等孙揆的军队走过，拦腰攻击截断他们，擒获孙揆而回。
English: Li Cunxiao sent three hundred horsemen to ambush the eldest son in the west cliff valley, wait for Sun Yat-sen's army to pass by, attack and cut them off, capture Sun Yat-sen and return.

古文：初，梁遣葛从周、硃崇节守潞州以待揆，闻揆见执，皆弃去，晋遂复取潞州。
现代文：当初，梁派葛从周、朱崇节坚守潞州等待孙揆，得知孙揆被俘，都弃城逃去，晋于是又攻取潞州。
English: At first, Liang Pai Ge from Zhou and Zhu Chongjie held fast to Bozhou and waited for Sun Yat-sen. When they learned that Sun Yat-sen had been captured, they all abandoned the city and fled, and Jin then captured Bozhou.

古文：是时，张浚、韩建伐晋，击阴地关，晋以李存信、薛阿檀等当浚，别遣存孝军于赵城。
现代文：这时，张浚、韩建攻伐晋，进攻阴地关，晋派李存信、薛阿檀等人抵挡张浚，另派李存孝驻扎在赵城。
English: At this time, Zhang Jun and Han Jian attacked Jin and attacked Yinji Pass. Jin sent Li Cunxin, Xue Atan and others to resist Zhang Jun, and sent Li Cunxiao to be stationed in Zhaocheng.

古文：唐军战败于阴地关，浚退保晋州，韩建走绛州。
现代文：唐军在阴地关战败，张浚退保晋州，韩建逃到绛州。
English: The Tang army was defeated at Yinji Pass, Zhang Jun retreated to Jinzhou, and Han Jian fled to Zhangzhou.

古文：存孝攻晋州，浚兵出战，辄复败，因闭壁不敢出。
现代文：李存孝进攻晋州，张浚的军队出来迎战，又被打败，因而闭城不敢出。
English: Li Cunxiao attacked Jinzhou, Zhang Jun's army came out to fight, and was defeated again, so the closed city did not dare to come out.

古文：存孝去，攻绛州。
现代文：李存孝离去，进攻绛州。
English: Li Cunxiao left and attacked Zhangzhou.

古文：浚、建皆走。
现代文：张浚、韩建都逃跑了。
English: Zhang Jun and Han Jian both ran away.

古文：存孝猨臂善射，身被重铠，櫜弓坐槊，手舞铁楇，出入阵中，以两骑自从，战酣易骑，上下如飞。
现代文：李存孝的手臂很长善于射箭，身上披着重甲，盛着弓箭带着畏矛，手舞铁挝，出入艇战阵之中，带着两匹战马，激战之中换马，上下如飞。
English: Li Cunxiao's arms are long and he is good at archery. He wears heavy armor, holds a bow and arrow, carries a spear, dances with his hands, goes in and out of the boat battle, carries two horses, changes horses in the heat of battle, and flies up and down.

古文：初，存孝取潞州功为多，而太祖别以大将康君立为潞州留后，存孝为汾州刺史，存孝负其功，不食者数日。及走张浚，迁邠州刺史。
现代文：当初，李存孝攻取潞州功劳最大，而唐太祖另外任命大将康君立为潞州留后，李存孝任汾州刺史。李存孝自负其功大，竟几天不吃饭，到扬赶张浚时，升任郇州刺史。
English: At first, Li Cunxiao made the greatest contribution to the conquest of Bozhou, but after Tang Taizu appointed General Kang Junli to stay in Bozhou, Li Cunxiao served as Bozhou scribe. Li Cunxiao was so proud of his great contribution that he did not eat for several days, and when Yang caught up with Zhang Jun, he was promoted to Bozhou scribe.

古文：大顺二年，徙邢州留后。
现代文：大顺二年，改任邢州节度留后。
English: In the second year of Dashun, he was transferred to the post of Bozhou Festival.

古文：是时，晋军连岁攻赵常山，存孝常为先锋，下赵临城、元氏。赵王求救于幽州李匡威，匡威兵至，晋军辄引去。存孝素与存信有隙，存信谮之曰： 存孝有二心，常避赵不击。 
现代文：这时，晋军连年进攻趟的常山，李存孝常任先锋，攻克趟的临城、元氏，趟王向幽州李匡威求救，李匡威兵到，晋军就退去了，李存孝素来和李存信有矛盾，李存信谗毁他说： 李存孝有二心，常常避开赵不攻击。 
English: At this time, the Jin army attacked Changshan for years in a row, Li Cunxiao was the permanent vanguard, Lincheng and the Yuan Dynasty were conquered, and the king asked for help from Yuzhou Li Kuangwei. When Li Kuangwei's soldiers arrived, the Jin army retreated. Li Cunxiao had always been in conflict with Li Cunxin, and Li Cunxiao destroyed him. He said: Li Cunxiao has two hearts, and often avoids attacking Zhao.

古文：存孝不自安，乃附梁通赵，自归于唐，因请会兵以代晋。
现代文：李存孝心怀不安，于是依附梁并和赵交往，自己归附于唐，于是请求会师攻伐晋。
English: Li Cunxiao felt uneasy, so he attached himself to Liang and associated with Zhao. He attached himself to Tang, so he asked for an ally to attack Jin.

古文：唐命赵王王镕援之。明年，赵与幽州有隙，惧而与晋和，反以兵三万助晋击存孝。
现代文：唐命趟王王镕援助他第二年，赵和幽州产生矛盾，因害怕而和晋讲和，反而派三万兵协助晋攻打李存孝。
English: In the second year after Tang ordered Wang Wangyao to come to his aid, Zhao and Yuzhou had a conflict. Out of fear, Zhao made peace with Jin, but sent 30,000 soldiers to help Jin attack Li Cunxiao.

古文：存孝婴城自守。太祖自将兵傅其城，掘堑以围之，存孝出兵冲击，堑不得成。裨将袁奉韬使人说存孝曰： 公所畏者，晋王尔。
现代文：李存孝据城防守，唐太祖亲自率兵来到城下，挖壕沟包阁他们，李存孝出兵冲击，壕沟没有挖成，偏将袁奉韬派人游说李存孝说： 你怕的不过是晋王罢了！
English: Li Cunxiao defended the city, Tang Taizu personally led the troops to the outskirts of the city, dug a trench to surround them, Li Cunxiao sent troops to attack, the trench was not dug, but sent Yuan Fengya to lobby Li Cunxiao and said: What you are afraid of is just Jin Wang!

古文：王俟堑成，且留兵去，诸将非公敌也，虽堑何为？ 
现代文：晋王等壕沟挖成后，将留下军队离去，那些将领们不是你的对手，即使有壕沟又能做什么？ 
English: After the trenches are dug, such as Jin Wang, he will leave the army to leave. Those generals are not your opponents. Even if there is a trench, what can you do?

古文：存孝以为然，纵兵成堑。堑成，深沟高垒，不可近，存孝遂窘。
现代文：李存孝认为对，听任晋车挖成壕沟，壕沟挖成，沟深擘高，无法接近，李存孝于是困于其中。
English: Li Cunxiao thought it was right, and allowed Jin Che to dig a trench. The trench was dug, the trench was deep and high, and it was impossible to approach. Li Cunxiao was trapped in it.

古文：城中食尽，登城呼曰： 兒蒙王恩，位至将相，岂欲舍父子而附仇雠，乃存信构陷之耳。愿生见王一言而死。 
现代文：城中粮尽，登上城墙呼喊说： 我蒙受唐王的恩德，官居将相，难道想舍弃父子之情而依附仇敌吗？不过是李存信陷害我罢了，希望活着见唐王说一句话再死。 
English: He ran out of food in the city, climbed the city wall and shouted: "I have received the grace of the Tang King, and I am a high-ranking official. Do I want to abandon the love of my father and son and cling to the enemy? It's just that Li Cunxin has set me up. I hope to live to see the Tang King say one word and then die."

古文：太祖哀之，遣刘夫人入城慰谕之。刘夫人引与俱来，存孝泥首请罪曰： 兒于晋有功而无过，所以至此，由存信为之耳！ 
现代文：唐太祖哀怜他，派刘夫人进城安慰晓谕他，刘夫人带着他一起返回，李存孝叩头请罪说： 我对于晋有功劳而无过失，到这步，都是李存信害的！ 
English: Emperor Taizu felt sorry for him and sent Lady Liu into the city to comfort and advise him. Lady Liu returned with him. Li Cunxiao bowed his head and pleaded guilty, saying, "I have nothing to do with Jin's faults, it is Li Cunxin who has harmed me up to this point!"

古文：太祖叱曰： 尔为书檄，罪我百端，亦存信为之邪？ 
现代文：唐太祖呵叱说： 你撰写檄文百端归罪于我，也是李存信害的吗？ 
English: Tang Taizu scolded, "You have written hundreds of slanderous articles blaming me, is Li Cunxin also to blame?

古文：缚载后车，至太原，车裂之以徇。
现代文：把他捆起来载在后车上，到太原，车裂分尸以示众。
English: They tied him up and loaded him onto the back of a truck. They drove to Taiyuan and dismembered his body to show it to the public.

古文：然太祖惜其材，怅然恨诸将之不能容也，为之不视事者十馀日。
现代文：但庸太祖爱惜他的才能，怅然若失憎恨将领们不能容下他，为此十多天不理政事。
English: However, Yangtze Grandfather cherished his talent, but the generals could not tolerate him, so he did not attend to political affairs for more than ten days.

古文：康君立素与存信相善，方二人之交恶也，君立每左右存信以倾之。
现代文：康君立素来和李存信交好，当两人关系恶化时，康君立每每协助李存信想搞垮他。
English: Kang Junli has always been friendly with Li Cunxin. When the relationship between the two deteriorated, Kang Junli always helped Li Cunxin to defeat him.

古文：存孝已死，太祖与诸将博，语及存孝，流涕不已，君立以为不然，太祖怒，鸩杀君立。
现代文：李存孝死后，唐太祖和将领们下棋，谈到李存孝，流泪不止，康君立却不以为然，唐太祖大怒，用毒酒杀死了康君立。
English: After the death of Li Cunxiao, Tang Taizu played chess with the generals. When he talked about Li Cunxiao, he shed more and more tears, but Kang Junli did not agree. Tang Taizu was furious and killed Kang Junli with poisoned wine.

古文：君立初为云州牙将，唐僖宗时，逐段文楚，与太祖俱起云中，盖君立首事。
现代文：康君立最初任云州牙将，唐僖宗时，驱逐段文楚，和唐太祖一起在云中起兵，康君立首倡其事。
English: Kang Junli was the first commander of Yunnan Province. When Tang Xizong came to power, he expelled Duan Wenchu. Together with Tang Taizu, he raised an army in Yunnan. Kang Junli was the first to take the initiative.

古文：其后累立战功，表昭义节度使，以存孝故杀之。
现代文：后来多次立下战功，表奏为昭义节度使，由于李存孝的缘故被杀。
English: Later, he repeatedly distinguished himself in battle, and was appointed as the commander of the Zhaoyi Festival. However, he was killed because of Li Cunxiao.

古文：○存进存进，振武人也，本姓孙，名重进。
现代文：李存进是振武人，原姓孙，名重进。
English: Li Cunjin is a Zhenwu person, originally surnamed Sun, surnamed Chongjin.

古文：太祖攻破朔州得之，赐以姓名，养为子。
现代文：唐太祖攻破朔州时得到他，赐给他姓名，收养作儿子。
English: When Emperor Taizu conquered Shuozhou, he obtained him, gave him his name, and adopted him as his son.

古文：从太祖入关破黄巢，以为义兒军使。
现代文：随唐太祖进关攻破黄巢，任命为义儿军使。
English: He entered the pass to break through the Yellow Nest with Emperor Taizu of Tang and was appointed as an envoy of righteousness.

古文：从庄宗战柏乡，迁行营马步军都虞候，历慈、沁二州刺史。
现代文：跟随唐庄宗在柏乡作战，升任行营马步军都虞候，历任慈、沁二州刺史。
English: He followed Tangzhuangzong to fight in Baixiang, and was promoted to the post of commander of the cavalry and infantry troops of the capital city, and successively served as the governor of Qi and the governor of Erzhou.

古文：庄宗初得魏博，以为天雄军都部署，治梁乱军，一切以法，人有犯者，辄枭首磔尸于市，魏人屏息畏之。
现代文：唐庄宗刚得到魏博时，任命他为天雄军都部署，整治梁的乱军，一切依法办理，有犯法的人，就在街市杀头分尸示众，魏人屏声敛气惧怕他。
English: When Tangzhuangzong had just obtained Wei Bo, he appointed him as the commander of the heavenly army to deploy, rectify the chaotic army of Liang, and handle everything according to law. If there is a person who violates the law, he will kill the head and show the body to the public in the street market. Wei people are afraid of him.

古文：从战河上，以功迁振武军节度使。
现代文：跟随唐庄宗在黄河边打仗，因功升任振武军节度使。
English: He followed Tangzhuangzong to fight on the Yellow River and was promoted to the post of military attaché of the Zhenwu army.

古文：是时，晋军德胜，为南北寨，每以舟兵来往，颇以为劳，而河北无竹石，存进乃以苇笮维大舰为浮梁。
现代文：这时，晋军驻扎在德胜，建南、北二寨，常常用船来回运兵，感到十分劳累，而黄河以北没有竹石，李存进于是用苇笮之绳索把战船连成浮桥。
English: At this time, the Jin army was stationed in Desheng, Jiannan and Beilizhai, and often used boats to transport soldiers back and forth. They felt very tired, and there was no bamboo or stone north of the Yellow River. Li Cunjin then used the ropes of the raft to connect the warships into a pontoon bridge.

古文：庄宗大喜，解衣以赐之。
现代文：唐庄宗十分高兴，脱下衣服赐给他。
English: Tang Zhuozong was very happy and took off his clothes and gave them to him.

古文：晋讨张文礼于镇州，久不克，而史建瑭、阎宝、李嗣昭相次战殁，乃以存进代嗣昭为招讨使，军于东垣渡。
现代文：晋在镇州讨伐张文礼，很久没有攻克，而史建瑭、问宝、李嗣昭相继阵亡，于是用李存进代替李嗣昭任招讨使，驻扎在束垣渡。
English: Jin campaigned against Zhang Wenli in Zhenzhou and did not conquer it for a long time, while Shi Jiankun, Qianbao, and Li Shizhao were killed in battle one after another, so Li Cunjin replaced Li Shizhao as a recruiting envoy and was stationed in Sokaku.

古文：东垣土恶，筑垒不能就，存进伐木为栅。
现代文：东垣渡的土质不好，不能修筑堡垒，李存进砍树修筑栅栏。
English: The soil quality of Donggakdu is not good, so it is impossible to build a fortress. Li Cunjin cut down trees to build a fence.

古文：晋军晨出刍牧，文礼子处球以兵千馀逼存进栅，存进出战桥上，杀处球兵殆尽，而存进亦殁于阵。
现代文：晋军早晨出去割草放马，张文礼的儿子张处球率一千多士兵逼近李存进的棚寨，李存进在桥上迎战，差不多杀光了张处球的军队，而李存进也阵亡。
English: The Jin army went out in the morning to cut grass and let horses run. Zhang Wenli's son Zhang Duanqiu led more than a thousand soldiers to approach Li Cunqin's shed. Li Cunqin fought on the bridge, almost killing Zhang Duanqiu's army, and Li Cunqin was also killed.

古文：追赠太尉。
现代文：迫赠太尉。
English: He was forced to give up his rank of captain.

古文：子汉韶，明宗时复本姓，为洋州节度使。
现代文：儿子李汉韶，唐明宗时恢复原姓，任洋州节度使。
English: His son, Li Hanju, restored his original surname during the Tang and Ming dynasties, and served as the Yangzhou Festival envoy.

古文：潞王从珂以凤翔反，汉韶与张虔钊会唐军讨之，唐军皆降于从珂，独汉韶与虔钊军不降，俱奔于蜀。
现代文：潞王李从珂占据凤翔反叛，李汉韶和张虔钊会合唐军讨伐他，唐军都向李从珂投降，只有李汉韶和张虔钊的军队不投降，都逃奔到蜀。
English: The warlord Li Congke rebelled against Fengxiang, and Li Hanlu and Zhang Qianlu joined the Tang army to fight against him. The Tang army surrendered to Li Congke, but Li Hanlu and Zhang Qianlu's army did not surrender and fled to Shu.

古文：事蜀，历永平、兴元、武信节度使。
现代文：在蜀做官，历任永平、兴元、武信节度使。
English: He served as an official in Shu, and successively held the positions of Yongping, Xingyuan, and Wuxin.

古文：年七十馀，卒于蜀。
现代文：七十多岁时，死在蜀。
English: In his seventies, he died in Shu.

古文：○存璋存璋，字德璜，初与康群立、恭志勤等从太祖入关，破黄巢，累迁义兒军使。
现代文：李存璋字德璜，最初和康君立、薛志勤等人跟随唐太祖进关，攻破黄巢，多次升任至义儿军使。
English: Li Cunxu (李存), also known as De Xi, initially followed Emperor Taizu into the pass with Kang Junli (康君立) and Xue Zhiqin (薛志勤) and others, broke through the Yellow Nest, and was promoted to the position of military envoy to the emperor several times.

古文：太祖病革，存璋与张承业等受顾命，立庄宗为晋王，晋王以存璋为河东马步军使。
现代文：唐太祖病危，李存璋和张承业等人受临终颅托，立唐庄宗为晋王，晋王任命李存璋为河东马步军使。
English: Tang Taizu was critically ill, Li Cunxu and Zhang Chengye and others received the deathbed skull, and Tang Zhuozong was appointed as the king of Jin, and the king of Jin appointed Li Cunxu as the military envoy of Hedong Ma Bu.

古文：晋自先王时，尝优假军士，军士多犯法逾禁，庄宗新立，尤患之，存璋一切绳之以法，境内为之清肃。
现代文：晋从先王时开始，曾宽容军士，军士们大多触禁犯法，唐庄宗刚登位，十分忧虑，李存璋把他们都绳之以法，境内因此清静整肃。
English: From the time of the first king, Jin had tolerated sergeants. Most of the sergeants broke the law. Tang Zhuangzong, who had just ascended to the throne, was very worried. Li Cunxu brought them all to justice, so the territory was cleaned up.

古文：从攻夹城，战柏乡，以功迁汾州刺史。
现代文：随唐庄宗进攻夹城，在柏乡作战，因功升任汾州刺史。
English: With Tang Zhuangzong's attack on Zhangcheng, he fought in Baixiang and was promoted to the post of Zhangzhou chief historian.

古文：庄宗与刘鄩战于魏博，梁遣王檀来，乘虚袭太原，存璋以汾州兵入太原距守，以功迁大同军防御使，遂为节度使。
现代文：唐庄宗和刘郭在魏博作战，梁派王檀前来，乘虚袭击太原，李存璋率汾州军队进太原坚守，因功升任大同军防御使，随后任为节度使。
English: Tang Zhuangzong and Liu Guo fought in Weibo. Liang sent Wang Dan to attack Taiyuan on the pretext of taking advantage of the situation. Li Cunxu led the Bozhou army into Taiyuan and stood firm. He was promoted to the defense envoy of the Datong Army for his merits, and later he was appointed as the envoy of the festival.

古文：天祐十九年以疾卒。
现代文：天佑十九年病死。追赠太尉。
English: By the grace of God, he died of illness at the age of 19. He was posthumously awarded the rank of captain.

古文：追赠太尉。○存贤存贤，许州人也，本姓王名贤。
现代文：李存贤，许州人，原姓王名贤。
English: Li Cunxian, a native of Xuzhou, was originally surnamed Wang Mingxian.

古文：少为军卒，善角牴，太祖击黄巢于陈州，得之，赐以姓名，养为子。
现代文：年轻时当兵，擅长摔跤，唐太祖在陈州攻打黄巢，得到他，赐给他姓名，收养作儿子。
English: When he was young, he was a soldier and good at wrestling. Tang Taizu attacked Huang Chao in Chenzhou, got him, gave him his name, and adopted him as his son.

古文：后为义兒军副兵马使，迁沁州刺史。
现代文：后来任义儿军副兵马使，升任沁州刺史。
English: Later, he was appointed deputy envoy of the Yili Army and was promoted to the post of Zhangzhou chief historian.

古文：先时，沁州当敌冲，徙其南百馀里，据险立栅而寓居。
现代文：从前，沁州位于敌军要道，迁州城到南面一百多里处，凭据险要地势建立栅寨驻下。
English: Once upon a time, Zhangzhou was located on the main road of the enemy army, more than a hundred miles south of Cangzhou City. According to the critical situation, it was necessary to build a stockade and stay there.

古文：至存贤为刺史，曰： 徙城避敌，岂勇者所为？ 
现代文：到李存贤任刺史时，说： 迁城躲避敌人，哪里是勇敢的人干的事？ 
English: When Li Cunxian was assigned to write history, he said: "Moving the city to evade the enemy, what is a brave person to do?

古文：乃复城故州。
现代文：于是恢复旧州城。
English: As a result, the old state capital was restored.

古文：梁兵屡攻之，存贤力自距守，卒不能近。
现代文：梁军多次攻城，李存贤奋力守卫，梁军始终不能接近。
English: Liang's army repeatedly attacked the city, and Li Cunxian fought hard to defend it. Liang's army was never able to get close.

古文：迁武州刺史、山北团练使，又迁慈州。
现代文：升任武州刺史、山北团练使，又升任慈州刺史。
English: He was promoted to Wuzhou Sashishi, Shanbei Regimental Training Officer, and Cizhou Sashishi.

古文：天祐十八年，梁兵攻硃友谦于河中，庄宗遣存贤援友谦。
现代文：天佑十八年，梁军在河中进攻朱友谦，唐庄宗派李存贤援救朱友谦。
English: In the 18th year of Heaven's blessing, Liang's army attacked Zhu Youqian in the middle of the river. Li Cunxian, a member of the Tangzhuang sect, came to Zhu Youqian's rescue.

古文：是时，友谦新叛梁归晋，而河中食少，人心多贰，谍者因谓存贤曰： 河中人欲杀子以归梁，宜亟去。 
现代文：这时，朱友谦刚刚背叛梁归附晋，而河中粮食少，人们多有二心，探子于是对李存贤说： 河中人想杀掉你归附梁，你应当赶快离开。 
English: At this time, Zhu Youqian had just betrayed Liang Guifu Jin, and there was little food in the river, and people were more ambivalent. The scout then said to Li Cunxian: People in the river want to kill you Guifu Liang, you should leave quickly.

古文：存贤曰： 死王事，吾志也。
现代文：李存贤说： 焉国事而死，是我的志向，又有什么遗憾呢！ 
English: Li Cunxian said, "It is my aspiration to die in the service of the country. What is there to regret?

古文：复何恨哉！ 
现代文：终于赶走了梁军。
English: Liang's army was finally driven away.

古文：卒击走梁兵。庄宗即位，拜右武卫上将军。
现代文：唐庄宗登位，拜为右武术上将军。
English: Tang Zhuozong ascended to the throne and was worshiped as the supreme general of right martial arts.

古文：庄宗亦好角牴，尝与王较而屡胜，颇以自矜，因顾存贤曰： 尔能胜我，与尔一镇。 
现代文：唐庄宗也喜欢摔跤，曾和王较量而多次获胜，十分自负，因而望着李存贤说： 你要是能胜我，给你一个节镇。 
English: Tang Zhuangzong also liked wrestling. He had competed against Wang and won many times. He was very conceited, so he looked at Li Cunxian and said, "If you can beat me, I will give you a township."

古文：存贤博而胜之。
现代文：李存贤摔跤获腾。
English: Li Cunxian wrestles free.

古文：同光二年春，幽州符存审病，庄宗置酒宫中，叹曰： 吾创业故人，零落殆尽，其所存者惟存审耳。
现代文：同光二年春，幽州符存审患病，唐庄宗在宫中摆酒，叹息说： 和我创业的老朋友，差不多都死完了，活着的只有符存审罢了！
English: In the spring of the same year, when Yuzhou Fu Cun Zi fell ill, Tang Zhuangzong put out wine in the palace and said with a sigh: "Almost all of my old friends who started businesses are dead, and only Fu Cun Zi is still alive!"

古文：今又病笃，北方之事谁可代之？ 
现代文：如今他又病重，北方的事谁能代替他呢？ 
English: Now that he is gravely ill, who will take his place in the North?

古文：因顾存贤曰： 无以易卿。角牴之胜，吾不食言。 
现代文：因而望着李存贤说： 没有人能代替你你摔跤胜了，我不会食言。 
English: Therefore, he looked at Li Cunxian and said, "No one can replace you. You have won the wrestling match. I will not break my word."

古文：即日以为卢龙军节度使。
现代文：当天任命他焉卢龙军节度使。
English: On the same day, he was appointed as the special envoy of the Lulong Army.

古文：是岁，卒于幽州，年六十五。
现代文：这年，死在幽州，终年六十五岁。
English: This year, he died in Yuzhou, at the age of 65.

古文：赠太傅。
现代文：追赠太傅
English: Taifu posthumously awarded

