古文：司马乔卿孙寿李观豆卢夫人尼修行陈文达高纸白仁皙窦德玄宋义伦李冈王陁王令望陈惠妻何澋张玄素李丘一
现代文：司马乔卿孙寿李观豆卢夫人尼修行陈文达高纸白仁皙窦德玄宋义伦李冈王陁王令望陈惠妻何澋张玄素李丘一
English: Sima Qiaoqing, Sun Shou, Li Guanzhong, Lu Shouwen, Chen Wenda, Gao Paper, Bai Ren, Dou De, Xuan Song, Yi Lun, Li Gang Wang, Wang Lingwang, Chen Hui's wife, He Xuan, Zhang Xuan Su, Li Qiuyi

古文：司马乔卿
现代文：司马乔卿
English: Sir Smaug

古文：唐大理司直河内司马乔卿，天性纯谨，有志行。
现代文：唐代大理寺直河内司马乔卿，本性纯厚谨慎，有志气有品德。
English: Sima Qiao of Dali Temple in the Tang Dynasty, pure and prudent in nature, with ambition and virtue.

古文：永徽中，为扬州司户曹。
现代文：唐高宗永徽年间，做了扬州司户曹。
English: During the reign of Emperor Gaozong of Tang and Yonghui Dynasties, he served as Yangzhou Sifu Cao.

古文：丁母忧，居丧毁瘠骨立，刺血写金刚般若经二卷。
现代文：他的母亲去世了，他为母亲守孝，悲伤忧愁，瘦得只剩皮包骨。为了超度母亲，他刺出鲜血写了金刚般若经两卷。
English: His mother passed away, he was filial to his mother, sad and sorrowful, so thin that he was only skin and bones. In order to surpass his mother, he stabbed out blood and wrote two volumes of the Prajnaparamita Sutra.

古文：未几，于庐侧生芝草二茎，九日长尺有八寸，绿茎朱盖，日沥汁一升食之，味甘如蜜，取而复生。
现代文：不久，在他为母亲守坟所搭盖的草房旁边生长出两棵灵芝草来。九天长了一尺八寸，绿茎红顶，每天流出汁液一升，喝下去，味道像蜜那样甜，今天取了，明天又生出来。
English: Not long after, two reishi plants sprouted up next to the meadow he had built for his mother's grave. They grew a foot and eight inches in nine days, with green stems and red tops. The sap flowed out at a rate of one liter a day. They were drunk and tasted as sweet as honey. They were picked today, and they would sprout again tomorrow.

古文：乔卿同寮数人并目睹其事。
现代文：乔卿的同事几个人都亲眼看到了这件事。
English: Several of Sir Joh's colleagues witnessed the incident.

古文：孙寿
现代文：孙寿
English: Sun Shou

古文：唐显庆中，平州人孙寿于海滨游猎，遇野火，草木荡尽。唯有一丛茂草，独不焚，疑草中有伏兽。
现代文：唐高宗显庆年间，平州人孙寿在海边打猎，遇到野火，草树全被烧尽，只有一处草丛茂盛，却不被烧毁。
English: During the reign of Emperor Gaozong of Tang Dynasty, Sun Shou, a native of Pingzhou, was hunting on the seashore when he encountered a wildfire. All the grass and trees were burned up, and only one thick clump of grass remained unburned.

古文：遂烛之以火，竟不爇。
现代文：他便疑心草中趴着的是野兽，就用火点着它，竟然点不着。
English: Suspecting that what was lying in the grass was a wild beast, he tried to light it on fire, but couldn't.

古文：寿甚怪之，入草中窥视，乃获一函金刚般若经，其傍又有一死僧，颜色不变。
现代文：孙寿感到很奇怪，进入草丛中窥探。找到了一卷金刚般若经，它的旁边又有一个死了的和尚。
English: Feeling very strange, Sun Shou went into the bushes to snoop around. He found a scroll of the Diamond Sutra, and next to it was a dead monk.

古文：火不延燎，盖由此也。
现代文：面色不变，火烧不到他，大概是因为有这卷金刚般若经了。
English: His complexion remained unchanged, and the fire could not burn him, probably because of this volume of the Diamond Sutra.

古文：始知经像非凡所测，孙寿亲自说之。
现代文：才知道这经的法力不是凡人所能猜测到的。孙寿亲自说了这件事。
English: Only then did he know that the magical power of this sutra could not be guessed by ordinary people. Sun Shou himself said this.

古文：李观
现代文：李观
English: Li Guan

古文：唐陇西李观，显庆中寓止荥阳。
现代文：唐朝陇西的李观，高宗显庆年间住在荥阳。
English: Li Qun and Gao Zongxianqing of the Tang Dynasty lived in Fenyang.

古文：丁父忧，乃刺血写《金刚般若心经》、《随愿往生经》各一卷，自后院中恒有异香，非常馥烈，邻侧亦常闻之，无不称叹。
现代文：他的父亲死了，他在守孝期间刺血写《金刚般若心经》、《随愿往生经》各一卷。从此庭院之中总是有一股奇异的香味，香气非常浓，连邻居也常常能闻到，没有不称赞的。
English: His father died, and during his filial piety, he pricked his blood to write one volume each of the "Vajra Prajna Sutra" and the "As You Wish" Sutra. Since then, there has always been a strange fragrance in the courtyard. The fragrance is very strong, and even the neighbors can often smell it, which is nothing short of praise.

古文：中山郎徐令过郑州，见彼亲友，具陈其事。
现代文：中山郎徐令过郑州，去看望那里的亲友，就都把这件事告诉了他。
English: When Zhongshan Lang Xu Ling went to Zhengzhou to visit relatives and friends there, they all told him about this.

古文：豆卢夫人
现代文：豆卢夫人
English: Mrs. Doulou

古文：唐陈国窦公夫人豆卢氏，芮公宽之姊也。
现代文：唐朝陈国公窦夫人豆卢氏是芮宽的姐姐。
English: The Tang Dynasty Chen Guogong Dou's wife, Dou Lu, was the elder sister of Zou Guang.

古文：夫人信罪福，常诵金刚般若经，未尽卷一纸许，忽头痛，至夜愈甚。
现代文：夫人信奉佛教的罪福观，常常诵读金刚般若经。有一回差一页没读完一卷，忽然头痛，到了夜里越发痛的厉害了。
English: My wife, who believes in Buddhism's view of sin and good fortune, often recites the Diamond and Pearl Sutra. Once, she missed a page and did not finish reading a volume. Suddenly, she had a headache, which became more and more severe at night.

古文：夫人自念，倘死遂不得终经，欲起诵之。
现代文：夫人自己想道，倘若死了就不能念完经书了，于是又要起来诵读，让婢女点燃蜡烛。
English: The lady thought to herself that if she died she would not be able to finish reading the scriptures, so she got up to read again and asked her maid to light a candle.

古文：令婢然烛，而火悉已灭，婢空还，夫人深益叹恨。
现代文：可是火全都熄灭了。婢女空手回来，夫人更加悔恨叹息。
English: But the fire was completely extinguished. The maid returned empty-handed, and the lady sighed with even greater regret.

古文：忽见厨中有烛炬，渐升堂陛，直入卧内，去地三尺许，而无人执，光明若昼。
现代文：忽然看见厨房中有火炬，慢慢地升入堂阶，一直到了后屋内，离地有三尺左右，可是没有人拿着，光明得像白昼一样。
English: Suddenly I saw a torch in the kitchen. It slowly ascended the steps and reached the back of the house. It was about three feet off the ground, but no one was holding it. It was as bright as day.

古文：夫人惊喜，取经诵之。
现代文：夫人惊喜，又拿出经书念起来。
English: To his wife's surprise, he took out the scripture and began to read.

古文：有顷，家人钻燧得火，烛光即灭。
现代文：过了一会，家里的人打着了火，于是烛光就灭了。
English: After a while, the family lit a fire and the candle went out.

古文：自此日诵五遍，以为常法。
现代文：从这开始，夫人每天吟诵经五遍，习以为常。
English: From then on, she chanted the sutras five times a day and got used to it.

古文：后芮公将死，夫人往视，公谓夫人曰： 吾姊以诵经之福，当寿万岁，生好处也。 
现代文：之后芮公将要去世的时候，夫人去探望，芮公对夫人说： 我姐姐因为念经得来的福，应当活百岁，托生在好的地方。 
English: Later, when her husband was about to die, his wife went to visit him. Her husband said to his wife, "My sister should live to be a hundred years old and be born in a good place, because of the blessing she received from reciting the sutras."

古文：夫人年至八十，无疾而终。
现代文：夫人年龄到八十岁，没有什么疾病而去世。
English: She was eighty years old and died without any illness.

古文：尼修行
现代文：尼修行
English: Niyama practice

古文：唐龙朔元年，洛州景福寺比丘尼修行房中。有侍童伍五娘，死后，修行为五娘立灵座。
现代文：唐高宗龙朔元年，洛州景福寺尼姑修行的房中，有一个侍女伍五娘，死了之后，修行为五娘立个灵位。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Gaozong of the Tang Dynasty, in the room where the nuns of the Gyeongbokgung Temple in Los Angeles went to practice, there was a maid, Wu Wuzhong. After her death, the nuns set up a shrine for her.

古文：经月余日，其姊及弟于夜中，忽闻灵座上呻吟。
现代文：经过一个多月，她的姐姐及弟弟在夜里，忽然听到灵位上有呻吟的声音。
English: After more than a month, her sister and brother suddenly heard a moaning sound in the spirit realm in the night.

古文：其弟初甚恐惧，后乃问之，答曰： 我生时于寺中食肉，坐此大苦痛。
现代文：她的弟弟起初很害怕，后来才问它，答道： 我活着的时候在寺中偷着吃过肉，犯了这等大罪而遭受痛苦的拆磨。
English: At first her brother was afraid, but then he asked him, and he answered, "When I was alive, I stole meat and ate it in the temple, and I committed such a great sin that I suffered painful torture.

古文：我体上有疮，恐污床席，汝可多将灰置床上也。 
现代文：我身上有疮，恐怕污染了床。你可以多把灰放在床上。 
English: I've got sores on my body, I'm afraid they've contaminated the bed. You can put more ashes on the bed.

古文：弟依其言，置灰后，看床上大有脓血。
现代文：弟弟按照她的话做，放上灰后，再看床上有很多的脓血。
English: My brother did as she said, put the ashes on, and then saw a lot of blood on the bed.

古文：又语弟曰： 姊患不能缝衣，汝太蓝缕，宜将布来，我为汝作衫及袜。 
现代文：她又告诉弟弟说： 姐姐担心你不能缝衣服，你穿得太破了，把布拿来，我给你作件衣服和袜子。 
English: She also told her brother, "My sister is worried that you can't sew clothes. Your clothes are too torn. Bring the cloth and I'll make you a dress and socks."

古文：弟置布于灵床上，经宿即成。
现代文：弟弟把布放在灵床上。过了一宿就做成了。
English: My brother put the cloth on the cot. After one night, it was finished.

古文：又语其姊曰： 儿小时染患，遂杀一螃蟹，取汁涂疮得差，今入刀林地狱，肉中见有折刀七枚，愿姊慈悯，为作功德救助之。
现代文：又对她的姐姐说： 我小的时候染上了病，就杀一只螃蟹，取它的汁涂在疮上就病愈了。现在我已入刀林地狱。肉体中看见有七把断刀。愿姐姐大发慈善怜悯之心，为我修功德救助于我。
English: She also said to her sister, "When I was a child, I got sick, so I killed a crab, took its juice and rubbed it on my sores, and my illness was cured. Now I have fallen into the hell of the sword forest. I see seven broken swords in my body. May my sister have great benevolence and compassion, cultivate merits for me, and help me.

古文：姊煎迫，卒难济办，但随身衣服，无益死者，今并未坏，请以用之。 
现代文：姐姐很困难，的确很难办成，我的随身衣服，对于已经死去的人已经没有什么用处了，现在也并没有破，用这些东西来做功德吧。 
English: Sister, it's very difficult, it's really hard to do it, my clothes, which are of no use to someone who has died, are not broken now, use these things to make merit.

古文：姊未报间，乃曰： 儿自取去。 
现代文：没等姐姐答话。又说： 我自己去拿。 
English: Without waiting for her sister to answer, she added: "I'll get it myself."

古文：良久又曰： 衣服以来，见在床上。 
现代文：过了一会又说： 衣服已拿来了，在床上。 
English: After a while he said: "I've got the clothes, they're on the bed."

古文：其姊试往观之，乃所敛之服也，遂送净土寺宝献师处，凭写金刚般若经。
现代文：她的姐姐往床上看，的确是给她入殓时穿的衣服。于是就把它送到净土寺宝献禅师那里。凭着这个去写金刚般若经。
English: Her sister looked at the bed and saw that it was indeed the dress she had worn for her betrothal, so she sent it to the treasure offering Zen master at Jodo-ji Temple. She used it to write the Diamond Sutra.

古文：每写一卷了，即报云： 已出一刀。 
现代文：每写完一卷，就报告说：已经拔出一把刀了。
English: At the end of each volume, he reported: "A knife has been pulled out."

古文：凡写七卷了，乃云： 七刀并得出讫，今蒙福业助。即往托生。 
现代文：一共写了七卷。她才说： 七把刀都被拔出来了。现在承蒙所修功德的帮助，我就要去托生了。 
English: She wrote a total of seven volumes. Then she said, "The seven swords have all been pulled out. Now, with the help of the merits I have cultivated, I am going to give birth."

古文：与姊及弟，哭别而去。
现代文：于是她和姐弟洒泪而别。
English: She said goodbye to her brother and sister in tears.

古文：吴兴沈玄法说，净土寺僧智整所说亦同。
现代文：这件事是吴兴沈玄法说的，和净土寺的和尚智整所说的一样。
English: This matter was said by Wu Xing Shen Xuan Fa, and the same was said by the monk Zhicheng of the Pure Land Temple.

古文：陈文达
现代文：陈文达
English: Chen Wenda

古文：唐陈文达，梓州郪县人。常持金刚经，愿与亡父母念八万四千卷，多有祥瑞。
现代文：唐朝陈文达，是梓州郪县人，常念金刚经许愿给死去的父母念八万四千卷，有很多吉祥的兆头。
English: Chen Wenda of the Tang Dynasty, a native of Jixian County, Zizhou Province, often recited the 84,000 volumes of the Diamond Sutra to make a wish for his dead parents. There were many auspicious signs.

古文：为人转经，患难皆免。
现代文：给别人念经，灾祸都能免除。
English: If you recite the sutra to others, you will be exempt from calamities.

古文：铜山县人陈约曾为冥司所追，见地下筑台，问之，云： 此是般若台，待陈文达。 
现代文：铜山县人陈约曾被冥司拘魂，看见地下筑起一台，一问，说： 这是般若台，等待陈文达来念经的。 
English: Chen You, a resident of Tongshan County, who was once tortured by the evil spirits, saw a prayer platform built underground and asked, "This is the prayer platform, waiting for Chen Wenda to come and recite the sutras."

古文：其为冥司所敬如此。
现代文：他为冥司尊敬到如此程度。
English: That's how much respect he has for Hades.

古文：高纸
现代文：高纸
English: Tall paper foam

古文：高纸，隋仆射颍之孙也。
现代文：高纸，是隋朝仆射颍的孙子。
English: Gao Papi is the grandson of the Sui Dynasty's retainer, Shao Jun.

古文：唐龙朔二年，出长安顺义门，忽逢二人乘马，曰： 王唤。 
现代文：唐高宗龙朔二年，从长安顺义门走出，忽然碰着两个骑马的人说： 大王叫你。 
English: In the second year of Emperor Gaozong's reign, he was walking out of the Shunyi Gate of Chang'an when he suddenly met two men on horseback who said, "The Great King is calling for you."

古文：纸不肯从去，亦不知其鬼使，策马避之，又被驱拥。
现代文：高纸不肯跟着他走，也不知道他们是鬼使，打马躲开了他们，又被驱赶着。
English: Gao Paper did not want to follow him, and did not know that they were ghosts. The horse ran away from them and was chased away.

古文：纸有兄，是化度寺僧。
现代文：高纸有个哥哥是化度寺的和尚，想要去寺内找他。
English: Takaishi has an older brother who is a monk at Kado-ji Temple, and he wants to go to the temple to look for him.

古文：欲往寺内，至寺门，鬼遮不令入。纸乃殴鬼一拳。鬼怒，即拽落马，曰： 此汉大凶粗。 
现代文：到了寺庙门口，鬼挡住门不让他进去，高纸就打了鬼一拳，鬼发怒了，就把他拽落马下说： 这个汉子是最野蛮粗鲁的人。 
English: When he came to the door of the temple, the ghost blocked the door and would not let him in, so Gao Paper punched the ghost. The ghost got angry and pulled him off his horse and said, "This man is the most barbaric and rude person.

古文：身遂在地，因便昏绝。
现代文：纸倒在地上，昏死过去。
English: He dropped the paper on the ground and passed out.

古文：寺僧即令舁入兄院，明旦乃苏，云：初随二使见王，王曰： 汝未合来，汝曾毁谤佛法，旦令生受其罪。 
现代文：寺庙的和尚把他抬到他哥哥的院内。第二天苏醒过来后，说：起初跟着两个使者来见阎王，阎王说： 你本来不应该现在来。但你曾毁谤佛法，暂且让你活着受罪。 
English: A monk from the temple carried him to his brother's yard. The next day, after he regained consciousness, he said, "At first, I followed two messengers to see the king of hell. The king of hell said, 'You shouldn't have come now. But you have slandered Buddhism, so let you live and suffer for a while.'

古文：令左右拔其舌，以犁耕之，都无所伤。
现代文：于是就叫左右的人割掉他的舌头，用犁耕他的身，却没有使他受到伤害。
English: So they had his tongue cut out and his body ploughed with a plough, but he was not harmed.

古文：王问本吏曰： 彼有何福德如此？ 
现代文：阎王问本吏说： 他有什么福德能够这样？ 
English: Yan Wang asked the clerk: What kind of merit does he have to be able to do this?

古文：曰： 曾念金刚经。 
现代文：回答说： 曾经念过金刚经。 
English: He replied, "I once recited the Diamond Sutra."

古文：王称善，即令放还。
现代文：阎王称赞好，就令放他还生。
English: The king of hell praised him and let him live.

古文：因与客语。言次忽闷倒，如吞物状，咽下有白脉一道，流入腹中，如此三度。
现代文：说到这里又和其他客人谈话，正说着话忽然昏倒，像吞咽东西的样子。咽喉下面一道白线，流进腹中，像这样三次。
English: At this point, he was talking with other guests, and while he was talking, he suddenly fainted, as if he had swallowed something. A white line appeared under his throat and flowed into his stomach, like this three times.

古文：人问之。曰： 少年盗食寺家果子，冥司罚令吞铁丸。 
现代文：客人问他，他说： 少年时曾盗窃寺庙里的果子吃，冥司惩罚让他吞铁丸子。 
English: When asked by a guest, he said: When I was a boy, I stole fruit from the temple to eat. My father punished me by making me swallow iron balls.

古文：后仕为翊卫，专以念经为事。白仁皙
现代文：之后他出仕做了翊卫，每天专心念经。白仁皙
English: After that, he served as a guardian and devoted himself to chanting the sutras every day.

古文：唐白仁皙，龙朔中为虢州朱阳尉，差运米辽东。过海遇风，四望昏黑，仁皙忧惧，急念金刚经，得三百遍。
现代文：唐代的白仁皙，龙朔年中做虢州朱阳尉。被派往辽东运粮，过海时遇到大风，四下看一片昏暗，仁皙忧虑害怕，急忙念金刚经，念了三百遍。
English: Bai Renzhao of the Tang Dynasty was the lieutenant of Zhu Yang of Zhangzhou in the middle of the Long Shuo period. He was sent to Liaodong to transport grain. When crossing the sea, he encountered a strong wind. Looking around, he saw a dark area. He was worried and afraid. He hurriedly recited the Diamond Sutra three hundred times.

古文：忽如梦寐，见一梵僧，谓曰： 汝念真经，故来救汝。 
现代文：忽然像做梦一样，看见一个梵僧，对他说： 你念真经，所以前来救你。 
English: Suddenly, as if in a dream, he saw a Sanskrit monk and said to him, "You are chanting the sutras, so I have come to save you."

古文：须臾风定，八十余人俱济。
现代文：不一会风停浪静，八十多人全都渡过了海。
English: Soon after the wind stopped and the waves calmed, more than eighty people had all crossed the sea.

古文：窦德玄
现代文：窦德玄
English: Dou Dexuan

古文：窦德玄，麟德中为卿，奉使扬州。
现代文：窦德玄，唐高宗麟德年中做卿相，奉命出使扬州。
English: Dou De Xuan and Tang Gao Zong Lin De, who was the minister of the emperor in the middle of the year, were ordered to go to Yangzhou.

古文：渡淮，船已离岸数十步，见岸上有一人，形容憔悴，擎一小袱坐于地。
现代文：渡过淮河，船已离岸几十步远了，看见岸上有一个人，面容憔悴。捧着一个小包袱坐在地上。
English: After crossing the Huai River, the boat was already a few dozen steps away from the shore. I saw a man on the shore, with a gaunt face. He was sitting on the ground holding a small bag.

古文：德玄曰： 日将暮，更无船渡。 
现代文：德玄说： 天色已晚了，又没有船过河。 
English: De Xuan said, "It's late in the day, and no boats have crossed the river.

古文：即令载之。
现代文：就让他坐上了船。
English: So they put him on a boat.

古文：中流觉其有饥色，又与饭，乃济。
现代文：船行到江中觉得他像是很饿的样子，又给他饭吃，才渡过去。
English: When the boat reached the middle of the river, the fisherman thought he looked very hungry, so he gave him something to eat before crossing.

古文：及德玄上马去，其人即随行，已数里。德玄怪之，乃问曰： 今欲何去？ 
现代文：等到德玄上马离开，那个人就跟着走，已走了几里路，德玄感到很奇怪，就问道： 现在你要到哪里去？ 
English: When De Xuan got on his horse and left, the man followed. They had already walked several miles. De Xuan felt very strange and asked, "Where are you going now?"

古文：答曰： 某非人，乃鬼使也。
现代文：他回答说： 我不是人，是鬼使。
English: He answered, "I am not a man, but an angel of the Lord.

古文：今往扬州，追窦大使。 
现代文：现在去扬州，拘拿窦大使。 
English: Now go to Yangzhou and arrest Ambassador Dou.

古文：曰： 大使何名？ 
现代文：德玄又问： 大使叫什么名字？ 
English: De Xuan also asked: What is the name of the ambassador?

古文：云： 名德玄。 
现代文：说： 名德玄。 
English: He said: My name is Degen.

古文：德玄惊惧，下马拜曰： 某即其人也。 
现代文：德玄惊恐，下马跪拜说： 我就是你说的那人。 
English: De Xuan panicked, got off his horse, knelt down and said, "I am the person you are talking about.

古文：涕泗请计，鬼曰： 甚愧公容载，复又赐食，且放，公急念金刚经一千遍，当来相报。
现代文：流着眼泪请求他想办法。鬼说： 你载我过河我很感谢，再赐给我饭吃，我暂且放了你，你赶快念金刚经一千遍，我会再来见你。 
English: With tears streaming down his face, he begged for help. The demon said, "I am very grateful to you for carrying me across the river, and for giving me food to eat. I have released you for the time being. You should quickly recite the Diamond Sutra a thousand times, and I will come to see you again."

古文：至月余，经数足，其鬼果来，云： 经已足，保无他虑，然亦终须相随见王。 
现代文：过了一个多月，经数也念够了，那个鬼果然来了，并说： 经已念够了，保证你没事了。然而总是要随我去见一见阎王。 
English: After more than a month, the ghost finally came and said, "I've had enough of reading the sutras, I'm sure you'll be fine. However, I always have to go with you to see hell."

古文：德玄于是就枕而绝，一宿乃苏。
现代文：德玄于是躺在枕头上气绝了，一宿才苏醒过来。
English: De Xuan then lay on his pillow, exhausted, and only woke up after a night's sleep.

古文：云：初随使者入一宫城，使者曰： 公且住，我当先白王。 
现代文：说当初随着使者进入一座宫城，使者说： 你暂且呆在这里，我当先禀告阎王。 
English: He said that at the beginning, as the messenger entered a palace city, the messenger said: You stay here for the time being, I should first tell the king of hell.

古文：使者乃入。
现代文：使者就进去了。
English: So the messenger went in.

古文：于屏障后，闻王遥语曰： 你与他作计，漏泄吾事，遂受仗三十。 
现代文：他立于屏障后面，听到阎王远远地说： 你和他合谋定计，泄露了我的事。应打三十棍。 
English: He stood behind the barrier and heard the king of hell say from far away: You conspired with him and revealed my affair. You should be beaten with thirty rods.

古文：使者却出，袒以示公曰： 吃杖了也。 
现代文：使者退出。解开上衣告诉德玄说： 已打了三十棍了。 
English: The messenger withdrew. He unbuttoned his jacket and told De Xuan: "I have already beaten thirty sticks.

古文：德玄再三愧谢，遂引入。
现代文：德玄再三愧谢。
English: De Xuan repeated his thanks.

古文：见一著紫衣人，下阶相揖，云： 公大有功德，尚未合来，请公还。 
现代文：于是引着他进去，看见一个穿着紫色衣服的人，走下台阶作揖说道： 你有很大的功德，还不应当来，请你回去。 
English: So they led him in, and when they saw a man dressed in purple coming down the steps to prostrate himself, they said to him, "You have great merits, but you should not have come. Please go back."

古文：出堕坑中，于是得活。
现代文：德玄出去后掉进坑中，又复活了。
English: De Xuan went out, fell into a pit, and came back to life.

古文：其使者续至，云： 饥未食，及乞钱财。 
现代文：那个使者又跟着到了，并且说： 饿了，还未吃东西，还要点钱做路费。 
English: And the messenger came again, and said, I am hungry; I have not eaten, and I need a little money for my journey.

古文：并与之，问其将来官爵，曰： 熟记取，从此改殿中监，次大司宪，次太子中允，次同元太常伯，次左相，年至六十四。 
现代文：德玄都满足了他。德玄问他将来的官爵，使者说： 仔细记住，从这以后改做殿中监，其次是大司宪，再次是太子中允，再次是司元太常伯，再次是左相，年龄到六十四岁。 
English: De Xuan satisfied him. De Xuan asked the future peer, and the messenger said: "Remember carefully, from now on, you will be the palace middle warden, followed by the Grand Secretary of the Constitution, then the Prince's Middle Assistant, then the Director of the Office of the Grand Master, and then the Left Eye, up to the age of sixty-four.

古文：言讫辞去，曰： 更不复得来矣。 
现代文：说完告辞而去，并且说： 再也不能来了。 
English: After saying his farewells, he left, saying: "I can't come anymore."

古文：后皆如其言。
现代文：以后德玄做官确实像他所说的那样。
English: It all turned out like he said.

古文：宋义伦
现代文：宋义伦
English: Song Yilun

古文：唐宋义伦，麟德中为虢王府典签。
现代文：唐代宋义伦，麟德年间做虢王府的典签，忽然死去了，三天后才苏醒。
English: Song Yilun of the Tang Dynasty, who was a signer of the King Gongfu during the Lingde era, died suddenly, and only woke up three days later.

古文：暴卒，三日方苏，云：被追见王，王曰： 君曾杀狗兔鸽，今被论，君算合尽，然适见君师主云：君持金刚经，不惟灭罪，更合延年？
现代文：他说到他被拘魂见到阎王，阎王说： 你曾经杀狗、兔、鸽，现在被人控告，你的寿命已到头了，然而恰好遇见你的师傅说，你念金刚经，不只是免罪，更应延长寿命，我现在放你生还。
English: He said that his detained soul saw the king of hell. The king of hell said, "You used to kill dogs, rabbits, and pigeons, and now you are being accused. Your life is over. However, the master who just happened to meet you said that if you recite the Diamond Sutra, you will not only be absolved of your sins, but your life will also be prolonged. I will now let you live."

古文：又见殿内床上，有一僧年可五六十，披衲，义伦即拜礼，僧曰： 吾是汝师，故相救，可依王语。 义伦曰： 诺。 
现代文：你能不能做到不吃酒肉，每天念经？ 义伦拜谢说： 能。 又看见殿内床上，有一个和尚年纪有五六十岁，披着和尚的衣服。义伦就给他行礼。和尚说： 我是你的师傅，所以来救你，可照阎王的话去做。 义伦说： 是。 
English: Can you not eat meat and drink wine, and recite the sutras every day? Yilun said, "Yes." He also saw a monk in his fifties or sixties, dressed in a monk's robe, on a bed in the hall. Yilun bowed to him. The monk said, "I am your teacher, so I have come to save you. You can do as the king of hell says." Yilun said, "Yes."

古文：王令随使者往看地狱。
现代文：阎王命他随着使者去看地狱。
English: He followed the messenger to see hell.

古文：初入一处，见大镬行列，其下燃火，镬中煮人，痛苦之声，莫不酸恻。
现代文：刚到一处，看见有一排大锅，锅下点火。锅中煮着人，痛苦的声音，听了没有不心酸的。
English: Just arrived at a place, saw a row of cauldrons, a fire was lit under the cauldron. A person was boiling in the cauldron, a painful sound, and there was nothing sadder than listening to it.

古文：更入一处，铁床甚阔，人卧其上，烧炙焦黑，形容不辨。
现代文：再到一处，铁床很宽，人躺在床上，烧烤得焦黑，形体面容已不能分辨。
English: In another place, the iron bed is very wide, and a man is lying on the bed, charred black, and his face is indistinguishable.

古文：西顾有三人，枯黑伫立，颇似妇人，向义伦叩头云： 不得食吃，已数百年。 
现代文：向西看有三个人，干枯黑瘦的站在那，很像是妇人。向义伦磕头说： 得不到吃的，已经几百年了。 
English: Looking west, there were three people standing there, withered, thin and black, very much like women. They said to Yilun Shantou: "It's been hundreds of years since we've had anything to eat.

古文：伦答曰： 我亦自无，何可与汝！ 
现代文：义伦答道： 我自己也没有，拿什么给你？ 
English: Yilun replied, "I don't have any myself, what can I get for you?"

古文：更入一狱，向使者云： 时热，恐家人见敛。 
现代文：再到一处地狱义伦对使者说： 天气热，恐怕家人把我装了棺材。 
English: Then he went to a place of hell and said to the messenger: "It's hot, I'm afraid my family has put me in a coffin."

古文：遂去。西南行数十步，后呼云： 无文书，恐门司不放出。 
现代文：于是鬼使就叫他走，向西南走了几十步，后面呼喊道： 没有文书，恐怕看门人不会放你出去！ 
English: So the demon messenger told him to leave, and he walked a few dozen steps to the southwest, shouting behind him: "If you don't have the paperwork, I'm afraid the doorman won't let you out!"

古文：遂得朱书三行，字并不识。
现代文：于是得到红字三行，字一个也不认识。
English: So I ended up with three lines of scarlet letters, and I didn't know a single word.

古文：门司果问，看了放出，乃苏。
现代文：门司果然查问，看了才放他出去。
English: Mengshi did indeed inquire, and only let him out after reading it.

古文：李冈
现代文：李冈
English: Li Gang

古文：唐兵部尚书李冈得疾暴卒，唯心上暖。
现代文：唐朝兵部尚书李冈得病突然死去，只是心头还温热，三天后又复活了。
English: Shangshu Li Gang of the Tang Dynasty Military Department died suddenly of illness, but his heart was still warm, and he was revived three days later.

古文：三日复苏，云，见一人引见大将军，蒙令坐。索案看，云： 错追公。 
现代文：他说看见一个人领着他见大将军，承蒙让他坐下，并拿出案卷来看说， 错拘了李公 。
English: He said that he saw a person lead him to the general, graciously let him sit down, and took out the case file to see, saying that Li Gong was detained by mistake.

古文：有顷，狱卒擎一盘来，中置铁丸数枚。
现代文：过了一会，狱卒拿一盘来，盘中放几粒铁丸，又抬出一平锅放在院子里。
English: After a while, the jailer brought a tray, put a few iron pellets in the tray, and took out a saucepan and placed it in the yard.

古文：复舁一铛放庭中，铛下自然火出，铛中铜汁涌沸。煮铁丸，赤如火，狱卒进盘。将军以让冈，冈惧云饱。
现代文：锅下自然冒出火来。锅中的铜汁沸腾，煮着铁丸，红的像火一样，狱卒送盘到将军前，将军让李冈吃，李冈惧怕受害，只说吃饱了，将军就吞了铁丸。
English: A fire naturally appeared under the pot. The copper juice in the pot was boiling, boiling iron pellets, red like fire. The jailer brought a plate to the general, and the general asked Li Gang to eat it. Li Gang was afraid of being harmed, and only said that he was full, and the general swallowed the iron pellet.

古文：将军吞之，既入口，举身洞然；又饮铜汁，身遂火起。俯仰之际，吞并尽，良久复如故。
现代文：丸一入口，全身便出现许多洞，又饮了铜汁，全身便起火，俯仰之际便一起吞进去了。
English: At the entrance of the circle, many holes appeared in the whole body, and after drinking copper juice, the whole body caught fire, and when it was tilted, it swallowed it all together.

古文：冈乃前问之，答云： 地下更无他馔，唯有此物，即吸食之。若或不餐，须臾即为猛火所焚，苦甚于此。
现代文：过了好久又像先前一样。李冈才上前问他，他答道： 地下再没有别的吃的，唯有这种东西，只好吃它了，如若不吃，一会就会被猛火烧毁，比这还要痛苦。
English: After a long time, just as before, Li Gang came forward to ask him, and he replied, "There is nothing else to eat underground, only this kind of thing, so I have to eat it. If I don't eat it, it will be burned by the fierce fire in a while, which is even more painful."

古文：唯与写佛经十部，转金刚经千卷，公亦不来，吾又离此。 
现代文：你只给写佛经十部，转金刚经一千卷。你也不会到这里来，我又能离开这里。 
English: You only have to write ten Buddhist sutras and transfer one thousand volumes of the Diamond Sutra. You won't come here, and I can leave here.

古文：冈既复生，一依所约，深加敬异。
现代文：李冈就复活了，一一按将军说的去办了，更加敬重他了。
English: Li Gang came back to life and did everything the general told him to do, which made him even more respected.

古文：王陁
现代文：王陁
English: Wang Yao

古文：唐王陁为鹰扬府果毅，因病遂断荤肉，发心诵金刚经，日五遍。
现代文：唐代王陁做鹰扬府果毅，因为有病而断绝吃荤肉，发自内心诵读金刚经，每日五遍。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, Wang Yao, the eagle Yangfu Kuo Yi, because of illness, cut off eating meat, and read the Diamond Sutra from the heart, five times a day.

古文：后染瘴疾，见群鬼来，陁即急念经。
现代文：以后又染上了瘴病，看见一群鬼来，王陁就急忙念经。
English: Later, he contracted leprosy again, and when he saw a group of ghosts, he hurried to recite the sutras.

古文：鬼闻便退，遥曰： 王令追汝，且止诵经。 
现代文：鬼听见后就退了回去，远远地说： 阎王令我们拘你，暂且别念经。 
English: When the demons heard this, they retreated to a distance and said, "The king of hell has ordered us to detain you. Don't recite the sutras for the time being."

古文：陁即为歇，鬼悉向前，陁乃昏迷欲绝。
现代文：王陁就停止了，鬼全都向前来，王陁于是昏迷要死。
English: Wang Yao stopped, and the ghosts all came forward. Wang Yao then fell into a coma and was about to die.

古文：既寤，遂一心持诵，昼夜不息。
现代文：不一会又看见一个鬼来说： 念经人，阎王命令暂且放你六个月。 
English: After a while, he saw another ghost, who said: "Reader, the king of hell has ordered that you be temporarily released for six months.

古文：六月虽过，鬼亦不来，夜闻空中有声呼曰： 汝以持经功德，当寿九十矣。 
现代文：王陁醒来之后，就一心念经。昼夜不停，六个月虽然过去了，鬼也没有来。夜里听到空中有呼叫声说： 你因为念经有功德，应当活九十岁了。 
English: After Wang Yao woke up, he began to recite the sutras with all his heart. Day and night, he did not stop. Although six months had passed, the ghost did not come. In the night, he heard a call in the sky saying, "Because you have the merit of reciting the sutras, you should live for ninety years."

古文：竟如其言。
现代文：后来真像他说的那样。
English: In the end, he did as he said.

古文：王令望
现代文：王令望
English: Wang Lingwang passes away

古文：唐王令望少持金刚经。
现代文：唐朝王令望从小念金刚经。
English: The king of the Tang Dynasty ordered Wang to recite the Diamond Sutra from childhood.

古文：还邛州临溪，路极险阻，忽遇猛兽，振怖非常。急念真经，猛兽熟视，曳尾而去，流涎满地。
现代文：有一年回邛州临溪，道路非常险阻。忽然遇到猛兽，他非常恐怖，急忙念真经，猛虎仔细看看他，便摆着尾巴走了，流出的口水满地都是。
English: One year, he was returning to Linxi, Luzhou, and the road was very dangerous. Suddenly, he encountered a ferocious beast. He was very frightened and hurriedly recited the Sutra. The ferocious tiger took a close look at him, then swung its tail and walked away. The saliva that flowed out was all over the ground.

古文：曾任安州判司，过扬子江，夜风暴起，租船数百艘，相接尽没，唯令望船独全。
现代文：他曾在安州做判司，过扬子江。夜里风暴突起，租船几百艘，相继覆没，唯有令望的船只独存。
English: He once worked as a judge in Anzhou and crossed the Yangtze River. A storm arose in the night, and hundreds of chartered ships were lost one after another. Only the most promising ships survived.

古文：后终亳州谯令。
现代文：以后做亳州谯令而死。
English: Later, he was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou and died.

古文：陈惠妻
现代文：陈惠妻
English: Chen Huizhong

古文：唐陈惠妻王氏初未嫁，表兄褚敬欲婚王氏，父母不许。
现代文：唐朝陈惠的妻子王氏未出嫁时，表兄褚敬想和王氏通婚，父母不答应。
English: When Wang, the wife of Chen Hui of the Tang Dynasty, was still unmarried, his cousin Zou Jing wanted to marry Wang, but his parents did not agree.

古文：敬诅曰： 若不嫁我，我作鬼，必相致。 
现代文：褚敬诅咒说： 如果不嫁给我，我作了鬼，一定娶你。 
English: "If you don't marry me, I'll turn into a ghost and I'll definitely marry you," she cursed.

古文：后归于惠。
现代文：后来王氏嫁给陈惠。
English: Later, Wang married Chen Hui.

古文：惠为陵州仁寿尉，敬阴恚之。
现代文：陈惠做了陵州仁寿尉。褚敬背后却恨他。
English: Chen Hui was made the Lieutenant of Lingzhou Renshou, but Yan Jing hated him behind his back.

古文：卒后，王梦敬，旋觉有娠，经十七月不产。
现代文：去世之后，王氏梦见褚敬，不久就觉得有了身孕，过了十七个月还没有生。
English: After her death, Ms. Wang had a dream about Zou Jing, and soon felt pregnant. Seventeen months later, she still hadn't given birth.

古文：王氏忧惧，乃发心持金刚经，昼夜不歇。
现代文：王氏忧愁害怕，于是决心念金刚经，昼夜不停，褚敬便永远不再来见王氏。
English: Mr. Wang was sad and afraid, so he decided to recite the Diamond Sutra, day and night, and Yan Jing would never come to see him again.

古文：敬永绝交，鬼胎亦销，从此日持七遍。
现代文：鬼胎也就消失了。从此王氏每天念七遍经。
English: The ghostly foetus also disappeared. From then on, Mr Wang recited the sutra seven times a day.

古文：何澋
现代文：何澋
English: What's up?

古文：唐何澋，天授初任怀州武德令，常持金刚经。
现代文：唐朝何澋，武后天授初年任怀州武德县令。常念金刚经。
English: He Jian of the Tang Dynasty, the first year of the Emperor Wu's Empress Wu, served as the governor of Wude County in Waizhou. He often recited the Diamond Sutra.

古文：至河阳，水涨桥倒，日已夕，人争上船，岸远未达，欲没。
现代文：到河阳去，水涨桥倒，天色已晚，人都争着上船，船离岸远还没到达，就要覆没。
English: Go to the river Yang, the water rises and the bridge collapses, the sky is too late, people are competing to get on the boat, the boat is far from the shore and has not yet arrived, it will be covered.

古文：澋惧，且急念经，须臾近岸，遇悬芦，攀缘得出。余溺死八十余人。
现代文：何澋害怕，连忙念经。不一会接近岸边，遇到了一个悬着的芦草，攀缘而得救，其余的八十多人都淹死了。
English: He Yao was scared and hurried to recite the sutra. Not long after, he came close to the shore and encountered a hanging reed. He was able to save himself by climbing over it, but the rest of the eighty-odd people drowned.

古文：张玄素
现代文：张玄素
English: Zhang Xuansu

古文：唐张玄素，洛阳人，少持金刚经。
现代文：唐朝张玄素是洛阳人，从小念金刚经。
English: Zhang Xuansu of the Tang Dynasty was from Luoyang and recited the Diamond Sutra from a young age.

古文：天授初，任黄梅宰，家有厄难，应念而消。
现代文：天授初年，任黄梅县令。家中遇到横祸，就念经而灾祸消失。
English: In the first year of Tianju, he was appointed as the magistrate of Huangmei County. When he encountered a calamity at home, he recited the sutra and the calamity disappeared.

古文：年七十遘疾，忽有花盖垂空，遂澡浴，与家人诀别，奄然而卒。
现代文：活到七十岁得了病，忽然有一个花盖从空中垂下，于是洗澡，和家人诀别，就安安静静地死了。
English: He lived to the age of seventy, fell ill, and suddenly a wreath of flowers fell from the sky, so he took a bath, said goodbye to his family, and died peacefully.

古文：李丘一
现代文：李丘一
English: Li Qiuyi

古文：唐李丘一好鹰狗畋猎。
现代文：唐朝李丘一喜好用鹰狗打猎。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, Li Qiu liked to hunt with eagles and hounds.

古文：通天元年，任扬州高邮丞。
现代文：武后万岁通天元年，任扬州高邮丞，忽然一天早上死去了。
English: In the first year of the Wu Emperor's reign, Tong Tian Rong, the Yangzhou High Postmaster General, died suddenly one morning.

古文：忽一旦暴死，见两人来追，一人自云姓段。
现代文：他看见两个人来拘他。其中一人自己说姓段。
English: He saw two men coming to arrest him, one of whom gave his name as Dan.

古文：时同被追者百余人，男皆著枷，女即反缚。
现代文：当时一齐被拘的有一百多人，男的都带枷锁，女的就被反绑着。
English: At that time, there were more than a hundred people detained at the same time. The men were all shackled, and the women were tied backwards.

古文：丘一被锁前驱，行可十余里，见大槐树数十，下有马槽，段云： 五道大神每巡察人间罪福，于此歇马。 
现代文：丘一被锁着走在前面。走了十多里，看见几十棵大槐树。下面有马槽子。段说： 五道大神每次巡察人间的祸福，都在这里喂马。 
English: He walked for more than ten miles and saw dozens of big eucalyptus trees. There was a horse trough below. Duan said, "Every time the Five Great Gods inspect the misfortunes and blessings of mankind, they feed the horses here."

古文：丘一方知身死。
现代文：丘一才知道自己已死。
English: It wasn't until later that he realized he was dead.

古文：至王门，段指一胥云： 此人姓焦名策，是公本头。 
现代文：到了阎王殿大门，段指着一个小官说： 这个人姓焦叫焦策，他知道你的一切表现。 
English: At the gate of the Hall of Hell, Duan pointed to a minor official and said, "This man's surname is Jiao, he knows everything about you.

古文：遂被领见。
现代文：于是被领见。
English: It was accepted.

古文：王曰： 汝安忍无亲，好杀他命，以为己乐。 
现代文：阎王说： 你怎么能六亲不认，喜好杀生，来做为自己的乐事？ 
English: The king of hell said, "How can you disown your six parents and enjoy killing animals for your own amusement?

古文：须臾，即见所杀禽兽皆为人语云： 乞早处分。 
现代文：不一会，就看见他所杀的禽兽都像人那样说话： 请求早早处分他。 
English: After a while, he saw that all the animals he had killed spoke like humans: "Please punish him early."

古文：焦策进云： 丘一未合死。 
现代文：焦策上前说： 丘一不应当死。 
English: Focusing forward, he said, "Okaichi should not die."

古文：王曰： 曾作何功德？ 
现代文：阎王问： 他曾作了什么功德？ 
English: Yan Wang asked: What merits did he have?

古文：云： 唯曾造金刚经一卷。 
现代文：回答说： 曾写金刚经一卷。 
English: He replied, "I have written one volume of the Diamond Sutra."

古文：王即合掌云： 冥间号金刚经最上功德，君能书写，其福不小。 
现代文：阎王拍手说： 冥间称金刚经为最高的功德，你能书写，你的功德不小。 
English: The king of hell clapped his hands and said, "The underworld regards the Diamond Sutra as the highest merit. If you can write, your merit is not small."

古文：即令焦策领向经藏，令验。
现代文：就令焦策领他到经藏处，令验证。
English: He asked Jiaozhe to take him to the place where the sutra was kept and have him verify it.

古文：至一宝殿，众经充满，丘一试抽一卷，果是所造之经。
现代文：于是就到了一座宝殿，装满了许多经书。丘一试着抽出一卷，果然是自己所写的经书。
English: So he arrived at a treasure house, filled with many scriptures. As soon as he tried to pull out a volume, it turned out to be a scripture he had written.

古文：既回见王，知造有实，乃召所杀生类，令恳陈谢，许造功德。
现代文：回去报告给阎王之后，知道确有其事，就叫出所杀的生灵，令他恳切地一一谢罪，答应建立功德。
English: After returning to report to the king of hell, knowing that it was true, he called out the creature he had killed and made him sincerely thank him for his sin one by one and promise to build up his merits.

古文：丘一依王命，愿写金刚经一百卷，众欢喜尽散。
现代文：丘一听从了阎王的话。愿意写金刚经一百卷。众生灵高兴地都散去了。
English: Qiu Yi obeyed the words of the king of hell. He was willing to write a hundred volumes of the Diamond Sutra. All living beings dispersed happily.

古文：王曰： 放去。 
现代文：阎王说： 放他回去。 
English: The king of hell said: Let him go back.

古文：焦策领出城门，云： 尽力如此，岂不相报。 
现代文：焦策领他走出城门，说： 我如此尽力，你难道不报答吗？ 
English: And Joshua brought him out of the gate of the city, and said, If I have done this, wilt thou not answer me?

古文：丘一许钱三百千，不受，云： 与造经二十部。 
现代文：丘一答应给钱三百千，焦策不接受，说： 给我写经二十部。 
English: Qiu Yi promised to give him three hundred thousand yuan, but he did not accept the offer and said, "Write me twenty copies of the Bible."

古文：至一坑，策推之，遂活。身在棺中，惟闻哭声，已三日矣，惊呼人至，破棺乃起。
现代文：到了一个土坑，策推他，于是丘一活了，身在棺材中，只听到哭声，已经死了三天了。丘一大声叫人，打开棺材他就活转来了。
English: When they reached a pit, they pushed him in, and that's when he came back to life. He was in a coffin, and all he could hear was crying. He had been dead for three days. As soon as he cried out, they opened the coffin and he came back to life.

古文：旬日，写经二十卷了，焦策来谢，致辞而去。
现代文：十天，他写经书二十卷了。焦策来感谢他，表示谢意走了。
English: Ten days later, he had written twenty volumes of scripture. He thanked him profusely and left.

古文：寻百卷亦毕。
现代文：一百卷也写完了。
English: A hundred volumes have been written.

古文：扬州刺史奏其事，敕加丘一五品，仍充嘉州招讨使。
现代文：扬州刺史向皇帝奏报这件事。皇帝下令加封丘一五品官，充当嘉州招讨使。
English: Yangzhou's magistrate reported the matter to the emperor, who ordered Qiu to be made an official of the Fifth Rank to serve as Jiazhou's envoy.

