古文：王伦，字正道，莘县人，文正公旦弟勖玄孙也。
现代文：王伦字正道，莘县人，文正公王旦弟王勖的玄孙。
English: Wang Lun Zi Zheng Dao, a native of Jixian County, is the great-great-grandson of Wang Tan, the younger brother of King Wen Zheng.

古文：家贫无行，为任侠，往来京、洛间，数犯法，幸免。
现代文：家境贫寒没有品行，放任游荡，往来京城洛阳之间，多次犯法，侥幸逃脱。
English: His family was poor and had no morals, and he was allowed to roam freely, going back and forth between Beijing and Luoyang, repeatedly breaking the law, and getting away with it.

古文：汴京失守，钦宗御宣德门，都人喧呼不已，伦乘势径造御前曰： 臣能弹压之。 钦宗解所佩夏国宝剑以赐，伦曰： 臣未有官，岂能弹压？ 道自荐其才。
现代文：汴京失守时，钦宗来到宣德门，城中民众喧嚣呼叫不断，王伦乘机径直来到钦宗跟前说 ：我能弹压他们。 钦宗解下自身佩带的夏国宝剑赐给他，王伦说 ：臣没有任何官职，怎么能弹压他们？ 于是自己推荐自己的才能。
English: When Qin Zong lost control of Beijing, he came to Xuande Gate. The people in the city were shouting loudly and continuously. Wang Lun took the opportunity to come straight to Qin Zong and said, "I can bounce them." Qin Zong took off his Xia Guo Sword and gave it to him. Wang Lun said, "I don't have any official position, how can I bounce them?" So he recommended his own talent.

古文：钦宗取片纸书曰： 王伦可除兵部侍郎。 伦下楼，挟恶少数人，传旨抚定，都人乃息。
现代文：钦宗取出一张小纸在上面写着 ：王伦可任命为兵部侍郎。 王伦下楼，率领数名品行恶劣的年轻人，传告圣旨安抚众人，民众才平息下来。
English: Qinzong took out a small piece of paper and wrote on it: "Wang Lun can be appointed as a military aide-de-camp. Wang Lun went downstairs, led several young men of bad character, preached the holy will to appease everyone, and the people calmed down.

古文：宰相何以伦小人无功，除命太峻，奏补修职郎，斥不用。
现代文：宰相何因为王伦是小人没有功劳，任命太快，奏请补任修职郎，钦宗拒绝采纳他的意见。
English: The prime minister, why because Wang Lun is a villain, has no merit, the appointment is too fast, he asked for a replacement for the repairman, Qin Zong refused to accept his opinion.

古文：建炎元年，选能专对者使金，问两宫起居，迁朝奉郎，假刑部侍郎。充大金通问使，阁门舍人朱弁副之，见金左副元帅宗维议事，金留不遣。
现代文：建炎元年，朝廷选拔能够善长应对的人出使金朝，探问徽宗、钦宗日常生活，迁任朝奉郎，假借刑部侍郎，充任大金通问使，门舍人朱弁为副使，会见金左副元帅宗维协商议事，金朝留下不遣返。
English: In the first year of Jianyuan, the imperial court selected people who were able to deal with the situation well and sent them to the Kim dynasty to inquire about the daily life of Huizong and Qinzong. They were transferred to the post of the court messenger, borrowed the post of the servant of the criminal department, served as the envoy for the investigation of large sums of money, and the disciple Zhu Ben was the deputy envoy. They met with the vice-marshal of the Jin Zuo Zong Wei to negotiate and discuss, and left the Kim dynasty without repatriation.

古文：有商人陈忠，密告伦二帝在黄龙府，伦遂与弁及洪皓以金遗忠往黄龙府潜通意，由是两宫始知高宗已即位矣。
现代文：有一位商人陈忠，向王伦密报两位皇帝在黄龙府，王伦于是同朱弁以及洪皓送给陈忠金钱让他到黄龙府暗中传递消息，徽、钦宗至此才知道高宗已经即位了。
English: A merchant, Chen Zhong, tipped off Wang Lun that the two emperors were in Huanglongfu. Wang Lun, together with Zhu Ben and Hong Qi, gave Chen Zhong money to secretly deliver the news to Huanglongfu. It was only then that Hui and Qin Zong knew that Gaozong had ascended to the throne.

古文：久之，粘罕使乌陵思谋即驿见伦，语及契丹时事。
现代文：过了很久，粘罕派乌陵思谋到驿馆会见王伦，说到契丹时事。
English: After a long time, Ulin Sipo, a member of the Mui Han faction, met with Wang Lun in Shuguang and talked about the current situation in Khitan.

古文：伦曰： 海上之盟，两国约为兄弟，万世无变。
现代文：王伦说： 海上之盟时，宋金两国约为兄弟，万世不变。
English: Wang Lun said: At the time of the naval alliance, the two countries of Song and Jin were approximately brothers, and this has never changed.

古文：云中之役，我实馈师，赞成厥功。
现代文：云中之战，我朝曾犒劳贵军，赞助贵军成功。
English: In the war in the clouds, I once worked hard for your army and sponsored your army to succeed.

古文：上国之臣，尝欲称兵南来，先大圣惠顾盟好，不许。
现代文：贵国大臣，曾想兴兵南下，但贵国先朝皇帝为保持双方盟好，没有允许。
English: The minister of your country once wanted to send troops to the south, but the emperor of your country did not allow it in order to maintain the alliance between the two sides.

古文：厥后举兵以祸吾国，果先大圣意乎？
现代文：此后贵国举兵祸害我国，这难道是贵国先朝皇帝的本意么？
English: After that, your country raised an army to wreak havoc on our country. Was this the original intention of your country's first emperor?

古文：况亘古自分南北，主上恭勤，英俊并用，期必复古。
现代文：况且自古自分为南北，皇上恭谨勤奋，英雄豪杰并用，目的在于一定要复古。
English: Moreover, since ancient times, they have been the north and the south, the emperor is respectful and diligent, and heroes and heroines are used at the same time, the purpose is to be retro.

古文：盍思久远之谋，归我二帝、太母，复我土疆，使南北赤子无致涂炭，亦足以慰先大圣之灵，幸执事者赞之。 思谋沉思曰： 君言是也，归当尽达之。 已而粘罕至，曰： 比上国遣使来，问其意指，多不能对。
现代文：为何不考虑长久远大的谋画，归还我朝二帝、太后，恢复我朝疆土，使南北民众不遭涂炭，也足以安慰贵朝先帝在天之灵，希望执事的人能够赞成。 乌陵思谋沉思很久说： 你说得对，回去后我会全部转达。 不久粘罕来到，说： 近来贵国遣使前来，询问他们的意图，多不能回答。
English: Why not consider a long-term and far-reaching plan to return the second emperor and empress dowager of my dynasty and restore the territory of my dynasty, so that the people of the north and south would not be burned, and it would also be enough to comfort the former emperor in the spirit of heaven, hoping that the deacon could agree.Uling thought for a long time and said: You are right, I will convey everything after returning. Soon, Mu Han came and said: Recently, your country sent envoys to come and inquire about their intentions, but I can't answer.

古文：思谋传侍郎语欲议和，决非江南情实，特侍郎自为此言耳。 伦曰： 使事有指，不然来何为哉？
现代文：乌陵思谋传达你说准备议和，这决不是贵朝的实际意愿，不过是你自己这样说罢了。 王伦说 ：出使前来当然有所使命，不然来此干什么呢？
English: Wuling thoughtfully conveyed that you said you were preparing to discuss peace, which is by no means the actual will of your dynasty, but you just said so yourself. Wang Lun said: Of course, there is a mission for the envoys to come, otherwise what are they doing here?

古文：人定者胜天，天定亦能胜人，惟元帅察之。 粘罕不答。
现代文：人定胜天，天定也能胜人，希望元帅考察这一点。 粘罕没有回答。
English: I hope the field marshal will look into this, as man can always beat the heavens, and the heavens can always beat man. Mu Han did not answer.

古文：是后，宇文虚中、魏行可、洪皓、崔纵、张邵相继入使，皆拘之。
现代文：此后，宇文虚中、魏行可、洪皓、崔纵、张邵相继出使来到金朝，都被扣留。
English: After that, the envoys of Uwen Huizhong, Wei Xingke, Hong Qi, Cui Zong and Zhang Shao came to the Kim dynasty, and they were all detained.

古文：绍兴二年，粘罕忽自至馆中与伦议和，纵之归报。
现代文：绍兴二年，粘罕突然来到驿馆同王伦议和，放他回朝报告。
English: In the second year of Shaoxing, Mu Han suddenly came to Yu Hall to discuss peace with Wang Lun, and sent him back to the North to report.

古文：是秋，伦至临安，入对，言金人情伪甚悉，帝优奖之。
现代文：这年秋天，王伦到临安，入朝应对，述说金朝情况十分详尽，高宗给予优厚奖励。
English: In the autumn of that year, Wang Lun went to Lin'an to deal with the situation of the Kim dynasty. He described the situation of the Kim dynasty in detail, and Gaozong gave him a generous reward.

古文：除右文殿修撰，主管万寿观，官其二弟一侄。
现代文：任命他为右文殿修撰，主管万寿观，并任命他两位弟弟一位侄儿为官。
English: He appointed him to write for the Right Literature Hall and be in charge of the concept of longevity, and appointed his two brothers and a nephew as officials.

古文：时方用兵讨刘豫，和议中格。
现代文：当时正兴兵讨伐刘豫，和议因此中止。
English: At that time, the Xing soldiers were fighting Liu Yu, and the peace talks were therefore suspended.

古文：三年，韩肖胄使金还，金遣李永寿、王诩继至。
现代文：绍兴三年，韩肖胄出使金朝回来，金朝派李永寿、王诩接着来到南宋。
English: In the third year of Shaoxing, Han Xiaojun sent an envoy to the Kim dynasty to return, and the Kim dynasty sent Li Yongshu and Wang Xi to the Southern Song Dynasty.

古文：二人骄倨，以伦充伴使，伦与道云中旧故，骄倨少损，遂拜诏。
现代文：两人骄横倨傲，朝廷以王伦充任陪伴使，王伦同他们说起云中故事，他们骄横倨傲之气稍微有所收敛，于是拜受诏书。
English: The two were arrogant and proud, and the imperial court appointed Wang Lun as the accompanying envoy. Wang Lun told them stories from the clouds, and their arrogance and pride were somewhat restrained, so they bowed to the imperial rescript.

古文：讫事，伦复请祠。
现代文：事毕，王伦请求立祠。
English: After all, Wang Lun requested to build a small shrine.

古文：刘光世求伦参议军事，辞。
现代文：刘光世请求让王论参议军事，王伦推辞了。
English: Liu Guangshi requested that Wang discuss military issues, but Wang Lun declined.

古文：宰相赵鼎请召伦赴都堂禀议，伦陈进取之策，不合，复请祠。
现代文：宰相赵鼎召王伦到都堂议事，王伦陈述攻守之策，与赵鼎意见不合，再次请求奉祠。
English: Prime Minister Zhao Ding summoned Wang Lun to the Great Hall of the People for deliberation. Wang Lun stated the strategy of attack and defense. He disagreed with Zhao Ding and once again requested the dedication of an ancestral shrine.

古文：七年春，徽宗及宁德后讣至，复以伦为徽猷阁待制，假直学士，充迎奉梓宫使，以朝请郎高公绘副之。
现代文：绍兴七年春，徽宗和宁德皇后的讣告传来，朝廷又任命王伦为徽猷阁待制、假直学士、充任迎奉梓宫使，以朝请郎高公绘为副使。
English: In the spring of the seventh year of Shaoxing, the obituaries of Emperor Huizong and Empress Ningde came in, and the imperial court appointed Wang Lun as Huizong's apprentice, pseudo-straight bachelor, acting as an envoy to the imperial court, and invited Lang Gao as deputy envoy.

古文：入辞，帝使伦谓金左副元帅昌曰： 河南地，上国既不有，与其付刘豫，曷若见归？ 伦奉诏以行，因附进太后、钦宗黄金各二百两，仍以金帛赐宇文虚中、朱弁、孙傅、张叔夜家属之在金国者。
现代文：王伦入朝辞行，高宗让王伦对金左副元帅完颜昌说 ：河南土地，贵国既不占有，与其交给刘豫，还不如归还我朝。 王伦奉诏前往，并附带上进献给太后、钦宗两人黄金各二百两，并将金帛赐给宇文虚中、朱弁、孙傅、张叔夜等人在金朝的家属。
English: After Wang Lun's resignation from the imperial court, Gao Zong asked Wang Lun to say to Vice-Marshal Guan Yanchang of Jin Zu: "Since your country does not own the land of Henan, rather than hand it over to Liu Yu, it would be better to return it to my dynasty." Wang Lun went to the imperial court with an imperial edict, and brought with him a gift of two hundred taels of gold for each of the Empress Dowager and Qin Zong, and also gave gold ingots to the families of Uwen Huizhong, Zhu Ben, Sun Fu, Zhang Shuya and others in the imperial court.

古文：伦至睢阳，刘豫馆之，疑有他谋，移文取国书。
现代文：王伦到达睢阳，刘豫设馆招待，怀疑宋金之间有其他计谋，写信求取国书。
English: Wang Lun arrived in Fenyang, Liu Yu set up a pavilion to invite him, suspected that there were other schemes between Song Jin, and wrote a letter to request the national anthem.

古文：伦报曰： 国书须见金主面纳，若所衔命，则祈请梓宫也。 豫肋取不已。
现代文：王伦回报说 ：国书必须见到金国主当面交纳，至于我的使命，就是祈请徽宗棺椁回朝。 
English: Wang Lun replied, "The imperial rescript must be presented to the emperor in person. As for my mission, it is to pray for Huizong's coffin to be brought back to the imperial court."

古文：会迓者至，渡河见挞懒于涿州，具言豫邀索国书无状，且谓： 豫忍背本朝，他日安保其不背大国。 
现代文：刘豫仍不断胁迫他交出。恰逢欢迎的使者来到，王伦渡河到涿州会见挞懒，详细说明刘豫要求索取国书的情况，并说 ：刘豫能忍心背叛本朝，他日怎能担保他不背叛贵国。 
English: Liu Yu still continued to coerce him to hand it over. Coinciding with the arrival of the welcoming envoy, Wang Lun crossed the river to Luzhou to meet with Zou Lazy, explained in detail the situation of Liu Yu's request to obtain the national document, and said: Liu Yu can bear to betray this dynasty, how can he guarantee that he will not betray your country.

古文：是年冬，豫废。
现代文：这年冬天，刘豫被废黜。
English: That winter, Liu Yu was deposed.

古文：伦及高公绘还，左副元帅昌送伦等曰： 好报江南，自今道涂无壅，和议可以平达。 伦入对，言金人许还梓宫及太后，又许归河南地，且言废豫之谋由己发之。
现代文：王伦和高公绘回朝，左副元帅为王伦等人送行说： 好好回报南朝，自今以后道路无阻，和议可以达成。 王伦入朝见高宗，说金朝答应归还徽宗棺椁和太后，又答应归还河南土地，且说废黜刘豫的计谋是由自己发起的。
English: Wang Lun and Gao Gongpai returned to the DPRK, and the left vice marshal saw Wang Lun and others off, saying, "I will return the favor to the Southern Dynasty. From now on, there will be no obstacles on the road, and we can reach a peace agreement." When Wang Lun entered the DPRK and met with Gao Zong, he said that the DPRK promised to return the coffin of Huizong and the empress dowager, and also promised to return the land of Henan Province, and said that the scheme to depose Liu Yu was initiated by himself.

古文：帝大喜，赐予特异。
现代文：高宗大喜，给予特别优厚的赏赐。
English: Gao Zong was overjoyed and gave him a particularly generous reward.

古文：初，伦既见昌，昌遣使偕伦入燕见金主亶，首谢废豫，次致使指。
现代文：当初，王伦见到完颜昌后，完颜昌派使者陪同王伦到燕京拜金帝完颜，王伦首先感谢废黜刘豫，然后说明自己此行的使命。
English: At first, after Wang Lun saw Yan Chang, Yan Chang sent an emissary to accompany Wang Lun to Yanjing to worship Emperor Jin. Wang Lun first thanked the deposed Liu Yu, and then explained his mission for this trip.

古文：金主始密与群臣定议许和，遂遣伦还，且命太原少尹乌陵思谋、太常少卿石庆来议事。
现代文：金帝开始秘密同群臣商定准许讲和，于是将王伦遣回，并命令太原少尹乌陵思谋、太常少卿石庆来到南宋商议和议事宜。
English: Emperor Jin began to secretly agree with his courtiers on permission to declare peace, so he sent Wang Lun back, and ordered Taiyuan Shao Yin Wuling Si Mu and Taichang Shaoqing Shi Qing to come to the Southern Song Dynasty to negotiate and discuss matters.

古文：至行在，伦往来馆中计事。
现代文：到达南宋朝廷后，王伦往来驿馆同他们磋商计议。
English: After arriving at the Southern Song Dynasty court, Wang Lun went back and forth to the Imperial Palace to consult with them.

古文：八年秋，以端明殿学士再使金国，知阁门事蓝公佐为之副，申问讳日，期还梓宫。
现代文：绍兴八年秋，王伦以端明殿学士的身份再次出使金朝，知门事蓝公佐作为他的副手。王伦辞行，来到都堂接受任务二十多项。
English: In the autumn of the eighth year of Shaoxing, Wang Lun, as the leading scholar of the Duanming Palace, once again sent an envoy to the Kim dynasty, with the gatekeeper Lan Guanzo as his deputy. Wang Lun resigned and came to Tudang to accept more than 20 tasks.

古文：伦辞，引至都堂授使指二十余事。既至金国，金主亶为设宴三日，遣签书宣徽院事萧哲、左司郎中张通古为江南诏谕使，偕伦来。朝论以金使肆嫚，抗论甚喧，多归罪伦。
现代文：来到金国后，金帝完颜为他设宴三天，派遣签书宣徽院事萧哲、左司郎中张通古为江南诏谕使，随从王伦来到宋廷。朝廷议论由于金朝使者傲慢无礼，大声争论，大多归罪于王伦。
English: After arriving in Jin, Emperor Jin held a banquet for him for three days, and sent Xiao Zhe, the Signing of the Imperial Emblem, and Zhang Tonggu, the middle of the left sergeants, as the imperial envoys to the south of the Yangtze River, and followed Wang Lun to Songting. The imperial court argued that the emissaries of the Kim dynasty were arrogant and rude, and argued loudly, mostly blaming Wang Lun.

古文：十一月，伦至行在，引疾请祠，不许，趣赴内殿奏事。
现代文：十一月，王伦到朝廷，以生病为由请求辞职，朝廷不许，催促他到内殿奏事。
English: In November, Wang Lun went to the imperial court and requested to resign on the grounds of illness. The imperial court did not allow him to do so and urged him to report to the inner court.

古文：时哲等骄倨，受书之礼未定。
现代文：当时萧哲等人倨傲骄横，接受金帝诏书的礼仪没有定下来。
English: At that time, Xiao Zhe and others were proud and arrogant, and the etiquette for accepting the edict of the Jin Emperor was not settled.

古文：御史中丞勾龙如渊诣都堂与秦桧议，召伦责曰： 公为使通两国好，凡事当于彼中反覆论定，安有同使至而后议者？ 伦泣曰： 伦涉万死一生，往来虎口者数四，今日中丞乃责伦如此。 桧等共解之曰： 中丞无他，亦欲激公了此事耳。 伦曰： 此则不敢不勉。 伦见通古，以一二策动之。
现代文：御史中丞勾龙如渊到都堂同秦桧商议，召王伦前来责备他说： 你为使节沟通两国和好，所有事情都应当在金朝那里反复议定，怎么能同使者来到后再商议呢？ 王伦哭着说： 王伦九死一生，在虎口中来往四次，今天中丞竟像这样责备我。 秦桧等人一起劝解他说 ：御史中丞没有别的意思，也是想激励你了断此事。 王伦说 ：这样我不敢不努力。 
English: Wang Lun cried and said, "Wang Lun has been in and out of Hougou four times in his nine lifetimes, and today, Chujo is blaming me like this." Qin Yu and the others tried to reason with him and said, "Chujo has no other intention than to encourage you to break off the affair." Wang Lun said, "I dare not make any effort in this way."

古文：通古恐，遂议以桧见金使于其馆，受书以归。
现代文：王伦会见张通古，反复劝说他，张通古害怕，于是决定让秦桧到驿馆会见金使，接受诏书后归去。
English: Wang Lun met with Zhang Tonggu and repeatedly persuaded him that Zhang Tonggu was afraid, so he decided to let Qin Yu meet with the envoy at the State Guest House, accept the imperial rescript, and return.

古文：金许归梓宫、太母及河南地。
现代文：金朝答应归还徽宗棺椁、太后及河南地区。
English: The Kim dynasty agreed to return the coffin of Huizong, the empress dowager and the Henan region.

古文：九年春，赐伦同进士出身、端明殿学士、签书枢密院事，充迎梓宫、奉还两宫、交割地界使，既又以伦为东京留守兼开封尹。
现代文：绍兴九年春，朝廷赐王伦同进士出身、端明殿学士、签书枢密院事，充任迎棺椁、奉还两宫、交割地界使，接着又任命王伦为东京留守兼开封尹。
English: In the spring of the ninth year of Shaoxing, the imperial court gave Wang Lun, who was born as a scholar and graduated from Duanming Palace, the post of signing the letter of the Privy Council, the post of welcoming the coffin, returning the two palaces, and handing over the land boundary, and then appointed Wang Lun as a Tokyo left-behind and Kaifeng Yin.

古文：伦至东京，见金右副元帅兀术，交割地界，兀术还燕。
现代文：王伦到达东京，会见金右副元帅兀，交割地界，兀返回燕京。
English: Wang Lun arrived in Tokyo, met with Vice-Marshal Jin Yu, negotiated the boundary, and returned to Yanjing.

古文：五月，伦自汴京赴金国议事。
现代文：五月，王伦从汴京到金朝议事。
English: In May, Wang Lun went from Beijing to the Jin Dynasty for deliberation.

古文：初，兀术还，密言于金主曰： 河南地本挞懒、宗磐主谋割之与宋，二人必阴结彼国。
现代文：当初，兀回来，秘密对金帝说 ：河南地区本是挞懒、宗磐主谋割让给宋，两人必定暗中勾结宋朝。
English: At first, Zou came back and secretly told Emperor Jin that the Henan region was originally lazy, and Zongban masterminded the cession to Song, and the two must have secretly colluded with the Song Dynasty.

古文：今使已至汴，勿令逾境。 伦有云中故吏隶兀术者潜告伦，伦即遣介具言于朝，乞为备。
现代文：今天使者已到汴京，不要让他越境。 王伦原在云中时的一位官属隶属兀，这时悄悄告诉王伦，王伦立即派人全部报告给朝廷，请求预为防备。
English: Today, the envoy has arrived in Beijing, and don't let him cross the border. An official who was subordinate to Wang Lun when Wang Lun was in the clouds quietly told Wang Lun that Wang Lun would immediately send all the people to report to the imperial court and ask them to be prepared.

古文：兀术遂命中山府拘伦，杀宗磐及挞懒。
现代文：兀于是命令中山府拘留王伦，杀死宗磐和挞懒。
English: He then ordered Zhongshan Prefecture to detain Wang Lun and kill Zong Pan and Zou Lazy.

古文：十月，伦始见金主于御子林，致使指。
现代文：十月，王伦才在御子林见到金朝皇帝，陈述自己的使命。
English: In October, Wang Luncai met with the emperor of the Kim dynasty in Mizi Lin and stated his mission.

古文：金主悉无所答，令其翰林待制耶律绍文为宣勘官，问伦： 知挞懒罪否？ 伦对： 不知。 又问： 无一言及岁币，反来割地，汝但知有元帅，岂知有上国邪？ 伦曰： 比萧哲以国书来，许归梓宫、太母及河南地，天下皆知上国寻海上之盟，与民休息，使人奉命通好两国耳。 既就馆，金主复遣绍文谕伦曰： 卿留云中已无还期，及贷之还，曾无以报，反间贰我君臣耶？ 乃遣蓝公佐先归，论岁贡、正朔、誓表、册命等事，拘伦以俟报；已而迁之河间，遂不复遣。
现代文：金帝全部不做回答，并下令翰林待制耶律绍文为宣勘官，讯问王伦 ：你知道挞懒的罪行吗？ 王伦回答 ：不知道。 又问 ：没有一句话说到岁币，反来割取土地，你只知道我朝有元帅，难道不知道我朝有皇帝吗？ 王伦说： 近来萧哲持国书来，答应归还棺椁、太后及河南地区，天下人都知道是贵国遵循海上之盟的约定，与民休息，使人奉命通好两国。 到驿馆后，金帝又派耶律绍文对王伦说 ：你当年滞留云中已没有回去的希望，等到放你回去，你不仅没有回报，反而离间我朝君臣关系吗？ 于是让蓝公佐先归朝，讨论岁贡、正朔、誓表、册命等事宜，拘留王伦等候回报；后来把王伦迁到河间，于是不再遣回。
English: Emperor Jin did not reply at all, and ordered Hanlin to put Ye Lu Shouwen on standby as an inspector, and interrogated Wang Lun: Do you know the crime of laziness? Wang Lun replied: I don't know. He also asked: There is not a single statement about the annual money, but the land is cut off, you only know that I have a marshal, don't you know that I have an emperor? Wang Lun said: Recently, Xiao Zhe held a state letter and promised to return the coffin, the dowager and the Henan region, the whole world knows that your country follows the agreement of the maritime alliance, rests with the people,

古文：十年，金渝盟，兀术等复取河南。
现代文：绍兴十年，金朝毁弃盟约，兀等再次夺取河南地区。
English: In the tenth year of Shaoxing, the Kim dynasty abandoned the treaty, and the Kuomintang once again seized the Henan region.

古文：伦居河间六载，至十四年，金欲以伦为平滦三路都转运使，伦曰： 奉命而来，非降也。 金益胁以威，遣使来趣，伦拒益力。
现代文：王伦居住在河间六年时间，到绍兴十四年，金朝打算让王伦任平滦三路都转运使，王伦说： 我是奉命出使而来，不是前来投降。 金朝再三威胁，并派使者前来催促，王伦拒绝更加坚决。
English: Wang Lun lived in Hema for six years, and came to Shaoxing for fourteen years. The Kim dynasty planned to have Wang Lun appointed as envoy to the three provinces of Pingyao. Wang Lun said, "I have been sent by order, but I did not come to surrender." The Kim dynasty repeatedly threatened and sent envoys to urge, but Wang Lun refused more resolutely.

古文：金杖其使，俾缢杀之。
现代文：金鞭打使者，让他缢杀王伦。
English: Jin whipped the messenger and told him to kill Wang Lun.

古文：伦厚赂使少缓，遂冠带南向，再拜恸哭曰： 先臣文正公以直道辅相两朝，天下所知。臣今将命被留，欲污以伪职，臣敢爱一死以辱命！ 遂就死，年六十一。
现代文：王伦用重金贿赂使者拖延一点时间，然后穿戴齐整面向南方，再三下拜痛哭说： 先祖文正公以正直公道担任两朝辅相，天下所共知，我今天身负使命被扣留，想以伪职污辱我，我怎敢爱惜自己一条性命而有辱使命！ 于是就义，时年六十一岁。
English: Wang Lun bribed the messenger with a large sum of money to delay a little time, and then he put on a suit and tie and faced the south. He repeatedly bowed and wept and said: Ancestor Wen Zhengg served as the auxiliary minister of the two dynasties with honesty and fairness, which is known to the whole world. I was detained today with a mission, and they wanted to insult me with a false position. How dare I cherish my life and dishonor my mission! So I was justified, at the age of sixty-one.

古文：开禧初，加赠少保，赐姓赵氏。
现代文：这时河间地震，雨雹连下三天不止，人人都为他悲哀。诏令赠予通议大夫，赐给家属金一百两、帛一千匹。
English: At this time, there was an earthquake in the middle of the river, and it rained for more than three days in a row, and everyone was sad for him. The imperial edict awarded the doctor of general discussion, and gave the family members one hundred and two gold and one thousand horses.

古文：有文集行于世。汤思退，字进之，处州人。
现代文：儿子王述同堂兄王遵潜入金境，到河间，得到王伦遗骨归来，朝廷按官礼安葬，后谥为 愍节 。汤思退字进之，处州人。
English: His son Wang Shuxiu and his cousin Wang Zun sneaked into Jinjing, went to Hema, retrieved Wang Lun's remains, and were buried by the imperial court according to the official etiquette. The day after the funeral was the Spring Festival. Tang Si Qi Zi Jin Zhi, a native of Zhenshou.

古文：绍兴十五年，以右从政郎授建州政和县令，试博学宏词科，除秘书省正字。
现代文：绍兴十五年以右从政郎的身份被授予建州政和县令，参加博学宏词科考试，任秘书省正字。
English: In the 15th year of Shaoxing's reign, he was awarded the title of Jianzhou Zhenghe County magistrate in his capacity as the right-hand man of politics. He took part in the erudite macro-lexical examination and served as the secretary of the provincial zhengzi.

古文：自是登郎曹，贰中秘，秉史笔。
现代文：从此位登郎曹，两任中秘，把持史笔。
English: From this time on, Deng Lang Cao, two-time vice-secretary, held the pen of history.

古文：二十五年，由礼部侍郎除端明殿学士、签书枢密院事，未几参大政。
现代文：绍兴二十五年，由礼部侍郎担任端明殿学士、签书枢密院事，不久参预朝廷大政。
English: In the 25th year of Shaoxing, he was appointed as an attendant of the Ministry of Ceremonies, served as a scholar of the Duanming Palace, signed a letter to the Privy Councillor, and soon became a member of the pre-imperial government.

古文：先是，秦桧当国，恶直丑正，必不异和议，不摘己过，始久于用。
现代文：早先秦桧当政时，厌恶正直，对方必须不反对和议，不鞭挞自己的过错，才能长期被任用。
English: Earlier, when Qin Hui was in power, he detested honesty. The other party must not oppose peaceful discussion and not whip his own fault in order to be appointed for a long time.

古文：时思退名位日进，桧病笃，招参知政事董德元及思退至卧内，属以后事，各赠黄金千两。
现代文：当时汤思退名声地位日益提高，秦桧病重，召参知政事董德元和汤思退到卧室内，嘱托后事，各赠给黄金一千两。
English: At that time, Tang Siyuan's reputation and status were increasing day by day. Qin Hui was seriously ill, and he summoned the senator and statesman Dong Deyuan and Tang Siyuan to retire to the bedroom. They were entrusted with the succession, and each was given one thousand taels of gold.

古文：德元虑其以我为自外，不敢辞，思退虑其以我期其死，不敢受。
现代文：董德元害怕秦桧以为自己站在他的对立面，不敢推辞；汤思退害怕秦桧以为自己希望他死去，不敢接受。
English: Dong Deyuan was afraid that Qin Yao thought he stood on the opposite side of him and dared not refuse; Tang Siqi was afraid that Qin Yao thought he wanted him to die and dared not accept.

古文：高宗闻之，以思退不受金，非桧党，信用之。
现代文：高宗听说，以为汤思退不接受黄金，不是秦桧党羽，信任并使用他。
English: Gao Zong heard that he thought that Tang Sifu did not accept gold and was not a Qin Shihuang's henchman, so he trusted and used him.

古文：二十六年，除知枢密院事。
现代文：绍兴二十六年，任知枢密院事。
English: He was appointed to the Privy Council in the 26th year of Shaoxing.

古文：明年，拜尚书右仆射；又二年，进左仆射。明年，侍御史陈俊卿论其 挟巧诈之心，济倾邪之术，观其所为，多效秦桧，盖思退致身，皆桧父子恩也。 遂罢，以观文殿大学士奉祠。
现代文：次年，官拜尚书右仆射；又过了两年，进为左仆射，第二年，侍御史陈俊卿弹劾他 挟持奸诈取巧之心，加上倾轧邪恶的权术，观察他的行为，大多仿效秦桧，大概汤思退得官，都是秦桧父子的恩惠 。于是被罢免，以观文殿大学士的身份任宫观官。
English: The following year, he was promoted to the position of Shangshu's right-hand man; two years later, he was promoted to the left-hand man. In the following year, the courtier Chen Junqing impeached him, accusing him of treachery and deception, and observing his behavior, mostly imitating Qin Hui. It was probably the favor of Qin Hui's father and son that Tang Si retired from the official position. Therefore, he was dismissed and appointed as a palace observer with the status of a scholar of the Academy of Confucius.

古文：隆兴元年，符离师溃，召思退复相。谏议大夫王大宝上章论之，不报。
现代文：隆兴元年，宋军在符离溃败，召汤思退复任丞相，谏议大夫王大宝上章论争，孝宗没有回答。
English: In the first year of the Longxing, the Song army was routed at Fuxi, and Tang Si was summoned to resign and be reinstated as chancellor. Wang Dabao, the chief doctor, discussed the matter, but Xiaozong did not answer.

古文：金帅纥石烈志宁遗书三省、枢密院，索海、泗、唐、邓四郡。
现代文：金军将领纥石烈志宁送信到三省、枢密院，索取海、泗、唐、邓四郡。
English: The general of the Jin Army, Zou Shi, sent Li Zhining to the three provinces and the Privy Council to request the four counties of Hai, Handan, Tang and Deng.

古文：思退欲与和，遣淮西安抚司干办公事卢仲贤加枢密院计议、编修官，持报书以往。
现代文：汤思退打算同金讲和，派遣淮西安抚司干办公事卢仲贤以枢密院计议、编修官的身份，拿着回信前往。
English: Tong Sidi planned to talk peace with Kim, and sent Lu Zhongxian, the head of the Huaixi Pacification Department, as the Privy Council's deliberation and editing officer, with a reply letter.

古文：既行，上戒勿许四郡。
现代文：临行时，孝宗告诫不要答应割让四郡。
English: When he was about to leave, Xiaozong cautioned him not to agree to cede the four counties.

古文：仲贤至宿州，仆散忠义惧之以威，仲贤皇恐，言归当禀命，遂以忠义为三省、枢密院书来。
现代文：卢仲贤到宿州，仆散忠义以武力威胁他，卢仲贤惶恐不安，说回去后当上报朝廷，于是持仆散忠义写给三省、枢密院的书信回来。
English: When Lu Zhongxian went to Suizhou, his servant Zan Zhongyi threatened him with force. Panicked and worried, Lu Zhongxian said that he would report to the imperial court when he got back, so he returned with the letters that his servant Zan Zhongxian had written to the three provinces and the Privy Council.

古文：上犹欲止割海、泗，思退遽奏以吏部侍郎王之望为通问使，知阁门事龙大渊副之，将割弃四州。
现代文：孝宗依然想阻止割让海、泗二郡，汤思退急忙上奏以吏部侍郎王之望为通问使，知门事龙大渊为副使，准备割弃四州。
English: Takamune still wanted to prevent the cession of the sea and the two counties of Gyeongju, and Tong Si-tai hurried to report that he was preparing to cede the four prefectures by appointing Wang Zhibang, an attendant of the personnel department, as the envoy, and Zhilong Dayuan, an official of the gate, as the deputy envoy.

古文：张浚在扬州闻之，遣其子栻入奏仲贤辱国无状。
现代文：张浚在扬州听说这件事，派遣儿子张木式入朝上奏卢仲贤无能辱国。
English: Zhang Jun heard about this in Yangzhou and sent his son Zhang Mu to the imperial court to report Lu Zhongxian's incompetence and national humiliation.

古文：上怒，会侍御周操论仲贤不应擅许四郡，下大理究问，召浚赴行在。
现代文：孝宗大怒，恰逢侍御史周操弹劾卢仲贤不应擅自答应割让四郡，下大理寺追查讯问，召张浚到朝廷。
English: Xiaozong's great anger coincided with the impeachment of Lu Zhongxian, who should not have agreed to cede the four counties without authorization, the investigation and interrogation of the Lower Dali Temple, and the summoning of Zhang Jun to the imperial court.

古文：十二月，拜思退左仆射，浚右仆射。
现代文：十二月，任命汤思退为左仆射，张浚为右仆射。
English: In December, he appointed Tang Sijie as his left-hand man and Zhang Jun as his right-hand man.

古文：二年，浚以金未可与和，请上幸建康，图进兵。
现代文：隆兴二年，张俊认为不能同金讲和，请求孝宗前往建康，图谋进兵。
English: In the second year of Longxing, Zhang Jun believed that he could not make peace with Kim, and asked Xiaozong to go to Jiankang and plan to enter the army.

古文：上手批王之望等并一行礼物并回，诏荆、襄、川、陕严边备，窜仲贤郴州。
现代文：孝宗亲自批准王之望等人和所带礼物一起撤回，诏令荆、襄、川、陕等边防地区加强戒备，把卢仲贤流放到郴州。
English: Xiaozong personally approved the withdrawal of Wang Zhifang and others together with the gifts they brought, and ordered Jing, Xiang, Sichuan, Shaanxi and other border areas to strengthen their vigilance, and exiled Lu Zhongxian to Zhangzhou.

古文：思退恐，奏请以宗社大计，奏禀上皇而后从事。
现代文：汤思退害怕恐惧，上奏请求将这关系到国家安危存亡的大事，上报太上皇高宗而后再行动。
English: Afraid and frightened, Tong Siwei requested that the matter, which was related to the safety and survival of the country, be reported to Emperor Gaozong before taking action.

古文：上批示三省曰： 金无礼如此，卿犹欲言和。
现代文：孝宗批示到三省说 ：金朝这样无礼，你还打算讲和。
English: Xiaozong issued orders to the three provinces, saying, "The Kim dynasty is so impolite, yet you are planning to make peace.

古文：今日敌势，非秦桧时比，卿议论秦桧不若。 思退大骇，阴谋去浚，遂令之望、大渊驿疏兵少粮乏，楼橹、器械未备，人言委四万众以守泗州，非计。上颇惑之，乃命浚行边，还兵罢招纳。
现代文：今天敌人的形势，不能同秦桧时相比，你的议论不如秦桧。 汤思退十分惊骇，阴谋驱逐张浚出朝，于是命令王之望、龙大渊急忙上奏兵少粮缺，楼船、兵械没有准备，人们都议论用四万人马守卫泗州，不是好的计策，孝宗对此很感疑惑，于是命令张浚巡视边境，撤兵罢免招纳士兵。
English: The enemy's situation today cannot be compared to that of Qin Shihuang's time, and your arguments are not as good as Qin Shihuang's. Tang Siyi was very alarmed and plotted to expel Zhang Jiu from the court, so he ordered Wang Zhifang and Long Dayuan to rush to the court to report that the soldiers were short of food, the ships and weapons were not prepared, and people were discussing that it was not a good strategy to use forty thousand horses to guard Zhangzhou. Xiaozong was very suspicious of this, so he ordered Zhang Jiu to patrol the border and withdraw the soldiers.

古文：浚力乞罢政，许之。
现代文：张浚极力乞求罢免自己的职务，孝宗答应了他。
English: Zhang Jun desperately begged to be relieved of his duties, and Xiaozong agreed.

古文：上命思退作书，许金四郡。
现代文：孝宗让汤思退写信给金，答应把四郡割让给金朝。
English: Xiaozong asked Tang Siwei to write a letter to Kim, promising to cede the four counties to the Kim dynasty.

古文：既而金专事杀戮，上意中悔，思退复密令孙造谕敌以重兵胁和。
现代文：随后金军专门从事杀戮抢劫，孝宗中途后悔，汤思退又暗中命令孙造告诉敌人用重兵胁迫讲和。
English: Subsequently, the Golden Army specialized in killing and robbing, and Xiaozong regretted halfway, and Tang Siyi secretly ordered Sun Zuo to tell the enemy to use heavy troops to coerce them to make peace.

古文：上闻有敌兵，命建康都统王彦等御之，仍命思退督江、淮军，辞不行。
现代文：孝宗听说有敌兵，命令建康都统王彦等人率兵抵御，并命令汤思退前去监督江、淮地区军队，汤思退推辞不去。
English: When Xiaozong heard that there were enemy soldiers, he ordered Jiankangdu ruler Wang Yan and others to lead the troops to resist, and ordered Tong Si to retreat to supervise the troops in the Jiang and Huai regions, but Tong Si refused to do so.

古文：仆散忠义自清河口渡淮，言者极论思退急和撤备之罪，遂罢相，寻责居永州。
现代文：金仆散忠义从清河口渡过淮河，议论者极力弹劾汤思退急于求和撤去防备的罪行，于是被罢免丞相职务，不久谪居永州。
English: The gold servant San Zhongyi crossed the Huai River from the mouth of the Qing River, and the commentators tried their best to impeach Tang Siyi for the crime of rushing to seek peace and withdrawing the defense, so he was dismissed from the post of chancellor and soon lived in Yongzhou.

古文：于是太学生张观等七十二人上书，论思退、王之望、尹穑等奸邪误国，招致敌人，请斩之。
现代文：于是太学士张观等七十二人上书，弹劾汤思退、王之望、尹穑等人奸邪误国，招致敌人前来，请求把他斩首。
English: As a result, seventy-two people, including the great scholar Zhang Guan, wrote a letter to impeach Tang Sidi, Wang Zhifang, Yin Qi and others for treason, inviting the enemy to come and ask him to be beheaded.

古文：思退忧悸死。
现代文：汤思退忧虑害怕而死。
English: Townsend died of worry and fear.

古文：思退始终与张浚不合，浚以雪耻复仇为志，思退每借保境息民为口实，更胜迭负，思退之计迄行，然终以不免。敌既得海、泗、唐、邓，又索商、秦，皆思退力也。
现代文：汤思退始终同张浚不和，张浚以雪耻复仇恢复中原为己任，汤思退总是借保境息民作为求和的口实，双方不断交锋，汤思退的主张终于得到推行，但最终以此获罪，金朝得海、泗、唐、邓四州，又索取了商、秦，都是汤思退出力的结果。
English: Tong Siyi was always at odds with Zhang Jun, and Zhang Jun took it as his duty to restore the Central Plains with the revenge of snow shame. Tong Siyi always used the protection of the country and the interests of the people as an excuse to seek peace, and the two sides constantly clashed. Tong Siyi's proposal was finally implemented, but he was eventually found guilty of this. The Kim dynasty gained the four states of Hai, Min, Tang, and Deng, and also requested the merchants and Qin, all of which were the result of Tong Siyi's withdrawal force.

