古文：西鄙用兵，大将刘平战死。
现代文：原文北宋仁宗时，西部边疆发生战争，大将刘平阵亡。
English: When the Northern Song Dynasty was ruled by Emperor Renzong, a war broke out in the western frontier, and General Liu Ping was killed in action.

古文：议者以朝廷委宦者监军，主帅节制有不得专者，故平失利。
现代文：朝中舆论认为，朝廷委派宦官做监军，致使主帅不能全部发挥自己的指挥作用，所以刘平失利。
English: According to public opinion in North Korea and China, the imperial court appointed eunuchs to supervise the army, resulting in the head coach not being able to fully exert his commanding role, so Liu Ping lost.

古文：诏诛监军黄德和，或请罢诸帅监军。
现代文：仁宗下诏诛杀监军黄德和，有人上奏请求把各军元帅的监军全部罢免掉。
English: Under Emperor Nanzong, Huang Dehe, the overseer of the army, was ordered to kill the overseers, and some people petitioned to remove all the overseers of the marshals of each army.

古文：仁宗以问吕夷简，夷简对曰： 不必罢。但择谨厚者为之。 
现代文：仁宗为此征求吕夷简的意见，吕夷简回答说： 不必罢免，只要选择为人谨慎忠厚的宦官去担任监军就可以了。 
English: To this end, Rinzong sought the opinion of Lü Yizhen. Lü Yizhen replied, "You don't have to remove him, just choose a cautious and loyal eunuch to serve as an overseer."

古文：仁宗委夷简择之。对曰： 臣待罪宰相，不当与中贵私交，何由知其贤否？
现代文：仁宗委派吕夷简去选择合适的人选，吕夷简又回答说： 我是一名待罪宰相，不应当和宦官交往，怎么知道他们是否贤良呢？
English: Rinzong appointed Lyu Yijian to select a suitable candidate, and Lyu Yijian replied: I am a prime minister-in-waiting, I should not associate with eunuchs, how do I know if they are virtuous?

古文：愿诏都知、押班，但举有不称者，与同罪。 
现代文：希望皇上命令都知、押班，只要是他们所荐举的监军，如有不胜任其职务的，与监军共同治罪。 
English: It is hoped that the emperor will give orders to the supervisors and the guards, as long as they are the supervisors recommended by the supervisors, and if they are not competent to perform their duties, they will jointly commit crimes with the supervisors.

古文：仁宗从之。
现代文：仁宗采纳了吕夷简的意见。
English: Renzong accepted Lu Yizhen's suggestion.

古文：翼日，都知叩头乞罢诸监军宦官。
现代文：第二天，都知、押班在仁宗面前叩头，请求罢免各监军的宦官。
English: The next day, Tochi and Otsuban kowtowed before Rinzong and requested the removal of the eunuchs who were supervising the troops.

古文：士大夫嘉夷简有谋。
现代文：朝中士大夫都称赞吕夷简有谋略。
English: The sergeants and doctors all praised Lü Yijian for his strategy.

古文：李迪与夷简同相，迪尝有所规画，吕觉其胜，或告曰： 李子柬之虑事，过于其父。 
现代文：李迪与吕夷简同任宰相。
English: Li Di and Lü Yijian were both appointed as prime ministers.

古文：夷简因语迪曰： 公子柬之才可大用。 
现代文：李迪曾经规划事情，而吕夷简觉得自己不如他。
English: Li Di used to plan things, while Lü Yizhen felt inferior to him.

古文：即奏除两浙提刑，迪父子皆喜。迪既失柬，事多遗忘，因免去。方知为吕所卖。
现代文：有人说： 李柬考虑事情更胜过他的父亲。 吕夷简就告诉李迪说： 令郎柬的才智可以好好借重。 于是禀奏天子命李柬为两浙提刑。
English: Some people said, "Li Kam will think about things more than his father." Lu Yijian told Li Di, "You can make good use of your brother-in-law's wisdom," and then played God's will for Li Kam to be sentenced to two years in prison.

古文：杀一监军，他监军故在也；自我罢之，异日有失事，彼借为口实，不若使自请罢之为便。
现代文：李迪父子都很高兴。李柬赴任以后，不能再凡事提醒。李迪年老健忘，因而被免除宰相之职。
English: Li Di and his son are very happy. After Li Kam can no longer remind them of everything, Li Di is old and forgetful, so he was relieved of the post of prime minister.

古文：文穆称其有宰相才，良然。
现代文：李迪才发现这正是吕夷简的阴谋。
English: It was only when Li Di found out that this was exactly Lü Yizhen's plot.

古文：惜其有才而无度，如忌富弼，忌李迪，皆中之以小人之智，方之古大臣，邈矣!
现代文：评译
English: Commentary on translation

