古文：卫使客事魏，三年不得见。
现代文：卫国派一位客卿侍奉魏国，过了三年这位客卿也没有被召见。
English: The Emperor sent a concubine to serve the State of Wei, but after three years, the concubine was not summoned.

古文：卫客患之，乃见梧下先生，许之以百金。
现代文：卫国的客卿很忧虑，就去拜见梧下先生，承诺给梧下先生一百金。
English: The guest of honor was very worried, so he went to visit his brother-in-law and promised him one hundred gold coins.

古文：梧下先生曰： 诺。 
现代文：梧下先生说： 遵命。 
English: The younger brother said, "Follow my orders."

古文：乃见魏王曰： 臣闻秦出兵，未知其所之。
现代文：于是梧下先生去拜见魏王说： 臣下听说秦国要出兵，不知要去哪个国家。
English: So the younger brother-in-law went to see the Wei king and said, "My vassal has heard that Qin is going to send troops, but he doesn't know which country to go to.

古文：秦、魏交而不修之日久矣。
现代文：秦、魏两国缔结邦交，但不修旧交的日子已经很久了。
English: Qin and Wei concluded diplomatic relations, but it has been a long time since the old diplomatic relations were not restored.

古文：愿王博事秦，无有佗计。 魏王曰： 诺。 
现代文：大王应该专心侍奉秦国，不应有其它打算。 魏玉说： 好吧。 
English: The great king should concentrate on serving Qin, and should not have any other plans. Wei Yu said: Okay.

古文：客趋出，至郎门而反曰： 臣恐王事秦之晚。 王曰： 何也? 
现代文：梧下先生这才快步走出，走到廊门又返回来说： 臣下认为大王现在想去侍奉秦国，恐怕已经晚了。 魏王说： 为什么？ 
English: Mr. Wu stepped out quickly, walked to the corridor door and returned saying, "The vassals think that the great king now wants to serve Qin, I'm afraid it's too late." Wei Wang said, "Why?

古文：先生曰： 夫人于事己者过急，于事人者过缓。
现代文：梧下先生说： 让别人侍奉自己都很着急，自己去侍奉别人就会慢慢腾腾。
English: The brother-in-law said, "All of us are anxious to have others serve us, but when we serve others, we will slowly rise to the top."

古文：今王缓于事己者，安能急于事人。 
现代文：现在大王对于侍奉自己都不着急，怎么会急着侍奉别人呢？ 
English: Now that the great king is in no hurry to serve himself, how can he be in a hurry to serve others?

古文： 奚以知之? 
现代文：魏王说： 您怎么知道呢？ 
English: Wei Wang said: How do you know that?

古文： 卫客曰：事王三年不得见。
现代文：梧下先生说： 卫国客卿说，待奉大王三年之久，一直没有受到召见。
English: Mr. Wu said, "Lord Wei Guoke said that he has not been summoned to the Great King for three years.

古文：臣以是知王缓也。 
现代文：臣下因此知道大王不着急。 
English: As a result, his subjects knew that the great king was not in a hurry.

古文：魏王趋见卫客。
现代文：魏王急忙去见卫国客卿。
English: Wei Wang hurriedly went to see Emperor Wei.

