古文：谯玄李业刘茂温序彭脩索卢放周嘉范式李善王忳张武陆续戴封李充缪肜陈重雷义范冉戴就赵苞向栩谅辅刘翊王烈孔子曰： 与其不得中庸，必也狂狷乎！ 又云： 狂者进取，狷者有所不为也。 
现代文：又说： 狂者进取，狷者不肯做坏事。 
English: He also said, "The maniac is enterprising, and the lazy person is unwilling to do bad things."

古文：此盖失于周全之道，而取诸偏至之端者也。
现代文：这大概是不能求全，只好取之于偏至的一种办法吧。
English: This is probably impossible to achieve, so we have to resort to a method that is biased.

古文：然则有所不为，亦将有所必为者矣；既云进取，亦将有所不取者矣。
现代文：然则有所不为，也一定有所必为的；既然说进取，也将有所不取的啊。
English: However, if you don't do something, you must do something; since you say that you are aggressive, you will also have to do something.

古文：如此，性尚分流，为否异适矣。
现代文：这样，人的性情尚不同，为与不为，各有所适而已。
English: In this way, people's dispositions are still different, and it is up to each person to act or not to act.

古文：中世偏行一介之夫，能成名立方者，盖亦众也。
现代文：承平时代一个偏行的人能成名正直，言行相称的，可以说是不少的。
English: In the Heping era, it can be said that there were quite a few cases in which a person who was biased could become famous for being honest, and his words and deeds were commensurate.

古文：或志刚金石，而克扞于强御。或意严冬霜，而甘心于小谅。
现代文：有的志气刚如金石，摧折强暴；有的意识严如冬霜，心怀诚信。
English: Some people are as strong-willed as a rock and as violent as a tornado; some people are as tough-minded as a winter frost and have integrity.

古文：亦有结朋协好，幽明共心；蹈义陵险，死生等节。
现代文：还有结朋协友，生死一心，赴义犯险，存殁同节的。
English: There are also friends and comrades, who share the same heart for life and death, who go to do good and take risks, and who share the same fate.

古文：虽事非通圆，良其风轨，有足怀者。
现代文：虽然这类事情算不得通达圆满，但它的风范是真正值得怀念的。
English: While this sort of thing is never entirely satisfactory, it's the manner of it that's truly memorable.

古文：而情迹殊杂，难为条品；片辞特趣，不足区别。措之则事或有遗，载之则贯序无统。
现代文：只是这类事情情节很复杂，不易分出条理品类来。一句话，某些特殊的旨趣不值得深究，不要它，有的事情就遗漏了；记下来，文章就没有个中心。
English: It's just that the circumstances of this kind of thing are very complicated, and it's not easy to separate out the organized categories. In a word, some special interests are not worth exploring, if you don't do it, some things will be left out; if you write it down, there will be no center of the article.

古文：以其名体虽殊，而操行俱绝，故总为《独行篇》焉。庶备诸阙文，纪志漏脱云尔。
现代文：因为它的名称体例虽然不同，而操守行事都很出色，所以总归入《独行篇》，庶几可以作为史的缺文，记述脱漏而已。
English: Because its name style is different, but its conduct is excellent, it is always included in the "Lone Ranger," and it can be used as a gap in history. It is just an omission in the record.

古文：谯玄字君黄，巴郡阆中人也。
现代文：◆谯玄传，谯玄字君黄，巴郡阆中人。
English: ◆玄传,玄字君黄,巴郡中.

古文：少好学，能说《易》、《春秋》。
现代文：年轻时好学习，能说《易》、《春秋》。
English: It's good to learn when you're young. You can say "Yi" and "Chunqiu."

古文：仕于州郡。
现代文：出仕州郡。
English: From Shishu County.

古文：成帝永始二年，有日食之灾，乃诏举敦朴逊让、有行义者各一人。
现代文：成帝永始二年，有日食的灾异，朝廷有诏令举敦朴、逊让、有行义的各一人。
English: In the second year of Emperor Yongzheng's reign, there was a solar eclipse, and the imperial court issued an edict condemning everyone who was unruly, disobedient, or did not do what was right.

古文：州举玄，诣公车，对策高第，拜议郎。
现代文：州举谯玄，去公车，对答策问，得高第，授议郎。
English: The state's high school students are the most intelligent, go to the bus, answer questions, get high grades, and are the best debaters.

古文：帝始作期门，数为微行。
现代文：成帝始作期门之会，多次随便外出。
English: Emperor Chengzong initiated the door-to-door meeting, and went out casually many times.

古文：立赵飞燕为皇后，后专宠怀忌，皇子多横夭。
现代文：立赵飞燕为皇后，赵飞燕专宠忌妒，皇子多被害死。
English: Zhao Feiyan was made empress, Zhao Feiyan was envied, and many princes were killed.

古文：玄上书谏曰： 臣闻王者承天，继宗统极，保业延祚，莫急胤嗣。故《易》有干蛊之义，《诗》咏众多之福。
现代文：谯玄上书道 ：我听说皇上秉天命继宗统极，保祖宗大业，延续皇帝的祚位，最紧要的事莫如继嗣有人，故《易》有干蛊之义，《诗》咏众多之福。
English: Zou Xuan Shang calligraphy: I heard that the emperor adhering to the destiny of heaven, the unification of successors, the great cause of protecting the ancestors, and the continuation of the emperor's throne are the most important things. Therefore, "Yi" has the meaning of dryness, and "Poem" has many blessings.

古文：今陛下圣嗣未立，天下属望，而不惟社稷之计，专念微行之事，爱幸用于所惑，曲意留于非正。
现代文：是说能承先轨，处事有才能，改正父母的过错，是说多子多孙为家国之福。现在皇上的继承人没有立，天下的人都在企立以望，皇上却不想国家的大计，专门搞微行的事，被女色所迷惑，把心用在非正经的事上。
English: It means being able to follow in the footsteps of one's predecessors, being able to do things well, and correcting the mistakes of one's parents. It also means that having many children and grandchildren is a blessing for one's country. At present, there is no heir to the emperor, and people all over the world are trying to establish one. However, the emperor does not want to make a grand plan for the country. He is only interested in minor matters, is confused by women's beauty, and devotes his attention to matters that are not serious.

古文：窃闻后宫皇子，产而不育。臣闻之怛然，痛心伤剥，窃怀忧国，不忘须臾。
现代文：听说后宫皇子生下多不能活，我心里极为难过，忧心忡忡，一刻也不忘记。
English: When I heard that the prince of the harem couldn't live after he was born, I felt extremely sad and worried, and I haven't forgotten it for a moment.

古文：夫警卫不修，则患生非常。
现代文：警卫不备，祸患常生，出人意外。
English: If the guards are not prepared, there will be frequent disasters and accidents.

古文：忽有醉酒狂夫，分争道路。既无尊严之仪，岂识上下之别！
现代文：忽然有醉酒狂夫，争斗道路，全无尊严的仪仗，谁知道上下之别。
English: Suddenly there are drunken madmen, fighting on the road, all without dignity of honor, who knows the difference between up and down.

古文：此为胡狄起于毂下，而贼乱发于左右也。
现代文：这就是胡狄起于您的车辆底下，贼乱发于您左右的原因啊。
English: That's why Houdini is under your car and thieves are all around you.

古文：愿陛下念天下之至重，爱金玉之身，均九女之施，存无穷之福，天下幸甚。 
现代文：希望皇上想到天下的大事，爱惜自己金玉的身体，均九女之施，保存无穷无尽的福。天下就好了。 
English: I hope that the emperor will think about the great things of the world, cherish his golden body, and preserve the endless blessings. The world will be better.

古文：时，数有灾异，玄辄陈其变。
现代文：这时，灾异屡见，谯玄就陈述灾异发生的原因。
English: At this time, disasters are common, and Yu Xuan stated the reasons for the occurrence of disasters.

古文：既不省纳，故久稽郎官。
现代文：皇帝不采纳，久在郎官，得不到升迁。
English: If the emperor does not adopt him, he will remain a subordinate official for a long time and will not be promoted.

古文：后迁太常丞，以弟服去职。
现代文：后来举太常丞，因弟弟死了，去职。
English: Later, he was promoted to Taichojo, but was removed from his post when his younger brother died.

古文：平帝元始元年，日食，又诏公卿举敦朴直言。
现代文：平帝元始元年，日食，又诏令公卿举敦朴直言的人。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, the year of the solar eclipse, he also issued an edict to the nobles to be straightforward.

古文：大鸿胪左咸举玄诣公车对策，复拜议郎，迁中散大夫。
现代文：大鸿胪左咸举谯玄到公车对答皇上的策问，又授议郎，升中散大夫。
English: Da Hongzhu Zuo Xianjian took Zou Xuan to the bus to answer the emperor's questions, and also conferred him with the title of deliberator, and promoted him to the position of middle-ranking doctor.

古文：四年，选明达政事、能班化风俗者八人。
现代文：四年，选明达政事且能够转移风俗的八人。
English: In four years, eight people who are able to understand politics and can transfer customs will be elected.

古文：时并举玄，为绣衣使者，持节，与太仆王恽等分行天下，观览风俗，所至专行诛赏。
现代文：当时大家举谯玄，任绣衣使者，持节，与太仆王恽等人分赴天下，观察风俗，所到的地方，专行诛杀坏人，奖赏好人。
English: At that time, everyone raised the banner of Xuan Xuan, appointed embroidered messengers, kept the festival, and went to the world with the great servant Wang Yao and others to observe the customs, and where they went, they were dedicated to killing bad people and rewarding good people.

古文：事未及终，而王莽居摄，玄于是纵使者车，变易姓名，间窜归家，因以隐遁。
现代文：事情还没有进行完，王莽代行皇帝事，谯玄于是把绣衣使者的车扔掉，改名换姓，私自跑回了家，隐藏起来。
English: The matter was not over yet. Wang Mang was acting on behalf of the emperor, so Yu Xuan threw away the car of the embroidered messenger, changed his name and ran back home to hide.

古文：后公孙述僭号于蜀，连聘不诣。
现代文：后来公孙述称伪号于蜀，多次聘请他，不去。
English: Later, Gongsun said that the fake name was Shu, and he hired him many times, but he did not go.

古文：述乃遣使者备礼征之；若玄不肯起，便赐以毒药。
现代文：公孙述于是派使者备礼征召他；如果谯玄不去，便赐以毒药。
English: According to his grandson, he then sent an envoy to summon him; if Yu Xuan did not go, he would give him poison.

古文：太守乃自赍玺书至玄庐，曰： 君高节已著，朝廷垂意，诚不宜复辞，自招凶祸。 
现代文：太守自己把玺书送到谯玄的家里，说： 您的高节已经著名，朝廷有意用您，实不应再辞，自惹凶祸。 
English: The daimyō himself sent the letter to Shingen's home, saying: Your high festival has already become famous, the imperial court intends to use you, you really should not give up, you are inviting disaster.

古文：玄仰天叹曰： 唐尧大圣，许由耻仕；周武至德，伯夷守饿。
现代文：谯玄仰天叹息道： 唐尧那样的大圣，许由还耻于做他的臣子，周武王那样的至德，伯夷宁愿饿死，不吃他的粟米。
English: Looking up at the sky, Yu Xuan sighed, "As a great saint like Tang Xuan, Xu Yu was ashamed to be his vassal. As a great moralist like King Zhou Wu, Bo Yi would rather starve to death than eat his corn."

古文：彼独何人，我亦何人。
现代文：公孙述是什么人，我是什么人。
English: My great-grandson tells me who he is and who I am.

古文：保志全高，死亦奚恨！ 
现代文：保志气，全大节，死了也无恨！ 
English: Keep your spirits up, the whole big festival, there is no hate in death!

古文：遂受毒药。
现代文：因接受了毒药。
English: For having received poison.

古文：玄子瑛泣血叩头于太守曰： 方今国家，东有严敌，兵师四出。国用军资，或不常充足。愿奉家钱千万，以赎父死。 
现代文：谯玄的儿子谯王英泣血叩头，对太守说 ：现在东边有大敌，军队征讨，国家用费大，军需多，国家府库不足，愿以家钱千万，以赎父死。 
English: Zou Wangying, the son of Zou Xuan, bowed down with tears of blood and said to the governor: "Nowadays, there is a great enemy in the east, the army is requisitioned, the state expenditure is large, the military expenditure is large, and the state treasury is insufficient. I am willing to spend tens of millions of family money to redeem my father's death."

古文：太守为请，述听许之。
现代文：太守为他请求，公孙述答应了。
English: The daimyō asked for him, and the great-grandson agreed.

古文：玄遂隐藏田野，终述之世。
现代文：谯玄因此隐藏田野，直到公孙述去世之日。
English: Shingen therefore hid the field until the day of his grandson's death.

古文：时，兵戈累年，莫能修尚学业，玄独训诸子勤习经书。
现代文：这时兵戈连年，学业无人讲述了，谯玄独训诸子努力学习经书。
English: At this time, it was the Year of the Goat, and no one spoke about their studies, so Xu Xuan single-handedly trained his sons to study the scriptures.

古文：建武十一年卒。
现代文：建武十一年逝世。
English: Kenmu died eleven years later.

古文：明年，天下平定，玄弟庆以状诣阙自陈。光武美之，策诏本郡祠以中牢，敕所在还玄家钱。
现代文：第二年，天下平定，谯玄的弟弟以谯玄的行状赴京师上奏皇上，光武赞美谯玄行事，下令本郡以中牢祭祀他，还令所在地方归还谯玄的家钱。
English: In the second year, when the country was pacified, the younger brother of Yu Xuan went to Beijing to play the emperor with the behavior of Yu Xuan. Guangwu praised Yu Xuan, ordered the county to worship him with a medium-sized prison, and ordered the local government to return Yu Xuan's family money.

古文：时，亦有犍为费贻，不肯仕述，乃漆身为厉，阳狂以避之，退藏山薮十余年。
现代文：当时，还有犍为费贻，不肯任公孙述的伪职，于是用漆涂身作鬼，装疯逃避，入藏山中十多年。
English: At that time, there was also a woman named Fei Yao, who refused to take on the fake job described by Gongsun Zhu, so she painted herself with paint to look like a ghost, pretended to be crazy to escape, and went into the mountains for more than ten years.

古文：述破后，仕至合浦太守。
现代文：公孙述被消灭后，官至合浦太守。
English: After his great-grandson Shu was eliminated, the post of Hepu Taishu (governor of Hepu) was created.

古文：瑛善说《易》，以授显宗，为北宫卫士令。
现代文：谯王英善解说《易》，用它教授显宗，任北宫卫士令。
English: Gong Wang Ying Zhen explained "Yi," used it to teach Xian Zong, and served as the North Palace Guard.

古文：李业字巨游，广汉梓潼人也。
现代文：◆李业传，李业字巨游，广汉梓潼人。
English: ◆Li Ye Chuan, Li Ye Zi You, Guanghan Zi Xuan Ren.

古文：少有志操，介特。
现代文：年轻时就有志气操守，孤芳自赏，不随流俗。
English: When she was young, she had ambition and integrity, admired herself, and did not follow the fashion.

古文：习《鲁诗》，师博士许晃。
现代文：学《鲁诗》，以博士许晃为师。
English: Studied "Lu Shi" under the tutelage of Dr. Xu Rong.

古文：元始中，举明经，除为郎。
现代文：元始中，举明经，授为郎。
English: In the early days, he was given a copy of the Sutra of Enlightenment as a gift.

古文：会王莽居摄，业以病去官，杜门不应州郡之命。
现代文：值王莽代皇帝掌政，李业托病去官，关门不应州郡的聘命。
English: Wang Mang took over the government on behalf of the emperor, Li Ye went on sick leave, and did not accept the appointment of the state and county.

古文：太守刘咸强召之，业乃载病诣门。咸怒，出教曰： 贤者不避害，譬犹彀弩射市，薄命者先死。
现代文：太守刘咸强迫他出来，李业不得已，抱病去刘咸那里，刘咸发怒，出来教训他说： 贤者是不躲避祸害的，这如同剑弩向闹市射出，命薄的先死。
English: The daimyō Liu Xian forced him to come out. Li Ye had no choice but to go to Liu Xian with his illness. Liu Xian became angry and came out to teach him a lesson. He said, "A wise man does not avoid disaster. It is like a sword that shoots out into the busy city. The weak die first."

古文：闻业名称，故欲与之为治，而反托疾乎？ 
现代文：听了你的名声，因此想请你同我一道治理郡政，你不识抬举，反托病不来，这是对的吗？ 
English: Having heard your reputation, I would like to ask you to join me in governing the county government. You do not know how to do it, and you do not come because you are ill. Is this right?

古文：令诣狱养病，欲杀之。
现代文：命令他去监狱养病，想把他杀了。
English: Ordered him to go to prison to recover, tried to kill him.

古文：客有说咸曰： 赵杀鸣犊，孔子临河而逝。
现代文：有个宾客对刘咸说 ：赵简子杀了窦鸣犊，孔子临河不渡。
English: A guest said to Liu Ham, "Zhao Jianzi killed Dou Mingtao, but Confucius did not cross the river."

古文：未闻求贤而胁以牢狱者也。 
现代文：没有听说求贤人却以进牢狱相威胁的啊！ 
English: I've never heard of a seeker of wisdom threatening to go to prison!

古文：咸乃出之，因举方正。
现代文：刘咸才把李业放出来，并举李业为方正。
English: It was Liu Xiancai who released Li Ye and elevated Li Ye to the position of Founder.

古文：王莽以业为酒士，病不之官，遂隐藏山谷，绝匿名迹，终莽之世。
现代文：王莽用李业任酒士，托病不去，因隐藏山谷里，埋名绝迹，直到王莽灭亡。
English: Wang Mang used Li Ye as a cupbearer, feigned illness to avoid going, hid in a valley, and disappeared without a trace until Wang Mang's death.

古文：及公孙述僭号，素闻业贤，征之，欲以为博士，业固疾不起。
现代文：公孙述立伪号，他平常听人说李业贤能，征召他，想用他为博士，李业坚决称病不起。
English: Gongsun gave a false name. He usually heard people say that Li Ye was capable, called him up, and wanted to use him as a doctor. Li Ye resolutely said that he could not afford to be ill.

古文：数年，述羞不致之，乃使大鸿胪尹融持毒酒、奉诏命以劫业：若起，则受公侯之位；不起，赐之以药。
现代文：几年之后，公孙述因为没有召到李业，以为丢了面子，于是派大鸿胪尹融拿着毒药，捧着诏书去要挟李业：如果他应命，就给公侯的显位；不应命，就赐给毒药。
English: A few years later, Gongsun said that he thought he had lost face because he had not summoned Li Ye, so he sent the great giant Zhao Yin Rong with poison and a decree to blackmail Li Ye: if he obeyed, he would be given the position of prince; if he did not obey, he would be given poison.

古文：融譬旨曰： 方今天下分崩，孰知是非？
现代文：尹融劝解李业道 ：当今天下分崩离析，哪个人知道谁是谁非。
English: Yin Rong's advice to Li Ye Dao: When the world is falling apart, who knows who is to blame.

古文：而以区区之身，试于不测之渊乎！
现代文：为什么要以渺小的身体，尝试不测的深渊呢？
English: Why should you, with your puny body, attempt the unfathomable abyss?

古文：朝廷贪慕名德，旷官缺位，于今七年，四时珍御，不以忘君。
现代文：朝廷慕你的名声道德，留着官职，空着位次，到今已经七年了，四时珍御，不忘记你。
English: The Imperial Court has been longing for your reputation and morality. They have kept your official position and vacated your court rank. It has been seven years now. They cherish you at all times and will not forget you.

古文：宜上奉知己，下为子孙，身名俱全，不亦优乎！
现代文：应当上奉知己，下为子孙着想，身名两全，不是很好吗？
English: Shouldn't it be good to be a confidant on the one hand and a descendant on the other for the sake of our children and grandchildren?

古文：今数年不起，猜疑寇心，凶祸立加，非计之得者也。 
现代文：现在几年不去，怀疑你有敌意，凶祸马上可以加之于你，这样，不是一个办法啊。 
English: If you don't go for a few years now, if you are suspected of having hostile intentions, evil can be inflicted on you immediately. That's not the way to go.

古文：业乃叹曰： 危国不入，乱国不居。
现代文：李业不得已，叹息说 ：危国不入，乱国不居。
English: As a last resort, Li Ye sighed and said, "You can't enter a dangerous country, and you can't live in a chaotic country."

古文：亲于其身为不善者，义所不从。
现代文：要亲身为不善，大义是不容许的。
English: It is impermissible to be personally bad, and it is impermissible to be self-righteous.

古文：君子见危授命，何乃诱以高位重饵哉？ 
现代文：君子见危授命，哪能用高位重饵引诱得了？ 
English: If a gentleman sees his life in danger, how can he be seduced by a high-ranking official?

古文：融见业辞志不屈，复曰： 宜呼室家计之。 
现代文：尹融见李业志不能屈，又道： 你应当叫了你妻室儿女商量一下。 
English: Seeing that Li Yezhi could not give in, Yin Rong also said: You should call your wife and children to discuss.

古文：业曰： 丈夫断之于心久矣，何妻、子之为？ 
现代文：李业说： 我好久就下了决心，问妻子干啥？ 
English: Li Ye said: I made up my mind a long time ago to ask my wife what she does.

古文：遂饮毒而死。
现代文：就饮毒而死。
English: He died from drinking poison.

古文：述闻业死，大惊，又耻有杀贤之名，乃遣使吊祠，赙赠百匹。
现代文：公孙述听说李业死了，大吃一惊，又觉背着杀害贤人之名可耻，竟派使者去吊祀，丧仪百匹。
English: His great-grandson recounted that when he heard that Li Ye had died, he was taken aback and felt that it was shameful to kill a wise man behind his back, so he sent an envoy to hang him, and there were hundreds of mourners.

古文：业子翚，逃避不受。
现代文：李业的儿子李逃辞，不肯接受。
English: Li Ye's son, Li Fucheng, refused to accept the resignation.

古文：蜀平，光武下诏表其闾，《益部纪》载其高节，图画形象。
现代文：公孙述的伪蜀平定之后，光武下诏表李业的里门。《益部纪》记载了李业的高节，图画了他的形象。
English: After the pseudo-suppression of Shu described by Gongsun, Guangwu issued an edict to show Li Ye the inner gate. "I Ching" recorded Li Ye's high festival and depicted his image.

古文：初，平帝时，蜀郡王皓为美阳令，王嘉为郎。
现代文：起初，平帝时，蜀郡王皓任美阳令，王嘉为郎。
English: At first, during the reign of Emperor Ping, Wang Xuan of Shu County served as the general of Miyang, and Wang Jia was his younger brother.

古文：王莽篡位，并弃官西归。
现代文：王莽篡了汉朝的皇位，他们都弃官西归。
English: Wang Mang usurped the imperial throne of the Han Dynasty, and they all resigned and returned to the West.

古文：及公孙述称帝，遣使征皓、嘉，恐不至，遂先系其妻、子。
现代文：公孙述称帝时，遣使征召王皓、王嘉，担心他们不去，因先收捕了他们的妻子。
English: When the prince's grandson proclaimed himself emperor, he sent an envoy to summon Wang Qian and Wang Jia. Fearing that they would not go, he arrested their wives first.

古文：使者谓嘉曰： 速装，妻、子可全。 
现代文：使者对王嘉说 ：赶快上路吧，妻子可以保全。 
English: The messenger said to Wang Jia: Hurry up and get on the road, your wife can be saved.

古文：对曰： 犬马犹识主，况于人乎！ 
现代文：王嘉回答道： 犬马还认识主人，何况是人呢？ 
English: Wang Jia replied: Dogs and horses still know their owners, let alone humans.

古文：王皓先自刎，以首付使者。
现代文：王皓先自杀，把脑袋交给了使者。
English: Wang Xuan committed suicide first and gave his head to the messenger.

古文：述怒，遂诛皓家属。
现代文：公孙述大怒，就诛杀了王皓的家属。
English: The grandson was so angry that he killed Wang Yao's family members.

古文：王嘉闻而叹曰： 后之哉！ 
现代文：王嘉听说了，叹气说： 我晚了一步啊！ 
English: Upon hearing this, Wang Jia sighed and said, "I'm a step late!

古文：乃对使者伏剑而死。
现代文：就对着使者伏剑而死。
English: He fell on his sword before the messenger and died.

古文：是时，犍为任永及业同郡冯信，并好爱博古。
现代文：这时，犍为任永及李业同郡人冯信，都好学，博通今古。
English: At this time, Yan for Ren Yong and Li Ye with the county people Feng Xin, are both good at learning, and are well-versed in modern times.

古文：公孙述连征命，待以高位，皆托青盲，以避世难。
现代文：公孙述多次征召，许以高官厚禄，都假托青光眼逃避世难。
English: His great-grandson recounted that he was called up several times and promised a high-ranking position with a generous salary, but he always faked his glaucoma to escape the hardships of life.

古文：永妻淫于前，匿情无言；见子入井，忍而不救。
现代文：任永的妻子以前与人通奸，隐瞒不说，看了儿子堕入井中，也见死不救。
English: Ren Yong's wife had previously committed adultery with a man, but she did not tell anyone about it. When she saw her son fall into the well, she could not save him.

古文：信侍婢亦对信奸通。
现代文：冯信的侍婢也与冯信通奸。
English: Feng Xin's maid also committed adultery with Feng Xin.

古文：及闻述诛，皆盥洗更视曰： 世适平，目即清。 
现代文：听说公孙述被诛杀了，任永、冯信都洗脸看视说 ：世界太平了，眼睛也明了。 
English: Hearing that Gongsun Shu had been beaten to death, Ren Yong and Feng Xin both washed their faces and said, "The world is peaceful, and my eyes are clear."

古文：淫者自杀。
现代文：通奸淫乱的人都自杀而死。
English: All the adulterers and fornicators committed suicide.

古文：光武闻而征之，并会病卒。
现代文：光武听说后征召他们，都正好病死在家。
English: After Mitsutake heard about it, he conscripted them, but they all happened to fall ill and die at home.

古文：刘茂字子卫，太原晋阳人也。
现代文：◆刘茂传，刘茂字子卫，太原晋阳人。
English: ◆Liu Maozhuan, Liu Maozi Ziwei, Taiyuan Jinyang people.

古文：少孤，独侍母居。
现代文：年幼时失去了父亲。
English: He lost his father at a young age.

古文：家贫，以筋力致养，孝行著于乡里。
现代文：一个人跟母亲住在一起。家里贫穷，靠劳动所得来奉养母亲，孝行为乡里所称道。
English: A man lives alone with his mother. The family is poor and relies on the income from labor to support his mother. His filial piety is praised in the village.

古文：及长，能习《礼经》，教授常数百人。
现代文：长大成人以后，能习《礼经》，教授门生常几百人。
English: After he became an adult, he was able to study the "Book of Rites" and often taught hundreds of students.

古文：哀帝时，察孝廉，再迁五原属国候，遭母忧去官。
现代文：哀帝时，举孝廉，升五原属国侯，遭母亲逝世去官。
English: At the time of the emperor's death, he was raised as a filial son and was promoted to the position of Gohara vassal, but was demoted after his mother's death.

古文：服竟后为沮阳令。
现代文：服丧期满，任沮阳令。
English: When the mourning period is over, the order to dispel the sun will be issued.

古文：会王莽篡位，茂弃官，避世弘农山中教授。
现代文：逢王莽篡了汉朝的皇位，刘茂弃官，躲在弘农山中教授门生。
English: Feng Wang Mang usurped the imperial throne of the Han Dynasty, Liu Mao abandoned his post and hid in Hongnong Mountain to teach his protégé.

古文：建武二年归，为郡门下掾。
现代文：建武二年，从弘农山中回来，任郡门下掾。
English: In the second year of Jianwu, he came back from Hongnongshan Middle School and served as the county gate guard.

古文：时，赤眉二十余万众攻郡县，杀长吏及府掾史。
现代文：这时赤眉二十几万人来攻打郡县，杀死长吏和府掾史。
English: At this time, more than 200,000 Red Eyebrows came to attack counties and counties, killing officials and prefectural officials.

古文：茂负太守孙福逾墙藏空穴中，得免。
现代文：刘茂背着太守孙福，爬墙躲藏在一个空洞中，侥幸免于死难。
English: Liu Mao carried the daimyō Sun Fu on his back, climbed a wall and hid in a hollow, narrowly escaping death.

古文：其暮，俱奔盂县。
现代文：当天晚上，两个人逃到盂县。
English: In the evening of the same day, two people fled to Zou County.

古文：昼则逃隐，夜求粮食。
现代文：白天隐藏起来，晚上出来找粮食吃。
English: They hide during the day and come out at night to find food.

古文：积百余日，贼去，乃得归府。
现代文：这样，一百多天，赤眉贼走了，才得以回到郡府。
English: Thus, after more than a hundred days, the red-browed thief was able to return to the county seat.

古文：明年，诏书求天下义士。
现代文：第二年，诏书访求天下义士。
English: In the second year, the imperial rescript called for the world's righteous.

古文：福言茂曰： 臣前为赤眉所攻，吏民坏死，奔走趣山。臣为贼所围，命如丝发，赖茂负臣逾城，出保盂县。
现代文：孙福对刘茂说： 我前被赤眉攻击，吏民大乱，逃跑上山，我被贼包围，命系丝发，幸亏有你背着我爬城，出保盂县。
English: Sun Fu said to Liu Mao: I was attacked by the Red Eyebrows, the officials and the people were in turmoil, and I fled up the mountain. I was surrounded by thieves, and my life was in danger. Fortunately, you carried me on your back to climb the city and get out of Boao County.

古文：茂与弟触冒兵刃，缘山负食，臣及妻子得度死命，节义尤高。
现代文：你又与弟弟身冒兵刃，缘山找吃的，我和妻子得以救了这条死命，节义特高。
English: You and your brother risked your lives to search for food in the mountains. My wife and I were able to save this man's life.

古文：宜蒙表擢，以厉义士。 
现代文：应当表扬提拔，以励义士。 
English: They should be commended and promoted, and they should be encouraged.

古文：诏书即征茂，拜议郎，迁宗正丞。
现代文：诏书立即征刘茂授议郎，升宗正丞。
English: The imperial edict immediately enlisted Liu Maozhu as a councillor, and Shosong as a secretary.

古文：后拜侍中，卒官。
现代文：后授侍中，死在任上。
English: He was later awarded the title of chamberlain, but died in office.

古文：延平中，鲜卑数百余骑寇渔阳，太守张显率吏士追出塞，遥望虏营烟火，急趣之。
现代文：延平中，鲜卑数百人侵犯渔阳，太守张显率领吏士追逐出塞，远望虏营烟火，紧紧追赶。
English: In Yanping, hundreds of Xianbei invaded Yuyang, and Zhang Xian, the Tai Shou, led the officials to chase them out of the city, and they watched the fireworks from the distance, and chased them closely.

古文：兵马掾严授虑有伏兵，苦谏止，不听。
现代文：兵马掾严授担心有埋伏，苦苦地劝谏，不要追去，太守张显不听他的。
English: The Terracotta Warriors and Horses were worried about an ambush, and painstakingly advised Zhang Xian not to pursue them. Zhang Xian did not listen to him.

古文：显蹙令进，授不获已，前战，伏兵发，授身被十创，殁于阵。
现代文：张显还是强迫前进，严授不得已，往前进战，果然埋伏下的鲜卑兵，突然出击，严授身被十创，死在阵上。
English: Zhang Xian still forcibly advanced, and Yan Xiu, as a last resort, marched forward to fight. As expected, the ambushed soldiers suddenly attacked, and Yan Xiu was mortally wounded and died on the battlefield.

古文：显拔刃追散兵，不能制，虏射中显，主簿卫福、功曹徐咸遽赴之，显遂堕马，福以身拥蔽，虏并杀之。
现代文：张显拔刀追赶被冲散的兵，不能制止，敌虏射中张显，主簿卫福、功曹徐咸很快去救张显，张显坠在马下，卫福用身体拥蔽张显，敌虏都把他们杀了。
English: Zhang Xian drew his sword to chase the soldiers who had been swept away. He couldn't stop them. The enemy shot Zhang Xian. Master Wei Fu and Gong Cao Xu Xian quickly went to save Zhang Xian. Zhang Xian fell under the horse. Wei Fu hugged Zhang Xian with his body. The enemy killed them all.

古文：朝廷愍授等节，诏书褒叹，厚加赏赐，各除子一人为郎中。
现代文：朝廷怜悯严授等的义烈，诏书褒奖，大加赏赐，各授儿子一人为郎中。
English: The imperial court severely commiserated with and bestowed honorable awards and rewards on the martyrs, and each of them was given a son as a foster child.

古文：永初二年，剧贼毕豪等入平原界，县令刘雄将吏士乘船追之。
现代文：永初二年，大贼毕豪等进入平原境内，县令刘雄率吏士乘船追逐。
English: In the second year of the Yongchu era, the great thief Bi Hao and others entered the plains, and the county magistrate Liu Xiong led the officials to chase them by boat.

古文：至厌次河，与贼合战。雄败，执雄，以矛刺之。
现代文：到厌次河，同贼作战，刘雄战败被执，贼用矛刺他。
English: He went to Yanqi River and fought with the thief. Liu Xiong was defeated and captured. The thief stabbed him with a spear.

古文：时小吏所辅前叩头求哀，愿以身代雄。
现代文：这时小吏所辅，上前叩头求哀，愿意自己代替刘雄而死。
English: At this time, the assistant to the minor official bowed his head and begged for mercy, willing to die in place of Liu Xiong.

古文：豪等纵雄而刺辅，贯心洞背即死。
现代文：毕豪等人便放了刘雄去刺所辅，矛贯心洞背，立死。
English: Bi Hao and others then let Liu Xiong go to stab the auxiliary, the spear pierced the heart hole, and he died.

古文：东郡太守捕得豪等，具以状上。
现代文：东郡太守捕得毕豪等人，将情况上报朝廷。
English: The governor of Dong County arrested Bi Hao and others and reported the situation to the imperial court.

古文：诏书追伤之，赐钱二十万，除父奉为郎中。
现代文：诏书追叙伤悼，赐钱二十万，授所辅的父亲所奉为郎中。
English: The imperial edict mourned his loss, gave him 200,000 yuan in money, and made his father, who had been an aide to him, a vassal.

古文：温序字次房，太原祁人也。
现代文：◆温序传，温序字次房，太原祁县人。
English: ◆Temperature sequence, temperature sequence, second house, from Taiyuan County.

古文：仕州从事。
现代文：出仕州从事。
English: engaged in the service state.

古文：建武二年，骑都尉弓里戍将兵平定北州，到太原，历访英俊大人，问以策谋。
现代文：建武二年，骑都尉弓里戍带兵平定北州，到达太原，遍访英俊之人，向他们请问策谋。
English: In the second year of Jianwu, he arrived in Taiyuan riding on the horse of Captain Yulizhong, who led the troops to pacify Beizhou. He visited many handsome people and asked them for advice.

古文：戍见序奇之，上疏荐焉。于是征为侍御史，迁武陵都尉，病免官。
现代文：弓里戍见了温序，认为是奇才，上疏荐温序，于是朝廷征他任侍御史，升武陵都尉，因病去官。
English: Yulizhong saw Wenxu, thought he was a genius, and recommended him to Shangshu. The imperial court then appointed him as an attendant to the emperor, promoted him to the rank of lieutenant of Wuling, but he had to leave his post due to illness.

古文：六年，拜谒者，迁护羌校尉。
现代文：六年，授温序为谒者，升护羌校尉。
English: Six years later, he was promoted to the rank of lieutenant colonel.

古文：序行部至襄武，为隗嚣别将苟宇所拘劫。
现代文：温序到襄武巡视部属，考察刑政，被阝鬼嚣别将苟宇拘执。
English: Wenzhong went to the Xiangwu Inspection Department to inspect the criminal justice system. He was scolded and ordered to take Guoyu into custody.

古文：宇谓序曰： 子若与我并威同力，天下可图也。 
现代文：苟宇对温序说 ：你如果同我合作，天下是可以得手的。 
English: Gou Yu said to Wen Sequoia: If you cooperate with me, the world can be successful.

古文：序曰： 受国重任，分当效死，义不贪生、苟背恩德。 
现代文：温序道： 受国家重任，只有效死命，大义所在，决不能贪生怕死，背叛朝廷的恩德。 
English: Wen Xiu Dao: If you are entrusted with a heavy responsibility by the state, you can only do what is effective and right. You must not be greedy for life and afraid of death, and betray the grace of the imperial court.

古文：宇等复晓譬之。
现代文：苟宇等人一再劝说他。
English: He was repeatedly persuaded by Gou Yu and others.

古文：序素有气力，大怒，叱宇等曰： 虏何敢迫胁汉将！ 
现代文：温序本有气力，大怒，叱苟宇等人道 ：丑虏哪敢胁迫汉将！ 
English: The warm sequence originally had power, great anger, scolding and other humanities: how dare the ugly people coerce the Han general!

古文：因以节楇杀数人。
现代文：就用节打杀了几个人。
English: He killed several people with a knife.

古文：贼众争欲杀之。宇止之曰： 此义士死节，可赐以剑。 
现代文：贼人多，争着要杀温序，苟宇止住他们说： 这是义士死节，可以给他一剑。 
English: There were many thieves vying to kill Onjo, but they were stopped by Gomu, who said, "This is the festival of the death of a righteous man. You can give him a sword."

古文：序受剑，衔须于口，顾左右曰： 既为贼所迫杀，无令须污土。 
现代文：温序接了剑，把胡须衔入口中，环视了一下左右的人说： 已经被贼迫杀，不要使须再被土所污。 
English: Wenzhong picked up the sword, tucked his whiskers into his mouth, looked around at the people around him and said, "You have been killed by thieves, don't let your must be polluted by the soil again."

古文：遂伏剑而死。
现代文：就伏剑而死。
English: With that, Rick killed himself with a sword.

古文：序主簿韩遵、从事王忠持尸归敛。
现代文：温序主簿韩遵、从事王忠收尸归葬。
English: The main book of the sequence, Han Zun, was engaged in the collection of Wang Zhong's body for burial.

古文：光武闻而怜之，命忠送丧到洛阳，赐城傍为冢地，赙谷千斛、缣五百匹，除三子为郎中。
现代文：光武听说了很可怜他，命令王忠送丧到洛阳，赐城旁边为温序的坟地，送丧仪谷千斛、缣五百匹，授三个儿子为郎中。
English: When Guangwu heard of this, he felt very sorry for him, and ordered Wang Zhong to send the funeral procession to Luoyang, to give him a cemetery next to the city for Onjo, to send a thousand yakitori and five hundred yakitori to the funeral valley, and to give him three sons as his groomsmen.

古文：长子寿，服竟为邹平侯相。
现代文：长子温寿，服丧期满后，任邹平侯相。
English: The eldest son, Wen Shou, served as the prince's minister after the mourning period was over.

古文：梦序告之曰： 久客思乡里。 
现代文：梦见温序告他说： 长期在外作客，思念家乡。 
English: In his dream, Wen Xuan told him, "I have been a guest abroad for a long time, and I miss my hometown.

古文：寿即弃官，上书乞骸骨归葬。
现代文：温寿就弃官，上书请求回家安葬他父亲。
English: Wen Shou resigned his post and sent a letter requesting to return home to bury his father.

古文：帝许之，乃反旧茔焉。
现代文：帝批准了他的请求，于是把他父亲的棺柩送回了家乡的旧坟地。
English: The emperor approved his request, so he sent his father's coffin back to the old cemetery in his hometown.

古文：彭脩字子阳，会稽毘陵人也。
现代文：◆彭脩传，彭脩字子阳，会稽毗陵人。
English: ◆Peng Jizhong, Peng Jizhong, Ziyang, will examine the tomb.

古文：年十五时，父为郡吏，得休，与脩俱归，道为盗所劫。脩困迫，乃拔佩刀前持盗帅曰： 父辱子死，卿不顾死邪？ 
现代文：十五岁时，父亲任郡吏，假日，彭与父亲一道回家，在路上被盗劫持，彭在困迫之际，拔佩刀抓住强盗头说： 父亲受辱，儿子死命，你不怕死吗？ 
English: At the age of fifteen, his father was a county official. On a holiday, Peng and his father went home together. They were robbed and kidnapped on the road. Peng, in a time of distress, drew his sword and grabbed the robber's head and said: Father is humiliated, son is dead. Aren't you afraid of death?

古文：盗相谓曰： 此童子义士也，不宜逼之。 
现代文：盗互相喊道： 这个小孩子是义士，不要逼迫他。 
English: The thieves shouted to each other: This child is a righteous man, don't persecute him.

古文：遂辞谢而去。
现代文：因向他表示对不起，相率走了。
English: After apologizing to him, the official left.

古文：乡党称其名。
现代文：在乡里著了名。
English: Made a name for himself in the village.

古文：后仕郡为功曹。
现代文：后来出仕郡为功曹。
English: Later, he was awarded for his service to the county.

古文：时，西部都尉宰祐行太守事，以微过收吴县狱吏，将杀之。主簿钟离意争谏甚切，祐怒，使收缚意，欲案之，掾史莫敢谏。
现代文：这时西部都尉宰晁代理太守事，因小小的过错收捕吴县狱吏，准备把他杀了，主簿钟离意极力争谏，宰晁发了怒，使收捕钟离意，要审讯他，掾史都不敢劝谏。
English: At this time, the western captain Zai Ye, acting as the deputy warden, arrested the Wuxian warden for a small mistake and prepared to kill him. The master bookkeeper Zhong Liang tried his best to win Zai Ye's favor. Zai Ye became angry and made Zai Ye want to arrest Zhong Liang. Zai Ye did not dare to persuade Zai Ye to interrogate him.

古文：脩排阁直入，拜于庭，曰： 明府发雷霆于主薄，请闻其过。 
现代文：彭脩推阁直入，跪在庭中，说： 太守对主簿大发雷霆，请问，他犯了什么罪过？ 
English: Peng Yao pushed his way straight in, knelt down in the courtyard, and said: The governor was furious about the ledger. Excuse me, what crime did he commit?

古文：祐曰： 受教三日，初不奉行，废命不忠，岂非过邪？ 
现代文：宰晁说： 他受命三天，根本不执行，废命就是不忠，这难道不是罪过吗？ 
English: Zai Yu said, "He was given the order for three days, but he did not carry it out at all. Wasting one's life is disloyalty. Isn't this a crime?"

古文：脩因拜曰： 昔任座面折文侯，朱云攀毁栏槛，自非贤君，焉得忠臣？
现代文：彭脩因拜道 ：从前任座当面反对文侯，朱云攀折殿槛，如果不是贤君，哪里会有忠臣？
English: Peng Rongyin prayed, "From the previous seat, I opposed the prince of Wen in person, Zhu Yun climbed the threshold of the palace, if not a wise man, where would there be a loyal subject?

古文：今庆明府为贤君，主簿为忠臣。 
现代文：现在我庆贺太守为贤君，主簿为忠臣。 
English: Now I celebrate the daisho as a wise ruler and the hosho as a loyal subject.

古文：祐遂原意罚，贳狱吏罪。
现代文：宰晁因原宥了钟离意的处罚，赦免了狱吏的罪过。
English: Zai Yu pardoned the sins of the prison guards because he had already pardoned the punishment.

古文：后州辟从事。
现代文：后来州征为从事。
English: He was later recruited by the state.

古文：时，贼张子林等数百人作乱，郡言州，请脩守吴令。
现代文：这时，贼张子林等几百人作乱，郡里向州里打报告，请用彭脩为吴县令。
English: At this time, Zhang Zilin, a thief, and several hundred other people rioted, and the county reported to the state. Please use Peng Rong as the Wuxian order.

古文：脩与太守俱出讨贼，贼望见车马，竞交射之，飞矢雨集。
现代文：彭脩与太守同去讨贼，贼望见太守、彭脩的车马，争着射击，飞矢如落雨一般。
English: Peng Rong and the governor went to look for the thief together. The thief saw the governor and Peng Rong's horse and chariot, and they fought to shoot, and the arrows flew like rain.

古文：脩障扞太守，而为流矢所中死，太守得全。
现代文：彭脩用身子掩蔽太守，被流矢射死，而太守得到保全。
English: Peng Yao shielded Taishu with his body and was killed by a stray arrow, while Taishu was saved.

古文：贼素闻其恩信，即杀弩中脩者，余悉降散。
现代文：贼平日听说了彭脩的恩信，因杀了用弩射死彭脩的那个人，其余的贼有的投了降，有的逃散了。
English: The thieves usually heard about Peng Yao's letter of gratitude and killed the man who shot Peng Yao with a crossbow. The rest of the thieves either surrendered or fled.

古文：言曰： 自为彭君故降，不为太守服也。 
现代文：说： 我们是为了彭君而降，不是为太守所服啊。 
English: He said, "We are surrendering for the sake of Peng Jun, not for the sake of obeying the Emperor."

古文：索卢放字君阳，东郡人也。
现代文：◆索卢放传，索卢放字君阳，东郡人。
English: ◆Solu Hoso Chuan, Solu Hoso Zi Junyang, Donggun people.

古文：以《尚书》教授千余人。
现代文：用《尚书》教授学生一千多人。
English: More than a thousand students have been taught using "Shang Shu."

古文：初署郡门下掾。
现代文：先任郡门掾。
English: He was the first to serve as the county gatekeeper.

古文：更始时，使者督行郡国，太守有事，当就斩刑，放前言曰： 今天下所以苦毒王氏，归心皇汉者，实以圣政宽仁故也。
现代文：更始时，使者督察郡国，太守犯了罪，应当处以斩刑。索卢放上前道 ：现在天下所以怨恨王莽，归心皇汉，是圣政宽仁的原因。
English: At the time of the reformation, the emissary of the inspector of the county and the governor committed a crime and should be punished by beheading. Solu put forward: the reason why the world now resents Wang Mang and reveres the emperor is the reason for the magnanimity of the holy government.

古文：而传车所过，未闻恩泽。
现代文：但是使者到郡，没有施行什么恩德。
English: However, the envoy to the county did not bring any benefits.

古文：太守受诛，诚不敢言，但恐天下惶惧，各生疑变。
现代文：太守受诛杀，本来不敢说什么话的，但只怕天下因此惶惧，各生疑变。
English: Tai Shou was killed in battle, and originally he did not dare to say anything, but he feared that the whole world would be frightened by this, and that everyone would be suspicious.

古文：夫使功者不如使过，愿以身代太守之命。 
现代文：噢，使有功的人，不如使有过的人，我愿意以身代替太守的命。 
English: Oh, it's better to let the meritorious people go than the ones who have been there. I'm willing to take my own life in place of the Taishou's.

古文：遂前就斩。
现代文：于是就上前就斩。
English: So I just went ahead and did it.

古文：使者义而赦之，由是显名。
现代文：使者认为他仗义舍身，就赦免了他。由是著了名。
English: The messenger pardoned him, thinking that he had died for a just cause, and his name was published.

古文：建武六年，征为洛阳令，政有能名。
现代文：建武六年，征为洛阳令，以精明能干著称。
English: Jianwu was conscripted into the Luoyang Regiment six years later, and was known for his shrewdness and ability.

古文：以病乞身。徙谏议大夫，数纳忠言，后以疾去。
现代文：因病辞职回家，调谏议大夫，多次进纳忠言，后来因病去官。
English: Due to illness, he resigned and went home. He was transferred to the position of doctor, and was promoted to councilor several times. Later, he left the post due to illness.

古文：建武末，复征不起，光武使人舆之，见于南宫云台，赐谷二千斛，遣归，除子为太子中庶子。
现代文：建武末年，再征不起，光武派人用轿子把他抬到京师，在南宫云台召见，赐谷二千斛，遣送回家，授他的儿子为太子中庶子。
English: At the end of Jianwu's life, when he could no longer pay the tax, Guangwu sent a palanquin to carry him to Beijing, summoned him to the Southern Palace in Yuntai, gave him two thousand taels of silver, sent him home, and bestowed upon his son the title of prince's illegitimate son.

古文：卒于家。
现代文：死在家里。
English: He died at home.

古文：周嘉字惠文，汝南安城人也。
现代文：◆周嘉传，周嘉字惠文，汝南安城人。
English: ◆Zhou Jia Chuan, Zhou Jia Zi Hui Wen, Ru Nan'an Chengren.

古文：高祖父燕，宣帝时为郡决曹掾。
现代文：高祖父周燕，宣帝时为郡决曹掾。
English: His great-great-grandfather, Zhou Yan, was a county magistrate in the time of Emperor Xuan.

古文：太守欲枉杀人，燕谏不听，遂杀囚而黜燕。
现代文：太守想冤枉杀人，周燕劝谏不听，于是杀了那个囚犯，同时也废黜了周燕。
English: The governor wanted to unjustly kill someone, but Zhou Yan dissuaded him, so he killed the prisoner and deposed Zhou Yan at the same time.

古文：囚家守阙称冤，诏遣复考。燕见太守曰： 愿谨定文书，皆著燕名，府君但言时病而已。 
现代文：囚犯的家人守在宫门上喊冤，诏令复查，周燕见太守道 ：望你把文书注意写好，都写着我的名字，府君只说那时你有病罢了。 
English: The prisoner's family members stood at the palace gate shouting their grievances, the imperial edict was reviewed, and Zhou Yanzhong saw the imperial guard saying, "I hope you have carefully written the documents, they all contain my name. The governor only said that you were ill at the time."

古文：出谓掾史曰： 诸君被问，悉当以罪推燕。
现代文：从太守处出来，对掾史说： 你们被问时，都只管把罪推在我周燕身上就是。
English: He came out of the Taishou office and said to Zou Shi: "When you are asked questions, all you can do is blame it on me, Zhou Yan.

古文：如有一言及于府君，燕手剑相刃。 
现代文：如果你们有一句话说了府君，我周燕就手剑相加。 
English: If you have a sentence that says "fukun," I, Zhou Yan, will add it with my sword.

古文：使者乃收燕系狱。
现代文：使者于是收捕周燕入狱。
English: The envoy then arrested Zhou Yan and sent her to prison.

古文：屡被掠楚，辞无屈桡。
现代文：多次拷打，不说实话。
English: Repeatedly tortured, not telling the truth.

古文：当下蚕室，乃叹曰： 我平王之后，正公玄孙，岂可以刀锯之余下见先君？ 
现代文：根据罪行应当下蚕室，于是叹息道： 我是平王的后代，正公的玄孙，难道可以刀锯之余去见先君？ 
English: According to the crime, he should go down to the silkworm room, so he sighed: I am the descendant of King Ping, the great-great-grandson of the righteous, can I go to see the forefather without a sword?

古文：遂不食而死。
现代文：就绝食而死。
English: He died of starvation.

古文：燕有五子，皆至刺史、太守。
现代文：周燕有五个儿子，都官至刺史、太守。
English: Zhou Yan had five sons, all of whom rose through the ranks of government officials to become imperial princes and emperors.

古文：嘉仕郡为主簿。
现代文：周嘉出仕为郡主簿。
English: Zhou Jia served as the chief steward.

古文：王莽末，郡贼入汝阳城，嘉从太守何敞讨贼，敞为流矢所中，郡兵奔北，贼围绕数十重，白刃交集，嘉乃拥敞，以身扞之。
现代文：王莽末年，群贼进了汝阳城，周嘉跟着太守何敞讨贼，何敞被流矢击中，郡兵纷纷逃散，贼围绕几十里，白刃交加，周嘉拥护何敞，用自己的身躯捍卫何敞。
English: At the end of Wang Mang's life, a group of thieves entered Ruyang City. Zhou Jia followed the governor He Dang to solicit the thieves. He Dang was hit by a stray arrow. The county soldiers fled in droves. The thieves circled for dozens of miles, exchanging blows with each other. Zhou Jia supported He Dang and defended He Dang with his own body.

古文：因呵贼曰： 卿曹皆人隶也。为贼既逆，岂有还害其君者邪？
现代文：因呵斥贼道 ：你们都是人家的奴隶，做贼已经大逆不道，难道还有杀害自己的长官的吗？
English: Because he shouted at the thieves, "You are all slaves of others. To be a thief is already an act of high treason. Do you still kill your own officers?"

古文：嘉请以死赎君命。 
现代文：我周嘉请以一死赎了长官的命。 
English: I, Zhou Jia, have redeemed the life of the commander with my death.

古文：因仰天号泣。
现代文：因仰天号泣。
English: For crying out loud.

古文：群贼于是两两相视，曰： 此义士也！ 给其车马，遣送之。
现代文：群贼面面相觑，说： 这是义士！ 还了他的车马，遣送他走了。
English: The band of thieves looked at one another and said, "Here is a righteous man! Give back his chariot and horse, and send him away."

古文：后太守寇恂举为孝廉，拜尚书侍郎。
现代文：后来太守寇恂举周嘉为孝廉，授尚书侍郎。
English: Later, the daimyō Kōken promoted Zhou Jia to the position of chivalry, and he was awarded the title of honorable clerk.

古文：光武引见，问以遭难之事。
现代文：光武召见，问周嘉遇难的事。
English: Guangwu summoned him to ask him about Zhou Jia's death.

古文：嘉对曰： 太守被伤，命悬寇手。臣实弩怯，不能死难。 
现代文：周嘉回答道： 太守负了伤，生命操在贼手，我实在愚鲁胆小，不能死难。 
English: Zhou Jia replied: I am too injured to defend myself, my life is in the hands of thieves, I am too stupid and timid to die.

古文：帝曰： 此长者也。 
现代文：帝说： 这是长者。 
English: The emperor said, "This is the elder."

古文：诏嘉尚公主，嘉称病笃，不肯当。
现代文：诏命周嘉娶公主，周嘉说自己有重病，不敢当。
English: The emperor ordered Zhou Jia to marry the princess. Zhou Jia said that he was seriously ill and did not dare to do so.

古文：稍迁零陵太守，视事七年，卒。
现代文：升零陵太守，任职七年，逝世。
English: Promoted to the position of Mausoleum Governor, served for seven years, and passed away.

古文：零陵颂其遗爱，吏民为立祠焉。
现代文：零陵称颂他的遗爱，官吏百姓为他立祠纪念。
English: Zero mausoleums extol his legacy, and officials and commoners have erected small shrines in his memory.

古文：嘉从弟暢，字伯持，性仁慈，为河南尹。
现代文：周嘉的叔伯弟弟周畅，字伯持，性仁慈，任河南尹。
English: Zhou Jia's uncle's younger brother, Zhou Chang, nicknamed Bo Zhi, was a benevolent character and was known as Henan Yin.

古文：永初二年夏，旱，久祷无应，暢因收葬洛城傍客死骸骨，凡万余人。应时澎雨，岁乃丰稔。
现代文：永初二年，夏天苦旱，久祷无雨，周畅因收葬洛阳旁客死的尸骨共一万多人，应时下了甘雨，这年获得了丰收。
English: In the first two years of the Yongzheng era, the summer was bitterly dry, and there was no rain for a long time. Zhou Chang buried more than ten thousand dead bodies of Luoyang's guests, and it rained at the right time. This year's harvest was rich.

古文：位至光禄勋。
现代文：位至光禄勋。
English: He was posthumously awarded the Order of the Silver Star.

古文：范式字巨卿，山阳金乡人也，一名汜。
现代文：◆范式传，范式字巨卿，山阳金乡人，一名汜。
English: ◆Paradigm biography, paradigm word Giant, Sanyang Jinxiangren, a dragonfly.

古文：少游太学，为诸生，与汝南张劭为友。
现代文：年轻时进太学，为诸生，与汝南张劭结为朋友。
English: When he was young, he went to Taiwan to study, and for the sake of all sentient beings, he became friends with Runan Zhangye.

古文：劭字元伯。
现代文：张劭字元伯。
English: The character of Zhang Ye, also known as Yuan Bo, appears.

古文：二人并告归乡里。
现代文：两人告假归乡里。
English: The two took a leave of absence and returned to their hometown.

古文：式谓元伯曰： 后二年当还，将过拜尊亲，见孺子焉。 
现代文：范式对元伯说： 二年以后我当回来，到您家来拜谒令尊令堂大人，并且看看您的儿子呢。 
English: Paradigm said to Yuanbo, "After two years, I should come back and visit your home to pay my respects to you and to see your son."

古文：乃共克期日。
现代文：于是两人共约定日期。
English: So the two agreed on a date.

古文：后期方至，元伯具以白母，请设馔以候之。
现代文：后来日子快到了，张元伯将这件事的详细情况统统告诉了他母亲，请母亲准备好的酒饭等待范式的到来。
English: Later, the day was approaching, Zhang Yuanbo told his mother all the details of the matter, and asked his mother to prepare wine and rice to wait for the arrival of the paradigm.

古文：母曰： 二年之别，千里结言，尔何相信之审邪？ 
现代文：他母亲说 ：一别两年，千里之外讲的话，你为什么相信得这样认真呢？ 
English: His mother said, "Why do you believe so earnestly in words spoken two years apart and thousands of miles away?

古文：对曰： 巨卿信士，必不乖违。 
现代文：答道 ：范巨卿是个极讲信实的人，一定不会违约的。 
English: Answer: Fan Jiuqing is a very trustworthy person, he will not violate the contract.

古文：母曰： 若然，当为尔酿酒。 
现代文：母亲说： 既然这样，为你准备酒饭好了。 
English: My mother said, "In that case, let's prepare some food and drink for you."

古文：至其日，巨卿果到，升堂拜饮，尽欢而别。
现代文：到那天，范巨卿真的到了，升堂拜饮，尽欢而别。
English: On that day, Fan Jiuqing really arrived, ascended the hall to worship and drink, and parted happily.

古文：式仕为郡功曹。
现代文：范式任郡功曹。
English: He was awarded the title of County Meritorious Officer.

古文：后元伯寝疾笃，同郡郅君章、殷子徵晨夜省视之。
现代文：后来张元伯害了重病，同郡人郅君章、殷子征白天晚上看视他。
English: Later, Zhang Yuanbo fell seriously ill, and fellow county residents Yu Junzhang and Yin Zizheng visited him during the day and at night.

古文：元伯临尽，叹曰： 恨不见吾死友！ 
现代文：元伯临终时，叹息道： 遗憾不见我的死友！ 
English: On his deathbed, Yuanbo sighed, "I'm sorry not to see my dead friend!"

古文：子徵曰： 吾与君章尽心于子，是非死友，复欲谁求？ 
现代文：殷子征说 ：我与君章全心全意招扶你，我们不是死友，您到哪里去找死友呢？ 
English: Yin Zi Zheng said: I and Jun Zhang wholeheartedly invite you to help us. We are not mortal friends. Where can you find a mortal friend?

古文：元伯曰： 若二子者，吾生友耳。山阳范巨卿，所谓死友也。 
现代文：元伯道： 像你们两位，是我的生友啊，山阳范巨卿才是我的死友哩。 
English: Yuan Bo: Like you two, he is my life-long friend. Sanyang Fan Jiuqing is my dead friend.

古文：寻而卒。
现代文：不久，逝世。
English: He died soon after.

古文：式忽梦见元伯玄冕垂缨屣履而呼曰： 巨卿，吾以某日死，当以尔时葬，永归黄泉。
现代文：范式忽然梦见元伯黑冠垂缨屣履而呼道 ：巨卿，我已某日死，当按时下葬，永归黄泉。
English: Paradigm suddenly dreamed of Yuan Bo's black crown drooping and exhaled: Great Lord, I have died one day, I should be buried on time and go to hell forever.

古文：子未我忘，岂能相及？ 
现代文：您没有忘记我的话，能不能在下葬时赶到？ 
English: You have not forgotten my words. Could you come to the funeral?

古文：式怳然觉寤，悲叹泣下，具告太守，请往奔丧。
现代文：范式忽然觉醒，悲叹泪下，报告太守，请求让他去奔丧。
English: The paradigm suddenly awakens, laments in tears, reports to the emperor, and asks him to go to the funeral.

古文：太守虽心不信而重违其情，许之。
现代文：太守虽然心里不相信，但认为范式这种感情是可贵的，就同意他奔丧。
English: Although the abbot did not believe it in his heart, he thought that this kind of feeling was valuable and agreed to his death.

古文：式便服朋友之服，投其葬日，驰往赴之。
现代文：范式就穿着朋友的丧服，按着下葬的日子，骑马奔赴。
English: Paradigm dressed in a friend's funeral clothes, according to the day of the funeral, riding a horse.

古文：式未及到，而丧已发引，既至圹，将窆，而柩不肯进。
现代文：范式还未到，元伯的丧已经发引，达到圹井，将下棺，这时灵柩抬不动，不肯进。
English: The form had not yet arrived, and the funeral procession for the great-great-grandfather had already started, reached the shaft, and the coffin was about to be lowered. At this time, the coffin could not be lifted and refused to go in.

古文：其母抚之曰： 元伯，岂有望邪？ 
现代文：他母亲拍着柩说： 元伯，难道还有所望吗？ 
English: His mother clapped her hands and said, "Grandpa, is there any hope?

古文：遂停柩移时，乃见有素车白马，号哭而来。
现代文：就把柩停了一会儿，只见素车白马，号哭而来。
English: He stopped the carriage for a moment, only to see the white horse, crying.

古文：其母望之曰： 是必范巨卿也。 
现代文：他母亲望了一望，道： 这一定是范巨卿啊！ 
English: His mother took one look and said, "This must be Fan Jiuqing!"

古文：巨卿既至，叩丧言曰： 行矣元伯！
现代文：巨卿到，对柩叩头说 ：去了元伯！
English: When the great lord arrived, he said to the eunuch's flunky, "He's gone, great-uncle!"

古文：死生路异，永从此辞。 
现代文：死生路异，永别了。 
English: We're parting ways for good.

古文：会葬者千人，咸为挥涕。
现代文：参加送葬的一千多人，都为之流泪。
English: More than a thousand people who attended the funeral shed tears.

古文：式因执绋而引柩，于是乃前。
现代文：范式于是执绋为引，柩才移动向前。
English: The paradigm then holds the plow as a guide, and the plow moves forward.

古文：式遂留止冢次，为修坟树，然后乃去。
现代文：范式就留在坟墓旁边，修好坟树，然后回去。
English: The paradigm is to stay by the grave, fix the tree, and go back.

古文：后到京师，受业太学。
现代文：后来到了京师，进太学学习。
English: Later, he moved to Beijing to study at the Beijing Foreign Studies University.

古文：时诸生长沙陈平子亦同在学，与式未相见，而平子被病将亡，谓其妻曰： 吾闻山阳范巨卿，烈士也，可以托死。
现代文：这时诸生长沙陈平子也同在太学，不认识范式，陈平子抱病将死，对他的妻子说 ：我听说山阳范巨卿是一位义士，可以托死。
English: At this time, Chen Pingzi, who was ill and about to die, said to his wife: I heard that Sanyang Fan Jueqing was a righteous man and could die.

古文：吾殁后，但以尸埋巨卿户前。 
现代文：我死后，只以尸体埋在巨卿户前就好了。 
English: When I die, I just want to be buried in front of the Great Hall.

古文：乃裂素为书，以遗巨卿。
现代文：于是撕了一块素，写了一封信给巨卿。
English: So he tore up a piece of wood and wrote a letter to the giant.

古文：既终，妻从其言。
现代文：死后，妻子照着平子的遗嘱办了。
English: After his death, his wife carried out Hiroko's last wishes.

古文：时式出行适还，省书见瘗，怆然感之，向坟揖哭，以为死友。
现代文：这时，范式刚好出外回来，看了陈平子的信和他的坟墓，不胜悲痛，对着坟拱手作揖，哭泣不止，认为是他的死友。
English: At this time, Fan Shih just happened to come back from a trip and read Chen Ping Zi's letter and his grave. Overcome with grief, he prostrated himself before the grave, weeping profusely, believing it to be his dead friend.

古文：乃营护平子妻兒，身自送丧于临湘。
现代文：于是护理平子的妻儿，亲自送丧回临湘。
English: As a result, he nursed the wife and children of Hiratsuko and personally sent them back to Linxiang.

古文：未至四五里，乃委素书于柩上，哭别而去。
现代文：在还隔临湘四五里的地方，将素书放在死柩上，哭别而去。
English: In a place that is still four or five miles away from Hunan, put the plain book on the coffin, cry goodbye and leave.

古文：其兄弟闻之，寻求不复见。
现代文：平子的兄弟听说了，寻找不见。
English: Hirako's brother heard about it, but has not been able to find him.

古文：长沙上计掾史到京师，上书表式行状，三府并辟，不应。
现代文：长沙上计掾史到京师，上书表范式的行状，三府都争征召，不应。
English: Changsha's history has reached Beijing, and the three prefectures are competing for recruitment, which is not appropriate.

古文：举州茂才，四迁荆州刺史。
现代文：举州的茂才，四升至荆州刺史。
English: Upstate's Maocai, four up to Jingzhou's Sanzhi.

古文：友人南阳孔嵩，家贫亲老，乃变名姓，佣为新野县阿里街卒。
现代文：友人南阳孔嵩，家里贫穷，父母亲又都老了，于是改名换姓，被雇做新野县阿里街的小卒。
English: His friend, Nanyang Kongsong, whose family was poor and whose parents were both elderly, changed his name and was hired to work on Ali Street in Nino County.

古文：式行部到新野，而县选嵩为导骑迎式。
现代文：范式巡视新野，县里选了孔嵩做导骑欢迎范式。
English: The model toured Niiro, and the prefectural government chose Kong Song to be the guide and welcome the model.

古文：式见而识之，呼嵩，把臂谓曰： 子非孔仲山邪？ 
现代文：范式认识他，叫孔嵩，挽着孔嵩的手臂道： 你不就是孔仲山吗？ 
English: Paradigm recognized him, called Kong Song, took Kong Song's arm and said: Aren't you Kong Zhongshan?

古文：对之叹息，语及平生。曰： 昔与子俱曳长裾，游息帝学。吾蒙国恩，致位牧伯，而子怀道隐身，处于卒伍，不亦惜乎！ 
现代文：相对叹息，谈到平生的经历，说 ：从前我与你都穿着长袍，在太学里学习，我蒙国家的恩德，位至刺史，你竟怀道隐瞒着自己的身份，处在卒伍，实在可惜啊！ 
English: Relatively sighing, he spoke of his life experience, saying: "Once upon a time, I and you both wore robes and studied in the same school. I received the grace of the country, and I am in history. It is a pity that you are concealing your identity and are in the ranks of the dead.

古文：嵩曰： 侯嬴长守于贱业，晨门肆志于抱关。
现代文：孔嵩说 ：侯嬴长期做着夷门卒，看守城门，非常快意。
English: Kong Song said, "Hou Yi has been a gatekeeper of the barbarians for a long time, guarding the city gate, and he is very happy.

古文：子欲居九夷，不患其陋。
现代文：孔子想居九夷，不嫌鄙陋。
English: Confucius wanted to live in Jiujiang, but he did not want to be despicable.

古文：贫者士之宜，岂为鄙哉！ 
现代文：穷贫是读书人的本分，难道这是鄙贱吗？ 
English: Poverty is the duty of a reader. Is this despicable?

古文：式敕县代嵩，嵩以为先佣未竟，不肯去。
现代文：范式令县代孔嵩，孔嵩认为先被雇，被雇的日期也未满，不肯去。
English: According to the standard order, Kong Song was appointed as the representative of the county. Kong Song thought that he had been hired first, and the date of being hired had not expired, and he refused to go.

古文：嵩在阿里，正身厉行，街中子弟，皆服其训化。
现代文：孔嵩在阿里，正身厉行，街里的子弟都服从他的教训。
English: Kong Song is in Ali, he is practicing hard, and the children in the street are obeying his teachings.

古文：遂辟公府。
现代文：于是公府征召。
English: As a result, he was conscripted by the government.

古文：之京师，道宿下亭，盗共窃其马，寻问知其嵩也，乃相责让曰： 孔仲山善士，岂宜侵盗乎！ 
现代文：去京师，在途中宿下亭，盗贼偷了他的马，不久，得知是孔嵩的马，就互相责骂道 ：孔仲山是个好人，难道也可以侵的吗？ 
English: On their way to Beijing, they stopped at a lodging on the way, and a thief stole his horse. Soon, when they learned that it was Kong Song's horse, they scolded each other, saying, "Kong Zhongshan is a good man, is it possible to invade him?"

古文：于是送马谢之。
现代文：于是把马送还了孔嵩。
English: So he gave the horse back to Kong Song.

古文：嵩官至南海太守。
现代文：孔嵩官至南海太守。
English: Kong Songguan to Nankai Taishu.

古文：式后迁庐江太守，有威名，卒于官。
现代文：范式后来升庐江太守，有威名，死在任上。
English: Later, he was promoted to the governor-general of the Li River. He had a prestigious name and died in office.

古文：李善字次孙，南阳淯阳人也，本同县李元苍头也。
现代文：◆李善传，李善字次孙，南阳氵育阳人。原是同县李元的仆人。
English: ◆Li Shan Chuan, the second grandson of Li Shan Zi, was born in Nanyang and raised in Yiyang. He was originally a servant of Li Yuan in the same county.

古文：建武中疫疾，元家相继死没，唯孤兒续始生数旬，而赀财千万，诸奴婢私共计议，欲谋杀续，分其财产。
现代文：建武中疫病流行，李元家里人一个一个相继病死，只有一个孤儿李续生下来，仅几十天，家里赀财成千上万，奴婢们私下商量，想把李续也杀了，大家好分了这些财产。
English: There was an epidemic in Jianwu, and members of Li Yuan's family died one after another. Only one orphan, Li Cunlian, was born. In just a few dozen days, the family amassed tens of thousands of dollars in wealth. The slaves and maids discussed in private whether they wanted to kill Li Cunlian as well, and everyone divided the property fairly.

古文：善深伤李氏而力不能制，乃潜负续逃去，隐山阳瑕丘界中，亲自哺养，乳为生湩。推燥居湿，备尝艰勤。
现代文：李善可怜李氏，但无力制止，于是暗地抱着李续逃跑，隐藏在山阳瑕丘界中，亲自哺养，喂饭喂水，他的奶也生出乳汁来，避暑避寒，备尝艰苦。
English: Li Shan felt sorry for Mr. Li, but was powerless to stop him, so he secretly hugged Mr. Li and ran away, hiding in the mountains and foothills, personally feeding him, feeding him with food and water, and his milk also produced milk, avoiding the summer and the cold, and preparing for hardship.

古文：续虽在孩抱，奉之不异长君，有事辄长跪请白，然后行之。
现代文：李续虽然在怀抱，李善对待他无异兄长，有事就跪着请示禀告后，再做。
English: Although Li Zhaoyi was in his arms, Li Shan treated him no differently than his elder brother. If something came up, he would kneel down and ask for an obituary notice, and then do it.

古文：闾里感其行，皆相率修义。
现代文：乡里为他的行事所感动，都跟着他做好事。
English: The villagers were moved by his actions and followed him to do good deeds.

古文：续年十岁，善与归本县，修理旧业。
现代文：李续十岁时，李善带他回本县，重理旧业。
English: When Li Zhai was ten years old, Li Shan brought him back to this county to resume his old career.

古文：告奴婢于长吏，悉收杀之。
现代文：向长史控告诸奴婢的事，长史统统把他们收捕杀了。
English: Accusing all the slaves to Changshi, Changshi arrested and killed all of them.

古文：时钟离意为瑕丘令，上书荐善行状。
现代文：这时钟离意任瑕丘令，上书荐李善的事迹。
English: At this time, Zhongli was ordered by Ren Keqiu to write a letter recommending Li Shan's deeds.

古文：光武诏拜善及续并为太子舍人。
现代文：光武诏令授李善和李续都为太子舍人。
English: According to the Guangwu Emperor's edict, both Li Shan and Li Cunli were crown princes.

古文：善显宗时辟公府，以能理剧，再迁日南太守。
现代文：李善，显宗时公府征召，因能治理难治的地方，升日南太守。
English: Li Shan, who was called up by the government when he was a member of the Hsien Chung Sect, was promoted to the position of the Southern Daju for his ability to govern difficult regions.

古文：从京师之官，道经淯阳，过李元冢。未至一里，乃脱朝服，持锄去草。
现代文：自京师去到职，路经氵育阳，经过李元的坟墓，在一里之外，就脱去朝服，拿着锄头除草。
English: Since the Beijing division went to work, it passed through Zhaoyuyang, passed Li Yuan's grave, and one mile away, it took off the imperial robe and weeded with a hoe.

古文：及拜墓，哭泣甚悲，身自炊爨，执鼎俎以修祭祀。
现代文：拜墓罢，哭泣悲伤不已，自己亲手炊饭，执鼎俎祭祀李元。
English: They worshipped the tomb, wept with great sadness, cooked rice with their own hands, and made a sacrificial offering to Li Yuan.

古文：垂泣曰： 君夫人，善在此。 
现代文：流泪说： 君夫人，善在此。 
English: With tears streaming down his face, he said, "Madam, goodness is here.

古文：尽哀，数日乃去。
现代文：尽哀，几天后才走。
English: Sadly, he passed away a few days later.

古文：到官，以爱惠为政，怀来异俗。
现代文：到官，以仁爱为政，感化异俗。
English: When he came to office, he took benevolence as his policy and influenced different customs.

古文：迁九江太守，未至，道病卒。
现代文：升九江太守，未到，在路上病死。
English: Sheng Jiujiang Taishu, did not arrive, died of illness on the way.

古文：续至河间相。
现代文：李续官至河间相。
English: Li was promoted to the post of Kawama-so.

古文：王忳字少林，广汉新都人也。
现代文：◆王忳传，王忳字少林，广汉新都人。
English: ◆ Wang Xizhun, Wang Xizhouzha Shaolin, Guanghan Xintuo.

古文：忳尝诣京师，于空舍中见一书生疾困，愍而视之。
现代文：王忳曾经至京师，在一间空房子里见一书生卧病，怜悯他，看了看他。
English: Wang Yao once went to Beijing to see a student lying ill in an empty house. He took pity on him and looked at him.

古文：书生谓忳曰： 我当到洛阳，而被病，命在须臾。腰下有金十斤，愿以相赠，死后乞藏骸骨。 
现代文：书生对王忳道： 我是去洛阳的，害病卧床，生命将不保，腰下有金十斤，愿意送给你，我死了以后，请你把我的尸体埋了。 
English: The scholar said to Wang Xuan, "I went to Luoyang, and I am bedridden due to illness, and my life is not guaranteed. I have ten kilos of gold under my waist, and I am willing to give it to you. After I die, please bury my body."

古文：未及问姓名而绝。
现代文：还没有来得及问书生的姓名，书生就死了。
English: Before he could ask the student's name, the student died.

古文：忳即鬻金一斤，营其殡葬，余金悉置棺下，人无知者。
现代文：王忳马上卖掉金一斤，为他经营埋葬，剩下的金子，全部放在棺材下面，没有人知道。
English: Wang Yao immediately sold a kilo of gold to pay for his burial. The rest of the gold was placed under the coffin, and no one knew about it.

古文：后归数年，县署忳大度亭长。
现代文：后来王忳回去，过了几年，县里授王忳为大度亭长。
English: Later, Wang Yao went back, and a few years later, the county awarded Wang Yao the title of Grand Pavilion Master.

古文：初到之日，有马驰入亭中而止。其日，大风飘一绣被，复堕忳前，即言之于县，县以归忳。
现代文：到任的那天，有匹马跑进亭中，不去；这天，大风飘一床绣被，坠在王忳面前，王忳报告县政府，县政府把马和绣被归了王忳。
English: On the day of his arrival, a horse ran into the pavilion and did not go; on this day, the wind blew a bed of embroidered quilts and fell in front of Wang Yao. Wang Yao reported to the county government, and the county government returned the horse and embroidered quilts to Wang Yao.

古文：忳后乘马到雒县，马遂奔走，牵忳入它舍。
现代文：王忳后来骑马去雒县，马奔走，牵王忳进入一家住宅。
English: Wang Yao later rode a horse to Lixian County. The horse galloped and dragged Wang Yao into a house.

古文：主人见之喜曰： 今禽盗矣。 
现代文：主人看了高兴地说 ：今天把盗马贼捉了啊！ 
English: The owner looked pleased and said, "Today we caught the horse thief!"

古文：问忳所由得马，忳具说其状，并及绣被。
现代文：问王忳怎么得的这匹马。王忳详细地说得马的情况，绣被的事也说了一遍。
English: Wang Yao was asked how he got the horse. Wang Yao described the horse's condition in detail and also talked about the embroidered quilt.

古文：主人怅然良久，乃曰： 被随旋风，与马俱亡，卿何阴德而致此二物？ 
现代文：主人愁怅了好久，才说： 绣被随旋风与马俱失，您有什么阴德得到这两件东西？ 
English: The host was worried for a long time before he said, "The embroidered quilt was lost with the whirlwind and the horse. How did you manage to get these two things?

古文：忳自念有葬书生之事，因说之，并道书生形貌及埋金处。
现代文：王忳自己想有收葬书生的事，于是说了出来，并且讲了书生的形貌及埋金的地方。
English: Wang Yao himself wanted to have something to bury Shousheng, so he spoke out, and talked about Shousheng's appearance and where to bury the money.

古文：主人大惊，号曰： 是我子也。
现代文：主人大惊号道： 是我的儿子啊。
English: The astonished owner exclaimed, "It's my son."

古文：姓金名彦。
现代文：姓金名彦。
English: His family name was Kanenahiko.

古文：前往京师，不知所在，何意卿乃葬之。
现代文：以前去京师，不知道他在什么地方，哪里想到是您埋葬了他。
English: I used to visit him in Beijing, but I didn't know where he was. I thought you had buried him.

古文：大恩久不报，天以此章卿德耳。 
现代文：大恩久不报，老天爷用它来表彰您的德行呢。 
English: It's been a long time since you've returned the favor, so may the Lord use it to commend your virtue.

古文：忳悉以被、马还之，彦父不取，又厚遗忳。忳辞让而去。
现代文：王忳把绣被和马交还了主人。金彦的父亲不收，还送了王忳不少的东西，王忳推让一番走了。
English: Wang Yao returned the embroidered quilt and horse to the owner. Jin Yan's father did not accept it, but also sent Wang Yao a lot of things. Wang Yao let the first one go.

古文：时，彦父为州从事，因告新都令，假忳休，自与俱迎彦丧，余金俱存。
现代文：这时金彦的父亲任州从事，便把这事告诉了新都令，乘王忳休假，自己与王忳一起去迎金彦的丧，剩下的金子都在。
English: At this time, Kim Yan's father was engaged in Renzhou, and he told the new governor of the capital about this. He took Wang Yao on vacation, and he and Wang Yao went to meet Kim Yan's funeral. The rest of the gold was there.

古文：忳由是显名。
现代文：王忳由是著了名。
English: Wang Bingyu is a famous author.

古文：仕郡功曹，州治中从事。
现代文：王忳出仕郡功曹，州治中从事。
English: Wang Hui is a distinguished county official and is engaged in state governance.

古文：举茂才，除郡令。
现代文：举茂才，授眉阝县令。
English: Mao Tse-tai was promoted, and he was given the title of county magistrate.

古文：到官，至麓亭。
现代文：到任，至阨亭。
English: Arrived at his post, and went to Shukutei.

古文：亭长曰： 亭有鬼，数杀过客，不可宿也。 
现代文：亭长说 ：亭有鬼，多次杀死过路客人，这里不可住宿啊。 
English: The manager of the pavilion said: "There is a ghost in the pavilion. It has killed several guests who were passing by. You can't stay here."

古文：忳曰： 仁胜凶邪，德除不祥，何鬼之避！ 
现代文：王忳道： 仁义战胜凶邪，德行除却不祥，有什么鬼可避的！ 
English: Wang Xi said: benevolence and righteousness prevail over viciousness and evil, virtue is ominous, and there is no way to avoid it!

古文：即入亭止宿。
现代文：就进亭住宿。
English: Accommodation will be in the entrance pavilion.

古文：夜中闻有女子称冤之声。
现代文：晚上听见有女子的叫喊声。
English: In the evening, a woman's screams were heard.

古文：忳咒曰： 有何枉状，可前求理乎？ 
现代文：王忳祷告说 ：有什么冤枉事，可以前来求理嘛。 
English: Wang Yao prayed and said, "If there is any injustice, you can come and seek justice."

古文：女子曰： 无衣，不敢进。 
现代文：女子道： 没有衣服，不敢进。 
English: Woman: Without clothes, I wouldn't dare to go in.

古文：忳便投衣与之。
现代文：王忳便丢了一件衣给她。
English: Wang Yao then threw a piece of clothing to her.

古文：女子乃前诉曰： 妾夫为涪令，之官过宿此亭，亭长无状，贼杀妾家十余口，埋在楼下，悉取财货。 
现代文：女子于是前来申诉道 ：妾夫是涪县令，到官经过此亭，在这里住宿，亭长是坏东西，残杀我家十多口人，埋在楼下，抢了我家的全部财物。 
English: The woman then came to complain: The concubine's husband is a county magistrate, he passes through this pavilion on his way to the office, and stays here. The pavilion manager is a bad man, he killed more than ten members of my family, buried them downstairs, and robbed my family of all their belongings.

古文：忳问亭长姓名。
现代文：王忳问亭长姓甚名谁。
English: Wang Yao asked the chief of the pavilion what his surname was.

古文：女子曰： 即今门下游徼者也。 
现代文：女子说： 就是你门下现在的游徼。 
English: The woman said, "That's the peregrine falcon under your door right now."

古文：忳曰： 汝何故数杀过客？ 
现代文：王忳说： 你为什么多次杀害过客？ 
English: Wang Yao said, "Why did you repeatedly kill a guest?"

古文：对曰： 妾不得白日自诉，每夜陈冤，客辄眠不见应，不胜感恚，故杀之。 
现代文：女子答道 ：妾不能白天自己申诉，夜晚陈述冤情，过客常睡觉不应，不胜愤慨，所以杀过客以泄恨。 
English: The woman replied, "A concubine cannot complain by herself during the day and state her grievances at night. It is not proper for a passerby to sleep a lot. I am outraged, so I killed the passerby to vent my hatred."

古文：忳曰： 当为汝理此冤，勿复杀良善也。 
现代文：王忳说： 当为你理这冤案，再莫杀害善良人了。 
English: Wang Yao said, "This unjust case should be handled by you. You should not kill good people."

古文：因解衣于地，忽然不见，明旦召游徼诘问，具服罪，即收系，及同谋十余人悉伏辜。
现代文：女子把衣服脱下，扔在地上，忽然不见了。第二天王忳召游徼审问，承认了全部罪行，马上逮捕，同谋十几个都处死。
English: The woman took off her clothes, threw them on the ground, and suddenly disappeared. The next day, Wang Xi summoned You Qi for interrogation. He confessed to all the crimes, was immediately arrested, and more than a dozen of his co-conspirators were executed.

古文：遣吏送其丧归乡里，于是亭遂清安。
现代文：派吏送他们的丧归乡里，阨亭从此安宁了。
English: Officials were sent to escort the mourners back to their hometowns, and since then, Suiting has been at peace.

古文：张武者，吴郡由拳人也。
现代文：◆张武传，张武，吴郡由拳县人。
English: ◆Zhang Wuchuan, Zhang Wuchuan, Wu County is from Yucheng County.

古文：父业，郡门下掾，送太守妻、子还乡里，至河内亭，盗夜劫之，业与贼战死，遂亡失尸骸。
现代文：父亲张业，郡门下掾，送太守的妻子回乡里，到河内亭，晚上被盗抢劫，张业与贼战死，尸体也没有找到。
English: Zhang Ye's father, the county gate lower eunuch, sent the wife of the eunuch back to the countryside, to Hanoi Pavilion, was robbed at night, Zhang Ye and the thief died in battle, and the body was not found.

古文：武时年幼，不及识父。
现代文：张武当时还在幼年，不记得父亲的面目。
English: Zhang Wu was still a child at the time and does not remember his father's face.

古文：后之太学受业，每节，常持父遗剑，至亡处祭醊，泣而还。
现代文：后来张武入太学受业，每至节日，常拿着父亲的遗剑，跑到父亲战死的地方祭奠，哭泣回来。
English: Later, Zhang Wu entered Taixue to study, and every holiday, he often took his father's sword, ran to the place where his father died in battle to pay tribute, and came back crying.

古文：太守第五伦嘉其行，举孝廉。
现代文：太守第五伦嘉奖张武的孝行，举孝廉。
English: The Fifth Prefect of Taizhou Province praised Zhang Wu's filial piety and promoted Xiaolian.

古文：遭母丧过毁，伤父魂灵不返，因哀恸绝命。
现代文：遭母亲逝世，哀痛过度，哀伤父亲的魂灵不返，悲痛而死。
English: After the death of his mother, he was overwhelmed with grief, and his grieving father's soul did not return, and he died of grief.

古文：陆续字智初，会稽吴人也。
现代文：◆陆续传，陆续字智初，会稽吴县人。
English: ◆ Successively passed down, successively the word Zhihu, the people of Wuxian County.

古文：世为族姓。
现代文：世世代代为县里的大姓。
English: It has been the biggest family name in the county for generations.

古文：祖父闳，字子春，建武中为尚书令。
现代文：祖父陆闳，字子春，建武中为尚书令。
English: His grandfathers were Lu Xuan, Zi Zichun, and Jian Wu Zhong.

古文：美姿貌，喜着越布单衣，光武见而好之，自是常敕会稽郡献越布。
现代文：人长得漂亮，爱穿越布单衣，光武见了也很喜欢这种越布，自此以后，常令会稽郡献越布。
English: People are beautiful, and they love to cross cloth singlets. Guangwu also liked this cross cloth when he saw it. Since then, he has often ordered the county to donate cross cloth.

古文：续幼孤，仕郡户曹史。
现代文：陆续小时死去了父亲，出仕郡户曹史。
English: One hour after another, his father, the county official Cao Shi, died.

古文：时岁荒民饥，太守尹兴使续于都亭赋民饘粥。
现代文：这时岁荒民饥，太守尹兴使陆续在都亭给老百姓发稀粥。
English: At this time, the people were starving, and the grand marshal Yin Xing successively sent thin gruel to the people in the capital.

古文：续悉简阅其民，讯以名氏。
现代文：陆续召集全部饥民，一个一个问清姓名。
English: All the starving people were called in one by one, and their names were asked.

古文：事毕，兴问所食几何？
现代文：事情结束，尹兴问吃了稀粥的有多少人？
English: When it was over, Yin Xing asked: How many people ate the gruel?

古文：续因口说六百余人，皆分别姓字，无有差谬。
现代文：陆续立即回答说有六百余人，还分别说出姓名，没有差误。
English: One after another, they immediately answered that there were more than six hundred people, and they also said their names separately, without error.

古文：兴异之。
现代文：尹兴非常赞赏他的才能。
English: Yin Xing highly appreciates his talent.

古文：刺史行部，见续，辟为别驾从事。
现代文：刺史巡视部属，考察刑政，召见了陆续，征召为别驾从事。
English: The subordinates of the History Inspection Department were summoned one after another to inspect the criminal justice system, and they were called up to engage in other activities.

古文：以病去，还为郡门下掾。
现代文：因病去官，回到郡里任门下掾。
English: Due to illness, he left the government and returned to the county to serve as a subordinate magistrate.

古文：是时，楚王英谋反，阴疏天下善士。及楚事觉，显宗得其录，有尹兴名，乃征兴诣廷尉狱。
现代文：这时楚王英谋反，暗地里搜求天下的人才，楚王英谋反事被发觉，显宗得了这份案录，有尹兴的名字，于是征尹兴到廷尉狱。
English: At this time, Chu Wang Ying plotted to rebel and secretly searched for talents around the world. Chu Wang Ying plotted to rebel and was discovered. Xian Zong obtained this case record, which had Yin Xing's name, so he conscripted Yin Xing to Tingyi Prison.

古文：续与主簿梁宏、功曹史驷勋及掾史五百余人诣洛阳诏狱就考，诸吏不堪痛楚，死者大半。唯续、宏、勋掠考五毒，肌肉消烂，终无异辞。
现代文：陆续与主簿梁宏、功曹史驷勋及掾史五百余人去洛阳诏狱挨审讯，诸吏不堪痛楚，死了一大半，只有陆续、梁宏、驷勋掠拷五毒，肌肉溃烂，始终没有说什么。
English: More than 500 people, including Liang Hong, Liang Hong and Li Shixun, went to Luoyang Zhaojing Prison to be interrogated. All the officials were in great pain and most of them died. Only Liang Hong and Li Shixun took the five poisons one after another, and their muscles festered. They never said anything.

古文：续母远至京师，觇候消息，狱事特急，无缘与续相闻，母但作馈食，付门卒以进之，续虽见考苦毒，而辞色慷慨，未尝易容，唯对食悲泣，不能自胜。使者怪而问其故。续曰： 母来，不得相见，故泣耳。 
现代文：母亲只好作了一些饭菜，交给门卒转送陆续。陆续虽然被打得遍体鳞伤，但辞色慷慨，没有改变容貌，只对着饭菜悲泣不止。审讯他的人觉得奇怪，问他是什么缘故。陆续说： 母亲来了，不得见面，所以哭啊。 
English: His mother had no choice but to prepare some meals and pass them on to her henchmen one after another. Although she was beaten and bruised all over, she was generous with her words and did not change her appearance, only weeping inconsolably over the food. His interrogators found it strange and asked him what was the reason. One after another they said: "Mother has come, we are not allowed to meet, that's why we are crying."

古文：使者大怒，以为门卒通传意气，召将案之。
现代文：审讯他的人大怒，认为门卒通传消息，要召来审讯。
English: His interrogators were furious, believing that his henchmen were sending a message to summon him for interrogation.

古文：续曰： 因食饷羹，识母所自调和，故知来耳。非人告也。 
现代文：陆续说 ：因为吃送来的羹汤，知道是母亲亲自调和的，所以晓得是母亲来了，不是别人告我的。 
English: He said one after another: Because I ate the soup that was sent to me, I knew that my mother had personally mixed it, so I knew that it was my mother who had come, not someone else who had accused me.

古文：使者问： 何以知母所作乎？ 
现代文：审讯的人问 ：为什么知道是你母亲作的呢？ 
English: Interrogator: How did you know it was your mother?

古文：续曰： 母尝截肉，未尝不方，断葱以寸为度，是以知之。 
现代文：陆续道 ：母亲经常切肉，没有不方的，切葱按一寸为标准，我是根据这个知道的。 
English: Successively: My mother often cuts meat, nothing too square, and chops onions according to one inch as a standard, I know from this.

古文：使者问诸谒舍，续母果来，于是阴嘉之，上书说续行状。帝即赦兴等事，还乡里，禁锢终身。
现代文：审讯的人问之于谒舍，陆续的母亲果然来了，于是私下觉得陆续不错，上书说陆续的事迹，皇上赦免了尹兴等人的事，送还乡里，终身禁止做官。
English: The interrogator asked about this at the Imperial Mansion, and one after another the mothers did indeed come, so he privately felt that one after another was good, and wrote a letter saying that one after another, the emperor pardoned Yin Xing and others, sent them back to the countryside, and banned them from working as officials for life.

古文：续以老病卒。长子稠，广陵太守，有理名。
现代文：陆续老死。长子陆稠，广陵太守，有治理之才。
English: The eldest son, Lu Zong, the governor of Guangling, had the ability to govern.

古文：中子逢，乐安太守。
现代文：次子陆逢，乐安太守。
English: The second son, Lu Feng, became the governor of Le'an.

古文：少子褒，力行好学，不慕荣名，连征不就。
现代文：少子陆褒，力行好学，不慕荣名，连续征召都不就。
English: It is not enough to be a good student, earn a good name, and be continuously recruited.

古文：褒子康，已见前传。
现代文：褒子陆康，已见前传。
English: Hongzi Lu Kang, already seen the prequel.

古文：戴封字平仲，济北刚人也。
现代文：◆戴封传，戴封字平仲，济北刚县人。
English: ◆ Dai Feng Chuan, Dai Feng Zi Ping Zhong, from Gang County, North Jeolla Province.

古文：年十五，诣太学，师事鄮令东海申君。
现代文：十五岁，去太学，拜癎令东海申君为师。
English: At the age of fifteen, he went to Taixue, where he was taught by Tonghai Shenjun.

古文：申君卒，送丧到东海，道当经其家。
现代文：申君逝世，戴封送申君丧到东海，要经过戴封自己的家门口。
English: After the death of Shen Jun, Dai Feng sent Shen Jun's funeral to the East China Sea, passing through Dai Feng's own front door.

古文：父母以封当还，豫为娶妻。
现代文：他父亲母亲认为戴封会回家的，预先为他娶妻。
English: His father and mother thought that Dai Feng would return home, and married a wife for him in advance.

古文：封暂过拜亲，不宿而去。还京师卒业。
现代文：戴封只到家待了一会儿，不宿就走了，回京师学完他的学业。
English: Dai Feng only stayed at home for a short while, left without lodging, and returned to Beijing to complete his studies.

古文：时同学石敬平温病卒，封养视殡敛，以所赍粮市小棺，送丧到家。
现代文：当时同学石敬平患瘟病死，戴封为他看病，殡殓，用自己携带的粮食买了一副小棺材，把他的丧送到家。
English: At that time, his classmate Shi Jingping died of the plague. Dai Feng was his doctor and undertaker. He bought a small coffin with the grain he was carrying and sent his funeral home.

古文：家更敛，见敬平行时书物皆在棺中，乃大异之。
现代文：他的家人改殓时，看见敬平走时带的书籍等物都在棺中，大为奇怪。
English: When his family changed his name, it was very strange to see that the books and other things that Keihei took with him when he left were all in the coffin.

古文：封后遇贼，财物悉被略夺，唯余缣七匹，贼不知处，封乃追以与之，曰： 知诸君乏，故送相遗。 
现代文：戴封后来遇了贼，财物全被抢掠一空，只剩下缣七匹，贼不知道缣在哪里，戴封于是追上贼，把缣给了贼，说： 晓得你们贫乏，所以送给你们。 
English: Later, Dai Feng encountered a thief. All of his belongings had been plundered. Only seven donkeys were left. The thief did not know where the donkeys were. Dai Feng then caught up with the thief and gave the donkeys to the thief, saying, "I know that you are poor, so I am giving them to you."

古文：贼惊曰： 此贤人也。 
现代文：贼惊叹道 ：这是贤人啊！ 
English: The thief exclaimed, "This is a wise man!"

古文：尽还其器物。
现代文：把先抢得的器物，全退还了他。
English: He was given back everything he had taken.

古文：后举孝廉，光禄主事，遭伯父丧去官。
现代文：后举孝廉，任光禄事，遭伯父丧，去官。
English: Later, he was promoted to the position of filial piety and Ren Guanglu, was mourned by his uncle, and left the post.

古文：诏书求贤良方正直言之士、有至行能消灾伏异者，公卿郡守各举一人。
现代文：诏书求贤良方正敢于说直话的人才，有好的德行能消灾服怪的，公卿郡守各举一人。
English: The imperial edict called for a virtuous person, a person who dared to speak the truth, a person with good moral conduct who could eliminate disasters, and a noble county governor.

古文：郡及大司农俱举封。
现代文：郡及大司农都举了戴封。
English: Both the county and the director of agriculture raised their seals.

古文：公车征，陛见，对策第一，擢拜议郎。迁西华令。
现代文：公车征召，皇上引见，对答策问第一，升授议郎，任西华令。
English: He was summoned by bus, introduced by the emperor, asked the first question about the answer strategy, was promoted to the position of deliberator, and was appointed to the position of Xihua.

古文：时汝、颍有蝗灾，独不入西华界。
现代文：这时汝、颍一带蝗虫为灾，独不入西华境内。
English: At this time, the locusts in the area around Yunnan were a disaster, and they could not enter the territory of West China.

古文：时督邮行县，蝗忽大至。督邮其日即去，蝗亦顿除，一境奇之。
现代文：当时督邮到县巡视，蝗虫忽然大批飞来，督邮当天离去，蝗虫顿时不见，此景被引为怪事。
English: At that time, the postmaster went to inspect the county, and locusts suddenly flew in large numbers. The postmaster left the same day, and the locusts suddenly disappeared. This scene was cited as a strange thing.

古文：其年大旱，封祷请无获，乃积薪坐其上以自焚。
现代文：这年大旱，戴封祈祷无效，于是积薪一堆，自己坐在上面点火自焚。
English: This year there was a drought, and wearing a seal and praying was not effective, so he accumulated a pile of money, sat on it and lit himself on fire.

古文：火起而大雨暴至，于是远近叹服。
现代文：火起，大雨暴至，远近的人叹服不止。
English: From the fire, heavy rainstorms came, and people from far and near were more than impressed.

古文：迁中山相。
现代文：升中山相。
English: He became a mountain guide in middle school.

古文：时诸县囚四百余人，辞状已定，当行刑。
现代文：这时各县有囚犯四百多人，罪状已经写好了，马上要行刑。
English: At this time, there were more than four hundred prisoners in each county, the charges had already been written, and they were to be executed immediately.

古文：封哀之，皆遣归家，与克期日，皆无违者。
现代文：戴封可怜这些囚犯，都遣送归家与亲人见面，规定回来的日期，结果没有一个人违期的。
English: Dai Feng took pity on the prisoners, sent them all home to meet their families, and set a date for their return. As a result, none of them missed the deadline.

古文：诏书策美焉。
现代文：诏书表扬他。
English: The imperial edict praised him.

古文：永元十二年，征拜太常，卒官。
现代文：永元十二年，征授太常，死在任上。
English: In the twelfth year of the Yongyuan era, he was awarded the title of Taizang and died in office.

古文：李充字大逊，陈留人也。
现代文：◆李充传，李充字大逊，陈留人。
English: ◆ Li Chong Chuan, Li Chong Zi Da Xun, Chen Liu Ren.

古文：家贫，兄弟六人同食递衣。
现代文：家里贫穷，兄弟六个人，交替穿一套衣服。
English: The family was poor, and the six brothers wore one set of clothes at a time.

古文：妻窃谓充曰： 今贫居如此，难以久安。妾有私财，愿思分异。 
现代文：李充的妻子悄悄地对李充说： 现在穷得这个样子，总不能长久这样下去吧，我有私房钱，我想不如分居为好。 
English: Li Chong's wife quietly said to Li Chong: Now I am so poor, I can't go on like this for long. I have my own money, I think it's better to separate.

古文：充伪酬之曰： 如欲别居，当醖酒具会，请呼乡里内外，共议其事。 
现代文：李充假装回答她说 ：如果要分居，当煮酒作食，叫了乡里内外亲朋戚友，共同商议这事。 
English: Li Chong pretended to answer her: "If you want to live apart, you should cook and drink, and invite relatives and friends in and out of the village to discuss the matter together."

古文：妇从充置酒晏客。
现代文：妻子照李充说的置酒请客。
English: His wife followed Li Chong's suggestion of inviting guests for a drink.

古文：充于坐中前跪曰母曰： 此妇无状，而教充离间母兄，罪合遣斥。 
现代文：李充在酒席桌前，跪着告诉他妈妈道： 这个妇人不是好东西，教我离间母亲和哥哥，按照她的罪过，应当遣送出去。 
English: At the banquet table, Li Chong knelt down and told his mother, "This woman is not a good thing. She taught me to separate my mother from my brother. According to her sins, she should be deported."

古文：便呵叱其妇，逐令出门，妇衔涕而去。
现代文：于是立即呵斥他妻子，驱逐出门，妻子含着眼泪走了。
English: He immediately yelled at his wife to get out of the house, and she left in tears.

古文：坐中惊肃，因遂罢散。
现代文：在坐的人，大为惊异，也都不敢吭声，大家各自回去了。
English: The people who were sitting there were so surprised that they didn't dare to say a word. Everyone went home.

古文：充后遭母丧，行服墓次，人有盗其墓树者，充手自杀之。
现代文：后来母亲死了，李充守服墓旁，有人偷盗墓树，李充把偷树的人杀了。
English: Later, after his mother died, Li Chong was guarding the grave next to the tomb, when someone stole the tomb tree. Li Chong killed the person who stole the tree.

古文：服阕，立精舍讲授。
现代文：服丧期满，盖了个精舍，教授门生。
English: At the end of the mourning period, he built a fine house and taught his disciples.

古文：太守鲁平请署功曹，不就。
现代文：太守鲁平请任功曹，不就。
English: It's not enough to be named a meritorious person by the Tai Shou Luping.

古文：平怒，乃援充以捐沟中，因谪署县都亭长。
现代文：鲁平发怒，把李充推倒在沟中，并且贬谪他代理县都亭长。
English: Enraged, Lu Ping pushed Li Chong into a ditch and belittled him as the acting prefectural governor.

古文：不得已，起亲职役。
现代文：李充不得已，起来任职。
English: Li Cheng had no choice but to take up his post.

古文：后和帝公车征，不行。
现代文：后来和帝公车征召，不行。
English: Later, he was conscripted into the Imperial Bus, but he couldn't do it.

古文：延平中，诏公卿、中二千石各举隐士大儒，务取高行，以劝后进，特征充为博士。
现代文：延平中，有诏公卿、中二千石各举隐士大儒，要求德行修养高，以劝后进，特征李充为博士。
English: In Yanping, there were Zhao Gongqing, and in the middle there were 2,000-koku high-ranking hermits and great scholars, who required virtue to be cultivated and advanced by persuasion, and Li Chong was a doctor.

古文：时鲁平亦为博士，每与集会，常叹服焉。
现代文：这时鲁平也是博士，每同集会，非常佩服他。
English: At this time, Lu Ping was also a doctor, and he was greatly admired at every meeting.

古文：充迁侍中。
现代文：李充升侍中。
English: Lichong rose to the rank of middle-ranking samurai.

古文：大将军邓骘贵戚倾时，无所下借，以充高节，每卑敬之。
现代文：大将军邓骘因系贵戚，权重当世，对任何人都不屑一顾，因为李充是高节之士，常常卑礼相敬。
English: The great general Deng Xuan, because he was a relative of a noble family, was given great importance in the world, and he did not care about anyone, because Li Chong was a high-ranking person, and he was often humble and respectful.

古文：尝置酒请充，宾客满堂，酒酣，骘跪曰： 幸托椒房，位列上将。幕府初开，欲辟天下奇伟，以匡不逮，惟诸君博求其器。 
现代文：有一次设酒请李充，宾客满堂，邓骘下跪道 ：托皇后的福，位至上将，现在府内工作刚刚开展，需要一批天下奇伟之士，帮助我所不及的地方，希望各位广泛地征求这种人才。 
English: On one occasion, Li Chong was invited to a banquet, the hall was full of guests, and Deng Xuan knelt down and said: "With the blessing of the empress, I am the supreme general. Now, the work within the government has just begun. I need a group of the world's greatest people to help where I cannot. I hope that you will widely solicit this kind of talent."

古文：充乃为陈海内隐居怀道之士，颇有不合，骘欲绝其说，以肉啖之。
现代文：李充于是陈述海内隐居有道的人，但不中大将军的意。邓骘想要李充莫说了，劝了他一块肉吃。
English: Li Chong then stated that there were virtuous people living in seclusion at sea, but that he did not mean to become a general. Deng Wei wanted Li Chong to say nothing, and persuaded him to eat a piece of meat.

古文：充抵肉于地，曰： 说士犹甘于肉！ 
现代文：李充把肉扔到地上，说： 说士难道爱吃肉！ 
English: Li Chong threw the meat on the ground and said, "Doesn't he love to eat meat?

古文：遂出，径去。
现代文：说罢，起身走了。
English: Just say it, get up and go.

古文：骘甚望之。
现代文：邓骘非常不快。
English: Deng Yao was very unhappy.

古文：同坐汝南张孟举往让充曰： 一日闻足下与邓将军说士未究，激刺面折，不由中和，出言之责，非所以光祚子孙者也。 
现代文：同坐汝南张孟举去批评李充道 ：昨天听你同邓将军谈士没有完，当面刺激，使他下不了台，说话不慎，这不是给子孙造福啊。 
English: Runan Zhang Meng, who was also present, raised his hand to criticize Li Chongdao: "Yesterday, I heard that you had not finished talking with General Deng, and the face-to-face stimulation made him unable to leave the stage, and he spoke carelessly. This is not beneficial to our children and grandchildren."

古文：充曰： 大丈夫居世，贵行其意，何能远为子孙计哉！ 
现代文：李充道 ：大丈夫在世作人，所贵的是自行其意，哪能远为子孙计呀！ 
English: Li Chengdao: It's okay to be a person in this world. What's important is your own will. How can you plan for your descendants?

古文：由是见非于贵戚。
现代文：因此被贵戚不满。
English: As a result, he was resented by his relatives.

古文：迁左中郎将，年八十八，为国三老。
现代文：升左中郎将，年八十八，为国三老。
English: He was promoted to the rank of middle-ranked left-hander at the age of 88, making him one of the Three Elders of the country.

古文：安帝常特进见，赐以几杖。
现代文：安帝常特进见，赐给他几杖。
English: An Di always thought ahead and gave him a few sticks.

古文：卒于家。
现代文：死在家里。
English: He died at home.

古文：缪肜字豫公，汝南召陵人也。
现代文：◆缪肜传，缪肜字豫公，汝南召陵人。
English: ◆Miu Xuan, Miu Xuan Zi Yu Gong, Ru Nan Zhao Ling Ren.

古文：少孤，兄弟四人，皆同财业。
现代文：年幼时，死了父亲，兄弟四个人，共着一份家产。
English: When he was young, his father died, leaving him with four brothers and a share of the family property.

古文：及各娶妻，诸妇遂求分异，又数有斗争之言。
现代文：兄弟结婚后，各人的妻子要求分居，并且常吵架。
English: After the brothers married, each man's wife asked to separate, and they often quarreled.

古文：肜深怀愤叹，乃掩户自挝曰： 缪肜，汝修身谨行，学圣人之法，将以齐整风俗，奈何不能正其家乎！ 
现代文：缪肜极为愤慨，因关门自己打自己道： 缪肜，你修身谨行，学圣人之道，是想整齐风俗，为什么自己一个家也不能正呢？ 
English: Miao Wei was extremely indignant, because he closed the door, he beat his own way: Miao Wei, you cultivate yourself and practice, learn the way of saints, you want to tidy up customs, why can't you straighten up your own home?

古文：弟及诸妇闻之，悉叩头谢罪，遂更为敦睦之行。
现代文：缪肜的弟弟和各人的妻子听了，都叩头谢罪，于是成了和睦讲求品行的家庭。
English: Miao Yao's younger brother and each man's wife listened, bowed their heads in thanks, and thus became a family of harmony and morality.

古文：仕县为主簿。
现代文：缪肜出仕县为主簿。
English: Miao Wei's county is the main one.

古文：时县令被章见考，吏皆畏惧自诬，而肜独证据其事。掠考苦毒，至乃体生虫蛆，因复传换五狱，逾涉四年，令卒以自免。
现代文：这时县令被控告，受审，吏都害怕，自己无罪认罪，惟有缪肜独证无事，掠打逼供，非常厉害，以至体上生了蛆，终于掠考苦毒，经过四年之久，才弄清楚了，县令因此获免。
English: At this time, the county magistrate was accused and put on trial. The officials were all afraid. He pleaded not guilty. Only his wife could prove that there was nothing wrong. He was beaten so badly that his body was paralysed. Finally, after four long years, it became clear that the county magistrate was exonerated.

古文：太守陇西梁湛召为决曹史。
现代文：太守陇西梁湛，召缪肜为决曹史。
English: Liang Zhan, the governor-general of Shanxi Province, summoned Miao Zang as the decisive Cao Shi.

古文：安帝初，湛病卒官，肜送丧还陇西。
现代文：安帝初年，梁湛死在官舍，缪肜送丧回陇西。
English: In the first year of An Di, Liang Zhan died in the official residence, and Miao Ye was sent back to Shaanxi for mourning.

古文：始葬，会西羌反叛，湛妻、子悉避乱它郡，肜独留不去，为起坟冢。
现代文：埋葬开始，逢西羌反叛，梁湛的妻子全都避乱跑到它郡去了，缪肜独留在那里不走，为梁湛筑坟冢。
English: At the beginning of the burial, Feng Xiqi rebelled, and all of Liang Zhan's wives fled to his county to escape the turmoil. Mu Ying alone stayed there and did not leave, building a tomb for Liang Zhan.

古文：乃潜穿井旁以为窟室，昼则隐窜，夜则负士，及贼平而坟已立。
现代文：暗中穿圹井旁为密室，白天隐藏在里面，夜晚背土筑坟，羌贼平定时，坟也筑好了。
English: It is a secret room next to the shaft, hidden during the day, and a grave is built at night. When the robber is defeated, the grave is also built.

古文：其妻、子意肜已死，还见大惊。
现代文：梁湛的妻子以为缪肜早已死了，回来见了，大为惊叹。
English: Liang Zhan's wife thought that Miao Yao had already died. When she came back, she was very surprised.

古文：关西咸称传之，共给车马衣资，肜不受而归乡里。
现代文：关西传为佳话，都送缪肜车马衣服赀财，缪肜统统不接受，回家去了。
English: Kansai is said to be a fairy tale. All of them sent Miao Yu carriages, horses, clothes and money. Miao Yu did not accept any of them and went home.

古文：辟公府，举尤异，迁中牟令。
现代文：公府征召，举尤异，升中牟令。
English: He was called up by the government, promoted through the ranks, and promoted to middle school.

古文：县近京师，多权豪。肜到，诛诸奸吏及托名贵戚宾客者百有余人，威名遂行。
现代文：县离京师近，显要权势的人多，缪肜到任，诛杀了一批奸吏及托名贵戚宾客的共一百多人，威名大著。
English: The county is close to Beijing, and there are many important and powerful people. When Miao Wei took office, he killed a group of traitors and a total of more than one hundred famous guests.

古文：卒于官。
现代文：死在任上。
English: He died in office.

古文：陈重字景公，豫章宜春人也。
现代文：◆陈重传，陈重字景公，豫章郡宜春县人。
English: ◆ Chen Chong Chuan, Chen Chong Zi Jing Gong, from Yichun County, Yuzhang County.

古文：少与同郡雷义为友，俱学《鲁诗》、《颜氏春秋》。
现代文：年轻时与同郡人雷义为朋友，都学《鲁诗》、《颜氏春秋》。
English: When he was young, he was friends with Lei Yi, who was from the same county. They both studied "Lu Shi" and "The Spring and Autumn of Yan Shi."

古文：太守张云举重孝廉，重以让义，前后十余通记，云不听。
现代文：太守张云举陈重孝廉，陈重让给雷义，前后写了十几封信，张云不依他的。
English: Zhang Yun, the daimyō, promoted Chen Chongxiao Lian and transferred Chen Chong to Lei Yi. He wrote more than a dozen letters back and forth, but Zhang Yun did not follow his example.

古文：义明年举孝廉，重与俱在郎署。
现代文：雷义第二年举孝廉，陈重与雷义都在郎署。
English: Lei Yi promoted Xiaolian in the second year. Chen Chong and Lei Yi were both promoted.

古文：有同署郎负息钱数十万，责主日至，诡求无已，重乃密以钱代还。
现代文：有个同署郎欠人家的息钱数十万，债主天天来，逼债不已，陈重秘密将钱代他还了。
English: A co-investigator owed hundreds of thousands of yuan in interest. The creditor came every day, forcing the debt, and Chen Jie secretly paid the money back to him.

古文：郎后觉知而厚辞谢之。
现代文：这个同署郎后来知道了，重重地感谢他。
English: This colleague later found out and thanked him profusely.

古文：重曰： 非我之为，将有同姓名者。 
现代文：陈重道： 不是我代还的，大概是与我同姓名的人做的吧。 
English: Chen Chongdao: It wasn't me who returned it, it was probably done by someone with the same name as me.

古文：终不言惠。
现代文：始终不说代他还了息钱。
English: He never claimed to have paid the interest on his behalf.

古文：又同舍郎有告归宁者，误持邻舍郎绔以去。
现代文：又有一个同舍郎回家省亲，把邻舍郎的一条裤错拿走了。
English: Another brother-in-law went home to check on his relatives and took a pair of trousers from his neighbour by mistake.

古文：主疑重所取，重不自申说，而市绔以偿之。
现代文：失主怀疑陈重拿了，陈重不和他申说，买了一条裤子还了他。
English: The owner suspected that Chen Chong had taken it. Chen Chong refused to talk to him and bought a pair of trousers and returned them to him.

古文：后宁丧者归，以绔还主，其事乃显。
现代文：后来归家的人回来了，把裤子交还失主，这件事才明白了。
English: The matter came to light when the man returned and handed the trousers back to their owner.

古文：重后与义俱拜尚书郎，义代同时人受罪，以此黜退。重见义去，亦以病免。
现代文：陈重后与雷义都授尚书郎，雷义代同时人受罪，因此被黜退，陈重看见雷义被黜，也托病辞官。
English: After Chen Chung and Lei Yi were both awarded the title of Shang Shulang, Lei Yi's contemporaries suffered from the crime, so they were banished. When Chen Chung saw Lei Yi being banished, he also took sick leave.

古文：后举茂才，除细阳令。
现代文：后来举茂才，授细阳令。
English: Later, he was given the title of Mao Cai and the title of Xiao Yang Rong.

古文：政有异化，举尤异，当迁为会稽太守，遭姊忧去官。
现代文：有特殊的政绩，举尤异，正要升会稽太守，遭姐姐的丧，去官。
English: He had special achievements in politics, and was about to be promoted to the position of auditor-general of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC) when his sister passed away.

古文：后为司徒所辟，拜侍御史，卒。
现代文：后为司徒所征召，授侍御史，逝世。
English: Later, he was conscripted by the shuto, awarded the title of imperial attendant, and passed away.

古文：雷义字仲公，豫章鄱阳人也。
现代文：◆雷义传，雷义字仲公，豫章郡鄱阳县人。
English: ◆Lei Yi Chuan, Lei Yi Zi Zhong Gong, from Yuyang County, Yuanzhang County.

古文：初为郡功曹，尝擢举善人，不伐其功。
现代文：先任功曹，曾经提拔推举善人，自己不居功。
English: The predecessor, Gong Cao, once promoted and promoted good people, but he did not take the credit.

古文：义尝济人死罪，罪者后以金二斤谢之，义不受。
现代文：雷义曾经救人死罪，罪人后来用二斤金子感谢他，雷义没有接受。
English: Lei Yi once saved a man from the death penalty. The criminal later thanked him with two kilos of gold. Lei Yi did not accept it.

古文：金主伺义不在，默投金于承尘上。
现代文：金主瞧雷义不在时，悄悄地把金子放在悬挂床上承接尘土的帐幕上。
English: When Lei Yi was not there, the goldsmith quietly placed the gold on the hanging bed to absorb the dust of the tent.

古文：后葺理屋宇，乃得之。
现代文：后来修理房屋，打扫卫生，才发现了。
English: It was only later, when the house was repaired and cleaned, that it was discovered.

古文：金主已死，无所复还，义乃以付县曹。
现代文：金主已死，无法送还，雷义不得已把金子送到县里去了。
English: The owner of the gold was dead and could not return it, so Lei Yi had no choice but to take the gold to the county.

古文：后举孝廉，拜尚书侍郎，有同时郎坐事，当居刑作。义默自表取其罪，以此论司寇。
现代文：后来举孝廉，授尚书侍郎，有同台郎犯罪应当受刑作，雷义默默地自己上表认了他的罪，因此以司寇论，罚往边地戍守防敌。
English: Later, Xiao Lian was promoted to filial piety, Shang Shushizhirong was awarded, and Tongtai Lang committed a crime that should be punished. Lei Yi silently confessed to his crime, so he was punished with the theory of scouting and sent to the border to defend against the enemy.

古文：同台郎觉之，委位自上，乞赎义罪。
现代文：同台郎发觉了，辞位上表，请求赎雷义罪。
English: When he found out, he resigned from his post and asked to atone for his sins.

古文：顺帝诏皆除刑。
现代文：顺帝诏令都除去他们的刑。
English: Emperor Shun's edict removed their punishments.

古文：义归，举茂才，让于陈重，刺史不听，义遂阳狂被发走，不应命。
现代文：雷义回郡，举茂才，让给陈重，刺史不依，雷义假装疯了，披毛散发逃走，不应命。
English: Lei Yi returned to the county, raised Shao Cai, gave it to Chen Zhe, stabbed Shishi, Lei Yi pretended to be crazy, wore fur and ran away, and died.

古文：乡里为之语曰： 胶漆自谓坚，不如雷与陈。 
现代文：乡里人作了一句顺口溜说 ：胶漆自谓坚，不如雷与陈。 
English: The villagers made a tongue-in-cheek remark: the glue paint is said to be strong, but not as strong as thunder and lightning.

古文：三府同时俱辟二人。
现代文：三府同时都征召他俩。
English: Both of them were called up by all three prefectures at the same time.

古文：义遂为守灌谒者。
现代文：雷义为代理灌谒者。
English: Lei Yi is the agent of the instigator.

古文：使持节督郡国行风俗，太守令长坐者凡七十人。
现代文：使持节督察郡国行风俗，太守令长获罪的共七十人。
English: A total of 70 people were found guilty of inciting the county inspector to break the national custom of celebrating the festival.

古文：旋拜侍御史，除南顿令，卒官。
现代文：不久，授侍御史，任南顿令，死在任上。
English: Soon after, he was appointed to the position of Imperial Historian by Emperor Nantong and died in office.

古文：子授，官至苍梧太守。
现代文：儿子雷授，官至苍梧太守。
English: His son, Lei Zhu, rose to the position of Cangwu Daiju.

古文：范冉字史云，陈留外黄人也。
现代文：◆范冉传，范冉字史云，陈留外黄人。
English: ◆Fan Ran Chuan, Fan Ran Zi Shiyun, Chen Ruiwai Huang Ren.

古文：少为县小吏，年十八，奉檄迎督邮，冉耻之，乃遁去。
现代文：年轻时为县小吏，年十八，奉令迎接督邮，范冉认为可耻，因逃跑外地。
English: When he was young, he was a minor official of the county. At the age of eighteen, he was ordered to meet the postmaster. Fan Ran thought it was shameful, so he ran away.

古文：到南阳，受业于樊英。
现代文：到南阳，从樊英受业。
English: He went to Nanyang and received training from Su Ying.

古文：又游三辅，就马融通经，历年乃还。
现代文：又游三辅，跟马融学习，通经术，几年之后，才回去。
English: He also toured Sanfu, studied with Ma Rong, and learned about Confucianism, only to return a few years later.

古文：冉好违时绝俗，为激诡之行。常慕梁伯鸾、闵仲叔之为人。
现代文：范冉特立独行，他的所作所为，往往违时绝俗。常羡慕梁伯鸾、闵仲叔的为人。
English: Fan Ran was a maverick, and his actions often went against the times and customs. He was often envied by Liang Boqi and Xizhong Uncle.

古文：与汉中李固、河内王奂亲善，而鄙贾伟节、郭林宗焉。
现代文：与汉中李固、河内王奂非常相好。却鄙视贾伟节、郭林宗之流。
English: He was very friendly with Li Gu and Hanoi Wang Xuan in Han Dynasty, but despised Jia Wei Jie and Guo Lin Zong.

古文：奂后为考城令，境接外黄，屡遣书请冉，冉不至。
现代文：王奂后来作考城令，县境与外黄接界，多次写信给范冉，请他去，范冉没有去。
English: Wang Hui later made the examination city ordinance, the county border and the outer yellow border, wrote to Fan Ran several times, asked him to go, Fan Ran did not go.

古文：及奂迁汉阳太守，将行，冉乃与弟协步赍麦酒，于道侧设坛以待之。
现代文：王奂升汉阳太守，将行，范冉才与弟弟范协步行抬着麦酒，在道路旁边设坛等着王奂。
English: Wang Ranzheng, the governor-general of Hanyang, was on his way, while Fan Rancai and his brother Fan Xie were on foot, carrying barley wine and waiting for Wang Ranzhang by the side of the road.

古文：冉见奂车徒骆驿，遂不自闻，惟与弟共辩论于路。
现代文：范冉看见王奂车子随从，络绎不绝，便不告诉王奂，只同弟弟两个人在路旁辩论。
English: When Fan Ran saw Wang Yao's car with his entourage, he didn't tell Wang Yao and only argued with his two younger brothers on the side of the road.

古文：奂识其声，即下车与相揖对。
现代文：王奂听出来，是范冉的声音，马上下车相见。
English: Wang Yao recognized it as Fan Ran's voice and immediately got off the train to meet him.

古文：奂曰： 行路仓卒，非陈契阔之所，可共到前亭宿息，以叙分隔。 
现代文：王奂说： 路上仓卒，不是畅叙离别情怀的地方，可同我一道到前亭宿息，好好的说说吧。 
English: Wang Yao said: On the road, it is not a place to enjoy the feelings of parting, but you can come with me to the front pavilion to sleep. Let's talk about it.

古文：冉曰： 子前在考城，思欲相从，以贱质自绝豪友耳。
现代文：范冉说： 你前在考城，想去你那里，因贫贱，不敢高攀，自绝豪友。
English: Fan Ran said: You were in Kaocheng before, and you want to go there, but because you are poor, you don't dare to climb high, and you refuse to be a high-ranking friend.

古文：今子远适千里，会面无期，故轻行相候，以展诀别。
现代文：现在你远行千里，会面无期，所以我和弟弟在这里等你，与你相别。
English: Now you are thousands of miles away, with no time to meet, so my brother and I are waiting for you here, to say goodbye.

古文：如其相追，将有慕贵之讥矣。 
现代文：如果我跟你走，那会招来慕贵的讥刺啊。 
English: If I were to go with you, it would invite mockery from your admirers.

古文：便起告违，拂衣而去。
现代文：便起告辞，拂衣而去。
English: Then he bade farewell, brushed off his clothes and left.

古文：奂瞻望弗及，冉长逝不顾。
现代文：王奂一直望得看不见范冉了还在望，范冉却头也不回地走了。
English: Wang Yao kept looking at Fan Ran until he couldn't see her, and then he kept looking at her, but Fan Ran didn't look back and walked away.

古文：桓帝时，以冉为莱芜长，遭母忧，不到官。
现代文：桓帝时，范冉被任为莱芜长，遭母丧，不到职。
English: During the reign of Emperor Kuan, Fan Ran was appointed as the chief of Laiwu, but he lost his mother and did not take up the post.

古文：后辟太尉府，以狷急不能从俗，常佩韦于朝。
现代文：后来征召至太尉府，因过于激进，不能从俗，在朝廷常佩韦以自勉励。
English: Later, he was conscripted to the captain's house, because he was too radical and could not be secular. At the imperial court, Pei Wei often encouraged himself.

古文：议者欲以为侍御史，因遁身逃命于梁沛之间，徒行敝服，卖卜于市。
现代文：舆论想用他为侍御吏，就隐身逃命于梁、沛之间，敝衣敝服，徒行于路，卖卜于市。
English: Public opinion wanted to use him as an attendant of the imperial officials, so he secretly fled for his life between Liang and Pei, took off his clothes, walked on the road, and sold divination in the city.

古文：遭党人禁锢，遂推鹿车，载妻子，捃拾自资。或寓息客庐，或依宿树廕。
现代文：遭党人禁锢，终身不得为官。推着鹿车，载着妻、子，拾麦穗自活，有时在客店里寓息，有时就依宿树下。
English: Imprisoned by party members, he was banned from holding public office for life. He pushed a deer cart, carried his wife and son, and gathered ears of wheat to support himself. Sometimes he slept in an inn, and sometimes he slept under a tree.

古文：如此十余年，乃结草室而居焉。
现代文：这样过了十多年，才盖了一间草房子住下来。
English: It took more than ten years before he built a grass house to live in.

古文：所止单陋，有时粮粒尽，穷居自若，言貌无改。
现代文：住的地方偏僻，有时粮食没有了，范冉也安之若素，言语容貌不改常态。
English: The place where they live is remote, sometimes there is no food, their appearance is normal, and their speech and appearance do not change.

古文：闾里歌之曰： 甑中生尘范史云，釜中生鱼范莱芜。 
现代文：闾里为之歌说 ：甑中生尘范史云，釜中生鱼范莱芜。 
English: There is a song about it in the Bailiwick of Luoyang: "Fresh fish in the kettle, fresh fish in the pot, fresh fish in the pot."

古文：及党禁解，为三府所辟，乃应司空命。
现代文：党禁解除以后，被三府征召，应了司空之命。
English: After the party ban was lifted, he was called up by the three prefectures and obeyed the order of Siku.

古文：是时西羌反叛，黄巾作难，制诸府掾属，不得妄有去就。冉首自劾退，诏书特原不理罪。
现代文：这时西羌反叛，黄巾作乱，朝廷命令各府掾属不得随便进人，范冉自己请按罪退职，诏书特原宥不论罪。
English: At this time, Xidi rebelled, the yellow scarf caused a disturbance, and the imperial court ordered all prefectures and subordinates not to arbitrarily enter people, and asked them to resign according to their crimes. The imperial edict specifically exempted them regardless of their crimes.

古文：又辟太尉府，以疾不行。
现代文：又征召大尉府，托病不去。
English: He was also conscripted to the captain's office, but did not go because of illness.

古文：中平二年，年七十四，卒于家。
现代文：中平二年，七十四岁，死在家里。
English: In the second year of Zhongping, at the age of seventy-four, he died at home.

古文：临命遗令敕其子曰： 吾生于昏暗之世，值乎淫侈之俗，生不得匡世济时，死何忍自同于世！
现代文：临终时，遗嘱告他的儿子说： 我生在昏庸黑暗的时代，适逢淫逸奢侈的社会风俗，在生不能救世济时，死又何能自同于世！
English: On his deathbed, he told his son: "I was born in a dark and mediocre time, a time of lascivious and extravagant social customs. When life cannot save the world, how can death do the same?

古文：气绝便敛，敛以时服，衣足蔽形，棺足周身，敛毕便穿，穿毕便埋。
现代文：气绝就装殓，用普通的衣服装殓，衣只要能遮蔽形体算了，棺材只要能够放得下我的身体，殓完便挖穴，穴挖好了，就埋。
English: I'll decorate it when I'm out of breath, I'll decorate it with ordinary clothes, as long as the clothes can cover my body, the coffin can hold my body, I'll dig a hole when I'm done, when the hole is dug, I'll bury it.

古文：其明堂之奠，干饭寒水，饮食之物，勿有所下。
现代文：圹中祭奠，干饭寒水，饮食一类的东西，都不要。
English: You don't need to bring anything for the ceremony, cold water for dry rice, or food.

古文：坟封高下，令足自隐。
现代文：坟的高下，使人站着能隐没肘子就行。
English: Under the height of the grave, it is enough for a person to stand up and be able to hide his elbows.

古文：知我心者，李子坚、王子炳也。今皆不在，制之在尔，勿令乡人宗亲有所加也。 
现代文：晓得我心思的是李子坚、王子炳二人，现在他们都不在，规定如此，不要使乡人宗族亲友增加什么的。 
English: I know that I am thinking of two people, Li Zijian and Wang Zhe, but they are both away at the moment. The rule is, don't add anything to the relatives and friends of the villagers.

古文：于是三府各遣令史奔吊。
现代文：于是二府各派令史奔丧致吊。
English: As a result, each faction in the two prefectures ordered Shi to hang himself.

古文：大将军何进移书陈留太守，累行论谥，佥曰宜为贞节先生。
现代文：大将军何进写信给陈留太守，收集范冉生平行事，论定谥号，大家都说应名 贞节先生 。
English: General He Jin wrote a letter to Chen Liu Taizhou, collected Fan Ran's life and deeds, and decided on a nickname. Everyone said that he should be called Mr. Zheng Jie.

古文：会葬者二千余人，刺史郡守各为立碑表墓焉。
现代文：参加送葬的有二千多人，刺史郡守各为范冉立碑表墓。
English: More than two thousand people attended the funeral, and each of the governors of Zhishi County erected a monument for Fan Ran.

古文：戴就字景成，会稽上虞人也。
现代文：◆戴就传，戴就字景成，会稽郡上虞县人。
English: ◆Dai Jichuan, Dai Jicheng, a native of Shangyu County.

古文：仕郡仓曹掾，杨州刺史欧阳参奏太守成公浮臧罪，遣部从事薛安案仓库簿领，收就于钱唐县狱。
现代文：出仕郡仓曹掾，扬州刺史欧阳参奏劾太守成公浮贪污罪，派部从事薛安查仓库档案账簿，收捕戴就系钱塘县监狱。
English: County Cang Cao Wei, Yangzhou Zhishi Ouyang participated in the impeachment of Taishou Chenggong for embezzlement, assigned to investigate Xue An's warehouse archives and accounts, and arrested and detained in Qiantang County Prison.

古文：幽囚考掠，五毒参至。
现代文：深囚拷打，五毒酷刑：鞭、瞂、灼、徽、纟墨，交互使用。
English: Deep-prisoner torture, five poisons torture: whip, shackle, burning, badge, ink, used interchangeably.

古文：就慷慨直辞，色不变容。
现代文：戴就意气慷慨，敢说敢道，颜色不变。
English: Dai is generous in spirit, dares to speak out, and his color does not change.

古文：又烧鋘斧，使就挟于肘腋。
现代文：又烧钅吴斧，命令戴就挟在肘腋。
English: He also burned the Wu axe and ordered him to wear it on his elbow.

古文：就语狱卒： 可熟烧斧，勿令冷。 
现代文：戴就对狱卒说： 把斧烧透一些，不要冷了。 
English: Dai said to the jailer: "Burn the axe a bit more, don't let it get cold."

古文：每上彭考，因止饭食不肯下，肉焦毁墯地者，掇而食之。
现代文：每次上郥考，因止饭食不肯下，肉被烧焦烂，落在地上的，戴就拾起来就吃。
English: Every time he took the entrance examination, he refused to go down because he had finished his meal. The meat was burnt and rotten and fell on the ground. Dai picked it up and ate it.

古文：主者穷竭酷惨，无复余方，乃卧就覆船下，以马通薰之。
现代文：审讯者的各种酷刑使用完了，再没有别的什么方法了，于是让戴就卧在复船底下，用马粪熏他。
English: After the interrogators had used all kinds of torture, there was nothing else they could do, so they made him lie under the ferry and smoked him with horse dung.

古文：一夜二日，皆谓已死，发船视之，就方张眼大骂曰： 何不益火，而使灭绝！ 
现代文：两天一夜，都说戴就已经熏死了，把船翻过来一看，戴就正张眼大骂道 ：为什么不加一点火，使熏死灭绝！ 
English: For two days and one night, it was said that Dai had already been smoked to death. When he turned the boat over and looked at it, Dai opened his eyes wide and cursed: Why not add a little fire to make the smoke die out!

古文：又复烧地，以大针刺指爪中，使以把土，爪悉墯落。
现代文：又再烧他，用大针刺戴就指甲中，使戴就抓土，指甲统统堕落。
English: He was burned again, and with a large needle he was pierced in the nail, causing the nail to scratch the ground, and the nails all fell off.

古文：主者以状白安，安呼见就，谓曰： 太守罪秽狼藉，受命考实，君何故以骨肉拒扞邪？ 
现代文：审讯者把这种情况告诉薛安，安把戴就叫来，对他说 ：太守罪恶累累，我奉命考实，你为什么用骨肉抗拒呢？ 
English: The interrogator told Xue An about this situation, and An called Dai and said to him: "You have committed a lot of crimes, I was ordered to investigate, why are you resisting with your own flesh and blood?

古文：就据地答言： 太守剖符大臣，当以死报国。
现代文：戴就据地答道 ：太守剖符大臣，应当以死报国。
English: Dai justifiably replied, "As the crown prince and minister of the imperial seal, I should serve my country even if I die."

古文：卿虽衔命，固宜申断冤毒，奈何诬枉忠良，强相掠理，令臣谤其君，子证其父！
现代文：您虽然是奉命审讯，本应当申断冤狱，为什么要诬陷忠良，强行逼供，令臣子诽谤君上，儿子作证父亲的不是！
English: Although you were ordered to conduct the trial, you should have claimed unjust imprisonment. Why did you frame Tadayoshi, force him to confess, make his vassals slander him, and his son testify against his father?

古文：薛安庸騃，忸行无义，就考死之日，当白之于天，与群鬼杀汝于亭中。
现代文：你薛安庸碌愚马矣，惯行不义，我被拷死的一天，当告诉老天爷，与群鬼杀你于亭中。
English: You Xue An Yong Rong Ma Yu Yu, a habitual wrongdoer, the day I was tortured to death, you should tell God that I will kill you in the pavilion with a group of ghosts.

古文：如蒙生全，当手刃相裂！ 
现代文：如果我不死，当亲手杀了你，裂了你的尸体。 
English: If I don't die, I'll kill you with my own hands and dismember your body.

古文：安深奇其壮节，即解械，更与美谈，表其言辞，解释郡事。
现代文：薛安极欣赏戴就的义烈壮节，马上解除了他的脚镣手铐，再同他好好的谈话，表扬他的言词，解释郡事。
English: Xue An extremely appreciated Dai's act of bravery. He immediately removed his shackles and handcuffs, and then had a good conversation with him, praising his words and explaining the county's affairs.

古文：征浮还京师，免归乡里。
现代文：征成公浮回京师，免职送回乡里。
English: He was conscripted back to the capital and sent back to his hometown.

古文：太守刘宠举就孝廉，光禄主事，病卒。
现代文：太守刘宠举戴就孝廉，光禄主事，病死。
English: The Great Guardian Liu Ji, who was held in high regard for his filial piety, was ill and died.

古文：赵苞字威豪，甘陵东武城人。
现代文：◆赵苞传，赵苞字威豪，甘陵东武城人。
English: ◆ Zhao Bingzhuan, Zhao Bingzhi Weihao, a resident of Dongwu City, Ganling.

古文：从兄忠，为中常侍，苞深耻其门族有宦官名势，不与忠交通。
现代文：叔伯哥哥赵忠，为中常侍，赵苞以门族有宦官为奇耻大辱，不与赵忠来往。
English: His uncle and elder brother, Zhao Zhong, was a middle-ranking attendant, and Zhao Yao regarded it as a great disgrace for his family to have a eunuch, and did not associate with Zhao Zhong.

古文：初仕州郡，举孝廉，再迁广陵令。
现代文：先出仕州郡，举孝廉，升广陵令。
English: The first to go was Shizhou County, followed by Xiaolian and Shangguanglingling.

古文：视事三年，政教清明，郡表其状，迁辽西太守。
现代文：任职三年，政治教化清明，郡上表朝廷，陈说赵苞的行事，升辽西太守。
English: He served for three years. His political education was clear. He was sent to the county to represent the imperial court. He was promoted to the position of the West Liao governor.

古文：抗厉威严，名振边俗。
现代文：雷厉风行，名声著于边地。
English: He was very popular and his reputation spread far and wide.

古文：以到官明年，遣使迎母及妻子，垂当到郡，道经柳城，值鲜卑万余人入塞寇钞，苞母及妻子遂为所劫质，载以击郡。
现代文：到职的第二年，派人迎接他的母亲和妻、子，快到郡了，经过柳城，碰上鲜卑一万多人入塞侵犯掳掠，赵苞的母亲及妻、子，被鲜卑劫持作人质，用车子载了攻击郡境。
English: In the second year of his appointment, he sent someone to welcome his mother and his wife and son, who were about to arrive in the county. Passing through Liucheng, he encountered more than 10,000 Xianbei who invaded and plundered the county. Zhao Wei's mother and his wife and son were taken hostage by Xianbei and attacked the county border with a car.

古文：苞率步骑二万，与贼对阵。
现代文：赵苞带领步兵骑兵二万人，与贼对阵。
English: Zhao Wei led 20,000 infantry and cavalry to fight against the bandits.

古文：贼出母以示苞，苞悲号谓母曰： 为子无状，欲以微禄奉养朝夕，不图为母作祸。
现代文：贼把赵苞的母亲带到阵地给赵苞看，赵苞悲痛呼号对母亲说 ：作儿子的无用，想得一点俸禄养母亲，没有想到反害了母亲。
English: The thief brought Zhao Yao's mother to the position to show her to Zhao Yao. Zhao Yao cried out in grief and said to his mother: "It's useless to be a son. I wanted to get a little salary to support my mother, but I didn't think about harming my mother."

古文：昔为母子，今为王臣，义不得顾私恩、毁忠节，唯当万死，无以塞罪。 
现代文：从前是母亲的儿子，现在是皇上的臣子，大义不得顾私恩，毁忠节，只当万死，无法抵罪。 
English: Once he was his mother's son, but now he is the emperor's vassal. No matter how great the righteousness, no matter how great the favor, no matter how great the disloyalty, no matter how great the death, no matter how great the guilt.

古文：母遥谓曰： 威豪，人各有命，何得相顾，以亏忠义！
现代文：母亲远远地对赵苞说： 威豪，各人有各人的命，哪能相顾，以损忠义！
English: His mother said to Zhao Yao from a distance: "Weihao, everyone has their own life, how can you care for each other to the detriment of loyalty!

古文：昔王陵母对汉使伏剑，以固其志，尔其勉之。 
现代文：从前王陵的母亲对汉朝使臣伏剑而死，以坚定王陵的志气，尔当勉励啊！ 
English: Once upon a time, Wang Ling's mother died by falling on her sword for the Han Dynasty envoys. Let's encourage Wang Ling's determination!

古文：苞即时进战，贼悉摧破，其母妻皆为所害。
现代文：赵苞立即进击，贼全部被攻破，但赵苞的母亲和妻、子，都被贼杀害了。
English: Zhao Wei immediately attacked, the thieves were all defeated, but Zhao Wei's mother, wife and son were all killed by the thieves.

古文：苞殡敛母毕，自上归葬。
现代文：赵苞殡殓母亲后，上表请求归葬。
English: After Zhao Jun's mother's funeral, he requested to be buried.

古文：灵帝遣策吊慰，封鄃侯。
现代文：灵帝派人吊慰，封赵苞为俞阝侯。
English: Emperor Ling sent someone to offer condolences, and Zhao Yao was appointed to the post of magistrate.

古文：苞葬讫，谓乡人曰： 食禄而避难，非忠也；杀母以全义，非孝也。
现代文：赵苞安葬母亲以后，对乡人说： 食禄如果逃避祸难，不忠；杀母亲以全义，不孝。
English: After burying his mother in peace, Zhao Yao said to the villagers: "If you run away from misfortune, you are disloyal; if you kill your mother, you are full of righteousness and unfilial."

古文：如是，有何面目立于天下！ 
现代文：这样的人，有什么面目生在世上呢？ 
English: What is the face of such a person born into the world?

古文：遂欧血而死。
现代文：因呕血而死。
English: He vomited blood and died.

古文：向栩字甫兴，河内朝歌人，向长之后也。
现代文：◆向栩传、向栩字甫兴，河内朝歌人，向长的后代。
English: ◆ He is a descendant of Xiang Lv Chuan, Xiang Lv Zi Fu Xing, a poet of the Hanoi Dynasty, and Xiang Long.

古文：少为书生，性卓诡不伦。
现代文：年轻时为诸生，性情古怪不伦。
English: When he was young, he was a loner with an eccentric personality.

古文：恒读《老子》，状如学道。
现代文：经常读《老子》，似乎是个学道的样子。
English: He often reads "Lao Zi" and seems to be a scholar.

古文：又似狂生，好被发，著绛绡头。常于灶北坐板床上，如是积久，板乃有膝踝足指之处。
现代文：又像个疯子，喜欢披头散发，着红色生丝头，经常在灶北坐板床上，这样年久月深，板上留有膝踝足指的痕迹。
English: And like a madman, he likes to spread his hair, with a red raw silk head, often sitting on the north side of the kitchen on a board bed, so old and deep, there are traces of knees, ankles and toes on the board.

古文：不好语言而喜长啸。
现代文：不喜欢说话，却喜欢大声长叫。
English: Doesn't like to talk, but likes to scream.

古文：宾客从就，辄伏而不视。
现代文：宾客想从他干什么的，往往隐匿不见。
English: What guests want from him is often hidden from view.

古文：有弟子，名为 颜渊 、 子贡 、 季路 、 冉有 之辈。
现代文：有弟子，名为 颜渊 、 子贡 、 季路 、 冉有 之辈。
English: There are disciples named Yan Yuan, Zigong, Ji Lu, Ran You.

古文：或骑驴入市，乞丐于人。或悉要诸乞兒俱归止宿，为设酒食。
现代文：有时骑着毛驴入市，向人讨吃；有时邀了全体乞儿到他家住宿，为他们设置酒食。
English: Sometimes he rode a donkey into the market and begged for food; sometimes he invited all the beggars to stay at his house and provided them with food and drink.

古文：时人莫能测之。
现代文：当时人不知道他的深浅。
English: At that time, people didn't know what he was up to.

古文：郡礼请辟，举孝廉、贤良方正、有道，公府辟，皆不到。
现代文：郡里备礼请征召，举孝廉、贤良方正，有道，公府征召，都不去。
English: In the county, those who are ready to be drafted, those who are filial and honest, those who are virtuous, and those who are conscripted by the government, will not go.

古文：又与彭城姜肱、京兆韦著并征，栩不应。
现代文：又与彭城姜肱、京兆韦著一道被征召，向栩不应。
English: He was also conscripted together with Pengcheng Jiangyao and Beijing Zhaowei, and he should not have been conscripted.

古文：后特征，到，拜赵相。
现代文：后来朝廷特征，到，授赵相。
English: Later, the imperial court awarded Zhao the title of Zhao Xiang.

古文：及之官，时人谓其必当脱素从俭，而栩更乘鲜车，御良马，世疑其始伪。
现代文：去赴任时，当时人说向栩一定会保持俭朴的，但向栩却改乘着华丽的车子，驾着良马，社会上怀疑他原来是个伪君子。
English: When he took office, it was said that he would remain frugal, but instead he rode a magnificent car and drove a good horse. The society suspected that he was a hypocrite.

古文：及到官，略不视文书，舍中生蒿莱。
现代文：到任后，全不看文书，官舍中蒿莱丛生。
English: After taking office, he did not look at the paperwork at all, and there were a lot of scandals in the official residence.

古文：征拜侍中，每朝廷大事，侃然正色，百官惮之。
现代文：征授侍中，每逢朝廷大事，凛然正色，百官都怕他。
English: As a samurai, whenever there was a big event in the imperial court, he was always in the right mood, and all the officials were afraid of him.

古文：会张角作乱，栩上便宜，颇讥刺左右，不欲国家兴兵，但遣将于河上北向读《孝经》，贼自当消灭。
现代文：适逢张角作乱，向栩上书陈述国家利害得失的事，稍稍讽刺了皇上左右的人，不想国家用兵，只要遣将在河上朝北读《孝经》，贼自然会消灭。
English: At the right time, Zhang Jiao made a disturbance and told Chu Shangshu about the state's gains and losses, slightly satirizing the people around the emperor. He did not want the state to use soldiers. As long as he sent Zhang Jiao to the north of the river to read "Filial Piety," the thieves would naturally be eliminated.

古文：中常侍张让谗栩不欲令国家命将出师，疑与角同心，欲为内应。
现代文：中常侍张让诬陷向栩不要国家命将出师，怀疑向栩与张角是一路人，想作内应。
English: Chang Zheng's attendant Zhang Zhan framed Xiang Tuo not to be the national leader, suspected that Xiang Tuo and Zhang Jiao were the same person and wanted to meddle.

古文：收送黄门北寺狱，杀之。
现代文：收捕送黄门北寺狱，杀了。
English: He was arrested and sent to Huangmen North Temple Prison. He was killed.

古文：谅辅字汉儒，广汉新都人也。
现代文：◆谅辅传，谅辅字汉儒，广汉新都人。
English: ◆Understand the auxiliary transmission, understand the auxiliary characters of Chinese Confucianism, Guanghan Xintuo people.

古文：仕郡为五官掾。
现代文：出仕郡为五官掾。
English: There are five government posts in the dispatching county.

古文：时夏大旱，太守自出祈祷山川，连日而无所降。
现代文：当时夏天大旱，太守亲自出去祈祷山川，连日不下雨。
English: At that time, there was a severe drought in the summer, and the Emperor himself went out to pray for the mountains and rivers, and it did not rain for days.

古文：辅乃自暴庭中，慷慨咒曰： 辅为股肱，不能进谏纳忠，荐贤退恶，和调阴阳，承顺天意，至令天地否隔，万物焦枯，百姓喁喁，无所诉告，咎尽在辅。
现代文：谅辅于是光着身子暴晒庭中，慷慨激昂，祈祷道 ：我谅辅作为太守的辅佐，有如手足，不能劝谏进忠，举贤人，斥退坏人和调阴阳，承顺天意，至使天地否隔，万物焦枯，百姓延颈相望，没有地方诉苦，罪咎都在我的不是。
English: Therefore, he exposed his naked body to the sun in the courtyard, impassioned, and prayed, "I, as an assistant to the daimyo, am like a limb. I can't persuade the eunuchs to be loyal, elevate the sages, repel the evil-doers and adjust the yin and yang, obey the will of heaven, so that heaven and earth are not separated, all things are scorched, the people are looking at each other, there is no place to complain, and the blame is all on me.

古文：今郡太守改服责己，为民祈福，精诚恳到，未有感彻。
现代文：现在太守改服责备自己，为老百姓求福，精诚恳切，没有得到上天的感应。
English: Now he is too ashamed to change his clothes, blames himself, and prays for the people, earnestly and sincerely, and has not received God's inspiration.

古文：辅今敢自祈请，若至日中不雨，乞以身塞无状。 
现代文：我谅辅现在决定自己求情，如果到中午不下雨，请以我的身子抵我的无德。 
English: I have now decided to intercede. If it doesn't rain by noon, please use my body to atone for my lack of virtue.

古文：于是积薪柴聚茭茅以自环，搆火其旁，将自焚焉。
现代文：于是用薪柴干草把自己包围起来，置火在旁，准备引火烧身。
English: So he surrounded himself with firewood and hay, set a fire next to him, and prepared to set himself on fire.

古文：未及日中时，而天云晦合，须臾澍雨，一郡沾润，世以此称其志诚。
现代文：还没有到中午时，天忽然阴云四合，沛然下雨，一郡沾润。当时社会上说是他的至诚所感。
English: It was not yet noon when the sky suddenly became overcast and it rained heavily, drenching the whole county. At the time, it was said in the community that this was his sincere feeling.

古文：刘翊字子相，颍川颍阴人也。
现代文：◆刘翊传，刘翊字子相，颍川颍阴人。
English: ◆ Liu Xuan Chuan, Liu Xuan Zi Xiang, Lu Chuan Zi Yin Ren.

古文：家世丰产，常能周旋而不有其惠。
现代文：家里世世代代是有钱人家，经常救济贫困，但并不认为自己作了好事。
English: His family has been rich for generations, and he often helps the poor, but he doesn't think he's done anything good.

古文：曾行于汝南界中，有陈国张季礼远赴师丧，遇寒冰车毁，顿滞道路。
现代文：曾经行至汝南境中，遇着陈国张季礼远赴师丧，车子被坚水毁了，阻滞路上。
English: I once traveled to the southern part of the country, and when Chen Guo and Zhang Jili went to the teacher's funeral, the car was destroyed by hard water, blocking the road.

古文：翊见而谓曰： 君慎终赴义，行宜速达。 
现代文：刘翊见了问道： 你赴老师的丧事，应当迅速赶到才好。 
English: When Liu Ye saw this, he asked: If you are going to your teacher's funeral, you had better get there quickly.

古文：即下车与之，不告姓名，自策马而去。
现代文：立即下车，把车子给了张季礼，连姓名也不告诉他，挥鞭打马走了。
English: He immediately got out of the car, gave the car to Zhang Qili, did not even tell him his name, and whipped the horse away.

古文：季礼意其子相也，后故到颍阴，还所假乘。
现代文：张季礼猜想是刘子相，后来专程到颍阴，把车还给了他。
English: Zhang Qili guessed that it was Liu Zixiang, and later made a special trip to Suyin to return the car to him.

古文：翊闭门辞行，不与相见。
现代文：刘翊闭门辞行，不与他相见。
English: Liu Ye resigned behind closed doors and refused to meet with him.

古文：常守志卧疾，不屈聘命。
现代文：平常守志在家养病，不违志应聘。
English: As usual, Shou Zhi recuperated at home and applied for the job.

古文：河南种拂临郡，引为功曹，翊以拂名公之子，乃为起焉。
现代文：河南种拂到郡，引用刘翊为功曹，刘翊认为种拂是名公种詗的儿子，出来任职。
English: Henan seed whisk to the county, citing Liu Wei as a meritorious person, Liu Wei believes that the seed whisk is the son of the famous father-in-law seed whisk, and comes out to serve.

古文：拂以其择时而仕，甚敬任之。
现代文：种拂认为刘翊是择时出仕，非常敬重他。
English: The seed whisk believes that Liu Ye is the one who chooses when to serve, and respects him very much.

古文：阳翟黄纲恃程夫人权力，求占山泽以自营植。
现代文：阳翟黄纲依恃程夫人的权势，要求占山泽地经营种植。
English: The impotent Huang Gang, relying on the power of Mrs. Yu Cheng, demanded the management and planting of mountains and lakes.

古文：拂召翊问曰： 程氏贵盛，在帝左右，不听则恐见怨，与之则夺民利，为之奈何？ 
现代文：种拂召见刘翊问道 ：程氏贵盛，在皇上的左右，不准，就怕惹怨，给他，这是侵夺百姓的利益，怎么办呢？ 
English: Liu Xi asked: "Cheng's wealth is on the emperor's right and left. If you don't allow it, you may cause resentment. If you give it to him, it is an encroachment on the people's interests. What should you do?

古文：翊曰： 名山大泽不以封，盖为民也。
现代文：刘翊道 ：名山大泽不以封人，是为了老百姓。
English: Liu Bingdao: The famous mountain glacier does not belong to anyone, it is for the people.

古文：明府听之，则被佞倖之名矣。若以此获祸，贵子申甫，则自以不孤也。 
现代文：太守依了他的要求，那就会得到谄媚的名声，如果因此获了祸患，令郎君申甫自不会成为孤儿的啊。 
English: If the daimyō had complied with his request, he would have gained a reputation as a charmer. If he had met with misfortune as a result, he would not have become an orphan.

古文：拂从翊言，遂不与之。
现代文：种拂听了刘翊的话，不给黄纲。
English: After listening to Liu Yi's words, he did not give Huang Gang.

古文：乃举翊为孝廉，不就。
现代文：于是举刘翊为孝廉，不就。
English: Therefore, it is not enough to elevate Liu Wei to the position of filial piety.

古文：后黄巾贼起，郡县饥荒，翊救给乏绝，盗其食者数百人。
现代文：后来黄巾贼起来，郡县饥荒，刘翊救济饥民共几百人。
English: Later, yellow scarf thieves arose, counties and counties suffered from famine, and Liu Ye provided relief to the starving people, a total of several hundred people.

古文：乡族贫者，死亡则为具殡葬，嫠独则助营妻娶。
现代文：乡里家族中的贫困户，死的帮助埋葬，寡妇鳏夫帮助婚娶。
English: The poor in rural families help to bury the dead, and widows and widowers help to marry.

古文：献帝迁都西京，翊举上计掾。
现代文：献帝迁都西京，刘翊举为上计掾。
English: Emperor Xian moved the capital to West Beijing, and Liu Bei was elevated to the highest position.

古文：是时寇贼兴起，道路隔绝，使驿稀有达者。
现代文：这时盗贼四起，道路不通，使驿极少能达到的。
English: At this time, the thieves are everywhere, the road is impassable, so that it is rarely possible to reach the cocoon.

古文：翊夜行昼伏，乃到长安。
现代文：刘翊晚上走，白天隐伏不动，才到了长安。
English: Liu Yao walked at night and remained motionless during the day before arriving in Chang'an.

古文：诏书嘉其忠勤，特拜议郎，迁陈留太守。
现代文：诏书表扬他的忠勤，特任以议郎，升陈留太守。
English: The imperial edict commended his loyalty, and he was specially appointed as a conciliator, and promoted to the position of chenryu taishu.

古文：翊散所握珍玩，唯余车马，自载东归。
现代文：刘翊散失了所有珍玩，只剩了随身的车马，自己乘着东归。
English: Liu Yao lost all of his precious toys, and all that was left was his horse and carriage, which he rode back to the East.

古文：出关数百里，见士大夫病亡道次，翊以马易棺，脱衣敛之。
现代文：出关数百里，看见士大夫病死路边，无人埋葬，就用马换了棺材，脱掉身上的衣服为殓。
English: After traveling hundreds of miles, he saw that Shidafu had died of illness on the side of the road and there was no one to bury him, so he changed the coffin with a horse and took off his clothes to use as a coffin.

古文：又逢知故困馁于路，不忍委去，因杀所驾牛，以救其乏。
现代文：又遇上老朋友困饿路上，不忍心弃他们离去，就把驾车的牛杀了，救济他们。
English: He also met an old friend on the road who was starving. He couldn't bear to leave them, so he killed the cow driving the car to help them.

古文：众人止之，翊曰： 视没不救，非志士也。 
现代文：不少人要他莫这样作，刘翊说： 见死不救，不是志士。 
English: Many people asked him not to do this, but Liu Wei said, "If you can't save yourself, you're not a hero."

古文：遂俱饿死。
现代文：因皆饿死。
English: Because they all starved to death.

古文：王烈字彦方，太原人也。
现代文：◆王烈传，王烈字彦方，太原人。
English: ◆ Wang Lechuan, Wang Lechao Hikokata, Taiyuan people.

古文：少师事陈寔，以义行称乡里。
现代文：年轻从陈萛学习，以义行著名。
English: He learned from Chen Xi when he was young and is famous for his righteous deeds.

古文：有盗牛者，主得之，盗请罪曰： 刑戮是甘，乞不使王彦方知也。 
现代文：乡里有个偷牛贼，牛主把贼捉了，贼请罪道： 我心甘情愿接受刑戮，请您不要使王彦方知道啊。 
English: There was a cattle thief in the village. The owner of the cattle caught the thief. The thief pleaded: I am willing to accept the punishment. Please don't let Wang Yanfang know.

古文：烈闻而使人谢之，遗布一端。
现代文：王烈听说便使人感谢他，送他六丈布。
English: When Wang Lie heard about this, people thanked him and sent him six-layered cloth.

古文：或问其故，烈曰： 盗惧吾闻其过，是有耻恶之心。
现代文：有人问他这是什么原因，王烈说： 贼害怕我知道他的罪过，是有羞耻之心。
English: Someone asked him what the reason was, and Wang Lie said, "The thief is afraid that I will know his sins, and he is ashamed."

古文：既怀耻恶，必能改善，故以此激之。 
现代文：既然有羞耻之心，一定能够改恶从善，所以这样激励他。 
English: Since he has a sense of shame, he must be able to turn evil into good, so encourage him in this way.

古文：后有老父遗剑于路，行道一人见而守之，至暮，老父还寻，得剑，怪而问其姓名，以事告烈。
现代文：后来有一个老爷爷把剑遗失在路上，一个行人看见了便守在那里，到了夜晚，老爷爷回来，寻得剑，怪而问这个人姓甚名谁，不答。因以这事告诉了王烈。
English: Later, an old grandpa lost his sword on the road. A passerby saw it and stopped there. In the evening, the old grandpa came back, found the sword, and asked who this person's name was, but he didn't answer. So he told Wang Lei about this.

古文：烈使推求，乃先盗牛者也。
现代文：王烈使人调查，原来是以前偷牛的那个人。
English: Wang Li had someone investigate, and it turned out to be the man who had stolen the cow before.

古文：诸有争讼曲直，将质之于烈，或至涂而反，或望庐而还。
现代文：那些争讼曲直的人，准备请王烈评定是非时，有的走到道上就返，有的望见王烈的房子就回来了。
English: When the litigants were ready to ask Wang Lie to judge the rights and wrongs, some went to the road and returned, and some saw Wang Lie's house and returned.

古文：其以德感人若此。
现代文：王烈用德感人如此。
English: Wang Lie's use of virtue is so touching.

古文：察孝廉，三府并辟，皆不就。
现代文：举孝廉，三府征召，都不就。
English: It is not enough to be a filial son or daughter, or to be called up by the three prefectures.

古文：遭黄巾、董卓之乱，乃避地辽东，夷人尊奉之。
现代文：遭黄巾、董卓战乱，避地辽东，少数民族尊重他。
English: He was forced to flee to Liaodong after the Yellow Turban and Dong Zhuo Wars, and was respected by ethnic minorities.

古文：太守公孙度接以昆弟之礼，访州政事，欲以为长史。
现代文：太守公孙度以兄弟的礼接待他，访问政治的得失。
English: Grand Marshal Sun Du received him with brotherly courtesy and asked him about the political gains and losses.

古文：烈乃为商贾自秽，得免。
现代文：想用他为长史，王烈于是做买卖自己糟蹋自己，得以免于被公孙度任长史。
English: Wanting to use him as a long-term successor, Wang Lie then did business and wasted himself, so that he could avoid being appointed as a long-term successor by his grandson.

古文：曹操闻烈高名，遣征不至。
现代文：曹操知道王烈高名，派人征召，不至。
English: Cao Cao knew of Wang Lie's high reputation and sent someone to recruit him, but he did not come.

古文：建安二十四年，终于辽东，年七十八。
现代文：建安二十四年，死于辽东，年七十八。
English: Jianan 24 years old, died in Liaodong, 78 years old.

