古文：张仪说秦王曰： 臣闻之，弗知而言为不智，知而不言为不忠。
现代文：张仪游说秦王道： 我常听人说： 不知道事情的原由就发言是很不明智的；明白事理、可以为事情的解决出谋划策却不开口，那是不忠贞。 
English: Zhang Yi lobbied Qin Wang: I often hear people say: It is very unwise to speak without knowing the cause of the matter; if you understand the matter and can make suggestions for solving the matter, but do not speak, that is disloyalty.

古文：为人臣不忠当死，言不审亦当死。
现代文：作为臣子，对君王不忠就是死罪；说话不谨慎也该死。
English: As a courtier, disloyalty to the king is a capital offense; speaking carelessly is also punishable by death.

古文：虽然，臣愿悉言所闻，大王裁其罪。
现代文：尽管事情的出路如此，但我仍然愿意把所有见闻都说出来给大王听，请大王裁决定罪。
English: Despite the way things turned out, I'm still willing to tell the king everything I've seen and heard, and ask the king's judge to decide on the crime.

古文：臣闻，天下阴燕阳魏，连荆固齐，收余韩成从，将西南以与秦为难。
现代文：我听说四海之内，北方的燕国和南方的魏国又在连结荆楚，巩固同齐国的联盟，收罗残余的韩国势力，形成合纵的联合阵线，面向西方，与秦国对抗。
English: I heard that within the four seas, the northern state of Yan and the southern state of Wei are also linking Jingchu, consolidating the alliance with Qi, gathering the remnants of Korean forces, forming a vertical joint front, facing west, and confronting Qin.

古文：臣窃笑之。
现代文：对此我私下不禁失笑。
English: I can't help but laugh about this in private.

古文：世有三亡，而天下得之，其此之谓乎!
现代文：天下有三种亡国的情况，而天下终会有人来收拾残局，可能说的就是今天的世道！
English: There are three kinds of situations in which a country is destroyed, and someone will eventually come to clean up the mess. This may be the way of the world today!

古文：臣闻之曰： 以乱攻治者亡，以邪攻正者亡，以逆攻顺者亡。 
现代文：我听人说： 以治理混乱之国去攻打治理有序之国必遭败亡，以邪恶之国去攻打正义之国必遭败亡，以背逆天道之国去攻打顺应天道之国必遭败亡。 
English: I have heard people say, "If a country governed by chaos attacks a country governed by order, it will be defeated; if a country ruled by evil attacks a country ruled by justice, it will be defeated; if a country ruled by evil attacks a country ruled by justice, it will be defeated; if a country ruled by evil attacks a country ruled by justice, it will be defeated; and if a country ruled by evil attacks a country ruled by justice, it will be defeated."

古文：今天下之府库不盈，囷仓空虚，悉其士民，张军数千百万，白刃在前，斧质在后，而皆去走，不能死，罪其百姓不能死也，其上不能杀也。
现代文：如今天下诸侯国储藏财货的仓库很不充实，囤积米粮的仓库也很空虚，它们征召所有人民，发动千百万计的军队，虽然是白刃在前，利斧在后，军士仍然都退却逃跑，不能和敌人拼死一战。其实并不是它们的人民不肯死战，而是由于统治者拿不出好办法进行教育。
English: Today, for example, the storehouses of the vassal states for storing wealth and goods are very insufficient, and the storehouses for hoarding rice and grain are also empty. They conscript all the people and launch millions of troops. Although the blade is in front and the axe is behind, the sergeants still retreat and flee, unable to fight to the death with the enemy. In fact, it is not that their people are unwilling to fight to the death, but because the rulers cannot come up with a good way to educate.

古文：言赏则不与，言罚则不行，赏罚不行，故民不死也。
现代文：说奖赏而不给予，说处罚却不执行，赏罚都不兑现，所以人民才不肯为国死战。
English: The reward is not given, the punishment is not carried out, and the reward and punishment are not fulfilled, so the people are not willing to fight to the death for the country.

古文： 今秦出号令而行赏罚，不攻无功相事也。
现代文：现在秦国赏罚分明，有功无功都按照实际情况进行奖惩。
English: Now Qin rewards and punishes clearly, and rewards and punishes according to the actual situation.

古文：出其父母怀衽之中，生未尝见寇也，闻战顿足徒裼，犯白刃，蹈煨炭，断死于前者比是也。夫断死与断生也不同，而民为之者是贵奋也。
现代文：人们离开父母怀抱之前，从来就没有见过敌人，所以一听说作战就跺脚、袒露胸膛，决心死战，迎着敌人的刀枪，勇往直前，赴汤蹈火，在所不惜，几乎全都决心要为国家死在战场上。
English: People had never seen an enemy before they left their parents' arms, so as soon as they heard about a battle, they stamped their feet, bared their chests, and resolved to fight to the death, to face the enemy's swords and guns, to go boldly forward, to go into the fire, but at the same time, almost all of them were determined to die on the battlefield for the country.

古文：一可以胜十，十可以胜百，百可以胜千，千可以胜万，万可以胜天下矣。
现代文：大王知道：一个人下定决心战死，和决心要逃生是不同的，但秦国人仍然愿意去战死，就是由于重视奋战至死精神的缘故。一个人可以战胜十人，十个人可以战胜百人，百人可以战胜千人，千人可以战胜万人，万人可以战胜全天下。
English: The great king knew that a person's determination to die in battle is different from the determination to escape, but the Qin people are still willing to die in battle because they value the spirit of fighting to the death. One person can defeat ten people, ten people can defeat a hundred people, a hundred people can defeat a thousand people, a thousand people can defeat ten thousand people, and ten thousand people can defeat the whole world.

古文：今秦地形，断长续短，方数千里，名师数百万，秦之号令赏罚，地形利害，天下莫如也。
现代文：如今秦国的地势，截长补短方圆有数千里，强大的军队有几百万。而秦国的号令和赏罚，险峻有利的地形，天下诸侯都望尘莫及。
English: Today, the terrain of Qin State has thousands of miles in circumference, and the powerful army has millions. And the orders and rewards and punishments of Qin State, with its precipitous and favorable terrain, are beyond the reach of all the princes in the world.

古文：以此与天下，天下不足兼而有也。
现代文：用这种优越条件和天下诸侯争雄，全天下也不够秦国吞并的。
English: Using this superior condition to compete with the world's princes, the whole world is not enough for Qin to annex.

古文：是知秦战未尝不胜，攻未尝不取，所当未尝不破也。开地数千里，此甚大功也。
现代文：由此可以知道，只要秦国作战绝对是战无不胜，攻无不取，所向无敌，完全可以开拓土地几千里，那将是很伟大的功业。
English: From this, we can know that as long as Qin's war is absolutely invincible, invincible, invincible, and can completely open up thousands of miles of land, it will be a great achievement.

古文：然而甲兵顿，士民病，蓄积索，田畴荒，囷仓虚，四邻诸侯不服，伯王之名不成，此无异故，谋臣皆不尽其忠也。
现代文：然而如今，秦国军队疲惫，人民穷困，积蓄用绝，田园荒废，仓库空虚，四邻诸侯不肯臣服，霸业不能树立，出现这种令人惊讶的情况并没有其他原因，主要是秦国谋臣不能尽忠的缘故。
English: However, today, the Qin army is exhausted, the people are impoverished, the savings are exhausted, the countryside is desolate, the warehouses are empty, the four neighboring princes refuse to submit, and hegemony cannot be established. There is no other reason for this surprising situation, mainly due to the fact that Qin's strategists cannot be loyal.

古文： 臣敢言往昔。
现代文：我愿用历史事实来加以说明。
English: I would like to illustrate this with historical facts.

古文：昔者齐南破荆，中破宋，西服秦，北破燕，中使韩、魏之君，地广而兵强，战胜攻取，诏令天下，济清河浊，足以为限，长城、钜坊，足以为塞。
现代文：从前齐国往南击破荆楚，往东战败了宋国，往西征服了秦国，向北打败了燕国，在中原地带又指挥韩、魏两国的君主。土地广大，兵强马壮，攻城略地，战无不胜，号令天下诸侯，清清的济水和混浊的黄河都是它的天然屏障，巨大的长城足可以作它的防守掩体。
English: In the past, the State of Qi defeated the State of Song in the south, the State of Chu in the east, the State of Qin in the west, the State of Yan in the north, and the monarchs of Han and Wei in the Central Plains. The land is vast, the soldiers are strong, the city is besieged, and the war is invincible. The clear water and the turbid Yellow River are its natural barrier, and the huge Great Wall foot can be used as its defensive cover.

古文：齐，五战之国也，一战不胜而无齐。故由此观之，夫战者万乘之存亡也。
现代文：齐国是一连五次战胜的强国，可是只战败一次，齐国就没有了，由此可见，用兵作战可以决定万乘大国的生死存亡。
English: Qi is a powerful country that has won five times in a row, but it has only been defeated once, and Qi is no more. It can be seen from this that the use of soldiers to fight can determine the life and death of a great country.

古文：且臣闻之曰： 削株掘根，无与祸邻，祸乃不存。 
现代文：我还听说： 斩草要除根，不给祸留下作为，祸患才不会存在。 
English: I have also heard it said that we must cut the weeds by uprooting them, and we must not leave any trace of the evil, so that the evil will not exist.

古文：秦与荆人战，大破荆，袭郢，取洞庭、五都、江南。荆王亡奔走，东伏于陈。
现代文：从前秦国和楚国作战，秦兵大败楚军，占领了楚国首都郢城，同时又占领了洞庭湖、五都、江南等地，楚王向东逃亡，藏在陈地。
English: During the war between the former Qin and Chu kingdoms, the Qin soldiers defeated the Chu army and occupied the capital of Chu, Shicheng, as well as Dongting Lake, the five capitals, and the south of the Yangtze River. King Chu fled to the east and hid in Chen.

古文：当是之时，随荆以兵，则荆可举。
现代文：在那个时候，只要把握时机攻打楚国，就可以占领楚国的全部土地。
English: At that time, as long as they seized the opportunity to attack Chu, they could occupy all the land of Chu.

古文：举荆，则其民足贪也，地足利也。东以强齐、燕，中陵三晋。然则是一举而伯王之名可成也，四邻诸侯可朝也。
现代文：而占领了楚国，那里的人民就足够使用，那里的物产就足可以满足物质需要，东面对抗齐、燕两国，中原可以凌架在三晋之上，如果这样就可以一举而完成霸业，使天下诸侯都来秦廷称臣。
English: But if they occupied Chu, the people there would have enough to live on, the goods there would be enough to meet their material needs, the east would be on an equal footing with Yan, and the Central Plains would tower above the Sanjin. If they did this, they could achieve hegemony in one fell swoop, and make all the princes of the world come to the Qin Dynasty to praise their vassals.

古文：而谋臣不为，引军而退，与荆人和。今荆人收亡国，聚散民，立社主，置宗庙，令帅天下西面以与秦为难，此固已无伯王之道一矣。
现代文：然而当时的谋臣不但不肯这样做，反而撤兵和楚人讲和，现在楚已收复了所有失地，重新集合逃散的人民，再度建立起宗庙和社稷之主，他们得以率领天下诸侯往西面来跟秦国对抗。这样，当然秦国就第一次失去了建立霸业的机会。
English: However, the strategists at that time not only refused to do so, but withdrew their troops and made peace with the Chu people. Now that Chu has regained all the lost land, reassembled the people who fled, and re-established the ancestral temple and the head of the community, they were able to lead the princes of the world to the west to confront Qin. In this way, of course, Qin lost the opportunity to establish hegemony for the first time.

古文：天下有比志而军华下，大王以诈破之，兵至梁郭，围梁数旬，则梁可拔。
现代文：后来其他诸侯国同心一致、联合兵临华阳城下。幸亏大王用诈术击溃了他们，一直进兵到魏都大梁外。当时只要继续围困几十天，就可以占领大梁城。
English: Later, other princely states joined forces and marched down to Huayang City. Fortunately, the great king defeated them with trickery and marched all the way to the outskirts of Dalian, the capital of Wei. At that time, as long as the siege continued for dozens of days, Dalian City could be occupied.

古文：拔梁，则魏可举。举魏，则荆、赵之志绝。荆、赵之志绝，则赵危。
现代文：占领大梁，就可以攻下魏国；攻下了魏国，赵、楚的联盟就拆散了，赵国就会处于危难之地。
English: If the Great Beam is occupied, Wei can be conquered; if Wei is conquered, the alliance of Zhao and Chu will be broken up, and Zhao will be in a critical situation.

古文：赵危而荆孤。
现代文：赵国陷入危难之地，楚国就孤立无援。
English: Zhao fell into a dangerous place, and Chu was left alone.

古文：东以强齐、燕，中陵三晋，然则是一举而伯王之名可成也，四邻诸侯可朝也。
现代文：这样秦国东可以威胁齐、燕，中间可以驾驭三晋，如此也可以一举建立霸王功业，使天下诸侯都来朝贺。
English: In this way, the east of Qin could threaten Qi and Yan, and the middle could control the three Jin dynasties. In this way, it was possible to establish the hegemony at one stroke, and make all the princes of the world come to congratulate.

古文：与魏氏和，令魏氏收亡国，聚散民，立社主，置宗庙，此固已无伯王之道二矣。
现代文：然而谋臣不但不肯这样做，反而引兵自退、与魏讲和，使魏国有了喘息的机会。如此就第二次失去了建立霸业的机会。
English: However, the advisors not only refused to do so, but instead withdrew their troops and made peace with Wei, giving Wei a chance to take a breather. Thus, the second opportunity to establish hegemony was lost.

古文：前者穰侯之治秦也，用一国之兵，而欲以成两国之功。
现代文：前不久穰侯为相，治理秦国，他用一国的军队，却想建立两国才能完成的功业。
English: Not long ago, he used the army of one country to govern Qin, but he wanted to establish the work that could be accomplished by the two countries.

古文：是故兵终暴灵于外，士民潞病于内，伯王之名不成，此固已无伯王之道三矣。
现代文：即使军队在边境外风吹日晒雨淋，人民在国内劳苦疲惫，霸王的功业却始终不能建立，这也就是第三次失去了建立霸业的机会。
English: Even if the army is in the wind, sun and rain outside the border, and the people are exhausted from domestic labor, the cause of hegemony can never be established. This is the third time that the opportunity to establish hegemony has been lost.

古文： 赵氏，中央之国也，杂民之所居也。
现代文：赵国在诸侯中位居中央，人民五方杂居。
English: The state of Zhao is in the middle of the principalities, and the people are mixed from five directions.

古文：其民轻而难用，号令不治，赏罚不信，地形不便，上非能尽其民力。
现代文：赵国民众轻浮而不好治理，以致使国家号令无法贯彻，赏罚毫无信用。赵国的地理位置不利于防守，统治者又不能使人民的潜力全部发挥出来，这一切已是一种亡国的形势了。
English: The people of Zhao are frivolous and difficult to govern, so that the state's orders cannot be implemented, and rewards and punishments have no credibility. The geographical location of Zhao is not conducive to defense, and the rulers cannot make the people's potential fully play out. All of this is already a situation of a ruined country.

古文：彼固亡国之形也，而不忧民氓，悉其士民，军于长平之下，以争韩之上党，大王以诈破之，拔武安。
现代文：再加上不体恤民间疾苦，几乎把全国的老百姓都征发到长平战场，去跟韩国争上党。大王以计谋战胜赵国，既而攻克武安。
English: Coupled with the fact that he did not sympathize with the hardships of the common people, he conscripted and sent almost all the common people of the country to the Changping battlefield to compete with South Korea for the party. The great king used stratagems to defeat Zhao and even conquered Wu'an.

古文：当是时，赵氏上下不相亲也，贵贱不相信，然则是邯郸不守，拔邯郸，完河间，引军而去，西攻修武，逾羊肠，降代、上党。
现代文：当时赵国君臣彼此不合作，官民也互不信赖，这样邯郸就无法固守，如果秦军攻下邯郸，在河间修正军队，再率领军队往西攻打修武，经过羊肠险塞，降服代和上党。
English: At that time, Zhao Guo's princes and ministers did not cooperate with each other, and the government and the people did not trust each other. As a result, it was impossible to hold on to Handan. If the Qin Army captured Handan, modified the army in Hebei, and then led the army to the west to attack and cultivate martial arts, it would pass through Sheep's Intestine, surrender and join the Party.

古文：代三十六县，上党十七县，不用一领甲，不苦一民，皆秦之有也。
现代文：代有县，上党有县，不用一副盔甲，不费一兵卒，就都成了秦国所有。
English: On behalf of a county, the upper party has a county, without a pair of armor, without the expense of a soldier, they all became the property of Qin.

古文：代、上党不战而已为秦矣，东阳河外不战而已反为齐矣，中呼池以北不战而已为燕矣。
现代文：代和上党不经过战争就成为秦国土地，赵国的东阳和河外等地不经过战争将反归齐国，中呼池以北之地不经过战争将属于燕国。
English: Daihe and Shangtang will become the land of Qin without a war, Dongyang and Hewai of Zhao will become the land of Qi without a war, and the land north of Zhonghuochi will become the land of Yan without a war.

古文：然则是举赵则韩必亡，韩亡则荆、魏不能独立。荆、魏不能独立，则是一举而坏韩，蠹魏，挟荆，以东弱齐、燕，决白马之口，以流魏氏。
现代文：既然如此，攻下赵国之后，韩国就必然灭亡，韩国灭亡以后，楚、魏就不能独立；楚魏既然不能独立就可一举攻破韩国；韩国既破，就伤害到魏国，然后再挟持楚国往东去削弱齐、燕，挖开白马津的河口来淹魏国。
English: Since this is the case, after conquering Zhao, Korea will inevitably perish. After the demise of Korea, Chu and Wei cannot become independent. Since Chu and Wei cannot become independent, they can break through Korea at one stroke. Once Korea is broken, it will hurt Wei, and then it will hold Chu to the east to weaken Qi and Yan, and dig out the mouth of the Baima River to flood Wei.

古文：一举而三晋亡，从者败。大王拱手以须，天下遍随而伏，伯王之名可成也。
现代文：如此一举就可以灭三晋，而六国的合纵联盟也势将瓦解，大王只要拱手在那里等着，天下诸侯就会一个跟着一个来投降，霸王之名号即刻就可以建立。
English: In this way, the Three Kingdoms can be destroyed in one fell swoop, and the alliance of six countries is also likely to collapse. As long as the great king waits there, the princes of the world will surrender one by one, and the name of the overlord can be established immediately.

古文：而谋臣不为，引军而退，与赵氏为和。
现代文：只可惜这一切都是假设，因为谋臣不但不这样做，反而自动退兵跟赵国讲和了。
English: It's just a pity that all of this is hypothetical, because the advisor not only does not do this, but instead automatically withdraws from the army and makes peace with Zhao Guo.

古文：以大王之明，秦兵之强，伯王之业，地尊不可得，乃取欺于亡国，是谋臣之拙也。
现代文：凭大王的贤明和秦兵的强盛，竟然建立不起天下霸主的基业，而且被既将灭亡的各诸侯国欺凌，这一切都是由于谋臣的愚昧笨拙所导致的。
English: With the wisdom of the great king and the strength of the Qin soldiers, they could not establish the foundation of the world's hegemon, and they were bullied by the various states that were about to perish. All of this was caused by the ignorance and clumsiness of the strategists.

古文：且夫赵当亡不亡，秦当伯不伯，天下固量秦之谋臣一矣。
现代文：赵国当亡不亡，秦国该称霸又不能称霸，天下人已经看透了秦国谋臣的本领高低，此其一。
English: Zhao should live and die, Qin should and should not dominate, the world has seen through Qin's ability to strategize, and this is the first.

古文：乃复悉卒乃攻邯郸，不能拔也，弃甲兵怒，战慄而却，天下固量秦力二矣，军乃引退，并于李下，大王又并军而致与战，非能厚胜之也，又交罢却，天下固量秦力三矣。
现代文：秦国曾用全国之兵，去攻打赵国的邯郸，不但没有攻下反而被敌人打得丢盔卸甲，将士们又气又怕地败下阵来，天下人已经看透了秦国将士的斗志，此其二。军队退下来以后，都聚集在李下，大王又重新编整努力督促将士们作战，可是并没有取得大胜，就纷纷罢兵撤退，天下人又都看透了秦国军队的战斗力，此其三。
English: Qin had used soldiers from all over the country to attack the capital of Zhao. However, instead of being conquered, they were beaten by the enemy and had to discard their armor. The soldiers were so angry and afraid that they lost the battle. People all over the world have seen through the fighting spirit of the soldiers of Qin, which is the second. After the army retreated, they all gathered under Li. The great king reorganized and made efforts to urge the soldiers to fight, but did not achieve a great victory, so they withdrew one after another. People all over the world have also seen through the combat effectiveness of the army of Qin, which is the third.

古文：内者量吾谋臣，外者极吾兵力。
现代文：在内看透了秦国的谋臣，在外看透了秦国的将士。
English: On the inside, he saw through the strategists of Qin, and on the outside, he saw through the soldiers of Qin.

古文：由是观之，臣以天下之从，岂其难矣。
现代文：由此观之，臣认为天下的合纵力量，难道不是更难对付了。
English: From this point of view, I think it is more difficult to deal with the combined forces of the world.

古文：内者吾甲兵顿，士民病，蓄积索，田畴荒，囷仓虚；外者天下比志甚固。愿大王有以虑之也。
现代文：秦国的军队疲劳不堪，人民极端困顿，再加上积蓄用尽、田园荒芜、仓库空虚；而国外诸侯合纵，团结一致，甚为坚固，但愿大王能多加考虑这危机！
English: The army of Qin was exhausted, and the people were extremely hard-pressed, with depleted savings, desolate countryside, and empty warehouses. Meanwhile, the foreign lords were united and very strong. I hope the great king can give more consideration to this crisis!

古文： 且臣闻之，战战慄慄，日慎一日。
现代文：我又听人说： 战战兢兢，日慎一日。 
English: And I heard another saying, Be alert and of a sober mind all the day.

古文：苟慎其道，天下可有也。
现代文：假如谨慎得法，可以占有全天下。
English: If we are prudent, we can take over the whole world.

古文：何以知其然也?
现代文：怎么知道是这样呢？
English: How is that possible?

古文：昔者纣为天子，帅天下将甲百万，左饮于淇谷，有饮于洹水，淇水竭而洹水不流，以与周武为难。
现代文：古代殷纣王做天子，率领天下百万大军，左边的军队还在淇谷饮马，右边军队已到洹水喝水了，竟把淇水和洹水都喝干了。
English: In ancient times, King Yin Xuan was the son of heaven and led the world's million-strong army. The army on the left was still drinking horses in Qi Valley, while the army on the right had already arrived at Surabaya to drink water, but ended up drinking both Qi Valley and Surabaya.

古文：武王将素甲三干领，战一日，破纣之国，禽其身，据其地，而有其民，天下莫不伤。
现代文：殷纣王是用这么雄壮庞大的大军跟周武王作战，可是武王只率领了名穿着简单盔甲的战士，仅仅经过一天战斗就打败了纣王之军，俘虏了殷的全部臣民，拥有了殷的全部的土地，天下竟没有一个人同情纣王。
English: King Yin fought against King Zhou with such a large and powerful army. However, King Wu only led famous soldiers wearing simple armor. After only one day of fighting, he defeated the army of King Yin, captured all the subjects of Yin, and owned all the land of Yin. No one in the world sympathized with King Yin.

古文：智伯帅三国之众，以攻赵襄主于晋阳，决水灌之，三年，城且拔矣。襄主错龟，数策占兆，以视利害，何国可降，而使张孟谈。
现代文：以前智伯率领率领韩智魏前往晋阳去攻打赵襄子，智伯掘出晋水河采取水攻，经过三年之久的攻打，当晋阳城快被攻下时，赵襄子用乌龟进行占卜，看看自己国家命运的吉凶，预测双方到底谁败降。
English: In the past, Zhi Bo led Han Zhi Wei to Jinyang to attack Zhao Xiangzi. Zhi Bo dug out the Jinshui River to take the water attack. After three years of attack, when Jinyang City was about to be captured, Zhao Xiangzi used a turtle to divinize, to see the fate of his country, and to predict who would be defeated.

古文：于是潜行而出，反智伯之约，得两国之众，以攻智伯之国，禽其身，以成襄子之功。
现代文：赵襄子又使用反间计，派赵国大臣张孟谈，悄悄出城，破坏韩、魏与智伯的盟约，结果争取到韩魏两国的合作，然后合力来攻打智伯，终于大败智伯的军队，俘虏了智伯本人。张孟谈于是成为赵襄子的一大功臣。
English: Zhao Xiangzi also used a countermeasure, sending Zhao's minister Zhang Mengdan to secretly leave the city and break the alliance between Han, Wei and Zhibo. As a result, he won the cooperation of Han, Wei and Zhibo, and then joined forces to attack Zhibo. Finally, he defeated Zhibo's army and captured Zhibo himself. Zhang Mengdan then became a great hero of Zhao Xiangzi.

古文：今秦地断长续短，方数千里，名师数百万，秦国号令赏罚，地形利害，天下莫如也。以此与天下，天下可兼而有也。
现代文：如今秦国的号令严明赏罚分明，再加上地形的优势，天下诸侯没有能比得上的。如果凭这种优势，而与天下诸侯争胜，整个天下就可以被秦征服。
English: Nowadays, the Qin state's proclamation is strict and clear about rewards and punishments. Coupled with the advantage of the terrain, there is nothing comparable in the world. If this advantage is used to compete with the world's princes, the whole world can be conquered by Qin.

古文： 臣昧死望见大王，言所以举破天下之从，举赵亡韩，臣荆、魏，亲齐、燕，以成伯王之名，朝四邻诸侯之道。
现代文：臣冒死罪，希望见到大王，谈论秦国的战略以及怎样能够破坏天下的合纵战略及其力量，灭赵亡韩，迫使楚魏称臣，联合齐、燕加盟，建立霸王之业，让天下诸侯都来朝贡。
English: The vassal committed the capital crime, hoping to see the great king, talking about the strategy of Qin and how to destroy the world's conspiracy strategy and its power, exterminate Zhao and Han, force Chu Wei to call himself a vassal, unite Qi and Yan to join, establish the overlord's business, and let the world's vassals come to pay tribute.

古文：大王试听其说，一举而天下之从不破，赵不举，韩不亡，荆、魏不臣，齐、燕不亲，伯王之名不成，四邻诸侯不朝，大王斩臣以徇于国，以主为谋不忠者。 
现代文：请大王姑且采用我的策略，假如不能一举而瓦解天下合纵，攻不下赵，灭不了韩，魏、楚不称臣，齐、燕不加盟，霸王之业不能建立，天下诸侯不来朝贡，那就请大王砍下我的头，在全国各地轮流示众，以惩戒那些为君主谋划而不尽忠的臣子。 
English: I would like to ask the king to adopt my strategy. If it is not possible to break up the whole country at one stroke, if it is not possible to conquer Zhao, if it is not possible to destroy Han, if Wei and Chu do not praise their vassals, if Qi and Yan do not join, if it is not possible to establish the overlord's business, and if the princes of the world do not come to pay tribute, then I would like to ask the king to cut off my head and show it to the public in all parts of the country in order to punish those courtiers who are not loyal to the monarch.

