古文：◎外国二
现代文：外国二
English: Foreign countries2

古文：○安南
现代文：安南
English: Annan

古文：安南，古交阯地。唐以前皆隶中国。
现代文：安南，是古代的交阯之地，唐朝以前皆隶属于中国。
English: Annan is an ancient crossroads. Before the Tang Dynasty, it belonged to China.

古文：五代时，始为土人曲承美窃据。
现代文：五代时期，该地被当地土人曲承美窃据。
English: During the Five Dynasties period, the area was occupied by the local aborigines.

古文：宋初，封丁部领为交阯郡王，三传为大臣黎桓所篡。
现代文：宋朝初年，朝廷封丁部领为交郡王，传了三代后被其手下的大臣黎桓所篡夺。
English: In the first year of the Song Dynasty, the leader of the imperial court's fuding department became the king of Ji County. Three generations later, he was usurped by his subordinate minister, Li Huan.

古文：黎氏亦三传为大臣李公蕴所篡。
现代文：黎氏传了三代之后也被他们手下的大臣李公蕴篡夺了王位。
English: After three generations of the Li clan, their minister, Li Gongyun, usurped the throne.

古文：李氏八传，无子，传其婿陈日炬。
现代文：李氏传了八代，没有子嗣，便将王位传给了女婿陈日炬。
English: The Li clan had been passed down for eight generations, and since there were no heirs, the throne was passed down to his son-in-law, Chen Shicu.

古文：元时，屡破其国。
现代文：元朝时，屡次攻破安南国。
English: During the Yuan Dynasty, it repeatedly invaded Annam.

古文：洪武元年，王日煃闻廖永忠定两广，将遣使纳款，以梁王在云南未果。
现代文：明朝洪武元年，安南国王陈日火奎听说廖永忠已平定了两广地区，想派使者向明朝廷投诚，因元朝的梁王还在云南没有成功。
English: In the first year of the Hongwu reign of the Ming Dynasty, the king of Annan, Chen Riguo, heard that Liao Yongzhong had pacified the two vast regions, and wanted to send an envoy to the Ming court to surrender, because the Liang Wang of the Yuan Dynasty was still unsuccessful in Yunnan.

古文：十二月，太祖命汉阳知府易济招谕之。
现代文：十二月，明太祖让汉阳知府易济前去招谕安南。
English: In December, Ming Taizu asked the governor of Hanyang, Yi Ji, to go and invite Annan.

古文：日煃遣少中大夫同时敏，正大夫段悌、黎安世等，奉表来朝，贡方物。
现代文：陈日火奎派少中大夫同时敏和正大夫段悌、黎安世等人奉表前来朝贡，向皇帝进献土产。
English: Chen Rifu Kui sent young junior doctors Simultaneously Min and Zheng doctors Duan Xuan, Li Anshi and others to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：明年六月达京师。
现代文：第二年六月，他们一行到达京城。
English: In June of the following year, they arrived in Kyoto.

古文：帝喜，赐宴，命侍读学士张以宁、典簿牛谅往封为安南国王，赐驼纽涂金银印。
现代文：皇帝甚喜，赐宴款待他们，并派侍读学士张以宁、典簿牛谅前往安南，册封陈日火奎为安南国王，赐予他驼纽涂金的银印。
English: The emperor was very pleased, gave a banquet to entertain them, and sent the scholars Zhang Yining and Niu Xuan to Annan to crown Chen Riguo as the king of Annan, and gave him a gold-plated silver seal.

古文：诏曰： 咨尔安南国王陈日煃，惟乃祖父，守境南陲，称藩中国，克恭臣职，以永世封。
现代文：皇帝的诏书中说： 安南国王陈日火奎，你的祖先守卫南部边陲，作为中国的藩篱，恭恭敬敬，克尽臣子的职守，世代受到朝廷的册封。
English: The emperor's edict said: Annan King Chen Rihkui, your ancestors guarded the southern border, as China's barrier, respectfully and reverently, fulfilled their duties as courtiers, and were knighted by the court for generations.

古文：朕荷天地之灵，肃清华夏，驰书往报。卿即奉表称臣，专使来贺，法前人之训，安遐壤之民。
现代文：我承天地的英灵，肃清了华夏大地，统治了中国，飞书传报与你，你马上奉表称臣，专门派使者前来祝贺，效法前人的古训，使境内百姓安宁。
English: I have inherited the spirit of heaven and earth, cleared the land of Huaxia, and ruled China. The flying book report is with you. You will immediately be honored as a vassal, send special envoys to congratulate, follow the ancient teachings of the predecessors, and make the people in the territory peaceful.

古文：眷兹勤诚，深可嘉尚。
现代文：我感念你的勤勉和忠诚，深为嘉尚。
English: I am deeply impressed by your diligence and loyalty.

古文：是用遣使赍印，仍封尔为安南国王。
现代文：所以派遣使者持印到安南，仍封你为安南国王。
English: So they sent an envoy with the seal to Annam and still crowned you king of Annam.

古文：于戏！
现代文：啊！
English: Alas!

古文：视广同仁，思效哲王之盛典；爵超五等，俾承奕叶之遗芳。
现代文：广视同仁，欲效法哲王的盛典；爵超五等，你可继奕叶之遗芳。
English: Widely respected by his peers, he wants to emulate the grandeur of King Zhe; he is a peer of the fifth rank, and you can follow the legacy of He Yeh.

古文：益茂令猷，永为藩辅，钦哉。 
现代文：希望你更尽心智，永做皇朝的藩辅。钦此。 
English: I hope that you will do your best to be the imperial court's hanzu forever.

古文：赐日煃《大统历》、织金文绮纱罗四十匹，同时敏以下皆有赐。
现代文：皇帝还给陈日火奎赏赐了《大统历》和四十匹织金文的丝绸及纱罗，同时敏以下官员也都得到赏赐。
English: The emperor also rewarded Chen Rihokui with the "Great General Calendar" and forty horses of silk and saros woven with gold, while officials such as Min were also rewarded.

古文：以宁等至，日煃先卒，侄日熞嗣位。遣其臣阮汝亮来迎，请诰印，以宁等不予。
现代文：张以宁到达安南时，陈日火奎已经死亡，他的侄子陈日火坚继嗣王位，派遣他手下的大臣阮汝亮来迎接张以宁，请求交付诰印，张以宁等人不给。
English: When Zhang Yining arrived in Annan, Chen Riguo was already dead. His nephew, Chen Riguo Jian, the heir to the throne, sent his minister, Ruan Ruliang, to meet Zhang Yining and request the delivery of the seal, but Zhang Yining and others would not give it.

古文：日熞乃复遣杜舜钦等请命于朝，以宁驻安南俟命。
现代文：陈日火坚便又派杜舜钦等到明朝廷请命，张以宁驻居安南等候朝廷的成命。
English: Chen Rihujian then sent Du Yuqin to wait until the morning to ask for the imperial court's order, and Zhang Yining stayed in Annan to wait for the imperial court's order.

古文：时安南、占城构兵，帝命翰林编修罗复仁、兵部主事张福谕令罢兵，两国皆奉诏。
现代文：此时安南与占城正构兵交战，皇帝命令翰林编修罗复仁、兵部主事张福谕令他们停战，两国都奉诏罢兵。
English: At this time, Annan and Zhancheng were at war, and the emperor ordered Hanlin editor Shuro Fuzhen and the head of the military department Zhang Fu to order them to cease the war, and both countries were ordered to strike.

古文：明年，舜钦等至告哀。
现代文：第二年，杜舜钦等人到京城告哀。
English: The following year, Du Yuqin and others went to the capital to mourn.

古文：帝素服御西华门引见，遂命编修王廉往祭，赙白金五十两、帛五十匹。
现代文：皇帝着素服在西华门引见他们，派编修王廉前往祭吊，送白金五十两、帛五十匹助他们办丧事。
English: Emperor Qingsufu introduced them at the West China Gate, and sent editor Xiu Wanglian to the funeral, sending fifty-two pieces of platinum and fifty horses to help them with the funeral.

古文：别遣吏部主事林唐臣封日熞为王，赐金印及织金文绮纱罗四十匹。
现代文：另外派遣吏部主事林唐臣前往安南，册封陈日火坚为安南国王，赐予他金印和四十匹织金文的丝绸及纱罗。
English: In addition, Lin Tangcheng, the head of the cadre department, was sent to Annan to crown Chen Rihujian as the king of Annan, and gave him a gold seal and forty horses of silk and saros woven with gold.

古文：廉既行，帝以汉马援立铜柱镇南蛮，厥功甚伟，命廉就祀之。
现代文：王廉出发时，皇帝认为汉朝的马援竖立铜柱镇抚南蛮，其功绩甚为伟大，命令王廉前去祭祀。
English: When Wang Lian set out, the emperor thought that the Han Dynasty's Ma'an erected a bronze pillar to appease Nanban, and ordered Wang Lian to go to the sacrifice.

古文：寻颁科举诏于其国，且以更定岳渎神号及廓清沙漠，两遣官诏告之。
现代文：不久，皇帝又给安南颁发了科举的诏令，并以更改岳读神号和廓清沙漠，两次派遣官员诏告他们。
English: Not long after, the emperor also issued a decree to Annan for the imperial examinations, and sent officials twice to tell them off for changing the name of Yue Ying Sheng and clearing the desert.

古文：日熞遣上大夫阮兼、中大夫莫季龙、下大夫黎元普等谢恩，贡方物。
现代文：陈日火坚也派遣上大夫阮兼、中大夫莫季龙、下大夫黎元普等人前来朝廷谢恩，贡献土产。
English: Chen Rijihu Jian also sent Dr. Ruan Can, Dr. Mo Jilong, and Dr. Li Yuanpu to the imperial court to express their gratitude and contribute to the local production.

古文：兼卒于道，诏赐其王及使臣，而送兼柩归国。
现代文：王廉死于从安南归国途中，皇帝下诏给安南国王和出使的大臣，让他们送王廉的灵柩回国。
English: Wang Lian died on his way home from Annan. The emperor issued an edict to the king of Annan and the ministers who had been dispatched, asking them to send Wang Lian's coffin back to the country.

古文：顷之，复仁等还，言却其赆不受，帝嘉之，加赐季龙等。
现代文：不久，罗复仁等人回国，说安南王送他们礼物他们没接受，皇帝嘉奖了他们，并给安南的莫季龙等人也加以赏赐。
English: Not long after, Luo Fuzhen and others returned to China, saying that they did not accept the gift sent to them by King Annan. The emperor commended them, and also rewarded Annan's Mody Long and others.

古文：四年春，遣使贡象，贺平沙漠，复遣使随以宁等来朝。
现代文：四年春，安南派使者向明朝廷贡献大象，祝贺朝廷平定沙漠之地，后又派使者随张以宁等人来京城朝觐皇帝。
English: In the spring of the fourth year, Annan sent an envoy to the Ming court to contribute elephants and congratulate the court on the pacification of the desert land. Later, he sent an envoy to accompany Zhang Yining and others to the imperial court in Beijing.

古文：其冬，日熞为伯父叔明逼死。
现代文：该年冬季，陈日火坚被其伯父陈叔明逼死。
English: In the winter of that year, Chen Rihujian was forced to die by his uncle Chen Shuming.

古文：叔明惧罪，贡象及方物。
现代文：陈叔明惧罪，向明朝廷贡献大象和土产。
English: Chen Shumei was afraid of committing a crime, so he offered elephants and local products to the Ming court.

古文：逾年至京，礼官见署表非日熞名，诘得其实，诏却之。
现代文：过了一年，他奉表进京城朝觐皇帝，礼官见表上署的不是陈日火坚的名字，询问了实情之后，拒绝了他的朝觐。
English: A year later, he was sent a form to enter the capital for the emperor's pilgrimage. The etiquette official saw that the name on the form was not the name of Chen Rihujian, and after inquiring about the facts, he refused his pilgrimage.

古文：叔明复朝贡谢罪，且请封。
现代文：陈叔明又向朝廷献贡谢罪，并请求皇帝册封他。
English: Chen Shuming also paid tribute to the imperial court and asked the emperor to grant him a title.

古文：其使者抵言日熞实病死，叔明逊避于外，为国人所推。
现代文：他的使者抵赖说陈日火坚实际上是病死的，陈叔明当时逊避在外，现为国人所推重。
English: His emissary denied that Chen Rihoujian actually died of illness. Chen Shuming was shunned at the time, but is now a national hero.

古文：帝命国人为日熞服，而叔明姑以前王印视事。
现代文：皇帝命令安南的国人都为陈日火坚服丧，而陈叔明暂且拿安南国王陈日火坚的印信管理国事。
English: The emperor ordered Annan's compatriots to mourn Chen Rihujian, while Chen Shuming temporarily took Annan King Chen Rihujian's seal to manage state affairs.

古文：七年，叔明遣使谢恩，自称年老，乞命弟煓摄政，从之。
现代文：七年，陈叔明派使者到京城向皇帝谢恩，自称自己年纪已老，请求明朝廷任命他的弟弟陈摄理国政，皇帝同意。
English: In the seventh year, Chen Shuming sent an envoy to Beijing to thank the emperor, saying that he was old and asked the Ming court to appoint his brother Chen as the regent of state affairs. The emperor agreed.

古文：煓遣使谢恩，请贡期。诏三年一贡，新王世见。
现代文：陈派使者向皇帝谢恩，请示向朝廷上贡的日期，皇帝下诏说三年朝贡一次，新王继承王位时到京城朝觐一次。
English: Chen sent an envoy to thank the emperor and ask for the date of the tribute to the imperial court. The emperor issued an edict saying that the tribute would be paid once every three years, and the new king would make a pilgrimage to Beijing when he succeeded to the throne.

古文：寻复遣使贡，帝令所司谕却，且定使者毋过三四人，贡物无厚。
现代文：不久安南国王又派使者向朝廷献贡，皇帝让有关官员进行劝谕和推却，并规定使者不要超过三四人，贡物不须丰厚。
English: Soon after, King Annan sent another envoy to pay tribute to the imperial court. The emperor asked the relevant officials to advise and dissuade him, and stipulated that the envoys should not exceed three or four people, and the tribute should not be rich.

古文：十年，煓侵占城，败没。
现代文：十年，陈侵略占城，失败后死亡。
English: Ten years later, Chen invaded and occupied the city, and died after the defeat.

古文：弟炜代立，遣使告哀，命中官陈能往祭。
现代文：他的弟弟陈火韦代理国王职务，派使者到京城告哀，朝廷派宦官陈能前去祭吊。
English: His younger brother, Chen Huwei, acting as the king, sent an envoy to the capital to mourn, and the court sent eunuch Chen Neng to the funeral.

古文：时安南怙强，欲灭占城，反致丧败。
现代文：这时的安南自恃强盛，想消灭占城，结果反而导致失败。
English: At this time, Annan was boasting of his strength and wanted to eliminate the occupation, but the result led to failure.

古文：帝遣官谕前王叔明毋构衅贻祸，以叔明实主国事也，叔明贡方物谢罪。
现代文：皇帝认为安南实际上是前国王陈叔明在主持国事，因而派遣官员劝谕他不要再挑起兵端贻祸两国了，陈叔明向朝廷贡献土产表示谢罪。
English: The emperor believed that Annan was actually the former king Chen Shuming presiding over state affairs, so he sent officials to advise him not to provoke hostilities and bring misfortune to the two countries. Chen Shuming expressed his gratitude to the court for contributing local products.

古文：广西思明土官诉安南犯境，安南亦诉思明扰边。
现代文：广西思明的土官向朝廷诉说安南侵犯了边境，而安南也向朝廷诉说思明骚扰了安南的边境。
English: The land officer of Guangxi Siming told the court that Annan had violated the border, and Annan also told the court that Siming had harassed Annan's border.

古文：帝移檄数其奸诳罪，敕守臣勿纳其使。
现代文：皇帝移檄文列数了安南的奸诳之罪，敕令边境上的守卫大臣不要接受安南的使者。
English: The emperor's imperial edict enumerated the crimes of Annan's treachery and ordered the border guard minister not to accept Annan's envoy.

古文：炜惧，遣使谢罪，频年贡奄竖、金银、紫金盘、黄金酒尊、象马之属。
现代文：陈火韦畏惧，派使者向明朝廷谢罪，每年频频向朝廷贡献奄竖、金银、紫金盘、黄金酒樽、大象和马等物。
English: Chen Huwei was afraid and sent an envoy to the Ming court to apologize. Every year, Chen Huwei frequently donated to the court such things as arrow shafts, gold and silver, purple gold plates, gold wine barrels, elephants and horses.

古文：帝命助教杨盘往使，令馈云南军饷，炜即输五千石于临安。
现代文：皇帝派助教杨盘出使安南，让他们给云南赠送军饷，陈火韦立即输送了五千石粮食到临安。
English: The emperor sent Yang Pan, a teaching assistant, to Annan to ask them to present military pay to Yunnan. Chen Huwei immediately sent five thousand kilos of grain to Lin'an.

古文：二十一年，帝复命礼部郎中邢文伟赍敕及币往赐。
现代文：二十一年，皇帝又让礼部郎中邢文伟带着敕谕和币前去赏赐安南国王。
English: In the twenty-first year, the emperor asked the vice-minister of etiquette, Zou Wenwei, to go to reward King Annan with an encyclical and coins.

古文：炜遣使谢，复进象。
现代文：陈火韦派使者来谢恩，又进献大象给皇帝。
English: Chen Huowei sent an envoy to express his gratitude, and presented the elephant to the emperor.

古文：帝以其频烦，且贡物侈，命仍三岁一贡，毋进犀象。
现代文：皇帝因其进贡频繁，而且贡物奢侈，便令他们仍为三年贡一次，不要进献犀和象。
English: The emperor, because the tribute was frequent and the tribute was extravagant, ordered them to pay tribute once every three years, and not to offer rhinoceroses and elephants.

古文：时国相黎季犛窃柄，废其主炜，寻弑之，立叔明子日焜昆主国事，仍假炜名入贡。
现代文：此时安南国的丞相黎季耑窃取了王国的大权，废除了国王陈火韦，不久又弑杀了他，扶立陈叔明的儿子陈日火昆主持国事，但仍假借陈火韦的名义向朝廷献贡。
English: At this time, Li Jizhe, the chancellor of Annan, stole the power of the kingdom, abolished the king Chen Huwei, and soon killed him, and appointed Chen Shuming's son Chen Rihukun to preside over state affairs, but still paid tribute to the imperial court under the name of Chen Huwei.

古文：朝廷不知而纳之，越数年始觉，命广西守臣绝其使。
现代文：明朝廷不知内情收纳了贡品，过了几年以后才发觉，于是命令广西的守卫大臣断绝安南使者入境。
English: The Ming court unknowingly received the tribute. It took several years to find out, so it ordered the Minister of Defense of Guangxi to deny the entry of the Annan envoy.

古文：季犛惧，二十七年遣使由广东入贡。
现代文：黎季耑有所惧怕，二十七年时派使者从广东入境向明朝廷进贡。
English: Li Jizhe was afraid, and in 27 he sent an envoy from Guangdong to pay tribute to the Ming court.

古文：帝怒，遣宜诘责，却其贡。
现代文：皇帝发怒，派官员诘责了黎季耑，拒绝接收他们的贡品。
English: Enraged, the emperor sent officials to reprimand Lijian and refused to accept their tribute.

古文：季犛益惧，明年复诡词入贡。
现代文：黎季耑为此更加畏惧，第二年又以诡词向明朝廷进贡。
English: Li Jizhe was even more afraid of this, and in the following year he paid tribute to the Ming court with cunning words.

古文：帝虽恶其弑逆，不欲劳师远征，乃纳之。
现代文：皇帝虽然厌恶他的弑主悖逆行为，但不想劳师远征，便收下了他们的贡品。
English: Although the emperor abhorred his tyrant's disobedience, he did not want to go on a punitive expedition, so he accepted their tribute.

古文：大军方讨龙州赵宗寿，命礼部尚书任亨泰、御史严震直谕日焜，毋自疑。
现代文：此时朝廷正派大军讨伐龙州的赵宗寿，便命令礼部尚书任亨泰、御史严震直前去谕告陈日火昆，要他自己不要多疑。
English: At this time, the imperial court sent a large army to fight against Zhao Zongshou of Longzhou, and ordered the Ministry of Ceremonies to appoint Heng Tai and Gu Shi to immediately go to Chen Nichigu Kun and tell him not to be suspicious.

古文：季犛闻言，稍自安。
现代文：黎季耑听说后，才稍为安心了一点。
English: After hearing this, Lai Jizhe was a little relieved.

古文：帝又遣刑部尚书杨靖谕令输米八万石，饷龙州军。
现代文：皇帝又派刑部尚书杨靖谕告他们，要他们输送米八万石，作为龙州官军的军饷。
English: The emperor also sent Yang Jing of the Department of Criminal Law to tell them that they should send 80,000 koku of rice as military pay for the official army of Longzhou.

古文：季犛输一万石，馈金千两、银二万两，言龙州陆道险，请运至凭祥洞。
现代文：黎季耑输送一万石米，向官军送金子一千两、银子二万两，说龙州的陆路太危险，请求将米运到凭祥洞。
English: Li Jizhe transported 10,000 koku of rice, and sent 1,000 taels of gold and 20,000 taels of silver to the government army, saying that the land route from Longzhou was too dangerous, and requesting that the rice be transported to Binxiangdong.

古文：靖不可，令输二万石于沲海江，江距龙州止半日。
现代文：杨靖不同意，让他输送两万石米到沲海江，因该江离龙州只有半天的路程。
English: Yang Jing disagreed and asked him to transport twenty thousand stone meters to the Bohai River, because the river is only half a day's journey from Longzhou.

古文：靖因言： 日焜年幼，国事皆决季犛父子，乃敢观望如此。 
现代文：杨靖因此向朝廷说 ：陈日火昆年幼，国事都取决于黎季耑父子，所以他们才敢如此观望。 
English: As a result, Yang Jing said to the imperial court: Chen Riguo and Kun are young, and the affairs of state depend on Li Jizhe and his son, which is why they dare to wait and see.

古文：时帝以宗寿纳款，移兵征向武诸蛮，遂谕靖令输二万石给军，而免其所馈金银。
现代文：此时皇帝已接受了赵宗寿的投诚，便移军前去征讨向武地区的蛮族人，于是谕告杨靖让安南输送两万石米给大军，而免除他们所馈赠的金银。
English: At this time, the emperor had already accepted Zhao Zongshou's surrender and moved his army forward to fight the barbarians in the Xiangwu region. Therefore, he ordered Yang Jing to let Annan deliver 20,000 koku of rice to the great army, while exempting them from the gifts of gold and silver.

古文：明年，季犛告前王叔明之讣。
现代文：第二年，黎季耑告诉明朝廷前王陈叔明的死讯。
English: In the following year, Li Jizhe informed the Ming court of the death of the former king Chen Shuming.

古文：帝以叔明本篡弑，吊祭则奖乱，止不行，移檄使知之。
现代文：皇帝认为陈叔明的王位本是自己弑杀国王后篡夺的，如果朝廷派使者前去吊祭，就是奖励叛乱，所以不派使者吊丧，只移了一份檄文给安南，告知明朝廷的态度。
English: The emperor believed that Chen Shuming's throne was originally usurped after he killed the king, and if the court sent an envoy to the hanging ceremony, it would be a reward for rebellion. Therefore, he did not send an envoy to the funeral, but only sent a copy of the imperial edict to Annan to inform him of the Ming court's attitude.

古文：思明土官黄广成言： 自元设思明总管府，所辖左江州县，东上思州，南铜柱为界。
现代文：思明的土官黄广成上奏说 ：自元朝设立思明总管府以来，所管辖的左江州县，东至上思州，南以铜柱为界。
English: Huang Guangcheng, a local official of Siming, said in his report: Since the establishment of the Siming General Administration Office in the Yuan Dynasty, the jurisdiction of Zuo Jiangzhou County, east to Shangshi, south to the copper pillar.

古文：元征交阯，去铜柱百里立永平寨万户府，遣兵戍守，令交人给其军。
现代文：元朝征讨交时，在离铜柱一百里远的地方设立了永平寨万户府，派兵戍守，令交人供给军饷。
English: When the Yuan Dynasty was seeking diplomatic relations, Yongpingzhai Wanyufu was set up a hundred miles away from the Copper Pillar, and soldiers were sent to guard it, and the people of Tongfang were ordered to provide military supplies.

古文：元季丧乱，交人攻破永平，越铜柱二百余里，侵夺思明所属丘温、如嶅、庆远、渊、脱等五县地，近又告任尚书置驿思明洞登地。
现代文：元朝末年动乱，交人攻破了永平，越过铜柱二百多里，侵占了思明所属的丘温、如敖山、庆远、渊县、脱县等五个县，近来又有报告说任尚书在思明的洞登设置驿所。
English: During the turmoil at the end of the Yuan Dynasty, the Jiaotong broke through Yongping, crossed more than 200 miles of copper pillars, and occupied five counties including Qiuwen, Lushan, Qingyuan, Yuan County, and Zhixian, which belonged to Siming. Recently, it was reported that Ren Shangshu set up a post in Siming's Dongdeng.

古文：臣尝具奏，蒙遣杨尚书勘实。
现代文：我都将此情况上奏过朝廷，承蒙皇上派杨尚书来调查审核此事。
English: I reported this situation to the imperial court, and the emperor sent Yang Shangshu to investigate and review the matter.

古文：乞敕安南以五县地还臣，仍画铜柱为界。 
现代文：现请求皇帝敕令安南，让他们归还上述五个县的地盘给我，双方仍划铜柱为边界。 
English: I now request the emperor to order Annan to return to me the land of the five counties mentioned above, and the two sides still draw a copper pillar as the boundary.

古文：帝命行人陈诚、吕让往谕，季犛执不从。
现代文：皇帝命行人陈诚、吕讠襄前去谕说此事，黎季耑坚持不肯还。
English: The emperor ordered Chen Cheng and Lv Yuxiang to go and tell the matter, but Lai Jizhe refused to return.

古文：诚自为书谕日焜，季犛贻书争，且为日焜书移户部。
现代文：陈诚便自己写了一封书信谕说陈日火昆，黎季耑也送书信去争说，还把陈日火昆的文书移交到户部。
English: Chen Cheng then wrote a letter himself saying Chen Riguo Kun, Li Jizhe also sent a letter to dispute it, and also handed over Chen Riguo Kun's document to the household department.

古文：诚等复命，帝知其终不肯还，乃曰： 蛮夷相争，自古有之。
现代文：陈诚等人前来京城复命，皇帝知道他们最终不肯归还，便说： 蛮人相互争斗，自古就有。
English: Chen Cheng and others came to the capital to answer the summons, and the emperor knew that they would eventually refuse to return, so he said: Barbarians have been fighting each other since ancient times.

古文：彼恃顽，必召祸，姑俟之。 
现代文：他们自恃顽强，必然会招致祸患，暂且等着瞧吧。 
English: They believe themselves to be tenacious, which will inevitably lead to disaster. Let's wait and see.

古文：建文元年，季犛弑日焜，立其子颙。
现代文：建文元年，黎季耑弑杀了陈日火昆，扶立他的弟弟陈禺页。
English: In the first year of Jianwen, Li Jizhe killed Chen Rifukun and promoted his younger brother Chen Yufei.

古文：又弑颙，立其弟案，方在襁褓中，复弑之。
现代文：不久又杀死陈禺页，扶立陈禺页的弟弟陈安火。陈安火尚在襁褓之中，又被黎季耑所杀。
English: Soon after, he killed Chen Yanzhe, and helped raise Chen Yanzhe's younger brother, Chen Anhu. Chen Anhu was still in his cradle when he was killed by Li Jizhe.

古文：大杀陈氏宗族而自立，更姓名为胡一元，名其子苍曰胡，谓出帝舜裔胡公后，僣国号大虞，年号元圣，寻自称太上皇，传位，朝廷不知也。
现代文：黎季耑在大肆杀戮了陈氏宗族后自立为王，将自己的姓名改为胡一元，给他的儿子黎苍改名为胡，意思是自己的祖先胡公是帝舜的后裔。他们把安南改国号为大虞，更年号为元圣，不久又自称太上皇，把王位传给胡。明朝廷对此毫无所知。
English: After Li Jizhe slaughtered the Chen clan, he became king. He changed his name to Hu Yi Yuan, and his son Li Qiang changed his name to Hu, meaning that his ancestor Hu Gong was a descendant of Emperor Qian. They changed Annan's country name to Dagu, the year of his death to Yuan Sheng, and soon claimed to be the emperor, passing the throne to Hu. The Ming court knew nothing about this.

古文：成祖既承大统，遣官以即位诏告其国。
现代文：明成祖承继皇帝位后，派官员诏告安南。
English: After Emperor Mingchengzhu succeeded to the throne, he sent an official to denounce Annan.

古文：永乐元年，自署权理安南国事，遣使奉表朝贡，言： 高皇帝时安南王日煃率先输诚，不幸早亡，后嗣绝。
现代文：永乐元年，胡自己署名为权理安南国政事，派使者奉表向明朝廷进贡，并向朝廷上奏说： 高皇帝时期，安南王陈日火奎率先向明朝廷投诚，但不幸早亡，子嗣也已断绝。
English: In the first year of Yongle, Hu signed himself as the political power of Annan, sent an envoy to pay tribute to the Ming Dynasty, and reported to the court: During the reign of Emperor Gao, Annan King Chen Rihokui took the lead in surrendering to the Ming Dynasty, but unfortunately died early, and his descendants have also been cut off.

古文：臣陈氏甥，为众所推，权理国事，于今四年。
现代文：我是陈氏的外甥，被众人所推重，权理安南的国事至今已有四年。
English: I am the nephew of Mr. Chen, who is highly regarded by many people. It has been four years since I assumed the leadership of the country.

古文：望天恩赐封爵，臣有死无二。 
现代文：希望天朝给恩赐王爵，则我虽死亦无二心。 
English: I hope that Heaven will bestow the title of Prince on me, and even if I die, I have no second thoughts.

古文：事下礼部，部臣疑之，请遣官廉访。
现代文：朝廷将此事交给礼部审议，礼部大臣对胡有怀疑，请求朝廷派官员前去查访。
English: The Imperial Court referred the matter to the Ministry of Ceremonies for consideration. The Minister of Ceremonies had doubts about Hu and requested the Imperial Court to send an official to visit him.

古文：乃命行人杨渤等赍敕谕其陪臣父老，凡陈氏继嗣之有无，胡推戴之诚伪，具以实闻。
现代文：朝廷便命行人杨渤等持皇帝的敕令前去谕告安南国的陪臣和父老们，让他们就陈氏有没有子嗣承袭王位，以及胡是否为众人所推戴之事，全以实情上报给明朝廷。
English: The imperial court then ordered Yang Jie and others to go with the emperor's edict to inform the vassals and fathers of Annan, so that they could report to the Ming court the truth about whether the Chen clan had any children to inherit the throne, and whether Hu was favored by the people.

古文：赉使者遣还，复命行人吕让、丘智赐绒锦、文绮、纱罗。
现代文：朝廷给胡的使者赏赐礼物后予以遣返，又命令行人吕讠襄、丘智等给他们赏赐绒锦、文绮和纱罗。
English: The imperial court rewarded Hu's envoys with gifts and sent them back, and also ordered the pedestrians Lv Yuxiang, Qiu Zhi, etc. to reward them with brocade, cloth and saros.

古文：既而使随渤等还，进陪臣父老所上表，如所以诳帝者，乞即赐封爵。
现代文：不久，胡的使者跟随杨渤等人回到京城，向皇帝进献安南陪臣父老的上表，表中内容与胡欺骗皇帝的言语一样，请求皇帝马上给胡赐封王爵。
English: Soon after, Hu's emissaries followed Yang Jie and others back to Beijing and presented the emperor with the list of Annan's father and grandfather, the contents of which were the same as Hu's words to deceive the emperor, and asked the emperor to immediately give Hu the title of prince.

古文：帝乃命礼部郎中夏止善封为安南国王。
现代文：皇帝于是命令礼部郎中夏止善册封胡为安南国王。
English: The emperor then ordered the minister of etiquette, Natsuo Shosenkan, to crown Hu as the king of Annam.

古文：遣使谢恩，然帝其国中自若也。
现代文：胡派使者前来谢恩，但在国内仍自称皇帝。
English: Hu sent envoys to thank him, but he still called himself emperor at home.

古文：思明所辖禄州、西平州、永平寨为所侵夺，帝谕令还，不听。
现代文：思明所管辖的禄州、西平州和永平寨被安南侵占后，皇帝谕令他们归还，他们不听。
English: After Annan invaded and occupied Luzhou, Xiping and Yongpingzhai, which were under the jurisdiction of Siming, the emperor ordered them to return, but they did not listen.

古文：占城诉安南侵掠，诏令修好。
现代文：占城向朝廷诉说遭受安南的侵扰和掠夺，皇帝下诏让他们互相修好。
English: Zhancheng told the imperial court that it had been invaded and plundered by Annan, and the emperor ordered them to make amends with each other.

古文：阳言奉命，侵掠如故，且授印章逼为属，又邀夺天朝赐物。
现代文：胡表面上接受朝廷的命令，私下里侵掠如故，并给占城授予印章，逼迫他们做自己的属国，同时还邀夺明朝廷赏给占城的赐物。
English: On the surface, Hu accepted the order of the imperial court, but secretly invaded and plundered as before, and granted a seal to Zhancheng, forcing them to be their own vassal state, while also inviting them to seize the gifts awarded to Zhancheng by the Ming court.

古文：帝恶之，方遣官切责，而故陪臣裴伯耆诣阙告难，言： 臣祖父皆执政大夫，死国事。
现代文：皇帝对胡的行为十分厌恶，正派官员去责问，而安南以前的陪臣裴伯耆到朝廷告难，说： 我的祖先都是执政大夫，死于国事。
English: The emperor was very disgusted with Hu's behavior and sent officials to question him, while Annan's former vassal, Pei Bo Rong, complained to the court, saying, "My ancestors were all government doctors and died in state affairs.

古文：臣母，陈氏近族。
现代文：我的母亲，是陈氏的近亲。
English: My mother is a close relative of Mr. Chen.

古文：故臣幼侍国王，官五品，后隶武节侯陈渴真为裨将。
现代文：所以我小时候就服侍国王，官至五品，后来在武节侯陈谒真手下当副将。
English: That's why I served the king when I was a child, rising to the rank of the fifth grade, and later became a vice admiral under the military governor Chen Yizhen.

古文：洪武末，代渴真御寇东海。
现代文：洪武末年，代替陈谒真在东海抗御敌人。
English: In the last years of Hongwu's life, he took the place of Chen Shizhen in the East China Sea to resist the enemy.

古文：而贼臣黎季犛父子弑主篡位，屠戮忠良，灭族者以百十数，臣兄弟妻孥亦遭害。
现代文：而贼臣黎季耑父子俩弑杀国王篡夺了王位，屠杀忠良之臣，灭族的人以百十计算，我的兄弟、妻子儿女也都遇害。
English: But the two sons of the thieving minister Lijian killed the king and usurped the throne, slaughtered loyal ministers, exterminated a hundred and ten people, and my brothers, wives and children were also killed.

古文：遣人捕臣，欲加诛醢。
现代文：他们派人追捕我，想诛杀我。
English: They sent people after me to try to kill me.

古文：臣弃军遁逃，伏处山谷，思诣阙庭，披沥肝胆，展转数年，始睹天日。
现代文：我弃军而逃，躲在山谷之中，想到朝廷公开真相。披肝沥胆经过几年辗转迁徙，今天终于见到了天日。
English: I abandoned the army and fled, hiding in the valley, thinking to reveal the truth to the imperial court. After several years of migration, today I finally saw the light of day.

古文：窃惟季犛乃故经略使黎国髦之子，世事陈氏，叨窃宠荣，及其子苍，亦蒙贵任。
现代文：黎季耑是前经略使黎国髦的儿子，世代服侍陈氏，窃取了陈氏的恩宠，他的儿子黎苍，也承蒙担任了贵职。
English: Li Jizhe is the son of the former minister Li Guoxiang, who served the Chen clan for generations and stole the Chen clan's favor. His son Li Qiang also assumed the noble post.

古文：一旦篡夺，更姓易名，僣号改元，不恭朝命。
现代文：他们一旦篡夺了王位后，便更换姓名，变改国号和年号，不听明朝廷的命令。
English: Once they usurped the throne, they changed their names, changed the country name and the year name, and did not listen to the orders of the Ming court.

古文：忠臣良士疾首痛心，愿兴吊伐之师，隆继绝之义，荡除奸凶，复立陈氏后，臣死且不朽。
现代文：国内的忠臣良士都痛心疾首，愿兴吊伐之师，张继绝之义，荡除奸凶，复立陈氏的后代为王，这样死了也有不朽的英名。
English: The loyal subjects in the country all bowed their heads in grief, wishing for the reinstatement of Zhang Jizhi, the master of hanging, the elimination of traitors, and the reinstatement of the descendants of the Chen clan as kings. Thus, they died with immortal fame.

古文：敢效申包胥之忠，哀鸣阙下，惟皇帝垂察。 
现代文：我不敢效法申包胥的忠心，现在朝廷哀鸣，望皇帝审察。 
English: I dare not follow the example of Shen Baozhen's loyalty, and now the court is crying for the emperor to investigate.

古文：帝得奏感动，命所司周以衣食。
现代文：皇帝得此奏言，深受感动，命有关官员给他周济衣食。
English: The emperor was deeply moved by this report and ordered the relevant officials to provide him with food and clothing.

古文：会老挝送陈天平至，言： 臣天平，前王日烜孙，奣子，日煃弟也。
现代文：此时碰上老挝将陈天平送到京城，陈天平说： 我是陈天平，是前王陈日火亘的孙子、陈天明的儿子、陈日火奎的弟弟。
English: At this time, when Laos sent Chen Tianping to Beijing, Chen Tianping said: I am Chen Tianping, the grandson of the former king Chen Rihe, the son of Chen Tianming, and the younger brother of Chen Rihe Kui.

古文：黎贼尽灭陈族，臣越在外州获免。
现代文：黎季耑贼人全部消灭了陈氏宗族，我因在外州才得以幸免。
English: The Lijian bandits wiped out the entire Chen clan, but I was spared because I was out of the province.

古文：臣僚佐激于忠义，推臣为主以讨贼。
现代文：我手下的僚佐激于忠义，推举我为主帅起兵讨贼。
English: My lieutenants were so inspired by my loyalty that they elected me to be the head coach and raised an army to hunt down the thieves.

古文：方议招军，贼兵见迫，仓皇出走，窜伏岩谷，万死一生，得达老挝。
现代文：正商议招军之事时，被贼人派军逼迫，仓惶出逃，躲在岩谷之中，万死一生之后到达老挝。
English: When they were discussing the matter of recruiting an army, they were forced by thieves to send an army, fled in a panic, hid in a rocky valley, and arrived in Laos after a lifetime.

古文：恭闻皇帝陛下入正大统，臣有所依归。
现代文：听说皇帝陛下登基统治全国，我才觉得有所归依。
English: It was only when I heard that His Majesty the Emperor had ascended to the throne to rule the whole country that I felt converted.

古文：匍匐万里，哀诉明庭。
现代文：经过万里跋涉，现将事情在朝廷哀告明白。
English: After traveling thousands of miles, he is now making things clear to the imperial court.

古文：陈氏后裔止臣一人，臣与此贼不共戴天。
现代文：陈氏后裔中只有我一人了，我与此贼不共戴天。
English: I'm the only one of Chen's descendants left, and I don't share the same fate as this thief.

古文：伏祈圣慈垂怜，迅发六师，用章天讨。 
现代文：祈望圣皇慈爱垂怜我们，迅速拨六师之军，对黎贼实施天讨。 
English: Pray that the Holy Emperor will have mercy on us and quickly dispatch the six-division army to carry out a heavenly crusade against the Li bandits.

古文：帝益感动，命所司馆之。
现代文：皇帝听后更加感动，让有关官员给他安排馆舍住下。
English: Hearing this, the emperor was even more moved, and asked the officials concerned to arrange a residence for him.

古文：方遣使贺正旦，帝出天平示之，皆错愕下拜，有泣者。
现代文：正派使者向明朝皇帝祝贺元旦，皇帝把陈天平带出来让他们一见，他们都错愕不已，赶忙下拜，还有哭泣者。
English: An envoy was sent to congratulate the Emperor of the Ming Dynasty on New Year's Day. The Emperor brought Chen Tianping out for them to see. They were all stunned, hurried to bow down, and some even cried.

古文：伯耆责使者以大义，惶恐不能答。
现代文：裴伯耆向使者责以大义，他们惶恐地无法回答。
English: Pei Bo-tao charged the envoys with great righteousness, but they were too frightened to reply.

古文：帝谕侍臣： 父子悖逆，鬼神所不容，而国中臣民共为欺蔽。一国皆罪人也，朕乌能容。 
现代文：皇帝谕告旁边的侍臣说 ：胡父子俩背主叛逆，鬼神也不容他们，而安南国中的臣民也与他们一起共同欺骗蒙蔽朝廷，这一国人都是罪人，我怎么能容忍呢！ 
English: The emperor told the courtier next to him, "Both Hu and his son have betrayed the Lord and rebelled, and the ghosts and gods will not tolerate them, and the subjects in Annan's country have also deceived and blinded the imperial court together with them. This countrymen are all sinners, how can I tolerate it!

古文：三年命御史李琦、行人王枢赍敕责，令具篡弑之实以闻。
现代文：三年，皇帝命令御史李琦、行人王枢一起带着皇帝的敕令去责问胡，让他把篡位弑主的实情全部上报朝廷。
English: In the third year, the emperor ordered the imperial historian Li Xi and the peddler Wang Zu to take the emperor's edict to question Hu, and let him report all the facts of the usurper to the court.

古文：云南宁远州复诉侵夺七寨，掠其婿女。
现代文：云南宁远州又上诉说胡侵夺了他们七个村寨，劫走了男女。
English: Ningyanzhou of Yunnan also appealed, saying that Hu had invaded seven of their villages and abducted men and women.

古文：遣其臣阮景真从琦等入朝谢罪抵言未尝僣号改元，请迎天平归，奉为主，且退还禄州、宁远地。
现代文：胡派遣他的大臣阮景真随李琦等人入朝向皇帝谢罪，抵赖说自己并未私自改国号和年号，请求陈天平回去，奉陈天平为国王，并退还所侵占的禄州、宁远等地。
English: Hu sent his minister, Nguyn Qung Trnh, to the North with Li Bình and others to apologize to the emperor, denying that he had not changed the name of the country and the year, asking Chen Tianping to return, to make Chen Tianping the king, and to return the occupied Luzhou, Ningyuan and other places.

古文：帝不虞其诈，许之。
现代文：皇帝没有料到其中有诈，答应了他。
English: The emperor, not suspecting any treachery, agreed.

古文：命行人聂聪赍敕往谕，言： 果迎还天平，事以君礼，当建尔上公，封以大郡。 
现代文：皇帝派行人聂聪带敕令前去谕告胡 ：如果你能真的迎接陈天平回去，以君王之礼服侍他，则把你设为上公，把大郡之地分封给你。 
English: The emperor sent a messenger to tell Hu: "If you can really welcome Chen Tianping back and serve him with the dignity of a king, you will be appointed as Shangguo and the land of Dagu County will be assigned to you."

古文：复遣景真从聪等还报，迎天平。
现代文：胡又派阮景真随聂聪等人回京城禀报，迎接陈天平。
English: Hu also sent Nguyn Qung Trnh to return to Beijing to receive Chen Tianping.

古文：聪力言诚可信，帝乃冬天平还国，敕广西左、右副将军黄中、吕毅将兵五千送之。
现代文：聂聪极力说胡诚实可信，皇帝便命令陈天平回国，敕令广西的左、右副将军黄中、吕毅带兵五千护送。
English: Gong Cong insisted that Hu was honest and trustworthy. The emperor then ordered Chen Tianping to return to China, and ordered the left and right vice generals Huang Zhong and Lü Yi from Guangxi to escort him with five thousand soldiers.

古文：四年，天平陛辞，帝厚加赉，敕封顺化郡公，尽食所属州县。
现代文：四年，陈天平向皇帝辞行，皇帝对他厚加赏赐，敕令封胡为顺化郡公，顺化郡所属各州县的赋税全归胡。
English: In the fourth year, Chen Tianping resigned to the emperor, and the emperor rewarded him generously, appointing Hu as the governor of Hue County, and all the taxes of the states and counties belonging to Hue County belonged to Hu.

古文：三月，中等护天平入鸡陵关，将至芹站，伏兵邀杀天平，中等败还。
现代文：三月，黄中等人护送陈天平进入鸡陵关，将到芹站时，胡的伏兵邀杀了陈天平，黄中等人失败而归。
English: In March, Huang Zhongren escorted Chen Tianping into Qilin Pass, and when the general arrived at Qinling Station, Hu's ambush invited him to kill Chen Tianping, but Huang Zhongren failed and returned.

古文：帝大怒，召成国公朱能等谋，决意讨之。
现代文：皇帝大怒，召集成国公朱能等前来谋划，决意征讨胡。
English: The emperor was enraged and summoned Zhu Neng, the prince of the unified country, and others to come to plan and resolutely recruit Hu.

古文：七月命能佩征夷将军印充总兵官，四平侯沐晟佩征夷副将军印为左副将军，新城侯张辅为右副将军，丰城侯李彬、云阳伯陈旭为左、右参将，督师南征。
现代文：七月，皇帝命令朱能佩带征夷将军印，充任总兵官；西平侯沐晟佩征夷副将军印，充任左副将军；新城侯张辅担任右副将军；丰城侯李彬、云阳伯陈旭为左右参将，率军南征。
English: In July, the emperor ordered Zhu Neng to wear the seal of the General of the Expeditionary Force and serve as the chief military officer; Xiping Hou Muxun to wear the seal of the Vice-General of the Expeditionary Force and serve as the left vice-general; Xincheng Hou Zhang Fu served as the right vice-general; Fengcheng Hou Li Bin and Yunyang Bo Chen Xu were the left and right joint generals and led the army to the south.

古文：能至龙州病卒，辅代将其军。
现代文：朱能到龙州时病逝，张辅代理他的职位。
English: Zhu Neng died of illness when he arrived in Longzhou, and Zhang Fu took his place.

古文：入安南坡垒关，传檄数一元父子二十大罪，谕国人以辅立陈氏子孙意。
现代文：大军进入安南的坡垒关，传檄文列数了胡一元父子俩的二十条大罪，告谕安南国人应辅助拥立陈氏的子孙。
English: The army entered Annan's stronghold, and the envoy enumerated the twenty major sins of Hu Yigen and his sons, and told the Annan people that they should help support the descendants of the Chen clan.

古文：师次芹站，遂造浮桥于昌江以济。
现代文：大军在芹站驻扎后，在昌江上造浮桥渡军队。
English: After the large army was stationed at Seri Station, a pontoon bridge was built on the Changjiang River to ferry the army.

古文：前锋抵富良江北嘉林县，而辅由芹站西取他道至北江府新福县，谍晟、彬军亦自云南至白鹤，乃遣骠骑将军朱荣往会之。
现代文：前锋抵达富良江北部的嘉林县，张辅也由芹站往西取其他道路到达北江府的新福县，谍报说沐晟、李彬的军队也从云南到达白鹤，张辅于是派骠骑将军朱荣前去与沐晟和李彬会面。
English: The vanguard arrived at Jialing County in the northern part of the Fuliang River. Zhang Fu also went west from Qin Station to take other roads to arrive at Xinfu County in Beijiang Prefecture. The spy report said that the army of Mu Xi and Li Bin also arrived at Baihe from Yunnan. Zhang Fu then sent the cavalry general Zhu Rong to meet with Mu Xi and Li Bin.

古文：时辅等分道进兵，所至皆克。
现代文：此时张辅等分路进兵，所到之处全被攻克。
English: At this time, Zhang Fu and other soldiers marched in separately, and everything they came to was conquered.

古文：贼乃缘江树栅，增筑土城于多邦隘，城栅连九百余里，大发江北民二百余万守之。
现代文：贼人便沿江树立栅寨，在多邦隘增筑土城，城墙与栅寨相连达九百多里，他们从江北征发了二百余万人前来戍守。
English: The thieves then set up a stockade along the river and built an earthen city in the Dokang Pass. The city wall is connected to the stockade by more than nine hundred miles. They conscripted more than two million people from the north of the river to come and defend the city.

古文：诸江海口皆下木桩，所居东都，严守备，水陆兵号七百万，欲持久以老官军。
现代文：各江海的口崖都钉下木桩，而胡贼所居住的东都守备严密，水陆军号称有七百万。他们想打持久战，拖垮明朝军队。
English: Wooden stakes were nailed to the cliffs at the mouths of all the rivers and seas, while the eastern capital, where the Ku Klux Klan lived, was heavily guarded. The army and navy were said to number seven million. They wanted to fight a protracted war and bring down the Ming army.

古文：辅等乃移营三带州个招市江口，造战舰。
现代文：张辅等便将军营移到三带州个招市的江口上，制造战船。
English: Zhang Fu and others then moved the battalion to the mouth of the Yangtze River in Zhancheng, one of the three belt prefectures, to manufacture warships.

古文：帝虑贼缓师以待瘴疠，敕辅等必以明年春灭贼。
现代文：皇帝考虑到贼人阻缓朝廷的军队是想等待瘴气和疫病发作，所以敕令张辅等人必须在第二年春天消灭贼人。
English: The emperor considered that the thieves were trying to delay the imperial army to wait for the outbreak of plague and plague, so he ordered Zhang Fu and others to eliminate the thieves in the spring of the following year.

古文：十二月，晟次洮江北岸，与多邦城对垒。
现代文：十二月，沐晟驻军在洮江北岸，与多邦城形成对垒。
English: In December, Muxun garrisoned troops on the north bank of the Minjiang River, forming a barrier with Duobangcheng.

古文：辅遣旭攻洮江州，造浮桥济师，遂俱抵城下，攻拔之。
现代文：张辅派陈旭攻打洮江州，造浮桥把军队渡过去，于是官军全部抵达城下，将多邦城攻拔下来。
English: Zhang Yu sent Chen Xu to attack Minjiang County, and built a floating bridge to cross the army. As a result, all the government troops arrived at the city and conquered the multi-national city.

古文：贼所恃惟此城，既破，胆裂。
现代文：贼人所倚恃只有该城，该城一破，则全胆裂。
English: The city is the only one on which the thieves rely. If the city is destroyed, the whole world will be shattered.

古文：大军循富良江南下，遂捣东都。
现代文：大军顺着富良江南下，直捣东都。
English: The large army went south along the Fura River and went straight to Dongdu.

古文：贼弃城走，大军入据之，薄西都。
现代文：贼人在东都弃城而逃，大军占领了东都，进逼西都。
English: The thieves abandoned the city in the east and fled. A large army occupied the east and forced its way into the west.

古文：贼大烧宫室，驾舟入海。
现代文：贼人便大烧宫室，驾船逃入海中。
English: The thieves then set fire to the palace and fled by boat into the sea.

古文：郡县相继纳款，抗拒者辄击破之。
现代文：各郡县相继投降，凡抗拒者都遭击破。
English: Counties surrendered one after another, and all those who resisted were defeated.

古文：士民上书陈黎氏罪恶，日以百数。
现代文：安南的士民中上书陈述黎氏罪恶行径的人，每天都数以百计。
English: Hundreds of citizens in Annan's constituency write to him every day to denounce the evil deeds of the Lai clan.

古文：五年正月大破季犛于木丸江，宣诏访求陈氏子孙。
现代文：五年正月，明军在木丸江大破黎季耑，皇帝宣读诏书访求陈氏的子孙。
English: In the first month of the fifth year, the Ming army broke the Liji River in the Maru River, and the emperor read out an edict to visit the descendants of the Chen clan.

古文：于是耆老千一百二十余人诣军门，言： 陈氏为黎贼杀尽，无可继者。
现代文：于是有耆老一千一百二十多人到军门前说 ：陈氏宗族已被黎贼杀尽了，无人可继承王位。
English: Therefore, more than eleven hundred and twenty elders came to the army gate and said, "The Chen clan has been wiped out by the Li bandits, and no one can inherit the throne."

古文：安南本中国地，乞仍入职方，同内郡。 
现代文：安南本是中国的领土，请求仍在此设职方司，与中国本土一样管理。 
English: Annan is originally a Chinese territory, and it is requested that a functional party department still be set up here, and managed in the same way as mainland China.

古文：辅等以闻。
现代文：张辅将此上报给朝廷。
English: Zhang Fu reported this to the imperial court.

古文：寻大破贼于富良江，季犛父子以数舟遁去。
现代文：不久，明军又在富良江大破贼人，黎季耑父子俩仅带几只船逃走。
English: Soon after, the Ming army broke up the bandits in the Furiang River, and Lijian and his son fled with only a few boats.

古文：诸军水陆并追，次茶笼县，知季犛走乂安，遂循举厥江，追至日南州奇罗海口，命柳升出海追之。
现代文：各军水陆并行追击，驻扎在荣笼县，知道黎季耑逃到翨安，于是沿举厥江追至日南州的奇罗海口，柳升奉命率兵还出海追击。
English: All the armies pursued by land and sea at the same time. They were stationed in Rongye County. They knew that Lai Jizhe had fled to Suan, so they chased him along the Jiu River to Chiro Haikou in Nichinan State. Liu Sheng was ordered to lead his soldiers out to sea to pursue him.

古文：贼数败，不能军。
现代文：贼人屡次失败，无法组织军队。
English: The bandits repeatedly failed to organize an army.

古文：五月获季犛及伪太子于高望山，安南尽平。
现代文：五月，明军在高望山俘获了黎季耑以及伪太子，于是安南全部平定。
English: In May, the Ming army captured Li Jizhe and the pseudo-prince in Gaowang Mountain, and Annan was completely subdued.

古文：群臣请如耆老言，设郡县。
现代文：各位大臣都请求按耆老所说的那样，在安南设置郡县加以管理。
English: The ministers all requested that counties be set up in Annam to administer it, as the retired general had said.

古文：六月朔，诏告天下，改安南为交阯，设三司：以都督佥事吕毅掌都司事，黄中副之，前工部侍郎张显宗、福建布政司左参政王平为左、右布政使，前河南按察使阮友彰为按察使，裴伯耆授右参议，又命尚书黄福兼掌布、按二司事。
现代文：六月初，皇帝诏告天下，把安南改为交，设立了三个司：任命都督佥事吕毅执掌都司事务，黄中做吕毅的副手；前工部侍郎张显宗、福建布政司左参政王平为左右布政使；前河南按察使阮友彰为按察使；授予裴伯耆为右参议。皇帝又命令尚书黄福兼管布政司和按察司的事务。
English: At the beginning of June, the emperor announced to the world that Annan had been changed to Foreign Minister, and three departments were established: the governor-general Lu Yi was appointed to take charge of the affairs of the capital, and Huang Zhong was appointed as Lu Yi's deputy; Zhang Xianzong, the former chamberlain of the Ministry of Industry, and Wang Ping, the left councillor of the Fujian Provincial Government, were appointed as the left and right foreign ministers of the Fujian Provincial Government; Ruan Youchang, the former Henan Deputy Inspector General, was appointed as the deputy inspector general; and Pei Boqi was appointed as the right councillor. The emperor also ordered Shang

古文：设交州、北江、谅江、三江、建平、新安、建昌、奉化、清化、镇蛮、谅山、新平、演州、乂安、顺化十五府，分辖三十六州，一百八十一县。
现代文：交三司之下统领有交州、北江、谅江、三江、建平、新安、建昌、奉化、清化、镇蛮、谅山、新平、演州、翨安、顺化十五府，其下又分别管辖三十六个州、一百八十一个县。
English: Under the three departments of Jiaotong, there are 15 prefectures of Jiaozhou, Beijiang, Lianjiang, Sanjiang, Jianping, Xin'an, Jianchang, Fenghua, Qinghua, Zhenmang, Lianshan, Xinping, Yenzhou, Handan and Hunhua, under which there are 36 prefectures and 181 counties.

古文：又设太原、宣化、嘉兴、归化、广威五州，直隶布政司，分辖二十九县。
现代文：又设置太原、宣化、嘉兴、归化、广威等五个州，直接隶属于布政司，五个州分别管辖二十九个县。
English: It also set up five prefectures, including Taiyuan, Xuanhua, Jiaxing, Nucleation and Guangwei, which are directly subordinate to the Department of Political Affairs. The five prefectures have jurisdiction over 29 counties respectively.

古文：其他要害，咸设卫所控制之。
现代文：其他要害之地，全部设置卫所控制起来。
English: All other critical areas will be controlled by the National Guard.

古文：乃敕有司，陈氏诸王被弑者咸予赠谥，建祠治冢，各置洒扫二十户。
现代文：皇帝又敕令有关官员，对陈氏家族中被黎季耑所弑的各位国王，都赠封谥号，为他们建立祠庙，建立墓冢。各派二十户人家专门洒扫这些庙冢。
English: The emperor also ordered the relevant officials to bestow the honorary titles on all the kings of the Chen family who were captured by Li Jizhe, to establish ancestral temples and tombs for them, and to send twenty people from each family to sweep these temples.

古文：宗族被害者赠官，军民死亡暴露者瘗埋之。
现代文：陈氏宗族中被黎贼所害的都赠送官职，军民死亡后还露骨在野的，全部予以掩埋。
English: The Chen family members who were victimized by the Li bandits were all given official positions, and those who were blatantly in the field after the death of soldiers and civilians were all buried.

古文：居官者仍其旧，与新除者参治。
现代文：原来当官的仍居旧位，与新官一起参与治理。
English: The original officials remain in their previous positions and participate in governance together with the new officials.

古文：黎氏苛政一切蠲除，遭刑者悉放免。
现代文：黎氏所颁行的苛政全部免除，遭刑在押的全部免罪释放。
English: All the harsh policies issued by the Lai Dynasty were absolved, and all those who had been sentenced to imprisonment were released without charge.

古文：礼待高年硕德。
现代文：以礼对待年高德望之人。
English: Treat the elderly with courtesy.

古文：鳏寡孤独无告者设养济院。
现代文：为鳏寡孤独无助者设立养济院。
English: A nursing home was set up for the widowed, lonely and helpless.

古文：怀才抱德之彦敦遣赴京。
现代文：对怀才抱德之士，敦请他们赴京城任用。
English: For those who have talent and virtue, urge them to go to Beijing for appointment.

古文：又诏访求山林隐逸、明经博学、贤良方正、孝弟力田、聪明正直、廉能干济、练达吏事、精通书算、明习兵法及容貌魁岸、诏言便利、膂力勇敢、阴阳术数、医药方脉诸人，悉以礼敦致，送京录用。
现代文：皇帝又下诏在交访求山林隐逸、明经博学、贤良方正、孝悌力田、聪明正直、廉能干济、练达吏事、精通书算、明习兵法以及容貌魁岸、语言伶俐、膂力过人、胆大勇敢、精通阴阳术数和医药方脉等人，全都以礼相待，敦请到京城录用。
English: The emperor also issued the following edict in the interview, asking the mountains and forests to be secluded, the scriptures to be learned, the virtuous to be upright, the filial to be strong, the intelligent to be honest, the honest to be able to work, the officials to be trained, the books to be well-versed in calculation, the military to be well-versed, the appearance to be handsome, the language to be fluent, the strength to be strong, the courage to be brave, the yin and yang to be well-versed in numbers and the medicine to be well-versed, and all of them to be treated with courtesy, and urged to be hired in Beijing.

古文：于是张辅等先后奏举九千余人。
现代文：这样张辅等人先后上奏举荐了九千多人。
English: In this way, Zhang Yu and others have successively recommended more than nine thousand people.

古文：九月，季犛、苍父子俘至阙下，与伪将相胡杜等悉属吏。
现代文：九月，黎季耑、黎苍父子被押送到朝廷，与伪将相胡杜等人一起交有关官员处理。
English: In September, Lai Jizhe and Lai Cang, father and son, were escorted to the imperial court, where they were handed over to the relevant officials, together with the pseudo-general Sang Hudu and others.

古文：赦苍弟卫国大王澄、子芮，所司给衣食。
现代文：皇帝赦免了黎苍的弟弟卫国大王黎澄和他的儿子黎芮，让有关官员供给他们衣食。
English: The emperor pardoned Lichang's younger brother, Emperor Licheng, and his son, Lihong, and allowed the relevant officials to provide them with food and clothing.

古文：六年六月，辅等振旅还京，上交阯地图，东西一千七百六十里，南北二千八百里。
现代文：六年六月，张辅等人率军回京，向皇帝呈上交地图，其东西长为一千七百六十里，南北宽为二千八百里。
English: In June of the sixth year, Zhang Fu and others led the army back to Beijing and presented the map to the emperor. Its east-west length is 1760 miles, and its north-south width is 2800 miles.

古文：安抚人民三百一十二万有奇，获蛮人二百八万七千五百有奇，象、马、牛二十三万五千九百有奇，米粟一千三百六十万石，船八千六百七十余艘，军器二百五十三万九千八百。
现代文：安抚了三百一十二万多人民，俘获了蛮人二百零八万七千五百多，缴获了大象、马、牛二十三万五千九百多头，缴获米粟一千三百六十万石，船八千六百七十余艘，军器二百五十三万九千八百多件。
English: He pacified more than 3.12 million people, captured more than 2.875 million barbarians, seized more than 235.9 million elephants, horses and cattle, seized 13.6 million koku of rice, more than 86.70 ships and more than 2.539.8 million pieces of military equipment.

古文：于是大行封赏，辅进英国公，晟黔国公，余叙赉有差。
现代文：于是皇帝大行封赏，张辅进封为英国公，沐晟进封为黔国公，其余的人都各按等级给予封赏。
English: As a result, the emperor awarded large rewards, Zhang Fu was awarded the title of Duke of Britain, Mu Xi was awarded the title of Duke of Shandong, and the rest of the people were awarded rewards according to their rank.

古文：时中朝所置吏，务以宽厚辑新造，而蛮人自以非类，数相惊恐。
现代文：此时中央王朝所设的官吏，都是以宽厚之德来治理地方，而蛮族人自认为这不是管理他们的办法，几次遭受惊吓。
English: At this time, the officials set up by the Central Dynasty were all governed by the virtue of benevolence, and the barbarians thought that this was not the way to manage them, and they were shocked several times.

古文：陈氏故官简定者，先降，将遣诣京师，偕其党陈希葛逃去，与化州伪官邓悉、阮帅等谋乱。
现代文：以前陈氏的官员简定，先向明朝投降，将把他送到京城去时，他偕同他的同党陈希葛逃走，与化州的伪官邓悉、阮帅等人一起密谋叛乱。
English: In the past, when Chen's official Jian Ding first surrendered to the Ming Dynasty and was about to be sent to Beijing, he escaped with his fellow party member Chen Xige and plotted a rebellion with fake officials Deng Si and Ruan Shuai of Huazhou.

古文：定乃僣大号，纪元兴庆，国曰大越。出没乂安、化州山中，伺大军还，即出攻盘滩咸子关，扼三江府往来孔道，寇交州近境。
现代文：简定于是僭称大号，改纪元为兴庆，定国名于大越，时常出没在翨安、化州的山中，窥伺大军回去后，即出来攻打盘滩的咸子关，扼住三江府的往来孔道，在交州近境为寇。
English: Therefore, Jian Ding changed the era to Xingqing, and the country's name to Dayue. He often appeared in the mountains of Jian'an and Huazhou, and after spying on the large army returning, he came out to attack Hanzi Pass in Pantan, strangle the passageway of Sanjiang Prefecture, and invade the vicinity of Jiaozhou.

古文：慈廉、威蛮、上洪、天堂、应平、石室诸州县皆向应，守将屡出讨，皆无功。
现代文：慈廉、威蛮、上洪、天堂、应平、石室的诸州县都响应他，守卫的将领虽然屡次出去讨伐，但都无功而返。
English: Zhuzhou counties such as Cilian, Wuyuan, Shanghong, Tianhe, Yingping and Shishuo all responded to him. Although the guarding generals went out to fight repeatedly, they all returned without success.

古文：事闻，命沐晟为征夷将军，统云南、贵州、四川军四万人，由云南征讨。
现代文：此事上报朝廷后，皇帝任命沐晟为征夷将军，统领云南、贵州、四川的军队四万人，从云南出发前去征讨。
English: After the matter was reported to the imperial court, the emperor appointed Mu Qian as a general to conquer the barbarians, leading 40,000 troops from Yunnan, Guizhou, and Sichuan to go to conquer the barbarians from Yunnan.

古文：而遣使赍敕招降者予世官。
现代文：同时又派使者持敕令招降他们，凡是投降的都世代为官。
English: At the same time, he sent an envoy with a command to invite them to surrender, and all those who surrendered became officials.

古文：贼不应，晟与战生厥江，大败，吕毅及参赞尚书刘俊死之。
现代文：贼人并不响应，沐晟与他们在生厥江接战，大败，吕毅及参赞尚书刘俊都战死。
English: The thieves did not respond, and Mu Xuan fought with them at the Juejiang River, resulting in a crushing defeat. Lu Yi and Counselor Shangshu Liu Jun both died in the battle.

古文：七年，败书闻，益发南畿、浙江、江西、福建、湖广、广东、广西军四万七千人，从英国公辅征之。
现代文：七年，败讯传到朝廷，皇帝又派遣南畿、浙江、江西、福建、湖广、广东、广西的军队四万七千人，跟随英国公张辅出征交。
English: Seven years later, news of the defeat reached the imperial court, and the emperor dispatched 47,000 troops from Nanki, Zhejiang, Jiangxi, Fujian, Hukang, Guangdong, and Guangxi to accompany the British general Zhang Shu to solicit diplomatic assistance.

古文：辅以贼负江海，不利陆师，乃驻北江仙游，大造战舰，而抚诸遭寇逋播者，遂连破慈廉、广威诸营栅。
现代文：张辅认为贼人依靠江海，不利于陆军作战，便将部队驻扎在北江的仙游，大造战舰，同时安抚那些遭受寇乱逃亡之人，于是接连攻破慈廉、广威各营栅。
English: Zhang Fu believed that the bandits relied on the river and sea, which was not conducive to the army's operations, so he stationed his troops in Xianyu of the Beijiang River, built warships, and at the same time appeased those who had fled from the invasion, and then successively broke through the camp gates of Cilan and Guangwei.

古文：侦其党邓景异扼南策州卢渡江太平桥，乃进军咸子关。
现代文：当侦知到简定的党徒邓景异扼守在南策州卢渡江的太平桥时，张辅便进军到咸子关。
English: When it was discovered that Deng Jingyi, a party member of Jianzhen, was guarding the Taiping Bridge on the Lu Du River in Nanzhe County, Zhang Fu marched into Hanziguan.

古文：伪金吾将军阮世每众二万，对岸立寨栅，列船六百余艘，树桩东南以扞蔽。
现代文：伪金吾将军阮世每率领二万人在卢渡江的对岸立下寨栅，环列了六百多艘战船，在东南面树立木桩作为蔽护。
English: The pseudo-King General Nguyn Thiệu led twenty thousand people to build a fence on the opposite bank of the L Tng River, lined up more than six hundred warships, and erected wooden stakes in the southeast as a cover.

古文：时八月，西北风急，辅督陈旭、朱广、俞让、方政等舟齐进，炮矢飙发，斩首三千级，生擒伪监门将军潘低等二百余人，获船四百余艘。
现代文：此时正是八月，西北风很急，张辅督陈旭、朱广、俞让、方政等人率舟齐进，火炮、弓箭一齐焱风发，斩杀了三千多敌人，活捉了伪监门潘低等二百多人，缴获船四百多艘。
English: At this time, it was August, and the northwesterly wind was very strong. Zhang's assistant governors Chen Xu, Zhu Guang, Yu Zhan, Fang Zheng and others led the boat forward. Artillery and bows and arrows were fired at the same time, killing more than three thousand enemies, capturing more than two hundred people such as the pseudo-supervisor Pan Xiao alive, and seizing more than four hundred ships.

古文：遂进击景异，景异先走，乃定交州、北江、谅江、新安、建昌、镇蛮诸府。
现代文：于是，张辅便率军进击邓景异，邓景异已预先逃走，便平定了交州、北江、谅江、新安、建昌、镇蛮等府。
English: As a result, Zhang Fu led the army to attack Deng Jingyi, who had already fled in advance, and they leveled the prefectures of Jiaozhou, Beijiang, Lianjiang, Xin'an, Jianchang, and Zhenmang.

古文：追破景异太平海口，获其党范必栗。
现代文：追击中又攻破了邓景异的太平海口，俘获他的党徒范必粟。
English: During the pursuit, they broke through Deng Jingyi's Taiping Haikou and captured his party member Fan Bibo.

古文：时阮帅等推简定为太上皇，别立陈季扩为帝，纪元重光。
现代文：此时，阮帅等人推举简定为太上皇，另立陈季扩为大越皇帝，将纪元年号改为重光。
English: At this time, Ruan Shuai and others elected Jian as the Emperor, and Chen Jian as the Emperor of the Great Yue, and changed the name of the first year of the era to Chongguang.

古文：乃遣使自称前安南王孙，求封爵。
现代文：陈季扩于是派遣使者到张辅处，自称自己是前安南国王的子孙，请求明朝廷给予册封王爵。
English: Chen Jizan then sent an envoy to Zhang Zifu, claiming to be a descendant of the former King Annan, and asked the Ming court to grant him the title of prince.

古文：辅叱斩之，由黄江、阿江、大安海口至福成江，转入神投海口，尽去贼所树桩栅。
现代文：张辅叱责并斩杀了陈季扩的使者，从黄江、阿江、大安海口至福成江，转入神投海口，全部消除了贼人所树立的桩栅。
English: Zhang Fu reprimanded and killed the envoys of Chen Jizan, from the Yellow River, the A River, the Da'an estuary to the Fucheng River, and transferred to the Shentou estuary, all of which eliminated the piles erected by the thieves.

古文：十余日抵清化，水陆毕会。
现代文：过了十多天，他们抵达清化，水陆两军会合一处。
English: After more than ten days, they arrived in Qinghua, and the two armies met at the same place.

古文：定已奔演州，季扩走乂安，帅、景异等亦散亡。
现代文：简定已逃奔到演州，陈季扩逃到翨安，阮帅、邓景异等人亦已逃散。
English: Jian Ding has fled to Yengzhou, Chen Jizhan fled to Hoan An, Ruan Shuai, Deng Jingyi and others have also fled.

古文：于是驻军，捕余党。
现代文：于是明军驻扎下来，搜捕贼人的余党。
English: As a result, the Ming army camped down and searched for the rest of the thieves.

古文：定走美良县吉利栅，辅等穷追及之。
现代文：简定逃到美良县的吉利栅，张辅等对他穷追不舍。
English: Jian Chen decided to flee to Jili Zhao in Mila County, and Zhang Fu and others pursued him relentlessly.

古文：定走入山，大索不得，遂围之，并其伪将相陈希葛、阮汝励、阮晏等俱就擒。
现代文：简定逃入山中，大肆搜索而不得，于是明军便包围了该山，大越的伪将伪相陈希葛、阮汝励、阮晏等都被擒。
English: Jian Ding escaped into the mountains, but was unable to find his way out, so the Ming army surrounded the mountain, and the Great Yue's false generals, Chen Xige, Ruan Ruling, and Ruan Hui, were all captured.

古文：先是，贼党阮师桧僣王，与伪金吾上将军杜元措等据东潮州安老县之宜阳社，众二万余人。
现代文：此前，贼党阮师桧僭称国王，与伪金吾上将军杜元措等人一起占领了东潮州安老县的宜阳社，共有二万多人。
English: Previously, the thief party, Nguyen Thi Tho, who called himself the king, together with the pseudo-supreme general, Du Yuan Cuo, and others, occupied Yiyang Company in Anlao County, East Chaozhou, with a total of more than 20,000 people.

古文：八年正月，辅进击之，斩首四千五百余级，擒其党范支、陈原卿、阮人柱等二千余人，悉斩之，筑京观。
现代文：八年正月，张辅率兵进剿阮师桧，斩获敌人首级四千五百多名，擒获他的同党范支、陈原卿、阮人柱等二千多人之后，全部处死，并修筑了京观。
English: In the first month of the eighth year, Zhang Fu led the soldiers into the capital of Nguyn Thiện, captured more than 4,500 enemy leaders, and captured more than 2,000 of his fellow party members, such as Fan Zhizhi, Chen Yuanqing, and Nguyn Trn, and then executed them all and built the Beijing Outlook.

古文：辅将班师，言： 季扩及党阮帅、胡具、邓景异等尚在演州、晙安，逼清化。
现代文：张辅将班师回京时，向皇帝上奏说： 陈季扩及其同党阮帅、胡县、邓景异等还盘踞在演州和翨安，逼迫清化。
English: When Zhang Fu returned his class to Beijing, he reported to the emperor: Chen Jizan and his fellow party members Ruan Shuai, Hu County, Deng Jingyi, etc. are still entrenched in Yanzhou and Xi'an, forcing Qinghua.

古文：而邓熔塞神投福成江口，据清化要路，出没乂安诸处。
现代文：而邓钅容则堵塞住神投福成江的江口，占据了清化的要道，常在翨安等地出没。
English: Deng Yunyong, on the other hand, blocked the estuary of the Shentou-Fucheng River, occupied the important path of purification, and often haunted Lu'an and other places.

古文：若诸军尽还，恐沐晟兵少不敌。
现代文：如果各军全部回国，恐怕沐晟的兵力太少，不敌于贼军。
English: If all the troops return to the country, I am afraid that the number of troops will be too small to defeat the invaders.

古文：请留都督江浩，都指挥俞让、花英、师祐等军，佐晟守御。 
现代文：请求将都督江浩，都指挥俞让、花英、师等人的军队留下，辅佐沐晟进行守卫。 
English: He requested that the military forces of the governor Jiang Hao, and the military commanders Yu Zhan, Hua Ying, and Shi, be left behind, and that the guards be assisted by Mu Xi.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝同意。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：五月，晟追季扩至虞江，贼弃栅遁。
现代文：五月，沐晟率军追击陈季扩到达虞江，贼人抛弃寨栅而逃。
English: In May, Muxun led the army to chase Chen Jizan to the Yujiang River, and the thief abandoned the stockade and fled.

古文：追至古灵县及会潮、灵长海口，斩首三千余级，获伪将军黎弄。
现代文：沐晟追到古灵县、会潮和灵长海口，斩获敌人首级三千多个，俘获伪将军黎弄。
English: He chased Muxu to Gurin County, Huichao and Lingchang Haikou, captured more than three thousand enemy heads, and captured the pseudo-general Lirong.

古文：季扩大蹙，奉表乞降。
现代文：陈季扩处境大为穷蹙，奉表请求投降。
English: Chen Jizan was in a very poor situation and was asked to surrender.

古文：帝心知其诈，姑许之，诏授交阯布政使，阮帅、胡具、邓景异、邓熔并都指挥，陈原樽右参政，潘季祐按察副使。
现代文：皇帝心知他在施诈，暂时允诺了他，下诏给交布政使，让他授予阮帅、胡县、邓景异、邓为都指挥，陈原樽为右参政，潘季为按察副使。
English: The emperor knew in his heart that he was being deceitful, so he gave him a temporary promise, and issued an edict to the political envoy to Kampot, instructing him to appoint Ruan Shuai, Hu Xian, Deng Jingyi, and Deng Weidu as commanders, Chen Yuantar as the right-wing political participant, and Pan Ji as the deputy envoy.

古文：诏既下，念贼无悛心，九年复命辅督军二万四千，合晟军讨之。
现代文：诏令下达后，顾念贼人没有悔改之心，九年便又命令张辅率军二万四千人，与沐晟的军队会合后共同讨伐贼人。
English: After the edict was issued, Gu Meng did not have the heart to repent. Nine years later, he ordered Zhang Fu to lead an army of twenty-four thousand to fight against the thieves after meeting with the army of Mu Xi.

古文：贼据月常江，树桩四十余丈，两崖置栅二三里，列船三百余艘，设伏山右。
现代文：贼人占据了月常江，树立木桩达四十多丈远，两岸设置栅寨达二三里长，排列战船三百多艘，在山右面设下埋伏。
English: The thieves occupied the Yue Changjiang River, erected wooden piles more than forty meters long, set up fences two to three miles long on both sides, lined up more than three hundred warships, and set up an ambush on the right side of the mountain.

古文：秋，辅、晟等水陆并进，阮帅、胡具、邓景异、邓钅容等来拒。
现代文：秋季，张辅、沐晟等率水陆两军齐头并进，阮帅、胡县、邓景异、邓等人也率军前来接战。
English: In the autumn, Zhang Fu, Muxun and other leaders of the two armies marched side by side, and Ruan Shuai, Hu Xian, Deng Jingyi, Deng and others also led the army to fight.

古文：辅令朱广等连舰拔桩以进，自率方政等以步队剿其伏兵，水陆夹攻。
现代文：张辅命令朱广等将战舰连起来，拔除树桩前进，自己率领方政等人以陆军进剿敌人的伏兵，水陆两路一起夹攻。
English: Zhang Fu ordered Zhu Guang and others to connect the warships, remove the stumps and advance. He himself led Fang Zheng and others to ambush the enemy with the army, and attack both land and sea together.

古文：贼大败，帅等皆散走。
现代文：贼人大败，阮帅等人都逃散了。
English: The thieves were soundly defeated, and Ruan Shuai and the others fled.

古文：生擒伪将军邓宗稷、黎德彝、阮忠、阮轩等，获船百二十艘。
现代文：明军活捉了伪将军邓宗稷、黎德彝、阮忠、阮轩等人，缴获船只一百二十艘。
English: The Ming army captured alive the pseudo-generals Deng Zongyao, Lai Deyao, Ruan Zhong, Ruan Xuan and others, and seized one hundred and twenty ships.

古文：辅乃督水军剿季扩，闻石室、福安诸州县伪龙虎将军黎蕊等断锐江浮桥阻生厥江交州后卫道路，遂往征之。
现代文：张辅监督水军进剿陈季扩，听到石室、福安等州县的伪龙虎将军黎蕊等贼人切断锐江上的浮桥，阻塞了生厥江交州的后卫道路时，张辅便率军前去征讨。
English: Zhang Fu supervised the advance of the naval forces into Jiuquan, and when he heard that the pseudo dragon and tiger generals Li Rui and other thieves from Shishimuro, Fu'an and other prefectures and counties cut off the pontoon bridge on the Rui River and blocked the rear guard road of Jiuquan Jiaozhou, Zhang Fu led the army to go to investigate.

古文：蕊及范慷来拒，蕊中矢死。
现代文：黎蕊和范慷率贼军前来接战，黎蕊中箭而死。
English: Li Rui and Fan Kang led the rebel army to fight, Li Rui was hit by an arrow and died.

古文：斩伪将军阮陀，获伪将军杨汝梅、防御使冯翕，斩首千五百级，追杀余贼殆尽。
现代文：张辅等斩杀了伪将军阮耚，俘获伪将军杨汝梅和防御使冯翕，斩获敌人首级一千五百多个，把余贼追杀殆尽。
English: Zhang Fu and others killed the pseudo-general Nguyen Xuan, captured the pseudo-general Yang Rumei and the defense force Feng Xuan, captured more than 1,500 enemy heads, and chased and killed the remaining thieves.

古文：慷及杜个旦、邓明、阮思瑊等亦就擒。
现代文：范慷和杜个旦、邓明、阮思王咸等亦就擒。
English: Fan Kang and Du Zhidan, Deng Ming, Ruan Si Wang Xian and others also went to bed.

古文：十年，辅督方政等击贼舟于神投海，大败之，擒伪将军陈磊、邓汝戏等。
现代文：十年，张辅督方政等人在神投海袭击贼人的战船，大败贼人，擒获了伪将军陈磊和邓汝戏等人。
English: Ten years later, Zhang Fuxu Fang Zheng and others attacked the pirates' warships in Shengtouhai, defeated the pirates, and captured the pseudo-generals Chen Lei and Deng Ruxiao.

古文：阮帅等远遁，追之不及。
现代文：阮帅等贼人远逃而去，追赶不及。
English: Ruan Shuai and other thieves fled far away, unable to catch up.

古文：辅军至乂安土黄，伪少保潘季祐等请降，率伪官十七人上谒。
现代文：张辅率军到达翨安的土黄，伪少保潘季等人请求投降，率领伪官十七人前来求见。
English: Zhang Fu led the army to Tuhuang in Lu'an, and the pseudo-minor guard Pan Ji and others requested surrender, leading seventeen pseudo-officials to come to see him.

古文：辅承制授季祐按察副使，署乂安府事。
现代文：张辅按前制授予潘季按察副使的职务，让他掌管翨安府的事务。
English: Zhang Fu, according to the previous system, granted Pan Ji the post of deputy envoy of inspection, and let him take charge of the affairs of Suanfu.

古文：于是伪将军、观察、安抚、招讨诸使陈敏、阮士勤、陈全勖、陈全敏等相继降。
现代文：于是伪将军、伪观察、伪安抚、伪招讨诸使陈敏、阮士勤、陈全勖、陈全敏等人相继投降。
English: As a result, the fake generals, fake observers, fake appeasers, and fake solicitors Chen Min, Ruan Shicun, Chen Quanzhang, Chen Quanzhong and others surrendered one after another.

古文：明年，辅及晟合军至顺州。阮帅等设伏爱子江，而据昆传山险，列象阵迎敌。
现代文：第二年，张辅军和沐晟军会合后到达顺州，阮帅等人在爱子江设下埋伏，占据了昆传山的山险，排列象阵迎敌。
English: In the second year, after Zhang Yu's army and Mu Xi's army met and arrived in Shunzhou, Ruan Shuai and others set up an ambush under the Aizi River, occupied the mountain perimeter of Kunchuan Mountain, and lined up the elephant array to meet the enemy.

古文：诸军大破之，生擒伪将军潘径、阮徐等五十六人，追至爱母江。
现代文：明军大破贼军，生擒了伪将军潘径、阮徐等五十六人，追击到爱母江。
English: The Ming army defeated the bandit army, captured alive the pseudo-generals Pan Qian, Ruan Xu and other fifty-six people, and pursued them to the Aimo River.

古文：贼溃散，邓钅容弟伪侯铁及将军潘鲁、潘勤等尽降。
现代文：贼人溃散，邓的弟弟伪侯邓铁以及伪将军潘鲁、潘勤等全部投降。
English: The thieves scattered, and Deng's brother, the pseudo-lord Deng Tie, as well as the pseudo-generals Pan Lu and Pan Qin, all surrendered.

古文：明年春，进军政和。贼帅胡同降，言伪大将军景异率党黎蟾等七百人逃暹蛮昆蒲栅。
现代文：又过了一年的春天，明军向政和进发，贼帅胡同投降，称伪大将军邓景异率领党徒黎蟾等七百人逃到暹蛮的昆蒲栅。
English: A year later, in the spring, the Ming army marched into the political peace, and the gangster-in-chief, Hutong, surrendered, saying that the pseudo-general Deng Jingyi led the party member Lihong and seven hundred others to flee to Kunpuzha in Siam.

古文：遂进罗蒙江，舍骑步行，比至，贼已遁。
现代文：张辅等人于是进军罗蒙江，路上舍下马骑步行，等赶到昆蒲栅时，贼人已经逃遁了。
English: Zhang Fu and others then marched into the Romeng River, abandoning the horse and riding on foot on the road. By the time they reached Kunpuzha, the thieves had already fled.

古文：追至叱蒲捺栅，又遁。
现代文：官军追击到叱蒲干栅，又让他逃跑了。
English: The government army chased him as far as Rebu Ganzhao, but he ran away again.

古文：昏夜行二十余里，闻更鼓声，辅率政等衔枚疾趋，黎明抵叱蒲干栅，江北贼犹寨南岸。
现代文：官军在黑夜里行军二十多里，听到传来的更鼓声时，张辅率领方政等衔枚疾驰，黎明时分抵达叱蒲捺栅，江北的贼人还以为自己人在南岸筑寨呢！
English: The official army marched more than twenty miles in the dark of night. When they heard the sound of more drums, Zhang Fu led Fang Zheng and other high-ranking officials in a gallop. At dawn, they arrived at Jiabuxi. The thieves in the north of the river still thought that they were building a castle on the south bank!

古文：官军渡江围之，矢中景异胁，擒之。镕及弟鈗亡走，追擒之，尽获其众。
现代文：官军渡江后包围了他们，邓景异胁下中箭被擒，邓和他的弟弟邓钅允逃走，官军追击将其擒获，将他们手下的贼人也全部俘虏。
English: After crossing the river, the government army encircled them. Deng Jingyi was captured under threat of arrows. Deng and his brother Deng Yuyun fled. The government army chased and captured them, and captured all the thieves under their command.

古文：别将朱广追伪大将军阮帅于暹蛮，大搜暹人关诸山，获帅及季扩等家属。
现代文：朱广则在暹蛮追击伪大将军阮帅，在暹人关大力搜捕，抓获了阮帅和陈季扩的家属。
English: Zhu Guang, on the other hand, pursued the pseudo-general Nguyn Châu in Siem Reap and vigorously searched for him in Siem Reap. He captured the family members of Nguyn Châu and Trn Thiện.

古文：帅逃南灵州，依土官阮茶汇。
现代文：阮帅逃到南灵州，投靠土官阮茶汇。
English: Ruan Shuai fled to South Lingshou and joined the local official Ruan Cha Hui.

古文：指挥薛聚追获帅，斩茶汇。
现代文：指挥薛聚追击中抓获了阮帅，斩杀了阮茶汇。
English: Commander Xue Ju caught Ruan Shuai during the pursuit and killed Ruan Cha Hui.

古文：初，邓镕之就执也，季扩逃乂安竹排山。
现代文：早先，邓被擒时，陈季扩逃入了翨安的竹排山。
English: Earlier, when Deng was arrested, Chen Jizan fled to the Bamboo-lined Mountain in Handan.

古文：辅遣都指挥师祐袭之，走老挝。
现代文：张辅派都指挥师袭击陈季扩，陈季扩逃到老挝。
English: Zhang Yu sent the capital command division to attack Chen Jizan, Chen Jizan fled to Laos.

古文：祐踵其后，老挝惧官军躏其地，请自缚以献。
现代文：师跟踪而至，老挝害怕官军蹂躏，请陈季扩自缚以便献给官军。
English: As the division followed, Laos, fearing the ravages of the government army, asked Chen Jizan to tie himself up so that he could be sacrificed to the government army.

古文：辅檄索之，令祐深入，克三关，抵金陵个，贼党尽奔，遂获季扩及其弟伪相国驩国王季揝，他贼尽平。
现代文：张辅传檄文到老挝，向他们索讨陈季扩，并命令师深入该地，攻克三个关隘，抵达金陵个，贼人及其同党全部逃奔而去，于是抓获了陈季扩和他的弟弟伪相国国王陈季蒀，其他的贼人悉被平定。
English: Zhang Fu transmitted a message to Laos, asking them to investigate Chen Jizan, and ordered the division to go deep into the country, conquer three passes, and arrive at Jinling. The thieves and their accomplices all fled, so Chen Jizan and his brother, the false king of the country, Chen Jizhe, were captured. The other thieves were subdued.

古文：明年二月，辅、晟等班师入京。
现代文：第二年二月，张辅、沐晟等人班师回到京城。
English: In February of the following year, Zhang Yu, Muxun and other class teachers returned to Beijing.

古文：四月复命辅佩征夷将军印，出镇。
现代文：四月，皇帝又命令张辅佩征夷将军印前往交镇守。
English: In April, the emperor also ordered Zhang Shu to wear the seal of the General of the Expeditionary Force and go to Jiaozhen.

古文：十四年召还。明年命丰城侯李彬代镇。
现代文：十四年，皇帝又将张辅召回国内，第二年，皇帝命令丰城侯李彬代理张辅镇守交。
English: Fourteen years later, the emperor recalled Zhang Fu back to China, and the next year, the emperor ordered Fengcheng Hou Li Bin to act as Zhang Fu's deputy to keep diplomatic relations.

古文：交人故好乱。中官马骐以采办至，大索境内珍宝，人情骚动，桀黠者鼓煽之，大军甫还，即并起为乱。
现代文：交人以前就好作乱，宦官马骐因采办到交后，大肆搜索交境内的珍宝，弄得人情骚动。桀骜不驯的狡黠者乘机煽动，朝廷大军刚一回国，交人便一并起来作乱。
English: The eunuch Ma Jun, who had been a troublemaker before the establishment of the Jiaotong, became a troublemaker after the establishment of the Jiaotong. He searched for precious treasures in the territory of the Jiaotong, which caused a commotion among the people. Unruly and cunning people took the opportunity to instigate. As soon as the imperial army returned to the country, the Jiaotong people got together and started a riot.

古文：陆那阮贞，顺州黎核、潘强与土官同知陈可论、判官阮昭、千户陈忷、南灵州判官阮拟、左平知县范伯高、县丞武万、百户陈已律等一时并反。
现代文：陆那的阮贞，顺州的黎核、潘强与土官同知陈可论，判官阮昭，千户陈籄，南灵州的判官阮拟，左平的知县范伯高，县丞武万和百户陈已律等人一时都起来造反。
English: Lu Na's Ruan Zhen, Shun Zhou's Li Jiu, Pan Qiang and local officials' confidant Chen Ke Lun, judge Ruan Zhao, thousand households Chen Yao, judge Ruan Qiu of South Ling Zhou, Zuo Ping's county magistrate Fan Bo Gao, county magistrate Wu Wan and hundred households Chen Ye Lu and others all rebelled at once.

古文：彬皆遣将讨灭之，而反者犹不止。
现代文：李彬都派将领讨伐消灭了他们，但造反并没有停止。
English: Li Bindu sent generals to fight and eliminate them, but the rebellion did not stop.

古文：俄乐巡检黎利、四忙故知县车绵之子三、乂安知府潘僚、南灵州千户陈顺庆、乂安卫百户陈直诚，亦乘机作乱。
现代文：俄乐的巡检黎利，四忙前知县车绵的儿子车三，翨安知府潘僚，南灵州的千户陈顺庆，翨安卫的百户陈直诚等人也乘机作乱。
English: Ruo Le's patrol inspector Lili, four busy former Zhixian County Che Mian's son Che San, Xuan An Prefecture Pan Liang, Nan Lingzhou's thousand households Chen Shunqing, Xuan Wei's hundred households Chen Zhicheng and others also took the opportunity to make trouble.

古文：其他奸宄，范软起俄乐，武贡、黄汝曲起偈江，侬文历起丘温，陈木果起武定，阮特起快州，吴巨来起善誓，郑公证、黎侄起同利，陶强起善才，丁宗老起大湾，范玉起安老，皆自署官爵，杀将吏，焚庐舍。
现代文：其他犯法作乱的人也很多，如范软在俄乐起兵，武贡、黄汝典在偈江起兵，侬文历在丘温起兵，陈木果在武定起兵，阮特在快州起兵，吴巨来在善誓起兵，郑公证、黎侄在同利起兵，陶强在善才起兵，丁宗老在大湾起兵，范玉在安老起兵，他们都自立官署自封爵位，杀死明朝廷委派的将领和官吏，焚烧庐舍。
English: There were also many other people who broke the law and caused disturbances. For example, Fan Soft raised an army in Russia, Wu Gong and Huang Ruxian raised an army in Gejiang, Nong Wenli raised an army in Qiuwen, Chen Muguo raised an army in Wuding, Ruan Te raised an army in Cangzhou, Wu Julai raised an army in Zhengyi, Zheng Gongzhen, Li Jiuyi raised an army in Tongli, Tao Qiang raised an army in Zhencai, Ding Zonglao raised an army in Dawan, and Fan Yu raised an army in Anlao. All of them set up their own government departments,

古文：有杨恭、阮多者，皆自称王，署其党韦五、谭兴邦、阮嘉为太师、平章，与群寇相倚，而潘僚、范玉尤猖獗。
现代文：有叫杨恭、阮多的人，都已自己称王，将其党徒韦五、谭兴邦、阮嘉封为太师和平章，与群寇相互倚恃，而其中的潘僚、范玉尤其猖獗。
English: Some of them, such as Yang Gong and Nguyn Tho, have proclaimed themselves kings, and their followers, such as Văn Văn, Tan Hng Bàng and Nguyn Chái, have been awarded the title of grandmaster and the Peace Medal, and they are in close contact with the bandits. One of them, Pan Lng and Phm Ngc, is particularly rampant.

古文：僚者，故乂安知府季祐子也，嗣父职，不堪马骐虐，遂反。
现代文：潘僚，是前翨安知府潘季的儿子，继承了父亲的职位，因不堪忍受马骐的虐待，于是起来造反。
English: Pan Liang, the son of Pan Ji, the former governor of Ya'an Prefecture, inherited his father's post, and because he could not bear Ma Jun's abuse, he rebelled.

古文：土官指挥路文律、千户陈苔等从之。
现代文：土官指挥路文律、千户陈苔等跟随他一起造反。
English: The local magistrate, commander Lu Wenrui, and thousands of households, such as Chen Tei, followed him to rebel.

古文：玉为涂山寺僧，自言天降印剑，遂僣称罗平王，纪元永宁，与范善、吴中、黎行、陶承等为乱，署为相国、司空、大将军，攻掠城邑。
现代文：范玉原是涂山寺的僧人，自称上天给他降赐了印和剑，于是自称为罗平王，将年号定为永宁，与范善、吴中、黎行、陶承等人相互作乱，封范善等人为相国、司空和大将军等职务，攻占城邑。
English: Fan Yuyuan was a monk of Tu Mountain Temple. He claimed that the heavens had given him the seal and sword, so he called himself King Luo Ping and set the year as Yongning. He and Fan Shan, Wu Zhong, Li Xing, Tao Cheng and others made trouble with each other. Fan Shan and others occupied cities and towns for the sake of the state, the position of Siku and the general.

古文：彬东西征剿，日不暇给。
现代文：李彬率军东征西剿，目不暇接。
English: Li Bin led the army eastward to Xicheng, and he was in a daze.

古文：中朝以贼久未平，十八年命荣昌伯陈智为左参将，助之。
现代文：中央朝廷认为贼人作乱那么久还没平息，十八年又派荣昌伯陈智为左参将，前往交帮助李彬。
English: The central court believed that the bandits had not calmed down after such a long period of turmoil, and sent Rong Changbo Chen Zhi to assist Li Bin in 18 as the left adjutant general.

古文：又降敕责彬曰： 叛寇潘僚、黎利、车三、侬文历等迄今未获，兵何时得息，民何时得安。
现代文：皇帝又降敕令责怪李彬说： 叛贼潘僚、黎利、车三、侬文历等迄今尚未抓获，军队何时才能得到休息，百姓何时才能得到安宁。
English: The emperor also issued an order to abdicate the throne and blamed Li Bin, saying: The traitors Panliang, Lili, Che San, Nongwen Lijie and others have not yet been captured. When will the army be able to rest, and when will the people be able to have peace?

古文：宣广为方略，速奏荡平。 
现代文：应广做计划，迅速荡平贼寇，上奏朝廷。 
English: It is necessary to make a broad plan, quickly defeat the bandits, and appeal to the imperial court.

古文：彬皇恐，督诸将追剿。
现代文：李彬接敕令后惶惶恐恐，急忙率各将追剿贼人。
English: Li Bin panicked after receiving the order and hurried to chase down the thieves.

古文：明年秋，贼悉破灭，惟黎利不能得。
现代文：第二年秋天，贼人全被破灭，只有黎利没有抓获。
English: In the autumn of the following year, all of the thieves were broken up, only Lili was not caught.

古文：利初仕陈季扩为金吾将军，后归正，用为清化府俄乐县巡检，邑邑不得志。
现代文：黎利原先在陈季扩手下当金吾将军，后来向官军归正，被任命为清化府俄乐县的巡检，悒悒不得志。
English: Originally, Lili served as General Kingo under Chen Jihan. Later, he converted to the official army and was appointed as a patrol inspector in Ore County, Qinghua Prefecture. He was discouraged.

古文：及大军还，遂反，僣称平定王，以弟石为相国，与其党段莽、范柳、范晏等放兵肆掠。
现代文：等明朝廷的大军一回国，便起来造反，自称为平定王，任命他的弟弟黎石为相国，与其党徒段莽、范柳、范晏等人纵兵大肆抢掠。
English: When the large army of the Ming court returned to the country, he rose in revolt, calling himself the King of Pacification, appointing his brother Li Shih as his consort, and plundering with his party members such as Dang Meng, Fan Liu, Fan Qi and others.

古文：官军讨之，生擒晏等，利遁去。
现代文：官军讨伐他们，活捉了范晏等人，黎利逃走。
English: The government army fought them, captured Fan Qi and others alive, and Lili fled.

古文：久之，出据可蓝栅行劫。
现代文：时间一久，他又出来占据了可蓝栅行劫。
English: After a long time, he came out again and occupied the blue gate to rob.

古文：诸将方政、师祐剿获其伪将军阮个立等，利逃匿老挝。
现代文：方政、师等将领前去进剿，俘获了他手下的伪将军阮个立等人，黎利逃到老挝躲藏起来。
English: Fang Zheng, division and other generals went to Quzhou and captured the pseudo-general Ruan Cili and others under his command. Lili fled to Laos and went into hiding.

古文：及政等还，利潜出，杀玉局巡检。
现代文：等方政等人一回军，黎利就偷偷地出来，杀死玉局的巡检。
English: When Fang Zheng et al. returned to the army, Lili secretly came out and killed the patrol of the Jade Bureau.

古文：已，复出掠磊江，每追击辄遁去。
现代文：不久，又出来抢劫磊江等地，每次追击总被他逃走。
English: Soon, he came out again to rob Leijiang and other places, and he was always chased away.

古文：及群盗尽灭，利益深匿。
现代文：等到群贼都被消灭之后，黎利益发深藏起来。
English: After waiting for the band of thieves to be wiped out, Li Jiufang went into hiding.

古文：彬奏言： 利窜老挝，老挝请官军毋入，党尽发所部兵捕利。
现代文：李彬上奏朝廷说 ：黎利逃窜到老挝，老挝请求官军不要进入老挝境内，他们会派自己的军队去捕获黎利的。
English: Li Bin reported to the imperial court, saying: Lili fled to Laos. Laos asked the government army not to enter the territory of Laos. They would send their own army to capture Lili.

古文：今久不遣，情叵测。 
现代文：现今时间已很久，还不见他们将黎利遣送过来，情况难以预测。 
English: It has been a long time since they sent Lili here, and the situation is difficult to predict.

古文：帝疑老挝匿贼，令彬送其使臣至京诘问，老挝乃逐利。
现代文：皇帝怀疑老挝故意藏匿黎利，让李彬将老挝的使臣送到京城来由皇帝诘问他们，这样老挝才驱逐黎利。
English: The emperor suspected that Laos was deliberately hiding Lili, and asked Li Bin to send Lao envoys to Beijing to be interrogated by the emperor, so that Laos could expel Lili.

古文：二十年春，彬卒，诏智代彬。
现代文：二十年春天，李彬病逝，皇帝下诏让陈智代理李彬的职务。
English: In the spring of the 20th year, Li Bin died of illness, and the emperor issued an edict to let Chen Zhi take over Li Bin's duties.

古文：二十一年，智追利于宁化州车来县，败之，利复远窜。
现代文：二十一年，陈智追击黎利到达宁化州的车来县，打败了黎利，黎利又往远处逃窜了。
English: In 1921, Chen Zhi chased Lili all the way to Che Lai County, Ninghua Prefecture, defeated Lili, and Lili fled far away.

古文：明年秋，智奏利初逃老挝，后被逐归瑰县。
现代文：第二年秋天，陈智上奏说黎利开始时逃到老挝，后来被老挝驱逐后回到瑰县。
English: In the autumn of the following year, Chen Zhi reported that Lili initially fled to Laos, and later returned to Gexian County after being expelled by Laos.

古文：官军进击，其头目范仰等已率男妇千六百人降，利虽求抚，愿以所部来归，而止俄乐不出，造国器未已，必当进兵。
现代文：官军向瑰县进军时，黎利手下的头目范仰等已率男女一千六百人前来投降，黎利虽然要求受招抚，愿率领手下的部属前来归附，但自己却躲在俄乐不肯出来，不停地制造军用器械，对此必当进兵征剿。
English: When the government army marched to Guxian, Fan Yang, the leader of Lili's men, had already led 1,600 men and women to surrender. Although Lili asked to be recruited and was willing to lead his subordinates to surrender, he refused to come out of hiding in Russia and continued to manufacture military equipment. For this, he had to be drafted.

古文：奏至，会仁宗以践阼大赦天下，因敕智善抚之，而利已寇茶笼州，败方政军，杀指挥伍云。
现代文：该奏章到达朝廷时，正好碰上仁宗接皇帝位大赦天下，于是敕令陈智对黎利善加招抚，而此时黎利已进犯了茶笼州，打败了方政的军队，杀死了指挥伍方。
English: When the musical score arrived at the imperial court, it happened to coincide with the amnesty of Emperor Renzong's accession to the throne, so the emperor ordered Chen Zhi to be kind to Lili Shan, and at this time Lili had invaded Cha Kengzhou, defeated Fang Zheng's army, and killed the commander Wufang.

古文：利未叛时，与镇守中官山寿善。
现代文：黎利尚未叛乱时，与镇守交的宦官山寿很好。
English: When Lili had not yet rebelled, Eucansan Shou, which had diplomatic relations with the town, was very good.

古文：至是寿还朝，力言利与己相信，今往谕之，必来归。
现代文：至此山寿回到朝廷，竭力上奏说自己与黎利相互信任，现前往交谕劝他，他必然会归附明朝廷。
English: At this point, Shan Shou returned to the imperial court, and tried his best to convince Lili that he and Lili trusted each other, and now he was going to the envoy to persuade him that he would inevitably return to the Ming court.

古文：帝曰： 此贼狡诈，若为所绐，则其势益炽，不易制也。 
现代文：皇帝说 ：此贼人狡猾险诈，如果被他所骗，则其势力更大，不容易节制了。 
English: The emperor said, "This thief is cunning and treacherous. If you are deceived by him, his power will be even greater, and it will not be easy to control him."

古文：寿叩头言： 如臣往谕，而利不来，臣当万死。 
现代文：山寿叩头说 ：如果我前去劝谕而黎利不来归降，我该万死。 
English: Sanju kowtowed and said, "If I go to exhort and Lili does not come to surrender, I deserve to die."

古文：帝颔之，遣寿赍敕授利清化知府，慰谕甚至。
现代文：皇帝同意了山寿的请求，派山寿持敕令授予黎利为清化府的知府，安慰劝谕甚为周备。
English: The emperor agreed to Shanshou's request and sent Shanshou to hold the imperial edict to award Lili as the prefecture of Qinghua Prefecture. The consoling advice was very thoughtful.

古文：敕甫降，利已寇清化，杀都指挥陈忠。
现代文：敕令刚降时，黎利已进犯到清化，杀死了都指挥陈忠。
English: When the imperial command had just been lowered, Lili had already attacked Qinghua and killed the commander Chen Zhong.

古文：利得敕，无降意，即借抚愚守臣，佯言俟秋凉赴官，而寇掠不已。
现代文：黎利得到敕令后，没有丝毫投降的意思，马上借招抚为名愚弄当地的守卫大臣，假称等秋天天气凉爽以后再赴清化做官，而私下里依然不停地攻城掠地。
English: After receiving the imperial edict, Lili did not have the slightest intention of surrendering. He immediately used the excuse of "appeasement" to fool the local guard minister, pretending that he would wait for the autumn weather to be cool before going to Qinghua to work as an official, but secretly he continued to attack the city and seize land.

古文：时洪熙改元，铸将军印分颁边将，智得征夷副将军印，又命安平伯李宁往佐之。
现代文：此时仁宗皇帝将年号改为洪熙，铸造将军印分别颁发给边境的将领，陈智得了一枚征夷副将军印，皇帝又派安平伯李安前去辅佐陈智。
English: At this time, Emperor Renzong changed the name of the year to Hongxi, the minted general's seal was separately issued to the generals on the border, Chen Zhi received a vice-general's seal for subduing the barbarians, and the emperor sent Anping Bo Li'an to assist Chen Zhi.

古文：智素无将略，惮贼，因借抚以愚中朝，且与方政迕，遂顿兵不进。
现代文：陈智本来就没有将军的谋略，惧怕贼人，因此就借招抚之名欺骗中央朝廷，并与方政合不来，于是停兵不进。
English: Chen Zhi did not have the general's strategy originally, he was afraid of thieves, so he deceived the central court under the name of enticement, and could not get along with Fang Zheng, so he stopped advancing.

古文：贼益无所忌，再围茶笼，智等坐视不救。
现代文：贼人更无所顾忌，再次包围了茶笼州，陈智等人坐视不救。
English: The thieves had no scruples and once again surrounded Chagos. Chen Zhi and the others watched helplessly.

古文：阅七月，城中粮尽，巡按御史以闻，奏至而仁宗崩。
现代文：过了七月，茶笼州城中粮食用尽，巡按御史将此上报朝廷，奏章到达时，仁宗皇帝逝世。
English: After July, the food supply in the city of Chaozhou was exhausted, and the inspector general reported this to the imperial court. When the report arrived, Emperor Nanzong died.

古文：宣宗初即位，敕责智及三司官。
现代文：宣宗皇帝刚登基，便敕令责备陈智和交三司的官员。
English: Emperor Xuanzong had just ascended to the throne when he issued an order to reprimand Chen Zhi and the officials of the Three Departments of Foreign Affairs.

古文：智等不为意，茶笼遂陷，知州琴彭死之。
现代文：陈智等人不以为意，茶笼州于是陷落，知州琴彭战死。
English: Chen Zhi and others were not impressed, Chagangzhou then fell, and Chizhou Qin Peng died in battle.

古文：尚书掌布按二司陈洽言： 利虽乞降，内携贰，既陷茶笼，复结玉麻土官、老挝酋长与之同恶。
现代文：执掌布政使司和按察使司的尚书陈洽上奏说： 黎利虽然请求投降，但内怀二心，已经攻陷了茶笼州后，又与玉麻的土官和老挝的酋长勾结起来共同作恶。
English: Shangshu Chen Gao, who was in charge of the cloth political envoy and the inspector envoy, said: Although Lili requested to surrender, he was double-minded. After he had captured Cha Keng Chau, he colluded with the local officials of Jade and the chiefs of Laos to commit evil together.

古文：始言俟秋凉，今秋已过，复言与参政梁汝笏有怨，乞改授茶笼州，而遣逆党潘僚、路文律等往嘉兴、广威诸州招集徒众，势日滋蔓。
现代文：开始时他说等秋季天凉时投降，现秋季已过，他又说自己与参政梁汝笏有怨仇，请求将他改任到茶笼州，同时又派遣叛党潘僚、路文律等前往嘉兴、广威各州招集徒众，势力一天比一天蔓延。
English: At the beginning, he said that he would surrender when the weather was cool in the autumn, but now the autumn has passed. He also said that he had a grudge against the politician Liang Rucheng and requested that he be transferred to Chaegu Prefecture. At the same time, he sent the rebel Panliang and Lu Wenlu to Jiaxing and Guangwei Provinces to recruit followers, and his power spread day by day.

古文：乞命总兵者速行剿灭。 
现代文：请求朝廷命令总兵的官员迅速将其剿灭。 
English: The officials requested the Imperial Court to order the soldiers to quickly exterminate them.

古文：奏上，为降敕切责，期来春平贼。
现代文：该奏章上达朝廷后，皇帝降敕令严责陈智等人，限定他们在明年春天平定叛贼。
English: After the report was submitted to the imperial court, the emperor issued a decree to severely punish Chen Zhi and others, restricting them to suppressing the traitors in the spring of the next year.

古文：智始惧，与政薄可留关，败还，至茶笼又败。
现代文：陈智至此才有所畏惧，与方政一样带兵到可留关，结果失败而回，到茶笼州时又被贼人打败。
English: At this point, Chen Zhi was a little afraid. Like Fang Zheng, he led the troops to Keliuguan, but failed and returned, and was defeated by the thieves when he reached Cha Kengzhou.

古文：政勇而寡谋，智懦而多忌，素不相能，而山寿专招抚，拥兵晙安不救，是以屡败。
现代文：方政有勇而少谋，陈智懦怯而多猜忌，两人素来不睦，而山寿又一意专门招抚，拥兵翨安不去救援，所以屡次被贼人所败。
English: Fang Zheng is brave but lacks strategy, Chen Zhi is cowardly but has many suspicions. The two have always been at odds, while Shan Shou was determined to be a special caress, to support soldiers and not to go to rescue, so he was repeatedly defeated by thieves.

古文：宣德元年春，事闻，复降敕切责。
现代文：宣德元年春天，败讯传到朝廷，皇帝又降敕令切责陈智等人。
English: In the spring of the first year of Xuande's reign, news of the defeat reached the imperial court, and the emperor issued an imperial edict to severely punish Chen Zhi and others.

古文：时渠魁未平，而小寇蜂起，美留潘可利助逆，宣化周庄、太原黄庵等结云南宁远州红衣贼大掠。
现代文：此时贼魁尚未平息，而小寇又蜂拥而起，美留州的潘可利助贼为逆，宣化的周庄、太原的黄奄等人勾结云南宁远州的红衣贼人大肆抢劫。
English: At this time, the bandit leaders had not yet calmed down, and the petty thieves swarmed again. Pan Keli from Meiliuzhou helped the bandits, while Zhou Zhuang from Xuanhua and Huang Ami from Taiyuan colluded with the red-clad bandits from Ningyuan in Yunnan to loot.

古文：帝敕沐晟剿宁远，又发西南诸卫军万五千、弩手三千赴交阯，且敕老挝不得容叛人。
现代文：皇帝敕令沐晟进剿云南的宁远，又征调西南各卫所的军队一万五千人、弓箭手三千奔赴交，并敕令老挝不能让叛人进入老挝境内。
English: The emperor ordered Mu Rong to invade Ningyuan in Yunnan Province, and sent 15,000 troops and 3,000 archers from the southwestern garrisons to establish diplomatic relations. He also ordered Laos not to allow the traitors to enter its territory.

古文：四月，命成山侯王通为征夷将军，都督马瑛为参将，往讨黎利。削陈智、方政职，充为事官。
现代文：四月，皇帝任命成山侯王通为征夷将军，都督马瑛为参将，前往交征讨黎利、朝廷还削了陈智、方政的职位，让他们充当事官。
English: In April, the emperor appointed Chengshan marquis Wang Tong as the general of the expeditionary force, and the governor Ma Ying as the general of the expeditionary force, and went to the front to fight against Lili. The court also cut the positions of Chen Zhi and Fang Zheng, and let them serve as officials.

古文：通未至，贼犯清化。政不出战，都指挥王演击败之。
现代文：王通未到交时，贼人进犯清化，方政不出来迎战，都指挥王演率军击败贼人。
English: When Wang Tong did not arrive at the junction, the thieves attacked Qinghua, and Fang Zheng did not come out to fight. Both commanded Wang Yuen to lead the army to defeat the thieves.

古文：诏大赦交阯罪人，黎利、潘僚降亦授职；停采办金银、香货，冀以弭贼，而贼无悛心。
现代文：皇帝曾下诏书大赦交的罪人，黎利、潘僚只要投降也给以授职位；停止交境内采办金银和香货，想以此平息贼人的反叛。
English: The emperor had issued an edict to grant amnesty to the criminals who surrendered, and to grant positions to Lili and Panli as long as they surrendered; to stop the purchase of gold, silver and perfumes within the territory, in order to quell the rebellion of the thieves.

古文：政督诸军进讨，李安及都指挥于瓒、谢凤、薛聚、朱广等先奔，政由此败，俱谪为事官，立功赎罪。
现代文：但贼人毫无悔改之心。方政率各军前去讨伐，而他手下的李安及都指挥于瓒、谢凤、薛聚、朱广等人预先走了，方政因此而失败，于是他们全被贬谪为事官，以立功赎罪。
English: However, the thief had no heart of repentance. Fang Zheng led all the armies to go to the crusade, and his subordinates, Li An and his subordinates, commanded by Yu Yao, Xie Feng, Xue Ju, Zhu Guang and others, went ahead. As a result, Fang Zheng failed, and they were all demoted to officials to atone for their sins.

古文：未几，智遣都指挥袁亮击贼黎善于广威州，欲渡河，土官何加伉言有伏。亮不从，遣指挥陶森、钱辅等渡河，中伏并死，亮亦被执。
现代文：不久，陈智派都指挥袁亮在广威州袭击贼人黎善，想渡河时，土官何加亻元说有埋伏，袁亮不听，派指挥陶森、钱辅等率军渡河，结果中埋伏而死，袁亮也被贼人俘虏。
English: Soon after, Chen Zhi sent Yuan Liang to attack the bandit Li Shan in Guangwei Province. When he wanted to cross the river, the local official He Jia Rongyuan said there was an ambush. Yuan Liang did not listen and sent the commanders Tao Sen and Qian Fu to lead the army across the river. As a result, he died in the ambush, and Yuan Liang was also captured by the bandits.

古文：善遂分兵三道犯交州，其攻下关者为都督陈浚所败，攻边江小门者为李安所败，善夜走。
现代文：黎善于是分兵三路进犯交州，其攻打下关的那一路贼军被都督陈浚所打败，其攻打边江小门的那一路贼军被李安打败，黎善连夜逃走。
English: Li Shan then sent three detachments to attack Jiaozhou. The bandit army that attacked Shimonoseki was defeated by the governor Chen Jun. The bandit army that attacked Bianjiang Xiaomen was defeated by Li An. Li Shan fled overnight.

古文：通闻之，亦分兵三道出击。
现代文：王通听到消息后，也分兵三路出击。
English: After Wang Tong heard the news, he also sent a detachment of soldiers to attack in three directions.

古文：马瑛败贼清威，至石室与通会，俱至应平宁桥。
现代文：马瑛在清威打败贼军后，到石室与王通会合，共同率军到庆平州的宁桥。
English: After defeating the bandit army in Qingwei, Ma Ying met with Wang Tong in Shishimuro and jointly led the army to Ningqiao in Qingping Prefecture.

古文：士卒行泥泞中，遇伏兵，大败。尚书陈洽死焉，通亦中胁还。
现代文：士卒在泥泞中行进时，遭伏击，结果被贼军打败，尚书陈洽战死，王通胁下也中伤而回。
English: When the soldiers were marching in the mud, they were ambushed. As a result, they were defeated by the bandits. Shangshu Chen Cai was killed in the battle, and Wang Tong was also slandered and returned under duress.

古文：利在乂安闻之，鼓行至清潭，攻北江，进围东关。
现代文：黎利在翨安听到这个消息后，马上率军敲着鼓向清潭进发，攻打北江，进而又包围了东关。
English: After hearing this news in Lu'an, Lili immediately led the army to march to Qingtan, attacking the Beijiang River, and then encircled Dongguan.

古文：通素无战功，以父真死事封。
现代文：王通本来就没有立过战功，因为他的父亲王真死了才让他接替其父的职位。
English: Wang Tong did not have any war achievements originally, because his father Wang Zhen died before he was allowed to take over his father's position.

古文：朝廷不知其庸劣，误用之。
现代文：而朝廷不知他是个庸劣之人，误用了他。
English: But the imperial court did not know that he was a mediocre person and misused him.

古文：一战而败，心胆皆丧，举动乖张，不奉朝命，擅割清化以南地予贼，尽撤官吏军民还东关。
现代文：王通一战失败，心胆俱丧，行为举动乖张，不听朝廷的命令，擅自将清化以南的土地割让给贼人，将该地方的官吏和军民全部撤到东关。
English: Wang Tong was defeated in the First World War, he was discouraged, his behavior was perverse, he did not listen to the orders of the imperial court, he arbitrarily ceded the land south of Qinghua to the thieves, and he withdrew all the local officials, soldiers and civilians to Dongguan.

古文：惟清化知州罗通不从，利移兵攻之不下。
现代文：只有清化知州罗通不听从他的命令，黎利便带兵攻打罗通，结果攻不下来。
English: Only when Chinghua Zhoushou Rotong disobeyed his order, Lili led an army to attack Rotong, but failed.

古文：贼分兵万人围隘留关，百户万琮奋击，乃退。
现代文：贼人便分兵一万人包围了隘留关，百户万琮奋勇出击，贼兵才退走。
English: The bandits then encircled the narrow pass with a detachment of ten thousand soldiers, and one million households bravely attacked, before the bandits retreated.

古文：帝闻通败，大骇，命安远侯柳升为总兵官，保定伯梁铭副之，督师赴讨，又命沐晟为征南将军，兴安伯徐亨、新宁伯谭忠为左、右副将军，从云南进兵，两军共七万余人。
现代文：皇帝听到王通的败讯后，大为惊骇，命令安远侯柳升为总兵官，保定伯梁铭为副总兵官，率军赴交征讨贼军，又任命沐晟为征南将军，兴安伯徐亨和新宁伯谭忠为左、右副将军，从云南向交进兵，两军合起来有七万多人。
English: After the emperor heard the news of Wang Tong's defeat, he was greatly shocked and ordered Anyuan Hou Liu to be promoted to the general officer, Baoding Bo Liangming to be the deputy general officer, and led the army to go to Jiaozuo to fight the thief army. He also appointed Mu Xi as the general of the southward expedition, Xingan Bo Xu Heng and Xinning Bo Tanzhong as the left and right deputy generals, and marched from Yunnan to Jiaozuo. The two armies combined have more than 70,000 people.

古文：复敕通固守，俟升。
现代文：皇帝又敕令王通在交固守，等候柳升。
English: The emperor also ordered Wang Tong to hold fast at the junction and wait for Liu Sheng.

古文：二年春，利犯交州。
现代文：二年春，黎利侵犯交州。
English: In the spring of the second year, Lili invaded Jiaozhou.

古文：通与战，斩伪太监黎秘及太尉、司徒、司空等官，获首级万计。
现代文：王通与他接战，斩杀了伪太监黎秘以及伪太尉、伪司徒、伪司空等叛贼官员，斩获首级数以万计。
English: Wang Tong fought with him and killed the pseudo-eunuch Li Bi and other traitor officials such as pseudo-captain, pseudo-captain, pseudo-captain, and pseudo-captain, and gained tens of thousands of heads.

古文：利破胆奔遁，诸将请乘势追之，通逗留三日。
现代文：黎利吓破了胆拼命远逃。各位将领请王通乘胜追击，王道却逗留三天按兵不动。
English: Lili was so scared that she ran away. The generals asked Wang Tong to chase after them, but Wang Tao stayed put for three days.

古文：贼知其怯，复立寨浚濠，四出剽掠。
现代文：叛贼了解到王通胆怯，又建立栅寨挖掘濠沟，四出劫掠。
English: When the traitors learned that Wang Tong was timid, they set up a stockade, dug a trench, and looted everywhere.

古文：三月复发三万三千人，从柳升、沐晟征讨。
现代文：三月，明朝廷又派了三万三千人，跟随柳升和沐晟征讨交。
English: In March, the Ming court sent another 33,000 people to follow Liu Sheng and Mu Rongzheng to negotiate.

古文：贼分兵围丘温，都指挥孙聚力拒之。
现代文：叛贼分兵包围了丘温，都指挥孙聚奋力拒敌。
English: The renegade detachment surrounded Qiu Wen, and under the command of Sun Ju, they fought hard to repel the enemy.

古文：先是，贼以昌江为大军往来要道，发众八万余人来攻，都指挥李任等力拒，杀贼甚众。
现代文：此前，叛贼认为昌江是明朝大军往来的要道，派八万多人前来攻打昌江，都指挥李任等人奋力拒敌，杀死了许多贼人。
English: Previously, the rebels believed that the Changjiang River was an important route for the Ming Dynasty's large army to come and go. They sent more than 80,000 people to attack the Changjiang River, all of whom were commanded by Li Ren and others. They fought hard to resist the enemy and killed many thieves.

古文：阅九月，诸将观望不救，贼惧升大军至，攻益力。
现代文：过了九月，各位将领互相观望不去救援，叛贼害怕柳升的大军到来，所以更加拼命攻城。
English: After September, the generals looked at each other and did not come to the rescue. The rebels were afraid of Liu Sheng's large army coming, so they attacked the city even more desperately.

古文：夏四月，城陷，任死之。
现代文：第二年夏天四月，昌江城失陷，都指挥李任战死。
English: In April of the following summer, the city of Changjiang fell, and the commander, Li Ren, died in battle.

古文：时贼围交州久，通闭城不敢出，贼益易之，致书请和。
现代文：这时贼人又长期包围了交州，王通关闭城门不敢出去，贼人更认为他容易对付，于是向他致书请求和解。
English: At this time, the thieves surrounded Jiaozhou for a long time. Wang Tong closed the gate and did not dare to go out. The thieves thought that he was easy to deal with, so they sent him a letter requesting reconciliation.

古文：通欲许之，集众议，按察使杨时习曰： 奉命讨贼，与之和，而擅退师，何以逃罪！ 
现代文：王通想答应他们，招集众人商议此事，按察使杨时习说： 我们奉朝廷之命讨伐贼人，与他们通和，擅自退兵，怎么能逃脱罪责。 
English: Wang Tong wanted to agree with them and called everyone together to discuss the matter. According to the inspector Yang Shixi, he said, "We were ordered by the imperial court to fight against the bandits, but how can we escape criminal responsibility if we make peace with them and leave the army without authorization?"

古文：通怒，厉声叱之，众不敢言，遂以利书闻。
现代文：王通发怒，厉声叱责杨时习，众人不敢再言，于是将黎利的致和书上报朝廷。
English: Wang Tong flew into a rage and severely reprimanded Yang Shixi. Everyone was afraid to say anything, so he reported Lili's letter to the court.

古文：升奉命久，俟诸军集，九月始抵隘留关。
现代文：柳升奉朝廷之命出征已较久，等到调拨的诸军集结之后，到九月才抵达隘留关。
English: It had been a long time since Liu Sheng had been dispatched on the orders of the imperial court, and it was not until September, after all the assigned troops had assembled, that he arrived at the pass.

古文：利既与通有成言，乃诡称陈氏有后，率大小头目具书诣升军，乞罢兵，立陈氏裔。
现代文：黎利已经与王通有约，于是诡称原安南王陈氏有后代，率领大小头目送书信到柳升军前，请求柳升罢兵，立陈氏后裔为王。
English: Lili already had an appointment with Wang Tong, so he falsely claimed that the Chen clan, the original king of Annan, had descendants, and led the big and small leaders to send a letter to Liu Sheng's army, requesting Liu Sheng to strike the soldiers and make the descendants of the Chen clan the king.

古文：升不启封，遣使奏闻。
现代文：柳升没有启封便派使者送到京城上报朝廷。
English: Liu Sheng did not open the seal and sent an envoy to the capital to report to the imperial court.

古文：无何，升进薄倒马坡，陷殁，后军相继尽殁。
现代文：不久，柳升进军到倒马坡，被叛贼攻陷后阵亡，后至的各军也全被贼军消灭。
English: Soon after, Liu Sheng marched into Qianma slope and was killed in battle after being captured by the traitors. All subsequent armies were also wiped out by the bandits.

古文：通闻，惧甚，大集军民官吏，出下哨河，立坛与利盟誓，约退师。
现代文：王通听到消息后，很害怕，大集军民和官吏，出下哨河，立坛与黎利盟誓，约定日期退军回国。
English: After hearing the news, Wang Tong was very scared. He gathered a large number of soldiers, civilians and officials, went to the Sentinel River, swore an oath with Lili, and returned to the country on the agreed date.

古文：遂遣官偕贼使奉表及方物进献。
现代文：于是王通派官员和叛贼使者一起奉表和土产向朝廷进献。
English: So Wang Tong sent officials and renegade emissaries together to offer tables and local produce to the imperial court.

古文：沐晟军至水尾，造船将进，闻通已议和，亦引退，贼乘之，大败。
现代文：沐晟率军到达水尾，制造了战船准备进军时，听到王通已与叛贼议和的消息，也引兵退了回去，叛贼乘机袭击，沐晟也大败而回。
English: When Mu Rong and his army arrived at the water's edge and made war ships ready to march, they heard the news that Wang Tong had negotiated peace with the traitors, and they also withdrew their troops. The traitors took the opportunity to attack, and Mu Rong was also defeated and returned.

古文：鸿胪寺进贼与升书，略言： 高皇帝龙飞，安南首朝贡，特蒙褒赏，锡以玉章。
现代文：鸿胪寺将叛贼送给柳升的书信进献到朝廷，书信中大致说： 高皇帝登极统治中国时，安南就率先向朝廷进贡，特蒙皇帝给予褒赏，赐给玉章。
English: Hongluo Temple presented a letter to Liu Sheng from the traitor to the imperial court. The letter roughly said: When Emperor Gao ascended the throne to rule China, Annan was the first to pay tribute to the imperial court. Emperor Temenggong rewarded him and gave him a jade medal.

古文：后黎贼篡弑，太宗皇帝兴师讨灭，求陈氏子孙。
现代文：后来贼人黎季耑篡夺权位，杀死国王，太宗皇帝便兴军讨伐消灭了黎氏父子，访求陈氏的子孙。
English: Later, the thief Li Jizhe usurped power and killed the king, and Emperor Taizong led the Xing Army to destroy the father and son of the Li clan and visit the descendants of the Chen clan.

古文：陈族避祸方远窜，故无从访求。
现代文：当时陈氏宗族之人正避祸远逃，所以无从访求。
English: At that time, the people of the Chen clan were fleeing from the disaster, so there was no way to visit.

古文：今有遗嗣皓，潜身老挝二十年，本国人民不忘先王遗泽，已访得之。
现代文：现今有陈氏的遗嗣陈詗，在老挝藏身二十年，本国人民不忘先王的遗泽，已将他访求到了。
English: Today, there is the heir of the Chen clan, Chen Lu, who has been hiding in Laos for twenty years. The people of the country have not forgotten the legacy of the former king and have visited him.

古文：倘蒙转达黼宸，循太宗皇帝继绝明诏，还其爵土，匪独陈氏一宗，实蛮邦亿万生民之幸。 
现代文：如果能蒙您将此转达给当今皇上，遵循太宗皇帝继绝的诏令，归还王爵和土地给陈氏后裔，这不仅仅是陈氏一族，实际上也是蛮国亿万百姓之幸。 
English: If we can have you convey this to the current emperor, follow the edict of Emperor Taizong's succession, and return the title and land to the descendants of the Chen clan, this is not only a blessing for the Chen clan, but also for the hundreds of millions of people in the barbarian country.

古文：帝得书颔之。
现代文：皇帝得到书信后点了点头。
English: The emperor nodded after receiving the letter.

古文：明日，皓表亦至，称 臣皓，先王暊三世嫡孙 ，其词与利书略同。
现代文：第二天，陈詗的表文也到朝廷，声称 ：我是陈詗，是先王陈日页三代以后的嫡孙。 其表文中的言词与黎利的书信大致相同。
English: The next day, Chen Rong's letter also arrived at the imperial court, claiming: "I am Chen Rong, the legitimate grandson of the previous king, Chen Rongzhi, three generations later," and the words in his letter were roughly the same as those in Lili's letter.

古文：帝心知其诈，欲藉此息兵，遂纳其言。
现代文：皇帝心中也知道他们是在欺骗，但想藉此息兵，于是接受了他们的表文。
English: The emperor also knew in his heart that they were cheating, but he wanted to use this to pacify the soldiers, so he accepted their petition.

古文：初，帝嗣位，与杨士奇、杨荣语交阯事，即欲弃之。
现代文：当初，皇帝刚即位时，就与杨士奇、杨荣谈及交的事，当时就想放弃交。
English: At first, when the emperor had just ascended the throne, he talked with Yang Shichi and Yang Rong about the matter of diplomatic relations. At that time, he wanted to give up diplomatic relations.

古文：至是，以表示廷臣，谕以罢兵息民意。
现代文：至此，皇帝将他们的表文出示给朝廷大臣，告诉大臣自己想就此罢兵，让百姓休息。
English: At this point, the emperor presented their petition to the minister of the court, telling the minister that he wanted to call off the army and let the people rest.

古文：士奇、荣力赞之，惟蹇义、夏原吉不可。
现代文：杨士奇、杨荣极力赞成，只有蹇义、夏原吉认为不能这么做。
English: Yang Shichi and Yang Rong strongly agreed, but only Zhai Yi and Xia Yuanji thought that this should not be done.

古文：然帝意已决，廷臣不敢争。
现代文：但是皇帝已决意这么做，朝廷大臣也不敢再争论。
English: But the emperor was determined to do so, and the ministers of the court did not dare to argue.

古文：十一月朔，命礼部左寺郎李琦、工部右侍郎罗汝敬为正使，右通政黄骥、鸿胪卿徐永达为副使，赍诏抚谕安南人民，尽赦其罪，与之更新，令具陈氏后人之实以闻。因敕利以兴灭继绝之意，并谕通及三司官，尽撤军民北还。
现代文：十一月初，皇帝任命礼部左侍郎李琦、工部右侍郎罗汝敬两人为正使，右通政黄骥、鸿胪寺卿徐永达为副使，持诏令招抚安谕安南人民，全部赦免他们的罪状，给予他们重新做人，让他们将陈氏后代的实际情况详细上报朝廷；并给黎利下敕令，让他担负起兴灭继绝的责任，还敕谕王通和交三司官，让他们将军民全部撤回到国内。
English: At the beginning of November, the emperor appointed the left attendant of the Ministry of Ceremonies, Li Qian, and the right attendant of the Ministry of Industry, Luo Ru Jing, as the main envoys, and the right envoy, Huang Qi, and the secretary of the Honglu Temple, Xu Yongda, as the deputy envoys. He issued a decree to appease and pacify the Annan people, to pardon all their crimes, to give them a new life, and to let them report the actual situation of Chen's descendants in detail to the imperial court. He also issued a decree to Lili, to let him assume the responsibility of the rise and fall, and also to

古文：诏未至，通已弃交阯，由陆路还广西，中官山寿、马骐及三司守令，由水路还钦州。
现代文：皇帝的诏令还没到达，王通就已放弃了交，从陆路回到了广西，宦官山寿、马骐和三司的官员守着诏令，从水路回到钦州。
English: Before the Emperor's edict arrived, Wang Tong had already given up the surrender and returned to Guangxi by land. Eguanshan Shou, Ma Jun and the officials of the three departments kept the edict and returned to Qinzhou by water.

古文：凡得还者止八万六千人，为贼所杀及拘留者不可胜计。
现代文：明朝的军民回到国内的只有八万六千人，被贼人所杀和拘留在交的不可胜数。
English: Only eighty-six thousand soldiers and civilians of the Ming Dynasty returned to the country, and the number of those killed and detained by the thieves is incalculable.

古文：天下举疾通弃地殃民，而帝不怒也。
现代文：天下人对王通弃地殃民都痛心疾首，而皇帝一点也不愤怒。
English: The people of the world are heartbroken over Wang Tong's abandonment of the people, but the emperor is not angry at all.

古文：三年夏，通等至京，文武诸臣合奏其罪，廷鞫具服，乃与陈智、马瑛、方政、山寿、马骐及布政使弋谦，俱论死下狱，籍其家。
现代文：三年夏季，王通等人到达京城，文武大臣联合上奏皇帝要治他的罪，朝廷审讯时大臣们全部穿着朝服，于是将王通与陈智、马瑛、方政、山寿、马骐和布政使弋谦一起处以死罪投进监狱，籍没了他们的家产。
English: In the summer of the third year, Wang Tong and others arrived in Beijing. The Minister of Education and the Minister of Military Affairs jointly appealed to the emperor to punish him for his crime. The ministers all wore imperial robes during the imperial court trial. Therefore, Wang Tong, Chen Zhi, Ma Ying, Fang Zheng, Shan Shou, Ma Jie and the cloth political envoy Zou Qian were sentenced to death and thrown into prison, and their family property was confiscated.

古文：帝终不诛，长系待决而已。
现代文：皇帝最终并没有诛杀他们，只是将他们长期关着等待决定罢了。
English: In the end, the emperor didn't kill them, he just locked them up for a long time to wait for a decision.

古文：骐恣虐激变，罪尤重，而谦实无罪，皆同论，时议非之。
现代文：马骐恣意虐待交的官民，激起了变故，罪行尤其严重，而弋谦实际上并没有罪，却与马骐一同论罪，舆论对此有非议。
English: Ma Jun arbitrarily mistreated the officials and citizens who were friends of him, provoked the incident, and the crime was particularly serious. In fact, Zou Qian was not guilty, but he and Ma Jun discussed the crime together, which was criticized by the public opinion.

古文：廷臣复劾沐晟、徐亨、谭忠逗留及丧师辱国罪，帝不问。
现代文：朝廷大臣又弹劾沐晟、徐亨、谭忠有逗留不前、丧师辱国的罪行，皇帝对他们并不追究。
English: The Minister of the Imperial Court also impeached Muxun, Xu Heng, and Tan Zhong for the crimes of not moving forward and humiliating the country. The emperor did not pursue them.

古文：琦等还朝，利遣使奉表谢恩，诡言皓于正月物故，陈氏子孙绝，国人推利守其国，谨俟朝命。
现代文：李琦等人回到朝廷，黎利派使者奉表向皇帝谢恩，诡称陈詗在今年正月已经病逝，陈氏的子孙已经彻底绝灭了，国人共同推举黎利监守国家，现等候明朝廷的任命。
English: Li Xi and others returned to the imperial court. Lili sent an envoy with a letter of thanks to the emperor, saying that Chen Xi had died of illness in the first month of this year, and that the descendants of the Chen clan had completely died out. The Chinese people jointly elected Lili to supervise the country, and are now waiting for the appointment of the imperial court tomorrow.

古文：帝亦知其诈，不欲遽封，复遣汝敬、永达谕利及其下，令访陈氏，并尽还官吏人民及其眷属。
现代文：皇帝也知道黎利是在欺骗朝廷，不想急于册封他，于是又派罗汝敬、徐永达前去谕告黎利及其他手下的官员，要他们去寻访陈氏的子孙，并将中国的官吏、百姓以及他们的家眷亲属全部送还给中国。
English: The emperor also knew that Lili was deceiving the imperial court and did not want to rush to canonize him, so he sent Luo Rujing and Xu Yongda to tell Lili and other officials under his command to visit the descendants of the Chen clan and return all Chinese officials, people and their families and relatives to China.

古文：明年春，汝敬等还，利复言陈氏无遗种，请别命。因贡方物及代身金人。
现代文：第二年春天，罗汝敬等人回到京城，黎利又上奏说陈氏确实已没有遗裔了，请求朝廷另外任命他人为王，并向朝廷贡献土产和与真人大小相同的金人。
English: In the spring of the following year, Luo Ruqing and others returned to Beijing, and Lili again made a report saying that the Chen clan really had no descendants, requesting the court to appoint someone else as king, and to contribute to the court the local produce and a gold statue the same size as a real person.

古文：又言： 臣九岁女遭乱离散，后知马骐携归充宫婢，臣不胜儿女私，冒昧以请。 
现代文：他还说 ：我九岁的女儿因遭战乱离散，后来了解到是马骐将她携回中国充当宫中的奴婢了。我无法抑制思念女儿的心情，冒昧请求皇帝将我女儿送还给我。 
English: He also said, "My nine-year-old daughter was separated from me due to the war, and later I learned that it was Ma Jun who brought her back to China to serve as a slave in the palace. I could not suppress the feeling of missing my daughter and ventured to ask the emperor to return my daughter to me.

古文：帝心知陈氏即有后，利必不言，然以封利无名，复命琦、汝敬敕谕再访，且以利女病死告之。
现代文：皇帝心中明白即使陈氏有后裔，黎利也一定不会上奏，但是册封黎利又无名义，于是又派李琦、罗汝敬持敕谕要他再继续寻访，并告诉黎利他的女儿已经得病而死。
English: The emperor knew in his heart that even if the Chen clan had descendants, Lili would not be able to play, but there was no name for Lili, so he sent Li Zhen and Luo Rujing to ask him to continue his search, and told Lili that his daughter had died of illness.

古文：五年春，琦等还，利遣使贡金银器方物，复饰词具奏，并具头目耆老奏请令利摄国政。
现代文：五年春天，李琦等人回国，黎利派使者向明朝廷贡献金银器和土产，又饰词上奏，并向朝廷出示安南的头目耆老请求明朝廷让黎利摄理安南国政事的奏章。
English: In the spring of the fifth year, Li Xi and others returned to the country. Lili sent an envoy to the Ming court to contribute gold and silverware and local products, and also played the lyrics, and presented to the court the leader of Annan, Yao Lao, to request the Ming court to let Lili supervise Annan's state affairs.

古文：使臣归，帝复以访陈氏裔，还中国遗民二事谕之，词不甚坚。
现代文：黎利的使者回去时，皇帝又以寻访陈氏遗裔，将留在安南的中国遗民归还中国这两件事谕告黎利，但言词不甚坚决。
English: When Lili's envoy returned, the emperor told Lili to search for the Chen family's descendants and return the Chinese survivors who remained in Annan to China, but his words were not very firm.

古文：明年夏，利遣使谢罪，以二事饰词对，复进头目耆老奏，仍为利乞封。
现代文：第二年秋天，黎利遣使者向朝廷谢罪，对皇帝所要求的两件事饰巧词应付，又向朝廷进献安南头目耆老请求朝廷册封黎利的奏章。
English: In the autumn of the following year, Lili sent an envoy to the imperial court to apologize for his sins, to deal with the two matters requested by the emperor, and to present to the imperial court the head of Annan, Zhao Lao, to request the imperial court to seal Lili's record.

古文：帝乃许之，命礼部右侍郎章敞、右通政徐琦赍敕印，命利权署安南国事。
现代文：皇帝于是同意了他们的要求，派礼部右侍郎章敝、右通政徐琦持着敕印到安南，任命黎利权署安南国的国事。
English: The emperor then agreed to their request and sent the Right Attendant of the Ministry of Ceremonies, Zhang Jun, and the Right Attendant of the Ministry of Ceremonies, Xu Jun, to Annan with the seal of approval, and appointed the Lili Rights Department to handle the state affairs of Annan.

古文：利遣使赍表及金银器方物，随敞等入贡。
现代文：黎利派使者奉表和金银器以及土产，随着章敝等人回朝廷向皇帝献贡。
English: Lili sent an envoy with a watch and gold and silverware as well as local products to return to the imperial court with Zhang Ye and others to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：七年二月达京师，比还，利及使臣皆有赐。
现代文：七年二月他们到达京城，等安南使臣回去时，皇帝给黎利和他的使臣都加以赏赐。
English: They arrived in Beijing in February of the seventh year, and when Annan's envoys returned, the emperor rewarded Lili and his envoys.

古文：明年八月来贡，命兵部侍郎徐琦等与其使偕行，谕以顺天保民之道。
现代文：第二年八月，安南派使臣来上贡，朝廷派兵部侍郎徐琦等人与安南使臣一起到安南，谕告黎利应顺天保民。
English: In August of the following year, Annan sent envoys to pay tribute, and the imperial court sent military attache Xu Xi and others to Annan together with Annan's envoys to tell Rili to protect the people.

古文：是年，利卒。
现代文：该年黎利死亡。
English: That year, Lili died.

古文：利虽受敕命，其居国称帝，纪元顺天，建东、西二都，分十三道： 曰山南、京北、山西、海阳、安邦、谅山、太原？明光、谅化、清华、晙安？顺化、广南。
现代文：黎利虽然接受明朝廷的任命，但在自己国内却称帝，纪元年号为顺天，建立了东、西两个都城，将全国分为十三个道，分别是：山南、京北、山西、海阳、安邦、谅山、太原、明光、谅化、清华、翨安、顺化、广南。
English: Although Lili accepted the appointment of the Ming court, he claimed to be an emperor in his own country. The year of the first century was named Xuntian. He established two capital cities in the east and west, and divided the country into thirteen provinces, namely: Shannan, Beijing North, Shanxi, Haiyang, Anbang, Lianshan, Taiyuan, Mingguang, Lianhua, Qinghua, Lian'an, Hunhua, and Guangnan.

古文：各设承政司、宪察司、总兵使司，拟中国三司。
现代文：在道中又设置承政司、宪察司、总兵使司，显然是仿照了中国的三司建置。
English: In the middle of the province, the Ministry of Civil Affairs, the Ministry of State Security, and the General Military Commissariat were also set up, which was obviously modeled on China's three departments.

古文：东都在交州府，西都在清华府。
现代文：东都设在交州府，西都设在清华府。
English: The eastern capital is located in Jiaozhou Prefecture, and the western capital is located in Qinghua Prefecture.

古文：置百官，设学校，以经义、诗赋二科取士，彬彬有华风焉。
现代文：他们还设置百官，建立学校，以经义、诗赋二科科举取士，彬彬然有华夏之风。
English: They also set up a hundred officials, established a school, and used the classics and poetry to raise two subjects, which was a typical Chinese summer style.

古文：僣位六年，私谥太祖。
现代文：黎利私自在安南称王六年，安南给他私封谥号为太祖。
English: Lili privately called Annan "king" for six years, and Annan gave him the title of "grandfather."

古文：子麟继，麟一名龙。
现代文：黎利的儿子黎麟继承了其父的位置。
English: Lili's son Lilin inherited his father's position.

古文：自是其君长皆有二名，以一名奏天朝，贡献不绝如常制。
现代文：黎麟另一个名字叫黎龙，从此安南的君长都有两个名字，以一个名字上奏明朝廷，像往常一样向朝廷献贡不绝。
English: Li Lin's other name was Li Long. From then on, Annan's monarchs had two names. They addressed the Ming court with one name and, as usual, paid tribute to the court incessantly.

古文：麟遣使告讣，命侍郎章敞、行人侯琎敕麟权署国事。
现代文：黎麟派使者向明朝廷通报黎利的死讯，朝廷派侍郎章敝、行人侯王进持敕任命黎麟权理安南国国事。
English: Li Lin sent an envoy to the Ming court to inform them of Li Li's death, and the court sent the attendant Zhang Ye and the peddler Hou Wang Jinji to appoint Li Lin to be in charge of the state affairs of the south.

古文：明年遣使入贡谢恩。
现代文：第二年黎麟派使臣向明朝廷进贡谢恩。
English: The following year, Emperor Li Lin sent an envoy to the Ming court to offer tribute and gratitude.

古文：正统元年四月以宣宗宾天，遣使进香。
现代文：正统元年四月，因宣宗皇帝之死，黎麟派使者前往京城向宣宗皇帝进香。
English: In April of the first year of the Juche era, due to the death of Emperor Xuanzong, Li Lin sent an envoy to the capital to offer incense to Emperor Xuanzong.

古文：又以英宗登极及尊上太皇太后、皇太后位号，并遣使表贺，贡方物。
现代文：又因英宗皇帝登上极位以及明朝廷给太皇太后和皇太后封尊号，黎麟一并派使臣上表祝贺，进献土产。
English: In addition, because Emperor Yingzong ascended the throne and the Ming court gave the Grand Empress Dowager and the Empress Dowager the title of honor, Lilin also sent envoys to the table to congratulate and offer local products.

古文：闰六月复贡。
现代文：闰六月，他们又来进贡。
English: In June, they came again to pay tribute.

古文：帝以陈氏宗支既绝，欲使麟正位，下廷议，咸以为宜。
现代文：皇帝认为陈氏的宗族支脉既已绝灭了，想将黎麟正式封为安南王。
English: The emperor thought that the family line of the Chen clan had already died out, and wanted to officially crown Li Lin as the King of Annan.

古文：乃命兵部右侍郎李郁、左通政李亨赍敕印，封麟为安南国王。
现代文：此事交给朝廷大臣讨论，全都认为可行。皇帝便派兵部右侍郎李郁、左通政木禾亨持敕印到安南册封黎麟为安南国王。
English: This matter was handed over to the ministers of the imperial court for discussion, and all of them thought it was feasible. The emperor then sent Li Yu, the right hand man of the military department, and Zuo Tong Zheng Mogo Heng, holding the seal, to Annan to proclaim Li Lin as the king of Annan.

古文：明年遣使入贡谢恩。
现代文：第二年黎麟派使者向明朝廷献贡谢恩。
English: The following year, Emperor Li Lin sent an envoy to the Ming court to offer tribute and gratitude.

古文：时安南思郎州土官攻掠广西安平、思陵二州，据二峒二十一村。
现代文：此时安南思郎州的土官攻掠广西的安平、思陵两个州，占领了两个峒二十一个村子。
English: At this time, the local officials of Annan's Silang Prefecture attacked and plundered Anping and Siling in Guangxi, occupying two hundred and twenty-one villages.

古文：帝命给事中汤鼐、行人高寅敕麟还侵地。
现代文：皇帝命令给事中汤鼐、行人高寅敕令黎麟归还所侵占的土地。
English: The emperor ordered Li Lin to return the land occupied by Tang Xuan and Gao Yingqin.

古文：麟奉命，遣使谢罪，而诉安平、思陵土官侵掠思郎。
现代文：黎麟奉命之后，派使者向朝廷谢罪，并诉说安平、思陵的土官侵掠安南的思郎州。
English: After receiving the order, Li Lin sent an envoy to the imperial court to apologize for the crime, and to tell that the local officials of Anping and Siling invaded and plundered Annan's Silang Prefecture.

古文：帝令守臣严饬。
现代文：皇帝命令守卫大臣严守疆界。
English: The emperor ordered the Minister of Defense to strictly guard the borders.

古文：七年，安南贡使还，令赍皮弁冠服、金织袭衣赐其王。
现代文：七年，安南派来上贡的使者回去时，皇帝让他带上皮弁冠服和织金袭衣赏赐安南国王。
English: In the seventh year, when Annan sent an envoy to pay tribute to the emperor, the emperor asked him to bring the flapper cap and woven gold cloak to reward King Annan.

古文：是岁，麟卒，私谥太宗。
现代文：该年，黎麟死亡，安南私封他的谥号为太宗。
English: That year, Li Lin died, and Annan privately gave him the nickname Taizong.

古文：改元二：绍平六年，大宝三年。
现代文：黎麟曾两次更改纪元年号：绍平六年，大宝三年。
English: Li Lin changed the era name twice: six years for Shaoping and three years for Dabao.

古文：子浚继，一名基隆，遣使告讣。
现代文：黎麟的儿子黎浚即位。黎浚又名黎基隆，派使者向明朝廷告丧。
English: Li Jun, the son of Li Lin, ascended to the throne. Li Jun, also known as Li Kilong, sent an envoy to the Ming court to mourn.

古文：命光禄少卿宋杰、兵科都给事中薛谦持节册封为国王。
现代文：皇帝命令光禄少卿宋杰、兵科都给事中薛谦持节册封黎浚为安南国王。
English: The emperor ordered Song Jie, the Guanglu Shaoqing, and Xue Qian, who was in charge of military science, to hold the festival book and crown Lijun as the king of Annam.

古文：浚遣将侵占城，夺新州港，掳其王摩诃贲该以归。
现代文：黎浚派将领侵略占城，夺取新州港，把占城王摩诃贲该掳到安南。
English: Li Jun sent generals to invade and occupy the city, seize the Xinzhou Port, and take the king of the city, Mogao, to Annam.

古文：帝为立新王摩诃贵来，敕安南使，谕浚归其故王。
现代文：皇帝为了扶立占城的新王摩诃贵来，敕令安南使者回去谕告黎浚把占城的前王送回占城去。
English: In order to help the new king of the occupied city, Ma Honggui, the emperor ordered Annan's envoy to return and tell Li Jun to send the former king of the occupied city back to the occupied city.

古文：浚不奉诏，侵掠人口至三万三千余，占城入诉。
现代文：黎浚不奉皇帝诏命，从占城掳掠走人口达三万三千多人，占城派使者到京城向明朝廷控诉安南。
English: Li Jun disobeyed the emperor's edict and abducted more than 33,000 people from Zhancheng. Zhancheng sent an envoy to Beijing to complain to the Ming court about Annan.

古文：景泰元年赐敕戒浚，迄不奉诏。
现代文：景泰元年，明朝廷赐敕令给黎浚，告诫他不要再行掳掠，从此黎浚便不遵奉明朝廷的诏令。
English: In the first year of the reign of King Taejo, the Ming court issued an imperial edict to Lai Jun, warning him not to carry out any more kidnappings. From then on, Lai Jun did not follow the imperial edict of the Ming court.

古文：四年遣使贺册立皇太子。
现代文：四年，黎浚派使者向明朝廷祝贺册立皇太子。
English: In four years, Li Jun sent an envoy to the Ming court to congratulate the crown prince.

古文：天顺元年遣使入贡，乞赐衮冕，如朝鲜例，不从。
现代文：天顺元年，黎浚派遣使者向明朝廷进贡，乞求皇帝按朝鲜国的前例赏赐他衮服冕冠，明朝廷不同意。
English: In the first year of Tianshun, Lijun sent an envoy to pay tribute to the Ming court, begging the emperor to reward him with a crown according to the precedent of Korea. The Ming court did not agree.

古文：其使者乞以土物易书籍、药材，从之。
现代文：黎浚的使者又乞求朝廷允许他们以安南的土产交换中国的书籍和药材，皇帝同意了。
English: Li Jun's emissaries also begged the imperial court to allow them to exchange Annan's local products for Chinese books and medicinal materials, and the emperor agreed.

古文：二年遣使贺英宗复辟。
现代文：二年黎浚又派使者向明朝廷祝贺英宗皇帝复辟。
English: Two years later, Emperor Lijun sent an envoy to the Ming court to congratulate Emperor Yingzong on his restoration.

古文：三年十月，其庶兄谅山王琮弑之而自立。
现代文：三年十月，黎浚的庶兄谅山王黎琮杀死黎浚自立为安南国王。
English: In October of the third year, Lijun's brother-in-law, the mountain king Lijun, killed Lijun and established himself as King Annan.

古文：浚改元二：大利十一年，延宁六年。
现代文：黎浚在位时曾两次改变纪元：大利占十一年；延宁有六年。
English: When Li Jun was on the throne, he changed the era twice: Italy accounted for eleven years; Yanning had six years.

古文：私谥仁宗。
现代文：安南给黎浚私封谥号为仁宗。
English: Annan gave Lijun the posthumous name of Renzong.

古文：琮，一名宜民，篡位九月，改元天与，为国人所诛，贬厉德侯，以浚弟灏继。
现代文：黎琮，又称黎宜民，篡夺安南国王的王位达九个月，将纪元改为天与，结果被安南国人所诛杀，贬为厉德侯，让黎浚的弟弟黎灏承即安南国王位。
English: Li Qian, also known as Li Yimin, usurped the throne of King Annan for nine months and changed the era to Tianyao. As a result, he was killed by the Annan people and demoted to the prince of Lide, so that Li Qian's brother Li Qian would succeed to the throne of King Annan.

古文：灏，一名思诚。
现代文：黎灏，又名黎思诚。
English: Lai Ying, also known as Lai Shicheng.

古文：初，琮弑浚，以游湖溺死奏。
现代文：当初，黎琮弑杀黎浚后，向明朝廷谎奏黎浚是因在湖中游水而溺死的。
English: At first, after killing Lijun, Lihong lied to the Ming court that Lijun drowned while swimming in the lake.

古文：天朝不知，将遣官吊祭。
现代文：明朝廷不知内情，将派遣官员前去吊祭。
English: In the morning, the imperial court, not knowing the inside story, will send officials to the hanging ceremony.

古文：琮恐天使至觉其情，言礼不吊溺，不敢烦天使，帝即已之。
现代文：黎琮怕朝廷的使者到安南后察觉事情的真象，便上奏说按礼制规定溺死者是不举行吊祭仪式的，所以不敢劳烦朝廷的使者前来安南。
English: Fearing that the emissary of the imperial court would discover the truth of the matter after arriving in Annan, Lihong made a report saying that according to the rules of etiquette, the drowning victim would not be held in a hanging ceremony, so he did not dare to bother the emissary of the imperial court to come to Annan.

古文：使者言浚无子，请封琮。
现代文：皇帝听后即停派吊祭使者。
English: After hearing this, the emperor immediately stopped sending the messenger.

古文：命通政参议尹旻、礼科给事中王豫往封。
现代文：安南使者向明朝廷上奏说黎浚没有子嗣，请求册封黎琮为安南国王。朝廷命令通政参议尹、礼科给事中王豫前去册封。
English: Annan's emissaries reported to the Ming court that Lijun had no son, and requested that Lijun be crowned King of Annan. The court ordered Tongzheng Councilor Yin and Li Ke to present the matter to King Yu to be crowned.

古文：未入境，闻琮已诛，灏嗣位，即却还。
现代文：他们还没有进入安南境内，就听说黎琮已被杀，黎灏即安南国王位，他们马上退了回来。
English: They had not yet entered Annan's territory when they heard that Lihong had been killed and that Lihong was Annan's throne. They immediately retreated back.

古文：灏连遣使朝贡请封，礼官疑其诈，请命广西守臣核实奏请，从之。
现代文：黎灏接连派使者向明朝廷献贡并请求册封，礼官怀疑其中有诈，请求皇帝命令广西的守卫大臣核实情况后上奏，皇帝同意。
English: Lihong successively sent envoys to the Ming court to pay tribute and request a seal. The etiquette official suspected that there was fraud and asked the emperor to order the Minister of Defense of Guangxi to verify the situation and report it. The emperor agreed.

古文：使臣言： 礼，生有封，死有祭。
现代文：安南的使臣说： 按礼制规定，生者有封，死者有祭。
English: Annan's envoy said: "According to the rules of etiquette, the living have a seal, and the dead have a sacrifice.

古文：今浚死既白，请赐祭。 
现代文：现今黎浚之死已经大白，请求给予吊祭。 
English: Now that Lai Jun's death has come to light, a memorial service has been requested.

古文：乃命行人往祭。
现代文：明朝廷才派行人前往安南进行吊祭。
English: It was not until the following morning that the imperial court sent people to Annan to perform the hanging ceremony.

古文：六年二月命侍读学士钱溥、给事中王豫封灏为国王。
现代文：六年二月明朝廷任命侍读学士钱溥、给事中王豫册封黎灏为安南国王。
English: In February of the 6th year of the Ming Dynasty, the court of the Ming Dynasty appointed Qian Qian, a bachelor's student, to be the king of Annan.

古文：宪宗践阼，命尚宝卿凌信、行人邵震赐王及妃彩币。
现代文：宪宗皇帝即位，派尚宝卿凌信、行人邵震给安南国王和王妃赏赐彩币。
English: Emperor Kenzong ascended to the throne, and sent Shang Baoqing Lingxin and pedestrian Shao Zhen to reward King Annan and his wife with colored coins.

古文：灏遣使来贡，因请冕服，不从，但赐皮弁冠服及纱帽犀带。
现代文：黎灏派使者向明朝廷献贡物，并请求朝廷赏赐冕冠衮服，皇帝没答应，只赐予他皮弁冠服和纱帽犀带。
English: Lihong sent an envoy to pay tribute to the Ming court, and asked the court to award him a crown and robe. The emperor did not agree, but only gave him a leather-capped robe and a sash.

古文：成化元年八月以英宗宾天，遣使进香，命赴裕陵行礼。
现代文：成化元年八月因英宗皇帝归天，安南国派使者前来进香，朝廷让他们到裕陵行礼。
English: In August of the first year of Chenghua, due to the Emperor Yingzong's death, the State of Annan sent an envoy to offer incense, and the imperial court asked them to come to Yuling to pay homage.

古文：灏雄桀，自负国富兵强，辄坐大。
现代文：黎灏是雄桀之人，自负安南国富兵强，于是日趋逞雄。
English: Lihong was a man of swagger, boasting that Annan's country was rich and strong, and he became more and more arrogant.

古文：四年侵据广西凭祥。
现代文：四年他派兵入侵并占据了广西的凭祥。
English: Four years later, he sent troops to invade and occupy Pingxiang in Guangxi.

古文：帝闻，命守臣谨备之。
现代文：皇帝听到消息后，命令当地的守卫大臣小心防备。
English: Upon hearing the news, the emperor ordered the local defense minister to be on the alert.

古文：七年破占城，执其王盘罗茶全，逾三年又破之，执其王盘罗茶悦，遂改其国为交南州，设兵戍守。
现代文：七年，黎灏派兵攻破占城，俘虏了占城国王盘罗茶全。过了三年他又派兵攻破占城国，俘虏占城国王盘罗茶悦，把占城国改为交南州，派兵戍守。
English: In the seventh year, Lihong sent troops to break through the occupied city and captured the king of the occupied city, Pan Luo Cha Quan. Three years later, he sent troops to break through the occupied country and captured the king of the occupied city, Pan Luo Cha Yue. He changed the occupied country to Nanzhou and sent troops to defend it.

古文：安南贡道，故由广西。
现代文：安南向明朝廷进贡的道路，以前一直是从广西进入的。
English: The road for Annan to pay tribute to the Ming court had always entered from Guangxi.

古文：时云南镇守中官钱能贪恣，遣指挥郭景赍敕取其货。
现代文：此时镇守云南的中官钱能贪心自恣，派指挥郭景持敕令向安南索取货物。
English: At this time, Qian Neng, the middle-ranking officer of the Yunnan garrison, was greedy and self-indulgent, and sent the commander Guo Jingzhi to ask Annan for the goods.

古文：灏素欲窥云南，遂以解送广西龙州罪人为词，随景假道云南入京，索夫六百余，且发兵继其后，云南大扰。
现代文：黎灏长期以来一直窥视云南，于是以解送广西龙州的罪人为名，随郭景一起假道云南前往京城，沿道抓夫六百多人，且派军队跟随其后，云南大受骚扰。
English: Lihong had been spying on Yunnan for a long time, so in the name of deporting criminals from Longzhou, Guangxi, he accompanied Guo Jing on a fake trip to Beijing, arrested more than 600 people along the way, and sent troops to follow him, Yunnan was greatly harassed.

古文：兵部言云南非贡道，龙州罪人宜解广西，不必赴京。
现代文：兵部上奏说云南不是上贡道路所经之处，龙州的罪人应该解送到广西，不必赴京城。
English: The report of the military department said that Yunnan was not the place where the tribute road passed, and the criminals in Longzhou should be sent to Guangxi, without having to go to Beijing.

古文：乃令守臣檄谕，且严边备。
现代文：皇帝便命令守卫大臣传檄文谕告此意，并严密边防的守备。
English: The emperor then ordered the Minister of Defense to issue an edict to this effect, and the border was closely guarded.

古文：灏既得凭祥，灭占城，遂侵广东琼、雷，盗珠池。
现代文：黎灏既已占据了凭祥，灭了占城，于是入侵广东的琼州、雷州，在珠池之地为盗。
English: Having occupied Pingxiang and destroyed the besieged city, Lihong invaded Qiongzhou and Leizhou in Guangdong and plundered Zhuqi.

古文：广西之龙州、右平，云南之临安、广南、镇安，亦数告警。
现代文：广西的龙州、右平，云南的临安、广南、镇安等地也数次告警。
English: Longzhou and Yuping in Guangxi, and Lin'an, Guangnan and Zhen'an in Yunnan have also issued warnings several times.

古文：诏守臣诘之，辄诡词对。
现代文：皇帝下诏让当地的守卫大臣去责问黎灏，他总是以虚言诡词应对。
English: The emperor decreed that the local minister of defense should question Lihong, but he always responded with lies and trickery.

古文：庙堂务姑息，虽屡降敕谕，无厉词。
现代文：朝廷对他一心姑息宽容，虽也屡次降敕谕戒止，但都没有一句严厉的词句。
English: The imperial court indulged and tolerated him wholeheartedly. Although they repeatedly issued warnings and restraining orders, they did not utter a single harsh word.

古文：灏益玩侮无畏忌，言： 占城王盘罗茶全侵化州道，为其弟盘罗茶悦所弑，因自立。
现代文：黎灏于是更加侮弄朝廷而无所畏忌，说： 占城王盘罗茶全入侵化州道，被他的弟弟盘罗茶悦所弑杀，盘罗茶悦就自立为王。
English: Lihong then taunted the imperial court even more fearlessly, saying: Pan Luo Cha Quan, the king of Zhancheng, invaded the State Road and was killed by his brother Pan Luo Cha Yue. Pan Luo Cha Yue then became king.

古文：及将受封，又为子茶质苔所弑。
现代文：等到即将受封时，盘罗茶悦又被自己的儿子茶质苔所弑杀。
English: When he was about to be crowned, Pan Luo Cha Yue was killed by his own son, Cha Xi Mei.

古文：其国自乱，非臣灏罪。 
现代文：占城国自己内乱，不是我黎灏的罪责。 
English: Zhancheng's own civil unrest is not my fault.

古文：中朝知其诈，不能诘，但劝令还其土宇。
现代文：朝廷知道黎灏之言有诈，但无法诘问，只好劝令他归还所侵占的占城国的领土。
English: The imperial court knew that Lihong's words were deceitful, but they could not cross-examine him, so they had no choice but to persuade him to return the occupied territory of the city-state.

古文：灏奏言： 占城非沃壤，家鲜积贮，野绝桑麻，山无金宝之收，海乏鱼盐之利，止产象牙、犀角、乌木、沉香。
现代文：黎灏上奏说： 占城国的土地不是沃壤，百姓家中少有积贮之粮，田野之中没有桑麻，山中没有金银，海中缺乏鱼、盐，这里只出产象牙、犀角、乌木、沉香。
English: Li Qian said: "The land of Shancheng is not fertile soil, there is little stored grain in people's homes, there is no mulberry in the fields, there is no gold and silver in the mountains, and there is a lack of fish and salt in the sea. Only ivory, rhinoceros horn, ebony and agarwood are produced here.

古文：得其地不可居，得其民不可使，得其货不足富，此臣不侵夺占城故也。
现代文：得到占城的土地也无法居住，得到占城的百姓也无法驱使，得到占城的货物也无法使自己变得富裕，这就是我不去侵夺占城的缘故。
English: If I get the land of the occupied city, I will not be able to live there, if I get the people of the occupied city, I will not be able to drive them, and if I get the goods of the occupied city, I will not be able to make myself rich. This is why I will not invade the occupied city.

古文：明诏令臣复其土宇，乞遣朝使申画郊圻，俾两国边陲休息，臣不胜至愿。 
现代文：朝廷既然明白地诏令我恢复占城国的领土，乞求朝廷派遣使者来申画疆界，使得我们两国的边疆地区能够得到休息，这是我的最大心愿。 
English: Since the imperial court has clearly ordered me to restore the territory of the occupied city-state, I beg the imperial court to send an envoy to claim the border, so that the border areas of our two countries can get some rest. This is my greatest wish.

古文：时占城久为所据，而其词诞如此。
现代文：这时的占城已被安南占据很久，而黎灏竟说如此的言词，真是荒诞之至。
English: At that time, the occupied city had been occupied by Annan for a long time, and it was really absurd for Lihong to say such words.

古文：先是，安南入贡，多携私物，道凭祥、龙州，乏人转运，辄兴仇衅。
现代文：先前，安南使者向明朝廷献贡时，多携带有私物，途经凭祥、龙州时，因缺乏人力转运，便将私物出售，但买卖时总是引起争执。
English: Previously, when Annan's envoys paid tribute to the Ming court, they mostly carried their personal belongings. When they passed through Pingxiang and Longzhou, they sold their personal belongings due to lack of manpower for transportation. However, disputes always arose during the sale and purchase.

古文：会遣使贺册立皇太子，有诏禁饬之。
现代文：碰上安南派使者向朝廷祝贺册立皇太子时，皇帝下诏禁止其使者携私物买卖。
English: When an envoy sent by Annan to congratulate the imperial court on the enthronement of the crown prince, the emperor issued an edict forbidding his emissary from carrying personal belongings.

古文：十五年冬，灏遣兵八百余人，越云南蒙自界，声言捕盗，擅结营筑室以居。
现代文：十五年冬，黎灏派兵八百多人，越过云南蒙自的边界，声称是为了捕盗，擅自在中国境内结营筑室居住下来。
English: In the winter of the fifteenth year, Lihong sent more than eight hundred soldiers to cross the border of Yunnan and Mengzi, claiming that it was to catch thieves, and set up camp in China without authorization.

古文：守臣力止之，始退。
现代文：当地的守卫大臣奋力制止，他们才退回去。
English: They retreated only after the local defense minister tried to stop them.

古文：灏既破占城，志意益广，亲督兵九万，开山为三道，攻破哀牢，侵老挝，复大破之，杀宣慰刀板雅、兰、掌父子三人，其季子怕雅赛走八百以免。
现代文：黎灏既已攻破占城，志向更为广大，亲自率兵九万，分三路攻破哀牢，侵略老挝。后又大破老挝的守军，杀死老挝的宣慰刀板雅、刀板兰、刀板掌父子三人，刀板雅的三儿子怕雅赛逃到八百才幸免于死。
English: Now that he had broken through the besieged city, Lihong had even greater ambitions. He personally led ninety thousand soldiers to break through the siege and invade Laos. Later, he defeated the defenders of Laos, killing the three sons of the Laotian consoler, Thao Phan Nga, Thao Phan Lan, and Thao Phan Nga. Thao Phan Nga's third son, Thao Phan Nga, only escaped death when he was eight hundred years old.

古文：灏复积粮练兵，颁伪敕于车里，征其兵合攻八百。
现代文：黎灏又积聚粮草训练军队，颁发伪敕令给车里，征调车里的兵力一起攻打八百。
English: Lihong also amassed grain and grass to train the army, issued a pseudo-order to the car, and conscripted the troops in the car to attack the 800 together.

古文：将士暴死者数千，咸言为雷霆所击。
现代文：其间将士暴死达数千人，而黎灏都称是遭雷霆所击而致。
English: Thousands of soldiers died violently during this time, and Lihong claimed to have been hit by a thunderbolt.

古文：八百乃遏其归路，袭杀万余人，灏始引还。
现代文：八百于是遏制住黎灏的归路，袭击并杀死了安南军一万余人，黎灏才引兵退回安南。
English: The eight hundred then blocked Lihong's way back, attacked and killed more than ten thousand of Annan's army, and only then did Lihong lead his troops back to Annan.

古文：帝下廷议，请令广西布政司檄灏敛兵，云南、两广守臣戒边备而已。
现代文：皇帝将此事交朝廷大臣商议，朝廷大臣请求皇帝命令广西的布政司传檄文给黎灏，要他敛兵息战，命令云南、两广的守卫大臣对边关地区要戒备守御。
English: The emperor referred the matter to the minister of the imperial court for deliberation. The minister of the imperial court requested the emperor to order the political secretary of Guangxi to send a letter to Lihong, asking him to restrain the troops and order the guard ministers of Yunnan and the two Guangxi provinces to be alert and guard the border areas.

古文：既而灏言未侵老挝，且不知八百疆宇何在，语甚诳诞。
现代文：不久黎灏上书说自己并没有侵略老挝，而且不知道八百的疆界在何地，其语气甚为诳诞。
English: Soon after, Lê Thnh wrote a letter saying that he had not invaded Laos and did not know where the eight-hundred-kilometer border was. The tone of the letter was very sinister.

古文：帝复慰谕之，迄不奉命。
现代文：皇帝对他又安慰抚谕一番，但他并不遵奉朝命。
English: The emperor comforted him again, but he did not follow the imperial order.

古文：十七年秋，满剌加亦以被侵告，帝敕使谕令睦邻保国。
现代文：十七年秋，满剌加也因遭安南侵略而上告朝廷，皇帝派使臣敕谕他们，让他们睦邻保国。
English: In the autumn of the seventeenth year, Manchukuo also sued the imperial court for being invaded by Annan, and the emperor sent envoys to advise them to be good neighbors and protect the country.

古文：未几，使臣入贡，请如暹罗、爪哇例赐冠带。
现代文：不久，安南的使臣进京献贡，请求明朝廷按暹罗、爪哇之例赏赐冠带。
English: Soon after, Annan's envoys went to Beijing to pay tribute, requesting the Ming court to reward the crown belt according to the example of Siam and Java.

古文：许之，不为例。
现代文：皇帝答应了他的请求，但不作为赏赐的惯例。
English: The emperor granted his request, but not as is customary for a reward.

古文：孝宗践阼，命侍读刘戩诏谕其国。
现代文：孝宗登皇帝位时，命令侍读刘戬持诏谕告安南国。
English: When Emperor Xiaozong ascended to the throne, he ordered Liu Xi to read the imperial edict to Annan.

古文：其使臣来贡，以大丧免引奏。
现代文：安南的使臣来献贡，明朝廷因有大丧而免除引奏。
English: Annan's envoys came to pay tribute, and the Ming court was exempted from the introduction because of the great mourning.

古文：弘治三年，时占城王古来以天朝力得还国，复诉安南见侵。
现代文：弘治三年，这时的占城王古来因依靠明朝的力量得以回还本国，又以安南入侵上诉明朝廷。
English: In the third year of Hongzhi, at this time, King Gulei of Chengdu was able to return to his country by relying on the strength of the Ming Dynasty, and appealed to the Ming Dynasty with Annan's invasion.

古文：兵部尚书马文升召安南使臣曰： 归谕尔主，各保疆土享太平。
现代文：兵部尚书马文升召见安南的使臣说 ：你回去后谕告你的主人，各自保卫自己的疆土才能享受太平。
English: The commander of the military department, Shangshu Ma Wensheng, summoned the envoys who had come to see Annan and said, "When you return, tell your master that peace can only be enjoyed when each side defends its own territory."

古文：不然，朝廷一旦赫然震怒，天兵压境，如永乐朝事，尔主得无悔乎？ 
现代文：不然的话，朝廷一旦赫然震怒，天兵压境，就像永乐年间的事例一样，你的主人不会后悔吧？ 
English: Otherwise, once the imperial court is outraged and the army of heaven crushes the border, just like the case during the Yongle Era, your master will not regret it, right?

古文：安南自是有所畏。
现代文：从此安南才有所畏忌。
English: Since then, Annan has been wary.

古文：十年，灏卒，私谥圣宗。
现代文：十年，黎灏逝世，安南国给他私封谥号为圣宗。
English: Ten years later, when Lihong passed away, the State of Annan gave him the posthumous title of Shentong.

古文：其改元二：光顺十年，洪德二十八年。
现代文：黎灏在位时改了两次纪元：光顺十年，洪德二十八年。
English: When Lihong was on the throne, he changed the era twice: 10 years for Guangshun and 28 years for Hongde.

古文：子晖继，一名鏳，遣使告讣，命行人徐钰往祭。
现代文：黎灏的儿子黎晖即位。黎晖，又名黎钅曾，派使臣向明朝廷告丧，朝廷派行人徐钰前去吊祭黎灏。
English: Lihong's son Lihong ascended to the throne. Lihong, also known as Lihong Zeng, sent envoys to the Ming court to mourn, and the court sent the passerby Xu Ying to go to the funeral of Lihong.

古文：寻赐晖皮弁服、金犀带。
现代文：不久明朝廷将皮弁服和金犀带赐给黎晖。
English: Soon after, the Ming court bestowed the fursuit and golden scythe belt to Lihong.

古文：其使臣言，国主受王封，赐服与臣下无别，乞改赐。
现代文：安南的使臣上奏说我们的国主受封为王，但朝廷赐予的王服与我们当臣下的没有区别，乞求朝廷另行改赐。
English: Annan's envoy reported that our sovereign had been crowned king, but the royal robes given by the court were no different from those given to us as subjects, and he begged the court to change it.

古文：礼官言： 安南名为王，实中国臣也。
现代文：礼官说 ：安南名义上是王国，实际上是中国的臣属国。
English: The etiquette official said: Annan is nominally a kingdom, but in fact it is a vassal state of China.

古文：嗣王新立，必赐皮弁冠服，使不失主宰一国之尊，又赐一品常服，俾不忘臣事中国之义。
现代文：新王刚立，必须赐予他皮弁冠服，让他不失主宰一国朝政的尊严，又赐予他一品常服，使他不忘臣事中国之义。
English: The new king, Gang Li, must be given a fursuit, so that he does not lose the dignity of ruling a country's dynastic politics, and he must also be given a suit of clothes, so that he does not forget the righteousness of China.

古文：今所请，紊乱祖制，不可许。
现代文：现今安南使者的请求，紊乱了祖先的遗制，这是不能答应的。
English: The request of the current Annan envoy, which disrupts the legacy of our ancestors, cannot be granted.

古文：然此非使臣罪，乃通事者导之妄奏，安惩。 
现代文：但这不是使臣的过错，而是通晓此事的人引导使臣妄奏的结果，应该惩治。 
English: However, this was not the fault of the envoy, but the result of someone with knowledge of the matter leading the envoy to act rashly, and should be punished.

古文：帝特宥之。
现代文：皇帝对此予以特赦。
English: The Emperor pardoned him specially.

古文：十七年，晖卒，私谥宪宗，其改元曰景统。
现代文：十七年，黎晖逝世，安南私下给他封谥号为宪宗，他所改的纪元称为景统。
English: In the seventeenth year, after Lihong's death, Annan privately gave him the posthumous title of "Kenzong," and the era he changed was called "Jingzong."

古文：子氵牵继，一名敬甫，七月而卒，私谥肃宗。
现代文：黎晖的儿子黎耛继承王位后七个月也去世，安南给他私封谥号为肃宗。
English: Reza's son, Reza, also died seven months after succeeding to the throne, and Annan gave him the posthumous title of Sozong.

古文：弟谊继，一名璿。
现代文：黎耛的弟弟黎谊继承王位，他的另一名字叫黎。
English: His younger brother, Lai Yoi, succeeded to the throne. His other name was Lai Sang.

古文：武宗践阼，命修撰伦文叙、给事中张弘至诏谕其国。
现代文：武宗继承皇帝位时，派修撰伦文叙、给事中张弘至到安南国谕告此事。
English: When Emperor Wuzong succeeded to the throne, Zhang Hongzhi went to Annan to report the matter.

古文：谊亦遣使告讣，命官致祭如常仪。
现代文：黎谊亦派使臣到京城报丧，朝廷命官员按常例举行吊祭仪式。
English: Liyi also sent envoys to the capital to report the death, and officials ordered by the imperial court held a hanging ceremony as usual.

古文：正德元年册为王。
现代文：正德元年明朝廷册封黎谊为安南国王。
English: In the first year of the Zhengde era, the Ming court crowned Liyi as King Annan.

古文：谊宠任母党阮种、阮伯胜兄弟，恣行威虐，屠戮宗亲，鸩杀祖母。
现代文：黎谊宠幸母党阮种、阮伯胜两兄弟，他们恣行威虐，屠戮宗亲，用毒酒毒死黎谊的祖母。
English: Two brothers, Ruan Zheng and Ruan Bosheng, who were favored by Liyi's mother's party, were tyrannical, slaughtered his paternal relatives, and poisoned Liyi's grandmother with poisoned wine.

古文：种等怙宠窃权，四年逼谊自杀，拥立其弟伯胜，贬谊为厉愍王。
现代文：阮种等人还恃宠篡权，四年他们逼迫黎谊自杀，拥立阮伯胜为王，将黎谊贬为厉愍王。
English: Nguyn Cnh and others also tried to usurp power. For four years, they forced Lê Li to commit suicide, supported Nguyn Bc Sn as king, and denigrated Lê Li as Lý Bnh.

古文：国人黎广等讨诛之，立灏孙晭，改谥谊威穆帝。
现代文：安南国人黎广等起来讨伐并诛杀了阮种、阮伯胜等人，拥立黎灏的孙子黎日周为王，改封黎谊的谥号为威穆帝。
English: Li Guang, a native of Annan, rose up to fight and kill Ruan Zheng, Ruan Borsheng, and others, and set up his grandson, Li Rizhou, as king, and changed Li Yi's title to Wei Mu Di.

古文：谊在位四年，改元端庆。
现代文：黎谊在位四年，将纪元改为端庆。
English: Liyi reigned for four years and changed the era to the Dragon Boat Festival.

古文：晭，一名滢，七年受封，多行不义。
现代文：黎日周，又名黎氵莹，七年受封为王，多行不义之事。
English: Li Rizhou, also known as Li Yuying, was crowned king for seven years and committed many unrighteous deeds.

古文：十一年，社堂烧香官陈皓与二子昺、升作乱，杀晭而自立。
现代文：十一年，安南国的社堂烧香官陈詗与两个儿子陈日丙、陈升一起作乱，杀死黎日周，自立为王。
English: In the eleventh year of the eleventh lunar month, the incense burner of the community hall of Annam, Chen Zhe, together with his two sons, Chen Rihei and Chen Sheng, made a disturbance, killed Li Rizhou, and became king.

古文：诡言前王陈氏后，仍称大虞皇帝，改元应天，贬晭为灵隐王。
现代文：他们诡称自己是前王陈氏的后裔，仍称自己为大虞皇帝，将纪元改为应天，把黎日周贬为灵隐王。
English: They cunningly claimed to be the descendants of the former King Chen, still called themselves the Emperor of Dagu, changed the era to Ying Tian, and degraded Li Rizhou to Lingyin Wang.

古文：晭臣都力士莫登庸初附皓，后与黎氏大臣阮私裕等起兵讨之。
现代文：黎日周手下的大臣都力士莫登庸原先附和陈詗，后来与黎氏的大臣阮弘裕等人一起兴兵讨伐陈詗。
English: The minister of the Li Zhou dynasty, Du Lisi Modeng Yong, initially sided with Chen Qi, and later joined forces with the minister of the Li dynasty, Nguyen Hong Yu, and others to fight Chen Qi.

古文：皓败走，获昺及其党陈璲等。
现代文：陈詗失败后逃走，他们便俘获了陈日丙及其同党陈王遂等人。
English: After Chen Yao failed and fled, they captured Chen Rihi and his fellow party member Chen Wangsui and others.

古文：皓与升奔谅山道，据长宁、太原、清节三府自保。
现代文：陈詗和陈升逃奔到谅山道，占据长宁、太原、清节三个府以自保。
English: Chen Yao and Chen Sheng fled to Lianye Mountain Road and occupied Changning, Taiyuan and Qingjie to protect themselves.

古文：登庸等乃共立晭兄灏之子譓，改谥晭襄翼帝。
现代文：莫登庸等人乃共同拥立黎日周兄长黎灏的儿子黎讠惠为安南王，改封黎日周的谥号为襄翼帝。
English: Moden Yong and others jointly supported Li Ronghui, the son of Li Rong, the elder brother of Li Rizhou, as the king of Annan, and changed the nickname of Li Rizhou to Xiang Yingdi.

古文：晭在位七年，改元洪顺。
现代文：黎日周在位七年，将纪元改为洪顺。
English: Li Rizhou reigned for seven years and changed the era to Hongshun.

古文：譓将请封，因国乱不果。
现代文：黎讠惠想向明朝廷请求册封，因国内动乱而未成行。
English: Lihong Hui wanted to petition the Ming court for a royal seal, but was unable to do so due to domestic turmoil.

古文：以登庸有功，封武川伯，总水陆诸军。
现代文：莫登庸因平乱有功，被封为武川伯，总管安南水陆诸军。
English: Moden Yong was awarded the title of Bu Chuan Bo (武川伯) for his contribution to the pacification of the turmoil, and became the commander-in-chief of Annan's land and water forces.

古文：既握兵柄，潜蓄异志。
现代文：莫登庸掌握兵权后，潜蓄异志。
English: After Moden Yong seized military power, he had a hidden ambition.

古文：黎氏臣郑绥，以譓徒拥虚位，别立其族子酉榜，发兵攻都城。
现代文：黎氏的大臣郑绥，认为黎讠惠只是空占虚位没有实权，便另拥立黎氏族人的儿子黎酉榜为王，发兵攻打都城。
English: Zheng Qi, the minister of the Li clan, thought that Li Qianhui was just occupying an empty seat and had no real power, so he set up the son of the Li clan, Li Qibang, as king and sent troops to attack the capital.

古文：譓出走，登庸击破绥兵，捕酉榜杀之，益恃功专恣，遂逼妻譓母，迎譓归，自为太傅仁国公。
现代文：黎讠惠为此出逃，莫登庸击败郑绥的军队，捕杀了黎酉榜，因而更加恃功恣纵，于是逼黎讠惠的母亲嫁给自己为妻，将黎讠惠迎接回来，自封为太傅仁国公。
English: As a result, Lê Đi Hi had to flee, and Mô Đình defeated the army of Zheng Hi and captured Lê Đi Bình. This made Lê Đi Hi's exploits even more extravagant, so he forced Lê Đi Hi's mother to marry his own wife, welcomed Lê Đi Hi back, and proclaimed himself Taifu Rìnguóng.

古文：十六年率兵攻陈皓，皓败走死。
现代文：十六年莫登庸率军攻打陈詗，陈詗败逃而死。
English: Sixteen years later, Moden Yong led an army to attack Chen Yu. Chen Yu was defeated and fled to his death.

古文：嘉靖元年，登庸自称安兴王，谋弑譓。
现代文：嘉靖元年，莫登庸自称为安兴王，阴谋弑杀黎讠惠。
English: In the first year of the Jiajing Dynasty, Moden Yong, who called himself King Anxing, plotted to kill Lihong Hui.

古文：譓母以告，乃与其臣杜温润间行以免，居于清华。
现代文：黎讠惠的母亲将此阴谋告诉黎讠惠，黎讠惠便与其手下的大臣杜温润从小道逃走才免一死，他们居住在清华。
English: Lai Ying Hui's mother told Lai Ying Hui about the plot, and Lai Ying Hui and his subordinate minister, Du Wenrun, fled by foot to avoid death. They lived in Tsinghua.

古文：登庸立其庶弟广，迁居海东长庆府。
现代文：莫登庸便扶立黎讠惠的庶弟黎耝为王，适居到海东的长庆府。
English: Moden Yong then installed Lihong Hui's half-brother Lihong as king and moved to Changqing Palace in the east of the country.

古文：世宗践阼，命编修孙承恩、给事中俞敦诏谕其国。
现代文：世宗即皇帝位时，命编修孙承恩、给事中俞敦持诏谕告安南。
English: When Emperor Sejong ascended to the throne, the commander-in-chief, Shosun Chung-en, issued an edict to Annan.

古文：至龙州，闻其国大乱，道不通，乃却还。
现代文：他们到达龙州时，听说安南国内大乱，道路不通，于是便退回京城。
English: When they arrived in Longzhou, they heard that there was a great disturbance in Annan and the roads were impassable, so they returned to Beijing.

古文：四年夏，譓遣使间道通贡，并请封，为登庸所阻。
现代文：四年夏，黎讠惠派使者从小路向明朝廷献贡物，并请求给予册封，结果被莫登庸所阻。
English: In the summer of the fourth year, Lihong Hui sent an envoy to pay tribute to the Ming court from a small road, and requested to be given a title, but was blocked by Moden Yong.

古文：明年春，登庸赂钦州判官唐清，为广求封。
现代文：第二年春，莫登庸贿赂钦州判官唐清，让他为黎耝求封。
English: In the spring of the following year, Mo Dengyong bribed Tang Qing, a judge in Qinzhou, to let him seek a crown for Lihong.

古文：总督张嵿逮清，死于狱。
现代文：总督张山顶逮捕了唐清，唐清死在狱中。
English: Governor Zhang Shanding arrested Tang Qing, who died in prison.

古文：六年，登庸令其党危范嘉谟伪为广禅诏，篡其位，改元明德，立子方瀛为皇太子。
现代文：六年，莫登庸让他的同党范嘉谟伪造黎耝禅位诏书，篡夺了黎耝的王位，将纪元改为明德，立自己的儿子莫方瀛为皇太子。
English: In the sixth year, Moden Yong had his party colleague Fan Jia Mu forge the imperial edict of Lihong's enthronement, usurped Lihong's throne, changed the era to Mingde, and set up his son Mo Fangjun as the crown prince.

古文：旋鸩杀２，谥为恭皇帝。
现代文：不久又以毒酒毒死黎耝，给他封谥号为恭皇帝。
English: Soon after, he poisoned Lihong with poisoned wine and gave him the title of Emperor Gong.

古文：逾年，遣使来贡，至谅山城，被攻而还。
现代文：过了一年，他们派使臣向明朝廷献贡，到谅山城时遭到攻击而回。
English: A year later, they sent envoys to pay tribute to the Ming court, but were attacked when they left the mountain city.

古文：九年，登庸禅位于方瀛，自称太上皇，移居都斋、海阳，为方瀛外援，作《大诰》五十九条，颁之国中。
现代文：九年，莫登庸禅位给莫方瀛，自称为太上皇，移居到都斋和海阳，作为莫方瀛的外援，并写了《大诰》五十九条，颁布在安南国中。
English: In the ninth year, Moden Yong Zhen was given to Mofang Tuo, who called himself the Grand Emperor, moved to Duzai and Haiyang as Mofang Tuo's foreign aid, and wrote the fifty-nine articles of the "Great Charter" and promulgated it in Annan.

古文：方瀛改元大正。
现代文：莫方瀛将纪元改为大正。
English: Mo Fangjun changed the era to Taisho.

古文：其年九月，黎譓卒于清华，国亡。
现代文：该年九月，黎讠惠在清华去世，黎氏王朝在安南灭亡。
English: In September of the same year, Lê Đi Hi died in Tsinghua, and the Lê dynasty perished in Annam.

古文：十五年冬，皇子生，当颁诏安南。
现代文：十五年冬，皇子降生，按礼制明朝廷应当颁诏书给安南。
English: In the winter of the fifteenth year, the prince was born, and according to the etiquette system, the Ming court should issue an imperial decree to Annan.

古文：礼官夏言言： 安南不贡已二十年，两广守臣谓黎譓、黎２均非黎晭应立之嫡，莫登庸陈皓俱彼国纂逆之臣，宜遣官按问，求罪人主名。
现代文：礼官夏言上疏说： 安南国已有二十年不来献贡了，守卫两广的大臣都说黎讠惠和黎耝都不是黎日周的嫡子，莫登庸、陈詗都是那个国家的篡逆之臣，应派官员前去按察审问，索求主犯。
English: The etiquette officer Xia Yan said: Annam has not come to pay tribute for twenty years. The ministers guarding the two provinces all said that both Lihong Hui and Lihong are not the legitimate sons of Lihizhou. Moden Yong and Chen Yong are the usurpers of that country. Officials should be sent to investigate and interrogate them and find the main culprits.

古文：且前使既以道阻不通，今宜暂停使命。
现代文：况且前番派使臣去时因道路不通，受阻而回，这次应当暂停派遣使臣前去该国。 
English: Moreover, when the previous envoy was sent to the country, he was prevented from returning due to impassable roads. This time, the dispatch of envoys to the country should be suspended.

古文：帝以安南叛逆昭然，宜急遣官往勘，命言会兵部议征讨。
现代文：皇帝认为安南的叛逆昭然若揭，应急派官员前去调查审核，命令夏言会同兵部官员一起讨论征讨之事。
English: The emperor thought that Annan's treason was blatant, sent officials to investigate and review the matter, and ordered Xia Yanhui to discuss the matter of conscription with the military officials.

古文：言及本兵张瓒等力言逆臣篡主夺国，朝贡不修，决宜致讨。
现代文：夏言和本兵张瓒等竭力上疏说叛逆之臣篡主夺国，对朝廷不修贡献，决议应该予以讨伐。
English: Xia Yan and his soldier Zhang Ye tried their best to dissuade the rebellious vassals from usurping the country and not making any contribution to the imperial court, and the resolution should be put down.

古文：乞先遣锦衣官二人往核其实，敕两广、云南守臣整兵积饷，以俟师期，制可。
现代文：请求皇上先派二名锦衣官前去核实事实，再事敕令两广、云南的守卫大臣整饬军队积聚粮饷，等待出师之期，皇帝同意。
English: The emperor agreed to the request that the emperor first send two officials to verify the facts, and then order the defense ministers of the two provinces and Yunnan to rectify the army's accumulation of grain and grain, and wait for the period of graduation.

古文：乃命千户陶凤仪、郑玺等，分往广西、云南，诘罪人主名，敕四川、贵州、湖广、福建、江西守臣，预备兵食，候征调。
现代文：朝廷便命令千户陶凤仪、郑玺等，分别前往广西、云南，诘问谁是主犯，同时敕令四川、贵州、湖广、福建、江西的守卫大臣，预备好军队和粮食，听候征调。
English: The imperial court then ordered thousands of households of Tao Fengyi, Zheng Qi, etc. to go to Guangxi and Yunnan respectively to ask who was the main criminal, and at the same time ordered the guards of Sichuan, Guizhou, Hukang, Fujian and Jiangxi to prepare troops and grain and await conscription.

古文：户部侍郎唐胄上疏，力陈用兵七不可，语详其传中，末言： 安南虽乱，犹频奉表笺，具方物，款关求入。
现代文：户部侍郎唐胄上疏朝廷，竭力陈说对安南用兵的七大不利，其话语详见本书的《唐胄传》中，最后他说： 安南虽然内乱，还是频繁地向朝廷奉表上笺，备好了土产，向我边关示诚以寻求入京。
English: His words can be found in detail in this book's "Tang Xuan." At the end, he said: "Despite the civil strife, Annan frequently submitted to the imperial court, prepared local products, and showed sincerity to our border to seek entry into Beijing.

古文：守臣以其姓名不符，拒之。
现代文：我守卫大臣因他们的姓名不符，拒绝他们入关。
English: I, the Minister of Defense, refused them entry because their names did not match.

古文：是彼欲贡不得，非负固不贡也。 
现代文：这是他们想献贡而无法献，而不是不想献贡啊！ 
English: It's because they want to pay tribute but can't, not because they don't want to!

古文：章下兵部，亦以为然，命俟勘官还更议。
现代文：皇帝将唐胄的疏章交给兵部，兵部认为唐胄之言亦然，朝廷便命令等审核事实的官员回来后再变更决定。
English: The emperor handed over Tang Xuan's posthumous medals to the military department, and the military department thought that Tang Xuan's words were the same, and the court ordered the officials who reviewed the facts to come back and change the decision.

古文：十六年，安南黎宁遣国人郑惟僚等赴京，备陈登庸篡弑状，言： 宁即譓子。
现代文：十六年，安南的黎宁派国人郑惟僚等人赴京城，详细陈述了莫登庸篡位弑主的情况，说： 黎宁就是黎讠惠的儿子。
English: Sixteen years later, Annan's Lien Ning sent Zheng Weili and others to Beijing to explain in detail the situation of Moden Yong's usurpation of the throne, saying: Lien Ning is the son of Lihong Hui.

古文：譓卒，国人立宁为世孙，权主国事。
现代文：黎讠惠逝世，国人拥立黎宁为世孙，权理国事。
English: After the death of Lai Shun Hui, the Chinese people supported the succession of Lai Ning as his grandchild, with the power to rule the country.

古文：屡驰书边臣告难，俱为登庸邀杀。
现代文：黎宁屡次驰书向边关大臣告难，送书信的使者都被莫登庸所邀杀。
English: Liening repeatedly wrote to the Minister of Frontier Affairs to complain, and the messengers who sent the letters were all invited to be killed by Morden Yong.

古文：乞兴师问罪，亟除国贼。 
现代文：乞求朝廷兴师问罪，尽快去除国贼。 
English: He begged the imperial court to arraign him and remove the traitor as soon as possible.

古文：时严嵩掌礼部，谓其言未可尽信，请羁之，待勘官回奏，从之。
现代文：当时是严嵩掌管礼部，谓郑惟僚等人的言词不可尽信，请求朝廷将他们羁留起来，等审核事实的官员回来上奏再说，皇帝同意。
English: At that time, Yan Song was in charge of the ceremonial department. He said that the words of Zheng Weirong and others could not be fully believed, and asked the court to detain them, and wait for the officials who reviewed the facts to come back and report. The emperor agreed.

古文：寻召凤仪等还，命礼、兵二部会廷臣议，列登庸十大罪，请大振宸断，克期徂征。
现代文：不久，朝廷召回了陶凤仪等人，命令礼部、兵部会同朝廷大臣一起议论，列举了莫登庸的十大罪状，请求皇帝速下圣断，限期出征。
English: Soon, the imperial court recalled Tao Fengyi and others, ordered the Ministry of Ceremonies and the Ministry of Military Affairs to discuss with the ministers of the imperial court, listed the ten major crimes of Modenyang, and requested the emperor to make a quick decision and set a deadline to go to war.

古文：乃起右都御史毛伯温于家，参赞军务，命户部侍郎胡琏、高公韶先驰云、贵、两广调度军食，以都督佥事江桓、牛桓为左、右副总兵，督军征讨，其大将需后命。
现代文：朝廷于是起用已归家的右都御史毛伯温，让他参赞军务，命令户部侍郎胡琏、高公韶先驰往云南、贵州和两广调度军队和粮食，任命都督佥事江桓、牛桓为左、右副总兵，督军征讨，军中的大将随后再任命。
English: The imperial court then appointed Mao Bowen, who had already returned home, as the right-hand governor of the capital, and made him the military affairs counselor, and ordered the household attendants Hu Tong and Gao Gongyi to go first to Yunnan, Guizhou, and the two provinces to dispatch troops and grain, and appointed the governor of Yunnan, Jiang Huan, and Niu Huan as the left and right deputy commanders-in-chief, the commander of the army, and the general of the army to be appointed later.

古文：兵部复奉诏，条用兵机宜十二事。
现代文：兵部又奉诏令，细述用兵事宜十二条。
English: In accordance with the imperial edict, the Ministry of Military Affairs also detailed the use of soldiers in twelve articles.

古文：独侍郎潘珍持不可，抗疏切谏。
现代文：只有侍郎潘珍持异议认为不可用兵，并向皇帝抗疏切谏。
English: Only the chamberlain, Pan Zhen, disagreed that soldiers should not be used and protested to the emperor.

古文：帝怒，褫其职。
现代文：皇帝愤怒之下，褫夺了他的职务。
English: Enraged, the emperor deprived him of his post.

古文：两广总督潘旦亦驰疏请停前命，言： 朝廷方兴问罪之师，登庸即有求贡之使，宜因而许之，戒严观变，以待彼国之自定。 
现代文：两广总督潘旦也急忙上疏请求朝廷停止执行出征的成命，说： 朝廷正兴问罪之师，莫登庸即有求贡的使者前来，应顺水推舟答应他们献贡，同时边防戒备森严以观其变化，等待彼国局势自己安定。 
English: Pan Dan, the governor-general of the two provinces, also hurried upstream to request the imperial court to stop the execution of the order to go to war, saying: The imperial court is in the process of investigating the crime, and now that there is an envoy to ask for tribute, he should push the boat along the water to agree to pay tribute. At the same time, the border guard is on high alert to observe its changes and wait for the situation in the other country to stabilize itself.

古文：严嵩、张瓒窥帝旨，力言不可宥，且言黎宁在清都图恢复，而旦谓彼国俱定，上表求贡，决不可许。
现代文：严嵩、张瓒事先窥探到皇帝的旨意，竭力上疏说不能宽恕莫登庸，并说黎宁在清都图谋恢复统治，而潘旦却说彼国都已安定，现上表请求献贡，决不能答应他们。
English: Yan Song and Zhang Ye had spied on the emperor's will in advance, and tried their best to say that they could not forgive Moden Yong, and that Lining was plotting to restore rule in the Qing capital, but Pandan said that other countries were stable, and now the table requested tribute, and they must not be allowed.

古文：旦疏遂寝。
现代文：这样，潘旦的上疏遂被搁置一边。
English: Thus, Pandan's oversights were set aside.

古文：五月，伯温至京，奏上方略六事，以旦不可共事，请易之，优旨褒答。
现代文：五月，毛伯温到京城，上奏陈述出兵方略六件大事，认为潘旦不能与己一起共事，请求皇上易人。
English: In May, Maobowen went to Beijing to report on six major issues concerning the dispatch of troops. He believed that Pandan could not work with him and asked the emperor to change his position.

古文：及兵部议上，帝意忽中变，谓黎宁诚伪未审，令三方守臣从宜抚剿，参赞、督饷大臣俱暂停，旦调用，以张经代之。
现代文：皇帝对他褒奖一番，并答应了他的要求。等到兵部的决议送上以后，皇帝忽然中途变卦，认为黎宁是诚是伪还未审核，命令云南、贵州、两广的守卫大臣相机安抚或进剿，参赞、督饷大臣都暂停行使职权，潘旦调任他用，以张经代潘旦出任两广总督。
English: The emperor praised him and agreed to his request. After the decision of the Ministry of Military Affairs was sent, the emperor suddenly changed his mind halfway. He thought that whether Lining was sincere or fake had not yet been reviewed. He ordered the guards of Yunnan, Guizhou, and the two provinces to pacify or arrest the camera. The Counsellor and the Minister of Supervision suspended the exercise of their powers. Pandan was transferred to another use, and Zhang Jing replaced Pandan as the governor of the two provinces.

古文：时御史徐九皋、给事中谢廷氵茝以修省陈言，亦请罢征南之师。
现代文：此时御史徐九皋、给事中谢廷耊也陈言，请求皇帝罢停征南之师。
English: At this time, Grand Historian Xu Jiuyong and Vice Admiral Xie Tingtao also made a statement, requesting the emperor to suspend the recruitment of Nan's division.

古文：八月，云南巡抚汪文盛以获登庸间谍及所撰伪《大诰》上闻。
现代文：八月，云南巡抚汪文盛抓获了莫登庸的间谍，搜出了莫登庸所撰的伪《大诰》，将此上报朝廷。
English: In August, the governor of Yunnan Province, Wang Wensheng, caught Modenyong's spy, found out the fake "Big Dragonfly" written by Modenyong, and reported this to the imperial court.

古文：帝震怒，命守臣仍遵前诏征讨。
现代文：皇帝听后震怒，命令守卫大臣仍遵前番的诏令征讨安南。
English: Hearing this, the emperor was furious and ordered the Minister of Defense to still follow the previous order to recruit Annan.

古文：时文盛招纳黎氏旧臣武文渊得其进兵地图，谓登庸以可破，遂上之朝。
现代文：这时汪文盛招纳了黎氏的旧臣武文渊，得到了安南的进兵地图，认为必可破莫登庸的军队，于是上报朝廷。
English: At this time, Wang Wensheng recruited Li's former vassal Wu Wenyuan, obtained Annan's enlistment map, and believed that he could defeat the modern army, so he reported to the court.

古文：广东按臣余光言： 莫之篡黎，犹黎之篡陈，不足深较。
现代文：广东的巡按大臣余光说： 莫氏篡夺黎氏的权位，就像黎氏之篡夺陈氏的权位一样，不值得仔细计较。
English: Guangdong's Minister of Public Security Yu Guang said: Mo's usurpation of Li's power, just like Li's usurpation of Chen's power, is not worth careful consideration.

古文：但当罪其不庭，责以称臣修贡，不必远征，疲敝中国。
现代文：但应该追究他不报朝廷的罪责，责成他向朝廷称臣修贡，这样就不必远征，使我们中国疲于奔命。
English: However, he should be held accountable for not reporting the crime to the imperial court, and he should be ordered to pay tribute to the imperial court. In this way, there is no need for an expedition, and we Chinese are exhausted from running for our lives.

古文：臣已遣使宣谕，彼如来归，宜因以抚纳。 
现代文：我已派使者向他们宣谕此意，如果他们前来归降，应该顺势安抚招纳他们。 
English: We have sent messengers to them, telling them that if they come to surrender, they should be accepted.

古文：帝以光轻率，夺禄一年。
现代文：皇帝认为余光此事做得太轻率，褫夺了他的一年俸禄。
English: The emperor thought that Yu Guang had done this too carelessly and robbed him of a year's salary.

古文：文盛即传檄安南，登庸能束身归命，籍上舆图，待以不死。
现代文：汪文盛马上传檄文到安南，如果莫登庸能够束身归奉朝廷，将安南的土地登记好献上来，可以不处他死罪。
English: Wang Wensheng immediately sent a message to Annan. If Moden Yong could return to the imperial court in shackles and submit Annan's land registration, he could not be sentenced to death.

古文：于是登庸父子遣使奉表乞降，且投牒文盛及黔国公沐朝辅，具述黎氏衰乱，陈皓叛逆，己与方瀛有功，为国人归附，所有土地，已载《一统志》中，乞贳其罪，修贡如制。
现代文：这样，莫登庸父子派使者奉表向明朝廷乞求归降，且投牒文给汪文盛和黔国公沐朝辅，详细叙述黎氏衰乱、陈皓叛逆的情形，并说自己和莫方瀛平叛有功，受国人推崇，争相归附。所有的安南国土，已经载入《一统志》之中，请求明朝廷宽恕罪行，自己将按制度给朝廷修贡。
English: In this way, Moden Yong and his son sent an envoy with a petition to the Ming court to beg for surrender, and sent a letter to Wang Wensheng and Wang Guoguo, the imperial aide, describing in detail the situation of the decline of the Li clan and the rebellion of Chen Qi, and saying that he and Mofang Xingping had made great contributions to the rebellion, were respected by the people of the country, and were competing to be annexed. All of Annan's land has been recorded in the "Unification History," asking the Ming court to forgive the crime, and he will pay tribute to the court according to the system.

古文：朝辅等以十七年三月奏闻，而黎宁承前诏，惧天朝竟纳其降，备以本国篡弑始末及军马之数、水陆进兵道里来上。
现代文：沐朝辅等人在十七年三月将此上奏给皇帝，而黎宁承接朝廷的前番诏令，怕明朝廷最终接纳莫氏的乞降，便将本国内部篡权弑主发生叛乱的始末、整个国家军队和战马的数量以及水陆两路进兵的道路等详细备好呈给皇帝。
English: In March 17th, Mu Chaoyu and others reported this to the emperor, and Lining followed the imperial edict. Fearing that the Ming court would eventually accept Mo's surrender, he prepared the details of the beginning and end of the rebellion of the usurper within the country, the number of the entire national army and war horses, and the land and water routes for the entry of soldiers to the emperor.

古文：俱下兵部，集廷臣议。
现代文：皇帝把沐朝辅等人的奏章和黎宁的上书全交给兵部，召集朝廷大臣共同商议此事。
English: The emperor handed over the imperial rescript of Mu Chaoyu and others and the petition of Lining to the Ministry of War, and convened the ministers of the imperial court to discuss the matter.

古文：佥言莫氏罪不可赦，亟宜进师。请以原推咸宁侯仇鸾总督军务，伯温仍为参赞，从之。
现代文：朝廷大臣都说莫氏之罪不能赦免，应急速进兵，请求皇上任命原先推举的咸宁侯仇鸾总督军务，汪伯温仍为参赞，皇帝同意。
English: The ministers of the imperial court all said that Mo's crime could not be pardoned, and that he should quickly join the army. They asked the emperor to appoint the previously elected Xianning Hou Qianqian as the military governor. Wang Bowen was still the counselor, and the emperor agreed.

古文：张经上言： 安南进兵之道有六，兵当用三十万，一岁之饷当用百六十万，造舟、市马、制器、犒军诸费又须七十余万。
现代文：张经上疏说 ：向安南进兵的道路有六条，兵力应要三十万；一年的粮饷要花费一百六十万；造舟船、买马匹、制造器械物资和犒赏军队等诸项费用又须花费七十余万。
English: Zhang Jing Shangsu said: There are six ways to march troops to Annan, and the troop strength should be 300,000; one year's grain supply will cost 1.6 million; and various expenses such as building boats, buying horses, manufacturing equipment and materials, and rewarding troops will cost more than 700,000.

古文：况我调大众，涉炎海，与彼劳逸殊势，不可不审处也。 
现代文：况且我们征调大队人马，涉炎热之海，我劳彼逸，情状相殊甚远，不能不审时度势而行啊。 
English: Moreover, we are recruiting and transferring a large number of people and horses, involving the hot sea, I work hard, the situation is very different, we must not judge the situation at the time.

古文：疏方上，钦州知州林希元又力陈登庸可取状。兵部不能决，复请廷议。
现代文：此疏章刚递上，钦州的知州林希元又竭力陈说可取莫登庸，于是兵部无法议决，又请朝廷大臣协议。
English: As soon as this memorandum was submitted, Lin Xiyuan, the chizhou of Qinzhou, tried his best to say that Modenyang should be chosen, so the military department could not make a decision, and asked the minister of the court for an agreement.

古文：及议上，帝不悦曰： 朕闻卿士大夫私议，咸谓不当兴师。
现代文：等朝廷大臣的协议呈给皇帝，皇帝不悦地说 ：我听你们士大夫私下议论，都说朝廷不该兴兵。
English: When the agreement of the ministers of the imperial court was presented to the emperor, the emperor said with displeasure, "I have heard you gentlemen discuss in private, and you all say that the imperial court should not raise an army.

古文：尔等职司邦政，漫无主持，悉委之会议。
现代文：你们这些人职司国家朝政，却漫无主张，遇到事情全部推诿给朝廷会议。
English: You people are in charge of state and imperial politics, but you have no ideas, and when things come up, you push them all to the imperial court meeting.

古文：既不协心谋国，其已之。
现代文：既然你们不同心协力为国家谋划，就停止出征好了。
English: Since you are not working together to plan for the country, stop going to war.

古文：鸾、伯温别用。 
现代文：仇鸾、毛伯温另行调用。 
English: Xenophanes and Mau Bo-Wen were summoned separately.

古文：十八年册立皇太子，当颁诏安南。
现代文：十八年朝廷册立皇太子，应当颁布诏书给安南。
English: In the 18th year of the reign of the crown prince, the imperial decree should be issued to Annan.

古文：特起黄绾为礼部尚书，学士张治副之，往使其国。
现代文：朝廷特地起用黄绾为礼部尚书，学士张治为他的副手，出使安南国。
English: The imperial court specially appointed Huang Qi as the minister of etiquette, and the scholar Zhang Zhi as his deputy, dispatched to Annan.

古文：命甫下，方瀛遣使上表降，并籍其土地、户口，听天朝处分，凡为府五十有三，州四十有九，县一百七十有六。
现代文：该使命刚刚下达，莫方瀛派使者上表乞降，并登记了安南的土地、户口数，听凭明朝廷的处置，共有府五十三个，州四十九个，县一百七十六个。
English: The mission had just been issued, and the Mongolian side sent an envoy to the table to beg for surrender, and registered Annan's land and the number of households, subject to the disposition of the Ming court, with a total of 53 prefectures, 49 states, and 176 counties.

古文：帝纳之，下礼、兵二部协议。
现代文：皇帝接纳了莫方瀛的表文，交给礼部、兵部官员共同讨论。
English: The emperor accepted Mo Fangyao's petition and gave it to officials from the Ministry of Ceremonies and the Ministry of Military Affairs to discuss.

古文：至七月，绾犹未行，以忤旨落职，遂停使命。
现代文：到七月，黄绾出使还未成行，便以逆忤圣旨罪落职，该使命也就停止了。
English: By July, Huang Qi's envoy had not yet set sail, and he was removed from office for the crime of disobeying the sacred edict, and the mission was also stopped.

古文：初，征讨之议发自夏言，帝既责绾，因发怒曰： 安南事，本一人倡，众皆随之。
现代文：当初，征讨安南的建议出自夏言，皇帝既已责罪了黄绾，就动怒道： 安南之事，本来只有一个人偶议，众人都是附随而已。
English: At first, the proposal to solicit Annan came from Xia Yan. The emperor, having already condemned Huang Qi, became angry and said: Annan's case was originally discussed by only one person, and everyone else was just a follower.

古文：乃讪上听言计，共作慢词。
现代文：你们便讥笑我听从夏言的话，共做怠慢之词应付我。
English: Then you ridiculed me for listening to Xia Yan's words, and all of you responded to me with disparaging words.

古文：此国应弃应讨，宜有定议，兵部即集议以闻。 
现代文：安南国是应该弃置还是应该讨伐，应有一个确定的决议，兵部马上召集大臣商议后将决议告诉我。 
English: Whether Annan's country should be abandoned or should be crusaded, there should be a definite resolution. The Ministry of Military Affairs should immediately convene the ministers for consultation and then inform me of the resolution.

古文：于是瓒及廷臣惶惧，请如前诏，仍遣鸾、伯温南征。
现代文：这样一来，张瓒和朝廷大臣都感到惶惧，请求皇帝按前番诏令行事，仍派仇鸾、毛伯温南征安南。
English: As a result, Zhang Ye and the ministers of the imperial court were alarmed and asked the emperor to act according to the previous edict and still send Qian Ye, Mao Bo and Wen Nan to conquer Annan.

古文：如登庸父子束手归命，无异心，则待以不死，从之。
现代文：如果莫登庸父子能够自动束手归降，对朝廷没有异心，则可不治他们的死罪。
English: If the Modenyang father and son can voluntarily surrender and have no hostility to the imperial court, then they can not be sentenced to death.

古文：登庸闻，大喜。
现代文：皇帝同意。莫登庸听说后，心中大喜。
English: The emperor agreed. Upon hearing this, Moden Yong was overjoyed.

古文：十九年，伯温等抵广西，传檄谕以纳款宥罪意。
现代文：十九年，毛伯温等人抵达广西，传檄文给莫登庸父子，将如果他们纳款示诚可以宽恕罪行的意思谕告他们。
English: In 1919, Mao Bowen and others arrived in Guangxi and sent a letter to Moden Yong and his son, telling them that if they paid the money and showed their sincerity, they could forgive the crime.

古文：时方瀛已卒，登庸即遣使请降。
现代文：此时莫方瀛已死，莫登庸即派使者前来请求归降。
English: At this time, Mo Fangyao was already dead, and Morden Yong sent an envoy to request him to surrender.

古文：十一月率从子文明及部目四十二人入镇南关，囚首徒跣，匍匐叩头坛上，进降表，伯温称诏赦之。
现代文：十一月，莫登庸率领二儿子莫文明及手下的部目四十二人进入镇南关。他们自己囚首徒跣，匍匐在坛上叩头，向朝廷所派的官员进归降表文，毛伯温宣读皇帝的诏令赦免了他们的罪行。
English: In November, Mo Dengyong led his second son, Mo Wenming, and forty-two of his subordinates into the town of Nankuan. They themselves carried their heads in their hands, prostrated themselves on the altar, and presented a letter of surrender to the officials sent by the imperial court. Mao Bowen read out the emperor's edict and pardoned their crimes.

古文：复诣军门匍匐再拜，上土地军民藉，请奉正朔，永为藩臣。
现代文：他们又到军门前匍匐再拜，呈上土地、军民的籍册，请求永为明朝廷的藩臣。
English: They also went to the military gate to bow again, presented the land, military and civilian registers, and requested to always be the vassals of the Ming court.

古文：伯温等宣示威德，令归国俟命。
现代文：毛伯温等人宣示了明朝廷的威德之后，让他们回国听候命令。
English: After Mao Bowen and others proclaimed the virtue of the Ming court, they were allowed to return to China to await orders.

古文：疏闻，帝大喜，命削安南国为安南都统使司，授登庸都统使，秩从二品，银印。
现代文：毛伯温等人将此情况上疏给朝廷，皇帝听后大喜，下令将安南国削为安南都统使司，授予莫登庸都统使的职位，官秩为从二品，佩银印。
English: Maobowen and others brought this situation to the attention of the imperial court. The emperor was overjoyed to hear this and ordered that Annan's country be reduced to the position of Annan's envoy to the capital city, and that Moden Yongdu be awarded the position of the envoy to the capital city, with the official rank of second grade and wearing a silver seal.

古文：旧所僣拟制度悉除去，改其十三道为十三宣抚司，各设宣抚、同知、副使、佥事，听都统黜陟。
现代文：以前安南所私自拟定的制度全部废除，将其十三道改为十三个宣抚司，各设宣抚、同知、副使、佥事，听从都统的升迁罢免。
English: The system previously devised by Annan himself was abolished in its entirety, and its thirteen provinces were changed into thirteen regions, each of which had its own governor, councillors, vice-governors, and officials, who were promoted and dismissed according to the dictates of the central government.

古文：广西岁给《大统历》，仍三岁一贡以为常。
现代文：广西每年给安南送《大统历》，仍让安南每三年向朝廷进贡一次以为常例。
English: Guangxi sends Annan the "Great General Calendar" every year, and still considers it customary for Annan to pay tribute to the imperial court once every three years.

古文：更令核黎宁真伪，果黎氏后，割所据四府奉其祀事，否则已之。
现代文：又让莫氏审核黎宁其人的真伪，如果确是黎氏后裔，割让他们所据的四个府给他们，让他们供奉祀事，否则就免了。
English: He also asked the Mohs to check the authenticity of Lien Ning's people. If they were indeed descendants of the Lai family, he would give them the four mansions on which they were based and let them offer religious services, otherwise they would be spared.

古文：制下，登庸悚惕受命。
现代文：皇帝的命令一下，莫登庸惶恐敬畏地接受了成命。
English: At the emperor's command, Moden accepted his fate with trepidation and awe.

古文：二十二年，登庸卒，方瀛子福海嗣，遣宣抚同知阮典敬等来朝。
现代文：二十二年，莫登庸去世，莫方瀛的儿子莫福海承继官职，派宣抚同知阮典敬等人前来朝贡。
English: Twenty-two years later, Moden Yong died, and his son, Mo Fok Hoi, succeeded to the official post, and sent Xuan Fu and his friend, Nguyn Đình Quang, and others to pay tribute.

古文：二十五年，福海卒，子宏瀷嗣。
现代文：二十五年，莫福海去世，他的儿子莫宏氵翼继承官职。
English: Twenty-five years later, Mo Fuhai passed away, and his son, Mo Hongzhu, succeeded to the post.

古文：初，登庸以石室人阮敬为义子，封西宁侯。
现代文：当初，莫登庸曾认石室人阮敬为义子，封为西宁侯。
English: At the beginning, Morden Yong had acknowledged the stone chamber's son-in-law, Nguyn Qun, as his son-in-law, and named him Xining Hou.

古文：敬有女嫁方瀛次子敬典，因与方瀛妻武氏通，得专兵柄。
现代文：阮敬有个女儿嫁给莫方瀛的次子莫敬典为妻。阮敬因与莫方瀛的妻武氏私通，得以专擅兵权。
English: Nguyn Kn had a daughter married to M Fong Th's second son, M Kn Thn. Nguyn Kn was able to wield military power because of his personal relationship with M Fong Th's wife, M Th.

古文：宏瀷立，方五岁，敬益专恣用事。
现代文：莫宏氵翼继立官职时，才五岁，阮敬便更加专权恣意用事。
English: Maw Hong Son Wing was only five years old when he took office, and Nguyen Quynh became even more authoritarian.

古文：登庸次子正中及文明避之都斋，其同辈阮如桂、范子仪等亦避居田里。
现代文：莫登庸的次子莫正中和莫文明都退避到都斋，与他们同辈的阮如桂、范子仪等人亦避居到乡里。
English: The second son of Mo Dengyong, Mo Zhengzhong and Mo Wenming, both retreated to the capital, and their contemporaries, Nguyen Ru Gui and Fan Ziyi, also fled to the countryside.

古文：敬举兵逼都斋，正中、如桂、子仪等御之，不胜。
现代文：阮敬举兵逼近都斋，莫正中、阮如桂、范子仪等人起来抵御，不胜。
English: Nguyn Qung raised an army and approached the capital, but Zhengzhong, Nguyn Rc Ki, Phm Thiệu and others rose up to resist and were defeated.

古文：正中、文明率家属奔钦州，子仪收残卒遁海东。
现代文：莫正中、莫文明率领家属逃奔到钦州，范子仪收拾残卒逃往海东。
English: Mo Zhengzhong and Mo Wenming led their families to flee to Qinzhou, while Fan Ziyi picked up the remnants and fled to Haidong.

古文：敬诡称宏瀷殁，以迎立正中为词，犯钦州，为参将俞大猷所败，诛死。
现代文：阮敬诡称莫宏氵翼已殁，以迎立莫正中为托词，进犯钦州，被参将俞大猷所败。
English: Nguyn Qung Trn said that M Hng had been defeated, and he invaded Qung Châu under the pretext of welcoming M Trng Trng, but he was defeated by Trn Đc.

古文：宏瀷初立时，遣使黎光贲来贡，至南宁，守臣以闻。
现代文：阮敬被诛杀。
English: Nguyen Quynh was beaten to death.

古文：礼官以其国内乱，名分未定，止来使勿进，而令守臣核所当立者。
现代文：莫宏氵翼将此上报朝廷。礼部官员认为其国内乱未定，名分不分，制止他们的使者进京，而让守卫大臣审核谁是该立之人。
English: Mohong reported this to the imperial court. Officials from the Ministry of Ceremonies, believing that their country was in turmoil, stopped their emissaries from entering Beijing and asked the Minister of Defense to verify who was responsible.

古文：至三十年事白，命授宏瀷都统使，赴关领牒。
现代文：到三十年事情真相大白以后，朝廷命令给莫宏氵翼授予都统使职位，让他赴关领牒。
English: Thirty years after the truth of the matter came to light, the imperial court ordered that Mo Hongwu be awarded the post of the General Secretary of the Communist Party of China, and that he be sent to Guan to receive the ultimatum.

古文：会部目黎伯骊与黎宁臣郑检合兵来攻，宏瀷奔海阳，不克赴。
现代文：此时正碰上部目黎伯骊和黎宁手下的大臣郑检一起合兵前来攻打，莫宏氵翼逃奔到海阳，无法赴关领牒。
English: At this time, Li Boqin, the superior, and Zheng Jian, the minister under Li Ning, were coming to attack together. Mohong fled to Haiyang, unable to go to Guan to receive the ultimatum.

古文：光贲等留南宁且十五年，其偕来使人物故大半。
现代文：黎光贲等人留在南宁达十五年，与他共同出使的人也已去世了一大半。
English: Lai Guangyao and others stayed in Nanning for fifteen years, and most of the people who were sent with him have also passed away.

古文：宏瀷祈守臣代请，诏许入京，其都统告身，仍俟宏瀷赴关则给。
现代文：莫宏氵翼祈求守卫大臣代他向朝廷请求，朝廷下诏允许黎光贲等人入京，但都统使官职的凭信仍要等莫宏氵翼赴关时才颁给。
English: Maw Hung Siu Wing asked the Minister of the Guard to make a request to the Imperial Court on his behalf, and the Imperial Court issued a decree allowing Lai Kwong Siu and others to enter Beijing. However, the credentials for the general envoy position still had to wait until Maw Hung Siu Wing went to Guan.

古文：四十三年，宏瀷卒，子茂洽嗣。
现代文：四十三年，莫宏氵翼去世，其儿子莫茂洽继嗣。
English: Forty-three years later, Mo Hongzhang passed away, and his son, Mo Mogao, became his successor.

古文：万历元年授都统使。
现代文：万历元年莫茂洽被授予都统使职位。
English: In the first year of the Wanli era, Momoocha was awarded the post of prefectural governor.

古文：三年遣使谢恩，贺即位，进方物，又补累年所缺之贡。
现代文：三年莫茂洽派使者向朝廷谢恩，祝贺万历皇帝即位，向皇帝进献特产，并补齐连年所缺的贡品。
English: Three years later, Momo sent an envoy to express his gratitude to the imperial court, congratulate Emperor Wanli on his accession to the throne, present special products to the emperor, and make up for the tribute that had been lacking for years.

古文：时莫氏渐衰，黎氏复兴，互相构兵，其国益多故。
现代文：此时莫氏的势力渐衰，黎氏势力复兴，他们互相构兵作战，安南国则更多变故。
English: At this time, Mo's power was waning, while Ri's power was reviving. They formed armies to fight against each other, while Annan's country saw more changes.

古文：始黎宁之据清华也，仍僣帝号，以嘉靖九年改元元和。
现代文：初始时黎宁占据清华期间，仍僭称帝号，把嘉靖九年改为元和元年。
English: At the beginning, when Lining occupied Tsinghua, he still pretended to be the emperor, and changed the nine years of Jiajing to Yuan and the first year.

古文：居四年，为登庸所攻，窜占城界。
现代文：过了四年，黎宁被莫登庸所攻，逃窜到占城界内。
English: After four years, Lining was attacked by Moden Yong and fled to within the city limits.

古文：国人立其弟宪，改元光照。
现代文：安南的国人便拥立他的弟弟黎宪，改纪元为光照。
English: Annan's compatriots then supported his younger brother, Rhee Heon, and changed the era to the Enlightenment.

古文：十五年廉知宁所在，迎归清华，后迁于漆马江。
现代文：十五年查访到黎宁所在的地方后，安南人将他迎回清华，后来迁到漆马江。
English: After fifteen years of visiting the place where Lining was, the Annan people welcomed him back to Tsinghua, and later moved to Chishima River.

古文：宁卒，其臣郑检立宁子宠。
现代文：黎宁去世后，他的大臣郑检扶立黎宁的儿子黎宠为王。
English: After the death of Liening, his minister Zheng Jianfu installed Liening's son Lijiao as king.

古文：宠卒，无子，国人共立黎晖四世孙维邦。
现代文：黎宠去世后没有子嗣，安南国人便共同拥立黎晖的四世孙黎维邦为王。
English: After the death of Licheng, who had no children, the people of Annam jointly supported Lihong's fourth generation, Sun Lvibang, as king.

古文：维邦卒，检子松立其子维潭，世居清华，自为一国。
现代文：黎维邦去世后，郑检的儿子郑松拥立黎维邦的儿子黎维潭为王，他们世代居住在清华，自成一国。
English: After the death of Lvibang, Zheng Song, the son of Zheng Guan, made Lvibang's son Lvytan king. They lived in Tsinghua for generations and became a country of their own.

古文：万历十九年，维潭渐强，举兵攻茂洽，茂洽败奔嘉林县。
现代文：万历十九年，黎维潭的势力逐渐强盛，便举兵攻打莫茂洽，莫茂洽失败后逃奔到嘉林县。
English: In the 19th year of Wanli, when the power of Liwitan gradually became strong, he raised an army to attack Momo Cai. After Momo Cai's defeat, he fled to Jialin County.

古文：明年冬，松诱土人内应，袭杀茂洽，夺其都统使印，亲党多遇害。
现代文：第二年冬，郑松引诱当地的土人作为内应，袭击并杀死了莫茂洽，夺取了他的都统使官印，莫茂洽的亲党大多也遇害。
English: In the winter of the following year, Zheng Song lured the local natives to act as his agents, attacked and killed Mo Mochao, and seized his imperial seal. Most of Mo Mochao's relatives were also killed.

古文：有莫敦让者，奔防城告难，总督陈蕖以闻。
现代文：有一个叫莫敦让的人，逃到防城告难，总督陈渠艹将此上报朝廷。
English: There was a man named Morton Jean, who fled to the defense of the city to complain, and Governor Chen Quan reported this to the imperial court.

古文：松复擒敦让，势益张。
现代文：郑松又擒获了莫敦让，势力更加扩张。
English: Zheng Song also captured Motun Jean, and his power expanded even more.

古文：茂洽子敬恭与宗人履逊等奔广西思陵州，莫履机奔钦州。
现代文：莫茂洽的儿子莫敬恭与宗人莫履逊等逃奔到广西的思陵州，莫履机逃奔到钦州。
English: Mo Maozhang's son, Mo Jingqiong, and his father-in-law, Morosong, fled to Silingzhou in Guangxi, and Morozhang fled to Qinzhou.

古文：独莫敬邦有众十余万，起京北道，击走黎党范拔萃、范百禄诸军，敦让得复归。
现代文：只有莫敬邦有军队十余万人，从京北道起兵，击溃了黎氏的同党范拔萃、范百禄诸军，莫敦让才得以复归。
English: Only when Mo Jingbang had an army of more than one hundred thousand people, raised an army from Beijing North Road, and defeated the army of Li's fellow party members, Fan Bajie and Fan Bailu, could Motongyan return.

古文：众乃推敬邦署都统，诸流寓思陵、钦州者悉还。
现代文：众人于是推举莫敬邦掌管都统事务，流居到广西思陵、钦州的人也都回来了。
English: The people then elected Mo Jingbang to be in charge of the affairs of the capital, and the people who had been exiled to Siling in Guangxi and Qinzhou also returned.

古文：黎兵攻南策州，敬邦被杀，莫氏势益衰。
现代文：黎氏的军队攻打南策州，莫敬邦被杀，于是莫氏的势力更加衰微。
English: Li's army attacked Nanze Prefecture, and Mo Jingbang was killed. As a result, Mo's power further declined.

古文：敬恭、敬用屯谅山高平，敬璋屯东海新安，惧黎兵追索，窜至龙州、凭祥界，令土官列状告当事。
现代文：莫敬恭、莫敬用屯驻谅山的高平，莫敬璋屯驻东海的新安，因怕黎氏军队追索，便逃窜到龙州、凭祥境内，让土官把具体的情况上报当地官府。
English: For fear of being pursued by Li's army, they fled to Longzhou and Pengxiang and asked the local officials to report the specific situation to the local government.

古文：维潭亦叩关求通贡，识以国王金印。
现代文：黎维潭也到广西来叩关要求向明朝廷通贡，以国王的金印作为标识。
English: Li Witan also came to Guangxi to demand tribute to the Ming court, using the king's gold seal as a mark.

古文：二十一年，广西巡抚陈大科等上言： 蛮邦易姓如弈棋，不当以彼之叛服为顺逆，止当以彼之叛我服我为顺逆。
现代文：二十一年，广西巡抚陈大科等人上疏说 ：蛮夷之邦国王易姓就如弈棋一样，不应当以彼国内部的叛逆顺服作为顺逆的标志，只应当以他们对我明朝廷是叛是服作为顺逆的标志。
English: In the 21st year, Chen Daike, the governor of Guangxi, and others said: the king of the barbarian state Yi surnamed is like a game of chess, and should not take the rebellious obedience within the country as a sign of rebellion, but should only take their rebellion against the court as a sign of rebellion.

古文：今维潭虽图恢复，而茂洽固天翰外臣也，安得不请命而扌间然戮之。
现代文：现今黎维潭虽然图谋恢复统治，而莫茂洽本来就是我明朝的外臣，怎么能不为他请命而让他猛然间遭杀戮呢。
English: Now, although Leviathan is plotting to restore its rule, how can Mo Mogao, who was originally my foreign minister in the Ming Dynasty, not ask for his life and let him be killed suddenly?

古文：窃谓黎氏擅兴之罪，不可不问。
现代文：我认为黎氏擅自兴兵之罪，不能不追究。
English: I think the Lai clan should be held accountable for the crime of raising an army without authorization.

古文：莫氏孑遗之绪，亦不可不存。
现代文：莫氏子遗，亦不能不保存。
English: The remains of Mo's son must also be preserved.

古文：倘如先朝故事，听黎氏纳款，而仍存莫氏，比诸漆马江，亦不翦其祀，于计为便。 
现代文：倘若像先朝的事例那样，听任黎氏投诚，也仍然保存莫氏，此之于当年的漆马江黎氏，亦不翦断他们的祀事，这样更好。 
English: It would have been better if, as in the case of the previous dynasty, the Li clan had been allowed to surrender and the Mo clan had been preserved, as was the case with the Chishima-Jiangli clan of that year, and their religious services had not been interrupted.

古文：廷议如其言。
现代文：朝廷大臣商量后决定按陈大科所述的那样行事。
English: The Imperial Court agreed to act in accordance with their proposal.

古文：明年，大科方遣官往察，敬用即遣使叩军门告难，且乞兵。
现代文：第二年，陈大科正派遣官员前去考察，莫敬用即派使者到军门告难，并请求陈大科出兵。
English: In the second year, Chen Daike was sending officials to investigate, and he sent an envoy to complain to the military and request Chen Daike to send troops.

古文：明年秋，维潭亦遣使谢罪，求款。
现代文：第二年秋天，黎维潭也派使者前来谢罪，请求投诚。
English: In the autumn of the following year, Liewitan also sent an envoy to Zeng to apologize and ask him to turn himself in.

古文：时大科已为两广总督，与广西巡抚戴耀并以属左江副使杨寅秋，寅秋窃计曰： 不拒黎，亦不弃莫，吾策定矣。 
现代文：这时陈大科已升为两广总督，他与广西巡抚戴耀一同嘱托左江副使杨寅秋办理此事。杨寅秋私下决定 ：不拒绝黎氏，也不弃莫氏。 
English: At this time, Chen Daike had been promoted to the governor of the two Guangxi Provinces. He and Dai Yao, the governor of Guangxi, jointly commissioned Yang Yinqiu, the deputy envoy of the Zuo River, to handle the matter. Yang Yinqiu privately decided: not to reject the Li clan, nor to abandon the Mo clan.

古文：两遣官往问，以敬恭等愿居高平来告，而维潭求款之使亦数至。
现代文：于是两头派官员前去勘问，结果莫敬恭等人愿意居住在高平，而黎维潭也几次派使者前来请求投诚。
English: As a result, officials from both sides went to inquire. As a result, Mo Jingqiong and others were willing to live in Gaoping, and Liewitan also sent envoys several times to request to surrender.

古文：寅秋乃与之期，具报督抚。
现代文：杨寅秋便与他们定下投诚日期，将此报告给总督和巡抚。
English: Yang Yinqiu set a date for the dedication ceremony with them and reported this to the governor and the governor.

古文：会敬璋率众赴永安，为黎氏兵击败，海东、新安地尽失，于是款议益决。
现代文：这时，正好莫敬璋率领众人赴永安，被黎氏的军队所击败，海东、新安的地盘尽数丧失，于是接受投诚的主意更为坚决。
English: At this time, it just so happened that Mo Jingyao led the people to Yong'an and was defeated by Li's army, losing as much territory as possible in Haidong and Xin'an, so he was more determined to accept the idea of defecting.

古文：时维潭图恢复名，不欲以登庸自处，无束身入关意。
现代文：这时的黎维潭想恢复名位，不想把自己比作莫登庸，因此没有把自己绑起来进关认罪的意思。
English: At that time, Leviathan wanted to restore his reputation and did not want to compare himself to Modenyang, so he did not want to tie himself up and plead guilty.

古文：寅秋复遣官谕之，其使者来报如约，至期忽言于关吏曰： 士卒饥病，款仪未备。
现代文：杨寅秋又派官员向黎维潭谕告投诚之事，黎维潭的使者来报告说投诚如约进行。到约定的投诚日期时，黎维潭忽然对边关的官吏说： 我士兵饥病交加，投诚的仪式无法准备。
English: Yang Yingqiu also sent officials to Li Wei Tan to announce the surrender. Li Wei Tan's emissary came to report that the surrender was carried out as scheduled. When the agreed surrender date arrived, Li Wei Tan suddenly said to the border officials: My soldiers are starving and ill, and the surrender ceremony cannot be prepared.

古文：且莫氏吾仇也，栖之高平，未敢闻命。 
现代文：况且莫氏是我的仇人，居住在高平，所以不敢听命马上投诚。 
English: Moreover, Mr. Mo is my enemy, he lives in Gaoping, so I dare not obey his order to immediately surrender.

古文：遂中宵遁去。
现代文：于是便在半夜逃走了。
English: So they fled in the middle of the night.

古文：大科等疏闻，谓其臣郑松专权所致。
现代文：陈大科等人将此上报朝廷，说是由于黎维潭的大臣郑松专权才致如此。
English: Chen Daike and others reported this to the imperial court, saying that it was due to the exclusive power of Zheng Song, the minister of Liewitan.

古文：维潭复遣使叩关，自己非遁。
现代文：黎维潭又派使者到边关求见，表白自己不是逃走。
English: Levithan also sent an envoy to the border to ask for an audience, confessing that he was not running away.

古文：大科等再遣官谕之，维潭听命。
现代文：陈大科等人便再次派官员前去谕告投诚之事，黎维潭听命服从。
English: Chen Daike and others once again sent officials to tell him to make a sincere pledge of allegiance, and Leviathan obeyed.

古文：二十五年遣使请期，寅秋示以四月。
现代文：二十五年黎维潭派使者前来询问日期，杨寅秋告诉他们在四月投诚。
English: In 2005, Liewitan sent envoys to inquire about the date, and Yang Yingqiu told them to cast their votes in April.

古文：郕期，维潭至关外，译者诘以六事。
现代文：届时，黎维潭到关外，译者问他六件事。
English: At that time, the translator asked him six things when Levithan was out of the customs.

古文：首擅杀茂洽，曰： 复仇急，不遑请命。 
现代文：第一件是擅自杀死莫茂洽，他答以 太急于复仇，来不及向朝廷请命 。
English: The first was the suicide of Mo Maoqiao, who replied that he was too eager for revenge to ask the court for an order.

古文：次维潭宗派，曰： 世孙也，祖晖，天朝曾锡命。 
现代文：第二件询问他的宗派，他说 我是世孙，祖先黎晖，朝廷曾经有赐命 。
English: The second question asked him about his religious denomination. He said that he was a descendant, an ancestor of Lihong, and that the imperial court had once given him an order.

古文：次郑松，曰： 此黎氏世臣，非乱黎氏也。 
现代文：第三件是询问郑松之事，黎维潭说： 他是黎氏世代的大臣，不是与黎氏捣乱的人。 
English: On the third question, about Zheng Song, Li Vitan said: He is a minister of Li's generation, not a troublemaker with Li.

古文：然则何宵遁，曰： 以仪物之不戒，非遁也。 
现代文：问他何以连夜逃走，他说： 因为举行仪式的物资不全，不是逃走。 
English: Asked why he fled in the middle of the night, he said: "Because the materials for holding the ceremony were not complete, not to escape.

古文：何以用王章，曰： 权仿为之，立销矣。 
现代文：问他为何使用国王的印章，他说 ：暂时仿着用一用，立刻就销毁。 
English: Asked why he used the king's seal, he said: "I used it as a temporary imitation and immediately destroyed it."

古文：惟割高平居莫氏，犹相持不绝。
现代文：只有在将高平之地割给莫氏方面，双方还相持不下。
English: Only in terms of assigning the high-level land to Mo, the two sides are still unable to keep up.

古文：复谕之曰： 均贡臣也，黎昔可栖漆马江，莫独不可栖高平乎？ 
现代文：陈大科等人又谕告说 ：大家都是朝廷的贡臣，黎氏昔日可居住在漆马江，莫氏就不能在高平栖息吗？ 
English: Chen Daike and others also announced: Everyone is a tributary of the imperial court. The Lai clan could live in the Chasma River in the past, but couldn't the Mo clan live in Gaoping?

古文：乃听命。
现代文：黎维潭这才听命。
English: It took a while for Shima to sit down.

古文：授以款关仪节，俾习之。
现代文：杨寅秋把款关仪节传授给他，让他去熟悉。
English: Yang Yinqiu taught him the customs of the ceremony and let him get familiar with it.

古文：维潭率其下入关谒御幄，一如登庸旧仪。
现代文：黎维潭率领他的下属入关拜谒御幄，一如莫登庸旧时的仪式。
English: Li Weitan led his subordinates into the gate to pay homage to the emperor, just like the old-time ceremony.

古文：退谒寅秋，请用宾主礼，不从，四拜成礼而退。
现代文：仪式完毕后，黎维潭去拜见杨寅秋，请求杨寅秋以宾主之礼相待，杨寅秋不答应。黎维潭于是四拜成礼而退。
English: After the ceremony, Li Vitan went to visit Yang Yingqiu, and asked Yang Yingqiu to treat him as a guest. Yang Yingqiu did not agree. Li Vitan then bowed and withdrew.

古文：安南复定。
现代文：安南再次安定。
English: Annan is stable again.

古文：诏授维潭都统使，颁历奉贡。一如莫氏故事。
现代文：皇帝下诏，授予黎维潭都统使职位，颁历法给他，让他如期奉贡给朝廷，就像以前莫氏一样。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict, conferred the post of general envoy to the capital on Li Wei Tan, issued a calendar to him, and asked him to pay tribute to the imperial court as scheduled, just as Mo had done before.

古文：先是，黎利及登庸进代身金人，皆囚首面缚，维潭以恢复名正，独立而肃容。
现代文：先前，黎利和莫登庸向朝廷进献代表自身本人的金人，都是囚首缚面的形状，黎维潭认为自己是恢复正名，其金人是立而肃容的形象。
English: Previously, Lili and Moden Yong presented to the imperial court a golden man representing themselves, both in the shape of a prisoner's head. Lili believed that he was restoring his rightful name, and his golden man was the image of a standing and solemn figure.

古文：当事嫌其倨，令改制，乃为俯伏状，镌其背曰： 安南黎氏世孙，臣黎维潭不得蒲伏天门，恭进代身金人，悔罪乞恩。 
现代文：接受金人的官员嫌该形象过于倨傲，让他改制，便成为俯伏状，在金人背上镌刻有字 ：安南黎氏世孙，臣子黎维潭不能亲自匍伏在朝廷门前，恭进代身金人，悔罪乞恩。 
English: The officials who received the gold man thought the image was too proud, and asked him to change it, so it became a prostrate figure. On the gold man's back was engraved the words: "Annan, the grandson of the Li family, and the vassal of Li Witan, cannot personally prostrate themselves in front of the imperial court, but enter on behalf of the gold man, and beg for forgiveness."

古文：自是，安南复为黎氏有，而莫氏但保高平一郡。
现代文：从此以后，安南又属黎氏所有，而莫氏只保有高平一个郡。
English: Since then, Annam has belonged to the Lai clan, while the Mo clan has only retained one county, Gapyeong.

古文：二十七年，维潭卒，子维新嗣，郑松专其柄。
现代文：二十七年，黎维潭去世，其儿子黎维新继嗣官位，郑松专擅权柄。
English: In the 27th year, Li Wei Tan died, and his son Li Wei Xin succeeded to the official position, and Zheng Song exclusively held the power.

古文：会叛酋潘彦构乱，维新与松移保清化。
现代文：碰上叛背的酋长潘彦作乱，黎维新和郑松移兵保清化。
English: When the renegade chieftain Pan Yan caused a riot, Li Weixin and Zheng Song moved their troops to protect and purify the area.

古文：三十四年遣使入贡，命授都统使。
现代文：三十四年他们派使者向朝廷进贡，朝廷命令授予黎维新都统使职务。
English: In 34 A.D. they sent an envoy to pay tribute to the imperial court, and the imperial court ordered that Levy be given the post of imperial envoy to the new capital.

古文：时莫氏宗党多窜处海隅，往往僣称公侯伯名号，侵轶边境，维新亦不能制。
现代文：此时莫氏宗亲多逃窜到海边，往往自称公侯伯的名号，侵犯我国边境，黎维新也无法制止。
English: At this time, most of Mo's relatives fled to the coast, often claiming the title of prince and invading China's borders, and Li Weixin could not stop them.

古文：守臣檄问，数发兵夹剿，虽应时破灭，而边方颇受其害。
现代文：守卫大臣发檄文问罪，数次发兵与安南军一起夹剿，虽然及时将他们击败并消灭，但边境一带已颇受其害。
English: The Minister of Defense issued a stern warning, and several times dispatched troops to clash with Annan's army. Although they were defeated and eliminated in time, the border area has suffered a lot.

古文：维新卒，子维祺嗣。
现代文：黎维新死后，其儿子黎维祺继嗣。
English: After the death of Levishin, his son Levishin became his successor.

古文：天启四年，发兵击莫敬宽，克之，杀其长子，掠其妻妾及少子以归。
现代文：天启四年，他发兵出击莫敬宽，攻克之后，杀了莫敬宽的长子，将其妻妾和小儿子掳掠回来。
English: In the fourth year of the Apocalypse, he sent an army to attack Mo Jing Kuan. After conquering, he killed Mo Jing Kuan's eldest son, and abducted his wife, concubine, and younger son.

古文：敬宽与次子逃入山中，复回高平，势益弱。
现代文：莫敬宽与第二个儿子一起逃入山中，重回高平，其势力更弱。
English: Mok Kinhwan fled into the mountains with his second son and returned to Gapyeong, where his power was even weaker.

古文：然迄明之世，二姓分据，终不能归一云。
现代文：然而终明朝之世，安南都是二姓分据，最终都无法统一。
English: However, by the end of the Ming Dynasty, Annan had been divided into two surnames, which ultimately could not be unified.

古文：安南都会在交州，即唐都护治所。
现代文：安南的都会在交州，就是唐代的都护治所。
English: The capital of Annan was in Jiaozhou, which was the capital of Tang Dynasty.

古文：其疆域东距海，西接老挝，南渡海即占城，北连广西之思明、南宁，云南之临安、元江。
现代文：其疆域东靠海，西接老挝，南边渡过海就是占城，北部连接中国广西的思明、南宁，云南的临安、元江。
English: Its territory is bordered by the sea in the east, Laos in the west, and the city of Champa in the south across the sea. In the north, it is connected to Siming and Nanning in Guangxi, and Lin'an and Yuanjiang in Yunnan.

古文：土膏腴，气候热，谷岁二稔。
现代文：安南的土地肥沃，气候炎热，稻谷一年二稔。
English: The land in Annan is fertile, the climate is hot, and the rice crop is harvested twice a year.

古文：人性犷悍。
现代文：安南人性格犷悍。
English: The Annan people have a strong character.

古文：驩、演二州多文学，交、爱二州多倜傥士，较他方为异。
现代文：州、演州多文学，交州、爱州多倜傥之士，这与其他地方有所差别。
English: There are many literati in Zhuzhou and Yanzhou, and there are many talented people in Jiaozhou and Aizhou, which is different from other places.

