古文：麻姑玄俗妻阳都女孙夫人樊夫人东陵圣母郝姑张玉兰
现代文：麻姑玄俗妻阳都女孙夫人樊夫人东陵圣母郝姑张玉兰
English: Magu's wife, Yangdu's granddaughter, Lady Zou's wife, Dongling's mother, Zhang Yulan

古文：麻姑
现代文：麻姑
English: Maku

古文：汉孝桓帝时，神仙王远，字方平，降于蔡经家。
现代文：汉孝桓帝时，神仙王远字方平，降临到蔡经家。
English: During the reign of Emperor Han Xiaokuan, the immortal Wang Yuan, also known as Fang Ping, came to the Caijing family.

古文：将至一时顷，闻金鼓箫管人马之声，及举家皆见，王方平戴远游冠，着朱衣，虎头鞶囊，五色之绶，带剑，少须，黄色，中形人也。
现代文：将要来到还有一会儿的时候，听到金鼓箫管人马的声音，蔡经及全家人都看见王远戴着远游冠，穿着红色衣服，腰挂虎头鞶囊，佩着五色绶带，带着剑，胡须少而黄，是个中等身形的人。
English: In a few moments to come, hearing the sound of the golden drum beating, Cai Jing and the whole family saw Wang Yuan wearing a long-distance crown, wearing red clothes, wearing a tiger's head pouch, wearing a five-color ribbon, carrying a sword, with a short yellow beard. He was a medium-sized man.

古文：乘羽车，驾五龙，龙各异色，麾节幡旗，前后导从，威仪奕奕，如大将军。
现代文：他乘着有羽毛的车，驾着五条龙，龙的颜色各异，旗幡招展，前导后从，威仪鲜明，像个大将军。
English: He rode in a car with feathers, driving five dragons, the colors of the dragons were different, the flags were fluttering, leading and following, the dignity was clear, like a great general.

古文：鼓吹皆乘麟，从天而下，悬集于庭，从官皆长丈余，不从道行。
现代文：吹鼓手都乘坐麒麟，他们从天而下，在蔡经家的院子上空悬空聚集，跟从的官员都一丈多高，不从道上走。
English: The trumpeters all ride on the unicorns. They come down from the sky and gather in the sky over the courtyard of Cai Jing's house. The officials who follow them are as tall as they are and do not walk on the road.

古文：既至，从官皆隐，不知所在，唯见方平，与经父母兄弟相见。
现代文：到了以后，跟从的官员都隐去，不知在哪，只见到王远与蔡经的父母兄弟相见。
English: After arriving, the officials who followed him all disappeared, I don't know where, only to see Wang Yuan meet Cai Jing's parents and brothers.

古文：独坐久之，即令人相访。经家亦不知麻姑何人也。
现代文：王远独坐很久，就令人去拜访麻姑，蔡经家里的人也不知麻姑是什么人。
English: Wang Yuan sat alone for a long time, so people went to visit Ma Gu, and the people in Cai Jing's family did not know who Ma Gu was.

古文：言曰： 王方平敬报姑，余久不在人间，今集在此，想姑能暂来语乎？ 
现代文：王远教使者说： 王方平敬告麻姑，我很久不在人间，今天在此停留，想必麻姑能暂来叙话吗？ 
English: Wang Yuan's messenger said: Wang Fangping told Ma Gu, "I have not been on earth for a long time, and I am staying here today. I wonder if Ma Gu can come and narrate for a while."

古文：有顷，使者还。
现代文：过了一会儿，使者回来了。
English: After a while, the messenger returned.

古文：不见其使，但闻其语云： 麻姑再拜，不见忽已五百余年，尊卑有叙，修敬无阶，烦信来，承在彼。
现代文：人们看不见使者，只听他报告说： 麻姑再拜，一晃已经五百多年没有见面了，但尊卑有序，敬奉没有机会，麻烦你派使者，很快来到我这里。
English: People couldn't see the messenger, but only heard him report: "Ma Gu, goodbye. It's been more than five hundred years since I've seen you, but there's an order of superiority and inferiority, and there's no opportunity for obeisance. Please send a messenger to come to me soon."

古文：登山颠倒而先受命，当按行蓬莱，今便暂往。如是当还，还便亲觐，愿来即去。 
现代文：我先已受命，说巡查蓬莱，现在就暂去，如此当回还，回来后就亲自去拜见。 
English: I have been ordered to inspect Penglai first, so I will go there for the time being, then I will return, and when I return, I will go to see him in person.

古文：如此两时间，麻姑至矣。
现代文：如此两个时辰，麻姑来了。
English: At two o'clock, Magu arrived.

古文：来时亦先闻人马箫鼓声。
现代文：来时人们也是先听到人马箫鼓的声音。
English: When people arrive, they first hear the sound of people and horses beating drums.

古文：既至，从官半于方平。
现代文：到达以后，看到她的随从官员比王远少一半。
English: Upon arrival, she saw that her entourage of officials was far less than half of Wang's.

古文：麻姑至，蔡经亦举家见之。
现代文：麻姑到时，蔡经全家也都看到了。
English: After Ma Gu arrived, Cai Jing led the whole family to visit her.

古文：是好女子，年十八九许，于顶中作髻，余发垂至腰。
现代文：是个美貌女子，年纪在十八九岁左右，在头顶当中梳了一个发髻，其余的头发都垂到腰际。
English: She was a beautiful woman, about eighteen or nineteen years old, with her hair in a middle bun on top of her head and the rest of her hair down to her waist.

古文：其衣有文章，而非锦绮，光彩耀目，不可名状。
现代文：她的衣服有花纹，却不是锦缎，光彩耀眼，不可用语言形容。
English: Her dress was patterned, but not brocaded, with a radiance too dazzling for words.

古文：入拜方平，方平为之起立。
现代文：麻姑进去拜见王远，王远也为她起立。
English: Maha-gu went in to see Wang Yuan, and Wang Yuan stood up for her.

古文：坐定，召进行厨，皆金盘玉杯，肴膳多是诸花果，而香气达于内外。
现代文：坐下以后，王远召人端进饮食，都是金盘玉杯，饭菜多半是各种花果，香气传到室内外。
English: After sitting down, Wang Yuan invited people to eat and drink, all of which were golden plates and jade cups. The meals were mostly a variety of flowers and fruits, and the aroma was transmitted indoors and out.

古文：擘脯行之，如柏灵，云是麟脯也。
现代文：切开干肉传给大家吃，觉得这干肉像是炙烤过的貊脯，仙人说是麒麟脯。
English: He cut up the dried meat and passed it around for everyone to eat. He thought the dried meat looked like a roasted toad, but the hermit said it was a unicorn toad.

古文：麻姑自说云： 接侍以来，已见东海三为桑田。
现代文：麻姑说道： 我从认识您以来，已经看到东海三次变为桑田了。
English: At this time, Magu said to Wang Yuan, Since I last received you, I have seen the East China Sea turn into a mulberry field three times.

古文：向到蓬莱，水又浅于往者会时略半也。
现代文：刚才到蓬莱，海水又比往昔聚会时浅得几乎有一半了。
English: When we arrived at Penglai just now, the sea water was almost half as shallow as when we used to meet.

古文：岂将复还为陵陆乎？ 
现代文：难道将要再还回变作山陵陆地吗？ 
English: Is it going to turn back into a mountainous land again?

古文：方平笑曰： 圣人皆言海中复扬尘也。 
现代文：王远笑着说： 圣人都说海中又要尘吐飞扬了。 
English: Wang Yuan said with a smile: The sages say that the dust will fly in the sea again.

古文：姑欲见蔡经母及妇侄，时弟妇新产数十日，麻姑望见乃知之，曰：噫！
现代文：麻姑想要见一见蔡经的母亲和妇人侄女，当时蔡经的弟妇刚生孩子几十天，麻姑望见就知道了，她说： 唉！
English: Ma Gu wanted to see Cai Jing's mother and the woman's niece. At that time, Cai Jing's younger sister had just given birth to a baby a few weeks ago. Ma Gu knew it when she saw it. She said: Alas!

古文：且止勿前。 
现代文：暂且停步不必前来。 
English: You don't have to come.

古文：即求少许米，得米便撒之掷地，视其米，皆成真珠矣。
现代文：就要了一点点米，麻姑接到米就把它撒掷到地上，一看那些米，全变成珍珠了。
English: She asked for a little bit of rice, and when she received it, she threw it on the ground. When she looked at the rice, it had all turned into pearls.

古文：方平笑曰： 麻姑年少，吾老矣，了不喜复作此狡狯变化也。 
现代文：王远笑着说： 麻姑依旧年轻，我老了。一点也不喜欢再做这种狡猾欺诈的变化了。 
English: Wang Yuan said with a smile: Magu is still young, I am old. I don't like to do this kind of cunning and deceptive change at all.

古文：方平语经家人曰： 吾欲赐汝辈酒。
现代文：王远告诉蔡经的家人说： 我想要赏给你们这些人酒喝。
English: Wang Yuan told Cai Jing's family, "I want to reward you people with wine.

古文：此酒乃出天厨，其味醇醲，非世人所宜饮，饮之或能烂肠。
现代文：这种酒乃是天厨酿出，它的味道醇醲，不适宜世人饮用，喝了它或许烂肠。
English: This kind of wine is brewed by heaven's kitchen, its taste is mellow, it is not suitable for the world to drink, it may be bad for the stomach.

古文：今当以水和之，汝辈勿怪也。 
现代文：今天得用水调和它，你们不要责怪。 
English: Don't blame yourselves if you have to mix it with water today.

古文：乃以一升酒，合水一斗搅之，赐经家饮一升许。
现代文：就拿一升酒兑入一斗水搅拌了以后，赐给蔡经家人每人喝了一升左右。
English: After pouring a liter of wine into a bucket of water and stirring it, he gave each of Cai Jing's family members about a liter to drink.

古文：良久酒尽，方平语左右曰： 不足远取也，以千钱与余杭姥相闻，求其沽酒。 
现代文：过了很久，酒喝光了，王远告诉左右的人说： 不值得到远处去取，拿一千个大钱给余杭姥，告诉她求她打酒。 
English: After a long time, the wine ran out, Wang Yuan told the people around him: "It's not worth getting far away to get it, take a thousand big money to Grandma Yu Hang, tell her to beg her to drink.

古文：须臾信还，得一油囊酒，五斗许。
现代文：不一会儿，使者回来了，买到一油囊酒，有五斗左右。
English: The man who had been sent to buy wine came back a moment later and bought a sack of wine, more than five barrels.

古文：信传余杭姥答言： 恐地上酒不中尊饮耳。 
现代文：信使转述余杭姥的答话说： 只恐怕地上的酒不适合您喝。 
English: The messenger relayed Grandma Yuhang's reply: "I'm afraid the wine on the ground is not suitable for you to drink."

古文：又麻姑鸟爪，蔡经见之，心中念言： 背大痒时，得此爪以爬背，当佳。 
现代文：另外，麻姑有鸟爪被蔡经看到了，他就在心里默念说： 脊背大痒时，能得此爪来抓痒，该很舒服。 
English: In addition, when Cai Jing saw that Ma Gu had a bird's claw, he silently said in his heart: When the spine is itchy, it should be very comfortable to get this claw to scratch the itch.

古文：方平已知经心中所念，即使人牵经鞭之。
现代文：王远已经知道蔡经心中想什么，就派人把蔡经拉走用鞭子抽打。
English: Wang Yuan already knew what Cai Jing was thinking, so he sent someone to drag Cai Jing away and beat him with a whip.

古文：谓曰： 麻姑神人也，汝何思谓爪可以爬背耶？ 
现代文：对他说： 麻姑是神人，你怎么想用麻姑的爪可以抓痒呢？ 
English: I said to him, "Magu is a divine being. How can you think that you can scratch an itch with the claws of Magu?

古文：但见鞭着经背，亦不见有人持鞭者。
现代文：只见鞭子落在蔡经的背上，也不见有拿鞭子的人。
English: I only saw the whip fall on Cai Jing's back, and I didn't see anyone holding the whip.

古文：方平告经曰： 吾鞭不可妄得也。 
现代文：王远告诉蔡经说： 我的鞭打也不是随便可以得到的。 
English: Wang Yuan told Cai Jing that: My whipping is not something that can be obtained casually.

古文：是日，又以一符传授蔡经邻人陈尉，能檄召鬼魔，救人治疾。
现代文：这一天，王远又把一张符传授给蔡经的邻人陈尉，这张符能檄召鬼魔，救人治病。
English: On this day, Wang Yuan also passed on a charm to Cai Jing's neighbor Chen Li. This charm can summon demons, save people and cure diseases.

古文：蔡经亦得解蜕之道，如蜕蝉耳，经常从王君游山海。
现代文：蔡经也获得了解蜕之道，像蝉蜕那样，经常跟随王君游山海。
English: Cai Jing also learned the way of the cicadas. Like the cicadas, she often followed Wang Jun to travel the mountains and seas.

古文：或暂归家，王君亦有书与陈尉，多是篆文，或真书字，廓落而大，陈尉世世宝之。
现代文：有时偶尔回家，王君也有信捎给陈尉，多是篆文，有的是楷书字，字写得松散而且大，陈尉家里世世代代把它当作宝贝。
English: From time to time, Wang Jun would occasionally come home with a letter addressed to Chen Fei. Most of the letters were handwritten, but some were written in block letters. The writing was loose and large, and Chen Fei's family treasured it for generations.

古文：宴毕，方平、麻姑命驾升天而去，箫鼓道从如初焉。
现代文：那次宴会完毕，王远、麻姑命驾升天而去，箫鼓导从像当初来时一样。
English: After the banquet was over, Wang Yuan and Ma Gu ascended to heaven, and the gong and drum instructors remained as they were when they first arrived.

古文：玄俗妻
现代文：玄俗妻
English: The Real Housewives of Windsor

古文：河间王女者，玄俗妻也。
现代文：河间王的女儿，是玄俗的妻子。
English: The daughter of the king of Kawama is the wife of a mystic.

古文：玄俗得神仙之道，住河间已数百年。
现代文：玄俗获得神仙之道，住在河间已经几百年了。
English: It has been hundreds of years since the occult gained access to the ways of the gods and lived in Kawama.

古文：乡人言常见之，日中无影。
现代文：乡人说常常见到他，在太阳底下没有影子。
English: The villagers say that they often see him and that there is no shadow under the sun.

古文：唯饵巴豆云母，亦卖之于都市，七丸一钱，可愈百病。
现代文：只吃巴豆云母，也到都市去卖它，七丸药一个钱，可以治愈百病。
English: Only eat mica, also go to the city to sell it, seven pills for one dollar, can cure all diseases.

古文：河间王有病，买服之，下蛇十余头。
现代文：河间王有病，买他的药吃了，打下十多条蛇。
English: Kawama Wang was ill, bought his medicine, ate it, and shot down more than ten snakes.

古文：问其药意，答言： 王之所以病，乃六世余殃所致，非王所招也，王尝放乳鹿，即麟母也。
现代文：河间王问他用药意图，他回答说： 大王有病的原因，乃是六世余殃造成的，不是大王招来的。大王曾经释放一头哺乳期的母鹿，这母鹿就是麒麟之母。
English: When Kawama no Okimi asked him about his intention to use the medicine, he replied, "The reason why Okimi is ill is the result of the sixth generation's remaining plague, not the result of Okimi's invitation. Okimi once released a lactating doe, which was the mother of Kirin.

古文：仁心感天，固当遇我耳。 
现代文：你的仁慈之心感动了天，本来应当遇到我。 
English: Your kindness touched the heavens, and you should have met me.

古文：王家老舍人云： 尝见父母说，玄俗日中无影。 
现代文：王家一个老舍人说： 曾听父母说过，玄俗在日光中没有影子。 
English: An elder of the Wang family said: I once heard my parents say that there is no shadow of the occult in the sunlight.

古文：王召而视之果验。
现代文：河间王就把玄俗召来，一看果然如此。
English: The king of Kawama summoned the world of the occult, and at first glance, that is exactly what happened.

古文：王女幼绝荤血。洁净好道。
现代文：河间王的女儿小时候就断了荤腥，清净好道。
English: When she was a child, King Kawama's daughter broke away from the pompous life and followed a pure and virtuous path.

古文：王以此女妻之。
现代文：河间王就把这个女儿嫁给了玄俗。
English: King Kawama then married this daughter off to Hanzo.

古文：居数年，与女俱入常山，时有见者。
现代文：住了几年后，玄俗与河间王的女儿一起进了常山，偶尔有人看到他们。
English: After living there for a few years, Xuanzang went into the Changshan Mountains with the daughter of the King of Kawama, and they were occasionally seen.

古文：阳都女
现代文：阳都女
English: Yangdu Womens Choir

古文：阳都女，阳都市酒家女也。
现代文：阳都女，是阳都市中卖酒人家的女儿。
English: Yangdu woman, is the daughter of a wine seller in Yangcheng.

古文：生有异相，眉连，耳细长。
现代文：她生得有异相：两眉相连，耳朵细长。
English: She was born with unusual features: her eyebrows are joined and her ears are elongated.

古文：众以为异，疑其天人也。
现代文：众人因此觉得奇异，疑心她是天人。
English: As a result, people thought it was strange and suspected that she was a divine being.

古文：时有黑山仙人犊子者，邺人也。
现代文：当时有人黑山仙人叫做犊子的，是邺县人。
English: At that time, there was a Montenegrin hermit called Zangzi, who was from Zangxian.

古文：常居黑山，采松子茯苓饵之，已数百年，莫知其姓名。
现代文：常住在黑山，采松子、茯苓用它当食物，已经几百年了，没有人知道他的姓名。
English: He has been living in Montenegro, picking pine nuts and using them as food for hundreds of years. No one knows his name.

古文：常乘犊，时人号为犊子。
现代文：因为他经常骑着牛犊，当时的人称他为犊子。
English: Because he often rode a yakitori, people at the time called him a mule.

古文：时壮时老，时丑时美。
现代文：这个犊子有时强壮有时衰老，有时丑陋有时漂亮。
English: This mule is sometimes strong, sometimes old, sometimes ugly, sometimes beautiful.

古文：来往阳都，酒家女悦之，遂相奉侍。
现代文：来往阳都，酒家女喜欢他，就奉侍他。
English: He comes and goes to Yangdu, the tavern maid likes him, and serves him.

古文：一旦女随犊子出取桃，一宿而返，得桃甚多，连叶甘美，异于常桃。
现代文：有一天，酒家女随着犊子外出去取桃，过了一夜回来，得桃很多，连叶子都很甜美，与普通的桃不同。
English: One day, the tavern maid went out with the mule to fetch peaches. She came back after a night and got a lot of peaches. Even the leaves were very sweet, different from ordinary peaches.

古文：邑人俟其去时，既出门，二人共牵犊耳而走，其速如飞，人不能追。
现代文：县里的人等着他出去的时候去看，出门以后，两个人共同牵着牛的耳朵走，其快如飞，人们不能追上。
English: People in the county waited for him to go out to see the cow. After he left, the two of them walked together holding the cow's ears. It was so fast that people couldn't catch up with it.

古文：如是且还，复在市中数十年，夫妇俱去。
现代文：如此又回来，又在市中住了几十年，后来夫妻一起走了。
English: So they came back, lived in the city for decades, and then left together.

古文：后有见在潘山之下，冬卖桃枣焉。
现代文：此后有人在潘山之下看到他们，冬天在那里卖桃卖枣。
English: Since then, some people have seen them at the foot of Mount Pan, where they sell peaches and dates in winter.

古文：孙夫人
现代文：孙夫人
English: Mrs. Sun

古文：孙夫人，三天法师张道陵之妻也。
现代文：孙夫人，是三天法师张道陵的妻子。
English: Mrs. Sun is the wife of the three-day mage Zhang Daoling.

古文：同隐龙虎山，修三元默朝之道积年，累有感应。
现代文：他们夫妻共同隐居在龙虎山，修行三元默朝之道多年，屡有感应。
English: The husband and wife lived together in seclusion in Longhu Mountain, practised the way of the Three Element Meditation for many years, and had many inspirations.

古文：时天师得黄帝龙虎中丹之术，丹成服之，能分形散影，坐在立亡。
现代文：当时张天师得到了黄帝龙虎中丹之术，丹炼成喝了，能够分形散影，坐在那立时无影。
English: At that time, Zhang Tianshi obtained the Yellow Emperor's dragon and tiger in Dan's rune, Dan refined into a drink, able to disperse the fractal, sitting there instantly without a shadow.

古文：天师自鄱，阳入嵩高山，得隐书《制命之术》，能策召鬼神。
现代文：天师从鄱阳进入嵩高山，得到隐书《制命之术》，能用拐杖召鬼神。
English: The heavenly teacher entered Songgaoshan from Shenyang, obtained the secret book "The Art of Controlling Life," and was able to summon ghosts and gods with a crutch.

古文：时海内纷扰，在位多危。
现代文：当时国内纷扰。当官的危机很多。
English: At that time, there was a lot of turmoil in the country, and there were many crises in the government.

古文：又大道凋丧，不足以拯危佐世。
现代文：又加上大道沦丧，不能拯救危难帮助世人。
English: Coupled with the decline of the road, it can not save the peril and help the world.

古文：年五十方修道。
现代文：年已五十才去修行道术。
English: It has been fifty years since I started to practice Daoism.

古文：及丹成，又二十余年。
现代文：等到丹炼成了，又过去二十多年。
English: By the time the dan is refined, more than twenty years have passed.

古文：既术用精妙，遂入蜀，游诸名山，率身行教。
现代文：法术运用精妙以后，就入蜀游历各名山，率身行教。
English: After the skillful use of magic, he went to Shou to travel around the famous mountains and taught himself.

古文：夫人栖真江表，道化甚行。
现代文：夫人住在江东修真养性，道化甚行。
English: My wife lives in the east of the Yangtze River, where she cultivates the virtues of truth and morality.

古文：以汉桓帝永嘉元年乙酉到蜀，居阳平化，炼金液还丹。
现代文：在汉桓帝永嘉元年乙酉到蜀，在阳平化居住，炼金液还丹。
English: In the first year of Emperor Yongjia of the Han Dynasty, Acetylene came to Shu, lived in Yangpinghua, and refined gold.

古文：依太乙无君所授黄帝之法，积年丹成，变形飞化，无所不能。
现代文：依照太乙元君所传授黄帝之法，过了几年丹炼成了，变形飞化无所不能。
English: According to the method of the Yellow Emperor taught by Tai Yi Yuanjun, after a few years, Dan was refined, and deformation and transformation were omnipotent.

古文：以桓帝永寿二年丙申，九月九日，与天师于阆中云台化，白日升天，位至上真东岳夫人。
现代文：在桓帝永寿二年丙申九月九日，与天师在阆中的云台成仙，白日升天，位至上真东岳夫人。
English: On September 9th, the second year of Emperor Kuan's eternal life, Yuntai, who was with the heavenly teacher in the cocoon, became a celestial being and ascended to heaven during the day, becoming the wife of Shang Zhen Dongyue.

古文：子衡，字灵真，继志修炼，世号嗣师，以灵帝光和二年，岁在己未，正月二十三日，于阳平化，白日升天。
现代文：他们的儿子张衡字灵真，继承他们的志向修炼，世人称他为嗣师，在灵帝光和二年，岁在己未，正月二十三日，于阳平成仙，白日升天。
English: Their son, Zhang Hengzhi Lingzhen, inherited their aspiration and cultivation, and the world called him the successor. He was two years old at the time of Lingdi's birth, and on the 23rd day of the first month of the year, he became immortal and ascended to heaven.

古文：孙鲁，守公期，世号嗣师，当汉祚陵夷，中土纷乱，为梁益二州牧，镇南将军，理于汉中。
现代文：他们的孙子张鲁字公期，世人称他为嗣师，正当汉朝国运衰颓，中原纷乱，他担任梁州、益州两州长官、镇南将军，在汉中治理军政。
English: During the reign of their grandson, Zhang Ruzi Gong, the world called him the successor. When the Han Dynasty was in decline and the Central Plains was in turmoil, he served as the governor of Liangzhou and Yizhou and the general of Zhenan, and governed military affairs in the Han Dynasty.

古文：魏祖行灵帝之命，就加爵秩。
现代文：曹操发布灵帝的命运，又给他加爵进俸。
English: Cao Cao announced Lingdi's fate and gave him a knighthood.

古文：旋以刘璋失蜀，蜀先主举兵，公期托化归真，隐影而去。
现代文：不久，因为刘璋丢失了蜀，刘备起兵，张鲁托形死亡归真，隐影而去。
English: Soon, because Liu Wei lost Shu, Liu Bei raised an army, and Zhang Ruto's death came true, and he disappeared.

古文：初，夫人居化中，远近钦奉，礼谒如市。
现代文：当初，夫人居于化中，远近之人都恭敬信奉她，礼拜的人像赶集市一般。
English: At the beginning, my wife was in the middle of her transformation, and people near and far revered and believed in her. The worshipers were like people rushing to the market.

古文：遂于山趾化一泉，使礼奉之人，以其水盥沐，然后方诣道静。
现代文：夫人就在山脚下点化一泉，使以礼敬奉她的人，用泉水洗浴，然后才去入道静修。
English: She lit a spring at the foot of the mountain, so that those who worshipped her with reverence could bathe in the spring water before going to the monastery for meditation.

古文：号曰解秽水，至今在焉。
现代文：那处泉水称作解秽水，至今还在那里。
English: That spring, called the Decontamination Spring, is still there.

古文：山有三重，以象三境。
现代文：山有三层，以像征三境。
English: The mountain has three layers, symbolizing the three realms.

古文：其前有白阳池，即太上老君游宴之所，后有登真洞，与青城、峨眉、青衣山、西玄山洞府相通，故为二十四化之首也。
现代文：山前有白阳池，就是太上老君游宴之处，山后有登真洞，与青城、峨眉、青衣山、西玄山洞府相通，所以成为二十四化之首。
English: In front of the mountain, there is the Baiyang Pond, which is the place where the Grand Empress Dowager Laojun held a banquet, and behind the mountain, there is the Dengzhen Cave, which is connected to Qingcheng, Emei, Qingling Mountain, and Xiguan Mountain Cave Town, so it has become the head of the 24 transformations.

古文：樊夫人
现代文：樊夫人
English: Mrs. Zou

古文：樊夫人者，刘纲妻也。
现代文：樊夫人是刘纲的妻子。
English: Mrs. Zou is Liu Gang's wife.

古文：纲仕为上虞令，有道术，能檄召鬼神，禁制变化之事。
现代文：刘纲做上虞县令，有道术，能传檄召鬼神，以及禁制变化一类事。
English: Liu Gang is a Shangyu County magistrate, has Taoism, can preach and summon ghosts and gods, and forbids changes.

古文：亦潜修密证，人莫能知。
现代文：他也是悄悄地修行秘密地学成的，没有人能知道。
English: He also quietly practiced and secretly learned, no one could know.

古文：为理尚清静简易，而政令宣行，民受其惠，无水旱疫毒鸷暴之伤，岁岁大丰。
现代文：办理政事崇尚清静简易，而政令发布施行，老百姓就受到他的恩惠，没有水旱疫毒猛兽伤害，年年大丰收。
English: He advocated cleanness, tranquility and simplicity in handling government affairs, and when the decree was issued and implemented, the people received his favor, there was no damage from floods, droughts, epidemics, and poisonous beasts, and there was a large harvest every year.

古文：暇日，常与夫人较其术用。
现代文：闲暇的日子，与夫人较量他们的法术效用。
English: In his spare time, he tests the effectiveness of his spells with his wife.

古文：俱坐堂上，纲作火烧客碓屋，从东起，夫人禁之即灭。
现代文：一起坐在堂上，刘纲作火烧磨房，火从东起，夫人禁咒火就灭了。
English: Sitting together in the hall, Liu Gang made a fire to burn the mill, the fire started from the east, and the fire was extinguished.

古文：庭中两株桃，夫妻各咒一株，使相斗击。
现代文：院子中有两株桃树，夫妻各自念动咒语催动，使两棵树互相斗击。
English: There were two peach trees in the yard, and the husband and wife each recited a spell to make the two trees fight each other.

古文：良久，纲所咒者不如，数走出篱外。
现代文：过了很久，刘纲驱动的树失败了，几步走出篱笆外。
English: After a long time, Liu Gang drove the tree failed, a few steps out of the fence.

古文：纲唾盘中，即成鲤鱼。
现代文：刘纲向盘子中唾一口唾沫，就变成了鲤鱼。
English: Liu Gang spat a mouthful of spit onto the plate and it turned into eel.

古文：夫人唾盘中成獭，食鱼。
现代文：夫人向盘子中唾一口唾沫，变成了水獭，去吃鱼。
English: Madam spat a mouthful of spit into the dish, turned into a leech, and went to eat the fish.

古文：纲与夫人入四明山，路阻虎，纲禁之，虎伏不敢动，适欲往，虎即灭之。
现代文：刘纲与夫人进入四明山，路被虎堵住，刘纲禁咒它，虎就趴着不敢动，刚要走，虎就要吃掉他。
English: Liu Gang and his wife entered Shiming Mountain. The road was blocked by a tiger. Liu Gang cursed it. The tiger lay down and did not dare to move. As soon as he wanted to leave, the tiger would eat him.

古文：夫人径前，虎即面向地，不敢仰视，夫人以绳系虎于床脚下。
现代文：夫人径直住前走，虎就面向地，不敢仰视，夫人用绳索把虎拴在床脚下。
English: The lady walked straight ahead, the tiger faced the ground, not daring to look up, and the lady tethered the tiger with a rope at the foot of the bed.

古文：纲每共试术，事事不胜。
现代文：刘纲每次和夫人共同试法术，总是不胜。
English: Every time Liu Gang and his wife try magic together, they always fail.

古文：将升天，县厅侧先有大皂荚树，纲升树数丈，方能飞举。
现代文：将要腾空乘云而行，县衙正厅旁边从前有棵大皂荚树，刘纲升上树几丈高，才能飞起来。
English: Liu Gang will have to take off and fly through the clouds. There used to be a large soap oak tree next to the county government building. How high can Liu Gang climb before he can fly?

古文：夫人平坐，冉冉如云气之升，同升天而去。
现代文：夫人平静地坐着，冉冉如云气升起，一同升天而去。
English: The lady sat calmly and slowly rose like a cloud, and together they ascended into the sky.

古文：后至唐贞元中，湘潭有一媪，不云姓字，但称湘媪。
现代文：后来到了唐朝贞元年间，湘潭县有个老太太，不说姓名，只称湘媪。
English: Later, during the reign of Emperor Zhengyuan of the Tang Dynasty, there was an old lady in Xiangtan County who, without giving her name, was known only as Xiang Yu.

古文：常居止人舍，十有余载矣，常以丹篆文字救疾于闾里，莫不响应。
现代文：平常在人家的房舍居住，已十多年了。常常用丹砂写篆字在闾里治病救人，没有不灵验的。
English: He has been living in other people's houses for more than ten years. He often uses red sandpaper to write Chinese characters to cure and save people in Bali. There is nothing he cannot do.

古文：乡人敬之，为结构华屋数间而奉媪。
现代文：乡人敬重她，给她盖几间华美的房屋奉养她。
English: The villagers respected her, built her several beautiful houses and took care of her.

古文：媪曰： 不然，但土木其宇，是所愿也。 
现代文：老太太说： 不要这样，只要有个土木房屋，这就是我的愿望。 
English: The old lady said, "Don't do that. As long as there is a mud house, that's what I want."

古文：媪鬓翠如云，肥洁如雪。
现代文：老太太鬓发如云，肥洁如雪。
English: The old lady's hair is as white as snow.

古文：策杖曳履，日可数百里。
现代文：拄着拐杖趿着鞋，每天可走几百里。
English: With crutches and shoes, he can walk several hundred miles a day.

古文：忽遇里人女，名曰逍遥。
现代文：忽然有一天，遇见一个乡下女子，名叫逍遥。
English: All of a sudden, one day, he met a woman from the countryside named Shouyao.

古文：年二八，艳美，携筐采菊。
现代文：十六岁，长得很艳丽，拿着筐采菊花。
English: Sixteen years old, very beautiful, picking chrysanthemums with a basket.

古文：遇媪瞪视，足不能移。
现代文：她遇到这个老太太就瞪着眼睛看，脚不能移动。
English: When she met this old lady, she stared at her, unable to move her feet.

古文：媪目之曰： 汝乃爱我，而同之所止否？ 
现代文：老太太看着她说： 你喜欢我，愿意同我一起到我住的地方去吗？ 
English: The old lady looked at her and said, "Do you like me and want to come with me to where I live?"

古文：逍遥然掷筐，敛衽称弟子，从媪归室。
现代文：逍遥高兴得把筐扔了，给老太太行礼自称弟子，跟老太太回家。
English: Happy to throw the basket, Shoryo bowed to the old lady, calling himself a disciple, and went home with the old lady.

古文：父母奔追及，以杖击之，叱而返舍。
现代文：她的父母奔跑着追上她，用棒子打她，吆喝着把她领回家。
English: Her parents ran after her, beating her with sticks and shouting as they led her home.

古文：逍遥操益坚，窃索自缢，亲党敦喻其父母，请纵之。
现代文：逍遥的志向更加坚定，就偷了一根绳子自己上吊，亲戚乡邻诚恳地开导她的父母，请求他们让逍遥愿意干什么就干什么。
English: As Shouyao's ambition became more determined, she stole a rope and hanged herself. Her relatives and neighbors sincerely enlightened her parents and asked them to let Shouyao do whatever she wanted.

古文：度不可制，遂舍之。
现代文：她的父母估计不能制止，就放了她。
English: Her parents thought they couldn't stop her and let her go.

古文：复诣媪，但帚尘易水，焚香读道经而已。
现代文：逍遥又到老太太那里去了，只是扫地打水烧香读道经而已。
English: Shouyao went to the old lady again, only to sweep the floor, draw water, burn incense and read sutras.

古文：后月余，媪白乡人曰： 果暂之罗浮，扃其户，慎勿开也。 
现代文：一个多月后，老太太告诉乡人说： 我暂时到罗浮山去，把门锁上了，你们千万不要开。 
English: More than a month later, the old lady told the villagers: I have temporarily gone to Luofu Mountain and locked the door. You must not open it.

古文：乡人问逍遥何之，曰： 前往。 
现代文：乡人问逍遥将要到哪去，老太太说： 前往。 
English: When the villagers asked Shouya where she was going, the old lady said, "I'm going."

古文：如是三稔，人但于户外窥见，小松迸笋而丛生阶砌。
现代文：如此三年，人们只从门外看见，老太太房舍阶下、墙边小松竹笋丛生。
English: So for three years, people only saw from outside the door, the old lady's house steps, the wall of small pines and bamboo shoots.

古文：及媪归，召乡人同开锁，见逍遥懵坐于室，貌若平日，唯蒲履为竹稍串于栋宇间。
现代文：等到老太太回来，她就召集乡人一同开锁，看见逍遥在室内迷迷糊糊地坐着，容貌像平时一样，只有草鞋被竹梢串到房梁上。
English: When the old lady returned, she called the villagers together to open the lock and saw Shouya sitting in the room, looking as usual, only his straw sandals were tied to the beam with bamboo shoots.

古文：媪遂以杖叩地曰： 吾至，汝可觉。 
现代文：老太太就用拐杖敲敲地，说： 我回来了，你可以醒了。 
English: The old lady tapped the ground with her cane and said, "I'm back, you can wake up now."

古文：逍遥如寐醒，方起，将欲拜，忽遗左足，如刖于地。
现代文：逍遥像睡觉醒来，刚起身，将要下拜，忽然左脚掉了，像砍落在地上。
English: When he woke up, he just got up and was about to bow. Suddenly, his left foot fell off and landed on the ground.

古文：媪遽令无动，拾足勘膝，噀之以水，乃如故。
现代文：老太太急忙令逍遥不要动，她捡起脚对正膝盖安上，用水喷喷它，右腿竟然如故。
English: The old lady hurriedly told Xiaoyang not to move. She picked up her foot, put it on her right knee, and sprayed it with water, but her right leg was still there.

古文：乡人大骇，敬之如神，相率数百里皆归之。
现代文：乡人大吃一惊，像敬神似的敬畏她，人们接连不断地从几百里外来拜服她。
English: The villagers were taken aback, and revered her as if she were a god. People came from hundreds of miles away to worship her.

古文：媪貌甚闲暇，不喜人之多相识。
现代文：老太太的神情很闲适，不喜欢相识人多。
English: The old lady's expression is very relaxed, she doesn't like to meet many people.

古文：忽告乡人曰： 吾欲往洞庭救百余人性命，谁有心为我设船一只？
现代文：有一天，老太太忽然告诉乡人说： 我要前往洞庭洞去救一百多人的性命，谁有心意为我准备一只船？
English: One day, the old lady suddenly told the villagers: "I want to go to Dongting Cave to save the lives of more than a hundred people. Who has the heart to prepare a boat for me?"

古文：一两日可同观之。 
现代文：一两天可以共同去观看。 
English: You can watch it together for a day or two.

古文：有里人张拱家富，请具舟楫，自驾而送之。
现代文：有个村民张拱家里很富裕，请求让他准备船只，自己驾船去送她。
English: One villager, Zhang Gong, whose family was very wealthy, asked him to prepare a boat and drive to her.

古文：欲至洞庭前一日，有大风涛，蹙一巨舟，没于君山岛上而碎。
现代文：要到洞庭的前一天，有大风大浪，拍击一只大船，沉没在君山岛上碎裂了。
English: The day before I was to go to Dongting, there was a big wind and big waves. A big ship was hit, sank and broke up on Junshan Island.

古文：载数十家，近百余人，然不至损，未有舟楫来救，各星居于岛上。
现代文：船上载着几十家一百多人却没有损伤，但也没有船来救，他们各自散居在岛上。
English: There were dozens of families and more than a hundred people on the boat, but they were not injured, but there was no boat to rescue them, and they all dispersed on the island.

古文：忽有一白鼍，长丈余，游于沙上。
现代文：忽然有一条扬子鳄，有一丈多长，游到沙滩上。
English: Suddenly, an alligator, more than a foot long, swam onto the beach.

古文：数十人拦之挝杀，分食其肉。
现代文：几十个人拦住它把它打死，把它的肉分着吃了。
English: Dozens of people stopped it, beat it to death and ate its flesh.

古文：明日，有城如雪，围绕岛上，人家莫能辨。
现代文：第二天，有像雪似的一座白城围绕岛上，人们没有谁能辨识。
English: The next day, a snow-like white city surrounded the island, which no one could identify.

古文：其城渐窄狭束，岛上人忙怖号叫，囊橐皆为齑粉，束其人为簇。
现代文：那座城逐渐变窄把人夹住，岛上的人恐怖地哭叫，行装都碎为粉末，那些人也都被捆成一簇。
English: The city gradually narrows and catches people, the people on the island cry in terror, the luggage is crushed into powder, and those people are also bundled into a cluster.

古文：其广不三数丈，又不可攀援，势已紧急。
现代文：那里面不到几丈宽，又不能攀援，形势已经很紧急了。
English: It's less than a few feet wide, and you can't climb up to help, so the situation is already very urgent.

古文：岳阳之人，亦遥睹雪城，莫能晓也。
现代文：岳阳城里的人也遥遥望见雪城，但没有人能明白这是怎么回事。
English: People in Yueyang City could also see Xuecheng in the distance, but no one could figure out what was going on.

古文：时媪舟已至岸，媪遂登岛，攘剑步罡，噀水飞剑而刺之，白城一声如霹雳，城遂崩。
现代文：这时，老太太的船已经到岸，老太太就登上君山岛，举起剑踏着罡步，喷一口法水飞快出剑去刺它，白城发出一声如霹雳，就崩塌了。
English: At this time, the old lady's boat had already reached the shore, so the old lady boarded the Junshan Island, raised her sword, walked on the pavement, sprayed a mouthful of French water, quickly took out her sword to stab it, and Baicheng uttered a cry and collapsed.

古文：乃一大白鼍，长十余丈，蜿蜒而毙，剑立其胸。
现代文：原来是一只大扬子鳄，长十多丈，蜿蜒而死，剑立在它的胸上。
English: It turned out to be a large alligator, more than ten meters long, meandering to its death, with a sword on its chest.

古文：遂救百余人之性命，不然，顷刻即拘束为血肉矣。
现代文：终于救了一百多人的性命，否则，顷刻之间这些人就被拘束成为血肉了。
English: In the end, he saved the lives of more than a hundred people who would otherwise have been reduced to flesh and blood in an instant.

古文：岛上之人，感号泣礼谢。
现代文：岛上的人都放声哭泣着向老太太行礼道谢。
English: Everyone on the island burst into tears as they saluted the elderly woman and thanked her.

古文：命拱之舟返湘潭，拱不忍便去。
现代文：老太太命张拱的船返回湘潭，张拱不忍马上离开。
English: The old lady ordered Zhang Qiang's boat to return to Xiangtan. Zhang Qiang could not bear to leave immediately.

古文：忽有道士与媪相遇曰： 樊姑尔许时何处来？ 
现代文：这时忽然有个道士与老太太相遇，这个道士说： 樊姑这些时何处来？ 
English: At this time, a Taoist suddenly met an old lady. The Taoist said, "Where did you come from?

古文：甚相慰悦。
现代文：互相都很感慰喜悦。
English: We were both very relieved and happy.

古文：拱诘之，道士曰： 刘纲真君之妻，樊夫人也。 
现代文：张拱讯问道士，道士说： 这位老太太就是刘纲真君的妻子樊夫人。 
English: Zhang Gongxun asked the priest, and the priest said, "This old lady is Liu Gangzhen's wife, Lady Zhou.

古文：后人方知媪即樊夫人也。
现代文：人们才知道湘媪就是樊夫人。
English: It was only then that people knew that Xiang Yu was Mrs. Yu.

古文：拱遂归湘潭。
现代文：张拱就回到了湘潭。
English: Zhang Gong immediately returned to Xiangtan.

古文：后媪与逍遥一时返真。
现代文：后来老太太与逍遥同时返回仙境。
English: Later, the old lady returned to Wonderland at the same time as Shouyao.

古文：东陵圣母
现代文：东陵圣母
English: East Mausoleum of the Virgin Mary

古文：东陵圣母，广陵海陵人也，适杜氏，师刘纲学道，能易形变化，隐见无方。
现代文：东陵圣母，是广陵府海陵县人，嫁给姓杜的，拜刘纲为师学道，能够易形变化，时隐时现没有定准。
English: Dongling Virgin Mary is from Hailing County, Guangling Prefecture. She was married to a man surnamed Du. He was a disciple of Liu Gang, and was capable of shape-shifting.

古文：杜不信道，常怒之。
现代文：她的丈夫不信道，常常因此生她的气。
English: Her husband does not believe and is often angry with her.

古文：圣母理疾救人，或有所诣，杜恚之愈甚，讼之官，云： 圣母奸妖，不理家务。 
现代文：圣母治病救人，有时前往有病的人家，她的丈夫气愤得更加厉害，把她告到官府，理由是： 圣母是邪恶伪诈的妖人，不理家务。 
English: Her husband was even more outraged and reported her to the authorities on the grounds that: Our Lady is an evil and deceitful demon, who does not take care of household chores.

古文：官收圣母付狱。
现代文：官府就把圣母抓起来投进监狱。
English: The authorities arrested the Virgin Mary and threw her in prison.

古文：顷之，已从狱窗中飞去，众望见之，转高入云中，留所着履一双在窗下。
现代文：不久，圣母已经从监狱的天窗中飞出去，众人都望见她越来越高直入云中，只留下她所穿的一双鞋在窗下。
English: Before long, Our Lady had flown out of the prison's skylight, and everyone saw her fly higher and higher into the clouds, leaving only the pair of shoes she was wearing under the window.

古文：于是远近立庙祠之，民所奉事，祷之立效。
现代文：于是远近的人盖庙宇祭祀她，老百姓求告的事，向她祷告立刻见效。
English: As a result, people from near and far built temples to worship her, and the prayers of the common people to her were effective immediately.

古文：常有一青鸟在祭所，人有失物者，乞问所在，青鸟即飞集盗物人之上。
现代文：经常有一只青色的鸟在祭祀的地方，有人丢失了东西，向她乞问在哪里，青鸟就飞去落在偷东西那个人的头上，因此，那里路不拾遗。
English: There is often a bluebird in the place of worship. Someone has lost something and asks her where it is. The bluebird flies away and lands on the head of the person who stole it, so there is no way to find it.

古文：路不拾遗，岁月稍久，亦不复尔。至今海陵县中不得为奸盗之事。
现代文：岁月稍长，也就不再这样了。至今海陵县人不得做奸盗之事。
English: With the passage of time, this is no longer the case. To this day, people in Hailing County are not allowed to commit theft.

古文：大者即风波没溺，虎狼杀之，小者即复病也。郝姑
现代文：如果做了，罪过大的，不是被风浪吞没淹死，就是被虎狼吃掉，罪过小的就一再生病。郝姑
English: If you do, if your sin is too big, you will either be swallowed up and drowned by the wind and waves, or eaten by the tigers and wolves. If your sin is too small, you will get sick again.

古文：郝姑祠在莫州莫县西北四十五里。
现代文：郝姑祠在莫州莫县西北四十五里。
English: Gonggu Ancestral Temple is located 45 miles northwest of Mo County, Mozhou.

古文：俗传云，郝姑字女君。
现代文：民间传说，郝姑小字女君。
English: According to folklore, she was a small-lettered lady.

古文：本太原人，后居此邑。
现代文：本来是太原人，后来住在这个县。
English: Originally from Taiyuan, he later lived in this county.

古文：魏青龙年中，与邻女十人，于沤洟汇水边挑蔬。
现代文：魏青龙年间，郝姑与邻女十人，在沤洟泄水边挑菜。
English: In the Qinglong period of the Wei Dynasty, Zou Gu and ten of her female neighbors were picking vegetables at the edge of the floodplain.

古文：忽有三青衣童子，至女君前云： 东海公娶女君为妇。 
现代文：忽然有三个青衣童子来到女君面前，说： 东海公娶女君为媳妇。 
English: Suddenly, three boys in blue came to the princess and said, "The East Sea Prince has married his daughter-in-law.

古文：言讫，敷茵褥于水上，行坐往来，有若陆地。
现代文：说完，就把垫子、褥子铺在水上，或行或坐来来往往，就像陆地一般。
English: Having said that, they spread mats and rafts on the water, and walk or sit up and down, just like on land.

古文：其青衣童子便在侍侧，流流而下。
现代文：那青衣童子就在女君旁边陪着，沿流而下。
English: The boy in blue is right next to the lady and accompanies her down the stream.

古文：邻女走告之，家人往看，莫能得也。
现代文：邻女跑回去告诉女君的家里，她家里人前去察看，没有办法能够找到她。
English: The neighbour ran back to tell the woman's family, who went to investigate but were unable to find her.

古文：女君遥语云： 幸得为水仙，愿勿忧怖。 
现代文：女仙从远处告诉家人说： 我有幸能够成为水仙，希望不要忧愁害怕。 
English: The nymph told her family from a distance: "I am lucky to be able to become Narcissus. I hope you won't be sad or scared."

古文：仍言每至四月，送刀鱼为信。
现代文：还说每到四月，就送刀鱼作为凭证。
English: He also said that every April, he would send a swordfish as a certificate.

古文：自古至今，每年四月内，多有刀鱼上来。
现代文：从古到今，每年四月里多有刀鱼上来。
English: From ancient times to the present, there are more swordfish coming up in April every year.

古文：乡人每到四月祈祷，州县长更若谒此祠，先拜然后得入。
现代文：乡人每到四月就向她祈祷。州县官吏如果到祠里去，要先行拜见之礼然后才能进去。
English: Villagers pray to her every April. If state and county officials go to the shrine, they must first pay their respects before they can enter.

古文：于祠前忽生青石一所，纵横可三尺余，高二尺余，有旧题云： 此是姑夫上马石 至今存焉。
现代文：在郝姑祠前不知何时出现一块青白石，长宽约三尺多，高二尺多，有旧题词是： 此是姑夫上马石 ，至今还在那里。
English: I don't know when a piece of bluish-white stone appeared in front of the ancestral shrine, about three feet long and wide, two feet high, with an old inscription: This is the Uncle Shangma stone, still there.

古文：张玉兰
现代文：张玉兰
English: Zhang Yulan

古文：张玉兰者，天师之孙，灵真之女也。
现代文：张玉兰是天师的孙女，灵真的女儿。
English: Zhang Yulan is the granddaughter of Tianshi, the daughter of Ling Zhen.

古文：幼而洁素，不茹荤血。
现代文：她小时候就喜欢洁素，不吃荤血。
English: When she was a child, she liked Jell-O and wouldn't eat blood sausage.

古文：年十七岁，梦赤光自天而下，光中金字篆文，缭绕数十尺，随光入其口中，觉不自安，因遂有孕。
现代文：十七岁那年，她梦见红光从天而降，红光中有金字篆文，缭绕几十尺，随着红光进入她的口中。玉兰自己觉得不安，于是就有了身孕。
English: At the age of seventeen, she dreamed of red light falling from the sky. In the red light, there was a gold-lettered 文, winding for dozens of feet, and it entered her mouth with the red light. Magnolia herself felt uneasy, so she became pregnant.

古文：母氏责之，终不言所梦，唯侍婢知之。
现代文：母亲责问她，她始终没说梦中事，这事唯有她的丫环知道。
English: Her mother scolded her for never telling her about the dream, which only her maid knew about.

古文：一旦谓侍婢曰： 吾不能忍耻而生，死而剖腹，以明我心。 
现代文：有一天，她对丫环说： 我不能忍受耻辱而活着，死了就剖腹，来表明我的心。 
English: One day she said to the maidservant, "I cannot bear the shame of living, and when I die, I will cut open my belly to show my heart."

古文：其夕无疾而终。
现代文：那天晚上，玉兰无病而死。
English: That night, Magnolia died without illness.

古文：侍婢以白其事，母不欲违，冀雪其疑。
现代文：丫环把这事告诉了玉兰的母亲，母亲不想违背玉女的遗嘱，也希望洗雪心中之疑。
English: The maidservant told this to Magnolia's mother, who didn't want to go against the young lady's will, but also wanted to clear her doubts.

古文：忽有一物如莲花，自疈其腹而出。
现代文：这时，忽然有一个东西像莲花似的，自己从玉兰腹中破腹而出。
English: At this time, suddenly there was something like a lotus flower, bursting out of Magnolia's belly.

古文：开其中，得素书《本际经》十卷，素长二丈许。幅六七寸。文明甚妙，将非人功。
现代文：打开那件东西，得到白绢金字写的《本际经》十卷，白色生绢长二丈左右，幅宽六七寸，文字鲜明很美，不是人工写成。
English: Open that thing and you will get ten volumes of the "Honjiki-kyo Sutra" written in gold lettering on white ginger. The white ginger is about two meters long and 67 centimeters wide. The writing is bright and beautiful, and it was not written by hand.

古文：玉兰死旬月，常有异香。
现代文：玉兰死后旬月，经常有异香。
English: In the second half of the month after the death of the magnolia, there is often a strange smell.

古文：乃传写其经而葬玉兰。
现代文：于是传写那些经书，又安葬了玉兰。
English: So he copied those scriptures and buried Magnolia.

古文：百余日，大风雷雨，天地晦瞑，失经，其玉兰所在坟圹自开，棺盖飞在巨木之上，视之，空棺而已。
现代文：一百多天过去了，有一天忽然刮起大风响起炸雷下起大雨，天昏地暗，《本际经》不见了，玉兰所在的坟圹自开，棺盖飞在大树之上，人们一看，只是空棺而已。
English: More than a hundred days passed. One day, a strong wind suddenly blew, thunder and lightning occurred, and it rained heavily. It was dark and gloomy. "The Book of Changes" was gone. The tomb where Magnolia was buried opened by itself, and the coffin lid flew above the trees. At first glance, it was just an empty coffin.

古文：今墓在益州，温江县女郎观是也。
现代文：如今墓在益州，温江县女郎观就是。
English: Now the tomb is in Yizhou, and the view of the maiden in Wenjiang County is the best.

古文：三月九日是玉兰飞升之日，至今乡里常设斋祭之。
现代文：三月九日是玉兰升天的日子，至今乡里的人还常常设斋祭祀她。
English: March 9th is the day of Magnolia's ascension to heaven. To this day, people in the village often hold a fast to worship her.

古文：灵真即天师之子，名衡，号曰嗣师。
现代文：灵真就是天师的儿子，名叫张衡，人称为嗣师。
English: Lingzhen is the son of the heavenly teacher, named Zhang Heng, who is known as the successor.

古文：自汉灵帝光和二年己未正月二十三日，于阳平化白日升天。
现代文：从汉灵帝光和二年己未正月二十三日，在阳平化白日升天。
English: On the 23rd day of the first month of the second year of Emperor Guangwu's reign, Emperor Guangwu ascended to heaven in broad daylight.

古文：玉兰产经得道，当在灵真上升之后，三国纷兢之时也。
现代文：玉兰产生出经书而得道，当在灵真飞升之后，三国纷争之时。
English: Magnolia produced a scripture and received the Tao, but after the spirit of truth soared, the three countries quarreled.

