古文：张思明张思明，字士瞻，其先获嘉人，后徙居辉州。
现代文：张思明字士瞻，祖先是获嘉人，后迁徙到辉州居住。
English: Zhang Siming, whose ancestor was awarded the Medal of Honor, later moved to Huizhou to live.

古文：思明颖悟过人，读书日记千言。
现代文：思明颖悟超群，读书能日记千言。
English: She is a brilliant thinker, and can write a thousand words in her diary.

古文：至元十九年，由侍仪司舍人辟御史台掾，又辟尚书省掾。
现代文：至元十九年，由侍仪司舍人征召为御史台属官，又为尚书省属官。
English: In the 19th year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was conscripted by the Master of Ceremonies to be a subordinate official of the Imperial Household Agency, and he was also a subordinate official of the Ministry of Literature.

古文：左丞相阿合马既死，世祖追咎其奸欺，命尚书簿问遗孽。
现代文：左丞相阿合马死后，世祖要追查他奸诈欺骗的罪行，召右丞何祖荣、左丞马绍进宫，思明为他们读文牍，从黄昏到黎明，帝听着竟忘了疲劳，说 ：读的人吐音很像侍仪舍人。 
English: After the death of Ahama, the left-handed prime minister, the founder of the dynasty wanted to investigate his crimes of treachery and deception. He summoned the right-handed prime minister He Zu Rong and the left-handed prime minister Ma Shao to the palace, thinking that they would read the imperial edict. From dusk to dawn, the emperor listened to them and forgot his fatigue, saying, "A reader who spits sounds is very similar to a person who attends ceremonies."

古文：一日，召右丞何荣祖、左丞马绍，尽输其赃以入，思明抱牍从，日已昏，命读之，自昏达曙，帝听忘疲，曰： 读人吐音，大似侍仪舍人。 右丞对曰： 正由舍人选为掾。 帝奇之，曰： 斯人可用。 
现代文：右丞回答说 ：正由舍人升为佐助。 
English: Ujo replied, "I am being promoted from shojin to sasuke."

古文：大德初，擢左司都事，有献西域秤法，思明以惑众不用。
现代文：帝很惊奇，说： 这个人可以重用。 第二天越级提拔任大都路治中，思明推辞，后改任湖广行省都事。
English: The emperor was very surprised and said, "This person can be reused." The next day, he was promoted to the next level and was appointed to the position of the provincial governor of the capital city of Hubei Province. He immediately resigned and was later appointed to the position of the provincial governor of Hubei Province.

古文：初立海道运粮万户府于江浙，受除者惮涉险，不行，思明请升等以优之，因著为令。
现代文：元贞元年，任中书省检校后，六部无积压案件，升迁为户部主事。大德初，提拔为右司都事，当初江浙设立海道运粮万户府。授职的人害怕历险，不起程。思明请求给以优厚待遇，并写成命令。
English: In the first year of Yuan Zhen, after the inspection of the school by the Ministry of Education and Culture, there were no backlog cases in six departments, and he was promoted to the head of the household department. At the beginning of the Great German Empire, he was promoted to the right department of the capital department, and at that time, Jiangsu and Zhejiang set up a roadway to transport grain to all households. The person who gave him the job was afraid of adventure and did not want to travel. Siming requested that he be given preferential treatment and wrote an order.

古文：五年，转吏部郎中。
现代文：五年转迁吏部郎中。
English: Five years later, he was transferred to the position of junior secretary.

古文：九年，改集贤司直。
现代文：九年改任集贤司直。
English: Nine years later, he was reassigned to Jixian.

古文：十年，除江浙行中书省左右司郎中。
现代文：十年授江浙行中书省左右司郎中。
English: He was awarded the 10th Jiangsu-Zhejiang trip and became the left and right secretary of the Ministry of Education.

古文：十一年春，两浙大饥，首赞发廪赈之。
现代文：十年春，两浙遭重灾，思明首先开仓救灾。
English: In the spring of the 10th year, the two Zhejiang provinces suffered a serious disaster, and Siming was the first to open a warehouse for disaster relief.

古文：至大三年，迁两浙盐运使，未上，入参议枢密院事，改中书省左司郎中。
现代文：至大三年，调迁两浙盐运使，还未就职，改入参议枢密院事，又改任中书省左司郎中。
English: When he was three years old, he transferred two Zhejiang Salt Transport Envoys, and before he took office, he was transferred to the Privy Council, and he was also transferred to the middle of the left secretary of the Ministry of Literature.

古文：皇庆元年，再授两浙盐运使，岁课羡赢，僚属请上增数，思明曰： 赢缩不常，万一以增为额，是我希一己之荣，遗百世之害。 
现代文：皇庆元年再任两浙盐运使，每年征收赋税都能超额。同僚请求增加赋税，思明说： 增额、减额，都不是不变的，万一以增加的为定额，是我求个人的荣誉而留下了百世的危害。 
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Qing, he was reappointed as the second Zhejiang salt transportation envoy, and the amount of tax collected each year could exceed the amount. Colleagues requested an increase in tax, Siming said: The increase and decrease are not constant, in case the increase is a fixed amount, I am asking for personal honor and leaving a great harm.

古文：二年，召为户部尚书。延祐元年，进参议中书省事；三年，拜中书参知政事。
现代文：二年，征召为户部尚书，延元年，参议中书省事，三年授中书参知政事。
English: In the second year, he was conscripted into the household of Shangshu, in the first year of Yan, he was a councillor in the provincial affairs, and in the third year, he was awarded the title of councillor in the political affairs.

古文：仁宗即位，浮屠妙总统有宠，敕中书官其弟五品，思明执不可。
现代文：仁宗即位，僧人妙总统受宠，诏令中书，予他弟弟五品官爵。
English: When Emperor Nenzong ascended to the throne, President Monzennmyo was favored, and the imperial edict was issued to give his younger brother five court ranks and a peerage.

古文：帝大怒，召见切责之，对曰： 选法，天下公器。径路一开，来者杂遝。故宁违旨获戾，不忍隳祖宗成宪，使四方得窥陛下浅深也。 
现代文：思明执意不从，帝大怒，召见，责问思明，回答说： 人才选拔是治天下的重要方面，小路一开，来的人就众多而杂乱，所以宁愿违诏定罪，不忍毁坏祖宗成法，使天下的人来窥视陛下的深浅。 
English: Siming stubbornly refused to comply, the emperor was furious, summoned him, questioned Siming, and replied: Talent selection is an important aspect of ruling the world. As soon as a path is opened, the people who come are numerous and chaotic. Therefore, he would rather violate the edict and condemn, and cannot bear to destroy the ancestral law, so that people around the world can see the depths of his majesty.

古文：帝心然其言，而业已许之，曰： 卿可姑与之，后勿为例。 
现代文：帝暗自认为有理，可已经特许过，就说： 你可暂且答应，下不为例。 
English: The Emperor thought to himself that this was reasonable, but since he had already given his special permission, he said, "You can agree to this for the time being, but this is not an example."

古文：乃为万亿库提举，不与散官。
现代文：于是，思明任此人为万亿库提举，不定其官阶。
English: As a result, Siming appointed this person to be the head of the trillion-dollar bank, without specifying his official rank.

古文：久之，近臣疾其持法峭直，日构谗间，出为工部尚书。帝问左右曰： 张士瞻居工部，得无怏怏乎？ 
现代文：时间长了，近臣妒忌他执法严峻刚直，一天天造成谗言离间，因而出任工部尚书，帝问左右的人： 张士瞻在工部该不会不乐意吧？ 
English: As time went on, his vassals envied him for his strict and upright enforcement of the law, which caused discord day after day. As a result, he was appointed as the official of the Ministry of Works. The emperor asked the people around him: Wouldn't Zhang Shizhun be happy in the Ministry of Works?

古文：对曰： 勤政如初。 
现代文：回答说 ：主持事务同当初一样。 
English: He replied: The presidency is the same as it was in the beginning.

古文：帝嘉叹之，命授宣政院副使。
现代文：帝更赞叹，命令授给宣政副使。
English: The emperor was even more impressed and gave the order to the deputy envoy.

古文：五年，除西京宣慰使。
现代文：五年，任西京宣慰使。
English: For five years, he served as the Xijing Xuanjong envoy.

古文：岭北戍士多贫者，岁凶，相挺为变，思明威惠并行，边境乃安。
现代文：岭北守卫的战士大多贫困，遇上灾荒，引起事变，思明既用威力又有仁慈，才使边境安定。
English: Most of the soldiers guarding the northern part of Lingnan are poor, encounter disasters, cause incidents, and think that it is necessary to use both power and mercy to stabilize the border.

古文：对曰： 臣自揆才薄，恐误陛下国事，若必欲任臣，愿荐一人为助。 
现代文：由于上疏陈述和林运粮十一条不便，帝用端砚和一尊好酒慰问他。适逢左丞相哈散辞职，帝不允许，他请求更加坚决，帝问： 你为什么要辞职？ 回答说： 我估量自己的才能太差，恐怕误了国事，一定要我任职，推荐一个人佐助我。 
English: Due to the inconvenience of the Shang-Shu Declaration and the 11th Article of the Lin-Yun Grain, the emperor consoled him with a piece of straw and a bottle of good wine. When the Minister of the Left, Hasan, resigned, the emperor did not allow it, and he asked for a more resolute request. The emperor asked: Why did you resign? He replied: I think my talent is too poor, I'm afraid I missed the state affairs, I must serve, recommend a person to assist me.

古文：帝问： 为谁？
现代文：帝问： 是谁呢？
English: The emperor asked, "Who is it?"

古文：朕能从汝。 
现代文：我能听你的。 
English: I can listen to you.

古文：比召至，车驾幸上都，见于道，慰勉之曰： 卿向不负朕注委，故朕用哈散言，复起汝。 
现代文：哈散说 ：张思明。 当天就授给思明中书参知政事。帝到上都，在路上见到思明，帝慰勉他说： 你没有辜负我的委托，所以我采用哈散的话，又起用你。 
English: Hasan said, "Zhang Siming. On the same day, the emperor gave Siming the title of chancellor. When the emperor arrived in Shangdu, he saw Siming on the road. The emperor consoled him and said, "You did not fail to live up to my commission, so I will use Hasan's words and employ you again."

古文：未几，升左丞。
现代文：不久，升左丞。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to Sajo.

古文：帝崩，英宗宅忧，右丞相帖木迭儿用事，日诛大臣不附己者，中外汹汹。思明谏曰： 山陵甫毕，新君未立，丞相恣行杀戮，国人皆谓阴有不臣之心。
现代文：帝崩，英宗居丧，右丞相帖木迭儿管理政事，大杀无辜，气势汹汹。思明谏道 ：先帝奉安刚毕，新君未立，恣纵杀戮，全国的人会说有反叛之心。
English: The emperor is dead, Emperor Yingzong is in mourning, the chancellor of the Right, Tetsuko Dier, is in charge of government affairs, innocent people are being massacred, and the situation is grim.Siming Xuan said: The former emperor Bongangbi, the new emperor has not yet been established, arbitrary killings, people across the country will say that they have a rebellious heart.

古文：万一诸王驸马疑而不至，将奈之何？
现代文：万一诸王、驸马怀疑不来此，将怎么办？
English: What will happen if the kings and queens hesitate to come here?

古文：不可不熟虑也。 
现代文：不能不深思熟虑。 
English: You have to think about it.

古文：众皆危之，帖木迭儿大悟曰： 非左丞言，几误吾事。 
现代文：大家都很忧惧，帖木迭儿大悟，说： 要不是左丞相提醒，几乎要误大事。 
English: Everyone was worried, and Tetsuko Teru realized the situation. She said, "If I hadn't been reminded by the Minister of the Left, I would have almost missed the big event.

古文：帝造寿安山寺，监察御史观音保、琐咬儿哈的迷失、成珪、李谦亨强谏，帝震怒，杀观音保、琐咬儿哈的迷失，以成珪、李谦亨属吏，思明白丞相曰： 言事，御史职也，祖宗已来，未尝杀谏臣。 
现代文：帝修建寿安山寺，监察御史观音保、琐咬儿哈的迷失、成王圭、李谦亨强谏，帝盛怒，杀了观音保、琐咬儿哈的迷失，把成王圭、李谦亨作为属吏，思明告诉丞相说 ：进谏是御史的职责，自祖宗以来，不曾杀谏臣。 
English: Emperor Sheng built Shou'an Mountain Temple, supervised the loss of Guanyin Bao, Zogui Erha, Chengwang Gui, and Li Qianheng, and Emperor Sheng got angry, killed Guanyin Bao, Zogui Erha, and took Chengwang Gui and Li Qianheng as subordinate officials. Siming told the prime minister, "It is the duty of the imperial historian to investigate, and he has never killed a vassal since the time of his ancestors."

古文：成、李既属吏，当论法，丞相乃力言之，二人得从轻典。
现代文：成、李既是属吏，应当按法论处，丞相极力说明道理，二人才从轻惩处。
English: Since Cheng and Li are subordinate officials, they should be dealt with according to the law. The prime minister should explain the reason as much as possible, and the two should be lightly punished.

古文：及拜住为左丞相，与帖木迭儿各树朋党，贼害忠良，思明惧祸及，累表辞，不获，后竟诬以不支蒙古子女口粮，饿死四百人，遂废于家，杜门六年。
现代文：拜住任右丞相，与帖木迭儿各树朋党，残害忠良，思明怕惹祸，多次上表辞官，未准，后来被诬陷为不供给蒙古子女口粮，饿死四百人，于是罢官在家，闭门六年。
English: Baizhu was appointed as the Minister of the Right, and he and his party cronies, led by Tetsuko Tider, killed and injured the faithful, and thought that they were afraid of getting into trouble. He repeatedly submitted his resignation, but it was not approved. Later, he was framed for not supplying rations to Mongolian children, and four hundred people starved to death. So he was dismissed from his post at home, and his doors were closed for six years.

古文：文宗天历元年，起为江浙行中书省左丞。
现代文：文宗天历元年起用为江浙行中书左丞相。
English: Since the first year of the lunar calendar, Wenzong Tianzhong has been used as the Minister of Education and Culture of Jiangsu and Zhejiang.

古文：其以下年未输者如数与之，有罪，吾当坐。 
现代文：正当陕西重灾，中书拨江浙盐运司赋税十万锭救灾。有吏劝说应给中书回话，赋税已交京师。思明说： 陕西灾民如无水之鱼，不得水而干死。
English: At the time of the serious disaster in Shaanxi, Zhongshu issued a tax of 100,000 baht to the Jiangsu-Zhejiang Salt Transportation Department for disaster relief. Some officials urged that the tax should be returned to Zhongshu, and the tax has been paid to the Beijing division. Siming said: The disaster victims in Shaanxi are like fish without water, and they die without water.

古文：朝廷韪之。
现代文：把下年征收如数交上，如判罪由我来承担。 
English: I will hand over the exact amount of next year's levy, and if I am convicted, I will bear the responsibility.

古文：二年，复以中书左丞召，入觐慈仁殿，敷陈累朝任贤使能、治民足国之道，因以衰老辞，帝未允，明日，即移告去。
现代文：事后朝廷认为做得对。二年恢复中书左丞职务，入宫见帝，详细陈述历朝任用贤能、治民富国的经验。因衰老呈请辞官，帝未同意，第二天就告辞走了。
English: After the event, the Imperial Court thought it was the right thing to do. Two years later, he was restored to the post of Chushizajo, entered the palace to see the emperor, and gave a detailed account of the experience of appointing and employing meritocracy and governing a rich country. Due to aging, he submitted his resignation, but the emperor did not agree, and he resigned the next day.

古文：重纪至元三年卒，年七十八。
现代文：至元三年卒，享年七十八岁。
English: He was 78 years old at the time of his death.

古文：思明平生不治产，不畜财，收书三万七千余卷；尤明于律，与谢仲和、曹鼎新同称三绝。
现代文：思明生平不治产业、不存钱，收集书三万七千多卷，同谢仲和、曹鼎新同称三绝。
English: In his life, Siming did not engage in industry or save money. He collected more than 37,000 volumes of books. He is also known as the "Three Absolutes" together with Xie Zhonghe and Cao Dingxin.

古文：赠推忠翊治守义功臣，依前中书左丞、上护军、清河郡公，谥贞敏。
现代文：赠推忠翊治守义功臣、中书左丞、上护军、清河郡公，谥号贞敏。
English: Presents were given to the loyal vassal, loyal subject, loyal subject, loyal subject, loyal subject, loyal subject, loyal subject, loyal subject, loyal subject, loyal subject, loyal subject, loyal subject, loyal subject, loyal subject, loyal subject.

古文：吴元珪吴元珪，字君璋，广平人。
现代文：吴元珪字君璋，广平人。
English: Wu Yuanzhang, the son of Wu Yuanzhang, was born in Guangping.

古文：父鼎，燕南提刑按察副使。
现代文：父亲名鼎，任燕南提刑按察副使。
English: His father was a well-known person, and he served as the vice-envoy of Yan Nanzhi Punitive Inspection.

古文：元珪简重，好深沉之思，凡征谋治法、律令章程，皆得于家庭之所授受。
现代文：元珪生活简朴，为人持重，喜思考，凡征战方略、治国之道、律令章程的知识，都是家中传授的。
English: In the Yuan Dynasty, people lived a simple life, respected others, and liked to think. All the knowledge about the strategy of war, the way of governing the country, and the rules and regulations were taught at home.

古文：二十六年，参议枢密院事。
现代文：至元十四年世祖召见，命授后卫经历，佩戴金符。
English: In the 14th year of the Yuan Dynasty, the ancestor was summoned to see him. He was ordered to guard experience and wear a gold badge.

古文：时缮修宫城，尚书省奏役军士万人，留守司主之。
现代文：十七年随帝去上都，受命去大都万岁山取药，不到一昼夜就到了，帝惊奇他的神速，提升枢密都事，升经历。
English: For seventeen years, he went to Shangdu with the emperor. He was ordered to go to Dadu Mountain to collect medicine, and arrived in less than a day and a night. The emperor was surprised by his speed, promotion of confidential matters, and promotion experience.

古文：元珪亟陈其不便，乃立武卫，缮理宫城，以留守段天祐兼都指挥使，凡有兴作，必以闻于枢府。
现代文：曾随俺伯进西蕃铠甲，帝问西蕃的制度，回答得非常详细、明白，帝更奇其才能。当时江南已平定，枢密奏请裁定官属，京师五卫、行省、万户府各设官吏，都有俸禄，给医药，设学校，置屯田，这些多为元珪建议。
English: At that time, the southern part of the Yangtze River had been pacified, and the Privy Council was asked to adjudicate on the officials, the officials of the Beijing Division of the Fifth Guards, the provinces, and the prefectures, all of which had a salary, to give medicine, to set up schools, and to set up military camps. These were mostly the suggestions of the Yuan Shun.

古文：寻升枢密院判官。
现代文：二十六年参议枢密院，不久升枢密院判官。
English: In 1926 he became a Privy Councillor, and was soon promoted to a Privy Councillor.

古文：奏定万户用军士八人，千户四人，百户二人，多役者有罚。
现代文：奏请规定万户用军八人，千户四人，百户二人，多役者有罚。
English: The report requested the stipulation that there should be no more than eight soldiers per 10,000 households, four soldiers per 1,000 households, and two soldiers per 100 households, and that there should be a penalty for multiple players.

古文：二十八年，除礼部侍郎，迁左司郎中。
现代文：二十八年任礼部侍郎，调迁左司郎中。
English: In 1928, he was appointed to the position of Reibu Jiro and transferred to Sasiro Junior High School.

古文：三十一年，参议中书省事。
现代文：三十一年参议中书省事。
English: The 31st year of the Council of Elders has passed without incident.

古文：大德元年，除吏部尚书。选曹铨注，多有私其乡里者，元珪曰： 此风不可长，川党、朔党之兴，宋之所由衰也。 
现代文：大德元年，任吏部尚书，官吏的选拔考核多数人偏袒自己同乡，元珪说 ：此风不能助长，川党、朔党兴起，就是宋朝衰败的原因。 
English: In the first year of the Great Patriotic War, when the appointment of officials was still on the books, and the selection and evaluation of officials were mostly biased in favor of their own countrymen, Yuan Shun said: This trend cannot be encouraged. The rise of the Sichuan Party and the Shuo Party is the reason for the decline of the Song Dynasty.

古文：三年，宣抚燕南，劾贪吏若干人。
现代文：三年，任燕南宣抚，弹劾贪吏若干人。
English: Three years later, Yan Nan was appointed as procurator, and several corrupt officials were impeached.

古文：迁工部尚书，河朔连年水旱，五谷不登，元珪言： 《春秋》之义，以养民为本，凡用民力者必书，盖民力息则生养遂，生养遂则教化行而风俗美。 
现代文：又迁工部尚书。河朔连年水灾，五谷不收，元珪说： 《春秋》一书的宗旨，是以养民为本，凡用民力一定有记载，民力得到休息，人民生活就会好，人民生活好，就能进行教化，风俗也就好了。 
English: He said: "The purpose of "Spring and Autumn" is to support the people. Any use of people's power must be recorded. If people's power is rested, people's lives will be better. If people's lives are better, they can be educated, and their customs will be better.

古文：武宗即位，由佥枢密院事拜枢密副使。
现代文：宰相很称赞这席话。六年，任命河南中书省佥事，又任命浙江省参知政事。
English: The prime minister highly praised the speech. In six years, he appointed An Zhi of Henan Province and Zhou Qu of Zhejiang Province.

古文：诏元珪二十余人议政中书，若惜人力，严选举，节财用，定律令，谨赏罚，建科举，课农桑，汰冗员，易封赠，皆切于世务者。
现代文：当时江浙省臣只元珪一人没有贪财贿赂之事。
English: At that time, Jiangsu and Zhejiang Provincial Minister Yuan Qi was the only one who did not commit bribery.

古文：初，诏发军万人屯田称海以实边，海都之乱，被俘者众，至是颇有来归者，饥寒不能存，至鬻子以活。元珪具其事以闻，诏赐钱赎之。帝在军中，即闻元珪名，至是，特加平章政事，赐白金二百五十两、只孙衣四袭。
现代文：武宗即位，由枢密院佥事升枢密副使。诏令元珪二十多人议政，提出惜人力、严选举、节财用、定律令、谨赏罚、建科举、劝农桑、汰冗员、易封赠，都是当时必办之事。帝久闻元珪之名，特加封平章政事，赐银二百五十两，只孙衣四套。
English: Emperor Wu Zong ascended to the throne and was promoted from the Privy Council to the Privy Vice-Minister. He ordered more than 20 people in the Yuan Dynasty to discuss politics, and proposed to save manpower, strict election, save money, issue laws, reward and punish, establish scientific research, persuade farmers, eliminate redundancy, and easily seal gifts, all of which were necessary things to do at that time. The emperor has long known the name of the Yuan Dynasty, specially added the seal of Pingzhang to the government affairs, and gave 2502 silver and four sets of grandson clothes.

古文：仁宗即位，诏元珪与十六人议时政。
现代文：仁宗即位，诏元珪等十六人议论时政。
English: Sixteen people, including Emperor Ninsong and Empress Dowager Yuan, discuss current affairs.

古文：皇庆元年，出拜江浙行省左丞。
现代文：皇庆元年出任江浙行省左丞。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Qing, he was appointed as the left senator of Jiangsu and Zhejiang.

古文：江淮漕臣言： 江南殷富，盖由多匿腴田，若再行检覆之法，当益田亩累万计。 
现代文：江淮漕臣提出要搜括江南的民田，元珪反对说： 江南四年来都较太平，户有定籍，田有定亩，一有动摇，危害不小。 
English: Jianghuai Cao Zhen proposed to survey the people's fields in the south of the Yangtze River, and Yuan Xuan objected: the south of the Yangtze River has been relatively peaceful for four years. Households have permanent residence, and fields have a fixed mu. If there is any wavering, it will be harmful.

古文：元珪曰： 江南之平，几四十年，户有定籍，田有定亩，一有动摇，其害不细。 执其论固争，月余不能止，移疾去。
现代文：争执一月不下，元珪称病离去。
English: The dispute lasted for a month, and Yuan Xuan claimed to be ill and left.

古文：延祐元年，拜甘肃行省左丞。
现代文：延元年任甘肃行省左丞。
English: In the first year of Yan, he was appointed as Gansu Provincial Secretary of the Left.

古文：岁余，召还，俾宣抚辽阳诸郡，复为枢密副使，召见嘉禧殿，帝曰： 卿先朝旧臣，宜在旧服。 
现代文：一年多召回，以宣抚身份到辽阳郡，又任枢密副使，帝在嘉禧殿召见他说： 你是前朝旧臣，应该仍任原职。 
English: More than a year later, he was recalled to Liaoyang County as a special envoy and appointed as a vice-envoy of the Privy Council. The emperor summoned him at the Jiaxi Palace and said, "You are an old minister of the former dynasty, you should still hold your original post."

古文：特加荣禄大夫，赐钞五千缗、貂裘二袭。
现代文：特加封荣禄大夫，赐钞五千缗、貂裘衣两套。
English: He was awarded the title of "Doctor of Honor and Merit" and given 5,000 baht in banknotes and two sets of embroidered clothes.

古文：元珪奏曰： 昔世祖限田四百亩，以给军需，余田悉贡赋税。
现代文：元珪上奏说： 从前世祖限制四百亩田供给军需，剩余的田全部要纳赋税。
English: "From the previous generation, we have limited the supply of four hundred mu of farmland to the military, and all the remaining farmland must be taxed," the document said.

古文：今经理江淮田土，第以增金为能，加以有司头会箕敛，俾元元之民，困苦日甚，臣恐变生不测，非国之福，惟陛下少加意焉。 
现代文：现在管理江淮田地的官员，以多报田亩来显示自己的能力，加上当地官府苛敛民财，使善良的百姓，一天天更加困苦，臣恐一旦生变，危害国家，惟望陛下稍加计虑。 
English: Now the officials who manage the fields of the Jianghuai River are showing their ability by announcing more acres of fields, coupled with the local government's austerity of the people's wealth, making the good people more and more difficult day by day. The minister is afraid of changing his life and endangering the country. I just hope that His Majesty will be a little more careful.

古文：帝曰： 凡尔军士之田，并遵旧制。 
现代文：帝曰： 凡你军士的田，都依旧制。 
English: The emperor said, "All of your sergeant's fields are still in good condition.

古文：至治元年，英宗即位，元珪与知枢密院事帖木儿不花上军民之政十余事，大抵言：诸王近侍，不可干军政；管军官吏，不可渔取军户；军官之材者，当迁其职；有司赋役，当务均一，而军民不可有所偏；军官袭职，惟传嫡嗣，而支庶不可有所乱。
现代文：至治元年英宗即位，元珪与帖木儿不花上奏有关军民的十多件事，大抵是：诸王近侍，不能干预军政；管军的官吏，不能剥削军户；有才能的军官，应该升迁；官府征收赋税，一定要公正，不能偏颇；军官袭职，只传嫡嗣。帝赞许并降旨施行。
English: By the time Emperor Yingzong ascended to the throne in the first year of the Heian period, Emperor Yuan and Emperor Timur did not bother to report more than ten things related to the military and the people, mostly: the close attendants of kings could not intervene in military affairs; the officials in charge of the army could not exploit the military households; talented officers should be promoted; the taxation levied by the government must be fair and not biased; officers should not take advantage of their positions, and only the legitimate heirs should inherit. The emperor approved and decreed the implementation.

古文：帝并嘉纳，即降旨施行之。元珪以年老致仕，至治二年，起商议中书省事。
现代文：元珪因年老辞官退隐，至治二年起用商议中书省事务。
English: Due to his old age, Yuan Xuan retired as a retired official, and from the last two years of his reign, he used to discuss the affairs of the Ministry of Education.

古文：三年卒。
现代文：三年卒。
English: Three years old.

古文：泰定元年，赠光禄大夫、河南等处行省平章政事、柱国，追封赵国公，谥忠简。
现代文：泰定元年赠光禄大夫、河南等处行省平章政事、柱国，追封赵国公，谥号忠简。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taizong, Guanglu was awarded the title of doctor, Henan Province and other provinces were awarded the title of government, pillar country, and Zhao Guogong was posthumously awarded the honorary title of Zhong Jian.

古文：三年，复加推诚佐理功臣、光禄大夫、司徒。
现代文：三年，又加推诚佐理功臣、光禄大夫、司徒。
English: Three years later, he was promoted to the posts of honorary minister of Sari, doctor of Koroku, and Sito.

古文：至元二十九年，用荐者授将仕郎、翰林国史院编修官，预修《世祖实录》。升应奉翰林文字，寻升修撰，历兴文署令，迁太常博士。
现代文：张升字伯高，祖先定州人，后来迁徙到平州。升幼年时机警聪敏超过一般人。长大努力学习，擅长文辞。至元二十九年授将仕郎、翰林国史院编修官，参预修纂《世祖实录》，升应奉翰林文字，不久升修撰、太常博士。
English: Zhang Shengzibai Gao, whose ancestors were from Dingzhou, later migrated to Pingzhou. When he was a child, he was more alert and intelligent than the average person. He grew up to study hard and was good at literature. In the 29th year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was awarded the title of general secretary, editor-in-chief of the Hanlin National History Academy, participated in the preparation of the compilation of the "Ancestral Record," and was promoted to be a scholar of Hanlin characters, and soon became a scholar and a doctor.

古文：成宗崩，大臣承中旨，议奉徽号，飨宗庙，升曰： 在故典，凡有事于宗庙，必书嗣皇帝名，今将何书？ 
现代文：成宗驾崩，大臣议论徽号，合祭宗庙，升说： 从前规定凡在宗庙有祭祀，一定要写嗣皇帝的名字，现在写什么？ 
English: After the death of Chengzong, the minister discussed the crest and the ritual of the ancestral temple, saying: Previously, it was stipulated that wherever there was a ritual in the ancestral temple, the name of the emperor must be written. What should be written now?

古文：议遂寝。
现代文：议论才终止。
English: The discussion then came to an end.

古文：武宗即位，议躬祀礼，升据经引古，参酌时宜以对，帝嘉纳之。
现代文：武宗即位，亲自祭祀礼节时，升据经引古，参酌时宜回答，受到帝的称赞，并采纳了他的意见。
English: When Emperor Wuzong ascended to the throne, he personally led the ritual rituals. He was praised by the emperor and his advice was adopted.

古文：至大初，改太常寺为太常礼仪院，即除升为判官。
现代文：至大初，改太常寺为太常礼仪院，升为判官。以后，调任汝宁知府。
English: At the beginning of the new year, he changed Taejō-ji Temple to Taejō Ritsuryo-in Temple, and was promoted to judge. Later, he was transferred to Runin Chifu.

古文：久之，外补知汝宁府。民有告寄束书于其家者，逾三年取阅，有禁书一编，且记里中大家姓名于上，升亟呼吏焚其书，曰： 妄言诬民，且再更赦矣，勿论。 
现代文：有一百姓告发，有一捆书信寄放在他家中，时隔三年取出一看，内有禁书一编，记有他本乡大家姓名，升要属吏快把这书烧毁，并说： 胡话诬陷民众，暂且免罪不说。 
English: A citizen reported that a bundle of letters had been left at his home, and when he took it out after three years, he saw that it contained a part of a forbidden book, with the names of everyone in his hometown. He should burn the book as soon as he was promoted to a subordinate official, and said: "If you frame the people with nonsense, you will be exonerated for the time being."

古文：同列欲召属县为备御计，升曰： 此讹言，久当自息，毋用惑民听。 斥其无稽，众论韪之。部使者举治行为诸郡最。
现代文：同级的官吏很害怕，朝廷知道后，认为升放走了违法作乱的人，派人了解情况，却始终查不出什么来，于是斥责他擅自焚书，升说： 这事情好像是违法作乱，但我为郡守，是父母官，现在斥责诬告，免去冤狱，即使判我重罪也不躲避。 
English: The officials at the same level were very scared. After the court found out, they thought that they had released the illegal rioters. They sent someone to investigate the situation, but they could not find anything. So they rebuked him for burning books without authorization. Sheng said: This matter seems to be illegal rioting, but I am the county governor and the parent official. Now I rebuke the false accusation and avoid unjust imprisonment. Even if I am convicted of a felony, I will not escape.

古文：升言： 麻非越土所生，海漕实吴郡事，于越无与。 
现代文：于是夺他两个月的俸禄。后来任江西行省左右司郎中，升绍兴路总管。在大德、至大年间，江浙遭重灾，流行瘟疫，百姓死亡几乎过半，赋税盐税责令里胥代纳。
English: As a result, he was deprived of his two-month salary. Later, he served as a middle-ranking official in Jiangxi Province, and the general manager of Sheng Shaoxing Road. During the Great German and Great Chinese Dynasties, Jiangsu and Zhejiang suffered severe disasters, epidemics of plague, and almost half of the people died, and were ordered to pay salt tax.

古文：章上，卒罢之。
现代文：升将此地情形如实报告行省，予以豁免。
English: Sheng will truthfully report the situation here to the province and be exempted.

古文：升既谨于绳吏，又果于去民瘼，故人心悦服。历湖北道廉访使、江南行台治书侍御史，召为参议中书省事，改枢密院判官，寻复中书参议。
现代文：后历任湖北道廉访使、江南行台治书侍御史。召为参议中书省事，又改枢密院判官，不久又恢复中书参议。
English: Afterward, he served as a liaison envoy to Hubei Province and traveled south of the Yangtze River to govern Taiwan. He was called to be a member of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC), and also became a judge of the Privy Council. He soon resumed being a member of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference.

古文：至治二年，又出为河东道廉访使，未行，拜治书侍御史。
现代文：至治二年出任河东道廉访使，还未启程，又任命治书侍御史。
English: In the last two years of his reign, he served as a visiting envoy to Kawagoe, but before he left, he also appointed a secretary to the Emperor.

古文：明年，出为淮西道廉访使。
现代文：第二年，任淮西道廉访使。
English: In the second year, he was appointed as a visiting envoy of the West Huai Road.

古文：泰定二年，拜陕西行省参知政事，加中奉大夫，寻迁辽东道廉访使。
现代文：泰定二年任陕西行省参知政事，加中奉大夫，不久升辽东道廉访使。
English: For two years, Taiding served as the political advisor to the provincial governor of Shaanxi Province, and was promoted to the post of middle-ranking doctor, and soon he was promoted to the post of the visiting envoy of the Liao Dynasty.

古文：属永平大水，民多捐瘠，升请发海道粮十八万石、钞五万缗，以赈饥民，且蠲其岁赋，朝廷从之，民得全活者众。
现代文：永平大水，民众多困厄，升请求发海道粮十八万石、钞五万缗，赈救灾民，减免这年的赋税，得到朝廷同意，很多民众得以活命。
English: Yongping heavy water, the people are in dire straits, and the request for the issuance of 180,000 koku of road grain, 50,000 baht of banknotes and coins to help the victims, and the reduction and exemption of this year's tax was approved by the Imperial Court, and many people were able to survive.

古文：明年，召拜侍御史。
现代文：第二年，任侍御史。
English: The following year, he was appointed to the position of Samurai Governor.

古文：天历初，出为山东道廉访使，时方有警，有司请完城以为备，升曰： 民恃吾以生，完城是弃民也。 
现代文：天历初，出任山东道廉访使，当时有警报，当地官府请求加固城池来防备，升说 ：百姓依靠我们而生，加固城池，兴师动众，这是抛弃百姓。 
English: At the beginning of the calendar, when he served as a visiting envoy from Shandong Province, there was an alarm at that time, and the local government requested to strengthen the city to prevent it. He said: The people rely on us, strengthen the city, and motivate the people. This is abandoning the people.

古文：由是民皆安之。文宗赐尚酝文币，以赏其功。逾年，召为太禧院副使，兼奉赞神御殿事，除河南省左丞，复迁淮西道廉访使。
现代文：过了一年，任太禧院副使，并兼奉赞神殿的事务，授职河南省左丞，又升淮西道廉访使。
English: A year later, he was appointed as the deputy envoy of the Palace of the Great Jubilee, and concurrently with the affairs of the temple of praise, he was awarded the post of Henan Province Zuo Jiao, and was also promoted to Huaixi Dao Liang envoy.

古文：升时年六十有九，上书乞致仕。
现代文：这时升已年六十九，上书辞官退隐。
English: At this time, he was sixty-nine years old and retired from the priesthood.

古文：至顺二年，复起为集贤侍讲学士，文宗眷待之意甚隆。元统元年，顺帝即位，首诏在廷耆艾，访问治道，升条上时所宜先者十事。
现代文：至顺二年又起用为集贤侍讲学士，受到文宗关怀。元统元年顺帝即位，召集五六十岁老臣，询问治国之道，升条陈应该先做的十件事。
English: In the second year of the Shun era, he was appointed as a scholar of the collection of sages, and received attention from Emperor Wenzong. In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, when Emperor Shun ascended to the throne, he summoned fifty- and sixty-year-old elders to inquire about the way of governing the country and the ten things that Chen should do before ascending to the throne.

古文：寻兼经筵官，廷试进士，特命升读卷，事已，告省先墓。
现代文：不久兼经筵官，考试进士，命升读卷，事后，升请求探望祖先的坟墓。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to eunuch, passed the entrance examination, was promoted to read the scroll, and later requested to visit the graves of his ancestors.

古文：帝赐金织文袍，以宠其归。
现代文：帝赐金织花纹袍子，使他荣耀还乡。
English: The emperor gave him a gold-embroidered robe so that he could return to his hometown in glory.

古文：明年，以奎章阁大学士、资善大夫、知经筵事召，赐上尊，趣就职，升以疾辞。帝察其不可强，许之。
现代文：第二年，以奎章阁大学士、资善大夫、知经筵事召回，赐好酒一尊，催促就职，升以病辞职，帝看不可勉强，才同意。
English: In the second year, he was recalled as a scholar of Keizhangge University, a talented doctor, and a learned scholar, and was given a good wine, urged to take office, and resigned due to illness. It was only after the emperor saw that he could not be forced that he agreed.

古文：寻命本郡月给禄半，以终其身。
现代文：不久命本郡每月给原俸禄的一半。
English: Before long, the county was giving him half of his salary every month.

古文：至正元年卒，年八十一。
现代文：至正元年卒，享年八十一岁。
English: He passed away in 1981, at the age of eighty-one.

古文：赠资德大夫、河南等处行中书省左丞，谥文宪。
现代文：赠资德大夫、河南等处行中书省左丞，谥号文宪。
English: He was awarded the title of "Wen Xian" (文憲) by the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology.

古文：臧梦解陆垕臧梦解，庆元人，宋末中进士第，未官而国亡。
现代文：臧梦解庆元人，宋末中进士，未做官宋已亡。
English: He was a member of the Song Dynasty's late middle school, but died before he could become an official.

古文：于是民以户计者，新增七百六十有四；田以顷计者，新辟四百四十有三；桑柘榆柳，交荫境内，而政平讼简，为诸州县最。
现代文：至元十三年随其乡郡守归附元朝，授与他奉训大夫、婺州路军民人匠提举。不久荐举息州知州；还未启程，又改为海宁知州。当时淮东按察副使王庆之，见梦解刚直廉洁谨慎，学问渊博，任职以来，门无私谒，官署肃然，凡有差役，都按贫富摊派，吏不干预。人口增加到七百六十四户；开辟田地四百四十三顷；桑柘榆柳成荫，政治平明，诉讼按实情处理，各州县未有伦比。
English: In the 13th year of the Yuan Dynasty, the county seat of his hometown was annexed to the Yuan Dynasty, and he was awarded the title of doctor and civilian craftsman of the Zhangzhou Road Army. He was soon recommended to be promoted to Xizhou Chizhou; before he left, he was changed to Haining Chizhou. At that time, Wang Qingzhi, the deputy inspector of Huaidong, saw the dream, was upright and prudent, and learned a lot. Since his appointment, the door was selfless, the government office was dignified, and all dispatched officers were distributed according to the rich and poor, and officials did not interfere. The population increased to 764

古文：乃举梦解才德兼备，宜擢清要，以展所蕴。
现代文：于是上章荐举梦解才德兼备，应提任要职，以施展他蕴蓄的才干。
English: Therefore, the previous chapter recommended that a person who has both the ability and the virtue of dream interpretation should be appointed to an important position in order to display his accumulated talent.

古文：而御史台亦以其廉能，抗章荐之。
现代文：御史台也因为他贤能而上奏章举荐。
English: He was also recommended by the History Channel for his virtuosity.

古文：二十七年，梦解满去者至是已五年矣。属江阴饥，江浙行省委梦解赈之。
现代文：二十七年，梦解到此任职已五年了，这年江阴遭灾，江浙行省委托梦解赈济。
English: In the 27th year, it has been five years since Menglu was appointed to this post. This year, Jiangyin suffered a disaster, and Jiangsu and Zhejiang provinces entrusted Menglu to help.

古文：故事，烟瘴之地，行部者多不躬至，而梦解咸遍历焉。遂按问宾州、藤州两路达鲁花赤，与凡贪官奸吏，置于法者无虑八十余人。
现代文：他亲临灾区发放粮食，救活四万五千多人。江南行台治书侍御史苟宗道听说了他的事迹后，举荐他，授同知桂阳路总管府事。
English: He personally distributed grain in the disaster area, saving more than 45,000 people. After hearing of his deeds, the south of the Yangtze River, the Taiji scribe and attendant of the Shigou sect, recommended him and awarded him the title of Guiyang Road general manager of government affairs.

古文：又平反邕州黄震被诬赃罪，及藤州唐氏妇被诬杀夫罪，凡两冤狱。
现代文：三十年提拔为奉议大夫、广西肃政廉访使。他一破常例，走遍边远地区，察问宾州、藤州两路达鲁花赤，依法惩处贪官奸吏八十多人。又给邕州黄震、藤州唐氏两桩冤狱平反。
English: After 30 years, he was promoted to the post of doctor of recommendation, and became the envoy of Guangxi to crack down on political corruption. He broke the usual practice and traveled throughout the remote areas to investigate the corrupt officials in Pennsylvania and Fujian, and punished more than 80 corrupt officials in accordance with the law. He also rehabilitated two cases of unjust imprisonment for the Huang Zhen and Tang families in Zhangzhou and Fujian.

古文：大德元年，迁江西肃政廉访副使。
现代文：大德元年，任江西肃政廉访副使。
English: In the first year of the Great Patriotic War, he served as deputy envoy of Jiangxi Suizheng Inspection.

古文：有临江路总管李倜，素狡狯，而又附大臣势，以控持省宪，梦解按其赃罪，而一道澄清。
现代文：临江路总管李倜，平素狡狯，又仗大臣之势，控制行省，梦解审明其贪赃罪，依法惩处，澄清一道吏治。
English: The general manager of Linjiang Road, Li Jun, is usually cunning and cunning, and relies on the power of the minister to control the province, to clarify his corruption crime, to punish according to law, and to clarify a cadre rule.

古文：六年，迁浙东肃政廉访副使。
现代文：六年，任浙东肃政廉访副使。
English: For six years, he served as the deputy envoy of the East Zhejiang Sui Dynasty.

古文：九年，除广东肃政廉访使。
现代文：九年授广东肃政廉访使。
English: He was awarded the title of "Guangdong Anti-Corruption Envoy" for nine years.

古文：梦解至是，既老且病，乃纳禄退居杭州，以亚中大夫、湖南宣慰副使致仕。
现代文：此时梦解既老又病，以亚中大夫、湖南宣慰副使辞官退居杭州，享有俸禄。
English: At this time, Mengde was both old and ill, and he retired to Hangzhou as an assistant middle-ranking doctor and deputy envoy of Hunan Xuanliao, enjoying a salary.

古文：后至元元年卒。
现代文：后至元元年卒。
English: He later graduated in 1981.

古文：梦解博学洽闻，为时名儒，然不少迂腐，而敏于政事，其操守尤为介特。
现代文：梦解博学广闻，为知名儒生，但一点也不迂腐，对政事敏锐，节操尤其出众。
English: He is a well-known Confucian scholar, but he is not pedantic at all, he is keen on politics, and his discipline is particularly outstanding.

古文：颢幼颖悟，日记诵千百言，稍长，游京师，登翰林承旨王磐、安藏之门。
现代文：著有《周官考》三卷、《春秋微》一卷。自号 鲁山大夫 ，士人称他 鲁山先生 。
English: He is the author of three volumes of "Zhou Guankao" and one volume of "Spring and Autumn Weakness." He calls himself "Lushan Daifu," and scholars call him "Mr. Lushan."

古文：磐熟金典章，安藏通诸国语，颢兼习之。
现代文：陈颢字仲明，祖先居住在卢龙，后迁徙到清州，于是成了清州人。陈颢幼年就很聪慧，日记千字。
English: Chen Yanzi Zhongming, whose ancestors lived in Lulong and later migrated to Cheongju, thus became a Cheongju native. Chen Yanzi was very bright as a child and kept a thousand-word diary.

古文：安藏乃荐颢入宿卫，寻为仁宗潜邸说书。
现代文：稍长，游学京师，求教于王磐、安藏门下学习典章、蒙古语。安藏推荐陈颢入宿卫，不久，在太学府中为仁宗讲解经史。
English: For a little longer, he traveled to study under the masters of Beijing, and sought instruction under Wang Pan and Anso to learn the legal code and the Mongolian language. Anso recommended Chen Xi to enter the palace guard, and soon he was lecturing on the history of the scriptures for Ninsong at Taigakufu.

古文：于是，仁宗奉母后出居怀庆，颢从行，日开陈以古圣贤居艰贞之道。
现代文：仁宗侍母后居怀庆，颢随行，每天讲述古代圣贤艰贞之道。
English: The attendant mother of Rinzong, Houju Huaiqing, accompanies the procession, recounting the arduous path of ancient sages and chastity every day.

古文：会成宗崩，仁宗入定内难，以迎武宗，颢皆预谋。
现代文：适逢成宗驾崩，仁宗入朝平定内难，迎接武宗，陈颢都参预谋划。
English: Chengzong passed away at the right time, Renzong entered the court to quell the internal difficulties, and to welcome Buzong, Chen Yidu participated in the pre-planning.

古文：及仁宗即位，以推戴旧勋，特拜集贤大学士、荣禄大夫，仍宿卫禁中，政事无不与闻。科举之行，颢赞助之力尤多。
现代文：仁宗即位，特授颢集贤大学士、荣禄大夫，仍宿卫宫中，凡政事帝没有不说给他听的，推行科举，颢大力赞助。
English: When Emperor Nizong ascended to the throne, he was specially awarded the title of "Distinguished Scholar" and "Doctor of Honor" and was still living in the palace. Whenever there was a political matter that the emperor needed to hear, he vigorously sponsored the implementation of the imperial examinations.

古文：颢时伺帝燕闲，辄取圣经所载大经大法有切治体者陈之，每见嘉纳。
现代文：在帝安闲休息时，就取圣人经书中，有关治理政体的大经大法，有切于当时政治者进呈，帝每阅后便称赞采纳。
English: While taking a leisurely rest in Di'an, he read from the Book of Saints, the Great Law of the Great Law of the Great Law of the Great Law of the Great Law of the Great Law of the Great Law of the Great Law of the Great Law of the Great Law of the Great Law of the Great Law of the Great Law of the Great Law of the Great Law of the Great Law of the Great Law of the Great Law of the Great Law of the Great Law of the Great Law of the Great Law of the Great Law.

古文：帝尝坐便殿，群臣入奏事，望见颢，喜曰： 陈仲明在列，所奏必善事矣。 
现代文：帝在便殿，群臣上奏事情时，看见颢便高兴地说： 陈仲明在此，上奏的一定是好事。 
English: When the emperor was in the throne room and his courtiers were reporting on the situation, he was pleased to see Zou and said, "Chen Zhongming is here, reporting on the situation must be a good thing."

古文：颢以父年老，力请归养清州，帝特命颢长子孝伯为知州以就养。
现代文：颢以父年迈，极力请求回清州侍养，帝特命颢的长子孝伯任知州以便奉养。
English: As his father was getting old, he strongly requested to go back to Chingju to take care of him. His eldest son, Takahaku, came to Chishu to take care of him.

古文：颢固辞，乃以孝伯为州判官。
现代文：颢坚决推辞，才以孝伯为州判官。
English: resolutely refused, and only then did he appoint Xiao Bo as the state judge.

古文：帝欲用颢为中书平章政事，颢叩首谢曰： 臣无汗马之功，又乏经济之略，一旦置之政途，徒速臣咎。
现代文：帝要任命颢为中书平章政事，颢叩头辞谢说： 我无汗马之功，又乏经世济民之才，一旦置身政途，只会加重罪责。
English: The emperor wanted to appoint Gong Pingzhang to the Central Government, but Gong kowtowed and said, "I have no merit, and I lack the ability to help the people. Once I get involved in politics, it will only increase my guilt."

古文：臣愿得朝夕左右，献替可否，庶少裨万一，亦以全臣愚忠。 
现代文：我愿朝夕侍奉您，出些主意，以尽愚忠。 
English: I would like to serve you morning and evening, to come up with some ideas, to do my best to be loyal.

古文：帝乃允。
现代文：帝才同意。
English: The emperor agreed.

古文：仁宗崩，辞禄家居者十年。
现代文：仁宗驾崩，辞官俸回家十年。
English: After the death of Rinzong, it took him ten years to return home after resigning from the government.

古文：颢顿首谢不敏。颢每集议，其言无不剀切，后至元四年，致政，命食全俸于家。
现代文：文宗即位，起用颢任集贤大学士，颢上疏大兴文治、增加国子学弟子员、免除儒生徭役，文帝赞许采纳。顺帝元统初年，颢随帝去上都，至龙虎台，帝握其手说 ：你是累朝老臣，凡事应直说，切勿隐讳。 颢所言无不切中事理，至元四年辞官在家，仍享全俸。
English: In the first year of Emperor Shun's reign, Emperor Wen went with Emperor Shun to Shangdu, to Longhu Square, and Emperor Wen shook his hand and said, "You are a tired old retainer, and you should speak frankly about everything, and you should not hide anything." What Emperor Wen said was reasonable, and by the fourth year of Emperor Shun's reign, the retired officials were at home, still enjoying their full salaries.

古文：明年卒，年七十六。
现代文：第二年卒，享年七十六岁。
English: He was seventy-six years old at the time of his death.

古文：至正十四年，赠摅诚秉义佐理功臣、光禄大夫、河南江北等处行中书省平章政事、柱国，追封蓟国公，谥文忠。
现代文：至元十四年赠摅诚秉义佐理功臣、光禄大夫、河南江北等处行中书省平章政事、柱国，追封蓟国公，谥号文忠。
English: In the 14th year of the Yuan Dynasty, he bestowed the title of "Minister of the People's Republic of China," "Minister of the People's Republic of China," "Minister of the People's Republic of China," "Minister of the People's Republic of China," "Minister of the People's Republic of China," "Minister of the People's Republic of China," "Minister of the People's Republic of China," "Minister of the People's Republic of China," "Minister of the People's Republic of China," and "Minister of the People's Republic of China."

古文：颢出入禁闼数十年，乐谈人善，而恶闻人过。
现代文：颢出入宫中数十年，乐于谈人之长，不愿听人之短。
English: He has been in and out of the palace for decades. He is happy to talk about people's strengths, but does not want to hear people's weaknesses.

古文：欧阳玄为国子祭酒，与颢同考试国子伴读，每出一卷，颢必拾而观之，苟得其片言善，即以置选列，为之色喜。
现代文：由他推荐成名的人终身不知是他推荐的。欧阳玄任国子祭酒时，与颢一同考试国子伴读，每出一卷，颢必阅，如有一句半句好的，立即放到选择之列，为之高兴。
English: People who were recommended by him to become famous were never known to have been recommended by him. When Ouyang Xuanzang was appointed as the son of the state to offer wine, he and Zou took the exam to be read by the son of the state. Zou must read every volume. If there is a good sentence and a half, he will immediately put it on the list of choices and be happy.

古文：玄叹曰： 陈公之心，盖笃于仁而逾于厚者，真可使鄙夫宽、薄夫敦矣。 
现代文：玄叹息说： 陈公的心，忠实于仁而超过于厚，真可使鄙俗的人宽容，不厚道的人敦厚。 
English: Xu Xuan sighed and said: Chen Gong's heart is loyal to benevolence and surpasses thickness, which can truly make the vulgar people tolerant and the unkind people courageous.

