古文：万章问曰： 舜往于田，号泣于旻天，何为其号泣也？ 
现代文：万章问： 大舜到田野里，望着天空哭诉，是什么事让他呼告哭泣呢？ 
English: Wan Zhang asked: When the giant centipede went to the field and looked up at the sky and cried, what made him cry?

古文：孟子曰： 怨慕也。 
现代文：孟子说： 这是因为他又怨恨又思念。 
English: Mencius said, "Resentment is also rife."

古文：万章曰： 父母爱之，喜而不忘；父母恶之，劳而不怨。
现代文：万章说： 常听说 得父母宠爱，高兴而难忘；被父母厌恶，忧愁而不怨恨。 
English: Wan Zhang said: It is often said that if you are loved by your parents, you will be happy and unforgettable; if you are loathed by your parents, you will be sad but not resentful.

古文：然则舜怨乎？ 
现代文：那么，大舜怨恨父母吗？ 
English: And then complain?

古文：曰： 长息问于公明高曰： 舜往于田，则吾既得闻命矣；号泣于旻天，于父母，则吾不知也。 
现代文：孟子说： 长息曾经问公明高： 大舜到田野里，我已经听你讲解过了；望着天哭诉，是为了父母，那我就不懂了。 
English: Mencius said, "Long-breath once asked Gongming Gao, 'I have already listened to your explanation about the giant centipede going into the field. If I look up at the sky and cry for my parents, then I won't understand.

古文：公明高曰： 是非尔所知也。 
现代文：公明高说： 这就不是你能理解的了。 
English: "It's not something you can understand," Mr. Komeito said.

古文：夫公明高以孝子之心，为不若是恝，我竭力耕田，共为子职而已矣，父母之不我爱，于我何哉？
现代文：这是公明高以孝子的心态，认为不应该若无其事，淡然处之：我尽力地耕田，恭敬地完成做儿子的职责而已，至于父母不宠爱我，我有什么办法呢？
English: This is a public, high-minded, filial-son mentality, which believes that nothing should be taken lightly: I only do my best to cultivate the fields and respectfully fulfill my duties as a son. As for my parents not favoring me, what can I do?

古文：帝使其子九男二女，百官牛羊仓廪备，以事舜于畎亩之中。天下之士多就之者，帝将胥天下而迁之焉。
现代文：帝尧派他的九个儿子两个女儿，还有百官带着牛羊、粮食，到农田里去侍奉大舜，天下的许多读书人都去归附他，帝尧考察天下而把天下迁让给舜。
English: The emperor sent his nine sons and two daughters, as well as hundreds of officials with cattle, sheep and grain, to the farmland to serve the emperor. Many readers from all over the world went to join him. The emperor inspected the world and transferred the world to the emperor.

古文：为不顺于父母，如穷人无所归。
现代文：因为不被父母喜欢，舜就如同穷人找不到归宿一样。
English: Being disliked by one's parents is like a poor man who cannot find a home.

古文：天下之士悦之，人之所欲也，而不足以解忧；好色，人之所欲，妻帝之二女，而不足以解忧；富，人之所欲，富有天下，而不足以解忧；贵，人之所欲，贵为天子，而不足以解忧。
现代文：被天下的读书人所喜欢，是每个人的欲望，而不能解开舜的忧愁；喜欢美貌的女子，也是每个人的欲望，娶了帝尧的两个女儿，而还是不能解开舜的忧愁；富裕，也是每个人的欲望，拥有了整个天下，也还是不能解开舜的忧愁；尊贵，也是每个人的欲望，身为天子那样的尊贵，也还不能解开舜的忧愁。
English: To be liked by the readers of the world is everyone's desire, but it cannot solve the sorrow of the world; a woman who likes beauty is also everyone's desire, married the two daughters of the emperor, but still cannot solve the sorrow of the world; richness is also everyone's desire, owned the whole world, but still cannot solve the sorrow of the world; dignity is also everyone's desire, being as noble as the son of heaven, but still cannot solve the sorrow of the world.

古文：人悦之、好色、富贵，无足以解忧者，惟顺于父母，可以解忧。
现代文：被人喜爱、喜好美色、富裕且尊贵，没有一样能解除舜的忧愁，惟有让父母顺心才能解忧。
English: To be loved by others, to like beauty, to be rich and noble, none of these things can relieve the sorrows of the cocoon. The only way to relieve the sorrows is to let the parents have their way.

古文：人少，则慕父母；知好色，则慕少艾；有妻子，则慕妻子；仕则慕君，不得于君则热中。
现代文：人在少年时，仰慕父母；知道爱好美色了，则思念年轻漂亮的了；有了妻子，就会思念家室；入仕作官就会思念君主，得不到君主赏识就会内心焦躁。
English: When one is a boy, one admires one's parents; when one knows that one loves beauty, one misses being young and beautiful; when one has a wife, one misses one's family; when one becomes an official, one misses the monarch; when one does not receive the monarch's appreciation, one becomes anxious.

古文：大孝终身慕父母。
现代文：只有最孝顺的人终身思念父母。
English: Only the most dutiful people miss their parents all their lives.

古文：五十而慕者，予于大舜见之矣。 
现代文：到了五十岁还思念父母的人，我在大舜身上见到了。 
English: I saw in Otaki someone who, at the age of fifty, still misses his parents.

