古文：《传》曰： 听之不聪，是谓不谋，厥咎急，厥罚恆寒，厥极贫。
现代文：《传》说： 听而不闻，逭叫作不谋，其罪责是急，其惩罚是持续寒冷，最终是贫困。
English: "Legend" said: Hearing but not hearing, howling but not doing anything, its guilt is urgent, its punishment is continuous cold, and finally poverty.

古文：时则有鼓妖，时则有鱼孽，时则有豕祸，时则有耳痾，时则有黑眚黑祥。
现代文：时或有鼓妖，时或有鱼孽，时或有猪祸，时或有耳朵怪病，时或有黑色灾异黑色征祥。
English: Sometimes there is a drum demon, sometimes there is a fish evil, sometimes there is a pig evil, sometimes there is an ear strange disease, sometimes there is a black plague strange black auspicious.

古文：惟火沴水。 
现代文：是火克水。 
English: It's fire and water.

古文：听之不聪，是谓不谋，言上偏听不聪，下情隔塞，则谋虑利害，失在严急，故其咎急也。
现代文：听而不闻，这叫做不谋，是说上偏听，下情阻隔不能传达，谋虑利害，就会因异常急迫而有阙失，所以其罪责是急。
English: To listen and not to hear is called "unscrupulousness," which means that the listener is biased on the one hand, and is unable to convey his or her feelings on the other hand. If the listener thinks about his or her own interests, he or she will be in a hurry and make mistakes. Therefore, his or her culpability is urgent.

古文：盛冬日短，寒以杀物，政促迫，故其罚常寒也。
现代文：隆冬时节白天很短，严寒伤害万物，政治急促紧迫，所以其惩罚是持久的寒冷。
English: In midwinter, the days are short, the cold hurts everything, and politics is urgent, so the punishment is a long cold.

古文：寒则不生百谷，上下俱贫，故其极贫也。
现代文：寒冷就会使百谷不能生长，上下都贫困，所以最终是贫困。
English: Cold will make the hundred grains can not grow, up and down are poor, so it is ultimately poverty.

古文：君严猛而闭下，臣战栗而塞耳，则妄闻之气发于音声，故有鼓妖。
现代文：君主严厉威猛而使下情闭塞，臣子恐惧惊慌而不能听取意见，妄听之气就会产生，所以有鼓妖。
English: The monarch is stern and powerful and makes the subordinates closed, the courtiers are afraid and panicked and can not listen to opinions, and the spirit of listening will occur, so there is a drum demon.

古文：寒气动，故有鱼孽。
现代文：寒气动，所以有鱼孽。
English: It's cold and windy, so there's fish poop.

古文：而龟能为孽，龟能陆处，非极阴也，鱼去水而死，极阴之薛也。
现代文：而龟能成为妖孽，龟能在陆地行动，不是极阴，鱼离开水就死，是极阴的妖孽。
English: But a turtle can become a witch, a turtle can move on land, but not in the extreme shade, and a fish can die if it leaves the water, but only in the extreme shade.

古文：于《易》，《坎》为水，为豕，豕大耳而不聪察，听气毁，故有豕祸也。
现代文：在《易》中，《坎》是水，是猪，猪有大耳朵却不能听得很清晰，听气有损毁，所以有猪祸。
English: In "Yi," "Kan" is water, is a pig, pigs have big ears but can not hear very clearly, hearing is damaged, so there is a pig disaster.

古文：一曰，寒岁豕多死及为怪，亦是也。
现代文：一说，寒冷的年份猪多死亡而为妖异，也是对的。
English: It is also correct to say that pigs die more in cold years, which is strange.

古文：及人，则多病耳者，故有耳痾。
现代文：至于人，就有很多耳朵有病的，所以有耳朵怪病。
English: As for people, there are many people with ear diseases, so there are ear diseases.

古文：水色黑，故有黑眚黑祥。
现代文：水的颜色黑，便有黑色灾异黑色征祥。
English: The color of the water is black, so there are black disasters and black auspicious signs.

古文：凡听伤者，病水敢；水气病，则火沴之。
现代文：凡是听觉有损伤的，是病于水气；水气有病，火就会克。
English: Anyone with a hearing impairment is affected by water vapour; if water vapour is affected, so is fire.

古文：其极贫者，顺之，其福曰富。
现代文：最终是贫困，顺应后，其福叫富。
English: In the end, it is poverty, and after compliance, its blessing is called wealth.

古文：刘歆《听传》曰有介虫之孽也。
现代文：刘歆《听传》说有甲虫的妖孽。
English: Liu Wei's "Listening to the Legend" says that the witchcraft of beetles is widespread.

古文：庶征之恆寒，刘歆以为大雨雪，及未当雨雪而雨雪，及大雨雹，陨霜杀菽草，皆恆寒之罚也。
现代文：通常征兆的持续寒冷，刘歆认为是下大雪，还有不应降雪时降雪，还有下大冰雹，降霜冻死禾苗百草，都是持续寒冷的惩罚。
English: Persistent cold, which is usually a sign, is considered by Liu Wei to be heavy snowfall, as well as snowfall when it should not be snowing, as well as heavy hail, frost and frozen dead grass seedlings, are all punishments of continuous cold.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 有德遭险兹谓逆命，厥异寒。
现代文：京房《易传》说： 有德行的遭遇艰险遣叫作逆命，其异征是寒冷。
English: Jing Fang's "Easy Biography" said: The encounter of hardships and dangers with virtue is called the opposite of life, and its symptom is coldness.

古文：诛罚过深，当燠而寒，尽六日，亦为雹。
现代文：杀罚过于深重，应当热时却寒冷，整整六天，也有冰雹。
English: The punishment for murder is too severe. When it should be hot, it is cold. For six whole days, there is also hail.

古文：害正不诛兹谓养贼，寒七十二日，杀飞禽。
现代文：陷害忠正不予诛杀这叫作养贼，寒冷七十二天，冻死飞禽。
English: Framing Zhongzheng and refusing to kill him is called raising a thief. The cold lasted for 72 days, and the bird froze to death.

古文：道人始去兹谓伤，其寒，物无霜而死，涌水而出。
现代文：有道的人开始离去这叫作伤，这种寒冷，万物无霜却会死，喷涌的水出来。
English: The virtuous people began to leave. This is called injury, this cold, everything without frost will die, gushing water will come out.

古文：战不量敌帮兹谓辱命，其寒，虽雨物不茂。
现代文：战斗不估量敌方力量这叫作辱命，这种寒冷，虽然有雨万物却不茂盛。
English: The battle does not measure the strength of the enemy, which is called humiliation, this cold, although there is rain, everything does not flourish.

古文：闻善不予，厥咎聋。 
现代文：听到好的却不赞同，其罪责是聋。 
English: If he hears a good thing and does not accept it, he is guilty of deafness.

古文：吴孙权嘉禾三年九月朔，陨霜伤谷。
现代文：吴孙权嘉禾三年九月初一，降霜伤害谷物。
English: On the first day of September in the third year of Wu Sun Quan Jia He, frost damage to cereals.

古文：案刘向说，诛罚不由君出，在臣下之象也 。
现代文：刘向说， 诛杀惩罚不是由君王决定，而是在于臣下的征象 。
English: Liu Xiang said that the punishment for fighting and killing is not decided by the monarch, but depends on the symptoms of the subjects.

古文：是时，校事吕壹专作威福，与汉元帝时石显用事陨霜同应。
现代文：这时，校事吕壹专权作威作福，与濩五童时互题掌权而天降霜的应兆相同。
English: At this time, the school affairs of Lv I, who wields absolute power, is the same as that of Zou Wudong, when he was in power and the weather was frosty.

古文：班固书九月二日，陈寿言朔，皆明未可以伤谷也。
现代文：歪坦记载是九月二日，陈寿说初一，都是表明遣时不能够伤害谷物。
English: According to the records, it was September 2nd, but Chen Shou said it was the first day of the new year, both of which indicated that it was not possible to harm the grain.

古文：壹后亦伏诛。
现代文：吕壹后来也被处死。
English: Lu Yi was later also executed.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 兴兵妄诛兹谓亡法，厥灾霜，夏杀五谷，冬杀麦。
现代文：京房《易恸说： 兴兵随意诛杀这叫作枉法，其灾祸是降霜，夏季伤损五谷，冬季伤损麦苗。
English: Jingfang, "Yi Xuan said: Xing soldiers arbitrarily fight and kill each other, this is called making a mistake. Its disaster is frost damage, summer damage grain crops, winter damage wheat seedlings.

古文：诛不原情兹谓不仁，其霜，夏先大雷风，冬先雨，乃陨霜，有芒角。
现代文：诛杀不顾念情这叫作不仁，有霜，夏季先有大雷风，冬季先有雨，然后降霜，有芒一样的角。
English: To fight and kill regardless of one's feelings is called unkindness. There will be frost. In summer, there will be a big thunderstorm first. In winter, there will be rain first, and then there will be frost. There will be horns like awns.

古文：贤圣遭害，其霜附木不下地。
现代文：圣贤的人遇害，霜附着在木上不下到地上。
English: The saints and sages were killed, and the frost clung to the trees and did not come down to the ground.

古文：佞人依刑兹谓私贼，其霜在草根土隟间。
现代文：奸佞的人依仗刑法这叫作私贼，霜在草根土缝中。
English: Those who commit treachery in accordance with the Criminal Law are called privateers, and the frost is in the grass roots.

古文：不教而诛兹谓虐，其霜反在草下。
现代文：不进行教化而诛罚这叫作虐，霜反在草下。 
English: Punishing without educating is called cruel and unusual punishment.

古文：四年七月，雨雹，又陨霜。
现代文：四年七月，降冰雹，又降霜。
English: In July 2004, hail and frost fell.

古文：案刘向说， 雹者，阴协阳也 。
现代文：刘向说， 冰雹，是阴气威胁阳气 。
English: Liu Xiang said, the hailstorm is the yin threatening the yang.

古文：是时，吕壹作威用事，诋毁重臣，排陷无辜。
现代文：当时，吕壹有威势掌握权力，诋毁重臣，排挤陷害无辜的人。
English: At that time, Lu Yi had the power to seize power, slander senior ministers, and oust and frame innocent people.

古文：自太子登以下咸患毒之，而壹反获封侯宠异，与春秋时公子遂专任雨雹同应也。
现代文：从太子孙登以下都痛恨他，而吕壹反而得到封侯的特别宠爱，舆昼秋时公子遂专断朝政天降冰雹的征兆相同。
English: From the Prince's son and grandson Deng downwards, they all hated him, while Lü Yi, on the other hand, received the special favor of the feudal lord. In the autumn, it was the same sign that the prince arbitrarily ordered the hail to fall from the sky.

古文：汉安帝信谗，多杀无辜，亦雨雹。
现代文：汉安帝听信谗言，杀了很多无辜的人，也是天降冰雹。
English: Han Andi listened to the advice, killed a lot of innocent people, and was also a hailstorm.

古文：董仲舒曰： 凡雹皆为有胁，行专一之政故也。 
现代文：董仲舒说： 凡是有冰雹都是有所胁迫，实行专断政治的缘故。 
English: Dong Zhongshu said: Whenever there is hail, it is due to coercion and the implementation of arbitrary politics.

古文：赤乌四年正月，大雪，平地深三尺，鸟兽死者太半。
现代文：赤乌四年正月，大雪，平地有三尺深，鸟兽死掉的有一大半。
English: In the first month of the fourth year of Akau, there was heavy snow, the flat ground was three feet deep, and most of the birds and animals died.

古文：是年夏，全琮等四将军攻略淮南、襄阳，战死者千余人。
现代文：当年夏季，全琮等四位将军攻占进卢、塞盐，战死的有一千多人。
English: In the summer of that year, four generals including Quanzhang conquered Jinshan, Shishan, and more than a thousand people died in the battle.

古文：其后，权以谗邪数责让陆议，议愤恚致卒，与汉景武大雪同事。
现代文：此后，茎攫因听信谗言多次责斥陆议，陆议愤恨而死，与汉朝量童、亘适时有大雪的事相同。
English: After that, Zhuge Liang repeatedly rebuked Lu Zhe for listening to his advice, and Lu Zhe died of resentment, which was the same as the Han Dynasty's Jian Tong and the timely heavy snow.

古文：十一年四月，雨雹。
现代文：十一年四月，下冰雹。
English: In April of the eleventh year, it began to hail.

古文：是时权听谗，将危太子。
现代文：这时，孙权听信谗言，将要危及太子。
English: At this time, Sun Quan listened to the advice and was about to endanger the prince.

古文：其后，硃据、屈晃以迕意黜辱，陈正、陈象以忠谏族诛，而太子终废。
现代文：此后，朱据、屈晃因违背他的心意遭到废黜侮辱，陈正、陈象因忠心劝谏遭到减族，而太子最终被废。
English: After that, Zhu Zhen and Qu Jiao were dethroned and insulted for violating his will, Chen Zheng and Chen Xiang were reduced in number for their loyal persuasion, and the prince was finally dethroned.

古文：此有德遭险，诛罚过深之应也。
现代文：这是有德的人遭遇凶险，诛杀惩罚遇于深重的应兆。
English: This is a sign that virtuous people are in grave danger, and the punishment of killing is in grave danger.

古文：武帝泰始六年冬，大雪。
现代文：武帝泰始六年冬，有大雪。
English: In the winter of the sixth year of Emperor Wu's reign, there was heavy snow.

古文：七年十二月，又大雪。
现代文：七年十二月，又降大雪。
English: In December of the seventh year, heavy snow fell again.

古文：明年，有步阐、杨肇之败，死伤甚众，不聪之罚也。
现代文：第二年，有步阐、杨肇之败，死伤的人很多，是对不能听从意见的惩罚。
English: In the second year, the defeat of Yang Zhaozhou and the death and injury of many people were the punishment for not being able to listen to opinions.

古文：九年四月辛未，陨霜。
现代文：九年四月辛未，降霜。
English: In April of the ninth year, the weather was cold and frosty.

古文：是时，贾充亲党比周用事，与鲁定公、汉元帝时陨霜同应也。
现代文：这时，买充的亲信相互勾结掌握朝政，与鲁定公、漠元帝时降霜的征兆相同。
English: At this time, the cronies of Maizong colluded with each other to take control of the imperial government, which was the same as the signs of frost in the time of Ruding Gong and Emperor Muyuan.

古文：咸宁三年八月，平原、安平、上党、泰山四郡霜，害三豆。
现代文：咸宁三年八月，平原、安平、上党、泰山四郡有霜，损害三豆。
English: In August of the third year of Xianning, there was frost in the four counties of Pingyuan, Anping, Shangdang and Taishan, damaging three beans.

古文：是月，河间暴风寒冰，郡国五陨霜伤谷。
现代文：当月，河间郡有暴风寒冰，郡国中五次降霜损伤谷物。
English: That month, there was a storm of cold ice in Kawama County, and five frosts damaged cereals in the county.

古文：是后大举征吴，马隆又帅精勇讨凉州。
现代文：此后大举征讨吴国，马隆又统率精兵征讨凉州。
English: After that, there was a large-scale campaign to conquer Wu, and Malong led the elite troops to conquer Liangzhou.

古文：五年五月丁亥，钜鹿、魏郡雨雹，伤禾麦。
现代文：五年五月丁亥，钜鹿、魏郡下冰雹，伤害禾麦。
English: In May of the fifth year of the Dinghai, Menglu and Wei counties were hit by hailstorms, which damaged the wheat.

古文：辛卯，雁门雨雹，伤秋稼。
现代文：辛卯，雁门郡下冰雹，伤害秋庄稼。
English: Unseasonably cold weather, hailstorms in Yanmen County, damage to autumn crops.

古文：六月庚戌，汲郡、广平、陈留、荥阳雨雹。
现代文：六月庚戌，汲郡、广平、陈留、荣阳下冰雹。
English: In June, Gengxu, Gu County, Guangping, Chenlu and Rongyang were hit by hailstorms.

古文：丙辰，又雨雹，陨霜，伤秋麦千三百余顷，坏屋百二十余间。
现代文：丙辰，又下冰雹，降霜，伤一千三百多顷秋麦，毁坏房屋一百二十多间。
English: At the same time, hail and frost fell, injuring more than 1,300 hectares of autumn barley and destroying more than 120 houses.

古文：癸亥，安定雨雹。
现代文：癸亥，安定下冰雹。
English: After the boar, the stable hail.

古文：七月丙申，魏郡又雨雹。
现代文：七月丙申，魏郡又下冰雹。
English: In July, Wei County was again hit by hail.

古文：闰月壬子，新兴又雨雹。
现代文：闰月壬子，新兴又下冰雹。
English: The intercalary month, the new moon, and the hailstorm.

古文：八月庚子，河南、河东、弘农又雨雹，兼伤秋稼三豆。
现代文：八月庚子，河南、河东、弘农又下冰雹，伤秋庄稼和三豆。
English: In August, Henan Province, Hedong Province and Hongnong Province were again hit by hailstorms, which damaged autumn crops and soybeans.

古文：太康元年三月，河东、高平霜雹，伤桑麦。
现代文：太康元年三月，河东、高平有霜和冰雹，伤桑和麦。
English: In March of the first year of Taikang, there was frost and hail in Hedong and Gaoping, and mulberry and wheat were damaged.

古文：四月，河南、河内、河东、魏郡、弘农雨雹，伤麦豆。
现代文：四月，河南、河内、河东、魏郡、弘农下冰雹，伤麦豆。
English: In April, hailstorms hit Henan, Hanoi, Hedong, Wei County, and Hongnong, damaging wheat beans.

古文：是月庚午，畿内县二及东平、范阳雨雹。
现代文：当月庚午，京城地区内的两个县和束平、范阳下冰雹。
English: In the afternoon of the same month, two counties in the Beijing area, He Sokping and Fanyang, were hit by hail.

古文：癸酉，畿内县五又雨雹。
现代文：癸酉，京城地区五个县又下冰雹。
English: At the same time, hailstorms hit five counties in the Beijing area.

古文：五月，东平、平阳、上党、雁门、济南雨雹，伤禾麦三豆。
现代文：五月，束平、平阳、上党、雁门、济南下冰雹，伤禾麦和三豆。
English: In May, Sokping, Pingyang, Shangdang, Ganmen and Jinan were hit by hailstorms, damaging wheat and bean crops.

古文：是时王浚有大功，而权戚互加陷抑，帝从容不断，阴胁阳之应也。
现代文：遣时王浚有大功，而权臣贵戚相互贬抑陷害，武帝不加制止，是阴气胁迫阳气的应兆。
English: Emperor Wu did not put a stop to this, which was a sign of the yang being coerced by the yin.

古文：二年二月辛酉，陨霜于济南、琅邪，伤麦。壬申，琅邪雨雹，伤麦。
现代文：二年二月辛酉，济南、琅邪降霜，伤麦。壬申，琅邪下冰雹，伤麦。
English: In February of the second year, it was cold in Xinjiang, and in Jinan, it was icy and frosty, and wheat was damaged. In Jinshin, it was icy and frosty and wheat was damaged.

古文：三月甲午，河东陨霜，害桑。
现代文：三月甲午，河东降霜，伤害桑树。
English: In the afternoon of March, frost fell in Hedong, injuring mulberry trees.

古文：五月丙戌，城阳、章武、琅邪伤麦。
现代文：五月丙戌，城阳、章武、琅邪伤麦。
English: In May, He Ping, Chengyang, Zhangwu, and Zou Yanzhong injured wheat.

古文：庚寅，河东、乐安、东平、济阴、弘农、濮阳、齐国、顿丘、魏郡、河内、汲郡、上党雨雹，伤禾稼。
现代文：庚寅，河东、乐安、束平、济阴、弘农、濮阳、齐国、顿丘、魏郡、河内、汲郡、上党下冰雹，伤禾苗庄稼。
English: In Goyang, Hedong, Le'an, Sokping, Jiyin, Hongnong, Shenyang, Qi Province, Dongqiu, Wei County, Hanoi, Gu County, Shangdang and Xizhimen, hailstorms damaged the seedlings of crops.

古文：六月，郡国十七雨雹。
现代文：六月，郡国十七次下冰雹。
English: In June, the county experienced its 17th hailstorm.

古文：七月，上党雨雹。
现代文：七月，上党下冰雹。
English: In July, hailstorms are common.

古文：三年十二月，大雪。
现代文：三年十二月，下大雪。
English: In December of the third year, it snowed heavily.

古文：五年七月乙卯，中山、东平雨雹，伤秋稼。
现代文：五年七月乙卯，中山、东平下冰雹，伤秋庄稼。
English: In July of the same year, Zhongshan and Dongping were hit by hailstorms, which damaged autumn crops.

古文：甲辰，中山雨雹。
现代文：甲辰，中山下冰雹。
English: In Jia Chen, there was hail under the mountain.

古文：九月，南安大雪，折木。
现代文：九月，南安下大雪，折断树木。
English: In September, heavy snow fell in Nan'an, breaking trees.

古文：六年二月，东海陨霜，伤桑麦。
现代文：六年二月，东海降霜，伤桑麦。
English: In February of the sixth year, the East China Sea froze, injuring the mulberry.

古文：三月戊辰，齐郡临淄、长广不其等四县，乐安梁邹等八县，琅邪临沂等八县，河间易城等六县，高阳北新城等四县陨霜，伤桑麦。
现代文：三月戊辰，齐郡临淄、长广不其等四县，乐安梁邹等八县，琅邪临沂等八县，河间易城等六县，高阳北新城等四县降霜，伤桑麦。
English: In March, four counties such as Wuchen, Linyi and Changguangbushi in Qi County, eight counties such as Le'an Liangyu, eight counties such as Shanzhai Linyi, six counties such as Yicheng in Hebei Province, and four counties such as Beixincheng in Gaoyang Province had frosts and mulberries were damaged.

古文：六月，荣阳、汲郡、雁门雨雹。
现代文：六月，荣阳、汲郡、雁门下冰雹。
English: In June, Rongyang, Kyu County, and Ganmen were hit by hail.

古文：八年四月，齐国、天水二郡陨霜。
现代文：八年四月，齐国、天水二郡降霜。
English: In April of the eighth year, frosts fell in two counties of Qi Province and Tianshui.

古文：十二月，大雪。
现代文：十二月，下大雪。
English: In December, it snowed heavily.

古文：九年正月，京都大风雨雹，发屋拔木。
现代文：九年正月，京都有大风下冰雹，掀倒房屋拔起树木。
English: In the first month of the ninth year, there were hailstorms in Kyoto under high winds, knocking down houses and uprooting trees.

古文：四月，陇西陨霜。
现代文：四月，陇西降霜。
English: In April, frosts fell in western Shaanxi.

古文：十年四月，郡国八陨霜。
现代文：十年四月，郡国八次降霜。
English: In April, the county had eight frosts.

古文：惠帝元康二年八月，沛及荡阴雨雹。
现代文：惠帝元康二年八月，沛郡和荡阴下冰雹。
English: In August of the second year of Hui Di Yuan Kang, there was a hailstorm in Pei County.

古文：三年四月，荥阳雨雹。
现代文：三年四月，荣阳下冰雹。
English: In April of the third year, hail fell under the Rongyang.

古文：六月，弘农湖、华阴又雨雹，深三尺。
现代文：六月，弘农湖、华阴又下冰雹，有三尺深。
English: In June, Hongnong Lake and Huayin were again hit by hail, which was three feet deep.

古文：是时，贾后凶淫专恣，与春秋鲁桓夫人同事，阴气盛也。
现代文：逭时，贾后凶恶荒淫专横，与春秋时鲁桓公夫人的情况相同，是阴气太盛。
English: When she was a child, Jia Hou was wicked, wild, lascivious, and domineering, which was the same as Lu Huan's wife in spring and autumn. She was too gloomy.

古文：五年六月，东海雨雹，深五寸。
现代文：五年六月，束海下冰雹，有五寸深。
English: In June of the fifth year, there was a hailstorm under the sea, five inches deep.

古文：十二月，丹阳建鄴雨雹。
现代文：十二月，丹杨建邺下冰雹。
English: In December, Danyang Jianyuan was hit by a hailstorm.

古文：是月，丹阳建鄴大雪。
现代文：当月，丹杨建邺下大雪。
English: That month, Danyang Jianye was hit by heavy snow.

古文：六年三月，东海陨雪，杀桑麦。
现代文：六年三月，东海降雪，损伤桑麦。
English: In March of the sixth year, snow fell in the East China Sea, damaging mulberry.

古文：七年五月，鲁国雨雹。
现代文：七年五月，鲁国下冰雹。
English: In May of the seventh year, there was a hailstorm in Lu.

古文：七月，秦、雍二州陨霜，杀稼也。
现代文：七月，秦、雍二州降霜，损害庄稼。
English: In July, frosts fell in Qin and Yong states, damaging crops.

古文：九年三月旬有八日，河南、荥阳、颍川陨霜，伤禾。
现代文：九年三月十八日，河南、荥阳、颍川三郡降霜，伤禾苗。
English: On March 18, 1997, frosts fell in three counties of Henan, Fenyang, and Beichuan, damaging the seedlings.

古文：五月、雨雹。
现代文：五月，下冰雹。
English: Hail in May.

古文：是时，贾后凶躁滋甚，及冬，遂废愍怀。
现代文：这时，买正凶暴日益严重，到冬季，终于废掉愍怀太子。
English: At this time, the Buy Zheng violence became increasingly serious, and by the winter, it was finally abolished.

古文：永宁元年七月，襄城、河南雨雹。
现代文：永宁元年七月，襄城、河南下冰雹。
English: In July of the first year of the Yongning era, hail fell in Xiangcheng and Henan Province.

古文：十月，襄城、河南、高平、平阳又风雹，折木伤稼。
现代文：十月，襄城、河南、高平、平阳又有大风冰雹，折断树木伤害庄稼。
English: In October, Xiangcheng, Henan, Gaoping, and Pingyang had strong winds and hail, which broke trees and damaged crops.

古文：光熙元年闰八月甲申朔，霰雪。
现代文：光熙元年闰八月初一甲申，有霰雪。
English: In Guangxi in the first year of Guangxi, there was a snowstorm in early August.

古文：刘向曰： 盛阳雨水，伤热，阴气胁之，则转而为雹。
现代文：刘向说： 强盛的阳气就有降雨，受到热气的侵伤，阴气胁迫它，就转而成为冰雹。
English: Liu Xiang said, "When the yang is strong, there will be rainfall. When it is injured by the heat, and the yin forces it, it will turn into hail.

古文：盛阴雨雪，凝滞，阳气薄之，则散而为霰。
现代文：强盛的阴气有降雪，凝聚而停滞，阳气逼近它，就散而成为霰。
English: The powerful yin qi has snowfall, condenses and stagnates, the yang qi approaches it, and then dissipates and becomes radon.

古文：今雪非其时，此听不聪之应。 
现代文：如今降雪不在季节，这是听而不合的应兆。 
English: Now snow is out of season, which is a welcome sign.

古文：是年，帝崩。
现代文：这年，惠帝去世。
English: That year, Hui Di passed away.

古文：孝怀帝永嘉元年十二月冬，雪，平地三尺。
现代文：孝怀帝永嘉元年十二月冬季，降雪，平地有三尺深。
English: In December of the first year of Xiaohui Di Yongjia, there was snowfall in winter, and the flat ground was three feet deep.

古文：七年十月庚午，大雪。
现代文：七年十月庚午，下大雪。
English: In the afternoon of October 7th, heavy snow fell.

古文：元帝太兴二年三月丁未，成都风雹，杀人。
现代文：元帝太兴二年三月丁未，成都有大风冰雹，死人。
English: In March of the second year of the Yuan Emperor Taixing, Chengdu was hit by heavy winds and hail, and people died.

古文：三年三月，海盐雨雹。
现代文：三年三月，海盐下冰雹。
English: In March of the third year, there was hail under the sea salt.

古文：是时，王敦陵上。
现代文：逭时，王敦侵凌君王。
English: In his youth, Wang Dun assaulted the king.

古文：永昌二年十二月，幽、冀、并三州大雨。
现代文：永昌二年十二月，幽、冀、并三州下大雨。
English: In December of the second year of Yongchang, heavy rain fell in You, Hebei, and Sanzhou.

古文：明帝太宁元年十二月，幽、冀、并三州大雪。
现代文：明帝太宁元年十二月，幽、冀、并州下大雪。
English: In December of the first year of the Ming Dynasty in Taining, heavy snow fell in Yu, Hebei and Binzhou.

古文：二年四月庚子，京都雨雹，燕雀死。
现代文：二年四月庚子，京都下冰雹，燕雀死。
English: In April of the second year, Genko, hail fell in Kyoto, and the bird died.

古文：三年三月丁丑，雨雪。
现代文：三年三月丁丑，下雪。
English: In March of the third year, it was snowing.

古文：癸巳，陨霜。
现代文：癸巳，降霜。
English: The snow is melting and the frost is falling.

古文：四月，大雨雹。
现代文：四月，大规模下冰雹。
English: In April, massive hailstorms.

古文：是年，帝崩，寻有苏峻之乱。
现代文：当年，旦眯去世，不久有蓝峻之乱。
English: In that year, Danzhong died, and soon after, the Lanjun Rebellion broke out.

古文：成帝咸和六年三月癸未，雨雹。
现代文：成帝咸和六年三月癸未，下冰雹。
English: It was late March in the sixth year of Emperor Chengxian's reign, and it was snowing.

古文：是时，帝幼弱，政在大臣。
现代文：遣时，成帝年幼弱小，政权由大臣掌握。
English: At the time of the Emperor's enthronement, Emperor Cheng was young and weak, and the government was controlled by ministers.

古文：九年八月，成都大雪。
现代文：九年八月，成都有大雪。
English: In August of 1997, Chengdu was hit by heavy snow.

古文：是岁，李雄死。
现代文：当年，李雄死。
English: That year, Li Xiong died.

古文：咸康二年正月丁巳，皇后见于太庙，其夕雨雹。
现代文：咸康二年正月丁巳，皇后出现在太庙，这天夜晚下冰雹。
English: In the first month of the second year of Xiankang, the queen appeared in the Great Temple, and it was hailstorming that night.

古文：康帝建元元年八月，大雪。
现代文：康帝建元元年八月，下大雪。
English: In August of the first year of Kangdi Jianyuan, it snowed heavily.

古文：是时，政在将相，阴气盛也。
现代文：这时，政权由将相掌握，是阴气太盛。
English: At this time, the power was in the hands of the generals, and the atmosphere was very gloomy.

古文：刘向曰： 凡雨阴也，雪又雨之阴也。
现代文：刘向说： 凡是雨就是阴，雪又是雨的阴。
English: Liu Xiang said: All rain is yin, and snow is the yin of rain.

古文：出非其时，迫近象也。 
现代文：出现不是在正常的时节，是有逼迫的征象。 
English: The appearance is not in a normal season, but is a sign of persecution.

古文：穆帝永和二年八月，冀方大雪，人马多冻死。
现代文：穆帝永和二年八月，冀州一带下大雪，人和马匹多冻死。
English: In August of the second year of Mu Di Yonghe, heavy snow fell around Jizhou, and many people and horses froze to death.

古文：五年六月，临漳暴风震电，雨雹，大如升。
现代文：五年六月，临漳有暴风雷电，下冰雹，像升一样大。
English: In June of the fifth year, there was a thunderstorm in Linfen, with hailstones as large as cranes.

古文：十年五月，凉州雪。
现代文：十年五月，凉州下雪。
English: In May of the tenth year, it snowed in Liangzhou.

古文：明年八月，张祚枹罕护军张瓘率宋混等攻灭祚，更立张耀灵弟玄靓。
现代文：第二年八月，张祚抱罕护军张璀率领宋混等进攻并消灭张祚，另立亟奖堕的弟弟亟宝塑。
English: In August of the following year, Zhang Xuan's Han protection army, led by Zhang Xuan, attacked and eliminated Zhang Xuan and Song Jian. Zhang Xuan's younger brother, Xuan Baoshuo, who had fallen into disgrace, took his place.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 夏雪，戒臣为乱。 
现代文：塞盅《易传》说： 夏季下雪，是警示臣子作乱。 
English: According to the "Easy Biography" of Sai Kung: "When it snows in summer, it is a warning to courtiers to make trouble."

古文：此其乱之应也。
现代文：这是张罐作乱的应兆。
English: It's a sign of things to come.

古文：十一年四月壬申朔，霜。
现代文：十一年四月初一壬申，有霜。
English: On the first day of April in the 11th year of the Jinshin, there was frost.

古文：十二月戊午，雷。
现代文：十二月戊午，有雷。
English: At noon on December 3rd, there was thunder.

古文：己未，雪。
现代文：己未，有雪。
English: It's still early, but there's snow.

古文：是时帝幼，母后称制，政在大臣，阴盛故也。
现代文：这时差睦年幼，母后听政，政权由大臣掌握，是阴气盛的缘故。
English: At this time, when he was very young, his mother listened to the government, and the power was controlled by the minister, which was the reason for the gloomy mood.

古文：升平二年正月，大雪。
现代文：升平二年正月，有大雪。
English: In the first month of the second year of the Heian period, there was heavy snow.

古文：海西太和三年四月，雨雹，折木。
现代文：海西太和三年四月，下冰雹，折断树木。
English: In April of the third year of the Western Taihe, hail fell and trees were broken.

古文：孝武太元二年四月己酉，雨雹。
现代文：孝武太元二年四月己酉，下冰雹。
English: In April of the second year of Emperor Xiaowu's reign, it rained and sleet fell.

古文：十二月，大雪。
现代文：十二月，下大雪。
English: In December, it snowed heavily.

古文：是时帝幼，政在将相，阴之盛也。
现代文：这时孝武帝年幼，政权由将相掌握，是阴气太盛。
English: At this time, Emperor Xiaowu was young and the political power was in the hands of the generals. It was too gloomy.

古文：十二年四月己丑，雨雹。
现代文：十二年四月己丑，下冰雹。
English: April of the twelfth year was a bad one, with hail.

古文：二十年五月癸卯，上虞雨雹。
现代文：二十年五月癸卯，上虞下冰雹。
English: Twenty years of May twilight, rising sun, falling hail.

古文：二十一年四月丁亥，雨雹。
现代文：二十一年四月丁亥，下冰雹。
English: In April of the 21st year of Dinghai, hail fell.

古文：是时，张夫人专宠，及帝暴崩，兆庶尤之。
现代文：造时，张夫人受到专宠，耋武帝突然死亡，民众责难张夫人。
English: At the time of construction, Mrs. Zhang was a special favorite. Emperor Wu suddenly died, and the people blamed Mrs. Zhang.

古文：十二月，雨雪二十三日。
现代文：十二月，下雪二十三天。
English: In December, it snowed for 23 days.

古文：是时嗣主幼冲，冢宰专政。
现代文：这时继位的君主年纪幼小，宰相专断朝政。
English: At this time, the monarch who succeeded to the throne was young, and the prime minister dictated the government.

古文：安帝隆安二年三月乙卯，雨雹。
现代文：安帝隆安二年三月乙卯，下冰雹。
English: In March of the second year of An Di Rong'an, the hail came down.

古文：是秋，王恭、殷仲堪称兵内侮，终皆诛之也。
现代文：当年秋，王苤、殷仲堪起兵侵入京城，最终都被诛杀。
English: In the autumn of that year, Wang Hui and Yin Zhongkang led an army to invade the capital, and were eventually killed.

古文：元兴二年十二月，酷寒过甚。
现代文：元兴二年十二月，严寒异常。
English: In December of the second year of the Yuanxing Dynasty, it was unusually cold.

古文：是时，桓玄篡位，政事烦苛。
现代文：这时，桓玄篡位，政事严酷。
English: At this time, Kuan Xuan usurped the throne and the government was harsh.

古文：识者以为朝政失在舒缓，玄则反之以酷。
现代文：有识之士认为朝政的失误在于松散宽缓，桓玄就反其道而行成严酷。
English: Those with insight believed that the mistake of the imperial government was to be loose and lenient, while Kuan Xuan did the opposite and was harsh.

古文：案刘向曰： 周衰无寒岁，秦灭无燠年。 
现代文：刘向说： 周朝衰亡没有寒冷的年份，秦朝覆灭没有炎热的年份。 
English: Liu Xiang said: The decline and fall of the Zhou Dynasty did not have a cold year, and the collapse of the Qin Dynasty did not have a hot year.

古文：此之谓也。
现代文：说的就是这种情况。
English: This is exactly what is happening.

古文：三年正月甲申，霰雪又雷。
现代文：三年正月甲申，天有霰雪又打雷。
English: In the first month of the third year of Jiaxing, the weather was snowy and thundery.

古文：雷霰同时，皆失节之应也。
现代文：雷霰同时出现，都是违背节令的应兆。
English: The simultaneous appearance of thunder and lightning are all signs of violation of the festival.

古文：四月丙午，江陵雨雹。
现代文：四月丙午，江陵下冰雹。
English: On the afternoon of the third day of April, hail fell in Jiangling.

古文：是时，安帝蒙尘。
现代文：这时，安帝蒙难。
English: At this time, Andi was in trouble.

古文：义熙元年四月壬申，雨雹。
现代文：义熙元年四月壬申，下冰雹。
English: In April of the first year of Yixing, Jinshin, there was a hailstorm.

古文：是时，四方未一，钲鼓日戒。
现代文：逭时，天下没有统一，军队天天戒备。
English: At that time, the world was not unified, and the army was on alert every day.

古文：五年三月己亥，雪，深数尺。
现代文：五年三月己亥，下雪，有数尺深。
English: In March of the same year, it snowed and was several feet deep.

古文：五月癸巳，溧阳雨雹。
现代文：五月癸巳，溧阳下冰雹。
English: The sun shines in May, but the hailstorm comes later.

古文：九月己丑，广陵雨雹。
现代文：九月己丑，广陵下冰雹。
English: September has been ugly, and hail has fallen across the country.

古文：明年，卢循至蔡洲。
现代文：第二年，卢循到蔡洲。
English: The following year, Lu Xun went to the tomb.

古文：六年正月丙寅，雪又雷。
现代文：六年正月丙寅，下雪又打雷。
English: In the first month of the sixth year, Hsin Yin, it snowed and thundered.

古文：五月壬申，雨雹。
现代文：五月壬申，下冰雹。
English: Jinshin in May, hailstorms.

古文：八年四月辛未朔，雨雹。
现代文：八年四月初一辛未，下冰雹。
English: At the beginning of April in the eighth year, it was raining and hailing.

古文：六月癸亥，雨雹，大风发屋。
现代文：六月癸亥，下冰雹，大风掀毁房屋。
English: In June, hailstones, hailstorms, and high winds destroyed houses.

古文：是秋，诛刘蕃等。
现代文：当年秋，诛杀刘蕃等人。
English: In the autumn of that year, he killed Liu Ye and others.

古文：十年四月辛卯，雨雹。
现代文：十年四月辛卯，下冰雹。
English: In April of the tenth year, the weather was very bad, with hailstorms.

古文：雷震魏明帝景初中，洛阳城东桥、城西洛水浮桥桓楹同日三处俱时震。
现代文：魏明帝景初年间，洛阳城束桥、城西洛水浮桥穿孔木柱同一天三个地方都受到雷击。
English: In the early years of the Wei Ming Dynasty, the Luoyang Shingzhu Bridge and the West Luoshui Floating Bridge were struck by lightning on the same day.

古文：寻又震西城上候风木飞鸟。
现代文：不久又有雷电震动西城上的候风木飞乌。
English: Soon, another thunder and lightning shook the wind-blown trees on the west side of the city.

古文：时劳役大起，帝寻晏驾。
现代文：当时大兴劳役，明帝不久去世。
English: At that time, Daxing was a laborer, and Emperor Ming died soon after.

古文：吴孙权赤乌八年夏，震宫门柱，又击南津大桥桓楹。
现代文：吴孙权赤乌八年夏，雷击皇宫门柱，又击中南津大桥的穿孔木柱。
English: In the summer of Wu Sun Quan's eighth year, lightning struck the gatepost of the imperial palace and the pierced wooden pillar of the Nanjin Bridge.

古文：孙亮建兴元年十二月朔，大风震电。
现代文：孙亮建兴元年十二月初一，有大风和雷电。
English: On the first day of December in the first year of Sun Liang Jianxing, there were high winds and lightning.

古文：是月，又雷雨。
现代文：当月，又有雷雨。
English: In the same month, there was another thunderstorm.

古文：义同前说，亮终废。
现代文：其含义与前面所说的相同，孙亮终于被废黜。
English: Its meaning is the same as the above, Sun Liang was finally dethroned.

古文：武帝太康六年十二月甲申朔，淮南郡震电。
现代文：武帝太康六年十二月初一甲申，淮南郡有雷电。
English: At the beginning of December in the sixth year of Emperor Taikang's reign, there was lightning in Huainan County.

古文：七年十二月己亥，毗陵雷电，南沙司盐都尉戴亮以闻。
现代文：七年十二月己亥，毗陵有雷电，南沙司盐都尉戴亮奏报。
English: In December of the 7th year of Ji Hai, there was a thunder and lightning in Binling, and the Nansha Division Salt Captain Dai Liang made a report.

古文：十年十二月癸卯，庐江、建安雷电大雨。
现代文：十年十二月癸卯，庐江、建安有雷电大雨。
English: In December of the same year, there was a thunderstorm and heavy rain in Minjiang and Jian'an.

古文：惠帝永康元年六月癸卯，震崇阳陵标，西南五百步标破为七十片。
现代文：惠帝永康元年六月癸卯，雷击中崇阳陵石标西南五百步处，石标破裂为七十片。
English: In June of the first year of Hui Di Yongkang's reign, lightning struck 500 meters southwest of the stone marker of the Chongyang Mausoleum, and the stone marker broke into 70 pieces.

古文：是时，贾后陷害鼎辅，宠树私戚，与汉桓帝时震宪陵寝同事也。
现代文：这时，贾后陷害三公大臣，宠信任用自己的亲戚，与漠桓帝时有雷击中宪陵陵寝的事相同。
English: At this time, Jia Hou framed the three ministers of state, and favored and trusted his own relatives, which was the same thing as when Emperor Mu Huan was struck by lightning and fell asleep in the mausoleum.

古文：后终诛灭。
现代文：买后最终被诛杀灭族。
English: He was eventually beaten to death after the purchase.

古文：永兴二年十月丁丑，雷震。
现代文：永兴二年十月丁丑，打雷。
English: In October of the second year of Yongxing, Ding ugly, thunder.

古文：怀帝永嘉四年十月，震电。
现代文：怀帝永嘉四年十月，有雷电。
English: In October of the fourth year of the Yongjia Emperor, there was a thunderstorm.

古文：愍帝建兴元年十一月戊午，会稽大雨震电。
现代文：愍帝建兴元年十一月戊午，会稽郡有大雨雷电。
English: In the afternoon of November of the first year of Emperor Jianxing, there was a heavy rain and lightning in Heji County.

古文：己巳夜，赤气曜于西北。
现代文：己巳夜，有赤气在西北方闪亮。
English: In the evening, a red gas cloud shines in the northwest.

古文：是夕，大雨震电。
现代文：当天夜晚，有大雨雷电。
English: In the evening of the same day, there was heavy rain, thunder and lightning.

古文：庚午，大雪。
现代文：庚午，下大雪。
English: In the late afternoon, it snowed heavily.

古文：案刘同说， 雷以二月出，八月入。 
现代文：刘向说， 雷在二月出现，在八月消退 。
English: Liu Xiang said that thunder appeared in February and subsided in August.

古文：今此月震电者，阳不闭藏也。
现代文：如今在这个月裹有雷电，这是阳气没有隐退收敛。
English: Now there is thunder and lightning in this month, which means that the yang has not retreated and converged.

古文：既发泄而明日便大雪，皆失节之异也。
现代文：发泄出来后的第二天就下大雪，遣都是失去控制的怪异。
English: It snowed heavily the day after the eruption, and everything was out of control.

古文：是时，刘聪僭号平阳，李雄称制于蜀，九州幅裂，西京孤微，为君失时之象也。
现代文：这时，刘载在乎阳僭称帝号，李雄在蜀地建立政权，天下分裂，西京孤立衰弱，是君主失时的征象。
English: At this time, Liu Zai was concerned about the impotence of the emperor, Li Xiong established a regime in Shu, the world was divided, and West Beijing was isolated and weak. It was a sign that the monarch was out of time.

古文：赤气，赤祥也。
现代文：赤气，是赤色征祥。
English: Red is auspicious.

古文：元帝太兴元年十一月乙卯，暴雨雷电。
现代文：元帝太兴元年十一月乙卯，有暴雨雷电。
English: In November of the first year of the Yuan Emperor Taixing, there was a thunderstorm.

古文：永昌二年七月庚子朔，雷震太极殿柱。
现代文：永昌二年七月初一丙子，雷电击中太极殿的柱子。
English: At the beginning of July in the second year of Yongchang, lightning struck the pillar of the Taiji Hall.

古文：十二月，会稽、吴郡雷震电。
现代文：十二月，会稽、吴郡有雷电。
English: In December, there was a thunderstorm in Wuxi County, Hebei Province.

古文：成帝咸和元年十月己巳，会稽郡大雨震电。
现代文：成帝咸和元年十月己巳，会稽郡有大雨雷电。
English: In October of the first year of Emperor Chengdi's reign, heavy rain and lightning struck Heji County.

古文：三年六月辛卯，临海大雷，破郡府内小屋柱十枚，杀人。
现代文：三年六月辛卯，临海有大雷，击破郡府内小屋的十根柱子，击死人。
English: In June of the third year of Xinwu, there was a large thunderstorm along the coast, which broke through ten pillars of a cottage in the county and killed a man.

古文：九月二日壬午立冬，会稽雷电。
现代文：九月二日壬午立冬，会稽有雷电。
English: On September 2nd, at the break of dawn, thunder and lightning occurred.

古文：四年十一月，吴郡、会稽大震电。
现代文：四年十一月，吴郡、会稽又有雷电。
English: In November of the fourth year, there was thunder and lightning in Wuxi County.

古文：穆帝永和七年十月壬午，雷雨震电。
现代文：穆帝永和七年十月壬午，有雷雨电击。
English: On the afternoon of October 7th, Mu Di Yonghe was shocked by a thunderstorm.

古文：升平元年十一月庚戌，雷。
现代文：升平元年十一月庚戌，打雷。
English: In November of the first year of the Heian period, there was a thunderstorm.

古文：乙丑，又雷。
现代文：乙丑，又打雷。
English: Second ugly, thunder again.

古文：五年十月庚午，雷发东南方。
现代文：五年十月庚午，有雷产生在东南方。
English: On the afternoon of October 5, lightning occurred in the southeast.

古文：孝武帝太元五年六月甲寅，雷震含章殿四柱，并杀内侍二人。
现代文：孝武帝太元五年六月甲寅，雷电击中含章毖的四根柱子，同时击杀二位内侍。
English: Emperor Xiaowu died in June of the fifth year of the Taiyuan Dynasty, in the year of Jia Yin, when lightning struck four pillars containing the imperial seal, killing two attendants at the same time.

古文：十年十二月，雷声在南方。
现代文：十年十二月，在南方有雷声。
English: On December 10th, there was thunder in the south.

古文：十四年七月甲寅，雷震，烧宣阳门西柱。
现代文：十四年七月甲寅，有雷震，烧宣阳门西柱。
English: In July 14th, the western pillar of Xuanxuanyang Gate was burned down by a thunderstorm.

古文：安帝隆安二年九月壬辰，雷雨。
现代文：安帝隆安二年九月壬辰，有雷雨。
English: There was a thunderstorm in Imjin in September of the second year of Emperor Antirong's reign.

古文：元兴三年，永安皇后至自巴陵，将设仪导入宫，天雷震，人马各一俱殪焉。
现代文：元兴三年，永安皇后从巴陵来，准备设立仪仗前导进入宫中，天有雷震，一人一马被击杀。
English: In the third year of the Yuanxing Dynasty, Empress Yongan came from Baling to set up a ceremonial vanguard to enter the palace. There was a thunderstorm, and one person and one horse were killed.

古文：义熙四年十一月辛卯朔，西北方疾风发。
现代文：义熙四年十一月初一辛卯，西北方刮大风。
English: At the beginning of November in the 4th year of Yixi, a strong wind blew from the northwest.

古文：癸丑，雷。
现代文：癸丑，打雷。
English: Crickets, thunder.

古文：五年六月丙寅，雷震太庙，破东鸱尾，彻柱，又震太子西池合堂。
现代文：五年六月丙寅，雷电击中太庙，击破束边屋顶的装饰，穿透柱子，又击中太子西池的合堂。
English: In June of the fifth year of the Heian period, lightning struck the main hall of the Imperial Temple, breaking the decoration of the roof, penetrating the pillars, and hitting the hall of Prince Nishiike.

古文：是时，帝不亲蒸尝，故天震之，明简宗庙也。
现代文：当时，安帝不亲自举行秋冬祭祀，所以上天雷击，表明慢待了宗庙。
English: At that time, Emperor An did not personally hold the autumn and winter ritual, so the thunderbolt from heaven showed that he had waited for the ancestral temple.

古文：西池是明帝为太子时所造次，故号太子池。
现代文：西池是明帝做太子时所前往留连处，所以称为太子池。
English: West Pond is the place where Emperor Ming went to stay when he was crown prince, so it is called Prince Pond.

古文：及安帝多病，患无嗣，故天震之，明无后也。
现代文：到安帝多病，忧虑没有继承人，所以上天雷击，表明没有后代。
English: By the time of Andi's illness, there were no heirs to worry about, so a thunderbolt from the heavens indicated that there would be no offspring.

古文：六年正月丙寅，雷，又雪。
现代文：六年正月丙寅，有雷，又有雪。
English: In the first month of the sixth year, there was thunder and snow.

古文：十二月壬辰，大雷。
现代文：十二月壬辰，有大雷。
English: In December, there is a thunderstorm.

古文：九年十一月甲戌，雷。
现代文：九年十一月甲戌，有雷。
English: In November of the ninth year, there was thunder in Jiaxuan.

古文：乙亥，又雷。
现代文：乙亥，又有雷。
English: In the second month of the year, there is thunder again.

古文：鼓妖惠帝元康九年三月，有声若牛，出许昌城。
现代文：惠帝元康九年三月，有像牛叫一样的声音，传出许昌城。
English: In March of the ninth year of Hui Di Yuan Kang, a sound like a cow's bellowing was heard coming from Xu Changcheng.

古文：十二月，废愍怀太子，幽于许宫。
现代文：十二月，废黜愍怀太子，幽禁在许宫中。
English: In December, the crown prince was deposed and imprisoned in the Xu Palace.

古文：明年，贾后遣黄门孙虑杀太子，击以药杵，声闻于外，是其应也。
现代文：第二年，贾后派黄门孙虑杀太子，用药杵击打，声音传到宫外，这是它的应兆。
English: The following year, Empress Dowager Jia sent Huangmen Sun Qian to kill the crown prince, beating him with a pestle, and the sound was heard outside the palace.

古文：苏峻在历阳外营，将军鼓自鸣，如人弄鼓者。
现代文：苏峻在历阳城外兵营，将军鼓自己鸣响，像有人在玩弄鼓。
English: Su Jun was in the barracks outside Liyang City. The general's drum sounded by itself, as if someone was playing with the drum.

古文：峻手自破之，曰： 我乡土时有此，则城空矣。 
现代文：苏峻自己用手击破鼓，说： 我的家乡有时出现这种现象，城就会空。 
English: Su Jun himself beat the broken drum with his hand and said: Sometimes this phenomenon occurs in my hometown, the city will be empty.

古文：俄而作乱夷灭，此听不聪之罚也。
现代文：不久后他作乱遭杀灭族，这是对听而不闻的惩罚。
English: Soon after, he was killed for causing a disturbance, which is a punishment for not listening.

古文：石季龙末，洛阳城西北九里，石牛在青石趺上，忽鸣，声闻四十里。
现代文：石季龙末年，洛阳城西北九里，有石牛在青石趺上，忽然呜叫，声音传出四十里。
English: At the end of the year of Shi Jilong, nine miles northwest of Luoyang City, there was a stone ox on the blue stone raft, suddenly whining, and the sound was heard forty miles away.

古文：季龙遣人打落两耳及尾，铁钉钉四脚。
现代文：石季龙派人打掉石牛两耳和尾巴，用铁钉钉住四脚。
English: Shi Jilong sent someone to knock off the two ears and tail of the stone ox, and nailed the four feet with iron nails.

古文：寻而季龙死。
现代文：不久后石季龙死。
English: Soon after, Shi Jilong died.

古文：孝武太元十五年三月己酉朔，东北方有声如雷。
现代文：孝武太元十五年三月初一己酉，东北方有像打雷一样的声音。
English: At the beginning of March in the 15th year of Emperor Xiaowu's reign, there was a thunderclap in the northeast.

古文：案刘向说，以为 雷当托于云，犹君托于臣。
现代文：刘向说，认为 雷应当依托于云，就像君依托于臣。
English: Liu Xiang said that he believed that Lei should rely on the cloud, just as Jun relies on the minister.

古文：无云而雷，此君不恤于下，下人将叛之象也。 
现代文：无云而有雷，这是君王不体恤臣下，臣下将要叛乱的征兆 。
English: There is no cloud but thunder, which is a sign that the monarch is not sympathetic to his subjects, and his subjects will rebel.

古文：及帝崩而天下渐乱，孙恩、桓玄交陵京邑。
现代文：到孝武童去世而天下渐乱，孙恩、桓玄相继侵犯京师。
English: By the time of the death of Xiaowu Tong, the world was in turmoil, and Sun En and Huan Xuan successively invaded the capital.

古文：吴兴长城夏架山有石鼓，长丈余，面迳三尺许，下有盘石为足，鸣则声如金鼓，三吴有兵。
现代文：吴兴长城夏架山有石鼓，一丈多长，鼓面直径三尺左右，下面有盘石做支撑，鸣响时声音就像金鼓，三县有战事。
English: There is a stone drum on Xiajia Mountain of Wuxing Great Wall. The drum is about three feet in diameter. The drumhead is about three feet long. There is a stone plate to support it. When it sounds, it sounds like a golden drum. There is a war in three counties.

古文：至安帝隆安中大鸣，后有孙恩之乱。
现代文：到安帝隆安年间大声呜响，后来有还墨之乱。
English: In the years leading up to the Andean Longan, there was a loud whimper, and later there was the Ink Rebellion.

古文：鱼孽魏齐王嘉平四年五月，有二鱼集于武库屋上，此鱼孽也。
现代文：魏齐王嘉平四年五月，有两条鱼落在武库屋顶上，这是鱼孽。
English: In May of Wei Qi Wang Jiaping's fourth year, two fish landed on the roof of the arsenal, which is a fish crime.

古文：王肃曰： 鱼生于水，而亢于屋，介鳞之物，失其所也。
现代文：王肃说： 鱼生在水中，却高上到屋顶，是介鳞动物，失去其所在。
English: Wang Su said: "Fish live in the water, but go up to the roof. They are mesopelagic animals and lose their habitat.

古文：边将其殆有弃甲之变乎！ 
现代文：边境将领将有丢弃锁甲的变故! 
English: The frontier generals will have the misfortune of discarding their locking armor!

古文：后果有东关之败。
现代文：后来果然有东关之败。
English: Later, there was indeed a defeat at Dongguan.

古文：干宝又以为高贵乡公兵祸之应。
现代文：王寞又认为是高贵乡公兵祸的应兆。
English: Wang Lian also believed that it was a sign of the disaster of the nobles and soldiers in the noble town.

古文：二说皆与班固旨同。
现代文：两种说法都舆班固所说的相同。
English: Both statements are the same.

古文：武帝太康中，有鲤鱼二见武库屋上。
现代文：武帝太康年间，有鲤鱼两次出现在武库屋上。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wu, eels appeared twice on the roof of the arsenal.

古文：干宝以为： 武库兵府，鱼有鳞甲，亦兵类也。
现代文：王宣认为： 武库是兵器府署，鱼有鳞甲，也是兵的类属。
English: Wang Xuan believes that: the arsenal is the top of the Ordnance Department, the fish has scales and scales, and it is also a kind of soldier.

古文：鱼既极阴，屋上太阳，鱼见屋上，象至阴以兵革之祸干太阳也。
现代文：鱼是极阴，屋上是太阳，鱼出现在屋上，象征极阴以兵革之祸侵害太阳。
English: The fish is the extreme shade, the sun is on the roof, and the fish appears on the roof, symbolizing the extreme shade encroaching on the sun with the scourge of war.

古文：至惠帝初，诛杨骏，废太后，矢交馆阁。
现代文：到惠帝初年，诛杀圭噬，废黜太后，馆阁中弓箭互射。
English: In the first year of Emperor Hui, the empress dowager was killed and deposed, and bows and arrows were exchanged in the pavilion.

古文：元康末，贾后谤杀太子，寻亦诛废。
现代文：元尘末年，买后陷害杀死太子，不久也被废黜诛减。
English: In the last years of the Yuan Dynasty, he killed the crown prince after buying and framing him, and was soon dethroned.

古文：十年之间，母后之难再兴，是其应也，自是祸乱构矣。 
现代文：十年之中，母后造成的祸难两次发生，这是应兆，从此祸乱就形成了。 
English: In ten years, the calamity caused by the queen mother occurred twice, which was a sign, and the calamity was formed from this.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 鱼去水，飞入道路，兵且作。 
现代文：京房《易传》说： 鱼离开水，飞上道路，战事将要发生。 
English: Jingfang "Easy Biography" said: The fish leaves the water and flies onto the road, and a battle is about to happen.

古文：蝗虫《春秋》，螽。
现代文：《春秋》，蝗虫为螽。
English: In Spring and Autumn, the locusts are the grasshoppers.

古文：刘歆从介虫之孽，与鱼同占。
现代文：刘歆将其作为甲虫的妖孽，与鱼孽的占卜相同。
English: Liu Yi took it as the beetle's witchcraft, which is the same as the fish's divination.

古文：魏文帝黄初三年七月，冀州大蝗，人饥。
现代文：魏文帝黄初三年七月，冀州有大蝗灾，百姓饥荒。
English: In July of the third year of Emperor Wen of Wei and Huang, there was a great locust plague in Jizhou, and the people were starving.

古文：案蔡邕说， 蝗者，在上贪苛之所致也 。
现代文：蔡邕说， 蝗灾，是主上贪婪苛刻所造成的 。
English: Cai Wei said that the locust plague was caused by the greed and harshness of the Lord.

古文：是时，孙权归顺，帝因其有西陵之役，举大众袭之，权遂背叛也。
现代文：这时，孙权归顺，文帝趁他与蜀国有西陵之战，发动大兵袭击他，孙权便背叛。
English: At this time, Sun Quan surrendered, and Emperor Wen took advantage of the battle between Sun Quan and Shou of the State of Shuling to launch soldiers to attack him. Sun Quan then betrayed him.

古文：武帝泰始十年六月，蝗。
现代文：武帝泰始十年六月，有蝗灾。
English: In June of the tenth year of Emperor Wu's reign, there was a plague of locusts.

古文：是时，荀、贾任政，疾害公直。
现代文：这时，荀、贾掌权，迫害公正正直的人。
English: At this time, Zhai and Jia took power and persecuted the just and honest people.

古文：惠帝永宁元年，郡国六蝗。
现代文：惠帝永宁元年，郡国六次出现蝗灾。
English: In the first year of Hui Di Yongning, there were six locust plagues in the county.

古文：怀帝永嘉四年五月，大蝗，自幽、并、司、冀至于秦雍，草木牛马毛鬣皆尽。
现代文：怀帝永嘉四年五月，有大蝗灾，从幽、并、司、冀到秦、雍，草木和牛马的毛都被吃光。
English: In May of the fourth year of Huai Di Yongjia, there was a great locust plague. From Yu, Bian, Si, and Hebei to Qin and Yong, the grass, trees, and the hair of cattle and horses were all eaten up.

古文：是时，天下兵乱，渔猎黔黎，存亡所继，惟司马越、苟晞而已。
现代文：这时，天下战乱，侵夺平民百姓，能决定存亡的，衹有司马越、苟晞而已。
English: At this time, the world was at war, the common people were being invaded and conquered, and only Sima Yue and Guo Yao could decide whether to survive or not.

古文：竞为暴刻，经略无章，故有此孽。
现代文：竞相残暴苛薄，治理没有法规，所以有道样的妖孽。
English: The competition is brutal and harsh, and there is no regulation for governance, so there is a kind of witchcraft.

古文：愍帝建兴四年六月，大蝗。
现代文：愍帝建兴四年六月，有大蝗灾。
English: In June of the fourth year of Emperor Jianxing, there was a large locust plague.

古文：去岁刘曜频攻北地、冯翊，麹允等悉众御之，卒为刘曜所破，西京遂溃。
现代文：上一年刘曜多次进攻北地、冯翊，曲允等人率全体部众抵御他，最终被刘曜攻破，西京于是溃败。
English: Last year, Liu You repeatedly attacked the north, Feng Yu, Qu Yun and other people led the entire department to resist him, and was finally defeated by Liu You, and the west was defeated.

古文：五年，帝在平阳，司、冀、青、雍螽。
现代文：五年，愍帝在平阳，司州、冀州、青州、雍州有蝗灾。
English: In the fifth year, there was a locust plague in Pingyang, Jizhou, Jizhou, Qingzhou and Yongzhou.

古文：元帝太兴元年六月，兰陵合乡蝗，害禾稼。
现代文：元帝太兴元年六月，兰陵合乡有蝗灾，伤害禾苗庄稼。
English: In June of the first year of the Yuan Emperor Taixing, there was a locust plague in Lanling He Township, which damaged the crops.

古文：乙未，东莞蝗虫纵广三百里，害苗稼。
现代文：乙未，东莞有蝗虫纵横三百里，伤害禾苗庄稼。
English: In the past, there were locusts in Dongguan for three hundred miles in length and breadth, harming crops.

古文：七月，东海、彭城、下邳、临淮四郡蝗虫害禾豆。
现代文：七月，束海、彭城、下邳、临淮四郡有蝗虫伤害禾苗豆。
English: In July, locusts damaged grain and bean seedlings in four counties of Sokha, Pengcheng, Heshou and Linhuai.

古文：八月，冀、青、徐三州蝗，食生草尽，至于二年。
现代文：八月，冀、青、徐三州有蝗灾，吃光生长的草，达二年时间。
English: In August, there was a locust plague in the three prefectures of Hebei, Qing and Hsu, which ate up all the growing grass for two years.

古文：是时，中州沦丧，暴乱滋甚也。
现代文：这时，中州沦陷，暴乱日益严重。
English: At this time, Zhongzhou fell, and the riots became increasingly serious.

古文：二年五月，淮陵、临淮、淮南、安丰、庐江等五郡蝗虫食秋麦。
现代文：二年五月，淮陵、临淮、淮南、安丰、庐江等五郡有蝗虫吃秋麦。
English: In May of the second year, there were locusts eating autumn barley in five counties including Huairing, Linhuai, Huainan, Anfeng and Minjiang.

古文：是月癸丑，徐州及扬州江西诸郡蝗，吴郡百姓多饿死。
现代文：当月癸丑，徐州和扬州江西以西各郡有蝗灾，吴郡百姓多饿死。
English: In the same month, there were locust plagues in counties west of Jiangxi in Jiuyugou, Xuzhou and Yangzhou, and many people in Wuxi County died of starvation.

古文：是年，王敦并领荆州，苛暴之衅自此兴矣。
现代文：当年，王敦兼领荆州，苛刻暴虐的祸患从此开始。
English: In that year, Wang Dun also led Jingzhou, and the scourge of harsh brutality began.

古文：孝武帝太元十五年八月，兗州蝗。
现代文：孝武帝太元十五年八月，兗州有蝗灾。
English: In August of the 15th year of Emperor Xiaowu's reign, there was a locust plague in Zhangzhou.

古文：是时，慕容氏逼河南，征戍不已，故有斯孽。
现代文：遣时，蔓容旦进逼董回南，征伐不停，所以有这样的妖孽。
English: When the time was ripe, the crabs came and forced Dong to go back to the south, and the conquest continued, so there was such a witchcraft.

古文：十六年五月，飞蝗从南来，集堂邑县界，害苗稼。
现代文：十六年五月，飞蝗从南来，聚集堂垦悬境，伤害禾苗庄稼。
English: In May of the 16th year, the flying locusts came from the south and gathered in the overhanging fields, damaging the grain seedlings.

古文：是年春，发江州兵营甲士二千人，家口六七千，配护军及东宫，后寻散亡殆尽。
现代文：这年春，征发辽业兵营士兵二千人，家属六七千人，分派到护军和东宫，不久后几乎全部逃散。
English: In the spring of that year, 2,000 soldiers from the Liaoye barracks and 67,000 family members were conscripted and assigned to the escort and the East Palace. Soon after, almost all of them fled.

古文：又边将连有征役，故有斯孽。
现代文：又边境将士连续有征战劳役，所以有这样的妖孽。
English: In addition, the frontier soldiers were continuously conscripted for war labor, so there was such a witchcraft.

古文：豕祸吴孙皓宝鼎元年，野豕入右大司马丁奉营，此豕祸也。
现代文：吴孙皓宝鼎元年，野猪进入右大司马丁奉军营，这是猪祸。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Wu Sun Yat-sen, a wild boar entered the military camp of the Right Senior General Martin Feng. This was a pig disaster.

古文：后奉见遣攻谷阳，无功而反。
现代文：后来丁奉被派进攻谷阳，无功而返。
English: Later, Ding Feng was sent to attack Guyang, but returned without success.

古文：皓怒，斩其导军。
现代文：孙皓发怒，斩杀他的前导官。
English: Enraged, Sun Yat-sen killed his forerunner.

古文：及举大众北出，奉及万彧等相谓曰： 若至华里，不得不各自还也。 
现代文：到发动大军北上，丁奉和万或等人相互说： 如果到达华里，不得不各自返回。 
English: When it came time to send the large army north, Ding Bong, Wan Rong and the others said to each other, "If we reach Huali, we will have to return separately."

古文：此谋泄，奉时虽已死，皓追讨谷阳事，杀其子温，家属皆远徙，豕祸之应也。
现代文：密谋败露，丁奉当时虽然已经死去，孙皓追究讨伐谷阳的事，杀死他的儿子丁温，家属都流放到远方，这是猪祸的应兆。
English: The plot was exposed, and although Ding Bong was already dead at the time, Sun Yat-sen investigated the matter of subjugating Gu Yang, killed his son Ding Wen, and his family members were exiled far away. This was a sign of the pig disaster.

古文：龚遂曰， 山野之兽，来入宫室，宫室将空 ，又其象也。
现代文：龚遂说， 山野的兽，进入到宫室，宫室将空 ，又是其征象。
English: Then he said, "The beast from the mountain and the field will enter the palace chamber, and the palace chamber will be empty, which is also its sign."

古文：怀帝永嘉中，寿春城内有豕生两头而不活。
现代文：怀帝永嘉年间，寿春城内母猪生两个头的小猪但没有活，周馥取来察看。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wei Yongjia, a sow in Shuchun Town gave birth to two piglets, but they did not live. Zhou Jun took them to inspect.

古文：周馥取而观之，时识者云： 豕，北方畜，胡狄象。
现代文：当时有见识的人说： 猪，是北方的畜，是胡狄的征象。
English: At that time, some people with insight said: "The pig is the animal of the north and the symbol of Hudi."

古文：两头者，无上也。
现代文：两头，是没有上。
English: Two ends, no top.

古文：生而死，不遂也。
现代文：生下就死，是不能成。
English: You can't be born and die.

古文：天戒若曰，勿生专利之谋，将自致倾覆也。 
现代文：天戒这样说，不要产生专为利的谋划，将会自己招致覆灭。 
English: Heaven's commandment says, "Don't come up with schemes designed for personal gain, or you will bring about your own downfall."

古文：周馥不寤，遂欲迎天子令诸侯，俄为元帝所败，是其应也。
现代文：周馥不能觉悟，于是就想挟天子以令诸侯，不久被元帝打败，这是其应兆。
English: Zhou Yu couldn't come to his senses, so he tried to blackmail the emperor into giving orders to the princes. He was soon defeated by the Yuan Emperor, which was a sign of things to come.

古文：石勒亦寻渡淮，百姓死者十有其九。
现代文：石勒不久也渡过淮河，百姓死亡的十有其九。
English: Shi Le soon crossed the Huai River, and nine out of ten people died.

古文：元帝建武元年，有豕生八足，此听不聪之罚，又所任邪也。
现代文：元帝建武元年，有猪长八只脚，这是对听而不闻的惩罚，又是对任用邪恶的人的惩罚。
English: In the first year of Emperor Jianwu of the Yuan Dynasty, there was a pig with eight long legs. This was the punishment for those who did not listen, and the punishment for those who appointed evil people.

古文：是后有刘隗之变。
现代文：此后有刘隗之变。
English: After that, there was a change in Liu Ye.

古文：成帝咸和六年六月，钱唐人家豭豕产两子，而皆人面，如胡人状，其身犹豕。
现代文：成帝咸和六年六月，钱唐有人家的公猪产两仔，都是人脸，像胡人的样子，它们的身子仍是猪身。
English: In June of the sixth year of Emperor Chengxian's reign, the male pigs of a certain family in Qiantang gave birth to two cubs. Both of them had human faces, resembling a goose, but their bodies were still those of pigs.

古文：京房《易妖》曰： 豕生人头豕身者，危且乱。
现代文：京房《易妖》说： 猪产下人头猪身的东西，危险而且有祸乱。
English: Jing Fang of "Easy Demon" said: Pigs give birth to things with human heads and pig bodies, which is dangerous and disastrous.

古文：今此豭豕而产，异之甚者也。 
现代文：如今公猪产仔，妖异更为严重。 
English: Now that the boars have given birth, the evil is even more serious.

古文：孝武帝太元十年四月，京都有豚一头二脊八足。
现代文：孝武帝太元十年四月，京都的一头猪有一头二脊八只脚。
English: In April of the 10th year of Emperor Kōmu's reign, a pig in Kyoto had two backs and eight legs.

古文：十三年，京都人家豕产子，一头二身八足，并与建武同妖也。
现代文：十三年，京都有人家的猪产仔，一头二身八只脚，都与建武时的妖异相同。
English: In the thirteenth year, there was a piglet born in Kyoto. It had two heads, two bodies, and eight legs, all of which were the same as those at the time of Jianwu.

古文：是后，宰相沈酗，不恤朝政，近习用事，渐乱国纲，至于大坏也。
现代文：此后，宰相沉湎于酗酒，不理朝政，亲近的人掌权，逐渐搞乱国家纲纪，直至败亡。
English: After that, the prime minister indulged in alcoholism, ignored the government, and people close to him took power, gradually disrupting the national discipline, until his downfall.

古文：黑眚黑祥孝怀帝永嘉五年十二月，黑气四塞，近黑祥也。帝寻沦陷，王室丘墟，是其应也。
现代文：孝怀帝永嘉五年十二月，黑气漫于四方，近于黑祥。孝怀帝不久沦丧，王室成为荒丘废墟，这是其应兆。
English: In December of the 5th year of the Yongjia Emperor Xiaohai, the dark atmosphere pervaded the four directions, close to Heixiang. Xiaohai Emperor soon fell, and the royal family became a wasteland of ruins. This was its response.

古文：愍帝建兴二年正月己已朔，黑雾著人如墨，连夜，五日乃止，此近黑祥也。
现代文：愍帝建兴二年正月初一己巳，黑雾附着在人身上就像墨一样，连续几夜，五天才结束，这近于黑祥。
English: On the first day of the first month of the second year of Emperor Jianxing, the black fog adhered to the human body like ink. It lasted for several consecutive nights and lasted for five days, which was close to Heixiang.

古文：其四年，帝降刘曜。
现代文：四年时，愍帝投降刘曜。
English: At the age of four, Emperor Gong surrendered to Liu You.

古文：元帝永昌元年十月，京师大雾，黑气蔽天，日月无光。
现代文：元帝永昌元年十月，京师有大雾，黑气遮天，日月无光。
English: In October of the first year of the reign of Emperor Yongchang, there was a heavy fog in Beijing, the black air obscured the sky, and the sun and moon had no light.

古文：十一月，帝崩。
现代文：十一月，元帝去世。
English: In November, Emperor Yuan died.

古文：火沴水武帝太康五年六月，任城、鲁国池水皆赤如血。
现代文：武帝太康五年六月，任越、叠鱼城池中的水红得像血一样。
English: In June of the fifth year of Emperor Wu Taikang, the water in the Ren Yue and Stacked Fish City Pool was red like blood.

古文：案刘向说，近水沴水，听之不聪之罚也。
现代文：玺咆说，近于火克水，是对听而不合的惩罚。
English: "Nearer to the fire than the water" is the punishment for disobedience, he said.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 君淫于色，贤人潜，国家危，厥异水流赤。 
现代文：直庆《易传》说： 君王好女色，贤人隐藏，国家危亡，其异征是水流赤色。 
English: "Easy Biography" by Zhiqing said: The ruler is a womanizer, the wise man hides, the country is in danger, and the symptom is the red color of the water flow.

古文：穆帝升平三年二月，凉州城东池中有火。
现代文：穆帝升平三年二月，凉州城束城池中有火。
English: In February of the third year of Mu Di's rise to the throne, there was a fire in the pond of Liangzhou Castle.

古文：四年四月，姑臧泽水中又有火。
现代文：四年四月，姑臧水泽中又有火。
English: In April of the fourth year, there was another fire in the lake of Gudang.

古文：此火沴水之妖也。
现代文：这是火克水的妖异。
English: This is the magic of fire and water.

古文：明年，张天锡杀中护军张邕。
现代文：第二年，张天锡杀中护军张邕。
English: In the second year, Zhang Tianxi killed the middle guard Zhang Ye.

古文：邕，执政之人也。
现代文：张邕是执掌权力的人。
English: Zhang Ye is the one who holds the power.

古文：安帝元兴二年十月，钱唐临平湖水赤，桓玄讽吴郡使言开除以为己瑞，俄而桓玄败。
现代文：安帝元兴二年十月，钱唐临平湖水成赤色，桓玄劝说吴郡下令清除以作为吉兆，不久后桓玄失败。
English: In October of the second year of An Di Yuanxing, the water of Qiantang Linping Lake turned red, and Huan Xuan persuaded Wu County to order it to be cleared as a good omen. Soon after, Huan Xuan failed.

古文：《传》曰： 思心之不容，是谓不圣，厥咎，厥罚恆风，厥极凶短折。
现代文：《传》说： 思心不容，逭叫作不圣，其灾祸是天气昏暗，其惩罚是持续有风，其结果是早夭。
English: "Zhuan" said: "Thinking is unacceptable, howling is unholy, its disaster is the weather is dark, its punishment is the continuous wind, and the result is an early death."

古文：时则有脂夜之妖，时则有华孽，时则有牛祸，时则有心腹之痾，时则有黄眚黄祥，时则有金木水火沴土。 
现代文：时或有脂夜之妖，时或有花孽，时或有牛祸，时或有心腹的怪病，时或有黄色灾异黄色征祥，时或有金木水火克土。 
English: Sometimes there is a fat night demon, sometimes there is a flower evil, sometimes there is a bull calamity, sometimes there is a strange disease of the abdomen, sometimes there is a yellow disaster, sometimes there is a yellow auspicious, sometimes there is gold, wood, water, fire and soil.

古文：思心不容，是谓不圣。
现代文：思心不容，这叫作不圣。
English: This is called "unholiness."

古文：思心者，心思虑也。
现代文：思心，是心思虑。容，是宽。
English: "Sishin" means "thought" and "zong" means "breadth."

古文：容，宽也。孔子曰： 居上不宽，吾何以观之哉！ 
现代文：孔子说： 在上者而不宽容，我怎么观察他啊! 
English: Confucius said: How can I observe the superior man if I am intolerant of him!

古文：言上不宽大包容，臣下则不能居圣位。
现代文：是说主上不宽大包容，臣下就不能位居贤明的职位。
English: That is to say, if the master is not lenient and tolerant, the vassal cannot occupy a position of wisdom.

古文：貌言视听，以心为主，四进皆失，则区无识，故其咎也。
现代文：外貌言语视觉听觉，以心为主，四者都迷失，那么就会昏昧不明，所以其灾祸是天气昏暗。
English: Appearance, speech, sight and hearing, with the heart as the main, all four are lost, then it will be dim and unclear, so its disaster is the weather is dim.

古文：雨旱寒燠，亦以风为本，四气皆乱，故其罚恆风也。
现代文：降雨干旱寒冷炎热，也是以风为本，四气都混乱，所以其惩罚是持续有风。
English: Rain, drought, cold and heat are also wind-based, and the four airs are chaotic, so the punishment is continuous wind.

古文：恆风伤物，故其极凶短折也。
现代文：持续的风伤害万物，所以其极端凶短折。
English: Persistent wind harms everything, so its extreme ferocity is short-lived.

古文：伤人曰凶，禽兽曰短，草木曰折。
现代文：伤人叫凶，伤禽兽叫短，伤草木叫折。
English: Wounds to people are called fierce, wounds to animals are called short, and wounds to plants and trees are called broken.

古文：一曰，凶，夭也；兄丧弟曰短，父丧子曰折。
现代文：一说，凶，是天；兄丧弟叫短，父丧子叫折。
English: One said, "It is heaven that is evil. An elder brother who has lost a younger brother is called short, and a father who has lost a son is called broken."

古文：在人，腹中肥而包裹心者，脂也。
现代文：对于人，腹中肥而包裹着心，是脂。
English: For man, the fat in the belly, which wraps around the heart, is sebum.

古文：心区则冥晦，故有脂夜之妖。
现代文：心昏昧就昏暗不明，所以有脂夜之妖。
English: If the mind is dim, it is dim and unclear, so there is a fat night demon.

古文：一曰，有脂物而夜为妖，若脂夜污人衣，淫之象也。
现代文：一说，有脂物在夜晚成为妖异，就像脂水晚上污人的衣服，是淫的征象。
English: One says that the greasy substance becomes demonic at night, just as grease stains people's clothes at night, and is a sign of lewdness.

古文：一曰，夜妖者，云风并起而杳冥，故与常风同象也。
现代文：一说，夜妖，是云风同时出现而幽暗不明，所以和常风有相同征象。
English: One said that the night demon is the cloud and wind that appear at the same time, but the darkness is unknown, so it has the same signs as the wind.

古文：温而风则生螟螣，有裸虫之孽。
现代文：温暖而有风就会产生螟媵，有裸虫之妖。
English: When it's warm and windy, grasshoppers come out, and there's the specter of naked worms.

古文：刘向以为： 于《易》，《巽》为风，为木。
现代文：刘向认为： 在《易》中，《巽》是风，是木。
English: Liu Xiang thought: In "Yi," "Cormorant" is the wind and the tree.

古文：卦在三月四月，继阳而治，主木之华实。
现代文：卦在三月四月，接续阳而治，主草木的开花结果。
English: In March and April, Gua will follow the sun, and the main plants will bloom.

古文：风气盛至，秋冬木复华，故有华孽。 
现代文：风的气很强地到来，秋冬时节草木会再开花，所以有花孽。 
English: When the wind blows strongly, plants and trees will bloom again in the autumn and winter, so there will be a shortage of flowers.

古文：一曰，地气盛同秋冬复华。
现代文：一说，地气盛，秋冬时节又会开花。
English: One said that the earth is vigorous, and the autumn and winter seasons will bloom again.

古文：一曰，华者色也，土为内事，谓女孽也。
现代文：一说，华，就是色，土是内事，说的是女孽。
English: One said, "Hua" means "color," "soil" means "internal affairs" and "female vice."

古文：于《易》，《坤》为土，为牛。
现代文：在《易》中，《坤》是土，指牛。
English: In Yi, Kun is earth and refers to cattle.

古文：牛大心而不能思虑，心气毁，故有牛祸。
现代文：牛有大心但不能思考，心气损毁，所以有牛祸。
English: Cows have a big heart, but they can't think, and their spirits are broken. That's why there are cow accidents.

古文：一曰，牛多死及为怪，亦是也。
现代文：一说，牛死很多成为妖怪，也是对的。
English: It is also correct to say that many cattle die and become yokai.

古文：及人，则多病心腹者，故有心腹之痾。
现代文：对于人，就多是心腹有病的，所以有心腹的怪病。
English: As for people, most of them are mentally ill, so they have mental illnesses.

古文：土色黄，故有黄眚黄祥。
现代文：土色黄，所以有黄色灾异黄色征祥。
English: The soil color is yellow, so there are yellow disasters and yellow auspicious signs.

古文：凡思心伤者，病土气；土气病，则金木水火沴之，故曰时则有金木水火沴土。
现代文：凡是思心有伤的，是病在土气；土气有病，金木水火就会克土，所以说时或有金木水火克土。
English: Anyone who has a wounded mind is sick in the earthy; if the earthy is sick, the gold, wood, water and fire will weaken the earth, so it is said that sometimes there is gold, wood, water and fire to weaken the earth.

古文：不言 惟 而独曰 时则有 者，非一冲气所沴，明其异大也。
现代文：不说 衹有 而说 时或有 ，不是一种气克，表明其妖异很大。
English: Not to say that it does not exist, but to say that it sometimes exists, is not an exaggeration, indicating that it is very strange.

古文：其极凶短折者，顺之，其福曰考终命。
现代文：其极端是凶短折，顺从，其福叫作考终命。
English: Its extreme is short-sightedness, obedience, and its blessing is to be the test of life.

古文：刘歆《思心传》曰： 时有臝虫之孽，谓螟螣之属也。 
现代文：塑哒《思心传》说： 时有赢虫之孽，指的是螟媵之类。 
English: Shuxiong said in "The Story of My Heart": Sometimes there is the evil of winning over insects, referring to maggots and the like.

古文：庶征恆风
现代文：征兆为持续刮风。
English: The signs are that the wind will keep blowing.

古文：魏齐王正始九年十一月，大风数十日，发屋折树。
现代文：魏齐王正始九年十一月，大风数十天，掀翻房屋折毁树木。
English: In November of the ninth year of the reign of King Wei Qi, there were dozens of days of high winds, which overturned houses and broke trees.

古文：十二月戊午晦尤甚，动太极东阁。
现代文：十二月末戊午尤为严重，动摇了太极殿的东合。
English: At the end of December, the earthquake was particularly severe, shaking the East Gate of the Taiji Temple.

古文：嘉平元年正月壬辰朔，西北大风，发屋折树木，昏尘蔽天。
现代文：嘉平元年正月初一壬辰，西北有大风，掀翻房屋折断树木，昏暗的飞尘遮蔽天空。
English: On the first day of the first month of the year of Jiaping, there was a gale in the northwest. Houses were overturned, trees were broken, and the sky was covered with dark flying dust.

古文：案管辂说，此为时刑大臣，执政之忧也。
现代文：管辖说，这是当时杀大臣，执政的忧患。
English: According to the governor, this was the time when the murder of a minister was a concern for the government.

古文：是时，曹爽区自专，骄僭过度，天戒数见，终不改革，此思心不睿，恆风之罚也。
现代文：遣时，曹爽昏昧专断，骄横僭越过度，上天的警示多次出现，始终不改过，这是思心不明智，有持续大风的惩罚。
English: At the time of sending, Cao Shuang was dim and arbitrary, his arrogance and arrogance became more and more excessive. The warning from heaven appeared many times, and he never changed it. This was a punishment for having an unwise mind and a persistent gale.

古文：后逾旬而爽等诛灭。
现代文：后来过了十多，曹爽等人被诛杀减族。
English: More than ten years later, Cao Shuang and others were beaten to death and their families were reduced in number.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 众逆同志，至德乃潜，厥异风。
现代文：京庆《易传》说： 民众背逆相同的志向，极高德行的人隐藏不出，有怪异的风。
English: Jingqing "I Chuan" said: The people are contrary to the same aspirations, people with extremely high moral conduct cannot be hidden, and there is a strange wind.

古文：其风也，行不解，物不长，雨小而伤。
现代文：其风，时间长，万物不能生长，雨小但有伤害。
English: Its wind, time is long, everything can not grow, the rain is small but there is damage.

古文：政悖德隐兹谓乱，厥风先风不雨，大风暴起，发屋折木。
现代文：政治昏悖有德的人隐退这叫乱，其风是先刮风不下雨，大风骤起，掀翻房屋折毁树木。
English: The retreat of the politically insouciant and virtuous is called chaos. The wind blows first and does not rain, and the gale suddenly rises, overturning houses and destroying trees.

古文：守义不进兹谓眊，厥风与云俱起，折五谷茎。
现代文：守着义却不进取遣叫作昏昧，其风与云同起，折断五谷的茎秆。
English: He that keepeth the law, and taketh not hold of it, is called a fool: whose wind also breaketh in the clouds, and the stump of the trees of the forest is broken.

古文：臣易上政兹谓不顺，厥风大飙发屋。
现代文：臣下替代主上执政这叫作不顺，其风大吹掀翻房屋。
English: It is called bad luck for a vassal to govern in place of his lord, and houses are overturned by the wind.

古文：赋敛不理兹谓祸，厥风绝经纪，止即温，温即虫。
现代文：赋税收敛不加治理这叫作祸，其风断绝法度，风停就温暖，温暖就有虫。
English: It is a calamity to restrain taxation without regulation. The wind breaks the law, the wind stops and there is warmth, and the warmth brings insects.

古文：侯专封兹谓不统，厥风疾而树不摇，谷不成。
现代文：诸侯王专断分封这叫作不统，其风迅疾而树不摇，谷物不能成熟。
English: The arbitrary division of fiefs by the princes and kings is called unorthodoxy. The wind is swift, but the trees do not shake, and the grain does not ripen.

古文：辟不思道利兹谓无泽，厥风不摇木，旱无云，伤禾。
现代文：排斥不思道义利益这叫作无泽，其风不摇树木，干旱无云，伤害禾苗。
English: Rejection without consideration for moral interests is called lackluster. Its wind does not shake trees, its drought is cloudless, and it harms grass seedlings.

古文：公常于利兹谓乱，厥风微而温，生虫蝗，害五谷。
现代文：公卿常关注利这叫作乱，其风微弱而温和，生虫和蝗，伤害五谷。
English: Court nobles often pay attention to the wind, which is called "chaos." Its wind is weak and gentle, and it brings insects and locusts to harm crops.

古文：弃政作淫兹谓惑，厥风温，螟虫起，害有益人之物。
现代文：抛弃政事去淫乱这叫作惑，其风温和，螟虫产生，伤害有益于人的作物。
English: To abandon politics for licentiousness is called deception, and it produces worms and harms crops that are good for people.

古文：诸侯不朝兹谓畔，厥风无恆，地变赤，雨杀人。 
现代文：诸侯不来朝觐逭叫作叛，其风不定，地变成赤色，下雨成灾死人。 
English: Princes do not come to the imperial court to rebel, the wind is erratic, the ground turns red, and it rains and people die.

古文：吴孙权太元元年八月朔，大风，江海涌溢，平地水深八尺，拔高陵树二千株，石碑蹉动，吴城两门飞落。
现代文：吴孙权太元元年八月初一，有大风，江海涌动涨溢，平地水深八尺，拔倒高陵的树二千株，石碑摇动错裂，吴城两门飞落。
English: On the first day of August in the first year of Wu Sun Quan Taiyuan, there was a strong wind, the river and sea swelled and overflowed, the water depth of the flat land was eight feet, two thousand trees of Gaoling were pulled down, the stone monument shook and cracked, and the two gates of Wucheng fell down.

古文：案华核对，役繁赋重，区不容之罚也。
现代文：华薮的应答是，徭役繁多赋税很重，是对昏昧不宽容的惩罚。
English: Hua Wei's response was that the heavy taxation of the rich and the poor was a punishment for ignorance and intolerance.

古文：明年，权薨。
现代文：第二年，孙权去世。
English: The following year, Sun Quan passed away.

古文：孙亮建兴元年十二月丙申，大风震电。
现代文：孙亮建兴元年十二月丙申，有大风雷电。
English: In December of the first year of Sun Liang's Jianxing, there was a storm.

古文：是岁，魏遣大众三道来攻，诸葛恪破其东兴军，二军亦退。
现代文：逭年，魏国派大军分三路进攻，诸葛恪打败其束兴军，另二军也退走。
English: In the year of the Rooster, Wei sent a large army to attack in three directions. Zhuge Ke defeated the Sok Hing army, and the other two armies also retreated.

古文：明年，恪又攻新城，丧众太半，还，伏诛。
现代文：第二年，诸葛恪又攻打新城，损失部众大半，返回，被处死。
English: The following year, Zhuge Ke attacked Xincheng again, lost most of his troops, returned, and was executed.

古文：孙休永安元年十一月甲午，风四转五复，蒙雾连日。
现代文：孙休永安元年十一月甲午，有风四面转向五次，昏雾连续数日。
English: In the afternoon of November 1st, Sun Xiu Yong'an year, the wind changed direction five times, and the fog lasted for several days.

古文：是时，孙綝一门五侯，权倾吴主，风雾之灾，与汉五侯、丁、傅同应也。
现代文：逭时，茎锤一家有五人被封为侯，权势超过是玺君主，风雾的灾祸，与坠塑五侯、工、传的应兆相同。
English: At that time, five members of the Stemhammer family were appointed as lords, and their power exceeded that of the lords. The calamity of wind and fog was the same as the signs of the five lords, workers, and lords.

古文：十二月丁卯夜，有大风，发木扬沙。
现代文：十二月丁卯夜，有大风，拔树木扬沙尘。
English: On the evening of December 12th, there was a strong wind, and trees were uprooted, sending up sand and dust.

古文：明日，綝诛。
现代文：第二天，逻继被杀。
English: He was killed the next day.

古文：武帝泰始五年五月辛卯朔，广平大风，折木。
现代文：武帝泰始五年五月初一辛卯，广平有大风，折断树木。
English: At the beginning of May in the fifth year of Emperor Wu's reign, there was a strong wind in Guangping, and trees were broken.

古文：咸宁元年五月，下邳、广陵大风，坏千余家，折树木。
现代文：咸宁元年五月，下邳、广陵有大风，毁坏一千多人家，折断树木。
English: In May of the first year of Xianning, there was a strong wind in the lower moat and Guangling, destroying more than a thousand people's homes and breaking trees.

古文：其月甲申，广陵、司吾、下邳大风，折木。
现代文：这月甲申，广陵、司吾、工艺有大风，折断树木。
English: In this month of Jiaxing, Guangling, Sigo, and Jiao experienced strong winds, and trees were broken.

古文：三年八月，河间大风，折木。
现代文：三年八月，蛔有大风，折断树木。
English: In August of the third year, there was a strong wind, and trees were broken.

古文：太康二年五月，济南暴风，折木，伤麦。
现代文：太康二年五月，济南有暴风，折断树木，毁伤麦子。
English: In May of the second year of Taikang, there was a storm in Jinan, which broke trees and damaged wheat.

古文：六月，高平大风，折木，发坏邸阁四十余区。
现代文：六月，高平有大风，折断树木，吹坏官署阁屋四十多个居处。
English: In June, there was a strong wind in Gaoping, which broke trees and damaged more than forty residences in the government office pavilion.

古文：七月，上党又大风，伤秋稼。
现代文：七月，上党又有大风，伤害秋庄稼。
English: In July, there was another strong wind at the beginning of the season, which damaged the autumn crops.

古文：八年六月，郡国八大风。
现代文：八年六月，郡国八次刮大风。
English: In June 2006, the county was hit by eight gales.

古文：九年正月，京都风雹，发屋拔树。
现代文：九年正月，京都有大风冰雹，吹翻房屋拔倒树木。
English: In the first month of the ninth year, there were high winds and hail in Kyoto, blowing over houses and uprooting trees.

古文：后二年，宫车晏驾。
现代文：第三年，武帝去世。
English: In the third year, Emperor Wu died.

古文：惠帝元康四年六月，大风雨，拔木。
现代文：惠帝元康四年六月，有大风雨，拔起树木。
English: In June of Hui Di Yuan Kang's fourth year, there was a heavy storm, and trees were uprooted.

古文：五年四月庚寅夜，暴风，城东渠波浪杀人。
现代文：五年四月庚寅夜，有暴风，城束水渠的波浪淹死人。
English: On the night of April 5th, there was a storm, and the waves of the castle canal drowned people.

古文：七月，下邳大风，坏庐舍。
现代文：七月，下邳有大风，损坏屋舍。
English: In July, a strong wind blew from the lower jaw, damaging houses.

古文：九月，雁门、新兴、太原、上党灾风伤稼。
现代文：九月，雁门、新兴、太原、上党大风损伤庄稼。
English: In September, high winds damaged crops in Yanmen, Xingxing, Taiyuan and Shangdang.

古文：明年，氐羌反叛，大兵西讨。
现代文：第二年，氐羌反叛，大军西征。
English: In the second year, Yan rebelled and led a large army on a western expedition.

古文：九年六月，飙风吹贾谧朝服飞数百丈。
现代文：九年六月，狂风吹走贾谧的朝服，飞了数百丈。
English: In June of the ninth year, a strong wind blew away Jia Wei's imperial robe, and it flew hundreds of meters.

古文：明年，谧诛。
现代文：第二年，贾谧被杀。
English: The following year, Jia Jun was killed.

古文：十一月甲子朔，京都连大风，发屋折木。
现代文：十一月初一甲子，京都连续有大风，吹翻房屋折断树木。
English: At the beginning of November, Kyoto was hit by continuous high winds, which toppled houses and snapped trees.

古文：十二月，愍怀太子废，幽于许昌。
现代文：十二月，鳖怀太子被废黜，幽禁在许昌。
English: In December, Emperor Wuhuai was deposed and imprisoned in Xuchang.

古文：永康元年二月，大风拔木。
现代文：永康元年二月，大风拔起树木。
English: In February of the first year of Yongkang, high winds uprooted trees.

古文：三月，愍怀被害。
现代文：三月，愍怀太子被害。
English: In March, Prince Gong Huai was killed.

古文：己卯，丧柩发许昌还洛。
现代文：己卯，灵柩从许昌出发回到洛阳。
English: Meanwhile, the coffin set off from Xuchang and returned to Luoyang.

古文：是日，又大风雷电，帏盖飞裂。
现代文：当天，又有大风雷电，帏帐车盖飘飞破裂。
English: On the same day, there were also high winds and thunder and lightning, and the roof of the carriage flew off and broke.

古文：四月，张华第舍飙风起，折木飞缯，折轴六七。
现代文：四月，张华的府第房舍狂风起，折断树木吹飞丝帛，折断六七根车轴。
English: In April, Zhang Hua's residence was hit by a strong wind, which snapped trees, blew away reeds, and broke six or seven axles.

古文：是月，华遇害。
现代文：当月，张华遇害。
English: That month, Zhang Hua was killed.

古文：十一月戊午朔，大风从西北来，折木飞沙石，六日止。
现代文：十一月初一戊午，有大风从西北来，折断树木吹飞沙石，六天才停止。
English: On the afternoon of the first day of November, a strong wind came from the northwest, breaking trees and blowing sand and stones. It lasted for six days.

古文：明年正月，赵王伦篡位。
现代文：第二年正月，赵王司马伦篡位。
English: In the first month of the second year, Zhao Wang Simarun usurped the throne.

古文：永宁元年八月，郡国三大风。
现代文：永宁元年八月，有郡国三次刮大风。
English: In August of the first year of the Yongning era, there were three strong winds in the county.

古文：永兴元年正月乙丑，西北大风。
现代文：永兴元年正月乙丑，西北刮大风。
English: In the first month of the first year of Yongxing, the second month was ugly, and a strong wind blew from the northwest.

古文：赵王伦建始元年正月癸酉，赵土伦祠太庙，灾风暴起，尘四合。
现代文：趟王司马伦建始元年正月癸酉，赵王司马伦祭祀太庙，有灾风暴起，飞尘四周都是。
English: Wang Simarun's construction began in the first month of the first year of the year, Zhao Wang Simarun dedicated the temple, and from the disaster storm, the flying dust was all around.

古文：其年四月，伦伏辜。
现代文：这年四月，司马伦伏罪。
English: In April of this year, Smalen committed a crime.

古文：元帝永昌元年七月丙寅，大风拔木，屋瓦皆飞。
现代文：元帝永昌元年七月丙寅，大风拔起树木，屋顶的瓦片都被吹掉。
English: In July of the first year of the reign of Emperor Yongchang, the wind uprooted trees, and roof tiles were blown away.

古文：八月，暴风坏屋，拔御道柳树百余株。
现代文：八月，暴风毁坏房屋，拔起皇宫道路旁的柳树一百多株。
English: In August, a storm destroyed houses and uprooted more than a hundred willow trees along the palace road.

古文：其风纵横无常，若风自八方来者。
现代文：此风纵横不定，就像风从八方吹来。
English: This wind is erratic, like the wind is blowing from all directions.

古文：是时，王敦专权，害尚书令刁协、仆射周顗等，故风纵横若非一处也。
现代文：这时，王敦专权，陷害尚书令刁协、仆射周颛等人，所以风纵横不是来自一个方向。
English: At this time, Wang Dun had exclusive power to frame Shang Shuling, Zou Xie and others, so the wind did not come from one direction.

古文：此臣易上政，诸侯不朝之罚也。
现代文：这是对臣下代替主上掌权，诸侯不来朝觐的惩罚。
English: This was the punishment for the vassals taking power in place of the lord, and the lords not coming to the imperial court.

古文：十一月，宫车晏驾。
现代文：十一月，皇帝去世。
English: In November, the emperor died.

古文：成帝咸康四年三月壬辰，成都大风，发屋折木。
现代文：成帝咸康四年三月壬辰，成都有大风，吹倒房屋折断树木。
English: In March of the fourth year of Emperor Jiankang's reign, Chengdu was hit by high winds, which brought down houses and snapped trees.

古文：四月，李寿袭杀李期，自立。
现代文：四月，李寿袭击杀死李期，自立为王。
English: In April, Li Shou attacked and killed Li Ji, and became king.

古文：穆帝升平元年八月丁未，策立皇后何氏。
现代文：康帝建元元年七月庚申，晋陵、吴郡受灾，有风。穆帝升平元年八月丁未，策立皇后何氏。
English: In July of the first year of Emperor Kangxi's reign, Goshun, Jinling and Wu County were hit by a storm. In August of the first year of Emperor Mu's reign, Dingwei, the Empress He was proclaimed.

古文：是日，疾风。
现代文：当天，有强风。
English: That day, there was a strong wind.

古文：后桓玄篡位，乃降后为零陵县君，不睿之罚也。
现代文：后来桓玄篡位，贬皇后做零陵县君，是对不智的惩罚。
English: Later, Kuan Xuan usurped the throne and demoted the empress to Ziling County, which was a punishment for being unwise.

古文：五年正月戊戌朔，疾风。
现代文：五年正月初一戊戌，有强风。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fifth year, there was a strong wind.

古文：海西公太和六年二月，大风迅急，是年被废。
现代文：海西公太和六年二月，大风很猛烈，遣年海西公被废黜。
English: In February of the sixth year of Emperor Haisi's reign, the wind was very strong, and Emperor Haisi was deposed.

古文：孝武帝宁康元年三月，京都大风，火大起。
现代文：孝武帝宁康元年三月，京都刮大风，起大火。
English: In March of the first year of Emperor Ningkang's reign, Kyoto was hit by high winds and a large fire broke out.

古文：是时，桓温入朝，志在陵上，帝又幼少，人怀忧恐，斯不睿之征也。
现代文：这时，桓温入朝，想要侵凌主上，孝武帝又年纪幼小，人们心怀忧虑恐惧，这是不智的征兆。
English: At this time, Kan-Wen entered the imperial court and wanted to usurp the throne. Emperor Xiaowu was young, and people were worried and fearful. This was a sign of unintelligence.

古文：三年三月戊申朔，暴风迅起，从丑上来，须臾逆转，从子上来，飞沙扬砾。
现代文：三年三月初一戊申，暴风急速而来，从丑位上吹来，很快转变方向，从子位上吹来，扬起沙尘石砾。
English: At the beginning of March in the third year, on the first day of the third month, the storm came rapidly, blowing from the ugly position, quickly changing direction, blowing from the sub-position, lifting sand, dust and gravel.

古文：太元二年二月乙丑朔，暴风折木。
现代文：太元二年二月初一乙丑，暴风刮断树木。
English: At the beginning of February in the second year of the Taiyuan era, a storm broke out, and trees were blown down.

古文：闰三月甲子朔，暴风疾雨俱至，发屋折木。
现代文：闰三月初一甲子，暴风疾雨一同来到，吹倒房屋折断树木。
English: On the first day of the third month, a storm with torrential rain came along, blowing down houses and breaking trees.

古文：三年六月，长安大风，拔苻坚宫中树。
现代文：三年六月，长安有大风，拔起苻坚宫中的树木。
English: In June of the third year, there was a strong wind in Chang'an, uprooting the trees in Jiaojian Palace.

古文：其后，坚再南伐，遂有淝水之败，身戮国亡。
现代文：此后，苻坚再次南下征伐，有淝水之败，身死国亡。
English: After that, Yu Jian once again went to the south to fight, but was defeated at the Battle of Surabaya and died for the country.

古文：四年八月乙未，暴风扬沙石。
现代文：四年八月乙未，暴风扬起沙石。
English: In August of the same year, a storm kicked up sand and rocks.

古文：十二年正月壬子夜，暴风。
现代文：十二年正月壬子夜，有暴风。
English: On the night of the first month of the twelfth year, there was a storm.

古文：七月甲辰，大风折木。
现代文：七月甲辰，大风折断树木。
English: At the first hour of July, a gale breaks the trees.

古文：十三年十二月乙未，大风，昼晦。
现代文：十三年十二月乙未，有大风，白天昏暗。
English: On the evening of December 13th, there was a strong wind and the day was dark.

古文：其后帝崩而诸侯违命，权夺于元显，祸成于桓玄，是其应也。
现代文：此后皇帝死而诸侯违抗朝廷命令，权力被五题夺取，祸难由盘造成，这是其应兆。
English: After that, the emperor died and the lords defied the imperial order, the power was seized by the five questions, and the disaster was caused by the disk, which was its response.

古文：十七年六月乙卯，大风折木。
现代文：十七年六月乙卯，大风折断树木。
English: In June 17th, a strong wind snapped trees.

古文：安帝元兴二年二月甲辰夜，大风雨，大航门屋瓦飞落。
现代文：安帝元兴二年二月甲辰夜，有大风雨，大航门的屋瓦被吹落。
English: On the night of February Jia Chen in the second year of An Di Yuanxing, there was a heavy wind and rain, and the roof tiles of the Great Gate were blown down.

古文：明年，桓玄篡位，由此门入。
现代文：第二年，桓玄篡位，从这个门进入。
English: In the second year, Kangen usurped the throne and entered through this gate.

古文：三年正月，桓玄出游大航南，飘风飞其卑輗盖，经三月而玄败归江陵。
现代文：三年正月，桓玄出游到大航南，旋风吹飞他韩挽车的车盖，过了三个月桓玄失败回到江陆。
English: In the first month of the third year, Huan Xuan went on a trip to Dahang South. A cyclone blew away the cover of his Korean-made car. After three months, Huan Xuan failed to return to Jianglu.

古文：五月，江陵又大风折木。
现代文：五月，又有大风折断树木。
English: In May, high winds again snapped trees.

古文：是月，桓玄败于峥嵘洲，身亦屠裂。
现代文：当月，桓玄在峻蠖泌战败，身体也被斩裂。
English: In the same month, Kuan Xuan was defeated at the Battle of Junsu, and his body was also chopped into pieces.

古文：十一月丁酉，大风，江陵多死者。
现代文：十一月丁酉，有大风，江陵死了很多人。
English: In November, Dingyao, there was a strong wind, and many people died in Jiangling.

古文：义熙四年十一月辛卯朔，西北疾风起。
现代文：义熙四年十一月初一辛卯，西北有强风。
English: At the beginning of November in the 4th year of Yixi, there was a strong wind in the northwest.

古文：五年闰十月丁亥，大风发屋。
现代文：五年闰十月丁亥，大风吹倒房屋。
English: Five years ago, in October of the year of the boar, a gale blew down houses.

古文：明年，卢循至蔡洲。
现代文：第二年，卢循到墓巡。
English: The following year, Lu Xun went to the tomb.

古文：六年五月壬申，大风拔北郊树，树几百年也。
现代文：六年五月壬申，大风拔起北郊的树，树生长了几百年。
English: In May of the sixth year of Jinshin, a gale uprooted a tree in the northern suburbs. The tree had been growing for hundreds of years.

古文：并吹琅邪、扬州二射堂倒坏。
现代文：同时将琅邪、扬州两座射堂吹倒毁坏。
English: At the same time, it blew down and destroyed the two firing halls of Xiji and Yangzhou.

古文：是日，卢循大艦漂没。
现代文：这天，卢循的大舰漂流沉没。
English: On this day, Lu Xun's great ship drifted and sank.

古文：甲戌，又风，发屋折木。
现代文：甲戌，又有大风，吹倒房屋折断树木。
English: Heavy rain and strong winds brought down houses and snapped trees.

古文：是冬，王师南讨。
现代文：当年冬，朝廷军队南征。
English: In the winter of that year, the imperial army marched south.

古文：九年正月，大风，白马寺浮图刹柱折坏。
现代文：九年正月，有大风，白马寺佛刹的柱被折断毁坏。
English: In the first month of the ninth year, there was a strong wind, and the pillars of the Buddhist temple of Hakuba-ji Temple were broken and destroyed.

古文：十年四月己丑朔，大风拔木。
现代文：十年四月初一己丑，大风拔起树木。
English: At the beginning of April of the tenth year, there was a terrible storm, and the trees were uprooted by the wind.

古文：六月辛亥，大风拔木。
现代文：六月辛亥，大风拔起树木。
English: In June of Xinhai, high winds uprooted trees.

古文：七月，淮北大风，坏庐舍。
现代文：七月，淮北有大风，毁坏房舍。
English: In July, a strong wind blew in Huaibei, destroying houses.

古文：明年，西讨司马休之应。
现代文：第二年西去征讨司马休之应验。
English: In the following year, he went to the west to solicit Sima Xiu's acceptance.

古文：夜妖魏高贵乡公正元二年正月戊戌，景帝讨毌丘俭，大风晦暝，行者皆顿伏，近夜妖也。
现代文：魏高贵乡公正五二年正月戊戌，星壹征讨旦丘俊，刮起大风，天色昏暗，行人都停伏下来，近于夜妖。
English: In the first month of the 52nd year of Wei Gao Gui Xiang Jiaochuan, the star of a crusade against the Dan Qujun, the wind blew, the sky was dark, the pedestrians stopped, close to the night demon.

古文：刘向曰： 正昼而暝，阴为阳，臣制君也。 
现代文：型直说： 正当白天却昏暗，阴成为阳，是臣控制君主。 
English: To put it bluntly: when it is day, it is dark, and when it is night, it is the vassal who controls the sovereign.

古文：元帝景元三年十月，京都大震，昼晦，此夜妖也。
现代文：元帝景元三年十月，京都发生大震动，白日昏暗，这是夜妖。
English: In October of the third year of the reign of Emperor Gyeonggi, there was a great earthquake in Kyoto. The daytime was dark, and it was a night demon.

古文：班固曰： 夜妖者，云风并起而杳冥，故与常风同象也。 
现代文：班固说： 夜妖，是风云同时产生而幽暗，所以与常风的征象相同。 
English: Ban Gu said: "The night demon is a storm cloud that occurs at the same time and is dark, so it has the same symptoms as the normal wind.

古文：刘向《春秋说》云： 天戒若曰，勿使大夫世官，将令专事。
现代文：刘向春秋说》说： 天戒这样说，不要让大夫世袭官职，那将会使得他们专断其事。
English: Liu Xiangchunqiu said: Heaven's commandment says, don't let doctors inherit official positions, that will make them arbitrarily decide things.

古文：暝晦，公室卑矣。 
现代文：天色昏暗，是王室衰败。 
English: It's gloom and doom for the royal family.

古文：魏见此妖，晋有天下之应也。
现代文：魏出现这种妖异，是晋拥有天下的应兆。
English: The appearance of this strange phenomenon in Wei is a sign that Jin owns the world.

古文：怀帝永嘉四年十月辛卯，昼昏，至于庚子，此夜妖也。
现代文：怀帝永嘉四年十月辛卯，白日昏暗，直到庚子，这是夜妖。
English: In October of the fourth year of Emperor Yongjia's reign, the days are dark, until Geng Zi, the night demon, appears.

古文：后年，刘曜寇洛川，王师频为贼所败，帝蒙尘于平阳。
现代文：第三年，刘曜侵犯洛阳，朝廷军队屡次被敌寇打败，怀帝流亡在平阳。
English: In the third year, Liu You invaded Luoyang, the imperial army was repeatedly defeated by enemy pirates, and Emperor Huai was exiled to Pingyang.

古文：孝武帝太元十三年十二月乙未，大风晦暝。
现代文：孝武帝左五十三年十二月乙未，刮大风，天色昏暗。
English: Emperor Xiaowu left in December of 53 B.C. There was a strong wind blowing and the sky was dark.

古文：其后帝崩，而诸侯违命，干戈内侮，权夺于元显，祸成于桓玄。
现代文：此后耋亘游去世，诸侯违抗朝命，兴兵侵扰京师，权力被元显夺取，灾祸由桓玄造成。
English: After that, Zou Wanyu died, the lords disobeyed the imperial order, the soldiers invaded the capital, the power was seized by Yuan Xian, and the disaster was caused by Kuan Xuan.

古文：臝虫之孽京房《易传》曰： 臣安禄位兹谓贪，厥灾虫食根。
现代文：京房《易传》说： 臣子安于俸禄官位这叫作贪，其灾祸是虫吃掉根。
English: Kyobo's "I Chuan" said: A vassal's dependence on the salary of an official is called greed, and its scourge is an insect eating the root.

古文：德无常兹谓烦，虫食叶。
现代文：德不能保持长久遣叫作烦，虫吃掉叶子。
English: Virtue cannot be kept up for long. It is a nuisance to have to call out, and the insects eat the leaves.

古文：不绌无德，虫食本。
现代文：不贬退无德的人，虫吃掉干、根。
English: Do not disparage those who have no virtue. Worms eat away the stem and roots.

古文：与东作争兹谓不时，虫食茎。
现代文：与束争这叫不时，虫吃掉茎。
English: From time to time, the insects eat the stems.

古文：蔽恶生孽，虫食心。 
现代文：昏昧邪恶产生妖孽，虫吃掉心。 
English: Darkness and evil beget witchcraft, and worms devour the heart.

古文：武帝咸宁元年七月，郡国螟。
现代文：武帝咸宁元年七月，郡国有螟虫。
English: In July of the first year of Emperor Wu's reign in Xianning, the county-owned maggots began to appear.

古文：九月。青州又螟。
现代文：九月，青州又有螟虫。
English: In September, aphids appeared in Qingzhou again.

古文：是月，郡国有青虫食其禾稼。
现代文：当月，郡国有青虫吃掉禾苗庄稼。
English: That month, the county-owned caterpillars ate the crops.

古文：四年，司、冀、兗、豫、荆、扬郡国二十螟。
现代文：四年，司州、冀州、兖州、豫州、荆州、扬州的各郡国有二十处螟虫。
English: In four years, 20 aphids were found in counties of Sizhou, Jizhou, Ganzhou, Yuzhou, Jingzhou and Yangzhou.

古文：太康四年，会稽彭蜞及蟹皆化为鼠，甚众，复大食稻为灾。
现代文：太康四年，会稽郡有彭蜞和蟹都变成鼠，非常多，又大吃稻谷成为灾祸。
English: In the four years of Taikang, there were so many Pengye and crabs in Hui County that they all turned into rats, and eating a lot of rice became a disaster.

古文：九年八月，郡国二十四螟。
现代文：九年八月，二十四个郡国有螟虫。
English: In August of the ninth year, twenty-four counties owned hookworms.

古文：九月，虫又伤秋稼。
现代文：九月，虫又伤害秋庄稼。
English: In September, insects again damage autumn crops.

古文：是时，帝听谗谀，宠任贾充、杨骏，故有虫蝗之灾，不绌无德之罚。
现代文：逭时，武帝听信谗言媚语，宠信任用买充、杨骏，所以有虫蝗的灾祸，是对不贬退无德的人的惩罚。
English: At that time, Emperor Wu listened to the flattering words of the eunuch, and trusted in the use of the peacock and the young pheasant. Therefore, the plague of locusts is a punishment for those who do not degrade and have no virtue.

古文：惠帝元康三年九月，带方等六县螟，食禾叶尽。
现代文：惠帝元康三年九月，带方等六个县有螟虫，吃光禾苗的叶子。
English: In September of the third year of Hui Di Yuan Kang, there were tapeworms in six counties such as Bifang, eating the leaves of the seedlings.

古文：永宁元年七月，梁、益、凉三州螟。
现代文：永宁元年七月，梁州、益州、凉州三州有螟虫。
English: In July of the first year of Yongning, there were tapeworms in the three prefectures of Liangzhou, Yizhou and Liangzhou.

古文：是时，齐王冏执政，贪苛之应也。
现代文：这时，齐王司马同掌握朝政，是贪婪苛刻的应兆。
English: At this time, Qi Wang Simatong took control of the imperial government, which was a sign of greed and harshness.

古文：十月，南安、巴西、江阳、太原、新兴、北海青虫食禾叶，甚者十伤五六。
现代文：十月，南安、巴西、江阳、太原、新兴、北海青虫吃掉禾苗叶子，严重的十伤五六。
English: In October, the caterpillars of Nan'an, Brazil, Jiangyang, Taiyuan, Xingxing and Beihai ate the leaves of the grass seedlings, causing 56 serious injuries.

古文：十二月，郡国六螟。
现代文：十二月，郡国出现六次螟虫。
English: In December, there were six cases of tapeworm in the county.

古文：牛祸武帝太康九年，幽州塞北有死牛头语，近牛祸也。
现代文：武帝太康九年，幽州塞北有死牛头说话，近于牛祸。
English: In the ninth year of Emperor Wu Taikang, there was a dead cow's head in the north of Yuzhou, which was close to a cow accident.

古文：是时，帝多疾病，深以后事为念，而托付不以至公，思瞀乱之应也。
现代文：这时，武帝多病，非常顾念身后的事，但是托付不公，是心思昏乱的应兆。
English: At this time, Emperor Wu was very ill and was very concerned about the future, but entrusting injustice was a sign of a confused mind.

古文：则有非言之物而言。 
现代文：师旷说： 人产生怨言，就有不说话的东西却说话。 
English: Shigeaki said, "When people complain, there are things that don't speak, but speak.

古文：又其义也。
现代文：也是这个意思。
English: That's what it means.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 杀无罪，牛生妖。 
现代文：京房《易传》说： 杀死无罪的人，牛就产生妖异。 
English: Kyobo's "I Chuan" says: "If you kill an innocent person, the cow will become a monster."

古文：惠帝太安中，江夏张骋所乘牛言曰： 天下乱，乘我何之！ 
现代文：惠帝太安间，江夏张骋所骑的牛说话道： 天下乱，骑我去何处! 
English: When Hui Di was in Taian, the cow ridden by Jiang Xia Zhang Ye said: The world is in turmoil, ride me anywhere!

古文：骋惧而还，犬又言曰： 归何早也？ 
现代文：张骋害怕而返回，犬又说话道： 怎么回来得这么早? 
English: Zhang Ye was scared and went back. The dog spoke again, "How did you come back so early?"

古文：寻后牛又人立而行。
现代文：不久后牛又像人一样站立行走。
English: Soon after, the cow stood up and walked like a human again.

古文：骋使善卜者卦之，谓曰： 天下将有兵乱，为祸非止一家。 
现代文：张骋让善于占卜的人来占卜此事，解说道： 天下将有战乱，造成祸害的不止一家。 
English: Zhang Ye asked a person who was good at divination to predict the matter, and he said: There will be war in the world, and more than one family will cause disaster.

古文：其年，张昌反，先略江夏，骋为将帅，于是五州残乱，骋亦族灭。
现代文：当年，退旦反叛，先攻，张壁任将帅，于是五州破坏败乱，张骋也遭到减族。
English: In that year, the Tang Dynasty rebelled and attacked first, and Zhang Bi was appointed as the general. As a result, the five states were destroyed and the rebellion was defeated, and Zhang Ye was also reduced in rank.

古文：京房 易传 曰： 牛能言，如其言占吉凶。 
现代文：京庆《易传》说： 牛能说话，依照它的话来占卜吉凶。 
English: Jingqing "I Chuan" said: Cows can speak, according to its words to tell fortunes.

古文：《易萌气枢》曰： 人君不好士，走马被文绣，犬狼食人食，则有六畜谈言。 
现代文：《易萌气枢》说： 君主不喜爱贤士，良马身披文饰织绣，犬狼吃人的食物，就会有六畜说话。 
English: "Yimeng Qi Zu" said: If the ruler does not like the wise men, the good horse is decorated with embroidery, the dog and the wolf eat people's food, then the six animals will speak.

古文：时天子诸侯不以惠下为务，又其应也。
现代文：当时天子诸侯都不关心老百姓，又是其应兆。
English: At that time, the princes and lords did not care about the common people, which was a good sign.

古文：元帝建武元年七月，晋陵陈门才牛生犊，一体两头。
现代文：元帝建武元年七月，晋陵陈门才的牛生下牛犊，一个身子两个头。
English: In July of the first year of the reign of Emperor Jianwu of the Yuan Dynasty, the cow of Jinling Chenmencai gave birth to a calf, a body with two heads.

古文：案京房《易传》言： 牛生子二首一身，天下将分之象也。 
现代文：案京房《易传》说： 牛生下仔是两个头一个身子，是天下将要分裂的征象。 
English: According to the "Easy Biography" of the Beijing Chamber of Deputies: The calf born is two heads and one body, which is a sign that the world will be divided.

古文：是时，愍帝蒙尘于平阳，寻为逆胡所杀。
现代文：遣时，愍帝流亡在平阳，不久被叛乱的塱人杀死。
English: At the time of the envoys, Emperor Gong was in exile in Pingyang, and was soon killed by the rebellious Gong people.

古文：元帝即位江东，天下分为二，是其应也。
现代文：元帝在江东即皇帝位，天下分裂为二，是其应兆。
English: The Yuan emperor became emperor in the east of the Yangtze River, and the world was divided into two, which was a response to this.

古文：太兴元年，武昌太守王谅牛生子，两头八足，两尾共一腹，三年后死。
现代文：太兴元年，武昌太守王谅的牛生仔，两个头八只脚，两条尾巴在同一身子上，三年后死。
English: In the first year of the Taixing Dynasty, the cowboy of Wuchang Taishou Wang Tong, with two heads, eight feet, and two tails on the same body, died three years later.

古文：又有牛一足三尾，皆生而死。
现代文：又有牛一只脚三条尾巴，都是生下就死了。
English: There was also a cow with one foot and three tails, which died at birth.

古文：案司马彪说， 两头者，政在私门，上下无别之象也。 
现代文：司马彪说： 两个头，是朝政掌握在私家手中，上下没有分别的征象。 
English: Sima Biao said: The two heads indicate that the government of the dynasty is in the hands of private individuals, and there is no distinction between the top and the bottom.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 足多者，所任邪也；足少者，不胜任也。 
现代文：京房《易传》说： 脚多，是任用奸邪；脚少，是不能胜任。 
English: Jing Fang's "I Chuan" said: If you have too many feet, you are an evil person; if you have too few feet, you are incompetent.

古文：其后王敦等乱政，此其祥也。
现代文：此后王敦等人乱政，这是其征祥。
English: After that, Wang Dun and others made a mess of the government, which was their crowning achievement.

古文：四年十二月，郊牛死。
现代文：四年十二月，用于郊祀的牛死。
English: In December of the fourth year, it was used for the death of a cow in a suburban shrine.

古文：案刘向说《春秋》效牛死曰： 宣公区昏乱，故天不飨其祀。 
现代文：刘向解说《春秋》中记载郊祀的牛死说： 宣公愚昧昏乱，所以上天不享受他的祭祀。 
English: Liu Xiang commented on the death of a cow at a suburban shrine recorded in "Spring and Autumn": Xuan Gong is stupid and confused, so Heaven does not enjoy his sacrifice.

古文：今元帝中兴之业，实王导之谋也。
现代文：如今元帝中兴的大业，其实是玉遵的谋略。
English: Today, the great cause of Yuan Di Zhongxing is actually the strategy of Yu Zun.

古文：刘隗探会上意，以得亲幸，导见疏外，此区不睿之祸。
现代文：刘隗了解主上心意，得到宠信，王丰受到疏远在外，这是昏昧不明的灾祸。
English: Liu Ye understood the Lord's will and was favored by Him, while Wang Feng was alienated from Him. This was a vague and unclear calamity.

古文：成帝咸和二年五月，护军牛生犊，两头六足。
现代文：成帝咸和二年五月，护军的牛生犊，两个头六只脚。
English: In May of the second year of Emperor Chengxian's reign, the cow guarding the troops was born with six legs and two heads.

古文：是冬，苏峻作乱。
现代文：这年冬季，苏峻作乱。
English: In the winter of that year, Su Jun started a riot.

古文：七年，九德人袁荣家牛产犊，两头八足，二尾共身。
现代文：七年，九德人袁荣家的牛产犊，两个头八只脚，两条尾巴共一个身子。
English: In the seventh year, the cattle of Yuan Rong's family of nine German people gave birth to a calf, with two heads, eight legs, and two tails.

古文：桓玄之国，在荆州诣刺史殷仲堪，行至鹤穴，逢一老公驱青牛，形色瑰异，桓玄即以所乘牛易取。
现代文：桓玄去封国，在荆州去看刺史殷仲堪，走到鹤穴，遇到一位老翁赶着青牛，外形颜色奇异，桓玄就以所骑的牛来交换。
English: Huan Xuan went to Hunan, and in Jingzhou he went to see the bullfight of Yin Zhongkan. When he came to the crane pit, he met an old man driving a young bull with a strange color, and Huan Xuan exchanged it for the bull he was riding.

古文：乘至零陵泾溪，骏驶非常，息驾饮牛，牛迳入江水不出。
现代文：骑到零陵泾溪，奔走不同寻常，桓玄停下车驾饮牛，牛直入江水中不再出来。
English: Riding to the Ziling Yuxi, the running was unusual. Huan Xuan stopped the car and drove the cow to drink. The cow went straight into the river and did not come out again.

古文：玄遣人觇守，经日无所见。
现代文：桓玄派人看守，过了一天也没有见到。
English: Kuan Xuan sent guards, but they didn't see him for a day.

古文：于后玄败被诛。
现代文：后来桓玄失败被杀。
English: Later, Kuan Xuan failed and was killed.

古文：黄眚黄祥蜀刘备章武二年，东伐。
现代文：蜀刘备章武二年，东征。
English: Shu Liu Bei Zhang, in his second year of military service, went to the East.

古文：二月，自秭归进屯夷道。
现代文：二月，从秭归进驻台道。
English: In February, he was transferred from Handan to Taitung.

古文：六月，秭归有黄气见，长十余里，广数十丈。
现代文：六月，挂墨有黄气出现，长十多里，宽几十丈。
English: In June, hanging ink mounds appeared, more than ten miles long and several tens of meters wide.

古文：后逾旬，备为陆议所破，近黄祥也。
现代文：后来过了十，刘备被陆议打败，近于黄色的征祥。
English: Later, after ten, Liu Bei was defeated by Lu Yi, close to the yellow Zhengxiang.

古文：魏齐王正始中，中山王周南为襄邑长。
现代文：魏齐王正始年间，中山王周南任襄邑县令。
English: At the beginning of the reign of King Wei Qi, Zhongshan King Zhou Nan served as the county magistrate of Xiangyi.

古文：有鼠从穴出，语曰： 王周南，尔以某日死。 
现代文：有老鼠从洞穴出来，说话道： 王周南，你在某日死。 
English: A mouse came out of the cave and said, "Wang Zhou Nan, you will die one day.

古文：周南不应，鼠还穴。
现代文：王周南没有应答，老鼠返回洞穴。
English: Wang Zhounan did not answer, and the mouse returned to the cave.

古文：后至期，更冠帻皁衣出，语曰： 周南，汝日中当死。 
现代文：到了所说的日期，老鼠换上冠巾黑衣出来，说道： 旦亩，你中午将死。 
English: When the appointed day arrived, the mouse put on his turban and black robe and came out, saying, "You will be dead by noon.

古文：又不应，鼠复入穴。
现代文：又没有应答，老鼠又进入洞穴。
English: Again there was no answer, and the mouse went back into its burrow.

古文：斯须更出，语如向。
现代文：很快又出来，像刚才那样说。
English: He soon came out again and said the same thing as before.

古文：日适欲中，鼠入须臾复出，出复入，转更数，语如前。
现代文：太阳快到正午时，老鼠进洞很快又出来，出来又进去，往返多次，说的还像先前一样。
English: When the sun was about to reach noon, the mouse went into the hole and quickly came out again, came out and went in again, went back and forth many times, and spoke as before.

古文：日适中，鼠曰： 周南，汝不应，我复何道！ 
现代文：太阳到正午，老鼠说： 旦尘，你不应答，我还能再说什么! 
English: When the sun reached noon, the mouse said, "Dian Dust, if you don't answer, what else can I say!"

古文：言绝，颠蹶而死，即失衣冠。
现代文：说完，老鼠扑倒在地死去，当即失去了衣冠。
English: With that, the mouse fell to the ground and died, instantly losing its crest.

古文：取视，俱如常鼠。
现代文：取来看，完全就像平常的老鼠。
English: From a distance, it looks just like an ordinary mouse.

古文：案班固说，此黄祥也。
现代文：班固说，这是黄色征祥。
English: "It's a yellow banner," Mr. Bangu said.

古文：是时，曹爽专政，竞为比周，故鼠作变也。
现代文：这时，曹爽专断朝政，竞相结党营私，所以老鼠出现变异。
English: At this time, Cao Shuang arbitrarily ruled the government, competing to form a party, so the mice mutated.

古文：惠帝元康四年十二月，大雾。
现代文：惠帝元康四年十二月，有大雾。
English: In December of Hui Di Yuan Kang's fourth year, there was heavy fog.

古文：帝时昏眊，政非已出，故有区之妖。
现代文：廛帝当时昏昧，政权不由自己掌握，所以有昏昧的妖异。
English: Emperor Qian was in a daze at the time, and the political power was not controlled by himself, so there was a daze.

古文：元帝太兴四年八月，黄雾四寒，埃氛蔽天。
现代文：元帝太兴四年八月，黄雾笼罩四方，尘埃烟气遮蔽天空。
English: In August of the fourth year of the Yuan Emperor Taixing, a yellow fog shrouded the four directions, and the dust and smoke obscured the sky.

古文：永昌元年十月，京师大雾，黑气贯天，日无光。
现代文：永昌元年十月，京城有大雾，黑气直达天空，太阳无光。
English: In October of the first year of Yongchang, the capital city was shrouded in heavy fog. The black air reached the sky, and the sun was without light.

古文：明帝太守元年正月癸巳，黄雾四塞。
现代文：明帝太守元年正月癸巳，黄雾笼罩四方。
English: In the first month of the first year of the reign of Emperor Ming, the yellow fog shrouded the four directions.

古文：二月，又黄雾四塞。
现代文：二月，又有黄雾笼罩四方。
English: In February, another yellow fog shrouded the four directions.

古文：是时王敦擅权，谋逆愈甚。
现代文：这时王敦专权，阴谋叛逆日益加剧。
English: At this time, Wang Dun's dictatorship, conspiracy and rebellion were increasingly intensified.

古文：穆帝永和七年三月，凉州大风拔木，黄雾下尘。
现代文：穆帝永和七年三月，远业大风拔起树木，黄雾落下尘埃。
English: In March of the seventh year of Mu Di Yonghe, the distant wind uprooted trees, and dust fell from the yellow fog.

古文：是时，张重华纳谮，出谢艾为酒泉太守，而所任非其人，至九年死，嗣子见杀，是其应也。
现代文：这时，张重华听信谗言，贬谢艾外任酒泉太守，而他所任用的人不称职，至九年死，继位的儿子被杀，这是其应兆。
English: At this time, Zhang Chonghua listened to the advice and belittled Xie Ai as the external Jiuquan governor, and the people he appointed were incompetent. He died nine years later, and his son who succeeded him was killed. This was his response.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 闻善不予兹谓不知，厥异黄，厥咎聋，厥灾不嗣。
现代文：京房《易恸说： 听到善言却不听从这叫作不智，其妖异是黄，其责罚是聋，其灾祸是没有继承人。
English: Jing Fang, "I Ching said: Hearing the good words but not obeying them is called unwise, its evil is yellow, its punishment is deafness, and its calamity is having no successor.

古文：黄者，有黄浊气四塞天下。
现代文：黄，是有黄浊的气笼罩四方。
English: Yellow, there is a jaundiced aura enveloping the four directions.

古文：蔽贤绝道，灾至绝世也。 
现代文：遮蔽贤才断绝道义，所以灾祸是世系断绝。 
English: The evil is the severance of the lineage, because it covers up the virtuous and abandons morality.

古文：孝武太元八年二月癸未，黄雾四塞。
现代文：孝武帝太元八年二月癸未，黄雾笼罩四方。
English: Emperor Xiaowu ascended to the throne in February of the eighth year of the Taiyuan Emperor, and a yellow fog shrouded the four directions.

古文：是时，道子专政，亲近佞人，朝纲方替。
现代文：这时，司马道子专权，亲近奸邪之人，朝廷纲纪败坏。
English: At this time, Sima Daozi gained absolute power, became close to traitors, and the discipline of the imperial court deteriorated.

古文：安帝元兴元年十月丙申朔，黄雾昏浊不雨。
现代文：安帝元兴元年十月初一丙申，黄雾昏暗污浊，不下雨。
English: At the beginning of October in the first year of An Di Yuanxing, the twilight fog was dark and dirty, and it did not rain.

古文：是时桓玄谋逆之应。
现代文：这是当时桓玄阴谋叛逆的应兆。
English: At the time, this was a sign that Kuan Xuan was plotting a rebellion.

古文：义熙五年十一月，大雾。
现代文：义熙五年十一月，有大雾。
English: In November of the fifth year of Yixi, there was heavy fog.

古文：十年十一月，又大雾。
现代文：十年十一月，又有大雾。
English: In November of the same year, there was another heavy fog.

古文：是时，帝室衰微，臣下权盛，兵及土地，略非君有，此其应也。
现代文：遣时，王室衰败，臣下的权力大，军队和土地，大多不是皇帝所有，这是其应兆。
English: At the turn of the millennium, the royal family was in decline, the power of the vassals was great, and the army and land were mostly not owned by the emperor.

古文：地震刘向曰： 地震，金木水火沴土者也。伯阳甫曰： 天地之气，不过其序；若过其序，人之乱也。
现代文：塑咆说： 地震，是金木水火克土。 值垦眯说： 天地之气，不能混乱；如果秩序出差错，应验人乱。
English: Shou Ro said: Earthquakes are caused by the movement of gold, wood, water, fire, and earth. Zhisheng said: The atmosphere of heaven and earth cannot be chaotic; if the order goes wrong, it will be chaotic.

古文：阳伏而不能出，阴迫而不能升，于是有地震。 
现代文：阳气隐伏而不能出，阴气压迫而不能升腾，便有地震。 
English: The yang is latent and cannot come out, the yin is oppressive and cannot rise, and then there are earthquakes.

古文：吴孙权黄武四年，江东地连震。
现代文：吴孙权黄武四年，江东接连地震。
English: In the fourth year of Wu Sun Quan's reign over Huangwu, the East River was hit by a series of earthquakes.

古文：是时，权受魏爵命为大将军、吴王，改元专制，不修臣迹。
现代文：此时，孙权接受魏国的爵命为大将军、吴王，改年号称雄，不修行做臣子的举止。
English: At this time, Sun Quan accepted the honorary title of the Great General of Wei and the King of Wu. In the following year, he was known as a hero and did not practice the manners of a vassal.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 臣事虽正，专必震。
现代文：京房《易传》说： 臣子行事虽然端正，专断就一定会地震。
English: Kyobo's "I Chuan" said: Although the vassal behaves well, arbitrariness will surely cause an earthquake.

古文：其震，于水则波，于木则摇，于屋则瓦落。
现代文：这地震，在水就泛起波浪，在树就会摇晃，在房屋就会掉下瓦片。
English: In this earthquake, the water will make waves, the trees will shake, and the tiles will fall off the houses.

古文：大经在辟而易臣兹谓阴动，厥震摇政宫。
现代文：常道不正而臣子变动叫作阴动，地震会摇动政宫。
English: A common practice that is not correct and a change of vassal is called a negative movement, and an earthquake will shake the government palace.

古文：大经摇政兹谓不阴，厥震摇山，出涌水。
现代文：常道摇动政事叫作不阴，地震摇动山岳，有水涌出。
English: An earthquake shakes the mountains, and water gushes out.

古文：嗣子无德专禄兹谓不顺，厥震动丘陵，涌水出。 
现代文：继位之子没有德行专擅禄位叫作不顺，地震摇动丘陵，有水涌出。 
English: If the son who succeeds to the throne is not a virtuous person, it is called bad luck. Earthquakes shake the hills, and water gushes out.

古文：刘向并云； 臣下强盛，将动而为害之应也。 
现代文：刘向又说： 这是臣下强盛，将要行动而为害的应验。 
English: Liu Xiang also said: This is the fulfillment that the vassal is powerful and will act to do harm.

古文：魏明帝青龙二年十一月，京都地震，从东来，隐隐有声，摇屋瓦。
现代文：魏明帝青龙二年十一月，京都地震，从东边来，发出低沉的响声，房子上的瓦片震动。
English: In November of the second year of the Wei Ming Dynasty, the Kyoto earthquake, coming from the east, emitted a muffled sound, and the tiles on the house shook.

古文：景初元年六月戊申，京都地震。
现代文：景初元年六月戊申，京都地震。
English: The Kyoto earthquake occurred in June of the first year of the Heian period.

古文：是秋，吴将硃然围江夏，荆州刺史胡质击退之。
现代文：当年秋天，吴国将领朱然率兵围攻江夏，荆州刺史胡质击退了他。
English: In the autumn of that year, Zhu Ran, the general of the State of Wu, led an army to besiege Jiangxia, but Jingzhou's Jishi Wuxiong repulsed him.

古文：又，公孙文懿叛，自立为燕王，改年，置百官。
现代文：又，公孙文懿反叛，自立为燕王，改年号，设置百官。
English: In addition, Gongsun Wenyu rebelled, established himself as the King of Swallows, changed his era name, and set up a hundred officials.

古文：明年，讨平之。
现代文：第二年，平定了他。
English: The next year, they subdued him.

古文：吴孙权嘉禾六年五月，江东地震。
现代文：吴国孙权嘉禾六年五月，江东地震。
English: In May of the sixth year of the reign of Sun Quan Jia He of the State of Wu, there was an earthquake in the east of the Yangtze River.

古文：赤乌二年正月，地再震。
现代文：赤乌二年正月，地震两次。
English: In the first month of the second year of Ako, there were two earthquakes.

古文：是时，吕壹专事，步骘上疏曰： 伏闻校事吹毛求瑕，趣欲陷人，成其威福，无罪无辜，横受重刑，虽有大臣，不见信任，如此，天地焉得无变！
现代文：当时，吕壹专权，步鹭上疏说： 我听说校事吹毛求疵，放纵私欲陷害别人，作威作福，无辜的人意外地遭受重刑，即使有大臣，也不受信任，这样，天地怎能没有变异!
English: At that time, Lu Yi's autocratic power was in full swing, saying: "I have heard that school affairs are nit-picking, indulging in selfish desires to frame others, acting as a bully, innocent people are unexpectedly subjected to heavy punishment, and even if there is a minister, they are not trusted, so how can heaven and earth not change!

古文：故地连震动，臣下专政之应也。
现代文：因此接连地震，这是臣下专擅朝政的应验。
English: As a result, earthquakes have occurred one after another, which is the result of the vassals' exclusive control of the government.

古文：冀所以警悟人主，可不深思其意哉！ 
现代文：天地希望能用以使帝王警悟，能不深思它的用意吗! 
English: Heaven and earth hope to be used to alert the emperor, can we not ponder its intention!

古文：壹后卒败。
现代文：吕壹后来终于失败。
English: Lu Yi later finally failed.

古文：魏齐王正始二年十一月，南安郡地震。
现代文：魏齐王正始二年十一月，南安郡地震。
English: In November of the second year of King Wei's reign, there was an earthquake in Nan'an County.

古文：三年七月甲申，南安郡地震。
现代文：三年七月甲申，南安郡地震。
English: In July of the third year of Jiaxing, the Nan'an County earthquake occurred.

古文：十二月，魏郡地震。
现代文：十二月，魏郡地震。
English: In December, there was an earthquake in Wei County.

古文：六年二月丁卯，南安郡地震。
现代文：六年二月丁卯，南安郡地震。
English: In February, Dingwu, Nan'an County was hit by an earthquake.

古文：是时，曹爽专政，迁太后于永宁宫，太后与帝相泣而别。
现代文：当时，曹爽专擅朝政，让太后迁进永宁宫，太后和皇帝哭泣着分别。
English: At that time, Cao Shuangxuan was in charge of the imperial government and moved the empress dowager into the Yongning Palace. The empress dowager and the emperor separated in tears.

古文：连年地震，是其应也。
现代文：连年地震，就是应验。
English: Year after year of earthquakes, that is the answer.

古文：吴孙权赤乌十一年二月，江东地仍震。
现代文：吴孙权赤乌十一年二月，江东接连地震。
English: In February of the 11th year of Wu Sun Quan's reign, the East River was hit by a series of earthquakes.

古文：是时，权听谗，寻黜硃据，废太子。
现代文：当时，孙权听信谗言，不久后罢黜朱据，废黜太子。
English: At that time, Sun Quan listened to the advice, and soon after deposed Zhu Xu and dethroned the crown prince.

古文：蜀刘禅炎兴元年，蜀地震。
现代文：蜀刘禅炎兴元年，蜀国地震。
English: In the first year of the revival of Shu Liu Zen, the Shu earthquake occurred.

古文：是时宦人黄皓专权。
现代文：当时宦人黄皓专权。
English: At that time, the power was in the hands of Huang Qi.

古文：案司马彪说， 阉官无阳施，犹妇人也 。
现代文：依司马彪的说法， 闯官没有阳物，就像妇人 。
English: According to Sima Biao, officials do not have a penis, just like women.

古文：皓见任之应，与汉和帝时同事也。
现代文：黄皓受到信任的应验，和汉和帝时的事相同。
English: The fulfillment of Huang Qi's trust is the same as that of the Han Dynasty and the Qing Dynasty.

古文：是冬，蜀亡。
现代文：当年冬天，蜀国灭亡。
English: In the winter of that year, the State of Shu collapsed.

古文：武帝泰始五年四月辛酉，地震。
现代文：武帝泰始五年四月辛酉，地震。
English: In April of the fifth year of Emperor Wu's reign, there was an earthquake.

古文：是年冬，新平氐羌叛。
现代文：当年冬天，新平的氐、羌反叛。
English: In the winter of that year, the cormorants and pheasants in Xinping rebelled.

古文：明年，孙皓遣大众入涡口。
现代文：第二年，孙皓派大军进入涡口。
English: In the second year, Sun Yat-sen sent a large army into the vortex.

古文：七年六月丙申，地震。
现代文：七年六月丙申，地震。
English: In June of the seventh year of Hsin, there was an earthquake.

古文：咸宁二年八月庚辰，河南、河东、平阳地震。
现代文：咸宁二年八月庚辰，河南、河东、平阳地震。
English: The Henan, Hedong and Pingyang earthquakes occurred in August of the second year of Xianning.

古文：四年六月丁未，阴平广武地震，甲子又震。
现代文：四年六月丁未，阴平、广武地震，甲子又震。
English: In June of the same year, the Yinping and Guangwu earthquakes, as well as the Kosi earthquake, occurred.

古文：太康二年二月庚申，淮南、丹阳地震。
现代文：太康二年二月庚申，淮南、丹杨地震。
English: In February of the second year of Taikang, the Goshun, Huainan and Danyang earthquakes occurred.

古文：五年正月朔壬辰，京师地震。
现代文：五年正月初一壬辰，京师地震。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fifth year, there was an earthquake in Beijing.

古文：六年七月己丑，地震。
现代文：六年七月己丑，地震。
English: In July of the same year, there was an earthquake.

古文：七年七月，南安、犍为地震。
现代文：七年七月，南安、犍为地震。
English: In July of the seventh year, Nan'an and Zhouzhou were hit by an earthquake.

古文：八月，京兆地震。
现代文：八月，京兆地震。
English: In August, the Great Kanto Earthquake occurred.

古文：八年五月壬子，建安地震。
现代文：八年五月壬子，建安地震。
English: In May of the eighth year, Jinsi, Jian'an earthquake.

古文：七月，阴平地震。
现代文：七月，阴平地震。
English: July, Yinping earthquake.

古文：八月，丹阳地震。
现代文：八月，丹杨地震。
English: August, Danyang earthquake.

古文：九年正月，会稽、丹阳、吴兴地震。
现代文：九年正月，会稽、丹杨、吴兴地震。
English: In the first month of the ninth year, there were earthquakes in Hefei, Danyang and Wuxing.

古文：四月辛酉，长沙、南海等郡国八地震。
现代文：四月辛酉，长沙、南海等郡国地震八次。
English: In April, there were eight earthquakes in counties such as Changsha and Nanhai.

古文：七月至于八月，地又四震，其三有声如雷。
现代文：七月到八月间，又地震了四次，其中三次发出雷一样的响声。
English: Between July and August, there were four more earthquakes, three of which had a thunderous sound.

古文：九月，临贺地震，十二月又震。
现代文：九月，临贺地震，十二月又震。
English: In September, the Linhe earthquake, and another earthquake in December.

古文：十年十二月己亥，丹杨地震。
现代文：十年十二月己亥，丹杨地震。
English: December 10, Ji Hai, Danyang earthquake.

古文：太熙元年正月，地又震，武帝世，始于贾充，终于杨骏，阿党昧利，苟窃朝权。
现代文：太熙元年正月，地又震。武帝时，从贾充开始直到扰双，结党营私，窃取了朝政大权。
English: In the first month of the first year of Taixi, the earth shook again. During the reign of Emperor Wu, from Jia Chong to Zhanshuang, he formed a party and stole the supreme political power of the dynasty.

古文：至于末年，所任转弊，故频年地震，过其序也，终丧天下。
现代文：到了末年，任用官员更加败坏，因此连年地震，阴阳秩序出现了差错，终于失去了天下。
English: By the end of the year, the appointed officials had become even more corrupt. As a result, there were earthquakes year after year, the yin and yang order went wrong, and the country was finally lost.

古文：惠帝元康元年十二月辛酉，京都地震。
现代文：惠帝元康元年十二月辛酉，京都地震。
English: Hui Di Yuan Kang was born in December of the first year of the Hsinchu, Kyoto earthquake.

古文：此夏，贾后使楚王玮杀汝南王亮及太保卫瓘，此阴道盛、阳道微故也。
现代文：造年夏天，贾后指使楚王司马璋杀了这汝南王亮和太保卫瓘，这是阴道盛、阳道衰的缘故。
English: In the summer of the Year of the Pig, Empress Jia ordered King Sima of Chu to kill this Runnan Wang Liang and Tai Bao Wei, which was the cause of the vagina's prosperity and the sun's decline.

古文：四年二月，上谷、上庸、辽东地震。
现代文：四年二月，上谷、上庸、辽东地震。
English: In February of the fourth year, there were earthquakes in Shanggu, Shangyong and Liaodong.

古文：五月，蜀郡山移；淮南寿春洪水出，山崩地陷，坏城府。
现代文：五月，蜀郡的山移动；淮南寿春洪水涌出，山崩地陷，官府被损坏。
English: In May, the mountains in Shu County moved; the floods in Shuchun, Huainan Province, gushed out, landslides sank, and government offices were damaged.

古文：八月，上谷地震，水出，杀百余人。
现代文：八月，上谷地震，水涌出，淹死一百多人。
English: In August, water gushed out after the Shanggu earthquake, drowning more than a hundred people.

古文：十月，京都地震。
现代文：十月，京都地震。
English: October, Kyoto earthquake.

古文：十一月，荥阳、襄城、汝阴、梁国、南阳地皆震。
现代文：十一月，荣阳、襄城、汝阴、梁国、南阳地震。
English: In November, the Rongyang, Xiangcheng, Ruyin, Liangguo and Nanyang earthquakes occurred.

古文：十二月，京都又震。
现代文：十二月，京都又震。
English: In December, there was another earthquake in Kyoto.

古文：是时，贾后乱朝，终至祸败之应也。
现代文：当时，买后扰乱朝纲，这是终于招致祸败的应验。
English: At that time, after buying and disrupting the morning program, this is finally the fulfillment of the calamity.

古文：汉邓太后摄政时，郡国地震。
现代文：汉朝邓太后摄政时，郡国地震。
English: When the Han Dynasty's Empress Dowager Deng was regent, there was an earthquake in the county.

古文：李固以为： 地，阴也，法当安静。
现代文：李固认为： 地属阴，按法应当安静。
English: Li Gu believes: The earth is yin and yang, and should be quiet according to the law.

古文：此同事也。京房《易传》曰： 小人剥庐，厥妖山崩，兹谓阴乘阳，弱胜强。 
现代文：现在却超出了阴的职责，专擅阳政事，所以有地震应验。 这是同一类事情。京房《易传》说： 小人夺人荫庇，妖祥是山崩，这叫阴乘阳，弱胜强。 
English: Now, however, they have exceeded the duties of yin and are exclusively good at yang politics, so there is an earthquake fulfillment. This is the same kind of thing. Beijing House "I Chuan" said: The villain takes away people's shade, and the evil omen is a landslide. This is called yin using yang, and the weak wins over the strong.

古文：又曰： 阴背阳则地裂，父子分离，夷羌叛去。 
现代文：又说： 阴背离阳就会地裂，父子分离，夷羌反叛。 
English: He also said: If the yin deviates from the yang, the earth will be split, the father and son will be separated, and the barbarians will rebel.

古文：五年五月丁丑，地震。
现代文：五年五月丁丑，地震。
English: In May of the same year, there was an earthquake.

古文：六月，金城地震。
现代文：六月，金城地震。
English: In June, the Jincheng earthquake occurred.

古文：六年正月丁丑，地震。
现代文：六年正月丁丑，地震。
English: In the first month of the sixth year, there was an earthquake.

古文：八年正月丙辰，地震。
现代文：八年正月丙辰，地震。
English: In the first month of the eighth year, there was an earthquake.

古文：太安元年十月，地震。
现代文：太安元年十月，地震。
English: In October of the first year of the Taian era, an earthquake.

古文：时齐王冏专政之应。
现代文：这是当时齐王司马同专擅朝政的应验。
English: This was the fulfillment of Qi Wang Sima Tongzhu's imperial policy at that time.

古文：二年十二月丙辰，地震。
现代文：二年十二月丙辰，地震。
English: In December of the same year, there was an earthquake.

古文：是时，长沙王乂专政之应也。
现代文：当时，长沙王司马义专擅朝政，这是应验。
English: At that time, the king of Changsha, Sima Yi, was exclusively in charge of the imperial government, which is a fulfillment.

古文：孝杯帝永嘉三年十月，荆、湘二州地震。
现代文：孝怀帝永嘉三年十月，荆州、湘州地震。
English: Xiao Huai Di Yongjia three years in October, Jingzhou, Hunan earthquake.

古文：时司马越专政。
现代文：当时司马越专擅朝政。
English: At that time, Sima Yue was exclusively in charge of the imperial government.

古文：四年四月，兗州地震。
现代文：四年四月，兖州地震。
English: In April of the same year, there was an earthquake in Zhangzhou.

古文：五月，石勒寇汲郡，执太守胡宠，遂南济河，是其应也。
现代文：五月，石勒侵犯汲郡，抓了太守胡宠，于是往南渡过黄河，这是应验。
English: In May, Shiller invaded Kyu County, captured the governor Hu Jia, and then crossed the Yellow River to the south, which was the fulfillment.

古文：愍帝建兴二年四月甲辰，地震。
现代文：愍帝建兴二年四月甲辰，地震。
English: In April of the second year of Emperor Jianxing's reign, there was an earthquake.

古文：三年六月丁卯，长安又地震。
现代文：三年六月丁卯，长安又地震。
English: In June of the same year, another earthquake hit Chang'an.

古文：是时主幼，权倾于下，四方云扰，兵乱不息之应也。
现代文：这是当时君主年幼，大权被臣下操纵，四方动荡，战乱不息的应验。
English: This was in response to the fact that the monarch was young at the time, that power was manipulated by vassals, that the four quarters were in turmoil, and that there was constant warfare.

古文：元帝太兴元年四月，西平地震，涌水出。
现代文：元帝太兴元年四月，西平地震，有水涌出。
English: In April of the first year of the Yuan Emperor Taixing, Xiping earthquake, water gushed out.

古文：十二月，庐陵、豫章、武昌、西陵地震，涌水出，山崩。
现代文：十二月，庐陵、豫章、武昌、西陵地震，有水涌出，山崩。
English: In December, the earthquakes in Fuling, Yuzhang, Wuchang and Xiling caused water to gush out and landslides.

古文：干宝以为王敦陵上之应也。
现代文：王室认为这是王敦陵凌主上的应验。
English: The royal family believed that this was the fulfillment of Wang Dunling's wish.

古文：二年五月己丑，祁山地震，山崩，杀人。
现代文：二年五月己丑，祁山地震，山崩，死了人。
English: In May of the second year, Lushan earthquake, landslide, and people died.

古文：是时，相国南阳王保在祁山，称晋王不终之象也。
现代文：这是当时相国南阳王司马保在祁山称晋王不得善终之象。
English: This was the time when Sima Bao, the Nanyang king of the same country, said in Shaoshan that the king of Jin would not have a good death.

古文：三年五月庚寅，丹阳、吴郡、晋陵又地震。
现代文：三年五月庚寅，丹杨、吴郡、晋陵又地震。
English: In May of the third year, there was another earthquake in Goyang, Danyang, Wu County, and Jinling.

古文：成帝咸和二年二月，江陵地震。
现代文：成帝咸和二年二月，江陵地震。
English: In February of the second year of Emperor Chengdi's reign, there was an earthquake in Gangneung.

古文：三月，益州地震。
现代文：三月，益州地震。
English: In March, there was an earthquake in Iksu.

古文：四月己未，豫章地震。
现代文：四月己未，豫章地震。
English: April has not yet come, but the earthquake in Yuzhang has begun.

古文：是年，苏峻作乱。
现代文：当年，苏峻作乱。
English: That year, Su Jun caused a riot.

古文：九年三月丁酉，会稽地震。
现代文：九年三月丁酉，会稽地震。
English: In March of the ninth year, Dingyao was hit by an earthquake.

古文：穆帝永和元年六月癸亥，地震。
现代文：穆帝永和元年六月癸亥，地震。
English: Mudiyonghe earthquake in June of the first year of the year.

古文：是时，嗣主幼冲，母后称制，政在臣下，所以连年地震。
现代文：当时，继主年幼，母后临朝听政，政权都由臣下操纵，所以连年地震。
English: At that time, the successor was young, his mother was a member of the imperial court, and the political power was controlled by the vassals, so there were earthquakes year after year.

古文：二年十月，地震。
现代文：二年十月，地震。
English: In October of the second year, an earthquake.

古文：三年正月丙辰，地震。
现代文：三年正月丙辰，地震。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, an earthquake occurred.

古文：九月，地又震。
现代文：九月，又地震。
English: In September, another earthquake.

古文：四年十月己未，地震。
现代文：四年十月己未，地震。
English: In October of 2004, there was an earthquake.

古文：五年正月庚寅，地震。
现代文：五年正月庚寅，地震。
English: In the first month of the fifth year of Goyang, an earthquake occurred.

古文：是时，石季龙僭即皇帝位，亦过其序也。
现代文：当时，石季龙僭即皇帝位，也是秩序出现了差错。
English: At that time, Shiji Longyu, that is, the emperor's throne, was also a mistake in the order.

古文：九年八月丁酉，京都地震，有声如雷。
现代文：九年八月丁酉，京都地震，有像打雷一样的声音。
English: In August 9th, Tingchuan, Kyoto earthquake, there was a sound like thunder.

古文：十年正月丁卯，地震，声如雷，鸡雉皆鸣句。
现代文：十年正月丁卯，地震，声音像打雷一样，鶸雉都呜叫。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, there was an earthquake, the sound was like thunder, and the crickets were howling.

古文：十一年四月乙酉，地震。
现代文：十一年四月乙酉，地震。
English: On April 11th, there was an earthquake.

古文：五月丁未，地震。
现代文：五月丁未，地震。
English: In May, there was an earthquake.

古文：升平二年十一月辛酉，地震。
现代文：升平二年十一月辛酉，地震。
English: In November of the second year of the Heian period, there was an earthquake.

古文：五年八月，凉州地震。
现代文：五年八月，凉州地震。
English: In August 2005, the Liangzhou earthquake occurred.

古文：哀帝隆和元年四月甲戌，地震。
现代文：哀帝隆和元年四月甲戌，地震。
English: In April of the first year of the year, there was an earthquake in Jiaxuan.

古文：是时，政在将相，人主南面而已。
现代文：当时，国政把持在将相手中，皇帝徒有虚名而已。
English: At that time, state affairs were in the hands of the enemy, and the emperor had only a false name.

古文：兴宁元年四月甲戌，扬州地震，湖渎溢。
现代文：兴宁元年四月甲戌，扬州地震，湖水河水满溢。
English: Xingning in April of the first year of Jiaxing, Yangzhou earthquake, lake and river water overflowed.

古文：二年二月庚寅，江陵地震。
现代文：二年二月庚寅，江陵地震。
English: In February of the following year, the Gangneung and Gangneung earthquakes occurred.

古文：是时，桓温专政。
现代文：当时，桓温专擅国政。
English: At that time, Kanemitsu was particularly adept at national politics.

古文：海西公太和元年二月，凉州地震，水涌。
现代文：海西公太和元年二月，凉州地震，水涌出。
English: In February of the first year of Haixi Gongtai and Liangzhou earthquake, water gushed out.

古文：是海西将废之应也。
现代文：这是海西将要被废黜的应验。
English: This is the fulfillment that Haisi will be dethroned.

古文：简文帝咸安二年十月辛未，安成地震。
现代文：简文帝咸安二年十月辛未，安成地震。
English: In October of the second year of Emperor Jianwen's reign, the Ancheng earthquake occurred.

古文：是年帝崩。
现代文：这一年皇帝去世。
English: The emperor died that year.

古文：孝武帝宁康元年十月辛未，地震。
现代文：孝武帝宁康元年十月辛未，地震。
English: Xiaowu Emperor Ningkang in October of the first year of Xinwei, earthquake.

古文：二年二月丁巳，地震。
现代文：二年二月丁巳，地震。
English: In February of the following year, there was an earthquake.

古文：七月甲午，凉州地又震，山崩。
现代文：七月甲午，凉州又地震，山崩。
English: In the afternoon of July 1st, there was another earthquake and landslide in Liangzhou.

古文：是时，嗣主幼冲，权在将相，阴盛之应也。
现代文：这是当时继主年幼，权在将相，阴盛的应验。
English: At that time, the successor was young, the power was in the hands of the general, and it was a gloomy fulfillment.

古文：太元二年闰三月壬午，地震。
现代文：太元二年闰三月壬午，地震。
English: 2nd year of the Taigen, at the stroke of 3 o'clock in the morning, earthquake.

古文：五月丁丑，地震。
现代文：五月丁丑，地震。
English: May ding ugly, earthquake.

古文：十一年六月己卯，地震。
现代文：十一年六月己卯，地震。
English: In June 11th, there was an earthquake.

古文：是后缘河诸将连岁兵役，人劳之应也。
现代文：这是此后黄河流域各将领连年打仗，人民劳困的应验。
English: This was the result of successive years of war waged by the generals in the Yellow River basin and the hardships suffered by the people.

古文：十五年二月己酉朔夜，地震。
现代文：十五年三月初一己酉夜，地震。
English: In the early hours of March 15, an earthquake struck.

古文：八月，京都地震。
现代文：八月，京都地震。
English: In August, the Kyoto earthquake occurred.

古文：十二月己未，地震。
现代文：十二月己未，地震。
English: It's December and there's been an earthquake.

古文：十七年六月癸卯，地震。
现代文：十七年六月癸卯，地震。
English: In June, 1917, there was an earthquake.

古文：十二月己未，地又震。
现代文：十二月己未，又地震。
English: It's not even December and there's another earthquake.

古文：是时，群小弄权，天下侧目。
现代文：当时，小人弄权，天下人侧目而枧。
English: At that time, villains tried to seize power, and the whole world looked away.

古文：十八年正月癸亥朔，地震。
现代文：十八年正月初一癸亥，地震。
English: On the first day of the first month of the 18th year, there was an earthquake.

古文：二月乙未夜，地震。
现代文：二月乙未晚上。地震。
English: On the evening of February 2nd, there was an earthquake.

古文：安帝隆安四年四月乙未，地震。
现代文：安帝隆安四年四月乙未，地震。
English: In April of the 4th year of the 4th year of the 4th year of the 4th year of the 4th year of the 4th year of the 4th year of the 4th year of the 4th year of the 4th year of the 4th year of the 4th year of the 4th year of the 4th year of the 4th year of the 4th year of the 4th year of the 5th year of the 4th year of the 4th year of the 4th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 7th year of the 6th year of

古文：九月癸丑，地震。
现代文：九月癸丑，地震。
English: September is ugly, with earthquakes.

古文：是时，幼主冲昧，政在臣下。
现代文：当时，皇帝年幼无知，国政由臣下把持。
English: At that time, the emperor was young and ignorant, and state affairs were controlled by his vassals.

古文：义熙四年正月壬子夜，地震有声。
现代文：义熙四年正月壬子晚上，地震，发出声音。
English: On the evening of the first day of the first month of the fourth year of Yixi, there was an earthquake and a sound.

古文：十月癸亥，地震。
现代文：十月癸亥，地震。
English: In October, there was an earthquake.

古文：五年正月戊戌夜，寻阳地震，有声如雷。
现代文：五年正月戊戌晚上，寻阳地震，有打雷一样的声音。
English: On the evening of the 1st day of the 1st month of the 5th year, there was an earthquake in Xuanyang, with a sound like thunder.

古文：明年，卢循下。
现代文：第二年，卢循失败。
English: In the second year, Lu Xun failed.

古文：八年，自正月至四月，南康、庐陵地四震。
现代文：八年，从正月到四月，南康、庐陵四次地震。
English: In eight years, from January to April, there were four earthquakes in Nankang and Fuling.

古文：明年，王旅西讨荆益。
现代文：第二年，朝廷的军队西讨荆州、益州。
English: In the second year, the imperial court's army marched west to Jingzhou and Yizhou.

古文：十年三月戊寅，地震。
现代文：十年三月戊寅，地震。
English: In March of the 10th year, there was an earthquake.

古文：山崩地陷裂吴孙权赤乌十三年八月，丹阳、句容及故鄣、宁国诸山崩，鸿水溢。案刘向说， 山，阳，君也。
现代文：吴孙权赤乌十三年八月，丹杨、句容及故鄣、宁国各处山崩，洪水横溢。依刘向的说法， 山，属阳，主帝王。
English: In August of the 13th year of Wu Sun Quan's reign, the mountains of Danyang, Juroung, and the former Shandong and Ning provinces all suffered landslides and floods. According to Liu Xiang, mountains belong to the sun, the main emperor.

古文：水，阴，百姓也。
现代文：水，属阴，主百姓。
English: Water is Yin, the master of the people.

古文：天戒若曰，君道崩坏，百姓将失其所与 ！
现代文：上天显示鉴戒，帝王之道崩坏，百姓将要失去他们的好感 !
English: Heaven warns that the emperor's way will collapse and the people will lose their goodwill!

古文：春秋梁山崩，汉齐、楚众山发水，同事也。
现代文：春秋时梁山崩塌，汉齐、楚之地群山发水，是同一种事情。
English: The collapse of Mount Liang in spring and autumn and the flooding of mountains in the Han and Chu regions are one and the same thing.

古文：夫三代命祀，祭不越望，吉凶祸福，不是过也。
现代文：三代时国君祭祀，不超过望祭，吉凶祸福，不超过这些。
English: During the three generations of the king's reign, the sacrificial offerings did not exceed the offering of hope, good luck, bad luck, and good fortune.

古文：吴虽称帝，其实列国，灾发丹阳，其天意矣。
现代文：吴主虽然称帝，实际上是列国之一，在丹杨发生灾祸，这是天意。
English: Although Lord Wu claimed to be an emperor, he was actually one of the nations, and the disaster that occurred in Danyang was God's will.

古文：刘歆以为： 国主山川，山崩川竭，亡之征也。 
现代文：刘歆认为： 国家主山川，山崩河流干，这是亡国的征兆。 
English: Liu Wei believes: The country's main mountains and rivers, landslides and rivers are dry, which is a sign of the country's downfall.

古文：后二年而权薨，又二十六年而吴亡。
现代文：两年以后孙权去世，又过了二十六年吴国灭亡。
English: Two years later, Sun Quan died, and another twenty-six years passed before the fall of the State of Wu.

古文：魏元帝咸熙二年二月，太行山崩，此魏亡之征也。
现代文：魏元帝咸熙二年二月，太行山山崩，这是魏国灭亡的征兆。
English: In February of the second year of the reign of Emperor Han of Wei-Yuan, the Taihang Mountains collapsed, which was a sign of the demise of the State of Wei.

古文：其冬，晋有天下。
现代文：这一年冬天，晋室拥有天下。
English: In the winter of that year, the Jin family owned the whole world.

古文：武帝泰始三年三月戊午，大石山崩。
现代文：武帝泰始三年三月戊午，大石山山崩。
English: In the early afternoon of March in the third year of Emperor Wu's reign, the Daishi Mountain landslide occurred.

古文：四年七月，泰山崩坠三里。
现代文：四年七月，泰山崩塌了三里。
English: In July of the same year, Mount Tai collapsed three miles away.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 自上下者为崩，厥应泰山之石颠而下，圣王受命人君虏。 
现代文：京房《易传》说道： 自上往下的叫作崩，应验了泰山的石头从高处往下坠，圣王受命人君被俘虏。 
English: According to the "I Chuan" of the Imperial Household Agency: "From the top to the bottom, they called for death, and the stone of Mount Tai fell down from a high place, and the holy king was ordered to be captured.

古文：及帝晏驾，而禄去王室，惠皇懦弱，怀愍二帝俱辱虏庭，沦胥于北，元帝中兴于南，此其应也。
现代文：到了武帝死后，福禄就离开了王室，惠帝懦弱，怀帝、愍帝全都受胡虏欺侮，在北方被囚禁，元帝在南方中兴，这是应验。
English: After the death of Emperor Wu, Fu Luo left the royal family, Hui Di was weak, Huai Di and Zang Di were all bullied by the Khuriks and were imprisoned in the north, and Yuan Di was rehabilitated in the south. This was the fulfillment.

古文：太康五年五月丙午，宣帝庙地陷。
现代文：太康五年五月丙午，宣帝庙地面下陷。
English: On the afternoon of the third day of May in the fifth year of Taikang, the ground of Xuan Di Temple sank.

古文：六年十月，南安新兴山崩，涌水出。
现代文：六年十月，南安新兴山崩，有水涌出。
English: In October of the sixth year, Nan'an had an emerging landslide, and water gushed out.

古文：七年二月，硃提之大泸山崩，震坏郡舍，阴平之仇池崖陨。
现代文：七年二月，硃提的大泸山崩，震坏了郡舍，阴平的仇池山崖倒塌。
English: In February of the seventh year, a large landslide in Xingti shook the county seat, and the flat cliff of Qiu Lake collapsed.

古文：八年七月，大雨，殿前地陷，方五尺，深数丈，中有破船。
现代文：八年七月，下大雨，宫殿前地面陷落，有五尺见方，深数丈，裹面有一条破船。
English: In July of the eighth year, it rained heavily, and the ground in front of the palace caved in. It was five feet square, several feet deep, and there was a broken boat on the surface.

古文：惠帝元康四年，蜀郡山崩，杀人。
现代文：惠帝元康四年，蜀郡山崩，有人伤亡。
English: In the fourth year of Hui Di Yuan Kang, a landslide occurred in Shu County, resulting in casualties.

古文：五月壬子，寿春山崩，洪水出，城坏，地陷方三十丈，杀人。
现代文：五月壬子，寿春山崩，洪水涌出，城墙被冲坏，地面陷落三十丈见方，有人伤亡。
English: In May, the Jinsi and Shuchun landslides occurred, flooding occurred, the city wall was washed away, the ground fell 30 meters, and there were casualties.

古文：六月，寿春大雷，山崩地坼，人家陷死，上庸亦如之。
现代文：六月，寿春出现大响雷，山崩地裂，有人陷入地而死，上庸也是这样。
English: In June, in Shouchun, there was a loud thunder, a landslide, and some people fell to the ground and died, and the same happened in Shangyong.

古文：八月，居庸地裂，广三十六丈，长八十四丈，水出，大饥。
现代文：八月，居庸地面开裂，宽三十六丈，长八十四丈，水涌出来，出现大饥荒。
English: In August, the ground of Juyong cracked, thirty-six meters wide and eighty-four meters long, water gushed out, and a great famine occurred.

古文：上庸四处山崩，地坠广三十丈，长百三十丈，水出杀人。
现代文：上庸有四个地方出现山崩，地面下坠的地方宽三十丈，长一百三十丈，有水涌出，淹死了人。
English: There were landslides in four places in Shangyong. The area where the ground fell was 30 meters wide and 130 meters long. Water gushed out and drowned people.

古文：皆贾后乱朝之应也。
现代文：这些都是买后扰乱朝政的应验。
English: All of these are the fulfillment of the policy of disrupting the imperial government after buying it.

古文：太安元年四月，西墉崩。
现代文：太安元年四月，西墉山崩。
English: In April of the first year of the Taian era, the Xidi landslide occurred.

古文：怀帝永嘉元年三月，洛阳东北步广里地陷。
现代文：怀帝永嘉元年三月，洛阳东北步广里地面下陷。
English: In March of the first year of Huai Di Yongjia, the ground sank in the northeast of Luoyang.

古文：二年八月乙亥，鄄城城无故自坏七十余丈，司马越恶之，迁于濮阳，此见沴之异也。
现代文：二年八月乙亥，鄄城城墙无故倒塌七十多丈，司马越憎恶这件事，迁移到濮阳，这是出现相克的灾异。
English: In August of the second year of Yihai, the city wall of Handan City collapsed more than 70 meters without reason. Sima Yue hated this event and moved to Handan, which was a disaster caused by the conflict.

古文：越卒以陵上受祸。
现代文：司马越最终因为冒犯皇上遭受祸患。
English: Sima Yue eventually suffered the misfortune of offending the emperor.

古文：三年七月戊辰，当阳地裂三所，广三丈，长三百余步。
现代文：三年七月戊辰，当阳有三个地方地裂，宽三丈，长三百多步。
English: In July of the third year, there were three cracks in Dangyang, three meters wide and three meters high, with a length of more than three hundred paces.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 地坼裂者，臣下分离，不肯相从也。 
现代文：京房《易传》说： 地面开裂，意味着臣下分离，不肯跟从。 
English: Kyobo's "I Chuan" said: The ground cracking means that the vassals are separated and refuse to follow.

古文：其后司马越苟晞交恶，四方牧伯莫不离散，王室遂亡。
现代文：后来司马越和苟晞闹矛盾，四方的官员无不离散，王室于是灭亡。
English: Later, conflicts arose between Sima Yue and Goguryeo, and the officials of the four sides dispersed, and the royal family perished.

古文：三年十月，宜都夷道山崩。
现代文：三年十月，宜都夷道山崩。
English: In October of the third year, there was a landslide on Yidu Road.

古文：四年四月，湘东需阝黑石山崩。
现代文：四年四月，湘东酃黑石山山崩。
English: In April of the same year, a landslide occurred on Mount Kuroishi in Shandong Province.

古文：元帝太兴元年二月，庐陵、豫章、武昌，西阳地震山崩。
现代文：元帝太兴元年二月，庐陵、豫章、武昌、西阳地震山崩。
English: In February of the first year of the Yuan Emperor Taixing, earthquakes and landslides occurred in Fuling, Yuzhang, Wuchang and Xiyang.

古文：二年五月，祁山地震，山崩，杀人。
现代文：二年五月，祁山地震，山崩，死了人。
English: In May of the second year, Lushan earthquake, landslide, people died.

古文：三年，南平郡山崩，出雄黄数千斤。
现代文：三年，南平郡山崩，崩出了数千斤雄黄。
English: Three years ago, a landslide in Nanping County caused the collapse of thousands of kilograms of gold.

古文：时王敦陵傲，帝优容之，示含养祸萌也。
现代文：当时王敦傲慢凌人，皇帝宽容他，意味着孕育祸胎。
English: At that time, Wang Dun was arrogant and domineering, and the emperor tolerated him, which meant giving birth to a bad seed.

古文：四年八月，常山崩，水出，滹沲盈溢，大木倾拔。
现代文：四年八月，常山山崩，有水涌出，滹沲水满溢出，大树倾折。
English: In August of the fourth year, there was a landslide in the Changshan Mountains. Water gushed out, floodwaters overflowed, and large trees toppled.

古文：成帝咸和四年十月，柴桑庐山西北崖崩。
现代文：成帝咸和四年十月，柴桑庐山西北崖崩塌。
English: In October of the 4th year of Emperor Chengdi's reign, the northwest cliff of Chaisangbushan Mountain collapsed.

古文：十二月，刘胤为郭默所杀。
现代文：十二月，刘胤被郭默杀死。
English: In December, Liu Yin was killed by Guo Mei.

古文：穆帝永和七年九月，峻平、崇阳二陵崩。
现代文：穆帝永和七年九月，峻平、崇阳两座皇陵崩塌。
English: In September of the seventh year of Mu Di Yonghe, two imperial tombs collapsed in Shunping and Soyang.

古文：十二年十一月，遣散骑常侍车灌修峻平陵，开埏道，崩压，杀数十人。
现代文：十二年十一月，派散骑常侍车灌修峻平陵，打开墓道，发生崩塌，压死了数十人。
English: In November of the 12th year, a caravan of horsemen was dispatched to repair the steep plain mausoleum, open the cemetery, collapse occurred, and dozens of people were crushed to death.

古文：升平五年二月，南掖门马足陷地，得钟一，有文四字。
现代文：升平五年二月，南掖门马足陷入地下，发现一口钟，钟上有四个字。
English: In February of the 5th year of Shengping, Nanhu Men Ma Fu fell into the ground and found a bell with four words on it.

古文：哀帝隆和元年四月丁丑，浩亹山崩，张天锡亡征也。
现代文：哀帝隆和元年四月丁丑，浩蜜山崩，这是张天锡灭亡的征兆。
English: The mourning of Emperor Long and the April of the first year of Dingwu and the mountain landslide of Haomei are signs of the demise of Zhang Tianxi.

古文：安帝义熙八年三月壬寅，山阴地陷，方四丈，有声如雷。
现代文：安帝义熙八年三月壬寅，山阴地面塌陷，有四丈见方，响声像雷声一样大。
English: In March of the eighth year of An Di Yixi, in Ren Yin, the shady ground of the mountain caved in. It was four meters high and square, and the noise was as loud as thunder.

古文：十年五月戊寅，西明门地穿，涌水出，毁门扇及限，此水沴土也。
现代文：十年五月戊寅，西明门地面穿裂，有水涌出，毁坏弓扇和门槛，这是水克土。
English: In May of the 10th year of Wu Yin, the ground of the Ximing Gate was cracked, and water gushed out, destroying the bow fan and the threshold. This is water-retaining soil.

古文：十一年五月，霍山崩，出铜钟六枚。
现代文：十一年五月，霍山山崩，出现六口铜钟。
English: In May of the eleventh year, there were six bronze bells in the wake of the Hushan landslide.

古文：十三年七月，汉中成固县水涯有声若雷，既而岸崩，出铜钟十有二枚。
现代文：十三年七月，汉中成固县水涯出现打雷一样的声音，不久水岸崩塌，出现十二口铜钟。
English: In July 13th, a thunderous sound was heard in Shui Ya, Chenggu County, Hanzhong Province. Soon after, the riverbank collapsed and twelve bronze bells appeared.

古文：惠帝元康九年六月夜，暴雷雨，贾谧斋屋柱陷入地，压谧床帐，此木沴土，土失其性，不能载也。
现代文：惠帝元康九年六月某夜，下暴雷雨，买谧的斋屋柱子陷入地下，压着了贾谧的床帐，这是木克土，土失去了本性，不能承载。
English: One night in June of the ninth year of Hui Di Yuan Kang, there was a thunderstorm, and the pillar of Mei Yao's yakitori restaurant fell into the ground, crushing Jia Yao's bedspread. This was wood soil. The soil had lost its natural properties and could not support the load.

古文：明年，谧诛焉。
现代文：第二年，贾谧被杀。
English: The following year, Jia Jun was killed.

古文：光熙元年五月，范阳国地燃，可以爨，此火沴土也。
现代文：光熙元年五月，范阳国地下燃烧，可以做熟饭，这是火克土。
English: In May of Guangxi in the first year of Guangxi, the underground of Fanyang burned, and cooked rice could be made. This was fire clay.

古文：是时，礼乐征伐自诸候出。
现代文：当时，礼乐征伐由诸侯作决定。
English: At that time, it was up to the feudal lords to decide on the performance of ceremonial music.

古文：《传》曰： 皇之不极，是谓不建，厥咎眊，厥罚恆阴，厥极弱。
现代文：《传》说道： 君主言行不恰当，逭叫做不能建立事功，罪过是昏聩，惩罚是长久的阴天，到了极点就是国势衰弱。
English: "Zhuan" said: The monarch's words and deeds are inappropriate, it is not possible to build achievements, the crime is delirium, the punishment is long-term cloudy weather, and the extreme is the national weakness.

古文：时则有射妖，时则有龙蛇之孽，时则有马祸，时则有下人伐上之痾，时则有日月乱行，星辰逆行。 
现代文：有时出现射妖，有时出现龙蛇类妖孽，有时出现马祸，有时出现下等人攻打上等人的弊病，有时出现曰月乱行，星辰逆行。 
English: Sometimes there is a shooting demon, sometimes there is a dragon and snake sorcery, sometimes there is a horse accident, sometimes there is a lower-class person attacking a higher-class person's malady, sometimes there is a chaotic moon and a retrograde star.

古文：皇之不极，是谓不建。
现代文：君主言行不恰当，这叫做不能建立事功。
English: If the ruler's words and deeds are not appropriate, this is called not being able to establish merit.

古文：皇，君；极，中；建，立也。
现代文：皇是君主，极是恰当，建是立。
English: The emperor is the monarch, it is very appropriate to build and establish.

古文：人君貌言视听思心五事皆失，不得其中，不能立万事，失在眊悖，故其咎眊也。
现代文：君主的容色言语目光听取思想五种行为都有差失，不能恰当，不能建立事功，错失在昏聩错乱，所以罪遇在昏聩。
English: The monarch's countenance, speech, eyesight, hearing, thought, and five kinds of behavior all have mistakes, cannot be appropriate, cannot establish merits, and the mistakes are in a daze, so the crime is in a daze.

古文：王者自下承天理物。
现代文：君王承受天命统理万物。
English: Monarchs have a divine mandate to rule over all things.

古文：云起于山，而弥于天；天气乱，故其罚恆阴，一曰： 上失中，则下强盛而蔽君明也。 
现代文：云从山上兴起，弥漫天空；天上气乱，所以惩罚是长久阴天。另一种说法，主上言行不恰当，那么下臣就会强盛，遮蔽了君主的圣明。
English: Clouds rise from the mountains and fill the sky; the sky is turbulent, so the punishment is a long cloudy day. Another way of saying it is that if the lord says or does something inappropriate, then the vassal will become powerful and overshadow the holy light of the monarch.

古文：《易》曰： 亢龙有悔，贵而亡位，高而亡民，贤人在下位而亡辅。 
现代文：《易》说： 亢龙有悔，尊贵而失去爵位，高贵而失去人民，贤人在下位而失去辅佐。 
English: "Yi" said: The dragon has regrets, the noble loses his title, the noble loses the people, and the wise man loses his assistant in the lower ranks.

古文：如此，则君有南面之尊，而亡一人之助，故其极弱也。
现代文：这样，那么君主贵为皇帝，却没有一个人帮助，所以到丁极点是弱小。
English: In this way, if the monarch is an emperor, there is no one to help him, so he is weak at the end of the day.

古文：盛阳动进轻疾。
现代文：盛阳运行迅疾。
English: Shengyang is running fast.

古文：礼，春而大射，以顺阳气。
现代文：礼法，春天天子需祭祀而行射礼，用以顺应阳气。
English: According to the etiquette, in the spring, the heavenly son needs to be sacrificed and perform the shooting ceremony to conform to the yang.

古文：上微弱则下奋惊动，故有射妖。
现代文：上微弱下就会惊动，因此有射妖。
English: The top and bottom will be alarmed, so there is a shooting demon.

古文：《易》曰： 云从龙。 
现代文：《易》说：厂云从龙。 
English: "Yi" said: Factory cloud from the dragon.

古文：又曰： 龙蛇之蛰，以存身也。 
现代文：又说： 龙蛇蛰伏，是为了保存自身。 
English: He also said, "The dragon and the snake lie in ambush to preserve themselves."

古文：阴气动，故有龙蛇之孽。
现代文：阴气动，所以有龙蛇的妖孽。
English: Yin moves, so there are dragon and snake spells.

古文：于《易》，《乾》为君，为马。
现代文：在《易》中，《干》为君，为马。
English: In "Easy," "Dry" is for you, for the horse.

古文：任用而强力，君气毁，故有马祸。
现代文：任用的人力强，君气受损，所以有马祸。
English: The manpower of the appointees was strong, and the dignity of the emperor was damaged, so there was a horse accident.

古文：一曰，马多死及为怪，亦是也。
现代文：另一种说法，马多死并成怪，也对。
English: Another theory, that Mado died and became a monster, is also true.

古文：君乱且弱，人之所叛，天之所去，不有明王之诛，则有篡杀之祸，故有下人伐上之痾。
现代文：君主迷乱软弱，人们就背叛他，上天就不要他，如果没有圣明君主被诛杀，就有篡位杀身的祸患，因此有下攻上的弊病。
English: The monarch is confused and weak, people betray him, heaven does not want him, if there is no saintly monarch to be killed, there will be the scourge of usurpation, so there is the evil of attacking.

古文：凡君道伤者，病天气。
现代文：凡是人君之道受损伤的，上天的气不正常。
English: Whenever the way of the human ruler is damaged, the qi of heaven is not normal.

古文：不言五行沴天，而曰 日月乱行，星辰逆行 者，为若下不敢沴天，犹《春秋》曰 王师败绩于贸戎 ，不言败之者，以自败为文，尊尊之意也。
现代文：不说五行克天，而说 日月乱行，星辰逆行 的原因，是因为下不敢克天，就好像《春秋》上说 周的军队对贸戎打了败仗 ，不说贸戎打败周，而用自己打败仗的写法，这是尊重高贵者的意思。
English: The reason why the five elements do not conquer the heavens, but the sun and moon do, and the stars go retrograde, is because the lower ones do not dare to conquer the heavens, just as if "Spring and Autumn" said that Zhou's army defeated the Moryong, and instead of saying that the Moryong defeated Zhou, they used their own way to defeat the war. This is the meaning of respecting the noble.

古文：刘歆《皇极传》曰有下体生于上之痾。
现代文：刘歆《皇极传》说有下体生在上身的弊病。
English: Liu Wei's "The Legend of the Emperor" says that the lower body is born with the ills of the upper body.

古文：说以为下人伐上，天诛已成，不得复为痾云。
现代文：遣一说法认为下攻打上，上天的诛罚已成现实，不能再是祸害了。
English: According to the saying that the attack from below and the punishment from heaven have become a reality, it can no longer be a scourge.

古文：恆阴吴孙亮太平三年，自八月沈阴不雨，四十余日。
现代文：吴国孙亮太平三年，从八月开始阴沉而不下雨，共四十多天。
English: Wu Guosunliang has been peaceful for three years, and it has been gloomy without rain since August, a total of more than forty days.

古文：是时，将诛孙綝，谋泄。
现代文：当时，准备杀孙绋，计划泄露。
English: At that time, the plan to kill Sun Yat-sen was leaked.

古文：九月戊午，綝以兵围宫，废亮为会稽王，此恆阴之罚也。
现代文：九月戊午，孙绋带兵围攻皇宫，废黜孙亮为会稽王，这是长时间阴天的惩罚。
English: In the afternoon of September, Sun Yat-sen and his soldiers besieged the imperial palace and deposed Sun Liang as the king of the council. This was the punishment for the long period of cloudy weather.

古文：吴孙皓宝鼎元年十二月，太史奏久阴不雨，将有阴谋。
现代文：吴孙皓宝鼎十二月，太史上奏说长时间阴天不下雨，将会有阴谋。
English: Wu Sun Rong Baoding said in December that if it does not rain for a long time, there will be a conspiracy.

古文：孙皓惊惧。
现代文：孙皓又吃惊又害怕。
English: Sun Yat-sen was surprised and scared.

古文：时陆凯等谋因其谒庙废之。
现代文：当时堕凯等人谋划趁着逊壁谒拜宗庙的时候废黜他。
English: At that time, Rui Kai and others plotted to depose him while he was worshiping at his ancestral temple.

古文：及出，留平领兵前驱，凯先语平，平不许，是以不果。
现代文：到了孙皓出来的时候，留平领兵做前锋，陆凯事先舆陆凯说了，陆凯不同意，因此没有成功。
English: When Sun Yat-sen came out, Ruiping led the troops as a forward, Lu Kai said in advance, Lu Kai did not agree, so it did not succeed.

古文：皓既肆虐，群下多怀异图，终至降亡
现代文：孙皓暴虐，下臣们大多别有居。终于投降灭亡。
English: Sun Yat-sen was tyrannical, and most of his vassals followed his lead. Finally, they surrendered and perished.

古文：射妖蜀车骑将军邓芝征涪陵，见玄猨缘山，手射中之。
现代文：蜀车骑将军垄芝征讨遣陆，看见一个黑猿爬山，张弓射中了它。
English: Shu Chariot riding General Renge Zhi, saw a black monkey climbing the mountain, and shot it with a bow.

古文：猨拔其箭，卷木叶塞其创。芝曰： 嘻！
现代文：猿拔出箭头，卷了一些树叶堵住伤。邓芝说： 唉!
English: The ape pulled out an arrow and rolled up some leaves to cover the wound. Deng Zhi said: Alas!

古文：吾违物之性，其将死矣！ 
现代文：我违背了万物的本性，将要死了! 
English: I have violated the nature of all things, and I am going to die!

古文：俄而卒，此射妖也。
现代文：一会儿就死了，逭就是射妖。
English: You'll be dead in a minute, that's what it is.

古文：一曰，猨母抱子，芝射中之，子为拔箭，取木叶塞创。
现代文：另一种说法，母猿抱着小猿，邓芝射中了母猿，小猿为大猿拔出箭，取来树叶堵住伤口。
English: Another way of saying it is that the mother ape is holding the baby ape, Deng Zhi shoots the mother ape, the baby ape pulls out an arrow for the big ape, and fetches leaves to plug the wound.

古文：芝叹息，投弩水中，自知当死。
现代文：邓芝叹息不已，把弓扔进水中，知道自己将要死去。
English: Deng Zhi sighed heavily and threw his bow into the water, knowing that he was about to die.

古文：恭帝为琅邪王，好奇戏，尝闲一马于门内，令人射之，欲观几箭死，左右有谏者曰： 马，国姓也。
现代文：恭帝为琅邪王时，喜欢做一些奇怪的游戏，曾经把一匹马阗在门内，让入射马，想看看要射多少箭才能射死。旁边的人规谏说： 马是国姓。
English: When Emperor Gong was fighting the evil king, he liked to play some strange games. He once tied a horse to a gate and let it be shot to see how many arrows it would take to kill it. The man next to him said, "The horse is the country's surname."

古文：今射之，不祥。 
现代文：现在却射它，不吉祥。 
English: To shoot it now is not auspicious.

古文：于是乃止，而马已被十许箭矣。
现代文：才停下，但是马已被射了十多箭。
English: But the horse had already been shot with more than ten arrows.

古文：此盖射妖也。
现代文：造就是射妖。
English: Zou means to shoot a demon.

古文：俄而禅位于宋焉。
现代文：不久，恭帝就禅位给宋。
English: Soon after, Emperor Kangxi gave Song the position of zen.

古文：龙蛇之孽魏明帝青龙元年正月甲申，青龙见郏之摩陂井中。
现代文：魏明帝青龙元年正月甲申，青龙出现在郏地摩陂的水井中。
English: In the first month of the first year of the Wei and Ming Dynasties, the year of the dragon, the year of the dragon appeared in the water wells of the Mahu River.

古文：凡瑞兴非时，则为妖孽，况困于井，非嘉祥矣。
现代文：凡是祥瑞不在适当的时候出现，就成了妖孽，何况被困在水井中，不是吉祥之兆。
English: If Xiang Rui does not appear at the right time, he will become a witch. Moreover, being trapped in a well is not an auspicious sign.

古文：魏以改年，非也。
现代文：狸因此改年号，做得不对。
English: That's why they changed the year, it's not the right thing to do.

古文：干宝曰： 自明帝，终魏世，青龙、黄龙见者，皆其主兴废之应也。
现代文：干实说： 从旦嘘开始，直到墓世结束，青龙、黄龙出现的，都是其皇帝兴废的应验。
English: In fact, from the beginning of the Tang Dynasty to the end of the tomb era, the emergence of the blue dragon and the yellow dragon was the fulfillment of the rise and fall of their emperors.

古文：魏土运，青木色，而不胜于金。
现代文：魏是土运，青是木的颜色，但是不能胜金。
English: Wei is the soil movement, and blue is the color of wood, but it cannot beat gold.

古文：黄得位，青失位之象也。
现代文：是黄得位，青失位的象征。
English: It is a symbol of yellow winning a place and blue losing a place.

古文：青能多见者，君德国运内相克伐也。
现代文：青龙多次出现，说明君德和国运互相克伐。
English: Qinglong appeared several times, indicating that Jun De and the National Movement were fighting against each other.

古文：故高贵乡公卒败于兵。 
现代文：因此直真塑公最终兵败。 
English: As a result, Tadazane Shoko suffered a final military defeat.

古文：案刘向说，龙贵象而困井中，诸侯将有幽执之祸也。
现代文：照塑咆的说法，龙是贵象却困在水井中，是诸侯将要被囚禁的征兆。
English: According to the legend, the dragon is a noble elephant trapped in a well. It is a sign that the princes will be imprisoned.

古文：魏世，龙莫不在井，此居上者逼制之应。
现代文：魏世，龙都是出现在井中，这是处在上位的人被逼迫的应验。
English: In the Wei Dynasty, dragons appeared in wells, which was the fulfillment of the persecution of those in power.

古文：高贵乡公著《潜龙诗》，即此旨也。
现代文：高贵乡公着《潜龙诗》，就有遣意思。
English: Noble Township's public wearing of the "Submerged Dragon Poem" has a meaning.

古文：高贵乡公正元元年十月戊戌，黄龙见于鄴井中。
现代文：高贵乡公正五元年十月戊戌，黄龙出现在邺的水井中。
English: In October of the year 500, a yellow dragon appeared in a well in Gaogui Township.

古文：甘露元年正月辛丑，青龙见轵县井中。
现代文：甘露元年正月辛丑，青龙出现在软县的水井中。
English: In the first month of the year of the Rooster, the year of the Pig, the year of the Dragon appeared in the wells of Soft County.

古文：六月乙丑，青龙见元城县界井中。
现代文：六月乙丑，青龙出现在元城县境内的水井中。
English: In the second month of June, a blue dragon appeared in a well in the territory of Yuancheng County.

古文：二年二月，青龙见温县井中。
现代文：二年二月，青龙出现在温县的水井中。
English: In February of the following year, a blue dragon appeared in a well in Wen County.

古文：三年，黄龙、青龙俱见顿丘、冠军、阳夏县界井中。
现代文：三年，黄龙、青龙都出现在顿丘、冠军、阳夏县境内的井中。
English: In three years, Huanglong and Qinglong appeared in Dongqiu, Champion, and Yangxia County.

古文：四年正月，黄龙二见宁陵县界井中。
现代文：四年正月，黄龙两次出现在宁陵县境内的井中。
English: In the first month of the fourth year, Huanglong appeared twice in wells in Ningling County.

古文：元帝景元元年十二月甲申，黄龙见华阴县井中。
现代文：元帝景元元年十二月甲申，黄龙出现在华坠逊的水井中。
English: In December of the first year of the reign of Emperor Jing of the Yuan Dynasty, the Yellow Dragon appeared in the wells of Huajingsun.

古文：三年二月，龙见轵县井中。
现代文：三年二月，龙出现在软县的水井中。
English: In February of the third year, a dragon appeared in a well in Soft County.

古文：吴孙皓天册中，龙乳于长沙人家，啖鸡雏。
现代文：吴孙皓天玉册年间，龙在垦丝的百姓家中产子，吃了老百姓的小鶸。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wusun, a dragon gave birth to a child in a commoner's home and ate the commoner's young cucumber.

古文：京房《易妖》曰： 龙乳人家，王者为庶人。 
现代文：京房《易妖》说： 龙在百姓家中生子，君王要成为庶人。 
English: Kyofusa "Ikimon" says: Dragons give birth to children in the homes of commoners, and kings become commoners.

古文：其后皓降晋。
现代文：后来孙皓投降了晋。
English: Later, Sun Yat-sen surrendered to Jin.

古文：武帝咸宁二年六月丙午，白龙二见于九原井中。
现代文：武帝咸宁二年六月丙午，白龙在九原的水井中出现了两次。
English: In the afternoon of June 3 of the second year of Emperor Wudi Xianning, the white dragon appeared twice in the wells of Jiuhara.

古文：太康五年正月癸卯，二龙见武库井中。
现代文：太康五年正月癸卯，两条龙在武库的水井中出现。
English: In the first month of Taikang's fifth year, two dragons appeared in the well of the arsenal.

古文：帝观之，有喜色。
现代文：皇帝看见后，喜形于色。
English: When the emperor saw it, he was overjoyed.

古文：百僚将贺，刘毅独表曰： 昔龙漦夏庭，祸发周室。
现代文：百官正要祝贺，圣隧却上奏说： 从前龙在夏庭中吐唾沫，祸患从旦室产生。
English: The dignitaries were about to congratulate him, but Shengtong said: "Once upon a time, a dragon spit in the summer garden, and a calamity arose from the den."

古文：龙见郑门，子产不贺。 
现代文：龙在郑门出现，王仅不庆贺。 
English: The dragon appears at Zhengmen, but the king does not celebrate.

古文：帝答曰： 朕德政未修，未有以应受嘉祥。 
现代文：皇帝回答说： 朕德政还没有建立，没有用来应验吉兆的事。 
English: The emperor replied, "We have not yet established a moral government, and there is nothing to fulfill the auspicious omens.

古文：遂不贺也。
现代文：于是没有庆贺。
English: So there was no celebration.

古文：孙盛曰： 龙，水物也，何与于人！
现代文：孙楚说： 龙是水物，和人有什么关系!
English: Sun Chu said: A dragon is a water creature, what does it have to do with people!

古文：子产言之当矣。但非其所处，实为妖灾。
现代文：子产说得对。但出现在不适当的地方，其实是妖灾。
English: Zi Yuan is right. But appearing in inappropriate places is actually an evil omen.

古文：夫龙以飞翔显见为瑞，今则潜伏幽处，非休祥也。 
现代文：龙是在飞翔中显现才成为吉祥，现在却潜伏在幽深的地方，不是吉兆。 
English: Dragons are auspicious only when they appear in flight, but now they are lurking in the depths, which is not a good omen.

古文：汉惠帝二年，两龙见兰陵井中，本志以为其后赵王幽死之象。
现代文：汉惠帝二年，两条龙出现在兰陵的水井中，本志认为是后来趟王被囚禁而死的象征。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Han Hui, two dragons appeared in the wells of Lanling, which is considered by this book to be a symbol of the later death of King Wado in captivity.

古文：武库者，帝王威御之器所宝藏也，屋宇邃密，非龙所处。
现代文：武库是帝王藏统治国家的器械的地方，屋宇深邃严密，不适合龙停留。
English: The arsenal is the place where the emperor hid the instruments of ruling the country, the building is deep and tight, not suitable for the dragon to stay.

古文：是后七年，籓王相害，二十八年，果有二胡僭窃神器，二逆皆字曰龙，此之表异，为有证矣。
现代文：此后七年，藩王互相加害，二十八年，果然有两个胡人僭称帝号，遣两个逆贼的名字叫龙，逭裹记载的灾异，是有证据的了。
English: After that, for seven years, the lords of the domain inflicted harm on each other. In the 28th year, two Hu people called themselves emperor and sent two traitors called dragons. The recorded disasters are evidence.

古文：愍帝建兴二年十一月，枹罕羌妓产一龙子，色似锦，文常就母乳，遥见神光，少得就视。
现代文：愍帝建兴二年十一月，袍罕羌妓产下一条小龙，外形像华丽的花纹，常常到母亲那裹吃奶，远远就能看见神光，很少能走近看到。
English: In November of the second year of Emperor Jianxing's reign, a prostitute in a robe gave birth to a baby dragon. It looked like a gorgeous flower pattern and often came to its mother to suckle. It could see the divine light from far away, but rarely could it get close enough to see it.

古文：此亦皇之不建，于是帝竟沦没。
现代文：这也意味着皇帝没有建功立业，于是最终沦没。
English: This also means that the emperor did not make any contributions, so he eventually fell.

古文：吕纂末，龙出东厢井中，到其殿前蟠卧，比旦失之。
现代文：吕纂末年，龙出现在东厢的水井中，并到大殿前蟠卧，第二天早上消失。
English: In the last years of the Lü dynasty, the dragon appeared in the well of the east wing, and went to lie down in front of the main hall, and disappeared the next morning.

古文：俄又有黑龙升其宫门。
现代文：不久又有黑龙飞上宫门。
English: Soon another black dragon flew to the palace gate.

古文：纂咸以为美瑞。
现代文：吕纂认为都是吉兆。
English: Lu Zuo believes that all of these are good omens.

古文：或曰： 龙者阴类，出入有时，今而屡见，必有下人谋上之变。 
现代文：有人说： 龙是阴类，出入有一定的时候，现在多次出现，一定有下臣谋算上面的人。 
English: Some people say: dragons are female, they come and go at a certain time, and now they appear many times. There must be a subordinate who is plotting against those above.

古文：后纂果为吕超所杀。
现代文：后来吕纂果然被吕超杀掉。
English: Later, Liusan was indeed killed by Luchao.

古文：武帝咸宁中，司徒府有二大蛇，长十许丈，居听事平上而人不知，但数年怪府中数失小兒及猪犬之属。
现代文：武帝咸宁年间，司徒府有两条大蛇，长十多丈，在大厅的屋椽上却没有人知道，但多年来奇怪府中常有小孩和猪狗之类失踪。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wu and Emperor Xianning, there were two large snakes, more than ten meters long, on the eaves of the hall, but no one knew about them. However, over the years, children and pigs and dogs have often disappeared from the palace.

古文：后有一蛇夜出，被刃伤不能去，乃觉之，发徒攻击，移时乃死。
现代文：后来有一条蛇晚上出来，被砍伤不能离去，才发觉，派人去打，过了些时候才死。
English: Later, a snake came out at night, was cut and couldn't leave, only to find out, sent someone to fight it, and died some time later.

古文：夫司徒，五教之府；此皇极不建，故蛇孽见之。
现代文：司徒是五教之府；这是君主言行不恰当，所以蛇孽出现。
English: Sutu is the capital of the five religions; it is the monarch's words and deeds that are not appropriate, and that is why the evil of serpents has appeared.

古文：汉灵帝时，蛇见御座，杨赐云为帝溺于色之应也。
现代文：漠灵帝时，蛇出现在御座上，杨赐说这是皇帝沉溺于女色的应验。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wu Ling, a snake appeared on the throne. Yang Zi said that this was the fulfillment of the emperor's indulgence in women.

古文：魏代宫人猥多，晋又过之，燕游是湎，此其孽也。
现代文：魏宫人众多，晋又超过魏，沉湎于宴饮游玩，这就是这些事的应验。
English: The Wei court had a large number of people, and the Jin dynasty surpassed the Wei dynasty, indulging in feasting and entertainment, which is the fulfillment of these things.

古文：《诗》云 惟虺惟蛇，女子之祥 也。
现代文：诗》说： 虺啊蛇啊，是女子的凶兆。 
English: The poem says, "The snake is a bad omen for a woman.

古文：惠帝元康五年三月癸巳，临淄有大蛇，长十余丈，负二小蛇入城北门，迳从市入汉城阳景王祠中，不见。
现代文：惠帝元康五年三月癸巳，临淄有大蛇，长十多丈，背着两条小蛇进了城北门，直接从市场进入汉城阳景王祠中，不见了。
English: In March of the fifth year of Hui Diyuan Kang, there was a big snake in Linyi, more than ten meters long, carrying two small snakes into the north gate of the city, directly from the market into the Seoul Yangjing Wang Ancestral Hall, and disappeared.

古文：天戒若曰，昔汉景王有定倾之功，而不厉节忠慎，以至失职夺功之辱。
现代文：天戒这样说，从前漠景王有安定国家的大功，但是不忠诚谨慎，以至于有丢失官职功劳被削夺的耻辱。
English: According to Heaven's Ring, in the past, the King of the Desert Scene had the great merit of a stable country, but he was not loyal and prudent, so that there was the shame of losing his official position and being deprived of his merits.

古文：今齐王冏不寤，虽建兴复之功，而骄陵取祸，此其征也。
现代文：现在齐王司马同不觉悟，虽有复兴国家的功勋，但是盛气凌人，招取祸患，造就是征兆。
English: Now the king of Qi, Sima Tong, does not realize that although he has the merit of reviving the country, he is arrogant, inviting disaster, and creating is a sign.

古文：明帝太宁初，武昌有大蛇，常居故神祠空树中，每出头从人受食。
现代文：明帝太宁初年，武昌有大蛇，常常停留在旧神祠的空树中，经常伸出头接受人们的食物。
English: In the first year of the Ming Emperor Taining, there was a big snake in Wuchang. It often stayed in the hollow tree of the old shrine, and often stretched out its head to accept people's food.

古文：京房《易妖》曰： 蛇见于邑，不出三年有大兵，国有大忧。 
现代文：京房《易妖》说： 蛇在城邑中出现，不出三年发生大战争，国家有大祸。 
English: Beijing Fang's "Easy Demon" said: "Snakes appear in cities and towns. Within three years, there will be a big war, and the country will be in great trouble.

古文：寻有王敦之逆。
现代文：不久就有王敦之乱。
English: Soon there was the Wang Dun Rebellion.

古文：马祸武帝太熙元年，辽东有马生角，在两耳下，长三寸。
现代文：武帝太熙元年，辽东有匹马长出角，在两耳的下面，长三寸。
English: In the first year of Emperor Wu Taixi, there was a horse in Liaodong that grew horns, three inches long under the ears.

古文：案刘向说曰， 此兵象也 。
现代文：照刘向的说法， 这是战争的象征 。
English: According to Liu Xiang, this is a symbol of war.

古文：及帝晏驾之后，王室毒于兵祸，是其应也。
现代文：到了皇帝去世之后，王室被战祸所害，这就是应验。
English: After the death of the emperor, the royal family was plagued by the scourge of war, which is the fulfillment.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 臣易上，政不顺，厥妖马生角，兹谓贤士不足。 
现代文：京房《易传》说： 臣下轻视主上，国政不顺畅，它的妖孽就是马长角，这说的是贤人不足。 
English: Kyobo's "I Chuan" said: The vassals despise the lord, the national politics are not smooth, and its witchcraft is the horse long horn, which means that there are not enough wise men.

古文：又曰： 天子亲伐，马生角。 
现代文：又说： 天子亲自出征，马生角。 
English: He also said, "The Son of Heaven will personally go out to fight, and Horse's Horn will come out."

古文：《吕氏春秋》曰： 人君失道，马有生角。 
现代文：《吕氏春秋》说： 帝王失道，马生角。 
English: "Lu's Spring and Autumn" said: The emperor has lost his way, Ma Sheng Kok.

古文：及惠帝践阼，昏愚失道，又亲征伐成都，是其应也。
现代文：到了惠帝登基，昏愚失道，又亲自征伐成都，这是应验。
English: When Hui Di ascended to the throne, he lost his way and personally conquered Chengdu, which was a fulfillment.

古文：惠帝元康八年十二月，皇太子将释奠，太傅赵王伦骖乘，至南城门，马止，力士推之不能动。
现代文：惠帝元康八年十二月，皇太子将要入学祭奠先圣先师，太傅赵王司马伦陪乘车，到了南城门，马停了下来，力士推都推不动。
English: In December of the eighth year of Hui Di Yuan Kang, the crown prince was about to enter the school to pay homage to the holy forerunner, accompanied by Father Zhao Wang Simarun. When he arrived at the South City Gate, the horse stopped, and the wrestler could not push it.

古文：伦入轺车，乃进。
现代文：司马伦进了小车，马才前进。
English: Smalen got into the car, and the horse started forward.

古文：此马祸也。
现代文：造就是马祸。
English: Construction is a disaster for horses.

古文：天戒若曰，伦不知义方，终为乱逆，非傅导行礼之人也。
现代文：天戒这样说，司马伦不懂得做人之道，终将叛逆作乱，不是辅导行礼的人。
English: According to the heavenly commandment, Smalen does not know how to be a human being, and will eventually rebel and cause chaos. He is not a person who teaches people how to perform rituals.

古文：九年十一月戊寅，忽有牡骝马惊奔至廷尉讯堂，悲鸣而死。
现代文：九年十一月戊寅，忽然有一匹公马受惊奔到廷尉的讯堂，悲伤地嘶鸣而死。
English: In November of the ninth year of Wu Yin, suddenly a stallion was frightened and ran to the courtiers' hall of residence, whinnied sadly and died.

古文：天戒若曰，愍怀冤死之象也。
现代文：天戒这样说，这是壁堕塞王冤死之象。
English: Thus says the heavenly decree, this is the image of the unjust death of the wall-falling king.

古文：见廷尉讯堂，其天意乎！
现代文：出现在廷尉的讯堂，这是天意吧!
English: Appearing in the Lieutenant's message hall, it must be God's will!

古文：怀帝永嘉六年二月，神马鸣南城门。
现代文：怀帝永嘉六年二月，神马在南城门嘶鸣。
English: In February of the sixth year of the reign of Emperor Yongjia, the divine horse neighed at the south gate.

古文：愍帝建兴二年九月，蒲子县马生人。
现代文：愍帝建兴二年九月，蒲子县马生下人。
English: In September of the second year of Emperor Jianxing's reign, Ma was born in Puzi County.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 上亡天子，诸侯相伐，厥妖马生人。 
现代文：京屋《易传》说： 上面没有了天子，诸侯互相攻打，妖孽是马生人。 
English: The Kyoya "Ikiden" says: There is no heavenly son above, the lords attack each other, and the witches are horse people.

古文：是时，帝室衰微，不绝如线，胡狄交侵，兵戈日逼，寻而帝亦沦陷，故此妖见也。
现代文：当时，皇室衰微，不绝如缕，胡人狄人交相侵犯，战事每天逼迫，不久后皇帝也沦入敌手，因此妖孽出现。
English: At that time, the imperial family was in decline, and there were incessant conflicts. The Hu people and the Di people violated each other, and the war was persecuted every day. Soon after, the emperor also fell into the enemy's hands, so the witchcraft appeared.

古文：元帝太兴二年，丹阳郡吏濮阳演马生驹，两头，自项前别，生而死。
现代文：元帝太兴二年，丹阳郡吏濮阳演的马生小马驹，有两个头，从脖子前分开，生下来就死了。
English: In the second year of the reign of the Yuan Emperor Taixing, the horse-born foal of the Danyang County official Zouyang, with two heads, separated from the neck, was born and died.

古文：司马彪说曰： 此政在私门，二头之象也。 
现代文：旦星彪的说法是： 这是政令出自私门，两个头的象征。 
English: According to Dansing Biao: This is a self-serving government order, a symbol of two heads.

古文：其后王敦陵上。
现代文：后来王敦欺犯皇帝。
English: Later, Wang Dun cheated the emperor.

古文：成帝咸康八年五月甲戌，有马色赤如血，自宣阳门直走入于殿前，盘旋走出，寻逐，莫知所在。
现代文：成帝咸康八年五月甲戌，有一匹马，颜色红得像血一样，从宣阳门一直跑进宫殿前，盘旋跑出，不久就不知道它在哪裹。
English: In May of the eighth year of Emperor Chengxiankang's reign, there was a horse as red as blood. It ran from the Xuanyang Gate all the way into the palace, circled around and ran out, and soon it didn't know where it was.

古文：己卯，帝不豫。
现代文：己卯，皇帝身体不适。
English: Apparently, the emperor is unwell.

古文：六月，崩。
现代文：六月，去世。
English: He died in June.

古文：此马祸，又赤祥也。
现代文：这是马祸，又是赤祥。
English: This is both a misfortune and a blessing.

古文：是年，张重华在凉州，将诛其西河相张祚，厩马数十匹，同时悉无后尾也。
现代文：逭一年，亟重萎在远丛，将要杀垩回相互谜，马厩裹的敷十匹马同时没有了尾巴。
English: A year later, withering away in the bushes, about to be killed again, the stable is packed with ten horses and has no tail.

古文：安帝隆安四年十月，梁州有马生角，刺史郭铨送示桓玄。
现代文：安帝隆安四年十月，梁州有匹马长角，刺史郭铨送给桓玄看。
English: In October of the fourth year of An Di's reign, Liang Zhou had a horse with a long horn, which he sent to Huan Xuan.

古文：案刘向说曰，马不当生角，犹玄不当举兵向上也。
现代文：照刘向的说法，马不应当长角，好比桓玄不应当起兵打皇帝。
English: According to Liu Xiang, horses should not have long horns, just as Huan Xuan should not have raised an army to fight the emperor.

古文：玄不寤，以至夷灭。
现代文：桓玄不省悟，以致灭族。
English: Kuan Xuan did not reflect, resulting in the extermination of the tribe.

古文：石季龙在鄴，有一马尾有烧状，入其中阳门，出显阳门，东宫皆不得入，走向东北，俄尔不见。
现代文：石季龙在邺，有一匹马尾巴像被烧过，进入中阳门，出颢阳门，束宫进不去，就跑向东北方向，一会儿就不见了。
English: Shi Jilong was in Handan, and there was a horse with a tail that looked like it had been burned. It went into Zhongyang Gate, out of Handan Yang Gate, and couldn't get into Sokong Palace, so it ran to the northeast and disappeared in an instant.

古文：术者佛图澄叹曰： 灾其及矣！ 
现代文：术士佛图澄感叹说： 灾祸到了! 
English: The sorcerer Buddhaclear sighed and said, "The disaster has come!

古文：逾年季龙死，其国遂灭。
现代文：一年后石季龙死，其国家便灭亡。
English: A year later, Shi Jilong died, and his country fell apart.

古文：人痾魏文帝黄初初，清河宋士宗母化为鳖，入水。
现代文：魏文帝黄初初年，清河宋士宗的母亲化为鳖，进入水中。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Wen of Wei and Emperor Huang of the Qing Dynasty, the mother of Song Shizong of the Qing Dynasty turned into a dragonfly and entered the water.

古文：明帝太和三年，曹休部曲丘奚农女死复生。
现代文：明帝太和三年，曹休家兵丘奚农的女儿死后复生。
English: In the third year of the reign of Emperor Ming, the daughter of a soldier and peasant of the Cao Xiu family was resurrected after her death.

古文：时又有开周世冢，得殉葬女子，数日而有气，数月而不能言，郭太后爱养之。
现代文：另外，有人掘开周世的坟墓，得到殉葬的女子，过了数日，有了呼吸，过了数月后能说话，郭太后喜欢并收养她。
English: In addition, someone dug up the grave of Zhou Shi, and the woman who was martyred and buried was able to breathe after a few days, and was able to speak after a few months. Empress Dowager Guo liked and adopted her.

古文：又，太原人发冢破棺，棺中有一生妇人，问其本事，不知也，视其墓木，可三十岁。
现代文：还有，太原人挖开坟墓打开棺材，棺材中有一个活的女人，问她关于自己的事情，她不知道，看她坟上的树木，大约有三十年树龄了。
English: Also, the Taiyuan people dug up the grave and opened the coffin. There was a living woman in the coffin and asked her about herself. She didn't know. Looking at the trees on her grave, they were about thirty years old.

古文：案京房《易传》曰： 至阴为阳，下人为上。 
现代文：京房《易传》说： 至阴成阳，下人为上。 
English: Jing Fang's "I Chuan" said: "From yin to yang, the inferior is superior."

古文：宣帝起之象也。
现代文：是宣帝兴起的象征。
English: It is a symbol of the rise of Emperor Xuan.

古文：汉平帝、献帝并有此异，占以为王莽、曹操之征。
现代文：汉朝平帝、献帝都有这样的怪事，占卜认为是王莽、曹操的征兆。
English: Both Emperor Ping and Emperor Xian of the Han Dynasty had such strange occurrences, which diviners believed to be signs of Wang Mang and Cao Cao.

古文：孙休永安四年，安吴民陈焦死七日复生，穿冢出。
现代文：孙休永安四年，安吴百姓陈焦死后七日复生，穿出坟墓出来。
English: Four years after the death of Sun Xiu Yongan and seven days after the death of Chen Jiao, the people of An Wu were resurrected and walked out of the tomb.

古文：干宝曰： 此与汉宣帝同事，乌程侯皓承废故之家，得位之祥也。 
现代文：干实说： 这和漠宣帝的事例相同，乌程侯孙皓继承废旧之业，是得到帝位的吉兆。 
English: Gan Zhi said: This is the same as the case of Emperor Mu Xuan, and the fact that Ucheng Hou Sun Quan inherited the old business is a good omen for getting the throne.

古文：孙皓宝鼎元年，丹阳宣骞母年八十，因浴化为鼋，兄弟闭户卫之。
现代文：孙皓宝鼎元年，丹杨人宣骞的母亲年纪八十岁，因为洗浴化为鼋，宣骞兄弟关起门保护。
English: In the first year of Sun Yat-sen's reign, the eighty-year-old mother of Sun Yat-sen's younger brother, Xuanzang, was turned into a skeleton after taking a bath. Xuanzang's brothers closed the door to protect her.

古文：掘堂上作大坎，实水其中，鼋入坎游戏，一二日恆延颈外望。
现代文：在堂上挖一个大坑，灌满水，鼋进入水坑中游戏，一两天经常伸长脖子往外看。
English: Dig a big hole in the hall and fill it with water. The toad will play in the puddle and will often crane its neck to look out for a day or two.

古文：伺户小开，便轮转自跃，入于远潭，遂不复还。
现代文：见门稍稍打开，就转过身自己跳了出去，进入了远处的水潭，便不再回来。
English: Seeing the door slightly open, he turned around and jumped out on his own, entered a distant pool, and never came back.

古文：与汉灵帝时黄氏母同事，吴亡之象也。
现代文：这与漠灵帝时黄氏母亲的事相同，是吴国灭亡的象征。
English: This is the same as what happened to the mother of the Huang family during the reign of Emperor Mengling, and is a symbol of the downfall of the State of Wu.

古文：魏元帝咸熙二年八月，襄武县言有大人见，长三丈余，迹长三尺二寸，发白，著黄巾黄单衣，柱杖呼王始语曰： 今当太平。 
现代文：魏元帝咸熙二年八月，襄武县传言有巨人出现，身高三丈多，脚印长三尺二寸，白头发，穿戴黄巾黄单衣，拄着拐杖呼喊王始说： 现在就要太平了。 
English: In August of the second year of the reign of Emperor Hanxi of the Wei-Yuan Dynasty, there was a rumor that a giant appeared in Xiangwu County. He was more than three meters tall, his footprints were three feet two inches long, he had white hair, he wore a yellow scarf and a yellow singlet, and he was on crutches shouting, "Now it's going to be peaceful."

古文：晋寻代魏。
现代文：晋朝很快取代了魏。
English: The Jin Dynasty soon replaced the Wei Dynasty.

古文：武帝泰始五年，元城人年七十生角。
现代文：武帝泰始五年，元城有人七十岁时头上长角。
English: In the first five years of Emperor Wu's reign, some people in Yuancheng had long horns on their heads at the age of 70.

古文：殆赵王伦篡乱之象也。
现代文：这是趟王司马伦篡位逆乱的征兆。
English: This is a sign of Wang Sima Lun's usurpation and rebellion.

古文：咸宁二年十二月，琅邪人颜畿病死，棺敛已久，家人咸梦畿谓己曰； 我当复生，可急开棺。 
现代文：咸宁二年十二月，琅邪人颜畿病死，入殓已久，家中人全都梦见颜畿对自己说： 我将要复生，快快打开棺材。 
English: In December of the second year of Xianning, the evil person Yanqi died of illness and had been in the coffin for a long time. All the family members dreamed of Yanqi and said to themselves: I am going to be revived, open the coffin quickly.

古文：遂出之，渐能饮食屈伸视瞻，不能行语，二年复死。
现代文：便将他移出棺材，渐渐能够饮食、伸展四肢、看得见东西，不能行动说话，过了两年又死去。
English: They removed him from the coffin, and gradually he was able to eat and drink, stretch his limbs, see, but he could not move or speak. Two years later he died again.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 至阴为阳，下人为上，厥妖人死复生。 
现代文：京房《易传》说： 至阴变成阳，下人变为上，它的妖孽是人死复生。 
English: Kyobo's "I Chuan" says: The yang becomes the yin, the lower becomes the upper, and its magic is the resurrection of the dead.

古文：其后刘元海、石勒僭逆，遂亡晋室，下为上之应也。
现代文：后来刘元海、互勤逆乱称帝，灭亡了置室，这是下人变为上的应验。
English: Later, Liu Yuanhai and the Mutually-Supportive Rebellion proclaimed themselves emperor and overthrew the emperor, which was the fulfillment of the transformation of the inferior into the superior.

古文：惠帝元康中，安丰有女子周世宁，年八岁，渐化为男，至十七八而气性成。
现代文：惠帝元康年间，安丰有个女子周世宁，年纪八岁，逐渐变为男性，到了十七八岁气质禀性都变成男人。
English: During Hui Di Yuan Kang's time, there was a girl in Anfeng, Zhou Shining, who was eight years old and gradually turned into a man. By the age of seventeen or eighteen, her temperament had turned into a man.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 女子化为丈夫，兹谓阴昌，贱人为王。 
现代文：京房《易传》说： 女子化为男子，这叫做阴性盛，贱人要当国王。 
English: Jing Fang's "Easy Biography" says: A woman turns into a man. This is called "feminine excess." A slut wants to be king.

古文：此亦刘元海、石勒荡覆天下之妖也。
现代文：遣也是刘元海、石勒颠覆天下的妖孽。
English: Liu Yuanhai and Shi Le are also sent to subvert the magic of the world.

古文：永宁初，齐王冏唱义兵，诛除乱逆，乘舆反正。
现代文：永宁初年，齐王司马闻首举义兵，清除逆乱，拨乱反正。
English: In the first year of Yongning, King Sima Wen of Qi was the first to raise a volunteer army to clear up the rebellion and restore order.

古文：忽有妇人诣大司马门求寄产，门者诘之，妇曰； 我截脐便去耳。 
现代文：忽然有个妇女到大司马门前请求寄宿产子，门人诘问她，妇女说： 截断脐带我就离开。 
English: Suddenly, a woman appeared in front of the Daesima gate, asking for a place to give birth. The gatekeeper questioned her, and the woman said, "Cut the umbilical cord and I'll leave."

古文：是时，齐王冏匡复王室，天下归功，识者为其恶之，后果斩戮。
现代文：当时，齐王司马同匡复王室，天下归功于他，有识之士厌恶他，后来他果然被杀死。
English: At that time, the king of Qi, Sima Tongkuang, restored the royal family. The world credited him, and people with insight loathed him. Later, he was indeed killed.

古文：永宁元年十二月甲子，有白头公入齐王冏大司马府，大呼曰： 有大兵起，不出甲子旬。 
现代文：永宁元年十二月甲子，有个白头老翁走进齐王司马闻大司马府，大喊道： 有大规模的军队兴起，不出一年。 
English: In December of the first year of Yongning, there was a white-haired old man who walked into Qi Wang Sima Wen Daisima's mansion and shouted: A large-scale army is rising, and it won't be a year.

古文：冏杀之。
现代文：司马同杀了他。
English: Sima Tong killed him.

古文：明年十二月戊辰，冏败，即甲子旬也。
现代文：第二年十二月戊辰，司马间失败，即是一年。
English: In December of the following year, it was one year since Sima failed.

古文：太安元年四月癸酉，有人自云龙门入殿前，北面再拜曰： 我当作中书监。 
现代文：太安元年四月癸酉，有人从云龙门进入殿前，向北面拜了两拜说： 我将要当中书监。 
English: In April of the first year of the Taian era, someone entered the hall from the Yunlong Gate, bowed twice to the north and said: I am going to be a librarian.

古文：即收斩之。
现代文：当时就被抓起来杀了。
English: At that time he was arrested and killed.

古文：干宝以为 禁庭尊秘之处，今贱人径入而门卫不觉者，宫室将虚而下人逾上之妖也 。
现代文：干宝认为 禁庭尊秘之处，现在下贱的人直接进来但门卫没有觉察，这是宫室将要空虚而下人凌上的妖孽 。
English: Gan Bao thought that the secret of the Forbidden City had been revealed, and now the lowly people came in directly, but the gatekeeper did not notice. This was a witchcraft that the palace would be empty and the people would be at the top.

古文：是后帝北迁鄴，又迁长安，宫阙遂空焉。
现代文：此后皇帝北迁到邺，又迁到长安，宫室于是空虚。
English: After that, the emperor moved north to Handan and then to Chang'an, leaving the palace empty.

古文：元康中，梁国女子许嫁，已受礼娉，寻而其夫戍长安，经年不归，女家更以适人。
现代文：元康年间，梁国有个女子许下婚约，已经接受了聘礼，不久她丈夫戍守长安，整年不回来，女家父母又把她嫁给别人。
English: During the Yuan and Kang dynasties, a woman in Liang Province made a marriage contract and accepted the betrothal gift. Soon after, her husband left for Chang'an and did not return for an entire year. The woman's parents then married her off to someone else.

古文：女不乐行，其父母逼强，不得已而去，寻得病亡。
现代文：女子不喜欢去，她父母强逼她，不得已去了，不久就得病身亡。
English: The girl did not like to go, her parents forced her, she had to go, and soon she fell ill and died.

古文：后其夫还，问其女所在，其家具说之。
现代文：后来她的丈夫回家，问那个女子在哪襄，女方家裹把情况详细地说了。
English: Later, her husband came home and asked where the woman was, and the woman recounted the incident in detail.

古文：其夫迳至女墓，不胜哀情，便发冢开棺，女遂活，因与俱归。
现代文：她丈夫直接到女子的坟墓前，非常悲哀，就挖开坟墓打开棺材，女子很快就复活，于是和她一起回家。
English: Her husband went directly to the woman's grave, very sad, he dug up the grave and opened the coffin, the woman soon came to life and went home with her.

古文：后婿闻知，诣官争之，所在不能决。
现代文：那个后婿听说后，到官府申辩，要夺回女子，官府不能决断。
English: After hearing that, the son-in-law went to the government to plead that the government could not decide whether to take back the woman.

古文：秘书郎王导议曰： 此是非常事，不得以常理断之，宜还前夫。 
现代文：秘书郎王导议论说： 这是一件不寻常的事，不能用常理下决断，应该归还前夫。 
English: Secretary Lang Wang said in his introduction: This is an unusual case, it cannot be decided with common sense, and it should be returned to the ex-husband.

古文：朝廷从其议。
现代文：朝廷同意了逭个意见。
English: The Imperial Court agreed with three opinions.

古文：惠帝世，杜锡家葬而婢误不得出，后十年开冢祔葬而婢尚生。
现代文：惠帝时代，杜锡家葬死人，奴婢被误关到墓裹出不来，十年以后掘开坟墓进行合葬，奴婢还活着。
English: In the era of Hui Di, the Du Xi family buried a dead man, and the slaves and maidservants were mistakenly locked up in the tomb and could not come out. Ten years later, the tomb was excavated for joint burial, and the slaves and maidservants were still alive.

古文：始如瞑，有顷渐觉，问之，自谓再宿耳。
现代文：开始时像昏睡，没多久渐渐醒过来，间她，她说是睡了两夜而已。
English: At first it felt like a coma, but after a while she gradually woke up and said she had only slept for two nights.

古文：初，婢之埋年十五六，及开冢更生，犹十五六也，嫁之有子。
现代文：当初，奴婢被埋时十五六岁，到了掘开坟墓苏醒过来后，还跟十五六岁一样，出嫁后生了儿子。
English: At first, the slave was fifteen or sixteen years old when she was buried. When she woke up after digging up the grave, she was still fifteen or sixteen years old, and she married and had a son.

古文：光熙元年，会稽谢真生子，头大而有发，两蹠反向上，有男女两体，生便作丈夫声，经一日死。
现代文：光熙元年，会稽谢真生儿子，头大而且有头发，两个脚掌翻过来朝上，有男女两种生殖器，生下来声音就像成年男子一样，过了一天后死掉。
English: In the first year of the Guangxi era, there was a real son of a real son, with a big head and hair, two feet turned upside down, male and female genitals, and a voice like a grown man. He died a day later.

古文：此皇之不极，下人伐上之痾，于是诸王有僭乱之象也。
现代文：这是皇帝行为不恰当，下人攻上的病弊，诸王有僭乱之象。
English: This is an inappropriate behavior of the emperor, a disease that has been attacked by subordinates, and the kings have the appearance of chaos.

古文：惠帝之世，京洛有人兼男女体，亦能两用人道，而性尤淫，此乱气所生。
现代文：惠帝的时候，京洛有人兼有男女两种生殖器，也都能正常使用，生性尤其淫荡，逭是乱气所生。
English: At the time of Hui Di, there were people in Jingluo who had both male and female genitals, and they could also use them normally. Their nature was particularly lewd, and warts were caused by turbulent gas.

古文：自咸宁、太康之后，男宠大兴，甚于女色，士大夫莫不尚之，天下相仿效，或至夫妇离绝，多生怨旷，故男女之气乱而妖形作也。
现代文：自从咸宁、太康之后，男宠之风大盛，比喜欢女色还厉害，士大夫无不崇尚这种风气，天下人争相仿效，有的甚至夫妇不相往来，女无夫，男无妻的情形很多，因此男女之气淆乱而妖孽之形出现。
English: Since Xianning and Taikang, there has been a flourishing trend of men's favoritism, which is even more powerful than liking women. All scholars respect this trend, and people all over the world strive to emulate it. Some even do not go out with their spouses, and there are many cases of women without husbands and men without wives. As a result, the temperament of men and women is confused and the form of witchcraft appears.

古文：怀帝永嘉元年，吴郡吴县万详婢生子，鸟头，两足马蹄，一手，无毛，尾黄色，大如枕。
现代文：怀帝永嘉元年，吴郡吴县万详的奴婢生儿子，鸟头，两脚像马蹄，仅有一只手，没有毛，尾巴黄色，像枕头那么大。
English: In the first year of Huai Di Yongjia, the son of a slave in Wuxi County, Wuxi County, had a bird's head, two feet like horses' hooves, only one hand, no hair, and a yellow tail, as big as a pillow.

古文：此亦人妖，乱之象也。
现代文：逭也是人妖，战乱之象征。
English: The dragonfly is also a werewolf, a symbol of war.

古文：五年五月，枹罕令严根妓产一龙，一女，一鹅。
现代文：五年五月，袍罕令严根的女妓生下一条龙，一个女儿，一只鹅。
English: In May of the fifth year, a prostitute with a strict dress code gave birth to a dragon, a daughter, and a goose.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 人生他物，非人所见者，皆为天下大兵。 
现代文：京房《易传》说： 人生下其他东西，不是人所遇到过的，都将发生战争。 
English: Jingfang "Easy Biography" said: Everything else under life, which is not encountered by people, will lead to war.

古文：是时，帝承惠皇之后，四海沸腾，寻而陷于平阳，为逆胡所害，此其征也。
现代文：当时，皇帝继惠帝之后，四海动荡不安，不久后在平阳陷入敌手，被叛胡杀害，造就是征兆。
English: At that time, after Emperor Hui, the four seas were turbulent and unstable. Soon after, he fell into the hands of the enemy in Pingyang and was killed by the traitor Hu. This was a sign.

古文：愍帝建兴四年，新蔡县吏任侨妻产二女，腹与心相合，自胸以上、脐以下各分，此盖天下未一之妖也。
现代文：愍帝建兴四年，新蔡县吏任侨的妻子生了两个女儿，逭两个婴儿腹部到心口之间相连，自胸部以上、肚脐以下分开，这是天下还没有统一的妖孽。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Jianxing, the wife of Xin Cai County official Ren Qiao gave birth to two daughters. The two babies were connected from the abdomen to the heart, and separated from the chest and below the navel. This is a witchcraft that has not yet been unified in the world.

古文：时内史吕会上言： 案《瑞应图》，异根同体谓之连理，异亩同颖谓之嘉禾。
现代文：当时内史吕会上书道： 照瑞应图》，不同根却同体叫连理，不是一棵禾苗却谷穗相连叫作嘉禾。
English: At that time, Naishi Ryusei would recite the calligraphy: 照瑞应图, different roots but the same body are called Lian Li, not a grain seedling but grain ears connected are called Jia He.

古文：草木之异犹以为瑞，今二人同心，《易》称 二人同心，其利断金 ，盖四海同心之瑞也。 
现代文：草木中的异常是吉兆，现在两个人的心连在了一起，《易》说  二人同心，其利断金 ，是四海同心同德的祥瑞。 
English: The abnormality in the grass and trees is a good omen. Now the two people's hearts are connected together. "Yi" said that the two people are one-hearted, which is the advantage of breaking the gold, and is the auspiciousness of the four seas being one-hearted and of the same morality.

古文：时皆哂之。
现代文：当时的人都讥笑他。
English: People laughed at him at the time.

古文：俄而四海分崩，帝亦沦没。
现代文：不久后四海分崩离析，皇帝也沦入敌手。
English: Soon after, the four seas fell apart, and the emperor also fell into the enemy's hands.

古文：元帝太兴初，有女子其阴在腹，当脐下，自中国来至江东，其性淫而不产。
现代文：元帝太兴初年，有个女子，女阴在腹部，正在肚脐下，从中原来到江东，她生性淫荡但生不出子女。
English: In the early years of the Yuan Emperor Taixing, there was a woman who came from the Central Plains to the East of the Yangtze River. She had a phallus in her abdomen, just below her navel. She was sexually promiscuous but had no children.

古文：又有女子阴在首，渡在扬州，性亦淫。
现代文：又有个女子女阴在头上，坐船到扬州，生性也淫荡。
English: There was also a woman with a female genitals on her head, who took a boat to Yangzhou and was also lewd by nature.

古文：京房《易妖》曰； 人生子，阴在首，天下大乱；在腹，天下有事；在背，天下无后。 
现代文：京房《易妖》说： 人生下子女，如果生殖器在头上，将要天下大乱；在腹部，天下有变故；在背，天下没有后代。 
English: Beijing House "Easy Demon" said: If the genitals are on the head, the world will be in chaos; if they are on the abdomen, the world will be changed; if they are on the back, there will be no descendants.

古文：于时王敦据上流，将欲为乱，是其征。
现代文：当时王敦占据高位，将要作乱，造就是征兆。
English: At that time, Wang Dun occupied a high position and was about to start a riot. This was a sign.

古文：三年十二月，尚书驺谢平妻生女，堕地濞濞有声，须臾便死。
现代文：三年十二月，尚书鞫谢平的妻子生女儿，一生下就发出濞濞的声音，一会儿就死了。
English: In December of the third year, the wife of Shang Shuxuan Xieping gave birth to a daughter. When she was born, she emitted a chirping sound and died in an instant.

古文：鼻目皆在顶上，面处如项，口有齿，都连为一，胸如鳖，手足爪如鸟爪，皆下勾。
现代文：婴儿的鼻子眼睛都长在头顶上，脸部就像是脖子，嘴裹有牙齿，全都连在一起，胸部像鳖，手指脚趾像是鸟爪，都往下勾。
English: The baby's nose and eyes are on the top of the head, the face is like a neck, the mouth is covered with teeth, all connected, the chest is like a beak, the fingers and toes are like bird claws, all hooked down.

古文：此亦人生他物，非人所见者。
现代文：遣也是人生异物，不是人所遇到过的。
English: Exile is also a foreign thing in life, not something that people have ever encountered.

古文：后二年，有石头之败。
现代文：二年之后，有石头之败。
English: Two years later, there was a stone defeat.

古文：明帝太宁二年七月，丹阳江宁侯纪妻死，经三日复生。
现代文：明帝太宁二年七月，丹阳江宁侯纪的妻子死，过了三天后复生。
English: In July of the second year of Emperor Taining of the Ming Dynasty, the wife of Danyang Jiangning Houji died and was revived three days later.

古文：成帝咸康五年四月，下邳民王和侨居暨阳，息女可年二十，自云上天来还，得征瑞印绶，当母天下。
现代文：成帝咸康五年四月，下邳百姓王和侨居在暨阳，他的亲生女王巫二十岁，自己说从天上回来，得了征瑞印绶，将要作母亲的仪范。
English: In April of the fifth year of Emperor Chengzong's reign, the Lower Han people's king and the overseas Chinese lived in Jiyang. His biological queen was twenty years old, and she said that she had returned from heaven. She had obtained the imperial seal and was going to be the mother's role model.

古文：晋陵太守以为妖，收付狱。
现代文：晋陵太守认为她是妖怪，抓起来关到监狱襄。
English: The governor of Jinling thought she was a monster and arrested her and put her in prison.

古文：至十一月，有人持柘杖绛衣诣止车门，口列为圣人使求见天子。
现代文：到了十一月，有人手持柘木拐杖身穿红衣服到车门前停下，说是圣人派来的使者求见天子。
English: In November, someone holding a birch cane and dressed in red stopped in front of the car door, claiming to be an emissary sent by the saint to ask to see the heavenly son.

古文：门侯受辞，辞称姓吕名赐，其言王和女可右足下有七星，星皆有毛，长七寸，天今命可为天下母。
现代文：守门官问姓名，说自己姓吕名赐，王和的女儿王可右脚掌下有七星，星都有毛，长七寸，上天现在任命王可为母亲的仪范。
English: The gatekeeper asked her name, and she said that her surname was given to her by the name of Lu. Wang He's daughter Wang Ke has seven stars under her right foot. The stars are all hairy and seven inches long. Heaven has now appointed Wang Ke as her mother's role model.

古文：奏闻，即伏诛，并下晋陵诛可。
现代文：这些话上奏皇帝以后，吕赐就被处死，皇帝同时下令晋陵太守处死王可。
English: After these words were reported to the emperor, Lv Zi was put to death, and the emperor also ordered the governor of Jinling to execute Wang Ke.

古文：康帝建元二年十月，卫将军营督过望所领兵陈渎女台有文在其足，曰 天下之母 ，灸之愈明。
现代文：康帝建元二年十月，卫将军营督过望所领兵速遗的女儿速台的脚上有字，叫作 天下之母 ，灸灼它就更加明显。
English: In October of the second year of Kangdi Jianyuan, the daughter of the Guards battalion commander of the observation post and the leader of the soldiers hastily died had a word on the foot of the speed platform, called the mother of the world, and it was even more obvious.

古文：京都喧哗，有司收系以闻。
现代文：京都哗然，有关官吏把速台抓起来并上报。
English: Kyoto was in an uproar, and the officials concerned seized the speedometer and reported it.

古文：俄自建康县狱亡去。
现代文：不久速台从建康县监狱逃跑。
English: He soon escaped from Jiankang County Prison.

古文：明年，帝崩，献后临朝，此其祥也。
现代文：第二年，皇帝去世，献后临朝听政，这是它的征兆。
English: The following year, the emperor died, and the imperial court listened to the government, which was a sign of it.

古文：孝武帝宁康初，南郡州陵女唐氏渐化为丈夫。
现代文：孝武帝宁康初年南郡州陵女唐氏逐渐变为男子。
English: In the first year of Emperor Xiaowu Ningkang's reign, the youngest daughter of Emperor Xiaowu, Tang, gradually became a man.

古文：安帝义熙七年，无锡人赵未年八岁，一旦暴长八尺，髭须蔚然，三日而死。
现代文：安帝义熙七年，无锡人赵未年纪八岁，有一天突然长高八尺，胡须很浓密，三日后死。
English: In the seventh year of An Di Yixi, Zhao Wei, an eight-year-old from Wuxi, suddenly grew eight feet tall and had a thick beard. He died three days later.

古文：义熙中，东阳人莫氏生女不养，埋之数日，于土中啼，取养遂活。
现代文：义熙年间，东阳人莫氏生下女儿不想养育，埋了敷天，婴儿在土中啼哭，于是抱回家养活了。
English: During the Yixi period, a Dongyang man named Mo gave birth to a daughter, but he did not want to raise her, so he buried her in the ground. The baby cried in the dirt, so he took her home to feed her.

古文：义熙末，吴豫章人有二阳道，重累生。
现代文：义熙末年，吴豫章有个人有两条阴茎，重叠着长。
English: In the last years of the Yixi Dynasty, Wu Yuzhang had a man with two penises that overlapped in length.

古文：恭帝元熙元年，建安人阳道无头，正平，本下作女人形体。
现代文：恭帝元熙元年，建安有个人阳道没有头，很平正，其下像是女性。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Gong of the Yuan Dynasty, Jianan had a personal yang road without a head, very flat, and it looked like a woman.

