古文：漻水出江夏平春县西，漻水北出大义山，南至厉乡西，赐水入焉。
现代文：漻水发源于江夏郡平春县西边。漻水发源于北方的大义山，南流到厉乡西边，有赐水注入。
English: Lishui originated in the west of Pingchun County, Jiangxia County. Lishui originated in the north of Dayi Mountain, flowing south to the west of Lixiang, with water injection.

古文：水源东出大紫山，分为二水，一水西径厉乡南，水南有重山，即烈山也。
现代文：赐水源出东方的大紫山，分为两条。一条往西流经厉乡南边，水南有重山，就是烈山。
English: The Great Purple Mountain, which is the source of water in the east, is divided into two parts. One flows westward through the south of Lixiang, and there is a heavy mountain south of the water, that is, Mount Lishan.

古文：山下有一穴，父老相传，云是神农所生处也，故《礼》谓之烈山氏。
现代文：山下有个洞穴，据父老们相传，都说这是神农出生的地方，所以《礼》称他为烈山氏。
English: There is a cave at the foot of the mountain, which, according to legend, is the place where Shennong was born, which is why "Li" calls him Mr. Leshan.

古文：水北有九井，子书所谓神农既诞，九井自穿，谓斯水也。
现代文：水北有九口井，子书中说，神农出生后，九井不藉人力而自然穿通，说的就是这条水。
English: There are nine wells in the north of the province. According to the children's book, after Shennong was born, nine wells were drilled naturally without the use of manpower. It is this water that is being talked about.

古文：又言汲一井则众水动，井今堙塞，遗迹仿佛存焉。
现代文：又说在一口井中汲水，诸井的水也都会动荡起来。现在井已埋塞，但遗迹仍依稀可辨。
English: It is also said that if water is drawn from one well, the water of all wells will be disturbed. Now the well has been buried, but the remains are still faintly discernible.

古文：亦云赖乡，故赖国也，有神农社。
现代文：又说赖乡就是古时的赖国，有神农社。
English: It is also said that Lai Township is the ancient Lai Country, and there is a Shennong Society.

古文：赐水西南流入于漻，即厉水也，赐、厉声相近，宜为厉水矣。
现代文：赐水就是厉水，往西南流，注入谬水。赐、厉音近，无怪赐水成为厉水 了。
English: Given water is salty water, flowing to the southwest, injecting false water. Given, salty sound is close, no wonder given water has become salty water.

古文：一水出义乡西南入随，又注漻。
现代文：另一条从义乡西边流出，南流进入随县，又注入漻水。
English: Another stream flows out from the western side of Yixiang, and the southern stream enters Suixian County, and then it is injected into Quzhou.

古文：漻水又南径随县注安陆也。
现代文：漻水又南经随县，往安陆流去。
English: Surabaya also flows south through Suixian to Anlu.

古文：南过安陆入于溳。
现代文：往南流过安陆县，注人涢水。
English: It flows southward through Anlu County, injecting fresh water.

古文：薪水出江夏蕲春县北山，山即蕲柳也。
现代文：蕲水发源于江夏郡薪春县的北山，北山也就是蕲柳山。
English: Surabaya's water originates from the Beishan Mountain in Zhichun County, Jiangxia County. The Beishan Mountain is also known as the Surabaya Mountain.

古文：水首受希水，枝津西南流，历蕲山，出蛮中，故以此蛮为五水蛮。
现代文：蕲水上流承接希水的支流，往西南流经蕲山，从蛮中流出，所以把这个地区的蛮族称为五水蛮。
English: The upper reaches of the Lishui River are connected to the tributary of the Xishui River, which flows southwest through the Lushan Mountains and flows out of the middle of the barbarians, so the barbarians in this area are called the Wushui barbarians.

古文：五水谓已水、希水、赤亭水、西归水、蕲水其一焉。
现代文：五水指的是巴水、希水、赤亭水、西归水，薪水也是其中之一。
English: The "five waters" refer to Bachu, Xishu, Chateung and Xigui waters, and salary is also one of them.

古文：蛮左凭居，阻藉山川，世为抄暴。
现代文：蛮族恶徒恃着他们居处山川的险阻，世世代代干着抢劫的勾当。
English: Barbarian villains have been looting the mountains and rivers where they live for generations.

古文：宋世沈庆之于西阳上下，诛代蛮夷，即五水蛮也。
现代文：宋时沈庆之在西阳一带讨伐蛮夷，就是这五水蛮。
English: During the Song Dynasty, Shen Qingzhi fought the barbarians in the Xiyang area, which is the origin of the Five Water Barbarians.

古文：南过其县西，晋改为蕲阳县，县徙江洲，置大阳戍，后齐齐昌郡移治于此也。
现代文：往南流过县西，晋时改蕲春县为蕲阳县，把县治迁到江洲，并设置大阳戍。后来齐时齐昌郡的郡治也迁到这里。
English: It flowed southward through the west of the county, and at the time of Jin, the county seat was changed from Qichun County to Fenyang County, the county government was moved to Jiangzhou, and Dayangyu was set up. Later, the county government of Qichang County was also moved here.

古文：又南至蕲口南，入于江。
现代文：又往南流到蕲口，往南注入大江。
English: It also flows south to Hekou and flows south into the Daxu River.

古文：蕲水南对蕲阳洲，入于大江，谓之蕲口。
现代文：蕲水南对薪阳洲，流入大江，汇流处叫蕲口。
English: Surabaya water south of Tuiyangzhou, flowing into the Yangtze River, the confluence is called Hukou.

古文：洲上有蕲阳县徙。
现代文：洲上有迁过来的蕲阳县。
English: On the mainland, there is Poyang County, which has been relocated.

古文：决水出庐江雩娄县南大别山，俗谓之为檀公岘，盖大别之异名也。
现代文：决水发源于庐江郡零娄县南方的大别山，大别山俗称檀公岘，是大别山的异名。
English: The breakwater originates from the Dabie Mountains in the south of Lijiang County, Lijiang County. The Dabie Mountains are commonly known as the Dangong Mountains, which is a different name for the Dabie Mountains.

古文：其水历山委注而络其县矣。
现代文：决水经大别山流出，在雩娄县兜了一个大弯。
English: The water flowed out through the Dabie Mountains and made a big bend in Handan County.

古文：北过其县东，县故吴也。
现代文：往北流过县东，雩娄县古时是吴国的地方。
English: It flows northward through the eastern part of the county. In ancient times, Jixian County was a part of Wuxi Province.

古文：《春秋左传》襄公二十六年，楚子秦人侵吴，及雩娄，闻吴有备而还是也。
现代文：《春秋左传》：襄公二十六年前，楚子、秦人入侵吴国，到了雩娄，听说吴已作好准备，就退了回去。
English: "The Legend of Spring and Autumn": Twenty-six years ago, Chu Zi and the Qin people invaded the State of Wu, and when they arrived at Shun, they heard that Wu had made preparations, so they retreated back.

古文：《晋书地道记》云：在安丰县之西南，即其界也。
现代文：《晋书·地道记》说：零娄在安丰县西南，与安丰接境。
English: "Jinshu·Jindo Ji" said: Zibo is located in the southwest of Anfeng County, bordering Anfeng.

古文：故《地理志》曰，决水出雩娄。
现代文：所以《地理志》说：决水发源于零娄。
English: Therefore, the "Geography" said: the water outburst originated from the zero anchor.

古文：《春秋》宣公八年，冬，楚公子灭舒蓼。
现代文：又往北流过安丰县东边，决水从零娄县往北流经鸡备亭。《春秋》：昭公二十三年冬，楚公子灭舒寥。
English: It also flowed northward through the eastern part of Anfeng County, and the breakwater flowed northward from Zibo County through Jibitei. "Spring and Autumn": In the winter of the 23rd year of Zhaogong, Chu Gongzi died.

古文：臧文仲闻之曰：皋陶庭坚，不祀忽诸，德之不逮，民之无援，哀哉！
现代文：减文仲听到这个消息时说：对皋陶、庭坚不去祭祀，完全加以忽视，恩惠没有施及于百姓，使他们无援无助，这多么可悲呀！
English: Upon hearing this news, Yan Wenzhong said, "How sad it is that they did not offer sacrifices to Zhaotao and Tianzhen, completely ignored them, and did not extend grace to the people, leaving them helpless!

古文：决水又北，右会阳泉水，水受决水，东北流径阳泉县故城东，故阳泉乡也。
现代文：决水又往北流，在右边汇合了阳泉水。阳泉水上流承接决水，往东北流经阳泉县老城东边。
English: The breakwater also flows to the north, merging with Yangquan Water on the right. The upstream Yangquan Water joins the breakwater and flows to the northeast through the east of the old city of Yangquan County.

古文：汉献帝中，封太尉黄琬为侯国。
现代文：阳泉县就是旧时的阳泉乡，汉献帝时，封给太尉黄碗，立为侯国。
English: Yangquan County is the Yangquan Township in the old days. When the Han Dynasty was dedicated to the emperor, it was given to the captain of the Yellow Bowl and established as a princely state.

古文：又西北流，左入决水，谓之阳泉口也。
现代文：又往西北流，在左边注入决水，汇流处叫阳泉口。
English: It flows to the northwest again, and discharges water on the left. The confluence is called Yangquankou.

古文：又北入于淮。
现代文：又往北注人淮水。
English: They also went to Beizhu Renhuai Shui.

古文：俗谓之法口，非也，斯决、灌之口矣。
现代文：决水入淮处，俗称绘口；这不对，这是决水、灌水的入口。
English: The place where the effluent enters the river Huai, commonly known as the drawing port; this is not correct, this is the inlet of the effluent and irrigation water.

古文：余往因公至于淮津，舟车所届，次于决水，访其民宰，与古名全违。脉水寻经，方知决口。
现代文：从前我曾因公到过淮水，舟车到后，就在决水边歇宿。我走访老百姓和地方官，地名与古名全不一致；探究水脉，查考《水经》，才知道这是决口。
English: In the past, I went to Huai Shui on business, and after arriving by boat, I stayed on the edge of the watershed. I visited the people and local officials, and the place names were completely inconsistent with the ancient names; I explored the water veins and examined the "Water Sutra," and only then did I know that this was the watershed.

古文：盖灌、浍声相伦，习俗害真耳。
现代文：只因灌、浍读音相同，民间沿用惯了，反而把真名埋没罢了。
English: It's just that people are used to using the same pronunciation for kan and gong, so they've buried their real names.

古文：砒水出庐江灊县西南，霍山东北，灊者，山、水名也。
现代文：砒水发源于庐江郡灊县西南、霍山东北，灊是山名和水名。
English: Surabaya water originates from the southwest of Surabaya County, Lijiang County and the northeast of Huoshan. Surabaya is the name of the mountain and the water.

古文：武帝元狩二年，别为六安国，王莽之安风也，《汉书》所谓以舒屠六。
现代文：据《开山图》，灊山围绕的大山是霍山。郭景纯说：灊水发源于此，县也按水命名。《春秋》：昭公二十七年改属淮南；文帝十六年又恢复衡山国；武帝元狩二年立为六安国。就是王莽的安风。《汉书》中说的以舒人屠杀六人，六即指六安。
English: According to the "Founding Map," the big mountain around Lushan is Huoshan. Guo Jingjun said: "Lushan originated from here, and the county was also named after water." "Spring and Autumn": Zhaogong 27 years old was transferred to Huainan; Emperor Wen restored Hengshan Province in 16 years; Emperor Wu established Liang'an Province in 2 years. It is Wang Mang's Anfeng. In the "Chinese Book" it is said that six people were killed by Shujin, and six refers to Liang'an.

古文：晋太康三年庐江郡治。
现代文：晋太康三年，这里是庐江郡的治所。
English: Jin Taikang three years, here is the legal center of Minjiang County.

古文：淠水又西北，分为二水，芍陂出焉。
现代文：淠水又往西北流，分为两条，芍破就由此分出。
English: Surabaya water flows to the northwest and divides into two streams, from which Surabaya is separated.

古文：又北径五门亭西，西北流径安丰县故城西。
现代文：又往北流经五门亭西边，往西北流经安丰县老城西边。
English: It also flows northward through the west side of the Five-Gate Pavilion and northwestward through the west side of the old city of Anfeng County.

古文：《晋书地道记》：安丰郡之属县也，俗名之曰安城矣。
现代文：按《晋书•地道记》，安丰县是安丰郡的属县，俗称安城。
English: According to the "History of Jin Dynasty," Anfeng County is a subordinate county of Anfeng County, commonly known as Ancheng.

古文：又北会濡水，乱流西北注也。
现代文：又往北流，汇合了濡水，然后乱流向西北奔去。
English: It flowed north again, merging with the wet water, and then the turbulent flow rushed to the northwest.

古文：北入于淮。
现代文：往北注人淮水。
English: The north stream pours cold water on everyone.

古文：水之决会，谓之沘口也。
现代文：沘水与淮水汇合的地方，叫沘口。
English: The place where the Bohai and Huai rivers meet is called the Bohai estuary.

古文：泄水出博安县，博安县，《地理志》之博乡县也，王莽以为扬陆矣。
现代文：泄水发源于博安县，博安县就是《地理志》里的博乡县，王莽称为扬陆。
English: The water discharge originated in Bo'an County. Bo'an County is Boxiang County in "Geography." Wang Mang is called Yanglu.

古文：泄水自县，上承沘水于麻步川，西北出，历濡溪，谓之濡水也。
现代文：泄水上流在博安县麻步川承接沘水，往西北流出去，经过濡溪，称为濡水。
English: The upstream of the water discharge in the Asabu River in Bo'an County receives salty water and flows out to the northwest, passing through Nureki, known as Nuremi.

古文：北过芍陂，西与沘水合，泄水自濡溪径安丰县，北流注于淠，亦谓之濡须口。
现代文：往北流过芍破，西流与沘水汇合。泄水从濡溪流经安丰县，北流注入淠水，汇流处也叫濡口。
English: It flows to the north through the Bohai Gap, and the west stream merges with the Bohai Water. The discharge water from the wet stream flows through Anfeng County, and the north stream injects the Bohai Water. The confluence is also called the wet mouth.

古文：西北入于淮。
现代文：往西北注人淮水。
English: to the northwest.

古文：乱流同归也。
现代文：此后水就分散乱流，一齐注入淮水。
English: After that, the water was dispersed by the turbulent flow and all of it was injected into the river.

古文：肥水出九江成德县广阳乡西，吕忱《字林》曰：肥水出良余山，俗谓之连枷山，亦或以为独山也。
现代文：肥水发源于九江郡成德县广阳乡西边，吕忱《字林》说：肥水发源于良余山，俗称连枷山，也有人叫独山。
English: Fertile water originates from the west side of Guangyang Township, Chengde County, Jiujiang County. Lu Zhen "Zhilin" said: Fertile water originates from Liangyu Mountain, commonly known as Lianyao Mountain, and some people call it Doku Mountain.

古文：北流分为二水，施水出焉。
现代文：北流分为两条，施水就从这里分出。
English: The north stream is divided into two, and the water supply is separated from here.

古文：肥水又北径获城东，又北径获丘东，右会施水枝津，水首受施水于合肥县城东，西流径成德县，注于肥水也。
现代文：肥水又往北流经荻城东边，又往北流经荻丘东，在右边汇合了施水的支流。此水上口在合肥县东边承接施水，往西流经成德县，注入肥水。
English: The fertilized water also flows northward through the east side of Fucheng, northward through the east side of Fucheng Hill, and joins the tributary of watering on the right side. This water outlet receives watering on the east side of Hefei County, and flows westward through Chengde County, injecting fertilized water.

古文：北过其县西，北入芍陂。
现代文：往北流过县西，北流注人芍陂。
English: Flowing north through the west of the county, the north stream flows into the Jinshan Reservoir.

古文：肥水自荻丘，北径成德县故城西，王莽更之曰平阿也。
现代文：肥水从荻丘往北流，经过成德县老城西边，王莽改名为平阿；又往北流经芍陂东边，又往北流经死虎塘东边。
English: Fertile water flows northward from Mengqiu, passing the west side of the old city of Chengde County, and Wang Mang was renamed as Ping'a; it also flows northward through the east side of Mengqiu, and northward through the east side of Shigotang.

古文：又北径芍陂东，又北径死虎塘东，芍陂渎上承井门，与芍陂更相通注，故《经》言入芍陂矣。
现代文：芍陂凑上流承接井门，与芍陂水流往来相通，所以《水经》说，注入芍陂。肥水又往北流，在右边汇合了阎涧水。
English: "The Water Sutra" says that because the upper stream of the Yunnan River flows into the Yunnan River, the Yunnan River flows into the Yunnan River, and the fertile water flows northward, meeting the Yunnan River on the right.

古文：肥水又北，右合阎涧，水上承施水于合肥县，北流径浚遒县西，水积为阳湖，阳湖水自塘西北径死虎亭南，夹横塘西注。
现代文：阎涧水上流在合肥县承接施水，往北流经浚遒县西边，水流蓄积成为阳湖。阳湖水从堤塘西北流经死虎亭南边，在横塘之间向西流注。
English: The upstream flow of Yan'an water is drained in Hefei County, and flows northward through the west side of Dredge County, and the water flow accumulates to become Yanghu. Yanghu water flows from the northwest of the dyke pond through the south side of the dead tiger pavilion, and flows westward between the side ponds.

古文：宋泰始初，豫州司马刘顺帅众八千，据其城地。以拒刘勔，赵叔宝以精兵五千，送粮死虎，刘勔破之此塘。
现代文：宋泰始一初，豫州司马刘顺率兵八千占据了县城和周围一带地方，抗拒刘酌；赵叔宝带了五千精兵，送粮到死虎，被刘酌打得大败。
English: At the beginning of Song and Tai, Liu Shun, the Sima of Yuzhou, occupied the county seat and the surrounding area with eight thousand soldiers, resisting Liu Ji; Zhao Shubao brought five thousand elite soldiers, sent grain to the dead tiger, and was defeated by Liu Ji.

古文：水分为二，洛涧出焉，阎浆水注之。
现代文：塘水分成两条，洛涧就由此流出，有黎浆水注入。
English: The water of the pond is divided into two, and the Luo River flows out of it, and the rainwater is injected.

古文：水受芍陂，陂水上承涧水于五门亭南，别为断神水，又东北径五门亭东，亭为二水之会也。
现代文：黎浆水来自芍陂。破水上流在五门亭南面承接涧水，分出断神水；又往东北流经五门亭东面一一五门亭在两水的汇合处。
English: The broken water upstream receives the broken water in the south of the five-door pavilion, separating the broken water; it also flows to the northeast through the five-door pavilion in the east of the five-door pavilion at the confluence of the two waters.

古文：断神水又东北径神迹亭东，又北，谓之豪水，虽广异名，事实一水，又东北径白芍亭东，积而为湖，谓之芍陂。
现代文：断神水又往东北流经神迹亭东面，又往北流，称为豪水，虽然名称不同，但实际上是一条水。又往东北流经白芍亭东面，蓄积成湖，称为芍陂。
English: The Broken God Water also flows to the northeast through the east of the Miracle Pavilion, and to the north, known as the High Water. Although the name is different, it is actually a water. It also flows to the northeast through the east of the White Dragon Pavilion, accumulating into a lake, known as the Dragonfly.

古文：陂周百二十许里，在寿春县南八十里，言楚相孙叔敖所造，魏太尉玉淩与吴将张休战于芍陂，即此处也。
现代文：芍陂周围约一百二十里，在寿春县南八十里，据说是楚国宰相孙叔敖所造。魏太尉王凌与吴将张休在芍陂作战，就是这地方。
English: About one hundred and twenty miles around Handan, eighty miles south of Shuchun County, it is said to have been built by the prime minister of Chu State, Sun Shuxuan. Wei Tai Li Wang Ling and Wu Shou Zhang Xiu fought in Handan, this is the place.

古文：陂有五门，吐纳川流，西北为香门陂，陂水北径孙叔敖祠下，谓之芍陂读。又北分为二水：一水东注黎浆水，黎浆水东径黎浆亭南。
现代文：芍陂有五道闸门，以调节水流；西北有香门破，破水往北流经孙叔敖祠下，叫芍陂渎；又往北流，分成两条，一条东流注入黎浆水。黎浆水往东流经黎浆亭南面。
English: There are five sluice gates to regulate the flow of water; in the northwest, the incense gate is broken, and the broken water flows northward under the Sun Shuxuan Ancestral Hall, which is called "fouling"; and the northward flow is divided into two, and one eastward flow is injected into the Lishui water. The Lishui water flows eastward through the south of the Lishui Pavilion.

古文：文钦之叛，吴军北入，诸葛绪拒之于黎浆。
现代文：文钦反叛，吴军北进，诸葛绪在黎浆据守抗拒，说的就是此水。
English: Wenqin rebelled, the Wu army marched north, and Zhugexu defended and resisted in Lijiang. It is this water that is being talked about.

古文：即此水也。东注肥水，谓之黎浆水口。
现代文：黎浆水往东注入肥水，汇流处叫黎浆水口。
English: The brine water is injected into the fertilizer water to the east, and the confluence is called the brine outlet.

古文：又北过寿春县东，肥水自黎浆北径寿春县故城东为长濑津，津侧有谢堂北亭，迎送所薄，水陆舟车，是焉萃止。
现代文：又往北流过寿春县东边，肥水从黎浆北流，经过寿春县老城东边，就到长獭津。旁边有谢堂北亭，迎宾送友都要来到这里；无论是水路陆路，过往舟车都要聚集在这里歇息。
English: It also flows northward through the eastern part of Shuchun County. Fertile water flows northward from Lishu, passing through the eastern part of the old city of Shuchun County, to Changbaijin. Next to it is Xiedang North Pavilion. Guests and friends should come here; whether by water or land, passing boats should gather here to rest.

古文：又西北，右合东溪，溪水引渎北出，西南流径导公寺西。
现代文：肥水又往西北流，在右边汇合了东溪。溪水向北分出一条水渠，往西南流经导公寺西边。
English: Fertile water also flows to the northwest, merging with the East Stream on the right. The stream water branches off into a channel to the north, and flows to the southwest, passing through the west side of Daikoji Temple.

古文：又西南流注于肥，肥水又西径东台下，台即寿春外郭，东北隅阿之榭也。
现代文：寺旁临溪建塔，高五层；寺院屋宇闲静宽敞，溪边丘冈高峻陡峭，溪水又往西南流，注入肥水。肥水又往西流经东台下，此台就是寿春外城东北角的水榭。
English: There is a five-storey pagoda next to the temple next to the creek; the temple building is quiet and spacious, the hill by the creek is high and steep, and the stream flows to the southwest, injecting fertile water. Fertile water also flows to the west through the east platform, which is the water basin in the northeast corner of Shuchun Walled City.

古文：东侧有一湖，三春九夏，红荷覆水，引读城隍，水积成潭，谓之东台湖，亦肥南播也。
现代文：东边有湖，夏日里红艳的荷花盖满湖面。流水经沟渠引入护城河，积成水潭，叫东台湖，也是肥水南流形成的。
English: There is a lake on the east side. In summer, bright red lotus flowers cover the surface of the lake. Flowing water is introduced into the moat through a ditch, accumulating into a pool, called Dongtai Lake, which is also formed by the south flow of fertilized water.

古文：肥水西径寿春县故城北，右合北溪，水导北山泉源下注，漱石颓隍，水上长林插天，高柯负日，出于山林精舍右，山渊寺左。
现代文：肥水往西流经寿春县老城北边，在右边汇合了北溪。溪水发源于北山，泉水从山上奔泻而下，冲刷着溪石，流泻于山涧中。山涧上面，密林插天，高枝上挂着太阳。
English: Fertile water flows westward through the northern part of the old city of Shuchun County, and merges with the North Stream on the right. The stream originates from the North Mountain, and the spring water rushes down from the mountain, washing the stream stones and flowing in the mountains. Above the mountains, dense forests intersperse the sky, and the sun hangs on the high branches.

古文：道俗嬉游，多萃其下。内外引汲，泉同七净。
现代文：涧水流出山林，流过僧舍的右边、山渊寺的左边，僧道和世俗男女常聚集在那边嬉游；寺内寺外的人都从溪里汲水，泉水十分清净。
English: Surabaya water flows out of the mountains and forests, passing to the right of the monk's house and to the left of San Yuan Temple. Monks and secular men and women often gather there to play. People inside and outside the temple draw water from the stream, and the spring water is very clean.

古文：溪水沿注西南，径陆道士解南。
现代文：溪水往西南流，陆道士的解南精庐就建在溪旁。
English: The water of the stream flows to the southwest, and the Ge Nan Jing Gong of the land Taoist is built next to the stream.

古文：精庐临侧川溪，大不为广，小足闲居，亦胜境也。溪水西南注于肥水。
现代文：庐舍虽不大，但平日闲居，尽够容身了，也是一处胜境。溪水往西南流，注入肥水。
English: Although it is not a large house, it is a good place to live. The stream flows to the southwest, injecting fertile water.

古文：北入于淮。
现代文：北流注人淮水。
English: The north stream pours cold water on everyone.

古文：肥水又西分为二水，右即肥之故读，遏为船官湖，以置舟舰也。
现代文：肥水又往西流，分为两条：右边的一条就是肥水的旧河道，截流蓄水，形成船官湖，用以停泊大小船只；左边的一条继续西流，经过石桥门北边。
English: Fertile water also flows westward and is divided into two: the one on the right is the old river channel of fertile water, intercepting and storing water to form a boating lake, used to moor large and small ships; the one on the left continues westward, passing the north side of the stone bridge door.

古文：肥水左渎，又西径石桥门北，亦曰草市门，外有石梁。渡北洲，洲上有西昌寺。寺三面阻水，佛堂设三像，真容妙相，相服精炜。是萧武帝所立也。
现代文：石桥门又叫草市门，外面有石桥通向北洲。洲上有西昌寺，寺院三面临水；佛殿里有三尊佛像，容貌逼真，神态庄严，衣服华美艳丽，是萧武帝所造。
English: Stone Bridge Gate, also known as Grass City Gate, has a stone bridge leading to the North Island. There is Xichang Temple on the island, with three temples facing the water; there are three Buddha statues in the Buddha Hall, with realistic appearance, solemn demeanor, and gorgeous clothes. They were made by Emperor Xiaowu.

古文：寺西即船官坊，苍兕、都水，是营是作。
现代文：寺院西边就是船官坊，掌管舟揖的苍兑和管理水利的都水等官，都在那里营造制作。
English: On the west side of the temple is the boatman's square, where the Cangdui, who is in charge of the boat, and the officials of the capital water, who manage the water conservancy, are building the production.

古文：湖北对八公山，山无树木，惟童阜耳。山上有淮南王刘安庙。
现代文：此湖北对八公山，这是一座林木不生的光山，山上有淮南王刘安庙。
English: This is Hubei's counterpart to the Eight Kingdoms Mountain, which is a bare mountain with no trees. On the mountain is the Liu An Temple of King Huainan.

古文：刘安是汉高帝之孙，厉王长子也。
现代文：刘安是汉高帝的孙子，厉王的长子，礼贤下士，十分爱好儒家之学。
English: Liu An is the grandson of Emperor Han Gao, the eldest son of King Li, a lay corporal, and is very fond of Confucianism.

古文：折节下士，笃好儒学，养方术之徒数十人，皆为俊异焉。多神仙秘法鸿宝之道。
现代文：他招致了几十个擅长方术的人，个个都是出众的英才，有奇能异术，掌握着许多神仙秘法和道术宝典。
English: He invited dozens of people who were good at square arts, and all of them were outstanding talents, had miraculous abilities, and mastered many immortal secret laws and Taoist treasure books.

古文：忽有八公，皆须眉皓素，诣门希见。
现代文：一天忽然来了八位须眉皆白的老者，到门前求见。
English: One day, eight elderly men with white eyebrows suddenly came to the door and asked to see him.

古文：门者曰：吾王好长生，今先生无住衰之术，未敢相闻。
现代文：守门人说：我们大王喜欢长生，现在各位先生并没有防止衰老的秘术，我们也不敢去享报。
English: The gatekeeper said, "Our great king likes to live forever, but now you gentlemen don't have the secret to prevent aging, and we don't dare to enjoy the newspaper."

古文：八公咸变成童，王甚敬之。
现代文：八位老者就都变成童子，淮南王十分敬重他们。
English: The eight old men all became boys, and King Huainan respected them very much.

古文：八士并能炼金化丹，出入无间，乃与安登山，薶金于地，白日升天。
现代文：八位术士都能炼金化丹，他们出入都和刘安一起，十分亲密；于是和他一同登山，把黄金埋在地里，白日升天而去。
English: Eight sorcerers were able to alchemize gold, and they went in and out together with Liu An, very close; so they climbed the mountain with him, buried the gold in the ground, and ascended to heaven in the daytime.

古文：余药在器，鸡犬舐之者，俱得上升。
现代文：器皿里还留下仙药，鸡犬舔过的，也都升天了。
English: The potion was still left in the vessel, and the cucumbers that the chicken and dog had licked also ascended to heaven.

古文：其所升之处。践石皆陷，人马迹存焉。
现代文：在他们升天的地方，踏过的岩石都下陷了，留下人马的足迹，所以这座山就得了八公山的名称。
English: At the place where they ascended to heaven, the rocks they stepped on all sank, leaving footprints of men and horses, so this mountain got the name of Mount Hakko.

古文：故山即以八公为目，余登其上，人马之迹无闻矣，惟庙像存焉，庙中图安及八士像，皆坐床帐如平生，被服纤丽，咸羽扇裙彼，中壶枕物，一如常居。
现代文：我曾攀登到山上，但人马的足迹已没有了，只有庙里的塑像还在。庙中塑了刘安和八位术士的像，都坐在挂了帷慢的坐榻上，就同他们在时一样；被服都非常华丽，手执羽毛扇，身穿衣裙，手巾、水壶、枕头等什物，都同寺院里所见一样。
English: In the temple, statues of Liu An and eight sorcerers were made. They were all sitting on slow-moving couches hung with curtains, just as they were at that time. Their robes were very ornate, and they held feather fans in their hands. They were wearing dresses, hand towels, water jugs, pillows, and other trinkets, all of which were the same as those seen in the temple.

古文：庙前有碑，齐永明十年所建也。
现代文：庙前有碑，是齐永明十年所立。
English: There is a monument in front of the temple, which was erected by Qi Yongming ten years ago.

古文：山有隐室石井，皆崔琰所谓余下寿春，登北岭淮甫之道室，八公石井在焉。
现代文：山上有暗室和石并，崔淡说：我到寿春，登临北岭淮南主修道的静室，八公石井还在，就指这些遗迹。
English: There is a dark room and a stone well on the mountain, Cui Tan said: I went to Shouchun and ascended the quiet room of the Huainan major training road in Beiling, and the eight-meter stone well is still there, referring to these relics.

古文：亦云：左吴与王春、傅生等寻安，伺诣玄洲，还为著记，号曰《八公记》，都不列其鸡犬升空之事矣。
现代文：又说：左吴和王春、傅生等去寻找刘安，一同来到玄洲。崔淡回来后写了一篇记，题目叫《八公记》，其中都没有提到鸡犬升天的事。
English: He also said: Zuo Wu, Wang Chun, Fu Sheng and others went to look for Liu An and came to Xuan Zhou together. After Cui Tan returned, he wrote a record called "Hakkongi," in which there was no mention of the chicken and dog ascending to heaven.

古文：按《汉书》，安反，伏诛，葛洪明其得道，事备《抱朴子》及《神仙传》。
现代文：按《汉书》，刘安是谋反被杀的，葛洪却说他得道，在《抱朴宇》和《神仙传》中都有详细的记载。
English: According to the "Hanshu," Liu An was killed for plotting rebellion, but Ge Hong said that he was justified, and there are detailed records in "Hugging Pak Yu" and "Legend of the Immortals."

古文：肥水又左纳芍陂渎。渎水自黎浆分水，引渎寿春城北，径芍陂门右，北入城。
现代文：肥水又在左边接纳了芍陂渎，渠水自黎浆分出，引水流向寿春城北边，经过芍陂门右侧，北流入城。
English: The left side of the canal receives the fertilized water, and the right side receives the polluted water. The canal water is separated from the rainwater, and the diverted water flows to the north side of Shuchun City, passes through the right side of the gate, and flows north into the city.

古文：昔巨鹿时苗为县长，是其留犊处也。
现代文：从前巨鹿时苗当县官，这里就是他留下小牛的地方。
English: Once upon a time, the giant deer Shimea was a prefectural official, and this is where he left his calf.

古文：渎东有东都街，街之左道北，有宋司空刘勔庙。宋元徽二年，建于东乡孝义里。
现代文：芍陂渎东边有东都街，大街左边一条路北面，有宋司空刘耐庙，是宋元徽二年在东乡孝义里修建的。
English: There is Dongdu Street on the east side of the road, and Song Sikuang Liu Nai Temple on the north side of the road on the left side of the street. It was built by Song Yuanhui in the second year of Dongxiang Xiaoyili.

古文：庙前有碑，时年碑功方创，齐永明元年方立。
现代文：庙前有碑，那年开始刻碑，但直到齐永明元年方才把它立在庙前。
English: There is a monument in front of the temple. The inscription of the monument began that year, but it was not erected in front of the temple until the first year of Qi Yongming.

古文：沈约《宋书》言泰始元年，豫州刺史殷琰反，明帝假勔辅国将军，讨之，琰降。
现代文：沈约《宋书》说：泰始元年豫州刺史殷淡造反，明帝授予刘酌以辅国将军的封号，前去讨伐。
English: Shenyuan's "Song Book" says: In the first year of the Tai Dynasty, Yuzhou stabbed Shi Yin and rebelled, and the Ming Emperor awarded Liu Jia the title of General of the Auxiliary State, and went to fight.

古文：不犯秋毫，百姓来苏，生为立碑，文过其实。
现代文：殷淡只得投降。刘耐军令严明，秋毫无犯，百姓得到休养生息，他生时就为他立碑，碑文美化他言过其实。
English: Yin and Tan had to surrender. Liu Nai's military orders were strict, there was no crime in the autumn, the people were able to rest and recuperate, and he erected a monument for him when he was alive. He exaggerated the beauty of the inscription.

古文：建元四年，故吏颜幼明为其庙铭，故佐庞珽为庙赞，夏侯敬友为庙颂，并附刊于碑侧。
现代文：建元四年，原属吏颜幼明作庙铭，原僚佐庞挺作庙赞，夏侯敬友作庙颂，都附刻在石碑侧面。
English: In the fourth year of the first year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, the former official Yan Youming made the temple inscription, the former colleague Sa Pang Ting made the temple praise, and Xia Hou Kei You made the temple ode, all of which were engraved on the side of the stone monument.

古文：渎水又北径相国城东，刘武帝伐长安所筑也，堂字厅馆仍故，以相国为名。
现代文：芍陂渎水又往北流经相国城东面，相国城是刘武帝攻长安时所筑。厅堂馆舍，仍旧以相国为名。
English: The polluted water flowed northward through the east side of the State-owned City, which was built when Liu Wudi attacked Chang'an. The hall and museum are still named after the State-owned City.

古文：又北出城，注肥水。
现代文：渎水北流出城，注入肥水。
English: The polluted water flows out of the city to the north, and the fertilized water is injected.

古文：又西径金城北，又西，左合羊头溪水。
现代文：肥水继续西流，经过金城北面，又往西流，在左边汇合了羊头溪水。
English: Fertile water continued to flow westward, passing the north side of Jincheng, flowing westward again, and merging with the water of Yangtou Creek on the left.

古文：水受芍陂，西北历羊头溪，谓之羊头涧水。
现代文：羊头溪水上口由芍陂给水，往西北流经羊头溪，称为羊头涧水。
English: The upstream mouth of Sheepshead Creek is fed by the reeds and flows northwest through Sheepshead Creek, known as Sheepshead Reeds.

古文：北径熨湖，左会烽水渎，渎受淮于烽村南，下注羊头溪，侧径寿春城西，又北历象门，自沙门北出金城西门逍遥楼下，北注肥渎。
现代文：北经熨湖，在左边汇合了烽水皮。烽水渎在烽村南面承接淮水，往下注入羊头溪。溪水旁经寿春城西面，又北流经象门，从沙门往北流出，经过金城西门逍遥楼下面，往北注入肥水。
English: To the north, it flows through Yeongho Lake, and on the left, it meets Yeongshui Peel. Yeongshui Peel connects with Hoaishui in the south of Yeoncheon Village, and flows down into Sheepshead Stream. The stream flows west of Shuchun City, and the north stream flows through Xiangmen, flows north from Shamen, passes under the West Gate of Jincheng, and flows north to inject fertilized water.

古文：肥水北注旧渎之横塘，为玄康南路驰道，左通船官坊也。
现代文：肥水北流注入旧渠的横塘，这条堤塘是玄康南路的驰道，左通船官坊。
English: The dike where the north stream of fertile water flows into the old canal. This dike is the runway of Xuan Kang South Road, and the left passage is Ship Official's Square.

古文：肥水径玄康城西北流，北出，水际有曲水堂，亦嬉游所集也。
现代文：肥水经玄康城往西北流，从北边流出，水边有个曲水堂，是游人纷集的地方。
English: Fertile water flows through Xuankang City to the northwest and flows out from the north. There is a Qusui Hall on the water's edge, which is a place where tourists gather.

古文：又西北流，昔在晋世，谢玄北御苻坚，祈八公山，及置阵于肥水之滨，坚望山上草木，威为人状，此即坚战败处。
现代文：又往西北流，从前晋时，谢玄抗击符坚南侵，在八公山祈祷，在肥水之滨布置战阵。符坚遥望山上草木，仿佛都成人形，这里就是符坚战败的地方。
English: It also flows to the northwest. In the former Jin Dynasty, Xie Xuan resisted the invasion of Fu Jian to the south, prayed on the Eight Mountains, and set up battle lines on the coast of Fertile Water. Fu Jian looked at the plants on the mountain from afar, as if they were all adult figures. This is the place where Fu Jian was defeated.

古文：非八公之灵有助，盖荷氏将亡之惑也。
现代文：这不是什么八公的神灵在保佑晋军，实际是符坚将亡，神志迷乱之故。
English: This is not some kind of the gods of the Eight Immortals who are blessing the Jin army, but is actually the result of the fact that the Fu Jian is about to die and his sanity is in disarray.

古文：肥水又西北注于淮，是曰肥口也。
现代文：肥水继续往西北流，注入淮水，汇流处叫肥口。
English: Fertile water continues to flow to the northwest and is injected into the Huai River. The confluence is called the Fertile Mouth.

古文：施水亦从广阳乡肥水别，东南入于湖。
现代文：施水也从广阳乡肥水分出，往东南注人湖中。
English: Water is also pumped from the Guangyang Township Fertilizer Reservoir to the southeast into Renren Lake.

古文：施水受肥于广阳乡，东南流径合肥县。
现代文：施水在广阳乡引入肥水，往东南流经合肥县。
English: Fertilizing water was introduced into Guangyang Township, flowing southeast through Hefei County.

古文：应劭曰：夏水出城父东南，至此与肥合，故曰合肥。
现代文：应肋说：夏水发源于城父东南，到这里与肥水汇合，所以地名叫合肥。
English: Ying Li said: Xia Shui originated in the southeast of the city, where it merged with Fertile Water, hence the name Hefei.

古文：阚駰亦言出沛国城父东，至此合为肥。
现代文：阐胭也说：夏水发源于沛国城父东边，到这里汇合了肥水。
English: Elucidation also said: Xiashui originated from the east side of Peiguo City, and the fertile water converged here.

古文：余按川殊派别。无沿注之理，方知应、阚二说，非实证也。
现代文：我按这两条水的水脉、流向完全不同，夏水决无注入肥水的道理。可知应、阐二人的说法都不是确实的证据。
English: According to me, the veins and flow direction of these two waters are completely different, and there is no reason for summer water to be injected with fertilized water. It can be seen that the statements of the two people are not true evidence.

古文：盖夏水暴长，施合于肥，故曰合肥也。
现代文：原来夏月诸水暴涨，于是施水汇合于肥水，所以地名叫合肥，并不是说夏水汇合肥水。
English: Originally, the summer and winter waters surged, so the irrigation water merged with the fertilizer water, so the place was called Hefei, not to say that the summer water merged with the fertilizer water.

古文：非谓夏水、施水自成德东径合肥县城南。城居四水中，又东有逍遥津，水上旧有梁。
现代文：施水自成德东流，经过合肥县城南，县城四面环水，又东有逍遥津，从前水上原来有桥。
English: The water flowed from Chengde to the east, passing through the southern part of Hefei County. The county seat was surrounded by water on all sides, and there was a bridge over the water in the past.

古文：孙权之攻合肥也，张辽败之于津北，桥不撤者两版。权与甘宁蹴马趋津，谷利自后著鞭助势，遂得渡梁。
现代文：孙权攻合肥时，张辽在桥北打败他，木桥桥板只留着两截没有拆去，孙权和甘宁踢马奔向桥头，谷利在后面扬鞭助势，于是才冲过桥梁。
English: When Sun Quan attacked Hefei, Zhang Liao defeated him at the north end of the bridge. Only two pieces of the wooden bridge deck remained, and they were not removed. Sun Quan and Gan Ning kicked their horses and ran to the bridge head. Gu Li gave a whip to help them, and then they rushed across the bridge.

古文：凌统被铠落水，后到追亡，流涕津渚。
现代文：凌统身披恺甲，掉到水里，他好久才赶到，悼念阵亡的亲从，在渡头水边痛哭流涕。
English: Ling was wearing armor when he fell into the water. It took him a long time to get there. He mourned his dead relatives and wept bitterly by the water's edge.

古文：施水又东，分为二水，枝水北出焉，下注阳渊。
现代文：施水继续往东流，分为两条，支流向北分出，注入阳渊。
English: The water flow continued to the east, divided into two, and the tributary flowed to the north and flowed into the Yangyuan.

古文：施水又东径湖口戍，东注巢湖，谓之施口也。
现代文：施水又往东流经湖口戍，往东注入巢湖，汇流处叫施口。
English: The water flows eastward through the Hukou estuary and flows eastward into Lake Chaohu. The confluence is called Shikou.

古文：沮水出汉中房陵县淮水，东南过临沮县界，沮水出东汶阳郡沮阳县西北景山，即荆山首也。
现代文：沮水发源于汉中郡房陵县的景山，往东南流过临沮县境，沮水发源于东坟阳郡沮阳县西北的景山，就是荆山的前缘。
English: Depressed water originates from Jingshan in Fangling County, Hanzhong County, and flows to the southeast through the border of Linyi County. Depressed water originates from Jingshan in the northwest of Depressed County, Dongbuyang County, which is the front edge of Mount Jing.

古文：高峰霞举，峻棘层云。
现代文：景山峰峦峻峭高耸，上接层云。
English: The peaks of Jingshan Mountain are steep and towering, with overlying clouds.

古文：《山海经》云：金玉是出，亦沮水之所导。
现代文：《山海经》说：这里出产金玉，也是沮水的发源地。
English: "Shanhai Jing" said: Here is the production of gold and jade, and it is also the birthplace of disheveled water.

古文：故《淮南子》曰：沮出荆山。
现代文：所以《淮南子》说：沮水发源于荆山。
English: Therefore, "Huai Nanzi" said: "The dejected water originates from Mount Jing."

古文：高诱云：荆山在左冯翊怀德县，盖以洛水有漆沮之名故也。
现代文：高诱说：荆山在左冯诩怀德县，这是因为洛水有漆沮一名的缘故。
English: Gao Yu said, "Jingshan is in Zuofengxuai County. This is because Luoshui is a famous lacquerware brand.

古文：斯谬证耳。
现代文：这里的引证却是错误的。
English: The quotation here is wrong.

古文：杜预云：水出新城郡之西南发阿山，盖山异名也。沮水东南流，径沮阳县东南，县有潼水，东径其县南，下入沮水。
现代文：杜预说：沮水发源于新城郡西南的发阿山，这是山的异名，沮水往东南流经沮阳县东南，县里有一条漳水，往东流经县南，注入沮水。
English: Du Yuan said: The stagnant water originates from Mount Faa in the southwest of Xincheng County. This is a different name for the mountain. The stagnant water flows southeastward through the southeast of Deyang County. There is a stream in the county that flows eastward through the south of the county and injects the stagnant water.

古文：沮水又东南径汶阳郡北，即高安县界。
现代文：沮水又往东南流，经过泣阳郡北边，接近高安县边界。
English: The depressing water flowed to the southeast, passing through the north of Weiyang County and approaching the border of Gao'an County.

古文：郡治锡城，县居郡下，城故新城之下邑。
现代文：坟阳郡治所在锡城，高安县治所在郡治下，城即旧时新城郡的下邑。
English: The county seat of Guoyang County is located in Xicheng, and the county seat of Gao'an County is located under the county, and the city is the lower town of Xincheng County in the old days.

古文：义熙初分新城立。
现代文：坟阳郡是义熙初年分新城郡而设置。
English: Guoyang County was established from Xincheng County in the first year of Yixi.

古文：西表悉重山也。
现代文：郡城西边都是重沓的山岭。
English: The west side of the county seat is all rugged mountains.

古文：沮水南径临沮县西，青溪水注之。
现代文：沮水南经临沮县西，有青溪水注入。
English: The Depu River flows south through the western part of Depu County, and the Qingxi River flows into it.

古文：水出县西青山，山之东有滥泉，即青溪之源也。
现代文：溪水发源于县西的青山，青山东边有滥泉，就是青溪的源头。
English: The water of the stream originates from the Qingshan Mountain in the west of the county. There is a miscellaneous spring on the east side of the Qingshan Mountain, which is the source of the Qingxi.

古文：口径数丈，其深不测，其泉甚灵洁。至于炎阳有亢，阴雨无时，以秽物投之，辄能暴雨。
现代文：源头口径数丈，深不可测，泉水洁净而灵异，一到盛夏骄阳如火，久旱无雨时，如以秽物投入，就会降下暴雨。
English: The caliber of the source is several meters high, unfathomable, the spring water is clean and wondrous. When the hot summer sun is like fire, when there is no rain for a long time, if it is put in with filth, it will rain heavily.

古文：其水导源东流，以源出青山，故以青溪为名。
现代文：水自源头东流，因发源于青山，所以叫青溪。
English: The water flows from the source to the east, and because it originates from Aoyama, it is called Qingxi.

古文：寻源浮溪，奇为深峭。
现代文：荡着轻舟溯流寻源，溪谷幽深峻峭，景色奇丽。
English: Floating in a light boat tracing the source, the valley is deep and steep, the scenery is beautiful.

古文：盛弘之云：稠木傍生，凌空交合，危楼倾崖，恒有落势，风泉传响于青林之下，岩猿流声于白云之上，游者常若目不周玩，情不给赏。
现代文：盛弘之说：两旁林木茂密，枝叶凌空相接，悬崖峭壁上建造危楼，看去常有摇摇欲坠之势。风声水声回荡于青林底下，岩上猿鸣流漾于白云上面。游人常感目不暇接，来不及欣赏。
English: Morihiroshi said, "There are dense forests on both sides, with branches and leaves soaring into the sky. Dangerous buildings have been built on cliff cliffs, which often look as if they are about to fall. The sound of wind and water reverberates under the Qinglin forest, and the sound of monkeys singing on the rocks floats above the white clouds. Visitors often feel dizzy and can't enjoy it.

古文：是以林徒栖托，云客宅心，泉侧多结道士精庐焉。
现代文：所以山林隐逸之士喜欢在这里栖身，水边修建了不少道士的庐舍。
English: That is why secluded mountain dwellers like to live here, and many Taoist hermitages have been built along the water's edge.

古文：青溪又东流入于沮水。沮水又屈径其县南。
现代文：青溪又往东流，注入沮水；沮水又转弯流经临沮县南边。
English: Qingxi also flows eastward, injecting sediment water; the sediment water then turns and flows through the southern edge of Lindu County.

古文：晋咸和中，为沮阳郡治也。
现代文：晋咸和年欲间，这里是阳沮郡的治所。
English: Between Jinxian and Nianyou, this is the county seat of Yangshuo County.

古文：沮水又东南，径当阳县故城北。
现代文：沮水又往东南流，经过当阳县老城北边。
English: The depressing water flowed to the southeast, passing through the northern side of the old city of Dangyang County.

古文：城因冈为阻，北枕沮川，其故城在东百四十里，谓之东城，在绿林长坂南，长坂即张翼德横矛处也。
现代文：老城利用山冈的险阻之势而筑，北濒沮水，老城在东面一百四十里，所以叫东城，在绿林长坂以南―长坂，就是张翼德横矛却敌的地方。
English: The old city was built by taking advantage of the dangerous situation of mountains and hills. To the north, there was a river, and the old city was a hundred and forty miles to the east, so it was called the East City. To the south of the green forest of Nagasaka is Nagasaka, which is the place where Zhang Yide was defeated by the crossbow.

古文：沮水又东南径驴城西，磨城东，又南径麦城西，昔关云长诈降处，自此遂叛。
现代文：沮水又往东南流经驴城西边、磨城东边，又往南流经麦城西边，这就是从前关云长诈降的地方，接着又在这里反叛了。
English: Depressing water also flows southeast through the west of the donkey city and the east of the mill city, and flows south through the west of the wheat city. This is where Guan Yunchang once cheated and then rebelled here.

古文：《传》云：子胥造驴、磨二城以攻麦邑，即谚所云东驴西磨，麦城自破者也。
现代文：《左传》说：伍子青筑驴、磨二城来进攻麦城，就是谚语所说的：东驴西磨，麦城自破。
English: "Zhu Zhen" said: Wu Zi Qing built a donkey and a mill to attack the wheat city, which is what the proverb said: East donkey west mill, wheat city self-destructed.

古文：沮水又南径楚昭王墓。东对麦城，故王仲宣之赋《登楼》云西接昭丘是也。
现代文：沮水又往南流经楚昭王墓，陵墓东对麦城，所以王仲宣《登楼赋》说：西接昭丘。
English: The water flowed southward through the tomb of King Chu Zhao, and the east side of the mausoleum faced the city of Mai. Therefore, Wang Zhongxuan said in "Deng Lou Fu" that the west side was connected to Zhaoku.

古文：沮水又南与漳水合焉。
现代文：沮水继续往南流，与漳水汇合。
English: Depressed water continues to flow south, merging with brackish water.

古文：又东南过枝江县，东南人于江。
现代文：又往东南流过枝江县东边，南流人江。
English: It also flows southeast through the eastern edge of Jiang County, and the South-flowing Renren River ends.

古文：沮水又东南径长城东，又东南流注于江，谓之诅口也。
现代文：沮水又往东南流经长城东边；又往东南流，注入大江，汇流处叫沮口。
English: Dejected water flows to the southeast through the eastern side of the Great Wall; it flows to the southeast and flows into the big river, and the confluence is called Dejected Mouth.

古文：漳水出临沮县东荆山，东南过蓼亭，又东过章乡南，荆山在景山东百余里，新城沶乡县界。
现代文：漳水发源于临沮县东边的荆山，往东南流过蓼亭，又往东流过章乡南边。荆山在景山东边百余里新城郡泳乡县边界上。
English: The Surabaya Water originates from Mount Jing in the east of Lintao County, flows southeast through Lingting, and flows east through the south of Zhangxiang. Mount Jing is more than 100 miles east of Jingshan on the border of Xincheng County and Yongxiang County.

古文：虽群峰竞举，而荆山独秀。
现代文：虽然群峰竞相高举，但荆山却独出众峰之上。
English: Although the peaks compete with each other, Mount Jing stands out from the crowd.

古文：漳水东南流，又屈西南，径编县南，县旧城之东北百四十里也。
现代文：漳水往东南流，又折向西南，流经编县城南，城在旧县城东北一百四十里。
English: Surabaya's water flows to the southeast and then turns to the southwest, flowing through the southern part of Henan County, 140 miles northeast of the old county seat.

古文：西南高阳城，移治许茂故城，城南临漳水。
现代文：西南有高阳城，后来把治所迁移到许茂旧城，城南濒临漳水。
English: In the southwest, there was Goyang City, and later the government office was moved to Xumao Old City, and the south of the city was on the edge of Surabaya.

古文：又南历临沮县之章乡南。
现代文：漳水又往南流经临沮县章乡南边。
English: Surabaya water also flows south through the southern part of Zhangxiang, Linshe County.

古文：昔关羽保麦城，诈降而遁，潘璋斩之于此。
现代文：从前关羽为保麦城，诈降而逃，潘璋就在这里杀了他。
English: Once upon a time, Guan Yu was the city of Baomei. He cheated and fled, and Pan Ye killed him right here.

古文：漳水又南径当阳县，又南径麦城东，王仲宣登其东南隅，临漳水而赋之曰：夹清漳之通浦，倚曲沮之长洲是也。
现代文：漳水又往南流经当阳县，又往南流经麦城东边。王仲宣在东南角登楼，面对漳水作赋，写道：傍着澄清的漳水水口，凭依弯曲的沮水长洲。
English: Surabaya water flows southward through Dangyang County, and southward through the east side of Maicheng. Wang Zhongxuan climbed a building in the southeast corner, facing Surabaya water, and wrote: Beside the clear Surabaya water outlet, with the bending depressed water Changzhou.

古文：漳水又南，沶水注之。
现代文：漳水继续往南流，汇合了诡水。
English: The Surabaya water continued to flow southward, merging with the Surabaya water.

古文：《山海经》曰：沶水出东北宜诸之山，南流注于漳水。
现代文：《山海经》说：诡水发源于东北的宜诸之山，南流注入漳水。
English: "Mountain and Sea Classic" says: The mysterious water originates from the mountains of Yizhun in the northeast, and the southern stream injects the brackish water.

古文：又南至枝江县北乌扶邑，入于沮。
现代文：又往南流到枝江县北边的乌扶邑，注人沮水。
English: It also flowed south to Ubu-eup, in the northern part of Shejiang County, pouring torrents of water.

古文：《地理志》曰：《禹贡》南条荆山，在临沮县之东北，漳水所出，东至江陵入阳水，注于沔。
现代文：《地理志》说：按《禹贡》，南条荆山在临沮县东北，漳水就发源在这里，往东到江陵，流进阳水，注入河水。
English: "Geography" said: According to "Yugong," Nanjie Mountain is located in the northeast of Lingshu County, the source of the water is here, and it flows eastward to Jiangling, flowing into the Yangshui River and injecting river water.

古文：非也。今漳水于当阳县之东南百余里而右会沮水也。
现代文：这不对亏现在漳水在当阳县东南百余里处，在右边汇合入沮水。
English: It's not a bad thing that Surabaya is now more than a hundred miles southeast of Dangyang County, merging into Surabaya on the right.

古文：夏水出江津，于江陵县东南，江津豫章口东有中夏口，是夏水之首，江之汜也。
现代文：夏水在江陵县东南从江津分出，江津豫章口东边有中夏口，这是从江水分出的夏水的上口。
English: Xiashui is separated from Jiangjin in the southeast of Jiangling County, and there is a middle Xiakou on the east side of Jiangjin Yuzhangkou, which is the upper mouth of Xiashui from the river water.

古文：屈原所谓过夏首而西浮，顾龙门而不见也。
现代文：屈原说：经过夏首向西航行，回望却看不见龙门。
English: Qu Yuan said: After sailing westward through the first day of summer, I could not see the Dragon Gate when I looked back.

古文：龙门即郢城之东门也。
现代文：龙门也就是那城的东门。
English: Longmen is also the east gate of the city.

古文：又东过华容县南，县故容城矣。
现代文：又往东流过华容县南边，华容县就是旧时睡容城。
English: It also flows eastward past the southern edge of Huarong County, which was once known as Xirong City.

古文：《春秋》鲁定公四年，许迁于容城是也。
现代文：《春秋》鲁定公四年前，许人迁移到容城，就是此城。
English: "Spring and Autumn" Four years before Luding, many people moved to Yongcheng, which is this city.

古文：北临中夏水，自县东北，径成都郡故城南，晋永嘉中，西蜀阻乱，割华容诸城为成都王颖国。
现代文：容城北濒中夏水，水从华容县东北流经成都郡旧城南边。晋永嘉年间一，西蜀因变乱与外界阻绝，把华容诸城划为成都王颖的封国。
English: The north of Rongcheng was on the edge of the Middle Xia Shui, and the water flowed from the northeast of Huarong County to the south of the old city of Chengdu County. In the first year of Jin Yong Jia, West Shu was cut off from the outside world due to turmoil, and the cities of Huarong were designated as the fiefdom of Chengdu Wang Ying.

古文：夏水又径交趾太守胡宠墓北。
现代文：夏水又流经交趾太守胡宠墓北。
English: Summer water also flows through the northern part of the tomb of the great guardian Hu Jia.

古文：汉太傅广身陪陵，而此墓侧有广碑，故世谓广冢，非也。
现代文：汉太傅胡广是陪葬于皇陵的，但此墓旁却有一块胡广碑，所以世人就以为是他的墓了，但实际上不是。
English: Han Taifu Hu Guang was buried in the imperial mausoleum, but there is a Hu Guang monument next to this tomb, so the world thought it was his tomb, but in fact it was not.

古文：其文言是蔡伯喈之辞。
现代文：碑文据说是蔡伯喈写的。
English: The inscription is said to have been written by Cai Boqin.

古文：历范西戎墓南。
现代文：夏水流经范西戎墓南。
English: Summer water flows through the south of Fan Xi Rong Tomb.

古文：王隐《晋书地道记》曰：陶朱冢在华容县，树碑云是越之范蠡。
现代文：王隐《晋书•地道记》说：陶朱公墓在华容县，立碑称，这是越国范氢的坟墓。
English: Wang Yin's "Jinshu•Jidoshu" said: "Tao Zhu Cemetery is in Huarong County. The monument says that this is the tomb of Yue Guo Fan Hsueh.

古文：夏水又东，径监利县南。晋武帝太康五年立。
现代文：晋《太康地记》、盛弘之《荆州记》、刘澄之《永初山川记》，都说墓在华容县西南，郭仲产说在县东十里。
English: Jin's "Diary of Taikang Land," Morihiro's "Diary of Jingzhou," and Liu Cheng's "Diary of Yongchu Mountain and River" all say that the tomb is in the southwest of Huarong County, and Guo Zhongyan says that it is ten miles east of the county.

古文：县土卑下，泽多陂池，西南自州陵东界，径于云杜沌阳，为云梦之薮矣。
现代文：细看墓碑，所题的字说：已故西戎令范君之墓。碑文已剥蚀残缺，无法了解其人的生平了，只说范蠢是他的祖先。墓碑立于永嘉二年立县，那里地势低洼，破塘池沼很多。西南从州陵东部边界经云杜、沌阳，就是云梦泽地带。
English: Looking closely at the tombstone, the inscription says: "The tomb of the late Xi Rong Rong Fan Jun." The inscription has been eroded and damaged, and it is impossible to understand his life, except to say that Fan Yu is his ancestor. The tombstone is located in Yongjia Nianlian County, where the terrain is low-lying and there are many broken ponds and marshes. The southwest from the eastern border of Shuling via Yundu and Chaoyang is the Yunmenze zone.

古文：韦昭曰：云梦在华容县。按《春秋》鲁昭公三年，郑伯如楚，子产备田具，以田江南之梦。
现代文：韦昭说：云梦在华容县，按《春秋》，鲁昭公三年前，郑伯赴楚，子产准备了农具来耕耘江南的云梦。
English: Wei Zhao said: Yunmeng is in Huarong County. According to "Spring and Autumn," three years ago, Zheng Bo went to Chu and prepared agricultural tools to cultivate Yunmeng in the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：郭景纯言华容县东南巴丘湖，是也。
现代文：郭景纯说：云梦就是华容县东莆的巴丘湖。
English: Guo Jingjun said: Yunmeng is Bachu Lake in Donglu, Huarong County.

古文：杜预云：枝江县、安陆县有云梦。盖跨川亘隰，兼苞势广矣。
现代文：杜预说：枝江县、安陆县有云梦，连片的洼地跨于江河两岸，所包括的地区十分宽广。
English: Du Yuan said: There is a cloud dream in the counties of the Yangtze River and Anlu. The continuous depressions straddle both banks of the river, and the area covered is very wide.

古文：夏水又东，夏杨水注之。
现代文：夏水又往东流，有夏杨水注入。
English: The summer water also flows eastward, and the summer poplar water is injected.

古文：水上承杨水于竟陵县之柘口，东南流与中夏水合，谓之夏杨水。又东北径江夏惠怀县北，而东北注。
现代文：夏杨水上流在竟陵县的拓口承接杨水，往东南流，与中夏水汇合，称为夏杨水；又往东北流经江夏惠怀县北边，向东北流去。
English: The upstream stream of Xia Yangshui receives Yangshui at the opening of Jingling County, flows to the southeast, merges with the middle Xia Shui, and is called Xia Yangshui; it also flows to the northeast through the north of Jiangxia Huihuai County, and flows to the northeast.

古文：又东至江夏云杜县，入干沔。
现代文：又往东流到江夏郡云杜县，注人沔水。
English: It also flows eastward to Yundu County, Jiangxia County, injecting fresh water.

古文：应劭《十三州记》曰：江别入沔为夏水，源夫夏之为名，始于分江，冬竭夏流，故纳厥称，既有中夏之目，亦苞大夏之名矣。
现代文：应韵《十三州记》说：从江水分支流入河水的是夏水的水源，夏水一名，是由分江而来的。冬天水涸断流，到了夏天又有水流通了，所以有夏水之称。此水既有中夏的称呼，也就包含了大夏一名了。
English: According to the rhyme of "The Chronicle of the Thirteen Provinces," the water that flows into the river from the river branch is the source of summer water. The summer water name comes from the branch of the river. In winter, the water dries up and the flow is cut off, and in summer, the water circulates again, so it is called summer water. Since this water has the name of mid-summer, it also contains the big summer name.

古文：当其决入之所，谓之堵口焉。
现代文：水流注入处，称为堵口。
English: The place where the water is injected is called the plug.

古文：郑玄注《尚书》，沧浪之水，言今谓之夏水，来同，故世变名焉。
现代文：郑玄注《尚书》，释沧浪之水时说，现在叫夏水，来源相同，只是年代久远，名称也变了。
English: Zheng Xuan annotated "Shang Shu," explaining the water of the waves, saying that it is now called summer water, the source is the same, but the age is long, and the name has changed.

古文：刘澄之著《永初山川记》云：夏水，古文以为沧浪，渔父所歌也。
现代文：刘澄之著《永初山川记》说，夏水，古文以为就是沧浪，《渔父》歌中曾唱到它。
English: Liu Cheng's book "The Chronicle of Mountains and Rivers in the Eternal Beginning" says that ancient texts thought that summer water was waves, and it was sung about in the song "The Fisherman's Father."

古文：因此言之，水应由沔。
现代文：照此说来，夏水应当是从河水流过来的。
English: According to this, the summer water should have come from the river.

古文：今按夏水是江流沔，非沔入夏。
现代文：但现在看来，夏水是江水分支流入河水，而不是从河水注入夏水的。
English: But now it seems that Xia Shui is the branch of river water flowing into the river, rather than the injection of Xia Shui from the river.

古文：假使沔注夏，其势西南，非《尚书》又东之文，余亦以为非也。
现代文：若是河水注入夏水，那么就势必往西南流，不会有《尚书》中又往东流的说法了。我也以为不是如此。
English: If the river water is injected with summer water, then it will inevitably flow to the southwest, and there will be no "Shangshu" saying that it will flow to the east. I also thought that this was not the case.

古文：自堵口下沔水，通兼夏目，而会于江，谓之夏汭也。
现代文：从堵口以下起，河水统兼夏水之名，与江水汇合，称为夏油。
English: From below the dam, the river water, also known as summer water, merges with the river water and is called summer oil.

古文：故《春秋左传》称吴伐楚，沈尹射奔命夏汭也。
现代文：《春秋左传》说，吴攻楚，沈尹射逃到夏纳。
English: "The Legend of Spring and Autumn" says that Wu attacked Chu, while Shen Yin shot and fled to Shana.

古文：杜顶曰：汉水曲入江，即夏口矣。
现代文：杜预说：汉水曲折长流入江，汇流处就是夏口。
English: Du Yu said: The Han River meanders into the Yangtze River, and the confluence is at Xiakou.

古文：羌水出羌中参狼谷，彼俗谓之天池白水矣。
现代文：羌水发源于羌中县参狼谷。羌水俗称天池白水。
English: Surabaya's water originates from Sanliu Valley, Yuzhong County. Surabaya's water is commonly known as Tianchi white water.

古文：《地理志》曰：出陇西羌道。东南流径宕昌城东，西北去天池五百余里。
现代文：《地理志》说：发源于陇西羌道，往东南流经宕昌城东边，宕昌城西北距天池五百余里。
English: "Geography" said: Originated from the west of Shaanxi Province, it flows to the southeast through the east of Tangchang City, and the northwest of Tangchang City is more than five hundred miles away from Tianchi.

古文：羌水又东南，径宕婆川城东而东南注。
现代文：羌水又往东南流经宕婆川城东边，向东南流去。
English: Surabaya water also flows southeast through the eastern edge of the city of Tago Bachuan and flows southeast.

古文：羌水又东南，阳部水注之。水发东北阳部溪，西南径安民戍，又西南注羌水，又东南径武街城西南，又东南径葭芦城西，羊汤水入焉。
现代文：从前姜维进犯陇右，听说钟会已进入汉中，就领兵退回。他知道雍州刺史诸葛绪驻兵于桥头，从孔函谷将往北路走，诸葛绪在这条路上拦截他，但姜维却改走北路。他渡过桥头，进入剑阁，诸葛绪去追，却没有追上。羌水又往东南流，阳部水注入，阳部水发源于东北的阳部溪，往西南流经安民戍，又往西南注入羌水。羌水又往东南流经武街城西南，又往东南流经蔑芦城西边，羊汤水注入。
English: He knew that Zhugexu, the governor of Yongzhou, had stationed soldiers at the bridgehead. Zhugexu was going to take the north road from Konghang Valley. Zhugexu intercepted him on this road, but Jiang Wei took the north road instead. He crossed the bridgehead and entered Jiange, Zhugexu chased him, but did not catch up. Surabaya water flowed to the southeast, Yangbu water was injected, Yangbu water originated from the northeast of Yangbu Creek, flowed to the southwest through Anmin Pass, and injected Surabaya water to the southwest. Surabaya water also flowed to the southeast through the southwest of Wujie

古文：水出西北阴平北界汤溪，东南径北部城北，又东南径五部城南，东南右合妾水傍西南出，即水源所发也。
现代文：羊汤水发源于西北方阴平北境的汤溪，往东南流经北部城北边，又往东南流经五部城南边，往东南流，在右边汇合了妾水。妾水从西南流来，水源所出处不远。
English: Sheep soup water originates from Tangxi in the northwest of Yinping North, flows southeast through the north of the northern city, flows southeast through the south of Wufeng, flows southeast, and merges with concubine water on the right. Concubine water flows from the southwest, and the source is not far away.

古文：羌水又径葭芦城南，径余城南，又东南，左会五部水。
现代文：羌水又流经葭芦城南，流经余城南，又往东南流，在左边汇合了五部水。
English: Surabaya water also flows through the south of Huludao, flows through the south of Yucheng, and flows to the southeast, merging the five waters on the left.

古文：水有二源，出南北五部溪，西南流合为一水，屈而东南注羌水。
现代文：五部水有两个源头，出自南五部溪和北五部溪，往西南流，合成一条，然后转向东南，注入羌水。
English: The Wubu water has two sources, from the South Wubu Creek and the North Wubu Creek, flowing to the southwest to form a single stream, and then turning to the southeast to inject salty water.

古文：羌水又东南流至桥头，合白水，东南去白水县故城九十里。
现代文：羌水又往东南流，到桥头汇合了白水。桥头东南距白水老城九十里。
English: Surabaya water flows to the southeast and joins Baishui at the bridgehead, which is 90 miles southeast of the old town of Baishui.

古文：又东南至广魏白水县，与汉水合，又东南过巴郡阆中县，又南至垫江县，东南入于江。
现代文：又往东南流，到广魏郡白水县与汉水汇合。又往东南流过巴郡阖中县，又往南到垫江县东边，南流人江。
English: It also flows to the southeast, merging with the Han River in Baishui County, Guangwei County. It also flows to the southeast through Yuzhong County, Bashu County, and southward to the east of Jiejiang County, the south stream of the Renren River.

古文：涪水出广魏涪县西北，涪水出广汉属国刚氐道徼外，东南流径涪县西，王莽之统睦矣。
现代文：涪水发源于广魏郡涪县西北。涪水发源于广汉属国刚氏道的徼外，往东南流经涪县西边。
English: The Ershui originates from the northwest of Er County, Guangwei County. The Ershui originates from outside the Er of Guogang Road, Guanghan Province, and flows southeast through the west of Er County.

古文：臧宫进破涪城，斩公孙恢于涪，自此水上。县有潺水，出潺山。
现代文：涪县就是王莽的统睦减宫进军攻破涪城，就在这里杀了公孙恢。从这里溯流而上，县境内有潺水，潺水发源于潺山，水源有金银矿。
English: Lushan County is the place where Wang Mang's army marched into and defeated Lushan City. It was here that he killed Gongsun Hui. From here, there is a stream running upstream. In the county, there is Lushan Water. Lushan Water originates from Lushan Mountain. The source of the water is a gold and silver mine.

古文：水源有金银矿，洗取火合之，以成金银。
现代文：用水来淘取矿砂，用火来熔冶，就可以制成金银。
English: Gold and silver can be made from ore mined with water and smelted with fire.

古文：潺水历潺亭而下注涪水。
现代文：潺水流经潺亭，注入涪水。
English: Surabaya water flows through the Surabaya Pavilion and is injected into Surabaya.

古文：涪水又东南径绵竹县北。
现代文：涪水又往东南流经绵竹县北边。
English: Surabaya water also flows southeast through the northern part of Mianzhu County.

古文：臧宫溯涪至于阳，公孙述将王元降，遂拔绵竹。
现代文：减宫从涪江逆流而上，直到平阳，公孙述的部将王元投降，于是攻取了绵竹。
English: Yan Gong went upstream from the Lijiang River to Pingyang, where Wang Yuan, the general described by Gongsun, surrendered and Mianzhu was captured.

古文：涪水又东南，与建始水合，水发平洛郡西溪，西南流，屈而东南流，人于涪。
现代文：涪水又往东南流，与建始水汇合。建始水发源于平洛郡的西溪，先往西南流，然后转向东南，注入涪水。
English: Surabaya water flows to the southeast and merges with Jianshi water. Jianshi water originates from Xixi Creek in Pingluo County, first flowing to the southwest, then turning to the southeast and injecting Surabaya water.

古文：涪水又东南径江油戍北。
现代文：涪水继续往东南流，经过江油戍北边。
English: Surabaya water continues to flow to the southeast, passing the northern side of the Yangtze River.

古文：邓艾自阴平景谷步道，悬兵束马人蜀，径江油广汉者也。
现代文：邓艾从阴平景谷小路跋山历险奇袭蜀国，就是经过江油、广汉的。
English: Deng Ai's adventurous journey from the small roads of Jinggu in Yinping to the mountains of Shu took him through the Yangtze River and Guanghan.

古文：涪水又东南，径南安郡南，又南与金堂水会，水出广汉新都县，东南流入涪。
现代文：涪水又往东南流经南安郡南边，又南流与金堂水汇合。金堂水发源于广汉新都县，往东南流，注入涪水。
English: Surabaya water flows to the southeast through the south of Nan'an County, and the south stream merges with Jintang water. Jintang water originates from Guanghan Xindu County and flows to the southeast, injecting Surabaya water.

古文：涪水又南，枝津出焉，西径广汉五城县，为五城水，又西至成都，入于江。
现代文：涪水又往南流，分出一条支水，西经广汉五城县，叫五城水，又西流到成都，注入江水。
English: Surabaya's water flows southward, creating a tributary, called Wucheng Water, which flows westward through Guanghan Wucheng County, and flows westward to Chengdu, where it is injected into the river.

古文：南至小广魏，与梓潼水合。
现代文：往南到小广魏，与梓渔水汇合。
English: Heading south to Xiaogangwei, it merges with Zi Yu Shui.

古文：小广魏即广汉县地，王莽更名曰广信也。
现代文：小广魏，是广汉县地区，王莽改名为广信。
English: Xiaogangwei is a district of Guanghan County. Wang Mang changed his name to Guangxin.

古文：梓潼水出其县北界，西南人于涪。
现代文：梓潼水发源于该县北界，往西南注人涪水。
English: The water of the river originates from the northern boundary of the county, and the water of the river is injected to the southwest.

古文：故广汉郡，公孙述改为梓潼郡。
现代文：小广魏，就是旧时的广汉郡，公孙述改名为梓潼郡。
English: Xiaogangwei, that is, Guanghan County in the old days, was renamed Zizhi County by Gongsun Su.

古文：刘备嘉霍峻守葭萌之功，又分广汉以北，别为梓潼郡，以峻为守。
现代文：刘备嘉奖霍峻守霞萌有功，又划广汉北部另立梓渔郡，派霍峻当太守。
English: Liu Bei commended Ho Jun for his contribution to the defense of Xia Meng, and also decided to set up a separate Zi Yu County in the northern part of Guanghan, appointing Ho Jun as the governor.

古文：县有五女，蜀王遣五丁迎之，至此，见大蛇入山穴，五丁引之，山崩，压五丁及五女，因氏山为五妇山，又曰五妇候，驰水所出。一曰五妇水，亦曰潼水也。
现代文：县里有五位姑娘，蜀王派遣五个兵丁去迎她们，到了这里，看见一条大蛇爬进山洞，五个兵丁去拖它，拉崩了山，五个兵丁和五位姑娘都被压在下面，因此称此山为五妇山，又叫五妇候。驰水就发源在这里，又名五妇水，也叫潼水。
English: There were five girls in the county. King Shu sent five soldiers to meet them. When they arrived, they saw a big snake crawling into the cave. The five soldiers dragged it and collapsed the mountain. The five soldiers and the five girls were all crushed underneath. Therefore, this mountain is called the Five Women's Mountain, also known as the Five Women's Wait. The spring water originated here, also known as the Five Women's Water, also known as the Surabaya Water.

古文：其水导源山中，南径梓潼县。王莽改曰子同矣。
现代文：这条水发源于山中，往南流经梓潼县，王莽改名为子同。
English: This water originates in the mountains and flows south through Zizhi County. Wang Mang changed his name to Zidong.

古文：自县南径涪城东，又南入于涪水，谓之五妇水口也。
现代文：水从县南流经涪城东边，又往南注入涪水，汇流处叫五妇水口。
English: The water flows from the south of the county through the east side of Lucheng, and then flows south into Lucheng, and the confluence is called Wuzhen water outlet.

古文：又西南至小广魏南，入于垫江。
现代文：又往西南流，到小广魏以南注人垫江。
English: It also flows to the southwest, to the south of Xiaoguangwei, where it discharges into the Jinshan River.

古文：亦言涪水至此入汉水，亦谓之为内水也。
现代文：也有人说，涪水到这里注入汉水，又称内水。
English: It is also said that Surabaya's water is infused here with Chinese water, also known as inland water.

古文：北径垫江。
现代文：往北流经垫江。
English: It flows north through the Mat River.

古文：昔岑彭与臧宫自江州从涪水上。公孙述令延岑盛兵于沈水。
现代文：从前岑彭和减宫从江州出发循涪水而上，公孙述命令延岑在沈水部署强大的兵力。
English: In the past, Yao Peng and Yan Gong traveled upstream from Jiangzhou along the Yanshui River. Gongsun Shu ordered Yan Xuan to deploy a strong force at Shenshui.

古文：宫左步右骑，夹船而进，势动山谷，大破岑军，斩首溺水者万余人，水为浊流。
现代文：藏宫左翼为步兵，右翼为骑兵，在两边拥着船前进，声势震动整个山谷，大败延岑军，斩首和落水淹死的多达万余广，把整条江水都弄浑浊了。
English: The left wing of the Tibetan Palace was the infantry, the right wing was the cavalry, and on both sides they embraced the boat and advanced. The sound shook the entire valley, defeated the Yan Xuan army, beheaded and drowned, and muddied the entire river.

古文：沈水出广汉县，下入涪水也。
现代文：沈水发源于广汉县，下注于涪水。
English: Shenshui originated in Guanghan County and settled in Surabaya.

古文：涔水出汉中南郑县东南旱山，北至安阳县，南入于沔。
现代文：涔水发源于汉中郡南郑县东南的旱山，往北流到安阳县，往南注人沔水。
English: Surabaya's water originates from Mount Arid in the southeast of South Zheng County, Hanzhong County. It flows north to Anyang County, and people pour water into it from the south.

古文：涔水即黄水也，东北流，径成固南城北。
现代文：涔水就是鬵水，往东北流经成固南城北边。
English: Surabaya's water is Surabaya's water, flowing northeast through the northern edge of Chenggu Nancheng.

古文：城在山上，或言韩信始立，或言张良创筑，未知定所制矣。
现代文：城在山上，有人说是韩信开始修筑，也有人说是张良创建，不知到底是谁造的。
English: The city is on a hill. Some people say that Han Xin started building it, while others say that Zhang Liang founded it. I don't know who actually built it.

古文：义熙九年，索遐为果州刺史，自成固治此，故谓之南城。
现代文：义熙九年，索遐当果州刺史，身在成固而设治于此，所以叫南城。
English: In the 9th year of Yixi, Sokou, who was a historian of Gozhou, settled in Chenggu, hence the name Nancheng.

古文：城周七里，衿涧带谷，绝壁百寻，北谷口造城东门，傍山寻涧，五里有余，盘道登陟，方得城治。
现代文：城周长七里，前临山涧，四周山谷环绕，悬崖绝壁高达百丈。从北边谷口到城东门，沿山边循着溪涧走，从盘旋曲折的山路登山，约五里余，才到城里。
English: The perimeter of the city is seven miles long, with mountains in front and valleys all around, and cliffs as high as a hundred meters. From the northern valley mouth to the east gate of the city, walk along the mountainside along the creek, and climb from the winding mountain road, about five miles, to get to the city.

古文：城北水旧有桁，北渡涔水。
现代文：城北水上旧时有浮桥，可通滓水北岸。
English: In the old days, there was a floating bridge on the water north of the city, which could pass through the northern shore of the water.

古文：水北有赵军城，城北又有桁渡沔，取北城，城即大成固县治也。
现代文：水北有赵军城，城北又有一道浮桥跨过酒水，可到北城；这座城就是大成固县的治所。
English: To the north of the water, there is Zhao Juncheng, and to the north of the city, there is a floating bridge across the water to the north of the city; this city is the capital of Dacheng County.

古文：黄水右岸有悦归馆，涔水历其北，北至安阳左入沔，为涔水口也。
现代文：鬵水右岸有悦归馆，涔水流经馆北，北流到安阳，在左边注入沔水，汇流处叫三水口。
English: On the right bank of Surabaya River, there is Yueguigu Pavilion. Surabaya River flows through the north of the pavilion, flows north to Anyang, and injects Surabaya River on the left side. The confluence is called Sanshuikou.

