古文：高颎高颎，字昭玄，一名敏，自云渤海蓚人也。
现代文：高颎字昭玄，也叫敏，自称是渤海蓚人。
English: Gao Xi Zi Zhaoxuan, also known as Min, claims to be a native of the Bohai Sea.

古文：父宾，背齐归周，大司马独孤信引为僚佐，赐姓独孤氏。
现代文：父亲高宾，背叛齐国，归顺北周，大司马独孤信引为臣僚，赐他姓独孤。
English: Gao Bin's father betrayed Qi and surrendered to the Northern Zhou Dynasty, and the Grand Master Ma Du Guoxin made him a minister and gave him the surname Du Guoxin.

古文：及信被诛，妻子徙蜀。
现代文：等到独孤信被杀，妻儿迁徙蜀地。
English: Wait until Du Guoxin is killed and his wife and children migrate to Shu.

古文：文献皇后以宾父之故吏，每往来其家。
现代文：文献皇后因为高宾是她父亲的老部下，每每到他家去。
English: Because Gao Bin was her father's old subordinate, she often went to his house.

古文：宾后官至鄀州刺史，及颎贵，赠礼部尚书、渤海公。
现代文：高宾后来升任若阝州刺史，等到高颎显贵后，高宾被追赠为礼部尚书、渤海公。
English: Gao Bin was later promoted to the post of the first secretary of the history of the state of Zhejiang. After Gao Bin became a prominent person, Gao Bin was posthumously awarded the title of the first secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies and the title of the Duke of Bohai.

古文：颎少明敏，有器局，略涉书史，尤善词令。
现代文：高颎年少时聪明敏捷，有器度，略涉书史，尤善词章。
English: When Gao Yao was young, he was smart and agile, had a sense of organization, knew a little about the history of books, and was particularly good at writing.

古文：初，孩孺时，家有柳树，高百许尺，亭亭如盖。
现代文：当初，他还在孩提时，家里有一柳树，高约百尺，亭亭如盖。
English: At first, when Gao Yao was a child, there was a willow tree at home, about a hundred feet high, like an umbrella cover.

古文：里中父老曰： 此家当出贵人。 
现代文：乡里的父老们说： 这个家里会出贵显之人。 
English: The parents back home said: This family is going to produce a great nobleman.

古文：年十七，周齐王宪引为记室。
现代文：高颎十七岁时，北周齐王宇文宪让他当记室。
English: At the age of seventeen, Zhou Qi Wang Yuwenxian appointed him as a recorder.

古文：武帝时，袭爵武阳县伯，除内史上士，寻迁下大夫。
现代文：周武帝时，他袭爵当武阳县伯，任内史上士，不久升任下大夫。
English: During the reign of Emperor Zhou Wu, he succeeded to the title of Count of Wuyang County, served as a historian, and was soon promoted to the position of junior doctor.

古文：以平齐功，拜开府。
现代文：因他平定齐国有功，拜授开府。
English: He was promoted to the highest rank of Kaifu for his contribution to the pacification of Qi.

古文：寻从越王盛击隰州叛胡，平之。
现代文：不久跟随越王宇文盛进攻隰州叛胡，平定了叛逆。
English: He soon followed Yuwen Sheng, the King of Yue, in attacking the rebels in Zhangzhou and put down the rebellion.

古文：高祖得政，素知颎强明，又习兵事，多计略，意欲引之入府，遣邗国公杨惠谕意。颎承旨欣然曰： 愿受驱驰。
现代文：隋高祖执掌北周大政时，素知高颎能干聪明，又善军事，多有谋略，意欲引他入丞相府。高祖派邗国公杨惠告诉他这个意思，高颎高兴地说： 我愿意听从丞相调遣，为他奔走。
English: When Sui Gaozu was in charge of the Northern Zhou Dynasty, he knew that Gaozhu was capable and clever, and good at military affairs. He had a lot of strategies and wanted to bring him into the prime minister's office. Gaozhu sent Yang Hui, the Duke of Shandong, to tell him this. Gaozhu said happily: I am willing to follow the prime minister's dispatch and run for him.

古文：纵令公事不成，颎亦不辞灭族。 
现代文：即使他的大事不能成功，我高颎也不推脱灭族之祸。 
English: Even if Yang Gongda's great cause fails, I am not afraid of being subjected to the scourge of extermination.

古文：于是为相府司录。
现代文：于是任他为相府司录。
English: As a result, he was appointed the secretary of the prefectural government.

古文：时长史郑译、司马刘昉并以奢纵被疏，高祖弥属意于颎，委以心膂。
现代文：当时长史郑译、司马刘日方都因奢侈放纵被杀，高祖更加倾心于高颎，把他当心腹。
English: At that time, Changshi Zheng and Sima Liu were both killed for their extravagant indulgence. Gao Zu was even more devoted to Gao Yao, and kept a close eye on him.

古文：尉迥之起兵也，遣子惇率步骑八万，进屯武陟。
现代文：尉迟迥造反，派他儿子尉迟惇率步兵骑兵八万，进驻武陟。
English: He rebelled and sent his son, Yi Xizhao, to lead 80,000 infantry and cavalry into Wuxi.

古文：高祖令韦孝宽击之，军至河阳，莫敢先进。
现代文：高祖令韦孝宽击之。官军至河阳，没谁敢先进兵。
English: Gao Zu ordered Wei Xiaokuan to attack it. The government army went to Heyang, and no one dared to advance.

古文：高祖以诸将不一，令崔仲方监之，仲方辞父在山东。
现代文：高祖因诸军号令不一，令崔仲方监军，但仲方以父亲在华山以东而推辞。
English: Gao Zu ordered Cui Zhongfang to supervise the army because of the different orders of the armies, but Zhongfang refused because his father was east of Mount Huashan.

古文：时颎又见刘昉、郑译并无去意，遂自请行，深合上旨，遂遣颎。
现代文：当时高颎又见刘日方、郑译都没有去军前的意思，于是请求让自己去，这深合高祖之意，于是派高颎去监军。
English: At that time, Gao Jue also saw that Liu Yifang and Zheng Zhan had no intention of going to the front of the army, so he asked to let himself go, which was in line with Gao Zu's intention, so he sent Gao Jue to supervise the army.

古文：颎受命便发，遣人辞母，云忠孝不可两兼，歔欷就路。
现代文：高颎一受相命，立即出发，派人代他向老母辞行，说 忠孝不能两全 ，流泪上路。
English: As soon as Gao Jun was ordered to leave, he immediately set out, sent someone to resign to his mother on his behalf, saying that loyalty and filial piety cannot be two different things, and went on his way in tears.

古文：至军，为桥于沁水，贼于上流纵大伐，颎预为土狗以御之。
现代文：到军前，在沁水上架桥，反贼在上游放火木伐，高颎预先作好土狗以防备火木伐。
English: Before the arrival of the army, the bridge was built on the Surabaya River, the anti-thieves set fire and felled trees upstream, and the sorghum was prepared in advance to prevent fire and felling.

古文：既渡，焚桥而战，大破之。
现代文：渡河后，焚烧桥梁，以示死战，结果大破叛军。
English: After crossing the river, they set fire to the bridge to signal the end of the battle, which resulted in a crushing defeat for the rebels.

古文：遂至鄴下，与迥交战，仍共宇文忻、李询等设策，因平尉迥。
现代文：于是追至邺下，与尉迟迥交战。高颎与宇文忻、李询等设计，平定了尉迟迥。
English: Therefore, he chased down the eunuch and fought with the eunuch's son. Gao Yao and Uwen Yao, Li Zhen and other designers defeated the eunuch's son.

古文：军还，侍宴于卧内，上撤御帷以赐之。
现代文：官军还京，在高祖卧室之内饮宴，高祖拆下帷幕赏给他。
English: The government army returned to Beijing and held a banquet in Gao Zu's bedroom. Gao Zu tore down the curtain and gave it to him.

古文：进位柱国，改封义宁县公，迁相府司马，任寄益隆。
现代文：高颎升任柱国，改封义宁县公，升任丞相府司马，他的官职更高，对他的寄托更重。
English: Gao Jun was promoted to the post of pillar state, changed his title to Yining County official, and was promoted to the post of secretary of the prime minister's office. His official position was higher, and his trust was heavier.

古文：高祖受禅，拜尚书左仆射，兼纳言，进封渤海郡公，朝臣莫与为比，上每呼为独孤而不名也。
现代文：高祖受北周禅让登基称帝后，授高颎为尚书左仆射，兼纳言，晋爵封为渤海郡公，朝中大臣无人可与之相比，皇上每每称他为独孤而不叫他的名字。
English: Gao Zu was enthroned as empress by Emperor Zhou of the Northern Zhou Dynasty. He was awarded the title of Gao Jian (尚書左仆射,兼纳言) and the title of Jin Jie (晋爵) and became the governor of Bohai County. No other minister in the middle of the dynasty can be compared to him. The emperor always called him alone and did not call his name.

古文：颎深避权势，上表逊位，让于苏威。
现代文：高颎深深地避免权势，上表章请求让位于苏威。
English: Gao Rong deeply avoided the power, and asked the upper chapter to give way to Su Wei.

古文：上欲成其美，听解仆射。
现代文：皇上想成全他的美意，让他辞去仆射之职。
English: The emperor wanted to fulfill his wish and have him resign from his position as a gunner.

古文：数日，上曰： 苏威高蹈前朝，颎能推举。
现代文：几天后，皇上又说： 苏威在前朝辞官不作，独孤颎能够推荐他。
English: A few days later, the emperor also said: Su Wei did not resign from the previous government, only the emperor could recommend him.

古文：吾闻进贤受上赏，宁可令去官！ 
现代文：我听说，推荐贤人的人应受上赏，怎能让独孤颎辞官呢？ 
English: I've heard that there should be a high reward for recommending a talented person. How can he be allowed to resign?

古文：于是命颎复位。
现代文：于是命高颎恢复官位。
English: As a result, Takahata's position was restored.

古文：俄拜左卫大将军，本官如故。
现代文：不久皇上拜授他为左卫大将军，本任官职如旧。
English: He was soon promoted to the post of General of the Left Division of the National Guard. He still holds his original post.

古文：时突厥屡为寇患，诏颎镇遏缘边。
现代文：当时突厥屡为边患，诏令高颎镇守边疆。
English: At that time, the Turks were often a problem at the border, and the emperor ordered Gaocheng Town to guard the border.

古文：及还，赐马百余匹，牛羊千计。
现代文：等到他还朝时，皇上赏他马匹一百多，牛羊数以千计。
English: When he became emperor, the emperor rewarded him with more than a hundred horses and thousands of cattle and sheep.

古文：领新都大监，制度多出于颎。
现代文：高颎兼任新都大监，制度多由高颎制定。
English: He also served as the inspector general of the new capital. The system of moving the capital to the capital originated in Takatsuki.

古文：颎每坐朝堂北槐树下以听事，其树不依行列，有司将伐之。上特命勿去，以示后人。
现代文：高颎每每坐在朝堂北大槐树下听取汇报、决断事情，其树不依行列，有关部门想砍掉，皇上特命不砍，以留给后人看，他就是这样被朝廷看重。
English: Gao Yao always sat under the Great Northern Banyan Tree in the Imperial Court to listen to reports and decide on matters. The tree did not follow the ranks, the relevant departments wanted to cut it down, but the emperor gave special orders not to cut it down, so as to leave it for posterity. This is how he was valued by the imperial court.

古文：其见重如此。又拜左领军大将军，余官如故。
现代文：又拜授他为左领军大将军，余官如故。
English: He was also awarded the rank of General of the Left Armies, which he still holds.

古文：母忧去职，二旬起令视事。
现代文：因丧母而离职，二十天后，皇上即令他复官断事。
English: He left office due to the death of his mother, and twenty days later, the emperor ordered him to resume his post.

古文：颎流涕辞让，优诏不许。
现代文：高颎流泪辞让，皇上不许可。
English: Takahata tearfully refused to give in, but the Emperor would not allow it.

古文：开皇二年，长孙览、元景山等伐陈，令颎节度诸军。
现代文：开皇二年，长孙览、元景山等讨伐陈国，皇上令高颎节度诸军。
English: In the second year of the emperor's reign, the eldest grandson Zhan, Yuan Jingshan and other leaders led the army to fight against Chen Guo, and Emperor Wen ordered Gao Gan to control the dispatch of the army.

古文：会陈宣帝薨，颎以礼不伐丧，奏请班师。
现代文：适逢陈宣帝崩，高颎认为按礼不能讨伐居丧之国，奏请朝廷班师。
English: At the time of Emperor Chen Xuan's death, Gao Yao thought that it was not proper to invade a country in mourning, so he asked the imperial court for help.

古文：萧岩之叛也，诏颎绥集江汉，甚得人和。
现代文：萧岩背叛时，诏令高颎安抚江、汉一带，很得民心。
English: At the time of Xiao Yan's betrayal, the edict of Gao Gan to pacify the Yangtze River and the Han region won the hearts of the people.

古文：上尝问颎取陈之策，颎曰： 江北地寒，田收差晚，江南土热，水田早熟。
现代文：皇上曾问平陈之策，高颎说： 江北寒冷，收割较晚；江南气温较高，水田收割较早。
English: The emperor once asked Ping Chen for advice, and Gao Wei said: The north of the Yangtze River is cold and the harvest is late; the south of the Yangtze River has a higher temperature and the harvest of paddy fields is earlier.

古文：量彼收积之际，微征士马，声言掩袭。彼必屯兵御守，足得废其农时。
现代文：估量陈国收获季节，我们略略征集点人马，声言要掩袭陈国，他们必定会屯兵防御，这足以废其农时。
English: Estimating the harvest season of Chen Guo, we slightly recruited a few people and horses, claiming to cover Chen Guo, they will certainly garrison defense, which is enough to waste their farming time.

古文：彼既聚兵，我便解甲，再三若此，贼以为常。
现代文：他们屯兵，我们就解甲，如此再三，贼人以为常。
English: They set up a garrison, and we disarm. This happens over and over again. Thieves think it's normal.

古文：后更集兵，彼必不信，犹豫之顷，我乃济师，登陆而战，兵气益倍。
现代文：以后再集兵，他必不信，在他们犹豫的时候，我们就过江，登陆而战，士气倍增。
English: After that, we mobilized more troops. They must not have believed that we would attack. While they were hesitating, we sent soldiers across the river and landed to fight. Morale was even higher.

古文：又江南土薄，舍多竹茅，所有储积，皆非地窖。
现代文：另外，江南地湿，房屋多为茅草竹子，所有的积蓄，都没贮藏到地窖里。
English: Besides, the soil layer in the south of the Yangtze River is shallow, and most houses are built of bamboo and thatch. People do not need cellars to store food.

古文：密遣行人，因风纵火，待彼修立，复更烧之。
现代文：我们可以偷偷派人去，就风放火，等他修好后，再去放火。
English: We can secretly send someone there, set fire to the wind, and wait for him to fix it, and then set fire to it.

古文：不出数年，自可财力俱尽。 
现代文：不过几年，自可使陈国财力俱尽。 
English: If this is done, the financial resources of Jiangnan will be exhausted within a few years.

古文：上行其策，由是陈人益敝。
现代文：皇上按他这个办法办，因此陈国人更加穷困。
English: The emperor acted according to his plan, so the people of Chen were even more impoverished.

古文：九年，晋王广大举伐陈，以颎为元帅长史，三军谘禀，皆取断于颎。
现代文：开皇九年，晋王杨广大举伐陈，任高颎为元帅长史，三军参谋，都由高颎决断。
English: In the ninth year of the emperor's reign, the king of Jin, Yang Guang, promoted Gao Qi to marshal, and Gao Qi to staff officer of the three armies. All decisions were made by Gao Qi.

古文：及陈平，晋王欲纳陈主宠姬张丽华。
现代文：等到平陈后，晋王杨广想纳陈后主宠姬张丽华。
English: As Chen Guo was already a commoner, Jin Wang wanted to accommodate Chen's favorite queen, Ji Zhang Lihua.

古文：颎曰： 武王灭殷，戮妲己。
现代文：高颎说： 周武王灭殷商，杀了妲己。
English: Gao Yao said, "Wu Wang should kill Yan, and then kill himself."

古文：今平陈国，不宜取丽华。 
现代文：现在平定陈国，不应娶张丽华。 
English: Now that Chen Guo has been pacified, Zhang Lihua should not be singled out.

古文：乃命斩之，王甚不悦。
现代文：高颎于是下令杀了张丽华，晋王很不高兴。
English: Gao Gan then gave the order to kill Zhang Lihua, which made Jin Wang very unhappy.

古文：及军还，以功加授上柱国，进爵齐国公，赐物九千段，定食千乘县千五百户。
现代文：等到大军还京后，因功加授高颎为上柱国，晋爵位为齐国公，赏布匹九千段，定食邑为千乘县的一千五百户。
English: After the great army returned to Beijing, it was awarded the title of Shangzhu Guo, the title of Qi Guo Gong, the award of nine thousand pieces of cloth, and the set meal for 1,500 households in Qianren County.

古文：上因劳之曰： 公伐陈后，人言公反，朕已斩之。
现代文：皇上慰劳他说： 你伐陈国后，有人说你谋反，我已杀了他。
English: The emperor consoled him, saying: "After you attacked Chen Guo, some people said that you were plotting a rebellion. I have already killed him.

古文：君臣道合，非青蝇所间也。 
现代文：君臣和好，不是苍蝇之类的小人所能离间得了的。 
English: It is not possible for a villain to cause discord between princes and ministers.

古文：颎又逊位，诏曰： 公识鉴通远，器略优深，出参戎律，廓清淮海，入司禁旅，实委心腹。
现代文：高颎又请求让位，诏书说： 你见识远大，谋略很深，出京参谋军事，帮助平定淮海一带；回京掌管禁军，我把你当作心腹。
English: Gao Rong also requested to give up his position, and the imperial edict said: You are far-sighted and have a deep strategy. You went to Beijing as a military staff officer to help pacify the Huaihai area; you returned to Beijing to take charge of the forbidden army. I regard you as a confidant.

古文：自朕受命，常典机衡，竭诚陈力，心迹俱尽。
现代文：自我受禅登基以来，你常常参与机要，尽忠竭力，心迹俱尽。
English: Since I was enthroned, you have often taken part in important occasions, devoted your loyalty and efforts, and done your best.

古文：此则天降良辅，翊赞朕躬，幸无词费也。 
现代文：这是天降良臣于我，让你帮我，望你不要再费口舌辞职了。 
English: This is a godsend to me, let you help me, I hope you don't bother to resign.

古文：其优奖如此。
现代文：皇上就是这样优待、奖励他。
English: This is how the Emperor treated and rewarded him.

古文：是后右卫将军庞晃及将军卢贲等，前后短颎于上。上怒之，皆被疏黜。
现代文：这以后，右卫将军庞晃及将军卢贲等人，先后在皇上面前进高颎的谗言，皇上发怒，疏远并贬黜了他们。
English: After this, the right guard general, Pang Huan, and the general, Lu Yao, and others, successively brought Gao Yao's criticism in front of the emperor. The emperor was angry, alienated and belittled them.

古文：因谓颎曰： 独孤公犹镜也，每被磨莹，皎然益明。 
现代文：皇上对高颎说： 你独孤公就像一面镜子，常被磨擦，越磨越亮。 
English: Emperor Wen then said to Gao Zhun: "Solitary man is like a bronze mirror, every time you grind it, it becomes brighter."

古文：未几，尚书都事姜晔、楚州行参军李君才并奏称水旱不调，罪由高颎，请废黜之。
现代文：不久，尚书都事姜晔、楚州行参军李君才都上奏，说水旱不调，罪由高颎，请求废黜他。
English: Not long after, Shang Shudu, Jiang Chen, and Li Juncai, who went to Chuzhou to join the army, jointly said that the drought was out of proportion, the crime was Gao Gan, and requested to be deposed. Both of them were convicted and removed from office.

古文：二人俱得罪而去，亲礼逾密。
现代文：二人都得罪而丢官。皇上对高颎的礼遇更甚。
English: Both of them were disgraced and lost their positions. The Emperor was even more courteous to Gao Yao.

古文：上幸并州，留颎居守。
现代文：皇上巡幸并州，留高颎守京师。
English: The emperor went on a tour of the provinces, and stayed in Gaozhou to guard the capital.

古文：及上还京，赐缣五千匹，复赐行宫一所，以为庄舍。
现代文：等皇上还京，赏他缣帛五千匹，又赏他一座行宫，让他作庄舍。
English: When the emperor returned to the capital, he rewarded him with five thousand yakitori, and also rewarded him with a portable palace, which he used as a summer residence.

古文：其夫人贺拔氏寝疾，中使顾问，络绎不绝。
现代文：他的夫人贺拔氏卧病，皇上派人问候，路上的人络绎不绝。
English: His wife, He Bashi, was ill in bed. The emperor sent greetings, and people on the road were incessant.

古文：上亲幸其第，赐钱百万，绢万匹，复赐以千里马。
现代文：皇上还亲自到他府第去，赏他钱币百万，布帛万匹，又赏他千里马。
English: The emperor also personally went to his residence to reward him with a million coins, ten thousand pieces of cloth, and a thousand horses.

古文：上尝从容命颎与贺若弼言及平陈事，颎曰： 贺若弼先献十策，后于蒋山苦战破贼。
现代文：皇上闲聊时曾让高颎和贺若弼谈平定陈国之事，高颎说： 贺若弼先献十策，后在蒋山苦战破敌。
English: When the emperor was chatting, he asked Gao Qi and He Ruoqi to talk about the matter of pacifying Chen Province. Gao Qi said: He Ruoqi first proposed ten measures, and then defeated the enemy in Mount Jiangshan.

古文：臣文吏耳，焉敢与大将军论功！ 
现代文：我只是个文官罢了，怎敢和大将军论功？ 
English: I'm just a civil servant, how dare I criticize the great general?

古文：帝大笑，时论嘉其有让。
现代文：皇上大笑，当时的舆论夸奖他能谦让。
English: Emperor Wen laughed loudly and praised Gao Qi for his modesty.

古文：寻以其子表仁取太子勇女，前后赏赐不可胜计。
现代文：不久，因为他的儿子娶了皇太子杨勇的女儿，前后的赏赐不可胜计。
English: Soon, because his son married the daughter of Crown Prince Yang Yong, the rewards were incalculable.

古文：时荧惑入太微，犯左执法。
现代文：那时，荧星侵入太微星座，进犯左执法星。
English: At that time, there was a fluorescent planet entering the Taibo fence, violating the left-hand law enforcement.

古文：术者刘晖私言于颎曰： 天文不利宰相，可修德以禳之。 
现代文：术士刘晖私下对高颎说： 天象对宰相不利，你可修德以除灾祸。 
English: The sorcerer Liu Wei said to Gao Wei in private: The celestial phenomenon is unfavorable to the prime minister, you can cultivate virtue to remove the disaster.

古文：颎不自安，以晖言奏之。
现代文：高颎听了，心中不安，将刘晖的话奏明皇上。
English: Gao Gan, alarmed and uneasy, played Liu Ye's words to Emperor Wen.

古文：上厚加赏慰。
现代文：皇上好好地安慰他，赏赐他。
English: Emperor Wen gave him a generous reward.

古文：突厥犯塞，以颎为元帅，击贼破之。
现代文：突厥进犯边塞，让高颎为元帅，率兵破贼。
English: The Turks invaded the border fortress, made Gao Jun the marshal, and led the soldiers to break the bandits.

古文：又出白道，进图入碛，遣使请兵。
现代文：又出兵白道，进而想取沙漠地带，派人回京请求增兵。
English: He also sent troops to Baidoa, and then wanted to take the desert area, and sent someone back to Beijing to request more troops.

古文：近臣缘此言颎欲反，上未有所答，颎亦破贼而还。
现代文：近臣因此说高颎想造反，皇上没答应他增兵，高颎也破贼而还。
English: A close retainer therefore said that Gao Kun wanted to rebel, but the emperor did not allow him to increase the number of soldiers. Gao Kun also defeated the bandits and fought back.

古文：时太子勇失爱于上，潜有废立之意。
现代文：当时皇太子杨勇失爱于皇上，皇上私下里有废太子之意。
English: At that time, the crown prince Yang Yong fell out of love with the emperor, and the emperor privately had the intention of abolishing the crown prince.

古文：谓颎曰： 晋王妃有神凭之，言王必有天下，若之何？ 
现代文：皇上对高颎说： 晋王妃有神灵附身，说晋王必有天下。你说怎么办？ 
English: The emperor said to Gao Yao: Jin Wangfei is possessed by a god, and it is said that Jin Wang must rule the world. What do you say?

古文：颎长跪曰： 长幼有序，其可废乎！ 
现代文：高颎长跪不起，说： 长幼有序，怎能废太子呢？ 
English: Gao Chang could not kneel down and replied, "The eldest and the youngest are in order, how can the dethronement be too much?

古文：上默然而止，独孤皇后知颎不可夺，阴欲去之，夫人卒，后言于上曰： 高仆射老矣，而丧夫人，陛下何能不为之娶！ 
现代文：皇上默然而止。独孤皇后知道高颎志不可夺，想偷偷地除掉他。当初，高颎夫人去世，皇后对皇上说： 高仆射老了，而丧夫人，陛下怎能不为他娶妻？ 
English: The emperor remained silent. The lonely empress knew that Gao Xizhi was invincible, and secretly wanted to get rid of him. At first, when Gao Xizhi's wife died, the empress said to the emperor: Gao Xizhi is old, and his wife is dead, how can His Majesty not marry him?

古文：上以后言谓颎，颎流涕谢曰： 臣今已老，退朝之后，唯斋居读佛经而已。
现代文：皇上将皇后的话告诉高颎，高颎流泪说： 我现在已经老了，退朝之后，惟有吃斋念佛而已。
English: The emperor relayed the queen's words to Gao Gan. Gao Gan shed tears and said, "I am old now. After I retired from the imperial court, all I can do is eat, fast, and pray to Buddha."

古文：虽陛下垂哀之深，至于纳室，非臣所愿。 
现代文：虽然陛下垂爱很深，甚至想帮我纳妻，但这不是我的意愿。 
English: Although His Majesty is very fond of me and even wants to help me marry, it is not my wish.

古文：上乃止。
现代文：皇上于是作罢。
English: The Emperor finally stopped.

古文：至是，颎爱妾产男，上闻之极欢，后甚不悦。
现代文：到这时，高颎的爱妾生了个男孩，皇上听说后十分高兴，皇后却不高兴。
English: By this time, Gao Yao's beloved concubine had given birth to a boy. The emperor was very happy to hear this, but the queen was not happy.

古文：上问其故，后曰： 陛下当复信高颎邪？
现代文：皇上问缘故，皇后说： 陛下还应该信任高颎吗？
English: When the Emperor asked why, the Empress said, "Should Your Majesty still trust Gao Yao?"

古文：始陛下欲为颎娶，颎心存爱妾，面欺陛下。
现代文：开始，陛下想为高颎娶妻，高颎心存爱妾，当面欺骗陛下。
English: At first, His Majesty wanted to marry a wife for Gao Yao, but Gao Yao kept his mistress in his heart and deceived His Majesty to his face.

古文：今其诈已见，陛下安得信之！ 
现代文：现在他的欺诈已显现，陛下怎能再信任他？ 
English: Now that his deceit has been exposed, how can His Majesty ever trust him again?

古文：上由是疏颎。
现代文：皇上因此疏远了高颎。
English: As a result, Emperor Wen began to distance himself from Gao.

古文：会议伐辽东，颎固谏不可。
现代文：适逢朝中商议讨伐辽东，高颎固谏不可。
English: When it was time to discuss the conquest of Liaodong, Gao Gan resolutely dissuaded him.

古文：上不从，以颎为元帅长史，从汉王征辽东，遇霖潦疾疫，不利而还。
现代文：皇上不从，任高颎为元帅长史，随汉王征讨辽东，遇上久雨疾病，不利而还。
English: The emperor did not comply, and Gao Jian was appointed marshal for a long time. He followed the Han king to conquer Liaodong. He encountered chronic rain disease, but was unfavorably treated.

古文：后言于上曰： 颎初不欲行，陛下强遣之，妾固知其无功矣。 
现代文：皇后对皇上说： 高颎当初并不想去，陛下强迫他去，我就知道他会无功而还的。 
English: The empress said to the emperor: "At first, Gao Yao didn't want to go, but your majesty forced him to go. I knew he would return without any results.

古文：又上以汉王年少，专委军于颎。
现代文：又，皇上因汉王年少，把军权全部交给高颎。
English: In addition, the emperor, due to the young age of the Han king, handed over all military power to Gao Jun.

古文：颎以任寄隆重，每怀至公，无自疑之意。
现代文：高颎因皇上寄托很大，心中每每挂念国事，无自疑避嫌之意。
English: Because the emperor had placed a great deal of trust in Takahata, he was always concerned about the affairs of state in his heart, without any self-doubt or aversion.

古文：谅所言多不用，甚衔之。
现代文：汉王杨谅的话，他大多不采用，因此汉王很恨他。
English: The Han King Yang Peng did not accept most of his words, so the Han King hated him very much.

古文：及还，谅泣言于后曰： 兒幸免高颎所杀。 
现代文：还京后，杨谅哭诉于皇后说： 儿有幸没被高颎所杀。 
English: After returning to Beijing, Yang Peng cried to the empress and said, "My son was lucky not to be killed by the stilt.

古文：上闻之，弥不平。
现代文：皇上听了，心中更加不平。
English: When Emperor Wen learned of this, he became more and more indignant.

古文：俄而上柱国王世积以罪诛，当推核之际，乃有宫禁中事，云于颎处得之。
现代文：不久，上柱国王世积因罪被杀，在推问他的时候，说到宫禁中的事，说是从高颎那里听到的。
English: Soon after, the king of Shangzhu, Shizhen, was killed for his crime. When he was interrogated, he mentioned the matter of the palace ban and said that he had heard about it from Gao Yao.

古文：上欲成颎之罪，闻此大惊。
现代文：皇上想定高颎的罪，听后大惊。
English: The emperor was shocked to hear of Gao Yao's supposed crime.

古文：时上柱国贺若弼、吴州总管宇文弥、刑部尚书薛胄、民部尚书斛律孝卿、兵部尚书柳述等明颎无罪，上逾怒，皆以之属吏。自是朝臣莫敢言者。
现代文：当时上柱国贺若弼、吴州总管宇文弼、刑部尚书薛胃、民部尚书斛律孝卿、兵部尚书柳述等人，都证明高颎无罪。皇上更气愤，因为他们都是高颎的老部下。
English: At that time, Shangzhu Province's Hera Ruoqi, Wuzhou's Governor-in-Chief Uwen Yao, Criminal Investigation Department's Shangshu Xue Gastro, People's Investigation Department's Shangshu Yao Rutong Xiaoqing, Military Investigation Department's Shangshu Liu Su and others all proved Gao Yao's innocence. The emperor was even more angry, because they were all Gao Yao's old subordinates.

古文：颎竟坐免，以公就第。
现代文：从此以后，朝中大臣没谁敢开口。
English: Gao Yao was finally relieved of his post, retaining his title.

古文：未几，上幸秦王俊第，召颎侍宴。
现代文：高颎竟然连坐被免官，仅以公爵身份回到自己的府第。不久，皇上到秦王杨俊府第，召高颎侍宴。
English: Soon after, Emperor Sui Wen drove to Qin King Yang Jun's capital and summoned Gao to accompany him at a banquet.

古文：颎歔欷悲不自胜，独狐皇后亦对之泣，左右皆流涕。
现代文：高颎眼泪汪汪悲不自胜，独孤皇后也和他相对而泣，左右都流泪。
English: Gao Yao shed tears and was inconsolable. The lonely empress also wept in front of him, shedding tears on both sides.

古文：上谓颎曰： 朕不负公，公自负也。 
现代文：皇上对高颎说： 我没对不起你，是你自己对不起自己。 
English: Emperor Wen said to Gao, "I can't live up to you, this is your own doing.

古文：因谓侍臣曰： 我于高颎胜兒子，虽或不见，常似目前。
现代文：皇上对侍臣们说： 我对高颎胜过对我的儿子，虽然有时看不到他，但他好像就在我眼前一样。
English: So he said to his aide-de-camp: "I regard Gao Yao Sheng as my son. Although I sometimes don't see him, I often see him before my eyes."

古文：自其解落，瞑然忘之，如本无高颎。
现代文：自从他离职以后，我一点都不记得他，好像本来就没有高颎一样。
English: Ever since he was dismissed, he was forgotten in the blink of an eye, as if he never existed.

古文：不可以身要君，自云第一也。 
现代文：不能拿自己要挟君王，自称天下第一呀！ 
English: You cannot use yourself to blackmail the sovereign and claim to be the best in the world.

古文：顷之，颎国令上颎阴事，称： 其子表仁谓颎曰： 司马仲达初托疾不朝，遂有天下。
现代文：后来，高颎封国的国令上告高颎私下做的一些事，说： 他的儿子高表仁对他说： 司马仲达当初托病不朝，于是拥有天下。
English: Later, Gao Yu's son Gao Biao Ren told Gao Yu about some of the things Gao Yu had done in private, saying: His son Gao Biao Ren said to him: Sima Zhongda had feigned illness at the beginning, so he owned the world.

古文：公今遇此，焉知非福！  
现代文：您今天也遇到类似情况，怎知不是福份？  
English: You are also experiencing this now, so how do you know that this is not a sign of a prosperous future?

古文：于是上大怒，囚颎于内史省而鞫之。
现代文：于是皇上大怒，把高颎囚禁在内史省拷问他。
English: The Sui Emperor was extremely angry and ordered Gao to be imprisoned in the Ministry of Internal Affairs for interrogation.

古文：宪司复奏颎他事，云： 沙门真觉尝谓颎云： 明年国有大丧。 
现代文：司法部门又上奏高颎别的事，说： 沙门真觉曾对高颎说： 明年国家将有大丧。 
English: The judicial department also brought up another matter of Gao Wei, saying: Shamen Zhengyue once said to Gao Wei: Next year, the country will have a great loss.

古文：尼令晖复云： 十七、十八年，皇帝有大厄。十九年不可过。 
现代文：尼姑令晖又说： 开皇十七、八年，皇帝有大灾难，十九年不可能活过去。  
English: The nun also said, "In the seventeenth and eighth years of the emperor's reign, there was a great disaster. It is impossible for the emperor to live past the nineteenth year.

古文：上闻而益怒，顾谓群臣曰： 帝王岂可力求！
现代文：皇上听了，更加震怒，回头对群臣们说： 帝王之位，岂可力求？
English: After learning this, Emperor Wen became even more furious and said to the hundreds of officials and courtiers: "Is Emperor Zou something that can be strived for?

古文：孔子以大圣之才，作法垂世，宁不欲大位邪？
现代文：孔子以大圣之才，作法传世，难道他不想当帝王吗？
English: Confucius passed down his wisdom and wisdom to the next generation. Didn't he want to be emperor?

古文：天命不可耳。
现代文：天命不可罢了。
English: Manifest destiny does not allow it.

古文：颎与子言，自比晋帝，此何心乎？ 
现代文：高颎和他儿子交谈，自比晋武帝，这是什么心思呢？ 
English: Gao Jun and his son said those words, comparing themselves to Emperor Jin, what kind of premeditation is that!

古文：有司请斩颎。
现代文：有关部门请求杀高颎。
English: The relevant departments requested to kill Gao Yao.

古文：上曰： 去年杀虞庆则，今兹斩王世积，如更诛颎，天下其谓我何？ 
现代文：皇上说： 去年杀虞庆则，现在又杀王世积，如再杀高颎，天下人会怎么说我？ 
English: The emperor said, "Last year I killed Yu Qing Zi, and now I am killing Wang Shizhe. If I kill Gao Yao again, what will the world say about me?"

古文：于是除名为民。
现代文：于是除掉高颎的官籍，让他作平民。
English: So he abolished his title and became a commoner.

古文：颎初为仆射，其母诫之曰： 汝富贵已极，但有一斫头耳，尔宜慎之！ 
现代文：高颎刚作仆射时，他的母亲告诫他说： 你富贵已到极点，只有一个东西没有，那就是杀头。
English: When Gao Yao was just beginning to shoot, his mother admonished him: "You are rich to the extreme, there is only one thing you don't have, and that is to kill.

古文：颎由是常恐祸变。
现代文：你应该小心呀！ 高颎从此常怕祸乱。
English: As a result, Gao Gan often fears a calamity.

古文：及此，颎欢然无恨色，以为得免于祸。
现代文：到现在，高颎高高兴兴，一点遗憾都没有，认为这样子可以免除灾祸。
English: Up to now, Gao Gan is very happy and has no regrets at all, believing that this way he can be exempted from the disaster.

古文：炀帝即位，拜为太常。
现代文：隋炀帝即位后，拜授高颎为太常。
English: After the Sui Dynasty ascended to the throne, it was customary to pay homage to Emperor Gaozong.

古文：时诏收周、齐故乐人及天下散乐。
现代文：当时下诏收集北周、北齐的乐工和天下的散乐。
English: At that time, it was decreed to collect the music of Northern Zhou and Northern Qi and the world's folk music.

古文：颎奏曰： 此乐久废。今或征之，恐无识之徒弃本逐末，递相教习。 
现代文：高颎上奏说： 此乐久废，今若征之，恐怕无识之徒舍本逐末，转相教习。 
English: "This music has been abandoned for a long time, and if it were to be introduced now, I'm afraid ignorant students would abandon it one by one and learn it in a different way," Gao Yao, the first violinist, said.

古文：帝不悦。
现代文：炀帝不高兴。
English: Gao Di was not happy to hear this.

古文：帝时侈靡，声色滋甚，又起长城之役。
现代文：炀帝那时十分奢侈靡费，声色更加讲究，又发起修筑长城的劳役。
English: At this time, Emperor Qian began to build the Great Wall.

古文：颎甚病之，谓太常丞李懿曰： 周天元以好乐而亡，殷鉴不遥，安可复尔！ 
现代文：高颎十分担忧，对太常丞李懿说： 周朝因好乐而灭亡，殷鉴不远，怎能又这样呢？ 
English: Gao Yao was very worried, and said to Taizhenzheng Lijun: "The Zhou Dynasty perished because of its love of pleasure. Yin Jian is not far away. How can this be?

古文：时帝遇启民可汗恩礼过厚，颎谓太府卿何稠曰： 此虏颇知中国虚实、山川险易，恐为后患。 
现代文：当时炀帝对启民可汗恩宠和礼遇太过分，高颎对太府卿何稠说： 这个胡人颇知中原虚实、山川险易，恐怕他成为后世的祸患。 
English: At that time, Emperor Qian's grace and courtesy to the Khan of the Qin people was too much. Gao Zheng said to the Grand Duke He Chouzhu: This Hu person knows the Central Plains well and the mountains and rivers well. I am afraid that he will become the scourge of future generations.

古文：复谓观王雄曰： 近来朝廷殊无纲纪。 
现代文：他又对观王杨雄说： 近来朝廷一点纲纪都没有。 
English: He also said to Guan Wang Yangxiong, "Recently, the imperial court has been particularly lacking in legal discipline.

古文：有人奏之，帝以为谤讪朝政，于是下诏诛之，诸子徙边。
现代文：有人告状，炀帝认为他诽谤朝政，于是下诏杀了他，儿子们都迁徙到边疆。
English: Someone filed a complaint, Emperor Xuan believed that he slandered the imperial government, so he killed him, and his sons all migrated to the frontier.

古文：颎有文武大略，明达世务。
现代文：高颎有文韬武略，通晓世务。
English: Gao Yao is literate and tactful, and is well-versed in world affairs.

古文：及蒙任寄之后，竭诚尽节，进引贞良，以天下为己任。
现代文：承受朝廷重任之后，竭诚尽节，引荐忠臣良士，以天下为己任。
English: After taking on the heavy responsibilities of the imperial court, he did his best to introduce loyal subjects and nobles, taking the world as his responsibility.

古文：苏威、杨素、贺若弼、韩擒等，皆颎所推荐，各尽其用，为一代名臣。
现代文：苏威、杨素、贺若弼、韩擒虎等人，都是高颎推荐的，他们各尽其才，成为一代名臣。
English: Su Wei, Yang Su, He Ruoqi, Han Xinghu and others were all recommended by Gao Qi. They each did their best to become a generation of eminent ministers.

古文：自余立功立事者，不可胜数。
现代文：其他立功、立事的，不可胜数。
English: There are countless others who have made outstanding contributions.

古文：当朝执政将二十年，朝野推服，物无异议。
现代文：他当朝执政近二十年，朝野推服，人无异议。
English: He has been in power for nearly twenty years, and has been supported by both the Emperor and the people without any objections.

古文：次弘德，封应国公，晋王府记室。
现代文：天下升平，这是高颎的功劳。论者认为他是真宰相。
English: The world has been leveled, and this is the merit of Gao Wei. Critics believe that he is the true prime minister.

古文：次表仁，封渤海郡公，徙蜀郡。
现代文：他被杀后，天下没有不伤感叹惜的，到现在人们仍在称冤不已。
English: After he was killed, there was nothing but sadness and regret in the world, and even now people are still complaining.

古文：○苏威子夔苏威，字无畏，京兆武功人也。
现代文：所有奇策密谋以及对时政的损益，都是高颎所定，世人没有知道内情的。
English: All the stratagems and conspiracies, as well as the gains and losses of the current government, were determined by Gao Wei, and the world did not know the inside story.

古文：父绰，魏度支尚书。
现代文：○苏威苏威字无畏，京兆武功人。父亲苏绰，西魏度支尚书。
English: ○ Suwei Suwei, nicknamed "Fearless," was a martial arts hero in Beijing. His father, Su Qiao, was a scholar in the Western Wei Dynasty.

古文：威少有至性，五岁丧父，哀毁有若成人。
现代文：苏威小时即有好品行，五岁丧父，悲哀有如大人。
English: Su Wei had a good character when he was a child. When he lost his father at the age of five, he was as sad as an adult.

古文：周太祖时，袭爵美阳县公，仕郡功曹。
现代文：北周太祖时，继承美阳县公的爵位，任郡功曹。
English: When he was the great-grandfather of the Northern Zhou Dynasty, he inherited the public title of Meiyang County and served as the county's meritorious person.

古文：大冢宰宇文护见而礼之，以其女新兴主妻焉。
现代文：大冢宰宇文护见了他，对他很礼遇，把自己的女儿新兴主嫁给他。
English: The Grand Empress Dowager Uwen met him, treated him with great courtesy, and married her daughter Xinxing Shuxing to him.

古文：见护专权，恐祸及己，逃入山中，为叔父所逼，卒不获免。
现代文：他见宇文护专权，恐怕灾祸连累自己，逃到深山中，被叔父逼迫，最后不能免于为官。
English: He saw the exclusive power of Yuwenguo, and feared that the disaster would drag him down with it. He fled to the mountains, was persecuted by his uncle, and finally could not avoid becoming an official.

古文：然威每屏居山寺，以讽读为娱。
现代文：但苏威每每居住山寺，以读书为乐。
English: But Su Wei lives in a mountain temple and enjoys reading.

古文：未几，授使持节、车骑大将军、仪同三司，改封怀道县公。
现代文：不久，授为持节使者、车骑大将军、仪同三司，改封爵位为怀道县公。
English: Soon after, he was awarded the title of Festival Messenger, General of Chariot and Cavalry, and Third Secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies, and his title was changed to Prince of Huai Dao County.

古文：武帝亲总万机，拜稍伯下大夫。
现代文：周武帝亲总万机，拜授苏威为稍伯下大夫。
English: However, he still often lived in a temple in the mountains, with reading being his greatest pleasure. Emperor Wu was personally in charge of the government and appointed him as a slightly junior doctor.

古文：前后所授，并辞疾不拜。
现代文：前后所授官爵，他都称疾不受。
English: He could not be dismissed from any of the posts he was given on the grounds that he was ill.

古文：有从父妹者，适河南元雄。
现代文：有一个堂妹，嫁给河北的元雄。
English: I have a cousin who is married to Geng Xiong from Hebei Province.

古文：雄先与突厥有隙，突厥入朝，请雄及其妻子，将甘心焉。
现代文：元雄早先与突厥人有仇。突厥入朝，请元雄和他的妻儿到突厥去，将要吃他们的心肝。
English: Early on, Motohiro had a feud with the Turks. When the Turks came to the court, he invited Motohiro and his wife and children to go to Turkey, where they would eat their hearts out.

古文：周遂遣之。
现代文：北周于是派元雄去突厥。
English: Therefore, the Northern Zhou Dynasty sent Yuan Xiong to Turkey.

古文：威曰： 夷人昧利，可以赂动。 
现代文：苏威说： 夷人爱财，可以行贿使其改变主意。 
English: Su Wei said: If the barbarians love money, they can bribe them to change their minds.

古文：遂标卖田宅，罄家所有以赎雄，论者义之。
现代文：于是标价变卖田产房屋，用尽家财以赎元雄，论者以此为义举。
English: As a result, the homestead houses were sold at a marked price, and the family's wealth was used up to ransom Motoharu, which was seen as a righteous deed by the commentators.

古文：宣帝嗣位，就拜开府。
现代文：周宣帝继位，拜授他为开府。
English: Northern Zhou then gave the Shixiong couple to the Turks.

古文：高祖为丞相，高颎屡言其贤，高祖亦素重其名，召之。
现代文：隋高祖为北周丞相时，高颎屡屡说苏威贤明，高祖也向重其名，召他入府。
English: When Sui Gaozu was the minister of the Northern Zhou Dynasty, Gaozhu repeatedly said that Su Wei was wise, and Gaozu also respected his name and invited him to the government.

古文：及至，引入卧内，与语大悦。
现代文：苏威到相府后，高祖把他引到卧室内，与他交谈，十分高兴。
English: After Su Wei arrived at the prime minister's residence, Gao Zu led him into the bedroom and talked with him. He was very happy.

古文：居月余，威闻禅代之议，遁归田里。
现代文：过了一个多月，苏威听说北周禅位之事，逃归田里。
English: After living there for more than a month, he heard that Yang Jian was going to accept Northern Zhou's offer of Zen, so he fled back to the countryside.

古文：高颎请追之，高祖曰： 此不欲预吾事，且置之。 
现代文：高颎请求追他回来，高祖说： 这是不想参与我的大事，姑且让他去吧。 
English: Gao Yao asked Gao Zu to chase him back. Gao Zu said, "This is because he doesn't want to participate in my big event. Let him go."

古文：及受禅，征拜太子少保。追赠其父为邳国公，邑三千户，以威袭焉。
现代文：高祖受周禅之后，征拜苏威为太子少保，追赠他的父亲为邳国公，食邑三千户，让苏威承袭。
English: After Gao Zu received Zhou Zhen, he recruited Su Wei as the prince's minor protector, posthumously presented his father as the prince of Shandong Province, and fed three thousand households, so that Su Wei would inherit.

古文：俄兼纳言、民部尚书。
现代文：不久又让他兼任纳言、民部尚书。
English: Soon after, he was also appointed as Nagon (councilor of state) and Minbu Shoshu (Minister of the People).

古文：威上表陈让，诏曰： 舟大者任重，马骏者远驰。以公有兼人之才，无辞多务也。 
现代文：苏威上表辞让，高祖下诏说： 船大装得多，马快跑得远，你有大才，请别推辞多做事。 
English: Su Wei made a formal resignation, and Gao Zu made a formal resignation, saying: The ship is much larger, the horse runs far faster, you have great talent, please do not refuse to do more things.

古文：威乃止。
现代文：苏威才不推辞。
English: Su Wei did not refuse.

古文：初，威父在西魏，以国用不足，为征税之法，颇称为重。
现代文：当初，苏威的父亲在西魏，因为国家用度不足，制定征税之法，颇为世人称道尊重。
English: At the beginning, Su Wei's father in the Western Wei Dynasty, because of insufficient state expenditure, formulated a taxation law, which was quite respected by the world.

古文：既而叹曰： 今所为者，正如张弓，非平世法也。
现代文：不久他又感叹说： 现在所做的事，就像拉弓一样，不是平等的办法。
English: He soon lamented: "What is being done now, like drawing a bow, is not a level playing field.

古文：后之君子，谁能弛乎？ 
现代文：后代的君子，谁能放松对世人的征调呢？ 
English: Future generations of gentlemen, who will be able to relax their demands on the world?

古文：威闻其言，每以为己任。
现代文：苏威听到这话，常常以为己任。
English: When Su Wei heard this, he often took it as his responsibility to reduce taxes.

古文：至是，奏减赋役，务从轻典，上悉从之。
现代文：到这时，苏威上奏，请减赋税，务必要轻赋薄税，皇上全部依从。
English: At this time, Su Wei played the trumpet, please reduce the tax, be sure to lightly tax, and the emperor fully complied.

古文：渐见亲重，与高颎参掌朝政。
现代文：苏威逐渐被皇上亲近看重，与高颎参与执掌朝政。
English: He was gradually close to and used by Emperor Sui Wen, and together with Gao Pi, he was in charge of the imperial government.

古文：威见宫中以银为幔钩，因盛陈节俭之美以谕上。上为之改容，雕饰旧物，悉命除毁。
现代文：苏威见皇宫中用银子作蚊帐钩，因而陈述节俭之美以劝告皇上，皇上为之动容，装饰性的东西，下令全部除掉销毁。
English: Su Wei saw that the royal palace used silver to make mosquito net hooks, so he stated the beauty of frugality to advise the emperor. The emperor was moved by it and ordered all decorative things to be removed and destroyed.

古文：上尝怒一人，将杀之，威入閤进谏，不纳。
现代文：皇上曾愤恨一个人，将要杀他，苏威上殿劝告，皇上不采纳。
English: The emperor once resented a man and was going to kill him. Su Wei went to court to advise the emperor, but the emperor did not accept.

古文：上怒甚，将自出斩之，威当上前不去。
现代文：皇上气极了，将要自己出来杀那个人，苏威当面阻拦，不让出殿。
English: The emperor was so angry that he was going to kill the man himself, but Su Wei stopped him in person and would not let him leave the palace.

古文：上避之而出，威又遮止。上拂衣而入。
现代文：皇上躲过苏威而出殿，苏威又挡住他，皇上只得拂衣而回去。
English: The emperor dodged Su Wei and went out of the palace, Su Wei blocked him again, and the emperor had to whip his clothes and go back.

古文：良久，乃召威谢曰： 公能若是，吾无忧矣。 
现代文：过了很久，才召苏威入殿，向他道歉说： 你能这样，我没什么担忧的了。 
English: After a long time, he summoned Su Wei and thanked him, saying, "If you can boldly resist like this, I won't have any worries in the future."

古文：于是赐马二匹，钱十余万。
现代文：于是赏马二匹，钱十几万。
English: As a result, two horses were rewarded with more than a hundred thousand dollars.

古文：寻复兼大理卿、京兆尹、御史大夫，本官悉如故。
现代文：不久苏威又兼任大理卿、京兆尹、御史大夫，原本任职一如既往。
English: Soon after, Su Wei was also appointed as the Lord of Dali Temple, Jing Zhaoyun, and the Grand Historian, but his original official position remained unchanged.

古文：治书侍御史梁毗以威领五职，安繁恋剧，无举贤自代之心，抗表劾威。
现代文：治书侍御史梁毗因苏威兼任五职，却甘心做繁杂的工作，没有推举贤士代替自己的意思，拟上表弹劾苏威。
English: The chief secretary, Shi Liangbei, who held five posts concurrently with Su Wei, was willing to do complicated work, and did not want to nominate a wise man to replace him, and planned to impeach Su Wei.

古文：上曰： 苏威朝夕孜孜，志存远大，举贤有阙，何遽迫之！ 
现代文：皇上说： 苏威朝夕孜孜以求，志向远大，尚缺举贤，何必急急忙忙逼他呢？ 
English: The emperor said, "Su Wei diligently pursues excellence day and night. He has lofty aspirations, but lacks the ability to promote talent. Why should we rush to force him?

古文：顾谓威曰： 用之则行，舍之则藏，唯我与尔有是夫！ 
现代文：回头对苏威说： 被任用就干，不被任用就算了，只有我和你才有这一特点吧。 
English: He also said to Su Wei: "If you are appointed, you should carry out your own ideas. If you are not appointed, you should withdraw and live in seclusion. Only I and you can do this!"

古文：因谓朝臣曰： 苏威不值我，无以措其言；我不得苏威，何以行其道？
现代文：皇上就着对满朝大臣们说： 苏威不遇上我，没法说出他想说的话；我得不到苏威，怎么能推行我的政策？
English: The emperor said to the ministers of the Manchu court: If Su Wei does not meet me, he cannot say what he wants to say; if I do not meet Su Wei, how can I carry out my policy?

古文：杨素才辩无双，至若斟酌古今，助我宣化，非威之匹也。
现代文：杨素才干无双，但至于斟酌古今，帮我推行教化，就不能与苏威相比了。
English: Yang Su's talent is unparalleled, but as far as helping me to carry out indoctrination, considering the past and the present, it cannot be compared with Su Wei.

古文：苏威若逢乱世，南山四皓，岂易屈哉！ 
现代文：苏威若遭遇乱世，终南山上的四皓，难道很容易使他理屈吗？ 
English: If Su Wei were to encounter a chaotic world and end up on the four ridges of the South Mountain, would it be easy to reason with him?

古文：其见重如此。
现代文：苏威就是这样被看重。
English: That's how much he values Kouhiko-chō.

古文：未几，拜刑部尚书，解少保、御史大夫之官。
现代文：不久，苏威拜受刑部尚书，解除少保、御史大夫之职。
English: Soon after, Suwei Bai received a letter from the Department of Corrections, relieving him of his duties as a junior security guard and doctor of history.

古文：后京兆尹废，检校雍州别驾。
现代文：后来废置京兆尹，他又检校雍州别驾。
English: At this time, he and Gao Jun made a concerted effort to sponsor the imperial government, and made plans for all matters large and small.

古文：时高颎与威同心协赞，政刑大小，无不筹之，故革运数年，天下称治。
现代文：当时高颎与苏威同心协力，政刑大小，二人无不筹划，所以革新几年，天下大治。
English: At that time, Gao Rong and Su Wei made concerted efforts, the size of the political punishment, the two were planning, so innovation for several years, the world is great.

古文：俄转民部尚书，纳言如故。
现代文：不久他又转任民部尚书，依旧任纳言。
English: Soon after, he was transferred to the Ministry of People's Affairs, where he continued to serve as an adviser.

古文：属山东诸州民饥，上令威赈恤之。
现代文：刚好华山以东各州百姓饥荒，皇上令苏威赈济他们。
English: Just as the people in the provinces east of the Huashan Mountains were starving, the emperor ordered Su Wei to help them.

古文：后二载，迁吏部尚书。
现代文：后两年，苏威转任吏部尚书。
English: In the last two years, Su Wei was transferred to Shang Shu of the Personnel Department.

古文：岁余，兼领国子祭酒。
现代文：又过了一年多，他兼任国事祭酒。
English: More than a year later, he also served as the chief sake brewer for the National Day Festival.

古文：隋承战争之后，宪章踳驳，上令朝臣厘改旧法，为一代通典。
现代文：隋朝承袭长期战争的局面，法制崩坏，皇上令大臣们修改旧法，成为一代通行的法典。
English: Sui Dynasty inherited the situation of long-term war, the legal system collapsed, the emperor ordered the ministers to amend the old law, and it became the code of a generation.

古文：律令格式，多威所定，世以为能。
现代文：法典及共行文，多由苏威所定，世人认为他很能干。
English: Most of the legal codes and codified texts were determined by Su Wei, and the world thought he was very capable.

古文：九年，拜尚书右仆射。
现代文：开皇九年，拜受尚书右仆射。
English: In the ninth year of the emperor's reign, he was given the title of Shangshu Rongfei.

古文：其年，以母忧去职，柴毁骨立。
现代文：这年，因遭母丧而离职，悲伤过度，他骨瘦如柴。
English: In this year, due to the death of his mother, he left office, mourned and grieved, and the imperial court continued to issue an edict of consolation.

古文：上敕威曰： 公德行高人，情寄殊重，大孝之道，盖同俯就。
现代文：皇上告谕苏威说： 你品德高于常人，感情特别深厚，孝顺之道，与俯就凡人差不多。
English: The emperor told Su Wei: Your moral character is higher than that of ordinary people, your feelings are particularly deep, and your filial piety is almost the same as that of ordinary people.

古文：必须抑割，为国惜身。
现代文：你必须节哀，为国家爱惜自己。
English: You must mourn, and love yourself for the sake of the country.

古文：朕之于公，为君为父，宜依朕旨，以礼自存。 
现代文：我对你来说，是君是父，你应按我的旨意，依礼保全自己。 
English: For I have been a father to you, and you shall keep yourself, as I have commanded you.

古文：未几，起令视事，固辞，优诏不许。
现代文：不久，皇上令他复职处理问题，他坚持推辞，皇上也不许可。
English: Soon, the emperor ordered him to resume his duties to deal with the problem. He insisted on resigning, but the emperor did not allow it.

古文：明年，上幸并州，命与高颎同总留事。
现代文：次年，皇上巡幸并州，下令他与高颎一起总理留守京城事。
English: The following year, the emperor went on a tour of the provinces and ordered him to stay in the capital together with the prime minister.

古文：俄追诣行在所，使决民讼。
现代文：不久又派他到并州行宫，让他处理民间诉讼。
English: Soon after, he was sent to the Bozhou Courthouse to deal with civil lawsuits.

古文：威子夔，少有盛名于天下，引致宾客，四海士大夫多归之。
现代文：苏威子苏夔，年少时即有大名于天下，招引门客，天下的名士大多归附于他。
English: Suwei's son, Su Shi, was famous in the world when he was young, attracting customers. Most of the world's celebrities were attached to him.

古文：后议乐事，夔与国子博士何妥各有所持。
现代文：后议音乐之事，苏夔与国子博士何妥各有所据，观点不一。
English: On the subject of music, Su Shi and Dr. Kuniko Ho To have different opinions.

古文：于是夔、妥俱为一议，使百僚署其所同。
现代文：于是苏夔、何妥都提议：让文武百官署名表示他们赞同哪一种意见。
English: So Su Shi and Ho Tuo both proposed: let the military and civilian officials sign to indicate which opinion they agree with.

古文：朝廷多附威，同夔者十八九。
现代文：朝廷大臣大多依附苏威，因此赞同苏夔的占了十之八九。
English: Most of the ministers of the imperial court depended on Su Wei, so the number of those who agreed with Su Shi accounted for 89 out of 10.

古文：妥恚曰： 吾席间函丈四十余年，反为昨暮兒之所屈也！ 
现代文：何妥愤怒，说： 我在案头研究四十几年，反被昨晚才生的一个小儿所屈服！ 
English: He said angrily: I have been lecturing as a teacher for more than forty years, but I have been bowed down by this posterity!

古文：遂奏威与礼部尚书卢恺、吏部侍郎薛道衡、尚书右丞王弘、考功侍郎李同和等共为朋党，省中呼王弘为世子，李同和为叔，言二人如威之子弟也。
现代文：于是奏告苏威与礼部尚书卢恺、吏部侍郎薛道衡、尚书右丞王弘、考功侍郎李同和等人一起结成朋党。禁省中叫王弘为世子，称李同和为小叔，说他们就像是苏威的子弟。
English: Therefore, Su Wei was reported to have formed a crony party with the Rectification Department's Shangshu Lu Wei, the Administration Department's chamberlain Xue Daoheng, the Rectification Department's right-hand man Wang Hong, and the Merit Examination chamberlain Li Tonghe. In the Forbidden City, Wang Hong was called the heir, Li Tonghe was called the little uncle, and they were said to be like Su Wei's children.

古文：威拜谢，上亦止。
现代文：又说苏威搞歪门邪道，让他的堂弟苏彻、苏肃等人混官当。
English: It was also said that Su Wei had engaged in crooked practices and allowed his cousins Su Che and Su Su to become mixed officials.

古文：后上幸仁寿宫，不豫，皇太子自京师来侍疾，诏威留守京师。
现代文：又，国子学请荡阴人王孝逸为书学博士，苏威嘱咐卢恺，任王孝逸为苏府参军。
English: In addition, Kuniko asked Wang Xiaoyi, a wandering Yin person, to become a doctor of calligraphy. Su Wei instructed Lu Xi to appoint Wang Xiaoyi to join the army of Su Prefecture.

古文：炀帝嗣位，加上大将军。
现代文：皇上命蜀王杨秀、上柱国虞庆则等人一起调查处理，诸事皆被证明。
English: The emperor ordered Shu Wang Yangxiu, Shang Zhuan Guoyuqing and others to investigate and deal with it together, and everything was proved to be correct.

古文：及长城之役，威谏止之。
现代文：皇上让苏威读《宋书·苏威留守京师。
English: The emperor asked Su Wei to read "Song Shu, Su Wei Remains in Beijing."

古文：高颎、贺若弼等之诛也，威坐与相连，免官。
现代文：隋炀帝继位后，加封苏威为上大将军。到要兴修长城时，苏威劝告炀帝停止大兴劳役。高颎、贺若弼等被杀，苏威因受株连，被免去官职。
English: After the Sui and Qian dynasties succeeded to the throne, Sui Wei was appointed as the supreme general. When it came to the construction of the Great Wall, Sui Wei advised Emperor Qian to stop the Daxing labor service. Gao Qi and He Ruoqi were killed, and Sui Wei was removed from his official post because he was a member of the Zhuang Company.

古文：岁余，拜鲁郡太守。
现代文：过了一年多，又拜授他为鲁郡太守。
English: After more than a year, he was appointed as the governor of Lu County.

古文：俄召还，参预朝政。
现代文：不久召他还京，参预朝政。
English: He was soon called back to Beijing to take part in pre-imperial politics.

古文：未几，拜太常卿。
现代文：不久，拜授他为太常卿。
English: Soon after, he was given the title of "Grand Marshal."

古文：其年从征吐谷浑，进位左光禄大夫。
现代文：这年随皇上征讨吐谷浑，升任左光禄大夫。
English: In the same year, he was promoted to the position of Sako Roku no daibu following the Emperor's order to recruit Togakunin.

古文：帝以威先朝旧臣，渐加委任。
现代文：炀帝因苏威是前朝旧臣，渐渐加以重用。
English: Emperor Xuanzong was an old vassal of the former imperial court, and gradually he was put to heavy use.

古文：后岁余，复为纳言。
现代文：一年多后，重新任命他为纳言。
English: More than a year later, he was reappointed as prime minister.

古文：与左翊卫大将军宇文述、黄门侍郎裴矩、御史大夫裴蕴、内史侍郎虞世基参掌朝政，时人称为 五贵 。
现代文：他与左翊卫大将军宇文述、黄门侍郎裴矩、御史大夫裴蕴、内史侍郎虞世基参掌朝政，时人称为 五贵 。
English: He was known as Gogui at the time, along with Zuo Jianwei Daishogun (Major General of the Left Division of Inner Palace Guards) Umenshu, Huangmen waiter Pei Rong, Goshi Daifu Pei Ying, and Naishi waiter Yu Shiji, who was in charge of the Imperial Court.

古文：及辽东之役，以本官领左武卫大将军，进位光禄大夫，赐爵宁陵侯。
现代文：到辽东之役时，苏威以本来官职兼任左武卫大将军，升任光禄大夫，赐宁陵侯爵位。
English: At the time of the Liaodong Campaign, Su Wei concurrently served as General Zuo Wuwei in his official capacity, was promoted to Guanglu Doctor, and was given the title of Marquis of Ningling.

古文：其年，进封房公。
现代文：这年，晋封房公爵位。
English: In the same year, he was promoted to the rank of Duke of Fang.

古文：威以年老，上表乞骸骨。
现代文：苏威自因年老，上表请求退休。
English: Su Wei requested to retire from the above table due to old age.

古文：上不许，复以本官参掌选事。
现代文：皇上不许，又让他以本官兼掌选举之事。
English: The emperor did not allow it, and told him to take over the election as his own official.

古文：明年，从征辽东，领右御卫大将军。
现代文：次年，随皇上征讨辽东，任右御卫大将军。
English: Emperor Qian conquered Liaodong, and he was promoted to Guanglu Doctor, given the title of Fangling Marquis, and soon promoted to Fangling Prince.

古文：杨玄感之反也，帝引威帐中，惧见于色，谓威曰： 此小兒聪明，得不为患乎？ 
现代文：杨玄感造反时，炀帝把苏威请到军帐中，面有惧怕之色，对苏威说： 这个小儿很聪明，怎能不成为国家的忧患呢？ 
English: When Yang Xuanxuan rebelled, Emperor Zhou invited Su Wei to the military account, and with a look of fear on his face, said to Su Wei: This kid is very smart, how can he not become a national worry?

古文：威曰： 夫识是非，审成败者，乃所谓聪明。
现代文：苏威说： 那些明辨是非、明断成功的人，才是聪明人。
English: Su Wei said: Those who clearly distinguish right from wrong and clearly succeed are the smart ones.

古文：玄感粗疏，非聪明者，必无所虑。
现代文：杨玄感很粗疏，不是聪明人，肯定没什么可担忧的。
English: Yang Xuanxin is very rough, not a smart person, there is certainly nothing to worry about.

古文：但恐浸成乱阶耳。 
现代文：只是担心出现祸乱的苗头罢了。 
English: They're just worried about the first signs of trouble.

古文：威见劳役不息，百姓思乱，微以此讽帝，帝竟不寤。
现代文：苏威见劳役不息，百姓思乱，略略用这讽劝炀帝，炀帝竟不领悟。
English: Su Wei saw that the labor service was incessant, the people were confused, and he used this irony to persuade Emperor Xuan slightly, but Emperor Xuan did not understand.

古文：从还至涿郡，诏威安抚关中。以威孙尚辇直长儇为副。
现代文：随皇上还京，到涿郡，下诏苏威安抚关中，让苏威的孙子尚辇直长苏儇为副使。
English: Following the emperor back to Beijing, he went to Su County and ordered Su Wei to pacify Guanzhong, and let Su Wei's grandson, Shang Xizhong Su Wei, be the deputy envoy.

古文：其子鸿胪少卿夔，先为关中简黜大使，一家三人，俱奉使关右，三辅荣之。
现代文：他的儿子鸿胪少卿苏夔，先任关中简黜大使，一家三人，都奉命出使关中，关中三辅的人都认为这很荣耀。
English: His son, Hongtao Shaoqing Su Qi, and the first ambassador of Guanzhong, Jian Qi Rong, a family of three, were all ordered to go to Guanzhong, and the people of Guanzhong Sanfu thought it was a great honor.

古文：岁余，帝下手诏曰： 玉以洁润，丹紫莫能渝其质；松表岁寒，霜雪莫能凋其采。
现代文：过了一年多，炀帝亲下手诏说： 玉石因为光洁玉润，丹紫不能超过它的质地；松柏耐寒，霜雪不能凋零它的风采。
English: After more than a year, Emperor Qian personally issued an edict saying: Because jade is polished and smooth, purple cannot exceed its texture; pine and cypress are cold-resistant, and frost and snow cannot wither its style.

古文：可谓温仁劲直，性之然乎！
现代文：可以说温润、仁爱、强劲、正直，这是它们的天性吧。
English: It can be said that they are warm-hearted, benevolent, strong, and honest, which is their nature.

古文：房公威器怀温裕，识量弘雅，早居端揆，备悉国章，先皇旧臣，朝之宿齿。
现代文：房公苏威，生性温裕，见识远大，早居要职，熟悉国法，是先皇帝的旧臣，今朝廷的老臣。
English: Fongong Su Wei, gentle by nature, far-sighted, early in important positions, familiar with the law of the country, is the former emperor's old minister, now the court's old minister.

古文：栋梁社稷，弼谐朕躬，守文奉法，卑身率礼。
现代文：他支柱国家，辅佐于我，守法奉公，卑身守礼。
English: He is the pillar of the country, supports me, abides by the law, serves the public, and keeps a low profile.

古文：昔汉之三杰，辅惠帝者萧何；周之十乱，佐成王者邵奭。
现代文：过去汉朝有三杰，辅佐惠帝的是萧何。周朝有十大治臣，辅佐成王的是邵。
English: Xiao He, Zhang Liang, and Han Xin were the three heroes of the Han Dynasty in the past. Xiao He assisted Hui Di; Xi Zhou had ten famous ministers to govern the chaotic world, and Shao Gong helped Cheng Wang to govern the court.

古文：国之宝器，其在得贤，参燮台阶，具瞻斯允。
现代文：国家的宝贝，在于得到贤人，参预治理国家，成为万众瞻仰的人物，这才是好的。
English: The treasure of the country lies in getting wise men to participate in the governance of the country and become a figure admired by all. This is good.

古文：虽复事藉论道，终期献替，铨衡时务，朝寄为重，可开府仪同三司，余并如故。 
现代文：可让他任开府仪同三司，余职如故。 
English: He can be appointed as the head of the prefectural government and the three departments, and his remaining duties will remain unchanged.

古文：威当时见尊重，朝臣莫与为比。
现代文：苏威当时如此被尊重，大臣没谁可与他相比。
English: Suu Kyi was so respected at the time that no other minister could be compared to him.

古文：后从幸雁门，为突厥所围，朝廷危惮。
现代文：后随炀帝到雁门，被突厥人包围，朝廷危惧。
English: Later, he followed Emperor Gong to the Wild Goose Gate, where he was surrounded by Turks and feared by the imperial court.

古文：帝欲轻骑溃围而出，威谏曰： 城守则我有余力，轻骑则彼之所长。
现代文：皇帝想轻骑突破重围出去，苏威劝告说： 守住城池，是我们的长处；轻骑突进，是敌方的长处。
English: When the emperor wanted to ride lightly to break through the encirclement, Su Wei advised him, "It is our advantage to hold the city; it is the enemy's advantage to ride lightly to break through.

古文：陛下万乘之主，何宜轻脱！ 
现代文：陛下是万乘之主，怎能轻忽？ 
English: Your Majesty is the Lord of Ten Thousand Buddhas and Bodies, how can you neglect this?

古文：帝乃止。
现代文：炀帝才罢。
English: Emperor Wu then gave up.

古文：突厥俄亦解围而去。
现代文：突厥不久也解围而去。
English: The Turks soon broke the siege and left.

古文：车驾至太原，威言于帝曰： 今者盗贼不止，士马疲敝。愿陛下还京师，深根固本，为社稷之计。 
现代文：车驾到太原，苏威对炀帝说： 现在盗贼不止，军队疲劳，愿陛下还京后，打好根基，为国家打算。 
English: After driving to Taiyuan, Su Wei said to Emperor Zou: "Nowadays, there are more and more thieves, and the army is fatigued. After returning to Beijing, may His Majesty lay a good foundation and plan for the country."

古文：帝初然之，竟用宇文述等议，遂往东都。
现代文：炀帝开始还以为然，最后却用宇文述等人的提议，而往东都洛阳去。
English: Emperor Yao thought so at first, but in the end he used the proposal of Yu Wenshu and others to go to the eastern capital Luoyang.

古文：时天下大乱，威知帝不可改，意甚患之。
现代文：当时天下大乱，苏威知道炀帝不可改变，心中很担忧。
English: At that time, the world was in turmoil. Su Wei knew that Emperor Gong could not be changed, and he was very worried.

古文：属帝问侍臣盗贼事，宇文述曰： 盗贼信少，不足为虞。 
现代文：刚好炀帝问侍臣关于盗贼的事，宇文述说： 盗贼的确很少，不足为虑。 
English: Just as Emperor Qian was asking his courtiers about the thieves, Yuwen said, "There are indeed very few thieves, so there is nothing to worry about.

古文：威不能诡对，以身隐于殿柱。
现代文：苏威不能胡说，就隐藏在殿柱背后。
English: Su Wei can't talk nonsense, so he hides behind the pillar.

古文：帝呼威而问之。
现代文：炀帝叫苏威出来，问他。
English: Emperor Zou called Su Wei to come out and asked him.

古文：威对曰： 臣非职司，不知多少，但患其渐近。 
现代文：苏威说： 我不管这事，不知盗贼多少，只担心他们越来越近。 
English: Su Wei said: I don't care about this, I don't know how many thieves there are, I'm just worried that they're getting closer and closer.

古文：帝曰： 何谓也？ 
现代文：炀帝说： 怎么讲？ 
English: Hao Di asked: Why did you say that?

古文：威曰： 他日贼据长白山，今者近在荥阳、汜水。 
现代文：苏威说： 盗贼以前占据长白山，现在近在荥阳、汜水一带。 
English: He replied, "In the past, the bandits occupied Changbai Mountain, but now they are close to Shenyang and Surabaya.

古文：帝不悦而罢。
现代文：炀帝不高兴而罢。
English: Sejong was not happy and gave up.

古文：寻属五月五日，百僚上馈，多以珍玩。
现代文：不久适逢五月初五，百官献礼，多献珍宝奇玩。
English: Soon the fifth day of the fifth month of the fifth month of the fifth month of the fifth month of the fifth month of the fifth month of the fifth month of the fifth month.

古文：威献《尚书》一部，微以讽帝，帝弥不平。
现代文：苏威献上一部《尚书》，旨在劝炀帝，炀帝更加不服气。
English: Su Wei presented a copy of "Shang Shu" to the emperor, aiming to persuade the emperor, who was even more unconvinced.

古文：后复问伐辽东事，威对愿赦群盗，遣讨高丽，帝益怒。
现代文：后来又问他讨伐辽东之事，苏威说，希望能赦免群盗，让他们讨伐高丽。炀帝更加恼怒。
English: Later, when Su Wei asked him about the crusade against Liaodong, he said that he hoped the bandits would be pardoned so that they could fight against Goryeo. Emperor Yao became even more angry.

古文：御史大夫裴蕴希旨，令白衣张行本奏威昔在高阳典选，滥授人官，畏怯突厥，请还京师。
现代文：御史大夫裴蕴明白炀帝心意，让白衣张行本告苏威往日在高阳主持选举时，滥授别人官职，又说他害怕突厥，请求回到京师。
English: The chief historian, Pei Yun, understood the emperor's intention and had Zhang Xingpeng, who was dressed in white, tell Su Wei that when he presided over the election in Gaoyang in the past, he had abused the official position of others. He also said that he was afraid of the Turks and asked to return to Beijing.

古文：帝令案其事。
现代文：炀帝下令调查这些事。
English: Emperor Xuan ordered an investigation into the matter.

古文：及狱成，下诏曰： 威立性朋党，好为异端，怀挟诡道，徼幸名利，诋诃律令，谤讪台省。
现代文：到冤狱可成时，炀帝下诏说： 苏威生性爱结朋党，好为异端，心怀诡道，贪图名利，贬损法令，诽谤台省官员。
English: When the unjust imprisonment could be carried out, Emperor Zhou issued an edict saying: Su Wei Sheng's sexual love and friendship with the party are heretical, his heart is deceitful, he is greedy for fame and profit, he derogates the laws and slanders the officials of Taizhou Province.

古文：昔岁薄伐，奉述先志，凡预切问，各尽胸臆，而威不以开怀，遂无对命。
现代文：往年将要征讨，以完成先皇大业，凡是我问到的人，都各尽心怀，只有苏威不表心意，于是无所回答。
English: In the past years, there was a need to collect money in order to complete the great cause of the first emperor. All the people I asked did their best. Only Su Wei did not show his intention, so there was no answer.

古文：启沃之道，其若是乎！
现代文：辅佐朝廷的作法，难道应该这样吗？
English: Is this the way to assist the imperial court?

古文：资敬之义，何其甚薄！ 
现代文：为皇帝参谋的道义，是何等的差呀！ 
English: How poor is the morality of the emperor's counsellor!

古文：于是除名为民。
现代文：于是除掉他的官职，让他当老百姓。
English: So he abolished his title and became a commoner.

古文：后月余，有人奏威与突厥阴图不轨者，大理簿责威。
现代文：过了一个多月，有人告苏威与突厥人阴谋不轨，大理寺责问苏威。
English: After more than a month, someone accused Su Wei of conspiring with the Turks, and Dali Temple questioned Su Wei.

古文：威自陈奉事二朝三十余载，精诚微浅不能上感，咎衅屡彰，罪当万死。
现代文：苏威自己陈说，他侍奉二朝三十多年，精诚所至，不能感动皇上，罪该万死。
English: Su Wei himself said that he had served the two dynasties for more than thirty years, and could not move the emperor with all his sincerity. The crime deserved death.

古文：帝悯而释之。
现代文：炀帝同情他而放了他。
English: Emperor Xuan took pity on him and released him.

古文：其年从幸江都宫，帝将复用威。裴蕴、虞世基奏言昏耄赢疾。帝乃止。
现代文：这年随炀帝巡江都行宫，炀帝将要重新起用苏威，裴蕴、虞世基上奏说，苏威太老了，炀帝就作罢了。
English: This year, as Emperor Gong toured the capital and went to the palace, Emperor Gong was going to reinstate Su Wei. Pei Yun and Yu Shiji said that Su Wei was too old, and Emperor Gong would not do it.

古文：宇文化及之弑逆也，以威为光禄大夫、开府仪同三司。
现代文：宇文化及叛逆弑君后，命苏威为光禄大夫、开府仪同三司。
English: After U Bunka and the rebellious Shunjun, Su Wei was appointed as the doctor of Guanglu, and Kaifu Yi as the third secretary.

古文：化及败，归于李密。
现代文：宇文化及失败，他投靠李密。
English: Yu culture and failure, he was attached to Li Mi.

古文：未几密败，归东都，越王侗以为上柱国、邳公。
现代文：不久李密失败，他回归东都。越王杨侗任他为上柱国、邳公。
English: Soon after Li Mi's defeat, he returned to Dongdu. King Yang Pi of Yue appointed him as Shangzhuang Guo and Zenggong.

古文：王充僭号，署太师。
现代文：王充称帝，任他为太师。
English: Wang Chong proclaimed him emperor and made him Grand Master.

古文：威自以隋室旧臣，遭逢丧乱，所经之处，皆与时消息，以求容免。
现代文：苏威自因隋朝老臣，遭遇战乱，所经之处，皆随时而处，以求他人容忍。
English: He thought of himself as an old vassal of the Sui Dynasty. He was subjected to turmoil, and the places he went to changed with the changes in the current situation, in order to be pardoned.

古文：及大唐秦王平王充，坐于东都阊阖门内，威请谒见，称老病不能拜起。
现代文：到大唐秦王李世民平定王充，坐在东都阊阖门内，苏威请求拜见，自称年老有病不能下拜。
English: When Li Shimin, King of the Qin Dynasty of the Great Tang Dynasty, came to settle Wangchong, he was sitting in the East Tudor Gate. Su Wei asked to see him, claiming that he was too old and sick to bow.

古文：王遣人数之曰： 公隋朝宰辅，政乱不能匡救，遂令品物涂炭，君弑国亡。
现代文：秦王派人数落他说： 你是隋朝宰辅，国家大乱你不能匡救，遂使生灵涂炭，君死国亡。
English: The king of Qin sent a number of people to him and said: You are the deputy of the Sui Dynasty, you can't save the country from chaos, so you make the living and the dead suffer, and the country dies.

古文：见李密、王充，皆拜伏舞蹈。
现代文：你见到李密、王充，都要拜倒舞蹈。
English: When you see Li Mi and Wang Chong, they all have to bow down and dance.

古文：今既老病，无劳相见也。 
现代文：如今你既老病，那就不劳相见了吧。 
English: Now that you've been ill for a long time, it's no trouble to see each other.

古文：寻归长安，至朝堂请见，又不许。
现代文：不久他回到长安，到朝廷请求拜见，秦王又不同意。
English: Soon he returned to Chang'an and went to the imperial court to ask for an audience, but the Qin king did not agree.

古文：卒于家。时年八十二。
现代文：苏威在家去世，当时八十二岁。
English: Su Wei died at home at the age of 82.

