古文：蒙山
现代文：蒙山
English: Mengshan

古文：鲁国费县蒙山上有寺废久，民欲架堂者，辄大蛇数十丈长，出来惊人，故莫得安焉。
现代文：鲁国费县的蒙山上有个被废弃很久的寺庙，老百姓想架起庙的大堂进行修建，就有一条几十丈长的大蛇，出来惊吓人，所以就不能修建了。
English: There is a long-abandoned temple on Mengshan in Luguofei County. When the common people wanted to erect the main hall of the temple for construction, there was a large snake several tens of meters long that came out to frighten people, so it could not be built.

古文：秦瞻
现代文：秦瞻
English: Qin Zhan

古文：秦瞻居曲河彭星野，忽有物如蛇，突入其脑中。
现代文：秦瞻住在曲河的彭星野，忽然有个象蛇的东西，突然地进入他的脑子里。
English: Qin Zhan lived in Peng Xingye of Quhe. Suddenly, something like a snake suddenly entered his mind.

古文：蛇来，先闻臭气，便从鼻入，盘其头中，觉泓泓冷，闻其脑间，食声咂咂，数日出去。
现代文：蛇来了，先闻到臭气，就从鼻孔进去，盘在他的头里，觉得象凉水一样冷嗖嗖地，听他脑里面，有咂咂的吃东西的声音。几天后出去。
English: The snake comes, smells the stench first, enters through the nostrils, coils in his head, feels cold like cold water, listens to the sound of eating in his head, and goes out a few days later.

古文：寻复来，取手巾，急缚口鼻，故不得入。
现代文：后来又来，这人拿来手巾，急忙地堵上口和鼻，所以不能再进到脑里。
English: Later, the man brought a handkerchief and hastily plugged his mouth and nose so he couldn't get inside her head.

古文：积年无他，唯患头重。
现代文：过了一年了，没有别的毛病。只是得了头重的病。
English: After a year, there was nothing else wrong with me. I just had a bad headache.

古文：广州人
现代文：广州人
English: People from Guangzhou

古文：广州人共在山中伐木，忽见石窠中有三卵，大如升，便取煮之。
现代文：广州人一起在山中伐树，忽然看见石头的巢穴中有三个卵，象升那么大，就拿出来煮它们。
English: The Cantonese were cutting down trees together in the mountains, when they suddenly saw three eggs in a stone nest, as big as cranes. They took them out and boiled them.

古文：汤始热，便闻林中如风雨声。须臾，有一蛇大十围，长四五丈，径来，于汤中衔卵去，三人无几皆死。
现代文：汤刚刚热，就听见树林中发出象刮风下雨的声音，不一会，有一条蛇有十围粗，四、五丈长，一直走过来，从汤中衔着卵就走了，这几个人不久都死了。
English: As soon as the soup was hot, they heard a noise in the woods that sounded like wind and rain. A moment later, a snake, ten times as thick and four or five times as long, walked all the way over to them, took the eggs from the soup and left. All of them died soon after.

古文：袁玄瑛
现代文：袁玄瑛
English: Yuan Xuanying

古文：吴兴太守袁玄瑛当之官。往日者问吉凶，曰： 法。
现代文：吴兴太守袁玄瑛在要去上任做官时，到占卜者那里去问吉凶。
English: When Wu Xing's governor Yuan Xuan Ying was about to take up his post as an official, he went to a fortuneteller to ask about good and bad luck.

古文：至官当有赤蛇为妖，不可杀。 
现代文：占卜者说：根据筮法的象征看，到官任上会有红蛇做妖，不可杀蛇。
English: The soothsayer said: According to the symbol of the law of the dragon, there will be a red snake as a demon on the post of the official, and you must not kill the snake.

古文：至，果有赤蛇在铜虎符石函上蟠，玄瑛命杀之，其后果为贼徐馥所害也。薛重
现代文：到了官任上时，果然有红色的蛇在装铜虎符的石匣上盘踞着。袁玄瑛杀了蛇，他后来果然被贼人徐馥所害。薛重
English: When he became an official, there was indeed a red snake coiled on a stone box containing bronze tiger charms. Yuan Xuan Ying killed the snake, and he was later indeed victimized by the thief Xu Xi.

古文：会稽郡吏郧县薛重得假还家，夜至家，户闭，闻妇床上有丈夫眠声，唤妇，久从床上出来开户。
现代文：会稽郡的小官吏郧县人薛重请假回家，夜里到家。门关着，听见妻子的床上有男人睡觉的声音，召唤妻子，很久才从床上下来开门。
English: Xue Chong, a minor official of the county auditor and a resident of Handan County, went home on leave and arrived home at night. The door was closed. He heard the sound of a man sleeping on his wife's bed, summoned his wife, and took a long time to get out of bed and open the door.

古文：持刀便逆问妇曰： 床上醉人是谁？ 
现代文：薛重拿着刀迎着问妻子说： 床上喝醉酒的人是谁？ 
English: Holding the knife, Xue Chong said to his wife, "Who is the drunk in the bed?

古文：妇大惊愕，因且苦自申明，实无人。
现代文：妻子吃惊地愣住了，接着苦苦地为自己申辩，真的没有人。
English: The wife froze in surprise, then struggled to defend herself. There really was no one there.

古文：重家唯有一户，既入，便闭妇索。了无所见。见一蛇隐在床脚，酒醉臭，重斫蛇寸断，掷于后沟。
现代文：薛重家只有一个门，进屋之后，就把门关上来搜索，却什么也没看见，只看见一条蛇隐藏在床下，喝醉了酒，满身臭味，薛重把蛇砍成一块块的，扔在屋后的沟里。
English: Xue Chong's house only has one door. After entering the house, he closed the door to search, but saw nothing. He only saw a snake hidden under the bed, drunk with wine and full of stench. Xue Chong cut the snake into pieces and threw it in the ditch behind the house.

古文：经日而妇死，数日，重又死，后忽然而生。
现代文：过了一天妻也死了。几天后，薛重也死了，后来忽然又活了。
English: A day later, his wife also died. A few days later, Xue Chong also died, and then suddenly came back to life.

古文：说始死，有人桎梏之。将到一处，有官寮问曰： 何以杀人？ 
现代文：薛重说自己刚死的时候，有人给他上了枷锁，带到一个地方，有个官僚问他说： 为什么杀人？ 
English: Xue Chong said that when he had just died, someone put him in shackles and took him to a place where a bureaucrat asked him: "Why kill?

古文：重曰： 实不行凶。 
现代文：薛重说： 我真的没有行凶。 
English: "I really didn't commit the crime," Xue said.

古文：曰： 尔云不杀者，近寸断掷著后沟，此是何物？ 
现代文：又问： 你说没杀人，近来砍成一块块又扔到后沟里去的，那是什么东西？ 
English: He also asked, "You said you didn't kill anyone, but recently you chopped him into pieces and threw them in a ditch. What was that?"

古文：重曰： 正杀蛇耳。 
现代文：薛重说： 那杀的是蛇。 
English: Xue Chong said, "It was the snake that did the killing."

古文：府君愕然有悟曰： 我当用为神，而敢淫人妇，又讼人。 
现代文：府君愣了一下就明白了说： 我准备让他成神，却敢去奸淫别人的妻子，又来告状。 
English: Fuchun froze for a moment, then understood and said, "I was going to make him a god, but I dared to fornicate with someone else's wife, and I'm going to sue."

古文：敕左右持来。吏将一人，著平巾帻，具诘其淫妄之罪，命付狱，重为官司便遣将出，重倏忽而还。
现代文：命令身边的人把他提来，官吏带着一个人，头上戴着平顶的头巾布，详细地问了他奸淫和妄告的罪行，下命令送到监狱里去，薛重被官衙很快打发出去，一下子就还阳了。
English: He ordered the people around him to bring him in. The officials brought in a man with a flat cap on his head and asked him in detail about the crimes of adultery and false accusation. They ordered him to be sent to prison. Xue Chong was quickly sent out by the officials, and the sun came out all of a sudden.

古文：顾楷
现代文：顾楷
English: Gu Kaixuan

古文：陈时吴兴顾楷在田上树取桑叶，见五色大蛇入一小穴。其后蛇相次，或三尺五尺次第相随，略有数百。
现代文：南北朝陈国的吴兴，有个人名叫顾楷在田地的树上摘桑树叶，看见一条五色的大蛇进入一个小洞，它的后面蛇都排着，有的隔三尺有的隔五尺一个接一个地跟随着，大约有几百条。
English: A man named Gu Kai was picking mulberry leaves from a tree in a field in Wu Xing, Chen country in the Northern and Southern Dynasties. He saw a five-colored snake enter a small hole. The snakes were all lined up behind it, some three feet apart and some five feet apart, following one after another. There were about hundreds of them.

古文：楷急下树，看所入之处，了不见有孔。
现代文：顾楷急忙下树，看那蛇进去的地方，一点也看不见有孔洞。
English: Gu Kai hurried down the tree and looked at the place where the snake had entered. He could not see any hole at all.

古文：日暮还家，楷病口哑，不复得语。
现代文：天黑回家，顾楷得了哑巴病，不再能说话。
English: It was dark when he got home. Gu Kai had a mute disease and could no longer speak.

古文：树提家
现代文：树提家
English: Tree-raising family

古文：隋绛州夏县树提家，新造宅，欲移入，忽有蛇无数，从室中流出门外，其稠如箔上蚕，盖地皆遍。
现代文：隋代时绛州的夏县树提的家里，刚建一所住宅，准备搬进去住。忽然有无数条蛇，从屋里爬出门外，蛇多得象竹席上的蚕，把地上全都铺得满满的。
English: In the Sui Dynasty, Shu Ti's family in Xia County, Quzhou, had just built a house and was preparing to move in. Suddenly, countless snakes crawled out of the house. The snakes were as numerous as silkworms on a bamboo mat, covering the entire floor.

古文：时有行客云： 解符镇。 
现代文：这时有过路的客人说： 我懂得符镇。 
English: At this time, a passing guest said: I know Fu Town.

古文：取桃枝四枚书符，绕宅四面钉之，蛇渐退，符亦移就之。
现代文：就找来四根桃树枝写上符，绕着住宅四面钉上，蛇渐渐地退回去，桃符也移动着随着蛇走。
English: He found four peach tree branches, wrote a sign on them, and nailed them around the house on all four sides. The snake gradually retreated, and the peach sign also moved with the snake.

古文：蛇入堂中心，有一孔，大如盆口，蛇入并尽。
现代文：蛇进入堂屋的中心，有一个洞，象盆口那么大，蛇全都进入洞里，就让烧一百斛开水灌进洞去。
English: The snake enters the center of the hall. There is a hole as big as the mouth of a basin. All the snakes go into the hole. Let a hundred liters of boiling water be poured into the hole.

古文：命煎汤一百斛灌之，经宿，以锹掘之，深数尺。得古铜钱二十万贯。
现代文：过了一宿。用锹挖那个洞，挖了几尺深，挖到了古代的铜钱二十万贯。
English: After a night's sleep, he dug the hole with a pickaxe, dug a few feet deep, and dug up 200 thousand yuan of ancient copper money.

古文：因陈破，铸新钱，遂巨富。
现代文：因陈旧锈蚀了，就用这些古铜铸了新钱，于是成了大富户。
English: When the old money rusted out, he used the bronze to mint new money and became a very rich man.

古文：蛇乃是古铜之精。
现代文：蛇就是古铜的精灵。
English: The serpent is the spirit of brass.

古文：隋炀帝
现代文：隋炀帝
English: Sui and Qian Dynasties

古文：《搜神记》： 蛇千年则断复续。 
现代文：《搜神记》中说，蛇活上千年就能使断了的身子再接上。
English: According to "Searching for the Gods," a snake can live for a thousand years and reattach its broken body.

古文：《淮南子》云： 神蛇自断其身而自相续。 
现代文：《淮南子》里说，神蛇能自己把身子弄断然后自己再把身子接上。
English: "Huainanzi" says that the divine snake can break the body by itself and then connect the body by itself.

古文：隋炀帝遣人于岭南，边海穷山，求此蛇数四，而至洛下。
现代文：隋炀帝多次派人到岭南和海边以及山的深处，去寻找这到种蛇，带到洛阳。
English: Sui and Qian emperors repeatedly sent people to Lingnan and the seaside as well as the depths of the mountains to search for this kind of snake and bring it to Luoyang.

古文：所得之者，长可三尺，而色黄黑，其头锦文，全似金色，不能毒人，解食肉。
现代文：得到的蛇，大约三尺长，黄黑色。蛇头上有锦绣一样的花纹，全象金子那样的颜色。没有毒，知道吃肉。
English: The resulting snake, about three feet long, is yellow and black. The snake's head has a pattern like brocade, all the color of gold. It is not poisonous and knows how to eat meat.

古文：若欲令自断其身者，则先触之令怒，使不任其愤毒，则自断为三四。
现代文：如果想让它自己弄断自己的身子，就先撩拨让它发怒，使蛇受不了那种折磨，就会自己断成三四截。
English: If you want it to break its own body, you must first make it angry, so that the snake can't bear the torture, and it will break itself into three or four pieces.

古文：其断之处，如刀截焉，见其皮骨文理，亦有血焉。
现代文：那断的地方，象刀割的一样，能看出它的皮、骨和肌肉的纹理，上面也有血。
English: Where it had been cut, like with a knife, you could see the texture of its skin, bones and muscles, and there was blood on it.

古文：然久怒定，则三四断稍稍自相就而连续，体复如故，亦似不相断。
现代文：可是等时间一长愤怒过后，那三四截断了的身子的接头就自己互相靠近连接起来，身体又象从前一样，也就象不曾断过一样。
English: However, after a long period of anger, the joints of the three or four severed bodies will close and connect with each other, and the body will be the same as before, just as if it had never been broken.

古文：隋著作郎邓隆云，此灵蛇一类，自断，不必千岁也。
现代文：隋朝的著作郎邓隆说： 这是灵蛇一类，能自断身体，不必一定得是活了千年以上的。 
English: Deng Long, the author of the Sui Dynasty, said: This is a kind of spirit snake, which can self-destruct, and does not necessarily have to live for more than a thousand years.

古文：兴福寺
现代文：兴福寺
English: Kofuku-ji Temple

古文：长安兴福寺有十光佛院，其院宇极壮丽，云是隋所制。
现代文：长安的兴福寺有个十光佛院，那佛院的殿宇极其壮丽，传说是隋朝时建造的。
English: Chang'an's Xingfu Temple has a ten-light Buddhist temple, the temple of the Buddhist temple is extremely magnificent, legend has it that it was built during the Sui Dynasty.

古文：贞观中，寺僧以其年纪绵远，虑有摧圮，即经费计工，且欲新其土木，乃将毁撤。
现代文：唐太宗贞观年间，寺里的和尚因为它的年代太久远，担心有所毁坏和坍塌，就筹集经费计算人工，打算重新翻盖。
English: During the reign of Taizong Zhenguan of the Tang Dynasty, the monks in the temple, because it was too old, feared that it would be destroyed and collapsed, so they raised funds and calculated it manually, intending to re-cover it.

古文：既启户，见有蛇万数，连贯在地，蛇蟠绕如积，摇首呿喙，若吞噬之状。
现代文：打开门以后，就看见有上万条蛇在地上连在一起，蛇互相缠绕着象堆在一起似的，摇着头张着口，象吞吃东西的样子。
English: After opening the door, I saw tens of thousands of snakes chained together on the ground. The snakes were wrapped around each other as if they were piled on top of each other, shaking their heads and opening their mouths as if they were eating something.

古文：寺僧大惧，以为天悯重劳，故假灵变，于是不敢除毁。
现代文：寺里的和尚非常害怕，认为是上天怜恤繁重的劳动，所以假借灵物使人改变主意，因此也不敢再拆十光佛院了。
English: The monks in the temple were very afraid, thinking that it was God's mercy and hard work, so they pretended to use spiritual objects to change people's minds. Therefore, they did not dare to demolish the Shiguang Temple again.

古文：张骑士
现代文：张骑士
English: Zhang Knights

古文：张骑士者，自云，幼时随英公李勣渡海，遇风十余日，不知行几万里。
现代文：张骑士自己说，小时候跟随着英公李勣渡海，遇上十多天的大风，不知走了几万里，风停了也没有波浪。
English: Zhang Knight said himself that when he was a child, he followed the Englishman Li Yan to cross the sea and encountered a gale for more than ten days. I don't know how many thousands of miles he walked, but when the wind stopped, there were no waves.

古文：风静不波，忽见二物黑色，头状类蛇，大如巨船，其长望而不极。须臾，至船所，皆以头绕船横推，其疾如风。
现代文：忽然看见二个黑色的东西，头的样子类似蛇，象条大船那么大，它的身长望去看不到头，不一会，到了船边，都用头绕着船横着推进，快得象风一样。
English: Suddenly I saw two black things, their heads looking like snakes, as big as a large ship, and I couldn't see their heads for how long they were. After a while, when they reached the side of the ship, they both used their heads to propel themselves sideways around the ship, as fast as the wind.

古文：舟人惶惧，不知所抗，已分为所啖食，唯念佛求速死耳。
现代文：船上的人惶恐害怕，不知道如何抗拒，已经断定要被怪物吃掉，只是念佛要求快些死去。
English: The people on board are terrified, they don't know how to resist, they have already concluded that they will be eaten by the monster, but they just pray to the Buddha to die faster.

古文：久之，到一山，破船如积。各自念云，彼人皆为此物所食。
现代文：很久以后，来到一座山前，破船堆积在山下，船上的人各自心里想，这些人都是被这个怪物吃掉了。
English: After a long time, they came to a mountain, and the wrecked boats were piled up at the bottom of the mountain. The people on the boat thought to themselves that these people had all been eaten by this monster.

古文：须臾，风势甚急，顾视船后，复有三蛇，追逐亦至，意如争食之状。
现代文：不一会，风吹得很急，回头看船后，又有三条大蛇，也追赶而来，那意思就象争夺吃食的样子。
English: After a while, the wind was blowing very fast, and after looking back at the boat, there were three big snakes that also chased after it. It was like they were competing for food.

古文：二蛇放船，回与三蛇斗于沙上，各相蜿蟺于孤岛焉。
现代文：二蛇放开船，回身和三条蛇在沙地上斗了起来，各个互相在孤岛上屈曲盘旋着争斗。
English: The two snakes let go of the boat, turned around and fought with the three snakes on the sand, each of them fighting with each other on the isolated island.

古文：舟人因是乘风举帆，遂得免难。
现代文：船上的人因此乘着风架起帆，于是才得免除了灾难。
English: The people on board were therefore able to set sail on the windlass and were thus spared from disaster.

古文：后数日，复至一山，遥见烟火，谓是人境。落帆登岸，与二人同行，门户甚大，遂前款关。有人长数丈，通身生白毛，出见二人，食之。一人遽走至船所，才上船，未及开，白毛之士走来牵揽。
现代文：往后几天，又到了一座山，远远地看见生火的烟，以为是人生活的地方，就落下帆上岸去，有一个人和二个人一起走，看见一个很大的门，就上前去敲门，有一个人身子有几丈高，浑身长白毛，出来见了两个人，捉住就吃了，剩下一个人急忙地跑回停船的地方，才上了船，没等开船，那个浑身白毛的人就跑来抓住缆绳。
English: A few days later, when they came to a mountain, they saw the smoke of a fire in the distance and thought it was a place where people lived, so they lowered their sails and went ashore. One man was walking with two others, and when he saw a large door, he went up to knock on it. A tall man with long white hair came out, saw two people, caught them and ate them. The other man hurried back to where the boat was docked and got on the boat. Before the boat could leave, the man with long white hair ran to grab the rope.

古文：船人人各执弓刀斫射之，累挥数刀，然后见释。
现代文：这时，船上的人个个手拿弓刀又砍又射，连续地挥舞了好几刀，然后船才被放开。
English: At this time, the people on the boat took their bows and arrows in their hands and cut and shot, waving several knives in succession, before the boat was released.

古文：在连州看到一棵柑子树，四月中旬，结了果象拳头那么大，又剖开一看，里面有一只两头蛇。
现代文：离岸有一里多，岸上已出现了几十个白毛巨人，挥动着手大声呼叫。于是又随风飘着船走了五、六天。远远看见一个海岛，停下船问居民，说是清远县的地方，属于南海郡。
English: More than a kilometer away from the shore, dozens of white-haired giants have appeared on the shore, waving their hands and calling loudly. So they sailed with the wind for five or six days. They saw an island far away, stopped the ship and asked the residents, saying that it was a place in Qingyuan County, belonging to Nanhai County.

古文：马岭山
现代文：李崇贞
English: Li Chongzhen

古文：开元四年六月，郴州马岭山侧有白蛇，长六七尺，黑蛇长丈余。
现代文：唐玄宗开元第四年的六月，彬州马岭山边有条白蛇，长六、七尺，还有条黑蛇长一丈多。
English: In June of the fourth year of Tang Xuan Zong's reign, there was a white snake, six or seven feet long, and a black snake more than a foot long on the mountainside of Binshu Ma Ling.

古文：须臾，二蛇斗，白者吞黑蛇，到粗处，口两嗌皆裂，血流滂沛。
现代文：不久，二条蛇斗了起来，白蛇吞了黑蛇。吞到黑蛇的身子粗的地方，口和咽的两侧都裂开了，血流得象下雨一样。
English: Soon, the two snakes fought, and the white snake swallowed the black snake. When it swallowed the thick body of the black snake, both sides of the mouth and pharynx were ruptured, and the blood flowed like rain.

古文：黑蛇头入，啮白蛇肋上作孔，头出二尺余，俄而两蛇并死，后十余日，大雨，山水暴涨，漂破五百余家，失三百余人。
现代文：黑蛇的头被吞，就咬白蛇的肋肉咬出了孔洞，头伸出白蛇的身子有二尺多长，不久两条蛇就一块死了。又过了十多天，天下大雨，山水暴涨，冲毁了五百多家，失踪了三百多人。
English: The black snake's head was swallowed, and it bit a hole in the white snake's ribs. The white snake's body, with its head sticking out, was more than two feet long. Soon, the two snakes died together. More than ten days passed, there was heavy rain, and the mountain torrents rose, washing away more than five hundred people, and more than three hundred people went missing.

古文：至相寺贤者
现代文：至相寺贤者
English: The sages of Shiso-ji Temple

古文：长安至相寺有贤者，自十余岁，便在西禅院修道。
现代文：长安的至相寺有个贤者，从十多岁起，就在西禅院修道。
English: There is a sage at Zhixiang Temple in Chang'an who has been a monk at Xi'an Zen Temple since he was more than ten years old.

古文：院中佛堂座下，恒有一蛇，贤者初修道时，蛇大一围，及后四十余年，蛇如堂柱。人蛇虽相见，而不能相恶。
现代文：院中佛堂的座下，早就有一条蛇，贤者刚修道时，蛇有一围粗细，等到四十多年后，蛇就象堂柱那么粗，人蛇虽互相见面，却不互相厌恶。
English: Under the seat of the Buddhist hall in the courtyard, there has long been a snake. When the sage was just a monk, the snake had a thick circumference. After more than forty years, the snake was as thick as the pillar of the hall. Although people and snakes meet each other, they do not hate each other.

古文：开元中，贤者夜中至佛堂礼拜，堂中无灯，而光粲满堂，心甚怪之。
现代文：开元年间，贤者半夜到佛堂做礼拜，堂中没有灯，可是满堂光华灿烂，心中觉得很奇怪。
English: During the first year of the year, the sages went to the Buddhist hall to worship at midnight. There was no light in the hall, but the hall was full of brilliance. I felt very strange in my heart.

古文：因于蛇出之处，得径寸珠。至市高举价，冀其识者。
现代文：接着在蛇出入的地方，得到一枚直径一寸的珠子，就到市上抬高价钱出卖，希望遇上一个认识这个宝珠的人。
English: Then, at the place where the snake enters and exits, he obtains a bead with a diameter of one inch, and goes to the market to sell it at a higher price, hoping to meet someone who knows this precious bead.

古文：数日，有胡人交市，定还百万。
现代文：几天后，有个胡人到市上来交易，只出钱百万。
English: A few days later, a Hu man came to the market to trade, and only offered a million.

古文：贤者曰： 此夜光珠，当无价，何以如此酬直？ 
现代文：贤者说： 这是夜光珠，应当是无价之宝，为什么出这么低的价钱呢？ 
English: The wise man said: This is a luminous bead, it should be priceless, why such a low price?

古文：胡云： 蚌珠则贵，此乃蛇珠，多至千贯。 
现代文：胡人说： 要是蚌珠就值钱了，这个是蛇珠，最多能卖一千贯钱。 
English: Hu said, "If it were a bead, it would be worth a lot of money. This bead is a snake bead, and it can be sold for up to one thousand kroner.

古文：贤者叹伏，遂卖焉。
现代文：贤者完全信服了，就卖给了胡人。
English: When the sage was completely convinced, he sold it to the fox.

古文：李林甫
现代文：李林甫
English: Li Linfu

古文：李林甫宅，即李靖宅。
现代文：李林甫的住宅，就是从前李靖的住宅。
English: Li Linfu's residence is the former residence of Li Jing.

古文：有泓师者以道术闻于睿宗时，尝与过其宅，谓人曰： 后之人有能居此者，贵不可言。 
现代文：有个叫泓师的人，在他因为精通道术而闻名于睿宗皇帝的时候，曾经路过那所住宅，对别人说： 以后有能居住在这所住宅里的人，一定非常尊贵。 
English: A man by the name of Zongshi once passed by the house when he was famous to Emperor Ruizong for his elixir channeling, and said to others, "If anyone can live in this house in the future, they must be very noble."

古文：其后久无居人。
现代文：那以后很久无人居住。
English: After that it was uninhabited for a long time.

古文：开元初，林甫官为奉御，遂从而居焉。
现代文：开元年间，李林甫做了奉御官，就住进这里。
English: In the first year of the 21st century, Li Linfu became a vassal and moved in here.

古文：人有告于泓师，曰： 异乎哉！吾言果验。
现代文：有人告诉了泓师，泓师说： 真是神奇呀，我的话果然应验了。
English: Someone told the guru, and the guru said, "It's amazing, my words have come true."

古文：是十有九年居相位，称豪贵于天下者，此人也。
现代文：那个占居相位十九年，在天下被称为最显贵的人，就是这个人。
English: This is the man who has been in the limelight for nineteen years and is known as the most prominent person in the world.

古文：虽然，吾惧其易制中门，则祸且及矣。 
现代文：虽然这样，我怕他改造中门，那么灾祸就来临了。 
English: However, I am afraid that if he remodels the middle gate, then disaster will come.

古文：林甫果相玄宗，恃权贵，为人觖望者久之。
现代文：李林甫果然给唐玄宗做了丞相。依仗权贵，长久以来，成为人民怨恨的人。
English: Li Linfu did indeed make Tang Xuan Zong his prime minister. He relied on the powerful, and for a long time became a person who was resented by the people.

古文：及末年，有人献良马，甚高，而其门稍庳，不可乘以过，遂易而制。
现代文：有人向他献上一匹好马，马很高，可是那个门又稍微矮了一点，不能骑着马通过，于是打算改造大门。
English: Someone had offered him a fine horse, a tall horse, but the gate was a little too short for him to ride through, so he planned to remodel the gate.

古文：既毁其檐，忽有蛇千万数，在屋瓦中。林甫恶之，即罢而不能毁焉。
现代文：折毁了门檐以后，忽然有千万条蛇，出现在屋瓦中，李林甫憎恶这件事，就停下不再折毁了。
English: After breaking the lintel, suddenly tens of thousands of snakes appeared in the roof tiles. Li Linfu hated this and stopped breaking the lintel.

古文：未几，林甫竟籍没。
现代文：不久，李林甫竟然被没收了家产。
English: Soon after, Li Linfu's family property was confiscated.

古文：其始相至籍没，果十九年矣。
现代文：从他开始做宰相到被没收家产，果然是十九年。
English: From the time he became prime minister to the confiscation of his family's property, it was indeed nineteen years.

古文：韦子春
现代文：韦子春
English: Wei Zichun

古文：临淮郡有馆亭，滨泗水上。
现代文：临淮郡有个馆所亭园，建在泗水边上。
English: Linhuai County has a museum pavilion, built on the edge of Surabaya.

古文：亭有大木，周数十栱，突然劲拔，阴合百步，往往有甚风迅雷，夕发其中。
现代文：亭园有棵大柱子，柱周围有十枓拱，独立挺拔，亭阴能遮住百步方圆，常常有大风和迅雷，傍晚时出现在亭园中。
English: There is a large pillar in the pavilion. Around the pillar, there are ten arches. It is independent and upright. The shade of the pavilion can cover a hundred square meters. There are often strong winds and thunderstorms. It appears in the pavilion in the evening.

古文：人望见亭有二光，对而上下，赫然若电，风既息，其光亦闭。
现代文：有人远远地看见亭园中有二道光，相对着一起上下地动，清楚得象闪电一样，风停息以后，那两道光也闭上了。
English: At a distance, someone saw two lights in the pavilion, moving up and down together, as clear as lightning. After the wind died down, the two lights also closed.

古文：开元中，有韦子春以勇力闻，会子春客于临淮，有人语其事者，子春曰： 吾能伺之。 
现代文：开元年间，有个韦子春因勇敢有力量而闻名于世，正赶上韦子春在临淮作客，有人告诉他那亭园里的怪事，韦子春说： 我能去观察一下。 
English: During the first year of the 21st century, there was a Wei Zichun who was famous in the world for his bravery and strength. Just as he was catching up with Wei Zichun, who was a guest in Linhuai, someone told him about the strange things in the pavilion. Wei Zichun said: I can go and observe.

古文：于是挈衣橐止于亭中以伺焉。
现代文：于是带着衣服行李住在亭中以便察看。
English: So they stayed in the pavilion with their clothes and luggage so that they could look around.

古文：后一夕，遂有大风雷震于地，亭屋摇撼，果见二光照耀亭宇。子春乃敛衣而下，忽觉有物蟠绕其身，冷如水冻，束不可解。
现代文：有一天晚上，有大风雷震动地面，亭子和屋子摇撼着，果然看见一道光照耀着亭园和屋宇，韦子春就收拾一下衣服下了亭子，忽然觉得有个东西蟠绕着自己的身子，冷得象冰冻一样勒得很紧，解不开。
English: One night, a strong wind and thunder shook the ground, shaking the pavilion and the house, and he saw a light shining on the pavilion and the house. Wei Zichun put away his clothes and went down to the pavilion. Suddenly, he felt that something was haunting his body. It was so cold that it was as if it was frozen. It was so tight that it could not be loosened.

古文：回视，见二老在其身后。子春即奋身挥臂，騞然有声，其缚亦解，遂归亭中。未几而风雨霁，闻亭中腥若鲍肆。
现代文：回头看，看见两个老人站在他的身后，韦子春就鼓起全身力气挥动着手臂，就听騞地一声响，他的束缚解开了，就回到亭中，不久风住雨停，闻到亭中的腥气象卖鱼铺子一样。
English: Looking back, he saw two old men standing behind him. Wei Zichun gathered all his strength and waved his arms. He heard a bang. His shackles were loosened, and he returned to the pavilion. Soon the wind and rain stopped, and he smelled the gloomy weather in the pavilion like a fishmonger's shop.

古文：明日视之，见一巨蛇中断而毙，血遍其地。
现代文：第二天一看，看见一条大蛇从中间断开死在那里，血流得遍地都是。
English: The next day, when he looked up, he saw that a large snake had been severed in the middle and had died there, with blood flowing all over the ground.

古文：里人相与来观，谓子春且死矣。乃见之，大惊。
现代文：乡里人互相前来观看，以为韦子春也一起死了，却见到了韦子春，都大吃惊。
English: The villagers came to watch each other, thinking that Wei Zichun had also died together, but when they saw Wei Zichun, they were all very surprised.

古文：自是其亭无风雷患。
现代文：从此那个亭子没有了风雷的灾害。
English: Since then, the pavilion has been free from wind and lightning disasters.

古文：宣州江
现代文：宣州江
English: Xuanzhou River

古文：宣州鹊头镇，天宝七载，江水盛涨漫三十里。
现代文：宣州的鹊头镇，天宝七年，江水猛涨漫淹三十里。
English: In Shantou Town of Xuanzhou, Tianbao for seven years, the river water surged and flooded for thirty miles.

古文：吴俗善泅，皆入水接柴木。
现代文：吴地的习俗，人人都善于泅水，都入水捞取木柴。
English: According to the customs of the Wu region, everyone is good at carrying water, and everyone goes into the water to collect firewood.

古文：江中流有一材下，长十余丈，泅者往观之，乃大蛇也。其色黄，为水所浮，中江而下。泅者惧而返，蛇遂开口衔之，泅者正横蛇口，举其头，去水数尺。
现代文：江的中流有一木材流下来，长十多丈，泅水的人去察看木材，竟是一条大蛇，身上黄色，让水漂浮着，在江的中间流下来，泅水的人惊得往回返，蛇就张开口衔他，泅水的人正好横在蛇口里，蛇抬起头，离水有几尺高。
English: In the middle of the river, there was a piece of timber, more than ten meters long, flowing down. The dowser went to inspect the timber, but it turned out to be a large snake. It was yellow in color and allowed the water to float. It flowed down in the middle of the river. The dowser was so surprised that he turned back. The snake opened its mouth and grabbed him. The dowser was lying right in the mouth of the snake. The snake raised its head and was several feet above the water.

古文：泅者犹大呼请救，观者莫敢救焉。
现代文：泅水的人还在大声呼救，看到的人没有敢下水去救的。
English: People wading in the water were still shouting for help, and those who saw them did not dare to go into the water to save them.

古文：李齐物
现代文：李齐物
English: Li Qiming

古文：河南尹李齐物，天宝中，左迁竟陵太守。
现代文：河南府尹李齐物，天宝年间，被贬职担任竟陵太守。
English: Yin Li Qi, from Henan Province, was demoted from his position as the head of the imperial mausoleum during the Tenpo era.

古文：郡城南楼有白烟，刺史不改即死，土人以为常占。
现代文：郡的城南楼如果出现白烟，刺史不改换就会死去，当地人认为是正常事。
English: If white smoke appears in the county's Seongnam Tower, the local people will die without changing the history, which is considered to be normal.

古文：齐物被黜，意甚恨恨。楼中忽出白烟，乃发怒云： 吾不畏死，神如余何？ 
现代文：李齐物被贬职，心里很是恨恨不平，楼中忽然出现白烟，就发怒说： 我不怕死，神仙能把我怎么样？ 
English: When Li Qiwen was demoted, he was very angry. Suddenly, white smoke appeared in the building. He became angry and said, "I'm not afraid of death. What can the gods do to me?"

古文：使人寻烟出处，云： 白烟悉白虫，恐是大蛇。 
现代文：派人寻找烟的出处，回来说： 白烟全是白蛇所为，恐怕是条大蛇。 
English: He sent someone to look for the source of the smoke and came back saying: "The white smoke is all the work of a white snake. I'm afraid it's a big snake."

古文：齐物令掘之，其孔渐大，中有大蛇，身如巨瓮。
现代文：李齐物下令掘洞，那洞孔渐渐大了，洞中有条大蛇，身子象大坛子那么粗。
English: Li Qiming ordered a hole to be dug, and the hole gradually grew larger. There was a big snake in the hole, its body as thick as a large jar.

古文：蛇初雷吼，城堞震动，经日方死。乃使人下堑塞之，齐物亦更无他。
现代文：李齐物命令用大锅烧几十斛油，油滚沸时就用来浇蛇，蛇刚开始时象雷吼叫一样，连城墙都震动了，过了一天才死去，就派人去把洞塞死填平。李齐物也没再遇到什么意外。
English: Li Qiye ordered to use a large pot to burn dozens of gallons of oil. When the oil boiled, it was used to water the snake. When the snake first began to roar like thunder, even the city walls shook. After a day, it died, and someone was sent to plug the hole. Li Qiye did not encounter any more accidents.

古文：严挺之
现代文：严挺之
English: Strictly speaking

古文：严挺之为魏州刺史，初到官，临厅事。有小蛇从门入，至案所，以头枕案。
现代文：严挺之做魏州刺史，刚到任时，到厅堂去，有条小蛇从门进去，爬到桌子跟前，把头枕在桌子上。
English: When Yan Ting did the history of Weizhou, when he first arrived, he went to the hall, and a small snake entered through the door, crawled to the table, and rested its head on the table.

古文：挺之初不达，遽持牙笏，压其头下地。
现代文：严挺之开始不理睬，急忙拿着手板，压住蛇头，让它下去。
English: Yan Ting ignored it at first, and hurriedly grabbed the hand board, held down the snake's head, and let it go.

古文：正立凝想，顷之，蛇化成一符。
现代文：正站着疑惑，不一会，蛇变成一张符。
English: He stood there in disbelief, and before long, the snake turned into a symbol.

古文：挺之意是术士所为，寻索无获而止。
现代文：严挺之以为是术士干的事，寻找了一会，没找到什么就停止了。
English: Yan Tingzhi thought it was the work of a sorcerer, searched for a while, and stopped when he found nothing.

古文：天宝樵人
现代文：天宝樵人
English: Tianbao Zhenren

古文：天宝中，有樵人入山醉卧，为蛇所吞。
现代文：天宝年间，有个樵夫喝醉了，躺在山上，被大蛇吞吃了。
English: During the Tenpo era, a woodcutter got drunk, lay down on the mountain, and was eaten by a snake.

古文：其人微醒，怪身动摇，开视不得，方知为物所吞。因以樵刀画腹，得出之。
现代文：那人稍微清醒了一点，奇怪身子在一动一摇，睁开眼什么也看不见，才知道是被动物吞到肚里，因而用砍柴刀划开动物的肚子，才得出来。
English: The man became a little more conscious, his strange body was shaking, he opened his eyes and could not see anything, only then did he realize that he had been swallowed by the animal, so he cut open the animal's stomach with a machete to get it out.

古文：眩然迷闷，久之方悟。
现代文：觉得眩晕不清醒而且憋闷。很久之后才明白过来。
English: I felt dizzy and drowsy. It took me a long time to understand.

古文：其人自尔半身皮脱，如麻风状。
现代文：那个人从此半身的皮都脱落了，就象白风病的样子。
English: The man's skin had peeled away from his entire torso, giving him the appearance of having leukaemia.

古文：无畏师
现代文：无畏师
English: Dauntless Division

古文：天宝中，无畏师在洛，是时有巨蛇，状甚异，高丈余，围五十尺，魁魁若。
现代文：天宝年间，无畏禅师在洛阳，这时有条巨蛇，样子很特异，头能抬起一丈多高，身围粗达五十尺，很是很壮大雄伟的样子，盘绕着出现在山下。
English: During the Tenpo era, when the fearless Zen master was in Luoyang, a giant snake with a very peculiar appearance appeared at the foot of the mountain. It could lift its head as high as a meter, and its girth was up to fifty feet. It was very large and majestic.

古文：盘绕出于山下，洛民咸见之。于是无畏曰： 后此蛇决水潴洛城。 
现代文：洛阳的百姓全看见过这条蛇。因此无畏师傅说： 以后这条蛇将掘开堤坝淹没洛阳城。 
English: All the people in Luoyang had seen this snake, so the fearless master said, "In the future, this snake will dig a dike and flood Luoyang City."

古文：即说佛书义甚精。
现代文：就讲说佛书中的道理很是精深。
English: Let's just say that the principles in the Buddhist scriptures are very profound.

古文：蛇至夕，则驾风露来，若倾听状。
现代文：大蛇到了晚上，就驾着风和雾前来，象是倾听的样子。
English: In the evening, the snake would come out of the wind and fog, as if listening.

古文：无畏乃责之曰： 尔蛇也，营居深山中，固安其所，何为将欲肆毒于世？
现代文：无畏就责备它说： 你是蛇类，应当居住在深山中，那里本来就是你安身的地方，为什么要想对世上的人大肆毒害呢？
English: Dauntless scolded it and said, "You are a snake, you should live deep in the mountains, that's where you belong, why do you want to poison the people of the world?

古文：即速去，无患生人。 
现代文：就快走开吧，不要给活着的人带来灾难。 
English: Just go away. Don't bring disaster to the living.

古文：其蛇闻之，遂俯于地，若有惭色，须臾而死焉。
现代文：那条蛇听了这话，就俯伏在地上，象是有点惭愧的样子，不一会就死了。
English: When the snake heard this, it prostrated itself on the ground, as if a little ashamed, and soon died.

古文：其后禄山据洛阳，尽毁宫庙，果无畏所谓决洛水潴城之应。
现代文：那以后安禄山占据了洛阳，把宫室和庙宇全毁了。果然应了无畏师傅说的掘开洛水淹没城市的话。
English: After that, Anlu Mountain occupied Luoyang and completely destroyed the palace and temples. It really fulfilled the words of the fearless master to dig up the water of Luoyang and flood the city.

古文：张镐
现代文：张镐
English: Zhang Ye

