古文：起旃蒙作噩，尽柔兆阉茂，凡二年。
现代文：起，止，一共两年。汉光武帝建武元年
English: It lasted for a total of two years. Emperor Jinxiao Wu was enthroned in the tenth year of the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：世祖光武皇帝上之上建武元年春，正月，方望与安陵人弓林共立前定安公婴为天子，聚党数千人，居临泾。更始遣丞相松等击破，皆斩之。
现代文：春季，正月，方望和安陵人弓林共同拥立前定安公刘婴当皇帝，聚集党徒数千人，占据临泾。更始皇帝刘玄派遣丞相李松讨伐方望等，将他们全部斩杀。
English: In spring, the first month of the year, Fangwang and the Anling people, Yulin, jointly supported the former Dingan Gong Liu Jiao as emperor, gathered thousands of party members, occupied Linyi. Moreover, the first emperor Liu Xuan sent the prime minister Li Song to fight Fangwang and others, and killed them all.

古文：邓禹至箕关，击破河东都尉，进围安邑。
现代文：邓禹的军队进抵箕关，打败了河东郡都尉的军队，进军包围了安邑县。
English: Deng Yu's army marched into Shaoguan, defeated the army of the captain of Hedong County, and marched into and surrounded Anyi County.

古文：赤眉二部俱会弘农。
现代文：赤眉军的两支队伍在弘农会师。
English: Two teams of the Red Eyebrows Army are in the Hongnong Association Division.

古文：更始遣讨难将军苏茂拒之；茂军大败。
现代文：更始皇帝刘玄派遣讨难将军苏茂抵挡，苏茂的军队大败。
English: Later, Emperor Liu Xuan dispatched the general Su Mao to resist, and Su Mao's army suffered a crushing defeat.

古文：赤眉众遂大集，乃分万人为一营，凡三十营。
现代文：赤眉军于是大为集结，分成一万人为一营，共计三十营。
English: As a result, the Red Eyebrows army was massed, divided into ten thousand people per battalion, for a total of thirty battalions.

古文：三月，更始遣丞相松与赤眉战于乡，松等大败，死者三万馀人。赤眉遂转北至湖。
现代文：三月，刘玄派遣丞相李松同赤眉军在乡展开大战，李松等大败，死三万余人，于是赤眉军向北推进到湖城。
English: In March, Liu Xuan dispatched the prime minister, Li Song, to wage war with the Red Eyebrows in the countryside. Li Song and others were soundly defeated, and more than thirty thousand people died. As a result, the Red Eyebrows pushed north to Hucheng.

古文：蜀郡功曹李熊说公孙述宜称天子。
现代文：蜀郡功曹李熊劝说蜀王公孙述应当称皇帝。
English: Li Xiong, the Gong Cao of Shu County, persuaded the King of Shu, Sun Su, that he should be called emperor.

古文：夏，四月，述即帝位，号成家，改元龙兴；以李熊为大司徒，述弟光为大司马，恢为大司空。
现代文：夏季，四月，公孙述在成都即帝位，号称 成家 ，改年号为 龙兴 。公孙述任命李熊为大司徒，任命弟弟公孙光为大司马，公孙恢为大司空。
English: In the summer, in April, Gongsun Su was enthroned in Chengdu, known as Cheng Jia, and changed his name to Long Xing. Gongsun Su appointed Li Xiong as the grand steward, his brother Gongsun Guang as the grand steward, and Gongsun Gao as the grand steward.

古文：越巂任贵据郡降述。
现代文：越人任贵献郡降附公孙述。
English: Yue Ren Guixian County was ceded to Gongsun.

古文：萧王北击尤来、大枪、五幡于元氏，追至北平，连破之；又战于顺水北，乘胜轻进，反为所败。
现代文：萧王刘秀率军北进，在元氏攻打尤来、大枪、五幡等几支贼寇军队，一直追到北平，连续打败贼军，又在顺水河的北岸交战。刘秀乘胜率军冒进，反被贼军打败。
English: Xiao Wang Liu Xiu led the army northward, attacked several Kleptocratic armies such as Yulai, Dahu and Wuhan in the Yuan Dynasty, and chased them all the way to Beiping, continuously defeated the Kleptocratic army, and then fought on the north bank of the Shunshui River. Liu Xiu led the victorious army to advance, but was defeated by the Kleptocratic army.

古文：王自投高岸，遇突骑王丰下马授王，王仅而得免。
现代文：刘秀自己从悬崖上跳下，骑兵突击队的王丰把战马给了刘秀，刘秀仅得免死。
English: Liu Xiu himself jumped off the cliff, Wang Feng of the cavalry commando gave the horse to Liu Xiu, Liu Xiu only escaped death.

古文：散兵归保范阳。
现代文：败兵退归范阳据守。
English: The defeated soldiers retreated to Fanyang.

古文：军中不见王，或云已殁，诸将不知所为，吴汉曰： 卿曹努力！
现代文：军中见不到刘秀，有人说刘秀已经被杀，将领们不知如何是好。吴汉说： 大家努力！
English: Liu Xiu cannot be seen in the army, some people say that Liu Xiu has been killed, the generals do not know what to do. Wu Han said: Everyone work hard!

古文：王兄子在南阳，何忧无主！ 
现代文：大王哥哥的儿子就在南阳，我们何必忧愁没有主君！ 
English: Daowang's brother's son is in Nanyang, why should we be sad without a master!

古文：众恐惧，数日乃定。
现代文：大家感到恐慌，几天后才安定下来。
English: Everyone panicked, and it took a few days for things to settle down.

古文：贼虽战胜，而惮王威名，夜，遂引去。
现代文：贼军虽然战胜了刘秀，但害怕刘秀的威名，于是乘夜撤走。
English: Although the bandits defeated Liu Xiu, they were afraid of Liu Xiu's prestige, so they withdrew at night.

古文：大军复追至安次，连战，破之。
现代文：刘秀的军队再次进军，到达安次，接连进攻，打败贼军。
English: Liu Xiu's army marched again, reached Anji, attacked successively, and defeated the bandits.

古文：贼退入渔阳，所过虏掠。
现代文：贼军撤退进入渔阳郡，所到之处，大肆掳掠。
English: The invaders retreated into Yuyang County and plundered everywhere they went.

古文：强弩将军陈俊言于王曰： 贼无辎重，宜令轻骑出贼前，使百姓各自坚壁以绝其食，可不战而殄也。 
现代文：强弩将军陈俊向刘秀进言： 贼寇没有辎重，应该派轻骑兵到贼寇的前面，让沿途的百姓各自坚壁清野，以断绝贼寇的粮食。可以不用攻打，贼寇自会消灭。 
English: Strong-arm general Chen Jun gave Liu Xiu some advice: the bandits are not serious, and light cavalry should be sent to the front of the bandits, so that the people along the way can clear the fields with their own walls to cut off the bandits' food. There is no need to attack, the bandits will be eliminated.

古文：王然之，遣俊将轻骑驰出贼前，视人保壁坚完者，敕令固守；放散在野者，因掠取之。
现代文：刘秀赞同，派遣陈俊率轻骑兵飞奔至贼军前面，对那些坚固完整的壁垒，则下令固守；对那些分散在郊野的，则乘机掠取到手。
English: Liu Xiu agreed, and dispatched Chen Jun and his light cavalry to gallop ahead of the bandits. He ordered them to hold on to the solid and complete barriers, and to seize the opportunity to plunder those scattered in the countryside.

古文：贼至，无所得，遂散败。
现代文：贼寇到达之后，一无所得，于是溃散。
English: When the bandits arrived, they found nothing and dispersed.

古文：王谓俊曰： 困此虏者，将军策也。 
现代文：刘秀对陈俊说： 使这群贼寇陷入困境，是靠将军您的策略。 
English: Liu Xiu said to Chen Jun: It is your strategy to rely on the general to get this group of bandits into trouble.

古文：冯异遗李轶书，为陈祸福，劝令归附萧王；轶知长安已危，而以伯升之死，心不自安，乃报书曰： 轶本与萧王首谋造汉，今轶守洛阳，将军镇孟津，俱据机轴，千载一会，思成断金。
现代文：冯异给更始将领舞阳王李轶写信，为他陈述利害，劝他归附刘秀。李轶知道长安已危，却因刘之死而心不自安，于是回信给冯异说： 我本来同刘秀最早合谋重建汉王朝。现在我守洛阳，你守孟津，全都据于战略要地。这是千载难逢的良机，你我二人同心，力可断金。
English: Feng Yi wrote a letter to the original general, King Wanyang Li Yao, stating his interests and persuading him to join Liu Xiu. Li Yao knew that Chang'an was in danger, but he was uneasy because of Liu's death, so he wrote back to Feng Yi saying: I originally conspired with Liu Xiu to rebuild the Han Dynasty. Now I guard Luoyang, you guard Mengjin, all based on strategic locations. This is a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity, you and I are of one mind, and we can break the gold.

古文：唯深达萧王，愿进愚策以佐国安民。 
现代文：请你转达萧王，我甘愿进献愚策，帮助他定国安民。 
English: Please tell King Xiao that I am willing to put forward foolish measures to help him keep the country and the people safe.

古文：轶自通书之后，不复与异争锋，故异得北攻天井关，拔上党两城，又南下河南成皋以东十三县，降者十馀万。
现代文：李轶自从和冯异互通书信之后，便不再同冯异交兵，因此冯异能够向北进攻天井关，攻取上党地区的两个城，又南下，攻取河南成皋以东的十三个县，收受降军十余万人。
English: After exchanging letters with Feng Yi, Li Xuan no longer exchanged troops with Feng Yi. Therefore, Feng Yi was able to attack the north of the ceiling pass, capture two cities in the upper party area, and go south, capture thirteen counties east of Henan Chenglu, and receive more than 100,000 troops.

古文：武勃将万馀人攻诸畔者，异与战于士乡下，大破，斩勃；轶闭门不救。
现代文：更始朝将领武勃率领一万余人攻打叛变者，冯异和武勃在士乡交战，大破武勃军，斩武勃。李轶紧闭城门，不予救助。
English: At the beginning of the Korean War, the general Wu Bo led more than ten thousand people to attack the mutineers. Feng Yin and Wu Bo fought in Shixiang, defeated Wu Bo's army, and cut off Wu Bo. Li Gan closed the city gate tightly and did not provide assistance.

古文：异见其信效，具以白王。
现代文：冯异见劝降的书信奏效，一五一十地向刘秀禀报。
English: Feng's letter of dissent and persuasion was effective, and he reported to Liu Xiuqi in 1510.

古文：王报异曰： 季文多诈，人不能得其要领。今移其书告守、尉当警备者。 
现代文：刘秀回复冯异说： 李轶诡诈多端，一般人不知道他到底是怎么想的，现在把他给你的信转送给应当警备的各郡太守和都尉。 
English: Liu Xiu replied to Feng Ying, saying: Li Qiye is deceitful and cunning. Ordinary people don't know what he really thinks. Now, forward his letter to you to the county grand marshals and captains who should be on guard.

古文：众皆怪王宣露轶书；硃鲔闻之，使人刺杀轶，由是城中乖离，多有降者。
现代文：大家全都奇怪刘秀为什么要泄露李轶的书信。更始朝将领朱鲔听说了这件事，派人刺杀了李轶。这样一来，洛阳城中离心离德，有不少人投降。
English: Everyone was puzzled as to why Liu Xiu would want to leak Li Xi's letter. In addition, when the imperial general Zhu Xi heard about this, he sent someone to assassinate Li Xi. As a result, Luoyang's central government broke away from Germany and many people surrendered.

古文：硃鲔闻王北征而河内孤，乃遣其将苏茂、贾强将兵三万馀人渡巩河，攻温；鲔自将数万人攻平阴以缀异。
现代文：朱鲔得知刘秀大军北征而河内势孤力单，于是派遣部将苏茂、贾强领兵三万余人渡过巩河，进攻温县。朱鲔亲自领兵数万人进攻平阴，以牵制冯异的军队。
English: Zhu Xi learned that Liu Xiu's army was marching north and that Hanoi was all alone, so he dispatched Sumo and Jia Qiang to lead more than 30,000 soldiers across the Gonghe River to attack Wen County. Zhu Xi personally led tens of thousands of soldiers to attack Pingyin to contain Feng Yi's army.

古文：檄书至河内，寇恂即勒军驰出，并移告属县，发兵会温下。
现代文：文书传到河内，寇恂马上集结军队急速出发，并传令下属各县发兵到温县城下会师。
English: The document was sent to Hanoi, and Colon immediately assembled an army and set off in haste, and ordered the subordinate counties to send troops to join the division under the city of Wen County.

古文：军吏皆谏曰： 今洛阳兵渡河，前后不绝。宜待众军毕集，乃可出也。 
现代文：军吏们全都劝阻说： 眼下洛阳大军渡过巩河，前后不绝；我们应该等到各县军队全都聚集，才能够出战。 
English: The military officials all dissuaded him, saying, "Right now, the Luoyang army is crossing the Gonghe River, and there is no stopping it; we should wait until all the troops from all the counties are gathered before we can go to war.

古文：恂曰： 温，郡之籓蔽，失温则郡不可守。 
现代文：寇恂说： 温县是本郡的屏障，如果温县陷落，那么郡城就守不住。 
English: "Wen County is the barrier of this county. If Wen County falls, then the county seat will not be able to be defended," said Kou Ye.

古文：遂驰赴之。
现代文：于是率军驱驰迎敌。
English: As a result, he led his army in a gallop to meet the enemy.

古文：旦日，合战，而冯异遣救及诸县兵适至，恂令士卒乘城鼓噪大呼，言曰： 刘公兵到！ 
现代文：第二天，寇恂和敌军交战，而此时冯异派出的救兵和各县的军队恰好赶到。寇恂命士兵在城上呐喊，大声呼叫： 刘公大军来了！ 
English: On the second day, the bandits and the enemy army fought, and at this time, the rescuers sent by Feng Yi and the army of each county just arrived. The soldiers of the bandits shouted on the city, shouting loudly: Liu Gong's army is coming!

古文：苏茂军闻之，陈动。
现代文：苏茂的部众听到后，阵列骚动。
English: Upon hearing this, Su Mao's subordinates became agitated.

古文：恂因奔击，大破之。
现代文：寇恂乘势冲击，大破敌军。
English: The Egrets took advantage of the shock and defeated the enemy.

古文：冯异亦渡河击硃鲔，鲔走；异与恂追至洛阳，环城一匝而归。
现代文：冯异也率军渡过巩河袭击朱鲔的军队，朱鲔逃走。冯异和寇恂追到洛阳，绕城一周而还。
English: Feng Yiyi also led the army across the Gonghe River to attack Zhu Xi's army, Zhu Xi fled. Feng Yiyi and Kou Xi chased Luoyang, circled the city and returned.

古文：自是洛阳震恐，城门昼闭。
现代文：从此洛阳全城震恐，白天也紧闭城门。
English: Since then, the whole city of Luoyang has been terrified, and the city gate has been closed during the day.

古文：异、恂移檄上状，诸将入贺，因上尊号。
现代文：冯异、寇恂发送文书呈报战果，将领们进帐祝贺，乘机请刘秀称帝。
English: Feng Yiyi and Kou Ye sent a document to report the results of the battle, congratulated the generals, and took the opportunity to invite Liu Xiu to become emperor.

古文：将军南阳马武先进曰： 大王虽执谦退，奈宗庙社稷何！
现代文：将军南阳人马武首先说： 大王您虽然谦恭退让，但国家宗庙社稷托付给谁？
English: General Ma Wu, a native of Nanyang, first said: Great King, although you are humble and concede, to whom did you entrust the national ancestral temple?

古文：宜先即尊位，乃议征伐。
现代文：您应先即帝位，然后再讨论征讨的事。
English: You should take the throne first, and then discuss the requisition.

古文：今此谁贼而驰骛击之乎？ 王惊曰： 何将军出此言！
现代文：像现在名号未正，东闯西杀，到底谁是贼呢？ 刘秀很吃惊，说： 将军怎么说出这种话？
English: Like now, the name is not correct, people are killing each other, who is the thief? Liu Xiu was surprised and said: How could the general say such a thing?

古文：可斩也！ 
现代文：够杀头的罪了！ 
English: Enough of the crime of beheading!

古文：乃引军还蓟。复遣吴汉率耿弇、景丹等十三将军追尤来等，斩首万三千馀级，遂穷追至浚靡而还。
现代文：于是率军返回蓟县，又派吴汉率领耿、景丹等十三位将军追击尤来等贼军，斩首一万三千余人，紧接着穷追到浚靡县才返回。
English: As a result, he led the army back to Min County, and sent 13 generals led by Wu Han, including Geng and Jing Dan, to pursue Yulai and other thieves, beheading more than 13,000 people, and then chasing them to Jumaili County before returning.

古文：贼散入辽西、辽东，为乌桓、貊人所钞击略尽。
现代文：贼军散入辽西、辽东，被乌桓、貊人抢掠击杀，几乎死尽。
English: The invaders scattered to West Liao and East Liao, and were robbed and killed by the Wuhuan and the Yao people, and almost died out.

古文：都护将军贾复与五校战于真定，复伤疮甚。
现代文：都护将军贾复同五校的贼军在真定交战，贾复身负重伤。
English: Jia Fu, the general of the Capital Guard, fought with the bandit army of the five schools in Zhending. Jia Fu was seriously injured.

古文：王大惊曰： 我所以不令贾复别将者，为其轻敌也。
现代文：刘秀大惊，说： 我所以不让贾复率军独当一面，是因为他轻敌。
English: Liu Xiu was shocked and said, "The reason why I didn't let Jia Fu lead the army alone is because he disrespected the enemy.

古文：果然，失吾名将！
现代文：果然如此，我丧失了一员名将！
English: And so it happened, I lost a great player!

古文：闻其妇有孕，生女邪，我子娶之；生男邪，我女嫁之；不令其忧妻子也。 
现代文：听说他妻子怀有身孕，如果生下女孩儿，将来我的儿子娶她为妻；如果生男孩儿，将来我的女儿嫁给他。不要让他为妻子儿女担忧。 
English: I heard that his wife is pregnant. If she gives birth to a girl, my son will marry her; if he gives birth to a boy, my daughter will marry him. Don't let him worry about his wife and children.

古文：复病寻愈，追及王于蓟，相见甚欢。
现代文：贾复的伤势不久痊愈，在蓟县追上刘秀，两人见面非常高兴。
English: Jia Fu's injury soon healed, and he caught up with Liu Xiu in Handan County. The two were very happy to meet.

古文：还至中山，诸将复上尊号；王又不听。
现代文：刘秀回到中山县，将领们再次请求他称帝，他再次拒绝。
English: When Liu Xiu returned to Zhongshan County, the generals again asked him to proclaim himself emperor, but he again refused.

古文：行到南平棘，诸将复固请之；王不许。
现代文：大军走到南平棘，将领们再次坚决恳请，他仍然不答应。
English: When the large army reached Nanping Thorn, the generals once again firmly implored him, but he still did not agree.

古文：诸将且出，耿纯进曰： 天下士大夫，捐亲戚，弃土壤，从大王于矢石之间者，其计固望攀龙鳞，附凤翼，以成其所志耳。
现代文：将领们将要退出，耿纯进谏说： 天下的士大夫舍弃亲属，背井离乡，在弹雨之中跟随大王，他们一心向往的，本是攀龙附凤，以成就志向。
English: When the generals were about to withdraw, Geng Chunjin said: "The world's soldiers and magistrates abandoned their relatives, left their hometowns, and followed the great king in the hail of bullets. What they longed for was to climb the dragon and attach the phoenix to achieve their goals.

古文：今大王留时逆众，不正号位，纯恐士大夫望绝计穷，则有去归之思，无为久自苦也。
现代文：现在您拖延时间，违背众意，不确定尊号，我恐怕士大夫会失去希望，无计可施，从而产生退归故里的想法，不会长期忍耐下去。
English: Now that you are procrastinating, going against the will of the people, and not sure of your honorific title, I am afraid that you will lose hope and have nothing to do, which will give rise to the idea of returning to your hometown, and you will not be able to endure it for a long time.

古文：大众一散，难可复合。 
现代文：众人一散，就很难再聚合到一处了。 
English: Once people are scattered, it's hard to get them together again.

古文：纯言甚诚切，王深感曰： 吾将思之。 
现代文：耿纯的话非常诚恳殷切，刘秀十分感谢，说： 我将予以考虑。 
English: Geng Chun's words were very sincere and earnest. Liu Xiu was very grateful and said: I will consider it.

古文：行至鄗，召冯异诣鄗，问四方动静。
现代文：刘秀的军队走到县，刘秀召见冯异打听各方军情。
English: Liu Xiu's army went to the county, Liu Xiu summoned Feng Ying to inquire about the military situation of all parties.

古文：异曰： 更始必败，宗庙之忧在于大王，宜从众议！ 
现代文：冯异说： 更始必败，忧虑宗庙的大任在您身上，您应当听从大家的建议。 
English: Feng Yin said, "If you try to do it again, you will fail. It is up to you to worry about the ancestral temple. You should listen to everyone's advice."

古文：会儒生强华自关中奉《赤伏符》来诣王曰： 刘秀发兵捕不道，四夷云集龙斗野，四七之际火为主。 
现代文：这时，恰好儒生强华从关中拿着《赤伏符》来晋见刘秀，符上说： 刘秀发兵惩奸贼，四方云集龙斗野，四七二八汉当立。 
English: At this time, the Confucian scholar Qianghua happened to come from Guanzhong to see Liu Xiu, holding the "Red Flag" and saying: Liu Xiu sent soldiers to punish the traitors, dragons gathered in all directions, and 4728 Han stood up.

古文：群臣因复奏请。
现代文：群臣因此再次奏请。
English: As a result, the ministers once again appealed to the emperor.

古文：六月，己未，王即皇帝位于鄗南；改元，大赦。
现代文：六月，己未，刘秀在县之南即皇帝位，改年号，大赦天下。
English: In June, Liu Xiu was crowned emperor in the south of the county, changed his name, and was pardoned by the emperor.

古文：邓禹围安邑，数月未下，更始大将军樊参将数万人度大阳，欲攻禹。
现代文：邓禹率军包围安邑，经过几个月也未能攻下。更始大将军樊参率领数万人从大阳渡河，准备攻打邓禹。
English: Deng Yu led the army to encircle Anyi, but failed to capture it after a few months. In addition, the general Shanshan led tens of thousands of people to cross the river from Dayang to prepare to attack Deng Yu.

古文：禹逆击于解南，斩之。
现代文：邓禹在解县南迎击，斩杀樊参。
English: Deng Yu met the attack in the south of Jie County and killed Gong Zhen.

古文：王匡、成丹、刘均合军十馀万，复共击禹，禹军不利。
现代文：王匡、成丹、刘均纠集十余万军队，再次一起攻打邓禹，邓禹军交战失利。
English: Wang Kuang, Cheng Dan, and Liu all gathered more than one hundred thousand troops and attacked Deng Yu again together. Deng Yu's army lost the battle.

古文：明日，癸亥，匡等以六甲穷日，不出，禹因得更治兵。
现代文：第二天，癸亥，王匡等因为当天是六十甲子记日的最后一天，所以闭门不出。而邓禹因此得以整顿部署军队。
English: The next day, Yan Hai, Wang Kuang and others closed their doors because it was the last day of the 60th anniversary of the founding of the People's Republic of China. As a result, Deng Yu was able to reorganize and deploy the army.

古文：甲子，匡悉军出攻禹。禹令军中无得妄动，既至营下，因传发诸将，鼓而并进，大破之。
现代文：甲子，王匡等全军出击攻打邓禹，邓禹下令军队不得轻举妄动，等到王匡军逼进营垒后，才传令各将领，击鼓并进，大破敌军。
English: Gao Zi, Wang Kuang and the whole army attacked Deng Yu. Deng Yu ordered the army not to make any rash moves. It was not until after Wang Kuang's army had forced their way into the camp that the generals were ordered to march forward, beating drums, and smash the enemy army.

古文：匡等皆走，禹追斩均及河东太守杨宝，遂定河东，匡等奔还长安。
现代文：王匡等全都逃跑，邓禹追击，斩杀了刘均以及河东太守杨宝，于是平定河东。王匡等逃回长安。
English: Wang Kuang and others all fled, Deng Yu pursued and killed Liu Jun and Yang Bao, the governor of Hedong, thus pacifying Hedong. Wang Kuang and others fled back to Chang'an.

古文：张卬与诸将议曰： 赤眉旦暮且至，见灭不久，不如掠长安，东归南阳；事若不集，复入湖池中为盗耳！ 
现代文：张同将领们商议： 赤眉军早晚就会到达，我们不久就会被消灭。
English: Zhang conferred with the generals: Sooner or later, the Red Eyebrows will arrive, and we will soon be wiped out.

古文：乃共入，说更始；更始怒不应，莫敢复言。
现代文：不如抢掠了长安，向东逃回南阳。事情如果办不成，我们再到江湖中，重新做强盗！ 
English: It would be better to rob Chang'an and flee eastward back to Nanyang. If things don't work out, we'll go back to the country and become robbers again!

古文：更始使王匡、陈牧、成丹、赵萌屯新丰，李松军槀，以拒赤眉。
现代文：于是一同晋见，说服刘玄。刘玄愤怒而不发一言，没有人敢再说话。刘玄命王匡、陈牧、成丹、赵萌驻屯新丰，命宰相李松屯兵城，以抗拒赤眉军。
English: So they went to see Jin together and convinced Liu Xuan. Liu Xuan did not say a word in anger, and no one dared to speak again. Liu Xuan ordered Wang Kuang, Chen Mu, Cheng Dan, and Zhao Meng to stay in Xinfeng, and ordered Prime Minister Li Song to stay in Hecheng to resist the Red Eyed Army.

古文：张卬、廖湛、胡殷、申屠建与隗嚣合谋，欲以立秋日貙膢时共劫更始，俱成前计。
现代文：张、廖湛、胡殷、申屠建与隗嚣合谋，准备借立秋这一天杀牲祭宗庙的时候，共同劫持刘玄，实现先前的计划。
English: Zhang, Liao Zhan, Hu Yin, and Shen Tu Jian conspired with Yan Han to jointly kidnap Liu Xuan on the day of the sacrificial offering at the ancestral temple in the autumn to realize the previous plan.

古文：更始知之，托病不出，召张卬等入，将悉诛之，唯隗嚣称疾不入，会客王遵、周宗等勒兵自守。
现代文：刘玄得知后，称病不出门。他召张等进宫，准备全都斩首。当时只有隗嚣自称有病没有进宫，召集他的宾客王遵、周宗等率军士自守。
English: When Liu Xuan learned of this, he said that he would not go out because he was ill. He summoned Zhang and others to the palace and prepared to behead them all. At that time, only Zangran did not enter the palace because he claimed to be ill, and he summoned his guests Wang Zun, Zhou Zong, and other soldiers to defend themselves.

古文：更始狐疑不决，卬、湛、殷疑有变，遂突出。
现代文：刘玄犹疑不决。张、廖湛、胡殷怀疑有变化，于是冲出宫去。
English: Liu Xuan hesitated. Zhang, Liao Zhan and Hu Yin suspected a change, so they rushed out of the palace.

古文：独申屠建在，更始斩建，使执金吾邓晔将兵围隗嚣第。
现代文：只有申屠建还留在宫中，刘玄斩杀了申屠建，命执金吾邓晔领兵包围隗嚣的宅第。
English: Only Shen Tuo Jian remained in the palace. Liu Xuan killed Shen Tuo Jian and ordered King Wu and Deng Xi to lead the troops to surround the tumultuous residence.

古文：卬、湛、殷勒兵烧门，入战宫中，更始大败。
现代文：张、廖湛、胡殷率兵烧毁宫门，杀入宫中，刘玄大败。
English: Zhang, Liao Zhan, and Hu Yin led the soldiers to burn down the palace gate and enter the palace. Liu Xuan was defeated.

古文：嚣亦溃围，走归天水。
现代文：隗嚣也突破包围，逃回天水。
English: Gong Han also broke through the encirclement and fled back to Tianshui.

古文：明旦，更始东奔赵萌于新丰。
现代文：第二天早晨，刘玄出皇宫向东投奔在新丰屯兵的赵萌。
English: The next morning, Liu Xuan left the palace and went east to join Zhao Meng, who was stationed in Xinfeng.

古文：更始复疑王匡、陈牧、成丹与张卬等同谋，乃并召入；牧、丹先至，即斩之。
现代文：刘玄又怀疑王匡、陈牧、成丹和张等是同谋，于是一块儿召见他们。陈牧、成丹先到，立刻被斩首。
English: Liu Xuan also suspected that Wang Kuang, Chen Mu, Cheng Dan and Zhang Gang were accomplices, so he summoned them together. Chen Mu and Cheng Dan arrived first and were immediately beheaded.

古文：王匡惧，将兵入长安，与张卬等合。
现代文：王匡恐惧，率军进入长安，与张等人会合。
English: Wang Kuang could not be intimidated and led his army to Chang'an to meet with Zhang and others.

古文：赤眉进至华阴，军中有齐巫，常鼓舞祠城阳景王，巫狂言： 景王大怒曰： 当为县官，何故为贼！  
现代文：赤眉军进抵华阴，随军有一位齐地的巫师，常常击鼓舞蹈，祭祀城阳景王刘章。巫师口出狂言： 景王大怒说： 应当做天子，为什么当盗贼！  
English: The Red-browed Army entered Huayin, and a wizard from Qi accompanied the army. He often played drums and danced, and made sacrifices to Liu Zhang, the King of Chengyang. The sorcerer uttered a rant: King Jing was furious and said: You should be a son of heaven, why be a thief!

古文：有笑巫者辄病，军中惊动。
现代文：凡是嘲笑巫师的人，都患了病，为此全军震惊。
English: Anyone who mocked the sorcerer became ill, shocking the entire army.

古文：方望弟阳说樊崇等曰： 今将军拥百万之众，西向帝城，而无称号，名为群贼，不可以久。
现代文：方望的弟弟方阳劝说樊崇等人： 现在将军拥有百万大军，向西面对帝王都城，却没有称号，被人称作盗贼，不可能长期维持下去。
English: Fangfang's brother Fangyang persuaded Yu Chong and others: Now the general has a million-strong army, facing the imperial capital to the west, but he has no title, he is called a thief, and it is impossible to maintain it for a long time.

古文：不如立宗室，挟义诛伐，以此号令，谁敢不从！ 
现代文：不如拥立一位刘氏宗室，挟天子的名义诛杀讨伐，以此号令天下，谁敢不服从！ 
English: It would be better to set up a Liu family member to fight and kill in the name of the emperor, and use this as a rallying cry to order the world, who dares to disobey!

古文：崇等以为然，而巫言益甚。
现代文：樊崇等认为说得很对，而巫师的狂言也越来越厉害。
English: Yu Chong and others think that this is very true, and the sorcerer's rant is getting more and more powerful.

古文：前至郑，乃相与议曰： 今迫近长安，而鬼神若此，当求刘氏共尊立之。 
现代文：向前进军抵达郑县，于是共同商议说： 现在已经逼近长安，而鬼神的旨意是这样，应该寻求一位刘氏宗室，共同尊他为皇帝。 
English: When the advancing army reached Zheng County, they discussed together and said: Now that Chang'an is approaching, and the will of the ghosts and gods is such, we should seek a Liu family member and jointly honor him as emperor.

古文：先是，赤眉过式，掠故式侯萌之子恭、茂、盆子三人自随。
现代文：早先，赤眉军经过式县，劫持故式侯刘萌的儿子刘恭、刘茂、刘盆子，让三人随军。
English: Earlier, the Red Eyebrows Army passed through Shixi County and abducted Liu Gong, Liu Mao, and Liu Bonzi, the sons of Liu Meng, the former lord of Shixi County, and let the three follow the army.

古文：恭少习《尚书》，随樊崇等降更始于洛阳，复封式侯，为侍中，在长安。
现代文：刘恭幼时学习《尚书》，后来跟从樊崇等在洛阳投降更始皇帝刘玄，重新封为式侯，担任侍中，后到长安。
English: When he was a child, Liu Qiong studied "Shang Shu." Later, he followed Yu Chong and others to surrender in Luoyang to the First Emperor Liu Xuan, was re-christened as a prince, served as a chamberlain, and then went to Chang'an.

古文：茂与盆子留军中，属右校卒史刘侠卿，主牧牛。
现代文：刘茂和刘盆子留在军中，归右校卒史刘侠卿管辖，负责放牛。
English: Liu Mao and Liu Bonzi remained in the army and came under the jurisdiction of Liu Xiaoxing, a graduate of the Right School, and were responsible for herding cattle.

古文：及崇等欲立帝，求军中景王后，得七十馀人，唯茂、盆子及前西安侯孝最为近属。
现代文：等到樊崇等想要拥立皇帝时，在军中寻找景王刘章的后代，找到七十余人，其中只有刘茂、刘盆子以及前西安侯刘孝血统最为亲近。
English: When Gong Chong and others wanted to support the emperor, they looked for descendants of King Jing Liu Zhang in the army and found more than seventy people, among whom only Liu Mao, Liu Bonzi and the former Xi'an lord Liu Xiao were the closest.

古文：崇等曰： 闻古者天子将兵称上将军。 
现代文：樊崇等人说： 听说古时候，天子亲自领兵，称为上将军。 
English: Gong Chong and others said, "I heard that in ancient times, the Son of Heaven personally led the army and was called Shangzheng.

古文：乃书札为符曰： 上将军 。
现代文：于是用一片木简做符，上写 上将军 三个字，又把两片未写字的木简也放在竹筒中。
English: So he used a piece of wood block to make a symbol, and wrote the three characters "上将军" on it. He also placed two pieces of wood block with no writing in a bamboo tube.

古文：又以两空札置笥中，于郑北设坛场，祠城阳景王，诸三老、从事皆大会。
现代文：在郑县北面修筑坛场，祭祀城阳景王刘章，各位三老、从事全都聚会于此。
English: In the north of Zheng County, an altar was built to worship Liu Zhang, the King of Chengyang, and all three elders gathered here.

古文：列盆子等三人居中立，以年次探札，盆子最幼，后探，得符；诸将皆称臣，拜。
现代文：请刘盆子等三人居台中排列站立，按照长幼顺序抽签。刘盆子年纪最小，最后抽，抽中了符。将领们全都向刘盆子称臣叩拜。
English: Liu Bonzi and the other three generals were asked to stand in a row in the middle of the table and draw lots according to the order of the eldest and youngest. Liu Bonzi was the youngest, and drew last, and won the flag. The generals all bowed to Liu Bonzi.

古文：盆子时年十五，被发徙跣，敝衣赭汗，见众拜，恐畏欲啼。
现代文：刘盆子当时十五岁，披散着头发，光着双脚，穿着破衣服，紫涨着脸，浑身冒汗。他看见众将跪拜，惊恐得要哭出来。
English: Liu Bonzi was fifteen years old at the time, his hair was disheveled, his feet were bare, he was wearing ragged clothes, his face was purple, and he was sweating profusely. When he saw the crowd kneeling, he was so frightened that he wanted to cry.

古文：茂谓曰： 善臧符！ 
现代文：刘茂对他说： 把你的符藏好！ 
English: Liu Mao said to him, "Hide your symbols well!"

古文：盆子即齧折，弃之。
现代文：刘盆子却立即把木简放到口中咬断，扔掉。
English: Liu Bonsi, however, immediately put the wooden block in his mouth, bit it, and threw it away.

古文：以徐宣为丞相，樊崇为御史大夫，逢安为左大司马，谢禄为右大司马，其馀皆列卿、将军。
现代文：他任命徐宣为丞相，樊崇为御史大夫，逢安为左大司马，谢禄为右大司马，其余的全被任命为卿、将军。
English: He appointed Xu Xuan as chancellor, Zhi Chong as imperial secretary, Feng An as left grand secretary, Xero as right grand secretary, and the rest were all appointed as lord and general.

古文：盆子虽立，犹朝夕拜刘侠卿，时欲出从牧儿戏；侠卿怒止之，崇等亦不复候视也。
现代文：刘盆子虽被立为皇帝，但每天早晚还要叩拜刘侠卿。他时常想到外面去和牧童们嬉戏，刘侠卿愤怒地制止他。樊崇等人也不再来问候探视。
English: Although Liu Bonzi was made emperor, he still had to bow to Lord Liu Chia every morning and evening. He often wanted to go out and play with the shepherd boys, but Lord Liu Chia angrily stopped him. Yu Chong and others did not visit again.

古文：秋，七月，辛未，帝使使持节拜邓禹为大司徒，封酂侯，食邑万户；禹时年二十四。
现代文：秋季，七月辛未，汉光武帝刘秀派使者持符节任命邓禹当大司徒，封为侯，食邑一万户。当时邓禹二十四岁。
English: In the autumn, in the middle of July, Emperor Wu of the Han Dynasty Liu Xiu sent an envoy to hold a festival to appoint Deng Yu to be the grand steward, to be given the title of marquis, and to feed 10,000 households. At that time, Deng Yu was twenty-four years old.

古文：又议选大司空，帝以《赤伏符》曰 王梁主卫作玄武 ，丁丑，以野王令王梁为大司空。
现代文：又商议选任大司空，刘秀凭《赤伏符》上说的 王梁主卫作玄武 ，丁丑，任命野王县令王梁为大司空。
English: They also discussed the appointment of the chief steward of the sky, and Liu Xiu appointed Wang Liang as the chief steward of the sky, based on the story of Wang Liang as the hero and Ding Yuxi as the hero and Ding Yuxi as the chief steward of the sky in "Red Flag."

古文：又欲以谶文用平狄将军孙咸行大司马，众咸不悦。
现代文：刘秀又打算按照谶文中的话任命平狄将军孙咸代理大司马，对此大家都不高兴。
English: Liu Xiu also intends to appoint General Ping Di, Sun Xian, as acting chief secretary in accordance with the words in the article, and everyone is unhappy about this.

古文：壬午，以吴汉为大司马。
现代文：壬午，任命吴汉为大司马。
English: In Renwu, Wu Han was appointed as the chief secretary.

古文：初，更始以琅邪伏湛为平原太守。
现代文：起初，刘玄以琅邪人伏湛为平原郡太守。
English: At first, Liu Xuan made the evil man Fuzhan the governor of Pingyuan County.

古文：时天下兵起，湛独晏然，抚循百姓。
现代文：当时各地起兵，只有伏湛安抚百姓，安然不动。
English: At that time, troops were raised in various regions, but only Fozhan pacified the people and remained calm.

古文：门下督谋为湛起兵，湛收斩之。
现代文：门下督为伏湛策划起兵的事，伏湛将他逮捕处斩。
English: The subordinate governor planned to raise an army for Fuchan, and Fuchan arrested and beheaded him.

古文：于是吏民信向，平原一境赖湛以全。
现代文：因此官民信赖向往伏湛，整个平原境内仗着伏湛而保全下来。
English: Therefore, the public and private sectors rely on Futan, and the entire plains are protected by Futan.

古文：帝征湛为尚书，使典定旧制。
现代文：刘秀征召伏湛当尚书，让他负责整理旧有的典章制度。
English: Liu Xiu conscripted Fuzhan Dang Shangshu and put him in charge of sorting out the old award system.

古文：又以邓禹西征，拜湛为司直，行大司徒事。
现代文：又因邓禹率军西征，任命伏湛当司直，代理大司徒职务。
English: In addition, because Deng Yu led the army to the westward march, he appointed Foshan Dang Si Zhi Zhi, acting as the chief officer.

古文：车驾每出征伐，常留镇守。
现代文：刘秀每次外出亲征，往往留伏湛镇守。
English: Every time Liu Xiu went out to fight in person, he often stayed behind to guard the town of Taman.

古文：邓禹自汾阴渡河，入夏阳，更始左辅都尉公乘歙引其众十万，与左冯翊兵共拒禹于衙；禹复破走之。
现代文：邓禹从汾阴渡过黄河，进入夏阳。更始朝左辅都尉公乘歙率领部众十万人和左冯翊的军队在衙县共同抗拒邓禹。
English: Deng Yu crossed the Yellow River from Suyin and entered Xiayang. At the beginning of the war, the Left Assistant Captain of the Imperial General Staff, Guo Jian, led hundreds of thousands of people and Zuo Feng Yu's army to jointly resist Deng Yu in Suixian.

古文：宗室刘茂聚众京、密间，自称厌新将军，攻下颍川、汝南，众十馀万人。
现代文：邓禹再次打败敌人，公乘歙等逃走。刘氏宗室刘茂在京县和密县聚集兵众，自称厌新将军，攻下颖川、汝南，部众达十余万人。
English: Deng Yu once again defeated the enemy, and fled to Gongzheng and other places. Liu Shao, the Liu family's ancestor, gathered soldiers in Jing County and Mi County, claiming to hate the new general, and captured Yingchuan and Runan, with more than 100,000 soldiers.

古文：帝使骠骑大将军景丹、建威大将军耿弇、强弩将军陈俊攻之。
现代文：刘秀派骠骑大将军景丹、建威大将军耿、强弩将军陈俊攻打刘茂。
English: Liu Xiu sent the cavalry generals Jing Dan, Jian Wei, Geng, and Qiang Jun to attack Liu Mao.

古文：茂来降，封为中山王。
现代文：刘茂前来投降，刘秀封他为中山王。
English: Liu Mao came to surrender, and Liu Xiu made him the king of Zhongshan.

古文：己亥，帝幸怀，遣耿弇、陈俊军五社津，备荥阳以东；使吴汉率建义大将军硃祜等十一将军，围硃鲔于洛阳。
现代文：己亥，刘秀来到怀县，派遣耿、陈俊在五社津屯驻，防备荥阳以东的变化。命吴汉率领建议大将军朱祜等十一位将军包围朱鲔镇守的洛阳。
English: Ji Hai and Liu Xiu came to Huai County and sent Geng and Chen Jun to stay in Wushejin to guard against the changes east of Fenyang. Wu Han led the order to suggest that eleven generals, including General Zhu Xi, surround Luoyang, where Zhu Xi was garrison.

古文：八月，进幸河阳。
现代文：八月，刘秀前往河阳。
English: In August, Liu Xiu went to Heyang.

古文：李松自槀引兵还，从更始与赵萌共攻王匡、张卬于长安。
现代文：更始朝宰相李松从城领兵返回，跟从刘玄与赵萌一同进攻王匡、张，战于长安。
English: At the beginning of the Tang Dynasty, the Prime Minister Li Song returned from the city to lead the troops, followed by Liu Xuan and Zhao Meng to attack Wang Kuang and Zhang, and fought in Chang'an.

古文：连战月馀，匡等败走，更始徒居长信宫。
现代文：一连打了一个多月，王匡等败逃，刘玄迁居到长信宫。
English: They fought for more than a month, Wang Kuang and others fled in defeat, and Liu Xuan moved to Changxin Palace.

古文：赤眉至高陵，王匡、张卬等迎降之，遂共连兵进攻东都门。
现代文：赤眉军到达高陵，王匡、张等迎接并投降赤眉，于是共同连兵攻打长安东都门。
English: The Red Eyebrows army reached Gaoling, Wang Kuang, Zhang and others greeted and surrendered to the Red Eyebrows, so the joint company attacked the Chang'an Dongdu Gate.

古文：李松出战，赤眉生得松。
现代文：李松出战，赤眉军生擒李松。
English: Li Song goes to war, Red-Eyed Army Cadet Li Song.

古文：松弟况为城门校尉，开门纳之。
现代文：李松的弟弟李况担任城门校尉，他打开城门把赤眉军放了进来。
English: Li Song's younger brother, Li Zhan, served as the captain of the city gate. He opened the city gate and let the Red Eyed Army in.

古文：九月，赤眉入长安。更始单骑走，从厨城门出。
现代文：九月，赤眉军进入长安，刘玄一个人骑马从厨城门逃出长安。
English: In September, the Red Eyebrows entered Chang'an, and Liu Xuan escaped from Chang'an on horseback through the city gate.

古文：式侯恭以赤眉立其弟，自系诏狱；闻更始败走，乃出，见定陶王祉。
现代文：刘玄所封的式侯刘恭因为赤眉军拥立他的弟弟刘盆子做皇帝，就自己绑缚起来，囚禁诏狱。听说刘玄兵败逃跑，才出狱，去见定陶王刘祉。
English: Liu Xuan's vassal Liu Qiong, because the Red Eyed Peasants' Army supported his brother Liu Bonsi as emperor, tied himself up and was imprisoned in the imperial prison. When he heard that Liu Xuan's soldiers had fled, he left the prison and went to see the King of Dingtao, Liu Zhi.

古文：祉为之除械，相与从更始于渭滨。
现代文：刘祉替他除去身上的刑具，一起到渭水河畔跟随刘玄。
English: Liu Zhi removed the torture instruments from his body and went to the bank of the Surabaya River to follow Liu Xuan.

古文：右辅都尉严本，恐失更始为赤眉所诛，即将更始至高陵，本将兵宿卫，其实围之。
现代文：右辅都尉严本害怕刘玄被赤眉军所杀，就挟持刘玄到高陵，严本亲自率兵守卫，实际是把刘玄包围起来。
English: Right Assistant Captain Yan Ben was afraid that Liu Xuan would be killed by the Red Eyebrows, so he took Liu Xuan to Gaoling. Yan Ben personally led the soldiers to guard, and actually surrounded Liu Xuan.

古文：更始将相皆降赤眉，独丞相曹竟不降，手剑格死。
现代文：刘玄的文武官员全都投降了赤眉军，只有丞相曹竟不降，手持宝剑格斗而杀。
English: All of Liu Xuan's civil and military officials surrendered to the Red Eyebrows, but only the prime minister Cao did not surrender and was killed in a sword fight.

古文：辛未，诏封更始为淮阳王；吏民敢有贼害者，罪同大逆；其送诣吏者封列侯。
现代文：辛未，刘秀下诏封刘玄为淮阳王。诏书说，无论官吏或百姓敢有杀害刘玄的，罪与大逆相同；有把刘玄送到官府的，封为侯爵。
English: In Xinwei, Liu Xiu issued an edict to crown Liu Xuan as the king of Huaiyang. The edict said that no matter whether officials or ordinary people dared to kill Liu Xuan, the crime was the same as high treason; if anyone sent Liu Xuan to the government, he would be crowned as a marquis.

古文：初，宛人卓茂，宽仁恭爱，恬荡乐道，雅实不为华貌，行己在于清浊之间，自束发至白首，与人未尝有争竞，乡党故旧，虽行能与茂不同，而皆爱慕欣欣焉。
现代文：起初，宛城人卓茂宽厚仁义而谦恭爱人，性情恬淡坦荡而乐守圣贤之道，朴实无华而不修饰，行动在清浊之间而不偏激。从少年到白发的老年，从未跟人争执过，家乡的亲朋故友虽然品行才干与卓茂不同，却全都很爱慕他。
English: At first, Zhuo Mao, a citizen of Ancheng, was generous, benevolent and just, but also humble and respectful. His disposition was light and serene, and he enjoyed following the path of saints and sages. He was unpretentious and unadorned, and his actions were not extreme. From a young boy to a white-haired old man, he never quarreled with anyone. His relatives, friends and old friends in his hometown all adored him, although his character and talent were different from Zhuo Mao.

古文：哀、平间为密令，视民如子，举善而教，口无恶言，吏民亲爱，不忍欺之。
现代文：卓茂在西汉哀帝、平帝时当密县县令，把老百姓看做自己的儿女，推行仁政教化百姓，口无恶言，官民亲近热爱他，不忍心欺骗他。
English: Zhuo Mao was a county magistrate of Mi County during the reigns of Emperor Ming and Emperor Ping in the Western Han Dynasty. He regarded the common people as his own children, promoted benevolent government and educated the people, and never said a bad word. The officials and the people loved him and could not bear to deceive him.

古文：民尝有言部亭长受其米肉遗者，茂曰： 亭长为从汝求乎，为汝有事嘱之而受乎，将平居自以恩意遗之乎？ 
现代文：曾经有一个人上告说，卓茂属下的亭长接受了他所送的米和肉。卓茂说： 是亭长跟你要的吗，还是你有事托他而送给他，还是平时自有恩惠情义而送给他的呢？ 
English: A man once complained that the chief steward under Zhuo Mao had accepted the rice and meat he sent. Zhuo Mao said: Did the chief steward ask you for it, or did you entrust him with something and give it to him, or did you give it to him out of your own benevolence?

古文：民曰： 往遗之耳。 
现代文：那个人说： 是我自己送给他的。 
English: The man said: I gave it to him myself.

古文：茂曰： 遗之而受，何故言邪？ 
现代文：卓茂说： 是你自己送去他接受的，为什么还要上告呢？ 
English: Zhuo Mao said, "If you send it to him, he will accept it, so why say it again?"

古文：民曰： 窃闻贤明之君，使民不畏吏，吏不取民。
现代文：那个人说： 我听说贤明的君主让老百性不惧怕官吏，官吏也不向老百姓索取东西。
English: The man said, "I have heard that wise monarchs do not fear officials, and officials do not ask for things from ordinary people.

古文：今我畏吏，是以遗之；吏既卒受，故来言耳。 
现代文：而现在我畏惧官吏，所以送东西给他。而他最终接受了，所以我来报告。 
English: But now I'm afraid of officials, so I sent him something, and he finally accepted, so I came to report.

古文：茂曰： 汝为敝民矣！
现代文：卓茂说： 你是个坏百姓！
English: Zhuo Mao said: You are a bad person!

古文：凡人所以群居不乱，异于禽兽者，以有仁爱礼义，知相敬事也。
现代文：人所以聚集在一起有秩序地生活而不同于禽兽的原因，就在于人有仁爱礼义，懂得互相尊重。
English: The reason why people gather together to live in an orderly manner and are different from animals is that people are kind, courteous, and know how to respect each other.

古文：汝独不欲修之，宁能高飞远走，不在人间邪！
现代文：而你偏偏想不在乎这些，难道你能够远走高飞，脱离人间吗？
English: And you just don't want to care about these things. Can you just fly away and leave the human world?

古文：吏顾不当乘威力强请求耳。
现代文：官吏固然不应当凭权力强求索取。
English: Officials just shouldn't use their power to forcibly extort money from the people.

古文：亭长素善吏，岁时遗之，礼也。 
现代文：亭长向来是一位善良的官吏，每年按时送他一点东西，是符合礼的。 
English: The chief of the pavilion has always been a kind official, and it is proper to send him something on time every year.

古文：民曰： 苟如此，律何故禁之？ 
现代文：那个人说： 如果这样，法律为什么禁止呢？ 
English: The man said: If so, why does the law prohibit it?

古文：茂笑曰： 律设大法，礼顺人情。
现代文：卓茂笑着说： 法律设立行为的规范，礼则顺应人之常情。
English: Zhuo Mao said with a smile, "What the law sets up is the great law, and what is polite is human feelings."

古文：今我以礼教汝，汝必无怨恶；以律治汝，汝何所措其手足乎！
现代文：现在我用礼教诲你，你一定没有怨恨恶感；如果我用法律惩罚你，你将有什么举动呢？
English: Now that I've taught you manners, you must have no hatred or ill-feeling; if I punish you with the law, what will you do?

古文：一门之内，小者可论，大者可杀也。
现代文：同一个门内，罪过小的可以论罪，罪过大的可以杀头。
English: Within a group, the small ones can be discussed, the big ones have to be killed.

古文：且归念之。 
现代文：你且回去想想吧！ 
English: Go back and think about it!

古文：初，茂到县，有所废置，吏民笑之，邻城闻者皆蚩其不能。
现代文：当初，卓茂到密县上任后，有废除的事项，也有新设立的措施。
English: At first, after Zhuo Mao took office in Mixian County, there were matters of abolition, as well as newly established measures.

古文：河南郡为置守令；茂不为嫌，治事自若。
现代文：官民嘲笑他，邻城的人听说以后都叽笑他没有才干。河南郡为他设置了一位县令。卓茂并没有感到厌恶不满，照常办公。
English: The government and the people laughed at him, and the people in the neighboring city are said to have ridiculed him for his lack of ability. Henan County set up a county magistrate for him. Zhuo Mao did not feel disgusted or dissatisfied, and continued to work as usual.

古文：数年，教化大行，道不拾遗；迁京部丞，密人老少皆涕泣随送。
现代文：几年以后，他所推行的教化形成风气，以致路不拾遗。后卓茂升迁当京部丞，密县的老少全流着眼泪，一路跟随着为他送行。
English: A few years later, the indoctrination he carried out formed a culture, so much so that there is no trace of it. After Zhuo Mao was promoted to the post of Kyobujo, all the young and old in the county shed tears and followed him all the way.

古文：及王莽居摄，以病免归。
现代文：等到王莽摄政，卓茂因病辞官，回归故里。
English: Wait until Wang Mang, the regent, and Zhuo Mao, who resigned due to illness, return to their hometowns.

古文：上即位，先访求茂，茂时年七十馀。
现代文：刘秀称帝后，首先寻访卓茂的下落。卓茂当时已七十余岁。
English: Liu Xiu, known as the Empress, first searched for Zhuo Mao's whereabouts. Zhuo Mao was more than seventy years old at the time.

古文：甲申，诏曰： 夫名冠天下，当受天下重赏。
现代文：九月甲申，刘秀下诏书： 名誉满天下，应当受最重的奖赏。
English: In September, Jia Sheng and Liu Xiu issued an edict: "Your fame has spread all over the world, and you should receive the heaviest reward."

古文：今以茂为太傅，封褒德侯。 
现代文：现任命卓茂当太傅，封为褒德侯。 
English: Zhuo Mao is now appointed as Taifu, and is given the title of Hohenzollern.

古文：臣光曰：孔子称 举善而教不能，则劝 ，是以舜举皋陶，汤举伊尹，而不仁者远，有德故也。
现代文：臣司马光曰：孔子说： 推举善行，教育能力弱的人，人们就能互相劝勉。 所以，虞舜推荐皋陶，商汤推荐伊尹，邪恶不仁的人远去，是因为这两人品德高尚的缘故。
English: Subordinate Sima Guang said: Confucius said: People can encourage each other by praising good deeds and educating those who are weak. Therefore, the reason why Yu Xi recommended Shao Tao, Shang Tang recommended Yi Yin, and those who are evil and unkind go far away is because of the high moral character of these two people.

古文：光武即位之初，群雄竞逐，四海鼎沸，彼摧坚陷敌之人，权略诡辩之士，方见重于世，而独能取忠厚之臣，旌循良之吏，拔于草莱之中，实诸群公之首，宜其光复旧物，享祚久长，盖由知所先务而得其本原故也。
现代文：光武帝刚刚即位，群雄竞逐，四海之内像滚水般沸腾。那些冲锋陷阵的人，有权谋而善辩的人，正为世人所敬重。而唯独光武帝能起用忠厚之臣，表彰奉公守法的官吏，从社会最底层选拔人才，安排在公卿首位。他所以能光复汉室，长治久安，是由于他知道首先必须做什么才能达到根本目的的缘故。
English: Emperor Guangwu had just ascended to the throne, and the four seas were churning like boiling water as the heroes competed. Those who charged into battle, those who had the right to seek and argue, were respected by the world. However, Emperor Guangwu was the only one who could appoint loyal subjects, commend officials who obeyed the law, select talents from the lowest level of society, and place them at the top of the nobility. He was able to restore the Han dynasty and maintain long-term peace because he knew what he had to do first in order to achieve his fundamental goal.

古文：诸将围洛阳数月，硃鲔坚守不下。
现代文：刘秀的将领们包围洛阳达几个月，因朱鲔坚守而未能攻下。
English: Liu Xiu's generals besieged Luoyang for several months, but were unable to capture it due to Zhu Xi's steadfast defense.

古文：帝以廷尉岑彭尝为鲔校尉，令往说之。
现代文：刘秀因为廷尉岑彭曾经当过朱鲔的校尉，所以派岑彭前去说服朱鲔。
English: Liu Xiu sent Zou Peng to persuade Zhu Rong because he had once been Zhu Rong's lieutenant.

古文：鲔在城上，彭在城下，为陈成败。
现代文：朱鲔在城上，岑彭在城下向朱鲔陈述利害得失。
English: Zhu Xi was on the top of the castle, and Zibo Peng was on the bottom of the castle to explain to Zhu Xi the gains and losses.

古文：鲔曰： 大司徒被害时，鲔与共谋，又谏更始无遣萧王北伐，诚自知罪深，不敢降！ 
现代文：朱鲔说： 大司徒刘被害时，我曾经参与谋划，又曾劝更始不要派遣萧王北伐。我确知自己罪孽深重，不敢投降。 
English: Zhu Xi said, "When the Grand Master Liu was killed, I had participated in the planning, and I had also advised not to send Xiao Wang to the Northern Expedition. I knew for sure that I was deeply guilty, and I did not dare to surrender.

古文：彭还，具言于帝。
现代文：岑彭返回，把这些话向刘秀禀报。
English: Nie Peng returned and reported these words to Liu Xiuyao.

古文：帝曰： 举大事者不忌小怨。
现代文：刘秀说： 做大事的人不计较小怨。
English: Liu Xiu said: Those who do big things do not care about minor grievances.

古文：鲔今若降，官爵可保，况诛罚乎！
现代文：朱鲔现在如果投降，可保全官职和爵位，怎么能够治罪呢？
English: If Zhu Xi surrenders now, he can keep his official position and peerage. How can he be punished?

古文：河水在此，吾不食言！ 
现代文：有黄河水在此作证，我决不食言！ 
English: With the Yellow River water here to testify, I will never go back on my word!

古文：彭复往告鲔，鲔从城上下索曰： 必信，可乘此上。 
现代文：岑彭又前去向朱鲔转告刘秀的话。朱鲔从城上垂下大绳子，说： 如果你说的确实是真的，请用绳子上城。 
English: Zhaopeng then went to tell Zhu Xi about Liu Xiu's words. Zhu Xi hung a large rope from the city and said, "If what you say is true, please use the rope to go to the city."

古文：彭趣索欲上，鲔见其诚，即许降。
现代文：岑彭向前准备攀登，朱鲔看到他的诚意，就答应投降。
English: Zhaopeng prepared to climb, but Zhu Xi saw his sincerity and agreed to surrender.

古文：辛卯，硃鲔面缚，与岑彭俱诣河阳。
现代文：九月辛卯，朱鲔把自己反绑起来，和岑彭一起到河阳。
English: In September of Xinwu, Zhu Xi tied himself up and went to Kheyang with Zhaopeng.

古文：帝解其缚，召见之，复令彭夜送鲔归城。
现代文：刘秀解下他身上捆绑的绳索，接见了他，又让岑彭连夜送他返回洛阳城。
English: Liu Xiuxiu untied the ropes tied to his body, received him, and asked Yao Peng to take him back to Luoyang City overnight.

古文：明旦，与苏茂等悉其众出降。
现代文：第二天早晨，朱鲔和苏茂等带领全体官兵出城投降。
English: The next morning, Zhu Xi and Sumo led all officers and soldiers out of the city to surrender.

古文：拜鲔为平狄将军，封扶沟侯；后为少府，传封累世。
现代文：刘秀任命朱鲔为平狄将军，封扶沟侯。朱鲔后当少府，封爵世代相传。
English: Liu Xiu appointed Zhu Xi as the General of Ping Di, and gave him the title of Fu Gou. After that, Zhu Xi became a minor prefect, and the title of peer was passed down from generation to generation.

古文：帝使侍御史河内杜诗安集洛阳。
现代文：刘秀派侍御史河内人杜诗安抚洛阳民心。
English: Liu Xiu sent Du Si, the governor of Hanoi, to appease the people of Luoyang.

古文：将军萧广纵兵士暴横，诗敕晓不改，遂格杀广。
现代文：将军萧广纵容部下为非作歹，杜诗劝戒告谕但萧广不改。
English: General Xiao Guang indulged his subordinates in wrongdoing, Du Si exhorted and admonished, but Xiao Guang did not change.

古文：还，以状闻。
现代文：于是杜诗杀了萧广，回来后把情况报告刘秀。
English: So Du Si killed Xiao Guang and reported the situation to Liu Xiu after returning.

古文：上召见，赐以棨戟，遂擢任之。
现代文：刘秀接见杜诗，赐给他官吏出行时作前导的戟，并提升官职。
English: Liu Xiu met with Du Si, gave him a gong to guide officials when they travel, and promoted him to a higher position.

古文：冬，十月，癸丑，车驾入洛阳，幸南宫，遂定都焉。
现代文：冬季，十月癸丑，刘秀进入洛阳，临幸南宫，于是定都。
English: In the winter, in October, Liu Xiu entered Luoyang and went to the Southern Palace, thus establishing the capital.

古文：赤眉下书曰： 圣公降者，封为长沙王；过二十日，勿受。 
现代文：赤眉拥立的刘盆子颁布诏书说： 刘玄如果投降，封为长沙王。超过二十天就不再接受。 
English: The red-browed Liu Bonsi issued an edict saying, "If Liu Xuan surrenders, he will be crowned the King of Changsha. If it takes more than twenty days, he will no longer be accepted."

古文：更始遣刘恭请降，赤眉使其将谢禄往受之。
现代文：刘玄派遣刘恭去请降。赤眉命右大司马谢禄前往接受刘玄投降。
English: Liu Xuan sent Liu Gong to ask for his surrender. Ma Xuelu, the right-hand man of Red Eyebrow, went to accept Liu Xuan's surrender.

古文：更始随禄，肉袒，上玺绶于盆子。
现代文：刘玄跟着谢禄，光着臂膀，向刘盆子呈上玉玺、绶带。
English: Liu Xuan followed Xielu, bare-armed, and presented Liu Bonsi with a jade bracelet and sash.

古文：赤眉坐更始，置庭中，将杀之；刘恭、谢禄为请，不能得，遂引更始出。
现代文：赤眉将领们让刘玄坐在大庭中央，准备杀他。刘恭、谢禄替他求情，不被采纳。
English: The red-browed generals made Liu Xuan sit in the center of the courtyard and prepared to kill him. Liu Gong and Xie Lu pleaded for him and were not accepted.

古文：刘恭追呼曰： 臣诚力极，请得先死！ 
现代文：然后赤眉将领们把刘玄拉出去行刑。刘恭一面追一面大声喊： 陛下！我已经尽了最大的努力，请让我先死！ 
English: Then the red-browed generals dragged Liu Xuan out to be executed. Liu Gong chased him and shouted loudly: "Your Majesty! I have done my best, please let me die first!"

古文：拔剑欲自刎。樊崇等遽共救止之。
现代文：拔剑就要自刎，樊崇等急忙一同上前救助，制止了他。
English: When he drew his sword, he was about to stab himself, and Gong Chong and the others rushed forward to help him and stopped him.

古文：乃赦更始，封为畏威侯。
现代文：这才赦免了刘玄，封为畏威侯。
English: It was only then that Liu Xuan was pardoned and given the title of Cui Wei Hou.

古文：刘恭复为固请，竟得封长沙王。
现代文：刘恭又坚持替刘玄请求，刘玄终于得以被封为长沙王。
English: Liu Qiong once again pleaded for his release, and was even crowned the King of Changsha.

古文：更始常依谢禄居，刘恭亦拥护之。
现代文：刘玄常常依靠谢禄，和他在一起居住，刘恭也支持保护他。
English: Liu Xuan often relied on Xuelu and lived with him. Liu Gong also supported and protected him.

古文：刘盆子居长乐宫，三辅郡县、营长遣使贡献，兵士辄剽夺之，又数暴掠吏民，由是皆复固守。
现代文：刘盆子住在长乐宫，三辅各郡县和营寨的首领派使节进贡。兵士们每每在途中劫夺财物，又多次残暴地掠夺官民，官民因此全都又回到各自的营寨坚守。
English: Liu Bonsi lived in Changle Palace, and the leaders of the counties and camps in Sanfu sent envoys to pay tribute. The soldiers often robbed property on the way, and many times brutally plundered officials and civilians. As a result, officials and civilians all returned to their respective camps to stand firm.

古文：百姓不知所归，闻邓禹乘胜独克而师行有纪，皆望风相携负以迎军，降者日以千数，众号百万。
现代文：三辅百姓不知应归附谁，听说唯独邓禹的军队连打胜仗，且军纪严明，于是全都扶老携幼，老远看见邓禹的军队即迎上前去，归顺的人每天以千数计算，部众号称百万。
English: The people of Sanfu didn't know who to follow. They heard that Deng Yu's army was the only one to win consecutive battles, and that military discipline was strict. So they all supported the old and the young. They saw Deng Yu's army coming from far away. The number of people who surrendered was counted in thousands every day, and the number of followers was said to be millions.

古文：禹所止，辄停车拄节以劳来之，父老、童稚，垂发、戴白满其车下，莫不感悦，于是名震关西。
现代文：邓禹所到之处，都停车竖起符节，慰劳归顺的百姓。父老儿童满满地围在邓禹车下，没有不感激喜悦的。于是邓禹的威名震动关西。
English: Wherever Deng Yu went, people would stop their cars and put up symbols to comfort the people who had surrendered. Fathers and children crowded around Deng Yu's car, filled with gratitude and joy. As a result, Deng Yu's prestige shook Kansai.

古文：诸将豪桀皆劝禹径攻长安，禹曰： 不然。
现代文：各位将领豪杰都劝邓禹直接攻打长安。邓禹说： 不能这样。
English: All the generals and heroes advised Deng Yu to directly attack Chang'an. Deng Yu said: This cannot be done.

古文：今吾众虽多，能战者少，前无可仰之积，后无转馈之资；赤眉新拔长安，财谷充实，锋锐未可当也。
现代文：眼下我们的人数虽然多，可是能打仗的人少。前面没有可依靠的粮草，后面没有运送给我们的物资。赤眉军刚刚攻占长安，钱粮充足，锐不可当。
English: Right now, although there are more of us, there are fewer people who can fight. There is no reliable grain and grass in the front, and there is no material delivered to us in the back. The Red Eyebrows Army has just captured Chang'an, and there is plenty of money and grain, so it can't be done.

古文：夫盗贼群居无终日之计，财谷虽多，变故万端，宁能坚守者也！
现代文：一群强盗匪徒纠合到一起没有长远打算，他们钱粮虽然多，但变故太多，岂能长期固守！
English: A group of robbers and bandits get entangled together without a long-term plan. Although they have more money and grain, they have changed too much. How can they stick to it for a long time?

古文：上郡、北地、安定三郡，土广人稀，饶谷多畜，吾且休兵北道，就粮养士，以观其敝，乃可图也。 
现代文：上郡、北地、安定三郡，地广人稀，粮食丰富，牲畜繁多。我暂且领兵向北，到粮多的地方休养军队，以等待赤眉军疲惫，那时才可图谋消灭他们。 
English: Shang County, Beidai County, and Anding County are widely sparsely populated, rich in grain, and abundant in livestock. I will temporarily lead the troops to the north, to a place with more grain to recuperate the army, to wait for the Red Eyebrows to get tired, and then I can try to destroy them.

古文：于是引军北至栒邑，所到，诸营保郡邑皆开门归附。
现代文：于是率军向北到达邑。所到之处，各营寨郡邑全都开门归顺。
English: So he led his army north to the townships. Everywhere he went, the townships all opened their doors and surrendered.

古文：上遣岑彭击荆州群贼，下犨、叶等十馀城。
现代文：刘秀派岑彭攻打荆州一带的众贼军，攻下、叶等十余城。
English: Liu Xiu sent Zi Peng to attack the bandit army around Jingzhou, capturing more than ten cities including Ye.

古文：十一月，甲午，上幸怀。
现代文：十一月甲午，刘秀到达怀地。
English: On the afternoon of November 1st, Liu Xiu arrived in Huaiji.

古文：梁王永称帝于睢阳。
现代文：梁王刘永在睢阳称帝。
English: Liang Wang Liu Yong was crowned emperor in Fenyang.

古文：十二月，丙戌，上还洛阳。
现代文：十二月丙戌，刘秀返回洛阳。
English: In December, Liu Xiu returned to Luoyang.

古文：三辅苦赤眉暴虐，皆怜更始，欲盗出之；张卬等深以为虑，使谢禄缢杀之。
现代文：三辅人民苦于赤眉军的暴虐，全都怜悯刘玄，想把他从赤眉军中救出来。张等深感忧虑，于是让谢禄勒死刘玄。
English: The people of Sanfu suffered from the tyranny of the Red Eyebrows, and they all pitied Liu Xuan and wanted to save him from the Red Eyebrows. Zhang et al. were deeply worried, so they let Sheru strangle Liu Xuan.

古文：刘恭夜往，收藏其尸。
现代文：刘恭连夜前往，收藏刘玄的尸体。
English: Liu Qiong went there overnight to collect Liu Xuan's body.

古文：帝诏邓禹葬之于霸陵。
现代文：刘秀听说，命邓禹把他安葬在霸陵。
English: Liu Xiu heard that Deng Yu ordered him to be buried in the Mausoleum.

古文：中郎将宛人赵熹将出武关，道遇更始亲属，皆裸跣饥困，熹竭其资粮以与之，将护而前。
现代文：原刘玄的中郎将宛城人赵熹将要出武关，在道上遇到刘玄的亲属，全都光着脚，饥饿困乏。赵熹拿出自己的全部财物粮食给他们，护送他们前行。
English: The original Liu Xuan's middle brother will be addressed to the city people Zhao Xuan is about to leave Wuguan. On the road, he encounters Liu Xuan's relatives, all barefoot and hungry. Zhao Xuan takes out all his wealth and grain to them and escorts them forward.

古文：宛王赐闻之，迎还乡里。
现代文：宛王刘赐得到消息，派人迎接，送还故乡。
English: When Liu Bei received the news, he sent someone to meet him and send him back to his hometown.

古文：隗嚣归天水，复招聚其众，兴修故业，自称西州上将军。
现代文：隗嚣回到天水，又招集部众，重整旧时功业，自称西州上将军。
English: He returned to Tianshui in a huff, summoned his subordinates again, reorganized his old work, and called himself the general of Xizhou.

古文：三辅士大夫避乱者多归嚣，嚣倾身引接，为布衣交；以平陵范逡为师友，前凉州刺史河南郑兴为祭酒，茂陵申屠刚、杜林为治书，马援为绥德将军，杨广、王遵、周宗及平襄行巡、阿阳王捷、长陵王元为大将军，安陵班彪之属为宾客，由此名震西州，闻于山东。
现代文：三辅的士大夫为了避乱，大都归附隗嚣。隗嚣热诚接待，像平民一样交为朋友。他任命平陵人范逡为师友，以前凉州刺史河内人郑兴为祭酒，以茂陵人申屠刚、杜林为治书，以马援为绥德将军，以杨广、王遵、周宗以及平襄人行巡、阿阳人王捷、长陵人王元为大将军，以安陵人班彪等为宾客，由此威名震动西方州郡，闻名于崤山以东。
English: In order to avoid the turmoil, most of the three assistant magistrates were subordinated to Yan Han. Yan Han warmly received them and made friends with them like commoners. He appointed Fan Qi from Pingling as his mentor and friend, Zheng Xing from Hanoi as the sacrificial wine, Shen Tuo Gang and Du Lin from Muring as the magistrates, Ma Yuan as the general of Xingde, Yang Guang, Wang Zun, Zhou Zong and Pingxiang as the generals, Wang Jie from Ayang and Wang Yuan from Changling as the guests, and Ban Biao from Anling as the guests. As a result, the reputation of Xizhou County was shaken

古文：马援少时，以家用不足辞其兄况，欲就边郡田牧。
现代文：马援年轻时，因家庭贫困，辞别哥哥马况，准备到边郡一带种田放牧。
English: When Ma Yuan was young, due to the poverty of his family, he said goodbye to his brother Ma Quan and prepared to go to the farmland and pasture in the area of Bian County.

古文：况曰： 汝大才，当晚成。良工不示人以朴，且从所好。 
现代文：马况说： 你是大器晚成的人，能工巧匠不把未雕琢的玉石拿给人看。
English: Ma Jian said, "You are a late bloomer. Skilled craftsmen don't show uncut jade to others.

古文：遂之北地田牧。
现代文：权且按照你自己的意愿，想干什么就干什么吧。 
English: You have the right to do whatever you want according to your own will.

古文：常谓宾客曰： 丈夫为志，穷当益坚，老当益壮。 
现代文：于是马援到北地种田放牧。他常对宾客们说： 大丈夫立志，穷困的时候应当更坚定，年老的时候应当更雄壮。 
English: As a result, Ma Yuan went to the North to farm and graze cattle. He often said to his guests: It's all right to be determined. When you are poor, you should be more determined. When you are old, you should be more majestic.

古文：后有畜数千头，谷数万斛，既而叹曰： 凡殖财产，贵其能赈施也，否则守钱虏耳！ 
现代文：后来，他拥有数千头牲畜，数万斛粮食。不久又叹息说： 增长财富，可贵之处在于能够赈济施舍，否则的话，不过是守财奴罢了！ 
English: Later, he owned thousands of livestock and tens of thousands of bushels of grain. Soon he sighed and said, "The precious part of growing wealth is to be able to give alms, otherwise, you are just a miser!"

古文：乃尽散于亲旧。
现代文：于是把全部家产分送给亲友故旧。
English: As a result, he gave away all of his family's property to relatives and friends.

古文：闻隗嚣好士，往从之。
现代文：得知隗嚣礼贤下士，就去投奔他。
English: When he learned of Corporal Lei Xian's arrogance, he went to join him.

古文：嚣其敬重，与决筹策。
现代文：隗嚣十分敬重马援，让他参与筹划决策。
English: Gong Han respected Ma Yuan very much and let him participate in the planning and decision-making.

古文：班彪，穉之子也。
现代文：班彪是班的儿子。
English: Ban Biao is the son of Ban.

古文：初，平陵窦融累世仕宦河西，知其土俗，与更始右大司马赵萌善，私谓兄弟曰： 天下安危未可知。
现代文：当初，平陵人窦融一家几代人曾在河西地区做官，了解当地的风土民情。窦融和刘玄的右大司马赵萌关系很好。窦融私下跟他的弟弟说： 天下是安定还是混乱，不可预测。
English: At the beginning, several generations of Dou Rong's family from Pingling worked as officials in the Hexi region to understand the local customs. Dou Rong and Liu Xuan's right-hand man, Ma Zhao Meng, had a good relationship. Dou Rong said to his brother in private: Whether the world is stable or chaotic is unpredictable.

古文：河西殷富，带河为固，张掖属国精兵万骑，一旦缓急，杜绝河津，足以自守，此遗种处也！ 
现代文：河西一带殷实富足，有黄河作为牢固的屏障。张掖属国有一万精锐骑兵，一旦有什么变化，切断黄河渡口，完全可以自守。
English: The area west of the river is rich and plentiful, with the Yellow River as a solid barrier. Zhangye's country has 10,000 elite cavalrymen, and if anything changes, they can cut off the Yellow River ferry and completely defend themselves.

古文：乃因萌求往河西。
现代文：这是保全我们子孙免于灭绝的地方！ 
English: This is the place to save our children and grandchildren from extinction!

古文：萌荐融于更始，以为张掖属国都尉。
现代文：于是，窦融凭借赵萌的关系请求前往河西。赵萌向刘玄举荐窦融，窦融被任命为张掖属国都尉。
English: As a result, Dou Rong requested to go to Hexi by virtue of Zhao Meng's relationship. Zhao Meng recommended Dou Rong to Liu Xuan, and Dou Rong was appointed as Zhang Ye's provincial captain.

古文：融既到，抚结雄桀，怀辑羌虏，甚得其欢心。
现代文：他到任后，抚慰结交豪杰，笼络西羌各部族，深得他们的欢心。
English: After he took office, he consoled and befriended the heroes, embraced the tribes of Xidi, and won their hearts.

古文：是时，酒泉太守安定梁统、金城太守库钧、张掖都尉茂陵史苞、酒泉都尉竺曾、敦煌都尉辛肜，并州郡英俊，融皆与厚善。
现代文：当时，酒泉太守安定人梁统、金城太守库钧、张掖都尉茂陵人史苞、酒泉都尉竺曾、敦煌都尉辛肜都是州郡的英雄俊杰，窦融全都和他们交往甚厚。
English: At that time, Jiuquan Governor-General Stableman Liang Tong, Jincheng Governor-General Ku Ye, Zhangye Lieutenant-General Muring, Jiuquan Lieutenant-General Zeng Zeng and Dunhuang Lieutenant-General Xin Ye were all heroes of the county, and Dou Rong had a close relationship with all of them.

古文：及更始败，融与梁统等计议曰： 今天下扰乱，未知所归。
现代文：等到更始朝覆亡，窦融跟梁统等计议说： 现在天下大乱，我们不知应归往何处。
English: Waiting for the first defeat, Dou Rong and Liang Tong said in their deliberation: "If we make a fuss today, I don't know what the outcome will be."

古文：河西斗绝在羌、胡中，不同心戮力，则不能自守，权钧力齐，复无以相率，当推一人为大将军，共全五部，观时变动。 
现代文：河西一带偏处在羌人和胡人之间，如果不同心协力，就不能自守。
English: The west of the river is located between the Xiong people and the Hu people. If they do not work together, they will not be able to defend themselves.

古文：议既定，而各谦让。
现代文：大家的权力和力量都相等，又谁也不能统率谁。
English: Everyone's power and strength are equal, and no one can lead anyone.

古文：以位次，咸共推梁统；统固辞，乃推融行河西五郡大将军事。
现代文：我们应当推举一人做大将军，共同保全五郡，观察时局的变化。 商定之后，大家各自谦让。
English: We should nominate one person to be the grand general, jointly preserve the five counties, and observe the changes in the current situation.

古文：武威太守马期、张掖太守任仲并孤立无党，乃共移书告示之，二人即解印绶去。
现代文：按照地位的高低，一致推举梁统当大将军。梁统坚决推辞，于是推举窦融代理河西五郡大将军职务。武威太守马期、张掖太守任仲，全都孤立没有党援，于是窦融等写信给他们，告知形势。二人马上交出印章绶带离开。
English: According to the level of status, they unanimously elected Liang Tong as the general. Liang Tong firmly refused, so they elected Dou Rong as the acting general of the five counties in Hexi. Wu Wei and Zhang Qian were both isolated without party support, so Dou Rong and others wrote to them to inform them of the situation. The two immediately handed over the seal and sash and left.

古文：于是以梁统为武威太守，史苞为张掖太守，竺曾为酒泉太守，辛肜为敦煌太守。
现代文：于是任命梁统当武威太守，史苞当张掖太守，竺曾当酒泉太守，辛肜当敦煌太守。
English: As a result, Liang Tong was appointed as the governor of Wuwei, Shi Zheng as the governor of Zhangye, Zeng Zeng as the governor of Jiuquan and Xin Zheng as the governor of Dunhuang.

古文：融居属国，领都尉职如故；置从事，监察五郡。
现代文：窦融居住在张掖属国，依然同以前一样任都尉职，同时设置从事，监督五郡。
English: Dou Rong lives in Zhang Ye's territory. He still holds the post of captain as before, and is also set up to supervise the five counties.

古文：河西民俗质朴，而融等政亦宽和，上下相亲，晏然富殖。
现代文：河西一带民风质朴，而窦融等也为政宽厚平和，上下相亲，一片安乐富足的景象。
English: The folk customs of Hexi are simple, and the politics such as Dou Rong are also amicable, the upper and lower levels are close to each other, and it is safe and prosperous.

古文：修兵马，习战射，明烽燧，羌、胡犯塞，融辄自将与诸郡相救，皆如符要，每辄破之。
现代文：并训练兵马，学习射箭，点燃烽火。羌人和胡人进犯边塞，窦融就亲自领兵和各郡的军队相救助，每次出击都不失期约，每战大都破敌军。
English: He also trained soldiers and horses, learned archery, and lit bonfires. The Yao people and the Hu people attacked the border fortress, and Dou Rong personally led the soldiers and the army of each county to help. Each attack did not miss the deadline, and most of the enemy troops were defeated in each battle.

古文：其后羌、胡皆震服亲附，内郡流民避凶饥者归之不绝。
现代文：以后，羌人胡人全都被威名所震，由此亲近归附。内地躲避战乱饥饿的百姓也络绎不绝地归顺窦融。
English: Afterward, all the Xiong people and the Hu people were shocked by the prestige, and thus they were close to the annexation. The people in the inland who were avoiding the war and hunger also continuously surrendered to Dou Rong.

古文：王莽之世，天下咸思汉德，安定三水卢芳居左谷中，诈称武帝曾孙刘文伯，云 曾祖母，匈奴浑邪王之姊也 。
现代文：王莽当政时，天下人都思念汉朝的恩惠。安定三水人卢芳住在左谷中，诈称自己是汉武帝的曾孙刘文伯，说： 我的曾祖母是匈奴浑邪王的姐姐。 
English: When Wang Mang was in power, people all over the world pined for the bounty of the Han Dynasty. Lu Fang, a member of the Three Water Tribes, lived in Zuo Valley and falsely claimed to be Liu Wenbo, the great-grandson of Emperor Wu of Han, saying, "My great-grandmother was the sister of the evil Hun king.

古文：常以是言诳惑安定间。
现代文：他常用这些话在安定一带欺骗迷惑人。
English: Lu Fang often used these words to deceive and confuse the stable.

古文：王莽末，乃与三水属国羌、胡起兵。
现代文：王莽末年，他和三水属国的羌人、胡人一同起兵。
English: In the last years of Wang Mang's life, he raised an army together with the Xiongren and Hu people of Sanshui Province.

古文：更始至长安，征芳为骑都尉，使镇抚安定以西。
现代文：刘玄到达长安，征召卢芳做骑都尉，让他镇守安抚安定以西地区。
English: He first went to Chang'an and appointed Lu Fang as a cavalry captain to calm and pacify the west of Ding'an.

古文：更始败，三水豪桀共立芳为上将军、西平王，使使与西羌、匈奴结和亲。
现代文：刘玄败亡，三水豪杰共同拥立卢芳为上将军、西平王。卢芳派使节同西羌、匈奴建立和亲关系。
English: Liu Xuan was defeated, and the three water heroes jointly supported Lu Fang as the supreme general and Xiping King. Lu Fang sent envoys to establish friendly relations with Xidi and Xiongnu.

古文：单于以为： 汉氏中绝，刘氏来归，我亦当如呼韩邪立之，令尊事我。 
现代文：匈奴单于认为： 汉朝政权中断，刘氏皇族前来归附，我也应当像当年汉朝扶立呼韩邪那样，扶立卢芳，让他尊敬事奉我。 
English: Xiong Niu Shan Yu thought: The Han Dynasty was no longer in power, and the Liu royal family came to accede to it. I should do as the Han Dynasty did in the past, summon Han Zhe, summon Lu Fang, and have him respectfully serve me.

古文：乃使句林王将数千骑迎芳兄弟入匈奴，立芳为汉帝，以芳弟程为中郎将，将胡骑还入安定。
现代文：于是命句林王率领数千骑兵迎接卢芳兄弟到匈奴，立卢芳为汉帝；任命卢芳的弟弟卢程为中郎将，让他们率领胡人的骑兵回到安定。
English: Therefore, King Lin led thousands of cavalry to welcome the Lu Fang brothers to the Xiongnu, and appointed Lu Fang as the Han Emperor; appointed Lu Fang's brother Lu Cheng as the middle brother, and let them lead the Hu people's cavalry back to stability.

古文：帝以关中未定，而邓禹久不进兵，赐书责之曰： 司徒，尧也；亡贼，桀也。
现代文：刘秀因为关中还未平定，而邓禹久不发兵进攻长安，写信责备他说： 你作为大司徒，应是圣明的唐尧；亡命的贼寇，应是暴虐的夏桀。
English: Because Guanzhong was not yet pacified, and Deng Yu did not send troops to attack Chang'an for a long time, Liu Xiu wrote a letter to reproach him: You, as the chief disciple, should be the saintly Tang Xuan; the fugitive thief should be the tyrannical Xia Xuan.

古文：长安吏民遑遑无所依归，宜以时进讨，镇慰西京，系百姓之心。 
现代文：长安城的官民们担惊受怕，无依无靠，你应该抓住时机进军讨伐，坐镇抚慰长安，维系民心！ 
English: The officials and people of Chang'an City are scared and helpless. You should seize the opportunity to march into the crusade, comfort Chang'an, and maintain the people's hearts!

古文：禹犹执前意，别攻上郡诸县，更征兵引谷，归至大要。
现代文：邓禹还是坚持以前自己的意见，另去攻打上郡各县，继而征兵运粮，返回大要。
English: Deng Yu still insisted on his previous opinion, and went to attack the counties in the upper county, and then conscripted soldiers to transport grain, and returned to the capital.

古文：积弩将军冯愔、车骑将军宗歆守栒邑，二人争权相攻，愔遂杀歆，因反击禹，禹遣使以闻。
现代文：积弩将军冯、车骑将军宗歆同守邑，二人因争权而互相攻打。冯于是杀了宗歆，并乘机反过来攻打邓禹。
English: Jiechi General Feng and Chariot General Zonglu were in the same village, and the two fought each other for power. Feng then killed Zonglu and took the opportunity to attack Deng Yu.

古文：帝问使人： 愔所亲爱为谁？ 
现代文：邓禹派人向刘秀报告。刘秀问使人： 冯最亲近的人是谁？ 
English: Deng Yu sent someone to report to Liu Xiu. Liu Xiu asked: Who is the closest person to Feng?

古文：对曰： 护军黄防。 
现代文：使人回答说： 是护军黄防。 
English: The envoy replied: It is the Yellow Guards.

古文：帝度愔、防不能久和，势必相忤，因报禹曰： 缚冯愔者，必黄防也。 
现代文：刘秀估计冯、黄防两人不可能长久和睦，势必互相冲突，因此回答邓禹说： 逮捕冯的人，一定是黄防。 
English: Liu Xiu estimated that the two people, Feng and Huang Bao, could not be reconciled for a long time and were bound to clash with each other. Therefore, Deng Yu replied: The person who arrested Feng must be Huang Bao.

古文：乃遣尚书宗广持节往降之。
现代文：于是刘秀派遣尚书宗广持符节前往招降。
English: As a result, Liu Xiu sent Shang Shuzong Guangzhi to recruit soldiers.

古文：后月馀，防果执愔，将其众归罪。
现代文：过了一个多月，黄防果然抓获了冯，率领他的军队回来请罪。
English: After more than a month, Huang Bao finally captured Feng and led his army back to plead guilty.

古文：更始诸将王匡、胡殷、成丹等皆诣广降，广与东归；至安邑，道欲亡，广悉斩之。
现代文：刘玄的几位将领王匡、胡殷、成丹等全都到宗广处投降。宗广和他们一同东归。走到安邑，王匡等半路上打算逃跑，宗广把他们全部处斩。
English: Several of Liu Xuan's generals, including Wang Kuang, Hu Yin, and Cheng Tan, all surrendered to Zongguang. Zongguang returned east with them. When they reached Anyi, Wang Kuang and the others planned to flee halfway, but Zongguang executed them all.

古文：愔之叛也，引兵西向天水；隗嚣逆击，破之于高平，尽获其辎重。
现代文：冯叛变时，曾领兵向西攻打天水，隗嚣迎击，在高平打败冯，夺得全部辎重。
English: When Feng mutinied, Zeng led his troops to the west to attack Tianshui, met the attack, defeated Feng in Gaoping, and won all the weight.

古文：于是禹承制遣使持节命嚣为西州大将军，得专制凉州、朔方事。
现代文：于是邓禹代表皇帝派遣使者持符节任命隗嚣为西州大将军，能够全权处理凉州、朔方的事务。
English: As a result, Deng Yu, adhering to the emperor's will, dispatched an envoy to be the general of Xizhou, and was able to dictate the political affairs of Liangzhou and Shuo Fang.

古文：腊日，赤眉设乐大会，酒未行，群臣更相辩斗；而兵众遂各逾宫，斩关入，掠酒肉，互相杀伤。
现代文：腊祭这一天，赤眉安排奏乐，举行盛大宴会。
English: On the day of the wax festival, the Red Eyebrows arranged music and held a grand banquet.

古文：卫尉诸葛穉闻之，勒兵入，格杀百馀人，乃定。
现代文：还没开始喝酒，群臣互相吵闹争斗。兵众于是各自跳墙进皇宫，劈开宫门而入，掠夺酒肉，互相残杀。卫尉诸葛得到消息，率军队进入皇宫，格杀一百余人，才平息了骚乱。
English: Before the drinking had begun, the courtiers were quarreling and fighting with each other. The soldiers then each jumped over the wall into the imperial palace, broke open the palace gate, plundered the wine and meat, and killed each other. The guard officer Zhuge got the news, led the army into the imperial palace, and killed more than a hundred people, before quelling the unrest.

古文：刘盆子惶恐，日夜啼泣，从官皆怜之。
现代文：刘盆子惶恐不安，日夜哭泣，左右侍从官都很可怜他。
English: Liu Bonsi was terrified and anxious, crying day and night. Attendants on both sides pitied him.

古文：帝遣宗正刘延攻天井关，与田邑连战十馀合，延不得进。
现代文：当初，刘秀派遣宗正刘延攻打天井关，同田邑连战十余回合，刘延不能前进。
English: At first, Liu Xiu dispatched Zongzheng Liu Yan to attack the ceiling pass, and fought more than ten rounds with Tianyi. Liu Yan could not advance.

古文：及更始败，邑遣使请降；即拜为上党太守。
现代文：等到更始朝覆亡，田邑派使者请求投降。刘秀就任命田邑为上党太守。
English: When the Han Dynasty fell, Tianyi sent an envoy to request surrender. Liu Xiu then appointed Tianyi as the supreme commander of the party.

古文：帝又遣谏议大夫储大伯持节征鲍永；永未知更始存亡，疑不肯从，收系大伯，遣使驰至长安，诇问虚实。
现代文：刘秀又派谏议大夫储大伯持符节征召鲍永。鲍永不知道更始朝的存亡，心怀疑虑不肯归顺，逮捕囚禁了储大伯，派使者骑马驱驰到长安，探听虚实。
English: Liu Xiu also sent Zhengyi's doctor, Zhu Daibong, to summon Bao Yong with a rune festival. Bao Yong did not know the existence of the Shang Dynasty, and hesitated to surrender, arrested and imprisoned Zhu Daibong, and sent an envoy to ride to Chang'an to find out the truth.

古文：初，帝从更始在宛，纳新野阴氏之女丽华。
现代文：起初，刘秀跟随刘玄在宛城时，娶新野县阴氏的女儿阴丽华为妻。
English: At first, Liu Xiu followed Liu Xuan to Wancheng and married Yin Liguo, the daughter of the Yin clan in Nino County.

古文：是岁，遣使迎丽华与帝姊湖阳公主、妹宁平公主俱到洛阳；以丽华为贵人。
现代文：本年，派人前去迎接阴丽华以及自己的姐姐湖阳公主、妹妹宁平公主一起来到洛阳。刘秀封阴丽华为贵人。
English: This year, he sent someone to meet Yin Lihua and his sister, Hoyang Princess, and his sister, Ningping Princess, who came to Luoyang together. Liu Xiufeng is the most beautiful woman in the world.

古文：更始西平王李通先娶宁平公主，上征通为卫尉。
现代文：更始朝西平王李通先前娶宁平公主为妻，刘秀征召李通，任命为卫尉。
English: At the beginning of the Qing Dynasty, Li Tong, King of Xiping, had previously married Princess Ningping. Liu Xiu conscripted Li Tong and appointed him as a guard lieutenant.

古文：初，更始以王闳为琅邪太守，张步据郡拒之。
现代文：当初，刘玄任命王闳当琅邪太守，张步占据琅邪郡抗拒王闳。
English: At first, Liu Xuan appointed Wang Xuan to be the governor of Xiangye County, and Zhang Bu occupied Xiangye County to resist Wang Xuan.

古文：闳谕降，得赣榆等六县；收兵与步战，不胜。
现代文：王闳劝谕招降，先后获取赣榆等六个县。他聚集兵力同张步作战，不能取胜。
English: Wang Qian exhorted him to surrender and successively captured six counties including Qian. He gathered troops to fight at the same pace, but could not win.

古文：步既受刘永官号，治兵于剧，遣将徇泰山、东莱、城阳、胶东、北海、济南、齐郡，皆下之。
现代文：张步接受了刘永任命的官职以后，就在剧县训练军队，派出将领攻打泰山、东莱、城阳、胶东、北海、济南、齐郡，全部陷落。
English: After Zhang Bu accepted the official post appointed by Liu Yong, he trained the army in Yunxian County and sent generals to attack Taishan, Donglai, Chengyang, Jiaodong, Beihai, Jinan and Qi County, all of which fell.

古文：闳力不敌，乃诣步相见。
现代文：王闳的力量不能和他对抗，于是到张步的驻地见张步。
English: Wang Yao's strength could not compete with him, so he went to Zhang Bu's residence to see Zhang Bu.

古文：步大陈兵而见之。怒曰： 步有何罪，君前见攻之甚！ 
现代文：张步安排大军列队，迎见王闳，发怒说： 我有什么罪，你先前攻打我那么厉害！ 
English: Zhangbu arranged for a large army to line up to meet Wang Yao, and angrily said: "What is my sin, you attacked me so badly before!

古文：闳按剑曰： 太守奉朝命，而文公拥兵相拒。闳攻贼耳，何谓甚邪！ 
现代文：王闳手按着剑柄说： 我奉朝廷的命令到任，而阁下领兵抗拒，我只是攻打贼寇罢了，叫做厉害呢！ 
English: Wang Yao put his hand on the hilt of his sword and said, "I came to the post by order of the imperial court, but your excellency led the troops to resist. I was only fighting against thieves and robbers. That's what's called great!

古文：步起跪谢，与之宴饮，待为上宾，令闳关掌郡事。
现代文：张步起身跪拜谢罪，设宴和王闳一起喝酒，待他为尊贵的客人，并由他掌管本郡事务。
English: Zhang Bu got up and knelt down to worship Xie Sin. He held a banquet and drank wine with Wang Yao, treated him as an honored guest, and put him in charge of the county's affairs.

古文：世祖光武皇帝上之上建武二年
现代文：建武二年春季，正月，甲子朔，出现日食。
English: In the spring of the second year of Jianwu, the solar eclipse occurred in the first month of the year.

古文：春，正月，甲子朔，日有食之。刘恭知赤眉必败，密教弟盆子归玺绶，习为辞让之言。
现代文：刘恭已知赤眉政权必定会瓦解，秘密嘱咐弟弟刘盆子交出玉玺绶带，并教他练习推辞谦让的话。
English: Knowing that the Chakmei regime was bound to collapse, Liu Gong secretly ordered his brother Liu Bonsi to hand over the jade sash, and taught him to practice the words of refusal and concession.

古文：及正旦大会，恭先曰： 诸君共立恭弟为帝，德诚深厚！
现代文：及至元旦大会群臣，刘恭首先说： 各位共同拥立我的弟弟做皇帝，恩德深厚。
English: Reaching out to the ministers at the New Year's Day meeting, Liu Gong first said: "You all jointly supported my brother to become emperor. Your kindness is profound.

古文：立且一年，殽乱日甚，诚不足以相成，恐死而无益，愿得退为庶人，更求贤知，唯诸君省察！ 
现代文：但即位将近一年，天下混乱，一天比一天厉害。我的弟弟实在不能胜任大家的重托，恐怕就是死了也不会对国家有好处。希望能够让我的弟弟退位做一个老百姓，再另求贤达智慧的人选。
English: But it's been almost a year since he ascended the throne, and the world is in chaos, and it's getting worse by the day. My younger brother is really not up to the task entrusted to him by everyone, and I'm afraid that even if he dies, it won't be good for the country. I hope that I can make my younger brother abdicate the throne and become an ordinary citizen, and then look for another candidate with great wisdom.

古文：樊崇等谢曰： 此者崇等罪也。 
现代文：谨请各位将军仔细考虑！ 樊崇等道歉说： 这都是我们的过失。 
English: I would like to ask all generals to think carefully! Yu Chong and others apologized and said: This is all our fault.

古文：恭复固请，或曰： 此宁式侯事邪？ 
现代文：刘恭再次坚持请求退位。有人说： 这难道是式侯你的事吗？ 
English: Liu Qiong once again insisted on asking for abdication. Someone said: Is this really a matter for the prince?

古文：恭惶恐起去。
现代文：刘恭害怕，起身离去。
English: Frightened, Liu Qiong got up and left.

古文：盆子乃下床解玺绶，叩头曰： 今设置县官而为贼如故，四方怨恨，不复信向，此皆立非其人所致。
现代文：于是刘盆子下了宝座解下玉玺绶带，叩头说： 现在虽然立了皇帝，可是大家像过去一样做强盗，四方怨恨，不再信服向往我们，这全都是因为立皇帝立错了人的缘故。
English: So Liu Pang Zi stepped down from the throne, undid his jade sash, and bowed his head and said, "Although we have an emperor now, everyone is a robber as in the past. All sides are resentful, no longer convinced, and yearn for us. All of this is because the wrong person was made emperor.

古文：愿乞骸骨，避贤圣路！
现代文：恳请各位将军让我退下，为圣贤让路！
English: Plead with your generals to let me step down and make way for a sage!

古文：必欲杀盆子以塞责者，无所离死！ 
现代文：如果一定要杀我来抵塞罪责，我也没有什么地方可以逃离一死！ 
English: If you must kill me to cover up your crime, I have nowhere to run from death!

古文：因涕泣嘘唏。
现代文：说完，痛哭流涕。
English: When you have finished, weep bitterly.

古文：崇等及会者数百人，莫不哀怜之，乃皆避席顿首曰： 臣无状，负陛下，请自今已后，不敢复放纵！ 
现代文：樊崇等及朝会的数百人，听到刘盆子的话，没有不哀怜的，于是全都离开座位叩头说： 我们不好，对不起陛下。从今往后，不敢再有放纵的行为！ 
English: Gong Chong and hundreds of other people at the Imperial Court Council could not help but feel pity when they heard Liu Bonsi's words, so they all left their seats to bow and said, "We are not good, I'm sorry, Your Majesty. From now on, don't dare to indulge in any more indulgent behavior!"

古文：因共抱持盆子，带以玺绶；盆子号呼，不得已。
现代文：于是一起把刘盆子抱上宝座，给他挂上玉玺绶带。刘盆子又号又呼，但身不由己。
English: So they put Liu Bonsi on the throne and put a jade sash around him. Liu Bonsi called and called, but he couldn't help himself.

古文：既罢出，各闭营自守。
现代文：朝会完毕，将领们出宫，各自紧闭营门自守。
English: After the morning meeting, the generals left the palace, each of them locking the door to protect themselves.

古文：三辅翕然，称天子聪明，百姓争还长安，市里且满。
现代文：三辅地区的人一致称颂皇帝聪明，老百姓争着返回长安，街市里人群拥挤。
English: People in the Sanfu area unanimously praised the emperor's wisdom, the common people fought to return to Chang'an, and the streets and markets were crowded.

古文：后二十馀日，复出，大掠如故。
现代文：可是，过了二十多天，官兵们又跑出营门，照旧大肆抢劫。
English: However, after more than twenty days, the officers and soldiers ran out of the gate of the camp and continued to loot.

古文：刁子都为其部曲所杀，馀党与诸贼会檀乡，号檀乡贼，寇魏郡、清河。
现代文：刁子都被他的部曲杀害，余党和其他贼寇在檀乡汇集，被称做檀乡贼。攻掠魏郡、清河。
English: Zongzi was killed by his subordinates, Yu Party and other bandits gathered in Dangxiang, and were called Dangxiang bandits. They attacked and plundered Wei County and Qinghe.

古文：魏郡大吏李熊弟陆谋反城迎檀乡，或以告魏郡太守颍川铫期，期召问熊，熊叩头首服，愿与老母俱就死。
现代文：魏郡大吏李熊的弟弟李陆阴谋叛变，迎接檀乡贼进城。有人把李陆的阴谋报告魏郡太守颍川人铫期。铫期召见李熊质问，李熊磕头承认，表示愿意和老母亲一起赴死。
English: Wei County official Li Xiong's younger brother Li Lu plotted a mutiny to welcome the Thief of Danzhong into the city. Someone reported Li Lu's plot to Wei County's grand marshal, Li Chuan, during his retirement. Li Xiong was summoned for questioning during his retirement. Li Xiong Shantou confessed and said he was willing to die with his old mother.

古文：期曰： 为吏傥不若为贼乐者，可归与老母往就陆也！ 
现代文：铫期说： 做官如果不像做贼那样快乐，可以和老母亲一块儿去投奔李陆！ 
English: "If being an official is not as happy as being a thief, you can go to Li Luwu with your old mother!

古文：使吏送出城。
现代文：铫期派官吏把李熊母子送出城。
English: Officials sent Li Xiong's mother and son out of the city.

古文：熊行，求得陆，将诣鄴城西门；陆不胜愧感，自杀以谢期。
现代文：李熊出城，找到李陆，带他到郡治邺城的西门，李陆不胜惭愧，自杀身亡，以向铫期谢罪。
English: Li Xiong went out of the city, found Li Lu, and took him to the west gate of the county seat of Handan City. Li Lu was so ashamed that he committed suicide to atone for his sins.

古文：期嗟叹，以礼葬之，而还熊故职。
现代文：铫期叹息，按照礼节安葬李陆，恢复了李熊原来的官职。
English: He was buried with full military honors, and Li Xiong was restored to his former position.

古文：于是郡中服其威信。
现代文：于是，魏郡的人都敬服铫期的威望。
English: As a result, the people of Wei County all obeyed his authority.

古文：帝遣吴汉率王梁等九将军击檀乡于鄴东漳水上，大破之，十馀万众皆降。
现代文：刘秀派遣吴汉率领王梁等九位将军，在邺城东面的漳水河畔攻击檀乡贼，大败贼兵，十余万人全部投降。
English: Liu Xiu sent Wu Han and nine other generals, including Wang Liang, to attack the Thangxiang bandits on the banks of the Surabaya River east of Handan City. The bandits were soundly defeated, and all of the more than 100,000 soldiers surrendered.

古文：又使梁与大将军杜茂将兵安辑魏郡、清河、东郡，悉平诸营保，三郡清静，边路流通。
现代文：刘秀又派王梁和大将军杜茂率领军队安抚魏郡、清河、东郡，扫平各个自保的营寨保垒，使这三郡平安清静，边疆的道路畅通无阻。
English: Liu Xiu also sent Wang Liang and General Du Mao to lead the army to pacify Wei County, Qinghe County, and Dong County, and sweep away the self-protection camps and fortifications, so that these three counties were safe and quiet, and the roads in the frontier were unimpeded.

古文：庚辰，悉封诸功臣为列侯；梁侯邓禹、广平侯吴汉皆食四县。
现代文：正月庚辰，刘秀把所有的功臣都封为侯爵。梁侯邓禹、广平侯吴汉都亭有四个县的封地。
English: In the first month of the Geng era, Liu Xiu made all his meritorious vassals marquesses. Liang Hou Deng Yu and Guangping Hou Wu Handuting had fiefdoms in four counties.

古文：博士丁恭议曰： 古者封诸侯不过百里，强干弱枝，所以为治也。
现代文：博士丁恭发表意见，说： 古时候，分封诸侯不过百里。树干强壮，树枝弱小，以此来把国家治理好。
English: Dr. Ding Gong expressed his opinion, saying: In ancient times, the feudal lords were only a hundred miles away. The trunk was strong, the branches were weak, and this was the way to govern the country well.

古文：今封四县，不合法制。 
现代文：现在封四个县，不合法制。 
English: Now, four counties have been sealed off, and the illegal system is in full swing.

古文：帝曰： 古之亡国皆以无道，未尝闻功臣地多而灭亡者也。 
现代文：刘秀说： 古时候的亡国全是因为无道，从来没有听说过因功臣封地多而亡国的。 
English: Liu Xiu said, "In ancient times, countries were destroyed because they had no morality. I have never heard of a country being destroyed because it had many meritorious vassals and fiefs.

古文：阴乡侯阴识，贵人之兄也，以军功当增封，识叩头让曰： 天下初定，将帅有功者众，臣托属掖廷，仍加爵邑，不可以示天下。
现代文：阴乡侯阴识，是贵人阴丽华的哥哥，因为战功应当增加封地。阴识磕头辞谢说： 天下刚刚安定，有战功的将帅很多，我作为后宫的亲属，仍然要增加封地，就无法面对天下。
English: Yinxu, the lord of Yinxiang, is the elder brother of Yin Lihua, the noblewoman, because the war merit should increase the fief. Yinxu bowed his head and said: The world has just been stabilized, there are many generals with war merit, as a relative of the harem, I still have to increase the fief, so I can't face the world.

古文：此为亲戚受赏，国人计功也。 
现代文：这是因为皇亲国戚受到封赏，全国百姓都评价他的功绩。 
English: This is because the emperor's relatives and relatives have been awarded, and the people of the whole country have evaluated his achievements.

古文：帝从之。
现代文：刘秀表示接受。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：帝令诸将各言所乐，皆占美县；河南太守颍川丁綝独求封本乡。
现代文：刘秀让将领们各自说出所愿封的地方，众人全都指出富庶的县分。河南太守颍川人丁只请求分封自己的故乡。
English: Liu Xiu asked the generals to each say the place they wished to seal, and they all pointed out the county divisions of the rich and poor. Henan Taishu Xichuan Ding only requested to seal his hometown.

古文：或问其故，綝曰： 綝能薄功微，得乡亭厚矣！ 
现代文：有人问他原因，丁说： 我的能力小，功劳又少，能够封乡亭侯就很优厚了！ 
English: When someone asked him the reason, Ding said, "My ability is small, and my merits are few. To be able to appoint a rural prefect is very generous!"

古文：帝从其志，封新安乡侯。
现代文：刘秀听从他的意愿，封他为新安乡侯。
English: Liu Xiu obeyed his wishes and named him Xin'an Township.

古文：帝使郎中魏郡冯勤典诸侯封事，勤差量功次轻重，国土远近，地势丰薄，不相逾越，莫不厌服焉。
现代文：刘秀命郎中魏郡人冯勤主持分封诸侯事宜。冯勤估量每个人功劳的大小，分封国土的远近，土地的肥沃贫瘠，使谁也不超越谁，没有不满足不服气的。
English: Liu Xiu's son-in-law, Feng Qin from Wei County, presided over the allocation of princes. Feng Qin estimated the size of each person's merit, the remoteness of the assigned land, the fertility of the land, so that no one surpassed anyone, and there was no dissatisfaction.

古文：帝以为能，尚书众事皆令总录之。
现代文：刘秀认为冯勤有才干，将尚书众事都交给他负责。
English: Liu Xiu thought that Feng Qin was talented and put him in charge of all matters related to Shangshu.

古文：故事：尚书郎以令史久次补之，帝始用孝廉为尚书郎。
现代文：以前的做法是，尚书郎的位置由尚书令史按年资依次递补，刘秀开始用孝廉当尚书郎。
English: The previous practice was that the position of Shang Shulang was successively supplemented by Shang Shuling Shi according to seniority, and Liu Xiu began to use Xiaolian as Shang Shulang.

古文：起高庙于洛阳，四时合祀高祖、太宗、世宗；建社稷于宗庙之右；立郊兆于城南。
现代文：刘秀在都城洛阳建立高庙。每年春夏秋冬四季，联合祭祀汉高祖刘邦、汉文帝刘恒、汉武帝刘彻。在宗庙的右边建起祭祀土神和谷神的社稷坛。
English: Liu Xiu built a high temple in the capital city of Luoyang. Every year in the spring, summer, autumn and winter, joint sacrifices were made to the Han Gao ancestor Liu Bang, the Han Emperor Liu Heng and the Han Emperor Liu Che. On the right side of the ancestral temple, a shrine altar was built to worship the soil god and the valley god.

古文：长安城中粮尽，赤眉收载珍宝，大纵火烧宫室、市里，恣行杀掠，长安城中无复人行；乃引兵而西，众号百万，自南山转掠城邑，遂入安定、北地。
现代文：在洛阳城南建立祭祀天地等众神的神坛。长安城中粮食耗尽，赤眉将领们把搜来的金银财宝装上车，大举纵火焚烧宫室、街巷民宅，恣意烧杀掳掠，长安城中再也看不见行人。赤眉于是领兵向西，号称百万大军。从南山起，对所经过的城邑进行抢掠。随后进入安定、北地。
English: In the south of Luoyang City, a shrine was built to worship the gods of heaven and earth. In Chang'an City, the grain was exhausted, and the red-browed generals loaded the collected gold and silver treasures onto the car, set fire to the palace, the streets and houses, and arbitrarily burned and plundered. No pedestrians could be seen in Chang'an City. Red-browed then led the soldiers westward, known as the million-strong army. From Nanshan, they plundered the cities and towns they passed. Then they entered the stable and the north.

古文：邓禹引兵南至长安，军昆明池，谒祠高庙，收十一帝神主，送诣洛阳；因巡行园陵，为置吏士奉守焉。
现代文：邓禹率领军队向南到达长安，驻屯昆明池，拜谒祭祀高庙，收集西汉十一位皇帝的神位，送往洛阳。同时巡行陵园，安排官兵事奉守护。
English: Deng Yu led the army to the south to Chang'an, stationed in Kunming Pool, paid homage to the high temple, collected the holy places of the eleven emperors of the Western Han Dynasty, and sent them to Luoyang. At the same time, he toured the cemetery and arranged for officers and soldiers to serve as guardians.

古文：真定王杨造谶记曰： 赤九之后，瘿杨为主。 
现代文：真定王刘杨制造谶文说： 赤九之后，瘿杨为主。 
English: Zhending Wang Liu Yang Manufacturing Co., Ltd. said: After the Red Nine, Zhenyang is the main.

古文：杨病瘿，欲以惑众；与绵曼贼交通。
现代文：刘杨脖子上生有赘瘤，想以此惑乱民众，并同绵曼县的盗寇互相勾结。
English: Liu Yang had a mole on his neck and wanted to use it to confuse the public and collude with robbers in Mianmen County.

古文：帝遣骑都尉陈副、游击将军邓隆征之，杨闭城门不内。
现代文：刘秀派遣骑都尉陈副、游击将军邓隆去召刘杨，刘杨紧闭城门不让他们入内。
English: Liu Xiu sent the cavalry captain Chen Zi and the guerrilla general Deng Long to summon Liu Yang. Liu Yang closed the gate tightly and did not allow them to enter.

古文：帝复遣前将军耿纯持节行幽、冀，所过劳慰王、侯，密敕收杨。
现代文：刘秀又派遣前将军耿纯持符节巡视幽州、冀州，沿途慰劳各处的王侯，并密令他逮捕刘杨。
English: Liu Xiu also sent the former general Geng Chun to hold the festival of symbols to inspect Yuzhou and Jizhou, and along the way to comfort princes everywhere, and secretly ordered him to arrest Liu Yang.

古文：纯至真定，止传舍，邀杨相见。
现代文：耿纯的母亲是刘杨本家，所以刘杨不怀疑他。
English: Geng Chun's mother is from Liu Yang's own family, so Liu Yang does not suspect him.

古文：纯，真定宗室之出也，故杨不以为疑，且自恃众强，而纯意安静，即从官属诣之；杨兄弟并将轻兵在门外。
现代文：而且又仗着自己人多势众。而耿纯神情安祥，刘杨就带着随从官属前去见耿纯。刘杨的兄弟们全都带领轻装的士兵守在门外。
English: Moreover, he relied on his many powerful people. While Geng Chun looked peaceful, Liu Yang went to see Geng Chun with his entourage of officials. Liu Yang's brothers all led lightly armed soldiers to guard outside the door.

古文：杨入，见纯，纯接以礼敬，因延请其兄弟皆入，乃闭阁，悉诛之，因勒兵而出。
现代文：刘杨走进耿纯的住所，拜见耿纯，耿纯以礼敬的态度迎接，乘机邀请刘杨的兄弟们全都进屋。于是关闭房门，把他们全部诛杀，然后率领军队离开。
English: Liu Yang walked into Geng Chun's residence and greeted him. Geng Chun greeted him with respect and took the opportunity to invite all of Liu Yang's brothers into the house. He then closed the door, killed them all, and then led the army away.

古文：真定震怖，无敢动者。
现代文：整个真定都处于震撼和恐怖之中，没有人敢有所举动。
English: Truly shocked and horrified, no one dared to move.

古文：帝怜杨谋未发而诛，复封其子为真定王。
现代文：刘秀怜悯刘杨谋反还没有行动就被诛杀，又封他的儿子刘德继任真定王。
English: Liu Xiu pitied Liu Yang for plotting a rebellion, but he was killed before he could act, and appointed his son Liu De as the successor to King Zhending.

古文：二月，己酉，车驾幸修武。
现代文：二月己酉，刘秀前往武。
English: In February, Liu Xiu went to Wuxi.

古文：鲍永、冯衍审知更始已亡，乃发丧，出储大伯等，封上印绶，悉罢兵，幅巾诣河内，帝见永，问曰： 卿众安在？ 
现代文：鲍永、冯衍确实了解到刘玄已死，于是发布文告追悼，放出储大伯等，封存好印信绶带，遣散所有的部众，用头巾包头到河内归降。刘秀召见鲍永，问： 你的部队在什么地方？ 
English: Bao Yong and Feng Yan really understood that Liu Xuan had died, so they issued a memorial notice, released the storage uncle and so on, sealed the letter and ribbon, dismissed all the subordinates, and returned to Hanoi with a headscarf. Liu Xiu summoned Bao Yong and asked: Where are your troops?

古文：永离席叩头曰： 臣事更始，不能令全，诚惭以其众幸富贵，故悉罢之。 
现代文：鲍永离开座位磕头说： 我效忠刘玄，却不能保全他。靠他的部众企望富贵，使我感到惭愧，所以全都把他们遣散了。 
English: Bowing his head from his seat, Bao Yong said, "We cannot guarantee the safety of the vassals and retainers at the beginning, and we are really ashamed to invite the rich and noble to come down with their subordinates, so we have disbanded them all."

古文：帝曰： 卿言大。 
现代文：刘秀说： 你的话格调很高。 
English: Liu Xiu said, "Your words have a high tone.

古文：而意不悦。
现代文：而心里却不高兴。
English: But inside I felt unhappy.

古文：既而永以立功见用，衍遂废弃。
现代文：不久，鲍永因立战功而被刘秀重用，冯衍被废弃不用。
English: Soon after, because of his war exploits, Bao Yong was reused by Liu Xiu, and Feng Yan was abandoned.

古文：永谓衍曰： 昔高祖赏季布之罪，诛丁固之功；今遭明主，亦何忧哉！ 
现代文：鲍永对冯衍说： 过去汉高祖刘邦奖赏有罪的季布，诛杀有功的丁固。现在我们遇到了圣明的君主，还有什么忧虑呢？ 
English: Bao Yong said to Feng Yan: In the past, Liu Bang, the founder of the Han Dynasty, rewarded the guilty Ji Bu and killed the meritorious Ding Gu. Now that we have met the monarch of Shengming, what other worries do we have?

古文：衍曰： 人有挑其邻人之妻者，其长者骂而少者报之。
现代文：冯衍说： 有一个人挑逗邻居的妻妾，年纪大的唾骂他，年纪轻的答应他。
English: Feng Yan said: There was a man who teased his neighbor's wife and concubine. The older one swore at him, while the younger one consented.

古文：后其夫死，取其长者。
现代文：后来她们的丈夫死了，这个人娶年纪大的人为妻。
English: Then their husband died, and the man married an older woman.

古文：或谓之曰： 夫非骂尔者邪？ 
现代文：有人对他说： 她不是那个骂你的人吗？ 
English: Someone asked him: Didn't your first wife scold you?

古文：曰： 在人欲其报我，在我欲其骂人也！ 
现代文：这个人说： 她是别人的妻子，我希望她答应我；她是我的妻子，我希望她唾骂别人！ 
English: This person said: She's someone else's wife, I want her to agree with me; she's my wife, I want her to swear!

古文：夫天命难知，人道易守，守道之臣，何患死亡！ 
现代文：人的命运很难预料，而做人的道理却易于遵守。遵守做人道理的臣子，还怕什么死亡？ 
English: It is difficult to predict a person's fate, but it is easy to abide by the principles of being a human being. What kind of death is a minister afraid of if he abides by the principles of being a human being?

古文：大司空王梁屡违诏命，帝怒，遣尚书宗广持节即军中斩梁；广槛车送京师。
现代文：大司空王梁多次违背刘秀的命令。刘秀大怒，派遣尚书宗广持符节到军营中就地处死王梁。
English: Wang Liang, the commander of the Ku, repeatedly disobeyed Liu Xiu's orders. Liu Xiu was furious and dispatched Shang Shuzong Guang to the military camp to execute Wang Liang on the spot.

古文：既至，赦之，以为中郎将，北守箕关。
现代文：宗广逮捕王梁，用囚车把他送到首都洛阳。囚车到后，刘秀赦免了王梁，任命他为中郎将，到北方镇守箕关。
English: Zongguang arrested Wang Liang and sent him to Luoyang, the capital, in a prison wagon. After the prison wagon arrived, Liu Xiu pardoned Wang Liang and appointed him as a middle-ranking general to guard Shaoguan in the northern town.

古文：壬子，以太中大夫京兆宋弘为大司空。
现代文：壬子，刘秀任命太中大夫京兆人宋弘当大司空。
English: As a result, Liu Xiu appointed the grand vice-premier Song Hong as the grand secretary.

古文：弘荐沛国桓谭，为议郎、给事中。
现代文：宋弘举荐沛国人桓谭当了议郎、给事中。
English: Song Hongzhi recommended Guotan Kan, who became a mediator and is now in the middle of the case.

古文：帝令谭鼓琴，爱其繁声。
现代文：刘秀让桓谭弹琴，喜爱那种复杂的音调。
English: Liu Xiu let Kan Tan play the piano and loved the complex tone.

古文：弘闻之，不悦；伺谭内出，正朝服坐府上，遣吏召之。
现代文：宋弘听说后，感到不高兴。打听到桓谭从宫中出来，宋弘穿戴好公服坐在大司空府中，官吏去召桓谭。
English: After hearing this, Song Hong was not happy. Upon hearing that Kuan Tan had come out of the palace, Song Hong put on his official uniform and sat in the empty palace, while the officials went to summon Kuan Tan.

古文：谭至，不与席而让之，且曰： 能自改邪，将令相举以法乎？ 
现代文：桓谭到来之后，宋弘不给他座位就责备他，并且说： 能自己改正过失吗？还是让我根据法律检举你呢？ 
English: After Kuan Tan arrived, Song Hong scolded him for not giving him a seat, and said: Can you correct the fault yourself? Or should I prosecute you according to the law?

古文：谭顿首辞谢；良久，乃遣之。
现代文：桓谭磕头谢罪。过了很久，宋弘才打发他走。
English: It took a long time for Song Hong to let him go.

古文：后大会群臣，帝使谭鼓琴。
现代文：后来，刘秀大会群臣，让桓谭弹琴。
English: Later, Liu Xiu gathered a group of ministers and asked Guan Tan to play the piano.

古文：谭见弘，失其常度。
现代文：桓谭看见宋弘，失却常态。
English: When Kan Tan saw Song Hong, he lost his normal state.

古文：帝怪而问之，弘乃离席免冠谢曰： 臣所以荐桓谭者，望能以忠正导主。而令朝廷耽悦郑声，臣之罪也。 
现代文：刘秀感到奇怪，问宋弘是怎么回事。宋弘于是离开座席，摘下帽子，谢罪说： 我所以举荐桓谭，是盼望他能用忠心和正义辅导君主；而他却让朝廷上下沉缅于郑国的音乐，这是我的罪过。 
English: Liu Xiu felt strange and asked Song Hong what was going on. Song Hong then left his seat, took off his hat, and said, "I recommended Kuan Tan in the hope that he would be able to advise the monarch with loyalty and justice, but he let the court sink into the music of Zheng Guo. This is my fault."

古文：帝改容谢之。
现代文：刘秀一听，表情由奇怪变为惭愧，向宋弘表示歉意。
English: Hearing this, Liu Xiu's expression changed from strange to ashamed, and he apologized to Song Hong.

古文：湖阳公主新寡，帝与共论朝臣，微观其意。
现代文：刘秀的姐姐湖阳公主新近守寡，刘秀和她一块儿评论朝臣，暗中察看她的心意。
English: Liu Xiu's sister, Princess Huyang, was recently widowed. Liu Xiu and her commented on the courtiers and secretly observed her thoughts.

古文：主曰： 宋公威容德器，群臣莫及。 
现代文：公主说： 宋弘的威仪容貌，道德气度，群臣没有人能赶得上他。 
English: The princess said, "Song Hongwei is a virtuous person, and his vassals are no match for him."

古文：帝曰： 方且图之。 
现代文：刘秀说： 我正计划这件事。 
English: The Emperor said, "I will look for him."

古文：后弘被引见，帝令主坐屏风后，因谓弘曰： 谚言 贵易交，富易妻， 人情乎？ 
现代文：不久宋弘被刘秀召见，刘秀事先让公主坐在屏风后，然后对宋弘说： 谚语说 地位高了换朋友，财富多了换妻子 ，这符合人情吧？ 
English: Soon after, Song Hong was summoned by Liu Xiu. Liu Xiu had previously asked the princess to sit behind a screen, and then said to Song Hong: As the saying goes, when one's status is high, one changes friends; when one's wealth is more, one changes wives. This is in line with human nature, right?

古文：弘曰： 臣闻贫贱之知不可忘，糟糠之妻不下堂。 
现代文：宋弘说： 我听说，贫贱时的朋友不能忘记；贫贱时的妻子不能分离。 
English: Song Hong said, "Ministers have heard that the friends of the poor and lowly should not be forgotten, and the wife of a scoundrel should not go to court."

古文：帝顾谓主曰： 事不谐矣！ 
现代文：刘秀回头对公主说： 事情办不成了！ 
English: Liu Xiu turned back to the princess and said, "It can't be done!

古文：帝之讨王郎也，彭宠发突骑以助军，转粮食，前后不绝，及帝追铜马至蓟，宠自负其功，意望甚高；帝接之不能满，以此怀不平。
现代文：刘秀征讨王郎时，彭宠征调骑兵突击部队协助作战，转运粮草，前后不断。等到刘秀追击铜马军到蓟城，彭宠仗着自己的功劳，期望很高。但是，刘秀没有满足彭宠的期望，彭宠因此心怀不平。
English: When Liu Xiu went to conquer Wang Lang, Peng Cun recruited and transferred cavalry assault troops to assist in the battle, transporting grain and grass continuously. When Liu Xiu chased the Bronze Horse Army to Lucheng, Peng Cun boasted of his own merits and had high expectations. However, Liu Xiu did not meet Peng Cun's expectations, and Peng Cun was dissatisfied.

古文：及即位，吴汉、王梁，宠之所遣，并为三公，而宠独无所加，愈怏怏不得志，叹曰： 如此，我当为王。
现代文：及至刘秀称帝，吴汉、王梁都是彭宠的部将，并列为三公，而唯独彭宠没有加官，更加不满意、不得志，叹息说： 既然他们列为三公，我应当封王。
English: By the time Liu Xiu was proclaimed emperor, Wu Han and Wang Liang were all Peng Jia's subordinates, and were also listed as the three princes. However, Peng Jia did not have any additional posts, which made him even more dissatisfied and discouraged. He sighed and said, "Since they are listed as the three princes, I should be crowned king."

古文：但尔者，陛下忘我邪！ 
现代文：仅仅现在这样，是陛下把我给忘了吗！ 
English: Is it only now that Your Majesty has forgotten me?

古文：是时北州破散，而渔阳差完，有旧铁官，宠转以贸谷，积珍宝，益富强。
现代文：这时，北方州郡残破零散，而渔阳郡还较为完整。这里有旧时设置的铁官。彭宠运铁矿来换取谷物，积蓄珍宝，一天比一天富强。
English: At this time, Beizhou County was fragmented, while Yuyang County was still relatively complete. There were iron officials set up in the old days. Peng Zhuang transported iron ore in exchange for grain, accumulated treasures, and became richer and stronger day by day.

古文：幽州牧硃浮，年少有俊才，欲厉风迹，收士心，辟召州中名宿及王莽时故吏二千石，皆引置幕府，多发诸郡仓谷禀赡其妻子。
现代文：幽州牧朱浮，年纪轻而才华出众，想要严格风俗教化，收拢士人之心，征召州中素有名望的人，和王莽时俸禄二千石的旧官吏，全都招致安置在州府中；调拨各郡大量粮食赡养他们的妻子儿女。
English: Yuzhou herdsman Zhu Fu, young and talented, wanted to impose strict customs and education, win the hearts of scholars, recruit famous and respected people in the state, and old officials with a salary of 2,000 koku at the time of Wang Mang, all invited to be placed in the state capital; allocate a large amount of grain to the counties to support their wives and children.

古文：宠以为天下未定，师旅方起，不宜多置官属以损军实，不从其令。
现代文：彭宠认为天下没有完全安定，军事行动方兴未艾，不应该多设置官员来消耗军事物资，因此不服从朱浮的命令。
English: Peng Qiao thought that the world was not completely stable, military operations were in the ascendant, and more officials should not be set up to consume military supplies, so he disobeyed Zhu Fu's order.

古文：浮性矜急自多，宠亦狠强，嫌怨转积。
现代文：朱浮一向骄矜急躁，自以为高人一等。彭宠也倔强不让步，两人之间的嫌隙怨恨越来越深。
English: Zhu Fu has always been arrogant and impetuous, believing himself to be superior. Peng Qiao is also stubborn and does not give in, and the rancor between the two is getting deeper and deeper.

古文：浮数谮构之，密奏宠多聚兵谷，意计难量。
现代文：朱浮多次向刘秀进谗言，陷害彭宠，密奏彭宠集结大量军队和粮草，意图很难预料。
English: Zhu Fu repeatedly slandered Liu Xiujin, framed Peng Cang, and secretly persuaded Peng Cang to gather a large number of troops and grain and grass. The intention is difficult to predict.

古文：上辄漏泄令宠闻，以胁恐之。
现代文：刘秀就故意泄露这些话让彭宠听到，以此胁迫，使他害怕。
English: Liu Xiu deliberately leaked these words so that Peng Jiao could hear them, thus coercing and frightening him.

古文：至是，有诏征宠，宠上疏，愿与浮俱征；帝不许。
现代文：到最后，有诏令征召彭宠，彭宠给刘秀上疏，请求和朱浮一块儿去洛阳，刘秀不准。
English: In the end, there was a decree to conscript Peng Cun, and Peng Cun gave Liu Xiu the upper hand, requesting to go to Luoyang with Zhu Fu, but Liu Xiu was not allowed.

古文：宠益以自疑。
现代文：彭宠因此更加疑心。
English: This made Peng Ciao even more suspicious.

古文：其妻素刚，不堪抑屈，固劝无受征，曰： 天下未定，四方各自为雄。
现代文：他的妻子一向刚强，不能忍受这种压抑屈辱，坚决劝丈夫不要接受征召，说： 天下还没有平定，四方英雄各自称雄。
English: His wife, who had always been tough, could not bear this kind of oppression and humiliation. She strongly advised her husband not to accept the call-up, saying, "The world has not yet been pacified, and the heroes of the four directions have each claimed victory.

古文：渔阳大郡，兵马最精，何故为人所奏，而弃此去乎！ 
现代文：渔阳是个大郡，兵马最强，为什么要放弃这里的一切离去呢？ 
English: Yuyang is a large county, with the strongest soldiers and horses. Why should we give up everything here and leave?

古文：宠又与所亲信吏计议，皆怀怨于浮，莫有劝行者。
现代文：彭宠又和自己亲信的官员商议，大家都怨恨朱浮，没有一个劝他去洛阳的。
English: Peng Ciao also consulted with officials close to him. Everyone resented Zhu Fu, and no one advised him to go to Luoyang.

古文：帝遣宠从弟子后兰卿喻之。
现代文：刘秀派彭宠的堂弟子后兰卿去劝导鼓宠，彭宠便留下子后兰卿，随后起兵叛变。
English: Liu Xiu sent Peng Cai's disciple, Hou Lanqing, to persuade Drum Cai. Peng Cai then left his son, Hou Lanqing, and subsequently mutinied.

古文：宠因留子后兰卿，遂发兵反，拜署将帅，自将二万馀人，攻硃浮于蓟。又以与耿况俱有重功，而恩赏并薄，数遣使要诱况。
现代文：他任命了将帅，自己率领二万余人攻打朱浮所在的蓟城。彭宠又因和耿况都有大功而封赏同样微薄，几次派人邀请引诱耿况。
English: He appointed a general and led more than twenty thousand people to attack the city of Handan, where Zhu Fu was located. Peng Qiao was also rewarded for his great service to Geng Zhou, but the reward was equally meager. He sent several invitations to lure Geng Zhou.

古文：况不受，斩其使。
现代文：耿况不肯接受，将彭宠派去的人斩杀。
English: Geng refused to accept the situation and killed the person sent by Peng Cai.

古文：延岑复反，围南郑。
现代文：延岑再次叛变，包围南郑。
English: Yan Xuan rebelled again and encircled Nan Zheng.

古文：汉中王嘉兵败走。岑遂据汉中，进兵武都；为更始柱功侯李宝所破，岑走天水。
现代文：汉中王刘嘉兵败逃跑，延岑于是占据汉中随后进攻武都，被原刘玄的柱功侯李宝打败，延岑逃往天水。
English: Liu Jia, the king of Hanzhong, was defeated and fled, so Yan Xun occupied Hanzhong and then attacked Wudu. He was defeated by Li Bao, the pillar of the original Liu Xuan, and Yan Xun fled to Tianshui.

古文：公孙述遣将侯丹取南郑。
现代文：公孙述派遣将领侯丹夺取南郑。
English: According to Gongsun, he dispatched the general Hou Dan to capture Nan Zheng.

古文：嘉收散卒得数万人，以李宝为相，从武都南击侯丹，不利，还军河池、下辨，复与延岑连战。
现代文：刘嘉收容散兵，得到数万人，用李宝为宰相，从武都向南袭击侯丹，战斗失利，军队退回河池、下辨。又同延岑连打了几仗。
English: Liu Jia received tens of thousands of stragglers, used Li Bao as the prime minister, attacked Khudan from Wudu to the south, lost the battle, and the army retreated to Hechi and Shibuan. He also fought several battles with Yan Xianlian.

古文：岑引北，入散关，至陈仓；嘉追击，破之。
现代文：延岑领兵向北，进入散关，抵达陈仓。刘嘉追击，打败延岑。
English: Yan Xun led his troops northward, entered Sankuan, and arrived at Chen Cang. Liu Jia pursued and defeated Yan Xun.

古文：公孙述又遣将军任满从阆中下江州，东据扞关，于是尽有益州之地。
现代文：公孙述又派将军任满从阆中下江州，向东占据关，于是全部占有益州地区。
English: According to Gongsun, he also sent generals to occupy Guan from the middle of the Yunnan to the lower Jiangzhou and to the east, so they all occupied the Yunnan region.

古文：辛卯，上还洛阳。
现代文：辛卯，刘秀返回洛阳。
English: Xinwu, Liu Xiu returned to Luoyang.

古文：三月，乙未，大赦。
现代文：三月乙未，刘秀实行大赦。
English: In March, Liu Xiu was granted amnesty.

古文：更始诸大将在南方未降者尚多。
现代文：更始朝在南方未投降的大将还有很多。
English: There are still many generals in the south who did not surrender at the beginning of the morning.

古文：帝召诸将议兵事，以檄叩地曰： 郾最强，宛为次，谁当击之？ 
现代文：刘秀召集将领们商议出兵的事，用檄书敲打地面，说： 郾城最强，宛城其次，谁承担此任攻击这两个地方？ 
English: Liu Xiu summoned the generals to discuss the dispatch of troops, and tapped the ground with a scribble, saying: "Shancheng is the strongest, and Wancheng is second, who will take on the task of attacking these two places?

古文：贾复率然对曰： 臣请击郾。 
现代文：贾复不加思索地说： 我请求攻打郾城。 
English: Jia Fu said without thinking: I ask you to attack Handan.

古文：帝笑曰： 执金吾击郾，吾复何忧！
现代文：刘秀笑着说： 执金吾攻郾城，我还有什么可担心的！
English: Liu Xiu said with a smile, "I have nothing to worry about if I attack Handan City!

古文：大司马当击宛。 
现代文：大司马应去攻宛城。 
English: Daisima should go and attack Wancheng.

古文：遂遣复击郾，破之；尹尊降。
现代文：于是派遣贾复攻打郾城。贾复破城，尹尊投降。
English: Therefore, Jia Fu was dispatched to attack the city of Diao. Jia Fu broke through the city, and Yin Zun surrendered.

古文：又东击更始淮阳太守暴汜，汜降。
现代文：又向东攻打更始朝淮阳太守暴，暴投降。
English: They also attacked to the east, and at the beginning of the morning, Huaiyang was too violent to defend and surrendered violently.

古文：夏，四月，虎牙大将军盖延督驸马都尉马武等四将军击刘永，破之；遂围永于睢阳。
现代文：夏季，四月，虎牙大将军盖延统率驸马都尉马武等四位将军进击刘永，打败刘永。
English: In the summer, in April, four generals led by General Huya Gaiyan and Lieutenant Mawu marched into Liu Yong and defeated Liu Yong.

古文：故更始将苏茂反，杀淮阳太守潘蹇，据广乐而臣于永；永以茂为大司马、淮阳王。
现代文：于是把刘永围困在睢阳。原更始朝将领苏茂叛变，杀淮阳太守潘蹇，占据广乐，向刘永称臣。刘永任用苏茂当大司马，封淮阳王。
English: Therefore, Liu Yong was besieged in Fenyang. The original imperial general, Sumo, mutinied, killed the Huaiyang governor, Pan Ye, occupied Guangle, and claimed Liu Yong as his vassal. Liu Yong appointed Sumo as his chief steward, and he became the king of Huaiyang.

古文：吴汉击宛，宛王赐奉更始妻子诣洛阳降；帝封赐为慎侯。
现代文：吴汉攻打宛城。宛王刘赐带着刘玄的妻子儿女到洛阳投降。刘秀封刘赐为慎侯。
English: Wu Han attacked Wancheng. Wan King Liu Zi took Liu Xuan's wife and children to Luoyang to surrender. Liu Xiufeng and Liu Zi were cautious.

古文：叔父良、族父歙、族兄祉皆自长安来。
现代文：刘秀的叔父刘良、族父刘歙、堂兄刘祉全从长安来到洛阳。
English: Liu Xiu's uncle Liu Liang, patriarch Liu Wei, and cousin Liu Zhiquan came to Luoyang from Chang'an.

古文：甲午，封良为广阳王，祉为城阳王；又封兄縯子章为太原王，兴为鲁王；更始三子求、歆、鲤皆为列侯。
现代文：甲午，刘秀封刘良为广阳王，封刘祉为城阳王；又封哥哥刘的儿子刘章为太原王、刘兴为鲁王。刘玄的三个儿子刘求、刘歆、刘鲤全封为侯爵。
English: At noon, Liu Xiufeng made Liu Liang the king of Guangyang, Liu Zhifu the king of Chengyang, Liu Zhang, the son of Liu Xuan, the king of Taiyuan, and Liu Xing, the king of Lu. Liu Xuan's three sons, Liu Cu, Liu Zi, and Liu Zhen, were all made marquesses.

古文：邓王王常降，帝见之甚欢，曰： 吾见王廷尉，不忧南方矣！ 
现代文：邓王王常归降。刘秀见到他非常高兴，说： 我看到王廷尉，不担心南方了。 
English: Liu Xiu was very happy to see him and said, "I see Lieutenant Wang Ting, and I am no longer worried about the south."

古文：拜为左曹，封山桑侯。
现代文：任命王常为左曹，封山桑侯。
English: He appointed Wang Chang as Zuo Cao and Fuzhan Sanguo.

古文：五月，庚辰，封族父歙为泗水王。
现代文：五月庚辰，刘秀封族父刘歙为泗水王。
English: In May, Geng Chen, Liu Xiufeng's father, Liu Ye, became the water king of Shandong.

古文：帝以阴贵人雅性宽仁，欲立以为后。
现代文：刘秀因为贵人阴丽华性情温柔宽厚，想立她为皇后。
English: Liu Xiu wanted to make her the empress because of her gentle and generous nature.

古文：贵人以郭贵人有子，终不肯当。
现代文：阴贵人因为郭贵人已有儿子，始终不肯承受这一封号。
English: Because Guo Guijin already had a son, Yin Guijin always refused to accept this title.

古文：六月，戊戌，立贵人郭氏为皇后，以其子强为皇太子；大赦。
现代文：六月戊戌，刘秀封贵人郭氏为皇后，以她生的儿子刘强为皇太子。实行大赦。
English: In June, Liu Xiufeng crowned the noble Guo family as empress, with her son Liu Qiang as crown prince. An amnesty was implemented.

古文：丙午，封泗水王子终为淄川王。
现代文：丙午，刘秀封泗水王的儿子刘终为淄川王。
English: In the afternoon of the third day, Liu Xiufeng, the son of the Water King, became the River King.

古文：秋，贾复南击召陵、新息，平之。
现代文：秋季，贾复南下，进攻召陵、新息，占领了两地。
English: In autumn, Jia Fuxin went to the south and attacked Zhaoling and Xinxi, occupying the two places.

古文：后部将杀人于颍川，颍川太守寇恂捕得，系狱。
现代文：贾复的部将在颍川杀人，颍川太守寇恂将其捕获，囚禁狱中。
English: Jia Fu's subordinates killed people in Luochuan, and Luochuan's governor, Guo Zhen, captured them and imprisoned them.

古文：时尚草创，军营犯法，率多相容，恂戮之于市。
现代文：当时新的秩序还在创建，军人触犯法律，大多互相包容，而寇恂将那个部将在街市上处死。
English: At that time, the new order was still being created, soldiers violated the law, most of them tolerated each other, and Kou Rong put that minister to death in the market.

古文：复以为耻，还，过颍川，谓左右曰： 吾与寇恂并列将帅，而为其所陷，今见恂，必手剑之！ 
现代文：贾复以此为耻辱，回来时经过颍川，对左右说： 我和寇恂同样都是将帅，而我却被他所欺侮。今天见到寇恂，我一定要亲手给他一剑！ 
English: Jia Fu took this as a disgrace, and when he came back, he passed by the Li River and said to the left and right: I and Kou Ye are also generals, but I was bullied by him. Seeing Kou Ye today, I must personally give him a sword!

古文：恂知其谋，不欲与相见。
现代文：寇恂知道贾复的打算，不想和他见面。
English: Kou Ye knew Jia Fu's plan and didn't want to meet him.

古文：姊子谷崇曰： 崇，将也，得带剑侍侧。
现代文：寇恂姐姐的儿子谷崇说： 我是一名武将，能够佩带宝剑在旁边侍候。
English: Gu Chong, the son of Kou Ye's sister, said, "I am a warrior, I can wear a sword and wait by my side.

古文：卒有变，足以相当。 
现代文：一旦有变化，足可以抵挡。 
English: Once there is a change, the foot can resist it.

古文：恂曰： 不然，昔蔺相如不畏秦王而屈于廉颇者，为国也。 
现代文：寇恂说： 不能这么做。从前蔺相如不畏惧秦王而受屈于廉颇，那是为了国家。 
English: "You can't do that," said Koro. "In the past, if you were not afraid of King Qin, but succumbed to corruption, it was for the sake of the country.

古文：乃敕属县盛供具，储酒醪，执金吾军入界，一人皆兼二人之馔。
现代文：于是下令所属各县，预备丰盛的供应，储存含渣的酒浆。执金吾的军队进入颍川境内，每人全都是两份饮食。
English: He then ordered the counties he belonged to to prepare a plentiful supply and store the wine syrup containing dregs. The army of Kingu entered the territory of Shukawa, and everyone had two meals.

古文：恂出迎于道，称疾而还。
现代文：寇恂出城在道上迎接贾复，然后声称有病返回城内。
English: Kou Ye went out of the city to meet Jia Fu on the road, and then claimed to be ill and returned to the city.

古文：复勒兵欲追之，而吏士皆醉，遂过去。
现代文：贾复率军要追寇恂，而官兵们都喝醉了，于是只好过境而去。
English: Jia Fu led the army to chase the bandits, but the officers and soldiers were drunk, so they had to cross the border.

古文：恂遣谷崇以状闻，帝乃征恂。
现代文：寇恂派谷崇到洛阳把情况向刘秀汇报，刘秀于是征召寇恂。
English: Koro sent Gu Chong to explain the situation to the emperor, who then summoned Koro.

古文：恂至，引见；时贾复先在坐，欲起相避。
现代文：寇恂到达洛阳，被引见刘秀。当时贾复已先在座，想起身回避。
English: Kou Ye arrived in Luoyang and was introduced to Liu Xiu. At that time, Jia Fu was already present and wanted to avoid him.

古文：帝曰： 天下未定，两虎安得私斗！
现代文：刘秀说： 天下还未安定，两虎怎么能私下相斗！
English: Liu Xiu said: The world is not yet stable, how can two tigers fight each other in private!

古文：今日朕分之。 
现代文：今天我替你们调解。 
English: Today I will mediate for you.

古文：于是并坐极欢，遂共车同出，结友而去。
现代文：于是两人并肩而坐，都非常高兴，随后乘一辆车出宫，结为好友而离去。
English: So the two of them sat side by side, very happy, and then they left the palace in a car, became friends and left.

古文：八月，帝自率诸将征五校。
现代文：八月，刘秀亲自统率众将领征讨五校军。
English: In August, Liu Xiu personally led the generals to conscript the five-unit army.

古文：丙辰，幸内黄，大破五校于阳，降其众五万人。
现代文：丙辰，到达内黄。在阳大败五校军，接收投降的部众五万人。
English: Hsin-Chen, arrived at Neihuang. Defeated the Five-School Army in Yang, and received 50,000 surrendered troops.

古文：帝遣游击将军邓隆助硃浮讨彭宠。
现代文：刘秀派遣游击将军邓隆协助朱浮讨伐彭宠。
English: Liu Xiu dispatched the guerrilla general Deng Long to assist Zhu Bui in defeating Peng Cun.

古文：隆军潞南，浮军雍奴，遣吏奏状。
现代文：邓隆的军队在潞城南屯驻，朱浮的军队在雍奴屯驻，然后派官吏向刘秀奏报军情。
English: Deng Long's garrison in the south, Zhu Fu's garrison in the north, and Yong Niu's garrison in the south sent officials to report the situation.

古文：帝读檄，怒，谓使吏曰： 营相去百里，其势岂可得相及！
现代文：刘秀看过文书，非常生气，对那个充当专使的官吏说： 官营相距一百里，这种形势怎么能够相互支援！
English: Liu Xiu read the document, was very angry, and said to the official who acted as the special envoy: The official camps are a hundred miles apart, how can this situation support each other!

古文：比若还，北军必败矣。 
现代文：等你回去，驻扎在北面的潞城的军队必定吃了败仗。 
English: By the time you get back, the army stationed in the northern city of Handan will surely have been defeated.

古文：彭宠果遣轻兵击隆军，大破之；浮远，遂不能救。
现代文：彭宠果然派遣轻装部队攻袭邓隆的军队，大败邓隆军。朱浮离得远，结果无法相救。
English: Peng Zhaotong sent light-armed troops to attack Deng Long's army and defeated Deng Long's army. Zhu Fu was far away and could not be saved.

古文：盖延围睢阳数月，克之。
现代文：盖延包围睢阳数月后，攻克睢阳。
English: After several months of encirclement of Fenyang by Gai Yan, he conquered Fenyang.

古文：刘永走至虞，虞人反，杀其母、妻；永与麾下数十人奔谯。
现代文：刘永逃到虞县，虞县人反叛，杀了刘永的母亲和妻子。刘永和部下数十人逃往谯县。
English: Liu Yong fled to You County. People in You County rebelled and killed Liu Yong's mother and wife. Liu Yong and dozens of his subordinates fled to Handan County.

古文：苏茂、佼强、周建合军三万馀人救永；延与战于沛西，大破之。
现代文：苏茂、佼强、周建集合大军三万余人来救刘永。盖延和他们在沛县西交战，大败苏茂等人。
English: Su Mao, Qiao Qiang, and Zhou Jian gathered an army of more than thirty thousand people to rescue Liu Yong. Gai Yan fought with them in the west of Pei County and defeated Su Mao and others.

古文：永、强、建走保湖陵，茂奔还广乐；延遂定沛、楚、临淮。
现代文：刘永、佼强、周建逃跑，据守湖陵，苏茂逃回广乐。盖延于是平定了沛、楚、临淮三郡。
English: Liu Yong, Jiao Qiang, and Zhou Jian fled, and guarded Huling, while Sumo fled back to Guangle. Geyan then pacified Pei, Chu, and Linhuai counties.

古文：帝使太中大夫伏隆持节使青、徐二州，招降郡国。
现代文：刘秀派太中大夫伏隆持符节出使青州、徐州，招降刘永统治下的各郡、各封国。
English: Liu Xiu sent Taizhong Dr. Furong to Qingzhou and Xuzhou on the Day of the Dragon to invite the counties and fiefdoms under Liu Yong's rule.

古文：青、徐群盗闻刘永破败，皆惶怖请降。
现代文：青州、徐州的盗寇听说刘永失败，全都惊惶恐怖，请求归降。
English: When the bandits in Qingzhou and Xuzhou heard that Liu Yong had failed, they were all terrified and asked him to surrender.

古文：张步遣其掾孙昱随隆诣阙上书，献鳆鱼。
现代文：张步派他的属官孙昱跟随伏隆到洛阳，奉上奏章，献上鳆鱼。
English: Zhang Bu sent his subordinate official Sun Qian to follow Fulong to Luoyang, presented him with a medal and a carp.

古文：隆，湛之子也。
现代文：伏隆是伏湛的儿子。
English: Fulong is the son of Fuchan.

古文：堵乡人董反宛城，执南阳太守刘粦。
现代文：堵乡人董在宛城反叛，捉住南阳太守刘。
English: Dong Dong, a villager, rebelled in Wancheng and captured Liu, the Nanyang governor.

古文：扬化将军坚镡攻宛，拔之；走还堵乡。
现代文：扬化将军坚镡进攻宛城，攻陷宛城。董逃回堵乡。
English: General Yanghua resolutely attacked Wancheng and captured it. Dong fled back to Touxiang.

古文：吴汉徇南阳诸县，所过多侵暴。
现代文：吴汉夺取南阳各县，在经过的地方，多有侵暴行为。
English: Wu Han conquered every county in Nanyang, and in the places he passed through, there were many acts of violence.

古文：破虏将军邓奉谒归新野，怒汉掠其乡里，遂反，击破汉军，屯据淯阳，与诸贼合从。
现代文：破虏将军邓奉请求回新野省亲，他对吴汉抢劫他的乡里十分愤怒，于是叛变，击溃吴汉的军队，在阳屯据，同各路贼寇联合起来。
English: Deng Bong, the general who defeated the invaders, requested to return to his relatives in Xinyo Province. He was very angry with Wu Han for robbing his hometown, so he rebelled, defeated Wu Han's army, and united with various bandits in Yangtun.

古文：九月，壬戌，帝自内黄还。
现代文：九月壬戌，刘秀从内黄返回洛阳。
English: In September, Liu Xiu returned to Luoyang from Neihuang.

古文：陕贼苏况攻破弘农，帝使景丹讨之。
现代文：陕县贼寇苏况攻破弘农。刘秀派景丹征讨。
English: The bandits of Su Jiao in Shaanxi attacked and defeated the Hongnong. Liu Xiu sent Jingdan to investigate.

古文：会丹薨，征虏将军祭遵击弘农、柏华、蛮中贼，皆平之。
现代文：正赶上景丹去世，便改派征虏将军祭遵攻打弘农、柏华、蛮中等地贼寇，把他们全部荡平。
English: Just in time for the death of Jingdan, they changed the assignment of the Conscripted General's Festival to the following: to attack and fight the Hongnong, the Baihua, and the very middle-class thieves and robbers, and to level them all.

古文：赤眉引兵欲西上陇，隗嚣遣将军杨广迎击，破之；又追败之于乌氏、泾阳间。
现代文：赤眉军打算向西去陇地，隗嚣派遣将军杨广迎击。打败赤眉；又乘胜追击，在乌氏、泾阳一带击败赤眉。
English: The Red Eyebrows Army planned to go west to Loudi, and sent General Yang Guang to meet the attack. Defeat the Red Eyebrows; and take advantage of the victory to pursue and defeat the Red Eyebrows in the Wuji and Shenyang areas.

古文：赤眉至阳城番须中，逢大雪，坑谷皆满，士多冻死。
现代文：赤眉抵达阳城、番须地区，天降大雪，把坑坑谷谷都填满了，很多士兵冻死。
English: When Red Eyebrows arrived in the Yangcheng and Fansu regions, heavy snow fell, filling the valleys and pits, and many soldiers froze to death.

古文：乃复还，发掘诸陵，取其宝货。
现代文：于是又返回来，挖掘西汉的皇陵，掠取其中的财宝。
English: He then returned to excavate the imperial tombs of the Western Han Dynasty and plunder their treasures.

古文：凡有玉匣殓者，率皆如生，贼遂污辱吕后尸。
现代文：凡是用玉衣装殓的尸体，大都栩栩如生。贼寇于是侮辱了吕后的尸体。
English: Most of the corpses dressed in jade are lifelike. The thief then insults Lyu's corpse.

古文：邓禹遣兵击之于郁夷，反为所败。
现代文：邓禹派兵在郁夷攻打赤眉，反被赤眉打败。
English: Deng Yu sent soldiers to attack the Red Eyebrows in Ikui, but they were defeated by the Red Eyebrows.

古文：禹乃出之云阳。
现代文：邓禹于是撤军，抵达云阳。
English: Deng Yu then withdrew and arrived in Yunyang.

古文：赤眉复入长安。
现代文：赤眉又进入长安。
English: Akemi entered Chang'an again.

古文：延岑屯杜陵，赤眉将逢安击之。
现代文：延岑驻扎在杜陵，赤眉将领逢安攻打延岑。
English: Yancheng was stationed in Tulin, and General Chaomei led the attack on Yancheng.

古文：邓禹以安精兵在外，引兵袭长安；会谢禄救至，禹兵败走。
现代文：邓禹因逢安的精兵离开长安，便率军袭击长安。恰巧谢禄的救兵赶到，邓禹战败逃跑。
English: Due to Feng An's elite soldiers leaving Chang'an, Deng Yu led his army to attack Chang'an. Coincidentally, Xuelu's rescuers arrived, and Deng Yu was defeated and fled.

古文：延岑击逢安，大破之，死者十馀万人。
现代文：延岑攻击逢安，逢安大败，死十余万人。
English: Yancheng attacked Feng'an. Feng'an was defeated, and more than 100,000 people died.

古文：廖湛将赤眉十八万攻汉中王嘉；嘉与战于谷口，大破之，嘉手杀湛，遂到云阳就谷。
现代文：廖湛率领十八万赤眉军进攻汉中王刘嘉。刘嘉和廖湛在谷口交战，廖湛大败，刘嘉亲手杀死廖湛，于是到云阳筹备军粮。
English: Liu Zhan led 180,000 Red Eyebrows to attack Liu Jia, the king of Han. Liu Jia and Liu Zhan fought in Taniguchi, Liu Zhan was defeated, Liu Jia killed Liu Zhan with his own hands, so he went to Yunyang to prepare military rations.

古文：嘉妻兄新野来歙，帝之姑子也。
现代文：刘嘉妻子的哥哥新野人来歙，是刘秀姑姑的儿子，刘秀派邓禹招降刘嘉。
English: Liu Jia's wife's brother, Xin Yuchen, is the son of Liu Xiu's aunt, Liu Xiu sent Deng Yu to recruit Liu Jia.

古文：帝令邓禹招嘉，嘉因歙诣禹降。
现代文：刘嘉依靠来歙的关系到邓禹的营垒归降。
English: Liu Jia relied on the relationship between Lai Ye and Deng Yu to fall back.

古文：李宝倨慢，禹斩之。
现代文：刘嘉的宰相李宝态度傲慢，邓禹斩杀李宝。
English: Liu Jia's prime minister Li Bao was arrogant, and Deng Yu killed Li Bao.

古文：冬，十一月，以廷尉岑彭为征南大将军。
现代文：冬季，十一月，刘秀任命廷尉岑彭当征南大将军。
English: In the winter, in November, Liu Xiu appointed the imperial lieutenant Yao Peng as the general of the Southern Expeditionary Army.

古文：帝于大会中指王常谓群臣曰： 此家率下江诸将辅翼汉室，心如金石，真忠臣也！ 
现代文：刘秀在大会群臣时，指着王常对群臣说： 此人率领下江将领辅佐保卫汉朝，心像金石一般坚硬，真是忠臣呵！ 
English: When Liu Xiu was at the general meeting of the ministers, he pointed to Wang Chang and said to the ministers: This man led the Lower River generals and assistants to defend the Han Dynasty, and his heart was as hard as a rock. What a loyal minister!

古文：即日，拜常为汉忠将军，使与岑彭率建义大将军硃祜等七将军讨邓奉、董。
现代文：当天，任命王常为汉忠将军，派他和岑彭率领建义大将军朱祜等七位将军征讨邓奉、董。
English: On the same day, Wang Chang was appointed as Han Zhong's general, and he sent him and Nie Peng to lead seven generals, including Jianyi's general Zhu Xi, to recruit Deng Feng and Dong.

古文：彭等先击堵乡，邓奉救之。
现代文：岑彭等先攻打堵乡的董，邓奉出兵援救董。
English: Yao Peng and others attacked and defeated Dong of Dongxiang first, and Deng Bong sent troops to rescue Dong.

古文：硃祜军败，为奉所获。
现代文：朱祜战败，被邓奉俘获。
English: Zhu Xi was defeated and captured by Deng Feng.

古文：铜马、青犊、尤来馀贼共立孙登为天子。
现代文：铜马、青犊、尤来等贼军残部共同拥立孙登当皇帝。
English: The remnants of the Kleptocratic Army, such as Bronze Horse, Qingcheng, and Youlai, jointly supported the enthronement of Sun as emperor.

古文：登将乐玄杀登，以其众五万馀人降。
现代文：孙登的部将乐玄杀死孙登，率领部众五万多人投降刘秀。
English: Sun Deng's general, Le Xuan, killed Sun Deng and led more than 50,000 people to surrender to Liu Xiu.

古文：邓禹自冯愔叛后，威名稍损，又乏粮食，战数不利，归附者日益离散。
现代文：邓禹自从冯叛变后，声望逐渐降低，再加上缺乏军粮，和赤眉军交战屡次不利，归附他的人逐渐离散。
English: Deng Yu's reputation gradually declined after Feng's mutiny. Coupled with the lack of military rations, and repeated unfavorable battles with the Red Eyebrows, his followers gradually dispersed.

古文：赤眉、延岑暴乱三辅，郡县大姓各拥兵众，禹不能定。
现代文：赤眉军和延岑军同时在三辅地区横暴作乱，郡县的大家族各自集结兵众自保，邓禹无能为力。
English: At the same time, the Red Eyebrows Army and the Yanqi Army rioted violently in the Sanfu area. The large families of counties and counties each gathered soldiers to protect themselves, and Deng Yu was powerless.

古文：帝乃遣偏将军冯异代禹讨之，车驾送至河南，敕异曰： 三辅遭王莽、更始之乱，重以赤眉、延岑之酷，元元涂炭，无所依诉。
现代文：刘秀于是派遣偏将军冯异接替邓禹讨伐赤眉等贼军。刘秀送冯异到河南，告诫冯异说： 三辅地区遭受王莽、更始的灾难，又加上赤眉、延岑的暴行，生灵涂炭，没有地方哀告倾诉。
English: Liu Xiu then sent the general Feng Ying to succeed Deng Yu to fight against the Red Eyebrows and other bandits. Liu Xiu sent Feng Ying to Henan and warned Feng Ying, saying: The Sanfu region has suffered from the disasters of Wang Mang and Chang Shi, coupled with the atrocities of the Red Eyebrows and Yan Xuan, the lives of the people have been ruined, and there is no place to complain.

古文：将军今奉辞讨诸不轨，营保降者，遣其渠帅诣京师；散其小民，令就农桑；坏其营壁，无使复聚。
现代文：将军现在奉命讨伐叛逆，对那些投降的营寨，将其首领送到京城洛阳，遣散小民，让他们回家耕田种桑；摧毁营寨堡垒，使他们不能再聚集起来。
English: The general was now ordered to crush the rebellion, to send his chiefs to the capitulated camps in the capital Luoyang, to dismiss the commoners and let them go home to farm and plant mulberry trees, and to destroy the camp fortresses so that they could not regroup.

古文：征伐非必略地、屠城，要在平定安集之耳。
现代文：出征讨伐并不是一定要夺取土地、屠杀城池，关键在于平息叛乱、安抚百姓而已。
English: Going on a crusade does not necessarily mean seizing land and slaughtering cities, the key is to quell the rebellion and pacify the people.

古文：诸将非不健斗，然好虏掠。
现代文：将领们不是不善于战斗，但喜好掳掠。
English: The generals are not brave enough to fight, but they are too fond of robbing and plundering.

古文：卿本能御吏士，念自修敕，无为郡县所苦！ 
现代文：你本可以驾驭部众，要常常告诫自己，不要给郡县的百姓造成痛苦！ 
English: You could have controlled your subordinates. You should always caution yourself not to cause pain to the people of the county!

古文：异顿首受命，引而西，所至布威信，群盗多降。
现代文：冯异叩头，接受命令，率军向西进发。他在所经过的地方传播威望和信誉，很多盗贼投降。
English: Feng Yixin bowed, accepted the order, and led the army to march westward. He spread prestige and credibility in the places he passed, and many thieves surrendered.

古文：臣光曰：昔周人颂武王之德曰： 铺时绎思，我徂惟求定。 
现代文：臣司马光曰：从前，西周时代的人称颂周武王的恩德说： 宣扬令人怀念的美德，我的追求只是天下安定。 
English: Minister Sima Guang said: Once upon a time, the people of the Western Zhou Dynasty praised the benevolence of King Zhou Wu and said: "To promote memorable virtues, my pursuit is only world stability."

古文：言王者之兵志，在布陈威德安民而已。
现代文：这是说君王的军事行动，目的仅在于传布威望美德，使人民安乐而已。
English: That is to say, the king's military operations are only aimed at spreading prestige and virtue and making the people happy.

古文：观光武之所以取关中，用是道也。
现代文：刘秀所以能夺取关中，所用的就是这个原则。
English: This is the principle that Liu Xiu used to win Guanzhong.

古文：岂不美哉！
现代文：这难道不是美好的事吗？
English: Isn't that a beautiful thing?

古文：又诏征邓禹还，曰： 慎毋与穷寇争锋！
现代文：刘秀又下诏征召邓禹回洛阳，说： 要慎重，不要同穷途末路的敌人争高低！
English: Liu Xiu issued another edict summoning Deng Yu to return to Luoyang, saying, "Be cautious, don't compete with the enemy who is at the end of his rope!

古文：赤眉无谷，自当来东。
现代文：赤眉军断粮，自然会来东方。
English: If the Red Eyebrows run out of food, they will naturally come to the East.

古文：吾以饱待饥，以逸待劳，折棰笞之，非诸将忧也。
现代文：我们以饱食等待饥饿，以安逸等待疲劳，折断策马用的杖便可抽打他们，大家不用担心。
English: We wait for hunger with fullness, we wait for fatigue with ease, we can beat them with a broken stick, don't worry.

古文：无得复妄进兵！ 
现代文：不许再轻率进攻！ 
English: No more reckless attacks!

古文：帝以伏隆为光禄大夫，复使于张步，拜步东莱太守，并与新除青州牧、守、都尉俱东。
现代文：刘秀任命伏隆当光禄大夫，又派他出使到张步处，任命张步当东莱太守，并同新任命的青州牧、太守、都尉一起东下。
English: Liu Xiu appointed Fulong as the doctor of Guanglu, and sent him to Zhang Bu, appointed Zhang Bu as the governor of Donglai, and went to the east with the newly appointed governor of Qingzhou, governor and lieutenant.

古文：诏隆辄拜令、长以下。
现代文：刘秀授权伏隆可以自行任命县令、县长及其以下的各级官员。
English: Liu Xiu authorized Fulong to appoint county magistrates, county governors and other officials at all levels.

古文：十二月，戊午，诏宗室列侯为王莽所绝者，皆复故国。
现代文：十二月戊午，刘秀发布诏令：凡被王莽新朝废除的刘氏皇族列侯，全都恢复原来的封国。
English: At noon of December, Liu Xiu issued a decree: all the Liu royal princes who had been abolished by Wang Mang's new dynasty were restored to their original fiefs.

古文：三辅大饥，人相食，城郭皆空，白骨蔽野，遗民往往聚为营保，各坚壁清野。
现代文：三辅地区发生了严重的饥荒，出现人吃人的现象。城郭全空，白骨遍野。生存下来的人往往聚在一起兴筑营寨自保，各自坚壁清野。
English: Severe famine and cannibalism occurred in the Sanfu area. The castle was completely empty, with bones strewn everywhere. Those who survived often gathered together to build camps for self-preservation, each with its own strong walls and clear fields.

古文：赤眉虏掠无所得，乃引而东归，众尚二十馀万，随道复散。
现代文：赤眉军掳掠不到东西，于是领兵东归，部众还有二十余万，一路上又纷纷逃散。
English: The Red Eyebrows were unable to capture anything, so the leaders returned to the east, along with more than 200,000 followers, who scattered along the way.

古文：帝遣破奸将军侯进等屯新安，建威大将军耿弇等屯宜阳，以要其还路，敕诸将曰： 贼若东走，可引宜阳兵会新安；贼若南走，可引新安兵会宜阳。 
现代文：刘秀派遣破奸将军侯进等驻屯新安，派遣建威大将军耿等驻屯宜阳，以截断赤眉军的归路。他命令将领们说： 贼寇如果向东逃跑，可率宜阳部队去与新安部队会师；贼寇如果向南逃跑，可率新安部队去与宜阳部队会师。 
English: Liu Xiu dispatched traitor-busting General Hou Jin and others to be stationed in Xin'an, and dispatched General Jian Wei Geng and others to be stationed in Yiyang, in order to cut off the return route of the Red Eyebrows. He ordered the generals to say: If the bandits escape to the east, they can lead the Yiyang troops to join the Xin'an troops; if the bandits escape to the south, they can lead the Xin'an troops to join the Yiyang troops.

古文：冯异与赤眉遇于华阴，相拒六十馀日，战数十合，降其将卒五千馀人。
现代文：冯异和赤眉军在华阴遭遇，互相对抗六十余天，交锋数十次，赤眉军将士有五千余人投降。
English: Feng Yiyi and the Red Eyebrows encountered each other in Huayin. They fought against each other for more than sixty days and clashed dozens of times. More than five thousand Red Eyebrows soldiers surrendered.

