古文：赵晖，字重光，澶州人也。
现代文：赵晖，字重光，澶州人。
English: Zhao Wei, the character of heavy light, is from Zhangzhou.

古文：弱冠以骁果应募，始隶于庄宗帐前，与大梁兵经百余战，以功迁马直军使。
现代文：成年后凭骁勇果敢应征入伍，开始时归于后唐庄宗帐下，与后梁军队经历一百多场战斗，因功升任马直军使。
English: After he became an adult, he was conscripted into the army by virtue of his bravery and courage. At the beginning, he was under the account of the Emperor of Tang, Zhuang Zong. He experienced more than 100 battles with the Emperor of Liang and was promoted to the post of Ma Zhi envoy for his merits.

古文：同光中，从魏王破蜀，命晖分统所部，南戍蛮陬。
现代文：同光年间，跟从魏王李继岌攻打川蜀，魏王命赵晖分兵统帅部下戍守南蛮边域。
English: During the same period of time, he followed the Wei King Li Jian to attack Sichuan Shu, and the Wei King ordered the subordinates of the commander-in-chief Zhao Bing to guard the southern barbarian border.

古文：明宗即位，征还，授禁军指挥使。
现代文：唐明宗即位后，召回，授任禁军指挥使。
English: After Emperor Tang Mingzong ascended to the throne, he was recalled and appointed commander of the Imperial Army.

古文：晋有天下，参掌卫兵，从马全节围安陆，佐杜重威战宗城，皆有功，改奉国指挥使。
现代文：后晋夺取天下，赵晖参与掌管卫兵，跟随马全节包围安陆，辅佐杜重威攻战宗城，都立有战功，改任奉国军指挥使。
English: After the Jin Dynasty conquered the whole country, Zhao Wei took part in commanding the guards, followed Ma Quanzhong to encircle Anlu, assisted Du Chongwei to attack Zongcheng, made great achievements in the war, and was reappointed as the commander of the national army.

古文：《通鉴》：契丹主赐赵晖诏，即以为保义留后。
现代文：开运末年，领部下屯驻陕地，遇上契丹入据汴京，赵晖有慷慨悲愤之意。
English: At the end of the first year of the campaign, when the leader's subordinates were stationed in Shaanxi, and Qidan entered Beijing, Zhao Yao was generous with grief and indignation.

古文：晖斩契丹使者，焚其诏，遣支使河间赵矩奉表晋阳。
现代文：当听到后汉高祖在并门起兵发难时，就与部将王晏、侯章尽力合计，赶走契丹人任命的官员，占据陕州，立即飞马向汉高祖报告。
English: When he heard that Emperor Gaozhu of the Later Han Dynasty had raised an army to fight in the War of the Annexation, he made every effort with the generals Wang Qian and Hou Zhang to drive away the officials appointed by the Khitan, occupy Shaanxi, and immediately report to Emperor Gaozhu of the Later Han Dynasty.

古文：汉祖乃命晖为保义军节度、陕虢等州观察处置等使。
现代文：汉高祖就命赵晖为保义军节度使，陕、虢等州观察处置使。
English: The founder of the Han Dynasty ordered Zhao Qi to be the envoy of the Guoying Army, and the envoy of the observation and disposition of the states such as Shaanxi and Shandong.

古文：汉祖之幸东京，路出于陕，晖戎服朝于路左，手控六飞达于行宫，君臣之义如旧结焉，旋加检校太尉。
现代文：汉高祖前往东京时，路过陕州，赵晖身穿戎装在路旁朝拜，手牵着高祖的御马送往行宫，君臣间的情义，就像故旧之交，旋即被加封为检校太尉。
English: When Emperor Gaozong of Han went to Tokyo, he passed through Shaanxi Province. Zhao Jun, dressed in military attire, paid homage at the roadside and led Emperor Gaozong's horse to the imperial palace. The sentiments between the emperor and his ministers were like old friends, and he was immediately promoted to the rank of inspector.

古文：乾祐初，移镇凤翔，加同平章事。
现代文：乾佑初年，调到凤翔镇守，加封为同平章事。
English: In the first year of Qianyou, he was transferred to Fengxiang Town Guard, and was awarded the title of Tongping.

古文：属王景崇叛据岐山，及期不受代，朝廷即命晖为西南面行营都部署，统兵以讨之。
现代文：正遇上王景崇占据岐山反叛，这时不接受赵晖的替代，朝廷就命赵晖为西南面行营都部署，统帅部队征讨王景崇。
English: When Wang Jingsong was caught up in the Qishan Rebellion, Zhao Qi was not accepted as a replacement. The imperial court ordered Zhao Qi to go to the southwest and lead the troops to subjugate Wang Jingsong.

古文：时李守贞叛于蒲，赵思绾据于雍，与景崇皆递相为援，又引蜀军出自大散关，势不可遏。晖领兵数千，数战而胜，然后堑而围之。
现代文：这时李守贞在蒲州反叛，王景崇又引来蜀军从大散关出兵为助，势不可挡。赵晖带领数千名士兵，几次交战获胜，然后挖战壕包围他们。
English: At this time, Li Shouzhen rebelled in Puzhou, and Wang Jingsong brought in the Shu army from Dasangguan to help, which was overwhelming. Zhao Jun led thousands of soldiers, won several battles, and then dug trenches to surround them.

古文：晖屡使人挑战，贼终不出，乃潜使千余人，于城南一舍之外，擐甲执兵，伪为蜀兵旗帜，循南山而下，诈令诸军声言川军至矣。
现代文：赵晖多次派人挑战，贼军始终不敢出战，于是赵晖暗中派出一千多人，在城南三十里的地方，穿上铠甲拿着兵器，伪造蜀军的旗帜，沿终南山东下，下令各军谣传蜀军来了。
English: Zhao Yu repeatedly sent people to challenge, the bandit army still did not dare to go to war, so Zhao Yu secretly sent more than a thousand people to a place 30 miles south of the city, put on armor and weapons, forged the flag of the Shu army, went east along the last Nanshan, and ordered all military rumors to spread that the Shu army was coming.

古文：须臾，西南尘起，城中以为信，乃令数千人溃围而出，以为应援，晖设伏而待，一鼓而尽殪之。自是景崇胆破，不复敢出。
现代文：一会儿，西南方尘土飞扬，城中贼军信以为真，便令几千人突破包围，以接应蜀军，赵晖设置伏兵等待，这时一跃而出，全部消灭了突围的军队，从此王景崇吓破了胆，不敢再出兵。
English: In a moment, the southwestern part of the city was covered with dust. Believing that there was a bandit army in the city, he ordered several thousand people to break through the encirclement to meet the Shu army. Zhao Wei set up an ambush and waited. At that time, he jumped out and wiped out all the breaking-out troops. From then on, Wang Jingsong was scared out of his wits and did not dare to send troops again.

古文：明年春，拔之，加检校太保、兼侍中。
现代文：第二年春天，攻克了岐山城，赵晖加封为检校太保、兼侍中。
English: In the spring of the following year, after conquering Qishan City, Zhao Zhe Jiafeng became a school inspector and a junior chamberlain.

古文：国初，就加兼中书令。
现代文：后周开国之初，加封赵晖为中书令。
English: At the beginning of the founding of the late Zhou Dynasty, Zhao Jian was added to the Chinese Calligraphy Order.

古文：三年春，拜章请觐，诏从之，入朝授归德军节度使。
现代文：广顺三年春天，上奏章请求入京朝拜，太祖答应了他，入京朝拜，授任归德军节度使。
English: In the spring of the third year of the Guangshun era, the last chapter of the Song Dynasty asked him to go to Beijing to pay homage, and the great-grandfather agreed. He went to Beijing to pay homage and was appointed as the German army's envoy to the festival.

古文：显德元年，受代归阙，以疾告老，授太子太师致仕，进封秦国公。
现代文：世宗显德元年，退职回京，因病告老归家，以太子太师身份退隐，进封为秦国公。
English: In the first year of the reign of King Sejong Hyeongde, he retired to Beijing, returned home due to illness, retired as the Grand Master of the Taiji, and was enthroned as the King of Qin.

古文：寻卒于其第，年六十七。
现代文：不久，在家中去世，享年六十七岁。
English: He died at home shortly afterwards, aged 67.

古文：制赠尚书令。
现代文：诏令追赠为尚书令。
English: The posthumous conferment of the imperial edict is the Imperial edict.

