古文：淹水出越巂遂久县徼外，吕忱曰：淹水，一曰复水也。
现代文：淹水发源于越禽郡遂九县边境外，吕忱说：淹水又叫复水。
English: The flooding originated in Yueyang County, outside the Suijiu County border, Lu Zhen said: flooding is also called flooding.

古文：东南至青蛉县。
现代文：往东南流到青岭县。
English: It flows southeast to Qingling County.

古文：县有禺同山，其山神有金马、碧鸡，光景倏忽，民多见之。
现代文：青岭县有禺同山，此山的山神有金马和碧鸡，祥光异彩一闪而过，人们常常看见。
English: In Qingling County, there is a mountain with the same name. The god of this mountain has a golden horse and a green chicken. People often see the auspicious light flashing by.

古文：汉宣帝遣谏大夫王褒祭之，欲至其鸡、马，褒道病而卒，是不果焉。
现代文：汉宣帝派遣谏大夫王褒去祭山神，想得到山神的碧鸡和金马，但王褒在路上病死了，因而没有成功。
English: Emperor Xuan of Han dispatched Dr. Wang Bo to offer sacrifices to the mountain god, hoping to obtain the mountain god's chicken and golden horse, but Wang Bo died of illness on the way and was not successful.

古文：王褒《碧鸡颂》曰：敬移金精神马，缥缥碧鸡。
现代文：王褒的《碧鸡颂》说：我们怀着敬意来取西方的神马，飘飘飞举的碧鸡。
English: Wang Bao's "Peking Chicken Ode" says: We respectfully come to take the West's sacred horse, the fluttering and flying Peking chicken.

古文：故左太冲《蜀都赋》曰：金马骋光而绝影，碧鸡倏忽而耀仪。
现代文：左太冲《蜀都赋》说：金马在阳光下驰骋却没有影子，碧鸡在瞬息间炫耀它的美丽。
English: Zuo Taichong's "Shu Du Fu" said: "The golden horse gallops in the sun without a shadow, and the blue chicken shows off its beauty in the blink of an eye."

古文：又东过姑复县南，东入于若水。
现代文：又往东流过姑复县南边，往东注入若水。
English: It also flows eastward past the southern edge of Gufu County, injecting fresh water to the east.

古文：淹水径县之临池泽，而东北径云南县西，东北注若水也。
现代文：淹水经过姑复县的临池泽，往东北流经云南县西，往东北注入若水。
English: The floodwater passed through Linchi Lake in Gufu County, flowed to the northeast through the west of Yunnan County, and injected fresh water to the northeast.

古文：益州叶榆河，出其县北界，屈从县东北流，县故滇池叱榆之国也，汉武帝元封二年，使唐蒙开之，以为益州郡。
现代文：益州叶榆河，发源于叶榆县北界，转弯从县里往东北流，叶榆县是旧时滇池的叶榆国。汉武帝元封二年前，派唐蒙去开拓那个地区，设为益州郡。
English: Yeju Yeju River, originating in the northern border of Yeju County, turns from the county to the northeast, Yeju County is the head of Yeju Country in the old days. Two years before the founding of the Han Dynasty, Emperor Wu sent Tang Meng to explore the area and set it up as Yeju County.

古文：郡有叶榆县，县西北八十里，有吊鸟山，众鸟千百为群，其会呜呼啁哳，每岁七八月至，十六七日则止。
现代文：郡里有叶榆县，叶榆县西北八十里有吊鸟山，成千成百的鸟聚集成群，会集时啾啾哪哪，传出一片叫声。鸟群每年七八月来到，十六七日就停止。
English: In the county, there is Yeji County, and in the northwest eighty of Yeji County, there is Hanging Bird Mountain. Thousands and hundreds of birds gather in groups, and when they gather, a cry is heard. The birds come in July and August every year, and stop on the 16th and 17th.

古文：一岁六至，雉雀来吊，夜燃火伺取之。
现代文：一年来六次。当难雀来吊时，夜间点火守候捕捉。
English: Six times a year. When the peregrine falcon comes to hang around, they light a fire at night and wait to catch it.

古文：其无嗉不食，似特悲者，以为义鸟，则不取也。
现代文：有的嗦囊里空空的，却不肯吃东西，好像特别悲哀似的，人们以为这是义鸟，就不捉它。
English: Some gulls have an empty pouch, but refuse to eat, as if they are particularly sad. People think it is a righteous bird and do not catch it.

古文：俗言凤凰死于此山，故众鸟来吊，因名吊鸟。
现代文：民间相传，凤凰死在这山上，所以百鸟都来吊丧，因此叫吊鸟。
English: According to folk legend, the phoenix died on this mountain, so hundreds of birds came to pay their respects, hence the name "hanging bird."

古文：县之东有叶榆泽，叶榆水所钟而为此川薮也。
现代文：县东有叶榆泽，由叶榆水汇聚而成，是此水的大沼泽。
English: In the eastern part of the prefecture, there is Ye Ye Lake, which is formed by the convergence of Ye Ye water, and is the largest swamp of this water.

古文：过不韦县，县故九隆哀牢之国也。
现代文：流过不韦县，不韦县是从前九隆哀牢之国。
English: Flowing through Buwei County, Buwei County is the country of mourning from the former Kowloon.

古文：有牢山，其先有妇人，名沙壹，居于牢山。
现代文：有牢山，他们的祖先有个女人叫沙壹，住在牢山。
English: There is a dungeon. Their ancestor was a woman named Shay, who lived in the dungeon.

古文：捕鱼水中，触沉木，若有感，因怀孕，产十子。
现代文：她在水中捕鱼时，触到沉在水下的树，心中似乎动了一下，因而就怀孕了，生了是个儿子。
English: While she was fishing in the water, she touched a tree that was sinking under the water. Her heart seemed to move, and she became pregnant and gave birth to a son.

古文：后沉木化为龙出水，九子惊走。小子不能去，背龙而坐，龙因舐之。
现代文：后来那棵沉在水里的树化成了龙，从水中出来，九个儿子都吓得跑开了，小儿子不能走，以背朝着龙坐，龙就去舔他。
English: Later, the tree that sank in the water turned into a dragon. When it came out of the water, the nine sons were scared and ran away. The youngest son could not walk, so he sat with his back to the dragon, and the dragon went to lick him.

古文：其母鸟语，谓背为九，谓坐为隆，因名为九隆。
现代文：他母亲是讲夷语的，把背叫做九，坐叫做隆，因此名为九隆。
English: His mother spoke the Yi language and called the back nine and the seat long, hence the name Jiulong.

古文：及长，诸兄遂相共推九隆为王。
现代文：九隆长大后，哥哥们都推他为王。
English: When Kowloon grew up, his brothers all pushed him to be king.

古文：后牢山下，有一夫一妇，生十女，九隆皆以为妻，遂因孳育，皆画身像龙文，衣皆著尾。
现代文：后来牢山下有一对夫妻，生了十个女儿，九隆都娶过来做妻子，于是养了许多儿女。他们身上都画了龙纹，衣服都带着尾巴。
English: Later, there was a couple at the foot of the mountain. They had ten daughters, all of whom Kowloon took as his wife, and they raised many children. They all had dragon patterns painted on their bodies, and their clothes all had tails.

古文：九隆死，世世不与中国通。
现代文：九隆死后，世世代代都不与中国来往了。
English: After the death of Kowloon, there was no contact with China for generations.

古文：汉建武二十三年，王遣兵来，乘革船南下，攻汉鹿茤民。
现代文：汉建武二十三年，国王派兵乘皮船南下，进攻汉朝的鹿爹人，鹿爹人弱小，将军也被俘了。
English: In the 23rd year of Jianwu of the Han Dynasty, the king sent soldiers to the south in a leather boat to attack the Han Dynasty's Deerslayer. Deerslayer was weak, and the general was also captured.

古文：鹿茤民弱小，将为所擒，于是天大震雷疾雨，南风漂起，水为逆流，波涌二百余里，革船沉没，溺死数千人。
现代文：于是天上响起震天动地的霹雳，暴雨南风刮得水都倒流了。波涛汹涌二百余里，皮船都沉没了，溺死了好几千人。
English: As a result, the heavens resounded with earth-shattering thunderclaps, and the torrential rain and southerly winds caused the water to flow backwards. The waves surged for more than two hundred miles, and all the leather boats sank, drowning several thousand people.

古文：后数年，复遣六王，将万许人攻鹿茤。鹿茤王与战，杀六王，哀牢耆老共埋之。
现代文：几年以后，又派了六个王侯率领一万余人来进攻鹿爹，鹿萝王和他们作战，杀了六个王侯，哀牢的父老们一同把他们埋葬了。
English: A few years later, six princes led by more than ten thousand people were sent to attack Deer Daddy. Deer Daddy fought with them, killed six princes, and buried them together with their grieving parents.

古文：其夜，虎掘而食之。
现代文：那天晚上，老虎把尸体都刨出来吃掉，天明后只见一堆白骨。
English: That night, the tigers gouged out the bodies and ate them. After daybreak, all that was left was a pile of white bones.

古文：明旦，但见骸骨，惊怖引去。乃惧，谓其耆老小王曰：哀牢犯徼，自古有之。今此攻鹿爹，辄被天诛。中国有受命之王乎？
现代文：人们看到都吓得逃开了，害怕地对他们的父老和小王说：哀牢进犯边疆，古来就有，此次进攻鹿爹，立即遭受上天的诛灭，难道中国有真命天子了吗？
English: When people saw this, they all ran away in fright, and said to their fathers and little kings in fear: "Mournfully invading the frontier has existed since ancient times, but this attack on Deer Daddy was immediately destroyed by the heavens. Does China have a true son of heaven?

古文：何天祐之明也。
现代文：为什么上天明明白白地保护他们呢？
English: Why does the heavens clearly protect them?

古文：即遣使诣越巂奉献。求乞内附，长保塞徼。
现代文：于是就派遣使者到越篙去送献礼物，请求归附，永远维护边境。
English: So he sent an envoy to Yueyang to present gifts, ask for annexation, and forever maintain the border.

古文：汉明帝水平十二年，置为永昌郡。
现代文：汉明帝永平十二年，在那里设置永昌郡。
English: In the twelfth year of Emperor Hanming Yongping, Yongchang County was established there.

古文：郡治不韦县，盖秦始皇徙吕不韦子孙于此，故以不韦名县。
现代文：郡治在不韦县―因为秦始王把吕不韦的子孙流徙到这里，所以用不韦作县名。
English: The county seat is Buwei County - because the descendants of Lu Buwei were exiled here by Qin Shi Huang, Buwei is used as the county name.

古文：北去叶榆六百余里，叶榆水不径其县，自不韦北注者，卢仓禁水耳。
现代文：不韦县北距叶榆六百余里，叶榆水并不流经不韦县；从不韦往北流的是卢仓水和禁水。
English: The north of Buwei County is more than 600 miles away from Yecheng. The water of Yecheng does not flow through Buwei County; the water of Lu Cang and the forbidden water flow north from Buwei.

古文：叶榆水自县南，径遂久县东，又径姑复县西，与淹水合。
现代文：叶榆水从县南流经遂久县东边，又流经姑复县西边，与淹水汇合。
English: Ye Ye water flows from the southern part of the county through the eastern part of Suiji County, and flows through the western part of Gufu County, and merges with the flood.

古文：又东南径永昌邪龙县，县以建兴三年，刘禅分隶云南，于不韦县为东北。
现代文：淹水又往东南流经永昌邪龙县。邪龙县于建兴三年，被刘禅划归云南郡，对不韦县来说，是在东北方了。
English: The floodwaters also flowed southeast through Yongchang's Yalong County. Yalong County was assigned to Yunnan County by Liu Zhen three years after Jianxing, but to Buwei County, it is in the northeast.

古文：东南出益州界，叶榆水自邪尤县东南，径秦臧县，甫与濮水同注滇池泽于连然、双柏县也。
现代文：往东南流出益州边界，叶榆水从邪龙县往东南流，经过秦藏县，往南流在连然、双柏县与淮水一同注入滇池泽。
English: Flowing out of the Yizhou border to the southeast, Ye Longshui flows from Yalong County to the southeast, passes through Qinzang County, and flows southward into Lian Ran and Shuangbai County together with Huai Shu.

古文：叶榆水自泽，又东北径滇池县南，又东径同并县南，又东径漏江县，伏流山下，复出蝮口，谓之漏江。
现代文：叶榆水从滇池泽又往东北流，经过滇池县南边，又往东流经同并县南边，又往东流经漏江县，在山麓潜入地下，又在蝮口流出，叫漏江。
English: The Yecheng Water flows from the Yecheng Lake to the northeast, passing through the southern edge of Yecheng County, flowing eastward through the southern edge of Tongyuan County, flowing eastward through the Yecheng County, sinking into the ground at the foot of the mountain, and flowing out at the mouth, called the Yecheng River.

古文：左恩《蜀都赋》曰：漏江袱流溃其阿，汩若汤谷之扬涛，沛若蒙汜之涌波。
现代文：左思《蜀都赋》说：漏江地下河冲破陵阜泪泊涌出，有如汤谷怒涛奔腾；水盛势强，有如嚎祀水的波涛汹涌。
English: Zuo Si's "Shu Du Fu" said: "When a leaking underground river bursts through the mausoleum, tears gush out, like the turbulent waves of the tangle; when the water is strong, it is like the turbulent waves of the sacred water.

古文：诸葛亮之平南中也，战于是水之南。
现代文：诸葛亮平定南中时，就是在此水以南作战的。
English: When Zhuge Liang conquered Nanzhong, he fought south of this water.

古文：叶榆水又径贲古县北，东与盘江合。
现代文：叶榆水又流经责古县北边，东流与盘江汇合。
English: The Yecheng River flows through the northern part of Yegu County, and the eastern part flows into the Pan River.

古文：北二水：左水东北径望海县南，建武十九年，马援征征侧置，又东径龙渊县北，又东合南水。
现代文：盘水发源于律高县东南的监盯山，东经梁水郡北、贵古县南，水阔百余步，深处十丈，瘴气很盛。朱褒谋反时，李恢直追到盘江。建武十九年马援讨伐征侧时所置；又往东流经龙渊县北边，又往东流与南水相汇合。
English: The Panshui originates from the Monitoring Mountain in the southeast of Lugao County, and flows eastward through the north of Liangshui County and the south of Guigu County. The water is more than a hundred paces wide, the depth is ten paces, and the turbidity is very strong. When Zhu Biao was plotting a counterattack, Li Wei chased it straight to the Panjiang River. It was placed on the side of the Horse Aid Campaign in the 19th year of Jianwu; it flowed eastward through the north of Longyuan County, and the eastward flow converged with the South Water.

古文：水自泠县东，径封溪县北。
现代文：南水从港冷县往东流经封溪县北边。
English: The South Water flows eastward from Gangneung County through the northern part of Fengxi County.

古文：《交州外域记》曰：交趾昔未有郡县之时，土地有滩田。其田从潮水上下，民垦食其田，因名为雒民。
现代文：《交州外域记》说：从前交趾没有郡县时，土地有锥田，田能开到哪里，依潮水上下而定；百姓靠垦种这些田亩吃饭，因此叫锥民。
English: "Jiaozhou Foreign Regions Records" said: In the past, when there were no counties in Jiaozhou, the land had conical fields, and where the fields could go depended on the tides; the people relied on reeds to grow these fields and eat, so they were called conical people.

古文：设雒王、雒侯，主诸郡县。
现代文：一这里设有摊王、摊侯来掌管各郡县，县里的主官大都是锥将。
English: First, there are stall kings and stall lords in charge of each county and county, and most of the chief officers in the county are cone generals.

古文：县多为雒将，雒将铜印青绶。后蜀王子将兵三万，来讨雒王、雒侯，服诸雒将，蜀王子因称为安阳王。
现代文：锥将有铜印青带，后来蜀王的儿子率兵三万来讨伐锥王、锥侯，征服了诸锥将，蜀王的儿子于是就称为安阳王。
English: Cone will have a bronze seal and blue belt. Later, Shu Wang's son, Cane, led thirty thousand soldiers to fight Cone King, Cone Lord, and conquered Cone Generals. Shu Wang's son was then called Anyang King.

古文：后南越王尉佗举众攻安阳王。安阳王有神人，名皋通，下辅佐，为安阳王治神弩一张，一发杀三百人。
现代文：后来南越王尉佗起兵去攻打安阳王，安阳王有个仙人名叫皋通，下凡来辅助他，为安阳王制了一把神弩，一发就可射杀三百人。
English: Later, the king of southern Vietnam, Wang Lijun, raised an army to attack the king of Anyang. The king of Anyang had a hermit named Shuntong, who came down to assist him. He made a shrine for the king of Anyang, which could shoot three hundred people with one shot.

古文：南越王知不可战。却军住武宁县。
现代文：南越王知道没法打仗了，就退兵驻在武宁县。
English: The king of South Vietnam knew that he could not fight anymore, so he left the army and was stationed in Muning County.

古文：按《晋太康记》县属交趾。
现代文：按晋《太康记》，武宁县属交趾郡。
English: According to Jin's "Diary of Taikang," Wu Ning County belongs to Jiaozi County.

古文：越遣太子名始，降服安阳王，称臣事之。
现代文：南越王派了名叫始的太子去投降安阳王，向他称臣，为他效劳。
English: The king of South Vietnam sent a prince named Choi to surrender to the king of Anyang, praising him as a minister and serving him.

古文：安阳王不知通神人，遇之无道，通便去，语王曰：能持此弩王天下，不能持此弩者亡天下。
现代文：安阳王不知道皋通是仙人，待他粗暴无礼，皋通就走了，对安阳王说：能保管好这把弩，可以称王于天下；不能保管好这把弩，就要亡天下。
English: King Anyang did not know that Lintong was a hermit, and treated him rudely. Lintong then left, saying to King Anyang: "If you can keep this scepter, you can become king of the world; if you cannot keep this scepter, you will die."

古文：通去，安阳王有女名曰媚珠，见始端正，珠与始交通。
现代文：皋通去后，安阳王有个女儿叫媚珠，她看到始长得眉清目秀，就和他私通起来。
English: After their liaison, King Anyang had a daughter named Mei Zhu. When she saw that Mei Zhu's eyebrows were bright and her eyes were beautiful, she began to have an affair with him.

古文：始问珠，令取父弩视之，始见督，便盗以锯截弩讫，便逃归报南越王。
现代文：始向媚珠探问，并叫她把她父亲的弩拿来看。他看见了弩，就偷来用锯子锯过，逃回告诉南越王。
English: He began to question Mei Zhu, and asked her to look at her father's ploughshare. When he saw the ploughshare, he stole it, sawed it with a saw, and fled back to tell the King of South Vietnam.

古文：南越进兵攻之，安阳王发弩，弩折，遂败。安阳王下船，径出于海。
现代文：南越王进兵攻打安阳王，安阳王开弩，弩就断了，仗也打败了，只得下船出海。
English: King Nam Viet marched into battle against King Anyang. Anyang opened the anchor, the anchor broke, the battle was lost, and they had to get out of the boat and go to sea.

古文：今平道县后王宫城见有故处。《晋太康地记》县属交趾。
现代文：现在平道县后面还可以看到安阳王的宫城遗址。据晋《太康地记》，平道县隶属于交趾。
English: At present, the ruins of Miyagi, the home of King Anyang, can still be seen in the back of Pingdo County. According to Jin's "Diary of Taikang," Pingdo County is part of Gose.

古文：越遂服诸雒将。
现代文：于是南越就征服了诸锥将。
English: As a result, South Vietnam conquered Zhu Jue.

古文：马援以西南治远，路径千里，分置斯县。治城郭，穿渠，通导溉灌，以利其民。
现代文：马援因西南治所遥远，路途千里，就分设此县，筑城开渠，引水灌溉，以利于百姓。
English: Because Ma'an was far away from the southwestern administrative center, thousands of miles away, it was divided into this county, built a city, opened a canal, and diverted water for irrigation, in order to benefit the people.

古文：县有猩猩兽，形若黄狗，又状貆纯。人面，头颜端正，善与人言，音声丽妙，如妇人好女。对语交言，闻之无不酸楚。
现代文：县里有猩猩，形状就像黄狗，又有点像貉，颜面像人，五官端正，善于和人谈话，声音柔丽妙曼，有如妓好的女子，和它交谈，听到它的话人们无不感到心酸。
English: There is a chimpanzee in the county. It is shaped like a yellow dog and a bit like a baboon. It has a face like a human, has neat features, is good at talking to people, and has a soft and charming voice, like a prostitute. People feel sad when they hear it speak.

古文：其肉甘美，可以断谷，穷年不厌。
现代文：猩猩的肉很鲜美，可以代替谷物，一年到头也吃不厌。
English: The meat of the orangutan is so delicious that it can be used as a substitute for cereals and can be eaten all year round.

古文：又东径浪泊，马援以其地高，自西里进屯此。
现代文：南水又往东流经浪泊，马援因那里地势高，就从西里移驻于此。
English: The southern water also flows eastward through Nampo, and Ma Yuan moved here from the west because of the high ground there.

古文：又东径龙渊县故城南，又东，左台北水，建安二十三年，立州之始，蛟龙蟠编于南、北二津，故改龙渊，以尤编为名也。
现代文：又往东流经龙渊县老城南面，又往东流，在左边汇合了北水。建安二十三年开始立州时，蛟龙在南北两处渡口盘缠编结在一起，所以把龙渊改名为龙编。
English: It also flows eastward to the south of the old town of Longyuan County, and then flows eastward to meet the North Water on the left. When the state was established in the 23rd year of Jian'an, the two ferry ports in the north and south of Longyuan were intertwined, so Longyuan was renamed Longhan.

古文：卢循之寇交州也，交州刺史杜慧度，率水步军晨出南津，以火箭攻之，烧其船舰，一时溃散，循亦中矢赴水而死。于是斩之，传首京师。
现代文：卢循进犯交州时，交州刺史杜慧度率领了水兵和步兵，一早就从南津出击，用火箭来进攻，把卢循的大船烧毁，部队就溃散了，卢循也中箭投水而死，于是砍下他的头，派人送到京城里去。
English: When Lu Xun attacked Jiaozhou, Jiaozhou's governor, Shi Duhui, led sailors and infantry, and attacked from Nanjin early in the morning. He attacked with rockets, burned Lu Xun's big ship, and the troops scattered. Lu Xun was also killed by arrows and water, so he cut off his head and sent someone to Beijing.

古文：慧度以斩循勋，封龙编侯。
现代文：杜慧度因杀卢循有功，被封为龙编侯。
English: Du Huidu was awarded the title of Longbai marquis for killing Lu Xun.

古文：刘欣期《交州记》曰：龙编县功曹左飞，曾化为虎，数月，还作吏。
现代文：刘欣期《交州记》说：龙编县功曹左飞，曾变成老虎，几个月后，又回来做小吏。
English: Liu Xin period "Jingzhou Chronicle" said: Longyan County Gong Cao Zuofei, once turned into a tiger, a few months later, he came back to be a minor official.

古文：既言其化，亦化无不在，牛哀易虎，不识厥兄，当其革状，安知其讹变哉？
现代文：就是说他变化了，而变虎后又离开了；牛哀变虎，连自己的哥哥也不认识了，在他变了形以后，又怎能知道他自己变虎呢？
English: That is to say, he changed, and after changing into a tiger, he left again; the ox changed into a tiger, and he didn't even know his brother. After he changed his shape, how could he know that he had changed into a tiger?

古文：其水又东径曲易县，东流注于泿郁。
现代文：水又往东流经曲易县，东流注入浪郁。
English: The water also flows eastward through Quyi County, and the eastward flow injects turbulent waves.

古文：《经》言于郡东界，复合为三水，此其二也。
现代文：《水经》说：在郡东边界上又汇成三条水，这是其中的两条。
English: "Water Sutra" said: On the eastern border of the county, three rivers converge, and these are two of them.

古文：其次一水东径封溪县南，又西南径西于县南，又东径赢陛县北，又东径北带县南，又东径稽徐县，径水注之。
现代文：还有一条水，往东流经封溪县南面，又往西南流经西于县南面，又往东流经赢陵县北面，又往东流经北带县南面，又往东流经稽徐县，有径水注入。
English: There is also a stream of water that flows eastward through the south of Fengxi County, flows southwestward through the south of Yixian County, flows eastward through the north of Yiling County, flows eastward through the south of Beibei County, and flows eastward through Jixu County, and is injected with runoff water.

古文：中水又东径羸陵县南，《交州外域记》曰：县本交趾郡治也。
现代文：径水发源于龙编县的高山，往东南流入稽徐县，注入中水，中水又往东流经赢陵县南面。《交州外域记》说：赢陵县原来是交趾郡的治所。
English: Runoff water originates from the high mountains of Longyan County, flows southeast into Jixu County, is injected into Zhongshui, and Zhongshui flows eastward through the south of Yingling County. "Jiaozhou Expatriates" said: Yingling County was originally the seat of Jiaozi County.

古文：《林邑记》曰：自交趾南行，都官塞浦出焉。
现代文：《林邑记》说：从交趾南行，有都官塞浦通出。
English: "Lin Yue Ji" said: From Jiaozi southbound, there is a city official cypress pass out.

古文：其水自县东径安定县，北带长江，江中有越王所铸铜船，潮水退时，人有见之者。
现代文：水从县东流经安定县，该县北边有长江流过，江中有越王所铸造的铜船，潮水退时有人曾看见过。
English: The water flows from the east of the county through Anding County. The Yangtze River flows through the north of the county. There is a bronze ship cast by Yue Wang in the river. Some people have seen it when the tide recedes.

古文：其水又东流，隔水有泥黎城，言阿育王所筑也。
现代文：水又往东流，隔岸有泥黎城，据说是阿育王所筑。
English: The water flows to the east, and there is a mud town across the river, which is said to have been built by King Ashoka.

古文：又东南合南水。南水又东南，径九德郡北。
现代文：又往东南流，与南水汇合，南水又往东南流经九德郡北面。
English: It also flows southeastward, merging with the South Water, which then flows southeastward through the northern part of Jiude County.

古文：《交州外域记》曰：交趾郡界有扶严究，在郡之北，隔渡一江。即是水也。
现代文：《交州外域记》说：交趾郡边界有扶严究，在郡城以北，渡过一条江，就是这条水了。
English: "Jiaozhou Expat Diary" said: "The border of Jiaozi County is very strict. To the north of the county seat, across a river, there is this water.

古文：江水对交趾朱县，又东径浦阳县北，又东径无切县北。
现代文：江水以北是交趾的朱载县，又往东流经浦阳县北面，又往东流经无功县北面。
English: To the north of the river is the intersecting Zhuzai County, and to the east it flows through the north of Urayang County, and to the east it flows through the north of Muguo County.

古文：建武十九年九月，马援上言：臣谨与交趾精兵万二千人，与大兵合二万人，船车大小二千艘，自入交趾，于今为盛。
现代文：建武十九年九月，马援上书说：我带领交趾精兵一万二千人，连同大兵共二万人，车船大小二千艘，自从进交趾以来，规模要算现在最盛大了。
English: In September of the 19th year of Jianwu, Ma Yuan wrote: I led twelve thousand soldiers to Jiaozuo, together with a total of twenty thousand soldiers, and two thousand cars and ships. Since entering Jiaozuo, the scale is now the largest.

古文：十月，援南入九真，至无切县，贼渠降。进入余发，渠帅朱伯弃郡，亡入深林巨薮。犀象所聚，羊牛数千头，时见象数十百为群。
现代文：十月，马援南下进入九真，直到无切县，敌方首领投降了，又进入余发，敌军主帅朱伯放弃了郡城，逃入深林大泽里，那是犀象聚集之地，有牛羊数千头，时常可以看到大象数十或数百头结集成群。
English: In October, Ma Yuan marched south into Jiu Zhen until he reached Muche County. The enemy leader surrendered and went into retreat. The commander of the enemy army, Zhu Bo, abandoned the county seat and fled into the deep forest of Dazeri. It was a place where rhinoceroses gathered, there were thousands of cattle and sheep, and dozens or hundreds of elephants could often be seen grouped together.

古文：援又分兵入无编县，王莽之九真亭。至居风县，帅不降，并斩级数十百，九真乃靖。
现代文：马援又分兵进入无编县，就是王莽的九真亭―到了居风县，首领不肯投降，杀了好几千人，九真方才平定。
English: Ma Yuan sent another detachment into Muxian County, that is, Wang Mang's Jiu Zhen Ting - when they reached Jufeng County, the leader refused to surrender and killed several thousand people, and the Jiu Zhen side was only pacified.

古文：其水又东径句漏县，县带江水，江水对安定县，《林邑记》所谓外越、安定、纪粟者也。
现代文：南水又往东流经句漏县，江水从县城旁边流过，江水对岸是安定县。《林邑记》所谓外越的安定、纪粟，指的就是此县。
English: The southern water also flows eastward through Guuliao County, the river water flows next to the county seat, and the opposite bank of the river is Ding'an County. The so-called "Ding'an" and "Ding'an" of the "Diary of Lin Yue" refers to this county.

古文：县江中有潜牛，形似水牛，上岸斗，角软还入江水，角坚复出。
现代文：县里江水中有潜牛，形状像水牛，上岸相斗，角软以后又潜入江水中，待到角硬后再出来。
English: In the water of the river in the county, there is a lurking bull, shaped like a buffalo, fighting on the shore. After the horn is soft, it dives into the river water, and comes out after the horn is hard.

古文：又东与北水合，又东注郁，乱流而逝矣。
现代文：又往东流与北水汇合，又往东流注入郁水，然后乱流逝去。
English: The eastward current also merges with the North Water, and the eastward current injects stagnant water, and then the turbulent current passes.

古文：此其三也。
现代文：这是第三条。
English: This is the third article.

古文：平撮通称，同归郁海，故《经》有入海之文矣。
现代文：取其通称，又以诸水最后都流入郁海，所以《水经》中有东流入海这样的文句。
English: Taking its common name, it also means that all waters eventually flow into the Yuhai Sea, so there is such a phrase as "East flows into the sea" in the "Water Sutra."

古文：夷水出巴郡鱼复县江，夷水即佷山清江也，水色清照，十丈分沙石，蜀人见其澄清，因名清江也。
现代文：夷水从巴郡鱼复县的大江中分出，夷水就是恨山清江。水清见底，十来丈深处的沙石都清晰可辨。蜀人看到江水这样澄清，因此取名叫清江。
English: Yishui is separated from the big river in Yufu County, Ba County. Yishui is the Henshan Qingjiang River. The water is clear to the bottom, and the sand and stones at a depth of more than ten meters can be clearly distinguished. The Shu people saw the river water so clear, so they named it Qingjiang.

古文：昔凛君浮土舟于夷水，据捍关而王巴。是以法孝直有言：鱼复捍关，临江据水，实益州祸福之门。
现代文：从前察君曾在夷水泛着泥船，据有捍关而在巴称王，所以法孝直曾说：鱼复的捍关临江据水，实在是益州祸福的门户。
English: Once upon a time, Chajun had a mud boat covered with muddy water, and it is said that there was a defense barrier and a king in Ba. Therefore, Fa Xiaozhi once said: the defense barrier of Yufu, which is adjacent to the river, is really the gateway to the misfortunes and blessings of Yizhou.

古文：夷水又东径建平沙渠县，县有巫城水，南岸山道五百里，其水历县东出焉。
现代文：夷水又往东流经建平沙渠县，县里有巫城，南岸山路五百里，夷水就经县东奔流出境。
English: The floodwaters also flowed eastward through Jianping Sand Canal County. There are Wucheng and five hundred miles of Nan'an Mountain Road in the county. The floodwaters flowed eastward through the county.

古文：东南过佷山县南，夷水自沙渠县入，水流浅狭，裁得通船。
现代文：往东南流过很山县南边，夷水从沙渠县流入，水流又浅又狭，仅能通船。
English: It flows southeast through the southern part of Miyama County, and the floodwaters flow in from Shachiku County. The water flow is shallow and narrow, and only boats can pass through.

古文：东径难留城南，城即山也。
现代文：往东流经难留城南边―所谓难留城，实际上是一座山。
English: It flows eastwards past the southern edge of the castle - the so-called castle, which is actually a mountain.

古文：独立峻绝，西面上里余，得石穴。
现代文：此山孤峰独上，极其高峻。
English: This mountain is a unique isolated peak, extremely high.

古文：把火行百许步，得二大石碛，并立穴中，相去一丈，俗名阴阳石。
现代文：由西面上山里余，有个石洞，持着火把行走百余步，有两块大石在洞中并立着，相距一丈，俗名阻阳石。
English: From the west side of the mountain, there is a stone cave, holding a torch and walking more than a hundred steps. There are two large stones standing side by side in the cave, one meter apart, commonly known as the sun block.

古文：阴石常湿，阳石常燥。每水旱不调，居民作威仪服饰，往入穴中，旱则鞭阴石，应时雨多，雨则鞭阳石，俄而天晴。
现代文：阴石常是湿流液的，阳石则常干燥，每遇水旱不调时，居民就穿戴起举行仪式的服饰，走进洞中。天旱就鞭打阻石，立即就会降雨；多雨就鞭打阳石，一会儿天就晴了。
English: The yin stone is often wet, while the yang stone is often dry. Whenever the water and drought are out of balance, the residents wear ceremonial clothes and walk into the cave. The drought will whip the stone, and it will rain immediately; the rain will whip the yang stone, and the sky will be clear in a moment.

古文：相承所说，往往有效，但捉鞭者不寿，人颇恶之，故不为也。
现代文：照传说的话做，往往会有效验。但执鞭的人不长寿，人们都很厌恶这件差使，所以不愿去做。
English: According to the legend, it is often effective, but the person who wields the whip does not live long, and people are disgusted with this task, so they do not want to do it.

古文：东北面又有石室，可容数百人。
现代文：东北又有一个石泯，可以容纳数百人，每逢乱世，人们就躲进石洞避难，敌寇是无法打进来的，因而名为难留城。
English: In the northeast, there is also a stone mound that can accommodate hundreds of people. Whenever there is chaos, people take refuge in a stone cave. Enemy robbers can't break in, so it's called the hard-to-stay city.

古文：每乱，民人室避贼，无可攻理，因名难留城也，昔巴蛮有五姓，未有君长，俱事鬼神，乃共掷剑于石穴，约能中者奉以为君。
现代文：从前巴蛮有五个部族，但没有一位君主。
English: Once there were five tribes in Baban, but there was no single ruler.

古文：巴氏子务相乃中之。
现代文：他们都敬奉鬼神，于是一同在石洞中掷剑，约定谁能掷中，就推他为君主。
English: They both worshipped ghosts and gods, so they threw their swords together in a stone cave and agreed that whoever could throw it would become the ruler.

古文：又令各乘土舟，约浮者当以为君，惟务相独浮，因共立之，是为廪君。
现代文：结果巴氏的儿子务相掷中了。又叫人们各自乘坐泥船，约定船浮的就当君主，结果只有务相一人能浮。因此诸部族都一致推举他为君，就是糜君。
English: As a result, Buso, the son of the Ba clan, won the toss. The people were each told to take a mud boat, and it was agreed that the one who floated would be the monarch. As a result, only Buso could float. Therefore, all the tribes unanimously elected him as the king, that is, the king.

古文：乃乘土舟，从夷水下，至盐阳。
现代文：于是就乘着泥船从夷水顺流而下，来到盐阳。
English: So he took a mud boat down the river from Yishui and came to Yanyang.

古文：盐水有神女，谓廪君曰：此地广大，鱼盐所出，愿留共居。
现代文：盐水有个神女，对凛君说：这里土地辽阔，是出产鱼盐的地方，希望你留下来和我同居。
English: There is a goddess of salt water, who said to Rin, "Here is a vast land, a place where fish salt is produced. I hope you will stay and live with me."

古文：廪君因伺便射杀之，天乃开明。廪君乘土舟，下及夷城。
现代文：凛君不肯答应，盐神每晚来和他同宿，白天化为飞虫，成群地飞起，把太阳都遮蔽了，弄得天昏地暗，如此接连十余日。
English: Rin didn't want to agree, so the salt god came to stay with him every night. During the day, he turned into a flying insect and flew in flocks, covering the sun and making the sky dark. This went on for more than ten days.

古文：夷城石岸险曲，其水亦曲，廪君望之而叹，出崖为崩。
现代文：凛君于是伺机把她射死，天才晴朗了。凛君乘着泥船来到夷城，夷城岩岸险峻而弯曲，水也弯曲。凛君望着叹了口气，山崖因而崩塌了下来。
English: Rin then waited for an opportunity to shoot her dead, and his genius became clear. Rin rode a mud boat to Yicheng. The rocky shore of Yicheng was steep and curved, and the water was also curved. Rin looked and sighed, and the cliff collapsed.

古文：廪君登之。上有平石，方二丈五尺，因立城其傍而居之，四姓臣之。
现代文：他登上崖顶，上面有一块平石，方二丈五尺，于是就在石旁建城居住，另外四个部族也都向他称臣。
English: He climbed to the top of the cliff, on which there was a flat stone, two feet high and five feet wide, so he built a city next to the stone and lived there. The other four tribes also paid him homage.

古文：死，精魂化而为白虎，故巴氏以虎饮人血，遂以人祀。
现代文：他死后，精魂化为白虎。从前巴氏以为虎喝人血，就用人来祭祀。
English: After his death, his spirit turned into a white tiger. Once upon a time, the Ba clan believed that tigers drank human blood, so they used humans to sacrifice them.

古文：盐水即夷水也。
现代文：盐水就是夷水。
English: Saltwater is polluted water.

古文：又有盐石，即阳石也。
现代文：又有盐石，就是阳石。
English: There is also salt stone, which is cinnabar.

古文：盛弘之以是推之，疑即廪君所射盐神处也。
现代文：盛弘之照此推论、以为可能这就是凛君射盐神的地方。
English: According to this deduction, Morihiro thought that this might be the place where Rinjun shot the salt god.

古文：将知阴石，是对阳石立名矣。
现代文：可想而知，阳石是针对阴石而立名的，这里如何又有阴石呢？
English: It can be imagined that the yang stone was named for the yin stone. How can there be a yin stone here?

古文：事既鸿古，难为明征。
现代文：不过传说里的事迹既极远古，也就难以验证了。
English: However, the events in the legend are so ancient that they are difficult to verify.

古文：夷水又东径石室，在层岩之上。石室南向，水出其下，悬崖千仞，自水上径望见。
现代文：夷水又往东流过一个石洞，石洞朝南，位于层岩面，水从洞下流过，悬崖干初，从水上可以看得很真切。
English: The water also flows eastward through a stone cave. The cave faces south and is located on the bedrock surface. Water flows under the cave. The cliff is dry and can be seen clearly from the water.

古文：每有陟山岭者，扳木侧足而行，莫知其谁。
现代文：常有爬山越岭的人，手攀树木，侧足而行，但不知是什么人。
English: There are often people who climb over the mountains, climb trees by hand, and walk sideways, but I don't know who they are.

古文：村人骆都，小时到此室边采蜜，见一仙人，坐石床上；见都，凝瞩不转。
现代文：村人骆都小时到山洞旁边采蜜，看见一个仙人坐在石床上，见了骆都，目不转睛地凝视着他。
English: When the villager, Luo Du, went to collect honey near the cave, he saw a fairy sitting on a stone bed. When he saw Luo Du, he stared at him intently.

古文：都还招村人重往，则不复见。
现代文：骆都回村邀村人一同再去，仙人却不见了。
English: Luo Du returned to the village and invited the villagers to return with him, but the hermit had disappeared.

古文：乡人今名为仙人室。
现代文：现在乡人把石洞称为仙人室。
English: Now the villagers call the stone cave the hermit's chamber.

古文：袁山松云：都孙息尚存。
现代文：袁山松说：骆都的子孙后代如今还在。
English: Yuan Shansong said, "Lodu's descendants are still alive today.

古文：夷水又东与温泉三水合。大溪南北夹岸，有温泉对注，夏暖冬热，上常有雾气，疡痍百病，浴者多愈。
现代文：夷水又往东流，与温泉三水汇合，大溪南北两岸，有温泉相对注入，夏天水温，冬天水热，水上常有雾气，凡疮痒百病，沐浴后都能痊愈。
English: The Yishui River flows eastward, merging with the three hot springs, and there are hot springs on the north and south banks of the Daxi River. The water temperature is warm in summer and hot in winter, and there is often fog on the water. People can recover from all kinds of ailments after taking a bath.

古文：父老传此泉先出盐，于今水有盐气。
现代文：老人相传，此泉先前出盐，现在水中还有盐气。
English: According to the legend of the old man, this spring used to produce salt, and now there is salt gas in the water.

古文：夷水有盐水之名，此亦其一也。
现代文：夷水之所以有盐水一名，这也是原因之一。
English: This is one of the reasons why salt water has a higher rank than water.

古文：夷水又东径佷山县故城南，县即山名也。
现代文：夷水又往东流经恨山县老城南边，该县就是因山而得名的。
English: The Yishui River also flows eastward through the southern part of the old city of Yanshan County, which is named after the mountain.

古文：孟康曰：音恒，出药草。
现代文：孟康说：了员，音恒，恨山出产一种叫恒山的药草。
English: Meng Kang said, "Listen, Ying Heng, Henshan produces a kind of herb called Hengshan.

古文：恒山今世以银为音也，旧武陵之属县。
现代文：了良，今读如银；恨山县是旧武陵郡的属县。
English: Xiaoliang, now read as silver; Henshan County is a subordinate county of the former Wuling County.

古文：南一里即清江东注矣。
现代文：南一里就是东流的清江。
English: South one mile is the east-flowing Qingjiang River.

古文：南对长杨溪。溪水西南潜穴，穴在射堂村东六七里，谷中有石穴，清泉溃流三十许步，复入穴，即长杨之源也。
现代文：此江南对长杨溪，溪水往西南流，潜入射堂村东六一七里一处山谷的岩洞中，清泉涌出约三十步，重又流入岩洞，这就是长杨溪的源头。
English: This river south of Changyang Creek, the stream water flows to the southwest and dives into a rock cave in a valley 617 miles east of Shedang Village. The clear spring gushes out about thirty paces and flows back into the cave. This is the source of Changyang Creek.

古文：水中有神鱼，大者二尺，小者一尺。居民钓鱼，失陈所须多少，拜而请之，拜讫，投钩饵。得鱼过数者，水辄波涌，暴风卒起，树木摧折。
现代文：水中有神鱼，大的二尺，小的一尺，居民钓鱼先祝告所需鱼数，然后跪拜请求，拜过后放下鱼钩钓饵；钓得的鱼如果超过所报的尾数，水面就会波涛汹涌，霎时间狂风大作，把树木都刮倒。
English: There are divine fish in the water, large two feet, small one foot, residents fishing first congratulate the required number of fish, then kneel to request, after bowing, put down the hook to catch the bait; if the fish caught exceeds the reported tail number, the water will be choppy, and the wind will be raging for a long time, knocking down trees.

古文：水侧生异花，路人欲摘者，皆当先请，不得辄取。
现代文：水边开着一种奇异的花，路人想要摘花，都要先向神灵祈求，不可立即去摘。
English: A strange flower blooms by the water's edge. If passers-by want to pick the flower, they must first pray to the gods, and must not pick it immediately.

古文：水源东北之风井山，回曲有异势，穴口大如盆。
现代文：水源东北有风井，那里的山回环曲折而有异势，风井洞口大如盆。
English: There is a wind well in the northeast of the water source, where the mountain ring twists and turns, and there is a strange situation. The entrance of the wind well is as big as a pot.

古文：袁山松云：夏则风出，冬则风入，春秋分则静。
现代文：袁山松说：夏天风从洞口吹出，冬天风从洞口吹入，春分秋分时节风静。
English: Yuan Shansong said, "In summer, the wind blows out from the mouth of the cave, in winter, the wind blows in from the mouth of the cave, and during the spring equinox and autumn equinox, the wind is calm.

古文：余往观之，其时四月中，去穴数丈，须臾寒飘卒至，六月中，尤不可当。
现代文：我曾去看过，当时正是四月中旬，离洞口还有好几丈，就有一股冷气袭来，六月中尤其冷不可当。
English: I went to see it once, and it was the middle of April, still several meters from the mouth of the cave, when a blast of cold air hit. It was especially cold in the middle of June.

古文：往人有冬过者，置笠穴中，风吸之。经月还步杨溪，得其笠，则知潜通矣。
现代文：过去有人在冬天经过这里，把笠帽放在洞中，被风吸了进去，月余之后回来，沿着长杨溪步行，又检回那顶笠帽，可知洞与溪是暗通的。
English: In the past, someone passed by here in the winter, put a hat in the cave, was sucked in by the wind, and came back a month later, walked along the Changyang Creek, and retrieved the hat, knowing that the cave and the creek are secretly connected.

古文：其水重源显发，北流注于夷水。
现代文：此水源头隐而复现，北流注入夷水。
English: The source of this water reappears, and the northern current injects it into the water table.

古文：此水清泠，甚于大溪，纵暑伏之辰，尚无能澡其津流也。
现代文：水比大溪更为清凉，即使是三伏的酷暑天气，人们还不能在水中洗澡。
English: The water is cooler than that of a large stream, and even in extremely hot weather, people cannot bathe in the water.

古文：县北十余里，有神穴，平居无水，时有渴者，诚启请乞，辄得水。或戏求者，水终不出。
现代文：县北十余里，有个神奇的洞穴，平时无水，遇有口渴的人虔诚地乞求，就可得水，如果是求着玩的，水却始终不出。
English: More than ten miles north of the county, there is a magical cave. Normally, there is no water. If a thirsty person piously begs, they can get water, but if they are asking for fun, the water never comes out.

古文：县东十许里至平乐村，又有石穴，出清泉，中有潜龙，每至大旱，平乐左近村居，辇草秽著穴中。龙怒，须臾水出，荡其草秽，傍侧之田，皆得浇灌。
现代文：县东十里左右，到了平乐村，又有个岩洞流出清泉。洞中有龙潜伏，每逢大旱，平乐附近各村就把秽物倒入洞中，龙发起怒来，立即就有水混出，把秽物涤荡净尽，傍近的田亩，就都得到灌溉。
English: About ten miles to the east of the county, in Pingle village, there is another cave with a spring flowing out of it. There is a dragon lurking in the cave. Every time there is a drought, the villages around Pingle pour filth into the cave. The dragon gets angry, and immediately water is mixed out, the filth is washed away, and the nearby fields are irrigated.

古文：从平乐顺流五六里，东亭村北山甚高峻，上合下空，空窍东西广二丈许，起高如屋，中有石床，甚整顿，傍生野韭。
现代文：从平乐顺流而下五六里，就是东亭村，有北山极其高峻，山顶闭合，底下却是空的。洞穴东西宽约二丈，像屋一般高立，中间有石床，十分整齐，旁边长着野韭。
English: Five or six miles downstream from Pingle is Dongting Village, with the extremely high Beishan Mountain. The top of the mountain is closed, but the bottom is empty. The cave is about two meters wide from east to west, stands tall like a house, has a stone bed in the middle, is very neat, and has wild reeds next to it.

古文：人往乞者，神许，则风吹别分，随偃而输，不得过越，不偃而输，辄凶。
现代文：人们前去求韭，神如应允，就会有风吹来，把韭分开，人们可以把被风吹倒的那部分割下来，但不可超过；如果把没有吹倒的也割下，那就会有祸事了。
English: People go to ask for straw, and if God grants it, a wind will blow and separate the straw. People can cut off the part that was blown down by the wind, but they must not exceed it. If they also cut off the part that was not blown down, then there will be a disaster.

古文：往观者去时特平，暨处自然恭肃矣。
现代文：参观的人去时并不经意，但一到那地方，自然就会肃穆恭敬起来。
English: Visitors go there unintentionally, but as soon as they get there, they naturally become serious and respectful.

古文：又东过夷道县北，夷水又东径虎滩，岸石有虎像，故因以名滩也。
现代文：又往东流过夷道县北边，夷水又往东流经虎滩；岸边有块岩石形状像虎，因而名为虎滩。
English: It flows eastward through the northern part of Yiduo County, and the Yidu River flows eastward through Tiger Beach. There is a rock shaped like a tiger on the shore, which is why it is called Tiger Beach.

古文：夷水又东径釜濑，其石大者如釜，小者如刁斗，形色乱真，惟实中耳。
现代文：夷水又往东流经釜獭，那里的岩石大的像大铁锅，小的如刁斗，形状和颜色都和真的一模一样，只不过是实心的罢了。
English: The water of the Yiwu River flows eastward through the Kama Basin, where the large rocks look like large iron pots, and the small ones look like paddles. The shape and color are exactly the same as the real ones, but they are solid.

古文：夷水又东北，丹水注之。其源百里，出西南望州山，山形竦峻，峰秀甚高。东北白岩壁立，西南小演通行。
现代文：夷水又往东北流，有一条水注入，水源远在百里外，与丹水一同发源于西南的望州山。山形险峻，秀丽的峰峦很高，东北是陡壁似的石岩，西南稍平，可以通行。
English: The Yishui also flows to the northeast, and a stream of water is injected. The source of the water is hundreds of miles away, and together with the Danshui, it originates from the southwest of Mount Bozhou. The mountain is steep, the beautiful peaks are high, the northeast is a steep wall-like stone rock, and the southwest is slightly flat and can be passed.

古文：登其顶平，可有三亩许，上有故城，城中有水，登城望见一州之境，故名望州山，俗语讹，今名武钟山。
现代文：攀登上山，山顶平坦，广约二亩，山上有一座城址城中有水，登城远望，一州境域历历在目，所以叫望州山。民间语讹，现在叫武钟山。
English: Climbing up the mountain, the top of the mountain is flat, about two mu wide, there is a castle site on the mountain, there is water in the city, there is a distant view of the city, and the territory of one state is clearly visible, so it is called Wanzhou Mountain. In folk language, it is now called Wuzhong Mountain.

古文：山根东有涌泉成溪，即丹水所发也。
现代文：山麓东边有泉水涌出，成为溪流，这就是丹水的源头。
English: On the eastern side of the foothills, a spring gushes out and becomes a stream. This is the source of the Dan River.

古文：下注丹水，夭阴欲雨，辄有赤气，故名曰丹水矣。
现代文：溪流下注丹水，天阴将雨的时候，就有赤气升起，所以名为丹水。
English: The stream is called Danshui because it is filled with red water. When it is cloudy or rainy, red air rises.

古文：丹水又径亭下，有石穴甚深，未尝测其远近。穴中蝙蝠，大如乌，多倒悬。
现代文：丹水又流经亭下，有个岩洞，极深，从来没有人探测过到尽头有多远；洞中蝙蝠大如乌鸦，很多都是倒挂在洞顶上。
English: Dan water also flows under the pavilion, there is a rock cave, extremely deep, no one has ever detected how far it is to the end; bats in the cave are as big as crows, many are hanging upside down on the top of the cave.

古文：《玄中记》曰：蝙蝠百岁者倒悬，得而服之，使人神仙。
现代文：《玄中记》说：蝙蝠百岁倒挂，能得到这样的蝙蝠服食，就可以成为仙人。
English: "The Tale of Genji" says: If you can get a bat that is 100 years old and hangs upside down, you can become a fairy godmother.

古文：穴口有泉，冬温夏冷，秋则入藏，春则出游。民至秋，阑断水口，得鱼，大者长四五尺，骨软肉美，异于余鱼。
现代文：洞口有泉水，冬温夏冷，水中有鱼，秋天入洞潜藏，春天出洞嬉游，人们到秋尽时截断水口，捕到的鱼大的长四五尺，骨软肉鲜，滋味与别的鱼不同。
English: There is spring water at the mouth of the cave. It is warm in winter and cold in summer. There are fish in the water. In autumn, they go into the cave to hide. In spring, they come out of the cave to swim. People cut off the mouth of the cave at the end of autumn. The fish they catch are four or five feet long, with tender bones and fresh meat. The taste is different from other fish.

古文：丹水又径其下，积而为渊。渊有神龙，每旱，村人以芮草投渊上流，鱼则多死。龙怒，当时大雨。
现代文：丹水又流经洞下，积水成为深潭，潭中有神龙，每逢天旱，村人就用丙草投入深潭上流，鱼多被毒死，龙怒，当即下起大雨。
English: Dan water also flows under the cave, and the accumulated water becomes a deep pool. There is a divine dragon in the pool. Every time there is a drought, the villagers use grass to put into the upper reaches of the deep pool. Most of the fish are poisoned to death. The dragon is angry, and heavy rain immediately falls.

古文：丹水又东北流，两岸石上有虎迹甚多，或深或浅，皆悉成就自然，咸非人工。
现代文：丹水又往东北流，两岸岩石上有很多老虎的脚迹，有的深，有的浅，但都是天然形成，不是人工斧凿出来的。
English: The Dan River flows to the northeast. There are many tiger footprints on the rocks on both sides of the river. Some are deep and some are shallow, but they are all natural formations, not man-made axes.

古文：丹水又北注于夷水，水色清澈，与大溪同。夷水又东北径夷道县北而东注。
现代文：丹水又往北注入夷水，水色清彻，和大溪相同，夷水又往东北流经夷道县北边，然后向东流去。
English: The Dan River also flows north into the Yidi River, and the water color is clear, the same as that of the Daxi River. The Yidi River flows northeast through the northern part of Yidi County, and then flows eastward.

古文：东入于江。
现代文：往东注入江水。
English: Injecting river water to the east.

古文：夷水又径宜都北，东入大江，有泾渭之比，亦谓之佷山北溪。
现代文：夷水又流经宜都北边，往东注入大江，二水一清一浊，就像径水和渭水一样。
English: Yiwu water also flows through the north of Yidu and flows into the big river to the east. The two waters are one clear and one turbid, just like running water and turbid water.

古文：水所经皆石山，略无土岸。
现代文：夷水也叫恨山北溪，水流所经都是石山，基本上没有土岸。
English: Yishui is also called Henshan Beixi. The water flows through stone mountains, and there is basically no bank.

古文：其水虚映，俯视游鱼，如乘空也。
现代文：溪水澄清，仿佛虚空无物，俯视游鱼，就像在空中浮动似的。
English: The water of the stream was clear, as if there was nothing there. Looking down at the swimming fish, it was as if they were floating in the air.

古文：浅处多五色石，冬夏激素飞清，傍多茂木空岫，静夜听之，恒有清响。
现代文：浅处多五色石子，不论冬夏，清流奔泻，飞溅起白雪似的浪花；溪旁是茂密的林木，空寂的山谷，静夜谛听，常常传来清脆的水声，各种鸟类哀鸣相和。
English: There are many five-colored stones in the shallows, regardless of winter and summer, the clear stream is rushing, splashing snow-like waves; the stream is surrounded by dense forests, empty valleys, quiet nights, often crisp water sounds, and various birds mourn in unison.

古文：百鸟翔禽，哀鸣相和，巡颓浪者，不觉疲而忘归矣。
现代文：人们逐浪畅游，不但不感到疲倦，而且还乐而忘归了。
English: People swim along the waves, not only do they not feel tired, but they also forget to return home with joy.

古文：油水出武陵孱陵县西界，县有白石山，油水所出，东径其县西，与洈水合。
现代文：油水发源于武陵郡屏陵县西部边界，县里有白石山，油水就发源在那里，往东流经屠陵县西边，与洈水相汇合。
English: The oil and water originated from the western border of Pingling County, Wuling County. There is Shiroishi Mountain in the county, and the oil and water originated there. It flowed eastward through the western side of Tuling County and merged with Surabaya.

古文：水出高城县洈山，东径其县下，东至孱陵县，入油水也。
现代文：洈水发源于高城县的洈山，往东流经该县近旁，东流到屏陵县注入油水。
English: The Surabaya water originates from Mount Surabaya in Gaocheng County, flows eastward through the vicinity of the county, and flows eastward to Pingling County to inject oil and water.

古文：东过其县北，县治故城，王莽更名孱陆也。
现代文：往东流过县北，油水流过旧县城，王莽改县名为屠陆。
English: Flowing eastward through the north of the county, oil and water flowed through the old county seat, and Wang Mang changed the name of the county to Tu Lu.

古文：刘备孙夫人，权妹也。
现代文：刘备的孙夫人是孙权的妹妹，又改筑此城。
English: Liu Bei's wife Sun, the sister of Sun Quan, rebuilt the city.

古文：又更修之，其城背油向泽。又东北入于江。
现代文：城背油水，面向沼泽。又往东北注入江水。
English: The back of the city is covered with oil and water, facing the swamp. River water is also injected to the northeast.

古文：油水自孱陵县之东北，径公安县西，又北流注于大江。
现代文：油水从屏陵县的东北边，经过公安县西边，又北流注入大江。
English: Oil and water flow from the northeast side of Pingling County, through the west side of Public Security County, and then flow north into the Dajiang River.

古文：澧水出武陵充县西历山，东过其县南，澧水自县东径临澧、零阳二县故界。水之南岸，白石双立，厥状类人，高各三十丈，周四十丈。
现代文：澧水发源于武陵郡充县西边的历山，往东流过县南，澧水从充县往东流，经过临澧、零阳二县旧界，南岸有两块白石，成双并立，形状像人，高度都有三十丈，周围四十丈。
English: Surabaya's water originates from Leshan on the west side of Wuling County's Chong County and flows eastward through the south of the county. Surabaya's water flows eastward from Chong County, passing through the old territories of Linyi and Liyang counties. On the south bank, there are two white stones, standing side by side in pairs, shaped like a person, with a height of 30 meters and a circumference of 40 meters.

古文：古老传言，昔充县尉与零阳尉并论封境，因相伤害，化而为石，东标零阳，西揭充县。
现代文：据老人相传，从前充县县尉和零阳县尉互争疆界，因为互相伤害，就化成了岩右。东面标明是零阳，西面就是充县。
English: According to the old man's legend, there was a border dispute between the former lieutenant of Zhengyang County and the lieutenant of Ziyang County. Because they hurt each other, they turned into a rock. The east side is marked as Zhengyang, and the west side is Zhengyang County.

古文：充县废省，临澧即其地，县即充县之故治，临侧澧水，故为县名，晋大康四年置。
现代文：充县撤废后，那地方就是现在的临澧，县城就是充县原来的治所。城濒澧水，所以名为临澧，设置于晋太康四年。
English: After the abolition of Chongxian, that place is now Linyi, and the county seat is the original administrative center of Chongxian. The city is on the edge of Lishui, so it is called Linyi. It was set up in Jin Taikang for four years.

古文：澧水又东，茹水注之。
现代文：渣水又往东流，有茹水注入。
English: The slag water also flows eastward, and boiling water is injected.

古文：水出龙茹山，水色清澈，漏石分沙。
现代文：茹水发源于龙茹山，水色澧清，底下的沙石都看得清清楚楚。
English: Boiling water originates from Longru Mountain, the water color is clear, and the underlying sand and stone can be seen clearly.

古文：庄辛说楚襄王所谓饮茹溪之流者也。
现代文：庄辛游说楚襄王，有饮茹溪清沫的话，即指此溪。
English: Zhuang Xin lobbied the king of Chu Xiang to drink the clear foam of Ru Creek, referring to this stream.

古文：茹水东注澧水。
现代文：茹水东流注入澧水。
English: Boil water to the east and pour in the simmering water.

古文：又东过零阳县之北，澧水东与温泉水会。
现代文：又往东流过零阳县北边，澧水东流与温泉水汇合。
English: It also flows eastward through the northern part of Liyang County, where the east stream of the Ershui River meets the hot spring water.

古文：水发北山石穴中，长三十丈，冬夏沸涌，常若汤焉。
现代文：温泉水发源于北山岩洞中，洞深三十丈，水源冬夏都在沸腾，常常像汤一样热。
English: The hot spring water originates in the Beishan cave, the depth of the cave is thirty meters, the water source is boiling in winter and summer, often as hot as soup.

古文：温水南流注于澧水。
现代文：温水南流，注入澧水。
English: Warm water flows south, injecting brackish water.

古文：澧水又东合零溪水，源南出零阳之山，历溪北注澧水。
现代文：澧水又往东流，与零溪水汇合。零溪水发源于南方的零阳之山，经此溪北流注入澧水。
English: Surabaya's water also flows eastward, merging with the water of Zero Creek, which originates in the south of Mount Zero Yang, and through which Surabaya's water is injected by the north stream of the stream.

古文：澧水又东，九渡水注之。
现代文：澧水又往东流，有九渡水注入。
English: The floodwaters also flowed eastward, and nine rivers were inundated.

古文：水南出九渡山，山下有溪，又以九渡为名。
现代文：九渡水发源于南方的九渡山，山下有溪，也以九渡为名。
English: Jiu Du Water originates from the Jiu Du Mountain in the south. There is a stream below the mountain, which is also named Jiu Du.

古文：山兽咸饮此水，而径越他津，皆不饮之。
现代文：山兽都饮这里的水，走到别的溪边，都不饮水。
English: All the mountain animals drink the water here, but when they go to the other side of the stream, they do not drink water.

古文：九渡水北径仙人楼下，傍有石形极方峭，世名之为仙楼。
现代文：九渡水往北流经仙人楼下，旁边有岩石，形状极其方正而陡峭，人们取名为仙楼。
English: The water of Jiutang River flows north through the bottom of Xianren, and there is a rock next to it. The shape is extremely square and steep, and people call it Xianren.

古文：水自下历溪曲折，透迤倾注。行者间关，每所寨溯，山、水之号，盖亦因事生焉。
现代文：水从岩下溪中弯弯曲曲地流淌着，行人历尽崎岖险阻，往往要提起衣襟溯流涉水，山水的名称，大概就是因为此种情况而产生的。
English: The water flows meanderingly from the creek under the rock, and pedestrians have experienced all the rugged obstacles. They often have to mention the name of the waterfall, the waterfall, probably because of this situation.

古文：九渡水又北流，注于澧水。
现代文：九渡水又北流注入澧水。
English: The Jiudoushui River and the North Stream inject fresh water.

古文：澧水又东娄水入焉。水源出巴东界，东径天门郡娄中县北，又东径零阳县，注于澧水。
现代文：澧水又往东流，有娄水注入，娄水发源于巴东边界，往东流经天门郡娄中县北边，又往东流经零阳县，注入澧水。
English: Surabaya water also flows eastward and is injected with Surabaya water. Surabaya water originates from the eastern border of Padang, flows eastward through the northern side of Yuzhong County, Tianmen County, and flows eastward through Ziyang County, injecting Surabaya water.

古文：澧水又东，径零阳县南，县即零溪以著称矣。
现代文：澧水又往东流经零阳县南边，该县就是因零溪而得名的。
English: Surabaya water flows eastward through the south of Liyang County, which is named after Liyang Creek.

古文：澧水又径渫阳县，右会渫水。
现代文：遭水又流经谍阳县，在右边汇合了谍水。
English: The water flowed through Spyangyang County and merged with Spyang Water on the right.

古文：水出建平郡，东径渫阳县南，晋太康中置。
现代文：谍水发源于建平郡，往东流经谍阳县南边，该县是晋太康年间所置。
English: The Jianping Water originates in Jianping County and flows eastward through the south of Jianyang County, which was established during the reign of Jin Taikang.

古文：渫水又左合黄水，黄水出零阳县西，北连巫山溪，出雄黄，颇有神异。
现代文：谍水又在左边汇合了黄水。黄水发源于零阳县西边，北与巫山相连，溪边出产雄黄，颇多神灵怪异之事。
English: The yellow water originates in the west of Liyang County, and is connected to Wushan in the north. It is produced by the creek, and there are many strange things.

古文：采常以冬月祭祀，凿石深数丈，方得佳黄，故溪水取名焉。
现代文：采雄黄常在冬季，祭祀后凿开岩石，深达数丈，才能得到优质的雄黄，所以溪水取名黄水。
English: Huanghuang is often harvested in the winter. After the sacrifice, the rock is chiseled to a depth of several meters in order to obtain high-quality Huanghuang. This is why the stream is called Huangshui.

古文：黄水北流注于渫水。渫水又东注澧水，谓之渫口。
现代文：黄水北流注入谍水，谍水又东流注入澧水，汇流处叫谍口。
English: The north flow of yellow water is injected into the spy water, and the east flow of spy water is injected into the brackish water, and the confluence is called the spy mouth.

古文：澧水又东径澧阳县南，南临澧水，晋太康四年立天门郡治也。
现代文：澧水又往东流经遭阳县南边，县城南濒澧水。澧阳县是晋太康四年所立，是天门郡的治所。
English: Surabaya also flows eastward through the southern edge of Xiangyang County, and the southern edge of the county town is on the edge of Surabaya. Xiangyang County was established by Jin Taikang four years ago and is the seat of Tianmen County.

古文：吴永安六年，武陵郡嵩梁山，高峰孤竦，素壁千寻，望之苕亭，有似香炉。
现代文：武陵郡篙梁山孤峰屹立，削壁千初，远望高高有如香炉。
English: The lonely peak of Qiliang Mountain in Wuling County stands tall. It was carved in the early 1000s, and looks like an incense burner from far away.

古文：其山洞开，玄朗如门，高三百丈，广二百丈，门角上各生一竹，倒垂下拂，谓之天帚。
现代文：那座山中间大开，深远明亮有如门户，高三百丈，阔二百丈，门角上各长着一竿翠竹，倒垂拂动，称为天帚。
English: That mountain is wide open in the middle, far-reaching and bright like a portal, three hundred meters high and two hundred meters wide. On each corner of the door, there is a pole of green bamboo, hanging upside down and fluttering, known as a sky lantern.

古文：孙休以为嘉样，分武陵，置天门郡。
现代文：吴永安六年，孙休以为祥瑞，就划出武陵地另设天门郡。
English: In the sixth year of Wu Yong'an, Sun Hui thought it was auspicious, so he carved out Wuling County and set up Tianmen County.

古文：澧水又东历层步山，高秀特出。山下有峭涧，泉流所发，南流注于澧水。
现代文：澧水又往东流经层步山，此山高峻秀丽，山下有陡涧，山泉南流注入澧水。
English: Surabaya also flows to the east through Shibuyama, this mountain is high and beautiful, there is a steep cliff under the mountain, and the southern mountain spring flows into Surabaya.

古文：又东过作唐县北。
现代文：又往东流过作唐县北边。
English: It also flows eastward past the northern edge of Tongtang County.

古文：作唐县，后汉分孱陵县置。
现代文：作唐县是后汉时从屏陵县分出来的。
English: Tang County was separated from Pingling County in the late Han Dynasty.

古文：澧水入县，左合涔水。
现代文：澧水流入作唐县，在左边汇合了滓水。
English: Surabaya water flows into Tang County, and Surabaya water merges on the left.

古文：水出西北天门郡界，南流径涔坪屯，屯堨涔水，溉田数千顷。
现代文：滓水发源于西北天门郡边界，往南流经渗坪屯，人们筑堰拦截浑水，灌溉田亩数干顷。
English: Surabaya's water originates from the northwest border of Tianmen County and flows south through Jiuping Township. People have built weirs to intercept the muddy water and irrigate several acres of dry fields.

古文：又东南流注于澧水。
现代文：又往东南流，注入澧水。
English: It also flows to the southeast, injecting salty water.

古文：澧水又东，澹水出焉。
现代文：澧水又往东流，澹水分支流出。
English: Surabaya water flows eastward, and the branch of Surabaya water flows out.

古文：澧水又南径故郡城东，东转径作唐县南。
现代文：澧水又往南流经旧郡城东边，向东转弯流经作唐县南边。
English: Surabaya water flows southward through the east side of the old county seat, and turns eastward to flow through the south side of Tang County.

古文：澧水又东径南安县南，晋太康元年分孱陵立。
现代文：澧水又往东流经南安县南边。南安县是晋太康元年，从屠陵分出设置的。
English: Surabaya also flows eastward through the south of Nan'an County. Nan'an County was set up in the first year of Jin Taikang from Tu Ling.

古文：澹水注之。
现代文：澹水在此注入澧水。
English: Here, brackish water is injected into brackish water.

古文：水上承澧水于作唐县，东径其县北，又东注于澧，谓之澹口。
现代文：澹水上流在作唐县承接澧水，往东流经作唐县北边，又往东注入澧水，汇流处叫澹口。
English: The upstream of the Surabaya water is in Tongtang County to undertake the Surabaya water. The eastward flow passes through the north of Tongtang County, and the eastward injection of the Surabaya water. The confluence is called the Surabaya mouth.

古文：王仲宣《赠士孙丈始诗》曰：悠悠澹澧者也。
现代文：王仲宣《赠士孙文始诗》说的悠悠澹澧，就指这条水。
English: Wang Zhongxuan's "Gift of Sun Yat-sen" refers to this water.

古文：澧水又东，与赤沙湖水会，湖水北通江而南注澧，谓之沙口。
现代文：遭水又往东流，与赤沙湖水汇合，湖水北与江通，南流注入澧水，汇流处叫沙口。
English: The submerged water then flows eastward, merging with the water of Chisha Lake. The northern part of the lake flows into the Yangtze River, while the southern part flows into the Bohai River. The confluence is called Shagou.

古文：澧水又东南注于沉水，曰澧口，盖其枝渎耳。
现代文：澧水又往东南注入沉水，汇流处叫澧口。这条水其实是澧水的一条支流。
English: The Surabaya water then flows southeast into the submerged water, and the confluence is called the estuary. This water is actually a tributary of the Surabaya water.

古文：《离骚》曰：沅有芷兮澧有兰。
现代文：《离骚》说：沉水有白芷，澧水有兰花。
English: "Issao" said: "Sinking water has egrets, while rushing water has orchids."

古文：又东至长沙下隽县西北，东入于江。
现代文：又往东流到长沙郡下隽县西北，往东注入江水。
English: It also flows eastward to the northwest of Zhangye County, Changsha County, injecting river water to the east.

古文：澧水流注于洞庭湖，俗谓之曰澧江口也。
现代文：澧水流注入洞庭湖，入口俗称澧江口。
English: The Lijiang River flows into Dongting Lake, and the entrance is commonly known as the Lijiang River mouth.

古文：沅水出牂柯且兰县，为旁沟水，又东至镡成县，为沅水。
现代文：沅水发源于样柯郡且兰县，称为旁沟水；又往东流到谭成县，称为沅水。
English: Surabaya's water originates in Jianke County and Kailan County, and is known as Byogou water. It also flows eastward to Tancheng County, and is known as Surabaya's water.

古文：东过无阳县，无水出故且兰，南流至无阳故县。县对无水，因以氏县。
现代文：往东流过无阳县，无水发源于旧时的且兰，往南流到无阳旧县城，县城面对无水，因此以水为县名。
English: It flows eastward through Moyang County. The anhydrous water originates from the old Kailan. It flows southward to the Moyang old county seat. The county seat faces the anhydrous water, so the county is named after water.

古文：无水又东南入沅，谓之无口。
现代文：无水又往东南流，注入沅水，汇流处叫无口。
English: Without water, it flows to the southeast, injecting brackish water, and the confluence is called no mouth.

古文：沅水东径无阳县，南临运水。
现代文：沅水往东流经无阳县，县城南临运水。
English: Surabaya's water flows eastward through Muyang County, and the water is transported to the south of the county.

古文：水源出东南岸许山，西北径其县南，流注于熊溪。
现代文：运水源出东南岸的许山，往西北流经该县南边，注入熊溪。
English: The source of the transported water comes from Xu Mountain on the southeast coast, flows northwest through the southern part of the county, and is injected into Xiongxi.

古文：熊溪南带移山，山本在水北，夕中风雨，旦而山移水南，故山以移为名，盖亦苍梧郁州，东武怪山之类也。
现代文：熊溪南流绕过移山，移山原在北岸，夜间风雨大作，天明以后，山就移到水南了，因而名为移山，这也是苍梧郁州、东武怪山一类怪事。
English: The south stream of Xiongxi bypassed the moving mountain. The moving mountain was originally on the north bank. During the night, there was a lot of wind and rain. After dawn, the mountain moved to the south of the water, so it was called the moving mountain. This is also a kind of strange thing like the strange mountain in Iuzhou and Dongwu.

古文：熊溪下注沅水。沅水又东径辰阳县，县有龙溪，水南出于龙峤之山，北流入于沅。
现代文：熊溪一下注沅水，沅水又往东流经辰阳县，该县有龙溪，发源于南面的龙娇之山，北流注入沅水。
English: At one point, Xiongxi Creek was filled with salty water, and the salty water then flowed eastward through Chenyang County. This county has Longxi Creek, which originates from the Longjiao Mountain in the south, and the north stream flows into the salty water.

古文：沅水又东，滏水注之。
现代文：沅水又往东流，有涤水注入。
English: The brackish water also flows eastward, and is infused with brackish water.

古文：水南出扶阳之山，北流会于沅。
现代文：溢水发源于南面的扶阳之山，北流汇合于沅水。
English: The overflow water originates from the mountain of Fuyang in the south, and the northern stream converges on Surabaya.

古文：沅水又东，与序溪合，水出武陵郡义陵县鄜梁山，西北流径义陵县，王莽之建平县也，治序溪。
现代文：沅水又东流与序溪汇合，序溪发源于武陵郡义陵县的都梁山，往西北流经义陵县一一就是王莽的建平县，治所在序溪。
English: Surabaya's eastern stream also joins Sequoia Creek. Sequoia Creek originates from Du Liang Mountain in Yiling County, Wuling County, and flows northwest through Yiling County - this is Wang Mang's Jianping County, governed by Sequoia Creek.

古文：其城，刘备之种归，马良出五溪，绥抚蛮夷，良率诸蛮所筑也。
现代文：刘备向株归挺进，派马良取道五溪，安抚蛮夷，就率领蛮族诸部落筑了序溪的县城。
English: Liu Bei advanced towards Zhuge, sent Ma Liang to take the Five Streams Road to pacify the barbarians, and then led the barbarian tribes to build the county seat of Zhouxi.

古文：所治序溪，最为沃壤，良田数百顷，特宜稻，修作无废。
现代文：所辖序溪一带，土壤最肥沃，良田数百顷，特别适宜种稻，长期以来耕作不废。
English: The area around Zhouxi, which is under its jurisdiction, has the most fertile soil, hundreds of hectares of good fields, especially suitable for growing rice, and has been cultivated for a long time.

古文：又西北入于沅。
现代文：序溪又往西北注入沅水。
English: The Sequence Creek injects fresh water to the northwest.

古文：沅水又东，合淑水，水导源椒溪，北流注沅。
现代文：沅水又往东流，汇合了淑水。淑水发源于淑溪，北流注入玩水。
English: Surabaya's waters flowed eastward and merged with Shuxi's waters. Shuxi's waters originated from Shuxi Creek, and the northern stream was infused with fresh water.

古文：沅水又东径辰阳县南，东合辰水。
现代文：沅水又往东流经辰阳县南边，东流与辰水汇合。
English: Surabaya also flows eastward through the south of Chenyang County, and the eastward flow merges with Chenshui.

古文：水出县三山谷，东南流，独母水注之。
现代文：辰水发源于辰阳县三山谷，往东南流，有独母水注入。
English: The Chenshui originates in the Sanzhan Valley of Chenyang County and flows southeast. It is fed by a single mother.

古文：水源南出龙门山，历独母溪，北入辰水。
现代文：独母水水源来自南方的龙门山，流过独母溪，北流注入辰水。
English: The source of the single mother water comes from the Longmen Mountain in the south, flows through the single mother stream, and the north stream is injected into the Chen Shui.

古文：辰水又径其县北，旧治在辰水之阳，故即名焉。《楚辞》所谓夕宿辰阳者也。
现代文：辰水又流经县北，旧治所在辰水以北，因名辰阳，就是《楚辞》所说的：夕宿辰阳。
English: Chenshui also flows through the north of the county, and the old government is located north of Chenshui. Because of the name Chenyang, it is called "Chunyang" in the "Analects of Confucius."

古文：王莽更名会亭矣。
现代文：王莽改名为会亭。
English: Wang Mang was renamed Kaiting.

古文：辰水又右会沅水，名之为辰溪口。
现代文：辰水又在右边汇合于沅水，汇流处称为辰溪口。
English: On the right, the Tatsusui joins the Surabaya, and the confluence is called the Tatsunokuchi.

古文：武陵有五溪，谓雄溪、溪、无溪、酉溪，辰溪其一焉。
现代文：武陵有五溪，叫雄溪、横溪、无溪、酉溪，辰溪是其中之一。
English: There are five streams in Wuling, called Xiongxi, Yangxi, Muxi and Yaoxi. Chenxi is one of them.

古文：夹溪悉是蛮左所居，故谓此蛮五溪蛮也。
现代文：溪水两岸，全是蛮族所居，所以称这一带的蛮人为五溪蛮。
English: Both sides of the stream are inhabited by barbarians, so the barbarians in this area are called Wuxi barbarians.

古文：水又径沅陵县西，有武溪，源出武山，与西阳分山。水源石上有盘瓠迹犹存矣。
现代文：水又流经玩陵县西边，有武溪，发源于武山，沉陵县与酉阳县以山分界，水源的岩石上，盘瓤的遗迹还在。
English: The water also flows through the west side of Jialing County, there is Wuxi, originated in Wushan, Shenling County and Fenyang County are separated by mountains, on the rock of the water source, the remains of the anchor are still there.

古文：盘瓠者，高辛氏之畜狗也，其毛五色，高辛氏患犬戎之暴，乃募天下有能得犬戎之将军吴将军头者，妻以少女。
现代文：盘瓤是高辛氏所养的狗，毛有五色。高辛氏因对犬戎的残暴感到忧虑，就招募天下勇士，说是如有人能取得犬戎吴将军的头颅，就把小女儿嫁给他。
English: Pansy is a five-colored dog owned by Mr. Gao Xin. Concerned about the cruelty of the dog Rong, Mr. Gao Xin recruited warriors from all over the world and said that if anyone could obtain the head of the dog Rong Wu, he would marry his little daughter to him.

古文：下令之后，盘瓠遂行吴将军之首于阙下，帝大喜，未知所报。
现代文：下令之后，盘瓤把吴将军的头衔到宫网之下，帝誉大喜，却不知怎样酬谢它。
English: After the order was issued, Emperor Taizong placed the title of General Wu under the palace net. The emperor was overjoyed with the honor, but did not know how to reward it.

古文：女闻之，以为信不可违，请行，乃以配之，盘瓠负女入南山，上石室中。所处险绝，人迹不至。
现代文：女儿听到这件事， 认为不可失信，请求让她去嫁给它。盘瓤把姑娘背到南山，登山进入石洞里面，那地方极险，人迹不到。
English: When her daughter heard about this, she thought she could not betray her trust and asked her to marry him. He carried the girl on a palanquin to the Nanshan Mountain, climbed the mountain and entered the cave. The place was extremely dangerous and there was no trace of anyone.

古文：帝悲思之，遣使不得进，经二年，生六男六女。
现代文：帝誉思女心悲，可是派遣使者也进不去。经过二年，生了六个儿子和六个女儿。
English: After two years, she gave birth to six sons and six daughters.

古文：盘瓠死，因自相夫妻。织绩木皮，染以草实，好五色衣，裁制皆有尾。
现代文：盘靓死后，儿女们自相结成夫妻，用木皮纺织成布，以野果染色；他们都爱好五色衣服，剪裁制作都有尾巴。
English: After the death of Pan Xuan, his sons and daughters married each other, weaving cloth from bark and dyeing it with wild berries; they all loved five-colored clothes and tailed their tailoring.

古文：其母白帝，赐以名山。其后滋蔓，号曰蛮夷。
现代文：他们的母亲察告帝誉，请把名山赐给他们，以后逐渐蕃衍，号称蛮夷。
English: Their mother sued the emperor, asking for the famous mountain to be given to them. Later, they gradually became known as barbarians.

古文：今武陵郡夷，即盘瓠之种落也。
现代文：现在武陵郡的夷人，就是盘瓤的部落。
English: Today, the Irits of Wuling County are the tribe that still resides there.

古文：其狗皮毛，嫡孙世宝录之。武水南流注于沅。沅水又东，施水注之。
现代文：他的狗衣毛，由嫡孙世代珍藏 武陵水往南流注入沅水，玩水又往东流，有施水注入。
English: The fur of his dog's coat has been treasured by his great-grandchildren for generations. Wuling water flows southward and is infused with reed water, while Zhishui water flows eastward and is infused with perfumed water.

古文：水南出施山，溪源有阳欺崖，崖色纯素，望同积雪。
现代文：施水发源于南方的施山，源头有阳欺崖；崖色纯白，望去如同积雪。
English: Shih water originates from the south of Shishan, the source of which is the cliff; the cliff is pure white and looks like snow.

古文：下有二石室，先有人居处其间。细泉轻流，望川竞注，故不可得以言也。施水北流会于沅。
现代文：下面有石洞两处，先前有人居住在里面，涓涓的泉水轻轻地流淌着，竞向山溪奔流。施水北流汇合于玩水。
English: Below, there are two stone caves where people once lived. The gurgling spring water flows gently, racing towards the mountain stream. The north stream of the Shisui River converges at the waterhole.

古文：沅水又东径沅陵县北，汉故顷侯吴阳之邑也。王莽改曰沅陆。
现代文：沅水又往东流经沉陵县北边，这里是汉朝时顷侯吴阳的食邑；王莽改名为沉陆。
English: Surabaya also flows eastward through the north of Shenling County, which was the food town of Wuyang in the Han Dynasty; Wang Manglu changed its name to Shenglu.

古文：县北枕沅水。
现代文：县城北频玩水。
English: In the northern part of the county, people frequently play with water.

古文：沅水又东径县故治北，移县治。县之旧城置都尉府。
现代文：沅水又往东流经旧县城北边，后来县治迁移，而在旧县城设置都尉府。
English: The Surabaya River flowed eastward through the northern part of the old county seat. Later, the county government was relocated, and the prefectural governor's office was established in the old county seat.

古文：因冈傍阿，势尽川陆，临沅对酉，二川之交会也。
现代文：都尉府傍着山冈，倚着山弯，一边是沅水，一边是酉水，位于两水汇流处，地势高旷，山川形胜尽收眼底。
English: Duyefu is located at the confluence of two rivers, next to a mountain and a hill, leaning against a mountain bend, with Surabaya on one side and Surabaya on the other. The terrain is high and wide, and the mountain and river shapes are spectacular.

古文：酉水导源益州巴郡临江县，故武陵之充县西源山，东南流，在无阳故具甫，又东径迁陵故县界，与西乡溪合，即延江之枝津，更始之下流，谓之西乡溪口。
现代文：酉水发源于益州巴郡的临江县；就是旧时武陵郡充县的酉源山，往东南流经旧无阳县南边，又往东流经旧迁陵县边界，与西乡溪汇合，汇流处称为西乡溪口。
English: The Xiangshui originates from Linjiang County, Ba County, Yizhou; that is, the Xiangyuan Mountain in the former Chong County, Wuling County. It flows southeastward through the south of the former Moyang County, and eastward through the border of the former Qianling County, and merges with the Xixiang Creek. The confluence is called the Xixiang Creek Mouth.

古文：酉水又东径迁陵县故城北，王莽更名曰迁陆也。
现代文：西乡溪是延江的一条支流，也是更始水的下流。酉水又往东流经迁陵县旧城北边，王莽改名为迁陆。
English: Xixiangxi is a tributary of the Yanjiang River, and is also downstream of the Qianshi Water. The Qianshui also flows eastward through the north of the old city of Qianling County, and Wang Mang changed its name to Qianlu.

古文：酉水东径酉阳故县南，县故西陵也。
现代文：酉水往东流经酉阳县旧城南边，这就是旧时的酉陵。
English: Surabaya water flows eastward through the southern side of the old city of Poyang County, which is the old time of Fuling.

古文：酉水又东径沅陵县北，又东南径潘承明垒西，承明讨五溪蛮，营军所筑也。其城跨山枕谷。
现代文：酉水又往东流经沉陵县北边；又往东流经潘承明垒西边，此垒是潘承明征讨五溪蛮时为驻军所筑，城堡建在临谷的山冈上。
English: Surabaya also flows eastward through the north of Shenling County; it also flows eastward through the west of Pancheng Ming Fort, which was built by Pancheng Ming to garrison the Wuxi Barbarians, and the castle was built on the hill in Lin Valley.

古文：西水又南注沅水，阚駰谓之受水，其水所决入，名曰酉口。沅水又径窦应明城侧，应明以元嘉初代蛮所筑也。
现代文：酉水又往南注入沅水，阐胭称为受水，入江处叫酉口。沅水又流经窦应明城侧，此城是元嘉初年窦应明讨伐蛮人时所筑。
English: Surabaya water also flows south into Surabaya water, which is called receiving water, and the place where it enters the river is called the mouth. Surabaya water also flows through the side of Douyingming City, which was built in the first year of Yuan Jia when Douyingming fought the barbarians.

古文：沅水又东，溪水南出茗山，山深回险，人兽阻绝，溪水北泻沅川。
现代文：沅水又往东流，有溪水发源于南方的茗山，山深而险，人迹不至，连野兽都难以越过。溪水北流，泻入沅水。
English: Surabaya also flows to the east. There is a stream that originates in the southern part of Mount Surabaya. It is deep and dangerous, inaccessible to humans, and even difficult for wild animals to cross. The stream flows north and flows into Surabaya.

古文：沅水又东，与诸鱼溪水合，水北出诸鱼山，山与天门郡之澧阳县分岭，溪水南流会于沅。
现代文：沅水又往东流，与诸鱼溪水汇合。诸鱼水发源于北方的诸鱼山―诸鱼山是沉陵县与天门郡澄阳县的分界―溪水南流，与玩水汇合。
English: Zhuyu Water flows eastward and merges with Zhuyu Stream. Zhuyu Water originates from Zhuyu Mountain in the north - Zhuyu Mountain is the boundary between Shenling County and Chengyang County, Tianmen County - the stream flows south and merges with Zhuyu Water.

古文：沅水又东，夷水入焉。
现代文：沅水又往东流，有夷水注入。
English: The floodwaters also flowed eastward, and the floodwaters were injected.

古文：水南出夷山，北流注沅。
现代文：夷水发源于南方的夷山，北流注入沅水。
English: The Yishui River originates from the Yishan Mountains in the south, and the north stream flows into the Yishui River.

古文：夷山东接壶头山，山高一百里，广圆三百里。
现代文：夷山东与壶头山相接，山高一百里，方圆三百里，山下水边，有新息侯马援征伐武溪蛮时军队歇息的地方。
English: The east side of Yishan Mountain is adjacent to Hukutou Mountain. The mountain is a hundred miles high and has a circumference of three hundred miles. At the foot of the mountain, at the water's edge, there is a place where the troops rested when they went to conquer Wuxi.

古文：山下水际，有新息侯马援征武溪蛮停军处，壶头径曲多险，其中纡折千滩。援就壶头，希效早成，道遇瘴毒，终没于此。
现代文：壶头道路曲折崎岖，险阻很多，其间溪流萦纤，有成千的险滩。马援去壶头，希望早日功成，不幸路上遭到瘴气之毒，终于死在这里。
English: The road to Hukou is winding and rugged, with many dangerous obstacles. In between, streams meander, and there are thousands of dangerous beaches. Ma went to Hukou to help, hoping for an early success. Unfortunately, he was poisoned by radon gas on the way, and finally died here.

古文：忠公获谤，信可悲矣！
现代文：他对朝廷忠心耿耿，却受人毁谤，实在可悲得很。
English: It's really sad that he was so loyal to the imperial court, but was slandered.

古文：刘澄之曰：沅水自壶头枝分，跨三十三渡，径交趾龙编县东北，入于海。
现代文：刘澄之说：沅水到壶头分出支流，跨水有三十三处渡口，流经交趾龙编县东北注入大海。
English: Liu Chengzhi said: "There are 33 ferry crossings across the tributary from Lushui to Houtou, and the river flows into the sea in the northeast of Jiaozuo Longyan County.

古文：脉水寻梁，乃非关究，但古人许以传疑，聊书所闻耳。
现代文：细究水脉所经，却是牛头不对马嘴的；但古人容许存疑，所以姑且记下我所听到的事罢了。
English: It is better to listen to the water than to listen to the horse, but the ancients tolerated doubt, so I'll just write down what I heard.

古文：又东北过临沅县南，临沅县与沅南县分水。
现代文：又往东北流过临沉县南边，临沉县与沅南县以玩水为分界。
English: It also flows to the northeast through the southern part of Lin-Shen County, and the boundary between Lin-Shen County and Hunan County is the playing water.

古文：沅南县西有夷望山，孤竦中流，浮险四绝，昔有蛮民避寇居之，故谓之夷望也。
现代文：沉南县西边有夷望山，孤峰耸峙于江心，四面无依，如在险流中飘浮。从前有蛮民避乱于此山，所以称为夷望。
English: On the west side of Shennan County, there is Yibang Mountain, a lonely peak that stands in the center of the river, with no shelter on all sides, as if floating in a dangerous current. In the past, barbarians took refuge in this mountain, so it is called Yibang.

古文：南有夷望溪水，南出重山，远注沅。
现代文：南有夷望溪水，发源于南方重叠的山岭间，远流注入沅水。
English: In the south, there is the Yibang Stream, which originates from the overlapping mountains in the south, and the distant stream injects the reeds.

古文：沅水又东得关下山，东带关溪，泻注沅渎。
现代文：玩水又东流，到了关下山，关溪在山的东面流过，泻注于沅水。
English: The play of water also flows to the east, and when it reaches the mountain of Guan, Guan Creek flows through the eastern side of the mountain and pours into the muddy water.

古文：沅水又东历临沅县西，为明月池白壁湾。
现代文：沅水又往东流经临沉县西边，就到明月池、白璧湾。
English: Surabaya water also flows eastward through the west side of Linshen County, reaching Mingyue Pond and Bai Bi Bay.

古文：湾状半月，清潭镜澈，上则风籁空传，下则泉响不断。行者莫不拥楫嬉游，徘徊爱玩。
现代文：湾呈半月形，澄清的潭水明澈如镜，头上风声在空中回荡，脚下流泉涂涂不绝，经过这里的人无不来荡桨嬉游，留连忘返。
English: The bay is half-moon-shaped, the clear water is as clear as a mirror, the wind echoes in the air above your head, and the flowing springs at your feet are incessant. People passing through here can't help but paddle and swim, and you'll never forget it.

古文：沅水又东，历三石涧，鼎足均峙，秀若削成，其侧茂竹便娟，致可玩也。
现代文：沅水又往东流经三石涧，涧中有三石鼎足而立，距离匀称，仿佛是妙手斧削而成。旁边翠竹袅袅婷婷，风姿妙曼，可供玩赏。
English: Surabaya water flows eastward through the three-stone moat. In the moat, there are three stone pinnacles standing upright, the distance is well-balanced, as if they were carved with a fine hand axe. Next to them, there are green bamboo shoots with a graceful appearance, which can be enjoyed.

古文：又东带绿萝山，绿萝蒙，颓岩临水，实钓渚渔咏之胜地，其迭响若钟音，信为神仙之所居。
现代文：沅水又往东流，绕过绿萝山。绿油油的松萝宛如纱帐垂披，危耸的山岩凭依着水边，真是钓鱼吟咏的胜地；水击山岩，回音荡漾，有如钟声一般，真是神仙居住的地方了。
English: The rushing water flows eastward, bypassing the Green Lotus Mountain. The lush green pineapple is draped like a gauze curtain, and the towering rock clings to the water's edge, making it a real fishing and singing resort; the water hits the rock, and the echoes reverberate like bells, making it a real place where immortals live.

古文：沅水又东径平山西，南临沅水，寒松上荫，清泉下注，栖托者不能自绝于其侧。
现代文：玩水又往东流经平山西边。平山南临沅水，寒松垂荫于冈峦之上，清泉流注于山崖之下，隐居的人一到这里，就再也不愿离开了。
English: The play of water also flows eastward through the west side of Pingshan. South of Pingshan is Linshui, the cold pine is shaded above the ridge, and the clear spring flows under the cliff. Once the secluded people come here, they will never want to leave.

古文：沅水又东径临沅县南，县南临沅水，因以为名，王莽更之曰监沅也。
现代文：沅水继续往东流经临沉县城南边，县城南临沅水，因此得名。王莽把临沉改名为监沉。
English: The Surabaya water continued to flow eastward through the southern part of the city of Linshen County, the southern part of the city of Linshen County, hence the name. Wang Mang changed the name of Linshen to Juncun.

古文：南对沅南县，后汉建武中所置也。
现代文：县治在武陵郡下―武陵郡本来是楚时的黔中郡。秦昭襄王二十七年。
English: The county seat is located in Wuling County - Wuling County was originally a county in the middle of Yunnan Province in the time of King Qin Zhaoxiang.

古文：县在沅水之阴，因以沅南为名。县治故城，昔马援讨临乡所筑也。
现代文：该县位于玩水南岸，因此名为玩南，县治旧城，是从前马援讨伐临乡时所筑。
English: The county is located on the south bank of the Jianshui River, hence the name Jiannan. The county seat is the old town, which was built when the former Ma'an army invaded the countryside.

古文：沅水又东历小湾，谓之枉渚。
现代文：沅水又往东流过一处小湾，称为枉诸。
English: Surabaya's waters also flow eastward through a small bay, known as Wuzhuang.

古文：渚东里许，便得枉人山。
现代文：清东一里左右，就是枉人山。
English: About a mile east of Qingdao, there is a mountain of people.

古文：山西带修溪一百余里，茂竹便娟，披溪荫渚，长川径引，远注于沅。
现代文：枉人山西边傍着修溪绵延一百余里，翠竹亭亭摇曳，沿溪披拂，荫蔽了水湾；漫长的溪流，从远处流来，注入沅水。
English: On the west side of the Wusongren Mountain, the Shu Creek stretches for more than a hundred miles. The green bamboo pavilions sway and flow along the stream, shading the bay. The long stream flows from afar, injecting fresh water.

古文：沅水又东入龙阳县，有澹水，出汉寿县西杨山。南流东折，径其县南。
现代文：沅水又往东流入龙阳县，有澹水发源于汉寿县西边的杨山，南流东转，流经县南。
English: The floodwaters flowed eastward into Longyang County. Some floodwaters originated from Yangshan in the west of Hanshou County, and the southern stream turned east and flowed through the south of the county.

古文：县治索城，即索县之故城也。
现代文：县治索城，就是索县的老城。
English: It is the old town of Suo County.

古文：汉顺帝阳嘉中改从今名。
现代文：汉顺帝阳嘉年间，才改为今名。
English: It was only during the reign of Emperor Han Shun that the name was changed to its current form.

古文：阚駰以为兴水所出，东入沅。
现代文：阐胭以为兴水发源在那里，往东流注入沅水。
English: He thought that the source of Xingshui was there, and that the eastward flow was infused with Xingshui.

古文：而是水又东历诸湖，方南注沅，亦曰渐水也。水所入之处，谓之鼎口。
现代文：而此水又往东流过诸湖，方才往南注入沅水，又名渐水；水流汇入处叫鼎口。
English: And this water flows eastward through the lakes, before it is injected southward into the brackish water, also known as gradient water; the confluence of the water flow is called Dingkou.

古文：沅水又东历龙阳县之汜洲，洲长二十里，吴丹杨太守李衡植柑于其上。临死，敕其子曰：吾州里有木奴千头，不责衣食，岁绢千匹。
现代文：沅水又往东流经龙阳县的把洲，洲长二十里，吴丹杨太守李衡在洲上种植柑桔，临死时嘱咐他的儿子说：我在乡里有木奴一千个，不要你供给衣食，每年可为你赚得一千匹绢。
English: The river also flows eastward through Putuo Island in Longyang County. The island is 20 miles long. Wu Dan Yang Taishou Li Heng planted citrus fruits on the island. When he was about to die, he told his son: "I have a thousand slaves in my village. I don't want to provide you with food and clothing. I can earn a thousand yakitori for you every year."

古文：太史公曰：江陵千树橘，可当封君。
现代文：太史公说：江陵一千棵桔树，抵得上封侯。
English: Taishigong said, "A thousand orange trees in Gangneung are worth a prince's fee."

古文：此之谓矣。
现代文：这话说得不错。
English: That's a good point.

古文：吴末，衡柑成，岁绢千匹。
现代文：吴国末年，李衡柑桔长成，每年收入可抵绢一千匹的价值。
English: In the last years of the State of Wu, Li Heng's citrus production grew to such an extent that his annual income was equivalent to the value of a thousand rhinoceroses.

古文：今洲上犹有陈根余枿，盖其遗也。
现代文：现在洲上还有树根和残存的树桩，就是当年留下的。
English: There are still tree roots and stumps left over from that year on the mainland.

古文：沅水又东径龙阳县北，城侧沅水，沅水又东合寿溪，内通大溪口，有木连理，根各一岸，而凌空交合。
现代文：沅水又往东流经龙阳县北边，县城就在沅水边上。沅水又往东流，与寿凑汇合，寿溪可通大溪口，那里有木连理，树根各在溪的一岸，枝娅则在水上凌空交合。
English: Surabaya also flows eastward through the north of Longyang County, and the county seat is on the edge of Surabaya. Surabaya also flows eastward, converging with Shouqin, and Shouxi can pass through the mouth of the large stream, where there is a tree connection, the roots of the trees are on one side of the stream, and the branches of the branches meet on the water.

古文：其上承诸湖，下注沅水。
现代文：寿溪上流承接诸湖，下注于沅水。
English: The upper reaches of Shou Creek join the lakes and flow down to Surabaya.

古文：又东至长沙下隽县西，北入于江。
现代文：又往东流到长沙下隽县西北，注入江水。
English: It also flows eastward to the northwest of Changsha's Xiamen County, injecting river water.

古文：沅水下注洞庭湖，方会于江。
现代文：沅水下流注入洞庭湖，方才与江水相汇合。
English: Surabaya water is injected into Dongting Lake downstream, and only then does it merge with the river.

古文：沅水出武陵镡成县北界沅水谷，《山海经》曰：祷过之山，沅水出焉，而南流注于海是也。
现代文：泿水发源于武陵郡谭成县北部边界的沉水谷，《山海经》说：祷过之山，泿水就发源在那边，往南流，注入大海。
English: Surabaya's water originates from the Sunken Valley on the northern border of Tancheng County, Wuling County. The "Sanghaibing" says: "After praying to the mountain, Surabaya's water originates there, flows southward, and flows into the sea."

古文：南至郁林潭中县，与邻水合。
现代文：往南流，到了郁林郡潭中县，与邻水汇合。
English: Flowing southward, it reached Tanzhong County, Yulin County, and merged with the neighboring water.

古文：水出无阳县，县故镡成也。
现代文：邻水发源于无阳县，就是旧时的谭成县。
English: Neighbouring water originated in Muyang County, which was the old Tancheng County.

古文：晋义熙中，改从今名。
现代文：晋义熙年间一，改为今名。
English: He changed his name to his current one in the first year of the reign of Emperor Jin Yixi.

古文：俗谓之移溪，溪水南历潭中，注于泿水。
现代文：俗称移溪，溪水南经潭中，注入很水。
English: Commonly known as the Shifting Creek, the stream flows south through the middle of the lake, injecting a lot of water.

古文：又东至苍梧猛陵县为郁溪，又东至高要县为大水。
现代文：又往东流到苍梧郡猛陵县，称为郁溪，又往东到高要县，称为大水。
English: It also flows eastward to Mengling County, Cangwu County, known as Yuxi, and eastward to Gaoyou County, known as Dashu.

古文：郁水出郁林之阿林县，东径猛陵县。
现代文：郁水发源于郁林的阿林县，往东流经猛陵县。
English: The Yulin River originates in Yulin's Aling County and flows eastward through Mengling County.

古文：猛陵县在广信之西南，王莽之猛陆也。
现代文：猛陵县在广信西南，就是王莽的猛陆。
English: Mengling County, in the southwest of Guangxin, is the land of Wang Mang.

古文：泿水于县左合郁溪，乱流径广信县，《地理志》苍梧郡治，武帝元鼎六年开。
现代文：泿水在猛陵县左边接纳了郁溪，乱流经过广信县。据《地理志》，广信县即苍梧郡的治所。武帝元鼎六年开拓了苍梧。
English: Surabaya accepted the Yuxi River on the left side of Mengling County, and the turbulent flow passed through Guangxin County. According to the "Geography," Guangxin County is the seat of Gou County. Emperor Wu Gangding pioneered Gou for six years.

古文：王莽之新广郡，县曰广信亭。
现代文：王莽叫新广郡，广信县则称为广信亭。
English: Wang Mang is called Xinguang County, and Guangxin County is called Guangxin Pavilion.

古文：王氏《交广春秋》曰：元封五年，交州自赢陛县移治于此。
现代文：王氏《交广春秋》说：元封五年前，交州从赢陵县把州治迁移到这里。
English: Mr. Wang's "Jiaoguang Spring and Autumn" said: Yuanfeng five years ago, Jiaozhou moved the state government from Yingling County to here.

古文：建安十六年，吴遣临淮步骘为交州刺史，将武吏四百人之交州，道路不通。
现代文：建安十六年，吴派遣临淮步鹭去当交州刺史，他率领武官四百人到交州，可是道路不通。
English: In the 16th year of Jianan, Wu sent Lin Huaibu to be the governor of Jiaozhou. He led 400 military attachés to Jiaozhou, but the road was impassable.

古文：苍梧太守长沙吴巨拥众五千，骘有疑于巨，先使渝巨，巨迎之于零陵，遂得进州。
现代文：苍梧太守吴巨，长沙人，拥有一支五千人的部队，步鹭疑忌吴巨，先派人去通知吴巨，吴巨在零陵迎接步鹭，于是才得以进州。
English: Emperor Cangwu, the ruler of Wu Jiu, a native of Changsha, had an army of five thousand men. However, Bu Xun was suspicious of Wu Jiu. He first sent someone to inform Wu Jiu. Wu Jiu met Bu Xun at Jiling, and only then was he able to enter the state.

古文：巨既纳骘，而后有悔，骘以兵少，恐不存立。
现代文：吴巨接纳了步鹭后，又有点后悔，步鹭因为兵少，只怕自己不能立足。
English: After Wu Jiu accepted the Foot Guards, he regretted a little. Because the Foot Guards had fewer soldiers, he was afraid that he would not be able to stand on his own feet.

古文：巨有都督区景，勇略与巨同，士为用。
现代文：吴巨有个叫区景的都督，也和吴巨一样勇武而富有谋略，士人都能为他效劳，因而受到步鹭的嫉忌。
English: Wu Jiu had a governor named Guo Jing, who was just as brave and resourceful as Wu Jiu. All the nobles were able to work for him, so he was envied by Bu Yao.

古文：骘恶之，阴使人请巨，巨往告景，勿诣骘。
现代文：他暗里差人去邀请吴巨，吴巨去警告区景，叫他不要去见步鹭，但步鹭三番五次地邀请他，区景也去了。
English: He secretly sent someone to invite Wu Jiu, and Wu Jiu went to warn Guo Jing, telling him not to go to see Bu Qian, but Bu Qian repeatedly invited him, and Guo Jing also went.

古文：骘请不已，景又往，乃于厅事前中庭俱斩，以首徇众，即此也。郁水又径高要县。
现代文：于是在大堂前的中庭里都被杀头示众，事情就发生在这里。郁水又流经高要县。
English: As a result, they were all beheaded in the atrium in front of the main hall, where the incident took place.

古文：《晋书。地理志》曰：县东去郡五百里，刺史夏避毒，徙县水居也。
现代文：《晋书•地理志》说：县城在郡城以东五百里，夏天刺史避毒，就迁到县城居住在水边。
English: "Jinshu•Geography" said: the county seat is five hundred miles east of the county seat. In the summer, to avoid poisoning, they moved to the county seat to live by the water.

古文：县有鹄奔亭，广信苏施妻始珠，鬼讼于交州刺史何敞处，事与斄亭女鬼同。
现代文：县里有鹊奔亭，广信县苏施的妻子始珠，冤魂向交州刺史何敞告状，事迹与篇亭女鬼相同。
English: In the county, there is Zou Ben Ting, the wife of Guangxin County's Susi, Zhu Ruo, the soul of injustice to the Jiaozhou stabbing history, the deed is the same as the ghost of Zhen Ting.

古文：王氏《交广春秋》曰：步骘杀吴巨、区景，使严舟船，合兵二万，下取南海。
现代文：王氏《交广春秋》说：步鹭杀吴巨、区景，命令严格管束船只，结集了两万兵力，去进攻南海。
English: Mr. Wang's "Crossing the Guangxi Spring and Autumn" said: step by step, kill Wu Jiu and Gu Jie, order strict control of ships, and gather 20,000 troops to attack the South China Sea.

古文：苍梧人衡毅、钱博，宿巨部伍，兴军逆骘于苍梧高要峡口，两军相逢于是，遂交战，毅与众投水死者，千有余人。
现代文：苍梧衡毅、钱博，都是吴巨的旧部属，他们起兵在苍梧高要峡口迎击步鹭，两军在这里相遇交战，衡毅与兵士一千余人投水而死。
English: Cangwu Hengyi and Qianbo were both former subordinates of Wu Jiu. They raised an army at the mouth of the Cangwu Gaobao Gorge to fight against the Shufu, where the two armies met and fought. Hengyi and more than a thousand soldiers were drowned and died.

古文：又东至南海番禺县西，分为二：其一，南入于海。
现代文：又往东流，到了南海郡番禺县西边，分为两条：一条往南流入大海。
English: It also flows eastward, to the west of Panyu County, Nanhai County, and is divided into two: one flows southward into the sea.

古文：郁水分泿南注。
现代文：郁水从泿水分支，往南流注。
English: Iku-sui branches from Surabaya-sui and flows south.

古文：其一，又东过县东，南入于海。
现代文：另一条又往东流过县东南，流入海。
English: The other stream flows eastward through the southeast of the county and flows into the sea.

古文：泿水东别径番禺，《山海经》谓之贲禺者也。
现代文：泿水的东支，流过番禺，就是《山海经》里所说的责禺。
English: The eastern branch of Surabaya, which flows through Panyu, is what is referred to in the "Song of Mountains and Seas."

古文：交州治中合浦姚文式问云：何以名为番禺？
现代文：交州治中合浦姚文式问道：为什么名叫番禺呢？
English: Gaozhou Zhizhong Hepu Yao Wenshih asked: Why is it called Panyu?

古文：答曰：南海郡昔治在今州城中，与番禺县连接，今入城东南偏，有水坑陵，城倚其上，闻此县人名之为番山。县名番禹，傥谓番山之禹也。
现代文：答道：南海郡从前的治所在现在的州城中，与番禺县治邻接。现在进城东南有水坑陵，城在陵上，听说县里人把山叫番山，县名番禺，也许就是番山之隅的意思。
English: Answer: The former seat of Nanhai County is in the current state capital, adjacent to Panyu County. Now there is a sinkhole mausoleum southeast of the city, and the city is on the mausoleum. I heard that people in the county call the mountain Panshan. The name of the county, Panshan, may mean the corner of Panshan.

古文：《汉书》所谓浮牂柯，下离津，同会番禺，盖乘斯水而入越也。
现代文：《汉书》所谓航行于拜柯，顺流直下离津，一同会合于番禺。这是沿此水入越的路线。
English: The so-called voyage in the "Hanshu" is to sail to Baike, go straight down the river and leave Tsu, and meet together in Panyu. This is the route along which the water enters Yue.

古文：秦并天下，略定扬越，置东南一尉，西北一候，开南海以谪徙民。
现代文：秦统一天下，平定扬州和越州，在东南设了一个都尉，在西北设了一个关侯，开发南海，把罪人迁徙到那边去。
English: Qin unified the country in one day, pacified Yangzhou and Yuezhou, set up a captain in the southeast, set up a checkpoint in the northwest, developed the South China Sea, and migrated the sinners to that side.

古文：至二世时，南海尉任嚣召龙川令赵佗曰：闻陈胜作乱，豪桀叛秦，吾欲起兵，阻绝新道，番禺负险，可以为国。
现代文：到二世时，南海尉任嚣把龙川令赵佗叫来，对他说：听说陈胜作乱，豪杰都起来反秦了，我也想起兵把新开的道路切断。番禺有险可恃，可以立国。
English: When he was in the second year of his reign, the captain of the South China Sea ordered Longchuan to summon Zhao Yao, and said to him: "I heard that Chen Sheng made a disturbance, and the heroes all rose up against Qin. I also remember the soldiers cutting off the newly opened road. Panyu is dangerous, and it is possible to establish a country.

古文：会病绵笃，无人与言，故召公来，告以大谋。
现代文：我不幸病重，无人可以商量，所以请你来把这件大事告知你。
English: Unfortunately, I am seriously ill and have no one to talk to, so I'm asking you to come and tell you about this big thing.

古文：嚣卒，佗行南海尉事，则拒关门设守，以法诛秦所置吏，以其党为守，自立为王。
现代文：任嚣死后，赵佗执掌南海尉的职权。就紧闭关口设防坚守，用计谋杀掉秦所设的官吏，派亲信守关，自立为王。
English: After the death of Ren Ren, Zhao Jun took over the authority of the South Sea lieutenant. He closed the gate, set up defenses, murdered the officials set up by Qin, sent his relatives to guard the gate, and became king.

古文：高帝定天下，使陆贾就立佗为南越王，剖符通使。
现代文：高帝平定天下，派遣陆贾去立赵佗为南越王，持有符信互通使节。
English: Emperor Gao pacified the world, sent Lu Jia to establish Zhao Wei as the king of South Vietnam, and sent envoys to exchange letters.

古文：至武帝元鼎五年，遣伏波将军路博德等攻南越王，五世九十二岁而亡。以其地为南海、苍梧、郁林、合浦、交趾、九真、日南也。
现代文：到武帝元鼎五年前，派遣伏波将军路博德去攻打南越，南越王传了五代，共九十二年亡国，于是就在那个地区设南海、苍梧、郁林、合浦、交趾、九真、日南等郡。
English: Five years before the reign of Emperor Wu, General Lu Bode of Fubo was sent to attack South Vietnam. Five generations of South Vietnamese kings passed away, a total of ninety-two years of national ruin. Therefore, Nanhai, Cangwu, Yulin, Hapu, Jiaozi, Jiuzhen, Nichinan and other counties were set up in that area.

古文：建安中，吴遣步骘为交州，骘到南海见土地形势，观尉佗旧治处，负山带海，博敞渺目，高则桑土，下则沃衍，林麓鸟兽，于何不有？海怪鱼鳖，鼋鼍鲜鳄，珍怪异物，千种万类，不可胜记。
现代文：建安年间，孙吴派遣步鹭去当交州刺史。步鹭到了南海，纵览那个地区的形势，观看尉佗时的治所。那地方依山面海，平旷开阔，一望无际；高处是桑园，下面是沃野；林莽山麓间，鸟兽应有尽有，还有海怪鱼鳖、尾矍、鳄鱼，珍宝异物，千奇百怪，种类万千，不胜枚举。
English: During the Jian'an era, Sun Wu sent Gao Gao to study the history of Jiaozhou. Gao Gao went to the South China Sea to survey the situation of the region and observe the government of the time of Emperor Wu. The place is by the sea on the mountain, flat and open, with an endless view; the high place is the mulberry garden, and the fertile field below; between the forest and the foot of the mountain, there should be all kinds of birds and beasts, as well as sea monsters, fish hooks, tail hooks, crocodiles, precious foreign objects, thousands of strange things, thousands of species, and countless numbers.

古文：佗因冈作台，北面朝汉，圆基千步，直峭百丈，顶上三亩，复道回环，逶迤曲折，朔望升拜，名曰朝台。
现代文：尉佗凭倚山冈修建高台，高台向北，朝着汉朝一方，圆形的台基方圆千步，台壁陡峭，高达百丈，顶上面积约三亩，在四周建了回旋曲折的复道，每逢初一、十五，就登台遥拜，名为朝台。
English: He built a high platform by leaning on the mountains and hills. The high platform faces north, towards the Han Dynasty side. The round base is a thousand paces square, the platform wall is steep, up to a hundred meters high, and the top has an area of about three mu. A complex circuit with twists and turns was built around it. Every first day and fifteenth day, he climbed the platform to worship, called the morning platform.

古文：前后刺史、郡守，迁除新至，未尝不乘车升履，于焉逍遥。
现代文：前后各任刺史、郡守，新来上任时，无不乘车而来，登台畅游。
English: All the past and present shishi and county governors, when they were newly appointed, all came by car and enjoyed the stage.

古文：骘登高远望，睹巨海之浩茫，观原薮之殷阜，乃曰：斯诚海岛膏腴之地，宜为都邑。
现代文：步鹭登高望远，看到大海一片茫茫，俯视原野湖泽，殷富丰盛，于是说道：这里真是海岛上的肥沃之地，适宜于建都。
English: He walked up to the top of the cliff, saw the vast expanse of the sea, looked down on the fields and lakes, rich and bountiful, and said: This is really a fertile place on the island, suitable for building a capital.

古文：建安二十二年，迁州番禺，筑立城郭，绥和百越，遂用宁集。
现代文：建安二十二年，把州城迁到番禺，修筑城墙，安抚百越，因而地方也平安无事。
English: In the 22nd year of Jianan, he moved the provincial capital to Panyu, built the city wall, and pacified the hundred Yue, so the place was safe.

古文：交州治中姚文式《问答》云：朝台在州城东北三十里。
现代文：交州治中姚文式《问答》说：朝台在州城东北三十里。
English: Yao Wen-style "Q&A" said: the morning station is 30 miles northeast of the state capital.

古文：裴渊《广州记》曰：城北有尉伦墓，墓后有大冈，谓之马鞍冈。
现代文：裴渊《广州记》说：城北有尉佗墓，墓后有大山冈，叫马鞍冈。
English: Pei Yuan's "Guangzhou Chronicle" said: There is a tomb of a lieutenant in the north of the city, and behind the tomb there is a large hill, called Ma's Hill.

古文：秦时占气者言，南方有天子气。
现代文：秦时望气者说：南方有天子气。
English: When the Qin Dynasty was in power, people said that the South had the spirit of the Son of Heaven.

古文：始皇发民凿破此冈，地中出血，今凿处犹存。
现代文：秦始皇调派民佚把山冈掘破，地里竟流出血来。
English: The First Emperor of Qin dispatched the people's army to excavate the mountain, and blood flowed from the ground.

古文：以状取目，故冈受厥称焉。
现代文：现在掘过的地方还在，按形状取名，所以把山冈叫马鞍冈。
English: The place that has been excavated now is still there, named according to its shape, so the mountain is called Ma On Shan.

古文：王氏《交广春秋》曰：越王赵佗，生有奉制称藩之节，死有秘奥神密之墓。
现代文：王氏《交广春秋》说：越王赵佗生时克尽臣节，尊奉王命，自称藩属；死后坟墓修筑得十分严密，隐秘深藏，无人知晓。
English: Wang's "Jiaoguang Spring and Autumn" said: When King Zhao Xinsheng passed away, he celebrated the Subordinate Day, honored and obeyed the king's order, and claimed to be a member of the clan; after his death, the tomb was built very strictly, hidden deep, and no one knew.

古文：佗之葬也，因山为坟，其垅茔可谓奢大，葬积珍玩。
现代文：尉佗安葬时，以山为坟，墓地可说奢华宏大了，随葬的珍宝古玩堆积如山。
English: When he was buried, he took the mountain as his grave. The cemetery can be said to be luxurious and magnificent. The buried treasures and antiques are piled up like mountains.

古文：吴时，遣使发掘其墓，求索棺柩，凿山破石，费日损力，卒无所获。
现代文：吴时派使者去发掘他的坟墓，寻觅他的棺枢，掘山劈石，耗费了大量时间和人力，结果却一无所获。
English: Wu Shi sent an emissary to excavate his grave, search for his coffin, dig mountains and split stones, and spent a lot of time and manpower, but the result was nothing.

古文：佗虽奢潜，慎终其身，乃今后人不知其处，有似松、乔迁景，牧竖固无所残矣。
现代文：尉佗虽然奢侈潜越，但能慎重行事得以善终，致使后人不知他所葬之处，这有点像赤松子，王子乔的迁化升仙而去一样，牧人竖子之流也不能破坏了。
English: Although he lived extravagantly, he was able to act prudently and end his life well, so that posterity does not know where he was buried. This is a bit like the red pine tree, Prince Joe's migration and ascension to immortality, and the stream of shepherds can not be destroyed.

古文：邓德明《南康记》曰：昔有卢耽，仕州为治中，少栖仙术，善解云飞。每夕，辄凌虚归家，晓则还州。
现代文：邓德明《南康记》说：从前有个卢耽，在州里当治中的官职，年少时学过仙术，善于腾云驾雾，每晚就凌空腾飞回家，天明又回到州署。
English: Deng Deming's "Nankang Ji" said: Once upon a time, there was a Lu Tan, who was a mid-level official in the state, who had studied magic when he was young, and was good at flying through clouds and driving fog. He would fly home every night, and Tianming would return to the state office.

古文：尝于元会至朝，不及朝列，化为白鹄，至阙前，回翔欲下，威仪以石掷之，得一只履，耽惊还就列，内外左右，莫不骇异。
现代文：一次元旦朝会时，他上朝来不及就位，就化为白鹊来到宫门前。当他盘旋飞翔着想下来时，仪仗队用石头去打，结果掉下的是一只鞋子。卢耽受惊就位，在场的人没有不感到骇异的。
English: On the first day of the imperial court meeting, he was too late to take his seat, so he turned into an egret and came to the front of the palace gate. When he hovered and wanted to come down, the honor guard hit him with a stone, and as a result, a shoe fell down. Lu was too scared to take his seat, and the people present were shocked.

古文：时步骘为广州，意甚恶之，便以状列闻，遂至诛灭。
现代文：当时步鹭任广州刺史，心里十分憎恶他，就呈递了一份状纸揭发他，于是被杀。
English: At that time, Bu Xuan was in charge of the history of Guangzhou, and he hated him very much in his heart. He submitted a petition to expose him, and was killed.

古文：《广州记》称吴平，晋滕修为刺史，修乡人语修，虾须长一赤，修责以为虚。
现代文：《广州记》说吴被平定后，晋滕情当刺史，他的乡人告诉他说：有的虾须长达一尺，滕情批评他瞎吹。
English: "Guangzhou Chronicle" said that after Wu was subdued, Jin Tengli was a bitter history. His countrymen told him: Some shrimps are a foot long. Tengli criticized him for blowing.

古文：其人乃至东海，取虾须，长四赤，速送示修，修始服谢，厚为遣。
现代文：于是那人去东海，带了长四尺的虾须，赶忙送给他看，滕惰这才相信了，向他道歉，并厚礼送他回去。
English: So the man went to the East China Sea, brought a four-foot-long shrimp whisker, and hurriedly showed it to him. It was only then that Teng Nian believed him, apologized to him, and sent him back with a gift.

古文：其一水南入者，郁川分派，径四会入海也。
现代文：有一条南流的水，是郁水的分支，经四会入海。
English: There is a south-flowing stream of water, which is a branch of the Yudu River, and it flows into the sea through four channels.

古文：其一即川东别径番禺城下，《汉书》所谓浮牂柯、下离津，同会番禺，盖乘斯水而入于越也。
现代文：另一条会合郁水向东分流，经番禺城下，就是《汉书》所说的：航行于群柯，顺流直下离津，一同会合于番禺。这是沿此水入越的路线。
English: Another meeting point is the eastward diversion of stagnant water, passing under the city of Panyu, which is what the "Chinese Book" says: sailing in Qun Ke, going downstream from Tsu, and meeting together in Panyu. This is the route along which the water enters Yue.

古文：泿水又东径怀化县，入于海。
现代文：泿水又往东流经怀化县入海。
English: Surabaya's waters flowed eastward through Huaihua County and into the sea.

古文：水有鱼。裴渊《广州记》曰：鱼长二丈，大数围，皮皆鑢物。生子，子小随母食，惊则还入母腹。
现代文：水中有鳍鱼，裴渊《广州记》说：鳍鱼长二丈，大数围，皮上遍布锉一样的东西，生出小鱼后，就随母鱼觅食，受惊时又钻进母鱼腹内。
English: There are eels in the water. Pei Yuan of "Guangzhou Chronicle" said: "The eels are about two meters long, with a large circumference, and the skin is covered with something like gills. After giving birth to small fish, they follow the mother fish to forage for food. When they are frightened, they burrow into the belly of the mother fish.

古文：《吴录。地理志》曰：鱼子朝索食，暮入母腹。
现代文：《吴录•地理志》说：蜡鱼的幼鱼白天觅食，晚间又钻进母鱼腹内。
English: "Wu Lu•Geography" said: the young fish of the wax fish forage during the day, and at night they burrow into the belly of the mother fish.

古文：《南越志》曰：暮从脐入，旦从口出。腹里两洞，肠贮水以养子。肠容二子，两则四焉。
现代文：《南越志》说：晚间从脐孔进去，早晨从口中出来，肚里有两孔，肠中贮水来养小鱼，一条肠可容两条小鱼，两条肠就容四条小鱼了。
English: "Nan Yue Zhi" said: "In the evening, it enters through the gill opening, and in the morning it comes out of the mouth. There are two holes in the stomach, and water is stored in the intestine to raise small fish. One intestine can hold two small fish, and two intestines can hold four small fish.

古文：其余水又东至龙川为涅水，屈北入员水。
现代文：余下的水又往东流到龙川，称为涅水，向北转弯注入员水。
English: The remaining water flows eastward to the Longchuan River, known as the Nirvana River, and turns north to inject fresh water.

古文：泿水枝津衍注，自番禺东历增城县。
现代文：泿水支流滚滚向前奔流，一条从番禺东经增城县。
English: Surabaya's tributary, the Surabaya River, rushes forward, flowing eastward from Panyu through Zengcheng County.

古文：《南越志》曰：县多，山鸡也。
现代文：《南越志》说：增城县多鸽鸵。
English: "Nan Yue Zhi" said: There are many pigeons in Zengcheng County.

古文：光采鲜明，五色炫耀，利距善斗，世以家鸡斗之，则可擒也。
现代文：鹤级是山鸡，它的羽毛光彩鲜艳，色泽耀眼；爪子锋利，善于相斗。人们用家鸡和它对斗，就可以捕获。
English: Crane is a mountain chicken, its feathers are bright and shiny, its color is dazzling; its claws are sharp and it is good at fighting. People can catch it by fighting it with a chicken.

古文：又径博罗县西界龙川，左思所谓目龙川而带坰者也。
现代文：这条支流又流经博罗县，西边与龙川接界。这就是左思所说的：望着龙川绕过遥远的野外。
English: This tributary also flows through Borough County, bordering the Longchuan River on the west side. This is what Zuo Si said: looking at the Longchuan River, it bypasses the distant field.

古文：赵佗乘此县而跨据南越矣。
现代文：赵佗就是利用该县为基地，扩张领土，直至占有整个南越的。
English: Zhao Jun used the county as a base to expand his territory until he occupied the whole of South Vietnam.

古文：员水又东南一千五百里，入南海。
现代文：员水又往东南流了一千五百里，注入南海。
English: The water flowed southeast for another 1,500 miles and entered the South China Sea.

古文：东历揭阳县，王莽之南海亭，而注于海也。
现代文：员水往东流经揭阳县―王莽叫南海亭一一注入大海。
English: The water flowed eastward through Jieyang County - Wang Mang called Nanhaitei to inject one by one into the sea.

