古文：圣人之治民，度于本，不从其欲，期于利民而已。
现代文：圣人治理民众，是从根本上考虑问题的，并不以满足民众欲望为转移，他只希望给民众带来实际利益罢了。
English: When a sage governs the people, he considers the problem from the bottom up, and does not satisfy the people's desires as a diversion. He only hopes to bring practical benefits to the people.

古文：故其与之刑，非所以恶民，爱之本也。
现代文：所以当君主对民众施用刑罚的时候，并不是憎恨民众，而是从爱护他们的根本利益出发的。
English: Therefore, when the monarch imposes punishment on the people, it is not out of hatred for the people, but out of love for their fundamental interests.

古文：刑胜而民静，赏繁而奸生。
现代文：刑罚严峻，民众就安宁；赏赐太滥，奸邪就滋生。
English: Severe chastisement brings tranquility to the people; lavish rewards breed corruption.

古文：故治民者，刑胜，治之首也；赏繁，乱之本也。
现代文：所以治理起民众来。刑罚严峻是国家太平的首务，赏赐太滥是国家混乱的根源。
English: Therefore, it is necessary to govern the people. Severe punishment is the top priority for the country's peace, and excessive reward is the root cause of the country's chaos.

古文：夫民之性，喜其乱而不亲其法。
现代文：民众的本性是喜欢赏赐而不喜欢刑罚。
English: It is the nature of the people to prefer rewards to punishments.

古文：故明主之治国也，明赏，则民劝功；严刑，则民亲法。
现代文：所以明君治理国家时，明定奖赏、民众就努力立功；刑罚严厉，民众就服从法令。
English: Therefore, when Ming Jun governed the country, the rewards were clearly defined, and the people worked hard to make merit; the punishments were severe, and the people obeyed the laws.

古文：劝功，则公事不犯；亲法，则奸无所萌。
现代文：民众努力立功，政府的事务就不受侵扰；民众服从令，奸邪就无从产生。
English: If the people make great efforts, the affairs of the government will not be interfered with; if the people obey orders, there will be no evil.

古文：故治民者，禁奸于未萌；而用兵者，服战于民心。
现代文：所以治理民众，要把奸邪禁止在尚未发生之时；用兵作战要使一切服从打仗的要求深入民心。
English: Therefore, to govern the people, it is necessary to prohibit treason when it has not yet occurred; to fight with soldiers, it is necessary to make all the demands of obeying the war go deep into the hearts of the people.

古文：禁先其本者治，兵战其心者胜。圣人之治民也，先治者强，先战者胜。
现代文：禁令能先治本的才有效，用兵能服民心的才能服，圣人治理民众，因为先治本，所以能强大；因为先服心，所以能取胜。
English: Prohibition can only be effective if it can first cure the root cause. Soldiers can only be used if they can satisfy the people's hearts. Saints can govern the people. Because they can first cure the root cause, they can be strong; because they can first satisfy the people's hearts, they can win.

古文：夫国事务先而一民心，专举公而私不从，赏告而奸不生，明法而治不烦。
现代文：国家大事要争先恐后而统一民心，专行公务来杜绝私欲，奖赏告奸、奸邪就不会产生，明定法度、政务就不会烦乱。
English: National events should strive to unify the people's hearts, and the performance of official duties should be carried out to eliminate selfish desires. There will be no reward for slandering and evil-doing, and there will be no disturbance of laws and government affairs.

古文：能用四者强，不能用四者弱。
现代文：能做到这四点的。国家就强盛；不能做到这四点的，国家就衰弱。
English: If you can do these four things, your country will be strong; if you can't do these four things, your country will be weak.

古文：夫国之所以强者，政也；主之所以尊者，权也。
现代文：国家之所以强大，靠的是政治措施；君主之所以尊贵。靠的是权力。
English: The strength of the state depends on political measures; the dignity of the monarch depends on power.

古文：故明君有权有政，乱君亦有权有政，积而不同，其所以立异也。
现代文：所以，明君有权力和政治措施。昏君也有权力和政治措施，结果渐显不同，是因为各自确立的原则有别。
English: Therefore, the Ming Emperor has power and political measures, and the Western Emperor has power and political measures, but the results are gradually different, because the principles established by each are different.

古文：故明君操权而上重，一政而国治。
现代文：所以明君掌握权势而地位尊贵，统一政纲而国家太平。
English: As a result, Emperor Ming held the power and the position was noble, the political program was unified, and the country was peaceful.

古文：故法者，王之本也；刑者，爱之自也。
现代文：所以，法令是称五天下的根本，刑罚是爱护民众的根本。
English: Therefore, the decree is said to be the foundation of the five days, and the punishment is the foundation of the protection of the people.

古文：夫民之性，恶劳而乐佚。
现代文：民众的本性是好逸恶劳。安逸，事业就会荒废。
English: It is the nature of the people to like ease and dislike toil. If they are at ease, their undertakings will be in vain.

古文：佚则荒，荒则不治，不治则乱，而赏刑不行于天下者必塞。
现代文：荒废了，政事就无法治理好。治理不好就要混乱；如果赏罚无法在全国实行，国家事业就必定得不到发展。
English: If it is neglected, political affairs cannot be governed well. If it is not governed well, there will be chaos. If rewards and punishments cannot be implemented throughout the country, the national cause will certainly not be developed.

古文：故欲举大功而难致而力者，大功不可几而举也；欲治其法而难变其故者，民乱不可几而治也。
现代文：所以想要建立大功而难于吸引民众力量，大功是不可能期望成就的；想要搞好法治却难于改变旧俗，民众必然混乱而不期望把国家治理好。
English: Therefore, if you want to build a great achievement, it is difficult to attract the power of the people, and it is impossible to expect great achievements; if you want to do a good job of the rule of law, it is difficult to change the old customs, and the people are inevitably confused and do not expect to govern the country well.

古文：故治民无常，唯治为法。
现代文：所以治理民众没有一成不变的常规，只有法度才是治世的法宝。
English: Therefore, there is no immutable rule for governing the people. Only the rule of law is the magic weapon for ruling the world.

古文：法与时转则治，法与世宜则有功。
现代文：法度顺应时代变化就能治理国家，统治方式适合社会情况就能收到成效。所以，民众质朴的话。
English: Laws can govern the country by adapting to the changes of the times, and the way of governing can be effective by adapting to the social situation. Therefore, the people should be simple.

古文：故民朴而禁之以名则治，世知维之以刑则从。
现代文：只要用褒贬进行控制就可以治理好；社会开化的话，只有用刑罚加以束缚才能使人驯服。
English: As long as it is controlled by praise and blame, it can be governed well; if society is civilized, it can only be tamed by punishment.

古文：时移而治不易者乱，能治众而禁不变者削。
现代文：时代有了发展而统治方式一成不变的，社会必然危乱；智能普遍提高而禁令规定一成不变的。国家必被削弱。
English: If the era develops but the mode of governance remains unchanged, the society will inevitably be in crisis; if the intelligence is generally improved but the prohibition is unchanged, the country will be weakened.

古文：故圣人之治民也，法与时移而禁与能变。
现代文：所以圣人治理民众，法制和历史时期同步发展，禁令和智能水平同步变更。
English: Therefore, sages govern the people, the legal system and the historical period develop simultaneously, and the ban and the level of intelligence change simultaneously.

古文：能越力于地者富，能起力于敌者强，强不塞者王。
现代文：能在农耕方面充分发挥力量的社会就富裕，能在战争领域充分调动力量的国家就强盛，而富强得以持续发展的，就可以称王天下。
English: A society that can give full play to its strength in agriculture is rich, a country that can fully mobilize its power in the field of war is strong, and if the rich and strong can continue to develop, it can be called the king of the world.

古文：故王道在所开，在所塞，塞其奸者必王。
现代文：所以称王天下的途在于开创什么，阻止什么；能够阻止奸邪行为的，必能称王天下。
English: Therefore, the way to be called the king of the world is to create something and stop something; if you can stop treason, you will be able to be called the king of the world.

古文：故王术不恃外之不乱也，恃其不可乱也。
现代文：所以称王天下的方略不是依靠外部不乱。而是依靠自身的不可扰乱。
English: Therefore, the strategy of calling the king under heaven is not to rely on external non-disturbance, but to rely on its own non-disturbance.

古文：恃外不乱而治立者削，恃其不可乱而行法者兴。
现代文：指望外部不乱而立国治民，国家就会削弱；指望自身的不可扰乱而推行法治，国家才能兴盛。
English: If a country relies on the outside world to keep order and govern the people, the country will weaken; if it relies on its own indestructibility to enforce the rule of law, the country will prosper.

古文：故贤君之治国也，适于不乱之术。
现代文：所以贤明君主治理国家时，立足干不可扰乱的方略。
English: Therefore, when a wise monarch governs the country, he or she should stick to a strategy that cannot be disturbed.

古文：贵爵，则上重，故赏功爵任而邪无所关。
现代文：民众以爵位为尊贵，君主权势就重。所以赏赐有功的人，把爵位赐给胜任的人。坏人就无可乘之机。
English: The people regard the title of nobility as honorable, and the power of the monarch as important. Therefore, reward those who have meritorious deeds, and give the title of nobility to those who are competent. There is no opportunity for bad people.

古文：好力者其爵贵；爵贵，则上尊；上尊，则必王。
现代文：专心发展实力的国家，爵位就会贵重起来；爵位贵重起来，君主就会受到尊敬；君主受到尊敬，就一定能称王天下。
English: If a country concentrates on developing its strength, the title of nobility will become more valuable; if the title of nobility becomes more valuable, the monarch will be respected; if the monarch is respected, he will certainly be able to be called the king of the world.

古文：国不事力而恃私学者其爵贱，爵贱，则上卑；上卑者必削。
现代文：不事耕战而依赖私学的国家，爵位就要被人看得轻贱；爵位被人看得轻贱，君主的威望就要降低；君主威望降低的话，国家必致削弱。
English: In a country that does not engage in war but relies on private education, the title of nobility will be looked down upon; if the title of nobility is looked down upon, the prestige of the monarch will be reduced; if the prestige of the monarch is reduced, the country will be weakened.

古文：故立国用民之道也，能闭外塞私而上自恃者，王可致也。
现代文：所以立国用民的一般法则在于：能够禁闭外势、阻塞私行而着眼于自强自力，就可以达到称王天下的目的。
English: Therefore, the general rule for the founding of a country and the use of the people is: if you can shut out the outside world, block the private life and focus on self-improvement, you can achieve the goal of praising the king.

