古文：算术求积尺之法，如刍萌、刍童、方池、冥谷、堑堵、鳖臑、圆锥、阳马之类，物形备矣，独未有隙积一术，古法：凡算方积之物，有立方，谓六幂皆方者。其法再自乘则得之。
现代文：算术中求物体体积的方法，如刍萌、刍童、方池、冥谷、堑堵、鳖臑、圆锥、阳马等，各种形状的物体都具备了，只是没有隙积术。古代的算法：凡计算物体的体积，有立方体，是指六个面都是正方形的物体，其计算方法是把一条边自乘两次就可以求得了。
English: The methods of calculating the volume of an object in arithmetic, such as cormorant, child, square pond, nether valley, plug, cormorant, cone, horse, etc., are all available for objects of various shapes, but there is no interpolation. Ancient algorithm: When calculating the volume of an object, there is a cube, which refers to an object with six square faces. The calculation method is to multiply one edge by itself twice to obtain it.

古文：有堑堵，谓如土墙者，两边杀，两头齐。
现代文：有堑堵，是指有点像土墙形状的物体，两边是斜的，两头的面是垂直的。
English: A blockage refers to an object shaped somewhat like an earthen wall, with sloping sides and a vertical face at both ends.

古文：其法并上下广，折半以为之广以直高乘之，以直高以股，以上广减下广，余者半之为勾。勾股求弦，以为斜高。
现代文：它的截面面积的算法是：先把上、下底的宽相加，除以二，作为截面的宽，用直高与它相乘就求得了一个值；再将直高作为股，用上底面的宽减去下底面的宽，所得之差除以二作为勾，用勾股定理算出弦，就是它的斜边长。
English: The algorithm for its cross-sectional area is: first, add the width of the upper and lower bottom, divide by two, as the width of the cross-section, and multiply it by the vertical height to obtain a value; then use the vertical height as the stock, use the width of the upper bottom to subtract the width of the lower bottom, and divide the difference by two as the hook, use the hook theorem to calculate the chord, which is the length of its hypotenuse.

古文：有刍童，谓如覆斗者，四面皆杀。
现代文：有刍童，是指有点像翻过来的方斗形状，四侧都是斜面。
English: If there is a gong dong, it means that it is a bit like an inverted square shape, with slopes on all four sides.

古文：其法倍上长加入下长，以上广乘之；倍下长加入上长，以下广乘之；并二位，以高乘之，六而一。
现代文：它的计算方法是：将上底面的长乘二，与下底面的长相加，再与上底面的宽相乘；将下底面的长乘二，与上底面的长相加，再与下底面的宽相乘；把这两个数值相加，与高相乘，再取其六分之一。
English: It is calculated as follows: multiply the length of the upper base by two, add it to the length of the lower base, and then multiply it by the width of the upper base; multiply the length of the lower base by two, add it to the length of the upper base, and then multiply it by the width of the lower base; add these two values, multiply it by the height, and then take one-sixth of it.

古文：隙积者，谓积之有隙者，如累棋、层坛及洒家积罂之类。
现代文：隙积，是指堆累起来而其中有空隙的物体，像堆叠起来的棋子、分层建造起来的土坛以及酒馆里堆累起来的酒坛子一类的物体。
English: "Gap accumulation" refers to objects that are piled up and have gaps in them, such as stacked chess pieces, earthenware pots built up in layers, and wine jars piled up in pubs.

古文：虽似覆斗，四面皆杀，缘有刻缺及虚隙之处，用刍童法求之，常失于数少。
现代文：它们虽像倒扣着的斗，四侧都是斜面，但是由于边缘存在着一定的残缺或空隙，如果用刍童法计算，所得数量往往比实际的要少。
English: Although they resemble upside-down buckets, with sloping sides on all four sides, due to certain imperfections or gaps on the edges, the number obtained is often less than the actual number if calculated using the child-raising method.

古文：余思而得之，用争童法为上位；下位别列：下广以上广减之，余者以高乘之，六而一，并入上位。
现代文：我想出了一种计算方法：用刍童法算出它的上位、下位数值，另外单独列出它的下底宽，减去上底宽，将所得之差乘高，取其六分之一，再并入前面的数目就可以了。
English: I came up with a method of calculation: use the child's method to calculate its upper and lower values, separately list its lower base width, subtract the upper base width, multiply the difference by the height, take one-sixth of it, and then add the previous number.

古文：假令积罂：最上行纵横各二罂，最下行各十二罂，行行相次。
现代文：假设有用酒坛子累成的堆垛，最上层的长、宽都是两只坛子，最下层的长、宽都是十二只坛子，一层层交错堆垛好。
English: Assuming a stack of useful wine jars, the top layer has a length and width of two jars, and the bottom layer has a length and width of twelve jars, and it is good to stack them in a staggered manner.

古文：先以上二行相次，率至十二，当十一行也。
现代文：先从最上层数起，数到有十二只坛子的地方，正好是十一层。
English: First, count from the top layer to the place where there are twelve jars, which is exactly the eleventh layer.

古文：以刍童法求之，倍上行长得四，并入下长得十六，以上广乘之，得之三十二；又倍下行长得二十四，并入上长，得二十六，以下广乘之，得三百一十二；并二位得三百四十四，以高乘之，得三千七百八十四。
现代文：用刍童法来计算，把上层的长乘二得四，与下层的长相加得十六，与上层的宽相乘，得三十二；再把下层的长乘二得二十四，与上层的长相加得二十六，与下层的宽相乘，得三百一十二；上、下两数相加，得三百四十四，乘高得三千七百八十四。
English: Using the child's method of calculation, multiply the length of the upper layer by two to get four, add the length of the lower layer to get sixteen, multiply the width of the upper layer to get thirty-two; then multiply the length of the lower layer by two to get twenty-four, add the length of the upper layer to get twenty-six, multiply the width of the lower layer to get three hundred and twelve; add the upper and lower numbers to get three hundred and forty-four, and multiply the height to get three thousand seven hundred and eighty-four.

古文：重列下广十二，以上广减之，余十，以高乘之，得一百一十，并入上位，得三千八百九十四；六而一，得六百四十九，此为罂数也。
现代文：另外将下层的宽十二减去上层的宽，得十，与高相乘，得一百一十，与前面的数字相加，得三千八百九十四；取它的六分之一，得六百四十九。这就是这堆酒坛的数量。
English: And take the breadth of the bottom, twelve; and the breadth of the top, ten; and the height, an hundred and ten; and the former number, three thousand eight hundred and ninety-four; and the sixth part of it, six hundred and forty-nine: this is the number of the wine press.

古文：刍童求见实方之积，隙积求见合角不尽，益出羡积也。
现代文：运用刍童法算出的是实方的体积，运用隙积法算出的是空缺部分拼合成的体积，也就可以算出多余的体积。
English: The volume of the solid square is calculated by the method of the child, the volume of the vacant part is calculated by the method of the gap, and the excess volume can also be calculated.

古文：履亩之法，方圆曲直尽矣，未有会圆之术。
现代文：丈量土地的方法，方、圆、曲、直的算法都有，不过没有会圆的算法。
English: There are square, round, curved and straight algorithms for measuring land, but there is no rounding algorithm.

古文：凡圆田，既能拆之，须使会之復圆。
现代文：凡是圆形的土地，既能够拆开来，也应该能让它拼合起来恢复圆形。
English: All land that is round can be taken apart, but it should also be possible to piece it back together to restore its round shape.

古文：古法惟以中破圆法拆之，其失有及三倍者。
现代文：古代的算法，只用中破圆法把圆形拆开来计算，它的误差有达三倍之多的。
English: The ancient algorithm only used the method of breaking the circle to calculate the circle, and its error was up to three times as much.

古文：余别为拆会之术，置圆田，径半之以为弦，又以半径减去所割数，余者为股；各自乘，以股除弦，余者开方除为勾，倍之为割田之直径。
现代文：我另外设计了一种拆开、会合的计算方法。假设有一块圆形的土地，用它的直径的一半作为弦，再以半径减去所割下的弧形的高，用它们的差作为股；弦、股各自平方，用弦的平方减去股的平方，将它们的差开平方后作为勾，再乘二，就是所割弧形田的弦长。
English: In addition, I designed a method of calculating the disassembly and reassembly. Suppose there is a round piece of land, use half of its diameter as a chord, then subtract the height of the cut arc from the radius, and use their difference as a string; the string and the strand are each squared, subtract the square of the strand from the square of the string, and then square their difference as a hook, and then multiply by two, which is the length of the string of the cut arc.

古文：以所割之数自乘倍之，又以圆径除所得，加入直径，为割田之弧。
现代文：把所割的弧形田的高平方，乘二，再除以圆的直径，所得的商加上弧形的弦长，便是所割弧形田的弧长。
English: Multiply the high square of the cut arc field by two, then divide by the diameter of the circle, and add the resulting quotient to the chord length of the arc, which is the arc length of the cut arc field.

古文：再割亦如之，减去已割之弧，则再割之弧也。
现代文：再割一块田也像这样计算，用总的弧长减去已割部分的弧长，就是再割之田的弧长了。
English: Re-cutting a field is also calculated like this, using the total arc length minus the arc length of the cut part, which is the arc length of the re-cut field.

古文：假令有圆田，径十步，欲割二步。以半径为弦，五步自乘得二十五；又以半径减去所割二步，余三步为股，自乘得九；用减弦外，有十六，开平方，除得四步为勾，倍之为所割直径。
现代文：假如有块圆形的土地，直径是十步，想使割出的圆弧高二步，就用圆半径五步作为弦，五步自乘得二十五；又用半径减去弧形的高二步，它们的差三步作为股，自乘得九；用它与弦二十五相减得十六，开平方得四，这就是勾，再乘二，就是弧的弦长。
English: If there is a circular piece of land with a diameter of ten paces, and you want to make the cut-out arc two paces higher, use the circle radius of five paces as a chord, five paces multiplied by itself to get twenty-five; use the radius to subtract the arc's height by two paces, and their difference by three paces as a unit, multiplied by itself to get nine; use it to subtract twenty-five from the chord to get sixteen, and open the square to get four, which is the hook, and then multiply by two, which is the chord length of the arc.

古文：以所割之数二步自乘为四，倍之得为八，退上一位为四尺，以圆径除。
现代文：把圆弧的高二步自乘，得四，再乘二得八，退上一位为四尺，用圆的直径相除。
English: Multiply the height of the arc by 2 to get 4, multiply by 2 to get 8, subtract by 1 to get 4 feet, and divide by the diameter of the circle.

古文：今圆径十，已足盈数，无可除。
现代文：现今圆的直径为十，已经满了整十数，不可除。
English: Now the diameter of the circle is ten, and it is full of tenths, so it cannot be divided.

古文：只用四尺加入直径，为所割之孤，凡得圆径八步四尺也。
现代文：只用四尺加下圆弧直径，就是所割圆的弧长，共得圆弧直径八步四尺。
English: Just add four feet to the diameter of the arc, which is the arc length of the cut circle, to get a total arc diameter of eight steps and four feet.

古文：再割亦依此法。
现代文：再割一块圆田，也依照这种方法。
English: Cut another circular field, also according to this method.

古文：如圆径二十步求弧数，则当折半，乃所谓以圆径除之也。
现代文：如果圆直径是二十步，要求弧长，就应当折半，也就是所说的要用圆弧的半径来除它。
English: If the diameter of the circle is twenty paces and the length of the arc is required, it should be halved, that is, the radius of the arc should be used to divide it.

古文：此二类皆造微之术，古书所不到者，漫志于此。
现代文：这两种方法都涉及精确的算法，是古书里没有说到的，随笔记录于此。
English: Both of these methods involve precise algorithms, which are not mentioned in the ancient book, but are recorded in this essay.

古文：造舍之法，谓之《木经》，或云喻皓所撰。
现代文：关于屋舍的营造技术，有一部专门讨论的书籍叫做《木经》，有的说是喻皓所撰。
English: Regarding the construction techniques of houses, there is a specially discussed book called "Mokyo," which is said to have been written by Yu Yu.

古文：凡屋有三分：去声。自梁以上为上分，地以上为中分，阶为下分。
现代文：此书将屋舍建筑概括为 三分 ：自梁以上为 上分 ，梁以下、地面以上为 中分 ，台阶为 下分 。
English: This book summarizes the building of the house as three points: from the beam above is the upper point, below the beam and above the ground is the middle point, and the steps are the lower point.

古文：凡梁长几何，则配极几何，以为榱等。
现代文：凡是梁长多少，则梁到屋顶的垂直高度就相应地配多少，以此定出比例。
English: Whatever the length of the beam, the vertical height of the beam to the roof will be matched accordingly, and the ratio will be determined.

古文：如梁长八尺，配极三尺五寸，则厅堂法也，此谓之上分。
现代文：如梁长八尺，梁到屋顶的高度就配三尺五寸，这是厅堂的规格。这叫做 上分 。
English: If the beam is eight feet long, the height of the beam to the roof is three feet and five inches, which is the specification of the hall.

古文：楹若干尺，则配堂基若干尺，以为榱等。
现代文：柱子高若干尺，则堂基就相应地配若干尺，也以此定出比例。
English: If the column is a few feet high, the base of the hall will be a few feet higher, and the proportions will be determined accordingly.

古文：若楹一丈一尺，则阶基四尺五寸之类。以至承拱榱桷，皆有定法，谓之中分。
现代文：如柱子高一丈一尺，则堂前大门台阶的宽度就配四尺五寸之类，以至于斗拱、椽子等都有固定的尺寸，这叫做 中分 。
English: If the pillar is one foot high, then the width of the steps in front of the hall will be four feet and five inches, so that the arch, the rafters, etc. have a fixed size, which is called the middle point.

古文：阶级有峻、平、慢三等，宫中则以御辇为法：凡自下而登，前竿垂尽臂，后竿展尽臂为峻道；荷辇十二人：前二人曰前竿，次二人曰前絛，又次曰前胁；后一人曰后胁，又后曰后絛，未后曰后竿。
现代文：台阶则有 峻 、 平 、 慢 三种；皇宫内是以御辇的出入为标准的：凡是抬御辇自下而上登台阶，前竿下垂尽手臂之长，后竿上举也尽手臂之长，这样才能保持平衡的台阶叫做 峻道 ；前竿与肘部相平，后竿与肩部相平，这样才能保持平衡的台阶叫做 慢道 ；前竿下垂尽手臂之长，后竿与肩部相平，这样就能保持平衡的台阶叫做 平道 。
English: There are three types of steps: steep, flat and slow. In the imperial palace, the entrance and exit of the imperial scepter is the standard: when the imperial scepter is raised from the bottom to the top of the steps, the front rod is lowered to the length of the arm, and the back rod is raised to the length of the arm, so that the balance can be maintained, the step is called the steep path; the front rod is level with the elbow, the back rod is level with the shoulder, so that the balance can be maintained, the step is called the slow path; the front rod is lowered to the length of the arm, the back rod is level with the shoulder

古文：辇前队长一人，曰传倡；后一人，曰报赛。前竿平肘，后竿平肩，为慢道；前竿垂手，后竿平肩，为平道；此之谓下分。
现代文：这些叫做 下分 。
English: These are called downshifts.

古文：其书三卷。
现代文：其书共有三卷。
English: His book consists of three volumes.

古文：近歳土木之工，益为严善，旧《木经》多不用，未有人重为之，亦良工之一业也。
现代文：近年土木建筑的技术更为严谨完善了，已多不用旧时的《木经》，然而还没有人重新编写一部这样的书，这也应该是优秀的木工信得留意的一项业内之事。
English: In recent years, civil engineering and construction techniques have become more rigorous and perfect, and the old "Wooden Scripture" is no longer used. However, no one has rewritten such a book, which should also be an industry thing that outstanding woodworkers should pay attention to.

古文：版印书籍，唐人尚未盛为之，自冯瀛王始印五经，已后典籍，皆为版本。
现代文：毕昇用雕版印刷书籍，唐朝人还没有大规模采用。至五代时的冯瀛王才开始用雕版印制五经，从那以后的各种典籍和图书都是雕版印刷本了。
English: Bi Sheng used engraved printing to print books, but the Tang Dynasty people had not yet adopted it on a large scale. It was not until the fifth generation of King Feng Xuan that he began to print the Five Classics with engraved plates. Since then, all kinds of classics and books have been engraved printed books.

古文：庆历中，有布衣毕昇，又为活版。
现代文：庆历年间，有位叫毕昇的平民又创造了活字印版。
English: During the celebration year, a commoner named Bi Sheng Rong also created a movable type printing plate.

古文：其法用胶泥刻字，薄如钱唇，每字为一印，火烧令坚。
现代文：他的方法是用胶泥刻字，字的厚薄像铜钱的边缘一般，每个字制成一个字模，用火烧烤使它变得坚硬。
English: His method is to engrave the characters with clay, the thickness of the characters is like the edge of a copper coin, each character is made into a type, and it is grilled with fire to make it hard.

古文：先设一铁版，其上以松脂腊和纸灰之类冒之。
现代文：先设置一块铁板，上面用松脂、蜡混合纸灰这一类东西覆盖住。
English: First, set up an iron plate and cover it with something like pine resin and wax mixed with paper ash.

古文：欲印则以一铁范置铁板上，乃密布字印。
现代文：想要印刷时，就拿一个铁框子放在铁板上，然后密密地排列好字模。
English: When you want to print, take an iron frame, put it on the iron plate, and then arrange the fonts closely.

古文：满铁范为一板，持就火炀之，药稍镕，则以一平板按其面，则字平如砥。
现代文：排满一铁框就作为一个印版，拿着它靠近火烘烤；等松脂等物开始熔化时，就拿一块平板按压它的表面，于是，排在板上的字模就平整得像磨刀石一样。
English: A full iron frame is used as a printing plate, hold it close to the fire and bake it; when the resin and the like begin to melt, take a flat plate and press its surface, so that the type on the board is flat like a grindstone.

古文：若止印三、二本，未为简易；若印数十百千本，则极为神速。
现代文：如果只印制三两本书，不能算很简便；如果印刷几十乃至成百上千本书，就显得特别快捷。
English: If you print only three or two books, it is not very simple; if you print dozens or even hundreds of books, it is particularly fast.

古文：常作二铁板，一板印刷，一板已自布字。此印者才毕，则第二板已具。
现代文：印刷时通常制作两块铁板，一块正在印刷，另一块已经另外排字模；这一块刚印完，另一块已经准备好了。
English: When printing, two plates are usually made, one is being printed, the other has been re-engraved; this one has just been printed, the other is ready.

古文：更互用之，瞬息可就。
现代文：两块交替使用，极短的时间就可以完成。
English: Two pieces can be used alternately, and the process can be completed in a very short time.

古文：每一字皆有数印，如之、也等字，每字有二十余印，以备一板内有重復者。
现代文：每一个字都有好多个字模，像 之 、 也 等字，每个字有二十多个字模，用来防备一块板里面有重复出现的字。
English: There are more than 20 word patterns for each word, such as "Chu," "Mei" and so on, which are used to prevent duplicate words from appearing on the board.

古文：不用则以纸贴之，每韵为一贴，木格贮之。
现代文：不用时，就用纸条做的标签分类加以标示，每个韵部做一个标签，用木格把它们储存起来。
English: When not in use, they are marked with labels made of paper to classify them, make a label for each rhyme, and store them in a crate.

古文：有奇字素无备者，旋刻之，以草火烧，瞬息可成。
现代文：遇到平时没有准备的生冷之字，随即把它刻出来，用草火烧烤，很快可以制成。
English: If you come across the word "fresh and cold" that you haven't prepared before, immediately carve it out and grill it over a grass fire. It will be ready in no time.

古文：不以木为之者，木理有疏密，沾水则高下不平，兼与药相粘，不可取。
现代文：不拿木头制作活字模，是因为木头的纹理有疏有密，沾了水就会变得高低不平，加上容易与药物互相粘连，不能取下来。
English: The reason for not using wood to make movable type is that the texture of wood is sparse and dense, and it will become uneven when stained with water. In addition, it is easy to stick together with drugs and cannot be removed.

古文：不若燔土，用讫再火令药熔，以手拂之，其印自落，殊不沾污。
现代文：不如用胶泥烧制字模，使用完毕后，再次用火烘烤，使药物熔化，用手一抹，那些字模就会自行脱落，一点也不会被药物弄脏。
English: It is better to burn the fonts with clay. After use, bake them again with fire to melt the drug. With a dab of your hand, those fonts will fall off on their own and will not be stained by the drug at all.

古文：昇死，其印为余群从所得，至今保藏。
现代文：毕昇死后，他的字模被我的堂房兄弟和侄子们得到了，到现在还珍藏着。
English: After Bi Sheng's death, his calligraphy was obtained by my cousins and nephews, and is still treasured.

古文：淮南人卫朴精于历术，一行之流也。
现代文：淮南人卫朴精通历法，在这方面是不亚于唐僧一行的人物。
English: Huainan man Weipu was well-versed in the calendar, and in this respect he was no less a figure than the line of Tang monks.

古文：《春秋》日蚀三十六，诸历通验，密者不过得二十六、七，唯一行得二十九；朴乃得三十五，唯庄公十八年一蚀，今古算皆不入蚀法，疑前史误耳。
现代文：《春秋》一书中记载了三十六次日食，历代历法学者通加验证，一般认为所记与实际天象密合的不过有二十六七次，只有一行证明有二十九次；而卫朴则证明有三十五次，只有庄公十八年的一次日食，与古今学者对日食发生日期的推算都不合，怀疑是《春秋》记错了。
English: Thirty-six solar eclipses are recorded in the book "Spring and Autumn," which has been verified by historians throughout the ages. It is generally believed that only 267 of the recorded eclipses are close to the actual celestial phenomenon, and only one line of evidence proves that there were 29 eclipses. However, Weipu proved that there were 35 eclipses, and only one eclipse in the 18th year of Zhuang, which is inconsistent with the calculation of the date of the solar eclipse by scholars from ancient times to the present. It is suspected that "Spring and Autumn" was recorded incorrectly.

古文：自夏仲康五年癸巳歳，至熙宁六年癸丑，凡三千二百一年，书传所载日食，凡四百七十五。众历考验，虽各有得失，而朴所得为多。
现代文：从夏代仲康五年癸巳岁到宋代熙宁六年癸丑岁，凡三千二百零一年，各种书籍所记载的日食共有四百七十五次，以往各种历法的推考检验虽各有得失，而卫朴所得出的合乎实际的结论要较前人为多。
English: From the 5th year of the reign of Zhongkang in the Xia Dynasty to the 6th year of the reign of Xining in the Song Dynasty, there were a total of 475 solar eclipses recorded in various books in the year 32001. Although the various calendars in the past had their own advantages and disadvantages, the realistic conclusions drawn by Wei and Pu were more than those of their predecessors.

古文：朴能不用算，推古今日月蚀，但口诵乘除，不差一算。
现代文：卫朴不用计算工具就能够推算古今的日月食，加减乘除都只用口算，却一个数都不会错。
English: Wei Pak can calculate ancient and modern solar and lunar eclipses without any calculation tools. Addition, subtraction, multiplication and division are all done by mouth, but not a single number can be wrong.

古文：凡大历悉是算数，令人就耳一读，即能暗诵；傍通历则纵横诵之。
现代文：凡是正式制定的历法书，全都是一大堆计算程序和数字，卫朴叫人在耳边读一遍，就能够背下来；对于历表和各种年表，他也都能纵横背诵。
English: All officially compiled calendars are a mass of calculation procedures and numbers. Wei Pak asks people to read them aloud, and then he can recite them by heart. He can also recite the calendar and various chronologies.

古文：尝令人写历书，写讫，令附耳读之，有差一算者，读至其处，则曰： 此误某字。 其精如此。
现代文：他曾让人抄写历书，抄写完毕后，叫抄写的人贴着他的耳朵读一遍，有哪个地方错了一个数，读到那地方时，他就说 某字抄错了 ，他的学问竟能精湛到这样的程度。
English: He once had someone copy an almanac, and when he had finished, he asked the scribe to read it again close to his ear, and if there was a place where a number was wrong, when he read that place, he would say "I copied a certain word wrong," his knowledge could be so exquisite.

古文：大乘除皆不下照位，运筹如飞，人眼不能逐。
现代文：他用算筹运算时，很大数字的乘除都不用一步一步摆下去，只照着数位运筹如飞，人的眼睛都跟不上。
English: When he calculates, he doesn't have to go through the multiplication and division of large numbers step by step. He just follows the digital operations. The human eye can't keep up.

古文：人有故移其一算者，朴自上至下，手循一遍，至移算处，则拨正而去。
现代文：有人曾故意移动了他的一只算筹，他从上到下用手摸了一遍，到被移动的地方，又随手拨正而离开。
English: Someone had deliberately moved one of his abacuses, and he had touched it with his hand from top to bottom, to the place where it had been moved, and then moved away.

古文：熙宁中撰《奉元历》，以无候簿，未能尽其术。自言得六七而已，然已密于他历。
现代文：熙宁年间制定《奉元历》，因为没有实际的观测记录，卫朴未能全部发挥他的才能和知识，他自己也说这部历法的可靠性大约只有六七成，然而已比其他历法要精密一些。
English: The "Bongyuan Calendar" was established during the reign of Emperor Xining. Since there were no actual observation records, Wei Pak was unable to fully utilize his talent and knowledge. He himself said that the reliability of this calendar was only about sixty to seventy percent, but it was more precise than other calendars.

古文：钱氏据两浙时，于杭州梵天寺建一木塔，方两三级，钱帅登之，患其塔动。
现代文：钱氏王朝统治两浙时，在杭州梵天寺修建一座木塔，才建了两三层时，钱帅登上木塔，嫌它晃动。
English: When the Qian dynasty ruled over Zhejiang and Zhejiang, they built a wooden pagoda in Hangzhou's Brahma Temple. When they had only built two or three floors, Qian Shuai climbed onto the wooden pagoda and felt it shake.

古文：匠师云： 未布瓦，上轻，故如此。 
现代文：工匠说： 还没有盖瓦，上面轻，所以才会这样。 
English: The craftsman said: "There are no roof tiles yet, and it's light on top, that's why it's like this.

古文：方以瓦布之，而动如初。
现代文：于是在上面盖了瓦，但是木塔还是像当初一样晃动。
English: So they covered it with tiles, but the wooden tower still shakes as it did in the beginning.

古文：无可奈何，密使其妻见喻皓之妻，赂以金钗，问塔动之因。
现代文：实在没有办法了，工匠就暗地里让妻子去见喻皓的妻子，给她送了金钗，求她向喻皓打听木塔晃动的原因。
English: There was really nothing he could do, so the craftsman secretly asked his wife to meet Yuyao's wife, gave her a gold ingot, and asked her to ask Yuyao about the reason for the shaking of the wooden tower.

古文：皓笑日： 此易耳。但逐层布板讫，便实钉之，则不动矣。 
现代文：喻皓笑着说： 这个容易啊，只要逐层铺上木板，用钉子钉牢，就不会晃动了。 
English: Yu Yao said with a smile, "This is easy. As long as you lay the wooden boards one layer at a time and nail them firmly, they won't shake."

古文：匠师如其言，塔遂定。
现代文：工匠按他说的，塔身于是稳定了。
English: The craftsman did as he was told, and the tower stabilized.

古文：盖钉板上下弥束，六幕相联如胠箧。
现代文：因为钉牢木板以后，各层上下更加紧密连接，上、下、左、右、前、后六面互相连接，就像一只箱子。
English: Because after nailing the wooden board, each layer is more closely connected up and down, and the top, bottom, left, right, front and back six sides are connected to each other, just like a box.

古文：人履其板，六幕相持，自不能动。
现代文：人踩上去，上下及周边四面互相支撑，当然不会晃动。
English: When a person steps on it, the top and bottom and the surrounding four sides support each other. Of course, it will not shake.

古文：人皆伏其精练。
现代文：人们都佩服喻皓技艺精熟。
English: People are impressed by Yu's skill.

