古文：史可法高弘图姜曰广
现代文：史可法，字宪之，祖籍大兴，实际上是祥符人。
English: Shi Kefa, the character of the Constitution, the ancestral home of Daxing, is actually a person from Xiangfu.

古文：世锦衣百户。祖应元举于乡，官黄平知州，有惠政。
现代文：他们家享有世袭锦衣百户的封赏。他的祖父史应元乡试中举，在黄平做知州，为百姓做了不少好事。
English: His grandfather Shi Yingyuan passed the middle school entrance examination in his hometown of Huangping and went to Chizhou, where he did a lot of good deeds for the people.

古文：语其子从质曰： 我家必昌。 
现代文：他曾对他的儿子史从质说 ：我们的家庭一定会昌盛的。 
English: He used to tell his son, Shi, from the bottom of his heart: Our family will surely prosper.

古文：从质妻尹氏有身，梦文天祥入其舍，生可法。
现代文：从质的妻子因梦见文天祥来到他的屋里而受孕怀胎，生下了史可法。
English: His wife, who had a dream that Wen Tianxiang came to his house, became pregnant and gave birth to Shi Kefa.

古文：以孝闻。
现代文：可法从小因孝顺闻名于乡里。
English: Kofa has been famous in the village for his filial piety since he was a child.

古文：举崇祯元年进士，授西安府推官，稍迁户部主事，历员外郎、郎中。
现代文：后考中崇祯元年榜进士，被任命为西安府推官，稍后升为户部主事，又做过员外郎和郎中等。
English: In the first year of the 21st century, after passing the middle school entrance examination, he was ranked as the best student and was appointed as the Xi'an prefectural governor. Later, he was promoted to the head of the household department, and he also served as a member of the middle and upper echelons.

古文：八年，迁右参议，分守池州、太平。
现代文：崇祯八年，他调任右参议，负责镇守池州、太平两地。
English: In the eighth year of Chongzhen, he was transferred to the post of Right Counselor, responsible for the township of Chizhou and Taiping.

古文：其秋，总理侍郎卢象升大举讨贼。改可法副使，分巡安庆、池州，监江北诸军。
现代文：这年秋天，全面负责军事的侍郎卢象升开始大规模讨伐敌人，史可法也改当副史，负责巡视安庆、池州，监领长江以北的部队。
English: In the autumn of that year, Lu Xiangsheng, the general in charge of the military, began a large-scale crusade against the enemy. Shi Kefa also became a vice-general, responsible for inspecting Anqing and Chizhou, and supervising the troops north of the Yangtze River.

古文：黄梅贼掠宿松、潜山、太湖，将犯安庆，可法追击之潜山天堂寨。
现代文：黄梅的敌军洗掠了宿松、潜山、太湖，又打算攻占安庆，可法率兵在潜山天堂寨追击敌人。
English: Huang Mei's enemy army plundered Suqiao, Qianshan and Taihu, and also planned to capture Anqing. However, he led his soldiers to pursue the enemy in Qianshan Paradise.

古文：明年，祖宽破贼滁州，贼走河南。十二月，贼马守应合罗汝才、李万庆自郧阳东下。可法驰驻太湖，扼其冲。
现代文：第二年，祖宽在滁州破敌，叛军逃往河南，十二月，敌将马守应联合罗汝才、李万庆从郧阳向东进犯，可法飞速进驻太湖，把守要害之地。
English: In the second year, Zu Kuan defeated the enemy in Luzhou, and the rebels fled to Henan. In December, the enemy commander Ma Shouying, together with Luo Rucai and Li Wanqing, attacked eastward from Shenyang, and quickly entered Taihu Lake to defend the crucial place.

古文：十年正月，贼从间道突安庆石牌，寻移桐城。
现代文：崇祯十年正月，敌人从安庆石牌的小路突围出去，不久移驻桐城。
English: In the first month of the 10th year of Chongzhen, the enemy broke out from the small road of Anqing Shibei, and soon moved to Tongcheng.

古文：参将潘可大击走贼，贼复为庐、风军所扼，回桐城，掠四境。
现代文：参将潘可大将敌军赶出，敌人逃窜途中，又被庐、凤两地的军队阻拦，因而敌人被迫杀回桐城，并掳掠了边近地区。
English: Senior General Pan Ke drove the enemy forces out. On their way to escape, the enemy was blocked by the forces of Shao and Feng. As a result, the enemy was forced to return to Tongcheng and plundered the surrounding areas.

古文：知县陈尔铭婴城守，可法与可大剿捕。
现代文：桐城知县陈尔铭环城固守，可法与可大合力追剿搜捕。
English: Tongcheng Zhixian Chen Erming Huancheng adhered to, but the law and the great joint efforts to track down and arrest.

古文：贼走庐江，犯潜山，可法与左良玉败之枫香驿，贼乃窜潜山、太湖山中。
现代文：敌人逃往庐江，进犯潜山，可法同左良玉联合在枫香驿打败敌军，敌人于是又逃窜到潜山、太湖一带的山中。
English: The enemy fled to the Lijiang River and attacked the Hidden Mountain, but Dafa and Zuo Liangyu united to defeat the enemy army in Fengxiangyi. The enemy then fled to the Hidden Mountain and the mountains around Taihu Lake.

古文：三月，可大及副将程龙败殁于宿松。
现代文：三月，可大及其副将程龙在宿松败亡。
English: In March, Koda and his second-in-command, Cheng Long, were defeated and killed in Sukamatsu.

古文：贼分其党摇天动别为一营，而合八营二十余万众，分屯桐城之练潭、石井、陶冲。
现代文：敌人分出同党摇天动，另外编为一营，合计八营共二十多万士兵，分别驻扎在桐城的练潭、石井、淘冲等地。
English: The enemy separated the comrades from the Heaven-shaking Movement and organized them into one battalion, with a total of eight battalions totaling more than 200,000 soldiers, stationed in Lintan, Ishii, Taochong and other places in Tongcheng.

古文：总兵官牟文绶、刘良佐击败之挂车河。
现代文：总兵官牟文绶、刘良佐在挂车河击败了他们。
English: The commander-in-chief Mufeng Yao and Liu Liang Zuo defeated them at the trailer river.

古文：当是时，陕寇聚漳、宁，分犯岷、洮、秦、楚、应、皖，群盗遍野。
现代文：正当这时，陕西聚集在漳地和宁地的土匪兵分几路侵犯岷、洮、秦、楚、应、皖等地，一时间到处都是贼寇。
English: Just at this time, the bandits and soldiers of Shaanxi gathered in Shunde and Ningde to invade Shantou, Handan, Qin, Chu, Ying, Handan and other places in several ways. For a while, there were bandits everywhere.

古文：总理卢象升既改督宣、大，代以王家祯，祖宽关外兵亦北归。
现代文：全面负责军事的卢象升改为宣、大两地督兵以后王家祯取代其职，祖宽率领的关外驻兵也撤而北回。
English: Lu Xiangsheng, who was in overall charge of the military, was replaced by Xuan, and Wang Jiaxuan took over his post after the supervisors of the two regions were removed, and the soldiers stationed outside Guan, led by Zu Kuan, also withdrew to the north.

古文：未几，上复以熊文灿代家祯，专抚贼。
现代文：不多久，皇帝又用熊文灿来替换了王家祯，专责收安乱民。
English: Not long after, the emperor replaced Wang Jiaxuan with Xiong Wencang, who was specifically charged with pacifying the turbulent people.

古文：贼益狂逞，盘牙江北，南都震惊。
现代文：敌人这下更加猖狂，盘结江北，犬牙相交，南都为之震惊。
English: The enemy is now more rampant, the north of the Yangtze River is entangled, the teeth of the dog are intersected, and the south is shocked.

古文：七月擢可法右佥都御史，巡抚安庆、庐州、太平、池州四府，及河南之光州、光山、固始、罗田，湖广之蕲州、广济、黄梅，江西之德化、湖口诸县，提督军务，设额兵万人。
现代文：七月，史可法被提升为右佥都御史，巡抚安庆、庐州、太平、池州四府，以及河南的光州、光山、固始、罗田，湖广的蕲州、广济、黄梅，江西的德化、湖口各县，负责督办军事，准予设立一万人的兵额。
English: In July, Shi Kofa was promoted to the Right Hand Capital Imperial Historian, the governor of Anqing, Zhangzhou, Taiping, and Chizhou, as well as the four prefectures of Gwangju, Gwangsan, Gushi, and Luotian in Henan Province, Zhangzhou, Guangji, and Huangmei in Hunan Province, and Dehua and Hukou in Jiangxi Province. He was responsible for supervising the military and approved the establishment of a quota of ten thousand soldiers.

古文：贼已东陷和州、含山、定远、六合，犯天长、盱眙，趋河南。
现代文：此时敌军已经向东攻占了和州、含山、定远、六合，并进犯天长、盱眙，向河南方向挺进。
English: At this time, the enemy army had already occupied Hezhou, Hanzhan, Dingyuan and Liuhe in the east, and attacked Tianchang and Handan, advancing towards Henan.

古文：可法奏免被灾田租。
现代文：可法奏请免除了灾区的田租。
English: However, land rent in the disaster area has been exempted.

古文：冬，部将汪云凤败贼潜山，京军复连破老回回舒城、庐江，贼遁入山。时监军佥事汤开远善击贼，可法东西驰御，贼稍稍避其锋。
现代文：冬天，部将汪云凤在潜山打败敌军，京城的军队接连攻占舒城、庐江，敌军逃往山中，当时监军佥事汤开远善于打击敌军，可法又东西驰援，敌军不敢正面交锋。
English: In winter, the commander Wang Yunfeng defeated the enemy army in the hidden mountain, the army of Beijing successively captured Shucheng and the Li River, and the enemy army fled to the mountains. At that time, the supervisor An Ji Tang Kai Yuan was good at fighting the enemy army, but the law was rushing to the east and west to help, and the enemy army did not dare to fight head-on.

古文：十一年夏，以平贼逾期，戴罪立功。
现代文：十一年夏，因为未能按期平定叛军，朝廷责令他戴罪立功。
English: In the summer of the eleventh year, the Imperial Court ordered him to take the blame for failing to quell the rebels on schedule.

古文：可法短小精悍，面黑，目烁烁有光。
现代文：史可法身材短小精悍，面孔黝黑，双目炯然有光。
English: Scofa is short and slender, with a dark face and bright eyes.

古文：廉信，与下均劳苦。
现代文：他品质廉洁守信，能与部下同甘共苦。
English: He is honest and trustworthy, and can work with his subordinates through thick and thin.

古文：军行，士不饱不先食，未授衣不先御，以故得士死力。连败贼英山、六合，顺天王乞降。
现代文：行军途中，士兵没有吃饱自己就不先吃，士兵衣服没发下自己决不先穿，所以士兵都愿意为他出力，他的军队相继在英山、六合两地打败敌人，顺天王也乞求投降。
English: During the march, the soldiers would not eat before they were full, and they would never wear the soldiers' clothes before they were issued, so the soldiers were willing to work hard for him. His army defeated the enemy in Yingshan and Liuhe in succession, and Shun Tianwang also begged for surrender.

古文：十二年夏，丁外艰去。
现代文：十二年夏，因岳父去世离职。
English: In the summer of 2012, he left his position due to the death of his father-in-law.

古文：服阕，起户部右侍郎兼右佥都御史。代朱大典总督漕运，巡抚凤阳、淮安、扬州，劾罢督粮道三人，增设漕储道一人，大浚南河，漕政大厘。
现代文：除下丧服后，出任户部右侍郎兼右佥都御史，接替朱大典总管漕运，巡抚凤阳、淮安、扬州等地，弹劾罢免了三个督粮道，增设漕储道一人，大力疏通南河，使漕务大有整治。
English: After removing his mourning clothes, he served as the right-hand man of the household and the right-hand man of the capital, succeeding Zhu Datian as the general manager of rowing transport, the governor of Fengyang, Huai'an, Yangzhou and other places, impeached and dismissed three supervisors of grain roads, added one rowing storage road, and vigorously dredged the South River, so that rowing was greatly rectified.

古文：拜南京兵部尚书，参赞机务。因武备久弛，奏行更新八事。
现代文：之后，调任南京兵部尚书，参赞机密政务，由于武备长期松弛，可法奏上八条改革意见。
English: Later, he was transferred to the Nanjing Military Department as Shang Shu, Counselor of Confidential Government Affairs. Due to the long-term slack in military preparedness, he was able to present eight reform opinions.

古文：十七年四月朔，闻贼犯阙，誓师勤王。
现代文：十七年四月初一，听说乱军进犯北京的皇宫，可法誓师勤王。
English: On the first day of April in the seventeenth year, I heard that the rebel army had attacked the imperial palace in Beijing. I swore to serve the king.

古文：渡江抵浦口，闻北都既陷，缟衣发丧。
现代文：渡江抵达浦口，听说北京陷落，皇上谢世，天下人身穿孝服，为皇上祭奠。
English: After crossing the river and arriving at Pukou, he heard that Beijing had fallen, the emperor was giving thanks to the world, and the whole world was wearing filial piety and paying tribute to the emperor.

古文：会南都议立君，张慎言、吕大器、姜曰广等曰： 福王由崧，神宗孙也，伦序当立，而有七不可：贪、淫、酗酒、不孝、虐下、不读书、干预有司也。
现代文：适逢南都讨论立君，张慎言、吕大器、姜曰广等说： 福王朱由崧是神宗的孙子，按辈份、排行应当立为王，但是他有七大缺点：贪、淫、酗酒、不孝、虐待下属、不读书、干预官吏。
English: When the Southern Capital was discussing the establishment of the prince, Zhang Shingyan, Lv Daju, Jiang Zhiguang, etc. said: King Fu Zhu Youjun is the grandson of Shenzong, according to his generation and ranking, he should be established as king, but he has seven major shortcomings: greed, lewdness, alcoholism, filial piety, mistreatment of subordinates, not reading books, and interference with officials.

古文：潞王常讠芳，神宗侄也，贤明当立。 
现代文：潞王朱常芳是神宗的侄儿，贤良而且聪明，应当立为王。 
English: King Zhu Changfang is the nephew of Shenzong. He is virtuous and wise, and should be made king.

古文：移牒可法，可法亦以为然。
现代文：用文书通报可法，可法也认为是这样。
English: It is possible to notify the law with a document, and the law also considers this to be the case.

古文：凤阳总督马士英潜与阮大铖计议，主立福王，咨可法，可法以七不可告之。
现代文：凤阳总督马士英暗地与阮大铖商议，主张立福王，询问可法，可法把福王不行的七点原因告诉他们。
English: Fengyang Governor Ma Shih-ying secretly discussed with Nguyen Dai Quan, advocated the establishment of King Fu, inquired about the law, and told them the seven reasons why King Fu could not be established.

古文：而士英已与黄得功、刘良佐、刘泽清、高杰发兵送福王至仪真，于是可法等迎王。
现代文：但马士英已经与黄得功、刘良佐、刘泽清、高杰发兵护送福王到仪真，于是可法等人前往迎接福王。
English: However, Ma Shiying had already sent soldiers with Huang Dergong, Liu Liangzuo, Liu Zeqing and Gao Jie to escort Fu Wang to Yizhen, so Kofa and others went to meet Fu Wang.

古文：五月朔，王谒孝陵、奉先殿，出居内守备府。群臣入朝，王色赧欲避。可法曰： 王毋避，宜正受。 
现代文：五月初一，福王访孝陵、奉先殿，出外住在内守备府，群臣上朝拜见福王，福王害臊想避开，可法说 ：王不要回避，应当认真接受臣子的朝见。 
English: On the first day of the fifth month, King Fook visited the Xiaoling Mausoleum and the Hall of the Ancestors, and stayed outside the Inner Palace. A group of courtiers came to pay homage to King Fook. King Fook did not want to avoid them, but the law said, "The king should not avoid them, but should earnestly accept the courtiers' court visits."

古文：既朝，议战守。
现代文：福王上朝后，开始讨论战守的问题。
English: After King Fu ascended to the throne, he began to discuss the issue of defense.

古文：可法曰： 王宜素服郊次，发师北征，示天下以必报仇之义。 
现代文：可法说： 福王您应当身穿孝服，住于郊外，发兵北征，来向天下显示您一定要报国家之仇的道理。 
English: But the law says, "Fu Wang, you should dress in filial piety, live in the suburbs, and send troops to the north to show the world that you must avenge the country."

古文：王唯唯。
现代文：福王连声说是。
English: Fu Wang Lianxuan said yes.

古文：明日再朝，出议监国事。张慎言曰： 国虚无人，可遂即大位。 
现代文：第二天朝见之后，大臣们出来讨论福王监国的事，张慎言说： 国虚无主，福王就此可以即皇位。 
English: After the second day's meeting, the ministers came out to discuss the matter of Fu Wang's supervision of the country. Zhang Shengyan said: The country has no owner, so Fu Wang can take the throne.

古文：可法曰： 太子存亡未卜，倘南来若何？ 
现代文：史可法说 ：太子生死不明，如果有一天太子到南边来了怎么办？ 
English: Scofa said: The prince's life and death are unknown. What if one day the prince comes to the south?

古文：诚意伯刘孔昭曰： 今日既定，谁敢复更？ 
现代文：诚意伯刘孔昭说 ：今天已经说定了，谁敢再有更改？ 
English: Sincerely, Comrade Liu Kongzhao said: Today it has been decided, who would dare to change it?

古文：可法曰： 徐之。 
现代文：可法说： 慢慢再说吧。 
English: But the law says: Let's talk about it slowly.

古文：乃退。
现代文：于是大家退出。
English: So back off.

古文：又明日，王监国，廷推阁臣，众举可法、高弘图、姜曰广。
现代文：第三天，福王监国，朝廷推选内阁大臣，大家都推举史可法、高弘图、姜曰广。
English: On the third day, Fu Wang supervised the country, the imperial court selected the cabinet ministers, and everyone nominated Shi Kefa, Gao Hongtu, and Jiang Zhiguang.

古文：孔昭攘臂欲并列，众以本朝无勋臣入阁例，遏之。
现代文：孔昭揎拳攘臂想入内阁大臣的行列，群臣用本朝没有勋臣入阁的先例阻止了他。
English: Kong Zhaohui wanted to join the ranks of cabinet ministers, but the ministers stopped him using the precedent that there were no noblemen in the cabinet.

古文：孔昭勃然曰： 即我不可，马士英何不可？ 
现代文：孔昭愤愤地说 ：就算我不能，马士英为什么不能入阁呢？ 
English: Kong Zhao said indignantly: Even if I can't, why can't Ma Shih-ying join the cabinet?

古文：乃并推士英。又议起废，推郑三俊、刘宗周、徐石麒。
现代文：于是又一并推举马士英为内阁大臣，又讨论填补大臣的空缺，推选了郑三俊、刘宗周、徐石麒。
English: As a result, Ma Shiying was elected as a cabinet minister at the same time, and the vacancy of the minister was discussed, and Zheng Sanjun, Liu Zongzhou, and Xu Shijun were elected.

古文：孔昭举大铖，可法曰： 先帝钦定逆案，毋复言。 
现代文：孔昭推选阮大铖，史可法说 ：先帝亲自定他为违逆案犯，不要再说了。 
English: When Kong Zhao elected Nguyn Đi Quang, Shih K Ph said, "The former emperor personally convicted him of treason, so stop talking about it."

古文：越二日，拜可法礼部尚书兼东阁大学士，与士英、弘图并命。可法仍掌兵部事，士英仍督师凤阳。乃定京营制，如北都故事，侍卫及锦衣卫诸军，悉入伍操练。锦衣东西两司房，及南北两镇抚司官，不备设，以杜告密，安人心。
现代文：过了两天，任命可法为礼部尚书兼东阁大学士，同士英、弘图是一起任用的，可法仍然掌管兵部的事务，士英仍然督军镇守凤阳，于是和北京过去一样又制定了京军制度，侍卫部队和锦衣卫各军都列入军队进行操练，锦衣卫东西两司房，以及南北两都的抚司官，不再全部设立，以防止告密，安定人心。
English: Two days later, Kofa was appointed as the Vice-Minister of the Ministry of Ceremonies and Donggak University Scholar. He and Hongtu were appointed together. Kofa was still in charge of the affairs of the Ministry of Military Affairs, and the Vice-Minister of Military Affairs was still in charge of the Fengyang garrison. Therefore, the Beijing military system was established as in the past in Beijing. The bodyguards and the bodyguards of all the troops were included in the army for training. The east and west offices of the bodyguards, as well as the officials of the two capitals, were no longer established in order to prevent whistleblowing and stabilize people's hearts.

古文：当是时，士英旦夕冀入相。
现代文：这个时候，马士英一天到晚想当首辅大臣。
English: At this time, Ma Shih-ying wanted to be the First Vice-Minister all day long.

古文：及命下，大怒，以可法七不可书奏之王。
现代文：等到朝廷的命令发布后，他非常恼怒，就把可法以前列举福王不该立的七条理由进呈给福王。
English: After the imperial order was issued, he was very angry and gave Fu Wang the seven reasons that Fu Wang should not have been appointed.

古文：而拥兵入觐，拜表即行。
现代文：然后带兵入见福王，递上奏章就走了。
English: Then he led the soldiers into the presence of King Fu, handed over the music, and left.

古文：可法遂请督师，出镇淮、扬。
现代文：可法于是请求统帅军队，外出镇守淮、阳两地。
English: But the law then asked the commander-in-chief of the army to go out to guard Huai and Yang.

古文：十五日，王即位。
现代文：十五日，福王即位。
English: On the 15th, King Fook ascended the throne.

古文：东平伯刘泽清辖淮、海，驻淮北，经理山东一路。
现代文：第二天，可法入朝辞别，被加封为太子太保，改任兵部尚书、武英殿大学士。
English: The next day, Kofo resigned from the imperial court and was given the additional title of Crown Prince and Protector of the Realm, and was reappointed to the post of Hyobusho (Minister of the Ministry of War) and a member of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：总兵官高杰辖徐、泗，驻泗水，经理开、归一路。
现代文：士英就在这一天入朝值勤，讨论把江北划分为四镇，东平伯刘泽清管辖淮、海等地，驻军泗水，经理开、归一路。
English: It was on this day that Shi Ying went on duty in the DPRK to discuss the division of the northern part of the Yangtze River into four towns, Dongping District Liu Zeqing to govern Huai, Hai and other places, stationed troops in Surabaya, and managers to start and return.

古文：总兵官刘良佐辖凤、寿，驻临淮，经理陈、杞一路。
现代文：总兵官刘良佐统辖凤、寿等地，驻扎在临淮，经理陈、杞一路。
English: The chief military officer Liu Liangza oversaw Feng, Shou and other places, stationed in Linhuai, and the managers Chen and Zou went all the way.

古文：靖南伯黄得功辖滁、和，驻庐州，经理光、固一路。
现代文：靖南伯黄得功统辖滁、和等地，驻军庐州，经理光州、固始一路。
English: Jingnan Bo Huang has made great achievements in the administration of Shanzhou, He and other places, stationed in Shanzhou, manager of Gwangju, Gushi all the way.

古文：可法启行，即遣使访大行帝后梓宫及太子二王所在，奉命祭告凤、泗二陵。
现代文：可法动身后，就派遣使臣寻访已故帝、后的灵柩以及太子、二王所在的地方，并奉命前往祭告凤、泗二陵。
English: However, after the ceremony, envoys were dispatched to search for the caskets of the deceased emperor and empress, as well as the places where the prince and the two kings were, and were ordered to go to the two mausoleums of Feng and Zou.

古文：可法去，士英、孔昭辈益无所惮。
现代文：可法离开后，士英、孔昭等更加肆无忌惮。
English: After Kofa left, Shi Ying, Kong Zhao and others became even more unscrupulous.

古文：孔昭以慎言举吴甡，哗殿上，拔刀逐慎言。
现代文：孔昭因为慎言推举吴生生，在大殿上闹闹嚷嚷，并持刀追杀慎言。
English: Kong Zhao made a ruckus in the Great Hall because Wu Sheng Sheng was chosen by Shen Yan, and chased Shen Yan with a knife.

古文：可法驰疏解，孔昭卒扼甡不用。
现代文：可法听说此事派骑兵上书劝解，孔昭最终卡住不让任用吴生生。
English: However, when the law heard about this, it sent a cavalryman to write a letter of persuasion, and Kong Zhao eventually stuck to not allowing Wu Shengsheng to be appointed.

古文：可法祭二陵毕，上疏曰： 陛下践阼初，祗谒孝陵，哭泣尽哀，道路感动。
现代文：可法祭二陵完后，上书说 ：陛下刚登位时，恭恭敬敬地拜见孝陵，哭泣之声足见您心中的悲哀，路上的行人也为之感动。
English: However, after the Dharma ceremony at the two mausoleums, a letter was sent saying: "When Your Majesty ascended the throne, you paid a respectful visit to the Mausoleum of Filial Piety. The sound of your tears showed the sadness in your heart, and pedestrians on the road were also moved by it.

古文：若躬谒二陵，亲见泗、凤蒿莱满目，鸡犬无声，当益悲愤。
现代文：如果您亲自拜见凤、泗二陵，看到满目蒿莱，无鸡鸣狗吠的凄惨景象。想必会更加悲愤。
English: If you were to visit the phoenix and skull tombs in person, you would surely be even more saddened and angry to see the gruesome sight of eyes filled with tears, no chickens and barking dogs.

古文：愿慎终如始，处深宫广厦，则思东北诸陵魂魄之未安；享玉食大庖，则思东北诸陵麦饭之无展；膺图受箓，则念先帝之集木驭朽，何以忽遘危亡；早朝晏罢，则念先帝之克俭克勤，何以卒隳大业。
现代文：我希望陛下能善始慎终，身居于高大舒适的宫殿时，能想到东北皇陵中先帝魂魄不能安息；享受宫廷的美餐时，能想到东北的皇陵中连麦子稀饭都没摆上一碗；当得到瑞应之图、吉祥符时，能想到先帝储才防败，怎么还会忽然遭遇危亡？早朝晏席结束时，能想到先帝一生克俭克勤，怎么最终还是国破家亡？
English: I hope that His Majesty will be prudent from the beginning to the end. When he lives in a tall and comfortable palace, he can think that the soul of the former emperor in the northeast imperial mausoleum cannot rest in peace; when enjoying a fine meal at the palace, he can think that there is not even a bowl of wheat porridge in the northeast imperial mausoleum; when he gets the auspicious map and the auspicious charm, he can think that the former emperor was able to prevent defeat, so how could he suddenly encounter peril? At the end of the early morning banquet, he can think of the former emperor's life of thrift and diligence, how did the country finally collapse?

古文：战兢惕厉，无时怠荒，二祖列宗将默佑中兴。
现代文：陛下如果办事小心谨慎，任何时候都不懈怠，已故皇上、皇后还有列祖列宗都会在冥冥之中帮助我朝中兴。
English: Your Majesty, if you act carefully and prudently, and do not slack off at any time, the late Emperor, Empress, and ancestors will all help me in my efforts to revive the dynasty.

古文：若晏处东南，不思远略，贤奸无辨，威断不灵，老成投簪，豪杰裹足，祖宗怨恫，天命潜移，东南一隅未可保也。 
现代文：假如晏乐、偏安于东南一隅，不考虑长远的策略，不辨贤人和奸人，决策不够灵活、明达，使老成的官吏离职而去，英雄豪杰裹足不前，列祖列宗在地下抱怨、担心，天命在不知不觉中他向转移，那么东南一隅也是无法保住的啊！ 
English: If happiness and peace prevail in the southeast corner, if long-term strategies are not considered, if sages and traitors are not distinguished, if decisions are not flexible and informed enough, if established officials leave office, if heroes and heroines do not move forward, if ancestors and descendants complain and worry underground, and if the fate of the world shifts towards them unknowingly, then the southeast corner cannot be saved!

古文：王嘉答之。
现代文：福王赞扬并回答了他。
English: Fu Wang praised and answered him.

古文：得功、泽清、杰争欲驻扬州。
现代文：得功、泽清、高杰争着想要驻军扬州。
English: To their credit, Ze Qing and Gao Jie competed to garrison Yangzhou.

古文：杰先至，大杀掠，尸横野。
现代文：高杰率兵先到扬州边界，一路大肆奸淫掳掠，所经之地尸横遍野。
English: Gao Jie led the soldiers to the border of Yangzhou first, and all the way they committed rape, abduction and plunder, and the dead bodies were scattered all over the country.

古文：城中恟惧，登陴守，杰攻之浃月。
现代文：城中开始惧怕，登上女墙守备，高杰攻打了两个月。
English: The city began to fear, climbed the female wall to defend, Gao Jie attacked for two months.

古文：泽清亦大掠淮上。
现代文：泽清也在淮上大肆掠夺。
English: Ze Qing also plundered Huaiyang.

古文：临淮不纳良佐军，亦被攻。
现代文：临淮不接纳刘良佐的军队，也遭到攻击。
English: Lin Huai did not accept Liu Liangzuo's army and was also attacked.

古文：朝命可法往解，得功、良佐、泽清皆听命。乃诣杰。
现代文：朝廷命令史可法前往劝解，得功、良佐、泽清都听从命令，于是，到高杰那里去。
English: The imperial court ordered Shikofa to go to persuade, and Toko, Ryosa, and Zeqing all obeyed the order and went to Gaojie.

古文：杰素惮可法，可法来，杰夜掘坎十百，埋暴骸。
现代文：高杰一向惧怕史可法，听说可法要来，他连夜掘出近百个土坑埋葬地面上的尸骸。
English: Gao Jie had always been afraid of Shi Kefa. When he heard that Shi Kefa was coming, he dug out nearly a hundred pits overnight to bury the corpses on the ground.

古文：旦日朝可法帐中，辞色俱变，汗浃背。
现代文：第二天早上来到军营中拜见可法，脸色和言辞都变了，汗流浃背。
English: The next morning, I went to the military camp to see Kofa. His face and words had changed, and he was sweating profusely.

古文：可法坦怀待之，接偏裨以温语，杰大喜过望。然杰亦自是易可法，用己甲士防卫，文檄必取视而后行。
现代文：可法却坦诚地接待他，跟他的偏将讲话也用温和的语气，高杰喜出望外，然而从这以后他也有点轻视可法，开始用自己的优势兵力防护左右，文檄也一定自己过目后才肯传递。
English: However, Kofa received him frankly, and Gao Jie was overjoyed to speak with him in a gentle tone. However, after that, he also despised Kofa a little, and began to use his superior military strength to protect the right and left. Wen Jiabao must also be willing to pass it on after seeing it for himself.

古文：可法夷然为具疏，屯其众于瓜洲，杰又大喜。
现代文：可法简单地把他们的情况上报给福王，又把他的兵力驻守在瓜洲，高杰对此又非常高兴。
English: Gao Jie was very happy to be able to simply report their situation to Fu Wang and station his troops in Guazhou.

古文：杰去，扬州以安，可法乃开府扬州。
现代文：等他离去后，扬州得以安定下来，可法于是在扬州开设府署。
English: After he left, Yangzhou was able to settle down, and the law was able to open a prefectural office in Yangzhou.

古文：六月，大清兵击败贼李自成，自成弃京师西走。青州诸郡县争杀伪官，据城自保。
现代文：六月，大清军队打败了反贼头领李自成，自成放弃北京率兵向西逃跑，青州等各郡县开始争先恐后地杀死他设立的伪官，占据城堡自卫。
English: In June, the Qing Dynasty army defeated the anti-thief leader Li Zicheng. Zicheng abandoned Beijing and led his troops to escape to the west. Qingzhou and other counties began to scramble to kill the false officials he set up and occupy the castle to defend themselves.

古文：可法请颁监国、登极二诏，慰山东、河北军民心。
现代文：可法请求皇上颁布监国、登极两个诏书，安抚山东、河北军队和百姓的思想。
English: However, the law requested the emperor to issue two imperial decrees on supervising the country and ascending to the throne to appease the thoughts of the Shandong and Hebei armies and people.

古文：开礼贤馆，招四方才智，以监纪推官应廷吉领其事。
现代文：并开设礼贤馆，招收各地有才智的人，让监纪推官应廷吉主管此事。
English: He also opened the Hall of Rites and Virtues to recruit talented people from all over the country, and let the procurator of discipline be in charge of the matter in Tingji.

古文：八月出巡淮安，阅泽清士马。
现代文：八月，可法外出巡视淮安，检阅泽清的兵马。
English: In August, Kefa went on a tour of Huai'an to inspect Zeching's soldiers and horses.

古文：返扬州，请饷为进取资。
现代文：返回扬州，向朝廷请求粮饷，作为进取北方的费用。
English: He returned to Yangzhou and asked the imperial court for grain subsidies as the cost of entering the north.

古文：士英靳不发，可法疏趣之。
现代文：士英吝啬不肯送发，可法上疏皇帝催促他。
English: Shi Ying was stingy and refused to send it, but the emperor urged him to do so.

古文：因言： 迩者人才日耗，仕途日淆，由名心胜而实意不修，议论多而成功少。
现代文：借此对皇上说： 近来人才日益减少，入官门路日益混乱，由此慕名之心胜而务实之心少，议论的事情很多但成功的事情很少。
English: He used this opportunity to say to the emperor: Recently, the number of talented people has been decreasing, and the way to enter the government has become increasingly chaotic. As a result, there are fewer people with a pragmatic heart and more people with a desire to make a name for themselves. There are many things to discuss, but few things that are successful.

古文：今事势更非昔比，必专主讨贼复仇。
现代文：现在的局势更和以往不同。一定要专心于讨伐乱贼，报复国仇才行。
English: The current situation is even more different from the past. We must concentrate on fighting the bandits and avenging the national enmity.

古文：舍筹兵筹饷无议论，舍治兵治饷无人才。
现代文：除却筹兵筹饷不应有什么别的议论，除却治兵治饷没有人才之可言。
English: There should be no discussion other than military preparations, and there is no talent other than military management.

古文：有摭拾浮谈、巧营华要者，罚无赦！ 
现代文：如有捡拾空虚词句，谋取高官厚禄的人，有罚无赦！ 
English: If there are people who pick up empty words and seek high-ranking officials, they will be punished without mercy!

古文：王优诏答之。
现代文：福王报以鼓励的诏书。
English: King Yongming replied to him with a euphemistic edict.

古文：初，可法虞杰跋扈，驻得功仪真防之。
现代文：当初，可法担心高杰蛮横不法，派得功在仪真驻军防备他。
English: At first, Kofo was worried about Gao Jie's lawlessness and sent troops to guard against him in Yizhen.

古文：九月朔，得功、杰构兵，曲在杰。
现代文：九月初一，得功与高杰兵戎相加，高杰理亏。
English: On the first day of September, Gao Jie's military achievements and merits were added together, while Gao Jie's losses were deducted.

古文：赖可法调剂，事得解。
现代文：靠着可法的和解事情才得以解决。
English: It was only through a legal settlement that the matter was resolved.

古文：北都降贼诸臣南还，可法言： 诸臣原籍北土者，宜令赴吏、兵二部录用，否则恐绝其南归之心。 
现代文：北京原来投降反贼的大臣们此时纷纷南下回朝，可法上书建议说： 原籍在北方的大臣，应该让他们到吏部、兵部听候录用，否则恐怕会使他们南下回朝之心绝灭。 
English: At this time, the ministers of Beijing who had originally surrendered to the anti-thieves went south to return to the North, but the law suggested in a letter: The ministers who were originally from the north should let them wait to be recruited by the personnel department and the military department, otherwise, I am afraid, their heart of going south to return to the North would be destroyed.

古文：又言： 北都之变，凡属臣子皆有罪。
现代文：又说 ：北京的祸变，凡属臣子的都有罪愆。
English: He also said, "In the calamity of Beijing, all the courtiers are guilty."

古文：在北者应从死，岂在南者非人臣？
现代文：在北方的官吏如果都应当跟先帝一道去死，难道在南京的都不是先帝的大臣？
English: If all officials in the north should die with the former emperor, shouldn't those in Nanjing be the former emperor's ministers?

古文：即臣可法谬典南枢，臣士英叨任凤督，未能悉东南甲疾趋北援，镇臣泽清、杰以兵力不支，折而南走。
现代文：即如我可法不才，在南京主管枢机，士英沾了国恩担任凤阳总督，都没有能率领东南的全部优势兵力迅速支援北都。镇守大臣泽清、高杰因兵力不能支持，倒过来向南方逃跑。
English: Even if I had the ability, the cardinal in charge of Nanjing, and Shi Ying as governor of Fengyang, who was favored by the state, could not lead all the superior forces in the southeast to quickly support the northern capital. The town guard minister, Ze Qing, and Gao Jie could not support the troops, and turned around and fled to the south.

古文：是首应重论者，臣等罪也。
现代文：如此说来，先应该追究的，是我们这些大臣的罪过。
English: Thus, it is we, the ministers, who should be held accountable for our sins.

古文：乃因圣明继统，钅未钺未加，恩荣叠被。
现代文：竟然因为圣明的陛下您入继王位，不仅没加诛杀，而且一次次得到恩典。
English: Because of Your Majesty's accession to the throne, not only has there been no struggle, but you have received grace time and time again.

古文：而独于在北诸臣毛举而概绳之，岂散秩闲曹，责反重于南枢、凤督哉。
现代文：南方的大臣如此，而单单对于在北方的大臣们毫毛不放，一概绳之以法，岂不是闲散小吏，罪责反比南枢、凤督还要重大了吗？
English: If this is the case with the ministers in the south, but the ministers in the north are not punished at all, is it not the case that the culpability of idle petty officials is even greater than that of Nanzhu and Fengdu?

古文：宜摘罪状显著者，重惩示儆。
现代文：我以为应该选择那罪状显著的降官，严加惩治，以示指教。
English: I thought I should choose the demoted official with the most serious charge and punish him severely to teach him a lesson.

古文：若伪命未污，身被刑辱，可置勿问。
现代文：如果大臣未曾接受乱贼的任命，或曾受乱贼刑罚的，可以撇开不加问罪。
English: If the minister has not accepted the appointment of a ruffian, or has been punished by a ruffian, he may be set aside without question.

古文：其逃避北方、俳徊而后至者，许戴罪讨贼，赴臣军前酌用。 
现代文：那些在北方逃避战乱，犹豫多时而后才到朝廷来的，允许他们戴罪入官，讨伐敌人，这些人可以到我领的军队里酌情录用。 
English: Those who fled the war in the north and hesitated for a long time before coming to the imperial court, allowing them to commit crimes and fight the enemy, these people can be recruited into our army as appropriate.

古文：廷议并从之。
现代文：朝廷经议论听取了他的意见。
English: After discussion, the Imperial Court listened to his opinion.

古文：杰居扬州，桀骜甚。可法开诚布公，导以君臣大义。杰大感悟，奉约束。
现代文：高杰驻兵扬州，很不驯服，可法对他开诚布公，用君臣的大义启发、开导他，高杰终于感悟，接受上方的领导。
English: Gao Jie, stationed in Yangzhou, was very unruly, but the law was open and honest with him, using the great righteousness of the monarchs and ministers to inspire and enlighten him. Gao Jie finally understood and accepted the leadership from above.

古文：十月，杰帅师北征。可法赴清江浦，遣官屯田开封，为经略中原计。
现代文：十月，高杰率领军队北讨，可法到清江浦，派遣官吏在开封屯田，为经略中原地区做准备。
English: In October, Gao Jie led the army to discuss the north, sent officials to Qingjiangpu, and dispatched officials to Kaifeng Tunden to prepare for the Central Plains region.

古文：诸镇分汛地，自王家营而北至宿迁，最冲要，可法自任之，筑垒缘河南岸。
现代文：各镇兵力划分防守地区。从王家营向北到宿迁一带最为要冲，可法亲自负责，沿黄河的南岸筑起了一道保垒。
English: The military forces of each town were divided into defensive areas. The area from Wangjiaying north to Suqian was the most important, and Kofa was personally responsible for building a barrier along the south bank of the Yellow River.

古文：十一月四日，舟次鹤镇，谍报我大清兵入宿迁。可法进至白洋河，令总兵官刘肇基往援。
现代文：十一月四日，可法乘船驻于鹤镇，信使报告大清部队已进入宿迁地区，可法率兵进抵白洋河，命令总兵官刘肇基前往支援。
English: On November 4, Kofa was stationed in He Town by boat. A messenger reported that the Qing troops had entered the Suqian area. Kofa led the soldiers into the Baiyang River and ordered the chief military officer Liu Zhaoji to go to support.

古文：大清兵还攻邳州，肇基复援之，相持半月而解。
现代文：大清部队回头攻打邳州，肇基又援助当地驻军，与大清军相持半个月才解邳州之围。
English: The Great Qing Army turned back to attack Bozhou, and Zhao Ji also assisted the local garrison. It took half a month to break the siege of Bozhou with the Great Qing Army.

古文：时自成既走陕西，犹未灭，可法请颁讨贼诏书，言：
现代文：当时，李自成逃往陕西，还未灭亡，可法请求皇帝颁布讨贼诏书，奏章中说：
English: At that time, Li Zicheng fled to Shaanxi, and before he died, he requested the emperor to issue an edict against thieves. The edict said:

古文：自三月以来，大仇在目，一矢未加。昔晋之东也，其君臣日图中原，而仅保江左；宋之南也，其君臣尽力楚、蜀，而仅保临安。
现代文： 自今年三月以来，仇敌还在眼前，朝廷却不加剿灭，过去晋朝建都南京，君臣日思夜想要恢复中原，而仅仅保住江南而已；宋朝南渡后，君臣尽心尽力想保守楚、蜀，而仅仅保住临安而已。
English: Since March this year, the enemy is still in front of us, but the imperial court has not been annihilated. In the past, the Jin Dynasty built Nanjing as the capital, and the monarchs and ministers thought about restoring the Central Plains day and night, but only kept the south of the Yangtze River; after the Song Dynasty went south, the monarchs and ministers tried their best to keep Chu and Shu, but only kept Lin'an.

古文：盖偏安者，恢复之退步，未有志在偏安，而遽能自立者也。
现代文：这样说来，偏安只能是为恢复而退步，没有志在偏安，就能自立于不败之地的。
English: In this way, partial security can only be a step backward for recovery, and without aspiring to partial security, it can be self-reliant in an invincible position.

古文：大变之初，黔黎洒泣，绅士悲哀，犹有朝气。
现代文：北京陷落之初，黎民百姓洒泪沾襟，官僚士绅悲愤哀痛，还有报仇雪耻的朝气。
English: At the beginning of the fall of Beijing, the people of Lai Min were in tears, the bureaucrats and gentry were sad and angry, and there was a youthful spirit of revenge.

古文：今则兵骄饷绌，文恬武嬉，顿成暮气矣。
现代文：现在却是军队骄横，粮饷缺乏，文官安坐，武官嬉闹，顿时成了暮气沉沉。
English: Now, however, the army is arrogant, there is a lack of food and water, the civilian officials are sitting quietly, the military attachés are frolicking, and the atmosphere has suddenly become gloomy.

古文：河上之防，百未经理，人心不肃，威令不行。
现代文：黄河上的防御设施，一切都还没办理，人心不够肃穆，命令不能执行。
English: As for the defense facilities on the Yellow River, everything has not yet been handled, people are not serious enough, and orders cannot be executed.

古文：复仇之师不闻及关、陕，讨贼之诏不闻达燕、齐。
现代文：复仇的军队没有听说开向关、陕，讨贼的诏书至今没传到燕、齐。
English: The vengeful army did not hear about the opening of Xiangguan and Shaanxi, and the edict to catch thieves has not yet reached Yan and Qi.

古文：君父之仇，置诸膜外。
现代文：君父的大仇被置之度外。
English: Your father's great revenge was left out.

古文：夫我即卑宫菲食，尝胆卧薪，聚才智精神，枕戈待旦，合方州物力，破釜沉舟，尚虞无救。
现代文：况且，就是人们能住草篷，吃粗食，卧薪尝胆，聚人才，养精神，枕戈待旦，动用全国的物力，破釜沉舟，决一死战，还怕无法解除国家的危亡哩。
English: Moreover, even if the people can live in grass tents, eat coarse food, sleep under logs, taste gall, gather talents, raise spirits, wait patiently, use the material resources of the whole country, break the pot and sink the boat, and fight to the death, they are still afraid of being unable to relieve the country's peril.

古文：以臣观庙堂谋画，百执事经营，殊未尽然。
现代文：就我看朝廷中君臣的战略决策，大臣们的所作所为，很有不对的地方。
English: As far as I am concerned, there is something very wrong with the strategic decision-making and the actions of the ministers in the imperial court.

古文：夫将所以能克敌者，气也；君所以能御将者，志也。
现代文：将领用以克敌制胜的是人心中的勇气；君主用以驾驭将领的是伟大的志向。
English: It is the valour of the heart which enables a general to overcome his enemies; it is the ambition of greatness which enables a prince to control his generals.

古文：庙堂志不奋，则行间气不鼓。
现代文：朝廷中志向不能激励，行伍间的勇气就不能鼓足。
English: Ambition cannot be inspired in the imperial court, and courage cannot be mustered in the ranks.

古文：夏少康不忘出窦之辱，汉光武不忘爇薪之时。
现代文：夏朝的少康不忘父王失国后从地穴中逃出性命的耻辱，汉朝的光武帝不忘兄长被杀后用柴草焚烧时的心情，所以都能有所成就。
English: The Xia Dynasty's Shao Kang did not forget the humiliation of escaping from the pit after his father lost the country, and the Han Dynasty's Guangwu Emperor did not forget the mood when his brother was burned with firewood after being killed, so they can all achieve something.

古文：臣愿陛下为少康、光武，不愿左右在位，仅以晋元、宋高之说进也。
现代文：我愿陛下像少康、光武那样，不希望身边的大臣仅仅把晋元帝、宋高宗那样的说法进呈给您。
English: I hope that Your Majesty, like Shokang and Guangwu, does not want the ministers around you to just present you with statements like Emperor Jin and Emperor Song.

古文：先皇帝死于贼，恭皇帝亦死于贼，此千古未有之痛也。
现代文： 先皇帝死于乱贼手下，恭皇帝也死于乱贼手下，这是千古不曾有过的哀痛。
English: The first emperor died at the hands of bandits, and Emperor Gong also died at the hands of bandits. This is a sorrow that has never been seen in thousands of years.

古文：在北诸臣，死节者无多；在南诸臣，讨贼者复少。此千古未有之耻也。
现代文：当时在北边的大臣忠节死难的不多；在南方的大臣讨伐贼寇的又少，这真是千古不曾有过的耻辱啊！
English: At that time, there were not many ministers loyal to the north who died in battle; and there were few ministers in the south who fought against the bandits. This was truly a disgrace that had not been seen in thousands of years!

古文：庶民之家，父兄被杀，尚思穴胸断〈月豆〉，得而甘心，况在朝廷，顾可漠置。
现代文：平民百姓的家里，父母兄弟被人杀了，还想抛颅头、洒热血，杀了敌人方才甘心。对于朝廷来说，难道就这样置之于脑后了吗？
English: In the homes of ordinary people, parents and siblings have been killed by someone, and they still want to throw the head, spill hot blood, and kill the enemy before they are willing. For the court, is this how they put it behind them?

古文：臣愿陛下速发讨贼之诏，责臣与诸镇悉简精锐，直指秦关，悬上爵以待有功，假便宜而责成效，丝纶之布，痛切淋漓，庶海内忠臣义士，闻而感愤也。
现代文：我请求陛下迅速发布讨贼的诏书，授权我和各镇军官都挑选精锐的部队，一直打向秦、关，并请悬上等的爵位用以封赏有功的大臣，给各位将领便宜行事的权力用以敦取成功。对天下发布的诏书，应当痛切淋漓，以便使海内的忠臣义士，听读之后感动、发愤。
English: I request Your Majesty to quickly issue an edict to hunt down the thieves, authorizing me and the officers of each town to select the best troops, and to continue to fight against Qin and Guan. I also request that high ranks be used to reward meritorious ministers, and that generals be given the power to act cheaply in order to achieve success. The edict issued to the world should be poignant, so that loyal patriots at home will be moved and angry after reading it.

古文：国家遘此大变，陛下嗣登大宝，与先朝不同。
现代文： 国家在遭了这次祸变后，陛下才接着登上皇帝的宝位，所以与以前不同。
English: After the country suffered this calamity, His Majesty ascended the throne of the emperor, so it was different from before.

古文：诸臣但有罪之当诛，曾无功之足录。
现代文：大臣们只有该诛杀的罪过，没有什么值得登录的功劳。
English: The ministers only have the crime of the battle, there is no merit to be recorded.

古文：今恩外加恩未已，武臣腰玉，名器滥觞。
现代文：现在皇上您恩外又加恩典，使得武将腰缠宝玉，重臣滥饮如泥。
English: Now, Your Majesty, Your grace and favor have made the generals waist-deep in jewels, and the senior vassals drunk as mud.

古文：自后宜慎重，务以爵禄待有功，庶猛将武夫有所激厉。
现代文：今后应该慎重一些，务必把爵位、俸禄加封给实有功劳的人，以便使猛将武夫有所激励。
English: In the future, we should be more cautious, and be sure to give peerages and salaries to those who have made real contributions, so as to encourage fierce warriors.

古文：兵行最苦无粮，搜括既不可行，劝输亦难为继。
现代文：另外军队在外，最怕的是没有粮草，搜括百姓既不能行，劝人捐助也很难维持。
English: In addition, the army is outside, the most feared thing is that there is no grain and grass, it is not possible to collect the people, and it is difficult to persuade people to donate.

古文：请将不急之工程，可已之繁费，朝夕之燕衎，左右之进献，一切报罢。
现代文：我请陛下把不紧要的工程，可以不花的费用，白日黑夜的晏乐，左右大臣的进贡，这一切都宣布停罢了吧。
English: I ask Your Majesty to declare a halt to all non-essential projects, expenses that can be spared, pleasures of the day and night, and tribute payments by ministers of the left and right.

古文：即事关典礼，亦宜概从节省。
现代文：即使事关国家的典礼，也应该一概考虑节省。
English: Even when it comes to state ceremonies, savings should always be considered.

古文：盖贼一日未灭，即有深宫曲房，锦衣玉食，岂能安享！
现代文：因为贼寇一日不灭亡，就是有幽静的宫殿，储秀的香阁，锦绣的衣服，美味的珍馐，陛下您能心安理得地享用吗？
English: Because if the bandits do not perish for a day, there will be a secluded palace, a beautiful Shangge, embroidered clothes, delicious delicacies, Your Majesty, can you enjoy them with peace of mind?

古文：必刻刻在复仇雪耻，振举朝之精神，萃万方之物力，尽并于送将练兵一事，庶人心可鼓，天意可回。
现代文：所以一定得时时刻刻以报仇为念，振奋举朝文武的精神，集聚四面八方的物力，一齐集中在选将练兵这件事上，以期人心鼓舞，众志成城，老天爷的心会重新向着我大明王朝。 
English: Therefore, we must always keep revenge in mind, invigorate the spirit of upholding the principles of literature and military arts, gather material resources from all over the world, and focus on the selection and training of generals, in the hope that people will be inspired, people's aspirations will be fulfilled, and God's heart will turn to me and the Ming Dynasty.

古文：可法每缮疏，循环讽诵，声泪俱下，闻者无不感泣。
现代文：可法每次写好奏章，必定一遍又一遍地朗读，自己声泪俱下，身边的人听了也感动得流下眼泪。
English: But every time I write a good piece of music, I must read it over and over again, with tears in my voice, and the people around me are also moved to tears.

古文：比大清兵已下邳、宿，可法飞章报。
现代文：等到大清兵已经打下邳州、宿松时，可法迅速递奏章向皇帝报告。
English: When the soldiers of the Great Qing Dynasty had defeated Zhangzhou and Suqiao, he could quickly deliver a report to the emperor.

古文：士英谓人曰： 渠欲叙防河将士功耳。 
现代文：士英对人说 ：他不过是想为防河将士纪功罢了。 
English: Shi Ying said to the man: He just wanted to do his duty to guard the river.

古文：慢弗省。
现代文：因此心下怠慢而未加思考。
English: Therefore, the mind is careless and does not think.

古文：而诸镇逡巡无进师意，且数相攻。
现代文：而各镇军队犹豫不决，都没有出兵救援的意思，而且相互之间几度开战。
English: But the town armies hesitated, had no intention of sending troops to rescue, and several times went to war with each other.

古文：明年，是为大清顺治之二年，正月，饷缺，诸军皆饥。
现代文：第二年，也就是大清顺治二年正月，粮饷缺乏，各军兵士都不胜饥饿。
English: In the second year, that is, the first month of the second year of the Great Qing Dynasty, there was a shortage of grain, and soldiers of all armies were starving.

古文：顷之，河上告警。
现代文：不久，黄河防线上传来警报。
English: Soon after, an alarm sounded on the Yellow River defense line.

古文：诏良佐、得功率师扼颍、寿，杰进兵归、徐。
现代文：皇帝下诏书命令良佐、得功率军扼守颍、寿两地，高杰进军归、徐两地。
English: The emperor issued an edict ordering the Liangzao and Deqiang armies to hold the two places of Shao and Shou, and Gao Jie to march into the two places of Gu and Xu.

古文：杰至睢州，为许定国所杀。
现代文：高杰到达睢州，被许定国杀害。
English: Gao Jie arrived in Zhangzhou and was killed by Xu Dingguo.

古文：部下兵大乱，屠睢旁近二百里殆尽。
现代文：他部下的军队乱了套，把方圆近二百里的人民屠杀殆尽。
English: The army of his subordinates went haywire, slaughtering the entire population of a nearly two-hundred-mile radius.

古文：变闻，可法流涕顿足叹曰： 中原不可为矣。 
现代文：可法听说此事，流着泪，跺着脚叹息说 ：中原地区也无法保住了。 
English: When Kofa heard about this, she shed tears, stamped her feet and sighed, saying, "The Central Plains region cannot be saved either."

古文：遂如徐州，以总兵李本身为提督，统杰兵。本身者，杰甥也。
现代文：于是到徐州，命令总兵李本身当提督，统领高杰的部队，本身是高杰的外甥。
English: So he went to Xuzhou and ordered the general Li himself to be the admiral, commanding Gao Jie's troops. He was Gao Jie's nephew.

古文：以胡茂顺为督师中军，李成栋为徐州总兵，诸将各分地，又立杰子元爵为世子，请恤于朝。军乃定。
现代文：任命胡茂顺为中军提督，李成栋做徐州总兵，每个将领分别管辖一地。又立高杰的儿子高元爵做世子，请朝廷对他加以抚恤，高杰的军队这才安定下来。
English: He appointed Hu Maosun as the admiral of the Chinese army, and Li Chengdong as the general of the Xuzhou army, and each general separately governed a place. He also appointed Gao Jie's son, Gao Yuanjie, as his heir, and asked the court to give him a pension. Only then did Gao Jie's army settle down.

古文：杰军既还，于是大梁以南皆不守。
现代文：由于高杰的军队不得已撤回，大梁以南的地方都失守了。
English: Since Gao Jie's army was forced to withdraw, all the places south of the girder were lost.

古文：土英忌可法威名，加故中允卫胤文兵部右侍郎，总督兴平军，以夺可法权。
现代文：士英妒忌可法的名声，晋升原中允官卫胤文为兵部右侍郎，总管兴平的军队，以此削弱可法的兵权。
English: Judge Ying envied Kehoe's reputation and promoted former Vice Admiral Wei Tan-man to the position of the right hand man of the military department and the commander-in-chief of Xingping's army, thereby weakening Kehoe's military power.

古文：胤文，杰同乡也，陷贼南还，杰请为己监军。
现代文：胤文是高杰的同乡，在北京曾陷于贼寇之手，后来南下回朝，高杰请他做自己的监军。
English: Tan Wen was Gao Jie's fellow villager. He had fallen into the hands of thieves and robbers in Beijing. Gao Jie later invited him to be his bodyguard when he returned to the North.

古文：杰死，胤文承士英旨，疏诮可法。
现代文：高杰死后，胤文接到士英的指授，上书皇帝讥笑可法。
English: After Gao Jie's death, Yan Wen received the instruction from Shi Ying, and the emperor sneered at the letter.

古文：士英喜，故有是命，驻扬州。
现代文：士英大喜，所以才有这个任命，让他驻军扬州。
English: Shi Ying was overjoyed, which is why this appointment was made, allowing him to be stationed in Yangzhou.

古文：二月，可法还扬州。未至，得功来袭兴平军，城中大惧。
现代文：二月，可法回扬州，还没到，得功率兵来袭击兴平军，扬州城中军民非常恐惧。
English: In February, Kofo returned to Yangzhou, but before he arrived, he was attacked by powerful soldiers of the Xingping Army. The military and civilians in Yangzhou were very afraid.

古文：可法遣官讲解。乃引去。
现代文：可法派遣官员前往为双方调和，得功才率兵离去。
English: The law can send officials to mediate between the two sides, and only the winner can lead the soldiers to leave.

古文：时大兵已取山东、河南北，逼淮南。
现代文：当时，大清兵已攻下山东、黄河南北的地区，逼进淮南。
English: At that time, the Qing soldiers had already conquered Shandong and the areas north and south of the Yellow River, and forced their way into Huainan.

古文：四月朔，可法移军驻泗州，护祖陵。
现代文：四月初一，可法率军转移，打算到泗水驻扎，护守明朝的祖陵。
English: On the first day of April, the French-led army was transferred, intending to be stationed in Surabaya to guard the Ming Dynasty's ancestral mausoleum.

古文：将行，左良玉称兵犯阙，召可法入援。
现代文：正打算去，左良玉叛乱，皇宫受到侵犯，朝廷召史可法前去支援。
English: While he was planning to go, Saaroyama rebelled, the Imperial Palace was invaded, and the Imperial Court called on Shikoh to come to their aid.

古文：渡江抵燕子矶，得功已败良玉军。
现代文：可法度江抵达燕子矶，得功已经把良玉的军队打败。
English: However, when the Fadu River arrived at Yanzhi Qiao, it had already defeated the army of Liangyu.

古文：可法乃趋天长，檄诸将救盱眙。
现代文：可法于是率兵到天长去，传檄号召各地将领救援盱眙。
English: But the law then led the soldiers to Tianchang, and sent out a call for generals from all over the country to come to the rescue.

古文：俄报盱眙已降大清，泗州援将侯方岩全军没。
现代文：不多时，探马来报，说盱眙已经投降大清，前往救援的泗州将领侯方严全军覆没。
English: Not infrequently, a report came from Tanma, saying that Yao had surrendered to Dajing, and that the entire army of Fang Yan, the general of Zhangzhou, who went to the rescue, had been wiped out.

古文：可法一日夜奔还扬州。讹传定国兵将至，歼高氏部曲。城中人悉斩关出，舟楫一空。可法檄各镇兵，无一至者。
现代文：可法一天一夜飞奔而回防守扬州，当时谣言说许定国的军队要来歼灭高氏的部队，扬州城中士民全都砸坏城门，外出逃命，大小船只为之一空，可法传檄召各镇兵，没有一处前来响应。
English: But one day and night, he rushed back to defend Yangzhou. At that time, there was a rumor that the army of Xu Dingguo would come to annihilate Gao's troops. The sergeants and people of Yangzhou City all broke down the city gate and fled for their lives. Large and small ships were empty. He summoned soldiers from all towns, but no one came to respond.

古文：二十日，大清兵大至，屯班竹园。明日，总兵李栖凤、监军副使高岐凤拔营出降，城中势益单。
现代文：本月二十日，大清军大举而来，驻扎在斑竹园，第二天，总兵官李栖凤、监军副使高岐凤拔营投降了清军，城中力量更加单薄。
English: On the 20th of this month, the Great Qing Army arrived en masse and was stationed in the Mottled Bamboo Garden. The next day, the general officer Li Qifeng and the deputy commander of the army, Gaoqi Feng, surrendered to the Qing Army, and the strength in the city was even thinner.

古文：诸文武分陴拒守。
现代文：可法命令文臣武将们分别登上城墙拒敌守城。
English: However, the law ordered the civil servants and generals to ascend the city wall separately to prevent the enemy from defending the city.

古文：旧城西门险要，可法自守之。
现代文：扬州旧城的西门形势险要，可法亲自把守。
English: The situation at the west gate of the old city of Yangzhou is critical, and the law can personally guard it.

古文：作书寄母妻，且曰： 死葬我高皇帝陵侧。 
现代文：可法又写信给母亲和妻子嘱咐说 ：我死后把我安葬在高皇帝的坟墓边侧。 
English: But he also wrote to his mother and wife, instructing them: "When I die, bury me next to Emperor Gao's tomb.

古文：越二日，大清兵薄城下，炮击城西北隅，城遂破。
现代文：过了两天，清兵逼近城下，用火炮轰炸西北角，扬州城陷落。
English: After two days, the Qing soldiers approached the city, bombarded the northwest corner with artillery, and Yangzhou City fell.

古文：可法自刎不殊，一参将拥可法出小东门，遂被执。可法大呼曰： 我史督师也。 
现代文：可法拔刀自杀而未死成，一参将护他从小东门出去，被清军抓住，可法大声呼叫说 ：我是史督师。 
English: Kofa drew his sword and committed suicide, but he did not die. A gendarme escorted him out of the small east gate, and he was caught by the Qing army. Kofa called out loudly, "I am a historian."

古文：遂杀之。
现代文：就此被杀。
English: The man then killed Yasuko.

古文：扬州知府任民育，同知曲从直、王缵爵，江都知县周志畏、罗伏龙，两淮盐运使杨振熙，监饷知县吴道正，江都县丞王志端，赏功副将汪思诚，幕客卢渭等皆死。
现代文：扬州知府任民育，同知曲从直、王缵爵，江都知县周志畏、罗伏龙，两淮盐运史杨振熙，监管粮饷的知县吴道正，江都县丞王志端，赏功副将汪思诚，幕客卢渭等都一齐遇害。
English: Ren Minyu, governor of Yangzhou, Zong Zhi Zi, Wang Xizhe, governor of Zhigu, Zhou Zhigui and Luo Fulong, governors of Jiangdu, Yang Zhenxi, governor of Zhigu, Wu Daozheng, governor of Zhigu, Wang Zhiduan, governor of Jiangdu, Wang Shicheng, vice-commander of the Order of Merit, and Lu Wei, a guest of the shogunate, were all killed together.

古文：可法初以定策功加少保兼太子太保，以太后至加少傅兼太子太傅，叙江北战功加少师兼太子太师，擒剧盗程继孔功加太傅，皆力辞，不允。
现代文：可法最初因扶立福王，制定国策有功封少保兼太子太保，又因太后南来封少傅兼太子太傅，排定在江北的战功又晋升少师兼太子太师，因捉拿盗贼大头目程继孔而加封太傅，他都竭力辞让，福王不准。
English: However, the law initially had the title of Shao Bao and the title of Daifu Daifu due to the founding of King Fu Fu and the establishment of national policy, and the title of Shao Fu and the title of Daifu Daifu due to the Empress Dowager's visit to the south, and the title of Shao Shi and the title of Daifu Daifu due to the war exploits in the north of the Yangtze River, and the title of Shao Shi and the title of Daifu Daifu due to the capture of the robber warlord Cheng Jikong. He tried his best to give in, but King Fu would not allow

古文：后以宫殿成，加太师，力辞，乃允。
现代文：后来因宫殿建成，加封太师，他又辞让，这次得到允许。
English: Later, because the palace was built, he was allowed to add the title of grandmaster, but he had to give it up again.

古文：可法为督师，行不张盖，食不重味，夏不箑，冬不裘，寝不解衣。
现代文：可法做督师时，外出不让人为他打顶盖，吃饭不用两样菜，夏天不用扇子，冬天不穿皮衣，睡觉不脱衣服。
English: However, when he was an inspector, he did not allow anyone to cover him when he went out, he did not need two dishes for dinner, he did not use a fan in summer, he did not wear a fur coat in winter, and he did not undress to sleep.

古文：年四十余，无子，其妻欲置妾。太息曰： 王事方殷，敢为儿女计乎！ 
现代文：四十多岁时还没有儿子，他的妻子想为他娶妾，可法叹息说： 国事正让人忧虑，怎能为生儿育女的事操心？ 
English: In his forties, he did not yet have a son, and his wife wanted to marry a concubine for him, but he sighed and said: The affairs of state are worrying people, how can I worry about having children?

古文：岁除遣文牒，至夜半，倦索酒。
现代文：有一年除夕夜签发文书，直到半夜，疲倦得想要点酒喝。
English: One year, on New Year's Eve, I stayed up until midnight to issue documents. I was so tired that I wanted to have a drink.

古文：庖人报殽肉已分给将士，无可佐者，乃取盐鼓下之。
现代文：厨师回答说 ：肉菜都已分给将士，没有剩余了，没有什么东西可以佐酒。 于是取了点咸豆豉下酒。
English: The cook replied, "All the meat and vegetables have been given to the soldiers, there is nothing left, there is nothing to make sake with," so he took some salted soybeans to make sake with.

古文：可法素善饮，数斗不乱，在军中绝饮。
现代文：可法平时很能饮酒，喝到几斗也不会醉，在军中却点酒不沾。
English: But the law is usually very able to drink alcohol, drink a few bucks and not get drunk, but in the army it does not touch alcohol.

古文：是夕，进数十觥，思先帝，泫然泪下，凭几卧。
现代文：这天晚上，连饮了几十杯，想到先帝，眼泪不觉掉下来，靠在案上睡着了。
English: That night, after drinking dozens of cups, thinking of the former emperor, tears fell unconsciously, and he fell asleep leaning on the case.

古文：比明，将士集辕门外，门不启，左右遥语其故。
现代文：等到天明，将士都聚集在辕门外，而门尚未打开，可法的侍卫官远远地告诉他们。
English: Until dawn, the soldiers were gathered outside the gate, but the door had not yet been opened, and the legal guards told them from a distance.

古文：知府民育曰： 相公此夕卧，不易得也。 
现代文：知府任民育说 ：史相公这一夜睡下，是不容易的。 
English: Governor Ren Minyu said, "It is not easy for Shisho to sleep tonight.

古文：命鼓人仍击四鼓，戒左右毋惊相公。
现代文：所以，命令报更的鼓手仍然敲报四更，告诫侍卫官不要惊动相公。
English: Therefore, the drummer who ordered the bell to be rung still struck the bell four times, warning the guards not to alarm the public.

古文：须臾，可法寤，闻鼓声，大怒曰： 谁犯吾令！ 
现代文：不久，可法醒来，听见鼓声，愤怒地说： 谁违反了我的命令？ 
English: Before long, Kofa woke up to the sound of the drums and angrily said, "Who disobeyed my orders?"

古文：将士述民育意，乃获免。
现代文：将士把任民育的话告诉了可法，才得以免罪。
English: The officer told the law what Ren Minyu had said, and he was exonerated.

古文：尝孑处铃阁或舟中，有言宜警备者，曰： 命在天。 
现代文：可法常独处于铃阁或战船中，有人劝他应加以警戒，他说： 命运交由老天掌握吧。 
English: However, he was often alone in a pavilion or a warship, and someone advised him to be on his guard. He said, "Leave your fate in God's hands."

古文：可法死，觅其遗骸。天暑，众尸蒸变，不可辩识。
现代文：可法死后，人们寻找他的尸体，因为天气炎热，许多尸体堆聚在一处都变了形，不能识别。
English: After Kofa's death, people searched for his body, but because of the hot weather, many of the bodies piled up in one place were deformed and could not be identified.

古文：我他日不归，以指葬可也。 
现代文：过了一年，他的家里用他的官袍和笏板为他招魂，埋葬在扬州城外梅花岭上。
English: A year later, his family used his official robe and chopping board to summon his spirit, and he was buried on Meihua Ridge outside Yangzhou.

古文：从高杰北征至睢州，杰被难，尔壎流寓祥符。遇一妇人，自言福王妃。尔壎因守臣附疏以进，诏斥其妄言，逮之，可法为救免。
现代文：可法死后，各地带兵的将领都假借他的名号活动，所以当时人们都说史可法还没有死。评论：史可法有感于国运艰难，赤胆忠心，发愤而起，在长江沿岸提督官兵，扼守南北的要害之地，兵分四镇星罗棋布，相互联络、声援，以期复兴明朝。
English: After Kofa's death, generals with troops from all over the country used his name to carry out activities, so people said at the time that Kofa was not dead. Comment: Kofa was impressed by the difficult national situation, loyal and loyal, and became angry. Admiral officers and soldiers along the Yangtze River, guarding the key areas in the north and south, and soldiers from four towns spread all over the world, communicated with each other and supported each other, with a view to reviving the Ming Dynasty.

古文：后守扬州新城，投井死。高弘图，字研文，胶州人。
现代文：然而，老天都在削割明朝的国运，朝中掌权的大臣从上边对他加以牵制，在外的将领又飞扬跋扈，最后导致军队挫败，粮饷缺乏，明朝领土一天一天地缩小，扬州这座孤城无法防守，史可法志向坚定，以身殉国，这是多么地让人悲哀啊！高弘图，字研文，胶州人。
English: However, all the gods were trying to curtail the Ming Dynasty's national movement. The ministers in power in the Middle Kingdom and the Middle Kingdom restrained him from the top, and the generals outside were also flying around. In the end, the army was defeated, food was scarce, the territory of the Middle Kingdom was shrinking day by day, Yangzhou, a lonely city, could not be defended, and Shikho aspired to be firm and martyred himself. How sad this was! Gao Hongtu, Zhikenwen, Jiaozhou people.

古文：万历三十八年进士。
现代文：万历三十八年进士。
English: In the thirty-eighth year of Wanli, he became a priest.

古文：授中书舍人，擢御史。
现代文：初任中书舍人，升为御史。
English: He was initially a junior high school teacher before being promoted to the position of Imperial Historian.

古文：柧棱自持，不依丽人。
现代文：他为人方正有个性，不依附别人。
English: He is very personable and doesn't cling to others.

古文：天启初，陈时政八患，请用邹元标、赵南星。
现代文：天启初年，弘图上书评论当时政治的八项弊端，请求任用邹元标、赵南星。
English: In the first year of Tianqi, Hongtu commented on the eight drawbacks of politics at that time in a letter and requested the appointment of Zhao Nanxing.

古文：巡按陕西，题荐属吏，赵南星纠之，弘图不能无望，代还，移疾去。
现代文：后来他外出巡按陕西时上书推荐手下的官吏，赵南星检举他的过失，弘图心中不由不怨恨，被人接任返朝后，他称病回乡去了。
English: Later, when he was out on a tour of Shaanxi, he wrote to recommend officials under his command, Zhao Nansing reported his negligence, and Hongtu couldn't help but feel resentment. After he was taken over and returned to the North, he said he was ill and went back to his hometown.

古文：魏忠贤亟攻东林，其党以弘图尝与南星有隙，召起弘图故官。入都，则杨涟、左光斗、魏大中等已下诏狱，锻炼严酷。
现代文：魏忠贤急于攻击东林党人，他的党羽认为弘图曾经与南星有矛盾，就召弘图出来担任原职，弘图进京以后，杨涟、左光斗、魏大中等人已经关进了皇家监狱，对他们的拷打很严酷。
English: Wei Zhongxian was eager to attack the Donglin Party members. His followers believed that Hongtu had been in conflict with Nanxing, so he called Hongtu out to take up his original post. After Hongtu entered Beijing, Yang Hui, Zuo Guangdou, Wei Dai and others had been imprisoned in the royal prison, and they were severely tortured.

古文：弘图果疏论南星，然言 国是已明，雷霆不宜频击 ， 诏狱诸臣，生杀宜听司败法 ，则颇谓忠贤过当者。
现代文：弘图果然上书评论南星，但是书中也讲 国事现已明了，皇上也不应该老是发火  ，皇家监狱中的几个大臣，对他们的生杀应该由刑官的法律来决定 ，很有一些认为忠贤过分的意思。
English: Hongtu indeed wrote a book to comment on Nan Xing, but the book also said that the affairs of state were now clear, the emperor should not always be angry, several ministers in the royal prison, and their life and death should be determined by the law of the executioner, and there were many people who thought that loyalty and virtue were excessive.

古文：疏中又引汉元帝乘船事，忠贤方导帝游幸，不悦，矫旨切责之。
现代文：奏疏中又援引了汉元帝乘船游玩的事，当时忠贤正引导熹宗四处出游，所以忠贤不高兴了，代皇帝拟了一道诏书严厉批评了他。
English: The record also cites the story of Emperor Hanyuan's boat trip. At that time, Zhongxian was guiding Shanzong on his travels. As a result, Zhongxian was displeased and drafted an edict on behalf of the emperor, severely criticizing him.

古文：后谏帝毋出跸东郊，又极论前陕西巡抚乔应甲罪，又尝语刺崔呈秀。
现代文：后来弘图又谏阻熹宗到东郊出游，又极力讲原陕西巡抚乔应甲的罪行，还上书隐约地批评了崔呈秀。
English: Later, Hongtu also tried to prevent Xizong from traveling to the eastern suburbs, and tried to talk about the crimes of the former Shaanxi governor Qiao Yingjia. He also vaguely criticized Cui Chengxiu in a letter.

古文：呈秀、应甲皆忠贤党，由是忠贤大怒，拟顺天巡按不用。弘图乞归，遂令闲住。
现代文：呈秀、应甲都是忠贤的同伙，因此忠贤很恼火，朝廷拟定让弘图出任顺天巡按，忠贤不用他，弘图请求弃官回乡，忠贤就命令他回家闲住去。
English: Chengxiu and Yingjia were both associates of Zhongxian. As a result, Zhongxian was very annoyed. The imperial court proposed that Hongtu should be appointed as the Shun Tian Junpo, but Zhongxian did not use him. Hongtu requested to resign and return to his hometown, and Zhongxian ordered him to go home and stay idle.

古文：庄烈帝即位，起故官。
现代文：庄烈帝即位后，弘图起复原职。
English: After Emperor Zhuang was enthroned, Hongtu was reinstated.

古文：劾罪田诏、刘志选、梁梦环。
现代文：他上书弹劾田诏、刘志选、梁梦环，这三个人都被问了罪。
English: He wrote a letter of impeachment against Tian Zhao, Liu Zhixuan, and Liang Menghuan, and all three of them were charged with crimes.

古文：擢太仆少卿，复移疾去。
现代文：朝廷提拔他为太仆少卿，他又称病离职走了。
English: The imperial court promoted him to the position of a servant of the emperor, but he left the post, saying he was ill.

古文：三年春，召拜左佥都御史，进左副都御史。
现代文：崇祯三年春天，朝廷召他入朝担任左佥都御史，又升为左副都御史。
English: In the spring of the third year of the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, the imperial court called him to the imperial court to serve as the Left Deputy Metropolitan Historian, and he was promoted to the Left Deputy Metropolitan Historian.

古文：五年迁工部右侍郎。
现代文：五年升为工部右侍郎。
English: Five years later, he was promoted to the position of the right hand man of the engineering department.

古文：方入署，总理户、工二部中官张彝宪来会，弘图耻之，不与共坐，七疏乞休。
现代文：他刚刚上任，总理户、工二部的宦官张彝宪来见他，弘图对此感到羞辱，不和他一起坐，后来七次上书请求解任。
English: He had just taken office when the Prime Minister and Zhang Yixian, the eunuch of the Second Department of the Ministry of Industry and Commerce, came to see him. Hongtu felt humiliated and did not sit with him. Later, he wrote seven times to request his dismissal.

古文：帝怒，遂削籍归，家居十年不起。
现代文：庄烈帝恼了，就把他削了官籍，让他回去了，从此他在家住了十年没得到过征召。
English: Zhuang Rongdi was annoyed, so he cut off his official registration and let him go back. Since then, he has lived at home for ten years and has never been conscripted.

古文：十六年，召拜南京兵部右侍郎，就迁户部尚书。
现代文：十六年，朝廷召他出任南京兵部左侍郎，当即就升为户部尚书。
English: Sixteen years later, the imperial court called him to serve as the left attendant of the Nanjing Military Department, and he was immediately promoted to the household secretary.

古文：明年三月，京师陷，福王立，改弘图礼部尚书兼东阁大学士。
现代文：第二年三月，京师失守，福王即位后，让弘图改任礼部尚书兼东阁大学士。
English: In March of the following year, after the defeat of the Beijing division and the ascension of King Fu to the throne, Hongtu was reassigned to the Department of Etiquette and Literature and became a scholar at Donggak University.

古文：疏陈新政八事。一，宣义问。
现代文：弘图上书就新政讲了八件事：一，宣布举义兵，问贼罪。
English: Hongtu's letter mentioned eight things about the New Deal: First, he announced the raising of volunteer soldiers and asked about the crime of theft.

古文：请声逆贼之罪，鼓发忠义。
现代文：请宣传反贼的罪行，激发天下人的忠勇义愤。
English: Please publicize the anti-thief crimes and arouse the loyalty, courage and righteous indignation of the people of the world.

古文：一，勤圣学。
现代文：二，勤奋钻研圣人的学说。
English: Second, diligently study the teachings of the sages.

古文：请不俟释服，日御讲筵。
现代文：请求福王不必等脱下丧服，每天到讲筵前学习。
English: Please do not wait for King Fook to take off his mourning clothes and come to study every day before the sermon.

古文：一，设记注。
现代文：三，设置记注官。
English: Third, set up a notetaker.

古文：请召词臣入侍，日记言动。
现代文：请召词臣进宫侍卫，每天记下皇上的一言一行。
English: Invite the courtiers to enter the palace and take down the emperor's every word and deed.

古文：一，睦亲藩。
现代文：四，团结藩王。
English: Fourth, unite the king of the domain.

古文：请如先朝践极故事，遣官赍玺书慰问。
现代文：请按照以前各朝皇上即位的成例，派官员持玺书前往各藩王处慰问。
English: Please follow the precedent of previous emperors ascending to the throne, and send officials with letters of condolence to the kings of each domain.

古文：一，议庙祀。
现代文：五，讨论宗庙祭祀。
English: Fifth, discuss the rituals of the ancestral temple.

古文：请权附列圣神主于奉先殿，仍于孝陵侧望祀列圣山陵。
现代文：请暂且把历朝圣主的神位安排在奉先殿里，仍然在孝陵一旁遥对历朝圣主的陵墓进行祭祀。
English: For the time being, please arrange the throne of the Lord of the Pilgrimage in the Funzen hall, and still worship the mausoleum of the Lord of the Pilgrimage next to the Xiaoling.

古文：一，严章奏。
现代文：六，严格规定臣民上书和进奏的程序。
English: Sixthly, the procedures for the submission of documents and the introduction of music by the subjects are strictly stipulated.

古文：请禁奸宄小人借端妄言，脱罪侥幸。
现代文：请禁止奸邪小人借题发挥，随意上书，开脱罪责，谋取升官。
English: Please prohibit evil villains from using the topic to play, to write at will, to absolve themselves of guilt, and to seek promotion.

古文：一，收人心。
现代文：七，笼络人心。
English: Seven, win the hearts and minds of people.

古文：请蠲江北、河南、山东田租，毋使贼徒藉口。
现代文：请免除江北、河南、山东的田租，不要让贼寇从朝廷这里寻找借口。
English: Please exempt Jiangbei, Henan and Shandong from land rent, and don't let the thieves and robbers find excuses from the imperial court.

古文：一，择诏使。
现代文：八，选择钦差使节。
English: Eight, choose the envoys sent by the emperor.

古文：请遣官招谕朝鲜，示牵制之势。
现代文：请派遣官员去通报朝鲜出兵，显现出牵制敌人的局势。
English: Please dispatch officials to inform the DPRK of the dispatch of troops and reveal the situation of the containment of the enemy.

古文：并褒纳焉。
现代文：福王都高兴地采纳了。
English: All of them happily accepted.

古文：当是时，朝廷大议多出弘图手。
现代文：在那个时候，朝廷的重要决定大多出于弘图的拟定。
English: At that time, most of the important decisions of the imperial court were based on the drafting of the Hongtu.

古文：马士英疏荐阮大铖，弘图不可。
现代文：马士英上书推荐阮大铖，弘图不答应。
English: Ma Shih-ying sent a letter to recommend Nguyen Dai Quang, but Hongtu did not agree.

古文：士英曰： 我自任之。 
现代文：士英说： 我自己承担责任。 
English: Shi Ying said: I take the responsibility myself.

古文：乃命大铖假冠带陛见。
现代文：于是让大铖借了衣冠觐见福王。
English: So he let Daju borrow his robe to see King Fu.

古文：大铖入见，历陈冤状，以弘图不附东林引为证。
现代文：大铖进见时一一数说自己的冤情，拿弘图过去不追随东林党人当成自己的证据。
English: When Daju saw Jin, he said his grievances one by one, taking Hongtu's past of not following the Donglin Party members as his own evidence.

古文：弘图则力言逆案不可翻，大铖、士英并怒。
现代文：弘图却极力讲逆党的案子不能翻，大铖、士英都恼恨他。
English: However, Hongtu tried his best to argue that the case against the party could not be overturned, and Dazhao and Shiying both resented him.

古文：一日，阁中语及故庶吉士张溥，士英曰： 我故人也，死，酹而哭之。 
现代文：一天，大家在内阁里谈到原庶吉士张溥，士英说： 他是我的朋友，他死后，我摆出酒肉祭奠并哭过他。 
English: One day, everyone in the cabinet was talking about Zhang Ye, a descendant of the original confectioner. Shi Ying said: He was my friend. After his death, I made a wine and meat offering and cried for him.

古文：姜曰广笑曰： 公哭东林者，亦东林耶？ 
现代文：姜曰广大笑着说： 你哭东林党人，难道你也是东林党人？ 
English: Jiang said with a broad smile, "You cry Donglin Party member, are you also a Donglin Party member?

古文：士英曰： 我非畔东林者，东林拒我耳。 
现代文：士英说 ：我并没有背叛东林党，是东林党人拒我于门外的嘛。 
English: Shi Ying said: I did not betray the Donglin Party, it was the Donglin Party members who turned me away.

古文：弘图因纵臾之，士英意解。
现代文：弘图借此附和了他几句，士英对他的怒气才消失。
English: With this, Hongtu echoed some of his words, and Shi Ying's anger toward him disappeared.

古文：而刘宗周劾疏自外至，大铖宣言曰广实使之，于是士英怒不可止。
现代文：然而这时刘宗周弹劾士英的奏章从外边送了进来，大铖扬言说是曰广主使的，于是士英怒不可止。
English: However, at this time, Liu Zongzhou's impeachment of Shi Ying was sent in from the outside, and Dazhao threatened to say that it was sent by Guang Shushi, so Shi Ying's anger could not be stopped.

古文：而荐张捷、谢升之疏出，朝端益水火矣。
现代文：等推荐张捷、谢升的奏疏进来以后，朝堂之中更加沸沸扬扬，水火不相容了。
English: After the recommendation of Zhang Jie and Xie Sheng came in, there was more excitement in the morning hall, and the water and fire were incompatible.

古文：内札用户部侍郎张有誉为尚书，弘图封还，具奏力谏，卒以廷推简用。
现代文：宫中传出福王的手札要任用户部侍郎张有誉担任尚书、弘图封还御批，写奏本上去极力谏阻，最后有誉还是以朝臣推举的方式被选用了。
English: It was reported in the palace that the hand card of King Fu was to be used by Zhang You Rong, the waiter of the user department, to serve as Shangshu, Hongtu, and return the seal of approval. He tried his best to oppose it in writing, but in the end, You Rong was selected by way of a courtier's recommendation.

古文：中官议设东厂，弘图争不得。遂乞休，不许，加太子少师，改户部尚书，文渊阁。
现代文：宦官们讨论开设东厂，弘图争论没用，就请求退休，福王不同意，给他加官太子少师，让他改任户部尚书、文渊阁大学士。
English: The eunuchs discussed the opening of the East Factory, but it was useless to argue with Hongtu, so he asked to retire. Fu Wang disagreed, and gave him the position of young teacher, and let him be reassigned to the Household Department of Shangshu and the University of Wenyu Pavilion.

古文：寻以太后至，进太子太保。
现代文：不久因为太后来到南京，弘图进爵为太子太保。
English: Soon after, as the empress dowager came to Nanjing, Hongtu was given the title of crown prince.

古文：其年十月，弘图四疏乞休，乃许之。
现代文：这年十月，弘图四次上书请求退休，福王于是答应了他。
English: In October of that year, Hongtu wrote four times to request retirement, and King Fu agreed to his request.

古文：弘图既谢政，无家可归，流寓会稽。
现代文：弘图告别政坛后无家可归，客居会稽。
English: After leaving politics, Hongtu became homeless and moved into a guest house.

古文：国破，逃野寺中，绝粒而卒。
现代文：国家破灭以后，他逃进一所荒凉的寺庙中绝食死了。
English: After the collapse of the state, he fled to a desolate temple and died on a hunger strike.

