古文：子期祀平王，祭以牛俎于王，王问于观射父，曰： 祀牲何及？ 
现代文：子期祭祀楚平王，把祭祀的牛肉送给楚昭王，昭王问观射父，说： 祭祀所用的牲畜有些什么？ 
English: During his childhood, he made a sacrifice to King Chuping and gave the sacrificed beef to King Chu Zhaowang. King Zhaowang asked his father, saying, "What kind of livestock was used for the sacrifice?"

古文：对曰： 祀加于举。
现代文：观射父回答说： 祭祀比平时杀牲的盛馔要多。
English: The father replied, "There are more sacrifices than usual.

古文：天子举以大牢，祀以会；诸侯举以特牛，祀以太牢；卿举以少牢，祀以特牛；大夫举以特牲，祀以少牢；士食鱼炙，祀以特牲；庶人食菜，祀以鱼。
现代文：天子平时的盛馔用牛、羊、猪齐全的太牢，祭祀时要供上三份太牢；诸侯平时的盛馔用一头牛，祭祀时要供上太牢；卿平时的盛馔用一羊、一猪的少牢，祭祀时用一头牛；大夫平时的盛馔用一头猪，祭祀时要供上一羊、一猪的少牢；士平时的盛馔用鱼肉，祭祀时要供上一头猪；百姓平时吃菜蔬，祭祀时要供上烤鱼。
English: The son of heaven usually uses a complete set of oxen, sheep, and pigs for sacrifice, and must provide three sets of sacrifices; the princes usually use a cow for sacrifice, and must provide a set of sacrifices; the lord usually uses a sheep for sacrifice, and a pig for sacrifice, and uses a cow for sacrifice; the doctor usually uses a pig for sacrifice, and must provide a sheep and a pig for sacrifice; the priest usually uses fish for sacrifice, and must provide a pig for sacrifice; the common people usually eat vegetables, and must provide grilled fish for sacrifice.

古文：上下有序，则民不慢。 
现代文：尊卑上下有等级秩序，那么百姓就不敢轻慢。 
English: If there is a hierarchical order of superiority and inferiority, then the people will not dare to be contemptuous.

古文：王曰： 其小大何如？ 
现代文：昭王说： 祭祀用的牲畜大小如何？ 
English: King Zhao said: What is the size of the livestock used for the ritual?

古文：对曰： 郊禘不过茧栗，烝尝不过把握。 王曰： 何其小也？ 
现代文：观射父回答说： 春祭夏祭所用的牲畜，它的角不超过蚕茧、栗子那么大；冬祭秋祭所用的牲畜，它的角不超过一把那么长。 昭王说： 怎么那么小呢？ 
English: The observer replied, "The horns of the animals used in the Spring Festival and Summer Festival are no bigger than the size of a silkworm cocoon or a chestnut, while the horns of the animals used in the Winter Festival and Autumn Festival are no longer than the length of a hand."

古文：对曰： 夫神以精明临民者也，故求备物，不求丰大。
现代文：观射父回答说： 神依靠精细明察监临百姓，所以要求祭品齐备，不要求硕大。
English: Father Guanzhong replied, "God relies on meticulous observation to supervise the people, so He requires the offerings to be complete, not large.

古文：是以先王之祀也，以一纯、二精、三牲、四时、五色、六律、七事、八种、九祭、十日、十二辰以致之，百姓、千品、万官、亿丑，兆民经入畡数以奉之，明德以昭之，和声以听之，以告遍至，则无不受休。
现代文：因此先王的祭祀，用一颗纯洁的心、玉和帛二精、牛羊猪三牲、四季所生谷物、五种色彩、六种音律、七件大事、金石等八音、九州的助祭、从干支十日和十二时辰中选择吉日良辰请神来享祭，百姓、千品、万官、亿类、万兆民众以全部收入来奉献神灵，用光明的德行来昭示孝敬，演奏和谐的乐声给神听，遍告神灵都来到，都来享受吉庆。
English: Therefore, the sacrifice of the former king, with a pure heart, jade and jade, two spirits, cattle, sheep and pigs, three animals, grain produced by the four seasons, five colors, six musical rhythms, seven major events, eight tones such as gold and stones, Kyushu's assistant, from the 10th day of the Chinese zodiac and the 12th hour, choose the auspicious day to invite the gods to enjoy the sacrifice, the people, thousands, thousands, billions and trillions of people to dedicate the gods with all their income, to show their filial piety with bright virtues, to play harmonious music to the gods, and to tell the gods that they have come

古文：毛以示物，血以告杀，接诚拔取以献具，为齐敬也。
现代文：用毛表示颜色，用血表明是刚杀的牲畜，拔毛取血来奉献完备的祭品，以向神表明诚心，为的是显示严肃恭敬。
English: The hair represents the color, the blood represents the freshly slaughtered animal, and the blood is drawn from the hair to offer a complete sacrifice, to show sincerity to God, in order to show seriousness and respect.

古文：敬不可久，民力不堪，故齐肃以承之。 
现代文：敬神不能太久，民力承受不了，所以幼牲稍微长成就赶快奉献给神。 
English: It is not possible to worship God for too long, and the people's strength cannot bear it. Therefore, if the young animal is a little too long, it should be dedicated to God as soon as possible.

古文：王曰： 刍豢几何？ 
现代文：昭王说： 祭祀的牲畜要豢养多长时间？ 
English: King Zhao said: How long should the sacrificial animals be kept?

古文：对曰： 远不过三月，近不过浃日。 
现代文：观射父回答说： 大的不过三个月，小的不过十天。 
English: The father replied, "The big one is only three months old, and the little one is only ten days old.

古文：王曰： 祀不可以已乎？ 
现代文：昭王说： 祭祀不可以废除吗？ 
English: King Zhao said, "Can't the sacrificial rites be abolished?

古文：对曰： 祀所以昭孝息民、抚国家、定百姓也，不可以已。
现代文：观射父回答说： 祭祀是用来宣扬孝道、繁育人口、安抚国家、安定百姓的，不可以废除。
English: Guanzha's father replied, "Sacrifices are used to promote filial piety, increase the population, pacify the country, and stabilize the people. They cannot be abolished.

古文：夫民气纵则底，底则滞，滞久而不振，生乃不殖。
现代文：人民放纵就会堕落，堕落就会停滞不前，停滞久了就振作不起来，万物就不会繁殖生长。
English: If the people indulge, they will fall, and if they fall, they will stagnate. If they stagnate for a long time, they will not be able to cheer up, and all things will not reproduce and grow.

古文：其用不从，其生不殖，不可以封。
现代文：不服从上面的命令，又不能使万物繁殖生长，就没有可以授予的封地。
English: If you don't obey the orders from above, and you can't make all things multiply and grow, then there is no fief that can be granted.

古文：是以古者先王日祭、月享、时类、岁祀。
现代文：因此古时候先王有每天的祭祀、每月的祭祀、四季的祭祀和每年的祭祀。
English: Therefore, in ancient times, there were daily sacrifices, monthly sacrifices, four-season sacrifices, and annual sacrifices.

古文：诸侯舍日，卿、大夫舍月，士、庶人舍时。
现代文：诸侯舍去每天的祭祀，卿和大夫舍去每月的祭祀，士和百姓舍去四季的祭祀。
English: The feudal lords went to the daily sacrifice, the lords and doctors to the monthly sacrifice, and the nobles and commoners to the four-season sacrifice.

古文：天子遍祀群神品物，诸侯祀天地、三辰及其土之山川，卿、大夫祀其礼，士、庶人不过其祖。
现代文：天子普遍祭祀群神万物，诸侯祭祀天地、日月星辰以及他们封国的山川，卿和大夫祭祀礼仪规定的五祀和祖先，士和百姓只祭祀自己的祖先。
English: The heavenly sons universally sacrifice the gods and all things, the princes sacrifice the heavens and the earth, the sun, the moon, and the stars, and the mountains and rivers they have made their fiefdoms, the lords and the magistrates sacrifice the five gods and ancestors prescribed by the etiquette, and the priests and the people only sacrifice their own ancestors.

古文：日月会于龙，土气含收，天明昌作，百嘉备舍，群神频行。
现代文：日月交会在苍龙七宿的尾宿时，地气收敛，天气晴爽，各种作物都收回家储藏，群神都频频活动。
English: When the sun and moon meet at the end of the seven mansions of the dragon, the earth's atmosphere converges, the weather is fine, all kinds of crops are collected and stored at home, and the gods are frequently active.

古文：国于是乎蒸尝，家于是乎尝祀，百姓夫妇择其令辰，奉其牺牲，敬其粢盛，洁其粪除，慎其采服，禋其酒醴，帅其子姓，从其时享，虔其宗祝，道其顺辞，以昭祀其先祖，肃肃济济，如或临之。
现代文：国这时举行秋祭和冬祭，家这时也举行秋祭和冬祭，百姓之家的夫妇们选择良辰，供奉祭牲，敬献黍稷，打扫清洁，郑重穿好祭服，滤清甜酒，率领自己的子弟和同族，举行四季的祭祀，主祭的宗祝虔诚地念着祝福的祭辞，来隆重祭祀他们的祖先，恭恭敬敬，济济一堂，如同神灵降临。
English: At this time, the autumn and winter festivals are held in the country, and the autumn and winter festivals are also held at home. The couples in the people's homes choose a good time, offer sacrifices, pay tribute, clean up, solemnly wear the ceremonial clothes, filter the sweet wine, lead their children and compatriots, and hold the four-season sacrifice. The main priest reverently recites the blessing and solemnly sacrifices their ancestors, respectfully and reverently, as if the gods were coming.

古文：于是乎合其州乡朋友婚姻，比尔兄弟亲戚。于是乎弭其百苛，殄其谗慝，合其嘉好，结其亲暱，亿其上下，以申固其姓。
现代文：这时会合了在各处的亲朋好友和亲属，兄弟、亲戚相互亲近，于是消除了各种纠纷，去除了怨恨邪恶，大家和谐友好，团结亲近，上下安定，来发展巩固自己的族姓。
English: At this time, relatives, friends and relatives from all over the world, brothers and relatives who are close to each other, gathered together, thus eliminating all kinds of disputes, eliminating hatred and evil, everyone is harmonious and friendly, united and close, and stable up and down, to develop and consolidate their family name.

古文：上所以教民虔也，下所以昭事上也。
现代文：君上用祭祀来教育百姓虔诚，下民用祭祀显示事奉长上。
English: The upper echelon uses religious rites to educate the people in piety, while the lower echelons use civil rites to show that they are serving the upper echelon.

古文：天子禘郊之事，必自射其牲，王后必自舂其粢；诸侯宗庙之事，必自射牛、刲羊、击豕，夫人必自舂其盛。
现代文：天子祭天的事，一定要亲自射杀牲畜，王后一定要亲自舂好祭祀的黍稷；诸侯祭祀宗庙的事，一定要亲自射牛、宰羊、杀猪，夫人一定要亲自舂好祭祀的黍稷。
English: In the matter of the heavenly son's sacrifice, it is necessary to personally shoot the livestock, and the queen must personally prepare the sacrificial offering; in the matter of the princes' sacrifice to the ancestral temple, it is necessary to personally shoot the cattle, slaughter the sheep, and kill the pigs, and the wife must personally prepare the sacrificial offering.

古文：况其下之人，其谁敢不战战兢兢，以事百神！
现代文：更何况是在他们之下的人，谁敢不小心畏慎，来事奉百神呢！
English: How much more those who are under them, who dare to serve a hundred gods without caution!

古文：天子亲舂禘郊之盛，王后亲缲其服，自公以下至于庶人，其谁敢不齐肃恭敬致力于神！
现代文：天子亲自舂好祭天用的黍稷。王后亲自缫丝做成祭服，自公卿以下直到百姓，谁敢不严肃恭敬地为神出力呢！
English: The Son of God himself knitted the robe for the sacrifice. The Queen herself knitted the robe. From the nobles down to the common people, who would dare to work for God without seriousness and respect?

古文：民所以摄固者也，若之何其舍之也！ 王曰： 所谓一纯、二精、七事者，何也？ 
现代文：民众依靠祭祀来维持巩固，怎么能废除祭祀呢？ 昭王说： 所说的一纯、二精、七事，指的是什么？ 
English: The people rely on sacrifices to maintain their stability, so how can sacrifices be abolished? Zhao Wang said, "What do you mean by the one pure, two fine, and seven things?

古文：对曰： 圣王正端冕，以其不违心，帅其群臣精物以临监享祀，无有苛慝于神者，谓之一纯。
现代文：观射父回答说： 圣明的君王要端庄地穿戴朝服大冠，用他专注不二的心，率领群臣用精致的物品来监临祭祀，对神没有一点不正当的念头，这称为一纯。
English: Guanzha's father replied, "The king of the holy light should wear the imperial robes and crown with dignity, and with his undivided attention, he should lead his courtiers to attend the sacrificial rites with exquisite items. He should not have any improper thoughts about God. This is called "pure."

古文：玉、帛为二精。
现代文：玉和帛称为二精。
English: Jade and antimony are called the two essences.

古文：天、地、民及四时之务为七事。 
现代文：天、地、民和四季的事务称为七事。 
English: The affairs of heaven, earth, people and the four seasons are called the seven matters.

古文：王曰： 三事者，何也？ 
现代文：昭王说： 三事是什么？ 
English: King Zhao said: What are the three things?

古文：对曰： 天事武，地事文，民事忠信。 
现代文：观射父回答说： 上天的事刚健威武，大地的事柔顺温文，百姓的事忠诚有信。 
English: Guanzhe's father replied, "The things of heaven are strong and powerful, the things of the earth are gentle and gentle, and the things of the people are faithful and trustworthy.

古文：王曰： 所谓百姓、千品、万官、亿丑、兆民经入畡数者，何也？ 
现代文：昭王说： 所说的百姓、千品，万官、亿类和兆民经入畡数，指的是什么？ 
English: King Zhao said, "What do you mean by the people, thousands, millions, billions and trillions of people?

古文：对曰： 民之彻官百。
现代文：观射父说： 民众呈上名字做官的有上百。
English: Guanzha's father said: "There are hundreds of officials whose names were submitted by the public.

古文：王公之子弟之质能言能听彻其官者，而物赐之姓，以监其官，是为百姓。
现代文：王公贵族的子弟本质好能恪于职守而呈上名字做官的，根据功劳职事赐给姓氏，让他们监守自己的官职，这叫做百姓。
English: The children of princes and aristocrats, who are good at performing their duties and are given the name of officials, are given surnames according to their merits and duties, so that they can guard their official duties. This is called the common people.

古文：姓有彻品，十于王谓之千品。
现代文：有姓氏的百官有众多僚属，十倍于王者的百官，叫做千品。
English: A hundred officials with surnames have many subordinates, ten times more than the king's hundred officials, called a thousand products.

古文：五物之官，陪属万为万官。
现代文：管理天、地、神、民、物五事的官，陪属有上万，叫做万官。
English: The officials who manage the five things of heaven, earth, gods, people, and things, and have tens of thousands of attendants, are called mandarins.

古文：官有十丑，为亿丑。
现代文：万官有十类，就是亿类。
English: There are ten kinds of universal functions, that is, one hundred million kinds of cranes.

古文：天子之田九畡，以食兆民，王取经入焉，以食万官。 
现代文：天子管辖的土地有九州，来养活万兆民众，君王收取经常的赋税，来养活万官。 
English: The land governed by the Son of Heaven includes Kyushu, to feed the trillions of people, and the monarch collects regular taxes to feed all officials.

