古文：赵氏之先，与秦共祖。
现代文：赵氏的先人和秦人是同一个祖先。
English: The ancestors of the Zhao clan and the Qin people are the same ancestors.

古文：至中衍，为帝大戊御。
现代文：传到中衍，他成为为商朝太戊帝驾驭车马的人。
English: In Zhongyan, he became a charioteer for Emperor Taewu of the Shang Dynasty.

古文：其后世蜚廉有子二人，而命其一子曰恶来，事纣，为周所杀，其后为秦。
现代文：他的后代蜚廉有两个儿子，一个儿子取名恶来，侍奉纣王，后被周人杀死，他的后代就是嬴秦氏。
English: His descendant, Qilian, had two sons, one of whom took an evil name and served King Qian, and was later killed by Zhou. His descendant was the Qin clan.

古文：恶来弟曰季胜，其后为赵。
现代文：恶来的弟弟名叫季胜，他的后代就是赵人。
English: The evil brother's name is Ji Sheng, and his offspring is Zhao Ren.

古文：季胜生孟增。
现代文：季胜生了孟增。
English: Ji Sheng gave birth to Meng Zeng.

古文：孟增幸于周成王，是为宅皋狼。
现代文：孟增受到周成王的宠信，这就是宅皋狼。
English: Meng Zeng was favored by King Zhou and was assigned to the Wolf Clan.

古文：皋狼生衡父，衡父生造父。
现代文：皋狼生了衡父，衡父生了造父。
English: Meng Zeng gave birth to Heng father. Heng father gave birth to Zou father.

古文：造父幸于周缪王。
现代文：造父得宠于周穆王。
English: The founding father was favored by King Zhou Mu.

古文：造父取骥之乘匹，与桃林盗骊、骅骝、绿耳，献之缪王。
现代文：造父选取了骏马八匹，与在桃林得到的盗骊、骅骝、绿耳等名马献给穆王。
English: The founding father selected eight horses and presented them to King Mu, together with the famous horses such as the stolen horse, the donkey and the green ear obtained in the peach grove.

古文：缪王使造父御，西巡狩，见西王母，乐之忘归。
现代文：穆王让造父赶车，到西方去巡视，会见了西王母，快乐得把回去都忘了。
English: King Mu asked his father-in-law to catch a car and go to the west to inspect the situation. When he met the mother of the western king, he was so happy that he forgot to go back.

古文：而徐偃王反，缪王日驰千里马，攻徐偃王，大破之。
现代文：不久，徐偃王发动叛乱，穆王乘坐马车，日行千里，攻打徐偃王，把他彻底打败。
English: Soon after, King Xu Rong launched a rebellion. King Mu rode in a carriage and traveled thousands of miles a day to attack King Xu Rong and completely defeat him.

古文：乃赐造父以赵城，由此为赵氏。
现代文：于是把赵城赐给造父，从此就成为赵氏。
English: So he gave Zhaocheng to his father-in-law, and from then on he became the Zhao clan.

古文：自造父以下六世至奄父，曰公仲，周宣王时伐戎，为御。
现代文：从造父往下经六代传到了奄父，奄父字公仲，周宣王的时候讨伐戎人，他给宣王赶车。
English: It was passed down through six generations from the founding father to the founding father. The founding father's name was Gongzhong. When King Zhou Xuan was fighting the soldiers, he was driving King Xuan's car.

古文：及千亩战，奄父脱宣王。
现代文：在千亩之战中，奄父曾使宣王脱险。
English: In the Battle of the Thousand Mu, Amaichi once saved Emperor Xuan from danger.

古文：奄父生叔带。
现代文：奄父生了叔带。
English: My father-in-law gave birth to my uncle.

古文：叔带之时，周幽王无道，去周如晋，事晋文侯，始建赵氏于晋国。
现代文：叔带的时候，周幽王荒淫无道，他就离开周王朝到了晋国，侍奉晋文侯，开始在晋国建立赵氏家族。
English: At the time of his uncle's visit, Zhou Yu Wang was living a wild and debauched life. He left the Zhou Dynasty and went to Jin Province to serve the prince of Jin, and began to establish the Zhao family in Jin Province.

古文：自叔带以下，赵宗益兴，五世而至赵夙。
现代文：从叔带往下，赵氏宗族越来越兴旺，又过五代传到了赵夙。
English: From the uncle down, the Zhao clan became more and more prosperous, and after five generations it was passed down to Zhao Yao.

古文：赵夙，晋献公之十六年伐霍、魏、耿，而赵夙为将伐霍。
现代文：赵夙，在晋献公十六年，征讨霍、魏、耿三国，他率领军队征讨霍国。
English: In the 16th year of the Jin Dynasty, Zhao Wei led an army to conquer the three states of Huo, Wei, and Geng.

古文：霍公求奔齐。
现代文：霍公求逃到了齐国。
English: Huo Gongcu fled to Qi Province.

古文：晋大旱，卜之，曰 霍太山为祟 。
现代文：这一年晋国大旱，占卜的结果说： 霍太山的神灵在作怪。 
English: This year, there was a great drought in Jin Province, and the result of divination said: The gods of Mount Huotai are acting strange.

古文：使赵夙召霍君于齐，复之，以奉霍太山之祀，晋复穰。
现代文：于是派赵夙到齐国迎回霍国国君，恢复了他的地位，让他主持霍太山的祭祀，晋国才又重新获得丰收。
English: Therefore, he sent Zhao Wei to Qi Province to welcome back the sovereign of Huo Province, restored his status, and let him preside over the sacrificial rites of Huotai Mountain. It was only then that Jin Province regained a good harvest.

古文：晋献公赐赵夙耿。
现代文：晋献公把耿地赐给赵夙。
English: Jin Xian Gong gave Geng Di to Zhao Xuan.

古文：夙生共孟，当鲁闵公之元年也。
现代文：赵夙下共孟这一年，正当鲁闵公元年。
English: The year of Zhao Xuan's reign is the year of Lu Xun.

古文：共孟生赵衰，字子余。
现代文：共孟生赵衰，赵衰字子余。
English: Both Meng Sheng Zhao Zhen and Zhao Zhen Zi Yu.

古文：赵衰卜事晋献公及诸公子，莫吉；卜事公子重耳，吉，即事重耳。
现代文：赵衰以占卜的方式决定去侍奉晋献公还是诸位公子，结果都不吉利。占卜到侍奉公子重耳时，结果吉利，他就去侍奉重耳。
English: Zhao Zhen decided by divination to serve Jin Xiangguo or you boys, but the result was not auspicious. When the divination came to serve the boy, the result was auspicious, and he went to serve the boy.

古文：重耳以骊姬之乱亡奔翟，赵衰从。
现代文：重耳由于骊姬之乱逃亡到翟国，赵衰跟随左右。
English: As a result of the Hiji Rebellion, Chong Er fled to Shan State, and Zhao Zhen followed him around.

古文：翟伐廧咎如，得二女，翟以其少女妻重耳，长女妻赵衰而生盾。
现代文：翟人讨伐廧咎如，得到两个女子。翟君把年少的女子给重耳为妻，年长的女子给赵衰为妻，生了赵盾。
English: For example, Zou Jun married a younger woman to Chong Er, and an older woman to Zhao Zhen, giving birth to Zhao Dun.

古文：初，重耳在晋时，赵衰妻亦生赵同、赵括、赵婴齐。
现代文：当初，重耳在晋国的时候，赵衰的元配妻子已经生下了赵同、赵括、赵婴齐。
English: At first, when Chong Er was in Jin Province, Zhao Zhen's former wife had already given birth to Zhao Tong, Zhao Guan and Zhao Ying Qi.

古文：赵衰从重耳出亡，凡十九年，得反国。
现代文：赵衰跟随重耳在外逃亡，共计十九年，才得以返回晋国。
English: Zhao Zhen followed Chung E outside to escape, a total of nineteen years before he was able to return to Jin.

古文：重耳为晋文公，赵衰为原大夫，居原，任国政。
现代文：重耳做了晋文公，赵衰做原大夫，住在原城，主持国家政事。
English: Chong Er became Jin Wen Gong, Zhao Sheng became the original doctor, lived in the original city, and presided over state affairs.

古文：文公所以反国及霸，多赵衰计策，语在晋事中。
现代文：晋文公所以能返回并且成为霸主，大多是赵衰的计策，这些事情都记载在《晋世家》里。
English: It was mostly Zhao Zhen's strategy that allowed Jinwen to return and become the overlord. These events are recorded in "The Jin Family."

古文：赵衰既反晋，晋之妻固要迎翟妻，而以其子盾为适嗣，晋妻三子皆下事之。
现代文：赵衰回到晋国以后，在晋国的原配妻子坚决要求把他在翟娶的妻子迎接回来，并且让翟妻的儿子赵盾做正宗继承人，而让自己的三个儿子居下位侍奉他。
English: After Zhao Zhen returned to Jin Province, his former wife in Jin Province, Meng, firmly demanded that he welcome back the wife he had married in Xing, and let Zhao Dun, the son of his wife, be the legitimate heir, and let his three sons serve him.

古文：晋襄公之六年，而赵衰卒，谥为成季。
现代文：晋襄公六年，赵衰去世，他的谥号是成季。
English: In the sixth year of the reign of Emperor Jinxiang, Zhao Zhen passed away. His nickname was Cheng Ji.

古文：赵盾代成季任国政二年而晋襄公卒，太子夷皋年少。
现代文：赵盾接替成季主持国政两年之后，晋襄公去世，太子夷皋年幼。
English: Two years after Zhao Dun succeeded Cheng Ji in presiding over state affairs, Prince Jinxiang died, and Prince Yixuan was still young.

古文：盾为国多难，欲立襄公弟雍。
现代文：赵盾由于国家多难，想立襄公的弟弟雍为国君。
English: Due to the country's difficulties, Zhao Dun wanted to make Xiangong's younger brother Yong the country's ruler.

古文：雍时在秦，使使迎之。
现代文：雍当时在秦国，就派使臣去迎接他。
English: Yong was in Qin at the time and sent an envoy to meet him.

古文：太子母日夜啼泣，顿首谓赵盾曰： 先君何罪，释其适子而更求君？ 
现代文：太子的母亲日夜啼哭，叩头对赵盾说： 先君有什么罪过，为什么要抛弃他的嫡子而另立国君呢？ 
English: The prince's mother cried day and night, and kowtowed to Zhao Dun, saying, "What was the previous emperor's sin? Why did he abandon his legitimate son and set up a new emperor?

古文：赵盾患之，恐其宗与大夫袭诛之，乃遂立太子，是为灵公，发兵距所迎襄公弟于秦者。
现代文：赵盾为此事忧虑，害怕她的宗亲和大夫们来袭击杀死自己，于是就立了太子，这就是晋灵公，并派兵去拦截到秦国迎接襄公弟弟的一行人。
English: Zhao Dun was worried about this, afraid that her great-grandparents and doctors would attack and kill her, so he set up a crown prince, this is Jin Ling Gong, and sent soldiers to intercept a group of people who came to Qin to welcome Xiang Gong's younger brother.

古文：灵公既立，赵盾益专国政。
现代文：灵公即位之后，赵盾更加独揽晋国的政事。
English: After the enthronement of Ling Gong, Zhao Dun became more and more involved in the political affairs of Jin.

古文：灵公立十四年，益骄。
现代文：灵公继位十四年，赵来越骄纵。
English: In the 14th year of Ling Gong's succession, Zhao became more and more arrogant.

古文：赵盾骤谏，灵公弗听。
现代文：赵盾多次进谏，灵公都不听从。
English: Zhao Dun repeatedly entered the cocoon, but Ling Gong did not obey.

古文：及食熊蹯，胹不熟，杀宰人，持其尸出，赵盾见之。
现代文：一次吃熊掌，因为没有煮熟，就把膳食官杀了，让人把他的尸体抬出去，正好被赵盾看见。
English: Once, he ate bear's paws, but because they were not cooked, he killed the catering officer and had his corpse carried out, just in time to be seen by Zhao Dun.

古文：灵公由此惧，欲杀盾。
现代文：灵公因此害怕，想要杀害赵盾。
English: As a result, Linggong was afraid and wanted to kill Zhao Dun.

古文：盾素仁爱人，尝所食桑下饿人反扞救盾，盾以得亡。
现代文：赵盾平素待人宽厚慈爱，他曾经送食物给一个饿倒在桑树之下的人，这个人挺身解救了赵盾，赵盾才得以逃走。
English: Zhao Dunping was generous and kind. He once sent food to a man who was starving under a mulberry tree. The man rescued Zhao Dun, and Zhao Dun was able to escape.

古文：未出境，而赵穿弑灵公而立襄公弟黑臀，是为成公。
现代文：他还没有逃出国境，赵穿就杀死了灵公，立襄公的弟弟黑臀为君，这就是晋成公。
English: He had not yet fled the country when Zhao Zhan killed Ling Gong and made Xiang Gong's younger brother, Black Buttocks, his regent. This was Jin Cheng Gong.

古文：赵盾复返，任国政。
现代文：赵盾又回来主持国政。
English: Zhao Dun returned to preside over state affairs.

古文：君子讥盾 为正卿，亡不出境，反不讨贼 ，故太史书曰 赵盾弑其君 。
现代文：君子讥讽赵盾 身为正卿，逃亡没有出国境，返回来也不诛讨逆贼 ，所以史官记载说 赵盾杀了他的国君 。
English: Nobles ridiculed Zhao Dun As a high-ranking official, Zhao Dun did not flee abroad, nor did he return to fight against the traitors, so historians recorded that Zhao Dun killed his sovereign.

古文：晋景公时而赵盾卒，谥为宣孟。子朔嗣。
现代文：晋景公的时候赵盾去世，他的谥号是宣孟，他的儿子赵朔承袭爵位。
English: Zhao Dun died at the time of Emperor Jinjing, his nickname was Xuan Meng, and his son Zhao Shuo inherited the title.

古文：赵朔，晋景公之三年，朔为晋将下军救郑，与楚庄王战河上。
现代文：晋景公三年，赵朔率领晋国的下军援救郑国，与楚庄王在黄河边交战。
English: In the third year of Jinjing, Zhao Shuo led the lower army of Jin to rescue Zheng and fought with Chu Zhuang Wang on the edge of the Yellow River.

古文：朔娶晋成公姊为夫人。
现代文：赵朔娶了晋成公的姐姐为夫人。
English: Zhao Shuo married the elder sister of Jin Chenggong.

古文：晋景公之三年，大夫屠岸贾欲诛赵氏。
现代文：晋景公三年，大夫屠岸贾要诛杀赵氏全族。
English: In the third year of the reign of King Jinjing, the doctor Tu Guan Jia wanted to kill the entire Zhao clan.

古文：初，赵盾在时，梦见叔带持要而哭，甚悲；已而笑，拊手且歌。
现代文：当初，赵盾在世的时候，曾梦见叔带抱着他的腰痛哭，非常悲伤；之后又大笑，还拍着手唱歌。
English: At first, when Zhao Dun was still alive, he had a dream that his uncle was holding him in his arms, crying with pain in his lower back, very sad; then he laughed loudly and clapped his hands and sang.

古文：盾卜之，兆绝而后好。
现代文：赵盾为此进行占卜，龟甲上烧出的裂纹中断，而后又完好。
English: Zhao Dun made a divination for this purpose, and the burnt crack on the tortoise shell was interrupted, and then it was intact.

古文：赵史援占之，曰： 此梦甚恶，非君之身，乃君之子，然亦君之咎。
现代文：赵国一位名叫援的史官判断说： 这个梦不吉利，不是应验在您的身上，而是应验在您儿子身上，可也是由于您的过错。
English: A historian in Zhao named Yuan judged: This dream is unlucky. It will not come true for you, but for your son, but it is also due to your fault.

古文：至孙，赵将世益衰。 
现代文：到您孙子那一代，赵氏家族将更加衰落。 
English: In your grandchild's generation, the Zhao family will decline even further.

古文：屠岸贾者，始有宠于灵公，及至于景公而贾为司寇，将作难，乃治灵公之贼以致赵盾。遍告诸将曰： 盾虽不知，犹为贼首。
现代文：屠岸贾这个人，起初受灵公的宠信，到景公的时候他就做了司寇，将要发难，就先惩治杀灵公的逆贼以便牵连出赵盾，同时遍告所有的将领说： 赵盾虽然不知情，但仍然是罪魁祸首。
English: This man, Tu Guan Jia, was initially favored by Linggong. When he arrived at Jinggong, he became a scout. When trouble was about to break out, he first punished the traitor who killed Linggong in order to implicate Zhao Dun. At the same time, he told all the generals: Although Zhao Dun did not know, he was still the main culprit.

古文：以臣弑君，子孙在朝，何以惩罪？
现代文：做臣子的杀害了国君，他的子孙却还在朝为官，这还怎么能惩治罪人呢？
English: A courtier killed the sovereign, but his sons and grandsons are still serving as officials in the imperial court. How can sinners be punished for this?

古文：请诛之。 
现代文：请各位诛杀他们。 
English: Please fight and kill them.

古文：韩厥曰： 灵公遇贼，赵盾在外，吾先君以为无罪，故不诛。
现代文：韩厥说： 灵公遇害的时候，赵盾在外地，我们的先君认为他没有罪，所以没有杀他。
English: Han Jue said: When Ling Gong was killed, Zhao Dun was out of town. Our forefather believed that he was not guilty, so he did not kill him.

古文：今诸君将诛其后，是非先君之意。而今妄诛，妄诛谓之乱。
现代文：如今各位将要诛杀他的后人，这不是先君的意愿而是随意滥杀，随意滥杀就是作乱。
English: Now you are going to kill his descendants. This is not the will of the late emperor, but indiscriminate killing at will. Indiscriminate killing at will is creating chaos.

古文：臣有大事而君不闻，是无君也。 
现代文：为人臣子有大事却不让国君知道，这是目无君主。 
English: If a vassal has an important matter but does not let the sovereign know about it, then the sovereign is blind.

古文：屠岸贾不听。
现代文：屠岸贾不听。
English: Tuogang Jia did not listen.

古文：韩厥告赵朔趣亡。
现代文：韩厥就告知赵朔赶快逃跑。
English: Han Jue told Zhao Shuo to run away.

古文：朔不肯，曰： 子必不绝赵祀，朔死不恨。 
现代文：赵朔不肯逃跑，他说： 您一定能不使赵氏的香火断绝，我死了也就没有遗恨了。 
English: Zhao Shuo refused to run away. He said, "You must be able to stop Zhao's incense burning. When I die, there will be no hatred left."

古文：韩厥许诺，称疾不出。
现代文：韩厥答应了他的要求，他谎称有病不出门。
English: Han Jue agreed to his request. He lied that he was ill and would not go out.

古文：贾不请而擅与诸将攻赵氏于下宫，杀赵朔、赵同、赵括、赵婴齐，皆灭其族。
现代文：屠岸贾不请示国君就擅自和将领们在下宫攻袭赵氏，杀死了赵朔、赵同、赵括、赵婴齐，并且灭绝了他们的家族。
English: Without asking the sovereign for permission, Tu Guan Jia and his generals attacked the Zhao clan in the lower palace, killing Zhao Shuo, Zhao Tong, Zhao Guan and Zhao Yingqi, and exterminating their families.

古文：赵朔妻成公姊，有遗腹，走公宫匿。
现代文：赵朔的妻子是成公的姐姐，有赵朔留下的身孕，她逃到晋景公的宫里躲藏起来。
English: Zhao Shuo's wife was the elder sister of Chenggong, and she was pregnant with Zhao Shuo's child. She fled to the palace of Jinjinggong to hide.

古文：赵朔客曰公孙杵臼，杵臼谓朔友人程婴曰： 胡不死？ 
现代文：赵朔的一位门客名叫公孙杵臼，杵臼对赵朔的朋友程婴说： 你为什么不死？ 
English: One of Zhao Shuo's protégés was named Gongsun Yuewu. Yuewu said to Zhao Shuo's friend Cheng Yuewu: Why don't you die?

古文：程婴曰： 朔之妇有遗腹，若幸而男，吾奉之；即女也，吾徐死耳。 
现代文：程婴说： 赵朔的妻子有身孕，如果有幸是男孩，我就奉养他；如果是女孩，我再死也不晚。 
English: Cheng Ying said: Zhao Shuo's wife is pregnant, if I am lucky enough to have a boy, I will take care of him; if it is a girl, I will not be late to die.

古文：居无何，而朔妇免身，生男。
现代文：过了不久，赵朔的妻子分娩，生下男孩。
English: Soon after, Zhao Shuo's wife went into labor and gave birth to a boy.

古文：屠岸贾闻之，索于宫中。
现代文：屠岸贾听说后，到宫中去搜查。
English: After hearing the news, Tu Guan Jia went to the palace to search.

古文：夫人置儿绔中，祝曰： 赵宗灭乎，若号；即不灭，若无声。 
现代文：赵朔的夫人把婴儿放在裤子里，祷告说： 如果赵氏宗族应该灭绝，你就大哭；如果不会灭绝，你就不要出声。 
English: Zhao Shuo's wife put the baby in her pants and prayed: "If the Zhao clan should be exterminated, you should cry loudly; if not, you should not speak out.

古文：及索，儿竟无声。
现代文：搜查到这里的时候，婴儿竟然没有声音。
English: When they got here, the baby didn't make a sound.

古文：已脱，程婴谓公孙杵臼曰： 今一索不得，后必且复索之，奈何？ 
现代文：脱险以后，程婴对公孙杵臼说： 今天一次搜查没有找到，以后一定要再来搜查，怎么办呢？ 
English: After escaping from danger, Cheng Ying said to Gongsun Jiuyong: Today's search did not find anything, we must search again in the future, what should we do?

古文：公孙杵臼曰： 立孤与死孰难？ 
现代文：公孙杵臼说： 扶立遗孤和死哪件事更难？ 
English: Gongsun Jiusu said, "Which is more difficult, to help orphans or to die?"

古文：程婴曰： 死易，立孤难耳。 
现代文：程婴说： 死很容易，扶立遗孤很难啊。 
English: Cheng Ying said: It is easy to die, but it is difficult to help the bereaved.

古文：公孙杵臼曰： 赵氏先君遇子厚，子强为其难者，吾为其易者，请先死。 
现代文：公孙杵臼说： 赵氏的先君待您不薄，您就勉强承担困难的事吧；我去做那件容易的，让我先死吧！ 
English: Gongsun Jiusu said, "The ancestors of the Zhao Clan have treated you well, so you can bear the difficult task; I will do the easy one, let me die first!"

古文：乃二人谋取他人婴儿负之，衣以文葆，匿山中。
现代文：于是两人设法弄到别人家的婴儿背着，给他包上绣花的襁褓，藏到深山里。
English: So the two of them managed to get someone else's baby on their backs, wrapped him in embroidered cocoons, and hid him deep in the mountains.

古文：程婴出，谬谓诸将军曰： 婴不肖，不能立赵孤。谁能与我千金，吾告赵氏孤处。 
现代文：程婴从山里出来，假意对将军们说： 我程婴没出息，不能扶养赵氏孤儿，谁能给我千金，我就告诉他赵氏孤儿藏在哪里。 
English: Cheng Ying came out of the mountains and pretended to say to the generals: My Cheng Ying is no good, I can't support the Zhao orphans, whoever can give me a thousand dollars, I will tell him where the Zhao orphans are hidden.

古文：诸将皆喜，许之，发师随程婴攻公孙杵臼。
现代文：将军们都很高兴，答应了他，就派兵跟随程婴去攻打公孙杵臼。
English: The generals were very pleased and agreed to send their soldiers to follow Cheng Ying to attack Gongsun Jiusu.

古文：杵臼谬曰： 小人哉程婴！
现代文：杵臼假意说： 程婴，你这个小人哪！
English: Yu Yu said, "Cheng Yu, you little runt!

古文：昔下宫之难不能死，与我谋匿赵氏孤儿，今又卖我。
现代文：当初下宫之难你不能去死，跟我谋划藏匿赵氏孤儿，如今你却出卖了我。
English: At first, you couldn't go to the palace to die, and you plotted with me to hide the Zhao orphans, but now you've betrayed me.

古文：纵不能立，而忍卖之乎！ 
现代文：即使你不能和我一起扶立他，怎能忍心出卖他呢！ 
English: Even if you cannot support him with me, how can you bear to betray him?

古文：抱儿呼曰： 天乎天乎！
现代文：他抱着婴儿大叫道： 天哪！天哪！
English: Holding the baby, he screamed: "Oh my God! Oh my God!"

古文：赵氏孤儿何罪？
现代文：赵氏孤儿有什么罪？
English: What are the Zhao orphans guilty of?

古文：请活之，独杀杵臼可也。 
现代文：请你们让他活下来，只杀我杵臼就可以了。 
English: Please let him live, just kill me.

古文：诸将不许，遂杀杵臼与孤儿。
现代文：将军们不答应，立刻杀了杵臼和孤儿。
English: The generals did not agree and immediately killed the miller and the orphan.

古文：诸将以为赵氏孤儿良已死，皆喜。
现代文：将军们以为赵氏孤儿确实已经死了，都很高兴。
English: The generals thought that the Zhao orphans had indeed died, and they were very happy.

古文：然赵氏真孤乃反在，程婴卒与俱匿山中。
现代文：然而真的赵氏孤儿却仍然活着，程婴最后和他一起隐匿在深山里。
English: However, the real Zhao orphan is still alive, and Cheng Ying finally hid with him in the mountains.

古文：居十五年，晋景公疾，卜之，大业之后不遂者为祟。
现代文：过了十五年，晋景公生病，进行占卜，占卜的结果说是大业的子孙后代由于祭祀断绝而作祟。
English: Fifteen years later, Prince Jinjing fell ill and performed a divination. The result of the divination was that the descendants of Daegu would be cursed because of the abandonment of the ritual.

古文：景公问韩厥，厥知赵孤在，乃曰： 大业之后在晋绝祀者，其赵氏乎？
现代文：景公问韩厥，韩厥知道赵氏孤儿还在世，便说： 大业的后代子孙中如今已在晋国断绝香火的，不就是赵氏吗？
English: Jing Gong asked Han Jue. Han Jue knew that the orphans of the Zhao family were still alive, so he said, "Among the descendants of the descendants of Da Ye, who have now cut off the incense in Jin, is it not the Zhao family?

古文：夫自中衍者皆嬴姓也。
现代文：从中衍传下的后代都是姓嬴的了。
English: The descendants from this family are all surnamed Zou.

古文：中衍人面鸟噣，降佐殷帝大戊，及周天子，皆有明德。
现代文：中衍人面鸟嘴，来到人世辅佐殷帝太戊，到他的后代辅佐的几位周天子，都有美好的德行。
English: Zhongyuan human-faced bird's beak, came to the world to assist Emperor Yin Taiwu, to his descendants to assist several Zhou Tianzi, all have good virtues.

古文：下及幽厉无道，而叔带去周适晋，事先君文侯，至于成公，世有立功，未尝绝祀。
现代文：再往下到厉王、幽王时昏庸无道，叔带就离开周王朝来到晋国，侍奉先君文侯，一直到成公，他们世代都建立了功业，从未断绝过香火。
English: Further down to Li Wang and Yu Wang, when they were dazed and confused, my uncle and I left the Zhou Dynasty and came to Jin Province to serve the previous king and prince, all the way to Chenggong. Their generations have established their merits, and they have never broken the incense.

古文：今吾君独灭赵宗，国人哀之，故见龟策。
现代文：如今只有君主您灭了赵氏宗族，晋国人都为他们悲哀，所以在占卜时就显示出来了。
English: Today, only you, the monarch, have destroyed the Zhao clan, and the people of Jin are all grieving for them, so it shows up in divination.

古文：唯君图之。 
现代文：希望您能够考虑此事！ 
English: I hope you will consider this matter!

古文：景公问： 赵尚有后子孙乎？ 
现代文：景公问道： 赵氏还有后代子孙吗？ 
English: Jing Gong asked: Does the Zhao clan have any descendants?

古文：韩厥具以实告。
现代文：韩厥就把实情完全告诉了景公。
English: Han Jue fully told the truth to Jing Gong.

古文：于是景公乃与韩厥谋立赵孤儿，召而匿之宫中。
现代文：于是景公就与韩厥商量立赵氏孤儿，先把他找来藏在宫中。
English: Therefore, King Jing consulted with Han Jue to find an orphan of the Zhao clan and hid him in the palace.

古文：诸将入问疾，景公因韩厥之众以胁诸将而见赵孤。
现代文：将军们进宫问候景公的病情，景公依靠韩厥的众多随从迫使将军们同赵氏孤儿见面。
English: The generals entered the palace to greet Jing Gong's illness, and Jing Gong relied on Han Jue's numerous followers to force the generals to meet with the Zhao orphans.

古文：赵孤名曰武。
现代文：赵氏孤儿名叫赵武。
English: The orphan of the Zhao family is named Zhao Wu.

古文：诸将不得已，乃曰： 昔下宫之难，屠岸贾为之，矫以君命，并命群臣。非然，孰敢作难！
现代文：将军们不得已，只好说： 当初下宫那次事变，是屠岸贾策动的，他假传君命，并且向群臣发令，如果不是这样，谁敢发动变乱呢！
English: As a last resort, the generals had no choice but to say: The incident that occurred in the lower palace was instigated by Tu Guan Jia, who falsely transmitted the king's order and issued orders to his ministers. If this were not the case, who would dare to start a revolution?

古文：微君之疾，群臣固且请立赵后。
现代文：就算国君没有生病，我们这些大臣也要扶立赵氏的后人。
English: Even if the sovereign is not ill, we, the ministers, must help the descendants of the Zhao family.

古文：今君有命，群臣之愿也。 
现代文：如今您下了命令，这也是我们的愿望啊！ 
English: Now that you have given the order, this is also our wish!

古文：于是召赵武、程婴遍拜诸将，遂反与程婴、赵武攻屠岸贾，灭其族。
现代文：于是就让赵武、程婴一一拜谢各位将军，将军们又反过来与程婴、赵武攻打屠岸贾，诛灭了他的家族。
English: Therefore, he had Zhao Wu and Cheng Rong thank the generals one by one. The generals, in turn, attacked and slaughtered Zhuang Jia with Cheng Rong and Zhao Wu, annihilating his family.

古文：复与赵武田邑如故。
现代文：景公重又把原属赵氏的封地赐给赵武。
English: Jing Gongjun also gave the fief originally belonging to the Zhao clan to Zhao Wu.

古文：及赵武冠，为成人，程婴乃辞诸大夫，谓赵武曰： 昔下宫之难，皆能死。
现代文：到赵武行了冠礼，已是成人了，程婴就拜别了各位大夫，然后对赵武说： 当初下宫的事变，人人都能为主殉难。
English: By the time Zhao Wu performed the coronation ceremony, he was already an adult. Cheng Yu waved goodbye to all the doctors, and then said to Zhao Wu: At the beginning of the palace incident, everyone can be martyred for the Lord.

古文：我非不能死，我思立赵氏之后。
现代文：我并非不能去死，我是想扶立赵氏的后代。
English: It's not that I can't die, I want to help the descendants of the Zhao family.

古文：今赵武既立，为成人，复故位，我将下报赵宣孟与公孙杵臼。 
现代文：如今赵武已经承袭祖业，长大成人，恢复了原来的爵位，我要到地下去报告给赵宣和公孙杵臼。 
English: Now that Zhao Wu has inherited the ancestral inheritance, grown up, and restored the original peerage, I want to go underground to report to Zhao Xuan and Gongsun Yuxuan.

古文：赵武啼泣顿首固请，曰： 武愿苦筋骨以报子至死，而子忍去我死乎！ 
现代文：赵武哭泣着叩首，坚持请求说： 我宁愿使自己筋骨受苦也要报答您一直到死，难道您忍心离开我去死吗？ 
English: Zhao Wu, weeping and bowing his head, insisted on his request, saying: I would rather make my bones and sinews suffer than repay you until death. Can you bear to leave me to die?

古文：程婴曰： 不可。
现代文：程婴说： 不行。
English: Cheng Ying said: I can't.

古文：彼以我为能成事，故先我死；今我不报，是以我事为不成。 
现代文：公孙杵臼认为我能完成大事，所以在我之前死去；如今我不去复命，他就会觉得我还没办成这件事。 
English: Gongsun Jiusu thought I could accomplish great things, so he died before me; now if I don't take my life back, he will think I haven't accomplished this.

古文：遂自杀。
现代文：于是就自杀了。
English: Zhang Tang then committed suicide.

古文：赵武服齐衰三年，为之祭邑，春秋祠之，世世勿绝。
现代文：赵武为程婴守孝三年，给他安排了祭祀用的土地，春秋祭祀，世代相传不曾断绝。
English: Zhao Wu took care of Cheng Ying for three years, and arranged a land for him to use for rituals. The spring and autumn rituals have been passed down from generation to generation.

古文：赵氏复位十一年，而晋厉公杀其大夫三郄。
现代文：赵氏恢复爵位十一年后，晋厉公杀了三位郤氏大夫。
English: Eleven years after the Zhao family was restored to the peerage, Jin Liguang killed three doctors of the Zou family.

古文：栾书畏及，乃遂弑其君厉公，更立襄公曾孙周，是为悼公。
现代文：栾书害怕牵连到自己，于是就杀了晋君厉公，改立襄公的曾孙周，这就是晋悼公。
English: Yanshu was afraid of implicating himself, so he killed Jinjun Liguo and replaced him with Xiangguo's great-grandson Zhou, which is called Jinluiguo.

古文：晋由此大夫稍强。
现代文：晋国从此以后大夫的势力逐渐强盛。
English: Since then, the influence of doctors in Jin gradually increased.

古文：赵武续赵宗二十七年，晋平公立。
现代文：赵武接续赵氏宗族后二十七年，晋平公即位。
English: Twenty-seven years after Zhao Wu succeeded the Zhao clan, Jinping ascended the throne.

古文：平公十二年，而赵武为正卿。
现代文：平公十二年，赵武做了正卿。
English: In the 12th year of the Heian period, Zhao Wu was made a chancellor.

古文：十三年，吴延陵季子使于晋，曰： 晋国之政卒归于赵武子、韩宣子、魏献子之后矣。 
现代文：十三年，吴国的延陵季子使晋国，他说： 晋国的政权最后要落到赵武子、韩宣子、魏献子后代的手里。 
English: In the thirteenth year, Yanling Qizi, the envoy of the State of Wu to the State of Jin, said: The political power of the State of Jin will eventually fall into the hands of the descendants of Zhao Wu Zi, Han Xuan Zi, and Wei Xian Zi.

古文：赵武死，谥为文子。
现代文：赵武死后，谥号是文子。
English: After Zhao Wu's death, his posthumous name was Wenzi.

古文：文子生景叔。
现代文：文子生了景叔。
English: Wen Zi gave birth to Uncle Jing.

古文：景叔之时，齐景公使晏婴于晋，晏婴与晋叔向语。
现代文：景叔的时候，齐景公派晏婴出使晋国，晏婴和晋国的叔向谈话。
English: At the time of Uncle Jing's visit, Qi Jing Gong sent an envoy to Jin, who had a talk with the uncle of Jin.

古文：婴曰： 齐之政后卒归田氏。 
现代文：晏婴说： 齐国的政权以后最终要落到田氏手里。 
English: Xingying said: After the political power of Qi, it will eventually fall into the hands of the Tian clan.

古文：叔向亦曰： 晋国之政将归六卿。
现代文：叔向也说： 晋国的政权将会落到六卿的手里。
English: Uncle Xiang also said: The political power of Jin will fall into the hands of the Six Lords.

古文：六卿侈矣，而吾君不能恤也。 
现代文：六卿很放肆，可是我们国君却不知忧虑。 
English: The Six Lords are very bold, but our sovereign is not worried.

古文：赵景叔卒，生赵鞅，是为简子。
现代文：赵景叔去世，他生子赵鞅，这就是赵简子。
English: Zhao Jingshu died, and his son Zhao Yao was born. This is Zhao Jianzi.

古文：赵简子在位，晋顷公之九年，简子将合诸侯戍于周。
现代文：赵简子在位期间，晋顷公九年，简子会合诸侯在周境内驻守。
English: During the reign of Zhao Jianzi, in the ninth year of Jin He, the princes of the Jianzi Association were stationed in Zhou territory.

古文：其明年，入周敬王于周，辟弟子朝之故也。
现代文：第二年，护送周敬王回周朝，因为他是为了躲避弟弟子朝而流亡在外。
English: The following year, he escorted King Zhou Jing back to the Zhou Dynasty, as he had fled the country to avoid his younger brother and disciple.

古文：晋顷公之十二年，六卿以法诛公族祁氏、羊舌氏，分其邑为十县，六卿各令其族为之大夫。
现代文：晋顷公十二年，六卿依照法令诛杀了国君的宗族祁氏和羊舌氏，把他们的领地分为十个县，六卿分别让自家的族人去做大夫。
English: In the twelfth year of the reign of Emperor Jinha, the six nobles, in accordance with the law, killed the prince's clans, the Shou clan and the Sheep Tongue clan, and divided their territory into ten counties. The six nobles separately let their own clansmen become doctors.

古文：晋公室由此益弱。
现代文：晋国公室从此更加削弱。
English: From then on, the Jin government was further weakened.

古文：后十三年，鲁贼臣阳虎来奔，赵简子受赂，厚遇之。
现代文：再过十三年，鲁国的乱臣阳虎逃到晋国来，赵简子接受了贿赂，对他给以厚待。
English: Thirteen years later, Lu's ruffian Yang Hu fled to Jin. Zhao Jianzi accepted the bribe and treated him well.

古文：赵简子疾，五日不知人，大夫皆惧。
现代文：赵简子生了病，五天不省人事，大夫们都害怕了。
English: Zhao Jianzi fell ill and was unconscious for five days. The doctors were scared.

古文：医扁鹊视之，出，董安于问。扁鹊曰： 血脉治也，而何怪！
现代文：医生扁鹊看过后走出来，董安于询问病情，扁鹊说： 血脉平和，你们何必惊怪！
English: After the doctor examined Bian Que, he came out. Dong An Yu inquired about her condition. Bian Que said, "Her blood is peaceful. Why should you be surprised?"

古文：在昔秦缪公尝如此，七日而寤。
现代文：从前秦穆公也有过这种情况，过了七天才醒过来。
English: Once upon a time, Qin Mu Gong was also in this situation. He woke up after seven days.

古文：寤之日，告公孙支与子舆曰： 我之帝所甚乐。
现代文：醒来的那天，告诉公孙支和子舆说： 我到了天帝住的地方很快乐。
English: On the day I woke up, I told my father-in-law, my son-in-law and my daughter-in-law: I am very happy to be with the Heavenly Emperor.

古文：吾所以久者，适有学也。
现代文：我之所以停留这么长时间，是由于我正好在受教。
English: The reason I stayed so long was because I happened to be studying.

古文：帝告我： 晋国将大乱，五世不安；其后将霸，未老而死；霸者之子且令而国男女无别。  
现代文：天帝告诉我： 晋国将要大乱，五世不得安宁；他们的后代将称霸，没有年老就死去，称霸者的儿子将要让你们晋国男女混杂。 
English: The Heavenly Emperor told me: There will be great turmoil in Jin, and the fifth generation will not have peace; their descendants will dominate and die without old age, and the sons of those who dominate will make you Jin men and women mixed.

古文：公孙支书而藏之，秦谶è于是出矣。
现代文：公孙支写下来并把它藏好，秦国的预言这时就传出来了。
English: Gongsunzhi wrote it down and hid it well, and the prophecy of the Qin State came out at that time.

古文：献公之乱，文公之霸，而襄公败秦师于殽而归纵淫，此子之所闻。
现代文：献公时的混乱，文公时的称霸，襄公时在殽山大败秦军，回去就纵容淫乱，这些都是您知道的。
English: You know about the chaos at the time of the dedication ceremony, the domination at the time of the civil ceremony, the defeat of the Qin army at the time of the civil ceremony, and the indulgence of fornication after returning home.

古文：今主君之疾与之同，不出三日疾必间，间必有言也。 
现代文：如今你们君主的病与秦穆公一样，三天之内必然会痊愈，好转之后一定有话要讲。 
English: Now your monarch's illness is the same as Qin Mu Gong's, he will surely recover within three days, and there will definitely be something to talk about after he gets better.

古文：居二日半，简子寤。
现代文：过了两天半，简子醒过来了。
English: Two and a half days later, Jane woke up.

古文：语大夫曰： 我之帝所甚乐，与百神游于钧天，广乐九奏万舞，不类三代之乐，其声动人心。
现代文：他对大夫们说： 我到了天帝那里非常快乐，和百神在钧天游览。听到了宏伟的乐曲多次演奏，还看到了万舞，不像是夏、商、周三代的音乐，那乐声非常动人。
English: He said to the doctors: I was very happy when I went to the Heavenly Emperor, and I toured the heavens with the hundred gods. I heard the magnificent music played many times, and I also saw the dance. It was not like the music of the Xia, Shang, and San dynasties. The music was very moving.

古文：有一熊欲来援我，帝命我射之，中熊，熊死。
现代文：有一头熊要来抓我，天帝让我射它，熊被射中了，死了。
English: There was a bear coming to catch me. The Heavenly Emperor told me to shoot it. The bear was shot and died.

古文：又有一罴来，我又射之，中罴，罴死。
现代文：又有一只罴过来，我又射它，罴被射中，也死了。
English: Another badger came, I shot it again, the badger was shot and died.

古文：帝甚喜，赐我二笥，皆有副。
现代文：天帝非常高兴，赐给我两个竹箱，都配有小箱。
English: Heavenly Father was very pleased and rewarded me with two bamboo shoots, both of which contained jewelry.

古文：吾见儿在帝侧，帝属我一翟犬，曰： 及而子之壮也，以赐之。 
现代文：我看到一个小孩在天帝身边，天帝又托付给我一只翟犬，对我说： 等你的儿子长大了，把这只犬送给他。 
English: I saw a child standing next to Heavenly Father. Heavenly Father also entrusted me with a mastiff and said to me, "When your son grows up, give him this dog."

古文：帝告我： 晋国且世衰，七世而亡，嬴姓将大败周人于范魁之西，而亦不能有也。
现代文：天帝还告诉我： 晋国将逐渐衰落，再传七代就要灭亡，嬴姓的人将在范魁的西边大败周人，可是你们却不能占有那里。
English: The Heavenly Emperor also told me: Jin will gradually decline, and it will take another seven generations to perish, and people with the surname of Xing will defeat Zhou people in the west of Fankui, but you can't occupy there.

古文：今余思虞舜之勋，适余将以其胄女孟姚配而七世之孙。  
现代文：现在我追念虞舜的功勋，到时候我将把舜的后代之女孟姚嫁给你的第七代孙子。  
English: Now I am thinking about the merits of Yu Yao, and when the time comes, I will marry Meng Yao, the daughter of Yu Yao's descendants, to your seventh-generation grandson.

古文：董安于受言而书藏之。
现代文：董安于听了这番话就把它写下来妥为保存。
English: After hearing this, Dong Anyu wrote it down to preserve it properly.

古文：以扁鹊言告简子，简子赐扁鹊田四万亩。
现代文：他把扁鹊说的话报告给简子，简子赐给扁鹊田地四亩。
English: People told Zhao Jianzi what Bian Que had said, and Zhao Jianzi gave Bian Que 40,000 mu of farmland.

古文：他日，简子出，有人当道，辟之不去，从者怒，将刃之。
现代文：有一天，简子外出，有人拦路，驱赶他也不离开，随从们很生气，要杀他。
English: One day, when Jian Zi was out, someone blocked the road and drove him away, but he did not leave. His followers were very angry and wanted to kill him.

古文：当道者曰： 吾欲有谒于主君。 
现代文：拦路人说： 我有事要拜见主君。 
English: The passerby said, "I have something to say to my master."

古文：从者以闻。简子召之，曰： 嘻，吾有所见子晣也。 
现代文：随从把他的话禀告简子，简子召见他，一见面就说： 嘻！我曾经清楚地看见过你呀。 
English: A follower reported his words to Janzo, who summoned him and said as soon as they met: "Hee hee! I saw you clearly once.

古文：当道者曰： 屏左右，愿有谒。 
现代文：拦路人说： 请让左右侍从退下，我有事禀告。 
English: The passer-by said, "Please make the two attendants step back. I have something to report."

古文：简子屏人。
现代文：简子让人们退下。
English: Yasuko told people to move back.

古文：当道者曰： 主君之疾，臣在帝侧。 
现代文：拦路人说： 您生病的时候，我正在天帝身边。 
English: The passer-by said, "When you were sick, I was with Heavenly Father.

古文：简子曰： 然，有之。
现代文：简子说： 对，确实有这回事。
English: "Yes, there is such a thing," she said.

古文：子之见我，我何为？ 
现代文：你见到我的时候，我在做什么？ 
English: What was I doing when you saw me?

古文：当道者曰： 帝令主君射熊与罴，皆死。 
现代文：拦路人说： 天帝让您射熊和罴，都被您射死了。 
English: The passerby said: Heavenly Father let you shoot a bear and a baboon, and you shot them both to death.

古文：简子曰： 是，且何也？ 
现代文：简子说： 对，将会怎么样呢？ 
English: Kenko said, "Yes, what will happen?

古文：当道者曰： 晋国且有大难，主君首之。
现代文：拦路人说： 晋国将有大难，而您首当其冲。
English: The passer-by said, "Jin Province will be in great trouble, and you will be the first to be affected."

古文：帝令主君灭二卿，夫熊与罴皆其祖也。 
现代文：天帝让您灭掉两位上卿，熊和罴就是他们的祖先。 
English: The Emperor has asked you to kill two nobles, whose ancestors were the bear and the stork.

古文：简子曰： 帝赐我二笥皆有副，何也？ 
现代文：简子说： 天帝赐给我两个竹箱，并且都有相配的小箱，这是什么意思？ 
English: Jane said, "God has given me two bamboo boxes, and they both have matching small boxes. What does this mean?"

古文：当道者曰： 主君之子将克二国于翟，皆子姓也。 
现代文：拦路人说： 您的儿子将在翟击败两个国家，他们都是子姓。 
English: The passer-by said: "Your son will beat two countries in cricket, and they are all surnames."

古文：简子曰： 吾见儿在帝侧，帝属我一翟犬，曰 及而子之长以赐之 。
现代文：简子说： 我看到一个小孩在天帝身边，天帝给我一只翟犬，并说： 等你的儿子长大了把这只犬送给他 。
English: Jane said: I saw a child standing next to Heavenly Father. Heavenly Father gave me a yakitori dog and said: When your son grows up, give him this dog.

古文：夫儿何谓以赐翟犬？ 
现代文：把翟犬送给小孩是什么意思？ 
English: What does it mean to give a dog to a child?

古文：当道者曰： 儿，主君之子也。翟犬者，代之先也。
现代文：拦路人说： 小孩就是您的儿子，翟犬是代国的祖先。
English: The passerby said, "The child is your son, the mastiff is the ancestor of the nation."

古文：主君之子且必有代。
现代文：您的儿子将来必定占有代国。
English: Your son will surely occupy the throne in the future.

古文：及主君之后嗣，且有革政而胡服，并二国于翟。 
现代文：到您的后代，将有政令的变革，并且要穿胡人的服装，在翟地吞并两个国家。 
English: Your descendants will bring about regime change and wear Hun garb and annex two countries in a flash.

古文：简子问其姓而延之以官。
现代文：简子问他的姓并且要聘他做官。
English: Yasuko asks his last name and wants to hire him as a clerk.

古文：当道者曰： 臣野人，致帝命耳。 
现代文：拦路人说： 我是乡野之人，只是来传达天帝的旨意罢了。 
English: The passerby said, "I am a man of the countryside, I am just here to convey the will of the Heavenly Emperor."

古文：遂不见。
现代文：说完就不见了。
English: After saying this, he disappeared.

古文：简子书藏之府。
现代文：简子把这些话记载下来保存在秘府里。
English: She wrote down these words and kept them in a secret place.

古文：异日，姑布子卿见简子，简子遍召诸子相之。
现代文：另一天，姑布子卿拜见简子，简子把儿子们都叫来让他看相。
English: On another day, the Empress Dowager Cixi went to visit Jianzi, who called his sons to come and see him.

古文：子卿曰： 无为将军者。 
现代文：子卿说： 没有能做将军的人。 
English: Ziqing said, "There is no one who can be a general.

古文：简子曰： 赵氏其灭乎？ 
现代文：简子说： 赵氏要完了吗？ 
English: Kenzo said, "Is the Zhao clan going to be finished?

古文：子卿曰： 吾尝见一子于路，殆君之子也。 
现代文：子卿说： 我曾在路上看到一个孩子，大概是您的儿子吧！ 
English: Ziqing said: I once saw a child on the road, probably your son!

古文：简子召子毋恤。
现代文：简子又叫来儿子毋恤。
English: Again, Kenzo called his son without mercy.

古文：毋恤至，则子卿起曰： 此真将军矣！ 
现代文：毋恤一到，子卿就站起来说： 这才是真正的将军呀！ 
English: As soon as he arrived, Ziqing stood up and said, "This is a real general!"

古文：简子曰： 此其母贱，翟婢也，傒道贵哉？ 
现代文：简子说： 这孩子的母亲卑贱，是从翟来的婢女，怎么说他尊贵呢？ 
English: Kenji said, "This child's mother is a lowly woman, a servant brought from the countryside. How can you call her noble?"

古文：子卿曰： 天所授，虽贱必贵。 
现代文：子卿说： 上天赐给的，即使卑贱也定能显贵。 
English: Ziqing said, "Given by heaven, even if you are lowly, you can still be distinguished."

古文：自是之后，简子尽召诸子与语，毋恤最贤。
现代文：从此以后简子常把儿子们都叫来谈话，毋恤表现最好。
English: From then on, Jane often invited her sons to come and talk to her, and they always did their best.

古文：简子乃告诸子曰： 吾藏宝符于常山上，先得者赏。 
现代文：简子有一次告诉儿子们说： 我把宝符藏在常山之上，谁先找到了就赏给他。 
English: Once, Kenshi told his sons, "I hid the treasure on Mt. Tsuneyama. Whoever finds it first will be rewarded."

古文：诸子驰之常山上，求，无所得。
现代文：儿子们赶快跑到常山上去找，结果什么也没找到。
English: The sons quickly ran to the Changshan Mountains to search, but they didn't find anything.

古文：毋恤还，曰： 已得符矣。 
现代文：毋恤回来后说： 已经找到宝符了。 
English: Without hesitation, he came back and said, "I've found the treasure."

古文：简子曰： 奏之。 
现代文：简子说： 你说吧。 
English: Kenko said: You can say it.

古文：毋恤曰： 从常山上临代，代可取也。 
现代文：毋恤说： 从常山上往下看到代国，代国可以夺取过来。 
English: Needless to say, if you look down from the Changshan Mountains, you can see the generational country, and the generational country can be taken over.

古文：简子于是知毋恤果贤，乃废太子伯鲁，而以毋恤为太子。
现代文：简子这才知道毋恤果然是贤才。于是废了太子伯鲁，把毋恤立为太子。
English: It was only then that Kenzo knew that Nepomyo was indeed a sage. So he abolished Prince Boru and made Nepomyo the crown prince.

古文：后二年，晋定公之十四年，范、中行作乱。
现代文：两年后，晋定公十四年，范氏、中行氏作乱。
English: Two years later, in the 14th year of the reign of Emperor Jinjing, the Fan and Zhongxing clans started a riot.

古文：明年春，简子谓邯郸大夫午曰： 归我卫士五百家，吾将置之晋阳。 
现代文：第二年春天，简子对邯郸大夫赵午说： 把卫国的五百户士民还给我，我要把他们安置到晋阳。 
English: In the spring of the following year, Jian Zi said to Zhao Wu, the doctor of the imperial court: Give me back the five hundred households of the patriots, and I will resettle them in Jinyang.

古文：午许诺。归而其父兄不听，倍言。
现代文：赵午答应了，回去后他的父兄却不同意，于是他违背了诺言。
English: Zhao He agreed, but after returning, his father and brother did not agree, so he broke his promise.

古文：赵鞅捕午，囚之晋阳。
现代文：赵鞅逮捕了赵午，把他囚禁在晋阳。
English: Zhao Wei arrested Zhao Wu and imprisoned him in Jinyang.

古文：乃告邯郸人曰： 我私有诛午也，诸君欲谁立？ 
现代文：并告诉邯郸人说： 我私自诛杀赵午，各位想让谁来接任？ 
English: He also told the eunuch, "I killed Zhao Wu on my own. Who do you want to succeed me?

古文：遂杀午。
现代文：于是杀了赵午。
English: So he killed Zhao Wu.

古文：赵稷、涉宾以邯郸反。
现代文：赵午的儿子赵稷和家臣涉宾凭借邯郸反叛。
English: Zhao Wu's son, Zhao Wei, and his vassal, Zhan Bin, rebelled with the help of Zhao Wei.

古文：晋君使籍秦围邯郸。
现代文：晋国国君派籍秦领兵包围邯郸。
English: The sovereign of the Jin Dynasty sent Qin leaders to encircle the city.

古文：荀寅、范吉射与午善，不肯助秦而谋作乱，董安于知之。
现代文：荀寅、范吉射和赵午关系很好，不肯帮助籍秦反而策划叛乱，董安于知道这件事。
English: Yu Yin, Fan Jisha and Zhao Wu had a good relationship. They did not want to help Qin, but planned a rebellion. Dong Anyu knew about this.

古文：十月，范、中行氏伐赵鞅，鞅奔晋阳，晋人围之。
现代文：十月，范氏和中行氏讨伐赵鞅，赵鞅逃到晋阳，晋人包围晋阳。
English: In October, the Fan and Zhongxing clans besieged Zhao Kun, Zhao Kun fled to Jinyang, and the Jinyang people surrounded Jinyang.

古文：范吉射、荀寅仇人魏襄等谋逐荀寅，以梁婴父代之；逐吉射，以范皋绎代之。
现代文：范吉射、荀寅的仇人魏襄等谋划驱逐荀寅，让梁婴父取代他；驱逐范吉射，让范皋绎取代他。
English: Fan Jizhe and Wei Xiang, the enemy of Fan Yin, plotted to expel Fan Yin and replace him with Liang Yingfa; to expel Fan Jizhe and replace him with Fan Xiyu.

古文：荀栎言于晋侯曰： 君命大臣，始乱者死。
现代文：荀栎对晋君说： 国君号令大臣，领头叛乱的要处死。
English: Zou said to Jinjun: The king has ordered the minister to execute the leader of the rebellion.

古文：今三臣始乱而独逐鞅，用刑不均，请皆逐之。 
现代文：如今三位大臣都领头作乱，可是单单驱逐赵鞅，这是施用刑罚不公平，请将他们全部驱逐。 
English: Now all three ministers are leading the riots, but to expel only Zhao Wei is an unfair punishment. Please expel all of them.

古文：十一月，荀栎、韩不佞、魏哆奉公命以伐范、中行氏，不克。
现代文：十一月，荀栎、韩不佞、魏哆奉国君的命令讨伐范氏、中行氏，没有取胜。
English: In November, Xing, Han Bu Yao, and Wei Yao fought the Fan and Zhong Xing clans under the command of the sovereign, but they did not win.

古文：范、中行氏反伐公，公击之，范、中行败走。
现代文：范氏、中行氏反过来讨伐定公，定公还击，范氏、中行氏失败逃跑。
English: Mr. Fan and Mr. Zhong Xing in turn fought against Ding Gong, Ding Gong fought back, and Mr. Fan and Mr. Zhong Xing failed to escape.

古文：丁未，二子奔朝歌。
现代文：丁未这天，两个人逃到朝歌。
English: On the day of Ding Wei, two people fled to Chaogao.

古文：韩、魏以赵氏为请。
现代文：韩不佞、魏哆为赵鞅求情。
English: Han Bu Rong and Wei Rong pleaded for Zhao Rong.

古文：十二月辛未，赵鞅入绛，盟于公宫。
现代文：十二月辛未这天，赵鞅进入绛城，在定公宫中盟誓。
English: On this day in December, Zhao Zhen entered Shicheng and swore an oath in the Dingong Palace.

古文：其明年，知伯文子谓赵鞅曰： 范、中行虽信为乱，安于发之，是安于与谋也。
现代文：第二年，知伯文子对赵鞅说： 范氏、中行氏虽然确实发动了叛乱，但这是董安于挑起的，这就是董安于参与了策划。
English: The following year, Zhibo Wenzi said to Zhao Wei: Although the Fan clan and the Zhongxing clan did indeed launch a rebellion, it was instigated by Dong Anyu, and Dong Anyu participated in the planning.

古文：晋国有法，始乱者死。
现代文：晋国有法，开始作乱的要处死。
English: There is a law in Jin that anyone who starts a riot must be put to death.

古文：夫二子已伏罪而安于独在。 
现代文：那两个人已经受到处治，而唯独董安于还在。 
English: Those two have been dealt with, but only Dong Anyu is still there.

古文：赵鞅患之。
现代文：赵鞅为此事忧虑。
English: Zhao Yao is worried about this.

古文：安于曰： 臣死，赵氏定，晋国宁，吾死晚矣。 
现代文：董安于说： 我死了，赵氏可以安定，晋国也能安宁，我死得太晚了。 
English: Dong Anyu said: I am dead, the Zhao clan can be stable, Jin country can be peaceful, I died too late.

古文：遂自杀。
现代文：于是就自杀了。
English: Zhang Tang then committed suicide.

古文：赵氏以告知伯，然后赵氏宁。
现代文：赵鞅把这件事告诉了知伯，此后赵氏才得安宁。
English: Zhao Yao told the matter to Zhi Bo, after which the Zhao clan was able to rest in peace.

古文：孔子闻赵简子不请晋君而执邯郸午，保晋阳，故书《春秋》曰 赵鞅以晋阳畔 。
现代文：孔子听说赵简子不请示晋君就逮捕邯郸大夫赵午，以致退守晋阳，所以在《春秋》中记载说： 赵鞅凭借晋阳叛乱 。
English: Confucius heard that Zhao Jianzi arrested Zhao Wu, the doctor of Zhai, without the permission of Jinjun, resulting in the retreat to Jinyang. Therefore, he recorded in the "Spring and Autumn" that: Zhao Wu rebelled by virtue of Jinyang.

古文：赵简子有臣曰周舍，好直谏。
现代文：赵简子有个家臣名叫周舍，喜欢直言进谏。
English: Zhao Jianzi has a vassal named Zhou She, who likes to be outspoken.

古文：周舍死，简子每听朝，常不悦，大夫请罪。
现代文：周舍死后，简子每当上朝处理政事的时候，常常不高兴，大夫们请罪。
English: After the death of Zhou She, Jian Zi was often unhappy whenever the Shang Dynasty dealt with political affairs, and the doctors pleaded guilty.

古文：简子曰： 大夫无罪。
现代文：简子说： 你们没有罪。
English: "You are not guilty," she said.

古文：吾闻千羊之皮不如一狐之腋。
现代文：我听说一千张羊皮也不如一只狐的腋下皮毛。
English: I have heard that a thousand sheepskins are not worth a fox's underarm.

古文：诸大夫朝，徒闻唯唯，不闻周舍之鄂鄂，是以忧也。 
现代文：大夫们上朝，只听到恭敬顺从的应答声，听不到周舍那样的争辩之声了，我为此而忧虑。 
English: When the doctors went to the morning, they only heard the respectful and obedient response, and could not hear the voice of argument like Zhou Xie. I am worried about this.

古文：简子由此能附赵邑而怀晋人。
现代文：简子因此能使赵地的人顺从，并使晋人也归向他。
English: As a result, Kenshi was able to make the people of Zhao obey him, and the people of Jin also turned to him.

古文：晋定公十八年，赵简子围范、中行于朝歌，中行文子奔邯郸。
现代文：晋定公十八年，赵简子在朝歌包围了范吉射和中行寅，中行寅逃奔邯郸。
English: In the 18th year of the reign of Emperor Jin, Zhao Jianzi surrounded Fan Jishao and Zhong Xingyin in the morning song, and Zhong Xingyin fled.

古文：明年，卫灵公卒。
现代文：第二年，卫灵公去世。
English: The following year, Wei Ling Gong passed away.

古文：简子与阳虎送卫太子蒯聩于卫，卫不内，居戚。
现代文：赵简子和阳虎把卫太子蒯聩送到卫国，卫国不接纳，卫太子只好住到戚城。
English: Zhao Jianzi and Yang Hu sent Wei Taizi to Wei Province, but Wei Province did not accept him, so Wei Taizi had to live in Qicheng.

古文：晋定公二十一年，简子拔邯郸，中行文子奔柏人。
现代文：晋定公二十一年，赵简子攻入邯郸，中行寅逃到柏人。
English: In the twenty-first year of the reign of Emperor Jinding, Zhao Jianzi invaded Yunnan, and Zhong Xingyin fled to Baoji.

古文：简子又围柏人，中行文子、范昭子遂奔齐。
现代文：简子又包围了柏人，中行寅、范吉射于是又奔到齐国。
English: Jian Zi also surrounded the Bao people, and Zhong Xingyin and Fan Jizhe then rushed to Qi Province.

古文：赵竟有邯郸、柏人。
现代文：赵氏终于占有了邯郸、柏人。
English: The Zhao clan finally gained control of Su and Bai.

古文：范、中行余邑入于晋。
现代文：范氏、中行氏其余的领地都归入晋国。
English: The remaining territories of the Fan and Zhongxing clans were incorporated into Jin.

古文：赵名晋卿，实专晋权，奉邑侔于诸侯。
现代文：赵简子名为晋国上卿，实际上独揽晋国政权，他的封地等同于诸侯。
English: Zhao Jianzi was called the high lord of the Jin Dynasty, and in fact, he monopolized the power of the Jin Dynasty. His fief was equivalent to that of a vassal.

古文：晋定公三十年，定公与吴王夫差争长于黄池，赵简子从晋定公，卒长吴。
现代文：晋定公三十年，定公与吴王夫差在黄池的诸侯盟会上争做盟主，赵简子跟随晋定公，终于让吴王为盟主。
English: Thirty years after the enthronement of Emperor Jinding, Emperor Jinding and King Wu fought for the leadership of the League of Princes in Huangchi. Zhao Jianzi followed Emperor Jinding and finally made King Wu the leader of the League.

古文：定公三十七年卒，而简子除三年之丧，期而已。
现代文：定公在位三十七年去世，简子免除了守丧三年之礼，一周年就结束了。
English: Sadamasa died in the thirty-seventh year of his reign, and Yasuko was exempted from the three-year mourning ceremony. The first anniversary is over.

古文：是岁，越王句践灭吴。
现代文：这一年，越王句践灭了吴国。
English: In the same year, Yue Wangcun destroyed the State of Wu.

古文：晋出公十一年，知伯伐郑。
现代文：晋出公十一年，知伯讨伐郑国。
English: Eleven years after he was promoted to the imperial court, Zhibo led a crusade against Zheng.

古文：赵简子疾，使太子毋恤将而围郑。
现代文：赵简子生病，派太子毋恤率兵包围郑国。
English: Zhao Jianzi fell ill and sent the crown prince to lead troops to surround Zheng.

古文：知伯醉，以酒灌击毋恤。
现代文：知伯喝醉了，用酒强灌毋恤并打他。
English: Zhi Bo was drunk, and they plied him with alcohol and beat him.

古文：毋恤群臣请死之。
现代文：毋恤的臣下要求把知伯处死。
English: Unforgiving vassals demanded that Chibok be put to death.

古文：毋恤曰： 君所以置毋恤，为能忍訽。 
现代文：毋恤说： 主君所以让我做太子，是因为我能忍辱负重。 
English: Needless to say, my lord made me crown prince because I can bear the burden of humiliation.

古文：然亦愠知伯。
现代文：但是他也怨恨知伯。
English: But he also resented Zhi Bo.

古文：知伯归，因谓简子，使废毋恤，简子不听。
现代文：知伯回去后，就对简子讲了，让他废毋恤，简子没有听从。
English: After Zhi Bo returned, he told Jian Zhou to let him go, but Jian Zhou did not listen.

古文：毋恤由此怨知伯。
现代文：毋恤从此更加怨恨知柏。
English: Needless to say, his resentment of Chihaku only grew from there.

古文：晋出公十七年，简子卒，太子毋恤代立，是为襄子。
现代文：晋出公十七年，赵简子去世，太子毋恤继位，这就是赵襄子。
English: Seventeen years after he was promoted to the throne, Zhao Jianzi passed away, and the crown prince had no choice but to succeed him. This is Zhao Xiangzi.

古文：赵襄子元年，越围吴。
现代文：赵襄子元年，越国包围吴国。
English: In the first year of Zhao Xiangzi, Yue surrounded Wu.

古文：襄子降丧食，使楚隆问吴王。
现代文：襄子减少了守孝期间规定的饮食，派家臣楚隆去慰问吴王。
English: Xiangzi reduced the diet prescribed during the period of filial piety and sent his vassal Chu Long to console King Wu.

古文：襄子姊前为代王夫人。
现代文：襄子的姐姐原本是代王夫人。
English: Xiangzi's sister was originally the acting queen.

古文：简子既葬，未除服，北登夏屋，请代王。使厨人操铜枓以食代王及从者，行斟，阴令宰人各以枓击杀代王及从官，遂兴兵平代地。
现代文：简子安葬以后，襄子还没有除丧服，就到北边登上夏屋山，请来代王，让厨师拿着铜勺请代王和他的随从进餐，斟酒时，暗中让名叫各的膳食用铜勺打死代王和随从宫员，于是就发兵平定代地。
English: After Jian Zi was buried, Xiang Zi had not yet removed his mourning clothes, so he went to the north to climb Xia Yu Mountain, invited the king to come, asked the cook to hold a copper spoon to invite the king and his entourage to dinner, and when pouring wine, secretly let the meal-eating copper spoon named Guo Zi kill the king and his entourage, and then sent troops to subdue the land.

古文：其姊闻之，泣而呼天，摩笄自杀。
现代文：他的姐姐听说这件事后，哭泣着呼喊苍天，磨尖簪子自杀了。
English: When his sister heard about it, she cried and screamed and committed suicide with a sharpened razor.

古文：代人怜之，所死地名之为摩笄之山。
现代文：代地人同情她，把她自杀的地方叫做摩笄之山。
English: Local people sympathize with her and call the place where she committed suicide the Mountain of Capricorns.

古文：遂以代封伯鲁子周为代成君。
现代文：襄子把代地封给伯鲁的儿子赵周，让他做代君。
English: Xiangzi gave the vicarious fief to Boru's son, Zhao Zhou, and let him be the regent.

古文：伯鲁者，襄子兄，故太子。
现代文：伯鲁是襄子的哥哥，原来的太子。
English: Baloo is the older brother of Xiangzi, the former crown prince.

古文：太子蚤死，故封其子。
现代文：太子早逝，所以封他的儿子。
English: The crown prince died young, so his son was given the title.

古文：襄子立四年，知伯与赵、韩、魏尽分其范、中行故地。
现代文：襄子即位四年，知伯和赵、韩、魏三家把范氏、中行氏原有的领地全都瓜分了。
English: Four years after Xiangzi's accession to the throne, Zhi Bo and the three families of Zhao, Han and Wei divided the original territories of the Fan and Zhongxing clans.

古文：晋出公怒，告齐、鲁，欲以伐四卿。
现代文：晋出公大怒，通告齐国、鲁国，想依靠他们讨伐四卿。
English: Jin came out in a rage and announced to Qi and Lu that he wanted to rely on them to fight the Four Lords.

古文：四卿恐，遂共攻出公。
现代文：四卿害怕，于是就一起攻打晋出公。
English: The four nobles were afraid, so they attacked Jin Decheng together.

古文：出公奔齐，道死。
现代文：出公逃奔齐国，半路上死了。
English: He ran away from his job to Qi Province and died on the way.

古文：知伯乃立昭公曾孙骄，是为晋懿公。
现代文：短伯就让昭公的曾孙骄即位，这就是晋懿公。
English: Dang Bo let the great-grandson of Akigimi ascend to the throne, and this is Shinshinkong.

古文：知伯益骄。
现代文：知伯越来越骄横。
English: Zhibo is becoming more and more arrogant.

古文：请地韩、魏，韩、魏与之。
现代文：他要求韩、魏两家割让领地，韩、魏给了他。
English: He asked Han and Wei to cede territory, and Han and Wei gave it to him.

古文：请地赵，赵不与，以其围郑之辱。
现代文：要求赵氏割地，赵氏不给，因为在包围郑国时知伯侮辱过他。
English: He asked the Zhao clan to divide the land, but the Zhao clan would not give it to him, because Zhibo had insulted him during the siege of Zheng.

古文：知伯怒，遂率韩、魏攻赵。
现代文：知伯恼怒，就率领韩、魏两家进攻赵氏。
English: Zhibo was so angry that he led Han and Wei to attack the Zhao clan.

古文：赵襄子惧，乃奔保晋阳。
现代文：赵襄子害怕，就逃奔到晋阳退守。
English: Zhao Xiangzi was afraid and fled to Jinyang to retreat.

古文：原过从，后至于王泽，见三人，自带以上可见，自带以下不可见。
现代文：原过跟随襄子，落在后边，到了王泽，看见三个人，从腰带以上可以看见，从腰带以下就看不见了。
English: I used to follow my brother-in-law, but fell behind. When I got to Wangze, I saw three people. I could see them from the waist up, but not from the waist down.

古文：与原过竹二节，莫通。
现代文：三人给了原过一根两节的竹棍，中间不通。
English: The three of them gave Hara a two-pronged bamboo stick, with a gap in the middle.

古文：曰： 为我以是遗赵毋恤。 
现代文：对他说： 替我们把这竹棍送给赵毋恤。 
English: He said to him, "Please give this bamboo stick to Zhao Bei for us."

古文：原过既至，以告襄子。
现代文：原过到了以后，把情况告诉襄子。
English: After you arrive, tell Xiangzi about the situation.

古文：襄子齐三日，亲自剖竹，有朱书曰： 赵毋恤，余霍泰山山阳侯天使也。
现代文：襄子斋戒三天，亲自把竹棍剖开，里边有朱红的字写道： 赵毋恤，我们是霍泰山山阳侯天使。
English: Xiangzi fasted for three days and personally cut open the bamboo stick. Inside, there was a red lettering that read: "Zhao Bei Bei, we are the angels of Mount Hotei.

古文：三月丙戌，余将使女反灭知氏。
现代文：三月丙戌日，我们将让你反过来灭掉知氏。
English: On the 6th day of the 3rd month, we will let you destroy Tomou in turn.

古文：女亦立我百邑，余将赐女林胡之地。
现代文：你也要为我们的百邑立庙，我们将把林胡的土地赐给你。
English: You will also build a temple for our hundred villages, and we will give you the land of Linhu.

古文：至于后世，且有伉王，赤黑，龙面而鸟噣，鬓麋髭，大膺大胸，修下而冯，左衽界乘，奄有河宗，至于休溷ù诸貉，南伐晋别，北灭黑姑。 
现代文：到你的后代，将有一位勇健的国王，皮肤红黑，龙脸鸟嘴，鬓眉相连，髭髯络腮，宽胸大腹，下体修长，上体壮大，左衣襟，披甲乘马。全部占有黄河中游一带，直至休溷地区的各部貉人，往南进攻晋国的其他城邑，往北灭掉黑姑。 
English: In your descendants, there will be a brave king, with reddish-black skin, a long face, a bird's beak, a frown, a beard, a broad chest, a large belly, a long lower body, a large upper body, a left collar, and a horse. All of them will occupy the middle reaches of the Yellow River, up to all parts of the Hulun region, attack other cities in Jin Province to the south, and destroy the Black Widow to the north.

古文：襄子再拜，受三神之令。
现代文：襄子再拜，接受了三位神人的旨令。
English: Xiangzi bowed again and accepted the order of the three gods.

古文：三国攻晋阳，岁余，引汾水灌其城，城不浸者三版。
现代文：三国攻打晋阳，持续了一年多，引来汾水灌城，城墙没有淹没的只剩下三版高了。
English: The Three Kingdoms attacked Jinyang, which lasted for more than a year, and the city was flooded with water. The only part of the city wall that was not submerged was three stories high.

古文：城中悬釜而炊，易子而食。
现代文：城里的人都把锅挂起来做饭，互换子女吃掉。
English: People in the city put on the pot to cook, and exchange their children to eat.

古文：群臣皆有外心，礼益慢，唯高共不敢失礼。
现代文：群臣都有了不忠之心，礼节越来越怠慢，唯有高共不敢对襄子失礼。
English: The courtiers all had a disloyal heart and were increasingly neglectful of etiquette. Only the high-ranking Communists dared not be rude to Xiangzi.

古文：襄子惧，乃夜使相张孟同私于韩、魏。
现代文：襄子害怕，于是半夜派丞相张孟同暗中结交韩、魏。
English: Xiangzi was afraid, so in the middle of the night he sent the prime minister Zhang Mengdong to secretly make friends with Han and Wei.

古文：韩、魏与合谋，以三月丙戌，三国反灭知氏，共分其地。
现代文：韩、魏与赵合谋，三月丙戌这天，三国反过来灭了知氏，共同瓜分了他的土地。
English: Han, Wei and Zhao conspired, and on this day in March, the three countries, in turn, annihilated Tomouji and jointly divided his land.

古文：于是襄子行赏，高共为上。
现代文：于是襄子进行封赏，高共功劳居首。
English: As a result, Xiangzi was awarded the prize, ranking first in terms of high Communist Party merit.

古文：张孟同曰： 晋阳之难，唯共无功。 
现代文：张孟同说： 晋阳有难期间，只有高共没有立功。 
English: Zhang Mengdong said: During the difficult period in Jinyang, only the high-level Communist Party did not do any meritorious deeds.

古文：襄子曰： 方晋阳急，群臣皆懈，惟共不敢失人臣礼，是以先之。 
现代文：襄子说： 当晋阳危急之时，群臣都很怠慢，只有高共不敢有失臣下的礼节，因此他要受上赏。 
English: Xiangzi said: When Jinyang was in a critical situation, all the ministers were negligent. Only Gao Gong didn't dare to lose the etiquette of a vassal, so he should be rewarded.

古文：于是赵北有代，南并知氏，强于韩、魏。
现代文：这时赵在北方占有代地，在南边并吞了知氏，比韩、魏强大。
English: At this time, Zhao occupied territory in the north and absorbed the Zhizhi in the south, becoming more powerful than Han and Wei.

古文：遂祠三神于百邑，使原过主霍泰山祠祀。
现代文：于是在百邑给三神立庙祭祀，派原过主持霍泰山神庙的祭祀。
English: As a result, the Three Gods Temple was built in Hyakumura, and he was sent to preside over the rituals of the Houtai Mountain Temple.

古文：其后娶空同氏，生五子。
现代文：后来襄子娶空同氏为妻，生了五个儿子。
English: Later, Xiangzi married a woman from the same clan and had five sons.

古文：襄子为伯鲁之不立也，不肯立子，且必欲传位与伯鲁子代成君。
现代文：襄子由于伯鲁未能继位，不肯立自己的儿子做太子，并且一定要传位给伯鲁的儿子代成君。
English: Since Bulu did not succeed to the throne, Xiangzi did not want to make his son the crown prince, and he had to pass the throne to Bulu's son, Taicheng.

古文：成君先死，乃取代成君子浣立为太子。
现代文：成君先死了，就选定代成君的儿子赵浣立为太子。
English: When Chengjun died first, Zhao Xingli, Chengjun's son, was chosen to succeed him as crown prince.

古文：襄子立三十三年卒，浣立，是为献侯。
现代文：襄子在位三十三年去世，赵浣即位，这就是献侯。
English: Xiangzi died in the thirty-third year of his reign, and Zhao Jun ascended the throne. This is the dedication ceremony.

古文：献侯少即位，治中牟。
现代文：献侯年纪不大就即位了，首府在中牟。
English: He ascended the throne at a young age, and the capital was in Zhongmou.

古文：襄子弟桓子逐献侯，自立于代，一年卒。
现代文：襄子的弟弟桓子驱逐了献侯，在代地自立为侯，一年后去世。
English: Xiangzi's younger brother, Huanzi, drove out the vassals and became a vassal in his place. He died a year later.

古文：国人曰桓子立非襄子意，乃共杀其子而复迎立献侯。
现代文：赵国人认为桓子即位不是襄子的意愿，就共同杀了他的儿子，又迎回献侯即位。
English: The people of Zhao believed that Han Zi's accession to the throne was not the will of Xiang Zi, so they jointly killed his son and welcomed back Xiang Zi to the throne.

古文：十年，中山武公初立。
现代文：献侯十年，中山国武公开始即位。
English: After ten years of dedication, the Emperor Wu of Zhongshan began to ascend to the throne.

古文：十三年，城平邑。
现代文：十三年，在平邑筑城。
English: Thirteen years of building a city in Ping'eup.

古文：十五年，献侯卒，子烈侯籍立。
现代文：十五年，献侯去世，他的儿子烈侯赵籍即位。
English: Fifteen years later, Xianhou died, and his son, Renhou Zhao, ascended to the throne.

古文：烈侯元年，魏文侯伐中山，使太子击守之。
现代文：烈侯元年，魏文侯攻打中山国，派太子魏击驻守。
English: In the first year of the reign of Liu Bei, Wei Wenhou attacked Zhongshan, and sent his son Wei Wei to garrison.

古文：六年，魏、韩、赵皆相立为诸侯，追尊献子为献侯。
现代文：六年，魏、韩、赵都立为诸侯，赵籍追尊献子为献侯。
English: In the sixth year, Wei, Han, and Zhao were all made princes, and Zhao's sons were made princes.

古文：烈侯好音，谓相国公仲连曰： 寡人有爱，可以贵之乎？ 
现代文：烈侯喜好音乐，对相国公仲连说： 寡人有喜爱的人，能让他尊贵起来吗？ 
English: The great lord liked music, and said to his countryman Zhong Lian: "If someone has a favorite, can he be honored?

古文：公仲曰： 富之可，贵之则否。 
现代文：公仲说： 使他富有还可以，让他尊贵则不行。 
English: Gongzhong said, "It is okay to make him rich, but it is not okay to make him honorable."

古文：烈侯曰： 然。
现代文：烈侯说： 好吧。
English: The martyr said: All right.

古文：夫郑歌者枪、石二人，吾赐之田，人万亩。 公仲曰： 诺。 
现代文：郑国的歌手枪和石两个人，我要赐给他们田地，每人一万亩。 公仲说： 是 。
English: Gun and Stone, two singers from Zhengzhou, I will give them each 10,000 mu of farmland.Kongzhong said, "Yes."

古文：不与。
现代文：事实上却没有给。
English: In fact, they didn't.

古文：居一月，烈侯从代来，问歌者田。公仲曰： 求，未有可者。 
现代文：过了一个月，烈候从代地回来，询问给歌手赐田的事，公仲说： 正在找，还没有找到合适的。 
English: After a month, the martyrs returned from the place of substitution, inquired about giving the singer a field, and Gongzhong said: I'm looking, I haven't found the right one yet.

古文：有顷，烈侯复问。公仲终不与，乃称疾不朝。
现代文：过了不久，烈侯又问，公仲始终不给，于是就说有病不上朝。
English: After a short while, the martyr asked again, and Gongzhong still refused, so he said that he would not go to the court if he was ill.

古文：番吾君自代来，谓公仲曰： 君实好善，而未知所持。
现代文：番吾君从代地来，对公仲说： 国君的确喜欢推行善政，只是不知道怎样实行。
English: Fango-kun came to replace him and said to Gongzhong, "Your Majesty really likes to carry out good governance, but he doesn't know how to do it.

古文：今公仲相赵，于今四年，亦有进士乎？ 公仲曰： 未也。 
现代文：现在您任赵的相国，已经有四年了，也曾推荐过人才吗？ 公仲说： 没有。 
English: Now that you have been Zhao's partner country for four years, have you ever recommended any talents?

古文：番吾君曰： 牛畜、荀欣、徐越皆可。 
现代文：番吾君说： 牛畜、荀欣、徐越都可以推荐。 
English: Fango-kun said, "We can recommend the beef cattle, Juxin, and Xu Yue."

古文：公仲乃进三人。
现代文：公仲就推荐了这三个人。
English: He recommended these three people.

古文：及朝，烈侯复问： 歌者田何如？ 
现代文：到上朝的时候，烈侯又问： 歌手的田地怎么样了？ 
English: When morning came, the martyr asked again: How is the singer's field?

古文：公仲曰： 方使择其善者。 
现代文：公仲说： 正派人挑选最好的田。 
English: Kinnaka said, "We send people to select the best rice fields.

古文：牛畜侍烈侯以仁义，约以王道，烈侯逌然。
现代文：牛畜侍奉烈侯时对他讲仁义的道理，用王道约束他，烈侯态度宽和。
English: When the cattle and animals served the martyrs, they spoke to him about the principles of benevolence and righteousness, restrained him with the royal way, and the attitude of the martyrs was amiable.

古文：明日，荀欣侍，以选练举贤，任官使能。
现代文：第二天，荀欣陪侍，建议精选起用贤才，任命官吏要使用能干的人。
English: The next day, Zhai Xin accompanied the procession, suggesting that the selection should use talents, and the appointment of officials should use capable people.

古文：明日，徐越侍以节财俭用，察度功德。
现代文：第三天，除越陪侍，建议节约财物，俭省用度，考察评估官吏们的功绩德行。
English: On the third day, in addition to accompanying the Vietnamese, it is recommended to save property, economize on expenses, and inspect and evaluate the merits and virtues of officials.

古文：所与无不充，君说。
现代文：他们所讲的道理没有不充分的，国君很高兴。
English: The reason they gave was not inadequate, and the sovereign was pleased.

古文：烈侯使使谓相国曰： 歌者之田且止。 
现代文：烈侯派人去对相国说： 给歌手赐田的事暂时停止。 
English: The feudal lord sent someone to say to his brother-in-law: Stop giving land to singers for the time being.

古文：官牛畜为师，荀欣为中尉，徐越为内史，赐相国衣二袭。
现代文：任命牛畜为师，荀欣为中尉，徐越为内史，赐给相国两套衣服。
English: He appointed Cattle and Cattle as his teachers, Juxin as his lieutenant, and Xu Yue as his secretary, and gave him two sets of clothes.

古文：九年，烈侯卒，弟武公立。
现代文：九年，烈侯去世，他的弟弟武公即位。
English: In the ninth year, the prince died, and his brother Wu Gong ascended to the throne.

古文：武公十三年卒，赵复立烈侯太子章，是为敬侯。
现代文：武公在位十三年去世，赵国又让烈侯太子赵章即位，这就是赵敬侯。
English: Wu Gong died in the thirteenth year of his reign, and Zhao Guo allowed the prince Zhao Zhang to ascend to the throne. This is Zhao Jinghou.

古文：是岁，魏文侯卒。
现代文：这一年，魏文侯去世。
English: This year, Wei Wenhou passed away.

古文：敬侯元年，武公子朝作乱，不克，出奔魏。
现代文：敬侯元年，武公的儿子赵朝叛乱，失败后逃奔魏国。
English: In the first year of Keihou, the son of Wu Gong rebelled against the Zhao Dynasty and fled to Wei after the defeat.

古文：赵始都邯郸。
现代文：赵国开始以邯郸为都城。
English: Zhao Province began to use Handan as its capital.

古文：二年，败齐于灵丘。三年，救魏于廪丘，大败齐人。
现代文：敬侯二年，在灵丘打败齐军。三年，在廪丘救授魏国，大败齐军。
English: In the second year of his reign, he defeated the Qi army at Lingqiu, and in the third year, he saved Wei and defeated the Qi army at Zouqiu.

古文：四年，魏败我兔台。
现代文：四年，赵军在兔台被魏军打败。
English: In four years, the Zhao army was defeated by the Wei army in Tiantai.

古文：筑刚平以侵卫。
现代文：赵修筑刚平城以便进攻卫国。
English: Zhao built the city of Gangping in order to attack the defense of the country.

古文：五年，齐、魏为卫攻赵，取我刚平。
现代文：五年，齐、魏两国帮助卫国攻赵，攻占了赵国的刚平城。
English: In the fifth year, the two countries of Qi and Wei helped the defending country to attack Zhao and captured the Gangping City of Zhao.

古文：六年，借兵于楚伐魏，取棘蒲。
现代文：六年，向楚国借兵伐魏，夺取了棘蒲。
English: In the sixth year, he borrowed soldiers from Chu to invade Wei, and captured Spindle.

古文：八年，拔魏黄城。
现代文：八年，攻下了魏国的黄城。
English: Eight years later, he captured the city of Huangcheng in Wei.

古文：九年，伐齐。
现代文：九年，进攻齐国。
English: Nine years later, they attacked Qi.

古文：齐伐燕，赵救燕。
现代文：齐国进攻燕国，赵军援救燕国。
English: Qi attacked Yan, and Zhao's army came to the rescue.

古文：十年，与中山战于房子。
现代文：十年，赵国与中山国在房子县交战。
English: Ten years ago, Zhao Province and Zhongshan Province went to war in Zhouzhu County.

古文：十一年，魏、韩、赵共灭晋，分其地。
现代文：敬侯十一年，魏、韩、赵共同灭亡晋国，瓜分了它的土地。
English: In the eleventh year of Ke Hou, Wei, Han and Zhao jointly destroyed Jin and divided its land.

古文：伐中山，又战于中人。
现代文：赵国攻打中山国，又在中人地区交战。
English: Zhao attacked Zhongshan and fought in the region of Zhongren.

古文：十二年，敬侯卒，子成侯种立。
现代文：十二年，敬侯去世，他的儿子成侯赵种即位。
English: In the twelfth year, Jing Hou died, and his son, Cheng Hou Zhao Zong, ascended to the throne.

古文：成侯元年，公子胜与成侯争立，为乱。
现代文：成侯元年，公子赵胜与成侯争夺君位，发动叛乱。
English: In the first year of Chenghou, the prince Zhao Sheng and Chenghou fought for the throne and launched a rebellion.

古文：二年六月，雨雪。
现代文：二年六月，下雪。
English: In June of 2002, it snowed.

古文：三年，太戊午为相。
现代文：三年，太戊午任相国。
English: Three years later, Tae Wo Wo was appointed as Minister of State.

古文：伐卫，取乡邑七十三。
现代文：征讨卫国，夺取了乡邑七十三处。
English: and conquered 73 townships and villages.

古文：魏败我蔺。
现代文：魏国在蔺打败赵军。
English: Wei defeated Zhao's army at Zou.

古文：四年，与秦战高安，败之。
现代文：四年，与秦军在高安交战，打败了它。
English: In four years, it fought with the Qin Army in Gao'an and defeated it.

古文：五年，伐齐于鄄。
现代文：五年，在鄄城攻伐齐军。
English: In five years, he fought against the Qi army in Lucheng.

古文：魏败我怀。
现代文：魏军在怀地打败赵军。
English: The Wei army defeated the Zhao army in Huaiji.

古文：攻郑，败之，以与韩，韩与我长子。
现代文：赵军攻打郑国，打败了它，把占领的郑地给了韩国，韩国把长子县给了赵国。
English: The Zhao Army attacked and defeated Zheng Guo, and gave the occupied Zheng Di to South Korea, and South Korea gave the eldest son county to Zhao Guo.

古文：六年，中山筑长城。
现代文：六年，中山国修筑长城。
English: It took Zhongshan Province six years to build the Great Wall.

古文：伐魏，败湪泽，围魏惠王。
现代文：赵军进攻魏国，在湪泽打败了它，围困了魏惠王。
English: Zhao's army attacked Wei, defeated it in Heze, and besieged Wei Hui Wang.

古文：七年，侵齐，至长城。
现代文：七年，进攻齐国，打到了齐长城。
English: In the seventh year, they attacked Qi Province and reached the Qi Great Wall.

古文：与韩攻周。
现代文：同韩国联合进攻西周国。
English: Jointly attack Western Zhou with South Korea.

古文：八年，与韩分周以为两。
现代文：八年，和韩国一起把西周分为两部分。
English: Eight years later, together with South Korea, West Zhou was divided into two parts.

古文：九年，与齐战阿下。
现代文：九年，与齐国在阿城之下交战。
English: In the ninth year, he fought against Qi under Acheng.

古文：十年，攻卫，取甄。
现代文：十年，进攻卫国，夺取甄城。
English: Ten years later, the attack on the defense of the country and the capture of Zhencheng.

古文：十一年，秦攻魏，赵救之石阿。
现代文：十一年，秦国进攻魏国，赵军到石阿去援救。
English: In the eleventh year, Qin attacked Wei, and Zhao's army came to Shia's rescue.

古文：十二年，秦攻魏少梁，赵救之。
现代文：十二年，秦军进攻魏国的少梁，赵军前去援救。
English: In the twelfth year, the Qin army attacked Xiao Liang of Wei, and the Zhao army went to the rescue.

古文：十三年，秦献公使庶长国伐魏少梁，虏其太子、痤。
现代文：十三年，秦献公派名叫国的庶长领兵进攻魏国的少梁，俘虏了魏国太子和公孙痤。
English: In the thirteenth year of the Qin Dynasty, Qin Xingguo sent a deputy commander named Guo to lead an army to attack Xiao Liang of Wei, and captured the prince of Wei and Gongsun Yao.

古文：魏败我浍，取皮牢。
现代文：魏军在浍水一带打败赵军，夺取了皮牢。
English: The Wei army defeated the Zhao army in the vicinity of Surabaya and captured Pidong.

古文：成侯与韩昭侯遇上党。
现代文：成侯与韩昭侯在上党相遇。
English: Cheng Hou and Han Zhaohou met at the Upper Party.

古文：十四年，与韩攻秦。
现代文：十四年，赵与韩一起攻秦。
English: In the 14th year, Zhao and Han attacked Qin together.

古文：十五年，助魏攻齐。
现代文：十五年，赵国帮助魏国攻齐。
English: In 15 years, Zhao Guo helped Wei Guo to catch up.

古文：十六年，与韩、魏分晋，封晋君以端氏。
现代文：十六年，赵国与韩国、魏国瓜分晋国。把端氏县封给晋君。
English: Sixteen years later, Zhao divided Jin with Korea and Wei, and gave the county of Hanzhi to Jin.

古文：十七年，成侯与魏惠王遇葛孽。
现代文：十七年，成侯与魏惠王在葛孽相遇。
English: In the seventeenth year, Cheng Hou and Wei Hui Wang met in Ge Wei.

古文：十九年，与齐、宋会平陆，与燕会阿。
现代文：十九年，赵国与齐国、宋国在平陆盟会，与燕国在西阿盟会。
English: In the 19th year, Zhao, Qi, and Song were in the Pinglu League, and Yan was in the West Arabian League.

古文：二十年，魏献荣椽，因以为檀台。
现代文：二十年，魏国进献上等木料做的檐椽，于是就用这些木椽修建了檀台。
English: In the 20th century, the state of Wei donated rafts made of high-grade wood, and then used these rafts to build the platform.

古文：二十一年，魏围我邯郸。
现代文：二十一年，魏军包围了邯郸。
English: In the twenty-first year, the Wei army encircled Wu.

古文：二十二年，魏惠王拔我邯郸，齐亦败魏于桂陵。
现代文：二十二年，魏惠王攻下了邯郸，齐军也在桂陵打败了魏军。
English: In the 22nd year, Wei Hui Wang captured Handan, and the Qi army also defeated the Wei army in Guilin.

古文：二十四年，魏归我邯郸，与魏盟漳水上。
现代文：二十四年，魏国把邯郸归还给赵国，赵国与魏国在漳水之滨盟誓。
English: Twenty-four years later, Wei returned the scepter to Zhao, and Zhao and Wei swore an oath on the shore of the scepter.

古文：秦攻我蔺。
现代文：秦军进攻赵国的蔺城。
English: The Qin army attacked Lucheng in Zhao.

古文：二十五年，成侯卒。
现代文：二十五年，成侯去世。
English: Twenty-five years later, Cheng Hou passed away.

古文：公子緤与太子肃侯争立，緤败，亡奔韩。
现代文：公子緤与太子肃侯争夺君位，赵緤失败，逃奔韩国。
English: Prince Zizang and Prince So competed for the throne, but Zhao Zizang lost and fled to Korea.

古文：肃侯元年，夺晋君端氏，徙处屯留。
现代文：肃侯元年，夺取了晋君的端氏县，把晋君迁到屯留安置。
English: In the first year of Suhou, they seized Jinjun's Hanzhi County and moved Jinjun to a settlement.

古文：二年，与魏惠王遇于阴晋。
现代文：二年，与魏惠王在阴晋相遇。
English: Two years later, he met Wei Hui Wang in Yinjin.

古文：三年，公子范袭邯郸，不胜而死。
现代文：三年，公子赵范袭击邯郸，没有取胜就死了。
English: In three years, his son Zhao Fan attacked Zhai, but died without winning.

古文：四年，朝天子。
现代文：四年，朝拜周天子。
English: For four years, he worshipped Zhou Tianzi.

古文：六年，攻齐，拔高唐。
现代文：六年，进攻齐国，夺取了高唐。
English: In six years, he attacked Qi and conquered Gaotang.

古文：七年，公子刻攻魏首垣。
现代文：七年，公子赵刻进攻魏国的首垣。
English: In the seventh year, the nobleman Zhao Ke attacked the capital of Wei.

古文：十一年，秦孝公使商君伐魏，虏其将公子卬。
现代文：十一年，秦孝公派商鞅征伐魏国，俘虏了魏国将军公子赵卬。
English: In the eleventh year, Qin Xiaogong sent Shangguan to invade Wei and captured the Wei general's son Zhao Jun.

古文：赵伐魏。
现代文：赵国进攻魏国。
English: Zhao attacked Wei.

古文：十二年，秦孝公卒，商君死。
现代文：十二年，秦孝公去世，商鞅也死了。
English: In the twelfth year, Qin Xiaogong died, and Shangyu also died.

古文：十五年，起寿陵。
现代文：十五年，开始兴建寿陵。
English: Fifteen years later, the construction of Shouling began.

古文：魏惠王卒。
现代文：魏惠王去世。
English: Wei Hui Wang passed away.

古文：十六年，肃侯游大陵，出于鹿门，大戊午扣马曰： 耕事方急，一日不作，百日不食。 
现代文：十六年，肃侯游览大陵，经过鹿门，宰相太戊午牵住马头说： 正当农事繁忙的时候，一天不耕作，一百天没有饭吃。 
English: Sixteen years ago, Su Hou toured Daling, passing through Lu Men, and Prime Minister Ta Wu Wu held the horse's head and said: Just when agricultural affairs are busy, one day without farming, one hundred days without eating.

古文：肃侯下车谢。
现代文：肃侯听了立即下车认错。
English: Suhou listened and immediately got off the bus to admit his mistake.

古文：十七年，围魏黄，不克。
现代文：十七年，围困魏国的黄城，没有攻克。
English: For seventeen years, they besieged the city of Huangcheng in Wei, but failed to conquer it.

古文：筑长城。
现代文：修筑长城。
English: Build the Great Wall.

古文：十八年，齐、魏伐我，我决河水灌之，兵去。
现代文：十八年，齐、魏征伐赵国，赵国决黄河之水淹灌敌军，敌军撤离。
English: In the 18th year, Qi and Wei conquered Zhao Province, and Zhao Province decided to flood the enemy army with water from the Yellow River, and the enemy army withdrew.

古文：二十二年，张仪相秦。
现代文：二十二年，张仪任秦国宰相。
English: In 1922, Zhang Yi was appointed the Prime Minister of Qin.

古文：赵疵与秦战，败，秦杀疵河西，取我蔺、离石。
现代文：赵疵与秦军交战，失败，秦军在河西杀死赵疵，夺取了赵国的蔺和离石两地。
English: Zhao Qi fought with the Qin army, but failed. The Qin army killed Zhao Qi in Hexi and seized the two places of Zhao's country, Zouhe and Liushi.

古文：二十三年，韩举与齐、魏战，死于桑丘。
现代文：二十三年，韩举与齐军、魏军作战，战死在桑丘。
English: In 233, Han Jiu fought against the Qi and Wei armies, and died in battle at Sanqiu.

古文：二十四年，肃侯卒。
现代文：二十四年，肃侯去世。
English: Twenty-four years later, So Hou passed away.

古文：秦、楚、燕、齐、魏出锐师各万人来会葬。
现代文：秦、楚、燕、齐、魏派出精兵各一万人同来参加葬礼。
English: Qin, Chu, Yan, Qi and Wei each sent ten thousand soldiers to attend the funeral.

古文：子武灵王立。
现代文：肃侯的儿子武灵王即位。
English: Soho's son, King Wuling, ascends the throne.

古文：武灵王元年，阳文君赵豹相。
现代文：武灵王元年，阳文君赵豹任宰相。
English: In the first year of King Wuling, Yang Wenjun Zhao Bao was appointed prime minister.

古文：梁襄王与太子嗣、韩宣王与太子仓来朝信宫。
现代文：梁襄王和太子嗣、韩宣王和太子仓到信宫来朝贺。
English: King Liang Xiang and the prince's heir, King Han Xuan and Prince Cang came to Xinyu Palace to congratulate the emperor.

古文：武灵王少，未能听政，博闻师三人，左右司过三人。
现代文：武灵王年少，还不能处理政事，设有博闻师三人，左右司过官三人。
English: King Wuling was young and not yet able to deal with political affairs. There were three scholars and three officials on the left and right.

古文：及听政，先问先王贵臣肥义，加其秩。国三老年八十，月致其礼。
现代文：到处理朝政的时候，首先问候先王的贵臣肥义，并给他增加品级和俸禄；国中八十以上的德高老人，每月都给他们送礼。
English: When it came to dealing with the affairs of the court, he first greeted the former king's courtier, Naru Hiyoshi, and gave him an increase in rank and salary. Virtuous elderly people over the age of eighty in the country gave them gifts every month.

古文：三年，城鄗。
现代文：武灵王三年，修筑鄗城。
English: Wuling Wang spent three years building Shicheng.

古文：四年，与韩会于区鼠。
现代文：四年，与韩王在区鼠会盟。
English: For four years, he was in league with Han Wang in the District Rat Association.

古文：五年，娶韩女为夫人。
现代文：五年，迎娶韩国宗亲之女为妻。
English: Five years later, he married the daughter of a Korean ancestor.

古文：八年，韩击秦，不胜而去。
现代文：八年，韩国进攻秦国，没有取胜就撤离了。
English: Eight years ago, South Korea attacked Qin, but withdrew after failing to win.

古文：五国相王，赵独否，曰： 无其实，敢处其名乎！ 
现代文：五国互相称王，只有赵国不称王，赵君说： 没有实际，怎能处在这个名分上呢！ 
English: The five countries called each other king, only Zhao did not call himself king. Zhao Jun said, "Without reality, how can we be in this position?"

古文：令国人谓己曰 君 。
现代文：下令赵国人都称他为 君 。
English: Zhao ordered his people to call him "Jun."

古文：九年，与韩、魏共击秦。秦败我，斩首八万级。
现代文：九年，与韩、魏一起进攻秦国，秦国打败了三国军队，斩杀了八万人。
English: In the ninth year, together with Han and Wei, they attacked Qin. Qin defeated the armies of the three countries and killed eighty thousand people.

古文：齐败我观泽。
现代文：齐国在观泽打败赵军。
English: Qi defeated Zhao's army at Guanzhe.

古文：十年，秦取我中都及西阳。
现代文：十年，秦军夺取赵国的中都和西阳。
English: Ten years later, the Qin army captured the central capital of Zhao and Xiyang.

古文：齐破燕。燕相子之为君，君反为臣。
现代文：齐国打败燕国，燕国宰相子之做了国君，国君反而称臣。
English: The State of Qi defeated the State of Yan. The son of the Prime Minister of the State of Yan became the ruler of the country. The ruler, on the other hand, praised the minister.

古文：十一年，王召公子职于韩，立以为燕王，使乐池送之。
现代文：十一年，武灵王把燕国公子职从韩国召来，立他为燕王，派乐池护送他回燕国。
English: In the eleventh year, King Wuling summoned the Prince of Yan from Korea, appointed him as the King of Yan, and sent Lechi to escort him back to Yan.

古文：十三年，秦拔我蔺，虏将军赵庄。
现代文：十三年，秦军攻下赵他的蔺城，俘虏了将军赵庄。
English: In the thirteenth year, the Qin army conquered Zhaotai's Lucheng and captured the general Zhao Zhuang.

古文：楚、魏王来，过邯郸。
现代文：楚王、魏王来赵国，至邯郸。
English: The King of Chu and the King of Wei came to Zhao and stayed there.

古文：十四年，赵何攻魏。
现代文：十四年，赵何进攻魏国。
English: In the 14th year, Zhao He attacked Wei.

古文：十六年，秦惠王卒。
现代文：十六年，秦惠王去世。
English: Sixteen years later, Qin Hui Wang passed away.

古文：王游大陵。
现代文：武灵王游览大陵。
English: King Wuling toured the Great Mausoleum.

古文：他日，王梦见处女鼓琴而歌诗曰： 美人荧荧兮，颜若苕之荣。
现代文：有一天，武灵王梦见一位少女弹琴并唱了一首： 美人光彩艳丽啊，容貌好像苕花。
English: One day, King Wuling had a dream of a young girl playing the piano and singing a song: "Beauty is radiant and beautiful, her face is like a daisy."

古文：命乎命乎，曾无我嬴！ 
现代文：命运啊，命运啊，竟然无人知晓我嬴女的芳名！ 
English: Fate, fate, that no one knows my little girl's name!

古文：异日，王饮酒乐，数言所梦，想见其状。
现代文：另一天，武灵王饮酒很高兴，屡次谈起他所做的梦，想像着梦中少女的美貌。
English: On another day, Wuling Wang was very happy to drink alcohol. He repeatedly talked about his dream and imagined the beauty of the girl in his dream.

古文：吴广闻之，因夫人而内其女娃嬴，孟姚也。
现代文：吴广听说后，通过夫人把他的女儿娃嬴送入宫中。
English: After hearing of this, Wu Guang sent his daughter, Dawao, to the palace through his wife.

古文：孟姚甚有宠于王，是为惠后。
现代文：这就是孟姚。孟姚特别受武灵王的宠爱，她就是惠后。
English: This is Meng Yao. Meng Yao is especially favored by King Wuling, and she is the Empress Dowager.

古文：十七年，王出九门，为野台，以望齐、中山之境。
现代文：十七年，武灵王到九门，修筑野台，以便瞭望齐国和中山国的边境。
English: In the seventeenth year, King Wuling went to Jiu Men and built a platform so that he could see the border between Qi and Zhongshan.

古文：十八年，秦武王与孟说举龙文赤鼎，绝膑而死。
现代文：十八年，秦武王和孟说举龙纹赤鼎，砸断腿后去世。
English: In the 18th year, Qin King Wu and Meng Shao lifted the dragon-patterned red ring, and died after breaking his leg.

古文：赵王使代相赵固迎公子稷于燕，送归，立为秦王，是为昭王。
现代文：赵王派代相赵固到燕国迎接秦公子稷，送他回国，立为秦王，这就是秦昭王。
English: King Zhao sent his representative Zhao Gu to Yan Province to meet Qin Gongzixuan, send him back to China, and establish him as the Qin King. This is Qin Zhao Wang.

古文：十九年春正月，大朝信宫。
现代文：武灵王十九年春天正月，在信宫举行盛大朝会。
English: In the first month of the 19th year of King Wuling's reign, a grand imperial meeting was held at the Xinyu Palace.

古文：召肥义与议天下，五日而毕。
现代文：召见肥义同他议论天下大事，谈了五天才结束。
English: He summoned Huiyi to discuss world affairs with him, and the discussion lasted for five days.

古文：王北略中山之地，至于房子，遂之代，北至无穷，西至河，登黄华之上。
现代文：武灵王到北边巡视中山国的地界，到了房子县，又去代地，北到无穷，西到黄河，登上黄华山顶。
English: King Wuling went to the north to inspect the geographical boundaries of Zhongshan, and when he arrived at Zhouzhu County, he went to the place of substitution, to the north to infinity, to the west to the Yellow River, and to the top of Huanghua Mountain.

古文：召楼缓谋曰： 我先王因世之变，以长南藩之地，属阻漳、滏之险，立长城，又取蔺、郭狼，败林人于荏，而功未遂。
现代文：然后召见楼缓商议说： 我们先王趁着世事的变化，做了南边领地的君长，连接了漳水、滏水的险阻，修筑长城，又夺取了蔺城、郭狼，在荏地打败了林胡人，可是功业尚未完成。
English: Then he summoned the lamas for deliberation and said: Our first king took advantage of the changes in the world, became the ruler of the southern territory, connected Surabaya and the perilous obstacles of Surabaya, built the Great Wall, captured Surabaya and Guolang, and defeated the Linhu people in Surabaya, but the work has not yet been completed.

古文：今中山在我腹心，北有燕，东有胡，西有林胡、楼烦、秦、韩之边，而无强兵之救，是亡社稷，奈何？
现代文：如今中山国在我们腹心，北面是燕国，东面是东胡，西面是林胡、楼烦、秦国、韩国的边界，然而没有强大兵力的救援，这样下去国家要灭亡，怎么办呢？
English: Today, Zhongshan Province is in our backyard. To the north is Yan Province, to the east is Donghu, and to the west are Linhu, Loudui, Qin, and the border of South Korea. However, there is no strong military force to help. If this continues, the country will perish. What should we do?

古文：夫有高世之名，必有遗俗之累。
现代文：要取得高出世人的功名，必定要受到背离习俗的牵累。
English: In order to achieve a reputation higher than the world, it is necessary to be involved in deviating from the custom.

古文：吾欲胡服。 
现代文：我要穿起胡人服装。 
English: I'm going to dress up as a werewolf.

古文：楼缓曰： 善。 
现代文：楼缓说： 很好。 
English: Lou said slowly: Very good.

古文：群臣皆不欲。
现代文：可是群臣都不愿意。
English: But the ministers did not want to go.

古文：于是肥义侍，王曰： 简、襄主之烈，计胡、翟之利。
现代文：当时肥义在旁侍奉，武灵王说： 简子、襄子二位主君的功业，就在于考虑到了胡、翟之利。
English: At that time, Feiyi was serving at his side, and King Wuling said: The achievements of the two masters, Jianzi and Xiangzi, were to take into account the benefits of Hu and Zou.

古文：为人臣者，宠有孝弟长幼顺明之节，通有补民益主之业，此两者臣之分也。
现代文：做臣子的，得宠时应有明孝悌、知长幼、顺从明理的德操，通达时应建立既可利民又能益君的功业，这两点是身为臣子的本分。
English: To be a courtier, when you are favored, you should have the virtues of filial piety, knowledge of elders and children, and obedience to reason. When you are enlightened, you should establish a career that can benefit both the people and the prince. These two points are the duty of being a courtier.

古文：今吾欲继襄主之迹，开于胡、翟之乡，而卒世不见也。
现代文：如今我想继承襄主的事业，开拓胡人、翟人所住之地，可是找遍世间也见不到这样的贤臣。
English: Now I want to carry on my master's work, to open up the land inhabited by the Hu people and the Qiang people, but I can't find such a wise man anywhere in the world.

古文：为敌弱，用力少而功多，可以毋尽百姓之劳，而序往古之勋。
现代文：我是为了削弱敌人，事半功倍，可以不耗尽百姓的劳力，就能继续两位先主的勋业。
English: In order to weaken the enemy, I did more with less, so that I could continue the noble work of the two forefathers without exhausting the labor of the people.

古文：夫有高世之功者，负遗俗之累；有独智之虑者，任骜民之怨。
现代文：凡是有高出世上功业的人，就要承受背弃习俗的牵累；有独特智谋的人，就要听任傲慢民众的埋怨。
English: Those who have higher achievements in the world will have to bear the burden of abandoning customs; those who have unique wisdom will have to listen to the complaints of arrogant people.

古文：今吾将胡服骑射以教百姓，而世必议寡人，奈何？ 
现代文：如今我要穿胡人服装骑马射箭，并用这个教练百姓，可是世人一定要议论我，怎么办呢？ 
English: Now I'm going to wear a Wu costume, ride a horse, shoot arrows, and use this coach to coach people, but the world must talk about me, what should I do?

古文：肥义曰： 臣闻疑事无功，疑行无名。
现代文：肥义说： 我听说做事犹疑就不会成功，行动犹豫就不会成名。
English: Huiyi said: I have heard that if you hesitate to do things, you will not succeed, and if you hesitate to act, you will not become famous.

古文：王既定负遗俗之虑，殆无顾天下之议矣。
现代文：您既然考虑决定承受背弃风俗的责难，那么就无须顾虑天下人的议论了。
English: Since you have considered and decided to bear the reproach of abandoning the custom, then there is no need to worry about the world's discussion.

古文：夫论至德者不和于俗，成大功者不谋于众。
现代文：追求最高道德的人不附和世俗，成就大功的人不会谋求与凡夫俗子商议。
English: Those who pursue the highest morality will not conform to the world, and those who achieve great achievements will not seek to negotiate with ordinary people.

古文：昔者舜舞有苗，禹袒裸国，非以养欲而乐志也，务以论德而约功也。
现代文：从前舜用舞蹈感化三苗，禹到裸国脱去上衣，他们不是为了满足欲望和愉悦心志，而是必须用这种方法宣扬德政并取得成功。
English: In the past, the three seedlings were inspired by dance, and Yu took off his shirt to the naked country. They were not to satisfy their desires and pleasures, but they had to use this method to promote moral government and achieve success.

古文：愚者暗成事，智者睹未形，则王何疑焉？ 
现代文：愚蠢的人事情成功了还没能明白事情的真谛，聪明人在事情尚无迹象的时候就能看清，那那么君王您还犹疑什么呢！ 
English: Foolish people do not understand the true meaning of things when things are successful, and wise people can see things clearly when there is no sign of things, so what are you hesitating about, king!

古文：王曰： 吾不疑胡服也，吾恐天下笑我也。
现代文：武灵王说： 穿胡服我不犹疑，我担心天下之人要嘲笑我。
English: King Wuling said, "I don't hesitate to wear Hu clothing. I'm afraid that people around the world will laugh at me.

古文：狂夫之乐，智者哀焉；愚者所笑，贤者察焉。
现代文：无知的人快乐，正是聪明人的哀伤；蠢人讥笑的事，贤人却能看得清。
English: The joy of the foolish is the grief of the wise: but the prudent seeth very well the folly of fools.

古文：世有顺我者，胡服之功未可知也。
现代文：世上有顺从我的人，穿胡服的功效是不可估量的。
English: There are people in the world who obey me, and the effect of wearing the robe is immeasurable.

古文：虽驱世以笑我，胡地中山吾必有之。 
现代文：即便世上所有人都来嘲笑我，胡地和中山国我也一定要占有。 
English: Even if everyone in the world laughs at me, I will definitely take possession of Huti and Zhongshan.

古文：于是遂胡服矣。
现代文：于是就穿起了胡服。
English: So he put on the robe.

古文：使王緤告公子成曰： 寡人胡服，将以朝也，亦欲叔服之。
现代文：武灵王派王緤转告公子成说： 寡人穿上胡服，将要这样上朝，也希望叔父穿上它。
English: King Wuling sent Wang Yao to tell his son-in-law: "Someone will wear a Hu robe to the imperial court, and I want my uncle to wear it, too.

古文：家听于亲而国听于君，古今之公行也。
现代文：家事要听从双亲，国事要听从国君，这是古今公认的行为准则。
English: It is a well-recognized code of conduct from ancient times to the present that one should obey one's parents in family affairs and obey the sovereign in state affairs.

古文：子不反亲，臣不逆君，兄弟之通义也。
现代文：子女不能反对双亲，臣子不能违背君主，这是兄弟们通用的道理。
English: Children cannot oppose their parents, and courtiers cannot disobey the monarch. This is a common principle among brothers.

古文：今寡人作教易服而叔不服，吾恐天下议之也。
现代文：如今我制定政令，改变服装，可是叔父您要不穿，我恐怕天下人要议论。
English: Now I'm making a decree to change my clothes, but whether you want to wear them or not, I'm afraid the whole world will want to talk about it.

古文：制国有常，利民为本；从政有经，令行为上。
现代文：治国有常规，利民是根本；处理政事有常法，有令就行最为重要。
English: Governing the country is routine, benefiting the people is fundamental; dealing with political affairs is routine, and following orders is most important.

古文：明德先论于贱，而行政先信于贵。
现代文：宣传德政要先从平民谈起，而推行政令就要先让贵族信从。
English: The propaganda of virtue politics should start with the common people, and the implementation of the executive order should start with the nobles.

古文：今胡服之意，非以养欲而乐志也。
现代文：如今穿胡服的目的，不是为了满足欲望和愉悦心志；事情要达到一定的目的，功业才能完成。
English: Nowadays, the purpose of wearing Hu clothing is not to satisfy desires and pleasurable aspirations; things have to achieve a certain purpose before the work can be completed.

古文：事有所止而功有所出，事成功立，然后善也。
现代文：事情完成了，功业建立了，然后才算是妥善。
English: Things are done, the work is established, and then it is considered to be done properly.

古文：今寡人恐叔之逆从政之经，以辅叔之议。
现代文：如今我恐怕叔父违背了处理政事的原则，因此来帮助叔父考虑。
English: Now I am afraid that my uncle has violated the principle of handling government affairs, so I will help my uncle consider.

古文：且寡人闻之，事利国者行无邪，因贵戚者名不累，故愿慕公叔之义，以成胡服之功。
现代文：况且我听说过，做有利于国家的事，行为不会偏邪；依靠贵戚的人，名不会受损害。所以我愿仰仗叔父的忠义，来成就胡服的功效。
English: Moreover, I have heard that if you do things that are beneficial to the country, your behavior will not deviate; if you rely on your relatives, your reputation will not be damaged. Therefore, I would like to rely on my uncle's loyalty to achieve the effect of Hufu.

古文：使緤谒之叔，请服焉。 
现代文：我派王緤来拜见叔父，请您穿上胡服。 
English: I've sent Wang Yao to see your uncle. Please put on your Hu clothing.

古文：公子成再拜稽首曰： 臣固闻王之胡服也。臣不佞，寝疾，未能趋走以滋进也。
现代文：公子成再拜叩头说： 我来已听说了大王穿胡服的事，我没有才能，卧病在床，不能奔走效力多多进言。
English: Prince Cheng bowed again and said, "I've heard about the great king wearing a wolf costume. I have no talent, I'm sick in bed, I can't run around. I'd rather talk."

古文：王命之，臣敢对，因竭其愚忠。
现代文：大王命令我，我斗胆回答，是为了尽我的愚忠。
English: The Great King commands me, and I answer boldly, in order to fulfill my foolish loyalty.

古文：曰：臣闻中国者，盖聪明徇智之所居也，万物财用之所聚也，圣贤之所教也，仁义之所施也，《诗》《书》礼乐之所用也，异敏技能之所试也，远方之所观赴也，蛮夷之所义行也。今王舍此而袭远方之服，变古之教，易古人道，逆人之心，而怫学者，离中国，故臣愿王图之也。 
现代文：我听说中国是聪明智慧的人居住的地方，是万物财用聚集的地方，是圣贤进行教化的地方，是仁义可以施行的地方，是远方之人愿来观览的地方，是蛮夷乐于效法的地方。如今大王抛弃了这些而穿起远方的服装，变更古来的教化，改易古时的正道，违反众人的心意，背弃学者之教，远离中国风俗，所以我希望大王仔细考虑此事。 
English: I have heard that China is a place where clever and wise people live, a place where all things of wealth and use are gathered, a place where saints and sages are educated, a place where benevolence and righteousness can be practiced, a place where people from far away are willing to come to watch, and a place where barbarians are happy to imitate. Now the great king has abandoned these and put on distant clothes, changed the ancient education, changed the ancient righteous way, violated the will of the people, abandoned the teachings of scholars, and distanced himself from Chinese customs, so I hope the great king will carefully consider this matter.

古文：使者以报。
现代文：使者回去如实禀报。
English: The messenger went back and reported truthfully.

古文：王曰： 吾固闻叔之疾也，我将自往请之。 
现代文：武灵王说： 我本来知道叔父有病，我要亲自去请求他。 
English: Wuling Wang said, "I knew my uncle was ill, so I wanted to ask him in person.

古文：王遂往之公子成家，因自请之，曰： 夫服者，所以便用也；礼者，所以便事也。
现代文：武灵王于是前往公子成家中，亲自请求他，说： 衣服是为了便于穿用的，礼是为了便于行事的。
English: King Wu Ling then went to Gongzicheng's home and personally asked him, saying, "Clothes are for ease of wear, and etiquette is for ease of conduct.

古文：圣人观乡而顺宜，因事而制礼，所以利其民而厚其国也。
现代文：圣人观察乡俗而顺俗制宜，根据实际情况制定礼仪，这是为了利民富国。
English: The sage observed the local customs and conformed to them, and formulated the etiquette according to the actual situation. This was to benefit the people and enrich the country.

古文：夫剪发文身，错臂左衽，瓯越之民也。
现代文：剪掉头发，身上刺花纹，臂膀上绘画，衣襟开在左边，这是瓯越百姓的习俗。
English: It is the custom of the people of Yunnan to cut their hair, tattoo their bodies, paint their arms, and wear their collars open on the left.

古文：黑齿雕题，却冠秫绌，大吴之国也。
现代文：染黑牙齿，额上刺花。戴鱼皮帽子，穿粗针大线的衣服，这是大吴国的习俗。
English: Blackened teeth, thorns on the forehead, wearing a fish skin hat, wearing clothes with thick needles and large threads, this is the custom of the Great Wu Kingdom.

古文：故礼服莫同，其便一也。
现代文：所以礼制服装各地不同，而为了便利却是一致的。
English: Therefore, the dress code varies from place to place, but for convenience it is consistent.

古文：乡异而用变，事异而礼易。
现代文：地方不同使用会有变化，事情不同礼制也会更改。
English: The use of different places will change, and the etiquette of different things will also change.

古文：是以圣人果可以利其国，不一其用；果可以便其事，不同其礼。
现代文：因此圣人认为如果可以利国，方法不必一致；如果可以便于行事，礼制不必相同。
English: Therefore, the sage believed that if it can benefit the country, the methods do not have to be the same; if it can be convenient to act, the etiquette does not have to be the same.

古文：儒者一师而俗异，中国同礼而教离，况于山谷之便乎？
现代文：儒者同一师承而习俗有别，中原礼仪相同而教化互异，何况是为了荒远地区的方便呢？
English: Confucians have the same teacher but different customs, the Central Plains have the same etiquette but different indoctrination, what's more, is it for the convenience of remote areas?

古文：故去就之变，智者不能一；远近之服，贤圣不能同。
现代文：所以进退取舍的变化，聪明人也不能一致；远方和近处的服饰，圣贤也不能使它相同。
English: Therefore, the wise man cannot be consistent with the changes in the pros and cons; the saints cannot make the clothing of the far and the near the same.

古文：穷乡多异，曲学多辩。
现代文：穷乡僻壤风俗多异，学识浅陋却多诡辩。
English: In poor and remote areas, customs vary widely, and knowledge is often shallow and sophistical.

古文：不知而不疑，异于己而不非者，公焉而众求尽善也。
现代文：不了解的事不去怀疑，与自己的意见不同而不去非议的人，才会公正地博采众见以求尽善。
English: Only those who do not doubt what they do not understand, and who do not criticize opinions that differ from their own, can fairly absorb the opinions of others to the best of their ability.

古文：今叔之所言者俗也，吾所言者所以制俗也。
现代文：如今叔父所说的是世俗之见，我所说的是为了制止世俗之见。
English: Now my uncle is talking about secularism, I am talking about stopping secularism.

古文：吾国东有河、薄洛之水，与齐、中山同之，无舟楫之用。
现代文：我国东有黄河、薄洛津，和齐国、中山国共有，可是没有舟船的设施。
English: In the east of our country, there are the Yellow River and the Bailuotsin River, which are shared with the countries of Qi and Zhongshan, but there are no boat facilities.

古文：自常山以至代、上党，东有燕、东胡之境，而西有楼烦、秦、韩之边，今无骑射之备。
现代文：从常山直到代地、上党，东边是燕国、东胡的国境，西边有楼烦、秦国、韩国的边界，如今没有骑射的装备。
English: From Changshan to Dechi and Shangdang, there is the border of Yan and Donghu in the east, and the border of Loudui, Qin and South Korea in the west. Nowadays, there is no equipping for horse shooting.

古文：故寡人无舟楫之用，夹水居之民，将何以守河、薄洛之水；变服骑射，以备燕、三胡、秦、韩之边？
现代文：所以我认为如果没有舟船的设施，住在河两岸的百姓，将用什么守住黄河、薄洛之水呢？改变服装、练习骑射，就是为了防守同燕、三胡、秦、韩相邻的边界。
English: Therefore, I think that if there is no boat facility, what will the people living on both sides of the river use to guard the Yellow River and the waters of Bo Luo? Changing clothes and practicing riding and shooting is to defend the neighboring borders with Yan, Sanhu, Qin and Han.

古文：且昔者简主不塞晋阳以及上党，而襄主并戎取代以攘诸胡，此愚智所明也。
现代文：况且从前简主不在晋阳以及上党设要塞，襄主并吞戎地、攻取代国以便排斥各地胡人，这是愚人和智者都能明白的。
English: Moreover, in the past, the Jian Lord did not set up fortresses in Jinyang and Shang Party, and the Jian Lord annexed and invaded other countries in order to exclude the Hu people from all over the country. This is something that both the foolish and the wise can understand.

古文：先时中山负齐之强兵，侵暴吾地，系累吾民，引水围鄗，微社稷之神灵，则鄗几于不守也。
现代文：从前中山国仗恃齐国的强大兵力，侵犯践踏我国土地，虏掠我国百姓，引水围困鄗城，如果不是社稷神灵保佑，鄗城几乎失守。
English: Once upon a time, the powerful military forces of Zhongshan and Qi invaded and trampled the land of our country, plundered our people, brought water and besieged Lucheng. If it were not for the blessing of the gods of Shifang, Lucheng would have been almost lost.

古文：先王丑之，而怨未能报也。
现代文：先王以此为耻，可是这个仇还没有报。
English: The former king was ashamed of this, but this revenge has not been repaid.

古文：今骑射之备，近可以便上党之形，而远可以报中山之怨。
现代文：如今有了骑射的装备，近可以使上党的地势更为有利，远可以报中山国之仇。
English: Now, with the equipping of cavalry and artillery, we can make the terrain of Shangdang more favorable, and we can avenge Zhongshan Province.

古文：而叔顺中国之俗以逆简、襄之意，恶变服之名以忘鄗事之丑，非寡人之所望也。 
现代文：可是叔父却顺从中原的习俗，违背简主、襄主的遗志，厌恶变服的名声而忘掉了鄗城被困的耻辱，这不是我所希望的。 
English: However, my uncle followed the customs of the Central Plains, went against the wishes of Lord Jian and Lord Xiang, hated the reputation of changing clothes, and forgot the shame of being trapped in Lucheng. This was not what I had hoped for.

古文：公子成再拜稽首曰： 臣愚，不达于王之义，敢道世俗之闻，臣之罪也。
现代文：公子成再拜叩头说： 我很愚蠢，没能理解大王的深意，竟敢乱说世俗的见解，这是我的罪过。
English: Prince Zicheng bowed again and said, "I am very stupid, I failed to understand the profound meaning of the great king, and I dared to say something out of the ordinary. This is my fault."

古文：今王将继简、襄之意以顺先王之志，臣敢不听命乎！ 
现代文：如今大王要继承简主、襄主的遗志，顺从先王的意愿，我怎敢不听从王命呢！ 
English: Now the great king wants to inherit the will of Jian Shou and Xiang Shou, and obey the will of the former king. How dare I not obey the king's order!

古文：再拜稽首。
现代文：公子成再拜叩头。
English: Comrade Zicheng kowtows again.

古文：乃赐胡服。
现代文：武灵王于是赐给他胡服。
English: King Wuling then gave him Hu Rong.

古文：明日，服而朝。
现代文：第二天，穿上胡服上朝。
English: The next day, I put on my goofy clothes and went to bed.

古文：于是始出胡服令也。
现代文：这时武灵王才开始发布改穿胡服的命令。
English: At this time, King Wuling began to issue orders to change into Hu clothing.

古文：赵文、赵造、周袑、赵俊皆谏止王毋胡服，如故法便。
现代文：赵文、赵造、周袑、赵俊都来劝阻武灵王不要穿胡服，依照原来的办法更适宜。
English: Zhao Wen, Zhao Zou, Zhou Qi, and Zhao Jun all came to dissuade Wuling Wang from wearing Hu clothing. It is more appropriate to follow the original method.

古文：王曰： 先王不同俗，何古之法？
现代文：武灵王说： 先王习俗不同，哪种古法可以仿效？
English: King Wuling said, "Different from the previous king's custom, which ancient law can be imitated?"

古文：帝王不相袭，何礼之循？
现代文：帝王们不互相因袭，哪种礼制可以遵循？
English: Emperors do not copy each other, what kind of etiquette can be followed?

古文：虙戏、神农教而不诛，黄帝、尧、舜诛而不怒。
现代文：伏羲神农注重教化，不行诛罚；黄帝、尧、舜使用刑罚，但不残暴。
English: Fuxi Shennong focused on enlightenment, not punishment; Huangdi, Zou, Zou used punishment, but not brutality.

古文：及至三王，随时制法，因事制礼。
现代文：到了夏、商、周三王，随时代不同来制定法度，根据实际情况规定礼制。
English: In summer, business, and Wednesday, the king, according to the different times to formulate laws and regulations, according to the actual situation to stipulate the etiquette.

古文：法度制令各顺其宜，衣服器械各便其用。
现代文：法规政令都顺应实际需要，衣服器械都便于使用。
English: Laws, regulations and decrees are in line with actual needs, and clothing and equipment are easy to use.

古文：故礼也不必一道，而便国不必古。
现代文：所以礼不必只用一种方式，而便利国家也不必效法古代。
English: Therefore, it is not necessary to use only one form of etiquette, and a convenient country does not have to follow the example of ancient times.

古文：圣人之兴也不相袭而王，夏、殷之衰也不易礼而灭。
现代文：圣人的兴起并不互相因袭却能统一天下，夏、殷的衰败并未变礼制也终于灭亡。
English: The rise of saints did not depend on each other, but they were able to unify the world. The decline of Xia and Yin did not change the etiquette and finally died out.

古文：然则反古未可非，而循礼未足多也。
现代文：那么，违背古制未可厚非，遵循旧礼并不不值得称道。
English: So, it is not unreasonable to go against the old system, and it is commendable to follow the old rituals.

古文：且服奇者志淫，则是邹、鲁无奇行也；俗辟者民易，则是吴、越无秀士也。
现代文：如果说服装奇特的人心志浮荡，那么邹、鲁一带就不会有奇特行为的人了；习俗怪异的地方百姓都轻率，那么吴、越一带也就不会有出众的人才了。
English: If it is said that people with strange clothes are fickle, then there will be no people with strange behavior in the areas of Handan and Lu; people in places with strange customs are imprudent, so there will be no outstanding talents in the areas of Wuxi and Yue.

古文：且圣人利身谓之服，便事谓之礼。
现代文：况且圣人认为，只要有利于身体就可以叫做衣服，只要便于行事就可以称为礼法。
English: Moreover, the sage believed that as long as it is beneficial to the body, it can be called clothing, and as long as it is convenient to act, it can be called etiquette.

古文：夫进退之节，衣服之制者，所以齐常民也，非所以论贤者也。
现代文：规定进退的礼节，衣服的制度，是为了使平民百姓有统一的遵循，不是为了评论贤人的。
English: The etiquette of entering and leaving, the system of clothing, is to make the common people have uniform compliance, not to comment on the wise.

古文：故齐民与俗流，贤者与变俱。
现代文：所以平民总是和流俗相伴，贤人却是同变革一道。
English: Therefore, the common people always go hand in hand with the vulgar, but the wise go hand in hand with the revolutionary.

古文：故谚曰 以书御者不尽马之情，以古制今者不达事之变 。
现代文：所以谚语说： 按照书本赶车的人不会摸透马的性情，用古法来约束今世的人不通晓事物的变化。 
English: Therefore, the proverb says: "Those who drive according to the book will not understand the temperament of the horse, and those who use the ancient law to restrict the modern world are not aware of the changes in things."

古文：循法之功，不足以高世；法古之学，不足以制今。
现代文：遵循古法的功效，不可能高出世俗；交法古代的学说，不可能治理今世。
English: The effect of following the ancient law cannot be higher than that of the secular; it is impossible to govern this world with the doctrine of the ancient law.

古文：子不及也。 
现代文：你们不懂这个道理啊！ 
English: You don't understand this!

古文：遂胡服招骑射。
现代文：终于推行胡服并招募士兵练习骑射。
English: Finally, they introduced uniforms and recruited soldiers to practice riding and shooting.

古文：二十年，王略中山地，至宁葭。西略胡地，至榆中。
现代文：武灵王二十年，武灵王攻占中山国土地，到达宁葭；往西攻占胡人土地，到达榆中。
English: In the 20th year of King Wuling, King Wuling conquered the land of Zhongshan and reached Ningbo; he conquered the land of the Hu people to the west and reached Yuzhong.

古文：林胡王献马。
现代文：林胡王进献马匹。
English: King Lin Hu presented horses.

古文：归，使楼缓之秦，仇液之韩，王贲之楚，富丁之魏，赵爵之齐。
现代文：回来后，派楼缓出使秦国，仇液到韩国，王贲去楚国，富丁去魏国，赵爵去齐国。
English: After returning, he sent Lou Ye to Qin, Qianye to Korea, Wang Hui to Chu, Fuding to Wei, and Zhao Jue to Qi.

古文：代相赵固主胡，致其兵。
现代文：让代相赵固掌管胡地，招募胡地士兵。
English: Let Zhao Gu, the generation leader, take charge of the Huti and recruit Huti soldiers.

古文：二十一年，攻中山。
现代文：二十一年，攻打中山国。
English: In the twenty-first year, attack Zhongshan Province.

古文：赵袑为右军，许钧为左军，公子章为中军，王并将之。牛翦将车骑，赵希并将胡、代。
现代文：赵袑率领右军，许钧率领左军，公子章率领中军，武灵王统率三军，牛翦率领战车和骑兵，赵希一并率领胡与代的士兵。
English: Zhao Jun led the right army, Xu Jun led the left army, Gongzi Zhang led the central army, Wuling Wang led the three armies, Niu Jun led the chariots and cavalry, and Zhao Xi led the soldiers of Hu and Dai.

古文：赵与之陉，合军曲阳，攻取丹丘、华阳、鸱之塞。
现代文：赵希与诸军通过隘口，到曲阳会师，攻占了丹丘、华阳、鸱上关塞。
English: Zhao Xi and his army passed through the pass to join the division in Quyang, and captured Dangqiu, Huayang, and Jinshan Pass.

古文：王军取鄗、石邑、封龙、东垣。
现代文：武灵王率军夺取了鄗城、石邑、封龙、东垣。
English: King Wuling led the army to capture Shicheng, Shiyu, Hulong, and Dongwaki.

古文：中山献四邑和，王许之，罢兵。
现代文：中山国献出四城求和，武灵王应允，收兵停战。
English: Zhongshan offered four cities to sue for peace, and King Wuling agreed to receive the troops and end the war.

古文：二十三年，攻中山。
现代文：二十三年，又进攻中山国。
English: Twenty-three years later, they attacked Zhongshan again.

古文：二十五年，惠后卒。
现代文：二十五年，惠后去世。
English: Twenty-five years later, Hui Hou passed away.

古文：使周袑胡服傅王子何。
现代文：派周袑穿胡服辅佐教导王子赵何。
English: Zhou sent Zhou Xuan, an aide dressed in Hu clothing, to teach the prince Zhao He.

古文：二十六年，复攻中山。攘地北至燕、代，西至云中、九原。
现代文：二十六年，再次进攻中山国，夺取的土地北至燕、代一带，西至云中、九原。
English: In the 26th year, he attacked Zhongshan Province again, and the land he seized extended from Yan and Dai in the north to Yunzhong and Jiuhara in the west.

古文：二十七年五月戊申，大朝于东宫，传国，立王子何以为王。
现代文：二十七年五月戊申日，在东宫举行盛大朝会，武灵王传位，立王子赵何为王。
English: On the 27th day of the fifth lunar month, a grand imperial court meeting was held in the East Palace. King Wuling was enthroned, and Prince Zhao He was proclaimed king.

古文：王庙见礼毕，出临朝。
现代文：新王到祖庙行参拜祖先之礼以后，出来上朝。
English: After the new king went to the ancestral temple to pay homage to the ancestors, he came out to the Shang Dynasty.

古文：大夫悉为臣，肥义为相国，并傅王。
现代文：大夫全都是大臣，肥义任相国，并且是新王的师傅。
English: The doctors were all ministers, and Feiyi was appointed as the minister of foreign affairs, and was the new king's teacher.

古文：是为惠文王。
现代文：这就是惠文王。
English: This is King Huiwen.

古文：惠文王，惠后吴娃子也。
现代文：惠文王是惠后吴娃的儿子。
English: King Huiwen was the son of Queen Hui Wuwa.

古文：武灵王自号为主父。
现代文：武灵王自称为主父。
English: King Wuling calls himself the master.

古文：主父欲令子主治国，而身胡服将士大夫西北略胡地，而欲从云中、九原直南袭秦，于是诈自为使者入秦。
现代文：主父想让儿子治理国家，自己就穿上胡服率领士大夫到西北巡视胡地，并想从云中、九原直向南方袭击秦国，于是他亲自乔装成使者进入秦国。
English: The father wanted his son to govern the country, so he put on the Hu clothing and led the scholar-doctor to the northwest to inspect the Huti, and wanted to attack Qin from Yunchu and Jiuyuan to the south, so he personally disguised himself as an emissary to enter Qin.

古文：秦昭王不知，已而怪其状甚伟，非人臣之度，使人逐之，而主父驰已脱关矣。
现代文：秦昭王没有觉察，过后惊怪他的状貌特别魁伟，不像人臣的气度感到奇怪，立即派人追赶，可是主父早已飞马奔出了秦国的关口。
English: Qin Zhao Wang did not notice, and later was surprised to see that his appearance was particularly magnificent. He did not feel strange like a dignitary, and immediately sent someone to chase him, but the master had already fled the pass of Qin.

古文：审问之，乃主父也。
现代文：仔细询问，才知道是主父。
English: After careful questioning, I learned that it was my father.

古文：秦人大惊。
现代文：秦国人非常惊恐。
English: The people of Qin were very frightened.

古文：主父所以入秦者，欲自略地形，因观秦王之为人也。
现代文：主父之所以进入秦国，是想亲自察看地形，并趁机观察秦王的为人。
English: The main reason why my father entered Qin was that he wanted to personally inspect the terrain and take the opportunity to observe the Qin king.

古文：惠文王二年，主父行新地，遂出代，西遇楼烦王于西河而致其兵。
现代文：惠文王二年，主父巡视新占领的土地，于是离开代地，往西在西河与楼烦王相会，并招收了他的士兵。
English: In the second year of King Huiwen's reign, his master inspected the newly occupied land, and then left the place and went west to meet with King Lou Yu in the West River, and recruited his soldiers.

古文：三年，灭中山，迁其王于肤施。
现代文：三年，灭掉中山国，把中山王迁到肤施县。
English: In three years, the Zhongshan Kingdom was eliminated, and the King of Zhongshan was moved to Kunshi County.

古文：起灵寿，北地方从，代道大通。
现代文：开始建灵寿城。北方的土地才开始属于赵国，通往代地的道路大为通畅。
English: The construction of Lingshou City began. The land in the north began to belong to Zhao State, and the road to the place was very smooth.

古文：还归，行赏，大赦，置酒酺五日，封长子章为代安阳君。
现代文：归来之后，论功行赏，实行大赦，设酒宴聚会欢饮五天，封长子赵章为代地的安阳君。
English: After his return, he gave a speech on the merits and rewards, implemented an amnesty, held a wine banquet for five days, and appointed his eldest son, Zhao Zhang, to replace Anyangjun.

古文：章素侈，心不服其弟所立。
现代文：赵章平素放纵，对弟弟继承王位一事不服。
English: Zhao Zhangping was indulgent and was not satisfied with his younger brother's succession to the throne.

古文：主父又使田不礼相章也。
现代文：主父又派田不礼辅佐赵章。
English: The father-in-law also sent Tian Bure Rong and his assistant Zhao Zhang.

古文：李兑谓肥义曰： 公子章强壮而志骄，党众而欲大，殆有私乎？
现代文：李兑对肥义说： 公子章正当壮年并且心志骄狂，党徒众多，野心很大，恐怕会有私心！
English: Li Dui said to Huiyi: Prince Zhang is in his prime and is full of pride. There are many party members and great ambitions. I'm afraid there will be selfishness!

古文：田不礼之为人也，忍杀而骄。
现代文：田不礼的为人，残忍并且傲慢。
English: Tian is rude, cruel and arrogant.

古文：二人相得，必有谋阴贼起，一出身徼幸。
现代文：这两个人互相投合，一定会有阴谋作乱的事情发生，一旦希望能够侥幸成功，就会铤而走险。
English: These two people are compatible with each other, there will definitely be a conspiracy to cause trouble, and once they hope to succeed by chance, they will take risks.

古文：夫小人有欲，轻虑浅谋，徒见其利而不顾其害，同类相推，俱入祸门。
现代文：小人有了野心，考虑事情就会轻率，谋事浅薄，只看到利益而不顾祸害，同伙互相怂恿，就会一起步入祸害之门。
English: If a villain has ambition, he will be hasty in considering things, shallow in planning, only see the benefits without considering the harm, and his associates will encourage each other, and they will walk into the door of disaster together.

古文：以吾观之，必不久矣。
现代文：据我看，这种事一定不会很久了。
English: The way I see it, this won't last long.

古文：子任重而势大，乱之所始，祸之所集也，子必先患。
现代文：您负有重任并握有大权，动乱会从您那里开始，灾祸会在您那里集中，您必定是最先遭遇祸患的。
English: You have great responsibility and great power, the turmoil will start from you, the disaster will be concentrated in you, you must be the first to encounter the disaster.

古文：仁者爱万物而智者备祸于未形，不仁不智，何以为国？
现代文：仁人博爱万物，智者防患于未然，不仁不智，怎能治理国家？
English: A benevolent person loves all things. A wise person prevents problems before they occur. Without benevolence and wisdom, how can a country be governed?

古文：子傒不称疾毋出，传政于公子成？
现代文：您何不声称有病不出家门，把政事移交给公子成呢？
English: Why don't you claim that you are ill, stay at home, and hand over the government to Kim Il Sung?

古文：毋为怨府，毋为祸梯。 肥义曰： 不可。
现代文：不要成为怨恨汇集的地方，不要做祸乱发生的阶梯。 肥义说： 不行。
English: Don't become a place where resentment gathers, and don't be a ladder for disasters to happen.

古文：昔者主父以王属义也，曰： 毋变而度，毋异而虑，坚守一心，以殁而世。 
现代文：当初主父把新王托付给我的时候说： 不要变更你的法度，不要改变你的心，坚持一心，直到你去世。 
English: When the Lord Father entrusted the new king to me, he said: Don't change your doctrine, don't change your heart, stick to one heart until you die.

古文：义再拜受命而籍之。
现代文：我再拜接受王命并且记载下来。
English: Then I received the king's command and wrote it down.

古文：今畏不礼之难而忘吾籍，变孰大焉。
现代文：如今惧怕田不礼作乱而忘记我记载的王命，什么罪过比变节更大呢！
English: What greater sin than treason is there than to forget the king's command, which I have recorded, out of fear that Tian Rude might make trouble!

古文：进受严命，退而不全，负孰甚焉。
现代文：进宫接受了庄严的王命，出宫后却不能完成，还有比这更严重的负义吗？
English: Entering the palace, he accepted the solemn royal command, but after leaving the palace, he could not complete it. Is there a more serious injustice than this?

古文：变负之臣，不容于刑。
现代文：变节负心之臣，刑罚是不宽容的。
English: If you are a traitorous and disloyal vassal, the punishment is intolerant.

古文：谚曰 死者复生，生者不愧 。
现代文：谚语说 死者如果复生，生者不应在他面前感到惭愧 。
English: The proverb says that if the dead come back to life, the living should not be ashamed before him.

古文：吾言已在前矣，吾欲全吾言，安得全吾身！
现代文：我说过的话再前面，我要完全实现我的诺言，怎能顾惜自己的身体！
English: What I said before, I want to fully realize my promise, how can I take care of my body!

古文：且夫贞臣也难至而节见，忠臣也累至而行明。
现代文：况且坚贞之臣当灾难临头时节操就会显现，忠良之臣遇到牵累时行事必须鲜明。
English: Moreover, when a calamity is imminent, the discipline of a loyal vassal will be revealed, and when a loyal vassal is involved, he must act clearly.

古文：子则有赐而忠我矣，虽然，吾有语在前者也，终不敢失。 
现代文：您已对我赐教并给我忠告。尽管如此，我已有言在先，始终不敢违背。 
English: You have taught me and advised me, nevertheless, I have spoken before and always dare not go back on it.

古文：李兑曰： 诺，子勉之矣！
现代文：李兑说： 好吧，您勉力而行吧！
English: Li Dui said: All right, do your best!

古文：吾见子已今年耳。 
现代文：我能看到您只有今年了。 
English: I've only been able to see you this year.

古文：涕泣而出。
现代文：说完就痛哭流涕而去。
English: After saying this, he went away weeping bitterly.

古文：李兑数见公子成，以备田不礼之事。
现代文：李兑几次去见公子成，以便防范田不礼作乱。
English: Li Dui went to see Gongzicheng several times in order to prevent Tian Rude from making trouble.

古文：异日肥义谓信期曰： 公子与田不礼甚可忧也。
现代文：另一天，肥义对信期说： 公子章和田不礼十分令人担忧。
English: On another day, Hiyoshi said to Nobukatsu, "It is very worrisome that Prince Kazuchika and Wada are not polite.

古文：其于义也声善而实恶，此为人也不子不臣。
现代文：他们对我说得好听而实际上很坏，他们为人不孝不忠。
English: They say nice things to me but they are really bad, they are unfilial and disloyal.

古文：吾闻之也，奸臣在朝，国之残也；谗臣在中，主之蠹也。
现代文：我听说，奸臣在朝廷是国家的祸害；谗臣在宫中是君主的蛀虫。
English: I have heard it said that a traitor in the court is the scourge of the state; a scoundrel in the palace is the monarch's tapeworm.

古文：此人贪而欲大，内得主而外为暴。
现代文：这种人贪婪并且野心很大，宫内得到君主宠爱就到外边行凶胡为。
English: This kind of person is greedy and very ambitious. If they are favored by the monarch inside the palace, they will go out and commit atrocities.

古文：矫令为慢，以擅一旦之命，不难为也，祸且逮国。
现代文：假传王命傲慢无礼，一旦擅自发出命令，也是不难做到的，祸害将要危及国家。
English: It is not difficult to issue an order without authorization, and the evil will endanger the country.

古文：今吾忧之，夜而忘寐，饥而忘食。
现代文：如今我为此忧虑，夜里忘记睡觉，饥饿忘记吃饭。
English: Now I worry about it, I forget to sleep at night, I forget to eat when I'm hungry.

古文：盗贼出入不可不备。
现代文：对盗贼的出没不可不防。
English: It's important to be on the lookout for thieves.

古文：自今以来，若有召王者必见吾面，我将先以身当之，无故而王乃入。 
现代文：从今以后，如果有人请见国王一定要同我见面，我要先用自身抵挡他，没有变故君王才能进来。 
English: From now on, if someone invites the king to meet me, I must first resist him with myself, so that the king can come in.

古文：信期曰： 善哉，吾得闻此也！ 
现代文：信期说： 好极了，我能听到这样的话！ 
English: The letter writer said: Great, I can hear that!

古文：四年，朝群臣，安阳君亦来朝。
现代文：惠文王四年，群臣前来朝拜，安阳君也来朝拜。
English: In the fourth year of King Huiwen, a group of ministers came to worship, and Anyang also came to worship.

古文：主父令王听朝，而自从旁观窥群臣宗室之礼。
现代文：主父让新王主持朝拜，他自己从旁暗中观察群臣和王室宗亲的礼仪。
English: The father-in-law let the new king preside over the adoration, while he himself observed the etiquette of the courtiers and royal relatives from the sidelines.

古文：见其长子章傫然也，反北面为臣，诎于其弟，心怜之，于是乃欲分赵而王章于代，计未决而辍。
现代文：看到他的长子赵章颓丧的样子，反倒向北称臣，屈身在弟弟面前，心里很怜悯他，那时就想把赵国一分为二，让赵章做代国之王，这个打算没有决定就中止了。
English: Seeing the grief-stricken look of his eldest son Zhao Zhang, he turned to the north and called himself a minister, bowed down before his brother, and felt very sorry for him. At that time, he wanted to divide Zhao Province into two, and let Zhao Zhang be the king of the country. This plan was suspended without a decision.

古文：主父及王游沙丘，异宫，公子章即以其徒与田不礼作乱，诈以主父令召王。
现代文：主父和惠文王到沙丘游览，居住在不同的宫殿里。公子章就利用他的党徒和田不礼作乱，诈传主父命令召见惠文王。
English: The master and King Huiwen toured the sand dunes and lived in different palaces. Prince Zhang took advantage of his party members and Wada to make a disturbance, and ordered the master to summon King Huiwen.

古文：肥义先入，杀之。
现代文：肥义首先进去，被杀死了。
English: Huiyi went in first and was killed.

古文：高信即与王战。
现代文：高信礼记与惠文王一起与公子章作战。
English: Gao Xin Li Ji and King Hui Wen fought together with Prince Zhang.

古文：公子成与李兑自国至，乃起四邑之兵入距难，杀公子章及田不礼，灭其党贼而定王室。
现代文：公子成和李兑从国都赶到，就调集四邑的军队前来抵御这场变乱，杀死了公子章和田不礼，消灭了他们的党徒，安定了王室。
English: When Prince Zicheng and Prince Li Du arrived from the capital, they mobilized the armies of the four towns to resist the rebellion, killed Prince Zicheng and Prince Wada, eliminated their party members, and stabilized the royal family.

古文：公子成为相，号安平君，李兑为司寇。
现代文：任命公子成为宰相，封号是安平君，任命李兑为司寇。
English: He appointed his son as prime minister, with the title of Anping Jun, and appointed Li Dui as scout.

古文：公子章之败，往走主父，主父开之，成、兑因围主父宫。
现代文：公子章被打败的时候，逃到了主父那里，主父开收留了他，公子成和李兑因而包围了主父的宫室。
English: When Prince Zizhang was defeated, he fled to his master. The master took him in, and Prince Zicheng and Li Dui surrounded the master's palace.

古文：公子章死，公子成、李兑谋曰： 以章故围主父，即解兵，吾属夷矣。 
现代文：公子章死后，公子成和李兑商量说： 由于赵章的缘故包围了主父，即使撤兵，我们这些人也要被诛杀全族！ 
English: After the death of Prince Zhao, Prince Zicheng and Li Dui discussed and said: Because of Zhao, we have surrounded our master. Even if we withdraw our troops, we will be killed and our whole family will be killed!

古文：乃遂围主父。
现代文：于是就继续包围主父宫室。
English: So they continued to surround the master and mistress.

古文：令宫中人 后出者夷 ，宫中人悉出。
现代文：命令宫中的人 最后出来的人灭族 ，宫里的人全出来了。
English: He ordered the people in the palace to exterminate the last people to come out, and everyone in the palace came out.

古文：主父欲出不得，又不得食，探爵而食之，三月余而饿死沙丘宫。
现代文：主父想出宫但出不来，又得不到食物，只好去掏雏雀充饥，三个多月以后饿死在沙丘宫。
English: The master wanted to leave the palace, but he couldn't, and he couldn't get any food, so he had to go out to feed the chicks. After more than three months, he starved to death in the Sand Dunes Palace.

古文：主父定死，乃发丧赴诸侯。
现代文：主父之死已确定无疑，这才向诸侯发出讣告。
English: The death of the father-in-law had already been established beyond doubt, and it was only then that an obituary notice was sent to the princes.

古文：是时王少，成、兑专政，畏诛，故围主父。
现代文：当时惠文王年少，公子成、李兑独揽大权，两人害怕被杀，所以围困主父。
English: At that time, King Huiwen was young, and Prince Zicheng and Li Dui held all the power. The two were afraid of being killed, so they besieged their master.

古文：主父初以长子章为太子，后得吴娃，爱之，为不出者数岁，生子何，乃废太子章而立何为王。
现代文：主父起初是把长子赵章立为太子，后来得到吴娃，非常宠爱她，为此不出吴娃之宫好几年，生下儿子赵何后，便废了太子章而立赵何为王。
English: At first, the father-in-law made his eldest son Zhao Zhang the crown prince. Later, he got Wu Wa and loved her very much. For this reason, he did not leave Wu Wa's palace for several years. After his son Zhao He was born, he abolished the crown prince title and made Zhao He the king.

古文：吴娃死，爱弛，怜故太子，欲两王之，犹豫未决，故乱起，以至父子俱死，为天下笑，岂不痛乎！
现代文：吴娃死后，对赵何的宠爱越来越淡，重又怜惜原来的太子，想让两个儿子并立为王，一直犹豫不决，所以变乱发生，以至父子一同死去，被天下人嘲笑，怎不令人痛惜呢！
English: After Wu Wa's death, Zhao He became less and less favored by Zhao He. He also felt pity for the former crown prince. He had been hesitant to allow his two sons to be crowned as kings, so there was turmoil, and the father and son died together, being ridiculed by the world. How can this not be deplorable?

古文：主父死，惠文王立立。
现代文：主父去世，惠文王继立。
English: After the death of his father, King Huiwen succeeded to the throne.

古文：五年，与燕鄚、易。
现代文：惠文王五年，赵国把鄚、易两地给了燕国。
English: In the fifth year of the reign of King Huiwen, Zhao gave the two provinces of Yao and Yi to Yan.

古文：八年，城南行唐。
现代文：八年，修筑南行唐城。
English: It took eight years to build the southbound Tangcheng station.

古文：九年，赵梁将，与齐合军攻韩，至鲁关下。
现代文：九年，赵梁领兵，与齐国联合攻打韩国，一直打到鲁关之下。
English: In the ninth year, Zhao Liang led the troops to jointly attack South Korea with Qi, and fought all the way to Luguan.

古文：及十年，秦自置为西帝。
现代文：到了十年，秦国自称为西帝。
English: By the tenth year, Qin was calling itself the Western Empire.

古文：十一年，董叔与魏氏伐宋，得河阳于魏。
现代文：十一年，董叔和魏氏征讨宋国，在魏国得到河阳。
English: In the eleventh year, Uncle Dong and the Wei clan went to conquer the Song Dynasty, and obtained Kheyang in Wei.

古文：秦取梗阳。
现代文：秦国夺取梗阳。
English: The Qin state captured Fenyang.

古文：十二年，赵梁将攻齐。
现代文：十二年，赵梁领兵攻打齐国。
English: In the twelfth year, Zhao Liang led the troops to attack Qi Province.

古文：十三年，韩徐为将，攻齐。
现代文：十三年，韩徐为统帅，进攻齐国。
English: In the 13th year, Han Xu became the commander and attacked Qi.

古文：公主死。
现代文：同年公主去世。
English: The princess died the same year.

古文：十四年，相国乐毅将赵、秦、韩、魏、燕攻齐，取灵丘。
现代文：十四年，燕国宰相乐毅统率赵、秦、韩、魏、燕五国联军进攻齐国，夺取了灵丘。
English: In the 14th year, the five allied armies of Zhao, Qin, Han, Wei and Yan, led by Le Yi, the Prime Minister of Yan, attacked Qi and captured Lingqiu.

古文：与秦会中阳。
现代文：赵王与秦王在中阳相会。
English: Zhao Wang and Qin Wang meet in Zhongyang.

古文：十五年，燕昭王来见。
现代文：十五年，燕昭王来会见赵王。
English: Fifteen years later, Yan Zhao Wang came to meet Zhao Wang.

古文：赵与韩、魏、秦共击齐，齐王败走，燕独深入，取临菑。
现代文：赵国与韩、魏、秦联合攻齐，齐王败逃，燕军孤军深入，攻下临淄城。
English: Zhao, Han, Wei, and Qin jointly attacked Linyi. King Qi was defeated and fled. Yan's lone army penetrated deep into Linyi and captured Linyi.

古文：十六年，秦复与赵数击齐，齐人患之。
现代文：十六年，秦国又同赵国几次进攻齐国，齐国人非常忧虑。
English: Sixteen years later, Qin and Zhao attacked Qi several times. The people of Qi were very worried.

古文：苏厉为齐遗赵王书曰：
现代文：苏厉为齐国写信给赵王，信中说：
English: Su Liwei wrote a letter to Zhao Wang, saying:

古文：臣闻古之贤君，其德行非布于海内也，教顺非洽于民人也，祭祀时享非数常于鬼神也。
现代文：我听说古代的贤君，他的德行并非遍布于海内各地，教化也并非普及到所有的百姓，四时祭祀的供品也不是经常让祖先享用。
English: I heard that the virtuous deeds of the ancient wise men were not spread all over the country, nor was the enlightenment spread to all the people, nor were the offerings of the four-hour sacrifice often enjoyed by the ancestors.

古文：甘露降，时雨至，年谷丰孰，民不疾疫，众人善之，然而贤主图之。
现代文：可是甘露普降，下雨及时，五谷丰收，百姓不生疫病，众人都对此赞颂，然而贤主却要深思。
English: But the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar

古文：今足下之贤行功力，非数加于秦也；怨毒积怒，非素深于齐也。
现代文：如今您的贤德和功力，并非经常施之于秦国；积蓄的怨恨和怒气，也并非平素就对齐国特别深。
English: Today, your virtue and ability are not always applied to Qin; the accumulated resentment and anger are not always particularly deep.

古文：秦赵与国，以强征兵于韩，秦诚爱赵乎？
现代文：秦赵两国联合，强使韩国出兵，秦国真是爱赵国吗？
English: Qin and Zhao united the two countries and forced South Korea to send troops. Did Qin really love Zhao?

古文：其实憎齐乎？
现代文：它确实恨齐国吗？
English: Does it really hate Qi?

古文：物之甚者，贤主察之。
现代文：事情如果过分，贤主就应该认真观察。
English: If things go too far, the wise master should carefully observe the situation.

古文：秦非爱赵而憎齐也，欲亡韩而吞二周，故以齐餤天下。
现代文：秦国并非爱赵并且恨齐，而是想要灭亡韩国并且吞并东、西二周，故意以齐国为诱饵吸引天下。
English: Qin did not love Zhao and hate Qi, but wanted to destroy South Korea and annex both East and West, deliberately using Qi as a bait to attract the world.

古文：恐事之不合，故出兵以劫魏、赵。
现代文：唯恐事情不能成功，所以才出兵胁迫魏国和赵国。
English: Fearing that the matter would not succeed, he sent troops to coerce Wei and Zhao.

古文：恐天下畏己也，故出质以为信。
现代文：又恐怕天下各国惧怕它，所以派出人质以便得到信任。
English: And I'm afraid that countries around the world are afraid of it, so they send hostages in order to gain trust.

古文：恐天下亟反也，故征兵于韩以威之。
现代文：还恐怕天下各国很快要反对它，所以在韩国征兵以示威胁。
English: I am also afraid that countries around the world will soon oppose it, so conscription in South Korea is a threat.

古文：声以德与国，实而伐空韩，臣以秦计为必出于此。
现代文：表面上说是对盟国有好处，实际上是要征讨空虚的韩国，我认为秦国的计谋一定是从这方面考虑的。
English: On the surface, it is beneficial to the allies, but in fact, it is to conquer the empty South Korea. I think that Qin's strategy must be considered from this aspect.

古文：夫物固有势异而患同者，楚久伐而中山亡，今齐久伐而韩必亡。
现代文：事情本来就有形势不同而祸患是一样的，楚国长期受到攻代而中山国却灭亡了，如今齐国长期被攻伐而韩国必定该灭亡了。
English: In the first place, the situation was different, but the disaster was the same. Chu was attacked for a long time, but Zhongshan was destroyed. Now Qi has been attacked for a long time, but Korea must be destroyed.

古文：破齐，王与六国分其利也。
现代文：攻破齐国，大王您和六国共分其利。
English: If you defeat Qi, you and the Six Kingdoms will share the profits.

古文：亡韩，秦独擅之。
现代文：灭亡了韩国，秦国就单独占有它。
English: When Korea perished, Qin took it over alone.

古文：收二周，西取祭器，秦独私之。
现代文：占领二周，往西可以得到天子祭祀用的礼器，秦国独吞私占。
English: After two weeks of occupation, the ceremonial objects used for the sacrifice of the heavenly son could be obtained in the west, and the Qin State swallowed them up.

古文：赋田计功，王之获利孰与秦多？
现代文：授给田地要计算功利，大王您得到的利益同秦国比谁多？
English: It is necessary to calculate the utility of granting fields. Great King, who will get more benefits than Qin?

古文：说士之计曰： 韩亡三川，魏亡晋国，市朝未变而祸已及矣。 
现代文：游说之士议论说： 韩国失去三川，魏国失去晋地，市朝还没有什么变化灾祸就要来到了。 
English: The lobbyists argued: South Korea lost the Three Rivers, Wei lost the Jin, and there has been no change in the city and the country. The disaster is about to come.

古文：燕尽齐之北地，去沙丘、钜鹿敛三百里，韩之上党去邯郸百里，燕、秦谋王之河山，间三百里而通矣。
现代文：燕国全部占领齐国北部土地之后，离沙丘、钜鹿就少了三百里，韩国的上党离邯郸一百里，燕国、秦国共谋夺取赵国的河山，经小路三百里就可串通。
English: After Yan and Qin occupied all the land in the northern part of Qi, they were three hundred miles away from the sand dunes and elk. Shangdang in Korea was one hundred miles away from Handan. Yan and Qin conspired to seize the mountains and rivers in Zhao. They could collude via the three hundred miles of small roads.

古文：秦之上郡近挺关，至于榆中者千五百里，秦以三郡攻王之上党，羊肠之西，句注之南，非王有已。
现代文：秦国的上郡靠近挺关，到达榆中有一千五百里，秦国如果依托三郡进攻赵国的上党，羊肠坂以西，句注山以南就不再为大王您所有了。
English: Qin's Shang County is close to Tingguan, and it takes 1500 miles to reach Yuzhong. If Qin relies on the three counties to attack Zhao's Shang Party, the west of Yangji slope, and the south of Juchu Mountain, it will no longer be owned by the king.

古文：逾句注，斩常山而守之，三百里而通于燕，代马胡犬不东下，昆山之玉不出，此三宝者亦非王有已。
现代文：越过句注山，截断常山并驻守在那里，仅三百里路就可直达燕国，代马胡犬从此不再东入赵国，昆山之玉也不能运至赵国，这三种宝物也就不再为大王所有了。
English: After crossing the Juchu Mountain, cutting off the Changshan Mountain and stationed there, only a three-hundred-mile road can reach Yan's country, and the dog named Mahu can no longer enter Zhao country from the east, and the Kunshan jade can no longer be transported to Zhao country, and these three treasures are no longer owned by the great king.

古文：王久伐齐，从强秦攻韩，其祸必至于此。
现代文：大王长期攻代齐国，跟随强秦进攻韩国，祸患必定会达到这种地步。
English: If the great king attacks Qi for a long time and follows the strong Qin to attack South Korea, the calamity will inevitably reach this level.

古文：愿王孰虑之。
现代文：希望您多加考虑。
English: I hope you will give it some thought.

古文：且齐之所以伐者，以事王也；天下属行，以谋王也。
现代文：况且齐国所以被攻伐，就是由于它侍奉了大王；各国军队集结在一起，就是为了加祸于大王。
English: Moreover, the reason why Qi was attacked was because it served the great king; the armies of all countries gathered together in order to aggravate the great king.

古文：燕秦之约成而兵出有日矣。
现代文：燕、秦两国的盟约一订立，出兵的日子就不远了。
English: As soon as the alliance between Yan and Qin was concluded, the day of sending troops was not far away.

古文：五国三分王之地，齐倍五国之约而殉王之患，西兵以禁强秦，秦废帝请服，反高平、根柔于魏，反巠分、先俞于赵。
现代文：五国想把赵国土地一分为三，齐国背弃了五国盟约而为解除赵国之祸牺牲自己，向西进兵抑制强秦，使秦国废除帝号请求屈服，把高平、根柔还给魏国，把分、先俞还给赵国。
English: The Five Kingdoms wanted to divide the land of Zhao into three parts. The State of Qi reneged on the Five-Nation Pact and sacrificed itself to remove the scourge of Zhao. It sent troops to the west to suppress the strong Qin, made the State of Qin give in to the request to abolish the imperial title, returned Gaoping and Genjo to the State of Wei, and returned Xibun and Xianye to the State of Zhao.

古文：齐之事王，宜为上佼，而今乃抵罪，臣恐天下后事王者之不敢自必也。
现代文：齐国侍奉大王，应该说是最上等的交情了，如今却让齐国服罪，我担心以后侍奉大王的国家不敢那么坚决了。
English: Qi served the great king, it should be said that it is the most superior friendship, but now it makes Qi serve the crime, I am afraid that the country that serves the great king will not dare to be so resolute in the future.

古文：愿王孰计之也。
现代文：希望大王仔细考虑。
English: I hope the king will think about it carefully.

古文：今王毋与天下攻齐，天下必以王为义。齐抱社稷而厚事王，天下必尽重王。
现代文：如今大王不与各国进攻齐国，天下各国必定认为大王主持正义，齐国将捧着江山社稷更尽心的侍奉大王，天下各国一定都会敬重大王的正义。
English: Now that the great king does not attack Qi with other countries, all countries in the world will certainly think that the great king presides over justice. Qi will serve the great king more diligently with the support of the country and society. All countries in the world will certainly respect the great king's justice.

古文：秦义，王以天下善秦；秦暴，王以天下禁之，是一世之名宠制于王也。
现代文：大王可以带领各国同秦国友好，如果秦国强暴，大王就带领各国抑制它，这样，一世的名誉荣耀都被大王掌握了。
English: The great king can lead all countries to be friendly with Qin. If Qin is violent, the great king will lead all countries to restrain it. In this way, the glory and honor of the first generation have been mastered by the great king.

古文：于是赵乃辍，谢秦不击齐。
现代文：于是赵国就停止进兵，谢绝秦国，不再进攻齐国。
English: As a result, the State of Zhao stopped marching in troops, renounced the State of Qin, and no longer attacked the State of Qi.

古文：王与燕王遇。
现代文：惠文王与燕王相会。
English: Huiwen Wang and Yan Wang meet.

古文：廉颇将，攻齐昔阳，取之。
现代文：廉颇领兵，进攻齐国的昔阳，把它攻下了。
English: Liang Po, leading the troops, attacked the Former Yang of Qi and conquered it.

古文：十七年，乐毅将赵师攻魏伯阳。
现代文：惠文王十七年，乐毅率领赵国军队攻打魏国的伯阳。
English: In the seventeenth year of King Huiwen, Le Yi led the army of Zhao to attack Bo Yang of Wei.

古文：而秦怨赵不与己击齐，伐赵，拔我两城。
现代文：秦国怨恨赵国不同它一起进攻齐国，就出兵讨伐赵国，攻下赵国的两座城。
English: Qin State resented Zhao State because it attacked Qi State together, so it sent troops to fight Zhao State and captured two cities in Zhao State.

古文：十八年，秦拔我石城。
现代文：十八年，秦国攻下赵国的石城。
English: In 18th year, Qin conquered Shicheng of Zhao.

古文：王再之卫东阳，决河水，伐魏氏。
现代文：赵王再次到卫地的东阳，决开黄河堤坝，征伐魏国。
English: Zhao Wang once again went to Dongyang in the Meiji era, broke through the Yellow River dike, and conquered Wei.

古文：大潦，漳水出。
现代文：大水成灾，漳水泛滥。
English: The floods have become a disaster, and the floodwaters are overflowing.

古文：魏冉来相赵。
现代文：魏冉来赵国任宰相。
English: Wei Ranlai Zhao Guo was appointed prime minister.

古文：十九年，秦取我二城。
现代文：十九年，秦军夺取了赵国的两座城。
English: In the 19th year, the Qin army captured two cities in Zhao.

古文：赵与魏伯阳。
现代文：赵国把伯阳还给魏国。
English: Zhao State returned Boyang to Wei State.

古文：赵奢将，攻齐麦丘，取之。
现代文：赵国让赵奢领兵，攻打齐国的麦丘，把它攻取了。
English: Zhao asked Zhao Shuo to lead the army to attack the wheat hill of Qi and captured it.

古文：二十年，廉颇将，攻齐。
现代文：二十年，廉颇领兵，进攻齐国。
English: For twenty years, Renpo led the troops and attacked Qi.

古文：王与秦昭王遇西河外。
现代文：赵王与秦昭王在西河之外相会。
English: Zhao Wang and Qin Zhao Wang meet outside the West River.

古文：二十一年，赵徙漳水武平西。
现代文：二十一年，赵国把漳水的水道改在武平的西边。
English: In the twenty-first year, Zhao Guo changed the waterway of Surabaya to the west of Wuping.

古文：二十二年，大疫。
现代文：二十二年，瘟疫大规模流行。
English: In 1922, there was a large-scale epidemic of plague.

古文：置公子丹为太子。
现代文：立公子丹为太子。
English: Prince Dan is crowned crown prince.

古文：二十三年，楼昌将，攻魏几，不能取。
现代文：二十三年，楼昌领兵，进攻魏国的几邑，未能夺取。
English: In 233, Louchang led an army to attack several towns in Wei, but failed to capture them.

古文：十二月，廉颇将，攻几，取之。
现代文：十二月，廉颇领兵，再攻几邑，占领了它。
English: In December, Liang Po led an army to attack several more towns and occupied it.

古文：二十四年，廉颇将，攻魏房子，拔之，因城而还。
现代文：二十四年，廉颇领兵，进攻魏国的房子，攻克了，就筑起城墙才回去。
English: In the twenty-fourth year, Lian Po led an army to attack Wei's house. After conquering it, he built a city wall before returning.

古文：又攻安阳，取之。
现代文：又进攻安阳，把它夺取了。
English: He attacked Anyang again and captured it.

古文：二十五年，燕周将，攻昌城、高唐，取之。
现代文：二十五年，燕周领兵，进攻昌城、高唐，都攻克了。
English: In 25 years, Yan Zhou led an army to attack Changcheng and Gaotang and conquered them.

古文：与魏共击秦。秦将白起破我华阳，得一将军。
现代文：赵国和魏国一起攻秦，秦国大将白起在华阳打败赵军，俘虏一名赵将。
English: Zhao and Wei attacked Qin together. General Bai Qi of Qin defeated Zhao's army in Huayang and captured a Zhao general.

古文：二十六年，取东胡欧代地。
现代文：二十六年，夺回被东胡胁迫叛离的代地。
English: In 1926, it recaptured the place from which it had been forced to defect by the Eastern Wu.

古文：二十七年，徙漳水武平南。
现代文：二十七年，又把漳水改道在武平以南。
English: In the 27th year, it re-routed Surabaya to the south of Wuping.

古文：封赵豹为平阳君。
现代文：封赵豹为平阳君。
English: Zhao Bao was given the title of Pingyangjun.

古文：河水出，大潦。
现代文：黄河泛滥，大水成灾。
English: The Yellow River is overflowing, and floods have become a disaster.

古文：二十八年，蔺相如伐齐，至平邑。
现代文：二十八年，蔺相如征代齐国，打到平邑。
English: In the 28th year, Zou Xiangru led the expedition to conquer Qi and reached Ping'e.

古文：罢城北九门大城。
现代文：停止修建北边九门县的大城。
English: Stop the construction of the big city in Jiumen County in the north.

古文：燕将成安君公孙操弑其王。
现代文：燕国将领成安君和公孙操杀死了他们的国王。
English: Yan's generals Cheng Anjun and Gongsun Rong killed their king.

古文：二十九年，秦、韩相攻，而围阏与。
现代文：二十九年，秦与韩相助攻赵，包围了阏与。
English: In the 29th year, Qin and Han Xiang assisted Zhao and surrounded Yu and Zhou.

古文：赵使赵奢将，击秦，大破秦军阏与下，赐号为马服君。
现代文：赵国派赵奢领兵，袭击秦军，在阏与城下大败秦军，赵王赐给他马服君的封号。
English: Zhao Guo sent Zhao Shuxia to lead an army to attack the Qin army, and defeated the Qin army in Zhai and under the city. King Zhao gave him the title of Ma Fu Jun.

古文：三十三年，惠文王卒，太子丹立，是为孝成王。
现代文：三十三年，惠文王去世，太子丹即位，这就是孝成王。
English: Thirty-three years later, King Huiwen passed away, and Prince Dan ascended the throne. This was King Xiaocheng.

古文：孝成王元年，秦伐我，拔三城。
现代文：孝成王元年，秦国攻打赵国，攻下了三座城池。
English: In the first year of the reign of King Xiaocheng, Qin attacked Zhao and captured three cities.

古文：赵王新立，太后用事，秦急攻之。
现代文：赵王刚刚即位，太后执掌政权，秦国加紧进攻。
English: King Zhao had just ascended the throne, the empress dowager was in power, and the Qin state stepped up its offensive.

古文：赵氏求救于齐，齐曰： 必以长安君为质，兵乃出。 
现代文：赵国向齐国求救，齐王说： 一定要让长安君来作人质，才能出兵。 
English: Zhao asked for help from Qi, and the king of Qi said, "We must let Chang'an be taken hostage before we can send troops."

古文：太后不肯，大臣强谏。
现代文：太后不肯，大臣极力进谏。
English: The empress dowager refused, and the minister forced his way into the palace.

古文：太后明谓左右曰： 复言长安君为质者，老妇必唾其面。 
现代文：太后明确地对左右说： 有再来谈让长安君去作人质的，老妇一定要唾他的脸。 
English: The empress dowager clearly said to the right and left: If there is any further talk of letting Chang'an Jun go as a hostage, the old woman must spit in his face.

古文：左师触龙言愿见太后，太后盛气而胥之。
现代文：左师触龙说希望拜见太后，太后怒气冲冲地等着他。
English: Zuo Shi Chulong said that he hoped to meet the Empress Dowager, and the Empress Dowager waited for him angrily.

古文：入，徐趋而坐，自谢曰： 老臣病足，曾不能疾走，不得见久矣。
现代文：触龙进宫后，慢慢地走着小碎步坐下，自己告罪说： 老臣我脚有毛病，简直不能快跑，没来拜见您有很久了。
English: After touching the dragon and entering the palace, he slowly walked with small steps and sat down. He confessed, "Old man, I have a problem with my feet. I simply can't run fast. I haven't come to see you for a long time."

古文：窃自恕，而恐太后体之有所苦也，故愿望见太后。 
现代文：我私下里宽恕自己，可是又恐怕太后的身体有什么不舒服，所以很想看望太后。 
English: Privately, I forgive myself, but I'm afraid the Empress is not feeling well, so I really want to see her.

古文：太后曰： 老妇恃辇而行耳。 
现代文：太后说： 老妇我依仗车辇行动。 
English: The empress dowager said, "As an old woman, I rely on my carriage to get around.

古文：曰： 食得毋衰乎？ 
现代文：触龙说： 您的饮食没有减少吧？ 
English: The dragon said, "You haven't reduced your diet, have you?"

古文：曰： 恃粥耳。 
现代文：太后说： 就靠喝粥罢了。 
English: The empress dowager said: I can only get by by drinking porridge.

古文：曰： 老臣间者殊不欲食，乃强步，日三四里，少益嗜食，和于身也。 
现代文：触龙说： 老臣我近来很不想吃饭，就勉强散散步，每天走上三四里，多少增加了点食欲，身体也舒适一些了。 
English: Chulong said, "Senior Minister, I have been reluctant to eat recently, so I have been taking a walk, walking three or four miles every day. My appetite has increased somewhat, and my body has become more comfortable.

古文：太后曰： 老妇不能。 
现代文：太后说： 老妇我办不到。 
English: The empress dowager said, "I can't manage an old woman."

古文：太后不和之色少解。
现代文：太后不平和的脸色稍有缓和。
English: The empress dowager's troubled face softened slightly.

古文：左师公曰： 老臣贱息舒祺最少，不肖，而臣衰，窃怜爱之，愿得补黑衣之缺以卫王宫，昧死以闻。 太后曰： 敬诺。
现代文：左师公触龙说： 我的儿子舒祺年龄最小，没什么出息，可是我已经衰老，心里很疼爱他，希望他能补上黑衣卫士的空缺来保卫王宫，我冒着死罪向您禀告。 太后说： 好吧！
English: Zuo Shi Gong Chulong said, "My son Shuxuan is the youngest and has no future, but I am old and I love him very much. I hope he can fill the vacancy of the black-clad guards to defend the royal palace. I am risking the death penalty to report this to you." The Empress Dowager said, "Okay!

古文：年几何矣？ 
现代文：年纪多大了？ 
English: How old are you?

古文：对曰： 十五岁矣。
现代文：回答说： 十五岁了。
English: And he said, I am fifteen years old.

古文：虽少，愿及未填沟壑而托之。 
现代文：虽然还不大，但愿在我还没入土的时候把他托付给您。 
English: Although it is still young, I hope to entrust it to you when I am not in the ground.

古文：太后曰： 丈夫亦爱怜少子乎？ 
现代文：太后说： 你们男人也疼爱小儿子吗？ 
English: The Empress Dowager said: Do your men also love their little sons?

古文：对曰： 甚于妇人。 
现代文：回答说： 超过妇人。 
English: And he said, More than a woman.

古文：太后笑曰： 妇人异甚。 
现代文：太后笑着说： 妇人爱得更厉害。 
English: The Empress Dowager smiled and said, "Women love more fiercely."

古文：对曰： 老臣窃以为媪之爱燕后贤于长安君。 
现代文：触龙说： 老臣私下里认为您老疼爱燕后胜过爱长安君。 
English: Chulong said: The old minister secretly thinks that you love Yan Hou more than you love Chang'an.

古文：太后曰： 君过矣，不若长安君之甚。 
现代文：太后说： 您错了，比爱长安君差得多了。 
English: The empress dowager said, "You are mistaken. You are much worse than Ai Chang'an."

古文：左师公曰： 父母爱子，则为之计深远。
现代文：左师公说： 父母疼爱子女，就应该为他们考虑得周到长远。
English: Zuo Shigong said: Parents love their children, so they should think about them in a thoughtful and long-term manner.

古文：媪之送燕后也，持其踵，为之泣，念其远也，亦哀之矣。
现代文：您老送燕后远嫁的时候，握着她的脚后跟，为她哭泣，想到她要去那么远，也是很可怜她呀。
English: When you used to give your daughter-in-law away to be married, you would hold her heel and weep for her. Thinking that she would have to go so far away, you also felt sorry for her.

古文：已行，非不思也，祭祀则祝之曰 必勿使反 。岂非计长久，为子孙相继为王也哉？ 太后曰： 然。 
现代文：走了以后，并非不想念她，可是祭祀的时候却祷告说 千万不要让她回来 ，难道不是为她的长远打算，希望她子子孙孙都能继承王位吗？ 太后说： 是啊。 
English: After she left, it wasn't that she didn't miss her, but during the sacrifice, she prayed and said, "Don't ever let her come back." Wasn't that her long-term plan, hoping that her children and grandchildren would inherit the throne? The Empress Dowager said, "Yes."

古文：左师公曰： 今三世以前，至于赵主之子孙为侯者，其继有在者乎？ 
现代文：左师公说： 从现在上推到三代以前，直到赵国每位君主的子孙被封侯的，他们的继承人还有在位的吗？ 
English: Zuo Shi Gong said: From now until three generations ago, until the descendants of every monarch in Zhao were crowned, did their heirs still reign?

古文：曰： 无有。 
现代文：太后说： 没有了。 
English: Wang Qie replied: No.

古文：曰： 微独赵，诸侯有在者乎？ 
现代文：触龙说： 不只是赵国，各国诸侯子孙后代的继承人还有在位的吗？ 
English: Chulong said: Not only Zhao, but also the heirs of the descendants of the princes of various countries are still in power?

古文：曰： 老妇不闻也。 
现代文：太后说： 老妇没听说过。 
English: The Empress Dowager said, "The old woman has never heard of it."

古文：曰： 此其近者祸及其身，远者及其子孙。
现代文：触龙说： 这是由于离得近的灾祸落到自己身上，离得远的灾祸就落到子孙头上。
English: Touching the dragon, he said, "This is because the near calamity has fallen on me, and the far calamity has fallen on my descendants."

古文：岂人主之子侯则不善哉？
现代文：难道君主的子孙被封侯的就全不好吗？
English: Isn't it a bad thing that the monarch's descendants are all princes?

古文：位尊而无功，奉厚而无劳，而挟重器多也。
现代文：是由于他们的地位尊贵但没有功勋，俸禄优厚但没有劳绩，而拥有的贵重的宝物又太多了。
English: It is because their positions are honorable but not meritorious, their salaries are generous but not meritorious, and they have too many valuable treasures.

古文：今媪尊长安君之位，而封之以膏腴之地，多与之重器，而不及今令有功于国，一旦山陵崩，长安君何以自托于赵？
现代文：如今您老让长安君的地位尊贵了，又封给他肥沃的土地，给他许多贵重的宝物，可是不趁现在让他为国立功，一旦您辞别了人世，长安君凭借什么在赵国立身？
English: Now you have always made Chang'an Jun's status honorable, and granted him fertile land, and given him many valuable treasures, but if you don't take advantage of this to make him a national merit, once you have passed away, what will Chang'an Jun rely on to be in Zhao Guozhong?

古文：老臣以媪为长安君之计短也，故以为爱之不若燕后。 
现代文：老臣以为您为长安君打算得短浅，所以认为疼爱他不如疼爱燕后。 
English: The old minister thought that your plan for Chang'an Jun was short-sighted, so he thought that loving him was not as good as loving Yan Hou.

古文：太后曰： 诺，恣君之所使之。 
现代文：太后说： 好吧，任凭您派他到哪里去吧！ 
English: The empress dowager said, "Well, you can send him wherever you like!"

古文：于是为长安君约车百乘，质于齐，齐兵乃出。
现代文：于是为长安君准备了一百辆车，到齐去做人质，齐国这才出兵。
English: As a result, a hundred cars were prepared for Chang'an Jun, and Qi came to be a hostage. It was only then that Qi sent troops.

古文：子义闻之，曰： 人主之子，骨肉之亲也，犹不能持无功之尊，无劳之奉，而守金玉之重也，而况于予乎？ 
现代文：子义听到这件事，说： 君主的儿子，有着骨肉的亲情，尚且不能没有建立功勋就享有尊贵，不能没有功劳就享有俸禄，从而无法守住金玉一类贵重的宝物，何况是我们的这样的人呢？ 
English: When Ziyi heard about this, he said, "The son of a monarch, who is a flesh-and-blood relative, can't enjoy dignity without establishing merit, can't enjoy salary without merit, and thus can't keep precious treasures such as gold and jewels. What's more, what about people like us?

古文：齐安平君田单将赵师而攻燕中阳，拔之。
现代文：齐国的安平君田单率领赵国军队进攻燕国的中阳，把它攻克了。
English: Anping Juntian of the State of Qi led the army of the State of Zhao to attack Zhongyang of the State of Yan and conquered it.

古文：又攻韩注人，拔之。
现代文：又进攻韩国的注人，也攻克了。
English: It also attacked and defeated South Korea's Chunjin.

古文：二年，惠文后卒。
现代文：孝成王二年，惠文后去世。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Xiaocheng, Huiwen passed away.

古文：田单为相。
现代文：田单任赵的相国。
English: Tian Shan served as Zhao's consort.

古文：四年，王梦衣偏裻之衣，乘飞龙上天，不至而坠，见金玉之积如山。
现代文：四年，孝成王做梦穿着左右两色的衣服，乘飞龙上天，没到天上就坠落下来，看见金玉堆积如山。
English: In the fourth year, Xiaocheng Wang had a dream that he was wearing two-colored clothes, flying up to the sky on a flying dragon, and falling down before reaching the sky. He saw a mountain of gold.

古文：明日，王召筮史敢占之。曰： 梦衣偏裻之衣者，残也。
现代文：第二天，孝成王召见名叫敢的筮史官来占卜，他说： 梦见穿左右两色衣服，象征残缺。
English: The next day, Prince Xiaocheng summoned a soothsayer named Dangang, who said, "I dreamt of wearing clothes of two colors, left and right, to symbolize a defect.

古文：乘飞龙上天不至而坠者，有气而无实也。
现代文：乘飞龙上天没有到天上就坠落下来，象征有气势但没有实力。
English: If a flying dragon does not reach the sky, it will fall down, symbolizing that it has momentum but no strength.

古文：见金玉之积如山者，忧也。 
现代文：看见金玉堆积如山，象征忧患。 
English: To see a mountain of gold nuggets is a sign of distress.

古文：后三日，韩氏上党守冯亭使者至，曰： 韩不能守上党，入之于秦。
现代文：过了三天，韩国上党的守将冯亭派使者到赵国，他说： 韩国不能守住上党，就要并入秦国。
English: Three days later, Feng Ting, the guardian of Korea's Upper Party, sent an envoy to Zhao. He said, "If Korea cannot keep the Upper Party, it will be merged into Qin."

古文：其吏民皆安为赵，不欲为秦。
现代文：那里的官吏百姓都愿意归属赵国，不愿归属秦国。
English: The officials and people there are willing to belong to Zhao, but not to Qin.

古文：有城市邑十七，愿再拜入之赵，财王所以赐吏民。 
现代文：上党有城邑十七个，愿再拜归入赵国，大王怎样向官吏百姓施恩，请您裁决。 
English: Shangdang has seventeen cities and towns, and they are willing to be re-incorporated into the State of Zhao. I would like to ask you to judge how the great king has been kind to the officials and the people.

古文：王大喜，召平阳君豹告之曰： 冯亭入城市邑十七，受之何如？ 
现代文：孝成王大喜，召见平阳君赵豹告诉他说： 冯亭进献十七城吗，接受它怎么样？ 
English: Xiao Chengwang was overjoyed and summoned Pingyang Jun Zhao Pan to tell him: If Feng Ting offers seventeen cities, how about accepting it?

古文：对曰： 圣人甚祸无故之利。 
现代文：赵豹回答说： 圣人把无缘无故的利益看做是大祸害。 
English: Zhao Pang replied, "A sage regards profit without reason as a great evil.

古文：王曰： 人怀吾德，何谓无故乎？ 
现代文：孝成王说： 人们都被我的恩德感召，怎么说是无故呢？ 
English: Xiaocheng Wang said: People are inspired by my grace, how can I say it is without reason?

古文：对曰： 夫秦蚕食韩氏地，中绝不令相通，固自以为坐而受上党之地也。
现代文：赵豹回答说： 秦国蚕食韩国的土地，从当中断绝，不让两边相通，本来自以为会安安稳稳地得到上党的土地了。
English: Zhao Pan replied: Qin encroached on Korea's land, cut it off from it, and did not allow the two sides to communicate with each other. Originally, I thought that I would get the land of the upper party safely and steadily.

古文：韩氏所以不入于秦者，欲嫁其祸于赵也。
现代文：韩国所以不归顺秦国，是想要嫁祸于赵国。
English: The reason why Korea did not submit to Qin was to blame Zhao.

古文：秦服其劳而赵受其利，虽强大不能得之于小弱，小弱顾能得之于强大乎？
现代文：秦国付出了辛劳而赵国却白白得利，即使强国大国也不能随意从小国弱国那里得利，小国弱国反倒能从强国大国那里得利吗？
English: Qin State has worked hard, but Zhao State has gained in vain. Even a strong and powerful country cannot arbitrarily benefit from a small and weak country. Can a small and weak country benefit from a strong and powerful country?

古文：岂可谓非无故之利哉！
现代文：这怎能说不是无故之利呢！
English: How can this be said not to be an unwarranted advantage?

古文：且夫秦以牛田之水通粮蚕食，上乘倍战者，裂上国之地，其政行，不可与为难，必勿受也。 
现代文：况且秦国利用牛田的水道运粮蚕食韩国，用最好的战车奋力作战，分割韩国的土地，它的政令已经施行，不能和它为敌，一定不要接受。 
English: Moreover, Qin used the waterways of the cattle fields to transport grain to encroach on South Korea, fought hard with the best chariots, and divided the land of South Korea. Its decree has been implemented, and it cannot be an enemy, and must not be accepted.

古文：王曰： 今发百万之军而攻，逾年历岁未得一城也。
现代文：孝成王说： 如今出动百万大军进攻，一年半载也得不到一座城。
English: Xiaocheng Wang said, "If we send out a million-strong army to attack now, we won't be able to capture a single city for a year and a half."

古文：今以城市邑十七币吾国，此大利也。 
现代文：现在人家把十七座城邑当礼物送给我国，这可是大利呀！ 
English: Now they are giving seventeen cities as a gift to our country, but this is Italy!

古文：赵豹出，王召平原君与赵禹而告之。
现代文：赵豹出去后，孝成王召见平原君和赵禹告诉他们这件事。
English: After Zhao Pan went out, Xiaocheng Wang summoned Pingyuan Jun and Zhao Yu to tell them the matter.

古文：对曰： 发百万之军而攻，逾岁未得一城，今坐受城市邑十七，此大利，不可失也。 王曰： 善。 
现代文：他们回答说： 出动百万大军进攻，过一年也得不到一座城，如今白白地得到十七座城邑，这么大的便宜，不能丢掉。 孝成王说： 好。 
English: They replied, "When you attack with a million-man army, you can't get a single city in a year, but now you've got seventeen cities for nothing. You can't lose such a great bargain."

古文：乃令赵胜受地，告冯亭曰： 敝国使者臣胜，敝国君使胜致命，以万户都三封太守，千户都三封县令，皆世世为侯，吏民皆益爵三级，吏民能相安，皆赐之六金。 
现代文：于是派赵胜去接受土地。赵胜告诉冯亭说： 我是敝国使者赵胜，敝国君主派我传达命令，封赐太守万户的城邑三座，封赐各县县令千户的城邑三座，全都世代为侯，官吏百姓全部晋爵三级，官吏百姓能平安相处，都赏赐黄金六斤。 
English: Zhao Sheng then sent Zhao Sheng to accept the land. Zhao Sheng told Feng Ting, "I am Zhao Sheng, the emissary of the Kingdom of Wei. The monarch of the Kingdom of Wei sent me to convey an order to award three townships of ten thousand households to the Empress Dowager, three townships of one thousand households to each county, all generations to be marquesses, all officials and commoners to be promoted to the third level of peerage, and all officials and commoners to be able to get along peacefully. All were awarded six pounds of gold.

古文：冯亭垂涕不见使者，曰： 吾不处三不义也：为主守地，不能死固，不义一矣；入之秦，不听主令，不义二矣；卖主地而食之，不义三矣。 
现代文：冯亭流下眼泪不见使者，他说： 我不能处于三不义的境地：为君主守卫国土，不能拼死固守，这是一不义；韩王把上党归属秦国，我不听君主的命令，这是二不义；出卖君主的土地而得到封赏，这是三不义。 
English: Feng Ting shed tears and did not see the messenger. He said, "I can't be in a situation of three injustices: I can't defend the land for the monarch, I can't fight to the death to keep it, this is an injustice; King Han made the upper party belong to Qin, I didn't listen to the monarch's order, this is two injustices; I sold the monarch's land and got a reward, this is three injustices."

古文：赵遂发兵取上党。
现代文：赵国于是发兵占领上党。
English: Zhao Guo then sent troops to occupy Shangdi.

古文：廉颇将军军长平。
现代文：廉颇领兵进驻长平。
English: Lianpo led the troops into Changping.

古文：六年，廉颇免而赵括代将。
现代文：孝成王六年，廉颇被免职，赵括接替他领兵。
English: In the sixth year of the reign of Emperor Xiaocheng, Renpo was dismissed from his post, and Zhao Bu replaced him as the leader of the army.

古文：秦人围赵括，赵括以军降，卒四十余万皆坑之。
现代文：秦将白起率军包围赵括，赵括战死，赵军投降，四十多万士兵都被坑杀。
English: Qin general Bai Qi led the army to encircle Zhao Quan, Zhao Quan died in the battle, Zhao's army surrendered, and more than 400,000 soldiers were killed.

古文：王悔不听赵豹之计，故有长平之祸焉。
现代文：孝成王后悔当初没有听从赵豹的意见，因此才有了长平之祸。
English: Xiaocheng Wang regretted that he did not listen to Zhao Bao's opinion at the beginning, which is why the disaster of Changping occurred.

古文：王还，不听秦，秦围邯郸。
现代文：孝成王回到王都，不答应秦国的要求，秦军围困邯郸。
English: When Prince Xiaocheng returned to the capital, he did not agree to the demands of the Qin state, and the Qin army besieged the capital.

古文：武垣令傅豹、王容、苏射率燕众反燕地。
现代文：武垣令傅豹和王容、苏射率领燕国民众反归燕地。
English: Wuqi ordered Fu Bao, Wang Rong and Su Ya to lead the Yan people to return to Yan.

古文：赵以灵丘封楚相春申君。
现代文：赵国把灵丘封给楚国宰相春申君。
English: Zhao State sealed Lingqiu to the Prime Minister of Chu State, Chunshen.

古文：八年，平原君如楚请救。
现代文：八年，平原君到楚国请求救援。
English: Eight years later, Plainsman went to Chu to ask for help.

古文：还，楚来救，及魏公子无忌亦来救，秦围邯郸乃解。
现代文：回国后，楚军前来救援，魏国公子无忌也来救援，秦国才解除了对邯郸的包围。
English: After returning to China, the Chu army came to the rescue, the Wei prince also came to the rescue, and the Qin state lifted the siege on the dragonfly.

古文：十年，燕攻昌壮，五月拔之。
现代文：十年，燕军进攻昌壮，五月攻克了。
English: In ten years, Yan's army attacked Changzhuang, and conquered it in May.

古文：赵将乐乘、庆舍攻秦信梁军，破之。
现代文：赵国将军乐乘、庆舍进攻秦国信梁的军队，把他打败了。
English: Zhao generals Le Rong and Qing She attacked the army of Qin general Xin Liang and defeated him.

古文：太子死。
现代文：赵国太子去世。
English: Zhao Guodaishi passed away.

古文：而秦攻西周，拔之。
现代文：秦国进攻西周国，把它攻下了。
English: Qin attacked Western Zhou and conquered it.

古文：徒父祺出。
现代文：徒父祺领兵出境。
English: My father led the troops out of the country.

古文：十一年，城元氏，县上原。
现代文：十一年，建元氏城，设上原县。
English: In the eleventh year after the founding of the Yuan Dynasty, Uehara County was established.

古文：武阳君郑安平死，收其地。
现代文：武阳君郑安平去世，收回他的封地。
English: Zheng Anping, the ruler of Wuyang, died and his fief was taken back.

古文：十二年，邯郸烧。
现代文：十二年，邯郸的草料库被烧毁。
English: Twelve years ago, the straw storehouse was burnt down.

古文：十四年，平原君赵胜死。
现代文：十四年，平原君赵胜去世。
English: Fourteen years ago, Plainsman Zhao Sheng passed away.

古文：十五年，以尉文封相国廉颇为信平君。
现代文：十五年，把尉文封给相国廉颇，封号信平君。
English: In the fifteenth year of his reign, he gave the title of 尉文 to his brother-in-law, 廉颇, and the title of 信平 jun.

古文：燕王令丞相栗腹约驩，以五百金为赵王酒，还归，报燕王曰： 赵氏壮者皆死长平，其孤未壮，可伐也。 
现代文：燕王派丞相栗腹同赵国交好，送五百斤黄金为赵王贺寿。栗腹回国后向燕王报告说： 赵国的壮丁都死在长平，他们的遗孤还没长大，我们可以前去征伐。 
English: Yan Wang sent his minister of foreign affairs, Li Pang, to make friends with Zhao Guo, and sent five hundred catties of gold to Zhao Wang He Shou. After returning to the country, Li Pang reported to Yan Wang: Zhao Guo's strong young men have all died in Changping, and their orphans have not yet grown up, so we can go on a campaign.

古文：王召昌国君乐闲而问之。
现代文：燕王召见昌国君乐闲问他。
English: Yan Wang summoned Chang Guojun Le and asked him about it.

古文：对曰： 赵，四战之国也，其民习兵，伐之不可。 王曰： 吾以众伐寡，二而伐一，可乎？ 对曰： 不可。 
现代文：乐闲回答说： 赵国是四面受敌的国家，它的百姓都受过军事训练，不能进攻它。 燕王说： 我们以多攻少，两个打一个，可以吗？ 回答道： 不可以。 
English: Le Xun replied: Zhao is a country that has enemies on all sides, and its people have received military training and cannot attack it.Yan Wang said: Can we attack with more or less, two against one?Answer: No.

古文：王曰： 吾即以五而伐一，可乎？ 
现代文：燕王说： 那我就用五个去打一个，可以吗？ 
English: Yan Wang said: Then I will use five to beat one, is that okay?

古文：对曰： 不可。 
现代文：回道道： 不可以。 
English: Fan Ye replied, "It's not appropriate."

古文：燕王大怒。
现代文：燕王大怒。
English: Yan Wang flew into a rage.

古文：群臣皆以为可。
现代文：群臣都认为可以。
English: The courtiers all thought it was fine.

古文：燕卒起二军，车二千乘，栗腹将而攻鄗，卿秦将而攻代。
现代文：燕国终于出动两支军队，两千辆战车，栗腹率军进攻鄗城，卿秦率军进攻代地。
English: Yan finally sent out two armies, two thousand chariots, Li Bei led the army to attack Shicheng, Qin Qin led the army to attack the place.

古文：廉颇为赵将，破杀栗腹，虏卿秦、乐闲。
现代文：廉颇为赵国大将，打败并杀死栗腹，俘虏了卿秦、乐闲。
English: Liangpo was the general of Zhao, defeated and killed Li Gang, and captured Qin and Le You.

古文：十六年，廉颇围燕。
现代文：十六年，廉颇围困燕国都城。
English: For sixteen years, the corrupt besieged the capital city of Yan.

古文：以乐乘为武襄君。
现代文：赵王把乐乘封为武襄君。
English: Zhao Wang crowned Le Rong as Wu Xiangjun.

古文：十七年，假相大将武襄君攻燕，围其国。
现代文：十七年，代理宰相大将武襄君进攻燕国，包围了它的国都。
English: In the seventeenth year, Acting Prime Minister General Wu Xiangjun attacked Yan Province and surrounded its capital.

古文：十八年，延陵钧率师从相国信平君助魏攻燕。
现代文：十八年，延陵钧率领军队跟随相国信平君廉颇帮助魏国进攻燕国。
English: In the 18th year, Yanling Yao led the army to follow the neighboring country, Xinping Junlian, to help Wei attack Yan.

古文：秦拔我榆次三十七城。
现代文：秦军攻下了赵国榆次地区的三十七座城池。
English: The Qin army captured thirty-seven castles in Zhao Guozhi region.

古文：十九年，赵与燕易土：以龙兑、汾门、临乐与燕；燕以葛、武阳、平舒与赵。
现代文：十九年，赵国和燕国交换国土：赵国把龙兑、汾门、临乐给燕国；燕国把葛城、武阳、平舒给赵国。
English: In 1919, Zhao and Yan exchanged territories: Zhao gave Yongdui, Qimen and Linle to Yan; Yan gave Gecheng, Wuyang and Pingshu to Zhao.

古文：二十年，秦王政初立。
现代文：二十年，秦王嬴政刚刚即位。
English: Twenty years ago, Qin King Hezheng had just ascended the throne.

古文：秦拔我晋阳。
现代文：秦军攻下赵国的晋阳。
English: The Qin army captured Jinyang in Zhao.

古文：二十一年，孝成王卒。
现代文：二十一年，孝成王去世。
English: In 1921, Prince Xiaocheng passed away.

古文：廉颇将，攻繁阳，取之。
现代文：廉颇领兵，进攻繁阳，把它占领了。
English: The corrupt general led an army, attacked the prosperous country, and occupied it.

古文：使乐乘代之，廉颇攻乐乘，乐乘走，廉颇亡入魏。
现代文：赵王派乐乘接替廉颇，廉颇攻打乐乘，乐乘逃跑，廉颇逃亡到魏国。
English: Zhao Wang sent Le Rong to succeed Ren Po, Ren Po attacked Le Rong, Le Rong fled, and Ren Po fled to Wei.

古文：子偃立，是为悼襄王。
现代文：孝成王之子赵偃即位，这就是悼襄王。
English: Xiaocheng Wang's son Zhao Jun ascended to the throne, this is the mourning of King Xiang.

古文：悼襄王元年，大备魏。
现代文：悼襄王元年，盛礼交好魏国。
English: In the first year of mourning for King Xiang, a grand ceremony was held in honor of the State of Wei.

古文：欲通平邑、中牟之道，不成。
现代文：想修通到魏国平邑和中牟的道路，没有成功。
English: Attempts to build a road to Ping'e and Zhongmou in Wei Province were unsuccessful.

古文：二年，李牧将，攻燕，拔武遂、方城。
现代文：悼襄王二年，李牧领兵，进攻燕国，攻下了武遂、方城。
English: In the second year of mourning for King Xiang, Li Mu led an army to attack Yan Province, capturing Wusui and Fangcheng.

古文：秦召春平君，因而留之。
现代文：秦国召见赵国的春平君，借故将他扣留在秦国。
English: Qin summoned Chunping of Zhao and detained him in Qin.

古文：泄钧为之谓文信侯曰： 春平君者，赵王甚爱之而郎中妒之，故相与谋曰 春平君入秦，秦必留之 。
现代文：泄钧替他在秦相文信侯吕不韦面前说： 春平君这个人，赵王特别喜爱他但是郎中们却忌妒他，所以他们互相商议说： 春平君到秦国，秦国一定扣留他。 
English: In front of Qin Emperor's close confidant Lü Buwei, Kaede said on his behalf, "Chunping is a person whom King Zhao especially likes, but his retainers are jealous of him, so they discussed with each other and said, "If Chunping comes to Qin, Qin will definitely detain him."

古文：故相与谋而内之秦也。
现代文：于是他们一起商量把春平君送到秦国。
English: So they discussed sending Chunping to Qin together.

古文：今君留之，是绝赵而郎中之计中也。
现代文：如今您扣留他，就是断绝了与赵国的关系，正好中了那些郎中的奸计。
English: Now that you have detained him, you have broken off relations with Zhao Guo, and you have just fallen for the tricks of those henchmen.

古文：君不如遣春平君而留平都。
现代文：您不如送回春平君，让他留在平都。
English: You might as well send Chunping back and let him stay in Pingdu.

古文：春平君者言行信于王，王必厚割赵而赎平都。 
现代文：春平君的言行受赵王的信任，赵王一定会割让许多土地赎回平都。 
English: Chunping's words and deeds are trusted by King Zhao, who will certainly cede many lands to redeem Pingdu.

古文：文信侯曰： 善。 
现代文：文信侯说： 好。 
English: Wenxin Hou said: Good.

古文：因遣之。
现代文：于是将春平君遣送回了赵国。
English: So he sent Chunping back to Zhao.

古文：城韩皋。
现代文：赵国在韩皋筑城。
English: Zhao's state built a city in the Han Dynasty.

古文：三年，庞暖将，攻燕，禽其将剧辛。
现代文：悼襄王三年，庞煖领兵，进攻燕国，俘虏了燕国的将领剧辛。
English: During the three years of mourning for King Xiang, Pang Jun led an army to attack Yan's country and captured Yan's general, Geng Xin.

古文：四年，庞暖将赵、楚、魏、燕之锐师，攻秦蕞，不拔；移攻齐，取饶安。
现代文：四年，庞煖统率赵、楚、魏、燕四国的精锐部队，进攻秦国的蕞地，没有攻克。又移兵进攻齐国，夺取了饶安。
English: In the fourth year, Pang Jun led the elite troops of Zhao, Chu, Wei, and Yan to attack the Qin state of Shantian, but failed to conquer it. He also moved troops to attack Qi and captured Rao'an.

古文：五年，傅抵将，居平邑；庆舍将东阳河外师，守河梁。
现代文：五年，傅抵领兵，驻扎在平邑；庆舍率领东阳及河外的军队，守卫黄河的桥梁。
English: In the fifth year, Fu arrived to lead the army and stationed in Pingyi; Qing She led the army of Dongyang and outside the river to guard the bridges of the Yellow River.

古文：六年，封长安君以饶。
现代文：六年前年，赵王把饶阳封给长安君。
English: Six years ago, Zhao Wang gave Raoyang to Chang'an.

古文：魏与赵邺。
现代文：魏国把邺送给赵国。
English: Wei gave the scepter to Zhao.

古文：九年，赵攻燕，取狸、阳城。
现代文：悼襄王九年，赵国进攻燕国，夺取了貍城和阳城。
English: In the ninth year of mourning for King Xiang, the State of Zhao attacked the State of Yan and captured the cities of Handan and Yangcheng.

古文：兵未罢，秦攻邺，拔之。
现代文：还没有收兵，秦国就来攻邺，将其攻取。
English: Before the troops were collected, Qin attacked and captured Yunnan.

古文：悼襄王卒，子幽缪王迁立。
现代文：赵悼襄王去世，他的儿子幽缪王赵迁即位。
English: Zhao Yuxiang Wang died, and his son Yu Mu Wang Zhao Qian ascended to the throne.

古文：幽缪王迁元年，城柏人。
现代文：幽缪王赵迁元年，在柏人筑城。
English: In the first year of the reign of King Zhao of Yu Mu, he built a city in Baoji.

古文：二年，秦攻武城，扈辄率师救之，军败，死焉。
现代文：二年，秦军进攻武城，扈辄率领军队救援，军队被打败，扈辄战死。
English: In the second year, the Qin army attacked Wucheng, Yu led the army to rescue, the army was defeated, Yu died in battle.

古文：三年，秦攻赤丽、宜安，李牧率师与战肥下，却之。
现代文：三年，秦军进攻赤丽、宜安两地，李牧领兵与秦军在肥城之下交战，打退了秦军。
English: In the third year, the Qin army attacked the two places of Chili and Yian. Li Mu, the leader of the army, fought with the Qin army under Fucheng, and repulsed the Qin army.

古文：封牧为武安君。
现代文：赵王封李牧为武安君。
English: Zhao Wangfeng Li Mu as Wu Anjun.

古文：四年，秦攻番吾，李牧与之战，却之。
现代文：四年，秦军进攻番吾，李牧同秦军作战，把它打退了。
English: In four years, the Qin army attacked Fango. Li Mu fought with the Qin army and drove it back.

古文：五年，代地大动，自乐徐以西，北至平阴，台屋墙垣太半坏，地坼东西百三十步。
现代文：五年，代地发生大地震，从乐徐以西，北至平阴，楼台、房屋、墙垣大半毁坏，地面裂开东西宽一百三十步的裂沟。
English: Five years later, a major earthquake occurred in the area. From the west of Le Xu to the north of Pingyin, most of the buildings, houses and walls were destroyed, and the ground was split into a 130-step wide crack.

古文：六年，大饥，民讹言曰： 赵为号，秦为笑。
现代文：六年，赵国发生大饥荒，百姓中传出民谣说： 赵人在哭，秦人在笑。
English: In the sixth year, a great famine occurred in Zhao Province, and folk songs were spread among the people saying: Zhao people are crying, Qin people are laughing.

古文：以为不信，视地之生毛。 
现代文：如果不相信，请看田里长不长苗。 
English: If you don't believe me, please see if there are any seedlings growing in the field.

古文：七年，秦人攻赵，赵大将李牧、将军司马尚将，击之。
现代文：七年，秦军攻打赵国，赵国大将李牧和将军司马尚领兵，反击秦军。
English: In the seventh year, the Qin army attacked Zhao, and Zhao's general Li Mu and general Sima Shang led the troops to counterattack the Qin army.

古文：李牧诛，司马尚免，赵匆及齐将颜聚代之。
现代文：李牧遭到陷害被杀，司马尚被免职，赵匆和齐国将军颜聚接替他们的职务。
English: Li Mu was framed and killed, Sima Shang was removed from office, and Zhao Xuan and Qigong General Yan Cong took their places.

古文：赵匆军破，颜聚亡去。
现代文：赵匆兵败，颜聚逃跑。
English: Zhao was defeated and Yan fled.

古文：以王迁降。
现代文：因此赵王迁投降。
English: Therefore, Zhao Wangqian surrendered.

古文：八年十月，邯郸为秦。
现代文：八年十月，邯郸归属秦国。
English: In October of the eighth year, Yao belonged to Qin.

古文：太史公曰：吾闻冯王孙曰： 赵王迁，其母倡也，嬖于悼襄王。
现代文：太史公说：我听冯王孙说： 赵王迁，他的母亲是歌女，受到悼襄王宠爱。
English: Taishi said: I heard Feng Wangsun say: Zhao Wangqian, his mother was a singer, was loved by the mourning King.

古文：悼襄王废适子嘉而立迁。
现代文：悼襄王废了嫡子赵嘉而立赵迁为太子。
English: To mourn the death of Prince Xiang, his legitimate son Zhao Jia was deposed and Zhao Jian became the crown prince.

古文：迁素无行，信谗，故诛其良将李牧，用郭开。 
现代文：赵迁平素行为不正，听信谗言，所以诛杀了赵国良将李牧，重用郭开。 
English: Zhao Qianping acted improperly and listened to the advice, so he killed Zhao Guoliang's general Li Mu and reused Guo Kai.

古文：岂不缪哉！
现代文：这难道不荒谬吗！
English: Isn't that ridiculous!

古文：秦既虏迁，赵之亡大夫共立嘉为王，王代六岁，秦进兵破嘉，遂灭赵以为郡。
现代文：秦国俘虏赵迁之后，赵国逃亡的大夫们共同扶立赵嘉为王，在代地称王六年。秦国进兵打败了赵嘉，终于灭了赵国，把它改为郡。
English: After the Qin captured Zhao Qian, the fleeing doctors of Zhao jointly made Zhao Jia king, and he reigned for six years. The Qin army defeated Zhao Jia and finally destroyed Zhao and changed it into a county.

