古文：秦树竺惠炽郭铨驾思令山都区敬之刘隽檀道济石秀之夏侯祖观张承吉梁清崔茂伯巢氏胡庇之索颐
现代文：秦树竺惠炽郭铨驾思令山都区敬之刘隽檀道济石秀之夏侯祖观张承吉梁清崔茂伯巢氏胡庇之索颐
English: Qin Shuxuan, Huizhong Guo, Guo Jie, Qin Shihuang, Qin Shihuang, Qin Shihuang, Qin Shihuang, Qin Shihuang, Qin Shihuang, Qin Shihuang

古文：秦树
现代文：秦树
English: Qin Shu

古文：沛郡人秦树者，家在曲阿小辛村。
现代文：沛郡人秦树，家住曲阿小辛村。
English: Qin Shu, a resident of Pei County, lives in Qua Xiaoxin Village.

古文：尝自京归，未至二十里许，天暗失道。
现代文：有一次他从京城回来，离家二十多里时，天黑得看不见道了。
English: Once, when he came back from Beijing, more than twenty miles away from home, it was too dark to see the road.

古文：遥望火光，往投之。
现代文：远看有灯光，就直奔而去。
English: When he sees a light in the distance, he runs straight towards it.

古文：见一女子，秉烛出云：女弱独居，不得宿客。
现代文：来到一座房子前，见有一个女子端着蜡烛走出来说：我一个年轻女子独自住着，没法留客人住宿。
English: When I arrived at a house, I saw a woman come out with a candle and say: "I am a young woman who lives alone and cannot accommodate guests.

古文：树曰：欲进路，碍夜不可前去，乞寄外住。
现代文：秦树说：我想往前走，但晚上实在没法再赶路了，请允许我在外屋借住一下吧。
English: Qin Shu said, "I want to go forward, but I really can't make it in the evening. Please allow me to stay in the outhouse for a while."

古文：女然之。
现代文：女子就答应了。
English: The girl agreed.

古文：树既进坐，竟以此女独处一室，虑其夫至，不敢安眠。
现代文：秦树进屋一看，原来这女子家只有一间屋子，怕她丈夫回来，就一直不敢就寝。
English: When Qin Shu entered the house, he saw that the woman's family only had one room. Afraid of her husband's return, she had been afraid to go to bed.

古文：女曰：何以过嫌，保无虑，不相误也。
现代文：女子说：你何必这么疑呢，就放心在这儿住吧，不会有什么事的。
English: The woman said, "Why do you have to be so suspicious? Just stay here and you won't have any problems."

古文：为树设食，食物悉是陈久。
现代文：女子为秦树摆下了饭菜，但饭菜看样子都是搁了很久的了。
English: The woman set out food for Qin Shu, but the food looked like it had been left out for a long time.

古文：树曰：承未出适，我亦未婚。欲结大义，能相顾否？
现代文：秦树说：你还没有出嫁，我也没有结婚，我想和你结为夫妻，不知你能不能同意？
English: Qin Shu said, "You haven't been married yet, and I haven't been married either. I want to marry you. I don't know if you can agree to this.

古文：女笑曰：自顾鄙薄，岂足伉俪？
现代文：女子说：我这样鄙陋微贱的女子，怎么配做你的终身伴侣呢。
English: The woman said, "How can I, such a lowly and despicable woman, be worthy of being your lifelong companion?"

古文：遂与寝止。向晨树去，乃俱起执别，女泣曰：与君一睹，后面莫期。
现代文：后来他们就同床共枕，直到天亮时，秦树要上路了，女子执手和秦树告别，哭着说：和您只有这一面之缘，以后就永别了。
English: Later, they slept together in the same bed until dawn, when Qin Shu was about to set out on a journey. The woman waved goodbye to Qin Shu, crying: "I only have this one connection with you, and I will say goodbye forever."

古文：以指环一双赠之，结置衣带，相送出门。
现代文：女子送给秦树一对指环，穿在秦树的衣带上并打了个结以作纪念，一直送出门外。
English: The woman gave Qin Shu a pair of rings, put them on Qin Shu's belt and tied a knot as a souvenir, and kept sending them out the door.

古文：树低头急去数十步，顾其宿处，乃是冢墓。
现代文：秦树出门后急走了几十步，回头看昨晚住的地方，只是一座坟墓。
English: After Qin Shu went out, he hurriedly walked dozens of steps. Looking back, the place where he stayed last night was just a tomb.

古文：居数日，亡其指环，结带如故。
现代文：过了几天，指环丢失了，但衣带上那个结还在。
English: A few days later, the ring was gone, but the knot was still there.

古文：竺惠炽
现代文：竺惠炽
English: 惠炽

古文：沙门竺惠炽，住江陵四层佛寺，以永初二年年。
现代文：有位和尚叫竺惠炽，住在江陵的四层佛寺，永初二年去世。
English: There was a monk named Gong Huiguo, who lived in a four-story Buddhist temple in Gangneung. He passed away two years ago.

古文：葬后，弟子七日会，举寺悉出，唯僧明道先患病，独停。
现代文：埋葬以后，给他举行头七祭礼，全寺的和尚都参加了，只有一个名叫明道的和尚因为生病，没有去，独自在庙里呆着。
English: After the burial, the first seven rites were held for him, and all the monks of the temple attended. Only one monk, named Mingdao, did not go because he was ill, and he stayed alone in the temple.

古文：忽见惠炽，谓明曰：我生不能断肉，今落饿狗地狱，令知有报。
现代文：忽然明道看见竺惠炽来了，对他说：我生前因为不能戒掉吃肉，现在死后已被投入饿狗地狱了。这是报应，特地来提醒你知道。
English: Suddenly, he saw Zou Huiqing coming, and said to him: "Because I couldn't give up eating meat when I was alive, I have been thrown into the hungry dog hell after my death. This is retribution, I'm here to remind you.

古文：郭铨
现代文：郭铨
English: Guo Wei

古文：郭铨，字仲衡，义熙初，以党附桓玄被杀。
现代文：郭铨字子衡，义熙初年时，因为和桓玄是同党被杀。
English: Guo Junziheng was killed in the first year of Yixi because he was a member of the same party as Huan Xuan.

古文：乃元嘉八年，忽乘舆导从，显形谓女婿刘凝之曰：仆有谪事，可四十僧会，得免脱也。
现代文：到了元嘉八年时，忽然现了形，乘着车带着侍从，对他的女婿刘凝之说：我将要受处罚曹到贬官，请你为我设一个四十名和尚参加的祭祀典礼，我就能得到免罪。
English: When he was eight years old, he suddenly appeared, riding in a chariot with attendants, and said to his son-in-law Liu Gengzhi, "I am about to be punished and demoted. Please set up a sacrificial ceremony for me with forty monks, and I will be absolved."

古文：又女梦曰：吾有谪罚，令汝夫作福。何以至今，设会不能见矜耶？
现代文：后来郭铨的女子也梦见父亲说：我将要获罪受罚，让你丈夫与我设坛祈祷，怎么到现在还不能可怜可怜我抓紧办呢？
English: Later, Guo Yao's daughter also dreamed of her father and said, "I am about to be punished. Let your husband set up an altar to pray with me. Why can't you have pity on me and act quickly?"

古文：女问当何处设斋，答曰：可归吾舍。
现代文：女子问应该在哪里设祭坛施舍斋饭，郭铨说：在我家里办就行。
English: When the girl asked where the altar should be set up for the almsgiving meal, Guo Yao said, "Just do it in my home."

古文：倏然复没。
现代文：说完就突然消失了。
English: After saying this, he suddenly disappeared.

古文：办会毕，有人称铨信，与凝之言：感君厚惠，事始获宥。
现代文：刘凝之给郭铨办了祭祀的事之后，有人给刘凝之传来郭铨的话说：感谢你的祭祀祈求，我的罪已经得到宽恕赦免了。
English: After Liu Genshi had performed the sacrifice for Guo Gan, someone passed Guo Gan's words to Liu Genshi, saying, "Thank you for your sacrifice and prayer. My sins have been forgiven and pardoned."

古文：贺思令
现代文：贺思令
English: He Sireung

古文：会稽贺思令，善弹琴，尝夜在月中坐，临风抚奏。忽有一人，形器甚伟，著械有惨色，至其中庭。
现代文：会稽人贺思令琴弹得很好。有一天他在月朗风清的院中弹琴，忽然有一个身材魁伟戴着刑具的人来到院中，看脸色很凄惨。
English: He Siring, the auditor of the association, played the piano very well. One day, he was playing the piano in the courtyard in the moonlight, when suddenly a tall man wearing a torture device came to the courtyard, looking very sad.

古文：称善，便与共语。
现代文：这人十分夸赞贺思令的琴艺，贺思令就和他谈起来。
English: The man was full of praise for He Siling's piano skills, and He Siling began to talk to him.

古文：自云是嵇中散，谓贺云：君下手极快，但于古法未合。
现代文：这人自称是晋代的中散大夫稽康，对贺说：你左手的指法太快，这不合乎古代的弹奏技法。
English: The man, who claimed to be the Jin Dynasty's Zhongshan doctor Qi Kang, said to He: Your left-hand fingering is too fast, which is not in line with ancient playing techniques.

古文：因授以《广陵散》。
现代文：然后就把古代名曲《广陵散》教给了贺思令。
English: Then he taught the ancient famous song "Guangling San" to He Siling.

古文：贺因得之，于今不绝。
现代文：贺思令学会了，使《广陵散》至今得以流传下来。
English: He Siling learned, so that "Guangling San" has been passed down to this day.

古文：山都
现代文：山都
English: Mountain capital

古文：山都，形为昆仑人，通身生毛，见人辄闭眼张口如笑。
现代文：山都是一种怪物，形状像昆仑山中的人，全身都长着毛。山都一见到人就闭眼张嘴好像在笑。
English: The mountain is a kind of monster, shaped like a man in the Kunlun Mountains, with hair all over his body. Whenever the mountain sees a person, it closes its eyes and opens its mouth as if smiling.

古文：好居深树中，翻石觅蟹啗之。
现代文：它们好住在深树林里。翻石头寻找螃蟹吃。
English: They like to live in the deep woods, turning over rocks in search of crabs to eat.

古文：《述异记》曰，南康有神，名曰山都，形如人，长二尺余，黑色赤目，发黄披身。
现代文：《述异记》里说，南康有一种叫山都的神，形状像人，但只有二尺多高，浑身黑色，两眼通红，长长的黄头发披在身上，在深山的树里作窝巢。
English: In the "Story of a Stranger," it is said that there is a god in Nankang called the Mountain God, shaped like a man, but only more than two feet tall, black all over, red eyes, long yellow hair draped over his body, making a nest in a tree deep in the mountains.

古文：于深山树中作窠，窠形为卵而坚，长三尺许，内甚泽，五色鲜明。二枚沓之，中央相连。
现代文：山都的巢是蛋形但很坚硬，三尺来长，里面很有光泽，五色鲜明，两个巢摞在一起，中间连着。
English: The nest of the mountain capital is egg-shaped but very hard, three feet long, very shiny inside, five bright colors, two nests tied together, connected in the middle.

古文：土人云，上者雄舍，下者雌室。
现代文：当地人说，上面那个是雄性山都住，下面那个是雌性山都住。
English: Locals say that the one above is inhabited by male mountain goats, while the one below is inhabited by female mountain goats.

古文：旁悉开口如规，体质虚轻，颇似木筒，中央以鸟毛为褥。
现代文：巢旁开一个园形的口，整个巢非常轻，很像个木筒，里面用鸟的毛作褥子。
English: A garden-shaped opening opens next to the nest, and the entire nest is very light, much like a wooden tube, with bird feathers inside.

古文：此神能变化隐形，猝睹其状，盖木客山林之类也。
现代文：山都神能变化隐身，乍一看，很像是木客、山椮之类。
English: At first glance, it looks like a woodcutter or a hawthorn.

古文：赣县西北十五里，有古塘，名余公塘。上有大梓树，可二十围，老树空中，有山都窠。
现代文：赣县西北十五里有个古塘，叫余公塘，上面有一棵二十围的大梓树，这棵树中心空了，山都在里面作了巢。
English: Fifteen miles northwest of Handan County, there is an ancient pond called Yu Gongtang. On top of it, there is a 20-meter-tall tree. The center of the tree is empty, and mountains have made nests in it.

古文：宋元嘉元年，县治民有道训道灵兄弟二人，伐倒此树，取窠还家。
现代文：宋元嘉元年，县城里有道训道灵兄弟二人砍倒了大梓树，把山都的巢带回家了。
English: In the first year of the Song and Yuan Dynasties, two Daoxun and Daoling brothers in the county town cut down the big tree and brought the nest of the mountain moth home.

古文：山都见形，骂二人曰：我居荒野，何预汝事？
现代文：山都于是现了形，骂两兄弟说：我在荒山野岭里住着，碍你们什么事了？
English: The mountain then appeared, scolded the two brothers and said: "I live in the wilderness, what's the matter with you?

古文：山木可用，岂可胜数？树有我窠，故伐倒之。
现代文：能用的树山里到处都有，可这棵树有我的巢，你却偏偏给砍了。
English: There are useful trees everywhere in the mountains, but this tree has my nest, but you just cut it down.

古文：今当焚汝宇，以报汝之无道。
现代文：为了报复你的胡作非为，我要烧掉你的房子！
English: I'm going to burn your house down to pay you back for what you've done!

古文：至二更中，内处屋上，一时起火，舍宅荡尽矣。
现代文：这天二更时分，弟兄俩的家中里外屋都着起了大火，烧得片瓦无存。
English: At 2 a.m. that day, a fire broke out in the outbuilding of the brothers' home, destroying all the tiles.

古文：木客，邓清明《南康记》曰，木客头面语声，亦不全异人，但手脚爪如钩利。
现代文：至于木客，邓清明著的《南康记》里说，木客的形貌和说话的声音，和人并不是完全不同，只是木客的手脚爪子锐利得像钩子。
English: As for the woodcutter, Deng Qingming's "Nankang Ji" said that the appearance and speaking voice of the woodcutter are not completely different from humans, but the claws of the woodcutter's hands and feet are sharp like hooks.

古文：曾有人往看其葬，以酒及鱼生肉遗宾，自作饮食，终不令人见其形也。葬棺法，每在高岸树梢，或藏石窠之中。
现代文：他们专门在悬岩峻岭上住。他们也能砍木柱，用绳索绑在树上住。过去曾有人想买他们的木柱，就先把要给木客的物品放在树下，买多少木本柱就放多少东西。如果木客觉得满意，就把木柱给人，从不多拿或侵犯人，但始终不跟人见面，也不到街上和人作交易。木客死后也是装进棺木埋葬，曾有人看见过木客的殡葬，也是用酒、鱼和生肉招待宾客，自己吃喝，始终不让人看见他们。
English: In the past, if someone wanted to buy their wooden post, they would first put the goods they wanted to give to the woodcutter under the tree, and then put as many things as they bought. If the woodcutter felt satisfied, they would give the wooden post to others. They never took or violated people, but they never met people or traded with people on the street. After the death of the woodcutter, they were also buried in a coffin. Some people had seen the funeral of the woodcutter. They also invited guests with wine, fish and raw meat. They ate and drank by themselves and never let anyone see them.

古文：南康三营伐船兵说，往亲睹葬所，舞唱之节，虽异于人，听如风林汛响，声类歌吹之和。
现代文：他们葬棺的坟，常常是在高岸的树枝上，或者把棺木放在石窠里。南康三营的伐船兵说，曾亲眼看见木客的葬仪，听他们在丧礼上跳舞唱歌，虽然不同于人类，但听起来像风吹过树林的声间，好像是唱歌和音乐演奏都融合在一起了。
English: They bury the coffin's grave, often on the branches of the high bank, or put the coffin in a stone coffin.Nankang Third Battalion's boatmen said that they had seen the funeral rites of the woodcutter with their own eyes, and listened to them dance and sing at the funeral. Although different from humans, it sounded like the wind blowing through the woods, as if singing and music were fused together.

古文：义熙中，徐道复南出，遣人伐榜，以装舟槛，木客及献其榜而不得见。
现代文：义熙年间，徐道复到南方去，派人砍木头用来做船帮，木客就献出了木头，但仍然不露面。
English: During the reign of Yixi, Xu Daofu went to the south and sent people to cut wood to make boats. The woodcutter offered the wood, but still did not show up.

古文：区敬之
现代文：区敬之
English: Respectfully yours,

古文：南康县营民区敬之，宋元嘉元年，与息共乘舫，自县溯流。
现代文：南康县屯垦区的老百姓区敬之。宋元嘉元年时和儿子一同乘船，从县里逆流而上，进入了一条小河。
English: In the first year of the Song and Yuan Dynasties, Song and his son rode a boat upstream from the county and entered a small river.

古文：深入小溪，幽荒险绝，人迹所未尝至。
现代文：这里荒山野径，地势十分险峻，是个人迹不到的地方。
English: This is a wild mountain trail, the terrain is very steep, and it is a place where there are no footprints.

古文：夕登岸，停止舍中，敬之中恶猝死，其子燃火守尸。
现代文：晚上他们上了岸，在一个屋子里歇息时，区敬之中了邪突然死去，他儿子点上火守在尸体旁。
English: They went ashore in the evening, and while resting in a room, the reverend died suddenly, and his son lit a fire and kept it near the body.

古文：忽闻远哭声，呼阿舅。孝子惊疑，俛仰间，哭者已至。
现代文：忽然听见远处传来哭声，哭的人喊着阿舅，区敬之的儿子十分奇怪，转眼间那个哭丧的已经来到面前，个子和人一样高，长头发一直垂到脚上。
English: Suddenly, he heard crying in the distance. The weeping man called out for his uncle. The son, who respected his uncle, was very surprised. In a blink of an eye, the mourner had come to him. He was as tall as a man, with long hair down to his feet.

古文：如人长大，披发至足，发多蔽面，不见七窍。
现代文：由于头发太密盖住了脸，看不见这人的七窍。
English: Due to the hair covering his face so tightly, the man's genitals cannot be seen.

古文：因呼孝子姓名，慰唁之。
现代文：这人叫着区敬之儿子的名字，并说了些安尉吊唁的话。
English: The man called his son's name and offered condolences.

古文：孝子恐惧，遂聚薪以燃火。
现代文：孝子心里非常害怕，就聚拢柴禾点火。
English: The filial son was very afraid in his heart, so he gathered firewood and lit a fire.

古文：此物言故来相慰，当何所畏？
现代文：那怪物说：我是专门来慰向你的，你怕什么呢？
English: The monster said: I have come to comfort you, what are you afraid of?

古文：将须燃火，此物坐亡人头边哭。
现代文：刚要点火，见那怪物坐在死尸的头旁哭起来。
English: I was just about to light the fire when I saw the monster sitting next to the head of the dead body and crying.

古文：孝子于火光中窃窥之，见此物以面掩亡人面，亡人面须臾裂剥露骨。
现代文：孝子借火光偷偷看，见那怪物把自己的脸盖在死尸的脸上，片刻间死尸脸上的肉就被撕裂剥掉，露出骨头。
English: The filial son peeked through the firelight and saw the monster cover his face with the face of the corpse. In an instant, the flesh on the corpse's face was torn off, exposing the bones.

古文：孝子惧，欲击之，无兵杖。须臾，其父尸见白骨连续，而皮肉都尽。竟不测此物是何鬼神。
现代文：孝子吓坏了，想打那怪物，但手边没有家伙，不大工夫，他父亲的尸体就只剩下了一架白骨，皮和肉都净光了，到底也不知道那怪物是什么鬼神。
English: The filial son was terrified and wanted to fight the monster, but there was no one at hand. In a short time, his father's body was left with only a skeleton, the skin and flesh were clean, and he did not know what the monster was.

古文：刘隽
现代文：刘隽
English: Liu Xuan

古文：元嘉初，散骑常侍刘隽，家在丹阳。
现代文：散骑常侍刘隽，家住在丹阳。
English: Liu Wei, a horseback riding attendant, lives in Danyang.

古文：后尝遇骤雨，见门前有三小儿，皆可六七岁，相率狡狯，面并不沾濡。
现代文：元嘉初年，有一天下起暴雨，他看见门前有三个六七岁的小孩，看样都很机灵淘气。
English: In the first year of Yuan Jia, one day when it was raining heavily, he saw three six- or seven-year-old children in front of the door, all of whom looked very clever and mischievous.

古文：俄见共争一匏壶子，隽引弹弹之，正中壶，霍然不见。
现代文：但脸上都很洁净。不一会儿就见三个小孩在抢一个葫芦作的小壶。刘隽用弹弓打那壶，一下子打中了，小孩们就突然没有了。
English: But their faces were all clean. Soon, I saw three children snatching a small pot made of gourds. Liu Ye hit the pot with a slingshot, hit it at once, and the children suddenly disappeared.

古文：隽得壶，因挂阁边。
现代文：刘隽把壶拿来，挂在房子边上。
English: Liu Ye brought the pot and hung it on the edge of the house.

古文：明日，有一妇人入门，执壶而泣，隽问之，对曰：此是吾儿物，不知何由在此？
现代文：第二天，一个女人进得门来，抓住那只壶哭了起来，刘隽向她怎么回事，回答说：这是我儿子的东西，不知怎么会在这里呢？
English: The next day, a woman came through the door, grabbed the pot and began to cry. Liu Ye asked her what was wrong and replied, "This is my son's stuff. How did it end up here?"

古文：隽具语所以，妇持壶埋儿墓前。
现代文：刘隽就把情况说了，那女人就把壶拿走埋在她儿子的墓前。
English: Liu Yao explained the situation, and the woman took the pot away and buried it in front of her son's grave.

古文：间一日，又见向小儿持来门侧，举之，笑语隽曰：阿侬已复得壶矣。
现代文：过了一天，刘隽又看见那些小孩来到门边，手里举着那个壶，笑着对刘隽说：我又得到我的壶喽！
English: A day later, Liu Yao saw those children come to the door again, holding the pot in their hands, smiling and saying to Liu Yao, "I got my pot again!"

古文：言终而隐。
现代文：说完就不见了。
English: After saying this, he disappeared.

古文：檀道济
现代文：檀道济
English: Tandooji Temple

古文：檀道济居清溪，第二儿夜忽见人来缚己，欲呼不得，至晓乃解，犹见绳痕在。
现代文：檀道济住在扬州青溪时，他的二儿子夜里忽然梦见有人来把他绑上了，想喊也喊不出来，到天亮才解开。一看，被绑过的绳印子还在身上。
English: When Dandooji lived in Yangzhou Qingxi, his second son suddenly dreamed that someone had tied him up at night. He couldn't even call out, and it took until dawn to untie him. At first glance, the rope mark that had been tied was still on his body.

古文：此宅先是吴将步阐所居，谚云：扬州青，是鬼营。
现代文：檀道济住的是吴国的将领步阐的旧居。当地人口头传说：扬州青，是鬼营。
English: It is the former residence of the leading general of the State of Wuxi, Yang Zhou Qing. According to the local oral legend, Yang Zhou Qing is a ghost camp.

古文：青溪青扬是也。
现代文：是说青溪和青扬都是鬼营。
English: That is to say, both Qingxi and Qingyang are ghost camps.

古文：自步及檀，皆被诛。
现代文：从步阐及檀道济都被诛杀。
English: Both step-by-step exposition and benevolence have been killed.

古文：石秀之
现代文：石秀之
English: Ishi Hideyuki

古文：丹阳石秀之，宋元嘉中，堂上忽有一人，著平巾帻，乌布裤褶，擎一板及门，授之曰：闻巧侔班垂，刻杭尤妙。太山府君故使相召。
现代文：宋代元嘉年间，丹阳人石秀之家忽然来了一个人，头戴平顶头巾，穿黑布夹衣裤，手里拿着写有公文的木板进了门，对石秀之宣读说：听说你手艺精巧可以比得上鲁班，尤其善于造船，所以阴司的太山府君召你前往。
English: During the Song Dynasty and Yuan Jia, a man suddenly came to the Danyang family of Shi Xiu, wearing a flat-top turban, black cloth jacket and trousers, and holding a wooden board with a document in his hand. He entered the door and read to Shi Xiu: I heard that your craftsmanship can be compared to Lu Ban, and you are especially good at shipbuilding, so the gloomy Taishan governor called you to go.

古文：秀之自陈：止能造车，制杭不及高平刘儒。
现代文：石秀之忙陈诉说：我只会造车，造船比不上高平人刘儒。
English: Shi Xiuzhi Busy Chen said, "I can only build cars, but shipbuilding is not as good as Gaoping's Liu Ru.

古文：忽持板而没。刘儒时为朝请，除历阳郡丞，数旬而殁。
现代文：那人拿着板忽然就消失了，刘儒当时被宫廷请去，被任命为历阳郡丞，几十天后就死了。
English: The man with the board suddenly disappeared. Liu Ru was invited by the court and appointed as Liyang county magistrate. He died a few weeks later.

古文：夏侯祖观
现代文：夏侯祖观
English: Xia Hou Zu Guan

古文：元嘉中，夏侯祖观为兖州刺史，镇瑕丘，卒于官。
现代文：元嘉年间，夏侯祖观当兖州的刺史，坐镇瑕丘，后来死在任上，沈僧荣代替了他的职务。
English: During the Yuan and Jia dynasties, Xia Hou Zu Guan served as the prefect of Zhangzhou, and was stationed in Keqiao Town. He later died in office, and Shen Sang Rong took his place.

古文：沈僧荣代之，经年，夏侯来谒僧荣，语如平生，每论幽冥事。
现代文：一年后，夏侯突然来拜访僧荣，谈吐像他活着时一样，谈话中常常说到阴间的事。
English: A year later, Xia Hou suddenly came to visit Sang Rong. They talked as if he were still alive, and often talked about things in the underworld.

古文：僧荣床上有一织成宝饰络带，夏侯曰：岂能见与，必以为施，可命焚之。
现代文：夏侯就指着床上一条刚织好的镶有宝石装饰物的腰带对僧荣说：我如果能让这条腰带再现，你就把它送给我好吗？
English: Xia Hou pointed to a freshly knitted belt with a gemstone ornament on the bed and said to Mon Rong: If I can reproduce this belt, will you give it to me?

古文：僧荣令对烧之，烟焰未灭，已见夏侯带在腰上。
现代文：你现在可以把带子烧掉。僧荣就当着夏侯的面把那带子烧了。带子的烟火还没灭，就见夏侯的腰上已系着那条带子了。
English: You can burn the ribbon now. So Rong Rong burned the ribbon in front of Xia Hou. Before the fireworks of the ribbon went out, you could see that the ribbon was already tied around Xia Hou's waist.

古文：僧荣明年在镇，夜设女乐，忽有一女人在户外，沈问之：吾本是杜青州弹筝妓采芝，杜以致夏侯兖州为宠妾。
现代文：第二年，僧荣在他的驻所里夜间找来些歌妓一起奏乐玩乐，忽然有一个女子来到门外。僧荣问她，她说：我原来是青州长官杜大人的弹筝妓女，名叫采芝。杜大人把我送给夏侯大人，我成了他宠爱的妾，把已经死了。
English: The following year, at night in his residence, Sang Rong found some courtesans to play music and have fun with. Suddenly, a woman came to the door. Sang Rong asked her, and she said, "I used to be a kite-playing prostitute named Tsezhi, who belonged to the young governor Tu Da Ren. Tu Da Ren gave me to Xia Hou Ren. I became his favorite concubine, but she died."

古文：唯愿座上一妓为伴戏。
现代文：现在我希望能在你的乐妓里找一位和我作伴的一起玩。
English: Now I'm hoping to find a partner in one of your honeys to play with.

古文：指下坐琵琶。
现代文：说着女子就指了指正在乐队里弹琵琶的女子。
English: As she spoke, the woman pointed to a woman playing the lute in the orchestra.

古文：妓啼云：官何忽以赐鬼。
现代文：弹琵琶的女子立刻哭了起来说：怎么就把我送给鬼了呢？
English: The woman playing the pipa immediately burst into tears and said, "How could you give me to the ghost?

古文：鬼曰：汝无多言，必不相放。
现代文：采芝说：你少废话，我不会放过你的。
English: Tsezhi said, "Don't talk nonsense, I won't let you go."

古文：入与同房别，饮酌未终，心痛而死。
现代文：弹琵琶的女子只好回屋和同伴们告别。宴会还没散，琵琶女就突发心痛病死了。
English: The pipa player had to go back to the house to say goodbye to her companions. Before the party was over, the pipa player died of a sudden heart attack.

古文：死气方绝，魂神已复人形，在采芝侧。
现代文：她刚断气，琵琶女的魂就复成人形，站在采芝身旁。
English: As soon as she breathed her last, the spirit of the lute player was reincarnated into a human form, standing next to the harpist.

古文：张承吉
现代文：张承吉
English: Zhang Chengji

古文：魏郡张承吉息元庆，年十二。
现代文：魏郡张承吉的儿子元庆十二岁。
English: The son of Zhang Chengji of Wei County, Yuan Qing, is twelve years old.

古文：元嘉中，见一鬼，长三尺，一足而鸟爪，背有鳞甲。
现代文：元嘉年间，元庆看见一个鬼，有三尺高，只有一只脚，脚是鸟爪，背上有鳞甲。
English: During the Yuan Jia era, Yuan Qing saw a ghost, three feet tall, with only one foot. The foot was a bird's claw, and it had scales on its back.

古文：来召元庆，恍惚如狂，游走非所，父母挞之。
现代文：这鬼来召元庆，元庆就变得像犯神经病似的到处乱跑。
English: This ghost summoned Yuan Qing, and Yuan Qing began to run around like a deranged person.

古文：俄闻空中云：是我所教，幸勿与罚。
现代文：父母打他，就听见空中那鬼说：是我让元庆这样的，请不要责罚他吧。
English: When his parents beat him, they heard the ghost in the sky say, "I made Yuanqing like this, please don't punish him."

古文：张有二卷羊中敬书，忽失所在。
现代文：张承吉有两卷羊中敬的书。忽然丢失了，后来那鬼从房梁上扔下了书。
English: Zhang Chengji had two volumes of the book "Sheep in the Midst of Reverence." They were suddenly lost, and later the ghost threw the book off the beam of the house.

古文：鬼于梁上掷还，一卷少裂坏，乃为补治。
现代文：原来其中的一卷有些损坏了，鬼还回来时已给修补好了。
English: Originally, one of the scrolls was somewhat damaged, but when the ghost returned, it had been repaired.

古文：王家嫁女，就张借□，鬼求纸笔代答。
现代文：有个姓王的，她的女儿要出嫁，向张承吉借东西，鬼就要了纸笔替张承吉回答王家。
English: There is a surname Wang, her daughter wants to get married, borrowed something from Zhang Chengji, the ghost asked for a pen and paper to answer the Wang family for Zhang Chengji.

古文：张素工巧，尝造一弹弓，鬼借之，明日送还，而皆折坏。
现代文：张承吉手很巧，曾做了个弹弓，鬼借去了弹弓，第二天送还时，把弹弓给折坏了。
English: Zhang Chengji was very clever. He once made a slingshot. The ghost borrowed the slingshot, and when he returned it the next day, the slingshot was broken.

古文：梁清
现代文：梁清
English: Liang Qing

古文：宋安定梁清，字道修，居扬州右尚方闲桓徐州故宅。
现代文：宋代安定人梁清，字道修，住宅在扬州右尚方一带，是在徐州当过地方官的桓某的旧宅院。
English: The residence of the Song Dynasty stable person Liang Qing, also known as Tao Xiu, is located in Yangzhou's Right Shangfang area. It is the old mansion of Huan Mou, who was a local official in Xuzhou.

古文：元嘉十四年二月，数有异光，又闻擗箩声，令婢子松罗往看。
现代文：元嘉十四年二月，在宅院中几次看到奇怪的亮光，又听见劈掰竹箩的声音。
English: In February of the 14th year of the Yuan Jia, she saw strange lights several times in the courtyard, and heard the sound of chopping bamboo shoots.

古文：见二人，问；云：姓华名芙蓉，为六甲至尊所使。从太微紫室仙人，来过旧居。仍留不去。
现代文：梁清让一个叫松罗的使女去看，松罗看见了两个人，问他们是谁，回答说，姓华名芙蓉，是六甲至尊神派来的，跟着太微紫石仙人来重访过去的居所，暂时停留一段。
English: Liang Qing asked a maidservant named Song Luo to take a look. Song Luo saw two people and asked who they were. He replied that his surname was Hua Mei Fu Rong and that he had been sent by the Supreme God of Liang Jia. He had come to revisit his former residence with the Taowu Purple Immortal and stay for a while.

古文：或鸟首人身，举面是毛。松罗惊。以箭射之，应弦而灭，并有绛汙染箭。
现代文：松罗见它是鸟头人身，满脸都是毛，大吃一惊，用箭射它，那怪物随着射出的箭消失了，看看箭头，上面沾着深红色的脏东西。
English: Song Luo was surprised to see that it was a bird-headed person with a hairy face. He shot it with an arrow, and the monster disappeared with the arrow. Look at the arrow, it is covered with dark red dirt.

古文：又覩一物，仿佛如人行树摽，令人刺中其髀，堕地淹没。
现代文：又看见一个怪物，好象是人行走在树间，梁清让人刺中了它的大腿，掉下地来不见了。
English: He also saw a monster that looked like a man walking among the trees. Liang Qing stabbed it in the thigh and it fell to the ground and disappeared.

古文：经日，又从屋上跛行，就婢乞食，团饭授之，顿造二升。
现代文：过了几天，这怪物又在房上瘸着腿走，并向婢女要吃的。婢女做了饭团给它吃，一顿竟吃了二升米的饭。
English: A few days later, the monster was limping around the house again, and asked the maid for food. The maid made rice balls for him to eat, and he ended up eating two liters of rice in one meal.

古文：数日，众鬼群至，丑恶不可称论。
现代文：几天后，来了一群鬼，个个奇怪模样无法描述。
English: A few days later, a group of ghosts arrived, each with a strange appearance that defies description.

古文：拉椤床障，尘石飞扬，累晨不息。
现代文：他们拉障子搭床铺，搞得飞沙走石尘土飞扬，折腾了好几个早晨也没个完。
English: They pulled the shoji to make a bed, made the sand fly and the dust fly, and tossed and turned for several mornings without a break.

古文：婢采药，路逢一鬼，著衣帻，乘马。卫从数十，谓采药曰：我是天上仙人，勿名做鬼。
现代文：有个婢女叫采药。有一天碰到个鬼，穿着衣服戴着头巾，骑着马，带着几十个随从，对采菊说，我是天上的神仙，不要叫我鬼。
English: One day she met a ghost, dressed in clothes, wearing a headscarf, riding a horse, with dozens of followers, and said to Tsechu, "I am a heavenly fairy, don't call me a ghost."

古文：问何以恒掷秽汙。答曰：粪汙者，钱财之像也；投掷者，速迁之征也。
现代文：采菊问他为什么常常到处乱扔肮脏的东西，回答说，粪便一类的脏东西，是钱财的象征。扔这些东西，是很快要升官的预兆。
English: Asked why he often threw dirty things around, he replied that dirty things such as excrement were a symbol of money, and throwing them was a sign that he would soon be promoted.

古文：顷之，清果为扬武将军北鲁郡太守。
现代文：果然过了不久，梁清就升任了扬武将军北鲁郡的太守。
English: Sure enough, it wasn't long before Liang Qing was promoted to the position of Yangwu's general and the governor of Beilu County.

古文：清厌毒既久，乃呼外国道人波罗迭诵呪，见诸鬼怖惧，逾垣穴壁而走，皆作鸟声，如此都绝。
现代文：梁清十分讨厌憎恨那些在他院子里胡闹的鬼怪，就请来一个叫波罗迭的外国道人念咒驱鬼。只见那群鬼一听咒语就吓得翻墙钻洞地逃掉了，一面逃一面发出像鸟叫似的声音。从此这院子的鬼才彻底消除了。
English: Liang Qing was so disgusted and hated the ghosts that were playing around in his yard that he invited a foreign Taoist named Borodyi to cast a spell to drive the ghosts away. As soon as he heard the spell, the group of ghosts were so scared that they climbed over the wall and escaped through a hole. As they fled, they emitted a sound like a bird's cry. From then on, the ghosts in the yard were completely eliminated.

古文：在郡少时，夜中，松罗复见威仪器械，从众数十人，戴帻。送书粗纸，七十许字，笔迹婉媚，远拟羲、献。
现代文：梁清刚到北鲁郡上任时，半夜里，婢女松罗又看见鬼怪的一队威严仪仗，有几十个随从，戴着头巾，送给梁清一张粗纸写的信，笔体非常潇洒秀丽，是很像王羲之、王献之的风格。
English: When Liang Qing first took office in Beilu County, in the middle of the night, his maid Song Luo saw the ghost of a team of dignified ceremonies. There were dozens of attendants, wearing headscarves, who gave Liang Qing a letter written on thick paper. The pen was very elegant and beautiful, very much like Wang Xizhi and Wang Xianzi's style.

古文：又歌云：坐侬孔雀楼，遥闻凤凰鼓。
现代文：这个鬼唱道，坐侬孔雀楼。遥闻凤凰鼓。
English: This ghost sings, sitting in the Peacock Tower. I can hear the phoenix drum from afar.

古文：下我邹山头，仿佛见梁鲁。
现代文：下我邹山头。仿佛见梁鲁。
English: I went down to the top of the mountain. It was as if I saw Liang Lu.

古文：鬼有叙吊，不异世人。
现代文：原来鬼界也有吊唁的礼节，和人世没什么不同。
English: Originally, the spirit world also has the etiquette of condolences, which is no different from the human world.

古文：鬼传教曾乞松罗一函书，题云故孔修之死罪白笺。以吊其叔丧。叙致哀情，甚有铨此。
现代文：鬼还转告松罗向梁清要了一匣书，给书上题着故孔修之死罪白笺，以吊他死去的叔叔，吊文中叙述悲痛的心情，非常合乎祭悼的文体。
English: The ghost also told Song Luo to ask Liang Qing for a box of books, inscribed with the capital crime of the late Kong Xiu, the hanging of his dead uncle, and the sorrowful mood described in the hanging, very much in line with the style of mourning.

古文：复云，近往西方，见一沙门，自名大摩杀，问君消息，寄五丸香以相与。
现代文：鬼又说，最近到西方去时，遇见一个和尚，名叫大摩杀，向梁清问候，并让他捎来五丸香交给梁清。
English: The ghost also said that when he recently went to the west, he met a monk named Damas, who greeted Liang Qing and asked him to bring five-pillared incense to Liang Qing.

古文：清先本使敦煌，曾见此僧。
现代文：原来梁清过去曾出使敦煌，在那里曾认识大摩杀和尚。
English: It turned out that Liang Qing had sent an envoy to Dunhuang in the past, where he had known the great monk.

古文：清家有婢产，于是而绝。
现代文：梁清家中家产婢仆都很富足。
English: Liang Qing's family was very rich in domestic servants.

古文：崔茂伯
现代文：后来鬼再也没来。崔茂伯
English: Later, the ghost never came back.

古文：崔茂伯女，结婚裴祖儿。
现代文：崔茂伯的女儿许配给裴祖的儿子。
English: Cui Maobing's daughter is engaged to Baizuo's son.

古文：婚家相去五百余里，数岁不通。
现代文：但两家相距五百多里地，好几年不通音信。
English: However, the two are more than five hundred miles apart and have not communicated for several years.

古文：八月中，崔女暴亡，裴未知也。
现代文：八月间，崔女突然死亡，这消息裴家并不知道。
English: In August, Ms. Cui died suddenly, and the Bae family did not know the news.

古文：日将暮，女诣裴门，拊掌求前。
现代文：有一天黄昏时分，崔女突然来到裴家门前，敲门求进。
English: At dusk one day, Cui Niang suddenly came to the front door of Bae's house, knocking on the door and asking to come in.

古文：提金罂，受二升许。到床前而立，裴令坐，问所由。
现代文：她拿着一个能装二升的金坛子，来到裴家公子的床前站住。裴公子请她坐，问她是谁来作什么。
English: She came to stand in front of Bae's bed, holding a golden jar that could hold two liters of sake. Bae invited her to sit down and asked who she was and what she was doing.

古文：女曰：我是清河崔府君女，少闻大人以我配君，不幸丧亡。
现代文：崔氏女说：我小时听我父母说把我许配给你，但我不幸去世了，不能和你成婚。
English: Cui's daughter said, "When I was a child, I heard my parents say that I would be betrothed to you, but unfortunately I passed away and cannot marry you.

古文：大义不遂，虽同牢未显，然断金已著，所以故来报君耳。
现代文：虽然没达到相依相伴，然归宿已经是必然的。所以我特来告诉你。
English: Although we haven't achieved mutual dependence and companionship, the destination is already inevitable. So I'm here to tell you.

古文：便别以金罂赠裴。
现代文：崔女告别时，把那金坛子送给裴公子。
English: When Cui Nian said goodbye, she gave the golden jar to Pei Gongzi.

古文：女去后，裴以事启父，父欲遣信参之。裴曰：少结崔氏姻，而今感应如此，必当自往也。
现代文：崔女走后，裴公子把这事告诉了父亲打算写信去向崔家查问，裴公子说：我和崔氏女小时确是订了亲，现在既然有这样的感应，就应该我亲自去一趟才是。
English: After Ms. Cui left, Mr. Pei told his father that he was going to write to the Cui family to inquire about the matter. Mr. Pei said, "I made an appointment with Ms. Cui when I was a child. Now that there is such an impression, I should go there in person."

古文：父许焉。
现代文：父亲答应了。
English: My father agreed.

古文：裴至，女果丧，因相吊唁。裴具述情事，出罂示茂伯，先以此罂送女入瘗，既见罂，遂与裴俱造女墓。
现代文：裴公子到了崔家，崔女确已死了，于是就表示吊唁，并说了崔氏女显灵的事，还拿出了崔氏女赠给他的金坛子。崔家本来是把金坛子给女儿随殓的，现在见裴公子拿来金坛，就和他一起到崔氏女的墓地去。
English: When Pei Gongzhi arrived at the Cui family home, the Cui woman was indeed dead, so he expressed his condolences and spoke about the Cui woman's apparition. He also took out the gold jar that the Cui woman had given him. The Cui family had originally given the gold jar to their daughter to take with her, but now when they saw Pei Gongzhi bring the gold jar, they went with him to the Cui woman's cemetery.

古文：未至十余里，裴复见女在墓言语，旁人悉闻声，不见其形。
现代文：离墓地还有十几里时，裴公子又听见崔氏女在墓地里说话的声音，旁边的人也听到了，只是看不见崔氏女的形象。
English: When he was still more than ten miles away from the cemetery, Bae heard the voice of Cui's daughter speaking in the cemetery, and the people around him also heard it, but they could not see the image of Cui's daughter.

古文：裴怀内结，遂发病死，因以合葬。
现代文：裴公子由于悲痛郁结在心中而得病死去。后来就把他和崔氏女合葬在一起了。
English: Mr. Pei died of an illness brought on by the grief in his heart, and he was later buried together with Ms. Cui.

古文：巢氏
现代文：巢氏
English: Mr. Chao

古文：元嘉中，太山巢氏，先为湘县令，居晋陵。
现代文：元嘉年间，太山人巢氏，曾当过湘县的县令，现在住在晋陵。
English: During the Yuan and Jia Dynasties, the Taishan Jinsao clan once served as the county magistrate of Hunan County, and now lives in Jinling.

古文：家婢采薪，忽有一人追之，如相问讯，遂共通情。
现代文：他家的一个使女出去打柴时，忽然有个人追人上来，和她问候攀谈，两人之间都产生了感情。
English: When one of his family's maids went out to fetch firewood, a man suddenly ran up to her, greeted her and struck up a conversation, and feelings arose between the two.

古文：随婢还家，仍住不复去。巢恐为祸，夜辄出婢。闻与婢讴歌言语，大小悉闻，不使人见，见者唯婢而已。恒得钱物酒食，日以充足。每与饮，吹笛而歌，歌云：闲夜寂已清，长笛亮且明。
现代文：巢氏怕招来祸事，晚上就把使女赶出家门，可是还是听见使女和那个外来的人谈笑唱歌，一家老小都能听见，但看不见那个人，只有使女自己能看见，那人常常给使女一些钱财和酒饭，使她日子过得很富足。有时使女和那人一块喝酒，那人就吹起笛子唱歌，唱的是：闲夜寂已清，长笛亮且明。
English: Mr. Nest, fearing to invite disaster, drove the maid out of the house in the evening, but he still heard the maid and the stranger talking, laughing and singing. The whole family could hear, but they could not see the man, only the maid could see for herself. The man often gave the maid some money and wine and rice to make her life very rich. Sometimes the maid and the man would drink together, and the man would play the flute and sing, singing: "Silent night is clear, flute is bright and clear."

古文：若欲知我者，姓郭字长生。
现代文：若欲知我者，姓郭字长生。
English: If you want to know me, my surname is Guo Zi Chang Sheng.

古文：胡庇之
现代文：胡庇之
English: Hoobizhi

古文：宋豫章胡庇之，尝为武昌郡丞，元嘉二十六年入廨，便有鬼在焉。
现代文：宋代江西人胡庇之，曾当过武昌郡的郡丞。元嘉二十六年他一到任时，就发现他的府宅已经有鬼了。
English: Hu Bizhi, a native of Jiangxi in the Song Dynasty, was once the county magistrate of Wuchang County. As soon as he took office in the 26th year of the Yuan Dynasty, he found that his mansion already had a ghost.

古文：中宵胧月，户牖小开，有人倚立户外，状似小儿。
现代文：每当半夜，月色迷蒙，门窗微开着，就能看见有人靠在门外站着，看样子像个小孩。
English: Every time in the middle of the night, when the moon is fading and the doors and windows are slightly open, you can see someone standing outside the door, looking like a child.

古文：户闭，便闻人行，如著木屐声。看则无所见，如此甚数。
现代文：如果关上门，就能听见木制拖鞋走路的声音，却什么也看不见，像这样的事有过不少次。
English: If you close the door, you can hear the sound of wooden slippers walking, but you can't see anything, there have been many times like this.

古文：二十八年二月，举家悉得时病，空中投掷瓦石，或是干土。
现代文：元嘉二十八年二月，胡庇之全家得了传染病。这时空中不时扔下来瓦片石块，或撒下来阵阵灰土。
English: In February 28th, Yuan Jia, Hu Bi's whole family fell ill with an infectious disease. At this time, tiles and stones were thrown down from time to time, and piles of ash were scattered in the air.

古文：夏中病者皆差，而投掷之势更猛。
现代文：到夏天过了一半时，家人的病都好了。
English: By mid-summer, the family's illnesses had all subsided.

古文：乃请道人斋戒转经，竟从倍来如雨，唯不著道人及经卷而已。
现代文：但空中往下扔石头瓦片更厉害了，胡庇之只好请来道士持斋念经。可是鬼怪扔东西加倍凶猛起来，像下雨似的，只是不往道士和经书上扔而已。
English: However, throwing stones and tiles into the air was even more powerful, so Hoobizhi had to invite a Taoist monk to hold a fast and chant a sutra. However, the ghosts threw things with even more ferocity, as if it were raining, only they didn't throw them at the Taoist monk or the sutra.

古文：秋冬渐有音声，瓦石掷人，肉皆青暗，而亦甚痛。
现代文：到秋冬以后，渐渐能听见鬼的声音，而且瓦片石块砸到人身上，把人的皮肉打得青一块紫一块的很痛。
English: After the autumn and winter, I could gradually hear the ghost's voice, and the tiles and stones hit people, and it was very painful to make people's skin and flesh turn blue and purple.

古文：有一老奶，好骂詈。鬼在边大嚇。
现代文：胡家有个老太太，忍不住就经常破口大骂，鬼就在她旁边大喊大叫地吓唬人。
English: There is an old lady in the Hu family who can't help but often curses loudly, and the ghost scares people by shouting next to her.

古文：庇之迎祭酒上章，施符驱逐。
现代文：胡庇之又请来祭酒官，给上天写了告鬼的状子，又画了符咒驱鬼，慢慢鬼才不再来骚扰了。
English: Hu Bizhi also invited the sacrificial wine officer, wrote a complaint to the sky, and drew a spell to drive out the ghost. Slowly, the ghost stopped bothering him.

古文：渐复歇绝。至二十九年，鬼复来，剧于前。
现代文：到元嘉二十九年，鬼又来了，而且闹得比以前更凶。
English: In the 29th year of the Yuan Jia, the ghost came again, and it was more violent than before.

古文：明年，丞廨火频四发，狼狈浇沃并息。
现代文：第二年，胡家的府宅好几次起火，拼命扑救才把火浇灭。
English: In the second year, the Hu family's mansion caught fire several times, and it took desperate efforts to put out the fire.

古文：鬼每有声如犬，家人每呼吃惊，后忽语音似吴。
现代文：鬼有时发出像狗叫的声音，家人们就大声呵斥一通。后来鬼忽然说话，口音像江浙人，三更时分来敲门。
English: Ghosts sometimes make a sound like a dog barking, and the family members shout loudly. Later, the ghost suddenly speaks, with an accent like a person from Jiangsu and Zhejiang, and knocks on the door at three o'clock.

古文：三更叩户，庇之问：谁也？答曰：程邵陵。
现代文：胡庇之问是谁，鬼说我叫程邵陵。
English: When Hu Bi asked who I was, the ghost said my name was Cheng Shao Ling.

古文：把火出看，了无所见。
现代文：等端着灯出来看时，又什么都看不见。
English: When I looked outside with the light on, I couldn't see anything.

古文：数日，三更中，复外户叩掌，便复骂之。
现代文：几天后半夜三更时那鬼又来拍门，胡庇之就骂他。
English: A few days later, when it was after midnight, the ghost knocked on the door again, and Hu Bizhi scolded him.

古文：答云：君勿骂我，我是善神，非前后来者。
现代文：鬼说，请不要骂我，我是个好神，不是以前的那个鬼。
English: The ghost said, "Please don't scold me. I'm a good god, not the ghost from before."

古文：陶御史见遣报君。
现代文：是陶御史派我来见你的。
English: It was Tao Gongshi who sent me to see you.

古文：庇之曰：我不识陶御史。
现代文：胡庇之说：我不认识什么陶御史。
English: Hu Bi said, "I don't know anything about the history of pottery.

古文：鬼云：陶敬玄，君昔与之周旋。
现代文：鬼说：陶敬玄御史，你过去和他很有交情的嘛。
English: The ghost said: Tao Jing Xuan, you used to be friends with him.

古文：庇之云：吾与之在京日，服事衡阳，又不常作御史。
现代文：胡庇之说：我和陶敬玄在京城时，他是在衡阳作事，而且根本没当过御史。
English: Hu Bizhi said: When Tao Jingxuan and I were in Beijing, he was working in Hengyang, and he had never been an imperial historian.

古文：云：陶今处福地，作天上御史。
现代文：鬼说：陶敬玄现在可到了福地了，他是在天上作御史哩。
English: The ghost said, "Tao Jingxuan can now go to the land of happiness. He is in heaven doing imperial history."

古文：前后相侵，是沈公所为。
现代文：过去到你的府宅来捣乱的是沈公，因为你现在住的府宅本来是他的。
English: It was Shen Gong who came to your mansion to cause trouble, because the mansion you live in now was originally his.

古文：此廨本是沈宅，来看宅，聊复投掷狡狯。忿戾禳却太过，乃至骂詈。
现代文：他来看他的旧宅，扔石头瓦片只是恶作剧开玩笑而已，可是你却又请道士又画符的，太过分了。还破口大骂，又让仆婢无礼地对待他，他就更气愤了。
English: He came to see his old house, throwing stones and tiles was just a prank and a joke, but you invited a priest and a painter, it was too much. He also cursed loudly, and let the servants treat him rudely, he was even more angry.

古文：命婢使无礼向之，复令祭酒上章，告罪状，事彻天曹。
现代文：尤其是你请来祭酒向上天告他的状，这事已经弄得天曹都知道了。
English: In particular, you invited the sacrificial wine to complain to heaven, which has already made heaven know.

古文：沈今为天然君，是佛三归弟子，那不从佛家请福，乃使祭酒上章。
现代文：沈公现在是天界的 天然君 ，是皈依佛门的很虔诚的弟子，你不去从佛门上供求福，反而找来祭酒上状子告他，他能不恼火吗？
English: Shen Gong is now the natural ruler of the heavenly world, a very pious disciple who has converted to Buddhism. You don't go to offer and seek blessings from the Buddha's door, but instead find a sacrificial wine and sue him. Can he not be annoyed?

古文：自今唯愿专意奉法，不须与恶鬼相当。
现代文：所以希望你今后要诚心诚意的遵奉佛门的法规，千万不要再把沈公当成恶鬼来对待。
English: Therefore, I hope that in the future, you will sincerely abide by the rules of Buddhism and never treat Shen Gong as an evil spirit.

古文：率之因请诸僧诵经斋戒讫，经一宿后。
现代文：胡庇之就请来一些和尚念经持斋，向神求得福佑。
English: Hu Bi Zhi invited some monks to recite the sutras and fast to seek blessings from the gods.

古文：复闻户外御史相闻：白胡丞，今沈相讼甚苦。
现代文：经过一夜之后，又听鬼在窗外说：陶御史已经知道这件事了，他让我告诉胡郡丞，沈公现在已经在控告你了，而且顶得很紧。
English: After one night, I heard the ghost say again outside the window: "Tao Yishi already knows about this matter. He asked me to tell Hu Guanzhong that Shen Gong is now suing you, and it is very tight.

古文：如其所言，君颇无理。
现代文：天曹审理的话，你并不太有理。
English: On the face of it, you don't have much of a case.

古文：若能归诚正觉，习经持戒，则群邪屏绝。
现代文：如果你能完全皈依佛法，学经文，坚守戒律，就能使一切邪崇都绝迹了。
English: If you can completely convert to Buddhism, study the sutras, and adhere to the precepts, you will be able to make all evil worship disappear.

古文：依依曩情，故相白也。
现代文：这是陶御史对你们过去友情的报答，特地让我向你转达的。
English: This is the reward for your past friendship from Emperor Tao, which I specially wanted to convey to you.

古文：索颐
现代文：索颐
English: Sogang

古文：宋襄城索颐，其父为人，不信妖邪。
现代文：宋代襄城有个索颐，他的父亲向来不信妖魔鬼怪。
English: In the Song Dynasty, Xiangcheng had a son, whose father did not believe in demons.

古文：有一宅凶，居者辄死，父便买居之，多年安吉，子孙昌盛，为二千石。
现代文：有一个凶宅，凡住进去的人都会死掉。索颐的父亲就买下搬进去了。住了不少年都是太太平平，子孙后代也很昌盛。
English: There was a house of horrors, where anyone who lived there would die. Sokha's father bought it and moved in. Many of the young people who lived there were too peaceful, and their children and grandchildren were also prosperous.

古文：当徙家之官，临去，请会内外亲戚。
现代文：后来索颐的父亲谋到了一个年俸二千石的官，准备搬家去赴任。临走前，请来了亲戚族人，聚餐告别。
English: Later, Sokun's father found an official with an annual salary of 2,000 koku, and prepared to move to take up the post. Before leaving, he invited relatives and relatives to have a farewell dinner.

古文：酒食既行，父乃言曰：天下竟有吉凶否？
现代文：在酒桌上，索颐的父亲说：天下哪有什么吉凶这些说道？
English: At the wine table, So-yeon's father said, "What in the world are these people talking about?

古文：此向来言凶，自吾居之，多年安吉，又得迁官，鬼为何在？
现代文：这所宅子过去都说是凶宅，从我搬进来以后，多年来太平无事，而且我还升了官。可见根本就没有什么鬼怪存在。
English: This house was said to be a haunted house in the past, but since I moved in, it has been peaceful for many years, and I have been promoted. It can be seen that there are no ghosts at all.

古文：自今以后，便为吉宅，居无嫌也。
现代文：从今以后，这个府宅就是吉宅，就放心的住吧。
English: From now on, this mansion is Yoshitake, so feel free to live here.

古文：语讫如厕，须臾，见壁中有一物，为卷席大，高五尺许。
现代文：说完后，他起身去厕所，不一会儿就看见墙里有一个东西，像卷起来的席子那么大，五尺来高，他就跑回去拿来一把刀去砍它。
English: After saying that, he got up to go to the toilet, and soon saw something in the wall, as big as a rolled-up mat, five feet high, and he ran back to get a knife to cut it.

古文：颐父便还取刀斫之，中断，便化为两人。
现代文：一刀把席子从中间砍断后，席子就变成了两个人。
English: After cutting the mat in half with a knife, the mat turned into two people.

古文：复横斫之，又成四人。便夺取刀，反斫索，杀之。
现代文：他又横着去砍，立刻又变成了四个人，而且这四个鬼怪夺下了他的刀把他杀掉了。
English: He cut again crosswise, and immediately he was four again, and the four monsters took his knife and killed him.

古文：持刀至座上，斫杀其子弟。凡姓索必死，唯异姓无他。
现代文：然后鬼怪们冲进了屋里，对索家的子弟乱杀乱砍，凡是姓索的都被杀死了，只有外姓人没遭此横祸。
English: Then the ghosts rushed into the house, killing and slashing the children of the Soh family. Everyone with the surname Soh was killed, only people with foreign surnames were not harmed.

古文：颐尚幼，乳母抱出后门，藏他家，止其一身获免。
现代文：当时索颐还很小，奶妈抱着他从后门逃出去藏在别人家。结果索家只有他一个人幸免于难。
English: At that time, So-yeon was still very young, and his wet nurse carried him out of the back door and hid him in someone else's house. As a result, he was the only one in the So-yeon family to survive.

古文：颐字景真，位至湘东太守。
现代文：索颐字景真，后来官作到湘东太守。
English: Li Xi's nickname was Jing Zhen, and he rose to the official rank of Shandong governor.

