古文：萧挞凛，字驼宁，思温之再从侄。
现代文：萧挞凛，字驼宁，萧思温再从侄。
English: Xiao Yuling, Zhaolin Ning, Xiao Siwen and his nephew.

古文：父术鲁列，善相马，应历间为马群侍中。
现代文：父亲术鲁烈，擅长相马，应历年间任马群侍中。
English: His father, Shululei, was good at soma (horse-drawn carriages), and served as an attendant in the horse troupe for many years.

古文：挞凛幼敦厚，有才略，通天文。
现代文：挞凛幼时敦厚，富有才智和谋略，精通天文。
English: When he was young, Hao Rin was strong-willed, full of wit and strategy, and well-versed in astronomy.

古文：保宁初，为宿直官，累任珝剧。
现代文：保宁初，任宿直官，累任困难繁重之职。
English: At the beginning of the Boryeong era, he was appointed as a lodging officer, a difficult and onerous position.

古文：统和四年，宋杨继业率兵由代州来侵，攻陷城邑。
现代文：统和四年，宋国杨继业率兵从代州侵犯我国，攻陷城池。
English: In the fourth year of the Unification, Yang Jiye of Song invaded China from Daizhou and captured the city.

古文：挞凛以诸军副部署，从枢密使耶律斜轸败之，擒继业于朔州。
现代文：挞凛任诸军副部署之职，随从枢密使耶律斜轸击败之，在朔州活捉杨继业。
English: Yan Lin was appointed as the deputy commander of the troops. He followed the imperial envoy Ye Lu to defeat him and capture Yang Jiye alive in Shuozhou.

古文：六年秋，改南院都监，从驾南征，攻沙堆，力战被创，太后尝亲临视。
现代文：六年秋，改任南院都监，随从圣宗皇上南征，进攻沙堆，奋力作战受了伤，太后曾亲自前往探视。
English: In the autumn of the sixth year, he was reassigned as the governor of the Southern Yuan, followed Emperor Shengzong on the Southern Expedition, attacked the sand dunes, fought hard and was injured. The Empress Dowager personally went to visit him.

古文：明年，加右监门卫上将军、检校太师，遥授彰德军节度使。
现代文：次年，升任右监门卫上将军、检校太师，遥授彰德军节度使。
English: The following year, he was promoted to General of the Right Supervisor of the Gate Guards, Inspector of Schools, and awarded the Distinguished Service Order of the German Army.

古文：十一年，与东京留守萧恒德伐高丽，破之。
现代文：十一年，与东京留守萧恒德攻讨高丽，击败之。
English: In the eleventh year, he fought against Koryo, defeating it, together with Sho Hengde, who stayed behind in Tokyo.

古文：高丽称臣奉贡。
现代文：高丽称臣进贡。
English: Goryeo pays tribute to its vassals.

古文：十二年，夏人梗边，王太妃受命总乌古及永兴宫分军讨之，挞凛为阻卜都详稳。
现代文：十二年，夏人骚扰边境，皇太妃受命统率乌古及永兴宫分军讨伐之，挞凛担任阻卜都详稳。
English: In the twelfth year, the Xia people harassed the border, and the Empress Dowager was ordered to lead the Ugu and Yongxing Palace detachments to fight against them.

古文：凡军中号令，太妃并委挞凛。
现代文：凡是军中号令，太妃全部都委托给挞凛施行。
English: Whenever there is an order in the army, Taifei entrusts the execution of it all to Erin.

古文：师还，以功加兼侍中，封兰陵郡王。
现代文：大军回师后，因功升为兼侍中，封兰陵郡王。
English: After the large army returned to the division, he was promoted to concurrently attendant middle for his merits, and was awarded the title of Lanling County King.

古文：十五年，敌烈部人杀详稳而叛，遁于西北荒，挞凛将轻骑逐之，因讨阻卜之未服者，诸蕃岁贡方物充于国，自后往来若一家焉。
现代文：十五年，敌烈部人杀死详稳而反叛，逃遁到西北荒野，挞凛统率轻骑追赶他们，并趁势讨伐不肯顺服的阻卜诸部，从此各族每年贡献的土产充满国库之中，彼此往来如同一家。
English: In the fifteenth year, the rebels of the enemy were killed and fled to the northwestern wilderness, and the Qin leaders rode lightly to chase them, and took advantage of the situation to fight the obstructionist ministries that refused to obey. Since then, the annual contribution of each ethnic group has filled the national treasury, and they have been in contact with each other as a family.

古文：上赐诗嘉奖，仍命林牙耶律昭作赋，以述其功。
现代文：皇上赐给他诗篇以示嘉奖，又命林牙耶律昭做赋以记述其功勋。
English: The emperor gave him a poem to show his appreciation, and also ordered Lin Ya Ye Li Zhao to write about his merits.

古文：挞凛以诸部叛服不常，上表乞建三城以绝边患，从之。
现代文：挞凛因为诸部时叛时降，上表请求建三座城邑以断绝边境患害，皇上从之。
English: Because of the various departments' rebellion and decline at different times, the above table requested the construction of three cities to cut off the border disaster, and the emperor agreed.

古文：子糙古，南京统军使。
现代文：不久征召他为南京统军使。
English: He was soon called up as the envoy of the Nanjing unified army.

古文：萧观音奴，字耶宁，奚王搭纥之孙。
现代文：二十年，又讨伐宋，活捉宋将王先知，击败其军于遂城，攻下祁州，皇上亲自拟诏加以褒奖。
English: Twenty years later, he fought against the Song Dynasty, captured the Song general Wang Sheng alive, defeated his army in Suicheng, and conquered Zhangzhou. The emperor personally issued an edict to commend him.

古文：统和十二年，为右祗候郎君班详稳，迁奚六部大王。先是，俸秩外，给獐鹿百数，皆取于民，观音奴奏罢之。及伐宋，与萧挞凛为先锋，降祁州，下德清军，上加优赏。同知南院事，卒。耶律题子，字胜隐，北府宰相兀里之孙。
现代文：进军至澶渊，宋主驻军于城隍间，未及交战之时，挞凛先考察地形，然后夺取宋的羊观、盐堆、凫雁，不幸为宋军暗伏的弩机射中而身亡。次日，灵车到，太后伤心恸哭，为之停止上朝五日。子萧忄造古，南京统军使。耶律题子，字胜隐，北府宰相兀里之孙。
English: Marching into the Yanyuan, Song's main army was stationed between the city walls. Before the battle, Yao Ling first inspected the terrain, and then captured Song's sheep, salt piles, and geese. Unfortunately, he was shot and killed by the Song army's hidden machine. The next day, the hearse arrived, the empress dowager cried with sadness, and stopped going to the court for five days. He was the son of Xiao Yao Zhegu, the Nanjing Unification Army envoy. He was the son of Ye Lu, Zha Sheng Yin, and the grandson of the prime minister of Beifu, Yao Li.

古文：善射，工画。
现代文：擅长射箭，又擅长绘画。
English: He is good at archery and painting.

古文：保宁间，为御盏郎君。
现代文：保宁年间，担任御盏郎君。
English: During his time in Boryeong, he served as a godfather.

古文：九年，奉使于汉，具言两国通好长久之计，其主继元深加礼重。
现代文：九年，奉命出使汉，详细地向汉陈述两国通好的长久之计，汉主刘继元对他特别礼敬尊重。
English: In the ninth year, he was ordered to send an envoy to Han to present to Han in detail the long-term plan for the two countries to get along well. Han master Liu Jiyuan had special respect for him.

古文：统和二年，将兵与西边详稳耶律速撒讨陀罗斤，大破之。
现代文：统和二年，率兵与西边详稳耶律速撒一道讨伐陀罗斤，大破之。
English: In the second year of unification, he led the soldiers to fight against the Dara Jins together with the Western Jiao Jian Ye Lu Hosa, and defeated them.

古文：四年，宋将杨继业陷山西城邑，题子从北院枢密使耶律斜轸击之，败贺令图于定安，授西南面招讨都监。
现代文：四年，宋将杨继业攻陷山西城池，题子随从北院枢密使耶律斜轸攻击宋军，败贺令图军于定安，因功授西南面招讨都监。
English: In the fourth year of the Song Dynasty, Yang Jiye was captured in the city of Shansi. He was accompanied by the Northern Court's Privy Councilor, Ye Lu, who attacked the Song Army, defeated the He Ling Tu Army in Ding'an, and invited the governor of the capital to the southwestern side for his merits.

古文：宋兵守蔚州急，召外援，题子闻之，夜伏兵道傍。
现代文：宋蔚州守兵见情况紧急，派人招徕外援，题子得知情报，连夜埋伏人马于路旁。
English: Seeing the urgent situation, the Song and Yuzhou garrison sent someone to solicit foreign aid. After receiving intelligence, they ambushed people on the side of the road overnight.

古文：黎明，宋兵果来，过未半而击之；城中军出，斜轸复邀之。
现代文：黎明时分，宋兵果然前来，题子待其人马经过不到一半时攻击之；城中兵马出战，耶律斜轸又拦击之。
English: At dawn, the Song soldiers indeed came and attacked them when they were less than half way through the battle; the soldiers and horses in the city went out to fight, and Yeludong halted them.

古文：两军俱溃，奔飞狐，地隘不得进，杀伤甚众。
现代文：两支宋军均被击溃，逃奔飞狐，因道路狭窄无法前进，死伤甚众。
English: Both Song armies were routed, and the fleeing flying foxes were unable to advance due to the narrow roads, resulting in numerous deaths and injuries.

古文：贺令图复集败卒来袭蔚州，题子逆战，破之，应州守将自遁。
现代文：贺令图又收集败兵前来袭击蔚州，题子迎战，击败宋军，应州守将自行逃遁。
English: He Lingtu also gathered the defeated soldiers to attack Ulshu, and defeated the Song Army. The provincial guards would flee on their own.

古文：进围寰州，冒矢石登城，宋军大溃。
现代文：题子进兵围攻寰州，亲自冒着箭矢飞石登城，宋军大溃败。
English: Zhang Zi marched into and besieged Bozhou, personally braved the arrows and flying stones to enter the city, and the Song Army suffered a great defeat.

古文：当斜轸擒继业于朔州，题子功居多。
现代文：耶律斜轸于朔州一战中擒获杨继业，其中题子的功劳居多。
English: In the First Battle of Shuozhou, Ye Lu Xuan won the Yang Succession, of which the merit of the theme was the most.

古文：二十六年，为辽兴军节度使，寻复为南府宰相。
现代文：这年冬天，又与萧挞凛从东路攻击宋，俘虏缴获甚多。
English: In the winter of the same year, he and Xiao Yulin attacked Song from the east and captured many prisoners.

古文：开泰初，加尚父，卒。
现代文：后来题子得知宋兵驻于易州，率兵迎击，到易州境内时去世。
English: Later, it was learned that Song soldiers were stationed in Yizhou, led soldiers to meet the attack, and died when they arrived in Yizhou.

古文：萧柳，字徒门，淳钦皇后弟阿古只五世孙。幼养于伯父排押之家，多知，能文，膂力绝人。
现代文：当初，题子击败贺令图，宋将中有人因受伤而倒地，题子画出其模样情状拿给宋人看，都嗟叹他画得维妙维肖。萧柳，字徒门，淳钦皇后弟弟阿古只的五世孙。幼时鞠养于伯父萧排押家中，聪慧多智，善于写文章，力大过人。
English: At first, the theme beat the heraldic map, and someone in the Song dynasty fell to the ground due to injury. The theme drew its appearance and situation for the Song people to see, and they all sighed that he drew it wonderfully. Xiao Liu, the character door, is the fifth generation grandson of Agudai, the younger brother of Queen Junqin. When he was young, he was raised in his uncle Xiao Paihu's home. He is intelligent and wise, good at writing articles, and has great strength.

古文：统和中，叔父恒德临终，荐其才，诏入侍卫。
现代文：统和年间，叔父萧恒德临终时向皇上荐举他有才能，诏令入宫侍卫。
English: During the years of unification, his uncle, Xiao Hengde, on his deathbed, recommended to the emperor that he had talent and ordered him to enter the palace as an attendant.

古文：十七年，南伐，宋将范庭召列方阵而待。时皇弟隆庆为先锋，问诸将佐谁敢当者，柳曰： 若得骏马，则愿为之先。 
现代文：十七年，南伐，宋将范庭召布列方阵以待，当时皇弟耶律隆庆担任先锋，问各位将领有谁敢于拒敌，萧柳说： 如果得到骏马，那我就愿意先行冲锋。 
English: In the 17th year of the Southern Expedition, the Song general Fan Ting called the Breton phalanx to wait. At that time, the brother of the king, Yelu Longqing, served as the vanguard and asked the generals who dared to reject the enemy. Xiao Liu said: If I get a horse, then I am willing to charge ahead.

古文：隆庆授以甲骑。
现代文：隆庆送给他铠甲坐骑。
English: Longqing gave him an armored mount.

古文：柳揽辔，谓诸将曰： 阵若动，诸君急攻。 
现代文：萧柳挽住马缰，对众将说： 阵形如果松动，各位请赶紧进攻。 
English: Xiao Liu held the reins of the horse and said to the general public: If the formation loosens, everyone please attack quickly.

古文：遂驰而前，敌少却。
现代文：于是飞马向前，敌人稍稍向后退却。
English: So Pegasus went forward, and the enemy retreated a little.

古文：隆庆席势攻之，南军遂乱。
现代文：隆庆趁势进攻，宋军阵形于是大乱。
English: Longqing took advantage of the situation to attack, and the Song Army's formation was thrown into chaos.

古文：柳中流矢，裹创而战，众皆披靡。
现代文：萧柳为流矢射中，他包裹好箭伤后继续作战，敌军全线溃退。
English: Xiao Liu was shot by a stray arrow. After he wrapped up his arrow wound, he continued to fight, and the entire enemy army retreated.

古文：时排押留守东京，奏柳为四军兵马都指挥使。
现代文：当时萧排押留守东京，奏请以萧柳为四军兵马都指挥使。
English: At that time, Xiao Pai was stationed in Tokyo, and he requested Xiao Liu to be the commander of the four armies.

古文：明年，为北女直详稳，政济宽猛，部民畏爱。
现代文：次年，任北女真详稳，为政宽猛相济，受到百姓敬佩爱戴。
English: The following year, Ren Bei Niang Zhen Zhe Jiao Jian, was admired and loved by the people for her political broad-mindedness.

古文：迁东路统军使。
现代文：迁为东路统军使。
English: He was transferred to the East Road Military Liaison Office.

古文：秩满，百姓愿留复任，许之。
现代文：任期满，百姓希望留下他再任详稳，得到允准。
English: At the end of his term of office, the people wanted him to remain in office for another term, which was approved.

古文：从伐高丽，遇大蛇当路，前驱者请避；柳曰： 壮士安惧此！ 
现代文：他曾跟从皇上征伐高丽，遇到大蛇挡道，先行官请他避开，萧柳说 ：大丈夫怎会惧怕这等小物！ 
English: He once followed the emperor to conquer Korea, and encountered a large snake blocking his path. The advance officer asked him to avoid it. Xiao Liu said, "It's okay, how could I be afraid of such a small thing!"

古文：拔剑断蛇。
现代文：拔剑斩蛇。
English: Draw your sword and cut the snake.

古文：师还致仕。
现代文：大军回师之后，辞职离任。
English: After the large army returned to the division, he resigned and left.

古文：柳好滑稽，虽君臣燕饮，诙谐无所忌，时人比之俳优。
现代文：萧柳生性滑稽，即使是君臣在一起宴饮，他也谈论诙谐无所避忌，时人比之为俳优戏子。
English: Xiao Liu is naturally funny. Even when he is dining with princes and ministers, he does not hesitate to talk about wit. At the time, people likened him to a haiku actor.

古文：临终，谓人曰： 吾少有致君志，不能直遂，故以谐进。冀万有一补，俳优名何避！ 
现代文：临终时，对人说： 我少时有致君于尧舜之志，因不便直接表达我的劝谏，这才借助于诙谐进言，所望能有万一之裨益，那样即使世人称我为俳优，我又何所憾恨？ 
English: At the end of his life, he said to people: When I was young, I had the ambition to become a haiku poet. Because it was inconvenient to directly express my advice, I resorted to witty speech to achieve the desired benefit. So even if the world calls me a haiku poet, what do I regret?

古文：顷之，被寝衣而坐，呼曰： 吾去矣！ 
现代文：不一会儿，披上睡衣坐起，大呼一声： 我去矣！ 
English: After a while, he put on his pajamas and sat up, shouting: I'm going!

古文：言讫而逝。
现代文：言讫去世。
English: Take good care of yourself.

古文：耶律观音奴集柳所著诗千篇，目曰《岁寒集》。
现代文：耶律观音奴收集萧柳所著诗作千篇，名之为《岁寒集》。
English: Yerut Guanyin collected thousands of poems written by Xiao Liu, called "Year of the Pig."

古文：高勋，字鼎臣，晋北平王信韬之子。
现代文：高勋，字鼎臣，晋北平王信韬之子。
English: Gao Xun, the son of Jinbei Ping Wang, the son of Jinbei Ping Wang, the son of Jinbei Ping.

古文：性通敏。
现代文：生性通达聪慧。
English: They are very intelligent by nature.

古文：仕晋为阁门使。
现代文：在晋国担任阁门使。
English: He served as a cabinet envoy to the Jin Dynasty.

古文：会同九年，与杜重威来降。
现代文：会同九年，与杜重威一道前来投降。
English: Nine years later, he came to surrender together with Du Chongwei.

古文：太宗入汴，授四方馆使。
现代文：太宗入汴京，授四方馆使。
English: Taizong entered Beijing and was appointed as the envoy to the four provinces.

古文：好结权贵，能服勤，大臣多推誉之。
现代文：喜好结纳权贵，服持职事勤劳，大臣们大多对他推奖美誉。
English: He was fond of bribing dignitaries and was diligent in his duties. Most of the ministers gave him high praise.

古文：天禄间，为枢密使，总汉军事。
现代文：天禄年间，任枢密使，总揽汉军事务。
English: During the Tenroku era, he served as a privy envoy and was in charge of Han military affairs.

古文：五年，刘崇遣使来求封册，诏勋册崇为大汉神武皇帝。
现代文：五年，刘崇派遣使者前来请求封册，诏令由高勋册封刘崇为大汉神武皇帝。
English: In the fifth year, Liu Chong sent an envoy to request the seal, and the imperial decree was issued by Gao Xun to crown Liu Chong as the Great Han Emperor Shenwu.

古文：应历初，封赵王，出为上京留守，寻移南京。
现代文：应历初，高勋被封为赵王，出京担任上京留守，不久移任南京。
English: At the beginning of the year, Gao Xun was given the title of Zhao Wang. He went to Beijing to serve as Shangjing Lingering, and soon moved to Nanjing.

古文：会宋欲城益津，勋上书请假巡徼以扰之，帝然其奏，宋遂不果城。
现代文：适逢宋想要在益津建城，高勋上书请求假借巡行视察以干扰之，皇上依准其奏，宋国最终没有将城建成。
English: At a time when the Song Dynasty wanted to build a city in Yijin, Gao Xun wrote to the emperor to request a fake inspection tour to interfere with it. The emperor agreed, and the Song Dynasty eventually did not build the city.

古文：十七年，宋略地益津关，勋击败之，知南院枢密事。
现代文：十七年，宋攻城于益津关，高勋击败之，主持南院枢密事务。
English: In the seventeenth year, Song attacked the city at Yijin Pass, Gao Xun defeated it and presided over the confidential affairs of the Southern Yuan.

古文：景宗即位，以定策功，进王秦。
现代文：景宗即位，因为扶立之功，进位为秦王。
English: The enthronement of King Gyeongjong, who was promoted to King of Qin for his role in establishing the dynasty.

古文：保宁中，以南京郊内多隙地，请疏畦种稻，帝欲从之。
现代文：保宁年间，因南京郊内多空地，高勋请求疏浚田园土地种植稻谷，皇上想采纳他的建议。
English: During the Boryeong era, Gao Xun requested that the pastoral land be dredged to plant rice, as there was a lot of open space in the suburbs of Nanjing. The emperor wanted to adopt his suggestion.

古文：林邪耶律昆宣言于朝曰： 高勋此奏，必有异志。
现代文：林牙耶律昆在朝中扬言说 ：高勋这一奏折，必定有异心。
English: Lingya Yerukun threatened the central government, saying, "If Gao Xun is responsible for this incident, he must have an ulterior motive."

古文：果令种稻，引水为畦，设以京叛，官军何自而入？ 
现代文：果真让他种上稻子，引水筑田垄，倘若他挟南京反叛，官军从何处进军呢？ 
English: If he really did ask him to plant rice and divert water to build a field ridge, if he were to rebel against Nanjing, where would the government army march in from?

古文：帝疑之，不纳。
现代文：皇上起了疑心，没有采纳。
English: The Emperor was suspicious and did not approve.

古文：寻迁南院枢密使。
现代文：不久高勋迁任南院枢密使。
English: Soon after, Gao Xun was transferred to the position of Privy Councilor of the Southern Yuan Dynasty.

古文：以毒药馈驸马都尉萧啜里，事觉，流铜州。
现代文：将毒药送给驸马都尉萧啜里，事情败露，流放到铜州。
English: He gave the poison to Lieutenant Xiao Zuoli, the affair was exposed, and he was exiled to Cangzhou.

古文：寻又谋害尚书令萧思温，诏狱诛之，没其产，皆赐思温家。
现代文：不久又阴谋杀害尚书令萧思温，诏令定罪诛杀之，抄没其家产，都赐给萧思温家。
English: Not long after, he conspired to kill Shang Shuling Xiao Siwen, was convicted by imperial edict, and his family property was confiscated, all of which was given to Xiao Siwen's family.

古文：奚和朔奴，字筹宁，奚可汗之裔。
现代文：奚和朔奴，字筹宁，奚可汗的后代。
English: Zhai and Shuo, the descendants of Zhaochening, Zhai Khan.

古文：保宁中，为奚六部长。
现代文：保宁年间，任奚六部酋长。
English: During his time in Boryeong, he served as the chief of six districts.

古文：统和初，皇太后称制，以耶律休哥领南边事，和朔奴为南面行军副部署。
现代文：统和初，皇太后临朝称制，由耶律休哥总领南边事务，和朔奴为南面行军副部署。
English: At the beginning of the unification, the Empress Dowager Lintong proclaimed the system, with Yelu Xiu Ge as the commander of the southern affairs, and Shuo Nu as the deputy commander of the southern march.

古文：四年，宋曹彬、米信等来侵，和朔奴与休哥破宋兵于燕南，手诏褒美。
现代文：四年，宋曹彬、米信等人前来进犯，和朔奴与休哥击败宋兵于燕南，圣宗皇上亲自草诏予以褒美。
English: In the fourth year, Song Cao Bin, Yixin and others came to attack, and together with Shuo Nu and Xiu Ge defeated Song soldiers in Yan Nan, and Emperor Shengzong personally wrote a reward.

古文：军还，怙权挝无罪人李浩至死，上以其功释之。
现代文：大军回国后，和朔奴恃仗权势殴打无罪之人李浩至死，皇上因为他有功，加以释免。
English: After the great army returned to China, he and Shuo Nu wielded their power to beat Li Hao, an innocent man, to death. The emperor released him because of his merits.

古文：六年冬，南征，将本部军由别道进击敌军于狼山，俘获甚众。
现代文：六年冬，南征，率本部军由别道进攻敌军于狼山，俘虏缴获甚众。
English: In the winter of the sixth year, the Southern Expedition, led by the headquarters army, attacked the enemy army from another road in Wolf Mountain, and captured a large number of prisoners.

古文：八年，上表曰： 臣窃见太宗之时，奚六部二宰相、二常衮，诰命大常衮班在酋长左右，副常衮总知酋长五房族属，二宰相匡辅酋长，建明善事。
现代文：八年，上表说： 我私下里发现太宗之时，奚六部二宰相、二常衮，钦命大常衮班次在酋长左右，副常衮总管酋长五房族属，二宰相辅佐酋长，经其建议或陈述做出了许多善事。
English: In the eighth year, the above table said: When I discovered Taizong in private, 六部二宰相,二常,钦命大常班次 were around the chief, the deputy chief of the chief of the chief of the chief of the chief of the chief of the chief of the chief of the chief of the chief of the chief of the chief of the chief of the chief of the chief of the chief of the chief of the chief of the chief of the chief of the chief of the chief of the chief of the chief of the chief of the chief of the chief of the chief of the chief of the chief of the chief of the chief of the chief of the chief of the chief

古文：今宰相职如故，二常衮别无所掌，乞依旧制。 
现代文：现在宰相职位如故，二常衮却别无所掌，请求依照旧制。 
English: Now the position of prime minister is the same as before, but Nijongjun has nothing else to do, and requests to follow the old system.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上从之。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：十二年秋，迁都部署，伐兀惹。
现代文：十三年秋，迁为都部署，讨伐兀惹。
English: In the autumn of the thirteenth year, it was moved to the capital and deployed to fight the rebellion.

古文：驻于铁骊，秣马数月，进至兀惹城。
现代文：驻军于铁骊，歇马数月，进军至兀惹城。
English: The troops were garrisoned in Tiegu, rested for several months, and then marched to the city of Handan.

古文：利其俘掠，请降不许，令急攻之。
现代文：贪图俘虏抢掠之厚利，对方请求投降也不准许，下令加紧攻城。
English: Greedy for the plunder of captives, the other side was not allowed to request surrender and ordered to intensify the siege of the city.

古文：城中大恐，皆殊死战。
现代文：城中人惊恐万状，均拼死作战。
English: The people in the city were terrified and fought to the death.

古文：和朔奴知不能克，从副部署萧恒德议，掠地东南，循高丽北界而还。
现代文：和朔奴知道不能攻克，听从副部署萧恒德建议，往东南一带攻战，顺着高丽北界回国。
English: Knowing that it was impossible to conquer Hsiao Shuo, he followed the suggestion of Vice-Deployment Xiao Hengde to attack in the southeast and return to the country along the northern border of Goryeo.

古文：以地远粮绝，士马死伤，诏降封爵，卒。
现代文：因为路途遥远粮草断绝，士卒马匹死的死伤的伤，损失惨重，诏令降其封爵，不久去世。
English: Because of the long distance of the journey, the grain and grass were cut off, the death and injury of the soldiers and horses were killed, and the loss was heavy, the imperial edict reduced his knighthood, and he died soon.

古文：子乌也，郎君班详稳。
现代文：子乌也，郎君班详稳。
English: Zi Wu also, brother-in-law class detailed stability.

古文：萧塔列葛，字雄隐，五院部人。
现代文：耶律合住，字粘衮，太祖弟迭剌之孙。
English: He is the grandson of his paternal great-grandfather and great-great-grandfather.

古文：八世祖只鲁，遥辇氏时尝为虞人。
现代文：幼时不喜欢玩耍，遇事聪明机敏，善于谈论。
English: When he was young, he didn't like to play, but he was clever and quick-witted, and good at talking.

古文：唐安禄山来攻，只鲁战于黑山之阳，败之。
现代文：初时因为是皇上亲近族人得以入宫侍卫，每次随从征伐都立有战功。保宁初，升任为右龙虎卫上将军。
English: At the beginning, because he was a close relative of the emperor, he was able to enter the palace as an attendant, and each time he accompanied the conquest, he achieved military merit. At the beginning of Boryeong, he was promoted to the right dragon tiger guard general.

古文：以功为北府宰相，世预其选。塔列葛仕开泰间，累迁西南面招讨使。
现代文：因为宋军多次骚扰边境，拜为涿州刺史，西南兵马都监、招安、巡检等使，赐号为推忠奉国功臣。
English: Because the Song Army harassed the border many times, he was given the title of the hero of promoting loyalty and serving the country.

古文：重熙十一年，使西夏，谕伐宋事，约元昊出别道以会。
现代文：合住长期任事于边境防务，尽管有战胜掳获之功，然而力求平定安静，不妄自生事以求取短期内之功劳，邻国敬重畏服，辖境安定。
English: He lived and worked in the border defense for a long time. Although he had the merit of defeating the captivity, he strived to maintain peace and tranquility. He did not dare to take matters into his own hands in order to gain short-term merit. He was respected and feared by the neighboring countries, and his territory was stable.

古文：十二年，改右夷离毕、同知南京留守，转左夷离毕，俄授东京留守，以世选为北府宰相，卒。
现代文：宋多次派人来交好，希望能传达和好之意，合住上表奏闻其事，景宗准予议和。安定边疆、安抚敌国，合住立了不少功。拜为左金吾卫上将军。任期满，遥摄镇国军节度使，不久去世。合住富于智慧，又有文采，通晓军旅之事。
English: Song repeatedly sent people to make friends, hoping to convey the goodwill of reconciliation. He stayed at the table to listen to the matter, and Jingzong allowed him to discuss peace. He stabilized the border and pacified the enemy country, and he did a lot of work. He worshiped General Zuo Jinwu. After his term of office, he was the military festival envoy of the remote shooting town, and he died soon. He was rich in wisdom, and he was literate, and he knew about the military journey.

古文：最后以萧挞凛为统军，直抵澶渊。将与宋战，挞凛中弩，我兵失倚，和议始定。
现代文：镇守范阳时，曾率领数骑人马直抵雄州北门，与郡将在马上陈说两国利害，以及周军侵犯我边境之始末。语气慷慨，左右都觉得雄壮。从此，边境数年没有战事。
English: When he was guarding Fanyang, he led several cavalry horses straight to the north gate of Xiongzhou. He and the county will immediately present the interests of the two countries, as well as the beginning and end of the Zhou army's invasion of our border. The tone is generous, and both sides feel majestic. Since then, there has been no war on the border for several years.

古文：或者天厌其乱，使南北之民休息者耶！
现代文：有见识者因此说，合住一番话，强似数十万兵马。
English: Therefore, some people with insight said that living together for a while is more like hundreds of thousands of soldiers.

