古文：《新唐书•宰相世系表》皆承用逐家谱牒，故多有谬误，内沈氏者最可笑。
现代文：《新唐书•宰相世系表》都是取自各家家谱的材料，错误很多，其中关于沈姓的记载最可笑。
English: The "New Tang Dynasty Book • Prime Minister's Family Tree" is all taken from various family tree materials, and there are many errors, of which the record about Shen's surname is the most ridiculous.

古文：其略云： 沈氏出自姬姓。
现代文：里面这样写： 沈姓是来自姬姓的。
English: It said: "The surname Shen comes from the surname Ji.

古文：周文王子聃叔季，字子揖，食采于沈，今汝南平舆沈亭是也。
现代文：周文王的儿子聃叔季，字子揖，封地在沈，也就是现在汝南平舆沈亭这个地方。
English: King Zhouwen's son, Zou Shujie, also known as Zi Zi, had his fiefdom in Shen, which is now the site of the Ru Nanping Muxin Pavilion.

古文：鲁成公八年，为晋所灭。
现代文：鲁成公八年，被晋国灭掉。
English: In the eighth year of Lu Chenggong, it was wiped out by Jin.

古文：沈子生逞，字修之，奔楚，遂为沈氏。
现代文：子揖的儿子叫逞，字修之，逃亡楚国，就姓了沈。
English: Zixuan's son was named Gan, his family name was Xiuzhi, and when he fled Chu, he took the surname Shen.

古文：生嘉，字惟良，嘉生尹戊，戊生诸梁，诸梁子尹射，字修文。
现代文：沈逞生儿子沈嘉，字惟良，沈嘉生儿子尹戊，尹戊生儿子诸梁，诸梁生儿子尹射，字修文。
English: Shen Gan gave birth to his son Shen Jia, his name was Wei Liang, Shen Jia gave birth to his son Yin Wu, Yin Wu gave birth to his son Zhu Liang, Zhu Liang gave birth to his son Yin Ya, his name was Xiuwen.

古文：其后入汉，有为齐王太傅敷德侯者，有为骠骑将军者，有为彭城侯者。 
现代文：后来到了汉代，有的当了齐王太傅敷德侯，有的当了骠骑将军，有的当了彭城侯。 
English: Later, in the Han Dynasty, some of them became Qi Wang Taifu Shidehong, some became Zhaojing generals, and some became Pengcheng princes.

古文：《宋书》沈约《自叙》云： 金天氏之后，沈国在汝南平舆，定公四年，为蔡所灭。
现代文：沈约修《宋书》时，曾在里边写了一篇《自叙》，里面写着： 沈国是金天氏的后代，在汝南平舆一带，鲁定公四年，被蔡国灭掉。
English: When Shen Youxiu was revising the "Song Book," he wrote a "self-narrative" inside, which said: Shen Guo is a descendant of the Jin Tian clan, in the area of Runan Pingwu, Lu Dinggong was killed by Cai Guo for four years.

古文：秦末有逞者，征丞相不就。 
现代文：秦朝末年，有个叫逞的人，皇帝请去做宰相，被他拒绝了。 
English: At the end of the Qin Dynasty, there was a man named Gan Gan who was asked by the emperor to become the prime minister, but he refused.

古文：其后颇与《唐表》同。
现代文：后面的叙述与《新唐书•宰相世系表》相同。
English: The following description is the same as the "New Tang Dynasty Book • Prime Minister's Family Tree."

古文：按聃季所封自是一国，与沈子不相涉。
现代文：认真考究一下，聃叔季所封的是另外一个国家，与沈国毫无关系。
English: A careful examination shows that the seal of Gong Shuji is from another country and has nothing to do with Sheng.

古文：《春秋》成公八年，晋侵沈，获沈子揖。
现代文：根据《春秋》的记载，鲁成公八年，晋国侵犯沈国，俘虏了沈子揖。
English: According to the records of "Spring and Autumn," in the eighth year of Lu Chenggong, Jin invaded Shen and captured Shen Zi Rong.

古文：昭二十三年，吴败顿、胡、沈、蔡之师于鸡父，沈子逞灭。
现代文：鲁昭公二十三年，吴国又在鸡父这个地方打败了顿、胡、沈、蔡几国的军队，沈子揖的儿子逞被灭。
English: In the 23rd year of the reign of King Lu Zhaogu, the State of Wu defeated the armies of the states of Dong, Hu, Shen and Cai in this place of the chicken father. Shen Zi Yao's son Gang Gang was eliminated.

古文：定四年，蔡灭沈，杀沈子嘉。
现代文：鲁定公四年、蔡国又灭了沈国，杀了逞的儿子沈嘉。
English: In the fourth year of Ruding's reign, Cai Guo destroyed Shen Guo and killed Gan Gan's son Shen Jia.

古文：今《表》云：聃季字子揖，成八年为晋所灭，是文王之子寿五百余岁矣。
现代文：可是现在的《世系表》上却说：聃季字子揖，鲁成公八年，被晋国灭亡。如果是这样，作为文王儿子的聪季就活到五百多岁了，这怎么可能呢？
English: However, the current "Genealogy Table" says: "季字子, in the eighth year of King Lu Chenggong, was killed by Jin. If so, how is it possible that King Wen's son, Cong Ji, lived to be more than five hundred years old?"

古文：逞为吴所杀，而《表》云奔楚，《宋书》云秦召为丞相。
现代文：沈逞是被吴国杀掉的，可是《世系表》上说他逃奔到了楚国，沈约在《宋书•自叙》中又说，秦国还想召他为丞相。
English: Shen Gang was killed by the State of Wu, but the "Genealogy Table" says that he fled to the State of Chu, and Shen Yao also said in the "Song Book • Autobiography" that the State of Qin still wanted to call him the prime minister.

古文：沈尹戊为楚将，战死于柏举，正与嘉之死同时，而以为嘉之子。
现代文：沈尹戊是楚国的大将，战死在柏举，这个时正与沈嘉死的时间是大致同时的，可是《世系表》却说尹戊是沈嘉的儿子。
English: Shen Yanwu was a general of the State of Chu. He died in the Battle of Baijiu. The time of his death was roughly the same as that of Shen Jia. However, the "Genealogy Table" said that Yin Wu was the son of Shen Jia.

古文：尹射书于《左传》，三十四年始书诸梁，乃以为其子。
现代文：尹戊在《左传》中先写的尹射，三十四年开始写成诸梁，可是《世系表》把诸梁当作了尹戊的儿子。
English: Yin Ying, who was first written as Yin Ying in "Zhuan," began to be written as Zhu Liang in the 34th year, but "Genealogy Table" regarded Zhu Liang as the son of Yin Ying.

古文：又春秋时人立字皆从子及伯仲，岂有修之、惟良、修文之比？
现代文：还有，春秋时代人立字的时候，都从子和兄弟，怎么会有修之、惟良、修文的叫法呢？
English: Furthermore, when people in the Spring and Autumn Period established the characters, they were all from sons and brothers. How could there be the names "Xiu Zhi," "Xueliang" and "Xuwen"?

古文：《汉列侯表》岂有所谓敷德、彭城侯？
现代文：《汉书•列侯表》怎么会有敷德侯、彭城侯？
English: How did "Hanshu•Lehou table" come to have the shidehou and the pengchenghou at the top?

古文：《百官表》岂有所谓骠骑将军沈达者？
现代文：《汉书•百官表》怎么会有骠骑将军沈达？
English: How could "Hanshu•Hundred Official Lists" have General Shen Da riding on horseback?

古文：沈约称一时文宗，妄谱其沈、姒、蓐、黄之沈，封于汾川，晋灭之，春秋之沈，封于汝南，蔡灭之。
现代文：实际上，作为金天氏的后代的沈姓，是现在沈、姒、蓐、黄各姓先人的沈。他们的封地在汾川，被晋国灭亡，春秋时代的沈姓，封于汝南，被蔡国灭亡。
English: In fact, as the descendants of the Jin Tian clan, the surname Shen of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of

古文：顾合而为一，岂不读《左氏》乎？
现代文：沈约把两个沈国的两个沈姓写成了一个，难道就没有读过《左传》？
English: Shen You wrote the two Shen surnames of the two Shen countries into one. Didn't he read "Zhuan"?

古文：欧阳公略不笔削，为可恨也！
现代文：欧阳修编撰《新唐书》的时候，不去加以考证删削，也是令人感到遗憾的。
English: It is also regrettable that Ouyang Xiu, when compiling the "New Tang Dynasty Book," did not do any research and editing.

