古文：趣昭阳单阏四月，尽旃蒙大荒落五月，凡二年有奇。
现代文：趣昭阳单阏四月，尽旃蒙大荒落五月，凡二年有奇。
English: It's strange to have a sunny April and a bleak May in the same year.

古文：太宗文武大圣大广孝皇帝中之下
现代文：太宗文武大圣大广孝皇帝中之下
English: Emperor Taizong, Emperor Wenzong and Emperor Guangxiao

古文：贞观十七年癸卯，公元六四三年夏，四月，庚辰朔，承基上变，告太子谋反。
现代文：唐太宗贞观十七年夏季四月，庚辰朔，纥干承基上书告发太子李承乾谋反。
English: In the summer of April of the 17th year of the Tang Taizong Zhenguan, Geng Chenshuo and Zou Gan Chengji wrote a letter to the crown prince Li Chengqian, accusing him of plotting a rebellion.

古文：敕长孙无忌、房玄龄、萧瑀、李世勣与大理、中书、门下参鞫之，反形已具。
现代文：太宗敕令长孙无忌、房玄龄、萧、李世与大理寺、中书省、门下省一同参与审问，谋反的情形已经昭彰。
English: Emperor Taizong ordered the eldest grandson Mu Mu, Fang Xuanling, Xiao, and Li Si to participate in the interrogation together with Dali Temple, the Ministry of Chinese Literature, and the subordinate provinces, and the situation of plotting rebellion has become clear.

古文：上谓侍臣： 将何以处承乾？ 
现代文：太宗对身边的大臣说： 你们看将如何处置承乾？ 
English: Emperor Taizong said to the ministers around him, "What do you think will happen to Chengxian?"

古文：群臣莫敢对，通事舍人来济进曰： 陛下不失为慈父，太子得尽天年，则善矣！ 
现代文：众位大臣不敢应答，通事舍人来济进言说： 陛下不失为慈父的形象，让太子享尽自然寿数，就不错了。 
English: The ministers did not dare to answer, but said, "His Majesty is a fatherly figure, and it would be nice to let the crown prince enjoy his natural life span.

古文：上从之。
现代文：太宗听从其意见。
English: Emperor Dezong accepted his suggestion.

古文：济，护儿之子也。
现代文：来济是来护儿的儿子。
English: Lai Chih is the son of a nanny.

古文：乙酉，诏废太子承乾为庶人，幽于右领军府。
现代文：乙酉，太宗下诏废黜太子李承乾为平民，幽禁在右领军府。
English: At the same time, Emperor Taizong decreed the dethroned crown prince Li Chengqian to be a commoner, and he was confined to the right leader's headquarters.

古文：上欲免汉王元昌死，群臣固争，乃赐自尽于家，而宥其母、妻、子。
现代文：太宗想要免除汉王李元昌的死罪，群臣执意争辩，于是便赐他在家中自尽，宽宥他的母亲、妻子儿女。
English: Emperor Taizong wanted to absolve the Han king Li Yuanchang of the death penalty, and the courtiers insisted on arguing, so he gave him to commit suicide at home, forgiving his mother, wife and children.

古文：侯君集、李安俨、赵节、杜荷等皆伏诛。
现代文：侯君集、李安俨、赵节、杜荷等人皆处斩。
English: Hou Junji, Li Antao, Zhao Jie, Du He and others were all executed.

古文：左庶子张玄素、右庶子赵弘智、令狐德棻等以不能谏争，皆坐免为庶人。
现代文：左庶子张玄素、右庶子赵弘智、令狐德等人以不能劝谏太子，均获罪免为平民。
English: The left illegitimate son, Zhang Xuansu, the right illegitimate son, Zhao Hongzhi, Ling Xude and others were all acquitted as commoners because they could not persuade the crown prince.

古文：馀当连坐者，悉赦之。
现代文：其余应当连坐的，全部赦免。
English: The rest, who were supposed to sit together, were all pardoned.

古文：詹事于志宁以数谏，独蒙劳勉。
现代文：詹事于志宁因为曾多次劝谏，单独蒙受嘉勉。
English: Zhan Zhizhi and Zhining were singled out for commendation because they had been repeatedly persuaded to take part.

古文：以纥干承基为祐川府折冲都尉，爵平棘县公。
现代文：任命纥干承基为川府折冲都尉，封爵平棘县公。
English: He appointed Zangan Chengji as the governor of Sichuan Orichong and the lord of Pingxian County.

古文：侯君集被收，贺兰楚石复诣阙告其事，上引君集谓曰： 朕不欲令刀笔吏辱公，故自鞫公耳。 
现代文：侯君集被收入狱中，贺兰楚石又到宫阙前告发他谋反的事，太宗召见侯君集对他说： 朕不想让那些刀笔吏羞辱你，所以便亲自审问你。 
English: Hou Junji was sent to prison, and Horan Chushik went to the palace to denounce him for plotting a rebellion. The emperor summoned Hou Junji and said to him, "I don't want those penpushers to humiliate you, so I will interrogate you myself."

古文：君集初不承。
现代文：君集起初不认罪。
English: Kim Ji-soo initially pleaded not guilty.

古文：引楚石具陈始未，又以所与承乾往来启示之，君集辞穷，乃服。
现代文：太宗便召见贺兰楚石详细陈述始末原委，又拿出与承乾来往的书信启给他看，君集理屈词穷，只得服罪。
English: Emperor Taizong then summoned Helan Chu Shih to give a detailed account of the beginning and end of the original committee, and took out the letters he had exchanged with Cheng Qian to show him that the king's collection of words and phrases was poor, and he had to confess.

古文：上谓侍臣曰： 君集有功，欲乞其生，可乎？ 
现代文：太宗对身边大臣说： 君集有功于大唐，乞求还他一条生路，可以吗？ 
English: Taizong said to the minister next to him, "Kunzhi has made contributions to the Great Tang Dynasty, is it okay to beg him for a way out?"

古文：群臣以为不可。
现代文：众位大臣都认为不可。
English: All the ministers agreed that it was impossible.

古文：上乃谓君集曰： 与公长诀矣！ 
现代文：太宗便对君集说： 与你永别了！ 
English: Taizong then said to Junshi, "Farewell forever!"

古文：因泣下，君集亦自投于地；遂斩之于市。
现代文：因而流下眼泪。君集也磕头表示服罪，于是将他斩首于集市上。
English: As a result, he shed tears. The king's retinue also bowed their heads in confession, and then beheaded him in the market.

古文：君集临刑，谓监刑将军曰： 君集蹉跌至此！
现代文：侯君集临刑前，对监刑的将军说： 君集我一时失足走到了这一步！
English: Before he was sentenced, Hou Junji said to the general who was carrying out the sentence: "I've come this far because of a momentary lapse!

古文：然事陛下于籓邸，击取二国，乞全一子以奉祭祀。 
现代文：然而当年在秦王府时即侍奉陛下，又有攻取吐谷浑、高昌二国的功绩，请求保全我一个儿子以维持家族的祭祀烟火。 
English: However, that year, when I was serving His Majesty at the Qin royal palace, I also had the merit of conquering the two countries of Tuyugun and Gaochang, and asked to keep my one son to maintain the family's sacrificial fireworks.

古文：上乃原其妻及子，徙岭南。
现代文：太宗便宽宥了他的妻子和子女，将他们迁徙到岭南。
English: Emperor Taizong then pardoned his wife and children and moved them to Lingnan.

古文：籍没其家，得二美人，自幼饮人乳而不食。
现代文：没收了他所有的家产，得到二个美女，从小喝人奶不吃别的食物。
English: Confiscated all his family property, got two beautiful women, drank human milk from a young age and ate no other food.

古文：初，上使李靖教君集兵法，君集言于上曰： 李靖将反矣。 
现代文：起初，太宗让李靖教授侯君集兵法，侯君集对太宗说： 李靖将要谋反。 
English: At first, Emperor Taizong asked Li Jing to teach Hojun Ji the art of war. Hojun Ji said to Emperor Taizong: Li Jing is going to rebel.

古文：上问其故，对曰： 靖独教臣以其粗而匿其精，以是知之。 
现代文：太宗问他是什么原因，侯君集答道： 李靖教我兵法时只教给我粗浅的内容，而隐匿精华，因此知道他要谋反。 
English: When Emperor Taizong asked him what the reason was, Hou Junji replied: When Li Jing taught me the art of war, he only taught me the shallow content, but concealed the essence, so he knew he wanted to rebel.

古文：上以问靖，靖对曰： 此乃君集欲反耳。
现代文：太宗将这些话问李靖，李靖答道： 此乃是君集想要谋反。
English: Emperor Taizong asked Li Jing about these words, and Li Jing replied, "This is a plot by the Junji to rebel.

古文：今诸夏已定，臣之所教，足以制四夷，而君集固求尽臣之术，非反而何！ 
现代文：如今中原已经平定，我所教的兵法，足以制服四方民族，而君集执意请求倾尽我的谋略，这不是想要谋反又是什么呢？ 
English: Now that the Central Plains have been pacified, the methods of warfare I have taught are enough to subdue the peoples of the four directions, and the monarchs insistently request that I exhaust my strategy. Isn't this an attempt at rebellion, and what is it?

古文：江夏王道宗尝从容言于上曰： 君集志大而智小，自负微功，耻在房玄龄、李靖之下，虽为吏部尚书，未满其志。
现代文：江夏王李道宗曾经语气和缓地对太宗说： 侯君集志大才疏，自认为有些功劳，对于位居房玄龄、李靖之下感到羞耻，虽然身为吏部尚书，还是不能满足他的愿望。
English: Li Daozong, the king of Jiangxia, once said to Taizong in a gentle tone: "Houjun has a lack of great talent, he thinks he has some merit, he is ashamed to live under Fang Xuanling and Li Jing, although he is a senior official, he still can't meet his wishes.

古文：以臣观之，必将为乱。 
现代文：依我观察，他一定会叛乱。 
English: From what I've seen, he's bound to rebel.

古文：上曰： 君集材器，亦何施不可！
现代文：太宗说： 依侯君集的才气，做什么不行呢！
English: Taizong said, "You can't do anything based on the talent of Hou Junji.

古文：朕岂惜重位，但次第未至耳，岂可亿度，妄生猜贰邪！ 
现代文：朕难道是珍惜高位不封予他？只是因为按顺序还排不到他，怎么可以随意猜忌，乱生疑惑呢？ 
English: Do I really cherish the high position of not awarding it to him? Just because I can't rank him in order, how can I arbitrarily suspect and create doubts?

古文：及君集反诛，上乃谢道宗曰： 果如卿言！ 
现代文：等到侯君集因谋反伏诛，太宗便当面感谢李道宗说： 果然不出你之所料。 
English: When Hou Junji was executed for plotting a counter-coup, Emperor Taizong thanked Li Daozong in person, saying, "This is exactly what you expected.

古文：李安俨父，年九十馀，上愍之，赐奴婢以养之。
现代文：李安俨的父亲，年高九十多岁，太宗怜悯他，赐给奴婢以侍奉他。
English: Li Anyao's father, who was more than 90 years old, was pitied by Emperor Taizong, who gave him slaves to serve him.

古文：太子承乾既获罪，魏王泰日入侍奉，上面许立为太子，岑文本、刘洎亦劝之；长孙无忌固请立晋王治。
现代文：太子李承乾已经获罪幽禁，魏王李泰便每天进宫侍奉太宗，太宗当面许诺立他为太子，岑文本、刘洎也劝说太宗立李泰；长孙无忌执意请求立晋王李治。
English: Prince Li Chengqian had already been convicted and imprisoned. Li Tai, the king of Wei, entered the palace every day to serve Emperor Taizong. Emperor Taizong promised to appoint him as the prince in person. Liu Bei also persuaded Emperor Taizong to appoint Li Tai. The eldest grandson had no choice but to insist on asking Emperor Jin to appoint Li Zhi.

古文：上谓侍臣曰： 昨青雀投我怀云： 臣今日始得为陛下子，乃更生之日也。
现代文：太宗对身边大臣说： 昨天李泰投到我怀里对我说： 我到今天才得以成为陛下最亲近的儿子，此乃我再生之日。
English: Emperor Taizong said to the ministers around him, "Yesterday, Li Tai threw himself into my arms and said to me, 'I have only been able to become Your Majesty's closest son today. This is the day of my rebirth.'

古文：臣有一子，臣死之日，当为陛下杀之，传位晋王。 
现代文：我有一个儿子，我死之日，当为陛下将他杀死，传位给晋王李治。 
English: I have a son. On the day of my death, I should kill him for His Majesty and pass the throne to the King of Jin, Li Zhi.

古文：人谁不爱其子，朕见其如此，甚怜之。 
现代文：人谁不爱惜自己的儿子，朕见李泰这么做，内心十分怜悯他。 
English: People who do not cherish their own son, I see Li Tai do this, my heart is very sorry for him.

古文：谏议大夫褚遂良曰： 陛下言大失。
现代文：谏议大夫褚遂良说： 陛下此言大为不妥。
English: Dr. Zou Suiliang said, "Your Majesty, this is very inappropriate.

古文：愿审思，勿误也！
现代文：希望陛下深思熟虑，千万不要出现失误。
English: I hope His Majesty will think it over and not make any mistakes.

古文：安有陛下万岁后，魏王据天下，肯杀其爱子，传位晋王者乎！
现代文：陛下百年之后，魏王占有天下，他怎么肯杀自己的爱子，将皇位传给晋王呢？
English: Your Majesty, a hundred years later, the Wei King occupied the whole world. How could he kill his beloved son and pass the throne to the Jin King?

古文：陛下日者既立承乾为太子，复宠魏王，礼秩过于承乾，以成今日之祸。
现代文：从前陛下既立承乾为太子，又宠爱魏王，对他的礼遇超过承乾，以致造成了今日的灾祸。
English: Once upon a time, His Majesty made Choekyi the crown prince and favored the king of Wei, treating him with more courtesy than Choekyi, which led to today's disaster.

古文：前事不远，足以为鉴。
现代文：承乾谋反的事刚刚过去，足可做为今日的借鉴。
English: The events of the rebellion have just passed, and they can be used as a reference for today.

古文：陛下今立魏王，愿先措置晋王，始得安全耳。 
现代文：陛下如今要立魏王为太子，希望先安置好晋王，只有这样政局才得稳定。 
English: His Majesty now wants to make Wei Wang the crown prince, and hopes to place Jin Wang first. Only in this way can the political situation be stabilized.

古文：上流涕曰： 我不能尔！ 
现代文：太宗流着眼泪说： 朕不能这么做。 
English: With tears streaming down his face, Taizong said, "I can't do this.

古文：因起，入宫。
现代文：说完站起身，回到宫中。
English: After saying this, he stood up and returned to the palace.

古文：魏王泰恐上立晋王治，谓之曰： 汝与元昌善，元昌今败，得无忧乎？ 
现代文：魏王李泰惟恐太宗立晋王李治为太子，对李治说： 你与李元昌关系密切，元昌谋反未成已自尽，你能够一点不担心吗？ 
English: Wei King Li Taiwei feared that Emperor Taizong would make Jin King Li Zhi the crown prince, and said to Li Zhi: You have a close relationship with Li Yuanchang. Yuanchang committed suicide before he could succeed in his plot. Can you not be worried at all?

古文：治由是忧形于色，上怪，屡问其故，治乃以状告；上怃然，始悔立泰之言矣。
现代文：李治听到这番话满脸忧愁。太宗感到奇怪，多次问他是什么原因，李治便将李泰对他说过的话告诉太宗；太宗很失望，开始后悔说过立李泰的话。
English: When Li Zhi heard this, his face was full of sorrow. Taizong was puzzled and asked him several times what the reason was. Li Zhi then told Taizong what Li Tai had said to him. Taizong was disappointed and began to regret saying what he had said.

古文：上面责承乾，承乾曰： 臣为太子，复何所求！
现代文：太宗曾当面指责李承乾，李承乾说： 我身为太子，还有什么更多的要求！
English: Emperor Taizong once accused Li Chengxian to his face. Li Chengxian said: As a prince, what more can I ask for!

古文：但为泰所图，时与朝臣谋自安之术，不逞之人遂教臣为不轨耳。
现代文：只是因为被李泰图谋，便常与朝廷大臣们谋求自我保存的策略，那些不逞之徒趁机唆我图谋不轨。
English: It was only because I was plotted against by Li Tai that I often sought self-preservation strategies with the ministers of the imperial court. Those who did not dare took the opportunity to instigate me to plot.

古文：今若泰为太子，所谓落其度内。 
现代文：如今若是立李泰为太子，那就正好落入他的谋划之内。 
English: If Li Tai were to become crown prince now, it would fall right into his plan.

古文：承乾既废，上御两仪殿，群臣俱出，独留长孙无忌、房玄龄、李世勣、褚遂良，谓曰： 我三子一弟，所为如是，我心诚无聊赖！ 
现代文：李承乾被废掉太子后，太宗亲御两仪殿，群臣都退朝，只留下长孙无忌、房玄龄、李世、褚遂良四人，太宗对他们说： 朕的三个儿子、一个弟弟，如此作为，我的心里实在是苦闷、百无聊赖。 
English: After the dethronement of Prince Li Chengqian, Emperor Taizong's relatives and courtiers withdrew from the imperial court, leaving only his four eldest grandsons, Mu Mok, Fang Xuanling, Li Shih, and Zou Suiliang. Emperor Taizong said to them, "My three sons and one younger brother, my heart is really distressed and bored.

古文：因自投于床，无忌等争前扶抱；上又抽佩刀欲自刺，遂良夺刀以授晋王治。
现代文：于是将身体向床头撞去，长孙无忌等人争抢上前抱住他；太宗又抽出佩刀想要自杀，褚遂良夺下刀交给晋王李治。
English: As a result, he pushed his body towards the head of the bed, and his eldest grandson Mudu and others scrambled forward to embrace him; Taizong also drew a sword to commit suicide, and Zou Suiliang took the knife and handed it to the Jin king Liji.

古文：无忌等请上所欲，上曰： 我欲立晋王。 
现代文：长孙无忌等请求太宗告知有什么要求，太宗说： 朕想要立晋王为太子。 
English: The eldest grandson did not hesitate to ask Emperor Taizong to tell him what he wanted. Emperor Taizong said, "I want to make Prince Jin the crown prince."

古文：无忌曰： 谨奉诏；有异议者，臣请斩之！ 
现代文：无忌说： 我等谨奉诏令；如有异议者，我请求将其斩首。 
English: It is not out of bounds to say: We are waiting for the imperial edict; if there is anyone who disagrees, I request that he be beheaded.

古文：上谓治曰： 汝舅许汝矣，宜拜谢。 
现代文：太宗对李治说： 你舅父许诺你为太子，你应当拜谢他。 
English: Emperor Taizong said to Li Zhi, "Your uncle promised you to be crown prince, you should thank him."

古文：治因拜之。
现代文：李治拜谢长孙无忌。
English: There is no reason why the eldest grandson of Li Zhi should not be grateful.

古文：上谓无忌等曰： 公等已同我意，未知外议何如？ 
现代文：太宗对长孙无忌等人说： 你们已经与朕的意见相同，但不知外朝议论如何？ 
English: Emperor Taizong said to the eldest grandson Muji and others: You have the same opinion as me, but I don't know what the foreign discussion is like.

古文：对曰： 晋王仁孝，天下属心久矣，乞陛下试召问百官，有不同者，臣负陛下万死。 
现代文：答道： 晋王仁义孝敬，天下百姓属心很久了，望陛下召见文武百官试探问一下，如有不同意的，就是臣等有负陛下罪该万死。 
English: He replied, "Dear Jin Wang, the people of the world have been loyal to you for a long time. I hope that Your Majesty will summon all the military and civilian officials to test and question them. If they disagree, it means that they are guilty of offending Your Majesty and deserve to die.

古文：上乃御太极殿，召文武六品以上，谓曰： 承乾悖逆，泰亦凶险，皆不可立。
现代文：太宗于是亲临太极殿，召见六品以上文武大臣，对他们说： 李承乾大逆不道，李泰也居心险恶，都不能立为太子。
English: Emperor Taizong then came to the Taiji Hall in person, summoned more than six ministers of literature and martial arts, and said to them: Li Chengqian is a traitor, and Li Tai also has a sinister intention, and neither of them can become the crown prince.

古文：朕欲选诸子为嗣，谁可者？
现代文：朕想要从众位皇子中选一人为继承人，谁可以为太子？
English: I want to choose an heir from among the princes. Who can be the crown prince?

古文：卿辈明言之。 
现代文：你们须当面明讲。 
English: You have to say it to their face.

古文：众皆欢呼曰： 晋王仁孝，当为嗣。 
现代文：众人都高声说道： 晋王仁义孝敬，应当做太子。 
English: Everyone said in a loud voice: Jin Wang is benevolent, virtuous and honorable, he should be crown prince.

古文：上悦，是日，泰从百馀骑至永安门；敕门司尽辟其骑，引泰入肃章门，幽于北苑。
现代文：太宗十分高兴。这一天，李泰率领一百多骑兵到永安门；太宗敕令城门官员遣散李泰的护骑，带李泰进入肃章门，将其幽禁在北苑。
English: Emperor Taizong was very pleased. On this day, Li Tai led more than one hundred cavalrymen to Yongan Gate; Emperor Taizong ordered the gate officials to dismiss Li Tai's escort, take Li Tai into Suizhang Gate, and imprison him in Beiyuan.

古文：丙戌，诏立晋王治为皇太子，御承天门楼，赦天下，酺三日。
现代文：丙戌，太宗下诏立晋王李治为皇太子，太宗亲临承天门楼，大赦天下，饮宴三天。
English: Emperor Taizong decreed that Jin King Li Zhi would become the crown prince, Emperor Taizong personally visited the Gate of Heaven, pardoned the world, and held a banquet for three days.

古文：上谓侍臣曰： 我若立泰，则是太子之位可经营而得。
现代文：太宗对身边大臣说： 朕如果立李泰为太子，那就表明太子的位置可以苦心经营而得到。
English: Emperor Taizong said to the ministers around him, "If I make Li Tai the crown prince, it shows that the position of crown prince can be obtained through hard work.

古文：自今太子失道，籓王窥伺者，皆两弃之，传诸子孙，永为后法。
现代文：自今往后，太子失德背道，而潘王企图谋取的，两人都要弃置不用，这一规定传给子孙后代，永为后代效法。
English: From now on, if the prince loses his virtue and goes astray, and if King Pan tries to gain it, both of them should be abandoned and not used. This regulation will be passed on to future generations and will always be followed by future generations.

古文：且泰立，则承乾与治皆不全；治立，则承乾与泰皆无恙矣。 
现代文：而且李泰为太子，则李承乾和李治均难以保全，李治为太子，则李承乾与李泰均安然无恙。 
English: Moreover, if Li Tai is the crown prince, then both Li Chengxian and Li Zhiguo are difficult to preserve. If Li Zhi is the crown prince, then both Li Chengxian and Li Tai are safe and sound.

古文：臣光曰：唐太宗不以天下大器私其所爱，以杜祸乱之原，可谓能远谋矣！
现代文：臣司马光曰：唐太宗并不将天下重任私与所偏爱的人，以此来杜绝祸乱的根源，可称得上是深谋远虑呀！
English: Subordinate Sima Guang said, "Tang Taizong did not entrust the world to me and my favorite people in order to eliminate the root cause of the calamity. It can be said to be forethought!

古文：丁亥，以中书令杨师道为吏部尚书。
现代文：丁亥，任命中书令杨师道为吏部尚书。
English: Dinghai, Yang Shidao was appointed as the secretary of the Ministry of Personnel.

古文：初，长广公主适赵慈景，生节；慈景死，更适师道。
现代文：起初，长广公主嫁给赵慈景，生下赵节；赵慈景死后，长广公主改嫁杨师道。
English: At first, Princess Changguang married Zhao Cijing and gave birth to Zhao Jie; after Zhao Cijing died, Princess Changguang married Yang Shiduo.

古文：师道与长孙无忌等共鞫承乾狱，阴为赵节道地，由是获谴。
现代文：杨师道曾与长孙无忌等人一道审讯承乾太子的狱案，暗中为赵节开脱罪责，由此获罪。
English: Yang Shidao and his eldest grandson Wu Boi and others once tried the prison case of Prince Cheng Qian, secretly exonerated Zhao Jie, and were convicted.

古文：上至公主所，公主以首击地，泣谢子罪，上亦拜泣曰： 赏不避仇雠，罚不阿亲戚，此天下至公之道，不敢违也，以是负姊。 
现代文：太宗到公主住所，公主以头触地，哭泣着为儿子的罪过道歉，太宗回拜并流着泪说： 赏赐不回避仇敌，惩罚不袒护亲属，这是天下至公至正的道理，不敢违背，因此有负于姐姐。 
English: Taizong went to the princess's residence. The princess touched her head to the ground, weeping and apologizing for her son's sins. Taizong bowed back and said with tears: Rewarding does not avoid enemies, punishing does not protect relatives. This is the most fair and just principle in the world. I dare not go against it, so I owe it to my sister.

古文：己丑，诏以长孙无忌为太子太师，房玄龄为太傅，萧瑀为太保，李世勣为詹事，瑀、世勣并同中书门下三品。
现代文：己丑，太宗下诏任命长孙无忌为太子太师，房玄龄为太傅，萧为太保，李世为太子詹事，萧、李世同为同中书门下三品。
English: At the same time, Emperor Taizong issued an edict to appoint the eldest grandson as the prince daishi, Fang Xuanling as the taifu, Xiao as the taibo, Li Shih as the prince Zhan Zhi, and Xiao and Li Shidong as the three lower grades of the same school.

古文：同中书门下三品自此始。
现代文：同中书门下三品这一位同宰相的要职从此开始。
English: The important position of the Third Rank, the same as that of the Prime Minister, began at this time.

古文：又以左卫大将军李大亮领右卫率，前詹事于志宁、中书侍郎马周为左庶子，吏部侍郎苏勖、中书舍人高季辅为右庶子，刑部侍郎张行成为少詹事，谏议大夫褚遂良为宾客。
现代文：又任命左卫大将军李大亮领右卫率，前任太子詹事于志宁、中书侍郎马周为左庶子，吏部侍郎苏勖、中书舍人高季辅为右庶子，刑部侍郎张行成为少詹事，谏议大夫褚遂良为太子宾客。
English: He also appointed the General of the Left Division of Guards Li Dayang to lead the Right Division of Guards, the former Crown Prince Zhan Zhi Yu Shining, the Junior Secretary Ma Zhou as the left illegitimate son, the Junior Secretary Su Shi, the Junior Secretary Gao Ji Fu as the right illegitimate son, the Junior Secretary Zhang Xing as the Junior Secretary of the Department of Justice, and the Vice-Chairman of the Council of State Su Su Liang as the guest of the Crown Prince.

古文：李世勣尝得暴疾，方云 须灰可疗 ；上自剪须，为之和药。
现代文：李世勣曾得暴病，药方说 胡须烧成灰可治疗 ，太宗剪下自己的胡须，为他配药。
English: Li Shijun had a severe illness, and the prescription said that his beard could be treated by burning it to ashes. Taizong cut off his own beard and prescribed medicine for him.

古文：世勣顿首出血泣谢。
现代文：李世勣连连磕头哭谢，直至头颅出血。
English: Li Shijuan repeatedly bowed his head in tears until his head bled.

古文：上曰： 为社稷，非为卿也，何谢之有！ 
现代文：太宗说： 这是为了社稷江山，并非为你个人，有什么可谢的？ 
English: Taizong said: This is for the sake of society, not for you personally, what is there to be grateful for?

古文：世勣尝侍宴，上从容谓曰： 朕求群臣可托幼孤者，无以逾公，公往不负李密，岂负朕哉！ 
现代文：李世勣曾侍奉太宗饮宴，太宗和缓地对他说： 朕一心想找到一个可以托孤的大臣，没有人能超过你的，往年你曾经不负于李密，岂能辜负朕！ 
English: Lee Sedol once served Emperor Taizong at a banquet. Emperor Taizong gently said to him, "I only want to find a minister who can rely on me. No one can surpass you. In previous years, you were not inferior to Li Mi. How can you be inferior to me!

古文：世勣流涕辞谢，啮指出血，因饮沉醉；上解御服以覆之。
现代文：李世勣流着泪辞谢，咬破指头沾血为誓，喝得酩酊大醉，太宗解下身上的皇袍给他披上。
English: With tears streaming down his face, Li Shih-tao thanked the emperor, bit his finger so hard that it bled, swore that he would never drink again, and was so drunk that the imperial robe from Emperor Taizong's body was draped over him.

古文：癸巳，诏解魏王泰雍州牧、相州都督、左武侯大将军，降爵为东莱郡王。
现代文：癸巳，太宗下诏解除魏王李泰的雍州牧、相州都督、左武候大将军等职务，降爵位为东莱郡王。
English: At the same time, Emperor Taizong issued an edict to relieve Wei King Li Tai of his posts as Yongzhou magistrate, Xiangzhou governor, and Zuowu general, and he was demoted to the rank of Donglai county king.

古文：泰府僚属为泰所亲狎者，皆迁岭表；以杜楚客兄如晦有功，免死，废为庶子。
现代文：李泰王府的僚属中凡是李泰的亲信，都迁徙流放到岭南；杜楚客因兄长杜如晦有功，免去死罪，废为平民。
English: Among the retainers of King Li Tai's palace, all of Li Tai's close followers were exiled to Lingnan; Du Chu's followers were exempted from the death penalty because of their brother Du Ru's obscure achievements, and were abolished as commoners.

古文：给事中崔仁师尝密请立魏王泰为太子，左迁鸿胪少卿。
现代文：给事中崔仁师曾私下请求立魏王李泰为太子，降职为鸿胪寺少卿。
English: During the incident, Cui Renshi had privately requested that the Wei King Li Tai be made the crown prince, and that he be demoted to the position of the junior secretary of Hongyu Temple.

古文：庚子，定太子见三师仪：迎于殿门外，先拜，三师答拜；每门让于三师。
现代文：庚子，规定太子见三师的礼仪：在殿门外迎接，太子先拜，三师答拜；每道门都要让三师先行。
English: Geng Zi prescribed the etiquette for the prince to meet the three divisions: to meet outside the palace gate, the prince should bow first, and the three divisions should bow in return; the three divisions should be allowed to go ahead of the prince at each gate.

古文：三师坐，太子乃坐。
现代文：三师坐下后，太子才能坐下。
English: After the three masters sit down, the prince can sit down.

古文：其与三师书，前后称名、 惶恐 。
现代文：太子给三师的书启，前后自称名字加 惶恐 二字。
English: The prince gave the opening of the book to the three divisions, adding the word "panic" before and after his own name.

古文：五月，癸酉，太子上表，以 承乾、泰衣服不过随身，饮食不能适口，幽忧可愍，乞敕有司，优加供给。 
现代文：五月，癸酉，太子上表章，言道： 李承乾与李泰只有随身几件衣服，饮食也不能对口味，幽禁忧愁可怜，请求敕令有关官署，优厚供给他们。 
English: In May, the crown prince, wearing a watch badge, said: Li Chengqian and Li Tai only have a few clothes with them, the food is not to their taste, the confinement is pitiful, please order the relevant government departments to provide them with a generous allowance.

古文：上从之。
现代文：太宗应允。
English: Emperor Dezong accepted his suggestion.

古文：黄门侍郎刘洎上言，以 太子宜勤学问，亲师友。
现代文：黄门侍郎刘洎上书言道： 太子应当勤学好问，亲善师友。
English: Huangmen waiter Liu Xuan said in his letter: The prince should study hard and be a good friend.

古文：今入侍宫闱，动逾旬朔，师保以下，接对甚希，伏愿少抑下流之爱，弘远大之规，则海内幸甚！ 
现代文：如今太子入侍宫闱，动辄超过十天半个月，太师太保以下官员，很少与太子应对答问，希望能稍微抑制一下对子孙的爱心，弘扬传之久远的规制，则是天下百姓的幸事。 
English: Nowadays, it often takes more than ten days and a half months for the crown prince to enter the palace, and officials below the daishi taibo rarely answer questions with the prince, hoping to restrain their love for their children and grandchildren a little, and carry forward the long-standing regulation, which is a blessing for the people of the world.

古文：上乃命洎与岑文本、褚遂良、马周更日诣东宫，与太子游处谈论。
现代文：于是太宗让刘洎与岑文本、褚遂良、马周几个人轮流到东宫，与太子相处谈论政事。
English: As a result, Emperor Taizong asked Liu Bei, Zou Wenwen, Zou Suiliang, and Ma Zhou to take turns going to the East Palace to discuss political affairs with the prince.

古文：六月，己卯朔，日有食之。
现代文：六月，己卯朔，出现日食。
English: In June, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：丁亥，太常丞邓素使高丽还，请于怀远镇增戍兵以逼高丽。上曰：  远人不服，则修文德以来之 。未闻一二百戍兵能威绝域者也！ 
现代文：丁亥，太常寺丞邓素出使高丽回到朝廷，请求太宗在怀远镇增派戍边兵力以威逼高丽，太宗说： 孔子说： 远方的人不服从，则勤修文德来招抚他们 ，未听说靠一二百个士兵就能威镇远方的。 
English: Emperor Taizong asked Emperor Taizong to send more troops to the border to intimidate Goryeo in the town of Huaiyuan. Emperor Taizong said, "Confucius said, 'If people in faraway places do not obey, then diligently study the classics to appease them.' I had not heard that one or two hundred soldiers could dominate a faraway town."

古文：丁酉，右仆射高士廉逊位，许之，其开府仪同三司、勋封如故，仍同门下中书三品，知政事。
现代文：丁酉，尚书右仆射高士廉请求退职，太宗应允，开府仪同三司的职衔和勋位封邑仍保留，而且仍是同门下中书三品，参知政事。
English: Ding Xi, Shang Shuxu's right-hand man, Gao Shicun, requested to retire, and Taizong agreed. The title of Kaifu Yi and the titles of the three departments and the honorary title of the fief are still retained, and it is still the same as the three prizes of Zhongshu and the governor of the political affairs.

古文：闰月，辛亥，上谓侍臣曰： 朕自立太子，遇物则诲之，见其饭，则曰： 汝知稼穑之艰难，则常有斯饭矣。 
现代文：闰六月，辛亥，太宗对身边大臣说： 朕自从立李治为太子，遇见任何事情都亲加教诲，看见他用饭，就说： 你知道耕稼的艰难就能常吃上这些饭。 
English: In the leap month of June, Xinhai, Taizong said to the ministers around him, "Since I made Li Zhi the crown prince, I have personally taught him everything. When I saw him eating, I said, "You know how hard it is to farm, you can always eat these meals."

古文：见其乘马，则曰： 汝知其劳逸，不竭其力，则常得乘之矣。 
现代文：看见他骑马，就说： 你知道马要劳逸结合，不耗尽马的力量，就能经常骑着它。 
English: When he saw him riding a horse, he said, "You know that a horse is a combination of work and rest, and you can ride it often without exhausting its strength.

古文：见其乘舟，则曰： 水所以载舟，亦所以覆舟，民犹水也，君犹舟也。 
现代文：看见他坐船，则说： 水能够载船，也能够翻船，百姓便如同这水，君主便如同这船。 
English: When he saw him in a boat, he said, "Water can carry a boat and overturn it. The people are like this water, and the prince is like this boat."

古文：见其息于木下，则曰： 木从绳则正，后从谏则圣。  
现代文：见到他在树下休息，则说： 木头经过墨线处理才能正直，君主能纳谏者才为圣君。  
English: When they saw him resting under a tree, they said: "Only wood treated with ink can be honest, and only a monarch who can accept bribes can be a saint."

古文：丁巳，诏太子知左、右屯营兵马事，其大将军以下并受处分。
现代文：丁巳，太宗下诏让太子掌管左、右屯营兵马事宜，屯营大将军以下的官员都要受其节制。
English: However, Emperor Taizong issued an edict to let the prince be in charge of the left and right camp soldiers and horses, and all officials below the camp general were subject to his restraint.

古文：薛延陀真珠可汗使其侄突利设来纳币，献马五万匹，牛、橐驼万头，羊十万口。
现代文：薛延陀真珠可汗派他的侄子突利设到唐帝国纳聘礼，拟献马五万匹，牛、骆驼一万头，羊十万只。
English: Xueyantuo Pearl Khan sent his nephew Tu Li to the Tang Empire to pay a bride price, intending to offer fifty thousand horses, ten thousand cattle and camels, and one hundred thousand sheep.

古文：庚申，突利设献馔，上御相思殿，大飨群臣，设十部乐，突利设再拜上寿，赐赉甚厚。
现代文：庚申，突利设献上食物，太宗亲临相思殿，大宴群臣，设立十部乐曲，突利设再次行礼祝寿，太宗赏赐突利设十分丰厚。
English: Goshun, Tuli offered food, Taizong personally visited the hall of lovesickness, a large banquet of ministers, set up ten pieces of music, Tuli offered another ceremony to celebrate his birthday, and Taizong rewarded Tuli with a very rich gift.

古文：契苾何力上言： 薛延陀不可与昏。 
现代文：契何力上书言道： 不可与薛延陀通婚。 
English: He wrote in his will: "You must not marry Xue Yentao."

古文：上曰： 吾已许之矣，岂可为天子而食言乎！ 
现代文：太宗说： 朕已经答应他们了，怎么可以身为天子而却自食其言呢？ 
English: Emperor Taizong said, "I have already promised them, so how can I, as the Son of Heaven, go back on my word?

古文：何力对曰： 臣非欲陛下遽绝之也，愿且迁延其事。
现代文：何力答道： 我不是想要陛下立刻回绝他们，只是希望暂且延缓此事。
English: Ho Li replied, "I don't want Your Majesty to reject them immediately, but I hope to delay the matter for the time being."

古文：臣闻古有亲迎之礼，若敕夷男使亲迎，虽不至京师，亦应至灵州；彼必不敢来，则绝之有名矣。
现代文：我听说自古有迎亲礼仪，假如陛下敕令夷男让他迎亲，即使不到长安来，也要到灵州；夷男必定不敢前来，则回绝他有理由了。
English: I heard that there has been a greeting etiquette since ancient times. If His Majesty commands a barbarian to come and greet him, even if he does not come to Chang'an, he must come to Lingshou. If the barbarian does not dare to come, then there is a reason to refuse him.

古文：夷男性刚戾，既不成昏，其下复携贰，不过一二年必病死，二争立，则可以坐制之矣！ 
现代文：夷男性情刚直暴戾，既然不能与大唐通婚，其部下又怀有二心，不过一二年便会病死，他的二个儿子争夺王位，到那时陛下可以轻易制服他们。 
English: The Yi men are stubborn and violent, since they cannot marry with the Great Tang, and their subordinates are double-minded, but they will die of illness in a year or two, and his two sons are competing for the throne, by which time His Majesty can easily subdue them.

古文：上从之，乃征真珠可汁使亲迎，仍发诏将幸灵州与之会。
现代文：太宗听从其意见，于是征召真珠可汗让他前来迎亲，又发布诏书说将要在灵州与他相见。
English: Emperor Taizong listened to his opinion, so he summoned Pearl Khan to let him come to meet his relatives, and issued an edict saying that he would meet him in Lingzhou.

古文：真珠大喜，欲诣灵州，其臣谏曰： 脱为所留，悔之无及！ 
现代文：真珠十分高兴，想要亲到灵州，其大臣劝谏说： 倘若被对方扣留，到那时后悔都来不及！ 
English: Pearl was very happy and wanted to go to Lingshou in person. Her minister advised her: "If you are detained by the other side, you won't have time to regret it!

古文：真珠曰： 吾闻唐天子有圣德，我得身往见之，死无所恨，且漠北必当有主。我行决矣，勿复多言！ 
现代文：真珠说： 我听说大唐天子有圣王的德行，我能亲自前去见他一面，至死都无遗憾。而且漠北必然会有人主事，我去的决心已定，不必再多说了。 
English: Pearl said, "I have heard that Datang Tianzi has the virtue of a holy king. If I could go and see him in person, I would not regret it for the rest of my life. Moreover, there is bound to be someone in charge in the north. My decision to go has already been made. I don't need to say any more."

古文：上发使三道，受其所献杂蓄。
现代文：太宗接连三次派使节，接受薛延它所献的牲畜。
English: Emperor Taizong sent envoys three times in succession to accept the livestock offered by Xue Yan.

古文：薛延陀先天库厩，真珠调敛诸部，往返万里，道涉沙碛，无水草，耗死将半，失期不至。
现代文：薛延陀先前库房没有马厩，真珠可汗便征调各部落马牛羊等，往返一万多里，途经沙漠地带，没有水和草，牲畜消耗损失将近一半，过了迎亲期限没有到。
English: Prior to Xueyantuo, the storehouse did not have stables, so the Pearl Khan conscripted horses, cattle and sheep from various tribes, traveling more than ten thousand miles, passing through the desert, without water and grass, livestock consumption loss of nearly half, and did not arrive after the welcoming period.

古文：议者或以为聘财未备而与为昏，将使戎狄轻中国，上乃下诏绝其昏，停幸灵州，追还三使。
现代文：有人议论认为聘礼未准备齐便与之通婚，这会使北方少数族轻视唐朝。太宗于是下诏回绝其婚姻，停止巡幸灵州，并追还三次派出的使节。
English: Some people argued that the Northern minority would despise the Tang Dynasty if the bridegroom married the bride before the bride was ready. Emperor Taizong therefore issued an edict rejecting the marriage, stopping the tour of Lingshou, and returning the envoys sent three times.

古文：褚遂良上疏，以为： 薛延陀本一俟斤，陛下荡平沙塞，万里萧条，馀寇奔波，须有酋长，玺书鼓纛，立为可汗。
现代文：褚遂良上奏疏认为： 薛延陀可汗本来是突厥的一个首领，陛下当年荡平沙漠，万里萧条少有人烟，殊余势力奔波投靠，须有一个酋长，于是才赐给他鼓和大旗，立为可汗。
English: Sui Liang Shang So So thought: Xueyantuo Khan was originally a Turkic leader. His majesty once leveled the desert, there were few people in the depression, and superfluous forces rushed to help. There had to be a chief, so he was given a drum and a flag and became a khan.

古文：比者复降鸿私，许其姻媾，西告吐蕃，北谕思摩，中国童幼，靡不知之。
现代文：近来又降下大恩，应允与他们通婚，西面告知吐番，北面通知思摩，连大唐朝中的儿童也都知道此事。
English: Recently, a great favor was bestowed upon him, and he agreed to marry them. The west side told him about Tuban, and the north side told him about Sima. Even children in the middle of the Great Tang Dynasty knew about this.

古文：御幸北门，受其献食，群臣四夷，宴乐终日。
现代文：陛下又行幸北门，接受他们敬献食物，群臣与边远地区，都整日宴饮庆贺。
English: His Majesty also visited the North Gate to receive their offerings of food, and the courtiers and outlying areas all feasted and celebrated throughout the day.

古文：咸言陛下欲安百姓，不爱一女，凡在含生，孰不怀德。
现代文：都说陛下为了安抚天下百姓，不爱惜自己的女儿，芸芸众生，谁不感恩戴德。
English: They all said that in order to appease the people of the world, His Majesty did not spare his own daughter and all living beings. Who would not be grateful?

古文：今一朝生进退之意，有改悔之心，臣为国家惜兹声听；所顾甚少，所失殊多，嫌隙既生，必构边患。
现代文：如今一朝陡生变化，有改悔之意，我深深为朝廷的声誉受损而惋惜；这样一来得到的很少，而失去的却很多，也会产生隔阂，必然会遭致边境不安宁。
English: Now, with the sudden change of government, there is a sense of repentance, and I deeply regret the damage to the reputation of the imperial court; as a result, little has been gained, but much has been lost, estrangement will also occur, and border unrest will inevitably occur.

古文：彼国蓄见欺之怒，此民怀负约之惭，恐非所以服远人、训戎士也。
现代文：薛延陀深怀被欺辱的怨恨，百姓也感受到背约的羞愧，恐怕这不是绥服远方、训教边兵的办法。
English: Xue Yanta harbored deep resentment of being bullied, and the people also felt the shame of breaking the contract. I'm afraid this is not the way to subdue the far away and train the frontier soldiers.

古文：陛下君临天下十有七载，以仁恩结庶类，以信义抚戎夷，莫不欣然，负之无力，何惜不使有始有卒乎！
现代文：陛下即位治理天下已有十七年了，以仁义恩惠交结百姓，以诚信礼义安抚边远地区，天下百姓没有不佩服的。背约实在是没有道理，为什么就不能善始善终呢？
English: It has been seventeen years since His Majesty ascended the throne to rule the world. He has united the people with benevolence, righteousness and grace, and pacified the remote areas with honesty, courtesy and righteousness. The people of the world have nothing to be ashamed of. There is really no reason to break the agreement. Why can't we have a good beginning and a good end?

古文：夫龙沙以北，部落无算，中国诛之，终不能尽，当怀之以德，使为恶者在夷不在华，失信者在彼不在此，则尧、舜、禹、汤不及陛下远矣！ 
现代文：龙沙城以北，薛延陀的部落众多，朝廷想要讨伐他们，终究不能全都消灭干净，应当对他们抚以德义，使正义掌握在朝廷手中而不是在对方手中，失信的在对方而不在我方。做到这些，则是尧、舜、禹、汤等人远不及陛下了。 
English: There are many tribes of Xueyantuo north of Longsha City. If the imperial court wants to fight them, it will not be able to wipe them all out completely. They should be treated with virtue and justice, so that justice is in the hands of the imperial court, not in the hands of the other side, and betrayal is in the other side, not in our side. To do these things, Yu, Yu, Yu, Tang and others are far from your majesty.

古文：上不听。
现代文：太宗不听其谏议。
English: The Emperor did not listen to him.

古文：是时，群臣多言： 国家既许其昏，受其聘币，不可失信戎狄，更生边患。 
现代文：当此时，众位大臣大都说道： 朝廷既然答应与他们通婚，又接受了人家的聘礼，就不可失信于薛延陀，以免又生边乱。 
English: At this time, most of the ministers said: Since the imperial court has agreed to marry them and accepted the bride price, it must not lose faith in Xue Yantao, so as to avoid another border riot.

古文：上曰： 卿曹皆知古而不知今。
现代文：太宗说： 你们这些人都是只知古而不知今。
English: Emperor Taizong said, "You people only know the past, but not the present.

古文：昔汉初匈奴强，中国弱，故饰子女、捐金絮以饵之，得事之宜。
现代文：从前汉初匈奴强大，中原汉王朝削弱，所以要装扮子女，送金银财物以做为诱饵，在当时是合乎时宜的。
English: At the beginning of the Former Han Dynasty, the Xiongnu was powerful and the Central Plains Han Dynasty was weak, so it was timely to dress up their children and give them gold, silver and property as bait.

古文：今中国强，戎狄弱，以我徒兵一千，可击胡骑数万。薛延陀所以匍匐稽颡，惟我所欲，不敢骄慢者，以新为君长，杂姓非其种族，欲假中国之势以威服之耳。
现代文：如今中原强大，北方少数族削弱，以我大唐的一千步兵，可以击败他们的数万骑兵，所以薛延陀肯卑躬屈膝，满足我们的要求，不敢稍有傲慢，是因为他们刚刚立了可汗，属下杂姓部族不少，想要借着大唐的势力以威慑制服他们。
English: Today, the Central Plains are strong, the northern minorities are weak, and with my one thousand foot soldiers of the Great Tang, I can defeat their tens of thousands of cavalry. Therefore, Xue Yanduo was willing to grovel and meet our demands, and did not dare to be a little arrogant, because they had just set up a khan, and there were many subordinate miscellaneous tribes, and they wanted to use the power of the Great Tang to subdue them with deterrence.

古文：彼同罗、仆骨、回纥等十馀部，兵各数万，并力攻之，立可破灭，所以不敢发者，畏中国所立故也。
现代文：他们中的同罗、仆骨、回纥等十多个部族，各有兵力几万人，如果他们合力攻打薛延陀，可以立即攻破取胜，之所以不敢轻举妄动，是因为畏惧是我大唐所立的可汗。
English: Among them, there are more than ten tribes such as the Tongluo, Hubei, and Hui, each with tens of thousands of troops. If they jointly attack Xueyantuo, they can immediately defeat and win. The reason why they do not dare to act rashly is because they are afraid of the khan set up by My Great Tang.

古文：今以女妻之，彼自恃大国之婿，杂姓谁敢不服！
现代文：如今将宗室女嫁给他，他们必然自恃是大国的女婿，其他部族谁还敢不服！
English: Now that he has married his daughter-in-law, they are bound to think of themselves as the son-in-law of a great power, and who among the other tribes would dare to disagree!

古文：戎狄人面兽心，一旦微不得意，必反噬为害。
现代文：这些戎狄人面兽心，一旦稍不满意，必会反咬一口，造成祸害。
English: Once they are a little dissatisfied, they will bite back and cause harm.

古文：今吾绝其昏，杀其礼，杂姓知我弃之，不日将瓜剖之矣，卿曹第志之。 
现代文：现在我们回绝其婚姻，停止接受他们的聘礼，其他部族得知我们抛弃了他们，很快会将他们瓜分豆剖，你们只须记住朕说过的话。 
English: Now that we've rejected their marriages and stopped accepting their dowries, and the other tribes know we've abandoned them and will soon be carving them up, just remember what I said.

古文：臣光曰：孔子称去食、去兵，不可去信。
现代文：臣司马光曰：孔子说宁可去掉食物和军队，但是不可以丢弃信用。
English: Minister Sima Guang said: Confucius said that it is better to get rid of food and troops, but you cannot discard trust.

古文：唐太宗审知薛延陀不可妻，则初勿许其昏可也；既许之矣，乃复恃强弃信而绝之，虽灭薛延陀，犹可羞也。
现代文：唐太宗深知不能与薛延陀通婚，则当初不答应与其成亲即可以了，既然答应薛延陀，又依仗强势背信弃义回绝对方，这样即使灭掉了薛延陀也足可羞愧。
English: Emperor Taizong of Tang was well aware that he could not marry Xue Yantuo, so he did not agree to marry him at the beginning. Since he agreed to marry Xue Yantuo, he relied on his strength to betray the truth and return to the absolute side. In this way, even if he eliminated Xue Yantuo, he would be ashamed.

古文：王者发言出令，可不慎哉！ 
现代文：君王发号施令，能不慎重吗？
English: When the king gives an order, can he be careless?

古文：上曰： 盖苏文弑其君而专国政，诚不可忍。以今日兵力，取之不难，但不欲劳百姓，吾欲且使契丹、靺鞨扰之，何如？ 
现代文：太宗说： 盖苏文杀死高丽国王而独掌国政，实在是不能忍受，以我方今日的兵力，攻取他们并不难，只是不想劳扰百姓，朕想暂且先让契丹、骚扰他们，怎么样？ 
English: Taejong said, "It's really unbearable that Gaesoo Man killed the King of Goryeo and took sole control of state affairs. With our current military strength, it's not difficult to capture them. I just don't want to bother the people. I'd like to let Khitan harass them for the time being. How about that?"

古文：长孙无忌曰： 盖苏文自知罪大，畏大国之讨，必严设守备，陛下姑为之隐忍，彼得以自安，必更骄惰，愈肆其恶，然后讨之，未晚也。 
现代文：长孙无忌说： 盖苏文自己也知道罪行严重，害怕大国的讨伐，必然要严加防备，陛下稍稍容忍一些，他得以自我保全，必然会更加骄横，更加无恶不作，此后再去讨伐，也不算晚啊。 
English: The eldest grandson said without hesitation: Gaisuwen himself also knows that the crime is serious and is afraid of the crusade of the great powers, so he must be strictly prepared. His majesty tolerates a little more, so that he can protect himself, he will inevitably be more arrogant and more innocent. After that, it is not too late to go to the crusade.

古文：上曰： 善！ 
现代文：太宗说： 很好！ 
English: Emperor Wu said: You said it well!

古文：戊辰，诏以高丽王藏为上柱国、辽东郡王、高丽王，遣使持节册命。
现代文：戊辰，太宗颁布诏令封高丽王高藏为上柱国、辽东郡王、高丽王，派使节携带旌节前往册封。
English: At that time, Emperor Taizong issued an imperial edict to crown King Gaozang of Goryeo as Shangzhuang, King of Liaodong County, and King of Goryeo, and sent envoys to carry the imperial seal.

古文：丙子，徙东莱王泰为顺阳王。
现代文：丙子，改封东莱王李泰为顺阳王。
English: Cun Zi changed the title of Donglai King Li Tai to Shunyang King.

古文：初，太子承乾失德，上密谓中书侍郎兼左庶子杜正伦曰： 吾儿足疾乃可耳，但疏远贤良，狎昵群小，卿可察之。
现代文：起初，太子李承乾德行丧失，太宗私下对中书侍郎兼左庶子杜正伦说： 我儿承乾如果仅有脚病倒还说得过去，只是他疏远贤良，亲昵小人。
English: At first, Prince Ri Seung Kyeong lost his virtue, and Taejong privately said to Du Chung Lun, the steward of the Chinese Academy of Letters and the left illegitimate son: If my son, Ri Seung Kyeong, only had a foot ailment, it would be manageable, but he alienated the virtuous and befriended the villains.

古文：果不可教示，当来告我。 
现代文：你应当加以监察，如果真不可教诲，请你来告诉我。 
English: Observe it, and if it is unteachable, tell me.

古文：正伦屡谏，不听，乃以上语告之。
现代文：杜正伦多次劝谏李承乾都不听，杜正伦便将太宗对他讲的话告诉承乾。
English: Du Zhenglun repeatedly urged Li Chengqian not to listen, and Du Zhenglun then told Chengqian what Taizong had told him.

古文：太子抗表以闻，上责正伦漏泄，对曰： 臣以此恐之，冀其迁善耳。 
现代文：太子上表章给太宗，太宗责怪杜正伦泄露此事，杜正伦答道： 我想用陛下的话恐吓他，希望他能弃恶从善。 
English: The crown prince gave the seal to Taizong, and Taizong blamed Du Zhenglun for leaking the matter. Du Zhenglun replied, "I want to use Your Majesty's words to intimidate him, hoping that he will abandon evil and do good."

古文：上怒，出正伦为穀州刺史。
现代文：太宗大怒，降杜正伦为谷州刺史。
English: Taizong was so angry that he demoted Du Zhenglun to the position of secretary of state of Guizhou.

古文：及承乾败，秋，七月，辛卯，复左迁正伦为交州都督。
现代文：等到李承乾谋反事败露，秋季，七月，辛卯，又将杜正伦降职为交州都督。
English: When Li Chengqian's countermeasures failed, Du Zhenglun was demoted to the post of the governor of Jiaozhou in the fall and July.

古文：初，魏征尝荐正伦及侯君集有宰相材，请以君集为仆射，且曰： 国家安不忘危，不可无大将，诸卫兵马宜委君集专知。 
现代文：起初，魏徵曾经推荐杜正伦与侯君集有宰相之才，请求任命侯君集为仆射，而且说： 朝廷安定不忘危亡，不可以没有大将，各宿卫兵马应该委派君集专管。 
English: At first, Wei Zheng had recommended Du Zhenglun and Hou Junji for the post of prime minister, and requested the appointment of Hou Junji as a subordinate, and said: The stability of the imperial court should not forget the danger of death, it is not possible to have a general, and each inn guard should be assigned to be in charge of the monarchs.

古文：上以君集好夸诞，不用。
现代文：太宗认为君集喜欢自我夸耀，没有重用。
English: Taizong thought that Junji liked to boast and did not have much use.

古文：及正伦以罪黜，君集谋反诛，上始疑征阿党。
现代文：等到后来杜正伦因泄露罪被贬职，侯君集因参与谋反被处死，太宗开始怀疑魏徵有结党营私之嫌。
English: Later, when Du Zhenglun was demoted for the crime of leaking, and Hou Junji was executed for participating in the conspiracy, Taizong began to suspect Wei Zhao of forming a faction.

古文：又有言征自录前后谏辞以示起居郎褚遂良者，上愈不悦，乃罢叔玉尚主，而踣所撰碑。
现代文：又有人上书言称魏徵自己抄录前后在朝中的谏言给起居郎褚遂良看，太宗更加不高兴，于是罢除魏徽的儿子魏叔玉娶公主一事，并毁坍所撰碑石。
English: Another person wrote that Wei Zheng's sermons, which he had transcribed before and after his visit to the court, were so good that Emperor Taizong was even more displeased. Therefore, Emperor Taizong dismissed Wei Hui's son Wei Shuyu from marrying the princess and destroyed the inscribed stone.

古文：初，上谓监修国史房玄龄曰： 前世史官所记，皆不令人主见之，何也？ 
现代文：起初，太宗曾对以宰相身份监修国史的房玄龄说： 前代史官所记的吏事，都不让君主看见，这是为什么？ 
English: At first, Emperor Taizong once said to Fusa Genro, who supervised the national history as the prime minister: Why is it that the previous historians did not allow the monarch to see the records of officials?

古文：对曰： 史官不虚美，不隐恶，若人主见之必怒，故不敢献也。 
现代文：答道： 史官不虚饰美化，也不隐匿罪过，如果让皇上看见必然会动怒，所以不敢进呈。 
English: He replied: Historians do not embellish, nor do they hide sins. If the emperor were to see them, he would certainly be angry, so he did not dare to present them.

古文：上曰： 朕之为心，异于前世帝王。
现代文：太宗说： 朕的志向不同于前代君主。
English: Emperor Taizong said, "My aspiration is different from the previous monarch.

古文：欲自观国史，知前日之恶，为后来之戒，公可撰次以闻。 
现代文：朕想亲自翻阅当朝国史，知道先前的过失，以做为以后的借鉴，希望你撰写完成后上呈给朕看看。 
English: I would like to read the history of the Han Dynasty myself, to know the previous mistakes, and to use it as a reference for the future. I hope you will submit it to me after you have finished writing it.

古文：谏议大夫硃子奢上言： 陛下圣德在躬，举无过事，史官所述，义归尽善。
现代文：谏议大夫朱子奢上书言道： 陛下身怀圣德，行动没有过失，史官所记述的，按理都是尽善尽美的事。
English: Dr. Zhu Zi, a leading scholar, summed it up in his epistle: Your Majesty is endowed with sanctity, your actions are without fault, and the things recorded by historians are, by definition, the best and most beautiful.

古文：陛下独览《起居》，于事无失，若以此法传示子孙，窃恐曾、玄之后或非上智，饰非护短，史官必不免刑诛。
现代文：陛下惟独要翻阅《起居注》，这对史官记事当然无所损失，假如将此规定传示给子孙后代，恐怕到了曾孙，玄孙之后偶有并非最明智的君主，掩饰过错袒护短处，史官必然难以避免身遭刑罚诛戮。
English: His Majesty only has to look through the "Resident's Note," which of course has nothing to lose for historians. If this provision is passed on to future generations, I am afraid that after great-grandchildren and great-great-grandchildren, there will occasionally be monarchs who are not the wisest, who cover up their mistakes and protect their shortcomings. Historians will inevitably find it difficult to avoid being punished.

古文：如此，则莫不希风顺旨，全身远害，悠悠千载，何所信乎！
现代文：如此下去，则史官们都顺从旨意行事，远避危害，那么悠悠千载的历史，有什么可相信的呢？
English: If this continues, then the historians will all act in accordance with the will and avoid harm, so what is there to believe in the history of thousands of years?

古文：所以前代不观，盖为此也。 
现代文：所以说前代君主不观看国史，正是为了这个缘故。 
English: So it is for this reason that the previous monarch did not watch the national history.

古文：上不从。
现代文：太宗不听其谏言。
English: The emperor did not listen.

古文：玄龄乃与给事中许敬宗等删为《高祖》、《今上实录》；癸巳，书成，上之。
现代文：房玄龄便与给事中许敬宗等删改成《高祖实录》和《今上实录》；癸巳，书写成，呈上太宗。
English: Fang Xuanling and Xu Jingzong, who were present at the event, then edited and changed it into "Gao Zu Shih Lu" and "Jing Shang Shih Lu"; when it was written, it was presented to Emperor Taizong.

古文：上见书六月四日事，语多微隐，谓玄龄曰： 昔周公诛管、蔡以安周，季友鸩叔牙以存鲁。朕之所以，亦类是耳，史官何讳焉！ 
现代文：太宗见书中记载武德九年六月四日玄武门之变，用辞多隐讳曲折，便对房玄龄说： 历史上周公诛灭管叔、蔡叔以定周朝，季友毒死叔牙以保存鲁国，朕当年的所作所为，正与此类似，史官有什么可隐讳的！ 
English: Taizong saw that the change of the Xuanwu Gate on June 4th, the 9th year of Wu De's reign was recorded in the book, with many hidden twists and turns in the words, so he said to Fang Xuanling: Historically, Zhou Gongyi exterminated Uncle Guan, Cai Shu used to establish the Zhou Dynasty, Ji You poisoned Uncle Fang to preserve Lu, and what I did that year was similar to this. Historians have nothing to hide!

古文：即命削去浮词，直书其事。
现代文：立即命令删削浮华之词，秉笔直书杀李建成、李元吉事。
English: He immediately ordered that the glitzy words be cut out and that Li Jiancheng and Li Yuanji should be killed in a straightforward manner.

古文：八月，庚戌，以洛州都督张亮为刑部尚书，参预朝政；以左卫大将军、太子右卫率李大亮为工部尚书。
现代文：八月，庚戌，朝廷任命洛州都督张亮为刑部尚书，参预朝政；任命左卫大将军、太子右卫率李大亮为工部尚书。
English: In August of the Heian period, the imperial court appointed Zhang Liang, the governor of the city of Luozhou, as the secretary of the criminal department and a member of the pre-imperial government, and appointed Li Da Liang, the left guard general and the prince of the right guard, as the secretary of the industrial department.

古文：大亮身居三职，宿卫两宫，恭俭忠谨，每宿直，必坐寐达旦。
现代文：李大亮身居三项要职，宿卫两宫，谦恭忠正谨慎，每次护卫值勤，必定坐着假寐直到天亮。
English: Li Da-liang held three important positions. He was the chief guard of the two palaces. He was modest and prudent. Every time he was on guard duty, he would sit and sleep until dawn.

古文：房玄龄甚重之，每称大亮有王陵、周勃之节，可当大位。
现代文：房玄龄非常敬重他，多次称李大亮有王陵、周勃的气节，可以担当大的职位。
English: Fang Xuanling respected him very much. He said many times that Li Dayang had the temperament of Wang Ling and Zhou Bo, and could take on big positions.

古文：初，大亮为庞王兵曹，为李密所获，同辈皆死，贼帅张弼见而释之，遂与定交。
现代文：起初，李大亮为庞玉的兵曹，被李密抓获，原来的同伙都被处斩，大将张弼见李大亮而将其释放，二人遂定交情。
English: At first, Li Dalyang was a petty officer of Pangyu. He was captured by Li Mi, and his original accomplices were all beheaded. General Zhang Qian saw Li Dalyang and released him, and the two made friends.

古文：及大亮贵，求弼，欲报其德，弼时为将作丞，自匿不言。
现代文：等到李大亮身居显贵，开始寻找张弼，想报答他的救命之恩，张弼当时官做将作监丞，自己隐匿不说。
English: When Li Dayuang became a dignitary, he began to look for Zhang Ye, wanting to repay him for saving his life. At the time, Zhang Ye was an official and would act as a supervisor, but he hid himself.

古文：大亮遇诸途而识之，持弼而泣，多推家赀以遣弼，弼拒不受。
现代文：李大亮在道上遇见张弼而认出他来，扶着张弼掉泪，并将自己的家产送给张弼，张弼拒不接受。
English: Li Dayang met Zhang Ye on the road and recognized him, helped Zhang Ye shed tears, and gave his family property to Zhang Ye, but Zhang Ye refused to accept it.

古文：大亮言于上，乞悉以其官爵授弼，上为之擢弼为中郎将。
现代文：李大亮将此事上禀太宗，请求将自己的官职爵位全都授予张弼，太宗为了李大亮的缘故提拔张弼为中郎将。
English: Li Dayang brought the matter to the attention of Taizong, requesting that all of his official titles and ranks be awarded to Zhang Ye. For Li Dayang's sake, Taizong promoted Zhang Ye to the rank of lieutenant general.

古文：时人皆贤大亮不负恩，而多弼之不伐也。
现代文：当时人都称赞李大亮不负恩情，也赞扬张弼不自我炫耀。
English: At that time, people praised Li Dayang for not being ungrateful, and also praised Zhang Ye for not showing off.

古文：九月，庚辰，新罗遣使言百济攻取其国四十馀城，复与高丽连兵，谋绝新罗入朝之路，乞兵救援。
现代文：九月，庚辰，新罗派使节来称百济攻取他国中四十多座城，又与高丽国联合，图谋断绝新罗到唐朝的通道，因而请求派兵救援。
English: In September, Gengchen, Silla sent an envoy to claim that Baekje had captured more than forty cities in other countries, and also united with Korea to attempt to cut off Silla's access to the Tang Dynasty, thus requesting the dispatch of troops for rescue.

古文：上命司农丞相里玄奖赍玺书赐高丽曰： 新罗委质国家，朝贡不乏，尔与百济各宜戢兵；若更攻之，明年发兵击尔国矣！ 
现代文：太宗命令司农寺丞相里玄奖带皇帝玺书前往高丽，对他们说： 亲罗归顺我大唐，每年不停朝贡，你们与百济都停止兵战，假如再行攻打，明年大唐就要发兵攻伐你们国家。 
English: Taizong ordered Li Xuan Rong, minister of the Sino-Tibetan Temple, to go to Goryeo with the emperor's imperial edict and said to them: Submit to my Great Tang Dynasty, pay tribute every year, and stop war with Baekje. If you attack again, the Great Tang Dynasty will send troops to attack your country next year.

古文：癸未，徙承乾于黔州。
现代文：癸未，将李承乾流放到黔州。
English: Soon after, Li Chengxian was exiled to Ganzhou.

古文：甲午，徙顺阳王泰于均州。
现代文：甲午，将顺阳王李泰流放到均州。
English: In the afternoon of the 1st day of the 1st month, the Shunyang King Li Tai was exiled to Junzhou.

古文：上曰： 父子之情，出于自然。
现代文：太宗说： 父子之情，是出自于自然。
English: Taizong said, "The father-son relationship comes from nature.

古文：朕今与泰生离，亦何心自处！
现代文：朕如今与李泰生而离别，还有什么心思自处！
English: Now that I am parting with Li Taisheng, what other thoughts do I have?

古文：然朕为天下主，但使百姓安宁，私情亦可割耳。 
现代文：然而朕为天下人的君主，只要能使百姓生活安宁，私情也当割舍呀。 
English: However, I am the ruler of the people of the world. As long as I can make the people live peacefully, personal feelings should also be abandoned.

古文：又以泰所上表示近臣曰： 泰诚为俊才，朕心念之，卿曹所知；但以社稷之故，不得不断之以义，使之居外者，亦所以两全之耳。 
现代文：又将李泰所上表文拿给身边大臣看，并说： 李泰实在是有才智，朕常常念叨他，你们也都知道，但是为了社稷江山，不得不以道义与他断绝亲情，让他居住在遥远的地方，这也是两全之策呀。 
English: He also showed the above statement of Li Tai to the ministers around him, and said: Li Tai is really talented, I often talk about him, you all know, but for the sake of the society, we have to break off the family relationship with him in a moral way and let him live in a distant place. This is also the best of both worlds.

古文：先是，诸州长官或上佐岁首亲奉贡物入京师，谓之朝集使，亦谓之考使；京师无邸，率僦屋与商贾杂居。
现代文：先前，各州的长官和高级佐僚年初亲自带着贡品进京，称之为朝集使，也称为考使。京城没有官邸，便大都租房子与商人们杂处在一起。
English: Previously, governors and senior aides from various prefectures went to Beijing in person at the beginning of the year with their tributes. They were called chosenshi or kousen. Since there were no official residences in Beijing, most of them rented houses and mingled with merchants.

古文：上始命有司为之作邸。
现代文：此时太宗命令有关部门为他们修建宫邸。
English: At this time, Emperor Taizong ordered the relevant departments to build a palace for them.

古文：冬，十一月，己卯，上礼圜丘。
现代文：冬季，十一月，己卯，太宗到圜丘祭祀。
English: In the winter, in November, Ji Yu and Taizong went to Mengqiu for a ritual.

古文：初，上与隐太子、巢剌王有隙，密明公赠司空封德彝阴持两端。
现代文：起初，太宗与隐太子李建成、巢刺王李元吉有隔阂，密明公赠司空封德彝暗中骑墙。
English: At first, Emperor Taizong had a rift with Prince Li Jiancheng, the Prince of Yin, and Prince Li Yuanji, the Prince of Nest, and Emperor Mimei gave him the title of Sikuo Feng Deyu to secretly ride on the wall.

古文：杨文幹之乱，上皇欲废隐太子而立上，德彝固谏而止。
现代文：杨文叛乱后，太上皇李渊想要废掉隐太子李建成而改立太宗，封德彝执意劝谏而停止。
English: After Yang Wen's rebellion, the retired emperor Li Yuan wanted to abolish the crown prince Li Jiancheng and set up a new emperor. However, Emperor Dezong persisted in persuading him to stop.

古文：其事甚秘，上不之知，薨后乃知之。
现代文：此事非常隐秘，太宗并不知道，等德彝死后才知道。
English: This was a very secret matter, and Emperor Taizong did not know about it, and only learned about it after Emperor Dezong's death.

古文：壬辰，治书侍御史唐临始追劾其事，请黜官夺爵。
现代文：壬辰，治书侍御史唐临开始追究弹劾其事，请求罢黜封氏官职爵位。
English: In Imjin, the chief secretary, Shi Tanglin, began to investigate the impeachment and requested the removal of the official title and peerage.

古文：上命百官议之，尚书唐俭等议： 德彝罪暴身后，恩结生前，所历众官，不可追夺，请降赠改谥。 
现代文：太宗让文武百官商议此事，尚书唐俭等人议论道： 德彝的罪过暴露在他死后，恩义结于生前，历任各种官职，不宜追究夺回，请求降赠官改封谥号。 
English: Emperor Taizong asked hundreds of civil and military officials to discuss the matter, and Shangshu Tang Jian and others discussed the matter: the sins of De Zheng were exposed after his death, the gratitude was made while he was alive, he held various official positions, it is not appropriate to investigate and recapture, and request the surrendering official to change the title.

古文：诏黜其赠官，改谥曰缪，削所食实封。
现代文：太宗下诏罢除所赠官职，改谥号为缪，削掉所得食邑和实封户。
English: Emperor Taizong issued an edict to revoke the official post he had bestowed, change his surname to Miao, and cut off his income from food stores and households.

古文：敕选良家女以实东宫；癸巳，太子遣左庶子于志宁辞之。
现代文：太宗敕令遴选大族良家女子以充实太子东宫；癸巳，太子派左庶子于志宁辞谢。
English: Emperor Taizong's edict ordered the selection of a woman from a high-ranking family to fill the East Palace of the crown prince; however, the prince's illegitimate son, Yu Shining, declined the offer.

古文：上曰： 吾不欲使子孙生于微贱耳。
现代文：太宗说： 我不过是不想让子孙们生于微贱之人。
English: Taizong said, "I'm just a person who doesn't want my children and grandchildren to be born into poverty.

古文：今既致辞，当从其意。 
现代文：如今既然致书辞退，理当遵从其本意。 
English: Now that the letter of resignation has been sent, it is reasonable to follow its original intention.

古文：上疑太子仁弱，密谓长孙无忌曰： 公劝我立雉权，雉奴懦，恐不能守社稷，奈何！
现代文：太宗怀疑太子过于仁义软弱，私下里对长孙无忌说： 你一再劝我立李治为太子，李治过于懦弱，恐怕他不能守护好社稷江山，怎么办呢？
English: Emperor Taizong suspected that the prince was too benevolent and weak, and privately said to his eldest grandson: You have repeatedly advised me to appoint Li Zhi as the prince, Li Zhi is too weak, I'm afraid he can't protect the society and the country, what should I do?

古文：吴王恪英果类我，我欲立之，何如？ 
现代文：吴王李恪英武果断很象我，我想要立他为太子，怎么样？ 
English: Wu Wang Li Ke Ying Wu resolutely like me, I want to make him a prince, how about it?

古文：无忌固争，以为不可。
现代文：长孙无忌执意争辩，以为不能这么做。
English: The eldest grandson was adamant that he couldn't do it.

古文：上曰： 公以恪非己之甥邪？ 
现代文：太宗说： 你因为李恪不是你的外甥吗？ 
English: Taizong said: Aren't you your nephew because of Li Jia?

古文：无忌曰： 太子仁厚，真守文良主；储副至重，岂可数易？
现代文：无忌说： 太子仁义厚道，真正是守成的有文才的君主；太子皇储的位置至关重大，怎么可以多次更改呢？
English: There is no need to say: The crown prince is benevolent and virtuous, and he is truly a monarch with literary talent; the position of the crown prince is crucial, how can it be changed many times?

古文：愿陛下熟思之。 
现代文：望陛下再细细考虑这件事。 
English: I hope His Majesty will reconsider this matter.

古文：上乃止。
现代文：太宗于是不再有此种想法。
English: The Emperor finally stopped.

古文：十二月，壬子，上谓吴王恪曰： 父子虽至亲，及其有罪，则天下之法不可私也。
现代文：十二月，壬子，太宗对吴王李恪说： 父子之间虽然是至亲，一旦犯罪，则天下的法令不能够偏私。
English: In December, Emperor Taizong said to King Wu Li Ke: Although father and son are close relatives, if they commit a crime, the laws of the world cannot be biased.

古文：汉已立昭帝，燕王旦不服，阴图不轨，霍光折简诛之。
现代文：汉朝已立昭帝，燕王刘旦不服，暗中图谋造反，霍光以一封便笺就杀了他。
English: The Han Dynasty had already established Emperor Zhao, but Yan Wang Liu Dan was not satisfied and secretly plotted to rebel. Huo Guang killed him with a note.

古文：为人臣子，不可不戒！ 
现代文：为人臣下，不能不深以为诫！ 
English: As a vassal, one cannot but be deeply admonished!

古文：庚申，车贺幸骊山温汤；庚午，还宫。
现代文：庚申，太宗车驾巡幸骊山温泉；庚午，回到宫中。
English: Goshun and Taizong drive around Shaoshan Hot Spring; in the afternoon, they return to the palace.

古文：贞观十八年甲辰，公元六四四年春，正月，乙未，车驾幸钟官城；庚子，幸鄠县；壬寅，幸骊山温汤。
现代文：贞观十八年春季，正月，乙未，太宗车驾行幸钟官城；庚子，临幸县；壬寅，游幸骊山温泉。
English: In the spring of the eighteenth year of Zhenguan, in the first month of the eighteenth year of the eighteenth year of the eighteenth year of the eighteenth year of the eighteenth year of the eighteenth year of the eighteenth year of the eighteenth year of the eighteenth year of the eighteenth year of the eighteenth year of the eighteenth year of the eighteenth year of the eighteenth year of the eighteenth year of the eighteenth year of the eighteenth year of the eighteenth year of the eighteenth year of the eighteenth year.

古文：相里玄奖至平壤，莫离支已将兵击新罗，破其两城，高丽王使召之，乃还。
现代文：相里玄奖到达平壤，莫离支已经率领部队进攻新罗，攻下两座城，高丽王派人召兵，这才回师。
English: When Emperor Xuanzong of Goryeo arrived in Pyongyang, Mo Yizhi had already led his troops to attack Silla, capturing two cities. The king of Goryeo sent someone to call up troops, and only then did he return to his division.

古文：玄奖谕使勿攻新罗，莫离支曰： 昔隋人入寇，新罗乘衅侵我地五百里，自非归我侵地，恐兵未能已。 
现代文：玄奖传谕使他们不要再攻打新罗，莫离支说： 以前隋朝东征高丽，新罗乘机侵蚀高丽土地五百里，如果他们不归还侵占我们的土地，恐怕难以休战。 
English: The Emperor's edict told them not to attack Silla again. Mo Yizhi said: In the past, when the Sui Dynasty invaded Korea, Silla took the opportunity to encroach on 500 miles of Korean land. If they do not return the land they occupied, I am afraid it will be difficult to reach a truce.

古文：玄奖曰： 既往之事，焉可追论！
现代文：玄奖说： 既往的事何必再去追究呢？
English: Xuanzang said, "Why do we have to investigate the past?

古文：至于辽东诸城，本皆中国郡县，中国尚且不言，高丽岂得必求故地！ 
现代文：至于说辽东各城，本来都是中原帝国的郡县，中原帝国尚且没有过问，高丽怎么可能一定要回故有的地地呢？ 
English: As for the cities in Liaodong, they were originally counties of the Central Plains Empire, and the Central Plains Empire has not asked, how can Korea return to the original land?

古文：莫离支竟不从。
现代文：莫离支最后没有听其劝告。
English: In the end, the Mo branch did not listen to his advice.

古文：二月，乙巳朔，玄奖还，且言其状。
现代文：二月，乙巳朔，相里玄奖回到京城，详悉禀报出使高丽的情况。
English: In February, at the stroke of midnight, Sori Hyun-soo returned to the capital to learn more about the situation of the dispatched envoy, Goryeo.

古文：上曰： 盖苏文弑其君，贼其大臣，残虐其民，今又违我诏命，侵暴邻国，不可以不讨。 
现代文：太宗说： 盖苏文杀死其国王，迫害高丽大臣，残酷虐待百姓，如今又违抗我的诏令，侵略邻国，不能不讨伐他。 
English: Taejong said, "Gaisowon killed his king, persecuted the minister of Goryeo, cruelly mistreated the people, and now he is defying my edict and invading neighboring countries. We must fight him."

古文：谏议大夫褚遂良曰： 陛下指麾则中原清晏，顾眄则四夷詟服，威望大矣。
现代文：谏议大夫褚遂良说： 陛下麾旗所指则中原大地平定，眼睛一转则四方民族归服，威望无与伦比。
English: Dr. Zou Suiliang said: His Majesty's raising of the flag signifies the pacification of the Central Plains, and the peoples of the four directions will be subdued in the blink of an eye. His prestige is unparalleled.

古文：今乃渡海远征小夷，若指期克捷，犹可也。万一蹉跌，伤威损望，更兴忿兵，则安危难测矣。 
现代文：如今却要渡海远征小小的高丽，如果捷报指日可待还可以；万一遭遇挫折，损伤威望，再引起百姓起兵反抗，则朝廷的安危难以预测呀！ 
English: Now, however, they want to cross the sea to make an expedition to tiny Korea. If the good news is just around the corner, that's fine; if they encounter setbacks, damage their prestige, and cause the people to rise up in revolt, then the safety of the imperial court is difficult to predict!

古文：李世勣曰： 间者薛延陀入寇，陛下欲发兵穷讨，魏征谏而止，使至今为患。
现代文：李世说： 当年薛延陀进犯，陛下想要发兵讨伐，魏徵谏阻而作罢，使之直到今日仍为祸患。
English: Li Shih said, "When Xue Yantao attacked, His Majesty wanted to send troops to fight, but Wei opposed it, making it a disaster to this day.

古文：向用陛下之策，北鄙安矣。 
现代文：那时如果采用陛下的策略，北方边区可保安宁。 
English: At that time, if His Majesty's strategy is adopted, the northern border areas will be safer.

古文：上曰： 然。
现代文：太宗说： 是这样。
English: His last position was that of Taijo-jo.

古文：此诚征之失，朕寻悔之而不欲言，恐塞良谋故也。 
现代文：这一点实在是魏徵的过失；朕不久即后悔而不想说出来，是怕因此而堵塞了进献良策的缘故。 
English: This was actually a mistake on Wei Zheng's part; I soon regretted it and didn't want to say it out of fear that it would block the introduction of good ideas.

古文：上欲自征高丽，褚遂良上疏，以为： 天下譬犹一身：两京，心腹也；州县，四支也；四夷，身外之物也。
现代文：太宗想要亲自去征伐高丽，褚遂良上奏疏说： 天下便如同人的整个身体：长安洛阳，如同是心脏；各州县如同四肢；四方少数民族，乃是身外之物。
English: Emperor Taizong wanted to personally conquer Korea, so he sent a message to Emperor Sui Liang: "The world is like a person's entire body: Chang'an and Luoyang are like the heart; the provinces and counties are like the limbs; the ethnic minorities in the four directions are external things.

古文：高丽罪大，诚当致讨，但命二、三猛将将四五万众，仗陛下威灵，取之如反掌耳。
现代文：高丽罪恶极大，诚然应当陛下亲去讨伐，然而命令二三个猛将率领四五万士兵，仰仗着陛下的神威，攻取他们易如反掌。
English: Goryeo's evil is extremely great, and it is true that His Majesty should personally go to fight, however, ordering two or three fierce generals to lead four hundred and fifty thousand soldiers, relying on His Majesty's divine power, it is easy to capture them.

古文：今太子新立，年尚幼稚，自馀籓屏，陛下所知，一旦弃金汤之全，逾辽海之险，以天下之君，轻行远举，皆愚臣之所甚忧也。 
现代文：如今太子刚刚封立，年龄还很幼小，其他藩王情况，陛下也都清楚，一旦离开固守的安全地域，越辽海的险境，身为一国之主，轻易远行，这些都是我所深觉忧虑的事。 
English: Now that the crown prince has just been enthroned, he is still very young, and His Majesty is also well aware of the situation of other lords of the realm. As soon as I leave the safety zone that I have firmly adhered to, the dangerous situation of crossing the Liao Sea, and as the lord of a country, I can easily travel far away. These are all things that I am deeply worried about.

古文：上不听。
现代文：太宗不听他的谏议。
English: The Emperor did not listen to him.

古文：时群臣多谏征高丽者，上曰： 八尧、九舜，不能冬种，野夫、童子，春种而生，得时故也。
现代文：当时大臣们多有谏阴太宗征伐高丽的，太宗说： 八个尧帝，九个舜帝，也不能冬季种粮；乡村野夫及儿童少年，春季播种，作物才生长，这是得其时令。
English: At that time, most of the ministers were Shanyin Taizong's conquest of Goryeo. Taizong said: "Eight emperors, nine emperors, cannot grow grain in winter; rural wild men and children, sow seeds in spring, and crops will grow. This is the right time."

古文：夫天有其时，人有其功。
现代文：天有它的时令，人有他的功效。
English: Heaven has its own season, man has his own effect.

古文：盖苏文陵上虐下，民延颈待救，此正高丽可亡之时也。议者纷纭，但不见此耳。 
现代文：盖苏文欺凌国王暴虐百姓，老百姓翘首企盼救援，此正是高丽应当灭亡的时令，议论者纷纭不休，只是因为未看到这个道理。 
English: Gaesuwen bullied the king, brutalized the people, and the people looked forward to rescue. This was the time when Goryeo should perish, and the commentators argued endlessly, just because they did not see this truth.

古文：己酉，上幸灵口；乙卯，还宫。
现代文：己酉，太宗巡幸灵口；乙卯，回到宫中。
English: Ji Yao, Taizong toured the palace; Yi Wu, returned to the palace.

古文：三月，辛卯，以左卫将军薛万彻守石卫大将军。
现代文：三月，辛卯，任命左卫将军薛万彻暂时代理右卫大将军。
English: In March, Xinwu appointed General of the Left Division, Xue Wanche, as the acting General of the Right Division for the time being.

古文：上尝谓侍臣曰： 于今名将，惟世勣、道宗、万彻三人而已，世勣、道宗不能大胜，亦不大败，万彻非大胜则大败。 
现代文：太宗曾对身边的大臣说： 当今的著名将领，只有李世、李道宗、薛万彻三人称得上，世、道宗不能取得大胜，但也没有大败，万彻则不是大胜就是大败。 
English: Taizong once said to the ministers around him: Today's famous generals, only Li Shih, Li Daozong, and Xue Wanche can be called the best three. Shih and Daozong cannot achieve a great victory, but there is no great defeat. Wanche is either a great victory or a great defeat.

古文：夏，四月，上御两仪殿，皇太子侍。
现代文：夏季，四月，太宗亲临两仪殿，皇太子在旁侍奉。
English: In the summer, in April, Emperor Taizong personally visited the Hall of the Two Ceremonies, with the crown prince serving alongside.

古文：上谓群臣曰： 太子性行，外人亦闻之乎？ 
现代文：太宗对众大臣说： 太子的性情，外面的人可曾听说过吗？ 
English: Emperor Taizong said to the ministers, "Has the outside world ever heard of the prince's temper?

古文：司徒无忌曰： 太子虽不出宫门，天下无不钦仰圣德。 
现代文：司徒长孙无忌说： 太子虽然没有出过宫门，天下人无不敬仰其德行。 
English: The great-grandson of Stowe said: Although the prince did not leave the palace, people all over the world admire his virtue.

古文：上曰： 吾如治年时，颇不能御常度。
现代文：太宗说： 我像李治这个年龄，不能够循规蹈距，照常规办事。
English: Taizong said, "I'm at the same age as Li Zhi, and I can't follow the rules and do things as usual.

古文：治自幼宽厚，谚曰： 生子如狼，犹恐如羊。 
现代文：李治自幼就待人宽厚，古谚说： 生男孩如狼，还担心他象羊一样。 
English: Li Zhi treated people generously since he was a child. An ancient proverb says: If a boy is born like a wolf, be afraid that he will turn out like a sheep.

古文：冀其稍壮，自不同耳。 
现代文：希望他稍大些，自然有所不同呀。 
English: Let's hope he's a bit bigger, he'll make a difference.

古文：无忌对曰： 陛下神武，乃拨乱之才，太子仁恕，实守文之德；趣尚虽异，各当其分，此乃皇天所以祚大唐而福苍生者也。
现代文：长孙无忌说： 陛下神明英武，乃是拨乱反正的大才；太子仁义宽厚，实是守成修德之才，志趣爱好虽然不同，但也各当其职分，此乃是皇天保护大唐国位而又降福于万民百姓。 
English: The eldest grandson said without hesitation: His Majesty's divine prowess and military prowess is a great talent for stirring up chaos; the prince's benevolence and generosity is actually a talent for cultivating virtue. Although their interests and hobbies are different, they should each fulfill their duties. This is the protection of the Great Tang Dynasty by the emperor and the blessing of the people.

古文：辛亥，上幸九成宫。
现代文：辛亥，太宗巡幸九成宫。
English: At the turn of the year, Emperor Taizong went on a tour of the Jiu Cheng Palace.

古文：壬子，至太平宫，谓侍臣曰： 人臣顺旨者多，犯颜则少，今朕欲自闻其失，诸公其直言无隐。 
现代文：壬子，到了太平宫，对身边的大臣们说： 大臣们顺从旨意的居多数，犯颜强谏者极少，如今朕想要听到关于朕的过失的话，诸位当直说无所隐瞒。 
English: When he arrived at the Taiping Palace, Ren Zi said to the ministers around him: The majority of ministers obey the will, and those who commit crimes are very few. Now I want to hear about my mistakes. You should say frankly that you have nothing to hide.

古文：长孙无忌等皆曰： 陛下无失。 
现代文：长孙无忌等都说： 陛下没有过失。 
English: The eldest grandson said, "Your Majesty did nothing wrong.

古文：刘洎曰： 顷有上书不称旨者，陛下皆面加穷诘，无不惭惧而退，恐非所以广言路。
现代文：刘洎说： 近来有人上书不合陛下圣意的，陛下都当面百般责备，上书者无不惭愧恐惧而退下，恐怕这不是广开言路的办法。 
English: Liu Wei said, "Recently, someone submitted a letter that was not in accordance with His Majesty's wishes. His Majesty rebuked them in front of His face in various ways. The person who submitted the letter was ashamed and retreated in fear. I'm afraid this is not a way to open up the path of speech.

古文：马周曰： 陛下比来赏罚，微以喜怒有所高下，此外不见其失。 
现代文：马周说： 陛下近来赏罚，略有因个人喜怒而有所高下的情况，此外没有见到过失。 
English: Ma Zhou said: His Majesty has recently given out rewards and punishments, and there have been some ups and downs due to personal emotions. In addition, he has not seen any mistakes.

古文：上皆纳之。
现代文：太宗都予以接受。
English: Emperor Taizong accepted it.

古文：上好文学而辩敏，群臣言事者，上引古今以折之，多不能对。
现代文：太宗喜欢文学而又思维敏捷善辩论，众位大臣上书言事，太宗引征古今事例以驳难，臣下多答不上来。
English: Taizong liked literature and was a quick thinker and a good debater. Many ministers wrote letters and made speeches. Taizong cited examples from the past and present to refute difficulties. His vassals could not answer many questions.

古文：刘洎上书谏曰： 帝王之与凡庶，圣哲之与庸愚，上下相悬，拟伦斯绝。
现代文：刘洎上书劝谏道： 帝王与平民，圣哲与庸人愚夫，上下相差悬殊，无与伦比。
English: Liu Ye wrote a letter to the emperor, exhorting him, "Emperor and commoner, sage and mediocre fool, there is a great disparity between the top and bottom, incomparable.

古文：是知以至愚而对至圣，以极卑而对至尊，徒思自强，不可得也。
现代文：由此可知以至愚对至圣，以最卑贱的对最尊贵的，白白地想着自强，也不可得到。
English: From this it can be seen that it is impossible to gain the most foolish for the most holy, the most lowly for the most exalted, in vain thinking of self-improvement.

古文：陛下降恩旨，假慈颜，凝旒以听其言，虚襟以纳其说，犹恐群下未敢对扬；况动神机，纵天辩，饰辞以折其理，引古以排其议，欲令凡庶何阶应答！
现代文：陛下降下恩旨，和颜悦色，倾听劝谏之言，虚心接纳臣下的意见，还担心臣下们未敢应对；何况陛下又灵动神思，发挥天辩巧慧，修饰辞藻以批驳他们的道理，引征古事以排解众议，这让凡夫百姓如何应答呢？
English: His Majesty sends down his grace, is amiable, listens to words of advice, humbly accepts the opinions of his subjects, but also worries that his subjects do not dare to respond; moreover, His Majesty is quick-witted, plays the skill of debate, embellishes words to refute their truth, and invokes ancient things to resolve public discussions. How does this make ordinary people respond?

古文：且多记则损心，多语则损气，心气内损，形神外劳，初虽不觉，后必为累。须为社稷自爱，岂为性好自伤乎！
现代文：而且博闻多记则损伤心思，多说话则伤气，心气损伤，形神劳顿，起初还没有察觉，以后必然成为牵累，望陛下为社稷江山而自爱身体，岂能为了兴趣爱好而自伤身体呢？
English: Moreover, if you read a lot, it will damage your mind; if you talk a lot, it will make you sad; if you are stressed, it will damage your mind; if you are overworked, you may not notice it at first, but it will inevitably become a burden. I hope that His Majesty will love his body for the sake of society, but can he hurt his body for the sake of his hobbies?

古文：至如秦政强辩，失人心于自矜；魏文宏才，亏从望于虚说。
现代文：至于秦始皇能言善辩，因自我夸耀而失去民心；魏文帝宏才伟略，因虚言妄论而有负众望。
English: As for Qin Shihuang, he could speak well and lost the people's hearts because of his self-aggrandizement; Wei Wendi was a great man, but he disappointed everyone's expectations because of his lies and delusions.

古文：此才辩之累，较然可知矣。 
现代文：这些由于辩才而受害的情形，还历历在目。 
English: These cases of those who have suffered as a result of their eloquence are all too familiar.

古文：上飞白答之曰： 非虑无以临下，非言无以述虑，比有谈论，遂致烦多，轻物骄人，恐由兹道，形神心气，非此为劳。
现代文：太宗书写飞白书答道： 没有思考则无法治理臣下，没有言语则无法表述思虑，近来议论国事，过分烦苛，高傲轻视他人，恐怕即由此产生，至于心神，则不是由此劳顿。
English: Taizong wrote to Feibai Shu and replied, "Without thought, you cannot govern your subjects; without words, you cannot express your thoughts; recently, when discussing state affairs, you have been excessively tiresome and haughtily despise others. I'm afraid this is the result, but as for the mind and spirit, this is not the result.

古文：今闻谠言，虚怀以改。 
现代文：如今听到你的直言谠论，当虚心改正。 
English: Now that I have heard your loyal and honest remarks, I must humbly correct them.

古文：己未，至显仁宫。
现代文：己未，车驾到显仁宫。
English: Before I knew it, I was driving to the Hsien-in Palace.

古文：上将征高丽，秋，七月，辛卯，敕将作大监阎立德等诣洪、饶、江三州，造船四百艘以载军粮。
现代文：太宗将要征伐高丽，秋季，七月，辛卯，敕令将作大监阎立德等人到洪、饶、江三州，造船只四百艘用来载运军粮。
English: Emperor Taizong was going to invade Korea, and in the autumn, in July, Emperor Xinwu ordered Yan Lide, the grand inspector, and others to go to Hong, Rao, and the Three Provinces of the Yangtze River to build 400 ships to transport military supplies.

古文：甲午，下诏遣营州都督张俭等帅幽、营二都督兵及契丹、奚、靺鞨先击辽东以观其势。
现代文：甲午，太宗下诏派营州都督张俭等率领幽州、营州二个都督府的兵马以及契丹、奚、族士兵先行进攻辽东，以观察形势。
English: In the afternoon of the 1st, Emperor Taizong sent Zhang Jian, the governor of Yingzhou, to lead the soldiers and horses of Yuzhou and Yingzhou's two governorates, as well as soldiers from the Khitan, Qiang and other ethnic groups, to attack Liaodong in advance to observe the situation.

古文：以太常卿韦挺为馈运使，以民部侍郎崔仁师副之，自河北诸州皆受挺节度，听以便宜从事。
现代文：任命太常寺卿韦挺为馈运使，民部侍郎崔仁师为副使，河北各州都接受韦挺节制统辖，听从他随时调遣。
English: He appointed Wei Ting, the chief priest of Taizhong Temple, as the envoy, and Cui Rinshi, the secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, as the deputy envoy. All the states in Hebei accepted Wei Ting's control and obeyed his dispatch at any time.

古文：又命太仆卿萧锐运河南诸州粮入海。
现代文：又任命太仆寺少卿萧锐运送河南各州粮草入海。
English: He also appointed Xiao Rui, the junior secretary of the Taipu Temple, to transport grain and grass from various states in Henan to the sea.

古文：锐，瑀之子也。
现代文：萧锐是萧的儿子。
English: Xiao Rui is the son of Xiao Wu.

古文：八月，壬子，上谓司徒无忌等曰： 人若不自知其过，卿可为朕明言之。 
现代文：八月，壬子，太宗对司徒长孙无忌等说： 人们苦于不自知过错，你可以为联言明。 
English: In August, in Renzi, Emperor Taizong said to the eldest grandson of the founder of the Jiuquan school, "People suffer from not knowing their own faults. You can be clear about the connection."

古文：对曰： 陛下武功文德，臣等将顺之不暇，又何过之可言！ 
现代文：无忌答道： 陛下的文德武功，我们这些人承顺都应接不暇，又有什么过错可言呢？ 
English: Without hesitation, he replied, "Your Majesty's literary and military exploits, we, the people of Zhonshun, are overburdened with responsibilities, so how can we be at fault?

古文：上曰： 朕问公以己过，公等乃曲相谀悦，朕欲面举公等得失以相戒而改之，何如？ 
现代文：太宗说： 朕向你们询问我的过失，你们却要曲意逢迎使我高兴，朕想要当面列举出你们的优缺点以互相鉴诫改正，你们看怎么样？ 
English: Emperor Taizong said, "I ask you about my faults, but you always want to please me. I want to list your strengths and weaknesses in front of you so that we can correct each other. What do you think?

古文：皆拜谢。
现代文：众大臣急忙磕头称谢。
English: The ministers hastily bowed their heads in thanks.

古文：上曰： 长孙无忌善避嫌疑，应物敏速，决断事理，古人不过；而总兵攻战，非其所长。
现代文：太宗说： 长孙无忌善于避开嫌疑，应答敏捷，断事果决超过古人；然而领兵作战，并非他所擅长。
English: Taizong said: The eldest grandson is good at avoiding suspicion, responding quickly, and deciding things more decisively than the ancients; however, he is not good at leading soldiers into battle.

古文：高士廉涉猎古今，必术明达，临难不改节，当官无朋党；所乏者骨鲠规谏耳。
现代文：高士廉涉猎古今，心术明正通达，面临危难不改气节，做官没有私结朋党；所缺乏的是直言规谏。
English: Gao Shiliang dabbles in the ancient and modern times, his mind is clear and upright, he does not change his mind in the face of danger, and he does not have a crony party when he is an official; what he lacks is a straightforward rule.

古文：唐俭言辞辩捷，善和解人；事朕三十年，遂无言及于献替。
现代文：唐俭言辞敏捷善辩，善解人纠纷；事奉朕三十年，却很少批评朝政得失。
English: Tang Jian was a quick talker and a good debater, good at resolving disputes; he served me for thirty years, but he rarely criticized the gains and losses of the imperial government.

古文：杨师道性行纯和，自无愆违；而情实怯懦，缓急不可得力。
现代文：杨师道性情温和，自身少有过失；而性格实怯懦，缓急之务不可依托。
English: Yang Shiduo is mild-mannered and seldom makes mistakes; however, his personality is cowardly and cannot be relied on for urgent matters.

古文：岑文本性质敦厚，文章华赡；而持论恒据经远，自当不负于物。
现代文：岑文本性情质朴敦厚，文章做的华美；然而持论常依远大规划，自然不违于事理。
English: The nature of the text is simple and dignified, and the articles are beautifully done; however, the theories often rely on far-reaching plans, which naturally does not contradict the facts.

古文：刘洎性最坚贞，有利益；然其意尚然诺，私于朋友。
现代文：刘洎性格最坚贞，讲究利人；然而崇尚然诺信用，对朋友有私情。
English: Liu Yao is the most steadfast character and pays attention to benefiting others; however, he advocates loyalty and has personal feelings for his friends.

古文：马周见事敏速，性甚贞正，论量人物，直道而言，朕比任使，多能称意。
现代文：马周处事敏捷，性情正直，品评人物，直抒胸臆，朕近来委任他做事，多能称心如意。
English: Ma Zhou is quick to deal with things, honest in nature, evaluates people, and speaks frankly. I recently appointed him to do things, and he is more than able to satisfy my heart.

古文：褚遂良学问稍长，性亦坚正，每写忠诚，亲附于朕，譬如飞鸟依人，人自怜之。 
现代文：褚遂良学问优于他人，性格也耿直坚贞，每每倾注他的忠诚，亲附于朕，如同飞鸟依人，人见了自然怜悯。 
English: Zou Suiliang's learning is superior to others, and his character is upright and steadfast. He always pours out his loyalty and is attached to me, just as a bird is attached to a person. People naturally feel pity when they see him.

古文：甲子，上还京师。
现代文：甲子，太宗回到京城。
English: At the same time, Emperor Taizong returned to Beijing.

古文：丁卯，以散骑常侍刘洎为侍中，行中书侍郎岑文本为中书令，太子左庶子中书侍郎马周守中书令。
现代文：丁卯，任命散骑常侍刘洎为侍中，代行中书侍郎职务的岑文本为中书令，太子左庶子中书侍郎马周暂时代理中书令。
English: Dingwu, appointed Zangjie's regular attendant Liu Zhen as a junior attendant, the official text of the acting junior attendant's duties was the junior attendant's order, and the prince's left illegitimate child, junior attendant's master Ma Zhou, temporarily acted as the junior attendant's order.

古文：文本既拜，还家，有忧色。
现代文：岑文本官拜中书令后，回到家中，面有忧色。
English: After bowing to the Chinese imperial edict, he returned home with a gloomy face.

古文：母问其故，文本曰： 非勋非旧，滥荷宠荣，位高责重，所以忧惧。 
现代文：他的母亲问他是什么原因，文本说： 我不是勋臣也不是故旧，枉蒙如此恩宠，官位高责任重，所以忧心忡忡。 
English: His mother asked him what the reason was, and the text said: "I am not a courtier, nor am I old-fashioned, I have been given such grace in vain, the post is highly responsible, so I am worried."

古文：亲宾有来贺者，文本曰： 今受吊，不受贺也。 
现代文：亲属宾客中有来称贺的，文本说： 现今只接受问，不接受贺喜。 
English: Among the guests who came to congratulate relatives, the text said: Today, only questions are accepted, and congratulations are not accepted.

古文：文本弟文昭为校书郎，喜宾客，上闻之不悦；尝从容谓文本曰： 卿弟过尔交结，恐为卿累；朕欲出为外官，何如？ 
现代文：岑文本的弟弟岑文昭官做校书郎，喜欢结交宾客，太宗听说后很不高兴；曾经和缓地对文本说： 你的弟弟过分沉溺于交往，恐怕会牵累到你，朕想让他到外地去做官，你看怎么样？ 
English: Emperor Taizong was very unhappy when he heard that the younger brother of Emperor Xianwen, Emperor Xianwen Zhao, was a school librarian and liked to make friends with guests. He once said to Emperor Xianwen, "Your younger brother is too fond of socializing, and I'm afraid he'll drag you down. I want him to go abroad to be an official. What do you think?"

古文：文本泣曰： 臣弟少孤，老母特所钟爱，未尝信宿离左右。
现代文：文本哭泣着说： 我弟弟年少时父亲即去世，我的老母亲特别钟爱他，从未让离开身边超过两天。
English: The text wept: My father died when my brother was young, and my old mother loved him dearly and never let him be away from her for more than two days.

古文：今若出外，母必愁悴，倘无元此弟，亦无老母矣。 
现代文：如今若是外出为官，母亲必然忧愁憔悴，倘如没有这位弟弟在身边，也会没有老母亲了。 
English: Now, if I go out to work, my mother is bound to be sad, and if I don't have this brother by my side, I won't have my old mother.

古文：因歔欷呜咽。上愍其意而止，惟召文昭严戒之，亦卒无过。
现代文：因而泣不成声，太宗怜悯他的孝心而打消原来的想法。只是召见岑文昭严厉训斥，文昭也终没有犯错误。
English: As a result, he could not stop crying. Taizong took pity on his filial piety and dispelled the original idea. However, he summoned Yu Wenzhao for a severe reprimand. Wenzhao did not make a mistake in the end.

古文：九月，以谏议大夫褚遂良为黄门侍郎，参预朝政。
现代文：九月，任命谏议大夫褚遂良为黄门侍郎，参预朝政。
English: In September, he was appointed as the Yellow Gate's chamberlain and took part in the pre-imperial government.

古文：焉耆贰于西突厥，西突厥大臣屈利啜为其弟娶焉耆王女，由是朝贡多阙；安西都护郭孝恪请讨之。
现代文：焉耆国同时臣服于西突厥，西突厥大臣屈利啜为自己的弟弟娶焉耆王的女儿为妻，从此焉耆对唐朝的贡赋多有缺漏；安西都护郭孝恪请求派兵讨伐。
English: At the same time, Yan'an was subject to the West Turk, and the West Turk minister Qu Lishu married the daughter of the King of Yan'an as his brother's wife. From then on, Yan'an's tribute to the Tang Dynasty was often lacking; Guo Xiaoqiao, the protector of Anxi, requested to send troops to fight.

古文：诏以孝恪为西州道行军总管，帅步骑三千出银山道以击之。
现代文：太宗降诏任命郭孝恪为西州道行军总管，统率三千步骑兵出银山道进攻焉耆。
English: Emperor Taizong issued an edict of abdication, appointing Guo Xiaoqi as the commander-in-chief of marching troops on Xizhou Road. Guo led 3,000 infantry and cavalry troops out of Yinshan Road to attack Yan'an.

古文：全焉耆王弟颉鼻兄弟三人至西州，孝恪以颉鼻弟栗婆准为乡导。
现代文：正赶上焉耆王的弟弟颉鼻兄弟三人路经西州，孝恪便让颉鼻的弟弟栗婆准做向导。
English: Just in time to catch up with Yan Xuan Wang's younger brother, Yan Xuan, the three brothers were passing through Xizhou. Xiao Ke then asked Yan Xuan's younger brother, Li Po, to act as a guide.

古文：焉耆城四面皆水，恃险而不设备，孝恪倍道兼行，夜，至城下，命将士浮水而渡，比晓，登城，执其王突骑支，获首虏七千级，留栗婆准摄国事而还。
现代文：焉耆城四面环水，仗恃地势险恶而不加防备。郭孝恪部队昼夜兼程急行军，夜晚到了城下，命令将士们囚水渡河，将近拂晓时，登上城楼，抓获焉耆王突骑支，打死打伤七千人，留下栗婆准代理国政，领兵马还师。
English: Yancheng was surrounded by water on all sides, and the situation was perilous, and no precautions were taken. Guo Xiao and his troops marched rapidly both day and night, and when night came to the city, they ordered the soldiers to cross the river, and when it was nearly dawn, they ascended the city tower, captured Yancheng Wang's cavalry detachment, killed and wounded seven thousand people, and left the chestnut as the deputy of state affairs, leading the soldiers back to the division.

古文：孝恪去三日，屈利啜引兵救焉耆，不及，执栗婆准，以劲骑五千，追孝恪至银山，孝恪还击，破之，追奔数十里。
现代文：郭孝恪离开后三天，屈利啜带兵前来救授，已经迟了一步，便抓起栗婆准，令五千轻骑兵追赶到银山，郭孝恪领兵还击，将屈利啜打得大败，又追击了数十里。
English: Three days after Guo Xiao Ke's departure, Qu Li Si led an army to come to rescue him. He was already one step late, so he grabbed the chestnuts and ordered five thousand light cavalry to chase him to Yin Shan. Guo Xiao Ke led an army to fight back, defeated Qu Li Si and chased him for dozens of miles.

古文：辛卯，上谓侍臣曰： 孝恪近奏称八月十一日往击焉耆，二十日应至，必以二十二日破之。朕计其道里，使者今日至矣！ 
现代文：辛卯，太宗对身边大臣们说： 郭孝恪近日上奏称八月十一日前去进攻焉耆，二十日应该到达该国，必定会在二十二日攻城取胜，朕计算其来回里程，使者今日也该前来报喜了。 
English: Xinwu, Taizong said to the ministers around him: Guo Xiaoqi recently reported that he would attack Yan'an before August 11, that he should arrive in the country on the 20th, and that he would surely attack the city on the 22nd. I calculated his round-trip mileage, and the messenger should come today to report the good news.

古文：言未毕，驿骑至。
现代文：话还没说完，驿站快骑就到了。
English: Before the words were out of my mouth, the stagecoach arrived.

古文：西突厥处那啜使其吐屯摄焉耆，遣使入贡。
现代文：西突厥处那啜让其手下将领代理焉耆国政，并派使者入朝进贡。
English: At that time, the West Turk government allowed its generals to act as agents of state affairs, and sent emissaries to the North to pay tribute.

古文：上数之曰： 我发兵击得焉耆，汝何人而据之！ 
现代文：太宗责备他们说： 我发兵击败焉耆，你们是何人，敢占据其国土？ 
English: Emperor Taizong scolded them, "I sent troops to defeat Yan Xuan, how many of you dare to occupy his land?"

古文：吐屯惧，返其国。
现代文：那位将领十分害怕，返回突厥。
English: Terrified, the general returned to Turkey.

古文：焉耆立栗婆准从父兄薛婆阿那支为王，仍附于处那啜。
现代文：焉耆拥立栗婆准堂兄薛婆阿那支为国王，仍然依附于处那啜。
English: Chidambaram's half-cousin, Shekpa Anas, who was crowned king, still clings to the throne.

古文：乙未，鸿胪奏 高丽莫离支贡白金。 
现代文：乙未，鸿胪寺奏称： 高丽国莫离支进贡白金。 
English: Eighty-two years later, Hongyeon-ji Temple made a report: Goryeo's Moryeong Branch paid tribute in platinum.

古文：褚遂良曰： 莫离支弑其君，九夷所不容，今将讨之而纳其金，此郜鼎之类也，臣谓不可受。 
现代文：褚遂良说： 莫离支杀死其国王，东方各族不会宽容他，如今将要讨伐他而又要收纳其贡品，这就如同春秋时鲁桓公向宋国取郜鼎一样，我觉得不能接受。 
English: Zou Suiliang said, "Mo Liizhi killed his king, and the Eastern nations would not tolerate him. Now they are going to fight him and collect his tribute. I find this unacceptable, just like Lu Huan's seizure of the throne of Song in the Spring and Autumn Period.

古文：上从之。
现代文：太宗听从他的意见。
English: Emperor Dezong accepted his suggestion.

古文：上谓高丽使者曰： 汝曹皆事高武，有官爵。
现代文：太宗对高丽国使者说： 你们都事奉前高丽国王高武，并有官爵。
English: Emperor Taizong said to the Koryo envoys, "You all serve the former Koryo king, Gao Moo, and have official titles.

古文：莫离支弑逆，汝曹不能复仇，今更为之游说以欺大国，罪孰大焉！ 
现代文：莫离支有杀君之罪，你们不能报仇，如今还要为他游说来欺骗我泱泱大国，罪恶极大。 
English: You can't avenge the crime of murdering the prince, and now you want to lobby for him to deceive our great country. This is a great sin.

古文：悉以属大理。
现代文：将使者们全部交付大理寺关押。
English: The envoys were all taken to Dali Temple for detention.

古文：冬，十月，辛丑朔，日有食之。
现代文：冬季十月，辛丑朔，出现日食。
English: In the winter of October, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：甲寅，车驾行幸洛阳，以房玄龄留守京师，右卫大将军、工部尚书李大亮副之。
现代文：甲寅，太宗车驾行幸洛阳，命令房玄龄留守京师，右卫大将军、工部尚书李大亮为副留守。
English: Emperor Jia and Emperor Taizong drove to Xingluoyang and ordered Fang Xuanling to stay behind as the Beijing division commander, and the commander of the Right Division of the Imperial Guards and the vice-commander of the Engineering Division, Shangshu Li Dayang, to stay behind.

古文：郭孝恪锁焉耆王突骑支及其妻子诣行在，敕宥之。
现代文：郭孝恪押送焉耆王突骑支及其妻子儿女到了太宗行幸的洛阳，太宗敕令宽宥他们。
English: Guo Xiaoqiu escorted Wang Tujie and his wife and children to Luoyang, where Emperor Taizong was on a pilgrimage, and Emperor Taizong ordered to pardon them.

古文：丁巳，上谓太子曰： 焉耆王不求贤辅，不用忠谋，自取灭亡，系颈束手，漂摇万里；人以此思惧，则惧可知矣。 
现代文：丁巳，太宗对太子说： 焉耆王不去访求贤臣辅政，不用忠良谋划国事，自取灭亡，颈手被捆束，漂泊万里。人们因这件事而想到畏惧，也就懂得什么是畏惧了。 
English: However, Emperor Taizong said to the Crown Prince, "If King Yan Xuan does not visit the wise men and ask them to assist him in governing the country, there is no need for him to plan the affairs of state, and he will perish by his own hand, be chained by the neck, and wander thousands of miles. People will think of fear because of this, and they will understand what fear is.

古文：己巳，畋于渑池之天池；十一月，壬申，至洛阳。
现代文：己巳，太宗在渑池县的天池打猎。十一月，壬申，回到洛阳行宫。
English: At that time, Taizong was hunting in Tianchi in Dianchi County. In November, he returned to Luoyang from Jinshin.

古文：前宜州刺史郑元璹，已致仕，上以其尝从隋炀帝伐高丽，召诣行在；问之，对曰： 辽东道远，粮运艰阻；东夷善守城，攻之不可猝下。 
现代文：前宜州刺史郑无已经退休在家，太宗因为他过去曾跟从隋炀帝讨伐高丽，特意将他召到行宫，问他讨伐高丽的计策，郑元答道： 辽东路途遥远，运粮较为艰难。高丽人善于守城，攻城不能很快攻下。 
English: Former Yizhou assassin Zheng Wu had already retired at home. Taizong, because he had followed the Sui and Qian dynasties to fight against Goryeo in the past, specially called him to the palace, and asked him about the strategy of fighting against Goryeo. Zheng Yuan replied: Liaodong is far away, and transporting grain is difficult. The Goryeo people are good at defending the city, and the city cannot be attacked quickly.

古文：上曰： 今日非隋之比，公但听之。 
现代文：太宗说： 今日已非隋朝时候可比，你只等着听好消息吧。 
English: Taizong said: Today is no longer comparable to the time of the Sui Dynasty. You just have to wait to hear the good news.

古文：张俭等值辽水涨，久不得济，上以为畏懦，召俭诣洛阳。
现代文：张俭等率领的部队正赶上辽水发大水，长时间渡不了河，太宗认为他们害怕对方，急召张俭到洛阳。
English: The troops led by Zhang Jian and others were catching up with Liao Shui Fa Dashui, and could not cross the river for a long time. Taizong thought that they were afraid of each other, and urgently summoned Zhang Jian to Luoyang.

古文：至，具陈山川险易，水草美恶；上悦。
现代文：张俭到后，详细陈述山川地势的险恶与平易，水草的丰美与恶劣，太宗听后很高兴。
English: After Zhang Jian arrived, he gave a detailed account of the dangerous and easy terrain of mountains and rivers, and the richness and badness of aquatic plants. Taizong was very happy after listening.

古文：上闻洺州刺史程名振善用兵，召问方略，嘉其才敏，劳勉之，曰： 卿有将相之器，朕方将任使。 
现代文：太宗听说州刺史程名振善于用兵打仗，便召见他问以方略，赞扬他才思敏捷，慰勉他，说道： 你有将相之才，朕将要对你有所任用。 
English: When Emperor Taizong heard that the statesman Cheng Zhen was good at using soldiers to fight, he summoned him to ask for strategies, praised him for his talent and quick thinking, comforted him, and said: You have the ability to match, I will make an appointment for you.

古文：名振失不拜谢，上试责怒，以观其所为，曰： 山东鄙夫，得一刺史，以为富贵极邪！
现代文：程名振失礼不拜谢，太宗假装恼怒，以观察他的态度，说道： 关东一个山村野夫，得到一个刺史职位，便认为是富贵之极了！
English: When Cheng Nanzhen made the mistake of not thanking him, Taizong pretended to be annoyed and observed his attitude, saying: A mountain villager in Guangdong who gets a post as a historian is considered to be extremely rich!

古文：敢于天子之侧，言语粗疏；又复不拜！ 
现代文：你竟敢在天子身边，言语粗鲁，而且还不拜谢！ 
English: How dare you be rude and ungrateful in the presence of the Son of God!

古文：名振谢曰： 疏野之臣，未尝亲奉圣问，适方心思所对，故忘拜耳。 
现代文：程名振谢罪道： 我本是粗疏之臣，未曾亲身恭奉过皇上的垂问，刚才只想着如何对答，所以忘了拜谢了。 
English: Chengna Zhen Xie Sin said, "I am a rough-hewn retainer. I have never personally submitted to the emperor's questions. I was just thinking about how to answer, so I forgot to thank him."

古文：举止自若，应对愈明辩。
现代文：举止自如，应答更为清楚。
English: Behave naturally and respond more clearly.

古文：上乃叹曰： 房玄龄处朕左右二十馀年，每见朕谴责馀人，颜色无主。
现代文：太宗于是感叹道： 房玄龄在朕身边二十多年，每次看见朕斥责别人，脸色惶恐不能自持。
English: Taizong then lamented, "Fang Xuanling has been with me for more than 20 years. Every time he sees me reprimanding others, his face turns red with fear and he can't help himself.

古文：名振平生未尝见朕，朕一旦责之，曾无震慑，辞理不失，真奇士也！ 
现代文：程名振平生未曾见过朕一面，朕一时责怪他，竟会毫无惧色，言语没有差错，真是天下的奇人！ 
English: Cheng Naming Zhen has never seen me in his life, I blame him for a moment, he would be fearless, there is no mistake in his words, he is truly a wonder of the world!

古文：即日拜右骁卫将军。
现代文：当日即拜官为右骁卫将军。
English: On the same day, he was promoted to General of the Right Division.

古文：甲午，以刑部尚书张亮为平壤道行军大总管，帅江、淮、岭、硖兵四万，长安、洛阳募士三千，战舰五百艘，自莱州泛海趋平壤；又以太子詹事、左卫率李世勣为辽东道行军大总管，帅步骑六万及兰、河二州降胡趣辽东，两军合势并进。
现代文：甲午，任命刑部尚书张亮为平壤道行军大总管，率领江、淮、岭、峡四州兵马四万人，又在长安、洛阳召募士兵三千人，战舰五百艘，从莱州渡海直逼平壤；又任命太子詹事、左卫率李世为辽东道行军大总管，率领步骑兵六万人以及兰、河二州投降的胡族兵马进逼辽东，两支部队合围并进。
English: In the afternoon of the first day of the month, he appointed Shangshu Zhang Liang of the Criminal Investigation Department to be the general manager of the march of Pyongyang Road, leading 40,000 soldiers and horses in the four states of the River, Huai, Ling and Gorge, recruiting 3,000 soldiers and 500 warships in Chang'an and Luoyang, and crossing the sea from Laizhou to Pyongyang; he also appointed Prince Zhan Zhi and Zuo Wei Li Shi to be the general manager of the march of Liaodong, leading 60,000 infantry and cavalry as well as Hu soldiers and horses surrendered in the two states of Lan and He into Liaodong, and the two forces encircled and

古文：庚子，诸军大集于幽州，遣行军总管姜行本、少府少监丘行淹先督众工造梯冲于安萝山。
现代文：庚子，各路大军会集在幽州，太宗派行军总管姜行本、少府少监丘行淹先行在安罗山监督众工匠制造练习登高冲锋用的云梯。
English: Geng Zi, the armies of all roads will gather in Yuzhou. Jiang Xing Ben, the general manager of the march of the Taizong faction, and Shofu Shao Jianqiu, the leader of the march, will supervise the craftsmen to make the cloud ladder for the practice of climbing high and storming in Anluo Mountain.

古文：时远近勇士应募及献攻城器械者不可胜数，上皆亲加损益，取其便易。
现代文：当时远近的勇士纷纷应召当兵以及献出各种攻城器械不计其数，太宗都亲自加以挑选淘汰，取其方便简易的器械。
English: At that time, countless warriors from near and far were called up to serve as soldiers and offered all kinds of siege equipment. Taizong personally selected and eliminated them, and took their convenient and simple equipment.

古文：又手诏谕天下，以 高丽盖苏文弑主虐民，情何可忍！
现代文：又手书诏令传令天下，说道： 高丽盖苏文杀死君王肆虐百姓，其情形实在是忍无可忍！
English: He also issued a proclamation to the world, saying: "The situation in which Goryege Suwen killed the king and wreaked havoc on the people is truly unbearable!

古文：今欲巡幸幽、蓟，问罪辽、碣，所过营顿，无为劳费。 
现代文：如今朕要亲自巡幸幽、蓟二州，向辽东、碣石一带兴师问罪，所经过之地的营房，不要过于劳费百姓。 
English: Now I want to personally tour the two provinces of Xingyuan and Jianye, and ask for punishment from the Liaodong and Jinshi areas. Camps in the places I pass through should not be too labor-intensive for the people.

古文：且言： 昔隋炀帝残暴其下，高丽王仁爱其民，以思乱之军击安和之众，故不能成功。
现代文：而且说： 从前隋炀帝残暴百姓，高丽王却对百姓仁爱，以人心思乱的军队去进攻求安思和的民众，所以不能取得胜利。
English: Moreover, he said: Once upon a time, Emperor Sui and Emperor Goryeo were cruel to the people, but King Goryeo was benevolent to the people, and attacked the people who were seeking peace and tranquility with a confused army, so they could not achieve victory.

古文：今略言必胜之道有五：一曰以大击小，二曰以顺讨逆，三曰以治乘乱，四曰以逸敌劳，五曰以悦当怨，何忧不克！
现代文：现在朕略说必胜之道有五条：一是以强大进攻弱小，二是以顺应时势去讨伐倒行逆施，三是以安定去乘机进攻敌方的内乱，四是以逸待劳，五是以百姓悦服的国家去进攻百姓积怨的国家，何愁不能取胜！
English: Now I will briefly say that there are five ways to win: one is to attack the weak and weak with a strong attack, the second is to follow the trend of the times to fight against the retrograde and counterproductive, the third is to take advantage of the enemy's civil unrest with stability, the fourth is to wait for labor, and the fifth is to attack the country where the people are dissatisfied with the country where the people are resentful. Do not worry, you can not win!

古文：布告元元，勿为疑惧！ 
现代文：以此布告黎民百姓，不要产生疑惧。 
English: This is a message to the people of Lebanon, do not be afraid.

古文：于是凡顿舍供费之县，减者太半。
现代文：于是各种行军征战的物资费用减少了一大半。
English: As a result, the cost of materials for various military campaigns has been reduced by more than half.

古文：十二月，辛丑，武阳懿公李大亮卒于长安，遗表请罢高丽之师。
现代文：十二月，辛丑，武阳懿公李大亮在长安去世，遗书请求停止进攻高丽。
English: In December, Xinwu, Wuyang warlord Li Dayang died in Chang'an, leaving a suicide note requesting to stop attacking Goryeo.

古文：家馀米五斛，布三十匹。
现代文：他家中只剩余五斛米，三十匹布。
English: All that is left in his home is five bushels of rice and 30 goats.

古文：亲戚早孤为大亮所养，丧之如父者十有五人。
现代文：亲属早死成为孤儿，被李大亮收养的十五个人，如同死了自己的父亲一样服丧。
English: Relatives died early and became orphans, and the fifteen people who were adopted by Li Dayang went into mourning as if their own father had died.

古文：壬寅，故太子承乾卒于黔州，上为之废朝，葬以国公礼。
现代文：壬寅，前太子李承乾死于黔州，太宗为此不上早朝，以国公礼安葬。
English: In Renin, the former crown prince, Li Chengqian, died in Zhangzhou. For this reason, Emperor Taizong did not attend the funeral in the early morning, and was buried with full state honors.

古文：甲寅，诏诸军及新罗、百济、奚、契丹分道击高丽。
现代文：甲寅，太宗下诏令各路大军以及新罗、百济、奚、契丹分兵几路进攻高丽。
English: Emperor Taizong issued an imperial edict ordering large armies from all directions, as well as detachments from Silla, Baekje, Joseon, and Khitan, to attack Goryeo from several directions.

古文：初，上遣突厥俟利苾可汗北渡河，薛延陀直珠可汗恐其部落翻动，意甚恶之，豫蓄轻骑于漠北，欲击之。
现代文：起初，太宗派突厥俟利可汗北渡黄河，薛延陀真珠可汗担心自己部落叛归其原来的主子，内心十分不满，便在漠北埋伏下轻骑兵，想要袭击俟利。
English: At first, the too-sectarian Turkic Qili Khan traveled north to the Yellow River. Xueyan Dadu Pearl Khan was worried that his tribe would rebel against his former master. He was very dissatisfied, so he ambushed light cavalry in the north of the desert and wanted to attack Qili.

古文：上遣使戒敕无得相攻。
现代文：太宗派使者传文告诫，不得相互攻伐。
English: The envoys of the Tai sect issued a communique warning that they should not attack each other.

古文：真珠可汗对曰： 至尊有命，安敢不从！
现代文：真珠可汗答道： 大唐天子有命，怎么敢不遵从呢？
English: Pearl Khan replied: Great Tang Tianzi has his life, how dare he not obey?

古文：然突厥翻覆难期，当其未破之时，岁犯中国，杀人以千万计。
现代文：然而突厥人反复无常，当年没有灭亡的时候，年年进犯唐朝，杀人成千上万。
English: However, the Turks were capricious, and when they did not perish that year, they attacked the Tang Dynasty every year, killing thousands of people.

古文：臣以为至尊克之，当剪为奴婢，以赐中国之人；乃反养之如子，其恩德至矣，而结社率竟反。
现代文：我认为大唐帝国打败他们，应当将他们全部降为奴隶，赐给唐朝百姓；却反而抚养他们如同自己的儿子一般，对他们的恩德太过分了，最后结社率还是反叛了。
English: I think that the Great Tang Empire defeated them and should have reduced them all to slaves and given them to the people of the Tang Dynasty. Instead, it raised them as if they were its own sons. It was too generous to them. In the end, the association rate still rebelled.

古文：此属兽心，安可以人理待也！
现代文：这些人都是人面兽心，怎么能用人的道理对待他们呢？
English: These people are human-faced and animal-hearted. How can we treat them with human reason?

古文：臣荷恩深厚，请为至尊诛之。 
现代文：我承荷大唐深厚的恩德，请求为大唐天子诛灭他们。 
English: I bear the burden of Datang's profound benevolence, and I ask the Son of Heaven to annihilate them for Datang.

古文：自是数相攻。
现代文：从此多次相互攻伐。
English: Since then, they have repeatedly attacked each other.

古文：俟利苾之北渡也，有众十万，胜兵四万人，俟利苾不能抚御，众不惬服。
现代文：俟利北渡黄河后，拥有十万民众，士兵四万人，俟利不能安抚统御，众人都不服从命令。
English: After the northward crossing of the Yellow River, with a hundred thousand people and forty thousand soldiers, Meli could not appease the ruler, and everyone disobeyed orders.

古文：戊午，悉弃俟利苾南渡河，请处于胜、夏之间；上许之。
现代文：戊午，众人都抛下俟利南渡黄河，请求居住在胜、夏二州之间，太宗答应了他们。
English: In the afternoon of the third day of the third month, many people left the south of Guili to cross the Yellow River and asked to live between the two states of Sheng and Xia. Taizong agreed to their request.

古文：群臣皆以为： 陛下方远征辽左，而置突厥于河南，距京师不远，岂得不为后虑！
现代文：众位大臣都认为： 陛下刚刚派兵远征辽东，而又将突厥人安置在河南一带，离京师很近，怎么能不成为后患呢？
English: All the ministers agreed: His Majesty has just sent an expeditionary force to Liaodong, and placed the Turks in the Henan area, very close to Beijing, how can it not be a hindrance?

古文：愿留镇洛阳，遣诸将东征。 
现代文：望陛下留下来镇守洛阳，派遣各位将领东征高丽。 
English: I hope Your Majesty will stay to defend Luoyang and send your generals to the East to invade Korea.

古文：上曰： 夷狄亦人耳，其情与中夏不殊。
现代文：太宗说： 夷狄族也是人呐，其人情与中原人没有什么大的差别。
English: Taizong said: The Yidi people are also human beings, and there is no big difference between their human feelings and the Central Plains people.

古文：人主患德泽不加，不必猜忌异类。
现代文：身为君主应该忧虑恩德不施及百姓，而不必对少数族人横加猜忌。
English: As a monarch, he should be concerned about the welfare of the people, instead of casting suspicion on ethnic minorities.

古文：盖德泽洽，则四夷可使如一家；猜忌多，则骨肉不免为仇乱。
现代文：勤施恩德，则四方民族可以使他们如同一家；多加猜忌，则亲骨肉也不免成为仇敌。
English: If they are diligent in extending kindness, the people of the four directions can make them like a family; if they are suspicious, their own flesh and blood will inevitably become enemies.

古文：炀帝无道，失人已久，辽东之役，人皆断手足以避征役，玄感以运卒反于黎阳，非戎狄为患也。
现代文：隋炀帝暴虐不道，早已失去了民心，隋朝东征高丽，百姓们都断手足以逃避兵役，杨玄感率领运送粮食的士卒在黎阳造反，并非夷狄等族制造祸患。
English: The tyrannical Sui and Qian Dynasties had already lost the hearts of the people. The Sui Dynasty's eastward march to Korea was successful, and the people were able to escape military service by cutting off their hands. Yang Xuanxuan led the grain delivery taxi to rebel in Liyang. It was not the Yidi and other ethnic groups who created the disaster.

古文：朕今征高丽，皆取愿行者，募十得百，募百得千，其不得从军者，皆愤叹郁邑，岂比隋之行怨民哉！
现代文：朕现今征伐高丽，都是征发愿意从军打仗的，召募十人得百人，召募百人得一千人，没有征召从军的，都满腹怨言，岂能与隋朝东征时百姓怨恨相比？
English: In the present-day conquest of Korea, all those who are willing to fight in the army are conscripted and sent to fight, those who are conscripted ten are conscripted for a hundred, those who are conscripted for a hundred are conscripted for a thousand, and those who are not conscripted are full of complaints. Can it be compared with the resentment of the people during the eastward campaign of the Sui Dynasty?

古文：突厥贫弱，吾收而养之，计其感恩，入于骨髓，岂肯为患！
现代文：突厥本是贫弱的民族，我大唐接收并养护他们，估计他们感恩戴德的想法刻骨铭心、深入骨髓，怎么肯成为祸患呢？
English: The Turks were originally a poor and weak people. I, the Great Tang Dynasty, received and protected them, and the thought of appreciating their gratitude was engraved in their hearts and marrow. How could it become a disaster?

古文：且彼与薛延陀嗜欲略同，彼不北走薛延陀而南归我，其情可见矣。 
现代文：而且突厥人与薛延陀欲望爱好大略相同，他们并没有北面投奔薛延陀而却南下归顺我们，可见其真情实意。 
English: Moreover, the Turks and Xueyantuo had roughly the same desires and hobbies. They did not go north to join Xueyantuo, but went south to submit to us, which shows their true feelings.

古文：顾谓褚遂良曰： 尔知起居，为我志之，自今十五年，保无突厥之患。 
现代文：回头对褚遂良说： 你掌管起居注，记上我说的话：从今往后十五年，可保没有突厥的祸患。 
English: He turned to Zou Suiliang and said, "You are in charge of the settlement note, write down what I said: Fifteen years from now, there will be no Turkish disaster.

古文：俟利苾既失众，轻骑入朝，上以为右武卫将军。
现代文：俟利已经失去部众，便轻骑入京朝见，太宗任命他为右武卫将军。
English: He had already lost his subordinates, so he rode lightly into the capital to meet with Emperor Taizong, who appointed him as the right wing general.

古文：贞观十九年乙巳，公元六四五年
现代文：贞观十九年春季，正月，韦挺犯有渎职罪，因事先没有巡视漕渠，运送大米的六百多条船只在卢思台旁边搁浅。
English: In the first month of the spring of the 19th year of Zhenguan, Wei Ting was guilty of dereliction of duty. Because he did not inspect the canals in advance, more than six hundred ships transporting rice were stranded next to Lu Sittai.

古文：春，正月，韦挺坐不先行视漕渠，运米六百馀艘至卢思台侧，浅塞不能进，械送洛阳；丁酉，除名，以将作少监李道裕代之。崔仁师亦坐免官。
现代文：他带上刑具被押送到洛阳；丁酉，韦挺被除名罪官，由将作少监李道裕代替他的职务。
English: He was escorted to Luoyang with the instruments of torture; Ding Rong and Wei Ting were removed from their positions as criminal officers, and Li Daoyu, who was to serve as a juvenile detention officer, took his place.

古文：沧州刺史席辩坐赃污，二月，庚子，诏朝集使临观而戮之。
现代文：崔仁师也因此免官。沧州刺史席辩犯有贪污受贿罪，二月，庚子，太宗诏令朝集使前往刑场观看，当众斩首。
English: Cangzhou assassin Shi Gang was found guilty of corruption and bribery, and in February, Geng Zi, Emperor Taizong, ordered the Choshu envoy to go to the execution site to watch and behead him in public.

古文：庚戌，上自将诸军发洛阳，以特进萧瑀为洛阳宫留守。
现代文：庚戌，太宗亲自统率各路大军从洛阳出发东征，任命特进萧为洛阳皇宫的留守。
English: Genghis Khan, Emperor Taizong personally led all the armies from Luoyang to set out for the east, and appointed a special envoy Xiao to stay behind at the Luoyang Imperial Palace.

古文：乙卯，诏： 朕发定州后，宜令皇太子监国。 
现代文：乙卯，太宗下诏： 朕从定州发兵后，便由皇太子监国。 
English: Second, Emperor Taizong issued an edict: After I dispatched troops from Dingzhou, the crown prince would supervise the country.

古文：开府仪同三司致仕尉迟敬德上言： 陛下亲征辽东，太子在定州，长安、洛阳心腹空虚，恐有玄感之变。
现代文：开府仪同三司致仕尉迟敬德上书言道： 陛下亲自征伐辽东，皇太子在定州，长安、洛阳两地内部空虚，恐怕会发生象杨玄感那样的变乱。
English: Kaifu Yi, together with the third secretary to the staff officer Chi Jing De, wrote: His Majesty personally conquered Liaodong, the crown prince was in Dingzhou, Chang'an and Luoyang, and the two places were empty inside. I am afraid that there will be turmoil like Yang Xuanquan.

古文：且边隅小夷，不足以勤万乘，愿遣偏师征之，指期可殄。 
现代文：而且高丽是个地处边陲的小国，不足以由皇上去辛苦操劳，希望陛下派一支部队征伐，指日可灭。 
English: Moreover, Korea is a small country at the edge of the world. It is not enough for the emperor to go and work hard. I hope that His Majesty will send an army to conquer the country.

古文：上不从。
现代文：太宗不听从。
English: The emperor did not listen.

古文：以敬德为左一马军总管，使从行。
现代文：任命尉迟敬德为左一马军总管，让他随行。
English: He appointed Lieutenant Qi Jingde as the commander-in-chief of the Left 1st Cavalry Army, and let him accompany him.

古文：丁巳，诏谥殷太师比干曰忠列，所司封其墓，春秋祠以少牢，给随近五户供洒扫。
现代文：丁巳，太宗下诏追谥殷商的太师比干为忠烈，有关部门为比干修墓，春秋两季用猪羊祭祀，又命附近五户人家常年扫墓。
English: Ding Si, Taishi Bi Gan, who chased away Yin merchants under Emperor Taizong, was a loyalist, the relevant departments repaired the tomb for Bi Gan, sacrificed with pigs and sheep in spring and autumn, and ordered five households in the vicinity to sweep the tomb all year round.

古文：上之发京师也，命房玄龄得以便宜从事，不复奏请。
现代文：太宗离开京城时，命令房玄龄相机处理政务，不必再去上奏请示。
English: When Taizong left the capital, he ordered Fang Xuanling Camera to handle government affairs, and there was no need to go to Shangso for instructions.

古文：或诣留台称有密，玄龄问密谋所在，对曰： 公则是也。 
现代文：有人到房玄龄留守处声称有密谋，玄龄问密谋人是谁，答道： 是你本人。 
English: Someone came to Fong Xuanling's home and claimed there was a conspiracy. Xuanling asked who the conspirator was and replied: "It was you."

古文：玄龄驿送行在。
现代文：玄龄让驿传送到太宗的行宫。
English: Xuanling had the scepter transported to the imperial palace of Emperor Taizong.

古文：上闻留守有表送告密人，上怒，使人持长刀于前而后见之，问告者为谁，曰： 房玄龄。 
现代文：太宗听留守处有上表送来告密人，非常恼怒，让人手持长刀立于帐前，而后见到告密人，问他告谁，答道： 房玄龄。 
English: Taizong heard that a whistleblower had been sent to his residence. He was very angry and had the person stand in front of the register with a long knife in hand. When he saw the whistleblower, he asked him whom he should sue, and he replied, "Fang Xuanling."

古文：上曰： 果然。 
现代文：太宗说： 果然不出所料。 
English: Taizong said, "It was as expected.

古文：叱令腰斩。
现代文：喝令将告密人腰斩。
English: The whistleblower was ordered to be beheaded.

古文：玺书让玄龄以不能自信， 更有如是者，可专决之。 
现代文：又亲下玺书责备房玄龄不能自信，称： 再有类似的事情，你可以独自处置。 
English: He also scolded Fu Xuanling for not being confident, saying: "If there is another similar incident, you can handle it on your own.

古文：癸亥，上至鄴，自为文祭魏太祖，曰： 临危制变，料敌设奇，一将之智有馀，万乘之才不足。 
现代文：癸亥，太宗到达邺县，亲自撰文祭奠魏太祖，评价道： 临危处理急变，料敌设置奇兵，作为一位将领智慧有余，作为帝王则才智不足。 
English: When Emperor Taizong arrived in Jixian, he personally wrote an article to pay tribute to Emperor Wei Taizu, commenting: Dealing with sudden changes at the time of crisis, setting up a strange soldier for the enemy, as a general, he had enough wisdom, but as an emperor, he lacked wisdom.

古文：是月，李世勣军至幽州。
现代文：本月，李世的部队到达幽州。
English: This month, Li's troops arrived in Yuzhou.

古文：三月，丁丑，车驾至定州。
现代文：三月，丁丑，太宗车驾到达定州。
English: In March, Ding Qiu and Taizong drove to Dingzhou.

古文：丁亥，上谓侍臣曰： 辽东本中国之地，隋氏四出师而不能得；朕今东征，欲为中国报子弟之仇，高丽雪君父之耻耳。
现代文：丁亥，太宗对身边的大臣说： 辽东本来就属于中原王朝的地域，隋朝四次派兵出征而不能取胜；如今朕亲自东征，是想要为中原人的子弟报其父兄之仇，为高丽百姓雪其国王被杀的耻辱。
English: Dinghai, Taizong said to the ministers around him: Liaodong originally belonged to the region of the Central Plains Dynasty. The Sui Dynasty sent troops to the east four times but could not win. Now I am personally marching to the east. I want to avenge my father and brother for the children of the Central Plains people, and the shame of the king being killed for the Korean people.

古文：且方隅大定，惟此未平，故及朕之未老，用士大夫馀力以取之。
现代文：而且四方都已平定，只有这一块小地方没有平定，所以乘朕还没有衰老，用士大夫们的余力打败他们。
English: Moreover, all four sides have been pacified, only this small area has not been pacified, so we have not yet aged, and the doctors have used their remaining strength to defeat them.

古文：朕自发洛阳，唯啖肉饭，虽春蔬亦不之进，惧其烦忧故也。 
现代文：朕从洛阳出发以来，只吃肉食，而一点不吃早春蔬菜，是担心因此而烦扰百姓。 
English: Since my departure from Luoyang, I only eat meat, and do not eat any early spring vegetables. I am worried that this will annoy the people.

古文：上见病卒，召至御榻前存慰，付州县疗之，士卒莫不感悦。
现代文：太宗看见有病的士兵，便召到御榻前亲予慰问，让州县妥加治疗，士兵们都深受感动。
English: When Emperor Taizong saw the sick soldiers, he called them to his bedside to offer his condolences and let the prefectures and counties treat them. The soldiers were deeply moved.

古文：有不预征名，自愿以私装从军，动以千讨，皆曰： 不求县官勋赏，惟愿效死辽东！ 
现代文：有人没有被登入东征部队的名簿中，自愿以私人装备跟从军队，动辄一千多人，都说： 我们不求得到皇上的封爵赏赐，只愿为陛下效忠，战死在辽东。 
English: Some people were not registered in the roster of the Eastern Expeditionary Force, but volunteered to follow the army with their personal equipment, and more than a thousand people said: We do not seek to be knighted by the emperor, we only want to be loyal to his majesty and die in battle in Liaodong.

古文：上不许。
现代文：太宗不应允。
English: The Emperor did not give his permission.

古文：上将发，太子悲泣数日，上曰： 今留汝镇守，辅以俊贤，欲使天下识汝风采。
现代文：太宗将要出发，太子一连哭泣几天，太宗说： 如今留下你镇守，加上俊彦贤才辅佐，正是想让天下人认识你的风度才能。
English: Emperor Taizong was about to set off, and the prince cried for several days in a row. Emperor Taizong said, "Leaving you as the town guard now, with Toshihiko Kensai as his assistant, is precisely to let the world know your grace and talent.

古文：夫为国之要，在于进贤退不肖，赏善罚恶，至公无私，汝当努力行此，悲泣何为！ 
现代文：治理国家最重要的在于进贤才摒弃小人，赏赐善举惩罚恶行，大公无私，你应当努力做到这些，有什么好悲泣的？ 
English: The most important thing in governing the country is to promote the wise and discard the villains, reward the good and punish the evil, and be selfless. You should strive to do these things. What is there to cry about?

古文：命开府仪同三司高士廉摄太子太傅，与刘洎、马周、少詹事张行成、右庶子高季辅同掌机务，辅太子。
现代文：命开府仪同三司高士廉代行太子太傅，与刘洎、马周、少詹事张行成、右庶子高季辅一同执掌机要事务，辅佐太子。
English: He ordered to set up a government office, with the three senior officials Gao Shixian acting as the prince's daifu, and Liu Zhen, Ma Zhou, Shao Zhan, Zhang Xicheng, and Gao Jifu, the right illegitimate son, to take charge of the important affairs of the machine and assist the prince.

古文：长孙无忌、岑文本与吏部尚书杨师道从行。
现代文：长孙无忌、岑文本与吏部尚书杨师道与太宗同行。
English: There is no doubt that Yang Shidou, the eldest grandson of the founder of the Qin dynasty, and Shangshu Yang, who was in charge of the personnel department, walked with Emperor Taizong.

古文：壬辰，车驾发定州，亲佩弓矢，手结雨衣于鞍后。
现代文：壬辰，车驾从定州出发，太宗亲自装备弓箭在马鞍后带上雨披。
English: In Imjin, driving from Dingzhou, Taizong personally equipped with bows and arrows in the saddle with a poncho.

古文：命长孙元忌摄侍中，杨师道摄中书令。
现代文：命长孙无忌暂行侍中职，杨师道暂代中书令。
English: The eldest grandson was appointed to the position of attendant for the time being, and Yang Shidao temporarily became the secretary.

古文：李世勣军发柳城，多张形势，若出怀远镇者，而潜师北趣甬道，出高丽不意。
现代文：李世勣部队从柳城出发，大张声势，假装要通过怀远镇，而秘密派部队北上直趋甬道，出其不意进攻高丽。
English: Lee Sedol's troops set out from Liucheng with great fanfare, pretending to pass through Huaiyuan Town, while secretly dispatching troops to the north to head straight for the pass and attack Goryeo by surprise.

古文：夏，四月，戊戌朔，世勣自通定济辽水，至玄菟。
现代文：夏季，四月，戊戌朔，李世从通定渡过辽水，到达玄菟。
English: In the summer, in April, Li Shih crossed the Liao Shui River from Tongding to Xuanzang.

古文：高丽大骇，城邑皆闭门自守。
现代文：高丽人大为惊骇，各城都关闭城门自守。
English: The people of Goryeo were greatly alarmed, and all the cities closed their gates to defend themselves.

古文：壬寅，辽东道副大总管江夏王道宗将兵数千至新城，折冲都尉曹三良引十馀骑直压城门，城中惊扰，无敢出者。
现代文：壬寅，辽东道副大总管江夏王李道宗领兵数千人到达新城，折冲都尉曹三良带领十多个骑兵直压近城门，城中人惊恐不安，没有人敢出来应战。
English: Ren Yin, Liao Dongdao, and deputy general manager of Jiangxia Wang Li Daozong led thousands of soldiers to the new city, and the commander Cao Sanliang led more than ten cavalrymen to press close to the city gate. People in the city were frightened and uneasy, and no one dared to come out to fight.

古文：营州都督张俭将胡兵为前锋，进渡辽水，趋建安城，破高丽兵，斩首数千级。
现代文：营州都督张俭率领胡族士兵做为前锋，渡过辽水，直趋建安城，大败高丽兵，斩首几千人。
English: Zhang Jian, the governor of Yingzhou, led the Hu soldiers as the vanguard, crossed the Liao Shui River, headed straight for Jianan City, defeated the Korean soldiers, and beheaded thousands of people.

古文：太子引高士廉同榻视事，又令更为士廉设案，士廉固辞。
现代文：太子李治让高士廉与自己同坐一榻处理政事，又令人再为士廉设立书案，士廉执意辞退。
English: Prince Li Zhi let Gao Shillian stay with him to deal with political affairs, and asked him to set up a case for Shillian. Shillian persistently declined.

古文：丁未，车驾发幽州。
现代文：丁未，太宗车驾从幽州出发。
English: Ding Wei and Taizong drove from Yuzhou.

古文：上悉以军中资粮、器械、簿书委岑文本，文本凤夜勤力，躬自料配，筹、笔不去手，精神耗竭，言辞举措，颇异平日。
现代文：太宗将军中的物资粮草、器械、文书簿录等全都委派给岑文本管理，文本夙兴夜寐，勤勉不怠，亲自料理调配，计算用的筹码、书写用的笔从不离手，心力耗竭，言谈举止颇与往日不同。
English: The materials, grain, grass, equipment, and records of documents in General Taizong were all assigned to the management of the text. He slept through the night, was diligent, personally arranged the food, and never left his hands without a chip for calculation and a pen for writing. He was exhausted, and his speech and behavior were quite different from the past.

古文：上见而忧之，谓左右曰： 文本与我同行，恐不与我同返。 
现代文：太宗看见他这样，十分担忧，对身边人说： 文本与我同行，恐怕很难与我一同返回。 
English: When Emperor Taizong saw him like this, he was very worried and said to those around him, "The text is traveling with me. I'm afraid it will be difficult to return with me."

古文：是日，遇暴疾而薨。
现代文：当天，岑文本得暴病而死。
English: On the same day, Yan Wenwen died of a violent illness.

古文：其夕，上闻严鼓声，曰： 文本殒没，所不忍闻，命撤之。 
现代文：当日夜晚，太宗听见有急促的鼓声，说道： 文本死去了，我实在不忍心听见鼓声，快命人撤掉。 
English: That night, Taizong heard a rapid drumbeat and said, "The text is dead. I can't bear to hear the drumbeat. Someone please take it down."

古文：时右庶子许敬宗在定州，与高士廉等共知机要，文本薨，上召敬宗，以本官检校中书侍郎。
现代文：当时右庶子许敬宗正在定州，与高士廉等共同掌管机要事务，岑文本死后，太宗召来许敬宗，以本官检校中书侍郎。
English: At that time, Emperor Taizong's son-in-law, Xu Jingzong, was in Dingzhou, and he and Gao Shiliang were jointly in charge of important matters. After the death of Emperor Xuanwen, Emperor Taizong summoned Xu Jingzong to serve as a junior high school secretary.

古文：壬子，李世勣、江夏王道宗攻高丽盖牟城。
现代文：壬子，李世、江夏王李道宗一道攻打高丽盖牟城。
English: Jinshi, Li Shih, and the King of Jiangxia, Li Daozong, together attacked the city of Gaimu in Goryeo.

古文：丁巳，车驾至北平。
现代文：丁巳，太宗的车驾到达北平城。
English: Soon after, Taizong's car arrived at Peiping City.

古文：癸亥，李世勣等拔盖牟城，获二万馀口，粮十馀万石。
现代文：癸亥，李世等人攻下盖牟城，俘虏二万多人，获得粮食十多万石。
English: Yan Hai, Li Shih and others captured Gaimu City, captured more than twenty thousand people, and obtained more than one hundred thousand koku of grain.

古文：张亮帅舟师自东莱渡海，袭卑沙城，其城四面悬绝，惟西门可上。
现代文：张亮率领水师从东莱渡海，袭击卑沙城，该城四面环水悬隔，只有西门可以进入。
English: Zhang Liang led the sailors across the sea from Donglai and attacked Bisha City. The city is surrounded by water on all sides, and only the west gate can be entered.

古文：程名振引兵夜至，副总管王大度先登，五月，己巳，拔之，获男女八千口。
现代文：程名振领兵夜间到达，副总管王文度先行登城，五月，己巳，攻下了该城，俘获男女八千人。
English: Cheng Nian Zhen arrived at night to lead the soldiers, and the vice-governor Wang Wendu went to the city first. In May, he seized the city and captured eight thousand men and women.

古文：分遣总管丘孝忠等曜兵于鸭绿水。
现代文：太宗分派总管丘孝忠等人在鸭绿江阅兵。
English: The head of the Taizong faction, Qiu Xiaozhong, and others parade in the Yalu River.

古文：李世勣进至辽东城下。
现代文：李世勣的部队行军到辽东城下。
English: Li Shijun's troops marched to the city of Liaodong.

古文：庚午，车驾至辽泽，泥淖二百馀里，人马不可通，将作大匠阎立德布土作桥，军不留行。
现代文：庚午，太宗车驾到了辽泽，这一带是二百多里的沼泽地，人马都不得通行，将作大匠阎立德垫土作桥，军队昼夜兼程。
English: In the afternoon, Taizong's car drove to Liao Ze. This area is more than two hundred miles of swampland, where no man or horse may pass. Yan Lide, a great craftsman, will pave the way and build a bridge. The army will travel both day and night.

古文：壬申，渡泽东。
现代文：壬申，渡过辽泽东去。
English: Jinshin, across the Liao Ze to the east.

古文：乙亥，高丽步骑四万救辽东，江夏王道宗将四千骑逆击之，军中皆以为众寡悬绝，不若深沟高垒以俟车驾之至。
现代文：乙亥，高丽步骑兵四万多人救援辽东，江夏王李道宗率领四千骑兵迎击，军中士兵都认为众寡悬殊，不如挖深濠沟加高壁垒坚守，等侯与皇帝车驾同行的大部队到来。
English: Emperor Yihai and more than forty thousand Koryo infantry and cavalrymen came to the rescue of Liaodong, and King Li Daozong of Jiangxia led four thousand cavalrymen to meet the attack. The soldiers in the army all thought that there was a great disparity in numbers, so it was better to dig a deep ditch and raise high barriers to hold out and wait for the arrival of the large force that was driving along with the emperor.

古文：道宗曰： 贼恃众，有轻我心，远来疲顿，击之必败。
现代文：李道宗道： 敌人仗着人马众多，有轻视我们之心，他们远道赶来十分疲惫，迎击他们必会取胜。
English: Li Daozongdao: The enemy relies on a large number of people and horses, and has contempt for us. They have come a long way and are very tired. They will surely win.

古文：且吾属为前军，当清道以待乘舆，乃更以贼遗君父乎！ 
现代文：而且我们做为前锋，正应当清理道路以等待皇上的车辇到来，怎么能再把敌人留给皇上呢？ 
English: Moreover, we, as the vanguard, are supposed to clear the road to wait for the arrival of the emperor's carriage, how can we leave the enemy to the emperor?

古文：李世勣以为然。
现代文：李世勣认为有道理。
English: Lee Sedol thinks it makes sense.

古文：果毅都尉马文举曰： 不遇劲敌，何以显壮士！ 
现代文：果毅都尉马文举说： 不遇上强劲的敌手，如何能显示出壮士的威风呢？ 
English: Captain Ma Wen of Guo Yi said, "Without encountering a strong opponent, how can you show the dignity of a strong man?

古文：策马趋敌，所向皆靡，众心稍安。
现代文：于是驱马逼近对方，所向披靡，士兵们才稍稍心安。
English: So they drove their horses closer to the other side, which was overwhelming, and the soldiers calmed down a bit.

古文：既合战，行军总管张君乂退走，唐兵不利，道宗收散卒，登高而望，见高丽陈乱，与骁骑数十冲之，左右出入；李世勣引兵助之，高丽大败，斩首千馀级。
现代文：与高丽兵展开激战后，行军总管张君后退，使唐朝军队不利，李道宗收罗其散兵游勇，登上高处观望，看见高丽军中阵形混乱，便率领几十名骁勇骑兵冲击他们，左进右出，右进左出；李世勣又领兵助战，高丽兵被打得大败，一千多人被杀。
English: After a fierce battle with the Goryeo soldiers, Zhang Jun, the commander-in-chief of the march, retreated, putting the Tang Dynasty army at a disadvantage. Li Daozong gathered his scattered soldiers and climbed to a high place to watch. Seeing the confusion in the formation of the Goryeo army, he led dozens of brave cavalry to attack them, left in and right out, right in and left out; Li Shijun also led soldiers to help the battle. The Goryeo soldiers were defeated and more than a thousand people were killed.

古文：丁丑，车驾渡辽水，撤桥，以坚士卒之心，军于马首山，劳赐江夏王道宗，超拜马文举中郎将，斩张君乂。
现代文：丁丑，太宗车驾渡过辽水，撤毁桥梁，以此来坚定将士们的决心，唐军驻扎在马首山，太宗慰劳赏赐江夏王李道宗，破格提拔马文举为中郎将，处斩后退的张君。
English: Ding Yuxiu, Taizong drove the car across Liao Shui and demolished the bridge to strengthen the determination of the soldiers. The Tang army was stationed in Mashu Mountain. Taizong rewarded the King of Jiangxia, Li Daozong, with consolation, promoted Ma Wen to the rank of lieutenant general, and executed Zhang Jun, who retreated.

古文：上自将数百骑至辽东城下，见土卒负土填堑，上分其尤重者，于马上持之，从官争负土致城下。
现代文：太宗亲率数百骑兵到辽东城下，看见士兵们背土填壕沟，太宗分出最重的，在马上拿着，于是随从官员都争先恐后背土到城下。
English: Taizong's relatives led hundreds of cavalrymen to the city of Liaodong, and saw the soldiers filling the trench with their backs. Taizong took the heaviest part and carried it on his horse, so the accompanying officials all scrambled to back the soil to the city.

古文：李世勣攻辽东城，昼夜不息，旬有二日，上引精兵会之，围其城数百重，鼓噪声震天地。
现代文：李世勣部队昼夜不停地攻打辽东城，到了第十二天，太宗又带引精兵合围，将城墙围有数百层，鼓噪声震天动地。
English: Li Shijun's troops attacked Liaodong City around the clock. On the twelfth day, Taizong led the elite soldiers to encircle the city, surrounded the city wall with hundreds of layers, and the drum noise was earth-shattering.

古文：甲申，南风急，上遣锐卒登冲竿之末，爇其西南楼，火延烧城中，因麾将士登城，高丽力战不能敌，遂克之，所杀万馀人，得胜兵万馀人，男女四万口，以其城为辽州。
现代文：甲申，南风刮得很大，太宗派精锐士兵登上冲竿的顶端，点燃城的西南楼，火势漫延直烧到城内，进而指挥将士们登城，高丽兵竭力奋战，抵抗不住，遂被唐军攻克，杀死一万多人，俘获高丽兵一万多人，百姓男女四万多人，改城名为辽州。
English: In Jiaxing, the south wind was blowing strongly. The too-sectarian elite soldiers climbed to the top of the pole, ignited the southwest tower of the city, the fire spread to the city, and then commanded the soldiers to climb the city. The Korean soldiers fought hard and could not resist. They were then defeated by the Tang army, killing more than 10,000 people, capturing more than 10,000 Korean soldiers, and more than 40,000 men and women. The city was renamed Liaozhou.

古文：乙未，进军白岩城。
现代文：乙未，唐军进军白岩城。
English: On the second day of the second month, the Tang army marched into Baiyan City.

古文：丙申，右卫大将军李思摩中弩矢，上亲为之吮血；将士闻之，莫不感动。
现代文：丙申，右卫大将军李思摩身上中箭，太宗亲自为他吮血，将士们听说后，没有不受感动的。
English: After hearing that General of the Right Division Li Sima was hit by an arrow and that Emperor Taizong personally drew blood for him, the generals were deeply moved.

古文：乌骨城遣兵万馀为白岩声援，将军契苾何力以劲骑八百击之，何力挺身陷陈，槊中其腰；尚辇奉御薛万备单骑往救之，拔何力于万众之中而还。
现代文：乌骨城派一万多士兵增援白岩的高丽兵，将军契何力派八百名精锐骑兵阻击，何力奋力挺身冲锋陷阵，腰上被长矛刺中，尚辇奉御薛万备单枪匹马前去救护，在万人丛中救出何力回到唐军账内。
English: Black Bone City sent more than ten thousand soldiers to reinforce the Goryeo soldiers in Baiyan. General Ji He Li sent eight hundred elite cavalry to block the attack. He Li fought hard to charge into the battle, and was stabbed in the waist with a spear. Shangyu Emperor Xue Wan Bei single-handedly went to the rescue, and rescued He Li in the crowd of thousands to return to the Tang army.

古文：何力气益愤，束疮而战，从骑奋击，遂破高丽兵，追奔数十里，斩首千馀级，会暝而罢。
现代文：何力情绪更为激愤，包扎上伤口又去拼杀，跟从的骑兵们奋勇出击，于是大败高丽兵，乘胜追击几十里，杀死一千多人，直到天黑才收兵。
English: He was even more enraged. He bandaged the wound and went out to fight. The cavalrymen who followed him bravely attacked. They defeated the Korean soldiers, chased them for dozens of miles, killed more than a thousand people, and did not withdraw until nightfall.

古文：万备，万彻之弟也。
现代文：薛万备是薛万彻的弟弟。
English: Xue Wan Bei is the younger brother of Xue Wan Che.

