古文：前人俗语，言浅理深。
现代文：前人的俗语，语言简单却寓意深远。
English: As the old saying goes, the language is simple, but the meaning is profound.

古文：补遗增广，集成书文。
现代文：不断的将遗漏进行补充和增加使其充实，集合成书文加以推广。
English: We will continue to supplement and increase omissions to enrich them, and promote them by compiling them into books.

古文：世上无难事，只怕不专心。
现代文：世上没有办不成的事，只怕不用心去做。
English: There is nothing in the world that can't be done, just don't bother to do it.

古文：成人不自在，自在不成人；
现代文：人若要有成就，就必须要努力奋斗，不可以贪图舒适安逸，否则将不能成为有用之才。
English: If a person wants to be successful, he must work hard, and must not covet comfort and ease. Otherwise, he will not be able to become a useful talent.

古文：金凭火炼方知色，与人交财便知心。
现代文：金经火炼知其成色，与人进行金钱上的往来便知道他的心术。
English: Money is refined by fire to know its quality, and if you have financial dealings with people, you will know his mind trick.

古文：乞丐无粮，懒惰而成。
现代文：乞丐没有粮食吃，是由于他的懒惰造成的，比喻人如果太过于懒惰，最终被饿死。
English: If a beggar has no food to eat, it is because of his laziness. If a person is too lazy, he will eventually starve to death.

古文：勤俭为无价之宝，节粮乃众妙之门。
现代文：勤俭节约是宝贵的好品质，做人不能铺张浪费。
English: Diligence, thrift and economy are valuable good qualities, and one should not be extravagant and wasteful.

古文：省事俭用，免得求人。
现代文：生活简朴，吃用节俭，就不会去麻烦别人。
English: Live simply, eat frugally, and don't bother others.

古文：量大祸不在，机深祸亦深。
现代文：人的度量大，就会化险为夷；如果心机重就会后患无穷。
English: If a person's measure is large, he will turn the danger into a disaster; if his heart is heavy, he will have endless troubles.

古文：善为至宝深深用，心作良田世世耕。
现代文：善良最为宝贵，一辈子由此得到的福泽无穷无尽；培养一颗善良的心，子孙后世代代受益。
English: Kindness is the most precious, and the blessings gained from it over a lifetime are endless; cultivate a kind heart, and your children and grandchildren will benefit for generations to come.

古文：群居防口，独坐防心。
现代文：与人在一起要谨慎说话，自己独处要防止胡思乱想。
English: When you are with other people, you should speak with caution, and when you are alone, you should prevent yourself from having crazy thoughts.

古文：体无病为富贵，身平安莫怨贫。
现代文：身体没有伤病才是真的富贵，一生平平安安的千万不要抱怨贫穷。
English: To be truly rich is to have no physical injuries or illnesses. If you live a peaceful life, don't complain about being poor.

古文：败家子弟挥金如土，贫家子弟积土成金。
现代文：败家子弟生活奢侈无度，把金钱当成泥土；贫家子弟一点一点的积累财富，最后变得富有。
English: The son of a poor family lives extravagantly and treats money like dirt; the son of a poor family accumulates wealth little by little and finally becomes rich.

古文：富贵非关天地，祸福不是鬼神。
现代文：富贵、祸福都是自己争取的，与天地、鬼神，无关。
English: Riches and honors, misfortunes and blessings are all won by oneself, and have nothing to do with heaven and earth, ghosts and gods.

古文：安分贫一时，本分终不贫。
现代文：守规矩的人生活只会贫穷一时，知道奋斗的人永远都不会贫穷。
English: Those who abide by the rules will only live in poverty for a while, and those who know how to struggle will never be poor.

古文：不拜父母拜干亲，弟兄不和结外人。
现代文：不孝顺家里的父母，到外面找干爹，对干爹比对亲爹都亲；与兄弟不睦跟旁人亲密。
English: If you are not filial to your parents at home, go out and look for a godfather. You are closer to your godfather than to your own father. If you are not on good terms with your brother, you are closer to others.

古文：人过留名，雁过留声。
现代文：人虽然走了，其名却让人难以忘怀，如同大雁飞去，留下其鸣之声。
English: Although people have gone, their names are unforgettable, just like geese fly away, leaving their chirping voices behind.

古文：择子莫择父，择亲莫择邻。
现代文：子女是可以选择的，但父亲不能选；可以选择亲人，但不能选择邻居。
English: You can choose your children, but not your father; you can choose your relatives, but not your neighbors.

古文：爱妻之心是主，爱子之心是亲。
现代文：对妻子的爱是主人的一种爱，对孩子的则是亲情。
English: The love of a wife is the love of a master, but the love of a child is the love of a relative.

古文：事从根起，藕叶连心。
现代文：事情的发生是有原因的，就像莲藕的叶子是连在下面藕上的一样。
English: Things happen for a reason, just as the leaves of the lotus are attached to the lower stalk.

古文：祸与福同门，利与害同城。
现代文：灾祸与福分出自一家，利益与危害互为邻居。
English: Misfortune and good fortune come from the same family, and benefit and harm are neighbors.

古文：清酒红人脸，财帛动人心！
现代文：清酒能让人脸变红，财帛能让人心变动。
English: Sake can make a person's face turn red, and money can change a person's heart.

古文：宁可荤口念佛，不可素口骂人。
现代文：宁可要吃肉的人念佛，也不要吃素的人骂人。
English: I'd rather have a meat eater chant the Buddha's name than a vegetarian swear.

古文：有钱能说话，无钱话不灵。
现代文：只要有钱，什么话都好说；没有钱话再好听也没用。
English: If you have money, you can say anything; if you don't have money, you can't say anything.

古文：岂能尽如人意？
现代文：如何能做到尽善尽美，称心如意呢？
English: How can you achieve perfection and be satisfied?

古文：但求不愧吾心。
现代文：不过是在扪心自问的时候，没有什么惭愧之处。
English: But when you ask yourself, there's nothing to be ashamed of.

古文：不说自己井绳短，反说他人箍井深。
现代文：看不到自己的短处，就说别人的不是。
English: If you can't see your own shortcomings, you'll blame others.

古文：恩爱多生病，无钱便觉贫。
现代文：夫妻互爱，有点病痛双方都要求对方检查治疗，便觉得多病；没有钱购物、治病，自然觉出贫穷。
English: Husband and wife love each other, both of them are a little sick and ask the other party to check and treat, they feel sick; they have no money to shop and treat illnesses, and naturally feel poor.

古文：只学斟酒意，莫学下棋心。
现代文：宁可跟喝酒就醉的那种人一样心思直爽单纯。也不要学下棋那种人的心思。
English: I'd rather be as straightforward and simple-minded as someone who gets drunk on alcohol, rather than someone who learns to play chess.

古文：孝莫假意，转眼便为人父母。
现代文：劝人要有慷慨大方之心，不要对人耍心眼！孝顺父母不辞辛劳，转眼自己也为人父母。
English: Persuade people to have a generous and generous heart, do not play tricks on people! Filial piety is hard work, and in a blink of an eye they are parents.

古文：善休望报，回头只看汝儿孙！
现代文：做好事不要期望回报，回头便可看到自己的儿孙。
English: Do good deeds without expectation of reward, and you will see your children and grandchildren in the future.

古文：口开神气散，舌出是非生！
现代文：过多的表现自己，会让人觉得浮夸，让本已具有的功夫散失；话讲多了，就会生出是非。
English: Too much self-expression will make people feel pompous and let the effort they already have dissipate; if you talk too much, there will be right and wrong.

古文：弹琴费指甲，说话费精神。
现代文：拨动琴弦也会磨损指甲；说话耗费精神！
English: To pluck the strings wears out the fingernails; to speak is exhausting!

古文：千贯买田，万贯结邻。
现代文：用一千贯银子去购置田产，还不如花一万贯去帮助邻里，建立良好的交情。
English: It is better to spend ten thousand yuan to help the neighbors and establish good friendships than to spend one thousand yuan to purchase farmland.

古文：人言未必犹尽，听话只听三分。
现代文：别人所说的话未必完全正确，最好只信三分。
English: What others say may not be completely correct, it is best to believe only three points.

古文：隔壁岂无耳，窗外岂无人？
现代文：隔着一道墙，也有人偷听，难道窗外就不会有人偷听？
English: Across a wall, someone is also eavesdropping, won't there be someone eavesdropping outside the window?

古文：财可养生须注意，事不关己不劳心。
现代文：有钱可以养生但是也要注意，不可以胡吃海塞；事情与己无关，把它搁在一边不管。
English: If you have money, you can take care of your health, but you should also be careful not to eat too much seafood; things have nothing to do with you, put it aside.

古文：酒不护贤，色不护病；财不护亲，气不护命！
现代文：酒色财气乃人生四戒，泛指各种不良品德、习气。
English: Liquor and wealth are the four precepts of life, which broadly refer to all kinds of bad morals and habits.

古文：一日不可无常业，安闲便易起邪心！
现代文：劝诫人们不要酗酒、好色、贪财和生气。人不可以不正常工作，安逸清闲就会容易生出邪念。
English: People should not be drunk, lustful, greedy or angry. People should not work in an abnormal way. When people are at ease, they are likely to have evil thoughts.

古文：炎凉世态，富贵更甚于贫贱；
现代文：人情的冷暖世态的炎凉，在富贵人家比贫穷人家表现得更为鲜明；
English: The warmth and coldness of people's feelings and the heat and coldness of the world are more pronounced in rich and noble people than in poor people;

古文：嫉妒人心，骨肉更甚于外人！
现代文：猜忌的心理；骨肉亲人之间比陌生人之间表现得更为厉害。
English: The psychology of suspicion; it is more pronounced between relatives than between strangers.

古文：瓜熟蒂落，水到渠成。
现代文：瓜熟了，瓜蒂自然脱落。
English: When the melon is ripe, the guard falls off naturally.

古文：人情送匹马，买卖不饶针！
现代文：水流到的地方自然形成一条水道。
English: Where the water reaches, it naturally forms a channel.

古文：过头饭好吃，过头话难听！
现代文：指时机和条件一旦成熟，事情自然成功。
English: means that once the time and conditions are ripe, things will naturally succeed.

古文：事多累了自己，田多养了众人。
现代文：如果是做人情，送匹马也没有问题。
English: If it is a humane act, there is no problem sending a horse.

古文：怕事忍事不生事自然无事；
现代文：但是做生意的话，一根针也要算清楚。
English: But when it comes to business, every needle must be counted.

古文：平心静心不欺心何等放心！天子至尊不过于理，在理良心天下通行。好话不在多说，有理不在高声！
现代文：烧过头的饭是可以吃的，但是话不能讲过头，也就是劝诫大家在吵架或者有纷争的时候，说话要有分寸，有所克制。
English: An overcooked meal can be eaten, but words cannot be overdone, that is, we must exhort everyone to speak with moderation and restraint when quarreling or having disputes.

古文：一朝权在手，便把令来行。
现代文：事情多了，受累的是自己；田地多了却可以养活很多人。
English: The more things there are, the more you suffer; the more fields there are, the more people there are to feed.

古文：甘草味甜人可食，巧言妄语不可听。当场不论，过后枉然。
现代文：担心有不好的事情发生，而防范于未然，隐忍可以激怒自己的事情，不去无中生有搬弄是非，自然就会天下太平；
English: Worry about bad things happening, and prevent them from happening, forbearance can irritate your own affairs, do not create problems out of nothing, and naturally the world will be peaceful;

古文：贫莫与富斗，富莫与官争！官清难逃猾吏手，衙门少有念佛人！
现代文：保持用心公平，态度公正，心境平静不躁，不自欺欺人，就会心情安定，没有忧虑和牵挂。
English: Keep your intentions fair, your attitude fair, your mood calm and not irritable, do not deceive yourself, you will be in a stable mood, without worries and concerns.

古文：家有千口，主事一人。父子竭力山成玉，弟兄同心土变金。
现代文：最尊贵，最崇高的帝王只不过是因为他们懂得讲道理；说话符合道理，懂得以道德规范和价值标准来约束自己的人走到哪里都不怕。好听的话不在于说得过多，有道理的语言不在于说话时声音的高低。
English: The most honorable, the most noble emperors are simply because they know how to reason; people who speak in accordance with reason and know how to restrain themselves by ethical norms and value standards are not afraid to go anywhere. Good words do not lie in talking too much, reasonable language does not lie in the pitch of the voice when speaking.

古文：当事者迷，旁观者清。
现代文：一旦掌了权，就发号施令，指手划脚。
English: Once in power, they give orders and dictate.

古文：怪人不知理，知理不怪人。未富先富终不富，未贫先贫终不贫。
现代文：甘草虽不好看但味道甜美人人都喜欢吃；表面上好听而实际上却是虚伪的谎言，是绝对不可听信的。
English: Although licorice is ugly, it tastes sweet and everyone likes to eat it; a lie that sounds good on the surface but is actually hypocritical is absolutely not believable.

古文：少当少取，少输当赢！饱暖思淫欲，饥寒起盗心！蚊虫遭扇打，只因嘴伤人！
现代文：普通人觉得只要吃饱穿暖就是真正的幸福；平安二字值千金，只要家人平安，生活就有希望。
English: Ordinary people feel that as long as they have enough to eat and are warm, they are truly happy; the word "safety" is worth a lot of money, as long as their family is safe, there is hope for life.

古文：欲多伤神，财多累心！布衣得暖真为福，千金平安即是春。家贫出孝子，国乱显忠臣！
现代文：在家庭贫困的时候，才能发现真正的孝子，在国家危难的时候，才能识别真正的忠臣。
English: When the family is poor, only then can the true filial son be found, and when the country is in danger, only then can the true loyal subject be identified.

古文：宁做太平犬，莫做离乱人！
现代文：宁愿在天下太平时作只犬，也不在离别战乱时生为人。
English: I would rather be a dog in a time of peace than a man in a time of war.

古文：人有几等，官有几品。
现代文：人有等级之分，官有品级之分。
English: People are divided into ranks, and officials are divided into ranks.

古文：理不卫亲，法不为民。
现代文：即物以类聚，人以群分。
English: That is to say, things are grouped according to their types, and people are grouped according to their groups.

古文：自重者然后人重，人轻者便是自轻。
现代文：理法的制定、实施、维护不能袒护自己人。懂得自重的人自然会受到别人的尊重；看不起别人的人，也就是看不起自己。
English: The formulation, implementation and maintenance of rational laws cannot protect their own people. People who know how to respect themselves will naturally be respected by others; people who look down on others, that is, look down on themselves.

古文：自身不谨，扰乱四邻。
现代文：自己做事行为放荡，就会扰乱周围居民的生活。
English: Self-indulgent behavior will disrupt the lives of the surrounding residents.

古文：快意事过非快意，自古败名因败事。
现代文：高兴的事情过去了，也就没有什么可值得高兴的了。自古以来都是因为做了坏事而身败名裂。
English: Happy things have passed, and there is nothing to be happy about. Since ancient times, people have been disgraced for doing bad things.

古文：伤身事莫做，伤心话莫说。
现代文：即防微杜渐。有害于身体健康的事情不要做，不利于心情舒畅的话语不要说。
English: Don't do things that are harmful to your health, and don't say things that are not conducive to a good mood.

古文：小人肥口，君子肥身。
现代文：小人只追求口腹之欲，君子却把修身作为自己的追求。
English: The villain only pursues the desire of the mouth and stomach, but the gentleman pursues self-cultivation.

古文：地不生无名之辈，天不生无路之人。
现代文：大地不会孕育无用之人，上天不会让人无路可走。
English: The earth will not give birth to useless people, and heaven will not let people have nowhere to go.

古文：一苗露水一苗草，一朝天子一朝臣。
现代文：一方水土养育一方人，当权者变动下属也相应变动。
English: On the other hand, water and soil nurture one person, and when the person in power changes, the subordinates also change accordingly.

古文：读未见书，如得良友；见已读书，如逢故人。
现代文：看没有看过的书，好像见到好朋友；读已经读过的书，好像见到老朋友。
English: To look at a book one has not read is like meeting a good friend; to read a book one has read is like meeting an old friend.

古文：福满须防有祸，凶多料必无争。
现代文：幸福美满的时候必须提防随时会出现的不幸；当面临险境，困难丛生的时候估计必然不会有人来强取豪夺。
English: When you are happy and contented, you must beware of misfortune that can occur at any time; when you are faced with danger and difficulties, it is estimated that there will be no one to forcibly take the plunder.

古文：不怕三十而死，只怕死后无名。
现代文：不怕只活到三十岁就死了，只怕死了以后没有人知道我是谁。
English: I'm not afraid that I'll only live until I'm thirty and then die, I'm just afraid that after I die, no one will know who I am.

古文：但知江湖者，都是薄命人。
现代文：能够将社会环境看的透彻的人，大都命运坎坷。
English: People who can see the social environment thoroughly usually have a bumpy fate.

古文：不怕方中打死人，只知方中无好人。
现代文：不怕在盗墓的时候把人打死，只知道在盗墓时见到的都不是好人。
English: I'm not afraid to beat someone to death while robbing a grave, I just know that what I see when I rob a grave is not a good person.

古文：说长说短，宁说人长莫说短；
现代文：议论别人的好坏是非时，宁可只说优点不说缺点。
English: When discussing the merits and demerits of others, it is better to talk only about the advantages rather than the shortcomings.

古文：施恩施怨，宁施人恩莫施怨。
现代文：施恩于人，不在乎多少，而在于别人是否急需；
English: Be kind to others, no matter how much, but whether others are in urgent need;

古文：育林养虎，虎大伤人。冤家抱头死，事要解交人。
现代文：施怨于人，不在乎深浅，而在于是否伤了别人的心；所以宁可只施恩于人，也不要施怨。
English: If you have a grudge against someone, it does not matter how deep or shallow it is, but whether or not you have hurt someone's heart. Therefore, it is better to be kind to others than to hold a grudge.

古文：卷帘归乳燕，开扇出苍蝇。
现代文：夜里不点灯，是爱惜飞蛾的生命呀。
English: If you don't light a lamp at night, you'll be sparing the life of a moth.

古文：爱鼠常留饭，怜蛾灯罩纱。人命在天，物命在人。
现代文：人的命运在于上天注定，东西的命运掌握在人的手里。即：人定胜天。
English: The fate of man is predestined by heaven, and the fate of things is in the hands of man. That is to say, man is sure to win over heaven.

古文：奸不通父母，贼不通地邻。
现代文：奸诈阴险的人不会想到通过和你的父母合作来害你；盗贼不会和同你的左邻右舍来盗窃你家财物。
English: A deceitful, conniving person would not think of working with your parents to harm you; a thief would not work with your neighbors to steal your family's belongings.

古文：盗贼多出赌博，人命常出奸情。
现代文：偷盗常常是因为赌博，出人命常常是因为奸情。
English: Stealing is often the result of gambling, murder is often the result of adultery.

古文：治国信谗必杀忠臣，治家信谗必疏其亲。
现代文：治理国家若听信谗言则忠臣必死；管理家庭事务若听信谗言则必疏远其亲属。
English: In governing a country, if you listen to advice, your loyal subjects will die; in managing family affairs, if you listen to advice, you will alienate your relatives.

古文：治国不用佞臣，治家不用佞妇。
现代文：治理国家绝对不能用非出于国家社稷而受宠信的一类人群；治理家庭事务不可用巧言谄媚的女人。
English: It is absolutely impossible to govern the country with a group of people who are not favored and trusted by the national society; it is impossible to govern family affairs with a smooth-talking and charming woman.

古文：好臣一国之宝，好妇一家之珍。
现代文：有良好品行的官臣是一国之宝，有良好品行的妻子是一家之珍。
English: A government official with good conduct is a national treasure, and a wife with good conduct is the treasure of the family.

古文：稳的不滚，滚的不稳。
现代文：做事情一定要沉稳扎实。即：根深蒂固。
English: Do things must be steady and solid. That is: deep-rooted.

古文：儿不嫌母丑，狗不嫌家贫。
现代文：比喻基础深厚，不容易动摇。儿子不嫌弃自己的母亲丑，家里的狗不嫌弃家里穷。
English: The metaphor has a deep foundation and is not easily shaken. A son does not dislike his mother for being ugly, a family dog does not dislike the family for being poor.

古文：君子千钱不计较，小人一钱恼人心。
现代文：即：枪打出头鸟。凡事好出风头的人会被打压打击。
English: That is: the gun shoots the first bird. People who like to be in the limelight will be suppressed.

古文：人前显贵，闹里夺争。要知江湖深，一个不做声。
现代文：就是知道满足的就不受辱，知道适可而止的就不危险。
English: That is to say, those who know how to be satisfied will not be humiliated, and those who know how to be moderate will not be in danger.

古文：知止自当出妄想，安贫须是禁奢心。
现代文：人要知道满足，知道适可而止。初入行业，三年事成；
English: People should know how to be satisfied and know when to stop. When you first enter the industry, three years of success;

古文：初入行业，三年事成；
现代文：刚开始工作，要用三年的时间才可以将行业的技能掌握；
English: It takes three years to master the skills of the industry when you first start working;

古文：初吃馒头，三年口生。
现代文：第一次吃馒头，三年时间口的动作都不熟练。
English: The first time you eat steamed bread, you won't be able to move your mouth for three years.

古文：家无生活计，坐吃如山崩。
现代文：一个家庭光是消费而不从事生产，即使有堆积如山的财富，也要耗尽。
English: Even if a family has a mountain of wealth, it will be exhausted if it only consumes and does not produce.

古文：家有良田万顷，不如薄艺在身；
现代文：家中有良田万顷可以耕种，不如有一技之长；
English: If you have 10,000 hectares of good farmland to cultivate at home, it is better to have a good skill;

古文：艺多不养家，食多嚼不赢。
现代文：技艺太多，往往不能做好，而无法养家；贪图多吃，消化不了。
English: Too many skills, often can not do a good job, but can not support a family; greed to eat more, can not digest.

古文：命中只有八合米，走遍天下不满升。
现代文：比喻工作或学习，图多而做不好或吸收不了。
English: For example, in work or study, if there are too many pictures, it is difficult to do well or absorb.

古文：使心用心，反害自身。
现代文：就是说掌握一门精湛过硬的技术比什么都强。
English: That is to say, mastering a superb technique is stronger than anything else.

古文：国家无空地，世上无闲人。
现代文：命中注定你只有八合米，就是走遍天下，也依然是这些。即：啥人啥命。
English: You are destined to have only eight rice, even if you travel all over the world, it will still be these.

古文：妙药难医怨逆病，混财不富穷命人。
现代文：使心用心就是别有用心，有某种不可告人的企图的人最后都会回过头来伤害到自己。
English: To follow one's heart is to have ulterior motives. People with ulterior motives will eventually turn around and hurt themselves.

古文：耽误一年春，十年补不清；
现代文：国家没有了空闲的地方，那么世上也就不会有无事可做的人了。
English: If there were no idle places in the country, there would be no idle people in the world.

古文：人能处处能，草能处处生。会打三班鼓，也要几个人。人不走不亲，水不打不浑。
现代文：由怨恨而生出的病就是再好的药也是很难治的，要是命相中是穷人，那么即使得到一笔横财也不能使自己变得富有。
English: The disease of resentment is difficult to cure even with the best medicine. If you are destined to be poor, even if you get a windfall, it will not make you rich.

古文：三贫三富不到老，十年兴败多少人！
现代文：一年之计在于春，若是耽误了，即使用十年的时间也难以补偿。
English: The best time of the year is in the spring. If there is a delay, it will be difficult to compensate even if it takes ten years.

古文：买货买得真，折本折得轻；
现代文：即机不可失，时不再来。告诉人们，时机难得，必需抓紧，不可错过。
English: Tell people that the opportunity is rare, must be seized, and must not be missed.

古文：不怕问到，只怕倒问。人强不如货强，价高不如口便。
现代文：野草可以随处生长，做人在每个地方都可以派上用场。
English: Weeds can grow anywhere, and being human can come in handy everywhere.

古文：会买买怕人，会卖卖怕人。
现代文：人无论在哪里，总会有用武之地的，类似天生我材必有用的意思。
English: People, no matter where they are, will always have a sense of usefulness, similar to the idea that we are born to be useful.

古文：只只船上有梢公，天子足下有贫亲。
现代文：即使你会打三班鼓，也要几个人才能打出这种味道来，强调合作的力量。
English: Even if you can play three sets of drums, it takes several people to play this flavor, emphasizing the power of cooperation.

古文：既知莫望，不知莫向。在一行，练一行；
现代文：人是靠不断的交往来拉近彼此的距离，如果不进行交流沟通的话，即使再亲近的人，也会慢慢疏远；水只有保持平静的时候才会显得清澈而不浑浊。
English: People rely on constant communication to close the distance between each other. If there is no communication, even the closest people will slowly drift apart. Water will only appear clear and not muddy when it remains calm.

古文：穷莫失志，富莫癫狂。天欲令其灭亡，必先让其疯狂。梢长人胆大，梢短人心慌。
现代文：人生就是一个起起落落的过程，富有的人谁能说自己能富一辈子，贫穷的人谁又能肯定他会穷一辈子，十年之内有多少人已经成功，又有多少人失败。
English: Life is a process of ups and downs. Rich people can say that they can be rich for the rest of their lives. Poor people can be sure that they will be poor for the rest of their lives. How many people have succeeded and how many have failed within ten years?

古文：隔行莫贪利，久炼必成钢。瓶花虽好艳，相看不耐长。
现代文：所以不要以一个人现在的成绩去评论一个人的成功以否，不要以他今天的成功就对他另眼相看，也不要以他今天的失败就下定论以为他一辈子都不会成功而看不起。
English: So don't judge a person's success based on their current results, don't look down on them based on their success today, and don't look down on them based on their failure today, thinking that they will never be successful.

古文：早起三光，迟起三慌。未来休指望，过去莫思量；
现代文：学会用平常、尊重、学习的心态去看待别人的成功与失败。
English: Learn to look at other people's successes and failures with a normal, respectful, and learning mindset.

古文：时来遇好友，病去遇良方。
现代文：买东西的时候要会判断东西的好坏真假，在讨价还价时要以东西的实际所值来进行折价，
English: When you buy something, you should be able to judge whether it is good or bad, true or false. When bargaining, you should use the actual value of the item to make a discount.

古文：布得春风有夏雨，哈得秋风大家凉。
现代文：不怕被别人问到，只怕别人家反问。
English: I'm not afraid of being asked, I'm just afraid of being asked back.

古文：晴带雨伞，饱带饥粮。满壶全不响，半壶响叮当。
现代文：有经验的医生往往被难以根治的老毛病搞得晕头转向，而腐烂变质的过期药，遇到在好的方子，也起不到好的治疗效果。
English: Experienced doctors are often bewildered by incurable old diseases, while rotting and deteriorating expired drugs, encountered in good recipes, do not have a good therapeutic effect.

古文：久利之事莫为，众争之地莫往。
现代文：比喻过去的缺点错误难以改正。
English: It is difficult to correct the shortcomings and mistakes of the past.

古文：老医迷旧疾，朽药误良方；
现代文：注定了死在水里，就不会在岸上去世。
English: If you're going to die in the water, you don't die on the shore.

古文：该在水中死，不在岸上亡。
现代文：比喻命有定数，该死在这里就不会死在那里。
English: As the saying goes, there is a fixed number for life. If you die here, you won't die there.

古文：舍财不如少取，施药不如传方。
现代文：失去钱财不如少量获取，施药救人不如传人以药方。
English: It is better to lose money than to gain a small amount of money, and it is better to use medicine to save people than to pass on a prescription.

古文：倒了城墙丑了县官，打了梅香丑了姑娘。
现代文：遇事要讲究方式方法。城墙倒了是让县官没了脸面，打了奴才就是让主子脸上无光。
English: In case of emergency, it is necessary to pay attention to the way and method. If the city wall falls down, the county official will lose face, and if the slave is beaten, the master will lose face.

古文：燕子不进愁门，耗子不钻空仓。
现代文：燕子不在没有人住的屋檐下筑巢，耗子不钻没有粮食的空仓。
English: Swallows don't build nests under unoccupied eaves, mice don't burrow into empty grain silos.

古文：苍蝇不叮无缝蛋，谣言不找谨慎人。
现代文：比喻没有看到真正的目标，决不轻易露出自已的底线条件。蛋要是无裂缝，苍蝇便不会去叮它，谣言也不会找上言行谨慎的人。
English: The metaphor does not see the real goal, and will never easily reveal its bottom line conditions. If the egg is crack-free, the fly will not sting it, and the rumor will not find a prudent person.

古文：一人舍死，万人难当。
现代文：一个人无所顾忌勇往直前，那么再多的人也难以阻挡住他。
English: If a person dares to go ahead without any scruples, then no matter how many people there are, it is difficult to stop him.

古文：人争一口气，佛争一炷香。
现代文：做人要有骨气有志气，不能丢了尊严。
English: To be a person, you must have a backbone and ambition, and must not lose your dignity.

古文：门为小人而设，锁乃君子之防。
现代文：门是为君子而设置的，锁是用来提防小人的。
English: Doors are for gentlemen, locks are for villains.

古文：舌咬只为揉，齿落皆因眶。
现代文：比喻人老了说话说不清楚，牙落眼昏，所答非所问。
English: For example, when a person is old, he can't speak clearly, his teeth are loose, and he can't answer what he's asked.

古文：硬弩弦先断，钢刀刃自伤。
现代文：从来都是硬弩的弦先断，每每见到锋利钢刀的刀口容易损伤。
English: It has always been the case that the strings of the harpsichord are cut first. Whenever you see a sharp steel knife, the edge is easily damaged.

古文：贼名难受，龟名难当。
现代文：告戒我们为人不能太露锋芒，要学会收敛。
English: He warned us not to be too outspoken and to learn to restrain ourselves.

古文：好事他人未见讲，错处他偏说得长。
现代文：不管把谁称作贼，谁心里都不好受；不管把谁称作乌龟，谁都难以忍受。
English: No matter who is called a thief, no one feels good; no matter who is called a turtle, no one can bear it.

古文：男子无志纯铁无钢，女子无志烂草无瓤。
现代文：即好事不出门恶事传千里。指好事不容易被人知道，坏事却传播得极快。男子没有志向就像没有钢的纯铁，女子没有志向就像没有瓤的烂草。
English: That is to say, good things don't go out of doors, and bad things travel thousands of miles. That is to say, good things are not easily known by people, but bad things spread very quickly. A man without ambition is like pure iron without steel, and a woman without ambition is like rotten grass without straw.

古文：生男欲得成龙犹恐成獐，生女欲得成凤犹恐成虎。
现代文：生了男孩都想望子成龙，总怕长大后成为善于隐匿的禽兽；生了女孩都想望女成凤，总怕长大后成为如虎一般的女子。
English: When boys are born, they all want to become dragons, and they are always afraid of growing up to become animals that are good at hiding; when girls are born, they all want to become phoenixes, and they are always afraid of growing up to become women like tigers.

古文：养男莫听狂言，养女莫叫离母。
现代文：教育男孩，不要去听信别人的胡言乱语，教育女孩，不要让她离开自己的母亲。
English: Teach a boy not to listen to other people's nonsense, and a girl not to leave her mother.

古文：男子失教必愚顽，女子失教定粗鲁。
现代文：男孩子缺少教养必然会成为愚昧顽固的人；女孩子失去教养必定会成为粗野鲁莽的人。
English: Ill-bred boys are bound to be stupid and obstinate; ill-bred girls are bound to be rude and reckless.

古文：生男莫教弓与弩，生女莫教歌与舞。
现代文：是说男孩子不要像弓与弩那样，认定一个目标就一发而不可收。
English: That is to say, boys should not be like bows and crossbows, identifying a target as a one-time shot.

古文：学成弓弩沙场灾，学成歌舞为人妾。
现代文：女孩子不要只知道欢歌乐舞而不懂得生存之道。
English: Girls should not only know how to sing and dance, but also know how to survive.

古文：财交者密，财尽者疏。婚姻论财，夫妻之道。
现代文：男孩子学会了弓弩之技，就会战死沙场；女孩子学会了歌舞之技，就会成为别人的姨太、陪房，二奶、小老婆。
English: If a boy learns the skill of bow and arrow, he will die on the battlefield; if a girl learns the skill of singing and dancing, she will become someone's aunt, concubine, second wife.

古文：色娇者亲，色衰者疏。
现代文：有钱时，人人都与你亲近；没钱时，人人都疏远着你。
English: When you have money, everyone is close to you; when you have no money, everyone is distant from you.

古文：少实胜虚，巧不如拙。百战百胜不如无争，万言万中不如一默。
现代文：古时婚姻讲究门当户对，也就是以家庭的财产多少来作为衡量，这是成为夫妻的途径之一。面容较好的自然亲近，面容不佳的自然疏远。再多的虚幻也不如一点真实可贵；奸巧伪诈不如笨拙而诚实。
English: In ancient times, marriage focused on pairing, that is, it was measured by the amount of family property, which was one of the ways to become a husband and wife. Natural closeness with a good face, natural estrangement with a bad face. No amount of illusion is more valuable than a little truth; cunning deception is not as good as clumsy and honest.

古文：有钱不置怨逆产，冤家宜解不宜结。
现代文：无休止的战斗胜利了又如何？不如保持和平，争论占了上风又有何用？不如保持沉默。
English: What if the endless battle is won? It is better to keep the peace. What if the argument prevails? It is better to remain silent.

古文：近朱者赤，近墨者黑。一个山头一只虎，恶龙难斗地头蛇。
现代文：战争虽然可以取得胜利，但死去的生命是不可挽回的，与人争辩虽然占了上风，但是伤了和气是不可挽回的，强调了和平与和气的重要意义。
English: Although the war can be won, but the dead life is irreparable, and although the dispute with people prevailed, but the broken harmony is irreparable, emphasizing the importance of peace and harmony.

古文：出门看天色，进门看脸色。
现代文：即团结一切可以团结的。
English: That is, to unite everything that can be united.

古文：商贾买卖如施舍，买卖公平如积德。天生一人，地生一穴。
现代文：即不论做什么事情都要公平对待。上天安排一个人诞生，地上必然有一个他将来死后埋葬的地方。
English: That is, no matter what you do, you must treat everyone fairly. Heaven arranges for a person to be born, and there must be a place on earth where he will be buried after his death.

古文：家无三年之积不成其家，国无九年之积不成其国。
现代文：一家人如果没有三年的积蓄，就不像家，一个国家如果没有九年的累积，就不能称为国家。
English: If a family does not have three years of savings, it is not like a home, and if a country does not have nine years of accumulation, it cannot be called a country.

古文：男子有德便是才，女子无才便是德。
现代文：男子与人争辩的时候能够显露出道德修养，女子不与人争辩是有道德修养的表现。
English: When men argue with people, they can show moral cultivation, and when women do not argue with people, it is a manifestation of moral cultivation.

古文：有钱难买子孙贤，女儿不请上门客。
现代文：有钱难以买到孝顺父母的儿子和有贤德的孙子。女儿不能会见主动上门的客人。
English: It is difficult to buy a filial son and a virtuous grandson with money. A daughter cannot meet a guest who comes to her door.

古文：男大当婚女大当嫁，不婚不嫁惹出笑话。谦虚美德，过谦即诈。
现代文：这是对古人而言的，就是说到了一定的年龄，男的要娶妻，女的要嫁人。谦虚是一种美德，过于谦虚就是不诚实，是欺骗。
English: This is for the ancients, that is to say, after a certain age, a man wants to marry a wife, a woman wants to marry a man. Modesty is a virtue, too much modesty is dishonest and deception.

古文：自己跌倒自己爬，望人扶持都是假。
现代文：自己摔倒了，就自己爬起来。指望别人扶持的，说明你还有能力可以自己爬起来。
English: If you fall down, you can get up by yourself. If you rely on others for support, it shows that you still have the ability to get up by yourself.

古文：人不知己过，牛不知力大。
现代文：人犯了错，往往自己认识不到；牛的力气有多大，牛自己并不知道。
English: When people make a mistake, they often don't recognize it themselves. Cows don't know how strong they are.

古文：一家饱暖千家怨，一物不见赖千家。
现代文：一家吃饱穿暖却使上千户人家埋怨，一件东西不见了也会赖做是上千户的穷人所为。
English: If one family is well-fed and warm, it will make thousands of families complain. If one thing is missing, it will depend on the poor of thousands of families.

古文：当面论人惹恨最大，是与不是随他说吧！
现代文：当着许多人的面去议论一个人，会让人家对你怀恨在心。一个人的是与不是要任凭别人去议论，自己不说就好。
English: Discussing a person in front of many people will make people hold a grudge against you. Whether a person is to be discussed by others, it is better not to talk about it yourself.

古文：谁人做得千年主，转眼流传八百家。
现代文：有谁能做得千年的主人，转眼之间流传到了上百户人家中。
English: Who can be the owner for a thousand years, it spread to hundreds of households in the blink of an eye.

古文：满载芝麻都漏了，还在水里捞油花！
现代文：即风水轮流转。好人不会永远属于你，好运不会永远随着你，好事不会永远都降临到你头上。比喻因小失大。得不偿失。
English: That is, feng shui takes turns. Good people will not always belong to you, good luck will not always follow you, and good things will not always fall on your head. Metaphor for small loss. Gain without loss.

古文：皇帝坐北京，以理统天下。
现代文：皇帝住在京城，以道理来统治天下。
English: The emperor lived in the capital and ruled the world with reason.

古文：五百年前共一家，不同祖宗也同华！
现代文：说明，做人一定要讲道理。是说不管你姓什么，都是炎黄子孙，都是中华儿女，五百年前都是一家人。
English: That is to say, no matter what your surname is, you are all descendants of the Yellow Emperor, you are all Chinese sons and daughters, and five hundred years ago you were all one family.

古文：学堂大如官厅，人情大过王法。
现代文：学校的课堂大的好像政府机关。
English: A large school classroom looks like a government office.

古文：找钱犹如针挑土，用钱犹如水推沙！
现代文：挣钱像积土成山，积累很慢；花钱如浪打潮头，哗哗东流。
English: Earning money is like piling up a mountain, the accumulation is very slow; spending money is like beating the tide, and the tide is going to the east.

古文：害人之心不可有，防人之心不可无！
现代文：行善不能有伤害别人的坏念头，但是也要防备他人，警惕他人。不怕没有路，没有路可以修路。
English: In doing good, one must not have evil thoughts of harming others, but must also be on guard against others and be alert to others. Don't be afraid that there is no way, there is no way to build a road.

古文：不愁无路，就怕不做。
现代文：就怕不修路，也就真的是无路可走了。
English: If the road is not repaired, there really is no way to go.

古文：须向根头寻活计，莫从体面下功夫！
现代文：应向根本寻找办法，不要只在表面上下功夫。
English: We should look for solutions at the root, not just scratch the surface.

古文：祸从口出，病从口入。药补不如肉补，肉补不如养补。
现代文：病毒常常因饮食不注意而入侵，灾祸往往因说话不谨慎而引起。用药补不如用肉补，用肉补不如以调养身心来补。
English: Viruses often invade due to careless eating, and disasters are often caused by careless speech. It is better to supplement with medicine than with meat, and it is better to supplement with meat than to supplement with physical and mental training.

古文：思虑之害甚于酒色，日日劳力上床呼疾。
现代文：心内的忧郁多虑所带来的危害，远远大于沉迷酒色所带来的危害。日日操劳就会浑身乏力而痛苦不迭。
English: The harm brought about by melancholy and hesitation in the heart is far greater than the harm brought about by addiction to alcohol. If you work hard every day, you will be exhausted and miserable.

古文：人怕不是福，人欺不是辱。
现代文：劝慰要懂得劳逸结合，不要想得太多，而劳神伤心。受人欺侮不是耻辱，人惧怕不是好事。
English: Consolation is to know how to combine work and rest, not to think too much, and work is sad. It is not a shame to be bullied, and it is not a good thing to be afraid of people.

古文：能言不是真君子，善处方为大丈夫！
现代文：能说会道的，不一定就是道貌岸然的君子。只有处世练达的把持好一个恰如其分的距离的人，才是大丈夫。
English: It is not necessary to be a virtuous gentleman to be able to speak eloquently. It is only okay if you are a well-practiced person who can maintain an appropriate distance.

古文：为人莫犯法，犯法身无主。
现代文：为人不要触犯法律，一旦触犯法律就会失去自由。
English: Don't break the law. If you break the law, you will lose your freedom.

古文：姊妹同肝胆，弟兄同骨肉。
现代文：姐妹之情如肝胆相照，兄弟之情如骨肉相连。
English: Sisterly love is like the heart and soul, brotherly love is like the flesh and blood.

古文：慈母多误子，悍妇必欺夫！
现代文：母亲过多的疼爱自己的子女大多会耽误子女的前途，泼辣凶悍的妻子必定会欺负自己的丈夫。
English: Mothers who love their children too much will mostly delay their children's future, and hot-tempered and fierce wives will certainly bully their husbands.

古文：君子千里同舟，小人隔墙易宿。
现代文：君子会不计困难，与你同舟共济。而小人就是宁愿与你隔墙而宿，也不会与你坦诚相见。
English: A gentleman will share the same boat with you regardless of the difficulties, while a villain would rather live next door to you than meet you face to face.

古文：文钱逼死英雄汉，财不归身恰是无。
现代文：小钱有时也会逼死英雄汉子，钱财自始至终都本是身外之物，不会依附在你身上，本质上说来，恰好等于没有。
English: Small money can sometimes drive a hero to his death. Money is an external thing from beginning to end. It doesn't cling to you. In essence, it's just as good as nothing.

古文：妻子如衣服，弟兄似手足。衣服补易新，手足断难续。
现代文：旧指同胞兄弟像手和脚那么亲密，老婆像衣服一样旧了可以换新的。衣服破了可以缝起来，手足之情断了就再难延续。
English: Old refers to the fact that brothers and sisters are as close as hands and feet, and wives are as old as clothes and can be replaced with new ones. If clothes are broken, they can be sewn up, but if the affection between brothers and sisters is broken, it will be difficult to continue.

古文：盗贼怨失主，不孝怨父母。
现代文：做贼的人会说被盗的人没有收好自己的东西，子女不孝则是因为父母没有教育好，因而抱怨父母。
English: A thief would say that the person who was robbed didn't collect his things properly, while children are not filial because their parents didn't educate them well, so they complain about their parents.

古文：一时劝人以口，百世劝人以书。
现代文：用嘴来劝人，只在一时，以书来劝人，可以流传百世。
English: To persuade a man with the mouth is but for a moment, but to persuade a man with a book is for a lifetime.

古文：我不如人我无其福，人不如我我常知足！
现代文：如果我不如别人，就不要妄想和别人一样享福。如果别人不如我，我应该对自己拥有的感到知足。
English: If I am not as good as others, I should not expect to enjoy the same happiness as others. If others are not as good as me, I should be satisfied with what I have.

古文：捡金不忘失金人，三两黄铜四两福。
现代文：捡到了金子，要立即想到此时失主是多么的着急。就当是拿三两黄铜换回来四两福气。
English: If you find gold, you should immediately think about how anxious the owner is at this time. It's like taking three or two pieces of brass in exchange for four or two pieces of luck.

古文：因祸得福，求赌必输。
现代文：即：拾金不昧。生活中因祸得福的事是有的，但是人如果好斗一定是输。
English: That is to say: it is not unlucky to pick up gold. There are things in life that are fortunate due to misfortune, but if a person is aggressive, he will definitely lose.

古文：一言而让他人之祸，一忿而折平生之福。
现代文：一句不当的话会使人走向灾祸的境地，一念之差会让自己一生的福份大打折扣。
English: One wrong word can lead a person to a disastrous situation, and one wrong thought can greatly reduce the fortune of one's life.

古文：天有不测风云，人有旦夕祸福。
现代文：比喻有些灾祸的发生，事先是无法预料的。
English: The occurrence of some calamities, for example, cannot be predicted in advance.

古文：不淫当斋，淡饱当肉。
现代文：把没有淫念当作是斋戒，把粗茶淡饭看作是美味佳肴。
English: Think of the absence of lust as a fast, and the coarse tea and light meal as a delicacy.

古文：缓步当车，无祸当福。
现代文：慢步行走以代乘车，没有不幸的事情发生便是福气。
English: It is a blessing to walk slowly instead of taking a car, if nothing unfortunate happens.

古文：男无良友不知己之有过，女无明镜不知面之精粗。
现代文：男子若没有好的朋友不知道自己的不足之处。女子若没有照过镜子不知道自己的肤色是精细红润，还是暗黄粗糙。
English: If a man does not have a good friend, he does not know his shortcomings. If a woman has not looked in the mirror, she does not know whether her skin color is fine and rosy, or dark yellow and rough.

古文：事非亲做，不知难处。
现代文：事情若不是自己亲自去做，不知道它有多么难以处理。
English: If you don't do it yourself, you don't know how difficult it is to deal with.

古文：十年易读举子，百年难淘江湖！
现代文：用十年的时间很容易考上举人，用百年的时间想要把江湖淘个清楚，比登天还难。
English: It is easy to pass the examination for ten years, but it is more difficult to clear the quackery in one hundred years than to ascend to heaven.

古文：积钱不如积德，闲坐不如看书。
现代文：积攒钱财不如多做好事、善事。闲着呆着不如静下心来看书学习。
English: It is better to accumulate money than to do more good deeds. It is better to stay idle than to read and study quietly.

古文：思量挑担苦，空手做是福。时来易借银千两，运去难赊酒半壶。
现代文：想法太多会把你拖累的像挑担子一样越担越重，在自己一无所有的情况下而创立起来的一番事业才是自己的福气。时来运转时得到千两黄金很是得意，运气不好时买半壶酒的钱都没有，意思是要惜财，运气不会天天都很好。
English: Too many ideas will drag you down like a heavy burden. The first business you create when you have nothing is your own good fortune. You are very proud to get a thousand and two gold when you are running. When you are unlucky, you don't have the money to buy half a pot of wine. That means you have to be careful with money. Your luck won't be good every day.

古文：天晴打过落雨铺，少时享过老来福。与人方便自己方便，一家打墙两家好看。
现代文：晴天打的临时铺盖终被下雨天淋湿，我们每个人年少时享受的衣来伸手，饭来张口的福气其实就是老了干不动了儿孙照顾自己的福气。给别人一些方便，也是给自己带来方便。一家把墙拆毁了，两家心里都高兴、愉快。
English: The temporary pavement that was made on a sunny day was eventually drenched by the rainy day. The blessing that each of us enjoyed when we were young, when we stretched out our hands for clothes and opened our mouths for meals, is actually the blessing that our children and grandchildren take care of themselves when they are old and immobile. Giving others some convenience is also bringing convenience to ourselves. One family tore down the wall, and both families were happy and happy.

古文：当面留一线，过后好相见。
现代文：做人做事要给别人留点情面，日后也好再次来往。
English: To be a good person and do good things, you should leave a little bit of affection for others, so that you can come and go again in the future.

古文：入门掠虎易，开口告人难。
现代文：进山抓老虎容易，开口向人求告就难了。
English: It is easy to go into the mountains to catch tigers, but it is difficult to ask people for help.

古文：手指要往内撇，家丑不可外传。
现代文：指羞于向人乞求帮助。手指头都是往内撇的，家里不光彩的事，不便向外宣扬。
English: They are ashamed to ask people for help. Their fingers are turned inward, and it is not convenient to publicize disgraceful things at home.

古文：浪子出于祖无德，孝子出于前人贤。货离乡贵，人离乡贱。
现代文：此句话说明家教胜于礼教。东西离开出产地就显得贵重，人离开家乡就难以有作为或被人看不起。
English: This sentence shows that tutoring is better than etiquette. Things are valuable when they leave their place of origin, and it is difficult for people to do something or be looked down upon when they leave their hometown.

古文：树挪死，人挪活。
现代文：人一挪动就有了活得更好的可能，树一挪动就有死掉的危险。
English: As soon as a person moves, there is a possibility of a better life; as soon as a tree moves, there is a risk of death.

古文：在家千日好，出门处处难。
现代文：指出门在外不比在家，会时时遇到困难。
English: He pointed out that the door is not better outside than at home, and will always encounter difficulties.

古文：三员长者当官员，几个明人当知县？
现代文：为人只要当了官就被人瞒着，不再容易了解到世间的真实情况了。
English: It is no longer easy to know the true state of affairs in the world, as long as one becomes an official, one is kept in the dark.

古文：明人自断，愚人官断。人怕三见面，树怕一墨线。
现代文：心地光明的人对事物的正确性会自己作出判断，只有愚昧无知的人才需要从官吏那里得到对事物认知的正确性。人在多次见面后就会发现对方的缺点，墨线是木匠量直用的。
English: Bright-hearted people will make their own judgments about the correctness of things. Only ignorant people need to get the correctness of things from officials. People will find each other's shortcomings after many meetings. Ink lines are used directly by carpenters.

古文：村夫硬似铁，光棍软如棉。
现代文：没那个本事就不要去做，让给有能力的人来做。
English: If you don't have that ability, don't do it. Let someone with ability do it.

古文：不是撑船手，怎敢拿篙竿！天下礼仪无穷，一人知识有限。
现代文：天下礼仪非常多，每个国家都各有不同，单靠一个人的了解是远远不够的。
English: There are many etiquettes in the world, each country is different, and it is far from enough for one person to understand them.

古文：一人不得二人计，宋江难结万人缘。
现代文：一个人不能同时与两个或两个以上的人一起商讨计划。即使是宋江，他也很难结交上一万个朋友。
English: A person cannot discuss plans with two or more people at the same time. Even Song Jiang found it difficult to make 10,000 friends.

古文：家有三亩田，不离衙门前，乡间无强汉，衙门就饿饭。
现代文：即：不是所有人的话你都可以采纳和相信，知心的人只能有一个。家里有三亩田地就在衙门的前面，乡里如果没有人来争夺那么衙门也就没有事情可做。
English: That is to say: you can't accept and believe everyone's words, and there can only be one person with a heart. At home, there are three acres of fields right in front of the gate, and if there is no one in the village to fight for it, then there is nothing to do at the gate.

古文：人人依礼仪，天下不设官。
现代文：人人都遵守道德礼仪，那天下也就用不着设置衙门官府了。
English: If everyone observed moral etiquette, there would be no need to set up a government.

古文：衙门钱，眼睛钱；
现代文：衙门里的钱再多，毕竟眼力所及；
English: No matter how much money is in the bank, after all, it is as far as the eye can see;

古文：田禾钱，千万年。
现代文：而田地里的庄稼却可以让人活千万年。
English: But the crops in the fields can keep people alive for tens of thousands of years.

古文：诗书必读，不可做官。
现代文：但是却不可以做官。
English: But they are not allowed to hold public office.

古文：为人莫当官，当官皆一般。
现代文：所谓无官不贪，天下所有的官者都一样。
English: The so-called no official, no greed, all officials in the world are the same.

古文：换了你我去，恐比他还贪。
现代文：换成是你我做官，恐怕比他还贪。
English: If I were you and I were an official, I'm afraid I'd be more greedy than him.

古文：官吏清廉如修行，书差方便如行善。
现代文：为官清廉就像自我约束的修行。书读的不好，也还可以识字，可以为他人带来方便，不失为无私的善举。
English: Being a clean official is like a self-discipline practice. If you are not good at reading, you can still be literate, which can bring convenience to others and is a selfless act of kindness.

古文：靠山吃山，种田吃田。吃尽美味还是盐，穿尽绫罗还是棉。
现代文：比喻自己所在的地方有什么条件，就依靠什么条件生活。
English: If there are any conditions in the place where you are, you should live according to those conditions.

古文：一夫不耕，全家饿饭，一女不织，全家受寒。
现代文：没有盐的支撑就没有美味佳肴，没有棉花纺纱织布就没有绫罗。一个家庭，男人不工作全家就会挨饿，女人不织布全家就要受到寒冷的侵袭。
English: Without the support of salt, there would be no delicious food, and without cotton spinning and weaving, there would be no straw. In a family, if the man did not work, the whole family would starve, and if the woman did not weave, the whole family would be attacked by the cold.

古文：金银到手非容易，用时方知来时难。
现代文：把金银拿到手里其实并不容易，到用它的时候才体会到它的来之不易。
English: In fact, it is not easy to get gold and silver in your hands. It is only when you use it that you realize how hard it was to get it.

古文：先讲断，后不乱，免得藕断丝不断。
现代文：把可能发生的不好的后果，都预料到，坦白的说出来，以免找后帐。
English: Anticipate all the possible bad consequences, and speak out frankly, so as not to be held responsible later.

古文：听人劝，得一半。
现代文：只要善于听取别人的劝告，你就已经有了一半的收获。
English: As long as you are good at listening to other people's advice, you have already gained half the harvest.

古文：不怕慢，只怕站。
现代文：不怕行动缓慢，就怕停滞不前。
English: If you are not afraid of moving slowly, you are afraid of stagnation.

古文：逢快莫赶，逢贱莫懒。
现代文：遇到畅快的时候，不要凑热闹；遇到行情不景气的时候，千万不要松懈。
English: When encountering a pleasant time, do not join the hustle and bustle; when encountering a downturn in the market, do not slacken.

古文：谋事在人，成事在天！
现代文：我们在做事情的时候，一定要学会正确对待，正确处理过程与结果的关系。
English: When we do things, we must learn to treat them correctly and correctly handle the relationship between the process and the result.

古文：长路人挑担，短路人赚钱。宁卖现二，莫卖赊三。
现代文：一个人挑担在路上行走，走的路长的人仍然挑担说明他没卖出东西，而走的路短的，却是卖完东西赚了钱。宁可卖现钱也不赊帐。
English: A person walks on the road with a burden, and the person who walks the longest still carries the burden, indicating that he has not sold anything, while the person who walks the shortest distance has sold something and made money. It is better to sell cash than to borrow.

古文：赚钱往前算，折本往后算。
现代文：挣钱盈利了就往前算，亏损了就往后算。
English: If you make a profit, you count it forward, if you make a loss, you count it backward.

古文：小小生意赚大钱，七十二行出状元。
现代文：不管是多小的生意，会做的都可以赚到大钱。
English: No matter how small the business, you can make a lot of money.

古文：自己无运至，却怨世界难。胆大不如胆小，心宽甚如屋宽。
现代文：无论你做什么，只要钻研进去了，不管是什么不好的职业，你也可以做其中的领头人。
English: No matter what you do, as long as you study hard, no matter what kind of bad profession, you can also be the leader of it.

古文：妻贤何愁家不富，子孙何须受祖田。
现代文：自己没有做事情的运气，或者是好运还没有到来，就抱怨在这个世界活的太难没有好运。
English: If you do not have the luck to do things, or if good luck has not yet come, you complain that it is too difficult to live in this world without good luck.

古文：是儿不死，是财不散。
现代文：胆大则妄为，胆小则怕事，不去管闲事，事情越少越好。
English: If you are bold, you will act rashly, if you are timid, you will be afraid of things. Don't meddle in things. The fewer things, the better.

古文：财来生我易，我去生财难。
现代文：心情愉快，无所牵挂比住进宽敞的屋子更好。
English: It is better to be happy and carefree than to live in a spacious house.

古文：十日滩头坐，一日下九滩。结交一人难上难，得罪一人一时间。
现代文：结交一个可以交心的朋友是难上加难，而得罪一个人却在一念之间，有时只是因为一句话就可招致终身记恨。
English: It is very difficult to make a friend with whom you can have a heart-to-heart talk, while offending someone is just a thought away. Sometimes, just because of a word, it can lead to lifelong hatred.

古文：借债经商，卖田还债；
现代文：借钱经商的话，如果没有赚到钱，就要卖田还债；
English: If you borrow money to do business, if you don't make any money, you have to sell the land to pay off the debt;

古文：赊钱起屋，卖屋还钱。
现代文：如果赊钱盖房子，房子盖好了，是不是要卖屋还钱？
English: If you borrow money to build a house, and the house is built, do you have to sell the house to pay back the money?

古文：修起庙来鬼都老，拾得秤来姜卖完。
现代文：把庙修好了鬼都已经老了，把秤捡起来的时候，人家姜都买完了。
English: The ghosts who had repaired the temple were already old, and when they picked up the scales, they had all bought ginger.

古文：不嫖莫转，不赌莫看。
现代文：说明做事情动作太慢，下手太晚，而耽误了得利的最佳时机。
English: It means that you do things too slowly, start too late, and miss the best time to make a profit.

古文：节食以去病，少食以延年。
现代文：即做买卖要看准行情，快速切入。
English: That is to say, when doing business, you should pay attention to the market and enter the market quickly.

古文：豆腐多了是包水，梢公多了打烂船。
现代文：比喻做人要光明磊落，不可猥琐。想做事想做就去做，但绝不可以不计后果。
English: Metaphorically, one should be honest and not be obscene. If you want to do something, do it, but you must not be reckless with the consequences.

古文：无口过易，无眼过难。无身过易，无心过难。
现代文：故意的不吃某一种食物，或者只吃限定的食物，是为了自己的病情可以得到好转；吃饭只吃半饱却是可以延年益寿的。
English: Deliberately not eating a certain kind of food, or only eating a limited amount of food, is so that one's own condition can be improved; eating only half-full meals can prolong life.

古文：不会凫水怨河湾，不会犁田怨枷担。
现代文：有些事物超过一定限度，必定会得到相反的结果。
English: Some things beyond a certain limit, will inevitably get the opposite result.

古文：他马莫骑，他弓莫挽。要知心腹事，但听口中言。宁在人前全不会，莫在人前会不全。
现代文：忘记自己鼻子底下这张嘴，不乱说话就会少惹是非，更不会搬弄是非；倘若有眼无珠，或者视而不见，没长眼睛那就必然会有和你过不去的；
English: Forget the mouth under your nose. If you don't speak in a disorderly manner, you will be less likely to stir up trouble, and even less likely to make fun of others. If you have no eyes, or if you are blind, if you don't have long eyes, then there will inevitably be something you can't get past;

古文：事非亲见，切莫乱谈。打人莫打脸，骂人莫骂短。
现代文：忘记自己是谁，遇事置身事外，便可明哲保身；倘若是做事没有主见，心不在焉那就自然会有人不会叫你好过。
English: If you forget who you are and stay out of trouble, you will be able to protect yourself; if you do not have your own opinion and are absent-minded, then someone will not let you have a good time.

古文：好言一句三冬暖，恶语伤人六月寒。
现代文：比喻本来是主观上出了问题，却要强调是客观上的原因。
English: The metaphor was originally a subjective problem, but it should be emphasized that it is an objective reason.

古文：人上十口难盘，帐上万元难还。
现代文：不要总惦记着骑别人的马，不要总惦记着使用别人的弓箭。
English: Don't always remember to ride someone else's horse, don't always remember to use someone else's bow and arrow.

古文：放债如施，收债如讨。
现代文：想要知道别人心里的想法，听到话后，要先分析其含义，再对症下药。
English: If you want to know what's on someone's mind, listen to the words, analyze their meaning, and then apply the right medicine.

古文：告状讨钱，海底摸盐。
现代文：宁可在人前面，会也表现出什么都不会；也不要在人前面不会装会。
English: Would rather be in front of people, will also show nothing will; also do not be in front of people will not pretend.

古文：衙门深似海，弊病大如天。
现代文：不是自己亲眼看到的事情，切记不可随便乱讲。
English: Don't talk about things you haven't seen with your own eyes.

古文：银钱莫欺骗，牛马不好变。
现代文：打人不要打人的脸，骂人不要揭穿人家的短处。
English: Don't hit people in the face, and don't call people names to expose their shortcomings.

古文：好汉莫被人识破，看破不值半文钱。狗咬对头人，雷打三世冤。
现代文：这样会伤害人家的自尊心。指善意的话使人虽在严冬也感到温暖，恶意的话使人虽在盛夏也感到寒冷。
English: This will hurt people's self-esteem. It means that kind words make people feel warm even in the winter, and malicious words make people feel cold even in the summer.

古文：不卖香烧无剩钱，井水不打不满边。
现代文：人数在十口人以上，用盘子盛菜就有些困难，一般超过十个人以上的都会选择自助。
English: If there are more than ten people, there are some difficulties in using plates to serve dishes. Generally, more than ten people will choose self-service.

古文：事宽则园，太久则偏。高人求低易，低人求高难。
现代文：若帐上有超过万元的欠款，想要还上肯定也是有些难度的。
English: If there is more than 10,000 yuan in arrears on the account, it is certainly somewhat difficult to get it back.

古文：有钱就是男子汉，无钱就是汉子难。
现代文：即对于管理者来说，需要解决的问题只有两个，一是控制你可以养活的人数，二是偿还欠款的能力。
English: That is, for managers, there are only two problems to be solved, one is to control the number of people you can feed, and the other is the ability to repay arrears.

古文：人上一百，手艺齐全。
现代文：借钱的时候如同施舍，基本上是借出去就收不回来。
English: When you borrow money, it's like charity, basically you lend it out and you can't get it back.

古文：难者不会，会者不难。
现代文：收债的时候如乞讨一样。
English: Debt collection is like begging.

古文：生就木头造就船，砍的没得车的圆。心不得满，事不得全。
现代文：通过司法程序进行讨债，就像在海底摸盐一般困难。凡是进入衙门的人，都很难再出来，官不亲民，民不见官的弊病是相当大的。
English: Debt collection through judicial procedures is as difficult as searching for salt on the ocean floor. It is difficult for anyone who enters the courtroom to come out again. The malady of officials not being close to the people and the people not seeing officials is considerable.

古文：鸟飞不尽，话说不完。人无喜色休开店，事不遂心莫怨天。
现代文：不要拿假的银钱来骗人，假的就是假的，真的就是真的，就像牛和马一样是改变不了的。是好汉就要做到底，不要被人说出个不字，一旦不字出口，也就再没了身价。
English: Don't use fake money to deceive people. Fake is fake, real is real, just like cows and horses can't be changed. If you are a good person, you must do your best. Don't be fooled by others. Once you are fooled, you will no longer have any self-worth.

古文：选婿莫选田园，选女莫选嫁奁。红颜女子多薄命，福人出在丑人边。
现代文：善恶是有分别的。狗只忠诚于它的主人；对三代做尽坏事的人，连老天都不会容他。
English: There is a difference between good and evil. A dog is loyal to his master; even God will not tolerate a man who does evil for three generations.

古文：人将礼义为先，树将花果为园。
现代文：这是告诉人们做人要积德行善。遇到事情只要从容对待，就能圆满解决。
English: This is to tell people that they should accumulate virtues and do good deeds. If they encounter things, they can be solved satisfactorily as long as they are treated calmly.

古文：临危许行善，过后心又变。
现代文：若事情拖得时间过久，说明必定对某一方面怀有偏袒。
English: If things take too long, it means that there must be favoritism for one side or the other.

古文：天意违可以人回，命早定可以心挽。
现代文：高人想要保持低调是很容易的，低人若想出人头地就要吃得苦中苦方为人上人。
English: It is easy for a high-ranking person to keep a low profile. If a low-ranking person wants to get ahead, he or she will have to go through a lot of hardships to become a high-ranking person.

古文：强盗口内出赦书，君子口中无戏言。
现代文：社会现实，男人有钱什么都有，男人没钱，一无所有。
English: Social reality, men with money have everything, men without money have nothing.

古文：贵人语少，贫子话多。
现代文：人多了，那也就十八般武艺各有不同。
English: The more people there are, the more different the 18 martial arts are.

古文：快里须斟酌，耽误莫迟春。
现代文：每个人所掌握的手艺也会各有不同。做任何事情，都要有方法。
English: The skills that each person has mastered will also vary. There must be a way to do everything.

古文：读过古华佗，不如见症多。
现代文：如果你知道做某一件事情的最佳方法。那么，你会觉得很好做，一点也不难。
English: If you know the best way to do something, then you'll feel good doing it, it's not hard at all.

古文：东屋未补西屋破，前帐未还后又拖。
现代文：如果你不知道做某一件事情的最佳方法，那么，你就会觉得很难做。
English: If you don't know the best way to do something, then you'll find it hard to do.

古文：今年又说明年富，待到明年差不多。志不同己，不必强合。莫道坐中安乐少，须知世上苦情多。
现代文：告诉我们要学会建立一种积极的心态，认识困难，承认困难，迎战困难，战胜困难，在解决困难的过程中成长并体验到乐趣与成就感，体会到什么叫做难者不会，这比单单的学习知识练习技能要关键的多，在不断的克服重重困难的过程中，我们的经验知识越来越多，而我们也会有更多的事情会 会者不难 。
English: He told us that we should learn to establish a positive mental attitude, recognize difficulties, admit difficulties, meet difficulties, overcome difficulties, grow and experience fun and sense of accomplishment in the process of solving difficulties, and experience what is called difficult but not difficult. This is much more important than just learning knowledge and practicing skills. In the process of constantly overcoming difficulties, our experience and knowledge are increasing, and we will also have more things that are not difficult.

古文：本少利微强如坐，屋檐水也滴得多。
现代文：人要靠学习才能有所作为，光有知识是不够的，还要注重实践。
English: People need to rely on learning in order to make a difference. Knowledge alone is not enough, we also need to focus on practice.

古文：勤俭持家富，谦恭受益多。
现代文：心里不要总想着还有更好的，永不知足。
English: Don't always think that there is something better, you will never be satisfied.

古文：细处不断粗处断，黄梅不落青梅落。见钱起意便是贼，顺手牵羊乃为盗。
现代文：看见别人的东西便有了想要占为己有的想法，那你就已经是一个贼了。趁人家不注意，把人家的东西拿走，那你就是强盗。
English: If you see someone else's things and have the idea of taking them for yourself, then you are already a thief. If you take advantage of someone's inattention and take away their things, then you are a robber.

古文：要做快活人，切莫寻烦恼。
现代文：要学会做一个快乐生活的人，千万不要自寻烦恼。
English: To learn to be a happy person, don't bother yourself.

古文：要做长寿人，莫做短命事。
现代文：要学会养生之道，使自己活得更长寿。千万不要做自寻死路的傻事。
English: You should learn the way of health care, so that you can live a longer life. Don't do stupid things to find your own death.

古文：要做有后人，莫做无后事。
现代文：不论做什么事情，都要给自己留条后路。
English: No matter what you do, always leave yourself a way out.

古文：不经一事，不长一智。
现代文：千万不要做没有退路的傻事。受到一次挫折，便得到一次教训，增长一分才智。
English: Don't do stupid things that have no way out. If you suffer a setback, you will learn a lesson and grow a little wiser.

古文：宁可无钱使，不可无行止。
现代文：哪怕身无分文去要饭，也不可停止不前。
English: Even if you are penniless and go to beg for food, you must not stop moving forward.

古文：栽树要栽松柏，结交要结君子。
现代文：不达目的死不休，永不言弃。是说要与那些品行端正的人结识并成为朋友。
English: Never give up, never give up. It means to get to know and become friends with those who behave well.

古文：秀才不出门，能知天下事。
现代文：读书人闭门苦读，就能知天下大事。
English: If a reader studies hard behind closed doors, he will be able to know the world's major events.

古文：钱多不经用，儿多不耐死。
现代文：钱财再多也经不起一直花销，孩子再多也承受不住接连去世的打击。
English: No amount of money can withstand constant spending, and no amount of children can withstand the blow of successive deaths.

古文：弟兄争财家不穷不止，妻妾争风夫不死不止。
现代文：物极必反，要懂得适可而止。兄弟之间争抢财产就会愈加贫穷，妻妾之间的争风吃醋会持续到丈夫去世的那一天。
English: Brothers fighting over property will become more and more impoverished, and jealousy between wives and concubines will continue until the day their husbands die.

古文：男人有志，妇人有势。
现代文：男人应该要有志向，女人应该要有气势。
English: Men should be ambitious and women should be assertive.

古文：夫人死百将临门，将军死一卒不至。天旱误甲子，人穷误口齿。
现代文：如果天气干旱无雨的话，那么白天黑夜将不再有什么区别；人如果穷的话，说的话就没有分量。
English: If the weather is dry and there is no rain, there will no longer be any difference between day and night; if a person is poor, what he says has no weight.

古文：百岁无多日，光阴能几时？
现代文：离百岁已经没有多少日子了，还能有多少时间呢？
English: There are not many days left before I turn 100. How much time do I have left?

古文：父母养其身，自己立其志。
现代文：父母给了我做人的身体，我要靠自己所学，树立自己的远大理想。
English: My parents gave me a human body. I want to rely on what I have learned and establish my own lofty ideals.

古文：待有余而济人，终无济人之日；
现代文：等到觉得有余粮的时候再接济别人，终不会有接济的时候。
English: If you wait until you feel you have surplus grain before helping others, there will eventually be no time to help others.

古文：待有闲而读书，终无读书之时。
现代文：如果一直想等有时间后再读书，那么就不会有读书的时候了。
English: If you always want to wait until you have time to read, then you won't have time to read.

古文：此书传后世，句句必精读，其中礼和义，奉劝告世人。
现代文：此本书传于后世，每一句都要用心去读，其中讲的都是做人处事的道理及意义。
English: This book has been passed down from generation to generation. Each sentence should be read attentively. It tells the truth and meaning of how to behave.

古文：勤奋读，苦发奋，走遍天涯如游刃。
现代文：读精此书，你就会在生活中，遇到各种事情都会显得游刃有余。
English: After reading this book, you will be able to cope with all kinds of things in your life.

