古文：曰若稽古皋陶曰： 允迪厥德，谟明弼谐。 禹曰： 俞，如何？ 皋陶曰： 都！
现代文：相传，皋陶和禹曾在舜帝面前讨论国家政事。皋陶说： 诚信地遵循尧帝的德行，君主就能做到决策英明，群臣也可以同心同德。 禹曰： 是啊！但是是怎么做到的呢？ 皋陶说： 啊！
English: According to legend, Juntao and Yu once discussed national politics in front of Emperor Juntao. Juntao said: If you faithfully follow the virtues of Emperor Juntao, the monarch will be able to make wise decisions, and the ministers can be of the same mind. Yu said: Yes! But how did you do it? Juntao said: Ah!

古文：慎厥身，修思永。
现代文：要谨慎其身，坚持不懈地努力提升自身的修养。
English: They should be cautious and make unremitting efforts to improve their self-cultivation.

古文：惇叙九族，庶明励翼，迩可远在兹。 禹拜昌言曰： 俞！ 
现代文：要使近亲宽厚顺从，使贤人勉力辅佐，由近及远，完全在于从这里做起。 禹听了这番精当的言论，拜谢说： 对呀！ 
English: If you want to make your close relatives be generous and obedient, and if you want to have wise people assist you, from near and far, it all starts from here.U listened to these wise words and said, "That's right!

古文：皋陶曰： 都！在知人，在安民。 
现代文：皋陶说： 最重要的还是知人善任，把臣民治理好。 
English: Xuntao said: The most important thing is to know the people well and to govern the subjects well.

古文：禹曰： 吁！
现代文：禹说： 哎呀！
English: Yu said: Alas!

古文：咸若时，惟帝其难之。
现代文：事实虽是这样，但是想要完全做到这些，只怕连先王都难以做到。
English: Although this is the case, it would be difficult for even the first king to fully achieve these things.

古文：知人则哲，能官人。
现代文：知人善任才算得上是明智之人，有智慧才能用人得当。
English: A wise man is only a wise man when he knows how to use people well.

古文：安民则惠，黎民怀之。
现代文：能够把臣民治理好，便是给他们以恩惠，这样臣民当然会把恩惠记在心里。
English: If you are able to govern your subjects well, you will be able to give them favors, so of course your subjects will keep the favors in mind.

古文：能哲而惠，何忧乎欢兜？何迁乎有苗？何畏乎巧言令色孔壬？ 皋陶曰： 都！
现代文：既然聪明而有恩德，还怕什么兜，何必迁徙流放苗民，又何必害怕讲那些花言巧语、献媚取宠的坏人呢？ 皋陶说： 啊！
English: Since they are clever and have benevolence, what are they afraid of? Why do they have to move and exile the Miao people, and why do they have to be afraid of the bad people who speak fancy words, flatter and spoil them? Zhaotao said: Ah!

古文：亦行有九德。
现代文：检验人的行为大约有九种美德。
English: There are about nine virtues to examine in a person's behavior.

古文：亦言，其人有德，乃言曰，载采采。 
现代文：检验了言论，如果那个人有德，就告诉他说，可做点工作。 
English: If that person is virtuous, tell him to do some work.

古文：禹曰： 何？ 
现代文：禹问： 什么叫九德呢？ 
English: Yu Q: What is Nine Virtues?

古文：皋陶曰： 宽而栗，柔而立，愿而恭，乱而敬，扰而毅，直而温，简而廉，刚而实，强而义。彰厥有常，吉哉！日宣三德，夙夜浚明有家；日严祗敬六德，亮采有邦。翕受敷施，九德咸事，俊乂在官。
现代文：皋陶说： 宽宏而又坚栗，柔顺而又卓立，谨厚而又严恭，多才而又敬慎，驯服而又刚毅，正直而又温和，简易而又方正，刚正而又笃实，坚强而又合宜，要明显地任用具有九德的好人啊！ 天天表现出三德，早晚认真努力于家的人，天天庄严地重视六德，辅助政事于国的人，一同接受，普遍任用，使具有九德的人都担任官职，那么在职的官员就都是才德出众的人了。
English: Zou Tao said: "Broad-minded yet firm, flexible yet outstanding, prudent yet strict, versatile yet cautious, tame yet strong, honest yet gentle, simple yet upright, upright yet solid, strong yet appropriate, it is necessary to clearly appoint good people with the nine virtues! Those who demonstrate the three virtues every day, those who earnestly work hard at home sooner or later, those who solemnly value the six virtues every day, and those who assist in political affairs in the country, all accept universal appointment, so that people with the nine virtues hold official positions, then the officials in office are people with outstanding virtues.

古文：百僚师师，百工惟时，抚于五辰，庶绩其凝。无教逸欲，有邦兢兢业业，一日二日万几。
现代文：各位官员互相效法，他们都想处理好政务，而且顺从君王，这样，各种工作都会办成。 治理国家的人不要贪图安逸和私欲，要兢兢业业，因为情况天天变化万端。
English: All officials follow each other, they all want to do a good job of government and obey the king, so all kinds of work will be done.Those who govern the country should not be greedy for ease and selfishness, but should be diligent, because the situation is changing every day.

古文：无旷庶官，天工，人其代之。
现代文：不要虚设百官，上天命定的工作，人应当代替完成。
English: Do not set up a hundred officials in vain. The work ordained by heaven should be completed by man.

古文：天叙有典，敕我五典五惇哉！
现代文：上天规定了人与人之间的常法，要告诫人们用父义、母慈、兄友、弟恭、子孝的办法，把这五者敦厚起来啊！
English: Heaven has prescribed the common law between man and man, and people should be admonished to cultivate the five virtues of fatherly righteousness, motherly kindness, brotherly friendship, brotherly respect, and filial piety.

古文：天秩有礼，自我五礼有庸哉！
现代文：上天规定了人的尊卑等级，推行天子、诸侯、卿大夫、士和庶人这五种礼制，要经常啊！
English: Heaven has prescribed the hierarchy of human dignity, and it is necessary to implement the five kinds of etiquette, namely, sons of heaven, princes, noblemen, doctors, and commoners, and to do so regularly!

古文：同寅协恭和衷哉！
现代文：君臣之间要同敬、同恭，和善相处啊！
English: There should be mutual respect, consideration, and goodwill between princes and ministers!

古文：天命有德，五服五章哉！
现代文：上天任命有德的人，要用天子、诸侯、卿、大夫、士五等礼服表彰这五者啊！
English: Heaven has appointed virtuous people, and they should be commended with the five ceremonial robes of heavenly sons, princes, lords, doctors, and judges!

古文：天讨有罪，五刑五用哉！
现代文：上天惩罚有罪的人，要用墨、劓、剕、宫、大辟五种刑罚处治五者啊！
English: Heaven punishes the guilty, using five kinds of punishments: ink, thunderbolt, thunderbolt, palace, and scourge!

古文：政事懋哉懋哉！  天聪明，自我民聪明。
现代文：政务要努力啊！要努力啊！ 上天的视听依从臣民的视听。
English: Government must work hard! Must work hard! Heaven's audio-visual is subordinate to the audio-visual of the subjects.

古文：天明畏，自我民明威。
现代文：上天的赏罚依从臣民的赏罚。
English: Heaven's rewards and punishments depend on the rewards and punishments of the subjects.

古文：达于上下，敬哉有土！ 
现代文：天意和民意是相通的，要谨慎啊，有国土的君王！ 
English: Providence and public opinion are intertwined. Be careful, you kings of the land!

古文：皋陶曰： 朕言惠可厎行？ 
现代文：皋陶问： 我的话可以得到实行吗？ 
English: Zhai Tao asked: Can my words be put into practice?

古文：禹曰： 俞！
现代文：禹说： 当然！
English: Yu said: Of course!

古文：乃言厎可绩。 
现代文：你的话可以得到实行并且获得成功。 
English: Your words can be put into practice and succeed.

古文：皋陶曰： 予未有知，思曰赞赞襄哉！ 
现代文：皋陶说： 我并不懂得什么，我想赞扬佐助帝德啊！ 
English: Zou Tao said: I don't understand anything, I want to praise Sasuke Dede!

