古文：李怀仙，柳城胡也。
现代文：李怀仙，是柳城的胡人。
English: Li Huaixian is a Hu person from Liucheng.

古文：世事契丹，守营州。
现代文：世代为契丹属下，守卫营州。
English: They have been under Khitan's control for generations, guarding Yingzhou.

古文：善骑射，智数敏给。
现代文：擅长骑马射箭，思维敏捷有计谋。
English: He is good at horse riding and archery, and is quick-thinking and resourceful.

古文：禄山之反，以为裨将。
现代文：安禄山叛乱，任他为副将。
English: An Lushan rebellion, he was appointed vice-general.

古文：史思明盗河南，留次子朝清守幽州，以阿史那玉、高如震辅之。
现代文：史思明攻陷河南，留次子史朝清守幽州，派阿史那玉、高如震辅佐。
English: Shishiming invaded Henan, and his second son, Shichosucho, guarded Yuzhou during the Qing Dynasty, with Ashinadama and Gaozhen as assistants.

古文：朝义杀立，移檄诛朝清。
现代文：史朝义杀父自立，还要诛杀史朝清。
English: Shi Chao killed his father in self-defense, but he also wanted to kill Shi Chao Qing.

古文：二将乱，朝义以怀仙为幽州节度使，督兵驰入。
现代文：阿史那玉与高如震两将叛变，史朝义派李怀仙为幽州节度使，带兵入州。
English: Two generals, Ashinadama and Gao Ruzhen, mutinied, and Shi Chaoyi sent Li Huaixian to Yuzhou as the envoy of the festival, and led the troops into the state.

古文：如震欲拒，不及计，乃出迎。
现代文：高如震本打算拒绝不纳，但来不及想出对策，只得出来迎接。
English: Gao Ruzhen originally planned to refuse to accept, but it was too late to come up with a countermeasure, so he had to come out to meet.

古文：怀仙外示宽以安士，居三日，大会，斩如震，州部悉平。
现代文：李怀仙表现极宽容以安人心。过了三天，大集会众将，斩杀高如震，州部乃平定下来。
English: Li Huaixian showed great tolerance to reassure the people. After three days, the large gathering of people will be as high as the earthquake, and the state will be settled down.

古文：朝义败，将趋范阳。
现代文：后来，史朝义兵败，准备去范阳。
English: Later, after the defeat of the Sino-Japanese war, he prepared to go to Fanyang.

古文：中人骆奉先间遣镌说，怀仙遂降，使其将李抱忠以兵三千戍范阳。
现代文：中人骆奉先派人从小路来详细与他剖析利害祸福，李怀仙降，派将领李抱忠带兵三千戍守范阳。
English: Luo Fengxian, a middle-ranking official, sent someone from a side road to dissect the interests, misfortunes and blessings with him in detail, Li Huaixian fell, and sent the general Li Baozhong with three thousand soldiers to defend Fanyang.

古文：朝义至，抱忠闭关不内，乃缢死，斩其首，因奉先以献。
现代文：史朝义到了，李抱忠闭关不接纳。史朝义自缢死，李怀仙斩下他的头，由骆奉先献入京师。
English: Shi Chaoyi arrived, Li Baozhong closed the gate and did not accept. Shi Chaoyi hanged himself, Li Huaixian cut off his head, and Luo Bongxian was the first to offer it to the Beijing division.

古文：仆固怀恩即表怀仙为幽州卢龙节度使，迁检校兵部尚书，王武威郡。
现代文：仆固怀恩上表推荐李怀仙任幽州卢龙节度使，后升检校兵部尚书，封爵武威郡王。
English: The servant Gu Wai Yan recommended Li Huai Xian to be appointed as the festival envoy of Yuzhou Lulong, after which he was promoted to the military department of the inspection school, and was knighted as the king of Wuwei County.

古文：属怀恩反，边羌挐战不解，朝廷方勤西师，故怀仙与田承嗣、薛嵩、张忠志等得招还散亡，治城邑甲兵，自署文武将吏，私贡赋，天子不能制。
现代文：后来跟着仆固怀恩叛变，边域各处战争不止。朝廷正招抚西方之师，所以李怀仙与田承嗣、薛嵩、张忠志等人得以招回亡散兵卒，治城邑，修甲兵，自己设置文武官将，地方贡赋据为私有，天子无法控制。
English: Later, following the mutiny of the servant Gu Huai'en, there were more and more wars in the border areas. The imperial court was courting the Western division, so Li Huaixian, Tian Chengzhi, Xue Song, Zhang Zhongzhi and others were able to call back the dead soldiers, govern the city, and train the armored soldiers. They set up their own civil and military officers, and the local tribute was private, and could not be controlled by the emperor.

古文：大历三年，麾下硃希彩、硃泚、泚弟滔谋杀怀仙，斩阍者以入，希彩不至。
现代文：大历三年，他的麾下朱希彩、朱氵此、朱滔，打算杀了李怀仙，朱氵此兄弟杀了门卫进屋，但朱希彩还没来。
English: In the third year of the lunar calendar, his subordinates, Zhu Xicai, Zhu Xizhe, and Zhu Tao, planned to kill Li Huaixian. Zhu Xicai's brother killed the doorman and entered the house, but Zhu Xicai did not come.

古文：黎明，泚惧欲亡，滔曰： 谋不成，有死，逃将焉往？ 
现代文：到天快亮了，朱氵此害怕起来，打算逃跑，朱滔说 ：计划如果不能成功，只有一死。逃能逃到哪里去？ 
English: When it was almost dawn, Zhu Yao became scared and planned to escape. Zhu Tao said, "If the plan does not succeed, there is only one death. Where can you escape to?"

古文：俄希彩至，共斩怀仙，族其家。
现代文：一会儿朱希彩来了，共同杀了李怀仙及其一家。
English: After a while, Zhu Xicai came and together they killed Li Huaixian and his family.

古文：希彩自称留后。
现代文：朱希彩自称留后。
English: Zhu Xisai said he would stay behind.

古文：张忠志以兵讨其乱，不克。
现代文：张忠志带兵来讨伐，未能得手。
English: Zhang Zhongzhi led an army to fight, but failed.

古文：代宗因赦罪，诏宰相王缙为节度使，以希彩副之。
现代文：代宗也只得赦他的罪，诏令宰相王缙为节度使，任朱希彩为节度副使。
English: The daimyō also had to forgive his sin, and ordered the prime minister, Wang Qi, to be the festival envoy, and appointed Zhu Xisai as the deputy festival envoy.

古文：希彩闻缙至，搜卒伍，大陈戎备以逆。
现代文：朱希彩听说王缙要来，就召集士卒，武装迎接王缙。
English: When Zhu Xicai heard that Wang Yao was coming, he summoned his soldiers and armed them to meet Wang Yao.

古文：缙建旌棨徐驱，希彩迎谒恭甚。
现代文：王缙带着旗旌仪仗，慢慢行进，朱希彩迎接拜见，甚为恭敬。
English: Wang Yao marched slowly with a ceremonial banner, and Zhu Xisai greeted him with great respect.

古文：缙度不可制，劳军，阅旬乃还。
现代文：王缙估计无法制服他，于是犒劳士兵，过了十来天就回去了。
English: Wang Yao estimated that he would not be able to subdue him, so he rewarded the soldiers and went back after about ten days.

古文：希彩即领节度。
现代文：朱希彩就此领了节度的事务。
English: Zhu Xicai thus took over the affairs of the festival.

古文：五年，封高密郡王。
现代文：大历五年，诏令封朱希彩为高密郡王。
English: In the fifth year of the lunar calendar, the imperial edict named Zhu Xisai as the king of Gaomi County.

古文：骜恣不轨，人不堪。
现代文：朱希彩为人桀骜恣肆，手下不堪其虐。
English: Zhu Xisai is reckless, and his subordinates are cruel.

古文：七年，其下李瑗间众之怨，杀之，共推硃泚为留后。
现代文：大历七年，朱希彩手下李瑗挑起众人对李希彩的不满，杀了他，共同推戴朱氵此为留后。
English: In the seventh year of the lunar calendar, Zhu Xi Cai's subordinate Li Xuan provoked the dissatisfaction of the people towards Li Xi Cai, killed him, and jointly pushed Zhu Xuan to stay behind.

古文：泚自有传。
现代文：朱滔，生性诡诈反复无常。
English: Zhu Tao, born cunning capricious.

古文：硃滔，性变诈多端倪。希彩以同宗倚爱之，使主帐下亲兵。
现代文：朱希彩因与之同宗而喜爱他倚仗他，让他主管帐下之亲兵。
English: Zhu Xi Lai liked him because he was from the same family as him and relied on him, letting him be in charge of the soldiers under his charge.

古文：泚领节度，遣滔将兵三千为天子西乘塞，为诸军倡。
现代文：朱氵此任节度使后，派朱滔带三千人马去泾州为天子防秋，为诸军中之首倡者。
English: After Zhu Xi was appointed as the festival envoy, he sent Zhu Tao with three thousand horses to Bozhou to prevent the autumn, and was the first advocate among the armies.

古文：始，安、史后，山东虽外臣顺，实傲肆不廷。
现代文：起先，从安史之乱以后，山东方面，外表上仍为臣服，实质上桀骜不驯。
English: At first, after the Anshi Rebellion, the Shandong side was still submissive on the outside, but rebellious on the inside.

古文：至泚首效款，帝嘉之，召见滔殿中。
现代文：到朱氵此，首次表示效忠朝廷，皇帝大为奖许，召朱滔到殿中相见。
English: Zhu Tao came here to show his allegiance to the imperial court for the first time. The emperor was so impressed that he summoned Zhu Tao to meet him in the palace.

古文：帝问曰： 卿材孰与泚多？ 
现代文：皇帝问： 你的才能与朱氵此比，谁的更大？ 
English: The emperor asked, "Your talent is greater than Zhu Xi's. Whose is greater?"

古文：滔曰： 统御士众，方略明辨，臣不及泚；臣年二十八，获谒天子，泚长臣五年，未识朝廷，此不及臣。 
现代文：朱滔说 ：统率士众，辨明形势，制定方略这些方面臣比不上朱氵此；不过，臣今年二十八岁，能荣获谒见天子的机会，朱氵此比我年长五岁，还未上过朝廷，这是他比不上臣的地方。 
English: Zhu Tao said, "In terms of leading the judges, identifying the situation, and formulating strategies, the minister is not as good as Zhu Xi; however, the minister is twenty-eight years old this year and has the opportunity to meet the Son of God. Zhu Xi is five years older than me and has not yet been to the imperial court. This is where he is not as good as the minister.

古文：帝愈嘉，特诏勒兵贯王城而出，屯泾州，置酒开远门饯之。
现代文：皇帝听后，更加高兴，特诏令带了兵贯穿王城而出，屯驻泾州，还在开远门设酒为他饯行。
English: After listening to the emperor, he was even more pleased. He issued a special edict to take the soldiers out through the royal city, stationed in Zhangzhou, and set up a wine for him at the far gate.

古文：戍还，乃谋夺泚兵，诡说曰： 天下诸侯未有朝者，先至，可以得天子意，子孙安矣。 
现代文：待他秋防回来，就产生了夺朱氵此兵权的打算，骗朱氵此说 ：天下的诸侯还没有人去朝见的，谁先去，可以得到天子的肯定，子孙就可安享富贵了。 
English: When he returned from the Autumn Festival, he had the idea of seizing Zhu Xi's military power. He lied to Zhu Xi and said, "None of the princes of the world have yet gone to the court of the emperor. Whoever goes first will be affirmed by the emperor, and his descendants will be able to enjoy prosperity."

古文：泚信之，因入朝。
现代文：朱氵此信以为真，就入朝见天子。
English: Believing this to be true, Zhu Xi went to the imperial court to meet the emperor.

古文：稍不相平，泚遂乞留，西讨吐蕃。以滔权知留后，兼御史大夫。
现代文：后来时势又不平静，朱氵此要求留下防守，后奉命西去讨伐吐蕃，让朱滔暂掌留后职，兼御史大夫。
English: Later, when the situation was not calm, Zhu Xi demanded that Zhu Rong stay on the defensive. Later, he was ordered to go to the west to fight the Tu Wei, and let Zhu Tao stay in the rear for a while, as well as the chief historian.

古文：滔杀有功者李瑗等二十馀人，威振军中。
现代文：朱滔将前有功人员李瑗等二十余人杀死，因而威镇军中。
English: Zhu Tao killed more than 20 people, including the former meritorious personnel Li Yan, and thus became a member of the Weizhen army.

古文：李惟岳拒命，滔与成德张孝忠再破之束鹿，取深州，进检校司徒，遂领节度，赐德、棣二州。
现代文：李惟岳不奉天子命谋反，朱滔与成德的张孝忠再次在束鹿将李惟岳打败，攻取深州，升任检校司徒，掌管节度事，受赐德、棣二州。
English: Li Wei Yue did not follow God's order to plot a rebellion. Zhu Tao and Zhang Xiaozhong of Chengde once again defeated Li Wei Yue in Shuxia, captured Shenzhou, was promoted to the post of school inspector, took charge of festival affairs, and was awarded the title of De and the title of Shizhou.

古文：德宗以康日知为深、赵二州团练使，诏滔还镇。
现代文：德宗任康日知为深、赵二州的团练使，诏令朱滔四镇。
English: De Zong appointed Kang Rih as a scholar, Zhao as a group training envoy of the two states, and ordered Zhu Tao to the four towns.

古文：滔失深州，不平，又请恒、定七州所赋供军，复不许，愈怨。
现代文：朱滔失去深州，心中不平，又请求要恒、定等七州的赋税以供军饷，又不得允许，怨恨就更深了。
English: Zhu Tao lost Shenzhen and was not happy. He also requested that the taxes of the seven states should be constant and fixed to provide military pay. This was not allowed, and the resentment was even deeper.

古文：时马燧围田悦，悦穷，间滔与王武俊同叛。
现代文：那时，马燧正围困田悦，田悦窘迫，于是使人离间朱滔与王武俊一同反叛。
English: At that time, Ma Xuan was besieging Tian Yue, and Tian Yue was in distress, so Zhu Tao and Wang Wujun rebelled together.

古文：滔姑子刘怦为涿州刺史，以书谏曰： 司徒身节制，太尉位宰相，恩遇极矣。
现代文：朱滔姑妈的儿子刘怦是涿州刺史，写信劝他： 司徒身为节制，太尉位于宰相，所得恩宠可谓到了极顶。
English: Aunt Zhu Tao's son, Liu Wei, was the governor of Zhangzhou, and she wrote to him to advise him: "Stu is a temperate person, the captain is the prime minister, and the grace he has received can be described as the ultimate.

古文：今昌平有太尉乡、司徒里，不朽业也。
现代文：直到如今，昌平还有太尉乡、司徒里，真是万代不朽之功业。
English: To this day, Changping still has Taifeng Township and Sutuli Township, which is truly an immortal work for all generations.

古文：能以忠顺自将，则无不济。
现代文：能以忠顺自我约束，则没有不成功业的。
English: If you can discipline yourself to be loyal and obedient, you will not fail in your career.

古文：比忘上乐战，不顾成败如安、史者，今复何有？
现代文：前不久背恩皇上，乐于征战不顾成败的如安禄山、史思明等人，如今还留有什么？
English: Not long ago, people like An Lushan, Shi Siming, and others, who were ungrateful to the emperor and willing to fight regardless of success or failure, what remains now?

古文：司徒图之，无贻悔。 
现代文：司徒您要好好考虑，谨慎从事，切莫做后悔的事。 
English: You should think carefully, act prudently, and never do anything you will regret.

古文：滔不从，连兵救悦。
现代文：朱滔不听，与王武俊联兵去援救田悦。
English: Zhu Tao did not listen and joined forces with Wang Wujun to rescue Tian Yue.

古文：又惧张孝忠之袭，使怦壁险而军。
现代文：既而又害怕张孝忠袭击自己，派刘怦倚险筑工事而守。
English: At the same time, he was afraid that Zhang Xiaozhong would attack him, so he sent Liu Xuan to guard the dangerous construction.

古文：滔激其众曰： 士蹀血斗，既下坚城，朝廷乃见夺，奏赏不报。
现代文：朱滔激励其士众说： 大伙儿浴血奋战，攻下坚城，却遭朝廷排挤，我们奏捷而不得赏赐。
English: Zhu Tao inspired his men to say: "We fought a bloody battle, captured a strong city, but were ousted by the imperial court. We achieved success but were not rewarded.

古文：君等疾趋，破马燧军以取赀粮，可乎？ 
现代文：你等迅速出击，攻破马燧军夺取粮草财物，好吗？ 
English: Wait for a quick attack to break through the horse and mule army to seize grain, grass and property, okay?

古文：军中不应，三号之，乃曰： 幽人死于南者，骸撑不揜，痛藏心髓，奈何复欲暴骨中野乎？
现代文：军中无人应答。三次号召，才有人说： 幽燕之人战死在南方的，尸骸都暴露野外，无人掩埋，看了谁不心痛？
English: No one in the army answered. It took three summonses before someone said: Yu Yan's men died in the south, their bodies were exposed in the open, no one buried them, who wouldn't be heartbroken?

古文：司徒兄弟受国宠，士各蒙官赏，愿安之，不恤其它。 
现代文：为什么还要人暴尸野外呢？司徒您兄弟受国家宠信，我们也可蒙受官赏。对此我们安心了，不再求其他。 
English: Why do we even need to have human corpses out in the open? Your brother, Satoru, is a favorite of the state, and we can also receive official awards. We are at ease with this, and no longer ask for anything else.

古文：滔罢，潜杀不可共乱者数十人。
现代文：朱滔这才作罢，暗中将不肯跟他一起谋乱的人杀了几十人。
English: Zhu Tao finally gave up and secretly killed dozens of people who did not want to join him in creating chaos.

古文：日知发其谋于燧，天子闻，以悦未下，重起两寇，即封滔通义郡王，实户三百。
现代文：康日知向马燧揭发了朱滔的阴谋。天子知道后，因为田悦还未攻下，不想再树一敌，于是封朱滔为通义郡王，实封三百户。
English: Kang Ritchie revealed Zhu Tao's plot to Ma Xuan. After Tian Zi knew, because Tian Yue had not yet been conquered, he did not want to make another enemy, so Zhu Tao was crowned the king of Tongyi County, and three hundred households were sealed.

古文：滔愈悖，分兵与武俊屯赵州胁日知，矫诏发其粮贮，即引兵救悦，次束鹿。
现代文：朱滔越来越悖逆，分兵给王武俊屯扎在赵州胁迫康日知，伪造诏书调拨他的粮草，并率兵去助田悦，驻扎在束鹿。
English: Zhu Tao became more and more rebellious. He sent troops to Wang Wujun in Zhaozhou to coerce Kang Rongzhi, forged an edict to allocate his grain and grass, and led the troops to help Tian Yue, stationed in Sokha.

古文：军大噪曰： 天子令司徒北还，而南救魏，宁有诏邪？ 
现代文：军中大哗说： 天子命司徒北上回镇，而现在却南下救魏，有诏令吗？ 
English: There was a great clamor in the army, saying, "Heaven's Son has ordered Stutts to return to the town from the north, but now he is going south to save Wei. Is there a decree?

古文：滔惧，走匿传舍。
现代文：朱滔害怕众怒，躲进传舍里。
English: Zhu Tao, fearing the wrath of the people, hid in the monastery.

古文：裨将蔡雄好谕士曰： 始天子约取成德，所得州县赐有功者。
现代文：裨将蔡雄出来好言解释 ：当初天子约司徒取成德，所得的州县赐给有功者。
English: It would be helpful if Cai Xiong were to come out with a good explanation: In the beginning, God's son, Joseph, chose the disciples to become virtuous, and the states and counties that they earned were given to those who had meritorious deeds.

古文：拔深州者，燕也。
现代文：攻克深州的，是我们燕人。
English: It is we, the Swallows, who have conquered Shenzhou.

古文：本镇常苦无丝纩，冀得深州以佐调率，今顾不得。
现代文：本镇常苦于缺乏丝絮，希望能得到深州有助于调济缺乏，如今却又得不到。
English: The town has always suffered from a lack of silk floss and hoped that getting Shenzhou would help alleviate the shortage, but now they can't get it.

古文：又天子以帛赐有功士，为马燧掠去，今引而南，非自为也。 
现代文：另外，天子将帛赐给有功者，但又被马燧半途抢去。现在引军南下，不是为了司徒本人。 
English: In addition, the Son of Heaven gave the scepter to the meritorious, but it was snatched away halfway by the horse. Now the army is being led south, not for the sake of Stutts himself.

古文：军中悔谢，复曰： 虽然，司徒南行违诏书，莫如还。 
现代文：兵士们听了都表示道歉自己的鲁莽，又说： 虽然是为了大家，但司徒南行违背诏令，不如还是回去。 
English: When the soldiers heard this, they all apologized for their temerity and said, "Although it was for the sake of everyone, it was against the imperial edict for the emperor to go south, so we might as well go back."

古文：滔回次深州，诛首变者二百人。
现代文：朱滔回军到达深州，诛杀出头哗闹的二百来人。
English: Zhu Tao's returning army arrived in Shenzhou and killed about two hundred people who started a ruckus.

古文：众惧，乃率兵南壁宁晋，与武俊合。
现代文：众人都怕了，朱滔才率兵南下，在宁晋筑工事坚守，与王武俊的兵会合。
English: Everyone was afraid, so Zhu Taocai led his soldiers to the south, held fast to the construction work in Ningjin, and met with Wang Wujun's soldiers.

古文：帝命马燧、李怀光击之，滔属郑云逵、田景仙皆奔燧。
现代文：皇帝命马燧、李怀光去回击，朱滔的部属郑云逵、田景仙都奔归马燧。
English: The emperor ordered Ma Rong and Li Huai Guang to fight back, and Zhu Tao's subordinates Zheng Yun Rong and Tian Jing Xian all rushed back to Ma Rong.

古文：已而滔破怀光军，则与王师屯魏桥，久不战。
现代文：后来，朱滔击败了李怀光，便与王师屯兵在魏桥两端，相望而不交战。
English: Later, Zhu Tao defeated Li Huaiguang, and then he and Wang Shih's soldiers camped at both ends of Wei Bridge, facing each other but not engaging in battle.

古文：悦德滔援，欲尊而臣之，滔让武俊，曰： 箧山之胜，王大夫力也。 
现代文：田悦感激朱滔的援救，准备尊朱滔为王，自愿为臣。朱滔谦让给王武俊，说 ：箧山之所以能取胜，全赖王大夫之力。 
English: Tian Yue was grateful for Zhu Tao's rescue and prepared to honor Zhu Tao as a king, voluntarily becoming his vassal. Zhu Tao humbly conceded to Wang Wujun, saying, "The reason why Lushan was able to win was entirely due to Dr. Wang's strength."

古文：于是，滔、武俊官属共议： 古有列国连衡共抗秦。
现代文：于是，朱滔、王武俊官属们共同商议说 ：古代有列国连衡共同抗秦。
English: As a result, Zhu Tao and Wang Wujun's officials and subordinates jointly discussed and said: In ancient times, there were countries in succession that jointly resisted the Qin.

古文：今公等在此，李大夫在郓，请如七国，并建号，用天子正朔。
现代文：如今公等在这里，李大夫在郓。不如仿效战国七国，大家都建国号，用天子的正朔年号。
English: Today, the public is here, and Dr. Li is at his bedside. It would be better to follow the example of the seven warring states, where everyone uses the founding year and the name of the heavenly son, Zhengshuo.

古文：且师在外，其动无名，岂长为叛臣，士何所归？
现代文：况且师在外，行动没有名义，难道能长久为叛逆之臣？兵士将何所归？
English: Moreover, the division is outside, the action has no name, can it be a rebellious vassal for a long time? Where will the soldiers go?

古文：宜择日定约，顺人心，不如盟者共伐之。 
现代文：效七国旧例则仍尊唐皇帝为天子，我们就名正言顺了。我们该快些选定日期定好盟约，以顺人心，违背盟约的就大家共同讨伐。 
English: According to the old example of the Seven Kingdoms, Emperor Tang is still revered as the Son of Heaven, and we are justified. We should quickly select a date to set up a covenant, to please the people, and everyone should jointly crack down on those who violate the covenant.

古文：滔等从之。
现代文：朱滔等人都同意。
English: Zhu Tao and others all agree.

古文：滔以禄山、思明皆起燕，俄覆灭，恶其名，以冀尧所都，因号冀，武俊号赵，悦号魏，纳号齐。
现代文：朱滔因为安禄山、史思明都起兵于燕，后来均遭覆灭，所以厌恶 燕 这一名称；而尧则都于冀，所以取国号为 冀 ，王武俊国号 赵 ，田悦国号 魏 ，李纳国号 齐 。
English: Zhu Tao disliked the name "Yan" because both Anlu Mountain and Shi Siming raised an army in Yan and were later overthrown and destroyed; while Zhu Tao disliked the name "Yan" because both Anlu Mountain and Shi Siming raised an army in Yan and were later overthrown and destroyed; and Zhu Tao disliked the name "Yan" because both Anlu Mountain and Shi Siming raised an army in Yan and were later destroyed; and Zhu Tao disliked the name "Yan" because both Anlu Mountain and Shi Siming raised an army in Yan and were later destroyed; and Zhu Tao disliked the name "Yan" because both Anlu Mountain and Shi

古文：建中三年冬十月庚申，为坛魏西，祀天，各僭为王，与武俊等三让乃就位。
现代文：建中三年冬十月庚申日，在魏西筑坛，祭天，各人都僭称为王，与王武俊、田悦等人三次谦让，才各自就位。
English: In the winter of the third year of the middle school, in October, on the day of the Hexin, when the altar was built in the west of Wei, and the sacrifice was made, everyone was called the king, and Wang Wujun, Tian Yue and others were humbled three times before they took their respective places.

古文：滔为盟主，称孤；武俊、悦及纳称寡人。
现代文：朱滔为盟主，自称时用 孤 ，王武俊、田悦、李纳，自称时用 寡人 。
English: Zhu Tao is the leader, claiming to be lonely, Wang Wujun, Tian Yue, Li Na, claiming to be few.

古文：是日，三叛军上有云气颇异，燧望笑曰： 是云无知，乃为贼瑞邪！ 
现代文：这一天，三叛军头上有云气呈现异样，马燧望着笑说： 这云无知，竟然去为贼人现瑞兆！ 
English: On this day, there was a strange cloud over the heads of the three rebels. Ma Jun looked at it and smiled and said, "It's so ignorant of you to act as a sign for the thieves!"

古文：先是，其地土息高三丈，魏人韦稔佞悦，以为益土之兆。
现代文：先前，那块地方突然长高了三丈。魏人韦稔为谄媚田悦，说这是将会扩充疆域的征兆。
English: Previously, the area had suddenly grown three-feet tall. Wei Wei, a Wei man, admired Tian Yue and said that this was a sign that the territory would be expanded.

古文：后二年，滔等册遗，正值其所。
现代文：两年后，朱滔等册立王所，就在此地。
English: Two years later, Zhu Tao and others set up a royal office, right here.

古文：滔改幽州为范阳府，以子为府留后，称元帅，用亲信为留守。
现代文：朱滔将幽州改为范阳府，让儿子做府留后，称元帅，又用亲信为留守。
English: Zhu Tao changed Yuzhou to Fanyang Prefecture, let his son stay as a prefect, called him a marshal, and used his cronies to stay behind.

古文：滔等居室皆曰殿，妻曰妃，子为国公，下皆称臣，谓殿下。
现代文：朱滔等的居室都称之为 殿 ，妻子称为妃，儿子为国公，以下皆为臣，称呼朱滔为殿下。
English: The living rooms of Zhu Tao and others are all called "den," the wife is called "fei," the son is called "kokugo," and the following are called "vassal," and Zhu Tao is called "his royal highness."

古文：上书曰笺，所下曰令。
现代文：臣属上书叫笺，朱滔所下达的叫令。
English: A subordinate's letter is known as a gong, and a command issued by Zhu Tao is a yakitori.

古文：置左右内史，视丞相；内史令、监，视侍中、中书令；东西侍郎，视门下、中书；东曹给事、西曹舍人，视给事中、中书舍人；司议大夫，视谏议大夫；六官省，视尚书；东、西曹仆射，视左右仆射；御史台曰执宪，置大夫至监察御史，驱使要籍官曰承令；左右将军曰虎牙、豹略；军使曰鹰扬、龙骧。
现代文：设置左右内史，有如丞相；设内史令、内史监，有如侍中、中书令；设东西侍郎，有如门下、中书；设东曹给事、西曹舍人，有如给事中、中书舍人；设司议大夫，有如谏议大夫；设六官省，有如尚书；设东西曹仆射，有如左右仆射；设御史台称为执宪，置大夫直至监察御史；设驱使要籍官称为承令；设左右将军，称为虎牙、豹略；设军使，称为鹰扬、龙骧。
English: Set up the left and right internal history, such as the chancellor; set up the internal history order, the internal history supervisor, such as the attendant, the middle school; set up the east and west attendant, such as the disciple, the middle school; set up the East Cao to give things, the West Cao to give people, such as the middle school, the middle school; set up the chairman of the board of supervisors, such as the chairman of the board of supervisors; set up the six government departments, such as Shangshu; set up the east and west Cao to serve the people, such as the left and right to serve the people; set up the government history

古文：以刘怦为范阳府留守，柳良器、李子千为左右内史，滔兄琼瑰、陆庆为东、西曹仆射，杨霁、马寔、寇瞻、杨荣国为司文、司武、司礼、司刑侍郎，李士真、樊播为执宪大夫、中丞。
现代文：任刘怦为范阳府留守，任柳良器、李子千为左右内史，任朱滔的哥哥朱琼瑰、朱陆庆为东、西曹仆射，任杨霁、马萛、寇瞻、杨荣国为司文、司武、司礼、司刑侍郎，任李士真、樊播为执宪大夫、中丞。
English: Liu Qian was appointed to stay at Fanyangfu, Liu Liangqi and Li Zicheng were appointed to the left and right internal history, Zhu Tao's brother Zhu Qiongqi and Zhu Luqing were appointed to the east and Cao Puxia to the west, Yang Qian, Ma Qian, Guo Zhan and Yang Rongguo were appointed to the secretary, secretary, secretary, secretary and secretary, Li Shizhen and Zibo were appointed to the constitutional doctor and the vice-chairman.

古文：其馀以次补署。
现代文：其余的人依次委任官职。
English: The rest will be appointed in turn.

古文：聘处士张遂、王道为司谏。
现代文：又聘任处士张遂、王道为司谏。
English: He also appointed the clerk Zhang Sui and Wang Dao as priests.

古文：燧遣李晟将兵至易、定，率张茂昭攻涿、莫，以绝滔援。
现代文：马燧派李晟率兵至易州、定州，率领张茂昭攻涿州、莫州，以断绝朱滔的援救。
English: Ma Yu sent Li Yu and his soldiers to Yizhou and Dingzhou, and led Zhang Maozhao to attack Zhangzhou and Mozhou, in order to cut off Zhu Tao's rescue.

古文：明年，围清苑，滔将郑景济固守。
现代文：第二年，又围清苑，朱滔的将领郑景济坚守。
English: The next year, they surrounded Qingyuan again, and Zhu Tao's general Zheng Jingji held out.

古文：滔使马寔将兵万人，与武俊拒燧，自以兵万馀救清苑，绝晟粮道。
现代文：朱滔派马萛率领一万人，与王武俊合力抗拒马燧，而他自己则带兵一万多去救助清苑，断绝李晟的粮道。
English: Zhu Tao sent 10,000 men led by Ma Jun to join forces with Wang Wujun to resist Ma Jun, while he himself led more than 10,000 soldiers to rescue Qingyuan and cut off Li Jun's food supply.

古文：兵至定州，晟不知，夜引兵还。
现代文：朱滔兵到定州，李晟不知道，夜里带兵回去了。
English: Zhu Daobei went to Dingzhou, but Li Yao did not know, and he took the soldiers back at night.

古文：滔疑有伏，不敢逼，遽保瀛州。
现代文：朱滔对此大惑不解，怀疑有伏兵，不敢靠近，而去保瀛州。
English: Zhu Tao was puzzled by this, suspected that there was an ambush, did not dare to approach, and went to Bozhou.

古文：而孝忠、晟合兵千人城莱水，滔骁将乌萨戒以兵七百袭杀城卒数百，晟不出。
现代文：此时张孝忠、李晟合兵一千在莱水筑城堡，朱滔的骁将乌萨戒带领七百人袭击，杀死了守城卒几百人，李晟不出城。
English: At this time, Zhang Xiaozhong and Li Xi were building a castle in Lishui with a thousand soldiers. Zhu Tao's army attacked with seven hundred soldiers led by Usa Jing, killing several hundred guards. Li Xi did not leave the city.

古文：景济望滔军立帜为应。
现代文：郑景济对着朱滔军竖旗帜呼应。
English: Zheng Jingji responded by raising a flag over Zhu Tao's army.

古文：滔进军薄晟营，晟战不利，城中兵亦出，晟大败，奔易州。
现代文：朱滔进军，逼近李晟营垒。李晟迎战不利，城中兵也出来了，李晟大败，逃奔易州。
English: Zhu Tao marched in and approached Li Yu's camp. Li Yu did not fare well in the battle, and soldiers from the city also came out. Li Yu was defeated and fled to Yizhou.

古文：茂昭走满城。
现代文：张茂昭去满城。
English: Zhang Maozhao went to Mancheng.

古文：滔已破晟，则回屯河间不进。
现代文：朱滔打败李晟后，回头屯扎在河间按兵不进。
English: After defeating Li Xuan, Zhu Tao retreated and camped in the middle of the river.

古文：武俊使宋端趣让，滔怒曰： 孤亟战且病，就医药，而王已复云云。
现代文：王武俊派宋端去催促，朱滔发怒说： 孤频频作战又得了病，正在就医，王还要噜嗦。
English: Wang Wujun sent Song Duan to urge him, and Zhu Tao said angrily, "Lonely and infrequent combatant has fallen ill again, he is seeking medical treatment, and Wang still wants to beat him."

古文：孤南救魏，弃兄背君如脱屣。
现代文：孤为了南下救魏，抛弃兄长，背叛国君，就像丢破鞋一样。
English: Going to the south to save Wei, abandoning his brother and betraying the sovereign, is like throwing away a worn-out shoe.

古文：王必相疑，亦听所为！ 
现代文：王若定要疑我，由他自便。 
English: If the king must doubt me, let him do so at his leisure.

古文：端还，武俊谓寔曰： 寡人望王速来指纵，决胜负，复何恶？
现代文：宋端将话带了回去。王武俊对马萛说 ：我希望王能速来，是希望他来指方向，决胜负，为什么那么恶声恶气？
English: Song Duan took the words back. Wang Wujun said to Ma Jun: "I hope Wang can come quickly. I want him to point out the direction and decide the outcome. Why are you so angry?"

古文：王异日并天下，寡人得六七城，为节度足矣。 
现代文：王将来并有天下，我只求有六七个城邑，当个节度就足够了。 
English: The king shall have all the land; and I will require six or seven cities for it, that it may be a feast to me.

古文：寔遣具道所以然，武俊亦遣使谢滔，滔悦，亦报谢。
现代文：马萛派人去作了解释，王武俊也派人去向朱滔道歉，朱滔很高兴，也派人答谢。
English: Ma Yu sent someone to explain, and Wang Wujun also sent someone to apologize to Zhu Tao. Zhu Tao was very happy and also sent someone to thank him.

古文：然武俊内衔之，滋不怿，与田悦潜谋绝滔。
现代文：不过，王武俊心中总存了个疙瘩，对朱滔的不满越来越甚，暗中与田悦商议如何与朱滔断绝。
English: However, Wang Wujun always had a nagging feeling in his heart, and his dissatisfaction with Zhu Tao was getting worse and worse. He secretly discussed with Tian Yue how to break up with Zhu Tao.

古文：及泚反，燧等皆班师，武俊、寔亦还。
现代文：及至朱氵此反叛，马燧等人均班师回朝，王武俊、马萛也各自回去。
English: When Zhu Rong rebelled, Ma Rong and the rest of his division returned to the North, and Wang Wujun and Ma Rong also went back separately.

古文：悦、武俊遣使至河间，贺泚即位。
现代文：田悦、王武俊派使者到河间，恭贺大秦皇帝即位。
English: Tian Yue and Wang Wujun sent envoys to Hema to congratulate Emperor Daqin on his accession to the throne.

古文：武俊诡请寔共攻康日知于赵州，谋覆其军，不克。
现代文：王武俊诈请马萛共同攻击康日知，想颠覆他的军队，但交战未能取胜。
English: Wang Wujun fraudulently invited Ma Jun to jointly attack Kangrizhi, hoping to subvert his army, but the engagement failed to win.

古文：实归，武俊饯之，厚赠遗。
现代文：马萛归去时，王武俊为之饯别，馈赠甚厚。
English: When Ma Xuan returned, Wang Wujun bid him farewell with a generous gift.

古文：泚遣人密召滔，使趋洛阳。
现代文：朱氵此派人秘密召朱滔，要他去洛阳。
English: Zhu Xi therefore sent someone to secretly summon Zhu Tao and ask him to go to Luoyang.

古文：滔发书，西向再拜，移檄诸道曰： 今发突骑四十万走洛阳，与皇帝会上阳宫。 
现代文：朱滔很高兴，发书回答，且朝西再拜，同时向各道发出檄书说 ：现在调发精锐骑兵四十万到洛阳去，与皇帝相会于上阳宫。 
English: Zhu Tao was very pleased, and sent a letter to reply, and bowed to the west again, and at the same time sent an imperial letter to all provinces saying: Now dispatch 400,000 elite cavalry to Luoyang to meet the emperor at the Shangyang Palace.

古文：使王郅说悦连和俱西。
现代文：派王郅去劝说田悦和他连兵一同西去。
English: He sent Wang Yao to persuade Tian Yue to go west with him.

古文：滔素强调敛，武俊等不能堪。
现代文：朱滔一向强行调兵敛财，王武俊等人颇不胜负担。
English: Zhu Tao has always forcibly transferred troops to accumulate wealth, and Wang Wujun and others are quite a burden.

古文：又令各以兵五千从攻洛，欲僭称帝，乘舆、法从及赦令皆具。
现代文：朱滔这次又令他们各出兵五千人，跟随他一同去攻洛阳，也打算僭越称帝，乘舆、法从及赦令帝王用品全都准备好了。
English: This time, Zhu Tao also ordered them to send out five thousand soldiers each to follow him to attack Luoyang. He also planned to invade Luoyang and proclaim himself emperor. All the imperial supplies were ready by virtue of the imperial edict, the law, and the pardon.

古文：初，回纥以女妻奚王，大历末，奚乱，杀王，女逃归，道平卢，滔以锦绣张道，待其至，请为婚，女悦，许焉。
现代文：当初，回纥可汗将女儿嫁给奚王，大历末年，奚国内乱，杀了王。回纥可汗女逃归，路过平卢，朱滔在路边张设锦绣，迎接回纥女。
English: In the beginning, the Uighur Khan married his daughter to the King of Kush. At the end of the calendar year, there was a civil war in Kush and the king was killed. The Uighur Khan's daughter fled and passed through Pinglu. Zhu Tao put up decorations on the roadside to welcome the Uighur woman.

古文：既而遣使修婿礼于回纥，回纥喜，报以名马重宝。
现代文：回纥女来后，朱滔向她求婚，回纥女很高兴，就同意了。后来，朱滔派使者去回纥表达女婿之礼，回纥可汗也很高兴，答谢他名马重宝。
English: After the Hui woman came, Zhu Tao proposed to her. The Hui woman was very happy and agreed. Later, Zhu Tao sent an envoy to Hui to express the gift of a son-in-law. The Hui Khan was also very happy and thanked him for the valuable horse.

古文：及僭相王，与武俊、悦、纳纳四金钥于回纥，曰： 四国愿听命于可汗，谨上金钥，启闭出纳，唯所命。 
现代文：到他自称诸侯王时，就与王武俊、田悦、李纳共同送了四把金钥匙给回纥，说： 我们四国，愿听命于可汗，特此奉上金钥匙，此后开关出入，均惟可汗命是从。 
English: When he claimed to be the prince of princes, he, together with Wang Wujun, Tian Yue and Li Na, sent four golden keys to Hui Xuan, saying: "We four countries, are willing to obey the orders of the khan, and hereby present the golden keys. After that, the switch is in and out, but the khan's orders are obeyed.

古文：至是，乞师焉。
现代文：这时他要去洛阳，就向回纥求兵。
English: At this time, he wanted to go to Luoyang, so he asked Huizhou for soldiers.

古文：回纥以二千骑从，而武俊亦先乞师，以断怀光饷路，未至，而王师还。
现代文：回纥给了两千人马。王武俊也先向回纥讨兵，想切断李怀光的运粮道。但回纥兵还未到，而王师已回。
English: Hui Xuan gave him two thousand horses. Wang Wujun also sent troops to Hui Xuan to cut off Li Huaiguang's supply route. However, Hui Xuan's troops had not yet arrived, while Wang Shi had already returned.

古文：回纥过幽州，滔使说其酋达干曰： 若能同度河而南，玉帛子女不赀，计可得也。 
现代文：回纥兵经过幽州，朱滔派使者去劝说其酋长达干 ：假若您能与我们同渡河南下，那里女子财物不计其数，都可取得。 
English: Uighur soldiers passed through Yuzhou, and Zhu Tao sent an envoy to persuade his chief Dagan: "If you can come with us to the south of the river, there are countless women's belongings that can be obtained.

古文：达干许诺，滔啖以金帛，约曰： 五十里舍，以须悦军。 
现代文：达干同意，朱滔用金钱玉帛贿赂，与他相约： 进军五十里就驻扎下来，等待田悦军到。 
English: Dagan agreed, Zhu Tao bribed him with money and jade, and made a deal with him: He would march fifty miles and camp down, waiting for Tian Yue's army to arrive.

古文：滔兵五万，车千乘，骑二万，士私属万馀，虏兵三千，马、橐它倍之；过武俊境，武俊劳之，牛酒刍米皆具。
现代文：朱滔领兵五万，战车一千乘，骑兵两万，士人私下相跟的一万多，再加虏兵三千，马和骆驼六千。经过王武俊辖境，王武俊出来犒劳，酒肉米饭饲料一应俱全。
English: Zhu Tao led fifty thousand soldiers, a thousand chariots, twenty thousand cavalry, more than ten thousand scholars followed him privately, plus three thousand mercenaries, and six thousand horses and camels. After passing through Wang Wujun's territory, Wang Wujun went out to work, and there was plenty of meat, wine, rice and fodder.

古文：然悦已用武俊谋，不肯出，储峙于野以待。
现代文：不过，田悦已采用王武俊的策略，不肯出兵，而把兵储屯在郊野。
English: However, Tian Yue has adopted the strategy of Wang Wujun, refusing to send troops, but keeping troops in the countryside.

古文：滔至贝州，悦刺史邢曹俊上谒滔，即归闭城守，滔疑之，次永济。
现代文：朱滔到了贝州，田悦的刺史邢曹俊来上谒朱滔，施行一般礼节后，邢曹俊即刻回去闭城而守。朱滔心中疑惑，驻扎在永济。
English: Zhu Tao arrived in Bozhou. Tian Yue's chief of staff, Yan Cao Jun, came to visit Zhu Tao. After the implementation of general etiquette, Yan Cao Jun immediately went back and closed the city. Zhu Tao had doubts in his heart and was stationed in Yongji.

古文：武俊阴遣客反间滔曰： 悦有憾，须公南，以兵断公归路，宜少备。 
现代文：王武俊暗中派门客去挑拨，对朱滔说 ：田悦对你有不满，待你过去南下后，就用兵掐断你的归路。你该有所准备。 
English: Wang Wujun secretly sent a concierge to provoke Zhu Tao, saying: Tian Yue is dissatisfied with you. If you go south, he will use soldiers to cut off your way back. You should be prepared.

古文：滔闻怒，入永济，执悦吏掠讯，不得其情，杀之。
现代文：朱滔听说后很生气。进入永济城，抓住田悦的官吏拷打审讯，没问出个所以然来，就把那官吏杀了。
English: Zhu Tao was very angry when he heard about it. He entered Yongji City, arrested the official who tortured and interrogated Tian Yue, and killed the official without asking why.

古文：使回纥大掠，南及澶、卫，系执老幼无遗者。
现代文：又唆使回纥兵大肆抢掠，南及澶州、卫州，无论男女老幼一起抓走。
English: He also instigated the Uighur soldiers to loot and pillage on a large scale, taking away men, women, children and the elderly from Minam, Bozhou and Weizhou.

古文：悦大恐，阖城自保。
现代文：田悦大惊，闭城自保。
English: Tian Yue was shocked and closed the city to protect himself.

古文：滔遣将杨布略定馆陶，屯平恩，置官吏。
现代文：朱滔派大将杨布攻下馆陶，屯扎在平恩，就此设置官吏。
English: Zhu Tao sent General Yang Bu to conquer Guantao and settle in Ping'an, setting up officials accordingly.

古文：滔整军北还，使马寔屯冠氏，闻悦死，遂攻魏州，围贝州。
现代文：朱滔整顿军队打算北归，派马萛屯守冠氏，此时，听说田悦死了，于是进攻魏州，围困贝州。
English: Zhu Tao's rectification army planned to return to the north and sent Ma Yatun to defend the Guan clan. At this time, he heard that Tian Yue had died, so he attacked Weizhou and besieged Beizhou.

古文：于是，武俊、李抱真合军击滔。
现代文：那时，王武俊、李抱真合军攻击朱滔。
English: At that time, Wang Wujun and Li Baozhen joined forces to attack Zhu Tao.

古文：滔急召寔至贝州，步马乏顿。
现代文：朱滔急忙召马萛到贝州来，但人马均极困乏。
English: Zhu Tao hurriedly summoned Ma Jun to Beizhou, but everyone was extremely tired.

古文：明日，辄约战，寔请休士三日，蔡雄、达干等畏武俊坚壁难图，请战。
现代文：第二天，朱滔就要他出战，马萛要求让士兵休息三天。蔡雄、达干等担心王武俊工事坚固，难以攻克，请朱滔出战。
English: The next day, Zhu Tao asked him to go to war, and Ma Jun requested that the soldiers rest for three days. Cai Xiong, Dagan and others were worried that Wang Wujun's construction was solid and difficult to conquer, and asked Zhu Tao to go to war.

古文：杨布曰： 大王将取东都，逢小敌即怯，何以长驱天下邪？ 
现代文：杨布说： 大王将去攻取东都，现在遇上小敌就怯阵，将来怎能长驱天下呢？ 
English: Yang Bu said: The great king will go to conquer the eastern capital, and now he is afraid when he encounters a small enemy. How can he drive out the world in the future?

古文：术士尹少伯亦言必胜。
现代文：术士尹少伯也说出战必胜。
English: The sorcerer Yin Shao Bo also said that the battle would be victorious.

古文：既战，为二军所乘，大败，大将硃良祐、李进皆被执，委杖如丘，滔奔入德州。
现代文：于是第二天出战，但被王武俊、李抱真两军压倒，结果大败，大将朱良、李进都被抓去，丢弃的兵械堆积如山，朱滔逃奔德州。
English: So they went out to fight the next day, but were overwhelmed by the two armies of Wang Wujun and Li Baozhen. As a result, they suffered a crushing defeat. Generals Zhu Liang and Li Jin were both captured, abandoned military equipment piled up like a mountain, and Zhu Tao fled to Texas.

古文：恨少伯、雄、布之谬，杀之。
现代文：心中怀恨尹少伯、蔡雄、杨布，把他们都杀了。
English: He harbored a grudge against Yin Shao Bo, Cai Xiong, and Yang Bu, and killed them all.

古文：俄而京师平，滔已败，不能军，走还幽州，上书待罪。
现代文：不久，京师乱平，朱滔也败得不能成军，于是回到幽州，上书皇帝，谢罪待命。
English: Soon, the Beijing division was defeated, and Zhu Tao was also defeated and could not join the army, so he returned to Yuzhou, sent a letter to the emperor, and apologized.

古文：有诏武俊、抱真开示大信，若诚心审固者，当洗衅录勋，与更始。
现代文：有诏给王武俊、李抱真，只要他们诚心归国，能将功补过，则均可不计前罪。
English: An edict was issued to Wang Wujun and Li Bozhen, stating that as long as they returned to the country with sincerity and were able to make amends, their previous crimes would not be counted.

古文：初，滔以刘怦忠力，使留守，及败，疑图己，仿徨不敢入。
现代文：当初，朱滔因刘怦忠诚有勇，使他任范阳留守，到自己兵败，怕他会谋害自己，彷徨不敢入城。
English: At first, Zhu Tao, because of Liu Ye's loyalty and courage, made him stay behind with Fan Yang until he was defeated, fearing that he would kill himself, and he did not dare to enter the city.

古文：怦闻其至，搜兵缮铠，夹道陈二十里迎谒，望滔哭，滔遂入府。
现代文：刘怦听说朱滔回镇，召集士兵，修整武器，出城二十里夹道迎接，刘怦望见朱滔，禁不住泪流满面。朱滔这才入府。
English: Liu Bei heard that Zhu Tao had returned to the town, gathered soldiers, repaired weapons, and went out of the city for twenty miles to meet him. Liu Bei couldn't help but shed tears when he saw Zhu Tao. Zhu Tao had just entered the palace.

古文：气沮索，日邑邑，被病，政事一委怦。
现代文：以后，心中沮丧，每日郁郁不乐，生了病。于是将一切政事全交给刘怦。
English: After that, he was depressed in his heart, depressed and unhappy every day, and became ill. Therefore, he handed over all political affairs to Liu Ye.

古文：贞元元年死，年四十二，赠司徒。
现代文：贞元元年死，年四十二岁，追赠司徒。
English: Sadamoto died in the first year of the year, at the age of forty-two, and was posthumously given to Souto.

