古文：文王问太公曰： 君臣之礼如何？ 
现代文：文王问太公道： 君主与臣民之间的礼法应该怎样才合适？ 
English: King Wen asked Taigongdao: What is the proper etiquette between a monarch and his subjects?

古文：太公曰： 为上惟临，为下惟沉，临而无远，沉而无隐。
现代文：太公回答说： 作为君主最重要的是洞察下情，作臣民的最重要的是顺服恭敬。
English: The grand duke replied: As a monarch, the most important thing is to understand the feelings of the people. As a subject, the most important thing is to obey and respect.

古文：为上惟周，为下惟定。
现代文：洞察下情在于不疏远臣民，驯服恭敬就不应该隐瞒私情。
English: Insight lies in not alienating subjects, and tame respect should not conceal private affairs.

古文：周则天也，定则地也。
现代文：君主要做的是遍施恩惠，臣民要做的是应安守职分。
English: The principal duty of a monarch is to bestow favors everywhere, while that of a subject is to perform his duties safely.

古文：或天或地，大礼乃成。 
现代文：遍施恩惠，要像上天播撒霖雨给予万物；安守职分，要像大地培育万物。
English: To bestow bountifully is to be like the sky that sends rain to all things, and to guard one's duty is to be like the earth that nurtures all things.

古文：文王曰： 主位如何？ 
现代文：君主效法上天，臣民效法大地，这样就可以确定君臣间的礼法。 
English: The monarch follows the example of heaven, and the subjects follow the example of the earth. In this way, the etiquette between the monarch and the subjects can be determined.

古文：太公曰： 安徐而静，柔节先定；善与而不争，虚心平志，待物以正。 
现代文：文王问道： 身居君主之位，处理政务时应该怎样做？ 太公答道： 应该安详稳重而沉着清静，柔和有节而胸有成竹，善于施惠而不同民众争利，虚心静气而公道无私，处理事务公平不偏不倚。 
English: King Moon asked, "What should I do when I am in the position of the monarch and dealing with government affairs?" Taikong replied, "I should be calm, steady, and composed; gentle, composed, and self-possessed; good at giving benefits and competing with different people for benefits; humble, calm, and impartial; and deal with affairs fairly and impartially."

古文：文王曰： 主听如何？ 
现代文：文王问： 君主应该怎么听取他人的意见呢？ 
English: King Wen asked: How should a monarch listen to the opinions of others?

古文：太公曰： 勿妄而许，勿逆而拒；许之则失守，拒之则闭塞。
现代文：太公答道： 君主在听他人说话时，不要轻率地接受，也不要粗暴地拒绝。
English: The lady-in-waiting replied, "When listening to others, the sovereign should neither lightly accept nor rudely reject.

古文：高山仰之，不可极也；深渊度之，不可测也。
现代文：轻率接受就容易让自己失去主见，粗暴拒绝可能就会阻塞臣民进言的途径。
English: It is easy to lose one's self-possession by accepting rashly, and it is possible that a rude refusal will block the way for subjects to make suggestions.

古文：神明之德，正静其极。 
现代文：君主要像高山一般，使人仰慕却无法窥见其顶峰；要像深渊那样，让人无法真正测量其深度。
English: A prince should be like a mountain, which one admires but cannot see the top of; or like an abyss, whose depth one cannot really measure.

古文：文王曰： 主明如何？ 
现代文：神圣英明的君主之德，就是要保持清静公正。 
English: The virtue of a holy and wise prince is to be calm and just.

古文：太公曰： 目贵明，耳贵聪，心贵智。
现代文：文王问： 君主怎样才能使内心保持清明，做到洞察一切呢？ 
English: King Wen asked: How can a monarch keep his heart clear and have insight into everything?

古文：以天下之目视，则无不见也；以天下之耳听，则无不闻也；以天下之心虑，则无不知也。
现代文：太公答道： 眼睛贵在能够观察看清事物，耳朵贵在听得到远处的意见，心贵在充满睿智。依靠天下人的眼睛去观察事物，就没有什么是看不见的；利用天下人的耳朵去倾听意见，就没有什么是听不见的；用思虑天下之心去思考事物，那么天下的事就没有不知道的。
English: Grandpa replied: Eyes are valuable for being able to observe and see things clearly, ears are valuable for hearing distant opinions, and hearts are valuable for being full of wisdom. If you rely on the eyes of the world to observe things, nothing is invisible; if you use the ears of the world to listen to opinions, nothing is inaudible; if you think about things with the mind of the world, then there is nothing unknown in the world.

古文：辐凑并进，则明不蔽矣。 
现代文：四面八方的情况都汇集到君主那里，君主自然就能洞察一切而不受蒙蔽了。 
English: Circumstances from all sides converge on the monarch, who is naturally able to see everything and not be blinded.

