古文：太史公读《秦记》，至犬戎败幽王，周东徙洛邑，秦襄公始封为诸侯，作西畤用事上帝，僭端见矣。
现代文：太史公研读《秦记》，看到上面记载犬戎部族击败杀死周幽王，周王室往东迁都到洛邑，秦襄公因为护送平王有功被封为诸侯，就建造了西畤来事奉天帝，就觉得这有越位犯上的痕迹了。
English: Taishi Gong studied "Qin Ji" and saw the above record of the Inurong tribe defeating and killing Zhou Yu Wang, the Zhou royal family moved east to Luoyang, Qin Xiang Gong was made a prince because he escorted Ping Wang, and he built Xidi to serve the heavenly emperor. He felt that there were traces of overstepping.

古文：《礼》曰： 天子祭天地，诸侯祭其域内名山大川。 
现代文：《礼经》上说: 天子才有权祭祀天地，诸侯只能祭祀他们封地中的名山大川。 
English: "The Book of Rites" says: Only the Son of Heaven has the right to sacrifice heaven and earth. Princes can only sacrifice the famous mountains and rivers in their fiefdoms.

古文：今秦杂戎翟之俗，先暴戾，后仁义，位在藩臣而臚于郊祀。君子惧焉。
现代文：当时秦国夹杂着西戎北狄的民风习俗，把凶暴乖戾摆在前面，将仁德道义放在后头，地位处在捍卫王室的臣属行列，却在祭祀规格上同天子平起平坐，有识之士都十分忧惧。
English: At that time, Qin mixed with the folk customs of the north of Xijun and the north of Di, and put the ferocity and viciousness in the front, and put the benevolence and morality in the back, and the status was in the ranks of the subjects who defended the royal family, but it was on a par with the heavenly son in terms of sacrificial specifications, and people with insight were very worried.

古文：及文公逾陇，攘夷狄，尊陈宝，营岐雍之间。
现代文：到秦文公，他越过陇坂，打败了夷狄，祭祀陈宝，开发了岐山到雍地这片地区。
English: As far as Qin Wenguo is concerned, he crossed Qishan, defeated Yidi, sacrificed Chen Bao, and developed this area from Qishan to Yongdi.

古文：而穆公修政，东竟至河，则与齐桓、晋文中国侯伯侔矣。
现代文：秦穆公修明政治，将秦国的边境向东一直扩展到黄河西岸，就与齐桓公、晋文公这些中原霸主势均力敌了。
English: When Qin Mu Gong reformed his politics and extended the borders of Qin to the east all the way to the west bank of the Yellow River, he was on an equal footing with the Central Plains overlords like Qi Huan Gong and Jinwen Gong.

古文：是后陪臣执政，大夫世禄；六卿擅晋权，征伐会盟，威重于诸侯。
现代文：此后，家臣执掌国政，大夫们世世代代享有俸禄，六卿独揽晋国的大权，无论征伐还是会盟，威势都在其他诸侯之上。
English: Since then, vassals have been in charge of state affairs, doctors have enjoyed salaries for generations, and the six lords have monopolized the power of Jin Province. Regardless of conquest or alliance, the power is above other lords.

古文：及田常杀简公而相齐国，诸侯晏然弗讨，海内争于战功矣。
现代文：到田常杀掉齐简公而自任齐相，诸侯们都无动于衷不予讨伐，这标志着海内已经围绕怎样保持本国的军事实力来争斗了。
English: When Gu Tian Chang killed Qi Jian Gong and appointed himself Qi Xiang, the lords were indifferent and did not fight, which marked that the country had been fighting over how to maintain its military strength.

古文：三国终之卒分晋，田和亦灭齐而有之，六国之盛自此始。
现代文：终于韩、赵、魏三国瓜分掉了晋国，田和也吞灭姜齐据为己有，六国并立的局面就是在这时候开始的。
English: Finally, Han, Zhao, and Wei divided Jin Province among themselves, and Tianhe also swallowed up Jiang Qi. The situation of six countries standing side by side began at this time.

古文：务在强兵并敌，谋诈用而从衡短长之说起。
现代文：各个诸侯国的首要之务在于壮大军事力量，吞并敌国，因而权谋诈术得到普遍应用，合纵连横的学说也相继兴起。
English: The primary task of each vassal state was to build up its military strength and annex enemy countries. As a result, the art of intrigue and deception was widely used, and the doctrines of "convergence" and "contiguity" also emerged.

古文：矫称蜂出，誓盟不信，虽置质剖符犹不能约束也。
现代文：各种假借王命的诸侯蜂拥而出，誓词盟约再也不遵守，即使各国互派人质，剖符为凭，都无法相互约束。
English: Princes of all kinds, pretending to be acting on the king's orders, swarmed out, pledges and covenants were no longer kept, and even if countries sent hostages to each other, they could not bind each other.

古文：秦始小国僻远，诸夏宾之，比于戎翟，至献公之后常雄诸侯。
现代文：秦国起初只是一个偏远小国，中原的各诸侯国都排斥它，甚至将它等同于西方的戎翟看待。但从献公以后，一直在诸侯中称雄。
English: At the beginning, Qin was just a small, remote country. The various states of the Central Plains rejected it, and even equated it with the Western militarism. However, since its dedication, it has always been dominant among the states.

古文：论秦之德义不如鲁卫之暴戾者，量秦之兵不如三晋之强也，然卒并天下，非必险固便形势利也，盖若天所助焉。
现代文：论起秦国的德义，还不如鲁卫两国中那些凶暴乖戾的人；计量秦国的兵力，也不如三晋强大，但最后秦国却吞并天下，这不一定就是因为秦国凭据天险，攻守方便，地理形势非常有利，而似乎是上天的帮助。
English: When it comes to the virtue of the Qin State, it is not as good as those violent and unruly people in the two countries of Lu Wei; when it comes to measuring the military strength of the Qin State, it is not as strong as that of the Three Jin Dynasties, but in the end, the Qin State has annexed the whole world. This is not necessarily because the Qin State is based on natural hazards, it is convenient to attack and defend, and the geographical situation is very favorable, but it seems to be the help of heaven.

古文：或曰 东方物所始生，西方物之成孰 。
现代文：有一种说法认为: 东方是万物开始萌生之地，西方是万物最后成熟的地方。 
English: There is a saying that: the East is the place where everything begins to germinate, and the West is the place where everything finally matures.

古文：夫作事者必于东南，收功实者常于西北。
现代文：据此看来，开创事业的人必定出现在东南，获取胜利果实的人常常在西北。
English: According to this view, those who start a business must appear in the southeast, and those who obtain the fruits of victory are often in the northwest.

古文：故禹兴于西羌，汤起于亳，周之王也以丰镐伐殷，秦之帝用雍州兴，汉之兴自蜀汉。
现代文：所以大禹在西羌兴起，商汤在亳地崛起，周人建立王朝是因为有丰镐作根据地去讨伐殷商，秦国能够完成帝业是由于有雍州做依靠才日益强大，汉朝兴盛是从巴蜀汉中开始的。
English: Therefore, Dayu arose in Xidi, Shangtang rose in Shandong, Zhou people established the dynasty because they had Fengyuan as a base to fight Yin merchants, Qin was able to complete the empire because they relied on Yongzhou to become increasingly powerful, and the Han Dynasty began to flourish in Bashu Han.

古文：秦既得意，烧天下《诗》《书》，诸侯史记尤甚，为其有所刺讥也。
现代文：秦国已经统一天下，就焚烧《诗经》《尚书》，而其他诸侯国的国史被焚烧得更厉害，因为书中有讽刺讥笑秦国的地方。
English: Once Qin had been unified, they burned the "Song of Songs" and the "Book of Songs," while the national histories of other states were burned even more severely, because the books contained satire mocking Qin.

古文：《诗》《书》所以复见者，多藏人家，而史记独藏周室，以故灭。
现代文：《诗》《书》之所以重新流传于世，是因为收藏的人很多，而各国国史专门收藏在周王室，因此一下子就全毁灭了。
English: "Poetry" and "Books" were reintroduced to the world because many people collected them, but the national histories of various countries were specially collected by the Zhou royal family, so they were all destroyed at once.

古文：惜哉，惜哉！
现代文：可惜呀！可惜呀！
English: What a pity! What a pity!

古文：独有《秦记》，又不载日月，其文略不具。
现代文：如今只有《秦纪》传下来，却又没有记载日月，内容简略也不完整。
English: Today, only the "Qin Dynasty" has been passed down, but there is no record of the sun and moon, and the content is brief and incomplete.

古文：然战国之权变亦有可颇采者，何必上古？
现代文：但是战国关于变通和应急的对策也有大量可以采用的，为什么非上古不可呢？
English: However, there are also a large number of Sengoku countermeasures for workarounds and emergencies that can be used, so why not the ancients?

古文：秦取天下多暴，然世异变，成功大。传曰 法后王 ，何也？
现代文：秦国夺取天下暴行很多，但秦国能随着时代的不同而相应调整对策，所以能有建树巨大的功业。经传中说: 效法后王。 这是为什么呢？
English: There are many atrocities in the conquest of the world by the Qin State, but the Qin State can adjust its countermeasures according to the different times, so it can have great achievements. According to the legend: Imitate the Queen. Why is this?

古文：以其近己而俗变相类，议卑而易行也。
现代文：这是因为后王距离我们的时代近，当代民俗的变化也和后王那个时期差不多，道理讲起来浅显明白，容易推行。
English: This is because the queen consort is close to our era, and the changes in contemporary folk customs are similar to those in the queen consort's time. The principles are simple and easy to understand, and easy to implement.

古文：学者牵于所闻，见秦在帝位日浅，不察其终始，因举而笑之，不敢道，此与以耳食无异？
现代文：一般的读书人局限于平常听到的那点东西，看见秦朝高居帝位的时间很短促，不去考察它本身发展的全过程，就因此讥笑它，这和轻信他们话语有什么分别呢？
English: Ordinary readers confine themselves to what they usually hear, seeing that the Qin Dynasty's time on the throne was very short, and ridicule it without examining the entire process of its own development. What is the difference between this and credulity in their words?

古文：悲夫！
现代文：真可悲呀！
English: How sad!

古文：余于是因《秦记》，踵《春秋》之后，起周元王，表六国时事，讫二世，凡二百七十年，着诸所闻兴坏之端，后有君子，以览观焉。
现代文：我于是根据《秦纪》的记载，接在《春秋》后面，上起周元王，列表编排六国发生的大小事件，下至秦二世，总共二百七十年，写出我所闻知的各种兴盛衰败的缘由，以供后世的有识之士观览。
English: I then based on the records of the "Qin Dynasty," followed by the "Spring and Autumn," up to King Zhou Yuan, compiled a list of the major and minor events that occurred in the six countries, down to Qin II, a total of two hundred and seventy years, I wrote down the various reasons for the rise and fall of prosperity that I knew, for future generations of insightful people to view.

