古文：羯鼓玄宗宋璟李龟年曹王皋李琬杜鸿渐
现代文：羯鼓玄宗宋璟李龟年曹王皋李琬杜鸿渐
English: 鼓玄宗宋李龟年曹王李杜鸿渐

古文：铜鼓张直方郑续
现代文：铜鼓张直方郑续
English: Brass Drum Zhang Naofang Continues

古文：琵琶罗黑黑裴洛儿杨妃段师汉中王瑀韦应物宋沇皇甫直王沂关别驾王氏女
现代文：琵琶罗黑黑裴洛儿杨妃段师汉中王瑀韦应物宋沇皇甫直王沂关别驾王氏女
English: Pipa Luo Hei Hei Pei Lore Yangfei Duan Teacher Han Zhong Wang Xing Wei Ying Thing Song Dynasty Emperor Funao Wang Xing Guan Farewell Princess

古文：五弦赵辟
现代文：五弦赵辟
English: Five-stringed Zhao Bi

古文：箜篌徐月华
现代文：箜篌徐月华
English: Xu Yuehua

古文：羯鼓
现代文：羯鼓
English: The gongs and drums

古文：羯鼓出外夷乐。
现代文：羯鼓，是一种从外城传到中国的乐器。
English: The gonggu is a musical instrument that was brought to China from outside the city.

古文：以戎羯之鼓，故曰羯鼓。
现代文：用骟了的公羊皮做鼓皮，因此叫羯鼓。
English: The skin of the drum is made of tanned ram's skin, which is why it's called a yakitori.

古文：其音主太簇一均。
现代文：它发出的音响主古时十二律中阳律第二律一度。
English: The sound it emits is in accordance with the second law of thermodynamics, one of the twelve laws of ancient times.

古文：龟兹部、高昌部、疏勒部、天竺部皆用之。
现代文：古代的龟兹、高昌、疏勒、天竺等地的少数民族都使用它。
English: It was used by ethnic minorities in ancient Kuez, Gaochang, Shule, Tianzhu and other places.

古文：次在都昙鼓、答腊鼓之下，鸡娄鼓之上。
现代文：它的地位在都昙鼓、答腊鼓之下，在鸡篓鼓之上。
English: Its status is below that of the Tudor drum and the Tara drum, and above that of the chicken drum.

古文：围如漆桶。下以牙床承之，击用两杖。其声焦杀鸣烈，尤宜促曲急破，作戟杖连碎之。
现代文：用上好的桑木围成漆桶，用象牙镶饰的床架承放，用双槌敲击，它发出的声音急促、威烈、轰鸣，尤其适宜表现快节奏的乐曲，促急、破碎的节奏。
English: It is surrounded by a lacquered barrel made of fine mulberry wood, supported by an ivory-inlaid bed frame, and struck with a pair of mallets. The sound it emits is rapid, powerful, and roaring. It is especially suitable for performing fast-paced music, speeding up and breaking the rhythm.

古文：又宜高楼玩景，明月清风，凌空透远，极异众乐。
现代文：可以敲击它为军士战阵征伐撕打助威，也宜于高楼观赏，节日或者社火时给舞蹈、百戏等娱乐游戏伴奏。这时朗月清风、天高气远，它的功能也与众多乐器不同。
English: It can be tapped to cheer up the sergeant's battle of conquest, it is also suitable for viewing in high-rise buildings, and it can accompany dances, plays and other entertainment games during festivals or social fires. At this time, the moon is clear and the wind is high, and its function is also different from many musical instruments.

古文：杖用黄檀狗骨花椒等木。
现代文：羯鼓的槌杖一般是用黄檀、狗骨、花椒等木做成的。
English: The mallet sticks of gongs and drums are generally made of wood such as sandalwood, dog bone, and bell pepper.

古文：须至干紧，绝湿气而复柔腻。
现代文：只有干透了，敲出的鼓声才最响亮。
English: It's only when it's completely dry that the drums are at their loudest.

古文：干取发越响，腻取战褭健举。
现代文：只有滑腻，击在鼓面上才能收到像战马举蹄扣击一样的效果。
English: Only when it is slippery and struck on the surface of the drum can it receive the same effect as the hoof-lifting of a warhorse.

古文：卷用刚铁，铁当精錬，卷当至匀。
现代文：围卷漆桶时须用刚铁。铁经过精炼，卷应当卷匀。
English: Rigid iron must be used when wrapping the paint bucket. After the iron is refined, the roll should be rolled evenly.

古文：若不刚，即应绦高下，抽捩不停。
现代文：不刚，则围卷的绦边上下不齐，松紧不一。
English: If it is not firm, then the edges of the wrapping will be uneven and the elasticity will be uneven.

古文：不匀。即鼓面缓急。
现代文：不匀，则鼓面上的鼓皮有紧有松吃力不匀。
English: Uneven, then the drum skin on the drum surface is unevenly tight and loose.

古文：若琴徽之姺病矣。
现代文：就象琴弦系绳不好而使琴声散逸不准一样，这样的鼓，敲击时发出的声音也忽高忽低、忽响忽沉，不合音律。
English: Just as the strings of a lute are not well tied so that the sound of the lute is not allowed to flow, the sound emitted by such a drum when it is struck also fluctuates from high to low, from sonorous to muffled, and is not in tune with the melody.

古文：玄宗
现代文：玄宗
English: Hyunjong

古文：唐玄宗洞晓音律，由之天纵。
现代文：唐玄宗精通乐律，是上天赋于给他的才能。
English: Tang Xuan Zong's mastery of musical notation was a gift bestowed upon him.

古文：凡是管弦，必造其妙。
现代文：不论是管乐，还是弦乐，他都造诣很精，深得其中的奥妙。
English: Whether it is wind or string music, he is highly accomplished and has a deep understanding of the intricacies involved.

古文：若制作调曲，随意即成。
现代文：如果要写支曲子，信手拈来，立等可取。
English: If you want to write a piece of music, it is advisable to come quickly and wait.

古文：不立章度，取适短长；应指散声，皆中点指。
现代文：不立什么章法，却长短正合适；随手弹拨，都符合节拍。
English: It doesn't have any rules, but the length is just right; when you play it by hand, it all fits the beat.

古文：至于清浊变转，律吕呼召，君臣事物，迭相制使，虽古之夔旷，不能过也。
现代文：至于清浊音的变化，乐律的定音，主、副旋律、乐件的配备、重叠、反复乐段的使用，就是古时候的夔旷也超不过他。
English: As for the changes in the clear gong tone, the tuning of the melody, the main melody, the secondary melody, the arrangement of the musical pieces, the overlapping, the use of the repeated music section, even the vastness of the ancient times is beyond him.

古文：尤爱羯鼓，常云：八音之领袖，诸乐不可为比。
现代文：唐玄宗尤其喜爱羯鼓。他常说：羯鼓是八音的领袖，其它乐器不可与之相比。
English: Tang Xuan Zong was particularly fond of the gonggu. He often said, "The gonggu is the leader of the eight tones, and other musical instruments cannot be compared to it."

古文：尝遇二月初，诘旦。巾栉方毕，时宿雨始晴，景色明丽。小殿内亭，柳杏将吐。
现代文：一次，大概是二月初，早晨，唐玄宗梳洗完毕，下了一宿的雨刚刚放晴，宫苑中景色明丽，小殿的内亭，柳枝返青刚吐嫩芽，杏花含苞欲将开放。
English: Once, probably at the beginning of February, in the morning, Tang Xuan Zong had finished combing, the rain that had fallen overnight had just cleared, the scenery in the palace garden was bright, the inner pavilion of the small hall, the willow branches were just beginning to sprout buds, and the apricot flowers were about to open.

古文：睹而叹曰：对此景物。
现代文：玄宗触景生情，赞赏地说：面对这样的良晨美景，怎么可以不欣赏呢？
English: Xuanzong touched the scene and said with appreciation: Faced with such a beautiful morning scenery, how can you not appreciate it?

古文：岂可不与他判断之乎。左右相目，将命备酒，独高力士遣取羯鼓。
现代文：跟随在唐玄宗左右的太监、宫娥，听了后互相观望，以为玄宗是让置酒宴饮呢，只有大太监高力士明了玄宗的心思，让人去为皇上取来羯鼓。
English: Following the eunuch, Gong'e, who was around Emperor Xuanzong of Tang, after listening, they looked at each other and thought that Emperor Xuanzong was letting them have a wine banquet. Only the Grand Eunuch, Gao Lixi, understood Emperor Xuanzong's thoughts and had someone fetch the gongs and drums for the emperor.

古文：上旋命之，临轩纵击一曲，曲名《春光好》。
现代文：玄宗又让人将羯鼓放在殿前檐下的平台上，他即先敲击一曲，名为《春光好》，好不惬意啊！
English: Xuanzong also had the gongs and drums placed on the platform in front of the hall, under the arches. He then began to play a piece called "Spring Light is Good," which was very unpleasant!

古文：神思自得。及顾柳杏，皆已发拆。
现代文：再看看柳芽与杏蕾，都被玄宗刚才击出的鼓声震开了。
English: Take a look at the willow buds and almond buds, both of which were shaken by the drums that Xuanzong had just beaten out.

古文：指而笑谓嫔嫱内官曰：此一事，不唤我作天公可乎？
现代文：玄宗指着震开的柳芽、杏花，对宫娥、太监们说：就凭这件事情，不称乎我为天人行吗？
English: Pointing to the trembling willow buds and apricot blossoms, Xuanzong said to Gong'e and the eunuchs, "Based on this, can I really be called a man of heaven?"

古文：皆呼万岁。
现代文：众人皆呼：万岁！
English: Everyone shouted: "Long live Mao!"

古文：又制《秋风高》，每至秋空迥澈，纤翳不起，即奏之。
现代文：唐玄宗又谱作《秋风高》鼓曲。每到清秋，天高地远，纤云皆无，即奏这支曲子。
English: Tang Xuan Zong also composed the "Autumn Wind High" drum music. Whenever the autumn comes, the sky is high and the earth is far away, and there are no clouds, play this piece.

古文：必远风徐来，庭叶徐下，其妙绝入神如此。
现代文：这时，就有风徐徐从远处吹来，宫庭院中的树叶纷纷飘落。这种绝妙的景象真是出神入化啊！
English: At this time, there is a wind blowing from afar, and the leaves in the palace courtyard are falling. This wonderful sight is really amazing!

古文：玄宗尝伺察诸王。
现代文：又有一次，唐玄宗察看诸位皇兄、皇弟。
English: On another occasion, Emperor Xuanzong of Tang inspected all the brothers and sisters of the emperor.

古文：所读书乃龟兹乐谱也。上知之。
现代文：视察到宁王李献那儿，见李献正挥汗用羯羊皮蒙鼓，案上放着一本翻开的《龟兹乐谱》。
English: When he visited Li Xian in Ningwang, he saw that Li Xian was sweating and using a sheepskin to cover the drum, and there was an open copy of "Turtle and Tortoise Music" on the case.

古文：喜曰。天子兄弟。当极此乐。
现代文：玄宗皇帝看了后，非常高兴，说：天子的兄弟，正应当有这种雅好嘛！
English: When Emperor Xuanzong saw it, he was very pleased and said, "Brother of the Son of Heaven, this is exactly the kind of yakitori that should exist!

古文：又汝阳王琎，宁王长子也。
现代文：又汝阳王李琎，是宁王李献的长子。
English: In addition, Ryu Yang Wang Li Yao is the eldest son of Ning Wang Li Xian.

古文：姿容妍美。秀出藩邸。
现代文：相貌妍美姿态清逸，诸位王室子弟没有比他标致漂亮的，因此，有个小名叫花奴。
English: His appearance is beautiful, his posture is graceful, and none of the royal children are more beautiful than him. Therefore, there is a little boy named Hanano.

古文：玄宗特钟爱焉，自传授之。
现代文：唐玄宗特别钟爱他，亲自教授他打击羯鼓的技艺。
English: Tang Xuan Zong was particularly fond of him and personally taught him how to play the gong and drum.

古文：又以其聪悟敏慧，妙达其旨，每随游幸，顷刻不舍。
现代文：这位王子以其聪敏的悟性，很快就领悟并掌握了这种技艺。
English: The prince, with his keen intelligence, soon understood and mastered the art.

古文：琎尝戴砑绢帽打曲，上自摘红槿花一朵，置于帽上。
现代文：因此每次伴随玄宗游玩赏景，玄宗都一刻也舍不得让他离开。汝阳王李琎，有一次头戴用碾磨发光的绢作的帽子击鼓，玄宗皇帝亲自采一朵红色槿花戴在他帽上。
English: Therefore, every time Emperor Xuanzong accompanied Emperor Xuanzong to enjoy the scenery, Emperor Xuanzong was reluctant to let him leave for a moment. Ruyang King Li Xi once wore a hat made of milled glowing enamel to play the drums. Emperor Xuanzong personally picked a red enamel flower and put it on his hat.

古文：其二物皆极滑，久之方安。
现代文：砑绢帽与槿花都很滑，不好戴，好久才戴上。
English: Both the felt hat and the felt flowers were very slippery, difficult to wear, and took a long time to put on.

古文：遂奏《舞山香》一曲，而花不坠。
现代文：汝阳王李琎再奏一曲《舞山香》，而帽上的槿花不掉下来。
English: Ryu Yang Wang Li Yao played one more song, "Dancing Mountain Incense," and the thistle flower on his hat did not fall off.

古文：上大喜笑，赐金器。
现代文：这是李琎项功过硬，击鼓时头不摇晃的结果。
English: This is the result of Li Yuxiang's excellent performance and not shaking his head when playing the drums.

古文：因夸曰：花奴，姿质明莹，肌发光细，非人间人，必神仙谪坠也。
现代文：玄宗皇帝大喜，赏赐李琎金器，并笑着夸赞道：花奴姿质明洁莹丽，肌肤头发细腻光洁，不是人世间的常人，一定是上天贬下来的神仙吧。
English: Emperor Xuanzong was overjoyed and rewarded Li Lan with a gold utensil. Laughing, he praised Li Lan and said, "The geisha's posture is clear and bright, her skin and hair are delicate and shiny. She is not an ordinary person in the world, but must be a celestial immortal."

古文：宁王谦谢，随而短斥之。
现代文：宁王谦谨地一拜，向玄宗皇帝表示谢意，随后申斥李琎，示意他不要总在皇上面前表现自己。
English: King Ning bowed humbly and expressed his gratitude to Emperor Xuanzong, and then reprimanded Li Xi, suggesting that he should not always show himself in front of the emperor.

古文：上笑曰：大哥不必过虑，阿瞒自是相师。
现代文：玄宗笑着说：大哥没有必要想的那么多。阿瞒我就是相师。
English: Xuanzong smiled and said, "Big brother, there's no need to think so much. I'm just a matchmaker.

古文：夫帝王之相，且须英特越逸之气，不然，有深沈包育之度。
现代文：帝王之相，应当是英俊特异，超逸不群的气质，要不然，也须具备深沉包育的度量。
English: The emperor's appearance should be handsome and unique, with a superior temperament, otherwise, it must also have the measure of deep nurturing.

古文：花奴但秀迈人，悉无此状，固无猜也。
现代文：花奴虽然秀俊过人，即全没有这些表象。
English: Although Hidetoshi is a great actor, he doesn't have any of these appearances.

古文：而又举止闲雅，当更得公卿间令誉耳。
现代文：因此，我对他没有什么猜忌的啊！何况，花奴又举止闲雅、脱俗，理应在公卿之间得到更多的赞誉呀！
English: Therefore, I have no suspicions about him! What's more, the philanderer also behaves in an elegant and refined manner, and deserves to receive more praise among the nobles!

古文：宁王又谢之。而曰：若于此，臣乃输之。
现代文：宁王李献再次拜请玄宗，说：果然象皇上说的那样，我认输了。
English: Li Xian, the king of Ning, once again invited Xuanzong and said, "As the emperor said, I have conceded defeat.

古文：上曰：若此一条，阿瞒亦输大哥矣。
现代文：玄宗说：就此一条，阿瞒我也输给大哥啦。
English: Xuanzong said, "On this one, I've lost to my elder brother anyway."

古文：宁王又谦谢。
现代文：宁王又恭谨地拜谢玄宗。
English: Ning Wang also respectfully bowed to Xie Xuan Zong.

古文：上笑曰：阿瞒赢处多。
现代文：玄宗皇帝笑着说：阿瞒我赢的多啦！
English: Emperor Xuanzong smiled and said, "I won a lot!

古文：太哥亦不用撝揖。
现代文：大哥总这样作揖拜谢，你会谢不过来的呀！
English: Big brother always makes excuses like this, you won't be able to thank him!

古文：众皆欢贺。
现代文：陪同玩赏的人都高兴地祝贺。
English: Accompanying people are happy to congratulate.

古文：玄宗性俊迈，酷不好琴。
现代文：唐玄宗性情豪迈俊逸，但是他一点也不喜欢琴。
English: Tang Xuan Zong was a dashing and handsome man, but he didn't like the piano at all.

古文：曾听弹正弄，未及毕，叱琴者曰：待诏出去。
现代文：一次听到有人在宫内弹琴，未等弹完，玄宗即走过去大声呵斥操琴的人，说：我命令你出去。
English: On one occasion, he heard someone playing the harp in the palace. Before the harp was finished, Xuanzong walked over and shouted at the person playing the harp, saying, "I order you to leave."

古文：谓内官曰：速召花奴将羯鼓来，为我解秽。
现代文：并对随身太监说，快快召来花奴为朕奏羯鼓，为朕解解这秽气。
English: And he said to the eunuch who was with him, "Quickly, call in the acolytes to play the cymbals for me and to purify me of this foul breath."

古文：又黄幡绰亦知音，上曾使人召之，不时至。
现代文：又黄幡绰也通晓音律。一次，玄宗皇帝让人召黄幡绰，很长时间，黄幡绰还没到。
English: Huang Banzhuo was also familiar with musical notation. Once, Emperor Xuanzong had someone summon Huang Banzhuo, and for a long time, Huang Banzhuo did not arrive.

古文：上怒，络绎遣使寻捕之。
现代文：玄宗大怒，不断地派人各处寻找黄幡绰，让将他抓回来。
English: Xuanzong was furious and constantly sent people everywhere to look for Huang Banzhuo and bring him back.

古文：绰既至，及殿侧，闻上理鼓，固止谒者，不令报。
现代文：后来，黄幡绰回来了，来到殿侧，听到皇上正在一边击鼓一边创作一支鼓曲。
English: Later, Huang Banzhuo returned, came to the side of the hall, and heard that the emperor was composing a drum piece while drumming.

古文：俄顷，上又问侍官：奴来未？
现代文：他制止住传报的人不要报告皇上他回来了。过了少许，玄宗又问侍从：绰奴才回来没有？
English: He stopped the messenger from reporting to the emperor that he had returned. After a while, Xuanzong asked the attendant again, "Didn't your servant just come back?"

古文：绰又止之。
现代文：黄幡绰又暗示不报。
English: Huang Hanqiao also hinted that he would not report it.

古文：曲罢，复改曲，才三数十声，绰即走入。
现代文：玄宗制作完这支鼓曲，又进行了改动。之后，重又击鼓奏曲。待皇上敲了三五十来声，黄幡绰才走入殿内报到。
English: After Emperor Xuanzong finished composing this piece of drum music, he made some changes to it. After that, he started to play the piece again. It was not until Emperor Xuanzong struck the thirty-fifty chime that Huang Banzhu walked into the hall to report for duty.

古文：上问何处来，曰：有亲故远适，送至城外。
现代文：玄宗皇帝问：你从何处回来？回答说：有个亲友出远门，我送到郊外长亭。
English: Emperor Xuanzong asked, "Where did you come from?" He replied, "A relative and friend went to a faraway place. I took him to the outskirts of Changting.

古文：上颔之。
现代文：玄宗皇帝颔首不语。
English: Emperor Xuanzong did not say a word.

古文：鼓毕，上谓曰：赖稍迟，我向来怒意，至必祸焉。
现代文：击鼓一曲完了，皇上说：你回来晚了些，我一向发怒必有人要受到处罚。
English: When the drumming was over, the emperor said, "You have come back late. I am always angry, so someone must be punished."

古文：适方思之，长入供奉五十余日，暂一日出外，不可不许他东西过往。
现代文：方才，我边击鼓边思考：你这次供奉的时间较长，已经有五十多天了吧。只有一天到宫外去，不应该不让他东走走，西看看啊。
English: Just now, while I was playing the drums, I was thinking: You've been offering this time for a long time, for more than fifty days. It's only one day to go outside the palace, shouldn't you let him walk around and look around?

古文：绰拜谢毕，内官有相偶语笑者。上诘之，具言绰寻至，听鼓而候其时入。
现代文：这两个太监如实地将黄幡绰已经回来好一会儿了直至听了一会儿皇上击鼓才进报的事情说了。玄宗皇帝问黄幡绰：你为什么这时才进报！
English: The two eunuchs truthfully said that Huang Banzhuo had been back for a long time until he heard the emperor beating the drum for a while. Emperor Xuanzong asked Huang Banzhuo: Why did you only report at this time!

古文：上问绰，绰语上方怒，其解怒之际，皆无少差误。
现代文：黄幡绰回答说：我回到侧殿时正赶上皇上发怒，和消解怒气的时候。这时我要进报，一定会出差错。
English: Huang Banzhuo replied, "When I returned to the antechamber, I was just in time to see the emperor's anger, and the time to dissipate his anger. At this time, I wanted to enter the newspaper, and there was bound to be a mistake.

古文：上奇之，复厉声谓之曰：我心脾骨下事，安有侍官奴听小鼓能料之耶？
现代文：玄宗皇帝感到非常奇怪，又厉声问道：我心里的想法，有侍奉我的奴才怎能从我击鼓的声音中听出来呢？
English: Emperor Xuanzong felt very strange and asked in a loud voice, "How can my servants hear the thoughts in my heart from the sound of my drumming?"

古文：今且谓我如何？
现代文：你现在再说说我在想什么呢？
English: Are you going to tell me what I'm thinking now?

古文：绰遂走下阶，面北鞠躬，大声曰：奉敕监金鸡。
现代文：黄幡绰走下台阶，面向北鞠躬，大声说道：皇上命令我掌管金鸡！
English: Huang Banzhao walked down the steps, bowed to the north, and said loudly: The emperor ordered me to take charge of the golden chicken!

古文：上大笑而止。
现代文：玄宗皇帝大笑作罢。
English: Emperor Xuanzong burst out laughing.

古文：宋璟
现代文：宋璟
English: Song Tao

古文：宋开府璟虽耿介不群，亦深好声乐，尤善羯鼓。
现代文：宋璟，字开府，性情虽然耿介孤傲，也深爱声乐，尤其擅长敲击羯鼓。
English: Song Xuan, whose family name was Kaifu, was a lonely and proud man, but he also loved vocal music and was particularly good at playing gongs and drums.

古文：始承恩顾，与玄宗论鼓事曰：不是青州石末，即是鲁山花瓮。撚小碧上，掌下须有朋肯声，据此乃是汉震第一鼓也。
现代文：宋璟刚承玄宗皇帝的恩顾，官任当朝宰相，跟玄宗谈论有关鼓的事情时说道：或用青州石末，或用鲁山花瓮做的鼓，用手指轻轻扣点，手掌下须发出朋肯声，这才是汉震第一鼓。
English: When talking to Emperor Xuanzong about the drums, Song Yigang, who was appointed to the post of prime minister by Emperor Xuanzong, said: "Whether it is a drum made of Qingzhou stone powder or Lu Shanhua gong, it should be lightly tapped with the fingers and make a punk sound under the palm. This is the first drum of Han Zhen."

古文：且磉用石末花瓮，固是腰鼓。
现代文：而且必须是作柱下石墩用过的石末花瓮。
English: And it has to be the same stone that was used for the under-pillars.

古文：掌不朋肯声，是以手指，非羯鼓明矣。
现代文：腰鼓与羯鼓的区别再于：一手用槌击鼓，一手用掌抚鼓面，感觉不到朋肯声，一定是腰鼓，而不是羯鼓。
English: The difference between the waist drum and the gong drum is: one hand hits the drum with a mallet, one hand strokes the drum face with a palm. You can't feel the punk sound, it must be the waist drum, not the gong drum.

古文：璟又谓上曰：头如青山峰，手如白雨点，按此即羯鼓之能事。
现代文：宋璟又对玄宗皇帝说：头象青山峰，手如白雨点。能做到这两点就是击奏羯鼓的能手。
English: Song Tao also said to Emperor Xuanzong: "Your head is like a mountain peak, and your hands are like white raindrops. If you can do these two things, you are a good player of the gong and drum."

古文：山峰取不动，雨点取其急。
现代文：头如青山峰，是说击鼓人头不能动。手如白雨点，是说击鼓人击的急促如雨下。
English: The head is like a mountain peak, which means that the drummer's head cannot move. The hands are like white raindrops, which means that the drummer's beat is as rapid as rain.

古文：玄宗与璟兼善两鼓也，而羯鼓偏好，以其比汉震稍雅细焉。
现代文：唐玄宗和宋璟都善于击奏这两种鼓，而尤其偏爱羯鼓。认为羯鼓比汉震鼓较为雅细秀气。
English: Both Tang Xuan Zong and Song Xuan were good at playing these two kinds of drums, but they especially preferred the gong drum. They thought that the gong drum was more elegant and beautiful than the Chinese drum.

古文：开府之家悉传之。
现代文：宋璟家世代相传都爱击鼓。
English: From generation to generation, the Song family loved to play the drums.

古文：东都留守郑叔明祖母，即开府之女。
现代文：东都洛阳留守郑明叔的祖母，就是宋璟家的女儿。
English: Uncle Zheng's grandmother, who stayed behind in Luoyang, the eastern capital, was the daughter of the Song Yi family.

古文：令尊贤里郑氏第有小楼，即宋夫人习鼓之所也。
现代文：现今，洛阳尊贤里郑家宅第里还有一座小楼，就是郑明叔这位祖母当年练习击鼓的地方啊！
English: Nowadays, there is still a small building in the third floor of the Zheng family residence in Luoyang, where Uncle Zheng Ming, the grandmother, used to practice drumming!

古文：李龟年
现代文：李龟年
English: The Year of the Tortoise

古文：李龟年善羯鼓，玄宗问卿打多少杖。
现代文：李龟年善击羯鼓。一次玄宗皇帝问他：卿打折了多少鼓杖？
English: Emperor Xuanzong once asked him, "How many drumsticks did you sell?"

古文：对曰：臣打五十杖讫。
现代文：回答说：臣至今已打折了五十只鼓杖。
English: He replied, "I have already discounted fifty drumsticks."

古文：上曰：汝殊未，我打却三竖柜也。
现代文：皇上说：你这还不算特用功夫。我已打折了三立柜啦！
English: The emperor said, "You don't have to work very hard. I've already discounted the three-tiered cabinet!"

古文：后数年，又闻打一竖柜，因锡一拂枚羯鼓卷。
现代文：数年后，听说玄宗皇帝又打折了一立柜鼓杖。因此，用铁铸一拂枚羯鼓卷。
English: A few years later, Emperor Xuanzong was rumored to have discounted a stand-up drumstick. Therefore, a whisk of iron was used to cast a gong drum roll.

古文：曹王皋
现代文：曹王皋
English: To wit: a flat, uniform mirror.

古文：嗣曹王皋有巧思，精于器用。
现代文：曹王李皋有巧思，非常精通各种器具古玩。
English: Cao Wang Lijun has a clever mind and is very familiar with all kinds of antique tools.

古文：为荆州节度使，有羁旅士人怀二卷，欲求通谒。
现代文：李皋任荆州节度使时，有一位暂居这里的有知识的人，带着二付制做羯鼓用的卷，请求通报求见。
English: When Li Qian was appointed as the Jingzhou Festival envoy, there was a knowledgeable person who temporarily lived here, with a second-hand drum roll, requesting to be notified and consulted.

古文：先启于宾府，观者讶之曰：岂足尚耶。
现代文：这位知识人将两副卷先打开给李皋的幕宾们看。看的人惊讶地说：这种平常的卷，还用给节度使看啊！
English: The intellectual opened the first two sets of volumes to the guests of Li Wei. The onlookers were surprised and said, "This ordinary volume is also used for the festival!"

古文：士曰：但启之，尚书当解矣。
现代文：这位知识人说：但请通报。节度使看了它们，一定会认出来的。
English: The intellectual said: "But let me know. The moderator will recognize them when he sees them."

古文：及见。皋捧而叹曰：不意今日获逢至宝。
现代文：待到通报后，李皋见到了这两副卷，捧视很久，赞叹地说： 没想到今天能获逢最珍贵的宝物！ 
English: After the announcement, Li Yan saw the two volumes, looked at them for a long time, and said with admiration: I didn't expect to get the most precious treasure today!

古文：指其刚匀之状，宾坐唯唯，或腹非之。
现代文：接着，指出这两副卷制做的钢硬均匀，是用钢铁精炼细卷而成的。
English: Next, it was pointed out that the steel of the two coils was uniformly hard and was made of refined steel coils.

古文：皋曰：诸公未必信。
现代文：在座的宾客点头称是，或心里不相信也不表现出来。
English: The guests present nodded yes, or did not believe in their hearts and did not show it.

古文：命取食袢，自选其极平者。
现代文：李皋说： 诸位不一定相信。
English: Li Wei said, "You may not believe it.

古文：遂重二卷於柈心，以油注卷满，而油不浸漏，相盖契际也。
现代文：请取来食盘一用。 待食盘取来后，李皋亲自挑选出特别平整的食盘，将两卷重叠置放在食盘上，让人将食油顷入卷中，直到注满为止。油一点也没有渗漏出来，是以证明卷与食盘相合得一点缝隙没有。
English: After retrieving the tray, Li Yan personally selected a particularly flat tray, placed two overlapping rolls on the tray, and asked the person to pour the cooking oil into the roll until it was full. The oil did not leak out at all, proving that there was no gap between the roll and the tray.

古文：皋曰：此必开元天宝中供御卷，不然无以至此。
现代文：李皋说： 这两付羯鼓卷定然是开元、天宝年间，向朝廷供奉的御卷。不然没有这么高质量的好卷。 
English: Li Wei said, "These two sets of gongs and drums are certainly the imperial rolls presented to the imperial court during the Kaigen and Tenpo eras. Otherwise, there are no good rolls of such high quality.

古文：问其所自，客曰：先人在黔，得于高力士家。
现代文：李皋问献卷的这位知识人： 你这两付卷从哪里得到的？ 献卷人回答说： 我的先人在黔中，从当年玄宗皇帝的大太监高力士家得到的。 
English: Li Zhe asked the intellectual who donated the scroll: Where did you get these two scrolls? The donor replied: My ancestors got them from the family of Gao Lixi, the Grand Eunuch of the Emperor Xuanzong, in Shizhong.

古文：众方深伏。李琬
现代文：众位宾客幕僚这才佩服曹王李皋的眼力。李琬
English: All the guests and staff members admired Cao Wang Lijun's vision. Lijun walked up.

古文：广德中，蜀客前双流县丞李琬者亦能之。调集至长安，居务本里。
现代文：唐代宗广德年间，蜀人，前双流县丞李琬也能击奏羯鼓，朝庭将他上调到京都长安，住在务本里。
English: During the reign of Emperor Zong Guangde in the Tang Dynasty, the Shu people, the former Shu-Ryu County Warlord Li Xi, could also play the gong drum, and the Imperial Court transferred him to Kyoto Chang'an, living in Rusumoto.

古文：尝夜闻羯鼓，曲颇工妙。
现代文：有一天夜里，李琬忽闻羯鼓声，曲调非常工稳绝妙。
English: One night, Li Yao suddenly heard the sound of gongs and drums. The tune was very steady and wonderful.

古文：于月下步寻，至一小宅，门户极卑隘。
现代文：于是踏月循声寻去，走到一幢小院，院门朽旧狭隘。
English: So he followed the sound of the footsteps of the moon and found a small courtyard with an old and narrow gate.

古文：叩门请谒，谓鼓工曰：君所击者，岂非耶婆色鸡乎？
现代文：叩门进入院内，对击鼓的人说： 你击的曲子不是耶婆色鸡吗？
English: Knocking on the door, he entered the yard and said to the drummer: "Isn't the tune you're playing a yakitori chicken?"

古文：虽至精能，而无尾何也？
现代文：虽然击奏得极准确，怎么没结尾呢？ 
English: Although the stroke is extremely accurate, why is there no end to it?

古文：工大异之曰：君固知音者，此事无有知。
现代文：击鼓的人大为吃惊，说： 你一定也是个懂得音律的人。为什么没有结尾，我也不知道。
English: The drummer was surprised and said, "You must also be a man of music. I don't know why it doesn't end."

古文：某太常工人也，祖父传此艺，尤能此曲。
现代文：我本是太常府里的一个工匠，击鼓这门技艺是祖父传给我们的。我特别能击刚才这首曲子。
English: I used to be a craftsman in Taijōfu, drumming is a skill that was passed down to us from my grandfather, and I am particularly skilled at playing the piece I just played.

古文：近者张儒入长安，其家流散，父没河西，此曲遂绝。
现代文：近来，因为张儒进入京都长安，我们全家流散，父亲失落在河西，这首曲子的曲谱也丢失了。
English: Recently, because Zhang Ru entered Kyoto Chang'an, our whole family was scattered, my father was lost in Hexi, and the score of this piece was also lost.

古文：今但按旧谱数本寻之，竟无结尾之声，因夜夜求之也。
现代文：现在我查找了几本旧曲谱，来找寻这曲鼓曲，竟然没有结尾的谱子。因此才夜夜击鼓寻索。 
English: Now I've been looking through some old books to find the score for this drum piece, and there's no end to it, so I've been drumming all night.

古文：琬曰：曲下意尽乎？
现代文：李琬问： 曲子的意思尽没有呢？ 
English: Li Wei asked: Is the meaning of the song complete?

古文：工曰：尽。
现代文：击鼓人说： 意已经尽了。 
English: The drummer said, "I've had enough.

古文：琬曰：意尽即曲尽。
现代文：李琬说： 意思尽了也就是曲子尽了。
English: Li Wei said: When the meaning is exhausted, the music is also exhausted.

古文：又何索焉？
现代文：你又上哪找去呢？ 
English: Where are you going to look for it?

古文：工曰：奈声不尽何？
现代文：击鼓人说： 怎奈鼓声未尽啊！ 
English: And the drummer said, "How is it that the sound of the drums is not exhausted!"

古文：琬曰：可言矣，夫曲有如此者，须以他曲解之，方可尽其声也。
现代文：李琬说： 说的对。鼓曲中有这样的，须用它曲解，方能使鼓声结束。
English: Li Yao said, "That's right. There is such a thing in the drum music, and it must be distorted in order to end the drumming.

古文：夫耶婆娑鸡当用屈柘急遍解。
现代文：耶婆娑鸡这首鼓曲，当用屈柘急遍解，就可以了。 
English: If you play the drum song "Yaba's Chicken Dance" in a fast rhythm, it will be fine.

古文：工如所教，果相谐协，声意皆尽。
现代文：击鼓人感激得流着眼泪向李琬致谢。第二天，立即报告太常府寺卿。
English: The drummer was so grateful that he shed tears to thank Li Qian. The next day, he immediately reported to the Grand Master.

古文：工泣而谢之。即言于寺卿，奏为主簿。
现代文：太常寺卿听了击鼓人的报告后，向朝庭奏请让李琬任主簿，朝庭批准了。
English: After listening to the drummer's report, the Lord of Taiji Temple asked the Imperial Court to allow Li Zhen to be the chief accountant, and the Imperial Court approved.

古文：后累官至太常少卿宗正卿。
现代文：后来，李琬连续升迁到太常少卿宗正卿。
English: Later, Li Xi was successively promoted to Taizang Shaoqing and Zong Zhengqing.

古文：杜鸿渐
现代文：杜鸿渐
English: Du Hongzhan

古文：代宗朝，宰相杜鸿渐亦能羯鼓。
现代文：唐代宗李豫当朝时，宰相杜鸿渐也能击奏羯鼓。
English: During the reign of Emperor Liyu of the Tang Dynasty, Prime Minister Du Hongyan could also play the gong.

古文：永泰中为三副元帅西川节度使。
现代文：永泰年间，杜鸿渐担任三州副元帅兼领西川节度使。
English: During the Yongtai era, Du Hongxian served as vice-marshal of the Three Provinces and the chief of the Nishikawa military governor.

古文：至成都，李琬有削杖者在蜀，一杖献鸿渐。
现代文：到成都，太常少卿李琬为父母居丧时使用的丧杖还在蜀中老家，送给杜鸿渐一根。
English: When he arrived in Chengdu, the funeral cane used by the too-frequent Shaoqing Li Jie for the funeral of his parents was still at his hometown in Shuzhong, and he gave one to Du Hongqian.

古文：鸿得之，示与众曰：此尤物也，当衣衾中收贮积时矣。
现代文：杜鸿渐得到后，拿出来给众位幕僚宾客观赏，说： 这是很难得的东西啊。 
English: After receiving the award, Du Hongxian took it out to give the guests an objective award, saying, "This is something that is hard to get.

古文：匠曰：某与脊沟中养者十年。
现代文：它大概在衣被里存放多年了。一木工说： 我在脊沟中养了一根杖，养了十年了。 
English: It had probably been stored in the quilt for years. A carpenter said: "I've had a cane in the gutter for ten years.

古文：及出蜀至利州西界，望嘉驿路入汉川矣。
现代文：待到离开蜀地，到了利州西边边界，就可以看到嘉驿大道蜿蜒进入汉川了。
English: After leaving Shudi and arriving at the western border of Lizhou, you can see Jiayu Avenue winding into the Han River.

古文：自西南来，始会嘉陵江，颇有山水景致。
现代文：又有一条江水流入嘉陵江中，此地山川很可以让人观赏。
English: Another river flows into the Jialing River, and the mountains and rivers here are very beautiful.

古文：其夜月色又佳，乃与从事杨炎、杜悰辈登驿楼望江月。
现代文：是夜，月夜皎洁，山川空蒙，杜鸿渐与从事杨炎、杜悰等人登上驿楼欣赏江月，边饮酒边说： 现在，我们从艰难危险疑忌迫害里走出来。
English: It was night, the moon was bright, and the mountains and rivers were cloudy. Du Hongqian and other people engaged in Yangyan and Duyu climbed the mirage to enjoy the river and the moon, and said while drinking: Now, we have come out of the hardship, danger, suspicion and persecution.

古文：行酒宴语曰：今日出艰危猜迫，外即不辱命于朝廷，内即免中祸于微质。
现代文：对国家来说，我们此去不会辜负朝廷对我们的希望，对我们个人来说，可以免除因为微小的过失而带来的祸患。
English: For the country, we will not fail to live up to the hopes of the imperial court, and for us personally, we can avoid the disasters brought about by minor mistakes.

古文：即保此安步，又瞰此殊境，安得不自贺乎。
现代文：既保证了我们的平安，今晚又能观赏到这么好的美景，我们怎么能不自我庆贺一下呢？ 
English: How can we not celebrate ourselves, having secured our safety and having such a beautiful view tonight?

古文：遂命家僮取鼓与板笛，以所得杖奏数曲。
现代文：于是，命令随身仆僮取来羯鼓与檀板、笛子。杜鸿渐亲自用李琬家人送给他的丧杖制成的槌杖击鼓，演奏了几支鼓曲。
English: Therefore, he ordered his attendant to fetch a gong, a sandalboard and a flute. Du Hongyan personally beat the drums with a mallet made of a cane given to him by Li Yu's family, and played several drum songs.

古文：四山猨鸟，皆惊飞噭走。
现代文：四外山中的猨猱、鸟雀听到鼓声后，鸣叫着飞散奔跑。
English: When the crickets and birds in the mountains heard the sound of the drums, they chirped and flew away.

古文：从事悉异之曰：昔夔之搏拊，百兽舞庭，此岂远耶。
现代文：随同的从事都大为吃惊，说：只有古时候的夔旷击奏搏拊时，群兽在院中起舞。但这毕竟是很遥远的传说了。
English: The attendant practitioners were very surprised and said, "Only in ancient times, when there was a battle, the animals danced in the courtyard, but this is a very distant legend."

古文：鸿渐曰：若某于此，稍曾致力，犹未臻妙，尚能及是。
现代文：杜鸿渐说：象我刚才在这儿只是稍稍用点力气，击奏出的鼓声还未达到完美的程度，就有这样的效果。
English: Du Hongyan said: As I just used a little bit of strength here, the drum beat has not yet reached a perfect level, it has such an effect.

古文：况至圣御天，贤臣考乐，飞走之类，何有不感。
现代文：何况象夔旷这样的乐圣击奏的是天乐，鸟兽听到乐声飞翔奔走舞蹈，这种事情是很可能会有的。
English: What's more, it's quite possible that a sacred music such as the Xuanwu will be played by heavenly music, and birds and beasts will fly and dance when they hear the music.

古文：因言此有别墅近花岩阁，每遇风景清明，即时或登阁奏此。
现代文：杜鸿渐又讲出一件事：这个地方有座别墅，它近旁有一座花岩阁，每当风清景明的时候，我登阁击奏羯鼓。
English: Du Hongyan also said one thing: there is a villa in this place, and there is a granite pavilion near it. Whenever the wind is clear and bright, I go to the pavilion to play the gong drum.

古文：初见群羊牧于川下，忽数头踯躅不已，某不谓之以鼓然也。
现代文：当时，山坡下面散放着一群羊，忽然有几头羊来回不停地走动。我还没有想到这是羯鼓声使它们这样的。
English: At that time, there was a flock of sheep scattered at the bottom of the hillside, and suddenly several sheep kept walking back and forth. I hadn't thought that it was the beating of the drums that made them like that.

古文：及止鼓亦止，复鼓之亦复然，遂以疾徐高下而节之，无不应之而变。
现代文：待看到羊停止不走了正是我停止不击鼓的时候；待我再击鼓，羊又跟着走动时，于是我忽疾忽缓、忽高忽低变化节奏地敲击羯鼓。
English: When I saw that the sheep did not move, that was when I stopped beating the drum; when I beat the drum again, and the sheep moved again, then I beat the gong with a changing rhythm.

古文：旋有二犬，自其家走而吠之。
现代文：再看山下走动的群羊都在跟着我的鼓声节奏地变化而变化。
English: Look at the flocks of sheep moving down the mountain, they are changing with the rhythm of my drums.

古文：及群羊侧，遂渐止声仰首，若有所听。
现代文：不一会儿，有两只狗从它的家门走出来吼叫了几声。等走到羊群旁边，渐渐不吼叫了，仰起脖颈似乎在听鼓声。
English: After a while, two dogs came out from the gate of his house and barked a few times. When they came to the sheep, they gradually stopped barking and craned their necks as if listening to the drums.

古文：少选，又复宛颈摇尾，亦从而变态。是知率舞固无难矣。
现代文：又过了一会儿，这两只狗开始转动脖颈，摇摆尾巴，这不是随着鼓声蹈舞起来又是什么呢？
English: After a while, the two dogs began to turn their necks and wag their tails. What if they were dancing to the beat of a drum?

古文：近士林中无习之者，唯仆射韩皋善，亦不甚露。
现代文：近些年来，在知识人圈中很少有学习击奏羯鼓的人了。唯有仆射韩皋击得一手好羯鼓但他藏而不露，很少见他击过。
English: In recent years, there have been very few people in the intellectual community who have learned to play the gong. The only one who can play the gong well is Hanzhao, but he hides it, and it is rare to see him play.

古文：为鄂州节度使时，闻于黄鹤楼一两习而已。
现代文：只是在他任鄂州节度使时，听说在黄鹤楼上击奏过一二次而已。
English: However, it is said that he played the flute once or twice on the top floor of the Yellow Crane Building when he was the delegate of the Ezhou Festival.

古文：铜鼓
现代文：铜鼓
English: Brass Drums

古文：蛮夷之乐，有铜鼓焉。
现代文：少数民族的乐器中，有铜鼓。
English: Among the musical instruments of ethnic minorities, there are brass drums.

古文：形如腰鼓，而一头有面，鼓面圆二尺许。
现代文：铜鼓的形状很像腰鼓，一头有面，鼓面圆约二尺来的。
English: The shape of the brass drum is very much like a waist drum, with a face at one end and a drum face about two feet in circumference.

古文：面与身连，全用铜铸。
现代文：鼓面与鼓身相连，全是用铜铸成。
English: The face of the drum is connected to the body of the drum and is made entirely of copper.

古文：其身遍有虫鱼花草之状，通体均匀，厚二分以来。
现代文：铜鼓身上都饰着花纹，有花、草、虫、鱼等各种动植物的形状。铜鼓通体上下薄厚均匀，约二分厚。
English: The body of the copper drum is decorated with patterns, with the shapes of flowers, grasses, insects, fish and other animals and plants. The entire body of the copper drum is uniformly thin, about two minutes thick.

古文：炉铸之妙，实为奇巧。
现代文：可见它铸造得非常精妙奇巧。
English: You can see that it was cast very delicately and skillfully.

古文：击之响亮，不下鸣鼍。
现代文：铜鼓敲击发出的声音异常响亮，就像鼍鸣。
English: The sound made by the beating of the brass drum is unusually loud, like a gong.

古文：贞元中，骠国进乐，有玉螺铜鼓。
现代文：唐德宗贞元年间，骠国向朝庭进献乐器，其中有玉螺铜鼓一只。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Dezong of Tang, the State of Min presented musical instruments to the imperial court, one of which was a tambourine.

古文：即知南蛮酋首之家，皆有此鼓也。
现代文：由此可以知道：南方少数民族的头领家中，都有这种铜鼓啊。
English: From this we can see that the leaders of the southern ethnic minorities all have this kind of brass drum.

古文：张直方
现代文：张直方
English: by Zhang Naifang

古文：咸通末，幽州张直方贬龚州刺史。
现代文：唐懿宗咸通末年，幽州张直方被降职改任龚州刺史。
English: In the last years of the Tang Dynasty, Zhang Naofang of Yuzhou was demoted to the post of scribe of Yuzhou.

古文：到任后，修葺州城，因掘土，得一铜鼓。
现代文：他上任后，修整城墙，掘土时，挖出一面铜鼓。
English: After he took office, he repaired the city wall, and when digging, he dug out a bronze drum.

古文：满任，载以归京。
现代文：他任满后，带着这面铜鼓回到京城长安。
English: After his term of office ended, he returned to the capital Chang'an with this bronze drum.

古文：到襄汉，以为无用之物，遂舍延寿庆院，用大木鱼悬于斋室。今见存焉。
现代文：途经襄汉认为这面铜鼓没有什么大用，于是舍给延寿庆寺院，用一根大绳将它悬挂在斋室中，直到今天还挂在那里。
English: Passing through Xianghan, he thought that this bronze drum was of no great use, so he gave it to the Yanjuqing Temple and hung it in the prayer room with a large rope, where it still hangs today.

古文：郑续
现代文：郑续
English: To be continued

古文：僖宗朝，郑续镇番禺日，有林蔼者为高州太守。
现代文：唐僖宗临朝时，郑续镇守番禺期间，有个叫林蔼的人任高州太守。
English: When the Tang Dynasty was in power, a man named Lin A was appointed governor of Gaozhou while Zheng Lian Zhen was governor of Panyu.

古文：有牧儿因放牛，闻田中有蛤鸣，牧童遂捕之。
现代文：有一个牧童放牛时，听到田地中有蛤蟆叫。
English: A shepherd boy was herding cattle when he heard a rooster crowing in the field.

古文：蛤跳入一穴，掘之深大，即蛮酋塚也。
现代文：这个牧童去捕捉，蛤蟆跳入一个洞穴，越掘越深越大，原来是一个当地少数民族头领的坟墓。
English: The shepherd boy went to catch it, and the baboon jumped into a cave, digging deeper and deeper, which turned out to be the grave of a local ethnic minority leader.

古文：蛤乃无踪，穴中得一铜鼓。其色翠绿，土蚀数处损缺。
现代文：蛤蟆已经逃得无影无踪了，却见墓穴中一面铜鼓，颜色翠绿，有几处让土腐蚀得有些缺损。
English: Xing had already escaped without a trace, but he saw a copper drum in the tomb, green in color, with some defects caused by soil corrosion.

古文：其上隐起，多铸蛙鼍之状。
现代文：铜鼓上面凸着各种纹饰，多数都是金线蛙的形状。
English: The brass drum is embossed with a variety of decorations, most of which are in the shape of a golden frog.

古文：疑其鸣哈，即鼓精也。
现代文：人们怀疑牧童见到的那个鸣叫的蛤蟆，就是鼓精啊。
English: It is suspected that the chirping crickets the herd boy saw were drum queens.

古文：遂状其缘由，纳于广帅，悬于武库，今尚存焉。
现代文：于是，将这面铜鼓交给郑续，并讲述了得鼓的经过。郑续将这面铜鼓悬挂在武器库内，到今天还存在。
English: So he handed the bronze drum to Zheng Zheng and told the story of how he got it. Zheng Zheng hung the bronze drum in the armory and it still exists today.

古文：琵琶
现代文：琵琶
English: Pipa ensemble

古文：罗黑黑
现代文：罗黑黑
English: Luo Heihe

古文：太宗时，西国进一胡善弹琵琶，作一曲，琵琶弦拨倍粗。
现代文：唐太宗时，西域国进献给朝廷一个胡人弹奏一手好琵琶，当场弹奏一曲。胡人的弦拨，比一般的琵琶粗一倍。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taizong of Tang, the Western Regions Province presented to the imperial court a Wu person to play a good lute and play a piece on the spot. The string of the Wu person is twice as thick as that of an ordinary lute.

古文：上每不欲番人胜中国，乃置酒高会，使罗黑黑隔帷听之，一遍而得。
现代文：太宗皇帝每次都不愿意胡人胜过国人，于是在宴请来朝见的这位胡使时，暗中将罗黑黑藏在隔帷后面，让她偷听这个胡人弹奏琵琶。
English: Emperor Taizong didn't want the Hu people to win over the Chinese people every time, so when he invited the Hu envoy to the imperial court, he secretly hid Luo Heihe behind the curtain, and let her eavesdrop on the Hu people playing the lute.

古文：谓胡人曰：此曲吾宫人能之。
现代文：当胡人弹奏完一遍后，唐太宗对胡使说：这只曲子，我宫中也有人能弹奏。
English: When Hu Ren finished playing it once, Tang Taizong said to Hu: "Someone in my palace can play this piece."

古文：取大琵琶，遂于帷下。令黑黑弹之，不遗一字。
现代文：于是取来大琵琶，放在帷幕下边，让罗黑黑当场弹奏刚才胡人弹奏的这支曲子，不漏一个音符。
English: So he took a large lute, placed it under the curtain, and asked Luo Heihe to play the piece that Hu Ren had just played on the spot, without missing a note.

古文：胡人谓是宫女也，惊叹辞去。
现代文：胡使问： 皇上，弹奏琵琶的这位姑娘就是您的宫女吗！ 惊叹着告辞。
English: Hu Zhi asked, "Emperor, is this girl who plays the lute your concubine?" He exclaimed in farewell.

古文：西国闻之，降者数十国。
现代文：西域各族胡人听到这个事情后，立即有几十个国家归降了唐朝。
English: After the Hu people of all ethnic groups in the western region heard about this, dozens of countries immediately surrendered to the Tang Dynasty.

古文：裴洛儿
现代文：裴洛儿
English: Pelor is back

古文：贞观中，弹琵琶裴洛儿始废拨用手，今俗所谓抽琵琶是也。杨妃
现代文：唐太宗贞观年间，弹琵琶的能手裴洛儿第一个停止使用弹拨而用手指来弹奏琵琶，就是现在人们说的抽琵琶。杨妃
English: During the reign of Emperor Taizong of Tang Dynasty, Pei Lo'er, a talented pipa player, was the first to stop using the plectrum and play the pipa with her fingers, which is now called playing the pipa.

古文：开元中，有中官白秀贞自蜀使回，得琵琶以献。
现代文：唐玄宗开元年间，宫中女官白秀贞出使蜀地归来，得到一只琵琶进献给杨妃。
English: During the first year of the reign of Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty, court lady Bai Xiuzhen sent an envoy to return to Shu and received a lute to present to Empress Yang.

古文：其槽逻皆桫檀为之，温润如玉，光耀可鉴。
现代文：这只琵琶的槽逻是桫檀木作的，像美玉一样温润晶莹，光洁得可以当镜子照人。
English: This lute's groove is made of ebony sandalwood, warm and crystal clear like a jewel, so bright that it can be used as a mirror.

古文：有金缕红文，影成双凤。
现代文：上面有金缕红纹，呈双凤图案。
English: There are red streaks on it, showing a double phoenix pattern.

古文：杨妃每抱是琵琶，奏于梨园。
现代文：杨妃经常怀抱着这只琵琶在梨园弹奏。
English: Yangfei often cradles this lute in her arms and plays it in the Pear Garden.

古文：音韵凄清，飘如云外。
现代文：声音清丽凄宛，就像从云外飘来的似的。
English: The sound is so clear and beautiful, it's like it's coming from outside the clouds.

古文：而诸王贵主，自虢国以下，竞为贵妃琵琶弟子。
现代文：诸位王公公主，虢国夫人以下，争着作杨妃的弟子，跟她学习琵琶。
English: All of you princes and princesses, from Mrs. Shingoku on down, compete to be Yangfei's disciple and learn the lute with her.

古文：每受曲毕，皆广有进献。
现代文：杨妃每教授一支曲子，都能收到很多进献的礼品。
English: Every time Yangfei teaches a piece of music, she receives a lot of gifts.

古文：段师
现代文：段师
English: Duan Division

古文：古琵琶弦用鹍鸡筋。
现代文：古时候，用鹍鸡筋作琵琶弦。
English: In ancient times, the strings of the lute were made from chicken giblets.

古文：开元中，段师能弹琵琶，用皮弦。
现代文：唐玄宗开元年间，段师能弹奏琵琶，改用皮弦。
English: During the first year of Emperor Xuanzong of Tang Dynasty, Duan Shi was able to play the lute, but he used leather strings instead.

古文：贺怀智破拨弹之，不能成声。
现代文：贺怀智用破拨的方法弹奏，不能奏成乐曲。
English: He Huai Zhi used the broken dial method to play, and could not play a piece of music.

古文：汉中王瑀
现代文：汉中王瑀
English: Hanzhong Wang Yao

古文：汉中王瑀见康昆仑弹琵琶，云琵声多，琶声少，亦未可弹五十四弦大弦也。
现代文：汉中王李瑀，观看康昆仑弹奏琵琶，说：你弹奏的琵音多，琶音少，也未弹五十四弦大弦啊。
English: Li Qiye, the king of the Han Dynasty, watched Kang Kunlun play the lute and said, "You play more lute and less lute, and you don't play the fifty-four-stringed lute."

古文：自下而上谓之琵，自上而下谓之琶。
现代文：自下而上弹拨叫琵，自上而下弹拨叫琶。
English: The pipa is played from the bottom up, and the lute is played from the top down.

古文：韦应物
现代文：韦应物
English: Wei Ying thing

古文：韦应物为苏州刺史，有属官，因建中之乱，得国工康昆仑琴瑟琵琶。
现代文：韦应物在苏州任刺史时，有一位下属，在建中之乱中得到国手康昆仑的琴、瑟、琵琶。
English: When Wei Yingwen was in Suzhou, there was a subordinate who got the national player Kang Kunlun's qin, ser and lute during the Jianzhong Rebellion.

古文：至是送官，表进入内。
现代文：后来送交官府，韦应物为他向朝廷进表，送入皇宫大内。
English: Later, it was sent to the government, and Wei Yingwen presented it to the imperial court for him, and it was sent to the Imperial Palace.

古文：宋沇
现代文：宋沇
English: Song Tao

古文：宋开府孙沇有音律之学。
现代文：宰相宋璟的孙子宋沇对音律学很有造诣。
English: The grandson of Prime Minister Song Tao, Song Tao was very accomplished in music theory.

古文：贞元中，进乐书二卷，德宗览而嘉焉。
现代文：唐德宗贞元年间，宋沇进献乐书二卷，唐德中读后很是赞赏。
English: During the reign of Emperor Dezong of the Tang Dynasty in the first year of the Tang Dynasty, Song Xi Jin dedicated two volumes of music books, which was highly appreciated after being read in Tang De Middle School.

古文：又知是璟之孙，遂召赐对坐，与论音乐，喜。
现代文：又得知宋沇即是宋璟的孙子，于是诏见宋沇进宫坐在对面，跟他谈论音律，谈得非常高兴。
English: He also learned that Song Xuan was Song Xuan's grandson, so he was very happy to see Song Xuan enter the palace, sit opposite him, and talk to him about music.

古文：数日，又召至宣徽，张乐使观焉。
现代文：过了几天，德宗皇帝又召见宋沇到宣微院，让乐工们奏乐给他听。
English: A few days later, Emperor Dezong summoned Song Xi to the Xuanwu Academy and asked the musicians to play music for him.

古文：曰：有舛误乖滥，悉可言之。
现代文：说： 有错误不符合音律的地方，你尽可以说出来。 
English: He said: "If there are mistakes that are out of tune, you can say it.

古文：沇曰：容臣与乐官商榷讲论，具状条奏。
现代文：宋沇说： 请允许臣与乐工们商讨议论后，列出条条来给您看。 
English: Song Tao said: Please allow me to list the articles for you after discussing with the musicians.

古文：上使宣徽使教坊与乐官参议。
现代文：德宗皇帝听了后，指派宣微院和宫内教坊的乐官参加讨论。
English: After listening, Emperor Dezong assigned music officials from the Xuanwu Academy and the Imperial Palace Music School to participate in the discussion.

古文：数日然后奏进，乐工多言沇不解声律，不审节拍，兼又瞆疾，不可议乐。
现代文：几天以后，一些参加讨论的乐官进奏德宗，说宋沇并不懂得乐理，不通晓节拍，他还有眼疾。因此，不能用这样的人评论音律。
English: A few days later, some of the musicians who took part in the discussion played into Dezong, saying that Song Tao did not understand music theory, did not know the beat, and that he had an eye disease. Therefore, it was not possible to use such a person to comment on the rhythm.

古文：上颇异之，又宣召见。
现代文：德宗皇帝感到诧异，又召见宋沇询问。
English: Emperor Dezong was surprised and summoned Song Jun to inquire.

古文：对曰：臣年老多疾，耳实失聪。
现代文：宋沇回答说：臣我的确年老多病，耳朵也确实聋了。
English: Song Tao replied, "It is true that I am old and sickly, and my ears are indeed deaf.

古文：若迨于音律，不至无业。
现代文：但是在评论音律方面，我还是可以做些事情的。
English: But I can still do something in terms of commenting on the music.

古文：上又使作乐，曲罢，问其得失，承禀舒迟，众工多笑之。
现代文：德宗皇帝又让乐工们演奏，一曲终了，询问宋沇：这次他们演奏得有什么长处与错误的地方？
English: Emperor Dezong asked the musicians to play again. At the end of the piece, he asked Song Tao: What were the strengths and weaknesses of their performance this time?

古文：沇顾笑，忿怒作色，奏曰：曲虽妙，其间有不可者。
现代文：宋沇看到乐工们讥笑他，立刻怒容满面，回答德宗皇帝说：演奏得虽然很精彩，但是演奏的乐工中间有不适合再在这儿干下去的人。
English: When Song Tao saw the musicians mocking him, his face immediately filled with anger. He replied to Emperor Dezong, "Although the performance was wonderful, there were musicians who were not fit to continue working here.

古文：上惊问之，即指一琵琶云：此人大逆戕忍，不日间即抵法，不宜在至尊前。
现代文：德宗皇帝惊异地问：都是哪些人？宋沇即指着一个演奏琵琶的乐工说：这个人犯下了大逆不道的罪刑，不久就会受到法律制裁的。因此，不适宜在皇上面前演奏。
English: Emperor Dezong asked in surprise, "Who are all these people?" Song Lan pointed to a musician playing the lute and said, "This person has committed a crime of high treason and will soon be punished by the law. Therefore, it is not appropriate to play in front of the emperor."

古文：又指一笙云：此人神魂已游墟墓，不可更令供奉。
现代文：又指一个吹笙的人，说：这个人的灵魂已经出窍了，现在正在一片墓地上闲游。
English: Referring to a braggart, he said: "This man's soul has left his body and is now wandering in a graveyard.

古文：上大骇焉，令主者潜伺察之。既而琵琶者为同侪告讦，称其六七年前，其父自缢，不得端由。即今按鞠，遂伏罪。
现代文：过了没多久，弹奏琵琶的那个乐工，同事告发他在六七年前，他父亲无缘无故就上吊死了，如今已被拘捕，并已认罪伏法。
English: Soon after, the pipa player, who was told by a colleague that his father had hanged himself for no reason six or seven years ago, was arrested and pleaded guilty.

古文：笙者乃忧恐不食，旬日而卒。
现代文：那个吹笙的乐工整天忧愁不吃饭，过了十多天果然死了。
English: The musician who played the bagpipes was so sad that he didn't eat all day. After more than ten days, he died.

古文：上转加钦重，面赐章服，累召对。
现代文：德宗皇帝更加敬重宋沇，当面赐与他赤、白相间，绣有日、月、星、辰的礼服。并屡次召见宋沉跟皇上对坐。
English: Emperor Dezong paid more respect to Song Sheng, and personally gave him a red and white dress embroidered with the sun, moon, stars, and hours. He also repeatedly summoned Song Sheng to sit opposite the emperor.

古文：每令察乐，乐工悉惴恐胁息，不敢正视。
现代文：每次让宋沇审察演奏，乐工们都惴惴不安，敛声屏气，不敢正视宋沇。
English: Every time they let Song Tao examine the performance, the musicians are uneasy, hold their breath, and dare not face Song Tao.

古文：沇懼罹祸，辞病而退。
现代文：宋沇看到这种情形，怕遭至祸患，于是借着身体有病为由，引退了。
English: Song Tao saw this situation and was afraid of suffering a disaster, so he retired on the grounds that he was ill.

古文：皇甫直
现代文：皇甫直
English: Emperor Fuzhong

古文：蜀将皇甫直别音律。
现代文：蜀将皇甫直善于识别音律。
English: Shu is good at recognizing musical rhythms.

古文：击陶器，能知时月。
现代文：他敲击陶器，便能判断出这件陶器是哪年哪月烧制的。
English: He tapped the pottery and was able to determine the year and month in which the pottery was fired.

古文：好弹琵琶。
现代文：他尤其喜爱弹奏琵琶。
English: He is particularly fond of playing the reed pipe.

古文：元和中，尝造一调，乘凉，临水池弹之。
现代文：唐宪宗元和年间，皇甫直谱写了一支曲子，乘凉的时候，在水塘旁边弹奏。
English: During the reign of Emperor Zong Yuan of the Tang Dynasty, the emperor wrote a piece of music and played it next to the pond when it was cool.

古文：本黄钟而声入蕤宾，因更弦，再三奏之，声尤蕤宾也。
现代文：本来曲子用的是黄钟阳律，弹奏出来的琴声却入到蕤宾阳律去了。他调弦，再三弹奏，发出的乐音还是蕤宾。
English: Originally, the piece used the Huangzhongyang rhythm, but the piano sound that came out of it went into the Zhibinyang rhythm. He tuned the strings, played it again and again, and the music sound that came out was still Zhibin.

古文：直甚惑不悦，自意不祥。
现代文：皇甫直特别疑惑不解，心中暗自认为：这恐怕是不祥的征兆啊。
English: Empress Dowager Cixi was particularly puzzled and secretly thought to herself: This is probably an ominous sign.

古文：隔日又奏于池上，声如故。
现代文：隔了一天，皇甫直又在池塘旁边弹奏这支曲子，声音跟前天一样。
English: A day later, the emperor played the piece again next to the pond, and the sound was the same as the day before.

古文：试弹于他处，则黄钟也。
现代文：他试着在别处弹奏，就又是黄钟阳律。
English: If he tries to play somewhere else, it's the same.

古文：直因切调蕤宾，夜复鸣于池上，觉近岸波动，有物激水如鱼跳，及下弦则没矣。
现代文：皇甫直急于调去蕤宾，当天夜晚又在池塘边调试不停。忽然觉得靠近岸边的水波在涌动，有个东西激扑着水波象鱼在水中跳跃。待到他松下琴弦就没有声息了。
English: The crown prince was in a hurry to transfer his guests, and that night he kept tuning the strings on the edge of the pond. Suddenly, he felt that the water waves near the shore were surging, and something pounced on the water waves, making the elephant fish jump in the water. When he loosened the strings, there was no sound.

古文：直遂集客车水，竭池穷泥，索之数日，泥下丈余，得铁一片，乃方响蕤宾铁也。王沂
现代文：于是，皇甫直召集庄客从池塘里往外车水。将池塘的水车干了又挖泥，折腾了好几天，在塘泥下面深有一丈的地方，挖到一片铁。这片铁，原来是一只古代磬类乐器中，名为方响的蕤宾铁。王沂
English: As a result, Emperor Fuzhi called on the villagers to draw water from the pond. After drying the water wheel of the pond and digging the mud, they tossed and turned for several days. In a place deep below the pond mud, they dug a piece of iron. This piece of iron turned out to be an ancient cymbal-like musical instrument called the square-sounding cymbal.

古文：王沂者平生不解弦管。
现代文：有个叫王沂的人，从打生下来到现在也没接触过弦、管等乐器。
English: There is a man named Wang Qian, who has never touched strings, pipes and other musical instruments since he was born.

古文：忽旦睡，至夜乃寤。
现代文：忽然有一天他在白天睡觉，一直睡到天黑透了，才醒过来。
English: Suddenly one day he fell asleep during the day and slept until it was completely dark before he woke up.

古文：索琵琶弦之，成数曲。
现代文：立即让人拿过琵琶来弹奏，一气弹了好几支曲子。
English: Immediately, someone took the lute to play, and several pieces were played at once.

古文：一名《雀啅蛇》，一名《胡王调》，一名《胡瓜苑》。
现代文：一支曲子名叫《雀啅蛇》，一支曲子叫《胡王调》，一支曲子叫《胡瓜苑》。
English: One piece is called "Sparrow Viper," one piece is called "Hu Wang Tune," and one piece is called "Cucumber Garden."

古文：人不识闻，听之者莫不流泪。
现代文：人们都没有听到过，从来不知道有这些曲子。
English: People haven't heard it, they never knew it was there.

古文：其妹请学之，乃教数声，须臾总忘，不复成曲。
现代文：但是听过王沂弹这些曲子的人，都被感染得不断流泪。王沂的妹妹要跟他学习弹奏这些曲子，他教弹数声，不一会又都忘了，再也弹不成曲子了。
English: But those who have heard Wang Yao play these pieces have been infected with tears. Wang Yao's sister wants to learn to play these pieces with him, he teaches several notes, and soon forgets them all, and can no longer play the piece.

古文：关别驾
现代文：关别驾
English: Don't drive through customs

古文：昭宗末，京都名娼妓儿，皆为强诸侯所有。
现代文：唐昭宗李晔末年。京都长安的一些有名的娼妓、歌妓，都让势力强大的诸侯们霸占去了。
English: In the last years of the reign of Emperor Li Zhaozong of the Tang Dynasty, some famous prostitutes and courtesans in Chang'an, Kyoto, were taken over by powerful lords.

古文：供奉弹琵琶乐工，号关别驾。小红者，小名也。
现代文：凭着善弹琵琶而侍奉皇上的一位女乐工，雅号关别驾，小名叫小红。
English: A female musician who served the emperor by virtue of her ability to play the lute. Her nickname was Guan Biejie, and her nickname was Xiaohong.

古文：梁太祖求之，既至，谓曰：尔解弹手不采桑乎。
现代文：后来成为梁太祖的朱温盘踞长安时，召见关别驾。关别贺赶到朱温那里，朱温说： 你这双弹奏琵琶的手不能采桑吧。 
English: When Zhu Wenpan, who later became Liang Taizu, was in Chang'an, he summoned Guan Bie He. Guan Bie He arrived at Zhu Wen's place, and Zhu Wen said, "You two lute-playing hands can't pick mulberry."

古文：关俛而奏之。
现代文：关别驾殷勤恭谨地为朱温弹奏一曲。
English: Guan Bie Di graciously played a song for Zhu Wen.

古文：及出，又为亲近者，俾其弹而饮酒。由是失意，不久而殂。
现代文：石潨用手指疾拂一下架弦的槽格，大声肆骂这些军校们说：我曾经在朝中宰相令狐绹府上作过供奉，今天老子高兴了，给你们这些臭当兵的弹奏一曲却没有人听。唉，可怜我这个名传京城的弹奏琵琶的国手哟！
English: Shi Hao whisked his finger across the groove of the string rack, and loudly scolded these military school students, saying: I once made an offering at the Foxtrot House ordered by the Prime Minister of the Imperial Court, and today Lao Zi was happy, but no one listened to the song I played for you stinking soldiers. Alas, pity me, the legendary pipa player from Beijing!

古文：复有琵琶石潨者号石司马，自言早为相国令狐绹见赏，俾与诸子涣、沨、连水边作名。乱后入蜀，不隶乐籍，多游诸大官家，皆以宾客待之。一日会军校数员，饮酒作欢，石潨以胡琴在坐非知因者，喧哗语笑，殊不倾听。潨乃扑檀槽而诟曰：某曾为中朝宰相供奉，今日与健儿弹而不我听，何其苦哉。于时识者叹讶之。
现代文：当时，在座饮酒中认识石潨的人，没有不为他的遭遇而惊讶叹息的。
English: At that time, there was no one who knew Ishizuka at the drinking party who was not surprised and saddened by what happened to him.

古文：王氏女
现代文：王氏女
English: Wang's daughter

古文：王蜀黔南节度使王保义，有女适荆南高从诲之子保节。
现代文：王建父子统治蜀中时，黔南节度使王保义，有个女儿嫁给荆南高从诲的儿子高保节。
English: When Wang Jian and his son ruled Shuzhong, the Southern Song Festival made Wang Baoyi famous, and there was a daughter who married Gao Baozi, the son of Gao Congyi of Jingnan.

古文：未行前，暂寄羽服。
现代文：未嫁到荆南前，暂时身着道服。
English: Before marrying Jing Nan, she temporarily dressed in a Taoist robe.

古文：性聪敏，善弹琵琶。
现代文：这位姑娘秉性聪慧，弹一手好琵琶。
English: This girl is intelligent and plays the lute well.

古文：因梦异人，频授乐曲。
现代文：王氏女在穿道服期间，梦见有异人频频向她传授乐曲。
English: During the period when Wang's daughter was wearing the robe, she dreamed that someone was frequently teaching her music.

古文：所授之人，其形或道或俗，其衣或紫或黄。
现代文：传授她乐曲的人，从形貌上看，有的是道士，有的是俗人。他们穿的衣裳有的是紫色，有的是黄色。
English: The people who teach her music, from the appearance, some are Taoists, some are laymen. Some of their clothes are purple, some are yellow.

古文：有一夕而传数曲，有一听而便记者。
现代文：有时一个夜晚传授她好几支乐曲，有的乐曲听一遍就能记住。
English: Sometimes several pieces of music are taught to her in one night, and some pieces can be remembered after listening to them once.

古文：其声清越，与常异，类于仙家《紫云》之亚也。
现代文：这些乐曲，都声音清丽，超凡脱俗，跟平常的乐曲不一样，有点像仙家《紫云》一类的乐曲。
English: These pieces, all of which have a beautiful sound and are out of this world, are different from ordinary pieces of music, and are a bit like the music of "Purple Cloud" by Seonja.

古文：乃曰，此曲谱请元昆制序，刊石于甲寅之方。
现代文：这些人还告诉王氏女，说： 这些曲谱请元昆作序，刊刻在甲寅方向的石上。
English: These people also told Wang's daughter: "Ask Yuan Kun to make a preface to these scores and engrave them on the stone facing the direction of Jia and Yin.

古文：其兄即荆南推官王少监贞范也，为制序刊石。
现代文：王氏女的兄长就是荆南推官少监王贞范，是他给这些乐曲作序刻石的。
English: The elder brother of Wang's daughter is Jingnan magistrate Wang Zhenfan, who made the stones for the prelude to these pieces of music.

古文：所传曲，有《道调宫》、《王宸宫》、《夷则宫》、《神林宫》、《蕤宾宫》、《无射宫》、《玄宗宫》、《黄钟宫》、《散水宫》、《仲吕宫》。
现代文：传授给王氏女的乐曲宫调有《道调宫》《王宸宫》《夷则宫》《神林宫》《蕤宾宫》《无射宫》《玄宗宫》《黄钟宫》《散水宫》《仲吕宫》。
English: The palace of music that was taught to Wang's daughters included the palace of Taoism, the palace of Wang Xizhe, the palace of Yizhe, the palace of Shenlin, the palace of Zhibin, the palace of Wushe, the palace of Xuanzong, the palace of Huang Zhong, the palace of Xanshui, and the palace of Zhonglu.

古文：商调，《独指泛清商》、《好仙商》、《侧商》、《红绡商》、《凤抹商》、《玉仙商》。角调，《双调角》、《醉吟角》、《大吕角》、《南吕角》、《中吕角》、《高大殖角》、《蕤宾角》。
现代文：商调有《独指泛清商》《好仙药》《侧商》《红绡商》《凤抹商》《玉仙商》，角调有《双调角》《醉吟角》《大吕角》《南吕角》《中吕角》《高大殖角》《蕤宾角》。羽调有《凤吟羽》《北风香》《背南羽》《背平羽》《应圣羽》《玉宫羽》《玉宸羽》《风香调》《大吕调》。
English: There are "One-fingered Pan-Clearing Merchant," "Good Immortal Medicine," "Side Merchant," "Red Kite Merchant," "Phoenix Smudging Merchant," "Jade Immortal Merchant," "Double Angle Merchant," "Drunken Jingle Merchant," "Big Lyu Merchant," "South Lyu Merchant," "Middle Lyu Merchant," "High and Large Reproduction Merchant" and "Phoenix Merchant." There are "Phoenix Jingle Merchant," "North Wind Fragrance," "Back South Feather," "Back Flat Feather," "Sacred Feather Merchant," "G

古文：其曲名一同人世，有《凉州》、《伊州》、《胡渭州》、《甘州》、《缘腰》、《莫靼》、《项盆乐》、《安公子》、《水牯子》、《阿滥泛》之属，凡二百以上曲。所异者，征调中有《湘妃怨》、《哭颜回》。
现代文：它的曲名同人世间的曲名相同。有《凉州》《伊州》《胡州》《甘州》《缘腰》《莫靼》《项盆乐》《安公子》《水牯子》《阿滥泛》等，共二百余支曲子。所不同的是，征调中有《湘妃怨》《哭颜回》。
English: The names of its pieces are the same as those in the human world. There are "Liangzhou," "Izhou," "Huzhou," "Ganzhou," "Jiangwa," "Motar," "Xiangbon," "Angongzi," "Mizuhashi," "Akanban" and so on, a total of more than two hundred pieces. The difference is that "Xiangfei" and "Crying Face" are in the melody.

古文：当时胡琴不弹徵调也。
现代文：当时琵琶、忽雷等胡人乐器，一般不弹奏徵调。
English: At that time, the pipa, the thunderbolt and other Hu people's musical instruments generally did not play the tune.

古文：王适高氏，数年而亡，得非谪坠之人乎。孙光宪子妇即王氏之侄也，记得一两曲，尝闻弹之，亦异事也。
现代文：后人孙光宪儿子的妻子，就是王氏女的侄女。她也曾记得这些曲子中的一两首，曾有人听她弹奏过。这也是一件奇异的事情啊！
English: Later generations, the wife of Sun Guangxian's son, who was the niece of Wang's daughter, also remembered one or two of these pieces, and someone once heard her play them. This is also a strange thing!

古文：五弦
现代文：五弦
English: Five Strings

古文：赵辟赵辟弹五弦，人或问其术，辟曰：吾之于五弦也，始则神遇之，终则天随之。
现代文：赵辟回答说：我弹五弦琴，开始时是神人在梦中传授给我的，能发展到什么程度则随天意啊。
English: Zhao Pi replied, "I play the five-stringed lute. In the beginning, a god-man taught it to me in a dream. How far I can develop it depends on God's will."

古文：方吾浩然，眼如耳，目如鼻，不知五弦为辟，辟之为五弦也。
现代文：我就像在浩淼无边的空濛中，眼像耳、目像鼻，不知道五弦琴就是我赵辟呢，还是我赵辟就是五弦琴啊！
English: It's like I'm in a vast, boundless void, with eyes like ears and eyes like noses, and I don't know whether the five-stringed lute is me, Zhao Bei, or whether I, Zhao Bei, am the five-stringed lute!

古文：箜篌
现代文：箜篌
English: 

古文：徐月华
现代文：徐月华
English: Xu Yuehua

