古文： 文章一小伎，于道未为尊。 
现代文： 文章一小伎，于道未为尊。 
English: The article is a small trick, and it is not respected in the road.

古文：虽杜子美有激而云，然要为失言，不可以训。文章岂小事哉！
现代文：这两句诗虽然是杜子美有所感而发，但是应该算是失言，不可以为典式，文章难道是小事吗？
English: Although these two poems were inspired by Du Zi Mei, they should be regarded as gaffes. They can't be regarded as classics. Isn't an article a trifle?

古文：《易•贲》之彖言： 刚柔交错，天文也；文明以止，人文也。
现代文：《易•贲》的《彖》辞中说： 刚柔互相交错，形成天文，以文明之道立身处事，形成人文。
English: In the "Xing" speech of "I•Xing," he said: "Strength and softness interlaced with each other to form astronomy, to conduct business in a civilized manner, and to form the humanities.

古文：观乎天文，以察时变；观乎人文，以化成天下。 
现代文：观看天上日月晨辰的运行，用以体察一年四季的时令交化，观察人间诗书礼乐之类的典章制度，据此以教化大治天下。 
English: Watching astronomy, you can detect seasonal changes; watching humanities, you can educate the world.

古文：孔子称帝尧焕乎有文章。
现代文：孔子称赞帝尧的文物制度光明灿烂。
English: Confucius praised the bright and splendid cultural relics system of the emperor.

古文：子贡曰： 天子之文章，可得而闻。 
现代文：子贡说： 老师关于文献方面的学问，可以听到。 
English: Zigong said: The teacher can be heard talking about literature.

古文：《诗》美卫武公，亦支有文章。
现代文：《诗经》中赞美卫武公，也称其有文章，能够尊守礼仪规范。
English: "The Book of Songs" praises Wei Wu Gong, also saying that he has articles and can respect the etiquette norms.

古文：尧、舜、禹、汤、文、武、成、康之圣贤，桀、纣、幽、厉之昏乱，非《诗》、《书》以文章载之，何以传？
现代文：唐尧、虞舜、夏禹、商汤、周文王、周武王、周成王、周康王等贤明君主的光辉业绩，夏桀、殷纣王、周幽王、周厉王等昏君的丑恶嘴脸，没有《诗经》、《尚书》用文章的形式记载下来，怎么能流传后世呢？
English: The brilliant achievements of wise monarchs such as Tang Xuan, Yu Xuan, Xia Yu, Shang Tang, Zhou Wen Wang, Zhou Wu Wang, Zhou Cheng Wang, Zhou Kang Wang, and the ugly faces of dim monarchs such as Xia Xuan, Yin Xuan Wang, Zhou Yu Wang, Zhou Li Wang, have not been recorded in the form of articles in "The Book of Songs" and "The Book of Songs," so how can they be passed down to future generations?

古文：伏羲画八卦，文王重之，非孔子以文章翼之，何以传？
现代文：伏羲画八卦，文王推演为六十四卦，如果不是孔子用文章的形式作了《十翼》，进行解说，怎么能让后人了解？
English: Fuxiong drew eight sagas, and King Wen deduced sixty-four sagas. If Confucius did not use the form of an article to make "Ten Wings" and explain it, how can future generations understand it?

古文：孔子至言要道，托《孝经》、《论语》之文而传。
现代文：孔子的高明深刻的道理，是寄托在《孝经》、《论语》的文字形式中流传。
English: The profound wisdom of Confucius is transmitted in the form of the "Book of Filial Piety" and "Analects."

古文：曾子、子思、孟子传圣人心学，使无《中庸》及七篇之书，后人何所窥门户？
现代文：曾子、子思、孟子传授孔圣人的儒家学说，似使没有《礼记》的《中庸》和七篇《孟子》等书，后代的人从哪里窥其途径？
English: Zeng Zi, Zi Si, and Mencius taught Confucianism by Confucius, so without books such as the "Middle Way" and the seven "Mencius" of the "Book of Rites," where will future generations find their way?

古文：老、庄绝灭礼学，忘言去为，而五千言与《内》、《外篇》极其文藻。
现代文：老子、庄子主张消灭礼仪制度，狂妄地说什么无为，可是五千言的《道德经》和分内、外篇的《庄子》却又极文藻之能事。
English: Laozi and Zhuo Zi advocated the elimination of the etiquette system, arrogantly saying that nothing could be done, but the five-thousand-word "Dao De Jing" and the inner and outer chapters of "Zhuo Zi" were extremely literate.

古文：释氏之为禅者，谓语言为累，不知大乘诸经可废乎？
现代文：佛门弟子参禅，说语言是累赘，不知道大乘诸经典可不可废弃？
English: Buddhist disciples meditate, say language is a burden, and don't know that the Mahayana classics can't be discarded?

古文：然则诋为小伎，其理谬矣！
现代文：既然如此，那么诋毁为小道，其理由是荒谬的！
English: That being the case, the reason for the slanderous tittle-tattle is absurd!

古文：彼后世为词章者，逐末而忘其本，玩其华而落其实，流宕自远，非文章过也。
现代文：那些后代的作文章的人，只注意它的表面形式却忘了写文章要载道的根本目的，追求文辞的华美却忽视其内容，形成风气，彼此推波逐澜，以至越走越远，这不是文章本身的过错。
English: It is not the fault of the article itself that those writers of later generations only paid attention to its surface form but forgot the fundamental purpose of writing an article, pursued the beauty of words but ignored its content, formed a style, pushed each other, and went further and further.

古文：杜老所云 文章千古事 ， 已似爱文章 ， 文章日自负 ， 文章实致身 ， 文章开宎奥 ， 文章憎命达 ， 名岂文章著 ， 枚乘文章老 ， 文章敢自诬 ， 海内文章伯 ， 文章曹植波澜阔 ， 庾信文章老更成 ， 岂有文章惊海内 ， 每语见许文章伯 ， 文章有神交有道 ，如此之类，多指诗而言，所见狭矣！
现代文：杜甫所说的 文章千古事  已似爱文章 ， 文章日自负 ， 文章实致身 ， 文章开宎奥 ， 文章憎命达 ， 名岂文章著 ， 枚乘文章老 ， 文章敢自诬 ， 海内文章伯 ， 文章曹植波澜阔 ， 庾信文章老更成 ， 岂有文章惊海内 ， 每语见许文章伯 ， 文章有神交有道 ，如此之类，大多是指诗歌而言，识见甚是狭窄。
English: Du Fu said that the articles of thousands of years ago have been likened to love articles, the articles of the day are conceited, the articles are real, the articles are open and profound, the articles are full of life, the name is not the author of the article, the piece is old, the article dares to be false, the inland articles are good, the articles of Cao Zhi are broad, the letters of the articles are old and better, there are no articles in the sea, every language sees a good article, the articles have a spirit and a way, and the like, mostly refer to poetry, and the understanding is very narrow.

