古文：隽不疑字曼倩，勃海人也。
现代文：隽不疑字曼倩，勃海郡人。
English: He is a native of Bohai County.

古文：治《春秋》，为郡文学，进退必以礼，名闻州郡。
现代文：精通《春秋》，任郡文学官，言行举止必定遵循礼仪规范，声名闻于州郡。
English: He is proficient in "Spring and Autumn," serves as a county literary officer, and his speech and behavior must follow the etiquette norms. He is well-known in the county.

古文：武帝末，郡国盗贼群起，暴胜之为直指使者，衣绣衣，持斧，逐捕盗贼，督课郡国，东至海，以军兴诛不从命者，威振州郡。
现代文：汉武帝末年，郡国盗贼蜂起。暴胜之被任命为直指使者，身着鲜艳的绣衣，手持锋利的斧娥，到各地镇压盗贼、监察郡国吏政，其执法范围远达束部沿海一带。
English: At the end of Emperor Hanwu's reign, the county's thieves revolted. Wu Shengzhu was appointed as the messenger to point the finger at them. Dressed in bright embroidered clothes and holding a sharp axe, he went to various places to suppress the thieves and monitor the county's officials. His law enforcement scope extended as far as the coastal area of Sokube.

古文：胜之素闻不疑贤，至勃海，遣吏请与相见。
现代文：对违抗其命令的人，暴胜之就以严厉的军兴法论处，其威名震动了各州郡。
English: For those who defied his orders, he punished them with a severe military law, and his prestige shook every state and county.

古文：不疑冠进贤冠，带櫑具剑，佩环玦，褒衣博带，盛服至门上谒。
现代文：暴胜之早就听说隽不疑很贤良，因此，他巡察至勃海郡后，便派随从去请隽不疑前来相见。隽不疑头戴进贤冠，腰挎饰有美玉和木刻图案的宝剑，身佩环、块等玉佩，阔袍宽带，盛装前往暴胜之住所拜谒。
English: He had heard from Buxing that Yan Doubtless was very virtuous. Therefore, after his inspection to Bohai County, he sent his followers to invite Yan Doubtless to come to see him. Yan Doubtless wore a virtuous crown on his head, a sword decorated with gems and woodcut patterns on his waist, a ring, a piece of jade, a wide-brimmed robe, and dressed up to visit the residence of Buxing.

古文：门下欲使解剑，不疑曰： 剑者，君子武备，所以卫身，不可解。
现代文：到了暴府门前，门卫想让隽不疑解下他的佩剑，隽不疑说： 剑是君子的武器装备，是用来护身的，不能随便解下来。
English: When he arrived at the gate of the tyrant's palace, the gatekeeper wanted him to unsheathe his sword, and he said without hesitation, "A sword is a gentleman's weapon and equipment, it is used to protect oneself, and it cannot be unsheathed casually."

古文：请退。 
现代文：如果你们一定要我解下佩剑后才让我进入暴府，那么请允许我现在就告辞吧。 
English: If you insist that I must unsheathe my sword before I can enter the Underworld, then please allow me to leave now.

古文：吏白胜之。
现代文：门卫将这一情况通报了暴胜之。
English: The doorman broke the news to the couple.

古文：胜之开阁延请，望见不疑容貌尊严，衣冠甚伟，胜之躧履起迎。
现代文：暴胜之开门延请隽不疑入府，望见隽不疑容貌严肃，神态自信，衣冠整齐庄重，暴胜之急忙离开座位拖着鞋起身迎接。
English: The opening of the door of the sudden victory extended an invitation to enter the house, and I saw that the appearance of the sudden victory was serious, confident, neat and dignified, and the sudden victory hurriedly left the seat and got up with slippers to meet.

古文：登堂坐定，不疑据地曰： 窃伏海濒，闻暴公子威名旧矣，今乃承颜接辞。
现代文：待宾主到堂上坐定，隽不疑端正腰身跪坐在地上说： 我身处荒远的沿海地区，很早就耳闻暴公子您的威名，但直到今天才有幸与您会面和交谈。
English: While waiting for the guest to sit down in the hall, he sat down on the floor and said: I am in a remote coastal area. I have long heard of your reputation as a violent man, but I have not had the privilege of meeting and talking with you until today.

古文：凡为吏，太刚则折，太柔则废，威行施之以恩，然后树功扬名，永终天禄。 
现代文：大凡为官，太刚直则容易受挫折，太软弱则容易荒废政务，因此，最好的办法是在实施威严的同时给予恩惠，这样就能够建功立业，永保其位。 
English: The best way is to be dignified and gracious at the same time, so that you can make achievements and keep your position forever.

古文：胜之知不疑非庸人，敬纳其戒，深接以礼意，问当世所施行。
现代文：暴胜之知道隽不疑不是一个平凡的人，恭敬地接受他的告诫，以很高的礼仪接待他，并向他请教在当时的形势下施政应采取哪些措施和手段。
English: Knowing that he was not an ordinary person, he respectfully accepted his admonition, received him with high etiquette, and asked him what measures and means should be taken to govern in the current situation.

古文：门下诸从事皆州郡选吏，侧听不疑，莫不惊骇。
现代文：暴府的幕僚都是从各州郡官吏中选拔出来的优秀人才，他们在旁边倾听了隽不疑的谈话，无不震惊叹服。
English: The staff of the tyrannical government are all outstanding talents selected from the officials of each state and county. They listened to the unsuspecting conversation next to them and were shocked and impressed.

古文：至昏夜，罢去。
现代文：直至深夜，隽不疑才离开暴府。
English: It was late at night when he left the tyrannical capital.

古文：胜之遂表荐不疑，征诣公车，拜为青州刺史。
现代文：于是暴胜之就上表举荐不疑，皇帝征召不疑到公车署，并拜他为青州刺史。
English: As a result, there was no doubt that the winner would be recommended by the table above, and the emperor would undoubtedly conscript him to the bus station, and worship him as the history of Qingzhou.

古文：久之，武帝崩，昭帝即位，而齐孝王孙刘泽交结郡国豪桀谋反，欲先杀青州刺史。
现代文：过了很久，汉武帝去世，汉昭帝即位。这时齐孝王之孙刘泽勾结郡国豪杰阴谋反叛，他们计划先刺杀青州刺史。
English: After a long time, Emperor Hanwu died and Emperor Han Zhao ascended the throne. At this time, Liu Ze, the grandson of King Qi Xiao Wang, colluded with the county's national heroes to plot a rebellion. They planned to assassinate the history of Qingzhou first.

古文：不疑发觉，收捕，皆伏其辜。
现代文：隽不疑及时察觉了刘泽等人的阴谋，将他们全都逮捕，刘泽等人皆伏法认罪。
English: Without a doubt, he detected the conspiracy of Liu Ze and others in time and arrested them all. Liu Ze and others all confessed to the crime.

古文：擢为京兆尹，赐钱百万。
现代文：不隽因此被提升为京兆尹，并被赐钱百万。
English: As a result, he was promoted to Jing Zhaoyun and given millions of money.

古文：京师吏民敬其威信。
现代文：京师的官吏百姓都敬服他的威信。
English: The officials and people of Beijing respected his authority.

古文：每行县录囚徒还，其母辄问不疑： 有所平反，活几何人？ 
现代文：每次不疑到地方州县巡视审查囚徒的罪状后返回京师，他的母亲总要问他： 有没有囚犯被平反？有多少人被你所救而免于冤死？ 
English: Every time he returned to the Beijing Division after inspecting the crimes of prisoners in local prefectures and counties, his mother always asked him: Have any prisoners been rehabilitated? How many people have you saved from wrongful death?

古文：即不疑多有所平反，母喜笑，为饮食言语异于他时；或亡所出，母怒，为之不食。
现代文：如果得知不疑审案多有所平反，他的母亲就喜形于色，甚至连饮食言语都不同于平时；如果得知不疑未能使囚犯得到平反，他的母亲就会非常生气，并因此而不吃饭。
English: If his mother knew that there was no doubt that most of the cases were rehabilitated, she would be so happy that she would even eat differently than usual; if she knew that there was no doubt that the prisoners were not rehabilitated, her mother would be so angry that she would not eat.

古文：故不疑为吏，严而不残。
现代文：因此，隽不疑为官，威严而不残忍。
English: Therefore, he is undoubtedly an official, dignified but not cruel.

古文：始元五年，有一男子乘黄犊车，建黄旐，衣黄襜褕，著黄冒，诣北阙，自谓卫太子。
现代文：汉昭帝始元五年，有一个男子乘着黄犊车，插着画有龟蛇图案的黄旗帜，穿着黄色长衣，头戴黄色帽子，来到皇宫北阙，自称是卫太子。
English: In the fifth year of Emperor Han Zhao's reign, there was a man who rode in a yellow carriage with a yellow flag with a turtle and snake pattern, wearing a yellow robe and a yellow hat, and came to the North Courtyard of the Imperial Palace, claiming to be the crown prince.

古文：公车以闻，诏使公卿、将军、中二千石杂识视。
现代文：公车令将这件事情上奏皇帝，皇帝下诏让公卿将军中二千石等官吏一起去辨认真伪。
English: The bus order reported this matter to the emperor, and the emperor issued an edict to let the court nobles, generals, 2,000-koku officials and other officials go together to distinguish between the serious and the false.

古文：长安中吏民聚观者数万人。
现代文：长安中官吏百姓围观者达数万人。
English: In Chang'an, there were tens of thousands of officials and ordinary people in the crowd.

古文：右将军勒兵阙下，以备非常。
现代文：右将军率军队来到宫城下，防备发生意外情况。
English: General Zuo led his troops to the outskirts of Miyagi to prepare for any unexpected situations.

古文：丞相、御史、中二千石至者并莫敢发言。
现代文：前来辨认的丞相御史中二千石等官吏都不敢表态。
English: The officials who came to identify the 2,000-koku chancellor were afraid to make a statement.

古文：京兆尹不疑后到，叱从吏收缚。
现代文：京兆尹隽不疑后到，他来到以后立即命令属吏将此人逮捕起来。
English: When he arrived, he immediately ordered his subordinates to arrest the person.

古文：或曰： 是非未可知，且安之。 
现代文：有人劝他说： 此人是不是卫太子现在还弄不清楚，姑且再等等吧。 
English: Someone advised him, "It's still unclear whether this person is the crown prince, so let's wait and see."

古文：不疑曰： 诸君何患于卫太子！
现代文：隽不疑说： 诸位何必畏惧卫太子呢！
English: He said without hesitation, "Why should you all be afraid of the crown prince?"

古文：昔蒯聩违命出奔，辄距而不纳，《春秋》是之。卫太子得罪先帝，亡不即死，今来自诣，此罪人也。 
现代文：孔子在《春秋》一书中肯定了蒯辄的做法。如今这位卫太子也曾得罪过先帝，他逃亡在外而没有接受处死，现在又自己来到，他是我朝的罪人。 
English: In his book Spring and Autumn, Confucius affirmed the practice of shunning. Now this Wei prince has also sinned against the former emperor, he fled abroad and did not accept the death penalty, and now he has come again, he is the sinner of my dynasty.

古文：遂送诏狱。
现代文：于是就将这个人送往皇家监狱。
English: So they sent this man to the royal prison.

古文：天子与大将军霍光闻而嘉之，曰： 公卿大臣当用经术明于大谊。 
现代文：汉昭帝和大将军霍光听说此事后很赞赏不疑，说： 公卿大臣们就是应该懂得如何运用经术来维护大义。 
English: When Emperor Han Zhao and General Huo Guangxuan heard about this, they were very appreciative and said, "Civil servants and ministers should know how to use the scriptures to safeguard the great cause."

古文：由是名声重于朝廷，在位者皆自以不及也。
现代文：经过造件事不疑在朝中名声大振，朝廷官吏们都自愧不如。
English: After the fabrication of the affair, the reputation of the imperial court was undoubtedly greatly enhanced, and the imperial court officials were ashamed of themselves.

古文：大将军光欲以女妻之，不疑固辞，不肯当。
现代文：大将军霍光想将女儿嫁给他为妻，不疑坚决推辞，不肯接受。
English: General Huo Guang wanted to marry his daughter to him as his wife, but he resolutely refused and refused to accept.

古文：久之，以病免，终于家。
现代文：又过了好长时间，不疑因疾病去官，最后逝世于家中。
English: After a long time, he left office due to illness, and finally died at home.

古文：京师纪之。
现代文：京都长安的人都怀念他。
English: People in Kyoto Changan miss him very much.

古文：后赵广汉为京兆尹，言： 我禁奸止邪，行于吏民，至于朝廷事，不及不疑远甚。 
现代文：后来，赵广汉为京兆尹，曾经对人说： 我在禁止奸邪，办理吏民事务，乃至处理朝廷大事等方面都远不及隽不疑。 
English: Later, Zhao Guanghan, known as Jing Zhaoyun, once said to people: I am far ahead of you in terms of prohibiting treason, handling public affairs, and even handling important matters of the imperial court.

古文：廷尉验治何人，竟得奸诈。
现代文：廷尉审查前述冒充卫太子之人，果然是个骗子。
English: The courtier examined the aforementioned person who was pretending to be the crown prince, and found him to be a fraud.

古文：本夏阳人，姓成名方遂，居湖，以卜筮为事。
现代文：此人原是夏阳人，叫成方遂，居住在湖县，以占卜为生。
English: This person was originally from Xiayang and was called Cheng Fang Sui. He lived in Huxian and made a living from divination.

古文：有故太子舍人尝从方遂卜，谓曰： 子状貌甚似卫太子。 
现代文：有一位原卫太子的随员曾向方遂问卜，他见到方遂后说： 您的相貌长得很像卫太子。 
English: A member of the entourage of the former crown prince once asked Fang Sui for advice. After seeing him, he said, "Your appearance is very similar to that of the crown prince."

古文：方遂心利其言，几得以富贵，即诈自称诣阙，廷尉逮召乡里知识者张宗禄等，方遂坐诬罔不道，要斩东市。
现代文：方遂听了这话后就生出冒充卫太子之心，想以此求取富贵，于是诈称卫太子而至阙门外。廷尉传唤乡里认识他的张宗禄等前来作证，方遂于是以欺骗无道之罪被腰斩于束市。
English: Upon hearing this, Fang developed a desire to impersonate the crown prince, hoping to gain wealth by doing so, so he pretended to be the crown prince and went outside the palace gates. The courtier summoned Zhang Zonglu and others who knew him in the countryside to come and testify, and Fang was beheaded in Sakuichi for the crime of deception.

古文：一云姓张名延年。
现代文：一说这位冒充者姓张名延年。
English: He said the impostor's surname was Zhang.

古文：疏广字仲翁，东海兰陵人也。
现代文：疏广字仲翁，束海郡兰陵县人。
English: He is a native of Lanling County, Sokai County.

古文：少好学，明《春秋》，家居教授，学者自远方至。
现代文：自幼好学，精通《春秋》，在家教学，向他求学的人中有的来自很远的地方。
English: He has been eager to learn since he was a child. He is well versed in "Spring and Autumn" and teaches at home. Some of the people who study with him come from far away.

古文：征为博士、太中大夫。
现代文：后来疏广被征为博士太中大夫。
English: Later, Sohang was enlisted as a doctor.

古文：地节三年，立皇太子，选丙吉为太傅，广为少傅，数月，吉迁御史大夫，广徙为太傅。
现代文：汉宣帝地节三年，册立皇太子，选任丙吉为太傅，疏广为少傅。几个月后，丙吉升为御史大夫，疏广升为太傅。
English: On the third year of the Emperor's Birthday, the crown prince was appointed, and Bongji was appointed as taifu and Sohang as shoofu. A few months later, Bongji was promoted to goshi taifu and Sohang was promoted to taifu.

古文：广兄子受字公子，亦以贤良举为太子家令。
现代文：疏广兄长的儿子疏受，字公子，也因贤良被选为太子家令。
English: The son of So Kwang's elder brother, So Ju, known as Ko Ko, was also chosen as the prince's heir due to his virtue.

古文：受好礼恭谨，敏而有辞。
现代文：疏受崇尚礼义，谦恭谨慎，思维敏捷而善于言辞。
English: He is respectful, courteous, prudent, quick-thinking and eloquent.

古文：宣帝幸太子宫，受迎谒应对，及置酒宴，奉觞上寿，辞礼闲雅，上甚欢说。
现代文：一次，汉宣帝驾临太子束宫，疏受接驾拜谒并回答汉宣帝的提问，又安排酒宴，在席间举杯为汉宣帝祝寿，言辞合乎礼仪而又闲雅优美，汉宣帝非常高兴。
English: On one occasion, Emperor Han Xuan came to Prince Zokong's palace, received a courtesy call and answered Emperor Han Xuan's questions, arranged a banquet, and raised a glass to celebrate Emperor Han Xuan's birthday during the banquet. The speech was polite and elegant, and Emperor Han Xuan was very happy.

古文：顷之，拜受为少傅。
现代文：不久，拜疏受为太子少傅。
English: Soon, Baisho was accepted as the prince's apprentice.

古文：太子外祖父特进平恩侯许伯以为太子少，白使其弟中郎将舜监护太子家。
现代文：太子的外祖父特进平恩侯许伯认为太子年少，向汉宣帝请求让他的弟弟中郎将许舜监护太子家。
English: The prince's maternal grandfather, Tetsujin Ping'en Hou Xu Bo, thought that the prince was too young and asked Emperor Han Xuan to let his brother Zhong Lang take care of the prince's family.

古文：上以问广，广对曰： 太子国储副君，师友必于天下英俊，不宜独亲外家许氏。且太子自有太傅、少傅。官属已备，今复使舜护太子家，视陋，非所以广太子德于天下也。 
现代文：宣帝为此事召问疏广，疏广回答说： 太子是国家的储君，他的老师和朋友必须选择天下杰出的人士充当，不应该衹亲近外戚许氏一家，况且，太子已有太傅少傅为辅佐，属宫设置已很完备，现在又让许舜监护太子家，这种见识实在浅陋，不利于向天下民众昭示太子的恩德。 
English: Emperor Xuan inquired about this matter with Zuo Guang, and Zuo Guang replied: The prince is the crown prince of the country, and his teachers and friends must be chosen from the world's outstanding people. He should not be close to his maternal relatives, the Hui family. Moreover, the prince has been assisted by Taifu Shao Fu, and the palace has been set up very well, and now he has Xu Yao as the guardian of the prince's family. This insight is really shallow, and is not conducive to showing the world's people the prince's benevolence.

古文：上善其言，以语丞相魏相，相免冠谢曰： 此非臣等所能及。 
现代文：宜帝很赞同疏广的看法，并将此事告诉了丞相魏相，魏相听后脱帽谢罪说： 疏广的这种远见卓识不是我们这些大臣所能赶得上的。 
English: Emperor Yi very much agreed with Sogang's view, and told the matter to Prime Minister Wei Xiang. After listening to him, Wei Xiang took off his hat and said, "Sogang's foresight is not something that we, the ministers, can match."

古文：广由是见器重，数受赏赐。
现代文：疏广由此而深得宣帝器重，多次受到奖赏和恩赐。
English: As a result, Sohang gained the respect of Emperor Xuan and received many rewards and gifts.

古文：太子每朝，因进见，太傅在前，少傅在后。
现代文：太子每次上朝，进见宣帝，总是太傅在前，少傅在后。
English: Every time the crown prince went to see Emperor Xuan, it was always the father-in-law who went first and the son-in-law who went last.

古文：父子并为师傅，朝廷以为荣。
现代文：疏广、疏受叔侄同为太子师傅，朝廷上下都以他们为荣耀。
English: The prince's uncles and nephews are his teachers, and the imperial court is proud of them.

古文：在位五岁，皇太子年十二，通《论语》、《孝经》。
现代文：疏广任太子太傅五年，皇太子满十二岁，已能通晓《论语》、《孝经》。
English: After five years as the crown prince, the crown prince is 12 years old and is already familiar with "The Analects" and "The Book of Filial Piety."

古文：广谓受曰： 吾闻 知足不辱，知止不殆 ， 功遂身退，天之道 也。
现代文：疏广对疏受说： 我听说 知足的人不蒙受羞辱，知道适可而止的人不遭遇危险， 功成身退，是符合天道规律的 。
English: Suo Guang said to Suo Jie: I have heard that a contented person does not suffer humiliation, a person who knows when to stop does not encounter danger, and a successful retreat is in line with the laws of heaven.

古文：今仕官至二千石，宦成名立，如此不去，惧有后悔，岂如父子相随出关，归老故乡，以寿命终，不亦善乎？ 
现代文：如今我们叔侄为官，位至二千石，可谓是功成名就了，如果现在我们不适可而止辞官离去，恐怕将来会后悔的。不如我们叔侄一起辞官出关，告老还乡，以养天年，这样做不是很好吗？ 
English: Now that our uncles and nephews have reached 2,000 koku, it can be said that success and fame are enough. If we don't stop resigning now, I'm afraid we will regret it in the future. Wouldn't it be better for our uncles and nephews to resign together and return to their hometowns to raise their children?

古文：受叩头曰： 从大人议。 
现代文：疏受叩头说： 听从您老人家的安排。 
English: "Listen to your old man's arrangements," said the careless servant.

古文：即日父子俱移病。
现代文：当天叔侄二人都上书称病。
English: On the same day, both uncles and nephews wrote to say they were ill.

古文：满三月赐告，广遂称笃，上疏乞骸骨。上以其年笃老，皆许之，加赐黄金二十斤，皇太子赠以五十斤。
现代文：三个月后宣帝又赐其续假，疏广于是声言病重，上疏要求告老还乡，皇上因其年岁确实已老，答应了他们的请求，加赐黄金二十斤，皇太子也赠金五十斤。
English: Three months later, Emperor Xuan gave him another leave of absence, and So Guang claimed to be seriously ill. Shang So asked him to return to his hometown. The emperor, because he was really old, agreed to their request, and gave him 20 jin of gold, and the crown prince also gave him 50 jin of gold.

古文：公卿大夫故人邑子设祖道，供张东都门外，送者车数百两，辞决而去。及道路观者皆曰： 贤哉二大夫！ 
现代文：朝中公卿大夫故旧亲朋以及京城人士在长安东都门外为他们设宴饯行，送行的车乘达数百辆，叔侄二人一一辞别而去，在路旁围观的人都赞叹说： 贤良啊，这两位大夫！ 
English: The late relatives and friends of the court nobles and doctors of the Joseon Dynasty, as well as the people of Beijing, held a banquet for them outside the Chang'an Dongdu Gate. Hundreds of cars were used to see them off. The two uncles and nephews left one by one. The people who were watching by the roadside said in admiration: How virtuous, these two doctors!

古文：或叹息为之下泣。
现代文：有人为之叹息并流下了眼泪。
English: Some people sighed and shed tears.

古文：广既归乡里，日令家共具设酒食，请族人故旧宾客，与相娱乐。
现代文：疏广回到故乡后，每天都让家人置办酒菜饭食，邀请族人及故旧宾客共同娱乐。
English: After Sau Guang returned to his hometown, he had his family prepare food and drink for him every day, and invited members of his tribe and old guests to join in the fun.

古文：数问其家金余尚有几所，趣卖以共具。
现代文：多次询问家中还剩多少金子，并催促家人将金子兑换以供应每日的酒食。
English: They repeatedly asked how much gold was left in the house and urged the family to exchange the gold for daily food and drink.

古文：居岁余，广子孙窃谓其昆弟老人广所爱信者曰： 子孙几及君时颇立产业基址，今日饮食，费且尽。
现代文：过了一年多，疏广的子孙私下对疏广的同族兄弟中受疏广亲近信任的老人说： 我们作子孙的希望在他老人家有生之年能置些田产基业。
English: After more than a year, the sons and grandsons of Sohang privately said to the old man, who was trusted by Sohang, one of the brothers of the same clan: Our sons and grandsons hope to be able to set up some agricultural foundation in the lifetime of his old man.

古文：宜从丈人所，劝说君买田宅。 
现代文：现在家中每天设宴宴客，他老人家所带回的钱财都快花光了。
English: Now his family hosts a banquet for guests every day, and the money and wealth he brought back with him are almost gone.

古文：老人即以闲暇时为广言此计，广曰： 吾凯老悖不念子孙哉？
现代文：我们想请您把我们的以上想法当作您的意思，去劝说他老人家购置些田地房产。 那位老人就在闲聊时向疏广透露了这个意思，疏广说： 难道我真的是老糊涂了，不知为子孙着想吗？
English: We would like to ask you to take our above ideas as your meaning, to persuade his old man to buy some field real estate. The old man revealed this meaning to So Guang when chatting, So Guang said: Is it true that I am really clueless, I do not know for the sake of my grandchildren?

古文：顾自有旧田庐，令子孙勤力其中，足以共衣食，与凡人齐。
现代文：我是考虑他们自有家中原来旧有的一些田产房屋，假设子孙们努力勤奋地去经营，足够供给他们的衣食，使他们同普通人一样地生活。
English: I am thinking of some of the old farmhouses in their own homes, assuming that their children and grandchildren will work hard and diligently to run them, enough to provide them with food and clothing, so that they can live like ordinary people.

古文：今复增益之以为赢余，但教子孙怠惰耳。
现代文：如果现在又增加产业使他们收入颇有赢余，衹能导致子孙们懒惰懈怠罢了。
English: If we now increase the industry so that their income is quite surplus, it will only lead to the children and grandchildren being lazy and slack.

古文：贤而多财，则损其志；愚而多财，则益其过。
现代文：贤德而富有，就会减损其意志；愚昧而富有，则会增添其过错。
English: Virtue and riches diminish the will; folly and riches increase the errors.

古文：且夫富者，众人之怨也；吾既亡以教化子孙，不欲益其过而生怨。
现代文：况且富贵者，往往容易成为众人忌恨的对象；我既没有什么可以教导子孙的，也不想增加他们的过失而使他们招来怨恨。
English: Moreover, the rich are often the objects of hatred; I have nothing to teach my children, and I do not want to increase their faults and make them hateful.

古文：又此金者，圣主所以惠养老臣也，故乐与乡党宗族共飨其赐，以尽吾余日，不亦可乎！ 
现代文：再说，这些金钱是圣上恩赐给我养老的，因此我乐于与乡亲宗族们共同分享圣上的恩赐，以此度过我的余生，不也很好吗！ 
English: Besides, this money was given to me by God for my old age, so I'm happy to share the gift of God with my fellow countrymen and countrywomen and spend the rest of my life with it, isn't that great!

古文：于是族人说服。
现代文：听了疏广的这番话，族人由此都对他心悦诚服。
English: After listening to Shuo Guang's words, the tribesmen were all impressed by his sincerity.

古文：皆以寿终。
现代文：最后，疏广、疏受叔侄二人都得以寿终。
English: In the end, both Shuo Guang and Shuo Jie's nephews and nieces were able to live out their lives.

古文：于定国字曼倩，东海郯人也。
现代文：于定国字曼倩，东海郡郯县人。
English: Yu Ding Guo Zi Mandao, from Donghai County, Shandong Province.

古文：其父于公为县狱吏、郡决曹，决狱平，罗文法者于公所决皆不恨。
现代文：他的父亲于公曾任县狱史、郡决曹等官职，判案公平，触犯法网而被于公依法判刑的人，没有因不服而心怀怨恨的。
English: His father, Yu Gong, had served as a county prison historian, county adjudicator and other official positions, and judged cases fairly. People who violated the law and were sentenced according to the law by Yu Gong did not hold grudges for their disobedience.

古文：郡中为之生立祠，号曰于公祠。
现代文：郡中的百姓为他立了生祠，称作于公担。
English: The people in the county built a shrine for him, called Yu Gongdan.

古文：东海有孝妇，少寡，亡子，养姑甚谨，姑欲嫁之，终不肯。
现代文：东海郡有个孝妇，年轻守寡，又无子女，很恭谨地奉养着婆婆，婆婆想让她改嫁，她始终不答应。
English: In Donghai County, there was a filial daughter, a young widow with no children, who very respectfully supported her mother-in-law. Her mother-in-law wanted her to remarry, but she never agreed.

古文：姑谓邻人曰： 孝妇事我勤苦，哀其亡子守寡。
现代文：她的婆婆对邻居说： 我这孝顺媳妇事奉我很勤劳辛苦，我怜悯她年轻守寡又没有子嗣。
English: Her mother-in-law said to her neighbor, "My dutiful daughter-in-law serves me diligently, and I pity her for being a young widow and having no children.

古文：我老，久累丁壮，奈何？ 
现代文：我年纪大了，却这样长时间地拖累年轻人，这可如何是好啊！ 
English: How good it is that I, an old man, have dragged the young people along for so long!

古文：其后姑自经死，姑女告吏： 妇杀我母 。
现代文：后来老太太为了不再拖累媳妇竟自杀身亡。老太太的女儿却上告县官说： 媳妇杀死了我母亲。 
English: Later, the old lady killed herself so that she would no longer be a burden to her daughter-in-law. The old lady's daughter, however, sued the prefectural government, saying, "My daughter-in-law killed my mother."

古文：吏捕孝妇，孝妇辞不杀姑。
现代文：县吏逮捕了孝妇，孝妇辩解说不是自己杀害了婆婆。
English: County officials arrested the filial daughter, who defended herself by saying that she did not kill her mother-in-law.

古文：吏验治，孝妇自诬服。
现代文：但在县吏的严刑逼供下，孝妇最后竟屈打成招。
English: However, under the strict punishment of the county officials to force the confession, the filial finally succumbed to the call.

古文：具狱上府，于公以为此妇养姑十余年，以孝闻，必不杀也。
现代文：此案上报到郡曹府，于公认为这个妇人奉养婆母十多年，以孝顺闻名乡里，一定不会是她杀害了其婆母。
English: The case was reported to the County Cao government, and it was recognized that the woman had been raising her mother-in-law for more than ten years, and was known for her filial piety in the village. It was definitely not her who killed her mother-in-law.

古文：太守不听，于公争之，弗能得，乃抱其具狱，哭于府上，因辞疾去。
现代文：太守不同意于公的分析，于公竭力争辩，最终也未能说服太守，于是他抱着判决书在郡曹府上大哭，并藉有病离开了郡曹府。
English: The governor did not agree with Yu Gong's analysis, and Yu Gong tried his best to argue, but ultimately failed to convince the governor, so he held the verdict in tears at the county Cao's residence, and left the county Cao's residence due to illness.

古文：太守竟论杀孝妇。
现代文：太守最终还是以谋杀婆母之罪将孝妇处以死刑。
English: In the end, the daimyō still sentenced the filial daughter to death for the murder of her mother-in-law.

古文：郡中枯旱三年。
现代文：孝妇冤死以后，郡中大旱了三年。
English: After the wrongful death of a filial daughter, there was a severe drought in the county for three years.

古文：后太守至，卜筮其故，于公曰： 孝妇不当死，前太守强断之，咎党在是乎？ 于是太守杀牛自祭孝妇冢，因表其墓，天立大雨，岁孰。
现代文：后来新太守上任，占卜大旱的原因，于公说： 那位孝妇不该死，前任太守一意孤行强行决断，灾祸恐怕是由此而生吧厂于是太守杀了一头牛，亲自前往孝妇的坟前祭奠，并为她立了墓碑，以表彰她的孝行，天上果然立即降下大雨，当年该郡五谷丰收。
English: Later, the new governor took office, divined the cause of the drought, and publicly said: That filial wife did not deserve to die. The former governor was determined to force the decision, and the disaster was probably caused by this. So the governor killed a cow, personally went to the grave of the filial wife to pay tribute, and erected a tombstone for her in recognition of her filial duty. The sky immediately rained heavily, and the county had a bumper harvest that year.

古文：郡中以此大敬重于公。
现代文：郡中人由此更加敬重于公。
English: As a result, people in the county have a greater respect for the public.

古文：定国少学法于父，父死，后定国亦为狱中、郡决曹，补廷尉史，以选与御史中丞从事治反者狱，以材高举侍御史，迁御史中丞。
现代文：于定国从小就跟随他的父亲学习法律，父亲死后，定国也任过狱史、郡决曹等官职，后补廷尉史，并被推选与御史中丞从事办理翻案者的狱案，因才智出众办案有方升为侍御史，又升任御史中丞。
English: Yu Dingguo followed his father to study law from a young age. After his father's death, Yu Dingguo also served as a prison historian, county adjudicator and other official positions, and later as a court lieutenant historian. He was selected to work with the court historian to handle the prison cases of those who overturned the cases. Due to his outstanding talent in handling cases, Yu Dingguo was promoted to the court historian, and was also promoted to the court historian.

古文：会昭帝崩，昌邑王征即位，行淫乱，定国上书谏。
现代文：时值汉昭帝去世，昌邑王被征召继位，行为荒淫秽罱，于定国上书规谏。
English: At the time of Emperor Han Zhao's death, King Changyi was called up to succeed him. He behaved in an obscene manner and went to Dinggu to write a will.

古文：后王废，宣帝立，大将军光领尚书事，条奏群臣谏昌邑王者皆超迁。
现代文：后来昌邑王被废，漠宣帝即位，大将军霍光领尚书事，他上书分条奏请皇上，凡是当时曾规谏过昌邑王的大臣都破格升官。
English: Later, King Changyi was abolished, Emperor Mu Xuan ascended to the throne, and General Huo Guang received Shang Shujie. He sent a letter to the emperor, and all the ministers who had been appointed by King Changyi at that time were promoted.

古文：定国由是为光禄大夫，平尚书事，甚见任用。
现代文：于定国因此而升任光禄大夫，平尚书事，很受重用。
English: As a result, Yu Dingguo was promoted to the post of doctor of Guanglu, and he was in charge of calligraphy, which was very important to him.

古文：数年，迁水衡都尉，超过廷尉。
现代文：几年后，又改任水衡都尉，被破格提升为廷尉。
English: A few years later, he was reappointed as Captain of the Water Conservancy and was promoted to Captain of the Imperial Court.

古文：定国乃迎师学《春秋》，身执经，北面备弟子礼。
现代文：于定国于是拜师学习《春秋》，亲自手执经书，面北而行弟子之礼。
English: Yu Dingguo then studied "Spring and Autumn" with his teacher, personally holding the scripture book in his hand, and bowed his head to the north to perform the disciple's salute.

古文：为人廉恭，尤重经术士，虽卑贱徒步往过，定国皆与钧礼，恩敬甚备，学士咸称焉。
现代文：他为人谦虚恭谨，尤其敬重精通经术的士人，即使是地位低下，徒步行走前来拜访的人，定国都以平等礼仪相待，照顾周全，尊崇备至，因此，受到士人的普遍赞誉。
English: He was a humble and respectful person. He especially respected the scholars who were well versed in the art of medicine. Even if they were low-ranking and came to visit on foot, Dingguo treated them with equal etiquette, took good care of them, and respected them. Therefore, he was widely praised by the scholars.

古文：其决疑平法，务在哀鳏寡，罪疑从轻。加审慎之心。
现代文：于定国判案公允，尽可能体恤鳏寡孤独之人，不是特别肯定的犯罪，都尽量从轻发落，格外注意保持审慎的态度。
English: Yu Dingguo's judgment is fair, as far as possible sympathetic to the widowed and lonely people, not a particularly positive crime, as far as possible from the light, pay special attention to maintain a prudent attitude.

古文：朝廷称之曰： 张释之为廷尉，天下无冤民；于定国为廷尉，民自以不冤。 
现代文：朝廷上下都称赞他说： 张释之任廷尉，天下没有受冤枉的人；于定国任廷尉，百姓都自认为不冤枉。 
English: The imperial court praised him from top to bottom: Zhang Xizhi was appointed as a courtier, and no one in the world was wronged; Yu Dingguo was appointed as a courtier, and the people all thought that he was not wronged.

古文：定国食酒至数石不乱，冬月治请谳，饮酒益精明。
现代文：于定国很能喝酒，连饮数石也不会醉，深冬时节请他办案议罪，饮酒后更加精明。
English: Yu Dingguo can drink very well, even if he drinks several stones, he will not get drunk. In the late winter, he will be asked to handle cases and plead guilty, and he will be more astute after drinking.

古文：为廷尉十八岁，迁御史大夫。
现代文：做了十八年廷尉后，升任御史大夫。
English: After serving as a courtier for eighteen years, he was promoted to the post of Imperial Historian.

古文：甘露中，代黄霸为丞相，封西平侯。
现代文：甘露年间，定国取代黄霸任丞相，被封为西平侯。
English: During the Kanro era, Dingguo replaced Huangba as chancellor and was given the title of Xipinghou.

古文：三年，宣帝崩，元帝立，以定国任职旧臣，敬重之。
现代文：三年后，宣帝驾崩，元帝即位，因定国是在职的先帝旧臣，汉元帝很敬重他。
English: Three years later, Emperor Xuan died and Emperor Yuan ascended to the throne. Emperor Han highly respected Emperor Yuan because he was a former emperor and a former vassal of the ruling state.

古文：时陈万年为御史大夫，与定国并位八年，论议无所拂。
现代文：当时陈万年任御史大夫，与定国共事八年，两人议论政事没有相抵触的情况。
English: At that time, Chen Mannian held the post of Imperial Historian and worked with Dingguo for eight years. The two discussed political affairs and there was no conflict.

古文：后贡禹代为御史大夫，数处驳议，定国明习政事，率常丞相议可。
现代文：后来贡禹代替陈万年为御史大夫，与定国政见多有不和，由于定国比较明了熟悉政事，所以在许多问题上汉元帝往往认同定国的意见。
English: Later, Gong Yu replaced Chen Wan Rong as the imperial historian, and he had a lot of disagreements with Ding Guo Zheng. Since Ding Guo was relatively clear and familiar with political affairs, Emperor Han Yuan often agreed with Ding Guo's opinions on many issues.

古文：然上始即位，关东连年被灾害，民流入关，言事者归咎于大臣。
现代文：然而，元帝刚即位不久，关东连年遭受灾害，百姓流离失所，大批涌入关内，有人上书皇上把责任推到主管大臣身上。
English: However, soon after the Yuan Emperor ascended the throne, Guandong suffered from disasters year after year, the people were displaced, and a large number of people poured into Guandong. Some people wrote to the emperor to put the responsibility on the minister in charge.

古文：上于是数以朝日引见丞相、御史，入受诏，条责以职事，曰： 恶吏负贼，妄意良民，至亡辜死。或盗贼发，吏不亟追而反系亡家，后不敢复告，以故浸广。
现代文：元帝于是多次在听朝之日召见丞相、御史，进宫受诏，逐条用职事责备他们，说： 地方上那些狡诈不忠的官吏害怕因捕拿盗贼不力而遭受责罚，任意怀疑加害良民，甚至使无辜之人冤屈而死，有的官吏发现盗贼后，不立即去追捕，却反而拘禁丢失财物的人家，使得后来百姓再受到盗贼的劫掠也不敢向官府报告，因此使得灾祸和恶劣风气逐渐滋长扩展。
English: Therefore, Emperor Yuan summoned the prime minister and the minister of history several times on the day of the morning of the hearing, entered the palace to receive the edict, and reproached them with their duties one by one, saying: Those cunning and disloyal local officials were afraid of being punished for their inability to capture the thieves, and arbitrarily suspected and harmed the good people, and even caused the death of an innocent person. Some officials did not immediately pursue the thieves after they found them, but instead detained the families of those who lost their property, so that later the people were robbed by the thieves and did not dare to report to the government, thus causing the disaster and bad customs to gradually grow

古文：民多冤结，州郡不理，连上书者交于阙廷。
现代文：老百姓多有冤抑，州郡官吏却不加处理解决，不断有上书鸣冤的人来到京城。
English: Many common people have grievances, but the state and county officials have not dealt with them, and people who have written to complain have come to Beijing.

古文：二千石选举不实，是以在位多不任职。
现代文：由于二千石的官员选举的下属官吏名不符实，因此，令长丞尉诸官在位者多不称职。
English: Due to the fact that the names of the subordinate officials elected by the officials of two thousand koku are not true, therefore, most of the officials who are in office are incompetent.

古文：民田有灾害，吏不肯除，收趣其租，以故重困。
现代文：农田遭受灾害，官吏不肯减免其赋税，反而催收其租，以致百姓穷困加重。
English: When farmlands suffer disasters, government officials refuse to reduce or waive their taxes, but instead collect their rents, thus increasing the poverty of the people.

古文：关东流民饥寒疾疫，已诏吏转漕，虚仓廪开府臧相振救，赐寒者衣，至春犹恐不赡。
现代文：关东流民饥寒交迫，疾病流行，朕已下韶令官吏转拨漕粮，打开仓廪，拿出库藏之物，救济灾民，向灾民们赐发了御寒冬衣，这些措施维持到春天犹恐不足。
English: The Kanto refugees are suffering from cold and hunger, and diseases are prevalent. I have issued an order to officials to redistribute rations, open storehouses, take out stored goods, and provide relief to the victims. Winter coats have been distributed to the victims. These measures may not be enough to last until spring.

古文：今丞相、御史将欲何施以塞此咎？
现代文：现在丞相、御史你们打算怎样弥补这些过错呢？
English: Now, Mr. Prime Minister and Mr. President, how do you plan to make up for these mistakes?

古文：悉意条状，陈朕过失。 
现代文：你们都要认真列举情状，陈述我的过失。 
English: You're all going to have to carefully enumerate the circumstances and state my culpability.

古文：定国上书谢罪。
现代文：定国于是上书谢罪。
English: So Sadakuni wrote a letter of apology.

古文：永光元年，春霜夏寒，日青亡光，上复以诏条责曰： 郎有从东方来者，言民父子相弃。
现代文：永光元年，春天降霜，夏季寒冷，太阳暗而无光，汉元帝又下韶分条责备说： 一个从束部来的郎官说那裹的老百姓因灾荒父子不能相保。
English: In the first year of the Yongguang era, the spring was frosty, the summer was cold, the sun was dim and there was no light, and Emperor Han Yuanzhong issued a reprimand saying: A vassal from Sokube said that the common people in that area could not protect themselves and their children due to the disaster.

古文：丞相、御史案事之吏匿不言邪？
现代文：这些情况丞相、御史你们这些主管大臣为什么隐瞒不报告呢？
English: Why do you, the ministers in charge, conceal these facts and not report them?

古文：将从东方来者加增之也？
现代文：或是从束部来的那位官员夸大其词了？
English: Or was the official from Sokobe exaggerating?

古文：何以错缪至是？欲知其实。
现代文：两方面反映的情况为什么有这样大的差异，我希望了解其真实情况。
English: I would like to know why there is such a big difference in the situation reflected by the two sides, and I would like to know the true situation.

古文：方今年岁未可预知也，即有水旱，其忧不细。
现代文：今年的收成还尚难预料，一旦有水旱之灾，后果很让人担心。
English: This year's harvest is still difficult to predict, and if there is a flood or drought, the consequences are very worrying.

古文：公卿有可以防其未然，救其已然者不？
现代文：公卿大臣你们有什么可以防患于未然，或救难于已然的办法没有？
English: Minister of State, is there anything you can do to prevent this from happening in the first place, or to help those who are already in trouble?

古文：各以诚对，毋有所讳。 
现代文：请各位以实相告，不要有什么隐讳。 
English: Please tell us the truth, don't hide anything.

古文：定国惶恐，上书自劾，归侯印，乞骸骨。
现代文：定国见此诏书，内心惶恐害怕，于是上书引咎自责，并归还侯印，乞求告老还乡。
English: When Ding Guo saw this edict, his heart panicked and he was afraid, so he wrote a letter blaming himself, and returned the seal, begging to return to his hometown.

古文：上报曰： 君相朕躬，不敢怠息，万方之事，大录于君。
现代文：汉元帝答覆其所请说： 您辅佐我治理天下，不敢稍有懈怠休息，国家各种政事，都是由您总揽的。
English: Emperor Han Yuan replied to his request, saying, "You are assisting me in governing the world. Don't dare to slack off. You are in charge of all the political affairs of the country.

古文：能毋过者，其唯圣人。
现代文：人非圣贤，孰能无过。
English: No man is a saint.

古文：方今承周、秦之敝，俗化陵夷，民寡礼谊，阴阳不调，灾咎之发，不为一端而作，自圣人推类以记，不敢专也，况于非圣者乎！
现代文：现今我汉朝承接着周、秦以来穷困衰敝的局面，民俗教化衰落，百姓缺少礼仪，阴阳失调，灾祸出现，不是单一的原因所引起的，推类考察古之所记圣人言行，尚不敢自己独担过失，更何况是平常之人呢！
English: Nowadays, our Han Dynasty inherits the situation of poverty and decline since the Zhou and Qin Dynasties, the decline of folk culture and enlightenment, the people's lack of etiquette, the imbalance of yin and yang, and the emergence of disasters, which are not caused by a single cause. By analogy, we examine the words and deeds of the saints recorded in ancient times. We still dare not bear the fault alone, let alone ordinary people!

古文：日夜惟思所以，未能尽明。
现代文：我曰思夜想，是什么原因导致这些灾难的，还是没能完全搞清楚。
English: I said to myself, I still haven't completely figured out what caused these disasters.

古文：经曰： 万方有罪，罪在朕躬。 
现代文：经书上说： 如果说天下有罪过的话，那么所有的过错都该归在我一国之主的身上。 
English: The scriptures say: If the whole world is guilty, then all the blame should fall on the Lord of our country.

古文：君虽任职，何必颛焉？
现代文：您虽身居要职，又何必独担责任呢？
English: Although you are in an important position, why do you have to bear the sole responsibility?

古文：其勉察郡国守相群牧，非其人者毋令久贼民。
现代文：继续努力监察郡国守相等地方官吏，不称职的不要让他继续在位欺压百姓。
English: Continue to monitor local officials such as county governors, and do not allow incompetent officials to continue to oppress the people.

古文：永执纲纪，务悉聪明，强食慎疾。 
现代文：请您继续主持国家大政，力求用尽你的聪明才智，还当努力进食，小心养护身体。 
English: Please continue to preside over the country's major policies, strive to exhaust your ingenuity, eat hard, and take care of your body.

古文：定国遂称笃，固辞。上乃赐安车驷马、黄金六十斤，罢就第。
现代文：定国于是又上书说病情加重，坚决要求辞官归乡，元帝便赐给他四匹马拉的可以坐乘的车、黄金六十斤，罢官归家。
English: Dingguo then wrote again, saying that his condition had worsened, and firmly demanded that the official return to his hometown. The Yuan Emperor then gave him a four-horse carriage that he could ride, sixty catties of gold, and dismissed him to return home.

古文：数岁，七十余薨。谥曰安侯。
现代文：又过了几年，定国七十多岁时逝世，谧号安侯。
English: A few years later, Sadakuni passed away at the age of over seventy, and his posthumous name was Anhō.

古文：子永嗣。
现代文：于定国死后，他的儿子于永荫袭了他的爵位。
English: After Yu Dingguo's death, his son Yu Yongyin succeeded to his title.

古文：少时，耆酒多过失，年且三十，乃折节修行，以父任为侍中中郎将、长水校尉。
现代文：于永年少时因嗜酒而多有过失，年近三十时却改变志节修养品行，并依靠父亲的荫泽出任侍中中郎将、长水校尉。
English: When he was young, he often made mistakes due to alcoholism, but at the age of nearly thirty, he changed his moral code and relied on his father's shadow to serve as a Vice-Commander and Captain of the Chosui School.

古文：定国死，居丧如礼，孝行闻。
现代文：于定国逝世时，他遵照礼仪居家守丧，以孝道而闻名。
English: When Dingguo died, he followed the etiquette of staying at home to mourn, and was known for his filial piety.

古文：由是以列侯为散骑、光禄勋，至御史大夫。
现代文：于是以列侯的身份授任散骑光禄勋，官至御史大夫。
English: As a result, he was awarded the Order of the Star of the Order of the Star of the Star of the Order of the Star of the Star of the Order of the Star of the Star of the Star of the Order of the Star of the Star of the Star of the Star of the Star of the Order of the Star of the Star of the Star of the Star of the Star of the Star of the Star of the Star of the Star of the Star of the Star of the Star.

古文：尚馆陶公主施。
现代文：并娶馆陶公主刘施为妻。
English: He also married Liu Shi, the princess of Guangtou.

古文：施者，宣帝长女，成帝姑也，贤有行，永以选尚焉。
现代文：刘施是漠宣帝的长女，汉成帝的姑母，贤惠而有德行，于永也因贤良而被选为驸马。
English: Liu Shi was the eldest daughter of Emperor Mu Xuan and the aunt of Emperor Han Chenglu. She was virtuous and virtuous, and Yu Yong was chosen as a wife for her virtue.

古文：上方欲相之，会永薨。
现代文：皇上正准备拜于永为宰相时，于永却逝世了。
English: When the emperor was preparing to make Yu Yong prime minister, Yu Yong passed away.

古文：子恬嗣。
现代文：于永的儿子于恬荫袭其位。
English: His son, Tian Yao, inherited the title.

古文：恬不肖，薄于行。
现代文：于恬不似其父祖那样贤良，没有什么值得称道的行为。
English: Yu Yao is not as virtuous as his forefathers, and there is nothing praiseworthy about his behavior.

古文：始，定国父于公，其闾门坏，父老方共治之。于公谓曰： 少高大闾门，令容驷马高盖车。
现代文：当初于定国的父亲于公在世时，他家乡的闾门坏了，同乡的父老止要一起修理闾门，于公对他们说： 把间门稍微扩建得高大些，使其能通过四匹马拉的高盖车。
English: When Yu Gong, the father of Yu Dingguo, was alive, the gate of his hometown was broken. The father of a fellow villager wanted to repair the gate together. Yu Gong said to them, "Expand the gate a little higher, so that it can pass through the four-horse carriage."

古文：我治狱多阴德，未尝有所冤，子孙必有兴者。 
现代文：我管理诉讼之事积了很多阴德，从未制造过冤案，因此我的子孙必定有兴旺发达的。 
English: I have accumulated a lot of virtues in the management of litigation, and have never created a wrongful case, so my children and grandchildren must be prosperous.

古文：至定国为丞相，永为御史大夫，封侯传世云。
现代文：后来于定国果然官至丞相，于永也官至御史大夫，并封侯传世。
English: Later, in Dingguo, he was appointed to the post of chancellor, and in Yongya, he was appointed to the post of imperial historian, and he was given the title of lord.

古文：薛广德字长卿，沛郡相人也。
现代文：薛广德，字长卿，沛郡相县人。
English: Xue Guangde, nicknamed "Changqing," was from Peixian County.

古文：以《鲁诗》教授楚国，龚胜、舍师事焉。
现代文：在楚国传授鲁人申培公所传之《诗经》，龚胜、龚舍兄弟二人都师从于他。
English: In Chu, he taught the "Song of Songs" passed down by the Lu people, Shen Pei Gong, and the two brothers, Zongsheng and Zongshe, both learned from him.

古文：萧望之为御史大夫，除广德为属，数与论议，器之，荐广德经行宜充本朝。
现代文：萧望之为御史大夫时，拜广德为自己的属官，多次与他交谈讨论，很器重他，并向皇帝举荐说广德通晓经术，行为修明，适合在朝廷任职。
English: When Xiao Wang was the imperial historian, he considered Guangde as his subordinate official. He talked and discussed with him many times, held him in high esteem, and recommended to the emperor that Guangde was familiar with the scriptures, behaved modestly, and was suitable to serve in the imperial court.

古文：为博士，论石渠，迁谏大夫，代贡禹为长信少府、御史大夫。
现代文：广德因此被征召为博士，参与石渠阁讲论，后升任谏大夫，继而取代贡禹任长信少府、御史大夫。
English: As a result, Guang De was called up as a doctor, participated in the lecture of Shiquijie Pavilion, and was later promoted to the position of Shao doctor, and then replaced Gong Yu as Changxin Shaofu and Goshi doctor.

古文：广德为人温雅有酝藉。
现代文：薛广德为人温文尔雅，宽容含蓄。
English: Xue Guangde is a gentle and elegant person, tolerant and reserved.

古文：及为三公，直言谏争。
现代文：而位及高官时，又敢于直言争谏。
English: When he was in power and a high-ranking official, he dared to be outspoken.

古文：始拜旬日间，上幸甘泉，郊泰时畤，礼毕，因留射猎。
现代文：当初他刚任御史大夫十天左右，正遇皇帝巡幸甘泉宫，并郊祀于泰时，仪式结束后，皇帝仍逗留射猎。
English: At that time, he had just served as the imperial historian for about ten days. He was meeting the emperor on a tour of Ganquan Palace, and was worshiping in the suburbs of Tai. After the ceremony, the emperor still stayed for shooting.

古文：广德上书曰： 窃见关东困极，人民流离。
现代文：广德上书说： 臣下看见关东贫困已极，百姓流离失所。
English: Guangde wrote: "Our subjects have seen the extreme poverty in Kanto and the displacement of the people.

古文：陛下日撞亡秦之钟，听郑、卫之乐，臣诚悼之。
现代文：陛下您却每天敲着亡秦的编钟，欣赏着郑、卫的音乐，臣下我实在感到哀痛。
English: Your Majesty, every day you strike the bell of the dead Qin Dynasty and enjoy the music of Zheng and Wei. I really feel sad for you.

古文：今士卒暴露，从官劳倦，愿队下亟反官，思与百姓同忧乐，天下幸甚。 
现代文：如今护驾的士卒们曝露风霜，随从的大臣们也疲惫不堪，希望陛下您尽早返回宫中，考虑与百姓同忧同乐，造就是天下民众的大幸。 
English: Now, the officers escorting the carriage are exposed to the weather, and the ministers accompanying the carriage are also exhausted. I hope that Your Majesty will return to the palace as soon as possible and consider sharing the same joys and sorrows with the people. This would be a great happiness for the people of the world.

古文：上即日还。
现代文：皇帝当天就回宫了。
English: The emperor returned to the palace the same day.

古文：其秋，上酎祭宗庙，出便门，欲御楼船，广德当乘舆车，免冠顿首曰： 宜从桥。 
现代文：这年秋天，皇帝用醇酒祭祀宗庙，从便门出来后，准备换乘楼船过河，薛广德拦住车马摘帽叩首向皇上进谏说： 陛下应当乘车从桥上过河。 
English: In the autumn of that year, the emperor used alcohol to sacrifice the ancestral temple. After coming out of the toilet, he was ready to transfer to the boat to cross the river. Xue Guangde stopped the car and horse, took off his hat, bowed his head to the emperor and said: Your Majesty should cross the river by car.

古文：诏曰： 大夫冠。 
现代文：皇上说： 请戴好您的帽子吧。 
English: The emperor said, "Please put on your hat."

古文：广德曰： 陛下不听臣，臣自刎，以血污车轮，陛下不得入庙矣！ 
现代文：广德坚持说： 陛下您如果不听从我的劝告，我就自杀在您面前，让我的血玷污您的车轮，使您不能进入宗庙！ 
English: Guang De insisted, "Your Majesty, if you do not listen to my advice, I will commit suicide in front of you, let my blood stain your wheels, so that you cannot enter the ancestral temple!"

古文：上不说。
现代文：皇上很不高兴。
English: As a result, the Son of Heaven is not satisfied with the Bo style.

古文：先驱光禄大夫张猛进曰： 臣闻主圣臣直。
现代文：这时走在前面先驱开道的光禄大夫张猛进言说： 我听说主上圣明，臣下才敢直谏。
English: At this time, Guanglu doctor Zhang Mengjin, who was the first to open the way, said: I heard that the Lord is holy, and only his vassals dare to stand up to him.

古文：乘船危，就桥安，圣主不乘危。
现代文：乘船渡河危险，从桥上过去比较安全，圣明之君是不会选择危险之路的。
English: It is dangerous to cross the river by boat, but it is safer to go over the bridge. The Prince of Wisdom will not choose a dangerous path.

古文：御史大夫言可听。 
现代文：御史大夫的建议是可以采纳的。 
English: Dr. Mishi's suggestion can be adopted.

古文：上曰： 晓人不当如是邪！ 
现代文：皇上说： 臣下劝谏难道不应当像张猛这样吗。 
English: The emperor said, "Shouldn't you persuade your vassals to be like Zhang Meng?"

古文：乃从桥。
现代文：于是接受建议乘车从桥上而过。
English: So Emperor Hanwen passed by on the bridge.

古文：后月余，以岁恶民流，与丞相定国、大司马车骑将军史高俱乞骸骨，皆赐安车驷马、黄金六十斤，罢。
现代文：从来又过了一个多月，因为年成不好，百姓大量流离，薛广德和丞相于定国、大司马车骑将军史高等都要求引咎辞官归乡，他们均被皇上厚赐了四匹马拉的坐车，六十斤黄金，免官而归。
English: Since then, more than a month has passed. Because of the bad year and the large number of displaced people, Xue Guangde, the prime minister Yu Dingguo, and the grand secretary of the carriage ride, General Shi Gaoli, all demanded the resignation of the officials to return to their hometowns. They were all given a four-horse carriage and sixty pounds of gold by the emperor. They were dismissed and returned.

古文：广德为御史大夫，凡十月免。
现代文：薛广德为御史大夫共十个月就免职了。
English: Xue Guangde was relieved of his duties after a total of ten months as chief historian.

古文：东归沛，太守迎之界上。
现代文：他束归家乡沛郡时，郡太守亲自到边界上迎接他。
English: When he returned to his hometown of Pei County, the county governor personally went to the border to meet him.

古文：沛以为荣，县其安车传子孙。
现代文：沛郡以他为荣，高悬皇上赐给他的坐车以传示子孙后代。
English: Pei County is proud of him, and the carriage given to him by the emperor hangs high to show it to future generations.

古文：平当字子思，祖父以訾百万，自下邑徙平陵。
现代文：平当，字子思，其祖父因有资财百万从下邑县迁至平陵县。
English: Pingtang, Zizi Si, whose grandfather moved from Shimoi County to Pingling County because of his million-dollar fortune.

古文：当少为大行治礼丞，功次补大鸿胪文学，察廉为顺阳长、栒邑令，以明经为博士，公卿荐当论议通明，给事中。
现代文：平当年轻时曾任大行治礼丞，因功补为大鸿胪文学，察举廉洁被先后选任顺阳长、拘邑令，因通晓经术被征召为博士，公卿大臣们因平当精通经术，议论通透明白，而举荐他为给事中。
English: When he was young, Ping Dang served as the grand secretary of the government, and he was praised as a great scholar of literature for his merits, and he was elected as the Shunyang chief and the governor of Guzheng county for his probity and integrity. He was called up as a doctor for his knowledge of the scriptures. The noble ministers recommended him for the position because he was proficient in the scriptures, and his discussions were clear and lucid.

古文：每有灾异，当辄傅经术，言得失。
现代文：每逢国家有灾异之事发生，平当就以经术为据，谈论得失。
English: Whenever a national calamity occurs, it is normal to discuss the gains and losses on the basis of the scriptures.

古文：文雅虽不能及萧望之、匡衡，然指意略同。
现代文：其言语文辞之雅洁虽然比不上萧望之和匡衡，然而意旨却大体相同。
English: Although the elegance and purity of his words are not as good as those of Shouwang and Kuangheng, the meaning is roughly the same.

古文：自元帝时，韦玄成为丞相，奏罢太上皇寝庙园，当上书言： 臣闻孔子曰： 如有王者，必世而后仁。 
现代文：汉元帝时，韦玄成任丞相，奏请废除太上皇陵寝和庙园，平当上书说： 臣下听说孔夫子曾云： 若有王者兴起治理天下，三十年后仁道必成。 
English: During the reign of Emperor Han Yuan, Wei Xuancheng, who was the Minister of Justice, petitioned for the abolition of the imperial mausoleum and temple, and Ping Dang wrote: His subjects have heard that Confucius once said: If a king arises to rule the world, after thirty years benevolence will prevail.

古文：三十年之间，道德和洽，制礼兴乐，灾害不生，祸乱不作。
现代文：三十年之间，道德和谐融洽，礼乐制度完备，灾害不生，祸乱不起。
English: In the past 30 years, morality has been harmonious and harmonious, the ritual music system has been complete, no disasters have occurred, and no disasters have occurred.

古文：今圣汉受命而王，继体承业二百余年，孜孜不怠，政令清矣。
现代文：如今我神圣的汉王朝受天命而治天下，继承前代留下的基业已有二百多年，勤奋而不敢懈怠，政令清明。
English: Today, my sacred Han Dynasty is destined by heaven to rule the world. It has inherited the legacy left by the previous generation for more than 200 years. It is diligent and does not dare to slack off, and its decrees are clear.

古文：然风俗未和，阴阳未调，灾害数见，意者大本有不立与？
现代文：但是，风俗尚未和顺，阴阳还未调和，灾害屡屡发生，我想是否因为还有什么重要的根本性的东西尚未修备呢？
English: However, customs have yet to be harmonized, yin and yang have yet to be reconciled, and disasters have repeatedly occurred. I wonder if this is because there are still some important fundamental things that have yet to be repaired.

古文：何德化休征不应之久也！
现代文：要不然为何很长时间没有出现道德教化的祥征吉兆了！
English: Otherwise, why has there been no sign of moral enlightenment for a long time?

古文：祸福不虚，必有因而至者焉。
现代文：祸与福的出现不是毫无缘由的，一定是由于某种原因才会产生的。
English: The emergence of misfortune and good fortune is not for no reason, it must be due to some reason.

古文：宜深迹其道而务修其本。
现代文：应当深入探求其原因和规律，并据此以修养根本。
English: It is necessary to deeply explore its causes and laws, and to cultivate the fundamentals accordingly.

古文：昔者帝尧南面而治，先 克胆俊德，以亲九族 ，而化及万国《孝经》曰 天地之性人为贵，人之行莫大于孝，孝莫大于严父，严父莫大于配天，则周公其人也。 
现代文：从前帝尧为王治理天下，首先 任用同族贤良之人，使他们身居显位，以此亲睦九族，而后推及天下周邦。《孝经》上说： 天地间的生命以人为贵，人的行为中没有比实行孝道更重要的事了，实行孝道最重要的在于尊敬父亲，要尊敬父亲，莫过于祭天时以父祖先辈配享，周公就是能够这样做的人。 
English: In the past, emperors ruled the world as kings. First, they appointed wise and virtuous people from the same ethnic group and placed them in prominent positions. In this way, the nine ethnic groups were reconciled, and then the world was ruled by Zhou. "The Book of Filial Piety" says: "Life in heaven and earth is precious to man. There is nothing more important in human behavior than practicing filial piety. The most important thing in practicing filial piety is to respect one's father. To respect one's father, there is no better way than to share with one's father and ancestors when offering sacrifices to heaven. Zhou Gong is the person who can do

古文：夫孝子善述人之志，周公既成文、武之业而制作礼乐，修严父配天之事，知文王不欲以子临父，故推而序之，上极于后稷而以配天。
现代文：孝子善于遵循先辈的志向，周公完成了文王、武王开创的事业而制定礼乐制度，修治尊父配享之事，他了解文王不愿以人子而君临于父祖之上，所以往上溯祖排列，推及始祖后稷，以后稷配天。
English: As a dutiful son, he was good at following the aspirations of his predecessors. Zhou Gong completed the work initiated by King Wen and King Wu, and formulated a ritual music system to govern the sharing of honor with his father. He understood that King Wen did not want to reign over his father and grandfather as a human son, so he traced his ancestry upwards, pushing it to the ancestor Houyi, and then to Heaven.

古文：此圣人之德，亡以加于孝也。
现代文：造就是圣人的德性，是最大最重要的孝道。
English: Making is the virtue of a saint, and is the greatest and most important filial duty.

古文：高皇帝圣德受命，有天下，尊太上皇，犹周文、武之追王太王、王季也。
现代文：我汉朝高皇帝因圣德而受命于天，拥有天下，尊奉太上皇，如同周朝文王、武王之追尊太王、王季一样。
English: I, Emperor Gao of the Han Dynasty, have been commanded by heaven because of my holiness, and I possess the whole world. I am honored to be the last emperor, just as King Wen and King Wu of the Zhou Dynasty were honored to be the last emperor, and so was King Ji.

古文：此汉之始祖，后嗣所宜尊奉以广盛德，孝之至也。
现代文：太上皇是汉王朝的始祖，后代应当尊奉他，以此推广盛大的恩德，这是孝道中最重要的事了。
English: Emperor Taizong is the progenitor of the Han Dynasty, and future generations should respect him and promote great benevolence, which is the most important thing in filial piety.

古文：《书》云： 正稽古建功立事，可以永年，传于亡穷。  
现代文：《尚书》云： 能够正确地考察以往的历史用以立功立事，便可以永享天年，国家传于子孙万代以至于无穷。  
English: "Shangshu" cloud: If you can correctly examine the past history and use it to make achievements, you can enjoy eternal life, and the country will be passed down to generations and generations to infinity.

古文：上纳其言，下诏复太上皇寝庙园。
现代文：皇上采纳了他的意见，下诏恢复太上皇的陵寝庙园。
English: The emperor adopted his opinion and issued an edict to restore the imperial mausoleum.

古文：顷之，使行流民幽州。举奏刺史二千石劳徕有意者，言勃海盐池可且勿禁，以救民急。
现代文：不久，出使幽州考察流民情况，上奏举荐那些能够尽心尽力安抚招徕百姓的刺史、二千石官吏，并建议暂且开放渤海盐池由国家垄断的禁令，让流民们煮盐求生，以解百姓的燃眉之急。
English: Soon, he was dispatched to Yuzhou to investigate the situation of the displaced people, to report and recommend those who could do their best to appease the people of Zhouzhuang, and suggested that the ban on the state monopoly of salt ponds in the Bohai Sea should be temporarily opened, so that the displaced people could boil salt to survive, in order to solve the urgent needs of the people.

古文：所过见称，奉使者十一人，为最，迁丞相司直。
现代文：他所到之处，民众无不称赞，是十一位出使官员中最有政绩的人，升任丞相司直。
English: Wherever he went, the people praised him. He was the most successful of the eleven officials sent to Japan, and was promoted to the post of prime minister.

古文：坐法，左迁逆方刺史，复征入为太中大夫给事中，累迁长信少府、大鸿胪、光禄勋。
现代文：后因犯法降职为朔方刺史，不久又征召入朝，任太中大夫给事中，累官长信少府、大鸿胪、光禄勋。
English: Later, he was demoted to the rank of Shao Fang Shishi due to a crime, and soon he was conscripted into the imperial court. He was appointed to the position of Tai Zhong Dafu (middle-ranking doctor), and was awarded the titles of Changxin Shofu, Dai Hongyi, and Guang Rukun.

古文：先是，太后姊子卫尉淳于长白言昌陵不可成，下有司议。
现代文：在此之前，太后姐姐的儿子卫尉淳于长进言说昌陵不能再修建，皇帝将他的意见下达给有关部门讨论。
English: Prior to this, the son of the empress dowager's sister, Wei Yi Jun Yuchang, said that Changling could no longer be built, and the emperor sent his opinion to the relevant departments for discussion.

古文：当以为作治连年，可遂就。
现代文：平当认为昌陵已修建了好几年，与其半途而废，不如继续修建完成。
English: It is generally believed that the Changling Mausoleum has been under construction for several years. Rather than abandoning it halfway, it is better to continue building it to completion.

古文：上既罢昌陵，以长首建忠策，复下公卿议封长。
现代文：后来皇帝决定停止昌陵的修建，又因为是淳于长首先提出的这一建议，因此下诏让公卿大臣们商议给淳于长封爵之事。
English: Later, the emperor decided to stop the construction of the Changling Mausoleum, and since it was Chun Yu Chang who first proposed this proposal, he issued a decree to let the noblemen and ministers discuss the matter of giving Chun Yu Chang a knighthood.

古文：当又以为长虽有善言，不应封爵之科。
现代文：平当又提出淳于长虽然提出了好的建议，但却不符合封爵的条件。
English: Pingdan also said that although Jun Yuchang made good suggestions, they did not meet the conditions for knighting.

古文：坐前议不正，左迁钜鹿太守。后上遂封上。
现代文：因此，皇上以平当在讨论是否停建昌陵一事时，提出了不正确的意见为由，将平当降为钜鹿太守，后来皇上就封了淳于长。
English: As a result, the emperor demoted Ping Dang to the position of the governor of Yangtze Province on the grounds that he had put forward incorrect opinions when discussing whether to stop the construction of Changling Mausoleum. Later, the emperor appointed Jun Yu as the governor.

古文：当以经明《禹贡》，使行河，为骑都尉，领河堤。
现代文：平当因精通经书《禹贡》篇，被派出使巡视黄河，任骑都尉，兼理黄河堤务。
English: Ping Dang, because of his mastery of the scripture "Yugong" chapter, was sent to inspect the Yellow River, appointed as a cavalry captain, and also in charge of the Yellow River embankment.

古文：哀帝即位，征当为光禄大夫、诸吏、散骑，复为光禄勋、御史大夫，至丞相。
现代文：汉哀帝即位后，征召平当为光禄大夫诸吏散骑，又先后任光禄勋，御史大夫，官至丞相。
English: After Emperor Han's ascension to the throne, Ping Dang was conscripted as the doctor of Guanglu, and successively served as the doctor of Guanglu, the doctor of history, and the minister of justice.

古文：以冬月，赐爵关内侯。
现代文：因为正值冬月，不是封侯的时候，所以哀帝先赐平当关内侯的爵位。
English: Because it was the winter month, not the time to seal the marquis, the emperor first gave Ping Dang the title of Marquis of Guanzhong.

古文：明年春，上使使者召，欲封当。
现代文：第二年春天，哀帝派使者召平当入朝，准备封他为侯。
English: In the spring of the following year, Emperor Ai sent an envoy to summon Ping Dang to the imperial court in preparation for him to be made a marquis.

古文：当病笃，不应召。
现代文：平当病重，不能应召。
English: He is seriously ill and cannot be called up.

古文：室家或谓当： 不可强起受侯印为子孙耶？ 
现代文：家裹有人对他说： 为子孙着想您难道不能强撑病体起来接受封侯吗？ 
English: At home, someone said to him: For the sake of your descendants, can't you force yourself to accept the title of prince?

古文：当曰： 吾居大位，已负素餐之责矣，起受侯印，还卧而死，死有余罪。
现代文：平当回答说： 我现在身居高位，已受到无功食禄的指责了，如今强撑起来接受封侯，回来躺下就死了，也是死有余罪。
English: Ping Dang replied, "I am now in a high position, I have already been accused of doing nothing, and now I have to stand up and accept the shackles, come back and lie down and die, which is also a mortal sin.

古文：今不起者，所以为子孙也。 
现代文：我如今不去接受封侯，正是为子孙着想啊！ 
English: I'm not going to accept the title of feudal lord now, it's for the sake of my descendants!

古文：遂上书乞骸骨。
现代文：于是上书请求告老还乡。
English: So he wrote a letter asking to be allowed to return to his hometown.

古文：上报曰： 朕选于众，以君为相，视事日寡，辅政未久，阴阳不调，冬无大雪，旱气为灾，朕之不德，何必君罪？
现代文：哀帝批示说： 我把您从群臣中选拔出来，任为丞相，您辅佐我治理国事的时间不长，现在天下阴阳不调和，冬天未降大雪，天旱成灾，这都是因为我没有德行造成的，怎能怪罪于您呢？
English: "I selected you from among my ministers and appointed you chancellor. The time you have been assisting me in governing state affairs is not long. At present, the yin and yang are not in harmony, there is no heavy snowfall in winter, and the drought has become a disaster. All of this is caused by my lack of virtue. How can I blame you?

古文：君何疑而上书乞骸骨，归关内侯爵邑？
现代文：您又为何心存疑虑而上书要求告老返乡，并送还关内侯的爵位和封邑呢？
English: Also, why did you have doubts and write a letter requesting that he return home at an old age and return the title and fiefdom of the Marquis of Kwanai?

古文：使尚书令谭赐君养牛一，上尊酒十石。
现代文：我让尚书令谭给您送去一头牛，十石好酒。
English: I asked Shang Shuling Tan to send you a cow, ten stone of good wine.

古文：君其勉致医药以自持。 
现代文：您要积极求医问药，多多保重啊。 
English: You should actively seek medical treatment. Take good care of yourself.

古文：后月余，卒。
现代文：又过了一个多月，平当去世。
English: After more than a month, Ping Dang passed away.

古文：子晏以明经历位大司徒，封防乡侯。
现代文：其子平晏因精通经义而官至大司徒，被封为防乡侯。
English: His son, Taira no Shizuku, rose to the rank of Daisetsu due to his proficiency in the teachings of the sutras, and was given the title of Hoso.

古文：汉兴，唯韦、平父子至宰相。
现代文：自汉朝建立以来，祇有韦贤和平当两家父子皆官至宰相之位。
English: Since the establishment of the Han Dynasty, only Wei Xian and Heping Dang, two fathers and sons, have been promoted to the position of prime minister.

古文：鼓宣字子佩，淮阳阳夏人也。
现代文：彭宣，字子佩，淮阳阳夏人。
English: Peng Xuan, Zizi Pei, Huaiyang Yang Xia Ren.

古文：治《易》，事张禹，举为博士，迁东平太傅。
现代文：研习《易经》，师从张禹，被选举为博士，又改任束平王国太傅。
English: Studied "I Ching" under Zhang Yu, was elected as a doctor, and was also appointed as the tutor of the Sokping Kingdom.

古文：禹以帝师见尊信，荐宣经明有威重，可任政事，繇是入为右扶风，迁廷尉，以王国人出为太原太守。
现代文：张禹因曾是漠成帝的老师而受到尊敬和信任，他向皇上举荐说彭宣精通经义且稳重而有威信，可以担任朝廷官吏，于是彭宣入朝任右扶风，不久又迁任廷尉，后因汉初规定各诸侯王国的人不得在京城为官，所以出任太原郡太守。
English: Zhang Yu was respected and trusted because he had been a teacher of Emperor Mu Cheng. He recommended to the emperor that Peng Xuan was proficient in the classics and had the stability and prestige to serve as an official of the imperial court. Peng Xuan was appointed to the imperial court as the right-hand man of Fu Feng, and was soon transferred to the position of court lieutenant. Later, because of the early Han Dynasty stipulation that people from various princely kingdoms were not allowed to serve as officials in the capital, he became the governor of Taiyuan County.

古文：数年，复入为大司农、光禄勋、右将军。
现代文：数年后，又入京城担任大司农、光禄勋、右将军等职。
English: A few years later, he returned to the capital to assume the posts of Daisho Nongro, Kōrokuhun, and General of the Right.

古文：哀帝即位，徙为左将军。
现代文：汉哀帝即位后，改任左将军。
English: After Emperor Han's accession to the throne, he was reassigned to the position of General of the Left.

古文：岁余，上欲令丁、傅处爪牙官，乃策宣曰： 有司数奏言诸侯国人不得宿卫，将军不宜典兵马，处大位。
现代文：过了一年多时间，汉哀帝打算任用外戚丁、傅两家的入主管皇室的禁卫工作，于是致书彭宣说： 有关部门多次上奏说诸侯王国的人不能担任皇室的禁卫工作，将军您因是王国人所以不宜掌管军队，身居高位。
English: After more than a year, Emperor Hanei planned to appoint his maternal cousins Ding and Fu to be in charge of the imperial palace's guard work, so he sent a letter to Peng Xuan saying: The relevant departments repeatedly reported that people from princely kingdoms could not serve as royal guards. General, because you are a royal, you are not suitable to be in charge of the army and hold a high position.

古文：朕唯将军任汉将之重，而子又前取淮阳王女，婚姻不绝，非国之制。
现代文：我考虑将军您身负汉朝将领之重任，而您的儿子先前又娶了淮阳王的女儿为妻，您家与王国之间有婚姻关系，您却在京为官，这不符合国家制度。
English: I think it is not in line with the national system that you, a general, are entrusted with the important task of leading the Han Dynasty, while your son previously married the daughter of King Huaiyang, and your family has a marital relationship with the kingdom, while you are an official in Beijing.

古文：使光禄大夫曼赐将军黄金五十斤、安车驷马，其上左将军印绶，以关内侯归家。 
现代文：我让光禄大夫曼赏赐您五十斤黄金，四匹马拉的坐车，您可交还左将军的印绶，以关内侯的身份回归故乡吧。 
English: I let Guanglu Doctor Man reward you with fifty catties of gold, a four-horse carriage ride, you can return General Zuo's seal, and return to your hometown as a Guan Nei Hou.

古文：宣罢数岁，谏大夫鲍宣数荐宣。
现代文：彭宣被罢官归乡后的数年间，谏大夫鲍宣曾多次上书举荐他。
English: In the years after Peng Xuan was dismissed and returned to his hometown, Dr. Bao Xuan wrote to him several times to recommend him.

古文：会元寿元年正月朔日蚀，鲍宣复言，上乃召宣为光禄大夫，迁御史大夫，转为大司空，封长平侯。
现代文：恰逢元寿元年正月初一出现日食，鲍宣再次举荐他，汉哀帝于是召彭宣入朝任光禄大夫，又升任御史大夫，后转任大司空，封为长平侯。
English: A solar eclipse occurred on the first day of the first month of the first month of the first year of the Yuan Shou, and Bao Xuan recommended him again. Emperor Han Ai then called Peng Xuan into the court to serve as the doctor of Guanglu, and he was promoted to the doctor of history, and then he was transferred to the position of Daishi Ku, and he was given the title of Changping Hou.

古文：会哀帝崩，新都侯王莽为大司马，秉政专权。
现代文：正遇汉哀帝去世，新都侯王莽出任大司马，专揽朝政大权。
English: At the time of Emperor Han's death, Wang Mang, the prince of the new capital, assumed the position of grand steward and took over the supreme political power of the dynasty.

古文：宣上书言： 三公鼎足承君，一足不任，则覆乱美实。
现代文：彭宣上书说： 三公就如同鼎之三足，共同扶持君主，如果其中一足不胜任了，则有倾覆鼎内美食的危险。
English: Peng Xuan wrote: The three princes are like the three legs of a pinnacle, jointly supporting the monarch. If one of the legs is not up to the task, there is a danger of the pinnacle's delicacies being overturned.

古文：臣资性浅薄，年齿老眊，数伏疾病，昏乱遗忘，愿上大司空、长平侯印绶，乞骸骨归乡里，俟置沟壑。 
现代文：我天资浅薄，年老昏聩，又体弱多病，记忆衰退，希望允许我交出大司空、长平侯的印绶，回归乡里，以度残年。 
English: I am naturally shallow, old and feeble, weak and sickly, and my memory is fading. I hope that I will be allowed to return to the countryside and live out the rest of my days by handing over the seal money of Daishi Ku and Changping Hou.

古文：莽白太后，策宣曰： 惟君视事日寡，功德未效，迫于老眊昏乱，非所以辅国家、绥海内也。
现代文：王莽将此事禀告太后，太后下达给彭宣策书说： 您治理政事的时间不长，尚未建立卓著功德，却迫于老迈昏乱，不能够辅佐国家，安定海内。
English: Wang Mang reported the matter to the empress dowager, and the empress dowager issued a policy letter to Peng Xuan Rong, saying: You have not been governing political affairs for a long time, and have not yet established outstanding merits, but are forced by old age and confusion, unable to assist the country and stabilize the sea.

古文：使光禄勋丰册诏君，其上大司空印绶，便就国。 
现代文：我已让光禄勋丰奉册诏告您，请呈上大司空的印绶，回到您的封国去吧。 
English: I have ordered Guanglu Xunfeng to issue an edict to you, please present the seal of the Grand Empress Dowager and return to your fiefdom.

古文：莽恨宣求退，故不赐黄金、安车驷马。
现代文：王莽因彭宣在他专擅朝政时提出告老还乡而怨恨彭宣，因此便没有按例赐彭宣黄金和安车驷马。
English: Wang Mang held a grudge against Peng Xuan because Peng Xuan proposed to return to his hometown when he was in power. Therefore, he did not give Peng Xuan gold and a horse and carriage as usual.

古文：宣居国数年，薨，谥曰顷侯。
现代文：彭宣回到封国数年后去世，谧号顷侯。
English: Peng Xuan died a few years after he returned to China, and his posthumous name was Zhou.

古文：传子至孙，王莽败，乃绝。
现代文：其封爵传到儿子和孙子辈，到王莽篡权失败后，封国就被废除了。
English: His knighthood was passed down to his sons and grandchildren. After Wang Mang's failure to usurp power, the knighthood was abolished.

古文：赞曰：隽不疑学以从政，临事不惑，遂立名迹，终始可述。
现代文：赞日：隽不疑以饱学之士参与朝政，遇事不迷惑，功名卓著，善始善终。
English: Praise for the day: I have no doubt that he is a well-educated person who participates in court politics, is not troubled by difficulties, has outstanding achievements, and has a good beginning and a good end.

古文：疏广行止足之计，免辱殆之累，亦其次也。
现代文：疏广激流勇退，避免遭受羞辱和危险，也是可取的。
English: It is also advisable to divert the wide torrent and retreat to avoid humiliation and danger.

古文：于安国父子哀鳏哲狱，为任职臣。
现代文：于定国父子哀恤鳏寡，了解狱情，是称职的大臣。
English: Yu Dingguo and his son mourn for the widows and widowers, understand the prison conditions, and are competent ministers.

古文：薛广德保县车之荣，平当逡遁有耻，彭宣见险而止，异乎 苟患失之 者矣。
现代文：薛广德保有悬车的荣耀，平当自觉退身有廉耻之心，彭宣见境遇险恶而毅然辞官，他们都不同于那些 因害怕失去既得利益，而可以做出任何奸邪之事 的小人。
English: Xue Guangde retains the glory of the suspended car, he is shameless when he consciously retreats, and Peng Xuan resolutely resigns when he sees the perilous situation. They are all different from those villains who can do any evil thing for fear of losing their vested interests.

