古文：文王问太公曰： 天下熙熙，一盈一虚，一治一乱，所以然者，何也？
现代文：文王询问太公说： 天下纷杂熙攘，有时强盛有时衰弱，有时安定有时混乱，之所以有这种局面是为什么呢？
English: King Wen asked the Grand Duke, "The world is full of hustle and bustle, sometimes strong, sometimes weak, sometimes stable, sometimes chaotic. Why is there such a situation?

古文：其君贤不肖不等乎？
现代文：是因为君主是否贤明导致的吗？
English: Is it because of the wisdom of the monarch?

古文：其天时变化自然乎？ 
现代文：还是因为天命变化自然形成的结果呢？ 
English: Or is it a natural result of the change of fate?

古文：太公曰： 君不肖，则国危而民乱，君贤圣，则国安而民治，祸福在君不在天时。 
现代文：太公回答说： 君主不贤明，就会造成国家危亡、民众混乱；君主贤明，国家就会安定民众安分守己。所以，国家的祸福在于君主是否贤明，与天命变化无关。 
English: The grand duke replied, "If the monarch is not wise, the country will be in peril and the people will be in chaos; if the monarch is wise, the country will be stable and the people will keep to themselves. Therefore, whether the monarch is wise or not has nothing to do with the change of fate.

古文：文王曰： 古之贤君可得闻乎？ 
现代文：文王问道： 古时贤明的君主的事迹，可以讲给我听听吗？ 
English: King Wen asked, "Can you tell me about the deeds of the wise monarchs in ancient times?"

古文：太公曰： 昔者帝尧之王天下，上世所谓贤君也。 
现代文：太公回答说： 过去帝尧治理天下，上古的人都称道他为贤君。 
English: The grand duke replied: In the past, emperors ruled the world, and the ancients praised him as a wise ruler.

古文：文王曰： 其治如何？ 
现代文：文王问道： 他是怎么治理国家的呢？ 
English: Wen Wang asked: How does he govern the country?

古文：太公曰： 帝尧王天下之时，金银珠玉不饰，锦绣文绮不衣，奇怪珍异不视，玩好之器不宝，淫佚之乐不听，宫垣屋室不垩，甍、桷、橼、楹不斫，茅茨偏庭不剪。
现代文：太公回答说： 帝尧治理天下的时候，不用金银珠玉作饰品，不穿锦绣华丽的衣服，不观赏珍贵奇异的物品，不把贵重的器物视若珍宝，不听淫逸靡靡的音乐，不粉饰宫庭墙垣，不雕饰甍桷椽楹，不修剪庭院中的茅草。
English: The grand duke replied, "When emperors ruled the world, they did not use gold, silver, and precious stones to make ornaments, did not wear ornate clothes, did not admire rare and exotic objects, did not treat precious objects as if they were precious, did not listen to lascivious music, did not whitewash the walls of the palace, did not carve ornaments, and did not trim the thatch in the courtyard.

古文：鹿裘御寒，布衣掩形，粝粮之饭，藜藿之羹。
现代文：用鹿裘来御寒，用粗布蔽体，饭食皆是粗粮，喝野菜做的汤羹。
English: They use deer antler to keep out the cold, cover their bodies with coarse cloth, eat coarse grains, and drink vegetable soup.

古文：不以役作之故，害民耕织之时。
现代文：不因征发劳役而耽误民众耕织。
English: Do not delay the people from farming and weaving because of the conscription.

古文：削心约志，从事乎无为。
现代文：抑制自己的欲望，控制自己的贪念，用清静无为治理国家。
English: restrain their desires, control their greed, and govern the country with serenity and inaction.

古文：吏忠正奉法者，尊其位；廉洁爱人者，厚其禄。
现代文：官吏中忠正守法的就升迁其爵位，廉洁爱民的就增加他的俸禄。
English: If a government official is loyal, upright and law-abiding, he will be promoted to a higher rank, and if he is honest and loves the people, his salary will be increased.

古文：民有孝慈者，爱敬之；尽力农桑者，慰勉之。
现代文：民众中孝敬长者、慈爱晚辈的给予敬重，尽力农桑的就勉励慰问。
English: Among the people, those with filial piety and respect for the elderly, and those with love and respect for the younger generation give respect, and those who are farmers and mulberry growers do their best to solicit condolences.

古文：旌别淑慝，表其门闾。平心正节，以法度禁邪伪。
现代文：区别善恶良莠，表彰善良的人家，提倡心志公平，端正品德节操，用法制禁止邪恶诈伪。
English: Distinguish between good and evil, commend good people, promote fairness, rectitude and morality, and use the legal system to prohibit evil and fraud.

古文：所憎者，有功必赏；所爱者，有罪必罚。
现代文：对于自己厌恶的人，如果建立功勋同样给予奖赏；对自己喜欢的人，如果犯有罪行也必定进行惩罚。
English: For those whom they dislike, if they establish merit, they will also reward; for those whom they like, if they commit a crime, they must also punish.

古文：存养天下鳏、寡、孤、独，振赡祸亡之家。其自奉也甚薄，共赋役也甚寡。
现代文：赡养鳏寡孤独，赈济遭受天灾人祸之家。至于帝尧自己的生活，则是十分俭朴，征收赋税劳役微薄。
English: It was a lonely home for supporting widows and widowers, and a home that suffered from natural and man-made disasters. As for the emperor's own life, it was very frugal, with meager taxes and labor.

古文：故万民富乐而无饥寒之色，百姓戴其君如日月，亲其君如父母。 
现代文：因此，天下民众富足安乐而没有饥寒之色，如同景仰日月一般爱戴他，像亲近自己的父母一样亲近他。 
English: Therefore, the people of the world are rich and happy without hunger and cold, love him as they admire the sun and moon, and are as close to him as they are to their parents.

古文：文王曰： 大哉，贤君之德也。 
现代文：文王说： 帝尧真是一位伟大的贤明的君主啊！ 
English: King Wen said, "Emperor Yao is truly a great and wise monarch!

