古文：己卯五月初一日平明起，店主人言： 自往尖山后，参府吴公屡令把总来候，且命店中一至即入报。 
现代文：己卯年五月初一日黎明起床，店主人说： 自从您前往尖山后，参将府的吴公屡次命令把总来等候，并且命令店中您一到就进府去报告。 
English: Waking up at dawn on the first day of May, the owner of the store said, "Since you went to Jianshan, Wu Gong, the general manager of the General Headquarters, has repeatedly ordered the general manager to wait, and ordered the store to report to the General Headquarters as soon as you arrived.

古文：余不知其因，令姑缓之，且游于市，而主人不听。
现代文：我不知其中的原因，命令他暂缓报告，暂且去游一游街市，可主人不听。
English: I don't know the reason, but I ordered him to postpone the report and go on a tour of the city market, but the owner didn't listen.

古文：已而吴君令把总持名帖来，言： 欲躬叩，旅肆不便，乞即枉顾为幸。 
现代文：不久吴君命令把总拿着名帖前来，说： 想要亲自拜见，但旅店中不方便，请马上枉驾来拜访便是幸事。 
English: Soon, Wu Jun ordered the general to come forward with a famous postcard, saying: I want to visit you in person, but it is inconvenient in the hotel, please come visit immediately.

古文：余颔之，因出观街子。
现代文：我点头同意了他，于是出门观看街子。
English: I nodded and agreed with him, so I went out to watch the parade.

古文：此处五日一大街，大街在南门外来凤山麓。
现代文：此处五天赶一次大街，大街在南门外来凤山山麓。
English: From here, it takes five days to reach the main street, which begins at the foot of Fengshan Mountain outside the South Gate.

古文：是日因旱，断屠祈雨，移街子于城中。
现代文：这天因为天旱，停止屠牲祈雨，把街子移到城中。
English: On this day, because of the drought, the slaughter was stopped to pray for rain, and the town was moved to the city.

古文：旱即移街，诸乡村皆然。
现代文：天旱就移街子，各处乡村都是这样。
English: When the weather is dry, people move to the suburbs. This is the case in all villages.

古文：为余谈大江自彼处分水岭发源，分绕省城而复合。
现代文：于是前去会晤潘捷余。捷余设宴招待来买珠宝的舍人，挽留我同宴。我辞谢了他，进城拜渴参将府。
English: So I went to meet Pan Jieyu. Jieyu set up a banquet to invite all the donors who came to buy jewelry, and kept me at the same banquet. I thanked him and went into the city to visit the general's residence.

古文：且言昔为贵州都阃，与陈学宪平人士奇同事，知黄石斋之异。下午还寓。
现代文：一见面就握住手臂志气相投，款待的礼节相当周到。这天他儿子将返回故乡，在内室收拾行李，我告辞了他出来。下午回到寓所。
English: As soon as I met him, I took hold of his arm. He was a kindred spirit, and the hospitality was very thoughtful. On this day, his son would return to his hometown, pack his bags in the inner room, and I said goodbye to him. I returned to the apartment in the afternoon.

古文：集鹰山宝藏徒径空来顾，抵暮别去。
现代文：集鹰山宝藏的徒弟径空来拜访，到天黑告别去了。
English: The apprentice who collected the treasures of Eagle Mountain came by air to pay a visit, and went to bid farewell in the dark.

古文：初二日余止寓中。
现代文：初二日我停在寓所中。
English: The first two days I stayed in the apartment.

古文：已又观音寺天衣师令其徒来候，余以参府有前期约会，辞之。
现代文：云峰山的老禅师法界来拜访。州学中的贤士李虎变兄弟来拜访。初三日参将府派人来等候赴宴。不久又有观音寺的天衣禅师命令他的徒弟前来迎候，我因为参将府在事前有约会，辞谢了他。
English: The old Zen master Hokei from Yunfeng Mountain came to visit. Brother Li Hucheng, a sage from the state school, came to visit. On the first three days, Sangjeongfu sent someone to wait for the banquet. Soon after, Tianyi Zen master from Guanyin Temple ordered his apprentice to come to meet him. I thanked him for the appointment because Sangjeongfu had an appointment in advance.

古文：上午赴参府招，所陈多腊味，以断屠故也。
现代文：上午赴参将府的招请，陈列的多半是腊味，是由于停止屠牲的缘故。
English: The invitation to visit the General Headquarters in the morning was mostly made of wax, due to the fact that the slaughter had been stopped.

古文：腊味中始食竹鼯。
现代文：下午告别他出来。
English: He came out in the afternoon to say goodbye.

古文：下午别之出。醉后过万寿寺拜法界，不在。
现代文：酒醉后到万寿寺去拜见法界，不在。
English: After getting drunk, he went to Manju-ji Temple to visit the Dharma Realm, but it was not there.

古文：出西门半里，过凌云桥，又西半里，由玉泉池南堰上西山之麓，则观音寺在焉。
现代文：出西门走半里，过了凌云桥，又向西半里，由玉泉池南面的堤上走到西山的山麓，就见观音寺在那里。
English: Go out of the West Gate, walk half a mile, pass the Lingyun Bridge, and walk half a mile westward, from the south bank of the Yuquan Pond to the foot of the West Mountain, and you will see the Guanyin Temple there.

古文：寺东向临玉泉池，寺南有古刹并列，即玉泉寺矣。
现代文：寺向东，面临玉泉池，寺南有座古刹并列，就是玉泉寺了。
English: The temple faces east, facing Gyokusen Pond, and there is an ancient temple to the south of the temple, which is Gyokusen Temple.

古文：天衣师拜经观音寺，三年不出，一见喜甚，留余宿。
现代文：天衣禅师在观音寺拜经，三年不出门，一见面高兴极了，留我住宿。
English: The heavenly robe Zen master prayed at the Guanyin Temple, and did not leave the house for three years. He was so happy to see me that he let me stay with him.

古文：余辞以他日，啜其豆浆粥而返，已昏黑矣。
现代文：我答应改日来住辞谢了，喝了他的豆浆粥后返回来，天已昏黑了。
English: I thanked him for promising to come back another day, drank his soy milk porridge and came back. It was getting dark.

古文：初四日参府令门役以《州志》至。
现代文：初四日参将府命令守门的差役把《州志》送来。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, the prefectural government ordered the gatekeeper to bring the "History of the State."

古文：方展卷而李君来候。
现代文：刚翻开书而李君前来问候。
English: Just after opening the book, Li Jun came to say hello.

古文：时微雨，遂与之联骑，由来凤山东麓循之南，六里，抵绮罗，入叩李君家。
现代文：此时下着细雨，便与他并排骑马，由来凤山东麓顺着山往南走，六里，抵达绮罗，进去拜访李君家。
English: At this time, it was drizzling, so he rode side by side with him. From the eastern foothills of Fengshan, they walked south along the mountain for six miles, arrived at Diao Luo, and went in to visit Li Jun's house.

古文：绮罗，《志》作矣罗，其村颇盛，西倚来凤山，南瞰水尾山，当两山夹凑间。
现代文：绮罗，志书上作矣罗，这个村子较兴盛，西面紧靠来凤山，南边远望水尾山，正当两山相夹凑拢之间。
English: This village is prosperous, with Fengshan Mountain to the west and Mizunoo Mountain in the distance to the south, right between the two mountains.

古文：盖罗汉冲之水，流经大洞、长洞二小阜间，北曲而注于平坞，乃分为二流，北为饮马河而抵城东，南为绮罗水而逼南山下，又西逼来凤东南麓，乃南捣两山夹间。
现代文：罗汉冲的水，流经大洞、长洞二座小土阜间，向北弯曲后流入平坦的山坞中，就分为两条河流，北面的是饮马河，流抵城东，南边的是绮罗水，逼近南山下，又往西逼近来凤山的东南麓，就往南冲捣在两山相夹之间。
English: The water of Luo Hanchong flows through the large cave and the long cave between the two small soil pits, bends to the north and flows into the flat dock, and is divided into two rivers. The north is the Puma River, flowing to the east of the city, and the south is the Luo Luo Water, approaching the south of the mountain, and approaching the southeastern foot of the Fengshan Mountain to the west, and rushing to the south between the two mountains.

古文：是村绾结集占据其谷口，竹树扶疏，田壑纡错，亦一幽境云。
现代文：此村盘结在两山的谷口，竹林树丛扶疏茂盛，田野壑谷迂曲错杂，也是一处幽境。
English: This village is entangled in the valley mouth of the two mountains, the bamboo groves are lush, the fields and valleys are tortuous, and it is also a secluded place.

古文：是夜宿李君家。
现代文：这天夜里住在李君家中。
English: That night, he stayed at Li Jun's home.

古文：余初望腾越中坞，东为球瓓、矣比，西为宝峰、毗卢，南为来凤、罗生，北为干峨、飞凤。
现代文：我起初远望腾越中间的山坞，东面是球玲山、矣比坡，西面是宝峰、毗卢山，南面是来凤山、罗生山，北面是干峨山、飞凤山。
English: At first, I looked far and wide beyond the dockyard in the middle of Tengyue. To the east were Mt. Quling and Mt. Yibipo, to the west were Mt. Baofeng and Mt. Bilu, to the south were Mt. Laofeng and Mt. Lousheng, and to the north were Mt. Ganga and Mt. Feifeng.

古文：西北则巃嵸最耸，而龙潭清海之水溢焉；东南则罗汉冲最深，而罗生、黄坡之流发焉；东北则赤土山最远，而罗武、马邑之源始焉；大盈江惟西南破龙光台、来凤西麓而去。
现代文：西北则是宠欢山，最为高耸，而龙潭清海子之水从那里溢出来;东南是罗汉冲，最深，而罗生山、黄坡的水流从那里发源;东北是赤土山，最远，而罗武塘、马邑村的水源从这里起始;大盈江仅在西南方冲破龙光台、来凤山西麓而去。
English: In the northwest is Dafan Mountain, which is the highest, and the water of Longtan Qinghaizi overflows from there; in the southeast is Luo Hanchong, the deepest, and the water flow of Luosheng Mountain and Huangpo originates from there; in the northeast is Red Earth Mountain, the farthest, and the water source of Luotang and Mayi Village starts from here; the Yangtze River only breaks through Longguangdai in the southwest and comes to the western foot of Fengshan.

古文：则是州之脉，盖西北由集鹰山分脉：南下者，为宝峰、毗卢，而尽于龙光台；东曲者，一峙为笔峰，再耸为巃嵸，遂东下而度干峨之岭，又东南而纡为永安、乱箭之哨。
现代文：那么此州的山脉，大体上从西北由集鹰山分出支脉：往南下延的，成为宝峰、毗卢山，而后在龙光台到了头;向东弯曲的，最先耸峙为笔峰，再耸起成为笼岌山，于是往东下延成为干峨的山岭，又向东南曲折成为永安哨、乱箭哨的山。
English: So, the mountains of this prefecture, in general, branch out from the northwest from Ji Ying Mountain: those that extend to the south become Baofeng and Bilu Mountain, and then come to a head at Longguangdai; those that curve to the east first stand as pen peaks, and then rise to become craggy mountains, and then extend to the east to become gnarled mountains, and then twist to the southeast to become Yongan Sentinel and Tangled Arrow Sentinel.

古文：郡人陈懿典进士《文星阁记》云： 嘉靖壬子，城外周凿城隍，至正南迤东，竁地丈许，有络石，工役斫截之。
现代文：那曲绕向西的，我最初怀疑起自南面的罗生山、水尾山，而后转向北成为来凤山，到此时才知罗汉冲的水又往南下流到罗直冲，那么来凤山的山脉，不是起自南面的罗生山、水尾山，而实际上是起自东面的黄坡、矣比坡两处山坡。
English: At first, I suspected that the westward-flowing meander originated from the south-facing Mount Rason and Mount Mizunoo, and then turned north to become Mount Lo Feng. It was only then that I learned that the water from Luo Hanchong flowed south to Mount Lo Zhiachong. Therefore, the mountains of Mount Lo Feng did not originate from the south-facing Mount Rason and Mount Water Tail, but actually originated from the east-facing slopes of Huangpo and Yibipo.

古文：其石累累如脊骨，穿地而来，乃秀峰之元龙正脉也。 
现代文：但两处山坡的西边都是平坦的山坞，而后往南抵达罗生山，山脉从田野中往西延伸。
English: But the western side of the two slopes is a flat dock, and then south to Mount Rason, the mountains extend from the middle of the field to the west.

古文：其说可与余相印证。土人不知，乃分濬罗汉冲水一枝，北流为饮马河而抵于城东。
现代文：本地人不了解，就把罗汉冲的水分流，疏挖出一条支流，向北流为饮马河，流抵城东。
English: The local people did not understand, so they diverted the water from the Luohan River and dug out a tributary, which flowed northward as the Shanma River and reached the east of the city.

古文：是此脉一伤于分流，再凿于疏隍，两受其病矣。
现代文：这样此处地脉第一次被分流损伤，再次在疏挖护城壕时凿断，两度受到伤害了。
English: In this way, the earth vein here was damaged by the diversion for the first time, and it was cut off again during the excavation of the moat, and it was damaged twice.

古文：土人之为之解者曰，脉由龙光台潜度于跌水河之下。
现代文：本地人为此解释说，山脉由龙光台潜在地中延伸到跌水河之下。
English: The local people explained that the mountains extend from Longguangdai to the middle of the potential underground to the bottom of the Qianshui River.

古文：不知跌水河虽石骨下亘，乃大水所趋，一壑之流交注焉；饮马河本无一水两分之理，乃人工所为，欲以此掩彼不可得也。
现代文：却不知跌水河虽然是骨状的岩石向下延亘，但是大水流向的地方，一个壑谷的水流都交相流注于其中;饮马河本来就没有一条河分为两条的道理，是人工建成的，想以此来掩盖那过失是不可能的。
English: But he did not know that although the Tumbling Water River is a bone-shaped rock extending downward, but where the big water flows, the water currents of a valley intersect and flow into it; the Drinking Horse River does not have a reason to be divided into two rivers, it is artificially built, and it is impossible to cover up the mistake.

古文：初五日晨餐后，即从李君循南山之麓东向行。
现代文：初五日早餐后，马上跟随李君沿南山的山麓向东行。
English: After breakfast on the fifth day of the first lunar month, I immediately followed Li Jun along the foothills of Nanshan towards the east.

古文：先半里，过水应寺。
现代文：先走半里，经过水应寺。
English: First walk half a mile, past Suiyouji Temple.

古文：又东二里，两逾南山北下之支，有寺在南峡中北向峙，即天应寺也。
现代文：又向东二里，两次越过南山往北下延的支脉，有寺庙在南面峡中，向北屹立，就是天应寺了。
English: Another two miles to the east, twice over the Nanshan branch extending to the north, there is a temple in the Nanmen Gorge, standing to the north, it is Tianye Temple.

古文：其后即罗生主峰，仰之甚峻，《志》称其条冈分布，不诬也。
现代文：寺后就是罗生山的主峰，仰面望它非常高峻，志书称它是呈条状山冈分布，不假呀!
English: Terao is the main peak of Mount Rason. Looking up at it, it is very high. The history book says that it is a striped mountain range, which is true!

古文：又东半里，上一北下之支，随之北下。
现代文：又往东半里，登上一条往北下延的支脉，顺着它向北下走。
English: Another half-mile to the east, climb a branch that stretches down to the north, and follow it northward.

古文：共一里，冈东尽处，竹树深密，绿荫袭人，披映心目。
现代文：共一里，山冈东边的尽头处，竹丛树林深密，绿色的树荫袭人，树影婆婆映人心目。
English: A total of one mile, at the end of the eastern side of the mountain range, the bamboo thicket is deep, the green shade is striking, and the tree shadow is eye-catching.

古文：其前复起一圆阜，立平畴中，是为团山，与此冈断而复续。
现代文：它前方又隆起一座圆形的土阜，立在平旷的田野中，这是团山，与此处山冈断而复续。
English: In front of it rises another round earthen mound, standing in the middle of a flat field. This is Tuanshan, which is a continuation of the mountain range.

古文：冈东村庐连络。
现代文：山冈东边村庄房屋连接不断。
English: The houses of the villages on the eastern side of the mountain range are constantly connected.

古文：余从竹中下，一老人迎入其庐，具腊肉火酒献。
现代文：我从竹林中下来，一位老人迎入他的屋中，准备了腊肉、火酒献上来。
English: When I came down from the bamboo forest, an old man welcomed me into his house. He had prepared bacon and wine to offer me.

古文：盖是日端午，而老人与李君有故，遂入而哺之。
现代文：原来这天是端午节，而老人与李君有交情，于是把我迎进去招待吃饭。
English: Originally, this day was the Dragon Boat Festival, and the old man had a friendship with Li Jun, so he welcomed me in and invited me to dinner.

古文：既午，复东向循南山行，半里，其北复起一长阜，如半月横于前，是为长洞山。
现代文：中午后，再向东沿南山行。半里，它北边又隆起一座长形土阜，如一半月亮横在前方，这是长洞山。
English: After noon, head east along Nanshan. Half a mile to the north, there is another long-shaped earthen mound, like a half moon lying in front of it. This is Changdong Mountain.

古文：又东二里，遂入山峡，有溪中贯而出，是为罗汉冲。
现代文：又向东二里，就进入山峡，有溪水从峡中流贯而出，这是罗汉冲。
English: Another two miles to the east, you enter a mountain gorge, and a stream flows out of the gorge. This is the Luohan River.

古文：溪南北皆有村夹峙峡口。
现代文：溪流南北都有村庄夹峙在峡口。
English: There are villages sandwiched between the north and south of the stream at the mouth of the gorge.

古文：由南村溯溪而东，又二里，越溪之北，有大路倚北山下，乃东逾岭趋猛连者，从其北坞中觅温泉。
现代文：由南岸的村庄溯溪往东行，又走二里，越到溪流的北岸，有大路依傍在北山下，是向东越岭通向猛连的路，从它北面的山坞中去找温泉。
English: From the village on the south bank, trace the stream to the east, and walk two miles to the north bank of the stream. There is a road next to the north mountain, which is the road to the east across the ridge to Menglian, and from the dock on the north side to find hot springs.

古文：其泉不热而温，流不急而平，一大石突畦间，水汇其旁，浅不成浴。
现代文：此泉不热但温，水流不急而平缓，一块大岩石突出在田地间，水汇积在石旁，浅得洗不成澡。
English: This spring is not hot but warm, the water flow is not rapid but gentle, a large rock protrudes between the fields, water accumulates next to the stone, so shallow that it cannot be used as a bath.

古文：东山下有 大洞温泉 ，为八景之一，即在其北岭峡中，与此隔一支岭，逾而北颇近，而李君急于还家，即导余从大路西出。
现代文：东山下有 大洞温泉 儿字，是八景之一，就在它北岭的峡中，与此地隔着一条支岭，向北翻越相当近，可李君急于回家，就领我从大路往西出来。
English: At the foot of the East Mountain, there is Daedong Hot Spring, which is one of the eight scenic spots. It is located in the gorge of the North Ridge, separated from this place by a branch ridge, and it is quite close to the north. However, Li Jun was in a hurry to go home, so he led me out of the highway to the west.

古文：二里，过溪南村，出峡口，随溪西行。
现代文：二里，过了溪南村，走出峡口，顺溪流往西行。
English: Two miles, past the village of Xi'nan, out of the mouth of the gorge, along the stream to the west.

古文：一里，过一桥，从溪南又西一里，过长洞北麓。
现代文：一里，走过一座桥，从溪南又向西一里，经过长洞山北麓。
English: One mile, over a bridge, from south of Hsinchu and one mile to the west, past the northern foot of Mount Chungdong.

古文：北望大洞之阜，夹溪而峙，余欲趋之，浴其温泉。
现代文：望北边大洞在的土阜，夹住溪流屹立，我想赶到那里去，在那里的温泉里洗澡。
English: Looking to the north, I saw a large hole in the soil, and a stream standing in between. I wanted to get there and take a bath in the hot springs there.

古文：李君谓泉在东峡中，其入尚远，遂强余还。
现代文：李君说是泉水在东面峡中，进去的路还很远，就强逼我往回走。
English: Li Jun said that the spring was in the Dongmen Gorge, and it was still a long way to go in, so he forced me to go back.

古文：又西一里，过团山北麓，又西三里而还李君家。
现代文：又向西一里，走过团山北麓，又向西三里后返回李君家中。
English: Another mile to the west, walked through the northern foot of Tuan Shan, and after another three miles to the west, returned to Li Jun's home.

古文：初六日晨饭，令顾仆携卧具，为杨广哨之游。
现代文：初六日早晨吃饭，命令顾仆带上铺盖，动身去游杨广哨。
English: On the morning of the sixth day of the first lunar month, after eating, he ordered his attendant to take a blanket and set off to visit Yangguanshifu.

古文：先是李君为余言，此地东南由罗汉冲入二百里，有滃吕山，东南由罗生四十里，有马鹿塘，皆有峰峦可观。
现代文：这之前李君对我说，此地往东南由罗汉冲深人二百里，有座渝吕山，向东南由罗生山走四十里，有个马鹿塘，都有峰峦值得观览。
English: Before that, Li Jun told me that there are two hundred miles from Luohan to Shenshen people in the southeast, there is Yu Lushan, forty miles to the southeast from Lousheng Mountain, and there is a Malu Tong, all of which are worth seeing.

古文：余乃先其近者，计可从硫黄塘、半个山而转也。
现代文：我于是先去那近处的，预计可从硫磺塘、半个山转回来。
English: So I went to the nearest one first, expecting to be able to return from the sulfur pond, half a mountain away.

古文：东三里，从水应、天应二寺之间，南向上山。
现代文：向东三里，从水应寺、天应寺两座寺庙之间，向南上山。
English: Three miles to the east, between the two temples of Suiyouji and Tenyouji, heading south up the mountain.

古文：愈上愈峻，七里，登绝顶。
现代文：越上走越陡峻，七里，登上绝顶。
English: The higher you go, the steeper it gets. It's seven miles to the top.

古文：北瞰即天应寺悬其坑麓，由州坞而北，惟巃嵸山与之对峙焉；西瞰则旁峡分趋，势若赘旒，皆下坠于绮罗南向之峡，有龙井出其下焉；惟东眺则本峰颉颃不相上下自掩；而南眺则浓雾弥沦，若以山脊为界，咫尺不可见。
现代文：俯瞰北面就是天应寺悬在山下坑谷的山麓，由州城所在的山坞往北，唯有宠众山与它对峙;俯瞰西边就见两旁山峡分向延伸而去，势如旗帜上悬垂的飘带，都是下坠到绮罗向南的峡谷中，有个龙井在峡谷下方涌出来;只有向东眺望是本山的山峰互相抗衡，交错遮掩;而往南眺望就见浓雾弥漫沉浮，好像是以山脊为界，咫尺间不能看见东西。
English: Looking down to the north, Tianying Temple hangs at the foot of the valley below the mountain. To the north, from the dock where the state capital is located, only the pet mountains confront it. Looking down to the west, you can see the canyons on both sides extending in different directions. Like the streamers hanging on the flag, they all fall down into the canyon to the south, and a dragon well gushes out below the canyon. The only view to the east is that the peaks of the mountain compete with each other and interlace to cover each other. And looking south, you can see the thick fog floating, as if bounded by the ridge, and you can't

古文：于是南从岭上盘峡，俱行氤氲中，茫若蹈海。
现代文：于是向南从岭上绕着峡谷走，都是行走在氰氯的浓雾之中，茫茫一片如蹈大海。
English: So we walked south from the ridge around the canyon, all walking in a thick fog of cyanogen chloride, a vast expanse like the open sea.

古文：半里，南下。
现代文：半里，往南下走。
English: Half a mile, heading south.

古文：下二里余，山半复环一壑，其脊自东南围抱而西，中藏圆坞，有小水西去。
现代文：下走二里多，山半腰又环绕着一个壑谷，山脊自东南往西围抱，中间藏着圆形的山坞，有小溪向西流去。
English: After walking more than two miles, halfway down the mountain is surrounded by a steep valley. The ridge is surrounded from the southeast to the west, with a circular dock hidden in the middle and a stream flowing to the west.

古文：其内雾影稍开，而雨色渐逼，虽近睹其田塍，而不免远罹其沾湿矣。
现代文：坞内雾影稍稍散开，可雨色渐逼过来，虽看得见那附近的田野，但远处不免被雨水沾湿了。
English: The mist in the dock has dispersed slightly, but the rain is gradually approaching. Although the nearby fields can be seen, the distance is inevitably wet with rainwater.

古文：复上南坡，蹑坡脊而南，五里，一岐随脊而西南，一歧坠坡而东向。
现代文：再上登南面的山坡，登上坡脊往南行，五里，一条岔道顺山脊通向西南，一条岔道沿山坡向东下坠。
English: Then climb the southern slope, climb the ridge to the south, five miles, a ramp along the ridge to the southwest, and a ramp along the slope to the east.

古文：余漫从脊上直南，已而路渐东下而穷。
现代文：我漫无目的地从脊上一直往南走，不久路渐渐向东下去后断了。
English: I walked aimlessly from the ridge all the way to the south, and soon the road gradually went down to the east and broke.

古文：二里，有村倚东坡下，披雾就讯之，乃清水屯也。
现代文：二里，有村庄靠在东边山坡下，分开浓雾去村中问路，是清水屯。
English: Two miles away, there is a village on the eastern slope of the mountain, separated by thick fog to ask for directions in the village, it is Qingshui Tun.

古文：按《志》，城南三十里为清水朗，此其地矣。
现代文：据志书，城南三十里是清水朗，这就是那地方了。
English: According to the diary, thirty miles south of the city is Qingshu Lang, and this is that place.

古文：然马鹿塘之径，当从北歧分向而东，此已逾而过南。
现代文：但去马鹿塘的路，应当从北边的岔路分向往东走，此时已走过头在南了。
English: However, the way to Ma Lu Tong should be from the north fork of the road to the east. At this time, you have already gone too far south.

古文：屯人指余从坡北东下，当得大路。
现代文：清水屯的人指点我从山坡北边往东下走，应该找得到大路。
English: The people from Qingshuitun told me to walk from the north side of the hill to the east. I should find the main road.

古文：从之，半里，东北涉一坑甚深，雾影中窥其东南旋壑下盘，当时不知其所出何向，后乃知其南界高峰，反西自竹家屯而东突，为陈播箕哨也。
现代文：听从他的话走，半里，向东北涉过一条非常深的坑谷，雾影中窥见它东南旋绕的壑谷向下盘绕，当时不知它出去通向哪里，后来才知它南面的高峰，反而自西边的竹家屯往东突，是陈播箕哨。
English: Following his advice, I walked for half a mile, wading through a very deep valley to the northeast. In the mist and shadow, I could see it winding down from the southeast. At that time, I didn't know where it went. Later, I learned that it was the peak to the south, but from the west side of Takejiatun to the east, it was Chen Huan's whistle.

古文：复东北上坡半里，见有路东向下，辄随之行，不意马鹿塘正道尚在其北。
现代文：再向东北上坡半里，见有路向东下走，就随着它走，没想到去马鹿塘的正道还在它北边。
English: Half a mile further uphill to the northeast, I saw a road heading east, so I followed it. I didn't expect that the right way to Malutang was still north of it.

古文：雾漫不辨，踉跄东下。
现代文：浓雾漫漫，辨不清方向，踉踉跄跄向东下走。
English: The fog is thick and the direction is unclear. The pelican is heading east.

古文：一里余，有峡自北而南，溪流贯之，有田塍嵌其底，而绝无人居。
现代文：一里多，有峡谷自北横向南，溪流贯穿峡中，有田地嵌在峡底，可绝无人烟。
English: For more than a mile, there are canyons from north to south, streams running through the canyon, fields embedded in the bottom of the canyon, but absolutely no one.

古文：塍中插禾已遍，亦无一人。
现代文：田野中已插遍禾苗，也无一人。
English: The fields are full of seedlings, but no one is growing.

古文：抵塍而路绝，塍狭如线，以杖拄畦中，东行抵溪，而溪两岸蒙翳不可渡。
现代文：到达田边路就断了，田埂狭窄得如线一样，用手杖拄在田中，往东走到溪边，但溪流两岸树丛浓密遮蔽，不能渡。
English: When we arrived at the field, the road was broken. The field fence was as narrow as a line. We walked with a cane in the middle of the field and walked east to the stream, but the trees on both sides of the stream were thickly covered and we couldn't cross.

古文：复还依西坡南向，一里得小径，渡溪东上。
现代文：再返回来靠着西面的山坡向南走，一里遇上小径，渡过溪流往东上行。
English: Coming back again, walk south along the western slope, encounter a path for one mile, cross the stream and go east.

古文：一里，路伏草间，复若断若续，然其上甚峻。
现代文：一里，路隐伏在草丛间，再次若断若续，但那上去之处非常陡峻。
English: For a mile, the road hides in the grass, again intermittently, but the going is very steep.

古文：三里，东向登岭头，复从岭上东南再陟一岭。
现代文：兰里，向东登上岭头，又从岭上向东南上登一岭。
English: Langli, climb the ridge to the east, and climb the ridge from the ridge to the southeast.

古文：半里，始见岭北有坳，自北南度，中伏再起，其东则崩崖下坠，其势甚拓，其坠甚峭，若中剖其脊并左右两帏而平坠焉。
现代文：半里，才见岭北有山坳，自北向南延伸，中间低伏再次隆起，它东面就是崩裂的山崖下坠，山势非常宽阔，那下坠之处十分陡峭，好似山脊从中剖开左右两幅筛慢并排平行下坠的样子。
English: Half a mile later, there is a ridge in the northern part of the ridge. It extends from north to south, with a low rise in the middle. To the east, there is a broken cliff. The mountain is very broad, and the place where it falls is very steep. It looks like the ridge has been cut open from the middle, and two screens are slowly falling side by side.

古文：坳北有路自崩崖北岭东行，南亦有微路，自崩崖南岭东上，而坳中独无北交之路。
现代文：山坳北边有条路自崩裂的山崖北面的山岭往东行，南边也有小路，自崩裂的山崖南面的山岭往东上行，可山坳中唯独没有北面来相交的路。
English: On the north side of the ridge, there is a road leading east from the mountain range on the north side of the collapsed cliff. On the south side, there is also a small road leading east from the mountain range on the south side of the collapsed cliff. However, there is no north-facing road in the ridge.

古文：余遂循崖南路上。
现代文：我于是沿山崖南面的路上走。
English: So I walked along the road south of the cliff.

古文：东一里，路为崩崖所坠，复歧而南，再陟南岭。
现代文：向东一里，路被崩裂的山崖陷下去，又岔向南，再上登南岭。
English: One mile to the east, the road was split by the collapse of the cliff down, and then to the south, and then up the Nanling.

古文：半里，复东行岭脊。
现代文：半里，再往东走在岭脊上。
English: Half a mile further east on the ridge.

古文：二里始有南来之路，循之东。
现代文：二里后才有南来的路，顺着它往东走。
English: After two miles there is a road to the south, follow it to the east.

古文：此瞰崩崖下陷，东向成坑，箐木深翳。
现代文：俯瞰北边崩裂的山崖下陷，向东处形成深坑，警中树木幽深密蔽。
English: Overlooking the collapse of the mountain cliff to the north, forming a deep pit to the east, the trees are deeply hidden.

古文：又东半里，再陟岭，岭乃南去，微径始东北下坡。
现代文：又向东半里，再登岭，山岭于是往南延去，小径开始向东北下坡。
English: Another half-mile to the east, then up the ridge, the ridge then extends south, and the trail begins to descend to the northeast.

古文：曲折连下三里，余以为将及北坑之底，随之出即马鹿塘矣；孰知一坡中环，路歧而东西绕之，未几遂绝，皆深茅丛棘，坑嵌其下甚深。
现代文：一连曲折下走三里，我以为将走到北面深坑的底部，顺着它出去就是马鹿塘了;谁知一道山坡环绕在中间，路岔为东西两条绕过山坡，不多久就断了，都是深深的茅草成丛的荆棘，坑谷嵌在它的下方非常深。
English: Walking three miles in a zigzag line, I thought I would reach the bottom of the deep pit in the north, and following it out would be Ma Lu Tang; who knew that a hillside surrounded the middle, and two roads went around the hillside, east and west, and soon broke, all of which were deep thatch and thorns, and the valley was embedded very deep below it.

古文：余始从其南，不得道，转而东，复不得道。往返踯躅，茅深棘翳，遍索不前。
现代文：我开始时从它南边走，找不到路，转向东，又找不到路，往返徘徊，茅草深长，荆棘密蔽，遍处搜索不能前走。
English: I started walking from the south side of it, I couldn't find the way, turned to the east, I couldn't find the way, wandered back and forth, the thatch was deep, the thorns were dense, searching everywhere I couldn't go forward.

古文：久之，复从南坡下得微径，下一里余而东抵坑底。
现代文：很久后，又从南面山坡下找到小径，下走一里多后往东抵达坑底。
English: After a long time, they found a path from the southern slope of the mountain, and after walking more than a mile, they reached the bottom of the pit in the east.

古文：则坑中有水潺潺，自崩崖东南流，坑两旁俱峭崖密翳，全无路影，而坑底甚平，水流乱砾间，时有平沙潆之，遂随之行。
现代文：就见坑中有潺潺流水，自崩裂的山崖向东南流，坑谷两旁全是陡峭的山崖密蔽，全无路的影子，可坑底非常平坦，水流在杂乱的砾石之间，不时绕过平坦的沙滩水流，就顺着水流走。
English: I saw that there was turbulent water in the pit, flowing from the collapsed cliff to the southeast, and both sides of the pit were covered with steep cliffs, and there was no road shadow. However, the bottom of the pit was very flat, and the water flowed between the jumbled gravels. From time to time, it bypassed the flat beach water flow and followed the water flow.

古文：或东或南，仰眺甚逼，而终绝路影。
现代文：有时东有时南，仰面眺望十分逼窄，可始终绝无路影。
English: Sometimes to the east and sometimes to the south, the view from the upper side is very narrow, but there is always no shadow.

古文：三里，稍开，俯见潆沙之上，虎迹甚明，累累如初印。
现代文：三里，稍开阔些，俯身见流水潇徊的沙滩之上，老虎脚印十分明显，连接成串如同刚印上去的。
English: Three miles, a little wider, leaning down to see the flowing water on the sandy beach, the tiger's footprints are very obvious, connected in strings as if they had just been printed.

古文：随之又东南一里余，有小溪自西南来注，有路影南缘之，始舍坑而南陟坡，一里，越其上。
现代文：顺着流水又往东南走一里多，有条小溪自西南流来注入，有路影在南边沿着小溪延伸，这才离开坑谷往南爬坡，一里，越到坡上。
English: I followed the flowing water and walked more than a mile to the southeast. A creek flowed in from the southwest, and a road shadow extended along the creek on the south side. Only then did I leave the valley and climb south, one mile, over to the slope.

古文：余意将逾坡东下，而路反从坡脊南行，余心知其误，然其路渐大，时亦渐暮，以为从大道，即不得马鹿塘，庶可得栖宿之所。
现代文：我猜想将越过山坡向东下走，可路反而从坡脊上往南行，我心知路错了，不过这条路渐渐变大，此时天也渐渐黑下来，以为从大道走，即便找不到马鹿塘，或许能够找到栖身寄宿的地方。
English: I thought I was going to cross the hillside to the east, but the road went south from the ridge instead. I knew it was the wrong way, but this road gradually became bigger, and at this time the sky gradually darkened. I thought that if I walked from the main road, even if I couldn't find Ma Lu Tong, I might be able to find a place to stay.

古文：乃蹑脊西驰二里，见西峰顶有峰特倚如覆钟，大道从此分歧，一自东南坡下而上，一向西北峰顶而趋，一从西南盘壑而行。
现代文：于是登上坡脊向西快步走二里，见西峰顶上有山峰依傍着如下覆的铜钟，大道从此处分岔，一条自东南的山坡下延上伸，一条向西北的峰顶伸去，一条从西南绕着壑谷延伸。
English: So I climbed the ridge and walked two miles to the west. At the top of the west peak, there was a mountain next to a bronze bell with the following inscription: "From here, the road splits into two, one extending up from the southeast slope, one extending to the northwest peak, and one extending from the southwest around Shibuya."

古文：未审所从，姑解所携饭啖之。
现代文：我不清楚从哪里走，姑且解下带着的饭吃了。
English: I didn't know where to go, so I just unzipped my bag and ate the food.

古文：余计上下二径，其去人必远，不若从盘壑者中行。
现代文：我估计上下两条道，它们离人烟必定很远，不如从盘绕在壑谷中的路走。
English: I estimate that there are two roads up and down, and they must be far away from people. It is better to walk from the road winding in the valley.

古文：于是又东南三里，遂坠坡而下，渐闻人声。
现代文：于是又向东南三里，就从坡上下坠，渐渐听到人声。
English: Then, three miles to the southeast, I fell down the slope and gradually heard human voices.

古文：下里余，得茅二龛在峡间，投之，隘鄙不堪宿。
现代文：下行一里多，在峡中遇到两间茅屋，到那里投宿，又窄又旧陋不能住宿。
English: After descending more than a mile, we came across two huts in the gorge, where we stayed. They were too narrow and old to be used as accommodation.

古文：望南坡上有数龛，乃下陟深坑，攀峻而上，共一里而入其龛，则架竹为巢，下畜牛豕，而上托爂卧，俨然与粤西无异。
现代文：远望南面山坡上有数间房屋，就下涉深坑，攀登陡峻的山坡上走，共一里后走入那里的房屋，是竹子架成的窝棚，下边养牛猪，而上方是架锅烧火和睡觉的地方，俨然与粤西的竹楼无异。
English: Looking far and wide to the south, there were several houses on the hillside. They went down into a deep pit, climbed up a steep hillside, and after a total of one mile, the houses they walked into were bamboo-framed huts. At the bottom, they raised cattle and pigs, and at the top, there was a place to burn pots and sleep. It was no different from the bamboo buildings in western Guangdong.

古文：屈指自南丹去此，至今已阅十五月，乃复遇之西陲，其中数千里所不见也。
现代文：屈指算来自从离开南丹到此地，至今已经历十五个月，才又在西部边睡遇见这种竹楼，其中数千里间没有见到过。
English: It has been fifteen months since I left Nantan and came to this place, only to sleep on the western edge and meet this kind of bamboo building, which I have not seen for thousands of miles.

古文：自登崩崖之脊，即望见高黎贡南亘之支屏列于东，下有深峡，而莫见龙川，意嵌其下也。
现代文：自从登上崩裂山崖的山脊，立即望见高黎贡山往南延亘的支脉屏风样排列在东方，下边有深峡，但无法见到龙川江，推想是深嵌在山下。
English: Since I climbed the ridge of the collapsed cliff, I could immediately see the foothills of Gaoligong Mountain stretching southward, arranged like a screen in the east. There was a deep gorge below, but I could not see the Longchuan River, which is thought to be deeply embedded under the mountain.

古文：又西南二十余里，至所宿之坡，下瞰南峡甚深，即与高黎贡遥夹者，意龙江从此去。
现代文：又向西南二十多里，到住宿的山坡，下瞰南面峡谷非常深，就是与高黎贡山远远相夹之处，推想龙川江从此流去。
English: Another twenty-odd miles to the southwest, to the slope of the accommodation, overlooking the very deep canyon to the south, is where it is far away from Mount Gaoligong, and it is assumed that the Longchuan River flows from here.

古文：西坞甚豁，远见重山外亘，巨壑中盘，意即南甸所托也。
现代文：西面山坞极为宽敞，远远望见重重山峦横亘在外面，巨大的壑谷盘绕在中间，推想就是南甸依托之处了。
English: The dock on the west side is extremely spacious. In the distance, you can see the mountains stretching out, and the huge reed valley coiled in the middle. Presumably, this is where Nandian rests.

古文：时雾黑莫辨方隅，而村人不通汉语，不能分晰微奥。
现代文：此时雾浓天黑无法辨清方位，而村里人不通汉语，不能弄清这里的隐微深奥之处。
English: At this time, the fog is thick, the sky is dark, and it is impossible to discern the direction, and the villagers do not understand Chinese, and cannot figure out the subtle and profound things here.

古文：即征其地名，据云为凤田总府庄，南至罗卜思庄一日余，东北至马鹿塘在二十里外，然无确据也。
现代文：立即追问这里的地名，据说是凤田总府庄，南边到罗卜思庄要走一天多，东北到马鹿塘在二十里之外，然而无确凿的证据。
English: They immediately asked for the name of the place. It was said to be Feng Tian Chong Fu Zhuang. To the south, it would take more than a day to walk to Rob Si Zhuang. To the northeast, it was twenty miles to Ma Lu Tang. However, there was no conclusive evidence.

古文：夜以所携米煮粥，啜之而卧。
现代文：夜里用带来的米煮粥，喝粥后躺下。
English: At night, cook porridge with the rice you brought, drink the porridge and lie down.

古文：初七日阴雨霏霏，饭后余姑止不行。
现代文：初七日阴雨霏霏，饭后我暂且停下不走。
English: The first seven days were cloudy and rainy. After dinner, I temporarily stopped walking.

古文：已而村人言天且大霁，余乃谋所行。
现代文：不久村里人说天将大晴，我才打算上路。
English: Soon the villagers said that it would be a fine day, so I decided to go.

古文：念马鹿塘在东北，硫磺塘在西北，北山之脊，昨已逾而来，西山之脊，尚未之陟，不若舍马鹿而逾西脊，以趋硫磺塘，且其地抵州之径，以硫磺塘为正道，遂从之。
现代文：考虑马鹿塘在东北方，硫磺塘在西北方，北山的山脊，昨天已翻越过来，西山的山脊，还未登过它，不如放弃马鹿塘而翻越西面的山脊，以便赶去硫磺塘，而且此地到州里的路，以走硫磺塘是正道，就从这条路走。
English: Considering that Malu Tong is in the northeast, Sulphur Tong is in the northwest, the ridge of Beishan has been climbed over yesterday, and the ridge of Xishan has not yet been climbed, it is better to abandon Malu Tong and climb the ridge on the west side in order to catch up with Sulphur Tong, and the road to Zhuli here, since Sulphur Tong is the right road, take this road.

古文：土人指余从村后西北向大山行。
现代文：当地人指引我从村后向西北的大山走。
English: Locals guided me from the back of the village towards the mountains in the northwest.

古文：余误由直北，一里余，下涉一涧，溯之北上坡，一里余，又下涉涧。
现代文：我错从正北走，一里多，下涉一条山涧，溯山涧向北上坡，一里多，又下走涉过山涧。
English: I made the mistake of walking from due north, more than a mile, and wading down a ridge. I followed the ridge northward uphill, more than a mile, and then walked down and waded through the ridge.

古文：其处一涧自西峡崩崖来，一涧自北峡崇山来，涉其西来者。
现代文：此处一条山涧自西南峡中崩裂的山崖处流来，一条山涧自北面峡中的崇山峻岭间流来，涉过那西边流来的山涧。
English: Here, a mountain stream flows from the cracked cliff in the southwest gorge, a mountain stream flows from the lofty mountains in the north gorge, and flows through the mountain stream coming from the west.

古文：又北上坡半里，路复分岐，一向北峡，一向西峡，皆盘其上坡。
现代文：又往北上坡半里，路又分岔，一条通向北面的山峡，一条通向西面的山峡，都是绕着山峡上坡。
English: Another half mile north uphill, the road splits again, a gorge leading to the north, a gorge leading to the west, all going uphill around the gorge.

古文：余从其北峡者，二里，路渐湮消失。
现代文：我从那通向北面山峡的路走，二里，路渐渐湮没了。
English: I walked the two miles from there to the mountain gorge to the north, and the road gradually disappeared.

古文：已北下，则其涧亦自西来，横堑于前，虽小而颇深，藤箐蒙塞，雨雾淋漓，遂不能入。
现代文：不久向北下走，就见那条山涧也自西边流来，堑沟样横在前方，水流虽小但相当深，藤枝竹丛蒙密闭塞，雨雾湿淋淋的，始终不能进去。
English: Soon, walking northwards, I saw that the hawthorn also flowed from the west, with a furrow-like groove in front. Although the water flow was small, it was quite deep. The wisteria and bamboo bushes were tightly blocked, wet with rain and fog, and I could not get in.

古文：乃复出，至岐口，转向西峡。
现代文：只得再出来，来到岔路口，转向西面的山峡。
English: I had to come out again, come to a fork in the road, and turn west into the gorge.

古文：一里，路亦渐湮，其南崩崖下嵌，即下流之所从出，而莫能逾焉。
现代文：一里，路也渐渐湮没了，它南边崩裂的山崖向下深嵌，就是山涧向下流出去的地方，可是不能越过去。
English: After one mile, the road also gradually disappeared. The mountain cliff on the south side of the road was deeply embedded downward, which was where the mountain stream flowed downward, but it was not possible to cross it.

古文：复出，从岐口南涉其涧，从涧南又得一岐西上，其路甚微。
现代文：再次出来，从岔路口往南涉过山涧，从山涧南边又找到一条岔路往西上走，此路非常小。
English: Coming out again, I waded through the mountains from the fork in the road to the south, and found another fork in the road from the south side of the mountain to the west. This road is very small.

古文：一里，北逾一坡，又北一里，即崩崖西对之坡也，其上皆垦崖，而仍非通道。
现代文：一里，向北越过一道坡，又往北一里，就是崩裂的山崖西边面对着的山坡，那上边全是开垦过的山崖，但仍不是通道。
English: One mile to the north, over a slope, and another mile to the north, is the slope facing the west side of the collapsed cliff. The upper side is all reclaimed cliff, but it is still not a passage.

古文：蹑之行，一里，上西顶。
现代文：踏上山坡走，一里，登上西边的山顶。
English: Walk up the hillside, one mile, and climb to the top of the hill on the west side.

古文：顶高云黑，莫知所从，计返下山，乃转南行莽棘中。
现代文：顶高云黑，不知从哪里走，考虑还是返回去下山走，于是转向南行走在草莽荆棘之中。
English: It was dark at the top of the mountain, and I didn't know where to go. I thought about going back down the mountain, so I turned south and walked among the grass and thorns.

古文：湿茅壅箐，踯躅东南向，二里，渐有径，下眺凤田所宿处，相距止二三里间。
现代文：茅草湿淋淋的竹丛奎塞，跌跌绊绊走向东南，二里，渐渐有小径，向下眺望凤田总府庄住宿之处，相距只在二三里之间。
English: The wet bamboo thicket of the thatch thickened, and I stumbled and stumbled toward the southeast, two miles, gradually there were paths, looking down at the accommodation place of Fengda Prefecture, the distance was only between two or three miles.

古文：更南半里，得大道西去，遂从之。
现代文：再向南走半里，遇上大道往西去，就顺着它走。
English: Walk another half-mile south, and when you come to the main road heading west, follow it.

古文：西循北山行一里，得耕者在坡下，问之，始知其上有小寨，名椤图，即从杨广哨入州正道矣。
现代文：往西沿北山行一里，在山坡下遇上耕田的人，向他问路，才知山上有个小寨子，名叫锣图，就是从杨广哨进州城的正道了。
English: I walked west along the North Mountain for one mile. At the bottom of the hillside, I met a farmer and asked him the way. It was only then that I learned that there was a small stockade on the mountain, called Baotu, which was the right way to enter the state capital from Yangguang Sentinel.

古文：乃亟西北上，蹑坡一里，有二茅当峡坪间，是为椤图寨。
现代文：于是急忙往西北上山，爬坡一里，有两间茅屋位于峡中的平地间，这是锣图寨。
English: So he hurried to the northwest up the mountain, climbed a mile, there are two huts located in the middle of the canyon between the plains, this is Zou Tuzhai.

古文：由寨后更蹑峻而北，半里，登冈。
现代文：由寨子后再踩着陡峻的山崖往北走，半里，登上山冈。
English: After leaving the stockade, walk north along the steep cliffs for half a mile to reach the top of the mountain.

古文：西望盘壑下开，水田漠漠，有溪流贯其中，壑西复有崇山外峙，其南又起一崇山，横接而南，交接之中，似有水中贯而去。
现代文：望西面盘绕的壑谷在下方展开，水田广漠，有溪流流贯其中，壑谷西边又有高山耸峙在外面，山南又突起一座高山，横着连接到南边，相互连接处的中间，似乎有水从中流贯而去。
English: Looking west, the winding Shibuya valley spreads out below. The paddy fields are vast and desolate, with streams running through them. On the west side of the Shibuya valley, there are also high mountains standing out. In the south of the mountain, there is also a high mountain protruding. It is connected to the south side, and in the middle of the interconnection, it seems that water runs through the middle.

古文：又北上一里半，遂凌大脊。
现代文：又向北上走一里半，就登上大山脊。
English: Another mile and a half north, and we crested a large ridge.

古文：北下回峡中，半里，一村庐倚南坡，是为杨广哨。
现代文：向北下到回绕的峡谷中，半里，一个村庄的房屋紧靠南面的山坡，这是杨广哨。
English: Half a mile north into the winding canyon, a village house clings to the southern slope of the mountain. This is Yang Guang Sentinel.

古文：从此西北下峡底一里余，有小溪自东北坠西南，其嵌甚深，乃从昨所度崩崖南岭分坠而成者。
现代文：从此往西北下到峡底一里多，有条小溪自东北倾泻到西南，溪流嵌在非常深的地方，是从昨天越过的崩裂的山崖南岭分流倾泻而成的。
English: From here, it's more than a mile northwest to the bottom of the gorge. A small stream cascades from the northeast to the southwest. The stream is embedded in a very deep place. It cascades from the Nanling branch of the collapsed cliff that was crossed yesterday.

古文：涉之西北上，复一里余而跻其脊，余以为即从此缘脊上北大峰矣，而孰意犹中界之支也。
现代文：涉过小溪往西北上走，再走一里多后登上山脊，我以为就是从此处沿山脊上登北面的大山峰了，可谁想到还只是隔在中间的支脉。
English: After wading through the stream and walking northwest, I walked more than a mile and climbed the ridge. I thought that I would climb the big mountain in the north along the ridge from here, but who would have thought that it was just a branch in the middle.

古文：半里越脊，又即北下峡底。
现代文：半里越过山脊，又马上向北下到峡底。
English: Half a mile over the ridge, and then immediately north to the bottom of the gorge.

古文：一里余，有大溪自北南坠，皆从石崖中破壁而去，此即清水朗东溪也。
现代文：一里多，有条大溪自北向南流泻，全是从石崖之间冲破石壁而去，这就是清水朗的东溪了。
English: For more than a kilometer, there is a large stream flowing from north to south, all of which breaks through the stone wall from between the cliffs. This is the clear and long East Stream.

古文：水嵌峡底甚逼，横独木渡其上。
现代文：水流嵌在峡底十分逼窄，横架了独木桥渡过溪上。
English: The water flow at the bottom of the canyon is very narrow, and a wooden bridge has been built across the stream.

古文：余宁木下涉水，即西北上坡。
现代文：我宁愿从独木桥下涉水，立即往西北上坡。
English: I'd rather wade out from under the one-log bridge and immediately head northwest uphill.

古文：始循崖石，继蹑陇脊，一里余，转而东北上，一里跻峰头。
现代文：开始时沿着石崖走，继而上登陇脊，一里多，转向东北上走，一里登上峰头。
English: At the beginning, walk along the cliff, then climb up the ridge, more than a mile, turn to the northeast and walk up to the top of the peak.

古文：由峰头西盘半里，复随峡北行。
现代文：由峰头向西绕半里，再顺峡谷往北行。
English: From the peak head, go west for half a mile, then go north along the canyon.

古文：其峡颇平，行其中一里余，当其东西分峡处，有村庐倚其中，是为陈播箕哨。
现代文：此峡相当平坦，行走在峡中一里多，正当它分为东西两峡之处，有村庄房屋依傍在峡中，这是陈播箕哨。
English: This gorge is quite flat, walking in the gorge more than a mile, just as it is divided into the east and west of the two gorges, there are village houses along the gorge, this is Chen Biao's whistle.

古文：从哨北即西北下，二里，循南山而西，一里，有村庐当坡，是为竹家寨。
现代文：从哨北马上往西北下走，二里，沿南山往西行，一里，有村庄房屋位于坡上，这是竹家寨。
English: From the north-west to the northwest, two miles, along the Nanshan to the west, one mile, there are village houses on the slope, this is the Bamboo Village.

古文：由寨东向北行，寨后复起一峰，有峡横其中，路分为二：循北峰直去，为腾越、南甸大道；穿北峰南峡而西，为硫磺塘道。
现代文：由寨子东边向北行，寨子后方又耸起一座山峰，有峡谷横在其中，路分为两条：沿北峰一直去的，是去腾越、南甸的大道;穿过北峰南面的峡谷往西，是去硫磺塘的路。
English: From the east side of the stockade to the north, behind the stockade another mountain peak rises, with a canyon lying in it. The road is divided into two: along the north peak, it is the road to Tengyue and Nandian; through the canyon south of the north peak to the west, it is the road to the sulfur pond.

古文：余乃舍大道从横峡西行。
现代文：我于是舍弃大道从横向的峡谷向西行。
English: I abandoned the highway and headed west through the transverse canyon.

古文：半里，忽坠峡西下。
现代文：半里，忽然峡谷向西下坠。
English: After half a mile, the canyon suddenly plunged to the west.

古文：其峡甚逼，而下甚峻，坠级历坎，与水争隘。
现代文：此峡非常狭窄而下边十分陡峻，坠下台阶经过坑穴，与水流争夺隘口。
English: The gorge is very narrow and very steep at the bottom, with steps plunging down through the pit, competing with the current for passage.

古文：一里余，望见西峡自北而南，一溪贯其中，即矣罗村之水，挟水尾山西峡而南者。
现代文：一里多，望见西面峡谷自北延向南，一条溪水流贯其中，这就是矣罗村的溪水，傍着水尾山西边的峡谷往南流的水流。
English: For more than a kilometer, you can see the west canyon stretching from north to south, with a stream running through it. This is the stream of Yiro Village, and the south-flowing stream next to the canyon on the west side of Mount Suido.

古文：溪西之山，岦屼南踞，是为半个山。
现代文：溪水西面的山，突兀地盘踞在南边，这是半个山。
English: The mountain on the west side of the stream, and the abrupt land on the south side, are half a mountain.

古文：按《一统志》有罗苴冲，硫磺塘在焉，疑即此山。
现代文：据《一统志》，有处罗直冲，硫磺塘在那里，怀疑就是此山。
English: According to the "Histories," there is a place called Luo Zhi Chong, where there is a sulfur pond, and it is suspected to be this mountain.

古文：然《州志》又两书之，岂罗苴冲即溪东所下之山耶？
现代文：但是《州志》又把它记载为两个地方，莫非罗宜冲就是溪水东面走下来的山吗?
English: But "Zhou Zhi" also recorded it as two places. Is Mofiro Yichong the mountain that came down from the east side of the stream?

古文：又西下半里，直抵溪上，有二塘在东崖之下，乃温水之小者。
现代文：又向西下山半里，直达溪边，有两个水塘在东边山崖之下，是温水塘中小一些的。
English: Another half-mile down the mountain to the west, straight to the stream, there are two ponds under the cliff on the east side, which are small and medium-sized warm ponds.

古文：其北崖之下，有数家居焉，是为硫磺塘村，有桥架溪上。
现代文：它北面山崖之下，有数家人居住在那里，这是硫磺塘村，有桥架在溪上。
English: To the north, below the cliffs, a few families live there. This is Sulphur Pool Village, with a bridge over the stream.

古文：余讯大塘之出硫磺处，土人指在南峡中，乃从桥南下流涉溪而西，随西山南行。
现代文：我打听出产硫磺的大塘所在之处，当地人指点在南面峡中，于是从桥南的下游涉过溪水往西走，顺西山往南行。
English: I inquired about the location of the large sulphur-producing pond, and the locals pointed me in the South Face Gorge, so I waded through the stream from the lower reaches of the south of the bridge to the west, and went south along the West Mountain.

古文：时风雨大至，田塍滑隘，余踯躅南行，半里得径。
现代文：此时风雨猛烈降临，田埂又滑又窄，我跌跌撞撞地往南行，半里后遇上小径。
English: At this time, the wind and rain fell heavily, the rice paddies were slippery and narrow, I stumbled to the south, and after half a mile I met a trail.

古文：又南一里，则西山南迸，有峡东注大溪，遥望峡中蒸腾之气，东西数处，郁然勃发，如浓烟卷雾，东濒大溪，西贯山峡。
现代文：又向南一里，就见西山往南迸裂开，有峡谷，东边流注着大溪，遥望峡中升腾的蒸气，散布在东西有几处，浓郁旺盛地喷发，如浓烟卷雾，东边濒临大溪，往西纵贯山峡。
English: Another mile to the south, I saw the west mountain cracking to the south, with a canyon, and a large stream flowing to the east. The steam rising in the Yanwang Gorge was scattered in several places, and it erupted thickly and vigorously, like a thick smoke haze. The east side was bordered by a large stream, and the west side was a longitudinal mountain gorge.

古文：先趋其近溪烟势独大者，则一池大四五亩，中洼如釜，水贮于中，止及其半，其色浑白，从下沸腾。作滚涌之状，而势更厉，沸泡大如弹丸，百枚齐跃而有声，其中高且尺余，亦异观也。
现代文：先赶去那靠近溪边烟势很大之处，是一个水池，大有四五亩，中间像锅一样下洼，水贮在其中，只达到池子的一半，水色浑浊发白，从下往上沸腾，作出翻滚腾涌的姿态，但气势更为猛烈，沸腾的水泡大如弹丸，成百枚一齐跃起而有声音，其中高的将近一尺多，也是奇异的景观。
English: The first place to go to, close to the edge of the stream, where there was a lot of smoke, was a pool, four or five acres in size, with a depression in the middle like a pot. The water stored in it only reached half of the pool. The water was murky and white, boiling from the bottom up, making a billowing gesture, but the momentum was more violent. The boiling bubbles were as big as marbles, and hundreds of them leapt up at once and made a sound. One of them was almost a foot high, which was also a strange landscape.

古文：时雨势亦甚大，持伞观其上，不敢以身试也。
现代文：此时雨势也非常大，打着伞在池上观看，不敢以身相试。
English: At this time, the rain was also very heavy, so I watched from the pool with an umbrella, not daring to try it myself.

古文：其东大溪，从南下，环山南而西合于大盈；西峡小溪，从热池南东注大溪。
现代文：它东边的大溪，从南面下流，环流过山南后向西汇流进大盈江;西面峡中的小溪，从热水池南边往东注入大溪。
English: The large stream on the east side of it flows down from the south, circulates through the south of the mountain, and then flows westward into the Dairen River; the small stream in the west gorge is injected into the large stream from the south of the hot spring pool to the east.

古文：小溪流水中亦有气勃勃，而池中之水，则止而不流，与溪无与也。
现代文：小溪的流水中也有勃勃的热气，而池中之水，却停而不流，与溪水不相干。
English: In the flowing water of the stream, there is also vigorous heat, but the water in the pool, however, stops and does not flow, and has nothing to do with the stream.

古文：溯小溪西上半里，坡间烟势更大，见石坡平突，东北开一穴，如仰口而张其上腭，其中下绾如喉，水与气从中喷出，如有炉橐鼓风煽焰于下，水一沸跃，一停伏，作呼吸状。
现代文：溯小溪向西上走半里，坡上烟势更大，见石坡平平前突，东北开有一处洞穴，如仰着的嘴张开它的上愕，穴中下边给结如同喉咙，水与气从穴中喷出，如同有火炉用的风箱在下边鼓风煽焰，水沸腾上跃一次，停歇潜伏一次，作出呼吸的形状。
English: Tracing the stream half a mile to the west, the smoke on the slope is greater. You can see the stone slope is flat and protruding. There is a cave in the northeast. It is like a mouth that is raised and opens its upper jaw. The lower side of the hole is knotted like a throat. Water and air are ejected from the hole. It is like a bellows used for a stove is blowing and fanning the flames on the lower side. The water boils and jumps up once, and stops and lurks once, making the shape of breathing.

古文：跃出之势，风水交迫，喷若发机，声如吼虎，其高数尺，坠涧下流，犹热若探汤。
现代文：水跃出之势，风水交迫，喷射时好似抛石机发射，声音如猛虎吼叫，水高数尺，落入下游的山涧中，把手伸进去还烫得好像沸水。
English: The water has the potential to leap out, the wind and water are intertwined, when spraying, it is like a stone-throwing machine, the sound is like a fierce tiger roaring, the water is several feet high, falling into the downstream mountains, and it is still hot like boiling water when you stick your hand in.

古文：或跃时，风从中卷，水辄旁射，揽人于数尺外，飞沫犹烁人面也。
现代文：有时上跃时风从中卷起，水便向四旁喷射，在数尺之外撒在人身上，飞溅的水沫仍灼人脸面。
English: Sometimes, when jumping up, the wind rolls up from it, and the water sprays to the four sides, scattering on the person a few feet away, and the splashing water droplets still burn the person's face.

古文：余欲俯窥喉中，为水所射不得近。
现代文：我想俯身窥视喷水的咽喉，被水射得不能接近。
English: I wanted to lean over and peer down the throat of the spray, to be shot out of reach by the water.

古文：其龈齶之上，则硫磺环染之。
现代文：那如齿跟上愕之上，就有硫磺环绕沾在上边。
English: Then, as the teeth catch up with the jaws, there is a ring of sulphur sticking to the top.

古文：其东数步，凿池引水，上覆一小茅，中置桶养硝，想有磺之地，即有硝也。
现代文：它东边几步开外，凿了水池引水，上边覆盖着一间小茅屋，屋中放了桶养硝，想来有硫磺的地方，就有硝了。
English: A few steps to the east of it, a pool has been dug to divert the water, and a small thatched cottage is covered on the upper side. A barrel has been placed in the house to raise salt. Wherever there is sulphur, there is salt.

古文：又北上坡百步，坡间烟势复大，环崖之下，平沙一围，中有孔数百，沸水丛跃，亦如数十人鼓煽于下者。
现代文：又向北上坡百步，坡上烟势又大起来，环绕着山崖之下，一圈平坦的沙地，其中有数百个孔，沸水成丛腾跃，也像有数十人在下边鼓风煽火的样子。
English: Another hundred paces north uphill, the smoke on the slope increased again, surrounding the bottom of the cliff, a circle of flat sand, among which there are hundreds of holes, boiling water leaping into clumps, and it also looks like dozens of people are fanning the fire below.

古文：似有人力引水，环沙四围，其水虽小而热，四旁之沙亦热，久立不能停足也。
现代文：似乎有人力引水，环绕沙地四周，那水虽小但热，四旁的沙也是热的，站立久了不能停脚。
English: It seems that someone is drawing water by force, encircling the sandy ground. Although the water is small, it is hot, and the sand around is also hot. If you stand for a long time, you can't stop.

古文：其上烟涌处虽多，而势皆不及此三者。
现代文：它上方烟气腾涌之处虽然多，但气势都不及此三处的。
English: Although there are many places where smoke billows above it, they are not as powerful as these three places.

古文：有人将沙圆堆如覆釜，亦引小水四周之，虽有小气而沙不热。
现代文：有人将沙堆成圆形如下覆的锅，也引了小水在四周围绕着它，虽有少量的蒸气但沙不热。
English: Someone has piled the sand into a round pot, covered with straw, and has also drawn a little water around it. Although there is a small amount of steam, the sand is not hot.

古文：以伞柄戳入，深一二尺，其中沙有磺色，而亦无热气从戳孔出，此皆人之酿磺者。
现代文：用伞柄戳人沙中，深一二尺，其中的沙有硫磺的颜色，可也无热气从所戳的孔中溢出，这都是人酿制硫磺之处。
English: An umbrella handle is used to poke into the quicksand at a depth of one or two feet. The sand is the colour of sulphur, but no hot air spills out of the hole. This is where the sulphur is produced.

古文：时雨势不止，见其上有路，直逾西岭，知此为半个山道，遂凌雨蹑崖。
现代文：此时雨势不止，见上边有路，就一直越过西岭，心知这是去半个山的路，便冒雨上登山崖。
English: At this time, the rain did not stop. Seeing a path on the upper side, I kept crossing the West Ridge. Knowing that this was the way to half the mountain, I braved the rain to climb the cliff.

古文：其崖皆堆云骈瓣，崡岈嵌空，或下陷上连，或旁通侧裂，人从其上行，热气从下出，皆迸削之余骨，崩坠之剥肤也，所云 半个 之称，岂以此耶？
现代文：这里的山崖皆似云朵堆积花瓣并列，高峻挺拔，嵌入空中，有的下陷上连，有的旁通侧裂，人从它上边走，热气从下边冒出来，全是进裂开来如削去皮肉剩余的骨头，崩塌坠落剥下的皮肤，所说 半个 的名称，难道是根据此种地形吗？
English: The cliffs here are all like clouds piled up petals side by side, tall and upright, embedded in the air, some sinking up, some side-by-side, side-by-side, people walk on top of it, hot air comes out from below, all are cracked and cracked, such as scraping the flesh off the remaining bones, collapsing and falling off the peeled skin, said half of the name, is it based on this kind of terrain?

古文：蹑崖半里，从其南循岭西上一里，渐随峡南转，则其峡自南岭头坠，中有水悬而为瀑，作两叠坠北下，即峡水之上流也。
现代文：登山崖半里，从它南边沿山岭向西上走一里，渐渐顺峡谷往南转，就见此峡自南面的岭头下坠，峡中有水流悬垂成为瀑布，分作两台向北坠下去，这是峡中水流的上游了。
English: Climb half a mile up the cliff, walk one mile west along the ridge from its southern edge, and gradually turn south along the canyon. You can see this canyon falling down from the southern ridge head. The water flow in the canyon overhangs into a waterfall, which is divided into two falls to the north. This is the upstream of the water flow in the canyon.

古文：又上半里，遂西逾瀑布之上。
现代文：又上走半里，就向西越过瀑布的上方。
English: After another half-mile walk, I crossed the top of the waterfall to the west.

古文：复从峡西更西南上一里，渐转而西半里，见大道盘西崖坠处，出南坳去，小径则西上峰顶，渐转北行，盖此即半个山之顶，至此南下为坳，入城之路，当在其东北，不应西去，遂舍大道从小道。
现代文：又从峡谷西边再往西南上爬一里，渐渐转向西半里，见大道盘绕在西边山崖下坠处，通出南面的山坳去，小径就向西通上峰顶，渐渐转向北行，大概这就是半个山的山顶，到此地往南下走是山坳，进城的路，应当在它的东北，不应往西去，于是舍弃大道从小道走。
English: From the west side of the canyon, climb one mile to the southwest, and gradually turn to the west half-mile. See the avenue winding around the western cliff fall, leading out of the southern ridge. The path will go west to the peak, and gradually turn to the north. This is probably the top of half of the mountain. To go south here is the ridge. The road into the city should be in its northeast, not west. So abandon the avenue and walk along the path.

古文：西上半里，随峰东向北行二里余，乃西北下，得竹坞村庐。
现代文：往西上行半里，顺山峰东面向北行二里多，于是往西北下走，遇上满是竹林的山坞和村庄房屋。
English: Half a mile up to the west, and more than two miles to the north along the east of the mountain peak, so I walked down to the northwest and encountered a dock full of bamboo groves and village houses.

古文：时雨势甚大，避雨庐中，就火沸汤，瀹饭而食之。
现代文：此时雨势非常大，进屋中避雨，就着火炉烧开水，煮饭来吃了。
English: At this time, the rain was very heavy. While sheltering from the rain, I lit the stove to boil water and cooked rice to eat.

古文：其处即半个山村也，昔置镇彝关于路次，此为屯哨，今关废而村存云。
现代文：此处就是半个山村了，从前在路旁设置了镇彝关，此地是屯驻的哨所，今天关废弃了而村子存留了下来。
English: Here is half of a mountain village. In the past, a town gate was set up on the side of the road. This place was a garrison post. Today, the gate is abandoned, but the village remains.

古文：由其东下坡，随峡东行里余，与南来大道合。
现代文：由村东下坡，顺峡谷往东行一里多，与南来的大道会合。
English: From the east of the village downhill, along the canyon to the east for more than a mile, meeting with the road to the south.

古文：随西山北转而行，于是水尾西溪即从此峡南下硫磺塘矣。
现代文：顺西山转向北走，在这里水尾山的西溪就从此峡往南下流到硫磺塘了。
English: Go along the West Mountain and turn to the north. Here, the West Stream of the Water Tail Mountain flows south from this gorge to the Sulphur Pool.

古文：北行二里余，复陟东突之坡。
现代文：往北行二里多，再上登东突的山坡。
English: Go north for more than two miles, and then climb the hillside to the east.

古文：行坡峡中，五里稍下，又一里面绮罗村在东坡下矣。
现代文：行走在山坡峡谷中，五里稍下走，又走一里而绮罗村在东面山坡下了。
English: Walking in the hillside canyon, five miles walk down a little, walk another mile and Milao village in the east down the hillside.

古文：时已薄暮，遂舍入州大道，东里余，宿李虎变家。
现代文：此时已近傍晚，就舍弃进州城的大道，向东一里多，住宿在李虎变家。
English: At this time, it was already late in the evening, so they abandoned the road into the state capital, more than a mile to the east, and stayed at Li Hu's home.

古文：虎变以骑候于马鹿道中，不遇，甫返，煮竹鼯相待。
现代文：虎变带了坐骑等候在去马鹿塘的道路中，未遇上，刚返回来，煮了竹鼯在等待。
English: Tigress took a horse and waited on the road to Malu Tong, did not meet, just returned, cooked bamboo shoots and waited.

