古文：晋副总管李存进造浮梁于德胜。
现代文：原文后梁时期，晋国的副总管李存进，在德胜建造了一座浮桥。
English: In the late Liang period, Li Cunjin, the vice-governor of Jin, built a floating bridge in Desheng.

古文：旧制浮梁须竹笮、铁牛、石囷。
现代文：原先建造浮桥的方法是用竹索、铁牛、石囷。
English: The original construction method of the floating bridge was to use bamboo ropes, iron oxen and stone rafts.

古文：存进以苇笮维巨舰，系于土山巨木，逾月而成。
现代文：李存进却让人用苇索绑在巨船上，然后固定在土山的大树上面，一个多月就把浮桥造好了。
English: Li Cunjin had someone tie him to the huge ship with a rope, and then fastened it to the top of a big tree in the mountains. The floating bridge was built in just over a month.

古文：浮梁之简便，自存进始。
现代文：这种简便的浮桥的造法就是由李存进开始的。
English: This simple floating bridge construction method was started by Li Cunjin.

古文：唐池州人樊若水，举进士不第，因谋归宋。乃渔钓于采石江上，乘小舟，载系绳维南岸，疾棹抵北岸，以度江之广狭。
现代文：南唐池州人樊若水参加进士考试落榜之后，想投降宋朝，他先假装在采石一带的江面上钓鱼，划着小船，先把绳索系到南岸，然后急调船头划向北岸，往返着测量江面的宽窄。
English: After he failed the entrance examination and wanted to surrender to the Song Dynasty, he first pretended to be fishing on the surface of the river in the quarry area, rowed a small boat, first tied the rope to the south bank, then sharply turned the bow of the boat to the north bank, and went back and forth to measure the width of the river.

古文：因诣阙上书，请造浮梁以济。
现代文：接着再上书宋太祖请求建造浮桥。
English: Then he wrote to Song Taizu to request the construction of a floating bridge.

古文：议者谓江阔水深，古未有浮梁而济者，帝不听，擢若水右赞善大夫，遣石全振往荆湖，造黄黑龙船数千艘。
现代文：有人批评他说，江面这么广阔，江水又深不可测，自古以来从来没有人请求建浮桥渡江的，太祖却没有听这些意见，而是擢升樊若水为右赞善大夫，派石全振前往荆湖，监督建造黄黑龙船数千艘。
English: Some people criticized him, saying that the river is so vast and the water is unfathomable. Since ancient times, no one has ever asked for the construction of a floating bridge to cross the river. However, the great-grandfather did not listen to these opinions. Instead, he promoted Zou Ruoshui to the position of doctor and sent Shi Quanzhong to Jinghu Lake to supervise the construction of thousands of yellow and black dragon boats.

古文：又以大舰载巨竹絙，自荆渚而下，先试于石碑口。
现代文：又用巨大的船舰装载巨竹，从荆湖顺流而下，先在石碑口尝试着搭建浮桥。
English: They also used a huge ship to load giant bamboo, sailed down the river from Jinghu, and first tried to build a pontoon bridge at Shibeikou.

古文：移置采石，三日而成，不差寸尺。
现代文：再在采石搭建浮桥，三天之内全部建造完成了，宽窄竟然一尺一寸也不差。
English: In addition, a floating bridge was built in the quarry. The entire construction was completed within three days, and the width was as narrow as one foot and one inch.

