古文：孟子告齐宣王曰： 君之视臣如手足；则臣视君如腹心；君之视臣如犬马，则臣视君如国人；君之视臣如土芥，则臣视君如寇雠。 
现代文：孟子告诉齐宣王说： 君主把臣子看待成自己的手足，臣子就会把君主看待如同心腹；君主把臣子看成马犬，臣子就会把君主看待如同常人；君主看待臣子如同尘土草芥，臣子就会把君主看待如同强盗仇敌。 
English: Mencius told King Qixuan: "If the sovereign regards the vassals as his brothers and sisters, the vassals will regard the sovereign as a confidant; if the sovereign regards the vassals as a dog, the vassals will regard the sovereign as an ordinary person; if the sovereign regards the vassals as a mustard seed, the vassals will regard the sovereign as a robber enemy."

古文：王曰： 礼，为旧君有服，何如斯可为服矣？ 
现代文：齐宣王说： 按照礼制，臣子要为自己过去的君主服丧，在什么情况下臣子才为君主服丧呢？ 
English: King Qi Xuan said: According to the etiquette, a vassal must first mourn for his past monarch. Under what circumstances should a vassal mourn for a monarch?

古文：曰： 谏行言听，膏泽下于民；有故而去，则君使人导之出疆，又先于其所往；去三年不反，然后收其田里。此之谓三有礼焉。
现代文：孟子说： 君主对臣子的劝告能够接受，建议能够听取，因而恩惠能够下达到百姓；臣子因故要离去，君主能派人引导其出国境，并派人事先前往其要去的地方进行妥善安排；其离去三年后不回来，才收回他的土地房产；这样做叫做三有礼。
English: Mencius said: If the sovereign can accept the advice of a vassal, and listen to his proposal, then his favor can reach the people; if a vassal wants to leave for some reason, the sovereign can send someone to guide him out of the country, and send someone to the place where he wants to go in advance to make proper arrangements; if he does not return after three years, then he can recover his land and real estate; this is called the three courtesies.

古文：如此，则为之服矣。
现代文：做到这些，臣子就会为他服丧。
English: If he does these things, the courtiers will mourn for him.

古文：今也为臣。谏则不行，言则不听；膏泽不下于民；有故而去，则君搏执之，又极之于其所往；去之日，遂收其田里。
现代文：现在做臣子，劝谏不被接受，建议不被听取，因此恩惠到不了百姓；臣子因故要离开国家，君主就派人拘捕他的亲族，并故意到他要去的地方为难他，离开的当天就没收了他的土地房产，这就叫做强盗仇敌。
English: Now that he is a courtier, his advice is not accepted, his suggestion is not listened to, so the favor cannot reach the people; if a courtier wants to leave the country for some reason, the monarch will send someone to arrest his relatives, and deliberately go to the place where he is going to embarrass him, and confiscate his land and real estate on the day he leaves. This is called a robber enemy.

古文：此之谓寇雠。寇雠何服之有？ 
现代文：对于强盗仇敌，为什么还要服丧呢？ 
English: Why should we mourn the death of a robber enemy?

