古文：冯盎，字明达，高州良德人，本北燕冯弘裔孙。
现代文：冯盎字明达，高州良德人，原本是十六国时北燕国君冯弘的后裔。
English: Feng Unzhi Mingda, a Gaozhou Liangde person, was originally a descendant of Feng Hong, a Northern Yan Guojun in the Sixteen Kingdoms.

古文：弘不能以国下魏，亡奔高丽，遣子业以三百人浮海归晋。
现代文：冯弘因不能忍受投降北魏，逃亡去了高丽国，派其子冯业带领三百人飘海归顺晋。
English: Unable to bear the surrender of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Feng Hong fled to Goryeo and sent his son Feng Ye to lead 300 people across the sea to surrender to Shun Jin.

古文：弘已灭，业留番禺，至孙融，事梁为罗州刺史。
现代文：冯弘灭国之后，冯业留在番禺，到了他的孙子冯融，侍奉梁朝任罗州刺史。
English: After Feng Hong destroyed the country, Feng Ye stayed in Panyu, and his grandson Feng Rong served the Liang Dynasty as the governor of Luozhou.

古文：子宝，聘越大姓洗氏女为妻，遂为首领，授本郡太守，至盎三世矣。
现代文：冯融的儿子冯宝，娶了岭南高凉的越族大姓洗家的女儿为妻，因而成为高凉地区越族的首领，梁朝委任他为本郡太守，传到冯盎已是第三代了。
English: Feng Rong's son, Feng Bao, married the daughter of Lingnan Gaoliang's largest Yue ethnic group, surnamed Shijia, and thus became the leader of the Yue ethnic group in Gaoliang. The Liang Dynasty appointed him as the governor of the county, and it has been passed down to Feng Ang for the third generation.

古文：隋仁寿初，盎为宋康令，潮、成等五州獠叛，盎驰至京师，请讨之。
现代文：隋朝仁寿初年，冯盎任宋康县令，潮、成等五个州的僚人反叛朝廷，冯盎快马飞驰到京都，奏请平定反叛的僚人。
English: In the first year of the Sui Dynasty's reign of benevolence, Feng Un was appointed the governor of Songkang County, and his colleagues in five states, including Chaozhou and Chengdu, rebelled against the imperial court. Feng Un quickly flew to Kyoto to appeal to his colleagues to quell the rebellion.

古文：文帝诏左仆射杨素与论贼形势，素奇之，曰： 不意蛮夷中乃生是人！ 
现代文：文帝诏令左仆射杨素与他共同讨论僚人反叛的情形势态，杨素对他感到惊奇，说： 想不到蛮荒异族中竟出现了这样的人！ 
English: Emperor Wen sent his left-hand man, Yang Su, to discuss the situation of his colleague's rebellion with him. Yang Su was surprised and said, "I didn't expect such a person to appear among the barbaric aliens!"

古文：即诏盎发江、岭兵击贼，平之，拜汉阳太守。
现代文：文帝立即下诏命令冯盎征集长江、岭南的军队攻打反叛的僚人。平定反叛后，冯盎被委任为汉阳太守。
English: Emperor Wen immediately issued a decree ordering Feng Ang to recruit troops from the Yangtze River and Lingnan to attack his rebel colleagues. After the rebellion was put down, Feng Ang was appointed the governor of Hanyang.

古文：从炀帝伐辽东，迁左武卫大将军。
现代文：他随从炀帝征伐辽东，迁升为左武卫大将军。
English: He followed Emperor Qian to conquer Liaodong and was promoted to General Zuo Wuwei.

古文：隋亡，奔还岭表，啸署酋领，有众五万。
现代文：隋朝灭亡，他跑回岭南，集聚民众，自任首领，统率部众五万人。
English: After the fall of the Sui Dynasty, he ran back to Lingnan, gathered the people, appointed himself as the leader, and led 50,000 people.

古文：番禺、新兴名贼高法澄、洗宝彻等受林士弘节度，杀官吏，盎率兵破之。
现代文：番禺、新兴的著名反叛者高法登、洗宝彻等人受林士弘的节制调度，杀戮官吏，冯盎领兵打败了他们。
English: Panyu, the emerging famous rebels Gao Fadeng, Zhi Baocher and others were dispatched by Lin Shihong's restraint, killed officials, and Feng Ang led the troops to defeat them.

古文：宝彻兄子曰智臣，复聚兵拒战，盎进讨，兵始合，辄释胄大呼曰： 若等识我耶？ 
现代文：洗宝彻的侄子名叫洗智臣，又集聚军众与冯盎对战，冯盎率兵进讨，两军刚交锋，冯盎就脱下战袍大喊： 你们认识我吗？ 
English: Zhi Baocher's nephew was named Zhi Zhi Chen. He also gathered an army to fight with Feng Ang. Feng Ang led the army into battle. As soon as the two armies clashed, Feng Ang took off his battle robe and shouted: Do you know me?

古文：众委戈，袒而拜，贼遂溃，擒宝彻、智臣等，遂有番禺、苍梧、硃崖地，自号总管。
现代文：敌方军众扔下武器，脱下战衣露出上身向他叩拜，反叛者的队伍因而溃散。冯盎俘虏了洗宝彻、洗智臣等人，于是占据了番禺、苍梧、朱崖的地盘，自称总管。
English: The enemy troops threw down their weapons, took off their battle jackets and bowed to him, exposing their upper bodies, and the rebel army dispersed as a result. Feng Ang captured Zi Bao Che, Zi Zhichen, and others, and then occupied the territory of Panyu, Cangwu, and Zhuyao, claiming to be the chief administrator.

古文：或说盎曰： 隋季崩荡，海内震骚，唐虽应运，而风教未孚，岭越无所系属。
现代文：有人鼓动冯盎说 ：隋朝已是末世，分崩离析、时局动荡，国内大乱；唐王虽然应运而生，但他的影响、教化尚未使人信服，岭南、百越之地尚无所归属。
English: Some people incited Feng Ang to say: the Sui Dynasty is already in its last days, falling apart, the current situation is turbulent, and there is great turmoil in the country; although Tang Wang came into being, his influence and enlightenment have not yet convinced people, and there is no place to belong to in Lingnan and Baiyue.

古文：公克平二十州，地数千里，名位未正，请南越王号。 
现代文：明公攻克平定了二十个州，占地方圆数千里，名份还未确定，请加 南越王 名号。 
English: Ming Gong conquered and leveled twenty states, covering thousands of miles of local circumference. The name has not yet been determined, please add the name of the king of South Vietnam.

古文：盎曰：吾居越五世矣，牧伯惟我一姓，子女玉帛吾有也，人生富贵，如我希矣。
现代文：冯盎说： 我家居留百越之地已经五代了，州郡长官所辖之地仅我一姓，子女玉帛我都有了，人世间的富贵，像我这样的就少有了。
English: Feng Ang said: My family has stayed in more than 100 places for five generations. The places under the jurisdiction of the state and county governors have only my surname. I have children and grandchildren. The rich in the world are few like me.

古文：常恐忝先业，尚自王哉？ 
现代文：我常常忧虑有辱先辈创下的基业，我还要自立为王吗？ 
English: I often worry that I have disgraced the legacy created by my predecessors. Do I still want to be king?

古文：武德五年，始以地降，高祖析为高、罗、春、白、崖、儋、林、振八州，授盎上柱国、高州总管，封越国公。
现代文：唐高祖武德五年，冯盎才献出他据有的地盘归顺朝廷。高祖将他原据有的地区划分为高、罗、春、白、崖、儋、林、振八个州，委任冯盎为上柱国、高州总管，封他为越国公。
English: In the fifth year of Emperor Gaozhong's reign, Feng Weng donated his territory to the Shun imperial court. Gaozhong divided his territory into eight provinces: Gao, Luo, Chun, Bai, Jia, Yao, Lin, and Zhen, and appointed Feng Weng as the governor of Shangchuan and Gaozhou, and made him the governor of Yue.

古文：拜其子智戴为春州刺史，智彧为东合州刺史。
现代文：委任他的儿子冯智戴为春州刺史，冯智为东合州刺史。
English: He appointed his son Feng Zhidai as the governor of Chunzhou and Feng Zhi as the governor of Donghe.

古文：盎徙封耿。
现代文：后冯盎改封为耿国公。
English: Later, Feng Un changed his title to Geng Guogong.

古文：贞观初，或告盎叛，盎举兵拒境。
现代文：贞观初年，有人告发冯盎反叛，冯盎率军到本地区边境抵御。
English: In the first year of Zhenguan, someone denounced Feng Ang as a rebel, and Feng Ang led an army to the border of the region to resist.

古文：太宗诏右武卫将军蔺暮发江淮甲卒将讨之，魏征谏曰： 天下初定，创夷未复，大兵之余，疫疠方作，且王者兵不宜为蛮夷动，胜之不武，不胜为辱。
现代文：太宗诏令右武卫将军蔺谟调集江、淮的士兵准备前去征讨，魏征劝谏说 ：天下刚刚平定，战乱给黎民带来的疾苦尚未平复，大规模战争之后，流行疫病正盛；况且王者的军队不应为了蛮荒异族轻易举动，战胜了它称不上威武，战胜不了它却是耻辱。
English: Emperor Taizong ordered General Yu Wuwei to mobilize the soldiers of the Jiang and Huai Rivers to prepare for the campaign. Wei Zheng advised Yu that: the world has just been pacified, the suffering brought by the war to the Lebanese people has not yet been alleviated, after the large-scale war, the epidemic disease is flourishing; moreover, the king's army should not move easily for the sake of the barbaric alien race. Defeating it cannot be called mighty, but it is a shame not to defeat it.

古文：且盎不及未定时略州县，摇远夷，今四海已平，尚何事？
现代文：而且冯盎不像天下未平定时那样攻占州县，又在边远的异族地区，如今国内已经安定，他还有何希冀？
English: Moreover, unlike Feng Ang, who conquered counties and prefectures when the world was not at peace, and in remote ethnic areas, now that the country has been stabilized, what hope does he have?

古文：反未状，当怀之以德，盎惧，必自来。 
现代文：反叛尚未形成，应当以仁德去安抚他，冯盎感到忧惧，必定会自来朝见天子。 
English: The rebellion had not yet formed, and it was necessary to appease him with benevolence. Feng Ang felt apprehensive and was sure to come to see the emperor.

古文：帝乃遣散骑常侍韦叔谐喻盎，盎遣智戴入侍。
现代文：于是太宗派散骑常侍韦叔谐前往开导冯盎，冯盎便派他的儿子冯智戴入宫侍奉皇帝以示守诚不二。
English: As a result, Wei Shuxin, a knight-errant of the Tai sect, went to enlighten Feng Ang. Feng Ang then sent his son Feng Zhidai to serve the emperor in the palace to show his sincerity.

古文：帝曰： 征一言，贤于十万众。 
现代文：太宗说 ：魏征一番话，胜过十万军队。 
English: Taizong said: Wei Zheng's one word is better than a hundred thousand troops.

古文：时暮兵已出，欲遂有功，遣副将上盎可击状，帝不许，罢之。
现代文：这时，蔺谟率领的军队已经出发，想以此建功，派副将回朝向皇帝禀报冯盎可以攻打的情况，太宗不准许进攻冯盎，停止了这次军事行动。
English: At this time, the army led by Miao Miao had already set out, hoping to make a contribution, and sent a vice-general back to the emperor to report the situation that Feng Ang could be attacked. Taizong did not allow Feng Ang to attack, and stopped this military operation.

古文：五年，盎来朝，宴赐甚厚。
现代文：贞观五年，冯盎进京朝见太宗，太宗设宴接待，赏赐给他非常丰厚的物品。
English: In the fifth year of Zhenguan, Feng Ang went to Beijing to see Emperor Taizong. Emperor Taizong held a banquet to welcome him and gave him very rich gifts.

古文：俄而罗、窦诸洞獠叛，诏盎率众二万为诸军先锋。
现代文：不久，罗、窦各洞的僚人反叛，太宗诏令冯盎率领军众二万人担任进讨诸军的先锋。
English: Soon after, Luo and Dou's colleagues rebelled, and Emperor Taizong ordered Feng Ang to lead an army of twenty thousand as the vanguard of the army.

古文：贼据险不可攻，盎持弩语左右曰： 矢尽，胜负可知矣。 
现代文：反叛的僚人占据险要关隘，无法攻破，冯盎手持弓弩对身边的人说： 我的箭射完了，胜负就清楚了。 
English: As his rebel colleagues occupied the narrow pass and were unable to break through, Feng Ang, bow and arrow in hand, said to the people around him: My arrows have been shot, and the outcome is clear.

古文：发七矢毙七人，贼退走，盎纵兵乘之，斩首千余级。
现代文：他连发七箭射死敌军七人，反叛者的队伍溃逃，冯盎挥兵追击，斩杀敌军首级一千余级。
English: He shot seven arrows in succession and killed seven enemy soldiers, the rebel team fled, Feng Ang waved his soldiers to chase, and killed more than a thousand enemy soldiers.

古文：帝诏智戴还慰省，赏予不可计，奴婢至万人。
现代文：太宗下诏冯智戴返回岭南省亲慰问，赏给的财物无法计算，赐给的奴婢达万人。
English: Emperor Taizong ordered Feng Zhidai to return to Lingnan Province to offer condolences to his relatives. The amount of property he was awarded is incalculable, and the number of slaves and maidservants he was given is as high as ten thousand.

古文：盎善为治，阅簿最，擿奸伏，得民欢心。
现代文：冯盎善于为政之道，亲自查阅财务出纳簿册文书，揭露举发隐秘的行奸作恶的人和事，深得黎民欢心。
English: Feng Ang was good at politics. He personally checked the financial books and documents, and exposed the hidden evil-doers. He won the hearts of the people.

古文：卒，赠左骁卫大将军、荆州都督。
现代文：死后，朝廷赠给他左骁卫大将军、荆州都督职衔。
English: After his death, the imperial court gave him the titles of General of the Left Division of the National Guard and Governor of Jingzhou.

古文：子三十人，智戴知名，勇而有谋，能抚众，得士死力，酋师皆乐属之。
现代文：冯盎有儿子三十人，其中冯智戴著名于时，勇敢又有谋略，能抚慰军众，拥有为他舍命效力的军士，下属的地方首领也都乐于受他统辖。
English: Feng Ang had thirty sons, of whom Feng Zhidai was famous at the time, brave and resourceful, able to soothe the troops, had soldiers who sacrificed their lives for him, and subordinate local leaders were also happy to be governed by him.

古文：尝随父至洛阳，统本部锐兵宿卫。
现代文：他曾经随父亲冯盎到洛阳，统领本部的精锐士兵值夜守卫。
English: He once followed his father, Feng Un, to Luoyang, where he commanded the elite soldiers of the headquarters on night guard duty.

古文：炀帝弑，引其下逃归。
现代文：隋炀帝被杀后，他率领部下逃回岭南。
English: After Emperor Sui was killed, he led his men to flee back to Lingnan.

古文：时盗贼多，岭峤路绝，智戴转战而前。
现代文：这时盗寇众多，五岭一线道路断绝，冯智戴沿途转战前进。
English: At this time, there were many robbers, the first-line road in Wuling was cut off, and Feng Zhidai advanced along the way.

古文：至高源，俚帅胁为谋主，会盎至，智戴得与盎俱去。
现代文：到达高凉时，当地的俚族首领胁迫他充当反叛的主谋者，适逢冯盎来到，冯智戴正好和其父一道离去。
English: When he reached Gaoliang, the local leader of the Yao tribe coerced him to act as the mastermind of the rebellion. When Feng Ang arrived, Feng Zhidai just left with his father.

古文：后入朝，帝劳赐加等，授卫尉少卿。
现代文：后来，他入宫侍奉太宗，太宗对他加等犒劳赏赐，授予他卫尉少卿官职。
English: Later, he entered the palace to serve Emperor Taizong, and Emperor Taizong rewarded him with additional pay and granted him the official position of Lieutenant of the Imperial Guard and Junior Secretary of the Imperial Guard.

古文：闻其善兵，指云问曰： 下有贼，今可击乎？ 
现代文：太宗听说他善长用兵，指着天上的云团问 ：下面有敌军，现在可以攻打吗？ 
English: When Emperor Taizong heard that he was good at using soldiers, he pointed to the clouds in the sky and asked, "There are enemy troops below. Can we attack them now?"

古文：对曰： 云状如树，方辰在金，金利木柔，击之胜。 
现代文：智戴回答说： 云的形状像树木，方位正在 金 ； 金 锐利、木柔软，攻打它必胜。 
English: Zhidai replied, "Clouds are shaped like trees, and their direction is like gold; gold is sharp, and wood is soft. If you attack it, you will be victorious."

古文：帝奇其对。
现代文：太宗对他的回答感到惊异。
English: Emperor Taizong was surprised by his answer.

古文：累迁左武卫将军。
现代文：冯智戴的官职做到了左武卫将军。
English: Feng Zhidai's official position was General Zuo Wuwei.

古文：卒，赠洪州都督。
现代文：死后，赠给他洪州都督的职衔。
English: After his death, he was given the title of Hongzhou Governor.

