古文：灵异十则
现代文：灵异十则
English: The Ten Laws of Spirituality

古文：放光老僧香金鸡泉收蛇穴石门复开土主报钟经声应耳然身雷雨猿猴执炊灵泉表异
现代文：放光老僧香金鸡泉收蛇穴石门复开土主报钟经声应耳然身雷雨猿猴执炊灵泉表异
English: Light-emitting old monk incense, golden rooster spring, snake pit, stone door reopening, local priest announcing the sutra, bell ringing, listening to the thunderstorm, monkey holding a cooking spirit spring

古文：景致十则
现代文：景致十则
English: Ten Scenic Spots

古文：山之有景，即山之峦洞所标也。
现代文：山间之所以有景，就是以山中的峰峦洞穴显现出来的。
English: The reason why there is a view between the mountains is that it is revealed by the peaks and caves in the mountains.

古文：以人遇之而景成，以情传之而景别，故天下有四大景，图志有八景、十景。
现代文：因为人遇见它便成了景，靠人的情感来传扬它景便有了区别，所以天下有四大景，图经志书中有八景、十景。
English: Because people encounter it, it becomes a scene, and relying on people's emotions to spread it makes a difference, so there are four major scenes in the world, and there are eight scenes and ten scenes in the picture book.

古文：岂天下之景，数反诎于郡邑乎？
现代文：难道遍天下的景，数量反而屈居于府县之下吗？
English: Is it possible that the number of scenes all over the world is actually lower than the number of prefectures?

古文：四乃拔其优，十乃足其数也。
现代文：四是挑拔其中尤其突出者，十是凑足景点的数量。
English: The fourth is to select the most outstanding among them, and the tenth is to make up the number of scenic spots.

古文：若鸡山则异于是，分言之，即一顶而已萃天下之四观，合言之，虽十景犹拘郡邑之成数也。
现代文：至于鸡足山则不同于此，分开来说，就是一个顶峰便已荟萃了天下的四种景观，合起来讲，纵然是十景仍是拘泥于府县通行的数目。
English: As for the Chicken Foot Mountain, it is different from this. Separately, it is a peak that has gathered four kinds of landscapes in the world. Taken together, even if it is ten views, it is still the number of prefectures and counties.

古文：绝顶四观东日、西海、北雪、南云。观之有四，分于张直指，而实开辟以来，即罗而致之。
现代文：绝顶四观景观有四种，由张直指使划分，而实际上开天辟地以来，就分布获得了这些景观。
English: There are four kinds of top four scenic spots, which are divided by Zhang Zhizhi, but in fact, these scenic spots have been distributed since the beginning of time.

古文：四之中，海内得其一，已为奇绝，而况乎全备者耶。
现代文：四种景观之中，海内得到其中之一，已是奇绝，何况是全部齐备的地方呢！
English: Among the four types of landscapes, it is a miracle for the inland to get one of them, and what's more, it is a place where everything is ready!

古文：此不特首鸡天，实首海内矣。
现代文：这不仅是鸡足山的第一，实在是海内第一了。
English: This is not only the first chicken foot mountain, it is really the first in the sea.

古文：诗五首未录
现代文：诗五首未收录。
English: Five poems are not included.

古文：华首重门龙华浩劫，转恨此门不辟。
现代文：华首重门龙华浩劫之时，转而恨此门不开。
English: At the time of the Longhua Massacre, Huashou's heavy gate did not open.

古文：不知使其中堂奥潜通，纵别有天地，不过一窈窕之区耳；何如双阙高悬，一丸中塞，使仰之弥高，望之不尽乎。
现代文：不知即使其中深邃之处暗中相通，纵然别有天地，不过是一处幽深的地方罢了；哪里比得上双网高悬，一个弹丸塞在中央，使得仰望它更加高大，远望它望不到头呢！
English: I don't know, even if the deep parts of it are secretly connected, even if there is no heaven and earth, it's just a deep place; what can compare to the double net hanging high, a projectile stuffed in the center, making it look up even higher, looking far away from it can't see the head!

古文：故方广石梁，以为五百应真之地，而亦旁无余窦。
现代文：故而正在扩建石桥，以为是五百罗汉应验真身之地，可也是四旁没有其余的洞穴。
English: Therefore, they are expanding the stone bridge, thinking that it is a place for the five hundred arhats to fulfill their true selves, but there are no other caves around.

古文：其意正与华首同也。
现代文：它的意境正好与华首门相同。
English: Its artistic conception is exactly the same as that of Huashoumen.

古文：诗一首见《鸡山十景》太子玄关
现代文：诗一首未收录。太子玄关
English: One poem is not included. Prince's Gate

古文：琼台中悬，已凌灏爽。
现代文：琼台悬在中央，已凌架在浩大清朗的空中。
English: Qiongdao hangs in the center, towering over the vast, clear sky.

古文：玄关上透，更转虚灵。
现代文：玄关向上穿透，更变得虚幻灵妙。
English: The porch penetrates upwards, becoming even more fantastically ingenious.

古文：栈壁排云，出没于烟霞之上。
现代文：石壁上栈道排上云天，出没在烟霞之上。
English: The boardwalk on the stone wall reaches up to the clouds, hovering above the smog.

古文：所称群玉峰头，瑶池月下，仿佛在此。
现代文：所称的群玉峰头，瑶池月下，仿佛就在此地。
English: The so-called group of jade peaks, Tsugaike Tsukishita, seems to be in this place.

古文：诗一首见《鸡山十景》罗汉绝壁
现代文：诗一首未收录。罗汉绝壁
English: One poem is not included.

古文：每爱袁石公 补填积雪成新径，展拓闲云架小庐 之句。
现代文：每每喜爱袁石公 补填积雪成新径，拓展闲云架小屋 的诗句。
English: I like Yuan Shigong's poem about filling the snow into a new path and expanding the leisurely cottage.

古文：行罗汉壁，宛然诗中之画也。
现代文：行走在罗汉壁，宛如是诗中之画。
English: Walking on the wall of Lohan, it is like a painting in a poem.

古文：至其崩云叠翠，人皆面壁，石可点头，自是一幅西来景，不烦丹青落笔。
现代文：来到它乱云飞崩翠色层叠之处，人都面向石壁，岩石可以触摸到头，自然是一幅西方来的景色，不必麻烦丹青落笔了。
English: When it comes to the place where the clouds are tumbling down and the emerald colors are cascading, people are facing the stone wall, the rock can be touched to the head, and it is naturally a view from the west. There is no need to trouble Dan Qing to write.

古文：诗一首见《鸡山十景》狮林灵泉
现代文：诗一首未收录。狮林灵泉
English: One poem is not included.

古文：山下出泉，有渟有流，皆不为异，乃泉不出于麓而出于峦，峦不出于坳而出于脊，脊不出于外泻而出于中垂，中垂不出于旁溢而出于顶灌。
现代文：山下出泉水，有积水有流泉，都不算奇异。此泉不出在山麓而出在山峦上，山峦上不出在山坳却出在山脊上，山脊上不出在向外流泻之处而出在中央下垂之处，中央下垂之处不出在往四旁外溢之处却出在山顶灌注之处。
English: It is not strange that there should be a spring at the foot of the mountain, or that there should be standing water, or that there should be a flowing spring. This spring does not come out at the foot of the mountain, but on the top of the mountain. It does not come out on the top of the mountain, but on the ridge. It does not come out on the ridge where it flows out, but in the middle where it hangs down. It does not come out in the middle where it hangs down, but in the place where it overflows to the four sides, but in the place where it is poured at the top of the mountain.

古文：此惟狮林念佛堂见之，欲不谓之灵不得也。
现代文：此景仅在狮子林念佛堂见到它，想不说它灵异是不可能的。
English: This scene is only seen in the Lion Forest Buddhist Memorial Hall, and it is impossible not to say that it is magical.

古文：诗二首见《鸡山十景》放光瑞影
现代文：诗二首未收录。放光瑞影
English: Two poems are not included.

古文：川泽之气，发为光焰，海之蜃楼，谷之光相太阳光通过山间云雾时衍射成相，俗称 佛光 ，皆自下而上。放光四面深环，危崖上拥，灵气攸聚，瑞影斯彰，其与四大比隆，宜也。
现代文：河川湖泽的水气，散发变为光焰，海中的海市屋楼，山谷间的光相，都是自下而上。放光塔四面深壑环绕，危崖上拥，是灵气聚集的场所，祥瑞的光影显现的地方，它与四大名山并列崇高的地位，是适宜的。
English: The water vapor of rivers and lakes is emitted into light and flame, the skyscrapers in the sea and the light between the valleys are all from the bottom up. The light tower is surrounded by deep water on all sides and surrounded by cliffs. It is a place where the aura gathers, a place where auspicious light and shadow appear, and it is suitable for a lofty position alongside the four famous mountains.

古文：然四大亦惟峨眉、五台，其光最异；若九华、普陀，亦止佛灯，未着光相，故放光之瑞影，真四之中，二之上者矣。
现代文：不过四大名山也只有峨眉山、五台山，它们的光影最奇异；至于九华山、普陀山，也只有佛灯，未挨上光相，所以放光塔的灵瑞光影，真正是居于四大名山之中，两座名山之上了。
English: However, the four famous mountains are only Mount Emei and Mount Wutai, and their light and shadow are the most bizarre; as for Mount Jiuhua and Mount Putuo, there are only Buddhist lanterns that have not been exposed to light, so the bright light and shadow of the light tower are truly among the four famous mountains and above the two famous mountains.

古文：诗一首见《鸡山十景》
现代文：诗一首未收录。浮屠给胜
English: One poem is not included.

古文：浮屠绾胜三距东环，百刹中峙，扃龙华于双阙，悬象魏即庙门外双阙，象即 相 ，相示；魏即 巍 ，巍然于九重，玉毫遍地，只欠当门一楗，金掌中天，忽成华藏千祥。既合此尖，永证胜果。
现代文：三支鸡爪环列在东方，百座寺宇并峙在山中，在双网锁住龙华寺，在九重崖高悬象魏，玉笔遍地，只欠当门的一根门门，金掌中天，忽化成灵异的千种祥瑞。既已集合在此处塔尖，永证善果。
English: Three chicken claw rings are lined up in the east, a hundred temples stand side by side in the mountains, Longhua Temple is locked in the double net, Wei is hanging high on the nine-story cliff, jade pens are everywhere, only one door is missing the door, the golden palm is in the sky, and a thousand kinds of auspiciousness are suddenly transformed into the supernatural.

古文：诗二首见《鸡山十景》瀑布腾空
现代文：诗二首未收录。瀑布腾空
English: Two poems not included. Waterfall taking off.

古文：匡庐之瀑，不及雁宕，独得列名四景，以人所共瞻也。
现代文：庐山的瀑布，不及雁宕山，唯独得以列人著名的四景，是因为它是人们共同瞻仰的地方。
English: Lushan's waterfall is not as famous as that of the Wild Goose Mountain, but it is the only one that has been awarded the Four Famous Views because it is a place for people to admire together.

古文：鸡山玉龙瀑布，亦不若猴子峒峡中崖石掩映，然玉龙独挂山前，漾荡众壑，领挈诸胜，与匡庐同，不得分大小观也。
现代文：鸡足山的玉龙瀑布，也不似猴子桐峡中那样石崖掩映，然而玉龙独自挂在山前，飘荡在群山壑谷中，代表着诸处胜景，与庐山相同，不能分出景观的大小来。
English: The Jade Dragon Waterfall on Jiu Foot Mountain is not hidden by the cliff like the one in the Monkey Tung Gorge. However, the Jade Dragon alone hangs in front of the mountain, floating in the mountains and valleys, representing various scenic spots. Like Lushan Mountain, it is impossible to distinguish the size of the landscape.

古文：诗一首见《鸡山十景》传衣古松
现代文：诗一首未收录。传衣古松
English: One poem is not included.

古文：鸡山之松，以五鬣，此指松毛见奇，参霄蔽陇，碧荫百里，须眉尽绿，然挺直而不虬，巨润而不古。
现代文：鸡足山的松树，以五嚣松见奇，耸入云霄密蔽山冈，碧绿浓荫百里，须眉全是绿色，然而挺拔笔直而不盘曲，巨大润泽而不古拙。
English: The pine trees of the Chicken's Foot Mountain are amazingly five-petalled pines, soaring into the sky and densely covering the mountain. They are bright green and richly shaded, and their whiskers are all green. However, they are straight and not curved, and they are huge and glossy, but not old-fashioned.

古文：而古者常种也，龙鳞鹤氅，横盘倒垂，缨络千万，独峙于传衣之前，不意众美之外，又独出此一老。
现代文：而古拙的是常见的树种，龙样的鳞片仙鹤般的大髦，横缠倒垂，万千缨络，独自屹立在传衣寺之前，意想不到众美之外，又独出现这样一棵老松树。
English: But it is the common tree species that is old-fashioned, dragon-like scales, crane-like large-scale, twisted and upside-down, thousands of branches, standing alone in front of the Dangui Temple. In addition to the unexpected beauty, such an old pine tree has appeared.

古文：诗一首见《鸡山十景》古洞别天
现代文：诗一首未收录。古洞别天
English: One poem is not included.

古文：鸡山岩有重门，洞无奥室，独于山后另辟神境。
现代文：鸡足山的山崖有重重石门，岩洞无深室，独在山后另外辟有神奇之境。
English: The cliffs of the Chicken's Foot Mountain have heavy stone doors, and there are no deep chambers in the caves. However, there is another magical place behind the mountain.

古文：盖山脉至此将尽，更出一番胚胎，令人不可测识。
现代文：原来是山脉到此处将完，另外翻出一番胚胎，让人不可测知。
English: It turns out that the mountains will end here, and another embryo will be turned out, making it undetectable.

古文：人所共瞻者，则扃之使不可几通 及 ；人所不到者，则通之示有所入，何山灵之幻乃尔？
现代文：人所共同瞻仰的地方，则把它锁闭起来使人不可考察；人所不能到达之处，却把它打通以示有通入的地方，为何山间灵气的变幻如此？
English: Where people look together, it is locked up so that it cannot be examined; where people cannot reach, it is opened to show where there is access. Why is the transformation of the mountain aura like this?

