古文：毛公注《生民》诗，姜嫄生后稷 履帝武敏歆 之句，曰： 从于高辛帝而见于天也。 
现代文：汉人毛公注《生民》诗，关于姜嫄生育后稷一事，有 履帝武敏歆 之句，注释说： 姜嫄配于高辛氏帝喾而为天所见。 
English: In the poem "Living People" by the Han Chinese poet Mao Gong, there is a line from the poem "Impressions of the Emperor" about the birth of Jiang Chen. The commentary says: Jiang Chen is a match made in heaven for Emperor Gao Xin.

古文：《玄鸟》诗， 天命玄鸟，降而生商 之句，曰： 春分玄鸟降，简狄配高辛帝，帝与之祈于郊祺而生契，故本其为天所命，以玄鸟至而生焉。 
现代文：《玄鸟》中，有 天命玄鸟，降而生商 一句，毛公作注说： 春分时燕子飞来，简狄配高辛氏帝喾，帝喾和简狄为求子而在郊外向上帝祈祷，因而生下了商的祖先契，所以契是受命于天，在燕子到来时才出生的。 
English: In "The Mysterious Bird," there is a sentence that says, "It is the destiny of the heavens to give birth to the mysterious bird, the merchant." Mao Gong made a note: At the spring equinox, swallows flew in, and Jian Di was matched with Emperor Gao Xin's Empress Dowager. Empress Dowager and Empress Dowager Jian Di prayed to God in the suburbs to ask for a son, and thus gave birth to the merchant's ancestor Qi. Therefore, Qi was ordered by heaven and was born when the swallows arrived.

古文：其说本自明白。
现代文：这种说法本来已经很明白了。
English: This statement is already very clear.

古文：至《郑氏笺》始云： 帝，上帝也。敏，拇也。
现代文：但到东汉郑玄所作的《郑氏笺》中又解释说： 帝，就是上帝；敏，就是大拇指。
English: However, it was explained in "Zheng Shi Yao" written by Zheng Xuan of the Eastern Han Dynasty: "Tei" means God; "Min" means thumb.

古文：祀郊祺时，有大人之迹，姜嫄履之，足不能满，履其拇指之处，心体歆歆然如有人道感已者，遂有身，后则生子。 
现代文：在郊为求子祈祷时，见到大人走过的足迹，姜嫄踩进去，其足不能塞满足迹，又踩大人足迹约拇指之处，姜嫄心体忻然如有人道附身，于是就有了身孕，后来就生下了儿子后稷。 
English: While praying for a child in the suburbs, she saw the footprints of an adult who had passed by. She stepped into them, and her foot couldn't cover the footprints. She also stepped on the adult's footprints around her thumb, and her heart felt as if it had been possessed by a human. As a result, she became pregnant, and later gave birth to her son Hou Yi.

古文：又谓： 鳦遗卵，简狄吞之而生契。 
现代文：又说： 燕子丢下燕蛋，简狄把它吃掉后生下了契。 
English: He also said: A swallow dropped an egg, and Jian Di ate it and gave birth to Qi.

古文：其说本于《史记》，谓： 姜嫄出野，见巨人迹，忻然践之，因生稷。 
现代文：此说法本出于《史记》，《史记》中说： 姜嫄到野外，见有大人足迹，忻然踩进去，因而生下了后稷。 
English: This saying is originally from the "Histories." In the "Histories," it is said that: Jiang Chen went to the field, saw an adult's footprints, suddenly stepped into it, and thus gave birth to Hou Chen.

古文： 简狄行浴，见燕堕卵，取吞之，因生契。 
现代文： 简狄去河边洗浴，见到燕子掉的蛋，拾起后把它吃掉，因此生下了契。 
English: Jane Dee went to bathe by the river, saw a swallow's dropped egg, picked it up and ate it, thus giving birth to Che.

古文：此二端之怪妄，先贤辞而辟之多矣。
现代文：这两则记载很是荒诞无稽。先贤辞而不引用和对它的批驳已经很多了。
English: These two accounts are quite absurd, and there have been many refutations of them without quoting the words of the sages.

古文：欧阳公谓稷、契非高辛之子，毛公子《史记》不取履迹这怪，而取其讹缪之世次。
现代文：欧阳修认为后稷、契都不是高辛氏帝喾之子，毛公在注《诗》中没有采用《史记》中姜嫄踩巨人足迹的说法，而采用了更为荒谬世次之说。
English: Ouyang Xiu believed that Houyi and Qi were not the sons of Emperor Gaoxin. Mao Gong did not use the story of Jiang Qi stepping on the footprints of giants in "Histories" in the note to "Poetry," but used the more absurd story of succession.

古文：按《汉书》，毛公赵人，为河间献王博士，然则在司马子长之前数十年，谓为取《史记》世次，亦不然。
现代文：需要说明的是，《汉书》中记载的毛公是赵地人，曾为河间献王的博士，这样的话，他则生活在司马迁之前数十年，说他采用《史记》世次之说，也不大可能。
English: It should be noted that the Mao Gong recorded in the "Hanshu" is a native of Zhao, a doctor who once offered the king to Kawama. In this case, he lived decades before Sima Qian, and it is unlikely that he used the "History" lineage.

古文：盖世次之说，皆出于《世本》，故荒唐特甚，其书今亡。
现代文：大概世次之说，都是出于《世本》一书，其书内容特别荒唐，该书今天已亡佚。
English: Probably the second-to-last said, are from the "World Book" a book, its content is particularly absurd, the book is now defunct.

古文：夫适野而见巨迹，人将走辟之不暇，岂复故欲践履，以求不可知之飞鸟堕卵，知为何物，而遽取吞之。
现代文：人去野外见到巨大的足迹，逃避犹恐不及，岂有故意踏踩它，以求难以预知的所谓吉祥？飞燕掉下的蛋知道这是什么东西，就马上拾起来吃掉？
English: People go to the field and see huge footprints, but they are too scared to run away. Do they deliberately step on it in order to seek the unpredictable so-called auspicious? If a swallow drops an egg, it knows what it is and immediately picks it up and eats it?

古文：以古揆今，人情一也。今之愚人未必尔，而谓古圣人之后妃为之，不待辨而明矣。
现代文：从古到今，人情世故都是一样的，今天也不会以此来愚弄人，而他们却说古代圣人的后妃这样作，其荒唐可笑，不用反驳它人们就很清楚了。
English: From ancient times to the present, people's manners and customs have been the same, and today they would not fool people with this, but they say that the empress of the ancient saints did this. It is ridiculous, and people know it without having to refute it.

