古文：○翟光鄴翟光鄴，字化基，濮州鄄城人也。
现代文：翟光邺字化基，濮州鄄城人。
English: He was born in Luzhou, Jiangsu Province.

古文：其父景珂，倜傥有胆气。
现代文：他的父亲翟景珂，风流倜傥有胆量有气魄。
English: His father, Yu Jingke, was a womanizer with courage and spirit.

古文：梁、晋相距于河上，景珂率聚邑人守永定驿，晋人攻之，逾年不能下，景珂卒战死。
现代文：梁、晋在黄河相对抗，翟景珂召集并率领邑人守卫永定驿，晋人攻打他们，一年多不能攻克，翟景珂最终战死。
English: Liang and Jin opposed each other in the Yellow River, and Yan Jingke called up and led the people of the county to guard Yongding. The Jin attacked them and could not conquer them for more than a year, and Yan Jingke eventually died in battle.

古文：光鄴时年十岁，为晋兵所掠，明宗爱其颖悟，常以自随。
现代文：翟光邺当时十岁，被晋兵抢去，唐明宗喜欢他聪明颖悟，常常让他跟着自己。
English: Yu Guangyao was ten years old at the time, and was snatched away by Jin soldiers. Tang Mingzong liked his cleverness and insight, and often let him follow him.

古文：光鄴事唐，官至耀州团练使。
现代文：翟光邺事奉棱唐，官做到耀州团练使。
English: Zou Guangya served the Tang Dynasty, and was the highest-ranking official to serve as a regimental drill commander in Yaozhou.

古文：晋高祖时，历棣沂二州刺史、西京副留守。
现代文：晋高祖时，历任棣沂二州刺史、西京副留守。
English: At the time of Emperor Gaozu's ascension to the throne, successive emperors were absent from the two states of Shizuoka and Saikyo.

古文：出帝已破杨光远，以光鄴为青州防御使。
现代文：晋出帝打败杨光速后，以翟光邺为青州防御使。
English: After Emperor Jin defeated Yang Guangxuo, he appointed Gong Guangyong as the defense envoy of Qingzhou.

古文：光鄴招辑兵民，甚有恩意。契丹灭晋，遣光鄴知曹州。
现代文：翟光邺招聚兵民，很有恩德契丹灭晋，委派翟光邺管理曹州。
English: Gong Guangya recruited soldiers and people, and appointed Gong Guangya to administer Caozhou.

古文：许王从益入汴，以为枢密使。
现代文：许王李从益进入汴京，任命他为枢密使。
English: Xu Wang Li Congyi entered Beijing and appointed him as a privy envoy.

古文：汉高祖入京师，改右领军卫大将军、左金吾大将军，充街使。
现代文：漠高祖进入京师，改任右领军卫大将军、左金吾大将军，充街使。
English: Mogao Zu entered the Beijing Division and was reassigned as the right-hand leader, General Wei, the left-hand leader, General Kingu, and the second-in-command.

古文：周太祖入立，拜宣徽使、枢密副使，出知永兴军，卒于官。
现代文：周太祖登位，拜任宣徽使、枢密副使，出知永兴军，死在任上。
English: Zhou Taizu ascended to the throne, and was appointed as the envoy for the proclamation of the imperial seal and the vice-envoy of the privy council, and dispatched the Yongxing Army. He died in office.

古文：光鄴为人沈默多谋，事继母以孝闻。
现代文：翟光邺为人沉默寡言、足智多谋，事奉继母以孝顺出名。
English: Yan Guangyao was a taciturn and resourceful person. He was famous for his filial piety while serving his stepmother.

古文：虽贵，不营财产，常假官舍以居，萧然仅蔽风雨。
现代文：虽然显贵，但不积聚财产，常借官舍居住，萧索得仅能遮蔽风雨。
English: Although they are prominent, they do not accumulate property. They often live in official residences, which can only shelter them from the wind and rain.

古文：雍睦亲族，粗衣粝食，与均有无，而光鄴处之晏然，日与宾客饮酒聚书为乐。
现代文：为使亲族和睦，粗衣粗食，同甘共苦，翟光邺处之泰然，天天和宾客们以饮酒聚书为乐事。
English: In order to make the relatives harmonious, the coarse clothes and coarse food, the same joys and sorrows, the serenity of the bright and shiny place, and the guests enjoy drinking and gathering books every day.

古文：其所临政，务以宽静休息为意。
现代文：处理政事，务必以宽松平静、休养生息为本。
English: When dealing with government affairs, it is imperative to take relaxation, calmness, rest and recuperation as the basis.

古文：病亟，戒其左右，气绝以尸归洛，无久留以烦军府。
现代文：病危，告诫他手下的人，死后即把尸体送回洛阳，不要久留以免拖累军府。
English: When he was critically ill, he warned his subordinates to send the body back to Luoyang immediately after death, and not to stay for a long time so as not to drag down the military government.

古文：既卒，州人上书乞留葬立祠，不许。
现代文：死后，州人上书请求留下安葬，建立祠庙，没有准许。
English: After his death, the people of the prefecture wrote to him to request that he be buried and that an ancestral temple be built, but they did not receive permission.

古文：○冯晖
现代文：冯晖，魏州人。
English: Feng Qi, a native of Weizhou.

古文：冯晖，魏州人也。
现代文：在效节军当兵，因功升任队长。
English: He served as a soldier in the Kisetsu army and was promoted to captain for his service.

古文：为效节军卒，以功迁队长。唐庄宗入魏，与梁相距于河上，晖以队长亡入梁军，王彦章以晖骁勇，隶之麾下。
现代文：唐庄宗进入魏州，和梁在黄河边相拒抗，冯晖作为队长逃到梁军中，王彦章认为冯晖骁悍勇猛，把他收归部下。
English: Tang Zhuangzong entered Weizhou, and Liang resisted on the edge of the Yellow River. Feng Yu, as captain, fled to Liang's army. Wang Yanzhang thought that Feng Yu was brave and collected him under his command.

古文：梁亡，庄宗赦晖不问。
现代文：梁灭亡，唐庄宗宽恕冯晖没有追究，让他跟随唐明宗讨伐杨立。
English: After Liang's death, Tangzhuangzong forgave Feng Xuan for not pursuing him, and let him follow Tangmingzong's crusade against Yang Li.

古文：从明宗讨杨立、魏王继岌平蜀，累迁夔、兴二州刺史。
现代文：魏王李继岌平定蜀后，冯晖多次升迁任夔、兴二州刺史。
English: After Li, the king of Wei, had successfully pacified Shu, Feng Xuan was promoted several times and became the ruler of Ren'ao and Xing'erzhou.

古文：董璋反东川，晖从晋高祖讨璋，军至剑门，剑门兵守，不得入，晖从佗道出其左，击蜀守兵殆尽。
现代文：董璋在束川反叛，冯晖跟随晋高祖讨伐董璋，军队到达剑门，创门有兵把守，不能进关，冯晖从别的路迂回到剑门关左翼，将蜀地守兵消灭殆尽。
English: Dong Xuan rebelled in Sokchuan, Feng Xuan followed Jingao Zu to fight Dong Xuan, the army reached Jianmen, Chuangmen was guarded by soldiers and could not enter Jianmen, Feng Xuan took a detour from another road and returned to the left side of Jianmenmen and wiped out the Shu guards.

古文：会晋高祖班师，拜晖澶州刺史。
现代文：恰逢晋高祖回师，拜任冯晖为澶州刺史。
English: It coincided with the promotion of Zhu Hui as a teacher, and the appointment of Feng Yu as the history of Zhangzhou.

古文：天福中，范延光反魏州，遣晖袭滑州，不克，遂入于魏，为延光守。
现代文：天福年间，范延光在魏州反叛，晋高祖派冯晖袭击滑州，没能攻克，冯晖于是进入魏州，为范延光守城。
English: During the time of Tianfu, Fan Yanguang rebelled in Weizhou. The ancestors of Jin Gao sent Feng Qi to attack the city of Nanzhou, but failed to conquer it. Feng Qi then entered Weizhou to defend the city for Fan Yanguang.

古文：已而出降，拜义成军节度使，徙镇灵武。
现代文：不久出城投降，被拜任义成军节度使，调任镇守灵武。
English: Soon after, he left the city and surrendered, and was appointed as the military governor of Yicheng and transferred to the town of Lingwu.

古文：灵武自唐明宗已后，市马籴粟，招来部族，给赐军士，岁用度支钱六千万，自关以西，转输供给，民不堪役，而流亡甚众。
现代文：灵武自从唐明宗以后，买马买粮，招徕部族，供应赏赐军士，每年花费度支钱六千万，自关以西，辗转运输供给，老百姓承受不了劳役，因此流亡的人很多。
English: Lingwu, since Tang Mingzong, has been buying horses to buy grain, recruiting tribes, supplying and rewarding soldiers, spending 60 million yuan every year, from Guanxi to the west, transporting and supplying. The common people can not bear the labor service, so there are many people in exile.

古文：青冈、土桥之间，氐、羌剽掠道路，商旅行必以兵。
现代文：青冈、土桥一带，氐、羌族拦路抢劫，商人旅客出行必须有军队保护。
English: In the areas of Aoka and Tsuchihashi, there have been roadblocks and robberies by the Yi and Shan ethnic groups. Business travelers must be protected by the military when traveling.

古文：晖始至，则推以恩信，部族怀惠，止息侵夺，然后广屯田以省转饷，治仓库、亭馆千馀区，多出俸钱，民不加赋，管内大治，晋高祖下诏书褒美。
现代文：冯晖一到任，就广施恩信，部族感激他的恩惠，停止了侵夺，然后推广屯田以便节省运送军饷的花费，修整仓库、亭馆一千多处大多出自俸钱，不增加百姓的赋税，辖区内太平无事，晋高祖下诏书表彰他。
English: As soon as Feng Xuan took office, he extended his grace. The tribe was grateful for his favor, stopped the encroachment, and then promoted the settlement in order to save the cost of transporting military pay. The renovation of more than a thousand warehouses and pavilions mostly came from salary money, without increasing the people's taxes. The area under his jurisdiction was peaceful, and he was commended by the Emperor Jinguo.

古文：党项拓拔彦超最为大族，诸族向背常以彦超为去就。晖之至也，彦超来谒，遂留之，为起第于城中，赐予丰厚，务足其意。
现代文：党项拓拔彦超是最大的部族头领，各族的顺逆常常看拓拔彦超的去留冯晖来到后，拓拔彦超前来拜见，于是留下他，为他在城中修建府宅，给予丰厚的赏赐，务求满足他的心意。
English: Party member Tuoba Yanchao was the largest tribal leader, and people of all ethnic groups often watched Tuoba Yanchao's departure and stay. After Feng Yao came, Tuoba Yanchao came to see him, so he left him, built a mansion for him in the city, and gave him a rich reward in order to satisfy his heart.

古文：彦超既留，而诸部族争以羊马为市易，期年有马五千匹。
现代文：拓拔彦超既已留下，各部族争相用羊马来贸易，一年就有马五千匹。
English: Now that Tuoba Yanchao has remained, the tribes are competing to use sheep and horses to trade, with five thousand horses a year.

古文：晋见晖马多而得夷心，反以为患，徙镇静难，又徙保义。
现代文：后晋见冯晖马多而且得到各部族拥戴，反而认为是祸患，调任他镇守静难，又调到保义。
English: Later, when Jin saw Feng Xuanmado, who was supported by all the tribes, he considered him to be a scourge. He transferred him to keep the peace, and then to Baoyi.

古文：岁中，召为侍卫步军都指挥使，领河阳节度使，晖于是始觉晋有患己意。
现代文：年内，又召为侍卫步军都指挥使，兼领河阳节度使，冯晖到此时纔发觉后晋有猜忌自己的意思。
English: During the year, he was also called to be the commander of the bodyguards of the marching army and the leader of the Heyang Festival. At this time, Feng Ye discovered that Hou Jin was suspicious of his own intentions.

古文：是时，出帝昏乱，冯玉、李彦韬等用事，晖曲意事之，因得复镇灵武。
现代文：这时，晋出帝昏庸迷乱，冯玉、李彦韬等人专权，冯晖违心地事奉他们，因而得以再次镇守灵武。
English: At this time, Emperor Jin was dazed and confused, Feng Yu, Li Yanqi and others had exclusive power, and Feng Yu served them against his will, so he was able to guard Lingwu again.

古文：时王令温镇灵武，失夷落心，大为边患。
现代文：当时王令温镇守灵武，失去各部族的人心，成为很大的边患。
English: At that time, the king ordered Wen Zhen to guard Lingwu, losing the hearts and minds of all tribes and becoming a great border problem.

古文：晖即请曰： 今朝廷多事，必不能以兵援臣，愿得自募兵以为卫。 
现代文：冯晖就请求说： 如今朝廷事务繁多，必定不能用兵支持我。希望能够自己招募士兵作为护卫。 
English: Feng Xuan pleaded: "Nowadays, there are so many affairs in the imperial court, I must not use soldiers to support me. I hope to be able to recruit soldiers as escorts myself."

古文：乃募得兵千馀人，行至梅戍，蕃夷稍稍来谒，晖顾首领一人，指其佩剑曰： 此板桥王氏剑邪？
现代文：于是招募士兵一千多人，抵达梅戍，各部族渐渐来拜见，冯晖望着一名首领，指着他的佩剑说： 这是板桥王氏的剑吗？
English: So he recruited more than a thousand soldiers, arrived in Meizhou, and the tribes gradually came to visit. Feng Yu looked at a leader, pointed to his sword and said: Is this the sword of the Banqiao Wang clan?

古文：吾闻王氏剑天下利器也。 
现代文：我听说王氏剑是天下的利剑。 
English: I heard that Wang's sword is the best sword in the world.

古文：俯而取诸腰间，若将玩之，因击杀首领者，其从骑十馀人皆杀之。
现代文：俯身从首领腰中取出剑，好像要玩赏，乘机杀死首领，跟随首领的十多个骑兵也都被杀了。
English: He bent down and took the sword from the leader's waist, as if he wanted to play, and took the opportunity to kill the leader. More than ten cavalrymen who followed the leader were also killed.

古文：裨将药元福曰： 今去灵武尚五六百里，奈何？ 
现代文：副将药元福说： 现在到灵武还有五六百里速，怎么办？ 
English: Vice Admiral Yue Yuanfu said, "There are still five or six hundred miles to Lingwu, what should we do?

古文：晖笑曰： 此夷落之豪，部族之所恃也，吾能杀之，其馀岂敢动哉！ 
现代文：冯晖笑着说： 此人是部落中的豪杰，是部族所依靠的人，我能够杀他，其余的人难道敢动弹吗！ 
English: Feng Yao smiled and said, "This person is a hero in the tribe, a person the tribe relies on. I can kill him, but will the rest of the people dare to move?

古文：已而诸族皆以兵扼道路，晖以言譬谕之，独所杀首领一族求战，即与之战而败走，诸族遂不敢动。
现代文：不久各部族都率兵卡住道路，冯晖用言语开导他们，只有首领被杀的一个部族请战，于是交战并赶走了他们，各部族于是不敢妄动。
English: Soon, all the tribes led their soldiers to block the road, and Feng Xuan used words to enlighten them. Only one tribe, whose leader was killed, asked for war, so they fought and drove them away, and the tribes did not dare to move.

古文：晖至灵武，抚绥边部，凡十馀年，恩信大著。
现代文：冯晖来到灵武，安抚边境各部，经历十多年，恩信大显。
English: Feng Rong came to Lingwu to appease the border ministries. After more than ten years of experience, his gratitude is obvious.

古文：官至中书令，封陈留王。
现代文：官做到中书令，封为陈留王。
English: The official did as ordered in the Chinese book, and was given the title of Chen Liu Wang.

古文：广顺三年卒，追封卫王。
现代文：广顺三年去世，追封为卫王。
English: Guangshun died three years later and was posthumously crowned the King of Wei.

古文：子继业。
现代文：儿子叫冯继业。
English: His son's name is Feng Jiye.

古文：○皇甫晖
现代文：皇甫晖，魏州人。
English: Wang Fuxi, a native of Weizhou.

古文：皇甫晖，魏州人也。为魏军卒，戍瓦桥关，岁满当代归，而留屯贝州。是时，唐庄宗已失政，天下离心。
现代文：在魏州当兵，戍守瓦桥关，期满应当换回，而留下屯守贝州。适时，唐庄宗已失政，天下离心。
English: In Weizhou, he served as a soldier and guarded the Tile Bridge Pass. At the end of his term, he should have been transferred back, but he stayed to guard Beizhou. At the right time, Tang Zhuangzong had lost power, and the world was centrifugal.

古文：晖为人骁勇无赖，夜博军中，不胜，乃与其徒谋为乱，劫其部将杨仁晟曰： 唐能破梁而得天下者，以先得魏而尽有河北兵也。
现代文：皇甫晖为人骁悍勇猛而又强横无耻，夜晚在军中博戏，没有取胜，于是和同党阴谋作乱，劫持都将杨仁晟说： 唐能够攻破梁而得到天下，是因为先取得魏州进而拥有河北全部军队昀。
English: Empress Dowager Dowager Cixi was a fierce and brave person, but she was also strong and shameless. At night, she played in the army and did not win, so she plotted with her fellow party members to make trouble and kidnap Yang Renyu said: Tang was able to break through the beam and gain the world because he first obtained Weizhou and then had all the army of Hebei.

古文：魏军甲不去体、马不解鞍者十馀年，今天下已定，而天子不念魏军久戍之劳，去家咫尺，不得相见。
现代文：魏州军队镗甲不离身、战马不卸鞍已有十多年。如今天下已经平定，可是天子不顾念魏州将士长期戍守的辛劳，离家很近，却不能和家人相见。
English: It has been more than ten years since the Weizhou army has been arming themselves and saddling their horses. Today, it has been pacified, but despite the hard work of the Weizhou soldiers for a long time, they are very close to home, but they cannot see their families.

古文：今将士思归不可遏，公当与我俱行。
现代文：现在将士想回家之心不可阻止，你应当和我们一起走。
English: Now you can't stop your heart from wanting to go home. You should come with us.

古文：不幸天子怒吾军，则坐据一州，足以起事。 
现代文：如果不幸天子对我军发怒，就占据一州，足以起兵夺权。 
English: If, unfortunately, the Son of Heaven is angry with our army, he will occupy one state, which is enough to raise an army and seize power.

古文：仁晟曰： 公等何计之过也！
现代文：杨仁晟说： 你们的打算多么错误！
English: Yang Renzhen said, "How wrong your plan is!

古文：今英主在上，天下一家，精甲锐兵，不下数十万，公等各有家属，何故出此不祥之言？ 
现代文：如今英主在上，天下一家，精锐的甲兵，不下几十万，诸君都有家属，为什么要说这样不祥的话？ 
English: Nowadays, the British Lord is on high, the whole world is one family, the elite armored soldiers are no less than hundreds of thousands, and all of you have families. Why would you say such ominous words?

古文：军士知不可强，遂斩之，推一小校为主，不从，又斩之，乃携二首以诣裨将赵在礼，在礼从之，乃夜焚贝州以入于魏，在礼以晖为马步军都指挥使。
现代文：军士们知道不能逼他就范，就杀了他，推举一个小校做首领，小校不答应，又斩杀了他，随即提着两颗首级拜见副将赵在礼，趟在礼从命，于是连夜焚毁贝州，进入魏州，赵在礼任命皇甫晖焉马步军都指挥使。
English: The sergeants knew that they could not force him to be a Fan, so they killed him. They nominated a schoolboy to be the leader. The schoolboy did not agree, so they killed him. They then presented the two severed heads to Vice Admiral Zhao Zaili, and Zaili obeyed the order. Therefore, they burned Beizhou overnight and entered Weizhou. Zhao Zaili appointed Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager

古文：晖拥甲士数百骑，大掠城中，至一民家，问其姓，曰： 姓国。 
现代文：皇甫晖领着全副武装的几百骑兵，在城中大肆劫掠，到一百姓家，问他的姓氏，回答说： 姓国。 
English: The Emperor Fuxi led several hundred fully armed cavalrymen, and went to a commoner's house to ask his surname, to which he replied, "Surname, country."

古文：晖曰： 吾当破国！ 
现代文：皇甫晖说： 我当破国！ 
English: Empress Dowager Fuxi said: I should break the country!

古文：遂尽杀之。
现代文：于是杀他全家。
English: So they killed his whole family.

古文：又至一家，问其姓，曰： 姓万。 
现代文：又到一家，问他们的姓氏，回答说： 姓万。 
English: He went to another family and asked their surname, to which they replied: "Surname Wan."

古文：晖曰： 吾杀万家足矣。 
现代文：皇甫晖说： 我杀一万家就够了。 
English: Emperor Fuxi said, "If I kill ten thousand families, it will be enough."

古文：又尽杀之。
现代文：又杀他全家。
English: And killed his whole family.

古文：及明宗入魏，遂与在礼合谋，庄宗之祸自晖始。
现代文：等到唐明宗进入魏州，他就和趟在礼合谋，唐庄宗的灾祸就出自皇甫晖。
English: When Emperor Mingzong of Tang Dynasty entered Wei Province, he conspired with Pu Zai Li. The disaster of Emperor Zhuangzong of Tang Dynasty was caused by Emperor Fu Xi.

古文：明宗即位，晖自军卒擢拜陈州刺史，终唐世常为刺史。
现代文：唐明宗登位，皇甫哩从士兵升任陈州刺史，在唐朝时他常担任刺史。
English: When Emperor Mingzong of Tang Dynasty ascended to the throne, Wangfuli was promoted from a soldier to a historian of Chenzhou. During the Tang Dynasty, he often served as a historian.

古文：晋天福中，以卫将军居京师。
现代文：晋天福中，皇甫晖以卫将军的身份住在京师。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jintianfu, Emperor Fuxi lived in the capital as a general of the Imperial Guards.

古文：在礼已秉旄节，罢镇来朝，晖往候之曰： 与公俱起甘陵，卒成大事，然由我发也，公今富贵，能恤我乎？
现代文：趟在礼已掌握军权，解除地方职务来到朝廷，皇甫晖前去迎候他说： 我和你都在甘陵起家，终成大事，但这是由我发起的，你如今富贵了，能照顾我吗？
English: After Zhenli had seized military power, he was relieved of his local duties and came to the imperial court. The empress dowager went to meet him and said, "You and I both started our lives in Ganling and eventually accomplished great things, but this was initiated by me. Now that you are rich and noble, can you take care of me?

古文：不然，祸起坐中！ 
现代文：要不然，灾祸就会在座中发生！ 
English: Otherwise, the disaster will happen in the audience!

古文：在礼惧，遽出器币数千与之，而饮以酒，晖饮自若，不谢而去。
现代文：趟在礼害怕，急忙拿出器物钱币几千给他，用酒款待他，皇甫晖神态自如地饮完酒，不辞而别。
English: Fearing that he would be disgraced, she hurriedly brought out thousands of coins to give him, and treated him to wine. The Empress Dowager drank the wine with a relaxed demeanor, and left without a word.

古文：久之，为密州刺史。
现代文：遇了很久，任密州刺史。
English: It's been a long time since I met him, but he's a legend in Michoacán.

古文：契丹犯阙，晖率其州人奔于江南，李景以为歙州刺史、奉化军节度使，镇江州。
现代文：契丹侵犯京师，皇甫晖率领密州人逃到江南，李景任命他为歙州刺史、奉化军节度使，镇守江州。
English: Khitan invaded Beijing, Emperor Fu Xi led the Mizhou people to escape to the south of the Yangtze River, and Li Jing appointed him as the governor of Zhangzhou and the commander of the Fenghua Army, guarding Jiangzhou.

古文：周师征淮，景以晖为北面行营应援使，屯清流关，为周师所败，并其都监姚凤皆被擒。
现代文：后周军队征讨淮地，李景任命皇甫晖为北面行营应援使，驻守清流关，被后周军队打败，连同手下都监姚凤一起被抓获。
English: Later Zhou's army conquered Huaiyi, Li Jing appointed Wang Fuzhang as an envoy to the north and stationed him at Qingshui Pass. He was defeated by the later Zhou's army and was captured together with his subordinate, the metropolitan inspector Yao Feng.

古文：世宗召见，晖金疮被体，哀之，赐以金带、鞍马，后数日卒。
现代文：周世宗召见他们，见皇甫晖满身伤口，很可怜他，赐给金带、鞍马，几天后去世。
English: Zhou Shizong summoned them, saw that the emperor's body was covered with wounds, felt very sorry for him, gave him a gold belt and a pommel horse, and died a few days later.

古文：幼善角牴，以屠狗为生。
现代文：拜任姚凤为左屯卫上将军。唐景思，秦州人。小时候擅长摔跤，以宰狗为生。
English: Tang Jingsi, a native of Qinzhou, was good at wrestling as a child and made a living by slaughtering dogs.

古文：后去为军卒，累迁指挥使。
现代文：后来去当兵，积官升任指挥使。
English: Later, he became a soldier and was promoted to commander.

古文：唐魏王继岌伐蜀，景思为蜀守固镇。
现代文：唐魏王李继岌伐蜀，唐景思为蜀守卫固镇。
English: Li Jie, the king of the Tang and Wei Dynasties, conquered Shu, and Jing Si, the ruler of the Tang Dynasty, guarded the town of Weigu.

古文：继岌兵至，景思以城降，拜兴州刺史。
现代文：李继岌的军队到来，唐景思献城投降，拜任兴州刺史。
English: Li Jizhe's army arrives, Tang Jingsi surrenders the city, and succeeds to Xingzhou.

古文：晋高祖时，为贝州行军司马。
现代文：晋高祖时，任贝州行军司马。
English: When he was promoted to Gaozu, he was appointed as the secretary of marching troops in Bechu.

古文：出帝时，契丹攻陷贝州，景思为赵延寿所得，以为壕砦使。
现代文：晋出帝时，契丹攻陷贝州，唐景思被趟延寿俘获，被任爵壕寨使。
English: When he ascended to the throne, Khitan invaded and occupied Bozhou. Tang Jingshi was captured by Wai Yan Shou, and was appointed as the envoy to Dungzhai.

古文：契丹灭晋，拜景思亳州防御使。
现代文：契丹灭晋，拜任唐景思为亳州防御使。
English: Qidan Zhaojin succeeded Tang Jingsi as the defense envoy of Zhangzhou.

古文：汉高祖时，为邓州行军司马，后为沿淮巡检。
现代文：汉高祖时，任邓州行军司马，后来任沿淮巡检。
English: When he was the founder of Henkel, he was the Sima of the Dengzhou marching army, and later he was the inspector along the Huai River.

古文：汉法酷，而史弘肇用事，喜以告讦杀人。
现代文：后汉法令残酷，而史弘肇专权，喜好以诬告杀人。
English: The laws of the later Han Dynasty were cruel, and Shi Hongzhao had absolute power and liked to kill people on the basis of false accusations.

古文：景思有奴，尝有所求不如意，即驰见弘肇，言景思与李景交通，而私畜兵甲。
现代文：唐景思有个奴仆，曾有所求而没有如愿，就驰马去见史弘肇，说唐景思和李景勾结，并私藏武器。
English: Tang Jingsi had a servant who had something to ask for but did not get what he wanted, so he rode to see Shi Hongzhao and said that Tang Jingsi had colluded with Li Jing and had hidden weapons.

古文：弘肇遣吏将三十骑往收景思，奴谓吏曰： 景思勇者也，得则杀之，不然将失之也。 
现代文：史弘肇派小吏率三十名骑兵去收捕唐景思，奴仆对小吏说： 唐景思是个勇猛的人，抓到就杀掉他，不然会让他逃掉。 
English: Shi Hongzhao sent a minor official and thirty cavalrymen to arrest Tang Jingsi. The servant said to the minor official: Tang Jingsi is a brave man. If you catch him, kill him. Otherwise, he will escape.

古文：吏至，景思迎前，以两手抱吏呼冤，请诣狱自理。
现代文：小吏到来，唐景思上前迎候，用两手抱着小吏喊冤，请求到狱司自我申辩。
English: When the petty official arrived, Tang Jing thoughtfully stepped forward to greet him. He hugged the petty official with both hands and shouted his grievances, asking him to go to the warden to defend himself.

古文：吏引奴与景思验，景思曰： 我家在此，请索之。
现代文：小吏传来奴仆和唐景思对证，唐景思说： 我家就在这里，请你搜查。
English: A petty official brought in a servant to cross-examine Tang Jingsi. Tang Jingsi said, "My home is right here. Please search."

古文：有钱十千，为受外赂。
现代文：如果有十千钱，就是接受别人的贿赂。
English: If you have ten thousand dollars, you are accepting bribes from others.

古文：有甲一属，为私畜兵。 
现代文：有镗甲一副，就是私藏武器。 
English: If you have a suit of armor, it's a secret weapon.

古文：吏索之，惟一衣笥，军籍、粮簿而已。
现代文：官吏搜索他家，祇有一个衣筐，内装军人登记簿、粮簿而已。
English: Officials searched his home and found only a basket containing a soldier's registration book and a ration book.

古文：吏闵而宽之，景思请械送京师以自明。
现代文：小吏同情而宽免了他，唐景思请求戴上枷锁到京师为自己辩白。
English: The petty official pardoned him out of sympathy, and Tang Jingsi asked to be put in shackles and go to Beijing to defend himself.

古文：景思有仆王知权在京师，闻景思被告，乃见弘肇，愿先下狱明景思不反，弘肇怜之，送知权狱中，日劳以酒食。
现代文：唐景思有个仆从王知权在京师，听说唐景思被告发，就去见史弘肇，希望先把自己关进狱中来表明厦量思没有反叛，史弘肇哀怜他，把王知权送到狱中，每天用酒食款待。
English: Tang Jingsi had a servant, Wang Zhiquan, in Beijing. When he heard that Tang Jingsi had been sentenced to death, he went to see Shi Hongzhao, hoping to first put himself in prison to show that Xia Ruxi had not rebelled. Shi Hongzhao took pity on him and sent Wang Zhiquan to prison, where he was entertained with wine and food every day.

古文：景思既械就道，颍、亳之人随至京师共明之。
现代文：唐景思戴枷上路后，颖、毫二州的人跟随到京师共同为他辩白。
English: After Tang Jingshi wore the yoke on the road, Ying and people from two states followed him to Beijing to jointly defend him.

古文：弘肇乃鞫其奴，具伏，即奏斩奴而释景思。
现代文：史弘肇于是审讯那个奴仆，他完全认罪，于是上奏处死奴仆，放了唐景思。
English: Shi Hongzhao then interrogated the slave, he fully confessed, and then the slave was executed and Tang Jingsi was released.

古文：后从世宗战高平，世宗以所得汉降兵数千为效顺指挥，以景思为指挥使，复戍淮上。
现代文：后来唐景思随周世宗在高平作战，周世宗把所得到的漠降兵几千人编为效顺指挥，任命唐景思为指挥使，又在淮河戍守。
English: Later, Tang Jingshi followed Zhou Shizong to fight in Gaoping. Zhou Shizong organized the several thousand desert soldiers he received into a subordinate command, appointed Tang Jingshi as the commanding officer, and guarded the Huai River.

古文：周师伐淮南，以功领饶州刺史，迁濠州刺史，兵攻濠州，以战伤重卒，赠武清军节度使。
现代文：周军攻伐淮南，唐景思因功兼任饶州刺史，升任濠州刺史，周军攻打濠州，唐景思因伤重而死，追赠为武清军节度使。
English: Zhou's army attacked Huainan, and Tang Jingshi was promoted to the post of the scribe of Bozhou, and Zhou's army attacked Bozhou. Tang Jingshi died of his injuries and was posthumously awarded the post of the scribe of the Wuqing Army.

古文：○王进王进，幽州良乡人也。
现代文：王进，幽州良乡人。
English: Wang Jin, a villager from Yuzhou.

古文：为人勇悍，走及奔马。
现代文：马人勇猛强悍，跑起来赶得上奔驰的马。
English: The horseman is brave and strong, and can run as fast as a galloping horse.

古文：少聚徒为盗，乡里患之，符彦超遣人以赂招置麾下。
现代文：年轻时聚众做盗贼，乡里认为他是祸患，符彦超派人用钱财将他收编为部下。
English: When he was young, he gathered people to be a thief. The village thought he was a scourge, and Fu Yanchao sent someone to use money to recruit him as a subordinate.

古文：彦超镇安远军，军中有变，遣进驰奏京师，明宗怪其来速，嘉其足力，以隶宁卫指挥。
现代文：符彦超镇守安速军，军中发生叛乱，他派王进疾速奏报京师，唐明宗因他来得快而惊奇，赞赏他的足力，把他归属宁卫指挥。
English: Fu Yanchao was in charge of the Anhui army, and there was a rebellion in the army. He sent Wang Jinji to report to the Beijing division. Tang Mingzong was surprised at how quickly he came, appreciated his footwork, and put him under the command of Ningwei.

古文：汉高祖为侍卫亲军指挥使，以进为军校。
现代文：汉高祖任侍卫亲军指挥使时，任王进为军校。
English: When the founder of Henkel served as the commanding officer of the Imperial Guards, Ren Wangjin became a military school.

古文：高祖镇河东，因以之从，每有急，遣进驰至京师，往返不过五六日，由是愈亲爱之，累迁奉国军都指挥使。
现代文：汉高祖镇守河束，就让他跟随，每有急事，就派王进急行到京师，往返不过五六天，因此更加亲信喜欢他，屡经升迁为奉国军都指挥使。
English: Whenever there was an emergency, he would send Wang Jin on an express train to Beijing Division. The round trip was only five or six days, so his close friends liked him even more, and he was repeatedly promoted to the commander of the national army.

古文：从周太祖起魏，迁虎捷右厢都指挥使。
现代文：随从周太祖在魏州起兵，升任虎捷右厢都指挥使。
English: He followed Zhou Taizu in raising an army in Weizhou and was promoted to the commanding officer of the right compartment of the Tiger-Craft Railway.

古文：历汝、郑二州防御使、彰德军节度使。
现代文：历任汝、郑二州防御使、彰德军节度使。
English: Successive Ye, Zheng Erzhou defense envoy, Zhang German army festival envoy.

古文：显德元年秋，以疾卒，赠太师。
现代文：显德元年秋，因病去世，追赠为太师。
English: In the autumn of the first year of the Xiande era, he died of illness and was posthumously awarded the title of Grand Master.

古文：呜呼！
现代文：唉！
English: Alas!

古文：予述旧史，至于王进之事，未尝不废书而叹曰：甚哉，五代之君，皆武人崛起，其所与俱勇夫悍卒，各裂土地封侯王，何异豺狼之牧斯人也！
现代文：我撰述过去的历史，写到王进的事，未尝不放下书而感叹说：太遇分了，五代的君主，都是由武人崛起的，和他们共事的都是勇士强兵，各自瓜分土地分封侯王，和豺狼牧养着这些人有什么不同！
English: I wrote about the history of the past, about Wang Jin, and I couldn't help but put down my book and sigh: what a coincidence. The five generations of monarchs were all raised by warriors, and all of them worked with brave and strong soldiers. Each of them divided the land into fiefs and princes. What's the difference between these people and the wolves that shepherd them?

古文：虽其附托遭遇，出于一时之幸，然犹必皆横身阵敌，非有百夫之勇，则必一日之劳。
现代文：虽然他们的依托遭遇，出于一时的幸运，然而必定都还是横身战阵、面临敌人，即使没有可敌百人的英勇，也必定有一朝的辛劳。
English: Although they were lucky for a while, they still had to face the enemy, and even if they didn't have the courage of a hundred men, they still had to work hard.

古文：至如进者，徒以疾足善走而秉旄节，何其甚欤！
现代文：至于像王进这样的人，只是以快步善跑而执掌军权，多么过分啊！
English: As for a man like Wang Jin, who holds the military power just by running fast, what an exaggeration!

古文：岂非名器之用，随世而轻重者欤？
现代文：难道不是代表等级的爵号车服的作用，随着世道的不同而轻重不同吗？
English: Isn't it true that the role of the representative rank of the knight's uniform is different according to the different ways of life?

古文：世治则君子居之而重，世乱则小人易得而轻欤？
现代文：在治世君子得到它就重要，在乱世小人易于得到它就不重要吗？
English: Is it important for a ruler to obtain it, but not important for a villain to obtain it easily in a chaotic world?

古文：抑因缘侥幸，未始不有，而尤多于乱世，既其极也，遂至于是欤？
现代文：抑或因机缘、因侥幸，以前未尝役有，而乱世尤多，到了极点，就成了这样吗？
English: Or is it because of chance, because of a fluke, that you have never been useful before, and the world is more chaotic, to the extreme, has it become like this?

古文：岂其又有甚于是者欤？
现代文：难道还有超过这种情况的吗？
English: Is there more to it than that?

古文：当此之时，为国长者不过十馀年，短者三四年至一二年。
现代文：当这时，统治国家的，长的不过十几年，短的三四年到一二年。
English: At that time, the reign of the country was only a dozen years long, short three or four years to one or two years.

古文：天下之人，视其上易君代国，如更戍长无异，盖其轻如此，况其下者乎！
现代文：天下的人，见上面改朝换代，与更换戍长没有什么不同，改朝换代都易如反掌，何况君主以下的人呢？
English: People all over the world, see the change of dynasty above, are no different from the change of eunuchs, and the change of dynasty is as easy as changing hands, let alone people below the monarch?

古文：如进等者，岂足道哉！
现代文：像王进等人，哪里值得称道呢？
English: Like Wang Jin and others, what is worthy of praise?

古文：《易》否泰消长，君子小人常相上下，视在上者如进等，则其在下者可知矣。
现代文：《易经》的否极泰来、此消彼长，君子小人常常相互上下，见了在上的如王进等人，那么在他们之下的就可想而知了。
English: In the I Ching, the negative and positive come and go, and the gentleman and the villain often go up and down with each other. If you see people like Wang Jin above, then you can imagine what's below them.

古文：可胜道哉！○常思常思，字克恭，太原人也。
现代文：我记载王进的事，是用以哀怜这一代人的混乱，可见当时身居下位的贤人君子，能说得完吗？能说得完吗？常思字克恭，太原人。
English: When I wrote about Wang Jin, it was to lament the chaos of this generation. It can be seen that the wise men and gentlemen who were in the lower ranks at that time, can they finish? Can they finish? Chang Si Zi Kekong, Taiyuan people.

古文：初从唐庄宗为卒，后为长剑指挥使。
现代文：最初追随唐庄宗当兵，后来任长剑指挥使。
English: He initially followed Tangzhuangzong as a soldier, and later served as a long sword commander.

古文：历唐、晋为六军都虞候。
现代文：历任唐、晋六军都虞候。
English: Successive Tang and Jin armies were all wealthy.

古文：汉高祖为河东节度使，以思为牢城指挥使。
现代文：汉高祖任河东节度使，任命常思为牢城指挥使。
English: Henkel's great-grandfather was appointed as the chief envoy of the Hedong Festival, and appointed Changsi as the commander of the dungeon.

古文：高祖入立，领武胜军节度使，徙镇昭义。思起军卒，未尝有战功，徒以幸会汉兴，遂秉旄节。
现代文：汉高祖登位，常思兼任武胜军节度使，调任镇守昭义常思行伍出身，不曾有战功，只因侥幸碰上汉的兴立，于是执掌帅权。
English: When Emperor Gaozu of the Han Dynasty ascended to the throne, Jangsi also served as the envoy to the festival of the victorious army, and was transferred to the post of town guard. Jangsi was born in the military and had no military achievements, but because of a fluke he encountered the rise of the Han Dynasty, so he held command.

古文：在潞州五年，以聚敛为事，而性鄙俭。
现代文：在潞州五年，以聚敛财富为能事，生性鄙劣吝啬。
English: In Luzhou for five years, he was able to accumulate wealth, but he was mean and stingy by nature.

古文：初，思微时，周太祖方少孤无依，衣食于思家，以思为叔，后思与周太祖俱遭汉以取富贵。
现代文：当初，常思微贱时，周太祖还小，孤苦无依，寄食在常思家，认常思为叔父后来常思和周太祖都遇汉而取得富贵。
English: In the beginning, when Chang Si was a lowly peasant, Zhou Taizu was still young, lonely and destitute. He sent food to Chang Si's home, and recognized Chang Si as his uncle. Later, both Chang Si and Zhou Taizu met Han and became rich.

古文：周太祖已即位，每呼思为常叔，拜其妻，如家人礼。
现代文：周太祖登位后，每每叫常思为常叔，拜见他的妻子，礼节如同自家人一样。
English: After Zhou Taizu ascended to the throne, he called Changshi as his uncle and visited his wife with the same etiquette as his own family.

古文：广顺三年，徙镇归德，居三年来朝，又徙平卢，思因启曰： 臣居宋，宋民负臣丝息十万两，愿以券上进。 太祖颔之，即焚其券，诏宋州悉蠲除之。
现代文：广顺三年，常思调任镇守归德，过了三年前来朝拜，又调任平卢，常思因而禀告说： 我在宋州，宋州百姓欠我丝息十万两，愿把债券进献 周太祖点头同意，随即烧掉债券，下诏给宋州全部免除。
English: In the third year of Guangshun, Chang Si was transferred to the post of town guard to return to Germany. After three years, he came to pay homage to the emperor and was transferred to Pinglu. Chang Si therefore announced: I am in Songzhou. The people of Songzhou owe me 100,000 taels of silver. I am willing to donate the bonds to Zhou Taizu. Zhou Taizu nodded and agreed. He immediately burned the bonds and issued an edict to completely exempt Songzhou.

古文：思居青州，逾年得疾，归于洛阳，卒，赠中书令。
现代文：常思住在青州，一年后患病，回到洛阳，去世，赠中书令。
English: Chang Si lived in Qingzhou, fell ill a year later, returned to Luoyang, passed away, and was awarded the Order of the Central Star.

古文：○孙方谏
现代文：孙方谏，郑州清苑人。
English: Sun Fangyao, a native of Qingyuan, Zhengzhou.

古文：孙方谏，郑州清苑人也。初，定州西北有狼山堡，定人常保以避契丹，有尼深意居其中，以佛法诱民，民多归之。
现代文：当初，定州西北有个狼山堡，定州人常占据它来躲避契丹，有个尼姑深意住在其中，用佛法诱惑百姓，老百姓多归依她。
English: At the beginning, there was a wolf mountain fort in the northwest of Dingzhou. Dingzhou people often occupied it to avoid the Khitan. There was a nun who deliberately lived in it, using Buddhism to tempt the people, and the people mostly converted to her.

古文：后尼死，堡人言其尸不朽，因奉而事之。
现代文：后来尼姑死了，堡中人说她的尸体不朽，因而祭奉她。
English: Later, the nun died, and the people in the castle said that her body was immortal, so they dedicated it to her.

古文：尼姓孙氏，方谏自以为尼族人，即继行其法，堡人推以为主。
现代文：尼姑姓孙，孙方谏自认为是尼姑同族的人，就继续施行佛法，堡中人推举他做首领。
English: The nun's surname was Sun, and Sun Fangyao, who considered himself a member of the same tribe as the nun, continued to practice Buddhism. The people in the fortress elected him as their leader.

古文：晋出帝时，义武军节度使恶方谏聚徒山中，恐为边患，因表以为游奕使。
现代文：置出帝时，义武里节度使厌恶孙方谴在山中聚众，怕成为边患，因而表奏他为游奕使。
English: When the emperor was enthroned, the Yiburi festival was held in the mountains to gather people who were disgusted with Sun Fang's punishment, fearing that he would become an outsider. Therefore, he was portrayed as a wanderer.

古文：方谏因有所求不得，乃北通契丹。
现代文：孙方谏因有所求而不能如愿，于是北通契丹。
English: Sun Fangyao couldn't do as he wished because of his desire, so he went to Beidong Qidan.

古文：契丹后灭晋，以方谏为义武军节度使。
现代文：后来契丹灭晋，任命孙方谏为义重墨节度使。
English: Later, the Khitan Emperor Jianjin appointed Sun Fangyao as the Minister of Religious Affairs.

古文：已而徙方谏于云中，方谏不受命，率其徒复入狼山。
现代文：不久调孙方谏到云中，孙方谏不接受任命，率领他的门徒又进入狼山堡。
English: Soon after, Sun Fangyao was transferred to Yunzhong. Sun Fangyao did not accept the appointment and led his disciples into the Wolf Mountain Fortress.

古文：汉高祖起，契丹纵火烧定州，虏其人民北去。
现代文：汉高祖兴立，契丹放火焚烧定州，掳掠定州百姓北去。
English: The Han Emperor Gaozu was enthroned, the Khitan set fire to Dingzhou, and the people of Dingzhou were abducted and taken north.

古文：方谏闻之，自狼山入，据之以归汉，高祖嘉之，即拜方谏义武军节度使。
现代文：孙方谏听说后，从狼山进入定州，占据定州归附汉，汉高祖表彰他，就拜授孙方谏为义武军节度使。
English: After hearing this, Sun Fangyao entered Dingzhou from the Wolf Mountain, occupied Dingzhou and annexed it to the Han Dynasty. The founder of the Han Dynasty commended him and awarded Sun Fangyao as the festival envoy of the Volunteer Army.

古文：周太祖时，徙镇镇国，以其弟行友为定州留后。
现代文：周太祖时，调任镇守镇国，任命他的弟弟孙行友为定州留后。
English: At the time of Zhou Taizu, he was transferred to the post of town guard of the town and country, and appointed his younger brother Sun Yingyou as the successor of Dingzhou.

古文：世宗攻太原，方谏朝于行在，从还京，至洛得疾，徙镇匡国，卒于洛阳，年六十二，赠太师。
现代文：周世宗进攻太原，孙方谏到皇帝行营朝拜，随同回到京师，到洛阳时患病，调任镇守匡国，死在洛阳，享年六十二岁，赠太师。
English: Zhou Shizong attacked Taiyuan, and Sun Fangyao went to the emperor's camp to worship, and returned to Beijing with him. When he came to Luoyang, he fell ill and was transferred to the town guard of Kuangguo. He died in Luoyang at the age of 62, and was given the title of Grand Master.

