古文：二十三年，王将铸无射而为之大林。
现代文：二十三年，周景王为了铸造无射乐钟而打算先造个大的林钟乐钟。
English: In 233, Zhou Jingwang, in order to cast a non-shooting bell, first planned to make a large Lin Zhongle bell.

古文：单穆公曰： 不可。
现代文：单穆公说： 不行啊。
English: Shanmukong said: You can't do that.

古文：作重币以绝民资，又铸大钟以鲜其继。
现代文：铸造大钱已经夺去了民众的资财，又要铸大钟来加重民众的负担。
English: The minting of big money has already robbed the people of their wealth, and they want to mint big bells to increase the burden on the people.

古文：若积聚既丧，又鲜其继，生何以殖？
现代文：如果民众的积蓄都被夺走，又加重他们的负担，他们怎么活下去？
English: If people's savings are all taken away from them, burdening them even more, how will they survive?

古文：且夫钟不过以动声，若无射有林，耳弗及也。夫钟声以为耳也，耳所不及，非钟声也。
现代文：钟不过是用来奏乐的，如果无射按大林钟这样的大钟来造，耳朵无法听到它的声音。钟声是让耳朵听的，耳朵听不见，就不算钟声了。
English: A bell is only used to play music. If a large bell such as the Daelim Bell is made without striking, the ear cannot hear its sound. The bell is for the ear to hear, and if the ear cannot hear it, it is not a bell.

古文：犹目所不见，不可以为目也。
现代文：犹如眼睛看不清楚的东西，不能硬让眼睛去看。
English: Just as the eyes cannot see clearly, the eyes cannot be forced to see.

古文：夫目之察度也，不过步武尺寸之间；其察色也，不过墨丈寻常之间。
现代文：眼睛所能观察的范围，不过几尺之间；其所能分辨的颜色，也不过一两丈的距离。
English: The range that the eye can observe is only a few feet; the color that it can distinguish is only a few feet away.

古文：耳之察和也，在清浊之间；其察清浊也，不过一人之所胜。
现代文：耳朵所能听到的和声在清音与浊音之间；其所能分辨的清、浊之音，不超过个人的能力所及。
English: The harmony that the ear can hear is between clear and muffled sounds; the clear and muffled sounds that it can distinguish are beyond the ability of an individual.

古文：是故先王之制钟也，大不出钧，重不过石。
现代文：所以先王铸造乐钟，大小不超过乐音的标准，重量不超过一百二十斤。
English: Therefore, the first king cast a musical bell, the size of which does not exceed the standard of musical sound, and the weight does not exceed one hundred and twenty pounds.

古文：律度量衡于是乎生，小大器用于是乎出，故圣人慎之。
现代文：音律、长度、容量、重量都因此确定，锱铢分寸、斤两丈尺的单位都由此产生。所以，圣人对此十分慎重。
English: The meter, length, capacity, and weight are all determined by this, and the units of 分寸 and 斤两丈尺 are all derived from this. Therefore, the sage was very cautious about this.

古文：今王作钟也，听之弗及，比之不度，钟声不可以知和，制度不可以出节，无益于乐而鲜民财，将焉用之！
现代文：现在陛下所铸造的钟，耳朵无法听到声音，大小不符合规制，钟声中听不出和声，规格上不能成为标准，既无益于乐又浪费民众财产，那有什么用呢？
English: What is the use of the bells now cast by your majesty, whose sound is inaudible to the ear, whose size does not conform to the regulations, whose harmony is inaudible, whose specifications cannot be standardized, and which are neither beneficial to music nor a waste of the people's property?

古文： 夫乐不过以听耳，而美不过以观目。
现代文： 乐音不过是让耳朵能听见，美物不过是让眼睛能看到。
English: Music is but for the ear to hear, beauty for the eye to see.

古文：若听乐而震，观美而眩，患莫甚焉。
现代文：如果乐音听起来震耳欲聋，美物看起来眼花缭乱，还有什么比这更糟的呢。
English: If the music is deafening and the beauty dazzling, what could be worse?

古文：夫耳目，心之枢机也，故必听和而视正。
现代文：耳朵和眼睛是心灵的枢纽，所以必须听和谐之音而看正当之物。
English: The ears and eyes are the hubs of the soul, so we must listen to the sound of harmony and see the right things.

古文：听和则聪，视正则明。
现代文：所听和谐才能耳聪，所看正当才能目明。
English: What can be heard must be harmonious, and what can be seen must be legitimate.

古文：聪则言听，明则德昭。
现代文：耳聪才能言语动听，目明才能德行磊落。
English: Ears and ears can make speech beautiful, eyes and eyes can be virtuous.

古文：听言昭德，则能思虑纯固。
现代文：言语动听而德行磊落，才能思虑纯正。
English: Only when one's speech is beautiful and virtuous can one think pure thoughts.

古文：以言德于民，民歆而德之，则归心焉。
现代文：用这些来对待民众，民众才心悦诚服地感恩戴德，就能归附于君王。
English: Use these to deal with the people, and the people will be able to attach themselves to the king only if they are sincerely grateful.

古文：上得民心以殖义方，是以作无不济，求无不获。然则能乐。
现代文：君王有民众的拥护来建功立业，因而能事无不成、求无不得，于是才能讲求音乐。
English: The monarch has the support of the people to build a career, so he can achieve anything, ask for anything, so he can ask for music.

古文：夫耳内和声，而口出美言，以为宪令，而布诸民，正之以度量，民以心力，从之不倦，成事不贰，乐之至也。
现代文：耳听和谐之音而口说动听之言，以此来制订法令颁布于民众，并用度、量来规范，民众就会忘我劳作，不怠惰地服从，不走样地完成事务，这是音乐所起的最大作用。
English: Listen to the sound of harmony with your ears and speak beautiful words with your mouth, so as to formulate decrees and issue them to the people, and use measure and quantity to standardize, the people will forget themselves to work, not lazily obey, and not do things in a haphazard manner. This is the greatest role played by music.

古文：口内味而耳内声，声味生气。
现代文：口尝味道而耳听声音，声音和味道产生精气。
English: The palate tastes and the ear hears sound, and sound and taste produce the spirit.

古文：气在口为言，在目为明。
现代文：精气在口为言语，在眼为视觉。
English: The breath becomes speech in the mouth and sight in the eye.

古文：言以信名，明以时动。
现代文：言语用来申明号令，视觉用来观时导行。
English: Words are used to assert orders, and vision is used to guide the viewer.

古文：名以成政，动以殖生。
现代文：用号令来修明政事，用行动来增殖财富。
English: Use the signal to clarify the political affairs, and use the action to increase the wealth.

古文：政成生殖，乐之至也。
现代文：政治清明而财富增加，这是音乐所起的最大作用。
English: When politics is clear and wealth increases, this is the greatest role played by music.

古文：若视听不和，而有震眩，则味入不精，不精则气佚，气佚则不和。
现代文：如果视听不和谐，出现耳鸣眼花，味入于口就不会精美，味不精美则精气涣散，精气涣散则无法和谐。
English: If the audio-visual is not harmonious, there will be ringing in the ears and eyes, and the taste in the mouth will not be exquisite. If the taste is not exquisite, the essence will be scattered, and if the essence is scattered, there will be no harmony.

古文：于是乎有狂悖之言，有眩惑之明，有转易之名，有过慝之度。出令不信，刑政放纷，动不顺时，民无据依，不知所力，各有离心。
现代文：于是就会有狂乱背理的言论，有胡涂混乱的看法，有错乱不定的号令，有谬误邪恶的准则，发布的政令失掉信用，刑法政事混乱不堪，行动违背季节，百姓失去依据而不知该如何出力，各自都有离散之心。
English: As a result, there will be wild and irrational remarks, muddled and confused views, confused and uncertain orders, fallacious and evil rules, issued decrees lose credibility, criminal law and government affairs are in chaos, actions go against the season, the people lose their basis and do not know how to contribute, and each has a discrete heart.

古文：上失其民，作则不济，求则不获，其何以能乐？
现代文：君王失去了民众，要做的完不成，要求的得不到，那还怎么能愉悦快乐呢？
English: If the ruler loses the people, if he cannot accomplish what he wants to do, and if he cannot get what he wants, then how can he be happy?

古文：三年之中，而有离民之器二焉，国其危哉！ 
现代文：陛下在三年之中就做了二件使民众离心的事，国家可就危险了。 
English: Your Majesty has done two things in three years that have alienated the people, and the country is in danger.

古文：王弗听，问之伶州鸠。
现代文：景王不听劝阻，去问乐官伶州鸠。
English: King Jing did not listen to the dissuasion, and went to ask the music official, Zhang Zhou.

古文：对曰： 臣之守官弗及也。
现代文：伶州鸠答道： 臣的职责无法知道这些。
English: Zhangzhou Yao replied, "It is not a minister's duty to know these things.

古文：臣闻之，琴瑟尚宫，钟尚羽，石尚角，匏竹利制，大不逾宫，细不过羽。
现代文：臣听说，琴瑟宜于演奏宫调，乐钟宜于演奏羽调，磬石宜于演奏角调，笙箫是取其音声悠扬，乐音低弘不逾越宫声，尖细的不超过羽声。
English: The minister heard that the lyre is suitable for playing the palace tune, the musical clock is suitable for playing the feather tune, and the flint is suitable for playing the horn tune. The flint is taken for its melodious sound, the low-pitched music does not exceed the palace sound, and the sharpness does not exceed the feather sound.

古文：夫宫，音之主也，第以及羽。
现代文：宫声，是乐音的主音，由它依次到羽声。
English: The palace sound is the main sound of the music, from which the feather sound follows.

古文：圣人保乐而爱财，财以备器，乐以殖财，故乐器重者从细，轻者从大。
现代文：圣人保有音乐而珍惜生财，资财用来置备器用，音乐用来增殖财富，所以质重的乐器演奏尖细的音声，质轻的乐器演奏低弘的音声。
English: The sage preserves music and cherishes the generation of wealth. Wealth is used to prepare instruments for use, and music is used to increase wealth. Therefore, high-quality musical instruments play sharp sounds, and low-quality musical instruments play muffled sounds.

古文：是以金尚羽，石尚角，瓦丝尚宫，匏竹尚议，革木一声。
现代文：因而乐钟宜于演奏羽调，磬石宜于演奏角调，埙缶琴瑟宜于演奏宫调，笙箫取其音声悠扬，鼓柷则音声不变。
English: Therefore, the music clock is suitable for playing feather tuning, the flint is suitable for playing angle tuning, and the gong can be used for playing palace tuning. Its sound is melodious, and the sound of the gong is unchanged.

古文： 夫政象乐，乐从和，和从平。
现代文： 施政就像奏乐，奏乐要求和谐，和谐要求均平。
English: Governance is like music. Music requires harmony, and harmony requires balance.

古文：声以和乐，律以平声。
现代文：五音用来和谐乐调，十二律用来均平音声。
English: The pentatonic scale is used for harmonic tuning, and the diatonic scale is used to equalize the sound.

古文：金石以动之，丝竹以行之，诗以道之，歌以咏之，匏以宣之，瓦以赞之，革木以节之。
现代文：钟磬奏出乐音，琴瑟笙箫衍成曲调，诗句用以表达，歌声用以咏唱，笙竽发出和声，埙缶加以装饰，鼓柷规范节拍。
English: The glockenspiel produces musical sounds, the lyre produces melodies, verses are used for expression, songs are used for chanting, gongs produce harmonies, gongs are used for decoration, and drums and cymbals regulate the beat.

古文：物得其常曰乐极，极之所集曰声，声应相保曰和，细大不逾曰平。
现代文：各种乐器都能发挥作用称为乐极，所发出的声响汇集在一起称为乐音，乐音和谐相应称为和，高低音声不相干扰称为平。
English: All kinds of musical instruments can play a role and are called musical poles, the sounds emitted are gathered together and called musical sounds, the harmony of musical sounds is called harmony, and the high and low sounds without interference are called flat.

古文：如是，而铸之金，磨之石，系之丝木，越之匏竹，节之鼓而行之，以遂八风。
现代文：就像这样，用金属铸成钟，把石磨成磬，组合丝木为琴瑟，穿凿匏竹为笙箫，用鼓声调节而演奏起来，以与八方之风相应。
English: Just like this, the metal is cast into a bell, the stone is ground into a gong, the combination of silk and wood is a zither, the chiseled bamboo is a gong, and it is played by adjusting the drum sound to correspond to the wind of the eight directions.

古文：于是乎气无滞阴，亦无散阳，阴阳序次，风雨时至，嘉生繁祉，人民和利，物备而乐成，上下不罢，故曰乐正。
现代文：于是阴气不郁积，阳气不散乱，阴阳有次序，风雨按时降，福祉频临，民众多利，品物齐备而乐音和谐，上下逸乐，这就叫乐正。
English: As a result, yin does not accumulate, yang does not scatter, yin and yang are in order, wind and rain fall on time, welfare is frequent, the people are rich, the goods are complete and the music is harmonious, and the music is up and down. This is called Lezheng.

古文：今细过其主妨于正，用物过度妨于财，正害财匮妨于乐。
现代文：现在尖细的音声越过了主音而干扰了乐律，耗费过度而损害了财用，乐律受到干扰而财用感到缺乏就有害于音乐。
English: Now a shrill voice overpowers the keynote and disturbs the melody. Excessive consumption damages finance. Disturbance of the melody and lack of finance are harmful to music.

古文：细抑大陵，不容于耳，非和也。
现代文：无射尖细的音声为大林钟低弘的音声所抑制凌掩，不能动听入耳，就不是和谐。
English: If the sound without sharpness is suppressed and covered up by the sound of Obayashi Jonghyo, and cannot be heard pleasantly, it is not harmony.

古文：听声越远，非平也。
现代文：听起来低沉迂远，就不是均平。
English: If it sounds muffled and roundabout, it's not even.

古文：妨正匮财，声不和平，非宗官之所司也。
现代文：既干扰乐律使财用缺乏，其音声又不和谐均平，就不是乐官所能管辖的了。
English: Since it interferes with the musical rhythm and causes a lack of financial resources, and its sound is not harmonious and even, it is not within the jurisdiction of the music officials.

古文： 夫有和平之声，则有蕃殖之财。
现代文： 有和谐均平的音声，便有繁衍增殖的财物。
English: If there is a harmonious and even voice, there will be wealth that will multiply and proliferate.

古文：于是乎道之以中德，咏之以中音，德音不愆以合神人，神是以宁，民是以听。
现代文：于是表达它的诗句符合道德，咏唱它的歌声符合音律，道德和音律都没有差池，用来沟通神人，神灵因此而安宁，百姓因此而顺从。
English: Therefore, to express its verses is in line with morality, and to sing its songs is in line with the musical rhythm. Morality and musical rhythm are not different, and they are used to communicate with the gods. The gods are therefore peaceful, and the people are therefore obedient.

古文：若夫匮财用、罢民力以逞淫心，听之不和，比之不度，无益于教而离民怒神，非臣之所闻也。 
现代文：如果耗费财物、疲惫民众来放纵个人的淫欲之心，入耳之音既不和谐，所奏之乐又不合法度，不仅无益于教化，而且离散民众、激怒神灵，这就不是臣所得知的事了。 
English: If one expends wealth and exhausts the people to indulge one's lustful heart, if the sound one hears is discordant, and if the music one plays is illegal, it will not only be useless for enlightenment, but will also alienate the people and anger the gods. This is not something a vassal should know.

古文：王不听，卒铸大钟。
现代文：景王不听劝谏，终于铸造了大钟。
English: King Gyeongbokgung did not listen to the advice and finally cast a large bell.

古文：二十四年，钟成，伶人告和。
现代文：景王二十四年，大钟铸成，乐工报告说乐音和谐。
English: In the twenty-fourth year of King Jing, a large bell was cast, and the musician reported that the music was harmonious.

古文：王谓伶州鸠曰： 钟果和矣。 
现代文：景王告诉伶州鸩说： 钟声不还是和谐了吗。 
English: King Gyeongbokgung told Jeonju Gyeongbokgung, "Isn't the bell still in tune?

古文：对曰： 未可知也。 王曰： 何故？ 
现代文：伶州鸠答道： 陛下不明白其中的缘故。 景王说： 为什么呢？ 
English: Quzhou Yao replied, "Your Majesty does not understand the reason for this." King Jing said, "Why?

古文：对曰： 上作器，民备乐之，则为和。
现代文：伶州鸠说： 君王制作乐器，百姓非常高兴，这才能叫和谐。
English: "The king makes musical instruments, and the people are very happy. This is what we call harmony," said Zhangzhou Yao.

古文：今财亡民罢，莫不怨恨，臣不知其和也。
现代文：现在化费了财物而民众疲惫，没有不怨恨的，臣认为这不是和谐。
English: Now, with money spent and the people exhausted, there is nothing but resentment, and the minister thinks this is not harmony.

古文：且民所曹好，鲜其不济也。其所曹恶，鲜其不废也。故谚曰： 众心成城，众口铄金。 
现代文：百姓都喜好的事情，很少有不成功的；百姓都厌恶的事情，很少有不失败的。所以，谚语说： 众志成城，众口铄金 。
English: There are very few things that the people like that do not succeed; there are very few things that the people dislike that do not fail. Therefore, the proverb says: Many minds make a city, and many mouths make money.

古文：三年之中而害金再兴焉，惧一之废也。 王曰： 尔老耄矣，何知？ 
现代文：三年里面耗费钱财的事情做了两件，恐怕至少有一件是要失败的。 景王说： 你老糊涂了，懂得什么？ 
English: In three years, I have done two things that cost a lot of money, and I am afraid that at least one will fail.King Jing said: You are confused, what do you know?

古文：二十五年，王崩，钟不和。
现代文：二十五年，景王去世，大钟所奏的音声不和谐。
English: Twenty-five years later, King Gyeongbokgung passed away, and the sound played by the large clock was discordant.

