古文：天文上《易》曰： 圣人仰观象于天，俯观法于地。 
现代文：《易经》说： 圣人抬头观察天象，低头观察地理。 
English: "I Ching" says: The sage looks up to observe the celestial bodies, but looks down to observe the geography.

古文：天文之事，其来已久。
现代文：有关天文的事情，由来已久。
English: Astronomy has been around for a long time.

古文：太祖革命受终，膺集期运。
现代文：左担顺应天命继承帝位，秉受时运。
English: Zuodan followed the destiny of inheriting the imperial throne, adhering to the times.

古文：宋升明三年，太史令将作匠陈文建陈天文，奏曰： 自孝建元年至升明三年，日蚀有十，亏上有七。
现代文：塞昱塱三年，太史令将作匠速塞建陈奏天文变化，说：自孝建元年至升明三年，有十次日食，其中上部亏缺有七次。
English: After three years of delay, the Taishi ordered the craftsmen to speed up the construction and record the astronomical changes, saying: From the first year of Xiao Jian to the third year of Xingming, there were ten solar eclipses, of which the upper part was deficient seven times.

古文：占曰 有亡国失君之象。 
现代文：占辞说 有亡国灭君的迹象 。
English: There are signs of the death of the country and the death of the prince.

古文：一曰 国命绝，主危亡 。
现代文：一说 国家天命断绝，君主危亡 。
English: One said that the country's destiny was cut off and the monarch was in danger of death.

古文：孝建元年至升明三年，太白经天五。
现代文：孝建元年至升明三年，金星有五次在中天。
English: From the first year of Xiao Jian to the third year of Xingming, Venus was in the midheaven five times.

古文：占曰 天下革，民更王，异姓兴 。
现代文：占辞说 天下转运，百姓改换君王，异姓兴起 。
English: Fortune-telling says that the world is changing, the people are changing their kings, and different surnames are emerging.

古文：孝建元年至升明三年，月犯房心四，太白犯房心五。
现代文：孝建元年至升明三年，月四次冲犯房宿心宿，金星五次冲犯房宿心宿。
English: From the first year of Xiao Jian to the third year of Shomei, four times a month, the house was attacked and the heart was attacked, and the Venus was attacked and the heart was attacked five times.

古文：占曰 其国有丧，宋当之 。
现代文：占辞说 该国家有丧事，宋应验了它 。
English: It is said that the country is in mourning, and Song has fulfilled it.

古文：孝建元年至永光元年，奔星出入紫宫有四。
现代文：孝建元年至永光元年，有四颗流星出入紫宫。
English: From the first year of Xiao Jian to the first year of Yongguang, there were four meteors entering and leaving the Purple Palace.

古文：占曰 国去其君，有空国徙王 。
现代文：占辞说 国家离开它的君主，导致国家空虚君王迁徙 。
English: Divination says that a country leaves its monarch, causing the country's empty monarch to migrate.

古文：大明二年至元徽四年，天再裂。
现代文：大明二年至元徽四年，天两次裂开。
English: From the 2nd year of the Ming Dynasty to the 4th year of the Yuan Dynasty, the sky cracked twice.

古文：占曰 阳不足，白虹贯日，人君恶之 。
现代文：占辞说 阳气不足，白虹贯穿太阳，君主认为不祥 。
English: The fortune-teller said that the yang is insufficient, the white rainbow runs through the sun, and the monarch thinks it is ominous.

古文：孝建二年至大明五年，月入太微；泰豫元年至升明三年，月又入太微；孝建元年至元徽二年，太白入太微各八，荧惑入太微六。
现代文：孝建二年至大明五年，月进入太微垣。泰豫元年至升明三年，月又进入太微垣。孝建元年至元徽二年，金星八次进入太微垣，火星六次进入太微垣。
English: From the 2nd year of Xiao Jian to the 5th year of the Ming Dynasty, the moon entered the solar eclipses. From the 1st year of the Taiyuan Dynasty to the 3rd year of the Shang Dynasty, the moon also entered the solar eclipses. From the 1st year of the Xiao Jian Dynasty to the 2nd year of the Yuan Dynasty, Venus entered the solar eclipses eight times, and Mars entered the solar eclipses six times.

古文：占曰 七耀行不轨道，危亡之象。
现代文：占辞说 曰月和金、木、水、火、土五星不按轨道运行，是危亡的象征。
English: According to fortune-telling, the five stars of the moon, gold, wood, water, fire and earth do not move according to their orbits, which is a symbol of danger.

古文：贵人失权势，主亦衰，当有王入为主 。
现代文：贵人失去权势，君主也要衰亡，将会有王进宫做君主 。
English: Nobles will lose their power, monarchs will decline and die, and kings will enter the palace to become monarchs.

古文：孝建二年至升明二年，太白、荧惑经羽林各三。
现代文：孝建二年至升明二年，金星、火星各有三次经过羽林星。
English: From the second year of Xiao Jian to the second year of Xingming, Venus and Mars each passed through Ulin three times.

古文：占曰 国残更世 。
现代文：占辞说 国家残破世道改换 。
English: It is said in fortune-telling that a country's ruin brings about a change in the world.

古文：孝建二年四月十三日，荧惑守南斗，成句己。
现代文：孝建二年四月十三曰，火星守卫南斗，形成句己形状。
English: On the 13th day of April in the second year of Xiao Jian, Mars guarded the Southern Cross, forming the shape of a sentence.

古文：占曰 天下易正更元 。
现代文：占辞说 天下改易正统，开始新的纪元 。
English: Fortune-telling says that the world will change to orthodoxy and a new era will begin.

古文：孝建三年十二月一日，填星、荧惑、辰星合于南斗，占曰 改立王公 。
现代文：孝建三年十二月一日，土星、火星、水星在南斗会合。占辞说 另立王公 。
English: On December 1st, the third year of the reign of Xiao Jian, Saturn, Mars, and Mercury met in the Southern Dipper.

古文：大明二年十二月二十六日，太白犯填星于斗；六年十一月十五日，太白、填星合于危。
现代文：大明二年十二月二十六，金星在斗星冲犯土星。六年十一月十五日，金星和土星在危宿会合。
English: On December 26, 2002, Venus collided with Saturn in the constellation of Draco. On November 15, 2006, Venus and Saturn met in the constellation of Vulpecula.

古文：占曰 天子失土 。
现代文：占辞说 天子失掉国上 。
English: In the words of a fortune-teller, "If the Son of Heaven is lost, the country will be lost."

古文：景和元年十月八日，荧惑守太微，成句己。
现代文：景和元年十月八日，火星守卫太微垣，形成句己形状。
English: On October 8th, the first year of the Jinghe era, the Mars guard was too small, forming a strange shape.

古文：占曰 王者恶之，主命无期，有徙主，若主王，天下更纪 。
现代文：占辞说 帝王认为不祥，主管命运不可捉摸，有君主易位，如果应验到王身上，天下会改换纪元 。
English: Fortune-tellers say that emperors think it is ominous, the fate of those in charge is unfathomable, there is a change of monarchs, and if it comes true to the king, the world will change the era.

古文：泰始三年正月十七日，白气见西南，东西半天，名曰长庚；六年九月二十七日，白气又见东南，长二丈，并形状长大，猛过彗星。
现代文：泰始三年正月十七日，有股白气出现在西南，划过东西半个天空，名叫长庚。六年九月二十七日，一股二丈长的白气又出现在东南方，而且形状长大，比彗星要迅猛。
English: On the seventeenth day of the first month of Taizhi Year 3, a white gas appeared in the southwest, sweeping across the eastern and western half of the sky, named Chang Geng. On September 27, 2006, a white gas with a double length appeared in the southeast, and the shape grew, faster than a comet.

古文：占曰 除旧布新易主之象，远期一纪 。
现代文：占辞说： 是除旧布新改换君主的征兆，预兆的时间长达十二年。 
English: The fortune-teller said, "It is a sign of the removal of the old cloth and the replacement of the monarch. The time of the omen is up to twelve years."

古文：至升明三年，一纪讫。
现代文：到升明三年，十二年终结。
English: Three years to enlightenment, twelve years to the end.

古文：泰始四年四月二十四日，太白犯填星于胃。
现代文：泰始四年四月二十四日，金星在胃宿冲犯土星。
English: On April 24th, 2004, Venus collided with Saturn in the stomach.

古文：占曰 主命恶之 。
现代文：占辞说： 君主命运不祥。 
English: The fortune-teller said: The fate of the monarch is ominous.

古文：泰始七年六月十七日，太白、岁星、填星合于东井。
现代文：泰始七年六月十七日，金星、木星、土星在井宿会合。
English: On the seventeenth day of the sixth month of the seventh year of the Tai, Venus, Jupiter, and Saturn met at Ijuku.

古文：占曰 改立王公 。
现代文：占辞说： 另立王公。 
English: The fortune-teller said, "Let's make another king."

古文：元徽四年至升明二年三月，日有频食。
现代文：元徽四年至升明二年三月，接连发生日食。
English: From the 4th year of the Yuan Dynasty to the 2nd year of the Ming Dynasty, there were consecutive solar eclipses in March.

古文：占曰 社稷将亡，王者恶之 。
现代文：占辞说： 国家将要灭亡，帝王认为不祥。 
English: The fortune-teller said: The country is about to perish, and the emperor thought it was ominous.

古文：元徽四年十月十日，填星守太微宫，逆从行历四年。
现代文：元徽四年十月十曰，土星守卫太微垣，逆着运行，历时四年。
English: On the 10th day of October in the 4th year of the Yuan Dynasty, the Saturn guard was too weak and ran backwards, which lasted for four years.

古文：占曰 有亡君之戒，易世立王 。
现代文：占辞说： 有亡君的警告，改换朝代另立君王。 
English: Fortune-telling says: There is a warning from the deceased king, and it is best to change dynasties and set up another king.

古文：元徽五年七月一日，荧惑、太白、辰星合于翼。
现代文：元徽五年七月一日，火星、金星、水星在翼宿会合。
English: On July 1st of the 5th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Mars, Venus, and Mercury met at the Pleiades.

古文：占曰 改立王公 。
现代文：占辞说： 另立王公。 
English: The fortune-teller said, "Let's make another king."

古文：升明二年六月二十日，岁星守斗建。
现代文：升明二年六月二十日，木星守卫斗建星。
English: On the 20th of June in the second year of the Ascendant, Jupiter stood guard over Dou Jianxing.

古文：阴阳终始之门，大赦升平之所起，律历七政之本源，德星守之，天下更年，五礼更兴，多暴贵者。
现代文：阴阳是终始的门户，大赦升乎年间所发生的事情；历律是七政的本源，德星守卫它，天下改换纪年，五礼再度兴盛，有许多忽然显贵的人。
English: Yin and yang are the gateway to the beginning and the end, and amnesty rises to what happens during the year; the calendar is the source of the seven political systems, the German star guards it, the world changes the calendar, the five rites flourish again, and there are many suddenly prominent people.

古文：升明二年十月一日，荧惑守舆鬼；三年正月七日，荧惑守两戒间，成句己。
现代文：升明二年十月一，火星守卫舆鬼星。三年止月七日，火星守在两戒之间，形成句己状。
English: On October 1st, the second year of the Ascendant, Mars stood guard over the spirit world. On the 7th day of the 3rd month, Mars stood guard between the two precepts, forming a square.

古文：占曰 尊者失朝，必有亡国去王 。
现代文：占辞说， 尊贵的人失去朝廷，一定有灭亡的国家和离位的君王。 
English: In the words of a fortune-teller, when a noble person loses the imperial court, there is sure to be a ruined country and a dethroned king.

古文：升明三年正月十八日，辰星孟效西方。
现代文：升明三年正月卜八日，水星正月在西方闪耀。
English: On the eighth day of the third lunar month, Mercury shines in the west.

古文：占曰 天下更王 。
现代文：占辞说： 天下改换帝王。 
English: The fortune-teller said: The world is changing emperors.

古文：升明三年四月，岁星在虚危，俳徊玄枵之野，则齐国有福厚，为受庆之符。 
现代文：升明三年四月，木星在虚宿、危宿，徘徊在玄枵星野，这样齐国就有厚福，是接受庆贺的征兆。
English: In April of the third year of the Ascendant, Jupiter is in the false lodgings, dangerous lodgings, and wandering in the constellations, so that the Qi country has good fortune, which is a sign of celebration.

古文：今所记三辰七曜之变，起建元讫于隆昌，以续宋史。
现代文：现在所记述的三辰七曜的变化，起白玉纽终于塑，用来接续塞吏。
English: The changes in the three hours and seven days of the week now described began with the creation of the Baiyunyu, which was used to succeed the Xili.

古文：建武世，太史奏事，明帝不欲使天变外传，并秘而不出，自此阙焉。
现代文：建武年间太史奏事，塱童不想让天象的变异外传，都隐秘而不出示，从此就空缺了。
English: During the Jianwu years, there were too many historical events, and Xing Tong did not want the variation of the celestial phenomenon to be passed on, so he kept it secret and did not show it. Since then, it has been vacant.

古文：○日蚀建元二年九月甲午朔，日蚀。三年七月己未朔，日蚀。
现代文：建元二年九月甲午初一，日食。三年七月己未初一，日食。
English: There was a solar eclipse on the first day of the first month of the second year of Jianyuan in September. There was a solar eclipse on the first day of the third year of July.

古文：永明元年十二月乙巳朔，日蚀。
现代文：永明元年十二月乙巳初一，日食。
English: In December of the first year of the Ming Dynasty, the solar eclipse occurred on the first day of the second month.

古文：十年十二月癸未朔，加时在午之半度，到未初见日始蚀，亏起西北角，蚀十分之四，申时光色复还。
现代文：十年十二月癸未初一，时间在午时的半度，到未时初，开始发生蚀变，从西北角起亏缺，蚀掉十分之四，申时光色恢复正常。
English: On December 10, before the first day of the month, the time was up to half a degree at noon, and by the beginning of the month, the erosion began to occur. From the northwest corner, there was a deficit, four-tenths of it was eroded, and the color returned to normal by the first day of the month.

古文：隆昌元年五月甲戌合朔，巳时日蚀三分之一，午时光复还。
现代文：隆昌元年五月甲戌月相会，巳时食三分之一，午时光恢复正常。
English: In May of the first year of the Longchang era, the crescent moon rendezvous, the crescent moon eclipses one-third of the time, and the noon time returns to normal.

古文：○月蚀建元四年七月戊辰，月在危宿蚀。
现代文：毖四年七月戊辰，月在危宿发生蚀变。
English: In July of the same year, the moon was eclipsed in Jeju.

古文：永明二年四月丁巳，月在南斗宿蚀。
现代文：丞塱二年四月丁巳，月在南斗星发生蚀变。
English: In April of the second year of the Joseon Dynasty, the Moon was eclipsed by the Southern Dipper.

古文：三年十一月戊寅，月入东井旷中，因蚀三分之一。
现代文：三年十一月戊寅，月进入井宿的空缺中，因而蚀掉三分之一。
English: In November of the third year, Wu Yin, Moon entered the vacancy of the well, thus erasing one-third.

古文：五年三月庚子，月在氐宿蚀。
现代文：五年三月庚子，月在氐宿发生蚀变。
English: In March of the fifth year, the moon was eclipsed in Oshuku.

古文：九月戊戌，月在胃宿蚀。
现代文：九月戊戌，月在胃宿发生蚀变。
English: September Pentecost, the moon in the stomach of the occurrence of erosion.

古文：六年九月癸巳，月蚀在娄宿九度，加时在寅之少弱，亏起东北角，蚀十五分之十一。
现代文：六年九月癸巳，月在娄宿九度发生蚀变，时间将近寅时，从东北角亏缺，蚀掉十五分之十一一
English: In September of the same year, the moon was eclipsed by nine degrees in Pescadero, and when the time was near Tama, it was eclipsed by eleven-fifteenths from the northeastern corner.

古文：十五日子时，蚀从东北始，至子时末都既，到丑时光色还复。
现代文：十五日子时，月从东北角发生蚀变，到子时末全都蚀掉，到丑时光色恢复正常。
English: At the fifteenth day, the moon undergoes an eclipse from the northeast corner. By the end of the waxing period, it is completely eclipsed, and by the end of the waning period, the color of the moon returns to normal.

古文：七年八月丁亥，月在奎宿蚀。
现代文：七年八月丁亥，月在奎宿发生蚀变。
English: In August of the 7th year of Dinghai, the moon was eclipsed in Kuishuku.

古文：十月庚辰，月奄蚀荧惑。
现代文：十月庚辰，月掩盖火星发生蚀变。
English: October Gengchen, the moon covers the Mars to undergo changes.

古文：八年六月庚寅，月奄蚀毕左股第一星。
现代文：八年六月庚寅，月掩盖毕宿左股第一颗星，发生蚀变。
English: In June of the eighth year, Geng Yin, the moon covered the first star on the left side of the zodiac, and there was an alteration.

古文：十年十二月丁酉，月蚀在柳度，加时在酉之少弱，到亥时，月蚀起东角七分之二，至子时光色还复。
现代文：十年十二月丁酉，月在柳宿度星发生蚀变，时间是将近酉时，到亥时月从束角起蚀掉七分之二，到子时光色恢复正常。
English: In December of the 10th year of Ding Xi, the moon and the willow cuckoo star had an alteration. The time was near the cuckoo, and by the time of the pig, the moon had eroded two-sevenths from the cuckoo angle, and by the time of the child, the color had returned to normal.

古文：永泰元年四月癸亥，月蚀，色赤如血。
现代文：丞台元年四月癸亥，月发生蚀变，颜色红得像血。
English: In April of the first year of the Joseon Dynasty, the moon was eclipsed, and its color turned red like blood.

古文：三日而大司马王敬则举兵，众以为敬则祲烈所感。
现代文：三天后大司马王敬则起兵，众人认为是王敬则威烈的感应。
English: Three days later, the chief steward, Ma Wang Jing, raised an army, which was considered by many to be a sign of Wang Jing's authority.

古文：永元元年八月己未，月蚀尽，色皆赤。
现代文：丞五元年八月己未，月全部蚀变，颜色都是红的。
English: In August of the year 511, the moon had not yet risen. The moon had completely changed, and its color was red.

古文：是夜，始安王遥光伏诛。
现代文：这天晚上，始安千萧遥光被杀。
English: On this night, Shi'an Qian Xiao Yaoguang was killed.

古文：史臣曰：日月代照，实重天行。
现代文：史臣曰：曰月交替照耀，实际是在天空重复运行。
English: Shichen said: "The moon shines alternately, in fact, it is repeated in the sky.

古文：上交下蚀，同度相掩。
现代文：在上的相交，在下的蚀变，同一纬度相互掩盖。
English: Intersection above, alteration below, at the same latitude, conceal each other.

古文：案旧说曰 日有五蚀 ，谓起上下左右中央是也。
现代文：根据旧的说法是 曰有五种蚀变 ，指的是从上、下、左、右、中央开始的蚀变。
English: According to the old saying, there are "five kinds of changes," referring to changes that start from the top, bottom, left, right and center.

古文：交会旧术，日蚀不从东始，以月从其西，东行及日。
现代文：日月交会旧的方法，日食不从束部开始，因为月从曰的西侧，向东运行赶上曰。
English: Under the old method, the eclipse does not start from the crescent, because the moon moves from the west side of the day to the east to catch up with the day.

古文：于交中，交从外入内者，先会后交，亏西南角；先交后会，亏西北角。交从内出者，先会后交，亏西北角；先交后会，亏西南角。
现代文：位置在交中，交从外部进入内部的，是先会后交，亏缺西南角；先交后会，亏缺西北角；交从内部外出的，是先会后交，亏缺西北角；先交后会，亏缺西南角。
English: Position in the intersection, the intersection from the outside to the inside, is the first meeting after the intersection, short of the southwest corner; the first meeting after the intersection, short of the northwest corner; the intersection from the inside to the outside, is the first meeting after the intersection, short of the northwest corner; the first meeting after the intersection, short of the southwest corner.

古文：日正在交中者，则亏于西，故不尝蚀东也。
现代文：曰正好在交中的，就会在西部亏缺，所以不曾有从束部蚀变的。
English: If it happens to be in the middle of the trade, there will be a shortage in the west, so there has never been a change from the bund.

古文：若日中有亏，名为黑子，不名为蚀也。
现代文：如果日中间有亏缺，名叫黑子，不称为日食。
English: If there is a deficit in the middle of the day, it is called a sunspot, not a solar eclipse.

古文：汉尚书令黄香曰： 日蚀皆从西，月蚀皆从东，无上下中央者。 
现代文：汉尚书令黄香说： 日食都从西部开始，月食都从束部开始，没有从上下中央开始的。 
English: Han Shang Shuling Huang Xiang said: Solar eclipses all start from the west, lunar eclipses all start from the bundle, not from the upper and lower center.

古文：《春秋》鲁桓三年日蚀，贯中下上竟黑。
现代文：《春秋》鲁桓公三年日食，贯通上中下全是黑的。
English: In "Spring and Autumn," the eclipse of the sun in the third year of Lu Kuan Gong is completely black from top to bottom.

古文：疑者以为日月正等，月何得小而见日中？
现代文：怀疑的人认为日月大小正好相等，月怎能小而且出现在曰当中呢。
English: Skeptics argue that the sun and moon are exactly the same size, so how can the moon be small and appear in the middle of the day?

古文：郑玄云： 月正掩日，日光从四边出，故言从中起也。 
现代文：郑玄说： 月正好掩盖住曰，日光从四边散出，所以说是从中间开始蚀变。 
English: Zheng Xuan said: "The moon just happened to cover the sun, and the sunlight scattered from the four sides, so it is said that the change began in the middle.

古文：王逸以为： 月若掩日，当蚀日西，月行既疾，须臾应过西崖既，复次食东崖。
现代文：王逸认为： 月如果掩盖曰，应当是日的西部蚀变，月既然运行得很快，一会儿就应超过日的西边，再依次侵蚀东边，现在观察日食。
English: Wang Yizhong believes that: If the moon covers the sun, it should be the western eclipse of the sun. Since the moon moves quickly, it should overtake the west side of the sun in a short time, and then erode the east side in turn. Now observe the solar eclipse.

古文：今察日蚀，西崖缺而光已复，过东崖而独不掩。 
现代文：西边亏缺可光已恢复正常，超过束边却独独不能盖住日。 
English: The west side is deficient, but the light has returned to normal, but it cannot cover the sun alone if it exceeds the cords.

古文：逸之此意，实为巨疑。
现代文：王逸的这个意思，的确是巨大的疑问。
English: Wang Yi's meaning of this is indeed a huge question.

古文：先儒难 月以望蚀，去日极远，谁蚀月乎 ？
现代文：先儒反驳 月在望日蚀变，离曰非常远，是谁造成月的蚀变呢 ?
English: The early Confucianism refutes that the moon is far away from the sun, who caused the moon to change?

古文：说者称 日有暗气，天有虚道，常与日衡相对。月行在虚道中，则为气所弇，故月为蚀也。
现代文：解释的人说 日有股暗气，天有条虚道，经常与日衡相对，月运行在虚道之中，就会被暗气遮掩，所以发生月食。
English: The person who explained said that the sun has a dark streak, the sky has a false path, and it is often opposite to the sun. The moon runs in the middle of the false path, and it will be covered by the dark, so a lunar eclipse occurs.

古文：虽时加夜半，日月当子午，正隔于地，犹为暗气所蚀，以天体大而地形小故也。
现代文：虽然时间是在半夜，曰月处于子午，正被大地隔开，可还是被暗气所侵蚀，这是因为天的体积大而地的形状小的缘故。
English: Although the time is in the middle of the night, the moon is at the meridian and is being separated by the earth, it can still be eroded by the dark air, which is due to the large volume of the sky and the small shape of the earth.

古文：暗虚之气，如以镜在日下，其光耀魄，乃见于阴中，常与日衡相对，故当星星亡，当月月蚀。 
现代文：暗和虚的气体，好比把镜子放在曰光下，它的光芒耀人魂魄，于是在阴暗中出现，经常与曰衡相对，所以遇到星则星消失，遇到月则月食 。
English: The dark and ethereal gas is like placing a mirror in broad daylight. Its radiance dazzles the soul, so it appears in the dark, often opposite the sun, so when it encounters a star, the star disappears, and when it encounters the moon, the moon eclipses.

古文：今问之曰： 星月同体，俱兆日耀，当月之蚀，星不必亡。
现代文：现在问他们说： 星和月是同样的天体，都得到曰的照耀，当发生月食时，星不一定消失。
English: Now ask them: The stars and the moon are the same celestial bodies, both receive the same illumination, and when a lunar eclipse occurs, the stars do not necessarily disappear.

古文：若更有所当，星未尝蚀。同禀异亏，其故何也？ 
现代文：如果是另有暗气侵蚀，可星未曾发生蚀变，月和星禀性相同，可发生的亏缺不同，这是什么缘故呢? 
English: If there is another dark gas erosion, but the star has not been altered, and the moon and the star have the same toughness, but the deficiency that can occur is different, what is the reason for this?

古文：答曰： 月为阴主，以当阳位，体敌势交，自招盈损。
现代文：回答说： 曰是阴主，让它处于阳位，体积相当，势力相交，自我招致盈亏。
English: He replied, "Say that it is the yin lord, let it be in the yang position, the volume is equivalent, the forces intersect, self-inflicted profit and loss.

古文：星虽同类，而精景陋狭，小毁皆亡，无有受蚀之地，纤光可满，亦不与弦望同形。 
现代文：星虽然与月是同类，可是光影狭窄鄙陋，一点小的毁坏就都消亡，没有受侵蚀的地方，一缕光就可以遮满，也就不会和月一样有半月圆月。 
English: Although the stars are of the same kind as the moon, their light and shadow are narrow and poor, and any small damage will cause them to die. Where there is no erosion, a ray of light can cover it, and there will not be a half moon and a full moon like the moon.

古文：又难曰： 日之夜蚀，验于夜星之亡；昼蚀既尽，昼星何故反不见？ 
现代文：又反驳说： 夜间发生食，可以验证夜间星辰的消亡；白天日食已尽。为什么白天的星辰反而不出现? 
English: He also countered: An eclipse at night can verify the demise of the stars at night; a solar eclipse during the day has ended. Why do the stars of the day not appear?

古文：答之曰： 夫言光有所冲，则有不冲之光矣；言有所当，亦有所不当矣。
现代文：回答说： 说光线有所冲撞，就有不冲撞的光线；说有所遭逢，也有不遭逢的。
English: He replied, "When light collides, there is light that does not collide; when light meets, there is light that does not meet.

古文：夜食度远，与所当而同没；昼食度近，由非冲而得明。 
现代文：夜间食位置远，和所遭逢的星辰一同消失；白天日食位置近，星辰由于不受冲撞而得以光明。 
English: At night, when the eclipse is far away, it disappears along with the stars it encounters; during the day, when the eclipse is close, the stars are not impacted and are able to shine.

古文：又问： 太白经天，实缘远日。
现代文：又提问说： 金星在天空闪耀，实际是因为远离太阳。
English: Another questioner said: Venus shines in the sky, actually because it is far away from the sun.

古文：今度近更明，于何取喻？ 
现代文：现在离得近反而更明亮，如何加以解释? 
English: Now that it is closer, it is brighter. How can this be explained?

古文：答曰： 向论二蚀之体，周冲不同，经与不经，自由星迟疾。难蚀引经，恐未得也。 
现代文：回答说： 从来论述食月食时的天体，周转冲撞各不相同，闪耀与不闪耀，自是由于星辰运行的快慢，引用星辰的闪耀反驳日月蚀变，恐怕未必有道理。 
English: He replied: Since we have discussed the celestial bodies at the time of eclipses and lunar eclipses, the turnover collision is different, shining and not shining, it is due to the speed of the stars, citing the shining of the stars to refute the eclipse of the sun and moon, I am afraid it may not be justified.

古文：日光色建元四年十一月午时，日色赤黄无光，至暮，在箕宿。
现代文：扭四年十一月午时，曰色赤黄没有光亮，直到傍晚，处在箕宿位置。
English: At noon on November 4th, the sun was reddish-yellow and there was no light until the evening, when it was in its nocturnal position.

古文：二年闰正月乙酉，日黄赤无光，至暮。
现代文：二年闰正月乙酉，曰色黄赤没有光亮，直到傍晚。
English: In the second leap year, the first month of the year, the day color yellow-red is not bright until the evening.

古文：永明五年十一月丁亥，日出高三竿，朱色赤黄，日晕，虹抱珥直背。
现代文：丞塱五年十一月丁亥，上三竿，朱色赤黄，周围有彩色光圈，形成虹、抱、珥、直、背各状。
English: In November of the fifth year, Dinghai, the upper three poles, vermilion red and yellow, surrounded by a colored aperture, form a rainbow, embrace, beak, straight, and back.

古文：建元元年十二月未时，日晕，匝黄白色，至申乃消散。
现代文：建五元年十二月未时，有一光圈环绕在曰的周围，呈黄白色，到申时才消散。
English: At the end of December in the year of Jianwen, there was a halo around the sun, which was yellow and white, and it only dissipated at the time of Yin.

古文：永明二年正月丁酉，日交晕再重。
现代文：丞塱二年正月丁酉，周围有重叠的彩色光圈。
English: In the first month of the second year of the ding dong, there are overlapping colored apertures around.

古文：三年二月丁卯，日有半晕，晕上生一珥。
现代文：三年二月丁卯，日周围有半个彩色光圈，光圈上生出一个珥形光圈。
English: In February of the third year, there was a half-colored aperture around the sun, and a beak-shaped aperture appeared on the aperture.

古文：四年五月丙午，日晕再重，仍白虹贯日，在东井度。
现代文：四年五月丙午，日周围有重叠的彩色光圈，仍旧是白虹横贯中，在井宿方位。
English: On the afternoon of May 4th, there are overlapping colored apertures around the sun, still in the middle of the white rainbow, in the direction of the well.

古文：六年三月甲申，日于兰云中薄半晕，须臾过匝，日东南晕外有一直，并黄色。
现代文：六年三月甲申，在兰色云中有半圈薄薄的光晕，不久环绕一圈，日东南部光圈外有直形云气，都呈黄色。
English: In March of the sixth year of Jiaxing, there was a half circle of thin halo in the blue cloud, soon surrounded by a circle, and there was a rectangular cloud outside the aperture in the southeast of the day, all of which were yellow.

古文：壬辰，日晕，须臾，日西北生虹贯日中。
现代文：壬辰，周围有彩色光圈。不久，曰的西北方生出一条虹贯穿日中。
English: Soon, a rainbow appeared in the northwestern part of the day, extending throughout the day.

古文：八年十一月己亥，日半晕，南面不匝；日东西带晕，各生珥，长三尺，白色，珥各长十丈许，正冲日，久久消散，背因成重晕，并青绛色。
现代文：八年十一月己亥，周围有半圈光环，南面空缺，曰的东西部带有光圈，各生有珥形云气，长三尺，白色，珥各有十丈多长，正对着日，很久才消散，背后就形成重叠的光圈，都呈青绛色。
English: In November of the eighth year, Ji Hai, there is a half circle of aura around, the south side is vacant, the east and west part of the day has an aperture, each has a cocoon-shaped cloud, three feet long, white, the cocoons are each ten feet long, facing the sun, it takes a long time to dissipate, and an overlapping aperture is formed behind, all of which are bluish-grey.

古文：九年正月甲午，日半晕，南面不匝；北带晕生一抱，东西各生一珥；抱北又有半晕，抱珥并黄色；北又生白虹贯日，久久消散。
现代文：九年正月甲午，周围有半圈光晕，南面空缺，北部带有光晕生出一抱形云气，东西各生出一珥形云气，环状云气北又有半圈光晕，抱、珥都呈黄色，北部又生出一条白虹贯穿日中，很久才消散。
English: At one o'clock in the first month of the ninth year, there was a half-circle halo around, the south side was vacant, the north side with the halo produced a cuddle-shaped cloud, the east and west each produced a cocoon-shaped cloud, the circular cloud to the north had a half-circle halo, the cuddle and cocoon were yellow, and the north produced a white rainbow throughout the day, and it took a long time to dissipate.

古文：建元元年六月甲申，日南北两珥，西有抱，黄白色。
现代文：建元元年六月甲申，日的南北部生出两珥形云气，西部有环状云气，呈黄白色。
English: In June of the first year of Jianyuan, Jiaxun, the south and north of the sun produced two cocoon-shaped clouds, and there was a ring-shaped cloud in the west, which was yellow and white.

古文：永明二年十一月辛巳，日东北有一背。
现代文：永明二年十一月聿巳，日的东北部有一背形云气。
English: In November of the second year of Yongming, there was a back-shaped cloud in the northeastern part of Japan.

古文：三年十一月庚寅，日西北有一背。
现代文：三年十一月庚寅，日的西北部有一背形云气。
English: In November of the third year of Geng Yin, there was a back-shaped cloud in the northwest of the day.

古文：四年正月辛巳，日南北各生一珥，又生一背。
现代文：四年正月辛巳，曰的南北部各生出一珥形云气，又生出一背形云气。
English: In the first month of the fourth year of Hsin, a bowl-shaped cloud appeared in the north and south of the country, and a back-shaped cloud appeared.

古文：十二月辛未，日西北生一直，黄白色，戊寅，日北生一背，青绛色。
现代文：十二月辛未，曰的西北部牛出一直形云气，呈黄白色。戊寅，曰的北部生出一背形云气，呈青绛色。
English: In December, Xinwei, in the northwestern part of the country, produced yellowish-white, straight-shaped clouds, while Wuyin, in the northern part of the country, produced bluish-grey, dorsal-shaped clouds.

古文：五年八月己卯，日东南生一珥，并青绛色。
现代文：五年八月己卯，曰的东南部生出一珥形云气，都是青绛色。
English: In August of the same year, a cluster of clouds formed in the southeastern part of Japan. They were bluish-grey in color.

古文：六年二月丁巳，日东北生黄色，北有一珥，黄赤色，久久并散。
现代文：六年二月丁巳，日的东北生出黄色云气，北部有一珥形云气，呈黄赤色，很久才一起消散。
English: In February of the sixth year, the northeast of the sun gave birth to yellow clouds, and in the north there was a cocoon-shaped cloud, which was yellow-red, and it took a long time to dissipate.

古文：庚申，日西有一背，赤青色，东西生一直，南北各生一珥，并黄白色。
现代文：庚申，曰的西部有一背形云气，呈赤青色，东西部生出一直形云气，南北部各生出一珥形云气，都呈黄白色。
English: According to Goshun, there is a dorsal-shaped cloud in the west of the country, which is reddish-bluish in color, an oblong-shaped cloud in the east and west, and a bowl-shaped cloud in the north and south, all of which are yellowish-white.

古文：七年十月癸未，日东北生一背，青赤色，须臾消。
现代文：七年十月癸未，曰的东北部生出一背形云气，呈青赤色，不久消散。
English: In October of the seventh year, a dorsal-shaped cloud appeared in the northeastern part of the country. It was bluish-red in color and soon dissipated.

古文：八年六月戊寅，日于苍白云中南北各生一珥，青黄绛杂色，泽润，并长三尺许，至巳午消。
现代文：八年六月戊寅，曰在苍白色云中南北部各生出一珥形云气，杂有青黄绛各色，光润，都是三尺多长，到巳时午时消散。
English: In June of the eighth year, Wu Yin said that in the north, south, and middle of the pale white clouds, there was a cluster of clouds, mixed with various colors of blue, yellow, and red, all of which were more than three feet long, and they dissipated by noon.

古文：隆昌元年正月壬戌，日于兰云中晕，南北带晕各生一直，同长一丈，须臾消。
现代文：隆昌元年正月壬戌，曰在兰色云中形成光晕，南北部带有光晕各生出一直形云气，都是一丈长，不久消散。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first year of the Longchang era, it was said that a halo was formed in the blue cloud, and the south and north with the halo each produced a straight-shaped cloud, all of which were long and soon dissipated.

古文：永元元年十二月乙酉，日中有三黑子。
现代文：丞五元年十二月乙酉，曰中有三个黑子。
English: In December of the fifth year of the Joseon Dynasty, there were three black spots.

古文：月晕犯建元四年十月庚寅，月晕五车及参头。
现代文：建五四年十月庚寅，月在五车星及参宿头形成光晕。
English: In October of 54th year, Geng Yin, the moon formed a halo around the five-chariot star and the head of the staff.

古文：永明元年正月壬辰，是日至十五日，月三晕太微及荧惑。
现代文：丞塱元年正月壬辰，这天到十五日，月在太微垣及火星处三次形成光晕。
English: From the first day of the month of Imjin in the first year of the Joseon Dynasty to the fifteenth day of the same month, the moon formed a halo three times at Taibo and Mars.

古文：三月庚申至十三日，月三晕太微及荧惑。
现代文：三月庚申到十三日，月在太微垣及火星处三次形成光晕。
English: From March Koshin to the 13th, the moon will form a halo three times at Taibugakure and Mars.

古文：五年二月乙未，自九日至是日，月三晕太微。
现代文：五年二月乙未，自九日到这天，月在太微垣三次形成光晕。
English: From the 9th to this day in February 2005, the moon formed a halo three times in Taiyuan.

古文：六年二月壬戌甲夜、十三日甲夜、十五日甲夜，月并晕太微。
现代文：六年二月壬戌初更，十三日初更，十五日初更，月都在太微垣形成光晕。
English: In February of the sixth year, at the first lunar eclipse, the 13th lunar eclipse, and the 15th lunar eclipse, the moon formed a halo around Taiyukagaki.

古文：永明元年十一月己未，月南北各生一珥，又有一抱。
现代文：永明元年十一月己未，月的南北部各生出一珥形云气，又有一环形云气。
English: In November of the first year of the Yongming era, a crescent-shaped cloud appeared in the north and south of the moon, and a ring-shaped cloud appeared.

古文：月犯列星
现代文：月冲犯各星。
English: The moon collides with the stars.

古文：建元元年七月丁未，月犯心大星北一寸，丁卯，月入轩辕中犯第二星。
现代文：建元元年七月丁未，月冲犯心宿大星北一寸。丁卯，月进入轩辕星中冲犯第二颗星。
English: In July of the first year of Jianyuan, Ding Wei, the moon hit the second star of the big star one centimeter north. Ding Wu, the moon entered the second star.

古文：十月丙申，月在心大星西北七寸。
现代文：十月丙申，月出现在心宿大星西北七寸。
English: In October, the moon appears in the northwest seven centimeters of the great star.

古文：十一月壬戌，月在氐东南星五寸。
现代文：十一月壬戌，月出现在氐宿东南星五寸。
English: In November, the moon appeared in the southeast of Poyang.

古文：十二月乙酉，月犯太微西蕃南头第一星。
现代文：十二月乙酉，月冲犯太微垣西部南头第一颗星。
English: In December, the first star appeared in the southwestern part of Taiyuan.

古文：庚寅，月行房道中，无所犯，癸巳，月入南斗魁中，无所犯。
现代文：庚寅，月运行房宿的通道中，无所冲犯。癸巳，月进入南斗魁星中，无所冲犯。
English: In Geng'in, there was no impact in the passage of the moon-operated rooming house. Soon, the moon entered the South Dou Qui star, there was no impact.

古文：二年三月癸卯，月犯心大星，又犯后星。
现代文：二年三月癸卯，月冲犯心宿大星，又冲犯后星。
English: At the end of March of the second year, the moon-impacted criminal was a big star, and the impact-impacted criminal was a late star.

古文：五月庚戌，月入南斗。
现代文：五月庚戌，月进入南斗。
English: In May, Geng Zang, Moon entered the Southern Dynasties.

古文：七月己巳，月入南斗。
现代文：七月已巳，月进入南斗。
English: July has already passed, and the moon has entered the Southern Cross.

古文：三年二月癸巳，月犯太微上将。
现代文：三年二月癸巳，月冲犯太微垣上将星。
English: In February of the third year, the moon-punching offender, Admiral Taikagaki, was born.

古文：四年二月乙亥，月犯舆鬼西北星。
现代文：四年二月乙亥，月冲犯舆鬼西北星。
English: In February of the fourth year of the Chinese lunar calendar, the moon collided with the Northwestern Star.

古文：丙子，月犯南斗魁第二星。
现代文：丙子，月冲犯南斗魁第二星。
English: He Zi, the second star of the moon-shooting Nan Dou Kui.

古文：辛未，月犯心大星，又犯后星。
现代文：辛未，月冲犯心宿大星，又冲犯后星。
English: Xin Wei, the moon-impacted criminal, is a great star, and the impact-impacted criminal is a later star.

古文：四月壬辰，月犯轩辕左民星。
现代文：四月壬辰，月冲犯轩辕星的左民星。
English: April's Imjin, the left-wing star of the moon's impact.

古文：庚子，月犯箕东北星。
现代文：庚子，月冲犯箕宿东北星。
English: Geng Zi, the moon crashing into the northeast star of Shibuya.

古文：五月丙寅，月犯心后星。
现代文：五月丙寅，月冲犯心宿后星。
English: May is the month of the crane, and the moon is the month of the criminal.

古文：戊寅，月掩昴西北星。
现代文：戊寅，月遮掩昴宿西北星。
English: Wuchin, the moon hides the northwest star of Oshuku.

古文：六月乙未，月犯箕东北星。
现代文：六月乙未，月冲犯箕宿东北星。
English: In June, the moon will collide with the north-eastern constellation of Pleiades.

古文：七月癸亥，月行南斗魁中，无所犯。
现代文：七月癸亥，月运行在南斗魁星中，无所冲犯。
English: In July, the boar, the moon run in the Nantou Kui star, there is no impact.

古文：庚辰，月犯轩辕女主。
现代文：庚辰，月冲犯轩辕星的女主星。
English: Geng Chen, the female lead star of the moon-shooting criminal Xuan Xingxing.

古文：八月庚子，月犯昴西南星。
现代文：八月庚子，月冲犯昴宿西南星。
English: August Geng Zi, the moon crashes into the south-west star of Shibuya.

古文：壬寅，月犯五车东南星。
现代文：壬寅，月冲犯五车星的东南星。
English: Ren Yin, the southeast star of the five-star lunar impact.

古文：壬申，月犯轩辕少民星。
现代文：壬申，月冲犯轩辕星的少民星。
English: Jinshin, a minor folk star of the moon-shooting criminal Xuan Xingxing.

古文：九月丁巳，月犯箕东北星。
现代文：九月丁巳，月冲犯箕宿东北星。
English: In September, the crescent moon will collide with the north-eastern star of Oshuku.

古文：壬辰，月在营室度，入羽林中。
现代文：壬辰。月出现在营室星方位，进入羽林星中。
English: Imjin. The moon appeared in the camp room star direction, entering the feather forest star.

古文：二十日，月入舆鬼，犯积尸。
现代文：二十曰，月进入舆鬼星，冲犯积尸星。
English: On the 20th day, the moon enters the ghost star, and it collides with the corpse star.

古文：十一月甲戌，月犯五车南星。
现代文：十一月甲戌，月冲犯五车星的南星。
English: In November, the moon will collide with the south star of the five-pointed star.

古文：十二月丁酉，月犯轩辕女主星，又掩女御。
现代文：十二月丁酉，月冲犯轩辕星的女主星，又遮掩女御星。
English: In December, the moon impinges on the female main star and covers the female main star.

古文：永明元年正月己亥，月犯心后星。
现代文：丞五元年正月己亥，月冲犯心宿后星。
English: In the first month of the fifth year of the Joseon Dynasty, Ji Hai, the moon's impact on the criminal's heart, became the next star.

古文：三月乙未，月犯轩辕女主星。
现代文：二月乙未，月冲犯轩辕星的女主星。
English: February B, the main female star of the moon-shocked Xuan Zixing.

古文：六月癸酉，月犯舆鬼西南星。
现代文：六月癸酉，月冲犯舆鬼西南星。
English: In June, the moon will collide with the southwestern star.

古文：八月乙丑，月犯南斗第四星，又犯舆鬼星。
现代文：八月乙丑，月冲犯南斗的第四颗星，又冲犯舆鬼星。
English: In August, Yixiu, the fourth star of the Southern Cross, and the ghost star.

古文：九月庚辰，月犯太白左蕃度。
现代文：九月庚辰，月冲犯金星左部方位。
English: September Gengchen, the moon will collide with the left part of Venus.

古文：癸巳，月犯东井北辕西头第一星。
现代文：癸巳，月冲犯井宿北辕西头第一颗星。
English: At that time, the first star of the West Head of North Gyeongsang Province was the Gyeongsangbokgung Youth Hostel.

古文：十二月丁卯，月犯心前星，又犯大星。
现代文：十二月丁卯，月冲犯心宿前星，又冲犯大星。
English: December Dingwu, the month of the impact of the criminal heart of the previous star, but also the impact of the big star.

古文：己巳，月犯南斗第五星。
现代文：己巳，月冲犯南斗的第五颗星。
English: Now, the moon has collided with the fifth star of the Southern Cross.

古文：二年二月甲子，月犯南斗第四星，又犯第三星。
现代文：二年二月甲子，月冲犯南斗第四颗星，又冲犯第三颗星。
English: In February of the second year, the moon collided with the fourth star of the Southern Cross and collided with the third star.

古文：三月丁丑，月犯东井北辕北头第一星。
现代文：三月丁丑，月冲犯井宿北辕北头第一颗星。
English: In March, Ding Chou, Yue Chong, Fang Jing, Beilun, and Beidong are the first stars.

古文：四月戊申，月犯轩辕右角。
现代文：四月戊申，月冲犯轩辕星的右角。
English: April wushin, the moon impinged on the right corner of xuanxing.

古文：六月丙寅，月犯东井辕头第一星。
现代文：六月丙寅，月冲犯井宿辕头的第一颗星。
English: In June, he was named the first star of the first star of the first star of the first star.

古文：八月丙午，月掩心大星。
现代文：八月丙午，月遮掩心宿大星。
English: On the afternoon of August 3rd, the moon hides the Great Star.

古文：戊申，月犯南斗第三星。
现代文：戊申，月冲犯南斗的第三颗星。
English: Boshin, the third star of the Southern Cross.

古文：戊子，月犯东井北辕西头第一星。
现代文：戊子，月冲犯井宿北辕西头第一颗星。
English: Bosi, the first star of the first star of the first star of the first star.

古文：十一月庚辰，月犯昴星。
现代文：十一月庚辰，月冲犯昴星。
English: November Geng Chen, the moon crashes into the star.

古文：丙戌，月犯轩辕左角。
现代文：丙戌，月冲犯轩辕星的左角。
English: The moon impinged on the left corner of the star.

古文：十二月壬戌，月犯心前星，又犯大星。
现代文：十二月壬戌，月冲犯心宿前星，又冲犯大星。
English: In December, the moon is the prelude to the criminal, and the criminal is the star.

古文：三年二月己未，月犯南斗第五星。
现代文：三年二月己未，月冲犯南斗的第五颗星。
English: In February of the third year, the moon collided with the fifth star of the Southern Cross.

古文：三月壬申，月在东井，无所犯。
现代文：三月壬申，月在井宿，无所冲犯。
English: In March, Jinshin, in the month of Ijuku, there is no impact.

古文：六月丙午，月掩心前星。
现代文：六月丙午，月遮掩心宿前星。
English: In the afternoon of June 3rd, the moon occulted the star in front of the inn.

古文：八月丙辰，月犯东井北辕第二星。
现代文：八月丙辰，月冲犯井宿北辕第二颗星。
English: In August, the second star of the second star of the second star of the second star.

古文：九月癸未，月犯东井南辕西头第一星。
现代文：九月癸未，月冲犯井宿南辕西头第一颗星。
English: In the early morning of September, the first star of the first star of the first star of the first star.

古文：四年正月癸酉，月入东井，无所犯。乙亥，月犯舆鬼。
现代文：四年正月癸酉，月进入井宿，无所冲犯：乙亥，月冲犯舆鬼星。
English: In the first month of the fourth year, the moon entered the well, and there was no impact: Eihei, the moon hit the ghost star.

古文：闰月辛亥，月犯房。
现代文：闰月辛亥，月冲犯房宿。
English: The intercalary month of Xinhai, the lunar impact criminal lodging.

古文：二月丁卯，月犯东井钺。
现代文：二月丁卯，月冲犯井宿铀星。
English: February is Dingwu, and the moon is Chonghuangjingjuku.

古文：三月乙未，月入东井，无所犯。
现代文：三月乙未，月进入井宿，无所冲犯。
English: On the second day of March, the moon entered the well, and nothing happened.

古文：七月辛亥，月犯东井。
现代文：七月辛亥，月冲犯井宿。
English: In July, Xinhai, Tsuchihonjuku.

古文：八月戊寅，月犯东井。
现代文：八月戊寅，月冲犯井宿。
English: In August, it is the month of Boshin, and in September, it is the month of Tsuchihakurai.

古文：九月辛卯，月与太白于尾合宿。
现代文：九月辛卯，月与金星在尾宿相会。
English: In September, the Moon and Venus meet at the end of the month.

古文：丙午，月入东井。
现代文：丙午，月进入井宿。
English: In the afternoon of the third day, the moon entered the well.

古文：十一月辛丑，月入东井旷中。
现代文：十月辛丑，月进入井宿的空隙中。
English: The month of October is harsh and ugly, and the moon enters the void of the well.

古文：辛亥，月犯房北头第二星。
现代文：辛亥，月冲犯房宿北头第二颗星。
English: Xinhai, the second star of the north star.

古文：十二月己巳，月犯东井北辕东头第二星。
现代文：十二月己巳，月冲犯井宿北辕束头第二颗星。
English: In December, the second star of Tsuchihonjinjuku Kitabatake Sokuto appeared.

古文：辛巳，月犯南斗第六星。
现代文：辛巳，月冲犯南斗的第六颗星。
English: Soon, the moon will collide with the sixth star of the Southern Cross.

古文：五年正月丙午，月犯房钩钤。
现代文：五年正月丙午，月冲犯房宿钩钤星。
English: On the morning of the first month of the fifth year, the moon collided with the criminal's room and hooked the star.

古文：二月癸亥，月犯东井南辕西头第二星。
现代文：二月癸亥，月冲犯井宿南辕西头第二颗星。
English: In February, the second star of the month, the second star of the month, the second star of the month.

古文：三月癸卯，月犯南斗第二星。
现代文：三月癸卯，月冲犯南斗的第二颗星。
English: In March, the second star of the Southern Cross.

古文：六月乙丑，月犯南斗第六星，在南斗七寸。
现代文：六月乙丑，月冲犯南斗的第六颗星，在南斗的七寸处。
English: In June, the moon impinges on the sixth star of the Southern Cross, at the seven-inch point of the Southern Cross.

古文：丙寅，月犯西建星北一尺。
现代文：丙寅，月冲犯西建星北一尺处。
English: In Hsinchu, the moon collided with the west star one foot to the north.

古文：史臣曰：《月令》昏明中星，皆二十八宿。
现代文：史臣曰：《月令》的昏明中星，都是二十八宿。
English: Shichen said: "The twilight stars in the "Moonlight" are all in twenty-eight places.

古文：箕斗之间，微为疏阔。
现代文：箕宿与斗宿之间，稍为疏阔。
English: It is a bit sparser between Shibuya and Dojima.

古文：故仲春之与孟秋，建星再用，与宿度并列，亟经陵犯，灾之所主，未有旧占。
现代文：所以仲春到孟秋之间，建星两度被利用，和二十八宿并列，屡经冲犯，主应发生灾异，没有旧的占辞。
English: Therefore, between Zhongchun and Mengqiu, Jianxing was used twice, and it was ranked alongside the twenty-eight lodges, and it was repeatedly attacked. Therefore, the main should be the occurrence of disasters. There is no old divination.

古文：《石氏星经》云： 斗主爵禄，褒贤进士。故置建星以为辅。
现代文：《石氏星经》说： 斗星主应爵位俸禄，褒奖举荐贤才士人，所以设建星作为辅佐。
English: "Shishi Xingjing" said: The master of the fighting star should receive a knighthood and a salary, and the reward should be recommended by a person of merit. Therefore, a construction star should be set up as an assistant.

古文：若犯建之异，不与斗同。 
现代文：至于冲犯建星的灾异，和斗星不同。 
English: As for the calamity of the impactor, it is different from that of the star.

古文：则据文求义，亦宰相之占也。
现代文：这是从字面上引申，也就是对宰相的占辞。
English: This is literally an extension, that is, of the prime minister's words.

古文：七月丁未，月行入东井旷中，无所犯。
现代文：七月丁未，月运行进入井宿的空隙中。无所冲犯。
English: In July, the lunar orbit entered the void of the well. There was no impact.

古文：八月壬申，月在毕，犯左股第二星西北三寸。
现代文：八月壬申，月在毕宿，冲犯左股第二星西北三寸处。
English: August in Jinshin, the month in Bijuku, the second star in the northwest three centimeters.

古文：九月戊子，月在填星北二尺八寸，为合宿。
现代文：九月戊子，月在土星北二尺八寸处，是合宿。
English: September Boshi, when the moon is 2'8" north of Saturn, is a training camp.

古文：十月戊寅，月入氐犯东南星西北一尺余。
现代文：十月戊寅，月进入氏宿冲犯其东南星西北一尺多处。
English: In October, when the moon enters Ujisado, the south-eastern and north-western constellations collide more than a foot apart.

古文：十一月戊寅，月入氐。
现代文：十一月戊寅，月进入氐宿。
English: November, the month of the Go-in, the month of the Go-in.

古文：十二月戊午，月在东壁度，在荧惑北，相去二尺七寸，为合宿。
现代文：十二月戊午，月在束壁方位处，位于火星北，相距二尺七寸，是合宿。
English: At noon of December, the moon was at the position of the bund wall, located north of Mars, at a distance of two feet and seven inches. It was a training camp.

古文：甲子，月在东壁度东南九寸，为犯。
现代文：甲子，月在东壁方位东南九寸，是冲犯。
English: Jiazi, the moon in the east wall of the south-east nine inches, is an impactor.

古文：癸酉，月在岁星南七寸，为犯。
现代文：癸酉，月在木星南七寸，是冲犯。
English: The crescent moon, seven inches south of Jupiter, is the culprit.

古文：六年正月戊戌，月在角星南，相去三寸。
现代文：六年正月戊戌，月在角星之南，相距三寸。
English: In the first month of the sixth year, the moon was in the south of the star, three inches away.

古文：二月丁卯，月在氐西南六寸。
现代文：二月丁卯，月在氐宿西南六寸。
English: February Dingwu, the moon is six centimeters southwest of Shishuku.

古文：三月乙未，月入氐中，在岁星南一尺一寸，为合宿。
现代文：三月乙未，月进入氐宿中，在木星南一尺一寸，形成合宿。
English: In March, the moon entered the mansion, one foot one inch south of Jupiter, forming a training camp.

古文：四月癸丑，月犯东井南辕西头第二星。
现代文：四月癸丑，月冲犯井宿南辕西头第二颗星。
English: April is the ugliest month, and the second star of the west end of Nanluo is the second star of the month.

古文：壬戌，月在氐西南星东南五寸，为犯。
现代文：壬戌，月在氏宿西南星东南五寸，造成冲犯。
English: In Renmin, the moon was five centimeters south-east of the south-west star in Uji-juku, resulting in a collision.

古文：渐入氐中，与岁星同在氐度，为合宿。
现代文：逐渐进入氐宿中，与木星同在氐宿方位，形成合宿。
English: Gradually enter the Pleiades, with Jupiter in the Pleiades position, forming a training camp.

古文：癸亥，月行在房北头第一星西南一尺，为犯。
现代文：癸亥，月运行在房宿北头第一颗星西南一尺，造成冲犯。
English: In the year of the boar, the moon moved one foot southwest of the first star on the north side of the room, causing a collision.

古文：六月乙卯，月在角星东一寸，为犯。
现代文：六月乙卯，月在角星东一寸，造成冲犯。
English: In June, the moon was one inch east of the crescent, resulting in a collision.

古文：丁巳，月行入氐，无所犯。
现代文：丁巳，月运行进入氐宿，无所冲犯。
English: Just then, the moon moved into Shibuya, leaving no trace.

古文：在岁星东三寸，为合宿。
现代文：在木星东三寸，形成合宿。
English: Three inches east of Jupiter, forming a training camp.

古文：七月乙酉，月入房北头第二次相星西北八寸，为犯。
现代文：七月乙酉，月进入房宿北头第二次相星西北八寸，形成冲犯。
English: July acetylene, the moon enters the room for the second time at the north end of the north-west star, forming a shock.

古文：庚寅，月在牵牛中星南二寸，为犯。
现代文：庚寅，月在牵牛中星南二寸，造成冲犯。
English: Goyang, two centimeters south of the moon in the cowherd, caused the impact.

古文：庚子，月行在毕左股第一星七寸，为犯，又进入毕。
现代文：庚子，月运行在毕宿左股第一颗垦七寸处，造成冲犯。又进入毕宿。
English: Geng Zi, the moon runs at the first seven centimeters of the left crotch of Bi-juku, causing an impact. He enters Bi-juku again.

古文：八月壬子，月行在岁星东二尺五寸，同在氐中，为合宿。
现代文：八月壬子，月运行在木星束二尺五寸处，同在氐宿之中，形成合宿。
English: In August, the moon orbits Jupiter at a distance of two feet and five inches, forming a training camp in the middle of the training camp.

古文：九月庚辰，月在房北头第一上相星东北一尺，为犯。
现代文：九月庚辰，月在房宿北头第一上相星东北一尺，造成冲犯。
English: In September, Gengchen, the moon was the first to rise in the north of the room, and the phase star was one foot in the northeast, causing a collision.

古文：又掩犯关楗闭星。
现代文：又遮掩冲犯关楗闭星。
English: It also obscures the impact of the offender.

古文：丁酉，月行入东井。
现代文：丁酉，月运行进入井宿。
English: Dingyao, the moon runs into the well.

古文：甲辰，月在左角星西北九寸，为犯。
现代文：甲辰，月在左角星西北九寸，造成冲犯。
English: Jia Chen, the moon is nine inches northwest of the left star, causing the impact.

古文：又在荧惑西南一尺六寸，为合宿。
现代文：又在火星西南一尺六寸，形成合宿。
English: They also formed a training camp one foot six inches southwest of Mars.

古文：十月癸酉，月入氐中，在西南星东北三寸，为犯。
现代文：十月癸酉，月进入氐宿中，在西南星东北三寸，造成冲犯。
English: At the end of October, the moon entered the middle of the month, and the southwest star was three inches to the northeast, causing a collision.

古文：闰月壬辰，月行入东井。
现代文：闰月壬辰，月运行进入井宿。
English: The leap month is in Imjin, and the moon moves into Ijuku.

古文：十一月丙戌，月行入羽林中，无所犯。
现代文：十一月丙戌，月运行进入羽林星中，无所冲犯。
English: In November, the moon's orbit entered the ecliptic, and there was no collision.

古文：乙未，月行在东井南辕西头第二星南一尺，为犯。
现代文：乙未，月运行在井宿南辕西头第二颗星南一尺，造成冲犯。
English: In the morning of the second day, the moon moved 1 shaku south of the second star at the west end of Ijuku Minami, causing a collision.

古文：丙寅，月在左角北八寸，为犯。
现代文：丙寅，月在左角星北八寸，造成冲犯。
English: Cui Yin, the moon is eight inches north of the star in the left corner, causing the impact.

古文：辛未，月行在太白东北一尺五寸，同在箕度，为合宿。
现代文：辛未，月运行在金星东北一尺五寸，同在箕宿方位，形成合宿。
English: In recent years, the moon has been orbiting one foot and five inches northeast of Venus, in the same direction as the Pleiades, forming a training camp.

古文：十二月甲申，月行在毕左股第二星北七寸，为犯。
现代文：十二月甲申，月运行在毕宿左股第二颗星北七寸，造成冲犯。
English: In December in Jiaxun, the second star north of seven centimeters of the moon moved to the left of the moon, causing a collision.

古文：乙未，月行入氐西南星东北一尺，为犯。
现代文：乙未，月运行进入氐宿西南星东北一尺，造成冲犯。
English: In the second half of the month, the movement of the moon entered one foot of the northeast of the southwest star of Oshuku, causing a collision.

古文：丙申，月在房北头上相星北一尺，为犯。
现代文：丙申，月在房宿北头上相星北一尺，造成冲犯。
English: According to the complaint, the moon appeared one foot north of the star on the north side of the rooming house, causing the collision.

古文：七年正月甲寅，月入东井旷中，无所犯。
现代文：七年正月甲寅，月进入井宿的空隙中，无所冲犯。
English: In the first month of the seventh year, Kato, the moon entered the gap of the well, and nothing happened.

古文：戊辰，月掩犯牵牛中星。
现代文：戊辰，月遮掩冲犯牵牛中星。
English: In Boshin, the moon hides the star of the cowherd.

古文：二月辛巳，月掩犯东井北辕东头第一星。
现代文：二月辛巳，月遮掩冲犯井宿北辕束头第一颗星。
English: February is in full swing, and the moon hides the first star of Chonghuangjing North Bund.

古文：三月庚申，月在岁星西北三尺，同在箕度，为合宿。
现代文：三月庚申，月在木星西北三尺，同在箕宿方位，形成合宿。
English: In March, Koshin, the moon is three feet northwest of Jupiter, and it is in the same position as the lodging, forming a training camp.

古文：四月乙酉，月入氐中，无所犯。
现代文：四月乙酉，月进入氐宿中，无所冲犯。
English: In April, the moon entered the middle of the month, and there was no impact.

古文：丙戌，月犯房星北头第一上相星北一尺，在楗闭西北四寸，为犯。
现代文：丙戌，月在房宿北头第一上相星北一尺冲犯，在楗闭星西北四寸，造成冲犯。
English: Propylene glycol, the moon in the room accommodation north of the first phase star north of a foot of impact, in the closed star northwest of four inches, resulting in impact.

古文：六月乙酉，月犯牵牛中星。
现代文：六月乙酉，月冲犯牵牛中星。
English: June acetylene, moon impact criminal cowherd star.

古文：乙未，月入毕，在左股第二星东八寸，为犯。
现代文：乙未，月进入毕宿，在左股第二颗星东八寸，造成冲犯。
English: In the second half of the month, the moon entered the last quarter, and the second star in the left quadrant was eight inches to the east, causing a collision.

古文：七月丁未，月入氐中，无所犯。
现代文：七月丁未，月进入氐宿中，无所冲犯。
English: In July, on the eve of the New Year, the moon entered the mansion, and there was nothing to offend.

古文：戊申，在楗闭星东北一尺，为犯。
现代文：戊申，在楗闭星东北一尺，造成冲犯。
English: Wushin, one foot northeast of Jiaolou, caused the collision.

古文：八月甲戌，月入氐，在西南星东北一尺，为犯。
现代文：八月甲戊，月进入氏宿，在西南星东北一尺，造成冲犯。
English: On August 1st, the moon entered Uji-juku, rising one foot to the northeast of the southwestern star, causing an impact.

古文：庚寅，月在毕右股第一星东北一尺，为犯。
现代文：庚寅，月在毕宿右股第一颗星东北一尺，造成冲犯。
English: Geng Yin, the first star in the northeast one foot in the month after the right-hand star, caused the impact.

古文：九月丁巳，月掩犯毕右股第一星。
现代文：九月丁巳，月遮掩冲犯毕宿右股第一颗星。
English: September is just around the corner, and the first star in the right-hand column is rising.

古文：庚申，月在东井北辕东头第一星西北八寸，为犯。
现代文：庚申，月在井宿北辕束头第一颗星西北八寸，造成冲犯。
English: Goshun, the first star of the north-west eight-pointed star in Yueyijuku Beilun Soktou, caused the impact crime.

古文：十月甲申，月行掩毕左股第三星。
现代文：十月甲申，月运行遮掩毕宿左股第三颗星。
English: In October, the moon's orbit occluded the third star in the left-hand quadrant.

古文：丁酉，月行在楗闭星西北八寸，为犯。
现代文：丁酉，月运行在楗闭星西北八寸，造成冲犯。
English: Ding Zhen, the moon orbits eight centimeters northwest of the Pleiades, causing the collision.

古文：十二月壬午，月在东井北辕东头第一星北八寸，为犯。
现代文：十二月壬午，月在井宿北辕东头第一颗星北八寸处，造成冲犯。
English: At noon on December 12th, the moon passed within eight centimeters of the first star to the north of the east of Jingjuku Beilun, causing a collision.

古文：八年正月丁巳，月在亢南头第二星南七寸，为犯。
现代文：八年正月丁巳，月在亢宿南头第二颗星南七寸，造成冲犯。
English: In the first month of the eighth year, the second star at the southern tip of Oshuku was seven centimeters, resulting in a collision.

古文：二月己巳，月行在毕右股第一星东北六寸，为犯。六月甲戌，月在亢南头第二星西南七寸，为犯。
现代文：二月己巳，月运行在毕宿右股第一颗星东北六寸，造成冲犯六月甲戌，月在亢宿南头第二颗星西南七寸，造成冲犯。
English: In February, the movement of the moon caused the first star on the right side of Bi-juku to move six centimeters to the northeast, resulting in a collision with the second star on the left side of June, and the second star on the south side of Bi-juku to move seven centimeters to the southwest, resulting in a collision.

古文：八月乙亥，月在牵牛中星南九寸，为犯。
现代文：乙亥，月在牵牛中星南九寸，造成冲犯。
English: In the autumn of the year of the boar, the moon was nine centimeters south of the star in the cowherd, causing a collision.

古文：辛卯，月在轩辕女御南八寸，为犯。
现代文：辛卯，月在轩辕女御星南八寸，造成冲犯。
English: Xinwu, in the month of Xuanqian, the woman's star was south of eight centimeters, resulting in an impact.

古文：九月辛酉，月在太微左执法星南四寸，为犯。
现代文：九月辛酉，月在太微垣左执法星南四寸，造成冲犯。
English: September was a tough month, with the enforcement of Shennan Shisun in Taiwakiga, resulting in a spike in offenses.

古文：十月壬午，月入东井旷中，无所犯。
现代文：十月壬午，月进入井宿的空隙中，无所冲犯。
English: At the stroke of noon in October, the moon entered the gap of the well, and there was no collision.

古文：戊子，月在太微右执法星东南六寸，为犯。
现代文：戊于，月在太微垣右执法星东南六寸，造成冲犯。
English: On the same day, the moon was six centimeters south-east of the law enforcement star on the right of Taiyukagaki, causing an impact crime.

古文：十一月戊戌，月行在填星北二尺二寸，为合宿。
现代文：十一月戊戌，月运行在土星北二尺二寸，形成合宿。
English: In November, the moon orbited 2 feet, 2 inches north of Saturn, forming a training camp.

古文：乙卯，月行在太微右执法星南二寸，为犯。
现代文：乙卯，月运行在太微垣右执法星南二寸，造成冲犯。
English: Second, the moon runs two inches south of Taiyukagaki right enforcement, causing impact crime.

古文：十二月庚辰，月行在轩辕右角星南二寸，为犯。
现代文：十二月庚辰，月运行在轩辕星的右角星南二寸，造成冲犯。
English: In December, Geng Chen, the moon orbited two centimeters south of the right angle of the star, causing the impact.

古文：癸未，月掩犯太微右执法。
现代文：癸未，月遮掩冲犯太微垣右执法星。
English: In the meantime, the moon hides the offender, and the law enforcement star of the right.

古文：九年正月辛丑，月在毕躔西星北六寸，为犯。
现代文：九年正月辛丑，月在毕躔西星北六寸，造成冲犯。
English: In the first month of the ninth year, the weather was bad, and the moon was six centimeters north of the west star in Bi'er, resulting in a collision.

古文：庚申，月在岁星西北二尺五寸，同在须女度，为合宿。
现代文：庚申，月在木星西北二尺五寸，同在须女星位，形成合宿。
English: Goshun, the moon is two feet and five inches northwest of Jupiter, at the same position as the star, forming a training camp.

古文：二月辛未，月入东井旷中，无所犯。
现代文：二月辛未，月进入井宿的空隙中，无所冲犯。
English: February is still young, the moon enters the gap of the well, there is nothing to offend.

古文：壬申，月行东井北辕东头第一星北九寸，为犯。
现代文：王申，月在井宿北辕束头第一颗星北九寸处运行，造成冲犯。
English: Wang Shen, the first star north of the first star of the first star of the first star of the first star of the first star of the first star of the first star of the first star of the first star of the first star of the first star.

古文：三月丙申，月入毕，在左股第二星东北六寸，又掩大星。
现代文：三月丙申，月进入毕宿，在左股第二颗星东北六寸，又遮掩大星。
English: In March, the moon enters the last quarter, and the second star in the left quadrant is six centimeters to the northeast, covering the big star.

古文：四月庚午，月在轩辕女御星南八寸，为犯。
现代文：四月庚午，月在轩辕女御星南八寸，造成冲犯。
English: On the afternoon of the fourth month, the moon was eight centimeters south of the Xuanxuan Lady Star, causing a collision.

古文：癸酉，月在太微东南头上相星南八寸，为犯。
现代文：癸酉，月在太微垣东南头上相星南八寸，造成冲犯。
English: At the same time, the moon was eight centimeters south of the south-eastern head of Taiyukagaki, causing an impact.

古文：癸未，月在岁星北，为犯，在危度。
现代文：癸未，月在木星北，造成冲犯，在危宿方位。
English: In the afternoon, the moon is north of Jupiter, causing impact, in the critical position.

古文：五月庚子，月行掩犯太微，在执法。
现代文：五月庚子，月在运行中遮掩冲犯太微垣，位置在执法星。
English: May Geng Zi, the month in the running to cover up the impact of the criminal is too weak, the position is in the law enforcement star.

古文：丁未，月掩犯东建西星。
现代文：丁未，月遮掩冲犯东建西星。
English: Ding Wei, the moon hides, and the east and west stars collide.

古文：七月癸巳，月在太白东五寸，为犯。
现代文：七月癸巳，月在金星束五寸，造成冲犯。
English: In July, the cormorant, the moon on Venus bunched five inches, causing impact crime.

古文：乙未，月在太微东蕃南头上相星西南五寸，为犯。
现代文：乙未，月在太微垣束部南头上相星西南五寸，造成冲犯。
English: In the morning, the moon was 5 centimeters south-southwest of the phase star on the south side of Taiyukagaki Sokube, causing an impact.

古文：壬寅，月掩犯东建星。
现代文：壬寅，月遮掩冲犯东建星。
English: Ren Yin, the moon hides the east building star.

古文：癸卯，月在牵牛南星北五寸，为犯。
现代文：癸卯，月在牵牛南星北五寸，造成冲犯。
English: At the same time, the moon is five centimeters north of the south star of the cow, causing the impact.

古文：乙巳，月在岁星北六寸，为犯。
现代文：乙巳，月在木星北六寸，造成冲犯。
English: At this time, the moon is six inches north of Jupiter, causing the impact.

古文：闰七月辛酉，月在轩辕女御星西南三寸，为犯。
现代文：闰七月辛酉，月在轩辕女御星西南三寸，造成冲犯。
English: The leap month of July was very hot, and the moon was three centimeters southwest of the Huanqian constellation, causing an impact.

古文：八月，月在轩辕左民星东八寸，为犯。
现代文：八月，月在轩辕左民星柬八寸，造成冲犯。
English: In August, in Xuancheng, the left wing of the People's Liberation Army (PLA) staged a coup.

古文：九月乙丑，月掩牵牛南星。
现代文：九月乙丑，月遮掩牵牛南星。
English: In September, the moon hides the Cowherd and the Southern Star.

古文：癸未，月入太微，在右执法东北四寸，为犯。
现代文：癸未，月进入太微垣，在右执法星东北四寸，造成冲犯。
English: Shortly after, the moon entered the Taibakaki, at the right of the law enforcement star northeast four inches, causing the impact.

古文：甲申，月掩太微东蕃南头上相星。
现代文：甲申，月遮掩太微垣束部南头上相星。
English: At Koshin, the moon hides the phase star on the south side of the Taikogaki bunch.

古文：十月甲午，月行在填星西北八寸，为犯，在虚度。
现代文：十月甲午，月运行在土星西北八寸，造成冲犯，在虚宿方位。
English: On October 1st at noon, the moon moves eight centimeters northwest of Saturn, causing a collision, in the false position.

古文：戊申，月在轩辕女主星南四寸，掩女御，并为犯。
现代文：戊申，月在轩辕女主星南四寸，遮掩女御星，都造成冲犯。
English: Wushin, the moon in the south of the main female star in Xuanxuan, and the cover of the female star, all caused the impact.

古文：辛亥，月入太微左执法东北七寸，为犯。
现代文：辛亥，月进入太微垣左执法星东北七寸，造成冲犯。
English: In Xinhai, the moon entered the northeast seven centimeters from the left law enforcement star of Taiyukagaki, causing an impact crime.

古文：十一月壬戌，月行掩犯岁星。
现代文：十一月壬戌，月在运行中遮掩冲犯木星。
English: In November, the moon occulted and collided with Jupiter during its orbit.

古文：己巳，月在毕右股大星东一寸，为犯。
现代文：己巳，月在毕宿右股大星束一寸，造成冲犯。
English: At the moment, the moon is one inch away from the right star cluster at the end of the month, causing an impact.

古文：辛未，月在东井南辕西头第二星南八寸，为犯。
现代文：辛未，月在井宿南辕西头第二颗星南八寸，造成冲犯。
English: Xin Wei, the second star of the second star of the second star of the second star of the second star of the second star of the second star of the second star of the second star of the second star of the second star of the second star of the second star of the second star of the second star of the second star of the second star of the second star.

古文：又入东井旷中。
现代文：又进入井宿的空隙中。
English: into the void of the well.

古文：丙子，月行在轩辕左民星东北七寸，为犯。
现代文：丙子，月进入到轩辕左民星东北七寸，造成冲犯。
English: On cue, the moon entered the northeast seven centimeters to the left of Minsing, causing an impact.

古文：丁丑，月行在太微西蕃上将星南五寸，为犯。
现代文：丁丑，月运行在太微垣西部上将星南五寸，造成冲犯。
English: Ding ugly, the moon runs in the west of Taiyukagaki, the general Xingnan five inches, resulting in impact crime.

古文：十二月庚寅，月行在岁星东南八寸，为犯。
现代文：十二月庚寅，月运行在木星东南八寸，造成冲犯。
English: In December, the moon orbited eight centimeters southeast of Jupiter, causing the collision.

古文：丙午，月掩犯太微东蕃南头上相星。
现代文：丙午，月遮掩冲犯太微垣东部南头上相斤已。
English: In the afternoon of the third day, the moon obscured the impact of the attack on the eastern part of the southern part of the city.

古文：十年正月庚午，月在轩辕右角大民星南八寸，为犯。
现代文：十年正月庚午，月在轩辕星右角大民星南八寸，造成冲犯。
English: On the afternoon of the 10th day of the first month of the year, the moon was eight centimeters south of Damingxing in the right corner of Xuanxing, causing a collision.

古文：二月己亥，月行太微，在右掖门。
现代文：二月己亥，月运行太微垣，在右掖门。
English: In February, at the time of the Chinese lunar new year, the moon was too far away to be seen at the right gate.

古文：甲辰，月行入氐中，掩犯东北星。
现代文：甲辰，月运行进入氐宿中，遮掩冲犯东北星。
English: In the first hour of the month, the moon moves into the middle of the zodiac, covering the north-eastern star.

古文：壬子，月行入羽林。
现代文：壬子，月运行进入羽林星。
English: In Imago, the moon runs into Uebayashi.

古文：三月己卯，月行入羽林，在填星东北七寸，为犯。
现代文：三月已卯，月运行进入羽林星，在土星东北七寸，造成冲犯。
English: March has passed, and the moon has entered Uranus, seven centimeters northeast of Saturn, causing an impact.

古文：在危四度。
现代文：在危宿四度。
English: Four times in a dangerous place.

古文：四月甲午，月行入太微，在右掖门内。
现代文：四月甲午，月运行进入太微垣，在右掖门内。
English: On the afternoon of April 1st, the moon entered Taibugaki, in the right side of the gate.

古文：丙午，月行在危度，入羽林。
现代文：丙午，月运行在危宿方位，进入羽林星。
English: On the afternoon of the third day, the moon was moving in the direction of the dangerous place, and entered the Yulin star.

古文：五月己巳，月掩南斗第三星。
现代文：五月己巳，月遮掩南斗第三颗星。
English: In May, the third star of the Southern Cross is eclipsed by the moon.

古文：甲戌，月行在危度，入羽林。
现代文：甲戌，月运行在危宿方位，进入羽林星。
English: Kuching, the moon runs in the critical position, entering the Yulin star.

古文：六月戊子，月在张度，在荧惑星东三寸，为犯。
现代文：六月戊子，月在张宿方位，在火星束三寸，造成冲犯。
English: June Boson, in the month of Zhangshu position, in the Mars bunch three inches, resulting in impact.

古文：己丑，月行入太微，在右掖门。
现代文：己丑，月运行进入太微垣，在右掖门。
English: Ugly, the moon runs into the too small wall, at the right gate.

古文：丁酉，月掩西建星西。
现代文：丁酉，月遮掩西建星西。
English: Ding dong, the moon hides the west and builds the west.

古文：丁未，月行入毕，犯右股大赤星。
现代文：丁未，月运行进入毕宿，冲犯右股大赤星。
English: Ding Wei, the moon run into the end of the night, the impact of the right big red star.

古文：七月甲戌，月行在毕躔星西北六寸，为犯。
现代文：七月甲戌，月运行在毕宿躔星西北六寸，造成冲犯。
English: In July, the crescent moon moved six centimeters northwest of the Pleiades, causing a shock.

古文：丁丑，月在东井北辕东头第二星西南九寸，为犯。
现代文：丁丑，月在井宿北辕柬头第二颗星西南九寸，造成冲犯。
English: Ding ugly, in the month of Jingjuku Beilun Kamdou second star southwest nine inches, resulting in impact crime.

古文：八月辛卯，月行西建星东一尺，又在东星西四寸，为犯。
现代文：八月辛卯，月运行在西建星束一尺，又在东星西四寸，造成冲犯。
English: In August, the moon moved westward by one foot and eastward by four inches, causing the collision.

古文：壬寅，月行在毕右股大赤星东北四寸，为犯。
现代文：壬寅，月运行在毕宿右股大赤星东北四寸，造成冲犯。
English: Minshin, the moon runs four centimeters to the northeast of Bi-juku right-share big red star, causing impact crime.

古文：甲辰，月行入东井旷中，无所犯。
现代文：甲辰，月运行进入井宿的空隙中，无所冲犯。
English: In the first hour of the month, the movement of the moon entered the gap of the well, and there was no impact.

古文：戊申，月行在轩辕女主星西九寸，为犯。
现代文：戊申，月运行在轩辕女主星西九寸，造成冲犯。
English: Wushin, the moon runs in Xuanwu female main star West Jiu Xun, causing impact crime.

古文：辛亥，月入太微，在左执法星北二尺七寸，为犯。
现代文：辛亥，月进入太微垣，在左执法星北二尺七寸，造成冲犯。
English: At Xinhai, the moon entered Taibai, and the north star of two feet seven inches was enforced on the left, resulting in an impact crime.

古文：九月癸亥，月行掩犯填星一寸，在危度。
现代文：九月癸亥，月在运行中遮掩土星一寸，在危宿方位。
English: In September, the moon occulted Saturn one inch during its orbit, and it was in the critical position.

古文：十月辛卯，月在危度，入羽林，无所犯。
现代文：十月辛卯，月在危宿方位，进入羽林星，无所冲犯。
English: October Xinwu, the month in the dangerous accommodation direction, into the feather forest star, there is no impact.

古文：癸亥，月入东井旷中，无所犯。
现代文：癸亥，月进入井宿的空隙中，无所冲犯。
English: When the moon entered the gap of the well, there was nothing to collide with.

古文：十一月甲子，月入毕，进右股大赤星西北五寸，为犯。
现代文：十一月甲子，月进入毕宿，进到右股大赤星西北五寸，造成冲犯。
English: In November, the moon entered the last quarter of the month, and entered the northwest five centimeters of the right big star, causing the impact.

古文：壬申，月入太微，在右执法星东北一尺三寸，无所犯。
现代文：壬申，月进入太微垣，在右执法星东北一尺三寸，无所冲犯。
English: In Jinshin, the moon entered Taibakaki, one foot and three inches northeast of the right enforcement star, and there was no impact.

古文：丁丑，月入氐，无所犯。
现代文：丁丑，月进入氐宿，无所冲犯。
English: Ding Yuxi, the moon enters the mansion, there is nothing to offend.

古文：十二月甲午，月入东井旷中，又进北辕东头第二星四寸，为犯。
现代文：十二月甲午，月进入井宿的空隙中，又进入北辕束头第二颗星四寸，造成冲犯。
English: On the afternoon of December 1st, the moon entered the gap of the well, and then entered the second star, Shisun, at the head of the Beilun bunch, causing a collision.

古文：庚子，月入太微，在右执法星东北三尺，无所犯。
现代文：庚子，月进入太微垣，在右执法星东北三尺，无所冲犯。
English: Geng Zi, the moon entered the Taibo wall, three feet to the northeast of the right enforcement star, there was no impact.

古文：十一年正月辛酉，月入东井旷中，无所犯。
现代文：十一年正月辛酉，月进入井宿的空隙中，无所冲犯。
English: In the first month of the eleventh year, the moon entered the gap of the well, and there was no impact.

古文：乙丑，月在轩辕女主星北八寸，为犯。
现代文：乙丑，月在轩辕女主星北八寸，造成冲犯。
English: The second ugliness, in the month of Xuanwu, the female main star, North Hassun, caused an impact.

古文：壬申，月行在氐星东北九寸，为犯。
现代文：壬申，月运行在氐宿东北九寸，造成冲犯。
English: In Jinshin, the moon moved 9 centimeters to the northeast of Oshuku, causing a collision.

古文：二月甲午，月行入太微，在上将星东北一尺五寸，无所犯。
现代文：二月甲午，月运行进入太微垣，在上将星东北一尺五寸，无所冲犯。
English: On the afternoon of February 1st, the moon moved into Taibugaki, one foot and five centimeters northeast of Shangzheng. There was no collision.

古文：壬寅，月行掩犯南斗第六星。
现代文：壬寅，月在运行中遮掩冲犯南斗第六颗星。
English: Ren Yin, the sixth star in the Southern Cross constellation, is eclipsed by the moon.

古文：癸卯，月掩犯西建中星，又掩东星。
现代文：癸卯，月遮掩冲犯西建中星，又遮掩束星。
English: At the same time, the moon occulted the star in the west and occulted the star in the east.

古文：四月乙丑，月入太微，在右执法西北一尺四寸，无所犯。
现代文：四月乙丑，月进入太微垣，在右执法星西北一尺四寸，无所冲犯。
English: April is ugly, the moon enters the too small wall, and it is one foot four inches northwest of the right enforcement star, and there is no impact.

古文：壬寅，月行在危度，入羽林，无所犯。
现代文：壬寅，月运行在危宿方位，进入羽林星，无所冲犯。
English: Minshin, the moon runs in the dangerous accommodation direction, enters the feather forest star, there is no impact.

古文：五月丁巳，月行入太微左执法星北三尺，无所犯。
现代文：五月丁巳，月运行进入太微垣左执法星北三尺，无所冲犯。
English: In May, just as the moon was setting, it entered the Taiyukagaki left-hand side of the law enforcement star north three feet, and there was no impact.

古文：甲子，月行在南斗第二星西七寸，为犯。
现代文：甲子，月运行在南斗第二颗星西七寸，造成冲犯。
English: The moon orbits the second star of the Southern Cross at a distance of seven centimeters to the west, causing a collision.

古文：乙丑，月掩犯西建中星。
现代文：乙丑，月遮掩冲犯西建中星。
English: Second ugly, the moon obscured the impact of the West built the middle star.

古文：又犯东星六寸。六月辛丑，月行掩犯毕左股第三星。壬寅，月入毕。
现代文：又犯东星六寸六月辛丑，月在运行中遮掩冲犯毕宿左股第三颗星壬寅，月进入毕宿。
English: In addition, the east star, Rokusun, made the month of June ugly, and the moon, while in motion, covered up the impact of the third star, Minshu, and the moon entered the afterlife.

古文：七月壬子，月入太微，在左执法东三尺，无所犯。
现代文：七月壬子，月进入太微垣，在左执法星束三尺，无所冲犯。
English: July Renzi, the moon entered Taibakaki, the star cluster three feet to the left of the law enforcement, there was no impact crime.

古文：丙辰，月行入氐，在东北星西南六寸，为犯。
现代文：丙辰，月运行进入氐宿，在东北星西南六寸，造成冲犯。
English: At 4:00 a.m., the moon moved into Shichijuku, six centimeters southwest of the northeast star, causing an impact.

古文：己未，月行南斗第六星南四寸，为犯。
现代文：己未，月运行在南斗第六颗星南四寸，造成冲犯。
English: So far, the moon has been orbiting four centimeters south of the sixth star in the Southern Cross, causing collisions.

古文：庚申，月行在西建星东南一寸，为犯。
现代文：庚申，月运行在西建星东南一寸，造成冲犯。
English: Gaoshen, the moon runs one inch southeast of Xi Jianxing, causing the impact.

古文：九月庚寅，月行在哭星西南六寸，为犯。
现代文：九月庚寅，月运行在哭星西南六寸，造成冲犯。
English: In September, the moon moved six inches southwest of the Weeping Star, causing an impact.

古文：壬辰，月行在营室度，入羽林，无所犯。
现代文：壬辰，月运行在营室星方位，进入羽林星，无所冲犯。
English: In Imjin, the moon moves in the direction of the camp star, enters the feather star, and has no impact.

古文：丁酉，月入毕，在右股大赤星西北六寸，为犯。
现代文：丁酉，月进入毕宿，在右股大赤星西北六寸，造成冲犯。
English: Ding Xuan, the moon entered Bijuku, six centimeters northwest of the right Great Red Star, causing a collision.

古文：己亥，月入东井旷中，无所犯。
现代文：己亥，月进入井宿的空隙中，无所冲犯。
English: At the time of the earthquake, the moon entered the gap of the well, and there was no impact.

古文：乙巳，月行太微，当右掖门内，在屏星西南六寸，为犯。
现代文：乙巳，月运行在太微垣，正当右掖门内，在屏星西南六寸，造成冲犯。
English: At this moment, the moon was moving in Taibugaki, just inside the right gate, six inches southwest of the screen star, causing the impact.

古文：十月壬午，月行在东建中星九寸，为犯。十一月壬子，月在哭星南五寸，为犯。
现代文：十月壬午，月运行在东建中星九寸，造成冲犯十一月壬子，月在哭星南五寸，造成冲犯。
English: At noon in October, the moon was 9 centimeters away from Dongjian Zhongxing, causing an impact. In November, it was 5 centimeters away from Renzi, and 5 centimeters away from Weeping Star South, causing an impact.

古文：辛酉，月行在东井钺星南八寸，又在东井南辕西头第一星南五寸，并为犯。
现代文：辛酉，月运行在井宿铁星南八寸，又在井宿南辕西头第一颗星南五寸，都造成冲犯。
English: In addition, the movement of the moon in the well-sleeping iron star south eight centimeters, and the first star south five centimeters in the west head of the well-sleeping iron star south eight centimeters, all caused impact crime.

古文：进入井中。
现代文：进入井宿中。
English: Entering the middle of the well.

古文：丁卯，月入太微。
现代文：丁卯，月进入太微垣。
English: Dingwu, the moon enters Taibugaki.

古文：壬申，月行入氐，无所犯。
现代文：壬申，月运行进入氐宿，无所冲犯。
English: In Jinshin, the moon runs into Shibuya, and there is no impact.

古文：十二月辛巳，月入羽林，又入东井旷中，又入东井北辕西头第二星南六寸，为犯。
现代文：十二月辛巳，月进入羽林星，又进入井宿的空隙中，又进入井宿北辕西头第二颗星南六寸，造成冲犯。
English: In late December, the moon entered the Hualin Star, and then entered the gap of the Well Inn, and then entered the second star of the Well Inn, Minami Rokun, in the western part of Beilun, causing a collision.

古文：乙未，月入太微，在右执法星东北二尺，无所犯。
现代文：乙未，月进入太微垣，在右执法星东北二尺，无所冲犯。
English: In the second half of the month, the moon entered Taiyukaki, two feet northeast of the right enforcement star, and there was no impact.

古文：乙亥，月入氐，无所犯。
现代文：乙亥，月进入氐宿，无所冲犯。
English: In the second month of the year of the boar, the moon entered Shishuku, and there was no impact.

古文：隆昌元年正月辛亥，月入毕，在左股第一星东南一尺，为犯。
现代文：隆昌元年正月辛亥，月进入毕宿，在左股第一颗星东南一尺，造成冲犯。
English: In the first month of Xinhai in the first year of Longchang, the moon entered the last quarter, and the first star in the left quarter was one foot southeast, causing a collision.

古文：三月辛亥，月在东井北辕西头第二星东七寸，为犯。
现代文：三月聿亥，月在井宿北辕西头第二颗星东七寸，造成冲犯。
English: In March, at the time of the Chinese New Year, the second star at the west end of Jingjuku North Tower moved seven centimeters to the east, causing a collision.

古文：甲申，月入太微，在屏星南九寸，为犯。
现代文：甲申，月进入太微垣，在屏星南九寸，造成冲犯。
English: In Jiaxing, the moon entered the Taibeigaki, nine centimeters south of Pingxing, causing the impact.

古文：六月乙丑，月入毕，在右股第一星东北五寸，为犯。
现代文：六月乙丑，月进入毕宿，在右股第一颗星东北五寸，造成冲犯。
English: In June, the second month, the moon entered the last quarter, and the first star in the right quarter, the northeast five inches, caused the impact.

古文：又在岁星东南一尺，为犯。
现代文：又在木星东南一尺，造成冲犯。
English: It was also one foot southeast of Jupiter, causing the impact.

古文：丁卯，月入东井南辕西头第一星东北七寸，为犯。
现代文：丁卯，月进入井宿南辕西头第一颗星东北七寸，造成冲犯。
English: Dingwu, the moon entered the first star of the first star of the first star of the first star of the first star of the first star of the first star of the first star of the first star of the first star of the first star of the first star of the first star of the first star of the first star of the first star of the first star of the first star of the first star of the first star of the first star of the first star of the first star of the first star of the first star of the first star of the first star of the first star of the first star of the first star of the first star of the first star of the first star of the first star of the first star of the

古文：永元元年七月，月掩心中星。
现代文：泰元元年七月，月遮掩心宿中星。
English: In July of the first year of the Tai, the moon covered the star in the middle of the heart.

