古文：起强圉协洽，尽重光大渊献，凡五年。
现代文：起，止，一共三年。
English: A total of three years.

古文：孝桓皇帝下永康元年
现代文：汉桓帝永康元年
English: Emperor Han Huan died in the first year of Yongkang

古文：春，正月，东羌先零围祋祤，掠云阳，当煎诸种复反。
现代文：春季，正月，东羌先零部包围县，劫掠云阳县。当煎等诸部羌民再度起兵反叛。
English: In the spring, the first month of the year, the Eastern Wei encircled the counties in the first half of the year and plundered Yunyang County.

古文：段颎击之于鸾鸟，大破之，西羌遂定。
现代文：护羌校尉段率军在鸾鸟县邀击，大破叛羌，将西羌平定。
English: The troops led by Colonel Duan, the garrison commander, were invited to attack in Ostrich County, defeated the rebels, and subdued Xidi.

古文：夫馀王夫台寇玄菟；玄菟太守公孙域击破之。夏，四月，先零羌寇三辅，攻没两营，杀千馀人。
现代文：玄菟郡太守公孙域率军将其击破。夏季，四月，先零部羌民大举进犯三辅地区，攻灭京兆虎牙营和扶风雍营，杀害一千余人。
English: In the summer, in April, the first detachment of Xuanwu County defeated it with the army led by the governor of Xuanwu County, Sun Wei. In the summer, the first detachment of Xuanwu people invaded the Sanfu area in a big way, attacked and destroyed the Beijing Zhao Koga Camp and the Fufeng Yong Camp, killing more than a thousand people.

古文：五月，壬子晦，日有食之。
现代文：五月壬子晦，发生日食。
English: At the end of May, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：陈蕃既免，朝臣震栗，莫敢复为党人言者。
现代文：陈蕃被免职以后，朝廷文武大臣大为震动恐惧，再没有人敢向朝廷替党人求情。
English: After Chen Xi was removed from office, the Minister of Culture and Military Affairs of the Imperial Court was greatly shocked and frightened, and no one dared to intercede with the Imperial Court on behalf of the party members.

古文：贾彪曰： 吾不西行，大祸不解。 
现代文：贾彪说： 我如果不西去京都洛阳一趟，大祸不可能解除。 
English: Jia Biao said, "If I don't go west to Kyoto and Luoyang, the great calamity can't be resolved.

古文：乃入雒阳，说城门校尉窦武、尚书魏郡霍谞等，使讼之。
现代文：于是，他就亲自来到洛阳，说服城门校尉窦武、尚书魏郡人霍等人，使他们出面营救党人。
English: As a result, he personally came to Luoyang to persuade Shingmen Captain Dou Wu, Shangshu Wei County resident Huo and others to come forward to rescue the party members.

古文：武上疏曰： 陛下即位以来，未闻善政，常侍、黄门，竞行谲诈，妄爵非人。
现代文：窦武上书说： 自陛下即位以来，并没有听说施行过善政。常侍、黄门却奸诈百出，竞相谋取封爵。
English: Dou Wu's letter said: Since His Majesty ascended the throne, it has not been heard that any good policies have been implemented. However, the regular attendants and Huangmen are full of treachery, competing to be knighted.

古文：伏寻西京，佞臣执政，终丧天下。
现代文：回溯西京长安时代，阿谀奉承的官员掌握朝廷大权，终于失去天下。
English: Looking back to the Western Capital Chang'an era, officials who flattered the people seized the power of the imperial court and finally lost the world.

古文：今不虑前事之失，复循覆车之轨。臣恐二世之难，必将复及，赵高之变，不朝则夕。
现代文：而今不但不忧虑失败的往事，反而又走到使车辆翻覆的轨道上，我恐怕秦朝二世胡亥覆亡的灾难，一定会再度降临，赵高一类的变乱，也早晚都会发生。
English: But now, instead of worrying about the past failures, we have come to the track of overturning vehicles. I am afraid that the disaster of the Qin Dynasty II Hu Hai's overthrow will surely come again, and disturbances such as Zhao Gao will happen sooner or later.

古文：近者奸臣牢修造设党议，遂收前司隶校尉李膺等逮考，连及数百人。旷年拘录，事无效验。
现代文：最近，因奸臣牢修捏造出朋党之议，就逮捕前司隶校尉李膺等入狱，进行拷问，牵连到数百人之多，经年囚禁，事情并无真实证据。
English: Recently, due to the fact that a treacherous vassal fabricated the opinion of a friend of the party, the arrest of the former lieutenant Li Yan and others went to prison, tortured, implicated hundreds of people, imprisoned for years, and there was no real evidence of the matter.

古文：臣惟膺等建忠抗节，志经王室，此诚陛下稷、伊、吕之佐；而虚为奸臣贼子之所诬枉，天下寒心，海内失望。
现代文：我认为，李膺等人秉着忠心，坚持节操，志在筹划治理王室大事，他们都真正是陛下的后稷、子契、伊尹、吕尚一类的辅佐大臣，却被加上虚构罪名，遭受奸臣贼子的冤枉陷害，以致天下寒心，海内失望。
English: In my opinion, Li Yu and others were loyal, adhered to discipline, and aspired to plan and manage the affairs of the royal family. They were truly His Majesty's aides-de-camp, sons-in-law, Yi Yin, and Lü Shang, but they were falsely accused and framed by treacherous vassals, so that the world was cold-hearted and disappointed at home.

古文：惟陛下留神澄省，时见理出，以厌人鬼喁喁之心。
现代文：而今，尚书台的亲近大臣，如尚书朱、荀绲、刘、魏郎、刘矩、尹勋等人，都是国家的忠贞之士，朝廷的贤良辅佐。
English: I would like to ask His Majesty to think carefully and act promptly to meet the expectations of people and ghosts.

古文：今台阁近臣，尚书硃寓、荀绲、刘祐、魏朗、刘矩、尹勋等，皆国之贞士，朝之良佐；尚书郎张陵、妫皓、苑康、杨乔、边韶、戴恢等，文质彬彬，明达国典，内外之职，群才并列。
现代文：尚书郎张陵、妫皓、苑康、杨乔、边韶、戴恢等人，举止文雅，崐通达国家的典章制度，朝廷内外的文武官员，英才并列。然而，陛下却偏偏信任左右亲近，依靠奸佞邪恶，让他们在外主管州郡，在内作为心腹。
English: Shang Shulang, Zhang Ling, Zou, Yuan Kang, Yang Qiao, Bentham, Dai Hui, and others behaved in a refined manner, were well-versed in the country's medal system, and were civil and military officials both inside and outside the court, and were of equal excellence. However, His Majesty was inclined to trust those around him, and relied on the wickedness of the traitors, allowing them to be in charge of provinces and counties outside the country, and acting as his confidants inside the country.

古文：而陛下委任近习，专树饕餮，外典州郡，内干心膂，宜以次贬黜，案罪纠罚；信任忠良，平决臧否，使邪正毁誉，各得其所，宝爱天官，唯善是授，如此，咎征可消，天应可待。
现代文：应该把这批奸佞邪恶之徒陆续加以废黜，调查和审问他们的罪状，进行惩罚。信任忠良，分辨善恶和是非，使邪恶和正直、诽谤和荣誉各有所归。遵照上天的旨意，将官位授给善良的人。果真如此，天象灾异的征兆可以消除，上天的祥瑞指日可待。
English: It is necessary to dethrone this group of treacherous evil-doers one after another, investigate and interrogate their crimes, and punish them. Trust the good and the faithful, distinguish between good and evil and right and wrong, make evil and honesty, slander and honor belong to each other. In accordance with the will of heaven, give official positions to good people. If this is the case, the signs of the celestial calamity can be eliminated, and the auspiciousness of heaven can be expected.

古文：间者有嘉禾、芝草、黄龙之见。夫瑞生必于嘉士，福至实由善人，在德为瑞，无德为灾。
现代文：近来，虽偶尔也有嘉禾、灵芝草、黄龙等出现，但是，祥瑞发生，一定是因为有贤才，福佑降临，一定是由于有善人，如果有恩德，它就是吉祥，没有恩德，它就是灾祸。
English: Recently, although occasionally there have been the appearance of Jiahe, Ganoderma lucidum, Huanglong, etc., but the occurrence of auspiciousness must be due to the arrival of genius, blessing, and good people. If there is benevolence, it is auspicious, and if there is no benevolence, it is disaster.

古文：陛下所行不合天意，不宜称庆。 
现代文：而今陛下的行为不符合天意，所以不应该庆贺。 
English: Now, His Majesty's actions are not in accordance with God's will, so there should be no celebration.

古文：书奏，因以病上还城门校尉、槐里侯印绶。
现代文：奏章呈上后，窦武即称病辞职，并缴还城门校尉、槐里侯的印信。
English: He was sent to the hospital, but returned home sick as the captain of the castle gate and the lord of Baili.

古文：霍谞亦为表请。
现代文：霍也上书营救党人。
English: Huo also wrote to rescue Party members.

古文：帝意稍解，因中常侍王甫就狱讯党人范滂等，皆三木囊头，暴于阶下，甫以次辨诘曰： 卿等更相拔举，迭为脣齿，其意如何？ 
现代文：桓帝的怒气稍稍化解，派中常侍王甫前往监狱审问范滂等党人。范滂等人颈戴大枷，手腕戴铁铐，脚挂铁镣，布袋蒙住头脸，暴露在台阶下面。甫逐一诘问说： 你们互相推举保荐，象嘴唇和牙齿一样地结成一党，究竟有什么企图？ 
English: Emperor Huan's anger subsided a little, and he sent the middle-ranking courtier Wang Fu to the prison to interrogate Fan Qi and other party members. Fan Qi and others wore large shackles around their necks, iron shackles on their wrists, iron shackles on their feet, and cloth bags covering their heads and faces, and were exposed at the bottom of the steps. He asked them one by one: What is your intention to recommend each other and form a party like lips and teeth?

古文：滂曰： 仲尼之言： 见善如不及，见恶如探汤。 
现代文：范滂回答说： 孔丘有言： 看见善，立刻学习都来不及。
English: Fan Ye replied, "Confucius said, 'If you see a good thing, it's too late to learn it right away.

古文：滂欲使善善同其清，恶恶同其污，谓王政之所愿闻，不悟更以为党。
现代文：看见恶，就好象把手插到滚水里，应该马上停止。 我希望奖励善良使大家同样清廉，嫉恨恶人使大家都明白其卑污所在。本以为朝廷会鼓励我们这么做，从没有想到这是结党。
English: Seeing evil is like sticking one's hand into boiling water, it should be stopped immediately. I hope that rewarding goodness will make everyone equally pure, and hating the wicked will make everyone understand their baseness. I thought the court would encourage us to do this, but I never thought it was a party.

古文：古之修善，自求多福。
现代文：古代人修德积善，可以为自己谋取多福。
English: The ancients cultivated virtue and accumulated goodness, and could seek many blessings for themselves.

古文：今之修善，身陷大戮。
现代文：而今修德积善，却身陷死罪。
English: Now he is a virtuous man, but he is facing the death penalty.

古文：身死之日，愿埋滂于首阳山侧，上不负皇天，下不愧夷、齐。 
现代文：我死后，但愿将我的尸首埋葬在首阳山之侧，上不辜负皇天，下不愧对伯夷、叔齐。 
English: On the day of his execution, please bury Fan Qi on the side of Shouyang Mountain. Above all, he will live up to the Emperor, and below, he will live up to Uncle Bo Yi.

古文：甫愍然为之改容，乃得并解桎梏。
现代文：王甫深为范滂的言辞而动容，可怜他们的无辜遭遇，于是命有关官吏解除他们身上的刑具。
English: Wang Fushen was moved by Fan Xuan's words and felt sorry for their innocent suffering, so he ordered the relevant officials to remove the instruments of torture from their bodies.

古文：李膺等又多引宦官子弟，宦官惧，请帝以天时宜赦。
现代文：而李膺等人在口供中，又牵连出许多宦官子弟，宦官们也深恐事态继续扩大。
English: However, in the confessions of Li Yan and others, many eunuchs were implicated, and the eunuchs were deeply afraid that the situation would continue to expand.

古文：六月，庚申，赦天下，改元；党人二百馀人皆归田里，书名三府，禁锢终身。
现代文：于是请求桓帝，用发生日食作为借口，将他们赦免。六月庚申，桓帝下诏，大赦天下，改年号。党人共二百余人，都遣送回各人的故乡；将他们的姓名编写成册，分送太尉、司徒、司空三府，终身不许再出来做官。
English: So he asked Emperor Huan to pardon them, using the solar eclipse as an excuse. In June, Emperor Huan issued a decree to pardon the whole country and change the name of the year. A total of more than two hundred party members were sent back to their hometowns; their names were compiled into a book and sent to the three prefectures of Taifeng, Szeto and Siku, and they were not allowed to come out to work as officials for life.

古文：范滂往候霍谞而不谢。
现代文：范滂前往拜访霍，却不肯道谢。
English: Fan Ye went to visit Huo, but refused to thank him.

古文：或让之，滂曰： 昔叔向不见祁奚，吾何谢焉！ 
现代文：有人责备他，范滂回答说： 过去，叔向不见祁奚，我何必多此一谢。 
English: When someone reproached him, Fan Ye replied: "In the past, my uncle never saw me, so why should I thank him so much.

古文：滂南归汝南，南阳士大夫迎之者，车数千两，乡人殷陶、黄穆侍卫于旁，应对宾客。
现代文：范滂南归汝南郡时，南阳的士绅乘车来迎接他的有数千辆之多。他的同乡殷陶、黄穆站在他身边侍卫，为他应接对答宾客。
English: When Fan Bingnan returned to Runan County, thousands of Nanyang gentry came to meet him by car. His fellow townsmen Yin Tao and Huang Mu stood guard beside him to receive and answer guests.

古文：滂谓陶等曰： 今子相随，是重吾祸也！ 
现代文：范滂对殷陶等人说： 而今你们跟随我，是加重我的灾祸！ 
English: Fan Yu said to Yin Tao and the others, "And now you are following me, adding to my woes!

古文：遂遁还乡里。
现代文：于是，他便悄悄逃回故乡。
English: They fled back to the countryside.

古文：初，诏书下举钩党，郡国所奏相连及者，多至百数，唯平原相史弼独无所上。
现代文：最初，下诏搜捕党人，各郡、各封国奏报检举，牵连所及，多的以百计数，只有平原国宰相史弼，一个党人也没有奏报。
English: At the beginning, party members were searched and arrested, and each county and province reported the case to the police. Of the hundreds of people implicated, only the prime minister of Plains State, Shi Yan, and no party member reported the case.

古文：诏书前后迫切州郡，髡笞掾史，从事坐传舍责曰： 诏书疾恶党人，旨意恳恻。
现代文：诏书前后多次下达，严厉催促州郡官府，限期奏报；掾史等属吏甚至受到刑和鞭刑。青州从事坐在平原国的传舍，质问史弼说： 诏书对党人痛恨入骨，皇帝的旨意如此诚恳痛切。
English: The edict was issued several times before and after, sternly urging the state and county government offices to submit the report within the time limit; officials such as Zou Shi were even punished and whipped. Qingzhou engaged in missionary work in the plain country, and questioned Shi Yu said: The edict hates the party members to the bone, and the emperor's will is so sincere and poignant.

古文：青州六郡，其五有党，平原何治而得独无？ 
现代文：青州共有六个郡国，其中五个郡国都有党人，平原国何治理得独无党人？ 
English: Qingzhou has a total of six counties, of which five counties have party members. How many plains countries have been governed solely by non-party members?

古文：弼曰： 先王疆理天下，画界分境，水土异齐，风俗不同。
现代文：史弼回答说： 先王治理天下，划分州郡国县境界，水土有不同，风俗有差异。
English: Shi Yan replied: The ancients ruled the world, divided the state, county, country and county boundaries, the soil and water are different, and the customs are different.

古文：它郡自有，平原自无，胡可相比！
现代文：其他郡国有的，平原国恰恰就没有，怎么能够相比。
English: Other counties and countries have them, but the plains countries do not have them. How can they be compared?

古文：若承望上司，诬陷良善，淫刑滥罚，以逞非理，则平原之人，户可为党。
现代文：如果仰望上司长官的旨意，诬陷善良无辜的人，甚至依靠严刑酷罚，使非理的举动得逞，则平原国的人民，家家户户都是党人。
English: If you look up to the will of your superiors, frame good and innocent people, and even rely on harsh punishments to make unreasonable actions succeed, then the people of Plains Country, every family is a party member.

古文：相有死而已，所不能也！ 
现代文：我这个封国宰相，只有一死而已，坚决不能做出这种事情。 
English: I, the prime minister of a vassal state, have only one life to live, and I absolutely cannot do such a thing.

古文：从事大怒，即收郡僚职送狱，遂举奏弼。
现代文：从事勃然大怒，立即逮捕史弼的所有属吏，送往监狱囚禁，然后弹劾史弼。
English: He flew into a rage, immediately arrested all of Shi Yan's subordinates, sent them to prison, and then impeached Shi Yan.

古文：会党禁中解，弼以俸赎罪。所脱者甚众。
现代文：正好遇着桓帝下令解除党禁，史弼用薪俸赎罪，所救脱的人很多。
English: Just when Emperor Huan ordered the party ban to be lifted, Shi Yan used his salary to atone, and many people were saved.

古文：窦武所荐：硃寓，沛人；苑康，勃海人；杨乔，会稽人；边韶，陈留人。
现代文：窦武所推荐的人有：朱，沛国人；苑康，勃海郡人；杨乔，会稽郡人；边韶，陈留郡人。
English: The people recommended by Dou Wu include: Zhu, a resident of Pei Guo; Yuan Kang, a resident of Bohai County; Yang Qiao, a resident of Caijing County; and Bentham, a resident of Chenliu County.

古文：乔容仪伟丽，数上言政事，帝爱其才貌，欲妻以公主，乔固辞，不听，遂闭口不食，七日而死。
现代文：杨乔容貌和仪表壮美，多次上书奏陈朝廷政事，桓帝喜爱他的才华和美貌，打算把公主嫁给他为妻，杨乔坚决推辞。桓帝不许，杨乔闭口崐绝食，七日而死。
English: Yang Qiao's looks and appearance are magnificent, and he has repeatedly written letters to play the political affairs of the Chen Dynasty. Emperor Huan loved his talent and beauty, and planned to marry the princess to him as his wife. Yang Qiao resolutely refused. Emperor Huan did not allow it. Yang Qiao kept his mouth shut and went on a hunger strike, and died seven days later.

古文：秋，八月，巴部言黄龙见。
现代文：秋季，八月，巴郡上报说，发现黄龙。
English: In the autumn, in August, Ba County reported that a yellow dragon had been found.

古文：初，郡人欲就池浴，见池水浊，因戏相恐， 此中有黄龙， 语遂行民间，太守欲以为美。故上之。
现代文：最初，一群人想去池塘洗澡，看到池塘的水浑浊，因此大家互相开玩笑地恐吓说： 里面有一条黄龙！ 于是这句开玩笑的话在民间传播开来，郡太守认为这是美事，所以将它上报朝廷。
English: At first, a group of people wanted to take a bath in the pond, but when they saw that the water was muddy, they jokingly threatened each other, saying, "There's a yellow dragon in there!" The joke spread among the people, and the county governor thought it was a beautiful thing, so he reported it to the imperial court.

古文：郡吏傅坚谏曰： 此走卒戏语耳。 
现代文：郡府属吏傅坚劝阻说： 这只是差役的一句戏言，怎能当真？ 
English: Fu Jian, an official of the county government, dissuaded him, saying, "This is just a play on words by a police officer. How can it be taken seriously?

古文：太守不听。
现代文：郡太守不听规劝。
English: The governor did not listen to him.

古文：六月大水，勃海海溢。
现代文：六月，发生大水灾，勃海海水倒灌泛滥。
English: In June, a major flood occurred, with the Bohai Sea flooding the area.

古文：冬，十月，先零羌寇三辅，张奂遣司马尹端、董卓拒击，大破之，斩其酋豪，首虏万馀人，三州清定。
现代文：冬季，十月，先零部羌民攻打三辅地区，张奂派遣司马尹端、董卓率军阻击，大败羌民，斩杀酋长、豪帅等，加上俘虏，共一万余人。
English: In the winter, in October, the first detachment of soldiers attacked the Sanfu area. Zhang Ye sent Sima Yin Duan, Dong Zhuo and the army to block the attack. They defeated the soldiers, killed the chiefs, great generals, and prisoners, a total of more than 10,000 people.

古文：奂论功当封，以不事宦官故不果封，唯赐钱二十万，除家一人为郎。
现代文：幽州、并州、凉州等三州动乱全部平定。张奂按照功劳应该晋封侯爵，但他不肯奉承宦官，结果没能晋封侯爵，只赏赐钱二十万，任命他家中一人为郎。
English: The Yuzhou, Bianzhou, Liangzhou and other three-state turmoil were all quelled. Zhang Ye should have been promoted to marquis according to his merits, but he refused to flatter the eunuch. As a result, he was not promoted to marquis. He was only awarded 200,000 yuan and appointed one member of his family as his vassal.

古文：奂辞不受，请徙属弘农。
现代文：张奂推辞不肯接受，只请求朝廷准许将他家的户籍迁移到弘农郡著籍。
English: Zhang Ye refused to accept the refusal and only asked the imperial court for permission to transfer his family's household registration to Hongnong County.

古文：旧制，边人不得内徙，诏以奂有功，特许之。
现代文：按照过去的法令规定，边郡人士不准迁居内地。桓帝下诏，因张奂有功，特别给予批准。
English: According to the provisions of past laws and regulations, people from the border counties were not allowed to move to the mainland. Emperor Huan issued an edict, giving special approval because of Zhang Ye's achievements.

古文：拜董卓为郎中。
现代文：任命董卓为郎中。
English: He appointed Dong Zhuo as his disciple.

古文：卓，陇西人，性粗猛有谋，羌胡畏之。
现代文：董卓是陇西郡人，性情粗暴勇猛而有智谋，羌人、胡人都畏惧他。
English: Dong Zhuo is a native of Shaanxi County. His temperament is rough, brave and resourceful. He is feared by both the Xiong people and Hu people.

古文：十二月，壬申，复瘿陶王悝为勃海王。
现代文：十二月壬申，重新改封瘿陶王刘悝为勃海王。
English: In December of Jinshin, he was re-christened Baotou King Liu Ye as Bo Hai King.

古文：丁丑，帝崩于德阳前殿。
现代文：丁丑，桓帝在德阳前殿驾崩。
English: Ding Chuxi, Emperor Kuan died in the front hall of Deyang.

古文：戊寅，尊皇后曰皇太后。
现代文：戊寅，尊皇后窦妙为皇太后。
English: In Wu Yin, the revered Empress Dou Miao is the empress dowager.

古文：太后临朝。
现代文：窦太后临朝主持朝政。
English: The Empress Dowager is in charge of state affairs.

古文：初，窦后既立，御见甚稀，唯采女田圣等有宠。
现代文：起初，窦妙被立为太后，但很少能见到桓帝，只有采女田圣等人受到桓帝的宠爱。
English: At first, Dou Myo was made the empress dowager, but she was rarely able to meet Emperor Huan. Only Tameya Tian Sheng and others were favored by Emperor Huan.

古文：后素忌忍，帝梓宫尚在前殿，遂杀田圣。
现代文：窦后忌妒而又残忍，当桓帝的棺材还停在德阳前殿时，她就下令处死田圣。
English: Dou Hou was jealous and cruel. When Emperor Huan's coffin was still parked in Deyang Front Hall, she ordered the execution of Tian Sheng.

古文：城门校尉窦武议立嗣，召侍御史河间刘鯈，问以国中宗室之贤者，鯈称解渎亭侯宏。
现代文：城门校尉窦武为了商议确定新皇帝人选，征召侍御史河间国人刘，向他询问刘姓皇族中的贤才，刘推荐解渎亭侯刘宏。
English: In order to discuss and determine the new emperor's candidate, the castle gate captain Dou Wu conscripted Liu, a citizen of the country between the rivers, to ask him about the sages in the imperial family with the surname of Liu, and Liu recommended Liu Hong.

古文：宏者，河间孝王之曾孙也，祖淑，父苌，世封解渎亭侯。
现代文：刘闳是河间王刘开的曾孙，祖父刘淑，父亲刘苌，两世都封为解渎亭侯。
English: Liu Wei is the great-grandson of Liu Kai, the king of Kawama. His grandfather, Liu Shu, and father, Liu Wei, were both given the title of Jiefu Pavilion.

古文：武乃入白太后，定策禁中，以鯈守光禄大夫，与中常侍曹节并持节将中黄门、虎贲、羽林千人，奉迎宏，时年十二。
现代文：于是窦武入宫秉报窦太后，在宫禁中决策。任命刘为守光禄大夫，和中常侍曹节共同持节，率领中黄门、虎贲武士、羽林军等一千人，前往迎接刘宏。当时，刘宏年仅十二岁。
English: As a result, Dou Wu entered the palace, reported to Empress Dowager Dou, and made a decision during the palace ban. Liu Hong was appointed as the doctor of Shuguanglu, and jointly held the festival with the attendants of Zhongchang, and led a thousand people, including the Yellow Gate, the Tiger Warriors, and the Ulin Army, to meet Liu Hong. At that time, Liu Hong was only twelve years old.

古文：孝桓皇帝下建宁元年
现代文：汉灵帝建宁元年
English: Emperor Hanling in the first year of Jianning

古文：春，正月，壬午，以城门校尉窦武为大将军。
现代文：春季，正月壬午，升城门校尉窦武为大将军。
English: In the spring, on the morning of the first day of the month, the captain of the castle gate, Dou Wu, became the general.

古文：前太尉陈蕃为太傅，与武及司徒胡广参录尚书事。
现代文：任命前太尉陈蕃为太傅，和窦武以及司徒胡广统领尚书台事宜。
English: The appointment of the former First Lieutenant Chen Hao as Taifu, and Dou Wu and the scholar Hu Guang in charge of Shang Shudai.

古文：时新遭大丧，国嗣未立，诸尚书畏惧，多托病不朝。
现代文：这时，正逢桓帝死亡的大丧，继位皇帝还没有即位，尚书们都内心畏惧，很多人假装生病不敢入朝理事。
English: At this time, it was the time of the great mourning of Emperor Huan's death, the successor emperor had not yet ascended to the throne, the scholars were afraid in their hearts, and many people pretended to be ill and did not dare to enter the imperial director.

古文：陈蕃移书责之曰： 古人立节，事亡如存。
现代文：陈蕃写信责备他们说： 古人树立名节，君王虽然死亡，我们事奉他，犹如他仍生存。
English: Chen Yao wrote a letter of reproach to them: The ancients set up a festival, and although the king died, we served him as if he were still alive.

古文：今帝祚未立，政事日蹙，诸君奈何委荼蓼之苦，息偃在床，于义安乎！ 
现代文：而今新皇帝尚未即位，政事更加紧迫，各位怎么可以在这样艰苦的处境中，推卸自己应尽的职责，而躺在床上休息？这在大义上又怎么能够安心？ 
English: But now that the new emperor has not yet ascended to the throne, and political affairs are more pressing, how can you shirk your due duties in such a difficult situation and lie in bed to rest? How can this be reassuring in terms of justice?

古文：诸尚书惶怖，皆起视事。
现代文：尚书们惶惧恐怖，都纷纷入朝治理政事。
English: With trepidation and fear, all of you went to work at the Imperial Court.

古文：己亥，解渎亭侯至夏门亭，使窦武持节，以王青盖车迎入殿中；庚子，即皇帝位，改元。
现代文：已亥，解渎亭侯刘宏抵达夏门亭。窦太后命窦武持节，用皇子封王时专用的青盖车，将刘宏迎接入宫。庚子，刘宏即皇帝位，为汉灵帝，改年号。
English: At the end of the year, Liu Hong, the prince of the Zhaozhong Pavilion, arrived at the Summer Gate Pavilion. On the Dou Wu Jie Festival, Liu Hong was welcomed into the palace by the empress dowager, who used the blue-covered car that was used when the prince was crowned king. Geng Zi, Liu Hong, that is, the emperor, was Han Ling Di, and the year was changed.

古文：二月，辛酉，葬孝桓皇帝于宣陵，庙曰威宗。
现代文：二月辛酉，将桓帝安葬在宣陵，庙号为威宗。
English: At the end of February, Emperor Kansu was buried in the Xuanling Mausoleum, and the temple's name was changed to Weizong.

古文：辛未，赦天下。
现代文：辛未，大赦天下。
English: Sin Wei, amnesty to the world.

古文：初，护羌校尉段颎既定西羌，而东羌先零等种犹未服，度辽将军皇甫规、中郎将张奂招之连年，既降又叛。
现代文：起初，护羌校尉段既已平定西羌，然而，东羌先零等部尚未归服。度辽将军皇甫规、中郎将张奂，连年不断地进行招抚，羌人不断归降，又不断起兵进行反叛。
English: At the beginning, the garrison had already subdued the Western Wei, but the Eastern Wei had not yet been subdued. Du Liao's general, Wang Fuxi, and his second-in-command, Zhang Qian, had been constantly courting them for years, and the Qian people were constantly surrendering, and constantly raising troops to rebel.

古文：桓帝诏问颎曰： 先零东羌造恶反逆，而皇甫规、张奂各拥强众，不时辑定，欲令颎移兵东讨，未识其宜，可参思术略。 
现代文：桓帝下诏询问段说： 东羌先零等部羌民作恶反叛，然而皇甫规、张奂各拥有强兵，不能及时平定，我想命令你率军到东方讨伐，不知道是否恰当，请认真考虑一下战略。 
English: The interrogation paragraph of Emperor Kuan's edict said: "The people of the Eastern Han, including the First and Second Divisions, rebelled viciously. However, Emperor Fuxi and Zhang Ye each had strong armies and could not be subdued in time. I would like to order you to lead an army to the East for a crusade. I don't know if it is appropriate, please seriously consider the strategy."

古文：颎上言曰： 臣伏见先零东羌虽数叛逆，而降于皇甫规者，已二万许落；善恶既分，馀寇无几。
现代文：段上书说： 我认为先零以及东羌诸部，虽然数度反叛，但向皇甫规投降的，已有二万余大小帐落，善恶已经分明，残余的叛羌所剩无几。
English: The above paragraph said: I think that the first zero and the Eastern Wei provinces, although they rebelled several times, but surrendered to the emperor, have more than twenty thousand large and small accounts, good and evil have been clearly defined, and there are few remaining traitors.

古文：今张奂踌躇久不进者，当虑外离内合，兵往必惊。
现代文：而今张奂所以徘徊踌躇，久不进兵，只因为顾虑已归服朝廷的羌人，仍跟叛羌相通，大军一动，他们必然惊慌。
English: Now Zhang Ye is hesitant to advance, probably because he is afraid that the enemy will attack from the outside and retreat from the inside. If he sends troops, those who surrender will be terrified.

古文：且自冬践春，屯结不散，人畜疲羸，有自亡之势，欲更招降，坐制强敌耳。
现代文：并且，从冬天开始，直到现在，已是春季，叛羌屯聚集结不散，战士和马匹都十分疲惫，有自行灭亡的趋势，想再一次招降他们，坐着不动便可制服强敌。
English: Moreover, since the beginning of winter, until now, it is spring, the rebels have gathered and gathered, the soldiers and horses are very tired, have a tendency to self-destruct, want to once again invite them to surrender, sitting still can subdue a strong enemy.

古文：臣以为狼子野心，难以恩纳，势穷虽服，兵去复动；唯当长矛挟胁，白刃加颈耳！
现代文：我认为，叛羌是狼子野心，很难用恩德感化。当他们势穷力屈时，虽然可以归服，一旦朝廷军队撤退，又重新起兵反叛。
English: In my opinion, rebellion is the ambition of a wolf, and it is difficult to use grace to influence it. When they are forced to give in, although they can submit, once the imperial army withdraws, they will rebel again.

古文：计东种所馀三万馀落，近居塞内，路无险所，非有燕、齐、秦、赵从横之势，而久乱并、凉，累侵三辅，西河、上郡，已各内徙，安定、北地，复至单危。
现代文：唯一的办法，只有用长矛直指他们的前胸，用大刀直加他们的颈项。共计东羌诸部只剩下三万余个帐落，全部定居在边塞之内，道路没有险阻，并不具备战国时代燕、齐、秦、赵等国纵横交错的形势。可是，他们却长久地扰乱并、凉二州，不断侵犯三辅地区，迫使西河郡和上郡的太守府都已迁徙到内地，安定郡、北地郡又陷于孤单危急。
English: The only way is to stab them in the chest with a spear and stab them in the neck with a big knife. In total, there are only more than 30,000 tents left in various parts of Eastern Yunnan, all settled within the border fortress. The roads are not dangerous, and do not have the situation of Yan, Qi, Qin, Zhao and other countries crisscrossing each other in the Warring States period. However, they have long disturbed and divided the two states, Liangshan and Liangshan, and constantly encroached on the Sanfu area. They have forced the Tai Shoufu of Saihe County and Shang County to move to the mainland, and have left Anding County and

古文：自云中、五原，西至汉阳二千馀里，匈奴、诸羌，并擅其地，是为痈疽伏疾，留滞胁下，如不加诛，转就滋大。
现代文：自云中郡、五原郡、西到汉阳郡，二千余里，土地全被匈奴人、羌人据有。这就等于恶疮暗疾，停留在两胁之下，如果不把他们消灭，势力将迅速膨胀。
English: From Yunzhong County, Wuhuan County, west to Hanyang County, more than two thousand miles, the land is all owned by the Huns and the Jurchens. This is equivalent to a malignancy, staying under the two threats, if they are not eliminated, their power will rapidly expand.

古文：若以骑五千、步万人、车三千两，三冬二夏，足以破定，无虑用费为钱五十四亿，如此，则可令群羌破尽，匈奴长服，内徙郡县，得反本土。
现代文：倘若用骑兵五千人、步兵一万人、战车三千辆，用三个冬季和两个夏季的时间，足可以击破平定，约计用费为钱五十四亿。这样，就可以使东羌诸部尽破，匈奴永远归服，迁徙到内地的郡县官府，也可以迁回故地。
English: If five thousand cavalrymen, ten thousand infantrymen, and three thousand chariots were used, it would take three winters and two summers to defeat and pacify the foot, with an estimated cost of 5.4 billion yuan. In this way, it would be possible to completely break the Eastern Wei, the Xiongnu would be forever subjugated, and they would migrate to the county and county government offices in the inland, and they could also move back to their hometowns.

古文：伏计永初中，诸羌反叛，十有四年，用二百四十亿；永和之末，复经七年，用八十馀亿。
现代文：据我计算，自安帝永初年代中期起，诸部羌人起兵反叛，历时十四年，用费二百四十亿。顺帝永和年代末期，羌人再度起兵反叛，又历时七年，用费八十余亿。
English: According to my calculation, since the early and mid-19th century of Emperor Anteyong, people from various provinces rebelled, which lasted for 14 years and cost 24 billion yuan. At the end of the Shunde Yonghe era, people from Anteyong rebelled again, which lasted for another seven years and cost more than 80 billion yuan.

古文：费耗若此，犹不诛尽，馀孽复起，于兹作害。
现代文：如此庞大的消耗，尚且不能把叛羌诛杀灭尽，以致残余羌众重新起兵反叛，遗害至今天。
English: Such a huge consumption, still can not kill all the traitors, so that the remnants of the crowd rebelled again, and the devastation continues to this day.

古文：今不暂疲民，则永宁无期。
现代文：而今如果不肯使人民忍受暂时劳累的痛苦，则永久的安宁便遥遥无期。
English: Now, however, if the people are not willing to endure the pain of temporary toil, permanent tranquility is out of the question.

古文：臣庶竭驽劣，伏待节度。 
现代文：我愿竭尽低劣的能力，等待陛下的节制调度。 
English: I am willing to do my best to wait for the schedule of the festival.

古文：帝许之，悉听如所上，颎于是将兵万馀人，赍十五日粮，从彭阳直指高平，与先零诸种战于逢义山。
现代文：桓帝批准，完全采纳段所提出的上述计划。于是，段率军一万余人，携带十五日粮食，从彭阳直接插到高平，在逢义山跟先零等部羌民决崐战。
English: Emperor Huan approved and fully adopted the above-mentioned plan proposed by Duan. Therefore, Duan led an army of more than ten thousand people, carrying fifteen days of grain, directly from Pengyang to Gaoping, and fought in Fengyi Mountain with the first zero and other people.

古文：虏兵盛，颎众皆恐。
现代文：羌军强大，段部众都很恐惧。
English: The Han army was strong, and everyone in the section was afraid.

古文：颎乃令军中长镞利刃，长矛三重，挟以强弩，列轻骑为左右翼，谓将士曰： 今去家数千里，进则事成，走必尽死，努力共功名！ 
现代文：段便下令军中，使用长箭头和锋利的大刀，前面排列三重举着长矛的步兵，挟持着强劲有力能够射远的弓弩，两边排列着轻装的骑兵，掩护着左右两翼。他激励将士说： 现在，我们远离家乡数千里，向前进则事情成功，逃走一定大家全死，共同努力争取功名！ 
English: Duan then ordered the troops to use long arrows and sharp swords, with three infantrymen holding spears lined up in front, holding strong and powerful long-range bows and arrows, and lightly armed cavalry lined up on both sides, covering the left and right wings. He inspired the soldiers to say: Now, we are thousands of miles away from home, things are successful when we move forward, we must all die when we escape, and we must work together to win fame!

古文：因大呼，众皆应声腾赴，驰骑于傍，突而击之，虏众大溃，斩首八千馀级。
现代文：就大声呐喊，全军跟随呐喊，步兵和骑兵同时发动攻击，先零羌军崩溃，段军队斩杀羌众八千余人。
English: He shouted loudly, the whole army followed the shout, the infantry and cavalry launched an attack at the same time, the first army collapsed, and the army killed more than eight thousand people.

古文：太后赐诏书褒美曰： 须东羌尽定，当并录功勤；今且赐颎钱二十万，以家一人为郎中。 
现代文：窦太后下诏褒奖说： 等到东羌全部平定，再合并论功行赏。现在，暂时赏赐段钱二十万，任命段家一人为郎中。 
English: Empress Dowager Dou issued an edict praising Duan, saying, "Wait until the whole of Donglu is pacified, and then discuss and reward the merits." Now, she has temporarily rewarded Duan with two hundred thousand dollars and appointed one member of the Duan family as a vassal.

古文：敕中藏府调金钱、彩物增助军费，拜颎破羌将军。
现代文：并且，命令中藏府调拨金钱等钱帛财物，帮助军费，擢升段为破羌将军。
English: Moreover, he ordered the Central Tibetan Administration to allocate money and other money and property to help with military expenses, and was promoted to the rank of general.

古文：闰月，甲午，追尊皇祖为孝元皇，夫人夏氏为孝元后，考为孝仁皇，尊帝母董氏为慎园贵人。
现代文：闰月甲午，追尊灵帝祖父刘淑为孝元皇，祖母夏氏为孝元后，父亲刘苌为孝仁皇，母亲董氏为慎园贵人。
English: At one o'clock in the afternoon of the leap month, Liu Shu, the grandfather of Emperor Reverend Sun, became Emperor Xia, his grandmother Xia became Empress Xia, his father Liu Wei became Emperor Xiaoren, and his mother Dong became Lady Shenyuan.

古文：夏，四月，戊辰，太尉周景薨，司空宣酆免；以长乐卫尉王畅为司空。
现代文：夏季，四月戊辰，太尉周景去世。司空宣酆被免官；擢升长乐卫尉王畅为司空。
English: In the summer, in April, the first lieutenant Zhou Jing died. The second lieutenant Xuanzang was dismissed; the second lieutenant Wang Chang was promoted to second lieutenant.

古文：五月，丁未朔，日有食之。
现代文：五月丁未朔，发生日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurs in early May.

古文：以太中大夫刘矩为太尉。
现代文：擢升太中大夫刘矩为太尉。
English: Dr. Liu Rui was promoted to the rank of lieutenant.

古文：六月，京师大水。
现代文：六月，京都洛阳发生大水灾。
English: In June, a major flood occurred in Kyoto's Luoyang district.

古文：癸巳，录定策功，封窦武为闻喜侯，武子机为渭阳侯，兄子绍为鄠侯，靖为西乡侯，中常侍曹节为长安乡侯，侯者凡十一人。
现代文：癸巳，论拥立皇帝的功劳，封窦武为闻喜侯，窦武的儿子窦机为渭阳侯，侄儿窦绍为侯，窦靖为西乡侯，中常侍曹节为长安乡侯，共封侯爵十一人。
English: As for the merits of supporting the emperor, Douwu was given the title of Wenshi marquis, Douwu's son Douji was given the title of Shenyang marquis, Douwu's nephew Doushao was given the title of Xixiang marquis, Doujing was given the title of Xixiang marquis, and Zhongzheng cadet Cao Jie was given the title of Chang'an marquis, making a total of eleven marquesses.

古文：涿郡卢植上书说武曰： 足下之于汉朝，犹旦、奭之在周室，建立圣主，四海有系，论者以为吾子之功，于斯为重。
现代文：郡人卢植上书劝说窦武说： 你现在在汉王朝中所处的地位，犹如姬旦、姬在周王朝所处的地位一样，拥戴圣明君主，关系到全国人民，谈论者认为你的功劳中，这是最为重大的了。
English: Lu Zhi, a resident of the county, wrote a letter to persuade Dou Wu, saying, "The position you now occupy in the Han Dynasty is the same as that occupied by Hetan and Hie in the Zhou Dynasty. You support the Holy Emperor and are related to the people of the whole country. Those who talk about you think that this is the most important of your achievements.

古文：今同宗相后，披图案牒，以次建之，何勋之有！
现代文：皇室的血统关系，本是一脉先后相传，你只不过按照图牒的次序，确立皇帝人选，这又有什么功勋？
English: The blood relationship of the imperial family is originally passed down one line after another. You just follow the order of the chart to establish the emperor's candidate. What is the merit of this?

古文：岂可横叨天功，以为己力乎！
现代文：岂可贪天之功，当作自己的力量。
English: Should one covet the merit of heaven and regard it as one's own strength?

古文：宜辞大赏，以全身名。 
现代文：我建议你，应该辞去朝廷给你的大赏，保全你的身分和名誉。 
English: He should give up the award and save his reputation.

古文：武不能用。
现代文：窦武不能采纳。
English: Dou Wu cannot be adopted.

古文：植身长八尺二寸，音声如钟，性刚毅，有大节。
现代文：卢植身长八尺二寸，说话的声音犹如洪钟一样响亮，性情刚正坚毅，有大节。
English: Lu Zhi is eight feet and two inches tall, his speaking voice is as loud as Hong Zhong, his temperament is upright and strong, and he has a large knuckle.

古文：少事马融，融性豪侈，多列女倡歌舞于前，植侍讲积年，未尝转眄，融以是敬之。
现代文：年少时跟随马融学习儒家经书，马融性格豪放不羁，常让女伎在面前载歌载舞。卢植在座下听讲多年，从来没有斜视一眼，马融因此对他十分敬重。
English: When he was young, he studied Confucian scriptures with Ma Rong. Ma Rong was a bold and uninhibited character, and often had his female acolytes sing and dance in front of him. Lu Zhe had been listening to lectures for many years and had never looked at him cross-eyed. Ma Rong therefore held him in high esteem.

古文：太后以陈蕃旧德，特封高阳乡侯。
现代文：窦太后为了感激陈蕃旧日对她的恩德，特封他为高阳乡侯。
English: In order to show her gratitude for Chen Yao's kindness to her in the past, Empress Dowager Dou specially appointed him as a Gaoyang villager.

古文：蕃上疏让曰： 臣闻割地之封，功德是为。
现代文：陈蕃上书辞让说： 我听说分割国家土地，作为封爵食邑，应该以功劳或恩德作为标准。
English: "I have heard that the division of state land, as a knighthood, should be based on merit or grace," Chen Yu said in his resignation letter.

古文：臣虽无素洁之行，窃慕君子 不以其道得之，不居也 。
现代文：我虽然没有清白廉洁的品行，但我羡慕正人君子 不是用正当的方法得到的东西，不能接受。 
English: Although I don't have a clean and upright character, I envy the upright gentleman. I can't accept something that I didn't get by legitimate means.

古文：若受爵不让，掩面就之，使皇天振怒，灾流下民，于臣之身，亦何所寄！ 
现代文：倘若我接受封爵而不辞让，捂住脸面坐上这个位置，将使皇天盛怒，降灾祸于百姓。这样，我渺小的身子，又向何处寄托！ 
English: If I were to accept a knighthood without making any concessions, if I were to hide my face and sit in this position, it would bring down the wrath of the emperor and bring disaster to the people. So, where should I put my small body?

古文：太后不许。
现代文：窦太后不准。
English: The Queen Mother wouldn't allow it.

古文：蕃固让，章前后十上，竟不受封。
现代文：陈蕃坚决辞让，奏章前后上呈有十次之多，终于不肯接受封爵。
English: Chen Yao resolutely refused to concede. He played ten times before and after, and finally refused to accept the knighthood.

古文：段颎将轻兵追羌，出桥门，晨夜兼行，与战于奢延泽、落川、令鲜水上，连破之；又战于灵武谷，羌遂大败。
现代文：破羌将军段，率领轻装部队穷追残余羌众，出桥门谷，日夜兼程，先后在奢延泽、落川、令鲜水等地接连发生战斗，取得一连串胜利。
English: After defeating the general section, he led the light-armed troops to pursue the remnants of the remnants of the people, out of the bridge gate valley, day and night, and successively fought in places such as Shuyanze, Ochuan, and Lingshui, and won a series of victories.

古文：秋，七月，颎至泾阳，馀寇四千落，悉散入汉阳山谷间。
现代文：尔后，又崐追到灵武谷，大败羌众。秋季，七月，段率军追击到泾阳，残余羌众只剩下四千余个帐落，全都逃散进入汉阳郡的各个山谷里。
English: Later, he chased them to Lingwu Valley and defeated them. In the autumn, in July, Duan led the army to chase them to Fenyang. There were only more than four thousand tents left, and they all fled into the valleys of Hanyang County.

古文：护匈奴中郎将张奂上言： 东羌虽破，馀种难尽，段颎性轻果，虑负败难常，宜且以恩降，可无后悔。 
现代文：护匈奴中郎将张奂向朝廷上书说： 东羌虽然被击破，但是残余羌民很难全部消灭，段性情轻率而果敢，应考虑到东羌诸部的失败，难以保持经常。最好是以恩德招降，就永远不会后悔。 
English: In a letter to the imperial court, the middle guard of the Xiongnu, Zhang Xuan, said: Although the Eastern Wei was defeated, it was difficult to completely eliminate the remnants of the Xiongnu. Duan's character was reckless and bold. Considering the failure of various departments of the Eastern Wei, it was difficult to maintain it. It is best to use grace to invite surrender, and you will never regret it.

古文：诏书下颎，颎复上言： 臣本知东羌虽众，而软弱易制，所以比陈愚虑，思为永宁之算，而中郎将张奂说虏强难破，宜用招降。
现代文：朝廷下诏，将张奂的建议转告段，段再次向朝廷上书说： 我原本知道东羌虽然人数众多，然而，他们的力量软弱，容易制服。所以，才不断向朝廷陈述我的愚见，想做永远安宁的打算。可是，中郎将张奂总是强调羌人力量强大，难以击破，应该采用招降的策略。
English: The imperial court issued an edict, relaying Zhang Ye's suggestion to Duan, and Duan wrote to the imperial court again, saying, "I originally knew that although Dong Ye had a large number of people, their strength was weak and easy to subdue. Therefore, I kept telling the imperial court about my stupidity and wanted to make a plan for eternal peace. However, Zhang Ye always emphasized that the Xiong people were powerful and difficult to defeat, and that a strategy of inviting surrender should be adopted.

古文：圣朝明监，信纳瞽言，故臣谋得行，奂计不用。
现代文：圣明朝廷明镜高悬，采纳我的犹如瞽者的妄说，所以，我的谋略才得以施行，而张奂的计划才被搁置不用。
English: The bright mirror of the Holy Ming Dynasty and the Imperial Court hung high, and they accepted my delusions as if I were a deaf-mute. Therefore, my strategy was able to be implemented, and Zhang Ye's plan was shelved.

古文：事势相反，遂怀猜恨，信叛羌之诉，饰润辞意，云臣兵 累见折衄，又言 羌一气所生，不可诛尽，山谷广大，不可空静，血流污野，伤和致灾。 
现代文：只因为事态的发展，跟张奂原来所预料的恰恰相反，张奂便心怀猜疑忌妒，听信叛羌的申诉，润饰言辞和文意，指责我的军队 不断受到挫折 ，又宣称： 羌人和汉人都是上天所生，不能诛杀灭尽，山谷广阔高大，不能空着无人居住。流血污染原野，有伤和气，招致天灾。 
English: It was only because of the development of the situation, which was exactly the opposite of what Zhang Ye had originally expected, that Zhang Ye became suspicious and envious, listened to the complaints of traitors, embellished his words and meaning, accused my army of being constantly frustrated, and declared: "Han people and Han people are all born of heaven, cannot be killed and exterminated, the valley is vast and high, cannot be empty and uninhabited. Bloodshed pollutes the wilderness, there is injury and spirit, and causes natural disasters.

古文：臣伏念周、秦之际，戎狄为害，中兴以来，羌寇最盛，诛之不尽，虽降复叛。
现代文：我低头思考，周王朝、秦王朝时代，西戎、北狄为害。汉王朝中兴以来，羌人的侵犯为害最大，杀也杀不完，虽然归降，不久又起兵反叛。
English: I bowed my head and thought, during the Zhou Dynasty and the Qin Dynasty, Xi Rong and Bei Di were the most harmful. Since the rise of the Han Dynasty, the aggression of the Xiong people has been the most harmful, and the killing has not ended. Although they surrendered, they soon rebelled.

古文：今先零杂种，累以反覆，攻没县邑，剽略人物，发冢露尸，祸及生死，上天震怒，假手行诛。
现代文：而今先零等诸部羌人，多次反复无常，攻陷县邑，抢夺人民财物，挖掘坟墓棺木，暴露死尸，使生人和死者都遭受灾祸。于是上天盛怒，才借我所统御的大军之手，对他们进行诛杀。
English: Now, first of all, the bastards, the capricious, the attacks on counties and towns, the looting of people, the digging of graves and the throwing of corpses, regardless of whether they are alive or dead, all suffer from their scourge, the wrath of God, lend me a hand to fight.

古文：昔邢为无道，卫国伐之，师兴而雨；臣动兵涉夏，连获甘澍，岁时丰稔，人无疵疫。
现代文：过去，春秋时代，邢国暴虐无道，卫国对它进行讨伐，大军出动之日，上天及时降雨。我率军征战，经过夏天，接连获降及时雨，庄稼丰收，人民也没有瘟疫疾病。
English: In the past, during the Spring and Autumn Periods, there was no way out of the tyranny of the Qing Dynasty, the defenders of the country carried out a crusade against it, and on the day of the dispatch of the great army, it rained in time. I led the army to fight, and after the summer, it rained in time, the crops were harvested, and the people did not have plague diseases.

古文：上占天心，不为灾伤；下察人事，众和师克。
现代文：上应天心，不降灾异伤害；下受人民拥戴，大众齐心，出师获胜。
English: Heaven's heart prevails above, no disaster or injury is reduced; people's hearts are very popular when they look down on others, so they are able to win the war.

古文：自桥门以西、落川以东，故宫县邑，更相通属，非为深险绝域之地，车骑安行，无应折衄。
现代文：从桥门以西，落川以东，旧有的宫殿和县城聚邑，互相连接，并不是穷山恶水的绝域地带，车辆马匹，都能安全行驶，不会遭到毁伤损坏。
English: From the west of Qiaomen to the east of Ochchuan, the old palaces and county towns are connected to each other. It is not a barren area. Vehicles and horses can travel safely and will not be damaged.

古文：案奂为汉吏，身当武职，驻军二年，不能平寇，虚欲修文戢戈，招降犷敌，诞辞空说，僭而无征。
现代文：张奂身为汉朝官吏，担任武职，到任二年，仍不能扫平贼寇，徒想兴修文教，止息干戈，招降八凶悍的敌人，这纯粹是虚诞无用之说，安全不能得到验证。
English: Zhang Xuan was an official of the Han Dynasty and held a military post. After two years in office, he still could not defeat the bandits. He wanted to promote literature and education, stop fighting, and recruit eight fierce enemies. This is purely a fictitious and useless saying, and the safety cannot be verified.

古文：何以言之？
现代文：为什么这么说呢？
English: Why do you say that?

古文：昔先零作寇，赵充国徙令居内，煎当乱边，马援迁之三辅，始服终叛，至今为鲠，故远识之士，以为深忧。
现代文：过去，先零羌众侵犯边塞，赵充国把他们迁居到边塞之内；煎当羌众扰乱边塞，马援把他们迁移到三辅地区。他们开始时全都降服，而后来终于起兵反叛，至今仍为祸害。所以，凡是有远见卓识的人士，都深感忧虑。
English: In the past, Zhao Chongguo resettled them within the border fortress after they invaded the border fortress; when Yan Yan disturbed the border fortress, Ma Yuan resettled them in the Sanfu area. They all surrendered at the beginning, but later they finally rebelled, and they are still a scourge. Therefore, anyone with foresight is deeply worried.

古文：今傍郡户口单少，数为羌所创毒，而欲令降徒与之杂居，是犹种枳棘于良田，养虺蛇于室内也。
现代文：而今沿边各郡，汉人户口稀少，常常遭受羌人的毒害。如果再把大批降羌内迁，让他们和汉人杂居在一起，这就犹如把荆棘种到良田，把毒蛇豢养在卧室一样。
English: At present, the number of hukou in Bian County is scarce. It has been repeatedly encroached upon by baboons. The invaders who want to surrender are mixed with civilians. It is just as dangerous as planting prickly birch and thorn tree in good fields and raising poisonous snakes indoors.

古文：故臣奉大汉之威，建长久之策，欲绝其本根，不使能殖。
现代文：所以，我依靠大汉朝廷的威名，建立长久安宁的计策，打算彻底地铲除病根，使它再不能发生。
English: Therefore, I rely on the prestige of the Han Dynasty, the strategy of establishing long-term peace, and intend to completely eradicate the root of the disease so that it can no longer occur.

古文：本规三岁之费，用五十四亿；今适期年，所耗未半，而馀寇残烬，将向殄灭。
现代文：本来规划三年的经费，支用五十四亿，迄今一载，消耗不到一半，然而，残余的叛羌，已象灰烬一样，濒临灭绝。
English: The originally planned three-year budget, with an expenditure of 5.4 billion, has so far been exhausted, consuming less than half. However, the remaining traitors, like ashes, are on the verge of extinction.

古文：臣每奉诏书，军不内御，愿卒斯言，一以任臣，临时量宜，不失权便。 
现代文：我每次拜读诏书，对军事行动朝廷绝不干预。但愿把这个精神贯彻到底，凡事都交由我全权处理，临事应变，不失军机。 
English: Every time I issue an edict, the army is outside, and cannot be commanded from within. I hope that it is completely as this sentence says, that I will be entrusted with special responsibilities, and that I will be able to adapt to the situation, without losing expediency.

古文：八月，司空王畅免，宗正刘宠为司空。
现代文：八月，司空王畅被免官，擢升宗正刘宠为司空。
English: In August, Sikyong Wang Chang was relieved of his duties, and Zongzheng Liu Jie was appointed as Sikyong.

古文：初，窦太后之立也，陈蕃有力焉。
现代文：起初，窦妙被册封为皇后，陈蕃曾经尽过力量。
English: At first, Dou Miao was canonized as the empress, Chen Xi had done her best.

古文：及临朝，政无大小，皆委于蕃。
现代文：等到窦妙当上太后，临朝主持朝政时，就把大小政事全部交付陈蕃。
English: When Dou Mya became empress dowager and Lin presided over the imperial court, she handed over all matters of state, large and small, to Chen Xi.

古文：蕃与窦武同心戮力，以奖王室，征天下名贤李膺、杜密、尹勋、刘瑜等，皆列于朝廷，与共参政事。
现代文：陈蕃和窦武同心合力，辅佐皇室，征召天下闻名的贤才李膺、杜密、尹勋、刘瑜等人，都进入朝廷，共同参与朝廷政事。
English: Chen Xuan and Dou Wu worked together to support the imperial family, and recruited world-famous talents such as Li Xuan, Du Mi, Yin Xun, and Liu Yu to enter the imperial court and jointly participate in the affairs of the imperial court.

古文：于是天下之士，莫不延颈想望太平。
现代文：于是，天下的士人，无不伸长脖子殷切盼望太平盛世的来临。
English: As a result, the world's scholars all craned their necks in eager anticipation of the coming of the age of peace and prosperity.

古文：而帝乳母赵娆及诸女尚书，旦夕在太后侧，中常侍曹节、王甫等共相朋结，谄事太后。
现代文：然而，灵帝的奶妈赵娆跟女尚书们，早晚都守候在窦太后身边，和中常侍曹节、王甫等人互相勾结，奉承窦太后。
English: However, Emperor Lingdi's wet nurse Zhao Yao and his female courtiers waited around Empress Dowager Dou in the morning and evening, and the middle-ranking attendants such as Cao Jie and Wang Fu colluded with each other to flatter Empress Dowager Dou.

古文：太后信之，数出诏命，有所封拜。
现代文：于是，得到窦太后的宠信，多次颁布诏书，封爵拜官。
English: As a result, he received the favor of Empress Dowager Dou, issued several imperial edicts, and was knighted.

古文：蕃、武疾之，尝共会朝堂，蕃私谓武曰： 曹节、王甫等，自先帝时操弄国权，浊乱海内，今不诛之，后必难图。 
现代文：陈蕃、窦武对此深为痛恨。有一次，在朝堂上共同商议朝廷政事，陈蕃私下对窦武说： 曹节、王甫等人，从先帝时起，就操纵国家大权，扰乱天下，今天如果不杀掉他们，将来更难下手。 
English: Chen Xi and Dou Wu deeply resented this. On one occasion, when they were discussing the political affairs of the imperial court together in the imperial hall, Chen Xi said to Dou Wu in private: Cao Si, Wang Fu and others have been manipulating the power of the state and disturbing the world since the time of the former emperor. If we do not kill them today, it will be more difficult to do so in the future.

古文：武深然之。
现代文：窦武也很同意陈蕃的意见。
English: Dou Wu also agrees with Chen Xi's opinion.

古文：蕃大喜，以手椎席而起。
现代文：陈蕃大为高兴，用手推席起身。
English: Chen Yao was very happy and pushed his chair up with his hand.

古文：武于是引同志尚书令尹勋等共定计策。
现代文：于是，窦武便和志同道合的尚书令尹勋等人，共同制定计策。
English: As a result, Dou Wu and the like-minded Shang Shuling, Yin Xun and others worked together to formulate a strategy.

古文：会有日食之变，蕃谓武曰： 昔萧望之困一石显，况今石显数十辈乎！
现代文：正好遇上发生日食的灾变，陈蕃对窦武说： 过去，萧望之困在一个石显手里，何况今天有数十个石显！
English: Just as the catastrophe of the solar eclipse occurred, Chen Zhen said to Dou Wu: In the past, depression was trapped in the hands of a stone, and today there are dozens of stone!

古文：蕃以八十之年，欲为将军除害，今可因日食斥罢宦官，以塞天变。 
现代文：我今年已八十岁，只想帮助将军铲除祸害。正可抓住发生日食这个机会，斥退废黜宦官，来消除天象变异。 
English: I am eighty years old this year, and I just want to help the general eradicate the scourge. I can seize the opportunity of a solar eclipse to expel the eunuchs and eliminate the celestial mutation.

古文：武乃白太后曰： 故事，黄门、常侍但当给事省内典门户，主近署财物耳；今乃使与政事，任重权，子弟布列，专为贪暴。
现代文：于是窦武禀告太后说： 按照旧日的典章制度，黄门、常侍只在宫内供职，负责管理门户，保管宫廷财物。而今却教他们参与朝廷政事，掌握重要权力，家人子弟，布满天下，专门贪赃暴虐。
English: So Dou Wuyi reported to the Empress Dowager: "According to the old ceremonial system, the Yellow Gate and the regular attendants only served in the palace, responsible for managing the portals and keeping the palace property. But now they are taught to participate in the affairs of the imperial court and hold important power, and the children of the family are spread all over the world, specializing in corruption and tyranny.

古文：天下匈匈，正以此故，宜悉诛废以清朝廷。 
现代文：天下舆论沸腾，正是为了这个缘故，应该将他们全部诛杀或废黜，以肃清朝廷。 
English: Public opinion was in full swing, and it was for this reason that they should all be killed or deposed in order to purge the imperial court.

古文：太后曰： 汉元以来故事，世有宦官，但当诛其有罪者，岂可尽废邪！ 
现代文：窦太后吃惊地说： 自从汉王朝建立以来，按照旧日的典章制度，世世代代都有宦官，只应当诛杀其中犯法有罪的，怎么能够将他们全都消灭？ 
English: Empress Dowager Dou said in surprise, "Since the establishment of the Han Dynasty, according to the old ceremonial system, there have been eunuchs for generations. Only those who are guilty of breaking the law should be killed. How can they all be eliminated?"

古文：时中常侍管霸，颇有才略，专制省内，武先白收霸及中常侍苏康等，皆坐死。
现代文：当时，中常侍管霸，很有才能和谋略，在禁宫独断专行。窦武请准窦太后，先行逮捕管霸，以及中常侍苏康等，都坐罪处死。
English: At that time, Vice-Regular Attendant Guanba, who was very talented and strategic, acted arbitrarily in the Forbidden City. Dou Wu asked Empress Dowager Dou to arrest Guanba first, and Vice-Regular Attendant Su Kang and others were all sentenced to death.

古文：武复数白诛曹节等，太后冘豫未忍，故事久不发。
现代文：窦武又多次向窦太后请求诛杀曹节等，窦太后犹豫不决，不忍批准，所以，便把事情拖延下去。
English: Dou Wu repeatedly asked the Dowager Dou to kill Cao Cao, but the Dowager Dou hesitated and could not bear to give her approval, so she delayed the matter.

古文：蕃上疏曰： 今京师嚣嚣，道路喧哗，言侯览、曹节、公乘昕、王甫、郑飒等，与赵夫人、诸尚书并乱天下，附从者升进，忤逆者中伤，一朝群臣如河中木耳，泛泛东西，耽禄畏害。
现代文：于是陈蕃又上书说： 而今京都洛阳人心不安，道路喧哗，传言侯览、曹节、公乘昕、王甫、郑疯等，和赵妖、尚书们共同扰乱天下。凡是依附和服从他们的升官进爵，违背和抗拒他们的中伤陷害。举朝的文武官员，好象河水中漂流的树木一样，一会漂到东，一会漂到西，只知道贪图俸禄，畏惧权势。
English: Therefore, Chen Yu also wrote: "Nowadays, the people of Kyoto and Luoyang are uneasy, the roads are noisy, and rumors of Hou Xiang, Cao Jie, Gong Rong, Wang Fu, Zheng Lun, and others, together with Zhao Ye and Shang Shu, are disrupting the world. Anyone who adheres to and obeys them will be promoted to the peerage, and anyone who disobeys and resists their slander will be framed. The cultural and military officials of the dynasty, like trees drifting in river water, will drift to the east and to the west. They only know how to covet money and fear power.

古文：陛下今不急诛此曹，必生变乱，倾危社稷，其祸难量。
现代文：陛下如果现在不迅速诛杀此辈，一定会发生变乱，危害国家，灾祸难以预计。
English: Your Majesty, if you do not quickly kill this generation now, there will certainly be turmoil, endangering the country, and the disaster is difficult to predict.

古文：愿出臣章宣示左右，并令天下诸奸知臣疾之。 
现代文：请求把这份奏章，宣示左右，并命天下的奸佞们都知道我对他们深恶痛绝。 
English: I'd like to show my record to all of you and let the bad guys out there know that I hate them.

古文：太后不纳。
现代文：窦太后不肯采纳。
English: Empress Dowager Dou refused to adopt it.

古文：是月，太白犯房之上将，入太微。
现代文：同月，金星侵犯房宿上将星，深入太微星座。
English: In the same month, Venus encroaches on the roosting general star, penetrating deep into the Taimu constellation.

古文：侍中刘瑜素善天官，恶之，上书皇太后曰： 案《占书》：宫门当闭，将相不利，奸人在主傍，愿急防之。 
现代文：侍中刘瑜一向精于天文，对上述天象感到厌恶，于是向窦太后上书说： 根据《占书》，天上有此星象崐，宫门应当关闭，将对将相不利，奸人近在咫尺，但愿紧急防备。 
English: Attendant Liu Yu, who had always been good at astronomy, was disgusted by the above-mentioned celestial body, so he wrote to Empress Dowager Dou: According to the "Book of Divination," there is this celestial body in the sky, the palace gate should be closed, it will be unfavorable to the general, and the traitor is close at hand, but I hope you can take emergency precautions.

古文：又与武、蕃书，以星辰错缪，不利大臣，宜速断大计。
现代文：同时，又写信警告窦武、陈蕃，指出星辰错乱，对大臣不利，应该迅速确定大计。
English: He also agreed with Dou Wu and Chen Yinshu that the stars were misaligned and the minister was unfavorable, and that the general plan should be decided quickly.

古文：于是武、蕃以硃寓为司隶校尉，刘祐为河南尹、虞祁为雒阳令。
现代文：于是窦武、陈蕃任命朱寓为司隶校尉，刘为河南尹，虞祁为洛阳县令。
English: As a result, Dou Wu and Chen Qi appointed Zhu Yue as Sili's lieutenant, Liu as Henan Yin, and Yu Qi as Luoyang County's magistrate.

古文：武奏免黄门令魏彪，以所亲小黄门山冰代之，使冰奏收长乐尚书郑飒，送北寺狱。
现代文：窦武奏准将黄门令魏彪免官，任命所亲信的小黄门山冰接替。然后由山冰出面，弹劾和逮捕长乐尚书郑飒，送往北寺监狱囚禁。
English: Dou Wuso Brigadier General Huang Men relieved Wei Biao of his post and appointed his close confidant Xiao Huang Men Shan Bing to succeed him. Then Shan Bing came forward to impeach and arrest Changle Shangshu Zheng Wei and sent him to Beidzi Prison.

古文：蕃谓武曰： 此曹子便当收杀，何复考为！ 
现代文：陈蕃对窦武说： 对于这批家伙，抓住便应当场诛杀，还用审问？ 
English: Chen Yao said to Dou Wu: These guys should be killed immediately, why do they need to be interrogated!

古文：武不从，令冰与尹勋、侍御史祝瑨杂考飒，辞连及曹节、王甫。
现代文：窦武没有听从，命山冰、尹勋、侍御史祝共同审问郑飒。郑飒在供辞中，牵连到曹节、王甫。
English: Dou Wu did not obey, and ordered Shan Bing, Yin Xun, and the chamberlain to jointly interrogate Zheng Qi. In his confession, Zheng Qi implicated Cao Jie and Wang Fu.

古文：勋、冰即奏收节等，使刘瑜内奏。
现代文：尹勋、山冰根据郑飒的口供，立即奏请窦太后准予逮捕曹节等人，奏章交由刘瑜呈递。
English: Yin Xun and Shan Bing requested that Cao Jie and others be arrested so that Liu Yu could report to the empress dowager.

古文：九月，辛亥，武出宿归府。
现代文：九月辛亥，窦武休假，出宫回家住宿。
English: In September Xinhai, Douwu leave, leave the palace to go home to stay.

古文：典中书者先以告长乐五官史硃瑀，瑀盗发武奏，骂曰： 中官放纵者，自可诛耳，我曹何罪，而当尽见族灭！ 
现代文：负责主管奏章的宦官得到消息，先行报告长乐五官史朱、朱秘密拆阅窦武的奏章，诟骂说： 宦官放任犯罪，自然可以诛杀，可是我们又有什么罪过，却应当全都遭到灭族？ 
English: The eunuch in charge of the music score received the news, and reported in advance that the five officials of Changle Music, Shi Zhu and Zhu secretly read Douwu's music score, and cursed and said: The eunuch allowed the crime to go unpunished, of course, he can kill, but what is our crime, but should we all be exterminated?

古文：因大呼曰： 陈蕃、窦武奏白太后废帝，为大逆！ 
现代文：因而大声呼喊说： 陈蕃、窦武奏请皇太后废黜皇帝，大逆不道！ 
English: Therefore, they shouted loudly: Chen Zhen, Dou Wusong, please ask the Empress Dowager to depose the emperor, this is an act of high treason!

古文：乃夜召素所亲壮健者长乐从官史共普、张亮等十七人，歃血共盟，谋诛武等。
现代文：便连夜召集一向亲近的健壮宦官、长乐从官史共普、张亮等十七人歃血共同盟誓，合谋诛杀窦武等人。
English: He then called together seventeen people, including the robust eunuchs who had always been close to him, Changle from the official histories, and Zhang Liang, to make a blood oath and conspire to kill Dou Wu and others.

古文：曹节白帝曰： 外间切切，请出御德阳前殿。 
现代文：曹节急忙向灵帝报告说： 外面情况紧急，请陛下赶快登上德阳前殿。 
English: Cao Zi hurriedly reported to Lingdi: The situation outside is urgent, please hurry to board the Deyang front hall.

古文：令帝拔剑踊跃，使乳母赵娆等拥卫左右，取棨信，闭诸禁门，召尚书官属，胁以白刃，使作诏板，拜王甫为黄门令，持节至北寺狱，收尹勋、山冰。
现代文：并且，教灵帝拔出佩剑，做出欢欣奋起的模样，派奶妈赵娆等在灵帝左右保护，收取符信，关闭宫门，召唤尚书台官属，用利刀威胁，命他们撰写诏书，任命王甫为黄门令，持节到北寺监狱，逮捕尹勋、山冰。
English: Moreover, Emperor Ling pulls out his sword, makes a joyful appearance, sends his wet nurse Zhao Zhen to protect him, receives letters, closes the palace gate, summons Shang Shudai's officials and subordinates, threatens them with a sharp sword, orders them to write an edict, appoints Wang Fu as the Yellow Gate, holds a festival at the North Temple Prison, and arrests Yin Xun and Shan Bing.

古文：冰疑，不受诏，甫格杀之，并杀勋；出郑飒，还兵劫太后，夺玺绶。
现代文：山冰怀疑诏书不是真的，拒不受诏，王甫格杀山冰，接着又杀死尹勋，将郑飒释放出狱。随后，王甫又率领卫士回宫，劫持窦太后，夺取皇帝的玺印。
English: Shan Bing suspected that the imperial edict was not true. Despite not accepting the imperial edict, Wang Fuge killed Shan Bing, then killed Yin Xun, and released Zheng He from prison. Subsequently, Wang Fu led the guards back to the palace, kidnapped the Dowager Dou, and seized the emperor's imperial seal.

古文：令中谒者守南宫，闭门绝复道。
现代文：命中谒者守卫南宫，紧闭宫门，切断通往北宫的复道。
English: The person who hit the dragon will guard the South Palace, close the palace gate, and cut off the road leading to the North Palace.

古文：使郑飒等持节及侍御史谒者捕收武等。
现代文：派郑飒等持节，率领侍御史、谒者，逮捕窦武等人。
English: He sent Zheng Xuan and others to hold the festival, led the attendants, and arrested Dou Wu and others.

古文：武不受诏，驰入步兵营，与其兄子步兵校尉绍共射杀使者。
现代文：窦武拒不受诏，投奔步兵校尉军营，跟他的侄儿、步兵校尉窦绍，共同射杀使者。
English: Dou Wu refused to accept the edict and rushed to the infantry captain's camp, where he and his nephew, infantry captain Dou Shao, shot the messenger together.

古文：召会北军五校士数千人屯都亭，下令军士曰： 黄门、常侍反，尽力者封侯重赏。 
现代文：召集会合北军五校尉营将士数千人，进屯都亭，对军士下令说： 黄门、中常侍谋反，努力作战的，封侯、重赏。 
English: He summoned a meeting of several thousand soldiers from the 5th Lieutenant Battalion of the North Korean Army, marched into the Dongdu Pavilion, and ordered the sergeants to say: Huangmen, middle-ranking officers who conspire to rebel and fight hard should be knighted and rewarded.

古文：王甫时出与蕃相遇，适闻其言，而让蕃曰： 先帝新弃天下，山陵未成，武有何功，兄弟父子并封三侯！
现代文：陈蕃听到事变，率领他的部属官员，和学生门徒八十余人，各人拔出刀剑，闯入承明门，一直走到尚书台门前，振臂大声呼喊说： 大将军忠心卫国，黄门反叛，为何反说窦武大逆不道？ 
English: Upon hearing of the incident, Chen Zhe led his subordinate officials and more than eighty student disciples, each of whom drew a sword, broke into the Chengming Gate and walked all the way to the door of Shang Shudai, waving his arms and shouting loudly, "The great general is loyal to the defense of the country, and the Yellow Gate is rebellious. Why do you say that Dou Wu's rebellion is wrong?

古文：又设乐饮宴，多取掖廷宫人，旬日之间，赀财巨万，大臣若此，为是道邪！
现代文：当时，王甫出来，正好和陈蕃相遇，听见他的呼喊、斥责陈蕃说： 先帝刚刚去世，修筑坟墓尚未竣工，窦武有什么功劳，兄弟父子三人同时赀财产累积上万，朝廷大臣这种行为，不是无道，又是什么？
English: At that time, Wang Fu came out and just happened to meet Chen Yao. He heard his shouts and scolded Chen Yao, saying: The former emperor has just passed away, the construction of the tomb has not yet been completed, what is Dou Wu's merit, the three brothers and father and son have accumulated tens of thousands of yuan in property at the same time, and this kind of behavior of the imperial court minister is not senseless, but what is it?

古文：公为宰辅，苟相阿党，复何求贼！ 
现代文：你是宰辅大臣，苟且互相结党，还去什么地方捉拿奸贼？ 
English: You are the Vice-Minister of Foreign Affairs, and you keep forming parties with each other. Where else would you go to catch traitors?

古文：使剑士收蕃，蕃拔剑叱甫，辞色逾厉。
现代文：命令武士逮捕陈蕃，陈蕃拔剑斥责王甫，言辞和脸色都更加严厉。
English: He ordered the samurai to arrest Chen Yao, Chen Yao drew his sword and rebuked Wang Fu, his words and countenance became harsher.

古文：遂执蕃，送北寺狱。
现代文：可是，武士终于把陈蕃拘捕，送到北寺监狱囚禁。
English: However, the samurai finally arrested Chen Yao and sent him to Beitera Prison.

古文：黄门从官驺蹋踧蕃曰： 死老魅！复能损我曹员数、夺我曹禀假不！ 
现代文：黄门从官骑士用脚踢着陈蕃得意洋洋地说： 死老精怪，还能不能裁减我们的人员数目，克扣我们的俸给和借贷？ 
English: Huangmen's servant knight kicked Chen Yao with his foot and said triumphantly: It's strange, can we still reduce the number of our personnel, reduce our salaries and loans?

古文：即日，杀之。
现代文：并于当天在狱中将陈蕃杀死。
English: On the same day, he killed Chen Xi in prison.

古文：时护匈奴中郎将张奂征还京师，曹节等以奂新至，不知本谋，矫制以少府周靖行车骑将军、加节，与奂率五营士讨武。
现代文：这时，护匈奴中郎将张奂正好被召回京都洛阳。
English: At this time, Zhang Xuan was called back to Kyoto Luoyang.

古文：夜漏尽，王甫将虎贲、羽林等合千馀人，出屯硃雀掖门，与奂等合，已而悉军阙下，与武对陈。
现代文：曹节等人因张奂新到，不了解政变的内幕。于是假传皇帝圣旨，擢升少府周靖为行车骑将军、加节，和张奂率领五校尉营留下的将士前往讨伐窦武。此时，天已微明，王甫率领虎贲武士、羽林军等共计一千余人，出朱雀掖门布防，跟张奂等会合。不久，全部抵达宫廷正门，和窦武对阵。
English: Cao Jie and others did not know the inside story of the coup because of Zhang Ye's new arrival. Therefore, they falsely preached the emperor's edict, promoted the young prefect Zhou Jing as the cavalry general, Ga Jie, and Zhang Ye led the five lieutenant battalions left behind to fight Dou Wu. At this time, the sky was already dim, Wang Fu led more than a thousand tigers, warriors, and Uhlin troops, and went out to defend the Suzaku Gate and meet with Zhang Ye and others. Soon, they all arrived at the main gate of the palace and confronted Dou Wu.

古文：甫兵渐盛，使其士大呼武军曰： 窦武反，汝皆禁兵，当宿卫宫省，何故随反者乎！
现代文：这样，王甫的兵力渐盛，他教士兵向窦武军队大声呼喊说： 窦武谋反，你们都是皇帝的警备部队，应当保卫皇宫，为什么追随谋反的人？
English: In this way, Wang Fu's military strength gradually increased, and he taught the soldiers to shout loudly to Dou Wu's army, saying: Dou Wu is plotting a rebellion, you are all the emperor's guard troops, you should defend the palace, why follow the rebel?

古文：先降有赏！ 
现代文：先投降的有赏！ 
English: There is a reward for surrendering first!

古文：营府兵素畏服中官，于是武军稍稍归甫，自旦至食时，兵降略尽。
现代文：北军五营校尉府的官兵，一向畏惧归服宦官，于是窦武的军队开始有人投奔王甫，从清晨到早饭时，几乎全部归降。
English: The officers and soldiers of the Northern Army's Fifth Battalion, the Captain's House, had always been afraid of surrendering to eunuchs, so Dou Wu's army began to rush to Wang Fu, and from early morning to breakfast, almost all of them surrendered.

古文：武、绍走，诸军追围之，皆自杀，枭首雒阳都亭；收捕宗亲宾客姻属，悉诛之，及侍中刘瑜、屯骑校尉冯述，皆夷其族。
现代文：窦武、窦绍被迫逃走，各路军队追捕包围，他们两人都自杀身亡，被砍下人头悬挂在洛阳都亭示众。紧接着，又大肆搜捕窦武的亲族、宾客、姻戚，全部加以诛杀。侍中刘瑜、屯骑校尉冯述，被屠灭全族。
English: Dou Wu and Dou Shao were forced to flee, pursued and encircled by troops from all directions. Both of them committed suicide and died, and their severed heads were hung in the Du Pavilion in Luoyang for the public to see. Immediately afterwards, Dou Wu's relatives, guests, and in-laws were searched for and killed. Liu Yu, a chambermaid, and Feng Shu, a cavalry captain, were slaughtered.

古文：宦官又谮虎贲中郎将河间刘淑、故尚书会稽魏朗，云与武等通谋，皆自杀。
现代文：宦官又诬陷虎贲中郎将河间国人刘淑，前尚书会稽郡人魏郎，说他俩和窦武等人通谋，他俩也都自杀。
English: The eunuch also slandered Liu Shu, a native of Kawama, and Wei Lang, a former county auditor of the Shangshu Association, saying that they both conspired with Dou Wu and others. Both of them also committed suicide.

古文：迁皇太后于南宫，徙武家属于日南；自公卿以下尝为蕃、武所举者及门生故吏，皆免官禁锢。
现代文：将窦太后迁到南宫，把窦武的家属放逐到日南郡。从三公、九卿以下，凡是陈蕃、窦武所推荐的官员，以及他们的学生门徒和过去的部属，全都免官，从此不许再出来作官。
English: He moved Empress Dowager Dou to the South Palace, and banished Dou Wu's family members to Nichinan County. From the Third Prince and the Ninth Lord on down, all officials recommended by Chen Xi and Dou Wu, as well as their students, disciples, and former subordinates, were removed from their posts, and were never allowed to work as officials again.

古文：议郎勃海巴肃，始与武等同谋，曹节等不知，但坐禁锢，后乃知而收之。
现代文：议郎、勃海郡人巴肃开始时参与窦武共同密谋，曹节等人不知道，只是坐罪禁锢不许再做官，后来才被发现，于是，下令逮捕巴肃。
English: Heirong and Baoxu, a resident of Bohai County, participated in Douwu's conspiracy at the beginning of the plot. Cao Jie and others did not know, but they were arrested and banned from working as officials. It was only discovered later, so Baoxu's arrest was ordered.

古文：肃自载诣县，县令见肃，入阁，解印绶，欲与俱去。
现代文：巴肃自己乘车来到县廷，县令见到巴肃以后，迎到后阁，解下县令印信，打算和巴肃一起逃走。
English: Basu himself came to the county court by car. After the county magistrate saw Basu, he welcomed him to the back pavilion, signed the county magistrate's seal letter, and planned to run away with Basu.

古文：肃曰： 为人臣者，有谋不敢隐，有罪不逃刑，既不隐其谋矣，又敢逃其刑乎！ 
现代文：巴肃说： 做臣下的，有谋略不敢隐藏，有罪过不敢逃避刑罚，既然没有隐藏谋略，又怎么敢逃避应得的刑罚？ 
English: Basu said, "As a subject, if you have a strategy, you dare not hide it. If you are guilty, you dare not escape punishment. Since you do not have a hidden strategy, how dare you escape the punishment you deserve?"

古文：遂被诛。
现代文：便被诛杀。
English: He was killed soon after.

古文：曹节迁长乐卫尉，封育阳侯。
现代文：曹节升任长乐卫尉，封为育阳侯。
English: Cao Jie was promoted to the rank of Changle Guards Lieutenant and given the title of Prince of Ikuyang.

古文：王甫迁中常侍，黄门令如故。
现代文：王甫升任中常侍，仍照旧兼任黄门令。
English: Wang Fu was promoted to the position of Middle Chamberlain, and still concurrently held the position of Yellow Door.

古文：硃瑀、共普、张亮等六人皆为列侯，十一人为关内侯。
现代文：朱、共普、张亮等六人，都封为列侯。另外，还有十一人封为关内侯。
English: Six people, including Zhu, Gongpu and Zhang Liang, were all made vassals. In addition, eleven people were made vassals of Guanai.

古文：于是群小得志，士大夫皆丧气。
现代文：于是，一群小人得志，士大夫们都垂头丧气。
English: As a result, a group of villains were inspired, and the magistrates were all crestfallen.

古文：蕃友人陈留硃震收葬蕃尸，匿其子逸，事觉，系狱，合门桎梏。
现代文：陈蕃的朋友、陈留郡人朱震，收殓埋葬陈蕃的尸体，把陈蕃的儿子陈逸秘密藏匿起来。
English: Chen Yao's friend Zhu Zhen, a resident of Chenlu County, collected and buried Chen Yao's body and secretly hid Chen Yao's son Chen Yi.

古文：震受考掠，誓死不言，逸由是得免。
现代文：事情被发觉以后，朱震全家被捕，男女老幼都被戴上刑具。朱震虽遭严刑拷打，誓死不肯吐露真情，陈逸因此得以逃命。
English: After the incident was discovered, Zhu Zhen's entire family was arrested, and the men, women, and children were all put on torture devices. Although Zhu Zhen was severely tortured, he refused to reveal the truth, so Chen Yi was able to escape.

古文：武府掾桂阳胡腾殡敛武尸，行丧，坐以禁锢。武孙辅，年二岁，腾诈以为己子，与令史南阳张敞共匿之于零陵界中，亦得免。
现代文：窦武大将军府的掾吏、桂阳郡人胡腾收殓殡葬窦武的尸体，为窦武吊丧，受到禁锢，不许做官的处分；窦武的孙子窦辅，年仅二岁，胡腾将他冒充是自己的儿子，跟大将军府令史、南阳郡人张敞把他藏到零陵郡境内，也得以逃命。
English: Douwu's grandson Dou Fu, only two years old, Hu Teng passed him off as his own son and hid him in the territory of Luling County with Douwu's grand marshal and Nanyang County resident Zhang Zhang. He also managed to escape with his life.

古文：张奂迁大司农，以功封侯。
现代文：张奂升任大司农，因功封侯。
English: Zhang Rong was promoted to the post of chief agronomist, and was given the title of marquis for his achievements.

古文：奂深病为曹节等所卖，固辞不受。
现代文：张奂懊悔中了曹节等人的奸计，坚决推辞，不肯接受封侯。
English: Zhang Xuan repented that he had been tricked by Cao Jie and others, and resolutely refused to accept the title of prince.

古文：以司徒胡广为太傅，录尚书事，司空刘宠为司徒，大鸿胪许栩为司空。
现代文：任命司徒胡广为太傅，主管尚书事务；司空刘宠为司徒；擢升大鸿胪许栩为司空。
English: Appointed the magistrate Hu Guang as Taifu, in charge of Shangshu affairs; appointed the magistrate Liu Zhao as the magistrate; promoted the magistrate Da Hong Xiu as the magistrate.

古文：冬，十月，甲辰晦，日有食之。
现代文：冬季，十月甲辰晦，发生日食。
English: In winter, at the stroke of midnight in October, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：十一月，太尉刘矩免，以太仆沛国闻人袭为太尉。
现代文：十一月，太尉刘矩被免官，升太仆、沛国人闻人袭为太尉。
English: In November, Second Lieutenant Liu Rong was relieved of his duties and promoted to Second Lieutenant.

古文：十二月，鲜卑及濊貊寇幽、并二州。
现代文：十二月，鲜卑和貊侵犯幽、并二州。
English: In December, the Xianbei and the Qianqiao invaded and annexed the two states.

古文：是岁，疏勒王季父和得杀其王自立。
现代文：同年，西域疏勒王国国王的叔父和得，杀掉国王，自立为王。
English: In the same year, the uncle of the king of the Kingdom of Sule in the Western Region, Hado, killed the king and became king himself.

古文：乌桓大人上谷难楼有众九千馀落，辽西丘力居有众五千馀落，自称王。辽东苏仆延有众千馀落，自称峭王。右北平乌延有众八百馀落，自称汗鲁王。
现代文：乌桓酋长上谷难楼拥有部众九千余个帐落；辽西郡的丘力居拥有部众五千余个帐落，自己称王；辽东郡的苏仆延拥有部众一千余人帐落，自称峭王；右北平郡的乌延拥有部众八百余个帐落，自称汗鲁王。
English: Wu Huan chieftain Shang Gu Nan Lou owns more than nine thousand households; Qiu Li Ju of Liaoxi County owns more than five thousand households and calls himself the king; Su Puyan of Liaodong County owns more than one thousand households and calls himself the king; Wu Yan of Right Beiping County owns more than eight hundred households and calls himself the king of Khanlu.

古文：孝桓皇帝下建宁二年
现代文：建宁二年
English: Jianning two years old

古文：春，正月，丁丑，赦天下。
现代文：春季，正月丁丑，大赦天下。
English: Spring, the first month of the year, Ding Chuxi, all is forgiven.

古文：帝迎董贵人于河间。
现代文：灵帝将母亲董贵人从河间国迎接到京都洛阳。
English: Ling Di welcomed his mother, Dong Guijin, from Kawama Province to Kyoto's Luoyang.

古文：三月，乙巳，尊为孝仁皇后，居永乐宫，拜其兄宠为执金吾，兄子重为五官中郎将。
现代文：三月乙巳，尊董贵人为孝仁皇后，住永乐宫。任命董贵人的哥哥董宠为执金吾，侄儿董重为五官中郎将。
English: In March of the same year, the Yongle Palace was built, and Dong Gui's elder brother, Dong Zha, was appointed as the regent, and his nephew, Dong Chong, as the vice-commander of the Five Departments.

古文：夏，四月，壬辰，有青蛇见于御坐上。
现代文：夏季，四月壬辰，金銮宝殿的皇帝御座上发现一条青蛇。
English: In the summer, in April, a blue snake was found on the emperor's throne in the Golden Pavilion.

古文：癸巳，大风，雨雹，霹雳，拔大木百馀。
现代文：癸巳，刮大风，降冰雹，雷霆霹雳，拔起大树一百余棵。
English: Suddenly, a strong wind blew, hail fell, thunder rumbled, and more than a hundred large trees were uprooted.

古文：诏公卿以下各上封事。
现代文：灵帝下诏，命三公、九卿以下官员，每人各呈密封奏章。
English: The Emperor ordered the court nobles and their subordinates to secretly submit criticisms and suggestions on state affairs, and to report and expose them.

古文：大司农张奂上疏曰： 昔周公葬不如礼，天乃动威。
现代文：大司农张奂上书说： 过去，周公姬旦埋葬时，因违背礼制，上天震怒。
English: In the letter, the director of the department of agriculture, Zhang Xuan, said: In the past, when Zhou Gong Hidan was buried, heaven was furious because of the violation of etiquette.

古文：今窦武、陈蕃忠贞，未被明宥，妖眚之来，皆为此也。
现代文：而今窦武、陈蕃对国家一片忠贞，还没有得到朝廷公开的宽恕，天降怪异反常的事物，都是为此而发。
English: But now Dou Wu and Chen Xi are loyal to the country, and have not yet been publicly pardoned by the imperial court. All the strange and abnormal things that have fallen from the sky are for this reason.

古文：宜急为改葬，徙还家属，其从坐禁锢，一切蠲除。
现代文：应该迅速地收敛安葬他们，召回他们被放逐边郡的家属，因跟从他们受连坐而遭到禁锢的，全部撤除。
English: They should be quickly rounded up and buried, their banished relatives in Bian County should be recalled, and those who were imprisoned for following them should all be removed.

古文：又，皇太后虽居南宫，而恩礼不接，朝臣莫言，远近失望。
现代文：还有，皇太后虽然居住南宫，可是恩遇礼敬都不及时周到，朝廷大臣无人敢说，远近的人都很失望。
English: Furthermore, although the Empress Dowager lives in the South Palace, the favors and courtesies are not timely and thoughtful. No one dares to tell the ministers of the Imperial Court, and people near and far are very disappointed.

古文：宜思大义顾复之报。 
现代文：应该思念大义，回报父母养育的亲恩。 
English: To think of the parents who gave birth to me and showered me with kindness is a great act of justice that should be rewarded.

古文：上深嘉奂言，以问诸常侍，左右皆恶之，帝不得自从。
现代文：灵帝深以为有理，询问中常侍们的意见，宦官们都大为反感，而灵帝又不能自作决定。
English: Ling Di thought it was reasonable, and asked the opinion of the middle-ranking attendants. The eunuchs were greatly disgusted, and Ling Di could not make his own decision.

古文：奂又与尚书刘猛等共荐王畅、李膺可参三公之选，曹节等弥疾其言，遂下诏切责之。
现代文：张奂又与尚书刘猛等联名推荐王畅、李膺是担任三公的合适人选，曹节等人更加痛恨张奂等人多嘴，便让灵帝下诏严厉责备。
English: Zhang Xuan and Shangshu Liu Meng also jointly recommended Wang Chang and Li Qian as suitable candidates to serve as the three princes. Cao Jie and others hated Zhang Xuan and others for talking too much, and let Ling Di issue a stern rebuke.

古文：奂等皆自囚廷尉，数日，乃得出，并以三月俸赎罪。
现代文：张奂等人自动投入廷尉狱，请求囚禁，数日之后，才被释放，但仍罚俸三月赎罪。
English: Zhang Jun and others were automatically put into the imperial lieutenant prison and asked to be imprisoned. A few days later, they were released, but they were still fined three months to atone for their sins.

古文：郎中东郡谢弼上封事曰： 臣闻 惟虺惟蛇，女子之祥 。
现代文：郎中东郡人谢弼上呈密封奏章说： 我曾经听说： 蟒蛇毒蛇，女子征兆 ，我认为，当初是皇太后在深宫之中决定迎立陛下的大计。
English: "I once heard: "Snake, viper, woman's omen," I think it was the empress dowager who, in the depths of the palace, decided to usher in His Majesty's grand plan.

古文：伏惟皇太后定策宫闼，援立圣明，《书》曰： 父子兄弟，罪不相及 ，窦氏之诛，岂宜咎延太后！
现代文：《尚书》说： 父子兄弟，罪行不相连及 ，窦姓家族的诛杀，岂能把罪过加到皇太后身上？如今被幽禁隔离在空宫之中，忧伤之情上感天心。
English: "Shangshu" said: Father and son brothers, the crimes are not connected, the Dou family fight and kill, can they add the guilt to the empress dowager? Now they are confined and isolated in the empty palace, and they are sad.

古文：幽隔空宫，愁感天心，如有雾露之疾，陛下当何面目以见天下！孝和皇帝不绝窦氏之恩，前世以为美谈。
现代文：万一发生措手不及的急病，陛下还有什么面目再见天下？和帝不断绝窦太后的养育之恩，前世传为美谈。
English: In the unlikely event of an unexpected sudden illness, what face will His Majesty have when he bids farewell to the world? Past lives are said to be full of beautiful stories about the nurturing grace of the empress dowager.

古文：礼， 为人后者为之子 ，今以桓帝为父，岂得不以太后为母哉！
现代文：《礼记》上说： 作为谁的后嗣，就是谁的儿子 而今陛下承认桓帝为父，岂能不承认皇太后为母？
English: "The Book of Rites" says: "As one's heir, one is one's son. And now that His Majesty acknowledges Emperor Huan as his father, can he not acknowledge Empress Dowager Wu as his mother?

古文：愿陛下仰慕有虞蒸蒸之化，俯思《凯风》慰母之念。
现代文：盼望陛下仰慕虞舜孝顺的教化，回想《凯风》歌颂思念母亲的恩情。
English: I would like to ask the emperor to admire Yu Xuan's enlightenment of ruling the world with filial piety, and to contemplate the consolation of the mother's heart in Kaifeng.

古文：臣又闻 开国承家，小人勿用 。
现代文：我又听说： 开国承家，不能任用小人。 
English: I've also heard that you can't appoint a villain to succeed the founding of a country.

古文：今功臣久外，未蒙爵秩，阿母宠私，乃享大封，大风雨雹，亦由于兹。
现代文：应该将他的家属召回京都洛阳，解除禁令。尚书令和太尉、司徒、司空都是社稷大臣，国家命脉所在。
English: Now the meritorious person has been away for a long time and has not been promoted to a higher rank, but my mother, because she is my favorite, actually enjoys a higher rank. The high winds and hailstorms are also due to this.

古文：又，故太傅陈蕃，勤身王室，而见陷群邪，一旦诛灭，其为酷滥，骇动天下；而门生故吏，并离徙锢。
现代文：可是现在的四公，只有司空刘宠还能推行善政，其他三位都是无德食禄，招贼引寇之辈，必然发生鼎足折断，食物倾覆的凶事。
English: However, of the current four princes, only Liu Jie, the Secretary of the Air Force, can still carry out good governance, and the other three are worthless, inviting thieves and robbers, and inevitably breaking off the top and overturning the food.

古文：蕃身已往，人百何赎！
现代文：正好趁着天降灾异，把他们全部罢免。
English: Chen Yao is dead, there is no redemption for him!

古文：宜还其家属，解除禁网，夫台宰重器，国命所系，今之四公，唯司空刘宠断断守善，馀皆素餐致寇之人，必有折足覆餗之凶，可因灾异，并加罢黜，征故司空王畅、长乐少府李膺并居政事，庶灾变可消，国祚惟永。 
现代文：征召前司王畅、长乐少府李膺等参与政事。
English: Former Secretary Wang Chang and Changle Minor Prefect Li Xi were called up to participate in politics.

古文：左右恶其言，出为广陵府丞，去官，归家。
现代文：差不多能使灾变消除，国运永昌。 灵帝左右近侍，对谢弼的建议非常痛恨，于是贬他出任广陵郡太守府的府丞。谢弼自动辞职，回到家乡。
English: Emperor Lingdi's close attendants hated Xie Yao's suggestion, so he demoted him to the post of prefectural governor of Guangling County. Xie Yao voluntarily resigned and returned to his hometown.

古文：曹节从子绍为东郡太守，以它罪收弼，掠死于狱。
现代文：曹节的堂侄曹绍正担任东郡的郡太守，用其他的罪名逮捕谢弼，在监狱中把他严刑拷打而死。
English: Cao Jie's cousin Cao Shao, who was serving as the county magistrate of Dong County, arrested Xie Yao on other charges and tortured him to death in prison.

古文：帝以蛇妖问光禄勋杨赐，赐上封事曰： 夫善不妄来，灾不空发。
现代文：灵帝向光禄勋杨赐询问有关蛇妖的事，杨赐上呈密封奏章说： 祥瑞不会妄自降临，灾异也不会无故发生。
English: Ling Di asked Yang Zi, a member of the Guanglu Order, about the snake demon. Yang Zi presented a sealed musical score and said: Xiang Rui will not come from nowhere, and disasters will not happen for no reason.

古文：王者心有所想，虽未形颜色，而五星以之推移，阴阳为其变度。
现代文：君王心里有所思想，虽然没有形诸脸色，但金木水火土等五星已经为之推移，阴阳也都随之改变。
English: There is a thought in the king's heart, although it has not taken the form of a face, but the five stars such as gold, wood, water, fire and earth have changed, and the yin and yang have also changed accordingly.

古文：夫皇极不建，则有龙蛇之孽，《诗》云： 惟虺惟蛇，女子之祥。 
现代文：君王的权威不能建立，就会发生龙蛇一类灾孽。《诗经》上说： 蟒蛇毒蛇，女子征兆。 
English: If the authority of the king cannot be established, evils such as dragons and snakes will occur. "The Book of Songs" says: "The boa constrictor and the poisonous snake are the signs of a woman."

古文：惟陛下思乾刚之道，别内外之宜，抑皇甫之权，割艳妻之爱，则蛇变可消，祯祥立应。 
现代文：只有请陛下思虑阳刚的道理，应该有内外之别，抑制皇后家族的权力，割舍娇妻艳妾的宠爱，则蛇变可以消失，祥瑞立刻就会出现。 
English: Only if you ask your majesty to think about the principle of masculinity, there should be a distinction between inside and outside, suppress the power of the queen's family, and give up the favor of the concubine, then the snake can disappear, and Xiang Rui will immediately appear.

古文：赐，秉之子也。
现代文：杨赐是杨秉的儿子。
English: Yang Jie is the son of Yang Bing.

古文：五月，太尉闻人袭、司空许栩免；六月，以司徒刘宠为太尉，太常汝南许训为司徒，太仆长沙刘嚣为司空。
现代文：五月，太尉闻人袭、司空许栩都被免官。六月，任命司徒刘宠为太尉，擢升太常汝南人训为司徒，太仆长沙郡人刘嚣为司空。
English: In May, both Taifu Wen and Siku Xu were removed from their posts. In June, Liu Zhao, a scholar, was appointed as a taifu, Taizhong Runanrenxiu was promoted as a scholar, and Liu Han, a scholar from Changsha County, was appointed as a scholar.

古文：嚣素附诸常侍，故致位公辅。
现代文：刘嚣一向阿谀奉承中常侍，所以才得以擢升到三公高位。
English: Liu Han has always been a flatterer of the attendants, so he was able to be promoted to the highest rank of the three princes.

古文：诏遣谒者冯禅说降汉阳散羌。
现代文：灵帝下诏，派遣谒者冯禅前往汉阳郡，说服残余的羌众投降。
English: Ling Di issued an edict to send the eunuch Feng Zen to Hanyang County to persuade the remaining eunuchs to surrender.

古文：段颎以春农，百姓布野，羌虽暂降，而县官无廪，必当复为盗贼，不如乘虚放兵，势必殄灭。
现代文：破羌将军段认为，春天是农耕季节，农夫布满田野，羌众即使暂时投降，地方官府也无能力供给他们的粮食，最后一定再次起兵为盗贼，不如趁他们空虚的时候，纵兵出击，一定可以将他们杀绝。
English: General Duan believes that spring is the farming season, farmers are all over the fields, and even if the people surrender temporarily, the local government is unable to provide them with food. In the end, they will definitely rise up again as thieves. It is better to take advantage of them when they are empty and attack them. You can definitely kill them.

古文：颎于是自进营，去羌所屯凡亭山四五十里，遣骑司马田晏、假司马夏育将五千人先进，击破之。
现代文：于是段亲自率军出征，挺进到离羌众所驻守的凡亭山四五十里的地方，派遣骑司马田晏、假司马夏育率领五千人作先锋，击破羌众的大营。
English: Therefore, Duan personally led the army to go on a campaign and advanced to a place forty to fifty miles away from the Fan Ting Mountain where the Xiong people were stationed, and sent the horseman Ma Tianqi and the fake horseman Ma Xiayu to lead five thousand people as the vanguard to break the large camp of the Xiong people.

古文：羌众溃东奔，复聚射虎谷，分兵守谷上下门，颎规一举灭之，不欲复令散走。
现代文：羌众向东撤退，重新聚集在射虎谷，并且分兵把守射虎谷的上下门。段计划一举将他们全部歼灭，不许他们再溃散逃亡。
English: They retreated to the east and regrouped in Shaohu Valley, and a detachment of soldiers guarded the upper and lower gates of Shaohu Valley. Duan planned to annihilate them all in one fell swoop and not allow them to disperse and flee again.

古文：秋，七月，颎遣千人于西县结木为栅，广二十步，长四十里遮之。
现代文：秋季，七月，段派遣一千余人在西县用木柱结成栅栏，纵深二十步，长达四十里，进行遮挡。
English: In the autumn, in July, more than a thousand people were sent to Xixian County to form a fence with wooden posts, with a depth of twenty paces and a length of forty miles.

古文：分遣晏、育等将七千人衔枚夜上西山，结营穿堑，去虏一里许，又遣司马张恺等将三千人上东山，虏乃觉之。
现代文：然后，分别派遣田晏、夏育率领兵士七千人，口中衔枚不许言语，乘夜攀登上西山，安营扎寨，挖凿壕沟，进到距羌众屯聚一里许的地方。又派遣司马张恺等率领三千人攀登上东山。这时，被羌众发觉。
English: Then, he sent 7,000 soldiers led by Tian Qi and Xia Yu to climb the West Mountain at night, set up camp, dig a trench, and enter the place one mile away from the crowd. He also sent 3,000 soldiers led by Sima Zhang Qi and others to climb the East Mountain. At this time, he was discovered by the crowd.

古文：颎因与恺等夹东、西山，纵兵奋击，破之，追至谷上下门，穷山深谷之中，处处破之，斩其渠帅以下万九千级。
现代文：段因而和张恺分别由东山和西山纵兵夹击，大破羌众，追击到射虎谷的上下门和穷山深谷之中，势如破竹，斩杀叛羌酉长以下共一万九千余人。
English: As a result, he and Zhang Xuan clamped down from the East Mountain and West Mountain respectively, broke through the crowd, pursued to the upper and lower gates of the Tiger Valley and the deep valleys of the Poor Mountain, and killed a total of more than 19,000 people below the traitor Xuan Chang.

古文：冯禅等所招降四千人，分置安定、汉阳、陇西三郡。
现代文：冯禅等所招降的四千人，被分别安置在安定、汉阳、陇西等三郡。
English: The four thousand people recruited by Feng Zhen and others were resettled in three counties including Dandong, Hanyang and Shaanxi.

古文：于是东羌悉平。
现代文：于是，东羌诸部的叛乱全部被平定。
English: As a result, all the rebellions in various parts of Eastern Yunnan were put down.

古文：颎凡百八十战，斩三万八千馀级，获杂畜四十二万七千馀头，费用四十四亿，军士死者四百馀人；更封新丰县侯，邑万户。
现代文：段先后共经历一百八十次战役，斩杀三万八千余人，俘获各种家畜四十二万七千余头，用费四十四亿，军吏和士兵死亡四百余人。东汉朝廷改封段为新丰县侯，每年征收一万户人家的租税。
English: Duan successively experienced a total of 180 battles, killed more than 38,000 people, captured more than 427,000 heads of various livestock, spent 4.4 billion yuan, and killed more than 400 military officials and soldiers. The Eastern Han Dynasty court changed Duan to Xinfeng County, and collected 10,000 households' tax every year.

古文：臣光曰：书称： 天地，万物父母，惟人万物之灵。
现代文：臣司马光曰：《尚书》说： 天地是万物的父母。而人是万物的精灵。
English: Minister Sima Guang said: "The Shang Shu said: Heaven and earth are the parents of all things, and man is the spirit of all things.

古文：亶聪明，作元后，元后作民父母。 
现代文：其中特别聪明的人，作为天子。天子是人民的父母。 
English: Among them, a particularly clever person, as the Son of Heaven. The Son of Heaven is the people's parent.

古文：夫蛮夷戎狄，气类虽殊，其就利避害，乐生恶死，亦与人同耳。
现代文：蛮夷戎狄各族的气质虽然跟我们不一样，但趋利避害，乐生恶死，也跟我们是相同的。
English: Although the temperament of barbarians and barbarians is different from ours, the pursuit of profit and the avoidance of harm, the joy of life and the evil of death, are also the same as ours.

古文：御之得其道则附顺服从，失其道则离叛侵扰，固其宜也。
现代文：治理得法，则归顺服从；治理不得法，则背叛侵扰，自在道理之中。
English: Governed by the law, they are submissive and obedient; governed without the law, they are rebellious and intrusive, and are at ease in the midst of reason.

古文：是以先王之政，叛则讨之，服则怀之，处之四裔，不使乱礼义之邦而已。
现代文：所以，从前圣明君王的为政，背叛则进行讨伐，归服就进行安抚，把他们安置在四方极远的边疆地带，不使他们扰乱中原的礼义之邦而已。
English: Therefore, in the past, the holy Ming emperors were in charge of politics, while the traitors carried out the crusade, pacified those who submitted, and placed them in the far-flung frontier areas, so that they would not disturb the nation of courtesy and righteousness in the Central Plains.

古文：若乃视之如草木禽兽，不分臧否，不辨去来，悉艾杀之，岂作民父母之意哉！
现代文：如果把他们当作草木禽兽，不区分善和恶，不辨别背叛和归服，竟然都象割草似的将他们一律杀掉，岂是作人民父母的本意？
English: Is it the intention of being the people's parents to treat them as if they were grass, trees, and animals, not to distinguish between good and evil, not to distinguish between betrayal and submission, and to kill them all like mowing grass?

古文：且夫羌之所以叛者，为郡县所侵冤故也；叛而不即诛者，将帅非其人故也。
现代文：况且羌族之所以起兵反叛，是由于不堪忍受郡县官府侵刻，而心中衔冤的缘故。而对于叛乱者，不能当时就加以诛杀，这是由于统帅将领都不是合适人选的缘故。
English: Moreover, the reason why the Yao people rebelled was because they could not bear the encroachment of the county and prefectural governments, and because of the grievances in their hearts. As for the rebels, they could not be killed at that time, because the commander-in-chief was not a suitable candidate.

古文：苟使良将驱而出之塞外，择良吏而牧之，则疆场之臣也，岂得专以多杀为快邪！
现代文：假如派遣优秀的将领把他们驱逐到塞外，再选择优秀的文吏进行治理，则奔驰疆场的大臣，岂能再有机会用大肆杀戮去称心快意？
English: If we send excellent generals to expel them from the country, and then select excellent civil servants to govern, will the minister of the Benzi battlefield have another opportunity to satisfy his heart with wanton killing?

古文：夫御之不得其道，虽华夏之民，亦将蜂起而为寇，又可尽诛邪！
现代文：如果治理不得法，即令是中原地区的汉民，也会蜂拥而起，成为寇盗，又怎能把他们斩尽杀绝？
English: If there is no rule of law, even if they are Han Chinese in the Central Plains, they will flock together and become robbers. How can they be exterminated?

古文：然则段纪明之为将，虽克捷有功，君子所不与也。
现代文：所以，段这个将领，虽然克敌有功，但是，正人君子对他并不赞许。
English: Therefore, although the general Duan did a good job in defeating the enemy, the upright gentleman did not approve of him.

古文：九月，江夏蛮反，州郡讨平之。
现代文：九月，江夏郡蛮族起兵反叛，州郡官府出兵，将其讨伐平定。
English: In September, the barbarians of Jiangxia County rebelled, and the prefectural government dispatched troops to quell the rebellion.

古文：丹杨山越围太守陈夤，夤击破之。
现代文：丹杨郡山越族起兵反叛，包围郡太守陈夤，被陈夤率军击破。
English: The Shan Yue people of Danyang County rebelled and besieged the county governor Chen Qi, who was defeated by the army led by Chen Qi.

古文：初，李膺等虽废锢，天下士大夫皆高尚其道而污秽朝廷，希之者唯恐不及，更共相标榜，为之称号：以窦武、陈蕃、刘淑为三君，君者，言一世之所宗也；李膺、荀翌、杜密、王畅、刘祐、魏朗、赵典、硃㝢为八俊，俊者，言人之英也；郭泰、范滂、尹勋、巴肃及南阳宗慈、陈留夏馥、汝南蔡衍、泰山羊陟为八顾，顾者，言能以德行引人者也；张俭、翟超、岑晊、苑康及山阳刘表、汝南陈翔、鲁国孔昱、山阳檀敷为八及，及者，言其能导人追宗者也；度尚及东平张邈、王孝、东郡刘儒、泰山胡母班、陈留秦周、鲁国蕃向、东莱王章为八厨，厨者，言能以财救人者也。
现代文：起初，李膺等虽然遭到废黜和禁锢，但天下的士族和文人都很尊敬他们，认为是朝廷政治恶浊，盼望能跟他们结交，唯恐不被他们接纳，而他们也互相赞誉，各人都有美号。称窦武、陈蕃、刘淑为三郡，所谓君，说他们是一代宗师；李膺、荀翌、杜密、王畅、刘、魏郎、赵典、朱为八俊，所谓俊，说他们是一代英雄俊杰；郭泰、范滂、尹勋、巴肃，以及南阳郡人宗慈、陈留郡人夏馥、汝南郡人蔡衍，泰山郡人羊陟为八顾，所谓顾，说他们是一代德行表率；张俭、翟超、岑、苑康，以及山阳郡人刘表、汝南郡人陈翔、鲁国人孔昱、山阳郡人檀敷为八及，所谓及，说他们是一代导师；度尚、以及东平国人张邈、王孝、东郡人刘儒、泰山郡人胡母班、陈留郡人秦周、鲁国人蕃响、东莱郡人王章为八厨，所谓厨、说他们是一代舍财救人的侠士。
English: At first, although Li Xi and others were deposed and imprisoned, the world's scholars and literati respected them very much, considering them to be the political villains of the imperial court. They hoped to make friends with them, lest they be accepted by them, and they also praised each other. Each person had a nickname. Dou Wu, Chen Xi, and Liu Shu were called the three counties, the so-called Jun, saying that they were a generation of masters; Li Xi, Shuguo, Du Mi, Wang Chang, Liu, Wei Lang, Zhao Dian, and Zhu were the eight juniors, the so-called Jun, saying that they were a generation of heroes; Guo Tai,

古文：及陈、窦用事，复举拔膺等；陈、窦诛，膺等复废。
现代文：等到后来，陈蕃、窦武掌握朝廷大权，重新举荐和提拔李膺等人。陈蕃、窦武被诛杀，李膺等人再度被废黜。
English: Later, Chen Xi and Dou Wu seized the power of the imperial court and re-recommended and promoted Li Jun and others. Chen Xi and Dou Wu were killed, and Li Jun and others were deposed again.

古文：宦官疾恶膺等，每下诏书，辄申党人之禁。
现代文：宦官们对李膺等人非常痛恨，所以皇帝每次颁布诏书，都要重申对党人的禁令。
English: The eunuchs hated Li Lan and the others very much, so every time the emperor issued an edict, he had to reiterate the ban on party members.

古文：侯览怨张俭尤甚，览乡人硃并素佞邪，为俭所弃，承览意指，上书告俭与同乡二十四人别相署号，共为部党，图危社稷，而俭为之魁。
现代文：中常侍侯览对张俭的怨恨尤为厉害。侯览的同郡人朱并素来奸佞邪恶，曾被张俭尖刻抨击过，便秉承侯览的旨意，上书检举说，张俭和同郡二十四人，分别互起称号，共同结成朋党，企图危害国家，而张俭是他们的首领。
English: The resentment against Zhang Jian was particularly strong. Zhu Xian, a fellow county resident of Zhang Jian, who had been sharply criticized by Zhang Jian, had been an evil villain. He followed the will of Zhang Jian and submitted a written report saying that Zhang Jian and twenty-four people from the same county, who had been given different titles, had jointly formed a crony party in an attempt to endanger the country, and Zhang Jian was their leader.

古文：诏刊章捕俭等。
现代文：灵帝下诏，命将朱并的姓名除掉，公布奏章，逮捕张俭等人。
English: Emperor Lingdi issued an edict ordering that Zhu Xian's name be removed, the report be published, and Zhang Jian and others be arrested.

古文：冬，十月，大长秋曹节因此讽有司奏 诸钩党者故司空虞放及李膺、杜密、硃㝢、荀翌、翟超、刘儒、范滂等，请下州郡考治。 
现代文：冬季，十月，大长秋曹节暗示有关官吏奏报： 互相牵连结党的，有前司空虞放，以及李膺、杜密、崐朱、荀翌、翟超、刘儒、范滂等，请交付州郡官府拷讯审问。 
English: In the winter, in October, the Grand Elder Qiu Cao suggested that the relevant officials should report to the prefectural government: the former party secretary Kuo Yu Fang, as well as Li Qian, Du Mi, Zou Zhu, Zou Next, Zou Chao, Liu Ru, Fan Qi, and others who were involved in the party, should be submitted to the prefectural government for interrogation.

古文：是时上年十四，问节等曰： 何以为钩党？ 
现代文：当时，灵帝年仅十四岁，问曹节说： 什么叫做互相牵连结党？ 
English: At that time, Lingdi was only fourteen years old. He asked Cao Jie: "What is the meaning of mutual entanglement?

古文：对曰： 钩党者，即党人也。 
现代文：曹节回答说： 互相牵连结党，就是党人。 
English: Cao replied: "Those who are involved with the Party are Party members.

古文：上曰： 党人何用为恶而欲诛之邪？ 
现代文：灵帝又问： 党人有什么罪恶，一定要诛杀？ 
English: Ling Di also asked: What is the evil of the Party members, must they fight and kill?

古文：对曰： 皆相举群辈，欲为不轨。 
现代文：曹节又回答说： 他们互相推举，结成朋党，准备有不轨行动。 
English: Cao Si also replied, "They promote each other, form crony parties, and prepare to engage in improper activities.

古文：上曰： 不轨欲如何？ 
现代文：灵帝又问： 不轨行动，想干什么？ 
English: Lingdi asked again: What do you want to do with your illegal actions?

古文：对曰： 欲图社稷。 
现代文：曹节回答说： 打算推翻朝廷。 
English: Cao Zi replied, "Planning to overthrow the imperial court."

古文：上乃可其奏。
现代文：于是，灵帝便批准。
English: The emperor approved his report.

古文：或谓李膺曰： 可去矣！ 
现代文：有人告诉李膺说： 你应该逃了。 
English: Someone told Li Yao, "You should have run away."

古文：对曰： 事不辞难，罪不逃刑，臣之节也。
现代文：李膺说： 侍奉君王不辞艰难，犯罪不逃避刑罚，这是臣属的节操。
English: Li Yan replied: "A good man does not avoid disaster, and a guilty man does not escape punishment. This is my discipline."

古文：吾年已六十，死生有命，去将安之！ 
现代文：我年已六十，生死有命，逃向何方？ 
English: I'm sixty years old, I've got my life in my hands, where can I go?

古文：乃诣诏狱，考死；门生故吏并被禁锢。
现代文：便主动前往诏狱报到，被酷刑拷打而死。他的学生和过去的部属都被禁锢，不许再做官。
English: He volunteered to report to Zhaojing Prison, where he was tortured to death. His students and former subordinates were all imprisoned and banned from working as officials.

古文：侍御史蜀郡景毅子顾为膺门徒，未有录牒，不及于谴，毅慨然曰： 本谓膺贤，遣子师之，岂可以漏脱名籍，苟安而已！ 
现代文：侍御史蜀郡人景毅的儿子景顾是李膺的学生，因为在名籍上没有写他的名字，所以没有受到处罚。景毅感慨地说： 我本来就认为李膺是一代贤才，所以才教儿子拜他为师，岂可以因为名籍上脱漏而苟且偷安？ 
English: Jing Gu, the son of Jing Yi, the attendant of Shi Shu County, was a student of Li Xi, and because his name was not written in the name book, he was not punished. Jing Yi said with emotion: I originally thought that Li Xi was a generation of geniuses, so I taught my son to worship him as a teacher. Is it possible to steal the peace because of the omission in the name book?

古文：遂自表免归。
现代文：便自己上书检举自己，免职回家。
English: He then reported himself in writing and was dismissed from his post.

古文：汝南督邮吴导受诏捕范滂，至征羌，抱诏书闭传舍，伏床而泣，一县不知所为。
现代文：汝南郡督邮吴导接到逮捕范滂的诏书，抵达征羌侯国时，紧闭驿站旅舍的屋门，抱着诏书伏在床上哭泣，全县的人都不知道发生了什么事情。
English: When Wu Du, the postal inspector of Runan County, received the writ of arrest of Fan Qi, and arrived at the Conquest of Qi, he closed the door of the guesthouse, hugged the writ and cried on the bed. People in the whole county did not know what had happened.

古文：滂闻之曰： 必为我也。 
现代文：范滂得到消息后说： 一定是为我而来。 
English: After receiving the news, Fan Ye said, "He must have come for me."

古文：即自诣狱。
现代文：即自行到监狱报到。
English: You're going to jail right now.

古文：县令郭揖大惊，出，解印绶，引与俱亡，曰： 天下大矣，子何为在此！ 
现代文：县令郭揖大吃一惊，把他接出来，解下印信，要跟范滂一道逃亡，说： 天下大得很，你怎么偏偏到这个地方来？ 
English: Guo Yao, the county magistrate, was taken aback, picked him up, opened the sealed letter, and wanted to flee with Fan Yao, saying: The world is very big, how did you come to this place?

古文：滂曰： 滂死则祸塞，何敢以罪累君。又令老母流离乎！ 
现代文：范滂回答说： 我死了，则灾祸停止，怎么敢因为我犯罪来连累你，而又使我的老母亲流离失所！ 
English: Fan Ye replied: "When I die, the calamity will stop. How dare I commit a crime to burden you and displace my old mother!"

古文：其母就与之诀，滂白母曰： 仲博孝敬，足以供养。
现代文：他的母亲来和他诀别，范滂告诉母亲说： 范仲博孝顺恭敬，足可供养您。
English: When his mother came to bid him farewell, Fan Ye told her mother: "Fan Zhongbo is a filial and respectful person, and I am ready to support you.

古文：滂从龙舒君归黄泉，存亡各得其所。
现代文：我则跟从龙舒君归于九泉之下。生者和死者，都各得其所。
English: I, on the other hand, have returned to Nine Springs from Longshukun. The living and the dead have each found their place.

古文：惟大人割不可忍之恩，勿增感戚！ 
现代文：只求您舍弃不能忍心的恩情，不要增加悲伤。 
English: I only ask you to give up the unbearable feelings of gratitude, and not to add to the sorrow.

古文：仲博者，滂弟也。
现代文：范仲博是范滂的弟弟。
English: Fan Zhongbo is Fan Yao's younger brother.

古文：龙舒君者，滂父龙舒侯相显也。
现代文：龙舒君是范滂的父亲，即已故的龙舒侯国宰相范显。
English: Long Shukun is the father of Fan Xuan, that is, the late Long Shukou State Prime Minister Fan Xian.

古文：母曰： 汝今得与李、杜齐名，死亦何恨！
现代文：母亲说： 你今天得以和李膺、杜密齐名，死有何恨！
English: My mother said, "Now you can be as famous as Li Yan and Du Mei, and you won't have any regrets when you die!"

古文：既有令名，复求寿考，可兼得乎！ 
现代文：既已享有美名，又要盼望长寿，岂能双全？ 
English: Having a good name and looking forward to a long life, is it possible to have both?

古文：滂跪受教，再拜而辞。
现代文：范滂跪下，聆听母亲教诲，听完以后，再拜而别。
English: Get down on your knees, submit to discipline, and then resign.

古文：顾其子曰： 吾欲使汝为恶，恶不可为；使汝为善，则我不为恶。 
现代文：临行时，回头对儿子说： 我想教你作恶，但恶不可作；教你行善、即我不作恶。 
English: When he was about to leave, he turned to his son and said, "I want to teach you to do evil, but not to do evil; teach you to do good, and I will not do evil."

古文：行路闻之，莫不流涕。
现代文：行路的人听见，无不感动流涕。
English: People on the street heard it and were moved to tears.

古文：凡党人死者百馀人，妻子皆徙边，天下豪桀及儒学有行义者，宦官一切指为党人；有怨隙者，因相陷害，睚眦之忿，滥入党中。
现代文：因党人案而死的共有一百余人，他们的妻子和儿女都被放逐到边郡。天下英雄豪杰，以及有良好品行和道义的儒家学者，宦官一律把他们指控为党人。有私人怨恨的，也乘机争相陷害，甚至连瞪了一眼的小积忿，也滥被指控为党人。
English: A total of more than 100 people died as a result of the Party members' case, and their wives and children were all banished to the border county. The world's heroes and heroines, as well as the Confucian scholars with good conduct and morality, were all accused of being Party members by the eunuchs. Those with personal grudges also took advantage of the opportunity to frame each other, and even the small accumulation of glances were also accused of being Party members.

古文：州郡承旨，或有未尝交关，亦离祸毒，其死、徙、废、禁者又六七百人。
现代文：州郡官府秉承上司的旨意，有的人和党人从来没有牵连和瓜葛，也遭到惩处。因此而被处死、放逐、废黜、禁锢的人，又有六七百人之多。
English: Adhering to the will of their superiors, some people who had never been involved with party members were also punished. As a result, there were more than six or seven hundred people who were executed, exiled, deposed, and imprisoned.

古文：郭泰闻党人已死，私为之恸曰： 《诗》云： 人之云亡，邦国殄瘁。 
现代文：郭泰听到党人相继惨死的消息，暗中悲恸说： 《诗经》上说： 人才丧亡，国家危亡。 
English: Guo Tai heard the news of the tragic deaths of party members one after another, and secretly said sadly: "The Book of Songs says: Talent perishes, the country is in peril.

古文：汉室灭矣，但未知 瞻乌爰止，于谁之屋 耳！ 
现代文：汉王朝行将灭亡，但不知道 乌鸦飞翔，停在谁家。  
English: The Han Dynasty is on the verge of extinction, but we don't know where the crow will land.

古文：泰虽好臧否人伦，而不为危言核论，故能处浊世而怨祸不及焉。
现代文：郭泰虽然也喜爱评论人物的善恶是非，但从不危言耸听、苛刻评论，所以才能身处浑浊的乱世，而没有遭到怨恨和灾祸。
English: Although Guo Tai also likes to comment on the good and evil of characters, he never makes alarmist and harsh comments, so he can be in a turbulent world without resentment and disaster.

古文：张俭亡命困迫，望门投止，莫不重其名行，破家相容。
现代文：张俭逃亡，困急窘迫，每当望见人家门户，便投奔请求收容。
English: Zhang Jian fled, in dire straits. Whenever he saw someone's door, he ran to ask for shelter.

古文：后流转东莱，止李笃家。
现代文：主人无不敬重他的声名和德行，宁愿冒着家破人亡的危险也要收容他。
English: Later, he went into exile in Donglai and stayed at the home of Li Duc.

古文：外黄令毛钦操兵到门，笃引钦就席曰： 张俭负罪亡命，笃岂得藏之！
现代文：后来他辗转逃到东莱郡，住在李笃家里。外黄县令毛钦手持兵器来到李笃家中，李笃领着毛钦就座以后说： 张俭是背负重罪的逃犯，我怎么会窝藏他！
English: Later, he fled to Donglai County and lived in Li Du's home. In addition, Huang County ordered Mao Qin to come to Li Du's home with weapons in hand. After Li Du led Mao Qin to take his seat, he said: Zhang Jian is a fugitive with serious crimes, how can I hide him!

古文：若审在此，此人名士，明廷宁宜执之乎！ 
现代文：假如他真的在我这里，这人是有名的人士，您难道非捉拿他不可？ 
English: If he's really here with me, and he's a famous person, don't you have to catch him?

古文：钦因起抚笃曰： 蘧伯玉耻独为君子，足下如何专取仁义！ 
现代文：毛钦因而站起身来，抚摸着李笃的肩膀说： 蘧伯玉以单独为君子而感到耻辱，你为何一个人专门获得仁义？ 
English: Therefore, Mao Qin stood up, stroked Li Du's shoulder and said: Zibo Yu is ashamed of being a gentleman alone, why are you the only one to receive benevolence?

古文：笃曰： 今欲分之，明廷载半去矣。 
现代文：李笃回答说： 而今就想和你分享，你已经获得了一半。 
English: Li Du replied: "And now I want to share it with you, you have gained half of it.

古文：钦叹息而去。
现代文：于是毛钦叹息告辞而去。
English: Mao went away with a sigh.

古文：笃导俭经北海戏子然家，遂入渔阳出塞。
现代文：李笃便引导张俭经由北海郡戏子然家，再进入渔阳郡，逃出塞外。
English: Li Tudu then guided Zhang Jian through the Beihai County, and then into the Yuyang County, and then out of the country.

古文：其所经历，伏重诛者以十数，连引收考者布遍天下，宗亲并皆殄灭，郡县为之残破。
现代文：张俭自逃亡以来，所投奔的人家，因为窝藏和收容他而被官府诛杀的有十余人，被牵连遭到逮捕和审问的几乎遍及全国，这些人的亲属也都同时被灭绝，甚至有的郡县因此而残破不堪。
English: Since Zhang Jian's escape, more than ten people have been killed by the authorities for hiding and sheltering him, and those who have been implicated, arrested and interrogated are almost all over the country. The relatives of these people have also been exterminated at the same time, and even some counties have been devastated.

古文：俭与鲁国孔褒有旧，亡抵褒，不遇，褒弟融，年十六，匿之。
现代文：张俭和鲁国人孔褒是旧友，当他去投奔褒时，正好遇上孔褒不在家，孔褒的弟弟孔融年仅十六岁，作主把张俭藏匿在家。
English: Zhang Jian and Kong Bao, a native of Lvgou, are old friends. When he went to visit Kong Bao, he happened to meet Kong Bao who was not at home. Kong Bao's younger brother, Kong Rong, was only 16 years old. He was the mastermind behind hiding Zhang Jian at home.

古文：后事泄，俭得亡走，国相收褒、融送狱，未知所坐。
现代文：后来事情被泄露，张俭虽然得以逃走，但鲁国宰相将孔褒、孔融逮捕，送到监狱关押，不知道应该判处谁来坐罪？
English: Later, the matter was leaked, and although Zhang Jian was able to escape, the Prime Minister of Lu arrested Kong Bo and Kong Rong and sent them to prison. I don't know who should be convicted.

古文：融曰： 保纳舍藏者，融也，当坐。 
现代文：孔融说： 接纳张俭并把他藏匿在家的，是我孔融，应当由我坐罪。 
English: Kong Rong said: It was I, Kong Rong, who accepted Zhang Jian and hid him at home. I should take the blame.

古文：褒曰： 彼来求我，非弟之过。 
现代文：孔褒说： 张俭是来投奔我的，不是弟弟的罪过。 
English: Kong Bo said: Zhang Jian came to join me, it was not his brother's fault.

古文：吏问其母，母曰： 家事任长，妾当其辜。 
现代文：负责审讯的官吏征求他俩母亲的意见，母亲说： 一家的事，由家长负责，罪在我身。 
English: The officers questioned their mother, who said: "The elders are in charge of the household, and I am to blame.

古文：一门争死，郡县疑不能决，乃上谳之，诏书竟坐褒。
现代文：一家母子三人，争相赴死，郡县官府疑惑不能裁决，就上报朝廷。灵帝下诏，将孔褒诛杀抵罪。
English: A family of three, mother and son, fought to the death, and when the county government was unable to rule on their suspicions, they reported the matter to the imperial court. Emperor Lingdi issued an edict to have Kong Bo Xuan killed to atone for his crime.

古文：及党禁解，俭乃还乡里，后为卫尉，卒，年八十四。
现代文：等到党禁解除以后，张俭才返回家乡，后来又被朝廷任命为卫尉，去世时，享年八十四岁。
English: It was not until after the party ban was lifted that Zhang Jian returned to his hometown. Later, he was appointed as a bodyguard by the imperial court. He died at the age of 84.

古文：夏馥闻张俭亡命，叹曰： 孽自己作，空污良善，一人逃死，祸及万家，何以生为！ 
现代文：当初，夏馥听到张俭逃亡的消息，叹息说： 自己作孽，应由自己承当，却凭空去牵连善良的人。一人逃命，使万家遭受灾祸，何必活下去！ 
English: At first, when Xia Yao heard the news of Zhang Jian's escape, she sighed and said, "If you commit evil, you should be responsible for it, but you have implicated good people out of thin air. If one person flees for his life and brings disaster to all families, why should he live?

古文：乃自翦须变形，入林虑山中，隐姓名，为冶家佣，亲突烟炭，形貌毁瘁，积二三年，人无知者。
现代文：于是他把胡须剃光，改变外貌，逃入林虑山中，隐姓埋名，充当冶铸金属人家的佣工，亲自挖掘烟炭，形容憔悴，为时二三年，没有人知道他是谁。
English: So he shaved off his beard, changed his appearance, fled into the forest and mountains, went incognito, worked as a metalworker's helper, personally dug out the soot, described the cocoon, for twenty-three years, no one knew who he was.

古文：馥弟静载缣帛追求饷之，馥不受曰： 弟奈何载祸相饷乎！ 
现代文：起初，中常侍张让的父亲去世，棺柩运回颍川郡埋葬，虽然全郡的人几乎都来参加丧礼，但知名的人士却没有一个人前来，张让感到非常耻辱。
English: At first, Zhang Zhan's father died and the coffin was transported back to Luochuan County for burial. Although almost everyone in the county came to attend the funeral, none of the famous people came. Zhang Zhan felt very ashamed.

古文：党禁未解而卒。
现代文：只有陈单独前来吊丧。
English: He died before the party ban was lifted.

古文：初，中常侍张让父死，归葬颍川，虽一郡毕至，而名士无往者，让甚耻之，陈寔独吊焉。
现代文：等到大肆诛杀党人，张让因为陈的缘故，曾出面保全和赦免了很多人。南阳郡人何一向和陈蕃、李膺友善，也在被搜捕之列。
English: After the party members were slaughtered, Zhang Zhan protected and pardoned many people for Chen's sake. Nanyang County residents who were friendly with Chen Zhen and Li Zhen were also among those rounded up.

古文：及诛党人，让以寔故，多所全宥。
现代文：于是他就改名换姓，藏匿在南阳郡和汝南郡之间，与袁绍结为奔走患难之交。
English: So he changed his name and hid between Nanyang County and Runan County, forming a close friendship with Yuan Shao.

古文：南阳何颙，素与陈蕃、李膺善，亦被收捕，乃变名姓匿汝南间，与袁绍为奔走之交，常私入雒阳，从绍计议，为诸名士罹党事者求救援，设权计，使得逃隐，所全免甚众。初，太尉袁汤三子，成、逢、隗。
现代文：他经常私自进入京都洛阳，和袁绍一道合计商议，为陷入党人案的名士们寻求救援，为他们策划，想方设法使其逃亡或隐藏，所保全和免于灾祸的人很多。当初，太尉袁汤生有三个儿子：袁成、袁逢、袁隗。
English: He often secretly entered Kyoto Luoyang, and together with Yuan Shao, they discussed the overall situation, sought rescue for the celebrities who were caught in the party members case, planned for them, and tried their best to escape or hide. There were many people who were protected and spared from disaster. At the beginning, Lieutenant Yuan Tangsheng had three sons: Yuan Cheng, Yuan Feng, and Yuan Yao.

古文：成生绍，逢生术。
现代文：袁成生袁绍，袁逢生袁术。
English: Yuan Cheng Sheng Yuan Shao, Yuan Feng Sheng Yuan Shu.

古文：逢、隗皆有名称，少历显官。
现代文：袁逢、袁隗都有声望，自幼便担任显要官职。
English: Yuan Feng and Yuan Qi were both famous and held important official positions from a young age.

古文：时中常侍袁赦以逢、隗宰相家，与之同姓，推崇以为外援，故袁氏贵宠于世，富奢甚，不与它公族同。
现代文：当时，中常侍袁赦认为袁逢、袁隗出身宰相之家，又和他同姓，特别推崇和结纳作为自己的外援，所以袁姓家族以尊贵荣宠著称当世，非常富有奢侈，跟其他三公家族绝不相同。
English: At that time, Vice-Admiral Yuan Yuan believed that Yuan Feng and Yuan Qi were from the Prime Minister's family, and they had the same surname as him, and they especially respected and appreciated him as their foreign aid. Therefore, the Yuan family was famous for its honor and prestige in the world, and was very rich and luxurious. It was completely different from the other three royal families.

古文：绍壮健有威容，爱士养名，宾客辐凑归之，辎軿柴毂，填接街陌。
现代文：袁绍体格健壮，仪容庄重，喜爱结交天下名士，宾客们从四面八方前来归附于他，富人乘坐的有帘子的辎车，贱者乘坐的简陋小车，填满街巷，首尾相接。
English: Yuan Shao is physically robust, dignified, and likes to make friends with the world's celebrities. Guests come from all over the world to join him. The rich people ride in a carriage with a curtain, and the low-class people ride in a simple car, filling the streets and streets.

古文：术亦以侠气闻。
现代文：袁术也以侠义闻名当世。
English: Yuan Shu is also famous for his chivalry.

古文：逢从兄子闳，少有操行，以耕学为业，逢、隗数馈之，无所受。
现代文：袁逢的堂侄袁闳少年时便有良好的品行，以耕种和读书为业，袁逢、袁隗多次馈赠于他，袁闳全不接受。
English: Yuan Feng's cousin, Yuan Xuan, had a good moral character when he was a boy, with farming and reading as his occupation. Yuan Xuan and Yuan Xuan gave him gifts many times, but Yuan Xuan did not accept them.

古文：闳见时方险乱，而家门富盛，常对兄弟叹曰： 吾先公福祚，后世不能以德守之，而竞为骄奢，与乱世争权，此即晋之三郤矣。 
现代文：袁闳眼看时局险恶昏乱，而袁姓家族富有贵盛，常对兄弟们叹息说： 我们先祖的福禄，后世的子孙不能用德行保住，而竞相骄纵奢侈，与乱世争权夺利，这就会如晋国的三大夫一样。 
English: Yuan Xuan saw that the current situation was dangerous and chaotic, and the Yuan family was rich and prosperous. He often sighed to his brothers, "The fortune of our ancestors cannot be preserved by the descendants of future generations with virtue. Instead, they will compete with each other in arrogance and luxury, and fight for power and profit with the chaotic world. This will be like the three great men of Jin.

古文：及党事起，闳欲投迹深林，以母老，不宜远遁，乃筑土室四周于庭，不为户，自牖纳饮食。
现代文：等到党人之案爆发，袁闳本想逃到深山老林，但因母亲年老，不适宜远逃，于是在庭院里建筑了一间土屋，只有窗而没有门，饮食都从窗口递进。
English: When the Party members' case broke out, Yuan Qi originally wanted to flee to the deep mountains and old forests, but because his mother was old, it was not suitable to flee far away, so he built a mud house in the courtyard. There was only a window but no door, and meals were served from the window.

古文：母思闳时，往就视，母去，便自掩闭，兄弟妻子莫得见也。
现代文：母亲思念儿子时，到窗口去看看他，母亲走后，就自己把窗口关闭，连兄弟和妻子儿女都不见面。
English: When the mother missed her son, she went to the window to see him. After the mother left, she closed the window herself, and even the brothers and their wives and children did not meet.

古文：潜身十八年，卒于土室。
现代文：一直隐身居住了十八年，最后在土屋中去世。
English: He lived incognito for eighteen years, and finally died in an earthen house.

古文：初，范滂等非讦朝政，自公卿以下皆折节下之，太学生争慕其风，以为文学将兴，处士复用。
现代文：起初，范滂等非议和抨击朝廷政事。自三公、九卿以下文武官员，都降低自己的身份，对他恭敬备至。太学学生争先恐后地仰慕和学习他的风度，认为文献经典之学将再度兴起，隐居的士人将会重新得到重用。
English: At first, Fan Xuan and others criticized and attacked the politics of the imperial court. From the three princes and nine nobles down, the civil and military officials all lowered their status and treated him with the utmost respect. The students of the Imperial Academy were scrambling to admire and study his demeanor, believing that the study of literature and classics would rise again, and that the secluded scholar would be reused.

古文：申屠蟠独叹曰： 昔战国之世，处士横议，列国之王至为拥彗先驱，卒有坑儒烧书之祸，今之谓矣。 
现代文：只有申屠蟠独自叹息说： 过去，战国时代隐居的士人肆意议论国家大事，各国的国王甚至亲自为他们执帚扫除，作为前导，结果产生焚书坑儒的灾祸。这正是今天所面临的形势。 
English: Only Shen Tuoqi alone sighed and said: In the past, the secluded scholars in the Warring States period freely discussed national affairs, and the kings of various countries even personally took the initiative to sweep them away, as a forerunner, resulting in the scourge of book burning. This is exactly the situation we are facing today.

古文：乃绝迹于梁、砀之间，因树为屋，自同佣人。
现代文：于是在梁国和砀县之间，再也见不到他的行迹。他靠着大树，建筑一栋房屋，把自己变成佣工模样。
English: So he no longer went between the beams, but borrowed a branch and built a house. He was just like a servant.

古文：居二年，滂等果罹党锢之锅，唯蟠超然免于评论。
现代文：大约居住了两年，范滂等果然遭受党锢大祸，只有申屠蟠超脱世事，才免遭抨击。
English: After living there for about two years, Fan Yu and others suffered a great disaster caused by the Party. Only Shen Tu Yu, who was detached from the world, was spared from criticism.

古文：臣光曰：天下有道，君子扬于王庭，以正小人之罪，而莫敢不服；天下无道，君子囊括不言，以避小人之祸，而犹或不免。
现代文：臣司马光曰：天下政治清明，正人君子在朝廷上扬眉吐气，依法惩治小人的罪过，没有人敢不服从。天下政治混乱，正人君子闭口不言，以躲避小人的陷害，尚且不能避免。
English: Sima Guang, a courtier, said: "Politics is clear all over the world, upright gentlemen raise their eyebrows and exhale in the imperial court, punish the crimes of villains in accordance with the law, and no one dares to disobey. The world is in political turmoil, and upright gentlemen keep their mouths shut to avoid the traps of villains, which cannot be avoided.

古文：党人生昏乱之世，不在其位，四海横流，而欲以口舌救之，臧否人物，激浊扬清，撩虺蛇之头，践虎狼之属，以至身被淫刑，祸及朋友，士类歼灭而国随以亡，不亦悲乎！
现代文：党人生在政治昏暗混乱的时代，又不担任朝廷的高官显位，面对天下民怨沸腾，却打算用舆论去挽救。评论人物的善恶，斥恶奖善，这就犹如用手去撩拨毒蛇的头，用脚践踏老虎和豺狼的尾巴，以致自身遭受酷刑，灾祸牵连朋友。读书人被大批杀害，王朝也跟着覆亡，岂不可悲！
English: In an era of political gloom and chaos, the Party members did not assume high-ranking positions in the imperial court. Faced with the seething resentment of the people around the world, they intended to use public opinion to save themselves. Commenting on the good and evil of characters, rejecting evil and rewarding good, this was like using hands to prick the head of a viper, and trampling the tails of tigers and jackals with their feet, so that they themselves were tortured, and the disaster involved their friends. Readers were killed in large numbers, and the dynasty also fell. Isn't it sad!

古文：夫唯郭泰既明且哲，以保其身，申屠蟠见几而作，不俟终日，卓乎其不可及已！
现代文：其中只有郭泰最为明智，竟能择安去危，保全自身。申屠蟠见机行动，不到一天，立刻回头，他的卓识远见，不是平常人所能赶得上的！
English: Among them, only Guo Tai was the wisest, who was able to choose safety over danger and protect himself. Shen Tuoqi saw an opportunity to act, and immediately turned back in less than a day. His foresight and foresight are beyond the reach of ordinary people!

古文：庚子晦，日有食之。
现代文：庚子晦，发生日食。
English: Geng Ziwei, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：十一月，太尉刘宠免；太仆扶沟郭禧为太尉。
现代文：十一月，太尉刘宠被免官，擢升太仆扶沟县人郭禧为太尉。
English: In November, Second Lieutenant Liu Jie was relieved of his duties and promoted to First Lieutenant by Guo Xiyu, a man from Fuguo County.

古文：鲜卑寇并州。
现代文：鲜卑攻打并州。
English: The newly conquered provinces were annexed by the Berber raiders.

古文：长乐太仆曹节病困，诏拜车骑将军。
现代文：长乐太仆曹节病危，灵帝下诏，任命他为车骑将军。
English: Cao Jie, the servant of the Changle Emperor, was critically ill, and the Emperor issued an edict to appoint him as the general of chariots and cavalry.

古文：有顷，疾瘳，上印绶，复为中常侍，位特进，秩中二千石。
现代文：不久，病愈，交回印信，仍担任中常侍，官位为特进，官秩为中二千石。
English: Soon after he recovered from his illness, he returned the seal letter and still served as a junior aide-de-camp, with the official rank of special promotion and the official rank of junior two thousand koku.

古文：高句骊王伯固寇辽东，玄菟太守耿临讨降之。
现代文：高句丽国王伯固侵犯辽东郡，玄菟郡太守耿临率军前往讨伐，伯固归降。
English: King Bo Gu of Goguryeo invaded Liaodong County, Geng Lin, the governor of Xuanzang County, led the army to fight, and Bo Gu surrendered.

古文：孝桓皇帝下建宁三年
现代文：建宁三年
English: Jianning three years old

古文：春，三月，丙寅晦，日有食之。
现代文：春季，三月丙寅晦，发生日食。
English: In the spring, in March, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：征段颎还京师，拜侍中。
现代文：征调段返回京都洛阳，任命他为侍中。
English: The transfer section returned to Kyoto Luoyang and appointed him as a chamberlain.

古文：颎在边十馀年，未尝一日蓐寝，与将士同甘苦，故皆乐为死战，所向有功。
现代文：段在边疆十余年，从来没有一天安心睡觉，和将士同甘共苦，所以部属都甘愿奋不顾身地拚死战斗，大军所到之处都能建立功勋。
English: Duan has been on the frontier for more than ten years. He has never had a day's restful sleep, and has shared the hardships and joys with his soldiers. Therefore, his subordinates are willing to fight to the death regardless of their own lives. The great army can build merits wherever it goes.

古文：夏，四月，太尉郭禧罢；以太中大夫闻人袭为太尉。
现代文：夏季，四月，太尉郭禧被罢免，擢升太中大夫闻人袭为太尉。
English: In the summer, in April, Lieutenant Guo Xie was dismissed and promoted to Lieutenant.

古文：秋，七月，司空刘嚣罢；八月，以大鸿胪梁国桥玄为司空。
现代文：秋季。七月。司空刘嚣被罢免。八月，擢升大鸿胪、梁国人桥玄为司空。
English: Autumn. July. Liu Han, Secretary of the Air Force, was dismissed. In August, Da Hongtao, Liang Guozhun and Qiao Xuan were promoted to Secretary of the Air Force.

古文：九月，执金吾董宠坐矫永乐太后属请，下狱死。
现代文：九月，执金吾董宠因假传他的妹妹董太后的谕旨有所请托，被下狱处死。
English: In September, he was sentenced to death for passing on a false rumor that his sister, Empress Dowager Dong, had ordered him to do so.

古文：冬，郁林太守谷永以恩信招降乌浒人十馀万，皆内属，受冠带，开置七县。
现代文：冬季，郁林郡太守谷永用恩德和威信招降乌浒蛮族十余万人，归服朝廷，授给帽子和腰带，设立了七个县。
English: In winter, Tai Shou Gu Yong of Yulin County used Ende and Wixin to recruit more than one hundred thousand barbarians from Wuyi, submitted to the imperial court, awarded hats and belts, and established seven counties.

古文：凉州刺史扶风孟佗遣从事任涉将敦煌兵五百人，与戊己司马曹宽、西域长史张宴将焉耆、龟兹、车师前、后部，合三万馀人讨疏，攻桢中城，四十馀日不能下，引去。
现代文：凉州刺史、右扶风郡人孟佗派遣从事任涉率领敦煌郡兵五百人，会同戊已校尉曹宽、西域长史张宴，动员焉耆王国、龟兹王国、车师前王国、车师后王国军队，共三万余人，前往讨伐疏勒王国，功打桢中城，经过四十余天不能攻克，只好撤退。
English: Meng Jian, a military historian from Liangzhou County and a native of Right Fufeng County, dispatched five hundred soldiers from Dunhuang County to lead the troops. Together with Wu Ye's lieutenant Cao Guang and the governor of the western region Zhang Yan, they mobilized the armies of the Kingdom of Yan, the Kingdom of Kuez, the Kingdom of Chuxian and the Kingdom of Chuxian, a total of more than thirty thousand people, went to fight against the Kingdom of Sule, and successfully fought in the middle of the city. After more than forty days, they could not conquer, and had to retreat.

古文：其后疏勒王连相杀害，朝廷亦不能复治。
现代文：从此以后，疏勒国王接连不断地被杀害，朝廷再也没有力量进行干预。
English: From then on, King Sule was killed one after another, and the court no longer had the power to intervene.

古文：初，中常侍张让有监奴，典任家事，威形喧赫。
现代文：最初，中常侍张让府中有一位负责掌管家务的奴仆，威风和权势显赫。
English: In the beginning, there was a manservant in charge of housework in the house of Zhang Jianfu, the vice-premier, who was very powerful and influential.

古文：孟佗资产饶赡，与奴朋结，倾竭馈问，无所遗爱。奴咸德之，问其所欲。
现代文：孟佗家资财产富足，跟这位奴仆结成好友。孟佗倾尽所有馈赠给他，对其他的家奴也都一样巴结奉承，毫不吝啬。
English: Meng Yao's family was rich in capital and property, and he became friends with this slave. Meng Yao gave him all the gifts he could, and flattered the other family slaves in the same way. He was not stingy.

古文：佗曰： 吾望汝曹为我一拜耳！ 
现代文：因此，家奴们对他大为感激，问他希望什么。孟佗回答说： 我只希望你们向我一拜就足够了。 
English: So the servants were very grateful to him and asked him what he wanted. Meng Yao replied, "I only want you to bow to me once, that's enough."

古文：时宾客求谒让者，车常数百千两，佗诣让，后至，不得进，监奴乃率诸仓头迎拜于路，遂共舆车入门，宾客咸惊，谓佗善于让，皆争以珍玩赂之。
现代文：家奴们满口答应。当时，每天前往求见张让的宾客，车辆常常有数百甚至上千之多。有一天，孟佗也前往晋见，稍后才到达，车辆无法前进，于是那位奴仆总管率领他的属下奴仆前来迎接，就在路旁大礼参拜，引导孟佗车辆驶进大门。宾客们见此情景，全都大吃一惊，认为孟佗和张让的关系不同平常，便争相送给孟佗各种珍贵的玩赏物品。
English: At that time, there were often hundreds or even thousands of vehicles for the guests who went to see Zhang Zhan every day. One day, Meng Yao also went to Jin to see him, but he arrived later, and the vehicles could not move forward. Therefore, the slave manager led his subordinate slaves to meet him, and made a grand visit to the roadside to guide Meng Yao's vehicle into the gate. When the guests saw this scene, they were all taken aback. They thought that the relationship between Meng Yao and Zhang Zhan was different from the ordinary, and they competed to give Meng Yao all kinds of precious toys.

古文：佗分以遗让，让大喜，由是以佗为凉州刺史。
现代文：孟佗将这些馈赠的物品分送给张让，张让大为欢喜。由于这个缘故，于是任命孟佗为凉州刺史。
English: Meng Xuan distributed these gifts to Zhang Zhan, who was greatly pleased. For this reason, he appointed Meng Xuan as the historian of Liangzhou.

古文：孝桓皇帝下建宁四年
现代文：建宁四年
English: Jianning four years old

古文：春，正月，甲子，帝加元服，赦天下，唯党人不赦。
现代文：春季，正月甲子，灵帝行成年加冠礼，大赦天下，只有党人不在赦免之列。
English: In the spring, the first month of the year, Lingdi will perform the coming-of-age ceremony and grant amnesty to the whole world. Only party members are not included in the amnesty.

古文：二月，癸卯，地震。
现代文：二月癸卯，发生地震。
English: At the end of February, an earthquake occurred.

古文：三月，辛酉朔，日有食之。
现代文：三月辛酉朔，发生日食。
English: In March, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：太尉闻人袭免；以太仆汝南李咸为太尉。
现代文：太尉闻人袭被免官，擢升汝南郡人李咸为太尉。
English: Captain Weng was demoted and promoted to the rank of captain, and Li Xian, a native of Runan County, was promoted to the rank of captain.

古文：大疫。
现代文：发生大瘟疫。
English: A great plague.

古文：司徒许训免；以司空桥玄为司徒；夏，四月，以太常南阳来艳为司空。
现代文：司徒许训被免官，任命司空桥玄为司徒。夏季，四月，擢升太常南阳郡人来艳为司空。
English: In the summer, April, Tai Chang Nanyang County resident Lai Yan was promoted to the position of Sifu.

古文：秋，七月，司空来艳免。
现代文：秋季，七月，司空来艳被免官。
English: In the autumn, in July, Sifu Laiyan was removed from office.

古文：癸丑，立贵人宋氏为皇后，后，执金吾酆之女也。
现代文：癸丑，灵帝封宋贵人为皇后。宋皇后是执金吾宋酆的女儿。
English: The Emperor Ling named Song Guizhou as his empress. Empress Song was the daughter of Emperor Jinwu and Empress Song.

古文：司徒桥玄免；以太常南阳宗俱为司空，前司空许栩为司徒。
现代文：司徒桥玄被免官，擢升太常、南阳郡人宗俱为司空，任命前任司空许栩为司徒。
English: Szeto Qiao Xuan was removed from office, promoted to Taizhong, Nanyang County Zonggu as Siku, and appointed the former Siku Xu as Szeto.

古文：帝以窦太后有援立之功，冬，十月，戊子朔，率群臣朝太后于南宫，亲馈上寿。
现代文：灵帝认为窦太后援立自己继承帝位有功，冬季，十月戊子朔，他率领朝廷文武百官，前往南宫朝见窦太后，并亲自向窦太后进食和祝寿。
English: Ling Di believed that Dou Taige's support in his succession to the imperial throne was a great achievement. In the winter, in October, he led hundreds of officials from the imperial court to the South Palace to meet Dou Taige, and personally ate and congratulated Dou Taige.

古文：黄门令董萌因此数为太后诉冤，帝深纳之，供养资奉，有加于前。
现代文：因此，黄门令董萌多次为窦太后申诉冤枉，灵帝深为采纳，对于供养窦太后的财物，都比以前增加。
English: Therefore, Huangmen ordered Dong Meng to repeatedly appeal for the Dowager Dowager Dou, and Ling Di was deeply adopted. As for the property to support the Dowager Dowager Dou, it has increased more than before.

古文：曹节、王甫疾之，诬萌以谤讪永乐宫，下狱死。
现代文：曹节、王甫对此非常痛恨，于是诬告董萌诽谤灵帝母亲董太后，将董萌下狱处死。
English: Cao Si and Wang Fu hated this very much, so they falsely accused Dong Meng of slandering Emperor Lingdi's mother, Empress Dowager Dong, and sentenced Dong Meng to death.

