古文：黄帝问曰：人有重身，九月而瘖，此为何也？
现代文：黄帝问道：有的妇女在怀孕九个月时，出现不能说话的症状，这是什么缘故呢？
English: Huang Di asked: Some women have symptoms of not being able to speak when they are nine months pregnant. Why is this?

古文：岐伯对曰：胞之络脉绝也。
现代文：岐伯回答说：这是因为胞宫中的络脉被胎儿压迫，阻绝不通所致。
English: Qibo replied, "This is because the vas deferens in the uterus is compressed by the fetus, resulting in obstruction.

古文：帝曰：何以言之？
现代文：黄帝说：为什么这样说呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "Why do you say that?

古文：岐伯曰：胞络者，系于肾，少阴之脉，贯肾、系舌本，故不能言。
现代文：岐伯说：胞宫的络脉系于肾脏，而足少阴肾经贯肾上系于舌本，今胞宫的络脉受阻，肾经亦不能上通于舌，舌本失养，故不能言语。
English: Qi Bo said: "The vas deferens of the uterus is connected to the kidney, while the tarsal nerve passes through the kidney to the base of the tongue. Now the vas deferens of the uterus is blocked, and the renal artery cannot pass through the tongue. The base of the tongue is in poor condition, so it cannot speak.

古文：曰：治之奈何？
现代文：黄帝说：如何治疗呢？
English: Huang Di said: How to treat it?

古文：岐伯曰：无治也，当十月复。
现代文：岐伯说：不需要治疗，待至十月分娩之后，胞络通，声音就会自然恢复。
English: Qi Bo said, "There is no need for treatment. If you wait until after giving birth in October, the cells will be connected, and your voice will naturally recover.

古文：《刺法》曰： 无损不足，益有余，以成其疹，然后调之。 
现代文：《刺法》上说： 正气不足的不可用泻法，邪气有余的不可用补法，以免因误治而造成疾病。 
English: In the "Stabbing Method," it is said: If the righteous qi is insufficient, the laxative method should not be used, and if the evil qi is too much, the tonic method should not be used, so as to avoid the disease caused by mis-treatment.

古文：所谓，无损不足者，身羸瘦，无用镵石也；无益其有余者，腹中有形而泄之，泄之则精出而病独擅中，故曰疹成也。
现代文：所谓 无损不足 ，就是怀孕九月而身体瘦弱的，不可再用针石治疗以伤其正气。所谓 无益有余 ，就是说腹中已经怀孕而又妄用泻法，用泻法则精气耗伤，使胎儿不得保全，胎死腹中后着而不去，独擅腹中，反而给治成疾病了。
English: The so-called lossless deficiency, that is, the pregnancy is in September and the body is weak, and it is no longer possible to use the acupuncture treatment to hurt its righteous spirit. The so-called useless surplus, that is, the abdomen is already pregnant and the laxative method is used, and the essence is consumed by the laxative method, so that the fetus cannot be preserved, the fetus dies in the abdomen and does not go, and the abdomen is alone, but it is cured into a disease.

古文：帝曰：病胁下满气逆，二三岁不已，是为何病？
现代文：黄帝说：有病，胁下胀满，气逆喘促，二三年不好的，是什么疾病呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "If you are ill, bloated under duress, short of breath, and have not been well for two or three years, what kind of illness is it?

古文：岐伯曰：病名曰息积。
现代文：岐伯说：病名叫 息积 。
English: Qi Bo said, "The illness is called Qi Jing.

古文：此不妨于食，不可灸刺。积为导引服药，药不能独治也。
现代文：这种病在胁下而不在胃，所以不妨碍饮食，治疗时切不可用艾灸和针刺，必须用导引法疏通气血，并结合药物调治，若单靠药物也是不能治愈的。
English: This disease is under duress and not in the stomach, so it does not interfere with diet. Moxibustion and acupuncture should not be used during treatment. It is necessary to use the guidance method to dredge the qi and blood, and combine it with medication. If it is not cured by medication alone.

古文：帝曰：人有身体髀股胻皆肿，环齐而痛，是为何病？
现代文：黄帝说：人有身体臀部、大腿、小腿都肿胀，并且环绕肚脐周围疼痛，这是什么疾病呢？
English: Huang Di said: If a person has swollen hips, thighs and calves, and pain around the navel, what kind of disease is it?

古文：岐伯曰：病名曰伏梁，此风根也。
现代文：岐伯说：病名叫 伏梁 。这是由于风邪久留于体内所致。
English: Qi Bo said: The illness is called Fu Liang. This is caused by the cold lingering in the body for a long time.

古文：其气溢于大肠而着于肓，肓之原在齐下，故环齐而痛也，不可动之，动之为水溺涩之病也。
现代文：邪气流溢于大肠，而流着于肓膜，因为肓膜的起源在肚脐下部，所以环绕脐部作痛。这种病不可用按摩方法治疗，否则就会造成小便涩滞不利的疾病。
English: The evil gas flow overflows the large intestine and flows into the diaphragm. Because the origin of the diaphragm is in the lower part of the navel, it causes pain around the navel. This disease can not be treated by massage, otherwise it will cause a disease of unfavorable urinary retention.

古文：帝曰：人有尺脉数甚，筋急而见，此为何病？
现代文：黄帝说：人有尺肤脉搏动数疾，筋脉拘急外现的，这是什么病呢？
English: Huang Di said: People have a number of diseases of the skin and pulse, and the myocardium is an emergent phenomenon. What kind of disease is this?

古文：岐伯曰：此所谓疹筋。是人腹必急，白色黑色见，则病甚。
现代文：岐伯说：这就是所谓 疹筋 ，此人腹部必然拘急，如果面部见到或白或黑的颜色，病情则更加严重。
English: Qi Bo said: This is the so-called rash muscle, this person's abdomen is necessarily urgent, if the face is seen either white or black, the condition is more serious.

古文：帝曰：人有病头痛，以数岁不已，此安得之？
现代文：黄帝说：有人患头痛已经多年不愈这是怎么得的？
English: Huang Di said: Some people have been suffering from headaches for many years. How did this happen?

古文：名为何病？
现代文：叫做什么病呢？
English: What is the disease called?

古文：岐伯曰：当有所犯大寒，内至骨髓，髓者以脑为主，脑逆故令头痛、齿亦痛，病名曰厥逆。
现代文：岐伯说：此人当受过严重的寒邪侵犯，寒气向内侵入骨髓，脑为髓海，寒气由骨髓上逆于脑，所以使人头痛，齿为骨之余，故牙齿也痛，病由寒邪上逆所致，所以病名叫做 厥逆 。
English: Qi Bo said: This person has been seriously affected by the evil of cold. The cold air invades the bone marrow, and the brain is the marrow sea. The cold air invades the bone marrow and the brain, so the person has a headache. The teeth are the rest of the bones, so the teeth also have pain. The disease is caused by the evil of cold and vice versa, so the name of the disease is juegenesis.

古文：帝曰：善。
现代文：黄帝说：说得好！
English: Emperor Jinwu said, "Very good."

古文：帝曰：有病口甘者，病名为何？
现代文：黄帝说：有患口中发甜的，病名叫什么？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "There is a disease that produces sweetness in the mouth. What is the name of the disease?"

古文：何以得之？
现代文：是怎样得的呢？
English: How did you get it?

古文：岐伯曰：此五气之溢也，名曰脾瘅。
现代文：岐伯说：这是由于五味的精气向上泛溢所致，病名叫 脾瘅 。
English: Qibo said: This is caused by the essence of the five elements overflowing upwards. The disease is called spleen abscess.

古文：夫五味入口，藏于胃，脾为之行其精气，津液在脾，故令人口甘也。此肥美之所发也，此人必数食甘美而多肥也。
现代文：五味入于口，贮藏于胃，脾再将精气输送全身，所以脾失运化，津液停留在脾，致使脾气向上泛溢，就会使人口中发甜，这是由于过食肥甘美味所引起的疾病。
English: Five tastes are put into the mouth, stored in the stomach, and the spleen then transports the essence to the whole body. Therefore, the spleen is out of gear, and the juice stays in the spleen, causing the spleen to overflow upwards, which will make the population sweet. This is a disease caused by overeating fat, sweet and delicious.

古文：肥者令人内热，甘者令人中满，故其气上溢，转为消渴。
现代文：患这种病的人，必然经常吃甘美而肥腻的食物，肥腻能使人生内热，甘味能使人胃脘满胀，所以脾运失常，脾热上溢，日久就会转化成 消渴 。
English: People who suffer from this disease must often eat sweet and fatty foods. Fattiness can make life hot, and sweetness can make people's stomachs swell. Therefore, the spleen is abnormal, the spleen fever is overflowing, and it will be transformed into thirst quenching.

古文：治之以兰，除陈气也。
现代文：本病可用兰草治疗，以排除蓄积郁热之气。
English: The disease can be treated with orchids to eliminate the accumulation of stagnant heat.

古文：帝曰：有病，口苦取阳陵泉口苦者，病名为何？
现代文：黄帝说：有病口中发苦的，这是什么病？是怎样得的呢？岐伯说：病名叫 胆瘅 。
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "There is a disease that causes bitterness in the mouth. What kind of disease is it? How did you get it?" Gibo said, "The disease is called gallstones."

古文：何以得之？岐伯曰：病名曰胆瘅。夫肝者中之将也，取决于胆，咽为之使。
现代文：肝为将军之官，主谋虑，胆为中正之官，主决断，诸谋虑取决于胆，咽部为之外使。
English: The liver is the officer of the general, the master of the strategy, the gall is the officer of the center, the master of the decision, the strategies depend on the gall, and the pharynx is the external force.

古文：此人者数谋虑不决，故胆虚，气上溢，而口为之苦。
现代文：患者因屡次谋略而不能决断，情绪苦闷，遂使胆失却正常的功能，胆汁循经上泛，所以口中发苦。
English: The patient is unable to make a decision due to repeated strategies, and is emotionally distressed. As a result, the gallbladder loses its normal function, and the bile follows the general direction, so the mouth is bitter.

古文：治之以胆募、俞，治在《阴阳十二官相使》中。
现代文：治疗时应取胆经的募穴和俞穴，这种治法，记载于《阴阳十二官相使》中。
English: During treatment, the fundus and inframammary sinuses of the gallbladder should be taken. This treatment method is recorded in the "Yin and Yang Twelve Official Relations."

古文：帝曰：有癃者，一日数十溲，此不足也。
现代文：黄帝说：有患 癃 者，一天要解数十次小便，这是正气不足的现象。
English: Huang Di said: People with epilepsy have to urinate dozens of times a day, which is a phenomenon of insufficient qi.

古文：身热如炭，颈膺如格，人迎躁盛，喘息气逆，此有余也。
现代文：同时又有身热如炭火，咽喉与胸膺之间有格塞不通的感觉，人迎脉躁动急数，呼吸喘促，肺气上逆，这又是邪气有余的现象。
English: At the same time, there are body heat such as charcoal fire, a feeling of blockage between the throat and the chest, a person's pulse is fast, breathing is short, and the lungs are upside down, which is another evil phenomenon.

古文：太阴脉微细如发者，此不足也。
现代文：手太阴肺经的脉象微细如头发，这也是正气不足的表现。
English: The pulse of the hand is as thin as hair, which is also a sign of a lack of righteousness.

古文：其病安在？
现代文：这种病的原因究竟在哪里？
English: What exactly is the cause of this disease?

古文：名为何病？
现代文：叫做什么病呢？
English: What is the disease called?

古文：岐伯曰：病在太阴，其盛在胃，颇在肺，病名曰厥，死不治。
现代文：岐伯说：此病根在脾脏，热邪炽盛的表现在胃，症状却偏重在肺，病的名字叫做 厥 ，属于不能治的死症。
English: Qi Bo said: "The root of this disease is in the spleen, and the fever manifests itself in the stomach, but the symptoms are concentrated in the lungs. The name of the disease is Jue, which is an incurable fatal disease.

古文：此所谓得五有余二不足也。
现代文：这就是所谓 五有余、二不足 的证候。
English: This is the so-called five-plus, two-minus syndrome.

古文：帝曰：何谓五有余二不足？
现代文：黄帝说：什么叫 五有余、二不足 呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "What is five surplus and two deficiency?"

古文：岐伯曰：所谓五有余者，五病气之有余也；二不足者，亦病气之不足也。
现代文：岐伯说：所谓 五有余 就是五种病气有余的证侯。所谓 二不足 ，就是两种正气不足的证候。
English: Qibo said: the so-called five excesses are the symptoms of five excesses of sickness, and the so-called two deficiencies are the symptoms of two deficiencies of righteousness.

古文：今外得五有余，内得二不足，此其身不表不里，亦正死明矣。
现代文：现在患者外见五有余，内见二不足，这种病既不能依有余而攻其表，又不能从不足而补其里，所以说是必死无疑了。
English: At present, the patient sees more than five on the outside, but sees two deficiencies on the inside. This disease can neither attack the surface by relying on the surplus, nor can it make up for it from the deficiency, so it is said that it is certain to die.

古文：帝曰：人生而有病巅疾者，病名曰何？
现代文：黄帝说：人出生以后就患有癫痫病的，病的名字叫什么？
English: Huang Di said: People are born with epilepsy, what is the name of the disease?

古文：安所得之？
现代文：是怎样得的呢？
English: How did you get it?

古文：岐伯曰：病名为胎病。
现代文：岐伯说：病的名字叫 胎病 ，这种病是胎儿在母腹中得的。
English: Qi Bo said: The name of the disease is fetal disease. This disease is acquired by the fetus in the mother's womb.

古文：此得之在母腹中，时其母有所大惊，气上而不下，精气并居，故令子发为巅疾也。
现代文：由于其母曾受到很大的惊恐，邪气逆于上而不下，精气与邪气相争并聚不散，影响胎儿故生下来就患癫痫病。
English: Because his mother had been greatly frightened, the evil spirit would not go down, and the spirit would fight with the evil spirit and would not disperse, affecting the fetus and causing it to be born with epilepsy.

古文：帝曰：有病痝然如有水状，切其脉大紧，身无痛者，形不瘦，不能食，食少，名为何病？
现代文：黄帝说：面目浮肿，像有水状，切按脉搏大而且紧，身体没有痛处，形体也不消瘦，但不能吃饭，或者吃的很少，这种病叫什么呢？
English: Huang Di said: the face is puffy, like watery, according to the pulse large and tight, the body has no pain, the body is not emaciated, but can not eat, or eat very little, what is this disease called?

古文：岐伯曰：病生在肾，名为肾风。
现代文：岐伯说：这种病发生在肾脏，名叫 肾风 。
English: "This disease occurs in the kidneys and is called nephritis," said Qi Bo.

古文：肾风而不能食，善惊，惊已心气痿者死。
现代文：肾风病人到了不能吃饭，常常惊恐的阶段，如若反复惊悸，导致心气不能恢复而神气消亡，就为死症。
English: When patients with nephritis reach the stage where they can't eat and are often terrified, such as if they have repeated convulsions, causing their spirits to fail to recover and their self-confidence to wane, it is a terminal illness.

