古文：子曰： 学而时习之，不亦说乎？
现代文：孔子说： 学了知识然后按一定的时间复习它，不也是很愉快吗？
English: Confucius said: Isn't it pleasant to learn knowledge and then review it according to a certain time?

古文：有朋自远方来，不亦乐乎？
现代文：有志同道合的人从远方来，不也是很快乐吗？
English: Isn't it great when like-minded people come from far away?

古文：人不知而不愠，不亦君子乎？ 
现代文：人家不了解我，我也不生气，不也是品德上有修养的人吗？ 
English: People don't understand me, I don't get angry, aren't I a moral person?

古文：有子曰： 其为人也孝弟，而好犯上者，鲜矣；不好犯上而好作乱者，未之有也。
现代文：有子说： 一个人如果能够孝顺父母，友爱兄长，却喜欢犯上作乱，这是基本不可能。不喜欢犯上作乱，而喜欢造反的人是没有的。
English: Atsuko said, "If a person is able to be filial and obedient to his parents, and loves his elder brother, but likes to commit disorder, this is basically impossible. There is no one who does not like to commit disorder, but likes to rebel.

古文：君子务本，本立而道生。
现代文：君子应该专心于根本的事务，根本建立了，治国做人的原则也就有了。
English: Nobles should concentrate on fundamental matters, and the principle of governing the country and being a man has been established fundamentally.

古文：孝弟也者，其为仁之本与！ 子曰： 巧言令色，鲜矣仁！ 
现代文：孝悌，这是仁爱的根本！ 孔子说： 花言巧语，满脸谄媚之色的人，很少会有仁爱之心。 
English: Filial piety, this is the foundation of benevolence! Confucius said: People who are full of flowery words and charming faces rarely have a benevolent heart.

古文：曾子曰： 吾日三省吾身：为人谋而不忠乎？
现代文：曾子说： 我每天多次地反省自己：替别人办事是不是尽心尽力呢？
English: Zeng Zi said, "I reflect on myself many times a day: Am I doing my best for others?

古文：与朋友交而不信乎？
现代文：跟朋友交往是不是真诚，诚实呢？
English: Is it sincere and honest to socialize with friends?

古文：传不习乎？ 
现代文：老师传授的知识是否复习过了呢？ 
English: Has the knowledge imparted by the teacher been reviewed?

古文：子曰： 道千乘之国，敬事而信，节用而爱人，使民以时。 
现代文：孔子说： 治理一个能出千辆兵车的大国，处理事物时应谨慎、恪守信用、诚实无欺，节约财政开支，爱惜百姓，征用民力时，要顾及他们的生产作息。 
English: Confucius said: To govern a large country that can produce a thousand chariots, we should be prudent in handling things, adhere to trust, be honest and honest, save financial expenses, cherish the people, and take into account their production schedule when requisitioning people's power.

古文：子曰： 弟子入则孝，出则弟，谨而信，泛爱众，而亲仁，行有余力，则以学文。 
现代文：孔子说： 弟子们在家里就要孝顺父母，出门在外，要顺从师长，言行要谨慎，要诚实可信，要博爱大众，亲近仁德的人。这样亲身实践之后，如果还有剩余的时间跟精力，就再去学习文献知识。 
English: Confucius said, "Disciples should be filial to their parents at home, obedient to their teachers when out and about, prudent in word and deed, honest and trustworthy, loving the public, and close to people of benevolence. After such personal practice, if there is any remaining time and energy, go back to studying literature knowledge.

古文：子夏曰： 贤贤易色；事父母，能竭其力；事君，能致其身；与朋友交，言而有信。
现代文：子夏说： 对妻子，看中品德，不看中姿色；侍奉父母，能够竭尽全力；服侍君主，能够献出自己的生命；跟朋友来往，能够说话诚实恪守信用。
English: Zixia said: For a wife, if you look at the character, you will not look at the appearance; if you serve your parents, you can do your best; if you serve the monarch, you can give your life; if you come and go with friends, you can speak honestly and abide by the trust.

古文：虽曰未学，吾必谓之学矣。 
现代文：这样的人，尽管他自己谦虚说没有学习，我也一定说他已经学习过了。 
English: Such a man, although he modestly says that he does not study, I must say that he has studied.

古文：子曰： 君子不重则不威，学则不固。
现代文：孔子说： 君子举止不庄重，就没有威严，即使读书，学习的知识也不会牢固。
English: Confucius said: If a gentleman's behavior is not dignified, there will be no dignity. Even if he reads books, the knowledge he learns will not be solid.

古文：主忠信，无友不如己者，过，则勿惮改。 
现代文：做事应该以忠和信这两种道德为主，不要和不忠不信的人交朋友；犯了错，就不要怕改正。 
English: The two morals of loyalty and faith should be the main ones in doing things. Don't make friends with those who are disloyal and unfaithful. If you make a mistake, don't be afraid to correct it.

古文：曾子曰： 慎终追远，民德归厚矣。 
现代文：曾子说： 慎重办理父母的丧事，虔诚祭祀远代先祖，这样就能使百姓的德行趋归敦厚。 
English: Zengzi said: Carefully handling the funerals of parents and piously offering sacrifices to distant ancestors can make the virtue of the people grow stronger.

古文：子禽问于子贡曰： 夫子至于是邦也，必闻其政，求之与，抑与之与？ 
现代文：子禽问子贡说： 老师去到一个国家，就会知道这个国家的政事。这种事情是他自己求得的呢？
English: The fowl asked Zigong, "When a teacher goes to a country, he will know the politics of that country. Did he ask for this kind of thing?"

古文：子贡曰： 夫子温、良、恭、俭、让以得之。
现代文：还是各个国家的国君主动以自己国家的政事咨询，亲口告诉他的呢？ 子贡说： 老师是靠温和、善良、恭敬、节俭、谦逊来取得他们的信任。
English: Or did the sovereigns of various countries take the initiative to consult him on the political affairs of their countries and tell him in person? Zigong said: The teacher gains their trust by being gentle, kind, respectful, frugal, and humble.

古文：夫子之求之也，其诸异乎人之求之与？ 
现代文：他老人家获得的方法，和别人获得的方法，不相同吧？ 
English: Isn't the way he got it different from the way other people get it?

古文：子曰： 父在，观其志；父没，观其行；三年无改于父之道，可谓孝矣。 
现代文：孔子说； 当他父亲还活着时，要观察他的志向；在他父亲去世以后，要观察他的行为；若是他能长久的坚持父亲生前正确的原则，这样的人就可以说是尽到孝了。 
English: Confucius said: When his father is still alive, observe his aspirations; after his father's death, observe his behavior; if he can adhere to the correct principles of his father's life for a long time, such a person can be said to have fulfilled filial piety.

古文：有子曰： 礼之用，和为贵。
现代文：有子说： 礼的作用，在于使人的关系变得更加和谐。
English: Ariko said, "The role of etiquette is to make human relationships more harmonious.

古文：先王之道，斯为美。
现代文：古代君王治国的方法，宝贵的地方就在这里。
English: It is here that the precious place of the ancient monarchs' way of governing the country lies.

古文：小大由之，有所不行。
现代文：但是不论大小事情一味按和谐的办法去做，有的时候又行不通。
English: However, no matter how big or small things are, it is sometimes not possible to do everything in a harmonious way.

古文：知和而和，不以礼节之，亦不可行也。 
现代文：这是因为为了和谐而和谐，不用礼来节制和谐，也是行不通的。 
English: This is because harmony for the sake of harmony, without using etiquette to control harmony, is also unworkable.

古文：有子曰： 信近于义，言可复也。恭近于礼，远耻辱也。
现代文：有子说： 讲究信用而合乎事实，说过的话是可以去实现的；恭敬而能合乎礼节，这样才能远离耻辱。
English: Ariko said, "If you are trustworthy and truthful, you can achieve what you say. If you are respectful and polite, you can avoid disgrace."

古文：因不失其亲，亦可宗也。 
现代文：所以依靠的都是可以信赖的人，这样也是值得尊敬的。 
English: Therefore, people who can be relied on are trustworthy, and this is also worthy of respect.

古文：子曰： 君子食无求饱，居无求安，敏于事而慎于言，就有道而正焉，可谓好学也已。 
现代文：孔子说： 君子，不追求饮食的饱足，不追求居住的舒适，做事情勤劳敏捷，说话小心谨慎，亲近有德之人来匡正自己，这样就算得上好学了。 
English: Confucius said: Gentlemen, if you do not pursue the fullness of food, do not pursue the comfort of living, do things diligently and quickly, speak cautiously, and get close to virtuous people to correct yourself, then you should be good at learning.

古文：子贡曰： 贫而无谄，富而无骄，何如？ 
现代文：子贡说： 贫穷却不巴结奉承，富有却不骄傲自大，怎么样？ 
English: Zigong said, "How about being poor but without flattery, and rich but without arrogance?

古文：子曰： 可也。
现代文：孔子说： 这样可以算不错了。
English: Confucius said: This can be considered a good thing.

古文：未若贫而乐，富而好礼者也。 
现代文：只是还不如虽贫穷却乐于道，虽然富裕却又好礼的人。 
English: It's just that they're not as good as people who are poor but happy to talk and rich but polite.

古文：子贡曰： 《诗》云： 如切如磋，如琢如磨 ，其斯之谓与？ 
现代文：子贡说： 《诗经》上说， 要像骨、角、象牙、玉石等的加工一样，先开料，再粗锉，细刻，然后磨光 ，就是讲的这个意思吧？ 
English: Zigong said, "In the "Book of Songs," it is said that, like the processing of bone, horn, ivory, jade, etc., it is necessary to first open the material, then roughen it, finely carve it, and then polish it, is that what you mean?

古文：子曰： 赐也，始可与言《诗》已矣，告诸往而知来者。 
现代文：孔子说： 子贡呀，你能从我已经讲过的话中领会到我还没有说到的意思，举一反三，我现在可以同你谈论《诗经》了。 
English: Confucius said, "Zigong, if you can understand from what I have said what I have not yet said, I can now talk to you about the Book of Songs.

古文：子曰： 不患人之不己知，患不知人也。 
现代文：孔子说： 不要担心别人不了解自己，只需要担心自己不了解别人。 
English: Confucius said: Don't worry that others don't understand you, just worry that you don't understand others.

