古文：七年春，齐人伐郑。
现代文：七年春季，齐国攻打郑国。
English: In the spring of the seventh year, Qi attacked Zheng.

古文：夏，小邾子来朝。
现代文：夏季。小邾国的国君来朝见鲁僖公。
English: In the summer, the sovereign of Xiaoyan came to the court to meet Lu Ye.

古文：郑杀其大夫申侯。
现代文：郑文公杀死申侯。
English: Zheng Wenguang killed Shen Hou.

古文：秋七月，公会齐侯、宋公、陈世子款、郑世子华，盟于甯母。
现代文：秋季七月，僖公与齐侯、宋公、陈世子款、郑世子华在甯母盟会。
English: In the autumn of July, Nie Gong and Qi Hou, Song Gong, Chen Shizihai and Zheng Shizihua were at the Nie Mu League.

古文：曹伯班卒。
现代文：曹昭公班去世。
English: Cao Zhaokong passed away.

古文：公子友如齐。
现代文：鲁国公子友去齐国。
English: The prince of Lu went to Qi.

古文：冬，葬曹昭公。
现代文：冬季，安葬曹昭公。
English: In winter, Cao Zhaogong was buried.

古文：七年春，齐人伐郑，孔叔言于郑伯曰： 谚有之曰： 心则不竞，何惮于病。 
现代文：七年春季，齐国人进攻郑国。孔叔对郑文公说： 俗语有这样的话： 心志假若不坚强，怎么能又怕屈辱？ 
English: In the spring of the seventh year, the people of Qi attacked Zheng. Uncle Kong said to Zheng Wenguang: There is a saying: If one's mind is not strong, how can one be afraid of humiliation?

古文：既不能强，又不能弱，所以毙也。
现代文：既然不能强硬，又不能软弱，因此只有死路一条。
English: Since you can't be tough and you can't be weak, there's only one way to die.

古文：国危矣，请下齐以救国。 
现代文：国家危险了，请您向齐国屈服以挽救国家。 
English: The country is in danger, please surrender to Qi to save the country.

古文：公曰： 吾知其所由来矣。姑少待我。 
现代文：郑文公说： 我知道他们是为什么来的了，姑且稍稍等我一下。 
English: Zheng Wengong said, "I know why they have come, let them wait for me for a moment."

古文：对曰： 朝不及夕，何以待君？ 
现代文：孔叔回答说： 情况危急，早晨到不了晚上，怎么等待君王呢？ 
English: Uncle Kong replied, "The situation is critical, the morning cannot reach the evening, how can we wait for the king?

古文：夏，郑杀申侯以说于齐，且用陈辕涛涂之谮也。
现代文：夏季，郑文公杀死申侯以讨好齐国，同时也是由于陈国辕涛涂的诬陷。
English: In the summer, Zheng Wengong killed Shen Hou to please Qi Guo, and also because of the frame-up by Chen Guo.

古文：初，申侯，申出也，有宠于楚文王。
现代文：当初，因为申侯是申氏所生，受到楚文王的宠信。
English: At first, he was favored by King Chuwen because he was born to the Shin clan.

古文：文王将死，与之璧，使行，曰， 唯我知女，女专利而不厌，予取予求，不女疵瑕也。
现代文：文王将要死的时候，把璧玉给他，让他走，说： 只有我了解你，你垄断财货而永不满足，从我这里取，从我这里求，我不加罪于你。
English: When King Wen was about to die, he gave Bi Yu to him and let him go, saying, "Only I understand you. You monopolize wealth and goods and are never satisfied. Take from me, ask from me, and I will not punish you."

古文：后之人将求多于女，女必不免。
现代文：后来的人将会向你索取大量财货，你必然不免于罪。
English: Later, people will ask you for a lot of money and goods, and you will certainly not be exempt from the crime.

古文：我死，女必速行。无適小国，将不女容焉。 
现代文：我死，你一定要赶快走，不要到小国去，他们不会容纳你的。 
English: I'm dying, you must leave quickly, don't go to a small country, they won't accept you.

古文：既葬，出奔郑，又有宠于厉公。
现代文：安葬楚文王后，申侯逃到郑国，又受到厉公的宠信。
English: Queen Chu Wen was buried peacefully, Shen Hou fled to Zheng Guo, and was favored by Liguo.

古文：子文闻其死也，曰： 古人有言曰： 知臣莫若君。 
现代文：子文听到他的死讯，说： 古人有这样的话说： 了解臣子没有像国君那样清楚的。 
English: On hearing the news of his death, Ziwen said: The ancients had this to say: A courtier does not know as much as a sovereign.

古文：弗可改也已。 
现代文：这句话是不能改变的啊！ 
English: This sentence cannot be changed!

古文：秋，盟于甯母，谋郑故也。
现代文：秋季，鲁僖公和齐桓公、宋桓公、陈国的世子款、郑国的世子华在宁母结盟，策划进攻郑国。
English: In the autumn, Lu Wei, Qi Huan, Song Huan, Chen Guo's heir, and Zheng Guo's heir Hua formed an alliance in Ningbo and planned to attack Zheng Guo.

古文：管仲言于齐侯曰： 臣闻之，招携以礼，怀远以德，德礼不易，无人不怀。 
现代文：管仲对齐桓公说： 臣听说：招抚有二心的国家，用礼；怀念疏远的国家，用德。凡事不违背德和礼，没有人不归附的。 
English: Guan Zhong said to Qi Kuan Gong, "Minister, I have heard that: to appease a double-minded country, use courtesy; to remember an estranged country, use virtue. Everything does not violate morality and etiquette, and there is no one who does not adhere.

古文：齐侯修礼于诸侯，诸侯官受方物。
现代文：齐桓公就以礼对待诸侯，诸侯的官员接受了齐国赏的土特产。
English: Lord Qi Huan treated the lords with courtesy, and the lords' officials accepted the local specialties appreciated by the State of Qi.

古文：郑伯使大子华听命于会。言于齐侯曰： 洩氏、孔氏、子人氏三族，实违君命。
现代文：郑文公派遣太子华接受会议的命令，对齐桓公说： 泄氏、孔氏、子人氏三族，违背您的命令。
English: Zheng Wengong dispatched Prince Zihua to accept the order of the meeting, and said to Qi Huan: The three clans of Ke, Kong and Zihong have violated your order.

古文：若君去之以为成，我以郑为内臣，君亦无所不利焉。 
现代文：您如果除掉他们而和敝国讲和，我国作为您的内臣，这对您也没有什么不利。 
English: If you get rid of them and make peace with China, our country, as your vassal, will not be a disadvantage to you.

古文：齐侯将许之。
现代文：齐桓公准备答应他。
English: Lord Qi Jing was ready to agree.

古文：管仲曰： 君以礼与信属诸侯，而以奸终之，无乃不可乎？
现代文：管仲说： 君王用礼和信会合诸侯，而用邪恶来结束，未免不行吧。
English: Guanzhong said, "It is inevitable that the king will use courtesy and sincerity to gather the princes, and end up with evil.

古文：子父不奸之谓礼，守命共时之谓信。
现代文：儿子和父亲不相违背叫做礼，见机行事完成君命叫做信。
English: If a son and his father do not contradict each other, it is called etiquette. If a son takes the opportunity to fulfill his father's command, it is called faith.

古文：违此二者，奸莫大焉。 
现代文：违背这两点，没有比这再大的邪恶了。 
English: There is no greater evil than to violate these two points.

古文：公曰： 诸侯有讨于郑，未捷，今苟有衅，从之不亦可乎？ 
现代文：齐桓公说： 诸侯进攻郑国，没有得胜；现在幸而有机可乘，利用这点，不也行吗？ 
English: Qi Kuan Gong said, "The lords attacked Zheng Guo, but did not win; now, fortunately, there is something to be taken advantage of, so why not take advantage of this?

古文：对曰： 君若绥之以德，加之以训辞，而帅诸侯以讨郑，郑将覆亡之不暇，岂敢不惧？
现代文：管仲回答说： 君王如果用德来安抚，加上教训，他们不接受，然后率领诸侯讨伐郑国；郑国挽救危亡还来不及，哪敢不害怕？
English: Guanzhong replied, "If the king uses virtue to appease and teach, they will not accept it, and then he will lead the princes to fight against Zheng. It is too late to save Zheng. How dare they not be afraid?"

古文：若总其罪人以临之，郑有辞矣，何惧？
现代文：如果领着他的罪人以兵进攻郑国，郑国就有理了，还害怕什么？
English: If the criminal who is leading him attacks Zheng Guo with soldiers, Zheng Guo will be justified. What is there to be afraid of?

古文：且夫合诸侯以崇德也，会而列奸，何以示后嗣？
现代文：而且会合诸侯，这是为了尊崇德行。会合而让奸邪之人列于国君，怎么能向后代交代？
English: Moreover, the princes were gathered together for the purpose of honoring virtue. How can we explain to future generations that a treacherous man was appointed as the sovereign?

古文：夫诸侯之会，其德刑礼义，无国不记。
现代文：诸侯的会见，他们的德行、刑罚、礼仪、道义，没有一个国家不加以记载。
English: There is not a single country that has not recorded the meetings of its princes, their virtues, punishments, etiquette, and morals.

古文：记奸之位，君盟替矣。
现代文：如果记载了让邪恶的人居于君位，君王的盟约就要废弃了。
English: If it is recorded that wicked men have been placed on the throne, the king's covenant will be nullified.

古文：作而不记，非盛德也。
现代文：事情做了而不能见于记载，这就不是崇高的道德。
English: It is not high morals to do something and not have it recorded.

古文：君其勿许，郑必受盟。
现代文：君主还是不要同意！郑国一定会接受盟约的。
English: Still, the monarch should not agree! Zheng Guo will definitely accept the covenant.

古文：夫子华既为大子而求介于大国，以弱其国，亦必不免。
现代文：子华既然做了太子，而要求凭借大国来削弱他的国家，也一定不能免于祸患。
English: Since Zihua has become a prince, and demands to weaken his country with the help of a great power, he must not be exempt from the disaster.

古文：郑有叔詹、堵叔、师叔三良为政，未可间也。 
现代文：郑国有叔詹、堵叔、师叔三个贤明的人执政，还不能去钻它的空子。 
English: Zhengzhou has Uncle Zhan, Uncle Dou, and Uncle Shifu, three wise people in power, but they can't take advantage of it.

古文：齐侯辞焉。
现代文：齐桓公于是向子华辞谢。
English: Lord Qi Kuan then withdrew his thanks to Zihua.

古文：子华由是得罪于郑。
现代文：子华因此得罪了郑国。
English: As a result, Zihua offended Zheng.

古文：冬，郑伯请盟于齐。
现代文：冬季，郑文公派遣使者到齐国请求订立盟约。
English: In the winter, Zheng Wengong sent an envoy to Qi to request the conclusion of a treaty.

古文：闰月，惠王崩。
现代文：闰十二月，周惠王去世。
English: In December, King Zhou Hui passed away.

古文：襄王恶大叔带之难。惧不立，不发丧而告难于齐。
现代文：襄王担心大叔王子带作乱，又害怕不能立为国君，所以不发布丧事的消息，却把将要发生内乱的事向齐国报告。
English: King Xiang was worried that his uncle, the prince, would cause trouble, and he was afraid that he would not be able to become the king. Therefore, he did not release the news of the funeral, but reported to Qi that there would be a civil war.

