古文：孔子行游，马逸食稼，野人怒，絷其马。
现代文：原文孔子有一天出行，在路上其驾车的马挣脱缰绳跑去偷吃了农夫的庄稼，农夫非常生气，捉住马并把它关起来。
English: One day when Confucius was traveling, the horse he was driving on the road broke free and ran off to steal the farmer's crops. The farmer was very angry and caught the horse and locked it up.

古文：子贡往说之，卑词而不得。
现代文：子贡去要马，放下架子低声下气地恳求农夫把马放了，没想到农夫根本不理他。
English: Zigong went to get the horse, put down the stand, and in a low voice implored the farmer to let the horse go. He did not expect the farmer to ignore him at all.

古文：孔子曰： 夫以人之所不能听说人，譬以太牢享野兽，以《九韶》乐飞鸟也！ 
现代文：孔子说： 用别人听不懂的道理去说服他，就好比请野兽享用祭祀的太牢，请飞鸟聆听九韶般优美的音乐一样，根本是驴唇不对马嘴，当然也就不会有什么好效果。 
English: Confucius said: To use a reason that others do not understand to persuade him is like inviting a wild animal to enjoy a sacrificial feast, or a bird to listen to music as beautiful as the nine heavens. In essence, the lips of a donkey are not the same as the mouth of a horse, and of course it will not have any good effect.

古文：乃使马圉往，谓野人曰： 子不耕于东海，予不游西海也，吾马安得不犯子之稼？ 
现代文：于是孔子改派马夫前去要马，马夫对农夫说： 你从未离家到东海边去耕作，我也不曾到过西方来，但两地的庄稼却长得一模一样，马儿怎么知道那是你的庄稼而不能偷吃呢？ 
English: So Confucius sent his groom to get a horse. The groom said to the farmer, "You have never left home to farm by the East Sea, and I have never been to the West, but the crops in the two places look exactly the same. How does the horse know that it is your crop and cannot steal it?"

古文：野人大喜，解马而予之。
现代文：农人听了觉得有道理，便把马儿还给马夫。
English: Hearing this, the farmer felt justified and returned the horse to the groom.

古文：人各以类相通。
现代文：冯述评所谓物以类聚，人以群分。
English: Feng commented on the so-called "like attracts like" and "people are divided into groups."

古文：述《诗》《书》于野人之前，此腐儒之所以误国也。
现代文：在粗人面前谈论《诗经》《尚书》，这是不知变通的迂腐儒生所以误国误事的原因。
English: Talking about "The Book of Songs" and "The Book of Songs" in front of the common people is the reason why the inflexible pedantry of Confucianism is a mistake.

古文：马圉之说诚善，假使出子贡之口，野人仍不从。
现代文：马夫的话虽然很有道理，但这番话若从子贡口中说出，恐怕仍然让农夫难以接受。
English: Although Maf's words make a lot of sense, if these words were to come from the mouth of Zigong, I'm afraid they would still be difficult for farmers to accept.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：文质貌殊，其神固已离矣。
现代文：因为子贡和农夫两人的学识、修养都相差太远，彼此在交涉之前就已经心存距离感。
English: Because the knowledge and cultivation of the two people, the tributary and the farmer, are too far apart, they already have a sense of distance before the negotiation.

古文：然则孔子曷不即遣马圉，而听子贡之往耶？
现代文：然而孔子为什么不要马夫先去，而任由子贡前去劝说农夫呢？
English: However, why did Confucius not want the stableman to go first, but let the tribute go ahead to persuade the farmer?

古文：先遣马圉，则子贡之心不服；既屈子贡，而马圉之神始至。
现代文：这是因为孔子知道如果一开始就让马夫去，子贡心中一定不服气；如今不但子贡心中毫无怨言，也使得马夫因此有了表现的机会。
English: This is because Confucius knew that if he had let Mafu go at the beginning, Zigong would not have been convinced; now, not only is there no complaint in Zigong's heart, but it also gives Mafu a chance to perform.

古文：圣人达人之情，故能尽人之用；后世以文法束人，以资格限人，又以兼长望人，天下事岂有济乎！
现代文：圣人能通达事理人情，所以才能人尽其才。后世常以成文的法规来束缚人，以各种资格来限制人，以拥有多种长处来期望人。这样，天下之事怎么还能有成功的希望呢？
English: The sages are able to understand human affairs, so the talented people can do their best. Later generations often bind people with written laws and regulations, restrict people with various qualifications, and expect people to have multiple strengths. In this way, how can things in the world still have hope of success?

