古文：魏收，字伯起，小字佛助，钜鹿下曲阳人也。
现代文：魏收，字伯起，小字佛助，钜鹿下曲阳人。
English: Wei collection, word Boqi, small word Bussu, elk down the song Yangren.

古文：自序：汉初魏无知封高良侯，子均。
现代文：他自叙家史说：汉初魏无知被封为高良侯，他的儿子叫魏均。
English: He recounted his family history: At the beginning of the Han Dynasty, Wei Wuzhong was named Gao Lianghou, and his son was named Wei Junmao.

古文：均子恢。
现代文：魏均的儿子魏恢。
English: Wei Jun's son Wei Wei.

古文：恢子彦。
现代文：魏恢的儿子魏彦。
English: Wei Wei's son Wei Yan.

古文：彦子歆，字子胡，幼孤，有志操，博洽经史，位终本郡太守。
现代文：魏彦的儿子魏歆，字子胡，幼小丧父，很有志气，精通经书和历史，官至本郡太守。
English: Wei Yan's son Wei Yao, nicknamed Hu, lost his father at a young age. He was very ambitious, well versed in scriptures and history, and rose to the position of the county's grand marshal.

古文：子悦，字处德，性沉厚，有度量，宣城公赵国李孝伯见而重之，以女妻焉。
现代文：魏歆的儿子魏悦，字处德，性情深沉厚重，胸怀宽阔，宣城公赵国李孝伯对他很器重，把女儿嫁给了他。
English: Wei Yue, the son of Wei Xuan, was a virtuous man, with a deep and profound character, and a broad mind. Xuancheng Zhao Guo Li Xiao Bo was very precious to him, and married his daughter to him.

古文：永熙二年春，卒于洛阳孝义里舍，时年六十。
现代文：魏悦任济阴太守，因政绩突出受到称誉。魏悦的儿子魏子建，字敬忠，是魏收的父亲，历任左光禄大夫，加封为散骑常侍、骠骑大将军。
English: Wei Yue's son, Wei Zijian, nicknamed Jingzhong, was the father of Wei Jie, the successive doctor of the Left Guanglu, and was awarded the title of straggler and cavalry general.

古文：又赠仪同三司、定州刺史，谥曰文静。
现代文：去世后，追赠为仪同三司、定州刺史，谥号文静。
English: After his death, he was posthumously given the posthumous names of Jidong Sanji, Dingzhou Zhishi, and the nickname Wenjing.

古文：二子，收、祚。
现代文：魏收从小机警敏捷，不拘小节。
English: Wei Hui has been alert and agile since he was a child.

古文：收少机警，不持细行。
现代文：十五岁时，颇能熟习文章的写法。
English: At the age of fifteen, he was quite familiar with how to write an article.

古文：年十五，颇已属文。及随父赴边，好习骑射，欲以武艺自达。
现代文：曾跟随父亲奔赴边疆，喜好骑马射箭，想靠武艺建功立业。
English: He once followed his father to the frontier, likes horseback archery, and wants to build a career in martial arts.

古文：荥阳郑伯调之曰： 魏郎弄戟多少？ 
现代文：荥阳郑伯跟他调侃说： 魏郎，你使用过的兵器有多少？ 
English: Shenyang Zhengbo mocked him and said: Wei Lang, how many weapons have you used?

古文：收惭，遂折节读书。
现代文：他很惭愧，便下苦功夫读书。
English: Ashamed, he studied hard.

古文：夏月，坐板床，随树阴讽诵。
现代文：夏天，他坐在木板床上，随着树荫的转移而改换位置读书。
English: In the summer, he sits on a wooden bed, shifting his position to read as the shade shifts.

古文：积年，床板为之锐减，而精力不辍。
现代文：过了几年，床板已经磨损，而他刻苦学习的精力一点也没有减少。
English: Years later, the floorboards have worn away, but his energy to study hard has not diminished at all.

古文：以文华显。
现代文：他靠文章的华丽优美渐露头角。
English: He rose to prominence through the pageantry of his writing.

古文：初除太学博士。
现代文：最初被任命为太学博士。
English: He was initially appointed as a Doctor of Science.

古文：及尔硃荣于河阴滥害朝士，收亦在围中，以日晏获免。
现代文：尔朱荣在河阴滥肆杀害朝臣，他也在兵士的包围中，因天色已晚，侥幸免于一死。
English: Er Zhu Rong killed courtiers indiscriminately in the shadows of the river. He was also surrounded by soldiers, but because it was late in the day, he narrowly escaped death.

古文：吏部尚书李神隽重收才学，奏授司徒记室参军。
现代文：吏部尚书李神俊很看重他的才学，奏请朝廷授他为司徒记室参军。
English: Li Shenjun, the secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, valued his talent and asked the court to allow him to join the army.

古文：永安三年，除北主客郎中。
现代文：孝庄帝永安三年，他任北主客郎中。
English: In the third year of Emperor Yongan of Xiaozhuang, he served as the guest of the north.

古文：节闵帝立，妙简近侍，诏试收为封禅书。
现代文：节闵帝即位，精心选拔近臣，下诏测试，让魏收起草封禅书。
English: Emperor Jiechi ascended to the throne, carefully selected his close vassals, issued the imperial edict test, and asked Wei Hui to draft the imperial edict.

古文：收下笔便就，不立藁草，文将千言，所改无几。
现代文：他提笔一挥而就，连草稿都没要。文章近千言，改动的地方寥寥无几。
English: With a single stroke of his pen, he didn't even ask for a draft. The article is nearly a thousand words long, with very few changes.

古文：时黄门郎贾思同侍立，深奇之，白帝曰： 虽七步之才，无以过此。 
现代文：这时，黄门郎贾思同侍立在天子旁边，很佩服魏收的才学，对节闵帝说： 曹植虽然有的七步成诗之才，也不能超过魏收。 
English: At this time, Huangmen Lang Jasi and his attendants stood next to the heavenly son, admiring Wei Jie's talent, and said to Emperor Xizong: Although Cao Zhi has the ability to write poetry in seven steps, he cannot surpass Wei Jie.

古文：迁散骑侍郎，寻敕典起居注，并修国史，俄兼中书侍郎，时年二十六。
现代文：朝廷迁升他为散骑侍郎，不久，命他掌管天子的起居注的记录，并参与修撰国史。很快，又兼中书侍郎，时年才二十六岁。
English: The imperial court promoted him to the position of horseback-riding attendant. Soon, he was ordered to take charge of the records of the Emperor's residence, and to participate in the compilation of national history. Soon, he also became the chancellor's attendant, at the age of only twenty-six.

古文：孝武初，又诏收摄本职，文诰填积，事咸称旨。
现代文：孝武帝初年，朝廷又下诏命魏收担任原来的官职。朝廷堆积了许多文书诰命，魏收一一处理，事事都能让孝武帝满意。
English: In the first year of Emperor Xiaowu's reign, the imperial court issued an imperial edict ordering Wei Jie to resume his former official position. The imperial court had accumulated a lot of paperwork, and Wei Jie dealt with it one by one, so that everything could satisfy Emperor Xiaowu.

古文：黄门郎崔甗从齐神武入朝，熏灼于世，收初不诣门。
现代文：黄门郎崔跟随神武帝高欢入朝，气焰熏天，魏收不登他的家门。
English: Huangmen Lang Cui followed Emperor Gao Huan into the imperial court. He was full of enthusiasm, and Wei Jie did not enter his house.

古文：甗为帝登阼赦云： 朕托体孝文。 
现代文：崔为孝武帝登基起草的赦免天下罪囚的诏命中说 ：朕托体孝文。 
English: Cui said in the imperial edict to pardon the world's prisoners, which was drafted for the enthronement of Emperor Xiaowu: "I am a filial son.

古文：收嗤其率直。
现代文：魏收嗤笑他写得太直白。
English: Wei Hui scoffed that his writing was too straightforward.

古文：正员郎李慎以告之，甗深忿忌。
现代文：正员外郎李慎把这情况密报给崔，崔非常恼恨魏收。
English: Li Shen, the official foreign minister, reported this situation to Cui secretly. Cui was very angry with Wei Shuo.

古文：时节闵帝殂，令收为诏。
现代文：这时，节闵帝已经去世，朝廷命魏收起草诏书。
English: At this time, Emperor Jiechi had already passed away, and the imperial court ordered Wei Wei to draft the edict.

古文：甗乃宣言：收普泰世出入帏忄屋，一日造诏，优为词旨，然则义旗之士，尽为逆人。
现代文：崔便扬言，魏收在节闵帝在位时出入于朝廷，每天起草的诏书，都虚饰矫情。并把那些有侠肝义胆的将士都称为叛逆。
English: Cui then threatened that Wei Hui went in and out of the imperial court during the reign of Emperor Xizong, and the edicts he drafted every day were all false and pretentious. And he called those soldiers who had chivalry and courage as traitors.

古文：又收父老，合解官归侍。
现代文：另外，魏收的家人也应该解除官职。
English: In addition, Wei Hui's family members should also be relieved of their official duties.

古文：南台将加弹劾，赖尚书辛雄为言于中尉綦俊，乃解。
现代文：御史台准备弹劾魏收，幸赖尚书辛雄替他在中尉綦俊面前说情，才得以缓解。
English: The Imperial Historian's Office was preparing to impeach Wei Jie. Fortunately, Shang Shuxu Xinxiong interceded on his behalf in front of Lieutenant Zou Jun, and was able to ease the situation.

古文：收有贱生弟仲同，先未齿录，因此怖惧，上籍，遣还乡扶侍。
现代文：魏收有一个弟弟魏仲同，先前未被收录，因此十分害怕，登记之后，送回乡间。
English: Wei collected a younger brother, Wei Zhongtong, who had not been included before, so he was very afraid. After registration, he was sent back to the countryside.

古文：孝武尝大发士卒，狩于嵩山之南，旬有六日。
现代文：孝武帝曾调集大批士卒到嵩山少室峰南狩猎，前后共十六天。
English: Emperor Xiaowu once mobilized a large number of soldiers to hunt in the south of Songshan Mountain, a total of sixteen days.

古文：时寒，朝野嗟怨。
现代文：当时，天气寒冷，朝野一片埋怨哀叹的声音。
English: At that time, the weather was cold and there was a lot of complaining and lamenting.

古文：帝与从官及诸妃王，奇伎异饰，多非礼度。
现代文：孝武帝与近臣们以及各位嫔妃都奇装异服，行为轻薄癫狂，大多不合礼度。
English: Emperor Xiaowu and his courtiers, as well as all the empresses, are dressed in strange clothes, behave frivolously and madly, and most of them are not polite.

古文：收欲言则惧，欲默不能已，乃上《南狩赋》以讽焉，年二十七。
现代文：魏收想劝谏但心里又害怕，想沉默不发却又不能自抑，便呈上自己写的《南狩赋》以作讽喻，时年二十七岁。
English: At the age of twenty-seven, Wei Hui wanted to dissuade him, but he was afraid in his heart. He wanted to remain silent, but he could not restrain himself, so he presented his own "Nanjing Fu" as a parable.

古文：虽富言淫丽，而终归雅正。
现代文：文章虽然辞采过于华丽，而终属高雅宏正之作。
English: Although the wording of the article is too ornate, it is ultimately a work of high elegance and grandeur.

古文：帝手诏报焉，甚见褒美。
现代文：孝武帝亲手写诏书批阅，大加褒奖。
English: Emperor Xiaowu personally approved the reading of the edict with his own handwriting, and received a great deal of praise.

古文：郑伯谓曰： 卿不遇老夫，犹应逐兔。 神武固让天柱大将军，魏帝敕收为诏，令遂所请。欲加相国，问收相国品秩，收以实对，帝遂止。
现代文：最初，神武帝高欢坚持辞让天柱大将军的职务，孝武帝命魏收起草诏书，以顺从他的请求，想再加封他为相国，问魏收相国的品秩有多高，魏收据实回答，孝武帝便作罢了。
English: At first, Emperor Gao Huan insisted on resigning from the post of Tianzhu General, and Emperor Xiaowu ordered Wei Hui to draft an edict to comply with his request to add him as a sister country. He asked Wei Hui how high the rank of the sister country was, Wei Hui answered truthfully, and Emperor Xiaowu gave up.

古文：收既未测主、相之意，以前事不安，求解，诏许焉。
现代文：魏收没有揣测出主与相的心思，心里很不安稳，请求解去自己的官职，朝廷下诏同意。
English: Wei Jie did not guess the thoughts of the lord and the consort, he was very uneasy in his heart, he asked to be relieved of his official duties, and the imperial court agreed.

古文：久之，除帝兄子广平王赞开府从事中郎，收不敢辞，乃为《庭竹赋》以致已意。
现代文：过了很久，朝廷命他任孝武帝哥哥的儿子广平王高赞的开府从事中郎，魏收不敢拒绝，便作《庭竹赋》以抒发自己的心情。
English: After a long time, the imperial court ordered him to serve as the middle-man for Guangping Wang Gaozan, the son of Emperor Xiaowu's elder brother, Kaifu. Wei Jie did not dare to refuse, so he wrote "Tian Zhu Fu" to express his feelings.

古文：寻兼中书舍人。与济阴温子升、河间邢子才齐誉，世号 三才 。
现代文：不久，他被任命为中书舍人，与济阳的温子升、河间的邢子才齐名驰誉，世人称他们为三才子。
English: Not long after, he was appointed as the person in charge of Chinese calligraphy. He was as famous as Wenzhisheng of Jiyang and Zhezi of Hema. The world called them the Three Talents.

古文：时孝武内有间隙，收遂以疾固辞而免。
现代文：这时，孝武帝对魏收已有成见，他便以有病为由坚决辞去官职，才得以免祸。
English: At this time, Emperor Xiaowu was already prejudiced against Wei Jie, and he resolutely resigned his official post on the grounds of illness, only to be spared.

古文：舅崔孝芬怪而问之，收曰： 惧有晋阳之甲。 
现代文：他的舅父崔孝芬对他的辞官很为奇怪，问他原因，他答道： 我惧怕有晋阳起兵时那样的兵甲。 
English: His uncle, Cui Xiaofeng, was puzzled by his choice of words. When he asked why, he replied, "I'm afraid of having the kind of armor that Jin Yang had when he raised an army."

古文：寻而神武南上，帝西入关。
现代文：不久，高欢率军南上，孝武帝被迫西逃入关。
English: Soon, Gao Huan led the army south, and Emperor Xiaowu was forced to flee to the west.

古文：收兼通直散骑常侍，副王昕聘梁。
现代文：魏收兼任通直散骑常侍，作为王昕的副手出使南梁。
English: Wei Rui concurrently served as Tsunzhi Sanzhi's equerry, and dispatched Nan Liang as Wang Yao's deputy.

古文：昕风流文辩，收辞藻富逸，梁主及其群臣咸加敬异。
现代文：王昕辞辩风流秀逸，魏收言词华美富赡，南梁天子及其朝臣对他们都很敬服。
English: Wang Qian's speech was elegant and graceful, Wei Wei's speech was beautiful and rich, and Nan Liang Tianzi and his courtiers all respected them.

古文：先是，南北初和，李谐、卢元明首通使命，二人才器，并为邻国所重。
现代文：早先，南北刚刚通好，魏首次派李谐、卢元明出使南朝。二人的才能器识，都被南梁佩服。
English: Earlier, the South and the North had just been reconciled, and Wei sent Li Hani and Lu Yuanming as envoys to the Southern Dynasty for the first time. Both men's talents and knowledge were admired by Nan Liang.

古文：至此，梁主称曰： 卢、李命世，王、魏中兴，未知后来，复何如耳。 
现代文：这时，梁朝君主称赞说： 卢、李著名于当世；王、魏继而兴起，不知后来的使者又会怎么样呢？ 
English: At this time, the monarch of the Liang Dynasty praised and said: Lu and Li are famous in this world; Wang and Wei have risen successively. I don't know what will happen to the later emissaries.

古文：收在馆，遂买吴婢入馆；其部下有卖婢者，收亦唤取，遍行奸秽。
现代文：魏收在梁朝的馆舍买来吴地的婢女奸玩；他的部下有买婢女的，他也把她们唤来，全都奸淫。
English: Wei collected maidservants from the Liang Dynasty and bought them to play with in Wu. Some of his subordinates also bought maidservants, and he summoned them, and they all committed adultery.

古文：梁朝馆司，皆为之获罪。
现代文：梁朝的馆司都因此获罪。
English: The librarians of the Liang dynasty were all convicted for this.

古文：人称其才，而鄙其行。
现代文：人们称赞他的才能，却鄙薄他的行为。
English: People praise his talent, but despise his actions.

古文：在途作《聘游赋》，辞甚美盛。
现代文：他在回国途中写下《聘游赋》辞藻极为工丽。
English: On his way back to China, he wrote down the words of the "Hiring You Fu" chorus, which are extremely beautiful.

古文：使还，尚书右仆射高隆之求南货于昕、收，不能如志，遂讽御史中尉高仲密禁止昕、收于其台，久之得释。
现代文：回来后，尚书右仆射高隆之向他和王昕索取南梁的货物，二人没有送给他，他便让御史中尉高仲密将王昕、魏收拘禁在御史台，过了很久才将他们放还。
English: After returning, Shang Shuxu's right-hand man Gao Longzhi asked him and Wang Xi for Nan Liang's goods, but the two did not give them to him. He then asked Wang Shi's lieutenant Gao Zhongmi to detain Wang Xi and Wei Jie in the Imperial Palace. It took a long time before they were released.

古文：及孙搴死，司马子如荐收，召赴晋阳，以为中外府主簿。
现代文：孙搴死后，司马子如向朝廷推荐魏收。他被召至晋阳，任中外府主簿。
English: After Sun Yat-sen's death, Sima Ziru recommended Wei Jie to the imperial court. He was summoned to Jinyang to serve as the chief secretary of the central and foreign prefectures.

古文：以受旨乖忏，频被嫌责，加以箠楚，久不得志。
现代文：因违忤圣旨，不断受到嫌弃和斥责，并遭受鞭挞，很久都郁郁不能伸展抱负。
English: Because he violated the sacred will, he was constantly rejected and rebuked, and was whipped. For a long time, he was depressed and unable to expand his ambitions.

古文：会司马子如奉使霸朝，收假其余光。
现代文：适逢司马子如奉命来到高欢的朝堂，魏收借助他的影响。
English: When Sima Zi was ordered to come to the high-spirited imperial court, Wei Hui took advantage of his influence.

古文：子如因宴戏言于神武曰： 魏收，天子中书郎，一国大才，愿大王借与颜色。 
现代文：司马子如利用宴会的机会对神武帝开玩笑说： 魏收，是天子的中书郎，一国杰出的人才，希望大王您给他点好的脸色。 
English: Sima Zi Rong took the opportunity of the banquet to joke with Emperor Shenwu, saying, "Wei Jie is the son of Heaven's chief scribe, an outstanding talent of the country. I hope you will give him a good countenance."

古文：由此转府属，然未甚优礼。
现代文：他因此转为府属的官员，然而，高欢对他并不优待。
English: As a result, he became an official of the prefectural government. However, Gao Huan did not treat him well.

古文：收从叔季景有文学，历官著名，并在收前，然收常所欺忽。
现代文：魏收的从叔魏季景颇有文学专长，做官也很著名，声望在魏收的前面。然而，魏收对他却经常欺侮怠慢。
English: Wei Jie's uncle, Wei Jijing, was a literary expert and a well-known official, and his reputation was ahead of Wei Jie's. However, Wei Jie often bullied and neglected him.

古文：季景、收初赴并，顿丘李庶者，故大司农谐之子也，以华辩见称，曾谓收曰： 霸朝便有二魏。 
现代文：季景与魏收刚到并州时，顿丘的李庶是已故大司农李谐的儿子，靠华丽而雄辩的口才出名。他曾对魏收说 ：我朝霸主的朝堂上有两个姓魏的。 
English: When Ji Jing and Wei Rui first arrived in the unified state, Li Zhao of Dongqiu was the son of the late farmer Li Jin, famous for his magnificent and eloquent eloquence. He once said to Wei Rui: There are two surnames Wei in the morning hall of my morning overlord.

古文：收率尔曰： 以从叔见比，例邪输之比卿。 
现代文：魏收很轻率地说 ：拿我的从叔与我来比较，就像是把邪输与你相比。 
English: Wei Hui said very flippantly, "Comparing my uncle to me is like comparing the devil to you."

古文：邪输者，故尚书令陈留公继伯之子，愚痴有名，好自入市肆，高价买物，商买共所嗤玩。
现代文：邪输，是已故尚书令陈留公继伯的儿子，愚笨得出名，喜欢自己到市上用很高的价钱买东西，商贩们都嗤笑他。
English: The evil loser is the son of the late Shang Shuling Chen Liu Gong's stepbrother. He is notoriously stupid and likes to go to the market to buy things at a high price. Merchants laugh at him.

古文：收忽以季景方之，不逊例多如此。
现代文：魏收忽然拿魏季景与这个傻瓜相比，他的不恭逊大多像这件事。
English: Wei Jie suddenly compared Wei Jijing to this fool, and his insolence was mostly like this.

古文：收本以文才，必望颖脱见知，位既不遂，求修国史。
现代文：魏收本来依恃有文才，希望有一天必定能脱颖而出，被天子知道，不料官位不高，愿望难以顺遂，于是，便请求撰修国史。
English: Wei Hui originally had literary talent, hoping that one day he would be able to stand out and be known by the Son of Heaven. However, his official position was not high, and his wish was difficult to fulfill. Therefore, he requested to write a national history.

古文：崔暹为言于文襄曰： 国史事重，公家父子霸王功业，皆须具载，非收不可。 
现代文：崔暹在文襄帝面前替他说项 ：国史事关重大，你们父子二人建立的霸王的丰功伟业，都需要记载下来，这件事非魏收不能胜任。 
English: In front of Emperor Wenxiang, Cui Sie said for him, "The history of the country is of great importance. The exploits and great deeds of the overlords established by your father and son both need to be recorded. This matter cannot be handled by non-Wei.

古文：文襄乃启收兼散骑常侍，修国史。
现代文：文襄帝便启奏朝廷，命魏收为兼散骑常侍，修撰国史。
English: Emperor Wenxiang then issued a proclamation to the imperial court, ordering Wei Wei to become a knight-errant and write a history of the country.

古文：武定二年，除正常侍，领兼中书侍郎，仍修国史。
现代文：东魏孝静帝武定二年，他任正常侍，领兼中书侍郎，仍旧修撰国史。
English: In the second year of Emperor Wu Ding of the Eastern Wei Xiao Jing Dynasty, he served as a normal attendant, leader and junior secretary, and was still writing national history.

古文：魏帝宴百僚，问何故名 人日 ，皆莫能知。
现代文：魏孝静帝宴请朝中的官员，问 人日 一语的来历，群臣都不知道。
English: Emperor Wei Xiao Jing invited officials from both sides of the Korean peninsula to a banquet and asked them about the origin of the phrase, but none of the ministers knew anything about it.

古文：收对曰： 晋议郎董勋答问礼俗云：正月一日为鸡，二日为狗，三日为猪，四日为羊，五日为牛，六日为马，七日为人。 
现代文：魏收回答说 ：晋朝的议郎董勋著的《答问礼俗》中说：正月一日为鸡，二日为狗，三日为猪，四日为羊，五日为牛，六日为马，七日为人。 
English: Wei Jie replied, "According to "Answering Questions on Etiquette" written by the Jin Dynasty's mediator, Dong Xun, the first day of the first month is chicken, the second day is dog, the third day is pig, the fourth day is sheep, the fifth day is cow, the sixth day is horse, and the seventh day is human.

古文：时邢邵亦在侧，甚恧焉。
现代文：当时，邢邵也在旁边，甚为惭愧。
English: At that time, Zou Shao was also nearby, very ashamed.

古文：自魏、梁和好，书下纸每云： 想彼境内宁静，此率土安和。 
现代文：自从魏、梁两国和好，在来往的国书中常有 想彼境内宁静，此率土安和 的句子。
English: Since the Wei and Liang dynasties made peace with each other, there is often a sentence in the books of state between the two countries, "If you want peace and tranquility in your country, then make peace and tranquility in your country."

古文：梁后使其书乃去 彼 字，自称犹著 此 ，欲示无外之意。
现代文：梁后来在国书中去掉了 彼 字，仍保留 此 字以自称，是为了表示不见外的意思。
English: Liang later removed the word "he" from the national anthem, but still retained the word to call himself, in order to express the hidden meaning.

古文：收定报书云： 想境内清晏，今万国安和。 
现代文：魏收将这句话改为： 想境内清晏，今万国安和。 
English: Wei Hui changed this sentence to: I want to clean up the country, and now the world is at peace.

古文：梁人复书，依以为体。
现代文：梁国在复信中也这样写，成为固定的礼宾用语。
English: Liang Guo also wrote this in his reply letter, which has become a fixed protocol language.

古文：后神武入朝，静帝授相国，固让，令收为启。
现代文：后来，神武帝高欢回到朝廷，孝静帝命他为相国，高欢坚决辞让，让魏收代他写奏章。
English: Later, Emperor Shenwu sent Gao Huan back to the imperial court, and Emperor Xiaozhing ordered him to become a consort of the emperor. Gao Huan resolutely refused and let Wei collect him to write a musical composition.

古文：启成呈上，文襄时侍侧，神武指收曰 此人当复为崔光。 
现代文：奏章写好后送给他，这时文襄帝高澄在旁边，高欢指着魏收说： 这个人应当又是一个崔光。 
English: After the score was written, it was given to him. At this time, the Emperor Gaocheng was nearby. Gao Huan pointed to Wei Wei and said, "This person should be another Cui Guang."

古文：四年，神武于西门豹祠宴集，谓司马子如曰： 魏收为史官，书吾善恶，闻北便利时诸贵常饷史官饮食，司马仆射颇曾饷不？ 
现代文：武定四年，高欢在西门豹祠宴集群臣，对司马子如说： 魏收任史官，写我的善与恶。听说北伐的时候，权贵们常常送给史官吃的东西，司马仆射你是否也曾宴请过史官呢？ 
English: In the fourth year of Wuding, Gao Huan gathered a group of courtiers at a banquet at the West Gate Leopard Shrine, and said to Sima Zi: Wei was appointed as a historian, write about my good and evil. I heard that during the Northern Expedition, the dignitaries often gave the historian something to eat. Sima Pusha, have you ever had a banquet for a historian?

古文：因共大笑。
现代文：因而两人一起大笑。
English: So they both burst out laughing.

古文：仍谓收曰： 卿勿见元康等在吾目下趋走，谓吾以为勤劳。
现代文：高欢对魏收说 ：你不要见元康这些人在我面前奔走，我就认为他们很勤劳。
English: Gao Huan said to Wei Rui, "You should not see Yuan Kang and these people running in front of me. I think they are very hardworking."

古文：我后世身名在卿手，勿谓我不知。 
现代文：我今后的名誉地位在你手里，不要认为我不知道。 
English: My future reputation is in your hands. Don't think I don't know.

古文：寻加兼著作郎。
现代文：不久，加封魏收为兼著作郎。
English: Soon, Wei Hui was added as a co-author.

古文：收昔在京洛，轻薄尤甚，人号云 魏收惊蛱蝶。 
现代文：魏收过去在京城洛阳，尤为轻薄，人们称他为 魏收惊蛱蝶 。
English: Wei Jie used to be in the Beijing city of Luoyang, especially light and thin, people called him Wei Jie alarming butterflies.

古文：文襄曾游东山，令给事黄门侍郎颢等宴。文襄曰： 魏收恃才无宜适，须出其短。 
现代文：文襄帝高澄曾到东山游览，命给事黄门侍郎颢等人准备宴会，并对他说： 魏收依恃才能，以为自己什么都行，我们要找出他的短处来。 
English: Emperor Gaocheng once visited Dongshan and ordered Huangmen waiter Lang Quan and others to prepare a banquet, and said to him: Wei has no talent, he thinks he can do anything, we have to find out his shortcomings.

古文：往复数番，收忽大唱曰： 杨遵彦理屈，已倒。 
现代文：说了好多遍，魏收忽然大声说： 杨尊彦理屈辞穷，已被难倒。 
English: After saying this many times, Wei Jie suddenly said in a loud voice, "Yang Zhongyan has been stumped.

古文：愔从容曰： 我绰有余暇，山立不动。
现代文：杨忄音从容说道 ：我的道理绰绰有余，像山一样屹立不动。
English: Yang Xuanyin said calmly: My reason is more than enough, standing like a mountain.

古文：若遇当涂，恐翩翩遂逝。 
现代文：如果遇到当政的国号那个姓，恐怕会翩翩消失。 
English: If you come across the surname of the country's political leader, you will probably disappear.

古文：当涂者魏，翩翩者蝶也。
现代文：当政的国号即是魏，翩翩者，即为蝴蝶。
English: The country's official name is Wei, and those who dance are the butterflies.

古文：文襄先知之，大笑称善。
现代文：高澄先听出话的意思，大笑着称赞他说得好。
English: Gao Cheng first heard the meaning of the words, laughed loudly and praised him for speaking well.

古文：文襄又曰： 向语犹微，宜更指斥。 
现代文：高澄又说 ：这句话太含蓄，应进一步明白指斥。 
English: Takasumi also said: This sentence is too vague and should be further refuted.

古文：愔应声曰： 魏收在并作一篇诗，对众读讫，云： 打从叔季景出六百斗米，亦不辨此。 
现代文：杨忄音应声说道 ：魏收在并州写了一首诗，对着众人读过，说： 就是打着我的从叔魏季景，逼他拿出六百斛米，他也不理解诗的含义。 
English: Yang Yuyin said in response: Wei Hui wrote a poem in Bianzhou, read it to the crowd, and said: Even if I beat my uncle Wei Jiqing and forced him to take out six hundred glutinous rice, he would not understand the meaning of the poem.

古文：远近所知，非敢妄说。 
现代文：这句话远近都知道，我不敢随便乱说。 
English: This saying is known far and wide, and I dare not say it casually.

古文：文襄喜曰： 我亦先闻。 
现代文：高澄高兴地说 ：我也听说过这件事。 
English: Takasumi happily said, "I heard about it, too."

古文：众人皆笑。
现代文：众人都笑。
English: Everyone laughs.

古文：收虽自申雪，不复抗拒，终身病之。
现代文：魏收虽然自我申辩，却不再否认这件事，他终身都以此为病。
English: Although Wei Jie defended himself, he no longer denied the incident. He had been plagued by it all his life.

古文：侯景叛入梁，寇南境。
现代文：侯景叛魏入梁，侵犯南部边境。
English: Hou Jing rebelled against Wei and invaded the southern border.

古文：文襄时在晋阳，令收为檄五十余纸，不日而就。
现代文：高澄当时在晋阳，命魏收写下五十余张的一篇檄文，他不到一天就写完。
English: At that time, Gao Cheng was in Jinyang. He ordered Wei to collect and write an obituary of more than 50 pages, which he finished in less than a day.

古文：又檄梁朝，令送侯景，初夜执笔，三更便了，文过七纸。
现代文：朝廷又要送给南梁檄书，让南梁朝廷送给侯景。魏收刚入夜执笔起草，三更就已写完，文章写满了七张纸。
English: The imperial court also wanted to give Nan Liang a letter, and let Nan Liang's imperial court give it to Hou Jing. Wei Rui had just finished writing in the evening, and the article filled seven pieces of paper.

古文：文襄善之。
现代文：高澄很赞赏他。
English: Takasumi admires him very much.

古文：魏帝曾委秋大射，普令赋诗，收诗末云： 尺书征建鄴，折简召长安。 
现代文：魏孝静帝曾在秋季举行射箭，让群臣赋诗。魏收诗的末一句是： 尺书征建业，折简召长安。 
English: Emperor Xiaojing of the Wei Dynasty held an archery competition in the autumn, and had his vassals perform a poem. The last sentence of the Wei collection of poems is: "Buildings are solicited by shakusho, and Chang'an is summoned by ojian."

古文：文襄壮之，顾谓人曰： 在朝今有魏收，便是国之光采。
现代文：高澄非常欣赏诗的雄壮豪迈，对周围的人说： 我朝现在有魏收，便是国家的光彩。
English: Gao Cheng very much appreciated the grandeur of the poem, and said to the people around him: I have Wei Jie now, which is the glory of the country.

古文：雅俗文墨，通达纵横。
现代文：雅俗共赏的文章，析理通达，气势纵横。
English: An article that is appreciated by both the refined and the vulgar, with an insightful analysis, and a powerful message.

古文：我亦使子才、子升，时有所作，至于词气，并不及之。
现代文：我也让邢子才、温子升不断写作，才情词气都赶不上他。
English: I also let Zou Zi Cai and Wen Zi Sheng continue to write, but their talent and words can't keep up with him.

古文：吾或决有所怀，忘而不语，语而不尽，意有未及，收呈草，皆以周悉。
现代文：我有时心有所思，忘了而没有说出，说出来了词语又不详备，不能完全把意思表达出来。
English: I sometimes have thoughts in my mind that I forget and do not say, and words that I do say are not detailed and cannot fully express my meaning.

古文：此亦难有。 又敕兼主客郎，接梁使谢珽、徐陵。
现代文：魏收呈上他起草的文章，都把我的想法说得完完全全。这种人才真难得。 又命魏收兼主客令，接待梁朝的使者谢王廷、徐陵。
English: Wei Hui presented the articles he had drafted, all of which fully expressed my thoughts. This kind of talent is truly rare. He also ordered Wei Hui to serve as host and guest, and to receive the emissaries of the Liang Dynasty, Xie Wangting and Xu Ling.

古文：侯景既陷梁，梁鄱阳王范时为合州刺史，文襄敕收以书喻之。
现代文：侯景投降南梁，梁朝的鄱阳王萧范当时任合州刺史。高澄命魏收写信劝谕萧范。
English: Hou Jing surrendered to Nan Liang, and Xiao Fan, the King of Fenyang in the Liang Dynasty, was then appointed as the governor of Hezhou. Gao Cheng ordered Wei Luo to write a letter to persuade Xiao Fan.

古文：范得书，仍率部伍西上，州刺史崔圣念入据其城。
现代文：萧范得到书信后，便率领所部西上，州刺史崔圣念占据了这座城池。
English: After Xiao Fan received the letter, he led the headquarters westward, and the prefectural governor Cui Shengnian occupied the city.

古文：文襄谓收曰： 今定一州，卿有其力，犹恨 尺书征建鄴 未效耳。 
现代文：高澄对魏收说： 今天平定一州，你出了很大力，但遗憾的是 尺书征建业 还没有实现啊！ 
English: Gao Cheng said to Wei Hui, "You have made great efforts to pacify Yizhou today, but unfortunately, the construction project has not been realized yet!"

古文：文襄崩，文宣如晋阳，令与黄门郎崔季舒、高德正、吏部郎中尉瑾于北第参掌机密。
现代文：高澄遇害身死，文宣帝高洋到晋阳，命魏收与黄门郎崔季舒、高德正、吏部郎中尉瑾在北边的相王府参与机密大事。
English: Gao Cheng was killed and died, Emperor Wenzhong sent Gao Yang to Jinyang, and ordered Wei Hui and Huangmen Lang Cui Jishu, Gao Dezheng, and Librarian Lang Lieutenants Zou to participate in confidential events in the north of the King's Court.

古文：转秘书监，兼著作郎，又除定州大中正。
现代文：魏收又转任秘书监，兼著作郎，又任定州大中正。
English: Wei Jie was also transferred to the post of secretary supervisor, author's assistant, and vice-president of Dingzhou University.

古文：时齐将受禅，杨愔奏收置之别馆，令撰禅代诏册诸文，遣徐之才守门，不听出。
现代文：这时，齐将受魏禅让，杨忄音奏请把魏收置于别的馆舍，命他撰写受禅的诏书典册，派徐之才替他看门，文宣帝不允许他到别馆。
English: At this time, Qi will be transferred to Wei Zhen, Yang Xuanqiao please put Wei Zhen in another hall, order him to write the imperial edict book, send Xu Zhen to watch the door for him, Emperor Wenxuan will not allow him to go to another hall.

古文：天保元年，除中书令，仍兼著作郎，封富平县子。
现代文：北齐天保元年，他任中书令，仍然兼任著作郎，封为富平县子。
English: In the first year of the Northern Qi era, he was appointed as the middle secretary, still concurrently serving as the scribe, and was named the son of Fuping County.

古文：二年，诏撰魏史。
现代文：二年，朝廷命他撰写《魏史》。
English: Two years later, the imperial court ordered him to write "The History of Wei."

古文：四年，除魏尹，故优以禄力，专在史阁，不知郡事。
现代文：四年，任他为魏尹，所以给予他优厚的俸禄，让他专门在史馆著述，不参与其他事务。
English: For four years, he was Wei Yin, so he gave him a generous salary, let him write exclusively in the history museum, and did not participate in other affairs.

古文：初，帝令群臣各言志，收曰： 臣愿得直笔东观，早出魏书。 
现代文：当初，文宣帝让群臣各自陈述自己的志向，魏收说： 我愿在东观秉笔直书，早日写出《魏书》。 
English: At first, Emperor Wenzhong asked his ministers to state their own ambitions, and Wei Rui said: I would like to write a straightforward book in Dongguan and write "Weishu" as soon as possible.

古文：故帝使收专其任。
现代文：所以，文宣帝命他专任其职。
English: Therefore, Emperor Wenzhong ordered him to take up his post full-time.

古文：又诏平原王高隆之总监之，署名而已。
现代文：又下诏命平原王高隆之负责监修史书，但只是挂名而已。
English: He also issued an edict ordering the Plain King Gaolong to be in charge of supervising the revision of the history book, but it was just a name.

古文：帝敕收曰： 好直笔，我终不作魏太武诛史官。 
现代文：文宣帝对魏收说 ：好好地直笔写史，我始终不会像魏太武帝拓跋焘那样诛杀史官。 
English: Emperor Wenxuan said to Wei Rui: "Write history well and straightforwardly, I will never fight and kill historians like Wei Taiwu Emperor Tuoba.

古文：始，魏初邓彦海撰代记十余卷，其后崔浩典史，游雅、高允、程骏、李彪、崔光、李琰之郎知世修其业。
现代文：当初，魏初邓彦撰写《代记》十多卷，以后崔浩负责史事，游雅、高允、程骏、李彪、崔光、李琰之等郎官世代修史。
English: At the beginning of the Wei Dynasty, Deng Yan wrote more than ten volumes of "Diary," after which Cui Hao was responsible for historical affairs, and Youya, Gao Yun, Cheng Yu, Li Biao, Cui Guang, Li Xizhi and other generations of officials edited history.

古文：浩为编年体，彪始分作纪、表、志、传，书犹未出。
现代文：崔浩修编年体，李彪被分配修纪、表、志、传几部分，书没有写出来。
English: Cui Hao revised the chronicle, Li Biao was assigned to revise the discipline, table, history, and biography, but the book was not written.

古文：宜武时，命邢峦追撰孝文起居注，书至太和十四年。又命崔鸿、王遵业补续焉，下讫孝明，事甚委悉。
现代文：宣武帝时，命邢峦追忆撰写《孝文起居注》，史书写到太和十四年，又命崔鸿、王尊业补续没有写完的史著，下至孝明帝，史事十分详细。
English: At the time of Emperor Xuanwu, it was ordered to write "A Note on the Beginning of Xiaowen's Residence," and the history was written until the 14th year of the Taihe era, and Cui Hong and Wang Zunye were ordered to supplement the unfinished history, down to Emperor Xiaoming, the history was very detailed.

古文：济阴王晖业撰辨宗室录三十卷。
现代文：济阴王元晖撰写《辨宗室录》三十卷。
English: Wang Yuanjun of Jilin Province wrote 30 volumes of "Banshu Shuroku."

古文：收于是与通直常侍房延佑、司空司马辛元植、国子博士刁柔、裴昂之、尚书郎高孝干专总斟酌，以成魏书。
现代文：魏收在这些史料的基础上，与通直常侍房延、司空司马辛元植、国子博士刁柔、裴昂之、尚书郎高孝干博览总括，认真斟酌，写成《魏书》。
English: On the basis of these historical materials, Wei Hui, together with Tsun Zhi Chang Zifang Yan, Tsuko Sima Xin Yuan Zhao, Kun Zi Dr. Jiao Rou, Pei An Zhi, Shang Shulang Gao Xiao Gan, carefully considered and compiled the "Wei Shu."

古文：辩定名称，随条甄举。
现代文：辨析酌定名称，逐条甄别选择。
English: Analyze the discretionary names, and screen and select them one by one.

古文：又搜采亡遗，缀续后事，备一代史籍，表而上闻之。
现代文：又搜集博采亡佚的史料，连缀补续缺漏未写的史实，完成一代史书，上表奏闻朝廷。
English: He also collected the historical materials of Bo Zi's death, interlaced and supplemented the missing and unwritten historical facts, completed a generation of history books, and presented them to the imperial court.

古文：勒成一代大典：凡十二纪，九十二列传，合一百一十卷。
现代文：修撰成的这一代重要的典籍。其规模是：共有十二纪、九十二列传，共一百一十卷。
English: The scale of this important classic of this generation is: a total of twelve periods, ninety-two series of biographies, a total of one hundred and ten volumes.

古文：五年三月，奏上之。
现代文：天保五年三月，呈送天子。
English: In March of the 5th year of the Tenpo era, he was presented with a heavenly son.

古文：秋，除梁州刺史。
现代文：这年秋天，魏收被任命为梁州刺史。
English: In the autumn of that year, Wei Jie was appointed as the chief historian of Liangzhou.

古文：收以志未成，奏请终业，许之。
现代文：魏收因为全书并未修完，上表请求继续完成这项事业，朝廷同意。
English: Since Wei Jie had not finished the whole book, he asked the court to continue the work, and the court agreed.

古文：十一月复奏十志：天象四卷，地形三卷，律历二卷，礼乐四卷，食货一卷，刑罚一卷，灵徵二卷，官氏二卷，释老一卷，凡二十卷。续于纪传，合一百三十卷。
现代文：十一月，又送上十志：《天象》四卷、《地形》三卷、《律历》三卷、《礼乐》四卷、《食货》一卷、《刑罚》一卷、《灵征》二卷、《官氏》二卷、《释老》一卷、共二十卷，加上续写的纪传，共一百三十卷。
English: In November, another ten volumes were sent: "Celestial Elephant" four volumes, "Terrain" three volumes, "Ritual Calendar" three volumes, "Ritual Music" four volumes, "Food" one volume, "Punishment" one volume, "Spiritual Sign" two volumes, "Civil Servant" two volumes, "Old Man" one volume, a total of twenty volumes, plus the continuation of the biography, a total of one hundred and thirty volumes.

古文：分为十二表，其史三十五例，二十五序，九十四论，前后二表一启，皆独出于收。
现代文：全书共分十二帙，其中有三十五例，二十五序，九十四论，前后还有二表一启，都是由魏收独创的体例。
English: The whole book is divided into twelve chapters, of which there are thirty-five cases, twenty-five prefaces, ninety-four chapters, and two tables and an introduction, all of which are original examples created by Wei Jie.

古文：收所引史官，恐其陵逼，唯取学流先相依附者。
现代文：魏收选拔的史官，因怕他们在学术上超过和威迫自己，因而，只选取那些在学术上依附自己的人。
English: Wei collected the selection of historians, for fear that they would surpass and intimidate themselves academically, and therefore only selected those who were academically dependent on themselves.

古文：其房延祐、辛元植、眭仲让虽夙涉朝位，并非史才；刁柔、裴昂之以儒业见知，全不堪编缉；高孝干以左道求进。
现代文：其中，房延、辛元植、眭仲让虽然早就官列朝班，但并不是史才；刁柔、裴昂之以儒学被天子知遇，却不能胜任编撰史书；高孝干靠旁门左道寻求进身之阶。
English: Among them, Fang Yan, Xin Yuan Zhi, and Zou Zhong Zhan, although they have long been in the official ranks of the imperial class, are not historical talents; Zou Rong and Pei Ang Ti, although they are familiar with Confucianism, are not competent to compile history books; Gao Xiao Gan relies on the side door to seek advancement.

古文：修史诸人，宗祖姻戚，多被书录，饰以美言。
现代文：参与修史的这些人，他们的祖宗亲戚，大多被收录入史，并粉饰溢美。
English: Most of these people who participated in the revision of history, their ancestors and relatives, were included in history and whitewashed.

古文：收颇急，不甚能平，夙有怨者，多没其善。
现代文：魏收性格峻急，不能公平待人。过去同他有冤仇的，大多隐去人家的善政美德，不载入史册。
English: Wei Jie's character is precipitous, and he cannot treat people fairly. In the past, those who had a grudge against him mostly hid their good political virtues and were not recorded in the history books.

古文：每言： 何物小子，敢共魏收作色！
现代文：他写史时常洋洋自得地说 ：你是个什么样的小东西，敢跟我魏收作对！
English: When he was writing history, he often said with pride: What a little thing you are, daring to oppose my Wei!

古文：举之则使上天，按之当使入地。 
现代文：我的史笔要抬举你能让你上天，要贬低你能让你入地。 
English: My history will exalt you if you can get to heaven, and disparage you if you can get to earth.

古文：初，收在神武时为太常少卿，修国史，得阳休之助。
现代文：开初，魏收在高欢在世时任太常少卿，负责修撰国史，得到了阳休之的帮助。
English: At the beginning of the year, Wei Hui was appointed to the position of Taizhang Shaoqing when Gao Huan was still alive. He was responsible for compiling the national history and received help from Yang Xiu.

古文：因谢休之曰： 无以谢德，当为卿作佳传。 
现代文：他因而感谢阳休之说 ：我无法酬谢你的恩德，一定为你写一篇好的传记。 
English: He therefore thanked Yang Xiu, saying, "I cannot repay your kindness, I will surely write a good biography for you."

古文：休之父固，魏世为北平太守，以贪虐为中尉李平所弹获罪，载在魏起居注。
现代文：休之的父亲阳固，北魏时任北平太守，因贪婪暴虐被中尉李平弹劾获罪，事情记载在《魏起居注》里。
English: Hui's father, Yang Gu, who was the governor of Peking at the time of the Northern Wei Dynasty, was impeached and convicted by Lieutenant Li Ping for greed and brutality. The matter is recorded in the "Note on Living in the Wei Dynasty."

古文：收书云： 固为北平，甚有惠政，坐公事免官。 
现代文：魏收在写阳固传时说： 阳固为北平太守，很有政绩，因公事坐罪被免除官职。 
English: When Wei Hui was writing about Yang Gu's biography, he said: Yang Gu was the governor of Peking, he had a lot of achievements in politics, and he was removed from his post for the crime of taking part in public affairs.

古文：又云： 李平深相敬重。 
现代文：文中还说 ：李平对他极为敬重。 
English: The article also said that Li Ping had great respect for him.

古文：尔硃荣于魏为贼，收以高氏出自尔硃，且纳荣子金，故减其恶而增其善，论云： 若修德义之风，同韩、彭、伊、霍，夫何足数。 
现代文：尔朱荣在北魏时做过强盗，魏收因高欢最早隶属尔朱氏，高氏又接纳了尔朱荣的儿子尔朱金，所以减轻他的罪恶而夸大他的优点。魏收在尔朱荣传后议论道 ：如果论起树立道德礼仪的良好风气，那么，韦、彭、伊、霍等人与他相比，又何足齿数！ 
English: During the Northern Wei Dynasty, Er Zhurong was a robber. The Wei Dynasty accepted Gao Huan because he was originally a member of the Er Zhu clan, and the Gao clan accepted Er Zhurong's son, Er Zhujin, thus mitigating his crimes and exaggerating his merits. After Er Zhurong was introduced to the Wei Dynasty, Wei Hui commented, "If we talk about establishing a good culture of moral etiquette, then Wei, Peng, Yi, Huo and others are nothing compared to him!

古文：时论既言收著史不平，文宣诏收于尚书省与诸家子孙共加论讨。
现代文：既然人们议论认为魏收撰述史书不公平，文宣帝便命他在尚书省与贵家的子弟儿孙们一起共同讨论。
English: Since people argued that it was unfair for Wei Zhao to write a history book, Emperor Wenzhong ordered him to discuss it with the children and grandchildren of your family in Shangshu Province.

古文：前后投诉，百有余人，云遗其世职位；或云其家不见记录；或云妄有非毁。
现代文：前后投诉史书问题的有一百多人，有人说遗漏了他们家的世系职位；有的说他的家人没有被记载入史；有的说书中有随便诋毁的地方。
English: More than a hundred people have complained about problems with the history books. Some say that their family's position in the lineage was omitted; some say that his family was not recorded in history; some say that the book contains random defamation.

古文：收皆随状答之，范阳卢斐父同附出族祖玄传下；顿丘李庶家传，称其本是梁国家人。
现代文：魏收都根据情况一一解答。范阳卢斐的父亲卢同的传略附在他的族祖卢玄的传后；顿丘的李庶家的事传，称他本来是梁国蒙地人。
English: The biographies of Lu Tong, the father of Fan Yang Lu Fei, are attached to the biography of his ancestor Lu Xuan; the biography of the Li branch family in Dongqiu, saying that he was originally a Mongolian from Liang.

古文：斐、庶讥议，云史书不直。
现代文：卢斐、李庶对他颇有讥讽，说他写的史书不真实。
English: Lu Fei and Li Shiao ridiculed him, saying that the history book he wrote was not true.

古文：收性急，不胜其愤，启诬其欲加屠害。
现代文：魏收性情急躁，非常气愤，启奏朝廷说他们诬告，想对他们加以迫害。
English: Wei Jie was impatient and very angry. He told the court that they had made false accusations and wanted to persecute them.

古文：帝大怒，亲自诘责。
现代文：文宣帝听说后也非常愤怒，亲自驳诘斥责卢、李二人。
English: Emperor Wenxuan was also very angry after hearing this, and he personally refuted and rebuked Lu and Li.

古文：斐曰： 臣父仕魏。
现代文：卢斐说 ：我的父亲在北魏做官，位至仪同，功业卓著，名扬天下。
English: Lu Fei said, "My father was an official in the Northern Wei Dynasty. He was held in the same high esteem and was famous for his outstanding achievements.

古文：位至仪同，功业显著，名闻天下，与收无亲，遂不立传。博陵崔绰，位至本郡功曹，更无事迹，是收外亲，乃为传首。 
现代文：因与魏收关系不密切，所以他不给立传。博陵的崔绰，官位仅至本郡的功曹，更没有什么突出的事迹。因为是魏收的亲戚，便为他立传，并且放在首位。 
English: Because he was not closely related to Wei Jie, he did not give him a legend. Cui Qiao of Boling, whose official rank was only as high as that of the county, did not have any outstanding deeds. Because he was a relative of Wei Jie, he established a legend for him and put it first.

古文：收曰： 绰虽无位，道义可嘉，所以合传。 
现代文：魏收说 ：崔绰虽然没有官位，道德节操却值得称赞，所以为他立传。 
English: Wei Wei said: Although Cui Qiao does not have an official position, his moral integrity is commendable, so he is a legend.

古文：帝曰： 卿何由知其好人？ 
现代文：文宣帝说 ：你怎么知道他是好人？ 
English: Emperor Wenxuan said, "How do you know he is a good man?"

古文：收曰： 高允曾为绰赞，称有道德。 
现代文：魏收说： 高允曾经为崔绰写过一篇赞，称颂他有道德。 
English: Wei Wei said: Gao Yun once wrote a praise for Cui Zhuo, praising him for his morality.

古文：帝曰： 司空才士，为人作赞，正应称扬。
现代文：文宣帝说 ：高司空是一位才士，给别人写赞，正应该称颂表扬。
English: Wen Xuandi said: Gao Si Kuang is a talented person, he writes praise to others, he should be praised.

古文：亦如卿为人作文章，道其好者，岂能皆实？ 
现代文：也像你给别人写文章，说他好的地方，难道能都符合事实？ 
English: It's also like when you write an article for someone and say something nice about them, can it all be true?

古文：收无以对，战栗而已。
现代文：魏收无言以对，只是浑身打颤。
English: Wei Hui was speechless, just trembling all over.

古文：但帝先重收才，不欲加罪。
现代文：但是，文宣帝早先就看中了魏收的才学，不想加罪于他。
English: However, Emperor Wenzhong took an early liking to Wei Xie's talent for learning and did not want to add to his guilt.

古文：时太原王松年亦谤史，及斐、庶并获罪，各被鞭配甲坊，或因以致死。
现代文：这时，太原的王松年也批评魏收，和卢斐、李庶一起获罪，各被鞭打，流配在街巷市坊，有的因此死去。
English: At this time, Wang Songnian of Taiyuan also criticized Wei Jie, and was found guilty together with Lu Fei and Li Shiao. They were each whipped, banished to the streets and alleys, and some died as a result.

古文：卢思道亦抵罪。
现代文：卢思道也被罪罚。
English: Lu Si Dao was also punished.

古文：然犹以群口沸腾，敕魏史且勿施行，令群官博议。
现代文：然而，终因众口沸腾，议论纷纷，朝廷下令命《魏书》停止传播发行，让群臣们共同商议。
English: However, in the end, due to the public outcry and discussion, the imperial court ordered the "Weishu" to stop the dissemination and distribution, and let the ministers discuss it together.

古文：听有家事者入署，不实者陈牒。
现代文：允许史书中牵涉到家事的人进入史局，不真实的地方可以陈述吁请。
English: Allow those who are involved in family affairs in the history books to enter the history bureau, and where it is not true, it can be stated and appealed.

古文：于是众口喧然，号为 秽史 ，投牒者相次，收无以抗之。
现代文：于是，众口喧哗，称《魏书》为 秽史 ，投递诉状的人一个接一个，魏收应接不暇，无法抗拒。
English: As a result, there was a clamor of people calling "Weishu" a "dirty history," and the people who submitted complaints one after another. Wei was overwhelmed and could not resist.

古文：时左仆射杨愔、右仆射高德正二人势倾朝野，与收皆亲。
现代文：这时，左仆射杨、右仆射高德正二人权势倾于朝野，与魏收关系密切。
English: At this time, his left-hand man, Sho Yang, and his right-hand man, Sho Gao Dezheng, both of whom were inclined towards the court, were closely related to Wei Jie.

古文：收遂为其家并作传，二人不欲言史不实，抑塞拆辞，终文宣世，更不重论。
现代文：魏收也为他们家里的人作过传，这两个人不愿说《魏书》不真实，便堵塞言路，终文宣帝一世，不再议论这件事。
English: Wei Jie had also written a biography of someone in their family. The two men did not want to say that "Weishu" was not true, so they blocked the path of speech, ending with Emperor Xuan I, and no longer discussed the matter.

古文：又尚书陆操尝谓愔曰： 魏收魏书可谓博物宏才，有大功于魏室。 
现代文：尚书陆操曾对杨说： 魏收的《魏书》真可以称得上博览万物，才学恢宏，对魏室大有贡献。 
English: Shang Shul Lu Cao once said to Yang: Wei Shu's "Weishu" can truly be called an exposition of all things, it is magnificent to learn, and it has made great contributions to the Wei dynasty.

古文：愔尝谓收曰： 此谓不刊之书，传之万古。
现代文：杨忄音也曾对魏收说： 你的《魏书》是不可磨灭的著作，可以传之千秋万代。
English: Yang Yuyin also said to Wei Shu: Your "Weishu" is an indelible work that can be passed down for thousands of generations.

古文：但恨论及诸家枝叶亲姻，过为繁碎，与旧史体例不同耳。 
现代文：但可惜的是论及各家的枝叶姻亲，过于繁杂琐碎，与旧史的体例不相同呀。 
English: However, it is a pity that the branches and leaves of the in-laws of each family are too complicated and trivial, which is different from the style of the old history.

古文：收曰： 往因中原丧乱，人士谱牒遗逸略尽，是以具尽其枝派。望公观过知仁，以免尤责。 
现代文：魏收说： 过去因为中原动乱，缙绅士大夫的家谱文书散佚殆尽，所以，详细地叙述他们的源流枝派，希望您看到书中的过失而能理解我的良苦用心，以免过分地指责。 
English: Wei Zhi said: In the past, because of the Central Plains turmoil, the genealogy documents of the gentlemen doctors were scattered and exhausted. Therefore, I will describe their source and branch schools in detail. I hope you can see the mistakes in the book and understand my good intentions, so as not to criticize excessively.

古文：八年夏，除太子少傅，监国史。复参修律令。
现代文：天保八年夏天，魏收任太子少傅，负责监修国史，还参与修改律令。
English: In the summer of the 8th year of the Tenpo era, Wei was appointed as the prince's junior tutor, responsible for supervising the national history, and also participated in the revision of the ritsuryo.

古文：三台成，文宣曰： 台成，须有赋。 
现代文：三台建成，文宣帝说： 台落成，须有词赋歌颂。 
English: When the three stages were completed, Emperor Wenxuan said, "When the stage is completed, there must be words of praise."

古文：愔先以告收，收上《皇居新殿台赋》，其文甚壮丽。
现代文：杨忄音先把这消息告诉了魏收，他写了《皇居新殿台赋》呈上，文章十分宏丽壮阔。
English: Yang Xuanyin first told Wei Jie about this news. He wrote "Imperial Palace New Hall Stage Play" and presented it to Wei Jie. The article was very magnificent.

古文：时所作者自邢邵已下，咸不逮焉。
现代文：当时的作者自邢邵以下，都赶不上他。
English: The authors at that time, from Zou Shao on down, couldn't keep up with him.

古文：收上赋前数日，乃告邢邵，邵后告人曰： 收甚恶人，不早言之。 
现代文：他呈上赋作的前几天才告知邢邵，邢邵后来对别人说： 魏收真是个小人，不早点告知这个消息。 
English: He did not inform Wei Shao until a few days before he submitted the work. Wei Shao later said to others: Wei Hui is really a villain, do not inform this news earlier.

古文：帝曾游东山，敕收作诏，宣扬威德，譬喻关西。
现代文：文宣帝曾到东山游览，命魏收起草诏书，宣扬朝廷的威德，以告谕关西的北周。
English: Emperor Wenxuan once visited Dongshan and ordered Wei Jie to draft an edict, proclaiming the virtue of the imperial court, in order to warn the northern Zhou of Kansai.

古文：俄顷而讫，辞理宏壮，帝对百僚大嗟赏之。
现代文：他倾刻写成，词气恢宏，内容宏博，文宣帝对着群臣们大加赞叹。
English: He wrote it by heart, with magnificent words and rich content, and Emperor Wenxuan was greatly admired by his courtiers.

古文：仍兼太子詹事。
现代文：他仍兼太子詹事。
English: He is still the crown prince.

古文：收娶其舅女，崔昂之妹，产一女，无子。
现代文：魏收娶他的舅父的女儿，妻子是崔昂的妹妹，生了一个女儿，没有儿子。
English: Wei married his uncle's daughter, Choi Aung's sister, and had a daughter, but no son.

古文：魏太常刘芳孙女、中书郎崔肇师女，夫家坐事，帝并赐收为妻。
现代文：魏太常刘芳的孙女和中书郎崔肇师的女儿，丈夫家因犯罪，文宣帝都将她们赐给魏收为妻。
English: Wei Taizang was the granddaughter of Liu Fang and the daughter of the Chinese scholar Cui Zhaoshi. As her husband's family had committed crimes, Emperor Wenzhong gave both of them to Wei as his wife.

古文：时人比之贾充置左右夫人。
现代文：当时人们把他比做晋代的贾充，有左右两个夫人。
English: At that time, people compared him to Jia Chong, the second generation of the Jin Dynasty, who had two wives.

古文：然无子。
现代文：然而他最终还是没有儿子。
English: However, he did not have a son in the end.

古文：后病甚，恐身后嫡媵不平，乃放二姬。及疾瘳追忆，作《怀离赋》以申意。
现代文：后来他的病情严重，恐怕自己死后妻妾之间关系不睦，便放去两个姬妾，疾病痊愈后，他写了《怀离赋》以表达自己思念的情怀。
English: Later, his illness was serious, and he was afraid that the relationship between his wife and concubine would not be harmonious after his death, so he let go of two concubines. After he recovered from the disease, he wrote "Hui Yifu" to express his thoughts and feelings.

古文：文宣每以酣宴之次，云太子性懦，宗社事重，终当传位常山。
现代文：文宣帝每次宴会在酒兴酣畅之余，常感叹太子性情怯懦，国家宗庙事关重大，自己终当传位给自己的兄弟常山王高演。
English: Every time Emperor Wenxuan had a banquet, he often lamented the prince's cowardly temperament, the national ancestral temple was of great importance, and he finally had to pass the throne to his brother, King Gao of Changshan.

古文：收谓杨愔曰： 古人云：太子国之根本，不可动摇。
现代文：魏收对杨忄音说： 古人说：太子是国家的根本，不可以任意动摇。
English: Wei Hui said to Yang Xuanyin: The ancients said: the prince is the foundation of the country, and cannot be shaken arbitrarily.

古文：至尊三爵后，每言传位常山，令臣下疑贰。
现代文：文宣帝喝了几杯酒之后，常说要传位给常山王，让我们做臣子的产生疑虑。
English: After Emperor Wenxuan had drunk a few glasses of wine, he often said that he wanted to pass the throne to King Changshan, which made us courtiers have doubts.

古文：若实，便须决行；若戏此言，魏收既忝师傅，正当守之以死，但恐国家不安。 
现代文：如果真的这样，应该决定并付诸实行；如果是一句戏言，我既然任太子的师傅，正当为太子以死效忠。但是，恐怕国家不会安定。 
English: If this is true, it should be decided and put into practice; if it is a joke, since I am the prince's teacher, I should be loyal to the prince to the death. However, I am afraid that the country will not be stable.

古文：愔以收言奏帝，自此便止。帝数宴喜，收每预侍从。
现代文：杨忄音把魏收的话奏报给文宣帝，从此文宣帝不再说传位给常山王的话。文宣帝多次摆设喜庆酒宴，魏收每次都参加。
English: Yang Xuanying reported Wei Jie's words to Emperor Wenzhong, and from then on, Emperor Wenzhong no longer said anything about passing the throne to the King of Changshan. Emperor Wenzhong held many festive banquets, and Wei Jie attended every time.

古文：皇太子之纳郑良娣也，有司备设牢馔。
现代文：皇太子纳郑良娣为妃，有司设下很完整的牛、羊、猪三牲祭品的酒馔。
English: Crown Prince Na Zheng Liangyao was the consort, and there was a very complete set of oxen, sheep, and pigs for sacrifice.

古文：帝既酣饮，起而自毁覆之，仍诏收曰： 知我意不？ 
现代文：文宣帝开怀畅饮之后，站起来把完整的牛、羊、猪都弄烂了，然后问魏收： 理解我的意思吗？ 
English: After Emperor Wenxuan had a hearty drink, he stood up and ruined the complete cow, sheep and pig, and then asked Wei Jie: Do you understand what I mean?

古文：收曰： 臣愚谓良娣既东宫之妾，理不须牢，仰惟圣怀，缘此毁去。 
现代文：魏收说： 我很愚笨，认为良娣不过是太子的妃子，按理不应该设置牛、羊、猪三牲祭品。圣怀念此，因而将它们捣毁。 
English: Wei Hui said, "I was very stupid and thought that the pigeon was just the prince's concubine, and that it was not right to set up the three animal sacrifices of cattle, sheep, and pigs. Sheng Huai remembered this and destroyed them.

古文：帝大笑，握收手曰： 卿知我意。 
现代文：文宣帝听后大笑，握着魏收的手说： 你了解我的意思。 
English: After listening, Emperor Wenxuan laughed loudly, shook Wei Wei's hand and said: You know what I mean.

古文：安德王延宗纳赵郡李祖收女为刀，后帝幸李宅宴，而妃母宋氏荐二石榴于帝前。
现代文：安德王高延宗纳赵郡李祖收的女儿为妃，后来文宣帝到李宅赴宴，而妃子的母亲宋氏拿出两个石榴放到文宣帝面前。
English: The daughter of King Gaoyan of Ande, Zongna of Zhao County and Li Zuoren of Li County became the princess. Later, Emperor Wenzhong went to Li's house for a banquet, and the princess's mother, Lady Song, took out two pomegranates and placed them in front of Emperor Wenzhong.

古文：问诸人，莫知其意，帝投之。
现代文：文宣帝问所有的人都不知道是什么意思，便将它们放在一旁。
English: Emperor Wenxuan asked everyone if they knew what it meant, and then put them aside.

古文：收曰： 石榴房中多子，王新婚，妃母欲子孙众多。 
现代文：魏收说： 石榴里面有很多子，安德王新婚，妃子的母亲想让他们夫妻子孙众多。 
English: Wei Wei said: There are many sons in the pomegranate. King Ando is newly married, and the mother of the concubine wants their husband to have many wives and grandchildren.

古文：帝大喜，诏收： 卿还将来。 
现代文：文宣帝非常高兴，对魏收说： 今后你还要来。 
English: Emperor Wenxuan was very pleased and said to Wei Hui, "You will come again in the future."

古文：仍赐收美锦二疋。
现代文：便赐给他两匹华美的锦缎。
English: and gave him two magnificent brocade horses.

古文：十年，除仪同三司。
现代文：天保十年，朝廷任命他为仪同三司。
English: In the tenth year of the Tenpo era, the Imperial Court appointed him as the Third Secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：帝在宴席，口敕以为中书监，命中书郎李愔以收一代盛才，难于率尔，久而未讫。
现代文：文宣帝在一次筵席上口头任命魏收为中书监，让中书郎李忄音在树下起草任命的诏书，李忄音认为魏收是一代卓越的人才，自己难于驾驭诏书的起草，很久也没有将诏书写成。
English: At a banquet, Emperor Wenxuan verbally appointed Wei Jie as the Censor of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, and asked the Censor of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Li Yuyin, to draft an edict of appointment under a tree. Li Yuyin believed that Wei Jie was an outstanding talent. He found it difficult to control the drafting of the edict, and did not write the edict for a long time.

古文：比成，帝已醉醒，遂不重言，愔仍不奏，事竟寝。
现代文：文宣帝从酒醉中清醒，便不再提封任的话。李忄音也不奏知，事情渐渐沉寂。
English: Emperor Wenxuan sobered up from his drunkenness and no longer mentioned the matter of the appointment. Li Yinyin did not know about it, and things gradually calmed down.

古文：及帝崩于晋阳，驿召收及中山太守阳休之参议吉凶之礼，并掌诏诰。
现代文：文宣帝在晋阳驾崩，朝廷派驿使召魏收和中山太守阳休之参与议定丧葬的大礼，并负责起草诏诰。
English: When Emperor Wenxuan passed away in Jinyang, the imperial court sent an envoy to summon Wei Jie and Zhongshan Taishou Yang Xiu to participate in the agreed funeral ceremony, and was responsible for drafting the imperial edict.

古文：仍除侍中，迁太常卿，文宣谥及庙号、陵名，皆收议也。
现代文：仍任侍中，又迁任太常卿。文宣帝的谥号，以及庙号、陵墓的名称，都是魏收提议的。
English: He still served as a chamberlain, but was transferred to the position of Tai Changqing. Emperor Wenxuan's nickname, as well as the name of the temple and the name of the mausoleum, were all proposed by Wei Jie.

古文：及孝昭居中宰事，命收禁中为诸诏文，积日不出。
现代文：常山王高演在朝中任宰相，他命魏收在宫中起草诏书，数日也不出宫一次。
English: Wang Gaoyuan of Changshan served as prime minister in the middle of the dynasty. He ordered Wei Wei to draft the imperial edict in the palace, and did not leave the palace for several days.

古文：转中书监。皇建元年，除兼侍中、右光禄大夫，仍仪同，监史。
现代文：魏收又转任中书监，皇建元年，他任兼侍中、右光禄大夫，仍任仪同，监修国史。
English: Wei Jie was also transferred to the post of middle school librarian, and in the first year of the Emperor's reign, he also served as an attendant middle school and Uguanglu doctor, and still served as an attendant, supervising the national history.

古文：收先副王昕使梁，不相协睦，时昕弟晞亲密，而孝昭别令休之兼中书，在晋阳典诰诏，收留在鄴，盖晞所为。
现代文：他早先给王昕作副手出使南梁，两人关系不协调。这时王昕的弟弟王与朝廷关系亲密，孝昭帝命阳休之兼中书，在晋阳负责起草诏诰，魏收留在邺城，都是王的主意。
English: He had earlier sent Nan Liang to Wang Xi as his deputy, and the relationship between the two was not coordinated. At that time, Wang Xi's younger brother Wang had a close relationship with the imperial court. It was Wang's idea to write the imperial edict in Jinyang, to draft the imperial edict in Shijiazhuang, and to keep Wei in Shicheng.

古文：孝昭后姓元，议恪不欲广及，故议从收。
现代文：魏收很不满意，对太子舍人卢询祖说 ：如果让你起草文诰诏书，我也不说什么。 朝廷又命祖王廷为著作郎，想取代魏收。
English: Wei Jie was very dissatisfied and said to Lu Xunzu, the prince's concubine, "If you let me draft the imperial edict, I won't say anything." The imperial court also appointed Zu Wangting as the scribe, who wanted to replace Wei Jie.

古文：又除兼太子少傅，解侍中。帝以魏史未行，诏收更加研审，收奉诏，颇有改正。
现代文：司空主簿李翥是一个长于文学词章的人，听说朝中这些人事变动后对别人说 ：诏书文诰都归阳休之，著作郎又任命了祖王廷，我朝文史顿失生气，恐怕魏公要祸起背后。 孝昭帝认为《魏书》没有刊行，命魏收进一步研讨审改，他奉诏后对《魏书》作了很多修改。
English: After hearing of the personnel changes in the middle of the dynasty, he said to others: "All the imperial edicts and proclamations have returned to the sun, and the author has appointed Zou Wangting, I have lost my temper with the imperial edicts and proclamations, and I am afraid that Wei Gong is behind the calamity." Emperor Xiaozhao thought that the "Weishu" had not been published, and ordered Wei Zi to further study and revise it. He made many modifications to the "Weishu" after receiving the imperial edict.

古文：及诏行魏史，收以为直置秘阁，外人无由得见，于是命送一本付并省，一本付鄴下，任人写之。
现代文：朝廷下诏允许《魏书》传行，魏收认为书稿藏之秘阁，外人无法看见。于是，朝廷命送一本交付并省，一本放在邺城，任凭人们翻阅改易。
English: The Imperial Court issued an edict allowing the "Weishu" to be passed down, and Wei Rong thought that the manuscript was kept secret and could not be seen by outsiders. Therefore, the Imperial Court ordered one copy to be delivered to the province, and one to be placed in Handan City, allowing people to flip through and read it.

古文：太宁元年，加开府。
现代文：太宁元年，朝廷加封魏收为开府。
English: In the first year of Taining, the imperial court added Wei collection to the capital.

古文：河清二年，兼右仆射。
现代文：河清二年，他为兼右仆射。
English: In the second year of Heqing, he was also the right-hand man.

古文：时武成酣饮终日，朝事专委侍中高元海，凡庸不堪大任。
现代文：这时，武成帝终日沉湎酒乡，朝中大事委付侍中高元海。高元海凡俗平庸，不堪大任。
English: At this time, Emperor Wucheng spent all day in the wine country, and Gao Yuanhai, a mediocre commoner, was appointed by the Central Affairs Commission. Gao Yuanhai was not up to the task.

古文：以收才名振俗，都官尚书毕义云长于断割，乃虚心倚仗。
现代文：因魏收的才名震动世俗，都官尚书毕义云善于处理繁琐的事务，元海便虚心依赖他们。
English: The talents of the Wei and Wei dynasties shook the world, and the officials of the capital were good at handling complicated affairs. Yuanhai humbly relied on them.

古文：收畏避，不能匡救，为议者所讥。
现代文：魏收畏祸保身，不能匡救时弊，被人们所讥讽。
English: Wei to ward off evil and protect themselves, can not save the ills of the times, and was ridiculed by people.

古文：帝于华林别起玄洲苑，备山水台观之丽，诏于阁上画收，其见重如此。
现代文：武成帝在华林另外建造玄洲苑，极尽山水台阁的壮丽，下诏命在台阁中画上魏收的像。
English: Emperor Wucheng also built Xuanzhouyuan in Hualin, to maximize the magnificence of the landscape pavilion, and ordered the portrait of Wei Jie to be painted in the pavilion.

古文：始收比温子升、邢邵稍为后进，邵既被疏出，子升以罪死，收遂大被任用，独步一时。
现代文：开始，魏收与温子升、邢邵相比，声望稍逊一筹。邢邵被朝廷疏远调出京城，温子升因犯罪被处死，魏收便被重用，独步一时。
English: At the beginning, Wei Jie's reputation was slightly inferior to that of Wenzhisheng and Zou Shao. Zou Shao was removed from Beijing by the imperial court, Wenzhisheng was executed for a crime, and Wei Jie was reused and left alone for a while.

古文：议论更相訾毁，各有朋党。
现代文：议论对他更加诋毁。
English: The discourse has become even more vituperative.

古文：收每议陋邢文。邵又云： 江南任昉，文体本疏，魏收非直模拟，亦大偷窃。 
现代文：他们各树朋党，魏收常贬低邢邵的文章，邢邵却攻击他： 江南的任日方，文体本来粗疏，魏收不是直接模仿，也是公开偷窃。 
English: They were all friends of the party. Wei Jie often belittled Zou Shao's articles, but Zou Shao attacked him: Any Japanese side in Jiangnan, the style was originally coarse, Wei Jie was not a direct imitation, but also an open theft.

古文：收闻乃曰： 伊常于沈约集中作贼，何意道我偷任。 
现代文：魏收听到后便反唇相讥 ：你经常在沈约的文集中作贼，为什么说我偷窃任日方的文章？ 
English: After hearing this, Wei Hui retorted: You often act as a thief in Shen Yao's anthology, why do you say that I steal articles from the Japanese side?

古文：任、沈俱有重名，邢、魏各有所好。
现代文：任日方、沈约都享有很高的声誉，邢邵、魏收对他们的文章各有自己的偏爱。
English: Ren Nichifang and Shen Youyou both enjoy a high reputation, and Zou Shao and Wei Hui each have their own preferences for their articles.

古文：武平中，黄门郎颜之推以二公意问仆射祖珽。珽答曰： 见邢、魏之臧不，即是任、沈之优劣。 
现代文：武平时，颜之推问仆射祖王廷对邢、魏二人的看法，祖王廷回答 ：邢、魏二人的长处和短处就是任日方、沈约的优点和缺点。 
English: In times of war and peace, Yan Zhi asked his servant Zhao Wangting for his views on Ren and Wei. Zhao Wangting replied: The strengths and weaknesses of Ren and Wei are the strengths and weaknesses of Ren and Shen.

古文：收以温子升全不作赋，邢虽有一两首，又非所长，常云： 会须能作赋，始成大才士。
现代文：魏收认为温子升从不写赋，邢邵的赋作也只有一两篇，而写赋正是他自己的长处，常常夸耀说： 必须能写赋，才能成为大才士。
English: Wei Hui believed that Wen Zisheng never wrote fu, and that Zou Shao's fu works were only one or two, but writing fu was his own strength. He often boasted: "One must be able to write fu in order to become a great talent."

古文：唯以章表碑志自许，此外更同兒戏。 
现代文：只以奏章、碑传、志乘自许，其他就更同儿戏一般。 
English: Only the music chapter, the inscription, and the self-congratulation of Zhi Rong, the others are more like a children's play.

古文：自武定二年以后，国家大事诏命，军国文词，皆收所作。
现代文：自武定二年以后，国家的重大诏命，军国的文告露布，都出自魏收之手。
English: Two years after Wu Ding, the country's major imperial edict, the military's manifesto, all came from Wei Jie's hand.

古文：每有警急，受诏立成。
现代文：每有紧急事情，魏收都受命起草诏书，顷刻便成。
English: Whenever there was an emergency, Wei Xi Du was ordered to draft an edict, which was done in an instant.

古文：或时中使催促，收笔下有同宿构，敏速之工，邢、温所不逮也。
现代文：有时宦官前来催促，魏收的笔下就好像已经提前构想出来一样，一挥而就。敏捷快速的功夫，是邢邵、温子升不能相比的。
English: Sometimes eunuchs come to urge, Wei Jie's writing is as if it has been conceived in advance, and it is done with a single stroke. The agile and fast effort is incomparable to that of Zhao Shao and Wen Zisheng.

古文：其参议典礼，与邢相埒。
现代文：他的参议典章礼仪制定的能力，与邢邵相似。
English: His ability to formulate the etiquette of the senate ceremony is similar to that of Zou Shao.

古文：既而赵郡公增年获免，收知而过之，事发除名。
现代文：魏收因为子侄年少，为了加以训诫和教诲，写了《枕中篇》，内容为：
English: Because Wei Hui's nephew was young, in order to admonish and teach him, he wrote the "Pillow Middle Chapter," which reads:

古文：其年，又以托附陈使封孝琰，牒令其门客与行，遇昆仑舶至，得奇货：猓然褥表、美玉盈尺等数十件。
现代文： 我曾读过管子的书，其中有句话说 ：责任最重大的都不如身体，人生的旅途中最危险的都不如嘴，期限最长的都不如年。
English: I once read a pipe book, in which there is a saying: the most important responsibility is not as good as the body, the most dangerous in the journey of life is not as good as the mouth, and the longest period is not as good as years.

古文：罪当流，以赎论。三年，起除清郡尹。
现代文：担负着重大的责任行走在危途上，以度完人生，只有君子才能善始善终。 
English: Only a gentleman can make a good start and a good end, bearing great responsibilities and walking on a dangerous path to complete his life.

古文：乘危也有术，盖乘之而靡恤。彼期远而能通，果应之而可必。岂神理之独尔，亦人事其如一。
现代文：认真追思玩味这句话，真令人喟然长叹。 山岳屹立而稳重，因为山体扎实，所以不会倾倒；山中的蕴藏可称坚固，但也在不断地积聚变化；吕梁山非常幽深，却可以在其中边走边歌而不用警惕；焦原临百仞之溪，异常险峻，也可以登临而不必惊慌。
English: Seriously pondering this sentence, it is really a long sigh. Mountains are standing and stable, because the mountain body is solid, so it will not topple over; the reserves in the mountains can be called solid, but they are also constantly accumulating and changing; Mount Luliang is very deep, but you can walk and sing in it without being alert; Jiao Yuan near Baizhong Creek, extremely steep, can also be climbed without having to panic.

古文：呜呼！处天壤之间，劳死生之地，攻之以嗜欲，牵之以名利，粱肉不期而共臻，珠玉无足而俱致，于是乎骄奢仍作，危亡旋至。
现代文：九层台阶垒在一起，所以可以轻松地登上；岁、日、月、星辰、历数等五纪确定后，就不会怅然无序地前行。 唉呀，生长在天地之间，辛劳奔波在死生之地，为了满足嗜欲去追求，为了获取名利去奋斗，美味佳肴不期而至，珠玉珍宝无足自来，因此骄奢淫逸，身败家亡接踵而至。
English: The nine steps are all together, so it is easy to climb up; after the five disciplines such as the year, day, month, star and calendar are determined, it will not be chaotic and disorderly. Alas, growing up between heaven and earth, laboriously rushing in the land of life and death, in order to satisfy the desire to pursue, in order to obtain fame and fortune to struggle, delicious dishes come unexpectedly, gems and precious stones come from nowhere, so pride and luxury, defeat and death follow one after another.

古文：然同上智大贤，惟几惟哲，或出或处，不常其时。
现代文：然而，那些上智大贤，都靠着机遇和智慧，审时度势，不拘泥于时间和条件。
English: However, those wise sages rely on opportunities and wisdom to judge the time and situation, and are not bound by time and conditions.

古文：其舒也济世成务，其卷也声销迹灭。
现代文：他们大显身手就可以救济时世，成就大业；急流勇退会立即销声匿迹。
English: They can help the times and achieve great things with their great efforts; the rapid retreat will disappear immediately.

古文：玉帛子女，椒兰律吕，谄谀无所先；称肉度骨，膏辱挑舌，怨恶莫之前。
现代文：对于子女玉帛，椒兰器乐一类的享受，和阿谀奉承，献媚上官的卑劣行径，从不争先去做；挑肥拣瘦，斤斤计较，油嘴滑舌，拨弄是非，招致怨恨的事情，从不上前参与。
English: For the enjoyment of children's jade, pepper and orchid instrumental music, and flattery, the despicable act of flattering the superior, never compete to do it first; pick and choose, cunning, glib, tease, and cause resentment, never participate.

古文：勋名共山河同久，志业与金石比坚。
现代文：他们的勋名与山河同在，志节与金石比坚。
English: Their honours are on a par with the mountains and rivers, and their selflessness is on a par with the precious stones.

古文：斯盖厚栋不桡，游刃砉然。
现代文：所以，粗大的木梁不会弯曲，游刃有余，就会圭石然而开。
English: Therefore, the thick wooden beam will not bend, and if you have enough skill, you will be able to open the stone.

古文：逮于厥德不常，丧其金璞，驰骛人世，鼓动流俗，挟汤日而谓寒，包溪壑而未足。
现代文：如果道德失常，丧失掉原来的金质玉洁，很快惊动天下，煽动起流俗恶习。抱着装满热水的壶还说冷，欲满溪壑仍不知足。
English: If morals are out of kilter, if the original golden purity is lost, it will soon alarm the world and incite the rise of vulgar vices. Holding a pot full of hot water is still cold, and wanting to fill the stream is still not enough.

古文：源不清而流浊，表不端而影曲。
现代文：源头不清，其流必浊。晷表不直，日影必斜。
English: If the source is not clear, the current will be turbulent. If the table is not straight, the shadow will be oblique.

古文：闻诸君子，雅道之士，游遨经术，厌饫文史。笔有奇锋，谈有胜理。
现代文： 听说那些有道德的君子和学有专长的读书人，在浩瀚的书海中遨游。饱读文学历史经典，笔下有奇异的锋芒，谈吐有深刻过人的道理。
English: I have heard that those who are moral gentlemen and learned readers with expertise travel in the vast sea of books. They read literary and historical classics, the pen has a strange edge, and the talk has a profound reason.

古文：孝悌之至，神明通矣。
现代文：孝敬父母，和睦兄弟，真如神礻氏之明，无所不通。
English: Filial piety to parents, harmonious brothers, truly like the wisdom of the Shinran clan, omniscient.

古文：审蹈而行，量路而止。自我及物，先人后已。
现代文：审视着脚步走路，计量着路程的远近决定行止，与别人相处，先人后己。
English: Examine the pace of walking, measure the distance of the journey, determine the behavior, get along with others, and be yourself.

古文：情无系于荣悴，心靡滞于愠喜。
现代文：感情不被荣辱纠缠，心境不受喜怒的影响。
English: Feelings are not entangled by honor and disgrace, and moods are not affected by emotions.

古文：不养望于丘壑，不待价于城市。
现代文：不在山林丘壑中寻求安逸，不在通都大邑中待价而沽。
English: Do not seek comfort in the mountains and hills, do not wait for a bargain in the big cities.

古文：言行相顾，慎终犹始。
现代文：言行一致，善始善终。
English: Words and deeds are consistent, and a good beginning makes a good ending.

古文：有一于斯，郁为羽仪。
现代文： 在家门内也会有祸患发生，所以，事情不可以不机密。
English: Accidents can also happen at home, so it's important to keep things confidential.

古文：恪居展事，知无不为，或左或右，则髦士攸宜，无悔无吝，故高而不危。
现代文：墙上伏有贼寇，说话不能够过于放肆。应认真谛听他说的话，应该仔细观察他的行动。
English: There is a thief on the wall, you should not speak too boldly. You should carefully listen to what he says, and you should carefully observe his actions.

古文：异乎勇进忘退，苟得患失；射千金之产，徼万钟之秩；投烈风之门，趣炎火之室。
现代文：言语不善，行为不端的魔鬼强盗和囚犯盗贼，上天会暗中夺去他们的魂魄，公开减少他们的寿命。行不犯法，动不违道。
English: Heaven will secretly take away their souls and openly reduce their lifespan if they are devils, robbers, prisoners, and thieves who do not speak well or behave well.

古文：载蹶而坠其贻宴，或蹲乃丧其贞吉。可不畏欤！
现代文：象征国家的公鼎是我所信赖的，私人的珍宝不是我看重的。
English: I trust the public crown that symbolizes the country, but I don't care about the private treasures.

古文：可不戒欤！
现代文：经过黑染料的浸泡就变成天青色。
English: After being soaked with black dye, it turns into a sky-blue color.

古文：门有倚祸，事不可不密；墙有伏寇，言不可而失。
现代文：超过了蓝色就成为青色。拿着墨绳量就会看出是直还是不直；用水平仪观察就能看出平或是不平。等待时机，然后谋求，不如没有贪婪的欲望。
English: If it exceeds the blue, it becomes blue. If you hold the amount of ink rope, you can see whether it is straight or not; if you observe with a level, you can see whether it is flat or not. If you wait for the opportunity and then seek, it is better not to have greedy desires.

古文：宜谛其言，宜端其行。
现代文：知道克制，知道满足，就可以免去因贪赃枉法受到的惩处。
English: If you know restraint and contentment, you can be exempted from punishment for corruption.

古文：言之不善，行之不正，鬼执强梁，人囚径廷，幽夺其魄，明夭其命。
现代文：所以，有所举措，必须分析事情每个微小的环节；有所行动，一定在细枝末节上小心谨慎。考虑得细致周到，失败就会少；既观察又谨慎，好运气就会到来。
English: Therefore, if you have a plan, you must analyze every tiny part of the matter; if you have an action, you must be careful about the details; if you are thoughtful and thoughtful, you will have fewer failures; if you are observant and cautious, good luck will come.

古文：不服非法，不行非道。公鼎为己信，私玉非身宝。
现代文： 月亮满盈，犹如圆规划出一般，入夜之后逐渐变亏；木槿花开在枝头，到了暮春花朵就会凋萎。
English: The moon is full, as if the circle is generally planned out, and gradually becomes a loss after nightfall; the hibiscus flowers open on the branches, and the flowers will wither in late spring.

古文：过涅为绀，逾蓝作青，持绳亲直，置水观平。
现代文：世上哪里会有只增加而不减少的事物？又怎么会只减少而不被损失的情况呢？利益不要太大，好处不要太多。
English: Where in the world can there be things that only increase and do not decrease? And how can there be a situation where there is only a decrease and no loss? The benefit should not be too great, and the benefit should not be too much.

古文：时然后取，未若无欲，知止知足，庶免于辱。
现代文：只有有道德的人才畏惧利益太大，有亲身体验的人才担心好处太多。
English: It is only the virtuous who fear too much gain; it is only the practical men who fear too much advantage.

古文：是以为必察其几，举必慎于微。
现代文：学问渊博，道德尊崇，众多的诽谤就会一齐袭来；官位崇高，职责重大，各种怨恨就会联合起来向你进攻。
English: If you are learned and virtuous, many calumnies will be heaped upon you; if you are high-ranking and responsible, all grudges will be united against you.

古文：如山之大，无不有也；如谷之虚，无不受也。
现代文：畅达乐观，像孔子那样的人也会栖惶不安；忠贞诚恳，像周公那样的人也会狼狈不堪。
English: People like Confucius, who are full of optimism, will also be anxious; people like Zhou Gong, who are loyal and sincere, will also be overwhelmed.

古文：能刚能柔，重可负也；能信能顺，险可走也；能智能愚，期可久也。
现代文：不要说别人比自己偏执狭隘，自己也有无法避免的过失；不要说别人比自己愚笨粗陋，自己也有不可克服的缺点。
English: Don't say that others are more bigoted and narrow-minded than you, and that you also have unavoidable faults; don't say that others are more stupid and crude than you, and that you also have insurmountable shortcomings.

古文：周庙之人，三缄其口，漏邑在前，欹器留后，俾诸来裔，传之坐右。其后群臣多言魏史不实，武成复敕更审。
现代文：一个人要像高山一样高大，没有不具备的才能和智慧；要像山谷那样空阔，没有不能容纳的事情。能刚能柔，可以担负重任；能守信又能灵活，可以越过艰难险阻；能聪明绝顶又能装痴装愚，你就可以长久不遭受挫折。 后来，朝臣们大多认为《魏书》失实，武成帝又命魏收重新审查。
English: A person should be as tall as a mountain, with no talents and wisdom that he does not possess; he should be as broad as a valley, with no things that cannot be accommodated; he should be able to be stiff and soft, he should be able to shoulder heavy responsibilities; he should be able to keep his word and be flexible, he should be able to overcome difficulties and dangers; he should be able to be extremely clever and be able to pretend to be stupid, he should be able to avoid setbacks for a long time. Later, most of the courtiers thought that the "Weishu" was untrue, and Emperor Wu Cheng ordered the Wei collection to be re-examined.

古文：收又回换，遂为卢同立传，崔绰反更附出。
现代文：他进行了修改，为卢同写了传记，崔绰的事迹附在其后。
English: He revised and co-wrote a biography for Lu, and the story of Cui Cao was attached to it.

古文：杨愔家传本云 有魏以来，一门而已 ，至是改此八字。
现代文：杨忄音的家传原来有 有魏以来，一门而已 ，这时，去掉了这八个字。
English: Yang Xuanyin's family legend originally had only one door since the Wei Dynasty, but at that time, these eight words were removed.

古文：又先云 弘农华阴人 ，乃改 自云弘农 以配王慧龙 自云太原人 ，此其失也。
现代文：另外，原先还说杨氏是 弘农华阴人 ，现在改为 自云弘农 ，以和王慧龙的 自云太原人 相一致，这是失实的地方。
English: In addition, it was originally said that Mr. Yang was a Hongnong Huayin person, but now it is changed to Ziyun Hongnong, to be consistent with Wang Huilong's Ziyun Taiyuan person, which is an untruthful place.

古文：寻除开府、中书监。
现代文：不久，他被任命为开府、中书监。
English: Soon, he was appointed as the head of the government and the chief librarian.

古文：武成崩，未发丧，在内诸公以后主即位有年，疑于赦令。
现代文：武成帝驾崩，没有发丧，朝廷内的大臣认为后主已经即位数年，怀疑他是否有什么敕令。
English: Emperor Wucheng passed away without a funeral. The ministers in the imperial court thought that the successor had been on the throne for several years and doubted whether he had any imperial decree.

古文：诸公引收访焉。收固执宜有恩泽，乃从之。
现代文：朝臣们请魏收去询问，魏收一直记着武成帝对自己的恩泽，便同意了。
English: The courtiers asked Wei Jie to inquire, and Wei Jie agreed, always remembering Emperor Wucheng's favor to him.

古文：掌诏诰，除尚书右仆射，总议监一礼事，位特进。
现代文：他负责诏书文诰，被封为尚书右仆射。又负责监修五礼，官位被封至特进。
English: He was in charge of the imperial rescript, and was awarded the title of Shangshu Rongbai. He was also in charge of supervising the Five Rites, and his official rank was upgraded to special promotion.

古文：收奏请赵彦深、和士开、徐之才共监，先以告士开，士开惊，辞以不学。
现代文：他奏报朝廷，请赵彦深、和士开、徐之才共同监修。先告诉和士开，士开吃惊，以不懂五礼为理由拒绝。
English: He reported to the imperial court and asked Zhao Yanshen, He Shikai and Xu Zhicai to jointly supervise the work. He first told He Shikai that He Shikai was surprised and refused on the grounds that he did not understand the Five Rites.

古文：收曰： 天下事皆由王，五礼非王不决。 
现代文：魏收说： 天下的事都由您来决定，五礼没有您也无法决定。 
English: Wei Wei said, "Everything in the world is up to you to decide, and the Five Rites cannot be decided without you.

古文：士开谢而许之。
现代文：士开感谢并表示同意。
English: Shikai thanked and agreed.

古文：多引文士令执笔，儒者马敬德、熊安生、权会实主之。
现代文：他大多任用文人学士执笔，儒生马敬德、熊安生、权会实际上主管其事。
English: He mostly appointed literati bachelors to write, and the Confucian scholars Ma Jingde, Xiong Ansheng, and Quan Cong were actually in charge of the matter.

古文：武平三年薨，赠司空、尚书左仆射，谥文贞。
现代文：魏收于武平三年去世，朝廷追赠他为司空、尚书左仆射，谥号文贞。
English: Wei Jie died in the third year of Wu Ping, and the imperial court posthumously awarded him the titles of Siku, Shang Shuzo Zuo Shu, and Wen Zhen.

古文：有集七十卷。
现代文：有文集七十卷。
English: There are seventy volumes in the anthology.

古文：收硕学大才，然性褊，不能达命体道。
现代文：魏收学问渊博，才能卓异，然而性情偏狭，不能够通达命运，践履道德。
English: Wei Zhe is well-educated and talented, but his disposition is narrow and he is not able to reach his destiny and practice morality.

古文：见当涂贵游，每以言色相悦。
现代文：遇见当政的权要，常常用甜言蜜语和满脸献媚的颜色取悦邀宠。
English: When meeting important people in power, they often use sweet words and flattering colors to please their favorites.

古文：然提奖后辈，以名行为先，浮华轻险之徒，虽有才能，弗重也。
现代文：然而他提携后生晚辈，却能注重名声和行为，那些浮华轻薄，阴险狡诈的人，虽有才能，他也不重用。
English: However, he associates with the younger generation, but can pay attention to reputation and behavior. Those who are flashy, frivolous, insidious and cunning, although they have talent, he does not use them.

古文：初，河间邢子才、子明及季景与收，并以文章业，世称大邢小魏，言尤俊也。
现代文：当初，河间的邢子才、邢子明，以及他与他的从叔魏季景，都因文章出名，人们称之为大邢小魏，称赞他们十分杰出。
English: At the beginning, Kawama's Nanzicai and Nanziming, as well as he and his uncle Wei Jijing, were all famous for their articles. People called them Dai Nanzicai and Xiao Wei, and praised them as very outstanding.

古文：收少子才十岁，子才每曰： 佛助，僚人之伟。 
现代文：魏收比邢子才小十岁，子才常赞美他： 魏收，是同僚中的伟人。 
English: Wei Jie is only ten years younger than Ren Zi, and Zi Jie often praises him: Wei Jie is a great man among his colleagues.

古文：后收稍与子才争名，文宣贬子才曰： 尔才不及魏收。 
现代文：后来，魏收与邢子才较量名声，文宣帝常贬斥子才说： 你的才能不如魏收。 
English: Later, Wei Jie competed with Zou Zi for fame, and Emperor Wenzhong often scolded Zi Jie, saying, "Your talent is not as good as Wei Jie."

古文：收益得志，自序云： 先称温、邢，后曰邢、魏。 
现代文：魏收更加得意，自己称说： 早先人们称温、邢，后来却称邢、魏。 
English: Wei Jie was more pleased with himself, saying, "Earlier, people called him Wen or Wei, but later they called him Wei or Wei.

古文：然收内陋邢，心不许也。
现代文：然而，他内心却鄙视邢邵，并不赞成他。
English: However, in his heart, he despised Gong Shao and did not approve of him.

古文：卒，家无余财，遗命薄葬，赠散骑常侍、卫尉卿。
现代文：魏收的动作轻捷迅速，喜好唱歌，善跳胡人的舞蹈。
English: Wei Jie's movements are light and quick, he likes to sing and is good at dancing.

古文：所著文笔二百余篇。
现代文：文宣帝末年，他多次与优伶们模仿猕猴与狗搏斗，文宣帝十分宠爱他。
English: In the last years of Emperor Wenzhong, he repeatedly fought with the nobles in imitation of a macaque and a dog. Emperor Wenzhong loved him very much.

古文：子澹知名。
现代文：执笔写史后，大多惑于复杂的人际关系。
English: After writing history, most people are puzzled by complex interpersonal relationships.

古文：澹子彦深。年十五而孤，专精好学，高才善属文。
现代文：北齐灭亡之后，魏收的坟墓被挖掘，遗骨被扔在外面。魏澹，字彦深，魏收的堂兄弟。十五岁失去父亲，专心精一，发奋读书，才能出众，善于写文章。
English: After the demise of Beiqi, Wei Jie's grave was dug up and his remains were thrown outside. Wei Jie, also known as Yan Sheng, was Wei Jie's cousin. He lost his father at the age of fifteen. He was devoted to his studies, excelled in his studies and was good at writing articles.

古文：仕齐，殿中侍御史，预修五礼，及撰御览。
现代文：在北齐做官，任殿中侍御史，参与修订五礼和撰写《御览》。
English: He served as an official in North Qi, and was appointed to attend to the history of the palace, and participated in the revision of the Five Rites and the writing of the "Overview."

古文：除殿中郎、中书舍人，与李德林修国史。
现代文：又任殿中郎、中书舍人，与李德林一起撰写国史。
English: He was also appointed to the post of palace chamberlain, and a member of the Chinese Academy of Letters, and wrote a national history together with Li Delin.

古文：入周为纳言中士。
现代文：入北周后任纳言中士。
English: After joining the Northern Zhou, he was appointed as a Nagon sergeant.

古文：隋初，为行台礼部侍郎，寻为聘陈使主。还，除太子舍人。
现代文：隋初，任行台礼部侍郎，不久，任出使南陈的使主，归来后任太子舍人。
English: At the beginning of the Sui Dynasty, he was appointed as an attendant of the Ceremonial Department of the Imperial Court. Soon after, he was appointed as the envoy of the envoy of the Southern Chen Dynasty. After his return, he was appointed as the prince's concubine.

古文：废太子勇深礼之，令注庚信集，撰笑苑，世称博物。
现代文：已废的太子杨勇对他十分器重，令他注释《庾信集》，编纂《笑苑》，人们称赞他博学多闻。
English: Yang Yong, the deposed crown prince, held him in high esteem. He had him annotate the "Collection of Letters" and compile the "Laughing Garden." People praised him for his erudition.

古文：迁著作郎，仍为太子学士。
现代文：升任著作郎，仍任太子学士。
English: He was promoted to Shosho-ro, and still held the post of Prince's Bachelor.

古文：帝以魏收所撰后魏书褒贬失实，平绘为中兴书事不伦序，诏澹别成魏史。
现代文：隋文帝认为魏收撰写的《后魏书》中褒贬失实，平绘所写的《中兴书》叙事混乱，下诏令魏澹另外写一部《魏史》。
English: Sui Emperor Wen thought that the "Post-Wei Shu" written by Wei Hui was full of exaggerations and distortions, and the "Zhongxing Shu" written by Ping Pu was full of confusing narratives. He ordered Wei Wei to write another "Wei Shi."

古文：澹自道武下及恭帝，为十二纪，七十八列传。别为史论及例，各一卷，合九十二卷。义例与魏收多所不同。
现代文：魏澹从道武帝开始至恭帝结束，共写成十二纪，七十八列传，另各写了一卷史论和凡例，共九十二卷，著书的主旨和体例与魏收的多不相同。
English: The Wei dynasty, from the beginning of Emperor Daowu to the end of Emperor Gong, wrote a total of twelve chronicles, seventy-eight series of biographies, and each wrote a volume of historiography and legend, a total of ninety-two volumes. The theme and style of the book are mostly different from the Wei dynasty.

古文：其一曰： 臣闻天子者继天立称，终始绝。
现代文：他说： 我听说天子承天命而临天下，始终不应该称他们的姓名。
English: He said, "I have heard that God's sons come to the world according to God's command, and their names should never be mentioned.

古文：故谷梁传： 太上不名。 
现代文：所以，《谷梁传》上说： 对于天子不能说他的姓名。 
English: Therefore, "Guliangzhuan" said: "You can't say the name of the son of heaven.

古文：曲礼： 天子不言出，诸侯不生名。 
现代文：《曲礼》中也说： 不能说天子的生身出处，不能称诸侯的名字。 
English: "Song of Songs" also says: It is not possible to say where the son of heaven was born, and it is not possible to call princes by their names.

古文：诸侯尚不生名，况天子乎？
现代文：诸侯尚不能写出姓名，更何况天子呢？
English: Princes can't write their names yet, let alone the Son of Heaven?

古文：若为太子，必须书名。
现代文：如果是天子，必须写他们的名字。
English: If they are divine, their names must be written.

古文：良由子者对父生称，父前子名，礼之意也。
现代文：是因为儿子对父亲继承的称呼，在父亲面前称儿子的名字，是符合礼的要求的。
English: It is because the son inherits the name of his father, and it is proper to call the son by his name in front of his father.

古文：至如马迁，周之太子，并皆言名，汉之储两，俱没其讳，以尊汉卑周，臣子之意也。
现代文：至于司马迁在《史记》中写到周朝的太子，都写出他们的名字；而写到汉代的太子，都避讳他们的姓名，是尊崇当代，轻视前朝，以尽臣子的心意。
English: As for the princes of the Zhou Dynasty that Sima Qian wrote about in the "Histories," they all wrote their names; while the princes of the Han Dynasty avoided their names. They respected their contemporaries and despised the previous dynasty in order to satisfy their vassals.

古文：窃谓虽立此理，恐非其义。
现代文：我认为他立下这个规矩，恐怕不合乎道理。
English: I don't think it's reasonable for him to set this rule.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：春秋、礼记，太子必书名，天王不言出，此仲尼之褒贬，皇王之称谓，非当时与异代，遂为优劣也。
现代文：是因为《春秋》、《礼记》上，对太子一定写出名字，对天子则不说出他的生身出处，这是孔子确定的。对皇帝的称谓，不能只根据当代和前代而有所不同。
English: This is because Confucius determined that in "Spring and Autumn" and "The Book of Rites," the name of the crown prince must be written, but the name of the emperor must not be mentioned. The title of the emperor cannot be different only according to the current generation and the previous generation.

古文：班固、范晔、陈寿、王隐、沈约参差不同，尊卑失序。
现代文：班固、范晔、陈寿、王隐、沈约等人撰述的史书对皇帝的称呼各不一样，使尊卑的位置颠倒。
English: The history books written by Ban Gu, Fan Ye, Chen Shou, Wang Yin, Shen Yotong and others have different names for the emperor, reversing the position of superiority and inferiority.

古文：至于魏收讳储君之名，书天子之字，过又甚焉。
现代文：至于魏收所著的《后魏书》中讳去太子的名字，写出天子的名字，过失则更加严重。
English: As for the "Post-Wei Shu" written by Wei Hui, the mistake of omitting the name of the prince and writing the name of the emperor is even more serious.

古文：今所撰，讳皇帝名，书太子字，欲尊君卑臣，依春秋之义。 
现代文：我所撰写的这部《魏史》避讳皇帝的姓名，写出太子的名字，是想分别君臣尊卑不同的位置，是按照《春秋》中的要求去作的。
English: This "History of Wei" that I have written avoids the name of the emperor and writes the name of the prince, in order to distinguish the different positions of the superior and inferior, and is made in accordance with the requirements of "Spring and Autumn."

古文：二曰 魏氏平文以前，部落之君长耳。
现代文： 魏代的皇帝在平文帝以前，都是部落酋长。
English: The emperors of the Wei Dynasty were all tribal chiefs before the reign of Emperor Pingwen.

古文：太祖远追二十八帝，并极崇高，违尧舜宪章，越周公典礼。
现代文：太祖拓跋王圭向前追溯二十八代，极力抬高他们的位置，都违背了尧和舜的典章，超出了周公制定的礼节。
English: The great-great-grandfather Tuoba Wang Gui traced back 28 generations and tried to elevate their position, all of which violated the rules of bowing and kneeling, and went beyond the etiquette established by Zhou Gong.

古文：但道武出自结绳，未师典诰，当须南董直笔，裁而正之；反更饰非，岂是观过？
现代文：道武帝出身于结绳记事，没有开化的民族，没有学习中原的典章制度，所以需要南董那样敢于秉笔直书的史官进行裁正。而魏收却替他掩盖过失，难道让后人继续重复这些过失？
English: Emperor Daowu was born in Knots and Records, he did not come from a civilized nation, he did not learn the Central Plains' system of ordinances, so he needed a historian who dared to write straight, like Nandong, to make corrections. But Wei Hui covered up his mistakes for him. Should future generations continue to repeat these mistakes?

古文：但力微天女所诞，灵异绝世，尊为始祖，得礼之宜。
现代文：但是，力微相传为天女所生，神灵奇异，举世无双，被尊称为拓跋氏的始祖，是十分恰当的。
English: However, it is quite appropriate that Riki, who is said to have been born of a celestial maiden, and who has a divine spirit that is unique in the world, is revered as the founder of the Tubas clan.

古文：平文、昭成，雄据塞表，英风渐盛，图南之业，基自此始。
现代文：平文帝、昭成帝雄据塞北，势力逐渐强大，南图中原的大业从这时开始。
English: Emperor Pingwen and Emperor Zhao Chengxiong were based in the north of Tibet, and their influence gradually became strong. The great cause of the Central Plains in southern Tibet began at this time.

古文：长孙斤之乱也，兵交御坐，太子授命，昭成获免。
现代文：长孙斤发动祸乱，在宫廷中交兵，太子在危难中遇难，昭成帝什翼犍保全了性命。
English: The eldest grandson, Jin, unleashed a calamity and made war in the court, the prince was killed in a crisis, and Emperor Zhaoxing's son, Shi Yingtao, saved his life.

古文：道武此时，后缗方娠，宗庙复存，社稷有主，大功大孝，实在献明。
现代文：道武帝拓跋王圭的皇后缗这时正怀身孕，宗庙得以保存，国家有了君主，卓著的功劳和孝心，实在在献明这里。
English: The empress Dowager of Emperor Tuoba Wang Gui was pregnant at this time, the ancestral temple was preserved, the country had a monarch, and outstanding merit and filial piety were truly dedicated here.

古文：此之三世，称谥可也；自兹以外，未之敢闻。 
现代文：这三代帝王是值得称道的。除此之外，不敢闻问。
English: These three generations of emperors are praiseworthy. Beyond that, I dare not ask.

古文：其三曰： 幽王死于骊山，厉王出奔于彘，未尝隐讳，直笔书之，欲以劝善惩恶，诒诫将来。
现代文： 幽王死在骊山，厉王逃于彘地，史书没有隐瞒，照直写出，想借此劝善惩恶，给后世留下教训。
English: Yu Wang died in Lushan, and Li Wang fled to Lushan. The history books did not conceal this, but wrote it down as it was. They wanted to use this to persuade the good and punish the evil, and to leave a lesson for future generations.

古文：而太武、献文，并遭非命，前史立纪，不异天年，言论之间，颇露首尾。杀主害君，莫知姓名，逆臣贼子，何所惧哉？
现代文：太武帝和献文帝都死于非命，而魏收的《后魏书》为他们写的纪中，对这种不正常死亡，只在行文中间有所流露，却没有暴露出杀主背君的凶手的姓名，以后会怎样使那些乱臣贼子产生畏惧之心呢？
English: Emperor Taowu and Emperor Xianwen both died a violent death, and in Wei Zhe's "Post-Wei Shu" written for them, this kind of abnormal death was only revealed in the middle of the text, but did not reveal the name of the murderer who killed the lord and lord. How will those ruffian thieves be frightened in the future?

古文：今分明直书，不敢回避。 
现代文：我的史书将他们被害的情况照直写出，不作任何掩饰。
English: My history book tells the truth about the circumstances of their deaths, without any glossing over.

古文：四曰： 自晋德不竞，宇宙分崩，或帝或王，各自署置。
现代文： 自从西晋皇室失去治国的道德，天下便分崩离析。群雄称王称帝，任意设官立国。
English: Since the West Jin royal family lost the morality of governing the country, the world fell apart. A group of strongmen claimed to be kings and emperors, arbitrarily set up officials and established the country.

古文：其生略如敌国，书死便同庶人。
现代文：他们活着互相攻打，有如敌国；死了就如同普通的百姓。
English: They live as enemies and fight against each other; they die like ordinary people.

古文：凡处华夏之地者，皆书曰卒，同之吴、楚。 
现代文：凡是在华夏一带活动的群雄，死了都写为卒，就同在江南称雄的那些人一样。 
English: All the heroes who were active in the Huaxia area were written as pawns when they died, just like those who were heroes in the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：澹又以为 司马迁创立纪传已来，述者非一，人无善恶，皆为立论。
现代文：魏澹还认为 ：司马迁创立纪传体的史书以来，著述史书的各不相同，不管好人坏人，都为他们立论评说。
English: Wei Wei also believes that since Sima Qian created the biographical history book, the written history books are all different, regardless of whether they are good or bad, they all set up a commentary for them.

古文：子罕言。
现代文：不管传主的立身和事迹有多少，都写入正史。事情不典型，就起不到对后世的劝惩作用。再则，述作如同铭颂一样，叙述重复，行文繁杂。左丘明具有亚圣的才能，阐发圣人们的思想，托言 君子曰 的那些议论，都恰如其分；其中对普通的事情，也都直抒己见。我所撰写的《魏史》，私下里在仿效左丘明。
English: Regardless of the number of the founder's life and deeds, they are all written into the official history. If the events are not typical, they will not play a role of exhortation and punishment for future generations. In addition, the description is like an epitaph, the description is repetitive, and the writing is complex. Zuo Qiuming has the ability of a sub-saint, to explain the thoughts of saints, and the arguments of the preacher Junzi are all appropriate; they also express their own views on ordinary things. The "Wei History" I have written is secretly imitating Zuo Qiuming.

古文：澹弟彦玄，位洧州司马。
现代文：可为世人起劝戒作用的，都议论他的得失优劣；对世人没什么帮助的，就不去论说。 
English: Those who can play the role of admonition for the world all discuss his merits and demerits; those who are of little help to the world do not discuss.

古文：子满行。
现代文：文帝看了连连称善。
English: Emperor Wen saw Lianlian Zong and praised him.

古文：魏兰根，字兰根，收族叔也。
现代文：不久去世。魏兰根，字兰根，魏收的族叔。
English: He died soon after. Wei Langen, also known as Langen, was Wei Xie's uncle.

古文：父伯成，中山太守。
现代文：他的父亲魏伯成，任中山太守。
English: His father, Wei Bocheng, was appointed as the governor of Zhongshan.

古文：兰根身长八尺，仪貌奇伟，博学高才，机警有识悟。
现代文：兰根身长八尺，仪表堂堂，学识渊博，才能卓著，机警敏捷，又有识见。
English: Langan is eight feet tall, well-groomed, well-educated, talented, alert, agile, and insightful.

古文：起家北海王国侍郎。
现代文：离家出仕，任北海王国侍郎。
English: He left home to work as a waiter in the North Sea Kingdom.

古文：母忧，居丧有孝称。
现代文：母亲去世，守丧时以恪守礼仪出名。
English: When his mother died, he was known for his strict adherence to etiquette during the funeral.

古文：将葬，常山郡境先有董卓祠，祠有柏树，兰根以卓凶逆，不应遗祠至今，乃启刺史，请伐为椁。
现代文：他即将葬母，常山郡境内原先有董卓祠，祠内植有柏树，兰根认为董卓是汉代国家凶恶的叛逆，不应该到今天还保留他的祠宇，便报告刺史，请求砍伐柏树，为母亲做棺木。
English: He was about to bury his mother. There used to be a Dong Zhuo ancestral shrine in Changshan County, with a cypress tree planted in the shrine. Langen thought that Dong Zhuo was a vicious rebel of the Han Dynasty, and it was not right to keep his ancestral shrine to this day. He reported the incident to the authorities and requested that the cypress tree be cut down to make a coffin for his mother.

古文：左右人言有灵，兰根了无疑惧。
现代文：周围的人说董卓会显灵降罪，他毫不畏惧。
English: People around him said that Dong Zhuo would show the spirit of repentance, and he was not afraid.

古文：父丧，庐于墓侧，负土成坟，忧毁殆于灭性。
现代文：他的父亲去世，他在墓旁建房居住，自己背土垒成坟墓，痛苦忧虑到几乎使自己丧生。
English: When his father died, he built a house next to the grave and lived there, digging his own grave and worrying so much that he almost lost his life.

古文：正光末，尚书令李崇为大都督，讨蠕蠕，以兰根为长史。
现代文：正光末年，尚书令李崇任大都督讨伐蠕蠕族，任兰根为长史。
English: In the last years of the reign of Zheng Guang, Shang Shu ordered Li Chong to be appointed as the grand governor to fight against the Cree people. He was appointed for a long time.

古文：因说崇曰： 缘边诸镇，控摄长远，昔时初置，地广人稀，或征发中原强宗子弟，或国之肺腑寄以爪牙。
现代文：他劝说李崇： 边境各镇控制的地方很长很远。过去刚设置时，由于地广人稀，将领有的是从中原征调来的大姓的子弟，有的是朝廷大臣安排的心腹爪牙。
English: He persuaded Li Chong: The places controlled by the border towns are very long and far away. In the past, when they were first set up, due to the vastness of the land and the scarcity of people, the generals were the sons of the eldest son transferred from the Central Plains, and some were the henchmen arranged by the imperial minister.

古文：中年以来，有司乖实，号曰府户，役同厮养，官婚班齿，致失清流。
现代文：若干年以来，有司隐瞒事实，将这些戍边将士称为府户，役使起来就像国家养的军户一样，官配婚姻，只叙年齿，不问门第，以致使他们都逐渐失去了清流的身份。
English: Over the past few years, some officials have concealed the facts and referred to these fringe families as "fuhu" (households of the prefectural governors), which are just like the military households maintained by the state. They marry officials, only report their age, and do not ask their lineage, so that they have gradually lost their status as a pure stream.

古文：而本宗旧类，各各荣显，顾瞻彼此，理当愤怨。
现代文：而他们原来的家族，都很荣耀显赫。前后对比，理所当然地愤懑怨恨。
English: And their original families, all glorious and illustrious, are, by comparison, justifiably angry and resentful.

古文：宜改镇立州，分置郡县。
现代文：应该将镇改为州，分别设置郡县。
English: Towns should be changed to prefectures and counties should be set up separately.

古文：凡是府户，悉免为平人，入仕次第，一准其旧。
现代文：凡是府户，都免为平民。做官的顺序，仍按过去的规定。
English: All households are exempt from being civilians. The order of officials is still in accordance with the previous regulations.

古文：此计若行，国家庶无北顾之虑。 
现代文：这个办法如能实行，国家就没有北顾之忧。 
English: If this method can be implemented, the country will not have to worry about the North.

古文：崇以奏闻，事寝不报。
现代文：李崇奏报给朝廷，事情被压了下来。
English: Li Chongso reported to the imperial court, and the matter was suppressed.

古文：孝昌初，为岐州刺史，从行台萧实夤讨破宛川。
现代文：孝昌初年，他任岐州刺史，跟随行台萧宝夤打破宛川。
English: In the first year of Xiaochang, he was appointed as the chief historian of Qizhou and followed Gaotai Xiao Baojun to break the Wanchuan River.

古文：俘其人为奴婢，以美女十人赏兰根。兰根辞曰： 此县介于强虏，故成背叛。
现代文：俘虏了那里的人民当奴婢，萧宝夤赏给兰根十个美女，他推辞说 ：这个县紧靠强大的敌人，所以背叛。
English: After capturing the people there as slaves, Xiao Baojun rewarded Langen with ten beautiful women. He refused, saying, "This county is close to a powerful enemy, so I betrayed it."

古文：今当恤其饥寒，奈何并充仆隶？ 
现代文：现在应当体恤他们的饥寒，怎么能让他们做奴隶？ 
English: Now is the time to sympathize with their hunger and cold, how can we let them be slaves?

古文：于是尽以归其父兄。
现代文：于是，他把美女都送回家。
English: As a result, he sent all the beautiful women home.

古文：部内麦多五穗。
现代文：他管辖的州内麦子大多长出五个穗。
English: Most of the wheat in his state grows five ears.

古文：邻州田鼠为灾，犬牙不入岐境。
现代文：邻州的田鼠成为灾害，却不到岐州境内为害。
English: Field mice in neighboring states have become a disaster, but they do not harm the territory of Qizhou.

古文：及萧宝夤败于泾州，岐州人囚兰根降贼。
现代文：萧宝夤在泾州失败，岐州有人囚禁了兰根向敌兵投降。
English: Xiao Baojun failed in Zhangzhou, and someone in Qizhou imprisoned Langen to surrender to the enemy soldiers.

古文：宝夤兵威复振，城人复斩贼刺史侯莫陈仲和，推兰根复任。
现代文：萧宝夤兵威重新振作。岐州城的百姓杀死敌人派来的刺史侯莫陈仲和，推举兰根重新任刺史。
English: Xiao Baojun regained his courage. The people of Qizhou City killed the assassin sent by the enemy, Mo Chen Zhonghe, and elected Langen as the new assassin.

古文：朝廷以兰根得西土人心，加都督泾、岐、东秦、南岐四州诸军事，兼四州行台尚书。
现代文：朝廷因兰根深得西部百姓的爱戴，加封他为都督泾、岐、东秦、南岐四州诸军事，兼四州行台尚书。
English: The imperial court, because of Langen, was deeply loved by the people in the western part of the country. He was given the additional title of the military governor of the four states of Shan, Qi, East Qin and South Qi, as well as the honorary title of the governor of the four states of Xizhou, Qi, East Qin and South Qi.

古文：孝昌末，河北流人南度，以兰根兼尚书，使齐、济、二兗四州安抚，并置郡县。
现代文：孝昌末年，河北流亡到外地的人向南迁移，朝廷命兰根兼尚书，派往齐、济、二衮四州安抚，并为流民设置郡县。
English: In the last years of Xiaochang, people from Hebei who had been exiled to other places migrated to the south. The imperial court ordered Langen and Shangshu to be sent to Qi, Jie and Erqi to pacify the four states, and set up counties for the exiles.

古文：兰根甥邢杲反于青、光间，复诏兰根慰劳。
现代文：他的外甥邢杲在青州、光州之间造反，朝廷命他去安抚慰劳。
English: His nephew Zou rebelled between Qingzhou and Gwangju, and the court ordered him to appease and comfort him.

古文：杲不下，仍随元天穆讨之。
现代文：邢杲不接受招安，兰根便跟随元天穆前去讨伐。
English: did not accept the offer, so Langen followed Yuan Tianmu and went to fight.

古文：还，拜中书令。
现代文：归来后，被封为中书令。
English: After his return, he was given the title of Zhongshu Ling.

古文：庄帝之将诛尔硃荣，兰根泄之于兄子周达，周达告尔硃世隆。
现代文：孝庄帝准备诛杀尔朱荣，兰根将消息泄露给他哥哥的儿子魏周达，周达告诉了尔朱世隆。
English: Emperor Xiaozhuang was preparing to kill Zhu Rong, and Langen leaked the news to his brother's son Wei Zhouda, who told Zhu Shilong.

古文：及荣死，兰根忧，不知所出。
现代文：尔朱荣被杀死后，兰根十分忧虑，不知道应该怎么办。
English: After Er Zhu Rong was killed, Langen was very worried and did not know what to do.

古文：时应诏王道习见信于庄帝，兰根乃托附之，求出立功。
现代文：这时，应诏王道习被孝庄帝信任，兰根便托他说情，请求率兵外出立功。
English: At this time, Emperor Xiaozhuang trusted King Daoxi, and Langen asked him to intercede, requesting that he lead the soldiers to go out and perform meritorious deeds.

古文：乃兼尚书右仆射、河北行台，定州率募乡曲，欲防井陉。
现代文：朝廷命他为兼尚书右仆射、河北行台，在定州率领招募来的乡勇，准备防守井陉。
English: The imperial court ordered him to be the right-hand man of Shang Shuxiu, and he went to Hebei Province, and in Dingzhou he led the recruited Xiangyong to prepare to defend Jingyao.

古文：为荣将侯深所败，走依勃海高乾。属乾兄弟义举，固在其中。
现代文：他被尔朱荣的将领侯深打败，逃奔渤海依附高乾，高乾兄弟颇有义举，将他接纳。
English: He was defeated by Zhu Rong's general, Hou Sheng, and fled to the Bohai Sea to cling to Gao Qian. Gao Qian's brothers accepted him with great generosity.

古文：神武以宿望深礼之。
现代文：神武帝高欢因他过去很有威望，对他礼遇颇深。
English: Emperor Jimmu was held in high esteem because of his past, and he was treated with great courtesy.

古文：中兴初，为尚书右仆射。
现代文：中兴初年，命他为尚书右仆射。
English: In the first year of ZTE, he was appointed as the right-hand man of Shangshu.

古文：神武将入洛阳，时废立未决，令兰根察节闵帝。
现代文：高欢即将进入洛阳，这时，朝廷的废立大事还没有决定，命兰根去察看节闵帝元恭。
English: Gao Huan was about to enter Luoyang. At that time, the matter of abolishing the imperial court had not yet been decided. He ordered Langen to go and see Emperor Yuan Rong.

古文：帝神采高明，兰根恐于后难测，遂与高乾兄弟及黄门侍郎崔甗同请。
现代文：元恭神采高旷英明，兰根怕以后的情况不好预测，便与高乾兄弟以及黄门侍郎崔一起谒见元恭。
English: As the spirit of Yuan Qiao was so lofty and wise, Langen was afraid that the future situation would be difficult to predict, so he went to see Yuan Qiao together with Gao Qian's brothers and Huangmen's chamberlain Cui.

古文：神武不得已，遂立武帝。
现代文：高欢不得已，便拥立孝武帝元修。
English: As a last resort, Gao Huan supported the enthronement of Emperor Yuanxiu.

古文：太昌初，加侍中、开府仪同三司、钜鹿县侯，启授兄子周达。
现代文：太昌初年，他被加封为侍中、开府仪同三司、钜鹿县侯，他奏报朝廷，请求将爵位授给他哥哥的儿子魏周达。
English: In the first year of Taichang, he was awarded the titles of Chamberlain, Grand Marshal of Kaifu, Third Secretary, and Lord of Elu County. He sent a report to the imperial court, requesting that the title be conferred on his brother's son, Wei Zhouda.

古文：兰根既预勋业，位居端副，始叙复岐州勋，封永兴侯。
现代文：他既参与了拥立新帝的大事，官位为尚书令的副贰，朝廷又追记他在岐州刺史任上的功勋，封他为永兴侯。
English: Not only did he participate in the great event of supporting the new emperor, his official position was the vice-governor of Shangshuring, and the court also recorded his merits in the appointment of Qizhou stabbing history, naming him Yongxing Hou.

古文：高乾之死，兰根惧，以病免。
现代文：高乾被处死后，他心中害怕，因生病免于追究。
English: After Gao Qian was executed, he was afraid in his heart and was exempted from investigation due to illness.

古文：天平初，言病笃，以开府仪同归本乡，门施行马。
现代文：天平初年，上表说自己病重，朝廷同意他以开府仪同的身份还乡。
English: In the first year of the balance, the above table said that he was seriously ill, and the court agreed that he would return to his hometown as the head of the government.

古文：武定三年，薨。赠司徒公，谥曰文宣。
现代文：武定三年去世，朝廷追赠他为司徒公，谥号为文宣。
English: When Wuding died three years later, the Imperial Court posthumously bestowed him with the title of Stogong, and his posthumous name was Wenxuan.

