古文：荆王刘贾，高帝从父兄也，不知其初起时。
现代文：荆王刘贾，漠高祖刘邦的堂兄，不知是什么时候参加起事的。
English: Jing Wang Liu Jia, a cousin of Liu Bang, the founder of the Mongol Empire, took part in the uprising at some point.

古文：汉元年，还定三秦，贾为将军，定塞地，从东击项籍。
现代文：汉元年，汉王还定三秦时，刘买任将军。平定了司马欣的塞地后，又随刘邦东进攻打项籍。
English: In the first year of the Han Dynasty, when the Han king still set up the Three Qin Dynasties, Liu Bei was appointed as a general. After he had settled Sima Xin's settlement, he followed Liu Bangdong's attack to fight.

古文：汉王败成皋，北度河，得张耳、韩信军，军修武，深沟高垒，使贾将二万人，骑数百，击楚，度白马津入楚地，烧其积聚，以破其业，无以给项王军食。
现代文：汉王败于成皋，向北渡过黄河，夺得张耳、韩信的军队，将军队驻扎在脩武县城。一方面深挖战壕，高筑壁垒；另一方面，派刘买带兵两万人，骑兵数百，进攻楚国，渡过白马津，进入楚地，焚烧了楚国的粮草，破坏了楚军的军需供给，使其无法供应项王军队的粮食。
English: On the one hand, he dug deep trenches and built high barriers; on the other hand, he sent Liu Bei with 20,000 soldiers and hundreds of cavalry to attack Chu, crossed Baima Jin and entered Chu, burned the grain and grass of Chu, and destroyed the military supply of Chu, making it unable to supply grain to the king's army.

古文：已而楚兵击之，贾辄避不肯与战，而与彭越相保。
现代文：不久，楚兵出击，刘贾总是避开，不与楚兵交战，而与彭越相互依恃，以图自保。
English: Soon, the Chu soldiers attacked. Liu Jia always avoided fighting with the Chu soldiers, and instead, he and Peng Yue clung to each other in order to protect themselves.

古文：汉王追项籍至固陵，使贾南度淮围寿春。
现代文：汉王追击项籍到了固陵，派刘买带兵南渡淮河包围寿春。
English: Han Wang chased Xiang Zeng to Guling and sent Liu Mai to take soldiers south to the Huaihe River to encircle Shuchun.

古文：还至，使人间招楚大司马周殷。
现代文：回来之后，派人去离间并招降了楚国的大司马周殷。
English: Liu Jia soon arrived and sent someone to look for an opportunity to recruit Ma Zhouyin, the chief secretary of Chu.

古文：周殷反楚，佐贾举九江，迎英布兵，皆会垓下，诛项籍。
现代文：周殷反楚归汉，协助刘买攻取九江，迎合英布的军队，会战于垓下，攻灭了项羽。
English: Zhou Yin rebelled and returned to Han, assisted Liu Bei in conquering Jiujiang, pandered to Yingbu's army, fought under the yoke, and defeated Xiang Yu.

古文：汉王因使贾将九江兵，与太尉卢绾西南击临江王共尉，尉死，以临江为南郡。
现代文：因此，汉王又派刘贾率领九江兵，与太尉卢绾一起，往西南方向进攻临江王共尉。共尉死后，临江遂改为南郡。
English: Therefore, the Han king also sent Liu Jia to lead the Jiujiang soldiers, together with Taiyi Lu, to the southwest to attack Linjiang's co-captain. After the death of the co-captain, Linjiang was finally changed to Nan County.

古文：贾既有功，而高祖子弱，昆弟少，又不贤，欲王同姓以填天下，乃下诏曰： 将军刘贾有功，及择子弟可以为王者。 
现代文：刘贾既有了战功，当时高祖的儿子年龄小，兄弟少，才德又不高，想封同姓的人为王以镇服天下，于是下韶说： 将军刘买有功劳，是够得上从子弟中选择封王条件的人。 
English: Liu Jia not only had the merits of war, but at that time Gaozu's son was young, had few brothers, and his talent was not high. He wanted to make the person with the same surname the king to conquer the world, so he said: General Liu Mai has merits, and is the person who can choose the conditions for crowning the king from his children.

古文：群臣皆曰： 立刘贾为荆王，王淮东。 
现代文：大臣们说： 立刘买为荆王吧，管辖淮东。 
English: The ministers said: Let Liu Bei be the king of Jing, and govern Huadong.

古文：立六年，而淮南王黥布反，东击荆。
现代文：六年以后，淮南王黥布反叛，向东攻打荆地。
English: Six years later, the king of Huainan, Zibo, rebelled and attacked Jingdi to the east.

古文：贾与战，弗胜，走富陵，为布军所杀。
现代文：刘买与之交战，未能取胜，向富陵县败逃，被黥布的追兵杀死。
English: Liu Buy fought with him, failed to win, fled to Fuling County in defeat, and was killed by the chasing soldiers of Zibo.

古文：燕王刘泽，高祖从祖昆弟也。
现代文：燕王刘泽，高祖同曾祖的兄弟。
English: Yan Wang Liu Ze, the brother of Gao Zu and Zeng Zu.

古文：高祖三年，泽为郎中。
现代文：高祖三年，刘泽为郎中。
English: In his third year of high school, Liu Ze became his junior high school classmate.

古文：十一年，以将军击陈豨将王黄，封为营陵侯。
现代文：高祖十一年，以将军之职带兵打败陈稀的将军王黄，被封为营陵侯。
English: In the eleventh year of Gaozu's reign, he led the troops to defeat the rare general Wang Huang as a general and was awarded the title of Yingling Hou.

古文：高后时，齐人田生游乏资，以画奸泽。
现代文：高后主政的时候，齐国人田生游说在外时缺少资金，便以献策的方式求助于刘泽。
English: When Tian Sheng, a high school dropout from Qi Province, was in charge of politics, he was short of funds when he was not lobbying, so he turned to Liu Ze for help in the form of suggestions.

古文：泽大说之，用金二百斤为田生寿。田生已得金，即归齐。
现代文：刘泽十分高兴，在田生过生的时候送给他二百斤黄金。田生拿到了黄金，立即返回齐国。
English: Liu Ze was very happy and gave him two hundred kilos of gold when Tanyo passed away. Tanyo took the gold and immediately returned to Qi.

古文：二岁，泽使人谓田生曰： 弗与矣。 
现代文：次年，刘泽派人间田生： 我们不再是朋友啦! 
English: The following year, Liu Ze sent a message to Tian Sheng: We are no longer friends!

古文：田生如长安，不见泽，而假大宅，令其子求事吕后所幸大谒者张卿。
现代文：田生来到长安，不去见刘泽，而借住在一个大宅裹，让他的儿子设法到吕后所宠幸的大谒者张卿手下做事。
English: Tian Sheng came to Chang'an, not to see Liu Ze, but to live in a large house, so that his son could try to work under Zhang Qing, the favorite of Lü Hou.

古文：居数月，田生子请张卿临，亲修具。
现代文：几个月后，田生的儿子请张卿到家里作客，田生亲自为他设宴。
English: A few months later, Tianyou's son invited Zhang to his home as a guest, and Tianyou himself held a banquet for him.

古文：张卿往，见田生帷帐具置如列侯。张卿惊。
现代文：张卿前往，看见田生家裹的帷帐等装饰用具一如列侯的规格，大为惊讶。
English: Zhang Qing went there and was greatly surprised to see that the draperies and other decorative tools of the Tian Sheng family were just like the specifications of the feudal lords.

古文：酒酣，乃屏人说张卿曰： 臣观诸侯邸第百余，皆高帝一切功臣。
现代文：酒喝到畅快的时候，田生让众人退去，对张卿说： 臣观看了一百余所诸侯邮宅，都是高祖的功臣所住。
English: When the wine was well drunk, Tian Sheng asked everyone to leave and said to Zhang Jing: "My vassal has seen more than a hundred post houses of various lords, all of which were lived in by Gaozu's meritorious retainers.

古文：今吕氏雅故本推毂高帝就天下，功至大，又有亲戚太后之重。
现代文：现今吕氏家族原本辅佐高帝取得天下，功劳非常大，又有亲戚太后之尊。
English: Today, the Lv family, which originally assisted Emperor Gao in conquering the world, has made great contributions, and is respected by the relatives of the empress dowager.

古文：太后春秋长，诸吕弱，太后欲立吕产为吕王，王代。
现代文：太后年事已高，吕氏势力尚弱小，太后欲立吕产为吕王，统辖代国。
English: The empress dowager was very old, and the influence of the Lü clan was still weak. The empress dowager wanted to establish the Lü clan as the King of Lü and govern the country.

古文：太后又重发之，恐大臣不听。
现代文：可太后难于启齿，怕大臣不同意。
English: The empress dowager wants to raise the matter officially, and I'm afraid the courtiers don't agree.

古文：今卿最幸，大臣所敬，何不风大臣以闻太后，太后必喜。
现代文：目前你最受宠幸，大臣们都敬重您，您何不规劝大臣们同意封诸吕为王，然后禀报太后，太后必然高兴。
English: Now that you are the favorite of the Empress Dowager and respected by the ministers, why don't you gently persuade the minister to report this to the Empress Dowager. The Empress Dowager must be happy.

古文：诸吕以王，万户侯亦卿之有。
现代文：吕氏家族封为王，您也必然得封万户侯。
English: The Lü family was crowned king, and you will inevitably be crowned prince.

古文：太后心欲之，而卿为内臣，不急发，恐祸及身矣。 
现代文：太后想求得的事，您作为内臣，不迅速使其实现，恐怕将大祸临头。 
English: The Empress Dowager wanted to do this in her heart, and you are a vassal. If you don't bring it up soon, I'm afraid disaster will befall you.

古文：张卿大然之，乃风大臣语太后。
现代文：张卿听了，认为很对，于是讽劝大臣们赞成封诸吕之事，并禀报了太后。
English: Zhang Xing was very much in agreement with this, so he gently persuaded the minister to report the matter to the Empress Dowager.

古文：太后朝，因问大臣。
现代文：太后上朝，就提起这件事，征求大臣们的意见。
English: When the Empress Dowager ascended the throne, she asked the minister about this matter.

古文：大臣请立吕产为吕王。
现代文：大臣们请封吕产为吕王。
English: The minister requested that Liushang be made the king of Lv.

古文：太后赐张卿千金，张卿以其半进田生。田生弗受，因说之曰： 吕产王也，诸大臣未大服。
现代文：事后，太后赏赐了张卿黄金一千斤，张卿取一半给田生，田生不受，并乘机劝说他道： 吕产封王，大臣们未必十分服气。
English: After the event, the empress dowager rewarded Zhang Qing with a thousand catties of gold. Zhang Qing took half of the gold and gave it to Tian Sheng. Tian Sheng did not accept it, and took the opportunity to persuade him, saying, "King Lyu Sang Huo, the ministers may not be fully convinced.

古文：今营陵侯泽，诸刘长，为大将军，独此尚觖望。
现代文：现在营陵侯刘泽，是刘氏宗族中的长者，又是大将军，衹有他因未被封王而心怀怨望。
English: Now Liu Ze, the lord of Yingling, is the elder of the Liu clan and a great general, but he still holds a grudge because he was not crowned king.

古文：今卿言太后，裂十余县王之，彼得王喜，于诸吕王益固矣。 
现代文：现在您去对太后讲，分齐地十几个县封他为王，刘泽为此高兴而去，吕氏诸王的地位便更加稳固了。 
English: Now you go and tell the empress dowager that more than a dozen counties have made him king. Liu Ze is happy about this, and the position of the kings of the Lü Dynasty has become more stable.

古文：张卿入言之。
现代文：张卿就对太后说了。
English: Zhang Xing said to the empress dowager.

古文：又太后女弟吕须女亦为营陵侯妻，故遂立营陵侯泽为琅邪王。
现代文：又因为太后妹妹吕须的女儿是营陵侯刘泽的妻子，于是就封刘泽为琅邪王。
English: Also, because the daughter of the empress dowager's sister, Liushu, was the wife of Liu Ze, the lord of Yingling, Liu Ze was named the evil king.

古文：琅邪王与田生之国，急行毋留。
现代文：琅邪王与田生前往封国，田生劝他快走，不要逗留。
English: The evil king and Tian Sheng went to Fengguo. Tian Sheng advised him to leave immediately and not to linger.

古文：出关，太后果使人追之。
现代文：走出函谷关后，太后果然派人追来。
English: After leaving the Hakodate pass, the emperor sent someone to chase him.

古文：已出，即还。
现代文：刘泽已经出关，来人就回去了。
English: Liu Ze has already left the country, and the newcomers have gone home.

古文：泽王琅邪二年，而太后崩，泽乃曰： 帝少，诸吕用事，诸刘孤弱。 
现代文：刘泽为琅邪王的次年，吕太后病逝。刘泽便说： 皇帝年少，诸吕当权，刘氏宗室势孤力弱。 
English: The following year, after Liu Ze had defeated the evil king, Empress Dowager Lv died of illness. Liu Ze then said: The emperor is young, all Lv are in power, and the Liu family is weak.

古文：引兵与齐王合谋西，欲诛诸吕。
现代文：于是领兵与齐王合谋西进，打算诛灭诸吕。
English: As a result, the leader of the army conspired with King Qi to advance westward, intending to annihilate Zhulü.

古文：至梁，闻汉灌将军屯荥阳，泽还兵备西界，遂跳驱至长安。
现代文：当到达梁地时，听说汉大将军灌婴屯驻荣阳，就收兵驻扎于本国的西疆，独自奔驰至长安。
English: When he arrived in Liangdi, he heard that the general of the Han Dynasty had been stationed in Rongyang, so he received troops and stationed them in his home country of Western Xinjiang, and then drove alone to Chang'an.

古文：代王亦从代至。诸将相与琅邪王共立代王，是为孝文帝。
现代文：这时，代王刘恒也从代国到了京师长安，各将相与刘泽共同拥立代王为汉天子，即孝文帝。
English: At this time, the acting king, Liu Heng, also came from the country to the capital, Chang'an. The generals and Liu Ze jointly supported the acting king as Han Tianzi, that is, Emperor Xiaowen.

古文：文帝元年，徙泽为燕王，而复以琅邪归齐。
现代文：孝文帝元年，改封刘泽为燕王。把琅邪地区仍给了齐国。
English: In the first year of Emperor Xiaowen's reign, Liu Ze was renamed Yan Wang. He still gave the Shiji area to Qi.

古文：泽王燕二年，薨，谥曰敬王。
现代文：刘泽做燕王两年后去世，谧称敬王。
English: Liu Ze died two years after he became the King of Yan. He was nicknamed the King of Respect.

古文：子康王嘉嗣，九年薨。
现代文：其子康王刘嘉继位，九年去世。
English: His son Kang Wang Liu Jia succeeded to the throne and died nine years later.

古文：子定国嗣。
现代文：康王之子定国继位。
English: King Kang's son, Sadakuni, succeeded to the throne.

古文：定国与父康王姬奸，生子男一人。夺弟妻为姬。与子女三人奸。
现代文：定国和他父亲的姬妾通奸。生一男孩，又强夺其弟媳为妾，还与三个女儿通奸。
English: Sadakuni committed adultery with his father's concubine, fathered a boy, forced his brother-in-law to become his concubine, and committed adultery with his three daughters.

古文：定国有所欲诛杀臣肥如令郢人，郢人等告定国。定国使谒者以它法劾捕格杀郢人灭口。
现代文：定国打算诛杀肥如县县令郢人，郢人等向朝廷上告定国，定国派谒者以违犯别的法律的罪名捕杀郢人灭口。
English: Ding Guo intended to kill Fuxi, such as the county ordered the executioner, the executioner and so on to the imperial court to sue the country, Ding Guo sent the executioner to arrest and kill the executioner on the charge of violating other laws.

古文：至元朔中，郢人昆弟复上书具言定国事。
现代文：到了元朔年间，郢人的兄弟再次上书朝廷详细告发定国的罪状。
English: In the early years of the Yuan Dynasty, Yan's brother once again sent a letter to the imperial court detailing the charges against Ding Guo.

古文：下公卿，皆议曰： 定国禽兽行，乱人伦，逆天道，当诛。 
现代文：武帝让公卿大臣讨论，都议论说： 定国的行为如同禽兽，乱了人伦，违反了天意，罪当处死。 
English: Emperor Wu let the nobles and ministers discuss, and they all argued that: the act of establishing a state is like a beast, it disturbs human relations, violates the will of heaven, and the crime should be put to death.

古文：上许之。
现代文：天子批准了这一建议。
English: Emperor Jing agreed with this opinion.

古文：定国自杀，立四十二年，国除。
现代文：定国于是自杀。封国建立四十二年，被废除。
English: Sadakuni then committed suicide. Forty-two years after the establishment of the feudal state, it was abolished.

古文：哀帝时继绝世，乃封敬王泽玄孙之孙无终公士归生为营陵侯，更始中为兵所杀。
现代文：哀帝时，为了延续断绝封国的诸侯世家，将刘泽玄孙的孙子无终县的衹有一级爵位的刘归生封为营陵侯。更始年间，刘归生被兵士杀害。
English: At the time of mourning for the emperor, in order to continue the lineage of feudal lords who had broken away from the feudal state, Liu Guosheng, the grandson of Liu Zeyuan and holder of the first-class peerage of Muzhen County, was made the lord of the imperial mausoleum. During the early Heian period, Liu Guosheng was killed by soldiers.

古文：吴王濞，高帝兄仲之子也。
现代文：吴王刘濞，高帝兄长刘仲的儿子。
English: Wu King Liu Ye, the son of Emperor Gao's elder brother Liu Zhong.

古文：高帝立仲为代王。
现代文：高帝封刘仲为代王。
English: Emperor Gao appointed Liu Zhong as acting king.

古文：匈奴攻代，仲不能坚守，弃国间行，走雒阳，自归，天子不忍致法，废为合阳侯。
现代文：匈奴进攻代国，刘仲不能坚守，暗自弃国而逃，从雒阳回京师长安。天子不忍绳之以法，废除其王位，降为合阳侯。
English: The Xiongnu attacked the country, Liu Zhong could not hold out, secretly abandoned the country and fled, returning from Shenyang to the capital Chang'an. Tianzi could not bear to be brought to justice, abolished his throne, and was demoted to Heyang.

古文：子濞，封为沛侯。
现代文：将他的儿子刘濞封为沛侯。
English: He named his son Liu Xuan as Pei Hou.

古文：黥布反，高祖自将往诛之。
现代文：淮南王黥布反叛，高祖亲自带兵前往讨伐。
English: When the King of Huainan rebelled, Gaozu personally led an army to fight against him.

古文：濞年二十，以骑将从破布军。
现代文：这时，刘濞二十岁，以骑将随高祖打败黥布。
English: At this time, Liu Ye was 20 years old, and he defeated Zibo by riding with Gao Zu.

古文：荆王刘贾为布所杀，无后。
现代文：荆王刘买被黥布杀害后，无后代。
English: After Jing Wang Liu Bei was killed by Zibo, there were no descendants.

古文：上患吴会稽轻悍，无壮王填之，诸子少，乃立濞于沛，为吴王，王三郡五十三城。
现代文：高祖担心吴郡及会稽郡之民轻浮而凶悍，一时没有较强大的诸侯王镇抚，他的儿子年龄尚小，于是在沛封刘濞为吴王，管辖三郡五十三城。
English: Gao Zu was worried that the people of Wu County and Hui County were frivolous and fierce. For a while, there was no more powerful vassal of the princes. His son was still young, so he made Liu Ye the king of Wu in Peifeng and governed 53 cities in three counties.

古文：已拜受印，高祖召濞相之，曰： 若状有反相。 
现代文：拜授印后，高祖召见并给他相面，说： 你有反叛之相。 
English: After the conferment of the seal, Gao Zu summoned him and gave him the countenance, saying: You have the countenance of a rebel.

古文：独悔，业已拜，因拊其背曰： 汉后五十年东南有乱，岂若邪？
现代文：心裹后悔，不该封他，但又不能收回成命，于是轻轻拍着刘濞的背说： 汉立国五十年后，东南面将有反叛之乱，难道会是你吗?
English: His heart was full of regret, he should not have appointed him, but he could not take back his life, so he patted Liu Yao's back and said: Fifty years after the founding of Han, there will be a rebellion in the southeast, will it be you?

古文：然天下同姓一家，慎无反！ 
现代文：不过，天下同姓是一家，千万不要反叛! 
English: However, the world is a family with the same surname, do not rebel!

古文：濞顿首曰： 不敢。 
现代文：刘濞磕头说： 我不敢。 
English: Liu Wei tapped his head and said: I dare not.

古文：会孝惠、高后时天下初定，郡国诸侯各务自拊循其民。
现代文：惠帝与吕后统治时期，由于天下初定，各郡国诸侯都专心致力于本国的统治。
English: During the reigns of Emperor Hui and Empress Lyu, due to the fact that the world was initially determined, the princes of the counties and states were all dedicated to the rule of their own country.

古文：吴有豫章郡铜山，即招致天下亡命者盗铸钱，东煮海水为盐，以故无赋，国用饶足。
现代文：吴国的豫章郡有座产铜的山，于是招致四方的亡命之徒盗铸货币，又在东南煮海水为盐，因而不向百姓收税，国家财政十分富足。
English: There is a copper-producing mountain in Yuzhang County of Wuxi Province, so it invited the outlaws from four directions to steal money, and boil seawater in the southeast for salt, thus not collecting taxes from the people, and the national finance is very rich.

古文：孝文时，吴太子入见，得侍皇太子饮博。
现代文：文帝时，吴太子到京师朝见，得以陪伴皇太子饮酒下棋。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xiaowen, Wu Wang Taizi visited the imperial court in Beijing and was able to accompany the crown prince to drink and play chess.

古文：吴太子师傅皆楚人，轻悍，又素骄。
现代文：吴太子的师傅都是楚地人，致使他与楚人一样的轻浮凶悍，骄横纵恣。
English: Wu Taizi's masters were all from Chu, which made him as frivolous, fierce and arrogant as the Chu people.

古文：博争道，不恭，皇太子引博局提吴太子，杀之。于是遣其丧归葬吴。
现代文：下棋时争棋路，对皇太子不恭敬，皇太子举起棋盘掷向吴太子，将他打死，于是把他的尸体送归吴国安葬。
English: During a game of chess, they argued over the moves, showing no respect for the crown prince. The crown prince held up the chessboard and threw it at Prince Wu, killing him, and then sent his body back to the State of Wu for burial.

古文：吴王愠曰： 天下一宗，死长安即葬长安，何必来葬！ 
现代文：吴王恼怒地说： 天下同姓是一家，死在长安就安葬在长安，何必归葬吴地! 
English: Wu Wang said angrily, "There is only one family with the same surname in the world. If you die in Chang'an, you will be buried in Chang'an. Why should you be buried in Wu?"

古文：复遣丧之长安葬。
现代文：又把吴太子的尸体送回长安安葬。
English: The remains were also sent to Chang'an for burial.

古文：吴王由是怨望，稍失藩臣礼，称疾不朝。
现代文：由此，吴王心怀不满，渐渐失去诸侯王对汉廷的礼节，装病不朝见皇帝。
English: As a result, King Wu was dissatisfied and gradually lost the etiquette of princes and princes to the Han Dynasty, and pretended to be ill to avoid seeing the emperor.

古文：京师知其以子故，验问实不病，诸吴使来，辄系责治之。
现代文：朝廷知道是为了他的儿子被杀的缘故，查验后实际上没有病，因而吴国每派使臣来，总是拘系而进行责罚。
English: The imperial court knew that it was because of the murder of his son, and after examination, he was actually not ill. Therefore, whenever the envoys of the State of Wu came, they always punished him.

古文：吴王恐，所谋滋甚。
现代文：吴王害怕，更加固谋反叛朝廷。
English: King Wu was afraid and became more determined to rebel against the imperial court.

古文：及后使人为秋请，上复责问吴使者。
现代文：后来，刘濞让人代己向皇帝行秋请之礼，文帝又责问吴国来使。
English: Later, Liu Bei sent someone to make an autumn invitation to the emperor on his behalf, and Emperor Wen also asked the State of Wu to send an envoy.

古文：使者曰： 察见渊中鱼，不祥。
现代文：使者说： 天子要是察知臣下私事，使臣下忧患生变，是不吉利的。
English: The messenger said, "It is unlucky for a heavenly son to become aware of the private affairs of his vassals and cause their sorrows and troubles to come and go.

古文：今吴王始诈疾，及觉，见责急，愈益闭，恐上诛之，计乃无聊。
现代文：如今吴王开始谎称有病，被天子察觉了，他看到责罚得快，就更加隐蔽其阴谋了。
English: Now that King Wu began to lie about his illness and was discovered by Heaven, he saw that the punishment would be swift, so he concealed his plot even more.

古文：唯上与更始。 
现代文：他害怕天子要杀他，其谋对朝廷更没有好处。
English: He was afraid that the Son of Heaven wanted to kill him, and his plan was of no benefit to the imperial court.

古文：于是天子皆赦吴使者归之，而赐吴王几杖，老，不朝。
现代文：衹有天子赦免他以往的罪行才是上策。 于是，天子全部赦免吴国使者，放归吴国，并赏赐吴王凭几和手杖，说吴王老了，可以不到京城朝见天子。
English: Therefore, the heavenly son pardoned all the emissaries of the State of Wu, released them to the State of Wu, and rewarded the King of Wu with a pair of scissors and a cane, saying that the King of Wu was old and could not come to the capital to see the heavenly son.

古文：吴得释，其谋亦益解。
现代文：吴王被释罪后，其阴谋就更加无所顾忌了。
English: After Wu Wang was acquitted, his plot became even more reckless.

古文：然其居国以铜盐故，百姓无赋。
现代文：然而，吴国有铜和盐之利，百姓因而不用缴税；如有当服劳役者，官府也为之出钱以代。
English: However, the people of the feudal state he was in did not pay taxes because of the income from copper and salt.

古文：卒践更，辄予平贾。
现代文：每到年节，都要慰问有才学的人，并给乡里居民以赏赐。
English: Every year at the New Year's Festival, it is necessary to commiserate with those who have the ability to learn, and to reward the villagers.

古文：岁时存问茂材，赏赐闾里，它郡国吏欲来捕亡人者，颂共禁不与。
现代文：别的郡国派官吏来吴国逮捕逃到吴地的罪犯，吴国也释其罪，严禁不给。
English: Other counties and states sent officials to Wu to arrest criminals who had fled to Wudi. Wu also absolved them of their crimes and strictly forbade them from returning.

古文：如此者三十余年，以故能使其众。
现代文：就这样治理了三十余年，因而吴王能役使其民众。
English: He ruled for more than 30 years in this way, so King Wu was able to serve his people.

古文：朝错为太子家令，得幸皇太子，数从容言吴过可削。
现代文：时晁错为太子家令，得到皇太子的宠爱。他不止一次地讲吴王的罪过，主张削其地加以处罚。
English: He was the favorite of the crown prince because he was a member of the prince's household. More than once, he talked about the sins of King Wu and advocated that he should be punished.

古文：数上书说之，文帝宽，不忍罚，以此吴王日益横。
现代文：他还几次给文帝上书说这件事，文帝性格宽厚，不忍心处罚，由此吴王愈加蛮横。
English: He also wrote several times to Emperor Wen about this matter. Emperor Wen had a generous character and did not have the heart to punish, which made King Wu even more insolent.

古文：及景帝即位，错为御史大夫，说上曰： 昔高帝初定天下，昆弟少，诸子弱，大封同姓，故孽子悼惠王王齐七十二城，庶弟元王王楚四十城，兄子王吴五十余城。
现代文：后来景帝即位，晁错任御史大夫，他向天子说： 从前高祖初定天下，兄弟少，儿子们年龄小，于是大封同姓为诸侯王。因而高祖的庶子刘肥为齐悼惠王，统辖七十二城之地；庶弟刘交为楚元王，管辖楚国四十城之地；兄长的儿子刘濞为吴王，统辖吴国五十余城之地。
English: Later, when Emperor Jing ascended to the throne, he mistakenly appointed Gaozhu as the chief historian. He said to Tianzi, "In the past, Gaozhu initially ruled the world, with fewer brothers and younger sons. As a result, the daifong with the same surname was the prince. As a result, Gaozhu's illegitimate son Liu Fei was the king of Qi and Hui, who controlled 72 cities; his illegitimate brother Liu Jia was the king of Chu Yuan, who controlled 40 cities in Chu Province; and his elder brother's son Liu Yao was the king of Wu, who controlled more than 50 cities in Wu Province.

古文：封三庶孽，分天下半。
现代文：这三个诸侯国，占有了全国一半的土地。
English: These three principalities occupied half of the country's land.

古文：今吴王前有太子之隙，诈称病不朝，于古法当诛。
现代文：现在吴王因为他的儿子被杀，谎称有病不来朝见，按照古代法规应当处死。
English: Now King Wu, because his son was killed, falsely claimed to be ill and did not come to the court. According to ancient laws, he should be put to death.

古文：文帝不忍，因赐几杖，德至厚也。
现代文：文帝不忍心处死吴王，反而赏赐他凭几与手杖，对他的恩惠是多么的深厚。
English: Emperor Wen could not bear to put King Wu to death, but instead rewarded him with a pair of scissors and a cane. How profound was his grace.

古文：不改过自新，乃益骄恣，公即山铸钱，煮海为盐，诱天下亡人谋作乱逆。
现代文：可是吴王不但不改过自新，反而更加骄横放纵，公然就山铸造货币，煮海水为盐，引诱四方逃亡之入图谋叛乱。
English: However, King Wu not only did not reform, but became even more arrogant and indulgent. He openly minted money on mountains, boiled seawater into salt, and lured fugitives in all directions into plotting rebellion.

古文：今削之亦反，不削亦反。
现代文：现在削减他的属地他要反叛，不削减也要反叛。
English: Cut his territory now and he will rebel, cut it not and he will rebel.

古文：削之，其反亟，祸小；不削之，其反迟，祸大。 
现代文：削减了，他反叛会快一些，造成的祸害小一点；如果不削减他的属地，反叛得晚一些，造成的祸害会更大。 
English: If his territory is reduced, he will rebel faster and cause less damage; if his territory is not reduced, he will rebel later and cause more damage.

古文：三年冬，楚王来朝，错因言楚王戊往年为薄太后服，私奸服舍，请诛之。
现代文：景帝三年冬天，楚王来朝见天子，晁错就说楚王刘戊前些年在为薄太后守丧期间，在守丧的房间内与人通奸，请处以死刑。
English: In the winter of the third year of the reign of Emperor Jing, King Chu came to the imperial court to see the heavenly son, but he made a mistake and said that King Chu Liu Wu had committed adultery with someone in the mourning room during the mourning period for the Empress Dowager Bo a few years ago. He should be sentenced to death.

古文：诏赦，削东海郡。
现代文：天子下诏赦其死罪，祇削减他的属地束海郡。
English: The emperor pardoned his death sentence, but reduced his territory to Sokhaigun.

古文：及前二年，赵王有罪，削其常山郡。
现代文：在此前二年，赵王有罪，削去他的属地常山郡。
English: Two years before this, Zhao Wang was found guilty and his territory, Changshan County, was removed.

古文：胶西王卬以卖爵事有奸，削其六县。
现代文：胶西王刘印因为卖官爵的事犯了罪，也被削去了六个县。
English: Liu Yin, King of Jiaoxi, was also stripped of six counties after he committed a crime of selling official titles.

古文：汉廷臣方议削吴，吴王恐削地无已，因欲发谋举事。
现代文：在汉朝诸大臣议论要削减吴国属地时，吴王担心削地没完没了，就想按照预定计策进行谋反。
English: When the ministers of the Han Dynasty were discussing the reduction of the territory of the State of Wu, King Wu was worried that the reduction was endless, and he wanted to rebel in accordance with the predetermined strategy.

古文：念诸侯无足与计者，闻胶西王勇，好兵，诸侯皆畏惮之，于是乃使中大夫应高口说胶西王曰： 吴王不肖，有夙夜之忧，不敢自外，使使臣谕其愚心。 
现代文：考虑在诸侯王中无人可与之谋，听说胶西王勇敢，喜好军事，诸侯都惧怕他，于是派中大应高去游说胶西王说： 吴王碌碌无能，日夜都有忧心的事，我们是一家人，因而派我来向你说说吴王的心事。 
English: Considering that no one among the princes and kings could conspire with him, he heard that King Guoxi was brave and fond of military affairs, and that the princes were afraid of him, so he sent a high-ranking official to lobby King Guoxi, saying, "Wu Wang Luo Luo is incompetent, there are worries day and night, we are a family, so he sent me to tell you about the heart of King Wu.

古文：王曰： 何以教之？ 
现代文：胶西王说： 有什么指教？ 
English: Guoxi Wang said: What advice do you have?

古文：高曰： 今者主上任用邪臣，听信谗贼，变更律令，侵削诸侯，征求滋多，诛罚良重，日以益甚。
现代文：应高说： 现在天子任用奸邪之臣，听信谗言，更改法律，侵削诸侯王领地，征收索要的东西曰益增多，谴责处罚实在太重，而且与日俱增。
English: Ying Gao said, "Nowadays, the Son of Heaven appoints treacherous and evil ministers, listens to their advice, changes laws, encroaches on the territories of princes and kings, and demands more and more things to be collected. The condemnation and punishment are really too heavy, and are increasing day by day.

古文：语有之曰： 狧糠及米。 
现代文：俗话说：狗吃东西开始时舔糠，慢慢的就要吃米了。 
English: As the saying goes: When a dog starts to eat, it licks grasshoppers, and then it slowly starts to eat rice.

古文：吴与胶西，知名诸侯也，一时见察，不得安肆矣。
现代文：吴国与胶西，是诸侯中的有名者，一时受到查处，就不能安稳纵恣地行事了。
English: Wu and Jiaoxi are famous among the princes. If they are investigated and punished, they will not be able to act freely.

古文：吴王身有内疾，不能朝请二十余年，常患见疑，无以自白，胁肩累足，犹惧不见释。
现代文：吴王身体有病，不能朝见天子已有二十余年。他常常怕受到猜疑，而又无法说清楚，整日束身自修，还惟恐不能得到朝廷的开释。
English: King Wu is physically ill and has not been able to see the emperor for more than 20 years. He is often afraid of being suspected, but he cannot say it clearly. He has been self-cultivating all day, and he is afraid that he will not be able to get a release from the imperial court.

古文：窃闻大王以爵事有过，所闻诸侯削地，罪不至此，此恐不止削地而已。 
现代文：听说大王您曾因买卖官爵的事犯过错误，并因此被削减了属地，处罚不当，这恐怕朝廷的目的不止是要削地吧。 胶西王说： 有这回事。
English: I heard that you, the great king, once made a mistake in the matter of buying and selling officials and nobles, and as a result, your territory was reduced, and the punishment was improper. I'm afraid that the purpose of the court is not just to reduce the land.

古文：王曰： 有之，子将奈何？ 
现代文：你要怎么样? 
English: What do you want?

古文：高曰： 同恶相助，同好相留，同情相求，同欲相趋，同利相死。
现代文：应高说： 同做坏事，要互相帮助；共同友好，要把好处留给对方；要各自同情对方，就要相互满足对方的求助；共同的欲望，要一道奔赴向前；共同的利益，要一道拼死去追求。
English: Ying Gao said: to do bad things together, we must help each other; to be friendly together, we must leave benefits to each other; to sympathize with each other, we must satisfy each other's help; common desires, we must go forward together; common interests, we must fight and pursue together.

古文：今吴王自以与大王同忧，愿因时循理，弃躯以除患于天下，意亦可乎？ 
现代文：现在吴王自以为与大王所担心的是一样的，愿意依据时机，顺应事物的规律，哪怕是牺牲自己的生命，也要除去天下的灾难。您看可以吗? 
English: Now, King Wu thinks that what he fears is the same as that of the Great King, and is willing to follow the law of things according to the timing, even if it means sacrificing his own life, in order to eliminate the disasters of the world. Do you think that's okay?

古文：胶西王瞿然骇曰： 寡人何敢如是？
现代文：胶西王惊讶地看着他说： 我怎么敢这样做呢?
English: Guoxi Wang looked at him in surprise and said, "How dare I do this?

古文：主上虽急，固有死耳，安得不事？ 
现代文：皇帝虽然逼我们很急，那衹有一死而已，怎么能不服从他呢? 
English: Although the emperor is forcing us to hurry, we only have one life to live. How can we disobey him?

古文：高曰； 御史大夫朝错营或天子，侵夺诸侯，蔽忠塞贤，朝廷疾怨，诸侯皆有背叛之意，人事极矣。
现代文：应高说： 御史大夫晁错蛊惑天子，侵削诸侯，遮塞忠贤，满朝臣子都怨恨他，各诸侯王都有反叛之意，事情坏到了极点。
English: Ying Gao said, "The Grand Historian misled and bewitched the Son of Heaven, encroached on the lords, shielded the loyal and virtuous, all the courtiers resented him, all the lords and princes had the intention of rebelling, and things got extremely bad.

古文：彗星出，蝗虫起，此万世一时，而愁劳，圣人所以起也。
现代文：天上出现彗星，地裹出现蝗虫，这是万世也少有的。在百姓忧愁劳苦之时，圣人就该举事了。
English: Comets appear in the sky and locusts swarm over the earth, which is rare in all ages. When the people are sad and weary, it is time for the saints to take action.

古文：吴王内以朝错为诛，外从大王后车，方洋天下，所向者降，所指者下，莫敢不服。
现代文：吴王对汉廷的目的是为了除去晁错，对诸侯则跟随在大王之后，驰骋于天下，走到哪裹，哪里就投降；军队攻打哪裹，哪裹就崩溃，没有人敢不服从。
English: The king of Wu's aim for Hanting was to remove the yoke of error. For the princes, they followed the great king and galloped around the world. Wherever they went, they surrendered; wherever the army attacked, they collapsed. No one dared to disobey.

古文：大王诚幸而许之一言，则吴王率楚王略函谷关，守荥阳敖仓之粟，距汉兵，治次舍，须大王。
现代文：如幸得大王诚心答应并给我一个回音，那么，吴王就率领楚王夺取函谷关，守住荣阳敖仓的粮食，抗拒汉兵，搭建行军停息的简易房舍，等待大王。
English: If, fortunately, the great king sincerely agreed and gave me a reply, then King Wu would lead King Chu to seize Hangu Pass, hold the grain of Rongyang Warehouse, resist the Chinese soldiers, build a simple house to stop the march, and wait for the great king.

古文：大王幸而临之，则天下可并，两主分割，不亦可乎？ 王曰： 善。 
现代文：要是有幸大王来了，那么，天下可以兼并，由吴、胶西两主分而治之，这样不也是可行的吗? 胶西王说： 奸。 
English: If the great king comes, then the whole country can be annexed and divided and ruled by Wu and Jiaoxi. Isn't this also feasible? King Jiaoxi said: Treachery.

古文：归报吴王，犹恐其不果，乃身自为使者，至胶西面约之。
现代文：应高回去向吴王报告了情况。吴王还担心胶西王不实现诺言，于是亲自以使者身份潜行至胶西，与刘印当面约定。
English: Ying Gao went back to report the situation to Wu Wang. Wu Wang was also worried that Guoxi Wang would not fulfill his promise, so he personally sneaked to Guoxi as an emissary and made an appointment with Liu Yin in person.

古文：胶西群臣或闻王谋，谏曰： 诸侯地不能为汉十二，为叛逆以忧太后，非计也。
现代文：胶西国群臣中有的人知道了胶西王的谋划，规劝说： 诸侯的属地不过是朝廷的十分之二，为叛乱而使太后忧愁，不是好的策略。
English: Some of Jiaosi's courtiers learned of King Jiaosi's plan and tried to dissuade him, saying, "The territory of the princes is only two-tenths of the imperial court, and it is not a good strategy to make the empress dowager sad because of the rebellion."

古文：今承一帝，尚云不易，假令事成，两主分争，患乃益生。 
现代文：现在侍奉一个皇帝还说不容易，假使反叛得逞，两个皇帝争权夺利，发生的灾难将会更多。 
English: It is not easy to serve an emperor now. If the rebellion succeeds and the two emperors fight for power and profit, there will be more disasters.

古文：王不听，遂发使约齐、菑川、胶东、济南，皆许诺。
现代文：胶西王不听劝告，还是差派使臣分头去约齐、苗川、胶柬、济南各国，他们都答应了。
English: King Jiaoxi did not listen to the advice, but sent his envoys separately to the provinces of Yochi, Miaochuan, Jiaokam, and Jinan. They all agreed.

古文：诸侯既新削罚，震恐，多怨错。
现代文：诸侯新受削地的责罚，既震动又恐惧，大都怨恨晁错。
English: The princes were shocked and frightened by the new punishment, and most of them resented the injustice.

古文：及削吴会稽、豫章郡书至，则吴王先起兵，诛汉吏二千石以下。
现代文：等到削吴国的会稽、豫章郡的韶书一到，吴王首先起兵反叛，处死了在吴国朝廷的二干石以下官吏。
English: As soon as the imperial edict to abolish the imperial auditor of Wu and the imperial edict to abolish the imperial auditor of Yuzhang County arrived, the king of Wu first raised an army to rebel and executed the officials of the imperial court of Wu who were less than two stone.

古文：胶西、胶东、菑川、济南、楚、赵亦皆反，发兵西。
现代文：胶西、胶束、苗川，济南、楚、赵各国随之都反叛，向西进军。
English: Jiaoxi, Jiaozuo, Miaochuan, Jinan, Chu and Zhao all rebelled and marched westward.

古文：齐王后悔，背约城守。济北王城坏未完，其郎中令劫守王，不得发兵。
现代文：这时，齐王后悔，违背诺约，守城不发兵；济北王因城墙没有修好，他手下的郎中令胁迫住济北王，也不得发兵。
English: At this time, King Qi regretted and broke his promise not to send troops to defend the city; King Jibei was not allowed to send troops because the city wall had not been repaired, and his henchmen forced King Jibei to stay at home.

古文：胶西王、胶东王为渠率，与菑川、济南共攻围临菑。
现代文：胶西、胶束二王为统帅，与苗川王、济南王一道，共同围攻临萏。
English: The two kings of Jiaoxi and Jiaozuo were the commanders, and together with the kings of Miaochuan and Jinan, they jointly besieged Linyi.

古文：赵王遂亦阴使匈奴与连兵。
现代文：趟王刘遂于暗中也让匈奴与之联合进兵。
English: Wang Liu then secretly allowed the Xiongnu to join forces with him.

古文：七国之发也，吴王悉其士卒，下令国中曰： 寡人年六十二，身自将。少子年十四，亦为士卒先。
现代文：七国联合反叛开始时，吴王将全部军队投入，向国内下令说： 寡人现已六十二岁，亲自领兵出征；我小儿子十四岁，也身先士卒。
English: At the beginning of the seven-nation joint rebellion, King Wu committed all the troops and ordered the country to say: Some people are now sixty-two years old and personally lead the troops; my youngest son is fourteen years old and is also the first soldier.

古文：诸年上与寡人同，下与少子等，皆发！ 
现代文：国人中年龄大到六十二岁，小的满十四岁的，都要从军。 
English: Among the Chinese people, those aged up to sixty-two, and those as young as fourteen, must join the army.

古文：二十余万人。
现代文：共招集到二十余万人。
English: A total of more than 200,000 people were called up.

古文：南使闽、东越，闽、东越亦发兵从。
现代文：同时又派使臣到南面的闽、束越两国，两国也发兵相随。
English: At the same time, he also sent envoys to the southern provinces of Shandong and Sokou, both of which also sent troops to accompany him.

古文：孝景前三年正月甲子，初起兵于广陵。西涉淮，因并楚兵。
现代文：景帝前元三年正月甲子，吴王刘濞首先起兵于广陵，向西渡过淮河，与楚兵会合。
English: In the first month of the third year of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the third year of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the third year of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the third year of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month

古文：发使遗诸侯书曰： 吴王刘濞敬问胶西王、胶东王、菑川王、济南王、赵王、楚王、淮南王、衡山王、庐江山、故长沙王子：幸教！以汉有贼臣错，无功天下，侵夺诸侯之地，使吏劾系讯治，以侵辱之为故，不以诸侯人君礼遇刘氏骨肉，绝先帝功臣，进任奸人，诳乱天下，欲危社稷。
现代文：派使臣向各诸侯王送去书信，说： 吴王刘濞敬向胶西王、胶束王、苗川王、济南王、赵王、楚王、淮南王、衡山王、庐江王、已故长沙王的王子问候并请教：由于汉廷有贼臣晁错，他没有什么功劳，却侵夺诸侯的属地，并使官吏揭发、拘囚、审问和治罪诸侯，以专门侵夺、侮辱诸侯为其本职。对刘氏骨肉不以诸侯之礼相待，不任先帝功臣，进用邪恶之人，以迷惑之言为害天下，要使国家遭受危难。
English: He sent envoys to the princes to send a letter to the princes, saying: "Wu King Liu Qianqian sends greetings to the princes of Jiaoxi King, Jiaozuo King, Miaochuan King, Jinan King, Zhao King, Chu King, Huainan King, Hengshan King, Minjiang King, and the late Changsha King, and asks for advice: Because Hanting had a rogue minister who made a mistake, he had no merit, but invaded the territory of the princes, and made the officials expose, detain, interrogate and punish the princes, with special invasion and insult of the princes as their duty. Do not treat the Liu family with

古文：陛下多病志逸，不能省察。
现代文：天子多病，志在安乐，不能看清事实。
English: God's children are often ill, aspire to be happy, and cannot see the facts clearly.

古文：欲举兵诛之，谨闻教。
现代文：因而我要举兵诛灭晁错，现谨向大家讨教。
English: I want to take up arms against them, and I respectfully follow your advice.

古文：敝国虽狭，地方三千里；人民虽少，精兵可具五十万。
现代文：我国虽然窄小，方圆祇有三千单，人口虽少，但精兵有五十万。
English: Although our country is narrow and small, there are only three thousand square kilometers, and although the population is small, there are half a million elite soldiers.

古文：寡人素事南越三十余年，其王诸君皆不辞分其兵以随寡人，又可得三十万。
现代文：我尊奉南越国三十余年，其国王及各位首领都愿意分出军队支持我，因而又可以得到三十万人。
English: I have served the South Vietnamese nation for more than 30 years, and their king and leaders are willing to allocate troops to support me, so I can get another 300,000 people.

古文：寡人虽不肖，愿以身从诸王。
现代文：寡人我虽碌碌无能，愿意亲自跟随各位国王。
English: Although I am powerless, I am willing to personally follow the kings.

古文：南越直长沙者，因王子定长沙以北，西走蜀、汉中。
现代文：南越兵北攻长沙国，以王子平定长沙以北后，再向西进攻蜀郡、漠中。
English: The South Vietnamese soldiers attacked the north of Changsha Province, and after pacifying the north of Changsha with the prince, they attacked the west of Shu County and the middle of the desert.

古文：告越、楚王、淮南三王，与寡人西面；齐诸王与赵王定河间、河内，或入临晋关，或与寡人会雒阳；燕王、赵王故与胡王有约，燕王北定代、云中，转胡众入萧关，走长安，匡正天下，以安高庙。愿王勉之。
现代文：通告束越王、楚王及淮南、济北、衡山三王，与我一起西进；齐地诸王与趟王平定河间、河内以后，或是进入临晋关，或是与我在雒阳会合；燕王、赵王因原与匈奴单于有约定，燕王在平定北面的代、云中以后，将匈奴兵带入萧关，直取京师长安，匡救天下，以安高帝庙宇，与诸王共勉之。
English: Tell the three kings of Chu, Chu and Huainan, Jibei and Hengshan to march westward with me; the kings of Qi and the kings of Qi and the kings of Wei will either enter Linjin Pass or meet with me in Shenyang after they have pacified Hebei and Hanoi; the king of Yan and the king of Zhao, because of the original agreement with the Huns, will bring the Hun soldiers into Shouguan after the king of Yan has pacified the north side of the dynasty and the clouds, directly take the Beijing division of Chang'an, save the world, and work with the kings to secure the emperor's temple.

古文：楚元王子、淮南三王或不沐洗十余年，怨入骨髓，欲壹有所出久矣，寡人未得诸王之意，未敢听。
现代文：楚元王王子与淮南、衡山、济北三王已有十余年未得到朝廷的恩泽，故对漠廷恨之入骨，想发兵攻汉廷已久有此心，我没有得到各位国王的意见，未敢听其便。
English: Prince Chu Yuan and the three kings of Huainan, Hengshan and Jibei have not received the favor of the imperial court for more than ten years, so they have a deep hatred for the imperial court and have long wanted to send troops to attack Hanting. I did not get the opinion of the kings and did not dare to listen to their convenience.

古文：今诸王苟能存亡继绝，振弱伐暴，以安刘氏，社稷所愿也。
现代文：现在各位国王如能救亡国、继绝世，振兴弱小，讨伐暴虐，安定刘氏家族，是国家之大幸。
English: Now, if the kings can save the ruined country, succeed the dead, revitalize the weak, fight the tyranny, and stabilize the Liu family, it is a great blessing for the country.

古文：吴国虽贫，寡人节衣食用，积金钱，修兵革，聚粮食，夜以继日，三十余年矣。
现代文：吴国虽然贫穷，但我三十余年来，节衣缩食，积聚金钱，夜操练军队，屯积粮食。
English: Although Wu is a poor country, for more than 30 years, I have been saving money, accumulating money, training troops at night, and storing grain.

古文：凡皆为此，愿诸王勉之。
现代文：这一切都是为了这个原因，愿与各位国王共同努力实现。
English: All of this is for this reason, and I am willing to work with the kings to achieve it.

古文：能斩捕大将者，赐金五千斤，封万户；列将，三千斤，封五千户；裨将，二千斤，封二千户；二千石，千斤，封千户：皆为列侯。
现代文：凡能捕斩大将的，赏黄金五千斤，封万户侯；捕斩列将，赏黄金三千斤，封五千户侯；捕斩裨将，赏黄金两千斤，封二千户侯；捕斩二千石官吏者，赏黄金一千斤，封千户侯：皆为列侯。
English: Anyone who can capture and behead a general will be rewarded with 5,000 kg of gold and will be assigned to 10,000 households; capturing and beheading a general of the line will be rewarded with 3,000 kg of gold and will be assigned to 5,000 households; capturing and beheading a general of the army will be awarded with 2,000 kg of gold and will be assigned to 2,000 households; capturing and beheading an official of 2,000 koku will be awarded with 1,000 kg of gold and will be assigned to 1,000 households: all of them are vassals of the line.

古文：其以军若城邑降者，卒万人，邑万户，如得大将；人户五千，如得列将；人户三千，如得裨将；人户千，如得二千石；其小吏皆以差次受爵金。
现代文：有以军队与所辖城池或土地来降者，所带士兵、人户各一万者，封赏与斩获大将相同；所带士兵及人户各达五千的，其封赏与擒斩列将相同；如所带兵卒及人户各有三千，则按捕斩裨将待遇；如士兵、人户各有一千，则给斩获二千石的待遇。其他一般小官吏均可按等级分别享受爵位与赏金。
English: Those who surrendered with an army or a town had ten thousand soldiers, and ten thousand households in the town counted as a general; five thousand households with five thousand soldiers counted as a general; three thousand households with three thousand soldiers counted as a vice-general; one thousand households with one thousand soldiers counted as an official with two thousand koku; those minor officials who surrendered were also rewarded with a knighthood, depending on their position.

古文：它封赐皆倍军法。
现代文：所给封赏比汉廷的规定多一倍。
English: The award is more than double the amount stipulated by the court.

古文：其有故爵邑者，更益勿因。
现代文：原有爵位及封地的人，除保留其原有的外，另外再给封赏。
English: Those in the original burghs will only increase, not stay the same.

古文：愿诸王明以令士大夫，不敢欺也。
现代文：希望各位国王公开向士大夫等宣布，不敢有所欺瞒。
English: I hope that all the kings will openly announce to the scholars and officials that they dare not conceal anything.

古文：寡人金钱在天下者往往而有，非必取于吴，诸王日夜用之不能尽。
现代文：寡人的黄金与钱币天下处处都有，不一定取自吴国，各位国王日夜使用也用不完。
English: Many people's gold and coins are everywhere in the world, not necessarily taken from the State of Wu, and the kings use them all day and night.

古文：有当赐者告寡人，寡人且往遗之。
现代文：如有应该给予封赏的人，可以告诉我，我将派人送黄金、钱币去。
English: He that hath a reward tell me, and I will go and give it unto him.

古文：敬以闻。 
现代文：非常恭敬地将上列情况通告你们。 
English: Respectfully submitted to the kings.

古文：七国反书闻，天子乃遣太尉条侯周亚夫将三十六将军往击吴、楚；遣曲周侯郦寄击赵，将军栾布击齐，大将军窦婴屯荥阳监齐、赵兵。
现代文：汉朝廷知道了七国反叛的消息，景帝派太尉、条侯周亚夫带领三十六位将领出发攻打吴、楚；派曲周侯郦寄领兵攻打趟国，派将军乐布率兵出击齐国，派大将军窦婴驻扎荣阳，以监视齐、赵军队的动静。
English: The Han court learned of the news of the rebellion in the Seven Kingdoms. Emperor Jing sent the 36th generals led by the first lieutenant and commander Zhou Yafu to attack Wu and Chu; sent the commander Zhou Houyi to attack Wanzhou; sent the general Le Bu to attack Qi; and sent the general Dou Ying to Rongyang to monitor the movements of Qi and Zhao's army.

古文：初，吴、楚反书闻，兵未发，窦婴言故吴相爰盎。
现代文：当初，在吴、楚反叛的消息刚听到、尚未发兵之际，窦婴向天子讲起吴国前丞相袁盎。
English: At first, when he had just heard the news of the rebellion in Wu and Chu and had not yet sent troops, Dou Ying told Tian Zi about the former prime minister of Wu, Yuan Ang.

古文：召入见，上问以吴、楚之计，盎对曰： 吴、楚相遗书，曰 贼臣朝错擅適诸侯，削夺之地 ，以故反，名为 西共诛错，复故地而罢 。
现代文：天子于是召见袁盎，询问解决吴楚反叛的计策。袁蠢说： 吴、楚相互通书，都说 贼臣晁错专权，贬谪诸侯，削减侵夺诸侯封地，因此而反叛，称作向西讨伐，共同诛杀晁错，恢复原有封地即罢兵。
English: The heavenly son then summoned Yuan Ang to inquire about the solution to the rebellion of Wu Chu. Yuan Yu said: Wu and Chu wrote to each other, saying that the thief-vassals had usurped the exclusive power, demeaned the lords, cut down and seized the fiefs of the lords, and therefore rebelled, called the westward crusade, jointly fought and killed the usurpers, and restored the original fiefs, that is, the strike.

古文：方今计独斩错，发使赦七国，复其故地，则兵可毋血刃而俱罢。 
现代文：现今之计惟有将晁错处死，派出使臣去赦免七国之罪，恢复七国的原有封地，那就可以不用兵刃相见，就可以避免流血牺牲。 
English: The only solution at this time is to put the traitor to death, send envoys to pardon the sins of the Seven Kingdoms, and restore the original fiefdoms of the Seven Kingdoms. Then there will be no need for a showdown, and bloodshed can be avoided.

古文：上从其议，遂斩错。
现代文：天子依从他的建议，就将晁错斩首。
English: The son of heaven followed his advice and beheaded him.

古文：语具有《盎传》。
现代文：详细情况记载在《袁盎传》中。
English: The details are recorded in "Yuan Angzhuan."

古文：以盎为泰常，奉宗庙，使吴王，吴王弟子德侯为宗正，辅亲戚。
现代文：于是，封袁盎为太常，掌宗庙祭祀，并出使去见吴王。吴王的侄子德侯为宗正官，以与吴有近亲关系作为辅助使臣派去吴国。
English: As a result, Yuan Ang was given the title of Taizang and was put in charge of the temple's sacrificial rites. He was also sent on a mission to King Wu. King Wu's nephew, De Hou, was the official of the Zong, and he was sent to the State of Wu as an auxiliary envoy because he was a close relative of King Wu.

古文：使至吴，吴、楚兵已攻梁壁矣。
现代文：等到吴国时，吴、楚两国的军队已在进攻梁国的军营。
English: By the time they reached Wu, the armies of Wu and Chu had already attacked the military camp in Liang.

古文：宗正以亲故，先入见，谕吴王拜受诏。
现代文：宗正因为是亲戚，先入见吴王，命吴王跪拜接受诏书。
English: Because he was a relative, Zong Zheng pre-empted King Wu and ordered him to kneel down and accept the edict.

古文：吴王闻盎来，亦知其欲说，笑而应曰： 我已为东帝，尚谁拜？ 
现代文：吴王听说袁盎来了，知道他想说什么，笑着回答说： 我已经为束帝了，还要向谁拜? 
English: When King Wu heard that Yuan Ang was coming, he knew what he wanted to say, and replied with a smile: "I've already been crowned emperor, who should I bow to?

古文：不肯见盎而留军中，欲劫使将。
现代文：不肯见袁盎而将他扣留军中，企图胁迫其为吴将。
English: Unwilling to see Yuan Ang, he detained him in the army in an attempt to coerce him into becoming General Wu.

古文：盎不肯，使人围守，且杀之。
现代文：袁盎不肯答应，吴王就派兵围守，准备杀了他。
English: Yuan Ang refused to agree, so King Wu sent soldiers to surround him and prepare to kill him.

古文：盎得夜亡走梁，遂归报。
现代文：袁盎于夜间逃到了梁国，于是回到京城，将情况报告了天子。
English: Yuan Ang fled to Liang Province at night, and then returned to Beijing to report the situation to Tianzi.

古文：条侯将乘六乘传，会兵荥阳。
现代文：条侯周亚夫乘官车六乘传，调集大军会兵荣阳。
English: The feudal lord rode in a carriage drawn by six horses and rode to Shiyang.

古文：至雒阳，见剧孟，喜曰： 七国反，吾乘传至此，不自意全。
现代文：到了雒阳，遇见了剧孟，高兴地说： 七国反叛，我乘官车到了这里，没有想到竞能安全地到达此地。
English: When he arrived in Luoyang, he saw the play Meng and said happily: "The seven countries rebelled. I arrived here by ferry. I didn't expect to arrive safely."

古文：又以为诸侯已得剧孟，孟今无动，吾据荥阳，荥阳以东无足忧者。 
现代文：我还以为反叛的诸侯已得到了剧孟。现在剧孟没有动摇，我占据了荣阳，荣阳以东的地区就不用忧虑了。 
English: I also thought that the rebellious lords had gained control of Rongyang. Now, Rongyang has not wavered, I have occupied Rongyang, and the areas east of Rongyang do not have to worry.

古文：至淮阳，向故父绛侯客邓都尉曰： 策安出？ 
现代文：到了淮阳，向原是父亲绛侯周勃的幕僚邓都尉询问： 有什么计策? 
English: When he arrived in Huaiyang, he asked Lieutenant Deng Du, his father's former aide-de-camp, what was the plan?

古文：客曰： 吴兵锐甚，难与争锋。楚兵轻，不能久。
现代文：邓都尉说： 吴国的军队十分精锐，他们交锋很难取胜。楚军浮躁，不能久留。
English: The doorkeeper said: Wu soldiers are full of vigor, and it is difficult to win a battle with him. Chu soldiers are impetuous, and their vigor cannot be maintained for a long time.

古文：方今为将军计，莫若引兵东北壁昌邑，以梁委吴，吴必尽锐攻之。
现代文：如今为将军打算，不如带兵去东北方向驻兵昌邑，将梁国丢给吴国，吴国必然将全部精锐部队攻打梁国。
English: Now he proposed a strategy for the general. It would be better to lead the army to Changyi in the northeast, build fortifications and hold out, and give up Liangguo to the Wu army. The Wu army would certainly attack Liang with all its elite troops.

古文：将军深沟高垒，使轻兵绝淮泗口，塞吴饷道。
现代文：将军则深挖战壕，高筑壁垒，派出轻装部队守住淮河、泅水的出入口，断绝吴国的粮饷供给。
English: The general, on the other hand, dug deep trenches, built high barriers, and sent lightly armed troops to guard the entrances and exits of the Huai River and Surabaya, cutting off the supply of grain and rice in Wuxi.

古文：使吴、梁相敝而粮食竭，乃以全制其极，破吴必矣。 
现代文：使吴、楚两国感到疲惫而粮草匮乏，我们用装备、物资齐全的优点去制住他因缺粮、缺物资而急于想结束战争的不利处境，造就必然会打败吴国。 周亚夫听了说： 此计甚妙。 
English: So that the two countries of Wu and Chu feel tired and lack of grain and grass, we use the advantages of complete equipment and materials to control his unfavorable situation due to lack of grain and materials and anxious to end the war, which will inevitably defeat Wu. Zhou Yaf listened and said: This plan is wonderful.

古文：条侯曰： 善。 从其策，遂坚壁昌邑南，轻兵绝吴饷道。
现代文：于是，听从了他的计策，在昌邑南面坚守，同时派轻装部队切断吴国的运粮道路。
English: Therefore, he followed his strategy and held out in the south of Changyi, at the same time sending light troops to cut off the grain transport road in Wuxi.

古文：吴王之初发也，吴臣田禄伯为大将军。
现代文：吴王初起兵时，其臣田禄伯为大将军。
English: When the king of Wu just sent out an army, Wu Tingtian Lu Bo became a great general.

古文：田禄伯曰： 兵屯聚而西，无它奇道，难以立功。
现代文：他向吴王说： 将军队集结向西，没有其他出奇制胜的办法，立功很难。
English: He said to King Wu, "There is no other way to win a surprise victory than to concentrate the army to the west, and it is difficult to make a contribution.

古文：臣愿得五万人，别循江、淮而上，收淮南、长沙，入武关，与大王会，此亦一奇也。 
现代文：臣愿带领五万人，另行沿长江、淮河而进，收复淮南、长沙，入武关，而后与大王会合，这也是一条好计。 
English: The vassal is willing to lead 50,000 people to advance along the Yangtze River and Huaihe River, recover Huainan and Changsha, enter Wuguan, and then meet with the great king, which is also a good plan.

古文：吴王太子谏曰： 王以反为名，此兵难以藉人，人亦且反王，奈何？
现代文：吴王太子规劝说： 大王起兵是以反漠为名，军队难以借给别人统领。如他人也起来反对吴王，那怎么办?
English: Prince Wu tried to persuade him: The great king raised an army in the name of anti-desertification, and it was difficult to lend the army to others to command. If others also rose up against King Wu, what would happen then?

古文：且擅兵而别，多它利害，徒自损耳。 
现代文：况且，由他人揽军权分兵而去，万一碰到不利于我之事，衹能白白使自己遭受损失而已。 
English: Moreover, if I were to encounter something unfavorable to me as a result of someone else seizing military power and dispatching troops, I would only be able to cause myself losses in vain.

古文：吴王即不许田禄伯。
现代文：吴王于是没有答应田禄伯的请求。
English: King Wu also did not agree to Tian Luo Bo's suggestion.

古文：吴少将桓将军说王曰： 吴多步兵，步兵利险；汉多车骑，车骑利平地。
现代文：吴国年轻的将军桓将军向吴王劝说道： 吴国步兵多，利于在险恶之地作战；漠廷车、骑兵多，利于在平原作战。
English: A young general Huan of Wu said to Wu Wang: Most of Wu are infantrymen, and infantrymen are suitable for fighting in dangerous terrain; the Chinese army has many chariot cavalrymen, and chariot cavalrymen are suitable for fighting on flat ground.

古文：愿大王所过城不下，直去，疾西据雒阳武库，食敖仓粟，阻山河之险以令诸侯，虽无入关，天下固已定矣。
现代文：希望大王经过的城市末攻下的话，暂且径直西进，迅速占领洛阳的武器库，夺取敖仓的粮食，占据高山及河流的险要之地，并以此来号令诸侯，那么，虽然没有入关，天下就已经平定了。
English: It is hoped that if the city that the great king passed through is captured at the end, it will head straight west for the time being, quickly occupy the weapons depot in Luoyang, seize the grain in Kamakura, occupy the dangerous places of the mountains and rivers, and use this as a signal to the lords, then, although there is no entry, the world has been leveled.

古文：大王徐行，留下城邑，汉军车骑至，驰入梁、楚之郊，事败矣。 
现代文：如果大王行军慢，所遇城邑都要逗留，一旦漠军以兵车及骑兵来了，进入梁、楚两国的外围，战争就要失败了。 
English: If the great king marches slowly, all the cities and towns he encounters will have to stay. Once the desert army comes with chariots and cavalry and enters the periphery of Liang and Chu, the war will be lost.

古文：吴王问吴老将，老将曰： 此年少推锋可耳，安知大虑！ 
现代文：吴王征求各位老将军的意见，老将军们说： 此人年少，虽可用以冲锋陷阵，怎能懂得深谋远虑呢? 
English: Wu Wang asked the old generals for their opinions. The old generals said, "This man is young, and although he can charge into an ambush, how can he understand forethought?

古文：于是王不用桓将军计。
现代文：于是，吴王没有采用桓将军的计策。
English: As a result, King Wu did not adopt General Huan's strategy.

古文：王专并将其兵，未度淮，诸宾客皆得为将、校尉、行间侯、司马，独周丘不用。
现代文：吴王专权，并亲自带兵，尚未渡过淮河，他手下的许多宾客就分别被封为将、校尉、行间侯、司马等官，惟有周丘没有任用。
English: Wu Wang had not yet crossed the Huai River, and many of his guests were appointed as generals, lieutenants, marshals, and marshals. However, Zhou Qiu was not appointed.

古文：周丘者，下邳人，亡命吴，酤酒无行，王薄之，不任。
现代文：周丘，下邳人，有罪逃至吴国，做酒的买卖，且行为不端，吴王瞧不起他，故不任用。
English: Zhou Qiu, a citizen of Jiaozuo, was found guilty of fleeing to the State of Wu, of trading in liquor, and of misconduct. The King of Wu despised him, and therefore did not appoint him.

古文：周丘乃上谒，说王曰： 臣以无能，不得待罪行间。
现代文：于是周丘请见吴王，向吴王说： 臣因为没有能力，不能戴罪立功于军队。
English: Therefore, Zhou Qiu asked to see King Wu, and said to King Wu: "Since my vassal is not capable, he cannot take the blame and take the credit for the army.

古文：臣非敢求有所将也，愿请王一汉节，必有以报。 
现代文：臣不敢向大王请求给我带一些兵，衹希望大王给我一漠符节，我必然会有报答的。 
English: The vassal dared not ask the great king to bring me some soldiers, but hoped that the great king would give me a token, and I would certainly be rewarded.

古文：王乃予之。
现代文：吴王于是给他以汉符节。
English: King Wu gave him a rune.

古文：周丘得节，夜驰入下邳。
现代文：周丘得到了汉节，于夜间速入下邳。
English: Zhou Qiu got the talisman, and drove it into the lower jaw overnight.

古文：下邳时闻吴反，皆城守。
现代文：当时下邳已听说吴国反叛，都在城中防守。
English: At that time, all of Jiaozuo heard that King Wu had rebelled, and they all held fast to the castle.

古文：至传舍，召令入户，使从者以罪斩令。
现代文：周丘到了驿站，召传县令入房间，宣布县令罪名。让侍从将县令处死。
English: When Zhou Yu arrived at the station, he summoned the county magistrate into the room, declared the county magistrate guilty, and ordered the attendant to execute the county magistrate.

古文：遂召昆弟所善豪吏告曰： 吴反兵且至，屠下邳下过食顷。
现代文：然后将与自己的兄弟们相好的有势力的官吏召集在一起说： 吴：正的兵就要到了，将下邳全城的人都杀了衹不过要一顿饭的功夫。
English: Then he called together powerful officials who were friendly with his brothers and said, "Wu, the real soldiers are about to arrive, and they will kill everyone in the city, and it will only take one meal.

古文：今先下，家室必完，能者封侯至矣。 
现代文：现在我们降吴，各人的家属及房产必然会保住，能力大的争取封侯的机会到了。 
English: Now that we are moving to Wu, everyone's family members and properties will certainly be preserved, and the opportunity for those with great ability to fight for a fiefdom has arrived.

古文：出乃相告，下邳皆下。
现代文：这些人出去后便相互通告，于是下邳城全部投降。
English: After these people went out, they told each other, and all of them surrendered.

古文：周丘一夜得三万人，使人报吴王，遂将其兵北略城邑。
现代文：周丘一夜之间就得到兵卒三万人，于是派人去报告吴王，并带领士兵向北攻城略地。
English: Zhou Qiu gained 30,000 men overnight. He sent someone to report to King Wu, who led his army north to capture the city.

古文：比至城阳，兵十余万，破城阳中尉军。
现代文：及到城阳，已有士兵十余万人，并打败了城阳的中尉军。
English: As far as Chengyang, there are more than 100,000 soldiers, and they have defeated the lieutenant army of Chengyang.

古文：闻吴王败走，自度无与共成功，即引兵归下邳。
现代文：听说吴王败逃的消息，心裹思量无法与吴王一起取得成功了，于是又带着士兵回归下邳。
English: Later, when he heard that King Wu had been defeated and fled, he estimated that no one could accomplish the feat together, so he led the army back to Jiaozuo.

古文：未至，痈发背死。
现代文：途中，因背上生毒疮而死。
English: On the way, he died of poisonous sores on his back.

古文：二月，吴王兵既破，败走，于是天子制诏将军： 盖闻为善者天报以福，为非者天报以殃。
现代文：二月，吴王败逃，天子乃韶谕将军： 听说做善事者上天必然会以福回报，作恶者上天必会报以灾难。
English: In February, when King Wu was defeated and fled, the Son of Heaven sent a message to the general: "I have heard that those who do good deeds will surely be rewarded by Heaven with blessings, and those who do evil will surely be punished by Heaven with calamities.

古文：高皇帝亲垂功德，建立诸侯，幽王、悼惠王绝无后，孝文皇帝哀怜加惠，王幽王子遂、悼惠王子卬等，令奉其先王宗庙，为汉藩国，德配天地，明并日月。
现代文：我朝高帝功德永垂，建立诸侯之国。赵幽王、齐悼惠王无艮子继王位，文帝哀怜之，并施恩惠，封垦旺子刘遂、惶墓王子型生等为诸侯王，令他们继续奉祀其先王的宗庙，成为汉朝的藩国。其恩德可谓天高地厚、光比月。
English: During the reign of Emperor Gao, I established a country of princes by perpetuating the merits and virtues of the emperor. Zhao Yu Wang, Qi Meng Hui Wang Muzhizi succeeded to the throne. Emperor Wen was so sorry for this and granted favors. He made Muzhizi Wang Zi Liu Sui and Muzhiguo Wang Qisheng the princes of princes, so that they could continue to worship the ancestral temple of their forefathers and become the Han Dynasty's feudal state. Their benevolence can be said to be as thick as the sky and as light as the moon.

古文：而吴王濞背德反义，诱受天下亡命罪人，乱天下币，称疾不朝二十余年。
现代文：然而，吴王刘濞背德弃义，诱招天下的亡命之徒，私铸钱币，扰乱国家的币制，装病不按时朝见皇帝达二十余年。
English: However, the king of Wu, Liu Xuan, abandoned virtue, lured the world's outlaws, minted coins, disrupted the country's monetary system, and feigned illness for more than 20 years.

古文：有司数请濞罪，孝文皇帝宽之，欲其改行为善。
现代文：主管部门几次要求治刘濞之罪，文帝宽容不治，目的是想让他改过从善。
English: The competent department requested several times to punish Liu Xuan's crime, but Emperor Wen was tolerant and did not punish him. The purpose was to let him reform and do good.

古文：今乃与楚王戊、赵王遂、胶西王卬、济南王辟光、菑川王贤、胶东王雄渠约从谋反，为逆无道，起兵以危宗庙，贼杀大臣及汉使者，迫劫万民，伐杀无罪，烧残民家，掘其丘垄，甚为虐暴。
现代文：而今，他与楚王刘戊、趟王刘遂、胶西王刘印、济南王刘辟光、苗川王刘贤、胶束王刘雄渠互相约定，共同谋反，违反天意，叛逆汉朝，起兵发难，想推翻中央王朝。叛军杀死汉朝的大臣及使者，强行劫掠百姓，滥杀无辜，烧毁民宅，掘民坟冢，十分残暴。
English: Now, he and King Liu Wu of Chu, King Liu Sui of Zhai, King Liu Yin of Jiaosi, King Liu Peiguang of Jinan, King Liu Xian of Miaochuan, and King Liu Xiongqu of Jiaozuo have made a mutual agreement to conspire together to rebel against the will of heaven, rebel against the Han Dynasty, and raise an army to overthrow the Central Dynasty. The rebels killed the ministers and envoys of the Han Dynasty, forcibly plundered the people, killed innocents indiscriminately, burned people's houses, and dug people's graves. It was very cruel.

古文：而卬等又重逆无道，烧宗庙，卤御物，联甚痛之。
现代文：而刘印等人更加叛逆无道，烧毁郡国宗庙，抄掠供奉宗庙的衣服器具，我十分痛恨。
English: But Liu Ying and others were even more rebellious and reckless, burning the county's ancestral temple and plundering the clothes and utensils used to worship the ancestral temple. I hate them very much.

古文：联服避正殿，将军其劝士大夫击反虏。
现代文：现在我穿素服，不上正殿，希望将军们要动员士大夫努力讨伐这些反叛分子。
English: Now I wear plain clothes and do not go to the main hall. I hope that the generals will mobilize the scholars and doctors to fight these rebels.

古文：击反虏者，深入多杀为功，斩首捕虏比三百石以上皆杀，无有所置。
现代文：打击反叛分子以杀得多、入地深计功，俸禄在比三百石以上的反叛分子都要杀掉，不许释放。
English: In the fight against rebels, it is necessary to kill a lot of people and go deep into the land to make a contribution. Rebels with a salary of more than 300 koku should be killed and not released.

古文：敢有议诏及不如诏者，皆要斩。 
现代文：谁敢议论诏书或不按诏书要求的去做，都要处以腰斩。 
English: Anyone who dared to discuss the edict or act against it was to be beheaded.

古文：初，吴王之度淮，与楚王遂西败棘壁，乘胜而前，锐甚。
现代文：原先，吴王在渡过淮河后，与楚王一起向西攻败景帝弟刘武的梁国军队于棘壁，乘胜向前进击，锐不可当。
English: Originally, after crossing the Huai River, King Wu, together with King Chu, defeated the Liang army of Emperor Jing's younger brother Liu Wu in the west at the ridge wall, and took advantage of the victory to advance.

古文：梁孝王恐，遣将军击之，又败梁两军，士卒皆还走。
现代文：梁孝王为之畏惧，派将军迎击。吴、楚军又打败了梁国的两路军队，士兵都往回逃走。
English: Liang Xiaowang was afraid and sent a general to meet the attack. The Wu and Chu armies defeated Liang's two armies, and the soldiers fled back.

古文：梁数使使条侯求救，条侯不许。
现代文：梁孝王几次派使臣向太尉周亚夫求救，周亚夫不援救。
English: Liang Xiaowang sent envoys several times to request help from Lieutenant Zhou Yafu, but Zhou Yafu did not come to the rescue.

古文：又使使诉条侯于上，上使告条侯救梁，又守便宜不行。
现代文：又派使臣将周亚夫的态度向天子告发，天子派人让周亚夫去救梁国，周亚夫又以特殊情况而不发兵救梁。
English: He also sent an envoy to report Zhou Yafu's attitude to the Son of Heaven. The Son of Heaven sent someone to let Zhou Yafu save Liang Province, and Zhou Yafu did not send troops to save Liang under special circumstances.

古文：梁使韩安国及楚死事相弟张羽为将军，乃得颇败吴兵。
现代文：梁王于是派韩安国与以死阻楚反叛的楚丞相张尚之弟张羽为将军领兵，才得以稍败吴军。
English: King Liang sent Han An and Zhang Yu, the younger brother of the prime minister of Chu, who was killed for state affairs, as generals, only to be able to slightly defeat the army of Wu.

古文：吴兵欲西，梁城守，不敢西，即走条侯军，会下邑。
现代文：吴兵想向西进，梁国的城池均有防守，因而不敢向西走，转而奔向周亚夫的军队。
English: Wu soldiers wanted to go west, but the cities and towns in Liang Province were all defended, so they did not dare to go west, and instead ran to Zhou Yafu's army.

古文：欲战，条侯壁，不肯战。
现代文：在下邑，吴军求战，周亚夫坚守壁垒，不肯与战。
English: In the lower town, the Wu army wanted to fight, but Zhou Yafu held fast to the wall and refused to fight.

古文：吴粮绝，卒饥，数挑战，遂夜奔条侯壁，惊东南。条侯使备西北，果从西北。
现代文：吴军断粮，士兵饥饿，几次挑战，于是夜裹袭击周亚夫军营，佯攻东南面，周亚夫命令于西北面守备。
English: The Wu army was short of food, the soldiers were hungry, and several challenges were made. Therefore, they attacked Zhou Yafu's military camp at night, pretended to attack the southeast, and Zhou Yafu ordered them to defend the northwest.

古文：不得入，吴大败，士卒多饥死叛散。
现代文：吴兵果然从西北强攻，未能攻破，吴兵大败，士兵多半饿死或投降走散。
English: The Wu soldiers successfully attacked from the northwest, but failed to break through. The Wu soldiers were defeated, and most of the soldiers starved to death or surrendered and dispersed.

古文：于是吴王乃与其戏下壮士千人夜亡去，度淮走丹徒，保东越。
现代文：于是吴王与其麾下壮士千人乘夜逃走。过淮河，走丹徒，退保束越。
English: As a result, King Wu and a thousand strong men under his command fled by night. They crossed the Huai River, walked along the Dantu River, and retreated across the Baoshu River.

古文：东越兵可万余人，使人收聚亡卒。
现代文：束越有兵约万余人，并派人招集逃兵。
English: Sokcho had more than 10,000 soldiers, and sent someone to recruit deserters.

古文：汉使人以利啖东越，东越即绐吴王，吴王出劳军，使人鏦杀吴王，盛其头，驰传以闻。
现代文：汉廷派人以利引诱东越，东越于是欺骗吴王，乘吴王出来慰劳兵士，即派人用矛戟撞死了吴王，用木匣装上吴王的首级，飞马上报汉廷。
English: Hanting sent someone to lure East Vietnam with interest. East Vietnam then deceived King Wu and used him to come out to comfort the soldiers. That is, they sent someone to kill King Wu with a spear, put King Wu's head in a wooden box, and immediately reported to Hanting.

古文：吴王太子驹亡走闽越。
现代文：吴太子刘驹逃入闽越。
English: Liu Ye, the Prince of Wu, fled to Suiyue.

古文：吴王之弃军亡也，军遂溃，往往稍降太尉条侯及梁军。
现代文：吴王死后，吴军溃散，随时随地都有士兵向汉太尉条侯及梁军投降。
English: After the death of King Wu, the Wu army was broken up, and soldiers surrendered to Han Tai Fu Zhihou and Liang's army at any time and anywhere.

古文：楚王戊军败，自杀。
现代文：楚王刘戊兵败，自杀而死。
English: Chu King Liu Wu was defeated and committed suicide.

古文：三王之围齐临菑也，三月不能下。
现代文：胶西、胶束、苗！三王围攻齐国的临苗，历时三个月还没有攻破。
English: Qi's Jiaoxi King, Jiaodong King, and Qianchuan King besieged Linyi in Qi and could not capture it for three months.

古文：汉兵至，胶西、胶东、菑川王各引兵归国。胶西王徒跣，席稿，饮水，谢太后。
现代文：汉兵一来，就各自领兵回国去了。胶西王回国后，光脚步行，睡稻草席，喝白水，并向太后赔罪。
English: As soon as the Han soldiers arrived, they each led their soldiers back home. After returning to China, King Jiaosi walked barefoot, slept on straw mats, drank white water, and made amends to the empress dowager.

古文：王太子德曰： 汉兵还，臣观之以罢，可袭，愿收王余兵击之，不胜而逃入海，未晚也。 
现代文：其太子刘德说： 汉军已在撤兵，我看他们比较疲惫，可以袭击他们，希望大王收拾残余兵力追击，如不能战胜，可以逃到海上去，亦未为晚。 
English: His son, Prince Liu De, said: "The Han troops have already withdrawn. I think they are relatively tired, so we can attack them. I hope the emperor will gather the remaining troops to pursue them. If we can't defeat them, we can escape to the sea. It's not too late."

古文：王曰： 吾士卒皆已坏，不可用之。 
现代文：胶西王说： 我们的士兵伤亡过重，不能再打仗了。 
English: Guoxi Wang said, "Our soldiers have suffered too many casualties and can no longer fight.

古文：不听。
现代文：不听他儿子的意见。
English: The emperor does not allow it.

古文：汉将弓高侯颓当遗王书曰： 奉诏诛不义，降者赦，除其罪，复故；不降者灭之。
现代文：汉朝将领弓高侯韩颓当给胶西王送来一封书信，信中说： 我奉天子的韶书来诛杀反叛者。凡投降者赦免其罪，恢复原来的职位；不投降者消灭之。
English: Han Dynasty general Gao Hanzhong sent a letter to King Jiaosi, saying: "I have used the imperial edict of the Son of Heaven to kill the rebels. Those who surrender will have their sins forgiven and their positions restored; those who do not surrender will be eliminated."

古文：王何处？须以从事。 
现代文：胶西王你何去何从，我须据以处理。 
English: King Jiaoxi, I have to deal with you according to where you are going.

古文：王肉袒叩头汉军壁，谒曰： 臣卬奉法不谨，惊骇百姓，乃苦将军远道至于穷国，敢请菑醢之罪。 
现代文：胶西王袒胸露臂赴汉军军营，磕头拜谒，说： 臣刘印奉法不谨慎，所以惊骇百姓，有劳将军远道来到我的穷国，请给予剁为肉酱的刑罚。 
English: Jiaoxi Wang went to the Chinese army camp with his arms outstretched and bowed his head in homage, saying: Minister Liu Yin was not prudent in practicing the law, so he shocked the people. The general had come all the way to my poor country. Please give him the punishment of being made into meat sauce.

古文：弓高侯执金鼓见之，曰： 王苦军事，愿闻王发兵状。 
现代文：韩颓当手执金鼓与之相见，说： 胶西王对发兵反叛感到苦恼，我愿意听听你发兵的原因。 
English: Han Zheng met him with a golden drum in his hand and said, "King Jiaosi is distressed about sending troops to rebel. I am willing to listen to your reasons for sending troops.

古文：王顿首膝行对曰： 今者，朝错天子用事臣，变更高皇帝法令，侵夺诸侯地。
现代文：胶西王一面磕头，一面跪着向前走，回答说： 是这样的：晁错是天子面前当权的臣子，他改变高帝的法令，侵夺诸侯属地，刘印等认为是不公正的。
English: Guoxi Wang, bowing his head and kneeling as he walked forward, replied, "It's like this: Xun Er is a vassal in power before the Son of Heaven. He changed Emperor Gao's decrees and seized the lands belonging to the princes, which Liu Ying and others considered to be unjust.

古文：卬等以为不义，恐其败乱天下，七国发兵，且诛错。
现代文：我们害怕他要把国家搞乱，因而七国同时发兵以诛杀晁错为目的。
English: We were afraid that he would mess up the country, so seven countries sent troops at the same time with the aim of killing each other.

古文：今闻错已诛，卬等谨已罢兵归。 
现代文：现在听说晁错已被杀，刘印等谨撤兵回国。 
English: Now I hear that Zou Er has been killed, and Liu Ying and others are withdrawing their troops and returning to China.

古文：将军曰： 王苟以错为不善，何不以闻？
现代文：韩颓当说： 如果大王认为晁错所做不善，为什么不上告皇帝呢?
English: Han Xudong said, "If the king thinks that what you have done is wrong, why not appeal to the emperor?"

古文：及未有诏虎符，擅发兵击义国。
现代文：同时，没有皇帝诏书及发兵虎符，而擅自出兵攻打正义的国家。
English: At the same time, without the Emperor's edict and the dispatch of troops tiger, but without authorization to send troops to attack the just country.

古文：以此观之，意非徒欲诛错也！ 
现代文：从这些看来，你们的意图不是衹想诛杀晁错而已。 
English: From all this, it appears that your intention was not to kill or injure.

古文：乃出诏书为王读之，曰： 王其自图之。 
现代文：马上取出天子的诏书，读给胶西王听，说： 大王你自裁吧。 
English: He immediately took out the imperial edict from the emperor and read it to King Gyosei, saying, "Great King, you can judge for yourself."

古文：王曰： 如卬等死有余罪。 
现代文：胶西王说： 像刘印等这样的人死有余辜。 
English: Guoxi Wang said, "People like Liu Ying and others deserve to die.

古文：遂自杀。
现代文：于是就自杀而死。
English: Zhang Tang then committed suicide.

古文：太后、太子皆死。
现代文：太后、太子也都死了。
English: The empress dowager and the prince also died.

古文：胶东、菑川、济南王皆伏诛。
现代文：遣时，胶束、苗川、济南三王也都伏法被杀。
English: At the time of the dispatch, the three kings of Micellar bunch, Miaochuan and Jinan were also killed.

古文：郦将军攻赵，十月而下之，赵王自杀。
现代文：郦食其领兵进攻赵国，打了十个月才取胜，趟王刘遂自杀。
English: He led his army to attack Zhao, and it took ten months to win, after which Wang Liu committed suicide.

古文：济北王以劫故，不诛。初，吴王首反，并将楚兵，连齐、赵。
现代文：济北王刘志初被胁迫与谋，后坚守不发兵，所以赦而未杀。当初，是吴王首先反叛的，同时兼领楚兵，联络齐国与赵国。
English: Liu Zhihu, the king of Northern Qi, was coerced and plotted against, but he refused to send troops, so he was pardoned and not killed. In the beginning, it was King Wu who first rebelled, and at the same time he led Chu soldiers to connect Qi with Zhao.

古文：正月起，三月皆破灭。
现代文：从正月开始，到三月就都被攻破并灭亡。
English: From the first month of the year to March, they were all defeated and destroyed.

古文：赞曰：荆王王也，由汉初定，天下未集，故虽疏属，以策为王，镇江、淮之间。
现代文：赞曰：荆王刘贾之所以被封为王，是因为天下还未安定，所以虽是刘氏远房，也封为王，坐镇江淮一带。
English: Zang said: The reason why Liu Jia, the King of Jing, was crowned king was because the world was not yet stable, so although he was a distant relative of the Liu family, he was also crowned king, sitting in the Zhenjianghuai area.

古文：刘泽发于田生，权激吕氏，然卒南面称孤者三世。
现代文：刘泽封王起端于田生之谋，他先激吕后封吕产，后让人讽吕后封刘泽为王，终于面南称孤了三代。
English: Liu Ze Fong Wang began with Tian Sheng's plan. He first incited Lü, then Fong Liusheng, then made people ridicule Lü, then Fong Liu Ze as king, and finally Mengnan was said to be the only one for three generations.

古文：事发相重，岂不危哉！
现代文：一旦事情败露，随之就是重罪，难道不是很危险吗?
English: Isn't it dangerous that once something is out there, it's a felony?

古文：吴王擅山海之利，能薄敛以使其众，逆乱之萌，自其子兴。
现代文：吴王刘濞专有山海物产之利，能减轻赋税，笼络并役使民众，反叛之谋从他的儿子被杀时萌生。
English: The king of Wu, Liu Bei, profited from the mountains and the sea. He was able to reduce taxes, entice and coerce the people, and the plot to rebel began when his son was killed.

古文：古者诸侯不过百里，山海不以封，盖防此矣。
现代文：古代的诸侯国方圆不过百里，山林川泽还不算在内，大概就是为了防备其反叛中央。
English: Ancient vassal states were no more than a hundred miles in circumference, not including mountains, forests, rivers and streams, presumably in order to prevent them from rebelling against the central government.

古文：朝错为国远虑，祸反及身。 毋为权首，将受其咎 ，岂谓错哉！
现代文：晁错为国家的长远利益着想，反而灾祸及身而死。 不要做起事的主谋，因为会遭到祸害 ，此言不正是说的晁错吗!
English: If you make the mistake of thinking about the long-term interests of the country, then disaster will strike and you will die. Don't be the mastermind, because you will be harmed, isn't this exactly the wrong thing to say?

