古文：薛宣字赣君，东海郯人也。
现代文：薛宣字赣君，是束海郯县人。
English: Xue Xuanzhe is from Sokhaiguan County.

古文：少为廷尉书佐、都船狱吏。
现代文：年轻时任廷尉书佐、都船狱史。
English: When he was young, he served as a court lieutenant and assistant secretary, and was in charge of the ship's prison history.

古文：后以大司农斗食属察廉，补不其丞。
现代文：后来当大司农斗食属官时被察举为廉吏，补任不其县丞。
English: Later, when he became a subordinate official of the Agricultural and Food Affairs Division, he was investigated and found to be a corrupt official, and he was not appointed to the post of county magistrate.

古文：琅邪太守赵贡行县，见宣，甚说其能。
现代文：琅邪太守赵贡巡视属县，见到薛宣，非常赏识他的才能。
English: Zhaogong, the eccentric daimyō, was on a tour of his county when he met Xue Xuan. He was very appreciative of his talent.

古文：从宣历行属县，还至府，令妻子与相见，戒曰： 赣君至丞相，我两子亦中丞相史。 
现代文：让薛宣跟从他一一巡视属下各县，回到府署，让妻子、儿子和薛宣见面，告请薛宣说： 赣君官至丞相时，我的两个儿子也还适合作丞相史。 
English: Let Xue Xuan follow him one by one to inspect the subordinate counties, return to the prefectural government office, let his wife, son and Xue Xuan meet, and invite Xue Xuan to say: When Qin Junguan became prime minister, my two sons were also suitable for the post of prime minister.

古文：察宣廉，迁乐浪都尉丞。
现代文：察举薛宣廉洁，薛宣升任乐浪都尉丞。
English: Xue Xuan was found to be honest and Xue Xuan was promoted to Le Lang Duzheng.

古文：幽州刺史举茂材，为宛句令。
现代文：幽州刺史推举薛宣为茂材，当了宛句令。
English: Xue Xuan was chosen by Yuzhou's chief historian as the successor to Mao Zhai.

古文：大将军王凤闻其能，荐宣为长安令，治果有名，以明习文法诏补御史中丞。
现代文：大将军王凤听说了薛宣的才能，举荐他做了长安令，薛宣的治理果然很有名声，由于明白熟悉法令条文而被诏令补任御史中丞。
English: The great general Wang Feng heard of Xue Xuan's talent and recommended him to make the Chang'an edict. Xue Xuan's governance was indeed very famous. Because he was clearly familiar with the provisions of the edict, he was appointed to the post of Vice-Minister of History by imperial edict.

古文：是时，成帝初即位，宣为中丞，执法殿中，外总部刺史，上疏曰： 陛下至德仁厚，哀闵元元，躬有日仄之劳，而亡佚豫之乐，允执圣道，刑罚惟中，然而嘉气尚凝，阴阳不和，是臣下未称，而圣化独有不洽者也。
现代文：当时，成帝刚刚登上帝位，薛宣任御史中丞，在朝廷上执行法令，在朝廷外统管部刺史。献上奏疏说： 陛下道德最为高尚，仁慈厚道，怜爱百姓，身体有太阳开始偏西还没来得及吃饭的劳苦，却没有舒服安逸的享乐，诚实地坚持圣人的大道，施行刑罚非常公正，可是好的风气还没有形成，阴阳没有调和，这是因为臣子不称职，而且圣明的教化还有不和谐的地方。
English: At that time, Emperor Cheng Rong had just ascended to the throne, and Xue Xuan was appointed as the vice-president of the imperial history department, executing decrees in the imperial court and writing history in the external administrative department of the imperial court. He presented a report saying: His Majesty's morality is the most noble, benevolent and kind, loves the people, his body has the hardships of the sun beginning to go west before he can eat, but there is no comfortable and easy enjoyment, he honestly adheres to the saint's way, and the punishment is very fair, but a good atmosphere has not yet been formed, and the yin and yang have not been reconciled. This

古文：臣窃伏思其一端，殆吏多苛政，政教烦碎，大率咎在部刺史，或不循守条职，举错各以其意，多与郡县事，至开私门，听谗佞，以求吏民过失，谴呵及细微，责义不量力。
现代文：我私下考虑，其中一个原因大概是官吏大多实行严酷的政令，刑赏与教化繁杂细碎，大部分罪过在部刺史身上，有的不遵守规定的职责，举动各自按照自己的心意，经常干预郡县的事务，甚至开启行私请托的门路，听信中伤谄媚之言，来搜求官吏百姓的过错，责备喝斥隐微的过失，不根据能力来责求行为的合宜。
English: Privately, I considered that one of the reasons was probably that most officials carried out harsh decrees, punishment, reward, and edification were complex and detailed, most of the crimes were committed by officials, some did not comply with the prescribed duties, each acted according to their own wishes, often intervened in county affairs, and even opened the door to private solicitation, listening to insults and flattering words, searching for the faults of officials and the people, blaming and reprimanding subtle faults, and blaming the appropriateness of behavior according to ability.

古文：郡县相迫促，亦内相刻，流至众庶。
现代文：郡和县相互催促，内部相互之间也很苛刻，这种风气也传布到了百姓中。
English: Counties and counties are pushing each other, and they are also harsh on each other internally. This culture has also spread to the people.

古文：是故乡党阙于嘉宾之欢，九族忘其亲亲之恩，饮食周急之厚弥衰，送往劳来之礼不行。
现代文：所以乡里之间缺少接待贵客的喜悦，九族之人忘记了他们亲戚的情义，供奉饮食救助危急的忠厚品德更加衰退，送走离开的人，慰劳归来的人的礼节不再施行。
English: Therefore, the joy of receiving distinguished guests is lacking in the countryside, the people of the nine ethnic groups have forgotten the feelings of their relatives, the loyal character of offering food and assistance to those in crisis has further declined, and the etiquette of sending away those who have left and comforting those who have returned is no longer enforced.

古文：夫人道不通，则阴阳否隔，和气不兴，未必不由此也。
现代文：社会的道德规范不通行，那么就会阴阳闭塞不通，和顺的气象不兴盛，这未必不是因为这个原因。
English: If the social moral norms are impassable, then the yin and yang will be blocked and impassable, and the harmonious weather will not flourish. This may not be due to this reason.

古文：《诗》云： 民之失德，乾餱以愆。 
现代文：《诗》说： 人们失去情谊，多是饮食小事上丧失了和气。 
English: "Poetry" said: People lose their friendship, and most of them lose their harmony in eating and drinking.

古文：鄙语曰： 苛政不亲，烦苦伤恩。 方刺史奏事时，宜明申敕，使昭然知本朝之要务。
现代文：俗语说： 政治苛暴人们就不亲附，徭役烦苦就会有损于皇恩，当刺史禀告政事的时候，应该明确地告诫他们，使他们清楚地知道本朝的要紧事务。
English: As the saying goes: People who are harsh in politics will not be attached to it, and those who are hard-working will harm the royal grace. When they report on political affairs, they should be clearly warned, so that they clearly know the important affairs of this dynasty.

古文：臣愚不知治道，唯明主察焉。 
现代文：我很愚昧不懂得治理国家的道理，希望圣明的主上考察我的意见。 
English: I am very ignorant and do not understand the principle of governing the country. I hope that the Lord of the Holy Light will examine my opinion.

古文：上嘉纳之。
现代文：皇上赞许并采纳了他的意见。
English: The Emperor approved and adopted his opinion.

古文：宣数言政事便宜，举奏部刺史郡国二千石，所贬退称进，白黑分明，繇是知名。
现代文：薛宣屡次谈论对于施政有利的事，上奏推举郡国俸禄为二千石的部刺史，所贬抑屏退和所称赞引荐的，清浊非常明了，因此在当时很有名气。
English: Xue Xuan repeatedly talked about the things that were good for governance. He recounted the history of selecting the county and national salary as the two-thousand-rock unit. The things that he deplored and praised were very clear, so he was very famous at that time.

古文：出为临淮太守，政教大行。
现代文：出任临淮太守，刑赏与教化得到普遍实施。
English: He was appointed as Linhuai Taishou, and the punishment, reward and enlightenment were generally implemented.

古文：会陈留郡有大贼废乱，上徙宣为陈留太守，盗贼禁止，吏民敬其威信。
现代文：正好陈留郡有大盗破坏扰乱秩序，皇上调任薛宣为陈留太守，强盗被子息，官吏百姓都敬重他的威望与信誉。
English: Just as there was a large-scale robbery in Chenliu County that disrupted order, the emperor transferred Xue Xuan to Chenliu Daju. The robber was his son, and the officials and people all respected his prestige and credibility.

古文：入守左冯翊，满岁称职为真。
现代文：入朝试职当左冯翊，满一年后，由于称职而正式任职。
English: Han Yanshou was appointed as Zuo Fengyao on a trial basis, and a year later, he was deemed competent enough to be given the post.

古文：始高陵令杨湛、栎阳令谢游皆贪猾不逊，持郡短长，前二千石数案不能竟。
现代文：当初高陵令杨湛、梁阳令谢游都贪婪狡诈，毫不恭顺，掌握郡裹长官的短处，先前幸禄为二千石的官员屡次考查都无法追究。
English: At the beginning, Gaoling's Yang Zhan and Liangyang's Xie You were both greedy, cunning, and insubordinate, grasping the shortcomings of county chiefs. Previously, officials with a fortune of two thousand koku could not be investigated after repeated examinations.

古文：及宣视事，诣府谒，宣设酒饭与相对，接待甚备。
现代文：到薛宣任职时，他们到府署来拜见，薛宣安排酒饭和他们对坐而食，招待非常周到。
English: When Xue Xuan took office, they came to visit him at the prefectural government office. Xue Xuan arranged for them to have a sit-down meal with wine and rice. The invitation was very thoughtful.

古文：已而阴求其罪臧，具得所受取。
现代文：随即暗中访求他们犯法所得的贿赂，完全获得了他们接受和索取贿赂的情况。
English: Then secretly visited them illegally obtained bribes, fully obtained their acceptance and solicitation of bribes.

古文：宣察湛有改节敬宣之效，乃手自牒书，条其奸臧，封与湛曰： 吏民条言君如牒，或议以为疑于主守盗。
现代文：薛宣察觉杨湛有改正过错、尊敬自己的表示，就自己亲手在简牒上书写，逐条列举他非法取得的贿赂，密封后送给杨湛说： 百姓像简牒上所写的那样逐条揭发您，有人商议认为您有主守盗的嫌疑。
English: Xue Xuan noticed that Yang Zhan had corrected his mistakes and showed respect for himself, so he wrote on the ultimatum with his own hand, listed the bribes he illegally obtained one by one, sealed it and gave it to Yang Zhan, saying: The people will expose you one by one as written on the ultimatum, and some people have discussed that you are suspected of stealing.

古文：冯翊敬重令，又念十金法重，不忍相暴章。
现代文：冯翊恭敬尊重您，又考虑到十金之法很重，不忍心揭露您。
English: Feng Yu respects and respects you, and considering that the law of ten golds is very heavy, he cannot bear to expose you.

古文：故密以手书相晓，欲君自图进退，可复伸眉于后。
现代文：所以秘密地用亲笔书信来告诉您，想要您自己考虑进退，到以后可以再扬眉吐气。
English: Therefore, I am confidentially writing to tell you that if you want to consider your own advancement and retreat, you can raise your eyebrows and vent your anger later.

古文：即无其事，复封还记，得为君分明之。 
现代文：如果没有这些事，再密封归还这封信，让我能够替您证实清白。 
English: Failing that, return this letter under seal so that I can clear your name.

古文：湛自知罪臧皆应记，而宣辞语温润，无伤害意。
现代文：杨湛自己知道犯法所得的贿赂和信上所记录的相符合，而薛宣言辞温和，没有伤害自己的意图。
English: Yang Zhan himself knew that the illegally obtained bribe was consistent with what was recorded in the letter, while Xue declared that he was mild-mannered and had no intention of harming himself.

古文：湛即时解印绶付吏，为记谢宣，终无怨言。
现代文：杨湛立时解下印信交付给属吏，写信感谢薛宣，始终没有怨恨不满的话。
English: Yang Zhan immediately opened the letter and handed it to his subordinate officials. He wrote a letter of thanks to Xue Xuan, and never expressed any resentment or dissatisfaction.

古文：而栎阳令游自以大儒有名，轻宣。
现代文：而梁阳令谢游自认为是大儒生，有名望，轻视薛宣。
English: But Liang Yangling Xie You thought of himself as a great Confucian scholar, and despised Xue Xuan.

古文：宣独移书显，责之曰： 告栎阳令：吏民言令治行烦苛，適罚作使千人以上；贼取钱财数十万，给为非法；卖买听任富吏，贾数不可知。
现代文：薛宣单独移送文书公开地责备他说： 通告烁阳令：官吏和百姓揭发梁阳令治理政务烦琐苛刻，谪罚从事劳役的在一千人以上；敛取钱财几十万，供给自己非法挥霍；买卖听凭富裕的官吏，价格与数量无法知道。
English: Xue Xuan separately transferred the document to publicly reproach him: "Notice the Yangyang Order: officials and people expose the Yangyang Order to govern the government, which is cumbersome and harsh, and punish more than a thousand people engaged in labor service; collect hundreds of thousands of money and wealth, and provide themselves with illegal extravagance; trade is subject to wealthy officials, and the price and quantity cannot be known."

古文：证验以明白，欲遣吏考案，恐负举者，耻辱儒士，故使掾平镌令。
现代文：检验确凿，想要派遣官员考查审问，又担心辜负举荐你的人，使儒士感到羞耻，所以派属员平督责梁阳令。
English: The inspection is conclusive, you want to send officials to examine and interrogate, and you are worried that you will fail to live up to the person who recommended you, which will make Confucianists feel ashamed, so you assign a subordinate officer, Pingdu, to rebuke Liang Yangling.

古文：孔子曰： 陈力就列，不能者止。 
现代文：孔子说： 审查自己的才力来担任官职，不能胜任的就放弃。 
English: Confucius said: Examine one's own ability to hold an official post, and if one is not competent, give up.

古文：令详思之，方调守。 
现代文：梁阳令详细地考虑这件事，我正要调入去署理你的职务。 
English: Liang Yang ordered to consider this matter in detail. I am about to be transferred to take over your duties.

古文：游得檄，亦解印绶去。
现代文：谢游收到檄文，也解除印信离开了。
English: Xie Yu received the letter and also cancelled the letter and left.

古文：又频阳县北当上郡、西河，为数郡凑，多盗贼。
现代文：又频阳县北边对着上郡、西河，是几个郡的会合处，盗贼很多。
English: In addition, the northern edge of Fenyang County, facing Shang County and West River, is the meeting place of several counties, and there are many thieves.

古文：其令平陵薛恭本县孝者，功次稍迁，未尝治民，职不办。
现代文：它的县令平陵人薛恭是本县的孝子，按照功劳的等次逐渐升迁，不曾治理过百姓，职责内的事情没有办理好。
English: Its county magistrate, Xue Qiong of Pingling, was a filial son of the county. He was gradually promoted according to the order of merit. He had never governed the people, and did not handle his duties well.

古文：而栗邑县小，辟在山中，民谨朴易治。
现代文：而粟邑县很小而且偏僻，座落在山里，百姓谨慎质朴容易管理。
English: But Maoyu County is small and remote, located in the mountains, and the people are prudent, simple and easy to manage.

古文：令巨鹿尹赏久郡用事吏，为楼烦长，举茂材，迁在栗。
现代文：县令钜鹿人尹赏是长时间在郡裹管事的官吏，任楼烦长，被推举为茂材，升职调到了粟邑。
English: The county magistrate, Yin Yun, was a long-serving official in charge of county affairs. He was promoted to Maozai and transferred to Maoyu.

古文：宣即以令奏赏与恭换县。
现代文：薛宣就依照法令奏请让尹赏与薛恭换任县令。
English: Xue Xuan, in accordance with the law, requested that Yin Yun and Xue Qiong be replaced as county magistrates.

古文：二人视事数月，而两县皆治。
现代文：两个人任职几个月后，两个县都治理得很好。
English: A few months after the two people took office, both counties were well governed.

古文：宣因移书劳勉之曰： 昔孟公绰优于赵魏而不宜滕薛，故或以德显，或以功举， 君子之道，焉可怃也！ 
现代文：薛宣就移送文书慰劳勉励他们说： 从前孟公绰作趟魏的家臣很优秀，却不适合当滕国、薛国的大夫，所以有的人依靠德行而显达，有的人凭藉功劳而被举荐， 君子进身的道路，怎么能够相同呢？
English: Xue Xuan consoled and encouraged them by sending them a letter: In the past, Meng Gongzhu was a very good vassal of Wei, but he was not suitable to be a doctor of Tengguo and Xueguo. Therefore, some people rely on virtue to be distinguished, and some people are recommended by merit. How can the path of a gentleman be the same?

古文：属县各有贤君，冯翊垂拱蒙成。
现代文：属下各县都有贤明的长官，冯翊垂衣拱手来享受成果。
English: There are wise officials in each of the subordinate counties, and Feng Xuan is proud to enjoy the results.

古文：愿勉所职，卒功业。 
现代文：希望你们尽力从事自己的职务，成就功勋事业。 
English: I hope that you will do your best to perform your duties and achieve meritorious deeds.

古文：宣得郡中吏民罪名，辄召告其县长吏，使自行罚。
现代文：薛宣得知郡中官吏和百姓的罪名，就召来该县的长吏并告知他，让他自己实行处罚。
English: When Xue Xuan learned of the crimes of the officials and people in the county, he summoned the officials of the county and told him to carry out the punishment himself.

古文：晓曰： 府所以不自发举者，不欲代县治，夺贤令长名也。 
现代文：告诉他说： 府裹不自己揭发检举的原因是不想替代县里来治理，夺走贤良的令长的名声。 
English: Tell him: The reason why the prefectural government does not want to expose the accusation is that it does not want to replace the county to govern and take away the reputation of the virtuous prefect.

古文：长吏莫不喜惧，免冠谢宣归恩受戒者。
现代文：长吏没有一个不是又欢喜又害怕，摘下帽子拜谢薛宣将恩德归给他们并接受训诫。
English: None of the officials were not happy and afraid, taking off their hats to thank Xue Xuan for his kindness to them and accept the admonition.

古文：宣为吏赏罚明，用法平而必行，所居皆有条教可纪，多仁恕爱利。
现代文：薛宣做官赏罚分明，运用法律公平而且执行坚决，所任官之处都有条文教令值得记述，多是仁厚宽恕，爱护别人，为百姓谋利。
English: Xue Xuan made officials with clear rewards and punishments, applied the law fairly and implemented it resolutely. Everywhere he was appointed, there were regulations and edicts worth mentioning. Most of them were benevolent and forgiving, loved others, and made profits for the people.

古文：池阳令举廉吏狱掾王立，府未及召，闻立受囚家钱。
现代文：池阳令举荐廉洁的官吏狱掾王立，府裹还没来得及召见，就听说王立收取了囚犯家属的钱财。
English: Before the government could summon Wang Li, an honest prison official recommended by Chiyang, it was learned that Wang Li had taken money from prisoners' families.

古文：宣责让县，县案验狱掾，乃其妻独受系者钱万六千，受之再宿，狱掾实不知。
现代文：薛宣诘问责备县裹，县裹查讯狱掾王立，原来是他的妻子私自收取了囚徒的一万六千钱，收受了有两个晚上，狱掾王立实际上并不知道。
English: Xue Xuanqian was held accountable by the county, and the county investigated the jailer Wang Li. It turned out that his wife had secretly collected 16,000 yuan from the prisoner and received it for two nights. The jailer Wang Li actually did not know.

古文：掾惭恐自杀。
现代文：王立羞惭恐惧而自尽。
English: Wang Li killed himself out of shame and fear.

古文：宣闻之，移书池阳曰： 县所举廉吏狱掾王立，家私受赇，而立不知，杀身以自明，立诚廉士，甚可闵惜！
现代文：薛宣听说了这件事，移送文书给池阳县说： 池阳县所举荐的廉洁的官吏狱掾王立，家属私下收受贿赂，而王立并不知道，却自杀来证明自己的清白。
English: Xue Xuan heard about this matter and sent a document to Chiyang County saying: The family members of Wang Li, the incorruptible official recommended by Chiyang County, secretly accepted bribes, and Wang Li did not know, but committed suicide to prove his innocence.

古文：其以府决曹掾书立之柩，以显其魂。
现代文：王立确实是廉洁的士人，让人非常哀怜痛惜。现把府决曹掾写在他的灵柩上，来显扬他的英魂。
English: Wang Li was indeed an incorruptible scholar, which made people very sad and regretful. Now, he has written "Fu Ding Cao" on his coffin to show his heroic spirit.

古文：府掾史素与立相知者，皆予送葬。 
现代文：府掾史平时和王立相交好的人，都要去给他送葬。 
English: All the people who had friendly relations with Wang Li in ordinary times had to go to his funeral.

古文：及日至休吏，贼曹掾张扶独不肯休，坐曹治事。
现代文：到了冬至官吏休假，贼曹掾张扶惟独不愿意休假，到官署办理公事。
English: When it came to the winter solstice, officials were on vacation, but the thief Cao Wei Zhang Fu did not want to take a vacation and went to the government office to handle official business.

古文：宣出教曰： 盖礼贯和，人道尚通。
现代文：薛宣出来开导他说： 礼仪崇尚谐和，社会的道德规范注重通行。
English: Xue Xuan came out to enlighten him and said, "Etiquette advocates harmony, and social moral norms focus on common usage.

古文：日至，吏以令休，所繇来久。
现代文：冬至这一天，官吏依照法律休假，从开始实行到现在已经很久了。
English: On the day of the winter solstice, government officials take a holiday in accordance with the law, and it has been a long time since it was implemented.

古文：曹虽有公职事，家亦望私恩意。
现代文：官署虽然有公家的职责事务，但家裹也盼望私人的恩爱情意。
English: Although the government office has public duties and affairs, the family also hopes for private kindness and love.

古文：掾宜从众，归对妻子，设酒肴，请邻里，一笑相乐，斯亦可矣！ 
现代文：曹掾应该依从众人，回家陪伴妻子儿女，安排酒菜，宴请邻里，一起欢笑取乐，这也是很合宜的呀！ 
English: Cao Wei should follow the crowd, go home to accompany his wife and children, arrange wine and vegetables, invite the neighbors, laugh and have fun together, which is also very appropriate!

古文：扶惭愧。
现代文：张扶很羞愧。
English: Zhang Fu was very ashamed.

古文：官属善之。
现代文：属吏都认为薛宣的话很对。
English: The subordinate officials all thought that Xue Xuan's words were right.

古文：宣为人好威仪，进止雍容，甚可观也。
现代文：薛宣为人注重仪容威严端正，进退举止文雅大方，很值得一观。
English: Xue Xuan is a dignified and upright person, and his movements are elegant and generous. It is well worth a look.

古文：性密静有思，思省吏职，求其便安。
现代文：性情深密安静，有智谋，思考省察官吏的职责，寻求便利安逸的办法。
English: His disposition is deep and quiet, he is resourceful, thinks about the duties of the provincial inspector, and seeks a convenient and comfortable way.

古文：下至财用笔研，皆为设方略，利用而省费。
现代文：下至钱财笔砚，都设计方略，使之便于使用而且节省了花费。
English: Right down to the money-saving pens, strategies have been devised to make them easier to use and more cost-effective.

古文：吏民称之，郡中清静。
现代文：官吏和百姓都称赞他，郡中安静太平。
English: The officials and the people all praised him, and the county was quiet and peaceful.

古文：迁为少府，共张职办。
现代文：薛宣升任少府，负责供给设置皇上所需帐具，职务上的事情办理得很好。
English: Xue Xuan was promoted to minor prefect, responsible for supplying and setting up the Emperor's necessary accounts, and he handled his duties well.

古文：月余，御史大夫于永卒，谷永上疏曰：
现代文：过了一个多月，御史大夫于永死了，谷永上奏疏说：
English: After more than a month, Dr. Mishi passed away, and Dr. Yanagisawa said:

古文：帝王之德莫大于知人，知人则百僚任职，天工不旷。故皋陶曰： 知人则哲，能官人。 
现代文： 帝王的美德没有比识别人的贤愚善恶更重要的，识别了人的贤愚善恶，那么百官就会胜任各自的职位，朝廷的官职就不会空缺，所以皋陶说： 识别人的贤愚善恶就是聪明，能够选用人才为官。 
English: The emperor's virtue is no more important than recognizing people's virtue, folly, goodness and evil. If people's virtue, folly, goodness and evil are recognized, then the officials will be competent in their respective positions, and the official positions of the court will not be vacant. Therefore, Zhai Tao said: Recognizing people's virtue, folly, goodness and evil is clever, and can select talents as officials.

古文：御史大夫内承本朝之风化，外佐丞相统理天下，任重职大，非庸材所能堪。
现代文：御史大夫在内负责本朝的风俗教化，在外辅佐丞相全面地治理天下，责任重大，职位很高，不是平庸的人所能够胜任的。
English: The Imperial Historian, among others, is responsible for the enlightenment of the customs of this dynasty, and the Vice-Minister of Foreign Affairs comprehensively governs the world. The responsibility is great, the position is high, and it is not possible for a mediocre person to be competent.

古文：今当选于群卿，以充其缺。
现代文：现在应当从百宫中挑选人才，来填补这个空缺。
English: The time has come to select from the talent pool to fill this vacancy.

古文：得其人则万姓欣喜，百僚说服；不得其人则大职堕斁，王功不兴。
现代文：选到合适的人，那么天下人就会欢欣喜悦，百官就会心悦诚服；没有选到合适的人，那么这一重要职责就会败坏，帝王的功业就不会兴盛。
English: If the right person is chosen, then the people of the world will rejoice and the officials will be pleased; if the right person is not chosen, then this important duty will be corrupted and the emperor's work will not flourish.

古文：虞帝之明，在兹一举，可不致详！
现代文：皇上您像虞帝般的英明，体现在这一次举动上，怎么能够不极其审慎呢？
English: Your wisdom, like that of Emperor Yu, is reflected in this move. How could you not be extremely prudent?

古文：窃见少府宣，材茂行洁，达于从政，前为御史中丞，执宪毂下，不吐刚茹柔，举错时当；出守临淮、陈留，二郡称治；为左冯翊，崇教养善，威德并行，众职修理，奸轨绝息，辞讼者历年不至丞相府，赦后余盗贼什分三辅之一。
现代文：我私下看到少府薛宣，才能美盛，品行纯洁，通晓处理政务。先前任御史中丞，在天子辇毂下执行法令，公平正直，不趋炎赴势，举止得当，很合时宜；出任临淮、陈留太守，两个郡都以治理得好而受到称赞；任左冯翊，推崇教化，修养善行，威严与恩德一起施行，各种职务美善而又有条理，犯法作乱的人都绝迹了，诉讼的人多年不到丞相府，大赦之后三辅的盗贼衹剩下了十分之一。
English: Privately, I saw that Xue Xuan, the young prefect, had the ability to be prosperous, had a pure moral conduct, and was knowledgeable in handling government affairs. Previously, he was the vice-prefect of the imperial history, executed decrees under the auspices of heaven, was fair and honest, did not go to the battlefield, behaved properly, and was very timely; served as Lin Huai and Chen Liu Taishu, and both counties were praised for their good governance; Ren Zuo Feng Qi, promoted enlightenment, cultivated good deeds, and exercised majesty together with benevolence, and all kinds of duties were good and well-organized. People who broke the law and caused disturbances have disappeared

古文：功效卓尔，自左内史初置以来未尝有也。
现代文：功绩成效突出，自从左内史开始设置以来不曾有过。
English: Outstanding achievements and achievements have never been seen since the establishment of the internal history of the left.

古文：孔子曰： 如有所誉，其有所试。 宣考绩功课，简在两府，不敢过称以奸欺诬之罪。
现代文：孔子说： 如果对一个人有所赞誉，那一定要对这个人有所考验，薛宣政绩的考核，明确地记载在丞相、御史两府裹，我不敢过分称赞他以犯下欺骗的罪过。
English: Confucius said: If there is praise for a person, then there must be a test for this person. The assessment of Xue Xuan's political performance is clearly recorded in the two prefectures of chancellor and imperial historian. I dare not praise him too much for committing the crime of deception.

古文：臣闻贤材莫大于治人，宣已有效。
现代文：我听说贤人的才能没有比治理百姓更重要的，薛宣已经有了成效了。
English: I have heard that the talent of a wise man is no more important than governing the people. Xue Xuan has already achieved results.

古文：其法律任廷尉有余，经术文雅足以谋王体，断国论；身兼数器，有 退食自公 之节。宣无私党游说之助，臣恐陛下忽于《羔羊》之诗，舍公实之臣，任华虚之誉，是用越职，陈宣行能，唯陛下留神考察。
现代文：他的法制律令方面的才能担任廷尉有余力，经学礼乐方面的才能足够用来图谋王道的根本，决断有关国事的计议；一身同时具有几方面的才能，有 减退膳食，服从公道 的节操，薛宣没有私结的党羽进言劝说的帮助，我担心陛下忽视了《羔羊》的诗意，舍弃公正诚实的臣子，任用有华丽虚浮的美名的人，因此我超越职守，陈述薛宣的品行才能，希望陛下留心考察。 
English: His talent in law and order is enough to serve as a courtier, and his talent in music and etiquette is enough to plot the fundamentals of the king's way and decide on state affairs. He has several talents at the same time, such as reducing meals, obeying the discipline of justice, and Xue Xuan does not have the help of private party members to persuade. I am worried that His Majesty has ignored the poetry of "Lamb," abandoned fair and honest courtiers, and appointed people with magnificent and vain fame. Therefore, I have gone beyond my duties to state Xue Xuan's moral qualities and hope that His Majesty will pay attention.

古文：上然之，遂以宣为御史大夫。
现代文：皇上认为他的话是对的，就任命薛宣为御史大夫。
English: The emperor thought his words were right and appointed Xue Xuan as the imperial historian.

古文：数月，代张禹为丞相，封高阳侯，食邑千户。
现代文：几个月后，薛宣替代张禹任丞相，封为高阳侯，食邑一千户。
English: A few months later, Xue Xuan replaced Zhang Yu as chancellor and was given the title of Goyang Hou, with a thousand households.

古文：宣除赵贡两子为史。
现代文：薛宣任命赵贡的两个儿子为丞相史。
English: Xue Xuan appointed Zhao Gong's two sons as chancellor.

古文：贡者，赵广汉之兄子也，为吏亦有能名。
现代文：趟贡，是赵广汉兄长的儿子，做官也有能干的名声。
English: Tongong, the son of Zhao Guanghan's elder brother, also had a reputation as an able official.

古文：宣为相，府辞讼例不满万钱不为移书，后皆遵用薛侯故事。
现代文：薛宣任丞相，府裹受理诉讼惯例是不足一万钱的不予移送文书，后人都遵循采用薛侯的先例。
English: When Xue Xuan was appointed as the prime minister, the government's practice in accepting lawsuits was not to transfer documents of less than 10,000 yuan. Later generations followed the precedent of adopting Xue Hou.

古文：然官属讥其烦碎无大体，不称贤也。
现代文：然而属吏指责他烦杂细碎没有要点，不能称为贤明。
English: However, his subordinate officers accused him of being tedious and detailed, lacking substance, and unable to be called wise.

古文：时天子好儒雅，宣经术又浅，上亦轻焉。
现代文：当时天子喜欢博学的儒士，薛宣的经学又很浅薄，皇上也轻视他。
English: At that time, the heavenly son liked erudite Confucianists, and Xue Xuan's study of scripture was very shallow. The emperor also despised him.

古文：久之，广汉郡盗贼群起，丞相、御史遣掾史逐捕不能克。
现代文：过了很久，广汉郡的盗贼成群地兴起，丞相御史派遣掾史追逐搜捕不能平定。
English: After a long time, the thieves in Guanghan County arose in droves, and the Minister of Justice dispatched the police to chase and arrest them, but they could not be subdued.

古文：上乃拜河东都尉赵护为广汉太守，以军法从事。
现代文：皇上就任命河东都尉趟护为广汉太守，用治军的法令来处理事务。
English: The emperor then appointed the governor of Guangdong Province, the lieutenant of Hedong Province, as the governor of Guanghan Province, and used the laws governing the army to deal with affairs.

古文：数月，斩其渠帅郑躬，降者数千人，乃平。
现代文：几个月后，斩杀了他们的大帅郑躬，降服几千人，才平定下来。
English: A few months later, Zheng Mu, their general, was killed, and several thousand people were subdued before the situation was stabilized.

古文：会邛成太后崩，丧事仓卒，吏赋敛以趋办。
现代文：适逢邛成太后驾崩，丧事很匆促，官吏收取赋税来急速办理。
English: At the time of the death of Empress Dowager Rencheng, the funeral was very hasty, and officials collected taxes to quickly handle it.

古文：其后上闻之，以过丞相、御史，遂册免宣曰： 君为丞相，出入六年，忠孝之行，率先百僚，朕无闻焉。
现代文：过后皇上听说了这件事，用它来责备丞相御史，就下诏罢免薛宣说： 你身为丞相，任职六年，但忠诚孝顺的行为，表率百官的举动，我没有听说过。
English: Afterward, the emperor heard about this matter and used it to reproach the prime minister Minoru, and dismissed Xue Xuan with the following edict: You, as prime minister, have been in office for six years, but I have never heard of your loyal and filial behavior, the behavior of a leader of a hundred officials.

古文：朕既不明，变异数见，岁比不登，仓廪空虚，百姓饥馑，流离道路，疾疫死者以万数，人至相食，盗贼并兴，群职旷废，是朕之不德而股肱不良也。
现代文：我既是不圣明，灾变怪异屡次出现，粮食连年没有收成，仓库虚空，百姓闸饥荒，流亡离散在道路上，由于疾病瘟疫而死的人要用万来计数，甚至到了人吃人的地步，强盗小偷一齐兴起，众多的职位空缺废弃，这是我没有德行而且辅佐之臣不称职的缘故。
English: Since I am not a saint, strange disasters have repeatedly occurred, grain has not been harvested for years, warehouses are empty, people are starving, exiles are scattered on the roads, people who die from diseases and plagues are counted in thousands, even to the point of cannibalism, robbers and thieves have risen together, and many vacancies have been abandoned, which is due to my lack of virtue and the incompetence of my subordinates.

古文：乃者广汉群盗横恣，残贼吏民，朕恻然伤之，数以问君，君对辄不如其实。
现代文：从前广汉郡的众多盗贼横暴恣肆，残害官吏百姓，我为这件事感到悲痛哀伤，屡次询问你，你的回答总是不符合事实。
English: Once upon a time, many thieves in Guanghan County went on a rampage, killing officials and civilians. I feel sad and sorrowful about this. I have asked you many times, but your answers are always inconsistent with the facts.

古文：西州隔绝，几不为郡。
现代文：西州阻隔断绝，几乎不成一个郡。
English: Xizhou is cut off from the rest of the country and is barely a county.

古文：三辅赋敛无度，酷吏并缘为奸，侵扰百姓，诏君案验，复无欲得事实之意。
现代文：三辅收取赋税没有限度，残酷的官吏相互勾结干坏事，侵犯骚扰百姓，命令你去案察检验，你却又没有想要获得事情真实情况的意图。
English: The three auxiliary departments collect taxes without limit, the cruel officials collude with each other to do bad things, violate and harass the people, and order you to investigate and test, but you have no intention of getting the true situation.

古文：九卿以下，咸承风指，同时陷于谩欺之辜，咎繇君焉！
现代文：九卿以下，都承奉你的意旨行事，一齐犯了欺骗的罪名，遇错是在你的身上。
English: The nine nobles and below have all acted in accordance with your wishes, and have all committed the crime of deception. If anything goes wrong, it will be your fault.

古文：有司法君领职解嫚，开谩欺之路，伤薄风化，无以帅示四方。
现代文：有司依法弹劾你任职松懈怠慢，开启了欺骗之路，损害削弱了风俗教化，无法作天下的表率。
English: You have been impeached according to the law for laxity and negligence in office, which has opened up a road of deception, undermined the edification of customs, and failed to set an example for the world.

古文：不忍致君于理，其上丞相、高阳侯印绶，罢归。 
现代文：我不忍心把你送到法官那里，你交上丞相高阳侯的印信，免职回家。 
English: I can't bear to send you to the judge, you hand over the seal letter of the chancellor Gaoyang Hou, and go home relieved of duty.

古文：初，宣为丞相，而翟方进为司直。
现代文：当初，薛宣任丞相，而翟方进任司直。
English: At first, Xue Xuan was appointed as chancellor, while Yan Fang was appointed as secretary.

古文：宣知方进名儒，有宰相器，深结厚焉。
现代文：薛宣知道左进是有名的儒者，有宰相的才干，就和他结交十分深厚。
English: Xue Xuan knew that Zuo Jin was a famous Confucian and had the ability of a prime minister, so he had a very deep friendship with him.

古文：后方进竟代为丞相，思宣旧恩，宣免后二岁，荐宣明习文法，练国制度，前所坐过薄，可复进用。
现代文：后来方进竟然替代他当了丞相，感念莲宣往日的恩德，盐宣免职两年后，方进举荐说薛宣明白通晓法制条文，熟悉国家的各种制度，先前所犯的遇错微小，可以再次提拔任用。
English: Later, Fang Jin actually replaced him as chancellor. He was moved by Lian Xuan's kindness in the past. Two years after Shi Xuan was relieved of his duties, Fang Jin recommended that Xue Xuan understood the legal provisions, was familiar with the various systems of the country, and the previous mistakes were minor. He could be promoted again.

古文：上征宣复爵高阳侯，加宠特进，位次师安昌侯，给事中，视尚书事。
现代文：皇上征召产亘，又封爵直腿昼，外加特进的宠封，地位次于国师安昌侯，任给事中，兼管尚书的事务。
English: He was called up by the emperor for a long period of service, and he was knighted and promoted to the peerage. In addition, he was given the title of favorite, which was second only to that of the state teacher, Anchang Hou, and he was appointed to be in charge of the affairs of Shangshu.

古文：宣复尊重。
现代文：蓝宣再次受到敬重。
English: Lan Xuan was once again respected.

古文：任政数年，后坐善定陵侯淳于长罢就第。
现代文：参预政事几年，后来由于与定陵侯淳于长友善而坐罪，免职回家。
English: He participated in pre-election politics for a few years, but later, because of his friendship with Dingling Hou Chunyu, he was removed from his post and sent home.

古文：初，宣有两弟，明、修：明至南阳太守；修历郡守、京兆尹、少府，善交接，得州里之称。
现代文：当初，薛宣有两个弟弟，薛明、薛修。薛明官至南阳太守。薛修历任郡守、京兆尹、少府，擅长于人与人之间的交往，受到乡里的称赞。
English: At the beginning, Xue Xuan had two younger brothers, Xue Ming and Xue Xiu. Xue Ming was the official to Nanyang Dazhu. Xue Xiu served as county governor, Jing Zhaoyun, and Shofu. He was good at interpersonal communication and was praised by the village.

古文：后母常从修居官。
现代文：后母长期随薛修在官任上。
English: The latter's mother followed Xue Xiu for a long time in official positions.

古文：宣为丞相时，修为临菑令，宣迎后母，修不遣。
现代文：薛宣当丞相时，薛修任堕茎令，萨宣迎接后母，薛修不肯送走。
English: When Xue Xuan was the prime minister, Xue Xiu was appointed to the position of vice-premier. Sasun hailed his stepmother, but Xue Xiu refused to see her off.

古文：后母病死，修去官持服。
现代文：后母生病去世，薛修辞去官职守丧。
English: When his stepmother died of illness, Xue Xiu resigned from his post and went into mourning.

古文：宣谓修三年服少能行之者，兄弟相驳不可，修遂竟服，繇是兄弟不和。
现代文：薛宣对薛修说，三年的守丧很少有能做到的，兄弟相互驳斥，意见不合，薛修于是守完丧期，因此兄弟不和睦。
English: Xue Xuan said to Xue Xiu that a three-year mourning period is rarely possible. The brothers refuted each other and disagreed. Xue Xiu then completed the mourning period, so the brothers did not get along.

古文：久之，哀帝初即位，博士申咸给事中，亦东海人也，毁宣不供养行丧服，薄于骨肉，前以不忠孝免，不宜复列封侯在朝省。
现代文：过了很久，哀帝刚刚登上王位，博士申咸任给事中，也是东海人，诽谤说薛宣不供养母亲，母亲死后不穿丧服，骨肉之情淡薄，先前由于不忠不孝免官，不应该再次封为列侯留在朝廷官署中。
English: After a long time, Emperor Yei had just ascended to the throne. Dr. Shen Xianren, who was also from the East Sea, slandered Xue Xuan by saying that he did not support his mother, did not wear mourning clothes after his mother's death, that his feelings were weak, and that he should not be made a vassal again and remain in the imperial office because he had previously been dismissed for disloyalty and filial piety.

古文：宣子况为右曹侍郎，数闻其语，赇客杨明，欲令创咸面目，使不居位。
现代文：整宣的儿子壁迟任右曹侍郎，屡次听到他的话，就贿赂门客杨明，想要让他毁坏申咸面容，使他不能担任官职。
English: Hezeken's son, Wai Chi, was appointed as the Right Cao's chamberlain. After hearing his words many times, he bribed his concubine, Yang Ming, to let him destroy Shin Xian's face so that he could not hold an official post.

古文：会司隶缺，况恐咸为之，遂令明遮斫咸宫门外，断鼻唇，身八创。
现代文：恰好司隶空缺，薛况担心申盛会当司隶，就命杨明在宫门之外拦路砍击申戚，砍断了他的鼻子嘴唇，在身上也有八处创伤。
English: When there happened to be a vacancy in the position of scribe, Xue Jiao was worried that Shen Sheng would become the scribe, so he ordered Yang Ming to block the road outside the palace gate and attack Shen Qi, cutting off his nose and lips, and he also had eight wounds on his body.

古文：事不有司，御史中丞众等奏： 况朝臣，父故宰相，再封列侯，不相敕丞化，而骨肉相疑，疑咸受修言以谤毁宣。
现代文：事情交给有司处理，御史中丞众等人奏道： 薛况是朝中大臣，父亲是原来的宰相，两次封为列侯，不相互告诫，秉承教化，而骨肉之间相互怀疑，疑心申咸听了薛修的话来诽谤薛宣。
English: The matter was handed over to a division to deal with, and the members of the Imperial Historian's Office and others made a report: Xue Jian was the Minister of the Middle Court, his father was the original Prime Minister, he was twice made a vassal, they did not admonish each other, they adhered to the teachings, but they were suspicious of each other, and they listened to Xue Xiu's words to slander Xue Xuan.

古文：咸所言皆宣行迹，众人所共见，公家所宜闻。
现代文：申咸所说的都是薛宣做过的事，是大家所共同看到的，朝廷所应该听到的。
English: What Shen Ham said were all things that Xue Xuan had done. They were things that everyone could see and that the imperial court should hear.

古文：况知咸给事中，恐为司隶举奏宣，而公令明等迫切宫阙，要遮创戮近臣于大道人众中，欲以隔塞聪明，杜绝论议之端。
现代文：薛况知道申咸是给事中，担心他当了司隶后上奏检举薛宣，就公然命令握塱等逼近宫殿，在大路人群裹拦路砍伤近臣，想要用来隔开阻塞朝廷的听觉视觉，堵住断绝议论的途径。
English: Knowing that Shen Xian was in the middle of things, and fearing that he had become a subordinate after the report of the investigation of Xue Xuan, Xue Jian openly ordered the crowd to approach the palace, blocking the road and injuring his close vassals. He wanted to use it to block the hearing and vision of the imperial court and block the way to cut off the discussion.

古文：桀黠无所畏忌，万众讠雚哗，流闻四方，不与凡民忿怒争斗者同。
现代文：薛况凶暴狡诈没有什么可以让他害怕忌惮的，人民喧哗，流播四方，这和普通百姓因为怨恨愤怒而相争打架的不同。
English: Xue Jiao is fierce and cunning. There is nothing for him to be afraid of. The people are noisy and scatter in all directions. This is different from ordinary people who fight because of resentment and anger.

古文：臣闻敬近臣，为近主也。
现代文：我们听说尊敬近臣，就是亲近主上。
English: We have heard that to respect one's neighbor is to be close to the Lord.

古文：礼，下公门，式路马，君畜产且犹敬之。
现代文：按照礼法，过君主的大门要下车，见君主所乘路车的马要手抚车前横木，君主的牲畜尚且还要尊敬它们。
English: According to the etiquette, you have to get off the carriage after passing through the monarch's gate. The horse of the carriage in which the monarch is riding should stroke the front crossbar of the carriage. The monarch's livestock should also respect them.

古文：《春秋》之义，意恶功遂，不免于诛，上浸之源不可长也，况首为恶，明手伤，功意俱恶，皆大不敬。
现代文：按《春秋》的大义，本意不好而成功，不能逃避诛罚，冒犯皇上这种行为的开端不可以助长。薛况是首恶分子，扰塱亲手伤人，后果与本意都很恶劣，都是大不敬。
English: According to the great justice of "Spring and Autumn," the original intention is not good, but it is successful, it is impossible to escape punishment, and the beginning of such behavior that offends the emperor cannot be encouraged. Xue Jiao is the chief villain, disturbing and injuring people with his own hands, the consequences and intentions are very bad, are very disrespectful.

古文：明当以重论，及况皆弃市。 
现代文：杨明应当从重定罪，和薛况都在闹市处死，陈尸示众。 
English: Yang Ming should be given a heavier sentence, and both he and Xue Jiao should be put to death in the downtown area, and their corpses displayed to the public.

古文：廷尉直以为： 律曰 斗以刃伤人，完为城旦，其贼加罪一等，与谋者同罪。 
现代文：廷尉直认为： 法律上说 打架用刀砍伤了人，判处完刑和城旦的刑罚，伤人者罪加一等，和策划的人同等罪名。 
English: Tinglian Zhi thought: Legally speaking, if a fighter slashes a person with a knife, he will be sentenced to the full punishment and the punishment of the city, and the injured person will be charged with the same crime as the planner.

古文：诏书无以诋欺成罪。
现代文：皇帝的文告命令不要由于诽谤欺骗而形成罪名。
English: The emperor's edict ordered that there should be no crime of libel or deception.

古文：传曰： 遇人不以义而见慭者，与痏人之罪钧，恶不直也。 
现代文：古书上说： 不用道义对待人而被殴伤的人，和殴伤人的人罪行相等，因为痛恨他不正直。 
English: An ancient book says: A person who is beaten without a moral code is as guilty as the one who beat him, because he hates his dishonesty.

古文：咸厚善修，而数称宣恶，流闻不谊，不可谓直。
现代文：申咸和薛修非常友好，而屡次宣扬薛宣的罪过，流布传播，很不合宜，不能说是正直。
English: Shen Xian and Xue Xiu are very friendly, but repeatedly proclaiming Xue Xuan's sins and disseminating them is very inappropriate and cannot be said to be honest.

古文：况以故伤咸，计谋已定，后闻置司隶，因前谋而趣明，非以恐咸为司隶故造谋也。
现代文：薛况因为父亲的缘故伤害申咸，计策已经定下来，后来听说安排任司隶的人选，就依照先前的谋划而催促杨明，不是因为担心申咸任司隶所以设下计谋。
English: Xue Jian hurt Shen Xian because of his father, the strategy had already been set. Later, when he heard that the person to be appointed as secretary was arranged, he urged Yang Ming according to the previous plan, not because he was worried about Shen Xian being appointed as secretary.

古文：本争私变，虽于掖门外伤咸道中，与凡民争斗无异。
现代文：本是相争私下发生了变故，虽然是在掖门外大路上砍伤申咸，与普通百姓相争打架没有什么不同。
English: Originally, the altercation took place in private. Although Shen Xian was slashed on the road outside the city gate, it was no different from ordinary people fighting.

古文：杀人者死，伤人者刑，古今之通道，三代所不易也。
现代文：杀人的被处死，伤人的被判刑，是古今通行的道理，三代也不能改变。
English: Murderers are put to death, and those who injure others are sentenced to death. This is a principle that has prevailed from ancient times to the present, and it cannot be changed in three generations.

古文：孔子曰： 必也正名。 
现代文：孔子说： 一定要辨正名分。 
English: Confucius said, "One must distinguish between the righteous and the wicked."

古文：名不正，则至于刑罚不中；刑罚不中，而民无所错手足。
现代文：名分不正，就会造成刑罚不适中，刑罚不适中，百姓就不知该怎么做。
English: If the name is not right, it will cause the punishment to be inadequate, and if the punishment is inadequate, the people will not know what to do.

古文：今以况为首恶，明手伤为大不敬，公私无差。
现代文：现在把薛况作为首恶分子，杨明亲手伤人是大不敬，就使公私没有差别。
English: Now, taking Xue Jiao as the chief villain, Yang Ming's personal injury is very disrespectful, so there is no difference between public and private.

古文：《春秋》之义，原心定罪。
现代文：《春秋》的大义，是推究本意来定下罪名。
English: The great justice of "Spring and Autumn" is to determine the crime by deducing the intention.

古文：原况以父见谤发忿怒，无它大恶。
现代文：追究根源，薛况由于父亲被诽谤而发泄愤怒，没有其他的大罪过。
English: Investigating the root cause, Xue Jian let out his anger because his father was slandered, and there was no other major crime.

古文：加诋欺，辑小过成大辟，陷死刑，违明诏，恐非法意，不可施行。
现代文：却要加上诋毁欺骗之辞，集合小的过错来促成大辟之罪，使人陷入死刑，违背圣明的诏令，恐怕不是法律的本意，不可以实行。
English: But to add the words of slander and deceit, to collect small faults to promote the crime of bigotry, to make people fall into the death penalty, to violate the edict of the Holy Light, is probably not the original intention of the law, and cannot be implemented.

古文：圣王不以怒增刑。
现代文：圣明的君主不由于发怒而加重刑罚。
English: A wise king does not increase the punishment of the wicked out of anger.

古文：明当以贼伤人不直，况与谋者皆爵减完为城旦。 
现代文：杨明应当判处伤害人不直，薛况和谋划的人都降低爵位，判处完刑和城旦的刑罚。 
English: Yang Ming should sentence those who harmed people to be dishonest, and those who harmed Xue Jiao and those who plotted to do so should be reduced in rank and sentenced to complete punishment and a fine.

古文：上以问公卿议臣。
现代文：皇上拿这件事来询问公卿大臣。
English: The emperor asked the court noble and minister about this matter.

古文：丞相孔光、大司空师丹以中丞议是，自将军以下至博士、议郎皆是廷尉。
现代文：丞相孔光、大司空师丹认为中丞的意见是对的，从将军以下到博士议郎都认为廷尉是正确的。
English: The chancellor Kong Guang and the grand secretary Ku Shidan believed that the opinion of the vice-chancellor was correct, and from the general down to the doctor, they all believed that the courtier was correct.

古文：况竟减罪一等，徙敦煌。
现代文：薛况最后减去一等罪名，调到敦煌。
English: Xue Jiao was finally charged with a first-class crime and transferred to Dunhuang.

古文：宣坐免为庶人，归故郡，卒于家。
现代文：薛宣坐罪，免职为平民，回到原来的郡县，在家裹去世。
English: Xue Xuan was convicted of sedition, dismissed as a commoner, returned to his original county, and died at home.

古文：宣子惠亦至二千石。
现代文：薛宣的儿子薛惠也做到二千石官。
English: Xue Xuan's son, Xue Hui, also became a 2,000-crop official.

古文：始惠为彭城令，宣从临淮迁至陈留，过其县，桥梁、邮亭不修。
现代文：当初薛惠任彭城令，薛宣从临淮调到陈留，经过他的属县，看到桥梁邮亭没有整修。
English: At the beginning, Xue Hui was assigned to Pengcheng, and Xue Xuan was transferred from Linhuai to Chenliu. Passing through his county, he saw that the bridge post office had not been renovated.

古文：宣心知惠不能，留彭城数日，案行舍中，处置什器，观视园菜，终不问惠以吏事。
现代文：薛宣心裹知道薛惠缺乏才干，就留在彭城几天，巡视官舍，处理安置杂用的器皿，察看园中蔬菜，始终不拿官吏的职责来考问薛惠。
English: Xue Xuan knew in his heart that Xue Hui lacked talent, so he stayed in Pengcheng for a few days to inspect the official residence, deal with the placement of miscellaneous utensils, and inspect the vegetables in the garden. He never questioned Xue Hui about his official duties.

古文：惠自知治县不称宣意，遣门下掾送宣至陈留，令掾进见，自从其所问宣不教戒惠吏职之意。
现代文：薛惠自己知道治理彭城县不合薛宣的心意，就派遣门下掾送薛宣到陈留，让他进府求见，以自己的名义来询问薛宣不用官吏的职责教诲告诫薛惠的意图。
English: Xue Hui himself knew that the governance of Pengcheng County was not in line with Xue Xuan's intentions, so he sent a subordinate to send Xue Xuan to Chenliu, let him enter the government to seek an audience, and in his own name to inquire about Xue Xuan's intention not to use the duties of officials to teach and admonish Xue Hui.

古文：宣笑曰： 吏道以法令为师，可问而知。
现代文：薛宣笑着说： 做官的方法是把法令作为老师，可以询问而得知。
English: Xue Xuan said with a smile: The way to be an official is to take the law as a teacher, and you can inquire and learn.

古文：及能与不能，自有资材，何可学也？ 
现代文：至于有能力做到与没有能力做到，各有自己的资质才能，怎么能够学呢？ 
English: As for the ability to do it and the inability to do it, each has its own qualifications and talents, how can you learn?

古文：众人传称，以宣言为然。
现代文：众人传播宣扬，认为薛宣的话是对的。
English: Many people spread the propaganda and thought that Xue Xuan's words were right.

古文：初，宣复封为侯时，妻死，而敬武长公主寡居，上令宣尚焉。
现代文：当初，薛宣第二次受封当高阳侯时，妻子死了，而敬武长公主守寡独处，皇上命薛宣娶了公主。
English: At first, when Xue Xuan received the title of Gaoyang marquis for the second time, his wife died, and Princess Jingwuchang was left alone. The emperor ordered Xue Xuan to marry the princess.

古文：及宣免归故郡，公主留京师。
现代文：当薛宣免职回原来的郡县时，公主留在了京城。
English: When Xue Xuan was relieved of his duties and returned to his original county, the princess stayed in Beijing.

古文：后宣卒，主上书愿还宣葬延陵，奏可。
现代文：后来薛宣去世，公主献上奏书，希望迎回薛宣葬在延陵，奏书被批准了。
English: Later, when Xue Xuan died, the princess presented a petition, hoping to welcome back Xue Xuan and bury him in Yanling. The petition was approved.

古文：况私从敦煌归长安，会赦，因留与主私乱。
现代文：薛况私自从敦煌回到长安，适逢大赦，就留下来和公主私通淫乱。
English: Ever since I returned to Chang'an from Dunhuang, when there was an amnesty, I stayed behind to fornicate with the princess.

古文：哀帝外家丁、傅贵，主附事之，而疏王氏。
现代文：哀帝的外家亲属丁氏、傅氏显贵，公主阿附事奉他们，却疏远了王氏。
English: The Ding and Fu clans, distant relatives of the late emperor, were prominent, and Princess A served them, but alienated the Wang clan.

古文：元始中，莽自尊为安汉公，主又出言非莽。
现代文：元始年间，王莽尊称自己为安漠公，公主又说话诋毁王莽。
English: In the early years, Wang Mang Rong called himself the Prince of Peace and Tranquility, and the princess slandered Wang Mang.

古文：而况与吕宽相善，及宽事觉时，莽并治况，发扬其罪，使使者以太皇太后诏赐主药。
现代文：而薛况和吕宽相友善，等到吕宽的事情被发觉时，王莽一并惩处薛况，宣扬他的罪过，派使者以太皇太后的韶令赐给公主毒药。
English: However, Xue Quan and Lu Kuan were friendly with each other. When Lu Kuan's affair was discovered, Wang Mang punished Xue Quan together, publicized his crime, and sent an emissary to give the princess poison by order of the Empress Dowager.

古文：主怒曰： 刘氏孤弱，王氏擅朝，排挤宗室，且嫂何与取妹披抉其闺门而杀之？ 
现代文：公主大怒说： 刘氏孤弱，王氏专擅朝政，排斥皇族，而且嫂嫂为什么会披露妹妹闺房中的事情，并处死妹妹呢？ 
English: The princess said angrily, "Liu is weak and alone, Wang is an expert in court politics and rejects the royal family, and why would her sister-in-law disclose the affair in her sister's boudoir and execute her sister?

古文：使者迫守主，遂饮药死。
现代文：使者逼迫看守住公主，公主终于喝下毒药死了。
English: The envoy forced the guards to detain the princess, who eventually drank the poison and died.

古文：况枭首于市。
现代文：薛况在集市上被斩首示众。
English: Xue Jian was publicly beheaded at the market.

古文：白太后云主暴病薨。
现代文：王莽禀告太后说公主暴病薨。
English: Wang Mang told the empress dowager that the princess was violently ill.

古文：太后欲临其丧，莽固争，乃止。
现代文：太后想要参加她的丧礼，王莽坚决规劝，太后才停止。
English: When the empress dowager wanted to attend her funeral, Wang Mang resolutely persuaded her to stop.

古文：朱博字子元，杜陵人也。
现代文：朱博字子元，是杜陵人。
English: Zhu Bo Zi Yuan is a native of Tuling.

古文：家贫，少时给事县为亭长，好客少年，捕搏敢行。
现代文：家境贫困，年轻时在县裹供职当亭长，喜欢结交少年宾客，追捕搏击，无所畏惧。
English: He comes from a poor family background, and when he was young, he worked as a pavilion manager in the county. He likes to make friends with young guests, chase and fight, and is fearless.

古文：稍迁为功曹，伉侠好交，随从士大夫，不避风雨。
现代文：逐渐升迁为功曹，刚直仗义，喜爱交游，跟随士大夫，不躲避风雨。
English: Gradually promoted as a meritorious person, upright and righteous, likes to travel, follows the scholar and scholar, and does not avoid the wind and rain.

古文：是时，前将军望之子萧育，御史大夫万年子陈咸以公卿子著材知名，博皆友之矣。
现代文：当时，前将军望之的儿子萧育、御史大夫万年的儿子陈咸由于是公卿子弟才能显著而为人所知，朱博都和他们相友善。
English: At that time, Xiao Yu, the son of the former general Wang Zhi, and Chen Xian, the son of the imperial historian Wan Yu, were known for their outstanding talents as the sons of nobles, and Zhu Bo was friendly with them.

古文：时，诸陵县属太常，博以太常掾察廉，补安陵丞。
现代文：当时各个皇陵所在的县都隶属太常，朱博以太常掾被察举廉洁，补为安陵丞。
English: At that time, all the counties where the imperial mausoleums were located were subordinate to Tai Chang, and Zhu Bo, Tai Chang, was investigated for corruption and promoted to Anling.

古文：后去官入京兆，历曹史列掾。出为督邮书掾，所部职办，郡中称之。
现代文：后来辞去官职到了京兆，历任曹史列掾，出京当了督邮书掾，所管辖的地方职务上的事情办理得很好，郡裹的人都称赞他。
English: Later, he resigned from his official post and went to Beijing Zhao, succeeding Cao Shilai, and went to Beijing to become a postmaster. He handled the affairs of the local posts under his jurisdiction very well, and the people in the county praised him.

古文：而陈咸为御史中丞，坐漏泄省中语下狱。
现代文：而陈咸任御史中丞，因泄露宫禁之内的话而坐罪，被关进监狱。
English: However, Chen Xianren, who held the position of Vice-Minister of History, was put in prison for leaking information that was forbidden by imperial edict.

古文：博去吏，间步至廷尉中，候伺咸事。
现代文：朱博辞去官职，偷偷地步行到廷尉府中，刺探陈咸的案子。
English: Zhu Bo resigned from his official position and secretly walked to the palace to spy on Chen Xian's case.

古文：咸掠治困笃，博诈得为医人狱，得见咸，具知其所坐罪。
现代文：陈咸被拷打讯问，伤势很重，朱博伪称是医生进了监狱，得以见到陈咸，完全知道了他所犯的罪名。
English: Chen Xian was tortured and interrogated, and his injuries were very serious. Zhu Bo falsely claimed to be a doctor and went to prison. He was able to see Chen Xian and fully understood the crime he had committed.

古文：博出狱，又变性名，为咸验治数百，卒免咸死罪。
现代文：朱博出了监狱，又改变姓名，替陈咸受刑，被打了几百下，终于免去陈咸的死罪。
English: Zhu Bo was released from prison, changed his name again, and was punished for Chen Xian. He was beaten several hundred times, and was finally exempted from Chen Xian's death sentence.

古文：咸得论出，而博以此显名，为郡功曹。
现代文：陈咸得以判处出狱，而朱博因为这件事名声显扬，当了郡功曹。
English: Chen Xian was able to be released from prison, and Zhu Bo became famous for this and became a county hero.

古文：久之，成帝即位，大将军王凤秉政，奏请陈咸为长史。
现代文：过了很久，成帝登上帝位，大将军王凤把持朝政，上奏请求让陈咸当长史。
English: After a long time, Emperor Cheng Rong ascended to the throne, General Wang Feng took control of the imperial government, and made a request for Chen Xian to be the long-term leader.

古文：咸荐萧育、朱博除莫府属，凤甚奇之，举博栎阳令，徙云阳、平陵二县，以高弟入为长安令。
现代文：陈咸举荐萧育、朱博担任幕府属官，王凤对朱博的才能感到很惊奇，就推举朱博当了橾阳令，后来又调到云阳、平陵县，由于政绩最佳入京任长安令。
English: Chen Xian recommended Xiao Yu and Zhu Bo to serve as officials of the shogunate. Wang Feng was very surprised by Zhu Bo's talent. He recommended Zhu Bo to be the commander of Shenyang. Later, he was transferred to Yunyang and Pingling County, and because of his best political performance, he was appointed to Beijing as the commander of Chang'an.

古文：京师治理，迁冀州刺史。
现代文：京都清明安定，升任冀州刺史。
English: Kyoto is clear and stable, and has been promoted to the post of Jizhou chief historian.

古文：博本武吏，不更文法，及为刺史行部，吏民数百人遮道自言，官寺尽满。从事白请且留此县录见诸自言者，事毕乃发，欲以观试博。
现代文：朱博本来是武官，没有经历过用法令条文办事的文职，等到当了刺史巡视部属时，官吏和百姓几百人拦路自行投诉，官署都满了，从事来禀告，请求暂时留在这个县，登记会见各个自行投诉的人，事情办完了再出发，想要以此来观察试探朱博。
English: Zhu Bo was originally a military attaché, and had never experienced a civil service that used the provisions of laws and regulations. When he was inspecting subordinates, hundreds of officials and ordinary people blocked the road to make complaints on their own. The government offices were full. They were engaged in obituaries, requested to stay in this county temporarily, registered to meet with various self-complainers, completed the matter and then set off. They wanted to use this to observe and test Zhu Bo.

古文：博心知之，告外趣驾。
现代文：朱博心裹明白，告诉外边赶快准备车马。
English: Zhu Bo knew it in his heart and told the outside world to quickly prepare the horses and chariots.

古文：既白驾办，博出就车见自言者，使从事明敕告吏民： 欲言县丞尉者，刺史不察黄绶，各自诣郡。
现代文：从事禀告说车马已经备好，朱博出来登车会见自行投诉的人，派遣从事明确地告谕官吏百姓： 想要投诉县裹丞尉的，刺史不监察黄绶的官员，各人自己到郡里去。
English: Zhu Bo came out and boarded the car to meet with the self-complainers, and sent officials to clearly tell the people: If you want to complain to the county's lieutenant, the officials who do not supervise Huang Qi, each person should go to the county.

古文：欲言二千石墨绶长吏者，使者行部还，诣治所。
现代文：想要投诉二千石的墨绶长吏的，等使者巡视部属回来，到刺史的官署去。
English: If you want to file a complaint against a 2,000-koku inkstone official, wait for the emissary to return from his inspection, and then go to the government office.

古文：其民为吏所冤，及言盗贼辞讼事，各使属其部从事。 
现代文：百姓被官吏所冤枉，以及投诉强盗小偷诉讼之事的，要到各自所属的部从事那裹。 
English: People who have been wronged by officials, as well as those who have filed complaints against robbers and thieves, should go to their respective departments to do so.

古文：博驻车决遣，四五百人皆罢去，如神。
现代文：朱博停车判决发落，四五百人都离去了，如同神明。
English: When the Zhu Bo parking decision was issued, four or five hundred people left, like gods.

古文：吏民大惊，不意博应事变乃至于此。
现代文：官吏百姓大为震惊，没有料到朱博应付事情变故竟然到了这种地步。
English: The officials and people were greatly shocked. They did not expect Zhu Bo to cope with the turn of events to such an extent.

古文：后博徐问，果老从事教民聚会。
现代文：后来朱博慢慢查问，果然是老从事教唆百姓集会。
English: Later, Zhu Bo slowly inquired, and it turned out that he was always engaged in instigating people to gather.

古文：博杀此吏，州郡畏博威严。
现代文：朱博杀了这个官吏，州郡都畏惧朱博的威严。
English: Zhu Bo killed this official, the state and county are afraid of Zhu Bo's majesty.

古文：徙为并州刺史、护漕都尉，迁琅邪太守。
现代文：朱博调任并州刺史、护漕都尉，升为琅邪太守。
English: Zhu Bo was transferred to the post of the governor of the state and the captain of the guard boat, and was promoted to the governor of Shiyan.

古文：齐舒缓养名，博新视事，右曹掾史皆移病卧。
现代文：齐郡风俗是人们都性情迟缓，白高自大来涵养名声，朱博刚刚任职，右曹掾史都移书称病，卧床不起。
English: The custom of Qi County is that people are all temperamentally retarded, white-haired and arrogant to cultivate fame, Zhu Bo has just taken office, and the right Cao Yu Shi has moved his letter to say that he is ill and is bedridden.

古文：博问其故，对言： 惶恐！
现代文：朱博询问原因，回答说： 恐惧！
English: Zhu Bo asked the reason and replied, "Fear!

古文：故事二千石新到，辄遣吏存问致意，乃敢起就职。 
现代文：按照先例，二千石的太守刚刚到任，总要派遣官员慰问，表达问候之意，我们才敢起来正式任职。 
English: According to precedent, the 2,000-koku daimyo has just taken office, and we must always send officials to offer condolences and greetings before we dare to officially take office.

古文：博奋髯抵几曰： 观齐儿欲以此为俗邪！ 
现代文：朱博气得胡须直立，拍击案桌说： 看齐郡的小子们难道想要把这作为习俗吗！ 
English: Zhu Bo's beard stood straight up in anger, he slapped the case table and said, "Do the children of Qi County really want to make this a custom?

古文：乃召见诸曹史书佐及县大吏，选视其可用者，出教置之。
现代文：朱博于是召见各个曹史书佐和县大吏，挑选其中看起来可以任用的，发布教令让他们填补空缺。
English: Zhu Bo then summoned all the Cao Shushi deputies and county officials, selected those who seemed to be available for appointment, and issued an edict for them to fill the vacancies.

古文：皆斥罢诸病吏，白巾走出府门。
现代文：驱逐罢免各个称病的官吏，让他们戴着白巾走出府署大门。
English: Expel and remove officials who call in sick, and make them wear a white scarf when they walk out the front door of the prefectural office.

古文：郡中大惊。
现代文：郡中大为震惊。
English: The county was stunned.

古文：顷之，门下掾赣遂耆老大儒，教授数百人，拜起舒迟。
现代文：不久，门下掾赣遂是年老受人尊重的大儒者，为几百人传授学业，拜见起身行动迟缓。
English: Before long, his disciple Zou was an old and respected great Confucian, teaching several hundred people, and he was slow to get up.

古文：博出教主簿： 赣老生不习吏礼，主簿且教拜起，闲习乃止。 
现代文：朱博出来训示土簿说： 赣遂老儒生，不熟悉官吏的礼节，主簿暂且教他跪拜起坐，直到熟习为止。 
English: Zhu Bo came out to instruct the mudbook and said, "This old Confucian student is not familiar with the etiquette of officials. The master book temporarily teaches him to kneel and sit up until he is familiar with it.

古文：又敕功曹： 官属多褒衣大袑，不中节度，自今掾史衣皆令去地三寸。 
现代文：又告谕功曹： 属吏大多穿着宽衣大裤，不符合规则制度，从今以后，掾史都让衣服离地三寸。 
English: He also told Gong Cao: Most of the subordinate officials wore wide-legged trousers, which did not conform to the rules and regulations. From now on, all officials should keep their clothes three inches off the ground.

古文：博尤不爱诸生，所至郡辄罢去议曹，曰： 岂可复置谋曹邪！ 
现代文：朱博特别不喜欢诸生，所到之郡就废弃议曹，说： 哪裹能够再设置议曹呢！ 
English: Zhu Bo especially disliked all beings. Whenever he came to a county, he would abandon the councilor and say, "How can I set up a councilor again?"

古文：文学儒吏时有奏记称说云云，博见谓曰： 如太守汉吏，奉三尺律令以从事耳，亡奈生所言圣人道何也！
现代文：文学儒吏不时有呈交文书言事而引经据典等等。朱博看到后对他们说： 像太守是汉室官员，奉行三尺法律条令来处理事务罢了，和你所说的圣人大道没有关系。
English: From time to time, literary Confucian officials would present documents and quotations, quote scriptures, and so on. Zhu Bo saw this and said to them, "It's just like the emperor is an official of the Han family, and only follows the three-foot law to handle affairs. It has nothing to do with what you said about the sage road."

古文：且持此道归，尧、舜君出，为陈说之。 
现代文：暂且拿着你的大道回去，尧舜出现时，再为他们陈述。 
English: For the time being, take your road back, and when the baboons appear, make a statement for them.

古文：其折逆人如此。
现代文：他就是像这样来挫折扫绝别人。
English: That's how he frustrates and turns people off.

古文：视事数年，大改其俗，掾史礼节如梦、赵吏。
现代文：朱博任职几年，大大改变了齐郡的风俗，掾史的礼节就和楚、趟的官吏一样了。
English: Zhu Bo served for several years and greatly changed the customs of Qi County. The etiquette of Zou Shi was the same as that of the officials of Chu and Wa.

古文：博治郡，常令属县各用其豪桀以为大吏，文武从宜。
现代文：朱博治理郡县，经常让属县各自任用当地豪杰作大吏，或文或武各从所宜。
English: In the administration of counties and counties in Zhubo, local heroes were often appointed by their respective counties to serve as officials, either civil or military, as appropriate.

古文：县有剧贼及它非常，博辄移书以诡责之。
现代文：县裹有了势力强大的盗贼以及其他突如其来的变故，朱博就移送文书去责成他们办理。
English: When there were powerful thieves and other sudden changes in the county, Zhu Bo transferred the document to them and ordered them to handle it.

古文：其尽力有效，必加厚赏；怀诈不称，诛罚辄行。以是豪强慹服。
现代文：其中竭尽才力有成效的，一定给以丰厚的奖赏；心怀欺诈不称职的，惩罚立时施行，因此豪强慑服。
English: Among them, those who have exerted their talents and achieved results must be given a rich reward; those who are fraudulent and incompetent will be punished immediately, so they will be deterred.

古文：姑幕县有群辈八人报仇廷中，皆不得。
现代文：姑幕县有朋辈八个人在县廷中报仇杀人，都没有被抓获。
English: Eight people of the same generation in Gubu County committed revenge killings in the county court, but none of them were caught.

古文：长吏自系书言府，贼曹掾史自白请至姑幕。事留不出。
现代文：长吏亲自带着文书上报太守府，贼曹掾史自我表白心迹，请求到姑幕去，事情被搁留，没有发出指示。
English: The chieftain personally brought the document to the Tai Shoufu, the thief Cao Yanshi confessed his intentions and asked to go to the aunt's tent. The matter was put on hold and no instructions were issued.

古文：功曹诸掾即皆自白，复不出。
现代文：功曹诸掾就都去自我表白，又没有发出。
English: All the meritorious persons went to declare themselves, but they did not do so.

古文：于是府丞诣阁，博乃见丕丞掾曰： 以为县自有长吏，府未尝与也，丞掾谓府当与之邪？ 
现代文：于是府丞到太守府，朱博才接见丞掾说： 我认为县裹自己有长吏，府裹从来没有参预过，丞掾认为府裹应当参预这件事吗？ 
English: As a result, Fucho went to the governor's office, and it was not until Zhu Bo met with Fucho that Fucho said, "I think the county has its own officials. Fucho has never participated in the preliminaries. Does Fucho think that Fucho should participate in the preliminaries?

古文：阁下书佐入，博口占檄文曰： 府告姑幕令丞：言贼发不得，有书。
现代文：门下的书佐进来，朱博不用起草，随口拟出檄文说： 府裹通告姑幕令丞：报告说盗贼兴起没有捕获，有县裹的文书。
English: When Zhu Bo's assistant came in, he didn't need to draft, he just made up a copy of the document and said, "The government has issued a notice, but there is no arrest. There is a document from the county.

古文：檄到，令丞就职，游檄王卿力有余，如律令！ 
现代文：檄文一到，令丞就任职位，游徼王卿没有尽力，完成法律规定的职责！ 
English: As soon as the decree arrived, Rongcheng assumed the post, and Youjun Wangqing did not do his best to complete the duties stipulated by the law!

古文：王卿得敕惶怖，亲属失色，昼夜驰鹜，十余日间捕得五人。
现代文：王卿收到檄文非常恐惧，亲属惊慌失色，王卿昼夜奔走，十几天裹抓获了五个人。
English: Wang Xing was very frightened when he received the letter, and his relatives panicked. Wang Xing ran around day and night, and captured five people in just ten days.

古文：博复移书曰： 王卿忧公甚效！
现代文：朱博又移送文书说： 王卿为公家忧虑，很有成效！
English: Zhu Bo also transferred a document saying: Wang Xing is worried about the public, it is very effective!

古文：檄到，赍伐阅诣府。
现代文：檄文一到，带着记功簿到府裹来。
English: As soon as the letter arrived, he came to the house with a workbook.

古文：部掾以下亦可用，渐尽其余矣。 
现代文：所属的掾史以下也可以任用，慢慢再捕获其余的几个人。 
English: The following members of Zou Shi can also be appointed, and the remaining few people can be slowly captured.

古文：其操持下，皆此类也。
现代文：他掌握控制下属，都是这一类的事。
English: That's the kind of thing he does to control his subordinates.

古文：以高弟入守左冯翊，满岁为真。
现代文：朱博由于政绩突出而入京试职当了左冯翊，满一年后正式任职。
English: Zhu Bo, due to his outstanding political achievements, entered Beijing on a trial basis as Zuo Fengyao, and officially took office one year later.

古文：其治左冯翊，文理聪明殊不及薛宣，而多武谲，网络张设，少爱利，敢诛杀。
现代文：他管理左冯翊，礼文仪节、明智聪察很是比不上薛宣，却多用武力和狡诈，能够张设罗网，缺乏仁爱，不能给人便利，敢于惩处杀戮。
English: He managed Zuo Fengyao, and his etiquette and wisdom were not as good as Xue Xuan's, but he used more force and cunning, was able to set traps, lacked benevolence, could not give people convenience, and dared to punish and kill.

古文：然亦纵舍，时有大贷，下吏以此为尽力。
现代文：然而也能放松施舍，不时有所宽免，属下官吏因此为他竭尽才力。
English: However, he was also able to relax his almsgiving, from time to time granting indulgences, so his subordinate officials did their best for him.

古文：长陵大姓尚方禁少时尝盗人妻，见斫，创著其颊。
现代文：长陵大姓尚方禁，年轻时曾经盗取别人的妻子，被砍伤，伤口留在了他的脸颊上。
English: Changling's eldest son, Shang Fanghan, stole another man's wife when he was young. He was slashed and the wound was left on his cheek.

古文：府功曹受赂，白除禁调守尉。
现代文：府功曹收取了贿赂，禀告府裹任命尚方禁为调守尉。
English: Fu Gong Cao received a bribe and accused Fu Wai of appointing Shang Fang Zong as a guard lieutenant.

古文：博闻知，以它事召见，视其面，果有瘢。
现代文：朱博听说之后，用别的公事召他来进见，看他的脸，果然有瘢痕。
English: After Zhu Bo heard about it, he called him in to see him on other official business. He looked at his face, and sure enough, there were scars.

古文：博辟左右问禁： 是何等创也？ 
现代文：朱博让左右避开，询问尚方禁： 遣是什么样的创伤？ 
English: Zhu Bozhong dodged left and right, asking Shang Fanghan: What kind of trauma is it?

古文：禁自知情得，叩头服状。
现代文：尚方禁自己知道实情已被朱博得知，以头叩地，承认情状。
English: Shang Fanghan himself knew that the truth had been learned by Zhu Bo, and acknowledged the situation with a head slap.

古文：博笑曰： 丈夫固时有是。
现代文：朱博笑着说： 大丈夫本来时常有这情欲之事。
English: Zhu Bo said with a smile: It's okay, men often have this kind of lust.

古文：冯翊欲洒卿耻，抆拭用禁，能自效不？ 
现代文：冯翊想要洗雪你的耻辱，重新任用你，能够主动效力吗？ 
English: If Feng Xuan wants to wash away your shame and reappoint you, can he take the initiative?

古文：禁且喜且惧，对曰： 必死！ 
现代文：尚方禁又高兴又害怕，回答说： 一定尽死力！ 
English: Both happy and afraid, Shangfang replied, "I will do my best!"

古文：博因敕禁： 毋得泄语，有便宜，辄记言。 
现代文：朱博于是告诫尚方禁： 不得泄露谈话，有应办的事，就记下来告诉我。 
English: Zhu Bo then cautioned Shang Fangyan: Do not divulge the conversation. If you have something to do, write it down and tell me.

古文：因亲信之以为耳目。
现代文：于是亲近信任他，作为自己的耳目。
English: So he trusted him closely, as his own eyes and ears.

古文：禁晨夜发起部中盗贼及它伏奸，有功效。
现代文：尚方禁早晚揭发部裹的盗贼以及其他潜伏的奸人，有功绩。
English: Shangfang Forbidden has made great achievements in exposing thieves and other lurking traitors.

古文：博擢禁连守县令。
现代文：朱博提拔尚方禁接连地试职当县令。
English: Zhu Bo promoted Shang Fang to be the county magistrate.

古文：久之，召见功曹，闭阁数责以禁等事，与笔札使自记， 积受取一钱以上，无得有所匿。
现代文：过了很久，朱博召见功曹，关上阁门，用尚方禁等人的事情来数落责备他，给他纸笔，让他自己记下，告诉他说： 累计接受索取一文钱以上，不得有所隐瞒。
English: After a long time, Zhu Bo summoned Gong Cao, closed the door of the attic, blamed him with the things of Shang Fangban and others, gave him a pen and paper, let him write it down, and told him: If you have received more than one penny in total, you must not hide anything.

古文：欺谩半言，断头矣！ 
现代文：有半句假话，就会断头！ 
English: If you tell half a lie, your head will be chopped off!

古文：功曹惶怖，具自疏奸臧，大小不敢隐。
现代文：功曹恐惧，自己全部写出脏款，或大或小不敢隐瞒。
English: Due to fear, he wrote out all the dirty money himself, and did not dare to hide it, big or small.

古文：博知其对以实，乃令就席，受敕自改而已。
现代文：朱博知道他是按照实际情况来答对，就让他回到座位上，接受诫饬自己改正罢了。
English: Zhu Bo knew that he was answering correctly according to the actual situation, so he just let him return to his seat, accept the commandments and correct himself.

古文：投刀使削所记，遣出就职。
现代文：扔下刀子让他削去所记录的东西，放他出府就任职位。
English: Throw down the knife and make him erase what he has recorded, and let him leave the government to take up his post.

古文：功曹后常战栗，不敢蹉跌，博遂成就之。
现代文：功曹后来常常恐惧发抖，不敢有所失误。
English: Later, Gong Cao often trembled with fear and dared not make a mistake.

古文：迁为大司农。
现代文：朱博于是使他进身显达。朱博升任大司农。
English: Zhu Bo then promoted him to the post of chief agronomist.

古文：岁余，坐小法，左迁犍为太守。
现代文：一年多后，犯了小遇错，降职当了犍为太守。
English: A little more than a year later, he made a small mistake and was demoted to the position of crown prince.

古文：先是，南蛮若儿数为寇盗，博厚结其昆弟，使为反间，袭杀之，郡中清。
现代文：此前南蛮若儿屡次成为盗贼，朱博深厚结交他的兄弟，让他们作内应，袭击杀死若儿，郡中清静。
English: Previously, Nanban's younger son had repeatedly become a thief, Zhu Bo had deep friendships with his brothers, let them meddle, attacked and killed the younger son, and the county was calm.

古文：徙为山阳太守，病免官。
现代文：朱博调任山阳太守，因为生病而免去官职。
English: Zhu Bo was transferred to the post of Sanyang Dazhong, but was relieved of his post due to illness.

古文：复征为光禄大夫，迁廷尉，职典决疑，当讠献平天下狱。
现代文：又被征召当了光禄大夫，升任廷尉，职责是掌管解决疑难之事，主持平议天下的狱讼。
English: He was also conscripted as a doctor of Guanglu and promoted to court lieutenant. His duties were to be in charge of resolving difficult matters and presiding over the settlement of prison lawsuits around the world.

古文：博恐为官属所诬，视事，召见正监典法掾史，谓曰： 廷尉本起于武吏，不通法律，幸有众贤，亦何忧！
现代文：朱博担心被属吏所欺骗，任职后，召见正监典法掾史，对他们说： 廷尉本来是从武官出身，不通晓法律，幸而有诸位贤吏，又有什么可担忧的！
English: Zhu Bo was worried about being deceived by subordinate officials. After taking office, he summoned the chief inspector of the Law and History, and said to them: The imperial lieutenant was originally from a military officer, and does not understand the law. Fortunately, there are all the wise officials, and there is nothing to worry about!

古文：然廷尉治郡断狱以来且二十年，亦独耳剽日久，三尺律令，人事出其中。
现代文：然而廷尉自从治理郡县，判决狱讼以来将近二十年，单单是耳濡目染的时间也很长了，三尺法律条文，人事尽在其中。
English: However, it has been nearly 20 years since the Lieutenant Governor took over the administration of counties and counties and sentenced people to prison. This is a long time to be blind and deaf. There are many legal provisions and many people involved.

古文：掾史试与正监共撰前世决事吏议难知者数十事，持以问廷尉，得为诸君覆意之。 
现代文：掾史试着和正监一起写出过去判决狱讼时官吏讨论难以明白的几十个案件，拿来询问廷尉，廷尉能够替你们再行臆断。 
English: Zou Shi tried to work with the chief warden to write down dozens of cases that were difficult to understand when the officials discussed the prison proceedings in the past, and used them to ask the court officer. The court officer can make a second guess for you.

古文：正监以为博苟强，意未必能然，即共条白焉。
现代文：正监认为朱博衹是要逞强，料想他不一定能够做到，就一起逐条陈述出来。
English: The chief supervisor thought that Zhu Bozhong was trying to be strong-willed, and thought that he might not be able to do it, so he made a detailed statement.

古文：博皆召掾史，并坐而问，为平处其轻重，十中八九。
现代文：朱博把掾史都召来，一同坐着来问难，朱博为他们判断刑罚的轻重，十个裹说对了八九个。
English: Zhu Bo summoned all the scholars and sat down with them to discuss the problem. Zhu Bo judged the severity of the punishment for them, and he was right in eighty-nine out of ten cases.

古文：官属咸服博之疏略，材过人也。
现代文：属吏都佩服朱博的干练，才能超过常人。
English: Officials all admire Zhu Bo's ability to surpass ordinary people.

古文：每迁徙易官，所到辄出奇谲如此，以明示下为不可欺者。
现代文：朱博每次升调改换官职，所到之处总是像这样来显出变幻莫测，以明确地告诉卜属长官自己是不可以欺瞒的。
English: Every time Zhu Bo was promoted, transferred or changed his official position, he always showed the vagaries of wherever he went, so as to clearly tell the chief of the Bu clan that he could not deceive himself.

古文：久之，迁后将军，与红阳侯立相善。
现代文：过了很久，朱博升任后将军，和红阳侯立相友善。
English: After a long time, Zhu Bo was promoted to general and became friendly with Hongyang Houli.

古文：立有罪就国，有司奏立党友，博坐免。
现代文：王立有罪回到封地去，有司举奏王立的党羽和朋友，朱博坐罪免官。
English: Wang Li was found guilty and went back to his fiefdom. A magistrate punished Wang Li's followers and friends. Zhu Bo was found guilty and removed from office.

古文：后岁余，哀帝即位，以博名臣，召见，起家复为光禄大夫，迁为京兆尹，数月超为大司空。
现代文：后来过了一年多，哀帝登上帝位，由于朱博是有名的大臣，就召见他，朱博从家裹被起用，又当了光禄大夫，升任京兆尹，几个月后超擢为大司空。
English: Later, after more than a year, Emperor Ai ascended to the throne. Since Zhu Bo was a famous minister, he was summoned to see him. Zhu Bo was appointed from his family, and became the doctor of Guanglu, was promoted to Jing Zhaoyun, and a few months later was promoted to the chief secretary of the sky.

古文：初，汉兴袭秦官，置丞相、御史大夫、太尉。
现代文：当初，汉朝兴起，承袭了秦代官制，设置丞相、御史大夫、太尉。
English: At first, the Han Dynasty arose, inheriting the official system of the Qin Dynasty, and setting up the position of chancellor, chief historian, and first lieutenant.

古文：至武帝罢太尉，始置大司马以冠将军之号，非有印绶官属也。
现代文：到武帝时废罢太尉，才设置了大司马，冠以将军的称号，没有印信属吏。
English: It was not until Emperor Wu abolished the position of captain that the position of grand steward was created, with the title of general, and there was no official responsible for the seal.

古文：及成帝时，何武为九卿，建言： 古者民朴事约，国之辅佐必得贤圣，然犹则天三光，备三公官，各有分职。
现代文：到成帝时，何武是九卿之一，建议说： 古时候百姓质朴，政事简约，国家的辅佐大臣一定要选用贤人圣人，然而还要效法天上的月星三光，设置三公的官位，各有专职。
English: At the time of Emperor Chengdu, He Wu was one of the nine nobles. He suggested that: In ancient times, the people were simple and the government was simple. The assistant minister of the state must choose a sage. However, it was necessary to follow the example of the moon and three stars in the sky and set up three official ranks, each with a full-time job.

古文：今末俗之弊，政事烦多，宰相之材不能及古，而丞相独兼三公之事，所以久废而不治也。
现代文：现在末世的衰败习俗是，政事烦杂，宰相的才能无法比得上古代，而丞相一个人兼任三公的职事，所以政治长久地衰败而不能清明安定。
English: Now the custom of decline in the last days is that politics is complicated, the talent of the prime minister cannot match that of the ancient times, and the prime minister is also responsible for the duties of the three princes, so politics has been in decline for a long time and cannot be clear and stable.

古文：宜建三公官，定卿大夫之任，分职授政，以考功效。 
现代文：应该设置三公的官位，确定卿大夫的责任，划分职务，授与政事，来考察功绩成效。 
English: It is necessary to set up the official ranks of the three princes, determine the responsibilities of the noble doctor, divide the duties, award the government affairs, and examine the achievements and effectiveness.

古文：其后上以问师安昌侯张禹，禹以为然。
现代文：过后皇上询问老师安昌侯张禹。张禹认为何武的意见是对的。
English: Afterward, the emperor asked the teacher Anchang Hou Zhang Yu. Zhang Yu thought He Wu's opinion was right.

古文：时曲阳侯王根为大司马票骑将军，而何武为御史大夫。
现代文：当时曲阳侯王根任大司马骠骑将军，而何武任御史大夫。
English: At that time, Wang Gen, the lord of Quyang, held the post of grand secretary of the Horse Cavalry General, while He Wu held the post of chief historian.

古文：于是上赐曲阳侯根大司马印绶，置官属，罢票骑将军官，以御史大夫何武为大司空，封列侯，皆增奉如丞相，以备三公官焉。
现代文：于是皇上赐给曲阳侯王根大司马的印信，设置属吏，罢除骠骑将军的官位，任命御史大夫何武为大司空，封为列侯，俸禄都增加到和丞相一样，来备足三公的官位。
English: As a result, the emperor gave the seal letter to Quyang marquis Wang Gen Daisima, set up subordinate officials, dismissed the official rank of the cavalry general, appointed goshi daifu He Wu as Daisiku, and made him a vassal, and the salary was increased to the same as that of the prime minister, to prepare for the official rank of the three dukes.

古文：议者多以为古今异制，汉自天下之号下至佐史皆不同于古，而独改三公，职事难分明，无益于治乱。
现代文：议论的人大多认为古代和现在制度不同，汉朝从天子的尊号下到佐史都和古代不相同，而仅仅改动了三公，职务很难分辨明确，对政事治理没有益处。
English: Most of the commentators think that the ancient system is different from the current one, and that the Han Dynasty is different from the ancient one from the title of the Son of Heaven to the Sasifu, but only the three officials have been changed. It is difficult to distinguish the posts clearly, and it is not beneficial to the governance of political affairs.

古文：是时，御史府吏舍百余区井水皆竭；又其府中列柏树，常有野乌数千栖宿其上，晨去暮来，号日 朝夕乌 ，乌去不来者数月，长老异之。
现代文：当时御史府官员的一百多处住所的井水都干涸了；又御史府中有众多的柏树，常常有几千只野乌鸦栖息在上面，晨去暮来称为 朝夕乌，乌鸦飞走几个月没有回来，年长的人对此感到非常奇异。
English: At that time, the well water of more than a hundred residences of the officials of the Imperial History Museum had dried up; there were also many cypress trees in the Imperial History Museum, and there were often several thousand wild crows perched on them. They were called morning and evening crows from dawn to dusk. The crows flew away and did not return for several months, and the older people felt very strange about this.

古文：后二岁余，朱博为大司空，奏言： 帝王之道不必相袭，各由时务。
现代文：后来过了两年多。朱博任大司空，上奏说： 帝王的治国之道不一定要互相承袭，都根据当世的要务而各有变化。
English: More than two years later, Zhu Bo, who was appointed as the Grand Secretary of the Empty Palace, said in his report: The emperors' way of governing the country does not necessarily have to be inherited from each other, they all have changes according to the important tasks of the present world.

古文：高皇帝以圣德受命，建立鸿业，置御史大夫，位次丞相，典正法度，以职相参，总领百官，上下相监临，历载二百年，天下安宁。
现代文：高皇帝以圣德接受天命，创建王业，设置御史大夫，地位次于丞相，掌管整饬法律制度，按照职责来参预政事，统辖百官，上下级相互监督，经历二百年时间，天下安定平静。
English: Emperor Gao accepted the destiny of heaven with sanctity, founded Wangye, set up the imperial historian, whose position was second only to the prime minister, took charge of rectifying the legal system, participated in political affairs in accordance with his duties, supervised hundreds of officials, and supervised each other at the upper and lower levels. After 200 years, the world was stable and calm.

古文：今更为大司空，与丞相同位，未获嘉祐。
现代文：现在改为大司空，和丞相同等地位，没有得到神明的佑护。
English: Now it has been changed to Daishi Ku, the same status as Nojo, and has not been blessed by the gods.

古文：故事，选郡国守相高第为中二千石，选中二千石为御史大夫，任职者为丞相，位次有序，所以尊圣德，重国相也。
现代文：按照先例，挑选郡国守相政绩突出的当中二千石的官员，挑选中二千石的官员任御史大夫，胜任职位的当丞相，地位等次很有顺序，以此来尊崇皇上圣德、尊重国家宰相。
English: According to the precedent, officials with 2,000 koku were selected from those with outstanding achievements in county, province, province, province, province, province, province, province, province, province, province, province, province, province, province, province, province, province, province, province, province, province, province, province, province, province, province, province, province, province, province, province, province, province, province, province, province.

古文：今中二千石未更御史大夫而为丞相，权轻，非所以重国政也。
现代文：现在中二千石的官员没有经历御史大夫而任丞相，权力很轻，不是尊重国家政治的方法。
English: It is not a way to respect national politics to have an official of 2,000 koku who has never been an Imperial Historian become the prime minister. The power is very light.

古文：臣愚以为大司空官可罢，复置御史大夫，遵奉旧制。
现代文：我认为大司空的官位可以废弃，重新设置御史大夫，遵循原来的官制。
English: I think that the position of the Grand Secretary can be abandoned, and the position of the Chief Historian can be re-established, following the original official system.

古文：臣愿尽力，以御史大夫为百僚率。 
现代文：我愿意竭尽才力，任御史大夫来作百官的表率。 
English: I am willing to do my best to make Dr. Goshi a role model for hundreds of officials.

古文：哀帝从之，乃更拜博为御史大夫。
现代文：哀帝听从了他的意见，就改任他为御史大夫。
English: Emperor Aye listened to his advice, and appointed him to the post of Imperial Historian.

古文：会大司马喜免，以阳安侯丁明为大司马卫将军，置官属，大司马冠号如故事。
现代文：适逢大司马傅喜免官，哀帝就任命阳安侯丁明为大司马卫将军，设置属吏，大司马冠以将军的称号和原来一样。
English: When the grand secretary Ma Fu Xi was relieved of his post, Emperor Ai appointed Yang Anhou Dingming as the grand secretary Ma Wei, and set up subordinate officials. The grand secretary Ma Guan was given the title of general, which was the same as before.

古文：后四岁，哀帝遂改丞相为大司徒，复置大司空、大司马焉。
现代文：后来过了四年，哀帝就改丞相为大司徒，又设置了大司空、大司马。
English: Later, after four years, Emperor Ai changed the chancellor to the grand steward, and set up the grand steward of the sky and the grand steward of the horse.

古文：初，何武为大司空，又与丞相方进共奏言： 古选诸侯贤者以为州伯，《书》曰 咨十有二牧 ，所以广聪明，烛幽隐也。
现代文：当初，何武任大司空，又和丞相翟方进一起上奏说： 古时候挑选诸侯中有德才的人作州伯，《书》上说： 和十二个州伯商量。 
English: At first, He Wu, who was assigned to the position of the Grand Secretary of the Empty Palace, also made a report with the Minister of Justice, Gong Fangjin, saying, "In ancient times, people of virtue and talent were selected from various provinces to serve as prefects. The book said, "Consult with twelve prefects."

古文：今部刺史居牧伯之位，秉一州之统，选第大吏，所荐位高至九卿，所恶立退，任重职大。
现代文：这是用来扩展视听范围、明察隐微之处的方法。现在部刺史占据州伯的官位，主持一州的纲纪，挑选推举大吏，所举荐的官位高达九卿，所厌恶的马上斥退，责任重而职权大。
English: This is a method used to expand the audio-visual scope and see the subtleties. At present, the Department of History occupies the position of prefect of a prefecture, presides over the discipline of a prefecture, selects and promotes officials, and recommends up to nine officials. Those who are disgusted are immediately expelled. The responsibility is heavy and the authority is large.

古文：《春秋》之义，用贵治贱，不以卑临尊。
现代文：《春秋》的大义，是任用尊贵的人来管理卑贱的人，不用地位低的来统管地位高的。
English: The great virtue of "Spring and Autumn" is to appoint noble people to manage low-ranking people, and not to use low-ranking people to manage high-ranking people.

古文：刺史位下大夫，而临二千石，轻重不相准，失位次之序。
现代文：刺史地位在大夫之下，却统管二千石的官员，轻重不相称，丧失了地位等级的次序。
English: An official with a historical status below a doctor, but in charge of 2,000 koku, is not commensurate with a higher-ranking official, and has lost the order of rank.

古文：臣请罢刺史，更置州牧，以应古制。 
现代文：我们请求废弃刺史，改设州牧，来应合古代的制度。 
English: We request that the history be scrapped and the state pastorate be set up to conform to the ancient system.

古文：奏可。
现代文：奏书被批准了。
English: The Emperor assents.

古文：及博奏复御史大夫官，又奏言： 汉家至德溥大，宇内万里，立置郡县。
现代文：到朱博奏请恢复御史大夫的官位时，又上奏说： 汉家至德广大，在天下万里疆域裹设置郡县。
English: When Zhu Bozo asked for the reinstatement of the official rank of Imperial Historian, he also said: The Han family is very broad and has set up counties in the vast territory of the world.

古文：部刺史奉使典州，督察郡国，吏民安宁。
现代文：部刺史奉命主管一州的政务，监督考察郡国，官吏和百姓都安定平静。
English: He was ordered to be in charge of the government affairs of a state, supervise and inspect the county, and the officials and the people were stable and calm.

古文：故事，居部九岁举为守相，其有异材功效著者辄登擢，秩卑而赏厚，咸劝功乐进。
现代文：按照先例，在部任职九年的举荐为守相，其中有卓异的才能、功绩显著的就进升提拔，职位低而奖赏丰厚，官员都勉力立功乐于进取。
English: According to the precedent, the recommendation of nine years of service in the ministry is to keep the phase, among which there are outstanding talents, remarkable achievements, promotion and promotion, low positions and rich rewards, officials are trying their best to be meritorious and enterprising.

古文：前丞相方进奏罢刺史，更置州牧，秩真二千石，位次九卿。
现代文：先前丞相翟方进奏请废弃刺史，改设州牧，俸禄为真二千石，地位次于九卿。
English: The previous chancellor, Shifang Jinso, asked for the abolition of Shishi and the establishment of the state pastorate, with a salary of 2,000 koku and a status second only to that of the nine nobles.

古文：九卿缺，以高第补，其中材则苟自守而已，恐功效陵夷，奸轨不禁。
现代文：九卿空缺，用政绩突出的州牧来补充，那么中等才能的人就会苟且保住自己罢了，恐怕功绩会衰败，为非作歹的人会制止不住。
English: If the position of the nine emperors is vacant and is filled by a state patriarch with outstanding political achievements, then a person of average talent will only be able to hold on to himself. I am afraid that his achievements will decline and that he will not be able to stop those who do evil.

古文：臣请罢州牧，置刺史如故。 
现代文：我请求废弃州牧，像原来那样设置刺史。 奏书被批准了。
English: I requested that the state pastorate be abolished and that the history be set up as it was before. The petition was approved.

古文：奏可。博为人廉俭，不好酒色游宴。
现代文：朱博为人廉正节俭，不喜爱美酒女色游玩宴乐。
English: Zhu Bo is an honest and frugal person, and does not like to drink wine, have sex, and enjoy banquets.

古文：自微贱至富贵，食不重味，案上不过三怀，夜寝早起，妻希见其面。
现代文：从卑微低贱到富有尊贵，吃饭没有多种菜肴，案桌上不超过三个碗盘。夜裹安寝，很早起床，妻子很少能见他一面。
English: From humble and lowly to rich and noble, he does not eat a variety of dishes, and there are no more than three bowls on the desk. He goes to bed at night, gets up very early, and his wife rarely sees him.

古文：有一女，无男。
现代文：有一个女儿，没有儿子。
English: They have a daughter but no son.

古文：然好乐士大夫，为郡守九卿，宾客满门，欲仕宦者荐举之，欲报仇怨者解剑以带之。
现代文：然而他乐于交结士大夫，当郡守九卿时，宾客满门，想要做官的就推举他，想要报仇的就解下佩剑给他带上。
English: However, he was happy to make friends with doctors. When the county governor, Jiuqing, came, the door was full of guests. If you wanted to be an official, you elected him. If you wanted to take revenge, you untied your sword and brought it to him.

古文：其趋事待士如是，博以此自立，然终用败。
现代文：朱博像这样来趋办世事，对待士人，因此凭自己的力量有所建树，然而最终还是因此败亡。
English: Zhu Bo dealt with the world and the scholars in this way, so he built something with his own strength, but eventually he was defeated.

古文：初，哀帝祖母定陶太后欲求称尊号，太后从弟高武侯傅喜为大司马，与丞相孔光、大司空师丹共持正议。
现代文：当初，哀帝的祖母定陶太后想要求取尊号，太后的堂弟高武侯傅喜任大司马，和丞相孔光、大司空师丹一起坚持正直的主张。
English: At first, the deceased emperor's grandmother, Empress Dowager Ding Tao, wanted to claim the honorific title, while the Empress Dowager's cousin, Gao Wu Hou Fu Xi Ren Da Sima, insisted on the principle of honesty, together with the Minister of War, Kong Guang, and Da Sifu, Ku Shidan.

古文：孔乡侯傅晏亦太后从弟，谄谀欲顺指，会博新征用为京兆尹，与交结，谋成尊号，以广孝道。
现代文：孔乡侯傅晏也是太后的堂弟，阿谀谄媚想要顺从太后的意旨，适逢朱博刚刚被征召任用为京兆尹，就和他相勾结，图谋使太后获取尊号，来推广孝道。
English: Kongxiang Hou Fuyao was also a cousin of the empress dowager. Ayanmei wanted to obey the will of the empress dowager. When Zhu Bo had just been conscripted and appointed as Jing Zhaoyun, she colluded with him and plotted to make the empress dowager obtain a noble title to promote filial piety.

古文：由是师丹先免，博代为大司空，数燕见奏封事，言： 丞相光志在自守，不能忧国；大司马喜至尊至亲，阿党大臣，无益政治。 
现代文：因此师丹首先被免官，朱博替代他当了大司空，屡次在内廷朝见进献密封的奏章，说： 丞相孑光的志向在于保住自己，不能为国扰忧；大司马傅喜极其尊贵，是最亲近的亲戚，却奉承大臣，和大臣结成朋党，对政事治理没有益处。 
English: As a result, Shidan was the first to be removed from office, and Zhu Bo replaced him as Daishi Ku, and repeatedly presented sealed reports to the Inner Court, saying: "Josei Xingguang's ambition is to preserve himself, and he cannot worry about the country; Daishi Mafuxi is extremely honorable, and is the closest relative, but he flatters the minister, and forms a party with the minister, which is not beneficial to political governance."

古文：上遂罢喜遣就国，免光为庶人，以博代光为丞相，封阳乡侯，食邑二千户。
现代文：皇上于是罢免傅喜，放逐他回到封地去，把孔光免为平民，让朱博替代孔光任丞相，封为阳乡侯，食邑二千户。
English: The emperor then dismissed Fu Xi, banished him back to the fiefdom, removed Kong Guang as a commoner, let Zhu Bo replace Kong Guang as the prime minister, and appointed him as the Yang Township, with 2,000 households.

古文：博上书让曰： 故事封丞相不满千户，而独臣过制，诚惭惧，愿还千户。 
现代文：朱博献上奏书推辞说： 按照先例，封给丞相的食邑不超过一千户，而惟独我超过规定，确实又惭愧又恐惧，希望退还一千户。 
English: Zhu Bo presented a report and said: According to the precedent, the food allowance given to the prime minister does not exceed one thousand households, but I exceeded the regulations, I am indeed ashamed and afraid, and I hope to return one thousand households.

古文：上许焉。
现代文：皇上允许了他的请求。
English: Emperor Xuan agreed.

古文：傅太后怨傅喜不已，使孔乡侯晏风丞相，令奏免喜侯。
现代文：傅太后怨恨傅喜不止，派孔乡侯傅晏婉言劝说丞相，命他上奏免去傅喜的侯位。
English: Empress Dowager Fu harbored more than one grudge against Fu Xi, and sent Kongxiang marquis Fu Yuanyan to persuade the prime minister, ordering him to appeal for Fu Xi's resignation.

古文：博受诏，与御史大夫赵玄议，玄言： 事已前决，得无不宜？ 
现代文：朱博接受了太后的命令，和御史大夫趟玄商量，趟玄说： 事情先前已有判决，这样做岂不是不太合适？ 
English: Zhu Bo accepted the empress dowager's order and discussed the matter with Dr. Watanabe. Watanabe said, "Since the matter has already been decided, wouldn't it be inappropriate to do so?"

古文：博曰： 已许孔乡侯有指。
现代文：朱博说： 已经答应了孔乡侯，是太后的意旨。
English: Zhu Bo said, "I have already agreed to marry Kong Xianghou, it is the will of the empress dowager.

古文：匹夫相要，尚相得死，何况至尊？
现代文：平民相求，尚且为他去死，何况至尊的太后呢？
English: How could a commoner die for a commoner, much less a queen mother?

古文：博唯有死耳！ 
现代文：我衹有一死罢了。 
English: I only have one life to live.

古文：玄即许可。
现代文：趟玄于是答应下来。
English: Watanabe then agreed.

古文：博恶独斥奏喜，以故大司空汜乡侯何武前亦坐过免就国，事与喜相似，即并奏： 喜、武前在位，皆无益于治，虽已退免，爵士之封非所当得也。请皆免为庶人。 
现代文：朱博不愿意单独斥责举奏傅喜，由于原来的大司宰泛乡侯何武先前也因过错坐罪，免职回到封地，事情和傅喜相类似，就一起举奏： 傅喜、何武先前居官，都对政事治理没有益处，虽然已经斥退免官，但爵位和封地的赏赐也不是他们所应当得到的，请把他们都免为平民。 
English: Zhu Bo did not want to reprimand Fu Xi alone. Since the former grand steward of Pan Township, Hou He Wu, had previously been found guilty of misconduct and removed from office and returned to the fief, the situation was similar to that of Fu Xi, so they were reprimanded together: Fu Xi and He Wu, who had previously been in office, were not beneficial to the governance of political affairs. Although they had been dismissed and removed from office, the peerage and the reward of the fief were not what they should have received. Please remove them all as commoners.

古文：上知傅太后素常怨喜，疑博、玄承指，即召玄诣尚书问状。
现代文：皇上知道傅太后平素怨恨傅喜，怀疑朱博、赵玄接受了太后的旨意，就召趟玄到尚书那裹去审问实情。
English: The emperor knew that the Empress Dowager Fu held a grudge against Fu Xi, and suspected that Zhu Bo and Zhao Xuan had accepted the Empress Dowager's order, so he summoned Xuan to Shangshu to interrogate the truth.

古文：玄辞服，有诏左将军彭宣与中朝者杂问。
现代文：趟玄招供服罪，皇上命令左将军彭宣与中朝官员一起审问。
English: The emperor ordered General Zuo Peng Xuan to be interrogated together with Chinese and North Korean officials.

古文：宣等劾奏： 博宰相，玄上卿，晏以外亲封位特进，股肱大臣，上所信任，不思竭诚奉公，务广恩化，为百寮先，皆知喜、武前已蒙恩诏决，事更三赦，博执正道，亏损上恩，以结信贵戚，背君乡臣，倾乱政治，奸人之雄，附下罔上，为臣不忠不道；玄知博所言非法，枉义附从，大不敬；晏与博议免喜，失礼不敬。
现代文：彭宣等弹劾奏道： 朱博是宰相，赵玄是上卿，傅晏由于是外家亲属而受封，居特进之位，都是辅佐大臣，皇上所信任的人，不考虑竭尽忠诚，以公事为重，致力于推广恩德教化，作百官的表率，都知道傅喜、何武先前已经蒙皇上恩诏作出决断，事情经过了三次赦免。朱博坚持旁门左道，损害皇上的恩德，来交结取信于显贵的外戚，背叛君主，偏向大臣，倾覆扰乱了政事的治理，是奸臣的首领，附和臣下，欺骗皇上，作为臣子不忠实，不守臣道。趟玄知道朱博所说的不合法制，歪曲道义附和听从，是大不敬。傅晏和朱博商量免去傅喜的侯位，是失礼不敬。
English: Peng Xuan and other impeachment petitioners said: Zhu Bo is the prime minister, Zhao Xuan is the high-ranking minister, Fu Xun was appointed because he is a foreign relative, and he is in a special promotion position. They are all assistant ministers. People trusted by the emperor, do not consider loyalty, attach great importance to public affairs, and are committed to promoting morality and ethics, and serve as a model for hundreds of officials. They all know that Fu Xi and He Wu have previously received the emperor's decree to make a decision, and the matter has been pardoned three times. Zhu Bo insisted on the side door left way, damaging the emperor's virtue, to make a deal

古文：臣请诏谒者召博、玄、晏诣廷尉诏狱。 
现代文：我们请求皇上命谒者召来朱博、趟玄、傅晏下到廷尉关押犯人的牢狱裹去。 
English: We request the Emperor's commanding officer to summon Zhu Bo, Wai Xuan, and Fu Ying to the prison where the court officers are holding the prisoners.

古文：制曰： 将军、中二千石、二千石、诸大夫、博士、议郎议。 
现代文：皇上命令说： 将军、中二千石、二千石的官员、诸位大夫、博士、议郎讨论。 
English: The Emperor's order said: "General, 2,000-koku middle-ranking and 2,000-koku high-ranking officials, doctors, professors, and councilors, let's discuss."

古文：右将军蟜望等四十四人以为： 如宣等言，可许。 
现代文：右将军娇望等四十四人认为 如彭宣等所言，可以允许。 
English: Forty-four people, including the right-wing general Zhaowang, believed that the movement could be allowed, as Peng Xuan and others said.

古文：谏大夫龚胜等十四人以为： 《春秋》之义，奸以事君，常刑不舍。
现代文：谏大夫龚胜等十四人认为 按《春秋》的大义，臣子用邪恶狡诈来事奉君主，国法难容。
English: Fourteen people, including Dr. Hao Yongsheng, believed that according to the great justice of "Spring and Autumn," courtiers use evil cunning to serve the monarch, and the national law is difficult to accept.

古文：鲁大夫叔孙侨如欲颛公室，谮其族兄季孙行父于晋，晋执囚行父以乱鲁国，《春秋》重而书之。
现代文：鲁国大夫叔孙侨如想要专擅鲁国的国政，就向晋国诬陷他的族兄季孙行父。晋国拘捕囚禁行父来扰乱鲁国，《春秋》重视并记载了这件事。
English: If the uncle and grandson of the governor of the State of Lu wanted to dominate the national politics of the State of Lu, they would frame his elder brother, Ji Sun Xingfa, to the State of Jin. The State of Jin arrested and imprisoned Xingfa to disrupt the State of Lu, and "Spring and Autumn" paid attention to and recorded this matter.

古文：今晏放命圯族，干乱朝政，要大臣以罔上，本造计谋，职为乱阶，宜与博、玄同罪，罪皆不道。 
现代文：现在傅晏放弃教令毁灭宗族，干预扰乱朝廷政事，结交大臣来欺骗皇上，由他设下计谋，是祸乱的主要来源。应该和朱博、趟玄同一罪名，罪名都是大逆不道。 
English: Now that Fu Xuan has abandoned the order to destroy the clan, interfered in and disrupted the political affairs of the imperial court, and made friends with ministers to deceive the emperor, he is the main source of evil. He should be charged with the same crime as Zhu Bo and Wai Xuan. They are all guilty of high treason.

古文：上减玄死罪三等，削晏户四分之一，假谒者节召丞相诣廷尉诏狱。
现代文：皇上减免趟玄死罪三等，削去傅晏四分之一的食邑，让谒者持节召丞相到关押犯人的牢狱裹去。
English: The emperor reduced and exempted the third degree of the crime of death by misadventure, cut a quarter of the food and drink of Fu Xi, and let the offender call the prime minister to the prison where the prisoner was held.

古文：博自杀，国除。
现代文：朱博自杀，封邑被收回。
English: Zhu Bo committed suicide, and the fief was taken back.

古文：初，博以御史为丞相，封阳乡侯，玄以少府为御史大夫，并拜于前殿，廷登受策，有音如钟声。
现代文：当初朱博由御史大夫升为丞相，封为阳乡侯。赵玄由少府升任御史大夫，一起在前殿拜受官职，被引上殿堂接受策命时，有像敲钟一样宏亮的声音。
English: At that time, Zhu Bo was promoted from the grand secretary to the prime minister, and was given the title of Yangxiang Marquis. Zhao Xuan was promoted from the minor prefect to the grand secretary, and together they bowed in front of the hall to receive the official position. When they were brought to the hall of fame to receive the appointment, there was a loud sound like a bell.

古文：语在《五行志》。
现代文：这件事记载在《五行志》裹。
English: This phrase appears in the "Five Elements."

古文：赞曰：薛宣、朱博皆起佐史，历位以登宰相。
现代文：赞曰：薛宣、朱博都从佐史出身，历任官位而升为宰相。
English: Zang said: Xue Xuan and Zhu Bo are both from Sashi, and have been promoted to the post of prime minister.

古文：宣所在而治，为世吏师，及居大位，以苛察失名，器诚有极也。
现代文：薛宣所在的地方治理得很好，是当世官吏的老师，到他任丞相时，由于以苛刻烦琐来显示精明而丧失了名望，才器确实有限啊。
English: Xue Xuan's province was well governed, and he was a teacher of contemporary officials. However, when he became chancellor, he lost his reputation for displaying shrewdness by being strict and cumbersome. His talent was indeed limited.

古文：博驰聘进取，不思道德，已亡可言，又见孝成之世委任大臣，假借用权。
现代文：朱博努力进取，不考虑道德仁义，已经没有什么值得称道的，又看见孝成时代将重任托付给大臣，就藉助滥用权力。
English: Zhu Bo's efforts to forge ahead, without considering morality, benevolence and righteousness, have nothing to commend, and when he saw the heavy responsibilities entrusted to the minister in the era of Xiaocheng, he helped to abuse power.

古文：世主已更，好恶异前，复附丁、傅称顺孔乡。
现代文：当世的君主已经改变，好恶与先前的君主不同，朱博又依附丁氏、傅氏，顺从孔乡侯。
English: The current monarch has changed. His likes and dislikes are different from those of the previous monarchs. Zhu Bo still clings to the Ding and Fu clans and obeys the Kong townsmen.

古文：事发见诘，遂陷诬罔，辞穷情得，仰药饮鸠。
现代文：事情发觉后受到责难，于是陷入了欺君罔上的罪名，屈辞穷，实情显露，仰头喝下了毒药。
English: After the matter was discovered, he was reprimanded, so he fell into the crime of bullying, bowed down, revealed the truth, and drank the poison.

古文：孔子曰： 久矣哉，由之行诈也！ 
现代文：王迂说： 王虫做欺骗的事情很久了呀！ 
English: Wang Dun said: "Wang Zhou has been cheating for a long time!

古文：博亦然哉！
现代文：塞厘也是这样啊！
English: That's what happened to Seli!

