古文：贞观初，太宗谓侍臣曰： 妇人幽闭深宫，情实可愍。
现代文：贞观初年，唐太宗对侍从的大臣们说： 妇女被禁闭在深宫里，实在很可怜。
English: In the first year of Zhenguan, Tang Taizong said to the attendant ministers: It is really pitiful that women are confined in the deep palace.

古文：隋氏末年，求采无已，至于离宫别馆，非幸御之所，多聚宫人。
现代文：隋代末年，隋炀帝不停地去挑选宫女，修建离宫别馆，在并非君主住宿的地方，也聚集了许多宫女。
English: At the end of the Sui Dynasty, Emperor Sui Xuan constantly went to select his concubines, built a palace annex, and gathered many concubines in a place that was not the monarch's accommodation.

古文：此皆竭人财力，朕所不取。
现代文：这都是耗竭百姓财力的行为，我从不效仿。
English: These are all actions that deplete the financial resources of the people, and I never follow suit.

古文：且洒扫之余，更何所用？
现代文：况且，这些妇女除了打扫宫室之外，还有什么用处呢？
English: Besides, what use are these women except for cleaning the palace?

古文：今将出之，任求伉俪，非独以省费，兼以息人，亦各得遂其情性。 
现代文：现在我准备放她们出去，任凭她们选择配偶，这样不仅可以节省费用，而且还可以使百姓减轻负担，宫女自己也会满意。 
English: Now I am ready to let them go out and let them choose their spouses, which will not only save costs, but also reduce the burden on the people, and the princess herself will be satisfied.

古文：于是后宫及掖庭前后所出三千余人。
现代文：于是，唐太宗从后宫和旁舍先后放出宫女三千多人。
English: As a result, Emperor Taizong of Tang released more than 3,000 concubines from his harem and side quarters.

古文：贞观二年，关中旱，大饥。
现代文：贞观二年，关中大旱，五谷不收，老百姓发生了饥荒。
English: In the second year of Zhenguan, Guanzhong suffered a severe drought, grain was not harvested, and the people suffered from famine.

古文：太宗谓侍臣曰： 水旱不调，皆为人君失德。
现代文：唐太宗对侍臣说： 水旱不调，都是因为君王治国无道造成的。
English: Emperor Taizong of Tang said to his courtiers: Uneven water and drought are all caused by the fact that the monarch has no way to govern the country.

古文：朕德之不修，天当责朕，百姓何罪，而多遭困穷！
现代文：我没有修养品德，应该受到老天的惩罚，可是老百姓有什么罪过呢，却遭此困境！
English: I have not cultivated my character and should be punished by God, but what is the fault of the people, but they are in this predicament!

古文：闻有鬻男女者，朕甚愍焉。 
现代文：听说现在百姓中有很多卖儿卖女的现象，我对他们非常怜悯啊。 
English: I have heard that there is a lot of child trafficking among the people now, and I feel very sorry for them.

古文：乃遣御史大夫杜淹巡检，出御府金宝赎之，还其父母。
现代文：于是，派御史大夫杜淹出京巡视，用御府的资财替很多卖身者赎了身，并将他们送还父母家。
English: As a result, he sent the Imperial Historian Du Huan out to inspect the capital, and he used the imperial capital's resources to redeem many of the prostitutes and return them to their parents' homes.

古文：贞观七年，襄州都督张公谨卒。太宗闻而嗟悼，出次发哀。
现代文：贞观七年，襄州都督张公谨去世，唐太宗知道后悲极而泣，要前去悼唁。
English: In the seventh year of Zhenguan, Zhang Gonggen, the governor of Xiangzhou, died. Tang Taizong was so sad that he cried and wanted to go to mourn him.

古文：有司奏言： 准阴阳书云： 日在辰，不可哭泣。 
现代文：有关部门上书说： 阴阳书上说，辰日这一天，不可以哭泣，在民间这也是要避讳的。 
English: The relevant departments wrote: According to the Yin and Yang book, it is not allowed to cry on this day, which is also to be avoided in the folk.

古文：此亦流俗所忌。 太宗曰： 君臣之义，同于父子，情发于中，安避辰日？ 
现代文：唐太宗说： 君臣之间的情义，像父子一样，悲伤之情发自内心，怎么能够避讳辰日呢？ 
English: Tang Taizong said: The relationship between princes and ministers is like that of a father and son. Sadness comes from the heart. How can we avoid it?

古文：遂哭之。
现代文：于是痛哭不已。
English: So she wept bitterly.

古文：贞观十九年，太宗征高丽，次定州，有兵士到者，帝御州城北门楼抚慰之。
现代文：贞观十九年，唐太宗征战高丽，驻扎在定州，行军前来的士兵，唐太宗都要在御州北门城上进行安抚慰问。
English: In the 19th year of Zhenguan, Emperor Taizong of Tang invaded Goryeo and stationed in Dingzhou. When the soldiers came marching, Emperor Taizong had to appease and console them at the North Gate of Gozhou.

古文：有从卒一人病，不能进。诏至床前，问其所苦，仍敕州县医疗之。
现代文：有一个士兵生病不能来，唐太宗亲自写下诏书派人送到他的病床前，询问他的疾苦，还叫当地医生为他治疗。
English: There was a soldier who couldn't come because he was ill. Emperor Taizong personally wrote down an edict and sent someone to his sickbed to inquire about his illness, and also asked a local doctor to treat him.

古文：是以将士莫不欣然愿从。
现代文：所以不管将军还是士兵都愿意为朝廷尽忠报国。
English: Therefore, both generals and soldiers were willing to be loyal to the imperial court and serve the country.

古文：及大军回次柳城，诏集前后战亡人骸骨，设太牢致祭，亲临，哭之尽哀，军人无不洒泣。
现代文：后来，大军回师驻扎在柳城，唐太宗下诏收集阵亡将士的遗骨，供奉牛、羊、猪，以太牢的仪式进行祭奠，他还亲自前去祭拜，痛哭失声，极其哀恸，在场将士无不受到感染，流下热泪。
English: Later, a large army was stationed in Liucheng, and Emperor Taizong issued an edict to collect the remains of the fallen soldiers, to offer cattle, sheep, and pigs, and to hold a solemn ceremony to pay tribute. He also personally went to worship, weeping bitterly, lost his voice, and was extremely sad. The soldiers present were all infected and shed tears.

古文：兵士观祭者，归家以言，其父母曰： 吾儿之丧，天子哭之，死无所恨。 
现代文：生还的士兵回到家乡，把这些情形告诉给死难者的父母，这些老人们说： 我的儿子死了，天子还为他哭泣，真是死而无憾啊。 
English: When the surviving soldiers returned to their hometowns and told the parents of the dead soldiers what had happened, the old men said, "My son is dead, and God is still weeping for him.

古文：太宗征辽东，攻白岩城，右卫大将军李思摩为流矢所中，帝亲为吮血，将士莫不感励。
现代文：唐太宗征战辽东时，在攻打白岩城的战役中，右卫大将军李思摩被乱箭射中，唐太宗亲自为他吸去污血，将士们无不受到感动和激励。
English: When Emperor Taizong of Tang conquered Liaodong, in the campaign to attack Baiyan City, the right guard general Li Sima was shot by random arrows. Emperor Taizong personally sucked out the dirty blood for him, and the soldiers were all moved and inspired.

