古文：丹丘子瀚海神薛延陀睦仁茜兖州人
现代文：丹丘子瀚海神薛延陀睦仁茜兖州人
English: Danqiu ZiHanhai ShenXue YanDaoMukRenQi Shanzhou Ren

古文：丹丘子
现代文：丹丘子
English: Danczuk

古文：隋开皇末。有老翁诣唐高祖神尧帝，状貌甚异。
现代文：隋文帝开皇末年，有一位老翁去拜见唐高祖李渊，他的相貌很不一般。
English: In the last years of the Sui Dynasty, there was an old man who went to visit Tang Gao's ancestor Li Yuan. His appearance was very unusual.

古文：神尧钦迟之，从容置酒，饮酣，语及时事曰：隋氏将绝，李氏将兴，天之所命，其在君乎？
现代文：高祖非常敬重他，从容不迫地布置酒筵，喝到兴起之时，那老翁谈到时事政治说：隋朝将要灭亡，李氏宗族将要兴起，取而代之。
English: Gao Zu respected him very much. He arranged the wine goblets leisurely and drank until the time of rise. When the old man talked about current affairs and politics, he said: The Sui Dynasty will perish, and the Li clan will rise to replace it.

古文：愿君自爱。
现代文：这是上天的旨意，不是您自身决定的呵。
English: This is God's will, not your own decision.

古文：神尧惕然自失，拒之。
现代文：希望你能够自爱自重，好自为之。
English: I hope you will be able to love yourself, respect yourself, and be self-reliant.

古文：翁曰：既为神授，宁用尔耶。
现代文：高祖感到戒惧不安，且怅然若失，急忙拒绝了。老翁说：既然是天神授命，只管用好了。
English: Gaozu felt afraid and uneasy, and he was at a loss, so he hastily refused. The old man said, "Since it was ordered by the gods, just use it."

古文：隋氏无闻前代，继周而兴，事逾晋魏。
现代文：隋朝的杨坚在前代没有什么名气，北周时袭父爵为隋国公，后废静帝自立的，权力超越了晋魏南北朝任何一个皇帝。
English: Yang Jian of the Sui Dynasty did not have much fame in the previous generation. He succeeded his father as the Prince of the State of Sui after the Northern Zhou Dynasty, and became independent after the fall of Emperor Jing. His power exceeded that of any emperor of the Northern and Southern Dynasties of the Jin and Wei Dynasties.

古文：虽偷安天位，平定南土，盖为君驱除。
现代文：可是，他虽然一时得到天子之位，平定了南方的国土，还是得被你推翻。
English: However, even though he temporarily gained the position of the Son of Heaven and pacified the southern lands, he still had to be overthrown by you.

古文：天将有所启耳。
现代文：上天将对你有所开导。
English: Heaven will enlighten you.

古文：神尧阴喜其言，因访世故。
现代文：听罢此言，高祖暗自高兴，于是询问治世经验。
English: Hearing this, Gao Zu was secretly pleased, so he inquired about the experience of reigning.

古文：翁曰：公积德入门，又负至贵之相，若应天受命，当不劳而定。
现代文：老翁说：你在品德方面已经修养成了，容貌又有大贵之相，如果应承天帝的旨意接受此命，定会不费力就能取得成功。
English: The old man said, "You have cultivated your moral character, and your appearance is noble. If you accept this mission according to the will of the Heavenly Emperor, you will surely succeed without any effort."

古文：但当在丹丘子之后。
现代文：但是，你应该排在丹丘子的后面。
English: However, you should line up behind Danczuk.

古文：帝曰：丹丘为谁？
现代文：高祖问道：丹丘是谁呀？
English: Gaozu asked, "Who is Danqiu?"

古文：翁曰：与公近籍，但公不知耳？
现代文：老翁说：跟你住的很近，但你却不知道他。
English: The old man said, "He lives very close to you, but you don't know him.

古文：神器所属，唯此二人。
现代文：将来帝位所属，只有你们二人。
English: In the future, only the two of you will belong to the throne.

古文：然丹丘先生，凝情物外，恐不复以世网累心。
现代文：然而，丹丘生在你的前面，他把精力和情感都集中到世俗之外，恐怕不会再为国家和社会的纲纪而费心。
English: However, Dancu, who was born before you, has concentrated his energy and emotions outside the secular world, and I am afraid that he will no longer bother about the discipline of the state and society.

古文：傥或俯就，公若不相持于中原，当为其佐。
现代文：倘若他屈就于此，你如果不打算和他在中原相争，那就应该去辅佐他。
English: If he succumbs to this, if you are not going to fight with him in the Central Plains, then you should support him.

古文：神尧曰：先生安在？
现代文：高祖问：丹丘先生在什么地方？
English: Gaozu asked, "Where is Mr. Dancu?"

古文：曰：隐居鄠杜间。帝遂袖剑诣焉。
现代文：老翁说隐居在鄠县和杜县的交界处，高祖随即藏剑于袖中前去拜见丹丘子。
English: The old man said that he lived in seclusion at the junction of Min County and Du County. Gao Zu immediately hid his sword in his sleeve and went to see Dan Qiu Zi.

古文：帝之来，虽将不利于丹丘，然而道德玄远，貌若冰壶，睹其仪而必骇神耸。
现代文：高祖的到来，虽然将对丹丘不利，然而丹丘在道德修养方面十分透彻深远，脸上冷若冰霜，看他的仪表就会使人敬畏不已。
English: Although the arrival of Gaozu will be unfavorable to Dancu, Dancu is very thorough and far-reaching in terms of moral cultivation, his face is cold as ice, and his appearance will make people awe-inspiring.

古文：至则伏竭于苫宇之下，先生隐几持颐，块然自处。
现代文：高祖来到之后就伏身在草棚前拜见，那丹丘先生坐在几案后面养神，泰然自若。
English: After Gao Zu arrived, he prostrated himself in front of the grass shed to pay his respects. Mr. Nandanqiu sat behind a few cases to refresh himself, calmly.

古文：拜未及起。
现代文：高祖拜谒完了站起身来。
English: Gao Zu stood up after he finished bowing.

古文：先生遽言曰：吾久厌浊世，汝膻于时者，显晦既殊，幸无见忌。
现代文：丹丘先生忽然说道：我很久就厌恶凡世了，而你胸中却一直装着世事；你我二人对国家和社会的了解是相当悬殊的，可值得庆幸的是，我没有因此被你忌恨。
English: Mr. Danciu suddenly said: I have long detested the world, but you have always carried the world in your heart; you and I have a very different understanding of the country and society, but fortunately, I have not been hated by you.

古文：帝愕而谢之，因跪起曰：隋氏将亡，已有神告。当天禄者，其在我宗。
现代文：高祖愕然不已，向他道谢，又跪下说道：隋朝就要亡了，已经有神人告诉我说，如今由上天赐予帝位的人，就在我们李氏宗族之内。
English: Gao Zu was stunned, thanked him, and knelt down and said, "The Sui Dynasty is about to die. A godman has already told me that the person who is given the throne by God is now in our Li clan."

古文：仆夙叶冥征。谓钟末运。
现代文：我在往日梦中所见的征兆，称为 钟末运 。
English: The signs that I have seen in my dreams in the past are called "the stroke of the clock."

古文：窃知先生之道，亦将契天人之兆。
现代文：我知道你修道德济世之道，也是想找寻天人合一的征兆。
English: I know that you practice the way of morality and benefit the world, and also want to look for signs of the unity of heaven and man.

古文：夫两不相下，必将决雄雌于锋刃，衒智力于权诈。苟修德不竞，仆惧中原久罹刘项之患。
现代文：如果我们两个不相上下，必将用武力一决雌雄，把才智全用在搞阴谋诡计、争权夺势之上，谁也不讲善和德，我担心中原大地会受像刘邦、项羽争雄那样的灾乱。
English: If the two of us are not on the same level, we will surely use force to fight the male and female, and use our talents to engage in intrigues and power grabs. No one will talk about goodness and virtue. I am worried that the Central Plains will suffer from disasters like Liu Bang and Xiang Yu.

古文：是来也，实有心焉，欲济斯人于涂炭耳。
现代文：我今天到这里来，其实是有很多心思和想法的，想救百姓于水火之中呵。
English: When I came here today, I actually had a lot of thoughts and ideas, I wanted to save people in the midst of fire and water.

古文：殊不知先生弃唐虞之揖让，蹑巢许之遐蹤。
现代文：殊不知你会把大唐基业揖让给我，而要步隐居不仕的巢父和许由的后尘。
English: I didn't know you were going to give me the capital of the Great Tang Dynasty and follow in the footsteps of your reclusive father and Xu Yue.

古文：仆所谓鸡夏虫，未足以窥大道也。
现代文：我所说的不过是鸡虫一般的浅见，不足以说明大的道理呵。
English: What I've said is just a superficial view, not enough to explain the big picture.

古文：生先笑而颔之。
现代文：丹丘先生笑着点点头。
English: Mr. Danczuk smiled and nodded.

古文：帝复进曰：以天下之广，岂一心一虑所能周哉。
现代文：高祖又进而说道：凭天下之广大，有些事情不是一个人所能考虑周全的。
English: Gao Zu went on to say: With the vastness of the world, some things cannot be considered thoroughly by one person.

古文：余视前代之理乱，在辅佐得其人耳。
现代文：我看前朝的治与乱，原因在于得到没得到辅佐之人。
English: In my opinion, the reason for the former government's rule and chaos is that it was led by people who did not receive assistance.

古文：苟非伊周皋夔之徒。
现代文：是不是伊尹、周公、皋夔那样的良臣。
English: Isn't he a good minister like Yi Yin, Zhou Gong, and Zou?

古文：秦汉以还，皆璅璅庸材不足数。汉祖得萧张而不尽其用，可为太息。
现代文：自秦汉以来，碌碌无为的庸才是靠不了前的；汉高祖刘邦得萧何、张良而未能很好发挥他们的作用，应该为此叹息。
English: Since the Qin and Han dynasties, the mediocrity of idleness has been unsustainable; Liu Bangde, the founder of the Han Dynasty, had Xiao He and Zhang Liang, but failed to play their roles well, which should be lamented.

古文：今先生尚不屈尧舜之位，固蔑视伊皋矣。
现代文：现在，你还没有为帝位而动心屈身，当然可以看不起伊尹皋夔。
English: Now that you haven't bent over for the throne, of course you can look down on him.

古文：一言可以至昌运。得无有以诲我乎？
现代文：一句话可以致国运昌盛，得到或没有得到对我都是个教诲。
English: One sentence can lead to the prosperity of the national movement. Whether I get it or not, it is a lesson for me.

古文：先生曰：昔陶朱以会稽五千之余众，卒殄强吴。
现代文：丹丘先生说：当年陶朱在会稽山用五千多人，战胜了强吴。
English: Mr. Dancu said: That year, Tao Zhu defeated Qiang Wu with more than five thousand people on the mountain of the association.

古文：后去越相齐，于齐不足称者，岂智于越而愚于齐？
现代文：后来他离开越国到齐国为相，在齐国他没有什么可以称道的。难道这能说他在越国就聪敏而到齐国之后就愚笨了呢？
English: Later, he left Yue for Qi as a prince, and he had nothing to commend him in Qi. Can it be said that he was clever in Yue and stupid in Qi?

古文：盖功业随时，不可妄致。
现代文：功业应该随着时代而兴，不可妄动，废兴你自己早已经心里有数。
English: Work should rise with the times, and you should not act rashly. You already know in your heart that you will fail to rise.

古文：废兴既自有数，时之善否，岂人力所为？
现代文：时事好坏，不是人力所能左右。而且不是我所能够知道。
English: Whether the current situation is good or bad is beyond human control, and it is beyond my ability to know.

古文：且非吾之知也？讫不对。帝知其不可挹也，怅望而还。
现代文：言罢，高祖没有再说什么，他知道自己不能推让，怅然地望着丹丘子越走越远。
English: Having said that, Gaozu didn't say anything else. He knew he couldn't give in, and stared blankly as Dan Qiu Zi walked further and further away.

古文：武德初，密遣太宗鄠杜访焉，则其室已墟矣。
现代文：武德初年，高祖秘密派遣李世民到鄠县和杜县的交界处寻访，然而，丹丘子住的屋子已经化作一片废墟了。
English: In the first year of Wude, Gao Zu secretly sent Li Shimin to the junction of Min County and Du County to investigate. However, the house where Dan Qiu Zi lived had been reduced to rubble.

古文：瀚海神
现代文：瀚海神
English: Lord of the Sea

古文：并州北七十里有一古冢。
现代文：并州以北七十里处有一座古墓。
English: And there is an ancient tomb seventy miles north of the state.

古文：贞观初，每至日夕，即有鬼兵万余，旗幡鲜洁，围绕此冢。
现代文：唐代贞观初年，每天天一亮，这里立即会出现一万多鬼兵，举着鲜艳的旗职，把这座古墓包围起来。
English: In the first year of Zhenguan in the Tang Dynasty, every day at dawn, more than ten thousand ghost soldiers would immediately appear here, holding bright banners, to surround this ancient tomb.

古文：须臾，冢中又出鬼兵数千，步骑相杂，于冢傍力战。
现代文：不一会儿，墓里又冲出鬼兵几千人，步兵和骑兵夹杂在一起，双方在墓旁拼力撕杀，天快亮时便各自退去。
English: A short while later, several thousand ghost soldiers rushed out of the tomb. Infantry and cavalry mingled with each other. Both sides fought to kill each other next to the tomb. They retreated separately when it was almost dawn.

古文：夜即各退，如此近及一月。
现代文：就这样闹了快一个月了。
English: It's been like this for almost a month.

古文：忽一夕，复有鬼兵万余，自北而至，去冢数里而阵。一耕夫见之惊走。
现代文：忽然在一天晚上，又有一万多鬼兵从北边冲杀过来，在距古墓几里地远的地方摆下了阵势，一个农民见状吓得拔腿就跑。
English: Suddenly, one night, more than ten thousand ghost soldiers stormed in from the north and set up a position several miles away from the ancient tomb. One farmer was so scared that he ran away.

古文：有一鬼将，令十余人擒之至前，谓曰：尔勿惧，我瀚海神也。
现代文：这时，有一位鬼将军，派十几个人把那农民抓到跟前，并对他说：你不要害怕，我是瀚海神呵。
English: At this time, a ghost general sent more than a dozen people to catch the farmer and said to him: "Don't be afraid, I am the god of the sea."

古文：被一小将窃我爱妾，逃入此冢中。
现代文：我的爱妾被手下一个小将带着私奔，逃进那座古墓里。
English: My beloved concubine was carried away by a young soldier and fled into the ancient tomb.

古文：此冢张公，又借之兵士，与我力战。
现代文：这座古墓的主人张公，又借给他兵马，与我拼战。
English: The owner of this ancient tomb, Zhang Gong, also lent him soldiers and horses to fight with me.

古文：我离瀚海月余，未获此贼，深愤之。
现代文：我离开瀚海一个多月了，尚未抓住这个贼，十分气愤。
English: I have been away from the open sea for more than a month, and I am very angry that I have not yet caught this thief.

古文：君当为我诣此冢造张公，言我自来收叛将，何乃藏之冢中？仍更借兵拒我，当速逐出。
现代文：你应当为我去拜见那古墓的主人张公，说我来此的目的就是捉拿叛将，他为何将此人藏在墓中，还借兵让他跟我对抗？
English: You should visit Zhang Gong, the owner of that ancient tomb, for me, and tell him that the purpose of my coming here is to capture the traitor. Why did he hide this person in the tomb and hire soldiers to fight against me?

古文：不然，即终杀尔！
现代文：他应该马上把那叛将驱赶出来，否则，最终我要把他杀死的！
English: He's got to get that traitor out now, or I'll end up killing him!

古文：仍使兵百人，监此耕夫往。
现代文：接着就派出一百多士兵，监视那农民向古墓走去。
English: He then sent more than a hundred soldiers to watch the farmer as he walked towards the tomb.

古文：耕夫至冢前，高声传言。良久，冢中引兵出阵。
现代文：农民来到墓前，高声传达瀚海神说的那些话。
English: The farmer came to the grave and loudly conveyed the words spoken by the sea god.

古文：有二神人，并辔而立于大旗下，左右剑戟如林。
现代文：好久，古墓里杀出兵马上前迎战。只见有两个神人，骑在马上，并肩站在大旗下，周围剑戟刀枪林立。
English: For a long time, soldiers from the ancient tombs rushed forward to meet the battle. I only saw two godmen, riding on horses, standing side by side under a large flag, surrounded by swords, sickles and guns.

古文：遽召此耕夫前，亦令传言曰：我生为锐将三十年，死葬此，从我者步骑五千余，尽皆精强。
现代文：其中一个神人急忙把农夫召呼过去，也让他传话过来说：我生前当过三十年勇将，死后埋葬在这里，跟随我的共有骑兵步兵五千多，全都是精兵强将。
English: One of the gods hurriedly summoned the farmer and asked him to pass on the message: "I was a warrior for thirty years in my lifetime, and after my death I was buried here. I was accompanied by a total of more than five thousand cavalry and infantry, all of whom were elite soldiers.

古文：今有尔小将投我，我已结交有誓，不可不借助也。
现代文：今天，你的一员小将投奔于我，我已经同他宣誓结交，不能不帮他的忙呵。
English: Today, one of your boys ran to me. I have sworn to befriend him, and I can't help but help him.

古文：若坚欲与我力争，我终败尔，不使尔得归瀚海。
现代文：如果你坚决想和我拼下去，我最终将把你打败，使你无法再回到瀚海。
English: If you insist on continuing to fight me, I will eventually defeat you and make it impossible for you to return to the open sea.

古文：若要且保本职，当速回！
现代文：如果你想要暂且保住现在的职位，就应当立即返回。
English: If you want to keep your current position for the time being, you should return immediately.

古文：耕夫又传于瀚海神，神大怒，引兵前进，令其众曰：不破此冢，今夕须尽死于冢前！
现代文：农民又把这番话传给了瀚海神。瀚海神听罢大怒，带兵前进，对手下发令说：不攻破这座古墓，咱们今天就都战死于墓前！
English: The peasants passed these words on to the god of the sea. The god of the sea became very angry, led his soldiers forward, and issued an order to his opponents: "If you do not break through this ancient tomb, we will all die in front of the tomb today!"

古文：追赶的人们听罢此言，全吓得跑了回来。
现代文：随即又拼杀起来。三次进攻均未成功，一直打到天黑，古墓中的兵马败下阵去，活捉了那名叛将。
English: The three attacks were unsuccessful, and they fought until dark, when the soldiers and horses in the ancient tomb were defeated and the traitor was captured alive.

古文：唐太宗派将领率兵攻打薛延陀部落，部落里的人们相互惊扰，这样一来铁勒各个部落全乱了，旋即被回纥人斩尽杀绝，这个部族便灭亡了。
现代文：接着他们又杀进墓中，找到了潮海神的爱妾，把她押送回去。张公及其手下兵士，全被斩杀于墓前。瀚海神命手下人放火烧了那座古墓，赐给那位农民一条金带子。第二天，那农民又到墓前观看，只见那大火还没有灭，墓旁边有许许多多的枯骨和木头人。
English: Then they went into the tomb again, found the beloved concubine of the tide sea god, and sent her back. Zhang Gong and his soldiers were all killed in front of the tomb. The sea god ordered his men to set fire to the ancient tomb and gave the farmer a gold band. The next day, the farmer went to the tomb to watch, only to see that the fire had not been extinguished, and there were many dead bones and wooden people next to the tomb.

古文：睦仁茜唐睦仁茜者，赵郡邯郸人也。
现代文：薛延陀唐代的睦仁茜，是赵郡邯郸县人士。
English: Xue Yanda, the Mutsuren Xi of the Tang Dynasty, was from Zhao County.

古文：少时经学，不信鬼神。
现代文：从小就钻研经学，不相信鬼神。
English: He studied the classics from a young age and did not believe in ghosts and gods.

古文：常欲试其有无，就见鬼人学之，十余年不能得见。
现代文：他常常想试探到底有无鬼神，就去拜见看到过鬼的人并跟他学习，十多年一无所获。
English: He often wanted to find out whether there were ghosts or not, so he went to see a man who had seen a ghost and studied with him. For more than ten years, he found nothing.

古文：后徙家向县，于路见一人，如大官，衣冠甚伟，乘好马，从五十余骑。
现代文：后来他把家迁往县城，在路上看到一个人，像个大官，衣帽十分威风而考究，骑着好马，骑马的随从就有五十多人。
English: Later, he moved his family to the county seat. On the road, he saw a man, who looked like a high-ranking official, wearing a very dignified and elegant hat, riding a good horse, with more than fifty followers on horseback.

古文：视仁茜而不言。
现代文：他看着睦仁茜却没有言声。
English: He looked at Mutsuhito but said nothing.

古文：后数见之，经十年，凡数十相见。
现代文：后来，经常看见他，十年之内，一共见过几十次。
English: Later, I saw him often, within ten years, I saw him a total of dozens of times.

古文：后忽驻马，呼仁茜曰：比频见君，情相眷慕，愿与君交游。
现代文：后来有一次，他停下马来，喊睦仁茜说：我经常看见你，感情上便有些眷恋而倾慕，真想和你交往、游玩呀。
English: Later, one time, he stopped his horse and called out to Mutsu Renshi, saying, "I often see you. Emotionally, I am somewhat attached to you and admire you. I really want to socialize and play with you."

古文：仁茜即拜之，问公何人耶？答曰：吾是鬼耳。姓成名景，本弘农人。西晋时为别驾，今任临湖国长史。
现代文：睦仁茜当即朝他揖拜，问他是什么人，回答说：我是鬼呵，姓成名景，本来是弘农县人，西晋时当过别驾，现在任临湖国的长史。
English: Mutsun Xie immediately bowed to him and asked him who he was, and replied: "I am a ghost, my surname is Cheng Mingjing. Originally, I was from Hongnong County. In the Western Jin Dynasty, I was a governor, and now I am the governor of Linhu Province.

古文：仁茜问其国何在？
现代文：睦仁茜问他国家在什么地方？
English: Mutsu Renshi asked him where his country was?

古文：王何姓名？
现代文：国君叫什么名字？
English: What is the sovereign's name?

古文：答曰：黄河以北，总为临湖国。国都在楼烦西北沙碛是也。
现代文：回答说：黄河以北，统称为临湖国，国都建在楼烦县西北处的沙漠地带。
English: He replied: North of the Yellow River, collectively known as the Lake Country, the country is built in the desert area northwest of Louduan County.

古文：其王即故赵武灵王。
现代文：我们的国君是已经死去的赵武灵王。
English: Our sovereign is the late King Zhao Wuling.

古文：今统此国，总受泰山控摄。
现代文：他今天统治这个国家，总的还要受泰山府君的控制和管理。
English: He rules the country today, and is generally subject to the control and management of Taishan prefect.

古文：每月各使上相朝于泰山。
现代文：每月派一名宰相去泰山朝觐。
English: Every month, a prime minister is sent to Mount Taishan for a pilgrimage.

古文：是以数来至此与君相遇也。
现代文：所以多少次路过此地与你相遇呵。
English: So how many times have I passed by here and met you?

古文：吾乃能有相益，令君预知祸难而先避之，可免横苦。
现代文：我只能给你一样好处，就是能够让你事先知道福难而设法避开它，可以免去受罪。
English: I can only give you one benefit, that is, I can let you know the blessings and hardships in advance and try to avoid them, and you can be free from suffering.

古文：唯死生之命，与大祸福之报，不能移动耳。
现代文：但生死和大祸大福是早就有定数的，不能变动了。
English: However, life and death, great calamity and great fortune have long been predetermined and cannot be changed.

古文：仁茜从之。景因命其从骑常掌事以赠之，遣随茜行。有事则令先报之，即尔所不知，当来告我，如是便别。
现代文：睦仁茜听从了成景的话，成景于是把他的从骑常掌事送给睦仁茜，派他跟随仁茜而去，有什么事情必须事先向上报告，并说道：凡是你所不知道的，就应当来告诉我。于是便告别。
English: Mutsureensie obeyed Chengjing's words. Chengjing then gave his former riding master to Mutsureensie and sent him to follow Renxi. Anything must be reported in advance, and said: "If you don't know, you should come and tell me." So he said goodbye.

古文：掌事恒随，遂如侍从者。
现代文：常掌事一直跟随着睦仁茜，就像个侍从似的。
English: The person in charge has always followed Mutsuhito, like a lackey.

古文：每有所问，无不先知。
现代文：每次睦仁茜提出问题，常掌事没有不事先知道的。
English: Every time Mutsu Renshi asked a question, the person in charge often did not know in advance.

古文：时大业初，江陵岑之象为邯郸令。
现代文：隋代大业初年，江陵来的岑之象做了邯郸县令。
English: In the first year of the Sui Dynasty, Zou Zi Zeng, who came from Jiangling, was made the magistrate of Zou County.

古文：子文本，年未弱冠。之象请仁茜于家教文本，仁茜以此事告文本。仍谓曰：成长史语我， 有一事差君不得道。既与君交，亦不能不告。
现代文：岑之象的儿子叫文本，年纪不满二十，岑之象请睦仁茜到家中教导文本。睦仁茜将与鬼相遇这件事告诉了文本，并对他说道：成景长史对我说： 有一事羞于启齿你还不知道；但我既然与你相交，也不能不告诉你呀。
English: The son of Dragonfly is called Text. He is under the age of twenty. Dragonfly invited Mutsunxie to his home to teach Text. Mutsunxie told Text about the encounter with the ghost and said to him, "Cheng Jing Changshi said to me, 'You don't know one thing I'm ashamed to tell you; but since I'm in your company, I can't not tell you.'"

古文：鬼神道亦有食，然不能得饱，常苦饥。
现代文：鬼神之道也是要吃饭的，但不能够吃饱，常常忍饥挨饿。
English: The way of ghosts and gods is also to eat, but they can't eat enough and often go hungry.

古文：若得人食，便得一年饱。
现代文：如果能够吃上人间的饭菜，一年之内都饱饱的。
English: If you can eat human food, you will be full within a year.

古文：众鬼多偷窃人食。
现代文：所以，那些鬼们都常常偷吃人间的饭食。
English: Therefore, those ghosts often steal people's food.

古文：我既贵重，不能偷之，从君请一食。
现代文：我很穷又十分珍重自己的名声，就不能去偷了。那么你就宴请他一顿吧！
English: I am too poor and too much attached to my reputation to steal, so give him a feast!

古文：仁茜既告文本。文本既为具馔，备设珍羞。
现代文：他既然告诉了文本，文本立即就派人准备饭食，备设珍羞。
English: Since he told the text, the text immediately sent someone to prepare the meal and prepare the delicacies.

古文：仁茜曰：鬼不欲入人屋，可于外水边张幕设席，陈酒食于上。
现代文：睦仁茜说：鬼是不想进人的房间的，可以在外面河边支起布棚摆下筵席。
English: Mutsu Renshi said, "If ghosts don't want to enter people's rooms, they can set up a table outside by the river.

古文：文本如其言。
现代文：岑文本照他说的一一去做了。
English: He did exactly what he said he would do.

古文：至时，仁茜见景与两客来至，从百余骑。
现代文：时间到了，睦仁茜看见成景与两位客人赶到，骑马的随从就有一百多人。
English: When the time came, Mutsureensi saw Cheng King and his two guests arrive, accompanied by more than a hundred horsemen.

古文：既坐，文本向席再拜，谢以食之不精，亦传景意辞谢。
现代文：落坐之后，岑文本起身向席间的客人再次揖拜，并道歉说自己准备的食物不够精细，也转告成景感谢之意。
English: After sitting down, Gong Wenbin stood up and bowed again to the guests in the middle of the table, and apologized that the food he had prepared was not fine enough, and also conveyed his gratitude to Cheng Jing.

古文：初文本将设食，仁茜请有金帛以赠之。
现代文：岑文本开始设宴时，睦仁茜拿黄金玉帛赠给他。
English: At the beginning of the banquet, Mutsuhito presented him with a golden gong.

古文：文本问是何等物？仁茜云：鬼所用物，皆与人异。
现代文：岑文本问是什么东西，睦仁茜说：鬼所用的东西，全都和人用的不一样。
English: When asked what it was, Mutsuhin said, "Everything used by ghosts is different from that used by humans.

古文：唯黄金及绢，为得通用。
现代文：但只有黄金和绢帛，能够通用。
English: But only gold and tungsten can be used.

古文：然亦不如假者。
现代文：但也不如假的好。
English: But it's not as good as fake.

古文：以黄金涂大锡作金，以纸为绢帛，最为贵上。
现代文：把黄金镀在锡块上当金子，用纸做绢帛，才是最贵重的上品。
English: The gold plated on the tin block as gold, made of paper, is the most valuable luxury.

古文：文本如言作之。
现代文：岑文本照他说的去做了。
English: He did exactly as he was told.

古文：及景食毕，令其从骑更代坐食。
现代文：等到成景吃饱了，又把他的从骑叫过来坐着吃开了。
English: When Chengjing had eaten his fill, he called his horse over and sat down to eat.

古文：文本以所作金钱绢赠之。景深喜，谢曰：因睦生烦郎君供给，郎君颇欲知寿命乎？
现代文：岑文本把所作的假金钱及绢帛送给成景，成景十分喜欢，谢道：由于我而给你找麻烦，而你却把这些东西送上来，十分感激。
English: He gave the fake money and money to Chengjing, who liked it very much. Chengjing thanked him, saying, "I caused you trouble, but you sent these things to me. I'm very grateful."

古文：文本辞云：不愿知也。
现代文：请问，你是不是很想知道自己的寿命呀？岑文本辞谢道：我不愿知道。
English: Excuse me, don't you want to know how long you're going to live? I don't want to know.

古文：景笑而去。
现代文：成景笑着离席而去。
English: Naruse laughs and leaves the room.

古文：数年后，仁茜遇病，不因困笃而不起。
现代文：几年之后，睦仁茜患上了病，他没有因为疾病沉重、处境窘迫而躺倒。
English: A few years later, Mutsunxie fell ill. He did not lie down because of the severity of the illness and the difficult situation.

古文：月余，仁茜问常掌事，掌事不知。便问长史，长史报云：国内不知。后月因朝泰山，为问消息而相报。
现代文：一个多月之后，睦仁茜问常掌事这是怎么回事，常掌事也不知道；便又去找成景长史，成景回答说：我也不知，下个月要去泰山朝觐，问清因由再告诉你。
English: After more than a month, Mutsureensi asked the chief steward what was going on, but the chief steward didn't know either. She then went to see Seonggye Changsik. Seonggye replied, "I don't know either. I'm going to the Taishan pilgrimage next month. Ask me why, and I'll tell you."

古文：至后月，长史来报云：是君乡人赵某，为泰山主簿。主簿一员缺，荐君为此官，故为文案，经纪召君耳。
现代文：到了下个月，成景来告诉他说：你的一个同乡赵某人，原来是泰山的主簿，现在主簿一职空缺，因此他推荐你当此官，有意让你管理文案，管事的人召你前去。
English: The next month, Cheng Jing came to tell him: "One of your fellow countrymen, Zhao Rong, used to be the chief clerk of Taishan, but now the post of chief clerk is vacant. Therefore, he recommended you to be this official, intending to let you manage the copywriting, and the person in charge called you forward.

古文：案成者当死。
现代文：但是文案整理成后你也就该死了。
English: But once the copy is done, you're dead.

古文：仁茜问计将安出，景云：君寿应年六十余，今始四十。
现代文：睦仁茜问他到底该不该去。成景说：你的寿命应该活到六十多岁，现在才四十岁。
English: Mutsu Renshi asked him whether he should go or not. Cheng Jing said: Your life expectancy should be more than sixty years old, and now you are only forty years old.

古文：但以赵主簿横征召耳，当为请之。
现代文：但是赵主簿横竖都要把你征召去，你应当去呀。
English: But Zhao, you should be called up to go, regardless of whether your name is on the roster or not.

古文：乃曰：赵主簿相问，睦兄昔与同学，恩情深至。
现代文：又说：赵主簿如果问起来，你就说与他昔日是同学，恩情深厚。
English: He also said: "If you ask Zhao Muzhu, you should say that he used to be a classmate and you are deeply grateful to him.

古文：今幸得为泰山主簿。
现代文：今天有幸被任为泰山主簿。
English: Today, I have the honor of being appointed as Tarzan's chief accountant.

古文：适遇一员官缺，明府令择人，吾已启公。公许相用。
现代文：梦中，那位赵某说：正赶上一个官职空缺，神君让我选人。我已经把你的名字报到神君那里，神君默许用你。
English: In the dream, that Zhao said: I am just in time for an official vacancy, God let me choose someone. I have reported your name to God, God tacitly agreed to use you.

古文：兄既不得长生，命当有死。死遇济会，未必当官。何惜一二十年苟生耶？
现代文：你老兄既然不能够得到长生，命中注定必有一死，那样死后的人都集中到一起，你就未必能够当上官了，何必吝惜一二十年的苟安生活呀？
English: Since your brother is not able to attain eternal life, his fate is doomed to death. If everyone were to gather together after his death, you would not necessarily be able to become a high-ranking official. Why should you begrudge him a peaceful life of ten or twenty years?

古文：今文案已出，不可复止。愿决作来意，无所疑也。
现代文：现在文案已经发下来了，不可能再收回去，希望你作出来的决定，什么也不要乱怀疑。
English: Now that the copy has been sent down, it is impossible to take it back again. I hope that you will not have any doubts about the decision you make.

古文：仁茜忧惧，病愈笃。
现代文：睦仁茜又担忧又害怕，病更加严重了。
English: Both worried and scared, Mutsurei's illness worsened.

古文：景谓仁茜曰：赵主簿必欲致君，君可自往泰山，于府君陈述，则可以免。
现代文：成景对睦仁茜说：赵主簿一定想致函给你，你可以自己前往泰山，向泰山府君陈诉，就能免去你的这个职务。
English: Chengjing said to Mutsu Rensi: Master Zhao must want to send you a letter. You can go to Mount Taishan yourself and complain to the governor of Mount Taishan, and you will be relieved of your duties.

古文：仁茜问何由见府君。景曰：往泰山庙东，度一小岭，平地是其都所。君往，自当见之。
现代文：睦仁茜问怎么才能见到府君，成景说：到泰山庙的东面，再过一个山岭，那片平地就是府君的明府，你到了那个地方，自然就可以见到他了。
English: Mutsu Renshi asked how she could see Fuchun, and Seung Kyung said, "If you go to the east side of the Taishan Temple and pass a mountain ridge, that flat land is Fuchun's Mingfu. When you get to that place, you can naturally see him."

古文：仁茜以告文本，文本为具行装。
现代文：睦仁茜把这事告诉了岑文本，文本为他准备行装。
English: Mutsu Renshi told this to the copywriter, and the copy was prepared for him.

古文：数日，又告仁茜曰：文书欲成，君诉惧不可免。急作一佛像，彼文书自消。
现代文：几天后，成景又告诉仁茜说：文状要写成了，你前去陈诉一定会害怕的，那就应当赶快做一尊佛像，这样那文书自然就会撤销了。
English: A few days later, Chengjing also told Renxi: "The document must be written, you will be afraid to go forward to report, then you should quickly make a Buddha statue, so that the document will naturally be revoked."

古文：告文本，以三千钱为画一座像于寺西壁。
现代文：睦仁茜嘱咐文本，花三千钱在寺院的西墙上画一尊佛像。
English: Mutsureishi instructed the text to spend three thousand money to paint a Buddha statue on the west wall of the temple.

古文：讫而景来告曰：免矣。
现代文：画完了，成景就来告诉他：你的那件事终于免了！
English: After the painting was finished, Cheng Jie came to tell him: Your case is finally over!

古文：仁茜情不信佛，意尚疑之，因问景云：佛法说有三世因果，此为虚实？
现代文：睦仁茜知道自己不信佛，对此半信半疑，问成景说：佛法说人有三世因果轮回，这是真是假？
English: Mutsu Renshi knew that she did not believe in Buddhism, but she half-believed and half-doubted, and asked Cheng Jing: Buddhism says that people have three generations of causal reincarnation, is this true or false?

古文：答曰：皆实。
现代文：成景回答说：全是真的。
English: "It's all true," Mr. Cheng replied.

古文：仁茜曰：即如是，人死当分入六道，那得尽为鬼？
现代文：睦仁茜说：即然如此，那么人死之后应当分别进入六条道，怎么会全变鬼呢？
English: Mutsu Renshi said, "That being the case, then after a person dies, they should go into the six realms separately. How can they all turn into ghosts?"

古文：而赵武灵王及君，今尚为鬼耶？景曰：君县内几户？
现代文：而赵武灵王和你这样的人，现在还是鬼，这成景说：你们那个县共有多少户？
English: But Zhao Wuling Wang and people like you are still ghosts, this Chengjing said: How many households are there in your county?

古文：仁茜曰：万余户。
现代文：仁茜说：一万多户。
English: More than 10,000 households have been affected, she said.

古文：又曰：狱囚几人？
现代文：成景又问：监狱中押着多少人？
English: Chengjing also asked: How many people are being held in prison?

古文：仁茜曰：常二十人已下。
现代文：仁茜回答：平时在二十人以下。
English: Nancy replied: "Usually, there are less than twenty people."

古文：又曰：万户之内，有五品官几人？
现代文：成景又问：你们那万户之内，做五品官的有几个人？
English: Chengjing also asked, "How many of your ten thousand households have officials of the Fifth Rank?"

古文：仁茜曰：无。
现代文：仁茜回答：没有一个。
English: Nancy replied, "None."

古文：又曰：九品以上官几人？
现代文：又问：做九品官以上的有几个人？
English: Another question: how many people above the ninth grade are there?

古文：仁茜曰：数十人。
现代文：仁茜回答说：几十个人。
English: Nancy replied, "Dozens of people."

古文：景曰：六道之义分，一如此耳。
现代文：成景说：所谓六道的合理划分，就跟这是一样的。
English: Chengjing said: the so-called rational division of the six ways is the same as this.

古文：其得天道，万无一人，如君县内无一五品官；得人道者，万有数人，如君县内九品数十人；入地狱者，万亦数十，如君狱内囚；唯鬼及畜生，最为多也，如君县内课役户。
现代文：能够在死后进入天道的，一万人中没有一个，这就像你们全县也没有一个做五品官的；能够在死后进入人道的，一万人中有几个，这就像你们县里做九品官以上的有几十个人差不多；人死后下地狱的，一万人中也有几十个，这就像你们县监狱里关押的囚犯。人死之后，只有做鬼和畜生的，才是最多的呵，这就像你们县里的纳税服役的人家一样。
English: Among ten thousand people, there is no one who can go to heaven after death, just like there is no one in your county who is a fifth-ranked official; among ten thousand people, there are a few who can go to humanity after death, just like there are dozens of people in your county who are ninth-ranked officials or higher; among ten thousand people who go to hell after death, there are also dozens, just like the prisoners in your county jail. After death, only ghosts and animals are the most numerous, just like the tax-paying service people in your county.

古文：就此道中，又有等级。
现代文：进入这条道的，也有等级之分。
English: There are also grades for entering this course.

古文：因指其从者曰：彼人大不如我，其不及彼者尤多。
现代文：于是，他指指自己的随从说道，这人就远远赶不上我了！其实，不如他的人还有很多很多。
English: So, he pointed to his entourage and said, "This person is far behind me! In fact, there are many people who are not as good as him."

古文：仁茜曰：鬼有死乎？
现代文：睦仁茜问道：鬼也有一死吗？
English: Mutsu Renshi asked: Do ghosts also have a death?

古文：曰：然。
现代文：成景回答说：是的。
English: The general said yes.

古文：仁茜曰：死入何道？
现代文：睦仁茜又问：那么鬼死之后进入什么道？
English: Mutsu Renshi also asked: So, what path do ghosts enter after death?

古文：答曰：不知，如人知生而不知死。
现代文：成景说：不知道，这就像人知道生而不知道死是怎么一回事似的。
English: Cheng Jing said, "I don't know. It's like knowing how to live but not knowing how to die."

古文：仁茜问曰：道家章醮，为有益否？
现代文：仁茜问道：道家的章醮，到底有没有益处？
English: Rensi asked, "Is there any benefit to the Taoist practice of chapter and verse?"

古文：景曰：道者彼天帝总统六道，是为天曹。
现代文：成景说：道者就是阴间总管六道的天帝，称为天曹。
English: Chengjing said, "The Taoist is the Heavenly Emperor of the six realms, known as Tenso.

古文：阎罗王者，如人间天子。
现代文：阎罗王，就像人间的皇帝一样。
English: King of Hell, just like the emperor of the human world.

古文：泰山府君，如尚书令录。五道神如诸尚书。
现代文：泰山府君，如同现在尚书令的职位，五道神如同各位尚书。
English: Taishan prefect, as the current position of Shang Shuling, the five gods are like you Shang Shuling.

古文：若我辈国，如大州郡。
现代文：像我们那样的国家，就跟现在的大的州郡一样。
English: A country like ours is like a big state now.

古文：每人间事，道士上章请福，如求神之恩。
现代文：每次处理人间的事情，都是由道士上表求神乞请保佑，如求神降恩等等。
English: Every time dealing with human affairs, it is up to the Taoist to ask for God's blessing, such as asking for God's grace and so on.

古文：大曹受之。下阎罗王云： 以某月日，得某申诉云。
现代文：天曹受理之后，接着对阎罗王说：于某月某日，接到某人的申诉等。
English: After Tian Cao accepted it, he then said to Yan Luo Wang: On a certain day of a certain month, I received a complaint from a certain person.

古文：宜尽理，忽令枉滥。
现代文：应当尽快公正地处理，不能不顾事由而冤枉人。
English: It should be handled fairly as soon as possible, and no one should be wronged regardless of the reason.

古文：阎罗敬受而奉行之，如人奉诏也。
现代文：阎罗王敬受而认真地奉行，就像人世间奉诏一样。
English: Yan Luo Wang is respected and earnestly pursued, just like the world's imperial edict.

古文：无理不可求免，有枉必当得申，何为无益也？
现代文：在这里，没有充分理由是不能请求赦免的，有冤屈也必然能够得到申报。怎么能说没有益处呢？
English: Here, one cannot ask for pardon without a sufficient reason, and one can certainly declare one's grievances. How can one say that there is no benefit?

古文：仁茜又问：佛家修福何如？
现代文：仁茜又问：请佛家保佑怎么样？
English: Rensi also asked: How about asking the Buddhists to bless the crane?

古文：景曰：佛是大圣，无文书行下。其修福者，天神敬奉，多得宽宥。
现代文：成景说：佛是大圣呵，不发文书，但他所要保佑的人，天神都会敬奉的，差不多都会得到宽恕和谅解。
English: Cheng Jing said, "Buddha is a great saint. He does not issue documents, but the people he wants to bless will be revered by the angels, and almost all of them will be forgiven and understood.

古文：若福厚者，虽有恶道，文簿不得追摄。
现代文：如果福大之人，虽然生前有过罪恶，阴司的文簿上也不得追记。
English: If a person is blessed with great fortune, although he or she has committed sins in his or her lifetime, it must not be recorded in the book of the dead.

古文：此非吾所识，亦莫知其所以然。
现代文：这些都不是我所见过的，也不知道为什么会这样。
English: I've never seen anything like it, and I don't know why.

古文：言毕即去。
现代文：说完就离去了。
English: After saying this, he left.

古文：仁茜一二日能起，便愈。
现代文：睦仁茜一两天就起床行走，病也好了。
English: After a day or two, Mutsunxi was up and walking, and her illness was cured.

古文：文本父卒，还乡里。
现代文：岑文本父亲死了，岑文本回到老家。
English: His father died, and he returned to his hometown.

古文：仁茜寄书曰：鬼神定是贪谄，往日欲郎君饮食，乃尔殷勤。比知无复利，相见殊落漠。
现代文：睦仁茜给他写信说：那些鬼神准是些贪婪且善于谄媚之徒，当初你请他们吃饭，显得那么殷勤、热情；如今知道再无利可图，与我相见便显得十分冷淡。
English: Mutsu Renshi wrote to him saying, "Those ghosts and gods must be greedy and good at flattery. At first, when you invited them to dinner, they seemed so attentive and enthusiastic. Now that they know there is no profit in it, they seem very cold when they meet me.

古文：然常掌事犹见随。
现代文：但是那位常掌事还一直跟随着我。
English: But the regular attendant was still with me.

古文：本县为贼所陷，死亡略尽。
现代文：另外，本县县城已被贼寇攻陷，人几乎被杀光了。
English: In addition, the county seat of this county has been invaded by bandits, and almost all the people have been killed.

古文：仆为掌事所导，故贼不见，竟以获全。
现代文：我由常掌事领着，贼寇们看不见，竟然保全了性命。
English: I was led by a regular steward, the thieves could not see me, and I actually saved my life.

古文：贞观十六年九月八日文官赐射于玄武门，文本时为中书侍郎。自语人云尔。
现代文：唐贞观十六年九月八日，太宗皇帝赐文官们在玄武门前练习射箭，岑文本当时是中书侍郎，也参加了，自己对别人讲出了上述之事。
English: On September 8th of the 16th year of the reign of Emperor Taizong of Tang, civil servants were practicing archery in front of the Xuanwu Gate. Zouwen, who was a Chinese scribe at the time, also participated and told others about the above-mentioned things.

古文：兖州人
现代文：兖州人
English: People from Zhangzhou

古文：唐兖州邹县人姓张，忘字。
现代文：唐代兖州邹县有个人姓张，忘记他的名字了。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, there was a person surnamed Zhang in Bozhou County, but I have forgotten his name.

古文：曾任县尉。
现代文：张某曾经当过县尉。
English: Zhang used to be a county lieutenant.

古文：贞观十六年，欲诣京赴选。
现代文：贞观十六年，他想进京城参加每年一次的官选，希望朝廷量才授官。
English: In the 16th year of Zhenguan, he wanted to go to Beijing to participate in the annual election of officials, hoping that the imperial court would only award officials.

古文：途经泰山，谒庙祈福。庙中府君及夫人并诸子等，皆现形像。
现代文：路过泰山时，他进庙中祈祷请神保佑，庙中的府君及夫人连同几个儿子等，全现出了原形。
English: When passing Mount Tai, he went into the temple to pray for God's blessing. The prefect and his wife, along with several sons, all appeared in their original form.

古文：张遍拜讫，至第四子旁，见其仪容秀美。同行五人，张独祝曰：但得四朗交游，赋诗举酒，一生分毕，何用仕官？
现代文：张某向他们一一揖拜完毕，当走到府君的第四个儿子身边，见他仪表和容貌俊美出众，同行的五个人当中只有张某祝颂道：我要能同四郎交往，饮酒赋诗，一生很快就过去，何必要当官呢？
English: After Zhang finished bowing to them one by one, when he came to the fourth son of the prefect, he saw his exquisite appearance and handsome appearance. Among the five people accompanying him, only Zhang congratulated him: I want to be able to socialize with Shiro, drinking and poetry, my life will soon be over, why do I need to be an official?

古文：及行数里，忽有数十骑马，挥鞭而至，从者云是四郎。
现代文：等他走出几里地之后，忽然有几十个骑马的人，挥鞭而来，随从告诉他说这就是四郎。
English: After he had walked a few miles, suddenly dozens of people on horseback came, brandishing whips. His followers told him that this was Shiro.

古文：曰：向见兄垂顾，故来仰谒。
现代文：四郎对张某说：刚才见你对我高看一眼，所以前来拜望你。
English: Shiro said to Zhang: Just now, I saw you look up at me, so I came to visit you.

古文：又曰：承欲选，然今岁不合得官。复恐在途有灾，不复须去也。
现代文：又说：知道你想参加大选，但今年是不会封你官职的，还恐怕在中途遇到祸事，不要再去了。
English: He also said: "I know you want to participate in the general election, but I won't appoint you this year. I'm afraid you'll meet with misfortune in the middle. Don't go again."

古文：张不从，执别而去。
现代文：张某不听，执意告别而去。
English: Zhang did not listen and insisted on bidding farewell.

古文：行百余里，张及同伴夜行，被贼劫掠，装具并尽。
现代文：走出一百多里，张某和同伴赶夜路时，被强盗劫掠一空，衣物用具全被抢走了。
English: Out of more than a hundred miles, Zhang and his companions were robbed by robbers when they were on the road at night, and all of their clothing and equipment were taken away.

古文：张遂祝曰：四郎岂不相助？
现代文：张某立即祈祷说：四郎怎么不来帮助我呀？
English: Zhang immediately prayed and said: Why doesn't Shiro come to help me?

古文：有顷，四郎车骑毕至，惊嗟良久。即令左右追捕。
现代文：俄顷四郎的车马全来了。见状，四郎惊叹好久，立即派手下人追捕强盗。
English: At that moment, all of Shiro's horses and chariots arrived. Seeing this, Shiro was astonished for a long time and immediately sent his men to chase the robbers.

古文：其贼颠仆迷惑，却来本所。四郎命决杖数十。
现代文：那强盗踉踉跄跄，神魂颠倒，又转回原地，四郎命人打他几十棍杖。
English: The robber, dazed and bewildered, turned back to where he had been, and Shiro ordered someone to beat him with dozens of sticks.

古文：其贼臂膊皆烂。
现代文：那强盗的屁股和胳膊全被打烂了。
English: The robber's buttocks and arms were all smashed.

古文：已而别去。
现代文：然后，张某与四郎告别而去。
English: Then, Zhang bid farewell to Shiro and left.

古文：四郎指一大树，兄还之日，于此相呼也。
现代文：四郎指着一棵大树说：你回来的时候，要在这里喊我呵！
English: Shiro pointed to a big tree and said, "When you come back, call me here!"

古文：是年，张果不得官而归。
现代文：这年，张某果然落选而归。
English: This year, Zhang lost the election and returned.

古文：至本期处，大呼四郎。
现代文：到了约定的地方，他大声连喊四遍四郎。
English: When he arrived at the agreed place, he shouted four times four times.

古文：俄而郎至。
现代文：不一会儿，四郎就来了。
English: Not long after, Shiro arrives.

古文：乃引张云，相随过宅。
现代文：他领着张某边走边说：咱们一起到这片坟地看看吧。
English: He led Zhang Xuan aside and said, "Let's go to this cemetery together."

古文：即有飞楼绮观，架迥凌空，侍卫严峻，有同王者。
现代文：走了不远，前面楼檐凌空，气势雄伟，十分壮观；而且，侍卫们神色严峻，把守甚严，如同保卫皇帝一样。
English: Not far away, the front towers soared into the air, majestic and very spectacular; moreover, the guards looked grim and guarded very strictly, as if they were protecting the emperor.

古文：张即入。
现代文：张某随四郎走了进去。
English: Zhang walked in with Shiro.

古文：四郎云：须参府君，始可安。
现代文：四郎说：咱们必须去参拜府君，才能够平安无事。
English: Shiro said, "We have to go and pay homage to Fuchun before we can leave safely."

古文：乃引入。经十余重门，趋而进，至大堂下谒拜。
现代文：四郎领着他往里走，经过十几道门，趋身而进，终于来到大堂之下。
English: Shiro led him inside, through more than a dozen doors, and finally under the lobby.

古文：见府君绝伟。张战惧，不敢仰视。
现代文：张某拜谒完毕，只见那府君十分魁伟威严，便有些胆战心惊，不敢抬头再望。
English: After Zhang finished praying, he saw that the prefect was very great and majestic, so he was a little scared and did not dare to look up again.

古文：判事似用朱书，字皆极大。
现代文：府君判案好像用红笔书写，字都很大。
English: Fuchun's verdict seems to have been written with a red pen, and the characters are very large.

古文：府君命使者宣曰：汝乃能与吾儿交游，深为善道。
现代文：府君让手下人宣布说道：你能够同我的儿子交往，使我深深感到你具有美好的品德。
English: Fuchun had his men announce, "Your being able to associate with my son makes me deeply feel that you have a fine character."

古文：宜停一二日聚，随便好去。
现代文：你应当在此住一两天，我再设宴招待你。
English: You should stay here for a day or two, and I'll throw a party for you.

古文：即令引出，至一别馆。
现代文：然后你再自便吧。当即，他被人领了出来，到了一座客馆。
English: Then do as you please. Immediately, he was led out to an inn.

古文：盛设珍羞，海陆毕备。奏乐盈耳。
现代文：这里已经摆下了丰盛的酒菜，那些珍奇的山珍海味应有尽有，而且有人奏乐助兴。
English: There is already a plentiful selection of food and drink here, with all kinds of rare mountain and sea delicacies, and music is played to add to the fun.

古文：即与四郎同室而寝。
现代文：当天，张某与四郎同室而睡。
English: On the same day, Zhang slept with Shiro in the same room.

古文：已经三宿。
现代文：就这样过了三宿。
English: That's how I got through Mishuku.

古文：张至明旦，游戏庭序，徘徊往来，遂窥一院，正见其妻。
现代文：第四天天一亮，张某在亭堂间游玩，徘徊往来，无意之中看见一个院子，正好见到自己的妻子在里面。
English: At first light on the fourth day, Zhang played among the pavilions, wandered around, and inadvertently saw a courtyard, just in time to see his wife inside.

古文：于众官人前荷枷而立。张还，甚不悦。
现代文：她戴着枷锁，低着头站在一些当官的面前。张某回到房间，十分不高兴。
English: Wearing shackles and with her head bowed, she stood in front of some officials. Zhang returned to her room, very unhappy.

古文：四郎怪问其故。
现代文：四郎感到奇怪，便问他怎么回事。
English: Shiro felt strange and asked him what was going on.

古文：张具言之。
现代文：张某把刚才的事说了。
English: Zhang Mou said what just happened.

古文：四郎大惊云：不知嫂来此也。
现代文：四郎大吃一惊，道：不知道嫂子来到这里呀！
English: Surprised, Shiro said, "I didn't know my sister-in-law was here!"

古文：即自往造诸司法所。
现代文：随即，亲自前往各司法部门询问。
English: He then personally went to each judicial department to inquire.

古文：其类乃有数十人，见四郎来，咸去下陛，重足而立。
现代文：各司法部门共有几十个人，见四郎来了，全都走下台阶，迭足而立，一个个现出十分恐惧的样子。
English: There were dozens of people from various judicial departments. When they saw Shiro coming, they all walked down the steps and stood up, one by one, looking very frightened.

古文：以手招一司法近前，具言此事。
现代文：四郎用手势把一个司法官唤到跟前，跟他说了这件事。
English: Shiro gestured for a judicial officer to come over and told him about it.

古文：司法报曰：不敢违命。
现代文：司法官回答说：我们不敢违命呵。
English: The magistrate replied: We dare not disobey.

古文：然须白录事知。
现代文：但是那也必须得让录事知道。
English: But you have to let the record know that, too.

古文：遂召录事，录事诺云：乃须夹此案于众案之中，方便同判，始可得耳。
现代文：随即把录事召了进来。这位录事答应下来，说道：这就必须把这个案子夹在众多的案子当中，才能便于一起宣判，方可达到目的。
English: Then the recorder was called in, and he consented, saying, "This case must be placed in the middle of a number of cases, so that they may be tried together, and the end may be attained."

古文：司法乃断云：此妇女勘别案内。
现代文：最后，司法官判决说：这位妇女所犯罪行，已经在别的案子里得到了甄别校正。
English: In the end, the magistrate ruled that the woman had committed a crime that had already been corrected in another case.

古文：常有写经持斋功德，不合即死。
现代文：另外，她还有抄写经书持斋多年的功德，不该立即处死。
English: In addition, she has the merit of copying scriptures and fasting for many years. She should not be executed immediately.

古文：遂放令归家。
现代文：随即，张某的妻子被放了出来，让她回家。
English: Immediately, Zhang's wife was released and allowed to go home.

古文：与四郎涕泣而别，仍云：唯作功德，可以益寿。
现代文：夫妻二人和四郎挥泪告别。四郎因而说：只有立功修德，才能够延年益寿呵。
English: The couple and Shiro bid a tearful farewell. Shiro said, "Only by making merit and cultivating virtue can we prolong our lives."

古文：张乘本马，其妻从四郎借马，与妻同归。
现代文：张某骑着原来的马，他妻子向四郎又借了一匹马，夫妻双双往家走。
English: Zhang rode the original horse, his wife borrowed another horse from Shiro, and both husband and wife walked home.

古文：妻虽精魂，事同平素。
现代文：妻子虽然是鬼魂，但与平时没什么两样。
English: Although his wife is a ghost, she is no different from usual.

古文：行欲至家，可百步许，忽不见。
现代文：快走到家了，大约还有一百步远时，妻子忽然就没了踪影。
English: I was about to walk home, and when I was about a hundred paces away, my wife suddenly disappeared.

古文：张即呼儿女，急往发之，开棺，妻忽起即坐，冁然笑曰：为忆男女，勿怪先行。
现代文：张某十分惊异而恐惧。进了家门，就看见儿女们号啕大哭，一问，才知道已经出殡了。张某立即呼唤儿女们。急忙去墓地挖坟。棺材打开了，妻子忽然坐了起来，笑着说道：因为思念儿女，别怪我先走了一步呵。
English: Zhang was very surprised and afraid. When he entered the house, he saw his children wailing and crying, and when he asked, he knew that the funeral had taken place. Zhang immediately called his children. He hurried to the cemetery to dig a grave. The coffin was opened, and his wife suddenly sat up and smiled and said: Because I miss my children, don't hurt me, I went one step ahead.

古文：于是已死经六七日而苏也。
现代文：于是，她在死亡六七天之后又苏醒过来了。
English: So she came back to life after being dead for six or seven days.

古文：兖州人说之云尔。
现代文：这个故事是兖州人讲的。
English: This story was told by the people of Zhangzhou.

