古文：李德裕镇浙右。甘露寺僧诉交代常住什物，被前主事僧耗用常住金若干两，引证前数辈，皆有递相交领文籍分明，众词指以新得替人隐而用之，且云： 初上之时，交领分两既明，及交割之日，不见其金。 
现代文：唐朝人李德裕镇守浙东的时候，甘露寺的僧侣控告在移交寺院杂物时，被前任住持耗费常住金若干两，引证前几任住持都有互相移交，记载得很清楚，众僧也指证前任住持私下挪用常住金，而且说初上任的时候，移交的银两数目全都清清楚楚，到交出来时银两却不见了。
English: When Li Deyu of the Tang Dynasty was in charge of the eastern part of Zhejiang, the monks of Kanlu Temple complained that the previous abbot had spent a certain amount of residence money when handing over the temple's sundries. It was clearly recorded that the previous abbots had handed them over to each other, and the monks also testified that the former abbot had privately misappropriated the residence money. Moreover, when he first took office, the two amounts of silver handed over were all clear and precise, but when they were handed over, the two silver coins were gone.

古文：鞫成具狱，伏罪昭然。
现代文：审判结束后，罪证昭然，但没有追究银两用到哪里。
English: After the trial, the evidence of the crime was clear, but there was no investigation into where the money went.

古文：未穷破用之所，公疑其未尽，微以意揣之，僧乃诉冤曰： 积年以来，空交分两文书，其实无金矣。众乃以孤立，欲乘此挤之。 
现代文：李德裕怀疑案子没有审问清楚，于是隐晦地对僧人稍加诱导，僧侣于是说出他的冤情道： 很多年来，都是只移交记录银两的文书，银两早就没有了，众僧因为我孤立，想乘此机会排挤我。 
English: Li Deyu suspected that the case had not been investigated clearly, so he subtly induced the monk a little. The monk then expressed his grievances: For many years, only the documents recording the silver two were handed over. The silver two had long been gone, and because I was isolated, the monks wanted to take this opportunity to push me out.

古文：公曰： 此不难知也。 
现代文：李德裕说： 这种事想要查清楚并不困难。 
English: Li Deyu said: It is not difficult to find out about such things.

古文：乃召兜子数乘，命关连僧人对事，遣入兜子中，门皆向壁，不令相见；命取黄泥各模交付下次金样以凭证据，僧既不知形状，竟摸不成，前数辈皆伏罪。
现代文：就找了数顶轿子，命令相关的僧侣都进入轿中，轿门对着墙壁，彼此看不见，再命令人取各种形状的黄泥来，让每个僧侣分别捏出交付给下任的黄金模式，作为证据，僧侣不知道具体形状，当然是捏不出来的，前数任住持僧侣才俯首认罪。
English: Several palanquins were found, and the monks concerned were ordered to get into the palanquins. The doors of the palanquins faced the wall, so they couldn't see each other. They were also ordered to take various shapes of yellow mud, and each monk was asked to separately squeeze out a gold pattern to be handed over to the next abbot. As proof, the monks didn't know the specific shape, of course, they couldn't squeeze it out. Only then did the previous abbot's monks bow their heads and confess.

