古文：秦始皇帝者，秦庄襄王子也。
现代文：秦始皇帝是秦庄襄王的儿子。
English: Qin Shi Huang was the son of Qin Zhuang Xiang Wang.

古文：庄襄王为秦质子於赵，见吕不韦姬，悦而取之，生始皇。
现代文：庄襄王在赵国作秦国人质时，看见吕不韦的姬妾，很喜欢，就把她娶了过来，生了始皇。
English: When Zhuang Xiang Wang was a hostage of Qin in Zhao, he saw Lü Buwei's concubine and liked her very much. He married her and gave birth to the first emperor.

古文：以秦昭王四十八年正月生於邯郸。
现代文：始皇在秦昭王四十八年正月生于邯郸。
English: The first emperor was born in the first month of the 48th year of the reign of Qin Zhao in Handan.

古文：及生，名为政，姓赵氏。
现代文：等到出生时，取名为政，姓赵氏。
English: When he was born, he was given the name Masa and the surname Zhao.

古文：年十三岁，庄襄王死，政代立为秦王。
现代文：十三岁，庄襄王死了，政继位为秦王。
English: At the age of thirteen, King Zhuangxiang died and was succeeded by King Qin.

古文：当是之时，秦地已并巴、蜀、汉中，越宛有郢，置南郡矣；北收上郡以东，有河东、太原、上党郡；东至荥阳，灭二周，置三川郡。
现代文：当时，秦国已经兼并了巴、蜀、汉中，越过宛占有了郢，设置了南郡；往北取得了上郡以东，占有了河东、太原、上党郡；东边到达荣阳，消灭了西周、东周，设置了三川郡。
English: At that time, Qin had already annexed Ba, Shu, and Hanzhong, crossed Wan and occupied Qu, and set up Nan County; to the north, it gained Shang County and the east, and occupied Hedong, Taiyuan, and Shangdang County; to the east, it reached Rongyang, eliminated West Zhou and East Zhou, and set up Sanchuan County.

古文：吕不韦为相，封十万户，号曰文信侯。
现代文：吕不韦做丞相，封邑十万户，号为文信侯。
English: Lü Buwei was made chancellor, the fief was 100,000 households, and his title was Wenxin Hou (文信侯).

古文：招致宾客游士，欲以并天下。
现代文：招揽宾客游士，打算吞并天下。
English: Inviting guests and wanderers, intending to take over the world.

古文：李斯为舍人。蒙骜、王齮、麃公等为将军。
现代文：李斯为舍人，蒙骜、王齮、麃公等为将军。
English: Li Si was the cutter, and Meng Ye, Wang Ye, Xing Gong and others were the generals.

古文：王年少，初即位，委国事大臣。
现代文：秦王年幼，即位初期，国家政事交由大臣处理。
English: King Qin was young, and at the beginning of his reign, state affairs were handled by ministers.

古文：晋阳反，元年，将军蒙骜击定之。
现代文：晋阳反叛，秦王政元年，将军蒙骜平定了叛乱。
English: Jinyang rebelled, and in the first year of the Qin Dynasty, General Meng Rong quelled the rebellion.

古文：二年，麃公将卒攻卷，斩首三万。
现代文：二年，麃公率军攻打卷邑，杀死了三万人。
English: Two years later, Zou Gong led an army to attack Zhanwu, killing thirty thousand people.

古文：三年，蒙骜攻韩，取十三城。
现代文：三年，蒙骜攻打韩国，夺取了十三个城邑。
English: Three years later, Mengniu attacked Korea and captured thirteen towns.

古文：王齮死。
现代文：王齮死了。
English: Wang Xuan is dead.

古文：十月，将军蒙骜攻魏氏畼有诡。
现代文：十月，将军蒙骜攻打魏国的邑、有诡。
English: In October, the general Meng Rong attacked Wei's Zou Yue, which was very strange.

古文：岁大饥。
现代文：这一年粮食大歉收。
English: This year, the grain harvest was very poor.

古文：四年，拔畼有诡。
现代文：四年，攻克邑、有诡。
English: In four years, the conquest of Yeup, there is a ruse.

古文：三月，军罢。
现代文：三月，撤回了军队。
English: In March, the army was withdrawn.

古文：秦质子归自赵，赵太子出归国。
现代文：秦国的人质从赵国返回，赵国太子离开秦国回到赵国。
English: The hostages of Qin returned from Zhao, and the prince of Zhao left Qin and returned to Zhao.

古文：十月庚寅，蝗蟲从东方来，蔽天。
现代文：十月庚寅，蝗虫从东方飞来，遮蔽了天空。
English: In October, locusts came from the east and covered the sky.

古文：天下疫。
现代文：天下瘟疾。
English: It's a plague.

古文：百姓内粟千石，拜爵一级。
现代文：百姓缴纳一千石粟米拜爵一级。
English: The people pay one thousand koku of millet rice, which is equivalent to one bajong.

古文：五年，将军骜攻魏，定酸枣、燕、虚、长平、雍丘、山阳城，皆拔之，取二十城。
现代文：五年，将军蒙骜进攻魏国，平定了酸枣、燕邑、虚邑、长平、雍丘、山阳城，都是使用武力攻克的，共夺取了二十个城色。
English: In the fifth year, General Meng Rong attacked Wei, and leveled Zhouzhuang, Yan'e, Wu'e, Changping, Yongqiu, and Shanyang. All of them were conquered by force, and a total of twenty cities were captured.

古文：初置东郡。
现代文：开始设置东郡。
English: Start setting up East County.

古文：冬雷。
现代文：冬天打雷。
English: Thunder in winter.

古文：六年，韩、魏、赵、卫、楚共击秦，取寿陵。
现代文：六年，韩国、魏国、赵国、卫国、楚国一起进攻秦国，夺取了寿陵。
English: In the sixth year, Korea, Wei, Zhao, Wei, and Chu attacked Qin together and captured Shuling.

古文：秦出兵，五国兵罢。
现代文：秦国出兵，五国的军队撤了回来。
English: Qin dispatched troops, and the armies of the five countries withdrew.

古文：拔卫，迫东郡，其君角率其支属徙居野王，阻其山以保魏之河内。
现代文：秦国攻克卫国，进逼东郡，卫君角率领他的支属迁居野王，凭借山险保卫魏国境内的河内地区。
English: Qin conquered Wei and pushed into Dong County. Wei Junjiao led his subordinates to move to Yanwang, and defended the Hanoi area within Wei's borders by means of mountain peril.

古文：七年，彗星先出东方，见北方，五月见西方。
现代文：七年，彗星先出现在东方。又出现在北方。五月出现在西方。
English: For seven years, the comet appeared first in the east, then in the north, and finally in the west in May.

古文：将军骜死。
现代文：将军蒙骜死了。
English: General Mongkut is dead.

古文：以攻龙、孤、庆都，还兵攻汲。
现代文：是因为攻打龙邑、孤邑、庆都，又回军攻打汲邑。
English: It was because they attacked Longyun-eup, Lone-eup, and Qingdu, and then returned to attack Kumi-eup.

古文：彗星复见西方十六日。
现代文：彗星又在西方出现了十六天。
English: The comet reappeared in the west for another sixteen days.

古文：夏太后死。
现代文：夏太后死了。
English: Empress Dowager Xia is dead.

古文：八年，王弟长安君成蟜将军击赵，反，死屯留，军吏皆斩死，迁其民於临洮。
现代文：八年，秦王赵政弟弟长安君赵成蟜率领军队攻打赵国，在屯留造反了，结果他手下的军官都被杀死，那里的百姓被迁往临洮。
English: In the eighth year, Qin King Zhao Zheng's younger brother, Chang Anjun Zhao Chengyi, led an army to attack Zhao Province and rebelled in Tunli. As a result, his officers were all killed, and the people there were moved to Linyi.

古文：将军壁死，卒屯留、蒲鶮反，戮其尸。
现代文：前来讨伐成蟜的将军壁死了，屯留人士兵蒲鶮，又造反，结果战死，死后还遭到鞭戮尸体的酷刑。
English: The general who came to fight against the Jurchens died, and the residents rebelled against the Jurchens. As a result, they died in battle, and after their death, they were tortured by whipping the corpses.

古文：河鱼大上，轻车重马东就食。
现代文：黄河的鱼大批涌上岸边，人们赶着马车到东方去找食物。
English: The fish in the Yellow River swarmed onto the shore in large numbers, and people drove horse-drawn carriages to the east to find food.

古文：嫪毐封为长信侯。
现代文：嫪毐封为长信侯。
English: This seal is from Naganobu.

古文：予之山阳地，令毐居之。
现代文：赐给他山阳地区，让他居住。
English: He was given the Shanyang region to live in.

古文：宫室车马衣服苑囿驰猎恣毐。
现代文：宫室、车马、衣服、苑囿、游猎对嫪毐一律不加限制。
English: There are no restrictions on the palace, chariots and horses, clothing, gardening, and hunting.

古文：事无小大皆决於毐。
现代文：事无大小都由嫪毐决断。
English: All matters, big or small, are decided by the gong.

古文：又以河西太原郡更为毐国。
现代文：又把河西、太原郡改为嫪毐的封国。
English: He also changed the fiefdoms of Hexi and Taiyuan County to Min.

古文：九年，彗星见，或竟天。
现代文：九年，彗星出现，有时光芒竟天。
English: In the ninth year, a comet appeared, sometimes shining as bright as the sky.

古文：攻魏垣、蒲阳。
现代文：攻打魏国的垣邑、蒲阳。
English: They attacked the Wei fortified town of Poyang.

古文：四月，上宿雍。
现代文：四月，秦王住宿在雍地。
English: In April, Qin Wang stayed in Yongdi.

古文：己酉，王冠，带剑。
现代文：己酉，秦王举行冠礼，佩戴宝剑。
English: After being crowned, King Qin held a coronation ceremony and wore a sword.

古文：长信侯毐作乱而觉，矫王御玺及太后玺以发县卒及卫卒、官骑、戎翟君公、舍人，将欲攻蕲年宫为乱。
现代文：长信侯嫪毐作乱阴谋被发觉了，就诈用秦王印信和太后印信调动县邑的军队和警卫士卒、国家骑兵、戎翟首领、舍人，打算进攻蕲年宫，发动叛乱。
English: When Changxin Houyi's conspiracy to create a disturbance was discovered, he fraudulently used Qin Wang Yinsin and Empress Dowager Yinsin to mobilize the troops and guards of the county and town, the national cavalry, the leaders of the army and navy, and the peasants, intending to attack the Summer Palace and launch a rebellion.

古文：王知之，令相国昌平君、昌文君发卒攻毐。
现代文：秦王知道了这个消息，派相国昌平君、昌文君调遣士卒，进攻嫪毐。
English: When King Qin learned of this news, he sent his ministers, Changping and Changwen, to dispatch soldiers to attack the Jurchens.

古文：战咸阳，斩首数百，皆拜爵，及宦者皆在战中，亦拜爵一级。
现代文：在咸阳交战，杀死了几百人，都得到了爵位，宦者参加战斗的，也得到一级爵位。
English: Those who fought in Xianyang and killed hundreds of people all received a knighthood, and those who participated in the battle also received a first-class knighthood.

古文：毐等败走。
现代文：嫪毐等人战败逃跑了。
English: Yao and the others were defeated and fled.

古文：即令国中：有生得毐，赐钱百万；杀之，五十万。
现代文：秦王就在全国下令：有活捉嫪毐的，赏钱一百万；杀死嫪毐的，赏钱五十万。
English: King Qin then issued an order to the whole country: if a baboon was caught alive, there would be a reward of one million; if a baboon was killed, there would be a reward of five hundred thousand.

古文：尽得毐等。
现代文：全部抓获了嫪毐等人。
English: All of them were captured, including Zou.

古文：卫尉竭、内史肆、佐弋竭、中大夫令齐等二十人皆枭首。
现代文：卫尉竭、内史肆、佐弋竭、中大夫令齐等二十人都被斩首悬挂。
English: Twenty people, including the captain of the guards, the head of the internal history department, the assistant secretary, and the junior doctor, were beheaded and hanged.

古文：车裂以徇，灭其宗。
现代文：又把他们五马分尸、巡行示众，夷灭了他们的宗族。
English: And he took five of their horses and killed them, and sent the bodies of the slain before the people.

古文：及其舍人，轻者为鬼薪。
现代文：嫪毐的舍人，罪轻的罚为鬼薪徒役。
English: Those who abandon the yakitori will be punished for minor offenses and made to work for the devil.

古文：及夺爵迁蜀四千馀家，家房陵。
现代文：削除爵位迁徙蜀地的有四千多家，居住在房陵。
English: There are more than four thousand people who have moved to Shunde after the removal of titles, and they live in Fangling.

古文：四月，寒冻，有死者。
现代文：这个月天寒地冻，有被冻死的。
English: This month, the weather was so cold that some froze to death.

古文：杨端和攻衍氏。
现代文：杨端和攻打衍氏。
English: Yang Duan and attack Yan Shi.

古文：彗星见西方，又见北方，从斗以南八十日。
现代文：彗星出现在西方，又出现在北方，跟随北斗向南移动了八十天。
English: The comet appeared in the west, then in the north, and followed the Big Dipper southward for eighty days.

古文：十年，相国吕不韦坐嫪毐免。
现代文：十年，相国吕不韦由于嫪毐的牵连获罪，免去了相国职务。
English: Ten years later, his brother-in-law, Lü Buwei, was exonerated from his duties as a brother-in-law because he was implicated in a crime.

古文：桓齮为将军。
现代文：桓为将军。
English: Kanenori became a general.

古文：齐、赵来置酒。
现代文：齐国、赵国的使者来了，摆酒设筵。
English: The envoys from the states of Qi and Zhao have arrived, wine is being served and tables are being set up.

古文：齐人茅焦说秦王曰： 秦方以天下为事，而大王有迁母太后之名，恐诸侯闻之，由此倍秦也。 
现代文：齐国人茅焦劝告秦王说： 秦国正在以经营天下为己任，而大王有放逐母太后的名声，恐怕各国诸侯听到这件事，由此引起背叛秦国。 
English: Mao Jiao, a man from Qi, advised the Qin king: "Qin is in the business of running the world, and the great king has a reputation for banishing his mother, the empress dowager. I am afraid that the princes of various countries will hear about this and this will cause them to betray Qin.

古文：秦王乃迎太后於雍而入咸阳，复居甘泉宫。
现代文：秦王就去雍地迎接太后，回到咸阳，让她又重新居住在甘泉宫。
English: King Qin went to Yongdi to meet the empress dowager, returned to Xianyang, and let her live in Ganquan Palace again.

古文：大索，逐客，李斯上书说，乃止逐客令。
现代文：秦王大规模地进行搜捕，驱逐从诸侯国来的宾客。李斯上书劝阻，秦王就废除了驱逐宾客的命令。
English: King Qin conducted a large-scale manhunt and expelled the guests from the principalities. Li Si wrote to dissuade him, and King Qin cancelled the order to expel the guests.

古文：李斯因说秦王，请先取韩以恐他国，於是使斯下韩。
现代文：他乘机建议秦王。首先攻取韩国，使其他诸侯国感到恐惧。于是秦王派李斯攻打韩国。
English: He took the opportunity to suggest to the King of Qin that Korea should be attacked first, so that the other vassal states would be afraid. So the King of Qin sent Li Si to attack Korea.

古文：韩王患之。与韩非谋弱秦。
现代文：韩王很优虑，和韩非商量削弱秦国的力量。
English: Han Wang was very cautious, and discussed with Han Fei how to weaken the power of Qin.

古文：大梁人尉缭来，说秦王曰： 以秦之彊，诸侯譬如郡县之君，臣但恐诸侯合从，翕而出不意，此乃智伯、夫差、湣王之所以亡也。
现代文：大梁人尉缭来到秦国，劝告秦王说： 以秦国的强大力量，诸侯就像一个郡县的君主。但是我担心诸侯联合起来，不露声色，出其不意地攻打秦国，这就是智伯、夫差、湣王所以灭亡的原因。
English: "With the great power of Qin, the lords are like the monarchs of a county. However, I am afraid that the lords will unite and attack Qin without warning. This is the reason why Zhibo, Fuzha, and Zhao Wang perished.

古文：原大王毋爱财物，赂其豪臣，以乱其谋，不过亡三十万金，则诸侯可尽。 
现代文：希望大王不要吝惜财物，贿赂他们有权势的大臣，破坏他们的计划，失去的不过三十万斤黄金，而诸侯则可以全部消灭。 
English: I hope that the great king will not be stingy with his wealth, bribe their powerful ministers, and destroy their plans. The loss is only 300,000 kilos of gold, while the lords can be completely eliminated.

古文：秦王从其计，见尉缭亢礼，衣服食饮与缭同。
现代文：秦王听从了他的建议，每次接见尉缭时都以平等的礼节相侍，衣服、饮食也与尉缭一样。
English: King Qin listened to his advice, and every time he received the lieutenant, he served him with equal etiquette, and his clothes and food were the same as the lieutenant's.

古文：缭曰： 秦王为人，蜂准，长目，挚鸟膺，豺声，少恩而虎狼心，居约易出人下，得志亦轻食人。
现代文：尉缭说： 秦王这个人，高鼻梁，细长的眼睛，鸷鸟一样的胸膛，豺狼一样的声音，刻薄寡恩，心如虎狼，处于穷困时容易谦卑下人，得志时也容易吞噬人。
English: Fei Yan said: This Qin Wang person, high nose, slender eyes, ostrich-like chest, jackal-like voice, mean and ungrateful, heart like a tiger wolf, is easy to humble people when he is in poverty, and easy to devour people when he is successful.

古文：我布衣，然见我常身自下我。
现代文：我是一个平民百姓，然而接见我时，常常甘居我下。
English: I'm a commoner, yet when I'm received, I'm often humbled.

古文：诚使秦王得志於天下，天下皆为虏矣。
现代文：如果秦王得志于天下，天下人都要成为他的俘虏了。
English: If King Qin's will prevails throughout the world, everyone in the world will become his prisoner.

古文：不可与久游。 
现代文：不能和他长期相处。 
English: I can't stay with him for long.

古文：乃亡去。
现代文：尉缭就逃走了。
English: So he ran away.

古文：秦王觉，固止，以为秦国尉，卒用其计策。
现代文：秦王发觉了，坚决地挽留他，让他做秦国国尉，终于采用了他的计策。
English: The Qin king found out, resolutely retained him and made him a Qin lieutenant, and finally adopted his strategy.

古文：而李斯用事。
现代文：而这时李斯主持朝政。
English: At this time, Li Si presided over the imperial court.

古文：十一年，王翦、桓齮、杨端和攻鄴，取九城。
现代文：十一年，王翦、桓、杨端和攻打邺邑，夺取了九个城邑。
English: In the eleventh year, Wang Yao, Huan Yao, and Yang Dua attacked and captured nine towns.

古文：王翦攻阏与、橑杨，皆并为一军。
现代文：王翦攻订阏与、橑杨，把全部士卒合并成一支军队。
English: Wang Qian made an agreement with Zhang and Yang, and merged all the soldiers into one army.

古文：翦将十八日，军归斗食以下，什推二人从军取鄴安阳，桓齮将。
现代文：王翦统率全军，过了十八天、遣返军队中斗食以下的无功人员，十人中推选二人从军。攻下邺邑、橑杨，是桓领兵攻克的。
English: Wang Hongtong led the whole army, and after eighteen days, the army repatriated the unproductive personnel below the fighting food, and two out of ten were selected to join the army. It was Huan Hongtong who led the army to conquer Fenyu and Fenyang.

古文：十二年，文信侯不韦死，窃葬。
现代文：十二年，文信侯吕不韦死了，私家入葬。
English: In the twelfth year, Wenxin Hou Lvubei died and was buried privately.

古文：其舍人临者，晋人也逐出之；秦人六百石以上夺爵，迁；五百石以下不临，迁，勿夺爵。
现代文：吕不韦的舍人来哭吊的，如果是晋人就驱逐出境；如果是秦人，俸禄在六百石以上的削除爵位，迁离旧居，五百石以下没有来哭吊的，也迁离旧居，不削除爵位。
English: If it is a Jin person, he will be expelled from the country; if it is a Qin person, if the salary is more than 600 koku, the peerage will be removed and the peerage will be removed from the former residence, and if it is less than 500 koku, the peerage will not be removed and the peerage will be removed.

古文：自今以来，操国事不道如嫪毐、不韦者籍其门，视此。
现代文：从此以后，治理国家政事，像嫪毐、吕不韦一样为逆不道的，抄没他的全家，按照这个样子处理。
English: Since then, he has governed the country's political affairs, and, like Zhai and Lü Buwei, he has been rebellious, and his entire family has been confiscated and dealt with in this way.

古文：秋，复嫪毐舍人迁蜀者。
现代文：秋天，嫪毐的舍人应该迁徙蜀地的得到了赦免。
English: In the autumn, those who should have migrated to Shu were pardoned.

古文：当是之时，天下大旱，六月至八月乃雨。
现代文：当时，天下大旱六个月，到八月才下雨。
English: At that time, the country was in a six-month drought, and it didn't rain until August.

古文：十三年，桓齮攻赵平阳，杀赵将扈辄，斩首十万。
现代文：十三年，桓攻打赵国的平阳，杀死了赵国将领扈辄，斩首十万。
English: In the thirteenth year, Huan Yu attacked Pingyang in Zhao, killed the Zhao general Lian Yu, and beheaded one hundred thousand people.

古文：王之河南。
现代文：赵王逃往河南。
English: Zhao Wang fled to Henan Province.

古文：正月，彗星见东方。
现代文：正月，彗星出现在东方。
English: In the first month, the comet appeared in the east.

古文：十月，桓齮攻赵。
现代文：十月，桓攻打赵国。
English: In October, Emperor Kanmu attacked Zhao.

古文：十四年，攻赵军於平阳，取宜安，破之，杀其将军。
现代文：十四年，在平阳进攻赵国军队，夺取了宜安，打垮了赵国军队，杀死了它的将军。
English: In the 14th year, he attacked the Zhao army in Pingyang, captured Yian, defeated the Zhao army, and killed its general.

古文：桓齮定平阳、武城。
现代文：桓平定了平阳、武城。
English: Kanenobu defeated Heiyang and Bucheng.

古文：韩非使秦，秦用李斯谋，留非，非死云阳。
现代文：韩非出使秦国，秦国采纳李斯的计策，把韩非羁留在秦国，韩非死在云阳。
English: Han Fei was sent to Qin. Qin adopted Li Si's strategy and kept Han Fei in custody in Qin. Han Fei died in Yunyang.

古文：韩王请为臣。
现代文：韩王请求作为秦国的臣属。
English: King Han requested to be made a vassal of Qin.

古文：十五年，大兴兵，一军至鄴，一军至太原，取狼孟。
现代文：十五年，秦国大举出兵，一支军队到达邺邑，一支军队到达太原，攻下了狼孟。
English: In the fifteenth year of the Qin Dynasty, a large number of soldiers were dispatched. One army reached Yingyue, another army reached Taiyuan, and captured the Wolf Meng.

古文：地动。
现代文：发生地震。
English: An earthquake occurred.

古文：十六年九月，发卒受地韩南阳假守腾。
现代文：十六年九月，派兵接收韩国南阳地区，腾暂时代理郡守。
English: In September, 166, troops were sent to take over the Nanyang region of South Korea, and Teng temporarily became acting county governor.

古文：初令男子书年。
现代文：开始下令男子登记年龄。
English: At first, men were ordered to register their age.

古文：魏献地於秦。
现代文：魏国向秦国献纳土地。
English: The State of Wei offered land to the State of Qin.

古文：秦置丽邑。
现代文：秦国设置丽邑。
English: Qin set up Liyu.

古文：十七年，内史腾攻韩，得韩王安，尽纳其地，以其地为郡，命曰颍川。
现代文：十七年，内史腾攻打韩国，抓获了韩王安，兼并了全部韩国领土，把它的领土设置了一个郡，命名为颍川。
English: In the seventeenth year, Inner Shiteng attacked Korea, captured Han Wangan, annexed the entire Korean territory, and set up a county in its territory, named Shuchuan.

古文：地动。
现代文：发生地震。
English: An earthquake occurred.

古文：华阳太后卒。
现代文：华阳太后死了。
English: The Empress Dowager Huayang is dead.

古文：民大饥。
现代文：百姓遭受严重的饥荒。
English: The people are suffering from a severe famine.

古文：十八年，大兴兵攻赵，王翦将上地，下井陉，端和将河内，羌瘣伐赵，端和围邯郸城。
现代文：十八年，大举出兵进攻赵国，王翦统率上地士卒，攻下井陉。杨端和统率河内士卒，羌瘣也率军攻打赵国，杨端和围攻邯郸城。
English: In the 18th year, troops were dispatched in large numbers to attack Zhao Province. Wang Huan led the troops from the provinces and captured Jingyi. Yang Duan led the troops from Hanoi and Huan also led the troops to attack Zhao Province and Yang Duan and besieged Shicheng.

古文：十九年，王翦、羌瘣尽定取赵地东阳，得赵王。
现代文：十九年，王翦、羌瘣全部攻占和平定了赵国的东阳地区，抓获了赵王。
English: In the 19th year, Wang Qian and Qian all conquered and pacified the Dongyang region of Zhao, and captured Zhao Wang.

古文：引兵欲攻燕，屯中山。
现代文：率兵准备进攻燕国，军队驻扎在中山。
English: He led the troops to prepare for the attack on Yan Province, and the troops were stationed in Zhongshan.

古文：秦王之邯郸，诸尝与王生赵时母家有仇怨，皆阬之。
现代文：秦王来到邯郸，凡是他生在赵国时曾与母亲家里有仇怨的，全部坑杀。
English: When King Qin came to Zhai, he killed everyone who had a grudge against his mother's family when he was born in Zhao.

古文：秦王还，从太原、上郡归。
现代文：秦王返回秦国，是从太原、上郡回来的。
English: When King Qin returned to Qin, he came from Taiyuan and Shang County.

古文：始皇帝母太后崩。
现代文：始皇帝的母亲皇太后去世。
English: The First Emperor's mother, the Empress Dowager, passed away.

古文：赵公子嘉率其宗数百人之代，自立为代王，东与燕合兵，军上谷。
现代文：赵国公子嘉带领他的宗族几百人前往代地，自立为代王、向东与燕国的军队联合起来，驻扎在上谷。
English: Zhao Guo Gongzijia led several hundred members of his clan to the vicarage, established himself as the acting king, united with the army of Yan to the east, and stationed in Shanggu.

古文：大饥。
现代文：这一年发生严重饥荒。
English: There was a great famine.

古文：二十年，燕太子丹患秦兵至国，恐，使荆轲刺秦王。
现代文：二十年，燕国太子丹担忧秦国的军队来到燕国，心里慌恐不安，派遣荆轲刺杀秦王。
English: Twenty years ago, Prince Dan of Yan worried that the army of Qin would come to Yan, so he panicked and sent Jingyao to assassinate King Qin.

古文：秦王觉之，体解轲以徇，而使王翦、辛胜攻燕。
现代文：秦王察觉了，肢解了荆柯的尸体巡行示众，派王翦、辛胜进攻燕国。
English: King Qin noticed this, dismembered Jing Ke's corpse and paraded it for the public to see, and sent Wang Xi and Xin Sheng to attack Yan Province.

古文：燕、代发兵击秦军，秦军破燕易水之西。
现代文：燕国、代国出兵攻击秦国军队，秦国军队在易水西边打败了燕国军队。
English: Yan and its surrogates sent troops to attack the Qin army, and the Qin army defeated the Yan army on the west side of the Yishui River.

古文：二十一年，王贲攻荆。
现代文：二十一年，王贲进攻荆地。
English: In the twenty-first year, Wang Yao launched an attack on Jing.

古文：乃益发卒诣王翦军，遂破燕太子军，取燕蓟城，得太子丹之首。
现代文：调遣更多的士卒前往王翦军队，于是打垮了燕太子的军队，攻下了燕国的蓟城，得到了太子丹的首级。
English: He dispatched more soldiers to Wang Hui's army, thus defeating Yan Taizi's army, capturing Yan's Shicheng, and receiving Prince Dan's head.

古文：燕王东收辽东而王之。
现代文：燕王东去聚集辽东兵力，在那里称王。
English: Yan Wangdong went to gather Liaodong's forces and proclaimed himself king there.

古文：王翦谢病老归。新郑反。
现代文：王翦推托有病，告老还乡，新郑反叛。
English: Wang Shutuo was ill and returned to his hometown. Xin Zheng rebelled.

古文：昌平君徙於郢。
现代文：昌平君迁徙到郢地。
English: Changping moved to Handan.

古文：大雨雪，深二尺五寸。
现代文：下大雪，雪有二尺五寸深。
English: Heavy snow is falling. The snow is two feet and five inches deep.

古文：二十二年，王贲攻魏，引河沟灌大梁，大梁城坏，其王请降，尽取其地。
现代文：二十二年，王贲进攻魏国，挖沟引河水淹灌大梁，大梁城墙毁坏，魏王请求投降，秦国占领了全部魏国领土。
English: In the 22nd year, Wang Xi attacked Wei, dug a ditch to divert river water to flood the girders, the girders of the city wall were destroyed, the Wei king asked for surrender, and Qin occupied the entire territory of Wei.

古文：二十三年，秦王复召王翦，彊起之，使将击荆。
现代文：二十三年，秦王又征召王翦，坚持要起用他，派他率军攻打荆国。
English: In 233, King Qin again conscripted Wang Xi, insisting on using him and sending him to lead the army to attack Jing.

古文：取陈以南至平舆，虏荆王。
现代文：攻下陈地以南至平舆一带，俘虏了荆王。
English: They conquered the area south of Chen Di to Pingwu and captured Jing Wang.

古文：秦王游至郢陈。
现代文：秦王巡游到达郢陈。
English: The Qin King's parade arrives in Niancheng.

古文：荆将项燕立昌平君为荆王，反秦於淮南。
现代文：荆将项燕立昌平君为荆王，在淮水南边起兵反秦。
English: Jing general Xiang Yan established Changping as the king of Jing and raised an army against Qin in the south of Huai Shui.

古文：二十四年，王翦、蒙武攻荆，破荆军，昌平君死，项燕遂自杀。
现代文：二十四年，王翦、蒙武进攻荆地，打败了荆军，昌平君战死，项燕也就自杀了。
English: In the twenty-fourth year, Wang Xuan and Mengwu attacked Jing, defeated the Jing army, Changping died in battle, and Xiangyan also committed suicide.

古文：二十五年，大兴兵，使王贲将，攻燕辽东，得燕王喜。
现代文：二十五年，大举出兵，派王贲为将，率军进攻燕国辽东地区，抓获了燕王喜。
English: In the 25th year, he sent a large number of soldiers, sent Wang Qi as the general, and led the army to attack the Liaodong area of Yan Province, and captured Yan Wangxi.

古文：还攻代，虏代王嘉。
现代文：回军进攻代国，俘虏了代王嘉。
English: The returning troops attacked the representing country and captured the representing Wang Jia.

古文：王翦遂定荆江南地；降越君，置会稽郡。
现代文：王翦平定了荆国江南地区；降服了越君，设置会稽郡。
English: Wang Hui pacified the south of the Yangtze River in Jing Province, subdued Yuejun, and set up the County Audit Office.

古文：五月，天下大酺。
现代文：五月，天下欢聚宴饮。
English: In May, the whole world gathers for feasting.

古文：二十六年，齐王建与其相后胜发兵守其西界，不通秦。
现代文：二十六年，齐王建和齐相后胜调遣军队防守西部边界，不与秦国来往。
English: In the 26th year, after King Qi Jianhe and Qixiang Sheng dispatched troops to defend the western border, and did not deal with Qin.

古文：秦使将军王贲从燕南攻齐，得齐王建。
现代文：秦国派将军王贲从燕国南下进攻齐国，俘虏了齐王建。
English: Qin sent the general Wang Qian to attack Qi from the south of Yan, and captured Qi Wang Jian.

古文：秦初并天下，令丞相、御史曰： 异日韩王纳地效玺，请为籓臣，已而倍约，与赵、魏合从畔秦，故兴兵诛之，虏其王。
现代文：秦国刚刚兼并天下，下令丞相、御史说： 前些时候韩王交出土地，奉献国王的印章，请求成为藩臣。不久背弃了约定，与赵国、魏国联合起来背叛秦国，所以我兴兵讨伐，俘虏了韩国的国王。
English: Qin had just annexed the whole country, so he ordered the prime minister and the minister of history to say: Some time ago, the king of Korea handed over land, dedicated the king's seal, and asked to become a vassal of the domain. Soon he reneged on the agreement and united with Zhao and Wei to betray Qin, so I raised an army and captured the king of Korea.

古文：寡人以为善，庶几息兵革。
现代文：我以为这是件好事，大概可以偃兵息革了。
English: I thought it was a good thing, I could probably retire.

古文：赵王使其相李牧来约盟，故归其质子。
现代文：赵王派他的丞相李牧来签订盟约，所以送回了他的作人质的儿子。
English: Zhao Wang sent his chancellor Li Mu to sign the covenant, so he sent back his hostage son.

古文：已而倍盟，反我太原，故兴兵诛之，得其王。
现代文：不久赵国背叛了盟约，在我国太原起兵反抗，所以我兴兵讨伐，抓获了它的国王。
English: Soon after, Zhao betrayed the treaty and rebelled in Taiyuan, our country, so I led an army and captured its king.

古文：赵公子嘉乃自立为代王，故举兵击灭之。魏王始约服入秦，已而与韩、赵谋袭秦，秦兵吏诛，遂破之。
现代文：赵国公子嘉自立为代王，所以我又发兵消灭了他，魏王最初说定臣服秦国，不久与韩国、赵国阴谋袭击秦国，秦国吏卒前往讨伐，摧毁了魏国。
English: Zhao Guo Gongzijia set himself up as acting king, so I sent troops to eliminate him. The Wei king initially said that he was determined to submit to Qin. Soon, he plotted with South Korea and Zhao to attack Qin. Qin officials went to fight and destroyed Wei.

古文：荆王献青阳以西，已而畔约，击我南郡，故发兵诛，得其王，遂定其荆地。
现代文：荆王献纳青阳以西的土地，不久违背约定，进攻我国南郡，所以我发兵讨伐，抓到了荆国国王，平定了荆地。
English: The King of Jing offered the land west of Qingyang, and soon broke the agreement and attacked the southern county of our country, so I sent an army to fight, caught the King of Jing, and leveled Jing.

古文：燕王昏乱，其太子丹乃阴令荆轲为贼，兵吏诛，灭其国。
现代文：燕王昏庸乱政，他的太子丹暗中指使荆轲为刺客，秦国吏卒前去讨伐，灭亡了他的国家。
English: Yan Wang's reign was chaotic and chaotic. His prince, Dan Maru, secretly ordered Jing Ye to become an assassin, and the Qin officials went to fight, and his country was destroyed.

古文：齐王用后胜计，绝秦使，欲为乱，兵吏诛，虏其王，平齐地。
现代文：齐王采用后胜的计策，不让秦国使者进入齐国，打算兴兵作乱，我派吏卒去讨伐，俘虏了齐国国王，平定了齐地。
English: The king of Qi used the strategy of post-victory to prevent the Qin emissaries from entering Qi, intending to stir up unrest. I sent officials to fight, captured the king of Qi, and leveled Qi.

古文：寡人以眇眇之身，兴兵诛暴乱，赖宗庙之灵，六王咸伏其辜，天下大定。
现代文：我以微渺之身躯，发兵诛暴讨乱，靠着祖先宗庙的威灵，六国国王都已各服其罪，天下完全平定了。
English: With my feeble body, I sent soldiers to quell the riots, relying on the power of the ancestral temple. The kings of the six countries have all confessed their sins, and the world has been completely pacified.

古文：今名号不更，无以称成功，传後世。
现代文：现在不改换名号，就不能颂扬建立的功业，流传后世。
English: If we don't change the name now, we won't be able to celebrate our achievements and pass them on to future generations.

古文：其议帝号。 
现代文：请你们商定帝号。 
English: Please agree on the imperial symbol.

古文：丞相绾、御史大夫劫、廷尉斯等皆曰： 昔者五帝地方千里，其外侯服夷服诸侯或朝或否，天子不能制。
现代文：丞相王绾、御史大夫冯劫、廷尉李斯等都说： 过去五帝管辖千里见方的地区，在这个地区之外的侯服、夷服，有的诸侯朝贡，有的诸侯不朝贡，天子不能控制。
English: The chancellor Wang Qian, the chief historian Feng Rong, and the courtier Li Si all said: In the past, the five emperors had jurisdiction over a thousand-kilometer-square region, and outside this region, some princes paid tribute, some princes did not pay tribute, and the emperor could not control it.

古文：今陛下兴义兵，诛残贼，平定天下，海内为郡县，法令由一统，自上古以来未尝有，五帝所不及。
现代文：现在陛下调遣义军，诛暴讨贼，平定天下，四海之内，设置郡县，统一法令，这是从上古以来所没有过的，五帝也望尘莫及。
English: Now, His Majesty has dispatched the rebel army, cracked down on violence and thieves, pacified the world and the four seas, set up counties and unified laws. This has never happened since ancient times, and it is beyond the reach of the five emperors.

古文：臣等谨与博士议曰： 古有天皇，有地皇，有泰皇，泰皇最贵。 
现代文：我们谨慎地和博士讨论，都说， 古代有天皇，有地皇，有泰皇，泰皇最高贵。 
English: We cautiously discussed with the doctor, and both said, In ancient times, there were emperors, there were earthly emperors, there were Thai emperors, and the Thai emperors were the most noble.

古文：臣等昧死上尊号，王为 泰皇 。
现代文：我们冒着死罪献上尊号，王称为 泰皇 。
English: At the risk of death, we presented him with an honorary title, and the king was called the Thai Emperor.

古文：命为 制 ，令为 诏 ，天子自称曰 朕 。 
现代文：天子之命称为 制 ，天子之令称为 诏 ，天子自称叫 朕 。 
English: The order of the Son of Heaven is called the system, the order of the Son of Heaven is called the edict, and the Son of Heaven calls himself "I."

古文：王曰： 去 泰 ，著 皇 ，采上古 帝 位号，号曰 皇帝 。
现代文：秦王说： 去掉 泰 字，留下 皇 字，采用上古表示地位称号的 帝 字，叫作 皇帝 。
English: King Qin said, "Get rid of the Thai character, keep the imperial character, and use the ancient imperial character to indicate the status of the title, called the emperor.

古文：他如议。 
现代文：其他遵照议定的意见。 
English: Other opinions in accordance with the agreement.

古文：制曰： 可。 
现代文：下达制命说： 可以。 
English: The Emperor's order said: Let's play.

古文：追尊庄襄王为太上皇。
现代文：追尊庄襄王为太上皇。
English: Emperor Taizhongzhuang is crowned as the last emperor.

古文：制曰： 朕闻太古有号毋谥，中古有号，死而以行为谥。
现代文：皇帝下达制命说： 我听说远古有称号，没有谥号，中古有称号，死后根据生前行迹确定谥号。
English: The emperor issued an order saying: I heard that in ancient times there was a title, but no nickname, and in the Middle Ages there was a title, and after death the nickname was determined according to one's deeds in life.

古文：如此，则子议父，臣议君也，甚无谓，朕弗取焉。
现代文：这样做，就是儿子议论父亲，臣子议论君王，很没有意义，我不采取这种做法。
English: To do so would be like a son talking about his father, or a vassal talking about the king. It makes no sense, and I will not do it.

古文：自今已来，除谥法。
现代文：从此以后，废除谥法。
English: From now on, it is time to abolish this law.

古文：朕为始皇帝。
现代文：我是始皇帝。
English: I am the First Emperor.

古文：後世以计数，二世三世至于万世，传之无穷。 
现代文：子孙后代用数计算，从二世、三世至于万世，传袭无穷。 
English: Counting the number of descendants, from the second and third generation to the millionth generation, the lineage is endless.

古文：始皇推终始五德之传，以为周得火德，秦代周，德从所不胜。
现代文：始皇根据五德终始的嬗递次序进行推演，认为周朝得到了火德，秦朝代替周朝的火德，遵循五行相胜的法则现在应是水德的开端。
English: The First Emperor deduced according to the order of transmission of the five virtues from beginning to end, and believed that the Zhou Dynasty obtained fire virtue, the Qin Dynasty replaced the fire virtue of the Zhou Dynasty, and following the rule of the victory of the five elements should now be the beginning of water virtue.

古文：方今水德之始，改年始，朝贺皆自十月朔。衣服旄旌节旗皆上黑。
现代文：改变一年的首月，十月初一群臣入朝庆贺。衣服、旄旌、节旗都祟尚黑色。
English: In the first month of the year, at the beginning of October, a group of courtiers entered the morning to celebrate. Clothes, bags, and festival flags were all black.

古文：数以六为纪，符、法冠皆六寸，而舆六尺，六尺为步，乘六马。
现代文：数目用六作标准，符、法冠都六寸，舆车宽六尺，六尺为步，驾车用六匹马。
English: The numeral six is used as the standard, the symbols and the crown are six inches high, the chariot is six feet wide, the stride is six feet, and six horses are used for driving.

古文：更名河曰德水，以为水德之始。
现代文：把河改名叫德水，作为水德的开始。
English: Renaming the river to De Shui, as the beginning of Shui De.

古文：刚毅戾深，事皆决於法，刻削毋仁恩和义，然後合五德之数。
现代文：为政强硬果决，暴戾苛细，事情都依法决断，刻薄严峻，没有仁爱恩德，没有温情道义，这样才符合五德演变的原则。
English: Strong and decisive for politics, violent and harsh, things are decided in accordance with the law, harsh and severe, there is no benevolence, no kindness, no tenderness, and no morality. This is in line with the principle of the evolution of the five moralities.

古文：於是急法，久者不赦。
现代文：于是法令峻急，囚禁很久的罪犯也不赦免。
English: As a result, the law is very strict, and criminals who have been imprisoned for a long time are not pardoned.

古文：丞相绾等言： 诸侯初破，燕、齐、荆地远，不为置王，毋以填之。
现代文：丞相王绾等建议说： 各国诸候刚被消灭，燕、齐、荆地辽远，不在那里立王，就没有人来安定燕、齐、荆。
English: The chancellor Wang Xi et al. suggested that: The states of various countries have just been eliminated, and Yan, Qi and Jing are far away. If a king is not set up there, there will be no one to stabilize Yan, Qi and Jing.

古文：请立诸子，唯上幸许。 
现代文：请把皇帝的几个儿子立为王，希望得到皇帝的赞成。 
English: Please make the emperor's sons kings, and hope for the emperor's approval.

古文：始皇下其议於群臣，群臣皆以为便。
现代文：始皇把王绾等人的建议交给群臣讨论，群臣都认为很适宜。
English: The first emperor gave the suggestions of Wang Xi and others to the ministers for discussion, and the ministers all thought it was very appropriate.

古文：廷尉李斯议曰： 周文武所封子弟同姓甚众，然後属疏远，相攻击如仇雠，诸侯更相诛伐，周天子弗能禁止。
现代文：廷尉李斯建议说： 周文王、周武王所封立的同姓子弟很多，然而后来的族属疏远，互相攻击、如同仇敌，诸侯交相讨代，周天子不能禁止。
English: The courtier Li Si suggested, "King Zhou Wen and King Zhou Wu had many sons with the same surname. However, the later clans were estranged and attacked each other, like enemies. Princes and lords exchanged visits, and Zhou Tianzi could not forbid it.

古文：今海内赖陛下神灵一统，皆为郡县，诸子功臣以公赋税重赏赐之，甚足易制。
现代文：现在依靠陛下的神灵统一了天下，都划分成为郡县，皇帝的子弟和功臣，都用国家的赋税重加赏赐，很容易治理。
English: Now, relying on His Majesty's deities, He has unified the world and divided it into counties. The emperor's sons and meritorious vassals are rewarded with heavy taxes from the state. It is easy to govern.

古文：天下无异意，则安宁之术也。
现代文：天下没有二心，这就是国家安定的方法。
English: There are no double-minded people in the world, and this is the way to ensure the stability of the country.

古文：置诸侯不便。 
现代文：封立诸侯是不适宜的。 
English: It is not appropriate to have feudal lords.

古文：始皇曰： 天下共苦战斗不休，以有侯王。赖宗庙，天下初定，又复立国，是树兵也，而求其宁息，岂不难哉！
现代文：始皇说： 天下苦于无休止的战争，是因为有诸侯王的缘故，依靠宗庙之灵，刚刚平定了天下，再去建立诸侯国，这是自我树敌，而要求得安宁，岂不是很困难的吗！
English: The first emperor said: The world is suffering from endless wars because of the vassals. Relying on the spirit of the ancestral temple, we have just pacified the world, and then go to establish a vassal state. This is self-made enemy, and it is not very difficult to ask for peace!

古文：廷尉议是。 
现代文：廷尉的建议是正确的。 
English: The courtier's advice was right.

古文：分天下以为三十六郡，郡置守、尉、监。
现代文：把全国划分为三十六郡，郡设守、尉、监。
English: The country was divided into 36 counties, each with a governor, lieutenant and inspector.

古文：更名民曰 黔首 。
现代文：百姓改称 黔首 。
English: The people changed their name to "Dagger."

古文：大酺。
现代文：天下欢聚宴饮。
English: The whole world is celebrating and feasting.

古文：收天下兵，聚之咸阳，销以为锺鐻，金人十二，重各千石，置廷宫中。
现代文：收集天下兵器，集中在咸阳，熔铸成钟鐻，又铸造了十二个铜人，每一个重一千石，安置在宫廷中。
English: He collected the world's weapons, concentrated them in Xianyang, melted and cast them into bells, and cast twelve bronze men, each weighing a thousand stones, and placed them in the court.

古文：一法度衡石丈尺。
现代文：统一法律制度和度量衡标准。
English: The unification of the legal system and standards of measurement.

古文：车同轨。
现代文：规定车子两轮距离相同。
English: It is stipulated that the distance between the two wheels of the car is the same.

古文：书同文字。
现代文：书写采用统一的文字。
English: A uniform script is used for writing.

古文：地东至海暨朝鲜，西至临洮、羌中，南至北乡户，北据河为塞，并阴山至辽东。
现代文：全国地域东至大海和朝鲜，西至临洮、羌中，南至门朝北开的地区，北据黄河为屏障，顺着阴山直至辽东。
English: The national territory extends east to the sea and Korea, west to Linyi and Yuzhong, south to the north-facing areas, north to the Yellow River as a barrier, and along the Yinshan to Liaodong.

古文：徙天下豪富於咸阳十二万户。
现代文：把天下豪富十二万户迁徙到咸阳。
English: 120,000 families of the world's super-rich moved to Xianyang.

古文：诸庙及章台、上林皆在渭南。
现代文：秦国各王的陵庙和章台、上林苑都在渭水南岸。
English: The mausoleums of the kings of Qin, Zhangdai and Shanglinyuan are all on the southern shore of Surabaya.

古文：秦每破诸侯，写放其宫室，作之咸阳北阪上，南临渭，自雍门以东至泾、渭，殿屋複道周阁相属。
现代文：秦国每消灭一个诸侯国，就模仿它的宫殿，在咸阳北坡上仿效建造，南临渭水，从雍门以东到达泾水、渭水汇流地区，宫殿室宇、空中栈道和缭绕回旋的阁道连续不断。
English: Every time Qin State eliminated a vassal state, it imitated its palace. It was built on the north slope of Xianyang, and south of Surabaya, from the east of Yongmen to the Surabaya and Surabaya confluence areas. The palace rooms, aerial boardwalks, and winding gallery roads are continuous.

古文：所得诸侯美人锺鼓，以充入之。
现代文：从诸侯国掳掠来的美女、钟鼓，都安置在里面。
English: The beautiful woman and the bell and drum, which were captured from the vassal states, are placed inside.

古文：二十七年，始皇巡陇西、北地，出鸡头山，过回中。
现代文：二十七年，始皇巡行陇西、北地，来到鸡头山，路过回中。
English: In the 27th year, the first emperor went on a tour of Shaanxi and Hubei, came to Jitou Mountain, and passed through Huizhong.

古文：焉作信宫渭南，已更命信宫为极庙，象天极。
现代文：于是在渭水南面建造信宫，不久把信宫改名为极庙，象征天极星。
English: Therefore, the Shingu was built in the south of Surabaya, and soon the Shingu was renamed the Pole Temple, symbolizing the celestial pole star.

古文：自极庙道通郦山，作甘泉前殿。筑甬道，自咸阳属之。
现代文：从极庙修路通往郦山，又建造了甘泉宫前殿，修筑甬道，从咸阳和它相连。
English: A road was built from the Pole Temple to Shaoshan, and the front hall of Ganquan Palace was built, and a causeway was built to connect it to Xianyang.

古文：是岁，赐爵一级。
现代文：这一年，赐予全国民爵一级。
English: In the same year, he was awarded the first-class national title.

古文：治驰道。
现代文：修建驰道。
English: Construction of the track.

古文：二十八年，始皇东行郡县，上邹峄山。
现代文：二十八年，始皇向东巡行郡县，登上邹峄山。
English: In the 28th year, the first emperor went on a tour of counties to the east and ascended Mount Lushan.

古文：立石，与鲁诸儒生议，刻石颂秦德，议封禅望祭山川之事。
现代文：树立石碑，和鲁地的一些儒生商议，刻写石碑颂扬秦朝的功德，又讨论封禅和望祭山川的事情。
English: They set up a stone monument, discussed with some Confucian students in Ludi, engraved a stone monument to praise the merits of the Qin Dynasty, and discussed the matter of fusing Zen and looking forward to the mountains and rivers.

古文：乃遂上泰山，立石，封，祠祀。
现代文：于是就登上泰山，树立石碑，积土成坛，祭祀上天。
English: So they ascended Mount Tai, erected a stone monument, piled up earth to make an altar, and offered sacrifices to the heavens.

古文：下，风雨暴至，休於树下，因封其树为五大夫。
现代文：下山时，忽然来了风雨，始皇停留在树下，因此封这棵树为五大夫。
English: When descending the mountain, the wind and rain suddenly came, and the first emperor stayed under the tree, so this tree was sealed as the Five Great Masters.

古文：禅梁父。刻所立石，其辞曰：
现代文：又到梁父辟地为基，祭祀了大地，在所立的石碑上进行刻辞，碑文说：
English: He also went to Liang's father to lay the foundation of the earth, sacrificed the earth, and engraved words on the stone monument erected. The inscription said:

古文：皇帝临位，作制明法，臣下脩饬。
现代文：皇帝即位，创立制度，申明法令，臣下修治严整。
English: The emperor ascended the throne, established a system, promulgated decrees, and governed his subjects strictly.

古文：二十有六年，初并天下，罔不宾服。
现代文：二十六年，开始兼并了天下，没有不顺从的。
English: In twenty-six years, the world began to be annexed, and no one disobeyed.

古文：亲巡远方黎民，登兹泰山，周览东极。
现代文：亲自巡视远方的百姓，登上这座泰山，遍览最东边的疆域。
English: He personally inspected the distant people, climbed Mount Tai, and surveyed the easternmost territory.

古文：从臣思迹，本原事业，祗诵功德。
现代文：随从的臣属回忆走过的道路，探求事业的来龙去脉，恭敬地颂扬秦朝的功德。
English: The attendant vassals recall the road traveled, explore the ins and outs of the cause, and respectfully praise the merits of the Qin Dynasty.

古文：治道运行，诸产得宜，皆有法式。
现代文：治国的方法得到贯彻执行，各项生产安排适宜，都有一定的规则。
English: The methods of governing the country have been thoroughly implemented, various production arrangements are appropriate, and there are certain rules.

古文：大义休明，垂于後世，顺承勿革。
现代文：伟大的真理美好而又光明，要流传后世，继承下来，不要改变。
English: The great truth, beautiful and bright, should be passed down to future generations, inherited, and should not be changed.

古文：皇帝躬圣，既平天下，不懈於治。夙兴夜寐，建设长利，专隆教诲。
现代文：皇帝本身神圣，已经平定了天下，仍坚持不懈地治理国家，早起晚睡，谋求长远的利益，特别重视对臣民的教导。
English: The emperor himself is sacred. He has already pacified the world, and still manages the country tirelessly. He gets up early and goes to bed late, seeks long-term interests, and pays special attention to teaching his subjects.

古文：训经宣达，远近毕理，咸承圣志。
现代文：有关治国的教诲和法则传播四方，远近都得到治理，完全接受了皇帝的神圣意志。
English: The teachings and rules of governing the country were spread to the four directions, and they were governed far and near, and they fully accepted the emperor's sacred will.

古文：贵贱分明，男女礼顺，慎遵职事。
现代文：贵贱等级分明，男女依礼行事，谨慎地遵守各自的职责。
English: There is a clear hierarchy of nobility and lowliness, and men and women act according to etiquette and carefully observe their respective duties.

古文：昭隔内外，靡不清净，施于後嗣。
现代文：明显地使内外有别，无不感到清静而纯洁，这种情况要延续到子孙后代。
English: Clearly make the inside and outside different, all feel calm and pure, this situation should continue to future generations.

古文：化及无穷，遵奉遗诏，永承重戒。
现代文：教化所及，无穷无尽，遵循遗留下来的诏令，永远继承这重要的告诫。
English: The reach of edification is endless, follow the legacy of the edict, and always inherit this important admonition.

古文：於是乃并勃海以东，过黄、腄，穷成山，登之罘，立石颂秦德焉而去。
现代文：于是沿着渤海东行，经过黄具、腄县，攀上成山的最高点，登上之罘的顶峰，树立石碑，颂扬秦朝的德业，然后离去。
English: So he traveled east along the Bohai Sea, passing Huangju and Yixian, climbed the highest point of Chengdu Mountain, climbed the peak of Zhishan, set up a stone monument, praised the virtue of the Qin Dynasty, and then left.

古文：南登琅邪，大乐之，留三月。
现代文：向南登上琅邪，非常高兴，停留了三个月。
English: He went south to Shanzhao, was very happy, and stayed there for three months.

古文：乃徙黔首三万户琅邪台下，复十二岁。
现代文：把三万户百姓迁徙到琅邪台下，免除十二年徭役。
English: Thirty thousand households of common people were relocated to the land of the wicked, and they were exempted from twelve years of forced labor.

古文：作琅邪台，立石刻，颂秦德，明得意。
现代文：修建琅邪台，立碑刻辞，颂扬秦朝的德业，表明符合天下的意志。
English: The construction of the Qin Yatai, the inscription on the monument, and the glorification of the Qin Dynasty's virtue show that it is in line with the will of the world.

古文：曰：
现代文：刻辞说：
English: The inscription reads:

古文：维二十八年，皇帝作始。
现代文：二十八年，刚开始做皇帝。
English: Twenty-eight years old, he had just become emperor.

古文：端平法度，万物之纪。
现代文：制定了公正的法律制度，这是天下万物的准则。
English: It has established a just legal system, which is the standard for all things under heaven.

古文：以明人事，合同父子。
现代文：以此来明确人和人之间的关系，使父子同心协力。
English: In this way, to clarify the relationship between people, so that the father and son work together.

古文：圣智仁义，显白道理。
现代文：皇帝神圣明智而又仁义，明白一切事物的道理。
English: The emperor is holy, wise and benevolent, and understands the truth of all things.

古文：东抚东土，以省卒士。
现代文：向东巡视东部地区，检阅士卒。
English: He toured the eastern region, inspecting soldiers and cadets.

古文：事已大毕，乃临于海。
现代文：巡视已经完全结束，就来到了海边。
English: When the inspection was completely over, they came to the beach.

古文：皇帝之功，勤劳本事。
现代文：皇帝的功勋，在于辛勤地操劳国家的根本大事。
English: The emperor's merit lies in his diligent handling of the country's fundamental affairs.

古文：上农除末，黔首是富。
现代文：重农抑商，百姓富裕。
English: Heavy farmers suppress merchants, and the people are rich.

古文：普天之下，抟心揖志。
现代文：举国上下，一心一意。
English: The whole country is united in this.

古文：器械一量，同书文字。
现代文：器物有一致的标准，统一书写文字。
English: There is a uniform standard for utensils and a uniform written language.

古文：日月所照，舟舆所载。皆终其命，莫不得意。
现代文：凡是日月所照，舟车所至，都能完成皇帝的使命，他所作所为没有不符合天下意志的。
English: Whatever the sun, moon, and chariots bring, can accomplish the emperor's mission, and there is nothing he does that does not conform to the will of heaven and earth.

古文：应时动事，是维皇帝。
现代文：只有皇帝，根据适当的时机来办理事情。
English: Only the emperor, according to the appropriate time to do things.

古文：匡饬异俗，陵水经地。
现代文：整顿不良的风俗，跨山越水，不受地域的限制。
English: The rectification of bad customs, transcending mountains and rivers, is not subject to regional restrictions.

古文：忧恤黔首，朝夕不懈。
现代文：优恤百姓，早晚都不懈怠。
English: If you treat people with kindness, sooner or later you will not slack off.

古文：除疑定法，咸知所辟。
现代文：消除疑虑，制定法令，大家都知道避免触犯刑律。
English: Eliminate doubts, formulate laws, and everyone knows how to avoid violating the criminal law.

古文：方伯分职，诸治经易。
现代文：郡守分别管理地方政务，各项政务的处理方法简单易行。
English: County governors will separately manage local government affairs, and the methods for handling various government affairs will be simple and easy to implement.

古文：举错必当，莫不如画。
现代文：采取的措施都很恰如其分，没有不整齐划一的。
English: The measures taken are all appropriate, and there are no irregularities.

古文：皇帝之明，临察四方。
现代文：皇帝神明，亲自到四方巡视。
English: Emperor Jimmu, personally went to inspect the four directions.

古文：尊卑贵贱，不逾次行。
现代文：尊卑贵贱，不逾越等级。
English: No one is higher or lower than anyone else.

古文：奸邪不容，皆务贞良。
现代文：奸诈邪恶的现象不允许存在，百姓都力求做一个正直善良的人。
English: The phenomenon of treachery and evil is not allowed to exist, and the people all strive to be honest and kind.

古文：细大尽力，莫敢怠荒。
现代文：大小事情务尽全力，不敢懈怠荒忽。
English: In matters big and small, we must do our best and not slack off.

古文：远迩辟隐，专务肃庄。端直敦忠，事业有常。
现代文：不论远处近处，还是偏僻的地方，都一心做到严肃庄重，正直忠厚，办事有一定的规则。
English: Whether far away, nearby, or in a remote place, they are determined to be serious and solemn, honest and loyal, and there are certain rules for doing things.

古文：皇帝之德，存定四极。
现代文：皇帝的德泽，安定了四方。
English: Emperor Dezawa, stabilized the four directions.

古文：诛乱除害，兴利致福。
现代文：讨伐暴乱，消除祸患，兴办好事，带来福祉。
English: crack down on riots, eliminate scourges, do good deeds, and bring well-being.

古文：节事以时，诸产繁殖。
现代文：根据时令来安排事情，各种产品不断增多。
English: According to the season to arrange things, a variety of products continue to increase.

古文：黔首安宁，不用兵革。
现代文：百姓安宁，不再进行战争。
English: The people are at peace, and there are no more wars.

古文：六亲相保，终无寇贼。
现代文：六亲相安，终身没有盗贼。
English: Six parents live in peace with each other, and there are no thieves in their lives.

古文：驩欣奉教，尽知法式。
现代文：高兴地遵守国家的教化，人人通晓法律制度。
English: Happy to comply with the state's indoctrination, everyone is familiar with the legal system.

古文：六合之内，皇帝之土。
现代文：天上地下，四面八方，都是皇帝的领土。
English: Heaven and earth, in all directions, are the emperor's territory.

古文：西涉流沙，南尽北户。
现代文：西边到达流沙，南边以门朝北开的地方为极限。
English: The west side reaches quicksand, and the south side is limited to the place where the door opens to the north.

古文：东有东海，北过大夏。
现代文：东边有东海，北边越过了大夏。
English: In the east, there is the East Sea, and in the north, the summer has passed.

古文：人迹所至，无不臣者。
现代文：人们足迹所至，没有不臣服的。
English: Wherever there are human footprints, there is no one who does not submit.

古文：功盖五帝，泽及牛马。莫不受德，各安其宇。
现代文：功勋超过了五帝，恩惠施及牛马，人人得到皇帝的德泽，过着安定的生活。
English: His meritorious service surpassed that of the five emperors, and he was favored with cattle and horses. Everyone received the emperor's blessing and lived a stable life.

古文：维秦王兼有天下，立名为皇帝，乃抚东土，至于琅邪。
现代文：秦王兼并了全国，确定了皇帝这一称号，于是抚循东部地区，到达琅邪。
English: King Qin annexed the whole country and confirmed the title of emperor, so he followed the eastern region and arrived at Xujiahui.

古文：列侯武城侯王离、列侯通武侯王贲、伦侯建成侯赵亥、伦侯昌武侯成、伦侯武信侯冯毋择、丞相隗林、丞相王绾、卿李斯、卿王戊、五大夫赵婴、五大夫杨樛从，与议於海上。曰： 古之帝者，地不过千里，诸侯各守其封域，或朝或否，相侵暴乱，残伐不止，犹刻金石，以自为纪。
现代文：列侯武城侯王离、列侯通武侯王贲、伦侯建成侯赵亥、伦侯昌武侯成、伦侯武信侯冯毋择、丞相隗林、丞相王绾、卿李斯、卿王戊、五大夫赵婴、五大夫杨樛随从，他们和始皇在海边议论秦朝的功德说： 古代称帝的人，领土不过纵横千里，诸侯各自固守自己的疆域，有的朝贡，有的不朝贡，互相侵伐，为暴作乱，残杀无已，然而还是刻金勒石，记载自己的功业。
English: Count Wucheng, Count Wang Li, Count Tongwu, Count Wang Hui, Count Renjia, Count Zhao Hai, Count Changwu, Count Cheng, Count Renjia, Count Wuxin, Count Feng Hezhe, Consul Yulin, Consul Wang Hui, Consul Li Si, Consul Wang Wu, Consul Zhao Jiao, Consul Yang Hui, they and the First Emperor discussed the merits of the Qin Dynasty on the seashore and said: The ancient emperors, the territory is only thousands of miles long and wide, the princes each adhere to their own territory, some pay tribute, some do not pay tribute, invade each other

古文：古之五帝三王，知教不同，法度不明，假威鬼神，以欺远方，实不称名，故不久长。
现代文：古代五帝、三王，实行的知识教育不一样，法律制度没有明确，借助鬼神的威力，来欺骗远方的百姓，实际情况和称号不相符，所以国家命运不长久。
English: In ancient times, the five emperors and three kings practiced different knowledge education, the legal system was not clear, and the power of ghosts and gods was used to deceive the distant people. The actual situation did not match the title, so the country's fate was not long-lasting.

古文：其身未殁，诸侯倍叛，法令不行。
现代文：人还没有死去，诸侯就背叛了，法令不能推行。
English: Before a man is dead, the princes have betrayed him, and the decree cannot be carried out.

古文：今皇帝并一海内，以为郡县，天下和平。
现代文：如今皇帝统一了四海之内，把全国分为郡县，天下安宁而和谐。
English: Now that the emperor has unified the four seas and divided the country into counties, the world is peaceful and harmonious.

古文：昭明宗庙，体道行德，尊号大成。
现代文：发扬光大宗庙的威灵，服膺真理，广布恩德，名副其实地得到了皇帝这一尊号。
English: Carrying forward the spirit of the great ancestral temple, obeying the truth, and being broad-minded, he truly earned the title of emperor.

古文：群臣相与诵皇帝功德，刻于金石，以为表经。 
现代文：群臣一起颂扬皇帝的功德，镌刻在金石上，作为后世的楷模。
English: Together, the courtiers praised the merits of the emperor, engraved on the gold stone, as a model for future generations.

古文：既已，齐人徐巿等上书，言海中有三神山，名曰蓬莱、方丈、瀛洲，仙人居之。
现代文：立石刻辞已经结束，齐人徐市等上书，说海中有三座神山，名叫蓬莱、方丈、瀛洲，仙人居住在那里。
English: The inscriptions on the standing stones have been completed, and the Qi people, including Xu Shi, have written a letter, saying that there are three sacred mountains in the sea, named Penglai, Hojo, and Luzhou, and the immortals live there.

古文：请得斋戒，与童男女求之。
现代文：希望斋戒沐浴，和童男童女寻求三座神山。
English: I hope to fast, bathe, and seek the three sacred mountains with boys and girls.

古文：於是遣徐巿发童男女数千人，入海求仙人。
现代文：于是派遣徐市挑选童男童女数千人，到海中寻找仙人。
English: As a result, the city of Xu was dispatched to select thousands of boys and girls to go to the sea in search of fairies.

古文：始皇还，过彭城，斋戒祷祠，欲出周鼎泗水。
现代文：始皇返回的时候，路过彭城，斋戒祈祷，想要从泗水打捞周鼎。
English: When the first emperor returned, he passed through Pengcheng, fasted and prayed, and wanted to salvage Zhou Ding from Surabaya.

古文：使千人没水求之，弗得。
现代文：让成千人潜入水中寻找，没有找到。
English: Let thousands of people dive into the water to look for it, but they didn't find it.

古文：乃西南渡淮水，之衡山、南郡。
现代文：于是就向西南走去，渡过淮水，前往衡山、南郡。
English: So he walked to the southwest, crossed Huai Shui, and went to Hengshan and Nan County.

古文：浮江，至湘山祠。
现代文：泛舟江上，来到湘山祭拜。
English: They went rafting on the river and came to Mount Xiangshan to worship.

古文：逢大风，几不得渡。
现代文：遇上大风，几乎不能渡水上山。
English: If there is a strong wind, it is almost impossible to cross the water and climb the mountain.

古文：上问博士曰： 湘君神？ 
现代文：始皇问博士说： 湘君是什么神？ 
English: The First Emperor asked the doctor: "What kind of god is Xiangjun?"

古文：博士对曰： 闻之，尧女，舜之妻，而葬此。 
现代文：博士回答说： 听说是尧的女儿，舜的妻子，死后埋葬在这里。 
English: The doctor replied, "I heard that it was the daughter of the dragonfly, the wife of the dragonfly, who was buried here after death.

古文：於是始皇大怒，使刑徒三千人皆伐湘山树，赭其山。
现代文：于是始皇非常生气，让刑徒三千人把湘山上的树木砍光了，全山露出红色的土壤。
English: As a result, the first emperor was very angry and had three thousand convicts cut down all the trees on Mount Xiangshan, revealing the red soil all over the mountain.

古文：上自南郡由武关归。
现代文：始皇从南郡取道武关回到咸阳。
English: The first emperor took the Wuguan Road from Nan County to return to Xianyang.

古文：二十九年，始皇东游。
现代文：二十九年，始皇向东巡游。
English: In the 29th year, the first emperor went on a tour to the east.

古文：至阳武博狼沙中，为盗所惊。
现代文：到了阳武博狼沙，被强盗惊吓了一场。
English: When he arrived at Yangwubo Wolf Sand, he was startled by the robbers.

古文：求弗得，乃令天下大索十日。
现代文：追捕强盗，没有抓获，就命令全国大肆搜查十天。
English: After chasing the robbers and failing to catch them, he ordered a nationwide search lasting ten days.

古文：登之罘，刻石。
现代文：始皇登上之罘，镌刻石碑。
English: There is a stone tablet inscribed with the first emperor's ascension.

古文：其辞曰：
现代文：碑文说：
English: The text reads as follows:

古文：维二十九年，时在中春，阳和方起。
现代文：二十九年，在春季第二个月的时候，天气开始暖和起来。
English: In 1929, during the second month of spring, the weather began to warm up.

古文：皇帝东游，巡登之罘，临照于海。
现代文：皇帝向东巡游，登上了之罘，面对着大海。
English: The emperor cruised eastward and boarded the cormorant, facing the sea.

古文：从臣嘉观，原念休烈，追诵本始。
现代文：随从的臣属看到这美好的景色，回忆皇帝的丰功伟绩，追念统一大业的始末。
English: The attendant vassals saw the beautiful scenery, recalled the emperor's great achievements, and remembered the beginning and end of the great cause of unification.

古文：大圣作治，建定法度，显箸纲纪。
现代文：伟大的皇帝开始治理国家，制定了法律制度，彰明纲纪。
English: The great emperor began to govern the country, established a legal system, and promulgated a legal code.

古文：外教诸侯，光施文惠，明以义理。
现代文：对外教诲诸侯，普施教化，广布惠泽，阐明道理。
English: Teach the people, spread the teachings, spread the benefits, and clarify the truth.

古文：六国回辟，贪戾无厌，虐杀不已。
现代文：六国诸侯奸回邪僻，贪婪乖戾，欲壑无厌，残虐杀戮，永无休止。
English: The feudal lords of the Six Kingdoms have returned to their evil ways. Greed is perverse, lust is insatiable, and brutal killings are never-ending.

古文：皇帝哀众，遂发讨师，奋扬武德。
现代文：皇帝哀怜民众，就调遣征伐的大军，奋武扬威。
English: The emperor felt sorry for the people and sent a large army to conquer them.

古文：义诛信行，威燀旁达，莫不宾服。
现代文：进行正义的讨伐，采取诚信的行动，武威耀，远播四方，没有不降服的。
English: To carry out a just crusade, to take actions in good faith, to display military prowess, to spread far and wide, there is no one who will not surrender.

古文：烹灭彊暴，振救黔首，周定四极。
现代文：消灭了强暴的势力，拯救了百姓，安定了天下。
English: eliminated the violent forces, saved the people, and stabilized the world.

古文：普施明法，经纬天下，永为仪则。
现代文：普遍推行严明的法律制度，治理天下，成为永久的准则。
English: The universal implementation of a strict legal system to govern the world has become a permanent norm.

古文：大矣哉！
现代文：伟大啊！
English: Oh, great!

古文：宇县之中，承顺圣意。
现代文：普天之下，都遵循皇帝的神圣意志。
English: The whole world follows the emperor's sacred will.

古文：群臣诵功，请刻于石，表垂于常式。
现代文：群臣颂扬皇帝的功勋，请求镌到在石碑上，记载下来永垂后世，作为永恒的法则。
English: The courtiers extolled the emperor's merits and requested that they be inscribed on a stone tablet, to be recorded for posterity as an eternal law.

古文：其东观曰：
现代文：东面台阁处的石碑刻辞说：
English: The inscription on the stone monument at the east platform says:

古文：维二十九年，皇帝春游，览省远方。
现代文：二十九年，皇帝在春天巡游，视察远方。
English: In the spring of 29 AD, the emperor went on a tour to inspect distant lands.

古文：逮于海隅，遂登之罘，昭临朝阳。
现代文：到了海边，就登上之罘，而对着初升的太阳。
English: When I got to the beach, I climbed onto the raft and swam towards the rising sun.

古文：观望广丽，从臣咸念，原道至明。
现代文：观望辽阔而又秀丽的景色，随从的臣属都怀念往事，回忆走过的道路是非常光明的。
English: Looking at the vast and beautiful scenery, the attendant vassals are nostalgic for the past, and the memories of the road traveled are very bright.

古文：圣法初兴，清理疆内，外诛暴彊。
现代文：英明法治最初施行的时候，就对国内的坏人坏事进行了清理，对外讨伐强暴的敌人。
English: When the wise rule of law was first implemented, it cleaned up the bad people and bad things in the country and fought violent enemies abroad.

古文：武威旁暢，振动四极，秦灭六王。
现代文：军威远扬，四方震动，消灭了六国，俘获了他们的国王。
English: The army was so powerful that it shook the four directions, annihilated six countries and captured their kings.

古文：阐并天下，甾害绝息，永偃戎兵。
现代文：开拓领土，统一天下，消除了战乱祸患，永远停止了战争。
English: to develop the territory, unify the country, eliminate the scourge of war, and stop the war forever.

古文：皇帝明德，经理宇内，视听不怠。
现代文：皇帝圣德明智，治理国家，处理政务，毫不懈怠。
English: Emperor Shengde wisely governed the country and dealt with government affairs, and did not slack off.

古文：作立大义，昭设备器，咸有章旗。
现代文：创立重大的法律制度，明确设置统一的标准器用，都有一定的规则。
English: There are certain rules for creating a major legal system and clearly setting a unified standard.

古文：职臣遵分，各知所行，事无嫌疑。
现代文：有职之臣都遵守本分，知道自己该做些什么，事情没有疑猜之处。
English: There is no room for doubt as the ministers on duty all abide by their duties and know what they should do.

古文：黔首改化，远迩同度，临古绝尤。
现代文：百姓发生了变化，远处近处都制度统一，是自古以来最好的时代。
English: The people have changed, the system has been unified in the near and far, and it is the best era since ancient times.

古文：常职既定，後嗣循业，长承圣治。
现代文：每人已经确定了固定的职务，子孙后代循守旧业，永远继承这英明的政治。
English: Everyone has already established a fixed position, and future generations will follow the old business and inherit this wise politics forever.

古文：群臣嘉德，祗诵圣烈，请刻之罘。
现代文：群臣颂美皇帝的恩德，恭敬地赞扬他的伟大功业，请求在之罘山上立碑刻辞。
English: The courtiers extolled the Emperor's benevolence, respectfully praised his great achievements, and requested that a monument be erected on the mountain to inscribe his words.

古文：旋，遂之琅邪，道上党入。
现代文：不久，就前往琅邪，从上党回到咸阳。
English: Soon after, he went to Suizhe and returned to Xianyang from Shangdang.

古文：三十年，无事。
现代文：三十年，没有发生重大的事情。
English: For thirty years, nothing significant happened.

古文：三十一年十二月，更名腊曰 嘉平 。
现代文：三十一年十二月，把腊祭改名叫 嘉平 。
English: In December of the 31st year, the name of the wax festival was changed to Jiaping.

古文：赐黔首里六石米，二羊。
现代文：赏赐百姓每里六石米，两只羊。
English: The people were rewarded with six kilos of rice and two sheep per kilometre.

古文：始皇为微行咸阳，与武士四人俱，夜出逢盗兰池，见窘，武士击杀盗，关中大索二十日。
现代文：始皇易服出行咸阳，有四个武士随从。夜间出来时，在兰池遇上盗贼，被盗贼所困逼。武士杀死了盗贼，在关中大肆搜查了二十天。
English: The First Emperor Yifu traveled to Xianyang, accompanied by four samurai. When he came out at night, he met a thief in Lanchi and was trapped by the thief. The samurai killed the thief and searched the gate for twenty days.

古文：米石千六百。
现代文：粮价一石达到一千六百钱。
English: The price of grain rose to 1,600 yuan per kilo.

古文：三十二年，始皇之碣石，使燕人卢生求羡门、高誓。
现代文：三十二年，始皇前往碣石，派燕地人卢生访求羡门、高誓。
English: In the 32nd year, the first emperor went to Shanshi and sent Lu Sheng, a native of Yan, to pay a visit to Qianmen and Gao Rong.

古文：刻碣石门。
现代文：在碣石城门上刻辞。
English: Engraved on the flint city gate.

古文：坏城郭，决通隄防。
现代文：摧毁城郭，挖通堤防。
English: Destroy the castle, dig through the dike.

古文：其辞曰：
现代文：城门上的刻辞说：
English: The text reads as follows:

古文：遂兴师旅，诛戮无道，为逆灭息。
现代文：于是调遣军队，诛伐无道，为暴作逆的人被消灭了。
English: As a result, the army was dispatched, the campaign went nowhere, and those who were violent rebels were eliminated.

古文：武殄暴逆，文复无罪，庶心咸服。
现代文：用武力平息暴乱，用文治保护无罪的人，全国上下人心归服。
English: The use of force to quell riots, the use of the rule of law to protect the innocent, and the obedience of the people throughout the country.

古文：惠论功劳，赏及牛马，恩肥土域。
现代文：加恩论叙有功人员的功劳，连牛马都得到了赏赐，恩惠润泽了大地。
English: Gahn talked about the merits of meritorious personnel, even the cattle and horses were rewarded, and the earth was moist with grace.

古文：皇帝奋威，德并诸侯，初一泰平。
现代文：皇帝奋武扬威，依靠正义的战争兼并了诸侯，第一次统一了全国，天下太平。
English: The emperor fought bravely, relied on a just war to annex provinces, unified the whole country for the first time, and the world was at peace.

古文：堕坏城郭，决通川防，夷去险阻。
现代文：拆毁六国的城郭，挖通河堤，铲平险阻。
English: Tear down the castle walls of the Six Kingdoms, dig through the river dike, and shovel away the obstacles.

古文：地势既定，黎庶无繇，天下咸抚。
现代文：地面上各种军事障碍已经夷平，百姓不再服事徭役，天下安定。
English: All kinds of military obstacles on the ground have been leveled, the people no longer serve as guards, and the country is stable.

古文：男乐其畴，女修其业，事各有序。
现代文：男的高兴地耕种他的土地，女的从事她的家庭手工业，各项事业井然有序。
English: The man is happily cultivating his land, the woman is engaged in her cottage industry, and the various undertakings are in good order.

古文：惠被诸产，久并来田，莫不安所。
现代文：各项生产都蒙受皇帝的惠泽，当地的农民和外来的农民，无不安居乐业。
English: All kinds of production were favored by the emperor, and local farmers and foreign farmers lived and worked without anxiety.

古文：群臣诵烈，请刻此石，垂著仪矩。
现代文：君臣颂扬皇帝的功绩，请求镌刻这一石碑，为后世垂示规范。
English: The princes and courtiers extolled the emperor's exploits and requested that this stone monument be engraved to set an example for future generations.

古文：因使韩终、侯公、石生求仙人不死之药。
现代文：派韩终、侯公、石生寻访仙人求取长生不死的灵药。
English: He sent Han Zhen, Hou Gong, and Shi Sheng to visit the hermit to obtain the elixir of immortality.

古文：始皇巡北边，从上郡入。
现代文：始皇巡行北方边境，从上郡回到咸阳。
English: The first emperor patrolled the northern border and returned to Xianyang from Shang County.

古文：燕人卢生使入海还，以鬼神事，因奏录图书，曰 亡秦者胡也 。
现代文：燕地人卢生被派人海中寻找仙人回来了，因为向始皇报告鬼神之事，就借机献上抄录的图书，上面说 灭亡秦朝的是胡 。
English: Lu Sheng, a native of Yan, who was sent to the sea to look for immortals, returned. Because he had reported to the first emperor about ghosts and gods, he took the opportunity to present a transcribed book, which said that it was Hu who destroyed the Qin Dynasty.

古文：始皇乃使将军蒙恬发兵三十万人北击胡，略取河南地。
现代文：始皇就派将军蒙恬发兵三十万人，向北攻胡人，夺取黄河以南地带。
English: The first emperor sent general Meng Qi to send 300,000 soldiers to attack the Hu people in the north and seize the area south of the Yellow River.

古文：三十三年，发诸尝逋亡人、赘婿、贾人略取陆梁地，为桂林、象郡、南海，以适遣戍。
现代文：三十三年，征发曾经逃亡的罪犯、入赘别人家的男子、商人攻取陆梁地区，设置桂林郡、象郡、南海郡，把有罪应当流徙的人派去戍守。
English: In the 33rd year, convicts who had escaped, men who had broken into other people's homes, and merchants were conscripted and sent to capture Lu Liang District, and Guilin County, Xiang County, and Nanhai County were set up, and the guilty people who should be exiled were sent to stay there.

古文：西北斥逐匈奴。
现代文：在西北方驱逐匈奴。
English: in the northwest to drive out the Huns.

古文：自榆中并河以东，属之阴山，以为四十四县，城河上为塞。
现代文：从榆中沿着黄河住东，直至阴山，设置四十四个县，在黄河附近修筑要塞。
English: He set up forty-four counties along the Yellow River from Luzhong in the east to Yinshan in the west, and built fortresses near the Yellow River.

古文：又使蒙恬渡河取高阙、山、北假中，筑亭障以逐戎人。
现代文：又派蒙恬渡过黄河攻占高阙、阳山、北假地带，修筑亭障来驱逐戎人。
English: He also sent Mengqi to cross the Yellow River to occupy Gaocheng, Yangshan and Beilun, and built pavilions to expel the Eunuchs.

古文：徙谪，实之初县。
现代文：迁徙罪犯，安排到刚刚建立的县邑中。
English: Criminals who migrated were placed in the newly established counties and towns.

古文：禁不得祠。
现代文：禁止民间祭祀。
English: Folk rituals are prohibited.

古文：明星出西方。
现代文：彗星出现在西方。
English: The comet appeared in the west.

古文：三十四年，适治狱吏不直者，筑长城及南越地。
现代文：三十四年，贬斥那些听讼断狱不公平的官吏，让他们去修筑长城或戍守南越地区。
English: In 1934, he denounced those officials who were unfairly pardoned and let them go to build the Great Wall or defend the South Vietnam region.

古文：始皇置酒咸阳宫，博士七十人前为寿。
现代文：始皇在咸阳宫摆酒设宴，七十个博士上前敬酒祝寿。
English: The first emperor held a banquet with wine at Xianyang Palace, and seventy scholars came forward to toast his birthday.

古文：仆射周青臣进颂曰： 他时秦地不过千里，赖陛下神灵明圣，平定海内，放逐蛮夷，日月所照，莫不宾服。
现代文：仆射周青臣颂扬说： 从前秦国的地域不超过一千里，依靠陛下神灵圣明，平定了天下，驱逐了蛮夷，太阳和月亮所能照到的地方，没有不降服的。
English: "From the area of the former Qin State, no more than a thousand miles, relying on His Majesty's holy spirit, we have pacified the world, expelled the barbarians, and there is no place where the sun and the moon can shine that has not surrendered.

古文：以诸侯为郡县，人人自安乐，无战争之患，传之万世。自上古不及陛下威德。 
现代文：把各国诸侯的领土置为郡县，人人安居乐业，没有战争之忧，这功业可以流传万世，从远古以来没有人能赶得上陛下的威德。 
English: Putting the territories of the princes of various countries into counties, everyone can live and work in peace and without fear of war. This achievement can be passed down for generations. Since ancient times, no one has been able to catch up with His Majesty's virtue.

古文：始皇悦。
现代文：始皇很高兴。
English: The first emperor was delighted.

古文：博士齐人淳于越进曰： 臣闻殷周之王千馀岁，封子弟功臣，自为枝辅。
现代文：博士齐人淳于越进谏说， 我听说殷周称王天下一千多年，分封子弟和功臣，作为自己的辅助势力。
English: "I heard that Yin Zhou called Wang Tian the next thousand years, the second son and hero, as his auxiliary force," said Dr. Qiren Junyue.

古文：今陛下有海内，而子弟为匹夫，卒有田常、六卿之臣，无辅拂，何以相救哉？
现代文：现在陛下拥有天下，而子弟却是平民百姓，偶然出现田常、六卿一样的臣属，无人辅佐，靠什么来挽救呢？
English: Now that His Majesty owns the whole world, while his children are commoners, what can be relied on to save us from the accidental appearance of subjects like Tian Chang and Liu Jie, with no one to assist them?

古文：事不师古而能长久者，非所闻也。
现代文：事情不效法古代而能长久不败的，我没有听到过。
English: I haven't heard of any dynasties that have been able to maintain long-term rule without learning from ancient experience.

古文：今青臣又面谀以重陛下之过，非忠臣。 
现代文：如今青臣当面阿谀，来加深陛下的过错，实在不是忠臣。 
English: Now, a young retainer is not a loyal retainer when he goes to the emperor's face to deepen the fault of the emperor.

古文：始皇下其议。
现代文：始皇把他们的建议交下去讨论。
English: The first emperor passed on their suggestion for discussion.

古文：丞相李斯曰： 五帝不相复，三代不相袭，各以治，非其相反，时变异也。
现代文：丞相李斯说： 五帝的制度不互相重复，三代的制度不互相因袭，各自都得到治理，不是后代一定要与前代相反，这是时代变化的缘故。
English: Premier Li said: The system of five emperors does not repeat each other, the system of three generations does not follow each other, and each is governed. It is not that the descendants must be contrary to the previous generation, but this is due to the changes of the times.

古文：今陛下创大业，建万世之功，固非愚儒所知。
现代文：如今陛下开创了伟大的事业，建立了万世不朽的功勋，本来不是愚蠢的读书人所能理解的。
English: Now, His Majesty has created a great cause and established an immortal merit, which is beyond the comprehension of stupid readers.

古文：且越言乃三代之事，何足法也？
现代文：况且淳于越说的又是三代的事情，有什么可效法的？
English: What's more, what Jun Yu Yue said is a matter of three generations, what can be emulated?

古文：异时诸侯并争，厚招游学。
现代文：从前诸侯竞争，用优厚的待遇招揽游学之士。
English: In the past, lords competed with each other to attract visiting scholars with generous benefits.

古文：今天下已定，法令出一，百姓当家则力农工，士则学习法令辟禁。
现代文：现在天下已经平定，颁布统一的法令，百姓在家则努力从事农业生产和家庭手工业，士人则学习法律禁令。
English: Now that the country has been pacified and unified laws and regulations have been promulgated, people at home are working hard to engage in agricultural production and cottage industries, and scholars are studying legal prohibitions.

古文：今诸生不师今而学古，以非当世，惑乱黔首。
现代文：如今这些读书人不向现实学习，而去模仿古代，来指责现行的社会制度，惑乱百姓。
English: Nowadays, these readers do not learn from reality, but imitate ancient times to criticize the current social system and confuse the people.

古文：丞相臣斯昧死言：古者天下散乱，莫之能一，是以诸侯并作，语皆道古以害今，饰虚言以乱实，人善其所私学，以非上之所建立。
现代文：我丞相李斯冒着死罪说：古代天下分散混乱，不能统一，所以诸侯同时兴起，人们的言论都称道古代，损害现行的政策，文饰虚言空语，搅乱事物的本来面貌，每人都以为自己的学说是最完善的，非议君主所建立的制度。
English: My prime minister, Li Si, risked the death penalty to say: In ancient times, the world was scattered and chaotic and could not be unified, so princes arose at the same time. People's speech praised the ancient times, undermined the current policy, embellished the literature with empty words, and disturbed the original appearance of things. Everyone thought that their own doctrine was the most perfect, and criticized the system established by the monarch.

古文：今皇帝并有天下，别黑白而定一尊。
现代文：现在皇帝兼并了天下，分辨是非，确立了至高无上的地位。
English: Now the emperor has annexed the whole world, distinguishing right from wrong and establishing a supreme position.

古文：私学而相与非法教，人闻令下，则各以其学议之，入则心非，出则巷议，夸主以为名，异取以为高，率群下以造谤。
现代文：私自传授学问，一起批评国家的法令教化，听到法令下达，就各用自己的学说去议论，入朝时心中非议，出朝时街谈巷议，在君主面前自我吹嘘，以此来沽名钓誉，标新立异，认为超人一等，率领臣民编造诽言谤语。
English: I taught myself, criticized the country's laws and edifications together, heard the decrees issued, and discussed each with their own doctrines, criticized in my heart when I entered the court, discussed in the streets when I left the court, and boasted in front of the monarch, in order to win fame and reputation, set a new standard, thought that supermen were first class, and led the subjects to make up slanderous words.

古文：如此弗禁，则主势降乎上，党与成乎下。
现代文：这种情况不加以禁止，上则君主的权威下降，在下则形成党徒互相勾结。
English: This situation is not prohibited, at the top, the authority of the monarch is reduced, and at the bottom, partisans are formed to collude with each other.

古文：禁之便。
现代文：禁止为好。
English: It would be better to ban it.

古文：臣请史官非秦记皆烧之。
现代文：我希望史官把不是秦国的典籍全部烧掉。
English: I hope the historian will burn all the books that are not from Qin.

古文：非博士官所职，天下敢有藏诗、书、百家语者，悉诣守、尉杂烧之。
现代文：不是博士官所主管的，国内敢有收藏《诗》、《书》、诸子百家著作的，都要送到郡守、郡尉那里焚毁。
English: If you dare to have a collection of "poetry," "books" and the works of hundreds of authors in China that is not under the supervision of the doctoral office, you must send it to the county governor and the county lieutenant to be burned.

古文：有敢偶语诗书者弃市。
现代文：有敢相互私语《诗》、《书》的，在闹市处死示众。
English: Those who dared to whisper "poetry" and "book" to each other were publicly executed in the city.

古文：以古非今者族。
现代文：以古非今的要杀死全族。
English: In ancient times, but not now, they wanted to kill the whole family.

古文：吏见知不举者与同罪。
现代文：官吏知情而不检举的，和他同罪。
English: A public official who knowingly fails to report a crime is guilty of the same crime.

古文：令下三十日不烧，黥为城旦。
现代文：命令下达三十天不烧掉书籍，就在脸部刺上字，成为刑徒城旦。
English: If they are ordered not to burn books for thirty days, they will be branded on the face and become a criminal.

古文：所不去者，医药卜筮种树之书。
现代文：所不烧毁的，是医药、卜筮、农林方面的书籍。
English: Not included in the purge are books on medicine, divination, planting and other subjects.

古文：若欲有学法令，以吏为师。 
现代文：如果想要学法令，可以到官吏那里学习。 
English: If you want to learn the law, you can study with officials.

古文：制曰： 可。 
现代文：始皇下达命令说： 可以照此办理。 
English: The Emperor's order said: Let's play.

古文：三十五年，除道，道九原抵云阳，堑山堙谷，直通之。
现代文：三十五年，开辟道路，通过九原，直达云阳，挖山填谷，修建一条笔直的大道连接起来。
English: Thirty-five years, open up the road, through the nine plains, straight to Yunyang, digging mountains and filling valleys, building a straight road to connect.

古文：於是始皇以为咸阳人多，先王之宫廷小，吾闻周文王都丰，武王都镐，丰镐之间，帝王之都也。
现代文：始皇认为咸阳人口众多，先王的宫廷狭小，听说周文王建都丰，武王建都镐，丰镐之间，是帝王的都城所在。
English: The first emperor believed that Xianyang had a large population, while the former king's court was small. It was said that the imperial capital was located between Zhou Wen Wang's Jian Du Feng, Wu Wang's Jian Du Xi, and Feng Di.

古文：乃营作朝宫渭南上林苑中。
现代文：于是就在渭水南岸的上林苑中兴建朝宫。
English: As a result, the imperial palace was built in Shanglin Court on the southern shore of Surabaya.

古文：先作前殿阿房，东西五百步，南北五十丈，上可以坐万人，下可以建五丈旗。
现代文：首先建造前殿阿房宫，东西五百步，南北五十丈，殿堂上可以坐一万人，殿堂顶下可以竖立五丈高的旗帜。
English: First of all, the front hall of Afang Palace was built. It is five hundred paces from east to west and fifty paces from north to south. Ten thousand people can sit on the hall, and a flag five paces high can be erected under the top of the hall.

古文：周驰为阁道，自殿下直抵南山。
现代文：周围环绕着架起阁道，从殿下直达南山。
English: Surrounded by raised walkways, the path leads from His Royal Highness to Nanshan.

古文：表南山之颠以为阙。
现代文：在南山的山顶上修建标志，作为门阙。
English: On the top of Nanshan Mountain, a sign was built to serve as a lintel.

古文：为复道，自阿房渡渭，属之咸阳，以象天极阁道绝汉抵营室也。
现代文：在空中架设道路，从阿房宫渡过渭水，与咸阳相连接，以此象征天下阁道越过天河直至营室。
English: A road was built in the sky, from Afang Palace across Surabaya to connect with Xianyang, symbolizing the path of the world across the Tianhe River to the camp.

古文：阿房宫未成；成，欲更择令名名之。
现代文：阿房宫尚未完工；完工后，想另外选择一个好的名字称呼它。
English: Afang Palace is not yet completed; after completion, I want to choose another good name to call it.

古文：作宫阿房，故天下谓之阿房宫。
现代文：在阿房建造宫殿，所以天下称它阿房宫。
English: A palace was built in Afang, so the world called it Afang Palace.

古文：隐宫徒刑者七十馀万人，乃分作阿房宫，或作丽山。
现代文：隐官刑徒七十多万人，分成几批营造阿房宫，或修建丽山工程。
English: More than seven hundred thousand prisoners were divided into several groups to build the Afang Palace, or to build the Lishan Project.

古文：发北山石椁，乃写蜀、荆地材皆至。
现代文：挖运北山的石头，输送蜀地、荆地的木材，都集中到这里。
English: The stone excavated and transported from the Beishan Mountains and the timber transported from the Shu and Jing regions are all concentrated here.

古文：关中计宫三百，关外四百馀。
现代文：关中共计宫殿三百座，关外四百多座。
English: There are a total of three hundred palaces in Guan and more than four hundred outside Guan.

古文：於是立石东海上朐界中，以为秦东门。
现代文：于是在东海附近朐县境内树立石碑，作为秦国的东门。
English: Therefore, a stone monument was erected on the territory of Jixian County near the East China Sea to serve as the eastern gate of Qin.

古文：因徙三万家丽邑，五万家云阳，皆复不事十岁。
现代文：迁徙三万户居住丽邑，五万户居住云阳，都免除十年的徭役。
English: Thirty thousand households living in Liyu and fifty thousand households living in Yunyang will be exempted from ten years of forced labor.

古文：卢生说始皇曰： 臣等求芝奇药仙者常弗遇，类物有害之者。
现代文：卢生劝始皇说： 我和其他人寻找灵芝奇药以及仙人，常常遇不上，好像有事物妨碍其中。
English: Lu Sheng advised the first emperor, "I and others have been searching for the elixir of life and the immortals, but we often don't find them. It's as if something is getting in the way.

古文：方中，人主时为微行以辟恶鬼，恶鬼辟，真人至。
现代文：仙方中要求，君主时时隐蔽行迹。来躲避恶鬼，躲避了恶鬼，真人就来到了。
English: According to the legend, the monarch always hid his whereabouts to avoid evil spirits, and when he did, the real person arrived.

古文：人主所居而人臣知之，则害於神。
现代文：君主居住的地方，臣属知道了，就会妨碍神仙。
English: If the subjects knew where the monarch lived, it would be a hindrance to the gods.

古文：真人者，入水不濡，入火不爇，陵云气，与天地久长。
现代文：真人没入水中不会被水浸湿，进入火中不感到热，凌云驾雾，与天地一样长寿。
English: A real person does not get wet when immersed in water, does not feel hot when immersed in fire, can drive through clouds and fog, and has the same longevity as heaven and earth.

古文：今上治天下，未能恬倓。
现代文：现在您治理天下，没做到清静无忧。
English: Now that you are governing the world, you have not achieved peace and tranquility.

古文：原上所居宫毋令人知，然后不死之药殆可得也。 
现代文：希望您居住的宫殿不要让人知道，然后长生不死的仙药大概可以找到。 
English: I hope you don't let anyone know about the palace you live in, and then the elixir of immortality can probably be found.

古文：於是始皇曰： 吾慕真人，自谓 真人 ，不称 朕 。 
现代文：于是始皇说： 我羡慕真人，自称 真人 ，不称 联 。 
English: So the first emperor said: I admire real people, I call myself a real person, but I don't call myself a member of the imperial family.

古文：乃令咸阳之旁二百里内宫观二百七十复道甬道相连，帷帐锺鼓美人充之，各案署不移徙。
现代文：就命令咸阳附近二百里内的二百七十座宫殿，用空中架设的道路和地面上的甬道连接起来，把帷帐、钟鼓、美人安置在里面，各种布置不得移动。
English: He ordered that the 270 palaces within 200 miles of Xianyang should be connected by a road in the sky and a causeway on the ground, and that the curtains, bells, drums, and beauties should be placed inside, and the various arrangements should not be moved.

古文：行所幸，有言其处者，罪死。
现代文：所临幸之处，如果有人把地点说出去，罪当处死。
English: If anyone divulges the location of the place, he shall be put to death.

古文：始皇帝幸梁山宫，从山上见丞相车骑众，弗善也。
现代文：始皇帝临幸梁山宫，从山上看见丞相随从车骑众多，很不以为然。
English: The First Emperor, who was present at the Liangshan Palace, saw from the mountain that the prime minister was accompanied by a large number of chariots and horses, and was very disapproving.

古文：中人或告丞相，丞相後损车骑。
现代文：宫中侍从把这件事告诉了丞相，后来丞相减少了随从的车骑。
English: The palace attendant told the matter to the prime minister, who later reduced the number of chariots and horses.

古文：始皇怒曰： 此中人泄吾语。 
现代文：始皇非常生气地说： 这是宫内的人泄漏了我的话。 
English: The First Emperor was very angry and said, "Someone in the Imperial Court leaked my words."

古文：案问莫服。
现代文：审问后没有人认罪。
English: No one confessed after the interrogation.

古文：当是时，诏捕诸时在旁者，皆杀之。
现代文：这时，下令逮捕当时在他身边的人，全部杀掉。
English: At this time, he ordered the arrest of the people who were with him at the time, and they were all killed.

古文：自是後莫知行之所在。
现代文：从此以后没有人知道他的行迹在什么地方了。
English: Since then, no one knows where he has been.

古文：听事，群臣受决事，悉於咸阳宫。
现代文：听理国政，群臣受命决断事情，都在咸阳宫。
English: In charge of national affairs, the courtiers were ordered to decide things, and they were all in Xianyang Palace.

古文：侯生卢生相与谋曰： 始皇为人，天性刚戾自用，起诸侯，并天下，意得欲从，以为自古莫及己。
现代文：侯生、卢生一起商量说： 始皇为人天生的刚愎暴戾，自以为是，从诸侯中兴起，吞并了天下，万事称心如意，为所欲为，认为自古以来没有人能赶上自己。
English: Hou Sheng and Lu Sheng discussed together and said, "The first emperor was born with an innate stubbornness, violent and self-righteous. He rose from the ranks of lords and annexed the world. He did whatever he wanted and thought that since ancient times, no one could catch up with him.

古文：专任狱吏，狱吏得亲幸。
现代文：专门任用治狱的官吏，治狱的官吏受到宠幸。
English: specially appointed prison officials, prison officials are favored.

古文：博士虽七十人，特备员弗用。
现代文：虽然有博士七十人，只是充数人员，并不任用。
English: Although there are seventy doctors, they are only filling positions and are not appointed.

古文：丞相诸大臣皆受成事，倚辨於上。
现代文：丞相和大臣都是接受已经决断的公事，一切依赖皇帝处理。
English: Both the prime minister and the ministers accepted the already decided public affairs, and everything depended on the emperor to deal with.

古文：上乐以刑杀为威，天下畏罪持禄，莫敢尽忠。
现代文：皇帝喜欢采用刑罚杀戮来确立自己的威严，天下人害怕获罪，只想保持禄位，没有人敢竭尽忠诚劝谏。
English: The emperor likes to use punishment killings to establish his majesty. People around the world are afraid of being punished and only want to maintain their positions. No one dares to do their best to persuade him.

古文：上不闻过而日骄，下慑伏谩欺以取容。
现代文：皇帝不能听到自己的过失，日益骄横，臣下恐惧而屈服，用欺骗来取得皇帝的欢心。
English: Unable to hear his own faults, the emperor became more and more arrogant. His vassals cowered in fear and resorted to deception to win the emperor's favor.

古文：秦法，不得兼方不验，辄死。
现代文：根据秦朝的法律，一人不能兼有两种方伎，方伎不灵验，就处以死刑。
English: According to the laws of the Qin Dynasty, a person could not have both kinds of Fangqi, and if the Fangqi did not work, he would be sentenced to death.

古文：然候星气者至三百人，皆良士，畏忌讳谀，不敢端言其过。
现代文：然而观察星象云气预测吉凶的人多至三百人，全都学问优秀，畏忌阿谀，不敢正面指出他的过错。
English: However, there are as many as three hundred people who observe the stars and clouds to predict the fortunes, all of whom are well-educated and are afraid of the grandma, and dare not point out his mistakes.

古文：天下之事无小大皆决於上，上至以衡石量书，日夜有呈，不中呈不得休息。
现代文：天下之事不论大小都取决于皇帝，皇帝甚至用秤来称量文书，一天有一定的额数，不达到额数不能休息。
English: No matter how big or small, everything in the world depends on the emperor. The emperor even uses a scale to weigh documents. There is a certain quota for the day, and if the quota is not reached, there can be no rest.

古文：贪於权势至如此，未可为求仙药。 
现代文：贪恋权势至于这种地步，不能给他寻找仙药。 
English: As far as this kind of greed for power is concerned, it is impossible to find a cure for him.

古文：於是乃亡去。
现代文：于是就逃走了。
English: So he ran away.

古文：始皇闻亡，乃大怒曰： 吾前收天下书不中用者尽去之。
现代文：始皇听说侯生、卢生逃走的消息，就非常气愤地说： 我以前收取天下书籍，不合时用的全部烧毁。
English: When the First Emperor heard the news that Hou Sheng and Lu Sheng had fled, he was very angry and said, "I used to confiscate all the books in the world and burn them if they were not suitable for the times.

古文：悉召文学方术士甚众，欲以兴太平，方士欲练以求奇药。
现代文：招集了很多文学方术之士，想要使国家太平，这些方士打算炼丹得到奇药。
English: He summoned many literary magicians to pacify the country, and these magicians planned to obtain magic potions from alchemy.

古文：今闻韩众去不报，徐巿等费以巨万计，终不得药，徒奸利相告日闻。
现代文：现在听说韩众离去后一直不来复命，徐市等人耗费巨万，最后还是没有得到仙药，只是每天传来一些为奸谋利的事情。
English: Now I've heard that after Han Zong left, he never came back to answer for his life. Xu Shi and others spent a huge amount of money, but in the end they still didn't get the elixir, but every day they heard about some things that were done for treachery and profit.

古文：卢生等吾尊赐之甚厚，今乃诽谤我，以重吾不德也。
现代文：我对卢生等人很尊敬，赏赐丰厚，如今诽谤我，来加重我的不仁。
English: I have a lot of respect for Lu Sheng and others, I have been rewarded handsomely, and now they are slandering me to aggravate my unkindness.

古文：诸生在咸阳者，吾使人廉问，或为訞言以乱黔首。 
现代文：在咸阳的一些儒生，我派人察问，有的制造怪诞邪说来惑乱百姓。 
English: I sent people to investigate some Confucian scholars in Xianyang, and found that some of them fabricated bizarre heresies to confuse the people.

古文：於是使御史悉案问诸生，诸生传相告引，乃自除犯禁者四百六十馀人，皆阬之咸阳，使天下知之，以惩後。
现代文：于是派御史审问儒生，儒生辗转告发，就能免除自己的罪过。触犯法禁的四百六十多人，全部在咸阳活埋，使全国都知道这件事，借以警戒后人。
English: Therefore, he sent an imperial historian to interrogate the Confucian students, and the Confucian students could absolve themselves of their sins if they reported it to him. More than four hundred and sixty people who violated the law were all buried alive in Xianyang, so that the whole country knew about this matter, so as to warn future generations.

古文：益发谪徙边。
现代文：更多地调发徒隶去戍守边境。
English: More soldiers will be sent to guard the border.

古文：始皇长子扶苏谏曰： 天下初定，远方黔首未集，诸生皆诵法孔子，今上皆重法绳之，臣恐天下不安。
现代文：始皇长子扶苏劝告说： 天下平定不久，远方百姓尚未安辑，儒生都学习和效法孔子，现在您用严厉的刑罚绳治他们，我担心天下动乱。
English: Fu Su, the eldest son of the first emperor, advised: The world has not been pacified for a long time, the people in faraway places have not yet settled down, Confucianism and Confucianism have all learned and followed the example of Confucius. Now you are punishing them with severe punishments. I am worried about unrest in the world.

古文：唯上察之。 
现代文：希望您明察此事。 
English: I hope you will look into this matter.

古文：始皇怒，使扶苏北监蒙恬於上郡。三十六年，荧惑守心。
现代文：始皇很生气，派扶苏到北方的上郡监视蒙恬。三十六年，火星占据心宿。
English: The first emperor was very angry and sent Fusu to Shang County in the north to monitor Mengniu. In 36 years, Mars occupied the heart of Cranes.

古文：有坠星下东郡，至地为石，黔首或刻其石曰 始皇帝死而地分 。
现代文：有一颗陨星坠落在东郡，到了地面变为石头，百姓中有人在这块石头上刻写说 始皇帝死而地分 。
English: There was a meteorite that fell in Dong County, and when it reached the ground, it turned into stone. Some of the people inscribed on this stone, "The First Emperor passed away."

古文：始皇闻之，遣御史逐问，莫服，尽取石旁居人诛之，因燔销其石。
现代文：始皇听到了，派御史挨个审问，没有人认罪，把在石头附近居住的人全部抓起来处死，用火烧毁这块石头。
English: The first emperor heard of this and sent emperors to interrogate them one by one. No one confessed, and all the people who lived near the stone were arrested and executed. The stone was destroyed by fire.

古文：始皇不乐，使博士为仙真人诗，及行所游天下，传令乐人歌弦之。
现代文：始皇闷闷不乐，让博士创作《仙真人诗》，出巡所到之处，传令乐工弹唱。
English: The first emperor was sullen and unhappy. He asked the doctor to compose "The Poem of the Immaculate Heart," and he went out to inspect the place, and ordered the musicians to play and sing.

古文：秋，使者从关东夜过华阴平舒道，有人持璧遮使者曰： 为吾遗滈池君。 
现代文：秋天，使者从关东来，夜里经过华阴平舒地方，有人拿着壁玉拦住使者说： 替我送给滈池君。 
English: In autumn, an envoy came from Kanto and passed through Huayin Pingshu at night. Someone stopped the envoy with a piece of jade and said, "Give it to Shuchi-kun for me."

古文：因言曰： 今年祖龙死。 
现代文：又趁机说： 今年祖龙死去。 
English: He also took the opportunity to say: This year, the ancestor died.

古文：使者问其故，因忽不见，置其璧去。
现代文：使者问他什么原因，这个人忽然不见，留下他的壁玉走开了。
English: The messenger asked him why, and the man suddenly disappeared, leaving his bricks behind.

古文：使者奉璧具以闻。
现代文：使者向始皇献上壁玉，讲述了事情的全部经过。
English: The envoy presented the First Emperor with a wall bead and told him the whole story.

古文：始皇默然良久，曰： 山鬼固不过知一岁事也。 
现代文：始皇很长时间沉默无语，后来说： 山野的鬼怪只不过知道一年之内的事情。 
English: The first emperor was silent for a long time, and later said, "The ghosts in the mountains only know about events within a year.

古文：退言曰： 祖龙者，人之先也。 
现代文：退朝后又说： 祖龙是人们的首领。 
English: After he retired, he said, "Zulong is the leader of the people.

古文：使御府视璧，乃二十八年行渡江所沈璧也。
现代文：让御府看这块壁玉，竟然是二十八年出行渡江时沉入水中的那块璧玉。
English: Let the Imperial Household Agency see this piece of wall bead, which turned out to be the gemstone that sank into the water when crossing the river in 2008.

古文：於是始皇卜之，卦得游徙吉。
现代文：于是始皇使人占卜吉凶，卦象是巡游迁徙就会吉利。
English: As a result, the first emperor asked people to tell fortunes. It was believed that if you went on a migration, you would have good luck.

古文：迁北河榆中三万家。
现代文：迁徙到北河、榆中三万家。
English: Thirty thousand families migrated to Beihe and Shizhong.

古文：拜爵一级。
现代文：每户赐给爵位一级。
English: Each household was given a first-class knighthood.

古文：三十七年十月癸丑，始皇出游。
现代文：三十七年十月癸丑，始皇出外巡游。
English: In October of the thirty-seventh year, the first emperor went on a tour.

古文：左丞相斯从，右丞相去疾守。
现代文：左丞相李斯随从，右丞相冯去疾留守。
English: Left Minister Ri Si followed, while Right Minister Feng Deguang stayed behind.

古文：少子胡亥爱慕请从，上许之。
现代文：始皇的小儿子胡亥很羡慕，要求跟着去，始皇答应了他。
English: The youngest son of the first emperor, Hu Hai, was very envious and asked to go with him. The first emperor agreed.

古文：十一月，行至云梦，望祀虞舜於九疑山。
现代文：十一月，走到云梦，朝九疑山方向望祭虞舜。
English: In November, I walked to Yunmeng, and looked in the direction of Jiuzhishan Mountain to see the sacrificial pagoda.

古文：浮江下，观籍柯，渡海渚。
现代文：浮江而下，观览籍柯，渡过江渚。
English: Floating down the river, watching the cormorants, crossing the river.

古文：过丹阳，至钱唐。
现代文：途经丹阳，到达钱唐。
English: Passing through Danyang, arriving at Qiantang.

古文：临浙江，水波恶，乃西百二十里从狭中渡。
现代文：在浙江岸边，看见波涛凶险，就向西走了一百二十里，从江面狭窄的地方渡了过去。
English: On the shore of Zhejiang, when he saw that the waves were dangerous, he walked one hundred and twenty miles to the west and crossed the narrow place on the river.

古文：上会稽，祭大禹，望于南海，而立石刻颂秦德。
现代文：登上会稽山，祭祀大禹，又望祭南海，树立石碑，到辞颂扬秦朝的功德。
English: They ascended the Hechi Mountain, offered sacrifices to Dayu, and hoped to offer sacrifices to Nanhai, set up stone monuments, and praised the merits of the Qin Dynasty.

古文：其文曰：
现代文：碑文说：
English: The inscription reads:

古文：皇帝休烈，平一宇内，德惠脩长。
现代文：皇帝建立了丰功伟绩，统一了天下，德惠深远。
English: The emperor has made great achievements and unified the world, and his virtue and benefit are far-reaching.

古文：三十有七年，亲巡天下，周览远方。
现代文：三十七年，亲自巡行全国，周游观览遥远的地方。
English: In 1937, he personally toured the whole country, touring and observing distant places.

古文：遂登会稽，宣省习俗，黔首斋庄。
现代文：于是登上会稽山。视察风俗习惯，百姓都很恭敬。
English: So they went up to Mount Hechi. They inspected the customs and habits, and the people were very respectful.

古文：群臣诵功，本原事迹，追首高明。
现代文：群臣颂扬皇帝的功德，回顾创业的事迹，追溯决策的英明。
English: The courtiers praised the emperor's merits, reviewed the history of entrepreneurship, and traced the wisdom of decision-making.

古文：秦圣临国，始定刑名，显陈旧章。
现代文：秦国伟大的皇帝君临天下，开始确定了刑法制度，陈述过去的规章。
English: When the great emperor of Qin came to the world, he began to determine the criminal law system and state the rules of the past.

古文：初平法式，审别职任，以立恆常。
现代文：首次统一了处理政务的法则，审定和区分官吏的职掌，借以建立长久不变的制度。
English: For the first time, the rules for handling government affairs were unified, and the duties of officials were verified and differentiated, thereby establishing a long-term and unchanging system.

古文：六王专倍，贪戾泬猛，率众自彊。
现代文：六国的诸侯王独断专行，违谬无信，贪婪乖张，傲慢凶猛，拥众称霸。
English: The princes and kings of the Six Kingdoms were arbitrary, treacherous, greedy, perverted, arrogant, fierce, and dominated the masses.

古文：暴虐恣行，负力而骄，数动甲兵。
现代文：他们暴虐纵恣，倚仗武力，骄狂自大，屡次挑起战争。
English: They are tyrannical and arbitrary, rely on force, are arrogant, and have repeatedly provoked wars.

古文：阴通间使，以事合从，行为辟方。
现代文：做间谍的使者暗中互相联系，进行合纵抗秦，行为邪僻放纵。
English: Envoys of spies secretly communicate with each other, carry out anti-Qin collaboration, and indulge in perverse behavior.

古文：内饰诈谋，外来侵边，遂起祸殃。
现代文：在内伪饰阴谋诡计，对外侵略秦国边境，因而带来灾难。
English: They disguised their intrigues and machinations at home and invaded the borders of Qin to the outside world, thus bringing disaster.

古文：义威诛之，殄熄暴悖，乱贼灭亡。
现代文：皇帝出于正义，用武力去讨伐他们，平息了暴乱。消灭了乱贼。
English: Out of justice, the emperor used force to fight them, quelled the riot, and eliminated the ruffians.

古文：圣德广密，六合之中，被泽无疆。
现代文：圣德宏大而深厚，天地四方，蒙受了无限的恩泽。
English: The sacred virtue is grand and profound, and it has received infinite grace from heaven and earth.

古文：皇帝并宇，兼听万事，远近毕清。
现代文：皇帝统一天下，听理万机，远近都政清民静。
English: The emperor unified the country, listened to reason, and the government, the Qing Dynasty, and the people were calm.

古文：运理群物，考验事实，各载其名。
现代文：运筹和治理大地间的万物，考察事物的实际情况，分别记载它们的名称。
English: operations and management of all things in the earth, examine the actual situation of things, and record their names separately.

古文：贵贱并通，善否陈前，靡有隐情。
现代文：不论是尊贵的人还是卑贱的人，都洞察他们的活动，好事坏事都摆在面前，没有隐瞒的情况。
English: Both high-ranking and low-ranking people have insight into their activities, and both good and bad things are in front of them, and there is no hidden situation.

古文：饰省宣义，有子而嫁，倍死不贞。
现代文：纠正人们的过错，宣扬大义，有了儿子而改嫁他人，就是背弃死去的丈夫，不守贞操。
English: To correct people's faults, to preach righteousness, to have a son and then remarry, is to abandon a dead husband and not to keep chastity.

古文：防隔内外，禁止淫泆，男女絜诚。
现代文：把内外隔离开来，禁止纵欲放荡，男女要洁身诚实。
English: Separate the inside from the outside, prohibit indulgence and debauchery, and men and women should be clean and honest.

古文：夫为寄豭，杀之无罪，男秉义程。
现代文：做丈夫的和别人的妻子通奸，杀死他也没有罪，这样，男人才能遵守道德规范。
English: If a man commits adultery with another man's wife, it is not a sin to kill him, so that the man may keep the moral law.

古文：妻为逃嫁，子不得母，咸化廉清。
现代文：做妻子的跑掉另嫁，儿子不能认她作母亲，这样人们都会被廉洁清白的风气所感化。
English: If a wife runs away to marry another man, and her son does not recognize her as his mother, people will be influenced by the culture of honesty and purity.

古文：大治濯俗，天下承风，蒙被休经。
现代文：进行大规模地整顿，涤荡不良的风俗习惯，天下百姓接受文明的社会风尚，受到了一种良好的治理。
English: Large-scale rectification has been carried out, bad customs and habits have been eliminated, and people all over the world have accepted civilized social customs, and have received a good governance.

古文：皆遵度轨，和安敦勉，莫不顺令。
现代文：人们都奉规守法，和睦平安，敦厚勤勉，没有不服从国家法令的。
English: People are law-abiding, peaceful, diligent, and do not disobey the laws of the state.

古文：黔首脩絜，人乐同则，嘉保太平。
现代文：百姓德修品洁，人人高兴地遵守统一的规定，欢乐地保持着太平的局面。
English: The people are virtuous and clean, everyone is happy to comply with the unified regulations, and happily maintain a peaceful situation.

古文：後敬奉法，常治无极，舆舟不倾。从臣诵烈，请刻此石，光垂休铭。
现代文：后世认真地奉行法治，就会无限期地长治久安下去，车船不倾，随从的大臣颂扬皇帝的功业，请求镌刻这一石碑，使这美好的记载光垂后世。
English: If future generations conscientiously follow the rule of law, there will be long-term peace and stability for an indefinite period of time, cars and ships will not sink, and the accompanying ministers will praise the emperor's achievements, request the engraving of this stone monument, and make this beautiful record shine for future generations.

古文：还过吴，从江乘渡。
现代文：返回时经过吴县，从江乘渡江。
English: On the way back, we passed through Wuxian County and crossed the Yangtze River.

古文：并海上，北至琅邪。
现代文：沿着海边北上，到达琅邪。
English: Go north along the coast and you will reach Shanzhuang.

古文：方士徐巿等入海求神药，数岁不得，费多，恐谴，乃诈曰： 蓬莱药可得，然常为大鲛鱼所苦，故不得至，原请善射与俱，见则以连弩射之。 
现代文：方士徐市等人到海中寻找神药，几年都没有找到，耗费了很多钱财，害怕受到谴责，就欺骗始皇说： 蓬莱的神药是可以得到的，然而常常苦于鲨鱼的袭击，所以不能到达蓬莱，希望派一些擅长射箭的人和我们一起去，鲨鱼出现就用连弩射死它。 
English: Fang Shi Xu and others went to the sea to look for the elixir, but they did not find it for several years. They spent a lot of money and, afraid of being condemned, deceived the first emperor and said: The elixir of Penglai is available, but it often suffers from shark attacks, so it can not reach Penglai. I hope to send some people who are good at archery to go with us. If a shark appears, shoot it with a crossbow.

古文：始皇梦与海神战，如人状。
现代文：始皇梦中与海神交战，海神像人一样的形状。
English: In his dream, the First Emperor was at war with the sea god, who had the shape of a man.

古文：问占梦，博士曰： 水神不可见，以大鱼蛟龙为候。
现代文：询问占梦的博士，博士说： 水神是看不到的，是以大鱼和蚊龙为征候的。
English: He asked the doctor who interpreted the dream, and the doctor said: The water god cannot be seen, but is indicated by the large fish and the mosquito dragon.

古文：今上祷祠备谨，而有此恶神，当除去，而善神可致。 
现代文：现在陛下祷告和祭祀周到而又恭谨，却出现了这个凶恶的海神，应当把它铲除，然后善良的神物就能到来。 
English: Now your majesty's prayers and sacrifices are thoughtful and respectful, but this vicious sea god has appeared. It should be eradicated, and then a good god can come.

古文：乃令入海者赍捕巨鱼具，而自以连弩候大鱼出射之。
现代文：于是让到海中去的人携带捕获大鱼的用具，而自己使用连弩，等待大鱼出现时射死它。
English: So they asked the people who went to the sea to carry the equipment for catching big fish, while they themselves used longlines and waited for the big fish to appear before shooting it dead.

古文：自琅邪北至荣成山，弗见。
现代文：从琅邪往北到达荣成山，没有见到大鱼。
English: I reached Rongcheng Mountain from Xinyi to the north, but I didn't see any big fish.

古文：至之罘，见巨鱼，射杀一鱼。
现代文：到了之罘，看见了大鱼，射死了一条。
English: When he arrived at the shoal, he saw a big fish and shot one dead.

古文：遂并海西。
现代文：于是沿海西行。
English: So we headed west along the coast.

古文：至平原津而病。
现代文：到了平原津就病了。
English: When I got to Tsu Plain, I got sick.

古文：始皇恶言死，群臣莫敢言死事。
现代文：始皇厌恶说死，群臣没有人敢提到死的事情。
English: The First Emperor detested the word "death," and none of his courtiers dared to mention it.

古文：上病益甚，乃为玺书赐公子扶苏曰： 与丧会咸阳而葬。 
现代文：始皇的病日益加重，于是就写了一封盖有皇帝玺印的诏书送给公子扶苏，说： 回来参加我的丧礼，一起在咸阳埋葬我。 
English: The First Emperor's illness was getting worse and worse, so he wrote an imperial edict stamped with the emperor's seal and sent it to Prince Fusu, saying: Come back to attend my funeral and bury me together in Xianyang.

古文：书已封，在中车府令赵高行符玺事所，未授使者。
现代文：诏书已经加封，放在中车府令赵高代替符玺郎掌管印玺符节事务的地方，没有送给负责传递的使者。
English: The imperial decree has been sealed and placed in the place where the Central Chefu ordered Zhao Gao to take charge of the matters of the Seal and Sign Festival in place of Fu Yulang. It was not sent to the messenger responsible for passing it on.

古文：七月丙寅，始皇崩於沙丘平台。
现代文：七月丙寅，始皇死于沙丘平台。
English: In July, the First Emperor died on the sand dune platform.

古文：丞相斯为上崩在外，恐诸公子及天下有变，乃祕之，不发丧。
现代文：因为始皇死在外面，丞相李斯怕始皇那些儿子以及国内百姓有人造，就封锁了消息，不举办丧事。
English: Because the First Emperor died outside, Premier Li Si was afraid that those sons of the First Emperor and the domestic people would be manipulated, so he blocked the news and did not hold a funeral.

古文：棺载辒凉车中，故幸宦者参乘，所至上食。
现代文：把棺材装在辊凉车中，原来亲近的宦官陪乘，所到之地，照旧送上饭食。
English: The coffin was loaded into a hearse, accompanied by the eunuchs who had been close to him, and meals were served as usual.

古文：百官奏事如故，宦者辄从辒凉车中可其奏事。
现代文：百官和过去一样上奏国事，宦官就从辒凉车中批准他们所奏之事。
English: As in the past, the eunuchs of the eunuchs approved what they played.

古文：独子胡亥、赵高及所幸宦者五六人知上死。
现代文：只有始皇的儿子胡亥、赵高和五六个亲近的宦官知道始皇已经死去。
English: Only the first emperor's sons, Hu Hai and Zhao Gao, and five or six close eunuchs knew that the first emperor had died.

古文：赵高故尝教胡亥书及狱律令法事，胡亥私幸之。
现代文：赵高过去曾经教胡亥学习文字和刑狱法律，胡亥私下对他很亲近。
English: In the past, Zhao Gao had taught Hu Hai to study literature and prison law. Hu Hai was very close to him in private.

古文：高乃与公子胡亥、丞相斯阴谋破去始皇所封书赐公子扶苏者，而更诈为丞相斯受始皇遗诏沙丘，立子胡亥为太子。
现代文：赵高就同公子胡亥、丞相李斯搞阴谋诡计，破开始皇封好送给公子扶苏的诏书，而另外诈称丞相李斯在沙丘接受始皇遗诏，立儿子胡亥为太子。
English: Zhao Gao plotted and schemed with Prince Hu Hai and Prime Minister Li Si to falsify the imperial seal sent to Prince Fusu, and also falsely claimed that Prime Minister Li Si accepted the imperial decree of the first emperor in the sand dunes and appointed his son Hu Hai as the prince.

古文：更为书赐公子扶苏、蒙恬，数以罪，赐死。
现代文：又另写了诏书送给公子扶苏、蒙恬，列举他们的罪状，命令他们自杀。
English: He also wrote another imperial edict to be sent to Fuso and Mengye, enumerating their crimes and ordering them to commit suicide.

古文：语具在李斯传中。
现代文：这些事情都记载在《李斯传》中。
English: These events are recorded in "The Life of Rhys."

古文：行，遂从井陉抵九原。
现代文：胡亥等人继续前进，于是从井陉到了九原。
English: Hu Hai and the others continued to move forward, so they went from Jingyao to Jiuhara.

古文：会暑，上辒车臭，乃诏从官令车载一石鲍鱼，以乱其臭。
现代文：正赶上暑天，始皇的辒凉车散发出臭味，就命令随从官员每车装载一石鲍鱼，用来混淆始皇尸体的臭味。
English: Just in time for the hot weather, the smell of the First Emperor's car emitted a stench, so he ordered the officials to load each car with one stone of abalone to confuse the smell of the First Emperor's corpse.

古文：行从直道至咸阳，发丧。
现代文：胡亥等人从直道回到咸阳，宣布了始皇死亡的消息。
English: Hu Hai and others returned to Xianyang from Zhudao and announced the news of the death of the first emperor.

古文：太子胡亥袭位，为二世皇帝。
现代文：太子胡亥继位，为二世皇帝。
English: Prince Hu Hai succeeded to the throne and became the second emperor.

古文：九月，葬始皇郦山。
现代文：九月，把始皇埋葬在郦山。
English: In September, the first emperor was buried in Shaoshan.

古文：始皇初即位，穿治郦山，及并天下，天下徒送诣七十馀万人，穿三泉，下铜而致椁，宫观百官奇器珍怪徙臧满之。
现代文：始皇刚即位时，就在郦山开山凿洞，等到统一了全国，把天下各方的七十多万刑徒送到郦山，把隧洞一直挖到见水的地方，用铜封锢，然后把棺材安放在里面，仿制的宫殿、百宫和各种珍奇宝物都徙置其中，藏得满满的。
English: When the first emperor ascended to the throne, he dug a hole in Lushan Mountain. When he unified the country, he sent more than 700,000 convicts from all over the world to Lushan Mountain. He dug the tunnel all the way to the water's edge, sealed it with copper, and then placed the coffin inside. Imitation palaces, palaces and all kinds of rare treasures were placed in it, hidden all over.

古文：令匠作机弩矢，有所穿近者辄射之。
现代文：让工匠制造带机关的弩箭，有人掘墓接近墓室时就会自动射向目标。
English: Let craftsmen make crossbows with a mechanism, and when someone digs a grave and approaches the burial chamber, it will automatically shoot at the target.

古文：以水银为百川江河大海，机相灌输，上具天文，下具地理。以人鱼膏为烛，度不灭者久之。
现代文：拿水银作成千川百溪和江河大海，使用机械互相灌注流通，墓中上面各种天象齐备，下面有地上景象万千，利用人鱼的脂肪作蜡烛，估计很长时期不会熄灭。
English: Using mercury to create a thousand rivers and streams and rivers and seas, using machinery to perfuse circulation with each other, the tomb is equipped with all kinds of celestial bodies above, and there are thousands of earthly scenes below, using the fat of mermaids as candles, it is estimated that it will not go out for a long time.

古文：二世曰： 先帝後宫非有子者，出焉不宜。 
现代文：二世说： 先帝后宫的姬妾没有儿子的，放出宫去不太合适。 
English: The second generation said: If the concubine of the previous emperor's harem has no son, it is not appropriate to let her out of the palace.

古文：皆令从死，死者甚众。
现代文：都让她们殉葬，死去的非常多。
English: All of them were buried as martyrs, and many of them died.

古文：葬既已下，或言工匠为机，臧皆知之，臧重即泄。
现代文：已经把始皇埋葬了，有人说工匠制造机关，奴隶们都知道，奴隶人数众多，就会泄漏出去。
English: The first emperor has already been buried. Some people say that craftsmen make organs, and slaves know that if the number of slaves is large, it will leak out.

古文：大事毕，已臧，闭中羡，下外羡门，尽闭工匠臧者，无复出者。
现代文：葬礼结束，已经封藏了墓室的随葬品，又关闭了当中的墓道，放下了最外面一段墓道的大门，把工匠和奴隶全部关死在里面，没有一个逃出去的。
English: When the funeral was over, they had already sealed the funerary objects in the burial chamber, closed the graveyard path in the middle, put down the door to the outermost section of the graveyard path, and locked all the craftsmen and slaves inside. No one escaped.

古文：树草木以象山。
现代文：在坟上种植革木，像山一样。
English: On top of the grave they planted gum trees, like a mountain.

古文：二世皇帝元年，年二十一。
现代文：二世皇帝元年，二世二十一岁。
English: Emperor Nisei was twenty-one years old in the first year of his reign.

古文：赵高为郎中令，任用事。
现代文：赵高为郎中令，掌握处理国家事务的权力。
English: Zhao Gao was the second-in-command and had the power to handle state affairs.

古文：二世下诏，增始皇寝庙牺牲及山川百祀之礼。令群臣议尊始皇庙。
现代文：二世发布诏令，增加始皇陵庙的祭牲，以及对山川等各种祭祀的礼数，让群臣讨论怎样尊崇始皇庙。
English: The second emperor issued an imperial edict to increase the number of sacrificial animals for the First Emperor's mausoleum and temple, as well as the number of rites for various rituals such as mountain and river, and let the courtiers discuss how to honor the First Emperor's temple.

古文：群臣皆顿首言曰： 古者天子七庙，诸侯五，大夫三，虽万世世不轶毁。
现代文：君臣都跪在地上磕着头说： 古代天子七庙，诸侯五庙，大夫三庙，即使是万世之后也不废除。
English: The princes and courtiers all knelt on the ground and bowed their heads, saying, "The seven temples of the ancient sons of heaven, the five temples of the princes, and the three temples of the doctors will not be abolished even after all eternity."

古文：今始皇为极庙，四海之内皆献贡职，增牺牲，礼咸备，毋以加。
现代文：现在始皇为极庙，四海之内都献上本地的产品，增多祭牲的数量，祭礼都很完备，没有什么可增加的了。
English: Now that the First Emperor is the Supreme Temple, local products are offered in all four seas, and the number of sacrificial animals has increased. The rituals are complete, and there is nothing to add.

古文：先王庙或在西雍，或在咸阳。
现代文：先王庙有的在西雍，有的在咸阳。
English: Some of the Ancestor's Temples are in Xi'an, and some are in Xianyang.

古文：天子仪当独奉酌祠始皇庙。
现代文：按天子的礼仪来说，应当亲自手持酒爵祭拜始皇庙。
English: According to the etiquette of the Son of Heaven, one should personally hold a sake goblet to worship the First Emperor's temple.

古文：自襄公已下轶毁。
现代文：自襄公以下各庙都废除。
English: All temples were abolished from the time of Emperor Xiang.

古文：所置凡七庙。
现代文：所设祖庙共有七座。
English: There are a total of seven ancestral temples.

古文：群臣以礼进祠，以尊始皇庙为帝者祖庙。
现代文：群臣按照礼仪进行祭祀，尊崇始皇庙为秦国皇帝的祖庙。
English: In accordance with the etiquette, the group of courtiers performed the ritual, and revered the First Emperor's Temple as the ancestral temple of the Qin Emperor.

古文：皇帝复自称 朕 。 
现代文：皇帝还是自称 朕 。 
English: The emperor still called himself "I."

古文：二世与赵高谋曰： 朕年少，初即位，黔首未集附。
现代文：二世和赵高商量说： 我年龄小，即位不久，百姓还没有全部归附。
English: The second generation and Zhao Gao discussed and said: I am young, I have been on the throne for a short time, and the people have not all returned.

古文：先帝巡行郡县，以示彊，威服海内。
现代文：先帝巡行郡县，来显示力量的强大，用武威压服天下。
English: The former emperor went on a tour of counties and prefectures to show his great power and conquer the world with martial prowess.

古文：今晏然不巡行，即见弱，毋以臣畜天下。 
现代文：现在安然不动，不去巡游，就显得软弱无力，这样是没有办法统治天下的。 
English: If you don't move now, if you don't go on a tour, you will appear weak and powerless, and there will be no way to rule the world.

古文：春，二世东行郡县，李斯从。
现代文：春天，二世向东巡行郡县，李斯随从。
English: In the spring, the second son went on a tour of counties and counties to the east, accompanied by Li Si.

古文：到碣石，并海，南至会稽，而尽刻始皇所立刻石，石旁著大臣从者名，以章先帝成功盛德焉：
现代文：到达碣石，沿海而行，向南来到会稽，又在始皇所立刻石上全部刻写了文字，石碑旁刻上随从大臣的名字，用来显示先帝取得的功绩和隆盛的德业。
English: Arriving at Shizukuishi, he walked along the coast, came south to Heian-kyo, and immediately inscribed all the words on the stone at the First Emperor's Residence. The names of the attendant ministers were engraved on the side of the stone monument, used to show the achievements and flourishing virtues of the former emperor.

古文：皇帝曰： 金石刻尽始皇帝所为也。
现代文：皇帝说： 这些金石刻辞都是始皇帝镌刻的。
English: The emperor said, "All these inscriptions on precious stones were engraved by the First Emperor.

古文：今袭号而金石刻辞不称始皇帝，其於久远也如後嗣为之者，不称成功盛德。 
现代文：现在我继承了皇帝的称号，而这些金石刻辞不称始皇帝，等到天长日久，好像后来嗣位的人刻写的，这同始皇帝取得的功绩和隆盛的德业是不相称的。 
English: Now that I have inherited the title of emperor, these stone inscriptions do not refer to the First Emperor. In the long run, as if inscribed by someone who later succeeded to the throne, the achievements made by the First Emperor are not commensurate with his flourishing virtues.

古文：丞相臣斯、臣去疾、御史大夫臣德昧死言： 臣请具刻诏书刻石，因明白矣。
现代文：丞相大臣李斯、大臣冯去疾、御史大夫大臣德冒着死罪说： 臣下请求把诏书全部刻在石碑上，这样就清楚了。
English: The Minister of War, Li Si, the Minister of Justice, Feng Deji, and the Minister of the Imperial Historian, De Rong, risked the death penalty and said, "Our subjects request that the edict be engraved in its entirety on the stone monument, so that it will be clear.

古文：臣昧死请。 
现代文：臣下冒着死罪来提出这一要求。 
English: A vassal risked the death penalty to make this request.

古文：制曰： 可。 
现代文：二世下令说： 可以。 
English: The Emperor's order said: Let's play.

古文：遂至辽东而还。
现代文：二世到辽东后就返回了。
English: After the second generation went to Liaodong, they came back.

古文：於是二世乃遵用赵高，申法令。
现代文：这时二世采纳赵高的建议，申明法令。
English: At this time, the Second Emperor adopted Zhao Gao's suggestion and issued a decree.

古文：乃阴与赵高谋曰： 大臣不服，官吏尚彊，及诸公子必与我争，为之柰何？ 
现代文：私下和赵高商量说： 大臣不顺服，官吏也还势力强大，那些公子们一定和我争夺权力，该怎么办呢？ 
English: Privately, he discussed with Zhao Gao, saying, "The ministers are not obedient, and the officials are still powerful. Those nobles are sure to compete with me for power. What should I do?

古文：高曰： 臣固原言而未敢也。
现代文：赵高说： 我本来就想说，但没有敢说。
English: Zhao Gao said: I wanted to say it, but I didn't dare.

古文：先帝之大臣，皆天下累世名贵人也，积功劳世以相传久矣。
现代文：先帝的大臣，都是出自几代负有名望的权贵之家，累世功勋，代代相传，为时已久。
English: The former emperor's ministers all came from powerful and prestigious families of several generations, and their achievements were handed down from generation to generation for a long time.

古文：今高素小贱，陛下幸称举，令在上位，管中事。
现代文：我赵高一向卑微低贱，如今陛下亲近抬举我，使我的官品居上，掌管宫中事务。
English: I, Zhao Gao, have always been humble and lowly, but now His Majesty has raised me up to be close to him, to make my official character high, and to be in charge of the affairs of the palace.

古文：大臣鞅鞅，特以貌从臣，其心实不服。
现代文：大臣们怏怏不乐，只是表面上顺从我，实际上他们心里并不服气。
English: The ministers were not happy and only obeyed me on the surface, but in reality they were not convinced in their hearts.

古文：今上出，不因此时案郡县守尉有罪者诛之，上以振威天下，下以除去上生平所不可者。
现代文：现在您外出巡行，何不趁这个时机，查究郡县守尉有罪的就处死他，上则威震天下，下则铲除您平生所不满的人。
English: Now that you are out on parade, why not take advantage of this opportunity to investigate the county sheriff and execute him if he is guilty, on the one hand, to shake the world, and on the other hand, to eradicate the people you have been dissatisfied with all your life.

古文：今时不师文而决於武力，原陛下遂从时毋疑，即群臣不及谋。
现代文：当今这个时代，不能师法文治，而是武力决定一切，希望陛下顺时从势，不要犹豫不决，则群臣来不及谋算。
English: In this day and age, it is no longer a matter of teaching, but of using force to decide everything. I hope that Your Majesty will follow the trend of the times and not hesitate, otherwise, your ministers will not have time to make plans.

古文：明主收举馀民，贱者贵之，贫者富之，远者近之，则上下集而国安矣。 二世曰： 善。 
现代文：英明的君主收揽起用遗民，低贱的使他高贵，贫穷的使他富有，疏远的亲近他，那就会上下聚集，国家安定。 二世说： 很好。 
English: The wise prince gathers together the remnant of his people, the lowly he makes noble, the poor he makes rich, and the alienated he brings near to him; then all will be gathered together, and the state will be secure.

古文：乃行诛大臣及诸公子，以罪过连逮少近官三郎，无得立者，而六公子戮死於杜。
现代文：于是杀戮大臣和那些公子们，假借罪名互相株连，来逮捕地位较低的近侍之臣和三署郎官。没有一个人能够保住他的官位，把六个公子处死在杜县。
English: So the Minister of Slaughter and the boys banded together under false pretenses to arrest low-ranking courtiers and third-ranking officials. No one was able to retain his position, and the six boys were executed in Du County.

古文：公子将闾昆弟三人囚於内宫，议其罪独後。
现代文：公子将闾兄弟三人被囚禁在宫中，最后审议他们的罪行。
English: The prince imprisoned the three brothers in the palace and finally judged them for their crimes.

古文：二世使使令将闾曰： 公子不臣，罪当死，吏致法焉。 
现代文：二世派使者对将闾下令说： 你不像大臣的样子，按所犯罪行应当处死，由狱吏执法。 
English: The second generation sent an envoy to the warden and ordered: "You are not like a minister. According to the crime you committed, you should be put to death. The warden will enforce the law."

古文：将闾曰： 阙廷之礼，吾未尝敢不从宾赞也；廊庙之位，吾未尝敢失节也；受命应对，吾未尝敢失辞也。
现代文：将闾说： 宫廷的礼仪，我未尝敢不服从司仪人的指挥；朝廷上的位次，我未尝敢违背礼节；承命回答问题，我未尝敢辞语差错。
English: "In terms of court etiquette, I didn't dare to disobey the command of the master of ceremonies; in terms of court rank, I didn't dare to violate etiquette; in terms of answering questions, I didn't dare to make a mistake.

古文：何谓不臣？
现代文：为什么说我不像大臣的样子呢？
English: Why do you say I don't look like a minister?

古文：原闻罪而死。 
现代文：希望知道我的罪行之后再死去。 
English: I hope to die knowing my crime.

古文：使者曰： 臣不得与谋，奉书从事。 
现代文：使者说： 我不能参预谋划，只是奉诏办事。 
English: The messenger said, "I can't be part of the pre-planning, I'm just following orders."

古文：将闾乃仰天大呼天者三，曰： 天乎！
现代文：于是将闾仰面连声大呼苍天，喊着说： 天啊！
English: So he lifted up his face to heaven and cried out in a loud voice, "O God!

古文：吾无罪！ 
现代文：我没有罪！ 
English: I am not guilty!

古文：昆弟三人皆流涕拔剑自杀。
现代文：兄弟三人都涕泪俱下，拔剑自杀。
English: With tears in their eyes, the three brothers drew their swords and committed suicide.

古文：宗室振恐。
现代文：宗室为之震动，恐惧不安。
English: The family room is shaken with fear and anxiety.

古文：群臣谏者以为诽谤，大吏持禄取容，黔首振恐。
现代文：群臣进谏的都认为是诽谤朝廷，大臣拿着俸禄，谄媚讨好，百姓惊恐。
English: The ministers who were promoted were considered to have slandered the imperial court, the ministers took their salaries, courted favorably, and the people were alarmed.

古文：四月，二世还至咸阳，曰： 先帝为咸阳朝廷小，故营阿房宫为室堂。
现代文：四月，二世回到咸阳，他说： 先帝因为咸阳宫廷狭小，所以兴建阿房宫。
English: In April, the second emperor returned to Xianyang. He said, "The previous emperor built the Afang Palace because the Xianyang Palace was too small.

古文：未就，会上崩，罢其作者，复土郦山。
现代文：殿堂还没有建成，碰上先帝逝世，停止了工程，让工匠去郦山覆土筑陵。
English: The hall of fame has not yet been built, but when the former emperor died, the project was stopped and the craftsmen were asked to cover the mountain with soil to build the mausoleum.

古文：郦山事大毕，今释阿房宫弗就，则是章先帝举事过也。 
现代文：郦山的工程大体已经结束，如今放弃阿房宫不去完成，就是表明先帝所做的事情是错误的。 
English: The Lushan project has been largely completed, and to abandon the Afang Palace without completing it now is to show that what the former emperor did was wrong.

古文：复作阿房宫。
现代文：又开始修建阿房宫。
English: The construction of Afang Palace began again.

古文：外抚四夷，如始皇计。
现代文：对外安抚四方夷狄，和始皇的策略一样。
English: It is the same strategy as that of the first emperor to appease the barbarians in all four directions.

古文：尽徵其材士五万人为屯卫咸阳，令教射狗马禽兽。
现代文：把健武的士卒五万人全部调来驻守咸阳，让人教习射御，驯养狗马禽兽。
English: He transferred all of the 50,000 able-bodied officers and men to garrison Xianyang, and had them teach shooting and tame dogs, horses, and animals.

古文：当食者多，度不足，下调郡县转输菽粟刍藁，皆令自赍粮食，咸阳三百里内不得食其穀。用法益刻深。
现代文：要吃粮食的很多，估计储存的粮食不够吃的，就向下面的郡县调用，把粮食草料运送到咸阳，运送的人都自带粮食，咸阳三百里以内的百姓不能食用这批粮谷，执法更加严厉苛刻。
English: There was a lot of grain to eat, and it was estimated that the stored grain was not enough to eat, so they called the following counties and counties to transport grain and grass to Xianyang. The people who transported the grain brought their own grain. The people within 300 miles of Xianyang could not eat this batch of grain, and the law enforcement was more severe and harsh.

古文：七月，戍卒陈胜等反故荆地，为 张楚 。
现代文：七月，屯戍的士卒陈胜等人在过去的荆地起兵造反，建立了张楚。
English: In July, Chen Sheng and other soldiers of the garrison rebelled in the former Jingdi and established Zhang Chu.

古文：胜自立为楚王，居陈，遣诸将徇地。
现代文：陈胜自封为楚王，住在陈县，派遣将领攻城略地。
English: Chen Sheng proclaimed himself the King of Chu, lived in Chen County, and dispatched generals to attack strategic locations.

古文：山东郡县少年苦秦吏，皆杀其守尉令丞反，以应陈涉，相立为侯王，合从西乡，名为伐秦，不可胜数也。
现代文：山东郡县的青年人苦于秦朝官吏的统治，都杀死了他们的守尉令丞起来造反，响应陈涉，相互推立为诸侯王，联合起来向西进军，以讨伐秦朝为名，造反的人多得无法计算。
English: The young people of Shandong County suffered from the rule of the Qin Dynasty officials. They all killed their bodyguards, ordered their young men to rebel, responded to suggestions, promoted each other to princes, and united to march westward in the name of fighting the Qin Dynasty. There were too many rebels to count.

古文：谒者使东方来，以反者闻二世。
现代文：谒者出使东方回来，把叛乱的事情报告了二世。
English: The eunuch returned from the east and reported the rebellion to the emperor.

古文：二世怒，下吏。
现代文：二世非常气愤，把谒者交给了狱吏治罪。
English: The second generation was very angry and handed the offender over to the warden to be punished.

古文：後使者至，上问，对曰： 群盗，郡守尉方逐捕，今尽得，不足忧。 
现代文：以后的使者回来，二世问他情况，使者回答说： 是一群盗贼，郡守郡尉正在追捕，现在全部抓获了，不值得担忧。 
English: Later, when the messenger returned, Nisei asked him about the situation. The messenger replied, "It's a group of thieves. The county governor and the county lieutenant are chasing them. Now they've all been caught. It's not worth worrying about."

古文：上悦。
现代文：二世很高兴。
English: The second generation is very happy.

古文：武臣自立为赵王，魏咎为魏王，田儋为齐王。
现代文：武臣自封为赵王，魏咎为魏王，田儋为齐王。
English: Wuxin proclaimed himself as King Zhao, Wei Wei as King Wei, and Tian Qi as King Qi.

古文：沛公起沛。
现代文：沛公在沛县起义。
English: Pei Gong revolted in Pei County.

古文：项梁举兵会稽郡。
现代文：项梁在会稽郡起兵。
English: Cao Liang raised an army in Heji County.

古文：二年冬，陈涉所遣周章等将西至戏，兵数十万。
现代文：二年冬天，陈涉所派遣的周章等将领西进，到达戏水，有几十万军队。
English: In the winter of the second year, Zhou Zhang and other generals sent by Chen Zhuang marched westward and arrived at Caoshui, with hundreds of thousands of troops.

古文：二世大惊，与群臣谋曰： 柰何？ 
现代文：二世大为震惊，和群臣商量说： 怎么办呢？ 
English: The second was very shocked, and discussed with his courtiers, saying, "What should we do?

古文：少府章邯曰： 盗已至，众彊，今发近县不及矣。
现代文：少府章邯说： 盗贼已经来到这里，兵众势强，现在调发近处县城的军队为时已晚。
English: Shoufu Zhangye said: The thieves have come here, the soldiers are strong, and now it is too late to send troops from the nearby county town.

古文：郦山徒多，请赦之，授兵以击之。 
现代文：郦山刑徒很多，希望赦免他们，发给兵器，让他们出击盗贼。 
English: There are a lot of prisoners in Lushan. I hope they will be pardoned and given weapons so that they can attack the thieves.

古文：二世乃大赦天下，使章邯将，击破周章军而走，遂杀章曹阳。
现代文：于是二世大赦天下，派章邯为将领，打垮了周章的军队，周章逃走，章邯在曹阳杀死了周章。
English: As a result, the second emperor pardoned the world, sent Zhang Ye as a general, defeated Zhou Zhang's army, Zhou Zhang fled, and Zhang Ye killed Zhou Zhang in Cao Yang.

古文：二世益遣长史司马欣、董翳佐章邯击盗，杀陈胜城父，破项梁定陶，灭魏咎临济。
现代文：二世又增派长史司马欣、董翳协助章邯进攻盗贼，在城父杀死了陈胜，在定陶打垮了项梁，在临济消灭了魏咎。
English: The second generation also sent additional leaders Shi Simakhin and Dong Hao to assist Zhang Ye in attacking the thieves. They killed Chen Sheng in Chengpu, broke Xiao Liang in Dingtao, and eliminated Wei Wei in Linji.

古文：楚地盗名将已死，章邯乃北渡河，击赵王歇等於钜鹿。
现代文：楚地盗贼的有名将领都已经死了，章邯就向北渡过黄河，在巨鹿进攻赵王歇。
English: The famous generals of the Chu thieves were all dead, so Zhang Xuan crossed the Yellow River to the north and attacked Zhao Wangxie at the Giant Deer.

古文：赵高说二世曰： 先帝临制天下久，故群臣不敢为非，进邪说。
现代文：赵高劝告二世说： 先帝统治天下的时间很长，所以群臣不敢为非作歹，向先帝提出邪说。
English: Zhao Gao advised the second son: The previous emperor ruled the world for a long time, so the ministers did not dare to do anything wrong and put forward evil theories to the former emperor.

古文：今陛下富於春秋，初即位，柰何与公卿廷决事？
现代文：现在陛下正是年轻的时候，刚刚即位，怎么能和公卿大臣在朝廷上决议事情呢？
English: Now that His Majesty is young and has just ascended to the throne, how can he and the Lord Chancellor settle matters at court?

古文：事即有误，示群臣短也。
现代文：如果事情有了差错，就把自己的短处暴露给群臣了。
English: If things go wrong, they will expose their own shortcomings to the ministers.

古文：天子称朕，固不闻声。 
现代文：天子自称朕，本来群臣就不应该听到天子的声音。 
English: The Son of Heaven calls Himself I. Originally, the ministers should not have heard the voice of the Son of Heaven.

古文：於是二世常居禁中，与高决诸事。
现代文：于是二世常常住在宫中，和赵高决断各种政务。
English: As a result, the second son often lived in the palace and decided various government affairs with Zhao Gao.

古文：其後公卿希得朝见，盗贼益多，而关中卒发东击盗者毋已。
现代文：从此以后公卿大臣很少有朝见的机会，盗贼越来越多，关中士卒被调发向东去攻打盗贼的一批接一批。
English: From then on, Kugyo-daijin rarely had the opportunity to meet the emperor, the number of thieves increased, and Sergeant Kwan was sent to the east to attack the thieves one by one.

古文：右丞相去疾、左丞相斯、将军冯劫进谏曰： 关东群盗并起，秦发兵诛击，所杀亡甚众，然犹不止。
现代文：右丞相冯去疾、左丞相李斯、将军冯劫进谏说： 关东成郡的盗贼一块儿起来造反，秦政府出兵讨伐，杀死了很多，然而盗贼还是没有被平息。
English: Minister of the Right Feng Dexia, Minister of the Left Li Si, and General Feng Rong Jinqi said: The thieves in Chenggong County, Guandong Province, rebelled together. The Qin government sent troops to fight and killed many of them, but the thieves were still not subdued.

古文：盗多，皆以戌漕转作事苦，赋税大也。
现代文：盗贼这样多，都是因为屯戍边地、水路运载、陆路转输和土木兴作等各种杂泛差役使百姓太劳苦，赋税也过于沉重。
English: The reason why there are so many thieves is that the people are overworked and overtaxed by all kinds of miscellaneous services such as settlement, border land, waterway transportation, land transfer and civil engineering.

古文：请且止阿房宫作者，减省四边戍转。 
现代文：希望停止阿房宫的兴建，减少四方边境的屯戍和运输任务。 
English: It is hoped that the construction of Afang Palace will be stopped and the settlement and transportation tasks along the four-party border will be reduced.

古文：二世曰： 吾闻之韩子曰： 尧舜采椽不刮，茅茨不翦，饭土塯，啜土形，虽监门之养，不觳於此。
现代文：二世说： 我听韩子说： 尧、舜的栎木屋椽不加整治，茅草屋不加修葺，吃饭用土碗，喝水用瓦盆，即使是供给看守城门的吃食和用品，也不俭薄到这种程度。
English: The second generation said, "I heard Han Zi say, 'Even if the eucalyptus and cypress houses are left unrepaired, and the thatched houses are left unrepaired, and earthenware bowls are used for eating, and earthenware pots are used for drinking, even if food and supplies are provided for the guards of the city gate, they are not frugal to such an extent.

古文：禹凿龙门，通大夏，决河亭水，放之海，身自持筑臿，胫毋毛，臣虏之劳不烈於此矣。 
现代文：禹开凿龙门，使大夏畅通，修治河道，疏导积水，引入大海，亲自拿着筑墙的杵和挖土的锹，小腿上的毛都掉光了，奴仆的劳苦程度也不比这更厉害。 
English: Yu opened the gantry, made the Daxia smooth, repaired the river, drained the stagnant water, and introduced it into the sea. He personally took the shovel to build the wall and the shovel to dig the soil. The hair on his calf was gone, and the level of slave labor was no more severe than this.

古文：凡所为贵有天下者，得肆意极欲，主重明法，下不敢为非，以制御海内矣。
现代文：凡是尊贵而掌握了天下的人，应该随心所欲，为所欲为，主要着重宣明法治，下面的臣民不敢胡作非为，以此来统治天下。
English: All those who are noble and have mastered the world should do whatever they want and do whatever they want, mainly focusing on proclaiming the rule of law, and the subjects below should not dare to do anything wrong, in order to rule the world.

古文：夫虞、夏之主，贵为天子，亲处穷苦之实，以徇百姓，尚何於法？
现代文：像那虞、夏的君主，贵为天子，亲自处于穷苦的状况，来顺从百姓，这还有什么法治可言？
English: What kind of rule of law can be said to be like that of the monarchs of the Eastern and Southern dynasties, who were regarded as the sons of heaven, and who themselves were in a state of poverty to obey the people?

古文：朕尊万乘，毋其实，吾欲造千乘之驾，万乘之属，充吾号名。
现代文：我尊为万乖之君，却没有万乘之实，我要制造一千乘车驾，设置一万乘的随从徒众，来符合我的万乘之君这一名号。
English: I am respected as the Prince of the Ten Thousand Blessings, but I do not have the Truth of the Ten Thousand Blessings. I will create a thousand chariots and set up a following of ten thousand disciples to live up to my title of the Prince of the Ten Thousand Blessings.

古文：且先帝起诸侯，兼天下，天下已定，外攘四夷以安边竟，作宫室以章得意，而君观先帝功业有绪。
现代文：而且先帝起于诸侯，兼并天下，天下已经安定，对外抗御四方夷狄，使边境安宁，兴修宫殿，以显示自己的得意之情，你们看到了先帝功业的开端和发展。
English: Moreover, the former emperor started from the vassals, annexed the world, the world has been stabilized, resisted the outside world, pacified the border, and built palaces to show his pride. You have seen the beginning and development of the work of the former emperor.

古文：今朕即位二年之间，群盗并起，君不能禁，又欲罢先帝之所为，是上毋以报先帝，次不为朕尽忠力，何以在位？ 
现代文：如今在我即位的两年之间，成群的盗贼同时并起，你们不能加以禁绝，又想废除先帝所做的事情，这是对上无以报答先帝，其次也是不给我尽忠竭力，凭什么处在现在的职位上？ 
English: Now, in the two years since I ascended the throne, hordes of thieves have emerged simultaneously. You cannot stop them, and you want to abolish what the former emperor did. This is because you cannot repay the former emperor, and secondly, you are not loyal to me. Why are you in your current position?

古文：下去疾、斯、劫吏，案责他罪。
现代文：把冯去疾、李斯、冯劫交给狱吏囚禁，审查追究他们的其他各种罪行。
English: Put Feng Deji, Li Si, and Feng Rong under the custody of prison officers, and investigate and prosecute them for various other crimes.

古文：去疾、劫曰： 将相不辱。 
现代文：冯去疾、冯劫说： 将相不能身受侮辱。 
English: Feng Dexia and Feng Cao said, "The general cannot be insulted."

古文：自杀。
现代文：自杀而死。
English: He committed suicide.

古文：斯卒囚，就五刑。
现代文：李斯最后被监禁狱中，受尽五刑。
English: Li Si was eventually sent to prison and served five terms.

古文：三年，章邯等将其卒围钜鹿，楚上将军项羽将楚卒往救钜鹿。
现代文：三年，章邯等人率领他们的军队包围巨鹿，楚国上将军项羽带领楚国士卒前往援救巨鹿。
English: In the third year, Zhang Xuan and others led their army to surround the giant deer, and the Chu warlord Xiang Yu led the Chu soldiers to rescue the giant deer.

古文：冬，赵高为丞相，竟案李斯杀之。
现代文：冬天，赵高做了丞相，彻底审查李斯，杀死了他。
English: In winter, Zhao Gao became chancellor, thoroughly examined Li Si, and killed him.

古文：夏，章邯等战数卻，二世使人让邯，邯恐，使长史欣请事。
现代文：夏天，章邯等人在战争上屡次退却，二世派人斥责章邯，章邯心里恐惧，派长史司马欣请示事情。
English: In the summer, Zhang Ye and others repeatedly retreated in the war, the second emperor sent people to reprimand Zhang Ye, Zhang Ye was afraid, and the leader of the faction, Shi Simasin, asked for instructions.

古文：赵高弗见，又弗信。
现代文：赵高不肯接见，又不信任他。
English: Zhao Gao refused to meet him and did not trust him.

古文：欣恐，亡去，高使人捕追不及。
现代文：司马欣很害怕，就逃走了。赵高派人追捕，没有追上。
English: Sima Xin was very scared and ran away. Zhao Gao sent people to chase him, but they couldn't catch him.

古文：欣见邯曰： 赵高用事於中，将军有功亦诛，无功亦诛。 
现代文：司马欣见到章邯说： 赵高在朝廷中操纵大权，将军有功也要被杀，无功也要被杀。 
English: Sima Xin saw Zhang Ye and said: Zhao Gao is manipulating great power in the imperial court. Generals with merits should be killed, and those without merits should be killed.

古文：项羽急击秦军，虏王离，邯等遂以兵降诸侯。
现代文：项羽迅速地攻打秦军，俘虏了王离，章邯等人就率军投降了各路诸侯。
English: Xiang Yu quickly attacked the Qin army, captured Wang Li, and Zhang Ye and others led the army to surrender to various princes.

古文：八月己亥，赵高欲为乱，恐群臣不听，乃先设验，持鹿献於二世，曰： 马也。 
现代文：八月己亥，赵高想要作乱，害怕群臣不肯服从，就预先做了一个试验，拿一只鹿献给二世，说： 这是一匹马。 
English: At the end of August, Zhao Gao wanted to make a disturbance and was afraid that the courtiers would not obey, so he made an experiment in advance. He took a deer and offered it to the second son, saying, "This is a horse."

古文：二世笑曰： 丞相误邪？
现代文：二世笑着说： 丞相错了吧？
English: The second laughed and said, "The prime minister was wrong, wasn't he?"

古文：谓鹿为马。 
现代文：把鹿说成是马。 
English: Call a deer a horse.

古文：问左右，左右或默，或言马以阿顺赵高。
现代文：赵高问左右大臣，左右大臣有的缄默不语，有的说是马，来阿谀迎合赵高。
English: Zhao Gao asked the left and right ministers, some of the left and right ministers were silent, some said it was a horse, to pander to Zhao Gao.

古文：或言鹿，高因阴中诸言鹿者以法。
现代文：有的说是鹿，赵高就假借法律暗中陷害那些说是鹿的人。
English: Some said it was a deer, but Zhao Gao used the law to secretly frame those who said it was a deer.

古文：後群臣皆畏高。
现代文：后来大臣们都很惧怕赵高。
English: Later, the ministers were afraid of Zhao Gao.

古文：高前数言 关东盗毋能为也 ，及项羽虏秦将王离等钜鹿下而前，章邯等军数卻，上书请益助，燕、赵、齐、楚、韩、魏皆立为王，自关以东，大氐尽畔秦吏应诸侯，诸侯咸率其众西乡。
现代文：赵高以前多次说 关东的盗贼不会有什么作为 ，等到项羽在巨鹿俘虏了秦军将领王离等人，继续向前推进，章邯等人的军队屡次退却，上书请求增加兵员，燕、赵、齐、楚、韩、魏都自立为王，从函谷关以东，差不多都背叛了秦朝官吏，响应各路诸侯，诸侯们率领自己的军队向西推进。
English: Zhao Gao had said many times before that the thieves of Guandong would not have any effect, until Xiang Yu captured the Qin general Wang Li and others in Julu and continued to advance, the army of Zhang Jun and others repeatedly retreated, petitioned to increase the number of soldiers, Yan, Zhao, Qi, Chu, Han and Wei all stood up as kings, from the east of Hakodate Pass, almost all betrayed the Qin Dynasty officials, responded to the various princes, and the princes led their own army to advance westward.

古文：沛公将数万人已屠武关，使人私於高，高恐二世怒，诛及其身，乃谢病不朝见。
现代文：沛公率领几万人屠毁了武关，派人私通赵高，赵高害怕二世发怒，遭到杀身之祸，就推说有病，不去朝见。
English: Pei Gong led tens of thousands of people to massacre Wuguan, and sent people to fornicate with Zhao Gao. Zhao Gao was afraid that the second generation would be angry and killed, so he said that he was ill and would not go to the court.

古文：二世梦白虎齧其左骖马，杀之，心不乐，怪问占梦。
现代文：二世梦见白色的老虎咬他驾车的左边的那匹马，最后马被咬死了，二世心里闷闷不乐，感到奇怪，就去问占梦的人。
English: Nisei dreamed of a white tiger biting the horse on the left side of his car. The horse was eventually bitten to death. Nisei felt sad and strange, so he asked the person who interpreted his dream.

古文：卜曰： 泾水为祟。 
现代文：占梦的人占卜说： 径水的水神在作祟。 
English: The diviners of dreams say: The god of water, the god of running water, is casting a spell.

古文：二世乃斋於望夷宫，欲祠泾，沈四白马。
现代文：于是二世在望夷宫斋戒，打算祭祀泾水的水神，沉入水中四匹白马。
English: As a result, the second son fasted at the Mogi Palace, intending to offer a sacrifice to the water god of Surabaya, and four white horses sank into the water.

古文：使使责让高以盗贼事。
现代文：派使者以有关盗贼的事情去指责赵高。
English: sent an envoy to accuse Zhao Gao of the theft.

古文：高惧，乃阴与其婿咸阳令阎乐、其弟赵成谋曰： 上不听谏，今事急，欲归祸於吾宗。
现代文：赵高很恐慌，就暗中和他的女婿咸阳令阎乐、他的弟弟赵成商量说： 皇帝不听劝告，如今事已危急，想要嫁祸于我们的家族。
English: Zhao Gao was very panicked, so he secretly discussed with his son-in-law Xianyang Ling Yanle and his brother Zhao Cheng and said: The emperor did not listen to advice, now things are critical, and he wants to blame our family.

古文：吾欲易置上，更立公子婴。
现代文：我打算废掉二世，另立公子婴做皇帝。
English: I'm going to abolish the second emperor and install another prince as emperor.

古文：子婴仁俭，百姓皆载其言。 
现代文：公子婴仁爱俭约，百姓都听信他的话。 
English: The nobleman, the infant, and the benevolent man love thrift, and the people listen to his words.

古文：使郎中令为内应，诈为有大贼，令乐召吏发卒，追劫乐母置高舍。遣乐将吏卒千馀人至望夷宫殿门，缚卫令仆射，曰： 贼入此，何不止？ 
现代文：赵高派郎中令作内应，欺骗说有一大群盗贼来了，命令阎乐叫来官吏发兵追击，又劫持阎乐的母亲，安置在赵高的家里，赵高派阎乐带领吏卒一千多人来到望夷宫殿门，把卫令仆射捆绑起来，说： 盗贼跑进这里，为什么不加阻止？ 
English: Zhao Gao sent a middle-ranking official to act as a middleman. He lied and said that a large group of thieves had come. He ordered Yan Le to call the officials to send troops to chase them. He also kidnapped Yan Le's mother and placed her in Zhao Gao's home. Zhao Gao sent Yan Le to lead more than a thousand officials to the gate of the Wangyi Palace, tied up the guards and said: "The thieves ran into here, why not stop them?"

古文：卫令曰： 周庐设卒甚谨，安得贼敢入宫？ 
现代文：卫令说： 四周墙垣内的庐舍设有士卒，防卫非常严谨，盗贼怎么敢闯入宫内？ 
English: The palace guard said: There are soldiers surrounding the palace within the walls, the defense is very strict, how dare thieves break into the palace?

古文：乐遂斩卫令，直将吏入 行射，郎宦者大惊，或走或格，格者辄死，死者数十人。
现代文：阎乐就杀了卫令，带领吏卒直入官内，一边走，一边射箭，郎官和宦者大为惊慌，有的逃窜，有的上前搏斗，搏斗的人都被杀死，死了几十人。
English: Yan Le killed the guards and led the officers and men straight into the office. As they walked, they shot arrows. The officials and courtiers were greatly alarmed. Some fled, some went forward to fight. Those who fought were killed, and dozens of people died.

古文：郎中令与乐俱入，射上幄坐帏。
现代文：郎中令和阎乐一起进入二世住处，用箭射向二世坐息的帷帐。
English: The second-in-command and Yan Le entered Nisei's residence together and shot arrows at the curtain where Nisei was sitting.

古文：二世怒，召左右，左右皆惶扰不斗。
现代文：二世大怒，叫来了左右侍从人员，左右侍从人员都惶恐纷扰，不上前搏斗。
English: The second generation was furious and called the attendants on the right and left. The attendants on the right and left were all panicked and disturbed, and did not go forward to fight.

古文：旁有宦者一人，侍不敢去。
现代文：身边有一个宦官，陪侍着二世，不敢走掉。
English: There is a eunuch at his side, who accompanies the second son and does not dare to leave.

古文：二世入内，谓曰： 公何不蚤告我？
现代文：二世逃入室内，对陪侍的宦官说： 你为什么不早告诉我？
English: The second escaped into the room and said to the attendant eunuch: Why didn't you tell me earlier?

古文：乃至於此！ 
现代文：竟到了这种地步！ 
English: It has come to this!

古文：宦者曰： 臣不敢言，故得全。
现代文：宦官说： 我不敢说，所以能保住性命。
English: And the eunuch said, I am not able to utter it for fear of my life.

古文：使臣蚤言，皆已诛，安得至今？ 
现代文：假如我早说了，就已经被杀死，哪里会活到现在？ 
English: If I had spoken out earlier, I would have been killed. How could I have survived until now?

古文：阎乐前即二世数曰： 足下骄恣，诛杀无道，天下共畔足下，足下其自为计。 
现代文：阎乐上前来到二世面前，列举他的罪状说： 你骄横纵恣，屠杀吏民，无道已极，天下百姓一起背叛了你，你自己作打算吧。 
English: Yan Le came forward to the Second Emperor and listed his crimes, saying, "You are arrogant and wanton, slaughtering officials and people. You have no morals. The people of the world have all betrayed you. You should make your own plans."

古文：二世曰： 丞相可得见否？ 
现代文：二世说： 我可以见见丞相吗？ 
English: The second said: May I see the prime minister?

古文：乐曰： 不可。 
现代文：阎乐说： 不可以。 
English: Yan Le said, "No.

古文：二世曰： 吾原得一郡为王。 
现代文：二世说： 我希望得到一个郡，去做一郡之王。 
English: The second said, "I want to get a county and be the king of a county."

古文：弗许。
现代文：阎乐不答应。
English: Yan Le still did not agree.

古文：又曰： 原为万户侯。 
现代文：又说： 我愿做万户侯。 
English: He also said: I would like to be a millionaire.

古文：弗许。
现代文：阎乐仍不答应。
English: Yan Le still did not agree.

古文：曰： 原与妻子为黔首，比诸公子。 
现代文：二世说： 希望和妻子儿女成为平民百姓，和那些公子们一样。 
English: The second generation said, "I hope that my wife and children will become commoners, just like those noblemen."

古文：阎乐曰： 臣受命於丞相，为天下诛足下，足下虽多言，臣不敢报。 
现代文：阎乐说： 我受命于丞相，替天下百姓处死你，虽然你说了很多话，我不敢向丞相报告。 
English: Yan Le said, "I was ordered by the prime minister to execute you on behalf of the people of the world. Although you have said a lot of things, I dare not report to the prime minister.

古文：麾其兵进。
现代文：阎乐指挥他的士卒向前进击。
English: Yan Le ordered his soldiers to advance and attack.

古文：二世自杀。
现代文：二世自杀。
English: The second generation committed suicide.

古文：阎乐归报赵高，赵高乃悉召诸大臣公子，告以诛二世之状。
现代文：阎乐回来报告赵高，赵高就把所有大臣和公子都召集起来，告诉他们杀死二世的情况。
English: When Yan Le returned to report to Zhao Gao, Zhao Gao called together all the ministers and nobles and told them the circumstances of the killing of the second son.

古文：曰： 秦故王国，始皇君天下，故称帝。
现代文：赵高说： 秦本来是诸侯王国，始皇君临天下，所以号称皇帝。
English: Zhao Gao said: Qin was originally a kingdom of princes, and the first emperor ruled the world, so he was known as the emperor.

古文：今六国复自立，秦地益小，乃以空名为帝，不可。
现代文：现在六国又都各自建立了政权，秦国地域日益缩小，竟仍然称帝，空有其名，这是不可以的。
English: Now that the six countries have all established their own political power, and the area of Qin is shrinking day by day, it is unacceptable that they still call him emperor and use his name in vain.

古文：宜为王如故，便。 
现代文：应该像过去一样称王，这样比较适宜。 
English: It is more appropriate to praise the king as in the past.

古文：立二世之兄子公子婴为秦王。
现代文：就立二世哥哥的儿子公子婴为秦王。
English: He appointed the second brother's son, Gongzibing, as the Qin king.

古文：以黔首葬二世杜南宜春苑中。
现代文：用百姓的礼仪把二世埋葬在杜县南面的宜春苑中。
English: The second son was buried in the Yichun Garden in the south of Du County with the etiquette of the common people.

古文：令子婴斋，当庙见，受王玺。
现代文：赵高让子婴斋戒，到宗庙参拜祖先，接受秦王印玺。
English: Zhao Gao asked his infant son to fast, visit the ancestral temple to worship the ancestors, and accept the Qin King's seal.

古文：斋五日，子婴与其子二人谋曰： 丞相高杀二世望夷宫，恐群臣诛之，乃详以义立我。
现代文：斋戒了五天，子婴和他的两个儿子商量说： 丞相赵高在望夷宫杀死二世，害怕群臣诛伐他，就假装以大义为名，立我为王。
English: Having fasted for five days, the infant and his two sons discussed the matter and said, "The prime minister, Zhao Gao, killed the second son in the palace of Wangyi. Fearing that his ministers would attack him, he pretended to be a king in the name of justice.

古文：我闻赵高乃与楚约，灭秦宗室而王关中。
现代文：我听说赵高和楚约定，由他消灭秦国宗室，在关中称王。
English: I heard that Zhao Gao and Chu agreed that he would eliminate the Qin dynasty and proclaim himself king in Guanzhong.

古文：今使我斋见庙，此欲因庙中杀我。
现代文：现在让我斋戒，拜见祖庙，这是想要趁我在祖庙的时候杀死我。
English: Now they want me to fast and visit the ancestral temple. They want to kill me while I am in the ancestral temple.

古文：我称病不行，丞相必自来，来则杀之。 
现代文：我就说有病不去，丞相一定亲自来我这里，来时就杀死他。 
English: I said that I would not go if I was ill, and that the prime minister must come to me in person, and that I would kill him when he came.

古文：高使人请子婴数辈，子婴不行，高果自往，曰： 宗庙重事，王柰何不行？ 
现代文：赵高好几次派人去请子婴，子婴不去，赵高果然亲自来了，说： 参拜宗庙是大事，王为何不去？ 
English: Zhao Gao several times sent people to invite the infant, but the infant did not go. Zhao Gao finally came in person and said, "Visiting the ancestral temple is a big deal, why doesn't the king go?

古文：子婴遂刺杀高於斋宫，三族高家以徇咸阳。
现代文：子婴就在斋戒的宫室里刺死了赵高，全部处死赵高家的三族，在咸阳示众。
English: The baby stabbed Zhao Gao to death in the palace room where he was fasting, and all three families of Zhao Gao's family were executed and paraded in Xianyang.

古文：子婴为秦王四十六日，楚将沛公破秦军入武关，遂至霸上，使人约降子婴。
现代文：子婴做了四十六天秦王，楚将沛公打垮了秦军，进入武关，来到霸上，派人去约子婴投降。
English: On the forty-sixth day of the Qin Dynasty, when the child was born, Chu Shogun Peigong defeated the Qin army, entered Wuguan, came to Hegang, and sent someone to ask the child to surrender.

古文：子婴即系颈以组，白马素车，奉天子玺符，降轵道旁。
现代文：子婴就用丝带系着脖子，白马素车，捧着天子的印玺和符节，在轵道旁投降。
English: The baby was tied with a ribbon around his neck, and the white horse-drawn carriage, holding the seal and symbols of the Son of God, surrendered on the side of the road.

古文：沛公遂入咸阳，封宫室府库，还军霸上。
现代文：于是沛公进入咸阳，封闭官室府库，回军霸上，过了一个多月。
English: As a result, Pei Gong entered Xianyang, closed the government office and treasury, and returned to the military hegemony, after more than a month.

古文：居月馀，诸侯兵至，项籍为从长，杀子婴及秦诸公子宗族。
现代文：各路诸侯的军队到了，项羽为合纵首领，杀死了子婴和秦公子的宗族。
English: The armies of the various lords arrived, and Xiang Yu, as the leader of the conspiracy, killed the baby and the clan of Qin Gongzi.

古文：遂屠咸阳，烧其宫室，虏其子女，收其珍宝货财，诸侯共分之。
现代文：屠毁咸阳，焚烧宫室，俘虏了秦国子弟和妇女，把珍宝财物搜刮在一起，诸侯们共同瓜分了。
English: They slaughtered Xianyang, burned the palace, captured Qin's sons and women, and scavenged the precious treasures and goods together. The princes divided them up.

古文：灭秦之後，各分其地为三，名曰雍王、塞王、翟王，号曰三秦。
现代文：消灭了秦国以后，把它的土地分为三部分，名叫雍王，塞王、翟王，号称三秦。
English: After the destruction of Qin, its land was divided into three parts, called Yong Wang, Sai Wang, and Yao Wang, known as the Three Qin Kingdoms.

古文：项羽为西楚霸王，主命分天下王诸侯，秦竟灭矣。
现代文：项羽为西楚霸王，负责分封天下诸侯王，秦朝最后灭亡了。
English: Xiang Yu was the king of Western Chu, responsible for dividing the world's princes, and the Qin Dynasty finally perished.

古文：後五年，天下定於汉。
现代文：过了五年，汉朝统一了全国。
English: Five years later, the Han Dynasty unified the whole country.

古文：太史公曰：秦之先伯翳，尝有勋於唐虞之际，受土赐姓。
现代文：太史公说：秦国的祖先伯翳，曾在唐、虞之际建立了功勋，获得了土地，被赐予赢姓。
English: Taishigong said: The ancestor of Qin State, Bo Xun, once established merits in the Tang and Yu dynasties, acquired land, and was given the surname of Ying.

古文：及殷夏之间微散。
现代文：到了夏、殷之间，势力衰微分散。
English: By the time of Xia and Yin, their power had waned and dispersed.

古文：至周之衰，秦兴，邑于西垂。
现代文：及至周朝没落，秦国兴起，在西垂建筑了城邑。
English: Until the fall of the Zhou Dynasty, the Qin State arose and built a city in Xittuo.

古文：自缪公以来，稍蚕食诸侯，竟成始皇。
现代文：从缪公以来，渐渐蚕食诸侯，统一事业最后由始皇完成了。
English: From the time of Mikuo, they gradually encroached on the vassals, and the unification was finally completed by the first emperor.

古文：始皇自以为功过五帝，地广三王，而羞与之侔。
现代文：始皇自认为功劳超过了五帝，疆域比三王还广阔，耻于和三王五帝相提并论。
English: The first emperor himself thought that his merits exceeded the five emperors, and his territory was wider than the three kings. He was ashamed to be compared to the three kings and five emperors.

古文：善哉乎贾生推言之也！
现代文：贾生的论述非常好。他说：
English: Jia Sheng's exposition is very good. He said:

古文：曰：秦并兼诸侯山东三十馀郡，缮津关，据险塞，修甲兵而守之。
现代文：秦兼并了各个诸侯国，山东三十多郡，缮治津渡和关口，占据险隘和要塞，训练军队，加以防守。
English: Qin annexed various vassal states and more than 30 counties in Shandong, governed Tsindu and Guekou, occupied narrow passes and fortresses, trained troops, and defended them.

古文：然陈涉以戍卒散乱之众数百，奋臂大呼，不用弓戟之兵，鉏櫌白梃，望屋而食，横行天下。
现代文：然而陈涉率领几百个散乱的戍卒，振臂大呼。不用弓乾一类的兵器，只用锄、櫌、木棍，走到哪里，吃到哪里，横行天下。
English: However, Chen Zhuo led hundreds of scattered hooligans, waving their arms and shouting loudly. They did not use weapons such as bows and arrows, but only used picks, hoes, and wooden sticks to go anywhere, eat anywhere, and rampage around the world.

古文：秦人阻险不守，关梁不阖，长戟不刺，彊弩不射。
现代文：秦人有险阻而不能固守，有关口桥梁而不能封锁，有长乾而不能刺杀，有强弩而不能发射。
English: Qin people have dangerous obstacles and can't stick to them, bridges with entrances and can't be blocked, long dry and can't be stabbed, strong shackles and can't be launched.

古文：楚师深入，战於鸿门，曾无籓篱之艰。
现代文：张楚的军队深入腹地，在鸿门作战，连越过篱笆一样的困难都没有。
English: Zhang Chu's army went deep into the hinterland and fought in Hongmen. They did not even have the same difficulties as crossing the fence.

古文：於是山东大扰，诸侯并起，豪俊相立。
现代文：于是山东大乱，诸侯同时并起，豪杰俊士互相椎立为王。
English: As a result, the Shandong War broke out, the princes simultaneously arose, and the heroes and good men became kings.

古文：秦使章邯将而东征，章邯因以三军之众要市於外，以谋其上。
现代文：秦派章邯率军东征，章邯在外利用自己统率的军队相要挟，猎取私利，图谋他的君王。
English: Qin sent Zhang Ye to lead the army to the east, and Zhang Ye used the army he led to threaten each other, seek personal gain, and plot against his king.

古文：群臣之不信，可见於此矣。
现代文：群臣不讲信用，从这里就可以看出来了。
English: Ministers are not trustworthy, you can see that from here.

古文：子婴立，遂不寤。
现代文：子婴立为王，最终也没有醒悟。
English: A baby boy was made king, and in the end he didn't wake up.

古文：藉使子婴有庸主之材，仅得中佐，山东虽乱，秦之地可全而有，宗庙之祀未当绝也。
现代文：如果子婴具有一般君主的能力，只要得到中等才能的辅佐大臣，山东虽然叛乱，秦国故地还是可以保全的，宗庙祭祀不会断绝。
English: If the child has the ability of an average monarch, as long as he gets a middle-ranking assistant minister, Shandong can still be preserved despite the rebellion, and the ancestral temple will not be cut off.

古文：秦地被山带河以为固，四塞之国也。
现代文：秦地被山带河，地势险固，是四面都有屏障和要塞的国家。
English: Qin is surrounded by mountains and rivers, with a rugged terrain. It is a country with barriers and fortresses on all sides.

古文：自缪公以来，至於秦王，二十馀君，常为诸侯雄。
现代文：从缪公以来，到秦王时，有二十多个君主，常常称雄于诸侯。
English: From the time of King Mu to the time of King Qin, there have been more than twenty monarchs, often claiming to be superior to the princes.

古文：岂世世贤哉？
现代文：难道秦国世世代代都是贤明的君主吗？
English: Hadn't Qin been a wise ruler for generations?

古文：其势居然也。
现代文：那是它的地理形势所造成的。
English: That's because of its geography.

古文：且天下尝同心并力而攻秦矣。
现代文：而且天下曾经同心协力进攻秦国。
English: Moreover, the whole world once made a concerted effort to attack Qin.

古文：当此之世，贤智并列，良将行其师，贤相通其谋，然困於阻险而不能进，秦乃延入战而为之开关，百万之徒逃北而遂坏。
现代文：在这个时候，贤人智者会集，优秀的将领统率指挥军队，贤明的宰相互相交流彼此的谋略，然而被险峻的地形所困阻，不能前进。秦就给他们敞开关门，引诱敌人深入，进行交战，于是六国百万之众败逃，土崩瓦解。
English: At this time, wise men and sages gathered, excellent generals led and commanded the army, and wise chieftains exchanged their strategies with each other. However, they were trapped by the steep terrain and could not advance. Qin opened and closed the door to them, lured the enemy in, and engaged in battle. As a result, millions of people in six countries fled and collapsed.

古文：岂勇力智慧不足哉？
现代文：这难道是武力和智慧不足吗？
English: Is it a lack of force and intelligence?

古文：形不利，势不便也。
现代文：是地形不利，形势不便的缘故。
English: This is due to the unfavourable terrain and the inconvenient situation.

古文：秦小邑并大城，守险塞而军，高垒毋战，闭关据厄，荷戟而守之。
现代文：秦国把小聚邑合并成大城市，在险阻要塞驻军防守，高筑营垒，不去交战，封锁关口，占据险隘，持戟把守这些地方。
English: Qin State merged small counties into large cities, garrisoned troops in defensive fortresses, built high barracks, did not engage in battle, blocked gates, occupied narrow passes, and guarded these places with shackles.

古文：诸侯起於匹夫，以利合，非有素王之行也。
现代文：诸侯都是从平民百姓中起来的，以利相合，没有素王那样的德操。
English: Princes and lords were all raised from the common people, with the same interests. They did not have the same virtues as the Su Wang.

古文：其交未亲，其下未附，名为亡秦，其实利之也。
现代文：他们的交谊并不亲密，他们的下属还没有诚心归服，表面以灭秦为名，实际上图谋私利。
English: Their friendship is not close, their subordinates have not yet sincerely surrendered, ostensibly in the name of eliminating Qin, but actually seeking personal gain.

古文：彼见秦阻之难犯也，必退师。
现代文：他们看到秦国地势险阻，难以侵犯，必然撤军。
English: They saw that the terrain of Qin was dangerous and difficult to invade, so they had to withdraw.

古文：安土息民，以待其敝，收弱扶罢，以令大国之君，不患不得意於海内。
现代文：秦使百姓休养生息，等待诸侯的衰败，收养贫弱，扶持疲困，来向大国诸侯发号施令，不怕不得意于天下。
English: Qin made the people rest and recuperate, waiting for the decline of the princes, adopting the poor and weak, supporting the tired, to issue orders to the great powers and princes, not afraid of the world.

古文：贵为天子，富有天下，而身为禽者，其救败非也。
现代文：贵为天子，富有天下，而自己被抓去成为俘虏，是因为他挽救败亡的策略不正确。
English: You are the son of heaven, the richest man in the world, and he was captured and taken prisoner because his strategy to save the downfall was not correct.

古文：秦王足己不问，遂过而不变。
现代文：秦王骄傲自满，不虚心下问，坚持错误而不改变。
English: Qin Wang is proud and complacent, does not ask questions with a humble heart, insists on mistakes and does not change.

古文：二世受之，因而不改，暴虐以重祸。
现代文：二世继承下来，沿袭不改，残暴凶虐，加重了祸患。
English: Inherited by the second generation, the lineage has not changed, and the brutality and cruelty have intensified the scourge.

古文：子婴孤立无亲，危弱无辅。
现代文：子婴势孤力单，没有亲近的人，地位危险脆弱，无人辅助。
English: Infants are left to fend for themselves, with no one close to them, their status is dangerously fragile, and they have no one to help them.

古文：三主惑而终身不悟，亡，不亦宜乎？
现代文：这三个君主一生迷惑不悟，国家灭亡，不是应该的吗？
English: Shouldn't these three monarchs have been bewildered all their lives and the country destroyed?

古文：当此时也，世非无深虑知化之士也，然所以不敢尽忠拂过者，秦俗多忌讳之禁，忠言未卒於口而身为戮没矣。
现代文：在这个时候，世上不是没有深谋远虑、能预见形势变化之士，然而所以不敢尽忠直谏，纠正错误，是因为秦国的风气有很多禁忌，忠诚的话还没有说完，而自己已被杀害。
English: At this time, the world is not without forethought, people who can foresee changes in the situation, but they do not dare to be loyal and correct mistakes, because the culture of Qin has many taboos, the words of loyalty have not been finished, and they have been killed.

古文：故使天下之士，倾耳而听，重足而立，拑口而不言。
现代文：所以天下之士，侧耳听命，叠足而立，闭口不言。
English: Therefore, men of the world, lend an ear and listen, stand with your feet together and shut your mouths.

古文：是以三主失道，忠臣不敢谏，智士不敢谋，天下已乱，奸不上闻，岂不哀哉！
现代文：这三个君主丧失了治国的原则，忠臣不敢直言规劝，智士不敢出谋划策，天下已经大乱，奸邪的事情没有人向君主报告，这难道不是太可悲了吗！
English: These three monarchs have lost the principle of governing the country, loyal subjects dare not speak out to persuade, wise men dare not offer advice, the world has fallen into chaos, and no one has reported the treachery to the monarch. Isn't this too sad?

古文：先王知雍蔽之伤国也，故置公卿大夫士，以饰法设刑，而天下治。
现代文：先王知道上下壅塞蒙蔽会损害国家利益，所以设置公卿、大夫、士，以整饬法令，建立刑罚，而使天下太平。
English: The previous king knew that the country's interests would be harmed by the cover-up and deception, so he set up court nobles, doctors, and magistrates to rectify the laws and establish punishments to bring peace to the world.

古文：其彊也，禁暴诛乱而天下服。
现代文：国势强盛时，能够禁止残暴，讨伐叛乱，天下归服。
English: When a country is strong, it can prohibit brutality, suppress rebellion, and subjugate the world.

古文：其弱也，五伯征而诸侯从。
现代文：国势弱小时，有五霸代替天子征讨，诸侯顺从。
English: When the country was weak, there were five overlords in place of the emperor to collect taxes, and the lords obeyed.

古文：其削也，内守外附而社稷存。
现代文：国势衰削时，内有所守，外有所附，国家可以存而不亡。
English: When a country is in decline, it can survive and not die if it protects what is inside and adds what is outside.

古文：故秦之盛也，繁法严刑而天下振；及其衰也，百姓怨望而海内畔矣。
现代文：秦国强盛时，法令繁密，刑罚严酷，天下震恐。到了它衰落时，百姓怨恨，天下叛离。
English: When the Qin state was strong, the laws were complex, the punishments were severe, and the whole world was shocked. When it declined, the people were resentful, and the whole world rebelled.

古文：故周五序得其道，而千馀岁不绝。
现代文：周朝纲常合乎正道，所以一千多年间，国运不绝。
English: The Zhou Dynasty Program has always been in line with the right path, so for more than a thousand years, the national movement has never stopped.

古文：秦本末并失，故不长久。
现代文：秦朝本末俱失，因此国柞短促。
English: The Qin Dynasty eventually lost the capital, so the national anthem was short.

古文：由此观之，安危之统相去远矣。
现代文：由此看来，国家安危的基础相差太远了。
English: From this perspective, the foundations of national security are too far apart.

古文：野谚曰 前事之不忘，後事之师也 。
现代文：民间俗话说 前事不忘，后事之师 。
English: There is a folk saying that one should not forget the past, but learn from it.

古文：是以君子为国，观之上古，验之当世，参以人事，察盛衰之理，审权势之宜，去就有序，变化有时，故旷日长久而社稷安矣。
现代文：因此有道德修养的人治理国家，观察远古的得失，考察当代的所作所为，参照人情事理，了解盛衰的道理，明悉权力威势的恰当运用，弃取有一定的次序，变革有适当的时间，所以历时久远，而国家安定。
English: Therefore, people with moral cultivation govern the country, observe the ancient gains and losses, examine the contemporary behavior, refer to human affairs, understand the principle of rise and fall, know the proper use of power, abandonment has a certain order, and change has a proper time, so it has lasted for a long time, and the country is stable.

古文：襄公立，享国十二年。
现代文：襄公即位，在位十二年。
English: Prince Xiang ascended the throne and reigned for twelve years.

古文：初为西畤。
现代文：开始修建西畤。
English: Commenced construction of the West Pier.

古文：葬西垂。
现代文：襄公埋葬在西垂。
English: Prince Xiang was buried in Xiduli.

古文：生文公。
现代文：生了文公。
English: Fumiko was born.

古文：文公立，居西垂宫。
现代文：文公即位，居住西垂宫。
English: Emperor Wengu ascended to the throne and lived in Xituli Palace.

古文：五十年死，葬西垂。
现代文：在位五十年死去，埋葬在西垂。
English: He died fifty years into his reign and was buried in Xideli.

古文：生静公。
现代文：生了静公。
English: Shizuko was born.

古文：静公不享国而死。
现代文：静公没有即位就死了。
English: Shizuko died without taking the throne.

古文：生宪公。
现代文：生了宪公。
English: The constitutional prince was born.

古文：宪公享国十二年，居西新邑。
现代文：宪公在位十二年，居住西新邑。
English: In the twelfth year of his reign, he lived in Xishin.

古文：死，葬衙。
现代文：死后埋葬在衙邑。
English: After his death, he was buried in Yeupo.

古文：生武公、德公、出子。
现代文：生了武公、德公、出子。
English: She gave birth to Wu Gong, De Gong and De Zi.

古文：出子享国六年，居西陵。
现代文：出子在位六年，居住西陵。
English: Isshi reigned for six years and lived in Xiling.

古文：庶长弗忌、威累、参父三人，率贼贼出子鄙衍，葬衙。
现代文：庶长弗忌。威累、参父三个人，率领盗贼在鄙衍把出子杀害了，埋葬在衙邑。
English: The second-in-command, Fu Boi, along with three other men, Wei Lei and San Fu, led a group of thieves to kill his son-in-law in Danyang and buried him in Yeup.

古文：武公立。
现代文：武公嗣立。
English: Takegimi became the heir.

古文：武公享国二十年。
现代文：武公在位二十年。
English: Emperor Wukong reigned for twenty years.

古文：居平阳封宫。
现代文：居住平阳封宫。
English: He lives in Pingyang Fugu Palace.

古文：葬宣阳聚东南。
现代文：埋葬在宣阳聚东南。
English: He was buried in the southeast of Xuanyang.

古文：三庶长伏其罪。
现代文：三个庶长伏法被诛。
English: The three lower-ranking officials were stripped of their posts.

古文：德公立。
现代文：德公嗣立。
English: Toko's successor was appointed.

古文：德公享国二年。
现代文：德公在位二年。
English: De Gong has been on the throne for two years.

古文：居雍大郑宫。
现代文：居住雍邑大郑宫。
English: He lives in Yongyi Dazheng Palace.

古文：生宣公、成公、缪公。
现代文：生了宣公、成公、缪公。
English: Shengguang, Chengguang and Miaoguang were born.

古文：葬阳。
现代文：埋葬在阳邑。
English: He was buried in Yang'eup.

古文：初伏，以御蛊。
现代文：开始规定三伏节令，在城郭四门杀狗，禳除暑热瘟疫。
English: The regulation of the Three-voltage Festival began, and dogs were killed at the four gates of the castle to eliminate the heat plague.

古文：宣公享国十二年。
现代文：宣公在位十二年。
English: Xuan Gong has been on the throne for twelve years.

古文：居阳宫。
现代文：居住阳宫。
English: He lives in Yanggong.

古文：葬阳。
现代文：埋葬在阳邑。
English: He was buried in Yang'eup.

古文：初志闰月。
现代文：开始记载闰月。
English: Recording of leap months begins.

古文：成公享国四年，居雍之宫。
现代文：成公在位四年，居住在雍邑的宫殿里。
English: Chenggong reigned for four years, living in a palace in Yongyue.

古文：葬阳。
现代文：埋葬在阳邑。
English: He was buried in Yang'eup.

古文：齐伐山戎、孤竹。
现代文：齐国讨伐山戎、孤竹。
English: Qi country to fight mountaineering, lone bamboo.

古文：缪公享国三十九年。
现代文：缪公在位三十九年。
English: Miao Gong reigned for thirty-nine years.

古文：天子致霸。
现代文：天子给予霸主的地位。
English: The Son of Heaven has given him the position of overlord.

古文：葬雍。
现代文：埋葬在雍邑地区。
English: He was buried in Yongyi District.

古文：缪公学著人。
现代文：缪公向宫殿门、屏之间的守卫人员学习。
English: Miao Gong learned from the guards at the palace gate and between the screens.

古文：生康公。
现代文：生了康公。
English: Kang Gong was born.

古文：康公享国十二年。
现代文：康公在位十二年。
English: It's been 12 years since Emperor Kangong ascended the throne.

古文：居雍高寝。
现代文：居住雍邑高寝。
English: He lives in Yongyue and sleeps on a high bed.

古文：葬竘社。
现代文：埋葬在竘社。
English: He was buried in Shinsha.

古文：生共公。
现代文：生了共公。
English: A commonwealth was born.

古文：共公享国五年，居雍高寝。
现代文：共公在位五年。居住雍邑高寝。
English: He reigned for five years. He lived and slept in Yongyue.

古文：葬康公南。
现代文：埋葬在康公南面。
English: He was buried south of Kanggong.

古文：生桓公。
现代文：生了桓公。
English: Prince Kan was born.

古文：桓公享国二十七年。
现代文：桓公在位二十七年。
English: Prince Kan has been on the throne for 27 years.

古文：居雍太寝。
现代文：居住雍邑太寝。
English: He lives in Yongyup and sleeps too much.

古文：葬义里丘北。
现代文：埋葬在义里丘北面。
English: He was buried on the north side of Yili Hill.

古文：生景公。
现代文：生了景公。
English: King Gyeongnam was born.

古文：景公享国四十年。
现代文：景公在位四十年。
English: Jing Gong reigned for forty years.

古文：居雍高寝，葬丘里南。
现代文：居住雍邑高寝。埋葬在丘里南面。
English: He lived and slept in Yongyue, and was buried on the south side of the hill.

古文：生毕公。
现代文：生了毕公。
English: Bi Gong was born.

古文：毕公享国三十六年。
现代文：毕公在位三十六年。
English: Bi Gong reigned for 36 years.

古文：葬车里北。
现代文：埋葬在车里北面。
English: Buried in the car to the north.

古文：生夷公。
现代文：生了夷公。
English: He was born as a barbarian.

古文：夷公不享国。死，葬左宫。
现代文：夷公没有即位就死了，埋葬在左宫。
English: Yigong died without ascending the throne and was buried in Samgong.

古文：生惠公。
现代文：生了惠公。
English: Huigong was born.

古文：惠公享国十年。
现代文：惠公在位十年。
English: Huigong reigned for ten years.

古文：葬车里。
现代文：埋葬在车里。
English: Buried in the car.

古文：生悼公。
现代文：车里位于康公、景公二墓之间。
English: The car is located between the two tombs of Kang Gong and Jing Gong.

古文：悼公享国十五年。
现代文：生了悼公。悼公在位十五年。
English: Eiko was born. Eiko reigned for fifteen years.

古文：葬僖公西。
现代文：埋葬在僖公西面。
English: He was buried on the west side of Shingong.

古文：城雍。
现代文：在雍邑筑城。
English: Build a city in Yongyi.

古文：生剌龚公。
现代文：生了刺龚公。
English: Lord Hedgehog is born.

古文：剌龚公享国三十四年。
现代文：刺龚公在位三十四年。
English: Lord Hedgehog reigned for thirty-four years.

古文：葬入里。
现代文：埋葬在入里。
English: He was buried in Niri.

古文：生躁公、怀公。
现代文：生了躁公、怀公。
English: She gave birth to Mani-gong and Kaigong.

古文：其十年，彗星见。
现代文：刺龚公十年，彗星出现。
English: In the tenth year of the hedgehog's reign, a comet appears.

古文：躁公享国十四年。
现代文：躁公在位十四年。
English: Manikoh reigned for fourteen years.

古文：居受寝。
现代文：居住受寝。
English: Living and sleeping together.

古文：葬悼公南。
现代文：埋葬在悼公南面。
English: He was buried in the southern part of the cemetery.

古文：其元年，彗星见。
现代文：躁公元年，彗星出现。
English: In the year of Mani, a comet appeared.

古文：怀公从晋来。
现代文：怀公从晋国返回。
English: Huai Gong returned from Jin Province.

古文：享国四年。
现代文：在位四年。
English: He reigned for four years.

古文：葬栎圉氏。
现代文：埋葬在栎圉。
English: He was buried in Wuchang.

古文：生灵公。
现代文：生了灵公。
English: My soulmate is born.

古文：诸臣围怀公，怀公自杀。
现代文：群臣围攻怀公，怀公自杀。
English: The retainers besieged Huai Gong, and Huai Gong committed suicide.

古文：肃灵公，昭子子也。
现代文：肃灵公是昭子的儿子。
English: Surying is Akiko's son.

古文：居泾阳。
现代文：居住泾阳。
English: He lives in Shenyang.

古文：享国十年。
现代文：在位十年。
English: Ten years on the throne.

古文：葬悼公西。
现代文：埋葬在悼公西面。
English: He was buried on the west side of the mausoleum.

古文：生简公。
现代文：生了简公。
English: Jian Gong was born.

古文：简公从晋来。
现代文：简公从晋国返回。
English: Jian Gong returned from Jin Province.

古文：享国十五年。
现代文：在位十五年。
English: He reigned for fifteen years.

古文：葬僖公西。
现代文：埋葬在僖公西面。
English: He was buried on the west side of Shingong.

古文：生惠公。
现代文：生了惠公。
English: Huigong was born.

古文：其七年。百姓初带剑。
现代文：简公七年，百姓开始佩带剑器。
English: In the seventh year of Jian Gong, the common people began to wear swords.

古文：惠公享国十三年。
现代文：惠公在位十三年。
English: Emperor Huigong reigned for thirteen years.

古文：葬陵圉。
现代文：埋葬在陵圉。
English: He was buried in the mausoleum.

古文：生出公。
现代文：生了出公。
English: He was born out of wedlock.

古文：出公享国二年。
现代文：出公在位二年。
English: He has been on the throne for two years.

古文：出公自杀，葬雍。
现代文：出公自杀，埋葬在雍邑。
English: Committed suicide after taking office and was buried in Yongyue.

古文：献公享国二十三年。
现代文：献公在位二十三年。
English: He has been on the throne for 23 years.

古文：葬嚣圉。
现代文：埋葬在嚣圉。
English: Buried in tumult.

古文：生孝公。
现代文：生了孝公。
English: A filial son was born.

古文：孝公享国二十四年。
现代文：孝公在位二十四年。
English: Takako has been on the throne for twenty-four years.

古文：葬弟圉。
现代文：埋葬在弟国。
English: He was buried in his brother's country.

古文：生惠文王。
现代文：生了惠文王。
English: King Huiwen was born.

古文：其十三年，始都咸阳。
现代文：孝公十三年，开始建都咸阳。
English: In the 13th year of Xiaogong, the construction of the capital Xianyang began.

古文：惠文王享国二十七年。
现代文：惠文王在位二十七年。
English: King Huiwen has been on the throne for 27 years.

古文：葬公陵。
现代文：埋葬在公陵。
English: He was buried in the imperial mausoleum.

古文：生悼武王。
现代文：生了悼武王。
English: A memorial service was held for King Wu.

古文：悼武王享国四年，葬永陵。
现代文：悼武王在位四年。埋葬在永陵。
English: In memory of King Mu, who reigned for four years and was buried in Yongling.

古文：昭襄王享国五十六年。
现代文：昭襄王在位五十六年。
English: King Zhaoxiang reigned for 56 years.

古文：葬茝阳。
现代文：埋葬在茝阳。
English: He was buried in Shenyang.

古文：生孝文王。
现代文：生孝文王。
English: He was born Prince Takahito.

古文：孝文王享国一年。
现代文：孝文王在位一年。
English: Prince Xiaowen reigned for one year.

古文：葬寿陵。
现代文：埋葬在寿陵。
English: He was buried in Shuling Mausoleum.

古文：生庄襄王。
现代文：生了庄襄王。
English: Zhuang Xiang Wang was born.

古文：庄襄王享国三年。
现代文：庄襄王在位三年。
English: King Zhuangxiang reigned for three years.

古文：葬茝阳。
现代文：埋葬在茝阳。
English: He was buried in Shenyang.

古文：生始皇帝。
现代文：生了始皇帝。
English: The First Emperor was born.

古文：吕不韦相。
现代文：吕不韦为丞相。
English: Lü Buwei became chancellor.

古文：献公立七年，初行为市。
现代文：献公即位七年，开始设置市场，进行贸易。
English: After seven years on the throne, he began to set up markets and engage in trade.

古文：十年，为户籍相伍。
现代文：十年，建立户籍，按五家为一伍进行编制。
English: Ten years later, a household register was established, compiled according to five families as a team.

古文：孝公立十六年。时桃李冬华。
现代文：孝公即位十六年，当时桃树李树在冬天开花。
English: In the 16th year of Emperor Xiaogong's reign, the peach tree and the plum tree bloomed in winter.

古文：惠文王生十九年而立。立二年，初行钱。
现代文：惠文王生后十九年即位，即位二年，开始铸造发行钱币。
English: Huiwen Wang ascended the throne nineteen years after his birth, and began to mint and issue coins two years after his accession.

古文：有新生婴兒曰 秦且王 。
现代文：有一个刚生下来的婴儿说 秦国将要称王天下 。
English: There was a newborn baby who said that Qin would be the king of the world.

古文：悼武王生十九年而立。立三年，渭水赤三日。
现代文：悼武王生后十九年即位，即位三年，渭水红了三天。
English: He ascended to the throne nineteen years after the death of King Wu, and was enthroned for three years.

古文：昭襄王生十九年而立。
现代文：昭襄王生后十九年即位。
English: He ascended the throne nineteen years after the birth of King Zhaoxiang.

古文：立四年，初为田开阡陌。
现代文：即位四年，开始在耕地上设置新田界。
English: Four years after his accession to the throne, he began to set up new fields on cultivated land.

古文：孝文王生五十三年而立。
现代文：孝文王生后五十三年即位。
English: He ascended the throne fifty-three years after the birth of Prince Takafumi.

古文：庄襄王生三十二年而立。
现代文：庄襄王生后三十二年即位。
English: She ascended to the throne 32 years after the birth of Prince Zhuangxiang.

古文：立二年，取太原地。
现代文：即位二年，攻取了太原地区。
English: Two years into his reign, he conquered the Taiyuan region.

古文：庄襄王元年，大赦，脩先王功臣，施德厚骨肉，布惠於民。
现代文：庄襄王元年，大赦天下，崇敬先王的功臣，广施恩德，亲厚宗室骨肉，播惠于百姓。
English: In the first year of King Zhuangxiang, he granted amnesty to the whole world, revered the heroic vassals of the former king, widely provided benevolence, became a close family member, and spread benefits to the people.

古文：东周与诸侯谋秦，秦使相国不韦诛之，尽入其国。
现代文：东周和各国诸侯图谋秦国，秦国派相国吕不韦消灭了东周，兼并了它的国土。
English: Eastern Zhou and the princes of various countries plotted against Qin. Qin dispatched its vassal state Lü Buwei to destroy Eastern Zhou and annex its territory.

古文：秦不绝其祀，以阳人地赐周君，奉其祭祀。
现代文：秦国不断绝它的祭祀，把阳人地区赐予周君，在那里奉事周先祖的祭祀。
English: The Qin state continued to refuse its sacrifices, and gave the Yangren region to Zhou Jun, where he served the sacrifices of Zhou's ancestors.

古文：始皇享国三十七年。
现代文：始皇在位三十七年。
English: The first emperor has been on the throne for 37 years.

古文：葬郦邑。
现代文：埋葬在郦邑。
English: He was buried in Yeonpyeong.

古文：生二世皇帝。
现代文：生了二世皇帝。
English: The second emperor was born.

古文：始皇生十三年而立。
现代文：始皇生后十三年即位。
English: She ascended the throne thirteen years after the birth of the first emperor.

古文：二世皇帝享国三年。
现代文：二世皇帝在位三年。
English: The second emperor reigned for three years.

古文：葬宜春。
现代文：埋葬在宜春。
English: He was buried in Yichun.

古文：赵高为丞相安武侯。
现代文：赵高为丞相，封安武侯。
English: Zhao Gao became chancellor and was given the title of Anwuhou.

古文：二世生十二年而立。
现代文：二世生后十二年即位。
English: He ascended the throne twelve years after the birth of the second generation.

古文：右秦襄公至二世，六百一十岁。
现代文：右秦襄公至二世，六百一十年。
English: Right Qin Xiang Gong to the second generation, 610 years old.

古文：孝明皇帝十七年十月十五日乙丑，曰：
现代文：孝明皇帝十七年十月十五日乙丑，班固说：
English: On the fifteenth day of the tenth month in the seventeenth year of Emperor Xiaoming, Ban Gu said:

古文：周历已移，仁不代母。秦直其位，吕政残虐。
现代文：周朝的历数已经过去了，按照仁德规范，处在子位的王朝不能代替母位的王朝的位置。它却自居母位，吕政为政残酷暴虐。
English: The history of the Zhou Dynasty has passed. According to the norms of benevolence, a dynasty in the position of a child cannot replace the position of a dynasty in the position of a mother. However, it regards itself as a mother, and Lu Zheng is cruel and tyrannical.

古文：然以诸侯十三，并兼天下，极情纵欲，养育宗亲。
现代文：然而却能以十三岁的一个诸侯，兼并了天下，放纵情欲，抚养宗族。
English: However, he was able to annex the whole country as a thirteen-year-old vassal, indulge in lust, and raise his clan.

古文：三十七年，兵无所不加，制作政令，施於後王。
现代文：三十七年之间，兵锋无所不至，制定政令，传给以后的帝王。
English: Between the thirty-seven years, the military was omnipresent, formulating decrees that were passed on to future emperors.

古文：盖得圣人之威，河神授图，据狼、狐，蹈参、伐，佐政驱除，距之称始皇。
现代文：他大概得到了圣人的神威，河神给了他图录，身据狼、狐、脚踏参、伐，上天帮助他驱除天下，最后终于，号称始皇。
English: He probably got the saint's divine power, the river god gave him the catalogue, the body according to the wolf, the fox, the foot, the war, the heaven to help him drive out the world, and finally, the so-called first emperor.

古文：始皇既殁，胡亥极愚，郦山未毕，复作阿房，以遂前策。
现代文：始皇死后，胡亥极端愚蠢，郦山工程还没有结束，又去继续修建阿房宫，来完成以前始皇遗留下来的计划。
English: After the death of the First Emperor, Hu Hai was extremely stupid. The Lushan Project had not yet been completed, and he continued to build the Afang Palace to complete the plan left by the First Emperor.

古文：云 凡所为贵有天下者，肆意极欲，大臣至欲罢先君所为 。
现代文：说什么 凡是尊贵而掌握了天下的人，应随心所欲，为所欲为，大臣们竟然想废除先君所做的事情 。
English: What is there to say about the fact that ministers want to abolish what their predecessors did, when anyone who is respected and holds the world in his hands should be able to do as he pleases?

古文：诛斯、去疾，任用赵高。
现代文：他杀死了李斯、冯去疾，任用赵高。
English: He killed Li Si and Feng Deji and appointed Zhao Gao.

古文：痛哉言乎！人头畜鸣。
现代文：二世说的话，真是令人痛心啊！长着人头，说的话却像畜牲叫唤。
English: The words of the second generation are truly distressing! They have human heads, but their words sound like the howling of animals.

古文：不威不伐恶，不笃不虚亡，距之不得留，残虐以促期，虽居形便之国，犹不得存。
现代文：不凭借帝王威势就不能夸耀自己的邪恶，邪恶不积累很多就不会轻易灭亡，到了君位无法保持时，残酷暴虐使在位时间更加短促，虽然占据地形有利的国土，还是不能存身立国。
English: One cannot boast of one's wickedness without the imperial might, one cannot easily perish without accumulating a lot of evil, and when the throne cannot be maintained, cruel tyranny makes the time of reigning even shorter. Although one occupies a land with favorable terrain, one still cannot survive and establish a country.

古文：子婴度次得嗣，冠玉冠，佩华绂，车黄屋，从百司，谒七庙。
现代文：子婴按照次序嗣立为王，头戴玉冠，身佩华丽的系印丝带，车子使用黄缯作盖里，身后随从百官，拜谒列祖的灵庙。
English: According to the order of succession, the baby is the king, wearing a jade crown on his head, wearing an ornate silk ribbon, using a yellow scepter as a cover on his chariot, followed by hundreds of officials, and worshipping the ancestral temple.

古文：小人乘非位，莫不怳忽失守，偷安日日，独能长念卻虑，父子作权，近取於户牖之间，竟诛猾臣，为君讨贼。
现代文：如果小人登上不符合自己身份的位子，都会恍恍惚惚，若有所失，天天苟且偷安，而子婴却能作长远打算，排除忧虑，父子使用计谋，就近在门户之内，竟然杀死了狡猾的奸臣，替已死的皇帝诛戮了这个贼子。
English: If a villain ascends to a position that does not correspond to his identity, he will be in a trance, if he loses something, he will steal security every day, but the baby can make long-term plans, eliminate worries, father and son use stratagems, close to the portal, he even killed a cunning traitor, and killed the thief for the dead emperor.

古文：高死之後，宾婚未得尽相劳，餐未及下咽，酒未及濡脣，楚兵已屠关中，真人翔霸上，素车婴组，奉其符玺，以归帝者。
现代文：赵高死后，宾辛姻娅还没有全部慰劳，饭还没有来得及咽下去，酒还没有来得及沾着嘴唇，楚国士卒已经屠戮关中，仙人翔至霸上，子婴素车白马，用丝带系着脖子，捧着他的符节和印玺，来归降真正的皇帝。
English: After the death of Zhao Gao, Binxin Ruoya had not yet done all the work, the meal had not yet been able to swallow, the wine had not yet been able to stick to the lips, the Chu soldiers had already been slaughtered, the immortals had soared to the top, and the baby vegetarian chariot white horse, with a ribbon tied around his neck, holding his rune and seal, came to surrender the real emperor.

古文：郑伯茅旌鸾刀，严王退舍。
现代文：真有点像当年郑伯左持茅旌，右执鸾刀，楚庄王后撤七里。
English: It's a bit like that time when Zheng Bo held a thatched palanquin in his left hand and a scythe in his right, and the Queen of Chu Zhuang retreated seven miles.

古文：河决不可复壅，鱼烂不可复全。
现代文：黄河决口不能再堵塞，鱼腐烂了不能再使它完整。
English: The mouth of the Yellow River can no longer be blocked, and the fish can no longer make it complete after rotting.

古文：贾谊、司马迁曰： 向使婴有庸主之才，仅得中佐，山东虽乱，秦之地可全而有，宗庙之祀未当绝也。 
现代文：贾谊、司马迁说： 如果当时子婴具有一般君主的能力，只要得到中等才能的辅佐大臣，山东虽然叛乱，秦国故地还是可以保全的，宗庙祭祀不会断绝。 
English: Jia Yi and Sima Qian said: If at that time the infant had the ability of an average monarch, as long as he got a middle-ranking assistant minister, although Shandong rebelled, Qin's homeland could still be preserved, and the ancestral temple sacrifices would not be cut off.

古文：秦之积衰，天下土崩瓦解，虽有周旦之材，无所复陈其巧，而以责一日之孤，误哉！
现代文：秦国的衰败局面是日久天长积聚而成，天下土崩瓦解，虽然有周旦这样的人才，也无法再施展他的聪明才智，去责备即位短暂的一个君主，那是错误的！
English: The situation of Qin's decline was built up over time and the world fell apart. Although there is such a talent as Zhou Dan, he can no longer use his ingenuity to reproach a short-lived monarch. That is wrong!

古文：俗传秦始皇起罪恶，胡亥极，得其理矣。
现代文：民间流传一种说法，认为罪恶起源于秦始皇，胡亥时登峰造极，这一看法是有道理的。
English: There is a popular saying that the evil originated with the First Emperor of Qin and reached its peak with Hu Hai. This view is reasonable.

古文：复责小子，云秦地可全，所谓不通时变者也。
现代文：贾谊、司马迁又责备子婴，说是秦国故地可以保全，这就是所说的不懂得形势变化的人。
English: Jia Yi, Sima Qian and blaming the baby, saying that Qin's homeland can be preserved, this is the so-called people who do not understand the changing situation.

古文：纪季以酅，春秋不名。
现代文：纪季把酅邑送给齐国，《春秋》赞美他，不直呼其名。
English: Ji Ji gave the county to the state of Qi. "Spring and Autumn" praised him, but did not call him by his name.

古文：吾读秦纪，至於子婴车裂赵高，未尝不健其决，怜其志。
现代文：我读《秦纪》，读到子婴车裂赵高，未尝不认为他的决断果敢而雄武，对他的心意表示同情。
English: When I read the "Qin Dynasty" and read about Zhao Gao, I couldn't help but think that his decision was bold and courageous, and I sympathized with his heart.

古文：婴死生之义备矣。
现代文：子婴就死生大义而言，是有的。
English: As far as life and death are concerned, babies do exist.

