古文：《后汉•邓骘传》： 拜为大将军，时遭元二之灾，人士饥荒，死者相望，盗贼群起，四夷侵畔。 
现代文：《后汉书•邓鹭传》说： 邓鹭被任命为大将军，当时正好遭逢元二之灾，饥荒严重，饿死的人触目可见，在这种形势下，盗贼蜂起，四方的少数民族也乘机反叛、入侵。 
English: "The Biography of Deng Xiaoping" says: Deng Xiaoping was appointed as a great general, and at that time he was hit by the disaster of the second year of the Yuan Dynasty. The famine was severe, and the people who died of starvation were very visible. Under this situation, the thieves revolted, and the ethnic minorities in the four directions also took the opportunity to rebel and invade.

古文：章杯注云： 元二即元元也，古书字当再读者，即于上字之下为小二字，言此学当两度言之。
现代文：章怀太子注释说： 元二即元元，在古书中某字应重复时，就在第一个字下写一个小小的 二 字，表明这个字应读两遍。
English: Prince Zhang Huai commented, "Yuan Er is Yuan Yuan. In ancient books, when a word should be repeated, write a small two under the first word to indicate that the word should be read twice.

古文：后人不晓，遂读为元二，或同之阳九，或附之百六，良由不悟，致斯乖舛。
现代文：后人不懂，于是读作元二，有人解释为阳九，有人附会为百六，实际上都是因为不懂才导致这样的错误。
English: Later generations did not understand it, so it was read as yuan two, some people interpreted it as yang nine, some people added it as one hundred and six, in fact, it was because they did not understand that it led to such an error.

古文：今岐州《石鼓铭》，凡重言者皆为 二 字，明验也。 
现代文：现在岐州的《石鼓铭》上，凡是重复的地方都写一个 二 字，便是明证。 
English: Now, on the "Stone Drum Inscription" of Qizhou, wherever there is a repetition, write a two-character word, which is clear evidence.

古文：汉碑有《杨孟文石门颂》云： 中遭元二，西夷虐残。 
现代文：汉碑《杨孟文石门颂》说： 中遭元二，西夷虐残。 
English: The Han monument "Yang Mengwen Shimen Ode" says: The middle was Yuan II, and the West was brutal.

古文：《孔耽碑》云： 遭元二轗轲，人民相食。 
现代文：《孔耽碑》说： 遭逢元二轗轲，人民相食。 
English: The "Confucius Monument" says: "In the Yuan Dynasty, the people were divided into two groups.

古文：赵明诚《金石跋》云： 若读为元元，不成文理，疑当时自有此语，《汉注》未必然也。 
现代文：赵明诚的《金石跋》说： 如果读作元元，文理不通，怀疑当时的确有元二的说法，《后汉书》的注释未必正确。 
English: Zhao Mingcheng's "Jinshiwabao" said: If it is read as the Yuan, the literature and science are not clear, and it is suspected that there was indeed a Yuan II at that time, the commentary of "Hou Han Shu" may not be correct.

古文：按王充《论衡•恢国篇》云： 今上嗣位，元二之间，嘉德布流。
现代文：按：王充的《论衡•恢国篇》说： 当今的皇上继位后，元二之间，恩德遍布四方。
English: According to Wang Chong's "On the Balance of Power and the Restoration of the State": After the current emperor succeeded to the throne, between the Yuan and the Second Dynasties, Ende spread all over the country.

古文：三年，零陵生芝草。
现代文：三年，零陵长出了灵芝草。
English: In three years, Lingzhi grass sprouted in the mausoleum.

古文：四年，甘露降五县。
现代文：四年，甘露降于五县之地。
English: In four years, Kamloops was reduced to a five-county region.

古文：五年，芝复生。
现代文：五年，又发现了灵芝。
English: Five years later, Ganoderma lucidum was discovered.

古文：六年，黄龙见。 
现代文：六年，黄龙现形。 
English: Six years later, Huanglong has become a reality.

古文：盖章帝时事。
现代文：这是汉章帝时期的事情。
English: This happened during the reign of Emperor Han Zhang.

古文：考之本纪，所书建初三年以后诸瑞皆同，则知所谓元二者，谓建初元年、二年也。
现代文：查考《章帝本纪》，可以看出，本纪中所纪的从建初三年以后各年的祥瑞，与王充所记的完全相同，显而易见，所谓的元二，乃是指建初元年和二年。
English: An examination of the "Zhangdi Biography" shows that the auspiciousness of each year after the first three years of construction described in this biography is exactly the same as that recorded by Wang Chong. It is obvious that the so-called Yuan II refers to the first year of construction and the second year.

古文：既称嘉德布流以致祥瑞，其为非灾眚之语，益可决疑。
现代文：既然说恩德遍布四方，则元二不是指灾祸，也就一目了然，无庸置疑了。
English: Since the benevolence is all over the four directions, the second element does not mean disaster, it is clear at a glance, no need to doubt.

古文：安帝永初元年、二年，先零，滇羌寇叛，郡国地震、大水。
现代文：汉安帝永初元年、二年，先零、滇羌叛乱，全国许多地方发生地震、大水。
English: In the first and second years of the Han Dynasty, the Zi Zi Rebellion, earthquakes and floods occurred in many parts of the country.

古文：邓骘以二年十一月拜大将军，则知所谓元二年，谓永初元年、二年也。凡汉碑重文不皆用小二字，岂有《范史》一部唯独一处如此！
现代文：邓鹭于二年十一月拜大将军，可见所谓的元二，乃是指永初元年、二年，而且，并不是所有的汉碑中重复字都用小 二 字，难道只有范晔的《后汉书》一书中如此，而且唯独一处？
English: Deng Xuan paid homage to the great general in November of the second year, and it can be seen that the so-called "Yuan Er" refers to the first and second years of the first century. Moreover, not all Chinese monuments use the small two-character repeated characters. Is it only in Fan Xuan's "Post-Han Shu" that it is so, and only in one place?

古文：予兄丞相作《隶释》，论之甚详。
现代文：我的哥哥宰相洪遵曾著《隶释》，对这个问题论述得非常详尽。
English: My elder brother, Prime Minister Hong Zun, wrote "The Explanation of Ranks" and discussed this issue in great detail.

古文：予修国史日，撰《钦宗纪赞》，用靖康元二之祸，实本于此。
现代文：我编纂国史的时候，撰《钦宗纪赞》，其中有 靖康元二之祸 一句，其根据就在于此。
English: When I was compiling the national history, I wrote the "Kinzong Commentary," in which there was a sentence about the calamity of Yasuko Genji, and its basis lies in this.

