古文：高祖下永定元年冬十月乙亥，高祖即皇帝位于南郊，柴燎告天曰： 皇帝臣霸先，敢用玄牡昭告于皇皇后帝：梁氏以圮剥荐臻，历运有极，钦若天应，以命于霸先。
现代文：永定元年冬季十月乙亥，高祖在南郊即位当了皇帝，烧柴祭祀向天祷告说： 皇帝臣霸先，冒昧地以黑色公牛祭告天帝：梁朝因为毁灭的运敷重至，历敷到了终了，敬顺上天的许诺，将命敷授予霸先。
English: In the winter of Yongding in the first year, in October of the second year of the Heian period, Gaozu ascended to the throne in the southern suburbs. He offered a firewood sacrifice and prayed to the heavens, saying, "Emperor Subordinate Hegemon, you have the audacity to use the Black Bull Festival to announce to the Heavenly Emperor that the Liang Dynasty has come to its end due to the heavy burden of destruction. You should honor the promise of Heaven and give your life to Hegemon."

古文：夫肇有烝民，乃树司牧，选贤与能，未常厥姓。
现代文：自从开始有了众民，就建立了官吏制度，选拔贤能之士，没有固定某个人的任职。
English: Since the beginning of the people, a system of officials has been established to select people of merit, and there is no fixed position for a certain person.

古文：放勋、重华之世，咸无意于受终，当涂、典午之君，虽有心于揖让，皆以英才处万乘，高勋御四海，故能大庇黔首，光宅区县。
现代文：放勋、重华的朝代，都无意于承受帝位，魏国、晋代的君主，虽然有心于揖让皇位，但是却都用英才作了皇帝，用高勋统治四海，所以能庇护百姓，占有天下。
English: The dynasties of the Song and Jin dynasties had no intention of inheriting the imperial throne. Although the monarchs of the Wei and Jin dynasties were willing to abdicate the throne, they used their talents to become emperors and ruled the four seas with high honors, so they could protect the people and occupy the world.

古文：有梁末运，仍叶遘屯，獯丑凭陵，久移神器，承圣在外，非能祀夏，天未悔祸，复罹寇逆，嫡嗣废黜，宗枝僭诈，天地荡覆，纪纲泯绝。
现代文：梁朝到了末运，仍然遭遇困难，匈奴等北方少数民族侵犯中原，建立国家长期统治，梁元帝在外面，不能祭祀国家，上天没有追悔所造成的祸乱，梁朝又遭受到侵掠和叛乱，嫡子被废除，宗支越分欺诈，国家动荡，纲纪泯减。
English: At the end of the Liang Dynasty, it still encountered difficulties. The Xiongnu and other northern ethnic minorities invaded the Central Plains and established a long-term rule of the country. Emperor Liang Yuan was outside and could not sacrifice the country. Heaven did not repent of the calamity caused by him. The Liang Dynasty was once again invaded and plundered and rebelled. The legitimate son was abolished. The patriarchate was divided and defrauded. The country was in turmoil and discipline was weakened.

古文：霸先爰初投袂，大拯横流，重举义兵，实戡多难，废王立帝，实有厥功，安国定社，用尽其力。
现代文：霸先在开始时投袂起兵，大力拯救动荡的局势，第二次发起义兵，实际上戡定很多祸乱，废除王拥立皇帝，实际上有我的功劳，保护国家安定社稷，不遣余力。
English: He first raised an army at the beginning to save the turbulent situation. The second time, he launched a volunteer army, which actually fixed a lot of disasters, abolished Wang Yuling Emperor, and actually had my credit, protected the country's stability and society, and spared no effort.

古文：是谓小康，方期大道。
现代文：这是所谓的小康，又希望大道。
English: This is the so-called "moderately well-off" and "hopeful" avenue.

古文：既而烟云表色，日月呈瑞，纬聚东井，龙见谯邦，除旧布新，即彰玄象，迁虞事夏，且协讴歌，九域八荒，同布衷款，百神群祀，皆有诚愿。
现代文：之后烟云显露了异色，月呈现出祥瑞，纬星聚集在井宿，青龙现于谯国的天空，除旧布新，已经显示了天象，更朝换代，又合乎民众呼声，九州八方，同时陈述衷心之意，众多神祇，都有真诚之愿。
English: After that, the smoke cloud revealed a different color, the moon appeared auspicious, the stars gathered in the well, the blue dragon appeared in the sky of the country, the old cloth was removed, the celestial body was shown, the dynasty was changed, and it was in line with the people's voice, the eight directions of Kyushu, while stating the heartfelt intention, many gods, all had sincere wishes.

古文：梁帝高谢万邦，授以大宝，霸先自惟菲薄，让德不嗣，至于再三，辞弗获许。
现代文：梁敬帝辞去天下，把玉玺授予我，霸先考虑到自己出身微薄，辞让不继承，以至于再三，辞让没有得到允许。
English: Emperor Liang Jing resigned from the world and bestowed the Jade Scepter on me. He first considered that he was from a humble background and that he would not inherit it, so he repeatedly refused to allow me to resign.

古文：佥以百姓须主，万机难旷，皇灵眷命，非可谦拒。
现代文：众人认为百姓需要君主，帝王日常的纷繁政务难以荒废，上天垂爱并赋予重任，不能谦逊拒绝。
English: People believed that the people needed a monarch, that the emperor's day-to-day affairs could not be neglected, that he was loved by heaven and given important responsibilities, and that he could not humbly refuse.

古文：畏天之威，用膺嘉祚，永言夙志，能无惭德。
现代文：害怕上天的威严，因此服从美好的祚命，永言平素的志愿，不能不内心惭愧。
English: To be afraid of the majesty of heaven, and therefore to obey the beautiful command of death, the eternal plain will, cannot but be ashamed of the heart.

古文：敬简元辰，升坛受禅，告类上帝，用答民心，永保于我有陈。
现代文：恭敬地选择吉利的时，我登上坛接受掸让，类祭上天，用来报答民众的心意，让他们永远保护我陈朝。
English: When I respectfully chose the auspicious time, I ascended the altar to accept the concession, and the offering was sent to heaven to repay the people's heart, and let them protect me forever.

古文：惟明灵是飨！ 
现代文：恭祭尊敬的神灵! 
English: Pay homage to the revered gods!

古文：先是氛雾，昼夜晦冥，至于是日，景气清晏，识者知有天道焉。
现代文：在此之前的云雾，昼夜昏暗，到了逭一天，景象清静安宁，有才识的人知道这是天道啊。
English: Before that, it was cloudy and gloomy day and night, but by the end of the day, the scene was calm and tranquil. Those with insight know that this is the way of heaven.

古文：礼毕，舆驾还宫，临太极前殿。
现代文：礼仪完毕，高祖乘坐舆驾回宫，登上太极前殿。
English: After the ceremony, Gao Zu took the carriage back to the palace and boarded the Taiji front hall.

古文：诏曰： 五德更运，帝王所以御天，三正相因，夏、殷所以宰世，虽色分辞翰，时异文质，揖让征伐，迄用参差，而育德振民，义归一揆。
现代文：下诏书说： 五德交相更替，帝王所以统治天下，三正互相因袭，夏、殷所以主宰世界，虽然辞藻、文笔在色彩上有分别，文章的华丽、质朴因时而异，让位舆贤和武力征伐，最终因此会有所不同，但是培养道德救济民众，意义最终是一致的。
English: The following imperial edict said: The Five Virtues alternate with each other. Emperors rule the world because of the Five Virtues. The Three Great Virtues attack each other because of the Three Great Virtues. Xia and Yin dominate the world because of the Five Great Virtues. Although there are differences in the color of words and writings, the splendor and simplicity of articles vary from time to time, giving way to public sages and military conquest. Ultimately, therefore, there will be differences. However, the significance of cultivating moral relief for the people is ultimately the same.

古文：朕以寡昧，时属艰危，国步屡屯，天维三绝，肆勤先后，拯厥横流，藉将帅之功，兼猛士之力，一匡天下，再造黔黎。
现代文：朕因为寡德昏昧，又处在困难危险时期，国家的命运多次出现艰难，国家的纲纪多次断绝，自始至终极力操劳，拯救动荡的局势，凭藉将帅的功劳和猛士的努力，使天下得到匡正，使黎民百姓得以生存。
English: Due to the vagueness of morality and being in a difficult and dangerous period, the fate of the country has been difficult many times, and the discipline of the country has been broken many times. From the beginning to the end, we have worked hard to save the turbulent situation. With the merits of the generals and the efforts of the soldiers, the world has been rectified and the people of Lebanon have been able to survive.

古文：梁氏以天禄永终，历数攸在，遵与能之典，集大命于朕躬。
现代文：梁朝因为天赐的福禄永远终止，天道存在，遵循选贤举能之典，聚集天命于我身。
English: Liang Dynasty, because of the blessing given by heaven, will end forever. The heavenly way exists. I will follow the law of selecting and promoting talents, and gather the destiny in my body.

古文：顾惟菲德，辞不获亮，式从天眷，俯协民心，受终文祖，升禋上帝，继迹百王，君临万宇，若涉川水，罔知攸济。
现代文：衹是我品德菲薄，推辞没有得到谅解，听从上天的命令，和谐于民心，在太祖庙承受帝位，升烟祭祀上天，继承历代帝王的事迹，君临天下，好像趟涉河水，不知能否渡过。
English: I am a man of fine moral character. My refusal was not understood. I obeyed Heaven's command, harmonized with the hearts of the people, assumed the imperial throne in the Great Ancestor's Temple, offered sacrifices to Heaven, inherited the deeds of emperors throughout the ages, and reigned over the world. It was like wading through river water. I didn't know if I could make it across.

古文：宝业初建，皇祚惟新，思俾惠泽，覃被亿兆。
现代文：帝业刚开始建立，皇位更新，考虑到让我的恩泽，广泛施于亿万百姓。
English: The empire was just beginning to be established, the throne was renewed, and considering my grace, it was widely applied to hundreds of millions of people.

古文：可大赦天下，改梁太平二年为永定元年。
现代文：应该大赦天下，改梁太平二年为永定元年。
English: There should be a general amnesty for the whole world, and the two years of peace should be changed to the first year of Yongding.

古文：赐民爵二级，文武二等。
现代文：赐给民间有功者爵位二级，文武官员两个等级。
English: People with meritorious service will be given a second-level title, and civil and military officials will be given two levels.

古文：鳏寡孤独不能自存者人谷五斛。
现代文：鳏寡孤独不能养活自己的每人赐给谷五斛。
English: Widows and widowers who are alone and cannot support themselves are each given five mu of grain.

古文：逋租宿债，皆勿复收。
现代文：欠租旧债，都不准再收。
English: Rent arrears and old debts are not allowed to be collected again.

古文：其有犯乡里清议赃污淫盗者，皆洗除先注，与之更始。
现代文：有犯了乡里清议贪脏污滥奸淫偷盗的人，都洗刷掉先前的罪名，让他们重新开始。
English: Those who have committed the village clean-up of corruption, abuse, adultery and theft have all been cleared of previous charges, allowing them to start afresh.

古文：长徒敕系，特皆原之。
现代文：长期服劳役敕令拘禁的，特地都恕免他们。
English: For those who have been detained for long-term forced labor, they will be specially pardoned.

古文：亡官失爵，禁锢夺劳，一依旧典。 
现代文：丢了官失了爵，被监禁或剥夺官职服劳役的官员，都全部依照旧典释放。 
English: The officials who lost their posts, lost their titles, and were imprisoned or deprived of their posts and forced labor were all released in accordance with the old law.

古文：又诏曰： 《礼》陈杞、宋，《诗》咏二客，弗臣之重，历代斯敦。
现代文：又下诏说： 《礼》陈述杞、宋，《诗》歌咏二客，不敢待以臣礼的重位，历代都予以殊礼。
English: He also issued the following edict: "The two masters of prose, Song and Poem, dare not be treated with the dignity of a courtier, and have been given special honors throughout the ages.

古文：梁氏钦若人祇，宪章在昔，济河沈璧，高谢万邦，茅赋所加，宜遵旧典。
现代文：梁朝敬顺人舆神，典章制度存于昔日，渡河时沉璧于其中，辞去天下，他拥有的封土和赋敛，应该遵循旧典。
English: Liang Chao respected the gods of the people, the award system existed in the past, he was absorbed in it when crossing the river, he resigned from the world, he owned fiefs and fiefs, should follow the old book.

古文：其以江阴郡奉梁主为江阴王，行梁正朔，车旗服色，一依前准，宫馆资待，务尽优隆。 
现代文：用江阴郡来侍奉梁主为江阴王，使用梁朝的历法，车旗服色，一切依照前朝标准，离宫别馆供给需求，务必尽力优待尊崇。 
English: Use Jiangyin County to serve the Liang Lord as the King of Jiangyin, use the calendar of the Liang Dynasty, the flag of the vehicle and the color of the clothing, all in accordance with the standards of the previous dynasty, supply the demand from the palace annex, and make every effort to give preferential treatment and respect.

古文：又诏梁皇太后为江阴国太妃，皇后为江阴国妃。
现代文：又下诏梁皇太后为江阴国太妃，皇后为江阴国妃。
English: It also decreed that the Empress Dowager Liang was the Princess of Jiangyin Province and the Empress was the Princess of Jiangyin Province.

古文：又诏百司依位摄职。
现代文：又下韶百官依照原位代理官职。
English: In addition, the next 100 officials will assume their posts as acting officials in accordance with their original positions.

古文：丙子，舆驾幸钟山祠帝庙。
现代文：丙子，皇帝驾临钟山祭祀蒋帝庙。
English: Bongzi, the emperor came to the bell mountain to worship the Chiang Kai-shek temple.

古文：戊寅，舆驾幸华林园，亲览词讼，临赦囚徒。
现代文：戊寅，皇帝来到华林园，亲自阅览诉状，亲自赦免囚徒。
English: Wu Yin, the emperor came to the Waring Garden, personally read the complaint, and personally pardoned the prisoners.

古文：己卯，分遣大使宣劳四方，下玺书敕州郡曰： 夫四王革代，商、周所以应天，五胜相推，轩、羲所以当运。
现代文：己卯，分别派遣大使慰劳天下，下玺书敕令州郡说： 四位帝王改朝换代，商、周所以顺应天意，五行相胜相推，轩辕、伏羲所以顺应规律。
English: He dispatched ambassadors to comfort the world, and issued the following edict: The four emperors changed the dynasty and generation, so Shang and Zhou followed the will of heaven, the five elements pushed each other, and Xuan Zang and Fuxi followed the law.

古文：梁德不造，丧乱积年，东夏崩腾，西都荡覆。
现代文：梁朝的势力衰落了，丧乱连年，东夏崩溃，西都覆灭。
English: The power of the Liang Dynasty waned, with years of turmoil, the collapse of the Eastern Xia and the fall of the Western Dynasties.

古文：萧勃干纪，非唯赵伦，侯景滔天，逾于刘载。
现代文：萧勃违犯法纪，并非衹有赵伦一个人，侯景罪行滔天，超过了刘载。
English: Xiao Bo's violation of legal discipline is not limited to Zhao Lun alone. Hou Jing's heinous crime exceeds that of Liu Zai.

古文：贞阳反篡，贼约连兵，江左累属于鲜卑，金陵久非于梁国。
现代文：贞阳谋反篡位，叛贼约联合军队，江左多次属于鲜卑，金陵长期不属于梁国。
English: Zhengyang conspired to usurp the throne, the traitors were about to join forces, Jiang Zuo repeatedly belonged to Xianbei, and Jinling did not belong to Liangguo for a long time.

古文：自有氤氲混沌之世，龙图凤纪之前，东汉兴平之，西朝永嘉之乱，天下分崩，未有若于梁朝者也。
现代文：自从氤氲混沌的时代，龙圃凤历之前，到束汉兴平初年，西晋永嘉之乱，天下分崩离析，没有像是梁朝这样的。
English: Since the chaotic times of the Han Dynasty, before the Dragon's Roost and the Phoenix's Calendar, to the first year of the Western Jin Dynasty and the Yongjia Rebellion, the world has fallen apart. There is no such thing as the Liang Dynasty.

古文：朕以虚薄，属当兴运，自昔登庸，首清诸越，徐门浪泊，靡不征行，浮海乘山，所在戡定。
现代文：朕以虚薄德能，适逢时运昌隆，自从昔日登上帝位，首先清除了诸越，徐门水泊，没有不进行征讨的，飘浮过海登上高山，为的是戡定四方。
English: By virtue of my feeble ability, I rose to the occasion. Since I ascended to the throne, I first cleared Zhu Yue, Xu Men Shui Po, and there was no one who did not carry out the requisition. I floated across the sea and ascended the mountain in order to anchor the four directions.

古文：冒朔风尘，骋驰师旅，六延梁祀，十翦强寇，岂曰人谋，皆由天启。
现代文：顶着风尘，军队驰骋沙场，六次挽救梁朝，十次歼灭强寇，怎么能说是人的谋划，都是由于上天的启示。
English: Against the wind and dust, the army galloped on the battlefield, six times saving the Liang Dynasty, ten times annihilating the invaders, how can it be said to be a human plan, all due to the revelation of heaven.

古文：梁氏以天禄斯改，期运永终，钦若唐、虞，推其鼎玉，朕东西退让，拜手陈辞，避舜子于箕山之阳，求支伯于沧洲之野，而公卿敦逼，率土翘惶，天命难稽，遂享嘉祚。
现代文：梁朝因为天赐的福禄已经改变，机运永远终止，敬顺唐、虞禅让之事，推让他的政权，朕东西退让，跪拜诉说，许由逃到箕山之南避开舜子，君主到沧洲之野去寻找支伯，然而公卿大臣敦请逼迫，天下民众惶悚不安地盼望，天命难违，于是享用王业之福。
English: The Liang Dynasty, because of the blessing given by heaven, has changed, the opportunity has ended forever, the matter of obeying and submitting to Tang and Yu Zhen, and pushing his regime, we have conceded everything, kneeled and told, the emperor fled to the south of Lushan to avoid the mule, the monarch went to the fields of Cangzhou to find Zhibo, but the minister urged the persecution, the people of the world anxiously hoped, and the fate of the world could not be denied, so they enjoyed the blessing of Wangye.

古文：今月乙亥，升礼太坛，言念迁桐，但有惭德。
现代文：今月乙亥，登上太坛举行礼仪，想念伊尹迁徙立里于抱的故事，衹是心有惭愧。
English: This month, Yi Hai, boarded the altar to hold a ceremony, misses the story of Yi Yin's migration, and is ashamed.

古文：自梁氏将末，频月亢阳，火运斯终，秋霖奄降。
现代文：自从梁朝将要末落，连续几个月出现旱灾，火运就要终止，连绵的秋雨骤然降下。
English: Since the Liang Dynasty was about to end, droughts occurred for several months in a row, the fire season was about to end, and continuous autumn rains suddenly fell.

古文：翌日成礼，圆丘宿设，埃云晚霁，星象夜张。
现代文：次日成就大礼，圆丘隔夜而设，尘埃乌云晚上就消散了，星象夜裹展示出来。
English: The next day was a great success, the dome was set up overnight, the dust cloud dissipated in the evening, and the starry night was displayed.

古文：朝景重轮，泫三危之膏露，晨光合璧，带五色之卿云。
现代文：朝阳出现光晕，三危山上的甘露往下滴，日月同时升起，带着五色的庆云。
English: The morning sun appears as a halo, the nectar on the three dangerous mountains drips down, the sun and the moon rise at the same time, with five-colored clouds.

古文：顾惟寡薄，弥惭休祉，昧旦丕显，方思至治。
现代文：考虑到我德寡能薄，更加惭愧受到的福祉，辛勤而英明地从政，思虑达到至治。
English: Considering that I am morally weak, I am even more ashamed of the well-being I have received, I have worked hard and wisely in politics, and my thoughts have reached the highest level.

古文：卿等拥旄方岳，相任股肱，剖符名守，方寄恤隐。
现代文：卿等统率军队专任一方，国家重任寄托给股肱之臣，分封授官给有贤名的郡守，寄托朕体恤百姓疾苦之念。
English: On the one hand, high-ranking officials such as lords were exclusively in charge of leading the army, while important national tasks were entrusted to vassals of the shogun, and dignified county governors were appointed, and the idea of sympathizing with the hardships of the people was entrusted to me.

古文：王历惟新，念有欣庆，想深求民瘼，务在廉平，爱惠以抚孤贫，威刑以御强猾。
现代文：国家的制度更新了，有欢悦庆幸的想法，想要深广探求民间疾苦，务必要清廉公平，用慈爱恩惠来抚恤孤儿贫民，用威命刑律来对付强横奸猾。
English: The country's system has been updated, with the idea of joy and happiness, and the desire to explore the people's sufferings in a wide range, and must be honest and fair, and use mercy and grace to support the orphans and the poor, and use the death penalty to deal with the strong and treacherous.

古文：若有萑蒲之盗，或犯戎商，山谷之酋，擅强幽险，皆从肆赦，咸使知闻。
现代文：如果有盗贼草寇，有的犯了戎商，山中的豪帅，凭藉幽险专横强暴，都从轻赦免，都让他们听到知晓。
English: If there are thieves and robbers, some have committed war merchants, and the great generals in the mountains, by virtue of the perilous and despotic violence, are lightly pardoned, let them hear it.

古文：如或迷途，俾在无贷。
现代文：如果有的迷途不返，对他们严惩不贷。
English: If some go astray and do not return, they will be severely punished.

古文：今遣使人具宣往旨，念思善政，副此虚怀。 
现代文：现在派遣使者前去宣示旨意，希望你们考虑善政，符合这种虚怀。 
English: It is in keeping with this vanity that you now send forth your emissaries to proclaim your will and hope that you will consider good government.

古文：庚辰，诏出佛牙于杜姥宅，集四部设无遮大会，高祖亲出阙前礼拜。
现代文：庚辰，下韶从杜姥宅请出佛牙，聚集四部众举行无遮大会，高祖亲自离开宫殿前去礼拜。
English: Geng Chen, the lower jaw, invited the Buddha's tooth from Du Bao's house, gathered four groups of people to hold an open-air conference, and Gao Zu personally left the palace to go to worship.

古文：初，齐故僧统法献于乌缠国得之，常在定林上寺，梁天监末，为摄山庆云寺沙门慧兴保藏，慧兴将终，以属弟慧志，承圣末，慧志密送于高祖，至是乃出。
现代文：最初，齐已故的僧统法献在乌缠国得到它，曾经把它放在定林上寺，凿塑互监末年，被巫山庆昼寺的和尚慧兴保藏，慧兴将要去世时，把它嘱托给师弟慧志，承圣末年，慧志把它秘密送给高祖，到逭时才被请出。
English: At first, the late monk Qi Unifo obtained it in Wuzhang. He placed it in Dinglin Shangji Temple, and in the last years of his life, it was preserved by the monk Huixing of Wushan Qinglun Temple. When Huixing was about to die, he entrusted it to his teacher and brother Huizhi. In the last years of his priesthood, Huizhi secretly gave it to Gao Zu, and was only invited out when it was time to die.

古文：辛巳，追尊皇考曰景皇帝，庙号太祖；皇妣董太夫人曰安皇后。
现代文：辛巳，追尊亡父为景皇帝，庙号太祖；亡母董太夫人为安皇后。
English: Xin Si, revered his deceased father as Emperor Jing, and his deceased mother, Mrs. Dong, as Empress An.

古文：追谥前夫人钱氏号为昭皇后，世子克为孝怀太子。
现代文：追谧前夫人钱氏号为昭皇后，嫡长子陈克为孝怀太子。
English: Qian's former wife, Qian Shi, was known as Empress Zhao, and his eldest son, Chen Ke, was known as Prince Xiaohui.

古文：立夫人章氏为皇后。
现代文：立夫人章氏为皇后。
English: Mrs. Zhang became the empress.

古文：癸未，尊景帝陵曰瑞陵，昭皇后陵曰嘉陵，依梁初园陵故事。
现代文：癸未，尊景皇帝陵为瑞陵，昭皇后陵为嘉陵，一切依照梁朝初年园陵的先例。
English: In the past, the mausoleum of Emperor Chongqing was called Ruiling, and the mausoleum of Empress Zhao was called Jialing, all in accordance with the precedent of the mausoleum in the first year of the Liang Dynasty.

古文：立删定郎，治定律令。
现代文：设置删定郎，制定律令。
English: Set up a censor and make a law.

古文：戊子，迁景皇帝神主祔于太庙。
现代文：戊子，迁移景皇帝的牌位拊于太庙。
English: Empress Dowager Wu and Empress Jiajing's Relocation Plaque Unveiled at the Imperial Temple.

古文：辛卯，以中权将军、开府仪同三司、丹阳尹王冲为左光禄大夫。
现代文：辛卯，任用中权将军、开府仪同三司、丹阳尹王冲作左光禄大夫。
English: Xin Yu appointed General Zhong Quan, Kaifu Yi Tong San Si, and Danyang Yin Wang Chong as doctors of the left light.

古文：癸巳，追赠皇兄梁故散骑常侍、平北将军、兗州刺史长城县公道谭骠骑大将军、太尉，封始兴郡王；弟梁故侍中、骠骑将军、南徐州刺史武康县侯休先车骑大将军、司徒，封南康郡王。
现代文：癸巳，追赠皇兄梁朝已故的散骑常侍、平北将军、兖州刺史长城县公道谭为骠骑大将军、太尉，封为始兴郡王；弟梁朝已故侍中、骠骑将军、南徐州刺史武康县侯休先为车骑大将军、司徒，封为南康郡王。
English: In addition, the late imperial brother Liang Chao was posthumously awarded the title of knight-errant, general of Pingbei County, the late imperial brother Liang Chao was posthumously awarded the title of knight-errant, general of Pingbei County, the late imperial brother Liang Chao was posthumously awarded the title of knight-errant, general of Pingbei County, the late imperial brother Liang Chao was posthumously awarded the title of knight-errant, general of Pingbei County, the late imperial brother Liang Chao was posthumously awarded the title of knight-errant, general of Pingbei County, the late imperial brother Li

古文：是月，西讨都督周文育、侯安都于郢州败绩，囚于王琳。
现代文：当月，西讨都督周文言、侯安都在郢州军队溃败，他们被王琳拘囚。
English: In the same month, the western campaign of the governor Zhou Wenyan and Hou An was defeated by the Zhangzhou army, and they were taken into custody by Wang Lin.

古文：十一月丙申，诏曰： 东都齐国，义乃亲贤，西汉城阳，事兼功烈。
现代文：十一月丙申，下诏书说： 束都齐国，有亲近贤人之义，西汉城阳，有功勋业绩之事。
English: In November, the next imperial edict said, "The whole country should be on the same level, there should be a close relationship between the wise and the righteous, and the western part of the country should be sunny, and there should be meritorious performance.

古文：散骑常侍、使持节、都督会稽等十郡诸军事、宣毅将军、会稽太守长城县侯蒨，学尚清优，神宇凝正，文参礼乐，武定妖氛，心力谋猷，为家治国，拥旄作守，期月有成，辟彼关河，功逾萧、寇，萑蒲之盗，自反耕农，篁竹之豪，用禀声朔。
现代文：散骑常侍、使持节、都督会稽等十郡诸军事、宣毅将军、会稽太守长城县侯陈蓓，学问崇尚娴雅，神态稳重端庄，文章参乎礼乐，武功戡定祸乱，竭尽心力的计谋，为了救治国家，统率军队作一郡太守，一个月就有了成就，就像那关河，功劳超过了萧、寇，盗贼草寇，自行恢复农业耕作，篁竹中的豪士，因此接受朝廷统治。
English: The ten counties of the military, General Xuan Yi, and the inspector general of the Great Wall County, Hou Chen Yi, rode around on horseback. He was a scholar who advocated elegance, his demeanor was steady and dignified, his articles were related to ceremonial music, martial arts and calamities, and he tried his best to make plans. In order to save the country, he led the army to become a county magistrate, and achieved success in one month, just like the Na Guan River. His achievements exceeded those of Xiao, Kou, and the thief Soko. He resumed agricultural farming on his own, and he was a great man among bamboo. Therefore, he accepted

古文：朕以虚寡，属当兴运，提彼三尺，宾于四门，王业艰难，赖乎此子，宜隆上爵，称是元功。
现代文：朕以虚寡德才，适逢时运昌隆，他提着剑，陈列在明堂四门，帝王基业艰苦困难，主要依赖着这个人，应该赐给上爵以示尊崇，使之和大功相称。
English: I, with the virtue of a widow and a widower, coincided with the prosperity of the times. He carried a sword and displayed it at the four doors of the Ming Hall. The emperor's foundation, arduous and difficult, mainly relies on this person. It should be given to the upper baron to show respect and make it commensurate with the great achievement.

古文：可封临川郡王，邑二千户。
现代文：封为临川郡王，食邑二千户。
English: He was given the title of King of Linchuan County, with a population of 2,000 households.

古文：兄子梁中书侍郎顼袭封始兴王，弟子梁中书侍郎昙朗袭封南康王，礼秩一同正王。 
现代文：兄长的儿子梁朝中书侍郎陈顼袭封始兴王，弟弟的儿子梁朝中书侍郎昙朗袭封南康王，礼仪和品秩与正王相同。 
English: The elder brother's son, Liang Zhaozhong's aide-de-camp Chen Zhe, succeeded to the throne of Wang Shixing, while the younger brother's son, Liang Zhaozhong's aide-de-camp Zhe Lang, succeeded to the throne of King Nankang. Their etiquette and rank were the same as those of King Zheng.

古文：己亥，甘露降于钟山松林，弥满岩谷。
现代文：己亥，有甘露落在丝山松林，布满了山谷。
English: In Jihai, there is nectar falling on the Silk Mountain pine forest, covering the valley.

古文：庚子，开善寺沙门采之以献，敕颁赐群臣。
现代文：庚子，盟姜壹的和尚采集甘露进献，敕令赏赐给群臣。
English: Geng Zi, a monk who was a confidant of Jiang I, collected nectar and presented it as a reward to his ministers.

古文：丙辰，以镇西将军、南豫州刺史徐度为镇右将军、领军将军。
现代文：丙辰，任用镇西将军、南豫州刺史途仅为镇右将军、领军将军。
English: Hunchin, the appointment of Zhenxi General, South Yuzhou stabbing history is only Zhenyu General, the leading general.

古文：庚申，京师大火。
现代文：庚申，京师发生了大火灾。
English: According to Goshun, there was a big fire in Beijing Division.

古文：十二月庚辰，皇后谒太庙。
现代文：十二月庚辰，皇后拜谒太庙。
English: In December, Geng Chen, the empress, paid homage to the Great Mother Temple.

古文：二年春正月乙未，诏曰： 夫设官分职，因事重轻，羽仪车马，随时隆替，晋之五校，鸣笳启途，汉之九卿，传呼并迾，虞官夏礼，岂曰同科，殷朴周文，固无恒格。
现代文：二年春季正月乙未，下韶书说： 设立官职，按照事情的轻重而有所不同，旌旗车马，随着时代变化而有所沿革，晋代的五校，吹奏笳笛来开道，漠代的九卿，传声呼喊不分主次，忧时的官职夏伐的礼仪，怎么能说是同一种类，直曲质朴周代文雅，本来没有常格。
English: In the second year of spring, in the first month of the second year, the next imperial edict said: the establishment of official positions varies according to the importance of the matter, the use of flags, chariots and horses has evolved with the changes of the times, the five schools in the Jin Dynasty played the flute to open the way, the nine nobles in the desert era shouted and shouted without distinction of priority, and the etiquette of the summer vacation of the official position in the time of sorrow, how can it be said to be of the same kind, the straight melody is simple and elegant, and originally has no fixed form.

古文：朕膺兹宝历，代是天工，留念官方，庶允时衷。
现代文：朕接受了皇位，代替天行使职责，留心礼法，希望合乎时宜。
English: I have accepted the throne of the emperor. I will perform my duties in place of the emperor, pay attention to etiquette, and hope to be in time.

古文：梁天监中，左右骁骑领硃衣直阁，并给仪从，北徐州刺史昌义之初，首为此职。
现代文：梁朝天监年间，左右骁骑领朱衣直合，并供给仪卫随从，北徐州刺史昌义之首先做这个官职。
English: During the time of Liang Chao's supervision of heaven, the left and right halves of Zhu Rong's riding collar and Zhu Rong's robe were directly connected, and he provided an attendant for the guard of honor. The first to do this official post was the Northern Xuzhou Jishi Changyizhi.

古文：乱离岁久，朝典不存，后生年少，希闻旧则。
现代文：混乱流离的年代久了，朝廷典章佚失不存，后来的人年少，很少听说旧时的规章。
English: The years of chaos and displacement have long passed, the imperial ordinances have been lost, and the people who came later were younger, and they rarely heard of the old regulations.

古文：今去左右骁骑，宜通文武，文官则用腹心，武官则用功臣，所给仪从，同太子二卫率。
现代文：现在除去左右骁骑，应该通用文武，文官则任用贤智之臣，武官则任用有功之臣，所供给的仪卫随从，和太子前、后二卫类似。
English: Now that the left and right equidistance has been eliminated, there should be universal use of literature and martial arts. Civil officials should appoint wise and virtuous vassals, and military officers should appoint meritorious vassals. The escort of ceremonial guards should be similar to the two guards before and after the crown prince.

古文：此外众官，尚书详为条制。 
现代文：此外的众多官职，尚书详细制作条例制度。 
English: In addition, the system of detailed regulations for the creation of official posts is still in the works.

古文：车骑将军、开府仪同三司侯瑱进位司空，中权将军、开府仪同三司、新除左光禄大夫王冲为太子少傅。
现代文：车骑将军、开府仪同三司侯填进位司空，中权将军、开府仪同三司、刚升任左光禄大夫的王冲为太子少傅。
English: The general of cavalry and cavalry, Kaifu Yi, and the three magistrates filled the vacant position of secretary, and the general of central power, Kaifu Yi, and the three magistrates, and Wang Chong, who had just been promoted to the doctor of the left light, became the young prince.

古文：左卫将军徐世谱为护军将军，南兗州刺史吴明彻进号安南将军，衡州刺史欧阳頠进号镇南将军。
现代文：左卫将军徐世谱为护军将军，南兖刺史呈旦旦翅进号为安南将军，盐刺史鞑阳倾进号为镇南将军。
English: Zuo Wei's general Xu Shifu was the escort general, Nan Xizhi's general Zhenan was the general Annan, and Yan Xizhi's general Zhenan was the general Zhenyang.

古文：辛丑，舆驾亲祠南郊。
现代文：辛丑，高祖亲自祭祀南郊。
English: Sin ugly, the emperor personally came to the southern suburbs to worship.

古文：诏曰： 朕受命君临，初移星琯，孟陬嘉月，备礼泰坛，景候昭华，人祗允庆，思令亿兆，咸与惟新。
现代文：下韶书说： 朕受天之命君临天下，登上皇位，孟春正月，在太坛备下礼品，节令美好，人神吉祥，想让亿万百姓，革故圆新。
English: The next imperial edict said: "I, by the order of heaven, have come to the world and ascended the imperial throne. In the first month of Mengchun, I prepared gifts at the Great Altar. The festival is beautiful, and the people and gods are auspicious. I want to make hundreds of millions of people revolutionize the old and make the new.

古文：且往代祅氛，于今犹梗，军机未息，征赋咸繁，事不获已，久知下弊，言念黔黎，无忘寝食。
现代文：前代祸乱，到现在仍然抵抗朝廷，战争没有停息，征赋都很繁重，事情无法结束，朕长期知道天下的弊病，想念黎民百姓，不忘他们的常生活。
English: The calamity of the previous generation, still resisting the imperial court, the war has not stopped, the conscription is very heavy, things can not end, I have long known the ills of the world, miss the people of Lai, and do not forget their daily life.

古文：夫罪无轻重，已发觉未发觉，在今昧爽以前，皆赦除之。
现代文：无论罪行是轻是重，是已经发觉的还是没有被发觉的，在今天黎明以前，都赦免他们。
English: Whether the crimes were minor or serious, discovered or undiscovered, they were pardoned before dawn today.

古文：西寇自王琳以下，并许返迷，一无所问。
现代文：西方的寇敌从王琳以下，都允许改过自新，对他们不再追究。
English: The Western invaders, from Wang Lin down, were allowed to reform themselves and were no longer investigated.

古文：近所募义军，本拟西寇，并宜解遣，留家附业。
现代文：他们近来招募的义军，本来当作西方的寇敌，都应该解散遣回，留在家中务农。
English: The rebels they have recently recruited should be disbanded and sent back to stay at home and work in agriculture, as they were originally regarded as invaders of the West.

古文：晚订军资未送者并停，元年军粮逋馀者原其半。
现代文：后来征订的军资没有送到的都停止，永定元年军粮拖欠未清的恕免一半。
English: Later, the requisitioned military funds that were not sent were stopped, and half of the military grain arrears in the first year of Yongding were forgiven.

古文：州郡县军戍并不得辄遣使民间，务存优养。
现代文：州郡县军戍都不得擅自派遣使者到民间，务必心存宽容养护。
English: State, county and prefectural military authorities are not allowed to send envoys to civilians without authorization, and must be tolerant and protective.

古文：若有侵扰，严为法制。 
现代文：如果有侵扰，严加惩罚。 
English: If there is any interference, it will be severely punished.

古文：乙巳，舆驾亲祠北郊。
现代文：乙巳，高祖亲自祭祀北郊。
English: Suddenly, Gao Zu himself came to offer sacrifices in the northern suburb.

古文：甲辰，振远将军、梁州刺史张立表称去乙亥岁八月，丹徒、兰陵二县界遗山侧，一旦因涛水涌生，沙涨，周旋千馀顷，并膏腴，堪垦植。
现代文：甲辰，振远将军、梁州刺史张立上表称已过去的乙亥年八月，丹徒、兰陵二县边界的遣山之侧，一天之间因为涛水涌生，沙漫涨，面积千余顷，都非常富饶，可以开垦种植。
English: In August of the year of the Chinese zodiac, which is said to have passed, Dantu and Lanling on the side of the mountain border between the two counties, because of the surge of water, the sand rose, covering an area of more than one thousand hectares. It is very rich and can be cultivated and planted.

古文：戊午，舆驾亲祠明堂。
现代文：戊午，皇帝亲自祭祀明堂。
English: In the afternoon, the emperor himself offered a sacrifice to Myeongdong.

古文：二月壬申，南豫州刺史沈泰奔于齐。
现代文：二月壬申，南豫州刺史沈泰逃亡到了齐。
English: In February, in Jinshin, Shen Tai, a fugitive from the Southern Yu Prefecture, arrived in Qi.

古文：辛卯，诏车骑将军、司空侯瑱总督水步众军以遏齐寇。
现代文：辛卯，下诏车骑将军、司空侯填总督水步众军来遏止齐寇。
English: Xin Wu, the general riding the imperial carriage, the governor filling the governor with water, and the army marching to stop the Qiqo.

古文：三月甲午，诏曰： 罚不及嗣，自古通典，罪疑惟轻，布在方策。
现代文：三月甲午，下韶书说： 惩罚不施于后嗣，是自古以来的通典，疑罪从轻，布列在筒册上。
English: On the afternoon of March 1st, the next imperial edict said: "Punishment not to be inflicted on heirs is a general rule since ancient times. Suspected crimes are to be treated lightly.

古文：沈泰反覆无行，遐迩所知。昔有微功，仍荷朝寄，剖符名郡，推毂累籓，汉口班师，还居方岳，良田有逾于四百，食客不止于三千，富贵显荣，政当如此。
现代文：沈泰反覆没有品行，远近都知，过去有小功劳，仍然承受朝廷的寄托，分封名郡，连续到藩府去任职，从汉口军队凯旋，回朝后专任一方，良田超过了四百顷，食客不止于三千人，富贵显荣，政事也应当和此相称。
English: Shen Tai repeatedly did not behave with integrity. It was known far and wide that he had small merits in the past, but still received the trust of the imperial court. He was assigned to a famous county, successively went to the provincial government to serve, returned from the Hankou army in triumph, and after returning to the imperial court, he was appointed to a full-time position. He had more than four hundred hectares of good fields, more than three thousand diners, and was rich and glorious. Political affairs should also be commensurate with this.

古文：鬼害其盈，天夺之魄，无故猖狂，自投獯丑。
现代文：恶劣的危害太过分了，上天夺了他的魂魄，没有原因地猖狂造反，自己投入到北方少数民族中去。
English: The evil harm was too much. Heaven took his soul, he rebelled wildly for no reason, and threw himself into the northern ethnic minorities.

古文：虽复知人则哲，惟帝其难，光武有蔽于庞萌，魏武不知于于禁，但令朝廷，无我负人。
现代文：虽然朕又知道为人就要明智，衹是做皇帝太困难了，光武帝受到庞萌的蒙蔽，魏武帝不了解于禁，衹是让朝廷中没有我亏欠的人。
English: Although I also know that it is necessary to be wise, it is too difficult to be an emperor, Emperor Guangwu was deceived by Pang Meng, Emperor Weiwu did not understand the ban, and there was no one in the imperial court who owed me.

古文：其部曲妻儿，各令复业，所在及军人若有恐胁侵掠者，皆以劫论。
现代文：令其部下、妻儿分别恢复常业，官员和军人如果有恐吓威胁侵扰掠夺的，都以抢劫论处。
English: He ordered his subordinates, wives and children to resume their regular jobs separately, and officials and soldiers were punished with robbery if they threatened or plundered.

古文：若有男女口为人所藏，并许诣台申诉。
现代文：如果有男女人口被人所藏的，也允许到官府申诉。
English: If there are men and women who have been abducted, they are also allowed to go to the government to appeal.

古文：若乐随临川王及节将立效者，悉皆听许。 
现代文：如果有乐意随从临川王及节将立功效劳的，全部都听任并同意他们。 
English: If there are those who are willing to follow the King of Linchuan and make contributions to the festival, they will all obey and agree with them.

古文：乙卯，高祖幸后堂听讼，还于桥上观山水，赋诗示群臣。
现代文：乙卯，高祖来到后堂听理诉讼，回来在桥上观看山水，赋诗给群臣看。
English: Second, Gaozu came to the back hall to listen to the proceedings, came back to watch the landscape on the bridge, and read poems to the courtiers.

古文：是月，王琳立梁永嘉王萧庄于郢州。
现代文：当月，王琳在郢州拥立梁朝的永嘉王萧庄。
English: That month, Wang Lin held the Yongjia Wang Xiaozhuang of the Liang Dynasty in Zhangzhou.

古文：夏四月甲子，舆驾亲祠太庙。
现代文：夏季四月甲子，高祖亲自祭祀太庙。
English: In the summer of April, Emperor Gaozu himself made a sacrifice to the Imperial Temple.

古文：乙丑，江絮王薨，诏遣太宰吊祭，司空监护丧事，凶礼所须，随由备办。
现代文：乙丑，江阴王去世，下诏书派遣太宰前去吊唁祭奠，司空监护丧事，凶礼所需的物品，随时由他们备办。
English: After the death of King Yixiu of Jiangyin, the following edict dispatched the Dazaifu to go to the condolence and memorial service, and the Sikuo to supervise the funeral and prepare the necessary items for the funeral at any time.

古文：以梁武林侯萧谘息季卿嗣为江阴王。
现代文：让梁朝的武林侯萧谘的儿子季卿继承作江昼担。
English: Let Ji Qing, the son of Wu Lin Hou Xiao Yi of the Liang Dynasty, succeed as Jiang Lun Lun.

古文：丙寅，舆驾幸石头，饯司空侯瑱。
现代文：丙寅，皇帝到互玺，为司空赵饯行。
English: Cui Yin, the emperor to each other, for Siku Zhao.

古文：戊辰，重云殿东鸱尾有紫烟属天。
现代文：戊辰，重云殿束侧的鸱尾有紫色烟雾连接着上天。
English: In the Boshin era, the appendix on the bundle side of the heavy cloud hall has purple smoke connecting it to heaven.

古文：五月乙未，京师地震。
现代文：五月乙未，京师发生了地震。
English: In May, an earthquake hit the capital city of Kyoto.

古文：癸丑，齐广陵南城主张显和、长史张僧那各率其所部入附。
现代文：癸丑，齐的广陵南城首领张显和、长史张僧那各自率领他们的部众入朝归附。
English: Zhang Xianhe, the leader of the southern city of Guangling, and Changshi Zhang, a monk, each led their followers to join the imperial court.

古文：辛酉，舆驾幸大庄岩寺舍身。
现代文：辛酉，皇帝到大庄严寺自作苦行。
English: Sincerely, the emperor went to the Grand Solemn Temple to perform self-mortification.

古文：壬戌，群臣表请还宫。
现代文：壬戌，群臣上表请求高祖还宫。
English: In the end, the courtiers petitioned Gao Zu to return to the palace.

古文：六月己巳，诏司空侯瑱、领军将军徐度率舟师为前军，以讨王琳。
现代文：六月己巳，下韶书命令司空侯填、领军将军涂度率领水军作先头部队，来讨伐王琳。
English: In June, the next imperial edict ordered Sikuo Houfu and the leading general Tu Du to lead the navy as the first troops to fight Wang Lin.

古文：秋七月戊戌，舆驾幸石头，亲送瑱等。
现代文：秋季七月戊戌，皇帝来到石头，亲自为侯填等人送行。
English: In the autumn of July, the emperor came to Shishi and personally saw off Hou Jian and others.

古文：己亥，江州刺史周迪擒王琳将李孝钦、樊猛、余孝顷于工塘。
现代文：己亥，江州刺史周迪在工塘活捉了王琳部将李孝钦、樊猛、余孝顷。
English: At the end of the year, Zhou Di, the governor of Jiangsu Province, captured Wang Linbu, Li Xiaoqin, Yan Meng and Yu Xiaohe alive in the work pond.

古文：甲辰，遣吏部尚书谢哲谕王琳。
现代文：甲辰，派遣吏部尚书谢哲宣谕王琳。
English: Jia Chen dispatched officials to write a letter of thanks to Wang Lin.

古文：甲寅，嘉禾一穗六岐生五城。
现代文：甲寅，五城有嘉禾一穗长了六个分枝。
English: In five cities, one spike of Jiahe has grown six branches.

古文：初，侯景之平也，火焚太极殿，承圣中议欲营之，独阙一柱，至是有樟木大十八围，长四丈五尺，流泊陶家后渚，监军邹子度以闻。
现代文：当初平定侯景时，大火烧毁了太极殿，承圣年间议论想要营造它，惟独缺少一根柱子，到这时有根樟木粗十八围，长四丈五尺，漂流到陶家后渚，监军邹子度报告给高祖。
English: At the time of the initial pacification of Houjing, a fire destroyed the Taiji Hall. During the years of consecration, there were discussions about wanting to build it, but one pillar was missing. At this time, there was a piece of eucalyptus wood with a thickness of eighteen and a length of four and a half feet. It drifted to the potter's house in Houjing, and the overseer reported to Gao Zu about the condition of the eucalyptus.

古文：诏中书令沈众兼起部尚书，少府卿蔡俦兼将作大匠，起太极殿。
现代文：下韶命令中书令沈众兼任起部尚书，少府卿蔡俦兼任将作大匠，建造太极殿。
English: According to the decree, Shen Zong will also serve as the chief architect, while Shofuqing Cai Jun will also serve as the master craftsman to build the Taiji Hall.

古文：八月丙寅，以广梁郡为陈留郡。
现代文：八月丙寅，把广梁郡改为陈留郡。
English: In August, he changed Guangliang County to Chenliu County.

古文：辛未，诏临川王蒨西讨，以舟师五万发自京师，舆驾幸冶城寺亲送焉。
现代文：辛未，下韶命令临川王陈蓓向西讨伐，率领五万水军从京师出发，皇帝到冶城寺亲自送行。
English: At the end of the year, the emperor ordered the king of Linchuan, Chen Xi, to go to the west and lead a 50,000-strong naval force from Beijing. The emperor personally escorted him to Yecheng Temple.

古文：前开府仪同三司、南豫州刺史周文育，前镇北将军、南徐州刺史、新除开府仪同三司侯安都等于王琳所逃归，自劾廷尉，即日引见，并宥之。
现代文：前开府仪同三司、南豫州刺史周文育，前镇北将军、南徐州刺史、新任开府仪同三司侯安都等人从王琳那裹逃回来，到廷尉处检举自己过失，当天引见给高祖，都宽恕了他们。
English: Former Kaifu Yi, together with the Third Secretary and the Southern Yu Prefecture's Secretary of History, Zhou Wenyu, former Zhenbei General, Southern Xuzhou's Secretary of History, and the newly appointed Kaifu Yi, together with the Third Secretary of History, Hou An, all returned from Wang Lin'an, went to the palace to report their mistakes, and were introduced to Gao Zu on the same day. Gao Zu forgave them.

古文：戊寅，诏复文育等本官。
现代文：戊寅，下诏恢复周文育等原来的官职。
English: Wu Yin, the next edict is to restore Zhou Wenyu and other former official positions.

古文：壬午，追封皇子立为豫章王，谥曰献；权为长沙王，谥曰思；长女为永世公主，谥曰懿。
现代文：壬午，追封皇子陈立为豫章王，谧号献；追封陈权为长沙王，谧号思；追封长女为永世公主，谧号懿。
English: In Renwu, Chen Li, the crown prince, was named Yu Zhang Wang, and his posthumous name was Xian; Chen Quan, the king of Changsha, was named Changsha Wang, and his posthumous name was Si; and his eldest daughter was named Princess Yongshih, and her posthumous name was Yao.

古文：谢哲反命，王琳请还镇湘川，诏追众军缓其伐。
现代文：谢哲覆命，王琳请求返回方镇湘川，下诏追赶众军缓和对他的讨伐。
English: Xie Zhe resigned, Wang Lin requested to return to Fangzhen Xiangchuan, and issued an order to pursue the army and ease the crusade against him.

古文：癸未，西讨众军至自大雷。
现代文：癸未，西讨众军从大雷赶到。
English: A few days later, the Western Expeditionary Force arrived from Dairi.

古文：丁亥，以信威将军、江州刺史周迪为开府仪同三司，进号平南将军。
现代文：丁亥，任用信威将军、江州刺史周迪为开府仪同三司，进号平南将军。
English: Ding Hai, appointed General Xin Wei, Jiangzhou Shishi Zhou Di as Kaifu Yi Tong San Si, and promoted General Pingnan.

古文：改南徐州所领南兰陵郡复为东海郡。
现代文：改南徐州所领的南兰陵郡又为束海郡。
English: South Lanling County, which was led by South Xuzhou, was changed to Sokkai County.

古文：冬十月庚午，遣镇南将军、开府仪同三司周文育都督众军出豫章，讨余孝劢。
现代文：冬季十月庚午，派遣镇南将军、开府仪同三司周文言都督众军从豫章出发，讨伐余孝勘。
English: On the afternoon of October in winter, Zhenan General, Kaifu Yi and the three divisions of Zhou Wenyan's army were dispatched from Yuzhang to fight against Yu Xiaokan.

古文：乙亥，舆驾幸庄严寺，发《金光明经》题。
现代文：乙亥，皇帝到庄严寺，阐发《金光明经》的题意。
English: Emperor Yihai went to the Solemn Temple to explain the meaning of the Golden Light Sutra.

古文：丁酉，以仁威将军、高州刺史黄法抃为开府仪同三司，进号镇南将军。
现代文：丁酉，任用仁威将军、高州刺史黄法毡为开府仪同三司，进号镇南将军。
English: Ding Jun, appointed General Ren Wei, Gaozhou Shishi Huang Fa Jun as Kaifu Yi Tong Three Division, and Jin He Zhenan General.

古文：甲寅，太极殿成，匠各给复。
现代文：甲寅，太极殿建成，匠人各自免除赋税徭役。
English: In the year of the Horse, the Taiji Hall was built, and the craftsmen were exempted from paying taxes.

古文：十二月庚申，侍中、安东将军临川王蒨率百僚朝前殿，拜上牛酒。
现代文：十二月庚申，侍中、安束将军临川王速芦率领百官在前殿朝见直担，拜礼奉上牛和酒。
English: On December Koshin, the chamberlain and Anzaku general, Linchuan Wang Hayaru, led a hundred officials to the front hall to see the direct burden in the morning, and offered cattle and wine at the prayer.

古文：甲子，舆驾幸大庄严寺，设无珝大会，舍乘舆法物。
现代文：甲子，皇帝到大庄严寺，开设无遮大会，舍弃乘舆法物苦行。
English: Emperor Gao Zi went to the Grand Solemn Temple and opened an open-air assembly, renouncing the use of public law and asceticism.

古文：群臣备法驾奉迎，即日舆驾还宫。
现代文：群臣备办法驾奉迎直担，即日皇帝回宫。
English: A group of courtiers prepared a plan to escort the emperor back to the palace the same day.

古文：丙寅，高祖于太极殿东堂宴群臣，设金石之乐，以路寝告成也。
现代文：丙寅，直担在左捶毖东堂宴会群臣安排了金石之乐，是因为正殿完成。
English: Cui Yin, who was directly in charge of the banquet in the East Hall of the Zuoying Courtyard, arranged the gold and stone music for the courtiers because the main hall was completed.

古文：壬申，割吴郡盐官、海盐、前京三县置海宁郡，属扬州。
现代文：壬申，割出吴郡盐官、海盐、前京三县设置海空郡，隶属于荡州。
English: In Jinshin, the three counties of Yanquan, Haiyan and Qianjing in Wu County were carved out and set up as Haiyan County, which was subordinate to Zhangzhou.

古文：以安成所部广兴六洞置安乐郡。
现代文：把安成管辖的广兴六个洞置为安乐郡。
English: Guangxing six holes under the jurisdiction of Ancheng will be placed as Anle County.

古文：丙戌，以宁远将军、北江州刺史熊昙朗为开府仪同三司，进号平西将军。
现代文：丙戌，任用宁速将军、北江州刺史熊昙朗为开府仪同三司，进号平西将军。
English: He appointed General Ning Hao and Northern Jiangsu Provincial Secretary Xiong Junlang to the three departments of Kaifu, and promoted General Ping Xi.

古文：丁亥，诏曰： 梁时旧仕，乱离播越，始还朝廷，多未铨序。
现代文：丁亥，下韶书说： 梁朝时的旧官员，遭战乱流离逃亡在外，刚开始回到朝廷，多敷没有审查评定。
English: Dinghai, the lower court said: The former officials of the Liang Dynasty, who were displaced by the war and fled abroad, have just returned to the imperial court, and most of them have not been reviewed and evaluated.

古文：又起兵已来，军勋甚众。
现代文：又从起兵以来，军队上的功勋非常多。
English: In addition, he has made a lot of contributions to the military since he joined the army.

古文：选曹即条文武簿及节将应九流者，量其所拟。 
现代文：选用官员就挑取文武簿及节将中舆九品相应的，衡量所拟定的官职。 
English: The selection of officials is based on the selection of the corresponding nine articles of the Book of Literature and the Nine Articles of the General Staff to measure the proposed official position.

古文：于是随材擢用者五十馀人。
现代文：于是依照才能擢用五十余人。
English: As a result, more than 50 people were promoted according to their abilities.

古文：三年春正月己丑，青龙见于东方。
现代文：三年春季正月己丑，青龙出现于东方天空。
English: In the spring of the third year, the first month of the year was ugly, and the blue dragon appeared in the eastern sky.

古文：丁酉，以镇南将军、广州刺史欧阳頠即本号开府仪同三司。
现代文：丁酉，用镇南将军、广州刺史欧阳倾即本号开府仪同三司。
English: Ding Jun, with Zhenan General, Guangzhou Zishi Ouyang Qian, that is, this issue of Kaifu Yi with three divisions.

古文：是夜大雪，及旦，太极殿前有龙迹见。
现代文：当天夜裹下大雪，到了天明，太极殿前面有龙的足迹出现。
English: In the evening of the same day, it was covered with heavy snow. At dawn, the footprints of a dragon appeared in front of the Taiji Hall.

古文：甲午，广州刺史欧阳頠表称白龙见于州江南岸，长数十丈，大可八九围，历州城西道入天井岗。
现代文：甲午，广州刺史欧阳憔上表声称白龙出现在州江的南岸，长敷十丈，粗约八九围，经过州城西道进入天井岗。
English: In the afternoon of the first day of the month, the above table claimed that the white dragon appeared on the south bank of the Zhou River, with a length of 10 meters, a roughness of about 89 meters, and passed through the West Road of Zhoucheng to enter the ceiling post.

古文：仙人见于罗浮山寺小石楼，长三丈所，通身洁白，衣服楚丽。
现代文：有仙人出现在罗浮山寺的小石楼，高约三丈，通身洁白，衣服华美绚丽。
English: A hermit appeared in the small stone tower of Luo Fushan Temple, about three meters tall, with a pure white body and gorgeous clothes.

古文：辛丑，诏曰： 南康、始兴王诸妹，已有封爵，依礼止是籓主。
现代文：辛丑，下诏书说： 南康王、始兴王的妹妹们，已经有了封爵，依照礼制她们祇是藩主。
English: The next imperial edict said, "The younger sisters of King Nankang and King Shixing have already been knighted, but according to the etiquette, they are only the lords of the domain."

古文：此二王者，有殊恒情，宜隆礼数。
现代文：但是遣两个王，和通常情况不一样，应该用隆重的礼节来对待。
English: But the sending of two kings, unlike the usual case, should be treated with great courtesy.

古文：诸主仪秩及尚主，可并同皇女。 
现代文：诸藩主的礼仪品秩以及出嫁，可以和皇女相同。 
English: The etiquette, rank and marriage of the lords of the domains can be the same as that of the princess.

古文：戊申，诏临川王蒨省扬、徐二州辞讼。
现代文：戊申，下韶临川王陈蓓审查扬、徐二州的诉讼。
English: Wushin, the lower court of Linchuan Wang Chenqi reviewed Yang and Xu Erzhou's lawsuit.

古文：二月辛酉，以平西将军、桂州刺史淳于量为开府仪同三司，进号镇西大将军。
现代文：二月辛酉，以平西将军、桂州刺史淳于量为开府仪同三司，进号镇西大将军。
English: At the end of February, with Pingxi General and Guizhou Shishi Junyu as Kaifu Yi and the three divisions, Jinbei Zhenxi Major General was promoted.

古文：壬午，司空侯瑱督众军自江入合州，焚齐舟舰。
现代文：壬午，司空侯填都督众军从江进入合州，焚烧齐的舟舰。
English: In the morning of the third day of the third month, the governor's troops entered Hezhou from the Yangtze River and burned Qi's ships.

古文：三月丙申，侯瑱至自合肥，众军献捷。
现代文：三月丙申，侯填从合肥赶到，众军进献所获的俘虏及战利品。
English: In March, Hou Fu arrived from Hefei, and the troops presented the prisoners and spoils of war they had captured.

古文：夏闰四月庚寅，诏曰： 开廪赈绝，育民之大惠，巡方恤患，前王之令典。
现代文：夏季闰四月庚寅，下韶书说： 开仓救济贫困，是抚养百姓的大恩惠，出巡四方济人患难，是先王美好的典章法度。
English: In the summer leap month of April, the next imperial edict said: opening warehouses to relieve poverty is a great boon to support the people, and dispatching four emissaries to relieve people in distress is a wonderful ceremony and law of the former king.

古文：朕当斯季俗，膺此乐推，君德未孚，民瘼犹甚，重兹多垒，弥疚纳隍。
现代文：朕碰上末世颓败的风俗，接受天命，皇帝恩德未能遍及，民众的疾苦仍然深重，再加上寇乱频繁，更加愧疚民处水火。
English: I encountered the defeated customs of the end of the world, accepted the fate of the world, the emperor's benevolence failed to spread, the people's suffering is still profound, coupled with frequent riots, more guilty people everywhere.

古文：良由四聪弗达，千里勿应。
现代文：确实由于对四方听不到，远方不能响应。
English: Indeed, since the four directions cannot be heard, the distant direction cannot respond.

古文：博施之仁，何其或爽？
现代文：普遍施予的仁德，为什么有时会不同?
English: The benevolence that is generally given, why is it sometimes different?

古文：残弊之轨，致此未康。
现代文：残敝的轨度，至今尚未恢复。
English: The trajectory of the debris has not yet been recovered.

古文：吴州、缙州，去岁蝗旱，郢田虽疏，郑渠终涸，室靡盈积之望，家有填壑之嗟。
现代文：吴州、缙州去年出现蝗灾旱灾，郢田的人虽然祷告，但是郑渠最终干涸，屋裹没有充裕的希望，家中却有死人的悲叹。
English: Locust plagues and droughts occurred in Wuzhou and Zhangzhou last year. Although the people of Putian prayed, the Zheng Canal eventually dried up. There was not enough hope for the house, but there was mourning for the dead in the home.

古文：百姓不足，兆民何赖？
现代文：百姓不足，民众依赖什么呢?
English: The people are in short supply. What do the people rely on?

古文：近已遣中书舍人江德藻衔命东阳，与令长二千石问民疾苦，仍以入台仓见米分恤。
现代文：近来已经派遣中书舍人江德藻接受使命到束阳，和县令郡守慰问民间疾苦，并用缴纳给台仓的现存的米分别抚恤。
English: Recently, the Chinese scholar Jiang Demao has been sent to Sokyang to accept the mission, and the county magistrate and the county governor have been sent to sympathize with the people's sufferings, and to use the existing rice paid to the Taicang to provide subsidies.

古文：虽德非既饱，庶微慰阻饥。 
现代文：虽然恩德不能使之吃鲍，但是或许稍微安慰阻止饥饿。 
English: While charity can't make the hungry go away, it might be a small consolation to stave off starvation.

古文：甲午，诏依前代置西省学士，兼以伎术者预焉。
现代文：甲午，下诏书依照前代设置西省学士，并让有技艺方术的人参与。
English: In the afternoon of the 1st, the next edict set up the West Provincial Baccalaureate in accordance with the previous generation, and allowed people with technical skills to participate.

古文：丁酉，遣镇北将军徐度率众城南皖口。
现代文：丁酉，派遣镇北将军徐度率领众人筑城南皖口。
English: Ding Rong sent Zhenbei General Xu Du to lead the people to build the south gate of the city.

古文：是时久不雨，丙午，舆驾幸钟山祠蒋帝庙，是日降雨，迄于月晦。
现代文：当时长期不下雨，丙午，皇帝到钟山祭祀蒋帝庙，遣一天降了雨，到月底停止。
English: At that time, it did not rain for a long time. In the afternoon of the 4th day, the emperor went to Zhongshan to offer sacrifices to the Chiang Kai-shek Temple. It rained for one day and stopped at the end of the month.

古文：五月丙辰朔，日有食之，有司奏：旧仪，御前殿，服硃纱袍、通天冠。
现代文：五月丙辰初一，出现了日食，官吏上奏：旧时礼仪，皇帝到前殿，穿朱纱袍、戴通天冠。
English: On the first day of the fifth lunar month, there was a solar eclipse. Officials played the old-time etiquette, and the emperor came to the front hall, wearing a red robe and a crown.

古文：诏曰： 此乃前代承用，意有未同。
现代文：下诏书说： 这是前代沿用，意义有些不同。
English: The next imperial edict said: This is the same as the previous generation, but the meaning is somewhat different.

古文：合朔仰助太阳，宜备衮冕之服。
现代文：合朔之日仰助太阳，应该准备衮冕之服。
English: On the day of the new moon, the sun should be worshipped, and the crowning robe should be prepared.

古文：自今已去，永可为准。 
现代文：自今以后，永远把这当作标准。 
English: From now on, this will always be the standard.

古文：丙寅，扶南国遣使献方物。
现代文：丙寅，扶南国派遣使者贡献本地产物。
English: Cui Yin, Funan Province sent an envoy to contribute local products.

古文：乙酉，北江州刺史熊昙朗杀都督周文育于军，举兵反。
现代文：乙酉，北江州刺史熊昙朗在军中杀死都督周文育，举兵造反。
English: Xiong Ronglang, the governor of North Jiangsu Province, killed the governor Zhou Wenyu in the army and raised an army to rebel.

古文：王琳遣其将常众爱、曹庆率兵援余孝劢。
现代文：王琳派遣他的部将常众爱、曹庆率兵援助余孝勘。
English: Wang Lin dispatched his general Chang Congai and Cao Qing led an army to aid Yu Xiaokan.

古文：六月戊子，仪同侯安都败众爱等于左里，获琳从弟袭、主帅羊暕等三十馀人，众爱遁走，庚寅，庐山民斩之，传首京师。
现代文：六月戊子，仪同三司侯安都在左里打败众爱等，俘获王琳的堂弟王袭、主帅羊陈等三十余人，众爱逃跑了，庚寅，庐山民众杀了他，把他的人头传送到京师。
English: In June, Wu Zi, Yi Tong and the third secretary Hou An all defeated the public love in Zuoli, captured Wang Lin's cousin Wang Gao, the head coach Yang Chen and more than 30 people. The public love ran away, and the Lushan people killed him and sent his head to the Beijing division.

古文：甲午，众师凯归。
现代文：甲午，众军队凯旋归来。
English: In the afternoon of the first day of the second month, the troops returned in triumph.

古文：诏曰： 昙朗噬逆，罪不容诛，分命众军，仍事掩讨，方加枭磔，以明刑宪。 
现代文：下韶书说： 昙朗反叛作乱，诛杀不足以抵偿其罪行，命令众军，仍然进行讨伐，施加诛戮，来表明刑法。 
English: The lower imperial edict said: "Hulang rebelled and caused turmoil, and killing was not enough to atone for his crimes. He ordered the troops to continue the crusade and inflict massacres to demonstrate the criminal law.

古文：徵临川王装往皖口置城栅，以钱道戢守焉。
现代文：征召临王陈蓓前往皖口构置围墙和栅栏，让钱道戢把守那襄。
English: Conscript Lin Wang Chen Yao to go to the gate to construct a fence and fence, and let Qian Daobao guard the gate.

古文：丁酉，高祖不豫，遣兼太宰、尚书左仆射王通以疾告太庙，兼太宰、中书令谢哲告大社、南北郊。
现代文：丁酉，高祖有病，派遣兼太宰、尚书左仆射王通为疾病祷告太庙，兼太宰、中书令谢哲祷告太社、祭祀天地。
English: Ding Xi, Gao Zu was ill, sent the concurrently Dazai and Shangshu's left-hand man Shaowang Tong to pray for the illness to the Great Temple, and the concurrently Dazai and Zhongshu ordered Xie Zhe to pray to the Great Shrine and offer sacrifices to heaven and earth.

古文：辛丑，高祖疾小瘳。
现代文：辛丑，直担的病稍稍见好。
English: It's ugly, but it's a little bit better.

古文：故司空周文育之柩至自建昌。
现代文：已故的司空凰塞直的灵柩从垩塑运至京师。
English: The coffin of the late Sikuo Hwangsaejung was transported from Gyeongbokgung to Beijing.

古文：壬寅，高祖素服哭于东堂，哀甚。
现代文：壬寅，产担素服在东堂哭吊，非常悲动。
English: Ren Yin, the producer of the plainclothes in the East Hall, wept and was very sad.

古文：癸卯，高祖临讯狱讼。
现代文：癸卯，高祖亲自讯问讼案。
English: However, Gao Zu personally interrogated the case.

古文：是夜，荧惑在天尊。
现代文：逭天夜裹，火星出现在天空。
English: Around midnight, Mars appeared in the sky.

古文：高祖疾甚。
现代文：高祖的病又严重了。
English: Gaozu's illness has become serious again.

古文：丙午，崩于璿玑殿，时年五十七。
现代文：丙午，高担在堕堕屘去世，时年五十七岁。
English: In the afternoon of the third day, Gaotan died at the age of fifty-seven.

古文：遗诏追临川王蒨入纂。
现代文：遣韶追召临王盐菱入朝继承皇位。
English: Lin Wang Yanling was summoned to the imperial court to succeed to the throne.

古文：甲寅，大行皇帝迁殡于太极殿西阶。
现代文：甲寅，刚死的皇帝迁柩到太极殿西阶。
English: Jia Yin, the emperor who had just died, moved to the west side of the Taiji Hall.

古文：秋八月甲午，群臣上谥曰武皇帝，庙号高祖。
现代文：秋季八月甲午，群臣奉上谧号为武皇帝，庙号为高祖。
English: On the afternoon of the first day of August in autumn, a group of courtiers received the posthumous title of Emperor Wu and the temple name of Gaozu.

古文：丙申，葬万安陵。
现代文：丙申，葬在万安陵。
English: He was buried in Wan'an Mausoleum.

古文：高祖智以绥物，武以宁乱，英谋独运，人皆莫及，故能征伐四克，静难夷凶。
现代文：产担用智慧安抚万物，用武功平定叛乱，独自运用英明的谋略，人们都赶不上他，所以能够征伐战胜四方，平定叛乱削除凶逆。
English: The procurator uses wisdom to pacify all things, uses martial arts to quell rebellion, and uses wise strategies alone. People can't catch up with him, so he can conquer the four directions and quell rebellion.

古文：至升大麓之日，居阿衡之任，恒崇宽政，爱育为本。
现代文：到了登上皇位之日，担当国家朝政的重任，常推崇宽大之政，以仁爱抚恤为本。
English: On the day he ascended to the throne, he took on the important task of the country's dynastic politics, often advocating a lenient policy based on benevolence and benevolence.

古文：有须发调军储，皆出于事不可息。
现代文：如果需要征发调用军需物资，都是出于事情不能平息。
English: If there is a need to requisition and transfer military supplies, it is because things cannot be calmed down.

古文：加以俭素自率，常膳不过数品，私飨曲宴，皆瓦器蚌盘，肴核庶羞，裁令充足而已，不为虚费。
现代文：加上以节俭朴素自作表率，平常饮食不过几个品种，宫中的私宴，都用粗陋的食器，各种食品和美味，削减至充足而已，不能白白浪费。
English: In addition, he set an example of frugality and simplicity, and his usual diet consisted of only a few varieties. The private banquets in the palace were all made of coarse tableware, and all kinds of food and delicacies were reduced to a sufficient amount so that they could not be wasted.

古文：初平侯景，及立绍泰，子女玉帛，皆班将士。
现代文：起初平定侯景，到拥立梁敬帝，美女玉帛，都分发给将士。
English: At first, the pacification of Houjing, to the support of Liang Jingdi, and the beauty of Jade Dragonfly were all distributed to the soldiers.

古文：其充闱房者，衣不重彩，饰无金翠，哥钟女乐，不列于前。
现代文：他充用于后宫的，衣服没有华美的色彩，饰物不用黄金翠玉，编钟女乐，他也不列于面前。
English: He served in the harem, the clothes did not have gorgeous colors, the ornaments did not use gold and jade, and he did not appear in front of the bell.

古文：及乎践祚，弥厉恭俭。
现代文：等到他登基，更加严格恭俭。
English: Wait until he ascends the throne, and be more strict and frugal.

古文：故隆功茂德，光有天下焉。
现代文：所以他建立了伟大的功勋美好的恩德，广阔地拥有天下。
English: Therefore, he established a great merit, a wonderful grace, and owned the world extensively.

古文：陈吏部尚书姚察曰：高祖英略大度，应变无方，盖汉高、魏武之亚矣。
现代文：陈朝吏部尚书姚察曰：高祖英明而有谋略度量宽宏，随机应变不拘一格，大概舆漠高祖、魏武帝相当。
English: Shangshu Yao, an official of the Chen Dynasty, said: Gao Zu is wise and resourceful, generous in measure, and flexible at random. He is probably comparable to Gao Zu and Emperor Wu of Wei.

古文：及西都荡覆，诚贯天人。
现代文：等到西都动荡颠覆，确实能会通天和人。
English: Wait until the turbulent subversion of the western capital, it will indeed be able to reconcile heaven and man.

古文：王僧辩阙伊尹之才，空结桐宫之愤，贞阳假秦兵之送，不思穆嬴之泣。
现代文：王僧辩缺少伊尹之才，白白结下桐宫的怨恨，贞阳假藉秦军队的送行，却不考虑穆赢的哭泣。
English: Wang Sangyan lacked the talent of Yi Yin, he bore the resentment of Tong Gong in vain, and Zhengyang pretended to see off the Qin army, but did not consider Mu Ying's crying.

古文：高祖乃蹈玄机而抚末运，乘势隙而拯横流，王迹所基，始自于此，何至戡黎升陑之捷而已焉。
现代文：高祖于是遵循天意抚平末世运数，乘着形势机会拯救动乱的局面，帝王功业的基础，从此开始，为什么要到戡定黎登上陌的胜利才可以呢。
English: Gaozu then followed the will of heaven to smooth out the number of the last days, taking advantage of the situation and the opportunity to save the turbulent situation, the foundation of the emperor's work. From this point on, why is it possible to win the victory of Lidenmiao in Liding?

古文：故于慎徽时序之世，变声改物之辰，兆庶归以讴歌，炎灵去如释负，方之前代，何其美乎！
现代文：所以在恭敬宣美政务之世，改朝换代之时，百姓诅歌他来归附，前朝离去如释重负，和前代相比，这是多么美好啊!
English: Therefore, in the era of reverence for the proclamation of the United States and the rise of government affairs, when the dynasty was changed, the people cursed him to join, and the previous dynasty left as a burden of relief. Compared with the previous generation, how beautiful it is!

