古文：太史公曰：殷以前尚矣。
现代文：太史公说：殷朝以前的历史已经很久远了，封爵的情况已不可考知了。
English: Tai Shigong said: The history before the Yin Dynasty is already very long, and the situation of the knighthood can no longer be known.

古文：周封五等：公、侯、伯、子、男。
现代文：周朝的封爵有五个等级：公、侯、伯、子、男。
English: In the Zhou Dynasty, there were five grades of knighthood: duke, lord, peer, son, and man.

古文：然封伯禽、康叔于鲁、卫，地各四百里，亲亲之义，褒有德也；太公于齐，兼五侯地，尊勤劳也。
现代文：封伯禽、康叔于鲁、卫两地，受封的地域各为各四百里，这是为了表示亲近亲属的情谊，同时也是对有德之人的褒奖。太公吕望封于齐，兼有五个侯爵的封地，这是对他为国家操劳而表示尊崇。
English: The regions of 400 li each for the two provinces of Hubei, Kansu, Yulu and Wei were sealed in order to express the affection of close relatives, and at the same time as a reward for virtuous people. The Taigong Lvang was sealed at the same time, and also had the fiefs of five marquesses, which was an expression of respect for his efforts for the country.

古文：武王、成、康所封数百，而同姓五十五，地上不过百里，下三十里，以辅卫王室。
现代文：武王、成王、康王时期所封的诸侯有数百个，其中与周室同姓者就有五十五个，他们的封地最大不过百里，最小者只有三十里，依靠他们来辅卫王室。
English: There were hundreds of feudal lords during the reigns of King Wu, King Cheng and King Kang, of whom 55 had the same surname as the Zhou family. The largest of their fiefs was only 100 li, while the smallest was only 30 li, and they relied on them to support the royal family.

古文：管、蔡、康叔、曹、郑，或过或损。
现代文：之后管叔、蔡叔、康叔和曹、郑始封之君，有的超过爵位应得之数，有的则被削减了。
English: Later, Guan Xiu, Cai Xiu, Kang Xiu and Cao and Zheng Shifeng's princes, some of them exceeded the number of titles they deserved, while others were reduced.

古文：厉、幽之后，王室缺，侯伯强国兴焉，天子微，弗能正。
现代文：厉王、幽王以后，周室衰败，争强称霸的诸侯国兴盛起来，周天子的力量微弱，无力纠正。
English: After Li Wang and Yu Wang, the Zhou dynasty fell into decline, and the vassal states that fought for supremacy flourished. Zhou Tianzi's power was weak and he was powerless to correct the situation.

古文：非德不纯，形势弱也。
现代文：这并不是道德不纯一，而是形势衰弱的缘故。
English: This is not because of moral impurity, but because of the weakness of the situation.

古文：汉兴，序二等。
现代文：汉朝兴起以后，封爵为王、侯二等。
English: After the rise of the Han Dynasty, the title of nobility was conferred on kings and second-class princes.

古文：高祖末年，非刘氏而王者，若无功上所不置而侯者，天下共诛之。
现代文：在高祖末期曾立下誓言，不是刘氏而称王者，或没有功劳不是天子所封而称侯者，天下的人都可以共同讨伐他们。
English: At the end of Gao Zu's life, he made a vow that all the people in the world could fight together against those who claim to be kings instead of the Liu clan, or those who claim to be knights without any merit other than being anointed by Heaven.

古文：高祖子弟同姓为王者九国，唯独长沙异姓，而功臣侯者百有余人。
现代文：高祖的子弟同姓而被封为王者有九个，唯独长沙王是异姓王，而有功之臣被封为侯者有一百多人。
English: There are nine sons of Gaozu with the same surname who have been made kings, except that Changsha King is a king with a different surname, and there are more than a hundred meritorious vassals who have been made princes.

古文：自雁门、太原以东至辽阳，为燕、代国；常山以南，大行左转，度河、济，阿、甄以东薄海，为齐、赵国；自陈以西，南至九疑，东带江、淮、谷、泗，薄会稽，为梁、楚、淮南、长沙国。皆外接于胡、越。
现代文：自雁门、太原以东至辽阳，为燕国和代国；常山以南，太行以东，过黄河、济水，以及阿、甄以东一直到海边，为齐国和赵国；从陈以西，南至九疑山，东含江、淮、谷、泗，直到会稽，为梁国、楚国、淮南国、长沙国，这些国的外围都和胡、越接壤。
English: From Yanmen and Taiyuan in the east to Liaoyang, it is Yan country and Dai country; from Changshan in the south, from Taihang in the east, across the Yellow River and Jishui, and from A and Zhen in the east all the way to the seaside, it is Qi country and Zhao country; from Chen in the west, south to Jiuzhishan, east to the Yangtze River, Huai, Gu and Yunnan, and as far as Huiqi, it is Liang country, Chu country, Huainan country, and Changsha country. The periphery of these countries are all bordered by Hu and Yue.

古文：而内地北距山以东尽诸侯地，大者或五六郡，连城数十，置百官宫观，僭于天子。
现代文：而内地北到太行山以东，都是诸侯王的封地，大的诸侯王国有五六个郡，数十个城池，他们设置的百官，和建造的宫观，已经超过了规定，几乎跟天子相同。
English: But the inland north to the east of Taihang Mountain is the fief of the princes. The great princes' kingdom has five or six counties and dozens of cities. The hundreds of officials they have set up and the palace they have built have exceeded the regulations and are almost the same as the heavenly sons.

古文：汉独有三河、东郡、颍川、南阳，自江陵以西至蜀，北自云中至陇西，与内史凡十五郡，而公主列侯颇食邑其中。
现代文：当时汉朝廷只占有河东、河西、河南、东郡、颖川、南阳，以及从江陵以西至蜀地，北从云中至陇西，加上内史共十五个郡，而公主列侯的食邑多数都在这些地区。
English: At that time, the Han Dynasty only occupied the counties of Hedong, Hexi, Henan, Donggun, Yingchuan, and Nanyang, as well as from Jiangling to Shudi in the west, and from Yunnan to Shaanxi in the north, plus a total of fifteen counties in history, and most of the food towns of the princesses and princes were in these areas.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么会形成这种局面呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：天下初定，骨肉同姓少，故广强庶孽，以镇抚四海，用承卫天子也。
现代文：因为天下初定时，骨肉同姓者较少，所以需要广泛增强汉室子弟的力量，用以镇抚四海，保卫天子。
English: Because at the beginning of the world, there were fewer people with the same surname, so it was necessary to extensively strengthen the power of the sons of Han to calm the four seas and protect the heavenly son.

古文：汉定百年之间，亲属益疏，诸侯或骄奢，忕邪臣计谋为淫乱，大者叛逆，小者不轨于法，以危其命，殒身亡国。
现代文：汉朝平定天下以后百年之间，诸侯王与天子的关系愈渐疏远，有的诸侯王骄奢起来，习惯于听从奸邪之臣的计谋去做淫乱之事，严重者谋反叛逆，轻微者不遵循国家法度，以致危及到自身性命，最后丧身亡国。
English: In the hundred years after the Han Dynasty had pacified the world, the relationship between the princes and the Son of Heaven became more and more distant. Some princes became arrogant and were accustomed to listening to the schemes of treacherous vassals to do immoral things. The serious ones plotted rebellion, and the minor ones did not follow the laws of the country, thus endangering their own lives, and finally died and lost their country.

古文：天子观于上古，然后加惠，使诸侯得推恩分子弟国邑，故齐分为七，赵分为六，梁分为五，淮南分三，及天子支庶子为王，王子支庶为侯，百有余焉。
现代文：天子借鉴上古政治的办法，然后加赐恩惠，使诸侯王得以施恩惠于子弟，并将国邑分封给他们。所以齐分为七国，赵分为六国，梁分为五国，淮南分为三国，连同天子的支庶子被分为王者、诸侯王的支庶子被分为侯者，一共有一百多个。
English: Drawing on the methods of ancient politics, Heavenly Son then bestowed favors so that princes could bestow favors on their sons and assign them provinces. Therefore, Qi was divided into seven provinces, Zhao was divided into six provinces, Liang was divided into five provinces, and Huainan was divided into three provinces. Together with Heavenly Son's illegitimate children, they were divided into kings, and the illegitimate children of princes were divided into princes, for a total of more than one hundred.

古文：吴楚时，前后诸侯或以适é削地，是以燕、代无北边郡，吴、淮南、长沙无南边郡，齐、赵、梁、楚支郡名山陂海咸纳于汉。
现代文：吴楚反叛的时期，有的诸侯王先后因犯罪而被削减封地，因此燕、代失去了北部的郡，吴、淮南、长沙失去了南部的郡，齐、赵、梁、楚的支郡和名山、陂海也都被朝廷收回由朝廷直接管辖。
English: During the period of the Wu-Chu rebellion, some princes were successively deprived of their fiefs for crimes. As a result, Yan and Dai lost their counties in the north, Wu, Huainan, and Changsha lost their counties in the south, and the sub-counties of Qi, Zhao, Liang, and Chu, as well as the famous mountains and the Bohai Sea, were all recovered by the imperial court and directly governed by the imperial court.

古文：诸侯稍微，大国不过十余城，小侯不过数十里，上足以奉贡职，下足以供养祭祀，以蕃辅京师。
现代文：诸侯的势力逐渐被削弱，大国不过十余城，小侯不过数十里，对上足以完成贡职，对下足以供养祭祀，用来藩卫京师。
English: The power of the feudal lords was gradually weakened, with the largest lords holding no more than a dozen castles, and the lesser lords holding no more than a few dozen ri, which was enough to pay tribute to the upper lords and to offer sacrifices to the lower lords, and was used to defend the capital.

古文：而汉郡八九十，形错诸侯间，犬牙相临，秉其厄塞地利，强本干，弱枝叶之势，尊卑明而万事各得其所矣。
现代文：而汉王朝直辖的郡有八九十个。交错在诸侯王国之间，就像犬牙一样相互交错地衔接，朝廷控制着要塞和有利地势，从而形成了本干强大、枝叶弱小的形势，使尊卑分明，所有的事情也就各得其所了。
English: But there were eighty or ninety counties under the direct control of the Han Dynasty. Interlaced between the vassal kingdoms, they interlaced with each other like the teeth of a dog. The imperial court controlled fortresses and advantageous positions, thus forming a situation in which the trunk was strong and the branches and leaves were weak. This made the hierarchy clear, and everything fell into place.

古文：臣迁谨记高祖以来至太初诸侯，谱其下益损之时，令后世得览。
现代文：作为臣子，我司马迁恭谨慎重地记载了高祖以来至太初间的各诸侯国的情况，用列表的方式记录它们自始封年用以下各国兴衰损益的时间，使后世得以观览，从中吸取教训。
English: As a courtier, I, Sima Qianqiong, carefully and seriously recorded the situation of the various vassal states from the time of Gaozu to the beginning of the era, recorded the time of their rise and fall, and the gains and losses of the following countries from the beginning of the feudal era in a tabular form, so that future generations could observe and learn from it.

古文：形势虽强，要之以仁义为本。
现代文：现今朝廷形势虽然强盛，但仍要将以仁义为本作为治国的根本。
English: Although the current situation of the imperial court is strong, it is still necessary to take benevolence and righteousness as the basis for governing the country.

