古文：汉室中兴，固皆光武之功，然更始既即天子位，光武受其爵秩，北面为臣矣，及平王郎、定河北，诏令罢兵，辞不受召，于是始贰焉。
现代文：汉朝衰微而又复兴，固然都是汉光武的功劳，但是更始帝刘玄即天子位之后，汉光武按受了他的封爵宫位，面向北做了臣子，等到平定了王郎、安定了河北，更始命令撤军，但汉光武推辞不受召见，在这时开始有了二心。
English: The decline and revival of the Han Dynasty, of course, are all the merit of Han Guangwu. However, after the first emperor Liu Xuan, that is, the Son of Heaven, Han Guangwu accepted his knighthood and became a courtier facing the north. After he had pacified Wang Lang and stabilized Hebei, he ordered the withdrawal of troops, but Han Guangwu's resignation was not accepted. At this time, he began to have second thoughts.

古文：更始方困于赤眉，而光武杀其将谢躬、苗曾，取洛阳、下河东，翻为腹心之疾。
现代文：正当刘玄被赤眉军围困时，汉光武却杀了他的将领谢躬、苗曾，攻取洛阳、打下河东，反而成了刘玄的腹心之疾。
English: Just when Liu Xuan was besieged by the Red Eyebrows, Han Guangwu killed his generals Xie Mu and Miao Zeng, captured Luoyang, and defeated Hedong. Instead, it became the illness of Liu Xuan's confidant.

古文：后世以成败论人，故不复议。
现代文：后代根据成功或失败来评论人，因此不再议论。
English: Future generations judge people by their success or failure, so they don't talk about it.

古文：予谓光武知更始不材，必败大业，逆取顺守，尚为有辞。
现代文：我认为汉光武知道刘玄不成材，一定会败坏大业，因此用武力夺取政权，用文教治理天下，还算可以辩解。
English: I think that Han Guangwu knew that Liu Xuan was not a good person and would surely ruin the great cause, so he could use force to seize power and use literature and education to govern the world.

古文：彼鲍永、冯衍，始坚守并州，不肯降下，闻更始已亡，乃罢兵来归，曰： 诚惭以其众幸富贵。 
现代文：那鲍永、冯衍，开始时坚守并州，不肯投降，听到刘玄已死，才停战来归顺汉光武，说道： 我实在惭愧带领我的部众来幸得富贵。 
English: At first, Bao Yong and Feng Yan insisted on annexing the state and refused to surrender. When they heard that Liu Xuan had died, they stopped fighting and surrendered to Han Guangwu, saying: I am really ashamed to lead my subordinates to fortune and wealth.

古文：其忠义之节，凛然可称。
现代文：他的忠义节操，威严正气，值得称赞。
English: His loyalty, self-restraint, dignity and uprightness are commendable.

古文：光武不能显而用之，闻其言而不悦。
现代文：汉光武不能提拔重用他，听到他的言谈就不高兴。
English: Han Guangwu could not promote and re-employ him, and was not happy to hear his words.

古文：永后以他立功见用，而衍终身摈斥，群臣亦无为之言者，吁！
现代文：鲍永后来因为另外立了功被任用了，而冯衍却终身被摈弃排斥，大臣们也没有谁替他说话的，唉！
English: Bao Yong was later appointed because of his outstanding achievements, while Feng Yan was rejected and ostracized for life. The ministers had no one to speak for him, alas!

古文：可叹哉！
现代文：可叹哪！
English: What a pity!

