古文：彻里彻里，燕只吉台氏。
现代文：彻里，姓燕只吉台氏。
English: Cheri, whose family name is Yandakichidai.

古文：曾祖太赤，为马步军都元帅，从太祖定中原，以功封徐、邳二州，因家于徐。
现代文：曾祖太赤为马步军都元帅，从太祖平定中原，因功封徐、邳二州，从此安家于徐州。
English: Zengzu Taihong was the marshal of Ma Bu's army. From the time of Taihong, he pacified the Central Plains, and because of his efforts, he was able to capture and subjugate two states. From then on, he made his home in Xuzhou.

古文：至元十八年，世祖召见，应对详雅，悦之，俾常侍左右，民间事时有所咨访。
现代文：彻里自幼失父，母亲蒲察氏教他读书。至元十八年，世祖召见了他，留在身边，常向他询问民间的事。
English: Cheri lost his father at a young age, and his mother, Ms. Puca, taught him to read. In the 18th year of the Yuan Dynasty, the patriarch summoned him to stay with him and often asked him about folk affairs.

古文：从征东北边还，因言大军所过，民不胜烦扰，寒饿且死，宜加赈给，帝从之，乃赐边民谷帛牛马有差，赖以存活者众。
现代文：随大军征东北边境，回朝后，向世祖陈述大军所过，民不堪烦扰，饥寒交迫致死，请朝廷赈济。世祖听从，赐边民粮食、布帛、牛马，使饥寒之民免于死亡。
English: He marched with a large army to the northeastern border, and after returning to the imperial court, he reported to his ancestors that a large army had passed by, the people could not bear the trouble, and they were forced to die of cold and hunger, and he asked the imperial court to help. The ancestors obeyed and gave the border people grain, cloth, cattle and horses, so that the cold and hungry people would not die.

古文：擢利用监。二十三年，奉使江南，省风俗，访遗逸。
现代文：二十三年，彻里奉使江南，考察风俗，访求宋朝遗民。
English: In 233, Cheri was sent to the south of the Yangtze River to investigate the customs and visit the Song Dynasty survivors.

古文：时行省理财方急，卖所在学田以价输官。
现代文：当时行省为上交钱粮，把学田都出卖了。
English: At that time, the provincial government sold off all the school fields in order to get money and grain.

古文：彻里曰： 学田所以供祭礼、育人才也，安可鬻？ 
现代文：彻里说： 学田是用来供祭礼、育人材的，岂可出售。 
English: Cheri said, "Gakuda is used for religious rites and educating people, so it should not be sold."

古文：遽止之。
现代文：令立即停止。
English: order to stop immediately.

古文：还朝以闻，帝嘉纳焉。
现代文：回朝将此事奏报世祖，世祖称赞并肯定了他的意见和决定。
English: He returned to China to report the matter to his ancestor, who praised and affirmed his opinion and decision.

古文：二十四年，分中书为尚书省。桑哥为相，引用党与，钩考天下钱粮，凡昔权臣阿合马积年负逋，举以中书失征奏，诛二参政。
现代文：二十四年，朝廷分中书为尚书省，桑哥为相，引用其党羽，搜括天下钱粮，凡过去权臣阿合马专政时所积存下来的逋欠，都认为是因中书失职不征，奏请诛杀二参政。
English: In 1924, the imperial court divided Zhongshu into Shangshu Province and Sango Province, and used its party members to collect the world's money and grain. All the debts accumulated during the dictatorship of the powerful minister Ahma in the past were considered to be due to Zhongshu's dereliction of duty and failure to collect, and he was invited to participate in politics.

古文：行省乘风，督责尤峻。主无所偿，则责及亲戚，或逮系邻党，械禁榜掠。民不胜其苦，自裁及死狱者以百数，中外骚动。
现代文：各行省乘机对百姓进行苛征，若户主不能交纳，就牵连到亲戚邻里，敲诈勒索，民不胜其苦，自杀及在狱中死的，数以百计，全国骚动。
English: All sectors and provinces took advantage of the opportunity to levy harsh taxes on the people. If the head of the household could not pay, relatives and neighbors were implicated. There was extortion, and the people could not bear the pain. Hundreds of people committed suicide or died in prison. There was a national uproar.

古文：廷臣顾忌，皆莫敢言。
现代文：廷臣都有顾虑，不敢直言。
English: The courtiers all have misgivings and dare not speak out.

古文：彻里乃于帝前具陈桑哥奸贪误国害民状，辞语激烈。
现代文：只有彻里于帝前详细陈述了桑哥奸贪误国害民的罪状，辞语激烈。
English: Only Cheri in front of the emperor gave a detailed account of Sango's crimes of treachery, corruption, and harming the people of the country, and her words were fierce.

古文：帝怒，谓其毁诋大臣，失礼体，命左右批其颊。
现代文：世祖大怒，认为他在诋毁大臣，命左右掌嘴。
English: The patriarch flew into a rage, believing that he was slandering the minister, and lashed out.

古文：彻里辩愈力，且曰： 臣与桑哥无仇，所以力数其罪而不顾身者，正为国家计耳。
现代文：彻里更加极力辩解说 ：臣与桑哥无仇，之所以力数其罪而不顾自身安危，正是为了国家。
English: Cheri argued even more strenuously that he had no grudge against Sango, and that the reason why he counted his sins and did not care about his own safety was precisely for the sake of the country.

古文：苟畏圣怒而不复言，则奸臣何由而除，民害何由而息！
现代文：如果怕圣上发怒而不敢言，则奸臣何以能除，民害何以能息！
English: If you do not dare to speak out for fear of angering the emperor, then how can you get rid of treacherous vassals and stop the harm done to the people?

古文：且使陛下有拒谏之名，臣窃惧焉。 
现代文：且恐怕陛下会蒙拒谏之名。 
English: And I'm afraid your majesty will be denied the title of emperor.

古文：于是帝大悟，即命帅羽林三百人往籍其家，得珍宝如内藏之半。
现代文：世祖这才明白，即命他率羽林军三百人去抄桑哥的家，所抄出的珍宝多至朝廷府库所藏的半数。
English: It was only then that the patriarch understood that he had ordered him to lead three hundred men of the Ulin army to search Sango's home, and that the treasures he had extracted amounted to half of the treasures stored in the imperial treasury.

古文：桑哥既诛，诸枉系者始得释。
现代文：桑哥伏诛后，原被冤枉囚禁的人才得到释放。
English: After Sango's arrest, only those who had been wrongfully imprisoned were released.

古文：复奉旨往江南，籍桑哥姻党江浙省臣乌马儿、蔑列、忻都、王济，湖广省臣要束木等，皆弃市，天下大快之。
现代文：又奉旨到江南清查桑哥的姻党，计有江浙省臣乌马儿、蔑列、忻都、王济，湖广省臣要束木等，将他们斩首示众，大快人心。
English: He was also ordered to go to the south of the Yangtze River to investigate Sango's in-laws, including the Jiangsu and Zhejiang provincial ministers Umar, Zhirei, Shidu, Wang Ji, and the Hunan and Guangxi provincial minister Guo Sokmu, and they were beheaded in public, which greatly pleased the people.

古文：彻里往来，凡四道徐，皆过门不入。
现代文：彻里到江南往返四次经过徐州，都过家门而不入。
English: He has passed through Xuzhou four times on his way to the south of the Yangtze River, but he has never entered the city.

古文：进拜御史中丞，俄升福建行省平章政事，赐黄金五十两、白金五千两。
现代文：进拜御史中丞，不久，升为福建行省平章政事，赐黄金五十两、白金五千两。
English: He was given the title of Imperial Historian, and was soon promoted to the post of Governor of Fujian Province, and was awarded fifty taels of gold and five thousand taels of platinum.

古文：汀、漳剧盗欧狗久不平，遂引兵征之，号令严肃，所过秋毫无犯。
现代文：汀、漳人民以欧狗为首反叛元朝，久未平息。彻里引兵征讨，号令严肃，所过秋毫无犯。
English: The people of Ting and Yao revolted against the Yuan Dynasty, led by Oogu, and the rebellion has not subsided for a long time. Cheri led the army to recruit soldiers, and the order was serious, so there was no crime committed.

古文：有降者，则劳以酒食而慰遣之，曰： 吾意汝岂反者耶，良由官吏污暴所致。
现代文：有来投降者，则以酒食，对他们说 ：我想你们不是蓄意反对朝廷，而是由官吏的贪婪暴行迫使你们走上反叛道路。
English: Some of those who surrendered were wined and dined, and he said to them: "I do not think that you are deliberately opposing the imperial court, but that the greed and brutality of the officials have forced you to take the path of rebellion.

古文：今既来归，即为平民，吾安忍罪汝。
现代文：今既归来，也就是平民，我不忍加罪于你们。
English: Now that you have returned and are civilians, I cannot bear to punish you.

古文：其返汝耕桑，安汝田里，毋恐。 
现代文：你们回去从事农业，安于家乡，不要恐惧。 
English: Go back to farming, stay at home, and don't be afraid.

古文：他栅闻之，悉款附。
现代文：其他山寨闻知，都来归顺。
English: Other copycats of Wenzhi have all come to submit.

古文：未几，欧狗为其党缚致于军，枭首以徇，胁从者不戮一人，汀、漳平。
现代文：不久，欧狗被同党逮捕送于彻里军前，斩首示众，胁从者不杀一人，汀、漳之乱至此平息。
English: Not long after, Oogu was arrested by his fellow party members and sent to the front of the Cheri army, where he was beheaded in front of the public. He threatened his followers not to kill anyone, and the Ting and Zou Rebellion was thus quelled.

古文：三十一年，帝不豫，彻里驰还京师，侍医药。
现代文：至元三十一年，世祖病重，彻里赶回京师侍奉医药。
English: By the 31st year of the Yuan Dynasty, the ancestor was seriously ill, and Cheri rushed back to Beijing to serve medicine.

古文：帝崩，与诸王大臣共定策，迎立成宗。
现代文：帝崩，与诸王共同决定迎立成宗。
English: After the emperor's death, he and the other kings jointly decided to establish the Chengzong.

古文：大德元年，拜江南诸道行台御史大夫。
现代文：大德元年，拜彻里为江南诸道行台御史大夫。
English: In the first year of the Great Patriotic War, Baicheri was the chief historian of the Southern Jiangsu provinces.

古文：一日，召都事贾钧谓曰： 国家置御史台，所以肃清庶官、美风俗、兴教化也。
现代文：有天彻里召都事贾钧告诫说 ：国家设立御史台，是为了肃整吏治，美化风俗，兴办教育。
English: One day, Jia Wei, who was summoned to the capital, warned that the state had set up the imperial history platform in order to rectify the bureaucracy, beautify customs, and establish education.

古文：乃者御史不存大体，按巡以苛为明，征赃以多为功，至有迫子证父、弟证兄、奴讦主者。伤风败教，莫兹为甚。
现代文：往日，御史不顾大体，按巡以苛察为明，查获贪赃以多为功，甚至有迫使儿子证实父亲有罪，弟弟证实哥哥有罪，奴仆攻击主人，伤风败教，没有比这更厉害的了。
English: In the past, there was nothing more severe than the Imperial Historian disregarding the general situation, taking the strictness of inspection as the criterion, and the detection of corruption as the greatest merit, and even forcing the son to prove the guilt of his father, the brother to prove the guilt of his brother, the servant to attack the master, and the bad manners to fail to teach.

古文：君为我语诸御史，毋庸效尤为也。 
现代文：你去代我告诉诸御史，切莫效法这些人。 
English: Go and tell the sages on my behalf not to follow the example of these people.

古文：帝闻而善之，改江浙行省平章政事。
现代文：成宗知道连连称好。改任江浙行省平章政事。
English: Chengzong knew that Lianlian was good. He was transferred to Pingzhang Government of Jiangsu and Zhejiang Province.

古文：江浙税粮甲天下，平江、嘉兴、湖州三郡当江浙什六七，而其地极下，水钟为震泽。
现代文：该省税粮之多为全国之最，平江、嘉兴、湖州三郡的税粮又相当江浙全省的十分之六七。然而此三郡地势低下，诸水汇聚为震泽。
English: The amount of tax grain in this province is the highest in the country, and the tax grain in the three counties of Pingjiang, Jiaxing and Huzhou is equivalent to 67 tenths of the entire province of Jiangsu and Zhejiang.

古文：震泽之注，由吴松江入海。
现代文：震泽之水由吴松江入海。
English: The water from the quake flowed into the sea from the Wusong River.

古文：岁久，江淤塞，豪民利之，封土为田，水道淤塞，由是浸淫泛溢，败诸郡禾稼。
现代文：年深月久，江道淤塞。豪民图利，堆土造田，使水道不通。于是湖水渐渐增高，淹没诸郡庄稼。
English: For a long time, the river was silted up. The powerful people profited by piling up soil to create fields, making the waterway impassable. As a result, the lake water gradually rose, flooding the crops of the counties.

古文：朝廷命行省疏导之，发卒数万人，彻里董其役，凡四阅月毕工。
现代文：朝廷命行省征发民夫万人来疏河道，彻里监督其工程，费时四月而竣工。
English: The imperial court ordered the province to recruit and dispatch 10,000 people to dredge the river and supervise the project, which took four months to complete.

古文：九年，召入为中书平章政事。
现代文：大德九年，召彻里入朝为中书平章政事。
English: In the ninth year of the reign of Emperor Dezong, Zhaocherli was summoned to the imperial court for the political affairs of Pingzhang.

古文：十月，以疾薨，年四十七。
现代文：十年十月病逝，年四十七岁。
English: He died of illness in October of the same year, aged 47.

古文：薨之日，家资不满二百缗，人服其廉。
现代文：直到他寿终之时，其家产不满二百缗，人人敬服他一生廉洁奉公。
English: Until the end of his life, his family income was less than 200 baht, and everyone respected him for his life of integrity and public service.

古文：赠推忠守正佐理功臣、太傅、开府仪同三司、上柱国，追封徐国公，谥忠肃。
现代文：朝廷赠推忠守正佐理功臣、太傅、开府仪同三司、上柱国，追封徐国公，谥 忠肃 。
English: The imperial court rewarded the loyal guards with the titles of Zheng Sari, meritorious vassal, Taifu, Kaifu Yi, Tong San Shi, Shangzhu Guo, posthumously awarded the title of Xu Guogong, and conferred the title of Zhong Su.

古文：至治二年，加赠宣忠同德弼亮功臣、太师、开府仪同三司、上柱国，追封武宁王，谥正宪。
现代文：至治二年，加赠宣忠同德弼亮功臣、太师、开府仪同三司、上柱国，追封武宁王，谥 正宪 。
English: In the second year of his reign, he also bestowed the titles of Xuanzhongzhong, Dechengliangliang, Daishi, Kaifuyi, Sanzhi, Shangzhuang, Wu Ning Wang, and Zheng Xian.

古文：世祖尝欲观国子所书字，不忽木年十六，独书《贞观政要》数十事以进，帝知其寓规谏意，嘉叹久之。
现代文：不忽木一名时用，字用臣，世代为康里部大人，康里即汉代时之高车国。祖父名海蓝伯，曾为克烈王可汗效力。不忽木为燕真次子。不忽木英俊不凡，拜太子赞善王恂为师。后随王恂北征，又拜许衡为师。
English: His grandfather's name was Hai Lan Bo (海蓝伯) and he once served the King of Crees, Khan. He was the second son of Yan Zhen (燕真). He was very handsome and was taught by the prince Zanzan Wang Qian (赞善王). He later followed Wang Qian Bei Zheng (王北征) and was also taught by Bai Xu Heng (拜许衡).

古文：衡纂历代帝王名谥、统系、岁年，为书授诸生，不忽木读数过即成诵，帝召试，不遗一字。
现代文：许衡编纂历代帝王谥名、帝系、岁年等书为教授学生，不忽木读数遍即可背诵。十六岁时摘录《贞观政要》中数十事进呈世祖，帝知其意在借此规谏，赞叹不已。
English: Xu Heng, the compiler of books on emperors' names, imperial lineages, and years of reign, is a professor's student. He can recite them several times without skipping a beat. At the age of sixteen, he extracted dozens of things from "Zhenguan Zhengyao" and presented them to his ancestor. Tizhi was impressed by this and was full of praise.

古文：至元十三年，与同舍生坚童、太答、秃鲁等上疏曰：
现代文：至元十三年，与同学坚童、太答、秃鲁等上疏皇帝，大意是：
English: In the 13th year of the Yuan Dynasty, together with his classmates Jian Tong, Ta Ta, and Zhao Lu, he became the emperor of Shang Zhao.

古文：臣等闻之，《学记》曰： 君子如欲化民成俗，其必由学乎！ 
现代文：《学记》说： 君子如欲教化人民，淳化风俗，必由教学开始。 
English: "School Records" said: If a gentleman wants to enlighten the people and simplify customs, he must start with teaching.

古文： 玉不琢不成器，人不学不知道。 
现代文： 玉不琢不成器物，人不学不知道理。 
English: If you don't carve it, you can't make it.

古文：故古之王者，建国君民，教学为先。
现代文：故古代皇帝建国治民，以教育为先。
English: The late ancient emperor took education as the first step in founding a country and governing the people.

古文：盖自尧、舜、禹、汤、文、武之世，莫不有学，故其治隆于上，俗美于下，而为后世所法。
现代文：在尧、舜、禹、汤、文、武时代，莫不兴办学校，所以国家兴隆，风俗淳厚，成为后世效法的榜样。
English: In the Han, Song, Yu, Tang, Wen, and Wu eras, there was no alternative but to establish schools, so the country flourished, and the customs were profound, becoming a model for future generations to emulate.

古文：降至汉朝，亦建学校，诏诸生课试补官。魏道武帝起自北方，既定中原，增置生员三千，儒学以兴。
现代文：汉朝也建立起学校，魏道武帝从北方入主中原，兴办儒学，生员三千，这些都是历代皆有学校的证明。
English: The Han Dynasty also established schools, Emperor Wei Daowu entered the Central Plains from the north, established Confucianism, and had 3,000 students. These are all proofs that every generation had schools.

古文：此历代皆有学校之证也。
现代文：唐代更是大力发展教育，设国学、太学、四门学，校舍一千二百间，聘博士教授书、算。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, education was vigorously developed, with the establishment of the four schools of Chinese classics, Chinese classics, and the four schools of mathematics, with 1,200 school buildings, and the appointment of doctoral professors to teach literature and mathematics.

古文：臣等今复取平南之君建置学校者，为陛下陈之。晋武帝尝平吴矣，始起国子学。
现代文：高丽、百济、新罗、高昌、吐蕃诸国酋长也送子弟来学习，仅国学生员就有八千余人。唐高宗时，除原来三学之外，又增设律学、书学、算学。
English: The chiefs of Goryeo, Baekje, Silla, Gochang, and Tubo also sent their sons and daughters to study here, and there are more than eight thousand students from China alone. When Tang Gao was founded, in addition to the original three schools, law, calligraphy, and mathematics were added.

古文：隋文帝尝灭陈矣，俾国子寺不隶太常。
现代文：我元朝地大人多，非晋、隋、唐可比，然而教育尚未充分发展。
English: There were more adults in the Yuan dynasty than in the Jin, Sui and Tang dynasties, but education was not fully developed.

古文：唐高祖尝灭梁矣，诏诸州县及乡并令置学。
现代文：现在朝为官的人，蒙古人不多。
English: There are not many Mongolians serving as government officials now.

古文：及至太宗，数幸国学，增筑学舍至千二百间，国学、太学、四门学亦增生员，其书、算各置博士，乃至高丽、百济、新罗、高昌、吐蕃诸国酋长亦遣子弟入学，国学之内至八千余人。
现代文：若要多培养蒙古族人材，使他们通晓汉人的制度，必须像古代那样，各地多设学校，可先在大都广立国学，选蒙古在十五岁以下，十岁以上品质好的少年及百官子弟和平民子弟优秀者共百人入学，由官府供给衣食；选才德兼备能为师表者任司业、博士、助教。
English: If we want to train more Mongolian human resources and make them familiar with the Chinese system, we must, as in ancient times, set up more schools in various regions. We can first establish a national school in the capital, select a total of 100 Mongolian children under the age of 15, and 100 high-quality young people over the age of 10, as well as 100 officials' children and outstanding civilians' children, and provide them with food and clothing by the government. Select those who are able to serve as teachers and can serve as teachers, doctors, and teaching assistants.

古文：高宗因之，遂令国子监领六学：一曰国子学，二曰太学，三曰四门学，四曰律学，五曰书学，六曰算学，各置生徒有差，皆承高祖之意也。
现代文：课程设小学、法律、书法、算术四科。
English: The curriculum includes four subjects: elementary school, law, calligraphy, and arithmetic.

古文：然晋之平吴得户五十二万而已，隋之灭陈得郡县五百而已，唐之灭梁得户六十余万而已，而其崇重学校已如此。
现代文：老师讲解四书五经和修身、齐家、治国、平天下的道理。小学科令学生读诵经书及学习各种礼节；律科则培训学生将来做官的本领；书科专习书法、绘画；算科则使学生熟于算术。
English: The teacher explains the Four Books and Five Classics, as well as the principles of self-cultivation, family harmony, national governance, and peace. Elementary school students are required to read and recite scriptures and learn various etiquettes; law students are trained in the skills of future officials; calligraphy and painting are specialized in calligraphy; and arithmetic makes students proficient in arithmetic.

古文：况我堂堂大国，奄有江岭之地，计亡宋之户不下千万，此陛下神功，自古未有，而非晋、隋、唐之所敢比也。然学校之政，尚未全举，臣窃惜之。
现代文：一科通后再学另一种。
English: Learn one subject and then learn another.

古文：臣等向被圣恩，俾习儒学。
现代文：整个教育事业由国子学官总管，经常检查，奖勤罚懒，务使学有成效。
English: The entire educational cause is supervised by the chief education officer of the state, who regularly inspects, rewards and punishes laziness, and ensures that learning is effective.

古文：脱虎脱逃归以闻，帝曰： 不忽木素刚正，必尔辈犯法故也。 
现代文：数年学成之后，由学官保举，并提出：蒙古人为官应授与哪等品级，其他人能任何职。成绩不好，依旧在国子学继读学习，终不能成才者，三年后令退学。
English: After several years of study, he was promoted by the academic officer, and proposed: Mongolians should be awarded what grade for officials, and others can do any job. If the grades are not good, they are still studying at the Kuniko school, and if they can't become talented, they will be expelled from school after three years.

古文：继而燕南奏至，帝曰： 我固知之。 
现代文：大都学校兴办好后，然后在各郡县设立学校，以达到教育民众，淳化风俗之目的。
English: After the construction of most of the metropolitan schools is completed, schools will be set up in each county and county to achieve the goal of educating the public and simplifying customs.

古文：十九年，升提刑按察使。
现代文：世祖看了奏疏之后，甚是高兴。
English: The patriarch was very happy after watching the performance.

古文：有讼净州守臣盗官物者，净州本隶河东，特命不忽木往按之，归报称旨，赐白金千两、钞五千贯。
现代文：至元十四年授不忽木为利用少监，十五年任燕南河北道提刑按察副使，十九年升提刑按察使。在任按察使时，执法如山，刚直不阿，深得皇帝信任。
English: In the 14th year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was awarded the title of "Junior Inspector" for the use of wood. In the 15th year, he was appointed as the vice-commissioner of the Yan'an and Hebei Provincial Criminal Investigation Department, and in the 19th year, he was promoted to the position of the Criminal Investigation Department. When he was appointed as the Criminal Investigation Department, he enforced the law like a mountain, was upright, and won the deep trust of the emperor.

古文：二十一年，召参议中书省事。
现代文：至元二十一年，召不忽木回京任参议中书省事。
English: In the 21st year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was called back to Beijing to serve as a councillor.

古文：时榷茶转运使卢世荣阿附宣政使桑哥，言能用己，则国赋可十倍于旧。
现代文：榷茶转运使卢世荣附和宣政使桑哥，说若任用他，可使国家财政增收十倍。
English: Lu Shirong, the tea transporter, said that if he were appointed, he could increase the state's revenue tenfold.

古文：帝以问不忽木，对曰： 自昔聚敛之臣，如桑弘羊、宇文融之徒，操利术以惑时君，始者莫不谓之忠，及其罪稔恶著，国与民俱困，虽悔何及。
现代文：帝问不忽木此人如何。不忽木奏曰 ：自古聚敛之臣，如桑弘羊、宇文融等，都是自称善于理财，其实是欺君罔上，却表示自己是忠心耿耿；等到事情败露，罪恶昭彰，国家人民均受其害时，后悔莫及。
English: The emperor asked the woodcarver how he was. The woodcarver replied, "Since ancient times, the vassals who gathered together, such as Kuang Hongyang and Uwen Rong, have all claimed to be good at financial management, but in fact, they were deceiving the emperor, but they said they were loyal; when the matter was exposed, the evil became clear, and the people of the country were harmed, there was no time to regret.

古文：臣愿陛下无纳其说。 
现代文：希望陛下勿听他花言巧语。 
English: I hope His Majesty will not listen to his rhetoric.

古文：帝不听，以世荣为右丞，不忽木遂辞参议不拜。
现代文：世祖未采纳他的劝谏，任卢世荣为右丞，不忽木因此辞去参议之职。
English: The patriarch did not accept his advice, and appointed Lu Shirong as his right-hand man. As a result, Bu Quimu resigned from his position as councillor.

古文：二十二年，世荣以罪被诛，帝曰： 朕殊愧卿。 擢吏部尚书。
现代文：直到至元二十二年卢世荣以欺君枉法罪被诛之后，世祖才承认不忽木的意见是正确的，向他表示愧意，提升他为吏部尚书。
English: It was not until 22 years after Lu Shirong was arrested for the crime of defrauding the king and perverting the law, that the patriarch admitted that the opinion of not chopping down trees was correct, expressed his remorse to him, and promoted him to the post of secretary.

古文：丞相以其言入奏，帝悟，命不忽木鞫之，具得其实，散札儿等伏诛，其捕系者尽释之。
现代文：奸臣阿合马因罪没收其家财，其心腹爪牙张散札儿也应判处死刑。但他胡言乱供，连及无辜。世祖命不忽木审理此案，查明实情，散札儿处以死刑，受冤被捕者全部释放。
English: The treacherous vassal Ahma confiscated his family's wealth for the crime, and his henchman Zhang Sanjia should also be sentenced to death. However, he made a nonsense confession and was even innocent. The patriarch's order was to investigate the case, find out the truth, sentence Sanjia to death, and release all those who were wrongfully arrested.

古文：二十三年，改工部尚书。九月，迁刑部。
现代文：二十三年不忽木改任工部尚书，是年九月又调往刑部。
English: In 1923, Fuhuki was transferred to the Ministry of Works, and in September of the same year, he was transferred to the Ministry of Justice.

古文：河东按察使阿合马，以赀财谄媚权贵，货钱于官，约偿羊马，至则抑取部民所产以输。
现代文：河东按察使阿合马贿赂权贵，借贷官钱，到期搜括民间羊马偿还。被揭发后，朝廷派官员去审理，阿合马不肯伏法。
English: According to the inspector of Hedong, Ahma bribed the powerful, borrowed official money, and collected and reimbursed the people's sheep and horses. After being exposed, the court sent officials to investigate, and Ahma refused to obey the law.

古文：事觉，遣使按治，皆不伏，及不忽木往，始得其不法百余事。会大同民饥，不忽木以便宜发仓廪赈之。阿合马所善幸臣奏不忽木擅发军储，又锻炼阿合马使自诬服。
现代文：最后还是不忽木去查清其违法事百余件，阿合马伏诛。大同发生灾荒，不忽木开仓赈灾，阿合马党羽诬告不忽木擅自发放军备储粮，世祖说： 开仓赈灾是他的职责，何罪之有？ 
English: In the end, there were more than a hundred cases of illegal activities that needed to be investigated, including the arrest of Aaima. There was a natural disaster in Datong, and Aaima's party falsely accused him of distributing armaments and grain reserves without authorization. The patriarch said, "It was his duty to open warehouses and distribute grain. What was his crime?"

古文：帝曰： 使行发粟以活吾民，乃其职也，何罪之有。 
现代文：二十四年，桑哥奏立尚书省，分割中书省的权力，并诬杀参政杨居宽、郭佑。
English: In 1924, Sango So set up the Ministry of Education and Culture, divided the power of the Ministry of Education and Culture, and falsely killed Yang Ju Kuan and Guo You, both of whom were involved in politics.

古文：命移其狱至京师审视，阿合马竟伏诛。
现代文：不忽木为他们辩护，桑哥怀恨在心，借口令不忽木离职回家养病。
English: He defended them, but Sango held a grudge and ordered him to go home on the pretext that he was ill.

古文：二十七年，拜翰林学士承旨、知制诰兼修国史。
现代文：二十七年拜不忽木为翰林学士承旨、知制诰、兼修国史。
English: In the 27th year, Bai Fuhongmu graduated from the Hanlin College of Arts and Sciences with a bachelor's degree in philosophy, a master's degree in intellectual property, and a master's degree in national history.

古文：二十八年春，帝猎柳林，彻里等劾奏桑哥罪状，帝召问不忽木，具以实对。
现代文：二十八年，彻里等劾奏桑哥篡权及迫害参政杨居宽等人罪状，帝向不忽木问明实情，决意诛杀桑哥，撤销尚书省，再将六部划归于中书省，欲用不忽木为丞相。
English: In the 28th year, Cheri and others impeached Sango for usurpation of power and persecuted Yang Ju-Kuan and others who participated in politics. The emperor asked Negu Mu about the truth, decided to kill Sango, revoked Shangshu Province, and then transferred six provinces to Zhongshu Province, and wanted to use Negu Mu as the prime minister.

古文：帝大惊，乃决意诛之。罢尚书省，复以六部归于中书，欲用不忽木为丞相，固辞，帝曰： 朕过听桑哥，致天下不安，今虽悔之，已无及矣。朕识卿幼时，使卿从学，政欲备今日之用，勿多让也。 不忽木曰： 朝廷勋旧，齿爵居臣右者尚多，今不次用臣，无以服众。 
现代文：不忽木坚决推辞，荐举太子詹事完泽，说他不曾接受阿合马的贿赂，看清了桑哥为相必坏国家大事。于是拜完泽为丞相，不忽木为平章政事。元军初征交趾不利，世祖计划再次进讨，不忽木谏阻，建议先遣使去交趾，向新即位的国王日火尊讲明臣服于大元朝的好处，如能悔过称臣，则不须用兵，如不服再讨伐不晚。
English: Therefore, Bai Wan Ze became the prime minister, and Bai Mu became the governor of Pingzhang Province. The first draft of the Yuan army was unfavorable, and the ancestor planned to advance again, but Bai Mu was opposed, and suggested that the envoy should be sent ahead to the meeting, to explain to the newly enthroned King Sun Quan the benefits of submitting to the Yuan Dynasty. If you can repent of your allegiance, you do not need to use soldiers. If you do not accept, it is not too late to fight again.

古文：帝曰： 然则孰可？ 
现代文：果然，交趾惧怕，派昭明王等来元朝谢罪，献上六年来的贡物。
English: Sure enough, Koji was afraid and sent King Shomei and others to the Yuan Dynasty to offer thanks and pay tribute for the past six years.

古文：对曰： 太子詹事完泽可。
现代文：世祖高兴地对不忽木说 ：此卿一言之力也。 
English: The ancestor happily said to Fukurogi, "This gentleman is capable of saying just one word."

古文：向者籍没阿合马家，其赂遗近臣，皆有簿籍，唯无完泽名；又尝言桑哥为相，必败国事，今果如其言，是以知其可也。 帝曰： 然非卿无以任吾事。 
现代文：有人劝世祖征讨流求及在江南征收包银，均为不忽木谏止。桑哥及其党徒纳速剌丁被诛之后，世祖认为桑哥另一党徒忻都善于管理财政，打算释放。
English: After Sango and his party member Nahao Ding were arrested, the patriarch thought that Sango and another party member Nahao Ding were both good at managing finances and planned to release them.

古文：乃拜完泽右丞相，不忽木平章政事。
现代文：不忽木再三再四力争，终于将忻都正法。有人诬告右丞相完泽徇私，世祖问不忽木有无其事，不忽木要求与揭发人当面对质。
English: Someone falsely accused the chancellor of the right, Kanazawa, of slandering me. The ancestor asked if there was anything wrong with Kanazawa, and Kanazawa demanded a face-to-face confrontation with the informant.

古文：遂详论款陈，夜至四鼓，明日进膳，帝以盘珍赐之。三十年，帝不豫，故事，非国人勋旧不得入卧内。不忽木以谨厚，日视医药，未尝去左右。
现代文：弄清是不实之辞，世祖大怒，令左右将揭发人掌嘴轰出朝廷。世祖常对人称赞塞旃能干，不忽木问世祖何以见得，世祖说： 此人侍奉宪宗时，常常将内府财物拿出暗中来资助我。 不忽木说 ：这是为臣不忠的表现。如果今天有人将内府财物私自去结交亲王，陛下觉得此人怎样？ 世祖忙挥手说： 卿别说了，是朕失言。 至元三十年，世祖有病，按规定非蒙古昔日有功之臣不得入卧室，而不忽木因为人谨慎厚道，每日负责皇帝医药，寸步不离。
English: When it became clear that this was a lie, the patriarch flew into a rage and ordered that anyone who revealed the truth be thrown out of the imperial court. The patriarch often praised Saeki's ability to others. He asked the patriarch how he knew this. The patriarch said, "When this man served Kenzong, he often secretly took out properties from the Inner Palace to help me. He said, "This is a sign of disloyalty as a vassal. If someone were to use properties from the Inner Palace to make friends with the prince today, what would your majesty think of this person?" The patriarch waved his hand and said, "Sir, don't say that, it's

古文：帝大渐，与御史大夫月鲁那颜、太傅伯颜并受遗诏，留禁中。
现代文：帝病情加重，留不忽木与御史大夫月鲁那颜、太傅伯颜在宫中侍奉。
English: The emperor's condition worsened, and he was left to serve in the palace with the imperial historian, Yue Lunanyan, and the grand tutor, Bo Yan.

古文：丞相完泽至，不得入，伺月鲁那颜、伯颜出，问曰： 我年位俱在不忽木上，国有大议而不预，何耶？ 
现代文：丞相完泽求见也不准入，抱怨说： 论年龄、爵位我都在不忽木之上，为什么不能参预国家大事？ 
English: The chancellor, Kanazawa, was not allowed to enter when he sought an audience, and complained: "I am above the tree in terms of age and title, so why can't I participate in national events?

古文：伯颜叹息曰： 使丞相有不忽木识虑，何至使吾属如是之劳哉！ 
现代文：伯颜叹息道 ：如果你能有不忽木那样的见识，那就不会让我们如此操劳了。 
English: Mother-in-law sighed, "If you could have the insight of not chopping down trees, then we wouldn't have to work so hard."

古文：竟以与同列多异议，称疾不出。
现代文：世祖驾崩后，凡出殡、祭奠、定庙号等事，皆由不忽木主持。
English: After the death of the ancestor, all funerals, memorial services, temple names, etc. were presided over by Fu Kuki.

古文：元贞二年春，召至便殿曰： 朕知卿疾之故，以卿不能从人，人亦不能从卿也。
现代文：成宗即位，朝中大事多采纳不忽木的意见，太后也把不忽木当作先朝旧臣，十分尊重。执政奏请任不忽木为陕西行省平章政事，太后对成宗说： 不忽木为人正直，先皇帝将国事付托于他，岂能让他任京外官员？ 
English: When Emperor Chengzong ascended to the throne, most of the important events of the dynasty adopted the opinions of Neguangmu, and the empress dowager also highly respected Neguangmu as a former courtier of the previous dynasty. When the government invited Neguangmu to govern the province of Shaanxi, the empress dowager said to Emperor Chengzong: Neguangmu is an honest person. The first emperor entrusted the affairs of state to him. Can he be allowed to serve as an official outside Beijing?

古文：欲以段贞代卿，如何？ 不忽木曰： 贞实胜于臣。 
现代文：于是将他留京都任职。朝臣多有议论，不忽木因而称病不出。
English: As a result, he was left in office in Kyoto. There was much discussion among the courtiers, who said that he would not be able to work due to his illness.

古文：乃拜昭文馆大学士、平章军国重事。
现代文：元贞二年成宗任段贞为陕西行省平章政事，拜不忽木为昭文馆大学士、平章军国重事。
English: In the second year of Yuan Zhen, Cheng Zong appointed Duan Zhen to govern the province of Shaanxi and Pingzhang, and Baifu Qumu to be a scholar of the Shouwen Museum and Pingzhang to be in charge of military affairs.

古文：辞曰： 是职也，国朝惟史天泽尝为之，臣何功敢当此。 
现代文：不忽木辞谢曰 ：该职在我朝只有史天泽曾任过，臣何功敢当此重任。 
English: He did not hesitate to express his gratitude, saying, "Only Shi Tianze has held this post in my reign, how dare a minister take on such an important responsibility."

古文：制去 重 字。
现代文：成宗令去 平章军国重事 中的 重 字。
English: Chengzong ordered to go to Heizhang for military and national importance.

古文：大德二年，御史中丞崔彧卒，特命行中丞事。
现代文：大德二年，御史中丞崔卒，特命不忽木行中丞事。
English: In the second year of the Taide era, Choi, a junior high school student, was given the special mission of becoming a junior high school student.

古文：三年，兼领侍仪司事。
现代文：三年，兼管侍仪司事。
English: For three years, he also held the post of steward of ceremonies.

古文：世祖尝语之曰： 太祖有言，人主理天下，如右手持物，必资左手承之，然后能固。
现代文：四年，病复发而卒，年四十六岁。不忽木家本贫寒，为官后平时亦穿儒服，不好奢华。
English: Four years later, his illness relapsed and he passed away at the age of 46. Not surprisingly, the Moku family was poor, and since he was an official, he also wore a Confucian robe, which was not luxurious.

古文：卿实朕之左手也。 
现代文：其俸禄赏赐自给有余，用以救济亲朋好友。
English: He was awarded a salary that was more than enough to support himself and to help his relatives and friends.

古文：每侍燕间，必陈说古今治要，世祖每拊髀叹曰： 恨卿生晚，不得早闻此言，然亦吾子孙之福。 临崩，以白璧遗之，曰： 他日持此以见朕也。 
现代文：他善于识别人材，丞相哈剌哈孙答剌罕就是他推荐的。平时少言寡语，但在帝前论国家大事时，则引经据典，侃侃而谈，滔滔不绝，知无不言。世祖视他为左右手，临崩时送他白璧，说： 他日持此以见朕。 
English: He was good at identifying people. He recommended the prime minister, Hatsuhasun Tadahiro. Usually, he was a man of few words, but when discussing national affairs before the emperor, he would quote scriptures, speak eloquently, talk endlessly, and know nothing. The founder of the world regarded him as his right and left hand, and when he was dying, he gave him a white stone, saying, "This is how he sees me."

古文：完泽，土别燕氏。
现代文：完泽，姓土别燕氏。
English: Kanazawa, surname Tsuchibeyan.

古文：祖土薛，从太祖起朔方，平诸部。
现代文：祖父土薛，随太祖起兵于北方，平定诸部，统一大漠南北。
English: Grandfather Tu Xue, along with his great-grandfather, raised an army in the north, pacified the provinces, and unified the north and south of the desert.

古文：太宗伐金，命太弟睿宗由陕右进师，以击其不备，土薛为先锋，遂去武休关，越汉江，略方城而北，破金兵于阳翟。
现代文：太宗伐金，命太弟睿宗由陕右进军，攻其不备。以土薛为先锋，出武休关，渡过汉江，攻取方城以北之地，破金兵于阳翟。
English: Taizong cut gold, and ordered his younger brother Ruizong to march from the right side of Shaanxi Province to attack it. With Tu Xue as the vanguard, he went out of the army, crossed the Han River, captured the land north of Fangcheng, and broke the gold soldiers in Yangtze River.

古文：金亡，从攻兴元、阆、利诸州，拜都元帅。
现代文：金亡后，又随大军攻兴元、阆州、利州，升为都元帅。
English: After the death of Jin, he followed the great army to attack Xingyuan, Zhangzhou and Lizhou, and was promoted to Marshal of the Capital.

古文：取宋成都，斩其将陈隆之，赐食邑六百户。父線真，宿卫禁中，掌御膳。
现代文：攻取宋之成都，斩宋将陈隆之。父亲纟泉真，为宫中宿卫亲军，掌御膳。
English: He captured Song's Chengdu and beheaded Song general Chen Longzhi. His father, Zou Quanzhen, was a palace guard and served at the imperial table.

古文：中统初，从世祖北征。
现代文：中统初年，从世祖北征。
English: In the first year of China's reunification, the Northern Expedition began.

古文：四年，拜中书右丞相，与诸儒臣论定朝制。
现代文：四年，拜中书右丞相，与儒臣一起制定朝纲。
English: In the fourth year, he became the Minister of the Right, and together with Confucius, he formulated the morning program.

古文：完泽以大臣子选为裕宗王府僚属。
现代文：完泽因为是大臣之子，选为裕宗王府的僚属。
English: Because he was the son of a minister, Kanazawa was chosen as a retainer of the Yuzong royal court.

古文：裕宗为皇太子，署詹事长。入参谋议，出掌环卫，小心慎密，太子甚器重之。
现代文：裕宗为皇太子，任完泽为詹事长，入府参与机要，出府掌管卫军，小心谨慎，受到太子的非常器重。
English: Yu Zong was the crown prince, Ren Wan Zhe was Zhan's chief of staff, he entered the palace to participate in important matters, and left the palace to take charge of the guards, he was careful and cautious, and he was highly valued by the prince.

古文：一日会燕宗室，指完泽语众曰： 亲善远恶，君之急务。善人如完泽者，群臣中岂易得哉！ 
现代文：有天宴请宗室，皇太子指完泽对来宾说： 君子切切要亲善远恶。而善人之像完泽者，在群臣中岂是能容易得到的！ 
English: One day, at a banquet for his father's family, the crown prince said to his guests, "A gentleman must be kind and far from evil. However, among the courtiers, a person who is kind and far from evil is easy to obtain!"

古文：自是常典东宫卫兵。
现代文：从此以后，完泽常执掌东宫卫兵。
English: Since then, Kanazawa has often been in charge of the East Palace guards.

古文：裕宗薨，成宗以皇孙抚军北方，完泽两从入北。
现代文：裕宗死，成宗以皇孙奉诏去北方抚军，完泽两次随成宗北行。
English: After the death of Yu Zong, Cheng Zong sent an imperial edict to his grandson to go to the north to raise an army, and Guanzhe accompanied Cheng Zong to the north twice.

古文：至元二十八年，桑哥伏诛，世祖咨问廷臣，特拜中书右丞相。
现代文：至元二十八年，桑哥伏诛，世祖征求廷臣意见，特拜完泽为中书右丞相。
English: In the 28th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Sanguo Fuxi, the founder of the dynasty, solicited the opinion of courtiers, and Tebai Kanze became the chancellor of the imperial court.

古文：完泽入相，革桑哥弊政，请自中统初积岁逋负之钱粟，悉蠲免之，民赖其惠。
现代文：完泽任丞相，革除桑哥的弊政，奏请将自中统初年历年所欠的钱粮，完全免征，人民大受其惠。
English: The people greatly benefited from Kanze's appointment as prime minister, his elimination of Sango's bad policies, and his request that the money and grain owed from the first calendar year of China's unification be completely exempted from taxation.

古文：三十一年，世祖崩，完泽受遗诏，合宗戚大臣之议，启皇太后，迎成宗即位，诏谕中外，罢征安南之师，建议加上祖宗尊谥庙号，致养皇太后，示天下为人子之礼。
现代文：三十一年，世祖崩，完泽受遗诏，与宗戚大臣商议，启奏皇太后，迎成宗即位，诏谕全国，停止对安南的征讨，建议加上祖宗尊谥庙号，奉养皇太后，以向天下人表示人子之礼。
English: In the 31st year, the ancestor passed away, Kanazawa received the last will and testament, discussed with the minister of the relatives of the ancestor, performed the ceremony for the empress dowager, ushered Chengzong to the throne, issued an edict to the whole country, stopped the solicitation of Annan, suggested adding the name of the ancestor to the temple, and supported the empress dowager, in order to express the gift of the son of man to the people of the world.

古文：元贞以来，朝廷恪守成宪，诏书屡下散财发粟，不惜巨万，以颁赐百姓，当时以贤相称之。
现代文：元贞以来，朝廷遵守祖宗制定的典章制度，屡下诏书，将国家的数万钱粮颁赐百姓，所以当时人称完泽为贤相。
English: Since Yuan Zhen, the imperial court has adhered to the system of awards established by the ancestors, repeatedly issued decrees, and awarded tens of thousands of state money grain to the people, so at that time people called Wan Zhe a sage.

古文：大德四年，加太傅、录军国重事。
现代文：大德四年，加太傅、录军国重事，地位、威望更高，成宗更加依重于他。
English: In the four years of Dade, Ga Tai Fu and Luo Jun were in charge of important national affairs, with higher status and prestige, and Cheng Zong was more dependent on him.

古文：位望益崇，成宗倚任之意益重，而能处之以安静，不急于功利，故吏民守职乐业，世称贤相云。
现代文：而他却能处之泰然，不急功好利，故吏民守职乐业。
English: However, he was able to handle it calmly, and was not in a hurry to succeed, so the officials and the people kept their duties and enjoyed their work.

古文：七年薨，年五十八，追封兴元王，谥忠宪。
现代文：大德七年去世，终年五十八岁。追封兴元王，谥 忠宪 。
English: Dade died seven years later, at the age of fifty-eight. Emperor Xingyuan was exiled and Emperor Zhongxian was crowned.

古文：阿鲁浑萨理
现代文：阿鲁浑萨理，畏兀族人。
English: Aruhunsari, a member of the Hui ethnic group.

古文：至元十二年，入为释教都总统，拜正议大夫、同知总制院事，加资德大夫、统制使。年七十卒。
现代文：祖父阿台萨理在太祖定西域回来时，随蒙军至燕，后又西还，精于佛学。父乞台萨理，精通佛学之经、律、论三藏。至元十二年为佛教都总统，拜正议大夫、同知总制院事，又加资德大夫、统制使，年七十而卒。
English: When his grandfather, Ataisali, returned from the western region of Taizu Ding, he followed the Mongolian army to Yan, and later returned to the west, specializing in Buddhism. His father, Keitaisali, was well versed in the sutras, laws, and three collections of Buddhist studies. By the year 1200, he was the president of the Buddhist capital, and also served as the chief adviser to the emperor, the general secretary of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, and the general secretary of the Chinese Academy of Sciences. He passed away at the age of 70.

古文：子三人：长曰畏吾儿萨理，累官资德大夫、中书右丞、行泉府太卿；季曰岛瓦赤萨理；阿鲁浑萨理，其中子也，以父字为全氏，幼聪慧，受业于国师八哈思巴，既通其学，且解诸国语。
现代文：阿鲁浑萨理为乞台萨理的次子，幼聪敏，因其父一名 万全 ，因以全氏为姓。
English: Aruhun Sari is the second son of Kedai Sari, Ju Ju Min, because his father's name is Manquan, and because his surname is Maru.

古文：世祖闻其材，俾习中国之学，于是经、史、百家及阴阳、历数、图纬、方技之说皆通习之。后事裕宗，入宿卫，深见器重。
现代文：拜国师八哈思巴为师，不仅精通佛学，且知蒙古及其他国语言。世祖知阿鲁浑萨理为才子，令他学习中国汉学，所以他又通晓经、史、百家及阴阳、历算、图纬、方技之学。后侍奉裕宗，入宿卫军，日受器重。
English: He was a disciple of the national teacher, Hachasipha, and was not only proficient in Buddhist studies, but also knew Mongolian and other languages. The ancestor knew that Aruhunsari was a talented person, and made him study Chinese Sinology, so he was also familiar with the classics, history, hundreds of families and yin and yang, calendar, map and latitude, and the study of square techniques. He served as a retainer of Yu Zong, entered the lodge guard, and received a heavy weapon.

古文：帝问左右，谁可使者。侍臣脱烈对曰： 阿鲁浑萨理可。 
现代文：至元二十年，有西域僧人自称能知天文，但翻译都不懂天文，有人推荐阿鲁浑萨理。
English: In the 20th year of the Yuan Dynasty, there was a monk in the western region who claimed to know astronomy, but the translator did not understand astronomy. Someone recommended Aruhunsari.

古文：即召与论难，僧大屈服。帝悦，令宿卫内朝。
现代文：世祖召他与僧人辩论问答，僧人佩服其学问，世祖十分高兴，留在宫内任宿卫。
English: The patriarch called him to debate and answer questions with the monks, the monks admired his learning, and the patriarch was very happy to stay in the palace as a guard.

古文：会有江南人言宋宗室反者，命遣使捕至阙下。
现代文：有江南人说宋朝宗室谋反，朝廷派使去逮捕。
English: Some people from the south of the Yangtze River said that the imperial court sent an envoy to arrest Song Dynasty's family for plotting a rebellion.

古文：使已发，阿鲁浑萨理趣入谏曰： 言者必妄，使不可遣。 
现代文：阿鲁浑萨理忙上朝谏阻说 ：此话不确实，是谎言，不能派人去逮捕。 
English: Aruhunsari hurriedly went to the imperial palace to protest, saying, "This is not true, it is a lie, we cannot send someone to arrest you."

古文：帝曰： 卿何以言之？ 对曰： 若果反，郡县何以不知？
现代文：世祖问他何以知道是谎言，阿鲁浑萨理从容回答道： 如果宋宗室真的谋反，郡县为何不知。
English: The patriarch asked him how he knew it was a lie, and Aruhunsari calmly replied: If the Song family really plotted a rebellion, why didn't the county know?

古文：言者不由郡县，而言之阙庭，必其仇也。
现代文：谋反消息不由郡县上报，而是由一般人来报告朝廷，这必是公报私仇。
English: Conspiracy news is not reported by counties and counties, but by ordinary people to report to the imperial court. This must be a private vendetta.

古文：且江南初定，民疑未附，一旦以小民浮言辄捕之，恐人人自危，徒中言者之计。 
现代文：江南刚刚平定，人心未服，一旦听信小人谎言而逮捕宋宗室，恐因此人人自危，中造谣者之计。 
English: The south of the Yangtze River had just been pacified, but the people were not convinced. If they listened to the villain's lies and arrested Song Zongshu, they feared that everyone would be in danger, which was the plan of the rumor-mongers.

古文：帝悟，立召使者还，俾械系言者下郡治之，言者立伏，果以尝贷钱不从诬之。
现代文：世祖猛醒，立即召还使者，并令郡县审问那造谣生事的人，果然是因曾没借到钱而进行诬告。
English: The patriarch woke up violently, immediately called back the messenger, and ordered the county to interrogate the rumor-monger, who had indeed made a false accusation because he had not borrowed money.

古文：帝曰： 非卿言，几误，但恨用卿晚耳。 
现代文：世祖深有感慨地说： 若不是卿指出，几乎误事，但恨用卿晚了。 
English: The ancestor said with deep emotion: If it is not pointed out by the lord, it is almost a mistake, but it is too late to use the lord.

古文：自是命日侍左右。
现代文：自此以后，阿鲁浑萨理常侍奉于世祖左右。
English: From then on, Aruhunsa served around his ancestor.

古文：二十一年，擢朝列大夫、左侍仪奉御。
现代文：至元二十一年，升阿鲁浑萨理为朝列大夫、左侍仪奉御。
English: In the 21st year of the Yuan Dynasty, Aruhunsari was promoted to the position of doctor of the Imperial Court and served as the left attendant.

古文：遂劝帝治天下必用儒术，宜招致山泽道艺之士，以备任使。
现代文：阿鲁浑萨理劝世祖用儒术来治理天下，为此，应广招隐居深山江湖有学问的人，以备需要时任用。
English: Aruhunsari advised the founder of the world to use Confucianism to govern the world. To this end, people with knowledge who live in seclusion deep in the mountains and rivers should be widely recruited in case of need.

古文：帝嘉纳之，遣使求贤，置集贤馆以待之。
现代文：世祖采纳这一意见，遣使求贤，设立 集贤馆 。
English: The ancestor of the world adopted this opinion, sent an envoy to seek sages, and set up a collection of sages.

古文：帝怒曰： 汝欲使朕见而损之乎？十倍此以待天下士，犹恐不至，况欲损之，谁肯至者。 阿鲁浑萨理又言于帝曰： 国学人材之本，立国子监，置博士弟子员，宜优其廪饩，使学者日盛。 
现代文：世祖同意，但还是任阿鲁浑萨理为中顺大夫、集贤馆学士，并兼太史院事及左侍仪奉御。他又向世祖建议： 国学，人材之本，立国子监，置博士弟子员，对他们的待遇从优，使来学的人日多。 
English: The ancestor agreed, but still appointed Aruhunsari as the doctor of Zhongshun, the scholar of the hall of sages, and also served as the secretary of the academy of history and the left attendant. He also suggested to the ancestor: the study of Chinese, the source of human resources, the establishment of the state overseer, the appointment of doctoral disciples, the treatment of them is better, so that more people come to study.

古文：从之。
现代文：世祖允准。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：二十二年夏六月，迁嘉议大夫。
现代文：二十二年六月，升嘉议大夫。
English: In June 1922, he was promoted to the position of doctor of medicine.

古文：二十三年，进集贤大学士、中奉大夫。
现代文：二十三年，晋为集贤大学士、中奉大夫。
English: In 233, he was promoted to a scholar of Jixian University and a doctor of Zhongfeng University.

古文：二十四年春，立尚书省，桑哥用事，诏阿鲁浑萨理与同视事，固辞，不许，授资德大夫、尚书右丞，继拜荣禄大夫、平章政事。
现代文：至元二十四年春，设立尚书省，桑哥当权，世祖诏命阿鲁浑萨理一同视事。他力辞未准，授为资德大夫、尚书右丞。后又拜荣禄大夫、平章政事。
English: In the spring of the 24th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Shangshu Province was established, Sango was in power, and the patriarch ordered Aruhunsari to supervise the matter together. He did not give up, and was awarded the title of Zide Doctor and Shangshu Ujo. Later, he was awarded the title of Bai Ronglu Doctor and Pingzhang Political Affairs.

古文：桑哥为政暴横，且进其党与。
现代文：桑哥当政，专横跋扈，植党营私。
English: Sangho in power, domineering, party-building.

古文：阿鲁浑萨理数切诤之，久与乖剌，惟以廉正自持。
现代文：阿鲁浑萨理多次恳切劝诤，与桑哥不合，只有自持廉正。
English: Aruhunsari repeatedly and earnestly urged him not to go along with Sango, but to maintain his integrity.

古文：桑哥奏立征理司，理天下逋欠，使者相望于道，所在囹圄皆满，道路侧目，无敢言者。
现代文：桑哥奏请设立征理司，清理天下百姓所欠赋税。派出去征税的人相望于道，监狱中关满了被他们逮捕的平民，路上行人只相望而不敢交谈。
English: Sango asked for the establishment of a tax collection department to clear up the tax arrears of the people around the world. The people who were sent out to collect taxes looked at each other, the prisons were full of civilians arrested by them, and pedestrians on the road only looked at each other and did not dare to talk.

古文：会地震北京，阿鲁浑萨理请罢征理司，以塞天变。
现代文：恰逢北京发生地震，阿鲁浑萨理借此上书，奏请撤废征理司以回答上天的惩戒。
English: Coinciding with the earthquake in Beijing, Aruhunsari used this opportunity to write a letter, requesting the abolition of the Department of Revenue Collection to answer God's chastisement.

古文：诏下之日，百姓相庆。
现代文：朝廷撤废征理司诏书宣布之时，百姓奔走相庆。
English: When the imperial rescript announcing the abolition of the Conscription Office was issued by the Imperial Court, the people rushed to celebrate.

古文：未几，桑哥败，以连坐，亦籍其产。
现代文：不久，桑哥败，阿鲁浑萨理亦受到牵连，家产被没收。
English: Soon, Sango was defeated, Aruhunsari was also implicated, and the family property was confiscated.

古文：帝问： 桑哥为政如此，卿何故无一言？ 
现代文：世祖问他： 桑哥为政暴虐，卿为何不说一句话？ 
English: The patriarch asked him: Sango is a tyrant, why doesn't he say a word?

古文：桑哥临刑，吏犹以阿鲁浑萨理为问，桑哥曰： 我惟不用其言，故至于败，彼何与焉。 帝益信其无罪，诏还所籍财产，仍遣张九思赐以金帛，辞不受。
现代文：他回奏道 ：臣不是没有说过，只是未采纳我的意见而已。陛下正十分信任桑哥，而桑哥所忌恨的就是我。臣多次进谏都未听取，若再谏有如抱柴救火，只是使之更加暴虐，不如进行一些补救工作，使国家根本不受大的损害，久而久之，陛下自必明白。 世祖也认为只能这样，诏令归还所没收的财产，并遣张九思赐他金帛。阿鲁浑萨理辞谢不受。
English: He replied, "It's not that the minister didn't say it, it's just that he didn't accept my opinion. Your majesty is very trusting of Sango, and it's me that Sango hates. The minister didn't listen to me many times, and if it's like carrying firewood to put out a fire, but making it more violent, it's better to carry out some remedial work so that the country doesn't suffer much damage at all. Over time, your majesty will understand. The patriarch also thought that this was the only way, and ordered the return of the confiscated property, and sent Zhang Jiu Si to give him gold ingots.

古文：二十八年秋，乞罢政事，并免太史院使，诏以为集贤大学士。
现代文：二十八年秋，朝廷批准阿鲁浑萨理辞去平章政事和太史院的职务，但留任集贤大学士。
English: In the autumn of the 28th year, the Imperial Court approved Aruhunsari's resignation from the posts of the Taihaku Government and the Taihaku Academy of History, but he remained a member of the Jixian University.

古文：司天刘监丞言，阿鲁浑萨理在太史院时，数言国家灾祥事，大不敬，请下吏治。
现代文：司天监刘监丞奏，阿鲁浑萨理在太史院时，多次谈论国家灾祥事，是大不敬，请治罪。
English: When Liu Jianzheng, the chief overseer of heaven, and Aru Hunsari were at the Imperial Academy of History, they repeatedly talked about the national calamity, which was very disrespectful and should be punished.

古文：帝大怒，以为诽谤大臣，当抵罪。
现代文：世祖大怒，认为刘监丞是诽谤大臣，当治以诬告之罪。
English: The patriarch flew into a rage, believing that Liu Jiancheng had slandered the minister and should be punished for making a false accusation.

古文：阿鲁浑萨理顿首谢曰： 臣不佞，赖陛下天地含容之德，虽万死莫报。
现代文：阿鲁浑萨理忙叩头奏道： 臣不才，赖陛下含天容地之大德而蒙任用，虽万死莫报。
English: Aruhunsa quickly bowed his head and said, "I am not a minister, but I have been appointed by His Majesty because of his great virtue, including his good looks, and I will do my best."

古文：然欲致言者罪，臣恐自是无为陛下言事者。 
现代文：然要将指责我的人治罪，臣恐从今以后再没有人敢进谏了。 
English: However, I will punish those who accuse me. I fear that from now on, no one will dare to go to jail.

古文：力争之，乃得释。
现代文：经他的力争，刘监丞终被开释。
English: Through his efforts, Liu Jiancheng was eventually released.

古文：帝曰： 卿真长者。 后虽罢政，或通夕召入论事，知无不言。
现代文：后来阿鲁浑萨理虽不在其位，但若召他入朝论事，他总是知无不言，言无不尽。
English: Later, although Aruhunsari was not in his position, if he was summoned to the court to discuss a matter, he would always know everything and say everything.

古文：三十年，复领太史院事。
现代文：至元三十年，再度奉命主持太史院事。
English: In the 30th year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was again ordered to preside over the Tai Shi Academy.

古文：明年，帝崩，成宗在边，裕宗太后命为书趣成宗入正大位，又命率翰林、集贤、礼官备礼册命。
现代文：三十一年，世祖驾崩，这时成宗尚在北边，裕宗太后一面写信去催成宗回朝即位，一面命阿鲁浑萨理率翰林、集贤及礼官做新皇帝登基大典的准备工作。
English: In the 31st year of the founder's death, when Chengzong was still in the north, Empress Dowager Yu Zong wrote a letter to urge Chengzong to return to the throne, and ordered Aruhunsar to lead Hanlin, Ji Xian and etiquette officials to prepare for the new emperor's enthronement ceremony.

古文：明年春，加守司徒、集贤院使，领太史院事。
现代文：成宗即位后于元贞元年春，加阿鲁浑萨理为守司徒、集贤院使，主持太史院事。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Chengzong in the spring of the first year of the reign of Empress Yuan Zhen, Gaaru Hunsari was appointed as the guardian of scholars and the envoy of the Grand Historian to preside over the affairs of the Grand Historian.

古文：初，裕宗即世，世祖欲定皇太子，未知所立，以问阿鲁浑萨理，即以成宗为封，且言成宗仁孝恭俭，宜立，于是大计乃决，成宗及裕宗皇后皆莫之知也。
现代文：早在皇太子裕宗去世时，世祖欲再立皇太子，但不能决定立谁，询问阿鲁浑萨理。阿鲁浑萨理提出成宗，称赞他仁孝恭俭，应为太子。于是世祖决定立成宗。这件事成宗和裕宗皇后不知道。
English: As early as the time of the death of Crown Prince Yuzong, Shiso wanted to re-establish a crown prince, but could not decide whom to appoint, so he asked Aruhunsari. Aruhunsari proposed Chengzong, praising him for his benevolence, filial piety and frugality, and that he should be crown prince. So Shiso decided to establish Chengzong. This matter was unknown to Chengzong and Empress Yuzong.

古文：数召阿鲁浑萨理不往，成宗抚军北边，帝遣阿鲁浑萨理奉皇太子宝于成宗，乃一至其邸。
现代文：成宗在北边抚军，世祖遣阿鲁浑萨理奉皇太子大印送给成宗。这是他第一次到成宗府邸。
English: Chengzong was in the north, raising an army. The patriarch sent Aruhunsari to present the crown prince's seal to Chengzong. This was the first time he had been to Chengzong's residence.

古文：及即位，语阿鲁浑萨理曰： 朕在潜邸，谁不愿事朕者，惟卿虽召不至，今乃知卿真得大臣体。 
现代文：成宗即位后对阿鲁浑萨理说： 朕即位之前，谁人不想来巴结我，只有卿虽召请也不肯来，今天朕才知卿真正有大臣的体统。 
English: After Chengzong's accession to the throne, he said to Arughunsari: "Before I ascended the throne, who would not want to flatter me? Only you would not come even though you were invited. Today, I know that you truly have the dignity of a minister.

古文：自是召对不名，赐坐视诸侯王等。
现代文：从此以后，成宗召他问话，不呼其名，赐坐，与诸侯王地位相当。
English: From then on, Chengzong summoned him for questioning, did not call his name, and gave him a seat, which was equivalent to the status of a prince.

古文：尝语左右曰： 若全平章者，真全材也，于今殆无其比。 
现代文：并常对左右说： 像全平章这样的人，是真正全材，今天几乎无人可以同他相比。 
English: And he often said to the right and left: A person like Quan Binzhang is a true all-rounder, and today almost no one can compare with him.

古文：大德三年，复拜中书平章政事。
现代文：大德三年，复拜为中书平章政事。
English: In the third year of the reign of Emperor Taide, the political affairs of Pingzhang were revived.

古文：十一年，薨，年六十有三。
现代文：大德十一年去世，享年六十三岁。
English: Dade died eleven years later, at the age of sixty-three.

古文：延祐四年，赠推忠佐理翊亮功臣、太师、开府仪同三司、上柱国，追封赵国公，谥文定。
现代文：延四年，赠推忠佐理翊亮功臣、太师、开府仪同三司、上柱国，追封赵国公，谥 文定 。
English: It was extended for another four years, and awarded the title of Zhao Guogong and the posthumous title of Wenjing.

古文：岳柱字止所，一字兼山。
现代文：有子三人：长子岳柱，次子久著，三子买住。岳柱是阿鲁浑萨理长子，字止所，一字兼山。
English: They had three children: the eldest son, Yue Zhu, the second son, Jiuzhuang, and the third son, Guanzhong. Yue Zhu was the eldest son of Aruhunsari, and his family name was "Zhishang" (止所) and "Yanshan" (兼山).

古文：自幼容止端严，性颖悟，有远识。
现代文：自幼容貌言行端庄，禀性聪敏，有远见卓识。
English: Since childhood, his appearance, speech, and behavior have been dignified, he is stubborn, intelligent, and far-sighted.

古文：方八岁，观画师何澄画《陶母剪发图》，岳柱指陶母手中金钏诘之曰： 金钏可易酒，何用剪发为也？ 
现代文：八岁观画师何澄画的《陶母剪发图》，岳柱指陶母手上的金镯子说 ：金镯子可以换酒，何用剪发卖钱？ 
English: Eight-year-old visual artist He Cheng painted "Ceramic Mother's Haircut," Yue Zhu pointed to the gold braid on the mother's hand and said: "The gold braid can be exchanged for wine, why use haircuts to sell money?"

古文：何大惊，即异之。
现代文：何澄大惊，认为他与众不同。
English: He Cheng was shocked and thought he was different.

古文：既长就学，日记千言。
现代文：长大入学，能日记千言。
English: He grew up and went to school, and can write a thousand words in his diary.

古文：年十八，从丞相答失蛮备宿卫，出入禁中，如老成人。至大元年，授集贤学士，阶正议大夫，即以荐贤举能为事。
现代文：十八岁时随丞相答失蛮入宫为宿卫。至大元年授集贤学士，官阶正议大夫，以荐贤举能为己任。
English: At the age of eighteen, he entered the Imperial Palace as an attendant of the chancellor, and in the first year of the Taisho era, he was awarded the title of "Bachelor of Virtue" and the official rank of "Doctor of Law" and was able to fulfill his duties by recommending virtuous people.

古文：皇庆元年，升中奉大夫、湖南道宣慰使。日接见儒生，询求民瘼。
现代文：皇庆元年，升中奉大夫、湖南道宣慰使，每日接见儒生，向他们访察民间疾苦。
English: In the first year of the Emperor's reign, the newly-promoted middle school doctor and the consoler of Hunan Province met with Confucian students every day and visited them to see the hardships of the people.

古文：延祐三年，进资善大夫、隆禧院使。
现代文：延三年进资善大夫、隆禧院使。
English: In the third year of extension, he became a good doctor and an envoy of Longxi Hospital.

古文：七年，授太史院使。
现代文：七年，授太史院使。
English: In the seventh year, he was appointed as an envoy to the Imperial Academy of History.

古文：英宗视其进止整暇，顾谓参政速速曰： 全院使真故家令子也。 泰定元年，改太常礼仪院使。
现代文：泰定元年改任太常礼仪院使。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taizong, he was reappointed as the envoy of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：四年，授礼部尚书，领会同馆事，俄授江西等处行中书省参知政事。
现代文：四年，授礼部尚书，主持会同馆事。不久又授江西等处行中书省参知政事。
English: In four years, he was awarded the title of Shangshu in the awarding department, presided over the affairs of the association and the museum. Soon he was awarded the title of Jiangxi and other provinces, and became the governor of the province.

古文：天历元年，进荣禄大夫、集贤大学士。
现代文：天历元年，进荣禄大夫、集贤大学士。
English: In the first year of the calendar, Jin Ronglu became a doctor and a scholar of Jixian University.

古文：至顺二年，除江西等处行中书省平章政事。
现代文：至顺二年，任江西等处行中书省平章政事。
English: Until the second year of Shun, he was appointed as the governor of Jiangxi Province and other provinces.

古文：时有诬告富民负永宁王官帑钱八百余锭者，中书遣使诸路征之。使至江西，岳柱曰： 事涉诬罔，不可奉命。 
现代文：有人诬告富民欠永宁王官钱八百余锭，中书省派人去征收。使臣到了江西，岳柱说这是诬告，不能奉命执行。
English: Someone falsely accused Fumin of owing more than 800 baht to a Yongning official, and the Ministry of Literature sent someone to collect the money. When the envoy arrived in Jiangxi, Yue Zhu said that this was a false accusation and could not be carried out as ordered.

古文：僚佐重违宰臣意，岳柱曰： 民惟邦本，伤本以敛怨，亦非宰相福也。 
现代文：还说： 人民是国家根本，伤本就会激起人民的怨恨，也不是宰相之福。 
English: He also said, "The people are the foundation of the country. If you hurt the foundation, you will arouse the resentment of the people. This is not a blessing for the prime minister."

古文：令使者以此意复命。
现代文：命使臣把这话去转告朝廷。
English: He ordered an envoy to convey this to the imperial court.

古文：时燕帖木儿为丞相，闻其言，感悟，命刑部诘治，得诬罔状，罪诬告者若干人。
现代文：当时，燕帖木儿为丞相，闻岳柱之言才醒悟，命刑部审问告状者，弄清果是诬告。
English: At that time, Yan Timur was the chancellor, and it was only after he heard Yue Zhu's words that he realized that the Ministry of Justice should interrogate the complainant to find out if it was a false accusation.

古文：桂阳州民张思进等，啸聚二千余众，州县不能治，广东宣慰司请发兵捕之。岳柱曰： 有司不能抚绥边民，乃欲侥幸兴兵，以为民害耶？
现代文：桂阳州百姓张思进等聚众二千余人对抗官府，广东宣慰司请发兵去逮捕，岳柱说： 当地官府不能安抚边民，还要兴兵，是要害民吗？
English: Guiyang people Zhang Sijin and others gathered more than two thousand people to oppose the government, Guangdong Xuan comfort Division please send troops to arrest, Yue Zhu said: The local government can not appease the border people, but also raise troops, is it to harm the people?

古文：不可。 
现代文：不能派兵。 
English: This battle cannot be fought alone.

古文：谕其众，皆使复业，一方以宁。三年，迁河南江北等处行中书省平章政事。
现代文：他派千户王英去向张思进等讲明利害祸福。抗拒官府的百姓说 ：迫使我们反抗官府者只是两巡检司，我等怎敢有异心。 大家复业。三年，调任河南江北等处行中书省平章政事。
English: He sent Wang Ying of the Thousand Households to explain to Zhang Sijin and others the benefits and harms. The people who resisted the government said: The only people who forced us to resist the government were the two inspectors, how dare we have a different heart. Everyone resumed their careers. Three years later, he was transferred to Pingzhang Political Affairs of the Central Government of the People's Republic of China.

古文：旋以军事至扬州，得疾，明年十二月，端坐而卒，年五十三。
现代文：不久，因军事至扬州。第二年十二月病卒，年五十三岁。
English: Soon, he went to Yangzhou for military reasons. He died of illness in December of the following year, at the age of 53.

古文：岳柱天资孝友，母弟久住早卒，丧之尽哀。
现代文：岳柱天资孝友，尤其好读经、史，天文、医药之书，无不深入研究。
English: Yuezhu's natural endowment of filial piety, especially good at reading the Bible, history, astronomy, medicine books, all in-depth research.

古文：度量弘扩，有欺之者，恬不为意。
现代文：度量广大，有人欺他，他不在意。有子四人。
English: He is very generous. If someone cheats him, he doesn't care. He has four children.

