古文：一曰：季春之月，日在胃，昏七星中，旦牵牛中，其日甲乙，其帝太皞，其神句芒，其虫鳞，其音角，律中姑洗，其数八，其味酸，其臭膻，其祀户，祭先脾。
现代文：季春于天干属甲乙，它的主宰之帝是太皞，佐帝之神是句芒，应时的动物是龙鱼之类的鳞族，声音是中和的角音，音律与姑洗相应。这个月的数字是八，味道是酸味，气昧是膻气，要举行的祭祀是户祭，祭祀时，祭品以脾脏为尊。
English: Qichun belongs to the root of heaven and earth, and its ruling emperor is Taiyu, the god of Zotei is Jumang, the corresponding animal is a dragonfish-like squid, the sound is a neutral horn sound, and the rhythm corresponds to the purification. The number of this month is eight, the taste is sour, the temperament is salty, and the sacrifice to be held is a house sacrifice. During the sacrifice, the sacrifice is made of the spleen.

古文：桐始华，田鼠化为鴽，虹始见，萍始生。
现代文：这个月梧桐树开始开花，鼹鼠变成鹌鹑之类的鸟，彩虹开始出现，浮萍开始长出。
English: Wotan began to bloom, voles changed into small birds like cranes, a rainbow began to appear in the sky, and duckweed began to grow in the water.

古文：天子居青阳右个，乘鸾辂，驾苍龙，载青旗，衣青衣，服青玉，食麦与羊，其器疏以达。
现代文：天子居住在东向明堂的右侧室，乘坐饰有用青凤命名的响铃的车子，车前驾着青色的马，车上插着绘有龙纹的青色旗帜，天子穿着青色的衣服，佩戴着青色的饰玉，吃的食物是麦子和羊，使用的器物纹理空疏而通达。
English: Tianzi lives in a room on the right side of Dongxiangming Hall. He rides in a car decorated with a bell named after Qingfeng. A blue horse is driven in front of the car, and a blue flag with a dragon pattern is placed on the car. Tianzi wears blue clothes and wears blue decorative beads. The food he eats is wheat and sheep. The utensils he uses are sparse and transparent.

古文：是月也，天子乃荐鞠衣于先帝，命舟牧覆舟，五覆五反，乃告舟备具于天子焉。天子焉始乘舟。
现代文：这个月，天子向太皞等先帝进献桑黄色的衣服，祈求蚕事如意，命令主管船只的官吏把船底翻过来检查，船底船身要反复检查五次，才向天子报告船只已经齐备。天子干是开始乘船。
English: This month, the heavenly son presented mulberry-yellow clothes to the former emperors such as Taiko, prayed for good luck, and ordered the officials in charge of the ships to turn over the bottom of the ship and check it. The bottom of the ship and the hull of the ship had to be checked five times before they reported to the heavenly son that the ships were ready. The heavenly son began to take the boat.

古文：荐鲔于寝庙，乃为麦祈实。
现代文：向祖宗进献鲟鱼，来祈求麦子籽实饱满。
English: Offer trout to the ancestors to pray for the fullness of the wheat seeds.

古文：是月也，生气方盛，阳气发泄，生者毕出，萌者尽达，不可以内。
现代文：这个月，春天的生养之气正盛，阳气向外发散，植物的萌芽部长出来了。这个时候，不能收纳财货。
English: This month, the vitality of spring is in full bloom, the yang is spreading outward, and the buds of plants are sprouting. At this time, it is not possible to store goods.

古文：天子布德行惠，命有司发仓窌，赐贫穷，振乏绝，开府库，出币帛，周天下，勉诸侯，聘名士，礼贤者。
现代文：天子要施德行惠，命令主管官吏打开粮仓地窖，赐与贫困没有依靠的人，赈救缺乏资用衣食的人，又打开储藏财物的仓库，拿出钱财，赈济天下；鼓励诸侯聘用名士，对贤人以礼相待。
English: In order to bestow virtue and benefit, the Son of Heaven ordered the officials in charge to open the granaries and cellars, to give to the poor who had no means of support, and to rescue those who lacked money, clothing, and food. He also opened the storehouses where the wealth was stored, and took out the money and wealth to help the world. He encouraged the lords to employ celebrities, and treated the wise with courtesy.

古文：是月也，命司空曰： 时雨将降，下水上腾，循行国邑，周视原野，修利堤防，导达沟渎，开通道路，无有障塞；田猎罼弋，罝罘罗网，喂兽之药，无出九门。 
现代文：这个月，天子命令司空说：应时的雨水将要降落，地下水也将向上翻涌，应该巡视国都和城邑，普遍地视察原野，整修堤防，疏通沟渠，开通道路，使之役有障碍壅塞。打猎所需要的各种网具和毒药不能带出城去。
English: This month, the Son of Heaven ordered Sifu to say: the timely rain will fall, and the groundwater will also surge upward. It is necessary to inspect the capital and cities, generally inspect the fields, repair the dikes, clear the ditches, and open the roads to make them useful. Various nets and poisons needed for hunting cannot be taken out of the city.

古文：是月也，命野虞无伐桑柘。
现代文：这个月，命令主管山林的官吏禁止人们砍伐桑树、柘树。
English: This month, officials in charge of mountain forests were ordered to prohibit people from cutting down mulberry and eucalyptus trees.

古文：鸣鸠拂其羽，戴任降于桑，具栚曲筐。
现代文：此时，鸣鸠振翅高飞，戴任落在桑间。
English: At this time, the chirping cormorants were flying high, and Dai Ren fell among the mulberry trees.

古文：后妃斋戒，亲东乡躬桑。
现代文：人们准备蚕薄，放蚕薄的支架以及各种采桑的筐篮。
English: People are preparing silkworm cocoons, silkworm cocoons and various baskets for harvesting mulberry.

古文：禁妇女无观，省妇使，劝蚕事。
现代文：王后王妃斋戒身心，面向东方亲自采摘桑叶。
English: The empress dowager fasted mentally and physically, facing the east to personally pick mulberry leaves.

古文：蚕事既登，分茧称丝效功，以共郊庙之服，无有敢堕。
现代文：这时要禁止妇女去游玩观赏，同时减少她们的杂役，鼓励她们采桑养蚕。
English: At this time, women should be prohibited from playing and watching, while reducing their chores and encouraging them to collect mulberry and raise silkworms.

古文：是月也，命工师令百工审五库之量，金铁、皮革筋、角齿、羽箭干、脂胶丹漆，无或不良。
现代文：蚕事已经完成，把蚕茧分给妇女，要她们缫丝，然后称量每人所缫之丝的轻重，考核她们的功效，用这些蚕丝来供给祭天祭祖所用祭服的需要，不许有人懈怠。这个月，命令主管百工的官吏让百工仔细检查各种库房中器材的数量和质量，金铁、皮革兽筋兽角兽齿，羽毛箭秆、油脂粘胶丹砂油漆，不得质地不好。
English: The silkworm business has been completed. The silkworm cocoons have been divided among the women, and they are asked to spin the silk. Then, the weight of the silk cocooned by each person is weighed, and their efficacy is assessed. These silk cocoons are used to supply the needs of the sacrificial clothing used by the ancestors of the heavenly sacrifice. No one is allowed to slack off. This month, the official in charge of the hundred craftsmen ordered the hundred craftsmen to carefully check the quantity and quality of the equipment in various warehouses. Gold iron, leather animal sinews, animal horns, animal teeth, feather arrowheads, grease and viscose sand paint,

古文：百工咸理，监工日号，无悖於时，无或作为淫巧，以荡上心。
现代文：各种工匠都从事自己的工作，监督百工的官员每日发布号令，使所制器物不违背时宜，不得制作过分奇巧的器物来勾动在上位者的奢望。
English: All kinds of craftsmen are engaged in their own work, and the officials who supervise the hundreds of craftsmen issue daily orders to ensure that the products made do not go against the times, and must not make excessively ingenious products to lure the extravagant expectations of those in power.

古文：是月之末，择吉日，大合乐，天子乃率三公、九卿、诸侯、大夫，亲往视之。
现代文：这个月的月末，选择吉日，大规模地鞋行音乐舞蹈合演，天子亲自率领三公九卿诸侯大夫前去观看。
English: At the end of this month, the auspicious day was chosen for a large-scale shoe-making, music and dance performance. The emperor himself led the three princes and nine noblemen to watch.

古文：是月也，乃合累牛、腾马、游牝于牧。牺牲驹犊，举书其数。
现代文：这个月，使公牛公马与母牛母马在放牧中交配，把选作祭品的牲畜和马驹牛犊，都记下它们的头数。
English: This month let the male ox and the female cow and the male horse be mated in the open pasture, and let the number of the head of the beast and of the he-goat, which are to be offered as a sacrifice, be recorded.

古文：国人傩，九门磔禳，以毕春气。
现代文：国人举行驱逐灾疫的傩祭，在九门宰割牲畜攘除邪恶，以此来结束春气。
English: The Chinese people held a holocaust to drive out the plague and slaughtered livestock in Jiumen to drive out the evil, thus ending the Spring Festival.

古文：行之是令，而甘雨至三旬。
现代文：推行与逸个月的时夸相应的政令，及时雨就会降落，三旬降落三次。
English: The implementation of the government decree corresponding to the time scale of the leap month, the rain will fall in time, and the rain will fall three times in the third quarter.

古文：季春行冬令，则寒气时发，草木皆肃，国有大恐；行夏令，则民多疾疫，时雨不降，山陵不收；行秋令，则天多沈阴，淫雨早降，兵革并起。
现代文：季春实行应在冬天实行的政令，那么，寒气就会时时发生，草木就会枝叶萧球，人民就会惶恐不安；如果实行应在夏天实行的政令，那么，人民中间就会流行瘟疫，应时之雨就不能按时降落，山陵上的庄稼就不能成熟收获。如果实行应在秋天实行的政令，那么，天气就会经常阴晦，淫雨就会过早降落，战事就会到处发生。
English: If the government order that should be implemented in winter is implemented in the spring, then cold weather will occur from time to time, the plants will die, and the people will be anxious; if the government order that should be implemented in summer is implemented, then the plague will spread among the people, the timely rain will not fall on time, and the crops in the mountains will not be ripe for harvest. If the government order that should be implemented in autumn is implemented, then the weather will be often gloomy, the rain will fall prematurely, and wars will occur everywhere.

古文：二曰：天生阴阳、寒暑、燥湿、四时之化、万物之变，莫不为利，莫不为害。
现代文：尽数天生出阴阳，寒暑、燥湿、以及四时的更替、万物的变化，没有一样不给人带来益处，也没有一样不对人产生危害。
English: No matter how many yin and yang, hot and cold, wet and dry, and four o'clock changes, changes in all things, there is nothing that does not bring benefits to people, and there is nothing that does not cause harm to people.

古文：圣人察阴阳之宜，辨万物之利以便生，故精神安乎形，而年寿得长焉。
现代文：圣人能洞察阴阳变化的合宜之处，能辨析万物的有利一面，以利于生命，因此，精、神安守在形体之中，寿命能够罅长久。
English: A sage is able to discern the proper place of yin and yang changes, and can discern the beneficial side of all things to benefit life. Therefore, the spirit and the divine are safe in the body, and the life span can be long.

古文：长也者，非短而续之也，毕其数也。
现代文：所谓长久，不是说寿命本来短而使它延长，而是使寿命终其天年。
English: The so-called long-term, not to say that life is short and make it longer, but to make life last forever.

古文：毕数之务，在乎去害。
现代文：终其天年的关键在于避开危害。
English: The key to long-term survival is to avoid harm.

古文：何谓去害？
现代文：什幺叫避开危害?
English: What does it mean to avoid harm?

古文：大甘、大酸、大苦、大辛、大咸，五者充形则生害矣。
现代文：过甜、过酸、过苦、过辣，过咸，这五种东西充满形体，那么生命就受到危害了。
English: Too sweet, too sour, too bitter, too spicy, too salty, these five things fill the body, and life is endangered.

古文：大喜、大怒、大忧、大恐、大哀，五者接神则生害矣。
现代文：过喜、过怒、过忧、过恐、过哀，这五种东西和精神交接，那么生命就受到危害了。
English: Overjoy, anger, worry, fear, and sorrow, these five things are intertwined with the spirit, so life is endangered.

古文：大寒、大热、大燥、大湿、大风、大霖、大雾，七者动精则生害矣。
现代文：过冷、过热、过燥、过湿、过多的风、过多的雨、过多的雾，这七种东西摇动人的精气，那么生命就受到危害了。
English: Too cold, too hot, too dry, too wet, too much wind, too much rain, too much fog, these seven things shake the human spirit, then life is endangered.

古文：故凡养生，莫若知本，知本则疾无由至矣。
现代文：所以，凡是养生，没有比懂得这个根本再重要的了，懂得了根本，疾病就无从产生了。
English: Therefore, when it comes to health, there is nothing more important than understanding this fundamental. Once you understand it, there is no way for disease to occur.

古文：精气之集也，必有入也。
现代文：精气聚集在一起，一定要有所寄托。
English: The energy gathered together, must have something to rest on.

古文：集於羽鸟，与为飞扬；集於走兽，与为流行；集於珠玉，与为精朗；集於树木，与为茂长；集於圣人，与为夐明。
现代文：聚集在飞禽上，便表现为飞翔，聚集在走兽上，便表现为行走；聚集在珠玉上，便表现为精美，聚集在树木上，便表现为繁茂，聚集在圣人身上，便表现为聪明睿智。
English: Concentrated on birds, it manifests as flying; concentrated on beasts, it manifests as walking; concentrated on jewels, it manifests as exquisite; concentrated on trees, it manifests as luxuriant; concentrated on saints, it manifests as clever and wise.

古文：精气之来也，因轻而扬之，因走而行之，因美而良之，因长而养之，因智而明之。
现代文：精气到来，依附在轻盈的形体上就使它飞翔，依附在可以跑动的形体上就使它行走，依附在具有美好特性的形体上就使它精美，依附在具有生长特性的形体上就使它繁茂，依附在具有智慧的形体土就使它聪明。
English: When the spirit arrives, it attaches itself to a light body to make it fly, to a body that can run to make it walk, to a body with beautiful characteristics to make it beautiful, to a body with growth characteristics to make it grow, and to a body with wisdom to make it wise.

古文：流水不腐，户枢不蠹，动也。
现代文：流动的水不会腐恶发臭，转动的门轴不会生虫朽烂，这是由于不断运动的缘故。
English: Flowing water will not rot and stink, and the rotating door shaft will not rot and rot, which is due to continuous movement.

古文：形气亦然。
现代文：人的形体、精气也是这样。
English: The same is true of the human body and spirit.

古文：形不动则精不流，精不流则气郁。
现代文：形体不活动，体内的精气就不运行，精气不运行，气就滞积。
English: If the body is not active, the energy in the body will not flow, and if the energy does not flow, the energy will stagnate.

古文：郁处头则为肿、为风，处耳则为挶、为聋，处目则为䁾、为盲，处鼻则为鼽、为窒，处腹则为张、为疛，处足则为痿、为蹶。
现代文：滞积在头部就造成肿病、风疾，滞积在耳部就造成挶疾、聋疾，滞积在眼部就造成蔑疾、盲疾，滞积在鼻部就造成鼽疾，窒疾，滞积在腹部就超成胀疾、舟疛，滞积在脚部就造成痿疾、蹶疾。
English: The accumulation in the head will cause swelling and wind disease, the accumulation in the ear will cause deafness and deafness, the accumulation in the eye will cause blindness and blindness, the accumulation in the nose will cause boils and boils, the accumulation in the abdomen will cause bloating and boils, and the accumulation in the foot will cause boils and boils.

古文：轻水所，多秃与瘿人；重水所，多尰与躄人；甘水所，多好与美人；辛水所；多疽与痤人；苦水所；多尪与伛人。
现代文：水中含盐分及其它矿物质过少的地方，多有头上无发和颈上止痛的人，水中含盐分及其它矿物质过多的地方，多有脚肿和痿躄不能行走的人；水味甜美的地方，多有美丽和睦康的人，水味辛辣的地方，多有生长疽疮和痈疮的人，水味苦涩的地方，多有患鸡胸和驼背的人。
English: Where the water contains too little salt and other minerals, there are more people with no hair on their heads and neck pain. Where the water contains too much salt and other minerals, there are more people with swollen feet and paralysis; where the water tastes sweet, there are more beautiful and healthy people; where the water tastes spicy, there are more people with gangrene and scabies; where the water tastes bitter, there are more people with chicken breasts and hunchbacks.

古文：凡食，无强厚味，无以烈味重酒，是以谓之疾首。
现代文：凡饮食，不要滋味过浓，不吃厚味，不饮烈酒，它是招致疾病的开端。
English: When eating, do not taste too strong, do not eat thick, do not drink spirits, it is the beginning of the disease.

古文：食能以时，身必无灾。
现代文：饮食能有节制，身怍必然没灾没病。
English: If you can control your diet, your body will not get sick.

古文：凡食之道，无饥无饱，是之谓五藏之葆。
现代文：饮食的原则，要保持不饥不饱的收态，选样五脏就能得到安适。
English: The principle of diet is to maintain a state of not being hungry and not being full, and the selection of the five internal organs can be comfortable.

古文：口必甘味，和精端容，将之以神气，百节虞欢，咸进受气。
现代文：一定要吃可口的食物，进食的时候，要精神和谐，仪容端正，用精气将养，这样，周身就舒适愉快，都受到了精气的滋养。
English: Be sure to eat delicious food. When eating, you should have a harmonious spirit, a neat appearance, and nourish yourself with energy. In this way, your whole body will be comfortable and happy, and you will be nourished by energy.

古文：饮必小咽，端直无戾。
现代文：饮食一定小口下咽，坐要端正，不要歪斜。
English: Make sure you swallow your food slowly, sit up straight, and don't slouch.

古文：今世上卜筮祷祠，故疾病愈来。
现代文：如今社会上崇尚占卜祈祷，所以疾病反而愈增。
English: Today, society worships divination and prayer, so diseases are on the rise.

古文：譬之若射者，射而不中，反修于招，何益於中？
现代文：这就象射箭的人，射箭没有射中箭靶，不纠正自己的毛病，反而去修正箭靶的位置，这对射中箭靶能有什么帮助?
English: This is like an archer who shoots an arrow but misses the target. Instead of correcting his mistake, he corrects the position of the target. How can this help him hit the target?

古文：夫以汤止沸，沸愈不止，去其火则止矣。
现代文：用滚开的水阻止水的沸腾，沸腾越发不能阻止，撤去下面的火，沸腾自然就止住了。
English: Use boiling water to stop the water from boiling. If the boiling continues, it can't be stopped. Remove the fire underneath, and the boiling will naturally stop.

古文：故巫医毒药，逐除治之，故古之人贱之也，为其末也。三曰：汤问於伊尹曰： 欲取天下，若何？ 伊尹对曰： 欲取天下，天下不可取；可取，身将先取。 
现代文：因为这些东西对于养生来说只是细技末节啊！先己汤问伊尹说： 要治理天下，该怎么办? 伊尹回答说： 一心只想治理天下，天下不可能治理好；如果说天下可以治理好的话，那首先要端正修养自身。 
English: Because these things are just the tip of the iceberg when it comes to health care! First Tong asked Yi Yin, "What should I do if I want to rule the world?" Yi Yin replied, "If I only want to rule the world, it is impossible to rule the world well; if I say that the world can be ruled well, then I must first cultivate myself.

古文：凡事之本，必先治身，啬其大宝。
现代文：大凡做事的根本，一定要首先修养自身，爱惜自己的身体。
English: The foundation of great work is to cultivate oneself first and cherish one's own body.

古文：用其新，弃其陈，腠理遂通。
现代文：不断吐故纳新，肌理就会保持畅通。
English: Constantly spitting out and absorbing new, the texture will remain unimpeded.

古文：精气日新，邪气尽去，及其天年。
现代文：精气日益增长，邪完全除去，就会终其天年。
English: The essence grows day by day, and if the evil is completely eliminated, it will last forever.

古文：此之谓真人。
现代文：这样的人叫作 真人 。
English: Such a person is called a real person.

古文：昔者，先圣王成其身而天下成，治其身而天下治。
现代文：过去，先代圣王修养自身，治理天下的大业自然成就，端正自身，天下自然太平安定。
English: In the past, the previous generation of holy kings cultivated themselves, and the great cause of governing the world was naturally achieved, and the world was naturally peaceful and stable.

古文：故善响者不於响於声，善影者不於影於形，为天下者不於天下於身。
现代文：所以，改善回声的，不致力于回声，而在于改善产生回声的声音。改善影子的，不致力于影子，而在于改善产生影于的形体，治理天下的，不致力于天下，而在于修养自身。
English: Therefore, to improve the echo is not to work on the echo, but to improve the sound that produces the echo; to improve the shadow is not to work on the shadow, but to improve the form that produces the shadow; to govern the world is not to work on the world, but to cultivate oneself.

古文：《诗》曰： 淑人君子，其仪不忒。
现代文：《诗》中说： 那个善人君子，他的仪容很端庄。
English: "Poetry" said: That good gentleman, his appearance is very dignified.

古文：其仪不忒，正是四国。 
现代文：他的仪容很端庄，给这四方各国做出榜样。 
English: Because his words and actions never deviate, he is a good example for the countries of the Quartet.

古文：言正诸身也。
现代文：这说的正是端正修养自身啊。
English: This is exactly what self-cultivation means.

古文：故反其道而身善矣；行义则人善矣；乐备君道而百官已治矣，万民已利矣。
现代文：因此，回心向道，自身就可以达到美好的境界了。行为合宜，就会受到他人的称赞了，乐施君道，百官就能治理好了，万民就能获得好处了。
English: Therefore, if you return your heart to the Tao, you will be able to achieve a beautiful realm. If you act appropriately, you will be praised by others. If you give generously, you will be able to govern well, and all people will benefit.

古文：三者之成也，在於无为。
现代文：这三方面的成功，都在于实现无为。
English: In all three cases, success lies in achieving inaction.

古文：无为之道曰胜天，义曰利身，君曰勿身。
现代文：无为之道就是听任天道无为之义就是要修养自身，无为之君就是凡事不亲自去敞。
English: The way of doing nothing is to allow the heavenly way to do nothing, righteousness is to cultivate oneself, and the way of doing nothing is not to open oneself to everything.

古文：勿身督听，利身平静，胜天顺性。
现代文：不亲自去做就不会偏听，修养自身就会平和清静，听任天道就会顺应天性。
English: If you don't do it yourself, you won't be biased, your self-cultivation will be peaceful and tranquil, and you will conform to nature if you follow the heavenly way.

古文：顺性则聪明寿长，平静则业进乐乡，督听则奸塞不皇。
现代文：顺应天性就会聪明、长寿；平和清静就会事业发展，百姓乐于归依，不偏听就会奸邪闭塞，不至惶惑。
English: Conformity to nature will lead to wisdom and longevity; peace and tranquility will lead to career development, the people are willing to convert, and if you do not listen to others, you will not be confused.

古文：故上失其道，则边侵於敌；内失其行，名声堕於外。
现代文：所以，君主不行君道，他的进境就会遭受敌人侵犯，在国内丧失德行，就会在国外名声败坏。
English: Therefore, if a monarch does not behave like a monarch, his territory will be invaded by enemies, he will lose his virtue at home, and his reputation will be tarnished abroad.

古文：是故百仞之松，本伤於下而末槁於上；商、周之国，谋失於胸，令困於彼。
现代文：因此，百仞高的松树，下面树根受了伤，上面的枝叶必然干枯，商、周两代末世，国君心中计谋无当，政夸在外自然难于推行。
English: Therefore, a hundred-meter-high pine tree, the roots below are injured, and the branches and leaves above are bound to dry up. In the last days of the Shang and Zhou dynasties, the hearts of the sovereigns were not well-planned, and it was naturally difficult to promote political boasting outside.

古文：故心得而听得，听得而事得，事得而功名得。
现代文：所以，心有所得，听就会有所得；听有所得，政事就会处理得当；政事处理得当，自然功成名立。
English: Therefore, if the mind has something to gain, listening will have something to gain; if listening has something to gain, political affairs will be handled properly; if political affairs are handled properly, natural achievements will be made.

古文：五帝先道而後德，故德莫盛焉；三王先教而後杀，故事莫功焉；五伯先事而後兵，故兵莫强焉。
现代文：五帝把道放在首位，而把德放在其次，所以没有任何人的德行比五帝更美好的了。三王把教化放在首位，而把刑罚放在其次，所以没有任何人的功业比三王更出色的了。
English: The Five Emperors put the way first and virtue second, so no one's virtue is better than the Five Emperors. The Three Kings put enlightenment first and punishment second, so no one's work is better than the Three Kings.

古文：当今之世，巧谋并行，诈术递用，攻战不休，亡国辱主愈众，所事者末也。
现代文：五霸把功业放在首位，而把武力征伐放在其次，所以没有任何人的军队比五霸更强大的了。当今世上，各种诡计一齐实施，奸诈骗术接连使用，攻战不止，灭亡的国家、受辱的君主越来越多，其原因就在于他们所致力的是细技束末啊。
English: In today's world, all kinds of tricks are carried out together, deception and trickery are used one after another, there are more and more wars, more and more ruined countries, more and more humiliated monarchs, and the reason is that what they are committed to is a bunch of tricks.

古文：夏后相启与有扈战於甘泽而不胜。
现代文：夏君启同有扈氏在甘泽交战，没有取胜。
English: Xia Junqi fought with the Youyi clan in Ganzawa, but did not win.

古文：六卿请复之，夏后相启曰： 不可。
现代文：六卿请求再战，夏君启说： 不行。
English: The six nobles asked for a rematch, and Xia Junqi said, "No."

古文：吾地不浅，吾民不寡，战而不胜，是吾德薄而教不善也。 
现代文：我的土地并不小，我的人民也不少，但同有扈氏交战却没能取胜，这是由于我的恩德太少，教化不好的缘故啊！ 
English: My land is not small, and my people are not few, but I have been unable to win the war with the Yi clan. This is due to my lack of benevolence and bad education!

古文：於是乎处不重席，食不贰味，琴瑟不张，锺鼓不修，子女不饬，亲亲长长，尊贤使能。
现代文：于是夏君启居处不用两层席，吃饭不吃多种菜，琴瑟不设，钟鼓不列，子女不修饰打扮，亲近亲族，敬爱长者，尊重贤人，任用能士。
English: As a result, Xia Jun's residence does not use two-tiered seats, does not eat a variety of dishes for dinner, does not have a piano, does not have a gong, does not dress up children, is close to relatives, respects elders, respects sages, and appoints able men.

古文：期年而有扈氏服。
现代文：一年之后，有扈氏就归服了。
English: A year later, the Arata clan surrendered.

古文：故欲胜人者，必先自胜；欲论人者，必先自论；欲知人者，必先自知。
现代文：因此，想耍制服别人的，一定先要克制自己，想要评论别人的，一定先要评论自己，想要了解别人的，一定先要了解自己。
English: Therefore, if you want to dominate others, you must first restrain yourself. If you want to criticize others, you must first criticize yourself. If you want to understand others, you must first understand yourself.

古文：《诗》曰： 执辔如组。 
现代文：《诗》中说； 手执缰绳驭马如同编织花纹一样。 
English: In the poem, it says, "Holding the reins in one's hand, riding a horse is like weaving a pattern."

古文：孔子曰： 审此言也，可以为天下。 
现代文：孔子说； 明悉这句话的含义，就可以治理天下了。 
English: Confucius said, "If you know the meaning of this sentence, you can govern the world."

古文：子贡曰： 何其躁也！ 
现代文：子贡说： 照《诗》中所悦的去做，举止太急躁了吧! 
English: Zigong said, "Do as you please in the poem, your behavior is too impetuous!"

古文：孔子曰： 非谓其躁也，谓其为之於此，而成文於彼也。 
现代文：孔予说： 这句诗不是说驭者动作急躁，而是说丝线在手中编织，而花纹却在手外成形。 
English: Kong Yu said: This poem does not mean that the driver is impatient, but that the silk thread is woven in the hand, but the pattern is formed outside the hand.

古文：圣人组修其身而成文於天下矣。
现代文：圣人修养自身，而大业成就于天下。
English: The sage cultivates himself, but the great cause is accomplished in the world.

古文：故子华子曰： 丘陵成而穴者安矣，大水深渊成而鱼鳖安矣，松柏成而涂之人已荫矣。 
现代文：所以子华子说。 丘陵生成了，穴居的动物就安身，大水深渊生成了，鱼鳖就安身了；松柏茂盛了，行路的人就在树荫下歇息了。 
English: Therefore Zihua Zi said, "The hills were born, and the animals that live in caves settled down; the great watery abysses were born, and the fishes settled down; the pine trees flourished, and the travelers rested in the shade.

古文：孔子见鲁哀公，哀公曰： 有语寡人曰： 为国家者，为之堂上而已矣。 
现代文：孔手谒见鲁哀公，哀公说： 有人告诉我说： 治理国家的人，在朝堂之上治理就行了。 
English: Confucius looked at Lu Aigong and said, "Someone once told me, 'Those who govern the country should govern above the palace.'

古文：寡人以为迂言也。 
现代文：我认为这是迂阔之言。 
English: I think that's an overstatement.

古文：孔子曰： 此非迂言也。
现代文：孔子说： 这不是迂阔之言。
English: Confucius said, "This is no idle talk.

古文：丘闻之，得之於身者得之人，失之於身者失之人。
现代文：我听说，在自身有所得的人，在到哪那里也会有所得，在自身有所失的人，在别人那里也会有所失。
English: I've heard it said that those who gain from themselves also gain from others, and those who lose from themselves also lose from others.

古文：不出於门户而天下治者，其惟知反於已身者乎！ 
现代文：不出门却把天下治理得很好，这恐怕只有懂得自身修养的国君才能做到吧！ 
English: I'm afraid that only a sovereign who knows how to cultivate himself can govern the country well without leaving home!

古文：四曰：主道约，君守近。
现代文：论人做君主的方法很简单，君主要奉行的原则就在近旁。
English: The way to be a monarch is simple, and the principles of the monarchy are close at hand.

古文：太上反诸己，其次求诸人。
现代文：最高的是向自身求得，其次是向别人寻求。
English: The best is to seek from oneself, and the second is to seek from others.

古文：其索之弥远者，其推之弥疏；其求之弥强者，失之弥远。
现代文：越向远处寻求的，离开它就越远，寻求它越花力气的，失掉它就越远。
English: The further one seeks it, the further one is from it; the more one seeks it, the further one is from losing it.

古文：何谓反诸已也？
现代文：什么叫向自身求得呢?
English: What does it mean to ask for something from yourself?

古文：适耳目，节嗜欲，释智谋，去巧故，而游意乎无穷之次，事心乎自然之涂。
现代文：使耳目适度，节制嗜好欲望，放弃智巧计谋，摒除虚浮伪诈，让自已的意识在无限的空间中邀游，让自己的思想立于无为的境界。
English: Make your ears and eyes moderate, temper your desires, give up cleverness and trickery, get rid of hypocrisy and deception, let your consciousness travel in infinite space, and let your thoughts stand in the realm of inaction.

古文：若此则无以害其天矣。
现代文：象这样，就没有什么可以危害自己的身心了。
English: In this way, there is nothing that can harm your body and mind.

古文：无以害其天则知精，知精则知神，知神之谓得一。
现代文：没有什么危害自己的身心，就能略知道事物的精微，知道事物的精微，就能够懂得事理的玄妙，懂得事理的玄妙就叫作得道。
English: Without any harm to one's body and mind, one can know the subtleties of things, and knowing the subtleties of things, one can understand the intricacies of things, and understanding the intricacies of things is called being enlightened.

古文：凡彼万形，得一後成。
现代文：那万物，得道而后才能生成。
English: Those things have to be created in a certain way.

古文：故知一，则应物变化，阔大渊深，不可测也；德行昭美，比於日月，不可息也，豪士时之，远方来宾，不可塞也；意气宣通，无所束缚，不可收也。
现代文：所以，懂得得道的道理，就会适应事物的变化，博大精深，不可测度，德行就会彰明美好，与日月并列，不可熄灭。豪杰贤士就会随时到来，从远方来归，不可遏止；精神、元气就会畅通，无所束缚，不可持守。
English: Therefore, if you understand the truth of the Tao, you will be able to adapt to the changes of things. It is vast, profound, and immeasurable. Your virtue will be bright and beautiful. It is on a par with the sun and the moon and cannot be extinguished. Heroes and sages will come at any time, coming from far away and cannot be stopped. Your spirit and vitality will be unimpeded, unrestrained, and cannot be held onto.

古文：故知知一，则复归於朴，嗜欲易足，取养节薄，不可得也；离世自乐，中情洁白，不可量也；威不能惧，严不能恐，不可服也。
现代文：所以懂得得道的道理，就含重新返朴归真，嗜欲容易满足，所取养身之物少而有节制，不可支配，就会超脱世俗，怡然自乐，内心洁白，不可污染，就会威武不能使他恐惧，严厉不能使他害怕，不可屈服。
English: Therefore, to understand the truth of the Tao, it is necessary to return to simplicity and return to the truth, the desire is easy to satisfy, the things taken to nourish the body are few and restrained, not controllable, it will be detached from the world, pleasantly self-satisfied, the heart is white, not polluted, it will be powerful and cannot make him fear, severe and cannot make him fear, and it will not yield.

古文：故知知一，则可动作当务，与时周旋，不可极也；举错以数，取与遵理，不可惑也；言无遗者，集肌肤，不可革也。谗人困穷，贤者遂兴，不可匿也。
现代文：所以懂得得道的道理，就会举动与事合宜，随着时势应酬交际，不可困窘，就会举止依照礼数，取与遵循事理，不可迷乱，就会言无过失，感于肌肤，不可改变，就会奸人窘困，贤者显达，不可隐匿。
English: Therefore, if you understand the principles of Taoism, you will act in accordance with things, socialize with the times, not be embarrassed, behave according to the number of etiquette, take and follow things, not be confused, speak without fault, feel the skin, not change, be embarrassed, wise, not hide.

古文：故知知一，则若天地然，则何事之不胜？
现代文：所以懂得得道的道理，就会象天地一样，那么，什么事情不能胜任?
English: Therefore, if you understand the truth of the Way, you will be like heaven and earth. So, what things are not up to the task?

古文：何物之不应？
现代文：什么事情不能得当?
English: What can go wrong?

古文：譬之若御者，反诸己，则车轻马利，致远复食而不倦。
现代文：这就象驾驭马车的人，反躬自求，就会车轻马快，即使跑很远的路再吃饭，中途也不会疲倦。
English: This is like a person driving a carriage, who, by his own efforts, can make the carriage go faster and faster. Even if he runs a long way and then eats, he will not get tired halfway.

古文：昔上世之亡主，以罪为在人，故日杀戮而不止，以至於亡而不悟。
现代文：过去，古代亡国的君主认为罪在别人，所以每天杀戮不停，以至干亡国仍不醒悟。
English: In the past, in ancient times, the monarch of the defeated country thought that the crime was someone else's, so the killing continued every day, and the defeated country still did not wake up.

古文：三代之兴王，以罪为在己，故日功而不衰，以至於王。
现代文：夏、商、周三代兴旺发达的君王，认为罪在自己，所以每天勤于功业，从不松懈，以至于成就了王者大业。
English: Xia, Shang and other thrice-prosperous emperors believed that their sins were their own, so they worked hard every day and never slackened, so much so that they achieved the great cause of kings.

古文：何谓求诸人？
现代文：什么叫向别人寻求?
English: What does it mean to seek from others?

古文：人同类而智殊，贤不肖异，皆巧言辩辞以自防御，此不肖主之所以乱也。
现代文：人同类而智慧不同，贤与不肖相异。人们都用花言巧语来替自己防范，这是昏君惑乱的缘故。
English: People are all the same, but their wisdom is different, and their virtue is different from their vices. People use fancy words and tricks to protect themselves, which is the reason for the confusion of the emperor.

古文：凡论人，通则观其所礼，贵则观其所进，富则观其所养，听则观其所行，止则观其所好，习则观其所言，穷则观其所不受，贱则观其所不为。
现代文：大凡衡量、评定人：如果他显达，就观察他礼遇的都是什么人，如果他尊贵，就观察他举荐的都是什么人，如果他富有，就观察能赡养的都是什么人，如果他听言，就观察他采纳的都是什么，如果他闲居在家，就观察他喜好的都是什么？如果他学习，就观察他说的都是什么，如果他困窘，就观察他不接受的都是什么，如果他贫贱，就观察他不做的都是什么。
English: A great man measures and evaluates people: if he is distinguished, he observes what people treat him with courtesy; if he is distinguished, he observes what people recommend him; if he is rich, he observes what people can support him; if he is obedient, he observes what he adopts; if he is idle at home, he observes what he likes; if he studies, he observes what he says; if he is embarrassed, he observes what he does not accept; if he is poor, he observes what he does not do.

古文：喜之以验其守，乐之以验其僻，怒之以验其节，惧之以验其特，哀之以验其人，苦之以验其志。
现代文：使他高兴，借以检验他的节操，使他快乐，借阻检验他的邪念；使他发怒，借以检验他的气度，使他恐惧，借以检验他卓异的品行，使他悲哀，借以检验他的仁爱之心，使他困苦，借以检验他的意志。
English: Make him glad by testing his self-control, make him happy by thwarting his evil thoughts, make him angry by testing his temper, make him fearful by testing his virtue, make him sad by testing his benevolence, make him miserable by testing his will.

古文：八观六验，此贤主之所以论人也。
现代文：以上八种观察和六项检验，就是贤明的君主用以衡量、评定人的方法。
English: The above eight observations and six tests are the methods by which a wise ruler measures and evaluates a person.

古文：论人者，又必以六戚四隐。
现代文：衡量、评定别人又一定用六戚、四隐。
English: To measure and evaluate others, you must use six relatives and four recesses.

古文：何谓六戚？
现代文：什么叫六戚?
English: What is "six relatives"?

古文：父、母、兄、弟、妻、子。
现代文：即父、母、兄、弟、妻，子六种亲属。
English: That is, father, mother, elder brother, younger brother, wife, and child are the six kinds of relatives.

古文：何为四隐？
现代文：什么叫四隐?
English: What is Siyin?

古文：交友、故旧、邑里、门郭。
现代文：即朋友、熟人、乡邻。亲信四种亲近的人。
English: That is, friends, acquaintances, neighbors, and relatives are the four types of close people.

古文：内则用六戚四隐，外则用八观六验，人之情伪、贪鄙、美恶无所失矣。
现代文：在内凭着六戚、四隐，在外凭着八观、六验，这样人们的真伪、贪鄙、美恶就能完全知晓，没有遗漏。
English: By virtue of the six kinships and four concealments within, and by virtue of the eight views and six tests without, people's true and false, greedy and virtuous, and evil can be fully known without omission.

古文：譬之若逃雨污，无之而非是。
现代文：就象是避雨一样，所往之处无一处没有雨水，无所逃避。
English: Just like avoiding the rain, there is nowhere to go where there is no rain, there is no escape.

古文：此先圣王之所以知人也。
现代文：选就是先代圣王用以识别人的方法。
English: Shinsengumi is the method used by the previous shogun to identify people.

古文：五曰：天道圜，地道方。
现代文：圜道天道圆，地道方。
English: The right way is the way round, and the wrong way is the wrong way.

古文：圣王法之，所以立上下。
现代文：圣壬效法它们，据以设立君臣上下。
English: Shingon imitated them, establishing a hierarchy of lords and vassals.

古文：何以说天道之圜也？
现代文：怎样解释天道圜呢?
English: How do you explain the rise of Tiandao?

古文：精气一上一下，圜周复杂，无所稽留，故曰天道圜。
现代文：精气一上一下，环绕往复，循环不已，无所留止，所以说天道圆。
English: The jing qi goes up and down, goes around and around, and goes around and around, and there is no stopping it. That is why it is said that heaven is round.

古文：何以说地道之方也？
现代文：怎样解释地道方呢?
English: How do you explain the real way?

古文：万物殊类殊形，皆有分职，不能相为，故曰地道方。
现代文：万物异类异形，都有各自的名分、职守，不能互相代替，所以说地道方。
English: All things of different types and shapes have their own titles and duties, and cannot be substituted for each other, which is why they are called real Taoist.

古文：主执圜，臣处方，方圜不易，其国乃昌。
现代文：君主掌握圜道，臣下处守方道，方道圆道不颠倒改变，这样国家才能昌盛。
English: A country can prosper only when the monarch has mastered the right way, and his vassals protect the left way, and the right way and the round way remain unchanged.

古文：日夜一周，圜道也。
现代文：太阳一昼夜绕行一周，这是圜遣。
English: The sun orbits the earth once a day and once a night.

古文：月躔二十八宿，轸与角属，圜道也。
现代文：月亮历行二十八宿，始于角宿，终于轸宿，角宿与轸宿首尾相接，这是圆道。
English: The moon travels through 28 mansions, starting at Kakunodate and ending at Oshuku. Kakunodate and Oshuku are next to each other, so it's a round trip.

古文：精行四时，一上一下，各与遇，圜道也。
现代文：精气四季运行，阴气上腾，阳气下降，相合而成万物，这是圆道。
English: The essence runs through the four seasons, the yin ascends, the yang descends, and together they become all things. This is a circular path.

古文：物动则萌，萌而生，生而长，长而大，大而成，成乃衰，衰乃杀，杀乃藏，圜道也。
现代文：万物有了活力就会萌发，萌发而后滋生，滋生而后成长，成长而后壮大，壮大而后成熟，成熟而后衰暾，衰致而后死亡，死亡而后形迹消失，这是圆道。
English: All things with vitality will germinate, germinate and then breed, breed and then grow, grow and then grow, grow and then mature, mature and then decline, decline and then die, die and then disappear, this is a roundabout.

古文：云气西行，云云然，冬夏不辍；水泉东流，日夜不休。
现代文：云气西行，纷纭回转，冬夏不止，水泉东流，日夜不停。
English: Clouds and winds move westward, swirls and swirls, winter and summer never end, water springs flow eastward, day and night never stop.

古文：上不竭，下不满，小为大，重为轻，圜道也。
现代文：泉源永不枯竭，大海水不满盈，小泉汇成大海，重水化作轻云，这是圆道。
English: The spring is never exhausted, the sea is never full, the small spring merges into the sea, and the heavy water turns into light clouds. This is a roundabout.

古文：黄帝曰： 帝无常处也，有处者乃无处也。 
现代文：萤帝说： 无帝没有固定的居处。如果它固定在一处，就不会无所不在了。
English: Huo Di said, "No emperor has a fixed abode. If it is fixed in one place, it will not be omnipresent."

古文：以言不刑蹇，圜道也。
现代文：这是说运行不止，这是圆道。
English: This means that the movement does not stop, it is a circle.

古文：人之窍九，一有所居则八虚，八虚甚久则身毙。
现代文：人体共有九个孔窍，其中一窍闭塞，另外八窍就会有病。八窍病得厉害，时间久了，人就会死亡。
English: The human body has a total of nine orifices, one of which is blocked, and the other eight orifices will be sick. The eight orifices are very sick, and after a long time, people will die.

古文：故唯而听，唯止；听而视，听止：以言说一。
现代文：所以，应答时若要听，应答就会停止，倾听时若要看，倾听就会停止。
English: Therefore, if you want to listen when you answer, the answer will stop, and if you want to look when you listen, the listening will stop.

古文：一不欲留，留运为败，圜道也。
现代文：这是说要专精于一官一窍一官一窍都不应停滞，停滞就成为祸灾，这是圆道。
English: This is to say that one should be proficient in one function, one skill, one function, one skill should not stagnate, stagnation will become a disaster, this is a roundabout way.

古文：一也齐至贵，莫知其原，莫知其端，莫知其始，莫知其终，而万物以为宗。
现代文：道是最高的，没有谁知道它的来源，也没有谁知道它的终极，没有谁知道它的开始，也没有谁知道它的归宿，然而万物都把它作为本源。
English: The Tao is the highest, no one knows its source, no one knows its end, no one knows its beginning, and no one knows its destination, yet all things take it as their source.

古文：圣王法之，以令其性，以定其正，以出号令。
现代文：圣王取法它，用来保全自己的天性，用来安定自己的生命，用来发号施令。
English: The holy king used it to preserve his nature, to stabilize his life, and to give orders.

古文：令出於主口，官职受而行之，日夜不休，宣通下究，瀸於民心，遂於四方，还周复归，至於主所，圜道也。
现代文：号令从君主之口发出，百官接受而施行，日夜不停，普遍下达，深入到底，合于民心，通达四方，然后又旋转复回，回到君主那里，这是圆道。
English: The proclamation issued from the mouth of the monarch, accepted and implemented by hundreds of officials, non-stop day and night, universally issued, in-depth to the end, in line with the people's hearts, reaching all directions, and then rotating and returning, returning to the monarch, this is a roundabout.

古文：令圜，则可不可，善不善，无所壅矣。
现代文：号令的施行符台圆道，不合宜的就能使它合宜，不好的就能使它美好，这样就没有壅闭之处了。
English: The implementation of the decree is a roundabout way. If it is inappropriate, it can be made appropriate, and if it is bad, it can be made good. In this way, there is no place for self-censorship.

古文：无所壅者，主道通也。
现代文：没有壅闭之处就是君道畅通啊！
English: Where there is no obstruction, the road is clear!

古文：故令者，人主之所以为命也，贤不肖、安危之所定也。
现代文：所以，号令是君主把它当作生命来看待的东西，君主的贤与不肖，国家的安危都由它决定。
English: Therefore, the order is something that the monarch regards as his life, the virtue and demerit of the monarch, and the safety of the country are all determined by it.

古文：人之有形体四枝，其能使之也，为其感而必知也。
现代文：人有形体四肢，其所以能够支使它们，是由于它们受到触动必定知道。
English: Human beings have physical limbs, and they are able to move them because they know they must be moved.

古文：感而不知，则形体四枝不使矣。
现代文：如果受到触动而不知道，那形体四肢就不会听从支使了，臣下也是这样。
English: If you are touched without knowing it, the limbs of the body will not obey you, nor will your subjects.

古文：人臣亦然。号令不感，则不得而使矣。
现代文：如果对君主的号令无动于衷，就无法支使他们了。
English: If you don't heed the monarch's call, you won't be able to stop them.

古文：有之而不使，不若无有。
现代文：有臣下却不听从支使，不如没有。
English: If you have vassals who do not obey their vassals, it is better not to have them.

古文：主也者，使非有者也，舜、禹、汤、武皆然。
现代文：君主就是要支使本不属于自己的臣下，舜、禹，汤，武王都是这样。
English: The monarch is to support the vassals who do not belong to him, and this is the case with Gong, Yu, Tang, and King Wu.

古文：先王之立高官也，必使之方，方则分定，分定则下不相隐。
现代文：先王设立高官，一定要使它方正。作到方正，职分就确定了，职分确定了，臣下就不会有隐私壅蔽其上。
English: When the late king created a high-ranking official, he had to make sure that it was legitimate. When it was legitimate, the position was determined, the position was determined, and the vassals would not have privacy to cover it.

古文：尧舜，贤主也，皆以贤者为後，不肯与其子孙，犹若立官必使之方。
现代文：尧舜是贤明的君主，他们都把贤人作为自己的继承人，不肯把帝位传给自己的子孙，然而设立官职仍然一定要使它方正。
English: The emperors were wise. They all chose wise men as their heirs. They did not want to pass the imperial throne on to their children and grandchildren. However, the establishment of an official post still had to be done correctly.

古文：今世之人主，皆欲世勿失矣，而与其子孙，立官不能使之方，以私欲乱之也，何哉？
现代文：当今世上的君主，都想父子相传世世代代不失君位，从而把它传给自己的子孙。但他们设立官职反而不能使它方正，用私欲把它搞乱了，这是为什么呢?
English: The monarchs of today's world all want to pass down the throne from father to son for generations without losing it, and thus pass it on to their own children and grandchildren. However, they can't square it by setting up an official position, but they have confused it with their selfish desires. Why is this?

古文：其所欲者之远，而所知者之近也。
现代文：这是因为他们贪求的太远，而见识太短的缘故。
English: This is because they seek too far and see too little.

古文：今五音之无不应也，其分审也。
现代文：五音无不应和，这是由于它们各自的乐律确定。
English: There is no disharmony between the five tones, which is due to the fact that their individual melodies are determined.

古文：宫、徵、商、羽、角，各处其处，音皆调均，不可以相违，此所以无不受也。
现代文：官、徵，商，羽、角各处在白己的位置上，音都调得根准确，不可以有丝毫盖误，这就是五音无不应和的缘故。
English: The official, the solicitor, the merchant, the feather, and the horn are all in their proper positions, and the tones are all accurately tuned, and there must not be the slightest error. This is the reason why there is no inappropriate harmony of the five tones.

古文：贤主之立官有似於此。
现代文：贤主设立官职与此相似。
English: The establishment of official posts by the emperor is similar to this.

古文：百官各处其职、治其事以待主，主无不安矣；以此治国，国无不利矣；以此备患，患无由至矣。
现代文：百官各守其职，治理分内的事，以此恃奉君主，君主就没有不安宁的，以此治理国家，国家就没有不兴旺的，以此妨备祸患，祸患就无从降临了。
English: All officials should perform their duties and manage their own affairs. By doing so, they can serve the monarch, and the monarch will not be restless. By doing so, they can govern the country, and the country will not fail to prosper. By doing so, they can prevent disasters, and disasters will not come.

