古文：支法衡程道惠僧善道李旦梁甲任义方齐士望杨师操裴则子河南府史周颂卢弁
现代文：支法衡程道惠僧善道李旦梁甲任义方齐士望杨师操裴则子河南府史周颂卢弁
English: Li Dan, Liang Jia, Ren Yifang, Qishi, Wang Yang, Shao Pei, Zhou Song, Lu Ben, Henan prefectural historian

古文：支法衡
现代文：支法衡
English: Support law and order

古文：晋沙门支法衡，得病旬日，亡经三日而苏。
现代文：晋时道人支法衡，得病十天后死了，三天后又苏醒过来。
English: Jinshi Daoist Zhi Fa Heng died ten days after falling ill, and woke up three days later.

古文：说死时，有人将去。见如官曹舍者数处，不肯受之。
现代文：他说死时，有人带他走，看见很多处象官府一样的房舍，都不肯接纳他。
English: He said that when he died, someone took him away, and when he saw many buildings that looked like government offices, they refused to accept him.

古文：俄见有铁轮，轮上有爪，从西转来，无持引者，而转驶如风。
现代文：不久看见一个铁轮子，上边有很多爪，从西面朝他滚来，没有人推它，轮子转动如风。
English: Soon he saw an iron wheel, with many claws on the top, rolling towards him from the west. No one was pushing it, the wheel was turning like the wind.

古文：如此数，人碎烂。吏呼衡道人来当轮立。
现代文：有一官吏喊罪犯立在轮前，轮子轧过来又轧过去，如此数次，那人已被压碎。那个官吏又招呼支法衡立在轮前。
English: An officer called the criminal to stand in front of the wheel, the wheel rolled over and over, several times, and the man was crushed.

古文：衡恐怖自责，悔不精进，今当此轮乎？
现代文：支法衡又恐惧又自责，后悔自己习经不深，才遭此厄运。
English: It was only after weighing up the law, fear and self-reproach, and regretting that he was not well versed in the sutras, that he suffered this misfortune.

古文：语毕，吏谓衡曰： 道人可去。 
现代文：说完，官吏对他说： 你可以走了。 
English: After saying this, the official said to him: You can go.

古文：于是仰首，见天有孔，不觉倏尔上升，以头穿中，两手搏两边，四向顾视。见七宝官船及诸天人。
现代文：于是支法衡抬头，看见天上有一个洞。恍惚中不觉身体上升，用脑袋穿过洞，用两手把住洞的两边，向四周看，看见了七宝官船和许多仙人。
English: Then, he looked up and saw a hole in the sky. In his trance, he unconsciously raised his body, passed through the hole with his head, grasped both sides of the hole with his hands, and looked around. He saw the Seven Treasures Ship and many immortals.

古文：衡甚踊跃，不能得上，疲而复下。
现代文：支法衡使很大劲也没上去，最后疲劳地下来。
English: With great effort, he did not get up, and finally fell down exhausted.

古文：所将衡去人笑曰： 见何物，不能上乎？ 
现代文：带支法衡离开的人笑着对他说： 看见什么了，为什么不上去？ 
English: The man who was leaving with a balance said to him with a smile: "What do you see, why don't you go up?

古文：乃以衡付船官，船官行船，使为舵工。衡曰： 我不能持舵。 
现代文：接着就把他送到船官那里。船官就让他驾船，支法衡说： 我不会掌舵。 
English: Then he brought him to the captain of the ship, who gave him the helm, but he said, "I will not take the helm."

古文：强之。有船数百，皆随衡后。衡不晓捉舵，跄沙洲上。
现代文：船官就强迫他，有数百条船都跟在支法衡的身后，由于他不会使船，就搁浅在沙滩上。
English: The officer forced him, with hundreds of boats trailing in the wake, to run aground on the beach because he wouldn't budge.

古文：吏司推衡，以法应斩。
现代文：吏司就推着他准备斩首。
English: The bailiff pushed him and prepared to behead him.

古文：引衡上岸，雷鼓将斩。忽有五色二龙，推船还浮，吏乃原之，衡大恐惧。
现代文：等把他带上岸边，正擂鼓准备斩首时，忽然有两条五彩的龙，把船推浮到水上。吏司就放了支法衡，他非常恐惧。
English: When they had brought him ashore and were about to behead him, suddenly two multicoloured dragons pushed the boat up onto the water. The magistrate put on the scales and he was terrified.

古文：望见西北有讲堂，上有沙门甚众。
现代文：看见西北方有个讲堂，上有很多僧人。
English: I saw a lecture hall in the northwest with many monks.

古文：闻经呗之声，衡遽走趣之。
现代文：远远传来念经之声，他就赶紧走上前。
English: The sound of chanting came from far away, and he hurried forward.

古文：堂有十二阶，始蹑一阶，见亡师法柱，踞胡床坐。见衡曰： 我弟子也，何以而来？ 
现代文：讲堂有十二级台阶，刚走到第一阶，就看见死去的师傅法柱正倚在床边坐着，见了支法衡说： 弟子为什么来这里？ 
English: The lecture hall has twelve steps. As soon as I walked up to the first step, I saw the deceased master Fa-Zhu sitting on the edge of the bed. When he saw the scales, he said, "Why did your disciple come here?"

古文：因起临阶，以手巾打衡面曰： 莫来。 
现代文：趁势走下台阶，用手巾打支法衡的脸说： 不要来。 
English: He took advantage of the situation and walked down the steps, using a hand towel to wipe his face and say: Don't come.

古文：衡甚欲上，复举步登阶，柱复推令下。至三乃上。
现代文：支法衡很想走上去，就又抬步登阶，法柱又推他下来，这样反复三次才上去。
English: When the official wanted to go up, he stepped up again, and the pillar pushed him down again. This happened three times before he could go up.

古文：见平地有一井，深三四丈，砖无隙际，衡心念言，此井自然。井边有人谓曰： 不自然者，何得成井？ 
现代文：看见地上有一口井，井深三四丈，井里的砖一点缝隙没有。他心想，这个井是自然的，井边有个人对他说： 不是自然的，怎能成为井？ 
English: Seeing a well on the ground, three or four stories deep, with no cracks in the bricks, he thought to himself that this well was natural. A man at the well's edge said to him: "If it isn't natural, how can it be a well?"

古文：虽见法柱故倚望之，谓衡： 可复道还去，狗不啮汝。 
现代文：只见法柱还倚在床边望着他，对他说： 你可以原道返回，狗不会咬你。 
English: The pillar was still leaning on the side of the bed, looking at him, and said to him, "You can go back the way you came, the dog won't bite you."

古文：衡还水边，亦不见向来船也。
现代文：支法衡就又回到水边，再也看不见原来的船了。
English: He returned to the water's edge and could no longer see the original boat.

古文：衡渴，欲饮水，乃堕水中，因便得苏。
现代文：他渴了想饮水，却掉在水里，因此才醒过来。
English: He was thirsty and wanted to drink water, but fell into the water and woke up.

古文：于是出家，持戒菜食，尽夜精思，为至行沙门。
现代文：从此他便出家修炼，吃斋念佛，昼夜深思，成为德行极高的僧人。
English: From then on, he became a monk of the highest virtue, practising asceticism, fasting, chanting the Buddha's name, and meditating day and night.

古文：比丘法桥，衡弟子也。
现代文：比丘僧法桥是他的弟子。
English: The bhikshu monk Dharma Bridge was his disciple.

古文：程道惠
现代文：程道惠
English: Cheng Daohui

古文：程道惠，字文和，武昌人也。
现代文：程道惠，字文和，武昌人。
English: Cheng Daohui, Zhiwenhe, Wuchang people.

古文：世奉五斗米道，不信有佛。
现代文：世代信奉五斗米道，不信有佛。
English: Generations have believed in the five-dipper rice ceremony and do not believe in the existence of the Buddha.

古文：常云： 古来正道，莫逾李老，何乃信惑胡言，以为胜教。 
现代文：经常说： 自古正道，没有超过老庄的。为什么要迷信胡人之言，把佛教视为胜数？
English: He often said, "Since ancient times, no one has surpassed Lao Zhuang in virtue. Why should we be superstitious and believe that Buddhism is superior?"

古文：太元十五年，病死，心下尚暖。
现代文：吴国孙权太元十五年，病死。心口尚暖，家人就没有入殓。
English: Wu Guo Sun Quan Taiyuan was 15 years old when he died of illness. Although his heart was still warm, his family did not have a funeral.

古文：家不殡殓，数日得苏。
现代文：过了几天就苏醒过来了。
English: After a few days, I came to my senses.

古文：说初死时，见十许人，缚录将去。
现代文：他说刚死时，看见十多个人，捆绑着将他拉走。
English: He said that when he was dying, he saw more than a dozen people tying him up and dragging him away.

古文：逢一比丘云： 此人宿福，未可缚也。 
现代文：正好碰见一个和尚，和尚说： 这个人前世积德，不能捆绑他。 
English: He happened to meet a monk. The monk said, "This man was virtuous in his previous life. I cannot bind him."

古文：乃解其缚，散驱而去。
现代文：于是给他松绑，赶他走去。
English: So they untied him and sent him on his way.

古文：道路修平，而两边棘刺森然，略不容足。
现代文：道路很平，道两边荆棘茂密，不能容足。
English: The road is very flat, and the thorns are thick on both sides of the road, making it impossible to walk.

古文：驱诸罪人，驰走其中，身随著刺，号呻聒耳。
现代文：驱赶着罪人在荆棘里边走，荆棘划破了他们周身，号哭的、呻吟的声音混成一片。
English: He drove the sinners among the thorns, and the thorns tore all around them, and the sounds of weeping and moaning mingled together.

古文：见道惠行在平路，皆叹羡曰： 佛弟子行路，复胜人也。 
现代文：他们看见道惠走在平路上，都感叹而羡慕地说： 佛家弟子走路，胜过一般人呀。 
English: When they saw Daohui walking on the flat road, they all said with admiration and envy: Buddhist disciples walk better than ordinary people.

古文：道惠曰： 我不奉法。 
现代文：道惠说： 我不信佛。 
English: He said, "I don't believe in Buddha.

古文：其人笑曰： 君忘之耳。 
现代文：有人说： 你忘了。 
English: Some people say: You've forgotten.

古文：道惠因自忆先身奉佛，已经五生五死。
现代文：道惠就回想起前世曾信佛，已经五生五死。
English: Daowei recalled that he had believed in Buddhism in a previous life, and had already had five births and five deaths.

古文：忘失本志，今生在世。幼遇恶人，未达邪正，乃惑邪道。
现代文：正由于忘记并失去了本来的志向，所以今生在世从小就遇到了恶人，分不清邪与正，却被邪道所诱惑。
English: It is precisely because they have forgotten and lost their original aspiration that, in this life, they have encountered evil people from an early age. They cannot distinguish between evil and righteousness, but are tempted by the evil way.

古文：既至大城，径进厅事。
现代文：走着，来到一座大城，道惠径直走到一大厅里。
English: Walking, he came to a big city and walked straight into a large hall.

古文：见一人，年可四五十，南面而坐。
现代文：看见一个人，约四五十岁，面朝南坐着。
English: I saw a man, about forty or fifty years old, sitting facing south.

古文：见道惠惊曰： 君不应来。 
现代文：看见道惠惊讶地说： 你不应该来。 
English: Seeing the surprised Dao Hui said, "You shouldn't have come."

古文：有一人著单衣帻，持簿书，对曰： 此人伐社杀人，罪应来此。 
现代文：有一个人穿着单衣服戴着头巾，拿着名册，进来说： 这个人毁坏祭神的场所还杀人，由于他的罪恶应该来这。 
English: A man in a tunic and a turban came in with a list of names and said, "This man has destroyed places of worship and killed people. Because of his sins, he deserves to be here."

古文：向逢比丘，亦随道惠入，申理甚至，云： 伐社非罪也，此人宿福甚多，杀人虽重，报未至也。 
现代文：原来遇到的和尚，也随道惠进来了。极力为道惠申辨理由，说： 毁坏祭神社下是他的罪过，这个人积福很多，虽杀人多，但报应的时候还没到。 
English: The monk he had originally met also came in with Dohy. He tried his best to argue for Dohy, saying: Destroying the shrine was his fault. This man had accumulated a lot of good fortune. Although he had killed many people, the time for retribution had not yet come.

古文：南面坐者曰： 可罚所录人。 
现代文：面朝南坐着的人说： 应该惩罚逮捕他的人。 
English: The man, who was sitting facing south, said his captors should be punished.

古文：命道惠就坐，谢曰： 小鬼谬滥，枉相录来，亦由君忘失宿命，不知奉正法故也。 
现代文：让道惠坐下，并赔礼说： 小鬼错抓了你，但也是因为你忘失信念，不知信奉佛法的缘故。 
English: He told Dao Hui to sit down and apologized, saying, "The ghost caught you by mistake, but it's also because you have forgotten your faith and don't know how to practice Buddhism.

古文：将遣道惠还，乃使暂兼覆校将军，历观地狱。
现代文：准备送道惠回去。先让他暂时兼任复校将军，看看地狱。
English: He is preparing to send Dohi back. First, let him temporarily serve as a re-education general, and see the hell.

古文：道惠欣然辞出，导从而行。
现代文：道惠欣然接受并告辞出去。
English: Dao Hui gladly accepted and resigned.

古文：行至诸城，皆是地狱，人众巨亿，悉受罪报。
现代文：在向导的引导下，来到诸城，都是地狱。很多罪人正在遭受报应。
English: Under the guidance of the guide, I came to the cities, all of which are hells. Many sinners are suffering retribution.

古文：见有猘狗，啮人百节，肌肉散落，流血蔽地。
现代文：看见疯狗，正在把人撕成碎块，骨肉散落，血流满地。
English: To see a mad dog tearing a man to pieces, flesh and bone scattered, blood running all over the ground.

古文：又有群鸟，其嘴如锋，飞来甚速，入人口中，表里贯洞。其人宛转呼叫，筋骨碎落。
现代文：又看见群鸟，尖嘴锋利，快速飞来，钻进罪人的嘴里，从里往外啄洞，那个罪人痛的惨叫，筋骨粉碎。
English: He also saw a flock of birds, with sharp beaks, flying fast, get into the sinner's mouth and peck the hole from the inside out. The sinner screamed in pain, his bones and sinews shattered.

古文：观历既遍，乃遣道惠还。
现代文：看遍了各地狱，就送道惠回去。
English: After seeing prisons all over the country, he sent Dohye back.

古文：复见向所逢比丘，与道惠一铜物，形如小铃。曰： 君还至家，可弃此门外，勿以入室。
现代文：又看见一开始碰见的那个和尚。和尚赠给道惠一个铜物，形状像小铃，和尚说： 你回家时，可把它丢在门外，不要带进屋内。
English: He also saw the monk he had met at the beginning. The monk gave him a bronze object, shaped like a small bell. The monk said, "When you go home, you can leave it outside the door, but don't bring it inside."

古文：某年月日，君当有厄。诫慎过此，寿延九十。 
现代文：某年某月，你若有灾难，要谨慎对待，可以活到九十岁。 
English: If you have a calamity in a certain year or month, you should treat it with caution. You can live to be ninety years old.

古文：时道惠家于京师大桁南，自还，达皂荚桥，见亲表三人，驻车共语，悼道惠之亡。
现代文：当时道惠家住在京城大桁南，于是自己回家。走到皂荚桥，看见三个亲人，正停车商量悼念自己的事情。
English: At that time, the Daohui family lived in Dajiannan, Beijing, so he went home by himself. When he walked to the Soapstone Bridge, he saw three relatives who were parking their cars to discuss and mourn his death.

古文：至门，见婢行哭而市。
现代文：到了家门，看见女婢们正在大街上哭。
English: And when he came to the door of the house, he saw the maids weeping in the street.

古文：彼人及婢，咸弗见也。
现代文：别人和婢女好像没有看见他。
English: The others and the maid did not seem to see him.

古文：道惠将入门，置向铜物门外树上，光明舒散，流飞属天，良久还小，奄尔而灭。
现代文：道惠进门前，就把铜物放在门外的树上，于是，一片光明，霞光满天，很长时间后逐渐变小了，不久即消失。
English: When Daowei came in front of the door, he placed the bronze object on the tree outside the door. As a result, a bright light filled the sky. After a long time, it gradually became smaller, and soon disappeared.

古文：至户，闻尸臭，惆怅恶之。
现代文：进屋后，闻到尸体的臭味，失望而厌恶。
English: After entering the house, he smelled the stench of dead bodies and was disgusted and disappointed.

古文：时宾亲奔吊，哭道惠者多。不得徘徊，因进入尸，忽然而苏。
现代文：当时亲人朋友正吊丧，哭道惠的人很多，难以进去，徘徊后终进尸体中，忽然苏醒过来。
English: At that time, relatives and friends were in mourning, there were many people crying, it was difficult to get in, and after wandering, they finally entered the corpse and suddenly woke up.

古文：说所逢车人及市婢，咸皆符同。
现代文：说起刚才遇见的事与人及在街上哭的女婢的情形，大家都说是这样的。
English: That's what everyone said about the things and people they had just met, and about the maids crying in the street.

古文：道惠后为廷尉，预西堂听诵，未及就列，欻然顿闷，不识人。半日乃愈。计其时日。即道人所戒之期。
现代文：后来道惠作了廷尉。一次，准备在西堂审案，没坐下就觉心闷，也认不清人，半天才好，仔细考虑计算这个时间，正是和尚告戒的那个日期。
English: Later, Dao Hui became a courtier. Once, when preparing to hear a case in the West Hall, he did not sit down and felt depressed, and could not recognize anyone. It was only half a day, and he carefully considered the calculation of this time, which was the date when the monk renounced.

古文：顷之。迁为广州刺史。元嘉六年卒，八十九矣。
现代文：不久，又升任为广州刺史，元嘉六年死，终年八十九岁。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to the post of Guangzhou chief historian. Yuan Jia died six years later, at the age of 89.

古文：僧善道
现代文：僧善道
English: Sozen-do

古文：僧善道者，在新野时，见有一人来寺中会，叉手恭敬，精进过常。
现代文：善道和尚在新野时，看见一个人来到寺庙朝拜。双手交叉，恭恭敬敬。
English: When he was a Zen priest in Shino, he saw a man come to the temple to worship. His hands were crossed, bowing respectfully.

古文：善道问： 贤者何乃用心如此？ 
现代文：虔诚的样子超过平常人。善道就问他： 贤者为什么这样用心？ 
English: He looked more pious than the average person. The virtuous asked him, "Why do the wise have such an earnest heart?

古文：其人曰： 我曾死三日。见有十余间瓦屋，下有数吏。有一轮，如作瓮均，径广二丈余。有铁叉，又著均上，均转如风。求死不得，一宿二日，眼眩心闷。
现代文：那人说： 我已死去三天，看见有十多间瓦房，房中有好多官吏，有个大轮子，像作瓮的转轮，直径有二丈多，有铁叉安在轮上，轮转如风，求死不得，这样一夜二天，我眼眩心闷。
English: The man said, "I have been dead for three days. I saw more than ten tile-roofed rooms, many officials in the rooms, a large wheel, like a spinning wheel for a plow, with a diameter of more than two feet, with an iron fork attached to the wheel, spinning like the wind. I couldn't die. For a night or two, my eyes were dazzled and I was depressed.

古文：有赤帻吏来，捉数枚简及一笔，问此是何人，均边人曰： 佛弟子，时不精进，但持生礼行就人，无有慈心。 
现代文：来了一个戴红头巾的人，拿着几张纸和一支笔，问这个人是谁？轮子旁一个人回答说： 他是佛家弟子，修行不深，只不过对人有礼貌罢了，没有善心。 
English: A man in a red headscarf came up, holding a few pieces of paper and a pen, and asked who this man was. A man next to the wheel replied: "He's a Buddhist disciple, his practice isn't deep, he's just polite to people, he doesn't have a kind heart."

古文：吏问曰： 此人罪略当毕，遣归。 
现代文：官吏说： 这个人罪不大，放他回去吧。 
English: The officials said, "This man's crime is not serious, let him go home."

古文：于是得去，乃活。
现代文：于是得以离开并复活。
English: So he was able to leave and come back to life.

古文：弟子未更此一死，实喜以生礼行就人。嫁女取妇家，恒五升面二双鸡，礼士大夫。
现代文：我没有死，实在是因为我平生以礼待上，嫁女儿娶儿媳都是五升面两只鸡，尊敬读书知礼的人。
English: I didn't die, really, because I've always treated everyone with courtesy, marrying my daughter and daughter-in-law are two chickens in a five-square-meter dish, and I respect people who know how to read.

古文：今日叉手呼佛，手适相离，已后恐堕均上。 
现代文：今日两手相叉，这样专心侍佛，是害怕再坠到轮子上。
English: Today, my hands are crossed, and I'm so focused on serving the Buddha that I'm afraid of falling onto the wheel again.

古文：李旦
现代文：李旦
English: Li Dan

古文：宋李旦，字世则，广陵人也，以孝谨质素，著称乡里。
现代文：南朝宋代李旦，字世则，广陵人。因为孝顺老人，行为谨慎而闻名乡里。
English: Southern Dynasty, Song Dynasty, Li Dan, Zhe Zhe, Guangling people. Because of filial piety to the elderly, the village is famous for its prudent behavior.

古文：元嘉三年，正月十四日，暴病，心不冷，七日而苏。
现代文：南朝宋文帝元嘉三年，正月十四日，得暴病而死。心口尚有余温，七天后又苏醒过来。
English: On the 14th day of the first month of the third year of the Southern Dynasty of Emperor Songwen, Emperor Yuanjia died of a violent illness. His heart was still warm, and he woke up seven days later.

古文：唅以饮粥，宿昔复常。
现代文：早晨能喝粥，过了一夜第二天恢复正常。
English: I was able to drink porridge in the morning. After one night, I was back to normal the next day.

古文：云，有一人，将信幡来至床头。称府君教唤，旦便随去。
现代文：他说：看见一个人，拿着信幡来到床前，说府君叫他去，他就随着走了。
English: He said: "I saw a man come up to the bed holding a letter banner and say that the governor had asked him to go, and he went with him.

古文：直向北行，道甚平净。
现代文：一直向北走，道路很干净。
English: Keep going north, the road is clear.

古文：既至，城阙高丽，似今宫阙。遣传教慰劳，呼旦可前。
现代文：到了一座城，城楼很高又很堂皇，很象现在的宫殿，府君派人慰劳，并叫李旦上前边来。
English: When they arrived at a city, the city tower was very high and magnificent, very much like the present palace. The governor sent someone to console them and called Li Dan to come forward.

古文：至大厅上，见有三十人，单衣青帻，列坐森然。
现代文：到大厅上，看见有三十人，都是穿单衣戴青头巾，排列坐着非常威严。
English: When I got to the hall, I saw thirty people, all wearing singlets and blue headscarves, sitting in a very dignified manner.

古文：一人东坐，被袍隐几，左右侍卫，可有百余。
现代文：其中有一人面朝东而坐，披着袍坐在茶几的后面。左右侍卫足有百余人。
English: One of them sat facing east, wearing a robe and sitting behind a coffee table. There were more than a hundred attendants on either side.

古文：视旦而语坐人云： 当示以诸狱，令世知也。 
现代文：那个人看着李旦对在坐的人说： 应该让他看看这些地狱，让世人也了解这里。 
English: The man looked at Li Dan and said to the people sitting there, "You should let him see these hells, so that the world will also know about this place."

古文：旦闻言已，举头四视，都失向处，乃是地狱中。
现代文：李旦听到话已讲完，抬头四顾，原来的一切都消失了，竟然是在地狱中。
English: After Li Dan finished his speech, he looked up and saw that everything had disappeared and he was in hell.

古文：见群罪人，受诸苦报，呻吟号呼，不可忍视。
现代文：看见一群罪人，正在痛苦地受到各种报应。呻吟呼喊，不忍目睹。
English: To see a group of sinners, suffering all kinds of retribution, groaning and crying, is unbearable to witness.

古文：寻有传教称： 府君放君还去，当更相迎。 
现代文：一会儿，有人传话，说： 府君放你回去，以后再叫你来。 
English: After a while, someone sent a message saying: "Governor, let you go back, I'll call you later."

古文：因此而还。 
现代文：因此才得以活过来了。
English: That's why I was able to survive.

古文：至六年正月复死，七日又活。
现代文：到了元嘉六年正月又死了，七天后又活。
English: In the first month of the sixth year of Yuan Jia, he died again, and seven days later he was alive again.

古文：述所见事，较略如先。
现代文：叙说死时所见到的事与前一次大致相同。
English: The account of what he saw when he died is much the same as the previous one.

古文：或有罪人寄语报家，道生时犯罪，使为作福。
现代文：有的罪人让他传话给自己家里人。说，自己活着时犯了罪，让家人为他修福。
English: Some sinners asked him to send a message to their family members, saying that they had committed a crime when they were alive, and asked their family members to pray for him.

古文：稍说姓字亲识乡伍，旦依言寻求，皆得之。
现代文：那些罪人简单地说了自己的姓氏住址，李旦按他们说的都找到了。
English: The criminals simply said their surnames and addresses, and Li Dan found them all.

古文：又云，甲申年当行疾疠，杀诸恶人。
现代文：李旦又说甲申年有流行病，是为了除掉一些恶人。
English: Li Dan also said that there was an epidemic in Jiaxing in order to get rid of some evildoers.

古文：佛家弟子，作八关斋，修心善行，可得免也。
现代文：佛家弟子，作八关斋，修心作善事积德，可以免除这场灾难。
English: Buddha's disciples can avoid this calamity by fasting for eight days, cultivating the mind, doing good deeds and accumulating virtues.

古文：旦本作道家祭洒，即欲弃录本法，道民谏制，故遂两事，而常劝化作八关斋。
现代文：李旦本是道教祭酒，于是想放弃本法，信道教的人劝阻他，所以通达了两种教。常常劝别人遵守八关斋。
English: Li Dan was originally a Taoist sacrificial wine, so he wanted to give up this law. Taoist believers dissuaded him, so he reached two religions. He often advised others to observe the eight-day fast.

古文：梁甲
现代文：梁甲
English: Liang Jia

古文：北齐时，有仕人姓梁，甚豪富。
现代文：北齐时，有个做官的人姓梁，非常富有。
English: At the time of the Northern Qi Dynasty, there was an official surnamed Liang who was very rich.

古文：将死，谓其妻子曰： 吾平生所爱奴马，使用日久，称人意。
现代文：快死的时候，对他的妻子说： 我平生喜爱的奴仆和马，经常使用，他们很称我意。
English: When he was about to die, he said to his wife: I have always loved servants and horses, I often use them, they are very dear to me.

古文：吾死，可以为殉。
现代文：我死后就让他们殉葬。
English: When I die, I'll be buried with them.

古文：不然，吾所弃也。 
现代文：不然，我会很遗憾的。 
English: Otherwise, I will be very sorry.

古文：及死，家人囊盛土，压奴杀之，马犹未杀。
现代文：等到梁甲死时，家人就用袋子装上土把奴仆压死，马没有杀死。
English: When Liang Jia died, his family used a bag of earth to crush the servant to death, but did not kill the horse.

古文：奴死四日而苏，说云，初不觉去，忽至官府，留止在门。经宿，见亡主被锁，兵卫引入。见奴谓曰： 我谓死人得使奴婢，故遗言唤汝。
现代文：奴仆死后四天就苏醒过来，说： 开始时不知不觉就去了，忽然来到一座官府，被留在门外住了一宿，看见已故去的主人被锁着，后来差役引他进府，梁甲见了对奴仆说： 我以为死人也可使用奴仆，才留下遗言叫你来。
English: Four days after the death of the slave, he woke up and said: At the beginning, I went unconsciously, I suddenly came to a government office, I was left outside the door and stayed for one night, I saw the deceased master was locked, and later the guard led him into the house. Liang Jia saw it and said to the slave: I thought that the dead could also use slaves, so I left a last word to call you.

古文：今各自受其苦，全不相关。
现代文：现在各自受苦，不分主人奴隶。
English: Now they suffer separately, slaves to whatever master.

古文：今当白官放汝。 
现代文：我去请求官吏放你回去。 
English: I'll go and ask the officials to let you go.

古文：言毕而入。
现代文：说完就进去了。
English: After saying that, he went inside.

古文：奴从屏外窥之，见官问守卫人曰： 昨日压脂多少乎？ 
现代文：我从屏风外窥视，着看见官吏正问守卫人员说： 昨天去压取了多少油水？ 
English: Peering through the screen, I saw officials asking the guards: How much oil and water did you extract yesterday?

古文：对曰： 得八斗。 
现代文：守卫人员说： 得了八斗。 
English: The guards said, "He got eight dowels."

古文：官曰： 更将去，压取一斛六斗。 
现代文：官吏说： 再去一次，压取他十六斗。 
English: The official said, "Let's go again and squeeze him for 16 dou."

古文：主则被牵出，竟不得言。
现代文：这时梁甲被领出来，没有机会说话。
English: At this time, Liang Jia was led out and did not have a chance to speak.

古文：明旦又来，有喜色。谓奴曰： 今当为汝白也。 
现代文：第二天梁甲又来了，面带喜色，对奴仆说： 今天可以为你求情了。 
English: The next day, Liang Jia came again, his face radiant with joy, and said to his servant, "Today, I can plead for you."

古文：又入。
现代文：进入屋内，官吏问有收获吗？
English: Entering the house, the official asked, "Is there anything to be gained?"

古文：官问得脂乎，对曰： 不得。 
现代文：回答说： 没有。 
English: "No," he replied.

古文：官问何以，吏曰： 此人死三日，家人为请僧设会，每闻经呗声，铁梁辄折，故不得也。 
现代文：官问为什么，差吏说： 这个人已死三天了，家人为他请和尚设道场，每当听到念经的声音，铁梁立即折断了，所以没有收获。 
English: When the official asked why, the police officer said: This man has been dead for three days. His family asked a monk to set up a dojo for him. Whenever he heard the sound of chanting, the iron beam immediately broke, so there was no harvest.

古文：官曰： 且将去。 
现代文：官说： 你去吧。 
English: The official said: Go ahead.

古文：吏白官： 请放奴。 
现代文：守卫的人请求放了那个奴仆。
English: The guards begged for the release of the slave.

古文：官即令放。与主俱出门，主遣传语妻子曰： 赖汝追福，获免大苦。然犹未脱，更能造经像以相救，冀因得免。
现代文：官吏就答应马上放奴仆，于是奴仆与主人梁甲一同出门。梁甲让奴仆传话给他的妻子说，多亏她设道场为我追福，才免除了更大的痛苦，但仍然没有解脱，还要造一个佛像我才能得救，希望因此而免除灾难。
English: The officials agreed to release the slave immediately, so the slave went out with his master, Liang Jia. Liang Jia asked the slave to send a message to his wife saying that thanks to her setting up a dojo to seek blessings for me, I was spared greater suffering, but still there was no relief, and I had to make a Buddha image to be saved, hoping to be spared from disaster.

古文：言毕而别，奴遂重生，而具言之。
现代文：从这以后不要用东西祭祀，我越是不吃东西，就越无罪。 
English: From now on, don't use things to make sacrifices. The more I don't eat, the more innocent I am.

古文：家中果以其日设会，于是倾家追福，合门练行。
现代文：说完就分开了。奴仆复生后，全家为他追福，全念佛修行了。
English: After saying this, they separated. After the slave was revived, the whole family sought blessings for him, and all of them practiced Buddha-remembrance.

古文：任义方
现代文：任义方
English: Ren Yifang

古文：唐括州刺史乐安任义方，武德年中，死经数日而苏。
现代文：唐朝，括州刺史乐安任义方，唐高祖武德年间，死后数日又复活了。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, including the reign of Emperor Le'an and the reign of Emperor Wu of the Tang Dynasty, he was resurrected a few days after his death.

古文：自云，被引见阎罗王。
现代文：自己说，他被引去见阎王，阎王命令差役把他带入地狱。
English: He said that he was taken to see the king of hell, and the king of hell ordered the guards to take him to hell.

古文：王令人引示地狱之处，所说与佛经不殊。又云，地下昼日昏暗，如雾中行。
现代文：他所说的地狱与佛经里说的没有不同。又说，地下白天黑夜都很昏暗，就象在雾中行走一样。
English: The hell he spoke of was no different from that described in Buddhist scriptures. He also said that underground, day and night are very dark, just like walking in a fog.

古文：时其家以义方心上少有温气，遂即请僧行道，义方乃于地下闻其赞呗之声。
现代文：家人因为他死后心口处还温暖，就去请和尚替他行道。义方在地下听到了和尚为他念经的声音。
English: Because his heart was still warm after his death, his family went to ask a monk to walk the path for him. Yoshikata heard the sound of the monk chanting for him underground.

古文：王检其案，谓吏曰： 未合即死，何因错追？ 
现代文：阎王核验了生死簿，对差吏说： 他不应该现在死，为什么错抓了他？ 
English: Yan Wang checked the life and death book and said to the policemen: He shouldn't die now, why did they arrest him by mistake?

古文：遂放令归。
现代文：于是就让放他回去。
English: So they let him go back.

古文：义方出，度三关。关吏皆睡。送人云，但寻呗声，当即到舍。
现代文：义方离开地府时连过了三道关，守卫关口的差吏都睡着了，送他的人说： 只要你按照念经的声音一路寻去，就一定能到家。
English: When Yoshikata left the mansion, he passed through three gates in a row. The officials guarding the gates were asleep. His escort said, "As long as you follow the sound of the chanting all the way, you will definitely be able to get home."

古文：见一坑当道，意欲跳过，遂落坑中，应时即起。
现代文：任义方在路上看见一个坑，想跳过去，却掉在坑中，马上就活过来了。
English: Ren Yifang saw a pit on the road and wanted to jump over, but fell into the pit and immediately came back to life.

古文：论说地狱，画地成图。
现代文：之后，诉说起地狱的情形，并在地上画图解说。
English: He then describes the hellish conditions and draws a diagram on the ground to illustrate his point.

古文：其说得奉禄，皆造经像，曾写《金刚般若》千余部。
现代文：从此以后他所得到的奉禄都用来建造佛像。并写了《金刚般若经》千余部。
English: From then on, he used his stipend to build Buddha statues and wrote more than a thousand copies of the Diamond Sutra.

古文：义方自说。
现代文：这是义方自己说的。
English: This was said by Yoshikata himself.

古文：齐士望
现代文：齐士望
English: Qishiwang Mountain

古文：魏州武强人齐士望，贞观二十一年，死经七日而苏。
现代文：魏州武强人齐士望，于唐贞观二十一年，死后七天又复生。
English: Qi Shibang, a military strongman from the state of Wei, was resurrected seven days after his death in the 21st year of the reign of Emperor Zhengyuan of Tang.

古文：自云，初死之后，被引见王，即付曹司，别遣勘当。
现代文：他自己说：刚死之后，被领去见阎王，阎王又把他交给曹司，让曹司查验他是否应该死。
English: He himself said that just after he died, he was taken to see the king of hell, and the king of hell handed him over to Cao Si, and let Cao Si check whether he should die.

古文：经四五日，勘簿云： 与合死者同姓字，然未合即死。 
现代文：过了四五天，曹司查看名册说： 他与该死的人同姓名，他不该现在死。
English: After four or five days, Cao Si checked the register and said, "He has the same name as the condemned man. He shouldn't die now."

古文：判官语士望曰： 汝生平好烧鸡子，宜受罪而归。 
现代文：判官对士望说：你生平喜欢烧鸡，应当受罪后再回去。 
English: The judge said to Shifang: You like to roast chicken in your life, you should be punished and then go back.

古文：即命人送其出门。
现代文：马上派人把士望送出门，去到离曹司一二里的地方。
English: They immediately sent someone to escort him to a place one or two miles away from Cao Si.

古文：去曹司一二里，即见一城门，城中有鼓吹之声，士望忻然趋走而入之。
现代文：看见一座城门，城中有鼓乐吹奏之声，士望就很欣然地走进去。之后，城门就关上了。
English: Seeing a gate in the city with the sound of drums and cymbals, he gladly entered, and then the gate was closed.

古文：入后，城门已闭，其中更无屋宇，遍地皆是热灰。
现代文：城中没有屋子，遍地都满是热灰。
English: There are no houses in the city, and the ground is covered with hot ash.

古文：士望周章不知所计，烧灼其足，殊常痛苦。
现代文：士望惊恐不知所措，热灰烧灼他的脚，非常痛苦。
English: Shi Wang was terrified and at a loss for words. The hot ash burned his feet, which was very painful.

古文：士望四顾，城门并开，及走向门，其扉即掩。
现代文：士望环顾四周，城门都开了，等走到门口，门又马上关闭。
English: Shibang looked around, the gates were all open, and when he reached the door, the door was immediately closed.

古文：凡经一日，有人命门者曰： 开门，放昨日罪人出。 
现代文：这样过了一天，有人命令看门的人说： 把门打开，放昨日的罪人出来。 
English: After a day like this, someone ordered the doorkeeper: "Open the door and let yesterday's sinners out."

古文：即命人送归。
现代文：于是就派人送他回来。
English: So they sent someone to bring him back.

古文：使者辞以路遥，迁延不送之。始求以钱绢，士望许诺。
现代文：但差役推说路太遥远，不送他，并向士望索求钱物，士望答应了他。
English: However, the policeman reasoned that the road was too far away and did not send him, and asked Shibang for money. Shibang agreed.

古文：遂经历川涂，践履荆棘。
现代文：之后，他们跋山涉水，披荆踏棘。
English: After that, they trekked through the mountains and waded through the water, wearing thorns and thorns.

古文：行至一处，有如环堵，其中有坑，深黑。
现代文：走到一个地方，好像四周都是围墙，其中还有一坑，又深又黑。
English: I came to a place that seemed to be surrounded by a wall, and in it there was a pit, deep and dark.

古文：士望惧之，使者推之，遂入坑内，不觉渐苏。
现代文：士望很害怕，使者推他，就掉进坑内，不觉中苏醒过来。
English: Shibang was very scared. The messenger pushed him, and he fell into the pit and woke up unconsciously.

古文：寻乃造纸钱等待焉，使者依期还到，士望妻亦同见之。
现代文：之后，就找纸造钱，等待使者来取，使者如期来到，士望的妻子也同时见到了使者。
English: After that, he looked for paper to make money and waited for the messenger to come and fetch it. The messenger came as scheduled, and Shibang's wife also saw the messenger.

古文：杨师操
现代文：杨师操
English: Yang Shiguo

古文：雍州醴泉县人杨师操，贞观中，任蓝田县尉。
现代文：雍州醴泉县人杨师操，唐贞观年间，任蓝田县尉。
English: Yang Shiguo, a native of Shiquan County, Yongzhou, was appointed as a lieutenant of Lantian County during the reign of Tang Zhenguan.

古文：尉后以身老还家，躬耕为业。
现代文：后来告老还乡，以躬耕为生。
English: Later, he returned to his hometown as an old man and made a living as a farmer.

古文：然立性毒恶，喜见人过。每乡人有事，无问大小，即录告官。
现代文：然而他生性恶毒，喜欢抓人的过错，每当乡里人有事情，不论大小都记下来去报告官府。
English: However, he is malicious by nature and likes to find fault with others. Whenever there is a problem in the village, no matter how big or small, he writes it down and reports it to the government.

古文：县令装瞿昙，用为烦碎，初不与理。
现代文：县令裴瞿昙，因为都是小事，起初不予受理。
English: The county magistrate, Pei Jun, did not accept the case at first because it was a minor matter.

古文：师操或上表闻天，人皆不喜。
现代文：师操就上书皇帝，人们都不喜欢他。
English: People don't like him because he's the emperor.

古文：每谓人曰： 吾性虽急暴，从武德已来，四度受戒，日诵经论。
现代文：师操常对人说： 我虽性情急暴，但从唐高祖武德以来，四次受戒，日日诵经。
English: Shifu often said to people: Although I have a violent temperament, I have been disciplined four times since Tang Gao, and I recite the sutras every day.

古文：然有人侵己，则不能忍。 
现代文：如果有谁侵犯我，我就不能忍受。 
English: I can't stand it if someone abuses me.

古文：到永徽元年，四月七日夜，见著青衣人，骑白马从东来，云，东阳大监追汝，须臾不见。
现代文：到了高宗永徽元年四月七日夜，他看见一个穿青衣的人，骑白马从东边来，说： 东阳大监追捕你。 片刻就不见了。
English: On the evening of April 7th, the first year of Gaozong Yonghui's reign, he saw a man in a blue robe riding a white horse coming from the east and said, "The Dongyang Grand Commissioner is chasing you."

古文：师操身忽倒。已到东阳都录处。
现代文：师操忽然倒地而亡，这样他就到了东阳都录处。
English: Shifu suddenly fell to the ground and died, so he went to the Dongyangdu Recording Office.

古文：于时府君大衙未散，师操遂私行曹司，皆有几案床席。
现代文：当时府君大衙还没散，师操私下来到曹司，看见有几案床席。
English: At that time, the prefectural government had not yet dispersed, and the teacher came down to Cao Si and saw that there were several cases on the bed.

古文：见囚人，或著枷锁，露头散腰，或坐立行住。如是不可算数。
现代文：还有囚犯，有的戴着枷锁，有的没扎头巾和腰带，有坐着的，也有行走的，犯人很多，不可胜数。
English: There were also prisoners, some in chains, some without headscarves or belts, some sitting, some walking. There were so many prisoners that they could not be counted.

古文：师操向东行，到一处，有孔极小，唯见小星流出，臭烟蓬勃。
现代文：师操向东走，到了一个地方，有一小孔，有火星流出，臭烟熏天。
English: The teacher went to the east, and arrived at a place where there was a small hole with a stream of smoke, and the stench was overwhelming.

古文：有两人手把铁棒，修理门首。
现代文：有两个人手拿着铁棒，正在修理门框。
English: Two men with iron bars in their hands were repairing the door frame.

古文：师操问： 此是何曹司？ 
现代文：师操问： 这是什么曹司？ 
English: The teacher asked: What is this Cao Cao?

古文：答云： 是猛火地狱，拟著持戒不全人。
现代文：回答说： 是猛火地狱。准备惩罚那些吃斋念佛而行为不正的人。
English: He replied, "It is the raging fire of hell, ready to punish those who eat, fast and chant the Buddha's name while doing wrong."

古文：闻有杨师操，一生喜论人过，逢人诈言惭愧，有片言侵凌，实不能忍。
现代文：听说有个叫杨师操的人，一生喜欢评论别人的过错，为人狡诈，有一句话触犯，他就不能忍让。
English: I heard that there is a person named Yang Shiguang, who likes to comment on other people's mistakes all his life, he is cunning, and if there is a word that offends, he cannot tolerate it.

古文：欲遣入此，故修理之。
现代文：打算把他关到这里，所以才修理这门。
English: They were going to put him in here, that's why they fixed the door.

古文：今日是四月八日，其家为师操身死，布施斋供，曹司平章欲放归，未得进止。我在此待。 
现代文：今天是四月八日，他的家人因为师操已死，正为他而布施斋供食品。曹司平章想放他回去，还没有最后判定，我们在这等待他。 
English: Today is April 8th, his family is giving alms and providing food for him because his teacher has died. Cao Si Ping Zhang wants to let him go back, but has not yet made a final decision. We are waiting for him here.

古文：师操便叩头礼谢云： 杨师操者，弟子身是。愿作方便。 
现代文：师操听后就叩头谢罪说： 我就是杨师操，希望你们行个方便。 
English: After listening to the exercises, he bowed his head and said, "I am Yang Shifu, I hope you have a convenient trip."

古文：答云： 尔但志礼十万佛，勤心忏悔，改却毒心，即往生乐处。 
现代文：答说： 你只要诚心念佛修练，常专心忏悔，改掉毒心，就会一生快乐。 
English: He said, "As long as you sincerely recite and practice the Buddha's teachings, repent often, and get rid of your poisonous heart, you will be happy for the rest of your life.

古文：师操依语声发愿，遂蒙放还，经三日却活。
现代文：师操依言发誓，于是就得以放还，三天后就复活了。
English: Shigu swore by his words, so he was released, and three days later he was resurrected.

古文：操具述于慧靖禅师，改过忏悔。
现代文：师操把这些经过就都对慧靖禅师说了，从此改过忏悔。
English: The disciple recounted these experiences to Zen Master Hui Jing and has since repented.

古文：今见年七十五，每一食长斋，六时礼念。
现代文：现在已经七十五岁了，天天吃斋念佛。
English: Now he is seventy-five years old, and he fasts and chants the Buddha's name every day.

古文：后梦前追使者云： 尔既止恶，更不来追。但勤诚修善而已。 
现代文：后来，有一次梦见以前追捕他的使者对他说： 你已经不再作恶事，就不再来追你了，只要你勤心修行就可以了。 
English: Later, in a dream, the messenger who had been pursuing him said to him, "Now that you have stopped doing bad things, I won't chase you anymore, as long as you practice diligently."

古文：裴则子
现代文：裴则子
English: Bae Zetsuko

古文：唐曹州离狐人裴则男，贞观末，年二十，死经三日而苏。
现代文：唐朝，曹州离狐人裴则的儿子，唐太宗贞观末年，二十岁，死后三天又复活了。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, Caozhou left the son of the fox Pei Ze, Tang Taizong Zhenguan in his last years, twenty years old, and three days after his death, he was resurrected.

古文：自云，初死，被一人将至王所，王遣将牛耕地。诉云： 兄弟幼小，无人扶侍二亲。 
现代文：他自己说：刚死时，被一人带到阎王住所。阎王派他驾牛耕地，他说： 兄弟幼小，没人服侍父母。 
English: He himself said: When he had just died, he was taken to the residence of the king of hell by one person. The king of hell sent him to drive cattle to cultivate the land. He said: Brothers are small, no one serves their parents.

古文：王即愍之，乃遣使将向南。
现代文：阎王怜悯他，就派人带他向南走。
English: The king of hell took pity on him and sent someone to take him south.

古文：至第三重门，入见镬汤及刀山剑树，数千人头皆被斩，布列地上，此头并口云大饥。
现代文：过了第三道门，进去后看见一大锅热汤及刀山剑树。数千人的头被斩掉，堆在地上。这些头上的嘴都说非常饥饿。
English: After the third door, I entered and saw a big pot of hot soup and a sword tree. Thousands of people's heads were cut off and piled on the ground. The mouths on these heads said they were very hungry.

古文：当村有一老母，年向七十，时有未死，见在镬汤前燃火。
现代文：同村的一个老妇人，年约七十，当时还没死，在锅前烧火。
English: An old woman from the same village, about seventy years old, who was not dead at the time, was making a fire in front of the pot.

古文：观望讫，还至王前，见同村人张成，亦未死。
现代文：看完这些后，又回到阎王跟前。看见同村人张成，也未死。
English: After seeing all of this, he returned to the king of hell and saw his fellow villager Zhang Cheng, who was also still alive.

古文：有一人诉成云： 毁破某屋。 
现代文：有一人告张成说： 张毁坏了我的房屋。 
English: One person told Zhang Cheng: "Zhang destroyed my house.

古文：王遣使检之，报云： 是实。 成曰： 犁地，不觉犁破其冢，非故然也。 
现代文：王派人查验这件事，回报说： 是事实，张成说： 我犁地时，不觉犁破他的屋子，不是故意的。 
English: Wang sent someone to investigate the matter and replied, "It's true." Zhang Cheng said, "When I was digging, I broke into his house unintentionally. It wasn't intentional."

古文：王曰： 汝虽非故心，终为不谨。 
现代文：阎王说： 你虽不是故意的，但还是不谨慎。 
English: Yan Wang said: Although you didn't do it on purpose, you are still careless.

古文：且遂令人杖其腰七下。
现代文：于是命令人打张成的腰七下。
English: So the order was given to raise the waist seven times.

古文：有顷，王曰： 汝更无事，放汝早还。 
现代文：过了一会，阎王说： 你已经没事了，放你早点回去。 
English: After a while, the king of hell said: You're all right now, let you go back early.

古文：乃使人送去，遣北出逾墙，及登墙，望见己舍，遂闻哭声，乃跳下墙，忽觉起坐。
现代文：就派人送他走。向北越过一道墙，在墙头上看见了自己的家，并且听到哭声，就跳下墙恍惚中醒了过来。
English: He sent someone to take him away. He crossed a wall to the north, saw his home at the top of the wall, and when he heard crying, he jumped off the wall and woke up from his trance.

古文：既苏之后，具为乡曲言之。邑人视张成，腰上有杖迹，迹极青黑。
现代文：活了之后，和乡里人详细说了这中间的经过，乡里人看张成的腰，果然有被打的伤痕，痕迹青黑明显。
English: After he was revived, he told the villagers about the incident in detail. When the villagers looked at Zhang Cheng's waist, there were indeed bruises from being beaten, and the marks were clearly black and blue.

古文：问其毁墓，答云，不虚。
现代文：问他毁墓的事，他说：不假。
English: Asked about the desecration, he said: "It's true.

古文：老母寻病，未几而死。
现代文：之后，老妇人便得病，不久便死了。
English: After that, the old woman fell ill and died soon after.

古文：河南府史
现代文：河南府史
English: History of Henan Province

古文：洛阳郭大娘者，居毓财里，以当垆为业，天宝初物故。
现代文：郭大娘住在洛阳毓财里，以开酒店为生。唐玄宗天宝年初病故。
English: Guo's eldest daughter lived in Luoyang's Shizhe Village and ran a hotel for a living. Tang Xuan Zong Tianbao died of illness at the beginning of the year.

古文：其夫姓王，作河南府史。
现代文：他的丈夫姓王，是河南府史。
English: His husband's surname is Wang, and he is a Henan prefectural historian.

古文：经一年，暴卒，数日复活。
现代文：一年后，他丈夫也暴死，几天后又复活。
English: A year later, his husband also died violently and was revived a few days later.

古文：自说，初被追见王，王云： 此人虽好酒，且无狂乱，亦不孤负他人，算又未尽，宜放之去。 
现代文：他自己说：刚死时被捕去见阎王，阎王说： 这个人虽是好渴酒，但并不狂乱，也不愧对他人，算起来他的命数未尽，应该放他回去。 
English: He himself said: He was arrested when he was just about to die and went to see the king of hell. The king of hell said: Although this man is a good drinker, he is not crazy, he is also worthy of others, his life is not over, he should be allowed to go back.

古文：处分讫，令所追人引入地狱，示以罪报。
现代文：阎王处理完毕，就命追捕他的人把他带进地狱，让他看看犯罪的报应。
English: After dealing with the king of hell, he ordered his pursuers to take him to hell and let him see the retribution of crime.

古文：初至粪池狱，从广数顷，悉是人粪。
现代文：首先带他到粪池地狱，有数顷地那么大都是人粪。
English: First, take him to the cesspool hell, where several hectares of land are mostly human excrement.

古文：见其妻粪池中受秽恶，出没数四。某悲涕良久。
现代文：看见他的妻子受污秽罪，在粪池中沉浮多次，他悲痛地哭了很久。
English: He wept bitterly for a long time as he watched his wife suffer the crime of defilement and sink and rise several times in the cesspool.

古文：忽见一人头，从空中落，堕池侧，流血滂沱。
现代文：忽然，一个人头，从空中坠落粪池旁边，血流如注。
English: Suddenly, a man's head fell from the sky and landed next to the cesspool, bleeding profusely.

古文：某问此是何人头也，使者云，是秦将白起头。
现代文：他问这是什么人的头？使者说： 这是秦朝大将白起的头。 
English: He asked, "Whose head is this?" The messenger said, "This is the head of the general of the Qin Dynasty, Bai Zuo."

古文：某曰： 白起死来已千余载，那得复新遇害？ 
现代文：他又说： 白起已死了一千多年，怎么能重新遇害？ 
English: He also said: Baiqi has been dead for more than a thousand years, how can he be killed again?

古文：答曰： 白起以诈坑长平卒四十万众，天帝罚之，每三十年一斩其头。迨一劫方已。
现代文：使者答： 白起用欺诈手段坑害长平兵卒四十多万人，天帝惩罚他每三十年斩一次头，直到一万年为止。 
English: The messenger replied, "He has killed more than 400,000 soldiers and civilians by fraudulent means. The Heavenly Emperor will punish him by beheading him once every thirty years for ten thousand years.

古文：又去一城中，悉是煻煨火。有数千人，奔走其间。
现代文：使者又带他到一座城中，遍地都是炭火灰，有数千人奔走在里面。
English: And they brought him to a city that was all in ashes, and thousands of men were running to and fro in it.

古文：遥望城间驰欲出，至辄已闭。
现代文：远远地看见城门想快快跑出去，等跑到门口，城门就关闭了。
English: He saw the gate in the distance and wanted to run out, but when he got to the gate, it was closed.

古文：盘回其间，苦痛备急。
现代文：他们似徘徊在火中，痛苦倍急。
English: They seem to linger in the fire, painfully anxious.

古文：事了别王，王言汝好饮酒，亦是罪。
现代文：看完地狱，告别阎王，阎王说你好饮酒也有罪，终究应该给他点疾病。
English: After seeing hell, bid farewell to the king of hell. The king of hell says that you are also guilty of drinking alcohol, after all, you should give him some disease.

古文：终须与一疾，不然，无诫将来。令左右以竹杖染水，点其足上。因推坑中，遂活。
现代文：否则无以告诫后人。于是命左右差役用竹杖染水，点在他的脚上，并趁机推到坑中。这样就复活了。
English: Otherwise, there would be no way to warn future generations. Therefore, he ordered the left and right guards to dye water with a bamboo cane, point it at his feet, and take the opportunity to push it into the pit. In this way, he was revived.

古文：脚上点处，成一钉疮，痛不可忍。
现代文：脚上被点的地方，从此长了一个疔疮，痛不可忍。
English: The place on my foot where I was stung has since developed an abscess, which is excruciatingly painful.

古文：却后七年方死。
现代文：之后七年才死。
English: He died seven years later.

古文：周颂
现代文：周颂
English: Zhou Song

古文：周颂者，天宝中，进士登科。
现代文：周颂，唐天宝年间，考取进士。
English: Zhou Song, Tang Tianbao years, passed the entrance examination.

古文：永泰中，授慈溪令。
现代文：永泰年间，被授予慈溪县令。
English: During the Yongtai era, he was awarded the Cixi County Order.

古文：在官，夜暴卒，为地下有司所追。至一城，其人将颂见王。
现代文：在任期间，一天夜里暴死。因为地府有司追捕，到一座城，这个差役将周颂带去见阎王。
English: During his term of office, he died suddenly one night. Because the prefectural government had a division to hunt him down, the officer took Zhou Song to a city to see the king of hell.

古文：门外忽逢吉州刺史梁乘，问颂何以至此地狱耶？ 初颂虽死，意犹未悟。
现代文：在门外忽然遇到了吉州刺史梁乘。梁乘问周颂为什么来到地狱，当初周颂虽死，但还没悟到自己已死。
English: Outside the door, he suddenly met a member of the Kishu clan, Liang Rong. Liang Rong asked Zhou Song why he had come to hell. At first, Zhou Song was dead, but he had not yet realized that he was dead.

古文：闻道地狱，心甚凄然。
现代文：听说这是地狱，心很凄楚悲伤。
English: Hearing that this is hell, my heart is so sad.

古文：因哽咽悲涕，向乘云： 母老子幼，漂寄异城，奈何而死。
现代文：因此，流着泪对梁乘说： 母亲岁数大了，孩子还小，又漂泊在他乡，为什么让我死呢？
English: Therefore, she shed tears and said to Liang Rong: My mother is old, my child is still small, and I am drifting in another village. Why let me die?

古文：求见修理。 
现代文：请你求见阎王述说其理。 
English: I implore you to see the King of Hell and tell him the reason.

古文：乘言当相为白。君第留此。
现代文：梁乘说应当为你说情，你先留在门外。
English: Liang Rong said that he should intercede for you, and you should stay outside the door.

古文：入门，闻呵叱云，判官见王，久之乃出。
现代文：梁乘进门听到呵叱声。判官见了阎王，很久才出来。
English: Liang Rong heard a scolding sound when he entered the door. It took the judge a long time to come out when he saw Yan Wang.

古文：谓颂曰： 已论遣，君宜暂见王，无苦也。 
现代文：对周颂说： 已决定让你回去，你先见见阎王，没有什么痛苦。 
English: He said to Zhou Song: It has been decided to let you go back, you will see hell first, there is no pain.

古文：有顷，使者引颂入见王，王形貌甚伟。头有两角。
现代文：过了一会，使者带颂进去见阎王。阎王形貌魁伟，头上有两角。
English: After a while, the messenger with the ode went in to see the king of hell. The king of hell is very tall and has two horns on his head.

古文：问颂曰： 公作官，不横取人财否？ 
现代文：问周颂说： 你作官时，不强取百姓的钱财吗？ 
English: Zhou Song asked: When you were an official, didn't you extort money from the people?

古文：颂云： 身是平时进士出身，官至慈溪县令，皆是累历，未常非理受财。 
现代文：颂说： 我是进士出身，官至慈溪县令，都是正常升迁，从来也没有收过不义之财。 
English: He said, "I am a graduate of Jin Shi, and I have been promoted normally from officer to Cixi County magistrate. I have never received any ill-gotten gains.

古文：王令检簿，检讫，云： 甚善甚善，既无勾当，即宜还家。
现代文：王令查看簿子，查看之后说： 很好，很好，既然没有做坏事，就马上放他回家吧。
English: Wang Ling examined the book and said, "Very good, very good. Since he has not done anything bad, let him go home immediately."

古文：衣裳得无隳坏耶。 
现代文：衣裳没有损坏吧？ 
English: Your clothes aren't damaged, are they?

古文：颂意谓衣裳是形骸。便答云： 适尔辞家，衣裳故当未损。 
现代文：周颂以为衣裳就是形骸，便回答说： 刚刚离开家，衣裳没有损坏。 
English: Zhou Song thought that the clothes were the remains, so he replied: I just left home, the clothes are not damaged.

古文：再拜辞出。
现代文：再拜告辞。
English: Say goodbye again.

古文：乘甚喜云： 王已相释，理可早去。 
现代文：梁乘很高兴地说： 阎王已放你，应该早些回去。 
English: Liang Rong said happily, "The king of hell has released you, you should go back earlier."

古文：颂云： 道路茫昧，何尔归去？ 
现代文：周颂说： 道路遥远迷茫，怎么回去呢？ 
English: Zhou Song said: The road is far away and confused, how can I go back?

古文：乘令追人送颂。
现代文：梁乘就派追捕他的人送他回去。 
English: Liang Rong sent his pursuers to take him back.

古文：行数里，其人大骂云： 何物等流，使我来去迎送如是。
现代文：走了几里路，差役大骂说： 你是什么东西，让我来去送迎这么辛苦。
English: After walking a few miles, the policeman scolded him: "What are you, making me come and pick you up so hard?

古文：独不解一言相识，孤恩若是。如得五千贯，当送汝还。 
现代文：素不相识又没什么恩情，如果你给我五千贯，我就送你回去。 
English: If you give me five thousand yuan, I will send you back.

古文：颂云： 纸钱五千贯，理易办。 
现代文：周颂说： 纸钱五千贯，得容易办到。 
English: Zhou Song said, "It is easy to make 5,000 yuan worth of paper money.

古文：因便许之。
现代文：于是就答应了这个要求。
English: So he agreed to this request.

古文：使者乃行十余里，至一石井，坐其侧，复求去。人言入井即活，更何所之。遂推颂落井而活。
现代文：使者又带他走了十多里路，来到一口石井边，坐在井旁，周颂还想再走，那人说入井就活了，你还要去哪里，便把周颂推入井中，他便复活了。
English: The messenger also took him more than ten miles away, came to a stone well, sat by the well, Zhou Song still wanted to go again. The man said that if he went into the well, he would live. Wherever you want to go, he pushed Zhou Song into the well, and he revived.

古文：卢弁
现代文：卢弁
English: Rouben

古文：卢弁者，其伯任湖城令。
现代文：卢弁的伯父任湖城县令，卢弁从东都前去省亲。
English: Lu Ben's uncle was the county magistrate of Hucheng County. Lu Ben went from Dongdu to visit his uncle.

古文：弁自东都就省，夜宿第二谷。
现代文：晚上住在第二谷。
English: In the evening stay in the second valley.

古文：梦中见二黄衣吏来追，行至一所，有城壁。
现代文：梦中看见二个穿黄衣的差吏来追捕他，把他带到一个地方，有城墙。
English: In his dream, he saw two yellow-clad policemen chasing him and taking him to a place with city walls.

古文：入城之后，欲过判官。
现代文：入城之后，想见判官。
English: After entering the city, I wanted to see the judge.

古文：属有使至，判官出迎。
现代文：正好有使臣到，判官出迎。
English: Just as the envoys arrived, the judges came out to greet them.

古文：吏领住一舍下，其屋上有盖，下无梁。
现代文：差役领卢在一座房子里住下。房子上有盖，但没有梁，柱子下有十个大磨。
English: The guard took Lu to live in a house with a roof, but no beams, and ten large mills under the pillars.

古文：柱下有大磨十枚，磨边有妇女数百，磨恒自转。
现代文：磨边有妇女数百人，磨一直自己转动，有十多个牛头卒。
English: There are hundreds of women at the grinding edge, the mill has been turning on its own, and there are more than ten cowherds.

古文：牛头卒十余，以大箕抄妇人，置磨孔中，随磨而出，骨肉粉碎。痛苦之声，所不忍闻。
现代文：用簸箕撮妇人倒入磨眼中，顿时随磨的转动而流出来粉碎的骨肉。痛苦之声，惨不忍闻。
English: With a pick, the woman pours into the eye of the mill, and suddenly, as the mill rotates, the pulverized flesh flows out. The sound of pain is unbearable.

古文：弁于众中，见其伯母，即湖城之妻也，相见悲喜，各问其来由。
现代文：弁在众人群中看见他的伯母，就是湖城县令的妻子，两人相见悲喜交加，互问来这里的原因。
English: Ben saw his aunt, the wife of the county magistrate of Hucheng, in the crowd. The two of them were sad and happy to see each other, and asked each other why they came here.

古文：弁曰： 此等受罪云何？ 
现代文：弁说： 在这里受罪是因为什么？ 
English: Ben said: What is the reason for suffering here?

古文：曰： 坐妒忌，以至于此。 
现代文：伯母说： 是因为妒嫉，才到这地步。 
English: My aunt said: "It's because of jealousy that it's come to this.

古文：弁曰： 为之奈何？ 
现代文：弁说： 这怎么办呢？
English: Ben said, "What about this?

古文：伯母曰： 汝素持《金刚经》，试为我诵，或当减罪。 
现代文：伯母说： 你素来坚持念《金刚经》，试着为我念《金刚经》，或许可以给我减罪。 
English: My aunt said, "You have always insisted on reciting the Diamond Sutra. Try to recite the Diamond Sutra for me, and perhaps you can reduce my crime."

古文：弁因持经，磨遂不转，受罪者小息。
现代文：弁就开始念经，磨便不转了，受罪的妇女暂时可以稍停受苦。
English: When the priest begins to chant, the mill does not turn, and the suffering woman can temporarily stop suffering.

古文：牛头卒持叉来弁所，怒曰： 何物郎君，来此诵经，度人作事。 
现代文：牛头卒拿着叉来到卢弁跟前，愤怒地说： 你是什么人，来这念经？替别人作事解除痛苦。 
English: The cowherd came to Lu Ben with a fork and said angrily, "Who are you to recite this sutra? Do things for others to relieve their suffering."

古文：弁对曰： 伯母在此。 
现代文：卢弁说： 我伯母在这里。 
English: Lu Ben said: My aunt is here.

古文：卒云： 若惜伯母，可与俱去。 
现代文：牛头卒说： 如果痛惜你的伯母，就带她一起走。 
English: The cowherd said, "If you feel sorry for your aunt, take her with you.

古文：弁遂将伯母奔走出城，各归就活。
现代文：卢弁就带着伯母奔跑出城，各自回家，得以复活。
English: Lu Ben took his aunt and ran out of the city. They went home separately and were able to revive.

古文：初，弁唯一小奴同行，死已半日，其奴方欲还报，会弁已苏。
现代文：当初卢弁与小奴同走，卢弁已死了半天，小奴正准备回去报告，恰好卢弁已苏醒。
English: At the beginning, Lu Ben was walking with Xiao Nong. Lu Ben had been dead for half a day, Xiao Nong was preparing to go back to report, and Lu Ben had just woken up.

古文：后数日，至湖城，入门，遇伯设斋。
现代文：几天后，到了湖城，正赶上伯父设斋。
English: A few days later, I arrived in Hucheng, just in time for my uncle to set up a stall.

古文：家人见弁，惊喜还报。伯母迎执其手曰： 不遇汝，当入磨中。
现代文：家人看见卢弁，惊喜的回报，伯母迎出来拉着卢弁的手说： 不遇见你，我就得进入磨孔中。
English: When the family saw Lu Ben, they were pleasantly surprised. Auntie greeted Lu Ben by holding out her hand and saying, "If I don't meet you, I'll have to go into the grinding pit."

古文：今得重生，汝之力也。 
现代文：今日得以重生，都是你出的力呀。 
English: You are the one who made it possible for me to be reborn today.

