古文：俞叟陈季卿陈生张定石旻唐武宗朝术士
现代文：俞叟陈季卿陈生张定石旻唐武宗朝术士
English: Chen Jiqing, Chen Sheng, Zhang Dingshi, Tang Wusong Dynasty sorcerer

古文：俞叟
现代文：俞叟
English: 

古文：尚书王公潜节度荆南时，有吕氏子，衣敝举策，有饥寒之色，投刺来谒。
现代文：尚书王潜在任荆南节度使时，有个姓吕的小伙子，穿着破衣，骑着毛驴，面带饥寒之色，递进名刺来拜见王潜。
English: When Wang Xiu, the potential king of Shangshu, was on his way to the Jingnan Festival, a young man surnamed Lu, wearing tattered clothes, riding a donkey, with a face of hunger and cold, came to visit Wang Xiu.

古文：公不为礼。
现代文：王潜很不礼貌地待他。
English: Wang Qian treated him very rudely.

古文：甚怏怏，因寓于逆旅。
现代文：吕生心里不痛快，就住在旅馆里。
English: Unhappy in his heart, Lv Sheng stayed in a hotel.

古文：月余，穷乏益甚，遂鬻所乘驴于荆州市。
现代文：过了一个多月，吕生的穷困程度更加严重，就到荆州集市去卖他所骑的那头驴。
English: After more than a month, Liusheng's poverty level became even more serious, so he went to the Jingzhou bazaar to sell the donkey he was riding.

古文：有市门监俞叟者。召吕生而语，且问其所由。
现代文：有个市门监俞叟，把吕生叫过来跟他说话，又问他来这里有什么事。
English: A city gate guard called Lv Sheng to come and talk to him, and asked him what he was doing here.

古文：吕生曰： 吾家于渭北，家贫亲老，无以给旨甘之养。
现代文：吕生说： 我家住在渭北，家里贫穷，父母年老，我没有什么好吃的东西供养老人。 
English: Lv Sheng said: My family lives in the north of Fujian Province. My family is poor and my parents are old. I don't have anything good to eat to feed the elderly.

古文：府帅公吾之重表丈也，吾不远而来，冀哀吾贫而周之。
现代文：府帅公是我的重表伯父，我不怕路远而来拜访他，指望他可怜我家贫寒能周济我。
English: Fusai Gong is my great-uncle. I am not afraid to travel far to visit him, hoping that he will take pity on my poor family and help me.

古文：入谒而公不一顾，岂非命也？ 
现代文：可是我进去拜见他时，他不理睬我，这难道不是命运吗？ 
English: But when I went in to see him, he ignored me. Wasn't that fate?

古文：叟曰： 某虽贫，无资食以周吾子之急。然向者见吾子有饥寒色，甚不平。
现代文：俞叟说： 我虽然贫穷，没有钱粮来周济你的急难，然而刚才看到你面带饥寒之色，觉得很不公平。
English: Zou said, "Although I am poor and have no money or grain to help you in your time of need, I feel it is very unfair to see you looking so hungry and cold just now.

古文：今夕为吾子具食，幸宿我宇下。 
现代文：今天晚上我为你准备一顿饭，希望你住在我的家里。 
English: I am preparing a meal for you tonight, and I would like you to stay at my house.

古文：生无以辞焉。 
现代文：吕生没话推辞，就答应了。
English: Without a word of refusal, Lv Sheng agreed.

古文：吕生许诺。于是延入一室，湫隘卑陋，摧檐坏垣，无床榻茵褥。致敝席于地，与吕生坐，语久命食，以陶器进脱粟饭而已。
现代文：于是俞叟把他领进一个房间，那里低矮简陋，房檐和墙壁都坏了，没有床榻，也没有草垫和褥子也就是用陶器盛来脱了皮的粟米饭而已。
English: So the donkey led him into a low, shabby room, with broken eaves and walls, no bed, no straw mattresses or mattresses, just a pot of skinned corn.

古文：食讫，夜既深，谓吕生曰： 吾早年好道，常隐居四明山，从道士学却老之术，有志未就，自晦迹于此，仅十年，而荆人未有知者。
现代文：吃完饭以后，夜已经很深了，俞叟对吕生说： 我早年喜好道术，曾经隐居在四明山，跟着道士学习防止衰老的方术，有志向却没成功，自己就隐匿形迹来到这里，将近十年了，而荆州没有知道我底细的人。
English: After eating, it was already late at night. Zhai said to Lv Sheng: In my early years, I was fond of Taoism. I used to live in seclusion in Shiming Mountain and study the ways to prevent aging with Taoists. I had aspirations but did not succeed. I came here without a trace for nearly ten years, and there was no one in Jingzhou who knew the details about me.

古文：以吾子困于羁旅，得无动于心耶？
现代文：因为你被困在旅馆里，我能无动于心吗？
English: Because you're stuck in a hotel, can I not care?

古文：今夕为吾子设一小术，以致归路裹粮之费，不亦可乎？ 
现代文：今天夜里替你安排一个小小法术，用它帮你弄到回去的路费，不也是可以的吗？ 
English: Isn't it possible to arrange a small spell for you tonight, and use it to help you get the fare back?

古文：吕生虽疑诞妄，然甚觉其异。
现代文：吕生虽然怀疑这可能是荒诞虚妄的事情，然而也觉得这事很奇异。
English: Although Lv Sheng suspected that this might be an absurd and preposterous thing, he also thought it was very strange.

古文：叟因取一缶合于地，仅食顷，举而视之，见一人长五寸许，紫绶金腰带，俯而拱焉。
现代文：俞叟就拿出一个瓦器放在地上，将近吃顿饭的时间，把那个瓦器拿起来一看，看到里面有一个身高五寸左右的小人，系着紫色的绶带金色的腰带，低着头拱着手。
English: He took out a pottery vessel and placed it on the ground. It was almost time for dinner. He picked up the pottery vessel and looked at it. Inside, he saw a small man about five inches tall, wearing a purple ribbon and a gold belt, with his head bowed and his hands in the air.

古文：俞叟指曰： 此乃尚书王公之魂也。 
现代文：俞叟指着那个小人对吕生说： 这就是尚书王公的魂灵啊。 
English: Zou pointed to the little man and said to Liusheng, "This is the spirit of Prince Shangshu."

古文：吕生熟视其状貌，果类王公，心默而异之。
现代文：吕生仔细地观看那个小人的状态和相貌，果然很像王潜，心里默默地觉得奇怪。
English: Lv Sheng carefully observed the state and appearance of the little man, and found that he really resembled Wang Qian. He silently felt strange.

古文：因戒曰：吕乃汝之表侄也，家苦贫，无以给旦夕之赡，故自渭北不远而来。
现代文：俞叟就告诫那个小人说： 吕生本来是你的表侄，家里为贫所苦，没有力量供养父母，特意从渭北不怕遥远来找你。
English: Zou then admonished the little man, saying: Lv Sheng was originally your cousin. His family suffered from poverty and did not have the strength to support his parents. He deliberately came to you from the far north of Shandong.

古文：汝宜厚给馆谷，尽亲亲之道。
现代文：你应当优厚待他，安排住处，供给粮米，尽到关心亲戚的责任。
English: You should treat him well, arrange a place to live, provide grain and rice, and fulfill the responsibility of caring for relatives.

古文：汝何自矜，曾不一顾，岂人心哉！
现代文：你为什么这么倨傲，竟不看顾一下？难道没有人心吗？
English: Why are you so proud that you don't care? Don't you have a heart?

古文：今不罪汝，宜厚赀之，无使为留滞之客。 
现代文：今天我不责罚你，你应当多多资助他，不要使他再作滞留之客了。 
English: Today I will not chastise you, but you shall surely help him with many things, and let him not remain as a stranger any longer.

古文：紫衣偻而揖，若受教之状。
现代文：那个穿紫衣的人躬身作揖，好像接受教训的样子。
English: The man in purple cringes, as if he's been taught a lesson.

古文：叟又曰： 吕生无仆马，可致一匹一仆，缣二百匹，以遗之。 
现代文：俞叟又说： 吕生没有仆人和马匹，可以送给他一匹马一个仆人，再拿二百匹双丝细绢赠送给他。 
English: Yao also said, "Liusheng has no servants or horses. You can give him a horse, a servant, and two hundred double-threaded reeds."

古文：紫衣又偻而揖。
现代文：穿紫衣的人又躬身作揖。
English: The man in purple bowed again.

古文：于是却以缶合于上，有顷再启之，已无见矣。
现代文：于是俞叟又把瓦器放回地上，过了一会儿，再掀起那个瓦器，那个小人已不见了。
English: So the badger put the earthenware back on the ground. After a while, he lifted the earthenware again, and the little man was gone.

古文：明旦，天将晓，叟谓吕生曰： 子可疾去，王公旦夕召子矣。 
现代文：第二天早晨，天快亮的时候，俞叟对吕生说： 你应当赶快回去，王公很快就会召你去了。 
English: The next morning, when it was nearly dawn, Zou said to Liusheng, "You should hurry back, the prince will call you soon."

古文：及归逆旅，王公果使召之，方见且谢曰： 吾子不远见访，属军府务殷，未果一日接言，深用为愧，幸吾子察之。 
现代文：等到吕生回到旅馆后，王公果然派人召他，他就随着差人去了。刚一见面，王公就道歉说： 你不怕路途遥远来拜访我，我管理的军府事务太多，没能抽出时间接待你，好好谈谈，因此很惭愧，希望你能体谅。 
English: After waiting for Lv Sheng to return to the hotel, Wang Gong did indeed send someone to summon him, and he went with the messenger. As soon as they met, Wang Gong apologized and said: You are not afraid of the long journey to visit me, I manage too many military affairs, I did not have time to receive you and have a good talk, so I am very ashamed, I hope you can understand.

古文：是日始馆吕生驿亭，与宴游累日。
现代文：当天就安排吕生到驿亭去住，又与他游乐了几天。
English: On the same day, he arranged for Lv Sheng to live in Yueting, and spent a few days with him.

古文：吕生告去，王公赠仆马及缣二百。
现代文：吕生告辞要走，王公赠给他仆人马匹和二百匹双丝细绢。
English: When Lv Sheng bade farewell and was about to leave, the prince gave his servant horses and two hundred double-threaded reeds.

古文：吕生益奇之，然不敢言。及归渭北，后数年。因与友人数辈会宿，语及灵怪，始以其事说于人也。
现代文：吕生更加觉得这事奇异，但不敢说，等回到渭北几年后，因为与几位友人相聚住在一起，谈到灵怪之事，他才把那件事说给别人听。
English: Lv Sheng thought this was even more strange, but he didn't dare to say anything. It wasn't until a few years after he returned to Shandong that he told others about it, because he had gathered with several friends to live together and talk about the strange thing.

古文：陈季卿
现代文：陈季卿
English: Chen Jiching

古文：陈季卿者，家于江南。
现代文：陈季卿家住江南，离开家里已经十年了，去考进士，立志考不中不回家。
English: Chen Jicheng lives in the south of the Yangtze River. He has been away from home for ten years. When he went to take the entrance examination, he made up his mind that if he failed, he would not go home.

古文：辞家十年，举进士，志不能无成归，羁栖辇下，鬻书判给衣食。常访僧于青龙寺，遇僧他适，因息于暖阁中，以待僧还。
现代文：因为一直没考中，就滞留在京城，靠卖字维持衣食。他经常到青龙寺去拜访和尚，有一次，因为和尚外出，他就在暖阁中休息，等着和尚回来。
English: Because he never took the middle school entrance examination, he stayed in the capital and supported himself by selling his writing. He often went to the Qinglong Temple to visit the monk. Once, because the monk was out, he rested in the warm pavilion and waited for the monk to return.

古文：有终南山翁，亦伺僧归，方拥炉而坐，揖季卿就炉。
现代文：有个终南山的老头，也等候和尚回来，正在炉旁坐着，他就揖让陈季卿到炉旁来。
English: An old man from the southern mountains, who was also waiting for the monk to return, was sitting by the stove, and he asked Chen Jieqing to come to the stove.

古文：坐久，谓季卿曰： 日已晡矣，得无馁乎？ 
现代文：坐了很久了，那个老头对陈季卿说： 太阳已经偏西了，你大概饿了吧？ 
English: After sitting for a long time, the old man said to Chen Jicheng, "The sun has set, so you must be hungry, right?"

古文：季卿曰： 实饥矣，僧且不在，为之奈何？ 
现代文：陈季卿说： 真的有些饿了，可是和尚又不在，怎么办呢？ 
English: Chen Jieqing said, "I'm really a little hungry, but the monk isn't here, what should I do?

古文：翁乃于肘后解一小囊，出药方寸，止煎一杯，与季卿曰： 粗可疗饥矣。 
现代文：老头就从肘后解下一个小口袋，拿出一寸见方的一块药，只煎了一杯，把它给了陈季卿，说： 用它大约可以解除饥饿了。 
English: The old man unzipped a small pouch from behind his elbow, took out a one-inch-square piece of medicine, fried only one cup, and gave it to Chen Jixing, saying, "You can probably relieve hunger with it."

古文：季卿啜讫，充然畅适，饥寒之苦，洗然而愈。
现代文：陈季卿喝完以后，觉得肚里饱饱的，心情也舒畅了，饥寒的痛苦全消失了。
English: After drinking it, Chen Jieqing felt that his stomach was full, his mood was comfortable, and the pain of hunger and cold had all disappeared.

古文：东壁有《寰瀛图》，季卿乃寻江南路，因长叹曰： 得自谓泛于河，游于洛，泳于淮，济于江，达于家，亦不悔无成而归。 
现代文：暖阁东边墙上有一幅《寰瀛图》，季卿就去寻找江南之路，不觉长叹说： 能够从渭水泛舟到黄河，到洛阳一游，到淮河游泳，渡过长江，回到家里，也就不为没有成就功名而还家感到后悔了。 
English: On the east wall of the warm pavilion, there is a "Dragonfly Map." Ji Qing Rong went to find the way to the south of the Yangtze River. He sighed and said: I can raft from Surabaya to the Yellow River, visit Luoyang, swim to the Huaihe River, cross the Yangtze River, and return home. I do not regret returning home without any achievements.

古文：翁笑曰： 此不难致。 
现代文：老头笑着说： 这不难办到。 
English: The old man smiled and said, "It's not hard to do.

古文：乃命僧童折阶前一竹叶，作叶舟，置图中渭水之上，曰： 公但注目于此舟，则如公向来所愿耳。然至家，慎勿久留。 
现代文：就命僧童到阶前去折一片竹叶，做成叶舟，把它放到图中渭水之上，说： 您只要把目光集中在这只小船上，就能使你刚才所说的话如愿了；不过到了家里，千万不要久留。 
English: He told the monk to go to the front step, fold a bamboo leaf, make a leaf boat, put it on the water in the picture, and said, "If you just focus your eyes on this small boat, you can make what you just said come true; but when you get home, don't stay too long.

古文：季卿熟视久之，稍觉渭水波浪，一叶渐大，席帆既张，恍然若登舟。
现代文：陈季卿盯着那叶小舟注视了很久，渐渐觉得渭水起了波浪，一片竹叶也渐渐变大，像席子似的船帆已经张开，恍恍惚惚好像登上了船。
English: Chen Jicheng stared at the small boat for a long time. Gradually, he felt that there were waves in the muddy water, a piece of bamboo leaf gradually became larger, the sail like a mat had opened, and he seemed to have boarded the boat in a trance.

古文：始自渭及河，维舟于禅窟兰若，题诗于南楹云： 霜钟鸣时夕风急，乱鸦又望寒林集。
现代文：开始从渭水到了黄河，把船系在禅窟寺庙下，在南边柱子上题诗，写的是： 霜钟鸣时夕风急，乱鸦又望寒林集。
English: He started from Surabaya to the Yellow River, anchored the boat under the Zen cave temple, and inscribed a poem on the south pillar, writing: When the frost bell is ringing, the evening wind is strong, and the crows are looking at the cold forest.

古文：此时辍掉悲且吟，独向莲花一峰立。 
现代文：此时辍棹悲且吟，独向莲花一峰立。 
English: At this time, he was sad and sad, and the lone lotus flower stood on a peak.

古文：明日，次潼关，登岸，题句于关门东普通院门云： 度关悲失志，万绪乱心机。
现代文：第二天，到潼关停留，上了岸，在关门东普通院门题句，写的是： 度关悲失志，万绪乱心机。
English: The next day, I stopped at Shaoguan and went ashore. At the gate of the East General Hospital, I wrote a question: "Douguan is sad and disheartened, everything is chaotic.

古文：下坂马无力，扫门尘满衣。
现代文：下坂马无力，扫门尘满衣。
English: The horses on the downhill slope are weak, and the sweeping gate is covered with dust.

古文：计谋多不就，心口自相违。
现代文：计谋多不就，心口自相违。
English: It's not enough to have a good plan, you have to have a good heart.

古文：已作羞归计，还胜羞不归。 
现代文：已作羞归计，还胜羞不归。 
English: Shame has been reckoned with, but there is no shame in victory.

古文：自陕东，凡所经历，一如前愿。
现代文：从陕西向东行，凡所经历之外，完全像他以前希望的那样。
English: From Shaanxi to the east, everything he experienced was exactly as he had hoped.

古文：旬余至家，妻子兄弟，拜迎于门。
现代文：十几天到了家，他的妻子兄弟在门前拜迎。
English: A dozen days later, when he arrived home, his wife's brother greeted him at the door.

古文：夕有《江亭晚望》诗，题于书斋云： 立向江亭满目愁，十年前事信悠悠。
现代文：晚上又写了《江亭晚望》诗，题写在书斋，那首诗是： 立向江亭满目愁，十年前事信悠悠。
English: In the evening, he also wrote the poem "Jiangting Evening View," inscribed in the study, the poem is: Standing towards Jiangting, full of sorrow, ten years ago, things were going well.

古文：田园已逐浮云散，乡里半随逝水流。
现代文：田园已逐浮云散，乡里半随逝水流。
English: The countryside has been scattered by the clouds, and the countryside has been swept away by the current.

古文：川上莫逢诸钓叟，浦边难得旧沙鸥。
现代文：川上莫逢诸钓叟，浦边难得旧沙鸥。
English: There is no shortage of trout on the river, and it is rare to find old sand eels on the banks of the river.

古文：不缘齿发未迟暮，今对远山堪白头。 
现代文：不缘齿发未迟暮，吟对远山堪白头。 
English: If you don't brush your teeth before it's too late, you won't be able to see the distant mountains.

古文：此夕谓其妻曰： 吾试期近，不可久留，即当进掉。 
现代文：这天晚上对他的妻子说： 我试期临近，不能久留，应该登舟而去了。 
English: That evening he said to his wife: "My probation period is approaching, I can't stay long, I should get on the boat and go."

古文：乃吟一章别其妻云： 月斜寒露白，此夕去留心。
现代文：于是又吟诗一章赠别他的妻子，这首诗写的是： 月斜寒露白，此夕去留心。
English: So he also gave his wife a chapter of a chant to say goodbye to her. The poem was written: "The moon is waning, cold and dewy white, this evening go and pay attention."

古文：酒至添愁饮，诗成和泪吟。
现代文：酒至添愁饮，诗成和泪吟。
English: Wine to add sorrow to drink, poetry to chant with tears.

古文：离歌栖凤管，别鹤怨瑶琴。
现代文：离歌栖凤管，别鹤怨瑶琴。
English: Don't blame the harp if you can't sing.

古文：明夜相思处，秋风吹半衾。 
现代文：明夜相思处，秋风吹半衾。 
English: Tomorrow night, the autumn wind will blow half-heartedly.

古文：将登舟，又留一章别诸兄弟云： 谋身非不早，其奈命来迟。
现代文：将要登舟时，又留下一首诗赠别众兄弟，诗中写道： 谋身非不早，其奈命来迟。
English: When he was about to board the boat, he left a poem to bid farewell to his brothers. He wrote in the poem: It's not too early to die, but it's too late to live.

古文：旧友皆霄汉，此身犹路歧。
现代文：旧友皆霄汉，此身犹路歧。
English: Old friends are heroes, this is just a misunderstanding.

古文：北风微雪后，晚景有云时。
现代文：北风微雪后，晚景有云时。
English: After the northerly wind and light snow, the evening view is cloudy.

古文：惆怅清江上，区区趁试期。 
现代文：惆怅清江上，区区趁试期。 
English: On the Qingjiang River, take advantage of the trial period.

古文：一更后。复登叶舟，泛江而逝。
现代文：一更以后，陈季卿又登上了竹叶舟，在长江之上泛舟消失了。
English: A little later, Chen Jicheng boarded the bamboo-leaf boat again, and the raft disappeared on the Yangtze River.

古文：兄弟妻属，恸哭于滨，谓其鬼物矣。
现代文：他的兄弟妻子等人在江边痛哭，认为他成鬼物了。
English: His brother, his wife and others were crying bitterly by the river, thinking that he had become a ghost.

古文：一叶漾漾，遵旧途至于渭滨，乃赁乘，复游青龙寺，宛然见山翁拥褐而坐。
现代文：他凭借一叶小舟飘飘荡荡，循着旧路又回到渭水之滨。上岸以后，他租了一匹马，又来游青龙寺，清清楚楚地看到终南山那个老头依然围着粗麻衣坐着。
English: With the help of a small boat, he drifted and followed the old road back to the shore of Surabaya. After landing, he rented a horse and visited the Qinglong Temple, where he clearly saw the old man of the South Mountain still sitting around the coarse linen.

古文：季卿谢曰： 归则归矣，得非梦乎？ 
现代文：陈季卿就向老头道谢说： 我回是回去了。莫非是梦吗？ 
English: Chen Jicheng thanked the old man and said, "I went back. Was it a dream?

古文：翁笑曰： 后六十日方自知。 
现代文：老头笑着说： 六十天后你自己就知道了。 
English: The old man smiled and said, "You'll find out in sixty days."

古文：而日将晚，僧尚不至。翁去，季卿还主人。
现代文：这时天色将晚，和尚还没有回来，老头就走了，陈季卿也回到了旅馆。
English: At this time, it was getting late, the monk had not yet returned, the old man left, and Chen Jixing also returned to the hotel.

古文：后二月，季卿之妻子，赍金帛，自江南来，谓季卿厌世矣，故来访之。
现代文：两个月后，陈季卿的妻子带着金银和布帛从江南到来，说是季卿已经厌世了，特意来寻访他。
English: Two months later, Chen Jixing's wife arrived from the south of the Yangtze River with gold, silver and cloth, saying that Jixing was tired of the world and specially came to visit him.

古文：妻曰： 某月某日归，是夕作诗于西斋，并留别二章。 
现代文：他的妻子说： 某月某日回家，那天晚上在西斋作了诗，同时还有两首留别诗。 
English: His wife said: "When he came home on a certain day of a certain month, he wrote a poem in the evening, and there were also two farewell poems.

古文：始知非梦。
现代文：陈季卿这才知道他回家不是梦。
English: It was only then that Chen Jieqing knew that his return home was not a dream.

古文：明年春，季卿下第东归，至禅窟及关门兰若，见所题两篇，翰墨尚新。
现代文：第二年春天，陈季卿落榜向东回家去，到禅窟和潼关东门寺庙，看到自己所题写的两首诗笔墨还是新的。
English: In the spring of the following year, Chen Jixing, who had been voted off the list, went back home to the east, to the Zen cave and the East Gate Temple of Shuguang, and saw that the two poems he had written were still new.

古文：后年季卿成名，遂绝粒，入终南山去。
现代文：后来陈季卿考中，功成名就，便不再吃一粒粮食，入终南山而去。
English: Later, Chen Jixing passed the middle school entrance examination with great success, so he no longer ate a grain of grain and went to Nanshan for the last time.

古文：陈生
现代文：陈生
English: Chen Sheng

古文：茅山陈生者，休粮服气，所居草堂数间，偶至延陵，到佣作坊，求人负担药物，却归山居。
现代文：茅山的陈生，停止吃粮而练气，居住的地方有几间草堂。有一次，他偶然到延陵去，到出卖劳力的作坊找人帮他背药物，返回山中住处。
English: Chen Sheng from Mao Shan stopped eating grain to practice qi, and lived in several grass huts. Once, he happened to go to Yanling, to a workshop that sold labor, to find someone to help him carry medicine, and returned to his mountain residence.

古文：以价贱，多不肯。
现代文：因为工钱低，多数人都不肯。
English: Because of the low wages, most people refuse to work.

古文：有一夫壮力，然神少，颇若痴者，疥疮满身，前拜曰： 去得。 
现代文：有一个人力气大，然而智力不足，有点像痴呆的人，全身生满了疥疮，上前行礼说： 我可以去。 
English: A man with great strength but little intelligence, a bit like a demented person, his whole body covered with acne, stepped forward and said: I can go.

古文：遂令挈囊而从行，其直多少，亦不问也。
现代文：陈生就叫他拿着口袋跟着走，做活的工钱多少，那个人也不问。
English: Chen Sheng told him to take his bag and follow him. He didn't ask the man how much he was paid for his work.

古文：既至，因愿留采薪，都不计其价。与陈生约：日五束。陈曰： 吾辟谷，无饭与餐。 
现代文：到了茅山陈生居处以后，那个人就想要留下来砍柴，完全不计较价钱，他与陈生约定，每天砍五捆柴，陈生说： 我不吃粮食，没有饭给你吃。 
English: After arriving at Chen Sheng's residence in Mao Shan, the man wanted to stay and cut firewood, regardless of the price. He agreed with Chen Sheng to cut five bundles of firewood every day. Chen Sheng said: "I don't eat food, I don't have food to eat."

古文：答曰： 某是贫穷人，何处得食？
现代文：那个人回答说： 我是个贫穷的人，在什么地方能吃到饭？
English: The man replied, "I am a poor man. Where can I find food?

古文：但斸草根餐，亦可矣 遂每日斫柴十束，五束留于房内自烧，五束供陈生。
现代文：只要挖草根吃，也就可以了。 于是他每天砍十捆柴，五捆留在房内自己烧，五捆供陈生用。
English: So every day he chopped ten bundles of firewood, five bundles he left in the room to burn himself, and five bundles were used for the aged.

古文：会山有衣冠家妻患齿，诣陈生觅药，其家日求之，又令小婢送梨饼子之类。
现代文：恰逢山下有个士宦人家的妻子患了牙痛，拜访陈生寻觅药物，那家人天天来请求，又派小丫环送梨果饼子之类的食品。
English: At the same time, the wife of a Shi Yan family in the foothills of the mountain had a toothache and visited Chen Sheng in search of medicine. The family came every day to make requests, and sent a maiden to deliver food such as pear cakes.

古文：陈生休粮，果食亦不食也，每至，则被佣者接而食之。
现代文：陈生不吃粮食，果食也不吃，每次送来东西，就被雇来的那个人接过去吃了。
English: Chen Sheng does not eat grain, nor does he eat fruit. Every time he brings something, the hired man picks it up and eats it.

古文：仍笑谓曰： 明日更送来，我当有药。 
现代文：那个人还笑着对人家说： 明天再送来，我一定有药。 
English: The man also smiled and said to the others, "Bring it back tomorrow, I'm sure I'll have the medicine."

古文：如此者数四。
现代文：如此情形已有多次了。
English: This has happened several times.

古文：一日，佣者并送柴十束，纳陈生处，为两日用。
现代文：有一天，雇来的那个人一起送来十捆柴，放到陈生的住处，作为两天的用柴。
English: One day, the hired man brought ten bundles of firewood together and placed them in Chen Sheng's residence as firewood for two days.

古文：夜后遂扃门炽火，携一小锅入。
现代文：天黑以后，那个人把门锁上，在里面点火，拿一个小锅出来。
English: After dark, the man locked the door, lit a fire inside and took out a small pot.

古文：陈生密窥之，见于葫芦中泻水银数合，煎之。搅如稀饧，投一丸药，乃为金矣。
现代文：陈生偷偷地去看他干什么，看到他从葫芦中倒出几盒的水银，煎熬起来，搅拌得像稀饭，又投进一丸药，水银就变成金子了。
English: Chen Sheng secretly went to see what he was doing, and saw that he poured out several boxes of mercury from the gourd, heated it up, stirred it like porridge, and put in another pill, and the mercury turned into gold.

古文：佣者拈两丸，以纸裹置怀中，余作一金饼，密赍出门去。
现代文：那个人把它搓成两个丸，用纸包上放到怀里，剩下的做成金饼，悄悄地把它带着走出门去。
English: The man rolled it into two balls, wrapped it in paper and put it in his arms. He made the rest into a golden cake and quietly carried it out the door.

古文：明日日高起，求药者已至，乃持丸者付之。令患齿者含之。
现代文：第二天，太阳升起很高了，求药的人来到以后，那个人就把搓成的丸交给来人，叫患牙痛的人含着它。
English: The next day, the sun was high in the sky, and when the person who asked for the medicine arrived, that person gave the rolled-up pill to a stranger and asked the person with the toothache to hold it.

古文：一丸未半，乃平复矣，痛止，第出虫数十。
现代文：那个牙痛患者含了一丸，还没用到一半时就康复了，疼痛停止了，只是打出几十条小虫。
English: The patient with a toothache took one pill, and before he had used half of it, he recovered, the pain stopped, and only a few dozen worms came out.

古文：陈生伺佣者出，于房内搜而观之，得书二卷，不喻其旨，遂藏之。
现代文：陈生等那个雇来的人外出，在他的房间里搜寻观察，找到了两卷书，看不明白书上的意思，就把它藏起来。
English: Chen Sheng waited for the hired man to go out, searched and observed in his room, found two volumes of books, did not understand the meaning of the book, and hid it.

古文：佣者至，大怒，骂陈生。
现代文：雇来的那个人回来后，发现书不见了，很生气，就骂陈生。
English: When the hired man came back, he found that the book was gone. He was very angry and cursed Chen Sheng.

古文：生不敢隐，却还之。
现代文：陈生不敢隐瞒，就把书又还给了他。
English: Chen Sheng did not dare to hide it, so he gave the book back to him.

古文：曰： 某今去矣。 
现代文：那个人说： 我今天走了。 
English: The man said: I left today.

古文：遂出门，入水沐浴，乃变为美少年，无复疮疥也。
现代文：就出了门，跳入水里洗个澡，竟然变成了美少年，再也没有疥疮了。
English: I went out, jumped into the water to take a bath, and turned into a beautiful boy. I no longer had acne.

古文：拜讫，跳入深涧中，遂不知所之。
现代文：拜别之后，跳进深涧中，最终不知道他到哪里去了。
English: After saying his goodbyes, he jumped into the deep end, not knowing where he had ended up.

古文：张定
现代文：张定
English: Zhang Ding

古文：张定者，广陵人也，童幼入学。
现代文：张定是广陵人，少年入学。
English: Zhang Ding is from Guangling. The boy is enrolled in school.

古文：天寒月晓，起早，街中无人。
现代文：有一天他起得很早，天气很冷，一轮晓月挂在天边，街上没有人。
English: One day he got up very early, the weather was very cold, a bright moon hung in the sky, and there was no one on the street.

古文：独行百余步，有一道士行甚急，顾见之，立而言曰： 此可教也。 
现代文：张定独自走了一百多步，有一个道士走得很急。那个道士回头看见了他，就站住对他说： 你这个人可以教啊。 
English: Zhang Ding walked more than a hundred paces alone. One Taoist walked very fast. The Taoist looked back and saw him, stopped and said to him, "You can teach."

古文：因问： 汝何所好？ 
现代文：就问他： 你喜欢的事情是什么？ 
English: So I asked him: What are your favourite things?

古文：答曰： 好长命耳。 
现代文：他回答说： 喜欢长生不老。 
English: He replied: I would like to live forever.

古文：道流曰： 不难致。汝有仙骨，求道必成。
现代文：道士说： 这不难办到，你有仙骨，探求道术一定能成功。
English: The Taoist said, "It's not hard to do, you have a sacral bone, you will succeed in your pursuit of Taoism."

古文：且教汝变化之术，勿泄于人。
现代文：我暂且教给你变化的法术，不要泄露给别人。
English: For the time being, I will teach you the magic of change, but do not reveal it to others.

古文：十年外，吾自迎汝。 
现代文：十年后，我亲自接你。 
English: Ten years later, I'll pick you up myself.

古文：因以口诀教之。
现代文：于是把口诀教给了他。
English: So I taught him the trick.

古文：定谨讷小心，于家甚孝。亦曾私为此木，召鬼神、化人物，无不能者。
现代文：张定谨慎小心，不喜欢说话，在家里很孝顺，也曾偷偷地练习这个法术，召鬼神、变人物，没有不能变的。
English: Zhang Ding is cautious and careful, does not like to talk, is very filial at home, and has secretly practiced this spell, summoning ghosts and gods, changing characters, there is nothing that cannot be changed.

古文：与父母往连水省亲，至县，有音乐戏剧，众皆观之，定独不往。
现代文：有一次，他与父母一起去连水县探亲，到县以后，有音乐戏剧，大家都去观看，唯独张定不去。
English: Once, he and his parents went to Lianshui County to visit relatives. After arriving in the county, there was a musical drama, and everyone went to watch it, but Zhang Dinglu did not.

古文：父母曰： 此戏甚盛，亲表皆去，汝何独不看邪？ 
现代文：父母对他说： 这个戏很热闹，亲戚里外的人都去，为什么唯独你不去看呢？ 
English: His parents said to him: This play is very lively, relatives and non-relatives all go, why don't you go and see it?

古文：对曰： 恐尊长要看，儿不得去。 
现代文：张定回答说： 恐怕尊长要去，儿不能去。 
English: Zhang Ding replied, "I'm afraid your excellency has to go, but my son can't.

古文：父母欲往，定曰： 此有青州大设，可亦看也。 
现代文：父母要去，张定说： 这里有青州大戏，也可以看看。 
English: Parents should go, Zhang Ding said: There is the Qingzhou Grand Opera here, you can also watch it.

古文：即提一水瓶，可受二斗以来，空中无物。
现代文：就提着一个水瓶，可以装二斗以上，中间空空的没有东西。
English: He was carrying a water bottle, which can hold more than two buckets, with nothing empty in the middle.

古文：置于庭中，禹步绕三二匝，乃倾于庭院内，见人无数，皆长六七寸。官僚将吏、士女、看人，喧阗满庭。
现代文：把它放在院子里，像巫师道士作法迈步绕着水瓶走了二三圈，就把水瓶放倒在院子里。这时，出现了无数的人，都六七寸高，有官僚、将吏、士女和观看的人，满院子一片喧闹。
English: He put it in the courtyard, walked around the water bottle two or three times like a sorcerer and Taoist, and then put the water bottle down in the courtyard. At this time, countless people appeared, all six or seven inches high, including bureaucrats, officials, men and women, and onlookers. The courtyard was full of noise.

古文：即见无比设厅戏场，局筵队仗，音乐百戏，楼阁车棚，无不精审。
现代文：马上又出现了无法比拟的设厅戏场：队仗、楼阁车棚、音乐百戏，无不精密周详。
English: In no time at all, there appeared an incomparable set-up theater: a team battle, a garret car shed, and a hundred musical plays, all of which were meticulously detailed.

古文：如此宴设一日，父母与看之。
现代文：这样安乐地摆布了一天，父母与他一起观看。
English: He swam the entire day in this way, and his parents watched with him.

古文：至夕，复侧瓶于庭，人物车马，千群万队，逦迤俱入瓶内。
现代文：到天黑时，又把水瓶放倒在院子里，人物车马、千群万队曲折连绵地都进到瓶内。
English: When it got dark, he put the water bottle down in the yard again, and people, cars, horses, and thousands of people all made their way into the bottle.

古文：父母取瓶视之。亦复无一物。
现代文：父母把瓶拿起来看，瓶中又是空无一物。
English: The parents picked up the bottle and looked at it, but there was nothing in it.

古文：又能自以刀剑剪割手足，刳剔五脏，分挂四壁。良久，自复其身，晏然无苦。
现代文：张定又能用刀剑剪割自己的手脚，剜出五脏，分挂在四面墙壁上，过了很久，自己又恢复身体原状，安适地没有痛苦。
English: Zhang Ding was also able to cut his hands and feet with a sword, scoop out his guts, and hang them on four walls. After a long time, he restored his body to its original state, comfortably without pain.

古文：每见图障屏风，有人物音乐者，以手指之，皆能飞走歌舞，言笑趋动，与真无异。
现代文：每当他看到图障屏风，有人物音乐的，就用手去指点它们，都能飞走歌舞、说笑跑动，跟真的没有不同。
English: Whenever he sees a screen with characters and music, he points to them with his hand and can fly away singing, dancing, joking and running. It's no different from reality.

古文：父母问其从何学之，曰： 我师姓药，海陵山神仙也。
现代文：父母问他从哪里学来这套法术，他说： 我的师父姓药，是海陵山的神仙。
English: When his parents asked him where he learned this spell, he said, "My master's name is Medicine, and he is a fairy from Mount Hailing.

古文：已锡升天之道，约在十年，今七年矣。 
现代文：已经教我学会升天之道，约定在十年，现在已经七年了。 
English: He has taught me to learn the way of ascension to heaven. It has been seven years since the appointment of ten years.

古文：辞家入天柱潜山，临去白父母曰： 若有意念，儿自归来，无深虑也。 
现代文：于是与家里人告别入天柱山隐居，临走时告诉父母说： 如果你们心里想念我，儿自会回来，不要太忧虑了。 
English: So he bid farewell to his family and went into seclusion on Mount Tianzhu. Before leaving, he told his parents: "If you miss me, my son will come back. Don't worry too much."

古文：如是父母念之，即便还家，寻复飞去。
现代文：这样，每当父母想念他的时候，他就回到家里来，不久又飞去。
English: Thus, whenever his parents missed him, he would come home and soon fly away again.

古文：一日谓父母曰： 十六年后，广陵为瓦砾矣。可移家海州，以就福地。 
现代文：有一天，他对父母说： 十六年后，广陵将变成废墟了，可以把家搬到海州，而到福地去。 
English: One day, he said to his parents: Sixteen years later, Guangling will be in ruins. You can move your home to Haizhou and go to the land of happiness.

古文：留丹二粒与父母，曰： 服之百余年无疾。 
现代文：又留下两粒丹药给父母，说： 把这丹药服下，可以一百多年没有疾病。 
English: He also left two pills for his parents, saying, "If you take this pill, you can be free of illness for more than a hundred years."

古文：自此不复归。
现代文：从这次走后，他再也没有回家。
English: After this trip, he never returned home.

古文：父母服丹，神气轻爽，饮食嗜好，倍于少壮者。遂移居海州。
现代文：他的父母吃了丹药，神清气爽，饮食嗜好，比年轻力壮的人强一倍，于是就把家搬到了海州。
English: His parents took the elixir and moved to Haizhou. They were refreshed and their appetite was twice as strong as that of young and strong people.

古文：乾符中，父母犹在。
现代文：乾符年间，他的父母还活着。
English: His parents were still alive in the Heian period.

古文：石旻
现代文：石旻
English: Stonehenge

古文：有石旻者，不知何许人也。浪迹江湖之间，有年数矣。
现代文：有个叫石旻的人，不知道是哪里人，在江湖之中到处漂泊行止不定，已有很多年了。
English: There is a man named Shi Hao. I don't know who he is, but he has been wandering around the country for many years.

古文：道术玄妙，殆不可测。
现代文：他道术玄妙，几乎没人能想象得出来。
English: His magic is so subtle that almost no one can imagine it.

古文：长庆中，客于宛陵郡。
现代文：长庆年间，到宛陵郡作客。
English: During the Changqing period, he was a guest in Wanling County.

古文：有雷氏子，常为宣城部将。
现代文：有个姓雷的男子，曾经做过宣城部将。
English: There is a man with the surname Lei, who once served as the commander of Xuancheng.

古文：一日，与友人数辈会饮于郡南别墅，旻亦在座。
现代文：有一天，他与几位朋友在郡南的别墅中聚会饮酒，石旻也在座。
English: One day, he and several friends were drinking at a villa in the southern part of the county, and Ishizuka was also there.

古文：其家僮网得一鱼，长数尺，致于舍。
现代文：雷家的仆人用网打到了一条鱼，有几尺长，送到别墅来。
English: The servants of the Lei family caught a fish with a net, a few feet long, and brought it to the villa.

古文：是日，雷生与客俱深醉。
现代文：这一天，雷生与客人都醉得很厉害。
English: On this day, both Lei Sheng and his guests were very drunk.

古文：诸客尽去，独旻宿雷氏别墅。
现代文：众位客人都走了，唯有石旻住在雷家的别墅中。
English: All the guests have left, only Shidao is staying in Lei's villa.

古文：时夏暑方甚，及明日视其鱼，已败烂不可食矣。
现代文：时当盛夏，热得很，到第二天看看那条鱼，已经腐败臭烂不能吃了。
English: It was the height of summer and very hot. The next day, I looked at the fish and it was rotten and stinking. I couldn't eat it.

古文：家僮将弃之，旻谓之曰： 此鱼虽败，吾有良药，尚可活之，安可弃耶？ 
现代文：雷家仆人将要把这条鱼扔掉，石旻对他说： 这条鱼虽然坏了，我有好药，还可以让它活过来。 
English: The servant of the Lei family was about to throw the fish away. Shi Yao said to him: Although this fish is broken, I have good medicine and I can make it come back to life.

古文：雷生笑曰： 先生妄矣！诚有良剂，安能活此鱼耶？ 
现代文：雷生笑着说： 先生随便乱说，纵有好药，怎么能把这条腐烂的鱼救活呢？ 
English: Lei Sheng said with a smile: "The professor is just talking nonsense. Even if there is good medicine, how can this rotten fish be revived?

古文：曰： 吾子幸观之。 
现代文：石旻说： 希望您看看怎么救吧！ 
English: Ishizaki said, "I hope you can see how to save it!"

古文：于是衣中出一小囊，囊有药数粒，投于败鱼之上。
现代文：于是从衣服中拿出一个小口袋，口袋中有几粒药，他就把药倒到那烂鱼身上。
English: So he took out a small pocket from his clothes. There were a few pills in the pocket, and he poured the pills onto the rotten fish.

古文：仅食顷，其鱼鲜润如初，俄摇鬣振鳞，若在洪流中。
现代文：不过吃顿饭的时间，那条鱼就像当初一样新鲜湿润，不一会儿，就摇鳍振鳞，好像在洪流中游动。
English: But by dinnertime, the fish is as fresh and moist as it was when it was caught, and in no time at all, it's wiggling like it's swimming in a torrent.

古文：雷生惊异，再拜谢曰： 先生之术，可谓神矣！
现代文：雷生对此很惊奇，对石旻拜了两拜逊谢说： 先生的法术，可以说是神了！
English: Lei Sheng was very surprised at this, and bowed twice to Shi Yan, saying, "Teacher's magic can be said to be divine!

古文：某辈尘俗聋瞽，望先生高踪，若井鲋与云禽，焉得而为伍乎？ 
现代文：我们这些尘俗中的聋子瞎子，仰望先生高大的形象，如同井里的虾蟆与云中飞禽相比一样，哪里能与我们为伍呢？ 
English: We, the deaf and blind of the world, who look up to the lofty image of the Lord, like the shrimp in the well compared to the birds in the clouds, where can we find company?

古文：先是雷生有症疾积年，既而求旻衣中之丹饵，欲冀瘳其久苦。
现代文：在这之前，雷生得了腹中结块的病已经多年了，于是雷生就向石旻讨求他衣袋中的丹药，一心指望减少长久的痛苦。
English: Before this, it had been many years since Lei Sheng had been ill with a lump in his abdomen. Therefore, Lei Sheng asked Shi Yan for the medicine in his pocket, hoping to reduce the long-term pain.

古文：旻不可，且曰： 吾之丹至清至廉，尔曹俗人，嗜好无节。脏腑之内，腥膻委集。
现代文：石旻不同意，并且说： 我的丹药最清最廉，你们这些世俗之人嗜好没有节制，脏腑之内鱼、肉堆集。
English: Shi Hao disagreed and said, "My herbal medicine is the purest and cheapest. You worldly people have unrestrained appetites, with fish and meat piled up in your intestines.

古文：设使以吾丹饵求置其中，则脏腑之气与药相攻，若水火之交战，宁有全人乎？
现代文：假使把我的丹药要去吃到肚子中，那么脏腑中的污气与药力相攻，如同水火交战，难道还有完整的人吗？
English: If I were to swallow my medicine into my stomach, the foul gas in my intestines would fight against the medicine, like water fights fire. Is there still a complete human being?

古文：慎不可食。 
现代文：千万不能吃。 
English: You mustn't eat it.

古文：旻又言： 神仙不难得，但尘俗多累，若槛猿笼鸟，徒有骞翔超腾之心，安可致乎？ 
现代文：石旻又说： 神仙不难修成，只是尘俗牵累太多，像槛中猿、笼中鸟一样，空有飞翔跳跃的想法，哪能办到呢？ 
English: Shi Hao also said: It is not difficult to build a god, but it is too much influenced by the world. Like the monkey in the threshold and the bird in the cage, there is the idea of flying and jumping in the sky. How can it be done?

古文：会昌中，卒于吴郡也。
现代文：直到会昌年间，石旻才死于吴郡。
English: It wasn't until the Heichang era that Shijie died in Wu County.

古文：唐武宗朝术士
现代文：唐武宗朝术士
English: Tang Wusong morning warlock

古文：唐武宗皇帝，好神仙异术。海内道流方士，多至辇下。
现代文：唐武宗皇帝喜好神仙奇异的法术，因此全国范围内的道流和方士，来到京城的人很多。
English: Emperor Wuzong of Tang Dynasty favored supernatural magic, so there were many Taoists and magicians from all over the country who came to Beijing.

古文：赵归真探赜玄机，以制铅汞，见之者无不竦敬。
现代文：赵归真探究道家奥妙的玄机，来制取铅汞，见到他的人无不敬畏。
English: Zhao Guizhen explored the mysterious secret of Taoism to produce lead and mercury, and everyone who saw him was awestruck.

古文：请于禁中筑望仙台，高百尺，以为骖鸾驭鹤，可刻期而往。
现代文：他又请求皇帝在宫禁之中修筑望仙台，高百尺，认为这样可以驾鸾驭鹤，约定日期而前往上清。
English: He also asked the emperor to build a watchtower in Sendai, a hundred feet high, during the palace ban, believing that this would allow him to ride a crane and travel to Shangqing on an agreed date.

古文：常云飞炼须得生银。
现代文：他常说：飞炼必须得到生银。
English: He often said that raw silver must be obtained for fly-refining.

古文：诏使于乐平山收采，既而大役工徒，所出者皆顽石矿，无从而得。
现代文：皇帝就下令派人到乐平山开采收集，不久又大规模地役使劳工，但开采出来的都是质地粗劣的石头矿石，生银无从而得。
English: The emperor ordered that people be sent to Leping Mountain to mine and collect ore, and soon there was large-scale forced labor, but all the ore mined was poor quality stone ore, and no raw silver was obtained.

古文：归真乃斋醮数朝，以御札致于岩穴。
现代文：赵归真就斋戒祭祀了几天，把皇帝的书札送到岩洞。
English: Zhao Guizhen fasted and sacrificed for several days, and sent the emperor's book to the cave.

古文：俄有老人杖策向至曰： 山川宝物，盖为有道而出；况明主以修真为念，是何感应不臻？
现代文：忽然有个老人拄着拐杖来到说： 山川宝物，为有道之人而出现；何况圣明的君主把修行道术作为自己的意念，这怎么能感应不到呢？
English: Suddenly, an old man on crutches came and said, "Treasures of the mountains and rivers have appeared for the virtuous; moreover, the holy monarch has made the practice of Taoism his own idea. How could he not be aware of this?"

古文：尊师无复怀忧，明当从请。 
现代文：尊师不要再担忧了，明天一定遵从你们的请求。 
English: Don't worry about it, Master. I'll definitely comply with your request tomorrow.

古文：语罢而出，莫知所之。
现代文：说完就出去了，没有人知道他到哪儿去了。
English: And he went out, and no man knew where he went.

古文：是夕有声如雷，山矿豁开数十丈，银液坌然而涌，与入用之数相符。
现代文：这天晚上，有像打雷一样的声音，山上的矿敞开几十丈，银液就喷涌出来，与进献给皇帝使用的数量相符合。
English: That night, there was a sound like thunder. The mine on the mountain opened up several dozen feet, and the silver liquid gushed out, corresponding to the amount dedicated to the emperor's use.

古文：禁中修炼至多，外人少知其术。
现代文：宫中修炼的人很多，外边的人很少知道那些法术。
English: There are many practitioners in the palace, but few people outside the palace know about those spells.

古文：复金陵人许元长、王琼者，显书符幻变，近于役使鬼神。
现代文：还有金陵人许元长、王琼，善于画符变化，近于役使鬼神。
English: There are also Jinling people such as Xu Yuanchang and Wang Qiong, who are good at changing symbols and are close to serving ghosts and gods.

古文：会昌中，召至京国，出入宫闱。
现代文：会昌年间，皇帝下令把他们召到京城，让他们出入宫廷。
English: During the Heichang era, the emperor ordered that they be summoned to the capital and allowed to enter and leave the court.

古文：武皇谓之曰： 吾闻先朝有明崇俨，善于符箓，常取罗浮柑子，以资御果，万里往来，止于旬日。
现代文：唐武宗对他们说： 我听说前朝有个明崇俨，善于使用符箓，常取罗浮山的柑子，来贡奉皇帝吃的水果。万里路程，一去一回，仅仅用了十来天。
English: Tang Wuzong said to them, "I heard that in the previous dynasty, there was a Ming chieftain who was good at using charms. He often took mandarin oranges from Mt. Luofu to pay tribute to the emperor for the fruit he ate. The journey of ten thousand miles, one trip at a time, only took ten days.

古文：我师得不建先朝之术，比美崇俨乎！ 
现代文：我师的法术难道比不上先朝的法术，你们不能与明崇俨比美吗？ 
English: Isn't my master's magic better than that of the previous dynasty? Can't you match Ming Chong's magic?

古文：元长起谢曰： 臣之受法，未臻玄妙。若涉越山海，恐诬圣德；但千里之间，可不日而至。 
现代文：许元长起身辞谢说： 臣接受法术，还没有达到玄妙的境界，如跋山涉海，恐怕欺骗圣德；但千里之间，我可以不到一天就到达。 
English: Hui Yuanchang stood up and said, "Your majesty, I have not yet reached the mystic realm after receiving the spell, but I am afraid that I would be cheating my sacred duty if I were to travel thousands of miles, but I can get there in less than a day.

古文：武宗曰： 东都常进石榴，时已熟矣。
现代文：武宗说： 东都洛阳经常进贡石榴，现在已经熟了。
English: Wu Zong said: Luoyang, the eastern capital, often pays tribute to pomegranates, which are now ripe.

古文：卿是今夕当致十颗。 
现代文：你今天晚上一定弄来十颗。 
English: You must have got ten tonight.

古文：元长奉诏而出。
现代文：许元长奉圣旨出去。
English: Xu Yuanchang went out in accordance with the sacred will.

古文：及旦，寝殿始开，以金盘贮石榴，置于御榻。
现代文：到天亮的时候，皇帝的寝殿刚开门，他就用金盘盛着石榴，放到御榻之上。
English: At dawn, when the door of the emperor's bedchamber was opened, he placed a pomegranate in a golden dish on his bed.

古文：俄有中使进奏，亦以所失之数上闻。
现代文：不一会儿，宫中使者进殿向皇帝奏报，又把丢失的石榴数量报告皇帝。
English: A short while later, an emissary from the palace entered the palace to report to the emperor, and also reported the number of lost pomegranates to the emperor.

古文：灵验变通，皆此类也。
现代文：法术的灵验变通，都是这一类。
English: This is the kind of thing that spells are good at.

古文：王琼妙于祝物，无所不能。
现代文：王琼善于禁咒东西，无所不能。
English: Wang Qiong is good at forbidding things and can do anything.

古文：方冬，以药封桃杏数株，一夕繁英尽发，芳芬秾艳，月余方谢。
现代文：正在冬季，他把药埋在几株桃树、杏树之下，一天夜里，许许多多的花全都开放，芬香浓烈而又鲜艳，一个多月花才凋谢。
English: In the winter, he buried the medicine under several peach trees and almond trees. One night, many flowers were all open, the fragrance was strong and bright, and it took more than a month for the flowers to fade.

古文：及武皇厌代，归真与琼俱窜逐岭表，唯元长逸去，莫知所在。
现代文：到唐武宗驾崩后，赵归真与王琼全被驱逐流放到岭南，只有许元长逃跑了，谁也不知道他到哪儿去了。
English: After the death of Tang Wuzong, Zhao Guizhen and Wang Qiongquan were exiled to Lingnan. Only Xu Yuanlong escaped, and no one knows where he went.

