古文：赵太后新用事，秦急攻之。
现代文：赵太后刚刚主持国政，秦国就加紧进攻赵国。
English: As soon as Empress Dowager Zhao presided over state affairs, Qin intensified its attack on Zhao.

古文：赵氏求救于齐。
现代文：赵国向齐国请求救援。
English: Zhao asked Qi for help.

古文：齐曰： 必以长安君为质，兵乃出。 
现代文：齐国说： 必须让长安君来做质子，我们才会派兵。 
English: Qi Guo said: We must let Chang'an Jun do the proton, and then we will send troops.

古文：太后不肯，大臣强谏。
现代文：赵太后不肯，大臣们都极力劝谏她。
English: The empress dowager refused, and the minister forced his way into the palace.

古文：太后明谓左右： 有复言令长安君为质者，老妇必唾其面。 
现代文：赵太后明确地告诫左右侍臣说： 谁要是再提起让长安君做质子的事情，我一定吐他一脸唾沫。 
English: Empress Dowager Zhao explicitly admonished the attendants around her, saying, "If anyone brings up the matter of Chang'an Jun doing proton therapy again, I will definitely spit in his face."

古文：左师触讋愿见太后。
现代文：左师触龙对太后侍臣说，希望拜见太后。
English: Zuo Shi Chulong said to the Empress Dowager's attendant that he hoped to meet the Empress Dowager.

古文：太后盛气而揖之。
现代文：太后怒气冲冲地等着他。
English: The Queen Mother was waiting for him in a fury.

古文：入而徐趋，至而自谢，曰： 老臣病足，曾不能疾走，不得见久矣。
现代文：触龙走入殿内就用快走的姿势慢慢地走着小步，到了太后面前道歉说： 老臣的脚有毛病，不能快走，很长时间没能来拜见您了。
English: Touching the dragon and entering the hall, he walked slowly with small steps in a fast walking posture. When he arrived in front of the empress dowager, he apologized and said, "The old minister's feet have a problem, he can't walk fast, and he hasn't been able to visit you for a long time."

古文：窃自恕，而恐太后玉体之有所郤也，故愿望见太后。 
现代文：我私下原谅了自己，但是又怕太后的贵体有什么不适，所以想来看望您。 说： 我也是脚有毛病全靠坐车走动。 
English: I privately excused myself, but I was afraid of any discomfort to the empress dowager's body, so I wanted to visit you. said: I also have problems with my feet and rely entirely on the car to get around.

古文：太后曰： 老妇恃辇而行。 
现代文：触龙说： 您每天的饮食该不会减少吧？ 太后说： 就喝点粥罢了。 
English: Touching the dragon, he said, "Shouldn't your daily diet be reduced?" The Empress Dowager said, "Just drink some porridge."

古文：曰： 日食饮得无衰乎? 曰： 恃粥耳。 曰： 老臣今者殊不欲食，乃自强步，日三四里，少益耆食，和于身也。 
现代文：触龙说： 老臣近来特别不想吃东西，还是强迫自己走走，每天走三四里，稍微增加了点食欲，身体也舒适些了。 
English: Chulong said, "Lately, Lao Zhen especially does not want to eat, but he still forces himself to walk, walking three or four miles a day. He has slightly increased his appetite, and his body is more comfortable.

古文：太后曰： 老妇不能。 
现代文：太后说： 我做不到像您那样。 
English: The empress dowager said, "I can't manage an old woman."

古文：太后之色少解。
现代文：太后的脸色稍微和缓了些。
English: The Dowager's face softened a little.

古文：左师公曰： 老臣贱息舒祺，最少，不肖。而臣衰，窃爱怜之，愿令得补黑衣之数，以卫王官，没死以闻。 
现代文：左师公说： 犬子舒祺，年龄最小，不成器；可是臣已衰老，私心又疼爱他，希望您能让他补充黑衣卫士的人数，来保卫王宫。我冒着死罪来禀告太后！ 
English: Zuo Shi Gong said, "Inuko Shuxun, the youngest, is not a match; however, the vassal has become old and selfish and loves him dearly. I hope you will allow him to supplement the number of black-clad guards to defend the palace. I am risking the death penalty to denounce the Empress Dowager!

古文：太后曰： 敬诺。
现代文：太后说： 答应您！
English: The Empress Dowager said: I promise!

古文：年几何矣? 
现代文：年龄多大了？ 
English: How old are you?

古文：对曰： 十五岁矣。
现代文：触龙回答： 十五岁了。
English: And he said, I am fifteen years old.

古文：虽少，愿及未填沟壑而托之。 
现代文：虽然还小，但想趁我未死之前来托付给您。 
English: Although it is still young, I hope to entrust it to you when I am not in the ground.

古文：太后曰： 丈夫亦爱怜其少子乎? 
现代文：太后说： 男人也疼爱小儿子吗？ 
English: The Empress Dowager said: Do men also love their little sons?

古文：对曰： 甚于妇人。 
现代文：触龙回答： 比妇人爱得厉害些。 
English: And he said, More than a woman.

古文：太后笑曰： 妇人异甚。 
现代文：太后笑着说： 妇人更厉害。 
English: The Empress Dowager smiled and said, "Women love more fiercely."

古文：对曰： 老臣窃以为媪之爱燕后贤于长安君。 
现代文：触龙回答： 老臣认为您疼爱燕后超过爱长安君。 
English: Chulong said: The old minister secretly thinks that you love Yan Hou more than you love Chang'an.

古文：曰： 君过矣，不若长安君之甚。 
现代文：太后说： 您错了，不像疼爱长安君那样厉害。 
English: The empress dowager said, "You are mistaken, you do not love Chang Anjun as much as I do.

古文：左师公曰： 父母之爱子，则为之计深远。
现代文：左师公说： 父母爱子女，就要为他们考虑得长远些。
English: Zuo Shi Gong said, "If parents love their children, they should think about them from a long-term perspective."

古文：媪之送燕后也，持其踵为之泣，念悲其远也，亦哀之矣。
现代文：您送燕后出嫁时，她上了车还握着她的脚后跟为她哭泣，惦念、伤心她的远嫁，这也够伤心的了。
English: When you gave her away for marriage, she got into the car and held her heel and cried for her, pining and grieving for her faraway bride. That was sad enough.

古文：已行，非弗思也，祭祀必祝之，祝曰： 必勿使反。 岂非计久长，有子孙相继为王也哉？ 太后曰： 然。 
现代文：送走以后，不是不想念她了；但每逢祭祀您一定为她祈祷，祈祷说： 千万不要被赶回来啊 这难道不是从长远考虑，希望她有子孙相继为王吗？ 太后说： 是这样。 
English: After she was sent away, it was not that you did not miss her; but whenever there was a sacrifice, you must pray for her, and say in your prayers: "Do not let her be driven back." Wasn't this a long-term consideration, hoping that she would have children and grandchildren to succeed her as king? The Queen Mother said: That's right.

古文：左师公曰： 今三世以前，至于赵之为赵，赵主之子孙侯者，其继有在者乎？ 曰： 无有。 
现代文：左师公说： 从现在算起往上推三代，一直到赵氏建立赵国的时候，赵王的子孙凡被封侯的，他们的子孙还有能继承爵位的吗？ 太后说： 没有。 
English: Zuo Shigong said, "From now on, if we count forward three generations, until the time when the Zhao clan established the Zhao Kingdom, will the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants

古文：曰： 微独赵，诸侯有在者乎？ 
现代文：触龙又问： 不仅是赵国，其他诸侯国君的被封侯的子孙的后继人有还在的吗？ 太后说： 我没有听说过。 
English: Chulong said: Not only Zhao, but also the heirs of the descendants of the princes of various countries are still in power?

古文：曰： 老妇不闻也。  此其近者祸及身，远者及其子孙。
现代文：触龙说： 他们当中祸患来得早的就会降临到自己头上，祸患来得晚的就降临到子孙头上。
English: Touching the dragon, he said, "The earlier the calamity comes, the sooner it will befall them, and the later the calamity comes, the later it will befall their descendants."

古文：岂人主之子孙则必不善哉？
现代文：难道国君的子孙就一定不好吗？
English: Are the descendants of the sovereign necessarily bad?

古文：位尊而无功，奉厚而无劳，而挟重器多也。
现代文：根本的原因是他们地位高贵却没有功，俸禄优厚却没有劳，而且拥有的贵重宝器太多了啊！
English: It is because their positions are honorable but not meritorious, their salaries are generous but not meritorious, and they have too many valuable treasures.

古文：今媪尊长安君之位，而封之以膏腴之地，多予之重器，而不及今令有功于国。一旦山陵崩，长安君何以自托于赵？
现代文：现在您把长安君的地位提的很高，并且把肥沃的土地封给他，还给他很多贵重的宝器，却不趁现在让他有功于国，一旦您百年之后，长安君凭什么在赵国立身呢？
English: Now you have elevated Chang'an Jun's status to a very high level, and have granted him fertile land, and given him many valuable treasures, but you do not take advantage of the present to let him be of service to the country. Once you are a hundred years later, why should Chang'an Jun stay in Zhao?

古文：老臣以媪为长安君计短也，故以为其爱不若燕后。 
现代文：老臣认为您为长安君考虑得太短浅，所以认为您对长安君的爱不如燕后。 
English: The old minister thinks that your consideration for Chang'an Jun is too short-sighted, so he thinks that your love for Chang'an Jun is not as good as Yan Hou.

古文：太后曰： 诺。
现代文：太后说： 您说得对。
English: The Empress Dowager said: You are right.

古文：恣君之所使之。 
现代文：任凭您指派他吧！ 
English: Let him be appointed by you!

古文：于是为长安君约车百乘，质于齐，齐兵乃出。
现代文：于是为长安君备车一百乘，到齐国去作人质。
English: As a result, a hundred cars were prepared for Chang'an Jun, and Qi came to be a hostage. It was only then that Qi sent troops.

古文：子义闻之曰： 人主之子也，骨肉之亲也，犹不能恃无功之尊，无劳之奉，而守金玉之重也，而况人臣乎? 
现代文：齐国才出兵。子义听到这事说： 国君的孩子，可算是国君的亲骨肉了，尚且还不能凭靠无功的尊位、没有劳绩的俸禄来守住金玉宝器，更何况是人臣呢！ 
English: When Ziyi heard this, he said, "The children of the sovereign can be regarded as the flesh and blood of the sovereign, yet they cannot hold on to the gold and jewels by virtue of their honorary positions without merit, and their salaries without merit, let alone as ministers!"

