古文：晋安帝时，侯官人谢端，少丧父母，无有亲属，为邻人所养。
现代文：东晋时，侯官县有个人叫谢端，小的时候父母不幸双亡，没有亲戚依靠，被邻居所收养。
English: In the Eastern Jin Dynasty, there was a man named Xie Duan in Houguan County. When he was young, his parents died, and he had no relatives to rely on, so he was adopted by a neighbor.

古文：至年十七八，恭谨自守，不履非法。
现代文：年龄到了十七八岁，他待人恭敬谨慎而自己也很遵循操守，不做不符合礼法的事情。
English: At the age of seventeen or eighteen, he treats people respectfully and cautiously, and he himself is very ethical and does not do things that are not in line with etiquette.

古文：始出居，未有妻，邻人共愍念之，规为娶妇，未得。
现代文：他刚开始出来单独生活，还没有娶妻子，邻居们都很怜悯同情他，劝说他娶一个妻子，但都没有办成。
English: He had just begun to live alone and had not yet married a wife. His neighbors took pity on him and tried to persuade him to marry a wife, but to no avail.

古文：端夜卧早起，躬耕力作，不舍昼夜。
现代文：谢端睡得晚起得早，自己耕田种地努力劳作，不分白天和黑夜。
English: Xie Duan slept late and got up early. He cultivated fields and worked hard, regardless of day and night.

古文：后于邑下得一大螺，如三升壶。以为异物，取以归，贮瓮中。
现代文：后来他在村外拾得一只大田螺，有如三升的水壶那么大，认为这是很奇异的东西，就拿回了家来，放置在瓮中。
English: Later, he picked up a large snail outside the village, as big as a three-liter kettle, and thought it was a very strange thing, so he took it home and placed it in a cocoon.

古文：畜之数日。端每早至野还，见其户中有饭饮汤火，如有人为者。
现代文：这样喂养了十多天，谢端每天早晨下地到从田野回来，都看到自己家里有饭菜、酒汤、热水、温火，就像有人在家里专门为他做好的一样。
English: After being fed this way for more than ten days, Xie Duan went to the field every morning and when he came back from the field, he saw that there were meals, wine soup, hot water and warm fire in his home, just like someone specially prepared for him at home.

古文：端谓邻人为之惠也。数日如此，便往谢邻人。
现代文：谢端以为这是邻居们给他的照顾，几天都是这样，他就前去感谢邻居们。
English: Xie Duan thought that this was the care given to him by his neighbors. It had been like this for several days, and he went to thank his neighbors.

古文：邻人曰： 吾初不为是，何见谢也。 端又以邻人不喻其意，然数尔如此。
现代文：邻居说： 这些事本来就不是我们做的，怎么让你来感谢呢？ 谢端又以为邻居们不理解自己的谢意，然而他数次去感谢都是如此，之后就问邻居们到底怎么回事。
English: The neighbor said: These things were not originally done by us, how can you thank us? Xie Duan also thought that the neighbors did not understand his gratitude, but he thanked them several times, and then asked the neighbors what was going on.

古文：后更实问，邻人笑曰： 卿已自取妇，密著室中炊爨，而言吾为之炊耶？ 端默然心疑，不知其故。
现代文：邻居们笑着对他说： 你自己已经娶了妻子，悄悄藏在家中为你生火做饭，怎么反而说是我们为你做的饭呢？ 谢端无言回答而心存疑惑，不知道其中是什么缘故。
English: The neighbors laughed and said to him, "You yourself have married a wife, and quietly hide in your home to light a fire and cook for you. How can you say instead that we cooked for you?" Xie Duan was speechless and had doubts in his heart. He didn't know why.

古文：后以鸡鸣出去，平早潜归，于篱外窃窥其家中，见一少女，从瓮中出，至灶下燃火。
现代文：后来一天他在鸡叫的时候起床出去，天一亮就悄悄回来，在篱笆外面偷偷察看自己家中。只见一个少女，从瓮中走出来，到灶下面点火做饭。
English: Then one day he got up at the crowing of the rooster and went out. At dawn he crept back and peeped over the fence into his house. He saw a young girl come out of the cocoon and light a fire under the stove to cook.

古文：端便入门，径至瓮所视螺，但见女。
现代文：谢端就进入家门，径直走到瓮前察看那只田螺，却只看到一个空壳。
English: Xie Duan entered the door of the house, walked straight to the front of the house to inspect the snail, but only saw an empty shell.

古文：乃到灶下问之曰： 新妇从何所来，而相为炊？ 女大惶惑，欲还瓮中，不能得去，答曰： 我天汉中白水素女也。
现代文：于是谢端就来到灶前问那少女： 新媳妇从什么地方来，还为我做饭？ 那少女非常惊惶不安，想要回到瓮中去，却又回去不了，就回答说： 我就是天河之中的白水素女。
English: So Xie Duan went to the kitchen and asked the girl: "Where did your new daughter-in-law come from, and is she still cooking for me?" The girl was very alarmed and anxious, and wanted to go back to the cocoon, but she couldn't go back, so she answered: "I am the White Hydrogen Woman in the Heavenly River."

古文：天帝哀卿少孤，恭慎自守，故使我权为守舍炊烹。十年之中，使卿居富得妇，自当还去。
现代文：天帝哀怜你年少孤单，待人恭敬谨慎又能自守礼节，所以就派我来暂且为你守屋做饭，在十年之中，使你身居富贵娶得妻子，我就应当回去。
English: The Heavenly Emperor pities you for being young and lonely, for being respectful and prudent, and for being able to observe proper etiquette. Therefore, he has sent me to guard your house and cook for you for the time being. In ten years, when you are rich and have a wife, I should return.

古文：而卿无故窃相窥掩，吾形已见，不宜复留，当相委去。
现代文：但你无故藏着身偷偷地看到了我的身子，使我的身形容貌已经暴露，我就不再适合留下来了，只有舍下你而去。
English: But for no reason, you hid and secretly saw my body, so that my physical appearance has been exposed, I am no longer suitable to stay, I can only leave you.

古文：虽然，尔后自当少差。勤于田作，渔采治生。
现代文：虽然以后你自然会少些缺些什么，但要辛勤耕田劳作、打鱼采集以打理生计。
English: Although you will naturally lack something in the future, you must work hard in the fields and collect fish to make a living.

古文：留此壳去，以贮米谷，常不可乏。 端请留，终不肯。
现代文：我留下螺壳你拿去，用来储藏粮食，常可以不缺吃用。 谢端请少女留下来，少女始终不答应。
English: I left the shell of the nut for you to take, it is used to store grain and can often be used for eating. Xie Du asked the girl to stay, but the girl never agreed.

古文：时天忽风雨，翕然而去。
现代文：这时天空忽然风雨大作，那少女飞快地飘然离去。
English: At this time, the sky suddenly became stormy, and the girl quickly flew away.

古文：端为立神座，时节祭祀。
现代文：谢端为她塑立了一个神位，一年四季祭祀她。
English: Xie Duan built a shrine for her and worshipped her all year round.

古文：居常饶足，不致大富耳。
现代文：谢端日常生活富饶丰足，只是没到大富的程度。
English: Xie Duan's daily life is rich and plentiful, but not to the extent of great wealth.

古文：于是乡人以女妻之。
现代文：于是，乡里的人家把自己的女儿嫁给他为妻。
English: As a result, people in the village married their daughters to him.

古文：后任至令长。
现代文：他后来走上仕途当了县令。
English: He later went on to become a county magistrate.

古文：云今道中素女祠是也。
现代文：据说现在道中的素女祠就是祭祀这个白水素女的。
English: It is said that the temple dedicated to the White Hydrogen Woman is the origin of the current temple.

古文：晋太康中，谢家沙门竺昙遂，年二十余，白皙端正，流俗沙门。
现代文：东晋太元时期，谢家有一个出家人叫竺昙遂，年龄二十来岁，皮肤白净相貌端正，因为流落在外而出家作了僧人。
English: During the Eastern Jin Dynasty in the Yuan Dynasty, the Xie family had a monk named Shuxiu, who was in his twenties, fair-skinned and good-looking. Because he was exiled, he became a monk.

古文：常行经清溪庙前过，因入庙中看。
现代文：有一次他出外远行从清溪庙前经过，因此进入庙中观看。
English: Once, when he was on a long trip, he passed in front of the Qingxi Temple, so he entered the temple to watch the deer.

古文：暮归，梦一妇人来，语云： 君当来作我庙中神，不复久。 昙遂梦问： 妇人是谁？ 妇人云： 我是清溪庙中姑。 如此一月许，便病。
现代文：傍晚回来，他梦见一个妇人走来，对他说道： 你应当来作我庙中的神，已经不会太久了。 
English: When he came back in the evening, he dreamed that a woman came to him and said, "You should come and be a god in my temple, it won't be long now."

古文：临死，谓同学年少曰： 我无福，亦无大罪，死乃当作清溪庙神。
现代文：竺昙遂在临死的时候，对年少的同学说： 我没有福缘，也没有多少罪过，死后就会去当清溪庙的神。
English: On his deathbed, Zou Sui said to his young classmates: "I have neither good fortune nor many sins. After I die, I will become the god of the Qingxi Temple."

古文：诸君行过，当看之。 既死后，诸年少道人诣其庙。
现代文：各位同学有出行之便，可以过来看看我。 竺昙遂死了之后，各位年少的僧人就到清溪庙去。
English: If you have the opportunity to travel, you can come and see me.After his death, all of you young monks went to Qingxi Temple.

古文：既至，便灵语相劳问，声音如昔时。
现代文：他们一到，竺昙遂的灵魂就说话问候，其声音就像他过去活着的时候一样。
English: When they arrived, his spirit greeted them with the same voice he had when he was alive.

古文：临去云： 久不闻呗声，思一闻之。 其伴慧觐便为作呗讫。其神犹唱赞。
现代文：竺昙遂在他们快要离开时说： 好久没有听到 赞偈 的唱颂声了，我想听一听。 其中的一个伙伴慧觐就为他唱颂 赞偈 ，唱颂完毕，竺昙遂的灵魂还在继续唱颂。
English: As they were about to leave, Yu Sui said, "I haven't heard the chanting of the hymn for a long time, I want to listen to it." One of his companions, Hui Yu, sang the hymn of the hymn for him. After the chanting, Yu Sui's soul continued to sing the hymn.

古文：语云： 岐路之诀，尚有凄怆。况此之怪，形神分散。
现代文：竺昙遂唱颂完后说： 生死路上的诀别，尚有凄楚悲伤，更何况像我们这样的分别。
English: After the chanting, she said, "Farewell on the road of life and death is still very sad, let alone such a difference as ours.

古文：窈冥之叹，情何可言。 既而歔欷不自胜，诸道人等皆为涕泣。
现代文：人体与神灵的离别，深藏在心中的感叹，这样的心情哪里能够用语言表达得出来啊！ 竺昙遂的灵魂说完就禁不住叹息抽泣起来，各位僧人都为之流下眼泪。
English: The parting of the human body from the gods, the lamentation hidden deep in the heart, where can such a mood be expressed in words! After saying this, Su Sui's soul could not help but sigh and sob, and all the monks shed tears for it.

古文：王导子悦为中书郎，导梦人以百万钱买悦，导潜为祈祷者备矣。
现代文：王导的儿子王悦在当中书郎的时候，有一次王导梦到有人拿一百万钱来买王悦，王导就悄悄地把为儿子祈祷的各种事情都全部做了。
English: When Wang Yue, Wang Du's son, was in middle school, Wang Du had a dream that someone offered a million dollars to buy Wang Yue. Wang Du quietly did all kinds of things to pray for his son.

古文：寻掘地，得钱百万，意甚恶之，一一皆藏闭。
现代文：王导随即挖地掘土，挖出了一百万钱，心里顿时感到非常痛恶，把这些钱全部都埋藏封闭起来。
English: Wang Du immediately dug into the ground and dug up a million money. He suddenly felt very disgusted and buried all the money and sealed it up.

古文：及悦疾笃，导忧念时至，积日不食。
现代文：到了王悦病得很严重时，王导的忧虑达到了心急如焚的地步，好几天吃不下饭。
English: When Wang Yue fell seriously ill, Wang Du's anxiety reached a fever pitch, and he couldn't eat for several days.

古文：忽见一人，形状甚伟，被甲持刀。
现代文：一天忽然看见一个人身材相貌非常魁梧，身穿盔甲手持大刀。
English: One day, I suddenly saw a very large man, wearing armor and holding a large knife.

古文：问是何人，曰： 仆，蒋侯也。
现代文：王导问他是什么人，那人说： 我，蒋侯是也。
English: Wang Du asked him who he was, and the man said, "I am Jiang Hou."

古文：公儿不佳，欲为请命，故来尔。
现代文：你的儿子生病不好，我想要为他祈福保命，所以就前来了，你用不着再忧虑。 
English: Your son is not well, and I wanted to pray for him and save his life, so I came. You don't have to worry anymore.

古文：孙恩作逆时，吴兴分乱，一男子忽急突入蒋侯庙。
现代文：王导因此就把饮食给那人吃，那人一吃就是几升。吃完后，那人突然怒气冲冲地对王导说： 你那当中书郎的儿子生命走到尽头，已经不可救了。 
English: For this reason, Wang Du gave the meal to the man to eat, and the man immediately ate several liters. After eating, the man suddenly said angrily to Wang Du: Your middle son Shuro's life has come to an end, he is beyond salvation.

古文：始入门，木像弯弓射之，即卒。
现代文：那人说完就不见了，王悦也命殒气绝死去。
English: After the man finished speaking, he disappeared, and Wang Yue also died.

古文：行人及守庙者：无不皆见。晋太元中，乐安高衡为魏郡太守，戍石头。其孙雅之在厩中，云有神来降。
现代文：东晋太元时期，乐安县有个叫高衡的人当魏郡的太守，守卫石头城，他的孙子高雅之在他手下掌管马匹。
English: During the Eastern Jin Dynasty, there was a man named Gao Heng in Le'an County who was the governor of Wei County and guarded Stone Town. His grandson Gao Yazhi was in charge of horses under him.

古文：自称白头公，拄杖光辉照屋。
现代文：有一天高雅之说有位神仙在他那里降临，自称是白头公，所拄的拐杖发出光辉照亮了整个屋子。
English: One day, Gao Yaozhi said that a fairy came to him, claiming to be a white-headed god, and his crutch emitted a glow that lit up the entire room.

古文：周甚惊惋。后五年，果作临贺太守。
现代文：那神仙把高雅之轻轻举起在夜空中行走，晚上到达京口而在早晨就已经返回来了。后来高雅之父子都被桓玄所杀害。
English: The fairy gently lifted Gao Ya's tail and walked in the night sky, arriving in Beijing in the evening and returning in the morning. Later, Gao Ya's father and son were both killed by Huan Xuan.

古文：豫章人刘广，年少未婚。
现代文：晋朝豫章郡有个人叫刘广，年纪小而没有婚配。
English: In Yuzhang County of the Jin Dynasty, there was a man named Liu Guang, who was young and unmarried.

古文：至田舍，见一女子，云： 我是何参军女，年十四而夭，为西王母所养，使与下土人交。 广与之缠绵。
现代文：有一天他到乡下农家去，碰见一个女子。那女子对他说： 我是何参军的千金，年龄十四岁的时候就死去了，被女神西王母收养，让我来与凡人结合。 于是刘广就与那女子缠绵结合。
English: One day, he went to a farmer's house in the countryside and met a woman. The woman said to him, "I am a soldier's daughter. I died when I was fourteen years old. I was adopted by the goddess Xi Wangmai, who asked me to unite with a human being." So Liu Guang became entangled with the woman.

古文：其日，于席下得手巾，裹鸡舌香。
现代文：这天，他从床席之下发现一条手巾，手巾里包裹着鸡舌香。
English: On this day, he found a hand towel from under the bed seat. The hand towel was wrapped in chicken tongue incense.

古文：其母取巾烧之，乃是火浣布。
现代文：他的母亲就把手巾拿去用火烧，结果原来是火浣布做的。
English: His mother took the handkerchief and burned it, and it turned out to be a fire-breathing cloth.

古文：桓大司马从南州还，拜简文皇帝陵，左右觉其有异说。
现代文：晋朝大司马桓温从南州回来，去拜谒简文皇帝的陵墓，他左右的随从发觉他有些异常。
English: When Ma Huanwen, the Grand Master of the Jin Dynasty, returned from Nanzhou to visit the mausoleum of Emperor Qian Jianwen, his entourage around him noticed something unusual about him.

古文：登车，谓从者曰： 先帝向遂灵见。 既不述帝所言，故众莫之知。但见将拜时，频言 臣不敢 而已。
现代文：他登上了马车，就对随从说： 先帝以前曾经就显现过神灵。 但他却没有讲出先帝显灵所说的话，所以随从们对显灵的经过不得而知，只看见他快要拜谒的时候，口中不断说 为臣不敢 而已。
English: When he boarded the carriage, he said to his attendants, "The previous emperor had a god appear to him before, but he did not speak the words that the previous emperor revealed to him, so his attendants do not know the process of the apparition. They only saw him when he was about to prostrate, and he kept saying that he did not dare to do so.

古文：又问左右殷涓形貌。
现代文：桓温又问左右随从殷涓这个人的相貌如何。
English: Kuan Wen also asked Yin Qi, the left and right attendant, how this person looked like.

古文：有人答： 涓为人肥短，黑色甚丑。 桓云： 向亦见在帝侧，形亦如此。 意恶之。
现代文：有个随从回答： 殷涓这个人又胖又矮，皮肤很黑非常丑陋。 桓温说： 在拜谒时也看见这个人站在先帝的身旁，他的相貌的确如此。 表现出对这个人非常厌恶之意。
English: One of the attendants replied, "This Yin Qi is short and fat, his skin is very dark, and he is very ugly." Huan Wen said, "I also saw this person standing next to the former emperor when he was paying homage, and his appearance is indeed like this. I am very disgusted with this person."

古文：遂遇疾，未几而薨。
现代文：于是桓温就患上了疾病，没过多久就死去了。
English: As a result, Kanon became ill and died not long after.

