古文：黄帝曰：愿闻谷气有五味，其入五脏，分别奈何？
现代文：黄帝道：我想知道，食物有酸、苦、甘、辛、咸五种味道，它们进入五脏的情况各是怎样的呢？
English: Huang Di said: I would like to know that food has five tastes: sour, bitter, sweet, spicy and salty. How do they enter the five internal organs?

古文：伯高曰：胃者，五脏六腑之海也，水谷皆入于胃，五脏六腑，皆禀气于胃。
现代文：伯高答：胃，是五脏六腑所需营养汇聚于其中的大海，水谷俱都进入胃中，五脏六腑都从它那里接受水谷所化的精微之气。
English: Answer: The stomach is a sea in which all the nutrients required by the five viscera and six glands are gathered. All the nutrients enter the stomach, and all the viscera and six glands receive the subtle qi from it.

古文：五味各走其所喜，谷味酸，先走肝；谷味苦，先走心；谷味甘，先走脾；谷味辛，先走肺；谷味咸，先走肾。
现代文：饮食物中所含的五味，分别趋走于各自喜欢的一脏：酸味的食物首先进入肝，苦昧的首先进入心，甘味的首先进入脾，辛味的首先进入肺，咸味的首先进入肾。
English: The five tastes contained in drinking food, respectively, tend to go to their respective favorite intestines: sour food first enters the liver, bitter first enters the heart, sweet first enters the spleen, pungent first enters the lungs, salty first enters the kidneys.

古文：谷气津液已行，营卫大通，乃化糟粕，以次传下。
现代文：食物所化生的精微、液津，正常地流行而布散全身。营气和卫气旺盛、通畅而周流全身。余下的部分化成糟粕，自上而下依次传化而排出体外。
English: The fine and liquid substances produced by food normally circulate and spread throughout the body. The energy and vitality are strong, smooth and circulate throughout the body. The remaining parts are transformed into waste, and are transmitted from top to bottom and excreted.

古文：黄帝曰：营卫之行奈何？
现代文：黄帝问：营气和卫气是如何运行的呢？
English: Huangdi asked: How do the camp spirit and the spirit of the camp work?

古文：伯高曰：谷始入于胃，其精微者，先出于胃之两焦，以溉五脏，别出两行，营卫之道；其大气之搏而不行者，积于胸中，命曰气海，出于肺，循咽喉，故呼则出，吸则入。
现代文：伯高回答说：谷物起初入于胃中，其中所化精微，先由胃输出于上、中两焦，以灌注、滋养五脏，另外又分两路而行，一路就是营、卫之气的道路；另一路与吸入的清气结合而形成宗气集聚在胸中，称为气海，宗气由肺而出，沿着喉咙，呼则气出体外，吸则气入体内。
English: He replied, "Grain is first absorbed in the stomach, and the refined grains are first transported from the stomach out of the upper and middle cokes to perfuse and nourish the five viscera. In addition, it goes in two ways. One way is the way of the camp and the way of the sacred air; the other way is combined with the inhaled pure air to form the gathering of the sacred air in the chest, called the sea of the sacred air. The sacred air goes out from the lungs and along the throat. When exhaled, the air goes out of the body, and when inhaled, the air goes into the body.

古文：天地之精气，其大数常出三入一，故谷不入，半日则气衰，一日则气少矣。
现代文：人体从天吸收的清气与地之水谷所吸收的精气相合后，概括地说是分为三路而滋养全身，而其摄入主要依靠水谷这一路，所以人如果半日不进水谷，就会感到气衰，一日不进水谷，就会感到气短。
English: When the pure air absorbed by the human body from the sky is combined with the essence absorbed by the earth's water valley, it is generally divided into three ways to nourish the whole body, and its intake mainly depends on the water valley. Therefore, if a person does not enter the water valley for half a day, he will feel short of breath, and if he does not enter the water valley for a day, he will feel short of breath.

古文：黄帝曰：谷之五味，可得闻乎？
现代文：黄帝问：食物的五味，我能知道吗？
English: Huang Di asked: What are the five flavors of food? Can I know?

古文：伯高曰：请尽言之。
现代文：伯高说：请让我详细地讲述这些情况。
English: "Please allow me to elaborate on these points," Bergoglio said.

古文：五谷：糠米甘，麻酸，大豆咸，麦苦，黄黍辛。
现代文：五谷中，粳米味甘、芝麻味酸、大豆味咸、麦味苦、黄米味辛。
English: Among the five tastes, glutinous rice tastes sweet, sesame tastes sour, soybean tastes salty, wheat tastes bitter, and yellow rice tastes spicy.

古文：五果：枣甘，李酸，栗咸，杏苦，桃辛。
现代文：五果中，枣子味甘、李子味酸、栗子味咸、杏子味苦、桃子味辛。
English: Among the five fruits, dates taste sweet, plums taste sour, chestnuts taste salty, apricots taste bitter, and peaches taste spicy.

古文：五畜：牛甘，犬酸，猪咸，羊苦，鸡辛。
现代文：五畜中，牛肉味甘、狗肉味酸、猪肉味咸、羊肉味苦、鸡肉味辛。
English: Among the five animals, beef tastes sweet, dog meat tastes sour, pork tastes salty, mutton tastes bitter, and chicken tastes spicy.

古文：五菜：葵甘，韭酸，藿咸，薤苦，葱辛。
现代文：五菜中，葵菜味甘、韭菜味酸、豆叶味咸、薤白味苦、葱味辛。
English: Among the five dishes, sunflower cabbage tastes sweet, leek tastes sour, bean leaf tastes salty, white clam tastes bitter, and green onion tastes spicy.

古文：五色：黄色宜甘，青色宜酸，黑色宜咸，赤色宜苦，白色宜辛。
现代文：在五色中，黄色与甘味相适宜，青色与酸味相适宜，黑色与咸味相适宜，赤色与苦味相适宜，白色与辛味相适宜。
English: Among the five colors, yellow is suitable for sweetness, blue is suitable for sourness, black is suitable for saltiness, red is suitable for bitterness, and white is suitable for pungency.

古文：凡此五者，各有所宜。
现代文：凡此五种颜色，各有其相适宜的味道。
English: Each of these five colors has its own appropriate flavor.

古文：五宜：所言五色者，脾病者，宜食糠米饭、牛肉、枣、葵；心病者，宜食麦、羊肉、杏、薤；肾病者，宜食大豆黄卷、猪肉、栗、藿；肝病者，宜食麻、犬肉、李、韭；肺病者，宜食黄黍、鸡肉、桃、葱。
现代文：五宜，所谓五种适宜是指，脾脏病变，宜食粳米饭、牛肉、枣、葵菜等；心脏病变，宜食麦、羊肉、杏、薤白等；肾脏病变，宜食大豆黄卷、猪肉、栗子、豆叶等；肝脏病变，宜食芝麻、狗肉、李子、韭菜等；肺脏病变，宜食黄米、鸡肉、桃子、葱。
English: Five are suitable, the so-called five kinds of suitable refers to: spleen lesions, suitable for eating glutinous rice, beef, dates, sunflower greens, etc.; heart disease lesions, suitable for eating wheat, mutton, apricots, egg whites, etc.; kidney lesions, suitable for eating soybean rolls, pork, chestnuts, bean leaves, etc.; liver lesions, suitable for eating sesame seeds, dog meat, plums, leeks, etc.; lung lesions, suitable for eating yellow rice, chicken, peaches, and onions.

古文：五禁：肝病禁辛，心病禁咸，脾病禁酸，肾病禁甘，肺病禁苦。
现代文：五脏病变的禁忌：肝脏病变禁忌辛味，心脏病变禁忌咸味，脾脏病变禁忌酸味，肾脏病变禁忌甘味，肺脏病变禁忌苦味。
English: Contraindications for diseases of the five viscera: liver disease contraindicated spicy, heart disease contraindicated salty, spleen disease contraindicated sour, kidney disease contraindicated sweet, lung disease contraindicated bitter.

古文：肝色青，宜食甘，糠米饭、牛肉、枣、葵皆甘。心色赤，宜食酸，犬肉、麻、李、韭皆酸。脾黄色，宜食咸，大豆、猪肉、栗、藿皆咸。肺白色，宜食苦，麦、羊肉、杏、薤皆苦。肾色黑，宜食辛，黄黍、鸡肉、桃、葱皆辛。
现代文：肝脏病变面色青，肝病苦急，宜食甘味食物以缓急，如粳米饭、牛肉，枣、葵菜都是甘味食物；心脏病变面色赤，心病苦缓，宜食酸味食物以收敛之，如狗肉、芝麻，李子、韭菜都是酸味食物；脾脏病变面色黄，宜食咸味食物，如大豆、猪肉、栗子、豆叶都是咸味食物；肺脏病变面色白，苦气上逆，宜食苦味食物以泄之，如麦子、羊肉、杏、薤白都是苦味食物；肾脏病变面色黑，肾病苦燥，宜食辛味食物以润泽之，如黄米、鸡肉、桃子、葱都是辛味食物。
English: Liver lesions are blue, liver disease is urgent, it is advisable to eat sweet foods with priority, such as glutinous rice, beef, jujube and sunflower are all sweet foods; heart disease is red, heart disease is slow, it is advisable to eat sour foods with convergence, such as dog meat, sesame, plum and leek are sour foods; spleen lesions are yellow, it is advisable to eat salty foods, such as soybeans, pork, chestnuts, and bean leaves are salty foods; lung lesions are white, bitterness is on the contrary, it is advisable to eat bitter foods with discharge, such as wheat, mutton, apricot,

