古文：齐藏珍，少历内职，累迁诸卫将军。
现代文：齐藏珍，小时历任朝廷内职，连升到诸卫将军。
English: Qi Zangzhen, who served as a minor official in the imperial court, was promoted to the rank of General of the Guards.

古文：前后监押兵师在外，颇称干事，然险讠皮无行，残忍辩给，无不畏其利口。
现代文：先后到地方监察部队，颇为干练，然而阴险邪恶，没有品行，残忍而能言善辩，没有人不怕他锋利的口舌。
English: Successively to the local supervisory force, quite capable, but insidious evil, no morals, cruel but eloquent, no one is not afraid of his sharp tongue.

古文：广顺中，奉命滑州界巡护河堤，以弛慢致河决，除名，配沙门岛。
现代文：广顺年间，奉命到华州巡视保护黄河堤岸，因为松懈轻慢而使黄河冲决了堤防，被除名，发配到沙门岛。
English: During the Guangshun era, he was ordered to inspect and protect the embankment of the Yellow River in Huazhou. Because of laxity and carelessness, the Yellow River broke through the embankment. He was expelled and sent to Shamen Island.

古文：世宗在西班时，与藏珍同列，每聆其谈论，或剖判世务，似有可采。
现代文：世宗为朝廷武将时，与齐藏珍共事，常常聆听他的谈论，有时分析判断时事，似有可取之处。
English: When Sejong was a military commander of the Imperial Court, he worked with Qi Zangzhen. He often listened to his discussions, and sometimes analyzed and judged current affairs, which seemed to have merits.

古文：及即位，自流所征还。
现代文：当世宗即位后，从沙门岛征召齐藏珍回来。
English: After Emperor Taizong ascended the throne, he summoned Qi Zangzhen from Shamen Island to come back.

古文：秦、凤之役，令监偏师。
现代文：在秦州、凤州战役中，令他督察偏师。
English: In the battles of Qinzhou and Fengzhou, he was made an inspector of the division.

古文：及淮上用兵，复委监护，与军校何超领兵降下光州。
现代文：到进军淮南时，又派他监军，与军校何超领兵攻下光州。
English: When he marched into Huainan, he also sent him to supervise the army, and he and the military school He Chao led the troops to conquer Gwangju.

古文：藏珍欺隐官物甚多，超以为不可，藏珍曰： 沙门岛已有屋数间，不妨再去矣。 
现代文：齐藏珍隐瞒占用国家财物很多，何超认为不能这样，齐藏珍却说 ：沙门岛已有几间房屋，不妨再去一次。 
English: Qizangzhen conceals and occupies a lot of state property. He Chao thinks that this cannot be done, but Qizangzhen says: there are already several houses on Shamen Island, you might as well go there again.

古文：其不畏法也如此。
现代文：他的不害怕刑法就像这一类。
English: He's not afraid of criminal laws like this one.

古文：世宗既破紫金山寨，追吴寇室涡口，因与藏珍言及克捷之状。
现代文：世宗攻破紫金山贼寨后，追击贼寇直到涡口，于是与齐藏珍谈到打了胜仗的经过。
English: After Sejong broke through the Zijinshan thief camp, he chased the thief until the vortex mouth, so he talked with Qi Zangzhen about the process of winning the battle.

古文：对曰： 陛下神武之功，近代无比，于文德则未光。 
现代文：齐藏珍说： 陛下的武略神功，在近代无人能比，然而对于文德则未能显现出来。 
English: Qi Zangzhen said: His majesty's military strategy is incomparable in modern times, but it has not been manifested for literature.

古文：世宗颔之，又问以扬州之事，对曰： 扬州地实卑湿，食物例多腥腐。臣去岁在彼，人以鳝鱼馈臣者，视其盘中虬屈，一如蛇虺之状，假使鹳雀有知，亦应不食，岂况于人哉！ 
现代文：世宗点头认为说得对，又问他有关扬州的情况，回答说： 扬州地势低下湿润，吃的大多是腥臭变质的东西，我去年在那里时，有人用鳝鱼招待我，看它弯弯扭扭放在盘子里，就像蛇一样的形状，假使靠食鱼虾生活的鹳鸟聪明的话，也当不吃它，何况是人呢！ 
English: Sejong nodded that he was right, and asked him about the situation in Yangzhou, and replied: Yangzhou is low and wet, and most of the food is foul-smelling and spoiled. When I was there last year, someone invited me with eel, and I saw that it was bent and twisted on the plate, like a snake-like shape. If the ostrich, which lives by eating fish and shrimp, is smart, it should not eat it, let alone people!

古文：其敷奏大率多此类，闻者无不悚然。
现代文：他敷衍皇上的问话大多都像这样，听到的人无不吃惊。
English: Most of his perfunctory questions to the emperor were like this, surprising everyone who heard them.

古文：一日，又奏云： 唐景思已为刺史，臣犹未蒙圣泽。 
现代文：一天，又上奏说： 唐景思已经做了刺史，而我尚未沾溉皇上的恩泽。 
English: One day, he wrote again: "Tang Jingsi has already made history, but I have not yet been favored by the emperor.

古文：世宗俯而从之，时濠梁未下，即命为濠州行州刺史。
现代文：世宗勉强顺从他，当时濠梁尚未攻下，就任他为濠州暂行刺史。
English: Sejong reluctantly obeyed him. At that time, He Liang had not yet been conquered, and he was appointed as the temporary governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：及张永德与李重进有间言，藏珍尝游说重进，洎寿阳兵回，诸将中有以藏珍之言上奏者。
现代文：当张永德与李重进有矛盾，齐藏珍曾游说支持李重进，当从寿阳回兵后，众将中有人将齐藏珍的话上奏世宗。
English: When Zhang Yongde had a conflict with Li Chongjin, Qi Zangzhen lobbied to support Li Chongjin. When he returned from Shouyang, someone among the generals quoted Qi Zangzhen's words to Shizong.

古文：世宗怒，急召赴阙。
现代文：世宗大怒，急召齐藏珍回京。
English: Sejong was furious and summoned Qi Zangchen back to Beijing.

古文：四年夏，以其冒称检校官罪，按其事而毙之，盖不欲暴其恶迹也。
现代文：显德四年夏，以他冒称检校官的罪名，审查他的罪行而杀死他，是因为不想暴露他的恶行。
English: Hende killed him in the summer of 2004 because he did not want to expose his misdeeds after investigating his crime of impersonating a school inspector.

