古文：梁鼎字凝正，益州华阳人。
现代文：梁鼎字凝正，益州华阳人。
English: Liang Ding's character is steady and upright. He is from Huayang, Yizhou.

古文：祖钺，仕蜀为剑门关使。
现代文：祖父梁钺，在蜀地曾任剑门关使。
English: His grandfather, Liang Qian, was once an envoy to Jianmen Pass in Shu.

古文：父文献，乘氏令。
现代文：父亲梁文献，乘氏县令。
English: His father, Liang Wen, was a county magistrate.

古文：鼎，太平兴国八年进士甲科，解褐大理评事、知秭归县，再迁著作佐郎。
现代文：梁鼎，太平兴国八年进士甲科，解褐大理评事、知秭归县，又升任著作佐郎。
English: Liang Ding, Taiping Xingguo eight years into the Jike, Gezhuang Dali commentary, Zhisheng returned to the county, and was promoted to Shuxing Saro.

古文：端拱初，献《圣德徽号颂》万余言，试文，迁殿中丞、通判歙州，以能声闻，有诏嘉奖。
现代文：端拱初年，向朝廷敬献《圣德徽号颂》万余言，考试文章，升为殿中丞、歙州通判，因才能而被世人所知，朝廷有诏书进行表扬奖励。
English: In the first year of Duan Gong, he presented to the imperial court the "Hymn to the Holy Emblem" with more than ten thousand words and an examination article, and was promoted to the court of the palace, and was known to the world for his talent. The imperial court had an edict to commend and reward.

古文：徙知吉州，民有萧甲者，豪猾为民患，鼎暴其凶状，杖脊黥面徙远郡。
现代文：调任吉州知州，有一位叫萧甲的居民，强横狡诈是当地百姓的一大祸害，梁鼎公布其凶猛的情状，用杖条抽打脸上，刺字后流放到边远之地。
English: Transferred to Chizhou, Jizhou, there was a resident named Xiao Jia, strong and cunning is a great scourge of the local people, Liang Ding announced his fierce situation, beat his face with a cane, and was exiled to a remote place after tattooing.

古文：太宗尤赏其强干，代还，赐绯鱼，旧例当给银宝瓶带，太宗特以犀带赐之，记其名于御屏。
现代文：太宗十分欣赏梁鼎办事尽心尽责，轮职回京之时，太宗赐予梁鼎帛和鱼，按以往的惯例太宗应当赐给银宝瓶带，太宗特地将犀牛带赐予梁鼎，将他的名字记在屏风上。
English: Emperor Taizong highly appreciated Liang Ding's conscientious performance of his duties. When he returned to Beijing on a rotational basis, Emperor Taizong gave Liang Ding a gourd and a fish. According to the previous practice, Emperor Taizong should have given Liang Ding a silver treasure bottle belt. Emperor Taizong specially gave Liang Ding a rhinoceros belt and recorded his name on the screen.

古文：淳化中，上言曰： 《书》云： 三载考绩，三考黜陟幽明。
现代文：淳化年间，梁鼎上书说： 《书》说： 三年的考察结果，通过这些考察结果贬职和升职就一清二楚了。 
English: During the period of Junhua, Liang Ding wrote: "The book" said: "The results of the three-year inspection, through these inspection results, the demotion and promotion are clear.

古文：此乃尧、舜氏所以得贤人治天下也。
现代文：这就是尧、舜能够得到贤人治理天下的原因。
English: This is the reason why,  can get sages to govern the world.

古文：三代而下，典章尚存，两汉以还，沿革可见。
现代文：三代以下，各种典章制度还保存着，西汉以来，各种制度的因袭和改变之处还可以考察。
English: Below the third generation, various award systems are still preserved, and since the Western Han Dynasty, the causes and changes of various systems can still be examined.

古文：至于唐室，此道尤精，有考功之司，明考课之令，下自簿尉，上至宰臣，皆岁计功过，较定优劣，故人思激厉，绩效著闻。
现代文：至于唐代，对这套办法更加精熟，设立了考功司，使人明白考核的命令，下自一般官员，上至宰相大臣，都每年登记他们的功绩和过失，通过比较来决定优劣，因此人们都考虑奋发有为，勉励自己，功绩显著。
English: As for the Tang Dynasty, it was more adept at this set of methods. It set up a gong master to make people understand the order of assessment. From the general officials to the prime minister, they registered their merits and faults every year, and decided the merits and demerits by comparison. Therefore, people all considered working hard, encouraging themselves, and their achievements were significant.

古文：五代兵革相继，礼法陵夷，顾惟考课之文，祇拘州县之辈，黜陟既异，名存实亡。
现代文：五代时期战争不断，礼法遭到破坏，而考核的法令，只限于州县的小官吏，这样官吏职位的升降就发生了变化，考核之法也就名存实亡了。
English: During the Five Dynasties Period, there were continuous wars, and the etiquette was destroyed, and the assessment decree was limited to minor officials in counties and prefectures. As a result, the promotion and demotion of officials' positions changed, and the assessment law also died in name.

古文：且夫今之知州，即古之刺史，治状显著者，朝廷不知；方略蔑闻者，任用如故。
现代文：今天的州县官吏，相当于古代的刺史，政绩显著者，朝廷并不知道；政绩平平者，仍然像以前一样任用。
English: Today's prefectural and county officials are the equivalent of ancient magistrates. Those with outstanding achievements are not known to the imperial court; those with mediocre achievements are still appointed as before.

古文：大失劝惩之理，浸成苟且之风。
现代文：完全失去了激励和惩罚人的原则，逐渐形成了一种苟且的风气。
English: The principle of motivating and punishing people has been completely lost, and a rigid culture has gradually formed.

古文：是致水旱荐臻，狱讼填溢，欲望天下承平，岂可得也。
现代文：这样导致水涝旱灾频繁发生，监狱关满了犯人，各种诉讼案件不断，想要天下太平，又怎能够呢？
English: This has led to frequent floods and droughts, prisons are full of prisoners, and various lawsuits are ongoing. If you want peace in the world, how can you do it?

古文：伏惟陛下继二圣之丕图，为亿兆之司牧，念百官之未乂，思四海之未康，特诏有司，申明考绩之法，庶几官得其人，民受其赐矣。 
现代文：我认为陛下继承二位先帝的宏图大略，作为全国黎民百姓的共主，考虑到百官还没有得到治理，天下还没有康宁，特地诏令有司，阐明考核的办法，这样或许可以选拔恰当的官吏，老百姓也能享受其恩惠。 
English: I think that His Majesty, inheriting the grand plan of the two former emperors, as the common master of the people of the whole country, considering that the officials have not yet been governed and there is no Kangning in the world, specially issued a decree to clarify the assessment method, so that the appropriate officials can be selected and the people can enjoy their benefits.

古文：俄为开封府判官，迁太常博士、三司右计判官，又为总计判官，会复三部，换度支判官。
现代文：不久担任开封府判官，升为太常博士、三司右计判官，又为总计判官，恰遇恢复三部，换为度支判官。
English: He soon served as a magistrate of Kaifeng Prefecture, and was promoted to Taizhong Doctor, the judge of the three departments of the right, and the judge of the total. When the three departments were restored, he was replaced by the judge of the degree.

古文：至道初，鼎洎陈尧叟建议兴三白渠，及陈、许、邓、颖、蔡、宿、亳数州用水利垦田，事具《食货志》。
现代文：至道初年，梁鼎到陈尧叟处建议兴建三白渠，以及陈州、许州、邓州、颍州、蔡州、宿州、亳州数州使用水利开垦田地，事情都记在《食货志》中。
English: In the first year of the Tao, Liang Ding went to Chen Xuan's office to propose the construction of three white canals, as well as the use of water conservancy to reclaim fields in several states of Chenzhou, Huzhou, Dengzhou, Zhangzhou, Caizhou, Cangzhou and Zhangzhou, all of which were recorded in the "Food Diary."

古文：迁都官员外郎、江南转运副使，就改起居舍人，徙陕西。
现代文：升任都官员外郎、江南转运副使，就地改为起居舍人，调任陕西。
English: He was promoted to the official of the capital, the vice-envoy of Jiangnan transshipment, changed to the resident, and transferred to Shaanxi.

古文：二年，五将分道击李继迁，李继隆擅出赤柽路无功，还奏军储失期，鼎坐削三任。
现代文：二年，五将分路攻打李继迁，李继隆擅自出兵赤柽路，无功而返，却上奏军事储备耽误了军期，梁鼎因此三年未任职。
English: In the second year, the five generals attacked Li Jixian separately, and Li Jilong sent troops to Chibi Road without authorization and returned without success. However, he delayed the military period by sending military reserves, so Liang Ding did not hold office for three years.

古文：复为殿中丞，领职如故。以母老求郡，历知徐、密二州。
现代文：又为殿中丞，兼任的职务仍和以前一样，以母亲年老为由向朝廷请求回郡，先后任徐州、密州二州知州。
English: In addition, he was a court junior secretary, and his duties were still the same as before. On the grounds of his mother's old age, he requested the imperial court to return to the county, and he was successively appointed to Xuzhou, Mizhou and Zhizhou.

古文：真宗践位，复旧官。
现代文：真宗继承皇位，梁鼎又恢复旧有官职。
English: Shinsong succeeded to the throne, and Liang Ding resumed his former official position.

古文：咸平四年，迁兵部员外郎、知制诰，赐金紫。
现代文：咸平四年，升任兵部员外郎、知制诰，被赐予金紫。
English: In the fourth year of Xianping, he was promoted to a member of the military department, and was given gold and purple.

古文：时三司督逋负严急，有久被留系者，命鼎与薛映按籍详定，多所蠲免。
现代文：这时三司责罚逃亡之人使老百姓遭受严厉急迫之害，致使有些人被长期扣留和捆绑，朝廷命梁鼎与薛映按照户口册详细核定，大多数人都被免除审讯。
English: At this time, the three departments punished those who fled and made the common people suffer severe and urgent harm, resulting in some people being detained and tied for a long time. The imperial court ordered Liang Ding and Xue Ying to be verified in detail according to the household registration book, and most people were exempted from interrogation.

古文：逾月，拜右谏议大夫、度支使。
现代文：过了一个月，授予右谏议大夫、度支使。
English: A month later, he was awarded the title of Doctor of the Right Division of the Supreme People's Procuratorate.

古文：时西鄙未宁，建议陕西禁解池盐，所在官鬻，诏从之。
现代文：这时西部边境还不安宁，梁鼎建议禁止陕西民间买卖解池盐，归所在地官府专卖，朝廷下诏听从他的意见。
English: At this time, the western border was still uneasy. Liang Ding proposed to ban the private sale and purchase of pond salt in Shaanxi Province, which should be sold exclusively by the local government, and the imperial court obeyed his opinion.

古文：以鼎为制置使，杨覃为转运使，张贺副之，又以内殿崇班杜承睿同制置盐事。
现代文：梁鼎为制置使，杨覃为转运使，张贺辅佐他们，又以内殿崇班杜承睿一起制置盐事。
English: Liang Ding was the salt-setting envoy, Yang Hui was the transportation envoy, Zhang He assisted them, and they worked together with Chongban Du Chengrui in the inner hall.

古文：议者多言： 边民旧食青盐，其价甚贱。洎禁青盐以困贼，令商贾入粟，运解盐于缘边，价直与蕃盐不相远，故蕃部赍盐至者，不能货鬻。
现代文：人们大多议论说 ：边境的老百姓过去吃青盐，价钱很低，到禁止青盐来围困敌贼，使商贾纳粟，将解池盐运往边境，价钱与蕃盐差不了多少，因而蕃部带盐来的人，不能够用东西直接买。
English: Most people argue that: the common people at the border used to eat salt, and the price was very low, until the ban on salt was imposed to besiege the enemy, the merchants were forced to transport the brine salt to the border, and the price was not much different from the salt, so the people who brought salt to the border could not buy it directly.

古文：今若禁解池盐，与内地同价，则民必冒禁复市青盐，乃资盗粮也。 时刘综为陕西转运使，鼎奏罢之。
现代文：现在如果禁止解池盐，和内地价钱一样，那么老百姓一定冒犯禁令又买卖青盐，这是给盗贼提供粮食。 这时刘综为陕西转运使，梁鼎上奏罢免刘综。
English: Now, if the price of brine salt is the same as the mainland price, then the people will definitely violate the ban and buy and sell green salt, which is to provide food for the thieves. At this time, Liu Simi was the Shaanxi transshipment envoy, and Liang Ding made an appeal to dismiss Liu Simi.

古文：综归朝，亦密陈其非便。
现代文：刘综回到京城，也暗中陈述禁解池盐没有好处。
English: When Liu Zi returned to Beijing, he also secretly stated that the salt in the forbidden pool was no good.

古文：鼎既行，即移文禁止盐商，所在约束乖当，延州刘廷伟、庆州郑惟吉皆不从规画。
现代文：梁鼎已经实行，就发布文书禁止盐商买卖解池盐，文书的规定违背实情不恰当，延州刘廷伟、庆州郑惟吉都不遵从这样的规定。
English: Liang Ding has been implemented, and a document has been issued to prohibit salt merchants from buying and selling brine salt. The provisions of the document are contrary to the facts and inappropriate. Liu Tingwei of Yanzhou and Zheng Weiji of Qingzhou do not comply with such provisions.

古文：又鼎奏运咸阳仓粟以实边，粟已陈腐，鼎即与民，俟秋收易新粟，朝廷闻而止之，上封章密陈其烦扰者甚众，鼎始谋多沮，遂令林特乘传与永兴张咏会鼎等同议可否，于是依旧通盐商。
现代文：梁鼎又上奏运送咸阳的粮食来充实西部边境的军粮，粮食已经陈腐霉烂，梁鼎就分与民丁，等待秋收后换新粮，朝廷听后阻止梁鼎这样做，梁鼎上封章暗中陈述许多人都对禁解池盐感到烦恼忧郁，他开始的谋划大多被停止，朝廷就派林特坐驿车与永兴张咏会同梁鼎等共同商议行还是不行，这样仍然按照旧例让盐商交换。
English: Liang Ding also played the role of transporting grain from Xianyang to replenish the military grain on the western border. The grain had become old and rotten. Liang Ding divided it with Min Ding and waited for the autumn harvest to exchange it for new grain. After listening to the court, Liang Ding prevented Liang Ding from doing so. Liang Ding secretly stated on the seal that many people were troubled and depressed about the salt in the forbidden pool. Most of the plans he started were stopped. The court sent Lin Te to take a carriage and Yongxing Zhangye to discuss with Liang Ding and others whether it was possible or not. This was still in accordance with the old practice of letting salt merchants exchange

古文：鼎坐首议改作非是，诏罢度支使，守本官。
现代文：梁鼎由于建议被认为行不通，因而被朝廷免去度支使，守本官。
English: Since Liang Ding's suggestion was considered unworkable, he was dismissed by the imperial court and kept his post.

古文：未几，丁内艰，起复。
现代文：不久，因遭逢母丧离职，被朝廷起复原职。
English: Soon after, he was relieved of his duties due to his mother's death, and was reinstated by the Imperial Court.

古文：景德初，知三班院、通进银台司兼门下封驳事，出知凤翔府。
现代文：景德初年，掌管三班院、通进银台司兼门下封驳事，离京任凤翔府知府。
English: In the first year of Jingde, he was in charge of Sanban-in, Tongjin-gindai-tsukasa and subordinate fiefs, and left Beijing to serve as Fengxiang prefectural governor.

古文：以居忧哭泣伤目，表求判西京留司御史台。
现代文：由于任职后忧郁哭泣伤害了眼睛，上表请求担任西京留司御史台。
English: Due to the fact that his eyes were hurt by the melancholy crying after his appointment, the above table requested to serve as the West Beijing Residency History Station.

古文：三年，卒，年五十二，赐二子出身。
现代文：景德三年去世，终年五十二岁，赐予他的二个儿子出身。
English: Jingde died three years later, at the age of fifty-two, giving birth to his two sons.

古文：鼎伟姿貌，磊落尚气，有介节，居官峻厉，名称甚茂。
现代文：梁鼎身材高大魁伟，胸怀坦荡崇尚气节，有独特的节操，任官严厉威肃，声名十分美好。
English: Liang Ding is a tall and powerful man, with an open mind and a reverent temperament. He has unique self-restraint, is a stern and dignified official, and has a very good reputation.

古文：好学，工篆、籀、八分。
现代文：梁鼎好学，擅长篆、籀、八分。
English: Liang Ding is eager to learn, and is good at,, and 八分.

古文：师道性慷慨尚气，善谈世务，与人交敦笃。
现代文：曾写有《隐书》三卷，《史论》二十篇，《学古诗》五十篇。
English: He has written three volumes of "Hidden Books," 20 articles of "History" and 50 articles of "Study of Ancient Poetry."

古文：工为诗，多与杨亿辈酬唱，当时称之。王济，字巨川。其先真定人，祖卿，有祠辨，赵王熔召置幕府。
现代文：梁鼎的儿子叫梁申甫、梁吉甫。王济字巨川。其先世为真定人，祖父王卿，擅长辩论，被赵王召见作为幕僚。
English: Liang Ding's sons were named Liang Shenfu and Liang Jifu. Wang Jizhe was called Juchuan. His grandfather, Wang Qing, was an expert in debate and was invited by King Zhao to serve as his chief of staff.

古文：熔政衰，卿惧祸，避地深州饶阳，遂为县人。
现代文：赵王政治衰败，王卿害怕遭祸，逃避到深州饶阳，于是成为饶阳人。
English: After Zhao Wang's political downfall, Wang Qing, fearing disaster, fled to Raoyang in Shenzhou and became a Raoyang citizen.

古文：父恕，后唐时童子及第，开宝中，知秀州。
现代文：父亲王恕，后唐时童子及第，开宝年中，任秀州知州。
English: His father, Wang Shou, was a boy in the late Tang Dynasty, and in the first half of the Qibao Dynasty, Ren Xiuzhou lived in Chizhou.

古文：会盗起，城陷，为盗所杀，将并害济。
现代文：恰逢盗贼兴起，秀州城被盗贼攻陷，王恕被盗贼所杀，而且准备把王济也一并杀害。
English: The rise of the thieves coincided with the fall of Xiuzhou City to the thieves, and Wang Shou was killed by the thieves, who were also preparing to kill Wang Jie.

古文：济伏柩号恸，谓贼曰： 吾父已死，吾安用生为，但恨力不能杀汝，以报父仇尔！ 贼义之，舍去。
现代文：王济趴在父亲的棺材上大声哭泣，极度悲哀，对盗贼说： 我的父亲已经死了，我还要活着干什么，只是遗憾我的力量不能杀了你们，来报父亲的仇恨罢了！ 盗贼认为王济很有道义，就放弃王济而离去。
English: Wang Jie lay down on his father's coffin and wept loudly, extremely sad, and said to the thieves: My father is dead, what do I have to do to stay alive, but I'm sorry that my strength can't kill you, just to report my father's hatred! The thieves thought Wang Jie was very moral, so they gave up Wang Jie and left.

古文：济携父骨匿山谷间。
现代文：王济携带着父亲的骨灰藏匿在山谷中间。
English: Wang Jie took his father's ashes with him and hid them in the middle of the valley.

古文：既而官军大集，济脱身谒其帅朱乙，陈讨贼之计。
现代文：不久官军大规模聚集，王济脱身拜见官军的统帅朱乙，陈述讨伐盗贼的办法。
English: Soon, the government army gathered on a large scale, and Wang Jizhong went to see the commander of the government army, Zhu Yi, to explain how to fight the thieves.

古文：乙嘉之，遗以束帛，奏假驿置遣归。
现代文：朱乙对王济的办法大加赞赏，送给王济一束线织品，并奏告借用运送政府公文的驿马送王济回家。
English: Zhu Yi greatly appreciated Wang Ji's method, gave Wang Ji a bundle of yarns, and reported that he would borrow a horse to transport government documents to send Wang Ji home.

古文：先是，济母终于岳阳，权窆佛舍。至是，乃并护二丧还饶阳。
现代文：在这之前，王济的母亲在岳阳过世，王济将母亲的尸首放在一座佛庙里，到这时候，王济就一并将父亲的骨灰护送回饶阳。
English: Prior to this, Wang Ji's mother died in Yueyang. Wang Ji placed his mother's body in a Buddhist temple. At this time, Wang Ji escorted his father's ashes back to Raoyang.

古文：州将以闻，太祖召见，以其尚少，且俾就学。
现代文：州将听说王济回来，就上奏朝廷，太祖召见王济，认为王济还年轻，暂时让他学习。
English: When the prefectural governor heard that Wang Jie had returned, he reported the matter to the imperial court. The great-grandfather summoned Wang Jie to see him, believing that Wang Jie was still young, and temporarily allowed him to study.

古文：雍熙中，上书自陈死事之孤，得试学士院，补龙溪主簿。
现代文：雍熙年间，王济上书朝廷说明自己是一个孤儿，父亲是被盗贼所杀，得以考试学士院，补为龙溪主簿。
English: During the Yongxi Dynasty, Wang Jie wrote to the imperial court to explain that he was an orphan and that his father had been killed by thieves. He was admitted to the Examination Academy and became the main book of Longxi.

古文：时调福建输鹤翎为箭羽。
现代文：这时调往福建运鹤毛作为箭上的羽毛。
English: At this time, crane feathers were transported to Fujian to be used as feathers on arrows.

古文：鹤非常有物，有司督责急，一羽至直数百钱，民甚苦之。
现代文：鹤不是一般的动物，有司督促责罚紧迫，一根鹤的羽毛价值数百钱，老百姓感到很痛苦。
English: The crane is not an ordinary animal. There are supervisors to urge and punish urgently. A crane's feather is worth hundreds of dollars. The common people feel very painful.

古文：济谕民取鹅翎代输，仍驿奏其事，因诏旁郡悉如济所陈。
现代文：王济告诉民众用鹅的羽毛代替鹤的羽毛，并派人骑马向朝廷上奏此事，朝廷因而下诏其他州郡全部像王济所陈述的办理。
English: Wang Jie told the people to use goose feathers instead of crane feathers, and sent a man on horseback to report the matter to the imperial court. As a result, the imperial court ordered all other prefectures and counties to handle the matter as Wang Jie had stated.

古文：县有陂塘数百顷，为乡豪斡其利，会岁旱，济悉导之，分溉民田。
现代文：龙溪县有池塘数百顷，池塘所得之利全被乡中豪强掌管，恰遇这年发生旱灾，王济全部疏导池塘，来灌溉老百姓的田地。
English: There are hundreds of hectares of ponds in Longxi County. The profits from the ponds are all controlled by the powerful people in the township. It just so happened that a drought occurred this year. Wang Ji diverted all the ponds to irrigate the fields of the common people.

古文：汀州以银冶构讼，十年不决，逮系数百人，转运使使济鞫之，才七日情得，止坐数人。
现代文：汀州由于冶炼银子而互相打官司，十年来没有决断，逮捕捆绑之人达数百，转运使派遣王济审讯此案，只用了七天就将案情弄清楚了，仅惩办了数人。
English: Tingzhou because of the smelting of silver and sue each other, there is no decision for ten years, hundreds of people were arrested and tied up, and Wang Ji was sent by the transit envoy to investigate the case. It took only seven days to clarify the case, and only a few people were punished.

古文：再调胙城尉，徙临河主簿。
现代文：又调任胙城县尉，改任临河主簿。
English: He was also transferred to the position of Shicheng County Lieutenant, and was appointed as the chief accountant of Linhe.

古文：转运使王嗣宗被诏举法官，以济名闻。
现代文：转运使王嗣宗被诏令推举法官，王济得以被推举。
English: The transfer allowed Wang Shizong to be promoted to judge by imperial edict, and Wang Jie to be promoted.

古文：迁光禄寺丞、权大理丞，改刑部详覆官、通判镇州。
现代文：升任光禄寺丞、代理大理丞，改任刑部详覆官、镇州通判。
English: He was promoted to Koroku-ji-jo and acting-dari-jo, and was reappointed as a detailed official of the criminal department and a general judge of the township.

古文：牧守多勋旧武臣，倨贵陵下，济未尝挠屈。
现代文：当时基层官员大多是功勋武臣，傲慢无礼欺压百姓，王济从来不为之屈服。
English: At that time, most of the grassroots officials were meritorious warriors, arrogant and rude to oppress the people, Wang Ji never yielded to them.

古文：戍卒颇恣暴不法，夜或焚民舍为盗。
现代文：驻守的士兵十分横暴不守法度，夜晚有的焚烧老百姓的房屋抢劫东西。
English: The soldiers stationed there are very violent and do not abide by the law. At night, they sometimes burn people's houses and loot things.

古文：一夕，报有火，济部壮士数十潜往侦伺，果得数辈并所盗物，即斩之。
现代文：一天晚上，通报发生大火，王济率领数十名壮士暗中前往侦察，果然抓获数人及其所盗窃的财物，马上将这些人斩首。
English: One night, when there was a report of a large fire, Wang Jie led dozens of strong men to secretly go to investigate, and they caught several people and their stolen property, and immediately beheaded these people.

古文：驰奏其事，太宗大悦。
现代文：王济派人骑马奏告此事，太宗十分不高兴。
English: Wang Ji sent a man on horseback to report the matter, and Taizong was very unhappy.

古文：都校孙进使酒无赖，殴折人齿，济不俟奏，杖脊送阙下，繇是军城畏肃。
现代文：都校孙进指使喝了酒的流氓，将人的牙齿打落，王济不等上奏，就用棘杖抽打孙进并将他送到朝廷，于是城中守军害怕，军纪严肃。
English: Sun Jin, the commander of the Capital School, ordered a drunk hooligan to knock out a man's teeth. Wang Jie did not wait for the performance to begin, but beat Sun Jin with a thorny stick and sent him to the imperial court. As a result, the defenders in the city were afraid and military discipline was strict.

古文：就迁太子中舍，诏书奖劳。
现代文：接着升为太子中舍，诏书奖励王济。
English: Then he was promoted to the Prince's Middle House, and the imperial edict rewarded Wang Ji.

古文：召判登闻鼓院，拜监察御史。
现代文：召任判登闻鼓院，授予监察御史。
English: He was appointed to the Wen Drum Academy and granted the title of inspector of history.

古文：上疏陈统天下之术、节民物之道，大者有十：择左右，别贤愚，正名器，去冗食，加奉禄，谨政教，选良将，分兵戍，修民事，开仕进。
现代文：王济上疏陈述统一天下，节省老百姓财力的决策，大致有这样十点：选择左右官员，区别贤才与愚才，端正纲纪，裁减多余的官员，增加现任官员的俸禄，严谨政治教令，选拔优秀的将领，分兵戍守，治理民事，广开仕路。
English: Wang Jishangso's report on the decision to unify the country and save the people's financial resources has roughly ten points: the selection of left and right officials, the distinction between the wise and the foolish, the correct discipline, the reduction of superfluous officials, the increase of the salary of current officials, the strict political instruction, the selection of excellent generals, the division of troops, the administration of civil affairs, and the opening of a wide career path.

古文：其言切于时，词多不载。
现代文：王济的上奏切合时政，因文字太长不予载录。
English: Wang Ji's recital is in line with the current political situation. It is too long to be included in this article.

古文：咸平初，济以刑纲尚繁，建议请删定制敕，乃命张齐贤领其事，济预焉。
现代文：咸平初年，王济认为朝廷刑法繁多，建议请求朝廷消减制定法律，朝廷于是命令张齐贤主管此事，王济参予此事。
English: In the first year of Xianping, Wang Jie thought that the imperial court had too many criminal laws, and proposed to request the imperial court to reduce and formulate laws. The imperial court then ordered Zhang Qixian to be in charge of the matter, and Wang Jie to participate in the matter.

古文：《刑统》旧条：持仗行劫，不以赃有无，悉抵死。
现代文：《刑统》旧的条令是：拿着武器行劫，不论有没有赃品，全部判处死罪。
English: The old regulation of the "Code of Criminal Procedure" was: if you commit robbery with weapons, regardless of whether they are fake or not, you will be sentenced to death.

古文：齐贤议货不得财者，济曰： 刑，期于无刑。
现代文：张齐贤议论宽赦那些没劫到财物之人的死罪，王济说： 被判刑的，希望不被判刑。
English: Zhang Qixian talked about pardoning the death penalty for those who did not rob the property, Wang Ji said: Those who have been sentenced hope not to be sentenced.

古文：以死惧之，尚不畏，况缓其死乎？ 因与齐贤廷争数四。
现代文：用死来恐吓他们，还不值得害怕，何况缓解他们的死刑呢？ 因此与张齐贤四次在上廷时面争。
English: Threatening them with death is not something to be afraid of, let alone commuting their death sentences. Therefore, I argued with Zhang Qixian four times in court.

古文：济词气甚厉，目齐贤为腐儒。
现代文：王济语词口气十分严厉，把张齐贤当作迂腐儒生。
English: The tone of Wang Jizhi's words was very severe, and he treated Zhang Qixian as a pedantic Confucian.

古文：然卒从齐贤议，人以济为刻。
现代文：但最后还是遵从了张齐贤的建议，人们大多认为王济刻薄。
English: But in the end, he followed Zhang Qixian's advice. Most people think Wang Jizhong is mean.

古文：改盐铁判官。
现代文：王济被改任盐铁判官。
English: Wang Ji was transferred to the post of Salt and Iron Judge.

古文：车驾巡师大名，调丁夫十五万修黄、汴河，济以为劳民，诏济驰往经度，还奏省十六七。
现代文：太宗巡视大名，征调民丁十五万修理黄河、汴河，王济认为这会增加老百姓的负担，朝廷于是诏令王济前去经办此事，回来上奏说省去费用十之六七。
English: Emperor Taizong inspected the feudal lords and conscripted 150,000 people to repair the Yellow River and the Min River. Wang Jie thought that this would increase the burden on the common people. The imperial court then ordered Wang Jie to go and deal with the matter and report back that he had saved 67 percent of the cost.

古文：齐贤时为相，以河决为忧。
现代文：张齐贤当时担任宰相，由于黄河决口而感到担忧。
English: Zhang Qixian, who was prime minister at the time, was worried about the Yellow River bursting its banks.

古文：因对，并召济见，齐贤请令济署状保河不决，济曰： 河决亦阴阳灾沴，宰相苟能和阴阳，弭灾沴，为国家致太平，河之不决，臣亦可保。 齐贤曰： 若是，则今非太平邪？ 济曰： 北有契丹，西有继迁，两河、关右岁被侵扰。
现代文：因为奏对，同时召见王济，张齐贤请朝廷让王济起草保护黄河的条文，朝廷没有决定，王济说： 黄河决口也是一种阴阳灾变的恶气，宰相如果能够调和阴阳，消除灾变恶气，黄河不决口的事，我也就可以保证了。 张齐贤说： 如果是这样，那今天就不太平吗？ 王济说： 北有契丹，西有继迁，两河、关右每年都被侵略骚扰。
English: Because the report was correct, Zhang Qixian summoned Wang Jie at the same time and asked the court to let Wang Jie draft a provision to protect the Yellow River. The court did not make a decision. Wang Jie said: The Yellow River is also an evil spirit of yin and yang cataclysms. If the prime minister can reconcile yin and yang, eliminate the evil spirit of cataclysms, and the Yellow River does not break, I can guarantee it. Zhang Qixian said: If so, is it not peaceful today? Wang Jie said: There are Khitan in the north, and there are successive migrations in the west. Both rivers and Guanzhu are

古文：以陛下神武英略，苟用得其人，可以驯致，今则未也。 上动容，独留济问边事。
现代文：凭陛下的雄才大略，如果人才使用得当，可以使天下太平，而现在却没有出现这种局面。 真宗对此感到震惊，单独留下王济询问边防之事。
English: On the basis of His Majesty's great talent, which, if properly used, could bring peace to the world, there is no such situation now, which shocked the Emperor, who left Wang Jie alone to inquire about border defense.

古文：济曰： 陛下承二圣之基，拥百万之众，蠢兹丑虏，敢尔凭陵，盖谋谟当国之人未有如昔之比。
现代文：王济说 ：陛下继承二位先帝的基业，拥有百万臣民，那些愚昧无知丑陋的边境民族，胆敢随意侵犯我们，这大概是当今治理国家的人不能和以前相比。
English: Wang Jie said: His Majesty inherited the legacy of the two previous emperors, has a million subjects, those ignorant and ugly border peoples dare to encroach on us at will, this is probably the people who govern the country today can not be compared with the past.

古文：臣谓国家所恃，独一洪河耳！
现代文：我觉得现在国家所依靠，只有唯一洪大的黄河！
English: I think the only thing the country can rely on now is the mighty Yellow River!

古文：此诚急贤之秋；不然，臣惧敌人将饮马于河渚矣。 又著《备边策》十五条以献。
现代文：现在是急需选拔贤才的时候；否则的话，我担心敌人会饮马黄河岸边。 王济又写了《备边策》十五条献给真宗。
English: Now is the time when we urgently need to select talents; otherwise, I am afraid that the enemy will invade the banks of the Yellow River. Wang Zi also wrote "Preparation Strategy" with 15 articles dedicated to the True Sect.

古文：三年，选官判大理寺，上曰： 法寺宜择当官不回者，苟非其人，或有冤滥，即感伤和气。王济近数言事，似有操持，可试之。 遂令济权判大理寺事。
现代文：咸平三年，选举大理寺判官，真宗说 ：大理寺判官应当选择当官不回来的，如果不是这样的人，一旦出现冤案，就会感伤和气，王济近来多次上书言事，好像具有节操和持守，可以让王济试试。 于是命令王济代理大理寺判官之事。
English: In the third year of Xianping, in the election of the judge of Dali Temple, Jinsong said, "The judge of Dali Temple should choose a person who does not come back as an official. If he is not such a person, once there is a wrongful case, he will be sentimental and kind. Wang Ji has recently written and spoken many times, as if he has discipline and perseverance, so that Wang Ji can try. Therefore, he ordered Wang Ji to act as the judge of Dali Temple.

古文：福津尉刘莹集僧舍，屠狗群饮，杖一伶官致死，济论以大辟，遇赦从流。
现代文：福津尉官刘莹将僧人会聚房中，杀狗群饮，将一伶官杖打致死，王济将刘莹以大辟罪论处，后来遭到赦免被流放。
English: Liu Ying, a lieutenant of Fu Jin, killed a group of dogs in the monks' meeting room and beat them to death with a cane. Wang Ji punished Liu Ying with a heavy fine, but she was later pardoned and exiled.

古文：时王钦若知审刑，与济素不相得，又以济尝忤齐贤，乃奏莹当以德音原释。
现代文：这时王钦若掌管刑事审讯，和王济一直不协调，又借口王济曾经冒犯张齐贤，于是王钦若就上奏朝廷刘莹应当释放，以显示皇帝的恩泽。
English: At this time, Wang Qin, who was in charge of the criminal trial, did not coordinate with Wang Ji, and also used the excuse that Wang Ji had offended Zhang Qixian. Therefore, Wang Qin reported to the court that Liu Ying should be released to show the emperor's favor.

古文：齐贤、王钦若议济坐故入，停官。
现代文：张齐贤、王钦若议论王济以外派官员在本地犯有过错，让王济停职。
English: Zhang Qixian and Wang Qin would suspend Wang Jie from his post if he said that officials sent by Wang Jie made mistakes in the local area.

古文：逾年，复为监察御史、通判河南府。
现代文：过了一年，又成为监察御史、河南府通判。
English: A year later, he became the Supervisor of History and the Henan Provincial Judge.

古文：景德初，徙知河中府。
现代文：景德初年，调任河中府知府。
English: In the first year of King Jingde's reign, he was transferred to the post of prefectural governor of Kawakuchu.

古文：契丹南侵，上幸澶渊，诏缘河断桥梁，毁船舫，稽缓者论以军法。
现代文：契丹南下侵略，真宗亲临澶渊，下诏命令沿黄河摧毁所有的桥梁和船只，凡查实缓办者以军法论处。
English: When the Khitans invaded the south, Zhenzong personally went to Puyuan and issued an order to destroy all bridges and ships along the Yellow River. Anyone who was found to have delayed the operation would be dealt with according to military law.

古文：济曰： 陕西有关防隔阂，舳舻远属，军储数万，一旦沉之，可惜；又动摇民心。 因密奏寝其事，上深嘉叹，遣使褒谕。
现代文：王济说： 陕西有关隘阻隔，大船相连，军粮储备数万，一旦沉没它们，很可惜；而且还会使民心动摇。 于是暗地里上奏建议停止此事，真宗很赞赏，派遣使者进行奖励。
English: Wang Ji said: Shaanxi is surrounded by narrow straits, large ships are connected, and there are tens of thousands of military grain reserves. It would be a pity if they were sunk, and it would also shake the people's hearts. Therefore, he secretly proposed to stop the matter, which was highly appreciated by Zhenzong, and sent an envoy to reward.

古文：未几，召拜工部员外郎兼侍御史知杂事。三年，判司农寺。
现代文：不久，被召见授予工部员外郎兼侍御史杂事，景德三年，判司农寺。
English: Not long after, he was called to be awarded the position of Geiro, a member of the Ministry of Works, as well as the position of Samurai for miscellaneous historical affairs, and Jingde for three years, and the position of Judge of the Agricultural Temple.

古文：时周伯星见，济乘间言曰： 昔唐太宗以丰年为上瑞。
现代文：这时周伯星出现，王济乘此机会上奏说： 从前唐太宗把丰年作为最好的征兆。
English: At this time, Zhou Bo Xing appeared, and Wang Jie took this opportunity to recite: Once upon a time, Emperor Taizong of the Tang Dynasty regarded a good harvest as the best omen.

古文：臣愿陛下日慎一日，居安虑危，则天下幸甚。 受诏与刘综改定茶法，颇易旧制，由是忤丁谓、林特、刘承规辈，因与钦若迭诋訾之。
现代文：我愿陛下一天比一天谨慎，居安思危，那么天下就大幸了。 接受诏令与刘综更改制定茶法，对旧的茶法改动很多，这样冒犯了丁谓、林特、刘承规等人，他们就与王钦若不断地诋毁非议王济。
English: I wish your majesty to be more and more prudent day by day, to stay safe and think about danger, then the world will be very lucky. accept the edict and Liu comprehensive changes to formulate the tea method, there are many changes to the old tea method, thus offending Ding Zuo, Lin Te, Liu Cheng Gui and others, they and Wang Qinlu constantly slander Wang Ji.

古文：四年，拜本曹郎中，出知杭州。
现代文：景德四年，授予工部郎中，离京任杭州知州。
English: In the fourth year of Jingde's reign, he was awarded the title of Junior Secretary of the Ministry of Industry, and left Beijing for Hangzhou and Chizhou.

古文：上面加慰谕，仍戒以朝廷阙失许密上言。
现代文：真宗亲自对王济加以劝慰和告谕，仍旧告诫朝廷的过失允许暗中上奏。
English: Zhenzong personally consoled and admonished Wang Jie, still admonishing the court for its negligence in allowing the opera to be secretly performed.

古文：迁刑部郎中。
现代文：升任刑部郎中。
English: He was promoted to vice-minister of the Ministry of Justice.

古文：郡城西有钱塘湖，溉田千余顷，岁久湮塞。
现代文：郡城西边有钱塘湖，灌溉田地千余顷，年代久远被埋没填塞。
English: There is Qiantang Lake on the west side of the county seat, with more than a thousand hectares of irrigated fields, which have been buried for a long time.

古文：济命工浚治，增置斗门，以备溃溢之患，仍以白居易旧记刻石湖侧，民颇利之。
现代文：王济于是派民工疏通治理，增设了斗门，来防备湖水泛滥，仍旧将白居易旧记刻在石湖侧，老百姓获得很多好处。
English: Wang Ji then dispatched migrant workers to smooth out and control the situation, added a gate to prevent the lake from flooding, and still engraved the old Bai Juyi on the side of the stone lake. The common people gained a lot of benefits.

古文：睦州有狂僧突人州廨，出妖言，与转运使陈尧佐按其实，斩之，上嘉其能断。
现代文：睦州有一位狂僧突然闯入州府，口出妖言，王济和转运使陈尧佐依照实际情况，将狂僧斩首，真宗赞赏王济能够果敢决断。
English: In Mutsuzhou, a mad monk suddenly broke into the state capital and uttered demonic words. Wang Jie and Tran Rong ordered Chen Jie Zuo to behead the mad monk in accordance with the actual situation. The True Sect appreciated Wang Jie's ability to make a decisive decision.

古文：大中祥符三年，徙知洪州，兼江南西路安抚使。
现代文：大中祥符三年，调任洪州知州，兼江南西路安抚使。
English: In the third year of high school, he was transferred to Hongzhou, Chizhou, and also became the pacifying envoy of the southwestern part of the Yangtze River.

古文：属岁旱民饥，躬督官吏为糜粥，日亲尝而给之；录饥民为州兵，全活甚众。
现代文：接着这年发生旱灾，老百姓饥饿无食，王济亲自督促官吏煮弼，每天亲自品尝来救济饥民，录用饥民当州兵，许多人得以度过饥荒。
English: The following year, a drought occurred, and the people were starving. Wang Ji personally urged officials to cook quail, and personally tasted it every day to help the starving people. Hungry people were recruited into the National Guard, and many people were able to survive the famine.

古文：是岁卒，年五十九，遗奏大旨以进贤退谀佞、罢土木不急之费为言。
现代文：这年王济死，终年五十九岁，遗言上奏真宗招纳贤才，疏远阿谀奸佞之徒，免除各种不急需的土木建筑劳役。
English: Wang Ji died this year, at the age of fifty-nine. In his last words, he urged the Shangso Jinsong to recruit talents, to alienate the agents of the enemy, and to exempt all kinds of civil construction labor that was not urgently needed.

古文：济颇涉经史，好读《左氏春秋》，性刚直，无所畏避。
现代文：王济涉猎了很多经史之书，喜欢读《左氏春秋》，性格刚强正直，不害怕和躲避什么。
English: Wang Ji has read a lot of books on history, likes to read "The Spring and Autumn of Zuo Shi," has a strong and upright personality, and is not afraid of or avoids anything.

古文：少时，深州刺史念金锁一见器之，且托后于济。
现代文：年轻时，深州刺史念金锁一见到王济就很器重他，并将自己的后代也托付给王济。
English: When he was young, when he saw Wang Jie, he respected him very much and entrusted his offspring to Wang Jie.

古文：金锁没，济抚其孤，授置禄仕。
现代文：念金锁死后，王济抚养他的后代，帮助他们走上仕途。
English: After the death of Nianjin Zhao, Wang Jizhong raised his descendants and helped them embark on their career.

古文：素与内臣裴愈有隙，愈坐事，上怒甚，命宪府鞫之，济适知杂事，力为辨理，遂获轻典。
现代文：王济一直与内臣裴愈不和，裴愈因事犯罪，真宗十分恼怒，命令宪府进行审问，王济恰好知道其他一些事情，极力为裴愈辩白开脱，终于使裴愈只获较轻的惩罚。
English: Wang Jie had always been at odds with his vassal Peiyu. When Peiyu committed a crime, Zhenzong was very angry and ordered the Constitutional Court to conduct an investigation. Wang Jie happened to know some other things and tried his best to justify and absolve Peiyu. In the end, Peiyu only received a lighter punishment.

古文：子孝杰，国子博士。
现代文：王济的儿子王孝杰，国子监博士。
English: Wang Jie's son, Wang Xiaojie, is the son-in-law of the state.

