古文：张晧子纲王龚子畅种暠子岱子拂挮子劭陈球
现代文：◆张晧传，张晧字叔明，犍为郡武阳人。六世祖张良，高帝时为太子少傅，封留侯。
English: ◆ Zhang Xuan, Zhang Xizhu Shuming, was a native of Wuyang County. Zhang Liang, the sixth generation ancestor, was the prince's younger brother and a feudal retainer when Gao was the emperor.

古文：张晧字叔明，犍为武阳人也。六世祖良，高帝时为太子少傅，封留侯。告少游学京师，永元中，归仕州郡，辟大将军邓骘府，五迁尚书仆射，职事八年，出为彭城相。
现代文：张晧年轻时游学京师，永元中，回州郡作官，辟大将军邓骘府，五次迁升为尚书仆射，任事八年，出为彭城相。
English: Zhang Ye traveled to Beijing to study when he was young. In the middle of the Yongyuan era, he served as an official in Huizhou County. He was promoted five times to Shang Shufu, and served for eight years. He was promoted to Pengcheng Minister.

古文：永宁元年，征拜廷尉。
现代文：永宁元年，征为廷尉。
English: In the first year of the Yongning era, he was promoted to court lieutenant.

古文：晧虽非法家，而留心刑断，数与尚书辩正疑狱，多以详当见从。
现代文：张晧虽然不是法家，但留心刑罚断狱，常与尚书辩正疑狱，他的意见多因详审平当被采纳。
English: Although Zhang Ye was not a legal scholar, he paid attention to the punishment of imprisonment. He often argued with Shang Shu about the punishment of imprisonment. His opinions were mostly accepted due to detailed examination.

古文：时安帝废皇太子为济阴王，晧与太常桓焉、太仆来历廷争之，不能得。
现代文：这时，安帝废皇太子为济阴王，张晧与太常桓焉、太仆来历在朝廷争辩，不得结果。
English: At this time, the deposed crown prince of An Di became the king of Jiyin, and Zhang Ye argued with Taizhong Huanan and Taipo Yuanlian in the imperial court, but to no avail.

古文：事已具《来历传》。
现代文：事已具载《来历传》。
English: This has been documented in the "Ancestral Records."

古文：退而上疏曰： 昔贼臣江充，造构谗逆，至令戾园兴兵，终及祸难。
现代文：张晧退出朝廷上疏说： 从前贼臣江充，制造谗言妖逆，致使戾园兴兵，终于发生祸难。
English: Zhang Ye withdrew from the imperial court and said: From the time of the former thief Jiang Cheng, he created rumors and rebellions, which led to the rise of soldiers in the Summer Palace, and finally disaster occurred.

古文：后壶关三老一言，上乃觉悟，虽追前失，悔之何逮！
现代文：后来壶关三老令狐茂上书说太子冤事，武帝才觉悟，虽然追到以前的失误，后悔也无济于事了！
English: Later, the Three Elders of Kuguan sent a letter to Fox Shigeru saying that the prince had been wronged, and Emperor Wu realized that, although he had caught up with his previous mistakes, regret would not help!

古文：今皇太子春秋方始十岁，未见保傅九德之义，宜简贤辅，就成圣质。 
现代文：现在皇太子才十岁，还未知保母师傅九德的意义，应当挑选有贤德的人为之辅佐，使他成为天子的气质。 
English: Now that the crown prince is only ten years old, the significance of the nanny master Jiu De is still unknown. It is necessary to select a virtuous person to assist him, so that he can become the temperament of the heavenly son.

古文：书奏不省。
现代文：书送上，未被采纳。
English: When the calligraphy is played, it cannot be reflected upon.

古文：及顺帝即位，拜晧司空，在事多所荐达，天下称其推士。
现代文：顺帝即位，任命张晧为司空，在职推举人才很多，天下称他是推士。
English: When Emperor Shun ascended to the throne, he appointed Zhang Ye as the Empress Dowager. There were many talented people who were elected on the job, and the whole world called him the Empress Dowager.

古文：时清河赵腾上言灾变，讥刺朝政，章下有司，收腾系考，所引党辈八十余人，皆以诽谤当伏重法。
现代文：这时清河赵腾上书说灾变，讥刺朝政，奏下达管事的人，捕赵腾等人考问。牵涉党羽八十多人，都因诽谤朝廷，应当处以重法。
English: At this time, Qinghe Zhao Teng wrote a book about the cataclysm, ridiculed the imperial government, sent it to the person in charge, and arrested Zhao Teng and others for questioning. Involving more than eighty people, all of them should be punished for slandering the imperial court.

古文：晧上疏谏曰： 臣闻尧舜立敢谏之鼓，三王树诽谤之木，《春秋》采善书恶，圣主不罪刍荛。
现代文：张晧上疏劝谏说 ：我听说尧舜设立敢谏鼓，三王立诽谤木，《春秋》采好事，写恶事，贤明的天子，不加罪于草野的小民。
English: Zhang Xuan was persuaded by Shang Zuo, who said, "I heard that you have set up a daring drum, the three kings have set up a slanderous tree, "Spring and Autumn" selects good deeds, writes evil deeds, is a wise son of heaven, and does not add guilt to the small people in the grassland.

古文：腾等虽干上犯法，所言本欲尽忠正谏。
现代文：赵腾等虽抵触朝廷犯法，但他说话是想尽忠正谏。
English: Although Zhao Teng and others violated the law by contradicting the imperial court, he was trying to be loyal and upright.

古文：如当诛戮，天下杜口，塞谏争之源，非所以昭德示后也。 
现代文：如果应当诛杀，天下人的口将堵着了，谏争的源流就塞住了，这不是宏扬道德以作后人表率的方法。 
English: If it is necessary to fight and kill, the mouths of people around the world will be gagged, and the source of the fight will be blocked. This is not a way to promote morality and set an example for future generations.

古文：帝乃悟，减腾死罪一等，余皆司寇。
现代文：帝竟感悟，减赵腾死罪一等，其余的都处二岁刑。
English: The emperor was so impressed that he reduced Zhao Teng's death sentence to the first degree, and the rest were sentenced to two years in prison.

古文：四年，以阴阳不和策免。
现代文：四年，因阴阳不和免职。
English: Four years later, he was removed from office due to discord between yin and yang.

古文：阳嘉元年，复为廷尉。
现代文：阳嘉元年，再为廷尉。
English: In the first year of Yang Jia, he became a courtier again.

古文：其年卒官，时年八十三。
现代文：这一年死于任上，年八十三。
English: He died in office that year, aged 83.

古文：遣使者吊祭，赐葬地于河南县。
现代文：朝廷派使者吊祭，赐葬地於河南县。
English: The imperial court sent an emissary to offer a hanging sacrifice, and the burial place was given to Henan County.

古文：子纲。
现代文：子张纲。
English: Zi Zhanggang said.

古文：纲字文纪。少明经学。
现代文：◆张纲传，张纲字文纪，年轻时通晓经学。
English: ◆Zhang Gang Chuan, Zhang Gang Zi Wen Ji, was familiar with the classics when he was young.

古文：虽为公子，而厉布衣之节。
现代文：虽然是公子，砥厉布衣之士的节概。
English: Although he was a nobleman, he was a man of the cloth.

古文：举孝廉不就，司徒辟高第为侍御史。
现代文：举孝廉不就，司徒以他的成绩优异，辟高第为侍御史。
English: It's not enough to be a filial son. With his outstanding achievements, Souto has surpassed Gaudi as a courtier.

古文：时顺帝委纵宦官，有识危心。
现代文：这时顺帝放纵宦官，有识之士都为之寒心。
English: At this time, Emperor Shun indulged eunuchs, and people with insight were cold-hearted.

古文：纲常感激，慨然叹曰： 秽恶满朝，不能奋身出命埽国家之难，虽生，吾不愿也。 
现代文：张纲心情激动，慨然叹说： 污秽恶浊满朝，不能奋身而出扫除国家的危难，虽然活着，我不愿意啊！ 
English: Zhang Gang was excited and sighed with emotion: "The filth and evil have spread all over the country. I can't get up and sweep away the country's danger. Although I am alive, I don't want to!"

古文：退而上书曰：《诗》曰： 不愆不忘，率由旧章。 
现代文：因而上书说： 《诗经》说： 不愆不忘，率由旧章。 
English: Therefore, the letter said: "The Book of Songs says: Do not forget, rate from the old chapter.

古文：寻大汉初隆，及中兴之世，文、明二帝，德化尤盛。
现代文：是说成王令德，不过循用旧的典章而已。考大汉最初兴隆，及中兴之世，文帝和明帝，道德教化更盛。
English: It is said to be a king's edict, but it is just a follow-up of the old ordinance. The examination of the Han Dynasty was initially prosperous, and in the era of prosperity, Emperor Wen and Emperor Ming, moral enlightenment was more prosperous.

古文：观其礼为，易循易见，但恭俭守节，约身尚德而已。
现代文：看当时的治理措施，显而易见，不难照着去做，不过推行俭朴坚持节约，修身尚德而已。
English: Looking at the governance measures at that time, it is obvious that it is not difficult to follow them, but the implementation of frugality, adherence to economy, and self-cultivation are only good deeds.

古文：中官常侍不过两人，近幸赏赐裁满数金，惜费重人，故家给人足。
现代文：中官常侍不过两人，左右侍奉的人，赏赐才满数金，爱惜费用，尊重人，所以家家富裕。
English: There are only two attendants for a middle-ranking officer, and those who serve on his right and left are only rewarded with a certain amount of money. They are cost-conscious and respect others, which is why their families are wealthy.

古文：夷狄闻中国优富，任信道德，所以奸谋自消而和气感应。
现代文：人人有吃有穿。夷狄知道中国富强，讲信义道德，所以奸谋自然消除，和气感应。
English: Everyone has enough to eat and wear. Yidi knows that China is rich and strong, and speaks of honesty and morality, so he naturally eliminates the trickery and responds to the qi.

古文：而皆者以来，不遵旧典，无功小人皆有官爵，富之骄之而复害之，非爱人重器，承天顺道者也。
现代文：而最近以来，不遵守旧的典章，没有功的小人都有官爵，使他们富足，使他们骄奢，然后再惩治他们，这不是爱人重才，奉承天命，顺从大道。
English: But recently, those who do not abide by the old rules and regulations, and those who are not meritorious have been given official titles, making them rich, making them arrogant, and then punishing them. This is not cherishing talent, flattering fate, and obeying the road.

古文：伏愿陛下少留圣思，割损左右，以奉天心。
现代文：请皇上稍加圣思，整饬左右，以奉天意。 
English: I would like to ask the emperor to think about it a little more, to straighten out his life, and to follow God's will.

古文：书奏不省。
现代文：书送上，皇帝没有采纳。
English: When the calligraphy is played, it cannot be reflected upon.

古文：汉安元年，选遣八使徇行风俗，皆耆儒知名，多历显位，唯纲年少，官次最微。
现代文：汉安元年，挑选八个使者巡视社会风俗，都是一些知名的老儒生，地位很高。只有张纲年轻，官次最小。
English: In the first year of Han'an, eight emissaries were selected to inspect social customs. They were all well-known old Confucian scholars with high status. Only Zhang Gang was young and had the lowest official rank.

古文：余人受命之部，而纲独埋其车轮于洛阳都亭，曰： 豺狼当路，安问狐狸！ 
现代文：其余的人接受命令启程，而张纲独埋其车轮于洛阳都亭，说： 豺狼当道，何问狐狸！ 
English: The rest of the people accepted the order to leave, while Zhang Gang alone buried his wheels in Luoyang Du Ting, saying: "The wolf is in charge, what about the fox!

古文：遂奏曰： 大将军冀，河南尹不疑，蒙外戚之援，荷国厚恩，以刍荛之资，居阿衡之任，不能敷扬五教，翼赞日月，而专为封豕长蛇，肆其食叨，甘心好货，纵恣无底，多树谄谀，以害忠良。
现代文：就上奏说 ：大将军梁冀，河南尹不疑，受外戚的援引，享受国家的厚恩，是草野小民之才，负辅导帝王、举持国政的责任，不能宏扬五教，辅翼皇上，专作大猪长蛇，元凶恶首，贪残无度，一心好货，放纵恣肆无止境，培植一班阿谀谄媚的人，陷害忠良。
English: Regarding the report, he said: General Liang Jie, Yin of Henan, no doubt, was invoked by his maternal relative to enjoy the country's bounty. He was a grassland talent. He was responsible for advising the emperor and holding state affairs. He could not promote the Five Teachings. He assisted the emperor. He specialized in being a big pig and a long snake. He was the originator of evil. He was greedy and ruthless. He was devoted to good products. His indulgence was endless. He cultivated a group of flatterers and framed the loyal.

古文：诚天威所不赦，大辟所宜加也。
现代文：这是皇帝的权威所不能赦，应该处以极刑的。
English: This is unforgivable by the authority of the emperor, and should be punished with capital punishment.

古文：谨条其无君之心十五事，斯皆臣子所切齿者也。 
现代文：谨条呈他们无君之心十五事，都是臣子们所切齿痛恨的。
English: There are fifteen things that show that they have no heart for the emperor, and they are all hated by the courtiers.

古文：书御，京师震竦。
现代文：书进，京师震动。
English: Books are coming in, and the capital is shaking.

古文：时，冀妹为皇后，内宠方盛，诸梁姻族满朝，帝虽知纲言直，终不忍用。
现代文：这时梁冀的妹妹是皇后，正得到皇上的宠爱，诸梁的亲戚满朝，帝虽然知道张纲说的是实话，终于不忍采用。
English: At this time, Liang Ji's sister was the empress and was being favored by the emperor. Zhu Liang's relatives were all over the country. Although the emperor knew that Zhang Gang was telling the truth, he finally could not bear to adopt him.

古文：时，广陵贼张婴等众数万人，杀刺史、二千石，寇乱扬、徐间，积十余年，朝廷不能讨。
现代文：这时，广陵贼张婴等众数万人，杀刺史、二千石、侵犯扰乱扬、徐间，十多年，朝廷不能讨伐。
English: At this time, tens of thousands of people, including the Guangling thief Zhang Ying, with a history of assassination, two thousand stones, and violation and disturbance, have been around for more than ten years, and the imperial court cannot fight them.

古文：冀乃讽尚书，以纲为广陵太守，因欲以事中之。
现代文：梁冀于是暗示尚书，任张纲为广陵太守，想因事攻击陷害他。
English: Liang Jie then hinted that Shang Shu, who had appointed Zhang Gang as the governor of Guangling, wanted to frame him for the attack.

古文：前遣郡守，率多求兵马，纲独请单车之职。
现代文：以前派去的郡守，一般都是向朝廷多要兵马，张纲独请单车赴任。
English: In the past, county governors were generally sent to the imperial court to ask for more soldiers and horses, but Zhang Gangdu asked for a bicycle to take office.

古文：既到，乃将吏卒十余人，径造婴垒，以慰安之，求得与长老相见，申示国恩。
现代文：既到，只带吏卒十几个人，直到张婴的阵地，安慰他们，要求与他们的首领相见，说明国家对他们的恩德。
English: Once they arrived, they took only officials and a dozen or so people with them as far as Zhang Xiao's position, consoled them, asked to meet with their leaders, and explained the country's kindness to them.

古文：婴初大惊，既见纲诚信，乃出拜谒。
现代文：张婴开始大为惊讶，看到张纲一片诚心，于是出来拜谒张纲。
English: Zhang Ying was very surprised at first. Seeing Zhang Gang's sincerity, he came out to pay homage to Zhang Gang.

古文：纲延置上坐，问所疾苦。
现代文：张纲被延请坐上座。张纲问张婴有什么困难。
English: Zhang Gang was invited to take a seat. Zhang Gang asked Zhang Xiao what the problem was.

古文：乃譬之曰：前后二千石多肆贪暴，故致公等怀愤相聚。
现代文：晓谕张婴说 ：以前的二千石大多贪污残暴，以致使公等怀愤聚集一起来了。
English: Zhang Ying said: Most of the previous two thousand stones were corrupt and cruel, so that the public gathered together with indignation.

古文：二千石信有罪矣，然为之者又非义也。
现代文：二千石是真正有罪啊！然而你们这么做也是不义呢。
English: Two thousand koku is really guilty! However, it is also unjust for you to do so.

古文：今主上仁圣，欲以文德服叛，故遣太守，思以爵禄相荣，不愿以刑罚相加，今诚转祸为福之时也。
现代文：现在皇上仁慈聪明，想用文德平息叛乱，所以派我来。我想你们如能以得到国家的爵禄为光荣，我就不愿用刑罚加之于你们了。现在真正是你们转祸为福的时机啊！
English: Now the emperor, who is kind and wise, wants to use diplomacy to quell the rebellion, so he has sent me. I think that if you can take the honor of receiving a state knighthood, I would not want to punish you. Now is really the time for you to turn misfortune into blessing!

古文：若闻义不服，天子赫然震怒，荆、扬、兗、豫大兵云合，岂不危乎？
现代文：如果你们知道应该这么做，还是不服从朝廷，天子赫然大怒，荆、扬、兖、豫大兵云集，难道不危险吗？
English: If you know that you should do this, or disobey the imperial court, the Son of Heaven will fly into a rage, and Jing, Yang, Yao, and Yu soldiers will gather. Isn't it dangerous?

古文：若不料强弱，非明也；充善取恶，非智也；去顺效逆，非忠也；身绝血嗣，非孝也；背正从邪，非直也；见义不为，非勇也；六者成败之几，利害所从，公其深计之。
现代文：如果不度量强与弱，这是不明；抛弃善的而取恶的，这是不智；不顺从而效法叛逆，这是不忠；身死无后，这是不孝；反正从邪，这不是直；见义不为，这是不勇。此六点是成败的关键，利害相依，您可以深深地考虑一下。 
English: If you do not weigh the strong and the weak, it is unclear; if you abandon the good and take the evil, it is unwise; if you do not obey and thus follow the rebellion, it is disloyalty; if you die, it is not filial piety; anyway, if you follow evil, it is not upright; if you do not do justice, it is not brave. These six points are the key to success or failure, interests depend on each other, you can deeply consider it.

古文：婴闻，泣下，曰： 荒裔愚人，不能自通朝廷，不堪侵枉，遂复相聚偷生，若鱼游釜中，喘息须臾间耳。
现代文：张婴听了，哭了起来，说 ：边远愚人，不能与朝廷通声气，不堪官吏的压迫欺侮，不得已，就大家集合一起，苟且偷生，好像鱼游釜中，暂时喘口气罢了。
English: Zhang Ying listened and began to cry, saying: "Faraway fools, unable to communicate with the imperial court, unable to bear the oppression and bullying of officials, as a last resort, everyone gathered together and secretly lived, as if in a fish tank, temporarily taking a breather.

古文：今闻明府之言，乃婴等更生之辰也。
现代文：现在听了太守的话，是我张婴等再生的时候了。
English: Now that I have listened to the words of the Empress Dowager, it is time for me to be born again.

古文：既陷不义，实恐投兵之日，不免孥戮。 
现代文：不过既然陷入不义，只怕投降之日，不免遭到逮捕杀戮。 
English: But since they have fallen into injustice, they only fear the day of surrender, when they will inevitably be arrested and killed.

古文：纲约之以天地，誓之以日月，婴深感悟，乃辞还营。
现代文：张纲以天长地久不变为约，以日月光鉴为誓，张婴深被感动，就辞张纲还营。
English: Zhang Gang made a promise that the heavens and the earth would remain unchanged for a long time, and swore by the sun and the moon. Zhang Ying was deeply moved, and he resigned Zhang Gang and returned to the camp.

古文：明日，将所部万余人与妻子面缚归降。
现代文：第二天，带了一万多人与妻子面缚投降。
English: The next day, he surrendered with more than ten thousand people and his wife chained to him.

古文：纲乃单车入婴垒，大会，置酒为乐，散遣部众，任从所之；亲为卜居宅，相田畴；子弟欲为吏者，皆引召之。
现代文：张纲于走单车进张婴阵垒，开大会，饮酒为乐，遣散部队，任各人随便去哪里都可以，亲自为被遣散的人员找住宅，看田土；子弟想为吏的，都引见召问。
English: Zhang Gang rode his bicycle into Zhang Jiao's camp, held a meeting, drank alcohol for fun, and dismissed the troops. Everyone was allowed to go wherever they wanted. He personally found houses for the dismissed personnel and looked at the fields. If his children wanted to be officials, they were summoned.

古文：人情悦服，南州晏然。
现代文：人情悦服，南州安然无事了。
English: Nanzhou is safe and sound.

古文：朝廷论功当封，梁冀遏绝，乃止。
现代文：朝廷论功当封张纲，梁冀阻止，未封。
English: The imperial court said that Zhang Gang should be sealed, but Liang Jie prevented it and did not seal it.

古文：天子嘉美，征欲擢用纲，而婴等上书乞留，乃许之。
现代文：天子嘉美，想征召提拔张纲，张婴等人上书请求把张纲留在广陵，朝廷批准了他们的请求。
English: Tianzi Jiamei, who wanted to recruit and promote Zhang Gang, Zhang Ying and others sent a letter requesting that Zhang Gang remain in Guangling, and the court approved their request.

古文：纲在郡一年，年四十六卒。
现代文：张纲在郡一年，年四十六逝世。
English: Zhang Gang lived in the county for one year and died at the age of 46.

古文：百姓老幼相携，诣府赴哀者不可胜数。
现代文：百姓扶老携幼，到郡府哀悼的不可胜数。
English: Countless people came to the county government to mourn, helping the elderly and bringing their children.

古文：纲自被疾，吏人咸为祠祀祈福，皆言 千秋万岁，何时复见此君 。
现代文：张纲自从患病，吏人都为他祈祷求福，都说 千秋万岁，何时再见此君 。
English: Ever since Zhang Gang fell ill, officials have been praying for his well-being, saying, "Long live the king, when will I see him again?"

古文：张婴等五百余人制服行丧，送到犍为，负土成坟。
现代文：张婴等五百多人穿着丧服送丧，一直送到犍为，负土把坟筑好。
English: More than five hundred people, including Zhang Ying, dressed in mourning clothes to attend the funeral. They were sent all the way to Xingwei to build the grave.

古文：诏曰： 故广陵太守张纲，大臣之苗，剖符统务，正身导下，班宣德信，降集剧贼张婴万人，息干戈之役，济蒸庶之困，未升显爵，不幸早卒。
现代文：朝廷下诏说 ：已故广陵太守张纲，大臣的后裔，奉天子命综理事务，以身作则，诱导下级，颁布宣传国家的道德信用，使巨贼张婴率一万多人投降，消除了战争的灾难，解除了百姓的困苦，没有升迁到高位，不幸早死了。
English: The imperial edict said, "The late Guangling Taishou Zhang Gangru, the descendant of the minister, was ordered by heaven to review the affairs, lead by example, induce subordinates, promulgate propaganda on the moral credit of the country, make the giant thief Zhang Xiaojing lead more than 10,000 people to surrender, eliminate the disaster of war, relieve the hardships of the people, was not promoted to a high position, and unfortunately died early.

古文：婴等缞杖，若丧考妣，朕甚愍焉！ 
现代文：张婴等披丧服，持丧杖，如死了父母一样。
English: Zhang Ying and others wore mourning clothes and carried mourning canes, as if they were their dead parents.

古文：拜纲子续为郎中，赐钱百万。
现代文：我对他的死十分忧伤。 任张纲儿子张续为郎中，赐钱百万。
English: I was very saddened by his death. He appointed Zhang Gang's son Zhang Dui as his son-in-law and gave him millions of money.

古文：王龚字伯宗，山阳高平人也。
现代文：◆王龚传，王龚字伯宗，山阳郡高平县人。
English: ◆ Wang Xizhong, Wang Xizhizhizhong, from Gaoping County, Sanyang County.

古文：世为豪族。
现代文：世世为大族。
English: They have been a powerful family for generations.

古文：初举孝廉，稍迁青州刺史，劾奏贪浊二千石数人，安旁嘉之，征拜尚书。
现代文：最初被推举为孝廉，迁为青州刺史，上奏弹劾贪污二千石数人，安帝嘉奖他，征召为尚书。
English: At first, he was promoted to filial piety, moved to Qingzhou, and impeached for embezzling 2,000 koku. An Di commended him, and he was conscripted as Shangshu.

古文：建光元年，擢为司隶校尉，明年迁汝南太守。
现代文：建光元年，升为司隶校尉，第二年升汝南太守。
English: In the first year of Jianguang, he was promoted to the rank of lieutenant, and in the second year he was promoted to the governor of Runan Province.

古文：政崇温和，好才爱士，引进郡人黄宪、陈蕃等。
现代文：为政主张温和，好才爱士，引进郡人黄宪、陈蕃等人。
English: He was a moderate politician who loved talent, and introduced county residents Huang Xian and Chen Yao.

古文：宪虽不屈，蕃遂就吏。
现代文：黄宪虽不屈就，陈蕃却做了吏。
English: Although Huang Xian was unyielding, Chen Xi became an official.

古文：蕃性气高明，初到，龚不即召见之。
现代文：陈蕃性气高明，初到府，王龚没有立即召见他。
English: Chen Yao was a high-spirited person. When he first arrived at the palace, Wang Yao did not immediately summon him.

古文：乃留记谢病去。
现代文：于是留了个字条就称病回去了。
English: So he left a note saying he was ill and went home.

古文：龚怒，使除其录。
现代文：王龚发怒，要除陈蕃的名。
English: Wang Yao was furious and wanted to remove Chen Yao's name.

古文：功曹袁阆请见，言曰： 闻之传曰 人臣不见察于君，不敢立于朝 ，蕃既以贤见引，不宜退以非礼。 
现代文：功曹袁阆要求见王龚，说： 听说《传》有言： 人臣不为君所了解，不敢立于朝。 陈蕃既然是按贤者引见的，就不应当按非礼辞退。 
English: Gong Cao Yuan Qi asked to see Wang Qi, saying, "I have heard that there is a saying in the Analects, 'If a vassal is not understood by the sovereign, he will not dare to stand in the imperial court.' Since Chen Qi was introduced by a wise man, he should not decline the invitation in a disrespectful manner.

古文：龚改容谢曰： 是吾过也。 
现代文：王龚为之变色说 ：是我的过啊！ 
English: Wang Yao turned pale and said, "It's my fault!"

古文：乃复厚遇待之。
现代文：于是又很有礼貌地对待他。
English: So I treated him very politely.

古文：由是后进知名之士莫不归心焉。
现代文：因此后进知名的人都敬佩王龚。
English: For this reason, even lesser-known people admire Wang Yao.

古文：阆字奉高。数辞公府之命，不修异操，而致名当时。
现代文：袁阆字奉高，几次辞去公府的征召，不求特异的操守，但在当时享有名望。
English: Yuan Shanzi was a high-ranking official. He resigned several times from the public service, and did not seek exceptional conduct, but he enjoyed great fame at the time.

古文：永建元年，征袭为太仆，转太常。
现代文：永建元年，征召王龚为太仆，调太常。
English: In the first year of the Yongjian era, Wang Yao was conscripted as a servant and transferred to a regular post.

古文：四年，迁司空，以地震策免。
现代文：四年，升司空，因地震免官。
English: Four years later, he was promoted to air vice marshal and relieved of his duties due to the earthquake.

古文：永和元年，拜太尉。
现代文：永和元年，任太尉。
English: In 1901, he was promoted to the rank of captain.

古文：在位恭慎，自非公事，不通州郡书记。
现代文：在位严肃谨慎，不是公事，不与州郡通书信。
English: He is serious and prudent in his reign. It is not a matter of business, and he does not exchange letters with the state and county.

古文：其所辟命，皆海内长者。
现代文：他所辟举任命的，都是海内德高望重的长者。
English: His appointees are all senior figures who are held in high esteem by Heinede.

古文：龚深疾宦官专权，志在匡正，乃上书极言其状，请加放斥。
现代文：王龚深疾宦官专权，有志挽救这种局势。于是上书极言宦官的祸害，请皇上放逐他们。
English: Wang Yao, who was deeply concerned about the eunuch's exclusive power, wanted to save the situation. Therefore, he wrote a letter to the emperor, saying that eunuchs were a scourge, and asked the emperor to banish them.

古文：诸黄门恐惧。各使宾客诬奏龚罪，顺帝命亟自实。
现代文：宦官恐惧，使宾客上奏诬蔑王龚有罪，顺帝命王龚赶快自己承认。
English: The eunuch's fear caused the guests to falsely accuse Wang Yao of being guilty, and Wang Yao quickly confessed to the emperor's order.

古文：前掾李固时为大将军梁商从事中郎，乃奏记于商曰：今旦闻下太尉王公敕令自实，未审其事深浅何如。
现代文：前掾李固这时为大将军梁商从事中郎，于是上书给梁商说 ：今天听说皇上下令王公自己承认罪责，不知道事情的深浅如何。
English: At that time, the former general Li Gu was acting as the middle man for the general Liang Shang, so he sent a letter to Liang Shang saying: Today, I heard that the emperor ordered the prince to admit his guilt, I don't know what the situation is.

古文：王公束厉节，敦乐艺文，不求苟得，不为苟行，但以坚贞之操，违俗失众，横为谗佞所构毁，众人闻知，莫不叹栗。
现代文：王公束身自修，砥厉节操，笃爱艺文，不求那些不当得而得的东西，不做那些不当做而做的行为。白白地因为操守贞洁，违背世俗，为一些人所不满，横暴地被谗言诬陷，大家听了，没有不叹息战怵的。
English: Wang Gong is self-cultivated, rigorous and disciplined, loves art and literature, does not ask for things that are undeserved, and does not do things that are done improperly. In vain, because of his chastity, contrary to the world, he was dissatisfied with some people, and was violently slandered. Everyone listened, and there was no one who did not sigh and tremble.

古文：夫三公尊重，承天象极，未有诣理诉冤之义。
现代文：三公位尊任重，承助天子，位象三台，没有向法官诉冤的理。
English: There is no reason to complain to the judge, as the three public offices are held in high esteem and are responsible for assisting the emperor.

古文：纤微感概，辄引分决，是以旧典不有大罪，不至重问。
现代文：纤微意气，随便解决算了。所以旧的典章规定，不是有大罪，不必审问。
English: Therefore, according to the old regulations, it is not a serious crime, and there is no need to interrogate.

古文：王公沈静内明，不可加以非理。
现代文：王公沉着聪明，不能对他非理。
English: Wang Gong is calm and intelligent. You can't treat him unfairly.

古文：卒有他变，则朝廷获害贤之名，群臣无救护之节矣。
现代文：如果卒然发生变故，那么朝廷有害贤的名声，全体臣子有失救护的责任啊！
English: If there is a sudden change of fortune, then the reputation of the imperial court as harmful and virtuous, all the courtiers have the responsibility to rescue!

古文：昔绛侯得罪，袁盎解其过，魏尚获戾，冯唐诉其冤，时君善之，列在书传。
现代文：从前绛侯周勃得罪，袁盎为他申诉，得以无罪释放；魏尚获罪过，冯唐为他申冤，当时文帝以为他们做得好，这事载在书传中。
English: Once upon a time, Zhou Bo, the former warlord, was found guilty, and Yuan Ang filed a complaint on his behalf and was acquitted; Wei Shang was found guilty, and Feng Tang filed a complaint on his behalf. At that time, Emperor Wen thought that they had done a good job. This is recorded in the biography.

古文：今将军内倚至尊，外典国柄，言重信著，指捴无违，宜加表救，济王公之艰难。
现代文：现在将军在朝廷倚仗皇上，在外掌握国家的权力，威信昭著，说话为人所重，指挥没有谁敢违抗，应当上表营救，拯救王公于艰难之中。
English: Now, generals rely on the emperor in the imperial court, and hold the power of the country outside. Their authority is well-known, their words carry weight, and no one dares to disobey their orders. They should come to the rescue and save the prince from difficulties.

古文：语曰： 善人在患，饥不及餐。 
现代文：俗话说： 好人在患难中，饿着肚子等饭吃。 
English: As the saying goes: A good man, when in trouble, waits until he's hungry to eat.

古文：然则立德者以幽陋好遗，显登者以贵涂易引。
现代文：这正是时候呢。 梁商马上对帝说了，事情消除了。
English: This is exactly the right time. Liang Shang immediately told the emperor and the matter was resolved.

古文：故晨门有抱关之夫，柱下无朱文之轸也。
现代文：王龚在位五年，因老且病，请求回家，死在家里。
English: After five years on the throne, due to old age and illness, Wang Hui asked to go home and died at home.

古文：暢字叔茂。
现代文：儿子叫王畅。◆王畅传，王畅字叔茂。
English: His son is called Wang Chang. ◆ Wang Chang Chuan, Wang Chang Zi Shumo.

古文：少以清实为称，无所交党。
现代文：年轻时以清廉笃实为人称道。很少与人交结。
English: When he was young, he was known for his honesty and integrity. He rarely socialized with others.

古文：初举孝廉，辞病不就。
现代文：开始为孝廉，托病不应。
English: Start with filial piety, and never feign illness.

古文：大将军梁商特辟举茂才，四迁尚书令，出为齐相。
现代文：大将军梁商特辟为茂才，四迁尚书令，然后被派出为齐相。
English: The great general Liang Shang was specially designated as Motsai, moved four times as Shang Shuling, and then was sent as Qi Xiang.

古文：征拜司隶校尉，转渔阳太守。
现代文：征召为司隶校尉，调为渔阳太守。
English: He was conscripted as a lieutenant of Sili and transferred to Yuyang Dazhu.

古文：所在以严明为称。
现代文：所到之处，都以严肃精明为人称道。
English: Everywhere he went, he was known for his seriousness and shrewdness.

古文：坐事免官。
现代文：因事获罪免官。
English: He was acquitted of the crime and removed from office.

古文：是时，政事多归尚书，桓帝特诏三公，令高选庸能。太尉陈蕃荐暢清方公正，有不可犯之色，由是复为尚书。
现代文：这时朝廷政事多归尚书，桓帝特诏三公，令选举有功有能的人为尚书，太尉陈蕃荐举王畅，说他清廉公正，有不可侵犯之色，因此再为尚书。
English: At this time, most of the political affairs of the imperial court were attributed to Shangshu. Emperor Huan issued a special edict to the three princes, ordering the election of meritorious and capable people as Shangshu. Lieutenant Chen Yan recommended Wang Chang, saying that he was clean, fair and inviolable, so he was Shangshu again.

古文：寻拜南阳太守。
现代文：不久，任命为南阳太守。
English: Soon, he was appointed as the governor of Nanyang.

古文：前后二千石逼惧帝乡贵戚，多不称职。
现代文：在他以前的二千石，都害怕帝乡的贵戚，大多不称职。
English: In the two thousand koku before him, they were all afraid of the emperor's noble relatives, most of them were incompetent.

古文：暢深疾之，下车奋厉威猛，其豪党有衅秽者，莫不纠发。会赦，事得散。
现代文：王畅深恶痛绝，一到任，就施展威猛，他们中间有罪恶的，都一一查办揭发，碰上朝廷大赦，事情就散了。
English: Wang Chang was deeply hated and despised. As soon as he took office, he showed his power. The guilty among them were investigated and exposed one by one. When there was an amnesty from the imperial court, the matter was resolved.

古文：暢追恨之，更为设法，诸受臧二千万以上不自首实者，尽入财物；若其隐伏，使吏发屋伐树，堙井夷灶，豪右大震。
现代文：王畅旧恨不消，另立条例，各受赃二千万以上不自首承认的，没收他的全部财物；如果有隐瞒的，派官吏拆屋伐树，填井平灶，一些恶势力，大为震动。
English: Wang Chang couldn't get rid of the old grudge, so he set up another regulation, and confiscated all the property of those who were fined more than 20 million yuan each and did not surrender and admit; if there was anything to hide, he sent officials to demolish houses, cut trees, fill wells and cook stoves, and some evil forces, which was a great shock.

古文：功曹张敞奏记谏曰：五教在宽，著之经典。
现代文：功曹张敞上书劝谏说 ：五教在宽大，已经写在经典上面。
English: Gong Cao Zhang Zhangran wrote a letter to persuade him to say: The five teachings are broad and have been written in the classics.

古文：汤去三面，八方归仁。
现代文：商汤说网去三面，八方都归服他的仁心。
English: Shang Tang said that the net went to three sides, and all sides submitted to his benevolence.

古文：武王入殷，先去砲格之刑。
现代文：武王入殷，首先除掉纣的炮烙之刑。
English: When King Wu entered Yin, the first thing he had to do was to remove the shackles of the cannon.

古文：高祖鉴秦，唯定三章之法。
现代文：汉高祖看到秦代的苛政，只定约法三章。
English: Han Gao Zu saw the harsh politics of the Qin Dynasty and only stipulated three chapters of contract law.

古文：孝文皇帝感一缇萦，蠲除肉刑。
现代文：孝文皇帝为缇萦上书赎父所感动，除去了肉刑。
English: Emperor Xiaowen removed corporal punishment, moved by the letter written to him by his father.

古文：卓茂、文翁、召父之徒，皆疾恶严刻，务崇温厚。
现代文：卓茂、文翁、召父之徒，都疾恶如仇，但专主温柔敦厚。
English: Zhuo Mao, Wen Weng, and Zhao Zifu's followers are all as evil as the enemy, but the tyrant is gentle and kind.

古文：仁贤之政，流闻后世。
现代文：仁爱贤明的政声，流传后世。
English: The political voice of benevolence, love and wisdom has been passed down to future generations.

古文：夫明哲之君，网漏吞舟之鱼，然后三光明于上，人物悦于下。
现代文：那些贤明圣哲的君主，法网稀疏，不求严峻。然后日、月、星三光明照在上，人物喜悦于下。
English: The rulers of those wise sages, the legal net is sparse, do not seek severity. Then the sun, moon and stars shine on the top, and the characters are happy on the bottom.

古文：言之若迂，其效甚近。
现代文：这些话似乎迂腐，但其效果立见。
English: These words may seem pedantic, but they are effective.

古文：发屋伐树。将为严烈，虽欲惩恶，难以闻远。
现代文：拆屋伐树，这是准备采取严酷猛烈的手段，虽然是想惩治坏人坏事，但恐怕远方的人听了，影响不好。
English: Demolishing houses and cutting down trees is a drastic measure that is being prepared. Although it is intended to punish bad people and bad deeds, I am afraid that people in faraway places will hear about it and be affected by it.

古文：以明府上智之才，日月之曜，敷仁惠之政，则海内改观，实有折枝之易，而无挟山之难。
现代文：您有上智的才华，明如日月，施行仁爱的政治，使海内改变旧观，有折枝这么容易，没有挟泰山以超北海之难。
English: You have the talent of wisdom, bright as the sun and the moon, implement the politics of benevolence, and make the country change the old view. It is so easy to have a broken branch, but it is difficult to overcome the North Sea without a mountain.

古文：郡为旧都侯甸之国，园庙出于章陵，三后生自新野，士女沾教化，黔首仰风流，自中兴以来，功臣将相，继世而隆。
现代文：光烈皇后、和帝阴后、邓后都是新野人。男女沾沐教化，百姓仰慕流风余韵。自中兴以来，功臣将相，代代兴隆。
English: The glorious empress, the empress dowager, and the empress dowager are all neo-savages. Both men and women are educated, and the people admire the flow of the wind and the aftertaste. Since the reformation, the meritorious generals have prospered from generation to generation.

古文：愚以为恳恳用刑，不如行恩；孳孳求奸，未若礼贤。
现代文：我以为急切用刑，不如行恩；勤勉求奸，不若礼贤。
English: I thought that to hasten punishment was better than to show mercy, and that to be diligent in prosecution was better than to be virtuous.

古文：舜举皋陶，不仁者远。
现代文：舜推举皋陶，坏人就不敢在左右了。
English: The bad guys won't dare to be on the right or the left.

古文：随会为政，晋盗奔秦。
现代文：晋命随会将中军，且为太傅，晋国的盗贼就跑到秦国去了。
English: Jin's mission was to escort the Chinese army, and he was the Taifu, so the thieves from Jin went to Qin.

古文：虞、芮入境，让心自生。
现代文：虞、芮二人，有狱不能解决，去找文王，到了周，见耕田的人让于田畔，年轻的人让年长的。
English: Two people, Yu and Zou, can't solve the problem of imprisonment, so they go to find King Wen. When they get to Zhou, they see that the people who cultivate the fields give way to the side of the fields, and the young people give way to the elderly.

古文：化人在德，不在用刑。
现代文：虞、芮二人感到很惭愧，说我们所争的，周人的所耻。
English: Yu and Zou both felt very ashamed, saying that what we were arguing about was a disgrace to Zhou people.

古文：暢深纳敞谏，更崇宽政，慎刑简罚，教化遂行。
现代文：于是就不去见文王，彼此相让而归。可见感化人在道德不在用刑。 王畅完全采纳了张敞的劝谏，改为推行宽政，小心地用刑，简易地施罚。教化大行。
English: As a result, they did not go to see King Wen and returned to each other. It can be seen that the influential person does not use punishment in morality. Wang Chang fully adopted Zhang Zhang's advice and changed to the implementation of leniency, carefully using punishment, and imposing punishment simply. Enlightenment.

古文：郡中豪族多以奢靡相尚，暢常布衣皮褥，车马羸败，以矫其敞。
现代文：南阳郡中的官僚大族，大多以奢侈浪费相标榜，王畅平常是布衣皮褥、羸马败车，以矫正这种不好的风气。
English: Most of the bureaucrats in Nanyang County flaunt extravagance and waste, and Wang Chang is usually a cloth-and-leather-clad, horse-drawn carriage, in order to correct this bad tradition.

古文：同郡刘表时年十七，从暢受学。
现代文：同郡刘表时年十七岁，跟王畅学习。
English: He was 17 years old at the time of the Liu table in the same county, and studied with Wang Chang.

古文：进谏曰： 夫奢不僭上，俭不逼下，循道行礼，贵处可否之间。
现代文：劝谏王畅说 ：奢不越上过分，俭不迫下照了做，依道行礼，所贵的是在可否之间，求得适当而已。
English: He advised Wang Chang to say, "Don't be extravagant, don't be frugal, don't do as you're told, and follow the etiquette. What's important is to find the right balance between what's possible and what's not.

古文：蘧伯玉耻独为君子。
现代文：蘧伯玉以独为君子可耻。
English: It is shameful for Zou Bo-yu to regard himself as a gentleman.

古文：府君不希孔圣之明训，而慕夷，齐之末操，无乃皎然自贵于世乎？ 
现代文：您不讲求孔圣人的明训，反而羡慕叔夷伯齐琐屑细末的操守。岂不是想自己以皎洁自贵于世吗？ 
English: Instead of seeking the teachings of the sage Kong, you are envious of the petty and petty virtues of Shuyiboji. Don't you want to be proud of your purity in the world?

古文：暢曰： 昔公仪休在鲁，拔园葵，去织妇；孙叔敖相楚，其子被裘刈薪。
现代文：王畅说 ：从前公仪休在鲁为相，拔掉园葵，与织布的妻子离婚；孙叔敖相楚，他的儿子被裘打柴。
English: Wang Chang said: In the past, the official ceremony was held in Lu Weixiang, the garden anemones were uprooted, and the weaver's wife was divorced; Sun Shuzhu was married to Chu, and his son was beaten by Qiu.

古文：夫以约失之鲜矣。
现代文：以节约而失败的少啊。
English: There are few cases of failure due to economy.

古文：闻伯夷之风者，贪夫廉，懦夫有立志。
现代文：听了伯夷的高风亮节，贪污的人就会廉洁，怯懦的人就会立志自强。
English: After listening to the high winds and bright festival of Baiyi, the corrupt people will be clean, and the cowardly people will be determined to strengthen themselves.

古文：虽以不德，敢慕遣烈。 
现代文：我虽然没有德行，却羡慕古人的功业。 
English: Though I have no virtue, I admire the achievements of the ancients.

古文：后征为长乐卫尉。
现代文：后来征为长乐卫尉。
English: Later, he was enlisted as a Changle Guardsman.

古文：建宁元年，迁司空，数月，以水灾策免。
现代文：建宁元年，升司空，才几个月，因水灾免官。
English: In the first year of Jianning, only a few months after being promoted to the air force, he was relieved of his duties due to a flood.

古文：明年，卒于家。
现代文：第二年，死在家里。
English: The following year, he died at home.

古文：子谦，为大将军何进长史。
现代文：儿子王谦，为大将军何进长史。
English: His son, Wang Qian, has a long history as a great general.

古文：谦子粲，以文才知名。
现代文：王谦的儿子王粲，以文才著名。
English: Wang Qian, the son of Wang Qian, is famous for his literary talent.

古文：种暠字景伯，河南洛阳人，仲山甫之后也。
现代文：◆种暠传，种暠字景伯，河南郡洛阳县人。仲山甫的后代。
English: ◆Courtesy of Jing Bo, a native of Luoyang County, Henan County. Descendants of Zhongshan Fu.

古文：父为定陶令，有财三千万。
现代文：父亲是定陶县令，有财三千万。
English: His father was the county magistrate of Dingtao County, with a fortune of 30 million yuan.

古文：父卒，暠悉以赈恤宗族及邑里之贫者。
现代文：父亲死了，种暠把这笔钱全部赈济宗族及县里的贫人。
English: After his father died, the farmer gave all the money to his family and the poor people in the county.

古文：其有进趣名利，皆不与交通。
现代文：那些争名夺利的人，种暠都不与他们来往。
English: Those who compete for fame and profit do not associate with them.

古文：始为县门下史。
现代文：开始做县的门下吏。
English: Began working as a clerk for the county.

古文：时河南尹田歆外甥王谌，名知人。
现代文：当时河南尹田歆的外甥王谌有知人之明。
English: At that time, Wang Yao, the nephew of Yin Tianyao of Henan Province, was clearly an acquaintance.

古文：歆谓之曰： 今当举六孝廉，多得贵戚书命，不宜相违，欲自用一名士以报国家，尔助我求之。 
现代文：田歆对王谌说 ：现在要推举六个孝廉，收了不少达官贵人亲戚的信，不能违背他们的托咐，我想自己用一名士以报效国家，你帮助我找找。 
English: Tian Yao said to Wang Yao: Now I have to nominate six filial pals. I have received many letters from relatives of dignitaries and officials. I can't go against their instructions. I want to use one of them to serve the country. Please help me find them.

古文：明日，谌送客于大阳郭，遥见暠，异之。还白歆曰： 为尹得孝廉矣，近洛阳门下史也。 
现代文：第二天，王谌送客人于大阳郭，远远地看见了种暠，认为不是凡人，回去告诉田歆说 ：为您得了一个孝廉，即洛阳门下吏呢。 
English: The next day, Wang Yao was escorting a guest to Dayang Guo. He saw Zong Yao from a distance and thought that he was not an ordinary person. He went back to tell Tian Yao and said, "You have gained a filial son, that is, the gatekeeper of Luoyang."

古文：歆笑曰： 当得山泽隐滞，乃洛阳吏邪？ 
现代文：田歆笑说 ：应当求山泽隐居不仕的人，原来是个洛阳吏呀！ 
English: Tian Yao laughed and said, "The person who should have asked Yamazawa to live in seclusion, turned out to be a Luoyang official!"

古文：谌曰： 山泽不必有异士，异士不必在山泽。 
现代文：王谌说 ：山泽中不一定有异人，异人不一定在山泽。 
English: Wang Yao said: There are not necessarily aliens in the mountains, and aliens are not necessarily in the mountains.

古文：歆即召暠于庭，辩诘职事。
现代文：田歆马上在庭中召见种暠，查问他职守内的事。
English: Tian Yao immediately summoned Zeng Yao in the court and asked him about his duties.

古文：暠辞对有序，歆甚知之，召署主簿，遂举孝谦，辟太尉府，举高第。
现代文：种暠说话有条有理，田歆对他说的甚为了解，召他代理主簿，于是举孝廉，辟召入太尉府，以成绩优秀举高第。
English: Zeng Yao spoke in a well-organized manner, Tian Yao understood what he said very well, called him to act as the main book, so he promoted Xiao Lin, called him to the captain's office, and promoted him to the highest rank with excellent results.

古文：顺帝末，为侍御使。
现代文：顺帝末年，为侍御史。
English: In the last years of Emperor Shun, he was a courtier.

古文：时，所遣八使光禄大夫杜乔、周举等，多所纠奏，而大将军梁冀及诸宦官互为请救，事皆被寝遏。
现代文：当时所派遣的八使光禄大夫杜乔、周举等，不少人被上奏纠劾，大将军梁冀及诸宦官互相请救说情，事情被搁置阻止。
English: The eight envoys sent at that time, including Guanglu's doctor Du Qiao and Zhou Ji, were reprimanded by many people. General Liang Jie and other eunuchs interceded with each other, and the matter was put on hold.

古文：暠自以职主刺举，志案奸违，乃复劾诸为八使所举蜀郡太守刘宣等罪恶章露，宜伏欧刀。
现代文：种暠认为自己的职责是揭发检举，有志查办奸逆，于是再弹劾那些被八使所检举的蜀郡太守刘宣等人罪恶昭彰，应当处以极刑。
English: Zeng Yao thought that his duty was to expose the accusation, and he was willing to investigate and deal with the treason, so he impeached those who were reported by the eight envoys, such as Liu Xuan, the governor of Shu County, whose crimes were notorious, and should be sentenced to capital punishment.

古文：又奏请敕四府条举近臣父兄及知亲为刺史、二千石尤残秽不胜任者，免遭案罪。
现代文：又奏请令四府条举近臣父兄及亲友为刺史特别残暴卑鄙不胜任的，罢免他的官治罪。
English: He also requested the four prefectures to list the close vassals, brothers and sisters, and relatives and friends as being particularly cruel, despicable and incompetent, and to dismiss him for the crime of official punishment.

古文：帝乃从之。
现代文：帝采纳他的意见。
English: The emperor accepted his opinion.

古文：擢暠监太子于承光宫。
现代文：选拔种暠监太子于承光官。
English: The selection of the prince of the seed inspector was made by Chengguang.

古文：中常侍高梵从中单驾出迎太子，时太傅仁乔等疑不欲从，惶惑不知所为。
现代文：中常侍高梵从中单车出迎太子，当时太傅杜乔等不想依从，犹疑不决，吓得不晓得怎么办。
English: Gao Fanzhong, the middle-ranking attendant, rode his bicycle to meet the prince. At that time, Du Qiao and others did not want to obey, hesitated, and were so scared that they did not know what to do.

古文：暠乃手剑当车，曰： 太子国之储副，人命所系。
现代文：种暠手持剑当车，说： 太子是国家皇位的继承人，与民众生死相关。
English: "The crown prince is the heir to the throne of the country and is related to the life and death of the people.

古文：今常侍来无诏信，何以知非奸邪？
现代文：现在常侍来没有诏命为信，哪里知道他不是奸人呢？
English: Now, if the attendant does not believe in the imperial edict, how do we know that he is not a traitor?

古文：今日有死而已。 
现代文：今日只有死而已。 
English: Today, there is only death.

古文：梵辞屈，不敢对，驰命奏之。诏报，太子乃得去。
现代文：高梵无话可说，不敢对答，驱车上奏皇上，诏下，太子才得去。
English: Gao Van had nothing to say and did not dare to answer. He drove up to the car and played the Emperor, then the Emperor, and the Prince had to go.

古文：乔退而叹息，愧暠临事不惑。
现代文：杜乔退而叹息，对种暠的临事当机立断，感到很惭愧。
English: Du Qiao retreated and sighed, and felt very ashamed for making a snap decision on the urgent matter of planting strawberries.

古文：帝亦嘉其持重，称善者良久。
现代文：帝也嘉奖种暠处事持重无误，啧啧叫好很久。
English: The emperor also commended the seedling for doing a good job and howling for a long time.

古文：出为益州刺史。
现代文：自朝廷出为益州刺史。
English: From the imperial court to the history of Yishu.

古文：暠素慷慨，好立功立事。
现代文：种暠平素意气激昂，喜立功立事。
English: He was full of enthusiasm and eager to make contributions.

古文：在职三年，宣恩远夷，开晓殊俗，岷山杂落皆怀服汉德。
现代文：在职三年，宣扬国家的恩德，远达国外，使风俗不同的地方也知道，岷山杂居的部落，都怀服汉朝的德泽。
English: He has been in office for three years. He has been promoting the benevolence of the country far and wide, so that different places with different customs also know that the mixed tribes in Lushan are all in favor of the Han Dynasty.

古文：其白狼、槃木、唐、邛、诸国，自前刺史朱辅卒后遂绝；暠至，乃复举种向化。
现代文：白狼、木、唐、邛、诸国，自从前刺史朱辅死后就与汉朝断绝关系；种暠到任，又都归化。
English: The White Wolf, the Wood, the Tang, the Yao, and the various provinces severed their ties with the Han Dynasty after the death of the former Sashishi Zhu Fu; when the Sect Master took office, they were all naturalized.

古文：时永昌太守冶铸黄金为文蛇，以献梁冀，暠纠发逮捕，驰传上言，而二府畏懦，不敢案之，冀由是衔怒于暠。
现代文：当时永昌太守冶铸黄金为文蛇，献给梁冀，种暠揭发并逮捕了永昌太守，以最快的方法上报朝廷，二府怕事懦弱，不敢查办，梁冀因此恨了种暠。
English: At that time, Yongchang's eunuch smelted and cast gold as a literary snake and dedicated it to Liang Jie. The eunuch exposed and arrested Yongchang's eunuch and reported it to the imperial court in the fastest way. The two governments were afraid of cowardice and did not dare to investigate. Liang Jie therefore hated the eunuch.

古文：会巴郡人服直聚党数百人，自称 天王 ，暠与太守应承讨捕，不克，吏人多被伤害。
现代文：正遇上巴郡人服直聚集党羽数百人，自称 天王 ，种暠与太守应承讨捕，没有得到胜利，不少吏人被伤害。
English: In the face of this, the people of Ba County immediately gathered hundreds of party members, claiming to be the king, the godfather and the eunuch should undertake a crackdown, but they did not succeed, and many officials were injured.

古文：冀因此陷之，传逮暠、承。
现代文：梁冀借此陷害他们，宣布逮捕种暠、应承。
English: Liang Jie took advantage of this to frame them and announced the arrest of Zeng Yao and Ying Cheng.

古文：太尉李固上疏救曰： 臣伏闻讨捕所伤，本非暠、承之意，实由县吏惧法畏罪，迫逐深苦，致此不详。
现代文：太尉李固上疏救说 ：我听说这次讨掳之所以多有伤害，本不是种暠、应承的责任，实因县吏害怕犯法获罪，强迫驱赶，百姓深受其苦，以致获得这种不好的结果。
English: "I heard that the reason why there was a lot of harm in this round-up was not because it was a duty, but because the county officials were afraid of committing a crime and forced the eviction, and the people suffered from it, resulting in such a bad result," said Lieutenant Li Gu Shangbo.

古文：比盗贼群起，处处未绝。
现代文：近来盗贼烽起，到处都是。
English: Thieves are on the rise these days, they're everywhere.

古文：暠、承以首举大奸，而相随受罪，臣恐沮伤州县纠发之意，更共饰匿，莫复尽心。 
现代文：种暠、应承因第一个举发大奸，随即受罪，我恐怕这样会挫伤州县检举弹劾的积极性，以后就会互相掩饰隐匿，不再尽心为国了。 
English: I am afraid that this will dampen the enthusiasm of the state and county prosecutors for impeachment, and they will cover up and hide from each other in the future, and will no longer do their best for the country.

古文：梁太后省奏，乃赦暠、承罪，免官而已。
现代文：梁太后看了上奏，赦了种暠、应承的罪，只免了他们二人的官罢了。
English: When Empress Dowager Liang saw the first performance, she forgave the sins of the seedling and the heir, but only pardoned the two officials.

古文：后凉州羌动，以暠为凉州刺史，甚得百姓欢心。
现代文：后来凉州羌骚动，任命种暠为凉州刺史，很得百姓的欢心。
English: Later, due to the turmoil in Liangzhou, Zonglu was appointed as the historian of Liangzhou, which was well received by the people.

古文：被征当迁，吏人诣阙请留之，太后叹曰： 未闻刺史得人心若是。 
现代文：种暠被征召，当升官，吏人到朝廷留种暠仍做凉州刺史。太后叹说 ：没有听说刺史得人心有这样的。 
English: He was conscripted as a samurai, and when he was promoted, the officials went to the imperial court to keep him as a samurai, but he still became the prince of Liangzhou. The empress dowager sighed and said, "I have never heard of such a popular prince."

古文：乃许之。
现代文：于是批准了凉州吏人的请求。
English: I said yes.

古文：暠复留一年，迁汉阳太守，戎夷男女送至汉阳界，暠与相揖谢，千里不得乘车。
现代文：种暠又留一年，升汉阳太守，戎夷男女送到汉阳境里，种暠向他们作揖致谢，徒行千里，没有车乘。
English: The seedlings remained for another year, and were sent to the Hanyang governor-general, and the men and women of Wuyi were sent to the territory of Hanyang. The seedlings were given to them as a token of thanks. They traveled thousands of miles on foot, and there was no car to take them.

古文：及到郡，化行羌胡，禁止侵掠。
现代文：种暠到汉阳郡，教化行于羌胡，他们自己禁止侵扰，掠夺财物。
English: The seeds were planted in Hanyang County, and the indoctrination was carried out in Yanhu. They themselves banned intrusion and plundered property.

古文：迁使匈奴中郎将。
现代文：升出使匈奴的中郎将。
English: The middle son of the Xiongnu was promoted to general.

古文：时，辽东乌桓反叛，复转辽东太守，乌桓望风率服，迎拜于界上。
现代文：这时辽东乌桓反叛，再调为辽东太守，乌桓观察风头率所属归服，在边界上迎拜种暠。
English: At this time, Wu Huan of Liaodong rebelled and was re-assigned as the governor of Liaodong. Wu Huan observed that the limelight belonged to the subordinate, and greeted the seed on the border.

古文：坐事免归。
现代文：因事获罪免官回家。
English: Due to the fact that he was exonerated, he returned home.

古文：后司隶校尉举暠贤良方正，不应。
现代文：以后司隶校尉举种暠为贤良方正，他不应。
English: In the future, he should not be promoted from the rank of lieutenant to that of a scholar.

古文：征拜议郎，迁南郡太守，入为尚书。会匈奴寇并、凉二州，桓帝擢暠为度辽将军。
现代文：征召授议郎，升南郡太守，调为尚书，遇匈奴侵犯并州、凉州，桓帝选拔种暠为度辽将军。
English: He was conscripted to be conferred with the title of eulogist, Shennan County Governor, and transferred to Shangshu. In the event that the Xiongnu invaded and annexed Suzhou and Liangzhou, Emperor Kuan selected him as General Du Liao.

古文：暠到营所，先宣恩信，诱降诸胡，其有不服，然后加讨。
现代文：种暠到营地，首先宣布讲恩德，讲信义，不得已才进行征讨，引诱诸胡投降。
English: When the seeds arrived at the camp, they first announced that they would preach benevolence and righteousness, and then, as a last resort, they carried out a campaign to lure Zhu Hu to surrender.

古文：羌虏先时有生见获质于郡县者，悉遣还之。
现代文：羌虏从前有被生捉押在郡县的，都打发回去了。
English: In the past, those who were captured alive and held in counties and counties were all sent back.

古文：诚心怀抚，信赏分明，由是羌胡、龟兹、莎车、乌孙等皆来顺服。
现代文：诚心安抚，信赏分明。因此羌胡、龟兹、莎车、乌孙等国都来顺服。
English: Sincerely appease, clearly believe in and appreciate. Therefore, countries such as Yinghu, Guze, Yarko, and Wusun have come to obey.

古文：乃去烽燧，除候望，边方晏然无警。
现代文：种暠于是去掉烽火台，撤除候望设施，边境安然无事。
English: As a result, the bonfires were removed, the waiting facilities were removed, and the border was safe.

古文：入为大司农。
现代文：调入朝廷为大司农。
English: He was transferred to the Imperial Court as the Chief of the Agricultural Department.

古文：延熹四年，迁司徒。
现代文：延熹四年，升司徒。
English: Four years later, he was promoted to apprentice.

古文：推达名臣桥玄、皇甫规等，为称职相。
现代文：推举名臣桥玄、皇甫规等，是称职的宰相。
English: The famous vassals such as Qiao Xuan and Wang Fuxi were elected as competent prime ministers.

古文：在位三年，年六十一薨。
现代文：在位三年，年六十一逝世。
English: He reigned for three years and died at the age of 61.

古文：并、凉边人咸为发哀。
现代文：并州、凉州的边民，都为哀悼。
English: And the border residents of Suzhou and Liangzhou are all in mourning.

古文：匈奴闻暠卒，举国伤惜。
现代文：匈奴听说种暠逝世，全国悲伤。
English: The Xiongnu heard of the death of the seedling, and the whole country was saddened.

古文：单于每入朝贺，望见坟墓，辄哭泣祭祀。
现代文：单于每入朝贺，望见种暠的坟墓，哭泣祭祀。
English: Every morning when I go to pray, I can see the grave of Seongyeon and weep at the memorial service.

古文：二子：岱、拂。
现代文：二子：种岱、种拂。
English: Two children: Seed pod, seed whisk.

古文：岱字公祖。好学养志。
现代文：◆种岱传，种岱字公祖，好学养志。
English: ◆ Learn from the ancestors, learn from the ancestors, learn from the ancestors, learn from the ancestors.

古文：举孝廉、茂才，辟公府，皆不就。
现代文：举孝廉、茂才，辟召公府，都不接受。
English: It is not acceptable to promote filial piety, modesty, and virtue, or to invite them to the government.

古文：公车特征，病卒。
现代文：公车特征，病死。
English: Bus features, illness and death.

古文：初，岱与李固子燮同征议郎，燮闻岱卒，痛惜甚，乃上书求加礼于岱。
现代文：起先，种岱与李固的儿子李燮同时被征召为议郎，李燮听说种岱死了，十分悲痛，就上书请求加礼于种岱。
English: At first, Zeng Yao and Li Gu's son, Li Yao, were both called up as mediators. Li Yao was very sad when he heard that Zeng Yao had died, so he wrote to Zeng Yao to ask for a bonus.

古文：曰： 臣闻仁义兴则道德昌，道德昌则政化明，政化明而万姓宁。
现代文：说： 我听说仁义兴，道德昌，道德昌，政化明，政化明，于是百姓安宁。
English: He said: I have heard of benevolence, righteousness, morality, morality, political reform, political reform, so the people are at peace.

古文：伏见故处士种岱，淳和达理，耽悦《诗》、《书》，富贵不能回其虑，万物不能扰其心。
现代文：逝世的处士种岱，淳朴安闲，明于事理，平生以诗书为乐，富贵不能屈其志，万物不能扰其心。
English: The deceased clerk was kind, simple and easy-going, knowledgeable about things, and enjoyed poetry and books all his life. He could not aspire to be rich, and everything could not disturb his heart.

古文：禀命不永，奄然殂殒。
现代文：获命不长，忽然逝世。
English: He was given a short life, but died suddenly.

古文：若不槃桓难进，等辈皆已公卿矣。
现代文：如果不是流连难进，他们这一辈都已经是公卿了。
English: If they hadn't been so hard to get into, their generation would all be court nobles by now.

古文：昔先贤既没，有加赠之典，《周礼》盛德，有铭诔之文，而岱生无印绶之荣，卒无官谥之号。
现代文：从前贤人死了，有加赠的典礼，《周礼》上写着，盛德的人逝世有铭诔之文，种岱在生没有作官的光荣，死了没有官谥的称号。
English: Once upon a time, when a wise man died, there was a ceremony to add a gift. "Weekly Rituals" says that the death of a person of great virtue is inscribed with an inscription, and the deceased did not have the glory of an official during his lifetime, and died without the title of an official.

古文：虽未建忠效用，而为圣恩所拔，遐迩具瞻，宜有异赏。 
现代文：虽然没有为国家建忠，有所报效，但是他是皇上选拔的，远近都知道，应当得到特殊的赏赐。 
English: Although he was not loyal to the country and did not perform well, he was selected by the emperor, and it was known far and wide that he should receive a special reward.

古文：朝廷竟不能从。
现代文：朝廷居然没有这样做。
English: The imperial court actually did not do so.

古文：拂字颖伯。
现代文：◆种拂传，种拂字颖伯。
English: ◆Seed whisking passed down, seed whisking word Yingbo.

古文：初为司隶从事，拜宛令。
现代文：开始为司隶从事，授宛县令。
English: He began to work as a subordinate, and was assigned to the county.

古文：时，南阳郡吏好因休沐，游戏市里，为百姓所患。
现代文：当时南阳郡吏好因例假游戏市里，为害百姓。
English: At that time, the officials of Nanyang County took advantage of the situation to go to the city to play games, to the detriment of the people.

古文：拂出逢之，必下车公谒，以愧其心，自是莫敢出者。
现代文：种拂出去遇了他们，一定下车接见，使他们感到羞愧。自此以后，不敢出来了。
English: When the whip came out and met them, they had to get out of the car to be interviewed, which made them feel ashamed. Since then, they have not dared to come out.

古文：政有能名，累迁光禄大夫。
现代文：为政有能干的好名声，累升为光禄大夫。
English: He has a good reputation as a capable politician and has been promoted to the post of Guanglu Doctor.

古文：初平元年，代荀爽为司空。
现代文：初平元年，代荀爽为司空。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, Shosaku was replaced by Siku.

古文：明年，以地震策免，复为太常。
现代文：第二年，因地震免官，复为太常。
English: The following year, he was relieved of his duties due to the earthquake, and returned to his regular duties.

古文：李、郭之乱。长安城溃，百官多避兵冲，拂挥剑而出曰： 为国大臣，不能止戈除暴，致使凶贼兵刃向宫，去欲何之！ 
现代文：李莈、郭汜作乱，长安城破，百官多避兵冲击逃散，种拂挥剑而出，说 ：做国家的大臣，不能止乱除暴，让贼冲进皇宫，想跑到哪里去！ 
English: Li Qiye and Guo Jie made a riot, Chang'an City was breached, and more than a hundred officials fled to avoid the shock and dispersion, and they came out with a whip and a sword, saying: as a minister of the country, it is impossible to stop the riot and eliminate violence, let the thieves rush into the palace, where do you want to go!

古文：遂战而死。子劭。
现代文：于是战斗至死，子种劭。
English: So they fought to the death, and the seed sprouted.

古文：劭字申甫。
现代文：◆种劭传，种劭字申甫。
English: ◆Seed gong chuan, seed gong zi shen fu.

古文：少知名。
现代文：年轻时就有名气。
English: He became famous at a young age.

古文：中平末，为谏议大夫。
现代文：中平末年，为谏议大夫。
English: At the end of Zhongping's life, he was a doctor of consultation.

古文：大将军何进将诛宦官，召并州牧董卓，至渑池，而进意更狐疑，遣劭宣诏止之。
现代文：大将军何进准备诛杀宦官，召并州牧董卓，董卓到渑池，何进狐疑，拿不定主意了。
English: General He Jin is preparing to kill the eunuch, and has called in the state herdsman Dong Zhuo, and Dong Zhuo has come to Dianchi. He Jin is suspicious and hesitant.

古文：卓不受，遂前至河南。
现代文：派种劭宣诏阻止董卓进京。董卓不接受，更前进达到河南。
English: He issued an edict to prevent Dong Zhuo from entering Beijing. Dong Zhuo did not accept the edict and continued to advance to Henan.

古文：劭迎劳之，因譬令还军。
现代文：种劭去迎接慰劳他们，因劝说董卓退军。
English: Zeng Yao went to meet and comfort them, for he had persuaded Dong Zhuo to withdraw.

古文：卓疑有变，使其军士以兵胁劭。
现代文：董卓怀疑有事变发生，使他的军士用枪胁迫种劭。
English: Dong Zhuo suspected that something had happened, so his sergeant threatened him with a gun to force him to plant the cocoon.

古文：劭怒，称诏大呼叱之，军士皆披，遂前质责卓。卓辞屈，乃还军夕阳亭。
现代文：种劭发怒，称有诏令，大呼叱咤，军士都为之四散，种劭因上前质问责备董卓，董卓无话以应，只得退军夕阳亭。
English: Zeng Yao got angry, said that there was a decree, shouted loudly, and the sergeants were scattered. Zeng Yao held Dong Zhuo accountable for the previous quality, and Dong Zhuo had nothing to say, so he had to withdraw from the sunset pavilion.

古文：及进败，献帝即位，拜劭为侍中。
现代文：等到何进失败，献帝即位，授种劭为郎中。
English: After He Jin's failure, he was offered the throne as emperor, and was given the title of foster son.

古文：卓既擅权，而恶劭强力，遂左转议郎，出为益、凉二州刺史。
现代文：董卓专权，恶种劭强干有力，把他降为议郎，出为益州、凉州刺史。
English: Dong Zhuo's exclusive power, the bad seed, Zou Qianggan, was powerful. He was reduced to a mediator, and was sent to Yizhou and Liangzhou to make history.

古文：会父拂战死，竟不之职。服终，征为少府、大鸿胪，皆辞不受。
现代文：遇上父亲战死，不到职，守丧期满，征召为少府、大鸿胪，都不接受。
English: In the event of his father's death in the war, he would not accept the post, the mourning period would expire, and he would not be conscripted as a shofu or daihong.

古文：曰： 昔我先父以身徇国，吾为臣子，不能除残复怨，何面目朝觐明主哉！ 
现代文：说： 先父以身死国，我做臣子的，不能驱除残暴，报复心中的怨恨，有什么面目见明主呀！ 
English: He said, "My forefather died for his country, and I, as a courtier, cannot drive out cruelty and avenge the hatred in his heart. What kind of face does the Lord have?

古文：遂与马腾、韩遂及左中郎刘范、谏议大夫马宇共攻李、郭，以报其仇。
现代文：就与马腾、韩遂及左中郎刘范、谏议大夫马宇共攻李莈、郭汜，以报仇恨。
English: Together with Ma Teng, Han Sui, Liu Fan, the left-middle-man, and Ma Yu, the doctor of negotiation, they attacked Li Qian and Guo Qian to show their hatred.

古文：与战于长平观下，军败，劭等皆死。
现代文：同郭汜战于长平观下，失败，种劭等都战死。
English: He fought with Guo Gan under the supervision of Changping, but was defeated, and all of his vassals died in the battle.

古文：腾遂还凉州。
现代文：马腾就回凉州去了。
English: Ma Teng went back to Liangzhou.

古文：陈球字伯真，下邳淮浦人也。
现代文：◆陈球传，陈球字伯真，下邳郡淮浦县人。
English: ◆Chen Gu Chuan, Chen Gu Zi Bozhen, from Huaipu County, Hebei Province.

古文：历世著名。
现代文：历代有名于世。
English: Famous throughout the ages.

古文：父，广汉太守。
现代文：父亲陈宜，广汉太守。
English: His father, Chen Yi, was the governor of Guanghan.

古文：球少涉儒学，善律令。
现代文：陈球年轻时广泛地浏览儒学，熟悉法律政令。
English: When he was young, Chen Qu extensively read Confucianism and was familiar with laws and decrees.

古文：阳嘉中，举孝廉，稍迁繁阳令。
现代文：阳嘉中期，举孝廉，升繁阳令。
English: In the middle of the Yang Jia period, the promotion of filial piety and the promotion of prosperity.

古文：时魏郡太守讽县求纳货贿，球不与之，太守怒而挝督邮，欲令逐球。
现代文：当时魏郡太守暗示县里送交货贿，陈球不给，太守发怒，鞭打督邮，想让他驱逐陈球。
English: At that time, the governor of Wei County hinted that the county would send the delivery bribe, but Chenqiu would not give it. The governor got angry and whipped the postmaster, wanting him to expel Chenqiu.

古文：督邮不肯，曰： 魏郡十五城，独繁阳有异政，今受命逐之，将致议于天下矣。 
现代文：督邮不肯，说： 魏郡十五城，独繁阳的政绩好，现在要我驱逐陈球，会引起天下人的议论。 
English: The postmaster general refused, saying, "Wei County has fifteen cities, and the political performance of Duxingyang is good. If I were to expel Chen Qiu now, it would cause the world's discussion.

古文：太守乃止。
现代文：太守才不敢这样做。
English: The governor did not dare to do so.

古文：复辟公府，举高第，拜侍御史。
现代文：后来辟公府，因成绩优秀，举为高第，授侍御史。
English: Later, he was appointed to the Imperial Household Agency, and because of his excellent grades, he was promoted to high rank and awarded the title of Imperial Historian.

古文：是时，桂阳黠贼李研等群聚寇抄，陆梁荆部，州郡懦弱，不能禁，太尉杨秉表球为零陵太守。
现代文：这时桂阳最狡猾的贼寇李研等集众侵扰抄抢，横行荆部，州郡懦弱，不能禁止，太尉杨秉上表推荐陈球为零陵太守。
English: At this time, Guiyang's most cunning thief, Li Yan, and others gathered to harass, copy and rob, rampant Jing Department, state and county are cowardly, can not be banned, Lieutenant Yang Bing on the table recommended Chen Ball as Ziling Taishu.

古文：球到，设方略，期月间，贼虏消散。
现代文：陈球到郡，研究征讨的方法与策略。仅仅一个月，李研等贼虏有的被消灭了，有的逃散了。
English: Chen Qiu went to the county to study the methods and strategies of requisitioning. In just one month, Li Yan and other thieves were eliminated, and some escaped.

古文：而州兵朱盖等反，与桂阳贼胡兰数万人转攻零陵。
现代文：州兵朱盖等却反叛，与桂阳贼胡兰几万人联合攻击零陵。
English: Zhu Gai and other members of the National Guard rebelled, however, and together with Guiyang thief Hulan, tens of thousands of people jointly attacked the tomb.

古文：零陵下湿，编木为城，不可守备，郡中惶恐。
现代文：零陵地下潮湿，编木为城，不可守，也不能防备，郡中百姓惊慌失措。
English: The people of the county were in a state of panic. The ground under the tomb was damp and the city was made of wood. It could not be defended or guarded.

古文：掾史白遣家避难，球怒曰： 太守分国虎符，受任一邦，岂顾妻孥而沮国威重乎？
现代文：掾史告诉陈球，要他遣散家属避难，陈球发怒说 ：太守拿了国家的虎符，负治理一邦的责任，难道可以只顾妻子儿子，败坏国家的威权吗？
English: Zou Shi told Chen Qiu that he should dismiss his family members and take refuge. Chen Qiu angrily said, "Since the supreme commander has taken the national tiger emblem and is responsible for governing a state, can he just take care of his wife and son and corrupt the country's authority?"

古文：复言者斩！ 
现代文：再说的，杀头！ 
English: By the way, kill the head!

古文：乃悉内吏人老弱，与共城守，弦大木为弓，羽矛为矢，引机发之，远射千余步，多所杀伤。
现代文：于是集合所有吏人老弱，共同守城，以大木作弦为弓，羽矛为矢，引机发射，可以射到一千多步以外，杀伤贼虏不少。
English: So they gathered all the officials, old and weak, and together defended the city, using large trees as strings for bows, spears as arrows, and launching the machine, which could shoot more than a thousand steps away, killing and capturing many thieves.

古文：贼复激流灌城，球辄于内因地势反决水淹贼。相拒十余日，不能下。
现代文：贼虏又引水灌城，陈球就于城内因地势反过来决水淹贼，相持十多天，贼没法攻下。
English: The bandits captured and brought water to flood the city. Due to the topography, Chen Ball broke through the water and flooded the bandits inside the city. They held out for more than ten days, and the bandits were unable to capture it.

古文：会中郎将度尚将救兵至，球募士卒，与尚共破斩朱盖等。
现代文：值中郎将度尚带救兵到，陈球招募士卒，与度尚一起击破了朱盖，并斩了朱盖。
English: Danzhong Lang brought Du Shang to the rescue, Chen Ku recruited soldiers, and together with Du Shang, they defeated Zhu Gai and beheaded Zhu Gai.

古文：赐钱五十万，拜子一人为郎。
现代文：赐钱五十万，授陈球的儿子一人为郎。
English: He gave half a million in money, and one of Chen Ball's sons became his son.

古文：迁魏郡太守。
现代文：升魏郡太守。
English: Later, Chen Jiao was transferred to be the governor of Wei County.

古文：征拜将作大匠，作桓帝陵园，所省巨万以上。
现代文：征召授将作大匠，修建桓帝陵墓，节省巨万以上。
English: The conscripts will work as master craftsmen to build Emperor Huan's mausoleum, saving more than a million yuan.

古文：迁南阳太守，以纠举豪古，为势家所谤，征诣廷尉抵罪。会赦，归家。
现代文：升南阳太守，因纠察检举豪强恶霸，遭到势力之家诽谤，征召去廷尉论罪，遇赦，归家。
English: Emperor Shen Nanyang, because of picketing and denouncing the powerful bullies, was slandered by the House of Influence, summoned to the palace to plead guilty, was pardoned, and returned home.

古文：征拜廷尉。
现代文：征召任为廷尉。
English: He was conscripted as a court lieutenant.

古文：熹平元年，窦太后崩。
现代文：熹平元年，窦太后逝世。
English: The Dowager Empress Dou passed away in the first year of the Heian period.

古文：太后本迁南宫云台，宦者积怨窦氏，遂以衣车载后尸，置城南市舍数日。
现代文：太后原来迁住南宫云台，宦官深深地怨恨窦氏，用衣车载太后尸体，放置城南市窖好几天。
English: The empress dowager had originally moved to the Southern Palace in Yuntai. The eunuchs deeply resented the Dou clan and used a cart to carry the empress dowager's body, leaving it in the cellars of Seongnam City for several days.

古文：中常侍曹节、王甫欲用贵人礼殡，帝曰： 太后亲立朕躬，统承大业。
现代文：中常侍曹节、王甫想按贵人之礼入殡，帝说： 太后亲立我为帝，继承大业。
English: On the Day of the Middle Chamberlain, Wang Fu wanted to go to the funeral according to the etiquette of the dignitary. The emperor said, "The empress dowager personally appointed me as the emperor to inherit the great cause."

古文：《诗》云： 无德不报，无言不酬。 
现代文：《诗经》上说： 无德不报，无言不酬。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: No virtue without report, no word without reward.

古文：岂宜以贵人终乎？ 
现代文：就是说没有不报的德，没有不回答的话。难道太后可以贵人入殡吗？ 
English: That is to say, there is no virtue that is not reported, and no words that are not answered. Can the empress dowager allow nobles to attend the funeral?

古文：于是发丧成礼。
现代文：于是按礼发丧。
English: As a result, the funeral was conducted according to protocol.

古文：及将葬，节等复欲别葬太后，而以冯贵人配礻付。
现代文：等到下葬时，曹节等人又想另外葬太后，以冯贵人配礻付。
English: When the funeral was over, Cao Jie and others wanted to bury the empress dowager separately, with Feng Guijin as the coffin bearer.

古文：诏公卿大会朝堂，令中常侍赵忠监议。
现代文：诏令公卿大会庙堂，令中常侍赵忠监督议论。
English: The imperial edict ordered the court nobles to assemble in the temple hall, and ordered the middle chamberlain, Zhao Zhong, to supervise the discussion.

古文：太尉李咸时病，乃扶舆而起，捣椒自随，谓妻子曰： 若皇太后不得配食桓帝，吾不生还矣。 
现代文：太尉李咸这时正抱病，扶着轿子起身，扌寿椒自随，对妻子说： 如果皇太后不得配食桓帝，我不生回了。 
English: At that time, Captain Li Xian was ill. He got up with the help of a palanquin and said to his wife, "If the Empress Dowager is not allowed to serve food to Emperor Huan, I will not be born again."

古文：既议，坐者数百人，各瞻望中官，良久莫肯先言。赵忠曰： 议当时定。 
现代文：议论开始，在坐的几百人，个个都看着宦官，好久一段时间，没有人敢于先说。赵忠说： 议当时定。 
English: At the beginning of the discussion, the hundreds of people sitting there all looked at the eunuch. For a long time, no one dared to speak first. Zhao Zhong said, "The discussion is set.

古文：怪公卿以下各相顾望。
现代文：责怪公卿以下你看我，我看你，不说话。
English: Look at me, I'm looking at you, don't talk.

古文：球曰： 皇太后以盛德良家，母临天下，宜配先帝，是无所疑。 
现代文：陈球说： 皇太后有盛德，出身良家，母临天下，应当殡葬先帝，这是没有疑问的。 
English: Chen Qiu said, "There is no doubt that the empress dowager is virtuous, comes from a good family, and her mother is on the verge of ascending to the throne. She should bury the former emperor.

古文：忠笑而言曰： 陈廷尉宜便操笔。 
现代文：赵忠笑笑说 ：陈廷尉请拿笔写出你的理由吧。 
English: Zhao Zhong smiled and said: Lieutenant Chen Ting, please take a pen and write down your reasons.

古文：球即下议曰： 皇太后自在椒房，有聪明母仪之德。
现代文：陈球就写下他的理由说 ：皇太后自在椒房，既聪明，又有母仪。
English: Chen Kuo wrote down his reasons and said: The empress dowager is at ease in the pepper room, both intelligent and maternal.

古文：遭时不造，援立圣明，承继宗庙，功烈至重。
现代文：遭时处身失所，引立皇上，继承宗庙，功烈最大。
English: He was at a loss at the time, raised the emperor, inherited the ancestral temple, and was the most meritorious.

古文：先帝晏驾，因遇大狱，迁居空宫，不幸早世，家虽获罪，事非太后。
现代文：先帝逝世，因遇上大兴监狱，迁居空宫，不幸早死，家庭虽然获罪，不是太后的事。
English: The death of the former emperor, due to encountering Daxing Prison, moving to the empty palace, and unfortunately dying early, although the family was convicted, it was not the matter of the empress dowager.

古文：今若别葬，诚先天下之望。
现代文：现在如果另外安葬太后，会失天下的人心。
English: Now, if the empress dowager were to be buried separately, the world would lose its heart.

古文：且冯贵人冢墓被发，骸骨暴露，与贼并尸，魂灵污染，且无功于国，何宜上配至尊？ 
现代文：并且冯贵人冢墓被掘发，尸骨暴露，与贼并尸，灵魂也遭到污染，又无功于国，哪里应当上配至尊？ 
English: Moreover, the tomb of Feng Guanzhong was excavated, the bones were exposed, and the thieves were buried together, the soul was also polluted, and there was no contribution to the country. Where should the supreme be?

古文：忠省球议，作色俯仰，蚩球曰： 陈廷尉建此议甚健！ 
现代文：赵忠看了陈球的理由，俯仰之间，变色嗤笑陈球说： 陈廷尉建此议，很有见识！ 
English: Zhao Zhong looked at Chen Qiu's reason, and between bending over and laughing, Chen Qiu said: Chen Tingfei's proposal is very insightful!

古文：球曰： 陈、窦既冤，皇太后无故幽闭，臣常痛心，天下愤叹。
现代文：陈球说 ：陈番、窦武既属冤案，皇太后无缘无故遭到深闭，我常痛心，天下的人，都为此愤慨、叹息。
English: Chen Qiu said: "Chen Fan and Dou Wu are both unjust cases. The empress dowager was locked up for no reason. I often feel sad. People all over the world are indignant and sigh because of this.

古文：今日言之，退而受罪，宿昔之愿。 
现代文：今天我说了这些，如果会后加罪于我，是我很久以来的愿望。 
English: I said these things today, and if I'm punished after the meeting, it's something I've wanted for a long time.

古文：公卿以下，皆从球议。
现代文：公卿以下，都赞同陈球的意见。
English: Everyone from the court noble downwards agrees with Chen Qiu's opinion.

古文：李咸始不敢先发，见球辞正，然后大言曰： 臣本谓宜尔，诚与臣意合。 
现代文：李咸开始不敢先说话，听陈球说的义正词严，然后大声说： 我说本应当如此，陈球说的正合我意。 
English: At first, Li Xian did not dare to speak first. He listened to Chen Qiu's words carefully, and then said loudly: I said it should be like this, Chen Qiu's words are just what I want.

古文：会者皆为之愧。
现代文：与会的人都为他惭愧。
English: Everyone at the meeting was ashamed of him.

古文：曹节、王甫复争，以为梁后家犯恶逆，虽葬懿陵，武帝黜废卫后，而以李夫人配食。
现代文：曹节、王甫再争，认为梁后家犯罪逆，别葬懿陵，武帝废黜卫后，以李夫人配食。
English: Cao Si and Wang Fu argued again, saying that Liang Hou's family had committed a crime and should not be buried. After Emperor Wu was deposed, Li's wife served food.

古文：今窦氏罪深，岂得合葬先帝乎？
现代文：现在窦氏罪大，难道可以合葬先帝吗？ 
English: Now that the Dou clan has committed a great sin, is it possible to bury the former emperor together?

古文：李咸乃诣阙上疏曰： 臣伏惟章德窦后虐害恭怀，安思阎后家犯恶逆，而和帝无异葬之议，顺朝无贬降之文。
现代文：李咸于是到朝廷上疏说 ：我想章德窦后，虐待残害恭怀，安思、闫后家犯恶逆，但和帝没有异葬的意思，顺庙没有贬降的文字。
English: Li Xian then went to the imperial court and said, "I think Zhang Deguang's family abused, mutilated, and flattered An Si and his wife's family, but there was no intention of burying him with the emperor, and there was no derogatory writing on the temple.

古文：至于卫后，孝武皇帝身所废弃，不可以为比。
现代文：至于卫后，孝武皇帝亲所废弃，不可以相比。
English: As for the Imperial Guard, it cannot be compared to the one abandoned by Emperor Xiaowu himself.

古文：今长乐太后尊号在身，亲尝称制，坤育天下，且授立圣明，光隆皇祚。
现代文：现在长乐太后尊号在身，又曾经临朝称制，代行皇上权力，教育天下，且引立当今皇上，光隆皇位。
English: Now, the Empress Dowager Changle is wearing the honorific title, and she was once the ruler of the imperial court, acting as the emperor's power, educating the world, and setting up the current emperor, Guanglong Emperor.

古文：太后以陛下为子，陛下岂得不以太后为母？
现代文：太后以皇上为子，皇上难道可以不认太后为母吗？
English: The Empress Dowager claims the Emperor as her son. Can the Emperor deny that the Empress Dowager is his mother?

古文：子无黜母，臣无贬君，宜合葬宣陵，一如旧制。 
现代文：儿子不能废免母亲，臣子不能贬谪皇帝，应该合葬宣陵，完全遵守旧制。 
English: A son cannot dispense with his mother, and a courtier cannot disparage the emperor. They should be buried together in the Xuanling Mausoleum, and they should fully abide by the old system.

古文：帝省奏，谓曹节等曰： 窦氏虽为不道，而太后有德于朕，不宜降黜。 
现代文：帝看了奏文，对曹节等说： 姓窦的虽然无道，但太后有德于我，不应该降黜。 
English: The emperor read the message and said to Cao Jie and others: Although the surname Dou is useless, the empress dowager has a virtue in me and should not lower the rank.

古文：节等无复言，于是议者乃定。
现代文：曹节没有再说了，于是所议的就定了下来。
English: Cao Si didn't say anything more, so the matter was settled.

古文：咸字元贞，汝南人。
现代文：李咸字元贞，汝南人。
English: Li Xian is a character named Yuan Zhen, from the south of the country.

古文：累经洲郡，以廉干知名，在朝清忠，权幸惮之。
现代文：由州而郡，逐级上升。以清廉干练著名；在朝廷尽忠，一般权贵有势和谄谀的人，都很怕他。
English: He rose through the ranks from prefecture to county. He was renowned for his integrity and ability; he was loyal to the imperial court, and was feared by all powerful and influential people.

古文：六年，迁球司空，以地震免。
现代文：六年，升陈球为司空，因发生地震免官。
English: Six years later, Sheng Chenqiu was promoted to air vice marshal, but was relieved of his duties due to the earthquake.

古文：拜光禄大夫，复为廷尉、太常。
现代文：授光禄大夫，再为廷尉、太常。
English: Juko Roku became a doctor, then a court lieutenant, and finally a grand chamberlain.

古文：光和元年，迁太尉，数月，以日食免。复拜光禄大夫。
现代文：光和元年，升太尉，数月，因日食免官，再授光禄大夫。
English: In the first year of the Guangwa era, he was promoted to the rank of captain, but was dismissed a few months later due to a solar eclipse. He was then awarded the rank of doctor.

古文：明年，为永乐少府，乃潜与司徒河间刘郃谋诛宦官。
现代文：第二年，任永乐少府，于是暗暗地与司徒河间刘谋划诛灭宦官。
English: In the second year, he was appointed as Yongle Shophu, so he secretly plotted with Liu to overthrow the eunuch.

古文：初，郃兄侍中，与大将军窦武同谋俱死，故郃与球相结。
现代文：起先，刘的哥哥侍中刘矹，与大将军窦武同谋诛宦官，都被宦官杀死，所以刘与陈球相结为谋。
English: At first, Liu's brother, the chamberlain Liu Yao, and the general Dou Wu conspired with the eunuch and were both killed by the eunuch, so Liu conspired with Chen Qiu.

古文：事未及发，球复以书劝郃曰： 公出自宗室，位登台鼎，天下瞻望，社稷镇卫，岂得雷同容容无违而已？
现代文：事情没有到动手的时候，陈球又写信劝刘说： 公是宗室的后代，位在三公，为天下的人所敬仰，国家的藩卫，难道可以随声附和容忍不加反对？
English: When things did not get off the ground, Chen Qiu also wrote a letter to persuade Liu, saying: Gong is the descendant of the family, is in the Three Kingdoms, is admired by people around the world, and is the defender of the country. Is it possible to agree and tolerate without objection?

古文：今曹节等放纵为害，而久在左右，又公兄侍中受害节等，永乐太后所亲知也。
现代文：现在曹节等人放肆为害，一直在您的左右，又您的哥哥侍中为曹节等人所害，这是永乐太后所亲知的。
English: Now Cao Jie and others have been harming you with their arrogance. They have been around you all the time, and your brother-in-law has been harmed by Cao Jie and others. This is well known to the Empress Dowager Yongle.

古文：今可表徙卫尉阳球为司隶校尉，以次收节等诛之。
现代文：现在可以上表调卫尉阳球为司隶校尉，依次收捕曹节等人杀掉。
English: Now you can go up to the table to change the guard lieutenant Yang ball to the officer lieutenant, and kill Cao Jie and others in turn.

古文：政出圣主，天下太平，可翘足而待也。 
现代文：这样，皇帝亲自掌权，天下太平，很快就可以到来。 
English: In this way, the emperor personally takes power, the world is at peace, and it can come soon.

古文：又，尚书刘纳以正直忤宦官，出为步兵校尉，亦深劝于郃。
现代文：又尚书刘纳因正直触犯了宦官，调出任步兵校尉，也力劝刘。
English: In addition, Shangshu Liu Na violated the eunuch for honesty, transferred to the post of infantry lieutenant, and also strongly advised Liu.

古文：郃曰： 凶竖多耳目，恐事未会，先受其祸。 
现代文：刘说： 凶恶的宦官，耳目很多，只怕事情还未准备好，先就受他们的祸害。 
English: Liu said, "Vicious eunuchs have many eyes and ears. If things are not ready yet, they will be the first to be harmed.

古文：纳曰： 公为国栋梁，倾危不持，焉用彼相邪？ 
现代文：刘纳说 ：您是国家的栋梁，国家倾斜快倒塌了，您不支持，用您为相干什么呢？ 
English: Liu Na said: You are the pillar of the country. The country is on the verge of collapse. If you do not support it, what is the use of you?

古文：郃许诺，亦结谋阳球。
现代文：刘答应了，也与阳球同谋。
English: Liu agreed and was also a co-conspirator with Yangqiu.

古文：球小妻，程璜之女，璜用事宫中，所谓程大人也。
现代文：陈球的小妻，是程璜的闺女，程璜在宫中做事，宫中叫他为程大人。
English: Chen Qiu's little wife was Cheng Yao's daughter-in-law. Cheng Yao worked in the palace, and the palace called him Cheng Yao.

古文：节等颇得闻知，乃重赂于璜，且胁之。
现代文：曹节等人对刘等的谋划，稍微知道一些，于是用重金收买程璜，并且威胁他。
English: Cao Jie and others knew a little more about Liu's plan, so they bribed Cheng Yu with a large sum of money and threatened him.

古文：璜惧迫，以球谋告节，节因共白帝曰： 郃等常与籓国交通，有恶意。
现代文：程璜被迫，又害怕，把陈球的谋划告诉了曹节，曹节因将全部情况告诉皇帝说 ：刘等经常与藩国来往，有坏主意。
English: Cheng Yao was forced, and afraid, to tell Cao Jie about Chen Qiuwu's plan. Cao Jie, because he told the emperor the whole situation, said: Liu and others often come and go from the domain, and have bad ideas.

古文：数称永乐声势，受取狼籍。
现代文：多次称说永乐太后的声势，接受的贿赂很多。
English: He has repeatedly said that he was influenced by the influence of Empress Dowager Yongle and accepted many bribes.

古文：步兵校尉刘纳及永乐少府陈球、卫尉阳球交通书疏，谋议不轨。 
现代文：步兵校尉刘纳及永乐少府陈球、卫尉阳球书信往来，图谋不轨。 
English: Infantry Lieutenant Liu Na and Yongle Major Chen Qiu and Guard Lieutenant Yang Qiu exchanged letters and plotted.

古文：帝大怒，策免郃，郃与球及刘纳、阳球皆下狱死。
现代文：帝大怒，免去刘司徒的官，刘与陈球及刘纳、阳球都死在狱中。
English: The emperor was furious and pardoned Liu Shitou's officers. Liu and Chen Kuo, Liu Na and Yang Kuo all died in prison.

古文：球时年六十二。
现代文：陈球时年六十二。
English: Chen Qu was 62 years old.

古文：子瑀，吴郡太守；瑀弟琮，汝阴太守；弟子珪，沛相；珪子登，广陵太守：并知名。
现代文：儿子陈王禹，吴郡太守；陈王禹的弟弟陈琮，汝阴太守；弟弟的儿子陈王圭，沛国相；陈王圭的儿子陈登，广陵太守。
English: Chen Wangyu's son, the governor of Wu County; Chen Wangyu's brother, Chen Hao, the governor of Ruyin; his brother's son, Chen Wanggui, the minister of Pei Province; Chen Wanggui's son, Chen Deng, the governor of Guangling.

