古文：从军辽左，历事熊廷弼、孙承宗，积功至游击。
现代文：曹文诏，大同人。他为人勇敢坚强而且有谋略。在辽东从军，先后在熊廷弼、孙承宗手下做事。因多次立功升为游击将领。
English: Cao Wenzhao was a Datong man. He was brave, strong and resourceful. He joined the army in eastern Liaodong and worked under Xiong Tingtao and Sun Chengzong. He was promoted to the rank of guerrilla general for his many meritorious deeds.

古文：崇祯二年冬，从袁崇焕入卫京师。
现代文：崇祯二年冬天，跟随袁崇焕入卫京城。
English: In the winter of the second year of Chongzhen's reign, he followed Yuan Chonghuan into the Imperial Palace.

古文：明年二月，总理马世龙畀所赐尚方剑，令率参将王承胤、张叔嘉、都司左良玉等伏玉田、枯树、洪桥，鏖战有功，迁参将。
现代文：第二年二月，总理马世龙把皇上赐给他的尚方宝剑交给文诏，命令他率领参将王承胤、张叔嘉，都司左良玉等埋伏在玉田的枯树和洪桥，因鏖战有功升为参将。
English: In February of the following year, Prime Minister Ma Shilong handed over the Shangfang Sword given to him by the emperor to Wen Zhao and ordered him to lead the samurai generals Wang Chengyin, Zhang Shujia, and Zuo Liangyu, who were lying in ambush in Yutian's Withered Tree and Hongqiao, and were promoted to the rank of samurai generals for their distinguished service in the Sino-Japanese War.

古文：自大堑山转战逼遵化，又从世龙等克大安城及鲇鱼诸关。
现代文：然后他从大堑山转战到遵化附近，又跟从世龙等攻下大安城以及鲇鱼等关口。
English: Then he moved from Dahuishan to fight in the vicinity of Zunhua, and followed the dragons to capture Da'an City and the eels.

古文：以与复四城功，加都督佥事。
现代文：因为收复四城的功绩，朝廷给他加官为都督佥事。
English: Because of his achievements in recovering the four cities, the Imperial Court promoted him to the post of governor-general.

古文：七月，陕西贼炽，擢延绥东路副总兵。
现代文：七月，陕西的贼寇活动猖獗，朝廷提拔他做了延绥东路副总兵。
English: In July, when robber activity was rampant in Shaanxi, the imperial court promoted him to the post of deputy commander-in-chief of Yancheng East Road.

古文：贼渠王嘉胤入据河曲。
现代文：贼将王嘉胤长期占据河曲。
English: Thieves kept Wang Jiayin in Hequ for a long time.

古文：四年四月，文诏克其城。嘉胤脱走，转掠至阳城南山。
现代文：崇祯四年四月，文诏攻克了被占据的城池，嘉胤逃跑了，辗转抢劫到阳城的南山一带。
English: In April of the 4th year of Chongzhen, Wen Zhao conquered the occupied city, and Jia Yin fled and went to rob the Nanshan area of Yangcheng.

古文：文诏追及之，其下斩以降，以功擢临洮总兵官。
现代文：文诏追上他，嘉胤的部下杀了嘉胤，投降了文诏。文诏因这次战功又被提升为临洮总兵官。
English: Wen Zhao caught up with him, and Jiayin's subordinates killed Jiayin and surrendered to Wen Zhao. Because of this military achievement, Wen Zhao was promoted to Linyi's chief military officer.

古文：点灯子自陕入山西。
现代文：点灯子从陕西进入山西。
English: The lanterns were lit from Shaanxi into Shanxi.

古文：文诏追之，及于稷山，谕降七百人。
现代文：文诏追击他们，追赶到稷山的时候，招安了七百名反贼。
English: Wen Zhao chased them, and when he chased them to Lushan, he recruited seven hundred anti-thieves.

古文：点灯子遁，寻被获，伏诛。
现代文：点灯子逃跑了，不久又被抓住，杀掉了。
English: He lit a lamp and ran away, but was soon caught and killed.

古文：李老柴、独行狼陷中部，巡抚练国事、延绥总兵王承恩围之。
现代文：李老柴、独行狼占据了中部，巡抚练国事、延绥总兵王承恩包围了他们。
English: Li Laochai and Lone Wolf occupied the central part of the country, and they were encircled by Wang Cheng'en, the inspector-general in charge of state affairs and the commander-in-chief of Yancheng.

古文：五月，庆阳贼郝临庵、刘道江援之。
现代文：五月，庆阳的贼寇郝临庵、刘道江前去援助。
English: In May, Liu Daojiang, a bandit from Qingyang, came to the aid of Lin'an.

古文：会文诏西旋，与榆林参政张福臻合剿，馘老柴及其党一条龙，余党奔摩云谷。副将张弘业、游击李明辅战死。
现代文：恰巧曹文诏从西面凯旋，就同榆林参政张福臻联合围剿他们，杀死了李老柴及他的同党一条龙，其他的同党逃往摩云谷，副将张弘业、游击将领李明辅战死。
English: Just as Cao Wenzhao returned from the west in triumph, he and Zhang Fuzhen, a politician from Yulin, jointly encircled them and killed Li Laochai and his fellow party members. Other party members fled to Moyun Valley. Vice-General Zhang Hongye and guerrilla general Li Mingyu were killed in the battle.

古文：文诏乃与游击左光先、崔宗荫、李国奇分剿绥德、宜君、清涧、米脂贼，战怀宁川、黑泉峪、封家沟、绵湖峪，皆大捷，扫地王授首。
现代文：文诏于是就同游击将领左光先、崔宗荫、李国奇分别围剿绥德、宜君、清涧、米脂等地的贼寇，分别在怀宁川、黑峪泉、封家沟、绵湖峪等地展开战斗，都取得了重大胜利。扫地王被杀了头。
English: Therefore, Wen Zhao, together with the guerrilla generals Zuo Guangxian, Cui Zongyin, and Li Guoqi, besieged the bandits in Shunde, Yijun, Qingyao, Mizhi and other places respectively, and fought in Huaining River, Heihe Spring, Fongjiagou, Mianhu and other places respectively, and achieved a major victory.

古文：红军友、李都司、杜三、杨老柴者，神一魁余党也，屯镇原，将犯平凉。
现代文：红军友、李都司、杜三、杨老柴是神一魁的残余党羽，他们屯兵镇原，准备进犯平凉。
English: The Red Army comrades, Li Du Si, Du San and Yang Lao Chai are the remnants of the party. They have set up camp and are preparing to attack Pingliang.

古文：国事檄甘肃总兵杨嘉谟、副将王性善扼之，贼走庆阳。
现代文：练国事发布檄文要求甘肃总兵杨嘉谟、副将王性善扼住他们的攻势，贼兵只好败退到庆阳。
English: In the exercise of state affairs, the imperial edict required the Gansu general Yang Jia Mu and the vice-general Wang Shongshen to stifle their offensive. The bandits had no choice but to retreat to Qingyang.

古文：文诏从鄜州间道与嘉谟、性善合。
现代文：文诏从州的小路出发前来同嘉谟、性善会合。
English: Wen Zhao set out from the county road to meet with Jia Mu and Xuan Zhen.

古文：五年三月，大战西濠，斩千级，生擒杜三、杨老柴。
现代文：五年三月，在西濠展开大战，斩获贼兵千余首级，活捉了杜三、杨老柴。
English: In March of the fifth year, a large-scale war was launched in Xidi, and more than a thousand heads of thieves were captured, and Du San and Yang Laochai were captured alive.

古文：余党纠他贼掠武安监，陷华亭，攻庄浪。
现代文：他们的残余党羽纠合另外的贼寇洗掠了武安监，占领华亭，又在攻打庄浪。
English: The remnants of their party, along with other bandits, plundered Wu'an County, occupied Huating, and attacked Zhuanglang.

古文：文诏、嘉谟至，贼屯张麻村。官军掩击，贼走高山。
现代文：文诏、嘉谟赶到，贼寇屯兵张麻村，官军直压过去，合力打击他们，贼寇逃往高山上了。
English: When Wen Zhao and Jia Mu arrived, the Kleptocrats set up a garrison in Zhangma village. The government army pressed straight ahead and fought them together. The Kleptocrats fled to the high mountains.

古文：游击曹变蛟、冯举、刘成功、平安等噪而上，贼溃走。
现代文：游击将领曹变蛟、冯举、刘成功、平安等人呐喊着冲了上去，贼寇又一次败逃。
English: The guerrilla generals Cao Zhengyu, Feng Jiu, Liu Chenggong, Pingan and others shouted and rushed up, and the bandits fled once again.

古文：变蛟者，文诏从子也。
现代文：曹变蛟是曹文诏的侄子。
English: Cao Zhengyu was the nephew of Cao Wenzhao.

古文：会性善及甘肃副将李鸿嗣、参将莫与京等至，共击斩五百二十余级。
现代文：这时性善与甘肃副将李鸿嗣、参将莫与京等到来，他们一起战斗，斩获了五百二十多个首级。
English: At this time, Xuan Zhen arrived with Gansu Vice-General Li Hongzhi and Vice-General Mo Hejing. They fought together and won more than five hundred and twenty heads.

古文：追败之咸宁关，又败之关上岭。追至陇安，嘉谟、变蛟夹击，复败之。
现代文：他们乘胜追击，先在咸宁关，又在关上镇打败了贼寇，追到陇安时，嘉谟和变蛟联合夹攻，又打败了他们。
English: They took advantage of the victory to pursue and defeated the bandits first in Xianning Pass and then in Guanzhang Town. When they chased them to Yan'an, Jia Mu and Zeng Ya jointly attacked and defeated them again.

古文：贼余众数千欲走汉南，为游击赵光远所遏，乃由长宁驿走张家川。
现代文：几千名残余贼寇想逃往汉南，被游击将领赵光远阻截，于是从长宁驿逃到了张家川。
English: A few thousand remaining bandits wanted to flee to Hannan, but were intercepted by the guerrilla general Zhao Guangyuan, so they fled from Changningyi to Zhangjiakou.

古文：其逸出清水者，副将蒋一阳遇之败，都司李宫用被执。
现代文：有一支从清水分出的贼寇力量较强，副将蒋一阳同他们相遇后战败，都司李宫用被捕了。
English: One band of thieves and robbers emerged from the clear water with a strong force. Vice Admiral Jiang Yiyang was defeated after encountering them, and General Li Gongrui was arrested.

古文：文诏乃纵反间，绐其党，杀红军友，遂蹙败之水落城。追至静宁州，贼奔据唐毛山，变蛟先登，殄其众。
现代文：文诏于是使用反间计，使它的党羽上当，让他们自己杀死了红军友，然后赶至水落城打败了他们，追到静宁州的时候，贼寇飞奔占领了唐毛山，变蛟率先攻上山头，全歼了这伙贼寇。
English: Wen Zhao then used countermeasures to trick his followers into killing their Red Army comrades, and then beat them to the water fall. When he chased them to Jingning County, the bandits rushed to occupy Tangmaoshan, and Zeng Yao took the lead in attacking the mountain, completely annihilating the band of bandits.

古文：可天飞、郝临庵，刘道江为王承恩所败，退保铁角城。
现代文：可天飞、郝临庵、刘道江被王承恩打败后，退保铁角城。
English: However, after Tianfei, Zou Lin'an and Liu Daojiang were defeated by Wang Cheng'en, they withdrew to Tieguancun.

古文：独行狼、李都司走与合，可天飞、刘道江遂围合水。
现代文：独行狼、李都司赶去同他们会合，可天飞、刘道江于是就携手围攻合水。
English: The lone wolf, Li Du Si, rushed to join them, but Tianfei and Liu Daojiang then jointly besieged Heshui.

古文：文诏往救。
现代文：文诏前去援救。
English: Wen Zhao went to the rescue.

古文：贼匿精锐，以千骑逆战，诱抵南原，伏大起。
现代文：贼寇隐藏了自己的精锐部队，只让一千多骑兵出来迎战，引诱官军抵达南原时，伏兵大起。
English: The bandit hid his elite troops, only letting more than a thousand cavalry come out to meet the battle, luring the government army to arrive in Nanyuan, and the ambush began.

古文：城上人言曹将军已殁。
现代文：城上的人都说曹将军已经死了。
English: People in the city say that General Cao is dead.

古文：文诏持矛左右突，匹马萦万众中。
现代文：文诏拿着长矛来回冲击，单枪匹马被包围在万余名敌兵中间。
English: Wen Zhao charged back and forth with a spear, single-handedly surrounded in the midst of more than ten thousand enemy soldiers.

古文：诸军望见，夹击，贼大败，僵尸蔽野，余走铜川桥。
现代文：各军见状，就出兵夹击援助，贼寇大败，伏尸遍野，残余的贼寇逃往桐川桥去了。
English: All the armies saw the situation and sent troops to intervene and help. The bandits were soundly defeated and their bodies strewn all over the countryside. The remaining bandits fled to Tongchuan Bridge.

古文：麒复追贼安口河、崇信窑、白茅山，皆大获。
现代文：文诏率领变蛟、冯举、嘉谟及其参将方茂功等追上他们，冲锋陷阵，拼命厮杀，贼寇又大败。
English: Wen Zhao led Zeng Yao, Feng Qiu, Jia Mu and his general Fang Maogong to catch up with them, charge into the battle, fight hard, and the bandits were defeated.

古文：总督洪承畴斩可天飞、李都司于平凉，降其将白广恩，余贼分窜。
现代文：不久文诏与宁夏总兵贺虎臣、固原总兵杨麒在甘泉虎兕凹打败贼寇，都大获全胜。总兵洪承畴在平凉斩了可天飞，降服其将领白广恩，其余的贼寇分路逃窜了。
English: Soon after, Wen Zhao, together with Ningxia General He Huochen and Guyuan General Yang Jie, defeated the bandits in Ganquan Tiger's Groove and won a complete victory. General Hong Chengzhuang defeated Bai Guangen in Pingliang and the remaining bandits fled.

古文：文诏追击之陇州、平、凤间。
现代文：文诏赶到陇州、平凉、凤翔之间追歼他们。
English: Wen Zhao rushed to Luzhou, Pingliang and Fengxiang to chase them.

古文：十月三战三败之，遂蹙贼耀州锥子山，其党杀独行狼、郝临庵以降。
现代文：在这年十月里三次战斗三败贼寇，接着就逼向耀州锥子山的贼寇，其党羽杀死独行狼、郝临庵后投降了。
English: In October of that year, they fought three times and defeated three bandits. Then, they forced the bandits to head for Yeozhou's Jiezi Mountain. The bandits killed the lone wolf and surrendered after they arrived at the hermitage.

古文：承畴戮四百人，余散遣。
现代文：承畴杀了其中四百多人，其余的遣散回家。
English: He killed more than 400 of them and sent the rest home.

古文：关中巨寇略平。
现代文：关中的巨贼大盗这下子略略被剿平了。
English: Guanzhong's great thief, the Great Thief, has been flattened.

古文：巡抚御史范复粹汇奏首功凡三万六千六百有奇，文诏功第一，嘉谟次之，承恩、麒又次之。
现代文：巡抚御史范复粹在递给朝廷的奏章中总计历次战斗中共获首级三万六千六百多，文诏的功劳第一，嘉谟第二，承恩、杨麒又在其次。
English: In the report presented to the imperial court, the governor, Fan Fuzi, received a total of more than 36,600 first-class medals in all previous battles. The merit of Wen Zhao was the first, that of Jia Mu was the second, and that of Cheng En and Yang Jie was the second.

古文：文诏在陕西，大小数十战，功最多，承畴不为叙。
现代文：文诏在陕西时，大小几十次战斗，立功最多，承畴却没有给他记功。
English: When Wen Zhao was in Shaanxi, he fought dozens of battles, and made the most contributions. However, he was not given any credit.

古文：巡按御史吴甡推奖甚至，复粹疏复上。兵部抑其功，卒不叙。
现代文：巡按御史吴生生十分推重文诏，复粹也再次上书汇报，但兵部还是压低他的功绩，最后还是没有给文诏论功行赏。
English: Wu Shengsheng, the inspector-general of the imperial press, put a lot of emphasis on the edict of the emperor, and also submitted a report to the Ministry of the People's Liberation Army, but the Ministry of the People's Liberation Army still downplayed his achievements, and finally did not reward him for his contribution to the edict of the emperor.

古文：当是时，贼见陕兵盛，多流入山西，其魁紫金梁、混世王、姬关锁、八大王、曹操、闯塌天、兴加哈利七大部，多者万人，少亦半之，蹂躏汾州、太原、平阳。
现代文：在这个时候，贼寇看到陕西兵力强盛，就大都流入山西，他们的首领紫金梁、混世王、姬关锁、八大王、曹操、闯塌天、兴加哈利分别统帅七大营部。每部人数多的有一万人，少的也有五千人，在汾州、太原、平阳等地肆意活动。
English: At this time, the bandits saw that Shaanxi's military strength was strong, and most of them flowed into Shanxi. Their leaders Zi Jinliang, Jie Zi Wang, Ji Guan Zhao, Hachidai Wang, Cao Cao, Xuan Zhao Tian, and Xing Jia Hali commanded seven battalions respectively. Each battalion had more than ten thousand people and less than five thousand people, and they were active in Zhangzhou, Taiyuan, Pingyang and other places.

古文：御史张宸极言： 贼自秦中来。
现代文：御史张宸极上书朝廷说： 贼寇是从陕西来的。
English: The imperial historian Zhang Bingji wrote to the imperial court, saying: The bandits came from Shaanxi.

古文：秦将曹文诏威名宿著，士民为之谣曰 军中有一曹，西贼闻之心胆摇 。
现代文：陕西将领曹文诏素有威名，士绅百姓为他编歌谣称赞说： 军中有一曹，西贼闻之心胆摇。 
English: Shaanxi General Cao Wenzhao was renowned for his prestige, and the gentry and common people praised him by making up songs, saying: There is a Cao in the army, and the hearts of Western thieves are shaken.

古文：且尝立功晋中，而秦贼灭且尽。宜敕令入晋协剿。 
现代文：而且他曾经在山西立过功，陕西的贼寇已消灭殆尽，应该下令让他进入山西帮助围剿贼寇。 
English: Moreover, he once made a great contribution in Shanxi, and the bandits in Shaanxi have been wiped out. He should be ordered to enter Shanxi to help encircle the bandits.

古文：于是命陕西、山西诸将并受文诏节制。
现代文：于是朝廷命令山西、陕西的各位将领一同受文诏指挥。
English: As a result, the imperial court ordered the generals of Shanxi and Shaanxi to receive the command together.

古文：六年正月抵霍州，败贼汾河、盂系，追及于寿阳。
现代文：六年正月文诏抵达霍州，在汾河、盂县打败贼兵，又乘胜追击到寿阳。
English: In the first month of the sixth year, Wen Zhao arrived in Huozhou, defeated the bandits in Luohe and Luo County, and pursued them to Shouyang.

古文：巡抚许鼎臣遣谋士张宰先大军尝贼，贼惊溃。
现代文：巡抚许鼎臣派遣谋士张宰在大军赶到之前先期尝试着跟贼寇战斗，贼寇给惊退了。
English: The governor Xu Dingchen dispatched the strategist Zhang Zai to try to fight the bandits before the large army arrived. The bandits retreated in shock.

古文：二月，文诏追击之，斩混世王于碧霞村。余党为猛如虎逐走，遇文诏兵方山，复败。五台、盂、定襄、寿阳贼尽平。
现代文：二月，文诏追击他们，在碧霞村杀了混世王，剩余的党羽被猛如虎驱赶跑，在方山同文诏的军队相遇，又被打败，五台、盂县、定襄、寿阳的贼寇都平定了。
English: In February, Wen Zhao chased them and killed the king of the world in Bixia Village. The remaining party members were driven away like tigers. In Fangshan, they met with Wen Zhao's army and were defeated again. The bandits in Wutai, Yixian, Dingxiang and Shouyang were all defeated.

古文：鼎臣命文诏军平定，备太原东，张应昌军汾州，备太原西。
现代文：鼎臣命令文诏驻军平定，防守太原的东部，命令张应昌驻军汾州，防守太原西部。
English: Ding Zhen ordered Wen Zhao's garrison to pacify and defend the eastern part of Taiyuan, and ordered Zhang Yingchang to garrison Zhangzhou and defend the western part of Taiyuan.

古文：文诏连败贼太谷、范村、榆社，太原贼几尽。
现代文：文诏接连又在太谷、范村、榆社等地打败贼兵，太原的贼兵差不多被剿平了。
English: The imperial edict successively defeated the bandits in Taiyuan, Fancun, Jinshe and other places. The bandits in Taiyuan were almost wiped out.

古文：帝以文诏功多，敕所过地多积糗粮以犒，并敕文诏速平贼。
现代文：崇祯皇帝因为文诏立功最多，命令他所经过的地区多积攒粮草犒劳他的兵马，并且敕令文诏尽快平定贼寇。
English: Emperor Chongzhen ordered the areas he passed through to accumulate more grain and grass to feed his soldiers and horses, and ordered Wen Zhao to quell the bandits as soon as possible.

古文：山西监视中官刘中允言文诏剿贼徐沟、盂、定襄，所司不给米，反以炮石伤士卒。
现代文：山西监视军情的宦官刘中允上书说文诏在徐沟、盂县、定襄围剿贼兵时，这些地方的主管部门不但不给他们稻米，反而用大炮打伤他们的士兵。
English: Liu Zhongyun, the eunuch who monitored the military situation in Shanxi Province, wrote in a letter that when the imperial edict was issued to encircle the bandits in XuGou, Yixian and DingXiang, the competent departments in these places not only did not give them rice, but also injured their soldiers with cannons.

古文：帝即下御史按问。
现代文：庄烈帝就把此事交给御史察问。
English: Emperor Zhuge Liang gave the matter to the imperial historian to investigate.

古文：三月，贼从河内上太行，文诏大败之泽州。
现代文：三月，贼寇从河内登上太行山，文诏在泽州打败了他们。
English: In March, the Thieves and Robbers from Hanoi climbed Mount Taihang, and Wen Zhao defeated them in Zezhou.

古文：贼走潞安，文诏至阳城遇贼不击，自沁水潜师，还击之芹地、刘村寨，斩首千余。
现代文：贼兵逃往潞安，文诏到阳城遇到贼兵没有打击它，而是从沁水偷偷地出兵拐回来。在芹地、刘村寨袭击他们，斩获了千余首级。
English: The bandits fled to Lu'an. When Wen Zhao encountered the bandits in Yangcheng, he did not fight them, but secretly sent soldiers from Surabaya to kidnap them. He attacked them in Seri and Liu Cunzhai, and captured more than a thousand heads.

古文：四月，贼屯润城，其他部陷平顺，杀知县徐明扬。
现代文：四月，贼寇屯兵润城，另外的队伍又打下了平顺，杀害了知县徐明扬。
English: In April, the bandits occupied Runcheng, and another group attacked Pingshun and killed Xu Mingyang of Zhixian.

古文：文诏至，贼走，乃夜半袭润城，斩贼千五百。
现代文：文诏一到，贼寇就撤退了，于是文诏半夜里袭击润城，斩获敌军一千五百人。
English: As soon as the edict arrived, the bandits retreated, so the edict attacked Runcheng in the middle of the night and captured 1,500 enemy soldiers.

古文：紫金梁、老回回自榆社走武乡，过天星走高泽山，文诏皆击败。
现代文：紫金梁、老回回从榆社逃往武乡，过天星逃往高泽山，文诏都赶去把他们打败了。
English: Zi Jin Liang and Lao Hui Hui fled from Jinshe to Wuxiang, and fled to Gaozeshan via Tianxing. Wen Zhao rushed to defeat them.

古文：他贼围涉县，闻文诏破贼黎城，解去。
现代文：另外的贼兵围攻涉县，听说文诏打下了黎城，就赶忙解围离去。
English: Other robber soldiers besieged the county, and when they heard that Wen Zhao had defeated Licheng, they hurriedly broke the siege and left.

古文：五月，帝遣中官孙茂霖为文诏内中军。
现代文：五月，崇祯皇帝派宦官孙茂霖做文诏军中的中军官。
English: In May, Emperor Chongzhen sent eunuch Sun Maolin to serve as a middle-ranking officer in the Emperor's army.

古文：贼犯沁水，文诏大败之，擒其魁大虎，又败之辽城毛岭山西。
现代文：贼兵进犯沁水，文诏把他们打得大败，活捉了他们的首领大虎，又在辽城毛领山西面打败了他们。
English: The robber soldiers invaded Surabaya. Wen Zhao defeated them, captured their leader, Big Tiger, alive, and defeated them on the west side of Mao Lian Mountain in Liaocheng.

古文：贼既屡败，乃避文诏锋，多流入河北。
现代文：贼兵在屡次战败的情况下，避开文诏的主力，大都流向黄河以北去了。
English: In the case of repeated defeats, the robber soldiers avoided the main force of the edict, and most of them flowed north of the Yellow River.

古文：帝乃命文诏移师往讨。
现代文：崇祯皇帝于是命令文诏移兵前去讨伐。
English: Emperor Chongzhen then ordered Wen Zhao to move his troops forward to fight.

古文：而贼已败邓玘兵于林县，文诏率五营军夜袭破之。
现代文：而贼兵已在林县打败了邓王己的军队，文诏率领五营兵力夜晚出袭，打败了他们。
English: But the bandits had already defeated Deng Wangji's army in Lin County. Wen Zhao led five battalions to attack at night and defeated them.

古文：七月大败怀庆贼柴陵村，馘其魁滚地龙，又追斩老回回于济源。
现代文：七月又在柴陵村打败了怀庆的贼寇，斩杀其首领滚地龙，又在林源追杀了老回回。
English: In July, he defeated the bandits of Huaiqing in Chailing Village, killed their leader, the rolling dragon, and chased down the old thief in Linyuan.

古文：文诏在洪洞时，与里居御史刘令誉忤。
现代文：文诏在洪洞时，同当地休闲在家的御史刘令誉不和。
English: When Wen Zhao was in Hongdong, he did not get along with Liu Ling Rong, the local governor, who was relaxing at home.

古文：及是，令誉按河南，而四川石硅土官马凤仪军败没于侯家庄，赖文诏驰退贼。
现代文：到这个时候，刘令誉来按察河南。四川石石主土官马凤仪的军队在侯家庄被打败，靠着文诏的快马赶到才打退贼兵。
English: At this time, Liu Lingyou came to inspect Henan. The army of Ma Fengyi, the chief land officer of Sichuan Shi Shi, was defeated in Houjiazhuang, and it took the fast horse of Wen Zhao to beat back the bandits.

古文：甫解甲，与令誉，语复相失。
现代文：战斗结束后文诏刚刚解甲休息，同令誉见了面，说话又不投机。
English: After the end of the battle, Wen Yao had just disarmed and rested. He met with Ling Rong and did not speculate.

古文：文诏拂衣起，面叱之。
现代文：文诏拂衣而起，当面斥责了他。
English: Wen Zhao stood up and rebuked him to his face.

古文：令誉怒，遂以凤仪之败为文诏罪。
现代文：刘令誉恼了，就把凤仪的败亡作为文诏的罪过。
English: Liu Ling Rong was annoyed and took Feng Yi's defeat as Wen Zhao's fault.

古文：部议文诏怙胜而骑，乃调之大同。
现代文：兵部认为文诏仗着打了几回胜仗就骄傲起来了，于是把他调往大同。
English: The military department thought that Wen Zhao had become proud after winning several battles, so he was transferred to Datong.

古文：七年七月，大清兵西征插汉，还师入大同境，攻拔得胜堡、参将李全自经，遂攻围怀仁县及井坪堡、应州。
现代文：七年七月，大清兵西征插汉，回师时就随便进入了大同境内，攻占了得胜堡，参将李全自杀身亡，于是就围攻怀仁县以及井坪堡、应州等地。
English: In July of the seventh year of the Qing Dynasty, the soldiers of the Western Expedition invaded Han, and when they returned to the division, they casually entered the territory of Datong, captured the Victory Fort, and the general Li Quan committed suicide and died, so they besieged Huairin County, as well as Yingping Fort, Yingzhou and other places.

古文：文诏偕总督张宗衡先驻怀仁固守。
现代文：文诏同总督张宗衡先驻扎在怀仁坚守。
English: Emperor Wenzhao and Governor Zhang Zongheng first stationed in Huairen.

古文：八月，围解，即移驻镇城，挑战败还。
现代文：八月，怀仁解了围，就移兵驻扎在镇城，向大清兵挑战，失败而回。
English: In August, after the siege of Huairen was lifted, he moved his troops and stationed them in Zhencheng to challenge the Qing soldiers, but failed and returned.

古文：已而灵丘及他屯堡多失陷，大清兵亦旋。
现代文：后来，灵丘以及其他屯兵的城堡大多失陷，大清兵就凯旋而回了。
English: Later, Lingqiu and most of the other garrisons' castles fell, and the Qing soldiers returned in triumph.

古文：十一月论罪，文诏、宗衡及巡抚胡沾恩并充军边卫。
现代文：十一月朝廷评定各将的罪过，文诏、宗衡以及巡抚胡沾恩一同被定罪充军到边地的卫所。
English: In November, the imperial court judged the guilt of each general, and Wen Zhao, Zong Heng, and the inspector Hu Jian'en were all convicted and sent to the frontier garrison.

古文：令甫下，山西巡抚吴甡荐文诏知兵善战，请用之晋中。
现代文：命令刚下达，山西巡抚吴生生就上书推荐文诏知兵善战，请求把他安排到山西来。
English: As soon as the order was issued, the Shanxi governor Wu Shengsheng sent a letter to recommend Wen Zhao Zhibei to be a good soldier and asked him to come to Shanxi.

古文：乃命为援剿总兵官，立功自赎。
现代文：于是朝廷命令他做援剿总兵官，让他立功赎罪。
English: As a result, the imperial court ordered him to serve as the general officer of the relief army, so that he could atone for his sins.

古文：当是时，河南祸尤剧，帝已允兵部议，敕文诏驰剿河南贼。
现代文：这个时候，河南的战祸尤其厉害，崇祯皇帝本来已经同意了兵部的意见，又传令让文诏率兵紧急前往河南剿贼。
English: At this time, the war calamity in Henan was particularly severe. Emperor Chongzhen had already agreed with the opinion of the military department and sent an order to Wen Zhao and his soldiers to urgently go to Henan to fight the bandits.

古文：甡复抗疏力争，请令先平晋贼，后入豫，帝不许。
现代文：吴生生又抗言上书力争，请求让文诏先平定山西的贼寇，然后进军河南，崇祯皇帝没有同意。
English: Wu Sheng Sheng again protested in writing, requesting that Wen Zhao first subdue the bandits in Shanxi and then march into Henan. Emperor Chongzhen did not agree.

古文：而文诏以甡有恩，竟取道太原，为甡所留。
现代文：然而，文诏因为吴生生对自己有恩，最后还是取道太原，被吴生生留住了。
English: However, because Wu Sheng Sheng was indebted to himself, Wen Zhao eventually took the path of Taiyuan and was retained by Wu Sheng Sheng.

古文：会贼高加计已歼，而凤阳告陷，遂整兵南，以八年三月会总督洪承畴于信阳。
现代文：这个时候，山西的贼首高加计已被歼灭，而凤阳失陷了，文诏于是整顿军队南下，于八年三月同承畴在信阳相会。
English: At this time, the bandit leader of Shanxi, Gao Jia, had been annihilated, and Fengyang had fallen. Therefore, Wen Zhao went south to rectify the army, and in March of the eighth year, they met in Xinyang.

古文：承畴大喜，即令击贼随州，文诏追斩贼三百八十有奇。
现代文：承畴非常高兴，立即就让他到随州进攻贼寇，文诏追杀贼兵三百八十多人。
English: He was very pleased and immediately sent him to Suizhou to attack the bandits. Wen Zhao chased and killed more than 380 bandits.

古文：四月，承畴次汝州。以贼尽入关中，议还顾根本。分命诸将扼要害，檄文诏入关，文诏乃驰至灵宝谒承畴。
现代文：四月，承畴驻扎在汝州，因为贼兵全跑到关中去了，决定回头先铲除贼寇的老巢，于是分别命令各位将领把守要害，发布檄文召文诏入关，文诏于是骑马到灵宝拜见承畴。
English: In April, Zhengzheng was stationed in Ruzhou. Because the bandits had all fled to Guanzhong, he decided to go back and eradicate the bandits' old nest first. He then ordered the generals to guard the key points and issued a proclamation to summon Zhengzheng to enter Guanzhong. Zhengzheng then rode to Lingbao to see Zhengzheng.

古文：承畴以贼在商、雒，闻官兵至，必先走汉中，而大军由潼关入，反在其后，乃令文诏由阌乡取山路至雒南、商州，直捣贼巢，复从山阳、镇安、洵阳驰入汉中，遏其奔轶。
现代文：承畴认为敌军在商州和雒南两地，如果听说官兵过去，一定会先逃往汉中，那时大军由潼关进入汉中，反而会落在贼寇的后面。于是命令文诏从阌乡取山路到商州和雒南，直捣贼窝，然后再从山阳、镇安、洵阳等地赶到汉中来，阻止他们逃跑。
English: Chengzhuang believed that if the enemy forces in Shangzhou and southern Fujian heard that the officers and soldiers had passed, they would certainly flee to Hanzhong first. At that time, the large army would enter Hanzhong from Shaoguan, but would fall behind the bandits. So he ordered Wen Zhao to take the mountain road from Shao Town to Shangzhou and southern Fujian, directly attack the bandits' dens, and then rush to Hanzhong from Shanyang, Zhen'an, and Shanyang to prevent them from escaping.

古文：曰： 此行也，道路回远，将军甚劳苦，吾集关中兵以待将军。 
现代文：并且对他说： 这次行军，道路迂回曲折，路程遥远，将军很辛苦，我聚集关中的兵力等待将军的到来。 
English: And he said to him: This march, the road is circuitous and tortuous, the distance is far away, the general is very hard, I gathered the troops in Guanzhong to wait for the general's arrival.

古文：拊其背而遣之，文诏跌马去。
现代文：然后亲切地拍着他的背为他送行，文诏二话没说就前去了。
English: Then he patted him affectionately on the back to see him off, and Wen Zhao went ahead without saying a word.

古文：五月五日抵商州。
现代文：五月五日文诏抵达商州。
English: On May 5, Wen Zhao arrived in Shangzhou.

古文：贼去城三十里，营火满山。
现代文：贼兵距城三十里，军营的灯火遍山都是。
English: The robber soldiers are thirty miles from the city, and the lights of the military camp are all over the mountains.

古文：文诏夜半率从子参将变蛟、守备鼎蛟、都司白广恩等败贼深林中，追至金岭川。
现代文：文诏半夜率领侄子、参将变蛟，守备官鼎蛟，都司白广恩等在深山老林中打败了贼寇，追赶到金岭川。
English: In the middle of the night, Wen Zhao led his nephews, General Zeng Zheng, Defense Officer Ding Zheng, and General Bai Guang'en to defeat the bandits in the deep mountains and old forests, and chased them to the Jinling River.

古文：贼据险以千骑逆战，变蛟大呼陷阵，诸军并进，贼败走。
现代文：贼寇仗着险要地势以一千名骑兵出来迎战，变蛟大声呼叫着冲进敌阵，各路兵马一同向前，贼寇又大败逃亡。
English: The bandits, taking advantage of the precarious situation, came out to meet the battle with a thousand cavalrymen, shouting loudly and rushing into the enemy lines. All the soldiers and horses advanced together, and the bandits were defeated and fled.

古文：变蛟勇冠三军，贼中闻大小曹将军名，皆怖慑。
现代文：变蛟勇冠三军，贼兵中一听说大、小曹将军，都怕得要死。
English: As soon as the three armies were crowned with bravery, the general and the minor Cao were heard among the robber soldiers, they were scared to death.

古文：已而闯王、八大王诸贼犯凤翔，趋氵幵阳、陇州，文诏自汉中驰赴。
现代文：不多久闯王、八大王率领的各路贼兵进犯凤翔，向阳、陇州挺进，文诏从汉中奔赴前线。
English: Not long after, the bandits led by the King and the Eight Great Kings invaded Fengxiang, advanced to Yangyang and Zhangzhou, and Wen Zhao rushed to the front line from Hanzhong.

古文：贼尽向静宁、泰安、清水、秦州间，众且二十万。
现代文：贼兵都奔向静宁、泰安、清水、泰州一带，兵力将近有二十万人。
English: The robber soldiers all rushed to Jingning, Tai'an, Shimizu, and Taizhou, with a force of nearly two hundred thousand.

古文：承畴以文诏所部合张全昌、张外嘉军止六千，众寡不敌，告急于朝，未得命。
现代文：承畴因为文诏的兵力同张全昌、张外嘉的兵力加在一起也只有六千人，与贼兵相比较悬殊太大，向朝廷告急，没有得到任何指示。
English: However, because the combined strength of the troops of Wen Zhao and Zhang Quanchang and Zhang Gaojia was only six thousand, the disparity was too great compared to the robber soldiers, and they were in a hurry to the imperial court and did not receive any instructions.

古文：六月，官军遇贼乱马川。
现代文：六月，官军在乱马川同贼兵相遇。
English: In June, the government army encountered the bandits in the turbulent Ma River.

古文：前锋中军刘弘烈被执，俄副将艾万年、柳国镇复战死。
现代文：前锋中军刘弘烈被抓获，不久副将艾万年、柳国镇又战死。
English: Liu Hongliao, the vanguard of the Central Army, was captured, and soon Vice Generals Ai Wannian and Liu Guozhen also died in battle.

古文：文诏闻之，瞋目大骂，亟诣承畴请行。
现代文：文诏听说后，瞪着眼睛大骂，立即赶到承畴那里请求进军作战。
English: When he heard about the edict, he stared and cursed, and immediately rushed to Chengzong to request an advance into battle.

古文：承畴喜曰： 非将军不能灭此贼。
现代文：承畴高兴地说 ：不是你曹将军，没人能消灭这股贼兵。
English: He said happily, "Not you, General Cao, no one can destroy this band of robbers."

古文：顾吾兵已分，无可策应者。
现代文：但我的兵力已分派出去，没法派出接应你的队伍。
English: But my forces have already been dispatched, and I can't send a team to meet you.

古文：将军行，吾将由泾阳趋淳化为后劲。 
现代文：将军出发以后，我会从泾阳赶到淳化做你的后盾。 
English: After the departure of the general, I will rush from Shenyang to Junhua to be your back-up.

古文：文诏乃以三千人自宁州进，遇贼真宁之湫头镇。
现代文：文诏于是率领三千人从宁州进军，在镇宁的秋头镇同贼兵相遇。
English: Wen Zhao then led three thousand people to march from Ningzhou and met with the bandits in Qiu Tou Town of Zhening.

古文：变蛟先登，斩首五百，追三十里，文诏率步兵继之。
现代文：变蛟率先登上城墙，斩首五百人，追敌三十里，文诏率领步兵跟在后面。
English: Zengqi took the lead in climbing the city wall, beheaded five hundred people, chased the enemy for thirty miles, and Wen Zhao led the infantry behind.

古文：贼伏数万骑合围，矢猬集。
现代文：贼兵埋伏下的数万骑兵突然出来包围了他们，箭像刺猬的刺一样密集。
English: Tens of thousands of cavalrymen, who had been lying in ambush for the robbers, suddenly came out and surrounded them, their arrows as dense as hedgehog spines.

古文：贼不知为文诏也，有小卒缚急，大呼曰： 将军救我！ 
现代文：贼寇并不知道是文诏的军队，有一名小兵被俘后捆绑得心急了，大声呼叫说： 将军快来救我！ 
English: The bandits did not know that it was the army of Wen Zhao. One of the small soldiers was so anxious after being captured and tied up that he shouted out: "General, come and save me!"

古文：贼中叛卒识之，惎贼曰： 此曹总兵也。 
现代文：贼寇中间的叛兵认识文诏，指点给贼兵说 ：这就是曹总兵。 
English: The rebel soldiers among the bandits recognized the edict and pointed it out to the bandits, saying, "This is General Cao."

古文：贼喜，围益急。
现代文：贼寇高兴起来，就更加紧了包围圈。
English: When the bandits were happy, they tightened the encirclement.

古文：文诏左右跳荡，手击杀数十人，转斗数里。
现代文：文诏左右跳荡，亲手杀了几十个贼兵，辗转拼战了几里路。
English: Wen Zhao jumped from side to side, killed dozens of bandits with his own hands, and fought for several miles.

古文：力不支，拔刀自刎死。
现代文：最后体力不支，拔刀自杀而死。
English: Finally, exhausted, he pulled out a knife and killed himself.

古文：游击平安以下死者二十余人。
现代文：游击将领自平定以下死亡的有二十多人。
English: More than 20 guerrilla generals have been killed since the end of the war.

古文：承畴闻，拊膺大哭，帝亦痛悼，赠太子太保、左都督，赐祭葬，世荫指挥佥事，有司建祠，春秋致祭。
现代文：承畴听说这个消息后捶胸痛哭，崇祯皇帝也为他痛心，追赠他为太子太保、左都督，赐予祭葬的恤典，让他的子孙世袭指挥佥事的官职，并命令有关部门为他立了庙，每年春秋两季予以祭奠。
English: Upon hearing this news, Emperor Chongzhen wept bitterly, and Emperor Chongzhen also grieved for him. He posthumously granted him the titles of Crown Prince and Left-wing Governor, granted him a memorial service, allowed his children and grandchildren to inherit the official posts of commanding the anecdotes, and ordered the relevant departments to build a temple for him, and pay homage to him in the spring and autumn every year.

古文：文诏忠勇冠时，称明季良将第一。
现代文：文诏的忠诚、勇武，世间无比，被称为明末良将中的第一人。
English: Wen Zhao's loyalty and bravery are unparalleled in the world, and he is known as the first person among the outstanding generals of the late Ming Dynasty.

古文：周遇吉，锦州卫人。
现代文：对于他的死，贼寇中相互庆贺。周遇吉，锦州卫人。
English: For his death, the thieves and robbers congratulated each other. Zhou Yuji, Jinzhou guardsman.

古文：少有勇力，好射生。
现代文：从小就胆大，有力气，喜欢射杀鸟兽。
English: Since childhood, he has been bold and energetic, and likes to shoot birds and beasts.

古文：后入行伍，战辄先登，积功至京营游击。
现代文：后来参军入伍，每次打仗都率先登上城墙，累积战功做到京营的游击将领。
English: Later, he joined the army and took the lead in climbing the city wall in every battle, accumulating military exploits to become the guerrilla general of the Beijing camp.

古文：京营将多勋戚中官子弟，见遇吉质鲁，意轻之。
现代文：京营中有很多高官、太监家的子弟，他们看遇吉为人质朴、粗鲁，有点瞧不起他。
English: There are many high-ranking officials and children of eunuch families in the Beijing camp. They see Yu Ji as a simple, rude person, and look down on him a little.

古文：遇吉曰： 公等皆纨裤子，岂足当大敌。
现代文：遇吉说： 你们都是些纨礻夸子弟，怎能抵挡大敌。
English: Yunji said, "You are all sons of bitches, how can you resist the great enemy?"

古文：何不于无事时练胆勇，为异日用，而徒糜廪禄为！ 
现代文：干么不在没事的时候锻炼一下胆力，准备日后派个用场，却在这里浪费国家的粮食呢？ 
English: Why don't you exercise your courage when things are going well and prepare to be of use in the future, while wasting the country's grain here?

古文：同辈咸目笑之。
现代文：他的同事们都瞅着他傻笑。
English: His colleagues look at him and smirk.

古文：崇祯九年，都城被兵。从尚书张凤翼数血战有功，连进二秩，为前锋营副将。
现代文：崇祯九年，都城受到军队攻击，遇吉跟随尚书张凤翼几次同敌人血战，立了功，连升两级，当上了前锋营副将。
English: In the ninth year of Chongzhen, the capital city was attacked by the army. Yu Ji followed Shangshu Zhang Fengyi and fought several bloody battles with the enemy. He made great achievements and was promoted two levels consecutively and became the vice-general of the forward battalion.

古文：明年冬，从孙应元等讨贼河南，战光山、固始，皆大捷。
现代文：第二年冬天，他又跟随孙应元等人到河南讨伐贼寇，在光山、固始作战，都取得很大胜利。
English: In the winter of the next year, he followed Sun Yingyuan and others to Henan to fight the bandits, and won great victories in the battles of Guangshan and Gushi.

古文：十一年班师，进秩受赉。
现代文：十一年班师以后，得到了提升和赏赐。
English: After eleven years as a teacher, he was promoted and rewarded.

古文：明年秋，复出讨贼，破胡可受于淅川，降其全部。
现代文：第二年秋天，遇吉又出兵讨贼，在淅川打败了胡可受，收降了他的全部兵力。
English: In the autumn of the following year, Yu Jie again sent troops to hunt down the thieves, and defeated Hu Kechu in Luochuan, capturing all of his troops.

古文：杨嗣昌出师襄阳，遇吉从中官刘元斌往会。
现代文：杨嗣昌出兵襄阳时，遇吉跟着宦官刘元斌前往会师。
English: When Yang Shichang sent troops to Xiangyang, Youji followed eunuch Liu Yuanbin to join the army.

古文：会张献忠将至房县，嗣昌策其必窥渡郧滩，遣遇吉扼守槐树关，张一龙屯光化，贼遂不敢犯。
现代文：正好张献忠快到了房县，嗣昌料想他一定会偷渡郧滩，派了遇吉去扼守槐树关，张一龙驻兵光化，贼寇这下就没敢来犯。
English: Just as Zhang Xianzhong was about to arrive in Fang County, Tsuchimang thought that he would definitely sneak across the Yangtze River and sent Yu Ji to guard the Yanshu Pass. Zhang Yilong's garrison had been reduced to rubble, and the bandits did not dare to come.

古文：十二月，献忠败于兴安，将走竹山、竹溪，遇吉复以嗣昌令至石花街、草店扼其要害，贼自是尽入蜀。
现代文：十二月，献忠在兴安战败，打算逃到竹山、竹溪，遇吉又遵照嗣昌的军令赶到花街、草店，把守那里的要害地段，贼寇于是全部逃入四川境内。
English: In December, Xian Zhong was defeated in the Battle of Xing'an. He planned to flee to Zhushan and Zhuxi. When he was lucky, he followed the military orders of Zichang and rushed to Huajie and Caotian to guard the key areas there. The bandits then all fled into Sichuan.

古文：遇吉乃从元斌驻荆门，专护献陵。
现代文：接着遇吉就跟随元斌驻守荆门，专门守卫献陵。
English: Next, Yu Jie followed Yuan Bin to guard Jingmen, specifically guarding the mausoleum.

古文：明年与孙应元等大破罗汝才于丰邑坪。
现代文：第二年，他和孙应元等在丰邑坪大败罗汝才。
English: The following year, he and Sun Yingyuan suffered a crushing defeat at Fengyiping.

古文：又明年与黄得功追破贼凤阳。
现代文：又过了一年和黄得功在凤阳追败贼寇。
English: Another year passed and Huang De Gong chased and defeated the bandits in Fengyang.

古文：已而旋师，败他贼李青山于寿张，追至东平，歼灭几尽，青山遂降。
现代文：后来在回师途中，又在寿张打败了另外一名贼将李青山，追赶到东平，差不多把他的人歼灭净尽，于是青山投降了。
English: Later, on the way back to the division, he defeated another thief, Li Qingshan, in Shou Zhang, and chased him to Dongping, almost annihilating his men, so Aoyama surrendered.

古文：屡加太子少保、左都督。
现代文：经几次晋升，遇吉做到了太子少保、左都督。
English: After several promotions, Youkichi achieved the position of crown prince minor protector and left-wing governor.

古文：十五年冬，山西总兵官许定国有罪论死，以遇吉代之。
现代文：十五年冬天，山西总兵官许定国因罪被判处死刑，朝廷让遇吉接任。
English: In the winter of the fifteenth year, the Shanxi general officer Xu Dingguo was sentenced to death for his crime, and the court allowed Yu Jie to take over.

古文：至则汰老弱，缮甲仗，练勇敢，一军特精。
现代文：他到任以后就裁汰老弱士兵，修造甲仗器械，操练勇敢作战的兵马，使得全军极其精锐。
English: After he took office, he eliminated old and weak soldiers, repaired armored war equipment, and trained soldiers and horses to fight bravely, making the whole army extremely elite.

古文：明年十二月，李自成陷全陕，将犯山西。
现代文：第二年十二月，李自成攻占了整个陕西，即将来犯山西。
English: In December of the following year, Li Zicheng conquered the whole of Shaanxi and was about to invade Shanxi.

古文：遇吉以沿河千余里，贼处处可渡，分兵扼其上流，以下流蒲坂属之巡抚蔡懋德，而请济师于朝。
现代文：遇吉认为黄河沿岸有一千多里，贼寇处处都可以渡过来，就分派部队抢守在上游，把下游蒲坂一带交给巡抚蔡懋德防守，又向朝廷请求增兵。
English: Yunji thought that there were more than a thousand miles along the coast of the Yellow River, and thieves and robbers could cross everywhere, so he dispatched troops to defend the upstream, and handed the downstream area of Pusan to the inspector Cai Bingde for defense, and asked the imperial court for more troops.

古文：朝廷遣副将熊通以二千人来赴。
现代文：朝廷派副将熊通带两千人来增援。
English: The imperial court sent Vice Admiral Kumamoto with two thousand men to reinforce.

古文：十七年正月，遇吉令通防河。
现代文：十七年正月，遇吉命令熊通防守黄河。
English: In the first month of the seventeenth year, You Ji ordered Xiong Tong to defend the Yellow River.

古文：会平阳守将陈尚智已遣使迎贼，讽通还镇说降。
现代文：正好当时平阳守将陈尚智已经派人去迎接贼寇，让熊通回营劝说遇吉投降。
English: Just at that time, the governor of Pingyang, Chen Shangzhi, had already sent someone to meet the thieves and let Xiong Tong return to the camp to persuade Yu Ji to surrender.

古文：遇吉叱之曰： 吾受国厚恩，宁从尔叛逆！
现代文：遇吉喝斥道： 我蒙受国家的大恩，难道能跟着你背叛朝廷？
English: Yu Jie shouted back: I have been greatly blessed by the state. Can I betray the imperial court with you?

古文：且尔统兵二千，不能杀贼，反作说客邪！ 
现代文：而且你领兵两千，不能杀贼，还要反过来给他们当说客！ 
English: And you lead two thousand soldiers, you can't kill thieves, but you have to turn them into lobbyists!

古文：立斩之，传首京师。
现代文：立刻把他斩了，把他的人头送往京师。
English: They immediately beheaded him and sent his head to the capital.

古文：至二月七日，太原陷，懋德死之。
现代文：到二月七日，太原失陷，懋德死于守城。
English: By February 7th, Taiyuan had fallen and Xingde died defending the city.

古文：贼遂陷忻州，围代州。
现代文：贼寇于是打下忻州，包围了代州。
English: The bandits then laid siege to Zhangzhou and encircled Daizhou.

古文：遇吉先在代遏其北犯，乃凭城固守，而潜出兵奋击。
现代文：遇吉开始在代州阻止贼寇北犯，一方面凭借城墙坚守，一面偷偷出兵奋战。
English: Yu Ji began to stop the thieves and robbers in Daizhou, on the one hand by virtue of the city wall, on the other hand, he secretly sent troops to fight.

古文：连数日，杀贼无算。
现代文：连续几天，杀了无数贼兵。
English: For several days in a row, he killed countless bandits.

古文：会食尽援绝，退保宁武。
现代文：当军粮吃光，救援无望时，只好退保宁武。
English: When the army ran out of food and there was no hope of rescue, Ningwu had no choice but to retreat.

古文：贼亦踵至，大呼五日不降者屠其城。
现代文：贼寇又紧跟着到了，大喊如果五天不投降就杀掉全城的军民。
English: The bandits followed closely behind, shouting that if they did not surrender in five days, they would kill all the soldiers and civilians in the city.

古文：遇吉四面发大炮，杀贼万人，火药且尽，外围转急。
现代文：遇吉朝四面八方发射大炮，打死了一万贼兵，火药就要用完了，城外的包围圈越来越小。
English: Yu Jichang fired cannons in all directions, killing ten thousand thieves, the gunpowder was about to run out, and the encirclement outside the city was getting smaller and smaller.

古文：或请甘言绐之，遇吉怒曰： 若辈何怯邪！
现代文：有人请说些好话把贼兵骗走算了，遇吉说： 你们太胆小了！
English: Someone please say some kind words to lure the robber soldiers away, Yu Ji said: You are too timid!

古文：今能胜，一军皆忠义。即不支，缚我予贼。 
现代文：现在如果我们能打胜，全军都是忠臣义士；就是支持不住，把我绑了交给贼兵也就罢了。 
English: Now, if we can win, the whole army will be loyal and righteous; if we can't win, just tie me up and hand me over to the bandits.

古文：于是设伏城内，出弱卒诱贼入城，亟下闸杀数千人。
现代文：于是在城内设下伏兵，派出弱卒诱引贼兵往城里边进攻，即刻放下闸门，杀死了先进来的几千名贼兵。
English: So he set up an ambush in the city, sent a weak pawn to lure the bandits to attack the city, immediately put down the gate, and killed several thousand advanced bandits.

古文：贼用炮攻城，圮复完者再，伤其四骁将。
现代文：贼寇用大炮轰炸城墙，城墙两次塌而强修，并且打伤了贼军的四员猛将。
English: Thieves and robbers bombarded the city wall with cannons. The city wall collapsed twice and had to be rebuilt, and four soldiers of the thief army were injured.

古文：自成惧，欲退。其将曰： 我众百倍于彼，但用十攻一，番进，蔑不胜矣。 
现代文：自成怕了，想退兵，他的将领们说 ：我们的兵力有他一百倍那么多，只要用十个对付他一个，轮流攻打，没有不能获胜的道理。 
English: He was afraid and wanted to retreat. His generals said: We have a hundred times as many troops as he has. As long as we use ten to deal with him one at a time, and take turns attacking, there is no reason why we cannot win.

古文：自成从之。
现代文：自成听取了他们的意见。
English: We listened to their opinions.

古文：前队死，后复继。
现代文：于是贼兵前队死了，后边跟上，不间断地猛攻。
English: As a result, the vanguard of the bandits died, the rear followed, and the onslaught continued without interruption.

古文：官军力尽，城遂陷。
现代文：官军气力用完了，城就被打了下来。
English: When the strength of the government army was exhausted, the city was knocked down.

古文：遇吉巷战，马蹶，徒步跳荡，手格杀数十人。
现代文：遇吉跟贼兵展开巷战，座下的战马倒在地上后，他徒步跳跃闪转，亲手杀死贼兵几十个人。
English: Yu Ji started a street battle with the bandits. After his horse fell to the ground, he jumped on foot and killed dozens of bandits with his own hands.

古文：身被矢如猬，竟为贼执，大骂不屈。
现代文：他的身上像刺猬一样被箭射中多处，最后被贼兵抓住，他大骂不屈。
English: Like a hedgehog, he was shot with arrows in many places on his body. Finally, he was caught by the robbers, and he swore loudly.

古文：贼悬之高竿，丛射杀之，复脔其肉。
现代文：贼兵把他绑在很高的木柱上，用乱箭射死了，又一片一片割下了他的肉。
English: The bandits tied him to a tall wooden post, shot him with random arrows, and cut off his flesh piece by piece.

古文：城中士民感遇吉忠义，巷战杀贼，不可胜计。
现代文：宁武城中的百姓、士绅受到遇吉忠贞、义勇的感动，在小巷中跟贼兵厮杀，打死的贼兵不可胜计。
English: The common people and gentry in Ningwu City were moved by the good luck, loyalty and bravery, and fought with the bandits in the alleys. The bandits could not be defeated.

古文：其舍中儿，先从遇吉出斗，死亡略尽。
现代文：遇吉家里的孩子们开始跟随遇吉在外边跟贼兵搏斗，死得差不多了。
English: The children in Yu Jie's family began to follow Yu Jie outside to fight the bandits, and almost died.

古文：夫人刘氏素勇健，率妇女数十人据山巅公廨，登屋而射，每一矢毙一贼，贼不敢逼。纵火焚之，阖家尽死。
现代文：他的夫人刘氏一向勇猛，率领几十名妇女守卫着山顶上的官署，她们登上屋顶射击贼寇，每一支箭射死一名贼兵，贼寇不敢靠近她们，便点火焚烧，她们全家都被烧死了。
English: His wife Liu has always been brave. She led dozens of women to guard the government office on the top of the mountain. They climbed onto the roof to shoot the bandits. Each arrow shot one bandit. The bandits did not dare to get close to them, so they lit a fire and burned. Their whole family was burned to death.

古文：自成集众计曰： 宁武虽破，吾将士死伤多。
现代文：自成召集手下商量说 ：宁武虽然打下了，我们的将士也死伤了很多。
English: He gathered his subordinates to discuss and said: Although Ningwu was defeated, many of our soldiers were killed and injured.

古文：自此达京师，历大同、阳和、宣府、居庸，皆有重兵。
现代文：从这里到京师，中间经过大同、阳和、宣府、居庸，都驻着重兵。
English: From here to Beijing Division, the middle passed through Datong, Yanghe, Xuanfu, Juyong, all stationed heavy troops.

古文：刻期将遁，而大同总兵姜瓖降表至，自成大喜。
现代文：如果都像宁武这个样子，我们的士兵还能剩几个呢？不如先回陕西休息，以后再来打吧。 
English: If they are all like Ningwu, how many of our soldiers will be left? It is better to go back to Shaanxi to rest first, and then fight again.

古文：方宴其使者，宣府总兵王承荫表亦至，自成益喜。
现代文：定好日子就要逃走，可是大同总兵姜王襄的使者、宣府总兵王承荫的投降书也送到了，自成更加高兴。
English: They had to set a good date to escape, but the messenger of Datong general soldier Jiang Wangxiang and the letter of surrender of Xuanfu general soldier Wang Chengyin also arrived, which made them even happier.

古文：遂决策长驱，历大同、宣府抵居庸。
现代文：于是决定长驱直入，经过大同、宣府到了居庸。
English: So they decided to drive straight in, passing through Datong and Xuanfu to Juyong.

古文：太监杜之秩、总兵唐通复开门延之，京师遂不守矣。
现代文：太监杜文秩、总兵唐通打开城门，引贼入城，京师就这样失守了。
English: The eunuch Du Wenchong and the general soldier Tang Tong opened the city gate and led the thieves into the city. Thus, the capital was lost.

古文：贼每语人曰： 他镇复有一周总兵，吾安得至此。 
现代文：贼寇后来经常对人说 ：别的兵镇再有一个周总兵，我们怎么能有今天！ 
English: Later, the bandit often said to people, "Other military towns have a Zhou general, how can we have one today!"

古文：福王时，赠太保，谥忠武，列祀旌忠祠。
现代文：福王在位时，追赠遇吉为太保，谥忠武，把他放在旌忠祠里加以祭祀。
English: When King Fu was on the throne, he gave a posthumous gift to Ji Jie for Taibo and Zou Zhongwu, and placed him in the Zou Zhong Temple to be sacrificed.

古文：黄得功，号虎山，开原卫人，其先自合肥徙。
现代文：黄得功，号虎山，开原卫人，他的祖先是从合肥迁移而来的。
English: Huang Dergong, the so-called Tiger Mountain, the founding guardian, his ancestors migrated from Hefei.

古文：早孤，与母徐居。
现代文：得功早年丧父，同母亲徐氏生活在一起。
English: He lost his father at an early age and lives with his mother, Ms. Xu.

古文：少负奇气，胆略过人。
现代文：他年少时就有无比的勇气，谋略过人。
English: When he was young, he had incredible courage and outmaneuvered everyone.

古文：年十二，母酿酒熟，窃饮至尽。
现代文：十二岁那年，母亲有一回酿好了酒，他偷偷地给喝完了。
English: When he was twelve years old, his mother brewed wine once, and he secretly finished it.

古文：母责之，笑曰： 偿易耳。 
现代文：母亲责怪他，他笑着说： 赔你很容易嘛。 
English: When his mother blamed him, he smiled and said, "It's easy to blame you.

古文：时辽事急，得功持刀杂行伍中，出斩首二级，中赏率得白金五十两，归奉母，曰： 儿以偿酒也。 
现代文：当时辽地军事很急，得功拿了一把刀混在官军中，跑到战场上就斩获了敌人两颗头颅，中奖赏后大概得了五十两白银，回家献给母亲，说 ：我用这钱来弥补偷喝的酒。 
English: At that time, the Liao military was in a hurry. They took a knife and mixed it with the official army. They ran to the battlefield and cut off two heads of the enemy. After winning the reward, they got about fifty-two pieces of silver. They went home and dedicated it to their mother, saying, "I used this money to make up for the stolen wine."

古文：由是隶经略为亲军，累功至游击。
现代文：从这以后得功给经略当了亲军，积累战功做到了游击。
English: From then on, the merits were given to Jing slightly as a pro-army, and the accumulation of merits was achieved as a guerrilla.

古文：崇祯九年，迁副总兵，分管京卫管。
现代文：崇祯九年得功升为副总兵官，分管京师的卫戍部队。
English: In the ninth year of the Chongzhen era, he was promoted to deputy commander-in-chief, in charge of the garrison troops of the Beijing Division.

古文：十一年以禁军从总督熊文灿击贼于舞阳，鏖光、固间，最。
现代文：十一年率领禁军跟从总管熊文灿到舞阳去打击贼兵，鏖战在光山和固始之间，战功最显著。
English: In the eleventh year, he led the Forbidden Army to follow the general manager Xiong Wencang to Wuyang to fight against the thief soldiers. The battle was fought between Guangshan and Gushi, and the war service was the most significant.

古文：八月又从击贼马光玉于淅川之吴村、王家寨，大破之。
现代文：八月又随从文灿在浙江的吴村和王家寨打击贼将马光玉，获得很大胜利。
English: In August, he followed Wen Can to fight against the thief Ma Guangyu in Wusun and Wangjiazhai in Zhejiang, and won a great victory.

古文：诏加太子太师，署总兵衔。
现代文：朝廷下诏加封他为太子太师，署总兵军衔。
English: Under the imperial edict, he was given the title of Crown Prince and Grand Master, and the rank of General of the Army.

古文：十三年从太监卢九德破贼于板石畈，贼革里眼等五营降。
现代文：十三年跟从太监卢九德在板石畈打败贼军，贼首革里眼等五营兵投降了。
English: In the thirteenth year, he followed the eunuch Lu Jiude to defeat the bandit army in the plate-rock cliff, and the bandit leader led five battalions to surrender.

古文：十四年以总兵与王宪分护凤阳、泗州陵，得功驻定远。
现代文：十四年以总兵的身份同王宪分别护守凤阳和泗州的皇陵，得功驻军定远。
English: For fourteen years, he guarded the imperial tombs of Fengyang and Ganzhou separately as a general with Wang Xian, and was awarded for his efforts in garrisoning Dingyuan.

古文：张献忠攻桐城，挟营将廖应登至城下诱降。
现代文：张献忠攻占桐城，挟持营将廖应登到城下诱降。
English: Zhang Xianzhong captured Tongcheng, and took Liao Ying into the castle to force him to surrender.

古文：得功与刘良佐合兵击之于鲍家岭，贼败遁，追至潜山，擒斩贼将闯世王马武、三鹞子王兴国。
现代文：得功与刘良佐联合兵力在鲍家岭攻打他们，贼兵失败而逃，追到潜山，抓获了贼兵将领闯世王马武、三鹞子王兴国，把他们杀掉了。
English: Liu Liangzao and his joint forces successfully attacked them in Baojialing. The bandits fled in defeat and chased them to the hidden mountain. They captured the bandit generals Zou Shi Wang Ma Wu and Sanjie Zi Wang Xingguo and killed them.

古文：三鹞子，献忠养子，最号骁勇者也。
现代文：三鹞子是张献忠的养子，是贼寇中号称最勇猛的将领。
English: Sanxunzi was the adopted son of Zhang Xiantong and was known as the most courageous general among the bandits.

古文：得功箭伤面，愈自奋，与贼转战十余日，所杀伤独多。
现代文：得功在战斗时中箭伤了脸，反而更加努力，同贼兵转战十多天，所杀伤的人数最多。
English: During the battle, he was wounded in the face by an arrow, but he made more efforts. He fought with the bandits for more than ten days, with the largest number of casualties.

古文：明年移镇庐州。
现代文：第二年他移守庐州。
English: The following year, he moved to Zhangzhou.

古文：十七年封靖南伯。福王立江南，进封侯。
现代文：十七年得功被封为靖南伯，福王在江南登基后，得功被晋升为侯。
English: In the seventeenth year, he was awarded the title of Jingnan Bo, and after King Fu ascended to the throne in the south of the Yangtze River, he was promoted to Hou.

古文：旋命与刘良佐、刘泽清、高杰为四镇。
现代文：不久受命同刘良佐、刘泽清、高杰一起开设了四大兵镇。
English: Soon he was ordered to open four major military towns together with Liu Liangzao, Liu Zeqing and Gao Jie.

古文：初，督辅史可法虑杰跋扈难制，故置得功仪真，阴相牵制。
现代文：起初，督辅史可法担心高杰蛮横无理，难以制服，所以让得功驻军仪真，暗中牵制高杰的势力。
English: At first, Dufu Kofo was worried that Gao Jie was unreasonable and difficult to subdue, so he secretly restrained Gao Jie's power by letting the military garrison be effective.

古文：适登莱总兵黄蜚将之任，蜚与得功同姓，称兄弟，移书请兵备非常。
现代文：恰好登莱总兵黄蜚即将前去上任。黄蜚与黄得功同姓，以兄弟相称，所以他给黄得功写信请为他派些兵防备意外。
English: It just so happened that the general of the Denglai army, Huang Di, was about to take office. Huang Di had the same surname as Huang Dergong, so he wrote to Huang Dergong to ask him to send some soldiers to guard against accidents.

古文：得功率骑三百由扬州往高邮迎之，杰副将胡茂桢驰报杰。
现代文：得功率领三百名骑兵从扬州出发到高邮迎接他，高杰的副将胡茂桢飞马向高杰做了汇报。
English: Gao Jie dispatched three hundred cavalrymen from Yangzhou to Gaoyou to welcome him, and Gao Jie's vice-commander Hu Maozhen Pegasus made a report to Gao Jie.

古文：杰素忌得功，又疑图己，乃伏精卒道中，邀击之。
现代文：高杰一向忌恨得功，又怀疑他要算计自己。于是在途中埋伏了精兵阻击他们。
English: Gao Jie has always been averse to taking credit, and suspected that he wanted to count on himself. So he ambushed the elite soldiers on the way to stop them.

古文：得功行至土桥，方作食，伏起，出不意，上马举铁鞭，飞矢雨集，马踣，腾他骑驰。
现代文：得功走到土桥正准备埋锅造饭，高杰的伏兵出其不意地打来，得功上马拿着铁鞭准备战斗，飞来的箭像下雨一样密集，得功的马跌倒在地，他骑上别人的马跑开了。
English: He was preparing to bury a pot to make rice when Gao Jie's ambush came out of the blue. He was on his horse holding an iron whip to prepare for battle. The arrows were as dense as rain. His horse fell to the ground. He got on someone else's horse and ran away.

古文：有骁骑舞槊直前，得功大呼，反斗，挟其槊而抶之，人马皆糜。
现代文：有一名勇猛的骑兵挥舞着大槊向得功冲来，得功大呼一声回头来战，抓住他的大槊往怀里一拉，就把他连人带马一起拉倒在地。
English: A gallant cavalryman, brandishing a halter, rushed up to De Gong. De Gong shouted back, grabbed his halter, pulled it into his arms, and pulled him and his horse to the ground.

古文：复杀数十人，跳入颓垣中，哮声如雷，追者不敢进，遂疾驰至大军，得免。
现代文：又杀了几十个人，然后翻身跳进废墙里边，他吼叫的声音如雷鸣电闪，追赶他的人不敢上前来了，于是他骑马飞奔，回到大部队中。
English: He killed dozens more, then turned and leapt into the waste wall, his bellowing sound like thunder and lightning, his pursuers dared not come forward, so he galloped back to the main force.

古文：方斗时，杰潜师捣仪真，得功兵颇伤，而所俱行三百骑皆殁。
现代文：这边正在战斗时，高杰又派了兵暗中去攻打仪真，得功的士兵损伤得比较严重。而与他一同前往高邮的三百骑兵都战死了。
English: While this side was fighting, Gao Jie secretly sent soldiers to attack Yizhen. The soldiers who won the battle were seriously injured, while the 300 cavalrymen who went to Gaoyou with him all died in the battle.

古文：遂诉于朝，愿与杰决一死战。
现代文：于是得功向朝廷做了上诉，并表示愿意同高杰决一死战。
English: Therefore, Gukong appealed to the imperial court and expressed his willingness to fight Gao Jie to the death.

古文：可法命监军万元吉和解之，不可。
现代文：可法派监军万元吉前往替他们和解，得功不同意。
English: However, the law sent the supervising army, Yuanji, to reconcile for them, but they did not agree.

古文：会得功有母丧，可法来吊，语之曰： 土桥之役，无智愚皆知杰不义。
现代文：恰好此时得功母亲去世，可法来吊丧，对他说： 土桥那一仗，不管聪明人还是愚蠢人都知道是高杰不对。
English: Just at this time, his mother passed away, and Kofa came to mourn and said to him: In that battle of the earth bridge, no matter whether they are smart or stupid, they all know that Gao Jie was wrong.

古文：今将军以国故捐盛怒，而归曲于高，是将军收大名于天下也。 
现代文：现在将军因为国家的缘故压住心中的火气，让高杰背着罪名，这正是将军在天下获取大名的时候啊！ 
English: Now the general is suppressing the fire in his heart for the sake of the country, and letting Gao Jie carry the blame. This is exactly the time for the general to gain a great name in the world!

古文：得功色稍和，终以所杀亡多为恨。
现代文：得功脸色渐渐地温和了一些，终究还是因为自己人被杀死得太多而感到恼恨。
English: His face gradually softened, but he was still angry that so many of his people had been killed.

古文：可法令杰偿其马，复出千金为母赗。
现代文：可法命令高杰赔偿他的战马，又拿出一千两银子作为得功母亲办丧事的费用。
English: But the law ordered Gao Jie to compensate for his war horse, and he also took out a thousand taels of silver to pay for the funeral expenses of his meritorious mother.

古文：得功不得已，听之。
现代文：得功没有办法，只好听从了可法的调解。
English: There was no way to get credit, so I had to listen to a legal mediation.

古文：明年，杰欲趋河南，规取中原。
现代文：第二年，高杰想进兵河南，谋划收复中原。
English: In the second year, Gao Jie wanted to enter Henan and planned to recover the Central Plains.

古文：诏得功与刘良佐守邳、徐。
现代文：朝廷诏令得功同刘良佐把守邳、徐两地。
English: The imperial edict was credited with Liu Liangzuo's success in protecting the two provinces of Yao and Xu.

古文：杰死，得功还仪真。
现代文：高杰死后，得功回到了仪真。
English: After Gao Jie's death, the credit went back to Yizhen.

古文：杰家并将士妻子尚留扬州，得功谋袭之。
现代文：高杰一家人和他的将士还留在扬州，得功想袭击他们。
English: Gao Jie's family and his soldiers were still in Yangzhou, and he had the courage to attack them.

古文：朝廷急遣卢九德谕止，得功遂移镇庐州。
现代文：朝廷赶忙派遣卢九德去指示他停止报复，得功于是移驻庐州。
English: The imperial court quickly dispatched Lu Jiude to instruct him to stop the retaliation, and he moved to Zhangzhou as a result.

古文：四月，左良玉东下，以请君侧为名，至九江，病死，军中立其子梦庚。
现代文：四月，左良玉举兵东来，以清除皇上身边的坏人为名义造反，船行到九江就病死了，他的军队拥立了他的儿子梦庚。
English: In April, Zuo Liangyu raised an army to the east and rebelled in the name of getting rid of the bad people around the emperor. He died of illness after sailing to Jiujiang. His army supported his son Meng Geng.

古文：命得功趋上江御之，驻师荻港。
现代文：朝廷命令得功赶快到上江抵御他们，驻军荻港。
English: The imperial court ordered the meritorious to rush to the upper river to resist them, and stationed troops in Da Nang.

古文：得功破梦庚于铜陵，解其围。
现代文：得功在铜陵打败了梦庚，解除了他们的包围。
English: He was credited with defeating Meng Geng in Tongling and lifting their siege.

古文：命移家镇太平，一意办贼，论功加左柱国。
现代文：后来朝廷又命令他携家迁到太平镇守，专门办理剿贼的事务，评定功绩加封他为左柱国。
English: Later, the imperial court ordered him and his family to move to Taiping Town, specifically to handle the affairs of the bandits, and to be awarded the title of "Left Pillar of the State."

古文：时大清兵已渡江，知福王奔，分兵袭太平。
现代文：这时清兵已经渡过长江，知道福王逃跑了，就兵分几路袭击太平。
English: At this time, the Qing soldiers had already crossed the Yangtze River. Knowing that Fu Wang had fled, the soldiers attacked Taiping in several directions.

古文：得功方收兵屯芜湖，福王潜入其营。
现代文：得功正收兵驻防芜湖，福王偷偷地来到了他的军营。
English: He was receiving soldiers stationed in Wuhu, and Fu Wang secretly came to his military camp.

古文：得功惊泣曰： 陛下死守京城，臣等犹可尽力，奈何听奸人言，仓卒到此！
现代文：得功惊讶地流着泪说 ：陛下如果死死地把守京城，我们还能够尽力抵抗，干什么听信奸贼的话，匆匆忙忙来到这里？
English: Surprised and with tears streaming down his face, he said: "If Your Majesty guards the capital to the death, we can still do our best to resist. Why did you listen to the words of a traitor and come here in a hurry?"

古文：且臣方对敌，安能扈驾？ 
现代文：况且我正在对敌作战，怎么能够保护您的车驾？ 
English: Besides, I am fighting against the enemy, how can I protect your car?

古文：王曰： 非卿无可仗者。 
现代文：福王说 ：除了你我是无可依靠了。 
English: Fu Wang said, "Apart from you, I have no one to rely on."

古文：得功泣曰： 愿效死。 
现代文：得功流着泪说 ：我愿意为陛下您效死。 
English: With tears streaming down his face, he said, "I am willing to die for Your Majesty."

古文：得功战荻港时，伤臂几堕。衣葛衣，以帛络臂，佩刀坐小舟，督麾下八总兵结束前迎敌。
现代文：得功在荻港时，胳臂受伤差一点快要断了，这时他身穿粗布衣裳，用布带吊着胳臂，佩带着腰刀坐在一只小船上，指挥部下的八个总兵整装待命，前去迎敌作战。
English: When he was in Da Nang, his arm was injured and almost broke. At that time, he was dressed in coarse cloth, hanging his arm with a cloth belt, wearing a loincloth and sitting on a small boat. Eight soldiers under his command were fully equipped and ready to go to fight the enemy.

古文：而刘良佐已先归命，大呼岸上招降。
现代文：而刘良佐这时已经投降了，带着大清军在岸上打招呼要得功投降。
English: But Liu Liangzuo had already surrendered at this time, and he greeted the Qing army on the shore with a call to surrender.

古文：得功怒叱曰： 汝乃降乎！ 
现代文：得功愤怒地喝斥道 ：你竟然会投降啊！ 
English: To his credit, he angrily shouted back, "You're actually going to surrender!

古文：忽飞矢至，中其喉偏左。
现代文：忽然一支箭飞来，射在他的咽喉偏左的地方。
English: Suddenly, an arrow flew into the left side of his throat.

古文：得功知不可为，掷刀拾所拔箭刺吭死。
现代文：得功知道一切都算完了，就扔了刀，拾起刚才拔下来的箭刺喉而死。
English: Knowing that everything was over, he threw down his knife, picked up the arrow he had just pulled out and stabbed himself to death.

古文：其妻闻之，亦自经。
现代文：他的妻子听说后，也自杀了。
English: His wife also committed suicide after hearing the news.

古文：总兵翁之琪投江死，中军田雄遂挟福王降。
现代文：总兵翁之琪投江而死，中军田雄于是就带着福王投降了。
English: The commander-in-chief, Weng Ziqi, fell into the river and died, and the middle-ranking soldier, Tian Xiong, surrendered with Fu Wang.

古文：得功粗猛不识文义。
现代文：得功粗犷、勇猛，没有文化。
English: He was coarse, brave, and uneducated.

古文：江南初立，王诏书指挥，多出群小。得功得诏纸或对使骂裂之。
现代文：福王在江南刚刚登基，他的诏书和指示大多是一群小人搞的，得功有时接到诏书以后竟当着使臣的面骂骂咧咧把诏书撕毁。
English: Fu Wang had just ascended to the throne in the south of the Yangtze River. Most of his edicts and instructions were carried out by a group of villains. To his credit, he sometimes scolded and tore up the edict in front of the envoys after receiving it.

古文：然忠义出天性，闻以国事相规诫者，辄屈己改不旋踵。
现代文：但是他的忠义出自天性，只要听到别人拿国家大事来规劝他，他总是心服口服，立即改正。
English: However, his loyalty comes from his nature. Whenever he hears others try to persuade him on national issues, he is always convinced and immediately corrects himself.

古文：北来太子之狱，得功抗疏争曰： 东宫未必假冒，先帝子即上子，未有了无证明，混然雷同者。
现代文：北来太子一案，得功曾抗言上书争论说： 太子未必是假冒的，先帝的儿子也就是您的儿子，不是一点证据都没有就能来胡乱假充的。
English: In the case of the North Korean crown prince, Gukong once wrote a letter to argue: The crown prince is not necessarily a fake, the son of the former emperor is also your son, it is not possible to falsify without a single piece of evidence.

古文：臣恐在廷诸臣，谄徇者多，抗颜者少，即明白识认，亦不敢抗词取祸矣。 
现代文：我担心在朝廷中的大臣们花言巧语奉承陛下您的人多，敢不看您的脸色直言进谏的人少，他们就是明白认出是太子，也不敢抗言上书，怕给自己惹祸啊！ 
English: I am afraid that there are many ministers in the Imperial Court who flatter Your Majesty with fancy words, but there are few who dare to speak frankly without looking at your face. Even if they clearly recognize you as the Crown Prince, they do not dare to resist writing a letter, for fear of causing trouble for themselves!

古文：时太子真伪莫敢决，而得功忠愤不阿如此。
现代文：当时太子的真假没人敢断定，可是得功敢于这样忠愤直言，不阿谀奉承。
English: At that time, no one dared to determine whether the crown prince was real or not, but he was praised for daring to be outspoken and not flatter.

古文：得功每战，饮酒数斗，酒酣气益厉。
现代文：得功每次打仗都喝下几斗酒，酒酣以后气力更加勇猛。
English: Every time he won a battle, he drank a few buckets of wine, and his strength was even stronger after drinking.

古文：喜持铁鞭战，鞭渍血沾手腕，以水濡之，久乃得脱，军中呼为黄闯子。
现代文：他喜欢拿着铁鞭打仗，每次战后鞭出的血沾在手腕上，要用水泡很长时间才能洗净，他的队伍中人们都称呼他是黄闯子。
English: He likes to fight with an iron whip. After every battle, the blood from the whip stains his wrists, and it takes a long time to wash it off with water. People in his team call him Huang Zorongzi.

古文：始为偏裨，随大帅立功名，未尝一当大敌。
现代文：他起初做偏裨小将，跟着别的大将立功成名，不曾撞上过大敌。
English: At first, he was a minor general, followed by other generals who achieved fame, and never ran into a great enemy.

古文：及专镇封侯，不及一年余而南北转徙，主逃将溃，无所一用其力，束手就殪，与国俱亡而已。
现代文：等自己领了一个兵镇封为侯爵以后，不到一年多时间就南北转移，主上逃跑，大将战败，没机会施展自己的力量就束手就死，与国俱亡了。
English: After he had led a garrison and been made a marquis, it took less than a year for him to be transferred from north to south, the commander fled, the general was defeated, and without the opportunity to exert his own strength, he tied his hands and died, perishing with the country.

古文：其军行纪律严，下无敢犯，所至人感其德。
现代文：他的军队出外，纪律严明，部下不敢侵扰百姓，因此所到之处人们都感激他的好处。
English: His army is well-disciplined, and his subordinates dare not disturb the people, so people everywhere are grateful for his benefits.

古文：庐州、桐城、定远皆为立生祠。
现代文：庐州、桐城、定远当时都为他建立了生祠。
English: At that time, ancestral shrines were built for him in Zhangzhou, Tongcheng and Dingyuan.

古文：葬仪真方山母墓侧。
现代文：他死后埋葬在仪真方山他母亲的墓边。
English: After his death, he was buried on the side of his mother's grave in Yizhenfangshan.

