古文：高允高允，字伯恭，勃海人也。
现代文：高允，字伯恭，渤海郡人。
English: Gao Yun, alias Bo Qiong, from Bohai County.

古文：祖泰，在叔父湖《传》。
现代文：祖父高泰，事迹在其叔父《高湖传》中有载。
English: Grandfather Gao Tai, whose exploits are recorded in his uncle's "The Legend of Gao Hu."

古文：父韬，少以英朗知名，同郡封懿雅相敬慕。
现代文：父高韬，少时以英朗知名，同乡人封懿雅相敬慕。
English: His father, Gao Yao, was famous for his bravery when he was young, and was admired by his fellow villagers.

古文：为慕容垂太尉从事中郎。
现代文：任慕容垂的太尉从事中郎。
English: The first lieutenant, Murongtui, was engaged as a middle-ranking officer.

古文：太祖平中山，以韬为丞相参军。
现代文：魏太祖平定中山，任高韬为丞相参军。
English: Wei Taizu subdued Zhongshan and appointed Gao Wei as chancellor to join the army.

古文：早卒。
现代文：早年过世。
English: He died at an early age.

古文：允少孤夙成，有奇度，清河崔玄伯见而异之，叹曰： 高子黄中内润，文明外照，必为一代伟器，但恐吾不见耳。 
现代文：高允少年丧父，大器早成，有神奇的气度，清河人崔玄伯见到他十分惊异，感叹说： 高子黄中内润，文明外照，必为一代伟器，我只担心自己不能亲眼见到。 
English: Gaoyun lost his father when he was a young boy, he became a great instrument at an early age and had a magical temperament. Cui Xuanbo from Qinghe was very surprised to see him and exclaimed: Gao Zi Huangzhong Inner Run, civilized exterior, must be a generation of great instruments. I'm just worried that I can't see it with my own eyes.

古文：年十余，奉祖父丧还本郡，推财与二弟而为沙门，名法净。
现代文：高允十来岁时，为祖父奔丧还归本郡，家中财产都让给两个弟弟而自己身归沙门，取名法净。
English: When Gao Yun was in his teens, he returned to his county after his grandfather's death. He left all of his family's property to his two younger brothers and returned to Shamen, taking the name Ho Ching.

古文：未久而罢。
现代文：不久又还俗了。
English: It soon became popular again.

古文：性好文学，担笈负书，千里就业。
现代文：高允喜好文学，担笈负书，千里求学。
English: Gao Yun likes literature, is fond of books, and travels thousands of miles to study.

古文：博通经史天文术数，尤好《春秋公羊》。
现代文：博通经史天文术数，尤其爱好《春秋公羊传》。
English: He is well-versed in the history of astronomy, and is particularly fond of "The Spring and Autumn of the Ram."

古文：郡召功曹。
现代文：郡中召他为功曹。
English: The county middle school called him a meritorious student.

古文：神三年，世祖舅阳平王杜超行征南大将军，镇鄴，以允为从事中郎，年四十余矣。
现代文：神三年，魏世祖的舅舅阳平王杜超任征南大将军，镇守邺城，任命高允为从事中郎，当时他已有四十多岁了。
English: In the third year of the Jin Dynasty, Yang Ping Wang Du Chao, the uncle of the founder of the Wei Dynasty, was appointed as the general of the Southern Expeditionary Army, the town guard of Shicheng, and Gao Yun was appointed as the middle-ranking official. At that time, he was more than forty years old.

古文：超以方春而诸州囚多不决，乃表允与中郎吕熙等分诣诸州，共评狱事。
现代文：杜超因为春天快到而诸州囚犯多不能判决，于是上表让高允与中郎吕熙等人分头前往各州，共同评决狱事。
English: Du Chao, because spring was approaching and most of the prisoners in the states could not be sentenced, so the table let Gao Yun and Zhong Lang Lv Xi and others go to the states separately to jointly judge the prison affairs.

古文：熙等皆以贪秽得罪，唯允以清平获赏。
现代文：吕熙等人都因贪污枉法获罪，惟有高允因清廉公正而得到嘉赏。
English: Lu Xi and others were all convicted of corruption and malfeasance, but Gao Yun was commended for his integrity and fairness.

古文：府解，还家教授，受业者千余人。
现代文：杜超幕府解散之后，高允回家教书，受其学业的有一千多人。
English: After the dissolution of the Du Chao Shogunate, Gao Yun returned home to teach, and more than a thousand people benefited from his studies.

古文：四年，与卢玄等俱被征，拜中书博士。
现代文：神四年，他与卢玄等人一起被征召，拜为中书博士。
English: In the fourth year of God's reign, he was conscripted along with Lu Xuan and others to become a doctor of Chinese calligraphy.

古文：迁侍郎，与太原张伟并以本官领卫大将军、乐安王范从事中郎。
现代文：迁任侍郎，与太原张伟二人都以本官兼任卫大将军、安乐王元范从事中郎。
English: He was transferred to the position of chamberlain, and both he and the Taiyuan Zhang Wei served as the general of the imperial guard, with Anle Wang Yuanfan serving as the middle officer.

古文：范，世祖之宠弟，西镇长安，允甚有匡益，秦人称之。
现代文：元范，是魏世祖的宠弟，西镇长安，高允辅佐他很得当，秦地人很是称赞他。
English: Yuan Fan was the favorite brother of Wei Shizuo, Xizhen Chang'an, Gao Yun's assistant, he was very competent, and the people of Qin highly praised him.

古文：寻被征还，允曾作《塞上翁诗》，有混欣戚，遗得丧之致。
现代文：不久高允就被征召还朝了。高允曾经作《塞上翁诗》，诗有混同高兴悲伤、遗落得失的情致。
English: Soon after, Gao Yun was conscripted to return to the imperial court. Gao Yun once wrote "Sajangweng Poem," a poem that mixed feelings of happiness and sadness, as well as feelings of loss and gain.

古文：骠骑大将军、乐平王丕西讨上邽，复以本官参丕军事。
现代文：骠骑大将军、乐平王元丕西讨上絡，高允又以本官参与元丕军事。
English: The general of the imperial cavalry and King Leping of the Yuan Dynasty fought against the West, and Gaoyun participated in the military of the Yuan Dynasty as his own officer.

古文：语在《丕传》。
现代文：记在《元丕传》中。
English: It is recorded in "The Tale of Genji."

古文：凉州平，以参谋之勋，赐爵汶阳子，加建武将军。
现代文：凉州平定后，因参与谋划之功，朝廷赐高允爵汶阳子，加授建武将军。
English: After the subjugation of Liangzhou, for his participation in the planning, the imperial court awarded Gao Yunjie the title of Wenyangzi, and awarded General Jianwu.

古文：后诏允与司徒崔浩述成《国记》，以本官领著作郎。
现代文：后来帝下诏让高允与司徒崔浩编撰《国记》，以本官领著作郎。
English: Later, the emperor ordered Gao Yun and the tutor Cui Hao to compile the "National Record," with Gao Yun as the leading author.

古文：时浩集诸术士，考校汉元以来，日月薄蚀、五星行度，并识前史之失，别为魏历，以示允。
现代文：当时崔浩召集众多术士，考校汉代以来的日月薄蚀、五星行度，并识别前史的误失，另撰魏历，拿给高允看。
English: At that time, Cui Hao gathered a large number of magicians to examine the eclipses of the sun and moon since the Han Dynasty, the five-star eclipses, and to identify the mistakes of the previous history, and to compile another Wei calendar and show it to Gao Yun.

古文：允曰： 天文历数不可空论。
现代文：高允说： 天文历数不可凭空而论。
English: Gao Yun said: The astronomical calendar cannot be discussed out of thin air.

古文：夫善言远者必先验于近。
现代文：大凡善言远古的必定验于近世。
English: The great words of the ancients must be put into practice in the modern world.

古文：且汉元年冬十月，五星聚于东井，此乃历术之浅。
现代文：况且汉代元年冬十月份，五星聚于东井，这本是历术之浅。
English: Moreover, in the winter and October of the first year of the Han Dynasty, the Five Stars gathered in the East Well, which is a very short history.

古文：今讥汉史，而不觉此谬，恐后人讥今犹今之讥古。 
现代文：而今讥讽汉史，而不觉得这是错误的，恐怕后人讥今就像今天我们讥古一样，闹出笑话。 
English: But if people ridicule the history of the Han Dynasty now, without thinking it is wrong, I am afraid that later generations will ridicule the present just as we ridicule the past today, and make jokes.

古文：浩曰： 所谬云何？ 
现代文：崔浩说： 你所说的谬妄指的是什么？ 
English: Cui Hao said: What do you mean by "absurd"?

古文：允曰： 案《星传》，金水二星常附日而行。
现代文：高允说： 我查《星传》，金水两星常常附日而行。
English: Gao Yun said, "I checked "The Tale of the Stars," and the two stars of gold and water often accompany the sun.

古文：冬十月，日在尾箕，昏没于申南，而东井方出于寅北。
现代文：冬季十月，太阳在尾箕，昏没于申南，而东井却出于寅北。
English: In the winter of October, the sun sets at the end of the day, fading to the south of Shin, but rising in the north of Tora.

古文：二星何因背日而行？
现代文：这两星是什么原因背日而行？
English: What are the reasons for these two stars to turn their backs on the world?

古文：是史官欲神其事，不复推之于理。 
现代文：这乃是史官想神化汉高祖受命之事，不再推之于理的结果。 
English: This is the result of historians who wanted to deify the Han Emperor Gaozu and no longer take it for granted.

古文：浩曰： 欲为变者何所不可，君独不疑三星之聚，而怪二星之来？ 
现代文：崔浩说： 想要变化什么地方不行，你独不怀疑三星之聚，却怪二星之来，是什么道理？ 
English: Cui Hao said: If you want to change something, you can't. You don't doubt the gathering of three stars, but you blame the two stars. What is the reason?

古文：允曰： 此不可以空言争，宜更审之。 
现代文：高允说： 这不能够空言相争，应加审查才行。 
English: Gao Yun said: This is not something that can be solved by our empty talk and unsubstantiated hasty debate, and should be further investigated and adjudicated.

古文：时坐者咸怪，唯东宫少傅游雅曰： 高君长于历数，当不虚也。 
现代文：当时在座的人都很奇怪，只有东宫少傅游雅说： 高君擅长历数，应当不虚妄。 
English: At that time, everyone present was very strange, only Donggong Shao Fu Youya said: Gao Jun is good at the calendar, it should not be false.

古文：后岁余，浩谓允曰： 先所论者，本不注心，及更考究，果如君语，以前三月聚于东井，非十月也。 
现代文：过了一年多，崔浩对高允说： 先前你所说的，不能使我心服口服，等到我重新考察一番，果然如你所说，五星以前三月聚于东井，而不是在十月份。 
English: After more than a year, Cui Hao said to Gao Yun: What you said earlier cannot convince me, until I re-examine it, as you said, the Five Stars gathered in Dongjing in March, not in October.

古文：又谓雅曰： 高允之术，阳元之射也。 
现代文：又对游雅说： 高允之术，犹如阳元的射箭技艺。 
English: He also said to Youya: Gaoyong's skills are like Yangyuan's archery skills.

古文：众乃叹服。
现代文：众人全都感叹佩服他。
English: Everyone was full of admiration.

古文：允虽明于历数，初不推步，有所论说。
现代文：高允虽然精于历数，当初却藏之于怀，也不论说，只有游雅屡屡以灾异求教于他。
English: Although Gao Yun was good at the calendar, he initially hid it in his heart. In fact, only Youya repeatedly asked him for advice.

古文：唯游雅数以灾异问允，允曰： 昔人有言，知之甚难，既知复恐漏泄，不如不知也。天下妙理至多，何遽问此？ 
现代文：高允说： 过去的人说，知之甚难，既已知道又怕泄漏，所以知道不如不知道。天下奇妙的道理甚多，为什么偏偏要问这个。 
English: Gao Yun said: In the past, people said that it was very difficult to know, and since they already knew and were afraid of leaks, it was better to know than not to know. There are many wonderful truths in the world, so why ask this one?

古文：雅乃止。
现代文：游雅于是作罢。
English: You Ya just stopped asking.

古文：寻以本官为秦王翰傅。
现代文：不久高允以本官任秦王元翰师傅。
English: Soon after, Gao Yun appointed his own official as Qin Wang Yuanhan's master.

古文：后敕以经授恭宗，甚见礼待。
现代文：后又命他教授魏恭宗经书，受到了很好的礼遇。
English: Later, he was also ordered to teach Wei Gongzong's sutras, and was treated with great courtesy.

古文：又诏允与侍郎公孙质、李虚、胡方回共定律令。
现代文：帝又诏高允与侍郎公孙质、李虚、胡方回一同议定律令。
English: Emperor Gao also decreed that Gao Yun and his attendants, Gongsun Quan, Li Qiu, and Hu Fang Hui, should jointly agree on the ritsuryo.

古文：世祖引允与论刑政，言甚称旨。
现代文：魏世祖召高允一起讨论刑政，高允的言论很得世宗赏识。
English: Emperor Wei called Gao Yun together to discuss criminal policy, and Gao Yun's speech was highly appreciated by the world.

古文：因问允曰： 万机之务，何者为先？ 
现代文：帝问高允说： 政事千头万绪，什么是第一位的？ 
English: The emperor asked Gao Yun, "Politics is a myriad of things, what comes first?

古文：是时多禁封良田，又京师游食者众。
现代文：当时，魏朝多禁封良田，又京城中游民很多。
English: At that time, the Wei Dynasty mostly banned good fields, and there were many wanderers in Beijing.

古文：允因言曰： 臣少也贱，所知唯田，请言农事。
现代文：高允因此说： 臣少时微贱，所了解的只有田耕之事，请让臣说一说农事。
English: Therefore, Gao Yun said: When a vassal is young, he is very humble, and all he knows is farming. Please let the vassal talk about farming.

古文：古人云：方一里则为田三顷七十亩，百里则田三万七千顷。
现代文：古人说：一里方圆的范围可以辟田三顷七十亩，百里方圆则有田三万七千顷。
English: The ancients said: the area of a one-mile square can cover three hectares and seventy mu of fields, and the area of a hundred-mile square is up to thirty-seven thousand hectares.

古文：若勤之，则亩益三斗，不勤则亩损三斗。
现代文：如果农人勤耕，则每亩可增粮三斗，不勤则损失三斗。
English: If farmers work diligently, they can increase grain by three bu per mu, and if they do not work, they will lose three bu.

古文：方百里损益之率，为粟二百二十二万斛，况以天下之广乎？
现代文：方圆百里增加减少的数量，合计有粮二百二十二万斛，何况天下如此之广呢？
English: The increase and decrease in the number of hundred miles, the total grain is 2.22 million baht, what's more, the world is so wide?

古文：若公私有储，虽遇饥年，复何忧哉？ 
现代文：如若公私都有粮食储备，即使遇上荒年，那又有什么可忧虑的呢？ 
English: If both the public and private sectors have grain reserves, even in the event of a bad year, then what is there to worry about?

古文：世祖善之。
现代文：世祖很欣赏他的说法。
English: The patriarch appreciated his words.

古文：遂除田禁，悉以授民。
现代文：于是废除田禁，全部把它们交给老百姓。
English: As a result, the ban on rice fields was abolished, and they were all handed over to the common people.

古文：初，崔浩荐冀、定、相、幽、并五州之士数十人，各起家郡守。
现代文：当初，崔浩推荐冀、定、相、幽、并五州之士数十人，每人都当郡守。
English: At first, Cui Hao recommended Ji, Ding, So, Yu, and dozens of people from five states, each of whom was a county governor.

古文：恭宗谓浩曰： 先召之人，亦州郡选也，在职已久，勤劳未答。
现代文：恭宗对崔浩说： 先召的人，也是州郡官职的人选，在职已久，勤劳政事未见酬答。
English: Gongzong said to Cui Hao: The first person to be summoned is also a candidate for a state and county official position. He has been in office for a long time, and he has not been rewarded for his hard work in politics.

古文：今可先补前召外任郡县，以新召者代为郎吏。
现代文：现今可先补前番征召的人为郡县守令，以新召的人代为郎吏。
English: Nowadays, the person who can fill in the previous conscription first is the county governor, and the newly conscripted person is the steward.

古文：又守令宰民，宜使更事者。 
现代文：而且太守县令治理百姓，应该派那些有经验的人。 
English: Moreover, the governor of the county governs the people, and those with experience should be sent.

古文：浩固争而遣之。
现代文：崔浩坚决不让步，固执地派了那些新征召的人。
English: However, Cui Hao persisted in his efforts and sent these people to take office.

古文：允闻之，谓东宫博士管恬曰： 崔公其不免乎！
现代文：高允听说此事，对东宫博士管恬说： 崔公要遭殃了！
English: When Gao Yun heard about this, he said to Dr. Donggong Guanjun: "Cui Gong is going to suffer!

古文：苟逞其非，而校胜于上，何以胜济？ 
现代文：坚持自己的错误，而要与皇上争个高低，这哪会有什么好结果。 
English: To persist in one's own mistakes, and to compete with the emperor, what good will that do?

古文：辽东公翟黑子有宠于世祖，奉使并州，受布千匹，事寻发觉。
现代文：辽东公翟黑子得到魏世祖的宠信，出使并州，得到了千匹绢帛的贿赂，不久事发。
English: Liaodong Gonglu Heizi received a favorite letter from Wei Shizu, sent an envoy to annex the state, received a bribe of a thousand horses, and soon the incident occurred.

古文：黑子请计于允曰： 主上问我，为首为讳乎？ 
现代文：黑子讨教于高允说： 主上问我，是汇报真实情况还是说假话？ 
English: Kuroko asked Gaoyun for advice, saying, "Lord, ask me, should I report the truth or tell a lie?

古文：允曰： 公帷幄宠臣，答诏宜实。又自告忠诚，罪必无虑。 
现代文：高允说： 公是皇上宠臣，回答时可据实以报，你又可自表忠诚，必然会没什么事的。 
English: Gao Yun said: The public is the emperor's favorite, you can answer truthfully, and you can show your loyalty, there will be nothing wrong.

古文：中书侍郎崔览、公孙质等咸言首实罪不可测，宜讳之。
现代文：中书侍郎崔览、公孙质等人都说自首后罪不可测，应该说假话。
English: Chusho's attendants, Choi Chan, Gong Sun Chung and others all said that after surrendering, the crime was unfathomable and they should have told a lie.

古文：黑子以览等为亲己，而反怒允曰： 如君言，诱我死，何其不直！ 
现代文：黑子以崔览等人为知己，反而对高允发脾气说： 你的说法，是引诱我去死，那太不值得了！ 
English: Kuroko took Cui Zhan and others as his confidants, but he lost his temper with Gao Yun and said, "What you said is to lure me to death, it's not worth it!

古文：遂与允绝。
现代文：于是与高允断交。
English: As a result, he broke off diplomatic relations with Gao Yun.

古文：黑子以不实对，竟为世祖所疏，终获罪戮。
现代文：黑子在皇帝面前说了假话，终被世祖疏远，最终获罪被杀。
English: Kuroko told a lie in front of the emperor, was eventually alienated by his ancestor, and was eventually convicted and killed.

古文：是时，著作令史闵湛、郄扌剽性巧佞，为浩信待。
现代文：当时，著作令史闵湛、郄性情奸巧邪佞，被崔浩所信任。
English: At that time, he was trusted by Cui Hao because of his writings about Shi Xizhan and his conniving and devious nature.

古文：见浩所注《诗》、《论语》、《尚书》、《易》，遂上疏，言马、郑、王、贾虽注述《六经》，并多疏谬，不如浩之精微。
现代文：见到崔浩所注释的《诗》、《论语》、《尚书》、《易》，便上疏，说马、郑、王、贾虽然注述《六经》，都多有疏漏谬妄，不如崔浩的精到细微。
English: Seeing Cui Hao's commentary on "Poetry," "Analects of Confucius," "Shang Shu" and "Elegy," he was puzzled. He said that although Ma, Zheng, Wang and Jia commented on the "Six Classics," there were many omissions and fallacies, which were not as fine and subtle as Cui Hao's.

古文：乞收境内诸书，藏之秘府。
现代文：请求皇帝收集国内诸书，藏于秘书府中。
English: He asked the emperor to collect all the books in the country and store them in the secretary's office.

古文：班浩所注，命天下习业。
现代文：颁发崔浩所注述的，命天下学子学习。
English: As noted by Cui Hao, it is the duty of all students to study.

古文：并求敕浩注《礼传》，令后生得观正义。
现代文：并请求皇帝下诏让崔浩注释《礼传》，让后生能够看到精正的经义。
English: We also asked His Majesty to order Cui Hao to continue to annotate the "Rituals" so that future generations can see the correct interpretation.

古文：浩亦表荐湛有著述之才。
现代文：崔浩也上表推荐说闵湛有著述的才能。
English: Cui Hao also recommended on the table that Gong Zhan has the talent of writing.

古文：既而劝浩刊所撰国史于石，用垂不朽，欲以彰浩直笔之迹。
现代文：接着闵湛等劝崔浩刊印自己所撰的国史，以图不朽，想要彰明崔浩执笔之绩。
English: Next, Yu Zhan and others persuaded Cui Hao to publish his own national history, with the aim of immortality, and wanted to highlight Cui Hao's achievements as a writer.

古文：允闻之，谓著作郎宗钦曰： 闵湛所营，贫寸之间，恐为崔门万世之祸。
现代文：高允听说，对著作郎宗钦说： 闵湛的所作所为，一不小心，我担心它日后会成为崔门的万世灾祸。
English: Gao Yun was heard to say to the author, Lang Zongqin: "What Gong Tan did was careless, and I fear that it will become a disaster for Cui Men in the future.

古文：吾徒无类矣。 
现代文：这样我们这些曾经参与其事的人都要大祸临头了。 
English: It's going to be very bad for those of us who have been involved.

古文：未几而难作。
现代文：不久，灾难就降临了。
English: Before long, disaster struck.

古文：初，浩之被收也，允直中书省。
现代文：当初，崔浩被收捕，高允在中书省值班。
English: At first, Cui Hao was arrested, and Gao Yun was on duty in the Chinese Literature Department.

古文：恭宗使东宫侍郎吴延召允，仍留宿宫内。
现代文：恭宗让东宫侍郎吴延召来高允，让他留宿宫内。
English: He asked Wu Yan, the chamberlain of the East Palace, to summon Gao Yun and let him stay in the palace.

古文：翌日，恭宗入奏世祖，命允骖乘。
现代文：第二天，恭宗入廷奏启魏世祖，命高允随行。
English: The next day, Gongzong entered the court to play the opening of the Wei Dynasty, and Mu Gaoyun accompanied him.

古文：至宫门，谓曰： 入当见至尊，吾自导卿。
现代文：到宫门前，恭宗对高允说： 进去见皇上，我随你去。
English: When he arrived in front of the palace gate, he said to Gao Yun, "Go in and see the emperor, I will follow you."

古文：脱至尊有问，但依吾语。 
现代文：假如皇上有什么话问你，你就依我告诉你的应答。 
English: If the Emperor asks you anything, you must answer as I tell you.

古文：允请曰： 为何等事也？ 
现代文：高允说： 这是为的什么事呢？ 
English: Gao Yun said: What is this for?

古文：恭宗曰： 入自知之。 
现代文：恭宗说： 进去你就知道了。 
English: "Go inside and you'll find out," said Yasuchika.

古文：既入见帝。
现代文：就进去见皇帝。
English: and went in to see the emperor.

古文：恭宗曰： 中书侍郎高允自在臣宫，同处累年，小心密慎，臣所委悉。
现代文：恭宗说： 中书侍郎高允自在臣宫中，臣与他相处多年，高允小心谨慎，臣很了解他。
English: Yasuchika said, "Chamberlain Gao Yun is in my palace. I have been with him for many years. Gao Yun is careful and cautious. I know him well.

古文：虽与浩同事，然允微贱，制由于浩。
现代文：高允虽然与崔浩同事，但他身份微贱，只有听命于崔浩。
English: Although Gao Yun is a colleague of Cui Hao, he is a lowly person and only obeys Cui Hao's orders.

古文：请赦其命。 
现代文：臣请求宽恕他的性命。 
English: The minister begged for his life.

古文：世祖召允，谓曰： 《国书》皆崔浩作不？ 
现代文：世祖召见高允，对他说： 《国书》都是崔浩所写的吗？ 
English: The patriarch summoned Gao Yun and said to him: "Were all the "National Books" written by Cui Hao?

古文：允对曰： 《太祖记》，前著作郎邓渊所撰。
现代文：高允回答说： 《太祖记》，前著作郎邓渊所写。
English: Gao Yun replied: "The Ancestor's Tale," written by Deng Yuan, the former author's son.

古文：《先帝记》及《今记》，臣与浩同作。
现代文：《先帝记》以及《今记》，为臣与崔浩一同写作。
English: "The Diary of a Former Emperor" and "This Diary" were written by Wei Min and Cui Hao together.

古文：然浩综务处多，总裁而已。
现代文：但是崔浩政事太多，只是总裁修订而已。
English: However, Cui Hao's government affairs are too many, and it is only the president's revision.

古文：至于注疏，臣多于浩。 
现代文：至于注疏，为臣所作多于崔浩。 
English: As for the commentary, he did more for his vassal than Cui Hao.

古文：世祖大怒曰： 此甚于浩，安有生路！ 
现代文：世祖大怒说： 这比崔浩的罪行还严重，怎能留给生路！ 
English: The ancestor said angrily, "This is more serious than Cui Hao's crime, how can he be allowed to live!"

古文：恭宗曰： 天威严重，允是小臣，迷乱失次耳。
现代文：恭宗说： 天威严重，高允是小臣，一时间迷乱失次。
English: Gongzong said, "Tianwei is serious, Gaoyong is a junior minister, he was confused for a while and lost his place.

古文：臣向备问，皆云浩作。 
现代文：臣先前问他，他说都是崔浩写的。 
English: The minister asked him earlier, and he said that it was all written by Cui Hao.

古文：世祖问： 如东宫言不？ 
现代文：世祖问： 真像东宫太子说的那样？ 
English: The ancestor asked: Is it really like what Crown Prince Azuma said?

古文：允曰： 臣以下才，谬参著作，犯逆天威，罪应灭族，今已分死，不敢虚妄。
现代文：高允说： 为臣才薄，谬参著作，犯触天威，罪应灭族，今天已到临死了，决不敢虚妄。
English: Gao Yun said: I am too weak to be a minister, I have written fallacious works, I have offended Heaven, and my crime should be exterminated. Today, I am on the verge of death, and I will not dare to be false.

古文：殿下以臣侍讲日久，哀臣乞命耳。
现代文：殿下因为臣为他讲书时间很长，哀怜为臣，为臣求命。
English: His Imperial Highness, because his vassal spent a long time lecturing to him, felt sorry for him and begged for his life.

古文：实不问臣，臣无此言。
现代文：如皇上不问臣子，臣便没有这番话。
English: If the emperor does not ask the vassal, the vassal will not have the right to say this.

古文：臣以实对，不敢迷乱。 
现代文：既问了，臣如实对答，不敢丝毫迷乱。 
English: After asking, the minister answered truthfully, not daring to be confused in the slightest.

古文：世祖谓恭宗曰： 直哉！此亦人情所难，而能临死不移，不亦难乎！
现代文：魏世祖对恭宗说： 正直，这也是人情所难，而你能临死不移，这就更难了！
English: Wei Shizu said to Gongzong: To be honest, this is also difficult for human beings, but if you can die without moving, this is even more difficult!

古文：且对君以实，贞臣也。
现代文：而且以实对君，真是忠贞的臣子。
English: Moreover, he is a truly loyal vassal to you.

古文：如此言，宁失一有罪，宜宥之。 
现代文：像你刚才这一番话，朕宁愿漏一有罪的人，也应该宽恕你。 
English: As you just said, I would rather leave out a guilty person, and I should also forgive you.

古文：允竟得免。
现代文：高允竟得免罪。
English: Gao Yun was actually exonerated.

古文：于是召浩前，使人诘浩。
现代文：于是召崔浩到皇帝面前，让人诘问他。
English: So he summoned Cui Hao to appear before the emperor for questioning.

古文：惶惑不能对。
现代文：崔浩惶恐恍惚不能应答。
English: Cui Haotian couldn't answer for fear of falling into a trance.

古文：允事事申明，皆有条理。
现代文：高允事事申明，有条有理。
English: At the time, however, Gao Yun's complaint was clear and well-organized.

古文：时世祖怒甚，敕允为诏，自浩已下、僮吏已上百二十八人皆夷五族。
现代文：当时世祖愤怒至极，命令高允拟诏书，自崔浩以下、僮仆吏卒以上一百二十八人全部夷灭九族。
English: At that time, the ancestor was extremely angry and ordered Gao Yun to draw up an edict to exterminate the nine ethnic groups, including all 128 people from Cui Hao on down, including servants and officials.

古文：允持疑不为，频诏催切。
现代文：高允表示怀疑而不拟诏，帝频频催办。
English: Gao Yun expressed doubt and did not intend to issue an edict, but the emperor frequently urged him to do so.

古文：允乞更一见，然后为诏。
现代文：高允请求再见一次皇上，然后再拟诏书。
English: Gao Yun asked to see the Emperor again, and then draft the imperial edict.

古文：诏引前，允曰： 浩之所坐，若更有余衅，非臣敢知。
现代文：帝让他去了，高允说： 崔浩所犯，如还有别的罪，臣不清楚。
English: The emperor let him go, Gao Yun said: If there are other crimes committed by Cui Hao, the minister does not know.

古文：直以犯触，罪不至死。 
现代文：如只是这一项罪行，还不至于被杀。 
English: If it was just this crime, he wouldn't have been killed.

古文：世祖怒，命介士执允。
现代文：世祖震怒，下令武士绑了他。
English: Furious, he ordered the samurai to tie him up.

古文：恭宗拜请。
现代文：恭宗又拜请。
English: Congratulations and please come again.

古文：世祖曰： 无此人忿朕，当有数千口死矣。 
现代文：世祖说： 如果没有这人招惹我，就该有数千人死了。 
English: The patriarch said: If this man had not provoked me, thousands of people would have died.

古文：浩竟族灭，余皆身死。
现代文：崔浩最终还是被灭了五族，其余的人都仅以身死。
English: In the end, Cui Hao was able to exterminate the Five Tribes, while the rest were left to die.

古文：宗钦临刑，叹曰： 高允其殆圣乎！ 
现代文：宗钦临刑时说： 高允大概是圣人吧！ 
English: At the time of his execution, Zongqin said, "Gao Rong is probably a saint!"

古文：恭宗后让允曰： 人当知机，不知机，学复何益？
现代文：恭宗后来责备高允说： 为人应当把握时机，不知见好就收，学识又有什么益处？
English: Later, Gongzong scolded Gao Yong, saying, "A person should seize the opportunity and accept what is good without knowing it. What is the benefit of knowledge?

古文：当尔之时，吾导卿端绪，何故不从人言，怒帝如此。每一念之，使人心悸。 
现代文：在那种时候，我从旁点拨你，你为什么不顺着点，让皇上那样动怒。现在我每每想起来，还心有余悸。 
English: At that time, I picked you up from the side, why didn't you follow the point and make the emperor angry like that. Now I still feel uneasy whenever I think about it.

古文：允曰： 臣东野凡生，本无宦意。
现代文：高允说： 为臣本是东野一介平凡书生，本来就无做官的打算。
English: Gao Yun said: As the subject is Higashino Issuke, an ordinary student, he originally had no intention of becoming an official.

古文：属休延之会，应旌弓之举，释谒凤池，仍参麟阁，尸素官荣，妨贤已久。
现代文：逢朝廷休明之期，应朝廷选士之举，为官凤池，参撰麟阁，尸素官荣，妨贤已久。
English: Whenever the Imperial Court was in recess, he was selected by the Imperial Court to be an official phoenix pond. He was also selected to be a member of the Linge. He died without official glory, but he had been a virtuous man for a long time.

古文：夫史籍者，帝王之实录，将来之炯戒，今之所以观往，后之所以知今。
现代文：大凡史书，都是帝王的实录，是将来的宝鉴，通过史书，今人可以观往，后人可以知今。
English: The great history books are all records of emperors and are a treasure book for the future. Through history books, people today can look forward to the future, and people in the future can know the present.

古文：是以言行举动，莫不备载，故人君慎焉。
现代文：所以言行举动，无不备载，所以人君应该谨慎从事。
English: Therefore, all words, deeds and actions should be prepared, so people should be cautious in their actions.

古文：然浩世受殊遇，荣曜当时，孤负圣恩，自贻灰灭。
现代文：然而崔浩世受特殊恩遇，荣耀当时，他却辜负圣恩，自招毁灭。
English: However, Cui Hao Shih received a special grace and glory at that time, but he failed to live up to the grace and self-destructed.

古文：即浩之迹，时有可论。
现代文：就崔浩的行迹，也时有可论之言。
English: There is also something to be said about Cui Hao's career.

古文：浩以蓬蒿之才，荷栋梁之重，在朝无謇谔之节，退私无委蛇之称，私欲没其公廉，爱憎蔽其直理，此浩之责也。
现代文：崔浩以蓬蒿之才，负朝廷栋梁之托，在朝廷无可称赞的节操，在私下里也无可称道，私欲淹没了他的公正廉洁，爱憎之情障蔽了他公理之心，这是崔浩的罪责。
English: Cui Hao was entrusted by the imperial court with a lofty talent. In the imperial court, Cui Hao's self-restraint was beyond praise. In his private life, he was also beyond praise. His impartiality and integrity were overwhelmed by his selfish desires, and his sense of justice was obstructed by his love and hatred. This was Cui Hao's guilt.

古文：至于书朝廷起居之迹，言国家得失之事，此亦为史之大体，未为多违。
现代文：至于书写朝廷起居的事情，说国家得失的事实，这也是史书笔法的大体模式，没有什么违背。
English: As for writing about the affairs of the imperial court and the state's gains and losses, this is also the general pattern of historical writing, and there is no contradiction.

古文：然臣与浩实同其事，死生荣辱，义无独殊。
现代文：但为臣与崔浩其实是同参一事，死生荣辱，义无独顾。
English: However, Wei Min and Cui Hao are actually in the same business, life and death, honor and dishonor, no one cares.

古文：诚荷殿下大造之慈，违心苟免，非臣之意。 
现代文：能有今天，实在是多亏殿下仁慈广大，违心苟免，不是为臣当初本意。 
English: The fact that we are able to be here today is really thanks to His Royal Highness's great kindness, and I do not mean to offend anyone. This was not my original intention.

古文：恭宗动容称叹。
现代文：恭宗面容改观，称叹不已。
English: Cong Zong's face is transformed, and he is overwhelmed with admiration.

古文：允后与人言，我不奉东宫导旨者，恐负翟黑子。
现代文：高允后来跟人说，我不遵照东宫太子安排的去做，是担心这样会辜负翟黑子。
English: Gao Yun later told people that I did not follow the arrangements made by the Crown Prince of the East Palace, because I was worried that I would fail the Black Prince.

古文：恭宗季年，颇亲近左右，营立田园，以取其利。
现代文：恭宗晚期，颇为亲近左右侍臣，营立田园，以取其利。
English: In the late period of Emperor Gongzong's reign, he was quite close to his attendants on the right and left, and established a pastoral garden to gain their benefit.

古文：允谏曰： 天地无私，故能覆载；王者无私，故能包养。
现代文：高允谏劝说： 天地无私，所以能覆载万物；王者无私，故能包养众生。
English: Gao Yunzhu said: The heaven and earth are selfless, so they can cover all things; the king is selfless, so he can nurture all beings.

古文：昔之明王，以至公宰物，故藏金于山，藏珠于渊，示天下以无私，训天下以至俭。故美声盈溢，千载不衰。
现代文：过去的明达王者，以至公之心主宰万物，所以藏金于山，藏珠于渊；以无私之心昭示天下，用至俭之言训示万民，所以他们美名盈溢，千载不衰。
English: The enlightened kings of the past ruled all things with a righteous heart, so they hid gold in the mountains and pearls in the abyss. They showed the world with a selfless heart and taught all people with the words of thrift. That is why their fame is abundant and will last for thousands of years.

古文：今殿下国之储贰，四海属心，言行举动，万方所则，而营立私田，畜养鸡犬，乃至贩酤市廛阝，与民争利，议声流布，不可追掩。
现代文：而今殿下您是国家储君，四海归心，您的言行举动，为万方所遵，而您却营立私田，畜养鸡犬，甚至贩酒市井，与民争利，天下议论您的声音四方流布，无法追掩。
English: But now, Your Highness, you are the Crown Prince of the country. The four seas have come to their senses. Your words and deeds are respected by all sides, but you have set up private fields, raised chickens and dogs, and even sold liquor, competing with the people for profits. The world is discussing your voice, which is spreading in all directions and cannot be covered up.

古文：夫天下者，殿下之天下，富有四海，何求而不获，何欲而弗从？而与贩夫贩妇竞此尺寸。
现代文：天下，是殿下的天下，您富有四海，何求而不能得到，什么愿望不能使人顺从，却与贩夫贩妇们争此尺寸之利。
English: The world, is the world of your highness, you are rich in the four seas, what to ask but can not get, what desire can not make people obey, but compete with the traffickers for this size.

古文：昔虢之将亡，神乃下降，赐之土田，卒丧其国。
现代文：过去虢国快亡时，神灵下降，赐予田地，终而丧灭其国。
English: In the past, when a country was about to die, the gods descended, bestowed fields, and finally destroyed the country.

古文：汉之灵帝，不修人君之重，好与宫人列肆贩卖，私立府藏，以营小利，卒有颠覆倾乱之祸。
现代文：汉代灵帝，不修饰作为人君的持重，喜欢与宫人们一起列市叫卖，私立府藏，以营求小利，终有颠覆倾乱之祸。
English: In the Han Dynasty, Emperor Lingdi, who did not decorate himself as a man of the people, liked to work with the palace people to list the market and sell, and the private palace collection to seek small profits, which eventually led to the disaster of subversion and chaos.

古文：前鉴若此，甚可畏惧。
现代文：前鉴如此，很可畏惧。
English: The antecedents are so, so daunting.

古文：夫为人君者，必审于择人。
现代文：大凡作为人君的，必须在择人问题上十分审慎。
English: An ordinary person, as a human being, must be very prudent in the selection of people.

古文：故称知人则哲，惟帝难之。
现代文：故称知人则圣哲明智，是皇帝难以做到的事。
English: Therefore, it is difficult for the emperor to call an acquaintance a sage.

古文：《商书》云： 无迩小人 。孔父有云：小人近之则不逊，远之则怨矣。
现代文：《商书》说 不要亲近小人 ，孔夫子有言，小人如亲近他们便行为不逊，疏远他们则心怀怨恨。
English: "The Book of Commerce" says, "Don't get close to villains," and Confucius said, "If villains get close to you, they will behave insolently, but if you distance yourself from them, you will harbor resentment."

古文：武王爱周、邵、齐、毕，所以王天下。
现代文：武王爱护周、邵、齐、毕诸公，所以能称王天下。
English: King Wu loved Zhou, Shao, Qi, and Bi, so he could be called the king of the world.

古文：殷纣爱飞廉、恶来，所以丧其国。
现代文：殷纣溺爱飞廉、恶来，所以丧失自己的国家。
English: Yan Xuan indulged in corruption and evil, and thus lost his own country.

古文：历观古今存亡之际，莫不由之。
现代文：纵观古今兴亡之事，无不由皇帝择人所决定。
English: Looking at the rise and fall of things from ancient times to the present, everything is decided by the emperor's selectors.

古文：今东宫诚曰乏人，俊乂不少。
现代文：而今东宫的确可以说缺人才，但英杰却并不少。
English: Now, the East Palace can indeed be said to be short of talent, but there are not a few heroes.

古文：顷来侍御左右者，恐非在朝之选。
现代文：一向以来侍御在您左右的，恐怕不是将来您在朝的人选。
English: The person who has always been at your side is probably not the person you want to be in the future.

古文：故愿殿下少察愚言，斥出佞邪，亲近忠良，所在田园，分给贫下，畜产贩卖，以时收散。
现代文：所以臣希望殿下您能稍稍体察为臣愚言，斥出邪佞，亲近忠良，所在园田，分给贫苦的人，畜产贩卖之类，都要适时收散而去。
English: Therefore, I hope that Your Imperial Highness will be able to understand a little about the foolishness of being a vassal, expel the evil, be close to the loyal, where the garden, the distribution to the poor, the sale of livestock, and the like, should be dispersed in a timely manner.

古文：如此则休声日至，谤议可除。 
现代文：像这样的话，则休明的称赞一天天到来，议论与批评就会逐渐消除。 
English: As such, the plaudits for Hume will come thick and fast, and the discussion and criticism will fade away.

古文：恭宗不纳。
现代文：恭宗没接受他的意见。
English: Yasutsune did not accept his opinion.

古文：恭宗之崩也，允久不进见。
现代文：恭宗去世，高允久久未能进见。
English: After the death of King Gyeongjong, Gao Yun was unable to see him for a long time.

古文：后世祖召，允升阶歔欷，悲不能止。
现代文：后来魏世祖召见他，高允升阶逴欷，悲不能止。
English: Later, Emperor Wei summoned him, and Gao Yun was promoted to the third grade. He could not stop grieving.

古文：世祖流泪，命允使出。
现代文：魏世祖流着眼泪，命高允退出。
English: Wei Shizhu shed tears and ordered Gaoyong to withdraw.

古文：左右莫知其故，相谓曰： 高允无何悲泣，令至尊哀伤，何也？ 
现代文：左右官员没人知道其中缘故，议论说： 臣等见高允无由而泣，让陛下为之悲伤，什么原因呢？ 
English: Officials on both sides, none of whom knew the reason for this, argued: What is the reason for the ministers and others to see Gao Yun crying for no reason, causing His Majesty to be sad?

古文：世祖闻之，召而谓曰： 汝不知高允悲乎？ 
现代文：世祖听说，召集他们说： 你们不知道高允很悲伤吗？ 
English: When the patriarch heard this, he called them together and said, "Don't you know that Gaoyong is very sad?

古文：左右曰： 臣等见允无言而泣，陛下为之悲伤，是以窃言耳。 
现代文：左右说： 为臣看到高允无言而泣，陛下为之悲伤，所以我们在窃窃议论。 
English: They both said, "We are secretly discussing the fact that the minister was speechless and cried when he saw Gao Yun, and His Majesty was saddened by it."

古文：世祖曰： 崔浩诛时，允亦应死，东宫苦谏，是以得免。
现代文：世祖说： 崔浩被诛杀时，高允也应该去死，是东宫苦谏，才免于一死。
English: The ancestor said: When Cui Hao was killed, Gao Yun should also die. It was the East Palace's bitterness that saved him from death.

古文：今无东宫，允见朕因悲耳。 
现代文：今天没有了东宫，高允看见朕因而很悲伤啊。 
English: Today there is no Donggong, Gao Yun is very sad to see me.

古文：允表曰： 往年被敕，令臣集天文灾异，使事类相从，约而可观。
现代文：高允上表说： 往年领诏，令臣收集天文灾异，使事类相从，大致可以阅读了。
English: Gao Yun said on the table: In previous years, the emperor issued an edict, ordering his ministers to collect astronomical calamities, so that things are consistent and can be read roughly.

古文：臣闻箕子陈谟而《洪范》作，宣尼述史而《春秋》著，皆所以章明列辟，景测皇天者也。
现代文：臣听说箕子陈表而《洪范》作，宣尼述史而《春秋》著，都是用来彰明后土，景测皇天的东西。
English: The minister heard that Zizi Chen's table and "Hong Fan" and "Spring and Autumn" were used to illuminate the hinterland and survey the imperial sky.

古文：故先其善恶而验以灾异，随其失得而效以祸福，天人诚远，而报速如响，甚可惧也。
现代文：所以它们能先其善恶而验以灾异，随其失得而效以福祸，天人的确相去甚远，但又如声、响相应，很可畏惧。
English: Therefore, they are able to test their good and evil with disaster, and their loss with good and evil. Heaven and man are indeed far apart, but they are like sound and resonance, and they are very frightening.

古文：自古帝王莫不尊崇其道而稽其法数，以自修饬。
现代文：自古以来的帝王无不尊崇其道而寻其奥妙，以此修正自身。
English: Since ancient times, all emperors have respected their ways and searched for their secrets in order to correct themselves.

古文：厥后史官并载其事，以为鉴诫。
现代文：其后的史官都记载了他们的事，以为鉴戒。
English: Subsequent historians have recorded their deeds as a warning.

古文：汉成帝时，光禄大夫刘向见汉祚将危，权归外戚，屡陈妖眚而不见纳。
现代文：汉成帝时，光禄大夫刘向见到汉代的命运很危险，大权归于外戚，屡屡陈述妖异之事希望引起重视而不被采纳。
English: During the reign of Emperor Han, Liu Xiang, a doctor of Guanglu, saw that the fate of the Han Dynasty was very dangerous, and the great power belonged to the relatives. He repeatedly stated strange things in the hope of attracting attention, but was not accepted.

古文：遂因《洪范》、《春秋》灾异报应者而为其传，觊以感悟人主，而终不听察，卒以危亡。
现代文：于是检索《洪范》、《春秋》中灾异报应的人与事而为其作传，企图以此感悟其主，但皇帝终于听不进他的话，终而危亡。
English: So he searched for the people and events in "Hong Fan" and "Spring and Autumn" and tried to impress his master, but the emperor finally could not listen to his words and eventually died.

古文：岂不哀哉！
现代文：这难道不是很悲哀吗？
English: Isn't that sad?

古文：伏惟陛下神武则天，睿鉴自远，钦若稽古，率由旧章，前言往行，靡不究鉴，前皇所不逮也。
现代文：为臣窃以为陛下神武齐天，睿鉴深远，钦若稽古，都由旧章，前言往行，无不深究，这是前代皇帝所赶不上的。
English: For his courtiers, his majesty is considered to be a man of great wisdom and military prowess, with far-reaching wisdom and profound knowledge, and he is revered as a scholar of ancient times. He has studied the old chapters and prefaces in great depth, which is something that previous emperors could not match.

古文：臣学不洽闻，识见寡薄，惧无以裨广圣听，仰酬明旨。
现代文：为臣学识不广博，识见寡少浅薄，害怕无以拓广圣德，仰酬皇上明旨。
English: For the vassals, their knowledge is not extensive, their insight is few and shallow, and they are afraid that they can not expand their virtue, and pay tribute to the emperor's clear intention.

古文：今谨依《洪范传》、《天文志》撮其事要，略其文辞，凡为八篇。 
现代文：今天谨依《洪范传》、《天文志》收集其事实大要，略其文辞，共为八篇。 
English: Today, in accordance with the "Hong Fan Biography" and "Astronomy," I would like to collect a summary of the facts and a brief description of the text, totaling eight articles.

古文：世祖览而善之，曰： 高允之明灾异，亦岂减崔浩乎？ 
现代文：世祖看了称赞写得好，说： 高允对灾异的了解，哪比崔浩少？ 
English: The ancestor saw that the praise was well written and said: Gao Yun's understanding of the calamity is less than that of Cui Hao.

古文：及高宗即位，允颇有谋焉。
现代文：等到高宗即位，高允出了许多计谋。
English: When Emperor Gaozong ascended the throne, Gaoyong made many plans.

古文：司徒陆丽等皆受重赏，允既不蒙褒异，又终身不言。
现代文：司徒陆丽等人都受到皇帝重赏，高允既不蒙褒扬，又终身不发一言。
English: Stulli and others were rewarded by the emperor, but Gaoyong was neither praised nor spoke a word for the rest of his life.

古文：其忠而不伐，皆此类也。
现代文：他的忠诚而不自矜，大致都如此类。
English: He's loyal without being boastful, and that's pretty much it.

古文：给事中郭善明，性多机巧，欲逞其能，劝高宗大起宫室。
现代文：给事中郭善明，性格十分机巧，老想呈显自己的才能，劝高宗大兴宫殿。
English: Guo Zhenming, a very clever character, always wanted to show his talent and persuade Gao Zong to expand the palace.

古文：允谏曰： 臣闻太祖道武皇帝既定天下，始建都邑。
现代文：高允劝谏说： 我听说太祖道武皇帝平定了天下后才开始兴修都邑。
English: Gao Yun said: I heard that it was only after Emperor Daowu had pacified the world that the construction of the capital city began.

古文：其所营立，非因农隙，不有所兴。
现代文：他一旦有所修造，不是农闲之季，绝不兴工。
English: Once he has built something, it is not the idle season for farmers, and he will never start construction.

古文：今建国已久，宫室已备，永安前殿足以朝会万国，西堂温室足以安御圣躬，紫楼临望可以观望远近。
现代文：现在建国已经很久了，宫室也已经完备了。永安前殿完全可以用来接受万国的朝贺，西堂的温室也可以用来让圣上休息，紫楼台高可以用来观望远近。
English: It has been a long time since the founding of the country, and the palace has been completed. The Yongan front hall can be used to receive morning greetings from all over the world, the greenhouse in the west hall can also be used to rest the saint, and the purple tower can be used to see far and near.

古文：若广修壮丽为异观者，宜渐致之，不可仓卒。
现代文：如果要再修更壮丽的宫室，也应当慢慢地准备，不可急于求成。
English: If you want to rebuild a more magnificent palace, you should also prepare slowly and not rush to succeed.

古文：计斫材运土及诸杂役须二万人，丁夫充作，老小供饷，合四万人，半年可讫。
现代文：估计砍材运土以及各种杂役就需两万多人，成年人做工，老少供饭，就合四万人半年才成。
English: It is estimated that more than 20,000 people are needed to cut timber, transport soil and all kinds of miscellaneous services. Adults work, and the old and the young provide meals, which is equivalent to 40,000 people for half a year.

古文：古人有言：一夫不耕，或受其饥；一妇不织，或受其寒。
现代文：古人言：一夫不耕就有人会挨饿，一妇不织就有人会受冻。
English: An ancient saying: If a husband does not plow, someone will starve; if a wife does not weave, someone will freeze.

古文：况数万之众，其所损废，亦以多矣。
现代文：何况是数万之众无法从事耕织生产，他们所要耗费花销，实在太多了。
English: Moreover, tens of thousands of people are unable to engage in farming and weaving production, and they have to spend a lot of money.

古文：推之于古，验之于今，必然之效也。诚圣主所宜思量。 
现代文：往古时推论再来验证现在，必然有借鉴之效啊，希望皇上认真思考。 
English: Inferring from the past to verify the present, there is bound to be a reference effect, I hope the emperor will seriously consider it.

古文：高宗纳之。
现代文：高宗接纳了他的意见。
English: Gaozong accepted his opinion.

古文：允以高宗纂承平之业，而风俗仍旧，婚娶丧葬，不依古式，允乃谏曰：
现代文：高允因高宗继承太平之业但风俗依旧，婚娶丧葬都不依古制，于是劝谏说：
English: Gao Yun, because Gao Zong inherited the Taiping cause, but the customs are still the same, marriage and funeral are not in accordance with the old system, so he advised Zou Rong:

古文：前朝之世，屡发明诏，禁诸婚娶不得作乐，及葬送之日歌谣、鼓舞、杀牲、烧葬，一切禁断。
现代文： 前朝的时候，多次颁发命令，禁止婚娶不得作乐以及葬送之日的歌谣、鼓舞、杀牲、烧葬，都在禁令之中。
English: During the previous dynasties, orders were issued many times, prohibiting marriage, not being allowed to make music, as well as songs, encouragement, killing animals, and cremation on the day of funeral, all of which were prohibited.

古文：虽条旨久颁，而俗不革变。将由居上者未能悛改，为下者习以成俗，教化陵迟，一至于斯。
现代文：虽然命令颁布很久但风俗仍未改变，大概这是因为处于上位的人不能立即改正，下面的人也就习以为俗，教化迟慢，已到这种地步。
English: Although the order has been issued for a long time, the custom has not changed, probably because the people at the top cannot be corrected immediately, and the people below have become accustomed to the custom, and the enlightenment is slow.

古文：昔周文以百里之地，修德布政，先于寡妻，及于兄弟，以至家邦，三分天下而有其二。
现代文：过去周文王靠百里之地，修德施政先从寡妻开始，再到兄弟，最后到家国，三分天下而有其二。
English: In the past, Zhou Wen Wang relied on the land of a hundred miles, and the cultivation of virtue in politics first began with his widowed wife, then his brothers, and finally his home country.

古文：明为政者先自近始。
现代文：聪明的执政者都要先从近处开始。
English: Smart governors start close to home.

古文：《诗》云： 尔之教矣，民胥效矣。 
现代文：诗经中讲： 你们接受了教化，百姓才会仿效啊。 
English: The sutra says: You have accepted enlightenment, and the people will follow suit.

古文：人君举动，不可不慎。
现代文：作为君主，一举一动，不可以不慎重啊。
English: As a monarch, every move must be made carefully.

古文：《礼》云：嫁女之家，三日不息烛；娶妇之家，三日不举乐。
现代文：礼记中讲，嫁女的家里要三日不灭蜡烛；娶媳妇的人家，三天不进行乐舞。
English: According to the book of etiquette, the bride's family should not extinguish candles for three days; the bride's family should not perform music and dance for three days.

古文：今诸王纳室，皆乐部给伎以为嬉戏，而独禁细民，不得作乐，此一异也。
现代文：现在各个王室每当娶妇人，都让乐部派人来舞奏表演，却惟独禁止百姓作乐，这是第一个不同啊。
English: Now, every time a royal family marries a woman, they let the club send someone to dance and play music, but they only ban the people from playing music. This is the first difference.

古文：古之婚者，皆拣择德义之门，妙选贞闲之女，先之以媒娉，继之以礼物，集僚友以重其别，亲御轮以崇其敬，婚姻之际，如此之难。
现代文：古时结婚之人，都选择德义之门，精心挑选贞洁贤雅的女子，先进行媒聘，继后送给礼品，会集亲友用来表示对别人的尊重，亲自驾车用来表示尊敬，婚姻之际，就是如此的困难。
English: In ancient times, people who got married chose the gate of virtue, carefully selected a chaste and virtuous woman, first hired a matchmaker, then gave gifts, gathered relatives and friends to show respect for others, and drove in person to show respect. When it comes to marriage, it is so difficult.

古文：今诸王十五，便赐妻别居。然所配者，或长少差舛，或罪入掖庭，而作合宗王，妃嫔籓懿。
现代文：现在各个王子年方十五便赐给妻子另起居室，但能配之人，有的年龄过于悬殊，有的出自犯罪之家，用她们来和王子结合，成为其他妇女的表率，这是最大的失礼啊。
English: Princes now give their wives a separate sitting-room at the age of fifteen, but it is the greatest discourtesy to use worthy women, some of whom are too old, and some of whom come from a criminal family, to unite them with the prince and to set an example to other women.

古文：失礼之甚，无复此过。往年及今，频有检劾。诚是诸王过酒致责，迹其元起，亦由色衰相弃，致此纷纭。
现代文：往年到现在，多有核查弹劾，大概是诸王过于嗜酒而导致诘责，但原因之起，也是因色衰相弃，导致这种纠纷。
English: Until now, there have been many cases of verification and impeachment, probably because the kings were too drunk and led to blame, but the cause was also due to sexual abandonment, leading to this kind of dispute.

古文：今皇子娶妻，多出宫掖，令天下小民，必依礼限，此二异也。
现代文：现在皇子娶妻，多出于宫庭，令天下百姓，必须依照礼法所定，这是第二个不同啊。
English: Now the prince marries a wife, mostly from the palace, so that the people of the world must follow the rules of etiquette. This is the second difference.

古文：万物之生，靡不有死，古先哲王，作为礼制，所以养生送死，折诸人情。
现代文：万物之生，没有不死的，古时的圣主明君，定出制度，所以养生送死，见于人情。
English: In the life of all things, there is no immortality. In ancient times, the holy Lord Mingjun set up a system, so it is seen in the human condition to take care of life and send it to death.

古文：若毁生以奉死，则圣人所禁也。
现代文：如果毁生用来奉死，就是圣人所禁止的了。
English: If the destruction of life is used to bring about death, it is forbidden by the sages.

古文：然葬者藏也，死者不可再见，故深藏之。昔尧葬谷林，农不易亩；舜葬苍梧，市不改肆。
现代文：但是葬是藏的意思，死者不可能再见面了，所以深藏下他们，过去将尧葬于毂，而百姓并不停止在这块土地上耕种，舜被葬于苍梧，百姓并不因此不做买卖。
English: However, buried means to hide, and the dead cannot be seen again. Therefore, if they are deeply hidden, the dead will be buried in the past, and the people will not stop farming on this land. The dead will be buried in the past, and the people will not stop doing business.

古文：秦始皇作为地市，下固三泉，金玉宝货不可计数，死不旋踵，尸焚墓掘。由此推之，尧舜之俭，始皇之奢，是非可见。
现代文：秦始皇造地下宫殿，下面有三条泉水，金银财宝不可计数，死不多时，就被焚尸掘墓，由此，尧舜勤俭，始皇奢侈，对错就很显然了。
English: The First Emperor of Qin built an underground palace, with three springs below, with countless gold, silver and treasures. When he died, his body was cremated and his grave was dug. As a result, it was clear that the First Emperor was hard-working and frugal, but also extravagant.

古文：今国家营葬，费损巨亿，一旦焚之，以为灰烬。苟靡费有益于亡者，古之臣奚独不然？
现代文：现在国家营造葬事，费耗巨亿，一旦焚亡，全为灰烬，这么奢侈怎么有益于死者呢，古时的大臣都不以为然。
English: At present, the state arranges funerals at a cost of billions of yuan. Once a person is cremated, they are all ashes. How can such extravagance benefit the dead? Ancient ministers were not impressed.

古文：今上为之不辍，而禁下民之必止，此三异也。
现代文：现在上面为之忙个不停，而让下边百姓必须做到，这是第三个不同啊。
English: Now, the higher-ups are busy with it all the time, but the people below have to do it. This is the third difference.

古文：古者祭必立尸，序其昭穆，使亡者有凭，致食飨之礼。今已葬之魂，人直求貌类者事之如父母，燕好如夫妻，损败风化，渎乱情礼，莫此之甚。上未禁之，下不改绝，此四异也。
现代文：古时丧葬必立尸主牌位，按照长幼大小序列，以便让吊亡者有所凭依来送致祭食品，现在已埋葬的人，人们只求其相貌类似者敬如父母，美丽的敬如夫妻，败风伤俗，扰乱情感礼节，是最大之过呀，上面不禁止，下边不改正杜绝，这是第四点不同呀。
English: In ancient times, funerals had to place the main plaques according to the size of the eldest and youngest, so that the deceased would have something to offer as sacrificial food. Nowadays, buried people are only asked to respect their look-alikes as parents, beautiful as husband and wife. Breaking customs and disturbing emotional etiquette is the biggest mistake. The above is not prohibited, and the below is not corrected. This is the fourth point of difference.

古文：夫飨者，所以定礼仪，训万国，故圣王重之。
现代文：所以，祭祀是为了确定礼仪，教化天下百姓，所以圣明之君特别重视。
English: Therefore, the purpose of the ritual is to determine the etiquette and educate the people of the world, so the Prince of Wisdom attaches great importance to it.

古文：至乃爵盈而不饮，肴乾而不食，乐非雅声则不奏，物非正色则不列。
现代文：到了爵器盈而不饮，菜肴干了不吃，音乐不是雅声不奏，物非正色不陈列。
English: At the end of the day, the knight's wares are not drunk, the dishes are not eaten when they are dry, the music is not played, and the objects are not displayed.

古文：今之大会，内外相混，酒醉喧譊，罔有仪式。又俳优鄙艺，污辱视听。朝庭积习以为美，而责风俗之清纯，此五异也。
现代文：现在的大会，内外不分，相互混杂，醉酒喧闹，没有仪式，又让一些戏子表演，污辱视听，朝廷以此习俗为美，而责备风俗不清纯，这是第五点不同啊。
English: The current congress, both inside and outside, mixed with each other, drunk and noisy, no ceremony, and let some actors perform, insulting audio-visual, the court takes this custom as beauty, but blames the custom as impure, this is the fifth point of difference.

古文：今陛下当百王之末，踵晋乱之弊，而不矫然厘改，以厉颓俗，臣恐天下苍生，永不闻见礼教矣。
现代文：现在陛下为王的王，承袭晋末大乱以来的弊俗而不猛烈地纠正改变，来扭正恶习，我担心天下百姓将永远不能听闻礼教了呀。 
English: Now that your majesty is the king of kings, inheriting the bad customs since the Jin and Later Dynasties without vigorously correcting the changes and correcting the bad habits, I am afraid that the people of the world will never be able to listen to the etiquette.

古文：允言如此非一，高宗从容听之。或有触迕，帝所不忍闻者，命左右扶出。
现代文：高允这样说并非一次，高宗从容听着他的话，有时即使有冲撞之处或者皇帝不想再听时，就让左右将他扶出去。
English: Gao Yun said this more than once, Gao Zong listened to his words calmly, and sometimes, even if there was a clash or the emperor did not want to listen again, he let the left and right help him out.

古文：事有不便，允辄求见，高宗知允意，逆屏左右以待之。礼敬甚重，晨入暮出，或积日居中，朝臣莫知所论。
现代文：遇有不便当朝说的，高允就请求私下相见。高宗知道高允的意思，把左右摒退后再等待他，对他十分敬重，有时早晨进宫晚上出来，有时几日在宫里，朝臣都不知他和皇帝说了什么。
English: Gaozong knew Gao Yun's meaning, he would stand back and wait for him, he had great respect for him, sometimes he would enter the palace in the morning and leave in the evening, sometimes he would stay in the palace for several days, the courtiers did not know what he had said to the emperor.

古文：或有上事陈得失者，高宗省而谓群臣曰： 君父一也。父有是非，子何为不作书于人中谏之，使人知恶，而于家内隐处也？
现代文：有的人上书表述这样做的得失。高宗看后对群臣说： 君父同一啊，父有对错，儿子为什么不于众人之中做书规劝，使他人知道错而不在家内隐瞒呀。
English: After Gaozong read the letter, he said to his courtiers, "Your father is the same. Fathers are right and wrong. Why doesn't your son write a book to persuade others, so that others know what is wrong and don't hide it at home?"

古文：岂不以父亲，恐恶彰于外也？
现代文：这不是因为是父亲，恐怕彰恶于外嘛。
English: It's not because he's a father, I'm afraid.

古文：今国家善恶，不能面陈而上表显谏，此岂不彰君之短，明己之美？
现代文：现在国家善恶，不能面陈而上表公开劝阻，这不是故意宣扬君主之错而表明自己的正确吗？
English: Now the state is good or evil, and cannot be openly and publicly dissuaded. Isn't this a deliberate propaganda of the monarch's fault and a demonstration of his rightness?

古文：至如高允者，真忠臣矣。
现代文：像高允这样的人，才是忠臣啊。
English: A person like Gao Yun is a loyal subject.

古文：朕有是非，常正言面论，至朕所不乐闻者，皆侃侃言说，无所避就。
现代文：我有对错，经常正言面论，哪怕是我所不愿听的也要侃侃而言，不加避躲。
English: I have right and wrong, I often speak the truth, even if I don't want to listen, I must speak frankly, without evasion.

古文：朕闻其过，而天下不知其谏，岂不忠乎！
现代文：我知道自己的过失而天下不知道他在规劝，这不是忠直吗。
English: I know my faults and the world does not know that he is exhorting, is this not loyalty?

古文：汝等在左右，曾不闻一正言，但伺朕喜时求官乞职。
现代文：你们在我左右，我不曾听到一句正论，但伺机见我高兴时求官乞职。
English: You are all around me, I have not heard a word of criticism, but wait for the opportunity to see me when I am happy to apply for a post.

古文：汝等把弓刀侍朕左右，徒立劳耳，皆至公王。此人把笔匡我国家，不过作郎。汝等不自愧乎？ 
现代文：你们持弓带刀侍奉我左右，等于是白白站立，却都做到公、王一职，这个人用笔帮助我匡正错误助益国家，官才不过做到一个郎中，你们就不自愧吗？ 
English: You serve around me with bow and sword, it is as if you are standing up for nothing, yet you have all fulfilled your duties as public servants and kings. This man has helped me with his pen to right wrongs and benefit the country. An official is nothing more than a lackey. Aren't you ashamed of yourselves?

古文：于是拜允中书令，著作如故。
现代文：于是任命高允为中书令，仍兼著作郎。
English: As a result, Gao Yun was appointed to the position of Chushirei, and he was still the scribe.

古文：司徒陆丽曰： 高允虽蒙宠待，而家贫布衣，妻子不立。 
现代文：司徒陆丽说： 高允虽然蒙受恩宠，但家里贫穷得像普通百姓，妻儿都无以为生。 
English: "Although Gao Yun was favored, his family was as poor as ordinary people, and his wife and children had nothing to live on.

古文：高宗怒曰： 何不先言！今见朕用之，方言其贫。 
现代文：高宗怒道： 怎么不早说，现在见我用他，才告诉他的贫困之状！ 
English: Gao Zong angrily said, "Why didn't you say earlier that I would use him only to tell him about his poverty!

古文：是日幸允第，惟草屋数间，布被缊袍，厨中盐菜而已。
现代文：这天到了高允家中，只有草屋几间，布被麻袍，厨房中只有一点盐菜。
English: When I arrived at Gao Yun's home on this day, there were only a few grass huts, cloth and hemp robes, and only a little pickled cabbage in the kitchen.

古文：高宗叹息曰： 古人之清贫岂有此乎！ 
现代文：高宗叹息说： 古时的人有清贫到这样的吗？ 
English: Gao Zong sighed and said: Did people in ancient times have such poverty?

古文：即赐帛五百匹、粟千斛，拜长子忱为绥远将军、长乐太守。
现代文：立即赐给绵帛五百匹，粮食一千斛，拜高允长子高忱为绥远将军、长乐太守。
English: He immediately gave Mian Ye five hundred horses and grain one thousand baht. Bai Gaoyun's eldest son Gaozhong was the general of Yuyuan and the governor of Changle.

古文：允频表固让，高宗不许。
现代文：高允多次上表坚决推辞，高宗不答应。
English: Gao Yun repeatedly expressed his firm refusal, but Gao Zong did not agree.

古文：初与允同征游雅等多至通官封侯，及允部下吏百数十人亦至刺史二千石，而允为郎二十七年不徙官。时百官无禄，允常使诸子樵采自给。
现代文：起初同高允一同受到征召的游雅等大多已经官至侯爵了，以及高允部下的官吏一百多人也都官至刺史二千石，而高允为郎中二十七年没有升过官，当时百官没有俸禄，高允常让自己的几个儿子砍柴采果来自己供养自己。
English: At first, most of Youya and others who were conscripted together with Gao Yun had been promoted to marquis, and more than a hundred officials under Gao Yun were also promoted to 2,000 koku. However, Gao Yun had not been promoted to an official position for 27 years. At that time, there was no salary for a hundred officials, and Gao Yun often let his sons chop wood and pick fruit to support themselves.

古文：初，尚书窦瑾坐事诛，瑾子遵亡在山泽，遵母焦没入县官。
现代文：开始，尚书窦瑾因事被杀，其子窦遵逃到山谷之中，其母焦氏被收进县官衙门，后因焦氏年老而得免受辱。
English: In the beginning, Shang Shu Dou Ye was killed, his son Dou Zong fled to the valley, and his mother Jiao Shi was taken into the custody of the county government. Later, because of Jiao Shi's old age, she was spared the humiliation.

古文：后焦以老得免，瑾之亲故，莫有恤者。允愍焦年老，保护在家。积六年，遵始蒙赦。
现代文：窦瑾的亲朋故旧中没有敢资助的人。高允可怜焦氏年老，将其留在家予以保护，六年后，窦遵才得到恩赦。
English: Dou Jun's relatives and friends had not dared to support him in the past. Gao Yun took pity on Jiao's old age and kept him at home to protect him. Six years later, Dou Jun was pardoned.

古文：其笃行如此。
现代文：高允的品行大都如此。
English: Most of Gao Yun's behavior is like this.

古文：转太常卿，本官如故。
现代文：后转为太常卿，本来的职责仍同过去一样。
English: Later, he was transferred to the position of Tai Changqing, but his original duties remained the same as before.

古文：允上《代都赋》，因以规讽，亦《二京》之流也。
现代文：高允上《代都赋》，来规劝皇上，也与《二京赋》相似。
English: Gao Yun's performance in "Dai Du Fu" to persuade the emperor is also similar to "Er Jing Fu."

古文：文多不载。
现代文：因文字太多，本书就不记载了。
English: Its words are many and varied.

古文：时中书博士索敞与侍郎傅默、梁祚论名字贵贱，著议纷纭。允遂著《名字论》以释其惑，甚有典证。
现代文：当时中书博士索敞和侍郎傅默、梁祚论辩名字的贵贱，议论纷纷，高允于是撰《名字论》来解释其迷惑，有许多考证。
English: At that time, the Chinese calligrapher Sokzang and his attendants Fu Mu and Liang Qi argued about the nobility of names, and there were many discussions. Gaoyun then wrote "Name Theory" to explain his confusion, and there are many references.

古文：复以本官领秘书监，解太常卿，进爵梁城侯，加左将军。
现代文：后来又以本官领秘书监，解除太常卿之职，晋爵为梁诚侯，加左将军。
English: Later, he was relieved of his duties as Tai Changqing, and promoted to the peerage as Liang Cheng Hou, and General Zuo.

古文：初，允与游雅及太原张伟同业相友，雅尝论允曰： 夫喜怒者，有生所不能无也。
现代文：最初，高允同游雅以及太原张伟同业友好，游雅曾评论高允说： 大概喜怒是一生所不可能没有的。
English: At first, Gao Yun was friendly with Youya and Taiyuan Zhang Wei in the same industry. Youya once commented on Gao Yun, saying: Probably, it is impossible to be without joy and anger in one's life.

古文：而前史载卓公宽中，文饶洪量，褊心者或之弗信。
现代文：但以前史书记载卓公为人宽厚持中，文饶度量宏大，偏心的人有的不相信。
English: However, in the past, the history secretary Zhaozhong was a kind and generous person, with great literary taste, and some people did not believe in eccentricity.

古文：余与高子游处四十年矣，未尝见其是非愠喜之色，不亦信哉。
现代文：我和高允相处四十多年了，没有见到他有喜怒之色，不得不相信了呀。
English: I have been with Gao Yun for more than forty years, and I have never seen him angry or happy. I have to believe it.

古文：高子内文明而外柔弱，其言呐呐不能出口，余常呼为 文子 。
现代文：高允内文明而外柔弱，说话呐呐似乎不能出口，我常叫他 文子 。
English: Gao Yun is civilized on the inside but soft on the outside. He can't seem to say a word. I often call him Wen Zi.

古文：崔公谓余云： 高生丰才博学，一代佳士，所乏者矫矫风节耳。 
现代文：崔公对我说： 高允才大学博，是一代名士，所缺乏的是一种矫直刚昂的风节啊。 
English: Cui Gong said to me: Gao Yuncai is a great scholar, he belongs to a generation of famous people, but what he lacks is an upright and strong spirit.

古文：余亦然之。
现代文：我认为有道理。
English: I think it makes sense.

古文：司徒之谴，起于纤微，及于诏责，崔公声嘶股战不能言，崇钦已下伏地流汗，都无人色。
现代文：司徒被处罚，起因是很小的错失，却受到了皇帝下令斥责，崔公声哑股战而不能说话，宗饮以下更是伏地流汗，面无人色。
English: Szeto was punished because of a very small mistake, but he was reprimanded by the emperor's order. Cui Gongsheng was mute and could not speak. After drinking, he was sweating profusely and his face was colorless.

古文：高子敷陈事理，申释是非，辞义清辩，音韵高亮。明主为之动容，听者无不称善。
现代文：惟独高允陈述事理，解释是非，辞又清辩，声音洪亮，明主为此而动容，听者无不予以称赞。
English: However, Gao Yun was the only one to state the facts, explain the rights and wrongs, and make clear arguments. His voice was loud, and his face was clearly moved by this. The listeners all praised him.

古文：仁及僚友，保兹元吉，向之所谓矫矫者，更在斯乎？
现代文：仁义惠到同僚亲友，因此而能保住身家。向来所谓正直的人，更能做到这样吗？
English: Benevolence benefits colleagues, relatives, and friends, and as a result, one is able to keep one's job. Can a person who has always been called honest do better than this?

古文：崇爱之任势也，威振四海。尝召百司于都坐，王公以下，望庭毕拜，高子独升阶长揖。由此观之，汲长孺可卧见卫青，何抗礼之有！
现代文：宗爱他有势力的时候，威名振于四海，曾经召集百官，王公以下的人都望庭中相拜，独有高允是到阶前长揖，由此可以看到，汲长孺可以躺着见卫青，这怎么能说是抗礼呢？
English: When Zong Ai had power, his reputation spread far and wide. He once called together hundreds of officials, and everyone from the prince on down paid homage to each other in the court. Only Gaoyun went to the front of the palace to see Wei Qing. From this we can see that Wei Qing could be seen lying on the floor of the palace. How can this be said to be disrespectful?

古文：向之所谓风节者，得不谓此乎？
现代文：向来所谓风节的人，能够这么称赞他们吗？
English: Can the so-called fashionistas praise them so highly?

古文：知人固不易，人亦不易知。吾既失之于心内，崔亦漏之于形外。
现代文：知人固然很不容易，但人也不易知道自己，我既然失之在内心，崔浩也外显漏于形体。
English: Of course, it is not easy to get to know someone, but it is not easy to know oneself. Since I am lost in my heart, Cui Hao is also lost in my body.

古文：钟期止听于伯牙，夷吾见明于鲍叔，良有以也。 
现代文：钟期只限于听伯牙之奏乐，管仲也只有鲍叔最能明其心迹，很少有人能够这样啊。 
English: The clock time is only limited to listening to the music of the bear's teeth, and only Uncle Bao can best reveal his thoughts. Very few people can do this.

古文：其为人物所推如此。
现代文：高允的为人被当时人推崇如此。
English: Gao Yun was highly respected by the people at that time.

古文：高宗重允，常不名之，恆呼为 令公 。 令公 之号，播于四远矣。
现代文：高宗敬重高允，通常不呼他的名字，习惯称之为 令公 。于是 令公 之号传遍四方。
English: Gao Zong respected Gao Yun, and usually did not call him by his name, but used to call him "Ringong." As a result, the name of "Ringong" spread to all four directions.

古文：高宗崩，显祖居谅暗，乙浑专擅朝命，谋危社稷。文明太后诛之，引允禁中，参决大政。又诏允曰： 自顷以来，庠序不建，为日久矣。道肆陵迟，学业遂废，子衿之叹，复见于今。
现代文：高宗去世，显祖居位时还很幼小不能承担大业，乙浑专权，图谋危及国家，文明太后杀了他，召高允到禁宫中参与谋断大事，又下诏给高允说： 很久以来，学校不建，为日已久，道肆陵迟，学业荒废，学子忧叹，又见于今。
English: Gao Zong passed away, when Xian Zu was still very young, he was not able to undertake great undertakings, he had absolute power and plotted to endanger the country, the Empress Dowager of Civilization killed him, called Gao Yun to the Forbidden Palace to participate in the decision-making process, and issued a decree to Gao Yun saying: For a long time, the school has not been built, it has been a long time, the Taoism has been delayed, the study has been wasted, the students are sad, and it is seen again today.

古文：朕既篡统大业，八表晏宁，稽之旧典，欲置学官于郡国，使进修之业，有所津寄。
现代文：朕继承大位八方安宁，查考旧章，想设置学官于郡国，使进修之业，能有所寄托。
English: I am the heir to the throne of Happo Anning, and I would like to set up an academic officer in the county so that I can have something to rely on for my further education.

古文：卿儒宗元老，朝望旧德，宜与中、秘二省参议以闻。 
现代文：你为儒宗元老，朝庭内外德名远扬，应当同中书、秘书二省官员共同参商后奏报。 
English: You are a veteran of Confucianism, and your reputation is well-known both inside and outside the Imperial Court. You should attend the consultation and report together with the chancellors and secretaries of the two provincial officials.

古文：允表曰： 臣闻经纶大业，必以教养为先；咸秩九畴，亦由文德成务。
现代文：高允上表说： 我听说经纶大业，必须以教养为先导，规范九州也要靠文德来辅其成功。
English: Gao Yun said on the table: I heard that the great cause of economic development must be guided by education, and the standardization of Kyushu must also rely on literature to supplement its success.

古文：故辟雍光于周诗，泮宫显于《鲁颂》。自永嘉以来，旧章殄灭。乡闾芜没《雅颂》之声，京邑杜绝释奠之礼。道业陵夷，百五十载。
现代文：所以要在祭礼后出奏《周颂》，让《鲁颂》在宴厅上播扬，但从永嘉以来，旧的规章没有了，乡间再无雅颂的声乐，城市杜绝了隆重典礼的制度，道业中断近一百五十年。
English: Therefore, "Zhou Song" should be played after the festival, and "Lu Song" should be played in the banquet hall, but since Yongjia, the old regulations have been lost, there is no more elegant song in the countryside, the city has eliminated the grand ceremony system, and the Taoism has been interrupted for nearly 150 years.

古文：仰惟先朝每欲宪章昔典，经阐素风，方事尚殷，弗遑克复。
现代文：仰想先朝曾准备恢复规章制度，发扬圣贤的思想风尚，因为正值多事之时，未能最终完成。
English: Looking back, the previous government had planned to restore the rules and regulations and carry forward the ideological style of the sages, but it was not finally completed because it was a time of many events.

古文：陛下钦明文思，纂成洪烈，万国咸宁，百揆时叙。申祖宗之遗志，兴周礼之绝业，爰发德音，惟新文教。
现代文：陛下敬重文明，继承大业，万国安宁，风调雨顺，申明祖宗的遗志，兴盛周礼的绝业，发布德音，振兴文教，士民百姓，都深感为幸。
English: His Majesty respects civilization, inherits the great cause, the world is peaceful, the wind and rain are favorable, affirms the will of the ancestors, the end of the prosperity week ceremony, promulgates the German pronunciation, revitalizes literature and education, and the people are deeply happy.

古文：请制大郡立博士二人、助教四人、学生一百人，次郡立博士二人、助教二人、学生八十人，中郡立博士一人、助教二人、学生六十人，下郡立博士一人、助教一人、学生四十人。
现代文：我承受诏命，并会同中书、秘书二省披阅史书，准备制定规章制度，怎么能不敦促儒者去从事教育之业，敬重学习以坚定这个道理呢。此诏大义，实与古义相通，当秉遵圣旨，兴建学校以正风俗，使先民之道再现于今日；读书之音，流传在四海。请求规定每大郡设立博士二人，助教四人，收学生一百人；其余的郡府，立博士二人，助数二人，收学生六十人，最次的郡府立博士一人，助教一人，收学生四十人。
English: I have received the imperial edict and, together with the chancellors and secretaries of the two provinces, I am going to read the history books and prepare to formulate rules and regulations. How can I not urge Confucians to engage in education and respect learning in order to strengthen this principle? This imperial edict is indeed consistent with ancient teachings. It is necessary to adhere to the holy will, build schools with correct customs, and make the way of the ancestors reappear today; the sound of reading is spread to the four seas. The request stipulates that each large county should establish two doctors, four teaching assistants, and receive 100 students; the remaining county governments should establish two doctors, two assistants, and receive 60

古文：其博士取博关经典、世履忠清、堪为人师者，年限四十以上。
现代文：博士应是博通各种经典，世代忠贞清白能为人师的人，年龄当在四十以上。
English: A doctor should be a person who is well-versed in all kinds of classics, a generation of loyalty and innocence, and can be a teacher, and should be over forty years old.

古文：助教亦与博士同，年限三十以上。
现代文：助教选拔也和博士同，年龄限在三十岁以上。
English: The selection of teaching assistants is also the same as that of doctors, with an age limit of over thirty years old.

古文：若道业夙成，才任教授，不拘年齿。学生取郡中清望、人行修谨、堪循名教者，先尽高门，次及中第。 
现代文：如果学业早已有成，有才能任教授者，就不限年龄，学生要收郡府中品行清廉，素有名望，可以遵循名数的人，先从高门望族中挑选，再往下延推至其他人家。 
English: If students have already completed their studies and have the ability to become professors, there is no age limit. Students should be selected from the high-ranking and respected families in the county government who are clean and honest, have a reputation, and can follow the number of names, and then pushed down to other families.

古文：显祖从之。
现代文：显祖听从了他的意见。
English: The emperor agreed.

古文：郡国立学，自此始也。
现代文：郡府成立学校，就是从此开始的。
English: The establishment of the school by the prefectural government started from here.

古文：后允以老疾，频上表乞骸骨，诏不许。
现代文：后来高允因年老多病，屡次上书请求告老还乡。
English: Later, due to old age and illness, Gao Yun repeatedly petitioned to return to his hometown.

古文：于是乃著《告老诗》。又以昔岁同征，零落将尽，感逝怀人，作《征士颂》，盖止于应命者，其有命而不至，则阙焉。
现代文：皇帝不许，于是写下告老诗，又因过去一同共事之人已零落将尽，感怀故去之人，做《征士颂》，大约限于应命的人，如果有征召命令而没到者，则付诸缺如。
English: The emperor did not allow it, so he wrote an old poem, and because the people who worked together in the past have been scattered and will be exhausted, the people who feel the past, do "Ode to the Conqueror," which is roughly limited to those who are on duty. If there is a call-up order and they do not arrive, they will be ignored.

古文：群贤之行，举其梗概矣。
现代文：群贤之行，叙述主要梗概。
English: The actions of the group of sages, describing the main outline.

古文：今著之于下：
现代文：现列于下面：
English: They are listed below:

古文：中书侍郎、固安伯范阳卢玄子真
现代文： 中书侍郎、固安伯范阳人卢玄，字子真
English: Lu Xuan, a member of the Guanbei Fanyang people, is portrayed by the character Zizhen

古文：郡功曹史博陵崔绰茂祖
现代文：郡功曹史博陵人崔绰，字茂祖
English: Guan Gong Cao Shi Bo's mausoleum person Cui Qiao, character Mozu

古文：河内太守、下乐侯广宁燕崇玄略
现代文：河内太守、下乐侯广宁人燕崇，字玄略
English: Yansong, the governor of Hà Ni and the ruler of Quang Nng, the capital of Hà Ni

古文：上党太守、高邑侯广宁常陟公山
现代文：上党太守、高邑侯广宁人常陟，字公山
English: Shangtang Dazhong, Gaoyu Hou Guangning Ren Changtao, Zhaogongshan

古文：征南大将军从事中郎勃海高毗子翼
现代文：征献大将军从事中郎勃海人高毗，字子商
English: Conscription general engaged in Zhonglang Bohai people Gao Wei, characters merchants from

古文：征南大将军从事中郎勃海李钦道赐河西太守、饶阳子博陵许堪祖根
现代文：河西太守、饶阳子博陵人许堪，字祖根
English: Dashu of Hexi, Raoyangzi, Boling, Xu Kan, and Zugen

古文：中书郎、新丰侯京兆杜铨士衡
现代文：中书郎、新丰侯京兆人杜铨，字士衡
English: Zhongshuro, Xinfenghou Jingzhao people cuckoo, character Shi Heng

古文：征西大将军从事中郎京兆韦阆友规
现代文：征西大将军从事中郎京兆人书韦阆，字友规
English: General of the Western Expedition Engaged in Zhonglang Jingzhao People's Calligraphy, Zhaoyu Rules

古文：京兆太守赵郡李诜令孙
现代文：京兆太守赵郡人李诜，字令孙
English: The governor of Zhao County of Beijing Zhaozhou Province, Li Jie, and his son

古文：太常博士、钜鹿公赵郡李灵虎符
现代文：太常博士、钜鹿公赵郡人李灵，字虎符
English: Dr. Taichang, Elk Gong, Li Ling from Zhao County, and the word "tiger"

古文：中书郎中、即丘子赵郡李遐仲熙
现代文：中书郎中、即丘子赵郡人李遐，字仲熙
English: Chushiro middle, that is, the hill child Zhao County people Li Yao, the word Zhongxi

古文：营州刺史、建安公太原张传仲业
现代文：营州刺史、建安公太原人张伟，字仲业
English: Zhang Wei, a native of Yingzhou and Jian'an, and Zhaozhongye

古文：辅国大将军从事中郎范阳祖迈
现代文：辅国大将军从事中郎范阳人祖迈
English: Vice-Commander-in-Chief of the Korean People's Army engaged in the role of middle-man Fan Yangren Zu Mai

古文：征东大将军从事中郎范阳祖侃士伦
现代文：征东大将军从事中郎范阳人祖侃，字士伦
English: General of the Expedition to the East Engaged in Zhonglang Fan Yang Ren Zu Kan, Zhi Lun

古文：东郡太守、蒲县子中山刘策
现代文：东郡太守、蒲县子中山人刘策
English: The governor of Dong County, Liu Ce, a mountain man from Pu County, is leading

古文：濮阳太守、真定子常山许琛
现代文：濮阳太守、真定子常山人许深
English: The governor of Shenyang, Manjie Zi, and the Changshan man Xu Sheng

古文：行司隶校尉、中都侯西河宋宣道茂
现代文：行司隶校尉、中都侯西河人宋宣，字道茂
English: Song Xuan, a colonel of the Civil Affairs Bureau and a member of the Central Military Commission of Hebei Province, with the character of Dao Mao

古文：中书郎燕郡刘遐彦鉴
现代文：中书郎燕郡人刘遐，字彦鉴
English: Zhongshuro Yan County people Liu Yao, Zi Yan Jian

古文：中书郎、武恆子河间邢颖宗敬
现代文：中书郎、武恒子河间人邢颖，字宗敬
English: Chushiro, Taketsune Kawama are brilliant, and Zetsuzo is a great actor

古文：沧水太守、浮阳侯勃海高济叔民
现代文：沧水太守、浮阳侯勃海人高济，字叔民
English: Cangshui Taishu, Fuyang Hou Bo, Haijin Gaoji, Zhao Shumin

古文：太平太守、平原子雁门李熙士元
现代文：太平太守、平原子雁门人李熙，字士元
English: Taiping Taishou, Li Xi, the gatekeeper of Pinghu Atomic Power Station, and the poet Yuan

古文：秘书监、梁郡公广平游雅伯度
现代文：秘书监、梁郡公广平人游雅，字伯度
English: Secretary Supervisor, Liang County, Guangyuan, Pingren, Youya, Zhaobodu

古文：廷尉正、安平子博陵崔建兴祖
现代文：廷尉正、安平子博陵人崔建，字兴祖
English: Tingfei Zheng, Anpingzi Bolingman Cui Jian, Zi Xingzu

古文：广平太守、列人侯西河宋愔
现代文：广平太守、列人侯西河人宋
English: Guangping, the de facto ruler, and the nobles of the Houxi River and the Song Dynasty

古文：州主簿长乐潘天符
现代文：州主簿长乐人潘元符
English: State Chief Registrar Pan Yuanfu

古文：郡功曹长乐杜熙
现代文：郡功曹长乐人杜熙
English: County Gong Cao Changle Musician Du Xi

古文：征东大将军从事中郎中山张纲
现代文：征东大将军从事中郎中山人张纲
English: Zhang Gang, the general of the Eastern Expedition, engaged in the middle-ranking

古文：中书郎上谷张诞叔术
现代文：中书郎上谷人张诞，字叔术
English: Chushuro Uetani no Hitohito, the Birth of Zhang, and the Art of Calligraphy

古文：秘书郎雁门王道雅
现代文：秘书郎雁门人王道雅
English: Wang Daoya, secretary of Langyanmen, passes away

古文：秘书郎雁门闵弼
现代文：秘书郎雁门人闵弼
English: Secretary, Mr. Lang Ganmenren

古文：卫大将军从事中郎中山郎苗
现代文：卫大将军从事中郎中山人郎苗
English: General Wei Da Da engages in the middle-aged middle-aged middle-aged middle-aged middle-aged

古文：大司马从事中郎上谷侯辩
现代文：大司马从事中郎上谷人侯辩
English: Daishima engages in vassal-vassal rivalry

古文：陈留郡太守、高邑子赵郡吕季才
现代文：陈留郡太守、高邑子赵郡人，品秀才
English: Chen Liu County Governor, Gao Yizi, Zhao County People, Outstanding Talents

古文：夫百王之御士也，莫不资伏群才，以隆治道。故周文以多士克宁，汉武以得贤为盛。
现代文：大概诸王的御士之道，没有不是凭着收伏群才，用来兴隆治道的，所以周文王以拥有众多士人安定天下，汉武帝以得到贤才成就一代盛世。
English: Probably, the way of emperors of kings, there is no way to prosper and rule the world without attracting talents. Therefore, King Zhouwen stabilized the world by having many scholars, and Emperor Hanwu achieved a prosperous generation by obtaining talents.

古文：此载籍之所记，由来之常义。
现代文：这些都记载于史书之中，是自古的恒常之理。
English: All of this is recorded in the history books and has been a constant truth since ancient times.

古文：魏自神已后，宇内平定，诛赫连积世之僭，扫穷发不羁之寇，南摧江楚，西荡凉域，殊方之外，慕义而至。于是偃兵息甲，修立文学，登延俊造，酬谘政事。
现代文：魏自神庆以来，天下平定，诛杀赫连几世窃据之势，横扫荡平不服顺的敌寇，南边平定江楚一带，西边扫荡凉城之地，很远的地方都仰慕而来，于是休兵息甲，修立文学，延揽贤才，咨询政事。
English: Since the time of Wei and Shenqing, the country has been pacified, and several generations of power-grabbing by Khelian have been defeated and killed, and the enemy corsairs who refused to submit have been swept away. The area around the Pingding River in the south and the land of Liangcheng in the west have been swept away, and people from far away have come to admire them. Therefore, they retired from military service, established literature, recruited talents, and consulted on political affairs.

古文：梦想贤哲，思遇其人，访诸有司，以求名士。
现代文：梦想贤哲，想遇这种人物，询访各有关部门，来访求有名之士。
English: Dream of sages, want to meet this kind of person, inquire all relevant departments, visit famous people.

古文：咸称范阳卢玄等四十二人，皆冠冕之胄，著问州邦，有羽仪之用。
现代文：都称范阳卢玄等四十二人，是士冠之裔，各个州县都有名声，可以作为羽翼之用。
English: Forty-two people, including Fan Yang and Lu Xuan, are said to be descendants of Shiguang, and each state and county has a reputation that can be used as a feather.

古文：亲发明诏，以征玄等。
现代文：皇帝立即亲自发布命令，征召卢玄等人。
English: The emperor immediately issued an order personally to conscript Lu Xuan and others.

古文：乃旷官以待之，悬爵以縻之。其就命三十五人，自余依例州郡所遣者不可称记。
现代文：于是留着官位等待，空着爵位准备分封，真正来应命就征的有三十五人，其他按惯例于各州郡所派选之人不可胜数。
English: As a result, they kept their official positions and waited, leaving their peerages empty and ready to be divided. There were thirty-five people who actually came to answer the call, and countless others who were selected according to the usual practice in each state and county.

古文：尔乃髦士盈朝，而济济之美兴焉。
现代文：于是英士满朝，济济一堂而为一时之美。
English: As a result, the British Empire flourished, flourished and became a momentary beauty.

古文：昔与之俱蒙斯举，或从容廊庙，或游集私门，上谈公务，下尽忻娱，以为千载一时，始于此矣。
现代文：过去我和他们都蒙抬举，有时从容于廊庙，有时游宴在私门，上读公务，下尽欢娱，认为千载一时之聚，从此开始。
English: In the past, I and all of them were held in high esteem. Sometimes we relaxed in the corridor of the temple, sometimes the banquet was held in a private house, we attended official functions, and we had fun. We thought it was a once-in-a-lifetime gathering, and it started from here.

古文：日月推移，吉凶代谢，同征之人，凋歼殆尽。
现代文：日月推移，吉凶代谢，同时受征之人，大都零落将尽。
English: From month to month, fortunes and misfortunes change, and those who are conscripted at the same time are mostly scattered.

古文：在者数子，然复分张。往昔之忻，变为悲戚。
现代文：在的只有几个，也都分于各处，过去的快乐变为悲凉之叹。
English: There are only a few left, and they are scattered all over the place. The happiness of the past has turned into a sad sigh.

古文：张仲业东临营州，迟其还返，一叙于怀，齐衿于垂殁之年，写情于桑榆之末。
现代文：张仲业东临营州，迟迟不能返还，一同相叙，共怜惜于垂暮之年，述情于夕阳将落之际。
English: Zhang Zhongye Donglin Yingzhou, delayed and unable to return, recounting together, pitying together in the twilight of the year, recounting the situation in the sunset.

古文：其人不幸，复至殒殁。
现代文：这个人不幸又突然故去。
English: Unfortunately, this person passed away suddenly.

古文：在朝者皆后进之士，居里者非畴昔之人，进涉无寄心之所，出入无解颜之地。
现代文：在朝中的都是后进的学子，与我傍居的也不再是旧日之人。进入没有交心的地方，出入没有表志的地方。
English: In the middle of the morning, they are all backward students, and those who live with me are no longer the people of the old days. Entering a place where there is no heart, entering and leaving a place where there is no sign.

古文：顾省形骸，所以永叹而不已。夫颂者美盛德之形容，亦可以长言寄意。
现代文：自己反省自己，所以感慨不已，大概称颂的人赞美盛德的形容，也可以用来做长言来寄托我对他们的思念。
English: I reflect on myself, so I am full of emotion. The description of praising those who praise Shengde can also be used to make long words to express my thoughts about them.

古文：不为文二十年矣，然事切于心，岂可默乎？
现代文：不做文已二十年了，但是事情记于心中，怎么可以埋没呢？
English: I haven't written for twenty years, but I keep things in my heart. How can I bury them?

古文：遂为之颂，词曰：
现代文：于是写作颂词说：
English: So the writing eulogy goes:

古文：紫气干霄，群雄乱夏，王袭徂征，戎车屡驾。扫荡游氛，克剪妖霸，四海从风，八垠渐化。
现代文：紫气干宵，群雄乱夏，王龚徂征，戎东屡驾，扫荡游氛，克剪骄霸，四海从风，八垠渐化。
English: The purple atmosphere is dry in the evening, the summer is turbulent, Wang Xizheng, Rongdong repeatedly drive, sweep the atmosphere, cut the arrogance, the four seas are from the wind, and the eight ridges are gradual.

古文：政教无外，既宁且一，偃武橐兵，唯文是恤。
现代文：政数无外，既宁且一，偃武兵，唯文是恤。
English: The political number is no exception, and it is better to be one, and to be a soldier, and to be a writer.

古文：帝乃旁求，搜贤举逸，岩隐投竿，异人并出。
现代文：帝乃旁求，搜贤举逸，岩隐投竿，异人并出。
English: The emperor begged for help, the sages and wise men raised their hands, Iwakuni threw his staff, and everyone else joined in.

古文：亹癖卢生，量远思纯，钻道据德，游艺依仁。
现代文：卢生，量远思纯，钻道据德，游艺依仁。
English: Lu Sheng, the amount of far-sighted pure, drill according to virtue, entertainment according to Ren.

古文：旌弓既招，释褐投巾，摄齐升堂，嘉谋日陈。自东徂南，跃马驰轮，僭冯影附，刘以和亲。
现代文：旌弓既招，释褐投巾，摄齐升堂，嘉谋日阵，自东徂南，跃马驰轮，僭冯影附，刘以和亲。
English: The bow and arrow is both a move, the brown throwing cloth is a release, the rising hall is a shot, the sun is a day, the horse is a gallop, the Feng is a shadow, and the Liu is a relative.

古文：茂祖茕单，夙离不造，克己勉躬，聿隆家道。
现代文：茂祖茕单，夙离不造，克己勉躬，聿隆家道。
English: The ancestors of Mao Zedong were single-minded, never separated from others, and strove to be self-restrained. This was the way of the Long family.

古文：敦心《六经》，游思文藻，终辞宠命，以之自保。
现代文：敦心六经，游思文藻，终辞宠命，以之自保。
English: With the six sutras in his heart and the writings in his mind, he finally gave up his favorite life to save himself.

古文：燕、常笃信，百行靡遗，位不苟进，任理栖迟。
现代文：燕、常笃信，自行靡遗，位不苟进，任理栖迟。
English: Yan, Chang Duxun believed, self-deprecating, punctilious, and tardy.

古文：居冲守约，好让善推，思贤乐古，如渴如饥。
现代文：居冲守约，好让善推，思贤乐古，如渴如饥。
English: To live in accordance with one's vows, so that one's virtue can be pushed forward, to think about virtue and happiness, to be thirsty and hungry.

古文：子翼致远，道赐悟深，相期以义，相和若琴。
现代文：子翼致远，道赐悟深，相期以义，相和若琴。
English: The child's wing is far-reaching, the path is deeply enlightened, the phase is righteous, and the harmony is like a harp.

古文：并参幕府，俱发德音，优游卒岁，聊以寄心。
现代文：并参幕府，俱发德音，优游卒岁，聊以寄心。
English: And participated in the Shogunate, all made a virtue, excellent tour graduates, and chatted with each other.

古文：祖根运会，克光厥猷，仰缘朝恩，俯因德友。
现代文：祖根运会，克光厥猷，仰缘朝思，俯因德友。
English: Zugen Games, Ke Guang Jueyun, Yangyan Morning Thoughts, Duyin German Friends.

古文：功虽后建，禄实先受，班同旧臣，位并群后。
现代文：功虽后建，禄实先受，班同旧臣，位并群后。
English: Although the merit is built later, the reward is received first, the class is the same as the old minister, and the position is the same as the group.

古文：士衡孤立，内省靡疚，言不崇华，交不遗旧。
现代文：士衡孤立，内省靡疚，言不崇华，交不遗旧。
English: Shihheng is isolated, introspective and depressed, does not speak highly of others, and does not forsake old friends.

古文：以产则贫，论道则富，所谓伊人，实邦之秀。
现代文：以产则贫，论道则富，所谓伊人，实邦之秀。
English: To produce is to be poor, to talk about the way is to be rich, the so-called Yi people are the best in the country.

古文：卓矣友规，禀兹淑亮，存彼大方，摈此细让。
现代文：卓矣友规，禀兹淑亮，存彼大方，摈此细让。
English: If you are a good friend, you will be a good wife. If you are a generous person, you will be a good husband.

古文：神与理冥，形随流浪，虽屈王侯，莫废其尚。
现代文：神与理冥，形随流浪，虽屈王侯，莫废其尚。
English: God and reason, form follows wandering, although Qu Wanghu, must not be wasted.

古文：赵实名区，世多奇士，山岳所钟，挺生三李。
现代文：赵实名区，世多奇士，山岳所钟，挺生三李。
English: Zhao Siminian District, Shedo Qi Shi, Mountain Bell, Ting Sheng San Li.

古文：矫矫清风，抑抑容止，初九而潜，望云而起。
现代文：矫以清风，抑抑容止，初九而潜，望云而起。
English: Correcting with the breeze, suppressing and tolerating, diving at the first nine, and looking up at the clouds.

古文：诜尹西都，灵惟作传，垂训皇宫，载理云雾。
现代文：诜尹西都，灵惟作传，垂训皇宫，载理云雾。
English: In the western capital, Ling Wei wrote a biography, studied the imperial palace, and wrote about clouds and fog.

古文：熙虽中夭，迹阶郎署，余尘可挹，终亦显著。
现代文：熙虽中夭，迹阶郎署，馀尘可挹，终亦显著。
English: Although he was in his mid-teens, his achievements as a magistrate were impressive.

古文：仲业渊长，雅性清到，宪章古式，绸缪典诰。
现代文：仲业渊长，雅性清到，宪章古式，绸缪典诰。
English: He is an expert in brokerage, has a refined elegance, an ancient charter, and is a diligent and courteous person.

古文：时值险难，常一其操。纳众以仁，训下以孝，化被龙川，民归其教。
现代文：时值艰难，常一其操，纳众以仁，训下以孝，化被龙川，民归其教。
English: When times are tough, he is always the first to act, to accept everyone with benevolence, to be disciplined with filial piety, to be transformed by Longchuan, and the people return to his teaching.

古文：迈则英贤，侃亦称选，闻达邦家，名行素显。
现代文：迈则英贤，侃亦称选，闻达邦家，名行素显。
English: Ma Zi is a great scholar, Kan is also known as a selector, he is well-known as a statesman, and his name is well-known.

古文：志在兼济，岂伊独善，绳匠弗顾，功不获展。
现代文：志在兼济，岂伊独善，绳匠弗顾，功不获展。
English: If one's ambition is to help others, he will not succeed. If one's ambition is to help others, he will not succeed.

古文：刘、许履忠，竭力致躬，出能骋说，入献其功。
现代文：刘、许履忠，竭力致躬，出能聘说，入献其功。
English: Liu and Xu Liuzhong, trying their best to bow, said that they were able to hire, and presented their achievements.

古文：輶轩一举，挠燕下崇，名彰魏世，享业亦隆。
现代文：轩一举，挠燕下崇，名彰魏世，享业亦隆。
English: Xuan, in one fell swoop, made Yan subordinate to Chong, won fame in the Wei Dynasty, and enjoyed a long career.

古文：道茂夙成，弱冠播名，与朋以信，行物以诚。
现代文：道茂夙成，弱冠播名，与朋以信，行物以诚。
English: Shigeru Shosei, a weak champion, made a name for himself, trusted his friends, and acted with sincerity.

古文：怡怡昆弟，穆穆家庭，发响九皋，翰飞紫冥。
现代文：怡怡昆弟，穆穆家庭，发响九皋，翰飞紫冥。
English: Yi Yi Kun Di, Mu Mu family, sounding nine gongs, Han Fei Zizhong.

古文：频在省闼，亦司于京，刑以之中，政以之平。
现代文：频在省闼，亦司于京，刑以之中，政以之平。
English: Frequent in the provincial government, also in the capital, in the middle of the punishment, in the middle of the politics.

古文：猗欤彦鉴，思参文雅，率性任真，器成非假。
现代文：猗欤彦鉴，思参文雅，率性任真，器成非假。
English: 彦鉴,思参文雅,率性任真,器成非假.

古文：靡矜于高，莫耻于下，乃谢朱门，归迹林野。
现代文：靡矜于高，莫耻于下，乃谢朱门，归迹林野。
English: He who is proud at the top is not ashamed at the bottom. He who is grateful at the gate returns to the forest.

古文：宗敬延誉，号为四俊，华藻云飞，金声夙振。
现代文：宗敬延誉，号为四骏，华藻云飞，金声夙振。
English: Zong Jing Yan reputation, the number is four, Huaso Yunfei, Jin Sheng Zhen.

古文：中遇沈彖，赋诗以讯，忠显于辞，理出于韵。
现代文：中遇沈蠿，赋德以讯，忠显于辞，理出于韵。
English: In the case of Shen Yi, Fu De is a message, loyalty is a word, and reason is a rhyme.

古文：高沧朗达，默识渊通，领新悟异，发自心胸。
现代文：高沧朗达，默识渊通，领新悟异，发自心胸。
English: Gao Canglongda, tacit knowledge, new understanding, from the heart.

古文：质侔和璧，文炳雕龙，耀姿天邑，衣锦旧邦。
现代文：质侔和璧，文炳雕龙，耀姿天邑，衣锦旧邦。
English: The quality is exquisite and exquisite, the style is elegant and elegant, the dragon is carved, the sky is dazzling, and the brocade is ancient.

古文：士元先觉，介焉不惑，振袂来庭，始宾王国。
现代文：士元先觉，介焉不惑，振袂来庭，始宾王国。
English: Shigeno sensed it first, mediated without confusion, Zhenlu came to the court, and began the kingdom of the guests.

古文：蹈方履正，好是绳墨，淑人君子，其仪不忒。
现代文：蹈方履正，好是绳墨，淑人君子，其仪不忒。
English: If you walk in the right direction, you will be good at rope and ink. If you are a lady, you will be good at it.

古文：孔称游夏，汉美渊云，越哉伯度，出类逾群。
现代文：孔称游夏，汉美渊云，越哉伯度，出类逾群。
English: Kong said that Yu Xia, Han Meiyuan, Yue Yaobodu, outclassed the crowd.

古文：司言秘阁，作牧河汾，移风易俗，理乱解纷。
现代文：司言秘阁，作牧河汾，移风易俗，理乱解纷。
English: The secret cabinet of the sermon, the role of the shepherd, the change of customs, and the resolution of disputes.

古文：融彼滞义，涣此潜文，儒道以析，九流以分。
现代文：融彼滞义，涣此潜文，儒道以析，九流以分。
English: Rongbi is stagnant, this is the hidden text, Confucianism is analysis, and the nine streams are points.

古文：崔、宋二贤，诞性英伟，擢颖闾阎，闻名象魏。
现代文：崔、宋二贤，诞性英伟，擢颖闾阎，闻名象魏。
English: Cui, Song Erxian, the birth of the heroic, Zhan Ying Yan Yan, known as Wei.

古文：謇謇仪形，邈邈风气，达而不矜，素而能贲。
现代文：謇謇仪形，邈邈风气，达而不矜，素而能贲。
English: The shape of the ceremony, the style of the ceremony, the achievement without the ceremony, but the ability to perform the ceremony.

古文：潘符扌票尚，杜熙好和，清不洁流，浑不同波。
现代文：潘符詄尚，杜熙好和，清不洁流，浑不同波。
English: Panfu is noble, Du Xi is harmonious, clean and unclean, and muddy.

古文：绝希龙津，止分常科，幽而逾显，损而逾多。
现代文：绝希龙津，止分常科，幽而逾显，损而逾多。
English: Xilongjin, stop the normal science, subtle and more than apparent, loss and more than.

古文：张纲柔谦，叔术正直，道雅洽闻，弼为兼识。
现代文：张纲柔谦，叔术正直，道雅洽闻，弼为兼识。
English: Zhang Gang is gentle and humble, honest in his skills, well-versed in Taoism and Aesthetics, and has both knowledge and wisdom.

古文：拔萃衡门，俱渐鸿翼，发愤忘餐，岂要斗食。
现代文：拔萃衡门，俱渐鸿翼，发愤忘餐，岂要斗食。
English: If you want to be a great leader, don't be a coward. If you are angry, don't forget to eat.

古文：率礼从仁，罔愆于式，失不系心，得不形色。
现代文：率礼从仁，罔愆于式，失不系心，得不形色。
English: Lead the ceremony from benevolence, stick to the style, do not lose heart, and do not change.

古文：郎苗始举，用均已试，智足周身，言足为治。
现代文：郎苗始举，用均已试，智足周身，言足为治。
English: As long as the seedling is raised, the use has been tested, the wisdom is all-encompassing, and the words are the rule.

古文：性协于时，情敏于事，与今而同，与古曷异。
现代文：性协于时，情敏于高。与今而同，与古曷异。
English: The sex is in time, the sensibility is high. It is the same as now, but very different from the past.

古文：物以利移，人以酒昏，侯生洁己，唯义是敦。
现代文：物以利移，人以酒昏，侯生洁己，唯文是敦。
English: Things are moved by interest, people are dizzy with wine, Hou Sheng is clean, but the writing is dull.

古文：日纵醇醪，逾敬逾温，其在私室，如涉公门。
现代文：日纵醇醪，逾敬逾温，其在私室，如涉公门。
English: The sun is hotter than the sun, warmer than the sun, hotter than the sun, hotter than the sun, hotter than the sun.

古文：季才之性，柔而执竞，郕彼南秦，申威致命。
现代文：秀才之性，柔而执竞，届陂南秦，申威致命。
English: The nature of talent, soft and persistent, the Southern Qin Dynasty, Shen Wei is fatal.

古文：诱之以权，矫之以正，帝道用光，边土纳庆。
现代文：诱之以权，矫之以正，帝道用光，边土纳庆。
English: Entice them with power, correct them with justice, use the imperial road to the end, and encourage them.

古文：群贤遭世，显名有代，志竭其忠，才尽其概。
现代文：群贤遭世，显名有代，志竭其忠，才尽其概。
English: A group of sages have passed through the ages, and they have become famous. Only when they are dedicated to their loyalty can they do their best.

古文：体袭朱裳，腰纽双佩，荣曜当时，风高千载。
现代文：礼袭朱裳，腰纽双佩，荣曜当时，风高千载。
English: Dressed in ceremonial red robes, with a double-breasted loincloth around the waist, Rongyou was at the height of his powers.

古文：君臣相遇，理实难偕，昔因朝命，举之克谐。
现代文：君臣相遇，理实难偕，昔因朝命，举之克谐。
English: When princes and courtiers meet, it is difficult to tell the truth. In the past, because of the imperial edict, they were more submissive.

古文：披衿散想，解带舒怀，此忻如昨，存亡奄乖。
现代文：披衿散想，解带舒怀，此忻如昨，存亡奄乘。
English: It's easy to get carried away, and it's easy to get carried away. It's the same as yesterday.

古文：静言思之，中心九摧，挥毫颂德，漼尔增哀。
现代文：静言思之，中心九摧，挥毫颂德，誛尔增哀。
English: With a quiet word and thought, the center is nine-branched, waving the praise of virtue, and waving the sorrow.

古文：皇兴中，诏允兼太常，至兗州祭孔子庙，谓允曰： 此简德而行，勿有辞也。 
现代文：皇兴年间，皇帝下诏让高允兼任太常，到兖州祭祀孔子庙，对高允说： 这次检阅德行的行动不要推辞了。 
English: During the reign of Emperor Xing, the emperor issued an edict to let Gao Yun also serve as Taizhang, and he went to the Confucius Temple in Zhangzhou to offer sacrifices. He said to Gao Yun, "Don't refuse this action of reviewing virtues."

古文：后允从显祖北伐，大捷而还，至武川镇，上《北伐颂》，其词曰： 皇矣上天，降鉴惟德，眷命有魏，照临万国。
现代文：后来高允跟随显祖北伐，大胜而归，到武川镇时，奏上《北伐颂》，文中写道： 皇矣上天，降鉴惟德，眷命有魏，照临万国。
English: Later, Gao Yun followed Emperor Xianzu to the Northern Expedition and returned victorious. When he arrived at the town of Bu Chuan, he played "Ode to the Northern Expedition" and wrote in the text: "The emperor ascended to heaven, descended to the heavens, descended to the heavens, ascended to the heavens, descended to the heavens, descended to the heavens, ascended to the heavens, descended to the heavens, descended to the heavens.

古文：礼化丕融，王猷允塞，静乱以威，穆民以则。
现代文：礼化丕融，王猷允塞，静乱以威，穆民以则。
English: Rectification is conciliatory, kingliness is conniving, tranquility is domineering, and the people are submissive.

古文：北虏旧隶，禀政在番，往因时囗，逃命北辕。
现代文：北虏旧隶，禀政在蕃，往因时囗，逃命北辕。
English: North Korea is the old subordinate, the government is in the north, the reason is the north, and the escape is the north.

古文：世袭凶轨，背忠食言，招亡聚盗，丑类实繁。
现代文：世袭凶轨，背忠食言，招亡聚盗，丑类实繁。
English: Hereditary evil ways, betrayal of loyalty and betrayal of words, inviting death and gathering thieves, and ugly people abound.

古文：敢率犬羊，图纵猖蹶，乃诏训师，兴戈北伐。
现代文：敢率犬羊，图纵猖獗，乃诏训师，兴戈北伐。
English: Dare to lead the dogs and sheep, the plot is rampant, it is the emperor's trainer, Hinggo northward.

古文：跃马里粮，星驰电发，扑讨虔刘，肆陈斧钺。
现代文：跃马裹粮，星驰电发，扑讨虔刘，肆陈斧钺。
English: The prancing horse is wrapped in grain, the star chariot is driven by electricity, the pious man is flung about, and the axe is wielded.

古文：斧钺暂陈，馘剪厥旅，积骸填谷，流血成浦。
现代文：斧钺暂阵，馘翦厥旅，积骸填谷，流血成浦。
English: The axe, the temporary camp, the Turkic brigade, the debris filling the valley, the bloodshed into a puddle.

古文：元凶狐奔，假息穷墅，爪牙既摧，腹心亦阻。
现代文：元凶狐奔，假息穷墅，爪牙既摧，腹心亦阻。
English: The former villain is running fast, pretending to be a poor villager, his minions are both destroyed and his confidants are also blocked.

古文：周之忠厚，存及行苇，翼翼圣明，有兼斯美。
现代文：周之忠厚，存及行苇，翼翼圣明，有兼斯美。
English: Zhou Zi is loyal and virtuous, exists and walks uprightly, is bright-eyed and beautiful.

古文：泽被京观，垂此仁旨，封尸野获，惠加生死。
现代文：泽被京观，垂此仁旨，封尸野获，惠加生死。
English: Ze was looked up to by the capital, and with this benevolent order, his body was sealed and his life spared.

古文：生死蒙惠，人欣覆育，理贯幽冥，泽渐殊域。
现代文：生死蒙惠，人欣覆育，理贯幽冥，泽渐殊域。
English: Life and death benefit, people rejoice over education, reason runs through the darkness, and Zecheng is a special area.

古文：物归其诚，神献其福，遐迩斯怀，无思不服。
现代文：物归其诚，神献其福，遐迩斯怀，无思不服。
English: Things to their sincerity, God to their blessing, and love to their hearts, without hesitation.

古文：古称善兵，历时始捷，今也用师，辰不及浃。
现代文：古称善兵，历时始捷，今也用师，辰不及浃。
English: In ancient times, he was known as a good soldier, who had a successful career, and now he is also a teacher.

古文：六军克合，万邦以协，义著春秋，功铭玉牒，载兴颂声，播之来叶。 
现代文：六军克合，万邦以协，义著春秋，功铭玉牒，载兴颂声，播之来叶。 
English: The six armies are united, the nations are in harmony, the spring and autumn are in harmony, the golden jubilee is in harmony, the celebration is in harmony, and the leaves are in harmony.

古文：显祖览而善之。
现代文：显祖览后认为写得很好。
English: After reviewing it, Xianzu thought it was well written.

古文：又显祖时有不豫，以高祖冲幼，欲立京兆王子推，集诸大臣以次召问。
现代文：显祖身体有不舒服的时候，因高祖当时很幼小，所以想立京兆王子推为太子，召集诸大臣一个个地询问。
English: When Emperor Xuanzong was not feeling well, because Emperor Gaozu was very young at the time, he wanted to make Prince Jingzhao the crown prince, and summoned his ministers one by one to inquire.

古文：允进跪上前，涕泣曰： 臣不敢多言，以劳神听，愿陛下上思宗庙托付之重，追念周公抱成王之事。 
现代文：高允进来跪着上前哭着说： 我不敢多说，怕有劳皇上圣听。希望陛下上思宗庙托付的重要，远追周公辅佐成王的旧事。 
English: Gao Yun came in, knelt down, and came forward crying, saying, "I don't dare to say more, for fear of making the emperor listen to me. I hope that His Majesty will think about the important, distant past of Zhou Gongfu Suo Cheng Wang entrusted to the ancestral temple."

古文：显祖于是传位于高祖，赐帛千匹，以标忠亮。
现代文：于是显祖将帝位传给了高祖，并赐高允千匹锦帛，表彰高允的忠直亮达。
English: As a result, Emperor Xianzu passed the imperial throne to Emperor Gaozu, and gave Emperor Gaoyong a thousand brocade horses, in recognition of Emperor Gaoyong's loyalty.

古文：又迁中书监，加散骑常侍。
现代文：后又升迁为中书监加散骑常侍。
English: Later, he was promoted to the post of Chinese librarian and errand boy.

古文：虽久典史事，然而不能专勤属述，时与校书郎刘模有所缉缀，大较续崔浩故事，准《春秋》之体，而时有刊正。
现代文：然而高允虽然能够对古老典故及历史之事有很多掌握，却不能够专心下来勤奋地专心著述。当时他和校书郎刘模有一些辑辍，大部分是接续崔浩的旧作，仿照春秋的体裁，而且当时就有删削纠正的地方。
English: However, although Gao Yun had a lot of knowledge about ancient allusions and history, he was not able to concentrate on writing diligently. At that time, he and Liu Mo, the school scribe, had some drafts, most of which were sequels to Cui Hao's old works, modeled on the spring and autumn genre, and there was a place for cutting and correcting at that time.

古文：自高宗迄于显祖，军国书檄，多允文也。
现代文：从高宗到显祖，军国的书信檄文，大多是高允所写。
English: From Gaozong to Xianzu, most of the military letters and documents were written by Gaoyong.

古文：末年乃荐高闾以自代。
现代文：后来就推荐了高闾来代替自己。
English: Later, he recommended Gao Yao to replace him.

古文：以定议之勋，进爵咸阳公，加镇东将军。
现代文：因他有帮助讨论决定重大政策的功劳，晋爵为咸阳公，加封为镇东将军。
English: Because of his merit of helping to discuss and decide major policies, he was given the title of Xianyang Gong and the title of Zhendong General.

古文：寻授使持节、散骑常侍、征西将军、怀州刺史。
现代文：不久又授命高允为持使节、散骑常侍、征西将军、怀州刺史。
English: Soon after, Gao Yun was also appointed as the envoy, straggler, general of the Western Expedition, and historian of Waizhou.

古文：允秋月巡境，问民疾苦。至邵县，见邵公庙废毁不立，乃曰： 邵公之德，阙而不礼，为善者何望？ 
现代文：高允秋季巡视边境，询问百姓疾苦，到了邵县，发现邵公庙被毁而未重新塑立，于是说： 邵公贤德，现在对他的庙毁坏而不修复，无法拜祭，想为善的人不就没有盼望了吗？ 
English: Gao Yun inspected the border in the autumn, inquired about the hardships of the people, arrived in Shao County, found that the Shao Gong Temple was destroyed and not rebuilt, and said: Shao Gong Xiande, now his temple is destroyed and not repaired, unable to worship, people who want to be good have no hope?

古文：乃表闻修葺之。
现代文：于是上表请求对邵公庙进行修葺。
English: As a result, the above table requested that the Shao Gong Temple be repaired.

古文：允于时年将九十矣，劝民学业，风化颇行。
现代文：当时高允已经年近九十了，仍在劝百姓注重学业，使风化相当地盛行。
English: At that time, Gao Yun was already nearly ninety years old, and he was still persuading the people to pay attention to their studies, so that the custom prevailed considerably.

古文：然儒者优游，不以断决为事。
现代文：但是儒士为人优柔，不善于决断办事。
English: However, Confucianists are soft-hearted and not good at making decisions.

古文：后正光中，中散大夫、中书舍人河内常景追思允，帅郡中故老，为允立祠于野王之南，树碑纪德焉。
现代文：后来到了正光年间，中散大夫、中书舍人河内人常景追思高允，率领郡中故老，在野王的南边为高允立祠，树碑，以为纪念。
English: Later, during the Zhengguang era, Dr. Zhong San, a scholar of Chinese classics and a resident of Hanoi, led the county's senior citizens to commemorate Gao Yun by erecting an ancestral shrine and a tree monument on the south side of the Wild King.

古文：太和二年，又以老乞还乡里，十余章，上卒不听许，遂以疾告归。
现代文：太和二年，高允又因年老乞求回归故里，上了十多次奏章，皇上终究没有允许，于是因病告老还乡。
English: In the 2nd year of the Taihe era, Gao Yun again begged to return to his hometown due to his old age, and played more than ten pieces of music. The emperor finally did not allow him, so he returned to his hometown due to illness.

古文：其年，诏以安车征允，敕州郡发遣。
现代文：第二年，皇上又下诏用舒适的车征召他，命令各州县沿途照料。
English: The following year, the emperor issued another edict summoning him in a comfortable car and ordered all prefectures and counties to take care of him along the way.

古文：至都，拜镇军大将军，领中书监。
现代文：到了都城，拜为镇军大将军、领中书监。
English: When he arrived in the capital, he was hailed as the general of the town army and the supervisor of the library.

古文：固辞不许。又扶引就内，改定《皇诰》。
现代文：高允坚决推辞没被允许，皇上让人扶搀着引入内殿，修改制定《皇诰》。
English: Gao Yun's firm refusal was not allowed, and the emperor had him escorted into the inner hall to revise and formulate the "Imperial Rescript."

古文：允上《酒训》曰：
现代文：高允上《酒训》一文：
English: Gao Yun on "Wine Education":

古文：臣被敕论集往世酒之败德，以为《酒训》。
现代文： 臣被敕论集往世酒之败德，以为酒训。
English: The vassal was accused of collecting the defeated virtues of past generations of wine, thinking that it was a wine eulogy.

古文：臣以朽迈，人伦所弃，而殊恩过隆，录臣于将殁之年，勖臣于已坠之地。
现代文：臣以朽迈，人伦所弃，而殊恩过隆，录臣于将殁之年，勖臣于已坠之地。
English: A vassal is regarded as rotten, abandoned by the human relations, but highly favored. A vassal is recorded in the year of his death, and a retired vassal in the place where he has fallen.

古文：奉命惊惶，喜惧兼甚，不知何事可以上答！
现代文：奉命惊惶，喜惧兼甚。不知何事可以上答。
English: I was terrified, but also excited. I didn't know what to answer.

古文：伏惟陛下以睿哲之姿，抚临万国，太皇太后以圣德之广，济育群生。
现代文：伏惟陛下以睿哲之姿，抚怡万国，太皇太后以圣德之广，济育群生。
English: His Majesty Fu Wei, in the form of a sage, brought happiness to all nations, while the Grand Empress Dowager, in the form of a saint, nurtured many children.

古文：普天之下，罔不称赖。
现代文：普天之下，罔不称赖。
English: In the eyes of the world, it's not a bad thing.

古文：然日昃忧勤，虚求不已，思监往事，以为警戒。
现代文：然日昃忧勤，虚求不已，思鉴往事，以为警戒。
English: On that day, I was worried and anxious, vainly seeking, thinking about the past, thinking that I should be alert.

古文：此之至诚，悟通百灵，而况于百官士民？
现代文：此之至诚，悟通百灵，而况于百官士民。
English: This is the sincerity of Wotong Bai Ling, and even more so of the hundred officials and people.

古文：不胜踊跃，谨竭其所见，作《酒训》一篇。
现代文：不胜踊跃，谨竭其所见，作酒训一篇。
English: Although he was not very enthusiastic, he tried his best to write a wine eulogy.

古文：但臣愚短，加以荒废，辞义鄙拙，不足观采。
现代文：但臣愚短，加以荒废，辞义鄙拙，不足观采。
English: But the minister is stupid and short-sighted, and his words are wasteful, mean-spirited, and unsatisfactory.

古文：伏愿圣慈，体臣悾悾之情，恕臣狂瞽之意。其词曰：
现代文：伏愿圣慈，体臣胓胓之情，恕臣狂瞽之意，其词曰：
English: The words of the prayer, which mean: "Wishing for holiness, being courteous and considerate, and forgiving those who are impetuous and reckless," read:

古文：自古圣王，其为飨也，玄酒在堂而酒在下，所以崇本重原，降于滋味。
现代文： 自古圣王，其为飨也，玄酒在堂而酒在下，所以崇本重原，降于滋味。
English: Since ancient times, it has been revered as the king of sake, with the gin at the top and the sake at the bottom. Therefore, it is revered for its weight, but not for its taste.

古文：虽泛爵旅行，不及于乱。
现代文：虽泛爵旅行，不及于乱。
English: Although Panjie travels, it is less than chaotic.

古文：故能礼章而敬不亏，事毕而仪不忒。
现代文：故能礼率而敬不亏，事毕而仪不忒。
English: Therefore, it is not a bad thing to be polite, and it is not a bad thing to be polite.

古文：非由斯致，是失其道。
现代文：非由斯致，是失其道。
English: If it is not from the heart, it is wrong.

古文：将何以范时轨物，垂之于世？
现代文：将何以范时轨物，重之于世？
English: What kind of time-travelling object will be brought back to life?

古文：历观往代成败之效，吉凶由人，不在数也。
现代文：历观往代成败之效，吉凶由人，不在数也。
English: Historically, the effect of success or failure in previous generations, good luck or bad luck depends on the person, not the number.

古文：商辛耽酒，殷道以之亡；公旦陈诰，周德以之昌。
现代文：商辛耽酒，殷道以之亡；公旦陈诰，周德以之昌。
English: Shangxing abstains from drinking, Yin Dao is the death of it; Gongdan is the death of it, Zhou De is the death of it.

古文：子反昏酣而致毙，穆生不饮而身光。
现代文：子反昏酣而致毙，穆生不饮而身光。
English: The son, on the other hand, went into a coma and died, while the son did not drink and died.

古文：或长世而为戒，或百代而流芳。
现代文：或长世而为戒，或百代而流芳。
English: or a precept for all eternity, or a legend for a hundred generations.

古文：酒之为状，变惑情性，虽曰哲人，孰能自竞？
现代文：酒之为状，变惑情性，虽曰哲人，孰能自竞？
English: Liquorice-like, bewildered emotionality, although a philosopher, can't compete?

古文：在官者殆于政也，为下者慢于令也，聪达之士荒于听也，柔顺之伦兴于诤也，久而不悛，致于病也。
现代文：在官者殆于政也，为下者慢于令也，聪达之士荒于听也，柔顺之伦兴于于诤也，久而不悛，致于病也。
English: Those who are in government are worse than those who are in politics, those who are below are slower than those who give orders, those who are clever are worse than those who listen, those who are docile are better than those who are lazy, those who are long-suffering are worse than those who are sick.

古文：岂止于病，乃损其命。
现代文：岂止于病。乃损其命。
English: It's more than an illness, it's life-threatening.

古文：谚亦有云：其益如毫，其损如刀。
现代文：谚亦有云：其益如毫，其损如刀。
English: There is also a proverb: its benefit is like nothing, its loss is like a knife.

古文：言所益者止于一味之益，不亦寡乎？
现代文：言所益者，止于一味之益，不亦寡乎。
English: Those who benefit from the speech are limited to the benefit of one, and there are few.

古文：言所损者夭年乱志，夭乱之损，不亦夥乎？
现代文：言所损者，夭年乱志，夭乱之损，不亦夥乎？
English: Those who are hurt by the words, the early years of chaos, the loss of the early years of chaos, do they not also suffer?

古文：无以酒荒而陷其身，无以酒狂而丧其伦。
现代文：无以酒荒而陷其身，无以酒狂而丧其伦。
English: Not trapped by alcoholism, not ruined by alcoholism.

古文：迷邦失道，流浪漂津。
现代文：速邦失道，流浪漂津。
English: Hayakuni lost its way, wandering drifted.

古文：不师不遵，反将何因。
现代文：不师不遵，反将何因。
English: If you don't follow the teacher, you won't get what you want.

古文：《诗》不言乎： 如切如瑳，如琢如磨 ，朋友之义也。
现代文：诗不言乎， 如切如誾，如琢如磨 ，朋友之义也。
English: Poetry does not say, such as cutting, such as grinding, such as grinding, the meaning of friends is also important.

古文：作官以箴之，申谟以禁之，君臣之道也。
现代文：作官以箴之，申谟以禁之，君臣之道也。
English: An official acts by precepts, a layman by prohibitions, and a ruler by subjects.

古文：其言也善，则三覆而佩之；言之不善，则哀矜而贷之。
现代文：其言也善，则三复而佩之，言之不善，则哀矜而贷之。
English: If his speech is good, he will be praised three times, and if his speech is not good, he will be mourned.

古文：此实先王纳规之意。
现代文：此实先王纳规之意。
English: This is actually the meaning of Wang Na Gui.

古文：往者有晋，士多失度，肆散诞以为不羁，纵长酣以为高达，调酒之颂，以相眩曜。
现代文：往者有晋，士多失度，肆散诞以为不羁，纵长酣以为高达，调酒之颂，以相眩曜。
English: In the past, there was Jin, Shidou lost its degree, Shanshan thought it was uninhibited, Longitudinal and Longitudinal thought it was high, the ode to mixing wine, and so on.

古文：称尧舜有千钟百觚之饮，著非法之言，引大圣为譬，以则天之明，岂其然乎？
现代文：称尧舜有千钟百觚之饮，著非法之言，引大圣为譬，以则天之明，岂其然乎？
English: Calling it a drink of a thousand bells and whistles, using illegal words, citing the great saint as an example, and referring to it as the light of heaven, is it really so?

古文：且子思有云：夫子之饮，不能一升。
现代文：且子思有云，夫子之饮，不能一升。
English: And the son thinks there is a cloud, the master's son's drink, can not be a liter.

古文：以此推之，千钟百觚皆为妄也。
现代文：以此推之，千钟百觚皆为妄也。
English: In other words, all the theories are nonsense.

古文：今大魏应图，重明御世，化之所暨，无思不服，仁风敦洽于四海。
现代文：今大魏应图，重明御世，化之所暨，无思不服，仁风敦洽于四海。
English: Now the Great Wei should map, the Great Ming Dynasty, the place of transformation, unthinkingly, the benevolent wind rushes to the four seas.

古文：太皇太后以至德之隆，诲而不倦，忧勤备于皇情，诰训行于无外。
现代文：太皇太后以至德之隆，诲而不倦，忧勤备于皇情，诰训行于无外。
English: Empress Dowager Cixi and even Emperor Dezhonglong were tireless in their learning, diligent in their preparation for the imperial position, and dedicated in their training.

古文：故能道协两仪，功同覆载。
现代文：故能道协两仪，功同覆载。
English: Therefore, the two instruments of the Road Association can be covered with the same work.

古文：仁恩下逮，罔有不遵，普天率土，靡不蒙赖。
现代文：仁恩下逮，罔有不遵，普天率土，靡不蒙赖。
English: Benevolence under the arrest, do not have to follow, the whole world led by the soil, all do not defame.

古文：在朝之士，有志之人，宜克己从善，履正存贞。节酒以为度，顺德以为经。
现代文：在朝之士，有志之人，宜克己从善，履正存贞，节酒口为度，顺德以为经。
English: In the people of the morning, people with aspirations, it is good to restrain oneself from doing good, to be upright and keep chastity, to be sober, and to be virtuous.

古文：悟昏饮之美疾，审敬慎之弥荣。
现代文：悟昏饮之美疾，审敬慎之弥荣。
English: Wisdom is the beauty of drunkenness, but discretion is the glory of prudence.

古文：遵孝道以致养，显父母而扬名。
现代文：遵孝道以致养，显父母而扬名。
English: He was raised with filial piety and made a name for himself by showing it to his parents.

古文：蹈闵曾之前轨，遗仁风于后生。
现代文：蹈闵曾之前轨，遣仁风于后生。
English: There was a precedent for this, and it was followed by the wind of benevolence.

古文：仰以答所授，俯以保其成。
现代文：仰以答所授，俯以保其成。
English: Ask and it will be given; seek and you will find.

古文：可不勉欤！可不勉欤！
现代文：可不勉欤，可不勉欤！ 
English: You can't force it, you can't force it!

古文：高祖悦之，常置左右。
现代文：高祖阅后十分高兴，常将此文放在自己的身边。
English: Gao Zu was very happy after reading the article and often kept it by his side.

古文：诏允乘车入殿，朝贺不拜。
现代文：下诏让高允进殿时可以乘车，朝贺时可以不拜。
English: The following edict allowed Gao Yun to take a car when entering the hall, and he could not bow during morning greetings.

古文：明年，诏允议定律令。
现代文：第二年，让高允商议制定律令。
English: In the second year, Gaoyong was allowed to discuss and formulate the regulation.

古文：虽年渐期颐，而志识无损，犹心存旧职，披考史书。
现代文：高允虽年近百岁，但他的志向知识并没有因之减少，仍然专心于自己的旧职，披阅史书。
English: Although Gao Yun is nearly a hundred years old, his ambition and knowledge have not decreased, and he still concentrates on his old job, reading history books.

古文：又诏曰： 允年涉危境，而家贫养薄。可令乐部丝竹十人，五日一诣允，以娱其志。 
现代文：皇上又下令说： 高允年龄太大，也已经到了很危险的境地，但他家里贫困，养给供应很微薄，可以让乐部派一个乐队，每五天到高允那里去演奏，使高允心情愉快。 
English: The emperor also ordered: Gao Yun is too old and has already reached a very dangerous situation, but his family is poor and the food supply is very meager, so let the club send a band to Gao Yun every five days to play there and make Gao Yun happy.

古文：特赐允蜀牛一头，四望蜀车一乘，素几杖各一，蜀刀一口。又赐珍味，每春秋常致之。
现代文：特地赐高允蜀牛一头，四望蜀车一辆，素几杖各一，蜀刀一口，又赐给珍奇食物，每到春秋季节经常送到他的住处。
English: He specially gave Gaoyun a Shushan ox, Shuhang a Shushan cart, a pair of canes, and a Shushan sword. He also gave him rare food, which was often sent to his residence every spring and autumn.

古文：寻诏朝晡给膳，朔望致牛酒，衣服绵绢，每月送给。
现代文：不久又命令朝廷负责膳食的职官，每逢初一、十五送去牛肉美酒，衣服绵绢，按月拨发。
English: Not long after, he ordered the official in charge of the imperial court's meals to send beef and wine to the emperor on the first day of the month and the fifteenth day of the month, and also ordered that the official's clothes should be well-fitted and distributed on a monthly basis.

古文：允皆分之亲故。
现代文：高允都将之分送给亲朋好友。
English: Gao Yun will give all the money to his relatives and friends.

古文：是时贵臣之门，皆罗列显官，而允子弟皆无官爵。其廉退若此。
现代文：当时的贵臣显门之后大都已成为大官，而高允的子弟都没有官爵，其清廉谦让就是这样。
English: At that time, most of the noblemen became high-ranking officials after they became prominent, but Gaoyun's children did not have official ranks, and his integrity and humility were just like that.

古文：迁尚书、散骑常侍，时延入，备几杖，问以政治。
现代文：后又迁升他为尚书、散骑常侍，经常请他入宫，备几杖，向他垂问国家政事。
English: Later, he was promoted to Shangshu (尚書) and Sanzhiyan (散騎) (常侍), and he was often invited to the palace to prepare a few sticks and ask him about state affairs.

古文：十年，加光禄大夫、金章紫绶。
现代文：太和十年，加封高允为光禄大夫，金章紫缓。
English: In the 10th year of the Taihe era, Gaoyong Gaoyong was appointed as the doctor of Guanglu, and Jinzhang Ziyang was promoted.

古文：朝之大议，皆咨访焉。
现代文：朝之大议，都前来看望问候。
English: In the morning, there was a big discussion, and everyone came to visit and say hello.

古文：魏初法严，朝士多见杖罚。
现代文：魏朝法律开始时很严苛，朝臣大多被杖罚过。
English: At the beginning of the Wei Dynasty, the laws were very strict, and most courtiers were punished with a cane.

古文：允历事五帝，出入三省，五十余年，初无谴咎。
现代文：高允经历了五代皇帝，出入三个省衙，五十多年，始终没有遇到过谴责与棒笞的处罚。
English: Gao Yun has experienced five generations of emperors, entered and left three provinces for more than fifty years, and has never encountered condemnation and punishment.

古文：初，真君中以狱讼留滞，始令中书以经义断诸疑事。
现代文：当初，真君年间因狱讼新案太多，开始让中书用经义来决断疑案。
English: At first, because there were too many new cases of prison litigation during Zhenjun's time, he began to let Zhongshu use scripture to decide doubtful cases.

古文：允据律评刑，三十余载，内外称平。
现代文：高允根据律法评判行刑，三十多年，内外都称赞高允的公正公平。
English: Gao Yun judged and executed the sentence according to the law. For more than 30 years, Gao Yun has been praised for his fairness both at home and abroad.

古文：允以狱者民之命也，常叹曰： 皋陶至德也，其后英蓼先亡；刘项之际，英布黥而王。
现代文：高允认为，官司的事关系到百姓的生命，常常感叹地说： 皋陶是至德的人啊，但是他的儿子英蓼却先死了。刘邦项羽之时，英布虽是犯人而能称王。
English: Gao Yun believed that the legal proceedings were related to the lives of the people, and often said with regret: Juntao was a very moral person, but his son Yingyao died first. At the time of Liu Bangxiao, Yingbo was a criminal, but he could be called a king.

古文：经世虽久，犹有刑之余衅。况凡人能无咎乎？ 
现代文：经历世事很久，仍然可能会有犯法的危险，何况普通人怎么可能没有过错呢？ 
English: After experiencing the world for a long time, there may still be a danger of breaking the law, and how can ordinary people not be at fault?

古文：其年四月，有事西郊，诏以御马车迎允就郊所板殿观瞩。马忽惊奔，车覆，伤眉三处。
现代文：第二年四月，皇上在西郊有事情，下诏让用皇帝所乘的马车接高允到西郊皇帝所在的板殿去观看风景，忽然马受惊狂奔，车翻人伤，伤及眼眉三处。
English: In April of the following year, the emperor had an event in the western suburbs, and issued an edict to use the carriage used by the emperor to take Gao Yun to the hall where the emperor was located in the western suburbs to watch the scenery. Suddenly, the horse was startled and ran wildly. The car overturned and injured people, injuring three eyebrows.

古文：高祖、文明太后遣医药护治，存问相望。
现代文：高祖、文明太后派医携药前往护理治疗，抚慰探望。
English: Gao Zu, the Empress Dowager of Civilization, sent doctors with medicine to nursing treatment, soothing and visiting.

古文：司驾将处重坐，允启陈无恙，乞免其罪。
现代文：负责驾车者将给予重罪，高允奏称自己并未受大伤，乞请免了驾车人之罪。
English: The driver responsible will be charged with a felony. Gao Yun said that he was not seriously injured, and the driver's crime was pardoned.

古文：先是，命中黄门苏兴寿扶持允，曾雪中遇犬惊倒，扶者大惧。允慰勉之，不令闻彻。
现代文：以前曾命令中黄门苏兴寿负责搀扶高允，曾经在下雪时遇到猛犬而惊惧跌倒，扶他的人都十分害怕、高允安慰劝勉他们，不让上边闻知此事。
English: Previously, he had ordered the middle Huangmen Su Xing Shou to be responsible for supporting Gao Yun. Once, when it was snowing, he encountered a fierce dog and was frightened and fell. The people who supported him were very afraid. Gao Yun consoled and persuaded them, and did not let the upper side know about this.

古文：兴寿称其允接事三年，未尝见其忿色。恂恂善诱，诲人不倦。昼夜手常执书，吟咏寻览。笃亲念故，虚己存纳。虽处贵重，志同贫素。性好音乐，每至伶人弦歌鼓舞，常击节称善。
现代文：苏兴寿称接待扶持高允共三年，没有发现高允有过忿怒的脸色，对人循循善诱，诲人不倦，昼夜手里常常拿着书，翻看吟咏，对亲友笃厚，对故旧思念，虚己待人，虽然地位高贵，但志向贫素淡泊，素来喜好音乐，每有歌唱人来为他歌舞演唱，他常常和着节拍而称赞。
English: Su Xingshou said that he had been receiving and supporting Gao Yun for a total of three years. He did not find that Gao Yun had an angry face. He was good at seducing people and never tired of teaching them. Day and night, he often held a book in his hands and looked through the chants. He was kind to his relatives and friends, missed the old days, and treated people with humility. Although he had a high position, his ambition was poor and shallow. He always liked music. Whenever a singer came to sing for him, he often praised it with a beat.

古文：又雅信佛道，时设斋讲，好生恶杀。
现代文：又很相信佛家之学，经常安排斋饭请僧人讲诵佛法，平生喜欢善行恶杀。
English: He also believes very much in the teachings of the Buddhist family. He often arranges meals and invites monks to recite the Dharma. He likes to do good deeds and kill evil.

古文：性又简至，不妄交游。
现代文：生性又十分疏简，从不妄加交游。
English: They are very simple by nature and never try to mate.

古文：显祖平青齐，徙其族望于代。
现代文：显祖平定青齐后，将其中有名望的大族之人迁移到代州。
English: After Xianzu had subdued the Qing Qi, he moved some of the prominent members of the large tribe to Daizhou.

古文：时诸士人流移远至，率皆饥寒。
现代文：当时许多士人因流动迁移到这么远的地方，都饥寒交迫。
English: At that time, many people migrated to such a far away place due to migration, and they were starving and cold.

古文：徙人之中，多允姻媾，皆徒步造门。允散财竭产，以相赡赈，慰问周至。无不感其仁厚。
现代文：迁来的人中，有许多是高允的妻族之人，都走到高允门前，高允把自己的财产全部拿出来用来周济他们，慰问周到，人们没有不感谢他的仁厚的。
English: Many of the people who moved here were Gao Yun's wives and relatives. They all came to Gao Yun's door. Gao Yun gave all of his wealth to help them, and his condolences were thoughtful. People couldn't help but thank him for his kindness.

古文：收其才能，表奏申用。
现代文：高允又对这些迁移来的人根据不同才能上书请皇上任用。
English: Gao Yun also asked the emperor to appoint these relocated people according to their different talents.

古文：时议者皆以新附致异，允谓取材任能，无宜抑屈。
现代文：当时议论的人都认为刚归顺的人容易产生异心，高允说取材任能，不应当以此来压抑委屈他们。
English: At that time, the people who were talking about it all thought that people who had just converted were likely to have other intentions, and Gao Yun said that they were free to gather information, and that it should not be used to suppress their grievances.

古文：先是，允被召在方山作颂，志气犹不多损，谈说旧事，了无所遗。
现代文：以前高允被召到方山作颂词，身体尚可且记忆也十分好，谈及过去之事，几乎没有什么遗忘。
English: In the past, Gao Yun was called to Fangshan to deliver a eulogy. He is in good health and has a very good memory. When he talks about the past, he hardly forgets anything.

古文：十一年正月卒，年九十八。
现代文：太和十一年正月去世，享年九十八岁。
English: His wife passed away in the first month of the eleventh year, at the age of ninety-eight.

古文：初，允每谓人曰： 吾在中书时有阴德，济救民命。若阳报不差，吾寿应享百年矣。 
现代文：最初，高允常对人言： 我任中书时有阴德曾救济恩治过百姓性命，如果阳报不差的话，我的寿命在百岁上。 
English: At the beginning, Gao Yun often said to people: When I was appointed to the Central Government, I had the virtue of benevolence to help and cure the lives of the people. If the report is not bad, my life expectancy is over one hundred years old.

古文：先卒旬外，微有不适。犹不寝卧，呼医请药，出入行止，吟咏如常。
现代文：去世前十天左右，略有不舒适，但仍不愿卧床不起，呼请医生饮用汤药，出入行止，仍然吟咏不止。
English: About ten days before his death, he was a little uncomfortable, but still did not want to be bedridden. He called the doctor to drink soup medicine and stopped going in and out.

古文：高祖、文明太后闻而遣医李脩往脉视之，告以无恙。
现代文：高祖、文明太后听说后派医生李去看他并把脉观察，高允仍说没有大病。
English: After hearing the news, Gao Zu, the Empress Dowager of Civilization, sent doctor Li to see him and check his pulse. Gao Yun still said that he was not seriously ill.

古文：脩入，密陈允荣卫有异，惧其不久。
现代文：李入宫后悄悄向皇上、文明太后陈述说高允的荣卫两脉已有异常之象，恐怕不久于世了。
English: After Li entered the palace, he quietly reported to the emperor and Empress Dowager Fuxing that Gao Yun's two veins had abnormalities, and he would probably die soon.

古文：于是遣使备赐御膳珍羞，自酒米至于盐醢百有余品，皆尽时味，及床帐、衣服、茵被、几杖，罗列于庭。王官往还，慰问相属。允喜形于色，语人曰： 天恩以我笃老，大有所赉，得以赡客矣。 
现代文：于是皇上、文明太后派使者准备好御膳珍肴相赐，自酒米到调味，有一百多种，都是当时新鲜之物。床帐、衣服、茵被、几杖罗列在庭中，朝中之官往往来来给予慰问，高允喜形于色，对人说： 天恩因我太老，给了这么多赐品，可以用来待客了。 
English: As a result, the Emperor and Empress Dowager Bunmei sent an envoy to prepare gourmet delicacies, from wine and rice to seasoning, there were more than a hundred kinds, all of which were fresh at the time. Bedspreads, clothes, quilts, and a few canes were lined up in the courtyard. Officials from the Imperial Court often came to offer condolences. Gaoyun was overjoyed and said to the people: "Thank God, because I am too old, I have been given so many gifts that can be used to welcome guests."

古文：表谢而已，不有他虑。
现代文：上表表示感谢，没有其他考虑。
English: The above table expresses thanks, there is no other consideration.

古文：如是数日，夜中卒，家人莫觉。
现代文：如此这样多日，夜间去世，家人都没察觉。
English: After so many days, he died in the night, without his family noticing.

古文：诏给绢一千匹、布二千匹、绵五百斤、锦五十匹、杂彩百匹、谷千斛以周丧用。
现代文：去世后皇上下诏给绢一千匹，布二千匹，绢五百斤，锦五十匹，杂彩百匹，谷一千斛用做送葬之费。
English: After his death, the emperor issued an edict to give 1,000 pennies, 2,000 cloths, 500 catties, 50 brocades, 100 miscellaneous flowers, and 1,000 gourds as funeral expenses.

古文：魏初以来，存亡蒙赉者莫及焉，朝庭荣之。
现代文：魏朝自初建国至此，存亡蒙赐赏的人没有一个人有过这么多，满朝人都认为这是莫大之荣。
English: Since the founding of the country, no one in the Wei Dynasty has been honored with so many awards. People throughout the dynasty considered it a great honor.

古文：将葬，赠侍中、司空公、冀州刺史，将军、公如故，谥曰文，赐命服一袭。
现代文：将下葬，赠侍中、司空公、冀州刺史、将军、公如故、谥曰：文。赐给命服一袭。
English: He will be buried with the following presents: the middle-ranked attendant, the second-ranked general, the first-ranked general, the second-ranked general, the second-ranked general, the second-ranked general, the third-ranked general, the second-ranked general, the second-ranked general, the third-ranked general, the second-ranked general, the third-ranked general, and the fourth-ranked general.

古文：允所制诗赋诔颂箴论表赞，《左氏、公羊释》，《毛诗拾遗》，《论杂解》，《议何郑膏肓事》，凡百余篇，别有集行于世。
现代文：高允所作的诗、赋、谏、颂、箴、论、表、赞、左氏、公羊释、毛诗拾遗、论杂解、议何郑膏肓事，共约百余篇，另有文集刊行于世。
English: Gao Yun's poems, poems, poems, poems, poems, poems, poems, poems, poems, poems, poems, poems, poems, poems, poems, poems, poems, poems, poems, poems, poems, poems, poems, poems, poems, poems, poems, poems, poems, poems, poems, poems, poems, poems, poems, poems, poems, poems, poems, poems, poems, poems, poems, poems, poems, poems, poems, poems, poems, poems, poems,

古文：允明算法，为算术三卷。
现代文：高允还精于算法之学，著有《算术》三卷。
English: Gao Yun is also proficient in the study of algorithms and is the author of three volumes of "Arithmetic."

