古文：杨素弟约从父文思文纪
现代文：杨素字处道，弘农华阴人。
English: Yang Su Zi is a practitioner, Hong Nong Hua Yin is a practitioner.

古文：杨素，字处道，弘农华阴人也。祖暄，魏辅国将军、谏议大夫。
现代文：祖父杨暄是魏朝的辅国将军、谏议大夫。
English: Grandfather Yang Jie was a general of the auxiliary state of the Wei Dynasty and a doctor of the imperial court.

古文：父敷，周汾州刺史，没于齐。
现代文：父亲杨敷为北周的汾州刺史，死于北齐。
English: His father, Yang Shiki, was the governor of Bozhou in Northern Zhou and died in Northern Qi.

古文：素少落拓，有大志，不拘小节，世人多未之知，唯从叔祖魏尚书仆射宽深异之，每谓子孙曰： 处道当逸群绝伦，非常之器，非汝曹所逮也。 
现代文：杨素小时候穷困失意，不拘小节，有远大的志向。世人都不理解他，只有他的堂叔祖、魏朝的尚书仆射杨宽认为他很不一般，常对子孙说： 处道不是一般的人，他日一定出类拔萃，无与伦比，不是你们赶得上的。 
English: When Yang Su was a child, he was poor and frustrated, unconcerned with trifles, and had lofty aspirations. The world did not understand him, only his great-uncle, the Wei Dynasty's Shang Shufu Yang Guang, thought he was very unusual, and often said to his children and grandchildren: He is not an ordinary person, his day must be outstanding, incomparable, not something you can catch up with.

古文：后与安定牛弘同志好学，研精不倦，多所通涉。
现代文：杨素后来和安定人牛弘志同道合，他们勤奋好学，研究探讨精心专诚，从不感到疲倦，因而很多方面都精通或者涉猎。
English: Yang Su later fell in with the stable Niu Hongzhi, and the two of them loved to study and discuss the essence of the classics, constantly penetrating and exerting themselves.

古文：善属文，工草隶，颇留意于风角。
现代文：他善于写文章，善长草书、隶书，很留心通过观察风向占卜吉凶。
English: He is good at writing articles, good at long cursive and cursive writing, and is very attentive to divining good and evil by observing the wind direction.

古文：美须髯，有英杰之表。
现代文：杨素长髯丰额，有一副英雄豪杰的仪表。
English: His beard is flowing and beautiful, and he has the appearance of a great hero.

古文：周大冢宰宇文护引为中外记室，后转礼曹，加大都督。
现代文：北周大冢宰宇文护召他当了中外记室，后转任礼曹，升任为大都督。
English: He was called by the Northern Zhou Dajie, Uwen, to be the foreign secretary, and later he was transferred to the etiquette officer and promoted to the grand governor.

古文：武帝亲总万机，素以其父守节陷齐，未蒙朝命，上表申理，帝不许。
现代文：周武帝亲自统领一切事务后，杨素因父亲坚守气节在齐丧生，没有得到朝廷的封赏，就上表申述道理。武帝没有应允，他又一再坚持。
English: After Emperor Zhou Wudi personally presided over all affairs, Yang Su, who lost his life because his father adhered to the principle of Qi in Qi and did not receive a reward from the imperial court, expressed his reason on the table. Emperor Wudi did not agree, but he insisted again and again.

古文：至于再三，帝大怒，命左右斩之。素乃大言曰： 臣事无道天子，死其分也。 
现代文：武帝大怒，命令左右将其斩首。杨素理直气壮地说： 我给无道的天子做事，死是应该的。 
English: Emperor Wu was furious and ordered his head to be chopped off. Yang Su said rationally: I am doing things for the wayless son of heaven, and I deserve to die.

古文：帝壮其言，由是赠敷为大将军，谥曰忠壮。拜素为车骑大将军、仪同三司，渐见礼遇。
现代文：武帝壮其言，于是追封杨敷为大将军，谥号 忠壮 ，并拜杨素为车骑大将军、仪同三司，逐渐被礼遇。
English: Emperor Wu Zhuang had his say, and Yangshiki was subsequently given the title of grand general, with the nickname "Loyal and Strong," and Yang Su was given the titles of grand general of chariot and cavalry, and grand general of the three departments of ceremony and etiquette, and was gradually treated with courtesy.

古文：帝命素为诏书，下笔立成，词义兼美。
现代文：武帝命令杨素起草诏书，他一挥而就，而且词藻文义均美。
English: Emperor Wu ordered Yang Su to draft the edict, and he did it in one fell swoop, and the words and meaning were all beautiful.

古文：帝嘉之，顾谓素曰： 善自勉之，勿忧不富贵。 
现代文：武帝嘉奖他，对他说： 好好努力，不愁日后没有荣华富贵。 
English: Emperor Wu commended him and said to him, "Work hard, and you will not have to worry about being rich and famous in the future."

古文：素应声答曰： 臣但恐富贵来逼臣，臣无心图富贵。 
现代文：杨素应声回答说： 我只怕富贵来逼我，我却无心谋取富贵。 
English: Yang Su replied in response: "I am only afraid of being forced by wealth, but I have no intention of seeking wealth.

古文：及平齐之役，素请率父麾下先驱。
现代文：平定北齐时，杨素请求率领父亲先前的部下作先锋。
English: When the Northern Qi was pacified, Yang Su requested to lead his father's former subordinates to be the vanguard.

古文：帝从之，赐以竹策，曰： 朕方欲大相驱策，故用此物赐卿。 
现代文：武帝应允了他，并且赐给他一条竹鞭，说： 我正要驱使天下，所以把这件东西赐给你。 
English: Emperor Wu agreed and gave him a bamboo whip, saying, "I am about to drive the whole world, so I am giving you this thing."

古文：从齐王宪与齐人战于河阴，以功封清河县子，邑五百户。
现代文：杨素跟随齐王宇文宪在河阴和齐人交战，因战功被封为清河县子，食邑五百户。
English: Yang Su followed the king of Qi, Yu Wenxian, and fought against the Qi people in Heyin. Because of his war service, he was awarded the title of the son of Qinghe County, and 500 households in the food village were created.

古文：其年授司城大夫。
现代文：这年武帝又授予杨素司城大夫之职。
English: In the same year, Emperor Wu granted Yang Susi the post of city doctor.

古文：明年，复从宪拔晋州。
现代文：第二年，杨素又跟随宇文宪攻取晋州。
English: The following year, Yang Su followed Yu Wenxian to conquer Jinzhou.

古文：宪屯兵鸡栖原，齐主以大军至，宪惧而宵遁，为齐兵所蹑，众多败散。
现代文：宇文宪屯兵于鸡栖原，北齐国主率领大军攻来，宇文宪因害怕连夜逃走，齐军紧追不舍，宇文宪部下大多失散。
English: Uwen Xian's garrison was in Jiuquan, and the Northern Qi sovereign led a large army to attack. Uwen Xian was afraid to flee overnight, and the Qi army was in hot pursuit. Most of Uwen Xian's subordinates were dispersed.

古文：素与骁将十馀人尽力苦战，宪仅而获免。
现代文：杨素和十多位骁勇之将竭力苦战，才使宇文宪幸免于难。
English: Yang Su and more than ten brave generals fought hard to keep Yu Wenxian alive.

古文：其后每战有功。
现代文：这以后，杨素屡建战功。
English: Since then, Yang Su has made great achievements in the war.

古文：及齐平，加上开府，改封成安县公，邑千五百户，赐以粟帛、奴婢、杂畜。
现代文：北齐平定后，杨素被加官为上开府，改封为成安县公，食邑一千五百户，并赏赐给他粮食、布帛、奴婢、牲畜。
English: After the pacification of North Qi, Yang Su was promoted to Shangkaifu and changed his title to Cheng'an County, with 1,500 households, and was given grain, cloth, slaves, and livestock.

古文：从王轨破陈将吴明彻于吕梁，治东楚州事。
现代文：后来杨素跟随王轨在吕梁击败陈将吴明彻，管理东楚州的事务。
English: Later, Yang Su followed Wang Lu in Luliang to defeat Chen's general Wu Mingcher and manage the affairs of East Chuzhou.

古文：封弟慎为义安侯。
现代文：武帝又封他的弟弟杨慎为义安侯。
English: His younger brother, Yang Shen, was given the title of Yian Hou.

古文：陈将樊毅筑城于泗口，素击走之，夷毅所筑。
现代文：陈将樊毅在泗口筑城，杨素击走了他，并荡平了他所筑的城墙。
English: Chen ordered Xing Yi to build a city in Hekou, but Yang Su defeated him and leveled the walls he had built.

古文：宣帝即位，袭父爵临贞县公，以弟约为安成公。
现代文：周宣帝登基后，杨素继承了父亲临贞县公的爵位。宣帝又封他的弟弟杨约为安成公。
English: When Emperor Xuanxuan ascended to the throne, Yang Su succeeded his father Yang Shiki to the title of Prince of Linzhen County, and his younger brother Yang You became the Prince of Ancheng County.

古文：寻从韦孝宽徇淮南，素别下盱眙、钟离。
现代文：不久跟随韦孝宽巡行淮河以南，杨素又单独攻下了盱眙、钟离两地。
English: Soon after, he followed Wei Xiaokang on a patrol south of the Huai River, and Yang Su separately captured the two places of Handan and Zhongli.

古文：及高祖为丞相，素深自结纳。高祖甚器之，以素为汴州刺史。
现代文：高祖当丞相时，杨素便与高祖深深交好，高祖很看重他，派他做汴州刺史。
English: When Gao Zu was the prime minister, Yang Su had a deep friendship with Gao Zu. Gao Zu valued Gao Zu very much and sent him to be the chief historian of Zhangzhou.

古文：行至洛阳，会尉迥作乱，荥州刺史宇文胄据武牢以应迥，素不得进。
现代文：赴任途中，走到洛阳，恰逢尉迟迥叛乱，荥州刺史宇文胄占据虎牢和尉迟迥相应，杨素不能前行。
English: On the way to Luoyang, Yang Su was caught in the middle of the rebellion led by Ye Xizhi, and Ye Xizhi and Ye Xizhi respectively occupied the Tiger's Stronghold and the Tiger's Stronghold. Yang Su was unable to move forward.

古文：高祖拜素大将军，发河内兵击胄，破之。
现代文：高祖拜杨素为大将军，调发河内之兵进攻宇文胄。
English: Gao Zu Bai Yang used to be a great general and dispatched soldiers from Hanoi to attack Umengyang.

古文：迁徐州总管，进位柱国，封清河郡公，邑二千户。
现代文：打败宇文胄后，杨素升为徐州总管，又进位为柱国，加授清河郡公，食邑二千户。
English: After defeating Uwen Yao, Yang Su was promoted to the general manager of Xuzhou, and was promoted to the pillar country, and was awarded the Qinghe County official, with 2,000 households.

古文：以弟岳为临贞公。
现代文：他的弟弟杨约也被封为临贞县公。
English: His younger brother, Yang You, was also named Linzheng County magistrate.

古文：高祖受禅，加上柱国。
现代文：高祖受禅后，加封杨素为上柱国。
English: After Gaozhu accepted Zen, Yang Su was given the title of Shangzhu Guo.

古文：开皇四年，拜御史大夫。
现代文：开皇四年，拜他为御史大夫。
English: For the first four years of the emperor's reign, he was known as the Imperial Historian.

古文：其妻郑氏性悍，素忿之曰： 我若作天子，卿定不堪为皇后。 
现代文：杨素的妻子郑氏性情凶暴蛮横，杨素曾怨恨地说： 我如果当了天子，你一定不能作皇后。 
English: Yang Su's wife, Zheng Shih, had a fierce and domineering temperament. Yang Su once said resentfully: "If I become the son of heaven, you must not become the queen."

古文：郑氏奏之，由是坐免。
现代文：郑氏把这话奏给高祖，他因此被免官。
English: Zheng reported his words to Emperor Wen, and Yang Su was convicted and removed from office.

古文：上方图江表，先是，素数进取陈之计，未几，拜信州总管，赐钱百万、锦千段、马二百匹而遣之。
现代文：高祖正想谋取江南，这之前，杨素曾多次进献夺取陈国的计策，没多久，高祖就拜杨素为信州总管，赏赐给他钱一百万、锦一千段、马两百匹而派他去信州。
English: Gaozu was trying to capture the southern part of the Yangtze River. Prior to this, Yang Su had repeatedly proposed a strategy to capture Chen Province. Not long after, Gaozu appointed Yang Su as the head of Shinshu, rewarded him with one million yuan, one thousand pieces of brocade, and two hundred horses, and sent him to Shinshu.

古文：素居永安，造大舰，名曰五牙，上起楼五层，高百馀尺，左右前后置六拍竿，并高五十尺，容战士八百人，旗帜加于上。
现代文：杨素住在永安，造了一种大船，名叫五牙，上面建了五层高楼，高达一百多尺，前后左右共配置了六部名为 柏竿 的战具，都高五十尺。船上可容纳八百多名士兵，旗帜放在上边。
English: Yang Su, who lived in Yong'an, built a kind of large ship called Wuzhu, on which a five-story high-rise was built, with a height of more than one hundred feet. A total of six pieces of military equipment called Baogang, each fifty feet high, were arranged in front and behind. The ship could accommodate more than eight hundred soldiers, and the flag was placed on the top.

古文：次曰黄龙，置兵百人。
现代文：另外一种船，稍稍小一些，起名黄龙，可配置士兵一百来人。
English: Another kind of ship, slightly smaller, is called Huanglong, and can be equipped with a hundred or so soldiers.

古文：自馀平乘、舴艋等各有差。
现代文：其余的平乘船、舴艋舟，各有不同。
English: The rest travel by boat or raft, each with a different route.

古文：及大举伐陈，以素为行军元帅，引舟师趣三硖。
现代文：等到大举伐陈时，高祖封杨素为行军元帅，率领水军奔赴三硖。
English: When the large-scale logging began, Gao Zu Feng Yang Su was the marching marshal, leading the navy to Sanluo.

古文：军至流头滩，陈将戚欣以青龙百馀艘、屯兵数千人守狼尾滩，以遏军路。
现代文：大军行至流头滩，陈将戚欣凭借一百多艘青龙船，屯兵几千人驻守在狼尾滩，阻挡大军去路。
English: The large army marched to the Liutou Beach. Chen Shouqi Xin marched with more than a hundred Qinglong ships, and several thousand soldiers were stationed at the Wolf's Tail Beach to block the way of the large army.

古文：其地险峭，诸将患之。
现代文：那里地势峻峭险要，将领们都忧心忡忡。
English: The terrain there is steep and dangerous, and the generals are worried.

古文：素曰： 胜负大计，在此一举。
现代文：杨素说： 成败在此一举。
English: Yang Su said, "Success or failure depends on this one move.

古文：若昼日下船，彼则见我，滩流迅激，制不由人，则吾失其便。 
现代文：如果我们白天乘船而下，他们就会看见我们，滩险水急，天制不由人力，那么我们就失去了有利的条件。 
English: If we go down by boat during the day, they will see us, the beach is dangerous, the weather is not man-made, then we lose the favorable conditions.

古文：乃以夜掩之。
现代文：于是决定在夜里攻其不备。
English: So they decided to attack it at night.

古文：素亲率黄龙数千艘，衔枚而下，遣开府王长袭引步卒从南岸击欣别栅，令大将军刘仁恩率甲骑趣白沙北岸，迟明而至，击之，欣败走。
现代文：杨素亲自率领上千艘黄龙舰，命令士兵把枚衔在口中，悄悄顺流而下，并派遣开府王长袭率领步兵从南岸进攻戚欣另外的营寨，命令大将军刘仁恩率领披甲持械的骑兵进攻白沙北岸。天快亮的时候，队伍都抵达了目的地。
English: Yang Su personally led thousands of Huanglong ships, ordered the soldiers to put their rank in their mouths and quietly sail down the river, and dispatched Kaifu Wang Chang to lead the infantry from the south bank to attack Qi Xin's other camp, and ordered General Liu Rien to lead the armored cavalry to attack the north bank of Baisha. When it was nearly dawn, the teams all arrived at their destination.

古文：悉虏其众，劳而遣之，秋毫不犯，陈人大悦。
现代文：进攻敌军，戚欣大败而逃，他的部下全部被俘。杨素安抚俘虏后送走了他们，秋毫无犯，陈国人非常高兴。
English: After attacking the enemy army, Cixin was defeated and fled, and all of his subordinates were captured. Yang Su pacified the captives and sent them away. Autumn committed no crime, and the people of Chen were very happy.

古文：素率水军东下，舟舻被江，旌甲曜日。
现代文：杨素率领水军继续东下，大小战船铺满了整了江面，旌旗盔甲在阳光下鲜艳耀眼。
English: Yang Su led the navy to continue eastward, the warships of all sizes filled the river, and the flag armor was bright and dazzling in the sun.

古文：素坐平乘大船，容貌雄伟，陈人望之惧曰： 清河公即江神也。 
现代文：杨素端坐在平乘大船之上，容貌体魄雄健魁伟，陈国人望而生畏，都说： 清河公就是长江之神啊！ 
English: Yang Sudao was sitting on a flat-bottomed boat. He looked very strong and powerful. The people of Chen were awestruck and said, "Qinghe Gong is the god of the Yangtze River!"

古文：陈南康内史吕仲肃屯岐亭，正据江峡，于北岸凿岩，缀铁锁三条，横截上流，以遏战船。
现代文：陈国南康内史吕仲肃屯兵岐亭，正好占据了江峡。他在北岸凿穿岩石，连接了三条铁锁链，横断长江上游，用来阻挡战船前进。
English: Chen Guonan Kannaishi Lyu Chung-Su's garrison, Qiting, happened to occupy the river gorge. He cut through the rock on the north bank and connected three iron chains to cross the upper reaches of the Yangtze River, which was used to block the advance of warships.

古文：素与仁恩登陆俱发，先攻其栅。仲肃军夜溃，素徐去其锁。
现代文：杨素和仁恩先登陆攻打吕仲肃的营寨，吕仲肃的队伍夜里溃逃，杨素从容地除掉了那些铁链。
English: Yang Su and Ren En first landed to attack Lv Zhong Su's camp, Lv Zhong Su's team fled in the night, Yang Su calmly removed those chains.

古文：仲肃复据荆门之延洲。
现代文：吕仲肃又占领荆门的延洲。
English: Lv Zhongsu also occupied Yanzhou of Jingmen.

古文：素遣巴蜒卒千人，乘五牙四艘，以柏樯碎贼十馀舰，遂大破之，俘甲士二千余人，仲肃仅以身免。
现代文：杨素派巴之地的士兵一千人，分乘四艘五牙船，用船浆击碎了十多艘敌舰，于是大破敌军，俘虏敌兵两千多人，吕仲肃一人逃脱。
English: Yang Su sent a thousand soldiers from the land of Ba, divided into four five-toothed ships, and smashed more than ten enemy ships with boat pulp. As a result, the enemy army was destroyed, more than two thousand enemy soldiers were captured, and one person, Lü Zhongsu, escaped.

古文：陈主遣其信州刺史顾觉镇安蜀城，荆州刺史陈纪镇公安，皆慑而退走。
现代文：陈后主派信州刺史顾觉镇守安蜀城，荆州刺史陈纪镇守公安，他们都因害怕杨素而退走。
English: Chen Houjun sent Shinshou's Zhang Shi Gu Jue to guard Anshu City, and Jingzhou's Zhang Shi Chen Ji to guard the public security. They all retreated for fear of Yang Su.

古文：巴陵以东，无敢守者。
现代文：从此，巴陵以东无人敢守。
English: East of Balin, no one dared to hold out any longer.

古文：湘州刺史、岳阳王陈叔慎遣使请降。
现代文：湘州刺史、岳阳王陈叔慎派使节恳请投降。
English: The envoys of Xiangzhou and Yueyang King Chen Shushen were implored to surrender.

古文：素下至汉口，与秦孝王会。
现代文：杨素顺流而下，直抵汉口，和秦孝王会合。
English: Yang Su floated down the river until he reached Hankou, where he met with Qin Xiao Wang.

古文：及还，拜荆州总管，进爵郢国公，邑三千户，真食长寿县千户。
现代文：班师回朝后，高祖拜杨素为荆州总管，晋封郢国公，食邑三千户，实食长寿县的一千户。
English: After the return of the class teacher to the imperial court, Gao Zu Bai Yang Su became the general manager of Jingzhou and was promoted to the governor of Shandong Province. There were three thousand households in the food village and one thousand households in the real food Changshou County.

古文：以其子玄感为仪同，玄奖为清河郡公。
现代文：高祖又封他的儿子玄感为仪同，封玄奖为清河郡公。
English: Gaozu also made his son, Xuan Xuan, a member of the imperial family, and awarded him the title of Qinghe County Grand Duke.

古文：赐物万段，粟万石，加以金宝，又赐陈主妹及女妓十四人。
现代文：并赏赐绵绢一万段，粮食一万石，还有一些黄金、珠宝，又把陈后主的妹妹和女乐十四人也赏赐给他。
English: He also rewarded him with ten thousand pieces of silk, ten thousand stones of grain, and some gold and jewels. He also rewarded him with the sister of the Chen Empress and fourteen female singers.

古文：素言于上曰： 里名胜母，曾子不入。逆人王谊，前封于郢，臣不愿与之同。 
现代文：杨素对皇上说： 乡里名叫 胜母 ，孝子曾子就不进去；叛逆之人王谊，以前曾分封于郢地，我不想和他一样。 
English: Yang Su said to the emperor: The name of the village is Shengmao, the filial son and the great-grandson will not enter; the rebellious person is Wang You, who had previously been assigned to Shantian, I do not want to be like him.

古文：于是改封越国公。寻拜纳言。
现代文：于是高祖改封他为越国公，不久又拜纳言之职。
English: As a result, Gaozu changed his title to Prince of Yue, and soon after, Baina took up the post.

古文：岁馀，转内史令。
现代文：一年多后，转任内史令。
English: A little more than a year later, he was transferred to the post of Internal History Officer.

古文：俄而江南人李稜等聚众为乱，大者数万，小者数千，共相影响，杀害长吏。
现代文：不久，江南人李棱等聚众叛乱，多的达几万人，少的也有几千人，互相响应，杀害官吏。
English: Soon, people from the south of the Yangtze River, such as Li Ren, rallied and rebelled. Tens of thousands at the most, and a few thousand at the least, responded to each other and killed officials.

古文：以素为行军总管，帅众讨之。
现代文：高祖任命杨素为行军总管，率众讨伐。
English: Gaozu appointed Yang Su as the general manager of the march and led the crusade.

古文：贼硃莫问自称南徐州刺史，以盛兵据京口。
现代文：叛贼朱莫问自称南徐州刺史，以重兵占据京口。
English: The renegade Zhu Mogao called himself the Southern Xuzhou Assassin, and guarded the capital with heavy troops.

古文：素率舟师入自杨子津，进击破之。
现代文：杨素率领水军从扬子津攻入，进而击败了他们。
English: Yang Su led the navy from Yangtze River to invade and defeat them.

古文：晋陵顾世兴自称太守，与其都督鲍迁等复来拒战。
现代文：晋陵的顾世兴自称为太守，和他的都督鲍迁等又来拒战。
English: Gu Shixing of Jinling claimed to be the governor-general, and his governor Bao Qian and others came to oppose the war.

古文：素逆击破之，执迁，虏三千馀人。
现代文：杨素迎战破敌，活捉鲍迁，俘虏敌兵三千多人。
English: Yang Su defeated the enemy, captured Bao Qian alive, and captured more than three thousand enemy soldiers.

古文：进击无锡贼帅叶略，又平之。
现代文：杨素又进而攻打无锡叛贼叶略，又铲平叛军。
English: Yang Su went on to attack the Wuxi traitor Ye Liang, and also defeated the rebels.

古文：吴郡沈玄懀、沈杰等以兵围苏州，刺史皇甫绩频战不利。
现代文：吴郡的沈玄憎、沈杰等人派兵包围了苏州，刺史皇甫绩屡战不利。
English: Shen Xuanhu, Shen Jie and others from Wu County sent troops to encircle Suzhou, but they were repeatedly defeated.

古文：素率众援之，玄懀势迫，走投南沙贼帅陆孟孙。
现代文：杨素率部援助他。玄憎情势窘迫，逃奔南沙贼首陆孟孙。
English: Yang Su and his subordinates came to his aid. Due to the dire situation, Meng Sun, the leader of the Nansha bandits, fled.

古文：素击孟孙于松江，大破之，生擒孟孙、玄懀。
现代文：杨素在松江和孟孙交战，大破叛军，活捉了陆孟孙和玄憎。
English: Yang Su fought with Meng Sun in Songjiang, defeated the rebels, and captured Lu Meng Sun and Xuanzang alive.

古文：黟、歙贼帅沈雪、沈能据栅自固，又攻拔之。
现代文：黝、歙的贼首沈雪、沈能凭借营寨独自坚持，杨素又将其扫平。
English: Shen Xue and Shen Neng, the heads of the bandits of Zou and Zou, insisted on their own by virtue of the encampment, and Yang Su swept them away.

古文：浙江贼帅高智慧自号东扬州刺史，船舰千艘，屯据要害，兵甚劲。
现代文：浙江的贼首高智慧自号为东扬州刺史，有上千艘战船，驻扎在险要的地方，兵力很强。
English: The leader of Zhejiang's thieves, Gao Zhizhi, called himself the East Yangzhou Historian. He had more than a thousand warships, stationed in critical places, and a strong military force.

古文：素击之，自旦至申，苦战而破。
现代文：杨素军进攻他，战斗从早晨一直持续到下午申时，终于苦战破敌。
English: Yang Su's army attacked him, and the battle lasted from the morning until the afternoon, when the enemy was finally defeated.

古文：智慧逃入海，素蹑之，从馀姚泛海趣永嘉。
现代文：高智慧逃到了海上，杨素紧追不舍，随着余姚漂洋过海来到了永嘉。
English: Gao Zhisheng fled to the sea, Yang Su followed closely, and together with Yuyao drifted across the ocean to Yongjia.

古文：智慧来拒战，素击走之，擒获数千人。
现代文：高智慧前来拒战，杨素打跑了他，擒获了贼兵几千人。
English: Gao Zhisheng came to resist the battle, Yang Su beat him and captured thousands of bandits.

古文：贼帅汪文进自称天子，据东阳，署其徒蔡道人为司空，守乐安。
现代文：叛贼之首汪文进自称天子，占据东阳，任他的党徒蔡道人为司空，派他据守乐安。
English: The head of the traitors, Wang Wenzhin, claimed to be the son of heaven and occupied Dongyang. He appointed his party member Cai Dao as the governor and sent him to guard Le'an.

古文：犹有贼首凶魁，逃亡山洞，恐其聚结，重扰苍生。
现代文：杨素前往讨伐，全部平定了他们，接着又击败了永嘉贼首沈孝彻。然后，杨素从陆路来到天台，挥兵直指临海郡，追捕那些漏网的叛贼。
English: Yang Su went to the crusade, pacified them all, and then defeated the Yongjia thief head Shen Xiaocher. Then, Yang Su came to the rooftop from the land and waved his soldiers straight to Linhai County to hunt down the traitors who slipped through the net.

古文：内史令、上柱国、越国公素，识达古今，经谋长远，比曾推毂，旧著威名，宜任以大兵，总为元帅，宣布朝风，振扬威武，擒剪叛亡，慰劳黎庶。
现代文：这次出征前前后后共经历了一百多次战斗，只剩下高智慧还逃守在闽越之间。高祖因为杨素长期在外，征旅劳累，下诏命令他驾乘驿车回朝休息。加封他的儿子杨玄感为上开府，赏赐彩色的丝织品三千段。杨素因为叛贼还没有消灭干净，怕养成后患，又请求出征。
English: After more than a hundred battles before and after this expedition, only Gaozu, the wisest of the three, remained behind. Gaozu ordered Yang Su, who had been away for a long time and was exhausted from the journey, to take a carriage back to the imperial court to rest. He also sealed his son Yang Xuan's heart as Shangkaifu and rewarded him with 3,000 pieces of colorful silk fabric. Yang Su, because the traitors had not yet been wiped out, was afraid of future troubles and asked to leave for the expedition.

古文：军民事务，一以委之。 素复乘传至会稽。
现代文：高祖下诏书表彰了他的功绩，又委任以元帅之职，命令他统管前方军民事务，率领大军，捕拿那些逃散的叛贼。于是杨素又乘驿车来到会稽。
English: Gaozhu's imperial rescript commended his achievements and appointed him to the post of marshal, ordering him to supervise the military and civilian affairs of the front, lead a large army, and capture those fugitive traitors. So Yang Su took a tuk-tuk to the auditorium.

古文：先是，泉州人王国庆，南安豪族也，杀刺史刘弘，据州为乱，诸亡贼皆归之。
现代文：这之前，泉州人王国庆，本是南安的豪族，他杀死了刺史刘弘，占据泉州叛乱，众多逃亡的叛贼都归附了他。
English: Prior to this, Quanzhou native Wang Guoqing, originally a member of the powerful Nan'an tribe, killed the assassin Liu Hong and occupied Quanzhou in a rebellion. Many of the fleeing traitors joined him.

古文：自以海路艰阻，非北人所习，不设备伍。
现代文：他自以为海路险阻，北方人不习惯，就没有设置海上防御的队伍。
English: He thought that the sea was difficult and dangerous, which was not what northerners were used to, so he did not take any precautions.

古文：素泛海掩至，国庆遑遽，弃州而走，馀党散入海岛，或守溪洞。
现代文：杨素却偏偏从海上掩袭而至，王国庆惊慌失措，弃州而逃，余党逃散海岛，或者据守山洞。
English: Yang Su, on the other hand, came from the sea to cover the attack, Wang Guoqing panicked and fled the state, and the rest of the party fled the island or guarded the cave.

古文：素分遣诸将，水陆追捕。乃密令人谓国庆曰： 尔之罪状，计不容诛。
现代文：杨素派人从水陆两路分头追捕，并且暗中叫人对王国庆说： 你的罪状，累计起来处以死刑还不够。
English: Yang Su sent people to chase Wang Guoqing from land and sea, and secretly told people to say to Wang Guoqing: "Your accumulated charges are not enough to be sentenced to death.

古文：唯有斩送智慧，可以塞责。 
现代文：只有斩送高智慧，才可以抵塞罪责。 
English: It is only by the sacrifice of high wisdom that guilt can be avoided.

古文：国庆于是执送智慧，斩于泉州。
现代文：王国庆于是把高智慧押来，在泉州将其斩首。
English: Wang Guoqing then summoned Gao Zhizhi and beheaded him in Quanzhou.

古文：自馀支党，悉来降附，江南大定。
现代文：其余那些被打散的党羽，也都来投降，江南大为安定。
English: The rest of the scattered party members also surrendered, and the south of the Yangtze River was generally stable.

古文：上遣左领军将军独孤陀至浚仪迎劳。
现代文：高祖派遣左领将军独孤陀到浚仪迎接犒赏杨素。
English: Gaozu dispatched the left-collar general Du Guoda to Dredge to welcome Yang Su.

古文：比到京师，问者日至。
现代文：等杨素回到京城，来问候他的人每天都有。
English: When Yang Su returned to Beijing, people came to greet him every day.

古文：拜素子玄奖为仪同，赐黄金四十斤，加银瓶，实以金钱，缣三千段，马二百匹，羊二千口，公田百顷，宅一区。
现代文：高祖拜杨素的儿子玄奖为仪同，赏赐黄金四十斤，外加一个银瓶，里面盛满了金钱，细绢三千段，马两百匹，羊两千口，官田一百顷，住宅一处。
English: Grandfather Bai Yangsu's son, Xuanzang, received the same award. He was given forty catties of gold, plus a silver bottle filled with money, three thousand pieces of fine silk, two hundred horses, two thousand sheep, one hundred hectares of government-owned land, and a house.

古文：代苏威为尚书右仆射，与高颎专掌朝政。
现代文：并且任命杨素取代苏威做了尚书右仆射，和高赹一同执掌朝政。
English: Yang Su replaced Su Wei as Shang Shu's right-hand man, and together with Gao Pi, he took charge of the imperial government.

古文：素性疏而辩，高下在心，朝臣之内，颇推高颎，敬牛弘，厚接薛道衡，视苏威蔑如也。
现代文：杨素性情粗疏而口才好，尊卑贵贱都放在心里，朝廷大臣之中，他非常推举高赹，敬重牛弘，深交薛道衡，而对苏威却不屑一顾。
English: Yang Su was coarse-natured but eloquent, and he kept in mind the high and the low. Among the ministers of the imperial court, he highly recommended Gao Zheng, respected Niu Hong, and had a deep friendship with Xue Daoheng, but he did not care about Su Wei.

古文：自馀朝贵，多被陵轹。
现代文：朝中其余的权贵大多被他欺凌。
English: He bullied most of the remaining nobles in the court.

古文：其才艺风调，优于高颎，至于推诚体国，处物平当，有宰相识度，不如颎远矣。
现代文：他的才学、本领、气度、风格比高赹要强；至于用自己的诚心体察国事，处理事情公平适当，有宰相的见识气度，就比高赹差远了。
English: His talent, ability, demeanor, and style are stronger than Gao Xi; as for using his sincerity to observe national affairs, deal with things fairly and appropriately, and have the insight of the prime minister, it is far from Gao Xi.

古文：寻令素监营仁寿宫，素遂夷山堙谷，督役严急，作者多死，宫侧时闻鬼哭之声。
现代文：不久，高祖命令杨素监管营造仁寿宫，杨素指挥平山填谷，督促劳役十分严急，做工的很多都累死了，宫殿旁边经常听到鬼哭声。
English: Soon, Gao Zu ordered Yang Su to supervise the construction of the Ren Shou Palace, Yang Su commanded the filling of the valley, and urged the labor service to be very urgent. Many of the workers were tired to death, and ghosts were often heard crying next to the palace.

古文：及宫成，上令高颎前视，奏称颇伤绮丽，大损人丁，高祖不悦。
现代文：仁寿宫修好后，高祖命令高赹前往察看，高赹报告说宫殿修得过于绮丽，损失民工太多，高祖心里颇不高兴。
English: After Ren Shou Palace was repaired, Gao Zu ordered Gao Gan to go and inspect it. Gao Gan reported that the palace was too beautiful and too many migrant workers were lost. Gao Zu was quite unhappy.

古文：素尤惧，计无所出，即于北门启独孤皇后曰： 帝王法有离宫别馆，今天下太平，造此一宫，何足损费！ 
现代文：杨素忧虑惧怕，却想不出什么办法，只好在北门启奏独孤皇后说： 帝王理当有一些行宫、别墅，现在天下太平，我们仅仅修造了这么一座宫殿，哪里就谈得上浪费了呢！ 
English: Yang Su was worried and afraid, but he couldn't think of anything to do, so he had to play the lonely queen at the north gate and say: The emperor should have some palaces and villas, now the world is peaceful, we only built such a palace, where can we talk about waste!

古文：后以此理谕上，上意乃解。于是赐钱百万，锦绢三千段。
现代文：皇后把这番话转告高祖，高祖这才消除了心中的不快，于是赐给杨素一百万钱，三千段锦绢。
English: The empress relayed these words to Gao Zu, and only then did Gao Zu eliminate the unhappiness in his heart, so he gave Yang Su one million money and three thousand pieces of brocade.

古文：十八年，突厥达头可汗犯塞，以素为灵州道行军总管，出塞讨之，赐物二千段，黄金百斤。
现代文：开皇十八年，突厥达头可汗进犯边塞。高祖拜杨素为灵州道行军总管，出塞讨伐，并赐给他织物两千段、黄金一百斤。
English: In the 18th year of the Emperor's reign, the Turkic Dadu Khan invaded the frontier fortress. Gaozu Bai Yang, who was the head of the Lingzhou Road march, went to the fortress to fight, and gave him two thousand pieces of fabric and one hundred pounds of gold.

古文：先是，诸将与虏战，每虑胡骑奔突，皆以戎车步骑相参，舆鹿角为方阵，骑在其内。
现代文：这之前，众将和突厥人作战，总是担心胡人的战马横冲直撞，都把战车和步卒骑兵相互掺杂，与形似鹿角的障碍物一起布成方阵，骑兵在方阵之内。
English: Before that, generals fighting the Turks, always worried about the rampaging horses of the Huns, mixed chariots and foot cavalry with each other and formed a phalanx with obstacles resembling antlers, with cavalry in the phalanx.

古文：素谓人曰： 此乃自固之道，非取胜之方也。 
现代文：杨素对别人说： 这只是巩固防御的途径，而不是夺取胜利的方法。 
English: Yang Su said to others: This is just a way to consolidate the defense, not a way to win.

古文：于是悉除旧法，令诸军为骑阵。
现代文：于是全部废除了原来的作法，命令诸军布设骑兵方阵。
English: As a result, he abandoned all the old methods of warfare and ordered the entire army to change to a cavalry formation.

古文：达头闻之大喜，曰： 此天赐我也。 
现代文：达头听了非常高兴，说： 这是天助我！ 
English: Dadou was very happy to hear this and said, "This is God's help to me!

古文：因下马仰天而拜，率精骑十余万而至。
现代文：并且下马直拜上天，然后率领精兵十多万攻来。
English: And dismounted and bowed to the heavens, and then led more than a hundred thousand elite soldiers to attack.

古文：素奋击，大破之，达头被重创而遁，杀伤不可胜计，群虏号哭而去。
现代文：杨素奋力出击，大败敌骑。达头受重伤逃走，其余被杀死杀伤的不计其数，幸存者都哭号着逃跑了。
English: Yang Su fought hard and defeated the enemy cavalry. Datou was seriously injured and fled, the rest were killed and injured countless times, and the survivors all ran away crying.

古文：优诏褒扬，赐缣二万匹，及万钉宝带。加子玄感位大将军，玄奖、玄纵、积善并上仪同。
现代文：高祖下诏书大大表扬杨素，赏赐给他细绢两万匹，外加一条万钉宝带，加封他的儿子玄感为大将军，玄奖、玄纵、积善一并升为上仪同。
English: Gao Zu's imperial edict greatly praised Yang Su, awarding him 20,000 fine horses, plus a million-nail treasure belt, and sealing his son Xuan Xuan as a general. Xuan Xuan, Xuan Zong, and Jie Zhen were all promoted to Shang Yi Tong.

古文：素多权略，乘机赴敌，应变无方，然大抵驭戎严整，有犯军令者立斩之，无所宽贷。
现代文：杨素很有随机应变的谋略，总是把握好时机去同敌人作战，他应对情况的变化并不拘泥于一定的方法，而控制军队严厉有序，如果有谁违犯了军令，他就立即斩首，没有宽容的。
English: Yang Su has a strategy of random contingency, always seizing the opportunity to fight with the enemy. He does not stick to a certain method to deal with changes in the situation, but controls the army in a strict and orderly manner. If anyone violates military orders, he will immediately behead them. There is no tolerance.

古文：每将临寇，辄求人过失而斩之，多者百余人，少不下十数。流血盈前，言笑自若。
现代文：每次临战之前，他总是寻找别人的过失而将其杀掉，多时达一百来人，少的时候也不下十来个，血流满地，他仍然谈笑自如。
English: Before every battle, he always looked for someone else's fault and killed them, sometimes up to a hundred people, sometimes not less than ten, blood flowing all over the ground, he still talks and laughs freely.

古文：及其对阵，先令一二百人赴敌，陷阵则已，如不能陷阵而还者，无问多少，悉斩之。
现代文：等到两军对垒，他总是先命令一两百人前去和敌人交战，攻破敌阵倒还罢了，如果没能攻破敌阵而败回来的，不管有多少人，他都一律处死。
English: When the two armies faced each other, he would always first order one or two hundred men to go forward and engage the enemy. If they failed to break through the enemy lines and returned defeated, he would execute all of them, no matter how many there were.

古文：又令三二百人复进，还如向法。
现代文：然后再派两三百人继续进攻，作法和先前一样。
English: Then he sent another two or three hundred men to continue the attack, as before.

古文：将士股忄栗，有必死之心，由是战无不胜，称为名将。
现代文：将士们两腿发抖，害怕至极，认为进退大不了都是一死，因而战无不胜，杨素也因此被人们称为名将。
English: The soldiers were trembling on their legs, extremely afraid, and thought that the only way out was death, so they were invincible. Yang Su was therefore called a great general.

古文：素时贵幸，言无不从，其从素征伐者，微功必录，至于他将，虽有大功，多为文吏所谴却。
现代文：杨素当时受到重用宠信，他说的话高祖没有不听的。那些跟随他出征讨伐的人，只要有一点点小小的功劳，就会记载下来，至于跟随其他将军的，即使立了大功，也多被文官所排挤掉。
English: At that time, Yang Su was favored by many generals, and Gaozu did not fail to listen to what he said. Those who followed him on the crusade, as long as they had a little bit of small merit, would be recorded. As for those who followed other generals, even if they made great contributions, they were mostly crowded out by civil officials.

古文：故素虽严忍，士亦以此愿从焉。
现代文：所以杨素虽然严厉残忍，士兵们还是愿意跟着他。
English: So even though Yang Su was harsh and cruel, the soldiers were still willing to follow him.

古文：二十年，晋王广为灵朔道行军元帅，素为长史。
现代文：开皇二十年，晋王杨广为灵朔道行军元帅，杨素为长史。
English: Twenty years after the emperor's enthronement, the Jin king Yang Guang became the marshal of the Lingshuo Dao march, and Yang Su had a long history.

古文：王卑躬以交素。及为太子，素之谋也。
现代文：晋王降低自己的身份交结杨素，后作太子，也是杨素的主意。
English: It was also Yang Su's idea for Jin Wang to lower his status and marry Yang Su, and later become crown prince.

古文：仁寿初，代高颎为尚书左仆射，赐良马百匹，牝马二百匹，奴婢百口。
现代文：仁寿初年，杨素取代高赹做了尚书左仆射。高祖赏赐给他好马一百匹、母马两百匹、奴婢一百口。
English: In the first year of his benevolent life, Yang Su replaced Gao Yao as Shang Shuxi's right-hand man. Gao Zu rewarded him with one hundred good horses, two hundred mares, and one hundred slaves.

古文：其年，以素为行军元帅，出云州击突厥，连破之。
现代文：这一年，高祖又拜杨素为行军元帅，前往云州攻打突厥，连连破敌。
English: In the same year, Gao Zu also followed Yang Su as a marching marshal and went to Yunnan to attack the Turks, defeating the enemy one after another.

古文：突厥退走，率骑追蹑，至夜而及之。
现代文：突厥逃跑，杨素率领骑兵紧追不舍，到夜里终于赶上。
English: When the Turks fled, Yang Su led the cavalry in hot pursuit, and finally caught up with them in the night.

古文：将复战，恐贼越逸，令其骑稍后。
现代文：杨素想再次进攻，又怕敌人分散逃跑，就命令骑兵稍稍跟在后边。
English: Yang Su wanted to attack again, but fearing that the enemy would scatter and flee, he ordered the cavalry to follow a little behind.

古文：于是亲将两骑，并降突厥二人，与虏并行，不之觉也。
现代文：他于是亲自带领两名骑兵和两个投降的突厥人潜入敌阵，同敌人一起前行，敌人没有发觉。
English: He then personally led two cavalrymen and two surrendered Turks to infiltrate the enemy lines and advance with the enemy without the enemy noticing.

古文：非唯廊庙之器，实是社稷之臣，若不加褒赏，何以申兹劝励？
现代文：等到敌人停下来，止宿屯驻的地方还没安排好，杨素命令后边的骑兵突然袭击，大败他们。从此，突厥人逃得远远的，碛南再没有他们的踪迹了。
English: Waiting for the enemy to stop, Yang Su ordered the cavalry behind to swoop in and defeat them. From then on, the Turks fled far away, and there was no trace of them in southern Hunan.

古文：可别封一子义康郡公，邑万户，子子孙孙，承袭不绝。
现代文：因为这次的战功，高祖让杨素的儿子玄感进位柱国，玄纵为淮南郡公，并赏赐给他织物两万段。文献皇后去世后，墓葬的规模制度，大多出自杨素之手。
English: Because of his war exploits, Gao Zu promoted Yang Su's son Xuan Xuan to the position of pillar state, and Xuan Xuan to the position of Huainan County governor, and rewarded him with 20,000 pieces of fabric.

古文：馀如故。并赐田三十顷，绢万段，米万石，金钵一，实以金，银钵一，实以珠，并绫锦五百段。
现代文：高祖认为很好，下诏书大大表彰他的功劳，封他的一个儿子为义康郡公，食邑一万户，世代承袭，并赏赐给他良田三十顷，绢一万段，米一万石，金钵一个，装满了金子，银钵一个，盛满了珠宝，外加绫、锦共五百段。
English: Gao Zu thought it was very good, and the next imperial edict greatly commended his merits, and made one of his sons the governor of Yikang County, with 10,000 households and generations of inheritance, and awarded him 30 hectares of good fields, 10,000 pieces of rice, 10,000 stones, one gold ingot filled with gold, one silver ingot filled with jewels, plus 500 pieces of brocade and brocade.

古文：时素贵宠日隆，其弟约、从父文思、弟文纪，及族父异，并尚书列卿。
现代文：当时杨素一天比一天显贵荣耀，他的弟弟杨约、叔父杨文思、杨文纪以及族父杨异，都是尚书，位列公卿。
English: At that time, Yang Su was becoming more and more distinguished and glorious day by day. His younger brother Yang You, uncle Yang Wensi, Yang Wenji and patriarch Yang Yi were all Shangshu and ranked as nobles.

古文：诸子无汗马之劳，位至柱国、刺史。
现代文：诸子虽无汗马之劳，也都官至柱国、刺史。
English: Although the sons did not have to work hard, they were also promoted to pillar countries and made history.

古文：家僮数千，后庭妓妾曳绮罗者以千数。
现代文：杨素家童几千人，后院披罗挂绮的乐妓小妾就以千计。
English: There are thousands of children in Yang Su's family, and thousands of concubines of prostitutes hanging in the backyard.

古文：第宅华侈，制拟宫禁。
现代文：府第华丽奢侈，规模体制摹仿皇宫。
English: The prefecture is opulent and extravagant, with a scale modeled after the Imperial Palace.

古文：有鲍亨者，善属文，殷胄者，工草隶，并江南士人，因高智慧没为家奴。
现代文：当时有一个叫鲍亨的人，很会写文章，还有一个叫殷胄的，精通草书、隶书，都是江南的读书人，却因为高智慧的缘故埋没为杨素的家奴。
English: At that time, there was a person named Bao Heng, who was very good at writing articles, and a person named Yin Qi, who was proficient in cursive and cursive, both of whom were readers in the south of the Yangtze River, but because of their high intelligence, they were buried as Yang Su's family slaves.

古文：亲戚故吏，布列清显，素之贵盛，近古未闻。
现代文：杨素的内外亲戚和过去属下的官吏，都位列清静显要之职。杨素的显贵，近代无人可与他相比。
English: Yang Su's relatives at home and abroad, as well as the government officials who were his subordinates in the past, all hold important positions. Yang Su's prominence is unparalleled in modern times.

古文：炀帝初为太子，忌蜀王秀，与素谋之，构成其罪，后竟废黜。
现代文：炀帝刚做太子的时候，非常顾忌蜀王杨秀，就和杨素谋划陷害他，最后使杨秀被废黜。
English: When Emperor Qian was just crown prince, he was very suspicious of Yang Xiu, the king of Shu, and plotted with Yang Su to frame him, which eventually led to Yang Xiu's dethronement.

古文：朝臣有违忤者，虽至诚体国，如贺若弼、史万岁、李纲、柳彧等，素皆阴中之。
现代文：朝臣之中如果有违背冒犯他的，即使其非常忠诚地为国事着想，像贺若弼、史万岁、李纲、柳等，杨素也在暗地里中伤他们。
English: If any of his courtiers disobeyed and offended him, even if they were very loyal to the national cause, such as He Ruojuan, Shi Wanling, Li Gang, Liu, etc., Yang Su also secretly slandered them.

古文：若有附会及亲戚，虽无才用，必加进擢。
现代文：如果归附奉迎他或者是他亲戚，即使无才可用，他也一定加以推荐提拔。
English: If someone clings to him and his relatives and friends, even if they have no talent, they will be promoted.

古文：朝廷靡然，莫不畏附。
现代文：朝廷内外没有不怕他、不归附他的。
English: The whole court was like this, with people fearfully clinging to him.

古文：唯兵部尚书柳述，以帝婿之重，数于上前面折素。
现代文：只有兵部尚书柳述凭着自己驸马的身份，多次在高祖面前说杨素的坏话。
English: Only the military commander, Shang Shuliushu, repeatedly said bad words about Yang Su in front of Gao Zu with the identity of his steed.

古文：大理卿梁毗，抗表上言素作威作福。
现代文：大理寺卿梁毗上书高祖，说杨素作威作福。
English: Liang Pi, the abbot of Dali Temple, wrote a letter to the founder of the college, saying that Yang Su's work was a blessing.

古文：上渐疏忌之，后因出敕曰： 仆射国之宰辅，不可躬亲细务，但三五日一度向省，评论大事。 
现代文：高祖于是逐渐疏远和猜忌杨素，后来下来力令说： 仆射是朝廷的辅政大臣，不可亲自处理那些细小的事务，只须三五天到官署一次，讨论一些国家大事就行了。 
English: Gaozu then gradually distanced himself from Yang Su and became suspicious of him. Later, he issued a strong order saying, "As the Vice-Minister of the Imperial Court, I cannot personally handle those small matters. I only need to go to the government office once every three to five days to discuss some national events.

古文：外示优崇，实夺之权也。
现代文：表面上显示对他的尊崇、优待，实际上剥夺了他的权力。
English: On the surface, it shows preferential treatment and respect for Yang Su, but in fact, it is to seize Yang Su's power.

古文：终仁寿之末，不复通判省事。
现代文：直到仁寿末，杨素不再处理事务。
English: Until the end of his life, Yang Su no longer handled affairs.

古文：上赐王公以下射，素箭为第一，上手以外国所献金精盘，价直巨万，以赐之。
现代文：高祖曾赏赐王公以下的人射箭，杨素名列第一，高祖亲将外国进贡来的金精盘，价值万两，赐给了杨素。
English: Gao Zu once awarded archery to people below Wang Gong, Yang Su ranked first. Gao Zu's relatives gave Yang Su a gold plate worth 10,000 taels from foreign tributes.

古文：四年，从幸仁寿宫，宴赐重叠。
现代文：仁寿四年，杨素跟随高祖驾临仁寿宫，高祖又多次赏赐宴席。
English: In the fourth year of his life, he followed Emperor Wen to the Renju Palace, where he was rewarded with a very sumptuous banquet.

古文：及上不豫，素与兵部尚书柳述、黄门侍郎元岩等入閤侍疾。
现代文：等到高祖病重，杨素和兵部尚书柳述、黄门侍郎元岩等人入宫侍候。
English: When Gao Zu was gravely ill, Yang Su, Hyobu Shang Shuliusu, Huangmen attendant Genyan and others waited for him to enter the palace.

古文：时皇太子入居大宝殿，虑上有不讳，须豫防拟，乃手自为书，封出问素。
现代文：当时皇太子杨广住在宫内的大宝殿，怕高祖有什么不好的消息须要预先防备，于是亲自写了一封信，封好送出来问杨素。
English: At this time, the crown prince Yang Guang entered the palace and lived in the Great Treasure Hall. Worried that Emperor Wen would have an accident and had to take precautions early, he wrote a letter in his own hand and sealed it for Yang Su.

古文：素录出事状以报太子。
现代文：杨素记下宫外的形势，来报告太子。
English: Yang Su jotted down the situation outside the palace to report to the crown prince.

古文：宫人误送上所，上览而大恚。
现代文：宫人却将回信误送到了高祖的住处，高祖见信大怒。
English: The courtiers mistakenly sent the reply to Emperor Wen's bedchamber, and Emperor Wen was extremely angry after reading it.

古文：所宠陈贵人又言太子无礼。
现代文：这时，高祖宠爱的陈贵人又说太子对她无礼。
English: At this time, Gao Zu's favorite Chen Guiren also said that the prince was rude to her.

古文：上遂发怒，欲召庶人勇。
现代文：高祖于是大发脾气，要召见已废的皇子杨勇。
English: Emperor Wen became angry and wanted to recall his eldest son Yang Yong, who had been abolished as a commoner.

古文：太子谋之于素，素矫诏追东宫兵士帖上台宿卫，门禁出入，并取宇文述、郭衍节度，又令张衡侍疾。
现代文：太子与杨素谋划对策，杨素假传圣旨派东宫的士兵入宫守卫，出入都由宇文述、郭衍决定，又命令张衡守候皇上的病情。
English: The prince and Yang Su planned a countermeasure. Yang Su sent soldiers of the East Palace to guard the entrance and exit of the palace, which was decided by Wu Wenshu and Guo Yan. He also ordered Zhang Heng to wait for the emperor's illness.

古文：上以此日崩，由是颇有异论。
现代文：高祖就在这天去世了，因此朝廷内外有很多非议。
English: Emperor Wen passed away on this day, which caused quite a bit of controversy.

古文：汉王谅反，遣茹茹天保来据蒲州，烧断河桥。又遣王聃子率数万人并力拒守。
现代文：汉王杨谅谋反，派蠕蠕天保占领蒲州，烧断了河桥，又派王耳冉子率领几万人与他合力防守。
English: Han King Yang Peng plotted a rebellion, sent Cui Cui Tianbao to occupy Puzhou, burned down the river bridge, and sent Wang Eranzi to lead tens of thousands of people to join forces with him to defend.

古文：素将轻骑五千袭之，潜于渭口宵济，迟明击之，天保败走，聃子慑而以城降。
现代文：杨素率领五千轻骑前去偷袭，他先隐蔽在渭口，夜间悄悄渡河，黎明时发动进攻，蠕蠕天保大败而逃，王耳冉子因害怕而开城投降。
English: Yang Su led five thousand light cavalry to make a sneak attack. He first hid in the estuary, quietly crossed the river at night, launched an attack at dawn, and fled to avoid a crushing defeat. Wang Eranzi was afraid and surrendered.

古文：有诏征还。
现代文：炀帝下诏书召回杨素。
English: Emperor Qian issued an edict to recapture him.

古文：初，素将行也，计日破贼，皆如所量。
现代文：起初，杨素出发之前就计算过几天可以打败敌人，结果不出所料。
English: At first, Yang Su calculated a few days before departure to defeat the enemy, and the result was unexpected.

古文：帝于是以素为并州道行军总管、河北安抚大使，率众数万讨谅。
现代文：炀帝又拜杨素为并州道行军总管、河北安抚大使，率领几万人讨伐杨谅。
English: Emperor Qian also appointed Yang Su as the general manager of the concurrent state road march and the ambassador of pacification in Hebei, leading tens of thousands of people to fight against Yang Tong.

古文：时晋、绛、吕三州并为谅城守，素各以二千人縻之而去。
现代文：当时晋州、绛州、吕州州城都被杨谅守住，杨素各派两千人去牵制他们。
English: At that time, Jin, Handan, and the three provincial capitals of Luzhou were all guarded by Yang Piao, and Yang Su attracted them with two thousand soldiers each.

古文：谅遣赵子开拥众十余万，策绝径路，屯据高壁，布阵五十里。
现代文：杨谅命令赵子开拥十余万之众，占领了所有的道路，盘踞在高壁，摆开五十里的战阵。
English: Yang Chong ordered Zhao Zi to embrace more than one hundred thousand people, occupied all roads, entrenched in the high wall, and set up a fifty-mile battle line.

古文：素令诸将以兵临之，自引奇兵潜入霍山，缘崖谷而进，直指其营，一战破之，杀伤数万。
现代文：杨素命令部将带兵正面对敌，自己则率领一支队伍潜入霍山，沿着悬崖深谷前进，直捣叛军老巢，一举击败了他们，杀死杀伤的数以万计。
English: Yang Su's command would lead the troops to face the enemy head-on, while he himself led a team to sneak into Huoshan, advance along the cliff and deep valley, and directly attack the rebels' lair, defeating them in one fell swoop, killing and injuring tens of thousands.

古文：谅所署介州刺史梁修罗屯介休，闻素至，惧，弃城而走。
现代文：杨谅所任命的介州刺史梁修罗驻守在介休，梁修罗听说杨素来了，非常害怕，弃城而逃。
English: The governor of Jingzhou, Liang Shuro, who was appointed by Yang Jun, was stationed in Jiehu. When Liang Shuro heard that Yang Su had come, he was very afraid and fled the city.

古文：进至清源，去并州三十里，谅率其将王世宗、赵子开、萧摩诃等，众且十万，来拒战。
现代文：杨素继续前进，到达清源，离并州还有三十里。杨谅率领部将王世宗、赵子开、萧摩诃等将近十万人马，前来迎战。
English: Yang Su continued to advance and reached Qingyuan, still thirty miles away from the annexation of the state. Yang Peng led nearly one hundred thousand horses, including Wang Shizong, Zhao Zikai and Xiao Maqi, to come to fight.

古文：悲欣惭惧，五情振越，虽百殒微躯，无以一报。
现代文：杨素又打败了他们，活捉了萧摩诃。杨谅退守并州，杨素进兵包围了他，杨谅无计可施，非常窘迫，只好投降，其余党羽也都一一铲平。
English: Yang Su defeated them again and captured Xiao Miao alive. Yang Piao retreated and annexed the state, Yang Siu's soldiers surrounded him, Yang Piao had no choice but to surrender, the rest of the party feathers were also shoveled one by one.

古文：其月还京师，因从驾幸洛阳，以素领营东京大监。
现代文：炀帝派遣杨素的弟弟修武公杨约携带亲笔诏书慰劳杨素，杨素见诏后也上表陈述了自己的谢意。这个月杨素回到京城，跟随炀帝驾临洛阳。炀帝任杨素为营建东京的大监。
English: Emperor Gao sent Yang Su's younger brother, Emperor Xiuwu, to Yang Guo with an imperial edict in his own handwriting to express his gratitude to Yang Su. After seeing the imperial edict, Yang Su also expressed his gratitude. This month, Yang Su returned to Beijing and followed Emperor Gao to Luoyang. Emperor Gao appointed Yang Su as the superintendent of the construction of Tokyo.

古文：以平谅之功，拜其子万石、仁行、侄玄挺皆仪同三司，赉物五万段，绮罗千匹，谅之妓妾二十人。
现代文：因杨素平定杨谅有功，炀帝拜他的儿子万石、仁行，侄子玄挺都为仪同三司，并赐给他们织物五万段、绮罗一千匹，赐杨谅妓妾二十人。
English: Because Yang Su had the merit of defeating Yang Chong, Emperor Qian worshiped his sons Wan Shi, Ren Xing, and nephew Xuan Ting as the three great generals, and gave them fifty thousand pieces of fabric, one thousand yakitori, and twenty prostitute concubines to Yang Chong.

古文：大业元年，迁尚书令，赐东京甲第一区，物二千段。寻拜太子太师，馀官如故。
现代文：隋炀帝大业元年，又升杨素为尚书令，赏赐给他东京上等府第一处，织物两千段，不久又拜为太子太师，其他职务不变。
English: In the first year of Emperor Sui's reign, Yang Su was promoted to Shang Shuling, and was awarded the first place in Tokyo's high-ranking prefectures, with two thousand pieces of fabric. Soon after, he was made the crown prince and grand master, and his other positions remained unchanged.

古文：前后赏锡，不可胜计。
现代文：前后赏赐给他的东西不知有多少。
English: I don't know how much was given to him back and forth.

古文：明年，拜司徒，改封楚公，真食二千五百户。
现代文：第二年，炀帝拜杨素为司徒，又改封他为楚公，食邑两千五百户。
English: In the following year, he was awarded the title of "Stu" and changed his title to "Chukong," and was given to 2,500 households in Shifu.

古文：未臻遐寿，遽揖清徽。
现代文：这一年，杨素死在任上。
English: This year, Yang Su died in office.

古文：春秋递代，方绵岁祀，式播雕篆，用图勋德，可立碑宰隧，以彰盛美。 素尝以五言诗七百字赠番州刺史薛道衡，词气宏拔，风韵秀上，亦为一时盛作。
现代文：谥号叫 景武 ，追封他为光禄大夫、太尉公、弘农河东绛郡临汾文城河内汲郡长平上党西河十郡太守，赐给他载丧的鍂车、为他执斑剑的仪仗四十人，以及鍂车前后的仪仗队和乐队，还赐给谷子小麦五千石、织物五千段，派鸿胪卿专门监督办理丧事，并且下诏书表示哀悼。杨素曾经作了一首共七百字的五言诗送给番州刺史薛道衡，气势非常宏大，风韵出众，堪称一时的上乘之作。
English: His posthumous name was Jingwu, and he was posthumously given the titles of Guanglu Doctor, Taifeng, Hongnonghe Donglu County, Linyi, Wencheng, Hanoi, Gu County, Pingcheng, Party, West River and Ten Counties Governor. He was given a funeral carriage, a ceremonial guard of forty people to hold a spotted sword for him, and an honor guard and band before and after the carriage. He was also given five thousand kilos of corn and five thousand pieces of fabric. He sent Hongyuqing to supervise the funeral, and sent a letter of condolence. Yang Su once wrote a five-character poem with a total of seven

古文：未几而卒，道衡叹曰： 人之将死，其言也善，岂若是乎！ 
现代文：写后没几天，杨素就死了。薛道衡叹息说： 人快要死的时候，他的话语也变得很友善了，难道就是像这样的吗？ 
English: A few days after writing, Yang Su died. Xue Daoheng sighed and said: When a person is about to die, his words also become very friendly. Is it like this?

古文：有集十卷。
现代文：杨素留有文集十卷。
English: There are ten volumes of anthologies.

古文：素虽有建立之策及平杨谅功，然特为帝所猜忌，外示殊礼，内情甚薄。
现代文：杨素虽然有辅佐高祖建国立业的谋略，并且有平定杨谅的功绩，然而却深为炀帝所忌。炀帝表面显出对他特殊的礼遇，实际上恩情却很淡薄。
English: Although Yang Su had a strategy of assisting Gao Zu to build the national cause, and had the merit of pacifying Yang Peng, he was deeply hated by Emperor Xuan. Emperor Xuan showed special courtesy to him on the surface, but in reality, his favor was very thin.

古文：太史言隋分野有大丧，因改封于楚。楚与隋同分，欲以此厌当之。
现代文：太史官说隋地所属的分野将有重大的丧事发生，炀帝因而改封杨素为楚公，因为楚地和隋地属同一分野，炀帝想借杨素来拦挡遭丧的运气。
English: The great historian said that there would be a major tragedy in the field belonging to the Sui Dynasty, and Emperor Qian thus changed Yang Su's title to Chu Gong. Because Chu and Sui belonged to the same field, Emperor Qian wanted to use Yang Su to prevent the loss of luck.

古文：素寝疾之日，帝每令名医诊候，赐以上药。然密问医人，恆恐不死。
现代文：杨素卧病在床的时候，炀帝常派一些有名的医生前去诊治侍候，并且赐他许多上好的药品，然而却总在暗地里问医生，总怕他不死去。
English: When Yang Su was sick in bed, Emperor Qian often sent some famous doctors to treat the attendant, and gave him many good medicines. However, he always secretly asked the doctor, always afraid that he would not die.

古文：素又自知名位已极，不肯服药，亦不将慎，每语弟约曰： 我岂须更活耶？ 
现代文：杨素知道自己的名望和地位已到了极限，不肯吃药，也不想谨小慎微地活下去了，经常对弟弟杨约说： 我难道还要活下去吗？ 
English: Yang Su knew that his fame and status had reached the limit, refused to take medicine, and did not want to live cautiously. He often said to his brother Yang You: Do I still want to live?

古文：素贪冒财货，营求产业。东、西二京，居宅侈丽，朝毁夕复，营缮无已。爰及诸方都会处，邸店、水硙并利田宅以千百数，时议以此鄙之。
现代文：杨素依仗自己富足的钱财，广求家产，东西二京他的居宅奢侈华丽，早晨拆毁晚上重建，营造修缮从不停止，在各方的大城市，他的旅店、水磨和肥沃的田地、华丽的房子都以千百来计算。当时人们议论纷纷，并且因此而瞧不起他。
English: Yang Su, relying on his abundant money and wealth, widely sought family property, his residence in Beijing was extravagant and gorgeous, demolished in the morning and rebuilt in the evening, and construction and repair never stopped. In the big cities of all countries, his hotels, watermills, fertile fields, and gorgeous houses were all counted in thousands. At that time, people talked about it and looked down on him for it.

古文：子玄感嗣，别有传。
现代文：杨素死后，他的儿子玄感继承了他的爵位，玄感另外有传。
English: After Yang Su's death, his son Xuan Xuan inherited his title. There is another legend about Xuan Xuan.

古文：诸子皆坐玄感诛死。
现代文：其余几个儿子后来因受玄感的牵连都被杀死。
English: The rest of his sons were later killed in mysterious circumstances.

古文：约字惠伯，素异母弟也。在童兒时，尝登树堕地，为查所伤，由是竟为宦者。
现代文：史臣说：杨素年轻的时候轻生而侠义，洒脱而不受羁绊，兼有文才武略，志向远大，常以立功扬名自期。
English: Sichen said: When Yang Su was young, she was frivolous and chivalrous, free-spirited and uninhibited, both literary and martial, ambitious, and often made a name for herself.

古文：性好沉静，内多谲诈，好学强记。素友爱之，凡有所为，必先筹于约而后行之。
现代文：高祖初举大事，将要扫清宇内、夺取天下的时候，常把一些关系重大的机密要事托付给他，总是让他承担起协助、辅佐的重任。他在宇内扫尽妖孽的气焰，使四海之内风平浪静，没有一点波澜；在边疆摧毁敌人矫健的骑兵，迫使匈奴远逃。
English: At the beginning of his great exploits, when Gaozu was about to clean up the world and conquer the world, he often entrusted him with some important confidential matters. He always asked him to take on the important task of assisting and supporting. He swept away the evil spirits in the world and made the four seas calm without any waves; he destroyed the enemy's gallant cavalrymen in the frontier and forced the Xiongnu to flee far away.

古文：在周末，以素军功，赐爵安成县公，拜上仪同三司。高祖受禅，授长秋卿。
现代文：推究他铲平凶恶残暴的敌人平定叛乱，有功之臣没有谁能比得过他；看他那些神奇的计策和高妙的文章，堪称一代英豪。
English: No meritorious minister can match him when it comes to crushing the vicious and cruel enemy and putting down the rebellion; looking at his miraculous strategies and brilliant articles, he can be called a generation of heroes.

古文：久之，为邵州刺史，入为宗正少卿，转大理少卿。时皇太子无宠，而晋王广规欲夺宗，以素幸于上，而雅信约。
现代文：然而他一味地凭借自己的聪明和欺诈自立于世，不走仁义的正道，阿谀奉迎皇上，使皇上的行为有些偏离；修筑建造离宫铺张浪费，使皇上陷于奢侈的名声；策划废除皇上的嫡亲长子，使国家到了快要倾覆的危险境地。
English: However, he blindly relied on his own cleverness and deception to become independent in the world, and did not follow the right path of benevolence and righteousness. He flattered and welcomed the emperor, which caused the emperor's behavior to deviate somewhat; he built and constructed extravagantly and wastefully, which made the emperor fall into the reputation of luxury; he plotted to abolish the emperor's legitimate eldest son, which brought the country to a dangerous situation of imminent overthrow.

古文：于是用张衡计，遣宇文述大以金宝赂遗于约，因通王意，说之曰： 夫守正履道，固人臣之常致，反经合义，亦达者之令图。
现代文：最终使国家破灭，皇家的祖庙变为一片废墟，在市井里每天受到风霜雨露的侵蚀。探求这祸害衰败的源头，实在是杨素的罪过啊！幸好他死了，而他的儿子又犯上作乱。他坟上的新土还没有被风吹干，就遭致满门抄斩，坟墓也被挖开，全族的人都被诛死。
English: In the end, the country was ruined, the royal ancestral temple was reduced to rubble, and the wells in the city were eroded every day by wind, rain, and dew. It was Yang Su's sin to explore the source of this disaster and decay! Fortunately, he died, and his son committed a riot. The new soil on his grave had not yet been dried by the wind, and the door was chopped, the grave was dug up, and the whole family was strangled.

古文：自古贤人君子，莫不与时消息，以避祸患。
现代文：这才知道坏事做多了会留下祸害，这话并非瞎说。
English: Since ancient times, there has never been a wise man or gentleman who did not advance and retreat with the world, to avoid disaster and protect himself.

古文：公之兄弟，功名盖世，当途用事，有年岁矣。
现代文：不守礼法的事做多了就会殃及自身，指的就是这一类的事啊！杨素字处道，弘农华阴人。
English: If you do more things that don't follow the etiquette and law, you will bring harm to yourself. This is the kind of thing I'm referring to! Yang Su Zi is a good person, Hong Nong Hua Yin is a bad person.

古文：朝臣为足下家所屈辱者，可胜数哉！
现代文：祖父杨暄是魏朝的辅国将军、谏议大夫。父亲杨敷为北周的汾州刺史，死于北齐。
English: His grandfather, Yang Jie, was a general of the auxiliary state of the Wei Dynasty and a doctor of the imperial court. His father, Yang Shiki, was the governor of Bozhou in Northern Zhou and died in Northern Qi.

古文：又储宫以所欲不行，每切齿于执政。
现代文：杨素小时候穷困失意，不拘小节，有远大的志向。
English: In addition, the crown prince often hated your brother because he could not achieve the goal of succession.

古文：公虽自结于人主，而欲危公者固亦多矣。主上一旦弃群臣，公亦何以取庇？
现代文：世人都不理解他，只有他的堂叔祖、魏朝的尚书仆射杨宽认为他很不一般，常对子孙说： 处道不是一般的人，他日一定出类拔萃，无与伦比，不是你们赶得上的。 
English: The world did not understand him, only his great-uncle, the Wei Dynasty's Shang Shuxu servant She Yang Kuan, thought he was very unusual, and often said to his children and grandchildren: He is not an ordinary person, his day must be outstanding, incomparable, not what you can catch up with.

古文：今皇太子失爱于皇后，主上素有废黜之心，此公所知也。
现代文：杨素后来和安定人牛弘志同道合，他们勤奋好学，研究探讨精心专诚，从不感到疲倦，因而很多方面都精通或者涉猎。他善于写文章，善长草书、隶书，很留心通过观察风向占卜吉凶。
English: Now, the crown prince is not liked by the queen, and the Lord has always had the idea of abolishing the throne, as you know.

古文：今若请立晋王，在贤兄之口耳。
现代文：杨素长髯丰额，有一副英雄豪杰的仪表。
English: If you ask for Prince Jin to be made crown prince, say only one thing to your brother.

古文：诚能因此时建大功，王必镌铭于骨髓，斯则去累卵之危，成太山之安也。 
现代文：北周大冢宰宇文护召他当了中外记室，后转任礼曹，升任为大都督。周武帝亲自统领一切事务后，杨素因父亲坚守气节在齐丧生，没有得到朝廷的封赏，就上表申述道理。武帝没有应允，他又一再坚持。武帝大怒，命令左右将其斩首。
English: Northern Zhou's grand vizier, Yuwen, called him to be the foreign secretary, and he later became the etiquette officer and was promoted to the grand governor. After Emperor Zhou Wu personally took charge of all affairs, Yang Su lost his life because of his father's adherence to qi jie and did not receive a reward from the imperial court. He repeatedly insisted that Emperor Wu did not agree. Emperor Wu was furious and ordered him to be beheaded.

古文：约然之，因以白素。
现代文：杨素理直气壮地说： 我给无道的天子做事，死是应该的。 
English: Yang Yoshen was convinced and told Yang Su this.

古文：素本凶险，闻之大喜，乃抚掌而对曰： 吾之智思，殊不及此，赖汝起予。 
现代文：武帝壮其言，于是追封杨敷为大将军，谥号 忠壮 ，并拜杨素为车骑大将军、仪同三司，逐渐被礼遇。
English: Emperor Wu Zhuang had his say, and Yangshiki was subsequently given the title of grand general, with the nickname "Loyal and Strong," and Yang Su was given the titles of grand general of chariot and cavalry, and grand general of the three departments of ceremony and etiquette, and was gradually treated with courtesy.

古文：约知其计行，复谓素曰： 今皇后之言，上无不用，宜因机会，早自结托，则匪唯长保荣禄，传祚子孙，又晋王倾身礼士，声名日盛，躬履节俭，有主上之风，以约料之，必能安天下。
现代文：武帝命令杨素起草诏书，他一挥而就，而且词藻文义均美。武帝嘉奖他，对他说： 好好努力，不愁日后没有荣华富贵。 杨素应声回答说： 我只怕富贵来逼我，我却无心谋取富贵。 
English: Emperor Wu ordered Yang Su to draft the imperial edict, and he did it in one fell swoop, and the words and meaning were all beautiful. Emperor Wu commended him and said to him, "Work hard and you will not have to worry about being rich and famous in the future." Yang Su replied in response, "I am only afraid of being rich and famous, but I have no intention of becoming rich and famous."

古文：兄若迟疑，一旦有变，令太子用事，恐祸至无日矣。 
现代文：平定北齐时，杨素请求率领父亲先前的部下作先锋。武帝应允了他，并且赐给他一条竹鞭，说： 我正要驱使天下，所以把这件东西赐给你。 
English: When the Northern Qi was being subdued, Yang Su asked to lead his father's former subordinates as the vanguard. Emperor Wu agreed and gave him a bamboo whip, saying, "I am about to drive the world, so I am giving this to you."

古文：素遂行其策，太子果废。
现代文：杨素跟随齐王宇文宪在河阴和齐人交战，因战功被封为清河县子，食邑五百户。
English: Yang Su acted according to this strategy, and Prince Yang Yong was abolished.

古文：及晋王入东宫，引约为左庶子，改封修武县公，进位大将军。
现代文：这年武帝又授予杨素司城大夫之职。第二年，杨素又跟随宇文宪攻取晋州。宇文宪屯兵于鸡栖原，北齐国主率领大军攻来，宇文宪因害怕连夜逃走，齐军紧追不舍，宇文宪部下大多失散。
English: In the same year, Emperor Wu awarded Yang Su the post of city doctor. The following year, Yang Su followed Uwen Hsien in conquering Jinzhou. Uwen Hsien's garrison was in Jiuyuan, and the Northern Qi sovereign led a large army to invade. Uwen Hsien was afraid to flee at night, and the Qi army pursued him relentlessly. Most of Uwen Hsien's subordinates were dispersed.

古文：及素被高祖所疏，出约为伊州刺史。
现代文：杨素和十多位骁勇之将竭力苦战，才使宇文宪幸免于难。这以后，杨素屡建战功。
English: Yang Su and more than a dozen brave generals fought hard to keep Yu Wen Xian alive. Since then, Yang Su has repeatedly made war exploits.

古文：入朝仁寿宫，遇高祖崩，遣约入朝，易留守者，缢杀庶人勇，然后陈兵集众，发高祖凶问。
现代文：北齐平定后，杨素被加官为上开府，改封为成安县公，食邑一千五百户，并赏赐给他粮食、布帛、奴婢、牲畜。后来杨素跟随王轨在吕梁击败陈将吴明彻，管理东楚州的事务。
English: After the pacification of North Qi, Yang Su was promoted to Shangkaifu and changed his title to Cheng'an County, with a population of 1,500 households, and was given grain, cloth, slaves, and livestock. Later, Yang Su followed Wang Luo to defeat Chen general Wu Mingcher in Luliang and managed the affairs of East Chuzhou.

古文：炀帝闻之曰： 令兄之弟，果堪大任。 
现代文：武帝又封他的弟弟杨慎为义安侯。陈将樊毅在泗口筑城，杨素击走了他，并荡平了他所筑的城墙。
English: Hao Di listened and said happily, "Your brother's younger brother is really up to the task."

古文：即位数日，拜内史令。
现代文：周宣帝登基后，杨素继承了父亲临贞县公的爵位。宣帝又封他的弟弟杨约为安成公。
English: A few days after his accession to the throne, he was appointed as the Minister of Internal Affairs.

古文：约有学术，兼达时务，帝甚任之。
现代文：不久跟随韦孝宽巡行淮河以南，杨素又单独攻下了盱眙、钟离两地。
English: Yangyou was very learned and well-versed in current affairs, and Emperor Xuan trusted him very much.

古文：后数载，加位右光禄大夫。
现代文：高祖当丞相时，杨素便与高祖深深交好，高祖很看重他，派他做汴州刺史。
English: When Gao Zu was the prime minister, Yang Su had a deep friendship with Gao Zu. Gao Zu valued Gao Zu very much and sent him to be the chief historian of Zhangzhou.

古文：后帝在东都，令约诣京师享庙，行至华阴，见其兄墓，遂枉道拜哭，为宪司所劾，坐是免官。
现代文：赴任途中，走到洛阳，恰逢尉迟迥叛乱，荥州刺史宇文胄占据虎牢和尉迟迥相应，杨素不能前行。高祖拜杨素为大将军，调发河内之兵进攻宇文胄。
English: On his way to the post, he went to Luoyang, which coincided with the rebellion of Lt. Lê Thiên. U Văn Đ occupied the Tiger's Lair and Lt. Lê Thiên accordingly, Yang Su could not go forward. Gao Zu Bai Yang Su was a great general and dispatched Hanoi's soldiers to attack U Văn Thiê.

古文：未几，拜淅阳太守。其兄子玄感，时为礼部尚书，与约恩义甚笃。
现代文：打败宇文胄后，杨素升为徐州总管，又进位为柱国，加授清河郡公，食邑二千户。
English: After defeating Uwen Yao, Yang Su was promoted to the general manager of Xuzhou, and was promoted to the pillar country, and was awarded the Qinghe County official, with 2,000 households.

古文：既怆分离，形于颜色，帝谓之曰： 公比忧瘁，得非为叔邪？ 
现代文：他的弟弟杨约也被封为临贞县公。高祖受禅后，加封杨素为上柱国。
English: His younger brother, Yang You, was also named the prince of Linzhen County. After Gaozhu accepted Zen, Yang Su was also named the prince of Shangzhu County.

古文：玄感再拜流涕曰： 诚如圣旨。 
现代文：开皇四年，拜他为御史大夫。杨素的妻子郑氏性情凶暴蛮横，杨素曾怨恨地说： 我如果当了天子，你一定不能作皇后。 
English: Yang Xuanxuan bowed down and said in tears, "It's really the words of the Holy One.

古文：帝亦思约废立功，由是征入朝。
现代文：郑氏把这话奏给高祖，他因此被免官。
English: Zheng relayed this to Gao Zu, who was removed from his post.

古文：未几，卒，以素子玄挺后之。文思字温才，素从叔也。
现代文：高祖正想谋取江南，这之前，杨素曾多次进献夺取陈国的计策，没多久，高祖就拜杨素为信州总管，赏赐给他钱一百万、锦一千段、马两百匹而派他去信州。
English: Gaozu was trying to capture the southern part of the Yangtze River. Prior to this, Yang Su had repeatedly proposed a strategy to capture Chen Province. Not long after, Gaozu appointed Yang Su as the head of Shinshu, rewarded him with one million yuan, one thousand pieces of brocade, and two hundred horses, and sent him to Shinshu.

古文：父宽，魏左仆射，周小冢宰。文思在周，年十一，拜车骑大将军、仪同三司、散骑常侍。
现代文：杨素住在永安，造了一种大船，名叫五牙，上面建了五层高楼，高达一百多尺，前后左右共配置了六部名为 柏竿 的战具，都高五十尺。
English: Yang Su lived in Yong'an and built a kind of large ship called the Wuzhen. A five-story high-rise was built on top of it, with a height of more than 100 feet. Around and in front of it, there were a total of six pieces of war equipment called the Baogang, all of which were 50 feet high.

古文：寻以父功，封新丰县子，邑五百户。
现代文：船上可容纳八百多名士兵，旗帜放在上边。另外一种船，稍稍小一些，起名黄龙，可配置士兵一百来人。
English: The ship can accommodate more than eight hundred soldiers, the flag is placed on top. Another kind of ship, slightly smaller, named Huanglong, can be equipped with about a hundred soldiers.

古文：天和初，治武都太守，十姓獠反，文思讨平之，复治翼州事。党项羌叛，文思率州兵讨平之。
现代文：其余的平乘船、舴艋舟，各有不同。等到大举伐陈时，高祖封杨素为行军元帅，率领水军奔赴三硖。
English: The rest of the flat boats and rafts are different. When it came to large-scale logging, Gao Zu Feng Yang Su was the marching marshal, leading the navy to Sanlu.

古文：进击资中、武康、隆山生獠及东山獠，并破之。
现代文：大军行至流头滩，陈将戚欣凭借一百多艘青龙船，屯兵几千人驻守在狼尾滩，阻挡大军去路。
English: The large army marched to the Liutou Beach. Chen Shouqi Xin marched with more than a hundred Qinglong ships, and several thousand soldiers were stationed at the Wolf's Tail Beach to block the way of the large army.

古文：后从陈王攻齐河阴城，又从武帝攻拔晋州，以勋进授上仪同三司，改封永宁县公，增邑至千户。
现代文：那里地势峻峭险要，将领们都忧心忡忡。
English: The terrain there is steep and dangerous, and the generals are worried.

古文：寿阳刘叔仁作乱，从清河公宇文神举讨之，战于砖井，在阵生擒叔仁。
现代文：杨素说： 成败在此一举。如果我们白天乘船而下，他们就会看见我们，滩险水急，天制不由人力，那么我们就失去了有利的条件。 于是决定在夜里攻其不备。
English: Yang Su said, "Success or failure is a matter of one shot. If we go down by boat during the day, they will see us, the beach is dangerous, the weather is not man-made, then we will lose the favorable conditions. So we decided to attack it at night.

古文：又别从王谊破贼于鲤鱼栅。其后累以军功，迁果毅右旅下大夫。
现代文：杨素亲自率领上千艘黄龙舰，命令士兵把枚衔在口中，悄悄顺流而下，并派遣开府王长袭率领步兵从南岸进攻戚欣另外的营寨，命令大将军刘仁恩率领披甲持械的骑兵进攻白沙北岸。天快亮的时候，队伍都抵达了目的地。
English: Yang Su personally led thousands of Huanglong ships, ordered the soldiers to put their rank in their mouths and quietly sail down the river, and dispatched Kaifu Wang Chang to lead the infantry from the south bank to attack Qi Xin's other camp, and ordered General Liu Rien to lead the armored cavalry to attack the north bank of Baisha. When it was nearly dawn, the teams all arrived at their destination.

古文：高祖为丞相，从韦孝宽拒尉迥于武陟。
现代文：进攻敌军，戚欣大败而逃，他的部下全部被俘。
English: Attacking the enemy army, Cixin was defeated and fled, and all of his subordinates were captured.

古文：迥遣其将李围俊怀州，与行军总管宇文述击走之。
现代文：杨素安抚俘虏后送走了他们，秋毫无犯，陈国人非常高兴。
English: Yang Su pacified the captives and sent them away. Autumn did not commit any crime, and the people of Chen were very happy.

古文：破尉惇，平鄴城，皆有功，进授上大将军，改封洛川县公。
现代文：杨素率领水军继续东下，大小战船铺满了整了江面，旌旗盔甲在阳光下鲜艳耀眼。杨素端坐在平乘大船之上，容貌体魄雄健魁伟，陈国人望而生畏，都说： 清河公就是长江之神啊！ 
English: Yang Su led the navy to continue to the east, the warships of all sizes filled the river, and the flag armor was bright and dazzling in the sun. Yang Su sat on the flat boat, with a strong and powerful appearance. The people of Chen were daunted and said: Qinghe Gong is the god of the Yangtze River!

古文：寻拜隆州刺史。
现代文：陈国南康内史吕仲肃屯兵岐亭，正好占据了江峡。
English: Chen Guonan Kannaishi Lyu Chung Soo's garrison at Gitei just happened to occupy the river gorge.

古文：开皇元年，进爵正平郡公，加邑二千户。
现代文：他在北岸凿穿岩石，连接了三条铁锁链，横断长江上游，用来阻挡战船前进。
English: He cut through the rock on the north bank, connected three iron chains, and crossed the upper reaches of the Yangtze River to block the advance of warships.

古文：后为魏州刺史，甚有惠政，及去职，吏民思之，为立碑颂德。
现代文：杨素和仁恩先登陆攻打吕仲肃的营寨，吕仲肃的队伍夜里溃逃，杨素从容地除掉了那些铁链。
English: Yang Su and Ren En first landed to attack Lv Zhong Su's camp, Lv Zhong Su's team fled in the night, Yang Su calmly removed those chains.

古文：转冀州刺史。
现代文：吕仲肃又占领荆门的延洲。
English: It is a turning point in the history of Jizhou.

古文：炀帝嗣位，征为民部尚书。转纳言，改授右光禄大夫。
现代文：杨素派巴之地的士兵一千人，分乘四艘五牙船，用船浆击碎了十多艘敌舰，于是大破敌军，俘虏敌兵两千多人，吕仲肃一人逃脱。
English: Yang Su sent a thousand soldiers from the land of Ba, divided into four five-toothed ships, and smashed more than ten enemy ships with boat pulp. As a result, the enemy army was destroyed, more than two thousand enemy soldiers were captured, and one person, Lü Zhongsu, escaped.

古文：从幸江都宫，以足疾不堪趋奏，复授民部尚书，加位左光禄大夫。
现代文：陈后主派信州刺史顾觉镇守安蜀城，荆州刺史陈纪镇守公安，他们都因害怕杨素而退走。从此，巴陵以东无人敢守。湘州刺史、岳阳王陈叔慎派使节恳请投降。杨素顺流而下，直抵汉口，和秦孝王会合。
English: Emperor Chen sent Shinshu statesman Gu Jue to guard Anshu City, and Jingzhou statesman Chen Ji to guard public security, but they both retreated out of fear of Yang Su. From then on, no one dared to guard east of Baling. The envoys of Hunan statesman Gu Jue and Yueyang king Chen Shushan pleaded for surrender. Yang Su sailed down the river to Hankou, where he met with Qin Xiaowang.

古文：卒官，时年七十。谥曰定。
现代文：班师回朝后，高祖拜杨素为荆州总管，晋封郢国公，食邑三千户，实食长寿县的一千户。
English: After the return of the class teacher to the imperial court, Gao Zu Bai Yang Su became the general manager of Jingzhou and was promoted to the governor of Shandong Province. There were three thousand households in the food village and one thousand households in the real food Changshou County.

古文：初，文思当袭父爵，自以非嫡，遂让封于弟文纪，当世多之。文纪字温范，少刚正，有器局。
现代文：高祖又封他的儿子玄感为仪同，封玄奖为清河郡公。并赏赐绵绢一万段，粮食一万石，还有一些黄金、珠宝，又把陈后主的妹妹和女乐十四人也赏赐给他。杨素对皇上说： 乡里名叫 胜母 ，孝子曾子就不进去；叛逆之人王谊，以前曾分封于郢地，我不想和他一样。 
English: Gao Zu also made his son, Xuan Xuan, a member of the imperial family, and awarded him the title of Qinghe County Grand Duke. He also rewarded him with ten thousand rupees, ten thousand stones of grain, and some gold and jewels. He also gave him the sister of the Chen Empress and fourteen female singers. Yang Su said to the emperor, "The name of the village is Shengmao, but my filial son and great-grandson will not enter it; the rebellious person is Wang You, who had previously been assigned to Loudi. I don't want to be like him."

古文：在周袭爵华山郡公，邑二千七百户。
现代文：于是高祖改封他为越国公，不久又拜纳言之职。
English: As a result, Gaozu changed his title to Prince of Yue, and soon after, Baina took up the post.

古文：自右侍上士累迁车骑大将军、仪同三司、安州总管长史。
现代文：一年多后，转任内史令。不久，江南人李棱等聚众叛乱，多的达几万人，少的也有几千人，互相响应，杀害官吏。高祖任命杨素为行军总管，率众讨伐。
English: A little more than a year later, he was transferred to the post of Inner Historian. Soon, Li Ren, a man from the south of the Yangtze River, and others rallied a crowd of tens of thousands of people to rebel, and a few thousand people responded to each other, killing officials. Gaozu appointed Yang Su as the general manager of the march and led the people to fight.

古文：将兵迎陈降将李瑗于齐安，与陈将周法尚军遇，击走之。
现代文：叛贼朱莫问自称南徐州刺史，以重兵占据京口。杨素率领水军从扬子津攻入，进而击败了他们。
English: The traitor Zhu Mo asked the self-proclaimed southern Xuzhou to stab history, occupying Jingkou with heavy troops. Yang Su led the navy to invade from Yangtze River, and then defeated them.

古文：以功进授开府，入为虞部下大夫。
现代文：晋陵的顾世兴自称为太守，和他的都督鲍迁等又来拒战。
English: Gu Shixing of Jinling claimed to be the governor-general, and his governor Bao Qian and others came to oppose the war.

古文：高祖为丞相，改封汾阴县公。
现代文：杨素迎战破敌，活捉鲍迁，俘虏敌兵三千多人。
English: Yang Su defeated the enemy, captured Bao Qian alive, and captured more than three thousand enemy soldiers.

古文：从梁睿讨王谦，以功进授上大将军。
现代文：杨素又进而攻打无锡叛贼叶略，又铲平叛军。
English: Yang Su went on to attack the Wuxi traitor Ye Liang, and also defeated the rebels.

古文：前后增邑三千户。拜资州刺史。
现代文：吴郡的沈玄憎、沈杰等人派兵包围了苏州，刺史皇甫绩屡战不利。
English: Shen Xuanhu, Shen Jie and others from Wu County sent troops to encircle Suzhou, but they were repeatedly defeated.

古文：入为宗正少卿，坐事除名。
现代文：杨素率部援助他。玄憎情势窘迫，逃奔南沙贼首陆孟孙。
English: Yang Su and his subordinates came to his aid. Due to the dire situation, Meng Sun, the leader of the Nansha bandits, fled.

古文：后数载，复其爵位，拜熊州刺史。
现代文：杨素在松江和孟孙交战，大破叛军，活捉了陆孟孙和玄憎。
English: Yang Su fought with Meng Sun in Songjiang, defeated the rebels, and captured Lu Meng Sun and Xuanzang alive.

古文：改封上明郡公。除宗正卿。
现代文：黝、歙的贼首沈雪、沈能凭借营寨独自坚持，杨素又将其扫平。
English: Shen Xue and Shen Neng, the heads of the bandits of Zou and Zou, insisted on their own by virtue of the encampment, and Yang Su swept them away.

古文：兼给事黄门侍郎，判礼部尚书事。
现代文：浙江的贼首高智慧自号为东扬州刺史，有上千艘战船，驻扎在险要的地方，兵力很强。
English: The leader of Zhejiang's thieves, Gao Zhizhi, called himself the East Yangzhou Historian. He had more than a thousand warships, stationed in critical places, and a strong military force.

古文：仁寿二年，迁荆州总管。岁余，卒官，时年五十八。
现代文：杨素军进攻他，战斗从早晨一直持续到下午申时，终于苦战破敌。
English: Yang Su's army attacked him, and the battle lasted from the morning until the afternoon, when the enemy was finally defeated.

古文：谥曰恭。史臣曰：杨素少而轻侠，俶傥不羁，兼文武之资，包英奇之略，志怀远大，以功名自许。
现代文：高智慧逃到了海上，杨素紧追不舍，随着余姚漂洋过海来到了永嘉。高智慧前来拒战，杨素打跑了他，擒获了贼兵几千人。
English: Gao Zhizhi fled to the sea, Yang Su chased after him, followed Yu Yao across the sea and came to Yongjia. Gao Zhizhi came to resist the war, Yang Su beat him and captured thousands of thieves.

古文：高祖龙飞，将清六合，许以腹心之奇，每当推彀之重。
现代文：叛贼之首汪文进自称天子，占据东阳，任他的党徒蔡道人为司空，派他据守乐安。
English: The head of the traitors, Wang Wenzhin, claimed to be the son of heaven and occupied Dongyang. He appointed his party member Cai Dao as the governor and sent him to guard Le'an.

古文：扫妖氛于牛斗，江海无波；摧骁骑于龙庭，匈奴远遁。
现代文：杨素前往讨伐，全部平定了他们，接着又击败了永嘉贼首沈孝彻。
English: Yang Su went to the crusade, pacified them all, and then defeated the Yongjia thief head Shen Xiaocher.

古文：考其夷凶静乱，功臣莫居其右；览其奇策高文，足为一时之杰。
现代文：然后，杨素从陆路来到天台，挥兵直指临海郡，追捕那些漏网的叛贼。
English: Then, Yang Su came to the rooftop by land and waved his soldiers straight to Linhai County to hunt down those traitors who had slipped through the net.

古文：然专以智诈自立，不由仁义之道，阿谀时主，高下其心。
现代文：这次出征前前后后共经历了一百多次战斗，只剩下高智慧还逃守在闽越之间。高祖因为杨素长期在外，征旅劳累，下诏命令他驾乘驿车回朝休息。
English: Gaozu had experienced more than a hundred battles before and after this expedition, and only Gaozu the wiser was left behind to flee to Yunnan. Since Yang Su had been away for a long time and was exhausted from the journey, Gaozu ordered him to take a carriage back to the North to rest.

古文：营构离宫，陷君于奢侈；谋废冢嫡，致国于倾危。
现代文：加封他的儿子杨玄感为上开府，赏赐彩色的丝织品三千段。杨素因为叛贼还没有消灭干净，怕养成后患，又请求出征。
English: His son, Yang Xuanxuan, was given the title of Shangkaifu, and rewarded with 3,000 pieces of colorful silk fabric. Yang Su, because the traitors had not yet been completely eliminated, was afraid of developing after-effects, and asked to go to war.

古文：终使宗庙丘墟，市朝霜露，究其祸败之源，实乃素之由也。
现代文：高祖下诏书表彰了他的功绩，又委任以元帅之职，命令他统管前方军民事务，率领大军，捕拿那些逃散的叛贼。于是杨素又乘驿车来到会稽。
English: Gaozhu's imperial rescript commended his achievements and appointed him to the post of marshal, ordering him to supervise the military and civilian affairs of the front, lead a large army, and capture those fugitive traitors. So Yang Su took a tuk-tuk to the auditorium.

古文：幸而得死，子为乱阶，坟土未干，阖门殂戮，丘陇发掘，宗族诛夷。
现代文：这之前，泉州人王国庆，本是南安的豪族，他杀死了刺史刘弘，占据泉州叛乱，众多逃亡的叛贼都归附了他。
English: Prior to this, Quanzhou native Wang Guoqing, originally a member of the powerful Nan'an tribe, killed the assassin Liu Hong and occupied Quanzhou in a rebellion. Many of the fleeing traitors joined him.

古文：则知积恶馀殃，信非徒语。
现代文：他自以为海路险阻，北方人不习惯，就没有设置海上防御的队伍。
English: He thought that the sea route was dangerous, and the northerners were not used to it, so they did not set up a sea defense team.

古文：多行无礼必自及，其斯之谓欤！
现代文：杨素却偏偏从海上掩袭而至，王国庆惊慌失措，弃州而逃，余党逃散海岛，或者据守山洞。
English: Yang Su, on the other hand, came from the sea to cover the attack, Wang Guoqing panicked and fled the state, and the rest of the party fled the island or guarded the cave.

古文：约外示温柔，内怀狡算，为蛇画足，终倾国本，俾无遗育，宜哉！
现代文：杨素派人从水陆两路分头追捕，并且暗中叫人对王国庆说： 你的罪状，累计起来处以死刑还不够。只有斩送高智慧，才可以抵塞罪责。 
English: Yang Su sent people to chase Wang Guoqing from land and sea, and secretly told people to say to Wang Guoqing: "Your accumulated charges are not enough to be sentenced to death. You can only be held responsible for your crimes if you are highly intelligent."

