古文：魏徵魏徵，字玄成，魏州曲城人。
现代文：魏徵字玄成，是魏州曲城县人。
English: Wei Zheng Zi Xuan Cheng was from Qucheng County, Weizhou.

古文：少孤，落魄，弃赀产不营，有大志，通贯书术。
现代文：幼丧双亲，落魄失意，扔下产业而不经营，胸怀大志，学贯古今。
English: He lost his parents at a young age, fell into despair, left the industry without running a business, had big aspirations, and studied everything from ancient times to the present.

古文：隋乱，诡为道士。
现代文：隋末大乱，假托出家做道士。
English: In the chaos at the end of the Sui Dynasty, he became a Taoist priest under false pretenses.

古文：武阳郡丞元宝藏举兵应李密，以徵典书檄。
现代文：武阳郡丞元宝藏起兵响应李密，让魏徵典掌文书。
English: In response to Li Mi's request, the soldiers of Zhuoyang County's Zheng Yuan Treasure raised an army and ordered Wei to collect the documents.

古文：密得宝藏书，辄称善，既闻徵所为，促召之。
现代文：李密接到元宝藏的书信，总说写得好，后来闻知是魏徵所做，立即招他前来。
English: When Li Mi received the letter from the former treasure, he always said that it was well written. Later, when he heard that it was written by Wei Zheng, he immediately invited him to come.

古文：徵进十策说密，不能用。
现代文：魏徵向李密献上十条计策，李密不能采用。
English: Wei Zheng presented Li Mi with ten strategies, which Li Mi could not adopt.

古文：王世充攻洛口，徵见长史郑颋曰： 魏公虽骤胜，而骁将锐士死伤略尽；又府无见财，战胜不赏。
现代文：王世充进攻洛口，魏徵拜见长史郑廷页说： 魏公虽多次战胜，但精兵猛将死伤甚多；而且仓库里没有财宝，打了胜仗得不到奖赏。
English: Wang Shichong attacked Luokou, Wei Zhaobai met with Changshi Zheng Tingzhe, who said: Although Wei Gong won many times, there were many deaths and injuries among the elite soldiers; moreover, there was no treasure in the warehouse, and there was no reward for winning the battle.

古文：此二者不可以战。
现代文：光这两条就不应出战。
English: These two alone should not go to war.

古文：若浚池峭垒，旷日持久，贼粮尽且去，我追击之，取胜之道也。 
现代文：如果挖深壕沟，加高堡垒，拖延决战的时间，贼寇粮尽自会离去，那时我军再出击，这才是取胜的办法。 
English: If we dig a deep trench, build a high fortress, and delay the time of the decisive battle, the thieves and robbers will leave of their own accord, and then our army will attack again. This is the only way to win.

古文：颋曰： 老儒常语耳！ 
现代文：郑廷页说： 这是老生常谈！ 
English: Zheng Tingzhe said: This is a cliché!

古文：徵不谢去。
现代文：魏徵便不辞而别。
English: Wei Zheng then left without a word.

古文：后从密来京师，久之未知名。
现代文：后来随同李密来到京师，很长时间也没出名。
English: Later, he came to Beijing Division with Li Mi, but he did not become famous for a long time.

古文：自请安辑山东，乃擢秘书丞，驰驿至黎阳。
现代文：魏徵便请求安抚山东地区，朝廷升任他为秘书丞，他便驾乘驿车急驰至黎阳。
English: Wei Zhengben requested to pacify the Shandong region, the imperial court promoted him to secretary-general, and he drove to Liyang in a fast car.

古文：时李勣尚为密守，徵与书曰： 始魏公起叛徒，振臂大呼，众数十万，威之所被半天下，然而一败不振，卒归唐者，固知天命有所归也。
现代文：当时李责力还在为李密防守，魏徵写信给他说： 当初魏公因叛乱起兵，振臂大呼，聚众数十万人，声威震动半个天下，但一失败就不能振作，最终归附唐朝，就是知道天下已有所归的缘故。
English: At that time, Li Ruili was still defending Li Mi, and Wei Zheng wrote to him: At the beginning, Wei Gong raised an army because of the rebellion, waved his arms and shouted, gathered hundreds of thousands of people, and shook half of the world with his voice, but once he failed, he could not cheer up, and eventually joined the Tang Dynasty, that is, he knew that the world had returned.

古文：今君处必争之地，不早自图，则大事去矣！ 
现代文：如今您处在兵家必争之地，不早点图谋自全的办法，大势一去就不可挽回！ 
English: Now that you are in a place where the soldiers must fight, if you do not find a way to self-sufficiency sooner, the momentum will be irrevocable!

古文：勣得书，遂定计归，而大发粟馈淮安王之军。
现代文：李责力收到信，就决定归附唐朝，并大力调拨粮草供给淮安王的军队。
English: Li Linli received the letter and decided to be annexed to the Tang Dynasty, and vigorously allocated grain and grass to supply the army of King Huai'an.

古文：会窦建德陷黎阳，获徵，伪拜起居舍人。
现代文：时逢窦建德攻陷黎阳，抓获魏徵，授予伪职为起居舍人。
English: At that time, Dou Jiande invaded Liyang, captured Wei Zheng, and awarded him a fake position as a resident.

古文：建德败，与裴矩走入关，隐太子引为洗马。
现代文：建德失败后，与裴矩西行入关，隐太子引荐他任太子洗马。
English: After the failure of Jiande, he entered the West with Pei Rong, and was recommended by Prince Yin to be appointed as the prince of Saima.

古文：徵见秦王功高，阴劝太子早为计。
现代文：魏徵见秦王功高，暗地劝说隐太子早定对策。
English: Wei Zheng met with the Qin King Gong Gao and secretly persuaded the Hidden Prince to decide on a countermeasure.

古文：太子败，王责谓曰： 尔阋吾兄弟，奈何？ 
现代文：太子失败后，秦王责备魏徵说： 你为什么让我们兄弟互相争斗？ 
English: After the defeat of the prince, the king of Qin reproached Wei Zheng and said: Why did you let our brothers fight each other?

古文：答曰： 太子蚤从徵言，不死今日之祸。 
现代文：魏徵回答说 ：太子早些听我的话，就不会死于今天的祸事了。 
English: Wei Zheng replied, "If the prince had listened to me earlier, he would not have died from today's disaster."

古文：王器其直，无恨意。
现代文：秦王器重他敢于直言，没有怨恨之意。
English: The Qin king valued him for his courage to speak out, without rancor.

古文：即位，拜谏议大夫，封钜鹿县男。
现代文：秦王即帝位后，拜魏徵为谏议大夫，封为巨鹿县男。
English: After Emperor Qin ascended to the throne, he was recruited by the Wei Dynasty to become a doctor of medicine, and was given the title of the man of Julu County.

古文：当是时，河北州县素事隐、巢者不自安，往往曹伏思乱。
现代文：这时，河北州县曾侍奉过隐太子与巢王的人自觉不安，往往藏匿谋乱。
English: At this time, people in Hebei Prefecture who had served the crown prince and the king of the nest were self-consciously uneasy, often hiding and plotting.

古文：徵白太宗曰： 不示至公，祸不可解。 
现代文：魏徵告知太宗说 ：不示以至公之意，祸患就不能解除。 
English: Wei Zheng told Taizong, "If you don't show the will of the people, you can't get rid of the evil."

古文：帝曰： 尔行安喻河北。 
现代文：太宗说： 你去安抚晓谕河北人士吧。 
English: Emperor Taizong said: Go and pacify the people of Hebei.

古文：道遇太子千牛李志安、齐王护军李思行传送京师，徵与其副谋曰： 属有诏，宫府旧人普原之。今复执送志安等，谁不自疑者？
现代文：路上遇见太子千牛李志安、齐王护军李思行被押解进京师，魏徵和副使商议说： 正好有诏书，东宫和齐王府旧属一律免罪，现又捕送志安等人，谁能没有疑心呢？
English: On the way, he met Li Zhian, the prince of Qian Niu, and Li Si Xing, the guardian of the king of Qi, who were escorted to Beijing. Wei Zheng and the deputy envoy discussed and said: It is just that there is an edict, the East Palace and the King of Qi's former residence are all exonerated, and now they are arresting Zhian and others. Who can have no doubts?

古文：吾属虽往，人不信。 
现代文：我们虽去传达圣旨，人们一定不信。 
English: Even if we try to convey the gospel, people will not believe us.

古文：即贷而后闻。
现代文：就放了志安等人而后奏闻朝廷。
English: He released Zhian and others and then reported to the imperial court.

古文：使还，帝悦，日益亲，或引至卧内，访天下事。
现代文：出使回来，太宗很高兴，和他日益亲近，有时引至卧室，询问天下之事。
English: When he returned from his mission, Taizong was delighted and became increasingly close to him, sometimes leading him to his bedroom to ask him about the world.

古文：徵亦自以不世遇，乃展尽底蕴无所隐，凡二百余奏，无不剀切当帝心者。
现代文：魏徵也认为这种赏识是不世之遇，便说尽心中想法而毫无隐讳，共上奏二百多项提议，全都切实可行合乎太宗之意。
English: Wei Zheng also thought that this appreciation was an extraordinary opportunity, so he said what he thought and did not hide anything. In total, more than two hundred proposals were made, all of which were practical and feasible in line with the intention of the Taizong.

古文：由是拜尚书右丞，兼谏议大夫。
现代文：由此任职为尚书右丞，兼任谏议大夫。
English: As a result, he was appointed to the post of Shoshuu-jo (尚書右丞) and concurrently held the post of Shogyo-dokufu (議大夫).

古文：左右有毁徵阿党亲戚者，帝使温彦博按讯，非是。
现代文：左右近臣有人诋毁魏徵偏袒亲戚朋友，太宗派遣温彦博讯问此事，与事实不符。
English: Some close vassals on both sides slandered Wei Zheng for favoring relatives and friends, and Taizong sent Wen Yanbo to inquire about the matter, which is inconsistent with the facts.

古文：彦博曰： 徵为人臣，不能著形迹，远嫌疑，而被飞谤，是宜责也。 
现代文：温彦博说： 魏徵作为臣子，不能著明形迹，远避嫌疑，因而遭到无端诽谤，这是应当责备的。 
English: Wen Yanbo said: It is reprehensible that Wei Zheng, as a vassal, could not leave a clear trace and avoid suspicion, and thus was slandered without reason.

古文：帝谓彦博行让徵。
现代文：太宗就叫温彦博去责备魏徵。
English: Emperor Taizong ordered Wen Yanbo to go and reprimand Wei Zheng.

古文：徵见帝，谢曰： 臣闻君臣同心，是谓一体，岂有置至公，事形迹？
现代文：魏徵进见太宗，说： 臣听说君臣应当同心，这就叫作如同一体，怎能抛弃至公，只求形迹？
English: Wei Zhengjin went to see Emperor Taizong and said, "Minister, I have heard that princes and ministers should be of the same mind, which is called being of the same body. How can you abandon your duty to the public and only seek glory?

古文：若上下共由兹路，邦之兴丧未可知也。 
现代文：如果上下全都如此，国家兴亡就难以预料了。 
English: If this were the case at all levels, it would be difficult to predict the country's rise and fall.

古文：帝矍然，曰： 吾悟之矣！ 
现代文：太宗吃惊地说 ：我明白你的意思了！ 
English: Taizong said in surprise, "I see what you mean!"

古文：徵顿首曰： 愿陛下俾臣为良臣，毋俾臣为忠臣。 
现代文：魏徵叩头说： 愿陛下让臣做良臣，不要让臣做忠臣。 
English: Wei Zheng kowtowed and said: May His Majesty let his vassal be a good vassal, but not a loyal vassal.

古文：帝曰： 忠、良异乎？ 
现代文：太宗说 ：忠臣、良臣有差别吗？ 
English: Taizong said: Is there a difference between a loyal subject and a good subject?

古文：曰： 良臣，稷、契、咎陶也；忠臣，龙逢、比干也。
现代文：魏徵说： 稷、契、咎陶是良臣，龙逢、比干是忠臣。
English: Wei Zheng said: Yan, Qi, and Jintao are good vassals, while Longfeng and Bigan are loyal vassals.

古文：良臣，身荷美名，君都显号，子孙傅承，流祚无疆；忠臣，己婴祸诛，君陷昏恶，丧国夷家，只取空名。
现代文：良臣，自身得美名，君主受显号，子孙世代相承，福庆传之无穷；忠臣，自身受祸被杀，君主陷于昏暴，国破家亡，仅取空名。
English: A good vassal earns a good name, a monarch receives a title of honor, generations of descendants succeed one another, and good fortune is passed down endlessly; a loyal vassal is killed by misfortune, a monarch falls into a coma, the country is ruined and the family is destroyed, and only an empty name is taken.

古文：此其异也。 
现代文：这就是两者的区别。 太宗说 ：好。 
English: This is the difference between the two. Taejong said, "Good."

古文：帝曰： 善。 因问： 为君者何道而明，何失而暗？ 
现代文：接着问 ：做君主的人怎样做才能明，犯何过失才会暗？ 
English: Then he asked: How can a monarch know what to do and what mistakes to make?

古文：徵曰： 君所以明，兼听也；所以暗，偏信也。
现代文：魏徵说： 君主之所以明，在于多方听取意见；之所以暗，在于偏听偏信。
English: Wei Zheng said: The reason why the monarch is clear is that he listens to opinions from many sides; the reason why he is obscure is that he is partial to listening and partial to believing.

古文：尧、舜氏辟四门，明四目，达四聪。虽有共，鮌，不能塞也，靖言庸违，不能惑也。
现代文：尧、舜大开四门，眼明能视四方，耳聪能听四方，虽有共工、鱼玄，不能蒙蔽他们，好听的言词荒谬的行为，也不能将他们迷惑。
English: The four doors of the cocoon and cocoon are wide open. The eyes can clearly see the four directions, the ears and ears can listen to the four directions. Although there are co-workers and sophistry, they cannot be blinded, and the beautiful words and absurd behaviors cannot confuse them.

古文：秦二世隐藏其身，以信赵高，天下溃叛而不得闻；梁武帝信硃异，侯景向关而不得闻；隋炀帝信虞世基，贼遍天下而不得闻。
现代文：秦二世身居深宫，偏信赵高，天下散乱而不得闻；梁武帝偏信朱异，侯景即将攻城而不得知；隋炀帝偏信虞世基，盗贼四起而不知晓。
English: Qin II lived in a deep palace, he was partial to Zhao Gao, the world was scattered and unheard of; Emperor Liang Wu was partial to Zhu Yixin, and it was unknown when Hou Jing was about to attack the city; Emperor Sui Xuan was partial to Yu Shiji, and the thieves were unknown.

古文：故曰，君能兼听，则奸人不得壅蔽，而下情通矣。 
现代文：所以说，君主如能多方听取意见，奸臣就蒙蔽不了君主，下情就能上达朝廷。 
English: Therefore, if the monarch can listen to opinions from many sides, the treacherous vassal will not be able to deceive the monarch, and the insinuation will reach the imperial court.

古文：郑仁基息女美而才，皇后建请为充华，典册具。
现代文：郑仁基女儿既漂亮又有才华，皇后建议娶她进宫为充华，典册都已具办。
English: Zheng Renki's daughter is both beautiful and talented. The empress suggested marrying her into the palace to enhance her beauty. The manuals have all been prepared.

古文：或言许聘矣。
现代文：有人说她已定下婚约。
English: Some say she is engaged to be married.

古文：徵谏曰： 陛下处台榭，则欲民有楝宇；食膏粱，则欲民有饱适；顾嫔御，则欲民有室家。
现代文：魏徵进谏道 ：陛下居于楼台，就应让百姓有居室；吃美食，就应让百姓吃饱饭；看到身边的侍妾，就应让百姓有室家。
English: Wei Zhengjin: If His Majesty lives on the balcony, he should let the people have a living room; if he eats delicious food, he should let the people have a full meal; if he sees his attendants and concubines around him, he should let the people have a house.

古文：今郑已约昏，陛下取之，岂为人父母意！ 
现代文：如今郑女已许配人家，陛下娶她进宫，难道是为民父母的意思吗！ 
English: Now that Zheng Niang has been betrothed, will His Majesty marry her into the palace for the sake of the people's parents?

古文：帝痛自咎，即诏停册。
现代文：太宗沉痛地责备自己，立即停止册封之事。
English: Taizong bitterly reproached himself and immediately stopped the canonization.

古文：贞观三年，以秘书监参豫朝政。
现代文：贞观三年，魏徵以秘书监身份参预朝政。
English: In the third year of Zhenguan, Wei Zheng took part in the pre-imperial politics as a secretary.

古文：高昌王曲文泰将入朝，西域诸国欲因文泰悉遣使者奉献。
现代文：高昌王麴文泰将入京朝见，西域各国都想趁此派遣使者进献贡品。
English: Gaochang's King Gongwen Tai will visit the Imperial Court in Beijing, and all the countries in the western region want to take advantage of this opportunity to send emissaries to offer tributes.

古文：帝诏文泰使人厌怛纥干迎之。
现代文：太宗下诏文泰使臣厌怛纥干前去迎接。
English: Emperor Taizong's envoy, Wen Tai, was so disgusted that he went to meet them.

古文：徵曰： 异时文泰入朝，所过供拟不能具，今又加诸国焉，则濒塞州县以乏致罪者众。
现代文：魏徵说 ：从前文泰入朝，所过地方供应物品尚且不能备齐，如今又加上各国使臣，那么沿边州县因供应不足而获罪者就会增多。
English: Wei Zheng said: From the time of the previous article, when the Tai Dynasty entered the North, the supply of goods to the places it passed through was not yet complete. Now, with the addition of the envoys of various countries, there will be an increase in the number of people who are guilty of insufficient supply along the border counties.

古文：彼以商贾来，则边人为之利；若宾客之，中国萧然耗矣。
现代文：他们以商贾身份来，边民可因此而得利；如做宾客来，中国就会因耗资财而贫困冷落。
English: If they come as merchants, the border residents can benefit from it; if they come as guests, China will be left out in the cold due to the cost of capital.

古文：汉建武时，西域请置都护、送侍子，光武不许，不以蛮夷敝中国也。 
现代文：东汉建武年间，西域各国请求设置都护、派遣王子入侍，光武帝不答应，就是不愿为蛮夷而耗费中国。 太宗说 ：对。 
English: During the Jianwu period of the Eastern Han Dynasty, the countries of the western region requested the establishment of a tutelage and the dispatch of princes to serve as attendants, but Emperor Guangwu did not agree, unwilling to expend China for barbarians. Taizong said: Yes.

古文：帝曰： 善。 追止其诏。
现代文：立即追回已经发出的诏令。
English: Immediately revoke the edict that has been issued.

古文：于是帝即位四年，岁断死二十九，几至刑措，米斗三钱。
现代文：那时太宗即位已四年，一年判死刑仅十九人，几乎弃置刑法而不用，米价每斗才三钱。
English: At that time, Taizong had been on the throne for four years, only nineteen people were sentenced to death in one year, the criminal law was almost abandoned and not used, and the price of rice was only three yuan per bucket.

古文：先是，帝尝叹曰： 今大乱之后，其难治乎？ 
现代文：从前，太宗曾感叹道： 大乱之后，国家很难治理啊！ 
English: Once upon a time, Taizong once lamented, "After the turmoil, it is difficult to govern the country!"

古文：徵曰： 大乱之易治，譬饥人之易食也。 
现代文：魏徵说： 乱后容易治理，就像饥者容易喂食一样。 
English: Wei Zheng said: It is easy to govern after chaos, just as it is easy to feed the hungry.

古文：帝曰： 古不云善人为邦百年，然后胜残去杀邪？ 
现代文：太宗说 ：古人不是说过，善人治国一百年，然后才能制服残暴，废除死刑吗？ 
English: Taizong said, "Didn't the ancients say that a good man should rule a country for a hundred years before he could subdue brutality and abolish the death penalty?

古文：答曰： 此不为圣哲论也。
现代文：魏徵回答说 ：这不是圣哲说的。
English: Wei Zheng replied, "This is not what the sage said."

古文：圣哲之治，其应如响，期年而可，盖不其难。 
现代文：圣哲之人治天下，功效就像回声一样，周年即可，不算太难。 
English: The sage's people rule the world, the effect is like an echo, the anniversary can be, it is not too difficult.

古文：封德彝曰： 不然。
现代文：封德彝说 ：不是这样。
English: Feng Dejun said, "That's not true."

古文：三代之后，浇诡日滋。
现代文：夏、商、周三代之后，轻薄诡诈之风日益滋长。
English: After the Xia, Shang and San dynasties, the trend of frivolity and trickery has been growing.

古文：秦任法律，汉杂霸道，皆欲治不能，非能治不欲。
现代文：秦代专用刑法，汉代杂用霸道，都是想治好而不能，不是能治好而不愿。
English: The Qin Dynasty's special criminal law, and the Han Dynasty's miscellaneous use of tyranny, are all about wanting to cure but not being able to, and not being able to cure but not wanting to.

古文：徵书生，好虚论，徒乱国家，不可听。 
现代文：魏徵是书生，喜爱空谈，只会扰乱国家，不可听从。 
English: Wei Zheng is a scholar, fond of empty talk, will only disrupt the country, and cannot be obeyed.

古文：徵曰： 五帝、三王不易民以教，行帝道而帝，行王道而王，顾所行何如尔。
现代文：魏徵说： 五帝、三王并没交换百姓而后教化，实行帝道便为帝，实行王道便为王，关键就在所推行的是什么。
English: Wei Zheng said: the five emperors and three kings did not exchange the people and then enlighten them, the implementation of the imperial way is the emperor, the implementation of the royal way is the king, the key is what is being promoted.

古文：黄帝逐蚩尤，七十战而胜其乱，因致无为。
现代文：黄帝驱逐蚩尤，经七十次战斗才制服其害，达到无为而治。
English: The Yellow Emperor expelled Qian Yu, and it took seventy battles to subdue his harm and achieve non-action.

古文：九黎害德，颛顼征之，已克而治。
现代文：九黎危害德行，颛顼进行征讨，获胜后就治理得很好。
English: Jiu Li harmed virtue and conduct, Zou carried out the requisition, and governed well after winning.

古文：桀为乱，汤放之；纣无道，武王伐之。
现代文：桀作乱，汤流放了他；纣无道，武王讨伐他。
English: If the rooster makes a mess, the soup will exile him; if the rooster has no way, the warrior king will fight him.

古文：汤、武身及太平。
现代文：汤与武王都亲身达到太平。
English: Both Tang and King Wu personally achieved peace.

古文：若人渐浇诡，不复返朴，今当为鬼为魅，尚安得而化哉！ 
现代文：如果人们日渐轻薄诡诈，不再返于淳朴，如今当会成为鬼魅，又怎能教训他们呢！ 
English: How can you teach people if they are getting more and more sly and treacherous, if they are no longer returning to simplicity and are now expected to become ghosts!

古文：德彝不能对，然心以为不可。
现代文：封德彝不能答复，但内心认为魏徵不对。
English: Feng Deyao couldn't answer, but in his heart he thought Wei Zheng was wrong.

古文：帝纳之不疑。
现代文：太宗却完全接受而不怀疑。
English: However, Emperor Taizong accepted it completely without any doubts.

古文：至是，天下大治。
现代文：到这时，天下已经大治。
English: By this time, the whole country was under martial law.

古文：蛮夷君长袭衣冠，带刀宿卫。
现代文：蛮夷君长服用衣冠，带刀入京宿卫。
English: The barbarian emperor took the crown and entered the imperial palace with a sword.

古文：东薄海，南逾岭，户阖不闭，行旅不赍粮，取给于道。
现代文：东到大海，南过五岭，夜不闭户，行不携粮，路上就能得到供应。
English: East to the sea, south across the Five Ridges, do not close the house at night, do not carry grain, you can get supplies on the road.

古文：帝谓群臣曰： 此徵劝我行仁义，既效矣。
现代文：太宗对群臣说 ：这是因为魏徵劝我实行仁义的结果啊。
English: Emperor Taizong said to his courtiers, "This is the result of Wei Zong exhorting me to practice benevolence."

古文：惜不令封德彝见之！ 
现代文：可惜封德彝见不到此情此景了！ 
English: It's a pity that Feng Dejun can't see this situation!

古文：俄检校侍中，进爵郡公。
现代文：不久魏徵任职检校侍中，晋爵为郡公。
English: Soon after, Wei Zheng was appointed as a school inspector, and he was promoted to county magistrate.

古文：帝幸九成宫，宫御舍湋川宫下。
现代文：太宗临幸九成宫，宫女安置在围川县官舍中。
English: Emperor Taizong visited Jiu Cheng Palace, and the palace maid was placed in a government house in Wuchuan County.

古文：仆射李靖、侍中王珪继至，吏改馆宫御以舍靖、珪。
现代文：尚书右仆射李靖、侍中王王圭接着到来，县官移出宫女腾出官舍给李靖、王王圭。
English: Shang Shuxu's right-hand man shot Li Jing, and Wang Wang Gui, an aide-de-camp, arrived next. The county officials moved out of the palace to make room for Li Jing and Wang Wang Gui.

古文：帝闻，怒曰： 威福由是等邪！何轻我宫人？ 
现代文：太宗闻知，发怒说： 这些人敢作威福，为何轻视我的宫女？ 
English: When Emperor Taizong heard of this, he became angry and said, "These people dare to act as tyrants, why do they despise my concubine?

古文：诏并按之。
现代文：下诏审讯他们。
English: Let's put them on trial.

古文：徵曰： 靖、珪皆陛下腹心大臣，宫人止后宫扫除隶耳。
现代文：魏徵说： 李靖、王王圭都是陛下的心腹大臣，宫女不过是后宫的扫除奴仆。
English: Wei Zheng said: Li Jing and Wang Wang Gui are both ministers of His Majesty's heart, and the concubines are nothing more than servants to sweep away the harem.

古文：方大臣出，官吏谘朝廷法式；归来，陛下问人间疾苦。
现代文：大臣外出，地方官要向他们询问朝廷法度；返回时，陛下要问他们民间疾苦。
English: When ministers go out, local officials should ask them about the Imperial Court's legal system; when they return, His Majesty should ask them about the hardships of the people.

古文：夫官舍，固靖等见官吏之所，吏不可不谒也。
现代文：官舍本来就是李靖他们召见官员的地方，地方官不能不拜见大臣。
English: The official residence was originally the place where Li Jing summoned officials, and local officials could not but visit the minister.

古文：至宫人则不然，供馈之余无所参承。
现代文：宫女则不然，除供应食用之外，无须参见侍候。
English: This is not the case for the ladies-in-waiting, who do not need to see the maids except when serving food.

古文：以此按吏，且骇天下耳目。 
现代文：如为此而审讯官员，将使天下人吃惊。 
English: If officials are put on trial for this, the world will be surprised.

古文：帝悟，寝不问。
现代文：太宗醒悟过来，按下此事不问。
English: Taizong wakes up and presses the matter without asking.

古文：后宴丹霄楼，酒中谓长孙无忌曰： 魏徵、王珪事隐太子、巢刺王时，诚可恶，我能弃怨用才，无羞古人。
现代文：后来，太宗在丹霄楼宴享群臣，饮酒时对长孙无忌说： 魏徵、王王圭侍奉隐太子、巢剌王时，的确可恨，我能抛弃旧怨，任用才士，无愧于古人。
English: Later, Emperor Taizong enjoyed a banquet with his courtiers at Danzhong Building. While drinking, he said to his eldest grandson: "It was really hateful when Wei Zheng and Wang Wang Gui served the crown prince and the king of the nest, I can abandon old grudges and appoint talented people, which is worthy of the ancients."

古文：然徵每谏我不从，我发言辄不即应，何哉？ 
现代文：但魏徵每次进谏，如我不从，我发话时总不马上回答，这是为什么？ 
English: But every time Wei Zheng makes a suggestion, if I do not comply, I always do not answer immediately when I speak. Why is this?

古文：徵曰： 臣以事有不可，故谏，若不从辄应，恐遂行之。 
现代文：魏徵说 ：臣认为事情不对头，就进谏；如不听从而马上回答，便怕就会这样照办。 
English: Wei Zheng said: If the minister thinks that things are not going well, he will be punished; if he does not listen and answer immediately, he is afraid that he will do so.

古文：帝曰： 弟即应，须别陈论，顾不得？ 
现代文：太宗说： 只管当即答应，再找机会陈说，难道不行？ 
English: Taizong said, "Can't you just say yes right away, and then find another opportunity to present your case?

古文：徵曰： 昔舜戒群臣： 尔无面从，退有后言。 
现代文：魏徵说： 从前舜告诫群臣： 你们不要当面顺从，过后又有话说。 
English: Wei Zheng said, "In the past, I warned my ministers, 'Don't obey in person, and speak afterwards.'

古文：若面从可，方别陈论，此乃后言，非稷、蒐所以事尧、舜也。 
现代文：如果当面服从答应，再另找机会陈说，这就是 过后又有话说 ，这不是稷、契侍奉尧、舜的做法。 
English: If you obey the promise in person, and then find another opportunity to make a statement, this is the practice of later saying, "This is not the practice of serving, serving, and serving."

古文：帝大笑曰： 人言徵举动疏慢，我但见其妩媚耳！ 
现代文：太宗大笑道 ：人说魏徵举止怠慢，我却觉得他很恭敬顺从！ 
English: Taizong laughed loudly, "People say Wei Zheng is careless, but I think he is very respectful and obedient!"

古文：徵再拜曰： 陛下导臣使言，所以敢然；若不受，臣敢数批逆鳞哉！ 
现代文：魏徵再次叩头说 ：陛下引导臣进言，所以敢如此；不然，臣怎敢屡次触犯陛下呢！ 
English: Wei Zheng bowed his head again and said, "Your Majesty has guided me to speak, so I dare to do so; otherwise, how dare I repeatedly offend Your Majesty!"

古文：十年，为侍中。
现代文：贞观七年，任侍中。
English: Zhenguan served as a chamberlain for seven years.

古文：尚书省滞讼不决者，诏徵平治。
现代文：当时尚书省有些久拖不决的案件，下诏让魏徵审理。
English: At that time, the Ministry of Education and Culture had some long-delayed cases, and it was decided to let Wei Zheng try them.

古文：徵不素习法，但存大体，处事以情，人人悦服。
现代文：魏徵平时不熟悉法律，只凭原则照实处理，人人都心悦诚服。
English: Wei Zheng is not familiar with the law at ordinary times, and only deals with the matter according to the principle. Everyone is pleased and satisfied.

古文：进左光禄大夫、郑国公。
现代文：进封左光禄大夫、郑国公。
English: Doctor Sakoroku and Zheng Guogong came to Jinfeng.

古文：多病，辞职，帝曰： 公独不见金在鑛何足贵邪？善冶锻而为器，人乃宝之。
现代文：因多病提出辞职。太宗说 ：您不见金属在矿山有何珍贵，把它精心锻造成器物，人们才看作宝贝。
English: Taizong said, "You don't see how precious the metal is in the mine, it's only when it's carefully forged into utensils that people see it as precious.

古文：朕方自比于金，以卿为良匠而加砺焉。
现代文：我正把自己比作金属，把您比作良匠而加以磨砺。
English: I'm comparing myself to metal and you to a craftsman sharpening it.

古文：卿虽疾，未及衰，庸得便尔？ 
现代文：您虽有病，还未衰老，怎能这样辞官呢？ 
English: How can you resign like this when you are sick and not yet senile?

古文：徵恳请，数却愈牢。
现代文：魏徵恳切请求，多次推辞，退意更坚。
English: Wei Zheng earnestly requested, repeatedly declined, and his resignation became more firm.

古文：乃拜特进，知门下省事，诏朝章国典，参议得失，禄赐、国官、防閤并同职事。
现代文：太宗便改任他为特进，知门下省事，下诏朝廷规章、国家制度，由他参议得失。与职事官一样赐予俸禄、属员及卫士。
English: Emperor Taizong then appointed him as a special envoy, to know the internal affairs of the palace, to issue the regulations of the imperial court and the national system, and to advise him on the merits and demerits. Like the officials, he was given a salary, subordinates and guards.

古文：文德皇后既葬，帝即苑中作层观，以望昭陵，引徵同升，徵孰视曰： 臣毛昏，不能见。 
现代文：文德皇后安葬后，太宗在禁苑中建造高层楼台，以眺望昭陵，有次带领魏徵同登，魏徵仔细看后说： 臣眼昏花，看不见什么。 
English: After the burial of Empress Wende, Emperor Taizong built a high-rise platform in the middle of the Forbidden Garden to overlook the Zhao Mausoleum. On one occasion, he led Wei Zheng to climb up to the platform. After taking a closer look, Wei Zheng said, "Your eyes are dimmed, you can't see anything."

古文：帝指示之，徵曰： 此昭陵邪？ 
现代文：太宗指给他看，魏徵说： 这不是昭陵吗？ 太宗说 ：是。 
English: Taizong pointed it out to him, and Wei Zheng said, "Isn't this Zhaoling?" Taizong said, "Yes."

古文：帝曰： 然。 徵曰： 臣以为陛下望献陵，若昭陵，臣固见之。 
现代文：魏徵说 ：臣以为陛下在望献陵，若是昭陵，我也看得见。 
English: Wei Zheng said: I thought that His Majesty was looking at the mausoleum, but if it was Zhaoling, I could also see it.

古文：帝泣，为毁观。寻以定五礼，当封一子县男，徵请封孤兄子叔慈。
现代文：太宗流泪，为此而毁高楼，不久因修定五礼，应封一子为县男，魏徵请封兄之孤子魏叔慈。
English: Taizong shed tears, destroyed the high-rise building for this reason, and soon, due to the revision of the Five Rites, should seal one son as the man of the county, Wei solicited Wei Shuci, the orphan of his brother.

古文：帝怆然曰： 此可以励俗。 
现代文：太宗伤感地说 ：这可以勉励世俗之人。 
English: Taizong said sadly, "This can encourage worldly people."

古文：即许之。
现代文：就答应了他。
English: I agreed to it.

古文：后幸洛阳，次昭仁宫，多所谴责。
现代文：后来太宗出巡洛阳，进驻昭仁宫，对地方官多所谴责。
English: Later, Emperor Taizong went on a tour of Luoyang and was stationed at the Palace of Emperor Shōnin, where he condemned many local officials.

古文：徵曰： 隋惟责不献食，或供奉不精，为此无限，而至于亡。
现代文：魏徵说 ：隋朝因为责备郡县不进食物，或是供物不够精美，为此事而无节制，以致灭亡。
English: Wei Zheng said: The Sui Dynasty, because it blamed counties and counties for not supplying food, or because the offerings were not exquisite enough, it did not restrain itself, resulting in its demise.

古文：故天命陛下代之，正当兢惧戒约，奈何令人悔为不奢。
现代文：所以上天命陛下取而代之，正应谨慎戒惧，约束自己，怎能让人因供应不奢侈而悔恨呢！
English: Therefore, it is prudent to be cautious and restrain oneself when replacing it with the above-mentioned heavenly destiny. How can people regret that the supply is not extravagant?

古文：若以为足，今不啻足矣；以为不足，万此宁有足邪？ 
现代文：如认为充足，如今就很充足了；如认为不足，比这多一万倍也会不知满足！ 
English: If you think it's enough, it's enough; if you think it's not enough, it's ten thousand times too much!

古文：帝惊曰： 非公不闻此言。 
现代文：太宗吃惊地说： 没有你，我听不到这样的话。 
English: Taizong was surprised and said, "Without you, I wouldn't have heard those words."

古文：退又上疏曰：《书》称 明德慎罚 ， 惟刑之恤 。
现代文：魏徵退下后又上疏说： 《尚书》称 扬明道德谨慎刑法 ， 要惧用刑法 。
English: After Wei Zheng retreated, Shang Zuo said: "Shang Shu" said, "Promote moral prudence and criminal law, and be afraid of using criminal law."

古文：《礼》曰： 为上易事，为下易知，则刑不烦。 
现代文：《礼记》说 ：居于上位容易侍奉，处于下位易被了解，那么刑法就不会繁多了。 
English: "Li Ji" said: It is easy to serve when you are at the top, and it is easy to be understood when you are at the bottom, so the criminal law will not be more complicated.

古文： 上多疑，则百姓惑；下难知，则君长劳。 
现代文： 为上者多疑，百姓就会感到迷惑；为下者难于了解，君长就会疲惫。 
English: If the superior is suspicious, the people will be confused; if the inferior is hard to understand, the ruler will be tired.

古文：夫上易事，下易知，君长不劳，百姓不惑，故君有一德，臣无二心。
现代文：为上者容易侍奉，为下者易被了解，那么君长就不会疲惫，百姓就不会迷惑，因此君主有一种美德，臣子就不会产生二心。
English: It is easy to serve for the superior and to be understood for the inferior. Then the ruler will not be tired and the people will not be confused. Therefore, the monarch has a virtue, and the vassal will not be double-minded.

古文：夫刑赏之本，在乎劝善而惩恶。
现代文：刑罚赏赐的目的，在于劝善惩恶。
English: The purpose of punishment and reward is to encourage good and punish evil.

古文：帝王所与，天下画一，不以亲疏贵贱而轻重者也。
现代文：帝王赐用，天下划一，是不应依据亲疏贵贱而轻重有别的。
English: The emperor's bestowal is the same all over the world. It should not be based on one's relative rank, but on one's importance.

古文：今之刑赏，或由喜怒，或出好恶。
现代文：如今的刑法赏赐则不然，或是出于一时的喜怒，或是出于好恶的不同。
English: Today's criminal law rewards are different, either out of a momentary anger, or out of a difference in likes and dislikes.

古文：喜则矜刑于法中，怒则求罪于律外；好则钻皮出羽，恶则洗垢索瘢。
现代文：高兴时该用刑而不忍心使用，发怒时丢开法律去寻找罪过；对自己喜欢的人极力赞美，对自己厌恶的人百般挑剔。
English: When one is happy, one should use punishment rather than forbearance; when one is angry, one should discard the law and look for faults; one should praise those whom one likes, and be critical of those whom one dislikes.

古文：盖刑滥则小人道长，赏谬则君子道消。
现代文：刑罚过滥，小人之道就会增长；赏赐不当，君子之道就会消亡。
English: If the punishment is excessive, the way of the villain will increase; if the reward is improper, the way of the gentleman will disappear.

古文：小人之恶不惩，君子之善不劝，而望治安刑措，非所闻也。
现代文：小人的恶行不予以惩罚，君子的善行不予以鼓励，而希望天下大治，刑罚弃置不用，这是从没听过的事。
English: It is unheard of not to punish the villain's evil and not to reward the gentleman's good, if by so doing one also hopes for a well-ordered state and rewards and punishments.

古文：且暇豫而言，皆敦尚孔、老；至于威怒，则专法申、韩。
现代文：而且闲暇时清谈，全都尊信、崇尚孔子、老子；到作威发怒之时，就专门效法申不害、韩非。
English: Moreover, they all respect and worship Confucius and Lao Tzu when they talk freely in their spare time; when they are angry, they specifically follow the example of Han Fei.

古文：故道德之旨未弘，而锲薄之风先摇。
现代文：所以道德的旨意还未宏扬，刻薄的风气就先煽起。
English: Therefore, the moral will has not yet been magnified, and the mean-spirited culture is first instigated.

古文：昔州犁上下其手而楚法以敝，张汤轻重其心而汉刑以谬，况人主而自高下乎！
现代文：从前伯州犁与人串通作弊，楚国的法律便遭破坏；张汤用心轻重不一，汉朝的刑罚便出差错。何况身为君主而自己就有偏颇呢！
English: Once upon a time, Bozhou Yi colluded with people to cheat, and the laws of Chu were destroyed; Zhang Tang had different intentions, and the punishment of the Han Dynasty went wrong. What's more, as a monarch, he was biased!

古文：顷者罚人，或以供张不赡，或不能从欲，皆非致治之急也。
现代文：近来处罚人员，有的是因为供应不周，有的是因为不能顺其意愿，都不是为了达到天下大治而急需处理的事情。
English: Recently, people have been punished, some because of poor supply, some because they could not go along with their wishes. These are not things that urgently need to be dealt with in order to achieve world peace.

古文：夫贵不与骄期而骄自至，富不与奢期而奢自至，非徒语也。
现代文：尊贵不与骄盈相约而骄盈自来，富足不与奢侈相期而奢侈自至，这并不是空话。
English: It is not an empty phrase to say that dignity does not coincide with pride, but that pride comes from within, and that affluence does not coincide with luxury, but that luxury comes from within.

古文：且我之所代，实在有隋。
现代文： 而且我朝取代隋朝的缘故，正在隋朝本身。
English: And the reason why the Ming Dynasty replaced the Sui Dynasty is the Sui Dynasty itself.

古文：以隋府藏况今之资储，以隋甲兵况今之士马，以隋户口况今之百姓，挈长度大，曾何等级焉！
现代文：用隋朝的库藏与今日的储存相比，用隋朝的军队与今日的兵马相比，以隋朝的人口与今日的百姓相比，计其长短大小，该有多大差别啊！
English: Compare the Sui Dynasty's treasury with today's storage, compare the Sui Dynasty's army with today's soldiers and horses, compare the Sui Dynasty's population with today's people, and measure their length and size, how big the difference is!

古文：然隋以富强而丧，动之也；我以贫寡而安，静之也。
现代文：然而隋朝因富强而灭亡，就是因为国家动荡；我朝因贫乏而平安，就是因为国家宁静。
English: However, the Sui Dynasty perished because it was rich and powerful, that is, because the country was in turmoil; the Han Dynasty was peaceful because it was poor, that is, because the country was peaceful.

古文：静之则安，动之则乱，人皆知之，非隐而难见、微而难察也。
现代文：宁静就会平安，动荡就会乱亡，这人人都知道，并不是隐晦难见、微妙难察的道理。
English: Everyone knows that when there is tranquility, there will be peace, and when there is turmoil, there will be chaos and death. This is not an obscure or subtle truth.

古文：不蹈平易之涂，而遵覆车之辙，何哉？
现代文：不走平坦的道路，而沿覆车之辙而行，这是为什么？
English: Why do we follow the ruts instead of the smooth road?

古文：安不思危，治不念乱，存不虑亡也。
现代文：是因为居安而不思危，安定时没想到动乱，生存时没考虑到灭亡。
English: It's because they live in peace and don't think about danger, they don't think about turmoil when things are stable, and they don't think about death when things are going well.

古文：方隋未乱，自谓必无乱；未亡，自谓必不亡。
现代文：隋朝未乱之时，自以为不会发生动乱；未亡之时，自以为不会灭亡。
English: When the Sui Dynasty was not in turmoil, it thought that there would be no turmoil; when it was still alive, it thought that it would not perish.

古文：所以甲兵亟动，徭役不息，以至戮辱而不悟灭亡之所由也，岂不哀哉！
现代文：所以兵马屡动，徭役不息，直到被杀受辱时，还不明白灭亡的缘故。岂不可悲！
English: Therefore, the soldiers and horses repeatedly move, and the service never stops, until they are killed and humiliated, they still do not understand the reason for the destruction. Isn't it sad!

古文：夫监形之美恶，必就止水；监 政之安危，必取亡国。
现代文：照看长相的美丑，得用静止的水，观察国家政局的安危，必用已亡之国作为借鉴。
English: To look after the beauty and ugliness of one's appearance, one should use still water, observe the safety and danger of the national political situation, and must use the dead country as a reference.

古文：《诗》曰： 殷鉴不远，在夏后之世。
现代文：《诗经》说： 殷朝的借鉴不远，就在夏朝时候。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: The reference of the Yin Dynasty is not far away, just in the summer time.

古文：臣愿当今之动静，以隋为鉴，则存亡治乱可得而知。
现代文：臣希望当今的举动，能用隋朝作为借鉴，那么存亡治乱的道理就可得知。
English: The minister hopes that today's move can be used as a reference for the Sui Dynasty, so that the reason for surviving and managing turmoil can be learned.

古文：思所以危则安矣，思所以乱则治矣，思所以亡则存矣。
现代文：想到能导致危险的原因就可获得安宁，想到能造成动乱的原因就可使天下太平，想到能使其灭亡的原因就能求得生存的权利。
English: If you think about what can cause danger, you can obtain tranquility; if you think about what can cause turmoil, you can make the world peaceful; if you think about what can cause its demise, you can obtain the right to survive.

古文：存亡之所在，在节嗜欲，省游畋，息靡丽，罢不急，慎偏听，近忠厚，远便佞而已。
现代文：生死存亡的关键，就在于节制嗜好和欲望，减少出游和行猎的次数，平息奢靡豪华之风，停建不急之役，谨慎而不偏听，亲近忠厚之人，疏远阿谀奉承之徒而已。
English: The key to life and death is to control one's hobbies and desires, reduce the number of trips and hunting, calm down the extravagant and luxurious style, stop the construction of non-urgent tasks, be careful not to listen, be close to loyal people, and alienate flatterers.

古文：夫守之则易，得之实难。
现代文：保持帝业容易，取得帝业的确困难。
English: It is easy to maintain imperial power, but it is really difficult to obtain it.

古文：今既得其所难，岂不能保其所易？
现代文：如今既已取得难得的帝业，难道就不能保持易保的帝业吗？
English: Now that it has achieved a rare empire, can it not maintain the empire of Yibao?

古文：保之不固，骄奢淫泆有以动之也。
现代文：不能牢固地保持它，就是因为骄奢淫逸之心在动摇它。 
English: It cannot be held fast, because the heart of pride and lewdness has shaken it.

古文：帝宴群臣积翠池，酣乐赋诗。
现代文：太宗在积翠池宴请群臣，和群臣痛饮美酒，赋诗言志。
English: Emperor Taizong held a banquet for his courtiers at Jiecui Pond. He and his courtiers drank fine wine and recited poems.

古文：徵赋《西汉》，其卒章曰： 终藉叔孙礼，方知皇帝尊。 
现代文：魏徵赋《西汉》之诗，其末章说： 最终依靠叔孙通制礼，然后才知道皇帝的尊严。 
English: Wei Zhengfu's poem "Western Han," the last chapter of which says: Finally, rely on the uncle and grandson to pass the rite, and then know the dignity of the emperor.

古文：帝曰： 徵言未尝不约我以礼。 
现代文：太宗说： 魏徵说话，没有不用礼来约束我的。 
English: Emperor Taizong said, "When Wei Zheng spoke, he did not use formalities to restrain me.

古文：它日，从容问曰： 比政治若何？ 
现代文：有一天，太宗从容问魏徵 ：近来国家政治如何？ 
English: One day, Emperor Taizong calmly asked Wei Zheng: How is the country's politics these days?

古文：徵见久承平，帝意有所忽，因对曰： 陛下贞观之初，导人使谏。
现代文：魏徵见太平日久，太宗思想有所疏忽，因而回答说 ：陛下在贞观初年，诱导臣下进谏。
English: Wei Zheng saw that the Taiping Dynasty had been in power for a long time, and that the Taizong thought was negligent, so he replied: His Majesty induced his vassals to enter the priesthood in the first year of chastity.

古文：三年以后，见谏者悦而从之。
现代文：三年以后，遇到进谏者能乐意听从。
English: Three years later, anyone who has been bullied is more than willing to listen.

古文：比一二年，勉强受谏，而终不平也。 
现代文：近一二年来勉强接受进谏，而心中照旧不满。 
English: For nearly a year or two, he reluctantly accepted the promotion, but his heart was still dissatisfied.

古文：帝惊曰： 公何物验之？ 
现代文：太宗惊奇地说： 你凭什么这样说？ 
English: Taizong said in surprise, "What makes you say that?"

古文：对曰： 陛下初即位，论元律师死，孙伏伽谏以为法不当死，陛下赐以兰陵公主园，直百万。
现代文：魏徵回答说： 陛下刚即位时，判决元律师死罪，孙伏伽进谏，认为依照法律不应处死，陛下将兰陵公主园囿赏赐给他，价值一百万钱。
English: Wei Qian replied: When His Majesty ascended to the throne, he sentenced the former lawyer Sun Fuga to death, believing that according to the law, he should not be executed. His Majesty gave him the Lanling Princess Garden Award, worth one million yuan.

古文：或曰： 赏太厚。 
现代文：有人说： 赏赐太厚。 
English: Some say: The reward is too great.

古文：答曰： 朕即位，未有谏者，所以赏之。 
现代文：陛下回答说： 我即位后，还没有进谏的人，所以要厚赏。 
English: His Majesty replied, "Since I have ascended the throne, no one has yet ascended the throne, so I would like to reward you generously."

古文：此导人使谏也。
现代文：这就是诱导臣下进谏。
English: This is inducing a vassal to go into a tantrum.

古文：后柳雄妄诉隋资，有司得，劾其伪，将论死，戴胄奏罪当徒，执之四五然后赦。
现代文：后来柳雄谎报在隋朝任官的资历，有关部门得知实情，弹劾他弄虚作假，判决他死罪。戴胄上奏说，柳雄之罪只应流放，接连上奏四五次，陛下才赦免其死罪。
English: Later, Liu Xiong lied about his qualifications as an official in the Sui Dynasty, and the relevant departments learned the truth, impeached him for deception, and sentenced him to death. Dai Ying reported that Liu Xiong's crime was only to be exiled, and after four or five consecutive reports, His Majesty pardoned his capital crime.

古文：谓胄曰 弟守法如此，不畏滥罚。 
现代文：并对戴胄说 ：如是这样严格守法，就不会滥用刑法了。 
English: He also said to Dai Juan, "If you strictly abide by the law like this, you won't abuse the criminal law."

古文：此悦而从谏也。
现代文：这就是高兴地听从劝谏。
English: This is what it means to be happy to listen to advice.

古文：近皇甫德参上书言 修洛阳宫，劳人也；收地租，厚敛也；俗尚高髻，宫中所化也。 
现代文：近来皇甫德参上书说 ：修建洛阳宫，是让百姓受苦；征收地租，是横征暴敛；世俗喜好梳高髻，是受宫中影响。 
English: Recently, Emperor Fu De said in his imperial edict: the construction of Luoyang Palace is to make the people suffer; the levying of land rent is extortion; the worldly preference of combing hair is influenced by the palace.

古文：陛下恚曰： 是子使国家不役一人，不收一租，宫人无发，乃称其意。 
现代文：陛下发怒说 ：这人要国家不役使一人，不收任何租税，宫女去掉头发，才能合他的心意。 
English: His Majesty was furious and said, "This man wants the state not to employ a single person, not to collect any taxes, and for his concubine to remove her hair in order to please him.

古文：臣奏： 人臣上书，不激切不能起人主意，激切即近讪谤。 
现代文：臣上奏说： 人臣上书言事，不激切就不能打动君主之心，一旦激切就接近毁谤。 
English: The vassal-in-chief said: When a vassal writes and speaks, it is impossible to move the heart of the sovereign without being impassioned, and once it is impassioned, it is close to slander.

古文：于时，陛下虽从臣言，赏帛罢之，意终不平。
现代文：当时陛下虽说听从臣言，赏赐丝帛，免治其罪，但心内终究愤恨不平。
English: At that time, although His Majesty said that he would listen to the words of his vassals, reward Shi Yan and exempt him from punishment, his heart was still resentful.

古文：此难于受谏也。 
现代文：这就是难于接受进谏了。 
English: That's a hard pill to swallow.

古文：帝悟曰： 非公，无能道此者。
现代文：太宗醒悟，说： 不是你，说不出这样的话。
English: Taizong wakes up and says, "It's not you, you can't say that."

古文：人苦不自觉耳！ 
现代文：人苦于不能了解自己。 
English: People suffer from not being able to understand themselves.

古文：先是，帝作飞仙宫，徵上疏曰：隋有天下三十余年，风行万里，威詹殊俗，一旦举而弃之。
现代文：在此之前，太宗建造飞山宫，魏徵上疏说： 隋朝据有天下三十多年，教化行于万里，威势震撼异族，然而顷刻丧失殆尽。
English: Prior to this, Emperor Taizong built the Feishan Palace, and Wei Zheng Shang Zuo said: The Sui Dynasty ruled the world for more than thirty years, and carried out thousands of miles of indoctrination. Its power shocked the foreign people, but it was all lost in an instant.

古文：彼炀帝者，岂恶治安、喜灭亡哉？
现代文：那位炀帝，难道厌恶安定喜好灭亡吗？
English: Does that tyrant loathe stability and prefer to perish?

古文：恃其富强，不虞后患也。
现代文：只因倚仗国力富强，不顾后患。
English: It is only because they rely on the strength and wealth of their country that they are able to get ahead, regardless of the consequences.

古文：驱天下，役万物，以自奉养，子女玉帛是求，宫宇台榭是饰，徭役无时，干戈不休，外示威重，内行险忌，谗邪者进，忠正者退，上下相蒙，人不堪命，以致殒匹夫之手，为天下笑。
现代文：驱使天下之人，役使万物，以奉养自己，搜求财帛子女，装修楼台馆所，徭役无时止息，征战接连不休，对外显示威严，对内行其险诈猜忌，邪恶者进用，忠正者斥退，上下互相欺瞒，百姓无法活命，以致自身死于匹夫之手，为天下之人所笑。
English: Drives the people of the world, serves all things, in order to support himself, searches for wealth and children, decorates buildings and kitchens, serves constantly, fights incessantly, shows majesty to the outside world, is dangerous and suspicious to the inside world, uses the wicked, repels the loyal, and deceives each other, the people can not live, so that he died at the hands of his peers and was laughed at by the people of the world.

古文：圣哲乘机，拯其危溺。
现代文：圣人乘此时机，拯救天下危难。
English: The sage took advantage of this opportunity to save the world from danger.

古文：今宫观台榭，尽居之矣；奇珍异物，尽收之矣；姬姜淑媛，尽侍于侧矣；四海九州，尽为臣妾矣。
现代文：如今隋帝的楼台馆所，尽被陛下所居；奇珍异物，尽为陛下所有；贵妇美女，尽在陛下身边；四海九州之人，尽成陛下臣妾。
English: Your Majesty, you are now living in a luxurious palace, with a collection of the world's rarest treasures, with the nation's beautiful women waiting by your side, and the people of Kyushu all over the world listening to your every command.

古文：若能鉴彼所以亡，念我所以得，焚宝衣，毁广殿，安处卑宫，德之上也。
现代文：如能借鉴隋朝之所以灭亡的原因，思虑我朝获取天下的缘故，焚其宝衣，毁其广殿，安居于低矮的宫室，那就具有上等德行。
English: If you can learn from the reasons for the demise of the Sui Dynasty, think about the reasons for the acquisition of the world by the Ming Dynasty, burn its precious clothes, destroy its Great Hall, and live in a low palace, then you will have a superior virtue.

古文：若成功不废，即仍其旧，除其不急，德之次也。
现代文：如已成之业不致败落，承袭其原有的楼台馆所，取消一切不急之务，那就具有次一等的德行。
English: If the work already done does not fail, inherits its original building, and cancels all non-urgent tasks, then it has a second-class virtue.

古文：不惟王业之艰难，谓天命可恃，因基增旧，甘心侈靡，使人不见德而劳役是闻，斯为下矣。
现代文：如不思虑创立帝业的艰难，认为天命可以依仗，凭借基址扩建宫殿，快意于奢侈淫逸，使人们不见德政而劳役不休，那就是下等的德行了。
English: If you don't think about the difficulties of creating an empire, think that you can rely on the fate of heaven, expand the palace by virtue of the foundation site, enjoy luxury and luxury, and make people work without seeing virtue, that is inferior virtue.

古文：以暴易暴，与乱同道。
现代文：用暴政取代暴政，将会照样出现动乱。
English: Replace tyranny with tyranny, and there will still be turmoil.

古文：夫作事不法，后无以观。
现代文：做事不合法规，后人就没有好评。
English: If you do things illegally, posterity will not have a good opinion of you.

古文：人怨神怒，则灾害生；灾害生，则祸乱作；祸乱作，而能以身名令终鲜矣。
现代文：民怨神怒，灾害就会发生；灾害发生，动乱就会暴发。动乱暴发，自己的生命和名声能保持善终就很少见了。 
English: When the people are enraged, disasters will occur; when disasters occur, unrest will break out. When unrest breaks out, it is rare to see one's own life and reputation preserved.

古文：是岁，大雨，谷、洛溢，毁宫寺十九，漂居人六百家。
现代文：这一年，天降大雨，谷水、洛水泛滥成灾，冲毁宫观十九所，漂没居民六百家。
English: In this year, heavy rain fell from the sky, flooding the valley and Luo River, destroying nineteen palaces and drowning six hundred residents.

古文：徵陈事曰：臣闻为国基于德礼，保于诚信。
现代文：魏徵上书陈事说： 臣听说治国以德与礼为基础，以诚与信为保证。
English: Wei Zheng's letter to Chen Zhi said: The minister heard that the governance of the country is based on virtue and courtesy, and sincerity and trust are the guarantee.

古文：诚信立，则下无二情；德礼形，则远者来格。
现代文：诚、信确立，居下者就不会产生二心；德、礼表现出来，远方之人就会前来归附。
English: If sincerity and faith are established, those who are inferior will not have double-mindedness; if virtue and courtesy are shown, people from far away will come to join.

古文：故德礼诚信，国之大纲，不可斯须废也。
现代文：所以德、礼、诚、信四者，是治国之大纲，不可废弃片刻。
English: Therefore, morality, propriety, sincerity, and faith are the four pillars of governing the country, and should not be neglected for a moment.

古文：传曰： 君使臣以礼，臣事君以忠。 
现代文：古书说： 君主按礼节使用臣下，臣下应尽心竭力侍奉君主。 
English: The ancient book says: The monarch uses his vassals according to etiquette, and the vassals should serve the monarch wholeheartedly.

古文： 自古皆有死，民无信不立。 
现代文： 自古以来人总是要死的，人民如不信任统治者，国家就立不住脚。 
English: Since ancient times, people have always wanted to die. If the people do not trust the rulers, the country cannot stand on its own feet.

古文：又曰： 同言而信，信在言前；同令而行，诚在令外。 
现代文：还说 ：说同样的话而被信任，是因说话之前就受信任。同样的命令被执行，是在命令之外是否真诚待人所致。 
English: He also said: To be trusted in saying the same thing is to be trusted before speaking; the same order being carried out is to be treated with sincerity outside the order.

古文：然则言而不行，言不信也；令而不从，令无诚也。
现代文：那么，说话不被听从，是因不受信任；命令不被执行，是因缺乏诚意。
English: Then, speech is not obeyed because it is not trusted; orders are not carried out because of a lack of sincerity.

古文：不信之言，不诚之令，君子弗为也。
现代文：不受信任的话，缺乏诚意的命令，君子是不说不为的。
English: If you are not trusted, if you give orders that lack sincerity, a gentleman is all talk and no action.

古文：自王道休明，绵十余载，仓廪愈积，土地益广，然而道德不日博，仁义不日厚，何哉？
现代文： 自从王道美好光明，至今已延续十多年了，仓库粮食越积越多，土地更为广阔，然而德行不能天天增广，仁义不能日渐加深，是何缘故呢？
English: It has been more than ten years since the king's path has been bright and beautiful. The storehouse has accumulated more and more grain, and the land has become more and more vast. However, virtue cannot increase every day, and benevolence and righteousness cannot be gradually deepened. Why is this?

古文：由待下之情，未尽诚信，虽有善始之勤，而无克终之美。
现代文：是因对待臣下，没有尽其诚信，虽有善始的勤劳，而无善终的美德。
English: It was because he did not treat his vassals with the utmost sincerity, and although he had the virtue of hard work from the beginning, he did not have the virtue of doing well in the end.

古文：故便佞之徒得肆其巧，谓同心为朋党，告讦为至公，强直为擅权，忠谠为诽谤。
现代文：因此阿谀奉承之徒得以施展伎俩，说同心之人是结党营私，揭人隐私是大公无私，刚强正直是专权自用，忠直敢谏是诽谤诬蔑。
English: Therefore, the flatterers were able to carry out the trick of saying that people of the same mind are partisan and selfish, that revealing one's privacy is selfless, that being strong and honest is for one's own use, and that being loyal and honest is slander.

古文：谓之朋党，虽忠信可疑；谓之至公，虽矫伪无咎。强直者畏擅权而不得尽，忠谠者虑诽谤而不敢与之争。
现代文：称为结党营私，虽是忠信也遭怀疑；称为大公无私，虽是做假也无罪过；刚强正直的人害怕专权的指责而不敢尽力办事，忠诚敢谏的人顾虑诽谤非议而不敢尽言。
English: Those who are called "partisan and selfish" have their loyalty doubted; those who are called "selfless" have no guilt even if they are false; those who are strong and honest are afraid of being criticized by the autocracy and do not dare to do their best, and those who are loyal and dare to criticize are afraid of being slandered and criticized.

古文：荧惑视听，郁于大道，妨化损德，无斯甚者。
现代文：惑乱视听，阻塞大道，妨碍教化，损伤德行，没有比这更甚的了。
English: There is nothing worse than confusing the audio-visual, blocking the avenue, hindering the enlightenment, and damaging the virtue.

古文：今将致治则委之君子，得失或访诸小人，是誉毁常在小人，而督责常加君子也。
现代文： 如今将致天下于大治的任务托付给君子，而其得失有时却询问小人，这样的话，毁誉就为小人操纵，而督察责罚则常加在君子头上。
English: Nowadays, the task of ruling the world is entrusted to the gentleman, and the villain is sometimes asked about his gains and losses. In this case, the villain manipulates the reputation, and the inspector's punishment is often imposed on the gentleman's head.

古文：夫中智之人，岂无小惠，然虑不及远，虽使竭力尽诚，犹未免倾败，况内怀奸利，承颜顺旨乎？
现代文：中等才智的人岂无小惠，但思虑不能远大，即使他们竭诚尽力，仍然不免倾覆败亡，何况心怀奸邪察颜观色行事的人呢！
English: Is it not true that people of average intelligence have small benefits, but their thoughts cannot be far-reaching. Even if they make every effort, they will still inevitably be overthrown and defeated, let alone those who act with treachery in mind!

古文：故孔子曰： 君子而不仁者有矣，未有小人而仁者。 
现代文：所以孔子说 ：君子中不仁爱的人是有的，但没有小人而有仁德的。 
English: That is why Confucius said, "Among the gentlemen, there are some who are not benevolent, but there are no villains, only the benevolent."

古文：然则君子不能无小恶，恶不积无害于正；小人时有小善，善不积不足以忠。
现代文：所以君子不能没有小恶，但恶不积多不妨碍其正直；小人不时也有小善，但善不积多不能使其忠诚。
English: Therefore, a gentleman cannot do without small evils, but the accumulation of more evils does not hinder his honesty; a villain sometimes has small good, but the accumulation of more good cannot make him loyal.

古文：今谓之善人矣，复虑其不信，何异立直木而疑其景之曲乎？
现代文：如今称某人为善人，又担心他不可信任，这与竖起直木而怀疑其影不直有何区别呢？
English: What's the difference between calling someone a good person now and worrying that they can't be trusted, and putting up a tree and wondering if it's straight?

古文：故上不信则无以使下，下不信则无以事上。信之为义大矣！
现代文：所以上不被下级信任就不能指挥下级，下不受上级信任就无法事奉上级，信任的意义很大啊！
English: Therefore, if a superior is not trusted by a subordinate, he cannot command a subordinate, and if a subordinate is not trusted by a superior, he cannot serve a superior. The significance of trust is great!

古文：昔齐桓公问管仲曰： 吾欲使酒腐于爵，肉腐于俎，得无害霸乎？ 
现代文： 从前齐桓公问管仲说： 我想让酒坏在杯中，肉烂在俎上，这不会妨碍霸业吧？ 
English: Once upon a time, Prince Qi Huan asked Guanzhong: "I want the wine to spoil in the glass and the meat to rot on the spit. Won't this interfere with hegemony?

古文：管仲曰： 此固非其善者，然无害霸也。 
现代文：管仲说： 这本不好，但不会妨碍霸业。 
English: Guanzhong said: This is not good, but it will not hinder the hegemony.

古文：公曰： 何如而害霸？ 
现代文：桓公说 ：怎样做才妨碍霸业呢？ 
English: Kanko said, "What should we do to prevent hegemony?"

古文：曰： 不能知人，害霸也；知而不能用，害霸也；用而不能任，害霸也；任而不能信，害霸也；既信而又使小人参之，害霸也。 
现代文：管仲说 ：不能知人，妨碍霸业；知而不能任用，妨碍霸业；用而不给职衔，妨碍霸业；给职衔而不信任，妨碍霸业；虽信任而又让小人参与，妨碍霸业。 
English: Guanzhong said: if you can't get to know someone, it hinders hegemony; if you can't get to know someone, it hinders hegemony; if you can't appoint someone, it hinders hegemony; if you don't give someone a title, it hinders hegemony; if you give someone a title, but don't trust them, it hinders hegemony; if you trust someone, but allow a villain to participate, it hinders hegemony.

古文：晋中行穆伯攻鼓，经年而不能下，馈闲伦曰： 鼓之啬夫，闲伦知之，请无疲士大夫，而鼓可得。 
现代文：晋国中行穆伯进攻鼓国，过了一年还未攻下。馈闲伦说 ：鼓国的啬夫，闲伦认识，不用劳累士大夫，鼓国就可得到。 
English: In the middle of Jin Province, Mubo attacked Drum Province, and after a year, Mubo still hadn't conquered Drum Province. Feeding Idleness Ren said: "Drug addict of Drum Province, knowing Idleness Ren, you don't need to be a doctor of medicine, you can get Drum Province."

古文：穆伯不应。
现代文：穆伯不答应。
English: Mube did not agree.

古文：左右曰： 不折一戟，不伤一卒，而鼓可得，君奚不为？ 
现代文：左右之人说 ：不折一戟，不伤一卒，而鼓国可得，您为何不答应？ 
English: People on both sides said, "If you don't break a single bone, don't hurt a single person, and if you can gain the whole country, why don't you agree?"

古文：穆伯曰： 闲伦之为人也，佞而不仁。
现代文：穆伯说： 闲伦为人，谄佞而不仁。
English: Mubo said, "He is a lazy person, he is ungrateful.

古文：若使闲伦下之，吾不可以不赏，若赏之，是赏佞人也。
现代文：如让闲伦拿下鼓国，我就不得不予以奖赏；如奖赏他，就是奖赏佞人。
English: If I let Idleness win the Drum Kingdom, I will have to reward him; if I reward him, I will reward the Drummer.

古文：佞人得志，是使晋国舍仁而为佞，虽得鼓，安用之！ 
现代文：佞人得志，就是让晋国舍弃仁德而为邪佞，虽得鼓国，又有何用！ 
English: If you want to be successful, you have to make Jin abandon benevolence and become evil. If you want to be successful, what's the use?

古文：夫穆伯，列国大夫，管仲，霸者之佐，犹能慎于信任，远避佞人，况陛下之上圣乎？
现代文：穆伯不过是列国大夫，管仲只是霸主的辅佐，尚能谨慎于信任别人，远避谗谀之徒，何况陛下这样的上圣呢！
English: Mubo is just a doctor of nations, and Guanzhong is just an assistant to the overlord. He can still be cautious in trusting others and stay away from scoundrels, let alone a saint like His Majesty!

古文：若欲令君子小人是非不杂，必怀之以德，待之以信，厉之以义，节之以礼，然后善善而恶恶，审罚而明赏，无为之化何远之有！
现代文：如想让君子小人是非分明，必定要以德怀抚，以信相待，以义勉励，以礼约束，然后表彰善人而厌弃恶人，审慎刑法而明于奖赏，无为而治的善政就为时不远了！
English: If you want to make the gentleman and the villain indistinguishable, you must caress them with courtesy, treat them with trust, encourage them with righteousness, restrain them with courtesy, and then commend the good people and reject the wicked, be prudent in criminal law and clear in reward, and good governance without action is not far away!

古文：善善而不能进，恶恶而不能去，罚不及有罪，赏不加有功，则危亡之期或未可保。
现代文：如表彰善人而不提拔，讨厌恶人而不除掉，罚不加于有罪，赏不及于有功，那么危亡之时甚至不能保全。 
English: If good people are commended but not promoted, evil people are hated but not eliminated, the guilty are not punished but not punished, and the meritorious are not rewarded but not rewarded, then there can be no preservation even in the time of peril.

古文：帝手诏嘉答。
现代文：太宗下手诏给以表彰和答复。
English: Emperor Taizong gave a commendation and a reply.

古文：于是，废明德宫玄圃院赐遭水者。
现代文：在这种情况下，下令废免明德宫玄圃院，将它赐给遭受水灾的民户。
English: Under these circumstances, it was ordered to abolish the Mingde Palace and give it to the flood-stricken households.

古文：它日，宴群臣，帝曰： 贞观以前，从我定天下，间关草昧，玄龄功也。
现代文：有一天，宴请群臣时，太宗说 ：贞观之前，随我平定天下，辗转奔波，是房玄龄的功劳。
English: One day, when entertaining a group of ministers, Taizong said, "Before Zhenguan, it was Fang Xuanling's merit to pacify the world with me and run around.

古文：贞观之后，纳忠谏，正朕违，为国家长利，徵而已。
现代文：贞观以后，进献忠告，纠正我的过失，为国家求长久利益，仅魏徵而已。
English: After chastity, it is only for Wei Zheng to offer advice, correct my mistakes, and seek long-term benefits for the country.

古文：虽古名臣，亦何以加！ 
现代文：即使是古代的名臣，也比不过他们！ 
English: Even the eminent ministers of ancient times were no better than them!

古文：亲解佩刀，以赐二人。
现代文：亲自解下佩刀，赏赐给他们俩。
English: He personally unsheathed his sword and rewarded them both.

古文：帝尝问群臣： 徵与诸葛亮孰贤？ 
现代文：太宗曾问群臣说： 魏徵与诸葛亮哪个贤能？ 
English: Emperor Taizong once asked his courtiers: "Which one is more capable, Wei Zheng or Zhuge Liang?"

古文：岑文本曰： 亮才兼将相，非徵可比。 
现代文：岑文本说： 诸葛亮兼有将相之才，魏徵不能和他相比。 
English: The transcript said: Zhuge Liang has the ability to be a matchmaker, but Wei Zheng cannot be compared to him.

古文：帝曰： 徵蹈履仁义，以弼朕躬，欲致之尧、舜，虽亮无以抗。
现代文：太宗说 ：魏徵履行仁义，以辅佐本人，想使本人达到尧、舜地步，虽是诸葛亮也比不过他。 
English: Taizong said: Wei Zheng performed benevolence and righteousness to assist himself, and wanted to make himself reach a higher level, although Zhuge Liang was no better than him.

古文：时上封者众，或不切事，帝厌之，欲加谯黜，徵曰： 古者立谤木，欲闻己过。
现代文：当时上书言事者多，有的不切实际，太宗厌烦，想予以驳斥，魏徵说： 古时设立谤木，想了解自己的过错。
English: At that time, there were a lot of people who made speeches, some were unrealistic, too boring, and wanted to refute them. Wei Zheng said: In ancient times, he set up a gossip tree and wanted to understand his mistakes.

古文：封事，其谤木之遗乎！
现代文：密封的上书，就是谤木制度的遗意吧！
English: A sealed petition, that is the legacy of the defamation law system!

古文：陛下思闻得失，当恣其所陈。
现代文：陛下想知得失，应当任其所言。
English: If you want to know the pros and cons, you should let him speak.

古文：言而是乎，为朝廷之益；非乎，无损于政。 
现代文：说得对，对朝廷有益；不对，也无损于政局。 
English: If you say the right thing, it will be beneficial to the imperial court; if you say the wrong thing, it will not harm the political situation.

古文：帝悦，皆劳遣之。
现代文：太宗高兴了，对上书言事者全都加以抚慰而后送走。
English: Taizong was so happy that he consoled all the petitioners and sent them away.

古文：十三年，阿史那结社率作乱，云阳石然，自冬至五月不雨，徵上疏极言曰：臣奉侍帷幄十余年，陛下许臣以仁义之道，守而不失；俭约朴素，终始弗渝。
现代文：贞观十三年，阿史那结社率作乱，云阳石头自燃，从冬直到这一年的五月不下雨，魏徵上疏极力尽言说： 臣侍奉陛下十几年，陛下答应臣推行仁义之道，保持它而不丧失；勤俭朴素，始终如一。
English: In the thirteenth year of Zhenguan, the Ashina association led a riot, the Yunyang stone spontaneously combusted, and there was no rain from winter until May of this year. Wei Zheng Shangso tried his best to say: I have served Your Majesty for more than ten years, Your Majesty has promised me to promote the way of benevolence and righteousness, and maintain it without losing it; diligence, frugality and simplicity, consistent.

古文：德音在耳，不敢忘也。
现代文：善言还在耳边，臣不敢忘。
English: The kind words are still in my ears, and I dare not forget them.

古文：顷年以来，浸不克终。
现代文：近年以来，渐渐不如当初。
English: In recent years, it has gradually become worse than it was at the beginning.

古文：谨用条陈，裨万分一。
现代文：现恭谨地分条陈叙，或可补其万一。
English: It is now respectfully presented in sections, or may be supplemented in the event that it is necessary.

古文：陛下在贞观初，清净寡欲，化被荒外。
现代文： 陛下在贞观初年，清净寡欲，教化遍及荒远地区。
English: In the first year of his chastity, his majesty was chaste and abstemious, and his enlightenment spread throughout the desolate regions.

古文：今万里遣使，市索骏马，并访怪珍。
现代文：如今派遣使臣于万里之外，购取骏马，搜访奇珍。
English: Now they are sending envoys thousands of miles away to buy fine horses and search for rare horses.

古文：昔汉文帝却千里马，晋武帝焚雉头裘。
现代文：从前汉文帝不接受千里马，晋武帝焚毁雉头裘。
English: Once upon a time, Emperor Wen of the Han Dynasty would not accept a thousand horses, and Emperor Wu of the Jin Dynasty burned down Shantou Qiu.

古文：陛下居常论议，远希尧、舜，今所为，更欲处汉文、晋武下乎？
现代文：陛下时常议论，要远比于尧、舜，今日所为，却要居于汉文帝、晋武帝之下吗？
English: Your Majesty has often said that you would rather live under Emperor Hanwen and Emperor Jinwu than Emperor Jiao and Empress Dowager Cixi, but what have you done today?

古文：此不克终一渐也。
现代文：这是逐渐不能坚持到底的第一件事。
English: That's the first thing that starts to get out of kilter.

古文：子贡问治人。孔子曰： 懔乎若朽索之驭六马。 
现代文：子贡问怎样治理百姓，孔子说： 恐惧啊，就像用烂绳驾驭六马拉的车辆。 
English: When Zigong asked how to govern the people, Confucius said, "Fear is like driving a six-horse carriage with a rotten rope."

古文：子贡曰： 何畏哉？ 
现代文：子贡说 ：怕什么呢？ 
English: Zigong said: What is there to be afraid of?

古文：对曰： 不以道导之，则吾仇也，若何不畏！ 
现代文：孔子回答说： 不用正道引导，就会成为我们的仇敌，怎能不怕呢！ 
English: Confucius replied, "Without proper guidance, you will become our enemy. How can we not be afraid?"

古文：陛下在贞观初，护民之劳，煦之如子，不轻营为。
现代文：陛下在贞观初年，关心百姓的疾苦，如同自己的子女一样，不轻易营建宫室。
English: In the first year of his chastity, his majesty was concerned about the suffering of the people, just like his own children, and did not easily build a palace.

古文：顷既奢肆，思用人力，乃曰： 百姓无事则易骄，劳役则易使。 
现代文：近来既已奢侈放纵，便想动用民力，还说 ：百姓无事容易骄慢，如服劳役就容易使唤。 
English: Recently, having become extravagant and indulgent, they want to use the people's power. They also say that the people are easy to be arrogant when they have nothing to do, and easy to use when they have to do labor service.

古文：自古未有百姓逸乐而致倾败者，何有逆畏其骄而为劳役哉？
现代文：自古以来不曾有过百姓安乐而导致国家覆亡的事，哪有怕他们骄纵而安排劳役的道理呢！
English: Since ancient times, there has never been a case of the people's happiness leading to the downfall of the country, even if they are arrogant and arrange labor service!

古文：虽忧人之言不绝于口，而乐身之事实切诸心。
现代文：这是逐渐不能坚持到底的第二件事。陛下在贞观初年，勤苦自己以利于他人，近来则纵欲以劳民。虽然不停地说忧民，而心里关切的却是使自己快乐的事。
English: This is the second thing that is getting harder and harder to maintain. In the first year of chastity, His Majesty worked hard to benefit others, but recently he has been indulging in labor. Although he keeps talking about worrying about people, his heart is concerned about making himself happy.

古文：无虑营构，辄曰： 弗为此，不便我身。 
现代文：不考虑建造之事，而说： 不这样做，对我身体不利。 
English: Instead of thinking about building, he said, "If I don't do this, it will be bad for my health."

古文：推之人情，谁敢复争？
现代文：按人之常情推论，谁敢再来谏争！
English: According to human common sense, who dares to fight again!

古文：此不克终三渐也。
现代文：这是逐渐不能坚持到底的第三件事。
English: This is the third thing that is getting out of hand.

古文：在贞观初，亲君子，斥小人。
现代文：在贞观初年，亲近君子，排斥小人。
English: In the first year of Zhenguan, be close to the gentleman and reject the villain.

古文：比来轻亵小人，礼重君子。
现代文：近来则轻亵小人，而礼重君子。
English: Lately, it has been the villains who have been treated with contempt, while the gentlemen have been treated with respect.

古文：重君子也，恭而远之；轻小人也，狎而近之。
现代文：礼重君子是对他们敬而远之；轻亵小人，是对他们宠幸接近。
English: The courteous gentleman keeps his distance from them; the scornful ruffian is favored by them.

古文：近之莫见其非，远之莫见其是。
现代文：接近小人，就看不到他们的过错；疏远君子，就不知道他们的正确。
English: If you are close to a scoundrel, you will not see his faults; if you are far from a gentleman, you will not know his virtues.

古文：莫见其是，则不待间而疏；莫见其非，则有时而昵。
现代文：看不到君子的正确之处，那么不等嫌隙出现就已疏远；看不到小人的过错，那么时间一长自会亲昵。
English: If you can't see the gentleman's right place, then you will be estranged without waiting for a rift to appear; if you can't see the villain's fault, then you will be intimate over time.

古文：昵小人，疏君子，而欲致治，非所闻也。
现代文：亲昵小人，疏远君子，而想使政治清明，没听说过。
English: To befriend the villain, to alienate the gentleman, and to want to make politics clear, is unheard of.

古文：此不克终四渐也。
现代文：这是逐渐不能坚持到底的第四件事。
English: This is the fourth thing that is getting out of hand.

古文：在贞观初，不贵异物，不作无益。
现代文：在贞观初年，不以异物为贵，不做无益之事。
English: In the first year of Zhenguan, do not regard foreign objects as precious, and do not do useless things.

古文：而今难得之货杂然并进，玩好之作无时而息。
现代文：如今稀有之物纷纷进奉，玩好之物的制作没有停息的时候。
English: Nowadays, rare things are being offered one after another, and the production of playful things has not stopped.

古文：上奢靡而望下朴素，力役广而冀农业兴，不可得已。
现代文：君长奢侈淫逸而期望臣民艰苦朴素，土木工程遍地而期望农业兴旺，是办不到的。
English: It is impossible for a ruler to live in luxury and luxury and expect his subjects to live in hardship and simplicity, and for a civil engineer to work everywhere and expect agriculture to flourish.

古文：此不克终五渐也。
现代文：这是逐渐不能坚持到底的第五件事。
English: This is the fifth thing that is getting out of hand.

古文：贞观之初，求士如渴，贤者所举，即信而任之，取其所长，常恐不及。
现代文：贞观初年，求贤若渴，贤人所荐之人，陛下随即信赖使用，取其所长，并常常担心做不到这一点。
English: In the first year of his chastity, he was very eager to find a virtuous person, someone recommended by sages, and he immediately trusted and used them, and often worried that he would not be able to do so.

古文：比来由心好恶，以众贤举而用，以一人毁而弃，虽积年任而信，或一朝疑而斥。
现代文：近来用人，随其内心好恶而定，因群贤推举而用，又以一人的毁谤而废；虽是多年委任且受信任者，有时竟出于一时的怀疑而斥逐。
English: In recent times, people have been appointed according to their personal likes and dislikes; they have been appointed by a group of eminent persons and dismissed by the slander of a single person; and even though they have been appointed for many years and trusted, they have sometimes been dismissed out of momentary doubt.

古文：夫行有素履，事有成迹，一人之毁未必可信，积年之行不应顿亏。
现代文：人的行为有平昔遵循的信念，做事也有既成痕迹可查，一人的毁谤未必可信，多年的善行不应顷刻勾销。
English: People's actions have beliefs that they have followed in the past, and there are established traces of doing things that can be investigated. One person's slander may not be credible, and years of good deeds should not be written off immediately.

古文：陛下不察其原，以为臧否，使谗佞得行，守道疏间。
现代文：陛下不察其缘由，以一人之言作为褒贬的根据，就会使得谗佞之人通行无阻，守道之士日渐疏隔。
English: Your majesty, regardless of the reason, will use one person's words as the basis for praise and criticism, which will make it possible for those who are lazy to pass through unhindered, and those who keep to the path will be increasingly alienated.

古文：此不克终六渐也。
现代文：这是逐渐不能持之以恒的第六件事。
English: This is the sixth thing that is becoming unsustainable.

古文：在贞观初，高居深拱，无田猎毕弋之好。
现代文：贞观初年，陛下身居高位，没有行猎的爱好。
English: In the first year of Zhenguan, His Majesty was in a high position and did not have the hobby of hunting.

古文：数年之后，志不克固，鹰犬之贡，远及四夷，晨出夕返，驰骋为乐，变起不测，其及救乎？
现代文：数年之后，不能保持初志，以致远方蛮夷，也来进献鹰犬，陛下晨出夜归，以驰马射箭为乐，不测之事发生，如何解救得了？
English: A few years later, unable to maintain his initial aspiration, he wandered far and wide, and also came to offer eagle dogs. His Majesty went out in the morning and returned at night, and enjoyed horse riding and archery. Something unexpected happened. How could he be saved?

古文：此不克终七渐也。
现代文：这是逐渐不能持之以恒的第七件事。
English: This is the seventh thing that is becoming unsustainable.

古文：在贞观初，遇下有礼，群情上达。
现代文：贞观初年，陛下待臣有礼，群情能够上达。
English: In the first year of Zhenguan, His Majesty was courteous to his subjects and was able to win their affection.

古文：今外官奏事，颜色不接，间因所短，诘其细过，虽有忠款，而不得申。
现代文：如今地方官入朝奏事，见不到天子之面，偶有短处，便受指责挑剔，他们虽有忠诚之心，而不能申诉朝廷。
English: Nowadays, when local officials report to the imperial court, they do not see the face of the Son of Heaven, and if they occasionally have shortcomings, they are criticized and criticized. Although they have a loyal heart, they cannot appeal to the imperial court.

古文：此不克终八渐也。
现代文：这是逐渐不能持之以恒的第八件事。
English: This is the eighth thing that is becoming unsustainable.

古文：在贞观初，孜孜治道，常若不足。
现代文：贞观初年，陛下孜孜以求治国之道，常常感到不足。
English: In the first year of Zhenguan, His Majesty diligently pursued the way of governing the country and often felt inadequate.

古文：比恃功业之大，负圣智之明，长慠纵欲，无事兴兵，问罪远裔。
现代文：近来却倚仗功业之大，才智之明，增长傲气放纵欲望，无事兴兵，问罪于远方蛮夷。
English: Lately, however, it has been relying on the greatness of its achievements, the brilliance of its talents, the growth of its arrogance, the indulgence of its desires, the raising of an army without any reason, and blaming the distant barbarians.

古文：亲狎者阿旨不肯谏，疏远者畏威不敢言。
现代文：受宠幸者迎合旨意不肯进谏，被疏远者害怕威势而不敢发言。
English: The favored ones cater to the will and refuse to enter the cocoon, and the alienated ones are afraid of the power and dare not speak.

古文：积而不已，所损非细。
现代文：长此下去，为害不浅。
English: If this continues, it will be very harmful.

古文：此不克终九渐也。
现代文：这是逐渐不能持之以恒的第九件事。
English: This is the ninth thing that is becoming unsustainable.

古文：贞观初，频年霜旱，畿内户口并就关外，携老扶幼，来往数年，卒无一户亡去。
现代文：贞观初年，连年发生霜旱灾害，京畿之民并往关外就食，扶老携幼，来往数年，而无一户逃亡。
English: In the first year of Zhenguan, frost and drought disasters occurred year after year, and the people of Gyeonggi also went to Guan for meals, helped the elderly with their children, and went back and forth for several years, but none of the families fled.

古文：此由陛下矜育抚宁，故死不携贰也。
现代文：这是因为陛下怜惜抚慰，所以百姓至死也不离心。
English: This is because His Majesty pities and consoles, so the people do not lose heart until death.

古文：比者疲于徭役，关中之人，劳弊尤甚。
现代文：近来百姓疲于徭役，关中之人，更是疲惫不堪。
English: Recently, the people are tired of serving as bailiffs, and the people in custody are even more exhausted.

古文：杂匠当下，顾而不遣。正兵番上，复别驱任。
现代文：各类工匠服役期满，强留役使而不遣返；适龄军士轮番宿卫，到期另有驱使。
English: All kinds of craftsmen have completed their service period, and are forced to remain in service without repatriation; soldiers of the right age take turns as guards, and are forced to retire.

古文：市物襁属于廛，递子背望于道。
现代文：官府购物很多，背负者相望于市肆及道上。
English: There is a lot of shopping at government offices, and those who are burdened look forward to it in the city and on the road.

古文：脱有一谷不收，百姓之心，恐不能如前日之帖泰。
现代文：万一粮食欠收，百姓之心，恐怕不会像从前那样安定稳妥了。
English: In the unlikely event of a poor grain harvest, the hearts of the people will probably not be as stable and secure as before.

古文：此不克终十渐也。
现代文：这是逐渐不能持之以恒的第十件事。
English: This is the 10th thing that is becoming unsustainable.

古文：夫祸福无门，惟人之召，人无衅焉，妖不妄作。
现代文： 福祸没有定准，全在人们自己招来，人无过失，妖物不会随意出现。
English: Fortune and misfortune are not predetermined, they are all caused by people themselves, people have no fault, and monsters will not appear at will.

古文：今旱之灾，远被郡国，凶丑之孽，起于毂下，此上天示戒，乃陛下恐惧忧勤之日也。
现代文：如今干旱致灾，远及各处州郡，恶人造起的叛乱，就出在京城之内，这是上天在显示警告，也是陛下忧惧操劳之时。
English: Now, drought-induced disasters have spread far and wide to all prefectures and counties, and rebellions caused by evil people have appeared in the capital. This is the time when the heavens are showing a warning, and His Majesty is worried about work.

古文：千载休期，时难再得，明主可为而不为，臣所以郁结长叹者也！
现代文：这是千载难遇的吉期，机会不可再得，明主能做到而不做，这就是臣之所以忧思难忘深为感叹的原因啊！ 
English: This is a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity, a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity, a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity, a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity, a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity, a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity, a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity, a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity, a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity, a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity.

古文：疏奏，帝曰： 朕今闻过矣，愿改之，以终善道。
现代文：这篇奏疏呈上后，太宗说： 我已知道自己的过失了，愿意改正，以使善道坚持到底。
English: After the report was submitted, Taizong said, "I already know my faults, and I am willing to correct them in order to persevere in the virtuous path."

古文：有违此言，当何施颜面与公相见哉！
现代文：如果违背这些话，哪有脸面与您相见呢！
English: If you go against these words, who will meet you face to face?

古文：方以所上疏，列为屏障，庶朝夕见之，兼录付史官，使万世知君臣之义。 
现代文：正要把你这篇奏疏，安置屏风之上，以便早晚观看，还将把它抄送史馆，让千秋万代都了解君臣间的大义。 
English: I am about to place your essay on the screen, so that you can watch it in the morning and evening. I will also copy it to the history museum, so that thousands of generations will understand the great justice between princes and ministers.

古文：因赐黄金十斤，马二匹。
现代文：随即赐予魏徵黄金十斤，骏马二匹。
English: He immediately gave Wei Zheng ten catties of gold and two horses.

古文：高昌平，帝宴两仪殿，叹曰： 高昌若不失德，岂至于亡！
现代文：高昌平定后，太宗在两仪殿宴请群臣，叹息说： 高昌如不丧失德行，哪能至于灭亡！
English: After Gaochang was pacified, Emperor Taizong held a banquet for his courtiers at the Two Ceremonial Hall, and said with a sigh: If Gaochang does not lose its virtue, how can it perish!

古文：然朕亦当自戒，不以小人之言而议君子，庶几获安也。 
现代文：但我也要告诫自己，不用小人的话来非议君子，也许就能获得安定了。 
English: But I also want to caution myself that if you don't criticize a gentleman with the words of a villain, you may be able to gain stability.

古文：徵曰： 昔齐桓公与管仲、鲍叔牙、宁戚四人者饮，桓公请叔牙曰： 盍起为寡人寿？ 
现代文：魏徵说： 从前齐桓公和管仲、鲍叔牙、宁戚四人一道饮酒，桓公对叔牙说： 为什么不站起来为我祝寿？ 
English: Wei Zheng said: Once upon a time, Prince Qi Huan drank alcohol with Guanzhong, Bao Shuga and Ning Qi. Prince Huan said to Shuga: Why don't you stand up and celebrate my birthday?

古文：叔牙奉觞而起曰： 愿公无忘在莒时，使管仲无忘束缚于鲁时，使甯戚无忘饭牛车下时。 
现代文：叔牙捧杯站起来说 ：愿您不要忘了逃亡莒国的日子，愿管仲不要忘了被囚鲁国的日子，愿宁戚不要忘了车下喂牛的日子。 
English: Uncle Fang stood up with a cup and said, "May you not forget the day you fled Shandong, may Guanzhong not forget the day he was imprisoned in Lu, and may Ningshi not forget the day he fed cattle under a car."

古文：桓公避席而谢曰： 寡人与二大夫能无忘夫子之言，则社稷不危矣。  
现代文：桓公离座向叔牙感谢道 ：我和两位大夫如能记住先生的话，国家就不会有危险了。  
English: Leaving his seat, Prince Kan thanked his uncle, saying, "If I and the two doctors can remember what you said, the country will not be in danger."

古文：帝曰： 朕不敢忘布衣时，公不得忘叔牙之为人也。 
现代文：太宗说 ：我不敢忘记做平民的日子，您不可忘记鲍叔牙的为人。 
English: Taizong said, "I dare not forget the days when I was a commoner. You must not forget Bao Shuya's character."

古文：帝遣使者至西域立叶护可汗，未还，又遣使赍金帛诸国市马。
现代文：太宗派遣使者到西域册立叶护可汗。使者还没回来，又派使者携带金银丝帛到西域各国买马。
English: Emperor Taizong sent an envoy to the Western Regions to set up Yegu Khan. Before the envoy returned, he sent another envoy to the Western Regions to buy horses, carrying gold and silver ingots.

古文：徵曰： 今立可汗未定，即诣诸国市马，彼必以为意在马，不在立可汗。
现代文：魏徵说 ：现在册立可汗之事未定，就派人去各国买马，他们就会认为陛下意在买马，不在册立可汗。
English: Wei Zheng said: Now that the matter of appointing a khan is undecided, they will send people to various countries to buy horses, and they will think that His Majesty intends to buy horses, not to appoint a khan.

古文：可汗得立，必不怀恩。
现代文：可汗得立，就不会怀念陛下的恩德。
English: If Khan succeeds, he will not miss His Majesty's kindness.

古文：诸蕃闻之，以中国薄义重利，未必得马而先失义矣。
现代文：各属国闻知此事，就会认为中国轻义而重利，不一定买到马而先丢了义。
English: When the vassal states hear about this, they will think that China is light on righteousness and heavy on profits, and that it is not necessary to buy a horse and lose its righteousness first.

古文：魏文帝欲求市西域大珠，苏则以为惠及四海，则不求自至；求而得之，不足贵也。
现代文：从前魏文帝想求购西域大珠，苏则认为如果皇恩达于四海，那么宝物就会不求自来；求购而得到它，就不值得宝贵。
English: Once upon a time, Emperor Wei Wendi wanted to buy the Great Pearl of the Western Regions, but the Soviet Union thought that if the emperor reached the four seas, then the treasure would not come from itself; if it was bought and obtained, it would not be valuable.

古文：陛下可不畏苏则言乎！ 
现代文：陛下不怕苏则的议论吗？ 
English: Isn't Your Majesty afraid of Su Ze's speech?

古文：帝遂止。
现代文：太宗便停派买马的使者。
English: So the emperor gave up.

古文：是后右仆射缺，欲用徵，徵让，得不拜。
现代文：之后尚书右仆射的职位空缺出来，太宗想用魏徵，魏徵推让，未任此职。
English: Later, the post of Shangshu's right-hand man became vacant, and Taizong wanted to use Wei Zheng, Wei Zheng pushed back, but did not take this post.

古文：皇太子承乾与魏王泰交恶，帝曰： 当今忠謇贵重无逾徵，我遣傅皇太子，一天下之望，羽翼固矣。 
现代文：皇太子承乾与魏王李泰彼此结仇，太宗说： 当今忠直贵重的朝臣，没人超过魏徵，我派他辅佐皇太子，统一天下之人的期望，太子的翅膀就能变硬。 
English: Emperor Taizong said: Today's loyal and valuable courtiers, no one surpasses Wei Zheng, I sent him to assist the crown prince, unify the expectations of the people, and the prince's wings will harden.

古文：即拜太子太师。
现代文：于是任命他为太子太师。
English: So he appointed him Crown Prince and Grand Master.

古文：徵以疾辞，诏答曰： 汉太子以四皓为助，我赖公，其义也。
现代文：魏徵以病为由推辞其职，太宗下诏回答说： 汉太子以四皓为辅佐，我依靠您，也是这个意思。
English: Wei Zheng resigned from his post on the grounds of illness, and Emperor Taizong replied in his edict: The Han prince is assisted by four emperors, and I rely on you, which is also what I mean.

古文：公虽卧，可拥全之。 
现代文：您虽卧病，也可保全太子。 
English: Although you are bedridden, you can still save the crown prince.

古文：十七年，疾甚。
现代文：贞观十七年，魏徵病重。
English: In the seventeenth year of Zhenguan, Wei Zheng fell seriously ill.

古文：徵家初无正寝，帝命辍小殿材为营构，五日毕，并赐素褥布被，以从其尚。
现代文：魏徵家里原无正寝，太宗命令停建小殿，用其材料为之营构，仅用五天完工。赐给魏徵素褥布被，以遵从其意愿。
English: Wei Zheng's family did not have a proper bed, so Emperor Taizong ordered him to stop the construction of the small hall and use its materials to build it. It took only five days to complete. Wei Zheng was given a silk quilt to comply with his wishes.

古文：令中郎将宿其第，动静辄以闻，药膳赐遗无算，中使者缀道。
现代文：命令中郎将在他家值宿，有动静随时奏闻，所赐药品、膳食不计其数，宫中出使之人不绝于道。
English: He ordered the second-in-command to stay at his house on duty, to report any movement at any time, to give countless medicines and meals, and to send others to the Tao.

古文：帝亲问疾，屏左右，语终日乃还。
现代文：太宗亲临问疾，屏退左右，交谈终日才回宫中。
English: Taizong personally came to inquire about the illness, the screen retreated to the left and right, and the conversation lasted all day before returning to the palace.

古文：后复与太子臻至徵第，徵加朝服，拖带。
现代文：后来又与皇太子一道来到魏徵家里，魏徵加盖朝服，拖着腰带。
English: Later, together with the crown prince, they came to Wei Zheng's home. Wei Zheng put on a royal robe and tugged at his belt.

古文：帝悲懑，拊之流涕，问所欲。
现代文：太宗悲痛忧闷，抚摸他流下眼泪，问他有何要求。
English: Touching him, she shed tears and asked him what he wanted.

古文：对曰： 嫠不恤纬，而忧宗周之亡！ 
现代文：魏徵回答说： 寡妇不忧纬线的多少，而忧虑宗周的危亡！ 
English: Wei Zheng replied: "A widow does not worry about the number of lines, but worries about Zhou's imminent death!"

古文：帝将以衡山公主降其子叔玉。时主亦从，帝曰： 公强视新妇！ 
现代文：太宗准备把衡山公主嫁给魏徵的儿子叔玉，当时公主也随同来至其家，太宗对魏徵说： 您看一下新娘吧！ 
English: Taizong was preparing to marry Princess Hengshan to Wei Zheng's son Shu Yu, when the princess also came to his house. Taizong said to Wei Zheng: Take a look at the bride!

古文：徵不能谢。
现代文：魏徵已说不出话。
English: Wei Zheng was speechless.

古文：是夕，帝梦徵若平生，及旦，薨。
现代文：这天晚上，太宗梦见魏徵还像平日一样，天亮时，魏徵逝世。
English: That night, Taizong had a dream that Wei Zheng was still alive as usual. At dawn, Wei Zheng passed away.

古文：帝临哭，为之恸，罢朝五日。
现代文：太宗亲临哭吊，极为悲痛，为之罢朝五天。
English: Taizong personally came to cry and hang, extremely sad, for which he was imprisoned for five days.

古文：太子举哀西华堂。
现代文：太子在西华堂为魏徵举哀。
English: The crown prince paid tribute to Wei at the West China Church.

古文：诏内外百官朝集使皆赴丧，赠司空、相州都督，谥曰文贞，给羽葆、鼓吹、班剑四十人，陪葬昭陵。
现代文：天子下诏内外百官朝集使全都前去送葬，追赠他为司空、相州都督，定谥号为文贞，给予羽葆、鼓吹、班剑四十人，将他陪葬于昭陵。
English: Under the decree of the heavenly son, hundreds of officials at home and abroad and the imperial envoys all went to the funeral. He was posthumously given the titles of Siku and Soshu governor, the posthumous name of Wenzhen, and was given feathers, trumpets and swords by forty people, who buried him in the mausoleum.

古文：将葬，其妻裴辞曰： 徵素俭约，今假一品礼，仪物褒大，非徵志。 
现代文：将下葬时，其妻裴氏推辞说： 魏徵平日节俭，现以一品官的礼节安葬，仪仗器物太多，不合他的本意。 
English: When he was about to be buried, his wife Pei said: Wei Zheng was frugal in his daily life, and now he is being buried with the etiquette of an official. There are too many ceremonial objects, which is not what he intended.

古文：见许，乃用素车，白布幨帷，无涂车、刍灵。
现代文：太宗答应其请，便用素车载棺，白布做其帷幔，不用涂车及草人草马等物。
English: Taizong agreed to his request, and used a plain cart to carry the coffin, and white cloth to make its drapery. There was no need to paint the cart, straw man, straw horse, and other things.

古文：帝登苑西楼，望哭尽哀。
现代文：太宗登上禁苑西楼，遥望灵车而痛哭尽哀。
English: Taizong boarded the West Building of the Forbidden City, gazed at the hearse and wept bitterly.

古文：晋王奉诏致祭。
现代文：晋王奉命在道旁设食祭奠。
English: Jin Wang was ordered to set up a food festival at the side of the road.

古文：帝作文于碑，遂书之。
现代文：太宗亲做碑文，并书写出来刻在石上。
English: Emperor Taizong made an inscription and wrote it out and engraved it on the stone.

古文：又赐家封户九百。
现代文：还赐给其家封邑九百户。
English: He also granted 900 households in his fiefdom.

古文：帝后临朝叹曰： 以铜为鉴，可正衣寇；以古为鉴，可知兴替；以人为鉴，可明得失。
现代文：太宗后来临朝，感叹地说： 以铜做镜子，可以端正衣冠；以古史为镜子，可以了解王朝兴废；以贤人做镜子，可以明白治政得失。
English: Later, when Emperor Taizong visited the imperial court, he said with a sigh, "Using copper as a mirror, you can straighten your clothes; using ancient history as a mirror, you can understand the rise and fall of dynasties; using wise men as a mirror, you can understand the gains and losses of governance."

古文：朕尝保此三鉴，内防己过。
现代文：我曾保有这样的三面镜子，对内防止自己的过失。
English: I used to keep three such mirrors to prevent myself from making mistakes.

古文：今魏徵逝，一鉴亡矣。
现代文：如今魏徵逝世，亡失了一面镜子。
English: Now that Wei Zheng has passed away, a mirror has been lost.

古文：朕比使人至其家，得书一纸，始半稿，其可识者曰： 天下之事，有善有恶，任善人则国安，用恶人则国弊。
现代文：我近派人到他家去，得到写了字的一张纸，仅写一半，其中可辨认的部分这样说： 天下的事情，有善也有恶，任用善人则国家安定，任用恶人则使国家危亡。
English: I sent a messenger to his house and received a half-written sheet of paper, the legible portion of which read: "In the world there is good and evil, the appointment of a good man brings stability to the country, the appointment of an evil man brings danger to the country."

古文：公卿之内，情有爱憎，憎者惟见其恶，爱者止见其善。
现代文：公卿大臣之内，感情有爱有恨，憎恨的人只见到可恨之处，喜爱的人只看见可爱之处。
English: Among the princes and ministers, there are feelings of love and hate. Those who hate only see what is hateful, and those who love only see what is lovely.

古文：爱憎之间，所宜详慎。
现代文：爱与恨之间，应当小心谨慎地对待。
English: Between love and hate, it should be treated with caution.

古文：若爱而知其恶，憎而知其善，去邪勿疑，任贤勿猜，可以兴矣。 
现代文：如果爱其人而又知其缺点，恨其人而又知其优点，除去邪恶而不犹疑，任用贤人而不猜测，国家就能兴旺发达了。 
English: If you love someone and know their faults, hate someone and know their strengths, remove evil without hesitation, and appoint wise people without guessing, the country can prosper.

古文：其大略如此。
现代文：其大体内容就是这样。
English: That's the gist of it.

古文：朕顾思之，恐不免斯过。
现代文：我反复思忖，恐怕难免犯这种错误。
English: I've thought about it, and I'm afraid it's an unavoidable mistake.

古文：公卿侍臣可书之于笏，知而必谏也。 
现代文：公卿大臣随从侍卫可将这些话写在朝笏之上，见此情况一定要进行谏争。 
English: The attendant of the bodyguard of the minister of justice can write these words on the morning eulogy. In this case, there must be a dispute.

古文：徵状貌不逾中人，有志胆，每犯颜进谏，虽逢帝甚怒，神色不徙，而天子亦为霁威。
现代文：魏徵的身材容貌与普通人没多少不同，但有志气胆略，每次犯颜进谏，虽遇太宗暴怒，而神色不变，最终天子也为之收敛神威。
English: Wei Zheng's stature and appearance are not much different from that of ordinary people, but he is ambitious and daring. Every time he commits a crime, although he encounters the wrath of Taizong, his appearance does not change, and eventually the heavenly son also restrains his power.

古文：议者谓贲、育不能过。
现代文：议者说孟贲、夏育的勇气也不能与之相比。
English: The legislator said that the courage of Meng Rong and Xia Yu can not be compared with it.

古文：尝上冢还，奏曰： 向闻陛下有关南之行，既办而止，何也？ 
现代文：魏徵曾于上冢墓返回时上奏说 ：近来闻知陛下将出行关南，既已准备好而后又中止，这是为什么？ 
English: When Wei Zheng returned to Shangluo Tomb, he said, "Recently, I heard that His Majesty will travel to Guannan. I was ready to go, but then I stopped. Why?

古文：帝曰： 畏卿，遂停耳。 
现代文：太宗说 ：怕您有言，便中断此行。 
English: Taizong said, "I'm afraid if you say anything, I'll cut this trip short."

古文：始，丧乱后，典章湮散，徵奏引诸儒校集秘书，国家图籍粲然完整。
现代文：起初，天下丧乱之后，典章图籍散亡，魏徵上奏引荐诸儒收集校正秘书，使得国家图籍文献粲然完备。
English: At the beginning, after the world was in turmoil, the official documents and books were scattered, and the Wei Zheng Shangso recommended that the Confucian scholars collect and correct the secretaries, making the national documents and books remarkably complete.

古文：尝以《小戴礼》综汇不伦，更作《类礼》二十篇，数年而成。
现代文：还曾因《小戴礼》综合汇录不合伦次，重新编写《类礼》二十篇，数年之后方才完成。
English: In addition, due to inconsistencies in the comprehensive compilation of "Xiao Dai Li," twenty articles of "Xiao Dai Li" were rewritten and only completed a few years later.

古文：帝美其书，录寘内府。
现代文：太宗赞美其书，下令誊录后藏于内府。
English: Emperor Taizong praised his book and ordered it to be transcribed and then kept in the Inner Palace.

古文：帝本以兵定天下，虽已治，不忘经略四夷也。
现代文：太宗本以武力平定天下，天下虽已大治，仍然不忘经略边疆蛮夷地区。
English: Emperor Taizong originally pacified the country by force. Although the country has been pacified, he still did not forget the border barbarian areas.

古文：故徵侍宴，奏《破阵武德舞》，则俯首不顾，至《庆善乐》，则谛玩无斁，举有所讽切如此。
现代文：因此魏徵每逢侍宴，演奏《破阵武德舞》，就低下头来不看，演至《庆善乐》时，就欣赏回味而不知疲倦，全是为了借此寓托讽切意思而已。
English: Therefore, whenever Wei Zheng held a banquet, he would bow his head and not look at the performance of "The Martial Arts Dance," and when he performed "Celebration Music," he would enjoy the aftertaste tirelessly, all in order to illustrate the ironic meaning.

古文：徵亡，帝思不已，登凌烟阁观画像，赋诗悼痛，闻者媢之，毁短百为。
现代文：魏徵逝世后，太宗思念不已，登上凌烟阁观看功臣画像时，还赋诗痛悼魏徵。有人闻知此事妒心大发，百般诋毁魏徵。
English: After Wei Zheng's death, Taizong pined for him, and when he went up to Lingyan Pavilion to look at the portrait of the hero, he also composed a poem to mourn Wei Zheng. Some people heard about this and were jealous and slandered Wei Zheng in various ways.

古文：徵尝荐杜正伦、侯君集才任宰相，及正伦以罪黜，君集坐逆诛，纤人遂指为阿党；又言徵尝录前后谏争语示史官褚遂良。
现代文：魏徵曾经推荐杜正伦、侯君集有才干能任宰相，到正伦因坐罢官，君集坐谋反罪被杀后，小人便指责魏徵曾阿附恶党；又说魏徵曾记下前后谏争之言，给史官褚遂良观看。
English: Wei Zheng once recommended that Du Zhenglun and Hou Junji were talented enough to serve as prime minister. After Zhenglun was killed for sitting down and resigning, and Junji was killed for plotting a counter-crime, the villain accused Wei Zhengzhen of being affiliated with the evil party; he also said that Wei Zhengzhen had recorded the words of the dispute before and after, and showed them to the historian Yu Suiliang.

古文：帝滋不悦，乃停叔玉昏，而仆所为碑，顾其家衰矣。
现代文：太宗因此更为不满，便停止叔玉的婚事，仆倒为魏徵写的碑文，所以其家逐渐衰落。
English: This made Taizong even more dissatisfied, so he stopped Uncle Yu's marriage, and the inscription written for Wei fell down, so his family gradually declined.

古文：辽东之役，高丽、靺鞨犯阵，李勣等力战破之。
现代文：辽东会战时，高丽、靺鞨兵马进犯唐军阵地，李责力等人尽力死战方才破敌。
English: During the Liaodong war, the Goryeo and Han soldiers and horses attacked the Tang army's positions, and Li Ruili and others tried their best to fight to the death before defeating the enemy.

古文：军还，怅然曰： 魏徵若在，吾有此行邪！ 
现代文：大军返还后，太宗神情怅然地说： 魏徵如健在的话，我能有这次行动吗？ 
English: After the return of the large army, Taizong said with a dazed look: If Wei Zheng is still alive, can I have this operation?

古文：即召其家到行在，赐劳妻子，以少牢祠其墓，复立碑，恩礼加焉。
现代文：立即征召其家属前往行在处所，赏赐慰劳其妻子儿女，用少牢祠祭魏徵之墓，重新树立石碑，恩礼更为崇敬。
English: Immediately conscript their families to go to the site, reward their wives and children for their hard work, use the tomb of Wei Zheng, a minor temple, to re-erect the stone monument, and venerate the gift more.

古文：四子：叔玉、叔琬、叔璘、叔瑜。
现代文：他有四个儿子：叔玉、叔琬、叔瞞、叔瑜。
English: He has four sons: Shuyu, Shuyu, Shuyu, Shuyu, and Shuyu.

古文：叔玉袭爵为光禄少卿。
现代文：叔玉承袭其爵位为光禄少卿。
English: Shudama succeeded to his title and became Kōroku Shōchō.

古文：神龙初，以其子膺绍封。
现代文：神龙初年，以叔玉之子魏膺继续袭封。
English: In the first year of Shenlong, Wei Wei, the son of Uncle Jade, continued to succeed.

古文：叔璘，礼部侍郎，武后时，为酷吏所杀。
现代文：叔瞞，任礼部侍郎，武后时被酷吏杀害。
English: His uncle, who was a chamberlain in the ceremonial department, was killed by a hooligan when he was crowned emperor.

古文：叔瑜，豫州刺史，善草隶，以笔意傅其子华及甥薛稷。
现代文：叔瑜，任豫州刺史，善写草隶字体，将其笔意传授其子魏华及外甥薛稷。
English: Uncle Yu, a member of the Henan Provincial History Committee, was good at writing cursive script, and passed on his penmanship to his son Wei Hua and nephew Xue Jun.

古文：世称善书者 前有虞、褚，后有薛、魏 。
现代文：世人称书法精妙的人 前有虞世南、褚遂良，后有薛稷、魏华 。
English: People who are world-renowned for their exquisite calligraphy include Yu Shennan and Zou Suiliang, followed by Xue Qi and Wei Hua.

古文：华为检校太子左庶子、武阳县男。
现代文：魏华任职检校太子左庶子，封武阳县男。
English: Wei Hua was the illegitimate son of the crown prince who was in charge of inspecting schools. He was a man from Wuyang County.

古文：开元中，寝堂火，子孙哭三日，诏百官赴吊。
现代文：开元年间，其家寝堂失火，子孙后人痛哭三天，朝廷下诏百官前往吊问。
English: During the first year of the year, his family's bedchamber caught fire, his children and grandchildren cried for three days, and the imperial court ordered hundreds of officials to come for questioning.

古文：赞曰：君臣之际，顾不难哉！
现代文：魏徵的五世孙有魏谟。赞文说：君臣之间，相处难道不难吗！
English: Wei Zheng's fifth-generation grandson was Wei Mu. Zhanwen said: Isn't it difficult to get along between princes and ministers?

古文：以徵之忠，而太宗之睿，身殁未几，猜谮遽行。
现代文：以魏徵的忠诚，以太宗的明智，身死不久，猜忌诬陷便畅行无阻。
English: With the loyalty of Wei Zheng, the wisdom of Aether Sect, his death was not long, and the suspicion and frame-up went smoothly.

古文：始，徵之谏，累数十余万言，至君子小人，未尝不反复为帝言之，以佞邪之乱忠也。
现代文：当初，魏徵的进谏之言，累计达数十余万字之多，至于君子与小人的道理，不是没有对太宗反复申述过，正是担心邪佞之徒扰乱忠良。
English: At the beginning, Wei Zheng's speech to the imperial edict amounted to more than hundreds of thousands of words. As for the principle of the gentleman and the villain, it was not that he had not repeatedly appealed to Taizong, but that he was worried that the evil-doers would disturb the faithful.

古文：久犹不免。
现代文：但死后仍然不免此难。
English: But even after death, there is no escaping it.

古文：故曰： 皓皓者易污，峣峣者难全 ，自古所叹云。
现代文：所以说 ，洁白的东西易被污染，刚直的人难以自全 ，成为自古以来人们感叹的话。
English: Therefore, it is said that "white things are easily polluted, and upright people are difficult to self-perfect," which has become a word that people have been lamenting since ancient times.

古文：唐柳芳称 徵死，知不知莫不恨惜，以为三代遗直 。
现代文：唐人柳芳曾称： 魏徵去世，人们不论认识与否，无不遗憾惋惜，认为他是类似于上古时代的正直之士。 
English: Liu Fang, a Chinese, once said: "Whether people knew Wei Zhenglu or not, they all regretted his death and thought that he was an honest person similar to those in ancient times.

古文：谅哉！
现代文：这话说得不错啊！
English: That's a good way of putting it!

