古文：洪荒之世，野处穴居；有巢以后，上栋下宇。
现代文：上古时代，人们白天在荒野活动，夜晚则居住在山洞中；自从有巢氏发明搭建房屋并教会大家之后，世人才建起有梁柱的屋宇来。
English: In ancient times, people roamed the wilderness during the day and lived in caves at night. It was only after the invention and teaching of house-building by Mr. Nest that people began to build houses with beams and columns.

古文：竹苞松茂，谓制度之得宜；鸟革翚飞，调创造之尽善。
现代文： 竹苞松茂 ，是说这样的建筑合于体制，预示会兴旺发达； 鸟革翚飞 ，形容房屋建造得高大华丽。
English: Zhuye Songmao means that such a building is in line with the system, indicating that it will be prosperous; the bird's skin is flying, describing the building as tall and gorgeous.

古文：朝廷曰紫宸，禁门曰青琐。
现代文：朝廷称作 紫宸 ，宫门叫作 青琐 。
English: The imperial court was called Shiju, and the palace gate was called Qingzo.

古文：宰相职掌丝纶，内居黄阁；百官具陈章疏，敷奏丹墀。
现代文：宰相掌管帝王诏书，其官署又名 黄阁 ；百官递送奏章，在 丹墀 下奏陈章疏。
English: The prime minister is in charge of the imperial edict, and his office is also known as Huangge; hundreds of officials deliver the song, and Chen Zhangso plays it under the danluo.

古文：木天署，学土所居；紫薇省，中书所莅。
现代文： 木天署 是翰林学士办公的场所， 紫嶶省 是内阁中书办公的场所。
English: The Wood and Sky Department is the place for the office of the Hanlin Scholar, and Zhouzhuang Province is the place for the book office of the Cabinet.

古文：金马玉堂，翰林院宇；柏台乌府，御史衙门。
现代文： 金马  玉堂 ，都是翰林院的美称； 柏台  乌府 ，都是御史台的别名。
English: Jinma, Gyokudo, are all famous names of Hanlin-in; Baidai, Wufu, are all aliases of Goshidai.

古文：布政司称为藩府，按察司系是臬司。
现代文：布政司又称 藩府 ，是作为屏藩的意思；按察司也叫作 臬司 。
English: Bu Zhengji, also known as Hanfu, means "Ping Clan"; Azechi is also called Shishi.

古文：潘岳种挑于满县，人称花县；于贱鸣琴以治邑，故曰琴堂。
现代文：潘岳任河阳县令时，鼓励百姓种桃树，因此河阳县有 花县 之称；宓子贱终日鸣琴就能治理好单父之地，故而其衙门有 琴堂 之名。
English: When Pan Yue was the governor of Hebei County, he encouraged the people to plant peach trees. Therefore, Hebei County is known as "Flower County." Playing the harp all day long can govern the land of a single father. Therefore, its gate has the name of "Kintang."

古文：谭府是仕宦之家，衡门乃隐逸之宅。
现代文： 潭府 是指做官而有财势的人家， 衡门 是指隐士的居所。
English: "Tanfu" refers to the family of an official with financial power, and "Hengmen" refers to the residence of a hermit.

古文：贺人有喜，曰门阑蔼瑞；谢人过访，曰蓬荜生辉。
现代文：祝贺别人家中有喜事，说门兰蔼瑞如同有一股喜气远临，连门兰上也集了许多祥瑞。
English: Congratulating others on happy events at home, saying that the door lantern is auspicious, is like a wave of joy coming from afar. Even the door lantern has many auspicious charms.

古文：美奂美轮，《礼》称屋宇之高华；肯构肯堂，《书》言父子之同志。
现代文：有高贵的宾客来访，觉得草屋柴门也增添了无数的光辉。 美奂美轮 ，是《礼记》中形容房屋的华美高大； 肯构肯堂 ，是《尚书》中说父子的志趣相同。
English: Noble guests came to visit, and they felt that the grass house Chimen also added countless brilliance. 美美輪, is the gorgeousness and grandeur of the house described in "Li Ji"; 肯构肯堂, is the same interest of father and son said in "Shang Shu."

古文：土木方兴曰经始，创造已毕曰落成。
现代文：开始测量建造房屋叫作 经始 ，建筑工程完毕谓之 落成 。
English: The beginning of the measurement of the construction of the house is called the beginning, and the completion of the construction project is the completion.

古文：楼高可以摘星，屋小仅堪容膝。
现代文：楼高千丈，仿佛伸手就可以摘到星星；屋子狭小，仅能容下一人的双膝。
English: The building is so tall, it's as if you could reach out and pluck the stars; the room is so small, it can only accommodate one person's knees.

古文：寇莱公庭除之外，只可栽花；李文靖厅事之前，仅容旋马。
现代文：寇准家的庭院小，只可以种几株花卉。李宰相的厅前也很窄，仅能调转马头。
English: The courtyard of Kou Jun's house is small, only a few flowers can be planted. The front of Prime Minister Li's office is also narrow, only the horse's head can be turned.

古文：恭贺屋成曰燕贺，自谦屋小曰蜗庐。
现代文：恭贺别人蓋成新屋说燕贺；自谦屋子简陋狭小说蝸居。
English: Congratulating others on the completion of a new house is said to be Yan He; the humble house is said to be simple and narrow.

古文：民家名曰闾阎，贵族称为阀阅。
现代文：平民百姓居住的地方叫作 闾阎 ，达官贵人的府第称作 阀阅 。
English: The place where ordinary people live is called  Yan, and the residence of high-ranking officials is called 阀阅.

古文：朱门乃富豪之第，白屋是布衣之家。
现代文： 朱门 是富贵人家的豪宅， 白屋 是平民百姓的住宅。
English: Zhumen is the mansion of the rich, and Baiya is the home of the common people.

古文：客舍曰逆旅，馆驿曰邮亭。
现代文：供旅客投宿的地方叫 逆旅 ，驿站上设置的旅舍叫 邮亭 。
English: The place for travelers to stay is called "Zagatabi," and the hostel set up at the post station is called "Ukitei."

古文：书室曰芸窗，朝廷曰魏阙。
现代文：学子诵读诗书的书房称为 芸窗 ，朝廷宣布政令的处所叫作 魏阙 。
English: The study where scholars recited poetry was called the "Art Window," and the place where the imperial court announced its decrees was called the "Wei Rong."

古文：成均辟雍，皆国学之号；黉宫胶序，乃乡学之称。
现代文：成均、辟雍都是西周国学的名号，黉宫、庠序皆为西周乡学的称谓。
English: Chengjun and Biyong are the names of the Western Zhou provincial schools, and Gonggong and Xingxuan are the titles of the Western Zhou provincial schools.

古文：笑人善忘，曰徙宅忘妻；讥人不谨，曰开门揖盗。
现代文：规模宏壮莫过于四香阁的辉煌，文章华美真是造五凤楼的手段。嘲笑别人健忘，就说如同搬家时丢掉了妻子；讥讽他不谨慎，如同打开门请强盗进来一样。
English: There is nothing on a grander scale than the splendor of the Four Incense Pagodas, and the beauty of the articles is really a means of building the Five-Phoenix Pagodas. Mocking others for being forgetful is like saying that you lost your wife when you moved; mocking him for not being careful is like opening the door and inviting robbers in.

古文：何楼所市，皆滥恶之物；垄断独登，讥专利之人。
现代文：何楼所卖的东西，都是伪劣虚假之物，垄断是讥诮那些蝇营狗苟、专门求利的小人。
English: The things sold in many buildings are fake and inferior. Monopoly is a mockery of those petty people who are dogmatic and only seek profit.

古文：荜门圭窦，系贫土之居；瓮牖绳枢，皆窭人之室。
现代文： 筚门  圭窦 ，是贫寒之士居住的地方； 瓮牖  绳枢 ，是穷困潦倒之人所居住的地方。
English: Qimen Gui Dou, is a place where the poor people live; Zou Zhenyu, is a place where the poor people live.

古文：宋寇准真是北门锁钥，檀道济不愧万里长城。
现代文：一定要学习宋代寇准抗击契丹进犯，才算得是北门锁钥。南朝檀道济文武全才，不愧是万里长城，南朝除了他，还有谁能抵抗北兵的。
English: It is necessary to learn the Song Dynasty's strategy of resisting the Khitan's invasion in order to be considered the key to the north gate. The Southern Dynasty was well-educated, well-mannered, and well-armed. It was truly the Great Wall of China. Apart from him, who else in the Southern Dynasty could resist the Northern soldiers?

