古文：荆王刘贾者，诸刘，不知其何属初起时。
现代文：荆王刘贾，是刘氏宗族的人，但不知他属于刘氏宗族的哪一支。初起事的时候，是汉王元年。
English: Jing Wang Liu Jia was a member of the Liu clan, but it is not known which branch of the Liu clan he belonged to. The first uprising occurred in the first year of the Han Dynasty.

古文：汉王元年，还定三秦，刘贾为将军，定塞地，从东击项籍。
现代文：汉王从汉中返回来平定三秦，任刘贾为将军，让他平定塞地，然后跟随汉王从东边进攻项羽。
English: Han Wang returned from Hanzhong to pacify Sanqin, appointed Liu Jia as general, let him pacify Sichuan, and then followed Han Wang to attack Xiang Yu from the east.

古文：汉四年，汉王之败成皋，北渡河，得张耳、韩信军，军脩武，深沟高垒，使刘贾将二万人，骑数百，渡白马津入楚地，烧其积聚，以破其业，无以给项王军食。
现代文：汉王四年，汉王在成皋被打败，北渡黄河，得到张耳、韩信的军队，驻扎在修武，深挖壕沟，高筑营垒，派刘贾率领两军队，几百名骑兵，渡过白马津进入楚地，烧掉那里囤积的粮草，破坏那里的产业，让他们无法给项王供应军粮。
English: In the fourth year of the Han dynasty, the Han king was defeated in Chengdu, crossed the Yellow River to the north, received the armies of Zhang Er and Han Xin, stationed in Xiuwu, dug deep trenches, built high camps, sent Liu Jia to lead two armies, several hundred cavalrymen, crossed the Baima Jin into Chudi, burned the grain and grass accumulated there, and destroyed the industry there, so that they could not supply grain to the king of Xiang.

古文：已而楚兵击刘贾，贾辄壁不肯与战，而与彭越相保。
现代文：不久楚军攻打刘贾，刘贾总是坚守营垒，并与彭越保持互相依仗的态势。
English: Soon, the Chu army attacked Liu Jia. Liu Jia always held the camp, and maintained a situation of mutual dependence with Peng Yue.

古文：汉五年，汉王追项籍至固陵，使刘贾南渡淮围寿春。
现代文：汉王五年，汉王追击项羽到了固陵，派刘贾南渡淮水包围寿春。
English: In the fifth year of the Han Dynasty, the Han King chased Xiang Yu to Guling and sent Liu Jianan to Huai Shui to encircle Shuchun.

古文：还至，使人间招楚大司马周殷。
现代文：刘贾很快到达，派人寻找机会招降楚大司马周殷。
English: Liu Jia soon arrived and sent someone to look for an opportunity to recruit Ma Zhouyin, the chief secretary of Chu.

古文：周殷反楚，佐刘贾举九江，迎武王黥布兵，皆会垓下，共击项籍。
现代文：周殷背叛项王，帮助刘贾攻占了九江，迎着武王黥布的军队在垓下会合，共同攻打项羽。
English: Zhou Yin betrayed King Xiang and helped Liu Jia to occupy Jiujiang. The army of King Wu and the army of Zibo met under the command of Zhou Yin and jointly attacked Xiang Yu.

古文：汉王因使刘贾将九江兵，与太尉卢绾西南击临江王共尉。
现代文：汉王于是刘贾率领九江的军队，和太尉卢绾一起向西南进攻临江王共尉。
English: Han Wang then Liu Jia led the army of Jiujiang, and together with Taiyi Lu Yao attacked the southwest of Linjiang Wang.

古文：共尉已死，以临江为南郡。
现代文：共尉死后，把临江改为南郡。
English: After the lieutenant's death, Linjiang was changed to Nan County.

古文：汉六年春，会诸侯於陈，废楚王信，囚之，分其地为二国。
现代文：汉王六年春季，汉王刘邦在陈县会见诸侯，废黜楚王韩信，并把他囚禁起来，他的领地被分为两国。
English: In the spring of the sixth year of the Han Dynasty, Han King Liu Bang met with princes in Chen County, deposed Chu King Han Xin, and imprisoned him. His territory was divided into two countries.

古文：当是时也，高祖子幼，昆弟少，又不贤，欲王同姓以镇天下，乃诏曰： 将军刘贾有功，及择子弟可以为王者。 
现代文：这时候，高祖的儿子年幼，兄弟少，又没有贤才，想封同姓家族的人为王来镇抚天下，于是就下诏令说： 将军刘贾有战功，应挑刘氏弟子中有战功的可以封为王。 
English: At this time, Gao Zu's son was young, with few brothers and no talents. He wanted to make someone with the same surname as his family the king to rule the world, so he issued an imperial decree saying: General Liu Jia had war merit, and he should choose a disciple of Liu's who had war merit to be made king.

古文：群臣皆曰： 立刘贾为荆王，王淮东五十二城；高祖弟交为楚王，王淮西三十六城。 
现代文：群臣都说： 应立刘贾为荆王，统辖淮东五十二座城；高祖的弟弟刘交立为楚王，统辖西三十六座城。 
English: The group of courtiers all said: Liu Jia should be appointed as the King of Jing and govern the 52 cities in East Huai; Gaozu's brother Liu Jia Li should be the King of Chu and govern the 36 cities in West Huai.

古文：因立子肥为齐王。
现代文：刘邦于是就立自己的儿子刘肥为齐王。
English: Liu Bang then set up his son Liu Fei as the king of Qi.

古文：始王昆弟刘氏也。
现代文：至此才开始封刘氏兄弟为王。
English: It was only then that the Liu brothers began to reign supreme.

古文：高祖十一年秋，淮南王黥布反，东击荆。
现代文：高祖十一年秋天，淮南王黥布反叛，向东攻打荆地。
English: In the autumn of the eleventh year of Gaozu's reign, the king of Huainan, Zibo, rebelled and attacked Jingdi to the east.

古文：荆王贾与战，不胜，走富陵，为布军所杀。
现代文：荆王刘贾与他交战，没有取胜，逃到富陵，被黥布的军队杀死。
English: Liu Jia, the king of Jing, fought against him, but did not win. He fled to Fuling and was killed by the troops of Yan Bu.

古文：高祖自击破布。
现代文：高祖亲自打败了黥布。
English: Gaozhu personally defeated Zengbu.

古文：十二年，立沛侯刘濞为吴王，王故荆地。
现代文：十二年，沛侯刘濞被封为吴王，统辖原荆王的故地。
English: In the twelfth year, Liu Ye, Pei Hou, was named the King of Wu and ruled over the former home of the King of Jing.

古文：燕王刘泽者，诸刘远属也。
现代文：燕王刘泽，是刘氏的远房宗亲。
English: Yan Wang Liu Ze is a distant relative of the Liu family.

古文：高帝三年，泽为郎中。
现代文：高帝三年，刘泽任郎中。
English: Gao Di was three years old, and Liu Ze was his junior.

古文：高帝十一年，泽以将军击陈豨，得王黄，为营陵侯。
现代文：高帝十一年，刘泽以将军之职攻打陈豨，俘虏了敌将王黄，被封为营陵侯。
English: In the eleventh year of the reign of Emperor Gao, Liu Ze, as a general, attacked Chen Xi, captured the enemy general Wang Huang, and was awarded the title of Yingling Hou.

古文：高后时，齐人田生游乏资，以画干营陵侯泽。
现代文：高后当政时期，齐人田生出游在外缺少旅费，就通过献计来向营陵侯刘泽求助。
English: After high school, when he was in power, Qi Ren Tian Sheng did not have enough travel expenses to travel abroad, so he asked Liu Ze, the lord of Yingling, for help through donations.

古文：泽大说之，用金二百斤为田生寿。
现代文：刘泽非常高兴，用二百斤黄金为田生祝寿。
English: Liu Ze was very happy and used two hundred catties of gold to wish Tian Yu a happy birthday.

古文：田生已得金，即归齐。
现代文：田生得到钱以后，立即返回了齐国。
English: After Tian Rong received the money, he immediately returned to Qi.

古文：二年，泽使人谓田生曰： 弗与矣。 
现代文：第二年，刘泽派人去对田生说： 不再和我来往了？ 
English: The following year, Liu Zhe sent someone to tell Tian Rong: "Are you no longer going out with me?

古文：田生如长安，不见泽，而假大宅，令其子求事吕后所幸大谒者张子卿。
现代文：田生来到长安，不去见刘泽，而是借了一座大宅院，让他的儿子求见并侍奉被吕后宠幸的大谒者张子卿。
English: Tian Sheng came to Chang'an, not to see Liu Ze, but to borrow a large mansion, so that his son could meet and serve Zhang Ziqing, the great eunuch who was Lu Hou's favorite.

古文：居数月，田生子请张卿临，亲脩具。
现代文：过了几个月，田生的儿子请张卿到家里做客，他亲自准备酒宴。
English: A few months later, Tian's son invited Zhang to his home as a guest, and he personally prepared the banquet.

古文：张卿许往。
现代文：张卿答应前往。
English: Zhang Qing agreed to go.

古文：田生盛帷帐共具，譬如列侯。
现代文：田生张挂起豪华的帷帐，摆设出精美的用具，好像诸侯一般。
English: Tianzhou Zhang hung up luxurious curtains and set out exquisite utensils, as if he were a prince.

古文：张卿惊。
现代文：张卿一见很惊讶。
English: Zhang Qing was surprised at first sight.

古文：酒酣，乃屏人说张卿曰： 臣观诸侯王邸弟百馀，皆高祖一切功臣。
现代文：趁酒兴正浓的时候，田生就让左右退下，向张卿劝说道： 臣观看了诸侯王的住宅一百多座，都是高祖时候的功臣。
English: Taking advantage of the time when the wine was in full bloom, Tian Sheng let the left and right withdraw, and persuaded Zhang Jing to say: The minister watched more than a hundred residences of princes and kings, all of which were meritorious heroes in Gao Zu's time.

古文：今吕氏雅故本推毂高帝就天下，功至大，又亲戚太后之重。
现代文：如今吕氏平素来就扶助高祖完成了统一天下的大业，功劳非常大，又月亲戚太后的尊贵。
English: Now, the Lv family has always supported Gao Zu to complete the great cause of unification, and the credit is very great, and the dignity of the relatives of the empress is very high.

古文：太后春秋长，诸吕弱，太后欲立吕产为王，王代。
现代文：太后年事已高，吕氏族人力量弱，太后想立吕产为王，做代地的诸侯王。
English: The empress dowager was old and the Lv clan was weak. The empress dowager wanted to make Lv Sheng the king instead of the local princes.

古文：太后又重发之，恐大臣不听。
现代文：太后要郑重出此事，又恐怕太臣们不同意。
English: The empress dowager wants to raise the matter officially, and I'm afraid the courtiers don't agree.

古文：今卿最幸，大臣所敬，何不风大臣以闻太后，太后必喜。
现代文：如今您最受太后宠幸，并受大臣们尊敬，何不婉言劝说大臣向太后禀告此事，太后一定高兴。
English: Now that you are the favorite of the Empress Dowager and respected by the ministers, why don't you gently persuade the minister to report this to the Empress Dowager. The Empress Dowager must be happy.

古文：诸吕已王，万户侯亦卿之有。
现代文：诸吕被封王之后，万侯也会为您所有了。
English: After Zhu Lü was crowned king, Wan Hou will also be yours.

古文：太后心欲之，而卿为内臣，不急发，恐祸及身矣。 
现代文：太后心里是想这样做的，而您是内臣，不赶快提出，恐怕灾祸要落到您的身上了。 
English: The Empress Dowager wanted to do this in her heart, and you are a vassal. If you don't bring it up soon, I'm afraid disaster will befall you.

古文：张卿大然之，乃风大臣语太后。
现代文：张卿对此非常同意，于是就婉言劝说大臣把此事禀告太后。
English: Zhang Xing was very much in agreement with this, so he gently persuaded the minister to report the matter to the Empress Dowager.

古文：太后朝，因问大臣。
现代文：太后上朝时，就此事询问大臣。
English: When the Empress Dowager ascended the throne, she asked the minister about this matter.

古文：大臣请立吕产为吕王。
现代文：大臣奏请立吕产为吕王。
English: The minister requested that Liushang be made the king of Lv.

古文：太后赐张卿千斤金，张卿以其半与田生。
现代文：太后赐给张卿黄金千斤，张卿把其中的一半送给田生。
English: The empress dowager gave Zhang Qing a gold coin, and Zhang Qing gave half of it to Tian Rong.

古文：田生弗受，因说之曰： 吕产王也，诸大臣未大服。
现代文：田生没有接受赠金，并趁机又向张卿劝说道： 吕产被封王，大臣们并没有完全心服。
English: Tian Sheng did not accept the gift money, and took the opportunity to persuade Zhang Jing again, saying: Liusang was crowned king, and the ministers were not completely convinced.

古文：今营陵侯泽，诸刘，为大将军，独此尚觖望。
现代文：如今营陵侯刘泽，是刘氏宗族，任大将军，只有他现在还很不满。
English: Today, Liu Ze, the lord of Yingling, is from the Liu clan and has been appointed general. Only he is still dissatisfied.

古文：今卿言太后，列十馀县王之，彼得王，喜去，诸吕王益固矣。 
现代文：现在您禀告太后，划出十几个县封他为王了，他得到王位，高高兴兴地离去，吕氏宗族的王位就更加巩固了。 
English: Now that you have announced to the Empress Dowager that you have designated more than a dozen counties to make him king, he has received the throne and left happily. The throne of the Lv clan has been further consolidated.

古文：张卿入言，太后然之。
现代文：张卿进宫禀告，太后认为很对。
English: The Empress Dowager thought it was right to publish Zhang Qing's obituary when he entered the palace.

古文：乃以营陵侯刘泽为琅邪王。
现代文：于是把营陵侯刘泽封为琅邪王。
English: As a result, Liu Zefeng, the commander of the camp, was made the king of evil.

古文：琅邪王乃与田生之国。
现代文：琅邪王就与田生前往封地。
English: The evil king went to the fiefdom with Tashio.

古文：田生劝泽急行，毋留。
现代文：田生劝刘泽快走，不要停留。
English: Tian Sheng advised Liu Ze to leave quickly and not to linger.

古文：出关，太后果使人追止之，已出，即还。
现代文：刚出函谷关，太后果然派人追赶阻拦他们，可是刘泽已经出关，追赶的人只好回去了。
English: As soon as they left Hakodate, the Empress Dowager sent someone to chase and stop them, but Liu Ze had already left, and the pursuer had to go back.

古文：及太后崩，琅邪王泽乃曰： 帝少，诸吕用事，刘氏孤弱。 
现代文：到太后去世以后，琅邪王刘泽说： 皇帝年幼，诸吕把持朝政，刘氏宗族孤单势弱。 
English: After the death of the empress dowager, Liu Ze, the evil king, said: The emperor is young, Zhu Lyu is in charge of the imperial government, and the Liu clan is alone and weak.

古文：乃引兵与齐王合谋西，欲诛诸吕。
现代文：于是带领军队与齐王刘襄谋划向西进兵，打算诛杀吕氏宗族。
English: Therefore, he led the army and Liu Xiang, the king of Qi, to plan a westward march, intending to kill the Lu clan.

古文：至梁，闻汉遣灌将军屯荥阳，泽还兵备西界，遂跳驱至长安。
现代文：到达梁地，听说朝廷派将军灌婴屯兵荥阳，刘泽就回师加强自己西部边界的守备，然后他迅速赶到长安。
English: When he arrived in Liangdi, he heard that the imperial court had sent a general to occupy and garrison Poyang. Liu Ze returned to his division to strengthen the defense of his western border, and then he quickly arrived in Chang'an.

古文：代王亦从代至。
现代文：代王也正好从代地赶到。
English: The king's representative also arrived just in time.

古文：诸将相与琅邪王共立代王为天子。
现代文：将相大臣与琅邪王共同拥立代王为天子。
English: The shogun, the prime minister and the evil king jointly supported the king as the son of heaven.

古文：天子乃徙泽为燕王，乃复以琅邪予齐，复故地。
现代文：天子于是徙封刘泽为燕王，重把琅邪还给齐王，恢复齐王原有的领地。
English: As a result, Heaven's Son transferred Liu Ze to the position of Yan Wang, returned the power to Qi Wang, and restored Qi Wang's original territory.

古文：泽王燕二年，薨，谥为敬王。
现代文：刘泽做燕王第二年去世，谥号是敬王。
English: Liu Ze died in the second year of Yan Wang. His nickname was Jing Wang.

古文：传子嘉，为康王。
现代文：王位传给了他的儿子刘嘉，这就是康王。
English: The throne passed to his son Liu Jia, known as King Kang.

古文：至孙定国，与父康王姬奸，生子男一人。
现代文：王位传到刘泽的孙子刘定国的时候，他与父亲康王的姬妾通奸，生下一个男孩。
English: When the throne passed to Liu Zhe's grandson Liu Dingguo, he committed adultery with the concubine of his father, King Kang, and gave birth to a boy.

古文：夺弟妻为姬。
现代文：又霸占弟弟的妻子为姬妾。
English: He also took his brother's wife as his concubine.

古文：与子女三人奸。
现代文：还与自己的三个女儿通奸。
English: He also committed adultery with his three daughters.

古文：定国有所欲诛杀臣肥如令郢人，郢人等告定国，定国使谒者以他法劾捕格杀郢人以灭口。
现代文：刘定国打算杀死肥如县令郢人，郢人等就把刘定国的罪行上告，刘定国派谒者假借其他法令告发、逮捕并杀死郢人以灭口。
English: Liu Dingguo planned to kill the Firu County magistrate, the magistrate and others sued Liu Dingguo for the crime, and Liu Dingguo sent magistrates to use other laws to inform, arrest and kill the magistrate to silence him.

古文：至元朔元年，郢人昆弟复上书具言定国阴事，以此发觉。
现代文：到元朔二年，郢人的兄弟再次上书告发刘定国不可告人的丑事，定国的罪恶因此暴露。
English: In the second year of the Yuan Shuo era, the brothers of Xingren once again sent a letter to denounce Liu Dingguo's unspeakable scandal, and Dingguo's evil was thus exposed.

古文：诏下公卿，皆议曰： 定国禽兽行，乱人伦，逆天，当诛。 
现代文：皇帝诏令公卿论处，公卿都议论说： 刘定国是禽兽之行，败坏人伦，违背天理，论罪理应处死。 
English: The emperor issued a decree to punish the nobles, and the nobles all argued and said: Liu Dingguo is a beastly act, corrupting human relations, violating the principles of heaven, and the crime should be put to death.

古文：上许之。
现代文：皇帝准许。
English: Emperor Jing agreed with this opinion.

古文：定国自杀，国除为郡。
现代文：刘定国自杀，封国废除，改设为郡。
English: Liu Dingguo committed suicide, the fiefdom was abolished, and the county was established.

古文：太史公曰：荆王王也，由汉初定，天下未集，故刘贾虽属疏，然以策为王，填江淮之间。
现代文：太史公说：荆王能被封王，是由于汉朝刚建立，天下尚未完全统一，所以刘贾虽是刘氏的远房，但以战功被封为王，威镇江淮之间。
English: Taishigong said: Jing Wang could be crowned king because the Han Dynasty had just been established, and the world had not yet been completely unified. Therefore, although Liu Jia was a distant relative of the Liu clan, he was crowned king for his war exploits. He was between Wei Zhen and Jianghuai.

古文：刘泽之王，权激吕氏，然刘泽卒南面称孤者三世。
现代文：刘泽被封王，是用权谋激起了吕氏的结果，这样刘泽才得以在南面三代为王。
English: Liu Ze's enthronement was the result of the Lv clan being stirred up by power-seeking, so that Liu Ze was able to become the king of the south for three generations.

古文：事发相重，岂不为伟乎！
现代文：事情从一开始就互相牵制，难道不是很奇妙伟大！
English: Isn't it wonderful that things have been holding each other back from the very beginning!

