古文：十有五年春，宋公使向戌来聘。
现代文：十五年春季，宋国的向戌来鲁国聘。
English: In the spring of the 15th year of the Song Dynasty, Emperor Xiang of the Song Dynasty was appointed as the Grand Duke of Lu.

古文：二月己亥，及向戌盟于刘。
现代文：二月己亥日，在刘地与向戌结盟。
English: In February, on Ji Hai Day, he allied with Xiang Yu in Liu Di.

古文：刘夏逆王后于齐。
现代文：周天子的大夫刘夏到齐国迎接往后。
English: Liu Xia, Zhou Tianzi's doctor, came to Qi Province to welcome the delegation.

古文：夏，齐侯伐我北鄙，围成。
现代文：夏季，齐国攻打我国北面边境，包围了成地。
English: In the summer, Qi attacked the northern border of our country and surrounded Chengdu.

古文：公救成，至遇。
现代文：襄公出兵救援成地，来到遇这个地方。
English: Prince Xiang sent soldiers to rescue Chengdi and came to this place.

古文：季孙宿、叔孙豹帅师城成郛。
现代文：季孙宿、叔孙豹率领军队去修筑成这座城池的外城。
English: Qisunjuku, uncle and grandson led the army to build the outer city of this castle.

古文：秋八月丁巳，日有食之。
现代文：秋季八月丁巳日，有日食发生。
English: A solar eclipse occurred on the third day of autumn in August.

古文：邾人伐我南鄙。
现代文：邾国人攻打我国南边边境。
English: China has attacked our southern border.

古文：冬十有一月癸亥，晋侯周卒。
现代文：冬季十一月癸亥日，晋侯去世。
English: In the winter of November, on the day of the Year of the Pig, Jin Hou passed away.

古文：十五年春，宋向戌来聘，且寻盟。
现代文：十五年春季，宋国的向戌来鲁国聘问，同时重温过去的盟约。
English: In the spring of the 15th year of the Song Dynasty, the Song Dynasty sent envoys to the Qilian and Lu Dynasties, and at the same time revisited the past treaty.

古文：见孟献子，尤其室，曰： 子有令闻，而美其室，非所望也！ 
现代文：见了孟献子，责备他的房屋太华丽，说： 您有好名声而把房屋修饰得太华丽，这不是别人所希望的。 
English: When he saw Meng Xianzi, he reproached him for his luxurious house, saying, "You have a good reputation, but you have decorated your house too luxuriously. This is not what others expect.

古文：对曰： 我在晋，吾兄为之，毁之重劳，且不敢间。 
现代文：孟献子回答说： 我在晋国的时候，我哥哥修建的。要毁坏它，又觉得毁坏又得用劳力，而且不敢说哥哥所做的事不对。 
English: Meng Xianzi replied, "When I was in Jin Province, my brother built it. I want to destroy it, but I feel that destroying it requires labor, and I don't dare to say that what my brother did was wrong.

古文：官师从单靖公逆王后于齐。
现代文：官师跟随单靖公在齐国迎接王后。
English: Officials and scholars followed Lord Shan Jing to meet the queen in Qi.

古文：卿不行，非礼也。
现代文：卿没有去，这是不合于礼的。
English: Sir didn't go. It's not polite.

古文：楚公子午为令尹，公子罢戎为右尹，子冯为大司马，公子橐师为右司马，公子成为左司马，屈到为莫敖，公子追舒为箴尹，屈荡为连尹，养由基为宫廐尹，以靖国人。
现代文：楚国公子午做令尹，公子罢戎做右尹，蒍子冯做大司马，公子橐师做右司马，公子成做左司马，屈到做莫敖，公子追舒做箴尹，屈荡做连尹，养由基做宫厩尹，来安定国内的人们。
English: In order to stabilize the people in the country, the prince of Chu did the following: the prince of the afternoon did Ling Yin, the prince of the strike did Right Yin, the prince of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the father of the son of the son of the father of the son of the son of the father of the son of the son of the father of the son of the son of the father of the son of the father of the son of the son of the father of the son of the father of the son of the father of the son of the father of the son of the son of the father of the

古文：君子谓： 楚于是乎能官人。
现代文：君子认为 楚国在这时候能够合理地安排官职的人选。
English: The gentleman thought that at this time, the State of Chu could reasonably arrange candidates for official positions.

古文：官人，国之急也。
现代文：安排官职的人选，这是国家的当务之急。
English: It is a matter of national urgency to arrange for the appointment of a candidate to the post.

古文：能官人，则民无觎心。
现代文：能够合理地安排，那么百姓就没有非分的想法。
English: If it can be arranged reasonably, then the people will not have the idea of non-participation.

古文：《诗》云： 嗟我怀人，寘彼周行。 能官人也。
现代文：《诗》说， 嗟叹我所怀念的贤人，要把他们全都安排在恰当的职位上 ，这就是能够安排官职的人选。
English: The Poem says, "I sigh for the wise men I have missed, put them all in their rightful place, that is, the man who can arrange the post."

古文：王及公、侯、伯、子、男、甸、采、卫、大夫，各居其列，所谓周行也。 
现代文：天子和公、侯、伯、子、男以及甸、采、卫的各级大夫，各就各位。这就是所说的 同行 了。 
English: Tianzi, Gu, Hou, Bo, Zi, Meng, as well as Tian, Zhe and Wei doctors of all levels, all take their places. This is what is meant by "accompanying."

古文：郑尉氏、司氏之乱，其馀盗在宋。
现代文：郑国尉氏、司氏的叛乱，留下的叛乱分子待在宋国。
English: After the rebellion of Zheng Guofeng and Si, the remaining rebels stayed in Song.

古文：郑人以子西、伯有、子产之故，纳赂于宋，以马四十乘与师茷、师慧。三月，公孙黑为质焉。
现代文：郑国人由于子西、伯有、子产的缘故，用马一百六十匹和师茷、师慧作为财礼送给宋国。三月，公孙黑去宋国作为人质。
English: The people of Zheng, for the sake of Zixi, Bo You and Zibo, sent one hundred and sixty horses to Song as a gift. In March, Gongsun Hei went to Song as a hostage.

古文：司城子罕以堵女父、尉翩、司齐与之。良司臣而逸之，托诸季武子，武子寘诸卞。
现代文：司城子罕把堵女父、尉翩、司齐给了郑国，认为司臣有才能而放走了他，托付给季武子，武子把他安置在卞地。
English: Shicheng Zihan gave Zheng Guo his daughter-in-law, Ye Ping, and Shizhi Qi, and thought that Sichen was talented and let him go, entrusting him to Ji Wuzi, who placed him in Shunde.

古文：郑人醢之三人也。
现代文：郑国人将这三人剁成肉酱。
English: The Zhengguo people made mincemeat of the three of them.

古文：师慧过宋朝，将私焉。
现代文：师慧经过宋国朝廷，打算小便。
English: Shi Hui passes through the Song court, about to urinate.

古文：其相曰： 朝也。 
现代文：扶他的人说： 这里是朝廷。 
English: His aides said, "This is the imperial court."

古文：慧曰： 无人焉。 
现代文：师慧说： 没有人啊。 
English: Shi Hui said, "No one came."

古文：相曰： 朝也，何故无人？ 
现代文：扶他的人说： 朝廷，为什么没有人？ 
English: Those who supported him said: Court, why is no one there?

古文：慧曰： 必无人焉。
现代文：师慧说： 一定是没有人啊。
English: Shi Hui said, "There must be no one around."

古文：若犹有人，岂其以千乘之相，易淫乐之矇？
现代文：如果还有人，难道会用拥有千乘战车国家的相国去交换一个演唱淫乐的瞎子？
English: If there are still people, would they exchange a blind man singing lewd music for a country with a thousand chariots?

古文：必无人焉故也。 
现代文：一定是由于没有人的缘故。 
English: It must be because there's no one there.

古文：子罕闻之，固请而归之。
现代文：子罕听到了，坚决向宋平公请求而让师慧回国。
English: Hearing this, Zi Han resolutely asked Song Ping Gong to let Shi Hui return to China.

古文：夏，齐侯围成，贰于晋故也。
现代文：夏季，齐灵公包围成地，这是因为齐国对晋国有了二心的缘故。
English: In the summer, Qi Linggong besieged Chengdu, which was because Qi had second thoughts about Jin.

古文：于是乎城成郛。
现代文：在那时候就在成邑建造外城。
English: At that time, the outer city was built in Chengdu.

古文：秋，邾人伐我南鄙。
现代文：秋季，邾国人攻打我国南部边境，我国派使者向晋国报告。
English: In the autumn, the Shan people began to attack the southern border of China, and China sent an envoy to Jin to report.

古文：使告于晋，晋将为会以讨邾、莒。
现代文：晋国准备举行会见以讨伐邾国、莒国。
English: Jin is preparing to hold a meeting to crack down on the two countries.

古文：晋侯有疾，乃止。
现代文：晋悼公有病，就停止下来。
English: If there is a public illness, it will be stopped.

古文：冬，晋悼公卒，遂不克会。
现代文：冬季，晋悼公死，就没有能举行会见。
English: In the winter, when the Jin mourned a public death, there was no way to hold a meeting.

古文：郑公孙夏如晋奔丧，子送葬。
现代文：郑国的公孙夏去到晋国奔丧吊唁，又派子蟜前去送葬。
English: Zheng's great-grandson Xia went to Jin to pay his condolences, and sent his son Zhuang to attend the funeral.

古文：宋人或得玉，献诸子罕。
现代文：宋国有人得到美玉，献给子罕。
English: In the Song Dynasty, someone was given a precious stone, which was dedicated to Zihan.

古文：子罕弗受。
现代文：子罕不受。
English: Children are not welcome.

古文：献玉者曰： 以示玉人，玉人以为宝也，故敢献之。 
现代文：献玉的人说： 拿给玉工看过，玉工认为是宝物，所以才敢进献。 
English: The donor said: I showed it to the jade craftsman, and he thought it was a treasure, so he dared to donate it.

古文：子罕曰： 我以不贪为宝，尔以玉为宝，若以与我，皆丧宝也。不若人有其宝。 
现代文：子罕说： 我把不贪婪作为宝物，你把美玉作为宝物，如果把玉给了我，我们两人都丧失了宝物，不如各人保有自己的宝物。 
English: Zi Han said: I treasure my non-greed, you treasure your beautiful jade. If you give me the jade, both of us will lose the treasure. It is better for each of us to keep our own treasure.

古文：稽首而告曰： 小人怀璧，不可以越乡。纳此以请死也。 
现代文：献玉的人叩头告诉子罕说： 小人带着玉璧，不能够越过乡里，把它送给您是用来免于一死的。 
English: The person who donated the jade kowtowed and told Zihang: "A villain cannot cross the countryside with a jade gemstone. It was given to you to save you from death."

古文：子罕寘诸其里，使玉人为之攻之，富而后使复其所。
现代文：子罕把美玉放在自己的乡里，让玉工为他雕琢，卖出去，使献玉的人富有以后，然后让他回到家里。
English: Zohan put the beautiful jade in his hometown, let the jade craftsman carve it for him, sell it, make the donor rich, and then let him return home.

古文：十二月，郑人夺堵狗之妻，而归诸范氏。
现代文：十二月，郑国人夺取了堵狗的妻子，让她回到娘家范氏去。
English: In December, the Zhengguo people seized the wife of the dog-choking man and sent her back to her daughter's home, the Fan family.

