古文：古者深衣，盖有制度，以应规、矩、绳、权、衡。
现代文：古人穿的深衣，是有一定的尺寸样式的，以合乎规、矩、绳、权、衡的要求。
English: The dark clothes worn by the ancients had a certain size and style to meet the requirements of rules, measures, ropes, weights and measures.

古文：短毋见肤，长毋被土。
现代文：深衣的长度即令再短，也不能够露出脚背；即令再长，也不能够拖拉住地。
English: No matter how short the length of the jacket is, it can't show the instep; no matter how long it is, it can't drag the ground.

古文：续衽，钩边。要缝半下；袼之高下，可以运肘；袂之长短，反诎之及肘。
现代文：裳的两旁都有宽大的余幅作枉，穿着时前后两枉交叠。深衣腰围的宽度，是深衣下缉的一半。袖子与上衣在腋下连合处的高低，以可以运肘自如为原则。袖子的出手部分的长度，以反折过来刚好到肘为合度。
English: On both sides of the petticoat, there is a wide margin, and the cuffs overlap when worn. The width of the waistline of the dark suit is half of that of the dark suit. The height of the sleeve and the jacket at the junction under the arm is based on the principle of being able to move the elbow freely. The length of the arm part of the sleeve is measured by reversing it just to the elbow.

古文：带下毋厌髀，上毋厌胁，当无骨者。
现代文：腰间大带的位置，下面不要压住大腿骨，上面不要压住肋骨，要束在大腿骨之上、肋骨之下的无骨部位。
English: The position of the large belt around the waist, do not hold down the thigh bone below, do not hold down the ribs above, should be tied above the thigh bone, the boneless part under the ribs.

古文：制：十有二幅以应十有二月。
现代文：深衣裁制的方式：上衣用布六幅，下裳用布六幅，共十二幅，以象征一年有十二个月。
English: The way of tailoring the undergarment: six pieces of cloth for the upper garment, six pieces of cloth for the lower garment, a total of twelve pieces, to symbolize the twelve months of the year.

古文：袂圜以应规；曲袷如矩以应方；负绳及踝以应直；下齐如权衡以应平。
现代文：圆形的袖口，用以象征圆规。方形的交领如矩，用以象征品行方正。背缝像墨线似的从后背直到脚后跟，用以象征品行正直。裳的下缉如秤杆秤锤，用以象征公平。
English: A round cuff, used to symbolize a compass; a square neckline, used to symbolize virtue; a back slit, like an ink line from the nape of the neck to the heel, used to symbolize virtue; and a hemline, like a balance, used to symbolize fairness.

古文：故规者，行举手以为容；负绳抱方者，以直其政，方其义也。故《易》曰：坤， 六二之动，直以方 也。
现代文：袖口之所以象征圆规，是为了举手抬脚都合乎礼貌；背缝如墨线与领口如曲尺，是表示为政要正直、品行要端方。所以《易经》上说：坤卦六二艾的动态，不但表示直，而且表示方。
English: The reason why the cuffs symbolize the compass is to raise the hand and raise the foot to be polite; the back seam is like an ink line and the neckline is like a ruler, indicating that the politician should be honest, and the moral conduct should be upright. Therefore, "I Ching" said: The dynamics of Kung Gua 62 Ai not only indicates straightness, but also indicates the square.

古文：下齐如权衡者，以安志而平心也。
现代文：裳的下缉像秤杆秤锤，是表示没有偏颇而把心放平。
English: The lower part of the robe is like a balance bar and a balance hammer, which means that there is no bias and the heart is flat.

古文：五法已施，故圣人服之。
现代文：因为深衣符合规、矩、绳、权、衡五个方面的要求，所以圣人要穿它。
English: Because the deep robe conforms to the requirements of the five aspects of rules, rules, ropes, weights and measures, so the saint should wear it.

古文：故规矩取其无私，绳取其直，权衡取其平，故先王贵之。
现代文：规与矩，取其大公无私之义；绳，取其正直之义；权与衡，取其公平之义。所以先王很看重深衣。
English: Rules and etiquette are based on the principle of selflessness; ropes are based on the principle of honesty; and weights and measures are based on the principle of fairness. Therefore, the former king attached great importance to shinbi.

古文：故可以为文，可以为武，可以摈相，可以治军旅，完且弗费，善衣之次也。
现代文：穿着深衣，可以习文，可以练武，可以作为摈相，可以、带领部队，样式完备，做起来省力，是朝服、祭服以外最好的衣服了。
English: Wearing dark clothes, you can study literature, you can practice martial arts, you can be a warrior, you can lead troops, the style is complete, it is labor-saving, it is the best clothing other than the court dress and the ceremonial dress.

古文：具父母、大父母，衣纯以缋；具父母，衣纯以青。
现代文：如果父母及祖父母都双双健在，所穿的深衣就用带有五彩花纹的布来镶边。如果只有父母健在，所穿的深衣就用青布来镶边。
English: If both parents and grandparents are alive, the dark clothes worn by the young man are edged with cloth with multicolored patterns. If only parents are alive, the dark clothes worn are edged with blue cloth.

古文：如孤子，衣纯以素。
现代文：如果是个父亡母存的孤儿，就用白布来镶边。
English: If it is an orphan whose father or mother is dead, it is edged with a white cloth.

古文：纯袂、缘、纯边，广各寸半。
现代文：深衣袖口的镶边，深衣下摆的镶边，深衣裳边的镶边，都是寸半宽。
English: The edging on the cuffs of dark clothing, the edging on the hem of dark clothing, and the edging on the hem of dark clothing are all half an inch wide.

