古文：肃宗废后庶人张氏，邓州向城人，家徙新丰。
现代文：肃宗废后庶人张氏，是邓州向城县人，其后徙家于新丰。
English: The Zhang family, commoners after the abolition of Su Zong, came from Xiangcheng County in Dengzhou and later migrated to Xinfeng.

古文：祖母窦，昭成皇后女弟也。
现代文：其祖母窦氏，是昭成皇后的妹妹。
English: His grandmother, Dou, was the younger sister of Empress Shosho.

古文：玄宗幼失昭成，母视姨，鞠爱笃备。
现代文：玄宗自幼失去昭成母后，视姨如母，极为敬爱。
English: Ever since he was a child, after losing his mother, Xuanzong regarded his aunt as his mother and held her in the highest esteem.

古文：帝即位，封邓国夫人，亲宠无比。
现代文：玄宗即位之后，封窦氏为邓国夫人，其亲宠无人可比。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Xuanzong, Feng Dou became the wife of Emperor Deng Guo, and there is no one comparable to her.

古文：五息子，曰去惑、去疑、去奢、去逸、去盈，皆显官。
现代文：其五子名为去惑、去疑、去奢、去逸、去盈，皆至显要官位。
English: His five sons were named Dewan, Dewan, Dewan, Dewan, Dewan, Dewan, and Dewan. All of them held important official positions.

古文：去盈尚常芬公主。
现代文：去盈娶常芬公主为妻。
English: He went to Ying to marry Princess Changfen.

古文：去逸生后。
现代文：去逸为张后之父。
English: Deyi is Zhang Hou's father.

古文：肃宗为忠王时，纳韦元珪女为孺人。
现代文：肃宗为忠王之时，娶韦元王圭之女为孺人。
English: When Su Zong was the Prince of Loyalty, he married the daughter of Wei Yuan Wang Gui as a concubine.

古文：既建太子，以孺人为妃，后为良娣。
现代文：立为皇太子之后，以韦孺人为王妃，以张后为良娣。
English: After he became crown prince, Wei Wei was crown princess and Zhang Hou was crown prince.

古文：妃兄坚为李林甫构死，太子惧，请与妃绝，毁服幽禁中。
现代文：后来因韦妃之兄韦坚被李林甫陷害致死，太子奏请与韦妃绝亲，毁其服幽居于禁中。
English: Later, because Wei Jian, the elder brother of Wei Fei, was framed to death by Li Linfu, the crown prince played the role of the last relative of Wei Fei, destroyed his clothes and lived in confinement.

古文：安禄山反，陷於贼，至德中薨。
现代文：安禄山造反后，韦妃陷入贼中，于至德年间逝世。
English: After the revolt in Anlu Mountain, Princess Wei fell into the hands of thieves and died during the reign of Emperor Zhi De.

古文：始，妃既绝，良娣得专侍太子，慧中而辩，能迎意傅合。
现代文：起初，韦妃既已绝亲，张良娣得以专侍太子，她聪慧而善辩，能曲意迎合上意。
English: At first, since Wei Fei was no longer a relative, Zhang Liangyao was able to serve the prince. She was clever and eloquent, and could cater to the prince's wishes.

古文：玄宗西幸，娣与太子从，度渭，民鄣道乞留复长安，太子不听。
现代文：玄宗西巡时，张良娣与太子随同前往，车驾渡过渭水时，百姓拦路请求留下太子收复长安，太子不听。
English: When Emperor Xuanzong was on a tour of the west, Zhang Liangyao and the crown prince went with him. When the car drove across Surabaya, the people blocked the road to request that the crown prince stay behind to recover Chang'an. The crown prince did not listen.

古文：中人李辅国密启，娣又赞其谋，遂定计北趣灵武。
现代文：中官李辅国密告太子请留，良娣也赞成其谋，便定计北趋灵武。
English: The lieutenant-general, Li Yu-kuo, tipped off the prince to stay, and Liang Xi also approved of his plan, so Lingwu decided to head north.

古文：时军卫单寡，夕次，娣必寝前，太子曰： 暮夜可虞，且捍贼非妇人事，宜少戒。 
现代文：当时军队卫士单寡，每逢晚上住宿，良娣必定寝于其前，太子说： 夜间怕出意外，况且捍御贼寇并非妇人之事，应当小心在意。 
English: At that time, the army guards were single and widowed, and whenever they stayed in the evening, Liang Yao would certainly sleep in front of them. The prince said: I'm afraid of an accident at night, and besides, defending against thieves and robbers is not a woman's business, so I should be careful.

古文：对曰： 方多事，若仓卒，妾自当之，殿下可徐为计。 
现代文：她回答说： 目前正是多事之秋，如事出仓卒，妾自当之，殿下便可从容脱身。 
English: She replied: At the moment, there are a lot of things going on. If things get out of hand, the concubine should take it into her own hands, and Her Royal Highness can get away with it.

古文：驻灵武，产子三日，起缝战士衣，太子敕止，对曰： 今岂自养时邪？ 
现代文：驻军于灵武时，临产生子，三天之后就起身缝制战士衣装，太子下令制止，她回答说： 如今岂是调养自己的时候？ 
English: When she was stationed at Lingwu, she gave birth to a son. Three days later, she got up to sew warrior costumes. The prince ordered her to stop. She replied, "Isn't it time to take care of yourself?"

古文：乾元初，册拜淑妃，赠其父尚书左仆射，姊妹皆封号，弟清、潜尚大宁、延和二郡主。
现代文：乾元初年，她被册拜为淑妃，并赠予其父尚书左仆射之职，其姐妹全都赐予封号，其弟张清、张潜娶大宁、延和二郡主为妻。
English: In the first year of Qianyuan, she was recorded as Shufei, and her father was given the post of Shangshu Zuozhuai, her sisters were all given seal names, and her brothers Zhang Qing and Zhang Qian married the two princes of Daning and Yanhe.

古文：遂立为皇后，诏内外命妇悉朝光顺门。
现代文：随即册立为皇后，下诏内外命妇全都朝见皇后于光顺门。
English: She was immediately crowned as empress, and all the empresses, both at home and abroad, came to see the empress at the Guangshun Gate.

古文：后能牢宠，稍稍豫政事，与李辅国相助，多以私谒桡权。
现代文：张后善于笼络人心，渐渐参预政事，与太监李辅国互为援助，常以私恩请谒干扰政务。
English: Zhang Hou was good at wooing the hearts of the people, and gradually participated in pre-political affairs. He and the eunuch Li Shuo Guo helped each other, and often interfered in political affairs with personal favors.

古文：亲蚕苑中，群命妇相礼，仪物甚盛。
现代文：还举行亲蚕礼于苑中，与群命妇相见，礼仪法物极盛。
English: There is also a pro-silkworm ceremony held in the middle of the garden, where you can meet a group of maidens, and there is an abundance of etiquette and rules.

古文：二年，群臣上帝尊号，后亦讽群臣尊己号 翊圣 ，帝问李揆，揆争不可。
现代文：乾元二年，群臣加上肃宗尊号，张后也暗示群臣尊崇自己号为 翊圣 ，肃宗问李揆，李揆固争不能这样。
English: In the second year of Qianyuan, Su Zong's vassals gave him the honorific title of "Suzong," and Zhang Hou also hinted that the vassals revered their own title of "Shansheng." Su Zong asked Li Jie, "Li Jie, you can't fight like this."

古文：会月蚀，帝以咎在后宫，乃止。
现代文：恰遇月食发生，肃宗认为咎在后宫，便停办加封皇后称号之事。
English: When a lunar eclipse occurred, Su Zong thought that the blame lay in the harem, so he stopped conferring the title of empress.

古文：又与辅国谋徙上皇西内。
现代文：又与李辅国谋议迁徙上皇居于西内。
English: He also discussed the relocation of the emperor's residence to the west with Li Yuxu.

古文：端午日，帝召见山人李唐，帝方拥幼女，顾唐曰： 我念之，无怪也。 
现代文：清明节时，肃宗召见山人李唐，当时肃宗正抱着幼女，对李唐说： 我太想她，请别怪罪。 
English: During the Qingming Festival, Su Zong summoned the mountain man Li Tang. At that time, Su Zong was holding his little daughter and said to Li Tang: I miss her so much, please don't blame me.

古文：唐曰： 太上皇今日亦当念陛下。 
现代文：李唐说： 太上皇今天也想念陛下。 
English: Li Tang said, "The Empress Dowager also misses Your Majesty today.

古文：帝泫然涕下，而内制於后，卒不敢谒西宫。
现代文：肃宗听罢潸然泪下，但因受制于张后，结果仍不敢前去西宫谒见。
English: Su Zong burst into tears upon hearing this, but because he was constrained by Zhang Hou, he still did not dare to go to the Western Palace to meet him.

古文：帝不豫，后自箴血写佛书以示诚。
现代文：后来肃宗生病，张后亲自用针刺血书写佛经以表示诚意。
English: Later, Su Zong fell ill, and Zhang Hou personally used a needle to prick the blood to write Buddhist scriptures to show his sincerity.

古文：初，建宁王倓数短后於帝，上皇在蜀，以七宝鞍赐后，而李泌请分以赏战士，倓助泌请，故后怨，卒被谮死。
现代文：起初，太子之弟建宁王李倓多次向肃宗申诉张后的过失，太上皇在蜀地，将七宝雕鞍赐予张后，而李泌奏请分割其物以赏赐战士，李亻炎赞同其请，因此遭到张后怨恨，结果遭受诬陷而死。
English: At first, the prince's brother, King Jianning of Li Yan, repeatedly complained to Emperor Su of Zhang's fault. In Shu, the emperor gave Zhang a seven-treasure carving saddle, and Li Xiu asked to divide it to reward the soldiers. Li Xuan agreed to his request, so he was resented by Zhang. As a result, he was framed and died.

古文：繇是太子深畏，事后谨甚。
现代文：因此太子深为恐惧，侍奉张后非常谨慎。
English: Therefore, the prince was deeply afraid, and he was very cautious after serving Zhang Rong.

古文：后犹欲危之，然以子早世而侗幼，故太子得无患。
现代文：张后仍想危害太子，但因亲生之子李亻召早逝，李侗又太幼小，因此太子之位未动。
English: Zhang Hou still wanted to harm the crown prince, but because his own son, Li Shanzhao, died early, and Li Shanzhao was too young, the position of the crown prince remained unchanged.

古文：宝应元年，帝大渐，后与内官硃辉光等谋立越王系，而李辅国、程元振以兵卫太子，幽后别殿。
现代文：宝应元年，肃宗病势加重，张后便与宦官朱辉等人谋议拥立越王李系为帝，而宦官李辅国、程元振却率兵护卫太子入宫，将张后幽禁于别殿。
English: In the first year of the Baoying Dynasty, Su Zong's illness worsened. Zhang Hou and eunuchs Zhu Hui and others made plans to support the enthronement of Emperor Yue of the Li dynasty. However, eunuchs Li Shuo Guo and Cheng Yuan Zhen led soldiers to escort the crown prince into the palace and confined Zhang Hou in the annex.

古文：有司上谥，葬丰陵。
现代文：代宗即位之后，群臣奏请皇上将张后废为庶人，随即被杀。
English: After the enthronement of the daimyō, a group of courtiers petitioned the emperor to abolish Zhang Hou as a commoner, and he was immediately killed.

古文：宪宗懿女皇后郭氏，汾阳王子仪之孙。
现代文：张清、张潜及其舅窦履信全被流放外地，张后党羽尽遭诛死。宪宗懿安皇后郭氏，是汾阳王郭子仪的孙女。
English: Zhang Qing, Zhang Qian and his uncle Dou Lixin were all exiled abroad, and all the party members were killed after Zhang. The Guo clan, the Empress of Jianzong, is the granddaughter of Guo Ziyi, the King of Shenyang.

古文：父暧，尚昇平公主，实生后。
现代文：其父郭暧，娶升平公主为妻，而生郭后。
English: His father, Guo Zhen, married Princess Shengping and had Guo Zhen.

古文：宪宗为广陵王，娉以为妃。
现代文：宪宗受封广陵王时，娶郭氏为其王妃。
English: When Kenzong was crowned Guangling King, he married Guo as his empress.

古文：顺宗以其家有大功烈，而母素贵，故礼之异诸妇，是生穆宗。
现代文：顺宗因其娘家为唐室建有大功，而其母向来贵盛，以故其礼数不同于诸妇。她生下穆宗。
English: Shunzong, because his daughter's family had made great contributions to the Tang Dynasty, and his mother had always been wealthy, so his number of rites was different from that of other women. She gave birth to Mu Zong.

古文：元和元年，进册贵妃。
现代文：元和元年，进封为贵妃。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, she was crowned as a noble consort.

古文：八年，群臣三请立为后，帝以岁子午忌，又是时后廷多嬖艳，恐后得尊位，钳掣不得肆，故章报闻罢。
现代文：元和八年，群臣多次奏请册立郭氏为后，宪宗因来年有子午之忌，而且当时后宫嬖幸之女尚多，担心郭氏既得尊位，会受她钳制掣肘而不能肆意寻欢作乐，以故不予册封。
English: In the 8th year of the Yuan Dynasty, the Guo clan was named after many requests from the courtiers. However, due to the fact that the next year was the anniversary of the death of Emperor Xizong, and there were still many daughters of the imperial concubine at that time, it was feared that the Guo clan would not be able to enjoy themselves freely since they had already obtained a high rank and would be constrained by her. Therefore, they were not named.

古文：穆宗嗣位，上尊号皇太后，赠暧太尉，母齐国大长公主，擢兄钊刑部尚书，鏦〗金吾大将军。
现代文：穆宗即位之后，加上尊号为皇太后，赠予其父郭暧为太尉，其母为齐国大长公主，提拔其兄郭钊为刑部尚书，郭钅从为金吾大将军。
English: After the enthronement of Mu Zong, with the honorary title of empress dowager, he gave his father Guo Jun the title of lieutenant general, his mother the title of the eldest princess of Qi Province, promoted his brother Guo Jun to the title of the minister of justice, and promoted Guo Jun to the title of the general of Kingu.

古文：后移御兴庆宫，凡朔望三朝，帝率百官诣宫门为寿。
现代文：郭太后移居于兴庆宫，穆宗每逢朔望参见，三朝庆贺时，亲率百官前往宫门拜寿。
English: Empress Dowager Guo moved to the Xingqing Palace, and Mu Zong visited the palace every New Year's Eve. During the celebration of the Three Dynasties, he and hundreds of officials went to the palace gate to celebrate his birthday.

古文：或岁时庆问燕飨，后宫戚里内外妇，车骑骈壅，环佩之声满宫。
现代文：每逢岁时庆问宴飨之时，后宫亲属内外命妇，车骑填塞宫门，环佩之声满宫。
English: Every year at the time of the welcoming banquet, the relatives of the harem, both inside and outside, fill the palace gate with cars and bicycles, and the sound of admiration fills the palace.

古文：帝亦豪矜，朝夕供御，务华衍侈大称后意。
现代文：穆宗性情亦颇为豪奢，朝夕供奉，务求豪华盛大以合郭太后之意。
English: Mu Zong's disposition is also quite extravagant, and she worships in the morning and evening, so that she can be as grand as Empress Dowager He Guo.

古文：后尝幸骊山，登览裴回，诏景王督禁甲从，帝自到昭应奉迎，留帐饮数日还。帝崩，中人有为后谋称制者，后怒曰： 吾效武氏邪？
现代文：太后曾经临幸骊山，登临游览，穆宗命令景王督率禁军侍卫，并亲自前往昭应奉迎太后，中官有人为太后谋划临朝称制，太后发怒说： 要我仿效武氏吗？
English: The empress dowager once visited Shaoshan and went on a tour. Mu Zong ordered Jing Wang Gu to lead the imperial guard and personally went to Zhaoying to welcome the empress dowager. A middle-ranking official was plotting for the empress dowager to visit the imperial palace. The empress dowager became angry and said, "Do you want me to follow the example of Emperor Wu?"

古文：今太子虽幼，尚可选重德为辅，吾何与外事哉？ 
现代文：如今太子年虽幼小，仍可选择德高望重之臣为之辅佐，我何必参预外廷事务呢！ 
English: Nowadays, although the prince is young, he can still choose a highly respected and respected vassal to assist him. Why do I have to participate in extra-judicial affairs?

古文：敬宗立，号太皇太后。
现代文：敬宗即位后，尊她为太皇太后。
English: After Emperor Keizong ascended to the throne, she became the Grand Empress Dowager.

古文：宝历仓卒，后召江王嗣皇帝位，是为文宗。
现代文：宝历年间变起仓促，郭后召江王入宫即皇帝之位，他就是文宗。
English: During the reign of Baoli, there was a sudden change. Guo Hou called Jiang Wang to enter the palace, that is, the emperor's throne. He was Wenzong.

古文：文宗性谨孝，事后有礼，凡羞果鲜珍及四方奇奉，必先献宗庙、三宫，而后御之。
现代文：文宗性情恭谨孝顺，侍奉郭后极有礼貌，凡珍馐嘉果及四方进贡的奇巧之物，必定先行进献宗庙、三宫之后，方才自己享用。
English: Wenzong's disposition is respectful and filial, and he is very polite after serving Guo. All the rare and precious fruits and the wonderful things brought by the four quarters must first be presented to the ancestral temple and the three palaces, and then enjoyed by themselves.

古文：武宗喜畋游，角武抃，择五坊小儿得出入禁中。
现代文：武宗即位后，性喜行猎游宴，与武士角力，选择五坊小儿让其出入宫禁。
English: After Emperor Wuzong ascended to the throne, he enjoyed hunting and feasting, wrestled with samurai, and chose a five-year-old child to be banned from entering the palace.

古文：它日问后起居，从容请曰： 如何可为盛天子？ 
现代文：有一天武宗问郭后起居之状，并从容请教说： 怎样做才能成为盛德天子呢？ 
English: One day, Wu Zong asked Guo Hou about his living conditions, and calmly asked: "How can I become Shengde Tianzi?"

古文：后曰： 谏巨章疏宜审览，度可用用之，有不可，以询宰相。
现代文：郭后说： 谏臣所上章疏应当留心阅览，觉得可行的就采用，如有不妥之处，可以征询宰相的意见。
English: Guo Hou said, "Courtiers should read the above chapter carefully, and if they think it is feasible, they should adopt it. If there is anything wrong, they can ask the prime minister's opinion.

古文：毋拒直言，勿纳偏言，以忠良为腹心，此盛天子也。 
现代文：不得拒受直言，不要听信谗言，要以忠良之士作为心腹。这样就能成为盛德天子。 
English: You must not refuse to accept straight talk, do not listen to insults, and take loyal people as confidants. In this way, you can become a virtuous son of heaven.

古文：帝再拜，还索谏章阅之，往往道游猎事，自是畋幸稀，小儿武抃等不复横赐矣。
现代文：武宗再拜致谢，还宫后索取大臣谏章阅览，多是劝谏游猎之事，从此后便很少出游行猎，五坊小儿与角力武士等人不再享受大量赏赐了。
English: Emperor Wuzong thanked him again, and also asked the Empress Dowager for a reading of the minister's medals, mostly to persuade him to go hunting. From then on, he rarely went out to hunt in processions, and the five boys and the wrestlers no longer enjoyed a large number of rewards.

古文：宣宗立，於后，诸子也，而母郑，故侍儿，有曩怨。
现代文：其后宣宗即位，其母郑氏，本为郭后侍儿，与郭后本有宿怨。
English: After that, Emperor Xuanzong ascended to the throne, and his mother Zheng, who was Guo Houben's servant, had a long-standing grudge against Guo Houben.

古文：帝奉养礼稍薄，后郁郁不聊，与一二侍人登勤政楼，将自陨，左右共持之。
现代文：宣宗奉养之礼渐渐淡薄，郭后因此郁郁不乐，便与几名侍从登临勤政楼，准备跳楼自尽，左右侍从赶紧拦住。
English: Xuanzong's hospitality gradually faded, and Guo Hou was depressed and unhappy, so he and several attendants went to the Qin Zheng Building and prepared to jump off the building to commit suicide. The attendants around him quickly stopped him.

古文：帝闻不喜，是夕后暴崩。
现代文：宣宗闻知此事很不高兴，这天晚上郭后突然去世。
English: Knowing this, Xuan Zong Wen was very unhappy. That evening, Guo Hou suddenly passed away.

古文：有司上尊谥，葬景陵外园。
现代文：有关部门议定尊谥，安葬于景陵外园。
English: Relevant departments agreed to honor him, and he was buried in the garden outside Jingling Mausoleum.

古文：太常官王暤请后合葬景陵，以主祔宪宗室，帝不悦，令宰相白敏中让之。
现代文：太常官王白皋奏请将郭后合葬于景陵，以其神主礻付祭于宪宗庙室，宣宗不喜，命宰相白敏中责让王白皋。
English: Grand Steward Wang Baizhang requested that Guo Hou be buried together with him in the Jingling Mausoleum, and that his god be enshrined in the temple room of the Jianzhong sect. Emperor Xuanzong was not pleased, and ordered Prime Minister Bai Minzhong to order Wang Baizhang to do so.

古文：暤曰： 后乃宪宗东宫元妃，事顺宗为妇，历五朝母天下，不容有异论。 
现代文：王白皋反驳说： 郭后本是宪宗在东宫时的元妃，作为儿媳侍奉顺宗，经历五朝皆为天下母后，不应再有异议。 
English: Wang Baiyao retorted: Guo Hou was originally the consort of Emperor Xianzong when he was in the East Palace. As a daughter-in-law, she served Emperor Shunzong, and through five dynasties, she was the mother of the world. There should no longer be any objection.

古文：敏中亦怒，周墀又责谓，暤终不桡，墀曰： 皋信孤直。 
现代文：敏中极为恼怒，周墀也加以指责，王白皋始终不肯屈从，周墀便说： 王白皋确是孤傲耿直。 
English: Minzhong was extremely angry, Zhou Qi also criticized him, Wang Baiyao still refused to yield, Zhou Qi said: Wang Baiyao is indeed arrogant.

古文：俄贬暤句容令。
现代文：不久即将王白皋贬职为句容县令。
English: Wang Baiyao would soon be demoted to the post of Junyong County magistrate.

古文：懿宗咸通中，暤还为礼官，申抗前论，乃诏后主祔於庙。
现代文：懿宗咸通年间王白皋还朝再任礼官，重申坚持先前的看法，终于使朝廷下诏将郭后神主礻付祭于太庙。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xizong of the Han Dynasty, Wang Baiyao was reappointed as a etiquette official, reiterated his previous opinion, and finally made the imperial court issue an edict to enshrine Guoguo Shinshu in the Imperial Temple.

