古文：重光大荒落，一年。
现代文：重光大荒落，一年。
English: Heavy light and great desolation, for one year.

古文：和皇帝中兴元年
现代文：齐和帝中兴元年
English: Emperor Qihe Zongxing in the first year of the year

古文：春，正月，丁酉，东昏侯以晋安王宝义为司徒，建安王宝寅为车骑将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：春季正月，丁酉，东昏侯任命晋安王萧宝义为司徒，任命建安王萧宝寅为车骑将军、开府仪同三司。
English: In the first month of spring, Ding Xi and Dong Dou Hou appointed King Xiao Baoyi of Jinan as the tutor, and King Xiao Baoying of Jianan as the general of chariot and cavalry, and the keeper of the imperial residences and the three departments.

古文：乙巳，南康王宝融始称相国，大赦；以萧颖胄为左长史，萧衍为征东将军，杨公则为湘州刺史。
现代文：乙巳，南康王萧宝融开始称相国，发令大赦天下，并且任命萧颖胄为左长史，任命萧衍为征东将军，任命杨公则为湘州刺史。
English: At this time, Xiao Baorong, the king of the Southern Kang Dynasty, began to call the country his brother-in-law, issued a general amnesty to the world, and appointed Xiao Yingqian as the left long history, appointed Xiao Yan as the eastward conquering general, and appointed Yang Gong as the history of Hunan.

古文：戊申，萧衍发襄阳，留弟伟总府州事，憺守垒城，府司马庄丘黑守樊城。
现代文：戊申，萧衍率兵从襄阳出发，留下弟弟萧伟总管府州事务，萧防守襄阳城附近的堡寨，府司马庄丘黑防守樊城。
English: Wushin, Xiao Yan led the troops from Xiangyang, leaving his brother Xiao Wei in charge of prefectural affairs, Xiao defended the fortress near Xiangyang City, and the prefectural governor Ma Zhuang Qiu Hei defended Lucheng City.

古文：衍既行，州中兵及储偫皆虚。
现代文：萧衍出发之后，州中兵力以及物资储备都很空虚。
English: After Xiao Yan's departure, the state's troop strength and material reserves were very empty.

古文：魏兴太守裴师仁、齐兴太守颜僧都并不受衍命，举兵欲袭襄阳，伟、憺遣兵邀击于治平，大破之，雍州乃安。
现代文：魏兴太守裴师仁、齐兴太守颜僧都两人不服从萧衍的命令，率领兵马要袭击襄阳，萧伟和萧派遣部队在始平进行拦截阻击，大获全胜，于是雍州得以安定。
English: Wei Xing Taishu Pei Shiren and Qi Xing Taishu Yan both disobeyed Xiao Yan's orders and led their troops to attack Xiangyang. Xiao Wei and Xiao sent troops to intercept and block the attack in Shiheping, and won a great victory. As a result, Yongzhou was stabilized.

古文：魏咸阳王禧为上相，不亲政务，骄奢贪淫，多为不法，魏主颇恶之。
现代文：北魏咸阳王元禧以太尉辅政，位居群臣之上，但是他不亲理政务，骄奢淫侈，贪得无厌，干了许多违法之事，宣武帝对他特别不满。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, Xianyang King Yuan Xiyi was a lieutenant of the auxiliary government, ranking above the ministers, but he did not personally manage government affairs, he was arrogant and extravagant, he was insatiably greedy, and he did many illegal things. Emperor Xuanwu was particularly dissatisfied with him.

古文：禧遣奴就领军于烈求旧羽林虎贲，执仗出入。烈曰： 天子谅暗，事归宰辅。
现代文：元禧派遣自己的奴仆到领军于烈那里要一些专为皇帝担任警卫任务的羽林虎贲，以便出入之时为他自己担任护卫，于烈不同意给，对来者说： 皇上正在为先帝守丧，朝廷政事归于辅政大臣掌管。
English: Yuan Xi dispatched his servants to Yu Lie, the leader of the army, to ask for some feathered forest tigers, which were specially used as guards for the emperor, so that they could serve as escorts for him when he went in and out. Yu Lie did not agree to this, and said to the visitor: The emperor is holding a funeral for the former emperor, and the affairs of the imperial court are under the control of the Vice-Minister of State.

古文：领军但知典掌宿卫，非有诏不敢违理从私。 
现代文：我身为领军，只知道负责皇上的警卫事情，所以没有皇上的诏令，我不敢违反规定私自给予。 
English: As the leader of the army, all I knew was that I was responsible for the emperor's security, so without the emperor's edict, I didn't dare to violate the rules and give it to him privately.

古文：禧奴惘然而返。
现代文：元禧的奴仆没办法，只好怏怏不乐地回去了。
English: There was nothing the servants of Yuanxi could do, so they reluctantly went back.

古文：禧复遣谓烈曰： 我，天子之子，天子叔父，身为元辅，有所求须，与诏何异！ 
现代文：元禧不肯就此罢休，他再次派奴仆去对于烈转达说： 我是皇上的叔父，身为辅政大臣，有所需求而向你提出，这与皇上的诏令有什么两样呢？ 
English: Yuan Xi did not want to stop there. He again sent a servant to relay the message to Lü: "I am the emperor's uncle. As an assistant minister, I have a request to make to you. How is this different from the emperor's edict?

古文：烈厉色曰： 烈非不知王之贵也，奈何使私奴索天子羽林！
现代文：于烈严厉地回答道： 于烈我并非不知道王爷的高贵身份，但是您怎么能指使自己的奴仆来索要皇上的羽林！
English: Yu Lie replied sternly: Yu Lie, I am not unaware of the noble status of the prince, but how can you instruct your servants to demand the emperor's feather forest!

古文：烈头可得，羽林不可得！ 
现代文：您可以要去我于烈的脑袋，但要羽林却一个也得不到。 
English: You can go to my Yu Lie's head, but you can't get a feather forest.

古文：禧怒，以烈为恒州刺史。烈不愿出外，固辞，不许；遂称疾不出。
现代文：元禧因此而恼羞成怒，依仗权力任命于烈为恒州刺史，于烈不愿意到外地去，坚决推辞，但是元禧不准许，于是就借口有病而躲在家中不出来了。
English: As a result, Yuan Xi became irritated and angry. Relying on power, he appointed Yu Lie to write the history of Hengzhou. Yu Lie did not want to go abroad and firmly refused, but Yuan Xi did not allow it, so he hid at home under the pretext of illness.

古文：烈子左中郎将忠领直阁，常在魏主左右。烈使忠言于魏主曰： 诸王专恣，意不可测。宜早罢之，自揽权纲。 
现代文：于烈的儿子左中郎将于忠统管直，经常在宣武帝身边，于烈就让于忠对宣武帝说： 各位王爷专横恣意，其内心不可测透，宜于早点把他罢黜掉，而由圣上亲自临朝执政。 
English: Yu Rong's son Zuo Zhongro (左中郎), who was always at Emperor Xuanwu's side, said to Emperor Xuanwu: "Your majesty is arbitrary, and his heart is impenetrable. It would be better to depose him as soon as possible, and let His Holiness himself govern the imperial court."

古文：北海王详亦密以禧过恶白帝，且言彭城王勰大得人情，不宜久辅政。
现代文：北海王元详也秘密地把元禧的罪过恶行告诉了宣武帝，并且说彭城王元勰深得人心，也不宜于长久地辅理朝政。
English: The North Sea King Yuan Zhe also secretly told Emperor Xuanwu about the sins and misdeeds of the Yuan Jubilee, and said that the Pengcheng King Yuan Zhe was deeply popular and was not suitable for long-term assistance to the imperial government.

古文：帝然之。
现代文：宣武帝听了，深表同意。
English: The emperor agreed to Wang Hun's score.

古文：时将礿祭，王公并斋于庙东坊。
现代文：快到春季祭宗庙之时，各位王公们全都汇齐在宗庙的东坊斋戒。
English: At this time, preparations were being made for the Spring Feast of the Spoon, and the princes were all fasting in the East Courtyard of the Tai Temple.

古文：帝夜使于忠语烈： 明旦入见，当有处分。 
现代文：宣武帝在夜里指派于忠去对于烈说： 明天早晨进来见我，将对你有所吩咐。 
English: Emperor Xuanwu sent Yuzhong to the martyrs in the middle of the night, saying, "Come to see me tomorrow morning, and I will give you some instructions."

古文：质明，烈至。帝命烈将直阁等六十馀人，宣旨召禧、勰、详，卫送至帝所。
现代文：第二天天刚亮，于烈到了，宣武帝命令于烈率领直六十多人，传达圣上旨意要召见元禧、元勰、元详三人，把他们护送到皇上的住所。
English: The next day, just after dawn, Yu Liang arrived. Emperor Xuanwu ordered Yu Liang to lead more than sixty people to convey the holy will to summon three people, Yuan Xiyi, Yuan Xuan, and Yuan Zhe, and escort them to the emperor's residence.

古文：禧等入见于光极殿，帝曰： 恪虽寡昧，忝承宝历。比缠尪疹，实凭诸父，苟延视息，奄涉三龄。
现代文：元禧等三人进入光极殿，宣武帝对他们说： 元恪我虽然孤陋寡闻，忝承皇位，到我患病之后，确实依靠几位叔父辅理朝政，才使我得以苟延残喘，不知不觉地就过去了三年。
English: Yuan Xi and the other three entered the Hall of Light, and Emperor Xuanwu said to them: Although I am a lonely and uneducated person, I am the heir to the throne. After my illness, I really relied on several uncles to assist me in governing the court, which allowed me to survive. Unknowingly, three years have passed.

古文：诸父归逊殷勤，今便亲摄百揆。
现代文：三位叔父一再表示要归政，殷勤谦逊之意不敢拂逆，所以现在我就亲自执掌朝政吧。
English: My three uncles have repeatedly said that they want to return to politics, and I dare not go against their courteous and humble intentions, so now I will personally take charge of the government.

古文：且还府司，当别处分。 
现代文：各位叔父暂且回到各自的府邸去吧，至于下一步如何，我当分别安排。 
English: You should go back to your hometowns. I'll make other arrangements.

古文：又谓勰曰： 顷来南北务殷，不容仰遂冲操。
现代文：元恪又对元勰说： 近来南北事务繁多，使您奔波辛劳，不能实现虚静之志节。
English: Yuan Ke also said to Yuan Shao, "Recently, there have been many affairs between the north and the south, which has made you run around and work hard, and you cannot achieve the goal of peace and tranquility.

古文：恪是何人，而敢久违先敕，今遂叔父高蹈之意。 
现代文：元恪我是何人，怎么敢长久违背先帝的遗敕？今天，我就顺从了叔父的高蹈避世的心意吧。 
English: Who am I, how dare I disobey the widow of the former emperor for so long? Today, I will follow my uncle's advice to avoid the world.

古文：勰谢曰： 陛下孝恭，仰遵先诏，上成睿明之美，下遂微臣之志，感今惟往，悲喜交深。 
现代文：元勰听后，感谢元恪说： 陛下孝顺恭敬，仰遵先帝的遗诏，批准我脱身俗务，这真是上成了圣明之美，下遂了微臣我的志向，抚今思往，如何不令我悲喜交织呢？ 
English: After listening, Yuan Zheng thanked Yuan Jia and said: "Your majesty, you are filial and respectful, you obeyed the last emperor's edict, and approved me to get rid of my mundane duties. This has truly become a sacred beauty. You have fulfilled my ambition as a minor vassal, and you have given me something to think about. How could you not make my sorrow and joy intertwine?

古文：庚戌，诏勰以王归第；禧进位太保；详为大将军、录尚书事。
现代文：庚戌，宣武帝诏令元勰以王爷身份回府静养，元禧位进太保，元详担任大将军、录尚书事。
English: Geng Zheng, Emperor Xuanwu decreed that Yuan Zheng return to the capital to recuperate as a prince, Yuan Xiyi entered Taibao, and Yuan Zhao served as a general and recorded records.

古文：尚书清河张彝、邢峦闻处分非常，亡走，出洛阳城，为御史中尉中山甄琛所弹。诏书切责之。
现代文：尚书清河人张彝、邢峦知道了元恪对三位叔父的安置情况，觉得这样处理很不正常，就离朝逃走，逃出了洛阳城，于是被御史中尉中山人甄琛弹劾，宣武帝发出诏书，狠狠地斥责了他们两人一顿。
English: Shangshu Qinghe people Zhang Ye and Yao learned about the placement of the three uncles by Yuan Ke, and felt that this treatment was very abnormal, so they fled from the government and escaped from Luoyang City. Therefore, they were impeached by the military history lieutenant Zhongshan Zhen, and Emperor Xuanwu issued an edict and severely reprimanded the two of them.

古文：复以于烈为领军，仍加车骑大将军，自是长直禁中，军国大事，皆得参焉。
现代文：宣武帝还是让于烈担任领军，又加封他为车骑大将军，从此以后，于烈常在皇宫内值班，国家军政大事，他都得以参与。
English: Emperor Xuanwu still allowed Yu Liang to lead the army, and also made him a general of the cavalry. From then on, Yu Liang was often on duty in the imperial palace, and he was able to participate in national military and political events.

古文：魏主时年十六，不能亲决庶务，委之左右。
现代文：宣武帝元恪当时才十六岁，不能亲自处理断决朝政事务，就委托给身边人办理。
English: Emperor Xuanwu was only 16 years old at the time, and since he could not personally handle the decision-making of the imperial government, he entrusted it to someone around him.

古文：于是幸臣茹皓、赵郡王仲兴、上谷寇猛、赵郡赵修、南阳赵邕及外戚高肇等始用事，魏政浸衰。
现代文：于是，宠幸之臣茹皓、赵郡人王仲兴、上谷人寇猛、赵郡人赵、南阳人赵邕以及外戚高肇等人开始专权，北魏的朝政从此逐渐衰败。
English: As a result, the favoured vassals, Ru Gan, Zhao County resident Wang Zhongxing, Shangguan resident Kou Meng, Zhao County resident Zhao, Nanyang resident Zhao Yao, and maternal relative Gao Zhao, began to wield absolute power, and the Northern Wei dynasty gradually declined.

古文：赵修尤亲幸，旬月间，累迁至光禄卿；每迁官，帝亲至其宅设宴，王公百官皆从。
现代文：赵尤其受宣武帝宠幸，一个月之内，就升至光禄卿。他每升一次官，宣武帝就亲自到他家去设宴庆贺一番，王公众臣们也都要随着一起去。
English: Zhao was especially favored by Emperor Xuanwu, and within a month, he was promoted to Guangluqing. Every time he was promoted, Emperor Xuanwu personally went to his house to hold a banquet to celebrate, and the king's public ministers also had to go along.

古文：辛亥，东昏侯祀南郊，大赦。
现代文：辛亥，南齐东昏侯在南郊举行祀天仪式，大赦天下。
English: In Xinhai, Dongdimou, Nanqi, held a ceremony to worship Heaven in the southern suburb, and pardoned the world.

古文：丁巳，魏主引见群臣于太极前殿，告以亲政之意。
现代文：丁巳，北魏宣武帝元恪在太极前殿召见百官群臣，告诉了他们自己要亲自执政的意见。
English: At that time, Emperor Xuanwu of the Northern Wei Dynasty summoned hundreds of officials and courtiers to the Taiji Front Hall and told them of his intention to personally govern.

古文：壬戌，以咸阳王禧领太尉，广陵王羽为司。
现代文：壬戌，宣武帝命咸阳王元禧兼任太尉，任命广陵王元羽为司徒。
English: According to Emperor Xuanwu's order, Xianyang Wang Yuanxi also served as a captain, and Guangling Wang Yuanyu was appointed as an assistant.

古文：魏主引羽入内，面授之。
现代文：元恪让元羽进入内殿，当面告诉了他这一任命。
English: Yuan Ke let Yuan Yu enter the inner hall and told him about the appointment in person.

古文：羽固辞曰： 彦和本自不愿，而陛下强与之。
现代文：但是，元羽坚决推辞不受，他说： 当初元勰自己本来不愿意担任司徒，而陛下却强使他担任。
English: However, Yuan Yu was adamant that he would not be pushed aside. He said, "At first, Yuan Yu himself did not want to serve as an attendant, but His Majesty forced him to serve.

古文：今新去此官而以臣代之，必招物议。 乃以为司空。
现代文：如今，刚免去了元勰的司徒之官，而以我代替他，这样一来必定要遭到众人的议论，所以我不能担任。 
English: Today, the magistrate of the Yuan Dynasty has just been dismissed, and replacing him with me, this will certainly be discussed by many people, so I can't serve.

古文：二月，乙丑，南康王以冠军长史王茂为江州刺史，竟陵太守曹景宗为郢州刺史，邵陵王宝修为荆州刺史。
现代文：于是，元恪就只好让他担任司空。二月，乙丑，南齐南康王萧宝融任命冠军长史王茂为江州刺史，任命竟陵太守曹景宗为郢州刺史，任命邵陵王萧宝攸为荆州刺史。
English: As a result, Yuan Kaku had no choice but to appoint him as the secretary. In February, in the second ugliness, Xiao Baorong, the king of Southern Kankang in South China, appointed the champion Wang Shimao as the governor of Jiangsu Province, appointed Cao Jingzong, the governor of Jingling, as the governor of Zhangzhou Province, and appointed Xiao Baoyu, the king of Shaoling, as the governor of Jingzhou Province.

古文：甲戌，魏大赦。
现代文：甲戌，北魏大赦天下。
English: Armor, the Northern Wei Dynasty amnestied the world.

古文：壬午，东昏侯遣羽林兵击雍州，中外纂严。
现代文：壬午，南齐东昏侯派遣羽林兵袭击雍州，宣布朝廷内外实行戒严。
English: In the morning of the 7th day of the 7th month, Dongdimou of Southern Qi dispatched Ulin soldiers to attack Yongzhou and declared martial law inside and outside the imperial court.

古文：甲申，萧衍至竟陵，命王茂、曹景宗为前军，以中兵参国张法安守竟陵城。
现代文：甲申，萧衍到达竟陵，命令王茂、曹景宗担任前军，又命令中兵参军张法安防守竟陵城。
English: When Gao Shen and Xiao Yan arrived at Jingling, they ordered Wang Mao and Cao Jingzong to serve as the vanguard, and ordered the middle-ranking soldiers to join Zhang Fa'an's army to defend Jingling.

古文：茂等至汉口，诸将议欲并兵围郢，分兵袭西阳、武昌。
现代文：王茂等人到达汉口，众将领计议要合并兵力围攻郢，以及兵分两路袭击西阳和武昌。
English: Wang Mao and others arrived in Hankou, and the generals discussed the need to combine forces to besiege Handan, as well as to attack Xiyang and Wuchang from two directions.

古文：衍曰： 汉口不阔一里，箭道交至，房僧寄以重兵固守，与郢城为掎角；若悉众前进，僧寄必绝我军后，悔无所及。
现代文：萧衍不同意这一方案，他说： 汉口河道宽不到一里，我们在河中间，敌人在两岸射箭，箭雨交织，如何得了？再说房僧寄以重兵把守汉口，与郢城成犄角之势，我们如果出动全部兵力前去，房僧寄必定要派兵去断绝我军的后路，如此一来后悔也来不及了。
English: Xiao Yan did not agree with this plan. He said: The Hankou River is less than a mile wide. We are in the middle of the river. The enemy is shooting arrows on both sides. The rain of arrows is intertwined. How did we get here? Moreover, Fuxiang Sending sent a heavy force to guard Hankou, which was in conflict with Lucheng. If we sent all our forces forward, Fuxiang Sending would have to send troops to cut off our army's back route. It would be too late to regret it.

古文：不若遣王、曹诸军济江，与荆州军合，以逼郢城；吾自围鲁山以通沔、汉，使郧城、竟陵之粟方舟而下，江陵、湘中之兵相继而至，兵多食足，何忧两城之不拔！
现代文：所以，不如派王茂、曹景宗的军队渡过长江，与荆州方面的兵力合作，逼攻郢城，我则亲自围攻鲁山，以便打通沔、汉水道，使郧城、竟陵的粮食能用舟船运下来，江陵和湘中的军队相继到来之后，兵多粮足，何愁攻不下这两座城池呢？
English: Therefore, it would be better to send the armies of Wang Mao and Cao Jingzong across the Yangtze River, cooperate with the military forces of Jingzhou, and besiege Lushan. I will personally besiege Lushan in order to open the Yangtze and Han waterways, so that the grain of Lushan and Jingling can be transported down by boat. After the armies of Jiangling and Hunan successively arrive, the soldiers have more food, so why not conquer these two cities?

古文：天下之事，可以卧取之耳。 
现代文：夺取天下，无须力战，简直可以卧而取之。 
English: To conquer the world, you don't need to fight, you can just lie down and take it.

古文：乃使茂等帅众济江，顿九里。
现代文：于是，萧衍就指使王茂等人率兵渡过长江，驻扎在九里。
English: As a result, Xiao Yan ordered Wang Mao and others to lead the troops across the Yangtze River and station them in Jiuli.

古文：张冲遣中兵参军陈光静开门迎战，茂等击破之。光静死，冲婴城自守。
现代文：张冲派遣中兵参军陈光静出城迎战，王茂等率部痛击，破敌获胜，陈光静战死，张冲只好据城自守，不敢出战。
English: Zhang Chong dispatched soldiers to join Chen Guangjing's army to go out of the city to fight, Wang Mao and others led the troops to beat the enemy, defeated the enemy, and Chen Guangjing died in battle. Zhang Chong had to defend himself according to the city and did not dare to go to war.

古文：景宗遂据石桥浦，连军相续，下至加湖。
现代文：于是，曹景宗便占据石桥浦，摆开战线，一直下至加湖。
English: As a result, Cao Jingzong occupied Shijiao Pu, opened a front, and went all the way down to Jiahu.

古文：荆州遣冠军将军邓元起、军主王世兴、田安之将数千人会雍州兵于夏首。
现代文：荆州方面派遣冠军将军邓元起、军主王世兴、田安之率领数千人在夏首与雍州方面的兵力会合。
English: The Jingzhou side dispatched champion general Deng Yuanqi, army commander Wang Shixing, and Tian Anzhi to lead thousands of people to join forces with the Yongzhou side in the early summer.

古文：衍筑汉口城以守鲁山，命水军主义阳张惠绍等游遏江中，绝郢、鲁二城信使。
现代文：萧衍筑建汉口城以便守护鲁山，并且命令水军主、义阳人张惠绍等人在长江中游动阻截，以便断绝郢城和鲁山之间的信使往来。
English: Xiao Yan built Hankou City in order to guard Lushan, and ordered Zhang Huishao, the commander of the naval forces and a native of Yiyang, to swim in the Yangtze River to intercept and cut off the courier traffic between Shicheng and Lushan.

古文：杨公则举湘州之众会于夏口。
现代文：杨公则率领湘州兵力与其他军在夏口会合。
English: Yang Gongzhu led the troops from Hunan Province to join the other armies in Xiakou.

古文：萧颖胄命荆州诸军皆受公则节度，虽萧颖达亦隶焉。
现代文：萧颖胄命令荆州方面的各部兵力全都接受杨公则的指挥调遣，即使是萧颖达也同样成为他的部下。
English: Xiao Yingtao ordered all the military forces in Jingzhou to accept Yang Gongze's command and dispatch. Even Xiao Yingdao also became his subordinate.

古文：府朝仪欲遣人行湘州事而难其人，西中郎中兵参军刘坦谓众曰： 湘土人情，易扰难信，用武士则浸渔百姓，用文士则威略不振；必欲镇静一州，军民足食，无逾老夫。 
现代文：南康王萧宝融的相国府商议要派遣人去执管湘州，但是难以找到合适的人选，西中郎中兵参军刘坦对众人说： 湘州的风土人情不同一般，那里的人容易骚乱，难以取信，如果派一个武将去则会侵扰、鱼肉百姓，而派文官去则威略不够，不容易镇得住。所以，要想使湘州平定安稳，军民丰衣足食，无论派谁去也没有派老夫我去合适。 
English: Nankang King Xiao Baorong's sister-in-law, the State Council, discussed sending someone to administer Hunan, but it was difficult to find a suitable candidate. Liu Tan, a West Zhonglang soldier who joined the army, told the crowd: Hunan's culture and people are different from the average. People there are prone to riots and it is difficult to gain their trust. If a military commander were sent there, he would disturb and harass the people, but if a civilian official were sent there, he would not have enough authority and it would not be easy to live there. Therefore, in order to make Hunan stable and stable, and the military and people well-fed, no matter

古文：乃以坦为辅国长史、长沙太守，行湘州事。
现代文：于是，就任命刘坦为辅国长史、长沙太守，主管湘州事务。
English: As a result, Liu Tan was appointed as the assistant governor of the country and the governor of Changsha, in charge of Hunan affairs.

古文：坦先尝在湘州，多旧恩，迎者属路。
现代文：刘坦曾经在湘州住过，当地有许多得过他好处的老熟人，所以迎接他到来的人挤满了道路。
English: Liu Tan used to live in Hunan, and there are many old acquaintances who have benefited from him, so the roads are crowded with people welcoming his arrival.

古文：下车，选堪事吏分诣十郡，发民运租米三十馀万斛以助荆、雍之军，由是资粮不乏。
现代文：刘坦到任之后，选派能干的吏员分赴十郡，发动民众运送租米三十多万斛，以便资助荆州和雍州的军队，由此粮食物资再也不缺乏了。
English: After Liu Tan took office, he sent competent officials to ten counties to mobilize the people to transport more than 300,000 baht of rent rice in order to finance the armies of Jingzhou and Yongzhou. As a result, there was no longer a shortage of grain and food.

古文：三月，萧衍使邓元起进据南堂西渚，田安之顿城北，王世兴顿曲水故城。
现代文：三月，萧衍派邓元起前去占据南堂西边的长江岸，田安之驻扎在城北，王世兴驻扎在曲水旧城。
English: In March, Xiao Yan sent Deng Yuanzhi to occupy the Yangtze River bank on the west side of the South Hall, Tian Anzhi was stationed in the north of the city, and Wang Shixing was stationed in the old city of Qushui.

古文：丁酉，张冲病卒，骁骑将军薛元嗣与冲子孜及征虏长史江夏内史程茂共守郢城。
现代文：丁酉，张冲病逝，骁骑将军薛元嗣与张冲的儿子张孜，以及征虏长史、江夏内史程茂共同守护郢城。
English: Ding Yao and Zhang Chong died of illness, and the cavalry generals Xue Yuan Ci and Zhang Chong's son Zhang Ze, as well as the conscripts Chang Shi and Jiang Xia Nei Shi Cheng Mao jointly guarded Fucheng.

古文：乙巳，南康王即皇帝位于江陵，改元，大赦，立宗庙、南北郊，州府城门悉依建康宫，置尚书五省，以南郡太守为尹，以萧颖胄为尚书令，萧衍为左仆射，晋安王宝义为司空，庐陵王宝源为车骑将军、开府仪同三司，建安王宝寅为徐州刺史，散骑常侍夏侯详为中领军，冠军将军萧伟为雍州刺史。
现代文：乙巳，南康王在江陵称帝即位，改换年号为中兴，大赦天下，并且建立宗庙、南北郊祭祀天地场所，州府城门则全部依照建康宫的规模而改建，设置了尚书五省，任命南郡太守为尹，萧颖胄为尚书令，萧衍为左仆射，晋安王萧宝义为司空，庐陵王萧宝源为车骑将军、开府仪同三司，建安王萧宝崐寅为徐州刺史，散骑常侍夏侯详为中领军，冠军将军萧伟为雍州刺史。
English: At this time, King Nankang ascended the throne in Jiangling, changed the year name to Zhongxing, granted amnesty to the whole world, and established the ancestral temple, the north and south suburbs, and the places of worship. The gates of the state capital were all rebuilt according to the scale of Jiankang Palace. Five provinces of Shangshu were set up, and the governor of Nang County was appointed as Yin, Xiao Yingqi was appointed as the governor of Shangshu, Xia Yan was appointed as the left footman, the king of Jinan was appointed as Xiao Baoyi, the king of Fuling was appointed as Xiao Baoyuan, the king

古文：丙午，诏封庶人宝卷为涪陵王。
现代文：丙午，萧宝融发出诏书，宣布萧宝卷已经成为庶人，并封他为涪陵王。
English: In the afternoon of the third day, Xiao Baorong issued an edict, announcing that Xiao Baorong had become a commoner, and he was named the King of Fuling.

古文：乙酉，以尚书令萧颖胄行荆州刺史，加萧衍征东大将军、都督征讨诸军事，假黄钺。
现代文：乙酉，萧宝融命令尚书令萧颖胄兼荆州刺史，又加封萧衍征东大将军、都督征讨诸军事，并且授予他皇帝所用的黄钺。
English: At the same time, Xiao Baorong ordered Shang Shuling to appoint Xiao Yingjun and Jingzhou Shishi, and also assigned Xiao Yan to the East General and the Governor to the military, and awarded him the Yellow Ribbon used by the emperor.

古文：时衍次杨口，和帝遣御史中丞宗夬劳军。宁朔将军新野庾域讽夬曰： 黄钺未加，非所以总帅侯伯。 
现代文：当时，萧衍正在杨口，和帝萧宝融派遣御史中丞宗去犒劳军队，宁朔将军、新野人庾域婉言对宗说： 皇上还没有授予萧衍黄钺，这样无法统率各路军队。 
English: At that time, Xiao Yan was in Yangkou, and Emperor Xiao Baorong sent the Imperial Historian Zhongzheng Zong to reward the labor of the army. Ningshuo General, the new wild man Zou Wei Wanyan said to Zong: The emperor has not yet awarded Xiao Yan the Yellow Ribbon, so it is impossible to lead all the armies.

古文：夬返西台，遂有是命。
现代文：宗返回江陵把这一情况告诉了和帝，于是就有了上述对萧衍的任命和授予黄钺一事。
English: Zong returned to Gangneung and told Emperor He about this situation, which led to the above-mentioned appointment of Xiao Yan and the awarding of Huang Qi.

古文：薜元嗣遣军主沈难当帅轻舸数千乱流来战，张惠绍等击擒之。
现代文：薛云嗣派遣军主沈难当率领轻舟数千艘穿越急流，前来交战，张惠绍等人迎战进击，擒获了沈难当。
English: Xue Yunzhi sent the commander Shen Nantang to lead thousands of light boats to cross the rapids and come to fight. Zhang Huishao and others came to fight and captured Shen Nantang.

古文：癸丑，东昏侯以豫州刺史陈伯之为江州刺史、假节、都督前锋诸军事，西击荆、雍。
现代文：癸丑，东昏侯委任豫州刺史陈伯之为江州刺史、假节、都督前锋诸军事，命令他西击荆、雍二州。
English: At that time, the Dongwu marquis appointed Chen Bo, the governor of Yuzhou, as the governor of Jiangzhou, the false festival, and the vanguard of the military, and ordered him to attack Jing and Yong in the west.

古文：夏，四月，萧衍出沔，命王茂、萧颖达等进军逼郢城，薛元嗣不敢出。诸将欲攻之，衍不许。
现代文：夏季，四月，萧衍率部出沔，命令王茂、萧颖达等部十九日进军逼近郢城，薛元嗣据守城内，不敢出战，众将领准备攻城，萧衍不允许。
English: In the summer, in April, Xiao Yan led the troops to march out and ordered Wang Mao, Xiao Yingda and other troops to march into and approach Lucheng on the 19th. Xue Yuan He remained in the city and did not dare to go out to fight. The generals were preparing to attack the city, but Xiao Yan would not allow it.

古文：魏广陵惠王羽通于员外郎冯俊兴妻，夜往，为俊兴所击而匿之；五月，壬子，卒。
现代文：北魏广陵惠王元羽与员外郎冯俊兴的妻子私通，夜里前去寻欢，被冯俊兴堵住痛打了一顿，并且把他藏匿起来，五月，壬子，元羽死去。
English: Northern Wei Guangling Hui Wang Yuan Yu had an illicit affair with the wife of Feng Junxing, a member of the Foreign Minister's family, and went out at night to seek pleasure. Feng Junxing stopped him, beat him severely, and hid him. In May, Ren Zi, Yuan Yu died.

古文：魏主既亲政事，嬖幸擅权，王公希得进见。
现代文：北魏宣武帝元恪亲自执政以来，宠幸之徒们专权，而王公大臣们却很少有进见的机会。
English: Since Emperor Xuanwu of the Northern Wei Dynasty personally took power, the favorites have had exclusive power, while the princes and ministers have rarely had the opportunity to forge ahead.

古文：咸阳王禧意不自安，斋帅刘小苟屡言于禧云，闻天子左右人言欲诛禧。禧益惧，乃与妃兄兼给事黄门侍郎李伯尚、氐王杨集始、杨灵祏、乞伏马居等谋反。
现代文：齐帅刘小苟多次告诉元禧，说他听皇上身边的人讲要杀掉元禧，元禧越发害怕了，于是就与妃子的哥哥担任给事黄门侍郎的李伯尚、氐王杨集始、杨灵、乞伏马居等人一起谋反。
English: Qi commander Liu Xiaogu repeatedly told Yuan Xiyi that he had heard people around the emperor say that they wanted to kill Yuan Xiyi. Yuan Xiyi became more and more afraid, so he plotted a rebellion with Li Boshang, the brother of the concubine who served as the attendant of the Yellow Gate, Yang Jizhi, Yang Ling, Beg Ma Ju and others.

古文：会帝出猎北邙，禧与其党会城西小宅，欲发兵袭帝，使长子通窃入河内举兵相应。
现代文：恰逢宣武帝去北邙打猎，元禧与同党们在城西小宅内集会，准备发兵去袭击宣武帝，并且派长子元通偷偷去河内起兵响应。
English: When Emperor Xuanwu went hunting in Beibei, Yuan Xiyi and his party members gathered in a small house in the west of the city to prepare to send troops to attack Emperor Xuanwu, and secretly sent his eldest son, Yuan Tong, to Hanoi to raise an army in response.

古文：乞伏马居说禧： 还入洛城，勒门闭门，天子必北走桑干，殿下可断河桥，为河南天子。 
现代文：乞伏马居劝说元禧： 我立即回到洛阳城中去，率兵关闭城门，皇上必定会朝北向桑乾逃去，殿下可以把黄河桥拆断，割据一方，做黄河以南的皇帝。 
English: Begged Ma Ju to persuade Yuan Xiyi: I will immediately go back to Luoyang city and close the city gate with my soldiers. The emperor will surely flee north to Sangqian. Your highness can tear down the bridge over the Yellow River and become the emperor south of the Yellow River.

古文：众情前却不壹，禧心更缓，自旦至晡，犹豫不决，遂约不泄而散。
现代文：但是，众人意见不统一，有的主张立即行动，有的主张暂缓一步，元禧心里更不急，从早晨到下午，尚犹豫不决，于是约定谁也不能泄露出去，大伙就散了。
English: However, the opinions of everyone were not unified, some advocated immediate action, others advocated delaying a step, and Yuan Xi was even less anxious. From the morning to the afternoon, he was still hesitant, so he agreed that no one could leak out, and everyone dispersed.

古文：杨集始既出，即驰至北邙告之。
现代文：杨集始刚出来，就立即骑马到北邙向宣武帝报告去了。
English: As soon as Yang Ji came out, he immediately rode to Beilun to report to Emperor Xuanwu.

古文：直寝苻承祖、薛魏孙与禧通谋，是日，帝寝于浮图之阴，魏孙欲弑帝，承祖曰： 吾闻杀天者身当病癞。 
现代文：担任直寝的苻承祖、薛魏孙与元禧合谋，这一天，宣武帝元恪在佛塔底下的阴凉处睡眠，薛魏孙将要杀死元恪，苻承祖却对他说： 我听说杀皇帝的人身体要得癞疮。 
English: On this day, Emperor Xuanwu was sleeping in the shade under the pagoda. Xue Wison was going to kill him, but Emperor Xuanwu said to him, "I heard that those who kill the emperor will get scabies."

古文：魏孙乃止。
现代文：于是，薛魏孙就没有下手。
English: As a result, Xue Weishun did not take action.

古文：俄而帝寤，集始亦至。
现代文：不一会儿，元恪睡醒了，杨集始也赶到了，向他报告了元禧的阴谋。
English: Not long after, Yuan Ke woke up, and Yang Jizhi also arrived and reported the plot of the first anniversary to him.

古文：帝左右皆四出逐禽，直卫无几，仓猝不知所出。
现代文：宣武帝左右的人都四处出动去追逐禽兽去了，身边没有几个卫士，所以仓猝之间不知如何是好。
English: The people around Emperor Xuanwu went out to chase the animals, and there were not many guards around, so they did not know what to do in a hurry.

古文：左中郎将于忠曰： 臣父领军留守京城，计防遏有备，必无所虑。 
现代文：这时，左中郎将于忠对宣武帝说道： 我父亲领军于烈留守在京城为了应付突然事变，必有所防备，所以一定不会有什么担忧的。 
English: At this time, Zuochungro said to Emperor Xuanwu: My father led the army to stay in the capital in order to deal with sudden events, he must be prepared, so there must be no worries.

古文：帝遣忠驰骑观之，于烈已分兵严备，使忠还奏曰： 臣虽老，心力犹可用。
现代文：宣武帝马上派遣于忠骑马去京城观察情况，到后一看，见于烈已经分布兵力，严加守备，做好了应急措施。于烈让于忠回去奏告宣武帝，说： 我虽然年纪老了，但是心力还够用。
English: Emperor Xuanwu immediately dispatched Yu Zhong on horseback to observe the situation in the capital city. When he arrived, he saw that Yu Liang had already distributed troops, maintained a strict defense, and prepared emergency measures. Yu Liang let Yu Zhong go back to report to Emperor Xuanwu, saying: Although I am old, my heart is still strong enough.

古文：此属猖狂，不足为虑，愿陛下清跸徐还，以安物望。 
现代文：元禧这帮家伙虽然猖狂，但是完全不足为虑，希望陛下收拾车驾慢慢返宫，以便安定人心。
English: Although the gang of guys at the New Year's Eve party were rampant, they were completely unconcerned. I hope that His Majesty will pack up his car and drive slowly back to the palace in order to stabilize people's minds.

古文：帝甚悦，自华林园还宫，抚于忠之背曰： 卿差强人意！ 
现代文：宣武帝听后喜悦万分，从华林园回到宫中，抚摸着于忠的后背说道： 您是比较令我满意的。 
English: Emperor Xuanwu was overjoyed after listening to the story. He returned to the palace from the Hualing Garden, stroked Yu Zhong's back and said, "You are more satisfying to me."

古文：禧不知事露，与姬妾及左右宿洪池别墅，遣刘小苟奉启，云检行田收。
现代文：元禧还不知道事情已经败露，同姬妾以及身边的人住宿在洪池别墅里，而派遣刘小苟去向元恪启告，说自己在巡视检查田野收割情况。
English: Yuanxi did not yet know that the matter had been exposed. He sent Liu Xiaogu to inform Yuanxi that he was inspecting the harvest situation in the fields, while his concubine and people around him stayed in the Hongchi Villa.

古文：小苟至北邙，已逢军人，怪小苟赤衣，欲杀之。
现代文：刘小苟到了北邙，已经遇上了军人，军人们见刘小苟穿着红衣服，觉得他不对劲，要杀他。
English: When Liu Xiaoguo arrived in Beilun, he had already met soldiers. When the soldiers saw Liu Xiaoguo wearing red clothes, they thought there was something wrong with him and wanted to kill him.

古文：小苟困迫，言欲告反，乃缓之。
现代文：刘小苟于困迫之中灵机一动，说自己要去报告元禧谋反之事，军人们才缓而未杀他。
English: Liu Xiaogu had a stroke of genius in the midst of his predicament, saying that he was going to report the plot to overthrow the Yuan Dynasty, but the soldiers did not kill him.

古文：或谓禧曰： 殿下集众图事，见意而停，恐必漏泄，今夕何宜自宽！ 
现代文：有人对元禧说： 殿下召集众人图谋大事，事情已经挑明了，但是却中途而止，恐怕必定会有所泄露，今天晚上怎么可以如此宽心自在呢？ 
English: Someone said to Yuan Xiyi, "Your highness has gathered everyone together to plan a big event. The matter has been clarified, but it has stopped halfway. I'm afraid something will inevitably be leaked. How can you be so relaxed tonight?"

古文：禧曰： 吾有此身，应知自惜，岂待人言！ 
现代文：元禧显得有些不耐烦，回答说： 我的身子为自己所有，应该知道如何爱惜，难道还用得着别人来提醒吗？ 
English: Yuan Xi looked a little impatient and replied: My body is my own, I should know how to cherish it. Do I really need to be reminded by others?

古文：又曰： 殿下长子已济河，两不相知，岂不可虑！ 
现代文：这人又对他说： 殿下的长子已经渡过黄河了，但现在我们这里又停止行动了，这样互相不知情，难道不值得忧虑吗？ 
English: The man also said to him, "Your Highness's eldest son has already crossed the Yellow River, but now that we have stopped moving here, and we don't know each other, isn't it worth worrying about?

古文：禧曰： 吾已遣人追之，计今应还。 
现代文：元禧回答说： 我已经派人去追他去了，估计现在应该回来了。 
English: Yuan Xi replied, "I have already sent someone to chase him, so I guess he should be back by now."

古文：时通已入河内，列兵仗，放囚徒矣。
现代文：这时元通已经到了河内，并且布置好兵力武器，放出了囚徒，开始行动了。
English: At this time, Motonori had already arrived in Hanoi, and he had laid out the troops' weapons, released the prisoners, and begun to act.

古文：于烈遣直阁叔孙侯将虎贲三百人收禧。
现代文：于烈派遣直叔孙侯率领虎贲三百名去抓捕元禧，元禧知道之后，从洪池东南逃跑，跟随的僮仆不过几人。
English: Yu Liang sent his uncle Sun Hou and 300 men led by Tigress to capture Yuan Xiyi. After Yuan Xiyi found out, he fled from the southeast of Hongchi with only a few retainers.

古文：禧闻之，自洪池东南走，僮仆不过数人，济洛，至柏谷坞，追兵至，擒之，送华林都亭。
现代文：元禧渡过了洛水，到达柏谷坞时，后面的追兵也赶上来了，捉住了他，押送到华林都亭。
English: When Yuan Xi crossed Luoshui and arrived at the dock in Kashiwa Valley, the pursuing soldiers also caught up with him, caught him and escorted him to Huarintu Pavilion.

古文：帝面诘其反状，壬戌，赐死于私第。
现代文：宣武帝元恪当面诘问了元禧谋反经过，于壬戌，赐元禧死于他本人的府中。
English: Emperor Xuanwu questioned Yuan Xiyi about the plot in person, and Yuan Xiyi died in his own palace.

古文：同谋伏诛者十馀人，诸子皆绝属籍，微给赀产、奴婢，自馀家财悉分赐高肇及赵修之家，其馀赐内外百官，逮于流外，多者百馀匹，下至十匹。
现代文：元禧的同谋伏法被诛的有十多人，他的几个儿子都从皇族的名册中除去，留给他们少量的财产和奴婢，在此以外的部分家产赏赐给高肇以及赵，其余的分赏给朝廷内外百官，甚至不入品的候补官员也得到了一些赏赐，多的有绢帛一百多匹，少的则十匹。
English: There were more than ten people who were executed as accomplices in the plot to overthrow the Yuan Dynasty. Several of his sons were removed from the list of members of the imperial family, leaving them with a small amount of property and slaves. In addition, part of the family property was awarded to Gaozhao and Zhao, and the rest of the reward was distributed to hundreds of officials inside and outside the imperial court. Even the alternate officials who did not enter the prize also received some rewards, the most was more than a hundred horses, and the least was ten horses.

古文：禧诸子乏衣食，独彭城王屡赈给之。
现代文：元禧的儿子们缺衣少食，只有彭城王元勰屡屡接济他们。
English: The sons of Yuanxi were short of clothes and food, and only Pengcheng Wang Yuanjun repeatedly helped them.

古文：河内太守陆琇闻禧败，斩送禧子通首。
现代文：河内太守陆闻知元禧谋反失败，便斩了元禧的儿子元通，把首级送往朝廷。
English: When Lu Wen, the governor of Hanoi, learned that Yuan Xie's counterattack had failed, he beheaded Yuan Xie's son, Yuan Tong, and sent the head to the imperial court.

古文：魏朝以琇于禧未败之前不收捕通，责其通情，征诣廷尉，死狱中。
现代文：但是，朝廷却认为陆在元禧没有失败之前不拘捕元通，指责他与元通串通合谋，把他征召到京城，经廷尉审理，最后死在狱中。
English: However, the imperial court believed that Lu did not arrest Mototsune before the failure of the first anniversary, accused him of colluding with Mototsune, conscripted him to Beijing, tried him as a court lieutenant, and finally died in prison.

古文：帝以禧无故而反，由是益疏忌宗室。
现代文：宣武帝元恪由于元禧无缘无故而谋反，因此越发疏远、猜忌宗室成员了。
English: Emperor Xuanwu and Empress Yuan Ke became increasingly estranged and suspicious of the members of the imperial family because Yuan Xie plotted a rebellion for no reason.

古文：巴西太守鲁休烈、巴东太守萧惠训不从萧颖胄之命；惠训遣子璝将兵击颖胄，颖胄，遣汶阳太守刘孝庆屯峡口，与巴东太守任漾之等拒之。
现代文：南齐巴西太守鲁休烈、巴东太守萧惠训不听从萧颖胄的命令，萧惠训还派遣自己的儿子萧带兵去袭击萧颖胄，萧颖胄派汶阳太守刘孝庆驻扎峡口，同巴东太守任漾之等人一起抵挡萧。
English: Lu Xuling, the governor-general of Brazil in South Qi, and Xiao Huixun, the governor-general of East Batan, disobeyed Xiao Yingtao's orders. Xiao Huixun also sent his son Xiao to attack Xiao Yingtao, and Xiao Yingtao sent Liu Xiaoqing, the governor-general of Wenyang, to station at the mouth of the gorge to resist Xiao together with the governor-general of East Batan, Ren Shizhi and others.

古文：东昏侯遣军主吴子阳、陈虎牙等十三军救郢州，进屯巴口。
现代文：东昏侯派遣军主吴子阳、陈虎牙等十三军去援救郢城，这些军队进驻了巴口。
English: Dongdimou sent 13 armies led by Wu Ziyang and Chen Hoga to rescue Lucheng. These armies were stationed in Bakou.

古文：虎牙，伯之之子也。
现代文：陈虎牙是陈伯之的儿子。
English: Chen Huya is the son of Chen Bozhi.

古文：六月，西台遣卫尉席阐文劳萧衍军，赍萧颖胄等议谓衍曰： 今顿兵两岸，不并军围郢，定西阳、武昌，取江州，此机已失；莫若请救于魏，与北连和，犹为上策。 
现代文：六月，江陵方面派遣卫尉席阐文去犒劳萧衍的军队，并且把萧颖胄等人的意见转达于萧衍： 如今您把兵力停在汉口两岸，而不合并诸军围攻郢城，平定西阳、武昌，夺取江州。这一机会已经失去了，所以不如求救于北魏，与他们联合起来，尚且不失为上策。 
English: In June, the Gangneung side sent an envoy to Xiao Yan's army, and conveyed the opinions of Xiao Yingtao and others to Xiao Yan: Now you have stopped your forces on both sides of Hankou, without joining forces to besiege Lucheng, pacify Xiyang and Wuchang, and seize Jiangzhou. This opportunity has been lost, so it is better to seek help from the Northern Wei Dynasty and unite with them, which is still the best strategy.

古文：衍曰： 汉口路通荆、雍，控引秦、梁，粮运资储，仰引气息；所以兵压汉口，连结数州。
现代文：萧衍回答道： 汉口路通荆州、雍州，控制秦州、梁州，一切粮草物资的运输，全凭这里通过，所以我才决定兵压汉口，连结数州。
English: Xiao Yan replied: Hankou Road connects Jingzhou and Yongzhou, controls Qinzhou and Liangzhou, and all grain and grass materials are transported through here, so I decided to militarily suppress Hankou and connect several states.

古文：今若并军围郢，又分兵前进，鲁山必阻沔路，扼吾咽喉；若粮运不通，自然离散，何谓持久？
现代文：现在如果合并各路军马围攻郢城，并且分兵前进，那么鲁山敌军必定要阻断沔水水路，这等于是扼住了我们的咽喉。如果水路被断，那么粮草就难以运到，军队缺粮，自然会发生逃亡离散，这样的话，又如何能持久得了呢？
English: Now, if the combined armies and horses of all directions besiege Lushan, and the detachments advance, then the enemy army of Lushan will certainly block the waterway of Lushan, which is tantamount to strangling our throats. If the waterway is broken, then the grain and grass will be difficult to transport, the army will be short of grain, and the escape and dispersion will naturally occur. In such a case, how can it be sustained?

古文：邓元起近欲以三千兵往取寻阳，彼若欢然知机，一说士足矣；脱距王师，固非三千兵所能下也。进退无据，未见其可。
现代文：邓元起近来想带三千兵力去攻取寻阳，寻阳那边如果能知道事态之发展，派一个说客去就够了；如果要抗拒我们的军队，那可远非三千兵就可以攻取得下来的，而到时必然会进退无所依据，所以不见得可行。
English: Deng Yuanzhi recently wanted to take three thousand soldiers to attack Xuanyang. If Xuanyang could know the development of the situation, it would be enough to send a lobbyist there; if they want to resist our army, it is far from three thousand soldiers that can attack and take it down, and at that time there will inevitably be no basis for advance and retreat, so it is not feasible.

古文：西阳、武昌，取之即得；然既得之后，即应镇守。
现代文：西阳和武昌，如果要占取，很快就可以攻下来的。然而，既然攻下来了，就应当驻兵镇守。
English: If Xiyang and Wuchang are to be occupied, they can be attacked quickly. However, since they have been attacked, they should be garrisoned.

古文：欲守两城，不减万人，粮储称是，卒无所出。
现代文：但是，要想守住这两座城市，少于一万人是不行的，这就必须要有相应的粮食物资供应，但是仓促之下难以筹措到的。
English: However, in order to hold the two cities, it is not possible to have less than ten thousand people. This requires a corresponding supply of grain and food, which is difficult to raise in a hurry.

古文：脱东军有上者，以万人攻一城，两城势不得相救，若我分军应援，则首尾俱弱；如其不遣，孤城必陷，一城既没，诸城相次土崩，天下大事去矣。
现代文：如果东边军队前来，以一万人攻打这两座城，而两城之间势必不能互相援救，如果我分派军队去援救，则首尾兵力俱将削弱；如果不派遣的话，则孤城必然陷入敌手，只要一座城丢失了，其它城也会相继土崩瓦解，如此则大势已去，谋求天下之大业也就宣告失败了。
English: If an army from the east comes and attacks the two cities with ten thousand men, the two cities will not be able to rescue each other. If I send an army to rescue, the strength of the army will be weakened; if I do not send, the lone city will inevitably fall into the hands of the enemy. As long as one city is lost, the other cities will collapse one after another. In this way, the general trend has gone, and the pursuit of the great cause of the world will be declared a failure.

古文：若郢州既拔，席卷沿流，西阳、武昌自然风靡。
现代文：如果在攻下郢州之后，沿江席卷而进，则西阳和武昌自然望风而披靡。
English: If, after conquering Zhangzhou, they sweep along the river, then Xiyang and Wuchang will naturally be ahead of the wind and invincible.

古文：何遽分兵散众，自贻忧患乎！
现代文：所以，又何需眼下分兵散众去攻打，以致自己给自己造成忧患呢？
English: Therefore, why is it necessary for a scattered group of soldiers to attack at this time, so as to cause trouble for themselves?

古文：且丈夫举事欲清天步，况拥数州之兵以诛群小，悬河注火，奚有不灭！
现代文：而且，大丈夫举事是为了清理出通向朝廷之路，何况我们拥有数州的兵力来诛斩一帮小人，好比是悬河注火，哪里有不能熄灭的道理呢？
English: What's more, it's a good thing to do in order to clear the path to the imperial court. Besides, we have the military power of several states to kill a bunch of villains. It's like pouring fire into a river. Is there any reason why it can't be extinguished?

古文：岂容北面请救戎狄，以示弱于天下！
现代文：所以，岂能求救于北方的戎狄，以致示弱于天下呢？
English: Shall they therefore cry for help to the army of the north, that they may be delivered from the oppression of the land?

古文：彼未必能信，徒取丑声，此乃下计，何谓上策！
现代文：他们也未必可以信任，求救于他们，我们只能是白白地落下千丑坏的名声，这实在是下策，怎么能说是上策呢？
English: They may not be able to trust them, to turn to them for help, we can only fall into a thousand ugly reputations in vain, this is really the next step, how can it be said to be the best?

古文：卿为我辈白镇军： 前途攻取，但以见付，事在目中，无患不捷，但借镇军靖镇之耳。 
现代文：请您替我们转告镇军将军萧颖胄：下一步的攻取之事，只管交给我负责好了，事情明摆在那里，我完全清楚该如何行动，不要担心不能取胜，只是要借镇军将军之威名来镇定军心罢了。 
English: Please tell the general of the town army, Xiao Yingyao, for us: just let me be responsible for the next step of the attack, the matter is clearly there, I know exactly how to act, don't worry about not being able to win, just use the prestige of the general of the town army to calm the military heart.

古文：吴子阳等进军武口。衍命军主梁天惠等屯渔湖城，唐修期等屯白阳垒，夹岸待之。
现代文：吴子阳等人进军武口，萧衍命令军主梁天惠等人驻兵渔湖城，又命令唐期等人驻兵白阳垒，在两岸严阵以待，准备夹击。
English: Wu Ziyang and others marched into Wukou, and Xiao Yan ordered the commander of the army, Liang Tianhui and others, to garrison Yuhu City, and ordered the Tang Dynasty and others to garrison Baiyang Fort, to wait in a tight line on both sides of the strait, and prepare for a pincer attack.

古文：子阳进军加湖，去郢三十里，傍山带水，筑垒自固。
现代文：吴子阳把军队开进加湖，他在离郢城三十里远近，选择地理形势依山傍水之处修筑战垒，自我固守。
English: Wu Ziyang led the army into Jiahu. He was thirty miles away from Lucheng. He chose the geographical situation to build a fortress on the side of the mountain by the water, and defended himself.

古文：子阳举烽，城内亦举火应之；而内外各自保，不能相救。
现代文：吴子阳点燃烽火，郢城之内也点火相应，但是城内与城外只愿各自保命，不能互相援救。
English: Wu Ziyang lit a bonfire, and the people inside the city also lit a bonfire accordingly, but the people inside and outside the city only wanted to save their own lives, and could not help each other.

古文：会房僧寄病卒，众复推助防张乐祖代守鲁山。
现代文：正在这时，房僧寄病死，众人又推选原来协助房僧寄守城的孙乐祖代替他防守鲁山。
English: Just at this time, the house monk died of illness, and the people elected Sun Lezu, who had originally assisted the house monk in guarding the city, to defend Luzhan instead of him.

古文：萧颖胄之初起也，弟颖孚自建康发，庐陵民修灵祏为之聚兵，得二千人，袭房陵，克之，内史谢奔豫章。
现代文：萧颖胄刚开始起兵之时，他的弟弟萧颖孚从建康逃出，庐陵百姓灵为他召集兵员，得到两千人，去袭击庐陵，攻下了庐陵，内史谢跑到了豫章。
English: When Xiao Yinghu first began to raise an army, his younger brother Xiao Yingfu escaped from Jiankang. The Fuling people's spirit gathered soldiers for him, got two thousand people, attacked Fuling, captured Fuling, and Neishi Xie ran to Yuzhang.

古文：颖胄遣宁朔将军范僧简自湘州赴之，僧简拔安成，颖胄以僧简为安成太守，以颖孚为庐陵内史。
现代文：萧颖胄派遣宁朔将军范僧简从湘州赶赴豫章，范僧简攻下了安成，萧颖胄任命范僧简为安成太守，任命萧颖孚为庐陵内史。
English: Xiao Yingqian sent the Ningshuo general Fan Sojan from Hunan to Yuanzhang, Fan Sojan conquered Ancheng, Xiao Yingqian appointed Fan Sojan as the governor of Ancheng, and appointed Xiao Yingfu as the historian of the tomb.

古文：东昏侯遣军主刘希祖将三千人击之，南康太守王丹以郡应希祖。
现代文：东昏侯派遣军主刘希祖率领三千人攻击萧颖孚，南康太守王丹率郡兵响应刘希祖。
English: Dongdoumou sent commander Liu Xizou with 3,000 men to attack Xiao Yingfu, while Nankang's governor Wang Dan led the county's soldiers to respond to Liu Xizou.

古文：颖孚败，奔长沙，寻病卒；谢复还郡。
现代文：萧颖孚战败，跑到长沙，很快就病死了，谢又回到了郡中。
English: Defeated, Xiao Yingfu fled to Changsha, where he soon fell ill and died. Xie then returned to Guanzhong.

古文：希祖攻拔安成，杀范僧简，东昏侯以希祖为安成内史。
现代文：刘希祖又去攻打安成，杀了范僧简，东昏侯任命刘希祖为安成内史。
English: Liu Xizou also went to attack Ancheng, killed Fan Zengjian, and Dongwu Hou appointed Liu Xizou as Ancheng's Inner Historian.

古文：修灵祏复合馀众攻谢，败走。
现代文：灵重新集合剩余的人马攻打谢，谢败逃而去。
English: Ling regrouped the remaining men and horses to attack Xie, but Xie was defeated and fled.

古文：东昏侯作芳乐苑，山石皆涂以五采。
现代文：东昏侯修建了芳乐苑，山石全部涂上五彩之色。
English: Dongdimou built Fangle Garden, and the mountains and rocks were all painted in multicolored colors.

古文：望民家有好树、美竹，则毁墙撤屋而徙之，时方盛暑，随即枯萎，朝暮相继。
现代文：他看见民众家有好树和美竹，就命人毁掉人家的院墙，拆掉房屋，把这树和竹子移走，重新栽在芳乐苑中。
English: When he saw that people's homes had good trees and beautiful bamboo, he ordered people to destroy the courtyard walls of people's homes, demolish the houses, remove the trees and bamboo, and replant them in the garden.

古文：又于苑中立市，使宫人、宦者共为裨贩，以潘贵妃为市令，东昏侯自为市录事，小有得失，妃则与杖；乃敕虎贲不得进大荆、实中荻。
现代文：当时正值盛暑，栽上不久就枯萎了，于是另换，所以移栽树、竹的人就从早到晚忙个不停。东昏侯又在芳乐苑中建立了一个集市，让宫人、宦官们充当小贩，让潘贵妃做市令，他自己则自任集市的录事，如果谁稍有过失，潘贵妃就把其交给卫士杖责。于是，东昏侯命令虎贲们打时不得使用杖和实芯的荻杆。
English: At that time, it was in the heat of the day, and soon after planting, the crane withered and was replaced, so the people who transplanted the trees and bamboo were busy from morning to night. Dongwu Hou also established a bazaar in the Fangle Garden, letting the courtiers and eunuchs act as hawkers, letting Pan Guifei be the mayor, and he himself acting as the recorder of the bazaar. If anyone made a slight mistake, Pan Guifei would give it to the guard's staff. Therefore, Dongwu Hou ordered the vultures not to use the staff and the solid rod when playing.

古文：又开渠立埭，身自引船，或坐而屠肉。
现代文：东昏侯又命令人挖渠筑坝，自己亲自驾船，或者坐下作屠夫卖肉。
English: Dongdimou also ordered people to dig a canal to build a dam, and he himself drove a boat, or sat down as a butcher to sell meat.

古文：又好巫觋，左右硃光尚诈云见鬼。
现代文：东昏侯又喜好巫师，他的身边人朱光尚诈称说自己能看见鬼。
English: Dong Douhou also liked wizards, and his sidekick Zhu Guang still falsely claimed that he could see ghosts.

古文：东昏入乐游苑，人马忽惊，以问光尚，对曰： 向见先帝大嗔，不许数出。 
现代文：一次，东昏侯进入东游苑，人马突然受惊，就问朱光尚是怎么回事，朱光尚回答说： 前次我曾看见先帝非常生气，不许圣上频繁出游。 
English: On one occasion, when Dong Dou Hou entered Dong Youyuan, people were suddenly frightened and asked Zhu Guang Shang what was going on. Zhu Guang Shang replied: The last time I saw the former emperor, he was very angry and did not allow the saint to travel frequently.

古文：东昏大怒，拔刀与光尚寻之。
现代文：东昏侯听了勃然大怒，拔出刀子，同朱光尚一起寻找明帝的鬼魂。
English: Hearing this, Dongdimhou flew into a rage, pulled out a knife, and together with Zhu Guangshan searched for the ghost of Emperor Ming.

古文：既不见，乃缚菰为高宗形，北向斩之，县首苑门。
现代文：找了半天没有找着，东昏侯又用菰草扎成明帝的形状，然后用刀斩下草人的脑袋，把它悬挂在东游苑的门上。
English: After searching for half a day, he couldn't find it. Dongdimou used a reed to make the shape of Emperor Ming, and then cut off the head of the straw man with a knife and hung it on the door of the East Garden.

古文：崔慧景之败也，巴陵王昭胄、永新侯昭颖出投台军，各以王侯还第，心不自安。
现代文：崔慧景失败之后，巴陵王萧昭胄、永新侯萧昭颖投降了朝廷军队，后来各自以王侯身份回到府第，然而心中到底不能安然。
English: After the defeat of Cui Huijing, Xiao Zhaoying, the King of Baling, and Xiao Zhaoying, the Prince of Yongxin, surrendered to the imperial army. Later, they each returned to the capital as princes, but they could not be at peace in their hearts.

古文：竟陵王子良故防阁桑偃为梅虫儿军副，与前巴西太守萧寅谋立昭胄，昭胄许事克用寅为尚书左仆射、护军。
现代文：竟陵王萧子良过去的防桑偃现在是梅虫儿的军副，他与从前的巴西太守萧寅合谋，要立萧昭胄为帝，萧昭胄许诺事成之后让萧寅做尚书左仆射和护军。
English: In fact, Xiao Ziliang, the King of Mausoleums, who used to guard against mulberry moths, is now Meizhu's deputy. He conspired with Xiao Yin, the former governor of Brazil, to establish Xiao Zhaohui as emperor. Xiao Zhaohui promised to let Xiao Yin be Shangshu's right-hand man and bodyguard.

古文：时军主胡松将兵屯新亭，寅遣人说之曰： 须昏人出，寅等将兵奉昭胄入台，闭城号令，昏人必还就将军；但闭垒不应，则三公不足得也。 
现代文：这时，军主胡松率兵屯驻在新亭，萧寅派人去游说他： 等待这个昏君出外的机会，萧寅等人带兵奉送萧昭胄进入宫中，然后关闭城门，发号施令，宣布登基。如此一来，昏君必然来投奔将军，您只管关闭寨垒不理他。
English: At this time, the military commander Hu Song and his soldiers were stationed in Xinting, and Xiao Ying sent someone to lobby him: "Wait for the opportunity for this dim prince to leave the country. Xiao Ying and others will lead soldiers to escort Xiao Zhaohui into the palace, then close the city gate, issue orders, and announce his accession to the throne. In this way, the dim prince will inevitably come to the general, you just close the fortifications and ignore him.

古文：松许诺。会东昏新作芳乐苑，经月不出游。
现代文：只要您按此办理，那么到时位到三公是不在话下的。 
English: As long as you follow this procedure, you will be able to make it to San Gong on time.

古文：偃等议募健儿百馀人，从万春门入，突取之，昭胄以为不可。
现代文：胡松答应了。恰在这时，东昏侯刚建成芳乐苑，整日在苑中玩嬉，好几个月不出外游赏。桑偃等人就在一起商议，准备招募壮士一百多人，让他们从万春门进去，突然地去把东昏侯收拾掉，萧昭胄认为这样不可行。
English: Hu Song agreed. It was at this time that Dong Dumo, who had just built Fang Le Yuan, played all day in the garden and did not go out to enjoy it for months. Mulberry and others discussed together and prepared to recruit more than a hundred strong men, let them enter from the Spring Gate, and suddenly go and clean up Dong Dumo. Xiao Zhaojun thought that this was not feasible.

古文：偃同党王山沙虑事久无成，以事告御刀徐僧重。
现代文：桑偃的同党王山沙考虑事情拖的太久了不会成功，就去把这件事报告了御刀徐僧重。
English: Mulberry's fellow party member Wang Sansha considered that the matter had been delayed for too long and would not be successful, so he went to report the matter to the Emperor.

古文：寅遣人杀山沙于路，吏于麝得其事。昭胄兄弟与偃等皆伏诛。
现代文：萧寅派人在路上刺杀了王山沙，但是官吏在王山沙的香袋中发现了写有萧照胄等人秘密计划的纸条，萧昭胄兄弟以及桑偃等人都伏法被诛。
English: Xiao Yin sent someone to assassinate Wang Shansha on the road, but the officials found a piece of paper with a secret plan written by Xiao Zhaohui and others in Wang Shansha's incense bag. Xiao Zhaohui's brothers and Mulberry and others were all arrested.

古文：雍州刺史张欣泰与弟前始安内史欣时，密谋结胡松及前南谯太守王灵秀、直阁将军鸿选等诛诸嬖幸，废东昏。
现代文：雍州刺史张欣泰同其弟前始安内史张欣时密谋策划，想勾结胡松以及从前的南谯太守王灵秀、直将军鸿选等人诛杀东昏侯身边的宠幸之徒，并且废去东昏侯。
English: The Yongzhou assassin Zhang Xintai and his brother, the former Xi'an insider Zhang Xintai, plotted and planned to collude with Hu Song and the former Southern Eunuch Wang Lingxiu, General Hung Xuan, and others to kill the favored ones around Dong Dou, and to abolish Dong Dou.

古文：东昏遣中书舍人冯元嗣监军救郢；秋，七月，甲午，茹法珍、梅虫儿及太子右率李居士、制局监杨明泰送之于中兴堂，欣泰等使人怀刀于座斫元嗣，头坠果柈中，又斫明泰，破其腹；虫儿伤数疮，手指皆堕；居士、法珍等散走还台。
现代文：东昏侯派遣中书舍人冯元嗣监督军队去援救郢城。秋季，七月甲午，茹法珍、梅虫儿以及太子右率李居士、制局监杨明泰在中兴堂为冯元嗣送行，张欣泰等派人怀中藏刀在座席上砍杀了冯元嗣，冯元嗣的脑袋坠落在装水果的盘子中，接着又砍向杨明泰，剖破了他的腹部，梅虫儿几处中伤，手指头全被砍掉，李居士、茹法珍等人则往宫中逃去。
English: In the autumn, on the afternoon of July 1st, Zhu Fazhen, Meizhuer, Li Guosi, the right-hand man of the prince, and Yang Mingtai, the inspector of the Bureau of Engraving and Printing, escorted Feng Yuanci in Zhongxing Hall. Zhang Xintai and others sent people to cut down Feng Yuanci with a hidden knife in their arms on the seat. Feng Yuanci's head fell into a plate containing fruit, and then they cut Yang Mingtai's abdomen. Meizhuer was slandered in several places and his fingers were cut off. Li Guosi, Ru Fazhen and others fled to the palace

古文：灵秀诣石头迎建康王宝寅，帅城中将吏见力，去车轮，载宝寅，文武数百唱警跸，向台城，百姓数千人皆空手随之。
现代文：王灵秀去石头迎接建安王萧宝寅，他率领着城中的将吏们，以便展示兵力，又把车子去掉车轮，让萧宝寅崐坐在上面，命人抬着前行，文武官员数百名在前头喝唱开道，浩浩荡荡地向朝廷走去，数千名老百姓全都空着双手跟随在后面。
English: Wang Lingxiu went to the stone to meet Jianan Wang Xiao Baoying. He led the generals in the city to demonstrate the strength of the army. He also removed the wheels from the car, let Xiao Baoying sit on it, and carried the messenger forward. Hundreds of civil and military officials sang and chanted in front of them, and walked towards the court in a grand manner. Thousands of ordinary people all followed behind with empty hands.

古文：欣泰闻事作，驰马入宫，冀法珍等在外，东昏尽以城中处分见委，表里相应。
现代文：张欣泰闻知已经开始行动了，急忙骑马入宫，希望乘茹法珍等人在外面之机，东昏侯能把城中布置防御的事情完全委托给他自己，以便里外相应。
English: Hearing that Zhang Xintai had already begun to act, he hurriedly rode into the palace on horseback, hoping that by taking advantage of the opportunity of Zhu Fazhen and others outside, Dongdimhou could completely entrust the arrangement of defense in the city to himself, so that the inside and outside would be corresponding.

古文：既而法珍得返，处分闭门上仗，不配欣泰兵，鸿选在殿内亦不敢发。
现代文：但是，不久茹法珍就从中兴堂逃回来了，他命令人关闭城门，配兵守护，但是没有发给张欣泰武器，鸿选在殿内也不敢行动。
English: However, not long after, Ru Fazhen escaped from Zhongxing Hall and returned. He ordered the gate to be closed and assigned soldiers to guard it, but Zhang Xintai was not issued weapons, and Hongxuan did not dare to act inside the hall.

古文：宝寅去杜姥宅，日已瞑，城门闭。
现代文：萧宝寅到达杜姥宅之时，天已经黑了，城门也已经关闭了。
English: By the time Xiao Baoying arrived at Du Baobao's house, it was already dark and the gate was closed.

古文：城上人射外人，外人弃宝寅溃去。
现代文：城门的守兵发箭射外面的人，这伙人就把萧宝寅扔下溃逃而去。
English: The guards at the gate shot arrows at the people outside, and the group threw Xiao Baoying down and ran away.

古文：宝寅亦逃，三日，乃戎服诣草市尉，尉驰以启东昏。东昏召宝寅入宫问之，宝寅涕泣称： 尔日不知何人逼使上车，仍将去，制不自由。 
现代文：萧宝寅也逃走了，三天之后，方才穿着武服来到草市尉司自首，草市尉驰马去报告东昏侯，东昏侯召萧宝寅进宫讯问他，萧宝寅痛哭流涕地说： 那天不知道什么人逼使我上车，就把我弄去了，实在是身不由己。 
English: Xiao Baoying also ran away. Three days later, he came in his military uniform to surrender to Cao Shijie. Cao Shijie galloped to report to Dong Wou. Dong Wou called Xiao Baoying into the palace to interrogate him. Xiao Baoying said with tears streaming down his face, "I don't know who forced me into the car that day and took me away. I really couldn't help myself."

古文：东昏笑，复其爵位。
现代文：东昏侯听得笑了，没有为难萧宝寅，恢复了他的爵位。
English: Dongdimou laughed to hear this, and Baoying did not hesitate to restore his title.

古文：张欣泰等事觉，与胡松皆伏诛。
现代文：张欣泰等人在事情败露之后，同胡松一起伏法被诛。
English: After the affair was exposed, Zhang Xintai and others were arrested together with Hu Song.

古文：萧衍使征虏将军王茂、军主曹仲宗等乘水涨以舟师袭加湖，鼓噪攻之。
现代文：萧衍命令征虏将军王茂、军主曹仲宗等人乘水涨而以水军去袭击加湖，击鼓呼叫进攻。
English: Xiao Yan ordered the conscript general Wang Mao, the military commander Cao Zhongzong and others to attack Jiahu with the navy by taking advantage of the rising water, beating drums and calling for an attack.

古文：丁酉，加湖溃，吴子阳等走免，将士杀溺死者万计，俘其馀众而还。
现代文：丁酉，加湖方面溃败，吴子阳等人逃走免死，将士被杀或被淹死的以万计数，王茂、曹仲宗的水军俘虏了吴子阳的残余兵将，凯旋而归。
English: Dingyao and Jiahu were defeated, Wu Ziyang and others escaped death, and tens of thousands of soldiers were killed or drowned. Wang Mao and Cao Zhongzong's naval forces captured Wu Ziyang's remaining soldiers and returned in triumph.

古文：于是郢、鲁二城相视夺气。
现代文：加湖失守之后，郢城和鲁山的守军顿时士气大泄。
English: As a result, the two cities of Fucheng and Lushan lost their vitality.

古文：乙巳，柔然犯魏边。
现代文：乙巳，柔然国进犯北魏边境。
English: Suddenly, the State of Juran invaded the Northern Wei border.

古文：鲁山乏粮，军人于矶头捕细鱼供食，密治轻船，将奔夏口，萧衍遣偏军断其走路。
现代文：鲁山缺乏粮食，军人们在矶头捕捞小鱼充当食物，并且秘密地准备好轻便的船只，将要逃奔夏口。萧衍知道城中守军要逃跑，便派遣一支部队断了他们的逃路。
English: Lushan was short of food, so the soldiers fished for small fish to serve as food in Keotou, and secretly prepared light boats to flee to Xiakou. Xiao Yan knew that the defenders in the city were about to flee, so he sent a force to cut off their escape route.

古文：丁巳，孙乐祖窘迫，以城降。
现代文：丁巳，孙乐祖窘迫无奈，献城投降。
English: Soon after, Sun Lezu was in despair and surrendered the city.

古文：己未，东昏侯以程茂为郢州刺史，薛元嗣为雍州刺史。
现代文：己未，东昏侯任命程茂为荆州刺史，薛元嗣为雍州刺史。
English: At the same time, Dongdimou appointed Chengmao as the governor of Jingzhou and Xue Yuanxi as the governor of Yongzhou.

古文：是日，茂、元嗣以郢城降。
现代文：但是就在这一天，程茂、薛元嗣献出郢城，投降了萧衍。
English: However, on this very day, Chengmao and Xue Yuanxi gave up Shicheng and surrendered to Xiao Yan.

古文：郢城之初围也，士民男女近十万口；闭门二百馀日，疾疫流肿，死者什七八，积尸床下而寝其上，比屋皆满。
现代文：郢城刚被围之时，有士人百姓男女近十万人，关闭城门二百多天，城内瘟疫流行，人人浮肿，每十个人之中就有七八个死去，尸体堆积在床底下，而活人睡在床上，家家户户都是这样。
English: When the city of Handan was first besieged, there were nearly one hundred thousand men and women, and the city gates were closed for more than two hundred days. There was a plague in the city, and everyone was swollen. Seven or eight out of every ten people died. Bodies piled up under the bed, while the living slept on the bed. This was the case in every household.

古文：茂、元嗣等议出降，使张孜为书与衍。
现代文：王茂、薛元嗣等人商议出城投降，让张孜写信给萧衍。
English: Wang Mao, Xue Yuan Ci and others discussed leaving the city and surrendering, and asked Zhang Ze to write to Xiao Yan.

古文：张冲故吏青州治中房长瑜谓孜曰： 前使君忠贯昊天，郎君但当坐守画一荷析薪，若天运不与，当幅巾待命，下从使君。
现代文：青州人治中房长瑜过去曾在张冲幕府中任过吏员，他对张孜说： 令尊前使君赤胆忠心，气贯长虹，郎君您唯一应当做到的就是坐镇坚守，使该城不要丢失，以不负已故令尊大人的重托。
English: In the past, Fong Changyu, a middle school student from Qingzhou, had served as a clerk in the Zhangchong shogunate. He said to Zhang Ze, "Your former servant is loyal and full of energy. Your only duty is to stay in the town and not let it be lost, so as not to fail to fulfill the important trust of your late master."

古文：今从诸人之计，非唯郢州士女失高山之望，亦恐彼所不取也。 
现代文：如果天运不济，我们就只好脱去戎装，听候安排，到黄泉之下去找使君大人。现在，你听从其他人的计策，欲出城而降，这不但使郢州的男女老少对你失去景仰之情，恐怕萧衍也不会瞧得上你。 
English: If the weather is bad, we have no choice but to take off our military uniforms, listen to the arrangements, and go down to the underworld to find the emperor. Now, you are following the advice of others and want to leave the city. This will not only make the men and women of Zhangzhou lose their admiration for you, but I am afraid that Xiao Yan will not be able to see you.

古文：孜不能用。
现代文：张孜不能听从房长瑜的劝谕，还是写信给萧衍，献城投降。
English: Unable to listen to Fang Changyu's advice, Zhang Ze wrote to Xiao Yan to surrender the city.

古文：萧衍以韦睿为江夏太守，行郢府事，收瘗死者而无其生者，郢人遂安。
现代文：萧衍任命韦睿为江夏太守，代理郢府事务。韦睿收埋死者，安抚还活着的人，于是郢人得以安定。
English: Xiao Yan appointed Wei Rui as the governor of Jiangxia, acting on behalf of the government affairs. Wei Rui buried the dead and appeased those who were still alive, so that the people could be stable.

古文：诸将欲顿军夏口；衍以为宜乘胜直指建康，车骑咨议能军张弘策、宁远将军庾域亦以为然。
现代文：诸位将领想要把军队驻扎在夏口，稍事休整。萧衍则认为应该乘胜而进，直驱建康，车骑谘议参军张弘策、宁远将军庾域也认为萧衍的意见非常对。
English: The generals wanted to station the army in Xiakou and take a short break. Xiao Yan thought that they should take advantage of the victory and go straight to Jiankang. Zhang Hongze and Ningyuan General Xuan Wei also thought that Xiao Yan's opinion was very right.

古文：衍命众军即日上道。
现代文：萧衍命令众路军队当日就开拔上路。
English: Xiao Yan ordered the troops to march out on the same day.

古文：缘江至建康，凡矶、浦、村落，军行宿次、立顿处所，弘策逆为图画，如在目中。
现代文：沿长江至建康，凡是矶、浦、村落，军队行走途中可以住宿、停留的地方，张弘策早已绘成地图，一目了然，诸将可以按图前进。
English: Along the Yangtze River to Jiankang, wherever there are islets, ponds and villages, where the army can stay and stay on the way, Zhang Hongze has already drawn a map. At a glance, the generals can advance according to the map.

古文：辛酉，魏大赦。
现代文：辛酉，北魏大赦天下。
English: Xin Xuan, the Northern Wei Dynasty, amnestied the whole country.

古文：魏安国宣简侯王肃卒于寿阳，赠侍中、司空。
现代文：北魏安国宣简侯王肃死于寿阳，朝廷追赠他侍中、司空。
English: Wang Su, the Northern Wei An Guo Xuan Jian Hou, died in Shouyang, and the imperial court posthumously awarded him the titles of chamberlain and secretary.

古文：初，肃以父死非命，四年不除丧。高祖曰： 三年之丧，贤者不敢过。 
现代文：当初，王肃因为父亲死于非命，四年过去了还不除去丧服，孝文帝对他说： 守丧三年，就是当年的贤者子夏也不敢超过这个期限呀。 
English: At first, because Wang Su's father died a violent death, four years passed without removing the mourning clothes. Emperor Xiaowen said to him: "Three years of mourning, even the sage Zixia of that year did not dare to exceed this time limit."

古文：命肃以祥禫之礼除丧。然肃犹素服、不听乐终身。
现代文：命令王肃以祥之礼除去丧服，然而王肃还是穿着素服，并且终生不听音乐。
English: He ordered Wang Su to remove his mourning clothes with a salute, but Wang Su still wore plain clothes and did not listen to music all his life.

古文：汝南民胡文超起兵于滠阳以应萧衍，求取义阳、安陆等郡以自效；衍又遣军主唐修期攻随郡，皆克之。
现代文：汝南民众胡文超在滠阳起兵，以响应萧衍，并且向萧衍要求攻取义阳、安陆等郡，以示效力。萧衍同意了胡文超的请求，并且又派军主唐期去攻打随郡，全都攻打下来了。
English: In response to Xiao Yan, the people of southern Ryukyu, Hu Wenchao, raised an army in Shenyang, and asked Xiao Yan to conquer Yiyang, Anlu and other counties to show their effectiveness. Xiao Yan agreed to Hu Wenchao's request, and also sent the commander Tang Jie to attack Su County, and all of them were attacked and defeated.

古文：司州刺史王僧景遣子贞孙为质于衍，司部悉平。
现代文：司州刺史王僧景派遣儿子到萧衍那里做人质，司州所辖各郡全部归顺萧衍。
English: The king of Shizhou sent his son to Xiao Yan as a hostage. All counties under the jurisdiction of Shizhou were turned over to Xiao Yan.

古文：崔慧景之死也，其少子偃为始安内史，逃潜得免。
现代文：崔慧景死的时候，他的小儿子崔偃任始安内史，由于潜逃而幸免于一死。
English: When Cui Huiqing died, his youngest son, Cui Xuanren, escaped death by absconding.

古文：及西台建，以偃为宁朔将军。
现代文：萧宝融的江陵政权建立之后，任命崔偃为宁朔将军。
English: After the establishment of Xiao Baorong's Jiangling regime, he appointed Cui Jun as Ningshuo general.

古文：偃诣公车门上书曰： 臣窃惟高宗之孝子忠臣而昏主之乱臣贼子者，江夏王与陛下，先臣与镇军是也；虽成败异术而所由同方。
现代文：崔偃来到公车门，上书萧宝融说： 我自己认为江夏王萧宝玄与陛下、先父崔慧景与镇军将军萧颖胄，都是高宗的孝子忠臣，同时又是昏君的乱臣贼子，虽然成功与失败的结局不同，但是所致力的方向却是相同的。
English: Cui Wei came to the bus gate and wrote to Xiao Baorong: I myself think that Xiao Baogen, the king of Jiangxia, and His Majesty, the forefather Cui Huijing, and the general of the town army Xiao Yingyao, are all the filial sons and loyal subjects of Gao Zong, and at the same time the unruly subjects and thieves of the dim prince. Although the outcome of success and failure is different, the direction of the efforts is the same.

古文：陛下初登至尊，与天合符；天下纤介之屈，尚望陛下申之，况先帝之子陛下之兄，所行之道，即陛下所由哉！
现代文：陛下刚刚登上至尊宝座，符合天心，天下微小的冤屈，还望陛下能为之洗雪，况且江夏王作为先帝之子，陛下之兄，他所走的路，陛下如今也正在走着。
English: His Majesty has just ascended to the Supreme Throne, which is in line with the will of Heaven. The world is full of small grievances, and it is hoped that His Majesty will be able to wash them away. Moreover, as the son of the former emperor and the brother of His Majesty, the path that Jiangxia Wang has walked, His Majesty is also walking it now.

古文：此尚弗恤，其馀何冀！
现代文：所以，如果连他都不能得到陛下的体恤的话，其余的还有何希望呢？
English: So if even he can't get His Majesty's sympathy, what hope is there for the rest?

古文：今不可幸小民之无识而罔之；若使晓然知其情节，相帅而逃，陛下将何以应之哉！ 
现代文：如今不可以寄希望于小民的无知无识而欺罔他们，假如我使他们一下子知道了事情的真相，并且带领他们逃亡的话，陛下将用什么办法来应付呢？ 
English: Now it is not possible to bully the common people by relying on their ignorance. If I were to let them know the truth of the matter at once and lead them to escape, how would Your Majesty deal with it?

古文：事寝，不报。
现代文：但是，事情被搁了起来，没有得到任何回答。
English: The matter was shelved and not brought up for discussion again.

古文：偃又上疏曰： 近冒陈江夏之兔，非敢以父子之亲而伤至公之义，诚不晓圣朝所以然之意。
现代文：于是，崔偃又上书萧宝融道： 近来冒昧上书陈说了江夏王的冤案，这并非是敢以父子之亲而伤害至上至公之道义，实在不知道圣朝为什么要这样做。
English: As a result, Cui Jun also wrote to Xiao Baoyong, "Recently, you had the temerity to write to me about the unjust case of King Jiangxia. This is not the righteous act of daring to hurt the father-son relationship. I really don't know why the Holy Dynasty would do this.

古文：若以狂主虽狂，而实是天子，江夏虽贤，实是人臣，先臣奉人臣逆人君为不可，未审今之严兵劲卒方指象魏者，其故何哉！
现代文：如果认为狂恶的东昏侯虽然狂恶，但毕竟是天子，江夏王虽然贤德，可终究是臣子，所以先父拥奉作为臣子的江夏王逆叛了作为天子的东昏侯不对的，那么不明白如今以强兵勇卒直捣魏阙，其原因又是为的什么呢？
English: If you think that although the evil Eastern Conspiracy Prince is evil, he is, after all, the Son of Heaven, and although the King of Jiangxia is wise, he is, after all, a vassal, so it is not right for your forefather to support the King of Jiangxia, who is a vassal, and rebel against the Eastern Conspiracy Prince, who is the Son of Heaven, then you do not understand what is the reason for using strong soldiers and brave soldiers to attack Wei and Wei.

古文：臣所以不死，苟存视息，非有它故，所以待皇运之开泰，申忠魂之枉屈。
现代文：我之所以没有死去，苟存人世，没有其他缘故，只是为了等待皇运开泰那一天，替死去的忠魂申冤报屈。
English: There is no other reason why I have not died, why I am still alive, but only to wait for the day when the Emperor's good fortune will come to pass, and to make a complaint on behalf of the dead loyal soul.

古文：今皇运已开泰矣，而死社稷者返为贼臣，臣何用此生于陛下之世矣！
现代文：如今皇运已经开泰，可为社稷而死者反倒成了贼臣，那么我还如何能以此生寄存于陛下之世呢？
English: Now that the emperor's fortune has been opened, but the deceased has become a vassal of thieves for the sake of the society, then how can I live in the world of his majesty?

古文：臣谨案镇军将军臣颖胄、中领军臣详，皆社稷之也，同知先臣股肱江夏，匡济王室，天命未遂，主亡与亡；而不为陛下瞥然一言。
现代文：臣谨按：镇军将军臣萧颖胄、中领军臣萧详，都是社稷之臣，他们全都知道先父为江夏王之股肱，尽力辅助他，共同匡济王室。无奈天命不遂，先父随主而亡。
English: According to the vassals: the general of the town army, the vassal Xiao Yingqi, and the middle-ranking military leader, the vassal Xiao Ji, are all the vassals of the social eunuchs. They all know that their forefathers were the vassals of the king of Jiangxia, and they tried their best to assist him and help the royal family. However, the fate of heaven was not fulfilled, and their forefathers died with the Lord.

古文：知而不言，不忠；不知而不言，不智也。
现代文：但是，他们两人不就这件事情对陛下说一句话，知而不言，是为不忠；不知而不言，是为不智。
English: However, both of them did not say a word to His Majesty about this matter. Not to speak when you know is disloyalty; not to speak when you don't know is unwise.

古文：如以先臣遣使，江夏斩之；则征东之驿使，何为见戮？
现代文：如果认为先父派去的使者被江夏王斩了，就说先父并非见知于江夏王，那么征东将军的驿使王天虎又为何被杀戳呢？
English: If it is believed that the emissary sent by the forefather was beheaded by the King of Jiangxia, it is said that the forefather was not known to the King of Jiangxia, so why was the envoy of the General of the Expedition to the East, Wang Tianhu, killed?

古文：陛下斩征东之使，实诈山阳；江夏违先臣之请，实谋孔矜。
现代文：陛崐下斩王天虎，确实是为了欺骗刘山阳；而江夏王违背先父的请求，斩了先父派去的使者，实是为了谋取孔矜。
English: His Majesty's beheading of King Tianhu was indeed for the purpose of deceiving Liu Shanyang; while King Jiangxia, in defiance of his father's request, beheaded the envoy sent by his father, was actually for the purpose of obtaining Kong Yao.

古文：天命有归，故事业不遂耳。
现代文：天命有归，所以江夏王与先父的事业没有成功罢了。
English: As fate would have it, the careers of Jiang Xiao Wang and his father did not succeed.

古文：臣所言毕矣，乞就汤镬！
现代文：我所要陈说的说完了，冒昧言之，愿乞一死。
English: I have said all that I have to say, and may I be allowed to die.

古文：然臣虽万没，犹愿陛下必申先臣。
现代文：然而，即使我死了，仍希望陛下一定为先父申冤。
English: However, even if I die, I still hope that His Majesty will definitely seek justice for my father.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：恻怆而申之，则天下伏；不则怆而申之，则天下叛。
现代文：因为如果事情本身冤曲，人们同情悲伤，对此进行伸张正义，则天下归心；如果不值得同情悲伤而加以平反，则天下反叛。
English: Because if the matter itself is unjust, people sympathize with sadness and seek justice for it, then the world will be reconciled; if it is not worth sympathizing with sadness and rehabilitating it, then the world will rebel.

古文：先臣之忠，有识所知，南、董之笔，千载可期，亦何待陛下屈申而为褒贬！
现代文：先父的忠心，有识之士皆知，南史氏和董狐之笔，千载可期，先父之忠终会载入青史的，又何须劳烦陛下特意对他做出褒贬呢？
English: The loyalty of his forefather is well known to all people of insight. The writings of Nan Shi and Dong Foo can be traced back thousands of years. The loyalty of his forefather will eventually be recorded in the history of young people. Why should His Majesty bother to praise or criticize him?

古文：然小臣惓惓之愚，为陛下计耳。 
现代文：然而，小臣我如此情切意急的愚诚，完全是出于为陛下考虑。 
English: However, the foolishness of my impatience is entirely out of consideration for His Majesty.

古文：诏报曰： 其知卿惋切之怀，今当显加赠谥。 
现代文：和帝看了崔偃的第二次上书之后，回诏答复说： 你的悲痛怨恨之心，我全知道了，现在应该特别赠给你父亲美好的谥号。 
English: After the emperor and empress read the second letter from Choe Hee, the emperor replied, "I know all about your grief and resentment, and now I should especially give your father a beautiful nickname.

古文：偃寻下狱死。
现代文：但崔偃很快就下狱而死。
English: But Cui Yao was soon released from prison and died.

古文：八月，丁卯，东昏侯以辅国将军申胄监豫州事；辛未，以光禄大夫张瑰镇石头。
现代文：八月丁卯，东昏侯命令辅国将军申胄监理豫州事务；辛未，命令光禄大夫张镇守石头。
English: In August, Dingwu and Dongwu ordered the general of the Auxiliary State, Shen Qi, to supervise the affairs of Yuzhou; Xinwei ordered the doctor of Guanglu, Zhang Zhen, to guard the stone.

古文：初，东昏侯遣陈伯之镇江州，以为吴子阳等声授。
现代文：早先之时，东昏侯派遣陈伯之镇守江州，以便增援吴子阳等人。
English: At an earlier time, Dongdimou sent Chen Bozhi to guard Jiangzhou in order to reinforce Wu Ziyang and others.

古文：子阳等既败，萧衍谓诸将曰： 用兵未必须实力，所听威声耳。
现代文：吴子阳等人失败之后，萧衍对众位将领们说： 用兵不一定靠实力，只是凭借威声罢了。
English: After the defeat of Wu Ziyang and others, Xiao Yan said to the generals: The use of soldiers does not necessarily rely on strength, but on prestige.

古文：今陈虎牙狠奔归，寻阳人情理当恟惧，可传檄而定也。 
现代文：如今，陈虎牙狼狈逃奔而回，寻阳方面一定人心慌乱，惶恐不安，所以无需用兵，只传一道檄文即可平定。 
English: Today, Chen Huya has run away and returned, and the people of Guiyang must be panicked and anxious. Therefore, there is no need to use soldiers, and only a sermon can be passed down.

古文：乃命搜俘囚，得伯之幢主苏隆之，厚加赐与，使说伯之，计即用为安东将军、江州刺史。
现代文：于是，萧衍命令人去搜查被囚禁的俘虏，发现了陈伯之的幢主苏隆之，对他加以优厚的赏给，派他去游说陈伯之，许诺只要陈伯之归顺，就任他为安东将军、江州刺史。
English: As a result, Xiao Yan ordered people to search the imprisoned prisoners, found Chen Bozhi's owner, Sulong Zhi, gave him a generous reward, sent him to lobby Chen Bozhi, and promised that as long as Chen Bozhi surrendered, he would be appointed as General Anton, the governor of Jiangsu Province.

古文：伯之遣隆之返命，虽许归附，而云 大军未须遽下 。
现代文：陈伯之派苏隆之回来汇报，虽然答应归附，但要求： 大军不必要突然下来。 
English: Chen Bo sent Su Long to report back, and although he agreed to return, he demanded: The large army does not need to come down suddenly.

古文：衍曰： 伯之此言，意怀首鼠。
现代文：萧衍听了之后，说： 陈伯之的这话，说明他心中还在迟疑不定。
English: After listening, Xiao Yan said, "Chen Bozhi's words show that he is still hesitant in his heart.

古文：及其犹豫，急往逼之，计无所出，势不得不降。 
现代文：正由于他在犹豫难决，所以要急去逼他，大兵压去，他束手无措，势必要投降。 
English: It was precisely because he was hesitating and indecisive that he had to be hurriedly pushed and pressed by the soldiers. He was helpless and was bound to surrender.

古文：乃命邓元起引兵先下，杨公则径掩柴桑，衍与诸将以次进路。
现代文：于是，萧衍命令邓元起领兵先下，杨公则抄近道袭取柴桑，萧衍自己则同其他将领前后而行。
English: As a result, Xiao Yan ordered Deng Yuanqi to lead the troops first, Yang Gong to take a shortcut to capture Chaisang, and Xiao Yan himself to go back and forth with other generals.

古文：元起将至寻阳，伯之收兵退保湖口，留陈虎牙守湓城。
现代文：邓元起将要到达寻阳，陈伯之收兵退保湖口，留下陈虎牙防守湓城。
English: Deng Yuanzhi will arrive at Xuanyang, Chen Bozhi will withdraw his troops to Hukou, leaving Chen Huya to defend Shicheng.

古文：选曹郎吴兴沈瑀说伯之迎衍。伯之泣曰： 余子在都，不能不爱。 
现代文：选曹郎吴兴人沈劝说陈伯之投降，出迎萧衍，陈伯之哭着说： 我的儿子都在京都，我如果投降了，他们怎么办？我不能不爱他们呀！ 
English: Choen Saorang Wu Xingren Shen persuaded Chen Bozhi to surrender and came out to meet Xiao Yan. Chen Bozhi cried and said, "My sons are all in Kyoto. If I surrender, what will they do? I can't help but love them!"

古文：瑀曰： 不然。
现代文：沈又说： 您说的其实不然。
English: Shen also said: What you said is actually not true.

古文：人情匈匈，皆思改计；若不早图，众散难合。 
现代文：现在城内人心惶惶，都想另找出路。所以，您如果不早点有所考虑的话，部下之众就溃散难于聚集了。 
English: People in the city are now panicking and want to find another way. So, if you don't think about it sooner, the crowd of your subordinates will be scattered and difficult to gather.

古文：丙子，衍至寻阳，伸之束甲请罪。
现代文：丙子，萧衍到了寻阳，陈伯之投降请罪。
English: Cun Zi, Xiao Yan went to Huan Yang, Chen Bo Zhi's surrender pleaded guilty.

古文：初，新蔡太守席谦，父恭穆为镇西司马，为鱼复侯子响所杀。
现代文：原先，新蔡太守席谦的父亲席恭祖任镇西司马，被鱼复侯萧子响所杀。
English: Originally, the new Empress Dowager Cai, the father of the new Empress Dowager Xiqian, was killed by Xiao Zixing.

古文：谦从伯之镇寻阳，闻衍东下，曰： 我家世忠贞，有殒不二。 
现代文：席谦跟随陈伯之镇守寻阳，闻知萧衍东下了，说道： 我家世世代代忠贞，宁死不贰。 
English: Shi Qian followed Chen Bo's town guard to seek the sun, heard Xiao Yan went east, and said: My family has been loyal for generations, I would rather die than be disloyal.

古文：伯之杀之。
现代文：陈伯之杀害了他。
English: Chen Bozhi killed him.

古文：乙卯，以伯之为江州刺史，虎牙为徐州刺史。
现代文：乙卯，陈伯之被任命为江州刺史，陈虎牙被任命为徐州刺史。
English: Yi Wu, Chen Bozhi were appointed as the Jiangzhou stabbing history, and Chen Huya was appointed as the Xuzhou stabbing history.

古文：鲁休烈、萧璝破刘孝庆等于峡口，任漾之战死。
现代文：鲁休烈和萧在峡口打败了刘孝庆，任漾之战死。
English: Lu Xurye and Xiao defeated Liu Xiaoqing at the mouth of the gorge, and Ren Yao died in the battle.

古文：休烈等进至上明，江陵大震。
现代文：鲁休烈等前进至上明，江陵大为震惊。
English: Ru Xiu Lie and others advanced to Shangming, and Jiangling was greatly shocked.

古文：萧颖胄恐，驰告萧衍，令遣杨公则还援根本。
现代文：萧颖胄恐惧了，急告萧衍，令他派遣杨公则回来援救江陵大本营。
English: Xiao Yingyao was scared, so he urgently called Xiao Yan and ordered him to send Yang Gongze back to rescue the base camp in Jiangling.

古文：衍曰： 公则今溯流上江陵，虽至，何能及事！
现代文：萧衍回答说： 杨公则如今溯江而上，前往江陵，即使到了，何能来得及呢？
English: Xiao Yan replied, "Yang Gongzhe is now travelling upstream to Gangneung. Even if he arrives, how can he make it in time?

古文：休烈等乌合之众，寻自退散，政须少时持重耳。
现代文：鲁休烈等不过是一群乌合之众，很快就会自己退散，您现在所需要的正是暂时稳定自己，不可慌乱。
English: What you need now is to temporarily stabilize yourself, do not panic.

古文：良须兵力，两弟在雍，指遣往征，不为难至。 
现代文：如果实在需要兵力增援，我的两个弟弟都在雍州，您指派人去征召他们，他们很容易就会到达的。 
English: If you really need reinforcements, my two younger brothers are in Yongzhou, and if you send someone to recruit them, they will easily arrive.

古文：颖胄乃遣军主蔡道恭假节屯上明以拒萧璝。
现代文：于是，萧颖胄就派遣蔡恭祖符崐节屯兵上明，以抵抗萧的进攻。
English: As a result, Xiao Yingyao sent Cai Gongzu to send troops to Shangming to resist Xiao's attack.

古文：辛巳，东昏侯以太子左率李居士总督西讨诸军事，顿新亭。
现代文：辛巳，东昏侯命令太子左率李居士总督西讨诸军事，驻兵新亭。
English: Soon after, Dongdimou ordered Prince Zuozhong and Li Jushi, the governor of Xi Province, to call in the military and station troops at Xinting.

古文：九月，乙未，诏萧衍若定京邑，得以便宜从事。
现代文：九月，乙未，和帝萧宝融诏令萧衍如果平定京城，自己可以根据具体情况而行事，不必每事必请示。
English: In September, Emperor Xiao Wei and Emperor Xiao Bao issued an edict that if Xiao Yan conquered the capital, he could act according to the specific situation, and did not have to ask for instructions on everything.

古文：衍留将军郑绍叔守寻阳，与陈伯之引兵东下，谓绍叔曰： 卿，吾之萧何、寇恂也。
现代文：萧衍留下骁骑将军郑绍叔驻守寻阳，自己与陈伯之率兵东下。行前，萧衍对郑绍叔说： 您就是我的萧何和寇恂。
English: Xiao Yan left the cavalry general Zheng Shao's uncle stationed in Xuanyang, and he and Chen Bo's soldiers headed east. Before leaving, Xiao Yan said to Zheng Shao's uncle: You are my Xiao He and Kou Yao.

古文：前涂不捷，我当其咎；粮运不继，卿任其责。 
现代文：如果前方战事不能取胜，我承当过失；如果粮草运输跟不上，承担责任。 
English: If the front cannot win the war, I will bear the blame; if the grain and grass transportation cannot keep up, I will bear the responsibility.

古文：绍叔流涕拜辞。
现代文：郑绍叔流涕向萧衍拜辞。
English: Zheng Shao's uncle bowed to Xiao Yan.

古文：比克建康，绍叔督江、湘粮运，未尝乏绝。
现代文：一直到攻克建康，郑绍叔督管江、湘的粮食运送，从来没有断绝过。
English: Until the conquest of Jiankang, Zheng Shao, the uncle of the governor of Jiangsu and Hunan, had never cut off grain transportation.

古文：魏司州牧广阳王嘉请筑洛阳三百二十三坊，各方三百步，曰： 虽有暂劳，奸盗永息。 
现代文：北魏司州牧、广阳王元嘉建议请求在洛阳城内修筑三百二十三个坊，每坊周边三百步，他说道： 这样修筑，虽然暂时带来许多劳苦，但是可以使奸盗永远止息。 
English: Wang Yuanjia, the Northern Wei governor of Shuzhou and Guangyang, proposed to request the construction of three hundred and twenty-three wards in Luoyang City, each with a perimeter of three hundred paces. He said, "This kind of construction, although it brings a lot of labor temporarily, can make the thieves stop forever."

古文：丁酉，诏发畿内夫五万人筑之，四旬而罢。
现代文：丁酉，北魏宣武帝诏令征京畿之内民夫五万人筑坊，四十天就修筑完毕。
English: During the Northern Wei Dynasty, Emperor Xuanwu issued an edict to conscript 50,000 people in Gyeonggi Province to build the mausoleum. The construction was completed in 40 days.

古文：己亥，魏立皇后于氏。
现代文：己亥，北魏立于氏为皇后。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty made her the empress.

古文：后，征虏将军劲之女；劲，烈之弟也。
现代文：于皇后是征虏将军于劲的女儿；于劲是于烈的弟弟。
English: Empress Yu is the daughter of conscript general Yu Jin; Yu Jin is the younger brother of Yu Lie.

古文：自祖父栗磾以来，累世贵盛，一皇后，四赠公，三领军，二尚书令，三开国公。
现代文：自从祖父于粟以来，于家几代显贵兴盛，家门中出了一个皇后，四个人被封公爵，三个人任领军，两个人任尚书令，还有三个人是开国公。
English: Since his grandfather Yu Soh, several generations of aristocrats have flourished in the Yu family. A queen has emerged from the family, four people have been named dukes, three people have served as army leaders, two people have served as court officials, and three people have been founding fathers.

古文：甲申，东昏侯以李居士为江州刺史，冠军将军王珍国为雍州刺史，建安王宝寅为荆州刺史，辅国将军申胄监郢州，龙骧将军扶风马仙琕监豫州，骁骑将军徐元称监徐州军事。
现代文：甲申，南齐东昏侯委任李居士为江州刺史，冠军将军王珍国为雍州刺史，建安王萧宝寅为荆州刺史，辅国将军申胄监管郢州，龙骧将军、扶风人马仙监管豫州，骁骑将军徐元称监管徐州军事。
English: Jiaxing and Dongwu of South Qi appointed Li Ruishi as the military governor of Jiangzhou, champion general Wang Zhenguo as the military governor of Yongzhou, Jian'an king Xiao Baoying as the military governor of Jingzhou, auxiliary general Shen Yi as the military governor of Zhangzhou, general Long Yu as the military governor of Yuzhou, and general Xu Yuan as the military governor of Xuzhou.

古文：珍国，广之之子也。
现代文：王珍国是王广之的儿子。
English: Wang Zhenguo is Wang Guangzhi's son.

古文：是日，萧衍前军至芜湖；申胄军二万人弃姑孰走，衍进军，据之。
现代文：这一天，萧衍的前军到达芜湖，申胄的军队两万人弃掉姑孰逃走，萧衍进军，占据了姑孰。
English: On this day, Xiao Yan's former army arrived at Wuhu, and 20,000 of Shen Yan's army abandoned Guzheng and fled. Xiao Yan marched in and occupied Guzheng.

古文：戊申，东昏侯以后军参军萧璝为司州刺史，前辅国将军鲁休烈为益州刺史。
现代文：戊申，东昏侯委任后军参军萧为司州刺史，前辅国将军鲁休烈为益州刺史。
English: Boshin, after the appointment of Dongdimou, Xiao, who joined the army, was appointed as the governor of Shizhou, and Lu Xury, the former general of the auxiliary state, was appointed as the governor of Yizhou.

古文：萧衍之克江、郢也，东昏侯游骋如旧，谓茹法珍曰： 须来至白门前，当一决。 
现代文：萧衍攻克江、郢之后，东昏侯照样游骋玩乐，他对茹法珍说： 等他来到白门前时，再与他决一死战，以定胜负。 
English: After Xiao Yan conquered the Ke River and the Yangtze River, Dong Dou Hou continued to travel and have fun. He said to Ru Fazhen: When he comes to the front of the White Gate, then fight him to the death to determine the outcome.

古文：衍至近道，乃聚兵为固守之计，简二尚方、二冶囚徒以配军；其不可活者，于硃雀门内日斩百馀人。
现代文：萧衍到了建康附近，东昏侯才召聚兵力，准备固守，他命人从建康的左、右尚方和东、西冶当中挑选囚徒充配军队，对不能让其活着的囚徒，在朱雀门内日斩百余人。
English: When Xiao Yan arrived in the vicinity of Jiankang, it was only then that Dongwu Hou gathered his forces and prepared to hold out. He ordered his men to select prisoners from the left and right sides of Jiankang and the east and west sides to form an army. For prisoners who could not be allowed to live, more than a hundred people were killed every day inside Suzakmen.

古文：衍遣曹景宗等进顿江宁。
现代文：萧衍派遣曹景宗等人进驻江宁。
English: Xiao Yan sent Cao Jingzong and others to Jiangning.

古文：丙辰，李居士自新亭选精骑一千至江宁。
现代文：丙辰，李居士从新亭挑选了崐精悍骑兵一千到达江宁。
English: In Xinting, Li Jushi selected a thousand brave cavalrymen from Xinting to arrive in Jiangning.

古文：景宗始至，营垒未立，且师行日久，器甲穿弊。
现代文：曹景宗刚到伊始，营垒还没有来得及建立，而且由于行军日久，士兵们的甲衣都穿破了。
English: Cao Jingzong had just arrived at the beginning, the camp had not yet been established, and due to the long march, the soldiers' armor was worn out.

古文：居士望而轻之，鼓噪直前薄之；景宗奋击，破之，因乘胜而前，径至皁荚桥。
现代文：李居士望而轻敌，击鼓呐喊直上前去，根本不把对手放在眼里。曹景宗奋而反击，大败李居士，因而乘胜前进，一直到了皂荚桥。
English: Li Guosi looked down on the enemy, beat the drum and shouted and went straight forward, not paying attention to the opponent at all. Cao Jingzong fought back hard, defeated Li Guosi, and thus took advantage of the victory and advanced all the way to Sofen Bridge.

古文：于是王茂、邓元超、吕僧珍进据赤鼻逻，新亭城主江道林引兵出战，众军擒之于陈。
现代文：于是，王茂、邓元起、吕僧珍也进据赤鼻逻，新亭城主江道林领兵出战，众军在阵中生擒了江道林。
English: As a result, Wang Mao, Deng Yuanqi, and Lv Sozhen also marched into the Red Nose Loo, and the lord of Xingting City, Jiang Duolin, led the troops into battle. The troops captured Jiang Duolin in the middle of the battle.

古文：衍至新林，命王茂进据越城，邓元起据道士墩，陈伯之据篱门，吕僧珍据白板桥。
现代文：萧衍到了新林，命令王茂向前推进，占据越城，邓元起占据道士墩，陈伯之占据篱门，吕僧珍占据白板桥。
English: When Xiao Yan arrived at Xinlin, he ordered Wang Mao to advance and occupy Yuecheng, Deng Yuanqi to occupy Taoist Monastery, Chen Bozhi to occupy the Fence Gate, and Lv Sozhen to occupy the Whiteboard Bridge.

古文：李居士觇之僧珍众少，帅锐卒万人直来薄垒。
现代文：李居士窥探到吕僧珍的兵力少，就率领精锐士卒一万人直向前来，逼近吕僧珍的营垒。
English: Li Guosi spied that Lv Sozhen's army was small, so he led ten thousand elite soldiers straight forward and approached Lv Sozhen's camp.

古文：僧珍曰： 吾众少，不可逆战，可勿遥射，须至堑里，当并力破之。 
现代文：吕僧珍对部下讲道： 我们的兵力少，不可出战，也不要远距离放箭，须等待他们到了我们的堑垒之中，再拼命打败他们。 
English: Lv Sozhen preached to his subordinates: We have a small number of troops, we cannot go to war, and we should not fire arrows from a long distance. We must wait for them to come to our fortress, and then defeat them desperately.

古文：俄而皆越堑拔栅。僧珍分人上城，矢石俱发，自帅马步三百人出其后，城上人复逾城而下，内外奋击，居士败走，获取器甲不可胜计。
现代文：不一会儿，李居士的军队都越过堑壕，拔掉栅栏，吕僧珍分派人上城，箭石一齐发射，自己则亲率步、骑兵三百人绕到敌人的背后，而城上的人又越城而下，这样内外奋力夹击，李居士溃败而逃，吕僧珍部缴获各种器甲不可胜数。
English: Within a short time, Li Jushi's army had all crossed the trenches and pulled down the fences. Lv Sozhen dispatched his men to the city, and they fired arrows and stones together. He himself led the way. Three hundred cavalrymen went around to the back of the enemy, and the people on the city went down over the city. In this way, they fought hard both inside and outside the city. Li Jushi was defeated and fled, and Lv Sozhen captured countless pieces of armor.

古文：居士请于东昏侯，烧南岸邑屋以开战场，自大航以西、新亭以北皆尽。
现代文：李居士请示东昏侯，要火烧长江南岸村舍的房屋以开辟战场，从大航以西，新亭以北的房屋全被烧光。
English: Li Guosi asked Dongdimou to set fire to the houses of the villages on the south bank of the Yangtze River to open up a battlefield. The houses west of Dahang and north of Xinting were all burned to the ground.

古文：衍诸弟皆自建康自拔赴军。
现代文：萧衍的几个弟弟都从建康自动出来奔赴军队。
English: Several of Xiao Yan's brothers volunteered to join the army from Jiankang.

古文：冬，十月，甲戌，东昏侯遣征虏将军王珍国、军主胡虎牙将精兵十万馀人陈于硃雀航南，宦官王宝孙持白虎幡督战，开航背水，以绝归路。
现代文：冬季十月，甲戌，东昏侯派遣征虏将军王珍国、军主胡虎牙率领精兵十万多人布阵于朱雀航南边，宦官王宝孙持白虎幡督战，他打开浮桥，断绝了后路，以作背水一战。
English: In the winter of October, the warlords of Jiajing and Dongming dispatched the conscript general Wang Zhenguo and the military commander Hu Huya, leading more than 100,000 elite soldiers, to set up a line of battle on the south side of Zhu Cahang. The eunuch Wang Baosun was in charge of the battle. He opened the pontoon bridge and cut off the back way to make a backwater battle.

古文：衍军小却，王茂下马，单刀直前，其甥韦欣庆执铁缠槊以翼之，冲击东军，应时而陷。
现代文：萧衍的军队稍微后撤，王茂下了马，手持单刀，直向前去，他的外甥韦欣庆手执铁缠槊左右掩护，冲击东昏侯的军队，立刻就冲破了他们的阵营。
English: Xiao Yan's army retreated a little, Wang Mao dismounted from his horse, holding a single knife, and went straight forward. His nephew Wei Xinqing, holding an iron chain, covered the left and right sides, attacked Dong Wuhou's army, and immediately broke through their camp.

古文：曹景宗纵兵乘之，吕僧珍纵火焚其营，将士皆殊死战，鼓噪震天地。
现代文：曹景宗乘机纵兵攻进，吕僧珍放火焚烧了敌方的营地，将士们全部拼力死战，战鼓和杀喊之声震天动地。
English: Cao Jingzong took advantage of the opportunity to attack the enemy's camp, and Lu Sonzhen set fire to the enemy's camp. The soldiers all fought to the death, and the sound of war drums and shouts shook the earth.

古文：珍国等众军不能抗，王宝孙切骂诸将帅，直阁将军席豪发愤突陈而死。
现代文：王珍国等众军抵抗不住，王宝孙狠骂诸位将帅，直阁将军席豪气红了眼，突阵而死。
English: Wang Zhenguo and other troops could not resist, Wang Baosun severely scolded the generals, and Zhaoguo's generals were enraged and died suddenly.

古文：豪，骁将也，既死，士卒土崩，赴淮死者无数，积尸与航等，后至者乘以之以济。
现代文：席豪是一员骁将，他阵亡之后，士卒们土崩瓦解，跳进秦淮河中死去的无以计数，尸体堆积的与桥面平等，后面来到的踏着这些尸体过了河。
English: Shi Hao was a general. After his death, the cadres fell apart and jumped into the Qinhuai River, killing countless people. The dead bodies were piled up as high as the bridge, and those who came later crossed the river on the corpses.

古文：于是东昏侯诸军望之皆溃。
现代文：于是，东昏侯的各路军队望见这一情形，全都溃散而逃。
English: As a result, the various armies of the Eastern dynasties saw this situation and all scattered and fled.

古文：衍军长驱至宣阳门，诸将移稍前。
现代文：萧衍的军队长驱直进，到了宣阳门，各位将领把营地渐向前移。
English: The commander of Xiao Yan's army drove straight ahead and arrived at Xuanyang Gate. The generals gradually moved the camp forward.

古文：陈伯之屯西明门，每城中有降人出，伯之辄呼与耳语。衍恐其复怀翻覆，密语伯之曰： 闻城中甚忿卿举江州降，欲遣刺客中卿，宜以为虑 。
现代文：陈伯之驻扎在西明门，每当城中有人出来投降，他都要叫来附着耳朵说话，萧衍恐怕他再生反覆之心，就偷偷地告诉他说： 听说城内特别气愤您率江州投降一事，要派刺客来刺杀您。所以，您应该小心为妙。 
English: Chen Bozhi was stationed at the Ximing Gate. Whenever someone in the city came out to surrender, he would call for someone to come and talk to his ear. Xiao Yan, fearing that he would repeat the same thing, secretly told him: I heard that the city is particularly angry about you leading Jiangzhou to surrender and wants to send assassins to assassinate you. Therefore, you should be careful.

古文：伯之未之信。
现代文：但是，陈伯之不相信。
English: He still didn't believe him.

古文：会东昏侯将郑伯伦来降，衍使伯伦过伯之，谓曰： 城中甚忿卿，欲遣信诱卿以封赏，须卿复降，当生割卿手足；卿若不降，复欲遣刺客杀卿。
现代文：恰好东昏侯的将领郑伯伦来投降，萧衍指使郑伯伦去见陈伯之，对他说： 城中特别忿恨您，要送信来，对您以封赏为引诱，待您重又投降回去之后，就要活割掉您的手脚；您如果不投降，就要派遣刺客来杀您。
English: Just as the drowsy general Zheng Bailun came to surrender, Xiao Yan ordered Zheng Bailun to go to Chen Bochi and say to him, "The city is particularly angry with you. They want to send you a letter and lure you with a reward. When you return after surrendering again, they will cut off your hands and feet alive. If you do not surrender, they will send assassins to kill you."

古文：宜深为备。 
现代文：所以，您要特别加以防备。 
English: You need to be more prepared.

古文：伯之惧，自是始无异志。
现代文：陈伯之害怕了，从此才开始没有异心了。
English: Chen Bozhi was scared, and from then on, there was no animosity.

古文：戊寅，东昏宁朔将军徐元瑜以东府城降。
现代文：戊寅，东昏侯的宁朔将军徐元瑜献出东府城投降。
English: Wu Yin, Dong Dou Hou's Ningshuo General Xu Yuan Yu surrendered Dongfucheng.

古文：青、冀二州刺史桓和入援，屯东宫。
现代文：青、冀两州的刺史桓和入城增援，驻扎在东宫。
English: Zhang Shikhan and reinforcements from Qing and Jie Provinces entered the city and were stationed in the East Palace.

古文：己卯，和许东昏，云出战，因以其众来降。
现代文：己卯，桓和欺骗东昏侯，声称出战，借机率部投降。
English: Jiwu, Kanwa deceived Dongwu, claimed to go to war, and took the opportunity to surrender.

古文：光禄大夫张瑰弃石头还宫。
现代文：光禄大夫张放弃石头回宫。
English: Dr. Guanglu Zhang abandons the stone and returns to the palace.

古文：李居士以新亭降于衍，琅邪城主张木亦降。
现代文：李居士献出新亭投降萧衍，琅邪城主张木也投降。
English: Li Guosi offered Xingting to surrender to Xiao Yan, and Zou Yachen advocated that Mu also surrender.

古文：壬午，衍镇石头，命诸军攻六门。
现代文：壬午，萧衍坐镇石头，命令各路军队攻打建康的六个城门。
English: In the morning, Xiao Yan sat on the stone of the town and ordered all the armies to attack the six gates of Jiankang.

古文：东昏烧门内营署、官府，驱逼士民，悉入宫城，闭门自守。
现代文：东昏侯命人放火烧了城内的营署、官府，驱逼士人和百姓全部进入宫城，关闭宫门，作最后的拒守。
English: The Dongdim ordered people to set fire to the camp headquarters and the government office in the city, and forced all the soldiers and people to enter Miyagi, close the palace gate, and make a last stand.

古文：衍命诸军筑长围守之。
现代文：萧娧苊钪诰啡乒切拗な露衔е
English: Xiao Guofeng is a relentless dewdrop.

古文：杨公则屯领军府垒北楼，与南掖门相对，尝登楼望战。
现代文：杨公则驻扎在领军府垒北楼，与南掖门正好相对。
English: Yang Gong was stationed in the north tower of the leading fortress, just opposite the South Gate.

古文：城中遥见麾盖，以神锋弩射之，矢贯胡床，左右失色。公则曰： 几中吾脚！ 
现代文：他曾经登楼观战，城中遥望见了他的麾盖，用神锋弩射他，箭头穿透了胡床，身边的人都惊恐失色，他却不以为然地说道： 差点儿射中我的脚。 
English: He once went upstairs to watch a battle, saw his skull cap from a distance in the city, shot him with a sacred arrow, the arrow penetrated the beard bed, people around him were shocked and discolored, but he said disapprovingly: I almost shot my foot.

古文：谈笑如初。
现代文：面不改色，谈笑如初。
English: We still talk and laugh as much as ever.

古文：东昏夜选勇士攻公则栅，军中惊扰；公则坚卧不起，徐命击之，东昏兵乃退。
现代文：东昏侯在夜间挑选勇士来攻打杨公则的栅垒，军中惊慌不已，杨公则却坚卧不起，慢慢地才命令打击来犯者，东昏侯的兵于是就撤退走了。
English: In the night, Dongdimou selected warriors to attack Yang Gongzhe's fortifications. The army panicked, but Yang Gongzhe was unable to resist, and slowly ordered to attack the intruders. Dongdimou's soldiers then retreated.

古文：公则所领皆湘州人，素号怯懦，城中轻之，每出荡，辄先犯公则垒；公则奖厉军士，克获更多。
现代文：杨公则所率领的兵士全是湘州人，素来被认为怯懦，城中轻视他们，每次出来冲荡，总是首先进犯杨公则的营垒，杨公则奖励军士们，所以克敌获胜的次数更多。
English: The soldiers led by Yang Gongze are all from Hunan Province. They have always been considered cowardly and despised in the city. Every time they rush out, they always attack Yang Gongze's camp first. Yang Gongze rewards the sergeants, so the number of victories over the enemy is more.

古文：先是，东昏遣军主左僧庆屯京口，常僧景屯广陵，李叔献屯瓜步；及申胄自姑孰奔归，使屯破墩，以为东北声援。
现代文：早先之时，东昏侯派遣军主左僧庆驻扎京口，常僧景驻扎广陵，李叔献驻扎瓜步。到申胄从姑孰跑回宫中之后，东昏侯又让他去驻守破墩，以便声援东北两边。
English: At an earlier time, the Eastern Consistory sent the commander Zuo Qing to be stationed in Jingkou, the senior monk Jing to be stationed in Guangling, and Li Shuxian to be stationed in Guapu. After Shen Yao ran back to the palace from Gu Yao, the Eastern Consistory also sent him to be stationed in Hailu, in order to support both sides of the Northeast.

古文：至是，衍遣使晓谕，皆帅其众来降。
现代文：到如今，萧衍派遣使者去劝谕上述各守将，他们都率部来降。
English: To this day, Xiao Yan has sent emissaries to advise the above-mentioned generals, all of whom have led their troops to surrender.

古文：衍遣弟辅国将军秀镇京口，辅国将军恢镇破墩，从弟宁朔将军景镇广陵。
现代文：萧衍派遣弟弟、辅国将军萧秀镇守京口，辅国将军萧恢镇守破墩，堂弟、宁朔将军萧景镇守广陵。
English: Xiao Yan dispatched his younger brother, the auxiliary general Xiao Xiu Zhen, to guard Jingkou, the auxiliary general Xiao Hui Zhen to guard Hakuo, and his cousin, the Ningshuo general Xiao Jing Zhen to guard Guangling.

古文：十一月，丙申，魏以骠骑大将军穆亮为司空；丁酉，以北海王详为太傅，领司徒，初，详欲夺彭城王勰司徒，故谮而黜之；既而畏人议己，故但为大将军，至是乃居之。
现代文：十一月，丙申，北魏任命骠骑将军穆亮为司空；丁酉，任命北海王元详为太傅，兼任司徒。当初，元详想要夺取彭城王元勰的司徒之位，所以诬陷中伤元勰，使得宣武帝罢黜了他。
English: In November, Bishen, Northern Wei appointed the cavalry general Mu Liang as Siku; Ding Xi, appointed the North Sea King Yuan Zhe as Taifu, and also served as a Sifu. At the beginning, Yuan Zhe wanted to seize the Sifu position of Pengcheng King Yuan Zhe, so he framed and slandered Yuan Zhe, causing Emperor Xuanwu to dismiss him.

古文：详贵盛翕赫，将作大匠王遇多随详所欲，私以官物给之。
现代文：元勰免去之后，宣武帝要任元详为司徒，但他害怕别人议论自己，所以只担任大将军，到这时他才居于司徒之位。元详大贵显赫，将作大匠王遇经常随元详所欲，私自把官物给他。
English: After the demise of Yuan Shao, Emperor Xuanwu wanted to appoint Yuan Zhao as a tutor, but he was afraid that others would talk about him, so he only served as a general, and only then did he live in the position of tutor. Yuan Zhao was very noble and distinguished, and he would often do whatever Yuan Zhao wanted, and he would give him official gifts.

古文：司空长史于忠责遇于详前曰： 殿下，国之周公，阿衡王室，所须材用，自应关旨；何至阿谀附势，损公惠私也！ 
现代文：司徒长史于忠当着元详面责备王遇，说道： 殿下的身份，相当于周公，担负着辅导皇上、主持国政的重任，他所需要什么东西，你自然应该得到圣上的旨令以后才给予，何至于如此阿谀附势，损公惠私呢？ 
English: In the presence of Yuan, the Chief Historian of Sifu, Yu Zhong, scolded Wang Yu in detail, saying: Your royal highness's status is equivalent to that of Zhou Gong, and he bears the heavy responsibility of advising the emperor and presiding over state affairs. What he needs, you should naturally obtain the order from the emperor before giving it to him. Why are you so subservient to him and harming the interests of the public and private?

古文：遇既踧，详亦惭谢。
现代文：王遇听了这一指斥自然脸上露出不安的神色，元详也惭愧地承认过错。
English: Upon hearing this rebuke, Wang Yu naturally showed an uneasy look on his face, and Yuan Ye also shamefully admitted his fault.

古文：忠每以鲠直为详所忿，尝骂忠曰： 我忧在前见尔死，不忧尔见我死时也！ 
现代文：于忠经常因耿直使元详忿恨不已，元祥曾经骂于忠： 我担心先看见你的死，而不担心你看见我死！ 
English: Yu Zhong was always angry at Geng Zhi for making Geng Zhi angry. Yuan Xiang once scolded Yu Zhong: "I'm afraid of seeing you die first, but I'm not afraid of you seeing me die!"

古文：忠曰： 人生于世，自有定分；若应死于王手，避亦不免；若其不尔，王不能杀！ 
现代文：于忠回对道： 人生在世上，一切自有定分，如果我应当死在王爷手中，逃避也不能幸免；如果不是如此，王爷也不能杀了我。 
English: Yu Zhong replied: Life in the world, everything has its own destiny. If I should die at the hands of the prince, I can't escape; if not, the prince can't kill me.

古文：忠以讨咸阳王禧功，封魏郡公，迁散骑常侍，兼武卫将军。
现代文：于忠因为讨伐咸阳王元禧有功，被封为魏郡公，升任散骑常侍，兼任武卫将军。
English: Yu Zhong was awarded the title of Wei County Governor, promoted to the rank of straggler, and concurrently served as the General of the Imperial Guard.

古文：详因忠表让之际，密劝魏主以忠为列卿，令解左右，听其上爵，于是诏停其封，优进太府卿。
现代文：元详借于忠上表辞让之际，就密劝宣武帝任于忠为列卿，并且解除他可以常在天子左右的散骑常侍和武卫将军的官职，以及听任他辞让出爵位。于是，宣武帝诏令撤消对于忠的封赏，特升进他为太府卿。
English: On the occasion of Genjo's concession to Tadachika's offer, he secretly persuaded Emperor Shomu to appoint Tadachika as a peer, and to relieve him of his official duties as a knight errant and general of the Imperial Guards, which allowed him to be constantly at the Emperor's side, as well as to allow him to resign his knighthood. As a result, Emperor Shomu revoked the reward for Tadachika, and promoted him to the position of Taifu-kyo.

古文：巴东献武公萧颖胄以萧璝与蔡道恭相持不决，忧愤成疾；壬午，卒。
现代文：巴东献武公萧颖胄因萧与蔡道恭相持不下，所以忧愤成疾，壬午，病死。
English: Because Xiao and Cai Daogong couldn't stand each other, Xiao Yingyao, the military hero of Badong, became ill and died.

古文：夏侯详秘之，使似其书者假为教命，密报萧衍，衍亦秘之。
现代文：夏侯详封锁了萧颖胄的死讯，使与萧颖胄的笔迹相似的人假冒其名写成命令，秘密地送给萧衍，萧衍亦秘而不宣。
English: Xia Houxian blocked the news of Xiao Yingyao's death, and had someone with a handwriting similar to Xiao Yingyao's write an order under a false name and secretly send it to Xiao Yan. Xiao Yan also kept it secret.

古文：详征兵雍州，萧伟遣萧忄詹将兵赴之。
现代文：夏侯详在雍州征兵，萧崐伟派遣萧率兵前去。
English: Xia Houzhao conscripted soldiers in Yongzhou, and Xiao Yuwei sent Xiao to lead the soldiers.

古文：璝等闻建康已危，众惧而溃，璝及鲁休烈皆降。
现代文：萧闻知建康已经危在旦夕，部下惧怕而溃散，萧以及鲁休烈都投降了。
English: Xiao Wenji Jiankang was already in danger, his subordinates were afraid and scattered, Xiao and Lu Xiu both surrendered.

古文：乃发颖胄丧，赠侍中、丞相；于是众望尽归于衍。
现代文：江陵方面这才给萧颖胄发丧，追赠他侍中、丞相，于是天下众望全归于萧衍。
English: It was only then that the Gangneung side mourned for Xiao Yingyao, posthumously bestowing upon him the titles of chamberlain and chancellor. As a result, all the world's hopes rested on Xiao Yan.

古文：夏侯详请与萧憺共参军国，诏以详为侍中、尚书右仆射，寻除使持节、抚军将军荆州刺史。
现代文：夏侯详向和帝请求与萧一起参与军国事务，和帝诏令夏侯详为侍中、尚书右仆射，很快又任命他为使持节、抚军将军、荆州刺史。
English: Xia Hou Zhe asked Emperor He for permission to participate in military affairs with Xiao, and Emperor He made Xia Hou Zhe an aide-de-camp and Shang Shu's right-hand man, and soon appointed him as the envoy, the general of the army, and the governor of Jingzhou.

古文：详固让于憺，乃以憺行荆州府州事。
现代文：夏侯详再三辞让，把上述官职推让给了萧。于是，和帝就让萧率管荆州府州军队。
English: Xia Houxiao repeatedly refused to concede, and pushed the above-mentioned official post to Xiao. Therefore, Emperor He let Xiao lead the Jingzhou Fuzhou army.

古文：魏改筑圜丘于伊水之阳；乙卯，始祀于其上。
现代文：北魏把祭天的圜丘改筑在伊水的北面，乙卯，首次在上面祭祀。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty rebuilt the sacred mound on the north side of the Yishui River, and for the first time, the sacrifices were held there.

古文：魏镇南将军元英上书曰： 萧宝卷骄纵日甚，虐害无辜。
现代文：北魏镇南将军元英上书宣武帝： 萧宝卷荒淫肆纵一日甚于一日，虐杀残害无辜。
English: Northern Wei Zhennan General Yuan Ying sent a letter to Emperor Wu: Xiao Bao rolled a wild and debauched day more than a day, killing and maiming the innocent.

古文：其雍州刺史萧衍东伐秣陵，扫土兴兵，顺流而下；唯有孤城，更无重卫，乃皇天授我之日，旷载一逢之秋；此而不乘，将欲何待！
现代文：其雍州刺史萧衍东伐秣陵，倾巢兴兵，顺流而下，如今襄阳成了一座孤城，更没有重兵守护，此乃是皇天授我之日，旷世难逢之秋，不乘此机会，还将等待什么呢？
English: Xiao Yan, the famous poet of Yongzhou, went to the East to excavate the Ming Tombs, built a nest, raised an army, and sailed down the river. Now, Xiangyang has become a lonely city, and there is no heavy guard. This is the day the emperor gave me, a rare autumn. If I don't take this opportunity, what will I wait for?

古文：臣乞躬帅步骑三万，直指沔阴，据襄阳之城，断黑水之路。
现代文：我请求亲自统率步、骑兵三万，直指沔南，占据襄阳城，切断黑水之路。
English: I request that you personally lead 30,000 infantry and cavalry to the south of Hunan, occupy Xiangyang City, and cut off the Black Water Road.

古文：昏虐君臣，自相鱼肉；我居上流，威震遐迩，长驱南出，进拔江陵，则三楚之地一朝可收，岷、蜀之道自成断绝。
现代文：齐朝昏虐的君臣们自相鱼肉残杀，而我居于上流，威震遐迩。再长驱南出，进军攻拔江陵，那么三楚之地一下子就可以得到，这样一来，岷、蜀的道路自然被断绝了。
English: The dim-witted lords and gentlemen of the Qi Dynasty slaughtered each other, and I lived in the upper reaches, trembling with fear. If I were driven south and marched to attack Jiangling, then the three places could be obtained at once. As a result, the road to Shao and Shu was naturally cut off.

古文：又命扬、徐二州声言俱举，建业穷蹙，鱼游釜中，可以齐文轨而大同，混天地而为一。
现代文：再命令扬州和徐州方面声言一起举兵征伐，那么建康穷蹙无路，成为中的游鱼，于是就可以平定九州，统一天下。
English: Then he ordered Yangzhou and Xuzhou to jointly raise an army and go to war, so that Jiankang would have no choice but to become a medium-sized fish, and then he would be able to pacify Kyushu and unify it.

古文：伏惟陛下独决圣心，无取疑议；此期脱爽，并吞无日。 
现代文：敬请陛下独自裁决而定，不要听取他人的异议。如果把这次机会错过的话，那么并吞齐朝就再也没有时日了。 
English: I respectfully request Your Majesty to make a decision on your own and not listen to the objections of others. If you miss this opportunity, there will be no more time to annex the country.

古文：事寝不报。
现代文：元英的上书没有得到回答。
English: The motion was put on hold with no response.

古文：车骑大将军源怀上言： 萧衍内侮，宝卷孤危，广陵、淮阴等戍皆观望得失。
现代文：车骑大将军源怀向宣武帝进言： 萧衍在国内大举进攻，萧宝卷孤危难保，广陵、淮阴等戍所都在观望得失。
English: The cavalry general Yuan Huai made a suggestion to Emperor Xuanwu: Xiao Yan launched a large-scale attack in the country, Xiao Bao rolled alone and was in danger, Guangling, Huaiyin and other places were waiting to see what would happen.

古文：斯实天启上期，并吞之会；宜东西齐举，以成席卷之势。
现代文：这实在是天授我良机，并吞天下之时已经到来了，我们应该东西两面一起发兵，以成席卷之势。
English: This is indeed a good opportunity given to me by Heaven. The time has come for us to swallow up the world. We should send troops from both the east and the west to create a sweeping momentum.

古文：若使萧衍克济，上下同心，岂惟后图之难，亦恐扬州危逼。
现代文：如果使萧衍成功，其上下同心，不但我们以后难以图取天下，就是我国扬州也恐怕要受到威逼。
English: If Xiao Yan is successful and the two sides are concentric, not only will it be difficult for us to win the world in the future, but I am afraid that our country Yangzhou will also be threatened.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：寿春之去建康才七百里，山川水陆，皆彼所谙。
现代文：因为治所寿春离建康才七百里，其山川水陆形势，全都是他们所熟悉的。
English: Because the Shuchun Detention Center is only seven hundred miles away from Jiankang, they are all familiar with its mountain, river, water and land situation.

古文：彼若内外无虞，君臣分定，乘舟藉水，倏忽而至，未易当也。
现代文：他们如果内外无患、君臣之分定了之后，顺着水路乘舟突然而到，我们是不易抵挡得住的。
English: If they suddenly arrive by boat along the waterway after there is no danger at home or abroad and the separation of princes and subjects has been settled, we will not be able to resist them easily.

古文：今宝卷都邑有土崩之忧，边城无继授之望，廓清江表，正在今日。 
现代文：如今，萧宝卷的京都有土崩瓦解之忧，自然边城没有得到援救的希望，所以廓清长江以南地区，正在今日。 
English: Today, Xiao Baowan's Beijing is in danger of collapsing, and the natural border city has no hope of rescue, so the area south of the Yangtze River is being cleared today.

古文：魏主乃以任城王澄为都督淮南诸军事、镇南大将军、开府仪同三司、扬州刺史，使为经略；既而不果。怀，贺之子也。
现代文：于是，北魏宣武帝任命任城王元澄为都督淮南诸军事、镇南大将军、开府仪同三司、扬州刺史，使他具体布署实施元英和源怀所提出的南征计划，但是最后这一计划没有进行。
English: As a result, Emperor Xuanwu of the Northern Wei Dynasty appointed the king of the city, Yuancheng, as the governor of Huainan Province, military, Zhennan general, Kaifu ceremony with three departments, Yangzhou engraving history, and made him specifically deploy to implement the southern expedition plan proposed by Yuan Ying and Yuan Huai, but in the end this plan was not carried out.

古文：东豫州刺史田益宗上表曰： 萧氏乱常，君臣交争，江外州镇，中分为两，东西抗峙，已淹岁时。
现代文：源怀是源贺的儿子。东豫州刺史田益宗上表说： 萧氏违乱常纲，君臣之间互相交战，江南的州镇，分而为二，各守一方，东西对峙，已经一年之久了。
English: Geng Huai is the son of Geng He. The East Henan prefect, Tian Yue Zong, said in his report: The Xiao clan has violated the rules, the monarchs and ministers have been at war with each other, the prefectures and towns in the south of the Yangtze River have been divided into two, each guarding one side, and the east and west have been confronting each other for over a year.

古文：民庶穷于转输，甲兵疲于战斗，事救于目前，力尽于麾下，无暇外维州镇，纲纪庶方，籓城棋立，孤存而已。
现代文：庶民百姓穷于输送转运粮草、物资，士兵们疲于征战斗杀，忙于应付目前之事，为争战而投入了全部力量，此外再无暇顾及外面州镇的守护。彼方治理众多地方，藩城棋布，但是只不过是孤存而已罢了。
English: The common people are too busy transporting grain, grass and materials, the soldiers are too tired to fight and kill, too busy to cope with the current situation, and have invested all their strength in the war. In addition, they have no time to take care of the protection of the outlying prefectures. There are many places to govern in the other side, and the domain is scattered, but it is just a lonely existence.

古文：不乘机电扫，廓彼蛮疆，恐后之经略，未易于此。
现代文：如果我方不乘机出征，如闪电般地一样扫去，开拓他们的疆域为我所有，恐怕以后再要筹划征伐，不易达到如此的效果。
English: If we do not take the opportunity to go to war, sweep them away like lightning, and open up their territory for me, I am afraid that we will have to plan the conquest in the future. It is not easy to achieve such an effect.

古文：且故寿春虽平，三面仍梗，镇守之宜，实须豫设。
现代文：而且，寿春虽然平定，但三面仍然阻塞而不通，所以镇守事宜，确实需要预先安排妥当。
English: Moreover, although Shuchun has been pacified, the three sides are still blocked and impassable, so the town's defense really needs to be properly arranged in advance.

古文：义阳差近淮源，利涉津要，朝廷行师，必由此道。
现代文：义阳离淮源比较近，是渡河的津要之地，朝廷军队的行进，必由此道经过。
English: Yiyang is relatively close to Huaiyuan. It is an important place to cross the river, and the imperial army must pass through this road.

古文：若江南一平，有事淮外，须乘夏水汎长，列舟长淮；师赴寿春，须从义阳之北，便是居我喉要，在虑弥深。
现代文：如果萧衍一旦平定江南，势必要用兵淮河之外，那么必定乘夏天淮河涨水，列舟长淮。而我方要派军队赴寿春，须从义阳之北经过，所以义阳便成为我方的咽喉要地，不得不深加担虑。
English: If, once Xiao Yan has pacified the south of the Yangtze River, it is inevitable that he will have to use soldiers to go beyond the Huai River, then he must take advantage of the summer flood of the Huai River, and the boat will be long and long. And if we want to send troops to Shuchun, we must pass through the north of Yiyang, so Yiyang will become our throat, and we have to be deeply worried.

古文：义阳之灭，今实时矣。
现代文：夺取义阳，如今确是良机。
English: Now is indeed a good time to seize Yiyang.

古文：请使两荆之众西拟随、雍，扬州之卒顿于建安，得捍三关之援；然后二豫之军直据南关，对抗延头，遣一都督总诸军节度，季冬进师，迄于春末，不过十旬，克之必矣。 
现代文：要攻取义阳，估计一下，不过只需要精兵一万二千罢了，但是用兵之道，贵在张大声势，所以请让荆州和东荆州的军队在西边佯攻随、雍，扬州的军队驻扎在建安，以便保卫三关的增援道路。然后，豫州和东豫州的军队直接占据南关，与延头对抗。朝廷派遣一位都督统管各路军队的调遣布署，于冬末发兵，迄于春末，不过百日，一定能够取得胜利。 
English: To capture Yiyang, it is estimated that only 12,000 elite soldiers are needed. However, the use of soldiers is expensive in Zhang Loud, so please let the armies of Jingzhou and East Jingzhou attack in the west and follow, Yong, Yangzhou's army stationed in Jian'an, in order to protect the reinforcement road of the three passes. Then, the armies of Yuzhou and East Yuzhou directly occupy the south pass and confront Yanbu. The imperial court dispatched a governor in charge of the deployment of the various armies to send troops at the end of winter, until the end of spring, but for 100 days, it will be able to achieve victory.

古文：元英又奏称： 今宝卷骨肉相残，籓镇鼎立。
现代文：元英又上奏说： 如今萧宝卷骨肉兄弟互相残杀，各藩镇互相对峙。
English: Yuan Ying also said: Nowadays, Xiao Bao and his brothers are killing each other, and all the provinces and towns are confronting each other.

古文：义阳孤绝，密迩王土，内无兵储之固，外无粮援之期，此乃欲焚之鸟，不可去薪，授首之寇，岂容缓斧！
现代文：义阳孤绝无援，又和我国紧相接壤，但是内部没有兵力储备用以固守，外部没有粮食援军作为希望，这正是欲焚之鸟，不可以去掉薪火；把脑袋伸过来的贼寇，岂容迟缓下斧？
English: Yiyang is isolated and helpless, and it shares a border with our country, but there is no reserve of troops to defend it internally, and there is no hope of grain reinforcements from the outside. This is precisely the bird that wants to burn, and it is impossible to remove the bonfire. Would the bandit who sticks his head out be allowed to delay the axe?

古文：若失此不取，岂惟后举难图，亦恐更为深患。
现代文：如果失去此次机会而不取义阳，岂只以后再攻取难以得手，而且恐怕更要成为今后的隐患。
English: If we lose this opportunity and do not take Yiyang, it will be difficult to win in the future, and I am afraid it will become a hidden danger in the future.

古文：今豫州刺史司马悦已戒严垂发，东豫州刺史田益宗兵守三关，请遣军司为之节度。 
现代文：现在，豫州刺史司马悦已经整装待发，东豫州刺史田益宗兵守三关，请派遣军司去他那里具体调遣布署。 
English: Now, Sima Yue, the military governor of Yuzhou, has been fully equipped and is ready to go. Tian Yuesong, the military governor of East Yuzhou, is guarding the three passes. Please send the military governor to him for specific deployment.

古文：魏主乃遣直寝羊灵引为军司。
现代文：于是，宣武帝派遣直寝羊灵引为军司。
English: As a result, Emperor Xuanwu dispatched Yangling, who slept upright, to lead the army.

古文：益宗遂入寇。建宁太守黄天赐与益宗战于赤亭，天赐败绩。
现代文：田益宗入侵南齐，南齐建宁太守黄天赐在赤亭同田益宗交锋，黄天赐战败。
English: Tian Yizong invaded Nanqi, and the governor of Nanqi Jianning, Huang Tianxie, fought with Tian Yizong in Akatei, and was defeated by Huang Tianxie.

古文：崔慧景之逼建康也，东昏候拜蒋子文为假黄钺、使持节、相国、太宰、大将军、录尚书事、扬州牧、钟山王；及衍至，又尊子文为灵帝，迎神像入后堂，使巫祷祀求福。
现代文：崔慧景攻逼建康之时，东昏侯拜钟山神蒋子文为假黄钺、使持节、相国、太宰、大将军、录尚书事、扬州牧、钟山王。到萧衍率兵到来之时，东昏侯又尊蒋子文为灵帝，迎接他的神像进入后堂，让巫师祈祷求福。
English: When Cui Huijing attacked and forced Jiankang, the Eastern Dynasties worshipped the bell mountain god Jiang Ziwen as the false Huang Di, the envoy of the festival, the country, the Dazai, the general, the recorder, the Yangzhou herdsman, and the king of the bell mountain. By the time Xiao Yan arrived with his soldiers, the Eastern Dynasties also revered Jiang Ziwen as the spirit emperor, welcomed his statue into the back hall, and let the sorcerer pray for blessings.

古文：及城闭，城中军事悉委王珍国；兗州刺史张稷入卫京师，以稷为珍国之副。
现代文：到了城门关闭之后，东昏侯把城中的军事全部委托给王珍国。兖州刺史张稷来守卫京师，东昏侯又让张稷任王珍国的副手。
English: After the city gate was closed, the Eastern Coma Marquis entrusted all the military in the city to Wang Zhenguo. Zhang Zhenguo, the governor of Zhangzhou, came to guard the Beijing Division, and the Eastern Coma Marquis let Zhang Zhenguo serve as Wang Zhenguo's deputy.

古文：稷，瑰之弟也。
现代文：张稷是张的弟弟。
English: Zhang Xuan is Zhang's younger brother.

古文：时城中实甲犹七万人，东昏素好军陈，与黄门、刀敕及宫人于华光殿前习战斗，诈作被创势，使人以板去，用为厌胜。
现代文：当时，城中的兵卒还有七万人，东昏侯向来喜好军阵，与身边的黄门、刀敕以及宫人们在华光殿前演习战斗，假作受伤的样子，让人用木板抬去，用这种形式来作为诅咒制胜。
English: At that time, there were still seventy thousand soldiers in the city. Dongdimou had always been fond of military formations. He practiced fighting in front of Huaguang Palace with the Yellow Gate, Sword and Scepter, and the palace people around him. He pretended to be injured and let people carry him away with a wooden board. He used this form as a curse to win.

古文：常于殿中戎服、骑马出入，以金银为铠胄，具装饰以孔翠。
现代文：东昏侯还经常在殿中着戎服，骑着马出入，用金银做成铠甲和头盔，全都装饰以翡翠。
English: Dongwu Hou also often wore military uniforms in the hall, rode in and out on horseback, made armor and helmets with gold and silver, all decorated with jade.

古文：昼眠夜起，一如平常。
现代文：他仍旧昼眠夜起，一如平常那样。
English: He still sleeps during the day and wakes up at night, as usual.

古文：闻外鼓叫声，被大红袍，登景阳楼屋上望之，弩几中之。
现代文：他听到外面的击鼓呐喊之声，就披着大红袍，登上景阳楼的屋顶观望，差点被弩机射中。
English: When he heard the sound of drums beating and shouts outside, he put on a red robe and climbed onto the roof of the Jingyang Building to watch. He was almost shot by a machine gun.

古文：始，东昏与左右谋，以为陈显达一战即败，崔慧景围城寻走，谓衍兵亦然，敕太官办樵、米为百日调而已。
现代文：开始之时，东昏侯与左右心腹一起合计，以为陈显达一战即败，崔慧景围城很快就逃走，于是认为萧衍的军队也会这样的，所以敕令太官备办柴火和粮米，够百日之用就行了。
English: At the beginning, Dongdimou and his right and left confidants made a plan together, thinking that Chen Xianda would be defeated in the first battle, and Cui Huijing would soon escape from the siege, so they thought that Xiao Yan's army would be the same, so they ordered the eunuch to prepare firewood and grain, enough for a hundred days.

古文：及大桁之败，众情凶惧。
现代文：但是，在大桁之败以后，城中民心慌乱，人人自危。
English: However, after the big defeat, the people's hearts in the city panicked, and everyone was in danger.

古文：茹法珍等恐士民逃溃，故闭城不复出兵。
现代文：茹法珍等人担心士人和百姓们逃溃，所以关闭城门而不再出战。
English: Ru Fazhen and others were worried that the nobles and commoners would flee, so they closed the city gates and no longer went out to fight.

古文：既而长围已立，堑栅严固；然后出荡，屡战不捷。
现代文：但是，等到萧衍的长围已经布置好，堑栅坚固之后，再派兵出城荡击，屡战屡败。
English: However, after Xiao Yan's long perimeter had been laid out and the gate was solid, he sent troops out of the city to attack, and was repeatedly defeated.

古文：东昏尤惜金钱，不肯赏赐；法珍叩头请之，东昏曰： 贼来独取我邪！
现代文：东昏侯尤其爱惜金钱，不肯赏赐，茹法珍磕头请他赏赐兵将，东昏侯竟说： 贼寇来只是为了收拾我一人吗？
English: Dongwu Hou was particularly parsimonious with money and refused to reward. Rufa Zhen Baotou asked him to reward the general. Dongwu Hou actually said: Did the bandits come just to clean up after me?

古文：何为就我求物！ 
现代文：为什么向我要东西赏赐？ 
English: Why should I be rewarded with something?

古文：后堂储数百具榜，启为城防；东昏欲留作殿，竟不与。
现代文：后堂之中储放了几百块木料，有人向东昏侯启奏要拿去做城防之用，他却不给，想留下来盖殿时使用。
English: Several hundred pieces of wood were stored in the middle of the back hall. Someone wanted to use it for city defense, but he didn't want to give it to him. He wanted to keep it and use it to build the hall.

古文：又督御府作三百人精伏，待围解以拟屏除，金银雕镂杂物，倍急于常。
现代文：东昏侯又督促御府制作了三百人使用的精制兵器，准备等萧衍之围解除之后，出外游玩时，卫士们用以驱赶士民。
English: Dongguan also urged the imperial court to make a refined weapon used by three hundred people, so that after the siege of Xiao Yan was lifted, the guards could use it to drive away the soldiers and civilians when they went out to play.

古文：众皆怨怠，不为致力。
现代文：至于金银雕镂物品，东昏侯亦让赶制，并限定时间要比平时快出一倍。
English: As for the gold and silver carvings, Dongdouhou also allowed the rush production, and the limited time was twice as fast as usual.

古文：外围既久，城中皆思早亡，莫敢先发。
现代文：但是，众人都心有怨气，消极怠工，根本不愿为他出力。
English: However, many people are resentful, lazy, and unwilling to work hard for him.

古文：茹法珍、梅虫儿说东昏曰： 大臣不留意，使围不解，宜悉诛之。 
现代文：外面围困的时间已经很久，城中的人都希望能早点逃走，只是谁也不敢先有所动作罢了。茹法珍和梅虫儿给东昏侯出主意说： 大臣们不用心，以致使城围不能解除，所以应该把他们全部杀掉。 
English: The siege outside had been going on for a long time, and everyone in the city was hoping to escape as soon as possible, but no one dared to make the first move. Ru Fa Zhen and Mei Zhi Er gave Dong Dumo a piece of advice, saying, "The ministers are not careful, so that the siege cannot be lifted, so they should all be killed."

古文：王珍国、张稷惧祸，珍国密遣所亲献明镜于萧衍，衍断金以报之。
现代文：王珍国和张稷惧害大祸临头，王珍国就派遣自己的亲信给萧衍献了一块明镜，以示自己的心意，萧衍则截断金子作回报，表示愿意和他同心共事。
English: Wang Zhenguo and Zhang Qian feared that a great calamity was imminent. Wang Zhenguo sent his close confidant to present a mirror to Xiao Yan to show his intentions. Xiao Yan cut off the gold in return and expressed his willingness to work with him.

古文：兗州中兵参军冯翊张齐，稷之腹心也，珍国因齐密与稷谋同弑东昏。
现代文：兖州中兵参军张齐是张稷的心腹，王珍国就通过张齐秘密地与张稷策谋，要一同杀掉东昏侯。
English: Zhang Qi, a soldier from Zhangzhou who joined the army, was Zhang Ye's confidant. Wang Zhenguo secretly plotted with Zhang Ye through Zhang Qi to kill Dong Douhou together.

古文：齐夜引珍国就稷，造膝定计，齐自执烛；又以计告后阁舍人钱强。
现代文：张齐在夜间把王珍国带到张稷那里，两人凑在一起谋密定计，张齐亲自在旁边手执蜡烛。他们密谋好之后，又把计策告诉了后舍人钱强。
English: Zhang Qi took Wang Zhenguo to Zhang Ye at night, and the two of them got together to plot a plan, with Zhang Qi himself holding a candle at his side. After they had plotted, they told the plan to their wives.

古文：十二月，丙寅夜，强密令人开云龙门，珍国、稷引兵入殿，御刀丰勇之为内应。
现代文：十二日月丙寅夜间，钱强秘密令人打开云龙门，王珍国和张稷带兵冲入殿中，御刀丰勇之做内应。
English: On the night of the 12th day of the 12th month, Qian Qiang secretly opened the Yunlong Gate, Wang Zhenguo and Zhang Xuan led the soldiers to rush into the hall, and the sword Fengyong did the inner response.

古文：东昏在含德殿作笙歌，寝未熟，闻兵入，趋出北户，欲还后宫，门已闭。
现代文：这天晚上，东昏侯在含德殿笙歌弹唱，休息之后，还没有睡熟，听到兵进来了，就急忙从北门跑出去，想跑回后宫去，可是门已经关闭了。
English: On this night, Dong Wumen Hou was playing and singing in the Hande Hall. After resting, he was not yet asleep. When he heard the soldiers coming in, he hurriedly ran out of the north gate and wanted to run back to the harem, but the door was already closed.

古文：宦者黄泰平刀伤其膝，仆地，张齐斩之。
现代文：宦官黄泰平用刀砍伤了东昏侯的膝盖，他倒在了地上，张齐上来斩下了他的脑袋。
English: The eunuch Huang Taiping slashed Dong Douhou's knee with a knife. He fell to the ground, and Zhang Qi came up and cut off his head.

古文：稷召尚书右仆射王亮等列坐殿前西钟下，令百僚署笺，以黄油裹东昏首，遣国子博士范云等送诣石头。
现代文：张稷召集尚书右仆射王亮等人列坐在殿前西边的钟下，命令群僚们签名，又命令人在黄绢上涂油，裹住东昏侯的首级，然后派遣国子博士范云等人送到石头。
English: Zhang Ye summoned Shang Shuxu's right-hand man Shaowang Liang and others to sit in a row under the clock on the west side of the front of the hall, ordered the colleagues to sign their names, and ordered them to put oil on the yellow skullcap and wrap it around the head of Dong Dumo Hou, and then sent Dr. Fan Yun and others to the stone.

古文：右卫将军王志叹曰： 冠虽弊，何可加足！ 
现代文：石卫将军王志叹息着说道： 帽冠虽然破了，但怎能再用足踩呢？ 
English: Stone Guard General Wang Zhi sighed and said: Although the cap is broken, how can I step on it with my foot?

古文：取庭中树叶挼服之，伪闷，不署名。
现代文：他到庭中摘取树叶，用手搓成团吞服下去，假装气上不来闷过去了，不在册子上签名。
English: He went to the courtyard to pick up leaves, swallowed them with his hands, pretending not to be bored, and did not sign the booklet.

古文：衍览笺无志名，心嘉之。
现代文：萧衍阅看送来的百官群僚们的签名册，见上面没有王志的名字，心里十分嘉许他。
English: Xiao Yan read the autograph book of the hundred officials and colleagues sent to him, and saw that Wang Zhi's name was not on it. He was very grateful to him.

古文：亮，莹之从弟；志，僧虔之子也。
现代文：王亮是王莹的堂弟，王志是王僧虔的儿子。
English: Wang Liang is the cousin of Wang Ying, and Wang Zhi is the son of Wang Sangyan.

古文：衍与范云有旧，即留参帷幄。
现代文：萧衍与范云过去就有交情，于是就把他留下来参加了自己的幕僚。
English: Xiao Yan had a friendship with Fan Yun in the past, so he left him to join his staff.

古文：王亮在东昏朝，以依违取容。
现代文：王亮在东昏侯执政之时，靠耍两面派而取悦于朝廷。
English: When Wang Liang was in power in the Eastern Zhou Dynasty, he pleased the imperial court by playing a two-faced person.

古文：萧衍至新林，百僚皆间道送款，亮独不遣。
现代文：萧衍到了新林，百官群僚们都抄小道去向他致意，唯独王亮没有派人去。
English: When Xiao Yan arrived in Xinlin, hundreds of officials and colleagues followed the trail to pay their respects to him, but Wang Liang did not send anyone.

古文：东昏败，亮出见衍，衍曰： 颠而不扶，安用彼相！ 
现代文：东昏侯失败之后，王亮出见萧衍，萧衍对他说： 朝廷倾覆而不加以匡扶，用你这宰相有何用呢？ 
English: After the failure of Dongdimou, Wang Liang met with Xiao Yan. Xiao Yan said to him: "What is the use of you, the prime minister, if you do not support the overthrow of the imperial court?"

古文：亮曰： 若其可扶，明公岂有今日之举！ 
现代文：王亮回答： 如果东昏侯可以扶持的话，明公您那里能有今日之举呢？ 
English: Wang Liang replied: If Dongdimhou can support you, Minggu, can you have today's move?

古文：城中出者，或被劫剥。
现代文：从宫城中出来的人，有的被抢劫。
English: Some of the people who came out of Miyagi were robbed.

古文：杨公则亲帅麾下陈于东掖门，卫送公卿士民，故出者多由公则营焉。
现代文：杨公则亲自率领部下列阵在东掖门，以便护送公卿士民们，所以出城者大多由杨公则的营地经过。
English: Yang Gongzhe personally led the troops to march to Dongcheng Gate to escort the nobles, officials and commoners, so most of the people leaving the city passed through Yang Gongzhe's camp.

古文：衍使张弘策先入清宫，封府库及图籍。
现代文：萧衍派张弘策先进去清理宫中，封存了府库和各种图籍。
English: Xiao Yan sent Zhang Hongze in advance to clean up the palace, sealed the prefectural treasury and various books.

古文：于时城内珍宝委积，弘策禁勒部曲，秋毫无犯。
现代文：其时，宫城中珍宝之物到处都是，张弘策严加管束部曲，做到秋毫无犯。
English: At that time, the treasures of Miyagi were everywhere, and Zhang Hongze strictly controlled the situation, so that there was no crime in the autumn.

古文：收潘妃及嬖臣茹法珍、梅虫儿、王咺之等四十一人皆属吏。
现代文：潘贵妃以及宠臣茹法珍、梅虫儿、王之等四十一人全被收拘，交给主管官吏处理。
English: Forty-one people, including Pan Guifei, her favorite Zhu Fazhen, Mei Zueri, and Wang Zhi, were all detained and handed over to the competent officials.

古文：初，海陵王之废也，王太后出居鄱阳王故第，号宣德宫。
现代文：当初，海陵王被废之后，王太后出宫居住在鄱阳王的旧宅中，号为宣德宫。
English: At first, after King Hailing was deposed, the Queen Mother came out of the palace to live in the old house of King Poyang, known as the Xuande Palace.

古文：己巳，萧衍以宣德太后令追废涪陵王为东昏侯，褚后及太子诵并为庶人。
现代文：乙巳，萧衍以宣德太后的名义，命令追封被废的涪陵王萧宝卷为东昏侯，褚皇后以及太子萧诵并黜为庶人。
English: At this time, Xiao Yan, in the name of the Empress Dowager Xuande, ordered that Xiao Baoru, the deposed King of Fuling, be posthumously awarded the title of Dongguang, and that the Empress Dowager and Prince Xiao Xie be posthumously awarded the title of commoner.

古文：以衍为中书监、大司马、录尚书事、骠骑大将军、扬州刺史，封建安郡公，依晋武陵王遵承制故事，百僚致敬；以王亮为长史。
现代文：萧衍被任命为中书监、大司马、录尚书事、骠骑大将军、扬州刺史，封为建安郡公，并且依照晋代武陵王司马遵承制之例，行使皇帝的权力，百官群僚们向萧衍致敬。王亮被任命为长史。
English: Xiao Yan was appointed as the chief librarian, grand steward, recorder of records, cavalry general, Yangzhou chief historian, and given the title of Jian'an County official. He also exercised the power of the emperor in accordance with the example of Wuling Wang Sima Zuncheng system in the Jin Dynasty. Hundreds of officials paid tribute to Xiao Yan. Wang Liang was appointed as the chief historian.

古文：壬申，更封建安王宝寅为鄱阳王。
现代文：壬申，改封建安王萧宝寅为鄱阳王。
English: In Jinshin, Xiao Baoying, the King of Jian'an, was changed to the King of Shenyang.

古文：癸酉，以司徒、扬州刺史晋安王宝义为太尉，领司徒。
现代文：癸酉，司徒、扬州刺史晋安王萧宝义被任命为太尉，兼任司徒。
English: Wang Xiao Baoyi was appointed as the first lieutenant and the second-in-command of the Yangzhou Zhishi Jinan.

古文：己卯，衍入屯阅武堂，下令大赦。
现代文：己卯，萧衍进驻阅武堂，下令大赦天下。
English: Jiwu and Xiao Yan were stationed in the Military Reading Room and ordered a general amnesty.

古文：又下令： 凡昏制谬赋、淫刑滥役外，可详检前原，悉皆除荡；其主守散失诸所损耗，精立科条，咸从原例。 
现代文：萧衍又下令： 凡是错误的规章，荒谬的税赋，过分的刑罚和劳役，可以详细考察当初制订的原因，全部废除。地方官吏负责掌管而造成散失和损耗，应精细地设立科目条例，一切都根据原来的惯例。 
English: Xiao Yan also ordered: All wrong regulations, absurd taxes, excessive punishments and labor service, can be examined in detail the reasons for the original formulation, all abolished. Local officials are responsible for the control and cause dispersion and loss, should be finely set up subject regulations, everything according to the original practice.

古文：又下令： 通检尚书众曹，东昏时诸诤讼失理及主者淹停不时施行者，精加讯辨，依事议奏。 
现代文：又下令： 对尚书省各部门的文案通检一遍，凡是在东昏侯时对各种诉讼案件处理不公道的，以及主办人拖延不及时办理的，认真地加以讯问辨查，根据事实论处并奏上。 
English: He also ordered: to inspect the documents of all departments of Shangshu Province once again, and if the handling of various litigation cases is unfair, and the organizer is delayed in handling them in a timely manner, they will be seriously questioned and investigated, and will be dealt with according to the facts and reported.

古文：又下令： 收葬义师，掩瘗逆徒之死亡者。 
现代文：又下令： 收葬阵亡将士，对东昏侯军队中的死亡者也加以掩埋。 
English: He also ordered: the dead soldiers should be buried, and those who died in the Dongdim army should also be buried.

古文：潘妃有国色，衍欲留之，以问侍中、领军将军王茂，茂曰： 亡齐者此物，留之恐贻外议。 
现代文：潘贵妃有倾国之色，萧衍想把她留下，就以这件事为侍中、领军将军王茂，王茂说： 使齐国亡掉的正是这个女人，您如果留下她，恐怕要招来外界的议论。 
English: Pan Guifei was in favor of overthrowing the state, and Xiao Yan wanted to keep her, so he used this matter as an aide-de-camp to the leading general Wang Mao. Wang Mao said: It was this woman who caused the death of Qi. If you keep her, I'm afraid you'll attract outside controversy.

古文：乃缢杀于狱，并诛嬖臣茹法珍等。
现代文：于是，萧衍下令把潘贵妃勒死在狱中，宠臣茹法珍等人也被诛杀。
English: As a result, Xiao Yan ordered Pan Guifei to be strangled to death in prison, and his favorite Zhu Fazhen and others were also killed.

古文：以宫女二千赉将士。
现代文：萧衍命令把两千宫女分赏给将士们。
English: Xiao Yan ordered that the two thousand concubines be distributed among the soldiers.

古文：乙酉，以辅国将军萧宏为中护军。
现代文：乙酉，萧衍任命辅国将军萧宠为中护军。
English: Acetylene, Xiao Yan appointed the auxiliary general Xiao Zhao as the middle guard.

古文：衍之东下也，豫州刺史马仙琕拥兵不附衍，衍使其故人姚仲宾说之，仙琕先为设酒，乃斩于军门以徇。
现代文：萧衍东下之时，豫州刺史马仙拥兵自守，不归附萧衍，萧衍就指派马仙的熟人姚仲宾去游说他。马仙先为姚仲宾摆了酒席，然后把他斩于军门之前，以向众人宣示决不投附萧衍。
English: When Xiao Yan was on his way to the east, Ma Xian, the military commander of Henan Province, sent Yao Zhongbin, an acquaintance of Ma Xian, to persuade him not to attach himself to Xiao Yan. Ma Xian first held a banquet for Yao Zhongbin, and then beheaded him in front of the military gate to declare to everyone that he would never attach himself to Xiao Yan.

古文：衍又遣其族叔怀远说之，仙琕曰： 大义灭亲。 
现代文：萧衍又派遣马仙的族叔马怀远去游说，马仙对马怀远说： 我要大义灭亲。 
English: Xiao Yan also sent Ma Xian's uncle Ma Huaiyuan to lobby. Ma Xian said to Ma Huaiyuan: I want to exterminate my relatives.

古文：又欲斩之；军中为请，乃得免。
现代文：又要斩马怀远，军中替马怀远请求，才得以幸免。
English: They also had to slaughter Ma Huaiyuan, and it was only through the army's request to replace Ma Huaiyuan that they were spared.

古文：衍至新林，仙琕犹于江西日抄运船。
现代文：萧衍到达新林之时，马仙还在长江西边每日拦截萧衍运粮的船只。
English: When Xiao Yan arrived at Xinlin, Ma Xian was still on the west side of the Yangtze River, intercepting Xiao Yan's grain ships every day.

古文：衍围宫城，州郡皆遣使请降，吴兴太守袁昂独拒境不受命。
现代文：萧衍围困宫城，各州郡都派遣使者来请求投降，只有吴兴太守袁昂在境内抗拒崐而不投降。
English: When Xiao Yan besieged Miyagi, all prefectures and counties sent envoys to request surrender. Only Wu Xing's father-in-law, Yuan Ang, resisted and did not surrender.

古文：昂，顗之子也。
现代文：袁昂是袁的儿子。
English: Yuan Ang is Yuan's son.

古文：衍使驾部郎考城江革为书与昂曰： 根本既倾，枝叶安附？
现代文：萧衍让驾部郎、考城人江革给袁昂写了一封信，信中写道： 树干已经倒了，枝叶还依附什么？
English: Xiao Yan asked Jiang Ge, his driver and a resident of Kaocheng, to write a letter to Yuan Ang. He wrote in the letter: The trunk of the tree has fallen, what are the branches and leaves still attached to?

古文：今竭力昏主，未足为忠；家门屠灭，非所谓孝。
现代文：现在你为昏君竭力效命，并非是忠；到时家门遭受屠灭，非所谓孝。
English: You are not loyal now that you are working hard for the late king; when your family is slaughtered, it is not called filial piety.

古文：岂若翻然改图，自招多福！ 
现代文：所以，还不如翻然醒悟，另有所图，给自己多造些福呢！ 
English: Therefore, it is better to wake up suddenly, have another plan, and create more benefits for yourself!

古文：昂复书曰： 三吴内地，非用兵之所；况以偏隅一郡，何能为役！
现代文： 袁昂回信说： 三吴邻近京畿，不是用兵的场所，况且以本郡如此偏隅之地，何能为麾下效力呢？
English: Yuan Ang replied in a letter: Sanwu is close to Gyeonggi, it is not a place for soldiers, moreover, with this county being such a remote place, how can it be effective?

古文：自承麾旆届止，莫不膝袒军门。
现代文：自从承蒙麾下挥师前来京都之后，各州郡莫不遣使膝行肉袒于军门，请求投降。
English: Since the waving division under the command of Shomei came to Kyoto, every prefecture and county had to kneel at the gate of the army and ask for surrender.

古文：惟仆一人敢后至者，政以内揆庸素，文武无施，虽欲献心，不增大师之勇；置其愚默，宁沮众军之威。
现代文：唯独在下一人敢于迟到，正是因为内心感到自己庸碌平常，文武缺欠，所以虽然想要献心投诚，但并不能为大军增勇，把我这愚默之人放在一边，难道会败坏军威。
English: However, the next person dares to be late, precisely because he feels that he is mediocre and ordinary, lacking in literature and martial arts, so although he wants to devote himself, he cannot increase the courage of the army, and if he puts me aside as a stupid person, it will damage the military prestige.

古文：幸藉将军含弘之大，可得从容以礼。
现代文：幸好由于将军气度弘大，才能让我从容地遵守礼仪。
English: Fortunately, thanks to the general's great discretion, I was able to use the bow with ease.

古文：窃以一餐微施，敞昨投殒；况食人之禄而顿忘一旦，非惟物议不可，亦恐明公鄙之，所以踌躇，未遑荐璧。 
现代文：窃以为受他人一餐之微薄的施舍，尚且需投命殒身相报；况且本人亨受朝廷食禄，而岂能忘恩于一旦呢？我如果以身投附，不但要招来众议，亦恐怕明公您也要加以鄙视。所以，我踌躇至今，没来得及进璧而降。 
English: Stealing the meager charity of a meal from others, I still have to sacrifice my life to repay the favor; moreover, I am richly rewarded by the imperial court, and can I not be ungrateful? If I sacrifice myself, I will not only attract public discussion, but I am afraid that you will also despise it. Therefore, I have hesitated so far, I have not had time to advance and descend.

古文：昂问时事于武康令北地傅映，映曰： 昔元嘉之末，开辟未有，故太尉杀身以明节。
现代文：袁昂向武康令、北地人傅征求对当前时局的看法，傅说： 从前元嘉末年的事，开天辟地以来所未有，所以太尉袁淑杀身以明节。
English: Yuan Ang solicited opinions on the current situation from Wu Kangling and Hokkien Fu. Fu said, "Since the last year of Yuan Jia, things have never been the same since the beginning of time. Therefore, Lieutenant Yuan Shu killed himself to make a point.

古文：司徒当寄托之重，理无苟全，所以不顾夷险以循名义。
现代文：令尊司徒袁受重托之命，无有苟全之理，所以不顾夷险安危而弘扬道义名节。
English: There is no reason why His Holiness the Drikung Kyabgon Chetsang should have been entrusted with such an important mission. Therefore, he carried out the famous festival of morality and righteousness regardless of the risks and dangers.

古文：今嗣主昏虐，曾无悛改；荆、雍协举，乘据上流，天人之意可知。
现代文：如今继位皇帝昏庸虐暴，毫无悔改之可能，荆州和雍州共同举兵，占据着上风，天人之意由此而可知。
English: Today, the succeeding emperor is dull and tyrannical, and there is no possibility of repentance. Jingzhou and Yongzhou have jointly raised an army and have the upper hand. The will of heaven and man can be known from this.

古文：愿明府深虑，无取后悔。 
现代文：愿明府大人深加思虑，不要它日而后悔。 
English: May the adults of Myofu think deeply and not regret it.

古文：及建康平，衍使豫州刺史李元履巡抚东士，敕元履曰： 袁昂道素之门，世有忠节，天下须共容之，勿以兵威陵辱。 
现代文：在建康平定之后，萧衍派豫州刺史李元履巡抚东南一带，他命令李元履说： 袁昂出身于有道的门第，世代有忠节，对于这样的名节之士，天下须共容之，所以不要使用兵威凌辱他。 
English: After Jiankang was pacified, Xiao Yan sent Li Yuanlu, the inspector of the southeastern area of Yuzhou, to inspect Li Yuanlu. He ordered Li Yuanlu to say: Yuan Ang was born in a virtuous family and had a loyal generation. For such a famous person, the world must be tolerant, so don't use military power to humiliate him.

古文：元履至吴兴，宜衍旨；昂亦不请降，开门撤备而已。
现代文：李元履到了吴兴，向袁昂宣读了萧衍的旨令，但袁昂还是不投降，只是打开城门，撤去守备而已。
English: Li Yuanlu arrived in Wuxing and read Xiao Yan's order to Yuan Ang, but Yuan Ang still did not surrender, but only opened the city gate and withdrew the garrison.

古文：仙琕闻台城不守，号泣谓将士曰： 我受人任寄，义不容降，君等皆有父母，我之忠臣，君为孝子，不亦可乎！ 
现代文：马仙闻知皇城失守，哭泣着对将士们说： 我受朝廷委命，义不容降，而你们皆有父母，不可不顾及。所以，我来做忠臣，你们做孝子，这样不也是可以的吗？ 
English: When Ma Xian learned that the imperial city had been lost, he wept and said to the generals: I have been appointed by the imperial court, and I cannot be degraded, and you all have parents, and you must not disregard them. Therefore, I come to be a loyal subject, and you to be a filial son, is this not also possible?

古文：乃悉遣城内兵出降，馀壮士数十，闭门独守。
现代文：于是，他命令城内之兵全部出降，只留下壮士几十人，闭门而独守。
English: As a result, he ordered all the soldiers in the city to surrender, leaving only a few dozen strong men, closed and alone.

古文：俄而兵入，围之数十重。仙琕令士皆持满，兵不敢近。
现代文：不一会儿，外兵进来了，前后把他围了数十重，马仙命令壮士们都拉开弓箭，围兵们谁也不敢近前。
English: After a while, the foreign soldiers came in and surrounded him dozens of times. Ma Xian ordered the strong men to open their bows and arrows, and none of the surrounding soldiers dared to approach.

古文：日暮，仙琕乃投弓曰： 诸君但来见取，我义不降！ 
现代文：如此对峙到天黑之时，马仙才投下手中之弓，说道： 各位只管来抓捕我，我义不投降。 
English: This confrontation lasted until nightfall, when Ma Xian threw down his bow and said, "Come and capture me, I will not surrender."

古文：乃槛送石间。
现代文：于是，马仙被关在囚车中，押送到石头。
English: As a result, Ma Xian was locked up in a prison van and taken to a stone quarry.

古文：衍释之，使待袁昂至俱入，曰： 令天下见二义士。 
现代文：萧衍释放了马仙，让他等袁昂到后一起进来，对他们二人说道： 二位之行为，让天下人见到了两位义士。 
English: Xiao Yan released Ma Xian and asked him to wait for Yuan Ang to come in. He said to the two of them, "The actions of the two of you have allowed the world to see two righteous men."

古文：衍谓仙琕曰： 射钩、斩祛、昔人所美。
现代文：萧衍又时马仙说： 小白不记管仲旧仇，重耳亦不记寺人旧怨，而为过去的人所赞道美。
English: Xiao Yan and Ma Xian said at the same time: Xiao Bai did not remember the old feuds between each other, nor did he remember the old grievances of the temple people, but he was praised by the past people.

古文：卿勿以杀使断运自嫌。 
现代文：您不要因杀了我派去的使者和阻断我的粮运的道路而自己见外。 
English: Don't blame yourself for killing the messengers I sent and blocking the path of my grain shipments.

古文：仙琕谢曰： 小人如失主犬，后主饲之，则复为用矣。 
现代文：马仙谢道： 小人我就象失去主人的狗一样，被后来的主人所饲养，那么只好新主人所用了。 
English: Ma Xian Xie said: Like a dog that has lost its owner, I was raised by the later owner, so I had to be used by the new owner.

古文：衍笑，皆厚遇之。
现代文：萧衍听得笑了，对马仙和袁昂二人都给以优厚的待遇。
English: Xiao Yan laughed when he heard this, and gave both Ma Xian and Yuan Ang a generous treatment.

古文：丙戌，萧衍入镇殿中。
现代文：丙戌，萧衍入镇殿中。
English: He Ping and Xiao Yan enter the town hall.

古文：刘希祖既克安成，移檄湘部，始兴内史王僧粲应之。
现代文：刘希祖攻克安成之后，给湘州送了一道檄文，始兴内史王僧粲对他加以响应。
English: After Liu Xizou conquered Ancheng, he sent a message to Hunan. Shi Xingnai Wang Sheng responded to him.

古文：僧粲自称湘州刺史，引兵袭长沙。
现代文：王僧粲自称为湘州刺史，带兵去袭击长沙。
English: Wang Sangyao claimed to be the leader of Xiangzhou and led an army to attack Changsha.

古文：去城百馀里，于是湘州郡县兵皆蜂起以应僧粲，唯临湘、湘阴、浏阳、罗四县尚全。
现代文：他来到了离长沙城还有百余里之处，于是湘州各郡县都蜂拥而起，响应王僧粲，唯有临湘、湘阴、浏阳、罗四个县尚自保全。
English: He came to a place more than a hundred miles away from Changsha City, so all counties and counties in Hunan flocked to respond to Wang Xiangyao. Only four counties, namely Linxiang, Xiangyin, Liuyang and Luo, remained unaffected.

古文：长沙人皆欲泛舟走，行事刘坦翻聚其舟焚之，遣军主尹法略拒僧粲，战数不利。
现代文：长沙人都想乘舟而逃，行事刘坦把船只全部收聚在一起，放火焚烧了，并派遣军主尹法略去抵挡王僧粲。
English: The people of Changsha all wanted to flee by boat. Acting Liu Tan gathered all the boats together, set fire to them, and sent the commander Yin Faliu to resist Wang Sangyao.

古文：前湘州镇军钟玄绍潜结士民数百人，刻日悉城应僧粲。
现代文：交战数次，都不能取胜，前湘州镇军钟玄绍偷偷地结集士人百姓数百人，约定日期，准备翻城策应王僧粲。
English: They fought several times, but could not win. The former Xiangzhou Town Army of Zhong Xuan Shao secretly gathered hundreds of scholars and commoners, set a date, and prepared to overrun the city in response to Wang Sangya.

古文：坦闻其谋，阳为不知，因理讼至夜，而城门遂不闭，以疑之。
现代文：刘坦知道了这一阴谋，但是他假装不知道，因此审理讼事案件一直到夜间，而城门不关闭，以便疑惑他们。
English: Liu Tan was aware of the plot, but he pretended not to know, so the court case went on into the night without the gates being closed, in order to confuse them.

古文：玄绍未发，旦，诣坦问其故，坦久留与语，密遣亲兵收其家书。
现代文：这天夜里，钟玄绍没有行动，第二早晨，他到刘坦那里去问不关城门的原故。刘坦把钟玄绍留下很久，与他谈话，而秘密派遣亲兵到他家中去抄收文书。
English: That night, Zhong Xuan Shao did not act. The next morning, he went to Liu Tan to ask the reason for not closing the city gate. Liu Tan left Zhong Xuan Shao for a long time, talked with him, and secretly sent soldiers to his home to copy and collect documents.

古文：玄绍在坐，而收兵巳报，具得其文书本末。
现代文：钟玄绍还坐在刘坦那里，而派去抄收的亲兵已经回来报告，全部抄获了他的文书，查清了事情的全部经过。
English: Zhong Xuan Shao was still sitting with Liu Tan, and the soldiers sent to copy and collect his documents had already returned to report that they had copied all of his documents and ascertained the entire course of events.

古文：玄绍即首伏，于坐斩之；焚其文书，馀党悉无所问。
现代文：因此，钟玄绍只好低头认罪，并被斩于座上。刘坦烧毁了钟玄绍的文书，其他同党一概不加过问。
English: Therefore, Zhong Xuan Shao had to bow his head and plead guilty, and was beheaded on the throne. Liu Tan burned Zhong Xuan Shao's documents, and no other party members were questioned.

古文：众愧且服，州郡遂安。
现代文：众人既惭愧，又服膺，于是州郡得以安定。
English: The people were both ashamed and obedient, and the state and county were stabilized.

古文：法略与僧粲相持累月，建康城平，杨公则还州，僧粲等散走。
现代文：尹法略与王僧粲相持了好几个崐月。建康城平定之后，杨公则返回湘州，王僧粲等人四处散逃了。
English: After Jiankang was pacified, Yang Gong returned to Hunan, while Wang Sangye and the others fled in all directions.

古文：王丹为郡人所杀，刘希祖亦举郡降。
现代文：王丹被郡中人杀死，刘希祖也率郡投降。
English: Wang Dan was killed by people in the county, and Liu Xizou also led the county to surrender.

古文：公则克己廉赋，轻刑薄赋。
现代文：杨公则克己廉正，做事审慎。
English: Yang Gongzhe is a man of integrity and prudence.

古文：顷之，湘州户口几复其旧。
现代文：他减轻刑罚，少收赋税，很快，湘州的户口就差不多恢复到原来的数量了。
English: He reduced the penalty, reduced taxes, and soon, the number of hukou in Hunan was almost back to the original number.

