古文：十有五年春，王正月，公如齐。
现代文：十五年春季，周历正月，僖公去齐国。
English: In the spring of the fifteenth year, in the first month of the lunar calendar, Ying Gong went to Qi.

古文：楚人伐徐。
现代文：楚国攻打徐国。
English: Chu attacked Xu.

古文：三月，公会齐侯、宋公、陈侯、卫侯、郑伯、许男、曹伯，盟于牡丘，遂次于匡。
现代文：三月，僖公与齐侯、宋公、陈侯、卫侯、郑伯、许男、曹伯在牡丘结盟，各诸侯驻军匡地。
English: In March, Shao Gong allied with Qi Hou, Song Gong, Chen Hou, Wei Hou, Zheng Bo, Xu Man, and Cao Bo in Mouchuo, and all the princes stationed their troops in Kuang Di.

古文：公孙敖帅师及诸侯之大夫救徐。
现代文：公孙敖率领军队和各诸侯国大夫援救徐国。
English: Gongsun Rong led the army and the governors of various provinces to rescue Xu.

古文：夏五月，日有食之。
现代文：夏季五月，有日食。
English: In summer, in May, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：秋七月，齐师、曹师伐厉。
现代文：秋季七月，齐国、曹国的军队攻打厉国。
English: In the autumn of July, the armies of Qi and Cao attacked Liguo.

古文：八月，螽。
现代文：八月，发生蝗虫灾害。
English: In August, the locust disaster occurred.

古文：九月，公至自会。
现代文：九月，季姬回到鄫国。
English: In September, Ji Ji returned to Shan State.

古文：季姬归于鄫。己卯晦，震夷伯之庙。
现代文：己卯日，九月的最后一天，雷击夷伯的庙宇。
English: On Jiwu Day, the last day of September, lightning struck the temple of Yibo.

古文：冬，宋人伐曹。
现代文：冬季，宋国攻打曹国。
English: In winter, Song attacked Cao.

古文：楚人败徐于娄林。
现代文：楚国在娄林打败徐国。
English: Chu defeated Xu in Yulin.

古文：十有一月壬戌，晋侯及秦伯战于韩。获晋侯。
现代文：十一月壬戌日，晋侯和秦伯在韩原交战，晋侯被擒获。
English: In November of the same year, Jin Hou and Qin Bo fought in Han Yuan, and Jin Hou was captured.

古文：十五年春，楚人伐徐，徐即诸夏故也。
现代文：十五年春季，楚国人进攻徐国，由于徐国依靠中原诸侯的缘故。
English: In the spring of the fifteenth year, the people of Chu attacked the State of Xu, because the State of Xu was dependent on the Central Plains.

古文：三月，盟于牡丘，寻葵丘之盟，且救徐也。
现代文：三月，鲁僖公和齐桓公、宋襄公、陈穆公、卫文公、郑文公、许僖公、曹共公在牡丘结盟，重温葵丘的盟约，同时为了救援徐国。
English: In March, Lu Xun, Qi Huan, Song Xiang, Chen Mu, Wei Wen, Zheng Wen, Xu Rong, and Cao Gong allied in Mochi to revisit the alliance of Mochi and to rescue Xu.

古文：孟穆伯帅师及诸侯之师救徐，诸侯次于匡以待之。
现代文：孟穆伯率领鲁军和诸侯的军队救援徐国，诸侯住在匡地等待他。
English: Meng Mubo led the Lu army and the armies of the princes to rescue Xu. The princes waited for him in Kuangdi.

古文：夏五月，日有食之。
现代文：夏季，五月，发生日食。
English: In summer, in May, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：不书朔与日，官失之也。
现代文：《春秋》没有记载朔日和日期，由于史官的漏记。
English: "Spring and Autumn" did not record the New Year's Day and the date, due to the omission of the historian.

古文：秋，伐厉，以救徐也。
现代文：秋季，进攻厉国，以此来救援徐国。
English: In the autumn, they attacked Liguo Province to rescue Xu Province.

古文：晋侯之入也，秦穆姬属贾君焉，且曰： 尽纳群公子。 
现代文：晋惠公回国继承君位的时候，秦穆姬把贾君嘱托给他，而且说： 把公子们都接回国内。 
English: When Jin Hui returned to China to succeed the throne, Qin Mu Ji entrusted Jia Jun to him, and said: Take all the princes back to China.

古文：晋侯烝于贾君，又不纳群公子，是以穆姬怨之。
现代文：晋惠公和贾君通奸，又不接纳公子们回国，由此穆姬就怨恨他。
English: Jin Huigong and Jia Jun committed adultery, and did not allow the young men to return to China, which made Mu Zhi resent him.

古文：晋侯许赂中大夫，既而皆背之。
现代文：晋惠公曾经答应给中大夫送礼，后来也都不给了。
English: Jin Huigong once promised to give gifts to Dr. Zhong, but later did not give them.

古文：赂秦伯以河外列城五，东尽虢略，南及华山，内及解梁城，既而不与。
现代文：还答应给秦穆公黄河以西和以南的五座城，东边到虢略镇，南边到华山，还有黄河之内的解梁城，后来都不兑现。
English: He also promised to give Qin Mu Gong five cities west and south of the Yellow River, east to Qiliu Town, south to Huashan, and within the Yellow River to Jie Liang City, but later did not honor it.

古文：晋饥，秦输之粟；秦饥，晋闭之籴，故秦伯伐晋。
现代文：晋国有饥荒，秦国给它运送粟米；秦国有饥荒，晋国却拒绝秦国买粮，所以秦穆公攻打晋国。
English: Jin was starving, so Qin sent it corn; Qin was starving, but Jin refused to buy grain from Qin, so Qin attacked Jin.

古文：卜徒父筮之，吉。 涉河，侯车败。 
现代文：卜徒父用筮草占卜，吉利： 渡过黄河，毁坏侯的车子。 
English: The Buddha's father divined with reeds, and for good luck, he crossed the Yellow River and destroyed the groom's carriage.

古文：诘之。对曰： 乃大吉也，三败必获晋君。
现代文：秦穆公仔细追问，卜徒父回答说： 这是大吉大利。晋军连败三次，晋国国君必然被俘获。
English: Qin Mu Gong questioned him carefully, and Bu Tu's father replied: "This is great good luck. The Jin army was defeated three times in a row, and the prince of Jin was inevitably captured.

古文：其卦遇《蛊》，曰： 千乘三去，三去之馀，获其雄狐。 
现代文：这一卦得到《蛊》，繇辞说： 三次驱除一千辆兵车，三次驱除之余，获得了那条雄狐。 
English: This story was picked up by "Chi," which said: "Three times a thousand chariots were driven away, and in addition to being driven away three times, the male fox was obtained."

古文：夫狐蛊，必其君也。《蛊》之贞，风也；其悔，山也。
现代文：雄狐指的一定是他们的国君。《蛊》的内卦是风，外卦是山。
English: A male fox's pointer is sure to be their sovereign. The inside gossip of "The Cormorant" is the wind, and the outside gossip is the mountain.

古文：岁云秋矣，我落其实而取其材，所以克也。
现代文：时令到了秋天了，我们的风吹过他们山上，吹落了他们的果实，还取得他们的木材，所以能战胜。
English: The season is autumn, and our wind blows over their mountains, blows down their fruit, and takes their timber, so we can win.

古文：实落材亡，不败何待？ 
现代文：果实落地而木材丢失，不打败仗还等待什么？ 
English: If the fruit falls to the ground and the wood is lost, what else awaits if the battle is not lost?

古文：三败及韩。
现代文：晋军三次战败，退到韩地。
English: The Jin army was defeated three times and retreated to Korea.

古文：晋侯谓庆郑曰： 寇深矣，若之何？ 
现代文：晋惠公对庆郑说： 敌人深入了，怎么办？ 
English: Jin Huigong said to Qing Zheng: What should we do if the enemy has penetrated deeper?

古文：对曰： 君实深之，可若何？ 
现代文：庆郑回答说： 君王让他们深入的，能够怎么办？ 
English: Qing Zheng replied: What can the king do if he lets them go too far?

古文：公曰： 不孙。 
现代文：晋惠公说： 答话放肆无礼！ 
English: Jin Huigong said: The answer is impudent and rude!

古文：卜右，庆郑吉，弗使。
现代文：占卜车右的人选，庆郑得吉卦。
English: The person on the right of the fortune-telling car, Qing Zheng, is the star of the story.

古文：步扬御戎，家仆徒为右，乘小驷，郑入也。
现代文：但是晋惠公不用他，让步扬驾御战车，家仆徒作为车右。以小驷马驾车，是从郑国来的。
English: However, Prince Jin Hui did not need him, so he let Yang Yang drive the chariot, with the family servant as the right-hand driver. He drove the chariot with a small steed and came from Zheng Guo.

古文：庆郑曰： 古者大事，必乘其产，生其水土而知其人心，安其教训而服习其道，唯所纳之，无不如志。
现代文：庆郑说： 古代发生战争，一定要用本国的马驾车。出生在自己的水土上，知道主人的心意；安于受主人的调教，熟悉这里的道路；随你放在哪里，没有不如意的。
English: Qing Zheng said: In ancient times, when there was a war, it was necessary to use the horses of one's own country to drive the car. Born on one's own soil and water, one knows the master's will; willing to be trained by the master, familiar with the road here; no matter where you put it, it will not be unsatisfactory.

古文：今乘异产以从戎事，及惧而变，将与人易。
现代文：现在用外国出产的马来驾车，从事战斗，等到一害怕而失去正常状态，就会不听指挥了。
English: Foreign-bred horses are now used for driving and fighting, and as soon as they are frightened and lose their normal condition, they will not listen to commands.

古文：乱气狡愤，阴血周作，张脉偾兴，外强中乾。
现代文：鼻子里乱喷粗气表示狡猾和愤怒，血液在全身奔流，使血管扩张突起，外表强壮而内部枯竭。
English: Foul breath in the nose indicates cunning and anger, blood rushes throughout the body, causing the blood vessels to dilate and protrude, outwardly strong and internally exhausted.

古文：进退不可，周旋不能，君必悔之。 
现代文：进也不能，退也不是，旋转也不能，君王必然要后悔。 
English: You can't go in, you can't go back, you can't spin around, and you're bound to regret it.

古文：弗听。
现代文：晋惠公不听。
English: He did not listen to the words of the crown prince.

古文：九月，晋侯逆秦师，使韩简视师，复曰： 师少于我，斗士倍我。 
现代文：九月，晋惠公将要迎战秦军，派韩简视察军队。韩简回来说： 军队比我们少，能奋力作战的人却倍于我们。 
English: In September, Jin Huigong was about to meet the Qin army and sent Han Jian to inspect the army. Han Jian said: The army is smaller than ours, but the people who can fight hard are twice as many as us.

古文：公曰： 何故？ 
现代文：晋惠公说： 什么原因？ 
English: Kan said, "Why is that?

古文：对曰： 出因其资，入用其宠。饥食其粟，三施而无报，是以来也。
现代文：韩简回答说： 君王逃离晋国是由于他的资助，回国是由于他的宠信，有了饥荒吃他的粟米，三次给我们恩惠而没有报答，由于这样他们才来的。
English: Han Zhen replied, "The king fled from Jin due to his patronage, returned home due to his favor, ate his corn when there was a famine, and gave us three favors without return. That's why they came."

古文：今又击之，我怠秦奋，倍犹未也。 
现代文：现在又将迎击他们，我方懈怠，秦国奋发，斗志岂止相差一倍啊！ 
English: Now they will face them again. We are slacking, Qin is working hard, and our fighting spirit is more than double the difference!

古文：公曰： 一夫不可狃，况国乎。 
现代文：晋惠公说： 一个人还不能轻侮，何况是国家呢？ 
English: Jin Huigong said: A person cannot be despised, let alone a country.

古文：遂使请战，曰： 寡人不佞，能合其众而不能离也。
现代文：于是就派韩简去约战，说： 寡人不才，能集合我的部下而不能让他们离散。
English: So he sent Han Yan to make an appointment for the battle, saying, "There is no one who is able to assemble my men and not scatter them."

古文：君若不还，无所逃命。 
现代文：君王如果不回去，我们将没有地方逃避命令。 
English: If the king doesn't return, we'll have nowhere to go to escape the order.

古文：秦伯使公孙枝对曰： 君之未入，寡人惧之，入而未定列，犹吾忧也。
现代文：秦穆公派公孙枝回答说： 晋君没有回国，我为他忧惧；回国后没有安定位置，还是我所担心的。
English: Qin Mu Gong sent Gongsun Zhi to reply, "I'm worried about Jinjun not returning to China. I'm worried about him not having a stable position after returning to China.

古文：苟列定矣，敢不承命。 
现代文：如果君位已定，寡人敢不接受作战的命令？ 
English: If the throne is already decided, who would dare not to accept the order to fight?

古文：韩简退曰： 吾幸而得囚。 
现代文：韩简退下去说： 我如果能被俘囚禁就是幸运的。 
English: Han Jian stepped back and said, "I'd be lucky to be captured and imprisoned."

古文：壬戌，战于韩原，晋戎马还泞而止。
现代文：十四日，秦、晋两军在韩原作战。晋惠公的小驷马陷在烂泥中盘旋不出。
English: On the 14th, the two armies of Qin and Jin fought in Han Yuan. Jin Huigong's pony got stuck in the mud and couldn't turn around.

古文：公号庆郑。
现代文：晋惠公向庆郑呼喊求救。
English: Jin Huigong shouted to Qing Zheng for help.

古文：庆郑曰： 愎谏违卜，固败是求，又何逃焉。 
现代文：庆郑说： 不听劝谏，违抗占卜，本来就是自取失败，为什么又要逃走呢？ 
English: Qing Zheng said, "If you don't listen to advice and defy divination, you will fail. Why do you want to run away?

古文：遂去之。
现代文：于是就离开了。
English: So he left.

古文：梁由靡御韩简，虢射为右，辂秦伯，将止之。
现代文：梁由靡驾韩简的战车，虢射作为车右，迎战秦穆公的战车，将要俘虏他。
English: Liang Yu is driving Han Jian's chariot, shooting arrows as the chariot's right, confronts Qin Mu Gong's chariot, and is about to capture him.

古文：郑以救公误之，遂失秦伯。
现代文：庆郑因为叫他们救援晋惠公而耽误，就使秦穆公走脱了。
English: Because Qing Zheng delayed calling them to rescue Jin Huigong, he let Qin Mukong escape.

古文：秦获晋侯以归。
现代文：秦国俘虏了晋惠公。
English: Qin captured Jin Huigong.

古文：晋大夫反首拔舍从之。
现代文：晋国的大夫披头散发，拔出帐篷，跟随晋惠公。
English: The doctor of Jin Province spread his head, pulled out his tent, and followed Jin Huigong.

古文：秦伯使辞焉，曰： 二三子何其慼也？
现代文：秦穆公派使者辞谢说： 你们几位为什么那样忧愁啊！
English: Qin Mu Gong sent an envoy to thank him and said: "Why are you so sad?

古文：寡人之从君而西也，亦晋之妖梦是践，岂敢以至。 
现代文：寡人跟随晋国国君往西去，只不过实现晋国的妖梦罢了，难道敢做得太过分吗？ 
English: Some people follow the prince of Jin to the west, but it is only to realize the dream of Jin. Do you dare to go too far?

古文：晋大夫三拜稽首曰： 君履后土而戴皇天，皇天后土实闻君之言，群臣敢在下风。 
现代文：晋国的大夫三拜叩头说： 君王踩着后土，而顶着皇天，皇天后土都听到了您的话，下臣们谨在下边听候吩咐。 
English: The doctor of Jin Province bowed three times and said: The king is stepping on the back soil, but standing on the Emperor's heaven, the Empress Dowager heard your words, and the subordinates are waiting for orders below.

古文：穆姬闻晋侯将至，以大子荦、弘与女简、璧登台而履薪焉。
现代文：秦穆姬听说晋惠公将要来到，领着太子莹、儿子弘和女儿简璧登上高台，踩着柴草。
English: Qin Mu Ji heard that Prince Jin Hui was coming, and he led Prince Ying, his son Hong and his daughter Jian Bi onto the platform, stepping on the firewood.

古文：使以免服衰绖逆，且告曰： 上天降灾，使我两君匪以玉帛相见，而以兴戎。
现代文：她派遣使者捧着遭丧所着丧服前去迎接秦穆公，说： 上天降下灾祸，让我两国国君不是用礼品相见而是兴动甲兵。
English: She sent an emissary to meet Qin Mu with the coffin and the coffin clothes, saying, "If heaven sends a calamity, let the two sovereigns meet not with gifts, but with armored soldiers."

古文：若晋君朝以入，则婢子夕以死；夕以入，则朝以死。唯君裁之。 
现代文：如果晋国国君早晨进入国都，那么我就晚上自焚；晚上进入，那么我就早晨自焚。请君王裁夺。 
English: If the prince of Jin enters the capital in the morning, then I will set myself on fire in the evening; if he enters in the evening, then I will set myself on fire in the morning.

古文：乃舍诸灵台。
现代文：于是秦穆公把晋惠公拘留在灵台。
English: As a result, Qin Mu Gong detained Jin Huigong in the spiritual platform.

古文：大夫请以入。
现代文：大夫请求把晋惠公带回国都。
English: The doctor requested that Jin Huigong be brought back to the capital.

古文：公曰： 获晋侯，以厚归也，既而丧归，焉用之？
现代文：秦穆公说： 俘获晋侯，本来是带着丰厚的收获回来的，但一回来就要发生丧事，这有什么用？
English: Qin Mukong said: Capturing Jin Hou, he originally came back with a bountiful harvest, but as soon as he came back, there would be a funeral. What good would that do?

古文：大夫其何有焉？
现代文：大夫又能得到什么呢？
English: What does the doctor get out of it?

古文：且晋人慼忧以重我，天地以要我。不图晋忧，重其怒也；我食吾言，背天地也。
现代文：而且晋国人用忧愁来感动我，用天地来约束我，如果不考虑晋国人的忧愁，就会加深他们对秦国的愤怒。
English: Moreover, the people of Jin used sorrow to move me, and heaven and earth to restrain me. If you do not consider the sorrow of the people of Jin, it will deepen their anger against Qin.

古文：重怒难任，背天不祥，必归晋君。 
现代文：我如果不履行自己的诺言，就是违背天地，加深愤怒会使我担当不起，违背天地会不吉利，一定要放晋君回国。 
English: If I do not fulfill my promise, I will be violating heaven and earth. Deepening my anger will make me unable to take responsibility. Violating heaven and earth will be unlucky. I must let Jinjun return to the country.

古文：公子絷曰： 不如杀之，无聚慝焉。 
现代文：公子絷说： 不如杀了他，不要积聚邪恶。 
English: "It's better to kill him, don't accumulate evil," he said.

古文：子桑曰： 归之而质其大子，必得大成。
现代文：子桑说： 放他回国而用他的太子作为人质，必然会得到很有利的讲和条件。
English: Zi Sang said, "If you let him return to China and use his prince as a hostage, you are bound to get very favorable terms and conditions."

古文：晋未可灭，而杀其君，祇以成恶。
现代文：晋国还不会灭亡，而杀掉它的国君，只能造成很坏的后果。
English: Jin will not yet perish, and killing its sovereign can only lead to very bad consequences.

古文：且史佚有言曰： 无始祸，无怙乱，无重怒。 
现代文：而且史佚有话说： 不要发动祸患，不要依靠动乱，不要增加愤怒。 
English: Moreover, Shi Yan had a saying: Don't unleash disaster, don't rely on turmoil, don't increase anger.

古文：重怒难任，陵人不祥。 
现代文：增加愤怒会使人难于担当，欺凌别人会不吉利。 
English: Increasing anger will make people difficult to handle, and bullying others will be unlucky.

古文：乃许晋平。
现代文：于是就允许晋国讲和。
English: As a result, Jin was allowed to make peace.

古文：晋侯使郤乞告瑕吕饴甥，且召之。子金教之言曰： 朝国人而以君命赏，且告之曰： 孤虽归，辱社稷矣。
现代文：晋惠公派遣郤乞告诉瑕吕饴甥，同时召他前来，饴甥教郤乞该怎么说话，说： 把都城里的人都召到宫门前而用国君的名义给予赏赐。
English: The Duke of Jin and Hui dispatched the eunuch to tell his nephew, and at the same time summoned him to come. The nephew taught the eunuch how to speak, saying: Call all the people in the capital to the front of the palace gate and give them a reward in the name of the sovereign.

古文：其卜贰圉也。  
现代文：而且告诉他们说： 我虽然回国了，但已经给国家带来了耻辱，还是占卜一个吉日，让我的继承人圉就国君之位吧。  
English: Moreover, he told them: Although I have returned home, I have already brought shame to the country, so let's predict a good day and let my successor take the place of the sovereign.

古文：众皆哭。
现代文：郤乞回去照办，大家一齐号哭。
English: The beggar went back and did as he was told. Everyone cried together.

古文：晋于是乎作爰田。
现代文：晋国就在这时开始改易田制，开阡陌从新规定田界。
English: It was at this time that Jin Province began to change the rice field system, and the new rice field boundaries were established.

古文：吕甥曰： 君亡之不恤，而群臣是忧，惠之至也。
现代文：吕饴甥说： 国君不为自己在外而担忧，反而为群臣担忧，这是最大的恩惠了，我们准备怎样对待国君？ 
English: Lv Yansong said, "The Emperor does not worry about himself when he is away, but worries about his courtiers. This is the greatest favor. How are we going to treat the Emperor?"

古文：将若君何？ 
现代文：大家说： 怎么办才行呢？ 
English: Everyone said: What can we do?

古文：众曰： 何为而可？ 对曰： 征缮以辅孺子。
现代文：吕饴甥回答说： 征收赋税，修理装备武器，以辅助继承人。
English: Lv Yongs nephew replied: collect taxes, repair equipment and weapons to assist the heir.

古文：诸侯闻之，丧君有君，群臣辑睦，甲兵益多，好我者劝，恶我者惧，庶有益乎！ 
现代文：诸侯听到我国失去了国君，又有新的国君，群臣和睦，装备武器比以前更多。喜欢我们的就会勉励我们，讨厌我们的就会有所害怕，也许会有好处吧！ 
English: When the lords hear that our country has lost its sovereign and has a new one, the courtiers are in harmony, and there are more weapons than before. If they like us, they will encourage us, and if they hate us, they will be afraid. Maybe it will be a good thing!

古文：众说。晋于是乎作州兵。
现代文：大家很高兴，晋国因为这样而开始兵制改革。
English: Everyone was very happy, and because of this, Jin Province began to reform the military system.

古文：初，晋献公筮嫁伯姬于秦，遇《归妹》之《睽》。
现代文：当初，晋献公为嫁伯姬给秦国而占筮，得到《归妹》变成《睽》卦。
English: At the beginning, Jin Xianguo took part in the marriage of Boji to Qin Guo and obtained "Gui Mei" to become "Ji" Guo.

古文：史苏占之曰： 不吉。
现代文：史苏预测说： 不吉利。
English: Su Su's prediction said: Unlucky.

古文：其繇曰： 士刲羊，亦无亡也。女承筐，亦无贶也。
现代文：卦辞说： 男人宰羊，不见血浆；女人拿筐，白忙一场。
English: Gua Zhi said: A man slaughters a sheep, but there is no blood plasma; a woman takes a basket, but it's all in vain.

古文：西邻责言，不可偿也。
现代文：西邻责备，不可补偿。
English: The western neighbor's reproach cannot be compensated.

古文：《归妹》之《睽》，犹无相也。 
现代文：《归妹》变《睽》，没人相帮。 
English: "Go back to your sister" has turned into "go away," and no one is helping.

古文：《震》之《离》，亦《离》之《震》，为雷为火，为嬴败姬，车说其輹，火焚其旗，不利行师，败于宗丘。
现代文：《震》卦变成《离》卦，也就是《离》卦变成《震》卦。 又是雷，又是火，胜者姓嬴，败者姓姬。车子脱离车轴，大火烧掉军旗，不利于出师，在宗丘打得大败。
English: The "earthquake" gua became the "leaving" gua, that is, the "leaving" gua became the "earthquake" gua. It was thunder and fire again, the winner was surnamed Zou, and the loser was surnamed Ji. The car broke away from the axle, the fire burned the military flag, which was not conducive to the formation of the division, and it was defeated in Zongqiu.

古文：《归妹》《睽》孤，寇张之弧，姪其从姑，六年其逋，逃归其国，而弃其家，明年其死于高梁之虚。 
现代文：《归妹》嫁女，《睽》离单孤，敌人的木弓将要张舒。侄子跟着姑姑，六年之后，逃回自己所居，抛弃了他的家，明年死在高梁的废墟。  
English: "Going back to my sister," the bride, "," left alone, the enemy's wooden bow will be Zhang Shu. The nephew followed his aunt, six years later, fled back to his home, abandoned his home, and died next year in the ruins of Gaoliang.

古文：及惠公在秦，曰： 先君若从史苏之占，吾不及此夫。 
现代文：等到惠公在秦国，说： 先君如果听从了史苏的占卜，我不会到这个地步！ 
English: When Huigong arrived in Qin, he said, "If my predecessor had listened to Shu Su's divination, I wouldn't have come to this!

古文：韩简侍，曰： 龟，象也；筮，数也。
现代文：韩简随侍在侧，说： 龟甲，是形象；筮草，是数字。
English: Han Jian, accompanied by the attendants, said: "The tortoise shell is an image; the thistle is a number.

古文：物生而后有象，象而后有滋，滋而后有数。
现代文：事物生长以后才有形象，有形象以后才能滋长，滋长以后才有数字。
English: After things grow, they have an image. After they have an image, they can grow. After they grow, they have numbers.

古文：先君之败德及，可数乎？
现代文：先君败坏的道德，难道可以数得完吗？
English: Is it possible to count the number of corrupt morals of our forefathers?

古文：史苏是占，勿从何益？
现代文：史苏的占卜，即使听从了，又有什么好处？
English: Su Su's divination, even if you listen to it, what good is it?

古文：《诗》曰： 下民之孽，匪降自天，噂沓背憎，职竞由人。  
现代文：《诗》说： 百姓的灾祸，不是从天下降。当面附和，背后毁谤，主要都由于人的无状。  
English: "Poem" says: "The calamity of the people does not come down from the sky. Accompaniment in the face, slander behind, are mainly due to people's lack of character."

古文：震夷伯之庙，罪之也。于是展氏有隐慝焉。
现代文：雷击夷伯的庙宇，这是降罪于他，由于可以看到展氏有别人不知道的隐恶。
English: The lightning hit the temple of Zhan Bo, which was a crime against him, because it could be seen that Zhan had hidden evils that others did not know.

古文：冬，宋人伐曹，讨旧怨也。
现代文：冬季，宋国人进攻曹国，为了报复以前结下的怨恨。
English: In winter, the Song people attacked Cao in order to avenge the grudge they had previously held.

古文：楚败徐于娄林，徐恃救也。
现代文：楚国在娄林打败徐国，徐国所以失败，是由于专靠别国去救援。
English: Chu defeated Xu in Yulin. The reason why Xu failed was that it relied on other countries to come to its rescue.

古文：十月，晋阴饴甥会秦伯，盟于王城。
现代文：十月，晋国的阴饴甥会见秦穆公，在王城订立盟约。
English: In October, Jin's nephew Yin Zang met with Qin Mu and made a pact in the royal city.

古文：秦伯曰： 晋国和乎？ 
现代文：秦穆公说： 晋国和睦吗？ 
English: Qin Mu Gong asked: Is the promotion of national reconciliation successful?

古文：对曰： 不和。
现代文：阴饴甥回答悦： 不和睦。
English: Lv Guo replied, "No reconciliation."

古文：小人耻失其君而悼丧其亲，不惮征缮以立圉也，曰： 必报仇，宁事戎狄。 
现代文：小人以失掉国君为耻辱，而哀悼失去了的亲属，不怕筹集资金，重整军队而立圉为国君，说： 一定报仇，宁可因此而事奉戎狄。 
English: The villain takes the loss of the sovereign as a disgrace, but mourns the lost relatives, is not afraid to raise funds, reorganize the army and establish himself as the sovereign, saying: "I will definitely take revenge, I would rather serve the military for this reason."

古文：君子爱其君而知其罪，不惮征缮以待秦命，曰： 必报德，有死无二。 
现代文：君子爱护国君而知道他的罪过，不怕筹集资金，重整军队来等待秦国的命令，说： 一定要报答恩德，有必死之志而无二心。 
English: The gentleman loved the sovereign and knew his sin, and was not afraid to raise funds and reorganize the army to wait for the order of the Qin State, saying: "We must repay the kindness, and have the will to die and no second thoughts."

古文：以此不和。 
现代文：因为这样才不和睦。 
English: That's why there's no harmony.

古文：秦伯曰： 国谓君何？ 
现代文：秦穆公说： 全国认为国君的前途会怎么样？ 
English: Qin Mukong asked: What does the whole country think of Guojun's future?

古文：对曰： 小人慼，谓之不免。君子恕，以为必归。
现代文：阴饴甥回答说： 小人忧愁，认为他不会被赦免；君子宽恕，以为他一定会回来。
English: The nephew replied, "The villain grieves, thinking that he will not be pardoned; the gentleman forgives, thinking that he will definitely return."

古文：小人曰： 我毒秦，秦岂归君？ 
现代文：小人说： 我们得罪了秦国，秦国怎么能让国君回来？ 
English: The little man said, "We have offended the Qin State. How can the Qin State allow its sovereign to return?

古文：君子曰： 我知罪矣。秦必归君。
现代文：君子说： 我们已经认罪了，秦国一定让国君回来。
English: The gentleman said, "We have confessed our sins, and the Qin state will definitely let the sovereign return."

古文：贰而执之，服而舍之，德莫厚焉，刑莫威焉。
现代文：有三心二意，就抓起来；服了罪，就释放他。德行没有比这再宽厚的了，刑罚没有比这再威严的了。
English: If he is half-hearted, he is arrested; if he is guilty, he is released. There is no more generous virtue, no more majestic punishment.

古文：服者怀德，贰者畏刑。此一役也，秦可以霸。
现代文：服罪的怀念德行，有三心二意的害怕刑罚，这一战役，秦国可以称霸诸侯。
English: Guilty of nostalgia for virtue, half-hearted fear of punishment, this campaign, Qin can dominate the princes.

古文：纳而不定，废而不立，以德为怨，秦不其然。  
现代文：让他回国而不使之安定，甚至废掉他而不立他为国君，使恩惠变为怨恨，秦国不会这样做的吧！  
English: Let him return to the country without stabilizing it, even abolish him without appointing him as the country's ruler, and turn favor into resentment, Qin will not do this!

古文：秦伯曰： 是吾心也。 
现代文：秦穆公说： 我正是这样想的。 
English: Qin Mukong said, "That's exactly what I thought."

古文：改馆晋侯，馈七牢焉。
现代文：于是改变对晋惠公的待遇，让他住在宾馆里，馈送了七副牛、羊、猪等食用物品。
English: As a result, they changed Jin Huigong's treatment, letting him live in a hotel and giving him seven cows, sheep, pigs and other edible items.

古文：蛾析谓庆郑曰： 盍行乎？ 
现代文：蛾析对庆郑说： 何不逃走呢？ 
English: Moth analysis said to Qing Zheng: Why not run away?

古文：对曰： 陷君于败，败而不死，又使失刑，非人臣也。
现代文：庆郑回答说： 使国君陷于失败，失败了不死反而逃亡，又让国君失去刑罚，这就不是做臣下的样子。
English: Qing Zheng replied: To make the sovereign fall into defeat, to fail and not die, but to escape, and to let the sovereign lose the penalty, this is not the appearance of being a subject.

古文：臣而不臣，行将焉入？ 
现代文：臣下而不合于臣道，又能逃到哪里去？ 
English: If you are a vassal and do not conform to the vassal way, where can you escape to?

古文：十一月晋侯归。
现代文：十一月，晋惠公回国。
English: In November, Jin Huigong returned to China.

古文：丁丑，杀庆郑而后入。
现代文：二十九日，杀了庆郑，然后进入国都。
English: On the 29th, he killed Qing Zheng and then entered the capital.

古文：是岁，晋又饥，秦伯又饩之粟，曰： 吾怨其君而矜其民。
现代文：这一年，晋国又发生饥荒，秦穆公赠送给他们粟米，说： 我怨恨他们的国君，而怜悯他们的百姓。
English: In the same year, there was another famine in Jin. Qin Mu Gong presented them with corn, saying, "I hate their sovereign, but pity their people."

古文：且吾闻唐叔之封也，箕子曰 其后必大。 
现代文：而且我听说唐叔受封的时候，箕子说： 他的后代一定昌大。 
English: Moreover, I heard that when Uncle Tang was enthroned, Zizi said: His descendants will certainly be great.

古文：晋其庸可冀乎！
现代文：晋国是可以图谋的吗！
English: Can Jin Province be plotted?

古文：姑树德焉，以待能者。 
现代文：我们姑且树立恩惠，来等待有才能的人。 
English: Let's set up a bounty to wait for talented people.

古文：于是秦始征晋河东，置官司焉。
现代文：于是，秦国就开始在晋国黄河东部征收赋税，设置官员。
English: As a result, Qin began to collect taxes and set up officials in the eastern part of the Yellow River in Jin.

