古文：六年春，王正月，王人子突救卫。
现代文：六年春天，周历正月，周庄王的属官子突的率军救援卫国。
English: In the spring of the sixth year, the first month of the lunar calendar, Zhou Zhuang Wang's subordinate officials led the army to rescue and defend the country.

古文：夏六月，卫侯朔入于卫。
现代文：夏季六月，卫惠公回到卫国。
English: In the summer of June, Wei Huigong returned to Wei Province.

古文：秋，公至自伐卫。
现代文：秋季，鲁庄公从攻打卫国的地方回国。
English: In the autumn, Prince Luzhuang returned to China from the place where he had attacked and defended the country.

古文：螟。
现代文：有虫害。
English: A plague of locusts.

古文：冬，齐人来归卫俘。
现代文：冬季，齐国人来归还卫国的宝器。
English: In winter, the people of Qi came to return the treasure of national defense.

古文：六年春，王人救卫。
现代文：六年春季，周庄王的属官叫子突的率军救援卫国。
English: In the spring of the sixth year, Zhou Zhuang Wang's subordinate officers called Zidong to lead the army to rescue and defend the country.

古文：夏，卫侯入，放公子黔牟于周，放甯跪于秦，杀左公子洩、右公子职，乃即位。
现代文：夏季，卫惠公回国，放逐公子黔牟到成周，放逐甯跪到秦国，杀了左公子泄、右公子职，这才即位。
English: In the summer, Prince Wei Hui returned to China, exiled his son Gong Mou to Cheng Zhou, exiled his son Yao to kneel in Qin, and killed his left and right sons before ascending to the throne.

古文：君子以二公子之立黔牟为不度矣。
现代文：君子认为左、右二公子扶立黔牟为国君， 是一种很欠考虑始终的行为。
English: The nobles thought that it was a very inconsiderate act for the two nobles on the left and right to help establish Shomu as the ruler of the country.

古文：夫能固位者必度于本末而后立衷焉。
现代文：对能够巩固自己地位的人，必须考虑他的各方面，然后用适当的方式立他为国君。
English: For a person who can consolidate his position, it is necessary to consider all aspects of him, and then establish him as the ruler of the country in an appropriate manner.

古文：不知其本，不谋。知本之不枝，弗强。《诗》云： 本枝百世。 
现代文：不了解他的根本，就是缺乏谋略；了解到虽有根本却没有枝叶，就不要勉强树立他。《诗》说： 有本有枝，繁衍百世。  
English: If you do not understand the root of it, you lack the strategy; if you understand that although there is a root, there are no branches, you should not reluctantly establish it. "Poem" says: There are roots and branches, and they can be propagated for a hundred generations.

古文：冬，齐人来归卫宝，文姜请之也。
现代文：冬季，齐国人前来归还卫国的宝器，这是由于文姜的请求。
English: In winter, the people of Qi came to return the treasure of national defense, which was due to Wen Jiang's request.

古文：楚文王伐申，过邓。
现代文：楚文王进攻申国，路过邓国。
English: King Chu Wen attacked Shen and passed by Deng.

古文：邓祁侯曰： 吾甥也。 
现代文：邓祁侯说： 他是我的外甥。
English: Deng Yuhou said: He is my nephew.

古文：止而享之。
现代文：把他留下而设宴招待他。
English: Let him stay and give him a feast.

古文：骓甥、耼甥、养甥请杀楚子，邓侯弗许。
现代文：骓甥、聃甥、养甥请求杀掉楚文王。邓侯不允许。
English: His great-nephew, great-great-nephew, and foster-nephew asked to kill King Chuwen, but Deng Hou did not allow it.

古文：三甥曰： 亡邓国者，必此人也。
现代文：这三甥都说： 灭亡邓国的，必定是这个人。
English: All three nephews said, "This man must be the cause of the downfall of Deng Guo."

古文：若不早图，后君噬齐，其及图之乎？
现代文：如果不早打主意，君王后悔便来不及了。
English: If he doesn't make up his mind soon, it will be too late for him to regret.

古文：图之，此为时矣。 
现代文：现在下手还来得及！下手吧，现在正是时候！ 
English: There's still time to get started! Get started, now is the time!

古文：邓侯曰： 人将不食吾馀。 
现代文：邓侯说： 如果这样做，人们会唾弃我而不吃我剩下的东西的。 
English: Deng Hou said, "If I do this, people will spit on me and not eat my leftovers."

古文：对曰： 若不从三臣，抑社稷实不血食，而君焉取余。 
现代文：三位外甥回答说： 如果不听我们三个人的话，土地和五谷的神明就得不到祭享，君王到哪里去取得祭神的剩余？ 
English: The three nephews replied, "If you do not listen to us three, the gods of the land and grain will not be able to enjoy the offerings. Where will the king get the rest of the offerings to the gods?"

古文：弗从。
现代文：邓祁侯还是不答应。
English: Akihiro didn't listen.

古文：还年，楚子伐邓。
现代文：攻打申国回国的那一年，楚王进攻邓国。
English: In the year when he attacked Sheng and returned to China, King Chu attacked Deng.

古文：十六年，楚复伐邓，灭之。
现代文：庄公十六年，楚国再次攻打邓国，终于灭亡了邓国。
English: In the 16th year of Zhuangguo, Chu attacked Deng again, and Deng was finally defeated.

