古文：天有常性，人有常顺，顺在可变，性在不改。
现代文：上天有固定不变的规律，人有顺应自然而养成的行为。人的行为在于可以变化，自然规律则不可改易。
English: Heaven has a fixed and unchanging law, and people have behaviors that are developed in accordance with nature. Human behavior can be changed, but the laws of nature cannot be changed.

古文：不改可因，因在好恶，好恶生变，变习生常，常则生丑，丑命生德。
现代文：不可改易就只能因循沿袭，而因循与否在于人的好恶。好恶可以产生变化，改变原有习惯，产生新的恒常。
English: You can only follow the lineage if you can't change it, and whether you follow it or not depends on people's likes and dislikes. Likes and dislikes can produce changes, change the original habits, and produce new constants.

古文：明王于是生，政以正之。民生而有习有常，以习为常，以常为慎。民若生于中，习常为常。
现代文：有恒常就可以产生耻丑，耻丑明就能生道德，英明君王因此而设立政教，借以修正人的习惯与常行。民众生来就有习惯，有常行。如果变习惯为常行，以常行为自然行为，人就如同生活在自然之中，人的习惯要变为常行，当从幼小时候开始。
English: People are born with habits and routines. If habits are changed to routines, and routines are changed to natural behaviors, people will be like living in nature. People's habits should be changed to routines, and this should start at a young age.

古文：夫习民乃常，为自血气始。
现代文：英明君王从幼小时候的耳目习惯上让民众明白什么是耻丑。
English: From a young age, the Wise Monarch had the habit of letting the people know what was shameful.

古文：明王自血气耳目之习，以明之丑。丑明乃乐义，乐义乃至上，上贤而不穷。
现代文：耻丑明白就能喜爱合宜的行为。喜爱合宜行为就能达于上司，上司就会多财而不匮乏。
English: Shame and ugliness can clearly love appropriate behavior. Love appropriate behavior can reach the boss, the boss will be rich and not lack.

古文：哀乐不淫，民知其至，而至于子孙，民乃有古。
现代文：哀乐不要过头，民众就会知道满足。这种风气子孙相传，民众乃有古朴之风。
English: Don't overdo the mourning and joy, and the people will know contentment. This style is passed down from generation to generation, and the people have a quaint style.

古文：古者因民以顺民。
现代文：远古时候就是依靠百姓而使百姓顺服的。
English: In ancient times, they relied on the people to make them obey.

古文：夫民群居而无选，为政以始之，始之以古，终之以古。
现代文：群居而没有首领，就设立长官以治理他们。开始治理用古法，最终也用古法。
English: When a band is without a leader, a chief is appointed to govern them, at first according to the old law, and eventually according to the old law.

古文：行古志，今政之至也。
现代文：行古法而治今事，是最好的政治。
English: It is the best policy to follow the ancient law and deal with the current situation.

古文：政维今，法维古。
现代文：即政令是现在的，而法规是古代的。
English: That is to say, the decrees are modern, but the laws are ancient.

古文：顽贪以疑，疑意以两，平两以参，参伍以权，权数以多，多宁以允，允德以慎，慎微以始而敬。终乃不困。
现代文：民众凶顽贪财，是由于思想糊涂；思想糊涂，是由于内心有矛盾。要消除矛盾，得用外在的政令法律，交错地使用权力。这样，政令之类必多。多了就难以允当。要允当就应谨慎。从谨慎细微处开始，认真对待结尾，最终才不致受困。
English: The fierce greed of the people is due to muddled thinking; muddled thinking is due to inner contradictions. To eliminate contradictions, it is necessary to use external decrees and laws, and stagger the use of power. In this way, there must be more decrees and the like. If there are more, it is difficult to be reasonable. To be reasonable, it should be cautious. Start with caution and subtlety, take the end seriously, and finally do not get trapped.

古文：困在坟，诱在王，民乃苟，苟乃不明，哀乐不时，四征不显，六极不服，把八政不顺，九德有奸，九奸不迁，万物不至。
现代文：困顿在于政令繁多，君王以此诱民，民众就会苟且。苟且就不知耻丑，哀乐就没有时限，四征就会不显明，六极就会不服从，八政就会不和顺，九德就会虚伪。九种奸伪不去掉，万物就不会到来。
English: The difficulty lies in the fact that there are many decrees, and the king lures the people with them, and the people will be obstinate. If they are obstinate, they will not know shame, sorrow and joy will not have a time limit, the four signs will not be obvious, the six poles will not obey, the eight politics will not be harmonious, and the nine virtues will be hypocritical. If the nine kinds of hypocrisy are not eliminated, everything will not come.

古文：夫礼非克不承，非乐不竟，民是复生□，好恶有四征，喜乐忧哀，动之以则，发之以文，成之以民，行之以化。
现代文：如同礼仪，非顺达不能奉行，非和谐不能终了。民众由是缺乏活命之理。人的好恶从四方面体现：欢喜、快乐、忧伤、悲哀。按法规动作，从政令出发，顺民众办事，应变化而行。
English: As with etiquette, if it is not harmonious, it cannot be carried out, and if it is not harmonious, it cannot be ended. The reason is that the people lack the reason for living. People's likes and dislikes are reflected in four aspects: joy, happiness, sadness, and sorrow. Act according to laws and regulations, proceed from government orders, act in accordance with the people, and act according to changes.

古文：命、丑、福、赏、祸、罚，六极不嬴，八政和平。
现代文：六极是：命令、羞辱、赐福、奖赏、降祸、惩罚。六极不过头，八政就会和谐平正。
English: The six principles are: command, humiliate, bless, reward, curse, and punish. If the six principles are not overdone, the eight principles will be harmonious and equitable.

古文：八政：夫妻、父子、兄弟、君臣。
现代文：八政是：夫为妻正，父为子正，兄为弟正，君为臣正。
English: The eight principles are: husband for wife, father for son, brother for brother, and lord for vassal.

古文：八政不怩，九德纯恪。
现代文：八政不逆反，九德就能纯一恭敬。
English: If the eight principles are not reversed, the nine virtues can be pure and respectful.

古文：九德：忠、信、敬、刚、柔、和、固、贞、顺。
现代文：九德是：忠实、诚信、恭敬、刚烈、柔和、和睦、坚定、忠贞、温顺。
English: The nine virtues are: faithfulness, sincerity, reverence, fortitude, gentleness, harmony, firmness, loyalty, and meekness.

古文：顺言曰政，顺政曰遂，遂伪曰奸，奸物在目，奸声在耳，耳目有疑。
现代文：听从其言叫做 政 ，顺从政令叫做 遂 ，成其虚伪叫做 奸 。奸物在眼中，奸声在耳中，耳目必有疑惑。
English: To obey its words is called politics, to obey its decrees is called sui, to be its hypocrite is called treachery. Treachery is in the eyes, treachery is in the ears, and there must be doubt in the eyes and ears.

古文：疑言有枢，枢动有和，和意无等。
现代文：疑惑必有转轴，机枢转动，疑惑便可调和。
English: Doubts must have a pivot, and when the pivot turns, doubts can be reconciled.

古文：万民无法，□□在赦，□复在古，古者，明王奉法以明幽，幽王奉幽以废法，则一人也，而绩功不同，明王是以敬微而顺分。
现代文：调和疑惑如不分等类，万民则无法依。可治理之法在于政治，而法规则在于从古。古代英明君王遵奉法规以明其昏暗，而昏王则奉守幽暗而废弃法规。都是一样的遵奉，功绩却不相同。
English: If there is no distinction between classes, all people will not be able to reconcile their doubts. The governable law lies in politics, and the rule of law lies in the ancients. In ancient times, the wise kings obeyed the laws to clarify their obscurity, while the dim kings obeyed the obscurity and abandoned the laws. They all obeyed the same, but their merits were different.

