古文：郭祚张彝孙晏之曾孙乾威邢峦弟子昕族孙臧邵李崇从弟平平子奖谐
现代文：郭祚，字季祐，太原晋阳人，是北魏车骑将军郭淮的弟弟郭亮的后代。
English: Guo Yao, surnamed Ji Yu, a native of Taiyuan and Jinyang, was a descendant of Guo Liang, the younger brother of the Northern Wei cavalry general Guo Huai.

古文：太武时，浩亲宠用事，拜逸徐州刺史，假榆次侯，赠光禄大夫。父洪之，坐浩事诛。祚亡窜得免。
现代文：祖父郭逸，任本州的别驾，先后把自己的两个女儿嫁给司徒崔浩做妻子，一个女儿嫁给崔浩的兄弟、上党太守崔恬。太武帝时，崔浩受朝廷重用，因而，郭逸被任为徐州刺史。父亲郭洪之，受崔浩的株连被杀害，郭祚因逃跑才免于一死。
English: Guo Yizhong's grandfather Guo Yizhong married two of his daughters to the scholar Cui Hao, and one daughter to Cui Hao's brother, the paramount party leader Cui Yao. During the reign of the Taiwu Emperor, Cui Hao was heavily used by the imperial court, and Guo Yizhong was appointed as the official historian of Xuzhou. Guo Hongzhi's father Guo Hongzhi was killed by Cui Hao's followers, and Guo Yizhong only escaped death by fleeing.

古文：少孤贫，姿貌不伟，乡人莫之识。
现代文：他从小无依无靠，贫穷潦倒，姿容相貌并不惊人，家乡的人都不认识他。
English: He grew up poor and destitute, his appearance was unremarkable, and no one in his hometown knew him.

古文：有女巫相祚后当富贵。
现代文：有一个女巫给他相面后认为他今后一定会大富大贵。
English: A witch gave him a face-to-face meeting and told him he would be rich and famous.

古文：祚涉历经史，习崔浩之书，尺牍文章见称于世。
现代文：郭祚博览经典史籍，学习崔浩的书籍，书信和文章都闻名当世。
English: Guo Gan's exposition of classic historical books, study of Cui Hao's books, letters and articles are famous in the world.

古文：弱冠为州主簿，刺史孙小委之书记。
现代文：二十岁任州主簿，刺史孙小委任他做书记。
English: At the age of twenty, he was appointed as the state's chief accountant, after which Sun Xiao appointed him as secretary.

古文：又太原太守王希彦，逸妻之侄也，共相赒恤，乃振。
现代文：太原太守王希彦，是他祖父郭逸的妻子的侄子，不断周济他，才使他振作。
English: Taiyuan governor Wang Xihian, the nephew of his grandfather Guo Yi's wife, kept giving him money to cheer him up.

古文：孝文初，举秀才，对策上第，拜中书博士。转中书侍郎，迁尚书左丞，长兼给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：孝文帝初年，郭祚被举荐为秀才，朝廷对策为上等，被任命为中书博士，转任为中书侍郎，又提升为尚书左丞。稍后，又任给事黄门侍郎。
English: In the first year of Emperor Xiaowen, Guo Qi was recommended as a brilliant person, and the imperial court's countermeasures were superior. He was appointed as a Doctor of Chinese Calligraphy, transferred to the position of a Chinese Calligraphy Attendant, and promoted to the position of a Senior Calligraphy Attendant. Later, he was also appointed as a Yellow Gate Attendant.

古文：祚清勤在公，夙夜匪懈，帝甚赏之。
现代文：他清廉谨慎，昼夜都不懈怠，孝文帝很赏识他。
English: He was honest and prudent, and never slacked off day or night. Emperor Xiaowen appreciated him very much.

古文：从南征，及还，正黄门。
现代文：跟随孝文帝南征，回来后任正黄门。
English: He followed Emperor Xiaowen in the Southern Expedition, and after his return, he was appointed to the position of Zhenghuangmen.

古文：车驾幸长安，行经渭桥，过淮庙，问祚曰： 是卿祖宗所承邪？ 
现代文：孝文帝去长安，路经渭桥，见一座郭淮庙，问郭祚： 这里供奉的是你的祖宗吗？ 
English: Emperor Xiaowen was on his way to Chang'an. Passing by the Long Bridge, he saw a Guo Huai Temple. He asked Guo Hui: Is it your ancestors who are worshipped here?

古文：祚曰： 是臣七世伯祖。 
现代文：他答道： 是我的七世伯祖。 
English: He replied, "He is my seventh great-uncle."

古文：帝曰： 先贤后哲，顿在一门。 
现代文：孝文帝说： 先人贤能，后世俊哲，都出在一门。 
English: Emperor Xiaowen said: Ancestor's wisdom and ability, and future generations' wisdom and ability, all come from the same source.

古文：祚对曰： 昔臣先人以通儒英博，唯事魏文。微臣虚薄，遭奉圣明，自惟幸甚。 
现代文：郭祚说 ：过去我的祖先渊博宏通，只侍奉魏文帝；我浅薄卑陋，遇上圣明的君主，自觉十分幸运。 
English: Guo Wei said: In the past, my ancestors were very wealthy and only served Emperor Weiwen; I am shallow and humble, and I feel very lucky to have met a saintly monarch.

古文：因敕以太牢祭淮庙，令祚自撰祭文。
现代文：孝文帝下令用由牛、羊、猪做成的最贵重的祭品祭祀郭淮庙，让郭祚自己撰写祭文。
English: Emperor Xiaowen ordered to use the most precious offerings made of cattle, sheep and pigs to worship Guo Huai Temple, and let Guo Wei himself write the ritual.

古文：以赞迁洛之规，赐爵东光子。
现代文：不久，他因参与迁都洛阳的筹划，赐爵为东光子。
English: Soon after, he was knighted as Dongguangzi for his participation in the plan to move the capital to Luoyang.

古文：孝文曾幸华林园，因观故景阳山。
现代文：孝文帝曾到华林园，顺便观看过去的景阳山。
English: Emperor Xiaowen once went to the Hualing Garden to see the Jingyang Mountain.

古文：祚曰： 山以仁静，水以智流，愿陛下修之。 
现代文：郭祚建议 ：山以仁爱静谧，水因智慧畅流。希望陛下整修这座山。 
English: Guo Wei suggested: The mountain is tranquil with benevolence and love, and the water flows smoothly with wisdom. I hope His Majesty will renovate this mountain.

古文：帝曰： 魏明以奢失于前，朕何为袭之于后？ 
现代文：孝文帝说 ：魏明帝因奢侈已失误在前，我为什么还要跟在他的后面学？ 
English: Xiaowendi said: Wei Mingdi has made mistakes because of his extravagance, so why should I follow his footsteps?

古文：祚曰： 高山仰止。 
现代文：郭祚叹道 ：真是高山仰止。 
English: Guo Yu sighed, "It really is like being in the mountains."

古文：帝曰： 得非景行之谓？ 
现代文：孝文帝接着说 ：难道不是景行行之吗？ 
English: Emperor Xiaowen went on to say, "Isn't it Jingxing Xingzhi?

古文：迁散骑常侍，仍领黄门。
现代文：郭祚升迁任散骑常侍，仍任黄门一职。
English: Guo Jian was promoted to the position of straggler's equerry and still held the position of Huangmen.

古文：是时，孝文锐意典礼，兼铨镜九流，又迁都草创，征讨不息；内外规略，号为多事。
现代文：这时，孝文帝锐意建立典章礼仪，加上铨选九品中正人才，又要迁都，一切都需创立。而不断征讨用兵，朝廷内外都需规划谋略，国家诸事纷繁。
English: At this time, Emperor Xiaowen was determined to establish the ceremony and etiquette, as well as the selection of nine honorable people, and the capital was to be moved. Everything needed to be created. While soldiers were constantly being recruited, both inside and outside the imperial court needed to plan and strategize, and the country was in turmoil.

古文：祚与黄门宋弁参谋帷幄，随其才用，各有委寄。
现代文：郭祚与黄门宋弁帮助孝文帝参谋运筹，根据每个人的才干，委以不同的重任。
English: Guo Wei and Huangmen Song Ben helped Emperor Xiaowen to plan the operation of the staff, and assigned different responsibilities according to each person's talents.

古文：祚承禀注疏，特成勤剧。
现代文：郭祚负责注释经书，他终于完成了这项辛苦而繁杂的任务。
English: Guo Gan was in charge of annotating the scriptures, and he finally completed this arduous and complicated task.

古文：尝以立冯昭仪，百官夕饮清徽后园。
现代文：孝文帝因册立冯后的姐姐为昭仪，晚上在清徽后园宴请朝臣。
English: Emperor Xiaowen made Feng Hou's sister Zhaoyi the empress dowager, and invited the courtier to a banquet in Qinghui Hou's garden in the evening.

古文：孝文举觞赐祚及崔光曰： 郭祚忧勤庶事，独不欺我。
现代文：孝文帝举起酒杯赐给郭祚和崔光，说： 郭祚忧劳勤勉于国事，从不欺骗我。
English: Emperor Xiaowen raised a cup of wine and gave it to Guo Gan and Cui Guang, saying: Guo Gan worked diligently in state affairs and never deceived me.

古文：崔光温良博物，朝之儒秀。
现代文：崔光温和善良，见闻广博，是我朝儒林的俊秀。
English: Cui Guang is gentle and kind, well-known and well-known. He is the most handsome man in the Julin dynasty.

古文：不劝此两人，当劝谁也！ 
现代文：不劝他两人喝酒，应当劝谁呢？ 
English: If he will not persuade them both to drink, who is he to persuade?

古文：其见知若此。
现代文：他如此被孝文帝看重。
English: He was so valued by Emperor Xiaowen.

古文：初，孝文以李彪为散骑常侍，祚因入见，帝谓祚曰： 朕昨误授一人官。 
现代文：一次，孝文帝任李彪为散骑常侍，郭祚入见孝文帝，孝文帝对他说 ：我昨天误授给一个人官职。 
English: On one occasion, Emperor Xiaowen appointed Li Biao as a straggler equerry. Guo Gan went to see Emperor Xiaowen, and Emperor Xiaowen said to him, "I mistakenly gave an official post to someone yesterday."

古文：祚对曰： 岂容圣诏一行，而有差异！ 
现代文：郭祚说 ：圣上的诏书颁发，怎么能允许有差错？ 
English: Guo Wei said, "When a sacred edict is issued, how can mistakes be allowed?"

古文：帝沈吟曰： 此自应有让，因让，朕欲别授一官。 
现代文：孝文帝沉吟许久说 ：我自应受到责备，因为你的责备，我想另授给李彪一个别的官职。 
English: Emperor Xiaowen pondered for a long time and said, "I deserve to be reproached. Because of your reproach, I want to give Li Biao another official post."

古文：须臾，彪有启云： 伯石辞卿，子产所恶，臣欲之已久，不敢辞让。 
现代文：不大一会儿，李彪有奏章送上，说： 伯石辞去公卿，子产很是厌恶。我想得到这个官职已经很久，不敢推辞。 
English: Not long after, Li Biao sent a report to the emperor, saying: "Father Shi has resigned as a court noble, and the children are disgusted. I have wanted to get this official post for a long time, and I dare not refuse.

古文：帝叹谓祚曰： 卿之忠谏，李彪正辞，使朕迟回，不能复决。 
现代文：孝文帝叹着气对郭祚说 ：你的忠诚进谏，李彪的义正辞严，使我处境两难，不能再作决定。 
English: Emperor Xiaowen sighed and said to Guo Yu, "Your loyalty to me and Li Biao's righteous words have put me in a dilemma, and I can no longer make a decision.

古文：遂不换李彪官也。
现代文：便不撤换李彪。
English: He did not remove or replace Li Biao.

古文：乘舆南讨，祚以兼侍中从，拜尚书，进爵为伯。
现代文：孝文帝南征，郭祚以侍中的身份随从，又被任命为尚书，晋爵号为伯。
English: Emperor Xiaowen led the Southern Expedition, and Guo Jie followed as an attendant. He was also appointed as Shangshu, and received the title of Shangjie.

古文：孝文崩，咸阳王禧等奏祚兼吏部尚书。
现代文：孝文帝去世，咸阳王元禧等人奏请朝廷任郭祚兼任吏部尚书。
English: After the death of Emperor Xiaowen, Xianyang King Yuanxi and others petitioned the imperial court to appoint Guo Jian as an official of the Ministry of Civil Affairs.

古文：寻除长兼吏部尚书、并州大中正。宣武诏以奸吏逃刑，县配远戍，若永避不出，兄弟代之。祚奏曰： 若以奸吏逃窜，徙其兄弟，罪人妻子，复应徙之，此则一人之罪，祸倾二室。
现代文：宣武帝下诏说：奸吏逃避刑罚，就将他发配远方；如果长久躲着不出来，就让他的兄弟代替。郭祚启奏说 ：如果因奸吏逃窜，流配他的兄弟，那么罪人的妻子，也应流配。这样，一人犯罪，祸及二家。
English: Emperor Xuanwu issued an edict: "If a traitor escapes punishment, he shall be exiled to a distant place; if he cannot escape for a long time, his brother shall take his place." Guo Qi said: "If a traitor escapes punishment and his brother is exiled, then the wife of the traitor should also be exiled. Thus, if one person commits a crime, the misfortune will spread to two families."

古文：愚谓罪人既逃，止徙妻子，走者之身，县名永配，于眚不免，奸途自塞。 
现代文：我认为罪人既然逃跑，只流配他的妻子。逃跑者本人记名永远流配，有病也不免除。这样，奸途就会被堵塞。 
English: I think that since the criminal has fled, only his wife will be exiled. The fugitive himself will be exiled forever, even if he is ill. In this way, the treacherous path will be blocked.

古文：诏从之。寻正吏部。
现代文：宣武帝下诏采纳他的意见，不久，他正式任吏部尚书。
English: Emperor Xuanwu issued an edict to adopt his opinion, and soon he was officially appointed as the secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs.

古文：祚持身洁清，重惜官位。
现代文：郭祚自身廉洁清净，爱惜官位。
English: Guo Gan himself is honest and clean, and cherishes his official position.

古文：至于铨授，假令得人，必徘徊久之，然后下笔，下笔即云： 此人便以贵矣。 
现代文：铨选人才，授予官职时，即使人选合适，也必定犹豫很长时间，然后才下笔批示。下笔时便说 ：这人便因此获得富贵了。 
English: When selecting talent and awarding official positions, even if the candidate is suitable, he must hesitate for a long time before writing down instructions. When writing down, he said: This person has become rich because of this.

古文：由是事颇稽滞，当时每招怨讟。
现代文：因此，事情往往被牵延耽误，因而当时常招致怨言。
English: As a result, matters were often delayed, leading to complaints at the time.

古文：然所拔用者，皆量才称职，时又以此归之。
现代文：然而，所选拔的人都量才称职，人们又因此归功于他。
English: However, he was given credit for selecting the best people for the job.

古文：出为使持节、镇北将军、瀛州刺史。
现代文：出任为使持节、镇北将军、瀛州刺史。
English: He was appointed as the envoy of the festival, the general of Zhenbei and the historian of Zhangzhou.

古文：及太极殿成，祚朝于京师，转镇东将军、青州刺史。
现代文：太极殿建成，郭祚到京城朝拜，转任为镇东将军、青州刺史。
English: After the completion of the Taiji Hall, Guo Gan went to Beijing to pay homage, and was appointed as the general of Zhendong and the historian of Qingzhou.

古文：祚逢岁不稔，阖境饥弊，矜伤爱下，多所振恤，虽断决淹留，号为烦缓，然士女怀其德泽。
现代文：遭逢荒歉，全境饥饿，郭祚怜爱灾民，多方救济。虽然决断优柔，被人称为繁琐缓慢，然而，地方男女都怀念他的恩泽。
English: Although his decision-making was indecisive, and he was called slow and cumbersome, local men and women still miss his grace.

古文：入为侍中、金紫光禄大夫、并州大中正。
现代文：他被调入朝廷，任侍中、金紫光禄大夫、并州大中正。
English: He was transferred to the imperial court, and served as a chamberlain, a doctor of the Jin Zi Guang Lu, and a vice-president of the State University.

古文：迁尚书右仆射。
现代文：迁任尚书右仆射。
English: He was transferred to the position of Shangshu's right-hand man.

古文：时议定新令，诏祚与侍中、黄门参议刊正。
现代文：当时，议定新的法令，下诏命郭祚与侍中、黄门一起讨论确定。
English: At that time, a new decree was agreed upon, and Guo Gan was ordered to discuss and confirm it with the chamberlains and the Yellow Gate.

古文：故事，令、仆、中丞驺唱而入宫门，至于马道。
现代文：朝廷旧例：令、仆射、中丞骑马，由骑卒传呼入宫，可以到马道。
English: The Imperial Court's old practice: the emperor, his servants, and junior courtiers rode on horseback, and were summoned to the palace by courtiers. They could go to the horse-drawn carriage.

古文：及祚为仆射，以为非尽敬之宜，言于帝，纳之。
现代文：郭祚任仆射，认为这是对皇上不敬重的表现，报告给了宣武帝，朝廷采纳了他的建议。
English: Guo Junren thought that this was a sign of disrespect to the emperor, and reported it to Emperor Xuanwu. The court accepted his suggestion.

古文：下诏御在太极，驺唱至止车门；御在朝堂，至司马门。
现代文：下诏规定，君主在太极殿，大臣入宫，传呼开道至止车门；君主在朝堂，传呼开道至司马门。
English: According to the following edict, when the monarch is in the Taiji Hall and a minister enters the palace, the herald calls out to open the way to the car door; when the monarch is in the court, the herald calls out to open the way to the Sima door.

古文：驺唱不入宫，自此始也。
现代文：传呼开道不能在宫廷中进行，就从这里开始。
English: If you can't do it in the court, start here.

古文：诏祚本官领太子少师。
现代文：朝廷下诏命郭祚以原来的官职兼任太子少师。
English: Under the imperial edict, the imperial court ordered Guo Jun to take up his former official position as the prince's junior teacher.

古文：祚曾从幸东宫，明帝幼弱，祚持一黄出奉之。
现代文：他曾随宣武帝到东宫，太子元诩年龄很小，郭祚将一个黄扁瓜瓜送给他。
English: He once accompanied Emperor Xuanwu to the East Palace. Prince Yuan Xuan was very young, and Guo Xuan gave him a cucumber melon.

古文：时应诏左右赵桃弓与御史中尉王显迭相脣齿，深为帝所信，祚私事之，时人谤祚者，号为桃弓仆射、黄少师。
现代文：当时，应诏左右赵桃弓与御史中尉王显互为表里，很被宣武帝所倚重。
English: At that time, Zhao Taoyuan and Wang Xian, the lieutenant of the imperial historian, were on the same side, and were highly respected by Emperor Xuanwu.

古文：祚奏曰： 谨案前后考格，虽班天下，如臣愚短，犹有未悟。
现代文：郭祚私下里趋奉他们。诽谤郭祚的人称为 桃弓仆射，黄扁瓜瓜少师。 他向朝廷奏说 ：过去考察官员的标准虽然颁布天下，像我这样愚蠢浅陋，还有不明白的地方。
English: Guo Gan secretly followed them. People who slandered Guo Gan were called "Peach Bow Shooter" and "Cucumber Squash Shooter." He reported to the court that although the standards for inspecting officials had been promulgated in the past, there were still stupid and shallow people like me who did not understand them.

古文：今须定职人迁转由状，超越阶级者即须量折。
现代文：现在，需要确定官员升迁的事由情状，超越官阶的就应该酌量折减。
English: Now, it is necessary to determine the circumstances of the promotion of officials, and those who exceed the official rank should be reduced.

古文：景明初考格，五年者得一阶半。
现代文：景明初年定的标准，五年才能升一级半。
English: According to the standard set in the first year of Jingming, it takes five years to rise one and a half levels.

古文：正始中，故尚书、中山王英奏考格，被旨： 但可正满三周为限，不得计残年之勤。 
现代文：正始年间，已故尚书、中山王元英上奏考察官员的标准，圣旨批道： 可以以满三年为期限，多余的月数不必计算。 
English: At the beginning of the year, the late Shang Shu and Zhongshan Wang Yuan Ying raised the standard of the inspection officials, and approved the sacred will: the period can be three years, and the extra months do not have to be counted.

古文：又去年中，以前二制不同，奏请裁决。旨云： 黜陟之体，知依旧来恆断。 
现代文：另外，去年因为前两种规定的内容不一样，奏请圣上裁决，圣旨说 ：升迁降免的规定，应按过去制定的制度决断。 
English: In addition, last year, because the content of the first two provisions was not the same, it was submitted to the Supreme Court for adjudication. The Supreme Court said that the provisions on promotion, demotion and exemption should be decided according to the system established in the past.

古文：今未审旧来之旨，为从景明之断？为从正始为限？
现代文：现在不知道所说的过去的制度，究竟是指景明时候的，还是指正始时候的？
English: It is not clear whether the "past system" referred to refers to the time of King Ming or the time of the beginning.

古文：景明考法，东西省文武闲官悉为三等，考同任事。
现代文：景明时考察官吏的方法，是将东西两省的文武闲官分为三等，经过考核委任官职。
English: The method of inspecting officials at the time of Jingming was to divide the civil and military officials of the two provinces into three grades and appoint them to official positions after examination.

古文：而前尚书卢昶奏，上等之人三年转半阶。
现代文：而前任尚书卢昶却奏说，上等官员三年升半级。
English: However, his predecessor, Shangshu Lu, reported that higher-ranking officials were promoted half a grade every three years.

古文：今之考格，复分为九等，前后不同，参差无准。 
现代文：现在的考察标准又分成九等，前后说法不一样，没有一个固定的标准。 
English: The current inspection standard is divided into nine levels, with different explanations and no fixed standard.

古文：诏曰： 考在上中者，得泛以前，有六年以上迁一阶，三年以上迁半阶，残年悉除。
现代文：朝廷下诏说： 考绩在上中的，可以照顾以前的情况，任职在六年以上的升一级，三年以上的升半级，多余的年月不算。
English: The imperial edict issued by the imperial court said: if the performance appraisal is higher than that of a junior high school, the previous situation can be taken into account; if the post has been held for more than six years, it will be promoted to the first grade, and if it has been held for more than three years, it will be promoted to the half grade, and the extra years will not be counted.

古文：考在上下者，得泛以前，六年以上迁半阶，不满者除。
现代文：考绩在上下者，可以照顾以前的情况，任职在六年以上的升半级；不满六年的不算，可以算在下一次考察中。
English: For those whose performance appraisal is lower or higher, the previous situation can be taken into account, and those who have been in office for more than six years can be promoted by half a grade; those who have not been in office for less than six years can be counted in the next inspection.

古文：其得泛以后，考在上下者，三年迁一阶。散官从卢昶所奏。 
现代文：考绩在上下者，任职三年升一级。有官衔而无官职的官员的考察，按卢昶上奏的办法。 
English: For those whose performance appraisals are lower or lower, they will be promoted to the next level after three years of service. For officials with official titles but no official posts, they will be examined according to the method of Lu Xun's ascension.

古文：寻加散骑常侍。
现代文：不久，加任郭祚为散骑常侍。
English: Not long after, Guo Jun was appointed as a horseback riding attendant.

古文：时诏营明堂、国学，祚奏曰： 今云罗西举，开纳岷、蜀；戎旗东指，镇靖淮、荆；汉、沔之间，复须防捍。
现代文：当时，朝廷下诏营建明堂和国学，郭祚上奏说： 现在，皇家的节仗向西挥动，开辟了岷、蜀一带；军队东进，平定了淮、荆大片土地；汉、沔之间，仍需加强防御。
English: At that time, the imperial court ordered the construction of the Ming Hall and the study of Chinese classics, and Guo Jian reported: Now, the royal family's festival has moved westward, opening up the Shou and Shu areas; the army has advanced eastward, and has leveled a large area of Huai and Jing; between Han and Shou, it is still necessary to strengthen defense.

古文：征兵发众，所在殷广。
现代文：征集兵士和军需，既多且广；边境的许多堡垒，战火不断。
English: The enlistments of soldiers and supplies were numerous and extensive; the frontier forts were numerous, and the fighting incessant.

古文：边郊多垒，烽驿未息，不可于师旅之际，兴板筑之功。且献岁云暨，东作将始。臣愚量谓宜待丰靖之年，因子来之力，可不时而就。 
现代文：不可以在战争频繁之际大兴土木。况且现在又是一年伊始，春耕即将开始。我认为应等到丰收和平的年份，根据物力人力再动工，很快就会建成。 
English: It is not possible to carry out large-scale civil engineering works at a time of frequent wars. Moreover, it is the beginning of the year, and spring ploughing is about to begin. I think we should wait until the year of harvest and peace, and then start construction according to material and human resources. It will be built soon.

古文：从之。
现代文：朝廷同意他的意见。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：宣武末年，每引祚入东宫，密受赏赉，多至百余万，杂以锦绣。
现代文：宣武末年，郭祚经常被召入东宫，朝廷常秘密地给他许多赏赐，多达一百多万，还有许多贵重的丝绸锦绣。
English: In the last years of his military service, Guo Gan was often called to the East Palace. The imperial court often secretly gave him many rewards, up to more than one million, as well as many precious silk brocades.

古文：又特赐以剑杖，恩宠甚深。
现代文：又赐给他剑和杖，恩宠深厚。
English: He also gave him a sword and a staff.

古文：迁左仆射。
现代文：升任为左仆射。
English: Promoted to the position of left-handed shooter.

古文：先是，梁将康绚遏淮，将灌扬、徐。
现代文：原先，南梁将领康绚把守淮河，准备决堤淹灌扬州、徐州。
English: Originally, the Southern Liang general Kang Hua guarded the Huai River, preparing to break the dike and flood Yangzhou and Xuzhou.

古文：祚表曰： 萧衍狂狡，擅断川渎，役苦人劳，危亡已兆。
现代文：郭祚上表说： 南梁的君主萧衍太狂妄，擅自截断河流，祸害百姓，这是他灭亡的征兆。
English: Guo Gan said on the table: Xiao Yan, the monarch of Nanliang, was too arrogant, cut off rivers without authorization, and harmed the people. This was a sign of his demise.

古文：宜敕扬州选一猛将，遣当州之兵，令赴浮山，表裹夹攻。 
现代文：应命扬州选一员猛将，率领本州兵马奔赴浮山，内外夹攻梁军。 
English: Yangzhou was ordered to select a fierce general, who led the Honshu soldiers and horses to rush to Fushan and attack Liang's army from both inside and outside.

古文：朝议从之。除使持节、散骑常侍、都督、雍州刺史、征西将军。
现代文：朝臣们经过讨论同意他的建议，任他为使持节、散骑常侍、都督、雍州刺史、征西将军。
English: After discussion, the courtiers agreed to his suggestion, and he was appointed as the envoy of the festival, the horseback riding attendant, the governor, the governor of Yongzhou, and the general of the Western Expedition.

古文：太和以前，朝法尤峻，贵臣蹉跌，便致诛夷。
现代文：太和年以前，朝廷法纪严厉峻刻，大臣一有差失，便招致灭族杀身。
English: Two thousand years ago, the imperial court's legal discipline was very strict, and if a minister made a mistake, he would be killed.

古文：李冲之用事也，钦祚识干，荐为左丞，又兼黄门，意便满足。
现代文：李冲管理朝政，钦佩郭祚的才干见识，举荐他为左丞，又兼任黄门，他因此便感到满足。
English: Li Chong managed the court politics, admired Guo Qi's talent and insight, recommended him as the left-hand man, and also served as the Yellow Gate, so he felt satisfied.

古文：每以孤门，往经崔氏之祸，常虑危亡，苦自陈挹，辞色恳然，发于诚至。
现代文：常常谈起自家是孤门独姓，早年经过崔浩案件的牵连，时常忧虑危机存亡，苦苦述说，辞色恳切，发自内心。
English: He often talks about his family being the only one, in the early years after the implication of the Cui Hao case, often worried about the crisis of survival, painstakingly recounted, earnest and heartfelt.

古文：冲谓之曰： 人生有运，非可避也。
现代文：李冲对他说 ：人生自有命运安排，不是能逃避得了的。
English: Li Chong said to him, "Life has its own destiny, and you can't escape it."

古文：但当明白当官，何所顾畏。 
现代文：但是，当官应该明白畅达，有什么可怕的？ 
English: However, officials should be clear, what is so terrible?

古文：自是积十数年，位秩隆重，而进趣之心，更复不息。
现代文：此后十多年，官位隆重，而上达进取之心，毫不松懈。
English: Since then, for more than ten years, the official rank has been grand, and the spirit of advancement has not slackened.

古文：又以东宫师傅之资，列辞尚书，志在封侯之赏，仪同之位。
现代文：他又靠东宫太子师傅的资格，辞去尚书的职务不干，志向在于获得封侯的赏赐，仪同的爵位。
English: He also relied on the qualification of the East Palace Prince Master, resigned from the post of Shangshu, and aspired to receive the reward of the feudal lord, and the peerage of the ceremony.

古文：尚书令、任城王澄为之奏闻。
现代文：尚书令、任城王元澄替他奏闻朝廷。
English: In his place, the king of the city, Motosumi, reported the news to the imperial court.

古文：及为征西、雍州，虽喜外抚，尚以府号不优，心望加大。
现代文：等到被封为征西将军、雍州刺史，虽喜得外任，却因封号不优隆，期望更大。
English: He waited until he was given the title of General of the Western Conquest and the History of the Siege of Yongzhou. Although he was pleased to be appointed to an outside post, he had higher expectations due to the fact that his title was not excellent.

古文：景尚弟庆礼，位通直郎。
现代文：执政大臣们颇感奇怪。当时，领军于忠恃宠骄傲狂纵，崔光等人曲意奉迎。
English: The ruling ministers were quite puzzled. At that time, the leader of the army, Yu Zhongyan, was proud and arrogant, and Cui Guang and others followed suit.

古文：庆礼子元贞，武定末，定州骠骑府长史。
现代文：郭祚对他们非常厌恶，便派自己的儿子，太尉从事中郎郭景尚劝说高阳王元雍，把于忠调出朝廷，到州郡任职。
English: Guo Gan was so disgusted with them that he sent his own son, First Lieutenant Guo Jing Shang, to persuade Gaoyang Wang Yuan Yong to transfer Yu Zhong from the imperial court to the county.

古文：张彝，字庆宾，清河东武城人也。
现代文：于忠听了十分恼怒，假借皇帝的诏命把郭祚杀害。张彝，字庆宾，清河东武城人。
English: Yu Zhong was very angry when he heard this, and under the pretext of the emperor's edict, he killed Guo Wei. Zhang Wei, also known as Qingbin, was from Dongwu City in Qinghe Province.

古文：曾祖幸，慕容超东牟太守。归魏，赐爵平陆侯，位青州刺史。
现代文：曾祖父张幸，任慕容超属下的东牟太守，归顺北魏，赐爵为平陆侯，位至青州刺史。
English: His great-grandfather, Zhang Xing, was appointed as the governor of Dongmou under Murong Chao, surrendered to the Northern Wei Dynasty, was given the title of Prince of Pinglu, and went down in history as the ruler of Qingzhou.

古文：祖准之袭，又为东青州刺史。
现代文：祖父张淮之继承官位，又任青州刺史。
English: Grandfather Zhang Huai's successor to the official position, also known as the history of Qingzhou.

古文：父灵真，早卒。
现代文：父亲张灵真，早亡。
English: His father, Zhang Lingzhen, died young.

古文：彝性公强有风气，历览经史，袭祖侯爵。
现代文：张彝性格坚强，有风骨气节，博览经典史书，继承了祖父的侯爵。
English: Zhang Qian has a strong character, a strong backbone, an extensive knowledge of classic history books, and has inherited his grandfather's marquis.

古文：与卢阳乌、李安人等结为亲友，往来朝会，常相追随。阳乌为主客令，安人与彝并散令。
现代文：与卢阳鸟、李安人结成朋友。往来上朝参见君主，三个人都同行，卢阳鸟任主客令，李安人与张彝都任散客令。
English: He made friends with Lu Yangjie and Li Anren. The three of them accompanied the emperor on his trips to and from the court. Lu Yangjie served as the chief guest, while Li Anren and Zhang Ye both served as unofficial guests.

古文：彝少而豪放，出入殿庭，步眄高上，无所顾忌。
现代文：张彝虽然年少，却性情豪放。出入宫庭昂首阔步，无所顾忌。
English: Although Zhang Ye was young, he had a bold temperament. He entered and left the palace with his head held high, without any scruples.

古文：文明太后雅尚恭谨，因会次见其如此，遂召集百寮督责之，令其修悔，而犹无悛改。
现代文：文明太后喜欢恭敬谨慎的臣僚，每次会见他都是这样，便召集百官，当面斥责他，让他悔过改正，而他毫无悔改的表示。
English: The empress dowager liked to treat her discreet ministers with respect, and every time she met with him, she summoned a hundred officials to reprimand him in person and make him change his ways, but he showed no sign of repentance.

古文：善于督察，每有所巡检，彝常充其选，清慎严猛，所至人皆畏伏，俦灯亦以此高之。
现代文：他擅长于督察，朝廷每次派员到下面巡视检查，他常常是其中的人选。他清廉谨慎，严肃威猛，所到之处，人人畏服，同行的官员也因此称赞他。
English: He excelled as an inspector, and he was often chosen to be one of the inspectors sent by the imperial court to inspect the palace. He was honest and prudent, serious and powerful, and everyone feared him wherever he went. The officials who accompanied him also praised him for this.

古文：迁主客令，例降侯为伯，转太中大夫，仍行主客曹事，寻为黄门。
现代文：升任主客令，循例降侯为伯，转太中大夫，仍任主客曹的事情，不久又被封为黄门。
English: He was promoted to the position of host and guest, and as usual, he was demoted from marquis to count, and then to the position of grand vice-chancellor, but he was still the host and guest, and was soon given the title of Yellow Gate.

古文：后从驾南征，母忧解任。
现代文：后来跟随孝文帝南征，因母亲去世解除官职。
English: Later, he followed Emperor Xiaowen in the Southern Expedition, but was relieved of his official duties due to the death of his mother.

古文：彝居丧过礼，送葬自平城达家，千里步从，不乘车马，颜貌瘦瘠，当世称之。
现代文：他守丧超过礼节的规定，送葬从平城到家乡一千多里路，他完全步行，不乘坐车马。累得容貌消瘦憔悴，被人们所称道。
English: He observed the funeral beyond the rules of etiquette, and traveled more than a thousand miles from Pingcheng to his hometown to attend the funeral. He walked completely, and did not ride a horse or carriage. He was praised by people for his tired and emaciated appearance.

古文：宣武初，除正尚书，兼侍中，寻正侍中。
现代文：孝文帝到冀州，派使者吊唁慰问，任他为骁骑将军而重新起用，回到朝廷又恢复原来的职务。因参与筹划迁都立功，晋爵为侯。
English: Emperor Xiaowen went to Jizhou and sent an envoy to offer condolences and condolences. He reappointed him as the general of the cavalry and returned to the imperial court to resume his original duties. He was awarded the title of prince for his participation in the planning of the relocation of the capital.

古文：宣武亲政，罢六辅。
现代文：宣武帝亲自治理朝政，罢除六辅的官员。
English: Emperor Xuanwu personally took control of the imperial government and dismissed the six subordinate officials.

古文：彝与兼尚书邢峦闻处分非常，惧，出京奔走。
现代文：张彝与尚书邢峦听说对官吏处分不按正常制度，心存畏惧，出京逃走。
English: Zhang Ye and Shang Shuxuan heard that officials were not punished according to the normal system, so they were afraid and fled from Beijing.

古文：为御史中尉甄琛所弹，云 非武非兕，率彼旷野。 
现代文：被御史中尉甄深弹劾，说他们 如果不是强人和凶手，为什么跑到旷野中去？ 
English: Impeached by Lieutenant Zhen Sheng, they said that if they were not strongmen and murderers, why did they run into the wilderness?

古文：诏书切责之。
现代文：朝廷下诏严厉地斥责他们。
English: The imperial edict severely reprimanded them.

古文：寻除安西将军、秦州刺史。
现代文：不久，任安西将军、秦州刺史。
English: Soon, he was appointed as the general of Anxi and the governor of Qin.

古文：彝务尚典式，考访故事，及临陇右，弥加讨习。于是出入直卫，方伯羽仪，赫然可观。
现代文：张彝平时崇尚典范，喜欢考察旧的制度和事例。到陇右任职后，更加认真探讨演习，于是官府的各种规矩，长官的仪仗，都赫然可观。
English: When Zhang Bingping was advocating the model, he liked to examine the old system and cases. After he took office, he more seriously discussed the exercises, so the various rules of the government and the etiquette of the officials were impressive.

古文：羌、夏畏伏，惮其威整；一方肃静，号为良牧。
现代文：羌、夏等少数民族都因为害怕他的威猛严整而表示服从。所辖之地安静无事，他被人们称赞为良吏。
English: Ethnic minorities such as the Min and Xia all obeyed him out of fear of his authority and strictness. The area under his jurisdiction was peaceful, and people praised him as a good official.

古文：其年冬，太极初就，彝与郭祚等俱以勤旧被征。
现代文：这年冬天，太极殿建成，他与郭祚等人都以勤勉谨慎的旧臣身份被朝廷征回参加贺典。
English: This winter, the Taiji Hall was completed, and he, together with Guo Gan and others, were conscripted by the imperial court to participate in the celebration as diligent and prudent former vassals.

古文：及还州，进号抚军将军。
现代文：他回到秦州，被晋封，号为抚军将军。
English: He returned to Qin and was promoted to the rank of general.

古文：彝表解州任，诏不许。
现代文：上表请求解除州刺史的官职，朝廷不同意。
English: The Imperial Court did not agree with the above request to remove the official position of the prefectural governor.

古文：彝敷政陇右，多所制立，宣布新风，革其旧俗，人庶爱仰之。
现代文：张彝治理陇中，有很多创建。树立新风，革掉旧俗，受到官民的爱戴敬仰。
English: In Zhangye's governance, there have been many innovations, establishing a new style and discarding old customs, which have been loved and admired by both the government and the people.

古文：为国造佛寺，名曰兴皇，诸有罪咎者，随其轻重，谪为土木之功，无复鞭杖之罚。
现代文：在那里为国家建造了一座名叫兴皇的寺院，所有犯罪的囚徒，根据罪行的轻重，罚他们到寺院工地上干活，不再让他们受皮鞭棍棒等刑具的拷打。
English: There, a temple named Xinghuang was built for the country. All prisoners who committed crimes were punished according to the severity of their crimes by being sent to work on the temple construction site. They were no longer tortured with whips, clubs, and other instruments of torture.

古文：时陈留公主寡居，彝意愿尚主，主亦许之。
现代文：这时，陈留公主正在守寡，张彝想娶她，公主也表示同意。
English: At this time, Princess Chen Liu was widowed, Zhang Ye wanted to marry her, and the princess agreed.

古文：仆射高肇亦望尚主，主意不可。
现代文：仆射高肇也想与公主结婚，公主却不愿意。
English: Pupil Gao Zhao also wanted to marry the princess, but the princess did not want to.

古文：肇怒，谮彝擅立刑法，劳役百姓，诏遣直后万贰兴驰驿检察。
现代文：高肇十分恼怒，攻击张彝私立刑法，役使百姓。朝廷下诏派直后万贰兴火速到秦州调查。
English: Gao Zhao was very angry, attacked Zhang Ye's private criminal law, and served the people. Immediately after the imperial court sent Wan Rongxing to Qinzhou to investigate.

古文：贰兴，肇所亲爱，必欲致彝深罪。
现代文：贰兴是高肇的亲信，欲致张彝于死地。
English: Hao Xing was a close confidant of Gao Zhao and wanted to kill Zhang Ye.

古文：彝清身奉法，求其愆过，遂无所得。
现代文：然而，由于张彝清白守法，寻找他的过失却一无所得。
English: However, since Zhang Yao was innocent and abided by the law, there was nothing to be gained by looking for his fault.

古文：见代还洛，犹停废数年。
现代文：朝廷派人代替了他的职务，调他回到洛阳，多年不安排职位。
English: The imperial court sent someone to take his place, transferred him back to Luoyang, and did not assign him a post for many years.

古文：因得偏风，手脚不便；然志性不移，善自将摄，稍能朝拜。
现代文：张彝因中风，手脚不灵便，然而志气性情毫无改变。自己认真调治休养，勉强可以上朝参拜。
English: As a result of the stroke, Zhang Xuan's hands and feet are not able to move, but his spirit and disposition have not changed. He has carefully adjusted his rest and recuperation, and he can barely go to the temple.

古文：久之，除光禄大夫，加金章紫绶。
现代文：过了很久，被任命为光禄大夫，加授金章紫绶。
English: After a long time, he was appointed as Guanglu Doctor and awarded the Gold Medal with Purple Ribbon.

古文：彝爱好知己，轻忽下流，非其意者，视之蔑尔。
现代文：张彝喜好同知己交往，轻视那些人品低下的人，不合他心意的人，他视之蔑如。
English: Zhang Ye liked to socialize with his friends. He despised those who were of low moral character, and those who did not meet his expectations. He regarded them with contempt.

古文：虽疹疾家庭，而志气弥高。
现代文：虽有病在家，而志向气节更高。
English: Although he is home sick, his aspirations are higher.

古文：上《历帝图》五卷，起元庖牺，终于晋末，凡十六代，一百二十八帝，历三千二百七十年，杂事五百八十九。
现代文：向朝廷呈上自己撰写的《历帝图》五卷，起于伏羲，终于晋末，共十六个朝代，一百二十八位皇帝，历经三千二百七十年，记事五百八十九件。
English: He presented to the imperial court his five-volume "Diary of Emperors," written by himself, starting in Fuxi and ending in Jin, a total of sixteen dynasties, one hundred and twenty-eight emperors, after three thousand two hundred and seventy years, five hundred and eighty-nine records.

古文：诏加征西将军、冀州大中正。虽年向六十，加之风疹，而自强人事，孜孜无怠。
现代文：宣武帝很是称赞他的功劳。张彝虽然年近六十，又加上中风，而自强不息，孜孜不倦。
English: Emperor Xuanwu highly praised his service. Although Zhang Ye was nearly sixty years old and had suffered a stroke, he never tired of self-improvement.

古文：公私法集，衣冠从事，延请道俗，修营斋讲。
现代文：不管是官府和私人组织的讲解佛法的集会，还是官绅士大夫们作佛事，以及筵请僧道，斋戒讲演，他都积极参与。
English: He actively participated in gatherings organized by the government and private organizations to explain Buddhism, as well as in Buddhist services conducted by government officials and doctors, and in lectures on the Buddhist monk's way of life and fasting.

古文：好善钦贤，爱奖人物，南北亲旧，莫不多之。
现代文：喜好善事，钦佩贤士，奖拔人物，南北各地新朋旧友，越来越多。
English: There are more and more people who like to do good deeds, admire sages, award figures, and make new friends and old friends from all over the north and south.

古文：大起第宅，微号华侈。
现代文：他营造起规模宏大的宅第，十分华丽奢侈。
English: He created a grand mansion, very opulent and luxurious.

古文：颇侮其疏宗旧戚，不甚存纪，时有怨憾焉。
现代文：对他的远房亲戚则颇为怠慢，不去关心照顾，因而，不断遭到他们的埋怨。
English: As for his distant relatives, he was rather negligent and did not care to take care of them, so he was constantly complained about by them.

古文：荣宦之间，未能止足，屡表在秦州豫有开援汉中之勋，希加赏报，积年不已，朝廷患之。
现代文：对于荣誉地位，他总不能满足，多次上表述说自己在秦州建有开发汉中的功勋，希望朝廷给他增加赏赐，连续多年提出这种要求，引起了朝廷的反感。
English: He was always dissatisfied with his honorary status. He repeatedly said that he had made great contributions to the development of the Han Dynasty in Qinzhou, and hoped that the court would give him more rewards. He made this request for many years, which aroused the antipathy of the court.

古文：第二子仲瑀上封事，求铨别选格，排抑武人，不使预在清品。
现代文：他的第二子张仲王禹给朝廷呈上奏章，要求另外订立选拔官员的标准，将军人们排斥在外，不把他们列入高贵的等级。
English: His second son, Zhang Zhongwangyu, presented a petition to the imperial court, demanding that a separate standard be established for the selection of officials, that the generals be excluded, and that they not be included in the noble class.

古文：由是众口喧喧，谤讟盈路，立榜大巷，克期会集，屠害其家。
现代文：因此，军人们议论纷纷，叫喊辱骂，不绝于路。又在大街上张贴告示，约定时间聚集在一起，要杀死他的全家。
English: As a result, the soldiers argued, shouted insults, blocked the road, and posted signs in the streets calling for a meeting to kill his entire family.

古文：彝殊无畏避之意，父子安然。
现代文：张彝毫无畏惧躲避的意思，与他的儿子照样安住在家。
English: Without any fear of evasion, Zhang Lu and his son still live at home.

古文：神龟二年二月，羽林武贲将几千人，相率至尚书省诟骂，求其长子尚书郎始均不获，以瓦石击打公门。上下慑惧，莫敢讨抑。
现代文：神龟二年二月，羽林武贲带领数千人，一起到尚书省吵骂，要抓获他的长子张始钧，没有抓到。军人们用石头砖瓦敲打大门，上上下下都很害怕，不敢出面制止。
English: In February of the second year of the Divine Turtle, Ulin Wuxuan led thousands of people to Shangshu Province to quarrel and try to capture his eldest son Zhang Shixuan, but he was not caught. The soldiers knocked on the gate with stones and bricks, and they were afraid up and down, and dared not come forward to stop them.

古文：遂持火虏掠道中薪蒿，以杖石为兵器，直造其第，曳彝堂下，捶挞极意，唱呼焚其屋宇。
现代文：军人们举着火把，又抢去路上堆放的木柴，用木棍、石头为兵器，直冲到他的家里，将他拉到堂下，用力捶打，高喊着点燃了他家的房子。
English: The soldiers, carrying torches and snatching firewood that had been piled up on the road, and using sticks and stones as weapons, rushed straight to his home, dragged him to the hall, beat him severely, shouted and set fire to his family's house.

古文：王尝亲案囚徒，乾雄误不持状，口对百余人，皆尽事情，同辈莫不叹能。
现代文：始钧、仲王禹兄弟俩从北面跳墙逃走。始均又回来救援他的父亲，向行凶的军人们下跪求饶，请求保留父亲的性命。张彝只剩下一口气，沙门寺与他家是近邻，用轿将他抬到庙中。看到和听到这件事的人，没有不惋惜和惊异的。
English: The two brothers, Shi Yan and Zhong Wang Yu, jumped over the wall from the north to escape. Shi Yan came back to rescue his father, kneeled down to the soldiers who committed the crime and begged for mercy, asking that his father's life be spared. Zhang Xuan had only one breath left, Shamen Temple was close to his home, and he was carried to the temple in a sedan. Those who saw and heard this incident were not without regret and surprise.

古文：后历寿春、阳城二县令，俱有政绩。
现代文：他因此去世，朝廷只处决了羽林军中最凶悍的八个人，不能将所有的凶犯诛杀。
English: As a result, he died. The imperial court only executed eight of the most ferocious members of Ulin's army, and was unable to kill all of the murderers.

古文：邢峦，字洪宾，河间鄚人，魏太常贞之后也。
现代文：为了安抚人心，其他人都被赦免。邢峦，字洪宾，河间莫阝地人，魏朝太常邢贞的后代。
English: In order to appease the hearts of the people, all the others were pardoned. Yu, Zi Hongbin, the people of Mogao, the descendants of the Wei Dynasty's Taizhong Zhenhu.

古文：族五世祖嘏，石勒频征不至。
现代文：同族的五世祖邢嘏，石勒多次聘请，他都没有接受。
English: The fifth generation ancestor of the same family, Shi Le repeatedly hired him, but he did not accept.

古文：嘏无子，峦高祖盖自旁宗入后。
现代文：邢嘏没有儿子，邢峦的高祖邢盖从旁宗过继给他为后。
English: He did not have a son, and his great-great-grandfather, Zengai, passed the throne to him from his uncle.

古文：盖孙颖，字宗敬，以才学知名。
现代文：邢盖的孙子邢颖，字宗敬，因才学出众驰名。
English: Zengai's grandson, Liangying, is famous for his ability to learn Zongjing.

古文：太武时，与范阳卢玄等同征。后拜中书侍郎，改通直常侍、平城子使宋。还，以病归乡。
现代文：太武帝时，他与范阳的卢玄等人一起被朝廷征用，后来被任命为中书侍郎，以通直常侍、平城子的身份出使南朝，回来后，因病回到家乡。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taibu, he was requisitioned by the imperial court together with Lu Xuan of Fanyang and others. Later, he was appointed as a Chinese scribe's servant and sent to the Southern Dynasty as a Tsunzhi standing attendant and Heijo's son. After returning, he returned to his hometown due to illness.

古文：久之，帝曰： 往忆邢颖长者，有学义，宜侍讲东宫，今安在？ 
现代文：过了很久，太武帝问： 回想邢颖这位长者，有学识道德，应到东宫辅导太子，现在在哪里？ 
English: After a long time, Emperor Taibu asked, "Recall that this elderly man, who was learned and moral, should have gone to the East Palace to tutor the crown prince. Where is he now?"

古文：司徒崔浩曰： 颖卧病在家。 
现代文：司徒崔浩说 ：邢颖有病在家休息。 
English: Szu Cui Hao said: "Jing Ying is ill and is resting at home.

古文：帝遣太医驰驿就疗。
现代文：太武帝派太医骑快马到他家诊治。
English: Emperor Taibu sent Taiji on a fast horse to his home for treatment.

古文：卒，赠定州刺史，谥曰康，子修年，即峦父也，位州主簿。
现代文：终于不治去世。邢颖的儿子邢修年，就是邢峦的父亲。邢峦从小喜爱学习，背着书箱到处寻求老师。
English: He finally died of his illness. His father was his son, Zou Shu Nian. From a young age, Zou loved to study, carrying a bookcase everywhere in search of a teacher.

古文：峦少好学，负帙寻师，守贫厉节，遂博览书传，有文才干略。
现代文：坚守贫困，砥砺节操，博览群书，具有文才武略。
English: He adhered to poverty, practised austerity, read a lot of books, and had literary talent.

古文：美须髯，姿貌甚伟。累迁兼员外散骑常侍，使齐。还，再迁中书侍郎，甚见顾遇，常参坐席。
现代文：须髯秀美，形貌魁伟，多次升迁至兼员外散骑常侍，出使南齐，归来，再升为中书侍郎，很被孝文帝看重，经常被赐坐论事。
English: Su Shi was beautiful, with a magnificent appearance. She was promoted several times to the rank of part-time outside riding attendant, sent to Nanzhi, returned, and was promoted again to the rank of Chinese writing attendant. She was highly valued by Emperor Xiaowen, and was often given a seat to discuss matters.

古文：孝文因行药至司空府南，见峦宅，谓峦曰： 朝行药至此，见卿宅乃住。
现代文：孝文帝因服药发散，到司空府的南面，看见邢峦的宅第，对邢峦说： 我早晨发散到了这里，见你的住宅才停止脚步。
English: As a result of taking medicine, Emperor Xiaowen went to the south side of Sikuofu, saw Gong's house, and said to Gong: I came here in the morning, and only stopped walking when I saw your house.

古文：东望德馆，情有依然。 
现代文：向东可以望见皇宫，令人感到恋恋不舍。 
English: To the east, you can see the Imperial Palace, which makes you fall in love with it.

古文：峦对曰： 陛下移构中京，方建无穷之业。
现代文：邢峦对答说： 陛下您修建中京，建立了万古不朽的大业。
English: Zou replied, "Your Majesty, you have built Zhongjing and established an eternal and immortal cause.

古文：臣意在与魏升降，宁容不务永年之宅。 
现代文：我想与我魏朝一起兴旺发达，难道能不营建长久性的住宅？ 
English: I want to prosper together with my Wei Dynasty, can I not build a permanent house?

古文：帝谓司空穆亮、仆射李冲曰： 峦之此言，其意不小。 
现代文：孝文帝对司空穆亮、仆射李冲说： 邢峦这句话，含意很深。 
English: Emperor Xiaowen said to Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager

古文：有司奏策秀、孝，诏曰： 秀、孝殊问，经、权异策，邢峦才清，可令策秀。 
现代文：后来，他被封为兼黄门侍郎，跟随孝文帝征讨汉北。邢峦驻扎在新野，去得稍晚。
English: Later, he was also appointed as a Yellow Gate attendant and followed Emperor Xiaowen to conquer Hanbei. He was stationed in Shinno and left a little late.

古文：后兼黄门郎，从征流北。峦在新野，后至。帝曰： 伯玉天迷其心，鬼惑其虑，守危邦，固逆主。
现代文：孝文帝说： 伯玉被天迷住了心窍，被鬼扰乱了头脑，坚守这座危险的城池，保护那个逆天而行的君主。
English: Emperor Xiaowen said: Her heart was captivated by the heavens, her mind was disturbed by the ghosts, and she held fast to this dangerous city and protected the monarch who went against the heavens.

古文：至此以来，虽未禽灭，城隍已崩，想在不远。
现代文：我率军到这里以后，虽然没有将他擒获，城墙和护城河已被我军攻破，料想攻取整个城池也为时不远。
English: Although we have not captured him since I led my army here, the city wall and moat have been breached by our army, and it is expected that it will not be long before the entire city is captured.

古文：所以缓攻者，正待中书为露布耳。 
现代文：我之所以不急于进攻，正是要等待你写一篇招降的露布呀。 
English: The reason why I am not in a hurry to attack is that I am waiting for you to write a letter of surrender.

古文：寻除正黄门，兼御史中尉、瀛州大中正，迁散骑常侍，兼尚书。
现代文：不久，他任正黄门，兼御史中尉、瀛州大中正，迁任散骑常侍，兼尚书。
English: Soon, he was appointed to the post of Zhenghuangmen, concurrently with the post of Lieutenant of History, Vice-President of Zhangzhou University, transferred to the post of Sanzhiyi's regular attendant, and concurrently with the post of Shangshu.

古文：宣武时，峦奏曰： 先皇深观古今，去诸奢侈，服御尚质，不贵雕镂，所珍在素，不务奇彩，至乃纸绢为帐扆，铜铁为辔勒，训朝廷以节俭，示百姓以忧矜。
现代文：宣武帝时，邢峦上奏说： 先皇洞观古今，反对奢侈，服饰用具，崇尚俭朴，不看重雕金镂玉；所珍惜的是素雅整洁，不追求奇服异彩。所以，用纸绢做屏帷，用铜和铁做坐骑的辔头。用节俭训教群臣，用忧戚对待百姓。
English: At the time of Emperor Xuanwu's enthronement, Zang Shangsoo said: "The first Emperor Dong Guan ancient and modern, opposed luxury, clothing and utensils, advocated frugality, did not attach importance to carved gold and enamel beads; what he cherished was elegant and tidy, and did not pursue extraordinary clothing. Therefore, he used paper curtain to make screen curtain, and copper and iron to make the steeple of mount. He used frugality to teach his ministers, and treated the people with concern.

古文：逮景明之初，承升平之业，四疆清晏，远近来同。
现代文：到了景明初年，继承前代升平兴旺的大业，四境和平清静，远远近近的国家都表示臣服。
English: In the first year of the Jingming Dynasty, inheriting the great cause of prosperity of the previous generation, there was peace and tranquility in all directions, and countries far and near all expressed their submission.

古文：于是蕃贡继路，商估交入，诸所献贸，倍多于常。
现代文：于是贡奉物品的使者一个接着一个，交易货物的商人争相到来。各种买卖，比往常多了一倍。
English: So the envoys of tribute came one after another, and the merchants of the traffic came one after another, and all the traffic was doubled.

古文：虽加以节约，犹岁损万计，珍货常有余，国用恆不足。
现代文：虽然加强管理，但是，每年损失的金钱数以万计。国家的珍宝异货多得用不完，而货币的使用常常不足。
English: Although management has been strengthened, tens of thousands of money are lost every year. The country's precious foreign goods are more than enough, and the use of currency is often insufficient.

古文：若不裁其分限，便恐无以支岁。
现代文：如果不限制它的外流，恐怕无法维持正常的开支。
English: If we do not restrict its outflow, we may not be able to maintain normal spending.

古文：自今非为要须者，请皆不受。 
现代文：从今以后，不是十分需要的财货，请不要接受。 
English: From now on, please do not accept goods that are not absolutely necessary.

古文：帝从之。
现代文：宣武帝听从了他的建议。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：寻正尚书。梁、溱二州行事夏侯道迁以汉中内附，诏加峦使持节、都督征梁、汉诸军事，进退征摄，得以便宜从事。
现代文：梁、秦两州的当政者夏侯道迁率汉中之地表示归附，朝廷下诏任邢峦为使持节、都督征讨梁汉诸军事，军队的进退征讨，允许他根据情况决定举措。
English: Liang and Qin states' political leaders Xia Hou, Dao Qian, and Qu Qui Hanzhong indicated their affiliation, and the imperial court issued an edict appointing him as the envoy to hold the festival, the governor to enlist Liang and Hanzhong's military, and to enlist the army's advance and retreat, allowing him to decide on measures according to the situation.

古文：峦至汉中，遣兵讨之，贼毕款附，乘胜追奔至关城之下。
现代文：邢峦率军队到达汉中，派兵讨伐敌兵，敌兵大多投降。北魏军队乘胜追赶到关城的下面。
English: Zou led the army to Hanzhong, sent troops to fight the enemy soldiers, and most of the enemy soldiers surrendered. The Northern Wei army took advantage of the victory and chased them to the bottom of Guancheng.

古文：诏拜峦使持节、梁、秦二州刺史。
现代文：朝廷又下诏书，命他为使持节、梁秦二州刺史。
English: The imperial court also issued an imperial edict, ordering him to go to Liangqin and Erzhou on the Envoys' Day.

古文：宣武不从。又王足于涪城辄还，遂不定蜀。
现代文：这次开疆拓土，东西宽七百里，南北长一千里，获取十四郡，派军队戍守占领的州县，又挥军进逼涪城。他上表请求乘胜攻取全蜀，宣武帝不同意。
English: This time, he opened up the country, expanded the land, the width of the east and west was seven hundred miles, the length of the north and south was one thousand miles, acquired fourteen counties, sent troops to defend the occupied states and counties, and waved the army into the city of Lushan. He requested the table above to take advantage of the victory to conquer all of Shu, but Emperor Xuanwu did not agree.

古文：峦既克巴西，遣军主李仲迁守之。
现代文：邢峦已经攻克巴西，派将领李仲迁守卫。
English: He had already conquered Brazil and sent the general Li Zhongqian to guard it.

古文：仲迁得梁将张法养女，有美色，甚惑之。散费兵储，专心酒色，公事谘承，无能见者。
现代文：李仲迁俘获南梁将军张法养的女儿。该女十分美艳，仲迁为之倾倒，动用军需，每天沉溺于酒色之中，来办公事的人都找不到他。
English: Li Zhongqian captured the daughter of Nanliang General Zhang Fa. The woman was very beautiful, and Zhongqian fell in love with her, used military supplies, and indulged in alcohol every day. People who came to do business couldn't find him.

古文：峦忿之切齿。
现代文：邢峦对他非常恼恨。
English: She was very angry with him.

古文：仲迁惧，谋叛。城人斩其首以降梁将谯希远，巴西遂没。
现代文：仲迁害怕，阴谋叛变，城里的人将他杀死，投降了南梁将军谯希远，巴西陷落。
English: Zhongmiao was afraid, plotted a mutiny, the people in the city killed him, surrendered to the Nanliang general Zou Xiyuan, and Brazil fell.

古文：武兴氐杨集起等反，峦遣统军傅竖眼讨平之。
现代文：武兴氐人杨集起等率众反叛，邢峦派统军傅竖眼讨伐，将其平定。
English: The rebels led by Wu Xing and Yang Jiqi rebelled, and the general and military commander of the Kuomintang faction launched a fierce attack to subdue them.

古文：峦之初至汉中，从容风雅，接豪右以礼，抚从庶以惠。
现代文：邢峦刚到汉中，风度从容优雅，接待豪右士绅，彬彬有礼；安抚百姓，施以恩惠。
English: As soon as he arrived in Hanzhong, his demeanor was calm and elegant. He received dignitaries and aristocrats with courtesy; he pacified the people and bestowed favors.

古文：岁余之后，颇因其去就，诛灭百姓，籍为奴婢者二百余口，兼商贩聚敛，清论鄙之。
现代文：一年多以后，他因为即将离任，任意诛杀百姓，将他们削籍成为奴婢的有二百多人。再加上他还对商人们进行搜刮，舆论对他十分鄙视。
English: More than a year later, because he was about to leave office, he arbitrarily killed people and reduced them to slaves, more than two hundred people. In addition, he also searched the merchants, and the public opinion despised him very much.

古文：征授度支尚书。
现代文：朝廷授给他度支尚书一职。
English: The imperial court awarded him the post of Dudushi Shangshuo.

古文：时梁人侵轶徐、兗，朝廷乃以峦为使持节、都督东讨诸军事、安东将军，尚书如故。
现代文：这时，梁军侵犯徐州、兖州，朝廷仍派他为使持节、都督东讨诸军事、安东将军，尚书职务不变。
English: At this time, Liang's army invaded Xuzhou and Zhangzhou, and the imperial court still sent him as the envoy to hold the festival, the governor of the east to discuss the military, and General Anton, but his duties remained unchanged.

古文：宣武劳遗峦于东堂曰： 知将军旋京未久，膝下难违；然东南之寄，非将军莫可。
现代文：宣武帝在东堂慰劳邢峦，说： 我知道将军你才回到京城不久，与家人刚刚团聚。然而，东南方面的战事，只有将军你才能承担重任。
English: Emperor Xuanwu consoled him in the East Hall, saying, "I know, General, that you have only recently returned to Beijing and have just been reunited with your family. However, in the war in the southeast, only you, General, can shoulder the heavy responsibility.

古文：自古忠臣亦非无孝也。 
现代文：自古以来忠臣们也不是没有孝心啊。 
English: Since ancient times, loyal subjects have not been without filial piety.

古文：峦曰： 愿陛下勿以东南为虑。
现代文：邢峦说 ：希望陛下不要忧虑东南方面的事情。 
English: Zou said, "I hope Your Majesty will not be worried about the situation in the southeast."

古文：帝曰： 汉祖有云： 金吾击郾，吾无忧矣。 
现代文：宣武帝高兴地说 ：汉祖说 ：金吾将军进攻郾地，我就没什么担忧了。 
English: Emperor Xuanwu said happily: Han Zu said: I have nothing to worry about if General Kingo attacks Shantian.

古文：今将军董戎，朕何虑哉！ 
现代文：现在将军你负责东南方面的军务，我还有什么忧虑呢？ 
English: Now, General, you are in charge of the southeastern military affairs, what worries do I have?

古文：峦至，乃分遣将帅致讨，兗州悉平；进围宿豫，平之。
现代文：邢峦率军到达东南骚乱地区，分别派兵攻讨。兖州被平定，又进围宿豫，也被讨平。
English: Zou led the army to the southeast riot area and sent troops to attack it separately. Zhou was pacified, and Zou entered and besieged Yu, and was also defeated.

古文：帝赐峦玺书慰勉之。
现代文：宣武帝赐给邢峦玺书表示慰勉。
English: Emperor Xuanwu gave him a letter of condolence.

古文：及梁城贼走，中山王英乘胜攻钟离，又诏峦率众会之。
现代文：梁城的敌兵败走，中山王元英乘胜进攻钟离，朝廷又下诏让邢峦率军与他会合。
English: The enemy soldiers in Liangcheng were defeated and fled, Zhongshan Wang Yuanying took advantage of the victory to attack Zhongli, and the imperial court also issued an edict to let the army led by Zou to join him.

古文：峦以为钟离天险，朝贵所具，若有内应，则所不知，如其无也，必无克状。
现代文：邢峦认为：钟离形势十分险要，朝廷中有权势的贵官在那里指挥，如果敌军中有我方的内应，胜负尚难预料；如果没有内应，一定无法攻克。
English: Zhai believed that the situation was very critical, and a powerful dignitary from the imperial court was in command there. If there was internal support from our side in the enemy army, it would be difficult to predict victory or defeat; if there was no internal support, it would be impossible to defeat.

古文：且俗语云 耕则问田奴，绢则问织婢 ，臣既谓难，何容强遣。
现代文：而且谚语说： 耕田的事去问农夫，织绢的事去问织妇。 我既然认为难于取胜，何必非去不可呢？
English: And the proverb says: Ask the ploughman about the plough, and the weaver about the spindle; and if I find it hard to win, why should I not go?

古文：峦既累表求还，帝许之。
现代文：他多次上表请求回来，宣武帝同意。
English: He repeatedly requested to return to the table, and Emperor Xuanwu agreed.

古文：英果败退，时人伏其识略。
现代文：元英果然败退。当时人们都佩服他的见识与谋略。
English: Yuan Ying was defeated. At that time, people admired his insight and strategy.

古文：初，侍中卢昶与峦不平，昶与元晖俱为宣武所宠，御史中尉崔亮，昶之党也，昶、晖令亮纠峦，事成，许言于宣武，以亮为侍中。
现代文：原先，侍中卢昶与邢峦关系不和，卢昶与元晖都被宣武帝宠信。御史中尉崔亮，是卢昶的同党，卢昶和元晖鼓动崔亮弹劾邢峦，事成之后，答应将他提升为侍中。
English: Originally, the relationship between the attendants Lu Wei and Zhai was not harmonious. Lu Wei and Yuan Zhai were both favored by Emperor Wu. The imperial history lieutenant Cui Liang was Lu Wei's same party. Lu Wei and Yuan Zhai encouraged Cui Liang to impeach Zhai. After the success, they promised to promote him to attendant.

古文：亮奏峦在汉中掠良人为婢。
现代文：崔亮便奏报邢峦在汉中抢掠良家人口为奴婢。
English: Cui Liang then issued a proclamation to rob the good people of the Han Dynasty as slaves.

古文：峦惧，乃以汉中所得巴西太守庞景仁女化生等二十余口与晖。
现代文：邢峦恐惧，便把在汉中得到的巴西太守庞景仁的女儿化生等二十多人送给元晖。
English: Out of fear, he sent more than twenty people, including the daughter of the Brazilian Emperor Pang Jingren, who was born in the Han Dynasty, to the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：化生等数人，奇色也。晖大悦，乃背昶为峦言，云峦新有大功，已经赦宥，不宜方为此狱，帝纳之。
现代文：化生等人都是天生丽质，元晖十分高兴，因此背叛了卢昶，反过来替邢峦说话，对宣武帝说邢峦最近立有大功，抢掠的人口已经放出，不应再为此事问罪。宣武帝采纳了他的意见。
English: Geng Yao was very happy, so he betrayed Lu Yao and spoke on Lu Yao's behalf. He told Emperor Xuanwu that Lu Yao had recently made great achievements, that the plundered population had been released, and that he should no longer be blamed for the matter. Emperor Xuanwu accepted his opinion.

古文：高肇以峦有克敌效而为昶等所排，助峦申释，故得不坐。
现代文：高肇也认为邢峦有攻克敌人的功劳，而却遭到卢昶的排斥，帮助邢峦申辩，所以，他才没有坐罪受罚。
English: Gao Zhao also believed that Zou had the merit of conquering the enemy, but he was rejected by Lu Zou and helped Zou to defend himself, so he did not take the blame and was punished.

古文：豫州城人白早生杀刺史司马悦，以城南入梁，遣其将齐苟仁率众入据县瓠。
现代文：豫州城一个叫白早生的人杀死刺史司马悦，献城投降南梁，派他的将领齐苟仁率众占据县瓠。
English: In the city of Yuzhou, a man named Bai Taosheng killed the assassin Sima Yue, surrendered the city to Nan Liang, and sent his general Qi Guoren to occupy the county seat.

古文：诏峦持节率羽林精骑讨之。
现代文：朝廷下诏命邢峦为持节，率领羽林军精锐骑兵讨伐叛军。
English: The imperial edict ordered him to hold the festival and lead the elite cavalry of the Feathered Forest Army to fight the rebels.

古文：封平舒县伯，赏宿豫之功也。
现代文：封他为平舒县伯，以奖赏他在宿豫立下的大功。
English: He was given the title of Pingshu County magistrate as a reward for his great contribution to the establishment of Sukuyu.

古文：宣武临东堂劳遣峦曰： 早生走也？
现代文：宣武帝在东堂对他慰劳送行，问： 白早生会逃走呢，还是会坚守？
English: Emperor Xuanwu gave him a send-off in the East Hall, and asked: "Will Bai Xiaosheng run away, or will he hold fast?"

古文：守也？何时平？ 
现代文：何时能够平定？ 
English: When will it be able to be pacified?

古文：峦曰： 今王师若临，士人必翻然归顺，围之穷城，奔走路绝，不度此年，必传首京师。
现代文：邢峦答道： 现在，王师如果压境，豫州城内的士人百姓一定会幡然悔悟，重新归顺。把这座处于穷途末路的城池包围，断绝敌兵的逃路，过不了今年，一定会将白早生传首京城。
English: Zou replied, "Nowadays, if Wang Shi is pushed to the limit, the scholars and common people in the city of Yuzhou will surely repent and return to obedience. If we can encircle this city, which is at the end of its rope, and cut off the escape route of the enemy soldiers, this year will not pass, and we will surely bring Bai Chaozheng to the capital.

古文：愿陛下不足为虑。 
现代文：望陛下不要挂虑在怀。 
English: I hope Your Majesty is not worried.

古文：帝笑曰： 卿言何其壮哉！
现代文：宣武帝笑着说 ：你说的多么勇壮啊！
English: Emperor Xuanwu smiled and said, "How brave you are!

古文：知卿亲老，频劳于外，然忠孝不俱，不得辞也。 
现代文：我知道你家里双亲年迈，你多年辛劳在外。然而，忠孝不能两全，请不要推辞呀。 
English: I know that your parents at home are old, and you have been working hard for many years. However, loyalty and filial piety cannot go hand in hand, so please don't refuse.

古文：于是峦率骑八百，倍道兼行。五日于鲍口，击贼大将胡孝智，乘胜至县瓠，因即度汝。
现代文：于是，邢峦率领八百名骑兵，星夜兼程，五天到达鲍口，进攻敌兵的大将胡孝智，乘胜到达县瓠，马上渡过汝水。
English: As a result, Yao led eight hundred cavalrymen on a journey through the starry night and arrived in Baokou in five days. Hu Xiaozhi, the general who attacked the enemy soldiers, took advantage of the victory to reach Xianyao and immediately crossed the river.

古文：既而大兵继至，遂长围围之。
现代文：不久，大兵接着到来，便把城池包围起来。
English: Soon after, the soldiers arrived and surrounded the city.

古文：诏峦使持节、假镇南将军，都督南讨诸军事。
现代文：朝廷下诏命他为使持节、假镇南将军、都督南讨诸军事。
English: The imperial court ordered him to hold a military parade for the Envoys' Day, and to pretend to be the General of the Southern Zhen and the Southern Governor.

古文：中山王英南讨三关，亦次县瓠，以后军未至，前寇稍多，惮不敢进。乃与峦分兵，将掎角攻之。
现代文：中山王元英南讨三关，也进抵县瓠。因后续部队没有到来，前面的敌兵又比较多，害怕而不敢进攻，便与邢峦分兵成犄角之势，向敌兵发起攻击。
English: Zhongshan Wangyuan Yingnan negotiated the three passes, and also arrived at the county seat. Because the follow-up troops did not arrive, and there were more enemy soldiers in front, they were afraid and did not dare to attack, so they got into a corner with the enemy soldiers and launched an attack on the enemy soldiers.

古文：梁将齐苟仁等二十一人开门出降，即斩早生等同恶数十人，豫州平。
现代文：梁将齐苟仁等二十一人打开了城门投降，并斩杀白早生及其同党数十人，豫州平定。
English: Twenty-one people, including Liang general Qi Guoren, opened the city gate to surrender, and killed Bai Chaosheng and dozens of his fellow party members to pacify Yuzhou.

古文：帝笑曰： 卿匪直一月三捷，所足称奇。乃存士伯，让功而弗处。 
现代文：邢峦率师回京，宣武帝到东堂慰劳他。邢峦说 ：这是靠陛下您的谋略和威望取得的胜利，元英等将士出力很多，我有什么功劳呢？ 
English: Zou led his division back to Beijing, and Emperor Xuanwu went to the East Hall to console him. Zou said, "This is a victory won by your majesty's strategy and prestige. Yuan Ying and other soldiers have made a lot of efforts. What do I have to thank for?"

古文：峦自宿豫大捷及平县瓠，志行修正，不复以财贿为怀，戎资军实，丝毫无犯。
现代文：邢峦自宿豫大捷到平定县瓠，志向行为都很端正，不再以获取财货为目的，凡是缴获的物品都充作军用，对百姓秋毫无犯。
English: From Yu Dajie to Pingding County, the aspirational behavior is very correct, no longer for the purpose of obtaining goods, all the seized items are used for military purposes, and there is no offense to the people.

古文：迁殿中尚书，加抚军将军，卒于官。
现代文：升任殿中尚书，加抚军将军职。在任上去世。
English: He was promoted to the post of palace secretary and promoted to the post of general of the army. He died in office.

古文：峦才兼文武，朝野瞻望，上下悼惜之。
现代文：他文武兼备，朝野上下对他都很仰望。
English: He is well-versed in both literature and martial arts, and people up and down the country look up to him.

古文：赠车骑大将军、瀛州刺史。
现代文：去世后，大家都很沉痛惋惜。朝廷给他封职为车骑大将军、瀛州刺史。
English: After his death, everyone was very sad. The Imperial Court appointed him as the General of Chariot and Cavalry and the Historian of Zhangzhou.

古文：初，帝欲赠冀州，黄门甄琛以峦前曾劾己，乃云： 瀛州峦之本郡，人情所俗。 
现代文：开始，宣武帝想赠给他冀州刺史，黄门甄琛因为邢峦过去曾弹劾过自己，便说 ：瀛州是邢峦的家乡，人们的感情想让他封在那里。 
English: At first, Emperor Xuanwu wanted to give him the history of Jizhou, and Huangmen Zhenqi, because Zhenqi had impeached himself in the past, said: Zhenzhou is Zhenqi's hometown, people's feelings want him to be sealed there.

古文：臧弟邵，字子才，小字吉。
现代文：朝廷同意了。等到甄琛写成诏书，说是优赠邢峦为车骑将军、瀛州刺史，议论者都嘲笑他浅薄。
English: The imperial court agreed. When Zhen Yi wrote an imperial edict, saying that he was the best gift for the general of cavalry and cavalry and the history of Zhangzhou, the commentators all ridiculed him for his shallowness.

古文：少时有避，遂不行名。
现代文：邢邵，字子才，小字叫吉。小时候因避讳，不再叫这个名字。
English: 邵,字子才,小字叫吉. When I was a child, I didn't call myself by this name because I didn't like it.

古文：年五岁，魏吏部郎清河崔亮见而奇之曰： 此子后当大成，位望通显。 
现代文：五岁时，北魏吏部郎，清河人崔亮看见他十分惊奇，说 ：这孩子今后当有大的作为，地位和声望都会很显著。 
English: When he was five years old, Cui Liang, an official of the Northern Wei Dynasty and a native of Qinghe, was very surprised to see him and said, "This child will have a great future, and his status and reputation will be very prominent."

古文：十岁便能属文，雅有才思，聪明强记，日诵万余言。
现代文：十岁就能写文章，很有才思，智慧聪明，记忆力强，每天能背诵万余言。
English: He can write articles at the age of ten. He is very talented, intelligent, and has a strong memory. He can recite more than ten thousand words every day.

古文：族兄峦有人伦鉴，谓子弟曰： 宗室中有此兒，非常人也。 
现代文：族兄邢峦善于鉴别人的前程，对子弟们说： 我们家族中有这个孩子，他可不是一个平常的人。 
English: An elder brother, Hao, who was good at predicting the future of others, said to his children: We have this child in our family, he is not an ordinary person.

古文：少在洛阳，会天下无事，与时名胜，专以山水游宴为娱，不暇勤业。
现代文：邢邵少年时在洛阳，适逢天下太平无事，常常置身于风景名胜之中，专门以游山玩水、宴饮集会为乐事，不再勤于学业。
English: When he was a teenager in Luoyang, when the world was at peace, he often found himself in the midst of scenic spots. He especially enjoyed hiking, playing in the water, and attending banquets and gatherings. He was no longer diligent in his studies.

古文：尝霖雨，乃读《汉书》，五日略能遍之，后因饮谑倦，方广寻经史，五行俱下，一览便无所遗。
现代文：曾经遇雨无法外出，去读《汉书》，五天就读了一遍。后来因倦于饮酒集会，才又搜寻经史研读，一目五行，一看便不遗忘。
English: Once, when it was raining and I couldn't go out, I went to read "Chinese Classics" and read it in five days. Later, because I was tired of drinking gatherings, I searched for the study of history. Five lines at a glance, I don't forget.

古文：文章典丽，既赡且速。
现代文：文章写得典雅秀丽，既富赡又迅捷。
English: The article is elegantly and beautifully written, both informative and quick.

古文：年未二十，名动衣冠。
现代文：不到二十岁，就驰名于达官贵人和学士名流之中。
English: Less than twenty years old, he is well known among dignitaries and celebrities.

古文：尝与右北平阳固、河东裴伯茂、从兄罘、河南陆道晖等至北海王昕舍宿饮，相与赋诗，凡数十首，皆在主人奴处。
现代文：曾经与右北平的阳固、河东的裴伯茂、从兄邢罘、河南的陆道晖等人到北海王元昕家里饮酒，一起吟诵诗篇，共得数十首，都放在主人的奴仆那里。
English: He used to drink alcohol with Yang Gu from North Pyongan Province, Pei Bo-mao from East Henan Province, and Lu Daojun from Henan Province at the home of King Yuan of the North Sea, and they recited poems together. They obtained a total of dozens of poems, all of which were placed with the master's servants.

古文：旦日奴行，诸人求诗不得，邵皆为诵之。
现代文：第二天早晨奴仆外出，人们得不到诗稿，邢邵为他们一一背诵。
English: The next morning, when the servants went out, the people could not get hold of the poems, so Yao Shao recited them one by one.

古文：诸人有不认诗者，奴还得本，不误一字。
现代文：这些人中有不记得自己写的诗句的，奴仆归来取回诗稿一看，竟一字不错。
English: Some of these people could not remember the verses they had written, but when the servant returned to retrieve the poem, he found that every word was correct.

古文：诸人方之王粲。
现代文：这些人将他比作王粲。
English: These people compare him to a king.

古文：吏部尚书陇西李神俊大相钦重，引为忘年之交。
现代文：吏部尚书、陇西人李神俊对他十分佩服器重，与他结成忘年之交。
English: Shangshu from the cadre department and Li Shenjun from Shaanxi admired him very much and formed a long-lasting friendship with him.

古文：释巾为魏宣武挽郎。除奉朝请，迁著作佐郎，深为领军元叉所礼。
现代文：进入仕途之后任魏宣武帝牵引灵车唱挽歌的挽郎，又被授予奉朝请，升任著作佐郎，深为领军元叉所礼遇。
English: After entering the service, he was appointed by Emperor Wei Xuanwu to drive the hearse and sing the elegy, and was also awarded the honor of being invited to the Imperial Court, promoted to the position of the author, and was deeply honored as the leader of the Yuan army.

古文：叉新除迁尚书令，神俊与陈郡袁翻在席，叉令邵作谢表，须臾便就，以示诸宾。
现代文：元叉新任尚书令，李神俊与陈郡的袁翻在庆贺的宴席上，元叉命邢邵替他给朝廷起草谢表。他倾刻写成，展示给诸位宾客。
English: At the celebratory banquet, Li Shenjun, the newly-appointed Shang Shuling of the Yuan Fork, and Yuan Fu of the Chen County were present. Yuan Fork's wife, Shao, drafted a thank-you letter for him to the imperial court. He engraved it and showed it to the guests.

古文：神俊曰： 邢邵此表，足使袁公变色。 
现代文：李神俊看了说： 邢邵写的这份奏书，足可以为元公增色。 
English: Li Shenjun read it and said, "This playbook written by Zou Shao is enough to add color to Yuan Gong.

古文：自孝明之后，文雅大盛。
现代文：自孝明皇帝以后，文学之风十分兴盛。
English: Since Emperor Xiaoming, literature has flourished.

古文：邵雕虫之美，独步当时，每一文初出，京师为之纸贵，读诵俄遍远近。
现代文：邢邵吟诗写赋的才能独步当时。每有文章写出，京城争相传抄，一时纸贵，高声朗读的声音传遍远近。
English: The ability to write poems was unique at that time. Whenever an article was written, the capital city scrambled to copy it, and the paper was expensive for a while, and the sound of reading aloud spread far and wide.

古文：于时袁翻与范阳祖莹位望通显，文笔之美，见称先达；以邵藻思华赡，深共嫉之。
现代文：当时袁翻和范阳的祖莹地位显赫，文笔的秀美，被先贤们称道。因为邢邵的文章瑰丽富赡，人们十分妒嫉。
English: At that time, Yuan Fuan and Fan Yang's Zou Ying status was prominent, and the beauty of the writing was praised by the sages. People were very jealous because Zou Shao's article was magnificent and rich.

古文：每洛中贵人拜职，多凭邵为谢章表。
现代文：洛阳每当有达官显贵被任命新职，大多请邢邵代写谢表。
English: In Luoyang, whenever a high-ranking official is appointed to a new post, most of them ask Zou Shao to write a thank-you note.

古文：尝有一贵胜初授官，大事宾食，翻与邵俱在坐，翻意主人托其为让表。遂命邵作之，翻甚不悦。
现代文：曾有一位贵显的大官刚被朝廷授予职务，大肆宴请宾客，袁翻与邢邵都在坐。袁翻想着主人会委托他代写谢表，然而却请了邢邵，他因此很不高兴。
English: Once upon a time, there was a distinguished dignitary who had just been appointed to a position by the imperial court, and he was holding a lavish banquet for his guests. Yuan Fuan and Zou Shao were both seated. Yuan Fuan thought that his host would commission him to write a thank-you note on his behalf, but instead he invited Zou Shao, which made him very unhappy.

古文：每告人云： 邢家小兒常客作章表，自买黄纸，写而送之。 
现代文：经常对别人说 ：邢家的这个小儿常替人家写奏章贺表，都是自买纸张，写好后给人家送去。 
English: He often said to others, "This child of my family often writes greeting cards for others. He buys the paper himself and sends it to others after he has finished writing.

古文：邵恐为翻所害，乃辞以疾。
现代文：邢邵恐怕被袁翻陷害，便以有病为词辞去官职。
English: I'm afraid that Yan Shao was framed by Yuan Fouping, so he resigned from his post, saying that he was ill.

古文：属尚书令元罗出镇青州，启为府司马，遂在青土，终日酣赏，尽山泉之致。
现代文：尚书令元罗镇守青州，让邢邵任府司马。他在青州终日饮酒游乐，观尽山川林泉的景色。
English: Shang Shu ordered Yuan Luo Zhen to guard Qingzhou, and let Zou Shao serve as the prefectural magistrate. He drank and played all day in Qingzhou, watching the scenery of mountains, rivers and forests.

古文：永安初，累迁中书侍郎。所作诏文体宏丽。
现代文：永安初年，迁任中书侍郎，所写的诏书文体宏丽。
English: In the first year of the Yong'an era, he was transferred to the post of middle school secretary, and his imperial edict was written in a magnificent style.

古文：及尔硃兆入洛，京师扰乱。邵与弘农杨愔避地嵩高山。
现代文：尔朱荣进入洛阳，京师一片混乱，邢邵与弘农杨躲避到嵩山。
English: Le Zhu Rong entered Luoyang, Beijing Division was in chaos, Zou Shao and Hongnong Yang fled to Songshan.

古文：普泰中，兼给事黄门侍郎，寻为散骑常侍。
现代文：普泰时，他任给事黄门侍郎，不久，任散骑常侍。
English: In Putai's time, he was appointed as Huangmen waiter, and soon after, he was appointed as Sanzhi's regular attendant.

古文：太昌初，敕令恆直内省，给御史，令覆案尚书门下事，凡除大官，先问其可不，然后施行。
现代文：太昌初年，朝廷令他任职内省，授给御史职务，命他负责尚书省门下事。朝廷凡任命重要官员，都要先问他是否可以，然后再去任命。
English: In the first year of Taichang, the imperial court ordered him to take up the post of introspection, gave him the post of imperial historian, and ordered him to be responsible for the affairs of Shangshu Province. Whenever the imperial court appointed important officials, they had to first ask him if it was possible, and then make the appointment.

古文：除卫将军、国子祭酒。
现代文：他被授予卫将军、国子祭酒。
English: He was awarded the title of General of the Guards, and the sake was named after him.

古文：以亲老还乡，诏所在特给兵力五人，并令岁一入朝，以备顾问。
现代文：因双亲年纪高迈，辞职还乡。朝廷下诏破例给他五名兵士，并让他一年入朝一次，遇事向他征询意见。
English: Due to the advanced age of his parents, he resigned and returned to his hometown. As an exception, the imperial court gave him five soldiers and allowed him to visit the imperial court once a year to ask for advice in the event of an emergency.

古文：丁母忧，哀毁过礼。
现代文：他母亲去世，悲哀痛悼，超过常礼。
English: When his mother died, he was overcome with grief.

古文：后杨愔与魏元叉及邵请置学，奏曰：
现代文：后来，杨与魏收及邢邵请求朝廷办学，启奏说：
English: Later, Yang and Wei and Shao Shao requested the imperial court to run a school, and the opening speech said:

古文：二黉两学，盛自虞、殷。
现代文： 学校，自虞和商时就开始兴盛。
English: Schools have been flourishing since the time of Yu and Shang.

古文：所以宗配上帝，以著莫大之严；宣布下土，以彰则天之轨。
现代文：所以，可以在祭祀上天时配享，以显示它莫大的尊严；对社会发表各种文告，也离不开它，以申明整齐天下的规则。
English: Therefore, it can be shared during the sacrifice to the heavens to show its great dignity; it is also indispensable to make various announcements to the society to affirm the rules of the world.

古文：养黄发以询哲言，育青衿而敷典教。用能享国长久，风徽万祀者也。
现代文：赡养老人，可以向他们征询有益的教导；培养读书人，能够传播经典的内容；兴办学校，可以使国家长治久安，美德千秋万代流传。
English: To support the elderly, we can ask them for useful teachings; to train readers, we can disseminate the content of classics; to establish schools, we can make the country long-term and stable, and the virtues can be passed down from generation to generation.

古文：爰暨亡秦，改革其道，坑儒灭学，以蔽黔黎。
现代文：二世而亡的秦国，改变尊崇学校的常道，坑杀读书人，毁灭学校，以使百姓变得愚昧。
English: The Qin dynasty, which died out in the second generation, changed the normal way of revering schools, killing readers and destroying schools, so that the people would become ignorant.

古文：故九服分崩，祚终二代。
现代文：所以，天下分崩动乱，国运只有两代。
English: As a result, the country was divided and in turmoil, and there were only two generations of the National Movement.

古文：炎汉勃兴，更修儒术。
现代文：汉代学校勃兴，又尊崇儒术。
English: Schools flourished in the Han Dynasty, and Confucianism was revered.

古文：故西京有六学之义，东都有三本之盛。
现代文：所以，在西京建有为帝王和宗室子弟读书的六学，在东都设有保存皇家图书册籍的大型府库。
English: Therefore, six schools were built in West Beijing for the emperor and his family members to study, and a large prefectural library for the preservation of royal books and catalogues was set up in the eastern capital.

古文：逮自魏、晋，拨乱相因，兵革之中，学校不绝，仰惟高祖孝文皇帝，禀圣自天，道镜今古，列教序于乡党，敦诗书于郡国。
现代文：到了魏晋时期，战乱频繁，但在兵马征战中，学校并没有停止开办。我朝高祖孝文皇帝禀性圣明，来自天授，道德学问，照耀古今，在乡村设立学校，在全国布教诗书。
English: During the Wei and Jin dynasties, there were frequent wars, but the schools did not stop operating during the military campaigns. Emperor Gaozhu Xiaowen of the Ming Dynasty, who was gifted with wisdom and moral knowledge, set up schools in the countryside and propagated poetry throughout the country.

古文：但经始事殷，戎轩屡驾，未遑多就，弓剑弗追。
现代文：但是，由于政务繁巨，多次率军征战，没有过多地考虑兴学办校，弓箭难于追回逝去的光阴。
English: However, due to the complexity of government affairs, leading the army to war many times, and not thinking too much about opening a school, it is difficult for the bow and arrow to recover the lost time.

古文：世宗统历，聿遵先绪，永平之中，大兴板筑。
现代文：世宗宣武帝继位，承继先帝的意志，永平年中，大兴土木，建立学校。
English: Emperor Shizong Xuanwu succeeded to the throne, inheriting the will of the previous emperor, and in the middle of the Yongping year, he carried out extensive civil engineering and established a school.

古文：续以水旱，戎马生郊，虽逮为山，还停一篑。
现代文：由于水旱灾害不断发生，加之时有征讨，学校虽然即将建成，却功亏一篑。
English: Due to the continuous occurrence of floods and droughts, coupled with the imposition of levies, although the school was about to be built, it was a failure.

古文：而明堂礼乐之本，乃郁荆棘之林；胶序德义之基，空盈牧竖之迹。
现代文：传播礼乐的明堂，却成了荆棘茂盛的所在；弘扬德义的学校，却有牧童的踪迹。
English: The Ming-tang, which spread liturgical music, became a place of thorns and thistles; the school, which promoted virtue and righteousness, had traces of shepherds.

古文：如此则元、凯可得之于上序，游、夏可致之于下国，岂不休欤。
现代文： 我又听说官吏要教给他本领，才能受职任事。任事之后，才发给他俸禄。
English: I also heard that government officials had to teach him skills before he could be assigned to a post, and only after he was assigned to a post did they pay him a salary.

古文：灵太后令曰： 配飨大礼，为国之本，比以戎马在郊，未遑修缮，今四表晏宁，当束有司，别议经始。 累迁尚书令，加侍中。
现代文：这样，上面就没有关于不称职的官吏的议论，下面就不会产生官吏尸位其政的批评。现在国子监虽然有学官的名称，而却没有教授生徒的实绩，何异于附着在燕麦上的菟丝，和南箕北斗那样徒有虚名。 灵太后看到奏表后下令说 ：祭祀赏赐的礼节，是国家的根本。以往戎马不息，没有对学校社庙加以修缮。现在四方太平，任命有司负责修理。 邢邵迁任尚书令，加封侍中的职务。
English: In this way, there would be no discussion of incompetent officials from above, and no criticism of the government by officials from below. Now, although the state overseer has the name of an academic official, he does not teach the students' actual performance, which is no different from the false name of a silk thread attached to oatmeal, and the Nanxun Beidou. After seeing the report, the Empress Dowager ordered: "The etiquette of sacrificing and rewarding is the foundation of the country. In the past, there was no rest for the horses, and the schools and temples were not repaired. Now it is peaceful in all directions, and a secretary is appointed to be responsible

古文：于时与梁和，妙简聘使，邵与魏收及从子子明被征入朝。
现代文：当时，北魏与南梁通好，朝廷选拔赴梁使者。邢邵与魏收及其从子魏子明都被征召入朝。
English: At that time, the Northern Wei Dynasty and the Southern Liang Dynasty were on good terms, and the imperial court selected envoys to Liang. Zou Shao, Wei Jie and his son Wei Ziming were all conscripted into the imperial court.

古文：当时文人，皆邵之下，但以不持威仪，名高难副，朝廷不令出境。
现代文：当时的文人，都在邢邵之下。但是，因为他不庄重威严，虽然名望很高，却难副其实，朝廷因而不让他出国。
English: The literati at that time were all under Shao Xuan. However, because he was not solemn and dignified, although his reputation was high, it was difficult to live up to reality, so the court did not let him go abroad.

古文：南人曾问宾司： 邢子才故应是北间第一才士，何为不作聘使？ 
现代文：南梁人曾经问北魏的礼宾司官员： 邢邵应是北朝第一个有才学的人，为什么不让他任使者？ 
English: Nanliang people once asked the protocol officer of the Northern Wei Dynasty: Zou Shao should be the first talented person in the Northern Dynasty, why not let him be an envoy?

古文：答云： 子才文辞实无所愧，但官位已高，恐非复行限。 
现代文：北魏的官员回答说： 邢邵才华实在无愧于当使者，但他的官位已经很高，恐怕不再适合。 
English: An official from the Northern Wei Dynasty replied: Zou Shao's talent is truly worthy of being an envoy, but his official rank is already high, and I am afraid it is no longer suitable.

古文：南人曰： 郑伯猷，护军犹得将命，国子祭酒何为不可？ 
现代文：南人又问： 郑伯猷原是护军，现在已当上将军，邢邵任国子监祭酒有什么不可以？ 
English: The southerners also asked: Zheng Boqin used to be a military escort, now he has become a general, what is wrong with drinking the sacrificial wine?

古文：邵既不行，复请还故郡。
现代文：邢邵没有被选上赴梁的使者，便请求辞官回乡。
English: Zou Shao was not chosen as an envoy to Liang, so he asked the diplomat to return to his hometown.

古文：武帝在京辅政，征之，在第为宾客。除给事黄门侍郎，与温子升对为侍读。
现代文：齐文襄帝高澄在京城辅助朝政，征请邢邵到自己的府第中做宾客，授予给事黄门侍郎，与温子升一起任侍读。
English: Emperor Gaocheng assisted the imperial government in the capital, and invited Zou Shao to be a guest at his prefectural middle school. Zou Shao was awarded the title of Huangmen waiter, and served as a waiter together with Wen Zisheng.

古文：宣武富于春秋，初总朝政，崔暹每劝礼接名贤，询访得失，以邵宿有名望，故请征焉。
现代文：文襄帝年富力强，刚管理朝政，崔暹常劝他礼貌地接待名士贤才，请教治国的得失。邢邵过去就很有名望，所以被征请。
English: Emperor Wenxiang was rich and powerful, and had just taken over the administration of the imperial court. Choi Siem often advised him to politely receive famous people and sages, and ask them for advice on the merits and demerits of governing the country. Gong Shao was very famous in the past, so he was conscripted.

古文：宣武甚亲重之。
现代文：高澄十分敬重他，经常向他请教。
English: Takasumi respected him very much and often asked him for advice.

古文：多别引见。邵旧鄙崔暹无学术，言论之际，遂云暹无所知解。
现代文：邢邵过去就鄙视崔暹的不学无术，言谈之间，便说崔暹缺少知识和见解。
English: In the past, Zou Shao despised Choi Siam's lack of knowledge and skill, and said that Choi Siam lacked knowledge and insight.

古文：宣武还以邵言告暹，并道 此汉不可亲近。 
现代文：高澄又将他的话告诉给了崔暹，并说： 这个人不能亲近。 
English: Gao Cheng also told his words to Cui Siam, and said, "This person can't get close.

古文：暹颇衔之。
现代文：崔暹对他怀恨在心。
English: Choi Siam held a grudge against him.

古文：邵奏魏帝，发敕用妻兄李伯伦为司徒祭酒。
现代文：邢邵上表奏请孝静帝，起用他的妻兄李伯伦任司徒祭酒。
English: Yao Shao asked Emperor Xiao Jing to use his brother-in-law Li Bolen as a priest to prepare the sacrificial wine.

古文：诏书已出，暹即启宣武，执其专擅，伯伦官事便寝。
现代文：任命的诏书已经发出，崔暹立即报告给高澄，高澄指责邢邵专擅权力，李伯伦的官职被撤销。
English: The official letter of appointment has been issued, Cui Siam immediately reported to Gao Cheng, Gao Cheng accused Zou Shao of arrogating power, and Li Bolen's official position was revoked.

古文：邵由是被疏。
现代文：邢邵从此又被朝廷疏远。
English: From then on, the imperial court distanced itself from Zou Shao.

古文：其后除骠骑、西兗州刺史。
现代文：以后，任骠骑、西兖州刺史。
English: After that, he served as a cavalry officer and a historian of Xishuanzhou.

古文：在州有善政，桴鼓不鸣，吏人奸伏，守令长短，无不知之。
现代文：在州中任职时有很好的政声，官衙旁边喊冤告状的人敲击的大鼓没有响过。吏卒们的作奸犯科，官员们的是非短长，他没有不知道的。
English: When he served in the middle of the state, there was a good political sound, and the big drum beat of the person who shouted the complaint next to the official gong did not sound. He did not know that the officials were committing crimes, and the officials were short-tempered.

古文：定陶县去州五十里，县令妻日暮取人斗酒束脯，邵逼夜摄令，未明而去，责其取受，举州不识其所以。
现代文：定陶县距州城五十里，县令的妻子每天晚索上要人家一斗酒、一束干肉，邢邵夜晚把县令拘捕，天未明又把他放回，斥责他索要人家的东西，全州上下都不知道是怎么一回事。
English: Dingtao County is 50 miles away from the state capital. The wife of the county magistrate asks for a barrel of wine and a bundle of dried meat every night. The police arrest the county magistrate at night, release him before dawn, and reprimand him for demanding things from others. The whole state does not know what is going on.

古文：在任都不营生产，唯南兗籴粟，就济阳食之。
现代文：在任上不过问生产的事，惟有到南兖州籴粮，让他们到济阳就食。
English: During his term of office, he did not ask about production, but only went to southern Luzhou to buy grain, so that they could eat in Jiyang.

古文：邵缮修观宇，颇为壮丽；皆为之名题，有清风观、明月楼，而不扰公私，唯使兵力。
现代文：邢邵修缮庵观庙宇，颇为宏丽壮观，他都为之题写匾额，有 清风观 、 明月楼 等。建筑时不动用公私财物，只役使兵卒。
English: Zou Shao repaired and renovated the An Guan Temple, which is quite magnificent and spectacular. He inscribed inscriptions for it, such as Qingfeng Guan, Mingyue Lou, etc. He did not use public or private property during construction, only soldiers.

古文：吏民为立生祠，并勒碑颂德。
现代文：官吏百姓替他建立生祠，并刻碑歌颂他的功德。
English: Government officials and ordinary people built a shrine for him, and carved a monument to praise his merits.

古文：及代，吏人父老及媪妪皆远相攀追，号泣不绝。至都，除中书令。
现代文：离职时，官民父老及老妪都追着为他送行，哭泣声不绝于路，到京城后任中书令。
English: When he left office, his father, father's father, father's father, father's father, father's father, father's father, father's father, father's father, father's father, father's father, father's father, father's father, father's father, father's father, father's father, father's father, father's father, father's father, father's father, father's father, father's father, father's father, father's father, father's father, father's father, father's father, father's father's father, father's father's father

古文：旧格制：生两男者，赏羊五口，不然则绢十匹。
现代文：旧制规定：一家生两个儿子，官府赏给五只羊；不要羊，给十匹绢。
English: According to the old system, if a family has two sons, the government will give them five sheep; if they don't want sheep, they will be given ten donkeys.

古文：仆射崔暹奏绝之。
现代文：仆射崔暹奏请去掉这条规定。
English: Please remove this rule for the minstrel show.

古文：邵云： 此格不宜辄断。
现代文：邢邵上表说 ：这项规定不应取消。
English: Zou Shao said at the meeting: This regulation should not be cancelled.

古文：句践以区区之越，赏法：生三男者给乳母。
现代文：勾践在小小的越国还立有赏法：女子生三个儿子的，公家给她雇乳母。
English: In the small country of Yue, there is also a reward system: if a woman has three sons, the government will hire her a nanny.

古文：况以天下之大而绝此条！
现代文：更何况今天国家之大却取消了这一条。
English: What's more, today's National Diet has abolished this article.

古文：舜藏金于山，不以为乏，今藏之于民，复何所损。 
现代文：舜将金隐藏在山里，就不认为国家穷困；现在，藏富于民，国家又会有什么损害呢？ 
English: If they had hidden the gold in the mountains, the country would not have been considered impoverished; now, if they hide the wealth from the people, what harm will the country suffer?

古文：又准旧皆讯囚取占，然后送付廷尉。
现代文：另外，按照旧例。有司可以将囚徒关押，然后再交付廷尉。
English: In addition, according to the old practice, a magistrate can detain a prisoner and then hand him over to a court official.

古文：邵以为不可，乃立议曰： 设官分职，各有司存，丞相不问斗人，虞官弓招不进。
现代文：邢邵认为不能这样。便建议说： 设立官职，分别职责，各有分工。丞相不必去过问别人打架斗殴，掌管山泽草木的虞官不负责打仗的事。
English: Zou Shao thought that this could not be done. He then proposed: "Establish an official position, separate duties, each with a division of labor. The prime minister does not have to go to ask others to fight, and the magistrate in charge of the mountains and forests is not responsible for fighting.

古文：岂使尸祝兼刀匕之役，家长侵鸡犬之功。 
现代文：难道能让代替鬼神接受祭祀的人去兼任厨师的劳作，让一家之长去贪占鸡犬的功劳？ 
English: Is it possible for a person who receives sacrifices in place of ghosts and gods to also work as a cook, and for the head of a family to take credit for chickens and dogs?

古文：诏并从之。
现代文：朝廷下诏将这两条建议都采纳了。
English: The lower jaws obeyed his every command.

古文：自除太常卿兼中书监，摄国子祭酒。
现代文：他被授予太常卿，兼任中书监，摄理国子祭酒。
English: He was awarded the title of Tai Changqing, concurrently served as the middle school librarian, and served as the provost of the National Children's Festival.

古文：是时朝臣多守一职，带领二官甚少。
现代文：当时，朝臣大多只任一职，兼任两种官职的很少。
English: At that time, most courtiers only held one post, and it was rare for them to hold two official posts.

古文：邵顿居三职，并是文学之首，当世荣之。
现代文：邢邵身兼三职，并名列文人学士之首，世人都赞赏他。
English: Zou Shao holds three posts, and is ranked as the first literati bachelor, and the world appreciates him.

古文：幸晋阳，路中频有甘露之瑞，朝臣皆作《甘露颂》，尚书符令邵为之序。
现代文：文宣帝到晋阳，路途中不断有天降甘露的祥瑞出现，朝臣们都写《甘露颂》，尚书让邢邵为这些文章作序。
English: When Emperor Wenzhong went to Jinyang, the auspiciousness of the heaven-sent nectar kept appearing on the way. The courtiers all wrote "Ode to Nectar," and Shangshu asked Zhao Shao to write the preface for these articles.

古文：及文宣崩，凶礼多见讯访，敕撰哀策。
现代文：文宣帝去世，丧事的礼节大多向他询问，朝廷又令他撰写悼文。
English: When Emperor Wenxuan died, most people asked him about the etiquette of the funeral, and the court ordered him to write a eulogy.

古文：后授特进，卒。
现代文：后来，朝廷授给他特进。去世。
English: Later, the Imperial Court awarded him a special promotion. He died.

古文：邵率情简素，内行修谨，兄弟亲姻之间，称为雍睦。
现代文：邢邵性情清简静素，涵养较深，处事谨慎。兄弟和亲友之间，相处和睦。
English: Xiao Shao's disposition is clear, simple and calm, with deep tolerance and prudence. Between brothers and relatives and friends, they get along well.

古文：博览坟籍，无不通晓。
现代文：他博览典章经史，通晓古今。
English: He is well versed in the history of ceremonial law and is familiar with the past and the present.

古文：晚年尤以《五经》章句为意，穷其指要。
现代文：晚年留意于《五经》，穷究其中的要旨。
English: In his later years, he paid attention to the "Five Classics" and studied the essence of them.

古文：吉凶礼仪，公私谘禀，质疑去惑，为世指南。
现代文：婚丧嫁娶的礼节，不管公私，只要向他咨询，都会立即释去疑惑，因而成为世人的指南。
English: The etiquette of marriage, whether public or private, as long as he is consulted, will immediately release doubts, thus becoming a guide for the world.

古文：每公卿会议，事关典故，邵援笔立成，证引该洽。
现代文：每次公卿大臣会议，事关典章和掌故，邢邵挥笔马上写就，引证恰当。
English: Whenever there is a meeting of court nobles and ministers, and the matter is related to ordinances and decrees, Zou Shao immediately writes it down with his pen, and the citation is appropriate.

古文：帝命朝章，取定俄顷，词致宏远，独步当时。
现代文：皇帝让他写诏书，倾刻便成，文词宏丽，文意深远，独步当时。
English: The emperor asked him to write an imperial edict, and it was engraved, the words were magnificent, the meaning was profound, and it was unique at that time.

古文：与济阴温子升为文士之冠，世论谓之温、刑。
现代文：他与济阴的温子升并为文人学士之冠，时人称他们为温、邢。
English: He and Wenzi of Jiyin rose to the top of the literati bachelor class. At that time, people called them Wenzi and Zou.

古文：钜鹿魏收虽天才艳发，而年事在二人之后，故子升死后，方称邢魏焉。
现代文：巨鹿人魏收虽然天才勃发，而年龄和经历在他们二人之后，所以，温子升死后，世人才称为邢、魏。
English: Although Wei Jie, the giant deer, was a genius, his age and experience lagged behind the two of them. Therefore, after Wen Zi's ascension, the world only knew him as Wei.

古文：虽望实兼重，不以才位傲物。
现代文：虽然他名实相符，却不依恃才能地位轻视别人。
English: Although his name is true, he doesn't cling to his position and belittles others.

古文：脱略简易，不修威仪，车服器用，充事而已。
现代文：生活简单随便，不修饰外表。官员们穿的服装，坐的车马，用的器具，他仅仅让它们充数，并不经常使用。
English: He lives a simple, unadorned life. The clothes worn by officials, the carriages they ride in, and the utensils they use, he only has them refilled and does not use them often.

古文：有斋不居，坐卧恆在一小屋。
现代文：有好房子不住，却经常住在一间小屋里。
English: They don't live in a nice house, but often in a small house.

古文：果饵之属，或置之梁上，宾至，下而共啖。
现代文：果品一类的食物挂在房梁上，等有客人来，取下来一块吃。
English: Fruits and other types of food are hung on the beams of the house, waiting for guests to come and take down a piece to eat.

古文：天姿质素，特安异同，士无贤愚，皆能倾接，对客或解衣觅虱，且与剧谈。
现代文：天生的质朴简素，不管性格与自己相同或相反，都能相安无事。对于来访的人，不管贤能或愚笨，都尽心接待。他对着客人一边解开衣扣寻找虱子，一边与他们交谈。
English: By nature, he is simple and unpretentious, and can get along with anyone, regardless of whether their personality is the same as his or the opposite. He is always ready to receive visitors, regardless of whether they are smart or stupid. He talks to his guests while unbuttoning his shirt and looking for a pair of socks.

古文：有书甚多，而不甚雠校。
现代文：藏书很多，而却不去校对。
English: They have a lot of books, but they don't proofread them.

古文：见人校书，笑曰： 何愚之甚！天下书至死读不可遍，焉能始复校此。
现代文：看见别人校对书籍，笑着说 ：为什么这样愚笨，天下书籍那么多，到死也读不完，哪有功夫去校对？
English: When he saw others proofreading books, he smiled and said, "Why are you so stupid? There are so many books in the world, you can't read them all before you die. How do you have time to proofread?"

古文：其高情达识，开遣滞累，东门吴以还，所未有也。
现代文：有时间想想那些有错误的书，便是一件有趣的事。 
English: It's fun to have time to think about books that have mistakes in them.

古文：有集三十卷，见行于世。邵世息大宝，有文情。孽子大德、大道，略不识字焉。李崇，字继长，小名继伯，顿丘人也。
现代文：他的妻弟李季节是一个很有才学的人，对他说： 世间的人有很多不聪明，想找有错误的书哪里能得到？ 他回答说 ：如果不想得到，便不用再去读书。 李崇，字继长，小名继伯，顿丘人。
English: His brother-in-law, Li Xian, who was a very talented scholar, said to him, "There are a lot of unintelligent people in the world. If you want to find a book with mistakes, where can you get it?" He replied, "If you don't want to get it, you don't have to go to school anymore." Li Chong, the eldest son, the younger brother, the man from Dongqiu.

古文：文成元皇后第二兄诞之子。
现代文：是文成帝的元皇后二哥李诞之的儿子。
English: He is the son of Emperor Wencheng's former empress's second brother, Li Xizhi.

古文：年十四，召拜主文中散，袭爵陈留公，镇西大将军。
现代文：十四岁时被朝廷召见，封为主文中散，承袭陈留公的爵位，任镇西大将军。
English: At the age of fourteen, he was summoned by the imperial court, given the title of Major Major, inherited the peerage of Chen Liu Gong, and was appointed as Zhenxi Grand General.

古文：孝文初，为荆州刺史，镇上洛，敕发秦、陕二州兵送崇至理。崇辞曰： 边人失和，本怨刺史，奉诏代之，但须一宣诏旨而已。
现代文：孝文帝初年，任荆州刺史，镇守上洛。朝廷命秦、陕二州派兵送他上任，他表示拒绝，说 ：边地的人们相互失去和气，本来就怨恨刺史没有治理好。
English: In the first year of Emperor Xiaowen, he was appointed as the governor of Jingzhou and the town guard of Shangluo. The court ordered Qin and Shaanxi to send soldiers to send him to the post, but he refused, saying: People in the border areas lost harmony with each other, and the resentment of the governor was not well managed.

古文：不劳发兵自防，使人怀惧。 
现代文：我现在奉诏前去代理，只需朝廷一道圣旨就行了，不用派兵护送，这会使人增加恐惧。 
English: I am now going to act on behalf of the imperial edict. All it takes is a decree from the imperial court. There is no need to send an escort of soldiers, which would increase people's fear.

古文：孝文从之。乃轻将数十骑驰到上洛，宣诏绥慰，人即帖然。
现代文：孝文帝同意，他只带数十名人马来到上洛，宣布朝廷的诏书进行抚绥安慰，人们马上止息了矛盾。
English: Emperor Xiaowen agreed. He came to Shangluo with only a few dozen eminent people and announced the imperial edict to soothe and comfort. People immediately stopped the conflict.

古文：边戍掠得齐人者，悉令还之。
现代文：边境的戍卒抓到南齐的人，他命令全部放还。
English: When the border guards caught the people from Nanzhi, he ordered them all to be released.

古文：南人感德，仍送荆州口二百许人。
现代文：南齐人感激他的恩德，便送回掠去的北魏荆州的二百多口人。
English: The people of Nanqi were grateful for his kindness, and sent back more than two hundred people from Jingzhou, Northern Wei, who had been robbed.

古文：两境交和，无复烽燧之警。
现代文：两国边境和睦，不再有烽烟狼尘的警报。
English: The border between the two countries is harmonious, and there is no longer a warning of smoke and dust.

古文：在州四年，甚有称绩。
现代文：在荆州刺史任上四年，很有政绩。
English: During his four years in Jingzhou, he has made great achievements in politics.

古文：召还京师，赏赐隆厚。
现代文：召回京师，朝廷给他十分优厚的赏赐。
English: The imperial court gave him a very generous reward.

古文：除兗州刺史。
现代文：他又任兖州刺史。
English: He was also appointed as the chief historian of Zhangzhou.

古文：兗土旧多劫盗，崇乃村置一楼，楼悬一鼓，盗发之处，双槌乱击，四面诸村，闻鼓皆守要路。
现代文：这一带过去盗贼很多，李崇便在每个村庄建一座城楼，楼上悬挂一面鼓。盗贼出现时，猛烈击鼓，四周村庄的人们听到鼓声就出动把守道路要口。
English: There used to be a lot of thieves in this area, so Li Chong built a city tower in each village, with a drum hanging from the upper floor. When the thieves appeared, they beat the drum violently, and the people around the village heard the drum and went out to guard the road junction.

古文：俄顷之间，声布百里，其中险要，悉有伏人，盗窃始发，便尔禽送。
现代文：倾刻之间，鼓声传遍百里，险要关口都有人埋伏。盗贼一出来，就将他们擒获。
English: In the twinkling of an eye, the sound of the drums was heard a hundred miles away, and there were ambushes at every turn. As soon as the thieves came out, they were caught.

古文：诸州置楼县鼓，自崇始也。
现代文：各州都建城楼悬大鼓，就从李崇这里开始。
English: Every state has built a city tower hanging a large drum, starting with Li Chong here.

古文：后例降为侯，改授安东将军。
现代文：以后循例封他为侯，改授为安东将军。
English: Later, he was given the title of marquess and promoted to the rank of General Anton.

古文：车驾南征，诏崇副骠骑大将军、咸阳王禧都督左翼诸军事。
现代文：孝文帝亲自南征，命李崇为副骠骑大将军、咸阳王元禧都督左翼诸军事。
English: Emperor Xiaowen personally led the Southern Expedition, and ordered Li Chong to be the deputy cavalry general, and Xianyang Wang Yuanxi to be the left wing military governor.

古文：徐州降人郭陆聚党作逆，人多应之。崇遣高平卜冀州诈称犯罪，逃亡归陆，陆纳之，以为谋主。数月，冀州斩陆送之，贼徒溃散。
现代文：徐州投降北魏的郭陆聚众叛乱，有很多人响应，李崇派高平人卜冀州诈称犯罪，逃到郭陆那里，郭陆接纳了他，让他做自己的参谋，过了几个月，卜冀州斩下郭陆的人头送来，其他贼众溃散各处。
English: When Xuzhou surrendered to Guo Lu of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Guo Lu rallied the people to rebel. Many people responded. Li Chong sent Gaoping to fraudulently claim that Guo Lu had committed a crime and fled to Guo Lu. Guo Lu accepted him and made him his staff officer. A few months later, Guo Lu's head was cut off and sent to Guo Lu from Buji, and the other thieves scattered everywhere.

古文：入为河南尹。
现代文：李崇被任命为河南尹。
English: Li Chong was named Henan Yin.

古文：后车驾南讨汉阳，崇行梁州刺史。
现代文：以后，孝文帝南讨汉阳，李崇任梁州刺史。
English: Later, Emperor Xiaowen marched south to conquer Hanyang, and Li Chong took the throne of Liangzhou.

古文：氐杨灵珍遣弟婆罗与子双领步骑万余，袭破武兴，与齐相结。
现代文：氐族杨灵珍派兄弟杨婆罗与儿子杨双领步兵和骑兵一万余众，攻破武兴，与南齐结成联盟。
English: The Yao Yang Lingzhen sent his brother Yang Borou and his son Yang Shuang to lead more than ten thousand infantry and cavalry to defeat Wuxing and form an alliance with Nanqi.

古文：诏崇为使持节、都督陇右诸军事，率众讨之。
现代文：朝廷下诏命李崇为使持节、都督陇右诸军事，率军讨伐。
English: The Imperial Court issued a decree ordering Li Chong to lead the army in the crusade for the Envoys' Day and for the military to be sent to the capital.

古文：崇槎山分进，出其不意，表裹以袭，群氐皆弃灵珍散归，灵珍众减太半。崇进据赤土。
现代文：他率军披荆斩棘，分路前进，出其不意，两面夹击敌兵。氐人都离开杨灵珍逃散，灵珍的人马顿时少了一大半，李崇挥军进占赤土。
English: He led the army through the thorns and thistles, advanced on a separate road, caught by surprise, and clamped down on the enemy soldiers on both sides. The soldiers all left Yang Lingzhen and fled, Lingzhen's men were reduced by more than half, and Li Chong waved the army into the red soil.

古文：灵珍又遣从弟率五千人屯龙门，躬率精勇一万据鹫硖。
现代文：灵珍又派从弟杨建率五千人马屯扎龙门，亲率精锐将士一万据守鹫硖。
English: Ling Zhen also sent five thousand people from his brother Yang Jian to Matun Zalongmen, and ten thousand elite soldiers from his relatives to guard the castle.

古文：龙门之北数十里中，伐树塞路。
现代文：在龙门以北数十里的地方砍伐树木，堵塞道路。
English: Dozens of miles north of Longmen, trees are being cut down, blocking roads.

古文：鹫硖之口，积大木，聚礌石，临崖下之，以拒官军。
现代文：在鹫硖的关口堆积大树，聚集石雷石，放在崖头上，用来抗拒官兵。
English: Large trees were piled up at the mouth of the ravine, and stones were gathered and placed on the cliff to resist the soldiers.

古文：崇乃命统军慕容拒率众五千，从他路夜袭龙门，破之。
现代文：李崇便命统军慕容拒率军五千人，从别的道路乘夜袭击龙门，将龙门攻破。
English: Li Chong then ordered the unified army of Murong He to lead an army of five thousand, attack the Dragon Gate at night from another road, and break through the Dragon Gate.

古文：崇自攻灵珍。灵珍连战败走，俘其妻子。
现代文：李崇亲自进攻杨灵珍，灵珍连战失败，他的妻子被俘获。
English: Li Chong personally attacked Yang Lingzhen. Lingzhen was defeated in the battle, and his wife was captured.

古文：崇多设疑兵，袭克武兴。
现代文：李崇到处设置疑兵，又攻克武兴。
English: Li Chong set up suspicious soldiers everywhere and attacked Wuxing.

古文：齐梁州刺史阴广宗遣参军郑猷、王思考率众援灵珍。崇大破之，并斩婆罗首，杀千余人，俘获猷等。
现代文：南齐梁州刺史阴广宗派参军郑猷、王思考率众救援杨灵珍，被李崇打得大败，并将杨婆罗斩首，杀死一千多人，俘获了郑猷等将领。
English: In Liangzhou, South Qi Province, Zheng Yao and Wang Qianling led the troops to rescue Yang Lingzhen, who was defeated by Li Chong, decapitated Yang Bolo, killed more than a thousand people, and captured Zheng Yao and other generals.

古文：灵珍走奔汉中。
现代文：杨灵珍逃到汉中。
English: Yang Lingzhen fled to Hanzhong Middle School.

古文：孝文在南阳，览表大悦曰： 使朕无西顾之忧者，李崇功也。 
现代文：孝文帝在南阳看到报捷的奏章，十分高兴，说 ：使我没有后顾之忧，是李崇的功劳啊！ 
English: Emperor Xiaowen was very happy to see the report of the successful performance in Nanyang and said, "It is Li Chong's merit that I have no worries!"

古文：宣武初，征为右卫将军，兼七兵尚书，转左卫将军、相州大中正。
现代文：任他为梁州刺史，亲手写下诏书说： 认真思谋经略，要除去那些必须除掉的，安抚那些可以教化的。百姓和朝廷都忧患的，要全部消灭。 
English: Let him write the history of Liangzhou, and write down the edict with his own hand, saying, "Consider carefully the strategy, eliminate those who must be eliminated, pacify those who can be educated, and eliminate all those who are troublesome to the people and the court."

古文：鲁阳蛮柳北喜、鲁北燕等聚众反叛，诸蛮悉应之，围逼湖阳。
现代文：杨灵珍偷偷占据白水，李崇将白水攻破，杨灵珍远远地逃走。宣武初年，鲁阳蛮人柳北喜、鲁北燕等聚众反叛，各蛮族部落都起来响应，进逼湖阳。
English: Yang Lingzhen secretly occupied Baishui, Li Chong broke through Baishui, and Yang Lingzhen fled far away. In the first year of Xuanwu, Luyang barbarians Liu Beixi, Lu Beiyan and others gathered to rebel, and all barbarian tribes rose up in response and entered Hoyang.

古文：游击将军李晖光镇北城，尽力捍御。
现代文：魏将游击将军李晖光镇守北城，尽力守卫。
English: Wei sent the guerrilla general Li Bingguang to defend the northern city and tried his best to guard it.

古文：贼势甚盛，诏以崇为使持节、都督征蛮诸军事以讨之。
现代文：敌兵攻势十分猛烈，朝廷下诏命李崇为使持节、都督征蛮诸军事，讨伐蛮兵。
English: The enemy's offensive was very fierce, and the imperial court ordered Li Chong to be the envoy to hold the festival, and the governor to recruit barbarians from the military and fight barbarians.

古文：东荆州蛮樊安聚众于龙山，僭称大号。
现代文：蛮族军队有数万人，驻扎在形势险要的地方抗拒官军。
English: There are tens of thousands of barbarian troops stationed in places where the situation is critical, resisting the government troops.

古文：梁武遣兵应之。诸将击不利，乃以崇为镇南将军、都督征蛮诸军事，率步骑讨之。
现代文：李崇多次进攻，将他们打败，连斩鲁北燕等人，将一万多户蛮人迁徙到幽州、并州一带安置。东荆州蛮人樊安在龙山聚众反叛，越位自称王号。
English: Li Chong attacked many times, defeated them, and even killed Lu Beiyan and others, and relocated more than ten thousand barbarian families to Yuzhou and the surrounding areas. Dongjingzhou barbarian Yan'an gathered in Longshan and rebelled, claiming to be the king.

古文：崇分遣诸将，攻击贼垒，连战克捷，生禽樊安，进讨西荆，诸蛮悉降。
现代文：梁武帝派兵接应他。魏军进攻失利，朝廷便以李崇为镇南将军、都督征蛮诸军事，率领步兵和骑兵进讨。李崇派将士们进攻敌人的营垒，连连告捷，活捉樊安。又进讨西荆，蛮族各军全部投降。
English: Emperor Liangwu sent troops to meet him. The Wei army failed in its attack, and the imperial court appointed Li Chong as the general of Zhenan and the governor to recruit barbarian troops and lead the infantry and cavalry into battle. Li Chong sent his soldiers to attack the enemy's camp, and they repeatedly achieved success and captured Yan'an alive. They also attacked Xijing, and all the barbarian troops surrendered.

古文：今朐山蚁寇，久结未殄，贼愆狡诈，或生诡劫，宜遣锐兵，备其不意。
现代文：不久，他兼任侍中、东道大使，黜退庸劣，提拔贤能，享有赏罚分明的美誉。
English: Soon, he also served as an attendant and host ambassador, rejecting mediocrity, promoting virtue, and enjoying a reputation for clear rewards and punishments.

古文：崇可都督淮南诸军事，坐敦威重，遥运声算。 
现代文：朝廷任他为散骑常侍、征南将军、扬州刺史。
English: The imperial court appointed him as a straggler, general of the Southern Expedition, and Yangzhou historian.

古文：延昌初，加侍中、车骑将军、都督江西诸军事。
现代文：延昌初年，加封他为侍中、车骑将军、都督江西诸军事。
English: In the first year of Yanchang, he was awarded the titles of chamberlain, cavalry general, and military governor of Jiangxi Province.

古文：先是，寿春县人苟泰有子三岁，遇贼亡失，数年不知所在，后见在同县赵奉伯家。
现代文：先是寿春县人苟泰有个三岁的小孩遇到贼兵丢失，好多年不知道下落。后来，看见小孩在同县赵奉伯家里。
English: First, there was a three-year-old child in Rengotai, Shuchun County, who was lost to the bandits and did not know his whereabouts for many years. Later, he saw the child at the home of Zhao Fengbo in the same county.

古文：泰以状告，各言己子，并有邻证，郡县不能断。
现代文：苟泰到官府告状，双方都说这是自己的孩子，并找来邻居作证，郡县的官吏无法断案。
English: Gou Tai went to the government office to file a complaint. Both sides said that this was their child, and brought in neighbors to testify. County officials were unable to close the case.

古文：崇令二父与兒各在别处，禁经数旬，然后告之曰： 君兒遇患，向已暴死，可出奔哀也。 
现代文：李崇让把双方和这个孩子各安置在别的地方，禁止他们见面。过了几十天，然后对他们说： 你的孩子有病，已经死去，可去奔丧致哀。 
English: Li Chongzhen placed the two parties and the child in different places, forbidding them to meet. After dozens of days, he said to them: Your child is sick and has died, you can go to mourn.

古文：苟泰闻即号啕，悲不自胜；奉伯咨嗟而已，殊无痛意。
现代文：苟泰听了立即号啕痛哭，悲不自禁；赵奉伯听后只叹了几口气，毫无悲痛的意思。
English: After listening to it, Gou Tai immediately cried bitterly and could not help but feel sad; after listening to it, Zhao Feng Bo only sighed for a few breaths, with no sense of sorrow.

古文：崇察知之，乃以兒还泰，诘奉伯诈状。奉伯款引，云先亡一子，故妄认之。
现代文：李崇察知，便把孩子交给苟泰，诘问赵奉伯为什么欺诈，赵奉伯招供说自己的孩子早先死了，所以冒认。
English: Li Chong noticed this and handed the child over to Guo Tai, who asked Zhao Fengbo why he had cheated. Zhao Fengbo confessed that his child had died earlier, so he had lied.

古文：又定州流人解庆宾兄弟，坐事俱徙扬州。
现代文：定州流人解庆宾兄弟俩，因犯罪被流放扬州。
English: The two Qingbin brothers were exiled to Yangzhou for committing a crime.

古文：弟思安背役亡归。庆宾惧后役追责，规绝名贯，乃认城外死尸，诈称其弟为人所杀，迎归殡葬。
现代文：兄弟解思安不服刑役偷跑回来，解庆宾怕吏役追查责罚，便改变姓名籍贯，冒认城外死尸，声言兄弟思安被人杀害，拉回来埋葬。
English: Brother Xie Si'an sneaked back without serving his sentence, and Xie Qingbin was afraid that the officials would investigate and punish him, so he changed his name and hometown, pretended to be a dead body outside the city, and claimed that Brother Xie Si'an had been killed and dragged back to be buried.

古文：颇类思安，见者莫辨。
现代文：这具死尸很像思安的模样，看见的人都无法分辨。
English: The corpse bore a strong resemblance to Si'an, and no one who saw it could tell the difference.

古文：又有女巫阳氏自云见鬼，说思安被害之苦，饥渴之意。
现代文：女巫阳氏自称遇见了鬼，叙说思安遇害的痛苦，和在阴间忍饥挨饿的情况。
English: The witch, Ms. Yang, claimed to have met a ghost, recounted the pain of Sian's murder, and the situation of starving in the underworld.

古文：庆宾又诬疑同军兵苏显甫、李盖等所杀，经州讼之。
现代文：庆宾又诬告军兵苏显甫、李盖等人将思安杀害，向州府告状。
English: Qingbin also falsely accused soldiers Su Xianfu, Li Gai and others of killing Sian, and filed a complaint with the state government.

古文：二人不胜楚毒，各自款引。
现代文：苏、李二人经不住行刑时的痛楚，都承认了罪状。
English: Both Su and Li, unable to bear the pain of the execution, confessed to the crime.

古文：狱将决竟，崇疑而停之。
现代文：狱案将要判决，李崇怀疑，停止了审讯。
English: The prison case was about to be adjudicated, and Li Chong became suspicious and stopped the interrogation.

古文：密遣二人非州内所识者，伪从外来，诣庆宾告曰： 仆住在北州，比有一人见过寄宿。
现代文：他秘密派两个不被本州人所认识的吏役，假装从外地来，找到庆宾说： 我们住在北州，恰遇一个过路人也来住宿，一块说话，看他有别的思虑，便询问他的来历。
English: He secretly sent two officials who were not known to the people of the state, pretending to come from out of town, to find the guests and said: We live in Beizhou, just happened to meet a passer-by who also came to stay, talk together, see if he has other concerns, and then inquire about his background.

古文：夜中共语，疑其有异，便即诘问，乃云是流兵背役，姓解字思安。
现代文：他自称是逃避刑役的流兵，姓解名思安。
English: He claimed to be a former soldier who had evaded military service. His surname was Sian.

古文：时欲送官，苦见求及，称 有兄庆宾，今往扬州相国城内，嫂姓徐。
现代文：当时我们想把他送到官府，他苦苦哀求，声称有一个哥哥叫庆宾，现在住在扬州相国城内，嫂子姓徐。
English: At that time, we wanted to send him to the government office, but he begged hard, claiming to have an older brother named Qingbin, who now lives in Yangzhou's Xiangguocheng, and a sister-in-law named Xu.

古文：君脱矜慜，为往告报，见申委曲，家兄闻此，必重相报。
现代文：您如果同情我，请替我家报个讯，申说我的委曲。家兄听了，一定重重地酬报。
English: If you sympathize with me, please send a message to my family and tell them about my commission. If my brother listens, he will definitely be rewarded.

古文：今但见质，若往不获，送官何晚？ 
现代文：现在您去我家询问，如果去我哥哥那里而没有什么收获，再将我送官也不晚。
English: Now you go to my house to inquire, if you go to my brother's and get nothing, then it's not too late to send me.

古文：是故相造，指申此意。
现代文：所以，我们特来拜访，告诉您这个情况。
English: That's why we've come to visit, to tell you about it.

古文：君欲见雇几何？当放贤弟。
现代文：您想报答，我们就放了您的弟弟。
English: If you want to repay us, we'll let your brother go.

古文：若其不信，可见随看之。 
现代文：如果您不信，可跟我们一起去看看。 
English: If you don't believe it, come with us to see it.

古文：庆宾怅然失色，求其少停。
现代文：庆宾听完，脸上变了颜色，请求他们稍停一停。
English: After listening, the celebrant's face changed color and he asked them to pause for a moment.

古文：此人具以报崇，摄庆宾问之，伏引。
现代文：这两个人把情况报告给了李崇，李崇将解庆宾抓来审问，他招供了实情。
English: The two men reported the situation to Li Chong, who arrested and interrogated Xie Qingbin, who confessed the truth.

古文：更问盖等，乃云自诬。
现代文：又问李盖等人的情况，庆宾供说是诬告。
English: He also asked Li Gai and others about the situation, and the celebrant confessed that it was a false accusation.

古文：数日之间，思安亦为人缚送。
现代文：数日之内，解思安也被人绑着押送回来。
English: Within a few days, Xie Sian was also escorted back, handcuffed.

古文：崇召女巫视之，鞭笞一百。
现代文：李崇把女巫找来，打了一百竹杖。
English: Li Chong found the witch and beat her with a hundred bamboo sticks.

古文：崇断狱精审，皆此类也。时有泉水涌于八公山顶，寿春城中有鱼数从地涌出，野鸭群飞入城，与鹊争巢。
现代文：当时，有泉水流入八公山顶，寿春城内有鱼多次从地下涌出，野鸭成群结队飞入城中，与喜鹊争巢。
English: At that time, there was a spring that flowed into the top of Mount Hachiko, fish in Shuchun City gushed out from the ground many times, and wild ducks flew into the city in flocks to compete with magpies for nests.

古文：五月，大霖雨十有三日，大水入城，屋宇皆没。
现代文：五月，滂沱大雨连续下了十三天，洪水灌入城内，房舍全被淹没，李崇与兵士漂泊在城头上。
English: In May, it rained heavily for 13 days in a row, flooding the city, completely submerging houses, and leaving Li Chong and his soldiers adrift at the top of the city.

古文：崇与兵泊于城上，水增未已，乘船附于女墙，城不没者二版而已。
现代文：水势继续上涨，他又将乘船附在城头的城墙上，城墙只剩下两块木板那么宽的地方没有被淹没。
English: As the water continued to rise, he would take the boat and attach it to the city wall at the head of the city, leaving only a two-plank-wide section of the wall unsubmerged.

古文：州府劝崇弃州保北山。
现代文：州府官员都劝李崇放弃州城到北山去，他说： 我蒙受国家的厚恩，守卫这个地方。
English: The prefectural officials all advised Li Chong to abandon the prefectural capital and go to Beishan. He said, "I have been blessed by the state to guard this place.

古文：崇曰： 吾受国重恩，忝守籓岳，淮南万里，系于吾身，一旦动脚，百姓瓦解，扬州之地，恐非国物。
现代文：淮南辽阔万里，安危系在我一人身上。我一旦离开这里，百姓倾刻四散逃去，扬州这一方土地恐怕不再成为国土。
English: Huainan is vast and vast, and my safety depends on me alone. Once I leave here, the people will scatter and flee, and I am afraid that this side of Yangzhou will no longer be a national territory.

古文：昔王尊慷慨，义感黄河，吾岂爱一躯，取愧千载。
现代文：过去王尊慷慨大义，感动了黄河，我难道只爱惜自己的身躯性命，而留下千载的愧疚和遗憾吗？
English: In the past, Wang Zun was generous and moved the Yellow River. Do I only cherish my own body and life, but leave a thousand years of guilt and regret?

古文：但怜兹士庶，无辜同死，可桴筏随高，人规自脱。吾必守死此城。 
现代文：只可怜这里的庶民百姓，无辜死于洪水，可让他们坐木筏去寻求生路。我一定死守在这里。 
English: I only pity the common people here, who died innocently in the flood, and let them take rafts to find a way to survive. I will definitely stay here.

古文：时州人裴绚等受梁假豫州刺史，因乘大水，谋欲为乱，崇皆击灭之。
现代文：这时，州人裴绚等接受南梁封给的豫州刺史职务，乘着大水，阴谋叛乱，李崇将他们击败消灭。
English: At this time, Pei Hua and other people from the prefecture accepted the post of Henzhou historian given by Nan Liangfeng, took advantage of the flood, plotted a rebellion, and Li Chong defeated and eliminated them.

古文：又以洪水为灾，请罪解任。
现代文：他因洪水成灾，请求解除职务。
English: He asked to be relieved of his duties because of the floods.

古文：诏曰： 夏雨泛滥，斯非人力，何得以此辞解。
现代文：朝廷下诏说 ：夏天雨水泛滥，不是人力造成的，何必为此辞职呢？
English: The imperial court issued an edict saying: the summer rain flooding was not caused by manpower, so why resign?

古文：今水涸路通，公私复业，便可缮甲积粮，修复城雉，劳恤士庶，务尽绥怀之略也。 
现代文：现在，水已退去，道路畅通，公私都恢复了旧业。可以训练军队，积蓄粮食，整修城池，慰劳抚恤士民，极尽安抚关怀的策略。 
English: Now, the water has receded, the roads are smooth, and both the public and private sectors have resumed their old business. It is possible to train the army, save grain, renovate the city, comfort the pensioners, and do the utmost to appease the care strategy.

古文：崇又表解州，不听。
现代文：李崇又一次上表请求解职，朝廷不接受。
English: Li Chong once again petitioned for dismissal, but the court did not accept it.

古文：是时，非崇则淮南不守矣。
现代文：这时，不是李崇淮南就不能保留。
English: At this time, it is not Li Chonghuainan who cannot be retained.

古文：崇沈深有将略，宽厚善御众。
现代文：李崇性情深沉，很有大将的谋略；待人宽厚，善于笼络部下。
English: Li Chong has a deep disposition and a great general's strategy; he treats people generously and is good at cajoling his subordinates.

古文：在州凡十年，常养壮士数千人，寇贼侵边，所向摧破，号曰： 卧彪 ，贼甚惮之。
现代文：在扬州刺史任上共十年，经常供养勇壮士兵数千人。敌兵侵略边境，都被他们摧垮，号称为 卧彪 ，敌人十分惧怕。
English: During his ten years of service in Yangzhou, he often supported thousands of brave soldiers. Enemy soldiers who invaded the border were all destroyed by them. He was known as "Wah Biao" and was greatly feared by the enemy.

古文：赏赐珍异，岁至五三，亲待无与为比。
现代文：梁武帝对李崇久任淮南十分反感，多次设反间计，几乎无所不至。
English: Emperor Liang Wudi was very disgusted with Li Chongji's appointment to Huainan, and repeatedly set countermeasures, almost everywhere.

古文：梁武每叹息，服宣武之能任崇也。
现代文：但宣武帝对他十分信赖，梁武帝的阴谋无法得逞，因而常常叹息说： 真佩服宣武帝对李崇的信任啊！ 
English: However, Emperor Xuanwu trusted him very much, Emperor Liangwu's plot could not succeed, so he often sighed and said: I really admire Emperor Xuanwu's trust in Li Chong!

古文：孝明践阼，褒赐衣马。
现代文：孝明帝元诩继位，赏赐给李崇衣服马匹。
English: Emperor Xiaoming succeeded to the throne, and rewarded Li Chong with clothes and horses.

古文：及梁遣其游击将军赵祖悦袭据西硖石，更筑外城，逼徙缘淮之人于城内。又遣二将昌义之、王神念率水军溯淮而上，规取寿春，田道龙寇边城，路长平寇五门，胡兴茂寇开、霍。
现代文：南梁派游击将军赵祖悦袭击并占据西硖石，又修筑外面的城墙，逼使沿淮河居住的人搬进城内，派遣将领昌义之、王神念率水军溯淮河西上，准备夺取寿春，梁将田道龙进犯边城，路长平攻打五门，胡兴茂谋取开、霍两地。
English: Nanliang sent the guerrilla general Zhao Zuyue to attack and occupy Xishuanshi, and also built the outer city wall, forced the people living along the Huai River to move into the city, sent the generals Changyizhi and Wang Shennian to lead the navy to the west of the Huai River to prepare for the capture of Shuchun, Liang invaded the border city with Tian Daolong, Lu Changping attacked Wumen, and Hu Xingmao tried to open and close the two places.

古文：扬州诸戍，皆被寇逼。
现代文：扬州各军事要地都被梁军侵逼。
English: Yangzhou's important military sites were invaded and occupied by Liang's army.

古文：崇分遣诸将，与之相持；密装船舰二百余艘，教之水战，以待台军。
现代文：李崇分派将领与敌人对阵。秘密安装二百多艘船，教他们练习水战，严阵以待。
English: Li Chong dispatched his generals to confront the enemy. He secretly installed more than two hundred ships, taught them to practice naval warfare, and waited for them.

古文：梁霍州司马田休等寇建安，崇遣统军李神击走之。又命边城戍主邵申贤要其走路，破之于濡水，俘斩三千余人。
现代文：南梁霍州司马田休等进攻建安，李崇派统军李神将他打败，又命边城守将邵申贤率众扼断敌人退路，在濡水将逃敌打败，斩杀三千多人。
English: Nanliang, Huozhou, Simatian and others attacked Jian'an. Li Chong sent the unified army of Li Shen to defeat him, and also ordered the border city guard Shao Shenxian to lead the crowd to cut off the enemy's retreat, defeat the fleeing enemy in the wet water, and kill more than three thousand people.

古文：灵太后玺书劳勉。
现代文：灵太后送玺书对李崇慰劳。
English: Li Chong was greatly comforted by the letter sent by Ling Tae.

古文：许昌县令兼纟宁麻戍主陈平王南引梁军，以戍归之。
现代文：许昌县令兼纟宁麻守城主将陈平王勾引梁军，献城投降。
English: Xu Chang County's magistrate and the lord of Suining Ma Castle, Chen Ping Wang, seduced Liang's army and surrendered the city.

古文：崇自秋请援，表至下余，诏遣镇南将军崔亮救侠石，镇东将军萧宝夤于梁堰上流决淮东注。
现代文：李崇从秋天开始向朝廷求援，共写了十多道奏章，朝廷才派镇南将军崔亮救援硖石，命镇东将军萧宝夤在南梁的辖区内挖开淮河大堤东灌。
English: Li Chong began to ask the imperial court for help in the autumn, and wrote a total of more than ten pieces of music. The imperial court only sent Zhennan General Cui Liang to rescue Zhi Shi, and ordered Zhendong General Xiao Baojun to excavate the Huai River dike in the area under the jurisdiction of Nan Liang.

古文：朝廷以诸将不相赴，乃以尚书李平兼右仆射持节节度之。
现代文：朝廷因各路将领不互相配合，便派尚书李平兼右仆射，持节统领各军。
English: Since the generals from all sides did not cooperate with each other, the imperial court sent Shangshu Li Ping and his right-hand man Shao to take command of the armies.

古文：崇遣李神乘斗舰百余艘，沿淮与李平、崔亮合攻硖石。
现代文：李崇派部将李神乘战船百余艘，顺淮河与李平、崔亮合攻硖石。
English: Li Chong sent a detachment of more than 100 warships to take Li Shen along the Huai River to attack Shaoshi together with Li Ping and Cui Liang.

古文：徵拜尚书左仆射，迁尚书令，加侍中。
现代文：李神的水军攻克硖石东北的外城，梁守将祖悦兵力不足，表示投降。
English: Li Shen's navy conquered the outer city of Northeastern Shanshi, and Liang's commander, Zu Yue, was short of troops and surrendered.

古文：崇在官和厚，明于决断，然性好财贿，败肆聚敛。
现代文：朝廷嘉奖李崇，给他晋封为骠骑将军、仪同三司，刺史和都督的职务不变。李崇当官平和宽厚，明察是非，善于决断，然而贪图财货，接受贿赂，不断向商贩们搜刮聚敛。
English: The imperial court commended Li Chong and promoted him to the post of general of cavalry and cavalry, the third secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies, the third secretary of the Ministry of History and the governor of the capital. Li Chong was a peaceful and generous official, he was able to see right from wrong and was good at making decisions. However, he was greedy for money and goods, accepted bribes, and constantly scrounged from merchants.

古文：孝明、灵太后尝幸左藏，王公嫔主从者百余人，皆令任力负布绢，即以赐之。
现代文：孝明帝与灵太后曾到左边的国库中巡视，王公大臣和嫔妃等随从的有一百多人，帝后命他们各尽自己的力气到府库中拿取布和绢，只要拿得动，都赐给他。
English: Emperor Xiaoming and Empress Dowager Jing visited the treasury on the left. There were more than a hundred attendants, including princes, ministers, and concubines. Empress Dowager Jing ordered each of them to do their best to take cloth and money from the treasury. As long as they could move, they were given to him.

古文：多者过二百匹，少者百余。
现代文：有拿得多的超过二百匹，少的也拿了一百多匹。
English: Some took more than two hundred cows, and a few took more than a hundred.

古文：唯长乐公两手持绢二十匹而出，示不异众而已，世称其廉俭。
现代文：只有长乐公拿了二十匹，以显示自己与众不同，世人们因此称赞他的廉洁。
English: Only Changle Gong took twenty horses to show that he was different, and the world praised his integrity.

古文：崇与章武王融以所负多，颠仆于地，崇乃伤腰，融至损脚。
现代文：李崇与章武王元融因背负的布绢太多，跌倒在地上，李崇摔伤了腰，元融扭坏了脚。
English: Li Chong and Zhangwu Wangyuan Rong fell to the ground because they were carrying too many cloth bags. Li Chong injured his lower back and Yuan Rong twisted his foot.

古文：时人为之语曰： 陈留、章武，伤腰折股，贪人败类，秽我明主。 
现代文：人们讽刺说： 陈留、章武，摔伤了腰，折断了股；贪取财货的败类，污秽了我朝的明主。 
English: People said sarcastically: Chen Liu and Zhang Wu fell and injured their waists and broke their thighs; the scum who coveted wealth and goods sullied the bright master of our dynasty.

古文：蠕蠕主阿那瑰犯塞，诏崇以本官都督北讨诸军事以讨之。
现代文：蠕蠕族首领阿那瞔侵犯边境，朝廷下诏命李崇以原来的职务兼任都督北讨诸军事，讨伐敌兵。
English: Anaxagoras, the leader of the Cree, invaded the border, and the imperial court ordered Li Chong to take his former position as the governor of the north to fight the military and fight the enemy soldiers.

古文：崇辞于显阳殿，戎服武饰，志气奋扬，时年六十九，干力如少。
现代文：李崇在显阳殿拜辞，身穿盔甲战袍，志气昂扬奋发。虽已年高六十九岁，但气度雄风有如青年。
English: Li Chong bowed his head at the Hall of the Rising Sun, wearing a suit of armor and a battle robe. Although he is 69 years old, he is as vigorous as a young man.

古文：孝明目而壮之，朝臣莫不称善。
现代文：孝明帝看了连连称赞，朝臣们也没有不赞叹的。
English: Emperor Xiaoming saw the continuous praise, and the courtiers did not fail to be impressed.

古文：遂出塞三千余里，不及贼而还。
现代文：李崇挥军出塞，驰驱三千余里，没有赶上退去的敌人而班师回来。
English: Li Chong led the army out of the fortress, drove more than three thousand miles, and did not catch up with the retreating enemy, but the division came back.

古文：崇请改六镇为州，兵编户，太后不许。
现代文：他请求将六个军镇改为州，太后不允许。
English: He requested to change six military towns into prefectures, but the empress dowager did not allow it.

古文：后北镇人破落汗拔陵反，所在响应。
现代文：后来，北部军镇的破六韩拔陵举兵反叛，到处都响应他。
English: Later, the northern military town of the broken six-Korean tomb-sweeping uprising, everywhere responded to him.

古文：征北将军、临淮王彧大败于五原，安北将军李叔仁寻败于白道，贼众日甚。
现代文：征北将军、临淮王元在五原被叛兵打败；不久，安北将军李叔仁在白道也遭遇失败，叛兵气焰越来越盛。
English: Lin Huai Wangyuan, the general of the Northern Expedition, was defeated by the rebels in Wuhan; soon, Anbei General Li Shuren also suffered a defeat in Baidu, and the rebels became more and more emboldened.

古文：诏引丞相、令、仆、尚书、侍中、黄门于显阳殿，曰： 贼势侵淫，寇连恆，朔，金陵在彼，夙夜忧惶。
现代文：朝廷下诏命丞相、令、仆射、尚书、侍中、黄门等各级官员聚集显阳殿，说 ：贼势蔓延，连寇恒、朔等地及金陵已被他们占有。
English: The imperial court issued an edict ordering officials at all levels, including the prime minister, the regent, the footman, the secretary, the chamberlain, and the huangmen, to gather at the Xianyang Palace, saying, "The banditry is spreading, and even places such as Kuo Heng, Shuo, and Jinling have been occupied by them.

古文：诸人宜陈良策。 
现代文：朕日夜忧惧，各位应陈奏破敌良策。 
English: I am worried day and night. You should come up with a good strategy to defeat the enemy.

古文：吏部尚书元修义以为须得重贵，镇压压恆、朔，总彼师旅，备卫金汤。
现代文：吏部尚书元修义认为需要一名权大名重的大臣，率军进攻恒、朔，指挥军队，保卫国家。
English: Shang Shu Yuan Xiu Rong, the head of the personnel department, believed that a powerful and important minister was needed to lead the army to attack Heng and Shuo, command the army, and defend the country.

古文：诏曰： 去岁阿那瑰叛逆，遣李崇北征，崇遂长驱塞北，返旆榆关，此一时之盛。
现代文：朝廷下诏说： 去年阿那王襄反叛，派李崇北征，他长驱塞北，返师在榆关，成为一时的盛举。
English: The imperial edict issued by the court said: Last year, Anawang Xiang rebelled and sent Li Chong to the north, he drove north and returned to Shaoguan, which became a momentous event.

古文：朕以李崇国戚望重，器识英断，意欲还遣崇行，总督三军，扬旌恆、朔，诸人谓可尔不？ 
现代文：朕认为李崇威望极高，有器识，有决断，想再派他去，统率三军，扬威于恒、朔一带，大家说可以吗？ 
English: I think that Li Chong is highly respected. He has the ability and determination. I would like to send him again to lead the three armies and promote the prestige of Hengduan and Shuo. Can we do that?

古文：仆射萧宝夤等曰： 陛下此遣，实合群望。 
现代文：仆射萧宝夤等奏说 ：陛下的这个决定，很符合众人的愿望。 
English: "This decision by His Majesty is very much in line with the wishes of the people," said pupil Xiao Baojun.

古文：于是诏崇以本官加使持节、开府、北讨大都督，抚军将军崔暹、镇军广阳王深皆受崇节度。
现代文：于是，朝廷下诏命李崇以本官加任使持节、开府、北讨大都督，抚军将军崔暹、镇军将军广阳王元深都受他的指挥。
English: As a result, the imperial court ordered Li Chong to be appointed as the envoy to hold the festival, Kaifu, and the north to be the grand governor, and the general of the Fuzhou army, Cui Siam, and the general of the town army, Guangyang Wangyuan Sheng, were under his command.

古文：又诏崇子光禄大夫神轨假平北将军，随崇北讨。
现代文：又下诏命李崇的儿子李神轨为平北将军，跟随李崇北征。
English: He also ordered Li Chong's son, Li Shenlu, to become the general of Pingbei and to follow Li Chong in the Northern Expedition.

古文：崇至五原，崔暹大败于白道之北，贼遂并力攻崇。
现代文：李崇率军至五原，崔暹在白道以北被敌军打败，所以，敌军便全力进攻李崇的军队。
English: Li Chong led the army to Wuhuan, and Cui Siam was defeated by the enemy north of Baidu. Therefore, the enemy attacked Li Chong's army with all their might.

古文：崇与广阳王深力战，累破贼众。
现代文：李崇与广阳王元深奋力抗击，多次打败敌兵。
English: Li Chong and Guangyang Wang Yuan fought hard and defeated the enemy soldiers many times.

古文：相持至冬，乃引还平城。
现代文：双方相持到冬天，李崇率兵退回平城。
English: Both sides held out until the winter, and Li Chong led his troops back to Pingcheng.

古文：深表崇长史祖莹诈增功级，盗没军资。
现代文：元深上表奏劾李崇的长史祖莹靠弄虚作假为自己增加立功的级别，又侵吞军需物资。
English: Shizhu Ying, the eldest son of Li Chong, who was impeached by Yuan Sheng, increased the level of meritorious service for himself by means of deception and embezzlement of military supplies.

古文：崇坐免官爵，征还，以后事付深。
现代文：李崇受牵连被免去官爵，召回京城，军事指挥大权交给元深。
English: Implicated, Li Chong was stripped of his title, recalled to Beijing, and the military command authority was handed over to Yuan Sheng.

古文：后徐州刺史元法僧以彭城南叛，时除安乐王鉴为徐州刺史以讨之。为法僧所败，单马之。
现代文：后来，徐州刺史元法僧献出彭城，叛投南梁。朝廷任安东王元鉴为徐州刺史，讨伐叛军，被元法僧打败，单人独骑逃了回来。
English: Later, the former legal monk of Xuzhou Zhishi offered Pengcheng and defected to Nanliang. The imperial court appointed Wang Yuanjian of Andong as the legal historian of Xuzhou to fight against the rebels. He was defeated by the former legal monk and fled back alone.

古文：太和初，拜通直散骑侍郎，孝文礼之甚重。频经大忧，居丧以孝称。
现代文：朝廷又下诏恢复李崇的官爵，任他为徐州大都督、节度诸军事。适逢李崇病重，朝廷便让卫将军、安丰王元延明代替他。孝昌元年，去世。谥号武康。李平，字云定，从小就有远大的志向。
English: The imperial court also issued an edict to restore Li Chong's official title, appointing him as the grand governor of Xuzhou and military governor. When Li Chong fell seriously ill, the imperial court asked Wei general, Anfeng Wangyuan Yanming to replace him. He died in the first year of Xiaochang. Nicknamed Wu Kang. Li Ping, the character Yun Ding, he had lofty ambitions since childhood.

古文：后以例降，袭爵彭城公。
现代文：长大后博览群书，喜好《礼经》、《易经》，很有文才。
English: After growing up, he read a lot of books, liked the "Book of Rites" and the "Book of Changes," and was very literate.

古文：累迁太子庶子。
现代文：太和初年，任通直散骑侍郎，孝文帝对他十分器重。
English: In the first year of the reign of Empress Dowager Cixi, Emperor Xiaowen placed great importance on Ren Tong Zhi, a cavalry officer.

古文：平请自效一郡，帝曰： 卿复欲以吏事自试也？ 
现代文：他请求到一个郡任职，孝文帝说： 你想治理一个地方来试试自己的才能吗？ 
English: He asked for a post in a county, and Emperor Xiaowen said, "Do you want to govern a place to test your talent?"

古文：拜长乐太守，政务清静，吏人怀之。
现代文：任他为长乐太守。李平为政清静简淡，官吏和百姓都很怀念他。
English: He was appointed as the governor of Changle. Li Ping's politics were quiet and simple, and officials and the people missed him very much.

古文：征行河南尹，豪右权戚惮之。
现代文：受征辟为河南行尹，豪门勋戚都害怕他。
English: He was conscripted as Henan Xingyin, and his wealthy relatives were all afraid of him.

古文：宣武即位，除黄门郎，迁司徒左长史，行尹如故。
现代文：宣武帝即位，任他为黄门郎，迁任司徒左长史，行尹的职务不变。
English: When Emperor Xuanwu ascended the throne, he appointed him as Huangmenlang, and transferred him to the post of Siduzuo Changshi, while the post of Xingyin remained unchanged.

古文：寻正尹，长史如故。
现代文：不久转为正尹，长史的官职不变。
English: He was soon changed to Zheng Yin, but his official position remained unchanged.

古文：车骑将幸鄴，平上表谏，以为： 嵩都创构，洛邑俶营，虽年跨十稔，根基未就。
现代文：宣武帝将到邺地视察，李平上表进谏，认为 嵩都创建，洛阳营造，虽然已经十年，但根基还不牢固。
English: Emperor Xuanwu will visit Handan, Li Ping will go to Handan, he believes that Songdu was founded, Luoyang was built, although it has been ten years, but the foundation is not solid.

古文：代人至洛，始欲向尽，资产罄于迁移，牛畜毙于辇运；陵太行之险，越长津之难，辛勤备经，劣达京阙；富者犹损太半，贫者可以意知。
现代文：代人到洛阳，开初还很向往。家里的资产在迁移途中损失殆尽，牛羊大多死在路上，跨过了险峻的太行山，渡过了汹涌的黄河，辛苦备尝，好不容易到达京城，富裕人家的财产还损失一大半，贫苦百姓的情况更可以想像。
English: The family's assets were completely lost during the migration, most of the cattle and sheep died on the road, they crossed the steep Taihang Mountain, crossed the turbulent Yellow River, worked hard to prepare, and finally reached Beijing. Wealthy families lost more than half of their property, and the situation of poor people is even more imaginable.

古文：兼历岁从戎，不遑启处。
现代文：加上历年来战事不断，百姓们无暇安居。
English: Coupled with the constant fighting over the years, the people have no time to live in peace.

古文：自景明以来，差得休息。
现代文：自景明以来，才稍可得到休息。
English: It is only since the Ming Dynasty that it has been able to rest a little.

古文：事农者未积一年之储，筑室者裁有数间之屋，莫不肆力伊、瀍，人急其务。
现代文：但农夫的家中没有一年的积蓄，修盖房子的人家中也只有数间小屋。百姓们没有不尽力于伊河和氵廛河一带的建设。
English: However, the farmer's family did not have a year's savings, and the people who built the house only had a few huts at home.

古文：实宜安静新人，劝其稼穑，令国有九载之粮，家有水旱之备。
现代文：现在，实在应该让庶民安居乐业，鼓励他们努力耕田，让国家积蓄够九年的粮食，每个家庭都可以应付水旱灾害的袭击。
English: Now, it is really necessary to let the common people live and work in peace, encourage them to work hard to cultivate the fields, let the country save enough grain for nine years, and every family can cope with the attacks of floods and droughts.

古文：若乘之以羁绁，则所废多矣。 
现代文：如果仍然限制和滋扰他们，那么，国家失掉的将会很多。 
English: If they continue to be restricted and harassed, the country will lose a lot.

古文：不从。
现代文：宣武帝没有采纳他的建议。
English: Le Zhu Rong did not listen.

古文：诏以本官行相州事。
现代文：朝廷下诏命他以原来的官职管理相州的事务。
English: The imperial court ordered him to manage the affairs of Sangju with his former official position.

古文：帝至鄴，亲幸平第，见其诸子。
现代文：宣武帝到邺城，亲自到他家，见到了他的几位儿子。
English: Emperor Xuanwu went to Lucheng, personally visited his home, and met several of his sons.

古文：寻正刺史。
现代文：不久，任命他为刺史。
English: Soon after, he was appointed chief historian.

古文：平劝课农桑，修饰太学，简试通儒以充博士，选五郡聪敏者以教之。
现代文：李平劝导农民耕田种桑，修建太学，选拔有学问的儒生充任讲学博士，从五郡的读书人中选拔聪明敏捷的进行教育。
English: Li Ping advised farmers to cultivate fields and plant mulberry trees, built a university, selected learned Confucian students to serve as lecturers and doctors, and selected intelligent and agile readers from the five counties to carry out education.

古文：图孔子及七十二弟子于讲堂，亲为立赞。
现代文：描绘孔子和七十二弟子的画像，挂在讲堂内，亲自为每幅画像写像赞。
English: Pictures depicting Confucius and the seventy-two disciples hang in the lecture hall, and he personally writes praise for each picture.

古文：前来台使，颇好侵渔。平乃画 履武尾，践薄冰 于客馆，注颂其下，以示诫焉。
现代文：前任刺史颇好鱼肉百姓，李平又画 履虎尾 和 践薄冰 两幅画，悬挂在客馆，写上颂文，以示警诫。
English: His predecessor, Li Ping, also painted two paintings, "Walking on the Tiger's Tail" and "Walking on Thin Ice," which were hung in the guest house and inscribed with eulogies as a warning.

古文：征拜度支尚书，领御史中尉。
现代文：被任命为度支尚书，领御史中尉的官衔。
English: He was appointed as a Duozhi Shangshu and given the official title of Lieutenant of the Imperial History Division.

古文：冀州刺史、京兆王愉反于信都，以平为持节、都督北讨诸军事、行冀州以讨之。
现代文：冀州刺史、京兆王元愉在信都反叛，朝廷命李平为持节、都督北讨诸军事、行冀州刺史，讨伐元愉。
English: Jizhou and Beijing Zhao Wang Yuan Yu rebelled in Xindu, the imperial court ordered Li Ping to hold a festival, the governor of the north to call in the military, go to Jizhou to make history, and fight Yuan Yu.

古文：宣武临式乾殿劳遣平，因曰：何图今日，言及斯事！ 
现代文：宣武帝在乾殿慰劳他，并为他送行，说 ：怎么会有今天？ 
English: Emperor Xuanwu consoled him in the Dry Palace and saw him off, saying, "How did today come to be?"

古文：歔欷流涕。
现代文：说到元愉叛乱的事，唏嘘感叹，泪流满面。
English: When it comes to the matter of the Yuan You rebellion, Zou Xiu sighed and burst into tears.

古文：平对曰： 愉天迷其心，构此枭悖。
现代文：李平回答道： 元愉是鬼迷心窍，才做出这种大逆不道的事。
English: Li Ping replied: Yuan You is a ghost-obsessed person, and that's why he did such an outrageous thing.

古文：陛下不以臣不武，委以总督之任。
现代文：陛下不认为我不勇武，委任为总督的职责。
English: His Majesty did not think me unmanly, assigning to me the duties of a governor.

古文：如其稽颡军门，则送之大理。若不悛待戮，则鸣鼓衅钲，非陛下之事。 
现代文：如果他主动到军门稽首投降，我便把他送到大理寺按刑法处治；如果怙恶不悛，我便挥军鸣鼓进攻，完成陛下交给的重任。 
English: If he voluntarily surrenders at the gate of the military inspector, I will send him to Dali Temple to be punished according to the criminal law; if he does not, I will attack with troops and drums to complete the important task entrusted by His Majesty.

古文：平进次经县，诸军大集。
现代文：他率军进至经县，叛军也向这里汇集。
English: He led the army into Jing County, and the rebels also gathered here.

古文：夜有蛮兵数千斫平前垒，矢及平帐，平坚卧不动，俄而乃定。
现代文：夜晚，蛮兵数千人攻打李平军营前面的营垒，箭射进了李平的军帐，李平躺在那里一动也不动，过了一会儿才安静下来。
English: In the evening, thousands of barbarians attacked the camp in front of Li Ping's military camp. Arrows shot into Li Ping's military account, Li Ping lay there motionless, and only calmed down after a while.

古文：遂至冀州城南十六里，大破逆众，逐北至城门，遂围城。
现代文：李平指挥军队到冀州城南十六里，大败敌兵，将他们向北追赶到城门处，包围了冀州城。
English: Li Ping commanded the army to sixteen miles south of Jizhou City, defeated the enemy soldiers, chased them north to the city gate, and surrounded Jizhou City.

古文：愉与百余骑突门走，平遣统军叔孙头追之。去信都八十里，禽愉。
现代文：元愉带一百多骑兵突围逃走，李平派统军叔孙头追赶他，离信都八十里，将元愉擒获。
English: Yuan Yue led more than a hundred cavalrymen to break out and escape. Li Ping sent the uncle and grandson of the unified army to chase him, and captured Yuan Yue eighty miles away from Xindu.

古文：冀州平，以本官领相州大中正。
现代文：冀州平定，朝廷命他以本官领相州大中正职衔。
English: Jizhou was pacified, and the imperial court ordered him to take the official title of senior official in charge of Jizhou University.

古文：平先为尚书令高肇、侍御史王显所恨，后显代平为中尉，平加散骑常侍。
现代文：李平被尚书令高肇、侍御史王显忌恨。后来，王显代替李平为御史中尉，李平被加封为散骑常侍。
English: Li Ping was hated by Gao Zhao, Shang Shuling, and Wang Xian, the attendant of Shi. Later, Wang Xian replaced Li Ping as the lieutenant of the attendant of Shi, and Li Ping was added as the attendant of horseback riding.

古文：显劾平在冀州隐截官口，肇又扶成其状，奏除平名。
现代文：王显纠劾李平在冀州隐瞒人口，高肇进一步捏造罪状，奏报朝廷解除了李平的职务。
English: Wang Xian reprimanded Li Ping for concealing the population in Jizhou, Gao Zhao further fabricated the charges, and the court dismissed Li Ping.

古文：延昌初，诏复官爵，除定、冀二州刺史。
现代文：延昌初年，朝廷下诏恢复了他原来的官职爵位，任定州和冀州两州的刺史。
English: In the first year of Yanchang, the imperial edict restored his former official title and knighthood, and he was appointed as the governor of Dingzhou and Jizhou.

古文：前来良贱之讼，多有积年不决；平奏不问真伪，一以景明年前为限，于是诤讼止息。
现代文：前来告状的，大多为积压多年没有处理的旧案。他奏报朝廷，不管积案的真伪，一律以景明年以前作为界限，于是，诉讼被止息。
English: Most of the plaintiffs were old cases that had been pending for many years. He reported to the Imperial Court that, regardless of the authenticity of the backlog, all cases would be settled by the end of the next year. As a result, the lawsuit was terminated.

古文：武川镇人饥，镇将任款请贷未许，擅开仓振恤，有司绳以费散之条，免其官爵。
现代文：武川镇发生灾荒，镇将任款请求借贷，没有得到允许，擅自打开粮仓救济灾民。有司用私散官仓这条法律处罚他，免掉了他的官职。
English: A disaster and famine occurred in the town of Wuchuan. The town requested a loan from the government and, without permission, opened a granary to help the victims. A magistrate punished him with the law of illegally distributing government warehouses and relieved him of his official position.

古文：尚书令、任城王澄奏理平定冀之勋，灵太后乃封武邑郡公，赐缣二千五百匹。
现代文：李平上疏奏说任款的目的是为了救济饥民，用心是好的，宣武帝原谅了他。孝明帝继位初，任李平为吏部尚书。
English: Emperor Xuanwu pardoned Li Ping, who said that the purpose of his appointment was to help the starving people and that his intentions were good. At the beginning of Emperor Xiaoming's succession, Li Ping was appointed as the secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs.

古文：先是，梁遣其赵祖悦逼寿春，镇南崔亮攻之。
现代文：李平精明强干，所在声望颇高，但因性情急躁而常使自己受累。原先，南梁派将领赵祖悦进逼寿春，魏镇南将军崔亮进攻敌兵，未能取胜。
English: Li Ping was shrewd and strong-willed, and his reputation was quite high, but he often got himself into trouble because of his impatient temperament. Originally, Nan Liang sent the general Zhao Zuyue to force Shuchun, and Wei Zhennan's general Cui Liang attacked the enemy soldiers, but failed to win.

古文：未克，又与李崇乖贰。
现代文：崔亮又与魏将李崇不和。
English: Cui Liang was also at odds with Wei general Li Chong.

古文：诏平以本官使持节、镇军大将军，兼尚书左仆射为行台，节度诸军，东西州将，一以禀之，如有乖异，以军法从事。
现代文：朝廷下诏命李平以本官任使持节、镇军大将军，兼任尚书右仆射，统领各路军队。东西州的将领，都要受他指挥，如果任意行动，按军法从事。
English: The imperial court issued a decree ordering Li Ping to assume the post of envoy, general of the town army, and concurrently the post of commander-in-chief, commander-in-chief, and commander-in-chief of all armies. The generals of the eastern and western states should all be under his command, and if they act arbitrarily, they should be dealt with according to military law.

古文：诏平长子奖以通直郎从。
现代文：命李平的长子李奖为通直郎，跟从他一起去前线。
English: He ordered Li Ping's eldest son, Li Xuan, to become Tong Naorong and follow him to the front.

古文：于是率步骑二千赴寿春，严勒崇、亮，令水陆兼备，克期齐举。
现代文：于是，他率步兵和骑兵二千人奔赴寿春，严格地指挥李崇、崔亮，令水陆两路军队按时向敌人发动进攻。
English: As a result, he led 2,000 infantrymen and cavalrymen to rush to Shouchun, strictly commanded Li Chong and Cui Liang, and ordered the land and sea forces to launch an attack on the enemy on time.

古文：崇、亮惮之，无敢乖互。
现代文：李崇、崔亮畏惧他，不敢违抗命令，因而互相配合。
English: Li Chong and Cui Liang were afraid of him and did not dare to disobey the order, so they cooperated with each other.

古文：频日交战，破贼军。
现代文：经过多日交战，打败敌军。
English: After several days of fighting, the enemy was defeated.

古文：安南将军崔延伯立桥于下蔡，以拒贼之援，贼将王神念、昌义之等不得进救。
现代文：安南将军崔延伯在下蔡建造一座桥梁，以阻挡敌人的援军。敌将王神念、昌义之等不能前来救援。
English: Annan General Cui Yanbo built a bridge in Lower Cai to block the enemy's reinforcements. Enemy generals Wang Shennong, Chang Yi and others could not come to the rescue.

古文：祖悦守死穷城，平乃部分攻之，斩祖悦，送首于洛。
现代文：赵祖悦死守困城，李平发起进攻，斩杀赵祖悦，将他的头颅送到洛阳。
English: Zhao Zuyue defended the besieged city, Li Ping launched an attack, killed Zhao Zuyue and sent his head to Luoyang.

古文：以功迁尚书右仆射，加散骑常侍。
现代文：因立功他升任为尚书右仆射，加封散骑常侍衔。
English: Due to his meritorious service, he was promoted to the rank of Shangshu's right-hand man, and given the additional rank of Zanzhi's regular attendant.

古文：平还京师，灵太后见于宣光殿，赐以金装刀仗一口。
现代文：他回到京城洛阳，灵太后在宣光殿接见他，赐给他一根用黄金装饰的刀仗。
English: He returned to the capital Luoyang, where the Empress Dowager received him at the Xuan Guang Temple and gave him a sword decorated with gold.

古文：时南徐州表云：梁堰淮水，日为患。
现代文：这时，南徐州给朝廷送来奏章说：南梁筑堰坝堵截淮水，经常为患。
English: At this time, South Xuzhou sent a report to the imperial court, saying: Nanliang Chikuyan Dam is blocked and cut off water, and it is often a problem.

古文：诏公卿议之。
现代文：朝廷命公卿大臣讨论。
English: The Imperial Court's commissioners, nobles, and ministers discuss.

古文：平以为不假兵力，终自毁坏。
现代文：李平认为不依靠武力，堰坝最终也会自己毁坏。
English: Li Ping believes that without relying on force, the dam will eventually self-destruct.

古文：奖弟谐。谐字虔和，幼有风采。赵郡李搔尝过元叉门下，见之，归谓其父元忠曰： 领军门下见一神人。 
现代文：果然梁人筑的堰坝被水冲破，灵太后十分高兴，设宴招待群臣，赦免李平过去的罪过，孝明帝亲手赐给他布绢一百匹。去世，遗嘱让薄葬。李谐，字虔和，从小就风采照人。赵郡的李搔曾在元叉那里见到他，归来对父亲李元忠说 ：我在领军门下遇见一个神奇的人。 
English: Sure enough, the dam built by Liang was broken by the water. The Dowager Empress was very happy. She held a banquet to invite the courtiers, forgave Li Ping's past sins, and Emperor Xiaoming personally gave him a hundred cloth ponies. He died, and his will was buried in a shallow grave. Li Jing, with a devout character, was a shining person from an early age. Li Wei of Zhao County once saw him at Yuan Zha, and when he returned, he said to his father Li Yuan Zhong: I met a magical person at the gate of the army leader.

古文：元忠曰： 必李谐也。 
现代文：李元忠说 ：一定是李谐。 
English: Li Yuanzhong said: It must be Li Jing.

古文：问之果然。
现代文：一问，果然是他。
English: I asked, and sure enough, it was him.

古文：袭父先爵彭城侯。
现代文：李谐承袭了父亲李平的爵位彭城侯。
English: Li Jing inherited the title of Pengcheng Marquis from his father, Li Ping.

古文：文辩为时所称，历位位中书侍郎。
现代文：他的文采被当时称道。历任中书侍郎。
English: His literary skills were praised at the time.

古文：天平末，魏欲与梁和好，朝议将以崔甗为使主。
现代文：天平末年，东魏准备与南梁和好，朝臣们议论要让崔瞱担任出使南梁的主要使者。
English: At the end of the Heian period, the Eastern Wei Dynasty was preparing to make peace with Nanliang, and the courtiers discussed having Cui Jian as the main envoy to send to Nanliang.

古文：甗曰： 文采与识，甗不推李谐；口颊々，谐乃大胜。 
现代文：崔瞱说： 文采与学识，我不推重李谐；而口才舌辩，李谐却远远地超过我。 
English: Cui Yao said: I don't give importance to Li Xinyi in terms of literature and learning, but in terms of eloquence, Li Xinyi far surpasses me.

古文：于是以谐兼常侍、卢元明兼吏部郎、李业兴兼通直常侍聘焉。
现代文：于是，朝廷命李谐为兼常侍、卢元明兼吏部侍郎、李业兴兼通直常侍，出使南梁。
English: As a result, the imperial court sent Nan Liang to the capital with the following orders: Li Hani concurrently as a regular attendant, Lu Yuanming concurrently as an attendant of the personnel department, and Li Ye Xing concurrently as a regular attendant of the communications department.

古文：梁武使硃异觇客，异言谐、元明之美。
现代文：梁武帝派朱异先看看客人，朱异极力夸赞李谐、卢元明的优点。
English: Emperor Liangwu sent Zhu Yi to look at the guests first. Zhu Yi praised the merits of Lixin and Lu Yuanming.

古文：谐等见，及出，梁武目送之，谓左右曰： 朕今日遇勍敌，卿辈常言北间都无人物，此等何处来？ 谓异曰： 过卿所谈。 
现代文：李谐等人被梁武帝接见。离开时，梁武帝目送他们，对左右的人说： 我今天遇到了强手。你们常说北边没有人才，这几个人是从哪里来的？ 又对朱异说 ：他们的才能超过你介绍的。 
English: Li Jini and others were received by Emperor Liangwu. When they left, Emperor Liangwu saw them off and said to the people around: I met a strong player today. You often say that there is no talent in the north, where did these people come from? He also said to Zhu Yiyi: Their talent exceeds what you introduced.

古文：是时鄴下言风流者，以谐及陇西李神俊、范阳卢元明、北海王元景、弘农杨遵彦、清河崔赡为首。
现代文：当时，邺下评论风流人物，认为李谐以及陇西的李神俊、范阳的卢元明、北海的王元景、弘农的杨遵彦、清河的崔赡最为杰出。
English: At that time, his subordinates commented on the fashionable people, and thought that Li Jing and Li Shenjun of Shaanxi, Lu Yuanming of Fanyang, Wang Yuanjing of the North Sea, Yang Zunyan of Hongnong, and Cui Yan of Qinghe were the most outstanding.

古文：初通梁国，妙简行人，神俊位已高，故谐等五人继踵，而遵彦遇疾道还，竟不行。
现代文：最初出使南梁，选拔使臣，李神俊官位已经很高，所以命李谐等五人出使。而杨遵彦中途患病回来，竟没有成行。
English: At first, Nan Liang was sent, envoys were selected, and Li Shenjun's official rank was already high, so five people, including Li Jin, were sent. However, Yang Zunyan fell ill halfway through the trip and did not go.

古文：既南北通好，务以俊乂相矜，衔命接客，必尽一时之选，无才地者不得与焉。
现代文：南北和好，必定由优秀杰出的人才互相交往；受朝廷之命接待宾客，一定选拔当时卓越俊逸的朝臣担任，没有才华和能力的人不得参与其事。
English: If North and South Korea are to be reconciled, it is essential that outstanding and talented people interact with each other. When receiving guests by order of the imperial court, the most outstanding and handsome courtiers of the time must be selected to serve. People without talent and ability are not allowed to participate.

古文：梁使每入，鄴下为之倾动，贵胜子弟盛饰聚观，礼赠优渥，馆门成市。
现代文：南梁的使者每次到来，邺下城内都要引起轰动。达官贵族的子弟都盛装艳服，着意修饰一番，前来聚观。国家对使者的馈赠很优厚，使者居住的馆驿前门庭若市。
English: Every time an emissary from Nanliang arrives, it causes a stir in the city. The children of high-ranking officials and aristocrats all dress up in fancy clothes and come to watch. The gift from the state to the emissary is very generous, and the front gate of the palace where the emissary lives is beautiful.

古文：宴日，齐文襄使左右觇之，宾司一言制胜，文襄为之拊掌。
现代文：宴请使者的时候，齐文襄帝高澄派左右的人前去观看，主持礼宾的人每有精彩话语出口，文襄帝都鼓掌叫好。
English: When the emissaries were invited to the banquet, Emperor Gaocheng sent people from all walks of life to watch. Whenever the person presiding over the protocol made a wonderful speech, Emperor Wenxiang applauded.

古文：魏使至梁，亦如梁使至魏，梁武亲与谈说，甚相爱重。
现代文：东魏的使者到南梁，也和南梁的使者到东魏一样受到热情款待。梁武帝亲自与使者交谈，相互间十分友好和尊重。
English: The envoys of the Eastern Wei Dynasty to Nanliang received the same warm hospitality as the envoys of the Southern Liang Dynasty to the Eastern Wei Dynasty. Emperor Liangwu personally talked with the envoys, and they were very friendly and respectful to each other.

古文：谐使还后迁秘书监，卒于大司农。
现代文：李谐出使南梁后迁任秘书监。死在大司农任上。
English: After Li Jing sent an envoy to Nan Liang, he was transferred to the post of secretary-supervisor. He died in the post of director-general of agriculture.

古文：谐长子岳，字祖仁，官中散大夫。
现代文：李谐身材短小，手有六指。因为脖子上长了瘤子而不得不昂着头，因为跛脚而走路缓慢，因为口吃而说话慢条斯理。
English: Li Jing is short and has six fingers. He has to hold his head up because of a bump on his neck, walks slowly because of his lameness, and speaks slowly because of his stutter.

古文：性纯至，居期惨，未曾听婢过前；追思二亲，言则流涕。岳弟庶，方雅好学，甚有家风。
现代文：人们都说他善于运用自己的这三个缺陷。李庶，为人端方，有雅量，喜好学习，颇有其父李谐的风采。
English: People say that he is good at exploiting his three defects. Li Shao is a well-mannered person, has elegance, likes to study, and has quite a bit of his father Li Jing's style.

古文：历位尚书郎、司徒掾，以清辩知名。
现代文：历任尚书郎、司徒掾，处世以清晰明辨著名。
English: Successive holders of the post, including Sho Shuro and Sotsuko, are known for their clear and distinct demeanor.

古文：常摄宾司，接对梁客，梁客徐陵深叹美焉。
现代文：经常担任宾司，接待梁朝的使者。南梁的使者徐陵十分佩服他的才华。
English: He often served as a host and received the envoys of the Liang Dynasty. Xu Ling, the envoy of the Southern Liang Dynasty, greatly admired his talent.

古文：庶生而天阉，崔谌调之曰： 教弟种须，以锥遍刺作孔，插以马尾。 
现代文：李庶天生的不长胡须，崔谌跟他开玩笑说： 我教给你种胡须的办法，用锥子在嘴唇上扎满小孔，插上马尾就行了。 
English: Li Shou was born with a short beard, and Cui Yao joked with him, "I'll teach you how to grow a beard. Just poke a small hole in your lip with a cone and insert a ponytail."

古文：庶曰： 先以此方回施贵族，艺眉有效，然后树须， 世传谌门有恶疾，以呼沱为墓田，故庶言及之。邢子才在傍大笑。
现代文：李庶回敬他说 ：先用这个办法在你自己身上治治你的眉毛，如果你的眉毛治好了，然后我再种胡须。 人们传说崔谌家有违于人伦的恶疾，死了都葬在呼沱墓田，所以李庶这样说他，邢子才在旁边听了哈哈大笑起来。
English: Li Zhe replied to him: First, use this method to cure your eyebrows on yourself. If your eyebrows are cured, then I will grow a beard again. People said that the Cui family had a malady that was against human ethics, and all the dead were buried in the Hulun cemetery, so Li Zhe said this to him, and the cripple only laughed out loud when he heard it.

古文：除临漳令。《魏书》之出，庶与卢斐、王松年等讼共不平。
现代文：《魏书》写成后，李庶与卢斐、王松年等人一起奏报其中失实的地方。
English: After the "Weishu" was written, Li Shizhe, together with Lu Fei, Wang Songnian and others, reported the places where it was untrue.

古文：魏收书王慧龙自云太原人，又书王琼不善事；以卢同附《卢玄传》；李平为陈留人，云其家贫贱。
现代文：魏收写王慧龙自称是太原人，又写王琼没有办事能力；把卢同附在《卢玄传》中；把李平写成陈留人，说他家境贫穷，这些都违背史实，所以，卢斐与李庶等人要告他的状。
English: Wei Hui wrote that Wang Huilong claimed to be a Taiyuan native, and also wrote that Wang Qiong lacked the ability to do business; Lu Tong was attached to "Lu Xuan Biography"; Li Ping was written as Chen Liu Ren, saying that his family was poor, all of which were contrary to historical facts, so Lu Fei and Li Shiao and others wanted to sue him.

古文：故斐等喧讼，语杨愔云： 魏收合诛。
现代文：他们对杨说应当把魏收斩首。
English: They told Yang that Wei Jie should be beheaded.

古文：愔党助魏，故遂白齐文宣，庶等并髡头鞭杖二百，庶死于临漳狱中。
现代文：杨的党羽偏袒魏收，便向齐文宣帝反告了他们一状，李庶等人被剃去头发，抽了二百鞭，李庶死在临漳的监狱中。
English: Yang's partisans sided with Wei Shui, so they counter-accused them to Qi Wen Xuan Di. Li Zhe and others were shaved and whipped 200 times. Li Zhe died in a prison in Linyi.

古文：庶兄岳痛之，终身不历临漳县门。
现代文：李庶的哥哥李岳十分痛惜弟弟的冤死，一生都不到临漳的城门。
English: Li Zhe's brother Li Yue was very sorry for his brother's wrongful death, and never came to the city gate of Linyi.

古文：庶妻，元罗女也。
现代文：李庶的妻子是元罗的女儿。
English: The wife of Li Zhe is the daughter of Yuan Luo.

古文：庶亡后，岳使妻伴之寝宿。
现代文：他死后，兄长李岳让自己的妻子与元氏做伴住宿。
English: After his death, his brother Li Yue let his wife stay with Mr. Yuan.

古文：积五年，元氏更适赵起。
现代文：过了五年，元氏改嫁给赵起。
English: Five years later, Ms. Yuan remarried to Zhao Qi.

古文：尝梦庶谓己曰： 我薄福，托刘氏为女，明旦当出，彼家甚贫，恐不能见养。
现代文：元氏曾梦见李庶对她说： 我福分薄，要托生在刘姓家中为女，明天早晨就要出生。他家很穷，恐怕不能养活我。
English: Ms. Yuan had a dream in which Li Shiao-Chu told her: "I am not so lucky. I want to give birth to a daughter in a family with the surname Liu. She will be born tomorrow morning. His family is very poor, and I am afraid they will not be able to support me.

古文：夫妻旧恩，故来相见告，君宜乞取我。
现代文：你我还有夫妻的旧恩，所以来告诉你，你要向刘家将我要回。
English: You and I still have the old friendship between husband and wife, so I'm here to tell you that you need to ask the Liu family to take me back.

古文：刘家在七帝坊十字衔南，东入穷巷是也。 
现代文：刘家住在七帝坊十字街南面，向东进入一条破旧的巷子就是。 
English: The Liu family lives on the south side of Qidifang Cross Street, just east of a dilapidated alley.

古文：元氏不应，庶曰： 君似惧赵公意，我自说之。 
现代文：元氏没有说话。李庶又说 ：你好像怕赵起不同意，我会告诉他的。 
English: Mr. Yuan did not speak. Mr. Li also said, "You seem to be afraid that Zhao Qi will not agree, so I will tell him."

古文：于是起亦梦焉。
现代文：于是，赵起也做了一个同样的梦。
English: As a result, Zhao Qi also had the same dream.

古文：起寤问妻，言之符合。遂持钱帛躬往求刘氏，如所梦得之，养女长而嫁焉。
现代文：赵起醒来问妻子，两人说的一样，便拿着钱到刘家，如梦中所说得到了他家的女儿。等到养女长大，将她嫁了出去。
English: Zhao Qi woke up and asked his wife. The two of them said the same thing, so he took the money and went to Liu's house. As he said in the dream, he got his family's daughter. When the adopted daughter grew up, he married her off.

