古文：肃宗朝八宝灵光豆万佛山玳瑁盆辟尘巾浮光裘重明枕
现代文：肃宗朝八宝灵光豆万佛山玳瑁盆辟尘巾浮光裘重明枕
English: Su Zong morning eight treasure Ling light bean million Foshan bowl bending dust cloth floating light Ge heavy bright pillow

古文：三宝村火玉马脑柜岑氏
现代文：三宝村火玉马脑柜岑氏
English: Sanbao village fire jade horse brain cabinet Mr. Zou

古文：肃宗朝八宝
现代文：肃宗朝八宝
English: The Eight Treasures of the Sui Dynasty

古文：开元中，有李氏者，嫁于贺若氏。
现代文：开元年间，有一个姓李的女子嫁给一个姓贺若的为妻。
English: In the first year of the 21st century, a woman surnamed Li married a man surnamed Herao.

古文：贺若氏卒，乃舍俗为尼，号曰真如。
现代文：贺若死了。姓李的就出家当了尼姑，法号真如。
English: Hera died, and Li became a nun, taking the name Zhenru.

古文：家于巩县孝义桥。其行高洁，远近宗推之。
现代文：她的家在巩县孝义桥，因为她品行高洁，所以远近闻名，人人敬佩。
English: Her home is in Xiaoyiqiao, Gong County, and she is widely known and admired for her high moral standards.

古文：天宝元年，七月七日，真如于精舍户外盥濯之间，忽有五色云气，自东而来。
现代文：天宝元年七月七日，真如在精舍窗外洗漱，忽然有一团五色的云气，从东方飘来。
English: On July 7th, Tenpo 1st year, it was like washing outside the window of a fine house. Suddenly, there was a five-colored cloud coming from the east.

古文：慎勿言也？ 真如谨守，不敢失坠。
现代文：云雾中伸出一只手，却看不到人的身形。那只手徐徐地把一个锦囊交给真如说： 珍藏它，千万不要告诉别人。 
English: A hand reaches out from the mist, but no human figure is to be seen. The hand slowly hands over a brocade bag. As the saying goes: treasure it, and never tell it to others.

古文：天宝末，禄山作乱，中原鼎沸，衣冠南走，真如展转流寓于楚州安宜县。
现代文：真如谨守秘密，不敢有所闪失。天宝末年，安禄山作乱，中原一时间人心慌慌，人们一齐向南奔逃。真如也不例外，辗转流落到楚州安宜县。
English: In the last years of the Tenpo era, there was a riot in Anlu Mountain, and the people of Central Plains were panicked for a while, and they all fled south. Zhenru was no exception, and eventually ended up in Chuzhou's Anyi County.

古文：肃宗元年，建子月十八日夜，真如所居，忽见二人，衣皂衣。
现代文：肃宗元年，建子月十八日夜间，真如在自己的住处，忽然看见两个穿黑衣服的人。
English: In the first year of Su Zong's reign, on the night of the 18th day of the month of Jianzi, it was as if he suddenly saw two people dressed in black at his home.

古文：引真如东南而行，可五六十步，值一城。
现代文：两个黑衣人拉着真如向东南方向行走。走了五六十步，面前出现一城。
English: The two black-clad men were leading the horse in a south-easterly direction. After fifty or sixty paces, a city appeared in front of them.

古文：楼观严饰，兵卫整肃。
现代文：城的建筑雄伟壮观，城下的兵卫齐整严肃。
English: The architecture of the city is majestic and magnificent, and the guards under the city are neat and serious.

古文：皂衣者指之曰： 化城也。 
现代文：进到城里之后，见城中有大殿。
English: After entering the city, there is a large hall in the city.

古文：城有大殿。一人衣紫衣，戴宝冠。号为天帝。
现代文：殿上，一人穿紫衣，戴宝冠，被称作天帝。
English: In the palace, a person wearing a purple robe and a crown is called the Heavenly Emperor.

古文：复有二十余人，衣冠亦如之，呼为诸天。
现代文：又有二十多人，衣冠和天帝差不多，被称为诸天。
English: There are also more than twenty people, dressed and crowned almost like heavenly emperors, known as the heavens.

古文：诸天坐，命真如进，而诸天相谓曰： 下界丧乱时久，杀戮过多，腥秽之气，达于诸天。不知何以救之？ 
现代文：诸天入座之后，才让真如进去。然后诸天互相议论道： 人世间丧乱的时间很久了，杀人太多了，腥臭污秽之气直冲云天，不知如何才能拯救？ 
English: Only after all the heavens had been seated did they allow Zhenru to enter. Then all the heavens discussed with each other, saying: It has been a long time since the world has been in turmoil, there have been too many murders, the stench of filth has reached the heavens, and I don't know how to save it.

古文：一天曰： 莫若以神宝压之。 
现代文：一个诸天说： 不如用神宝把邪恶之气压住。 
English: One of the heavens said, "It would be better to use the divine treasure to suppress the evil spirit."

古文：又一天曰： 当用第三宝。 
现代文：又一个诸天说： 那就应该用第三件宝贝。 
English: Another of the gods said: Then we should use the third treasure.

古文：又一天曰： 今厉气方盛，秽毒凝固，第三宝不足以胜之，须以第二宝，则兵可息，乱世可清也。 
现代文：又一个诸天说： 现在邪恶之气正盛，污秽之物会聚，第三件宝贝怕不能取胜，得用第二件宝贝才能息兵平乱。 天帝说： 说得对！ 
English: Another heavenly being said, "Now that the evil spirit is in full swing, and the filthy things are gathering, the third treasure may not be able to win, and the second treasure must be used to quell the troops and quell the turmoil." The heavenly being said, "That's right!

古文：天帝曰： 然 因出宝授真如曰：汝往令刺史崔侁，进达于天子。 
现代文：于是取出宝贝交给真如说： 你去让刺史崔侁把这事奏明天子。 
English: So he took out the treasure and gave it to Zhenru, saying, "You go and let Zhenru play this out.

古文：复谓真如曰： 前所授汝小囊，有宝五段，人臣可得见之。
现代文：又对真如说： 以前交给你的小囊，里边装有五件宝贝，一般官员可以观看。
English: He also said to Zhenru: The small bag given to you before contains five treasures, which can be viewed by ordinary officials.

古文：今者八宝，唯王者所宜见之。
现代文：现在给你的八件宝物，只有做帝王的可以看。你千万不要弄错了。 
English: The eight treasures given to you now can only be seen by emperors. You must not make a mistake.

古文：汝慎勿易也。 乃具以宝名及所用之法授真如。
现代文：于是就详细地将宝物的名称、用法讲授给真如。
English: He then explained the name of the treasure and how to use it to Zhenru in detail.

古文：已而复令皂衣者送之。
现代文：而后又让黑衣人把真如送回来。
English: He then asked the man in black to send the real thing back.

古文：翼日，真如诣县。摄令王滔之，以状闻州。
现代文：第二天，真如到县府向县令王滔之言明此事。
English: The next day, she went to the county government to explain the matter to the county magistrate Wang Tao.

古文：州得滔之状，会刺史将行。
现代文：王滔之具状向州里告。
English: Wang Tao's complaint was reported to the state.

古文：以县状示从事卢恒曰： 安宜县有妖尼之事，怪之甚也，亟往讯之。 
现代文：州里得到王滔之的状子，正赶上刺史马上就要出行，他便把县里的状子交给从事卢恒说： 安宜县有个妖怪尼姑的事儿，太怪了，你赶紧去过问一下。
English: Wang Tao, who received the certificate from the prefectural government, was about to leave on time for the ceremony, so he gave the certificate from the county to Lu Heng, who said, "There is a strange story about a monster nun in Anyi County. You should go and ask her about it."

古文：恒至县，召真如，欲以王法加之。
现代文：卢恒便来到安宜县，审问真如，要按王法惩办她。
English: Lu Heng then came to Anyi County to interrogate Zhenru and punish her according to the royal law.

古文：真如曰： 上帝有命，谁敢废坠！
现代文：真如说： 上天有命令，谁敢违抗？
English: It is as if to say: Heaven has an order, who would dare to defy it?

古文：且宝非人力所致，又何疑焉？ 
现代文：再说这些宝贝也不是人工所能做出来的，又何必多疑呢？ 
English: Besides, these treasures are not man-made, so why be suspicious?

古文：乃以囊中五宝示恒。
现代文：于是她就把锦囊中的五件宝贝展示给卢恒。
English: So she showed the five treasures in her bag of tricks to Lu Heng.

古文：其一曰 玄黄天符 ，形如笏。长可八寸余，阔三寸。上圆下方，近圆有孔。黄玉也。色比蒸栗，潭若凝脂。
现代文：第一件叫 玄黄天符 ，形如笏板，长有八寸多，宽三寸，上圆下方，接近圆的地方有小孔，是黄玉做成的，颜色像蒸熟的栗子，深沉如凝脂。
English: The first piece is called "Xuanhuang Tianfu," shaped like a cutting board, more than eight inches long and three inches wide, with small holes at the bottom of the upper circle and near the circle. It is made of topaz, the color is like steamed chestnuts, and it is deep like curd.

古文：辟人间兵疫邪疠。
现代文：有此宝可避人间兵疫邪疠。
English: With this treasure, you can avoid the human plague.

古文：其二曰 玉鸡 ，毛文悉备，白玉也。王者以孝理天下则见。
现代文：第二件叫 玉鸡 ，羽毛和花纹全都具备，是白玉做成的，做帝王的用孝道治理天下，这宝贝就能在人间出现。
English: The second piece is called the Jade Chicken. It has feathers and patterns all over it. It is made of white jade. If you are an emperor, you can rule the world with filial piety. This treasure can appear in the human world.

古文：其三曰 谷璧 ，白玉也。径五六寸。其文粟粒自生，无异雕镌之状。王者得之，即五谷丰稔。
现代文：第三件叫 谷璧 ，也是用白玉做成，直径五六寸，上面米粒状的花纹，和雕刻出的没什么两样，做帝王的得了它，能让天下的五谷年年丰收。
English: The third piece is called Gu Bi, also made of white jade, with a diameter of five or six inches, and a grainy pattern of rice on it, which is no different from the carved one. If you get it, you can make the world's grain harvest every year.

古文：其四曰 王母玉环 。二枚，亦白玉也。径六寸，好倍于肉。王者得之，能令外国归复。
现代文：第四件叫 王母玉环 ，两只，也是白玉制成，径六寸，做帝王的得了它，能让外国归顺。
English: The fourth piece is called the Queen Mother's Jade Ring, two pieces, also made of white jade, six inches in diameter, the emperor got it, can make foreign countries submit.

古文：其玉色光彩益发，特异于常。
现代文：这些宝贝件件都光彩焕然，不同寻常。
English: These treasures are all shiny and unusual.

古文：卢恒曰： 玉信玉矣，安知宝乎？ 
现代文：卢恒说： 这些玉都是真的，可怎么知道它们是宝呢？ 
English: Lu Heng said: These jade are all real, but how do you know they are treasure?

古文：真如乃悉出宝盘，向空照之，其光皆射日，仰望不知光之所极也。恒与县吏同视，咸异之。
现代文：真如便把五件宝贝全都端出来，往空中一举，宝光全都射向太阳，光芒万丈，仰望望不到尽头，卢恒和县吏一块观看，都感到惊异。
English: Just like that, he brought out all five treasures and lifted them into the air. All the precious light was directed to the sun. The light was dazzling. Looking up, there was no end. Lu Heng and the county officials watched together and were all surprised.

古文：翌日侁至，恒白于侁曰： 宝盖天授，非人事也。 
现代文：第二天崔侁来到，卢恒便对他说： 这些宝物可能是天赐的，不是人能办到的。 
English: The next day, when Cui Yao arrived, Lu Heng said to him, "These treasures may have been bestowed by heaven, but it is not something that man can do.

古文：真如曰： 不可。 
现代文：崔侁又查验一番和卢恒说的一样。他惊叹不已，就报告给节度使崔圆。
English: Cui Yao also checked the same as Lu Heng said. He was amazed and reported to the festival organizer Cui Yuan.

古文：圆固强之。真如不得已，又出八宝。
现代文：崔圆觉得挺怪，把真如传来，要一样一样地验看宝贝。
English: Cui Yuan felt very strange. She wanted to examine the baby in the same way.

古文：一曰 如意宝珠 ，其形正圆，大如鸡卵，光色莹澈。置之堂中，明如满月。
现代文：真如说不行，崔圆非看不可，真如拗他不过，只好又拿出那八件宝物给他看。第一件是 如意宝珠 ，形状是正圆形的，鸡蛋大小，光色晶莹明澈，放在屋里，明如满月。
English: True to form, Cui Yuan couldn't help but look at it, and true to form, he had no choice but to take out the eight treasures and show them to him. The first one was the Ruyi Pearl, which was round in shape, the size of an egg, and had a crystal clear light. It was placed in the room and was as bright as the full moon.

古文：其二曰 红靺鞨 ，大如巨栗，赤烂若朱樱。视之可应手而碎，触之则坚重不可破也。
现代文：第二件是 红靺鞨 ，像一个大栗子那么大，像个红色樱桃那样又红又软，看上去很容易弄碎，触一下，才知道既坚硬又沉重，很难击破。
English: The second is the red gourd, as big as a large chestnut, as red and soft as a red cherry, it looks easy to break, and when you touch it, it is hard and heavy, and it is difficult to break.

古文：其三曰 琅王干珠 ，其形如环，四分缺一，径可五六寸。
现代文：第三件是袄奴珠，其形状像个圆环，四分缺一直径足有五六寸。
English: The third piece is a jade slave bead, which is shaped like a ring and has a circumference of five or six inches.

古文：无孔。腻如青玉。
现代文：第四件是 玉印 ，半只手大小，上面的花纹像粗而凹陷的印文，中间填上东西便现出形来。第五件是 皇后采桑钩 ，二枚，长五六寸，筷子那么粗，像金的，又像银的，还像熟铜的。第六件是 雷公石 ，两枚，形状像斧，长四寸，宽一寸左右，没有孔，细腻光滑酷似青玉。
English: The fourth piece is a jade seal, half the size of a hand, the pattern on the top is like a thick and sunken seal, filling the middle with something to take shape.The fifth piece is the Queen's Mulberry Hook, two pieces, five or six inches long, as thick as chopsticks, like gold, like silver, and like cooked copper.The sixth piece is the Thunderstone, two pieces, shaped like an ax, four inches long, about one inch wide, no holes, delicate and smooth just like a blue jade.

古文：八宝置之日中，则白气连天；措诸阴室，则烛耀如月。
现代文：把这八宝放在日下，只见白气连天；把它们放到屋里，则见烛光如月。
English: If you put these eight treasures under the sun, you will only see white clouds; if you put them indoors, the candlelight will look like the moon.

古文：其所压胜之法，真如皆秘，不可得而知也。
现代文：至于那镇压邪恶腥秽的办法，真如秘而不宣，谁也不知。
English: As for the methods of suppressing evil and filth, they are so secret that no one knows about them.

古文：圆为录表奏之。真如曰： 天命崔侁，事为若何。 
现代文：崔圆要奏明天子，真如说： 天帝命崔侁去做此事，你硬要做是为什么呢？ 
English: If Cui Yuan wants to play the role of the Emperor, it's like saying, "It's God's command for Cui Yuan to do this. Why do you insist on doing it?"

古文：圆惧而止。
现代文：崔圆恐惧而止。
English: Cui Yuan stopped in fear.

古文：侁乃遗卢恒随真如上献。
现代文：于是崔侁派卢恒随真如一起前去献宝。
English: So Cui Gan sent Lu Heng to go with Zhenru to offer the treasure.

古文：时史朝义方围宋州，又南陷申州，淮河道绝，遂取江路而上，抵商山入关。
现代文：当时史朝义正围困宋州，又向南攻下申州，淮河路不通，就取道长江而上。四月十三日到达京都。
English: At that time, Shichao Yizhong was besieging Songzhou, and he also invaded Shenzhou to the south. The Huaihe Road was impassable, so he took the Yangtze River. He arrived in Kyoto on April 13.

古文：以建巳月十三日达京。
现代文：这时肃宗正卧病不起。
English: At this time, Su Zong was bedridden with illness.

古文：时肃宗寝疾方甚，视宝，促召代宗谓曰： 汝自楚王为皇太子，今上天赐宝，获于楚州。天许汝也，宜保爱之。 
现代文：他看了宝贝之后，急忙让人把代宗召来，说道： 你从楚王立为皇太子，现在上天赐宝，从楚州那边送来，这是上天助你，你应该珍重这些宝贝才是。 
English: After he saw the treasure, he quickly had someone call the daimyō and said, "You were made crown prince by the king of Chu. Now, heaven has bestowed a treasure on you. It was sent from Chuzhou. This is heaven's help to you. You should treasure these treasures."

古文：代宗再拜受赐。
现代文：代宗拜了两拜，接受上天所赐。
English: Zongde bowed twice and accepted the gift from heaven.

古文：得宝之故，即日改为宝应元年。
现代文：因此得宝当天就改年号为宝应元年。
English: Therefore, on the day of winning the treasure, the year was changed to the first year of the treasure.

古文：上既登位，及升楚州为上州，县为望县，改县名安宜为宝应焉。
现代文：他登基之后，就把楚州升为上州，把县升为望县，改安宜县名为宝应县。
English: After he ascended to the throne, he elevated Chuzhou to Shangzhou, the county to Meng County, and changed the name of Anyi County to Baoying County.

古文：刺史及进宝官，皆有超擢。
现代文：刺史及献宝者都有擢升。
English: Both the history-maker and the treasure-giver were promoted.

古文：真如所居之地得宝，河壖高敞，境物润茂。
现代文：赐号真如为 宝和大师 ，受宠及赏赐都胜过他人。
English: To be given a title is truly to be a treasure and a master, to be favored and rewarded more than others.

古文：遗址后为六合县尉崔珵所居。西堂之间，相传云。西域胡人过其傍者，至今莫不望其处而瞻礼焉。
现代文：遗址后来由六合县尉崔珵居住。相传说，至今西域胡人走到那里，没有不望着那住所下拜的。
English: The site was later inhabited by Liuhe County Lieutenant Cui Wei. According to legend, to this day, when Western Hu people go there, they do not bow down without looking at the residence.

古文：灵光豆
现代文：灵光豆
English: Lingguang beans

古文：代宗大历中，日林国献灵光豆龙角钗。
现代文：代宗大历年间，日林国献来灵光豆和龙角钗。
English: During the reign of Emperor Daizong of the Tai Li Dynasty, the country of Jilin offered Lingguang beans and Longjiao oysters.

古文：因其国有海，东北四方里。
现代文：这个国家有个大湖，一里见方那么大。
English: This country has a large lake, the size of a square kilometer.

古文：国西怪石方数百里，光明澄澈，可鉴人五脏六腑。
现代文：国西有怪石，方圆几百里。怪石光明澄澈。可以照见人的五脏六腑。
English: There is a strange stone in the west of the country, several hundred miles in circumference. The strange stone is bright and clear. You can see people's internal organs.

古文：亦谓之仙人镜。
现代文：也叫 仙人镜 。
English: It is also called the mirror of the hermit.

古文：国人有疾，辄照之，使知起于某脏某腑。即自采神草饵之，无不愈焉。
现代文：他们国家的人有病，总是先照仙人镜，弄清楚某脏某腑什么部位有病了，就去采草药治疗，没有治不好的。
English: When people in their country are ill, they always first look into the mirror to find out what part of a certain organ is ill, and then go to take herbal medicine for treatment. There is nothing that cannot be cured.

古文：灵光豆，大小类中华之菉豆，其色殷红，而光芒可长数尺。
现代文：灵光豆，大小像中国的绿豆，颜色殷红，而发出的光芒长达数尺。
English: Lingguang mung beans are the size of Chinese mung beans, reddish in color, and emit a glow several feet long.

古文：本国亦谓之诘多珠。
现代文：他们本国人也叫它 诘多珠 。
English: Their own people also call it 多珠.

古文：和石上菖蒲叶煮之，即大如鹅卵。
现代文：绿豆大小的一粒灵光豆，如果和石上菖蒲叶一块煮，就能煮成鹅蛋那么大。
English: If you boil a mung bean-sized bean together with a stone-leaved calamus leaf, you will be able to boil a cucumber the size of a goose egg.

古文：其中纯紫。称之可重一斤。
现代文：它里边是纯紫色的，重量可达到一斤。
English: It is pure purple on the inside and can weigh up to a kilo.

古文：帝啗一丸，叹其香美无比，而数日不复言饥渴。
现代文：皇上吃一丸，赞美它香味无比，而且好几天不再感到饥渴。
English: The emperor ate a whole one, praised it for its incomparable fragrance, and did not feel hungry or thirsty for several days.

古文：龙角钗类玉，绀色，上刻蛟龙之形。精巧奇丽，非人所制。
现代文：龙角钗类似一种玉，青红色，上面刻有蛟龙的图形，精巧奇丽，简直不像人工做的。
English: The dragon horn enamel is similar to a kind of jade, bluish-red, engraved with the figure of a dragon, exquisite and beautiful, it is simply not artificially made.

古文：帝赐独孤妃子。
现代文：皇上把它赐给独孤妃子。
English: The emperor gave it to a lonely concubine.

古文：与帝同泛舟于龙池，有紫云自二上而生，俄顷满于舟中。
现代文：独孤妃子和皇上同舟泛于龙池，二人头上便生出一团紫云，顷刻间紫云便充满舟中。
English: A lone concubine and the emperor were in the same boat in Longchi. A purple cloud appeared over the heads of the two, and the purple cloud filled the boat in an instant.

古文：帝由是命置之于堂内，以水喷之，化为二龙，腾空东去矣。
现代文：皇上于是命人将此钗放到堂内，用水喷它，它便化成两条龙，腾空向东飞去。
English: The emperor then ordered someone to place this cocoon in the hall, spray it with water, and it turned into two dragons, soaring away to the east.

古文：万佛山
现代文：万佛山
English: Wanfoshan

古文：上崇释氏教，乃春百品香和银粉以涂佛室。
现代文：皇上崇尚释迦牟尼氏创立的佛教，就舂百品香和入银粉涂刷佛室。
English: The emperor advocated Buddhism, founded by Shakyamuni, and had the Buddhist room painted with hundreds of kinds of incense and silver powder.

古文：遇新罗国献五色氍毹，及万佛山，可高一丈。
现代文：赶上新罗国献来一块五色毛地毯和一尊万佛山，皇上把万佛山也放在佛室。
English: When he arrived in Silla, he was presented with a five-coloured wool carpet and a statue of the Ten Thousand Buddhas. The emperor also placed the Ten Thousand Buddhas in the Buddhist room.

古文：上置于佛室，以氍毹籍其地。氍毹之巧丽，亦冠绝于一时。
现代文：用五色毛地毯铺地。万佛山高一丈。毛地毯之巧丽，也是冠绝一时的。
English: The floor is covered with a five-coloured wool carpet. Mount Everest is as high as a mountain. The beauty of the wool carpet is second to none.

古文：每方寸之内，即有歌舞妓乐，列国山川之状。
现代文：每方寸之内，就有歌舞妓乐和各国山川的形象。
English: Within every square inch, there are images of songs, dances, prostitutes and the mountains and rivers of various countries.

古文：或微风入室，其上复有蜂蝶动摇，燕雀飞舞。
现代文：有的可看出是微风入室，上面还有蜂蝶燕雀飞舞跃动。
English: Some can be seen to be a breeze into the room, and there are also hummingbirds dancing and jumping above.

古文：俯而视之，莫辨其真假。
现代文：俯首看去，不能辨别真假。
English: If you look down, you can't tell the difference between the real and the fake.

古文：万佛山，雕沉檀珠玉以成之。
现代文：万佛山，是雕刻沉檀和珠玉而成的。
English: Wanfoshan is made of carved sandalwood and precious stones.

古文：其佛形，大者或逾寸，小者八九分。
现代文：那些佛的形象，或大或小，大的有的超过一寸，小的只有八九分。
English: Those Buddha images are either big or small, some of the big ones are more than one inch, and the small ones are only eighty-nine.

古文：其佛之首，有如黍米者，有如菽者。其眉目口耳，螺髻毫相悉具。
现代文：再看那佛的头，有的像米粒那么大，有的像豆粒那么大，但是眉眼口鼻耳样样具备，连螺髻毛发也历历可见。
English: Looking at the Buddha's head again, some of it is as big as a grain of rice, some as big as a bean, but the eyebrows, eyes, mouth, nose and ears are all the same, and even the whiskers are visible.

古文：而辫缕金玉水精，为蟠盖流苏。庵赡匐罗等树，构百宝为楼阁台殿。其状虽微，势若飞动。
现代文：而发辫、衣缕、金玉、水精、蟠盖、流苏、沙石、草木以及楼阁亭台等等，形体虽然极小，但是栩栩如生，势若能动。
English: And the hairpins, clothespins, gold beads, water essences, lids, tassels, sandstone, plants and pavilions, etc., although very small in size, are lifelike and dynamic.

古文：前有行道僧，不啻千数。
现代文：前面行道僧人数量不在一千以下。
English: The number of monks in the foreground is not less than a thousand.

古文：下有紫金钟，阔三寸，以蒲牢衔之。
现代文：下边有紫金钟，三寸宽，由蒲牢兽衔之。
English: At the bottom, there is a purple and gold bell, three inches wide, made by the crane beasts.

古文：每击钟，行道僧礼拜至地。
现代文：敲一下钟，行道僧便礼拜到地。
English: At the stroke of the bell, the street monk prostrated himself to the ground.

古文：其中隐隐，谓之梵声。
现代文：同时还有隐隐的念经的声音。
English: At the same time, there is a faint sound of chanting.

古文：盖关綟在乎钟也。
现代文：大概机关技巧就在这钟上。
English: Presumably, the clock's mechanical skill lies in its construction.

古文：其山虽以万佛为名，其数则不可胜计。
现代文：尽管这山以 万佛 为名，但是数量数不胜数。
English: Although this mountain is named after the Ten Thousand Buddhas, there are countless others.

古文：上置九光扇于岩巚间。
现代文：上方放一个九光扇于岩石之中。
English: Above, place a nine-pointed fan in the rock.

古文：四月八日，召两街僧徒入内道场，礼万佛山。
现代文：四月八日，召集两街的僧众到佛室来，以佛室为道场，礼拜万佛山。
English: On April 8th, the monks of the two streets were summoned to the Buddhist room, and the Buddhist room was used as a dojo to worship the Ten Thousand Buddhas.

古文：是时观者叹非人工。及见有光出于殿中，咸谓之佛光。
现代文：这时候人们都赞叹万佛山不是人工可以造的，等到他们看到有光从殿中发出，便异口同声地说这是佛光。
English: At this time, people were all praising the fact that Mount Ten Thousand Buddhas could not be artificially created. When they saw the light emanating from the hall, they all said in unison that this was the Buddha's light.

古文：即九光扇也。
现代文：其实就是九光扇的作用。
English: In fact, it is the role of the fan.

古文：由是上命三藏僧不空，念天竺密语千口而退。
现代文：因此，皇上命一个叫不空的三藏和尚念了一千句天竺密语才退出。
English: Therefore, the emperor ordered a monk named Sanzang, who could not be called empty, to recite a thousand secret heavenly words before withdrawing.

古文：玳瑁盆
现代文：玳瑁盆
English: 盆

古文：宝历元年，南昌国献玳瑁盆、浮光裘、夜明犀。
现代文：宝历元年。南昌国献给皇帝一个玳瑁盆，一件浮光裘。还有一枚夜明犀。
English: In the first year of the Horei era, Nanchang Province presented the emperor with a gourd basin, a floating light pole, and a night shining rhinoceros.

古文：云：其国有酒山紫海。
现代文：据说，这个国家有酒山紫海。
English: It is said that the country has a wine mountain called the Purple Sea.

古文：盖山有泉，其味如酒，饮之甚醉则经日不醒。
现代文：所谓酒山，大概就是山中有泉，泉水味似酒。还说喝了酒山之酒可以醉得一天不醒。
English: The so-called "wine mountain" is probably a spring in the mountain, and the spring water tastes like wine. It is also said that drinking the wine from the wine mountain can make you drunk for a day.

古文：紫海水，色如烂椹，可以染衣。
现代文：紫海水，颜色有如腐烂的桑椹。可以染衣物。
English: Purple seawater, the color is like rotting mulberry. It can dye clothes.

古文：其鱼龙龟鳖、砂石草木，无不紫焉。
现代文：其中的鱼龙龟鳖、砂石草木，没有不是紫色的。
English: Among them, there is no fish, dragon, turtle, sandstone, grass or tree that is not purple.

古文：玳瑁盆，可容十斛，外以金玉饰之。
现代文：玳瑁盆，可容水十斛，外侧用金、玉装饰。
English: Bowl, can hold ten urns of water, decorated on the outside with gold and jade.

古文：及盛夏，上置于殿内，贮水令满，遣嫔御持金银杓，酌水相沃，以为嬉戏。
现代文：到了盛夏，皇上把玳瑁盆放在殿内，里边装满水，让宫中的女官拿着金银勺，酌盆里的水互相浇洒，以为游戏。
English: At the height of summer, the emperor placed a basin in the palace and filled it with water. He asked the court ladies to hold gold and silver spoons and sprinkle the water from the basin on each other, thinking it was a game.

古文：浮光裘，即紫海色染其地也。以五彩丝蹙成龙凤，各一千三百，仍缀以九色真珠。
现代文：浮光裘。就是用紫海水染的地儿，用五彩丝线蹙成龙凤，各一千三百个，再缀上九色真珠构成的。
English: Floating light qiu. It is dyed with purple seawater, embroidered with colorful silk thread into dragons and phoenixes, each one thousand three hundred, and then decorated with nine-colored pearls.

古文：上衣之，以猎于北苑，为朝日所照，而光彩动摇。
现代文：皇上穿着它，到北苑打猎，朝阳一照，光彩闪动，看的人都感到耀眼夺目。
English: The emperor wore it to go hunting in the North Garden, and the morning sun shone, sparkling with brilliance, dazzling everyone who looked at it.

古文：观者皆眩其目，上亦不为之贵。一日，驰马从禽，勿际暴雨，而裘无纤毫沾濡。方叹为异物。
现代文：皇上也不觉得贵重。有一天，驰马追一只飞禽，忽然间下起暴雨，但是浮光裘一点没湿，皇上才赞叹它是异物。
English: One day, riding a horse in pursuit of a bird, it suddenly began to rain heavily, but the floating light was not wet at all, and the emperor marveled that it was a foreign object.

古文：夜明犀，其状类通天犀，夜则光明，可照百步。覆缯十重，终不能掩其耀焕。
现代文：夜明犀，形状有点像通天犀，夜间发光，能照一百步远，即使用十层布蒙上，也不能蒙住它的光耀。
English: The noctilucent rhinoceros, shaped a bit like a rhinoceros, glows at night, can shine a hundred paces away, even if it is covered with ten layers of cloth, it cannot mask its brilliance.

古文：上遂命解为腰带。每游猎，夜则不施其蜡炬，有如昼日。
现代文：于是皇上就命人把它割碎成腰带，每次出去打猎，夜晚就不用点蜡了，和白天一样。
English: So the emperor ordered someone to cut it into a belt, and every time he went out hunting, he didn't have to put on wax at night, just like during the day.

古文：辟尘巾
现代文：辟尘巾
English: Bite the dust

古文：高瑀在蔡州。
现代文：高瑀在蔡州。
English: Gao Jun is in Caizhou.

古文：有军将甲知回易，折欠数百万，回之外县。
现代文：有个叫甲知的军将，因为折欠几百万的钱款而逃避了。
English: There was a general named Jochi who fled because he owed millions of money.

古文：去州二百余里，高方令锢身勘甲。
现代文：逃到外县离州二百多里，高瑀下令囚禁甲知，开始查办他。
English: After he fled to a county more than 200 miles away from the state, Gao Gan ordered that Jia Zhi be imprisoned and began to investigate him.

古文：甲忧迫，计无所出。
现代文：甲知忧愁窘迫，寝食不安，也想不出什么好办法来。
English: A knows sadness, embarrassment, sleep and food insecurity, and can't think of any good way to come.

古文：其类因为设酒食间解之。
现代文：他的朋友们于是就为他设酒宴借以消愁。
English: His friends then threw him a drinking party to take his mind off it.

古文：座客十余。
现代文：座间有客十几人。
English: There are more than a dozen guests in the auditorium.

古文：中有称处士皇甫玄真者，衣白若鹅羽，貌甚都雅。
现代文：其中有一个被称为处士的。
English: One of them is called the clerk.

古文：众皆有宽勉之辞。
现代文：姓皇甫，名玄真。穿一身白衣。
English: His surname is Hofu, and his name is Genzane. He wears a white robe.

古文：皇甫但微笑曰： 此亦小事。 
现代文：白的像天鹅的羽毛，相貌极是倜傥儒雅。人们对这位皇甫先生极尽敬佩赞勉之辞。
English: As white as a swan's feather, his appearance is extremely debonair. People are full of admiration and words of praise for Mr. Hofu.

古文：众散，乃独留。
现代文：皇甫先生只是微笑说： 这不过是小事一桩。 
English: Mr. Huang Fu just smiled and said: This is just a small matter.

古文：谓甲曰： 余尝游东，获二宝物，当为君解此难。 
现代文：宴罢人散之后，皇甫先生留了下来。他对甲知说： 我曾经游东海，在那里得到两件宝物。凭这两件宝物，该能够为你解除此难。 
English: After the party was dispersed, Mr. Huang Fu stayed behind. He said to Kachi, "I once traveled to the East Sea, where I obtained two treasures. With these two treasures, I can solve this problem for you."

古文：甲谢之，请具车马。
现代文：甲知感谢不尽，要为他准备车马。
English: Aichi is grateful and wants to prepare a horse and carriage for him.

古文：悉辞。行甚疾。
现代文：他全都拒绝，步行前往。
English: He turned them all down and walked.

古文：甚晚至州，舍于店中。
现代文：他走得很快，当晚就到了蔡州，住进旅店里。
English: He walked quickly, and that night he arrived in Caizhou, where he stayed in an inn.

古文：遂晨谒高。
现代文：第二天一早他就去拜见高瑀。
English: The next morning, he went to see Gao Yao.

古文：高一见，不觉敬之。
现代文：高瑀一见到他的处士风度，不知不觉地就生出几分敬意来。
English: As soon as Gao Yao saw his officer's demeanor, he unconsciously developed some respect.

古文：因谓高曰： 玄真此来，特从尚书乞甲性命。 
现代文：他对高瑀说： 我到尚书府上来，是特地向尚书请求饶过甲知性命的。 
English: He said to Gao Qi: I came to Shang Shufu specifically to ask Shang Shufu to spare Jia Xi's life.

古文：高遂曰： 甲欠官钱，非瑀私财。
现代文：高瑀说： 甲知欠官府的钱，又不是欠我个人的钱。
English: Gao Yao said, "The money owed by Kuching to the government is not money owed to me personally.

古文：如何？ 
现代文：公事公办，我帮得了他吗？ 
English: What do you think should be done?

古文：皇甫请避左右，言某於新罗获巾子，可辟尘，欲献此赎甲。
现代文：皇甫玄真请高瑀挥退左右，说： 我在新罗得到一条巾子，能辟尘，想要献上它赎甲知的性命。
English: Emperor Xuanzhen asked Gao Yao to move away from him, saying, "I have obtained a scarf in Silla that can repel dust, and I want to offer it to redeem Gao Yao's life.

古文：即于怀探出授高。
现代文：说着他伸手从怀中取出巾子交给高瑀。
English: He said, reaching out to take the towel from his arms and handing it to Takahata.

古文：高才执，已觉体中清凉。惊曰： 此非人臣所有，且无价矣。甲之性命，恐足酬也。 
现代文：高瑀刚抓到巾子，就觉得体内清凉爽快，大惊道： 这不是做人臣的所能得到的，是无价之宝，甲知的性命，用它换是绰绰有余的！ 
English: As soon as Gao Yao caught the handkerchief, he felt cool and refreshed inside, and said in surprise: This is not something that a vassal can get, it is a priceless treasure, the life of a vassal is more than enough!

古文：皇甫请试之。
现代文：皇甫先生让高瑀试验一下，看避尘巾是否灵验。
English: Mr. Huang Fu let Gao Yao test it to see if the dust cover was effective.

古文：翼日，因宴于郭外。
现代文：第二天，就在城外设宴。
English: The next day, they held a banquet just outside the city.

古文：时久旱，埃尘且甚。
现代文：当时天已久旱，尘埃极甚。
English: At that time, the weather had been dry for a long time, and the dust was extremely thick.

古文：高顾视马尾鬣及左右驺卒数人，并无纤尘。
现代文：骑马从城中跑到城外，高瑀看自己马尾马鬃及左右飞骑几人居然一尘不染。
English: Riding from the city to the outskirts of the city, Gao Yao looked at his ponytail and several people riding left and right were actually spotless.

古文：监军使觉，问高： 何事尚书独不沾尘坌？
现代文：监军使发觉了，便问高瑀道： 为什么唯独尚书不染灰尘呢？
English: When the inspecting officer found out, he asked Gao Jun: Why is it that only Shang Shuxu is not stained with dust?

古文：岂遭逢异人，获至宝乎？ 
现代文：难道是遇上了世外异人得到什么无价之宝了？ 
English: Is it really a priceless treasure to encounter a stranger from another world?

古文：高不敢隐。
现代文：高瑀不敢隐瞒，如实说给监军。
English: Gao Yao did not dare to hide it, and told the inspectors the truth.

古文：监军故求见处士。
现代文：监军坚决要拜见处士。
English: The supervisors are adamant that they want to meet with the clerk.

古文：高乃与俱往。
现代文：高瑀只好陪他一块去。
English: Gao Yao had to go with him.

古文：监军戏曰： 道者独知有尚书乎？
现代文：见到皇甫玄真，监军开玩笑道： 难道皇甫先生只知道有尚书吗？
English: Seeing Emperor Xuanzhen, the overseer joked: Did Emperor Xuanzhen only know about Shangshu?

古文：更有何宝，愿得一观。 
现代文：还有什么宝贝，拿出来看看行吗？ 
English: Is there anything else you'd like to show us?

古文：皇甫具述救甲之意。
现代文：皇甫玄真详细述说救甲知的意思。
English: Emperor Xuanzhen described in detail the meaning of rescuing Jia Chen.

古文：且言药出海东，今余一针，力差不及巾，可令一身无尘。
现代文：还说游东海时得到一巾一针，针还在手，但是针不如巾，只能让一人之身不染灰尘。
English: He also said that when he went to the East China Sea, he got a handkerchief and a needle, and the needle was still in his hand, but the needle was not as good as the handkerchief, and he could only keep one person's body free of dust.

古文：监军拜请曰： 获此足矣。 
现代文：监军拜谢说： 能得到这针也就足了。 
English: Supervisor Bai Xie said, "If I can get this needle, that's enough.

古文：皇甫即于巾上抽与之。
现代文：皇甫玄真就从巾上抽下针来递给监军。
English: Emperor Xuanzhen then pulled a needle from his handkerchief and handed it to the inspectors.

古文：针色如金。
现代文：监军马上开始试验。
English: The supervisors immediately began to experiment.

古文：监军乃扎巾试之，骤于尘中，唯身及马鬃尾无尘。
现代文：他骑飞奔驰，尘埃飞扬，但是他身与马鬃马尾都无尘土。
English: As he gallops, dust flies, but there is no dust on his body or on his horse's bridle.

古文：高与监军旦具礼往谒，将请其道要。
现代文：第二天早晨。高瑀与监军带着礼物去见皇甫先生，要向他请教一些道术方面的要领。
English: In the morning of the next day, Gao Yao and his overseers went to Mr. Huang Fu with gifts to ask him for some essentials in the field of Taoism.

古文：一夕忽失所在。
现代文：皇甫先生却于一夜之间不知去向了。
English: Overnight, however, Mr. Hofu disappeared without a trace.

古文：浮光裘
现代文：浮光裘
English: Floating Light Qiu

古文：重明枕
现代文：重明枕
English: Shigeming pillow

古文：有海外国贡重明枕。长一尺二寸，高六寸。
现代文：海外某一个国家进贡一个重明枕，长一尺二寸，高六寸，就像水精那样洁白。
English: A certain overseas country paid tribute with a heavy bright pillow, one foot two inches long and six inches high, as pure and white as water.

古文：洁白类于水精。
现代文：中间雕刻了楼台亭阁，四面雕刻了十个道士。
English: A pavilion is carved in the middle, and ten Taoist monks are carved on all four sides.

古文：中有楼台之形，四面有十道士，持香执简，循环无已。
现代文：道士有的拿着香，有的捧着书简，循环不止。这叫 行道真人 。
English: Some Taoists hold incense, some hold books, and the cycle goes on and on. This is called "walking the true path."

古文：谓之行道真人。
现代文：那雕刻和绘画。
English: The carving and painting.

古文：其镂木丹青，真人之首簪帔，无不悉具。
现代文：连道士头上的玉簪和霞帔，都非常逼真。
English: Even the jade and jasper on the Taoist's head are very lifelike.

古文：仍通莹焉。
现代文：诚乃通体晶莹。
English: The sincerity is crystal clear.

古文：三宝村
现代文：三宝村
English: Sanbao Village

古文：扶风县之西南，有三宝村。
现代文：扶风县的西南，有个村子叫三宝村。
English: In the southwest of Fufeng County, there is a village called Sanbao Village.

古文：故老相传云，建村之时，有胡僧谓村人曰： 此地有宝气，而今人莫得之，其启发将自有时耳。 
现代文：据老年人传说，建村的时候，有一个胡人和尚对村民说： 这地方有宝气，但是现在的人得不到它。它的出现将有一定的时机。 
English: According to the old people's legend, when the village was built, a Hu person and a monk said to the villagers: This place has precious gas, but the current people can't get it. Its appearance will have a certain opportunity.

古文：村人曰： 是何宝也？ 
现代文：村人问道： 是什么宝？ 
English: The villagers asked: What is the treasure?

古文：曰： 此交趾之宝，数有三焉。 
现代文：胡僧说： 这是交趾的宝物，数量是三件。 
English: The monk said, "This is the treasure of the toe-suckers. There are three of them.

古文：故因以三宝名其村，盖识其事。
现代文：因此，就以 三宝 为村名了。
English: Therefore, Sanpo became the name of the village.

古文：开成元年春，村中民夜梦一丈夫者，黑簪帻，被广袂之衣，腰佩长剑，仪状峻古。
现代文：开成元年的春天，村中有人夜里做梦，梦见一个成年男子，头戴黑色头巾，身披大袖子衣裳，腰间佩一把宝剑，仪表很是古雅。
English: In the spring of the first year of the millennium, someone in the village had a dream at night. He dreamed of an adult man, wearing a black turban, wearing large-sleeved clothes, wearing a sword at his waist, and his appearance was very quaint.

古文：谓民曰： 吾尝仕东汉。当光武时，与飞将马公，同征交趾，尝得南人之宝。
现代文：他对村民说： 我曾经在东汉的时候做过官，光武皇帝时，和飞将军马公一起征讨交趾。那时候曾得到南方人的宝物。
English: He said to the villagers, "I once served as an official in the Eastern Han Dynasty, and when Emperor Guangwu was in power, I worked with General Fei Ma Gong to solicit donations. At that time, I received treasures from the people of the south.

古文：其后马公遭谤，以为多掠南货，尽载以归。
现代文：后来，马公遭到诽谤，认为他掠夺了许多南方的财物，全运回家中。
English: Later, Magong was slandered, and it was believed that he had plundered many properties in the south and shipped them all back home.

古文：光武怒，将命索其家。
现代文：光武皇帝大怒，要派人抄他的家。
English: Emperor Guangwu was so angry that he wanted to send someone to search his house.

古文：吾惧且及祸，故埋于此地。 
现代文：我怕祸及自己，就把自己得到的宝物埋到这里。 
English: I'm afraid of harming myself, so I buried the treasure I got here.

古文：言未讫而寤。
现代文：话还没说完，梦已经醒了。
English: Before the words are out of my mouth, the dream has woken up.

古文：民即以所梦具告于邻伍中。
现代文：这人就把梦见的情形和邻居们讲了。
English: The man told his neighbors about the dream.

古文：是岁仲夏夕，云月阴晦，有牧竖望见西京原下，炯然有光，若曳练焉，久而不灭。
现代文：这年五月的一个晚上，乌云遮月，天色灰暗，一个牧童望见西京原下，焕发出光芒，像当空一条白练垂挂在那里，久久不灭。
English: One evening in May of this year, dark clouds obscured the moon, the sky was grey and gloomy. A shepherd boy looked down on the western suburbs of Kyoto and saw a radiant light. It was as if a white phoenix was hanging in the sky, never to be extinguished.

古文：牧竖惊告其父，即驰往视之。
现代文：牧童吃惊地告诉他的父亲，爷儿俩就跑去看，那光更亮。
English: Surprised, the shepherd boy told his father, and the two ran to see if the light was brighter.

古文：其光愈甚，至明夕亦然。于是里人数辈，夜寻其光，俯而观之。其光在土而出，若焰薪火。
现代文：第二天晚上也这样。于是村里几个人凑到一起，趁夜去寻找那光。一看，那光是从地里发出的，像燃烧的柴火。
English: The same thing happened the next night. So several people in the village got together and took advantage of the night to look for the light. At first glance, the light was emitted from the ground, like burning firewood.

古文：里人乃相与植准以表之。
现代文：人们便在这里竖了一个记号。
English: People put up a sign here.

古文：其明日，携锸具，穷表之下，深约丈余，得一金龟。
现代文：到了天明，大家带着锹镐而来，从立有记号的地方往下挖，果然，挖了一丈多深，就挖出来三件宝贝。
English: At dawn, everyone came with shovels and dug down from the marked place. Sure enough, after digging as deep as they could, they dug out three treasures.

古文：长二寸许，制度奇妙，代所未识。又得宝剑一，长二尺有四寸。又得古镜一，径一尺余。
现代文：一是一只金龟，长二寸左右做法奇妙，从未见过；二是一把宝剑，长二尺四寸；三是一面古镜，直径一尺还多。
English: One is a golden turtle, about two inches long, which has never been seen before; the second is a sword, two feet four inches long; the third is an ancient mirror, more than a foot in diameter.

古文：皆尘迹蒙然。
现代文：三样东西都尘迹斑斑，陈旧不堪。
English: All three are dusty and old.

古文：里人得之，遂持以诣县。
现代文：村人们就带着这些东西来到县里。
English: The villagers brought these things with them to the prefecture.

古文：时县令沛国刘随得之。
现代文：当时的县令沛国的刘随收到了这些东西。
English: Liu, then the county magistrate of Pei Province, received these items with him.

古文：发硎其剑，淡然若水波之色，虽利如切玉，无以加焉。
现代文：他把剑放到磨石上一磨，那剑立刻就呈现出水波一样的光色来，寒气逼人。
English: He put the sword on the grindstone to grind, and the sword immediately showed a light color like water waves, and the coldness was overwhelming.

古文：其长二尺四寸者，盖古以八寸为尺，乃古三尺。
现代文：它长二尺四寸的原因，大概是因为古人是以八寸为一尺，二尺四寸就是古代的三尺。
English: The reason why it is two feet four inches long is probably because the ancients used eight inches as one foot, and two feet four inches is three feet in ancient times.

古文：可与天球和璧，焜燿于上庠。 
现代文：那镜子花纹图案繁多，有异兽的图形环绕镜鼻。年代久远，保存完好。
English: The mirror has a wide variety of patterns, with the figure of a strange beast encircling the mirror's nose. It's been around for a long time and is well preserved.

古文：遂缄胶其事。
现代文：磨光之后，同样洁如清水，果真是天下之奇宝。
English: After polishing, it is as clear as water, truly a wonder of the world.

古文：闻岐阳帅。愿表献天子。时陈君亦节度岐陇，得而爱之，因有其宝。
现代文：县令刘随说： 这些东西是古代珍玩，是应该入王府的，那样便可以与天球合璧生辉，在大学讲堂上照耀后人。于是就书写文书上报，要把宝物献给天子。当时陈君亦在岐陇任节度使，他得见几样宝物之后，特别喜欢。
English: County magistrate Liu then said, "These things are ancient treasures, and they should be brought to the royal palace, so that they can match the glory of the celestial sphere and shine in the university lecture hall for future generations." So he reported in writing that he would donate the treasures to the heavenly son. At that time, Chen Jun was also the festival envoy in Gifu, and he was particularly fond of several treasures after seeing them.

古文：由是人无知者。
现代文：以后怎样，就无人知道了。
English: What happens next is anyone's guess.

古文：火玉
现代文：火玉
English: Fireball

古文：会昌元年，扶余国贡三宝： 曰火玉 ，曰 澄明酒 ，及 风松石 。
现代文：会昌元年，扶余国贡入三样宝物：一样叫 火玉 ；一样叫 澄明酒 ；还有一样是 风松石 。
English: In the first year of Huichang, Buyeo Province donated three kinds of treasures: the same is called fireball; the same is called clear wine; and the same is wind pine stone.

古文：火玉色赤，长半寸，上尖下圆。
现代文：火玉色红，长半寸，上尖下圆。
English: Fireball red, half an inch long, rounded at the tip.

古文：光照数十步。
现代文：发光能照出几十步远。
English: The glow can be seen dozens of paces away.

古文：积之可以燃鼎。
现代文：把火玉积攒起来，可以烧开锅。
English: If you save the fireballs, you can boil the pot.

古文：置之室内，冬则不复亦挟纩。
现代文：放到屋里，冬天就不用往衣服里絮棉花了。
English: If you keep them indoors, you won't have to lather cotton wool into your clothes in winter.

古文：宫人常用。
现代文：宫里的人常用这种东西。
English: People in the palace often use this kind of thing.

古文：澄明酒，亦异方所贡也。色紫如膏，饮之令人骨香。
现代文：也是方国所献，澄明酒，也是方国新献，紫色，膏状，喝起来让人感到骨头都有香味了。
English: It is also a gift from Fang Guo, a clear wine, and it is also a new gift from Fang Guo, purple, paste-like, and when drunk, it makes people feel that their bones are fragrant.

古文：风松石方一丈，莹澈如玉。
现代文：风松石方圆一丈，玉一样晶莹清澈。
English: The wind-carved stone is as round as a top, and as crystal clear as a jade.

古文：其中有树，形若古松偃盖，飒飒焉而凉飚生于其间。
现代文：那上面有树。它的形状像一棵古松仰向天空，飒飒地凉风生于其间。
English: There is a tree up there. It is shaped like an old pine tree that looks up to the sky, and a cool breeze blows through it.

古文：至盛夏，上令置于殿内，稍秋气飕飕，即令彻去。
现代文：到了盛夏，皇上就把它放到殿内，消暑纳凉。到了秋季，寒气一来，就让把它撤出去。
English: At the height of summer, the emperor would place it in the palace to cool off. In the autumn, when the cold weather came, he would have it taken out.

古文：马脑柜
现代文：马脑柜
English: Horse-brain cabinet

古文：武宗好神仙术，遂起望仙台，以崇朝礼。
现代文：唐武宗喜好神仙之术，所以就建了望仙台。还修了隆真室。
English: Tang Wusong liked the magic of the gods, so he built the Miao Sendai. He also built the Longzheng Room.

古文：更修隆真室，舂百宝屑以涂地。瑶楹金拱，银栏玉砌，晶莹炫耀，看之不足。
现代文：舂百宝为屑用来涂地，用瑶做柱子，用金子做拱门，用银子做门槛，用玉砌墙。莹光闪烁，百看不厌。
English: Hundreds of precious stones are used as scraps to paint the ground, to make pillars with reeds, to make arches with gold, to make thresholds with silver, to build walls with jade. The glittering light is dazzling.

古文：内设玳瑁之帐，火齐之床。
现代文：屋里装有用玳瑁做的帐子，用火齐做的床。
English: The room is furnished with curtains made of rattan and a bed made of fire.

古文：焚龙光之香，荐无忧之酒。
现代文：焚烧的是 龙光 香，饮用的是 无忧 酒。
English: It is the Longguang incense that is burned, and the worry-free liquor that is drunk.

古文：此皆他国所献也。
现代文：这些东西都是外国贡献来的。
English: All these things are foreign contributions.

古文：帝每斋戒沐浴，召道士赵归真以下，用探希夷之理。
现代文：武宗常斋戒沐浴，召道士赵归真来探讨听而不闻视而不见的道理。
English: Wuzong often fasts, fasts and bathes, and calls on the Taoist Zhao Guizhen to discuss the principle of hearing without hearing and seeing without seeing.

古文：由是室内生灵芝二株，皆如红玉。
现代文：从此室内长出两棵灵芝来，全都像红玉一般。
English: From this room, two Ganoderma lucidum plants sprouted up, all of which looked like red balls.

古文：更遇渤海贡马脑柜，方三尺，深色如茜，所作工巧，无以为比。
现代文：还赶上渤海国贡进马脑柜。这柜三尺正方，颜色很深，像茜色，做工之精巧无以伦比。
English: He also caught up with the Gongjin horse-brain cabinet of the Bohai Kingdom. This cabinet is three feet square, the color is very deep, like the color of parsley, and the workmanship is incomparable.

古文：帝用贮神仙之书，置之帐侧。紫瑰盆，量容半斛，内外通莹，其色纯紫，厚可一寸，举之则若鸿毛。
现代文：皇上用这柜装神仙之书，放在床头，紫瑰盆，容量可达半斛，内外通体晶莹，纯紫色，厚有一寸，重量轻如鸿毛。
English: The emperor used this cabinet to store the Book of Immortals, which was placed at the head of the bed. It was a purple gourd, with a capacity of up to half a gourd, crystal clear inside and out, pure purple, one inch thick, and as light as a feather.

古文：帝嘉其光洁，遂处于仙室，以和药饵。
现代文：皇上喜爱它的光洁，就把它放在仙室，用它和药吃。
English: The emperor loved its luster, so he placed it in the hermitage and ate it with medicine.

古文：后王才人掷玉环，误缺其半菽，上犹叹惜久之。
现代文：后来王才人扔玉环，将紫瑰盆打掉了半个豆粒那么大一块儿，皇上还喟叹惋惜了挺长时间呢。
English: Later, Wang CaiRen threw a jade ring and knocked the purple gourd half the size of a bean, and the emperor lamented for a long time.

古文：岑氏
现代文：岑氏
English: Tsukuda clan

古文：临川人岑氏，尝游山。溪水中见二白石，大如莲实，自相驰逐。
现代文：临川有个姓岑的人，有一次游山，看见溪水中有两块大如莲子的白色石头，自相追逐奔跑。
English: In Linchuan, there was a man surnamed Zou. Once, when he was hiking in the mountains, he saw two white stones as big as lotus seeds in the stream, chasing each other and running.

古文：捕而获之，归置巾箱中。
现代文：岑氏就把两块白石捉住了。回家把它放在箱子里。
English: Mr. Zou caught two white stones. He went home and put them in a box.

古文：其夕，梦二白衣美女，自言姊妹，来侍左右。
现代文：那大晚上，他做了一个梦，梦见两个穿白衣服的美女，自言她们是姐妹，侍立在他的左右。
English: That night he had a dream in which he saw two beautiful women dressed in white, who told him they were his sisters, standing on either side of him.

古文：既寤，盖知二石之异也。恒结于衣带中。
现代文：梦醒之后，大概知道这两块白石不寻常，就总藏在衣带中。
English: After waking up from a dream, he probably knew that the two white stones were unusual, so he always hid them in his belt.

古文：后至豫章，有波斯胡人，邀而问之： 君有宝乎？ 
现代文：后来他到了豫章，有一个波斯胡人拦住他问： 你有宝贝带在身上吗？ 他说： 是的。 
English: Later, when he arrived in Yuzhang, a Persian Hu man stopped him and asked, "Do you have any treasure with you?" He said, "Yes."

古文：曰： 然。 即出二石示之。
现代文：说完他就把二石掏出来给胡人看。
English: After he finished speaking, he pulled out the two stones to show them to Hu Ren.

古文：胡人求以三万为市。
现代文：胡人要用三万为价购买。
English: The Hu people want to buy it for 30,000 yuan.

古文：岑虽宝之而无用，得钱喜，即以与之。
现代文：岑氏虽然珍爱二石，但是留着也没用，就卖了。
English: Although Mr. Zou cherished the two stones, it was useless to keep them, so he sold them.

古文：以钱为生资，遂致殷赡。
现代文：他用这钱做谋生的本钱，就逐渐致富了。
English: He used the money to earn a living and gradually became rich.

古文：而恨不能问其石与其所用云耳。
现代文：但他一直为没有问那石头的名字和用处而遗憾。
English: But he always regretted not asking the name and purpose of the stone.

