古文：凡与敌战，若我军曾经挫衄，须审察士卒之气。
现代文：凡是对敌作战，如果我军曾经遭受过挫败，就必须细心观察部队的士气情况。
English: In any war against the enemy, if our army has suffered a setback, we must carefully observe the morale of the troops.

古文：气盛，则激励再战；气衰，则且养气，待其可用而使之。
现代文：如果部队士气仍然旺盛，就激励他们同敌人再战；如果士气衰竭，就养精蓄锐，等到士气旺盛可用时，再指挥他们与敌作战。
English: If the morale of the troops is still strong, he will encourage them to fight the enemy again; if the morale is exhausted, he will keep his energy and strength, and when the morale is strong, he will command them to fight the enemy.

古文：法曰： 谨养勿劳，并气积力。 
现代文：诚如兵法所说： 注意休整部队，不要让他们太过疲劳；要保持旺盛的士气，积蓄部队战斗力。 
English: As it is said in the Art of War: Pay attention to the rest and recuperation of troops, do not let them get too tired; maintain strong morale, and build up the combat effectiveness of troops.

古文：秦始皇问李信曰： 吾欲取荆，度用几何人？ 
现代文：秦王嬴政问李信道： 我打算攻取楚国，你估计需要多少兵力呢？ 
English: Qin Wang Bingzheng asked Li Xindao: I plan to invade Chu, how many troops do you think will be needed?

古文：对曰： 不过二十万人。 
现代文：李信回答说： 不过二十万人罢了。 
English: Li Xin replied, "Only 200,000 people left."

古文：及问王翦，曰： 非六十万人不可。 
现代文：秦王又问大将王翦，王翦却回答说： 非六十万人不行。 
English: King Qin also asked the general Wang Yao, but Wang Yao replied, "Not unless there are six hundred thousand people."

古文：王曰： 将军老矣！何怯也！ 
现代文：秦王听后不无讥讽地说： 将军你老了，为什么这样胆怯呢！ 
English: After hearing this, Qin Wang said, not without irony: General, you are old, why are you so timid!

古文：乃命信及蒙恬将二十万人伐荆。
现代文：于是，任命李信和蒙恬为将率领二十万人南下攻打楚国。
English: As a result, Li Xin and Meng Ye were appointed to lead 200,000 men south to attack Chu.

古文：翦因不用，遂谢病归频阳。
现代文：王翦因为自己的意见不被秦王采纳，便托病辞职回了老家频阳。
English: Because his opinion was not accepted by the Qin King, Wang Hui resigned his post and returned to his hometown of Fangyang.

古文：信，蒙恬，大破之。
现代文：李信率兵进攻平舆，蒙恬率兵进攻寝邑，皆大败楚军。
English: Li Xin led the troops to attack Pingwu, Meng Yao led the troops to attack Xieyun, and both of them defeated the Chu army.

古文：乃引兵西，与蒙恬会城父。
现代文：之后，李信又进攻鄢郢，击败楚军后，便领兵西向，与蒙恬在城父会师。
English: After that, Li Xin attacked Yunnan again. After defeating the Chu army, he led his soldiers westward and joined forces with Meng Yunnan in Chengdu.

古文：荆人因随之，三日不顿舍，大败信军，入两壁，杀七都尉，信奔还。
现代文：但是楚军尾随秦军，伺机进攻，三天三夜没有停息，把李信的军队击败，攻占了两个营垒，杀死了七个秦国都尉，李信兵败逃回秦国。
English: However, the Chu army followed the Qin army, waited for an opportunity to attack, and did not stop for three days and three nights. They defeated Li Xun's army, captured two camps, killed seven Qin captains, and Li Xun's soldiers fled back to Qin.

古文：王怒，自至频阳见王翦，强起之。
现代文：秦王得此消息，大怒；立即亲自前往频阳看望王翦，强行起用王翦为将。
English: King Qin was furious when he heard this news. He immediately went to Fengyang to visit Wang Qian in person, and forcibly appointed Wang Qian as commander.

古文：对曰： 老臣悖乱，大王必不得已用臣，非六十万人不可。 
现代文：王翦无奈，只好应允说： 老臣体弱多病，固执又糊涂。如果大王一定要启用我的话，那就非六十万人不可。 
English: Wang Xuan had no choice but to agree, saying: "The old minister is frail and sickly, stubborn and confused. If the great king must use my words, then six hundred thousand people must be used.

古文：王从之。
现代文：秦王答应了王翦的要求。
English: King Qin agreed to Wang Yao's request.

古文：翦遂将兵，王送至灞上。
现代文：王翦于是率军出征，秦王亲自到灞上设宴送行。
English: Wang Yao then led the army to go to war, and King Qin himself came to Yao to give him a send-off banquet.

古文：荆人闻之，悉兵以御翦。
现代文：楚国听说了，于是调集全部兵马抗击王翦部队。
English: When the State of Chu heard of this, it mobilized all of its soldiers and horses to fight against Wang Yao's troops.

古文：翦坚壁不战，日休士卒，洗沐而善饮食抚循之，与士卒同甘苦。
现代文：但王翦采取坚守营垒，不出战，天天休整部队，让士兵沐浴健身，并给士兵改善伙食，王翦亲自与士兵同甘共苦。
English: However, Wang Xi adhered to the camp, did not go to war, rested the troops every day, let the soldiers bathe and keep fit, and improved the food for the soldiers. Wang Xi personally shared the hardships with the soldiers.

古文：久之，问军中戏乎？
现代文：这样过了很久以后，王翦询问士兵在营里做什么游戏？
English: After a long time, Wang Yao asked the soldiers what kind of games they played in the battalion.

古文：对曰： 方投石超距。 
现代文：部下回答说： 正在投射矢石，练习跳越障碍。 
English: He came back with a report: They are throwing stones to see who can throw the farthest.

古文：翦曰： 可用矣。 
现代文：王翦听后高兴地说： 这样很好，部队可以投入作战了。 
English: After listening, Wang Yao said happily: This is very good, the troops can go into battle.

古文：荆人既不得战，乃引而东。
现代文：楚军由于多次挑战而秦军闭垒不出，无奈只好引军向东撤退。
English: Due to the repeated challenges of the Chu army, the Qin army could not close the base, but had no choice but to withdraw the army to the east.

古文：翦追击，大破之。
现代文：王翦乘机挥军追击，大败楚军；追至蕲南，击斩了楚将项燕。
English: Wang Hui took the opportunity to pursue the Chu army and defeated it; he chased it to the south of the Yunnan Province and killed the Chu general Xiang Yan.

古文：至蕲南，杀其将军项燕，荆兵遂败走，翦乘胜略定城邑。
现代文：王翦乘胜前进，占领了不少城邑。
English: Wang Hui took advantage of the victory to advance and occupied many towns.

