古文：武王问太公曰： 以车与步卒战，一车当几步卒？
现代文：武王询问太公说： 用战车同敌军的步兵作战，一辆战车能抵挡敌军的几名步兵？
English: King Wu asked the Grand Duke, "You use a chariot to fight the enemy's infantry. How many enemy infantrymen can a chariot withstand?"

古文：几步卒当一车？
现代文：敌人的几名步兵能抵挡一辆战车？
English: How many enemy infantrymen can resist a chariot?

古文：以骑与步卒战，一骑当几步卒？
现代文：用骑兵同步兵作战，一名骑兵能抵挡敌军的几名步兵？
English: Fighting with cavalry synchronized soldiers, can a cavalryman resist the enemy's several infantrymen?

古文：几步卒当一骑？
现代文：敌军的几名步兵能抵抗一名骑兵？
English: How many enemy infantrymen can resist one cavalryman?

古文：以车与骑战，一车当几骑？
现代文：用战车同骑兵作战，一辆战车能抵挡几名骑兵？
English: Using chariots to fight cavalry, how many cavalrymen can one chariot withstand?

古文：几骑当一车？ 
现代文：几名骑兵能抵挡一辆战车？ 
English: How many horsemen can resist a chariot?

古文：太公曰： 车者，军之羽翼也，所以陷坚陈，要强敌，遮走北也；骑者，军之伺候也，所以踵败军，绝粮道，击便寇也。
现代文：太公回答道： 战车，是军队的羽翼，具有强大的战斗力，用来攻陷坚固的阵地，拦截强敌，堵住败北逃跑的敌人的；骑兵是军队的眼睛，可以用来侦察警戒，用来追击逃跑的敌军，切断敌人粮道和袭击散乱流窜的敌军。
English: The Grand Duke replied: "Chariots are the wings of the army, with strong combat power, used to capture strong positions, intercept strong enemies, and block the enemy who has been defeated and fled; cavalry are the eyes of the army, which can be used for reconnaissance and warning, used to chase the fleeing enemy army, cut off the enemy's food supply and attack the scattered enemy army.

古文：故车骑不敌战，则一骑不能当步卒一人。
现代文：所以战车和骑兵的运用不恰当，在战斗中一名骑兵还连一名步兵都不能抵挡。
English: Therefore, the use of chariots and cavalry is inappropriate. In battle, a cavalryman cannot resist even an infantryman.

古文：三军之众，成陈而相当，则易战之法，一车当步卒八十人，八十人当一车；一骑当步卒八人，八人当一骑；一车当十骑，十骑当一车。
现代文：全军布列成阵，车、骑、步兵配合得当，那么在平坦地形上作战的法则是：一辆战车可以抵挡步兵八十人，八十名步兵可以抵挡一辆战车。一名骑兵可以抵挡步兵八人，八名步兵可以抵挡一名骑兵。一辆战车可以抵挡骑兵十人，十名骑兵可以抵挡一辆战车。
English: If the whole army is arrayed and the chariot, cavalry and infantry are properly coordinated, then the rule for fighting on flat terrain is: one chariot can resist eighty infantrymen, eighty infantrymen can resist one chariot, one cavalryman can resist eight infantrymen, eight infantrymen can resist one cavalryman, one chariot can resist ten cavalrymen, and ten cavalrymen can resist one chariot.

古文：险战之法，一车当步卒四十人，四十人当一车；一骑当步卒四人，四人当一骑；一车当六骑，六骑当一车。
现代文：在险阻地形上作战的法则是：一辆战车可以抵挡步兵四十人，四十名步兵可以抵挡一辆战车。一名骑兵可以抵挡步兵四人，四名步兵可以抵挡骑兵一人。一辆战车可以抵挡骑兵六人，六名骑兵可以抵挡战车一辆。
English: The rules for fighting on difficult terrain are: one chariot can resist forty infantrymen, forty infantrymen can resist one chariot, one cavalryman can resist four infantrymen, four infantrymen can resist one cavalryman, one chariot can resist six cavalrymen, six cavalrymen can resist one chariot.

古文：夫车骑者，军之武兵也，十乘败千人，百乘败万人；十骑败百人，百骑走千人，此其大数也。 
现代文：战车和骑兵，是军队中最具有威力的战斗力量，十辆故车可以击败敌人千名，百辆战车可以击败敌人万名。十名骑兵可以击败敌人百名，百名骑兵可以击败敌人千名，这些都是大概的数字。 
English: Chariots and cavalry are the most powerful fighting forces in the army. Ten old chariots can defeat a thousand enemies. A hundred chariots can defeat ten thousand enemies. Ten cavalrymen can defeat a hundred enemies. A hundred cavalrymen can defeat a thousand enemies. These are approximate figures.

古文：武王曰： 车骑之吏数，陈法奈何？ 
现代文：武王又问： 战车和骑兵的军官数量怎么配置，阵法怎么布列呢？ 
English: King Wu also asked: How should the number of officers of chariots and cavalry be arranged, and how should the formation be laid out?

古文：太公曰： 置车之吏数，五车一长，十车一吏，五十车一率，百车一将。
现代文：大公答道： 配置战车的军官数量为：五辆战车设置一长，十辆战车设置一吏，五十辆战车设置一率，百辆战车，设置一将。
English: Dagong replied: The number of officers assigned to chariots is as follows: five chariots are assigned to one captain, ten chariots are assigned to one officer, fifty chariots are assigned to one regiment, and one hundred chariots are assigned to one general.

古文：易战之法，五车为列，相去四十步，左右十步，队间六十步。
现代文：在平坦地形上作战的方法是，五辆战车为一列，每列前后相距四十步，每辆左右间隔为十步，每队问的前后距离和左右间隔各六十步。
English: The method of fighting on a flat terrain is to have five chariots in a line, with each line being forty paces apart in front and behind, each left and right being ten paces apart, and each line being sixty paces apart in front and behind and left and right.

古文：险战之法，车必循道，十车为聚二十车为屯，前后相去二十步，左右六步，队间三十六步；五车一长，纵横相去二里，各返故道。
现代文：在险阻地形上作战的方法是，战车必须沿着道路前进，十辆战车为一聚，二十辆战车为一屯。车与车前后距离二十步，左右间隔六步。队间的前后距离和左右间隔各三十六步，五辆战车设一长，活动范围前后左右各二里，战车撤出战斗后仍内原路返回。
English: The method of fighting on the dangerous terrain is that the chariots must advance along the road, ten chariots as a group, twenty chariots as a block. The distance between the front and rear of the car is twenty paces, the left and right spacing is six paces. The front and rear distance between the team and the left and right spacing is thirty-six paces, five chariots are set to one length, the range of activity is two miles around and around, and the chariots still return to the original road after withdrawing from the battle.

古文：置骑之吏娄五骑一长，十骑一吏，百骑一率，二百骑一将。
现代文：骑兵应配备的军官数量是，五名骑兵设一长，十名骑兵设一吏，百名骑兵设一率，二百名骑兵设一将。
English: The cavalry should be equipped with the following number of officers: one captain for five cavalrymen, one officer for ten cavalrymen, one captain for one hundred cavalrymen, and one general for two hundred cavalrymen.

古文：易战之法，五骑为列，前后相去二十步，左右四步，队间五十步。
现代文：在平坦地形上作战的方法是，五骑为一列，每列前后相距二十步，每骑左右间隔四步，队与队之间的前后距离和左右间隔为五十步。
English: The method of fighting on flat terrain is that the five horsemen are in a row, each row is twenty paces in front and behind, each horseman is four paces to the left and right, and the distance between the front and back of the team and the left and right is fifty paces.

古文：险战者前后相去十步，左右二步，队间二十五步；三十骑为一屯，六十骑为一辈，十骑一吏，纵横相去百步，周环各复故处。 
现代文：在险阻地形上作战的方法是：每列前后相距十步，左右间隔二步，队间距离和左右间隔各二十五步。三十名骑兵为一屯，六十名骑兵为一辈，每十名骑兵设一吏，活动范围前后左右各为百步，来回往复，按原路巡视。 
English: The method of fighting on dangerous terrain is as follows: each column is ten paces apart in front and behind, two paces apart to the left and right, and 25 paces apart in between and to the right and left. Thirty cavalrymen are a garrison, sixty cavalrymen are a generation, one officer is set for every ten cavalrymen, and the range of activities is one hundred paces each to the front and behind, to and fro, and patrol according to the original route.

古文：武王曰： 善哉！ 
现代文：武王说： 说得真好啊！ 
English: King Wu said, "What a great way to say it!

