古文：斛律金斛律金，字阿六敦，朔州敕勒部人也。
现代文：斛律金，字阿六敦，朔州敕勒部人氏。
English: He is a member of the Zhe Li Jin, Zhe A Lu Tun, and Shuo Zhou Zhe Le Cun.

古文：高祖倍侯利，以壮勇有名塞表，道武时率户内附，赐爵孟都公。
现代文：高祖倍侯利，因强壮武勇而扬名塞外，随道武内附，赐爵孟都公。
English: Gao's ancestor Beholi, who was famous for his strength and bravery, was awarded the title of Mengdugong along with Daowu.

古文：祖幡地斤，殿中尚书。
现代文：祖父幡地斤，任殿中尚书。
English: His grandfather, Hatajiki, was a high-ranking official in the imperial court.

古文：父大那瑰，光禄大夫、第一领民酋长。
现代文：父大那瑰，光禄大夫、第一领民酋长。
English: His father was the great Nagi, the doctor of Guanglu, and the first chief of the people.

古文：天平中，金贵，赠司空公。
现代文：天平中，斛律金显贵，赠司空公。
English: In the balance of the scale, the value of the golden ratio is prominent, and it is given to Lord Siku.

古文：金性敦直，善骑射，行兵用匈奴法，望尘识马步多少，嗅地知军度远近。
现代文：斛律金性格敦厚直率，善于骑马射箭，行兵使用匈奴的办法，望着飞扬的尘土能说有多少马兵步军，嗅地能知道军队已经离开这里有多长的时间。
English: He was good at horseback riding, archery, and marching troops using the methods of the Xiongnu. Looking at the flying dust, he could tell how many cavalry and infantry troops there were, and he could smell how long the troops had been away from here.

古文：初为军主，与怀朔镇将杨钧送茹茹主阿那瑰还北。
现代文：初任军主，同怀朔镇镇将杨钧一道护送蠕蠕主阿那瑰归北。
English: The first commander of the army, together with Wai Shuo Zhen Zhen, escorted Yang Jie, the commander of the army, back to the north.

古文：瑰见金射猎，深叹其工。
现代文：瑰见斛律金射箭，感叹其本事高超。
English: Zhu Xi saw the golden archery, and lamented that his skill was superb.

古文：后瑰入寇高陆，金拒击破之。
现代文：后阿那瑰寇掠高陆，被斛律金打垮。
English: Later, Anaju the Robber raided the highlands and was defeated by Bao Lijing.

古文：正光末，破六韩拔陵构逆，金拥众属焉，陵假金王号。
现代文：正光末年，破六韩拔陵作乱，斛律金领众归附，陵授给他王号。
English: At the end of Zheng Guang's life, he destroyed six Korean tombs and made a riot, which was followed by the people of Jinling, and he was given the title of king.

古文：金度陵终败灭，乃统所部万户诣云州请降，即授第二领民酋长。
现代文：斛律金估计陵必定失败，就带领部属万余户前往云州投降，随即被委任为第二领民酋长。
English: Estimating that the mausoleum would certainly fail, he led more than ten thousand of his subordinates to Yunnan to surrender, and was immediately appointed as the second territorial chief.

古文：稍引南出黄瓜堆，为杜洛周所破，部众分散，金与兄平二人脱身归尔朱荣。
现代文：又慢慢统领部众南移，出黄瓜堆后，被杜洛周击败，人员大都逃亡。金与兄平脱险，投奔尔朱荣。
English: He also slowly moved south to lead the troops. After leaving the cucumber heap, he was defeated by Du Luo Zhou, and most of the personnel fled. Jin and his brother Ping escaped the danger and went to Bener Zhu Rong.

古文：荣表金为别将，累迁都督。
现代文：尔朱荣上表署金为别将，后升任都督。
English: Er Zhu Rong was promoted to the post of general and later to the post of governor-general.

古文：孝庄立，赐爵阜城县男，加宁朔将军、屯骑校尉。
现代文：孝庄帝立，赐斛律金阜城县男，加宁朔将军、屯骑校尉。
English: Xiaozhuang Dili, Ziqilu Jinfucheng County Man, Ganingshuo General, Tunjie School Lieutenant.

古文：从破葛荣、元显，频有战功，加镇南大将军。
现代文：参加攻打葛荣、元颢等战，多次立功，加镇南大将军。
English: He took part in the battles against Ge Rong and Yuan Shao, and made meritorious contributions many times. He was promoted to the rank of general.

古文：及尔朱兆等逆乱，高祖密怀匡复之计，金与娄昭、厍狄干等赞成大谋，仍从举义。
现代文：在尔朱兆等人叛乱时，高祖就有了匡复之志，斛律金同娄昭、厍狄干等协助成就大计，并随同举起了义旗。
English: When Er Zhu Zhao and others rebelled, Gao Zu had the desire to restore order, and Bao Rujin, Tong Zhaozhao, Zi Dikang and others helped to achieve the grand plan, and raised the banner of righteousness.

古文：高祖南攻邺，留金守信都，领恒、云、燕、朔、显、蔚六州大都督，委以后事，别讨李修，破之，加右光禄大夫。
现代文：高祖南向攻邺，留斛律金守护信都，兼任恒、云、燕、朔、显、蔚六州大都督，处理后方诸种事务。攻讨李修，打败了他，以功加右光禄大夫。
English: Gao Zu marched southward to attack Lu, and stayed at Lijing to guard the capital, and concurrently served as the grand governor of the six states of Heng, Yun, Yan, Shuo, Xian, and Wei, dealing with various matters in the rear. He attacked Li Xiu and defeated him, and became the doctor of Guanglu with merit.

古文：会高祖于邺，仍从平晋阳，追灭尔朱兆。
现代文：于邺地与高祖部汇合，跟随着平定了晋阳，追击打垮了尔朱兆。
English: Yu and Gao Zu joined forces in Shantian, and together they subdued Jinyang and pursued and defeated Lzhu Zhao.

古文：太昌初，以金为汾州刺史、当州大都督，进爵为侯。
现代文：太昌初年，被任命为汾州刺史、当州大都督，升爵为侯。
English: In the first year of Taichang, he was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou, the governor of Dangzhou, and was promoted to marquis.

古文：从高祖破纥豆陵于河西。
现代文：又跟着高祖在河西打败了纥豆陵。
English: He also followed Gao Zu in defeating Peasling in Hexi.

古文：天平初，迁邺，使金领步骑三万镇风陵以备西寇，军罢，还晋阳。
现代文：天平初，迁都邺城，高祖命令斛律金率领三万步骑镇守风陵，以防备西部的寇贼，事情结束，回晋阳。
English: At the beginning of the Heian period, when the capital was moved to Yeongseong, Gaozu ordered Yeongru Kim to lead the 30,000-step ride to the town to guard the Fengling, in order to guard against the western bandits. When the matter was over, he returned to Jinyang.

古文：从高祖战于沙苑，不利班师，因此东雍诸城复为西军所据，遣金与尉景、厍狄干等讨复之。
现代文：又随着高祖参加了沙苑之战，因失利而撤军，于是东雍附近的许多城镇再次为西魏军所占领。高祖派遣斛律金与尉景、厍狄干等出兵将这些失地收复了过来。
English: In addition, Gaozu took part in the Battle of Shayuan and withdrew due to defeat. As a result, many towns near Dongyang were once again occupied by the West Wei army. Gaozu dispatched soldiers such as Gong Lujin, Yi Jing, and Gong Dickan to recover these lost lands.

古文：元象中，周文帝复大举向河阳。
现代文：元象中，周文帝再次率兵大举攻打河阳。
English: In the Yuan Dynasty, Zhou Wendi once again led an army to attack Kheyang in a big way.

古文：高祖率众讨之，使金径往太州，为掎角之势。
现代文：高祖率众抵抗，吩咐斛律金赶往太州，构成犄角之势。
English: Gao Zu led the crowd in resistance, and ordered Gong Liujin to rush to Taizhou, creating a dangerous situation.

古文：金到晋州，以军退不行，仍与行台薛修义共围乔山之寇。
现代文：金抵晋州，由于周军撤退而中途改变计划，即与行台薛修义一道围攻乔山的敌寇。
English: When Jin arrived in Jinzhou, due to the retreat of Zhou's army, he changed his plan midway, that is, he besieged Qiao Shan's enemy bandits together with Xue Xiuyi.

古文：俄而高祖至，仍共讨平之，因从高祖攻下南绛、邵郡等数城。
现代文：高祖很快赶到，乔山之敌被歼，继而随从高祖攻克了南绛、邵郡等数城。
English: Gaozu soon arrived, the enemy of Qiaoshan was annihilated, and then Gaozu conquered Nanlu, Shao County and several other cities.

古文：武定初，北豫州刺史高仲密据城西叛，周文帝入寇洛阳。
现代文：武定初，北豫州刺史高仲密举城归服了西魏。周文帝入侵洛阳。
English: At the beginning of the Wuding Dynasty, Gao Zhongmi, the governor of North Henan Province, secretly surrendered the city to the Western Wei Dynasty. Emperor Zhou Wen invaded Luoyang.

古文：高祖使金统刘丰、步大汗萨等步骑数万守河阳城以拒之。
现代文：斛律金在高祖的调配下统领刘丰、步大汗萨等数万步骑布防河阳城进行防守。
English: Under Gao Zu's deployment, Gong Liujin led Liu Feng, Bu Daihan Sa and other tens of thousands of troops to defend Heyang City.

古文：高祖到，仍从破密。
现代文：高祖抵达河阳，斛律金跟随着打败了高仲密。
English: Gao Zu arrived in Heyang, followed by Gong Li Jin, who defeated Gao Zhong Mi.

古文：军还，除大司马，改封石城郡公，邑一千户，转第一领民酋长。
现代文：军还，升任大司马，改封石城郡公，食邑一千户，转任第一领民酋长。
English: He was also promoted to the post of grand steward, changed his title to the governor of Shicheng County, served a thousand households, and was transferred to the post of the first territorial chief.

古文：三年，高祖出军袭山胡，分为二道。以金为南道军司，由黄栌岭出。
现代文：三年，高祖分兵二路偷袭山胡。斛律金为南道军司，率部从黄栌岭出发。
English: In the third year, Gao Zu's detachment raided the mountain pass on the second road. Gong Liujin was the military commander of the South Road, and the leading unit set out from Huangpi Ridge.

古文：高祖自出北道，度赤谼岭，会金于乌突戍，合击破之。
现代文：高祖则亲率兵马从北道开拔，翻越赤襌岭，两路兵马在乌突戍会合后，取得了偷袭的成功。
English: Gao Zu personally led the soldiers and horses from the North Road and climbed over the Chiafu Mountains. After the soldiers and horses from the two roads met in Utuxi, they achieved success in the sneak attack.

古文：军还，出为冀州刺史。
现代文：军还，斛律金出任冀州刺史。
English: In addition to the military, Gong Lujin served as the chief historian of Jizhou.

古文：四年，诏金率众从乌苏道会高祖于晋州，仍从攻玉壁。
现代文：四年，诏令斛律金率众走乌苏道，前往晋州与高祖相会，随同攻打玉壁。
English: In the fourth year, Zhao Ling and Lu Jin led the crowd to walk the Usu Road, went to Jinzhou to meet Gao Zu, and then attacked the Jade Wall.

古文：军还，高祖使金总督大众，从归晋阳。
现代文：军还，高祖命令斛律金总督兵众，返回晋阳。
English: Gao Zu also ordered the troops of the Governor of Lijing to return to Jinyang.

古文：世宗嗣事，侯景据颍川降于西魏，诏遣金帅潘乐、薛孤延等固守河阳以备。
现代文：世宗即位，侯景占据颍川投降了西魏，帝诏令斛律金带领潘乐、薛孤延等固守河阳以防备侯景的进攻。
English: When King Sejong ascended to the throne, Houjing occupied Hechuan and surrendered to the Western Wei Dynasty. The emperor ordered Gong Lujin to lead Pan Le, Xue Qianyan, and others to hold on to Heyang to prevent Houjing's attack.

古文：西魏使其大都督李景和、若干宝领马步数万，欲从新城赴援侯景。
现代文：西魏派遣其大都督李景和、若干宝领带数万兵马，计划从新城赶赴颍川援救侯景。
English: The Western Wei Dynasty dispatched its great governor Li Jinghe, several treasure ties and tens of thousands of soldiers and horses, planning to rush from Xincheng to Luchuan to rescue Houjing.

古文：金率众停广武以要之，景和等闻而退走。
现代文：斛律金率部停留广武准备拦截李景和部，景和得知此消息后退兵了。
English: Gong Lijing's division stopped at Guangwu to prepare to intercept Li Jinghe, who retreated after hearing the news.

古文：还为肆州刺史，仍率所部于宜阳筑杨志、百家、呼延三戍，置守备而还。
现代文：斛律金从河阳返归后，做了肆州刺史，依然统领所部在宜阳之地构筑了杨志、百家、呼延三戍，并派兵把守，安置停当才赴肆州。
English: After returning from Kheyang, Qu Liujin made the history of Wuzhou. He still built Yangzhi, Baike and Huyan in Yiyang, and sent soldiers to guard and settle them before going to Wuzhou.

古文：侯景之走南豫，西魏仪同三司王思政入据颍川。
现代文：侯景逃到南豫后，西魏的仪同三司王思政马上进驻了颍州。
English: After Hou Jing fled to Nanyu, the Western Wei Dynasty's eunuch Wang Shizheng immediately stationed in Zhangzhou.

古文：世宗遣高岳、慕容绍宗、刘丰等率众围之。
现代文：世宗派遣高岳、慕容绍宗、刘丰等人率兵包围了颍川。
English: Shizong sent Gao Yue, Murong Shaozong, Liu Feng and other soldiers to encircle Sui River.

古文：复诏金督彭乐、可朱浑道元等出屯河阳，断其奔救之路。
现代文：帝又诏令斛律金领众督促彭乐、可朱浑道元等驻屯河阳，用来截断王思政的退路。
English: The emperor also issued an imperial edict to urge Peng Le and Zhu Hun Dogen to stay in Heyang to cut off Wang Sisi's escape route.

古文：又诏金率众会攻颍川。
现代文：不几天，帝调斛律金会攻颍川。
English: Not a few days later, the Teichosei Ritsukin-kai attacked Beichuan.

古文：事平，复使金率众从崿坂送米宜阳。
现代文：夺回颍川后，帝又指派斛律金率部从萫坂送粮米到宜阳。
English: After recapturing Beichuan, the emperor also assigned the Ministry of Finance to send grain and rice from Beizhan to Yiyang.

古文：西魏九曲戍将马绍隆据险要斗，金破之。
现代文：西魏九曲戍将马绍隆占据险要之地拦击金的粮队，但却被击退了。
English: West Wei Jiuquan sent Marshall Long to occupy a critical position to stop Jin's grain convoy, but he was repulsed.

古文：以功别封安平县男。
现代文：因军功另封为安平县男。
English: He was also awarded the title of Anping County Man for his military service.

古文：显祖受禅，封咸阳郡王，刺史如故。
现代文：显祖受禅，封斛律金咸阳郡王，依然兼任刺史诸职。
English: Emperor Xianzu was a Zen priest and the king of Jinshanyang County, and he still held the posts of shishi.

古文：其年冬，朝晋阳宫。金病，帝幸其宅临视，赐以医药，中使不绝。
现代文：本年冬，朝晋阳宫，斛律金病，帝亲自来他家探视，并赐给医药，还不断派人慰问。
English: In the winter of this year, when Emperor Jinyang of the Jinyang Palace fell ill with the plague, the emperor himself came to visit his home and gave him medicine. He also constantly sent people to offer condolences.

古文：病愈还州。
现代文：病痊愈后回到肆州。
English: After recovering from his illness, he returned to Wuzhou.

古文：三年，就除太师。
现代文：三年，升任太师。
English: Three years later, he was promoted to Grand Master.

古文：帝征奚贼，金从帝行。
现代文：帝征讨奚贼，斛律金从行。
English: The emperor levies taxes on thieves, and the money follows.

古文：军还，帝幸肆州，与金宴射而去。
现代文：军还，帝亲临肆州，与斛律金宴饮欢聚之后才告别而去。
English: In addition, the emperor himself came to Zhouzhou and had a banquet with Gong Li before bidding farewell.

古文：四年，解州，以太师还晋阳。
现代文：四年，罢刺史职，以太师身份回到晋阳。
English: Four years later, he was relieved of his duties as the chief historian of Zhouzhou and returned to Jinyang as an etheric teacher.

古文：车驾复幸其第，六宫及诸王尽从，置酒作乐，极夜方罢。帝忻甚，诏金第二子丰乐为武卫大将军，因谓金曰： 公元勋佐命，父子忠诚，朕当结以婚姻，永为蕃卫。 
现代文：皇帝又亲幸其住宅，六宫以及诸王也一同前往，置酒作乐，直至深夜才告结束，帝极其欣喜，诏令斛律金第二子丰乐为武卫大将军，并说： 公为佐命元勋，父子忠诚，朕当与公结为婚姻，永为蕃卫。 
English: The emperor also personally blessed his residence, and the six palaces and the kings also went there together, drinking wine and making music until late at night. The emperor was extremely pleased, and he ordered the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the

古文：仍诏金孙武都尚义宁公主。
现代文：乃诏令斛律金之孙武都娶义宁公主。
English: He then ordered the grandson of Gong Li Jin, Gong Li Wudu, to marry Princess Yining.

古文：成礼之日，帝从皇太后幸金宅，皇后、太子及诸王等皆从，其见亲待如此。
现代文：行聘礼的这天，帝跟着皇太后亲临其家，皇后、太子以及诸王等也一齐来了，这就可见皇上十分地亲近敬重斛律金。
English: On the day of the betrothal ceremony, the emperor followed the empress dowager to her home, and the empress, the prince, and the kings also came together. This shows that the emperor was very close to and respected the empress dowager.

古文：后以茹茹为突厥所破，种落分散，虑其犯塞，惊挠边民，乃诏金率骑二万屯白道以备之。
现代文：不久由于蠕蠕被突厥攻破，种落分散，担心他们会侵犯边塞，骚扰边民，皇帝便诏令斛律金率两万骑兵屯驻白道进行防备。
English: Soon after, as the Cumhurians were defeated by the Turks and their settlements dispersed, fearing that they would encroach on the border fortress and harass the border people, the emperor ordered the emperor to garrison 20,000 cavalrymen in Baidoa for defense.

古文：而虏帅豆婆吐久备将三千余户密欲西过，候骑还告，金勒所部追击，尽俘其众。
现代文：此时虏帅豆婆吐久备带三千余户密谋西去，侦察的骑士回来报告后，斛律金率部追击，一下子将其全部虏获。
English: At this time, Zhuo Shuai's wife, Tu Jiubei, plotted with more than three thousand households to go west. After the reconnaissance knight came back to report, he led the pursuit and captured all of them at once.

古文：茹茹但钵将举国西徙，金获其候骑送之，并表陈虏可击取之势。
现代文：蠕蠕但钵拟将举国西徙，斛律金抓住他们的侦察骑士送往京城，并上表陈述可攻打蠕蠕的有利条件。
English: The Cree intended to move the whole country to the west, and sent their scout knights to the capital, and the above table states the favorable conditions for attacking the Cree.

古文：显祖于是率众与金共讨之于吐赖，获二万余户而还。
现代文：于是显祖率众与斛律金等一同在吐赖伏击，俘获两万多户而返归。
English: As a result, Hsien Zu led the crowd in an ambush on Tulai together with Zhaolujin and others, captured more than 20,000 households and returned.

古文：进位右丞相，食齐州干，迁左丞相。
现代文：进位右丞相，食齐州干，迁为左丞相。
English: He was promoted to minister of the right and moved to minister of the left.

古文：肃宗践阼，纳其孙女为皇太子妃。
现代文：肃宗登基，纳其孙女为皇太子妃。
English: Sojong ascended to the throne, and Na's granddaughter became the crown princess.

古文：又诏金朝见，听步挽车至阶。
现代文：又诏令斛律金朝见，特许步挽车至阶。
English: In addition, it was decreed that the law should be enforced in the morning, and the special step-by-step reversal should be carried out.

古文：世祖登极，礼遇弥重，又纳其孙女为太子妃。
现代文：世祖登基，礼遇更重，又纳其孙女为太子妃。
English: The founder ascended to the throne, and was treated with even greater courtesy, and his granddaughter was made the crown princess.

古文：金长子光大将军，次子羡及孙武都并开府仪同三司，出镇方岳，其余子孙皆封侯贵达。
现代文：斛律金长子光为大将军，次子羡及孙武都并为开府仪同三司，出镇方岳，其余的子孙均封侯而富贵显达。
English: According to the law, the eldest son of Sun Quan was a great general, the second son of Sun Quan and Sun Wudu were the same as the three departments of the Kaifu ceremony, and Fang Yue was out of the town, and the rest of the descendants were princes and rich and prominent.

古文：一门一皇后、二太子妃、三公主，尊宠之盛，当时莫比。
现代文：斛律金家出了一皇后，二太子妃，娶了三位公主，尊宠之盛，当时哪家也赶不上。
English: The Li family produced one queen, two princesses, and married three princesses. At that time, no other family could match their popularity.

古文：金尝谓光曰： 我虽不读书，闻古来外戚梁冀等无不倾灭。
现代文：斛律金曾对光讲： 我虽然没有读多少书，但听说古时外戚梁冀等没有不覆灭的。
English: Gong Liujin once said to the light: Although I have not read many books, I have heard that in ancient times, there were no relatives such as Liang Ji who did not perish.

古文：女若有宠，诸贵人妒；女若无宠，天子嫌之。
现代文：女若得宠，就会遭致嫉妒；女若无宠，天子便会嫌弃。
English: If a woman is favored by the Son of Heaven, other concubines will be jealous; if a woman is not favored, the Son of Heaven will reject her.

古文：我家直以立勋抱忠致富贵，岂可藉女也？ 
现代文：我家一直是以建立功勋尽忠奉上来致富致贵的，岂可凭借女孩子的地位？ 
English: My family has always relied on the establishment of meritorious service and loyalty to become rich and wealthy. Can they rely on the status of a girl?

古文：辞不获免，常以为忧。
现代文：虽然多次推辞朝廷的赏赐，但却无法拒绝，因此常为这些事忧愁。
English: He wanted to resign from various positions, but was not allowed to do so by the imperial court, so he was often worried.

古文：天统三年薨，年八十。
现代文：天统三年去世，时年八十。
English: He died three years later, at the age of eighty.

古文：世祖举哀西堂，后主又举哀于晋阳宫。
现代文：世祖在西堂为其举哀，继而后主又在晋阳宫为之举哀。
English: The patriarch mourned for him in the West Hall, and then the lord mourned for him in the Jinyang Palace.

古文：赠假黄钺、使持节、都督朔定冀并瀛青齐沧幽肆晋汾十二州诸军事、相国、太尉公、录尚书、朔州刺史，酋长、王如故，赠钱百万，谥曰武。子光嗣。
现代文：朝廷赐假黄钺、使持节、都督朔定冀并瀛青齐沧幽肆晋汾十二州诸军事、相国、太尉公、录尚书、朔州刺史，酋长、咸阳郡王等官爵如故，还赐钱百万，谥号武，子光嗣继。
English: The imperial court bestowed the title of Huangdi, the title of Jizhi, the title of Dadu, the title of Shuo, the title of Ding, the title of Qing, the title of Qi, the title of Cang, the title of Yuxi, the title of Jinshan, the title of Jinshan, the title of Jinshan, the title of Jinshan, the title of Jinshan, the title of Jinshan, the title of Jinshan, the title of Jinshan, the title of Jinshan, the title of Jinshan, and the title of Jinshan.

古文：光，字明月，少工骑射，以武艺知名。
现代文：斛律光，字明月，少年时就精通骑马射箭，而以武艺闻名于世。
English: When he was a boy, he was proficient in horse riding and archery, and was famous for his martial arts.

古文：魏末，从金西征，周文帝长史莫孝晖时在行间，光驰马射中之，因擒于阵，光时年十七。
现代文：魏末，跟随父亲金西征，周文帝长史莫者晖这时正在行武中，光看见后，骑在急驰的马上向他射箭，趁着射中的机会，将他活捉了过来，这时光才十七岁。
English: At the end of the Wei Dynasty, following his father Jin Xi Zheng, Zhou Wenzhong Shimo Zharen was in the middle of a military campaign. When he saw the light, he rode on a galloping horse to shoot arrows at him, and took advantage of the opportunity to capture him alive. He was only seventeen years old at the time.

古文：高祖嘉之，即擢为都督。
现代文：得高祖嘉奖，擢升为都督。
English: He received the Gaozu Commendation Award and was promoted to the post of governor-general.

古文：世宗为世子，引为亲信都督，稍迁征虏将军，累加卫将军。
现代文：世宗作太子，任命光做了亲信都督，慢慢地提升为征虏将军，累加卫将军。
English: As the crown prince, Shizong appointed Guang as the trusted governor of the capital, and gradually promoted him to be the general of conscripts and the general of garrison.

古文：武定五年，封永乐县子。
现代文：武定五年，封永乐县子。
English: In the fifth year of Wuding, he was assigned to Yongle County.

古文：尝从世宗于洹桥校猎，见一大鸟，云表飞飏，光引弓射之，正中其颈。
现代文：曾陪同世宗在洹桥狩猎，看见一只大鸟，正展翅高飞，光拿起弓来，一箭就射了下来，而且是正中要害。
English: He once accompanied Sejong on a duck hunting trip in Takahashi and saw a large bird flying high with its wings outstretched. He picked up his bow and shot it down with a single arrow, hitting the bull's-eye.

古文：此鸟形如车轮，旋转而下，至地，乃大雕也。
现代文：这只鸟形状像车轮，旋转着掉了下来，一看是大雕。
English: The bird, shaped like a wheel, spun around and fell to the ground, looking like a large eagle.

古文：世宗取而观之，深壮异焉。
现代文：世宗拿过雕来观看，将他夸赞了半天。
English: Sejong took the statue to see it and praised it for half a day.

古文：丞相属邢子高见而叹曰： 此射雕手也。 
现代文：丞相属邢子高感叹着说： 真正的射雕手。 
English: The chancellor, who is a member of the Jiazi High School, sighed and said: A true javelin thrower.

古文：当时传号落雕都督。
现代文：当时人们都称他为落雕都督。
English: At that time, people called him the sculpted governor.

古文：寻兼左卫将军，进爵为伯。
现代文：不久兼左卫将军，晋爵为伯。
English: He was soon promoted to General of the Left Guards and given the title of Count.

古文：齐受禅，加开府仪同三司，别封西安县子。
现代文：齐立国，加光开府仪同三司，另封西安县子。
English: After the founding of the State of Qi, Jia Guang Kaifu and the three departments were established, and Xi'an County was established.

古文：天保三年，从征出塞，光先驱破敌，多斩首虏，并获杂畜。
现代文：天保三年，随从大军出塞，光为先锋，打垮了敌人，掳获甚多，并且夺得了一些其他的牲畜。
English: In the third year of Tian Bao's reign, he followed the great army out of the fortress, and was only the vanguard, defeated the enemy, captured a lot, and captured some other livestock.

古文：还，除晋州刺史。
现代文：还京，除晋州刺史。
English: Return to Beijing, except for the history of Jinzhou.

古文：东有周天柱、新安、牛头三戍，招引亡叛，屡为寇窃。
现代文：同齐东部接壤的周的天柱、新安、牛头三戍之头目，经常召引亡叛，多次寇掠齐境。
English: The leaders of Zhou's Tianzhu, Xin'an, and Niutou's three armies, which bordered the eastern part of Tongji, often called for the death of rebels and repeatedly raided the territory of Tongji.

古文：七年，光率步骑五千袭破之，又大破周仪同王敬俊等，获口五百余人，杂畜千余头而还。
现代文：七年，光率五千步骑偷袭了他们。又大败周朝的仪同王敬俊等，虏获五百多人、杂畜千余头后返归。
English: In the seventh year, the horse with a speed of five thousand paces secretly attacked them. It also defeated the Shou Dynasty's King Jingjun and others, captured more than five hundred people and more than a thousand head of livestock, and then returned.

古文：九年，又率众取周绛川、白马、浍交、翼城等四戍。
现代文：九年，又领兵夺取了周的绛川、白马、浍交、翼城等四戍。
English: In the ninth year, he also led the troops to seize the four fortresses of Zhou, such as Shichuan, Baima, Shijiao, and Yingcheng.

古文：除朔州刺史。
现代文：任朔州刺史。
English: Ren Shuozhou stabbed history.

古文：十年，除特进、开府仪同三司。
现代文：十年，拜特进、开府仪同三司。
English: Ten years later, Baitejin and Kaifu Yi were promoted to the same three divisions.

古文：二月，率骑一万讨周开府曹回公，斩之。
现代文：二月，统领万骑攻打周的开府曹回公，并杀死了他。
English: In February, Cao Huigong, the leader of the Manchurian cavalry, attacked and killed Zhou's governor Cao Huigong.

古文：柏谷城主仪同薛禹生弃城奔遁，遂取文侯镇，立戍置栅而还。
现代文：柏谷城主帅、仪同薛禹生弃城逃跑，于是光就占领了文侯镇，立戍置栅后回京。
English: The commander of Kashiwa-dani Castle, Ito abandoned the city and ran away with Xue Yusheng, so Guangxu occupied Wenhou Town, erected a palisade and returned to Beijing.

古文：乾明元年，除并州刺史。
现代文：乾明元年，为并州刺史。
English: In the first year of the Qianming Dynasty, it was merged into the state.

古文：皇建元年，进爵巨鹿郡公。
现代文：皇建元年，晋爵巨鹿郡公。
English: In the first year of the Emperor's reign, he was raised to the peerage as Lord of Koga County.

古文：时乐陵王百年为皇太子，肃宗以光世载醇谨，兼著勋王室，纳其长女为太子妃。
现代文：这时，乐陵王百年为皇太子，肃宗认为光家世代淳厚清谨，加之为皇室立有功勋，便纳其长女为太子妃。
English: At this time, Le Ling Wang had been crown prince for a hundred years. Su Zong believed that the generation of the Guang family was pure and virtuous, adding that the royal family had made great achievements, and his eldest daughter was crown princess.

古文：大宁元年，除尚书右仆射，食中山郡干。
现代文：太宁元年，官尚书右仆射，食中山郡干。
English: In the first year of Taining, the official Shang Shuxu shot his right-hand man, and the food was dried in Zhongshan County.

古文：二年，除太子太保。
现代文：二年，除太子太保。
English: Two years later, he was removed from the position of crown prince.

古文：河清二年四月，光率步骑二万筑勋掌城于轵关西，仍筑长城二百里，置十三戍。
现代文：河清二年四月，光率二万步骑在轵关西部筑建勋掌城，又修造了二百多里的长城，设置了十三个戍。
English: In April of the second year of Heqing, he rode a horse with a speed of 20,000 steps to the west of Shaoguan to build the city of Xunzhang. He also built more than 200 miles of the Great Wall and set up 13 towers.

古文：三年正月，周遣将达奚成兴等来寇平阳，诏光率步骑三万御之，兴等闻而退走。
现代文：三年正月，周调将军达奚成兴等来寇掠平阳，帝令光率三万步骑抵御，兴等闻风而退走。
English: In the first month of the third year, the general of the Zhou Dynasty, Dagu Chengxing, and others came to plunder Pingyang. The emperor ordered him to ride at a speed of thirty thousand paces to resist, and Xing and others retreated when the wind blew.

古文：光逐北，遂入其境，获二千余口而还。
现代文：光乘机追赶，进入了周境，俘获二千余人才回来。
English: They just took the opportunity to catch up, entered the surrounding area, captured more than two thousand talents and returned.

古文：其年三月，迁司徒。
现代文：其年三月，迁司徒。
English: In March of the same year, the relocation of Stuto began.

古文：四月，率骑北讨突厥，获马千余匹。
现代文：四月，率骑北讨突厥，获良马千余匹。
English: In April, he led the Northern Crusade against the Turks and won more than a thousand good horses.

古文：是年冬，周武帝遣其柱国大司马尉迟迥、齐国公宇文宪，柱国庸国公可叱雄等，众称十万，寇洛阳。
现代文：是年冬，周武帝派遣柱国、大司马尉迟迥、齐国公宇文宪、柱国庸国公可叱雄等，拥众十万，寇掠洛阳。
English: In the winter of the same year, Emperor Zhou Wudi dispatched Zhuangguo, Daishi Ma Rong Chi, Qi Guo Gong U Wen Xian, Zhuangguo Yong Guo Gong Ke Zhe Xiong and so on, with a total of 100,000 people, to raid Luoyang.

古文：光率骑五万驰往赴击，战于邙山，迥等大败。
现代文：光率五万余骑急行军赶赴洛阳，两军在邙山大战，迥等大败。
English: More than 50,000 light cavalry troops rushed to Luoyang, and the two armies were defeated in the Battle of Lushan Mountain.

古文：光亲射雄，杀之，斩捕首虏三千余级，迥、宪仅而获免，尽收其甲兵辎重，仍以死者积为京观。
现代文：光发箭射死了可叱雄，获首级三千多级，迥、宪幸免一死，还缴获了所有的甲兵辎重，并将死尸堆成京观。
English: Guangfa arrow shot dead Kechuang, won more than three thousand first-class ranks, Zou and Xian survived one death, and also captured all the armored soldiers, and piled up the dead bodies into Jingan.

古文：世祖幸洛阳，策勋班赏，迁太尉，又封冠军县公。
现代文：世祖亲临洛阳，策勋颁赏，迁光为太尉，又封冠军县公。
English: The ancestor personally visited Luoyang, awarded the Medal of Merit, transferred to the rank of lieutenant, and was awarded the title of champion of the county.

古文：先是世祖命纳光第二女为太子妃，天统元年，拜为皇后。
现代文：早几年世祖命纳光第二女为太子妃，天统元年，拜为皇后。
English: A few years earlier, the second daughter of the second daughter of the second daughter of the second daughter of the second daughter of the second daughter of the second daughter of the first daughter of the second daughter of the second daughter of the second daughter of the second daughter of the second daughter of the second daughter of the second daughter of the first daughter of the second daughter of the second daughter of the second daughter of the first daughter of the second daughter of the second daughter of the second daughter of the second daughter of the second daughter of the second daughter of the second daughter of the second daughter of the first daughter of the second daughter of the second daughter of the second daughter of the second daughter of the second daughter of the second daughter of the second daughter

古文：其年，光转大将军。
现代文：其年，光转为大将军。
English: In the same year, he was promoted to general.

古文：三年六月，父丧去官，其月，诏起光及其弟羡并复前任。
现代文：三年六月，因父去世，光辞官归家。其月，诏令光及弟羡起复，仍为前任。
English: In June of the third year, due to the death of his father, Hikari resigned and returned home. In the same month, he and his younger brother were reinstated, still as predecessors.

古文：秋，除太保，袭爵咸阳王，并袭第一领民酋长，别封武德郡公，徙食赵州干，迁太傅。
现代文：秋，除太保，袭爵咸阳王，并袭第一领民酋长，另封武德郡公，移食赵州干，迁太傅。
English: In the autumn, in addition to Taibao, he inherited the title of Xianyang King, and also inherited the title of the first territorial people's chief, in addition, he was awarded the title of Wude County, moved to Zhaozhou, and moved to Taifu.

古文：十二月，周遣将围洛阳，壅绝粮道。
现代文：十二月，周又派将领围攻洛阳，截断粮道。
English: In December, Zhou sent generals to besiege Luoyang and cut off the grain route.

古文：武平元年正月，诏光率步骑三万讨之。
现代文：武平元年正月，帝诏令光率领三万步骑攻讨。
English: In the first month of the first year of the Wu-Ping Dynasty, the emperor ordered the light to lead the 30,000-step cavalry attack.

古文：军次定陇，周将张掖公宇文桀、中州刺史梁士彦、开府司水大夫梁景兴等又屯鹿卢交道，光擐甲执锐，身先士卒，锋刃才交，桀众大溃，斩首二千余级。
现代文：军队驻扎定陇，周将张掖公宇文桀、中州刺史梁士彦、开府司水大夫梁景兴等又屯驻鹿卢交大道，光披甲执锐，身先士卒，锋刃才交，桀众大溃，斩首两千多级。
English: The army was stationed in Dingtao. Zhou general Zhang Yigong, Zhongzhou governor Liang Shihyan, and the governor of Kaifu, Liang Jingxing, were also stationed in Lulu Jiaotong Avenue. They were dressed in armor, were the first to cross the border, and were the first to cross the border. They defeated the crowd and beheaded more than two thousand people.

古文：直到宜阳，与周齐国公宇文宪、申国公扌翕跋显敬相对十旬。
现代文：光又进军宜阳，与周齐国公宇文宪、申国公扌翕跋显敬对峙百日。
English: Guang also marched into Yiyang, and confronted Zhou Qi Guo Gong Yu Wen Xian and Shen Guo Guo Gong Ba Xian Jing for 100 days.

古文：光置筑统关、丰化二城，以通宜阳之路。
现代文：光置筑统关、丰化二城，用来打通前往宜阳的道路。
English: The two cities of Chikuodongguan and Fenghua were set aside to open the road to Yiyang.

古文：军还，行次安邺，宪等众号五万，仍蹑军后，光从骑击之，宪众大溃，虏其开府宇文英、都督越勤世良、韩延等，又斩首三百余级。
现代文：军还，驻扎安邺，宪等五万兵卒，紧跟在后。光指挥骑兵回头猛击，宪众大败，俘虏了开府宇文英、都督越勤世良、韩延等人，又斩首三百多级。
English: The army also stationed 50,000 soldiers such as Anhui and Xian, and followed closely behind. The light command cavalry struck back hard, and the Xian people were defeated. They captured Kaifu Uwen Ying, Governor Yue Qin Shiliang, Han Yan and others, and beheaded more than 300 people.

古文：宪仍令桀及其大将军中部公梁洛都与景兴、士彦等步骑三万于鹿卢交塞断要路。
现代文：宪依然下令桀及其大将军中部公梁洛都与景兴、士彦等三万步骑在鹿卢交堵塞要道。
English: Xian still ordered Yan and his general Zhongguo Gongliang Lodu to ride with Jingxing, Shihang and others for 30,000 paces at Lulu Junction to block the important road.

古文：光与韩贵孙、呼延族、王显等合击，大破之，斩景兴，获马千匹。
现代文：光与韩贵孙、呼延族、王显等人合兵猛击，大获全胜，杀死景兴，得马千匹。
English: Guang fought with Han Guisun, Huyan people, Wang Xian and others, and won a complete victory, killing Jingxing and gaining a thousand horses.

古文：诏加右丞相、并州刺史。
现代文：诏令加光右丞相、并州刺史。
English: The Imperial Court appointed him to the post of the Minister of the Right, and he was also appointed to the post of prefectural governor.

古文：其冬，光又率步骑五万于玉壁筑华谷、龙门二城，与宪、显敬等相持，宪等不敢动。
现代文：其年冬，光又率五万步骑在玉壁筑造华谷、龙门二城，与宪、显敬等相对抗，宪等不敢轻举妄动。
English: In the winter of the same year, he rode fifty thousand paces on the Jade Wall to build the two cities of Huaya and Longmen, and opposed Xian and Xian Jian. Xian did not dare to act rashly.

古文：光乃进围定阳，仍筑南汾城。置州以逼之，夷夏万余户并来内附。
现代文：光趁机围攻定阳，又筑南汾城，置州设郡用来逼迫周，夷夏万余户纷纷前来归附。
English: Guang Guang took advantage of the opportunity to besiege Dingyang, and built the southern city of Jicheng, and set up a county in Jizhou to persecute Zhou, and more than a million households in Yixia came to annex.

古文：二年，率众筑平陇、卫壁、统戎等镇戍十有三所。
现代文：二年，光又率众筑平陇、卫壁、统戎等镇戍十三所。
English: In the second year, Guang again led the crowd to build thirteen townships such as Pingyao, Weiqiao, and Unirong.

古文：周柱国枹罕公普屯威、柱国韦孝宽等步骑万余，来逼平陇，与光战于汾水之北，光大破之，俘斩千计。
现代文：周柱国木包罕公普屯威、柱国韦孝宽等领步骑万余，进逼平陇，同光在汾水之北交战，光获胜，俘、斩千余人。
English: Pu Tunwei, the governor of Mubo Han in Zhou Zhuang Province, and Wei Xiaokuan, the governor of Zhuang Province, led more than 10,000 cavalrymen and advanced to Pingyao, and fought with the light in the north of Surabaya. The light won and captured and killed more than a thousand people.

古文：又封中山郡公，增邑一千户。
现代文：又封光中山郡公，增邑一千户。
English: Zhongshan County was also sealed off, increasing the number of villages by one thousand.

古文：军还，诏复令率步骑五万出平阳道，攻姚襄、白亭城戍，皆克之，获其城主仪同、大都督等九人，捕虏数千人。
现代文：军还，帝诏令光率五万步骑沿平阳道进攻姚襄、白亭等城戍，都攻下了，俘虏城主、仪同、大都督等九人及数千士卒。
English: The army also attacked Yao Xiang, Baiting and other city gates along Pingyang Road at a speed of 50,000 paces, as ordered by the emperor, and captured nine people and thousands of soldiers, including the castle lord, the eunuch, and the grand governor.

古文：又别封长乐郡公。
现代文：又别封长乐郡公。
English: And don't forget Chungle County.

古文：是月，周遣其柱国纥干广略围宜阳。
现代文：是月，周派其柱国纥干广略围宜阳。
English: In the same month, Zhou sent his pillar Guo Gan Guang to slightly encircle Yiyang.

古文：光率步骑五万赴之，大战于城下，乃取周建安等四戍，捕虏千余人而还。
现代文：光率五万步骑赶往援救，两军在城下大战，又夺了周建安等四戍，捕获千余人才回。
English: Riding at a speed of fifty thousand steps, they rushed to the rescue. The two armies fought a great battle under the city. They also captured Zhou Jian'an and other four ridges, and captured more than a thousand talents.

古文：军未至邺，敕令便放兵散。
现代文：军还没有抵达邺城，敕令放散兵众，令归其家。
English: The army had not yet arrived in Handan, so the emperor ordered the soldiers to disperse and return to their homes.

古文：光以为军人多有勋功，未得慰劳，若即便散，恩泽不施，乃密通表请使宣旨，军仍且进。
现代文：光认为兵士多立有军功，没有得到慰劳奖赏，如果放散，不施恩泽，就不能赢得民心，于是秘密上表请求派人宣旨。
English: He thought that many soldiers had military merits and did not receive consolation rewards, and if they were dispersed and did not show favor, they could not win the hearts of the people, so he secretly asked the table to send someone to announce the order.

古文：朝廷发使迟留，军还，将至紫陌，光仍驻营待使。
现代文：军卒仍然前进，朝廷迟迟不发使，军队行至紫陌，光只好命令驻营等待。
English: The soldiers were still advancing, the imperial court was slow to send an envoy, the army marched to Shimo, and the emperor had no choice but to order the camp to wait.

古文：帝闻光军营已逼，心甚恶之，急令舍人追光入见，然后宣劳散兵。
现代文：帝听到说光军营已逼近都城的通报，很不高兴，急派舍人请光入见，然后慰劳奖赏兵众，令其放散。
English: Afterward, Gao Wei, the lord, heard that the military camp of Bao Riguang was approaching the capital, and he was very disgusted. He hurriedly sent a scholar to call Bao Riguang into the palace, and then encouraged him to work hard and disband the army.

古文：拜光左丞相，又别封清河郡公。
现代文：拜光左丞相，又别封清河郡公。
English: Baiguang Zuozhong minister, and do not be assigned to Qinghe County.

古文：光入，常在朝堂垂帘而坐。
现代文：光入，常在朝堂垂帘而坐。
English: The sun shines in, and he often sits in the morning hall with the curtains drawn.

古文：祖珽不知，乘马过其前。
现代文：祖王廷不知晓，骑马从其朝堂门口走过。
English: Unbeknownst to King Ting, he rode past the door of his palace.

古文：光怒，谓人曰： 此人乃敢尔！ 
现代文：光见后大怒，对人说： 这人好大胆子！ 
English: He was enraged and said to the others, "How dare this man do this!

古文：后珽在内省，言声高慢，光适过，闻之，又怒。
现代文：后来王廷在内省，高声大气地讲话，光正好路过，听到后，又十分恼怒。
English: Later, when Zu was studying under the gate, he spoke in a high-pitched and slow tone. Just at that time, a flash of light passed by, and he was furious when he heard the tone of Zu's speech.

古文：珽知光忿，而赂光从奴而问之曰： 相王瞋孝征耶？ 
现代文：王廷知光忿恨，向光的随从奴仆行贿，还打听说： 相王很恼怒我孝征吧？ 
English: Wang Ting was angry with Guang Guang, and bribed Guang Guang's attendant slaves. He also asked: "Is it true that King Si is very angry with me for my filial duty?

古文：曰： 自公用事，相王每夜抱膝叹曰： 盲人入，国必破矣！  
现代文：答： 自从公主事后，相王每夜抱膝长叹说， 盲人入朝，国家一定破灭 ！ 
English: A: Since the princess's death, King Soong has been holding his knees every night and sighing, "If a blind man ascends to the throne, the country will surely be destroyed!"

古文：穆提婆求娶光庶女，不许。
现代文：穆提婆请求娶光庶女为妻，光不同意。
English: Muti's request to marry the daughter of the concubine of Yao Ruiguang as a wife was not allowed.

古文：帝赐提婆晋阳之田，光言于朝曰： 此田神武帝以来常种禾，饲马数千匹，以拟寇难，今赐提婆，无乃阙军务也？ 
现代文：帝将晋阳田地赏给提婆，光在朝上大声讲： 晋阳的田地，神武帝以来常种禾，饲马几千匹，以平寇难，如今赏赐给提婆，这不是破坏军务吗？ 
English: The emperor awarded the fields of Jinyang to Deva, and the light in the morning said loudly: The fields of Jinyang, since the time of Emperor Jimmu, have often grown grain, fed thousands of horses, and have been awarded to Deva. Isn't this a violation of military affairs?

古文：由是祖、穆积怨。
现代文：因此光与祖、穆二人有了怨仇。
English: From then on, the ancestors Wangting and Muti were deeply resentful of him.

古文：周将军韦孝宽忌光英勇，乃作谣言，令间谍漏其文于邺，曰 百升飞上天，明月照长安 ，又曰 高山不推自崩，槲树不扶自竖 。
现代文：周朝将军韦孝宽忌妒斛律光的英武勇敢，就制作歌谣，令间谍在邺城散布，称： 百升飞上天，明月照长安。 又说： 高山不推自崩，槲树不扶自竖。 
English: General Wei Xiaokang of the Zhou Dynasty, envious of the bravery of the Yingwu warriors, made a song and ordered spies to spread it in Lucheng, saying: "The hundred rises to the sky, the bright moon shines on Chang'an." He also said: "Mountains do not push themselves to collapse, eucalyptus trees do not help themselves to stand up."

古文：祖珽因续之曰： 盲眼老公背上下大斧，饶舌老母不得语。 
现代文：祖王廷又乘机加了几句： 盲眼老公背上下大斧，饶舌老母不得语。 
English: Zu Wangting also took the opportunity to add a few sentences: The blind husband has a big axe on his back, and the talkative mother is speechless.

古文：令小儿歌之于路。
现代文：并让小儿在路上歌唱。
English: And let the children sing on the road.

古文：提婆闻之，以告其母令萱。
现代文：提婆听唱后，向他的母亲令萱作了报告。
English: After hearing the song, Deva reported to his mother Rama.

古文：萱以饶舌斥己也，盲老公谓珽也，遂相与协谋，以谣言启帝曰： 斛律累世大将，明月声震关西，丰乐威行突厥，女为皇后，男尚公主，谣言甚可畏也。 
现代文：萱认为 饶舌 是指斥的自己； 盲老公 说的是祖王廷。因而相与密谋，将歌谣向帝启报，说： 斛律累世为朝廷大将，明月威震关西，丰乐威行突厥，女为皇后，男娶公主，谣言十分可怕。 
English: Yao thought that "rapping" referred to himself; his blind husband said it referred to the ancestral royal court. Therefore, they conspired to report the song to the emperor, saying: Yao Lu has been the general of the imperial court for many generations, the bright moon dominates Kansai, Feng Le dominates Turkey, the woman is the queen, the man marries the princess, the rumor is very terrible.

古文：帝以问韩长鸾，鸾以为不可，事寝。
现代文：帝就此事询问韩长鸾，长鸾认为不必大惊小怪，事情也就作罢了。
English: The emperor asked Han Changtao about the matter. Changtao thought there was no need to make a fuss, and the matter was dropped.

古文：祖珽又见帝请间，唯何洪珍在侧。
现代文：祖王廷又在帝前挑拨，当时帝旁只有何洪珍在。
English: Zu Wangting also provoked in front of the emperor. At that time, only He Hongzhen was next to the emperor.

古文：帝曰： 前得公启，即欲施行，长鸾以为无此理。 
现代文：帝道： 前得你的报告，本打算施行的，却给长鸾制止了。 
English: Di Dao: I received your report, and I intended to carry it out, but I was stopped by Nagatoro.

古文：珽未对，洪珍进曰： 若本无意则可，既有此意而不决行，万一泄露如何？ 
现代文：王廷没有回答，洪珍进言说： 如若无此意，还行；既然有此意，就应该施行，万一泄露出去，那就把事情闹大了。 
English: Wang Ting did not answer, but Hong Zhen said, "If there is no such intention, it is okay; since there is such an intention, it should be implemented. If it leaks out, it will make things worse."

古文：帝曰： 洪珍言是也。 
现代文：帝说： 洪珍的话讲得有理。 
English: The latter said: He Hongzhen's words are right.

古文：犹豫未决。
现代文：但还是犹豫未决。
English: But they are still undecided.

古文：会丞相府佐封士让密启云： 光前西讨还，敕令放兵散，光令军逼帝京，将行不轨，事不果而止。
现代文：适逢丞相府佐封士让进密奏，奏称： 前时光西征回京，陛下敕令放散兵卒，光却令军卒进逼京师，欲行不轨，事情没有成功就停止了。
English: It was just the right time for Zafong Shi Jianjin to play a secret music, saying: In the past, when the Western Expedition returned to Beijing, His Majesty issued an order to release the soldiers, but he only ordered the soldiers to enter the Beijing Division, which was not a good idea, and the matter was stopped without success.

古文：家藏弩甲，奴僮千数，每遣使丰乐、武都处，阴谋往来。
现代文：再说，光家藏有弩甲，拥有奴僮千多，常派人前往丰乐、武都等人家里，相互勾结。
English: Moreover, the Guang family has a collection of armor, owns more than a thousand slaves, and often sends people to the homes of Fengle, Wudu and others to collude with each other.

古文：若不早图，恐事不可测。 
现代文：如不早点加以制止，任其发展，那就危险了。 
English: If the imperial court does not take action a day earlier, the consequences of the matter are probably unpredictable.

古文：启云 军逼帝京 ，会帝前所疑意，谓何洪珍云： 人心亦大圣，我前疑其欲反，果然。 
现代文：恰好启奏上有 军卒进逼京师 之语，与帝前些时日的怀疑相合，帝便对何洪珍说： 人的想法有时很正确，我以前怀疑他有反叛之心，现在看来的确如此。 
English: Just as the opening music had the words "military pawns march into Beijing to force the division," which coincided with the emperor's earlier suspicions, the emperor said to He Hongzhen: People's thoughts are sometimes very correct. I used to suspect that he had a rebellious heart, but now it seems that this is indeed the case.

古文：帝性至怯懦，恐即变发，令洪珍驰召祖珽告之。
现代文：帝性格十分怯懦，担心事情会突然暴发，命令洪珍快马召祖王廷进宫。
English: The emperor was very timid, fearing that things would suddenly break out, and ordered Hong Zhen to quickly summon the ancestral king into the palace.

古文：又恐追光不从命。
现代文：又害怕光不从命。
English: He was afraid of the light and didn't want to die.

古文：珽因云： 正尔召之，恐疑不肯入。
现代文：王廷趁机进言： 正要召他，又怕他起疑心不肯来。
English: The king took the opportunity to say: I was about to call him, but I was afraid that he would be suspicious and not want to come.

古文：宜遣使赐其一骏马，语云 明日将往东山游观，王可乘此马同行 ，光必来奉谢，因引入执之。 
现代文：应该派人赐给他一匹骏马，告诉他说 明天准备前往东山游观，王可乘这匹马一同前往 ，因此，光一定要入宫致谢，这时就乘机把他抓起来。 
English: They should send someone to give him a good horse and tell him that tomorrow they are going to go sightseeing in Dongshan, and the king can go with them on this horse. Therefore, Guang must enter the palace to express his thanks, and then they should seize the opportunity to arrest him.

古文：帝如其言。
现代文：帝遵其言。
English: The postmaster did as he was told.

古文：顷之，光至，引入凉风堂，刘桃枝自后拉而杀之，时年五十八。
现代文：不一会儿，光来了，有人把他引进凉风堂，刘桃枝从后边扭住，很快砍下了他的头。这年光五十八岁。
English: Not long after, the light came, someone brought him to Liangfeng Hall, Liu Taozhi twisted him from behind, and soon cut off his head. He was 58 years old.

古文：于是下诏称光谋反，今已伏法，其余家口并不须问。
现代文：光被诛，帝下诏说他谋反，现已伏法，其余家口不受株连。
English: After he was arrested, the emperor announced that he had plotted a rebellion and was now under house arrest. The rest of his family was not subject to house arrest.

古文：寻而发诏，尽灭其族。
现代文：很快又发诏书，将光族满门抄斩。
English: Soon, he issued an imperial edict to behead all members of the Guang family.

古文：光性少言刚急，严于御下，治兵督众，唯仗威刑。
现代文：光言语寡少，性格刚正急躁，御下严格，治兵督众，只是依仗威刑。
English: His words are few and far between, his character is upright and impetuous, his rule is strict, and he only relies on coercion and punishment to govern his soldiers and supervise his people.

古文：版筑之役，鞭挞人士，颇称其暴。
现代文：在筑城置戍的劳作中，他常常鞭挞役夫，极其残暴。
English: During the labor of building the castle, he often whipped his servants, which was extremely cruel.

古文：自结发从戎，未尝失律，深为邻敌所慑惮。
现代文：自从少年从军后，不曾违背规章，而使邻敌闻风丧胆。
English: Since the boy joined the army, he has never violated the rules and regulations, but has made his neighbors and enemies lose heart.

古文：罪既不彰，一旦屠灭，朝野痛惜之。
现代文：光没犯什么罪，却被朝廷处死，所以时人极其惋惜。
English: Light did not commit any crime, but was executed by the imperial court, so people at the time were extremely sorry.

古文：周武帝闻光死，大喜，赦其境内。
现代文：周武帝得光死的报告，十分欢喜，竟下令赦免其境内的罪犯。
English: Emperor Zhou Wu was so pleased with the report of his death that he issued an order to pardon the criminals in his territory.

古文：后入邺，追赠上柱国、崇国公。
现代文：后帝逃往邺城，追赠光为上柱国、崇国公。
English: After the emperor fled to Shicheng, he was posthumously awarded the titles of Shangzhu and Chongguo.

古文：指诏书曰： 此人若在，朕岂能至邺！ 
现代文：帝指着诏书说： 如果光还活着的话，我哪能跑到邺城来？ 
English: The emperor pointed to the edict and said, "If the light is still alive, how can I come to Lucheng?"

古文：光有四子。
现代文：光有四个儿子。
English: They have four sons.

古文：长子武都，历位特进、太子太保、开府仪同三司、梁兖二州刺史。
现代文：长子武都，历职特进、太子太保、开府仪同三司、梁兖二州刺史。
English: The eldest son, Wu Du, was promoted to the rank of special promotion, the crown prince, Taibo, Kaifu Yi Tong San Shi, and Liang Xuan Er Zhou Jishi.

古文：所在并无政绩，唯事聚敛，侵渔百姓。
现代文：所有任职并无政绩，惟有拼命聚敛，侵渔百姓。
English: All of them have no political achievements, but only desperately gather and encroach on the people.

古文：光死，遣使于州斩之。
现代文：光死后朝廷派人赴州处死了武都。
English: Upon hearing of his death, Emperor Wu of Zhou was overjoyed and granted amnesty to all criminals throughout the country.

古文：次须达，中护军、开府仪同三司，先光卒。
现代文：次子须达，官中护军、开府仪同三司，比光早死。
English: The second son, Suda, who was in charge of guarding the troops and the ceremony, died earlier than Guang.

古文：次世雄，开府仪同三司。
现代文：次子世雄，开府仪同三司。
English: His second son, Seung, became the third chief of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：次恒伽，假仪同三司。
现代文：次子恒伽，假仪同三司。
English: The second son, Heng Jia, was the first to perform the sham ceremony.

古文：并赐死。
现代文：世雄、恒伽被朝廷赐死。
English: Sekio and Tsenga were sentenced to death by the imperial court.

古文：光小子钟，年数岁，获免。周朝袭封崇国公。
现代文：光最小的儿子钟，因年幼，未受屠戮，北周时袭封崇国公。
English: Guang Guang's youngest son, Zhong, because of his young age, did not suffer the slaughter, and was captured by the Northern Zhou Dynasty.

古文：隋开皇中卒于骠骑将军。
现代文：隋开皇中卒于骠骑将军位上。
English: Sui Emperor died in the cavalry rank.

古文：羡，字丰乐，少有机警，尤善射艺，高祖见而称之。
现代文：斛律羡，字丰乐。少时机警，尤善射箭，而被高祖夸赞。
English: Envy of rules, joy of words. Less cautious, better at archery, praised by Gao Zu.

古文：世宗擢为开府参军事。
现代文：世宗擢其为开府参军事。
English: The Sejong promoted him to the post of military governor.

古文：迁征虏将军、中散大夫，加安西将军，进封大夏县子，除通州刺史。
现代文：迁征虏将军、中散大夫，加安西将军，晋封大夏县子，拜通州刺史。
English: The general who was exiled, the doctor of Zhongshan, the general of Jianxi, the son of Daxia County who was promoted, and the history of Baitong County.

古文：显祖受礼，进号征西，别封显亲县伯。
现代文：显祖受魏禅，进号征西将军，另封显亲县伯。
English: Xianzu was awarded the title of General of the Western Expedition, and was also given the title of Count of Xian.

古文：河清三年，转使持节，都督幽、安、平、南、北营、东燕六州诸军事，幽州刺史。
现代文：河清三年，转使持节，都督幽、安、平、南、北营、东燕六州诸军事，幽州刺史。
English: In the third year of Heqing, he was transferred to hold the festival, and the six prefectures of Yu, An, Ping, Nan, Beiying and Dongyan were transferred to the military, and the history of Yuzhou was written.

古文：其年秋，突厥众十余万来寇州境，羡总率诸将御之。
现代文：其年秋，突厥十余万众寇掠州境，羡统领诸将抗御。
English: In the autumn of the same year, more than a hundred thousand Turks invaded the state border, leading the generals to resist.

古文：突厥望见军威甚整，遂不敢战，即遣使求款。
现代文：突厥部众见齐军军容整肃，而不敢交战，马上派来使者请求款服。
English: The Turkic Department saw that the Qi army was tidy and did not dare to fight, and immediately sent an envoy to request money and clothing.

古文：虑其有诈，且喻之曰： 尔辈此行，本非朝贡，见机始变，未是宿心。
现代文：羡等估计有诈，告谕突厥说： 你们这帮人此次行动，不是来朝贡的，而是准备见机起事。
English: Envious of their deceit, he announced to the Turks: "You people are not here to pay tribute, but are preparing to take advantage of the situation.

古文：若有实诚，宜速归巢穴，别遣使来。 
现代文：如果是真心实意，就应该迅速回到你们的巢穴中去，再派遣使者前来。 
English: If you are sincere, you should quickly return to your nests and send messengers.

古文：于是退走。
现代文：于是突厥退走。
English: So the Turks retreated.

古文：天统元年夏五月，突厥木汗遣使请朝献，羡始以闻，自是朝贡岁时不绝，羡有力焉。
现代文：天统元年夏五月，突厥木汗遣使请求朝贡，羡将此情况向朝廷作了报告，从此开始，突厥朝贡岁时不绝。两方和好，羡起了很大作用。
English: In the summer and May of the first year of Tian Tong, the Turkic Khan sent an envoy to request tribute, and Eni reported this situation to the imperial court. From then on, there was no end to the Turkic tribute. The two sides reconciled, and Eni played a great role.

古文：诏加行台仆射。
现代文：诏令加其为行台仆射。
English: The Imperial Court issued an edict to add him to the ranks of Gaotai minions.

古文：羡以北虏屡犯边，须备不虞，自库堆戍东拒于海，随山屈曲二千余里，其间二百里中凡有险要，或斩山筑城，或断谷起障，并置立戍逻五十余所。
现代文：羡认为北虏多次侵扰边地，为防不测，就从库堆戍直至东海边，依山势的屈曲计算，共计两千多里的线上布防，其中两百里中的险要之处，或劈山筑城，或断谷修造屏障，并置立戍逻五十余所。
English: Envying that the Northern Hordes had repeatedly invaded the borderlands, in order to prevent accidents, they built a total of more than two thousand miles of line defense from the reservoir to the East Sea, calculated according to the curvature of the mountains. Among the two hundred miles, in the critical places, they either built a city on the mountain, or built a barrier in the valley, and erected more than fifty fortifications.

古文：又导高梁水北合易京，东会于潞，因以灌田。边储岁积，转漕用省，公私获利焉。
现代文：又导引高梁水往北与易京汇合，往东，与潞联结，或灌田，或转运边地储集的粮草物资，于公于私都有好处。
English: In addition, guiding the Gaoliang water to the north to merge with Yijing, and to the east to connect with Yunnan, or to irrigate fields, or to transfer grain and grass materials stored at the edge, is beneficial to both public and private.

古文：其年六月，丁父忧去官，与兄光并被起复任，还镇燕蓟。
现代文：三年六月，因父去世而辞官，不久，与兄光同被起复，依然镇守燕蓟。
English: In June of the third year, due to the death of his father, he resigned from his post. Soon after, he was reinstated together with his brother Guang Tong. He still guards Yan Xuan.

古文：三年，加位特进。
现代文：三年，加位特进。
English: Three years, and a special promotion.

古文：四年，迁行台尚书令，别封高城县侯。
现代文：四年，迁行台尚书令，另封高城县侯。
English: In four years, he was moved to Taishang Shuling and given the title of Gaocheng county magistrate.

古文：武平元年，加骠骑大将军。
现代文：武平元年，加骠骑大将军。
English: In the first year of the Wu-Ping Dynasty, he was promoted to General of Cavalry.

古文：时光子武都为兖州刺史。
现代文：此时，光子武都为兖州刺史。
English: At this time, Photon Martial Arts became the history of Zhangzhou.

古文：羡历事数帝，以谨直见推，虽极荣宠，不自矜尚，至是以合门贵盛，深以为忧。
现代文：羡侍奉数帝，因谨慎坦直而被世人推许，虽然极其荣宠，但从不自矜自夸，到了这个时候，由于合门贵盛，羡十分担忧。
English: Eni served several emperors, and was praised by the world for his prudence and straightforwardness. Although he was extremely honored and favored, he never boasted. At this time, Eni was very worried because of the prosperity of his family.

古文：乃上书推让，乞解所职，优诏不许。
现代文：所以就上书推辞，还请求解除自己所有的官爵，帝特意下诏不准许。
English: Therefore, he wrote a letter of resignation and also requested that he be stripped of all his titles, which the emperor specifically did not allow.

古文：其年秋，进爵荆山郡王。
现代文：其年秋，晋爵荆山郡王。
English: In the autumn of that year, he was promoted to the title of Jingshan County King.

古文：三年七月，光诛，敕使中领军贺拔伏恩等十余人驿捕之。遣领军大将军鲜于桃枝、洛州行台仆射独孤永业便发定州骑卒续进，仍以永业代羡。
现代文：三年七月，光被诛杀，帝敕使中领军贺拔伏恩等十余人乘驿马赶赴幽州逮捕羡，又调领军大将军鲜于桃枝、洛州行台仆射独孤永业带领定州骑卒随后赶来，拟命永业接替羡之刺史职位。
English: In July of the third year, when Guang was killed, the emperor sent more than ten people, including the middle leader of the army, He Ba Fuen, to rush to Yuzhou on horseback to arrest Eni. He also sent the general of the army, Sheng Yu Taoji, and the general of the army, Luo Zhou Xingtai, to lead the cavalry of Dingzhou, and Yongye was appointed to succeed Eni.

古文：伏恩等既至，门者白使人衷甲马汗，宜闭城门。
现代文：贺拔伏恩等抵达城郊，把守城门的人慌忙向羡报告，还建议紧闭城门。
English: When He Ba Fuen and others arrived at the outskirts of the city, they hurriedly reported to the people guarding the city gate, and also suggested closing the city gate.

古文：羡曰： 敕使岂可疑拒？ 
现代文：羡说： 朝廷派来的使者岂可不让进城？ 
English: Envy said: Shouldn't an envoy sent by the court be allowed to enter the city?

古文：出见之，伏恩把手，遂执之，死于长史厅事。
现代文：出门相见，伏恩拉着他的手，将他绑了起来，旋即处死于长史厅。
English: When they saw each other outside, Fawn took him by the hand, tied him up, and died in the Long History Room.

古文：临终叹曰： 富贵如此，女为皇后，公主满家，常使三百兵，何得不败！ 
现代文：羡临死前哀叹着说： 女为皇后，公主满家，出入有三百兵士护卫，如此富贵，怎能不败！ 
English: Envying before his death, he lamented: A woman is a queen, a princess has a full house, there are three hundred soldiers escorting her in and out, so rich, how can she not be defeated!

古文：及其五子世达、世迁、世辨、世酋、伏护，余年十五已下者宥之。
现代文：但朝廷宽宥了他的五个儿子世达、世迁、世辨、世酋、伏护和年十五以下的孩子。
English: However, the court pardoned his five sons, Shida, Shigen, Shiban, Shihai, Fuguo, and a child under the age of fifteen.

古文：羡未诛前，忽令其在州诸子自伏护以下五六人，锁颈乘驴出城，合家皆泣送之至门，日晚而归。
现代文：羡在未被诛杀前，忽然命令在幽州比伏护小的儿子五六人，颈戴枷锁骑驴出城，全家哭着送到城门口，晚上这几个儿子才回来。
English: However, before he was killed, he suddenly ordered five or six of his younger sons to be escorted out of the city wearing chains around their necks and riding donkeys. The whole family was sent crying to the city gate, and the sons only returned in the evening.

古文：吏民莫不惊异。
现代文：吏民十分地惊异。
English: The officials and the people were quite surprised.

古文：行燕郡守马嗣明，医术之士，为羡所钦爱，乃窃问之，答曰： 须有禳厌。 
现代文：行燕郡守马嗣明为医术之士，得羡亲爱，私底下问其缘由，羡答： 这是为了禳灾。 
English: Xingyan County Governor Ma Zhi is clearly a medical man. I envy him. I asked him privately why, and he replied, "It's to relieve the disaster."

古文：数日而有此变。
现代文：几天后就出现了这一事变。
English: The incident occurred a few days later.

古文：羡及光并少工骑射，其父每日令其出畋，还即较所获禽兽。
现代文：羡和光两人很早就擅长骑射，他们的父亲每天都要让他俩出去打猎，回家后比较收获。
English: Eni and Hikaru both excelled at shooting from horseback very early on. Their father had them go out hunting every day, and they were more productive when they got home.

古文：光所获或少，必丽龟达腋。
现代文：光有时猎物不多，但射中的都是要害。
English: Sometimes there is not much prey in the light, but everything that is shot is the key.

古文：羡虽获多，非要害之所。
现代文：羡虽然猎物不少，但射中的不是要害。
English: Although there is a lot of prey, it is not the most important thing to shoot.

古文：光常蒙赏，羡或被捶挞。
现代文：光常常得到奖赏，羡时常遭到捶打。
English: Light is often rewarded, envy is often beaten.

古文：人问其故，金答云： 明月必背上着箭，丰乐随处即下手，其数虽多，去兄远矣。 
现代文：人们打听原因，金说： 明月总是对准猎物的要害发箭，丰乐却是随便动手，他打的猎物多，但箭术却远远赶不上他的哥哥。 
English: When people asked why, Jin said, "Ming Yue always aimed his arrows at the key points of the prey, but Feng Le was more casual. He shot more prey, but his archery was far behind that of his brother."

古文：闻者咸服其言。
现代文：听了解释的人都认为金讲得有道理。
English: Everyone who listened to the explanation thought Kim was making sense.

古文：金兄平，便弓马，有干用。
现代文：金兄平，熟悉射箭骑马，有才干。
English: Kim Eunpyeong is familiar with archery and horseback riding, and is talented.

古文：魏景明中，释褐殿中将军，迁襄威将军。
现代文：魏景明中，脱除布衣而做了殿中将军，迁襄威将军。
English: In the middle of Wei Jingming, he stripped off his clothes and became the general of the palace, the general of Xiang Xiang Wei.

古文：正光末，六镇扰乱，隶大将军尉宾北讨。
现代文：正光末年，六镇动乱，跟随大将军尉宾往北击讨。
English: At the end of Masamitsu's life, six towns were in turmoil, and he followed Lieutenant General Bin to the north to fight against them.

古文：军败，为贼所虏。
现代文：军败，被贼俘虏。
English: Defeated, captured by thieves.

古文：后走奔其弟金于云州，进号龙骧将军。
现代文：后逃到其弟金所在的云州，不久进号为龙骧将军。
English: He later fled to Yunnan, where his younger brother Kim was located, and soon assumed the title of General Yongbyon.

古文：与金拥众南出，至黄瓜堆，为杜洛周所破，部落离散。
现代文：与金率众向南，抵黄瓜堆，被杜洛周打败，部众离散。
English: With the gold rate crowd to the south, against the cucumber heap, was defeated by Dulozhou, the crowd dispersed.

古文：及归尔朱荣，待之甚厚，以平袭父爵第一领民酋长。
现代文：投奔尔朱荣后，受到了优厚的待遇，还承袭了父爵第一领民酋长。
English: After he joined Bener Zhu Rong, he received generous treatment, and also inherited his father's title of the first territorial chief.

古文：高祖起义，以都督从。
现代文：高祖起义，以都督身份随从。
English: Gaozu revolted, and as the governor of the capital, he followed.

古文：稍迁平北将军、显州刺史，加镇南将军，封固安县伯。
现代文：慢慢迁平北将军、显州刺史，加镇南将军，封固安县伯。
English: Slowly moved to Pingbei General, Xianzhou stabbing history, plus Zhennan General, Fengguan County.

古文：寻进为侯，行肆州刺史。
现代文：不久晋爵为侯，行肆州刺史事。
English: He was soon promoted to marquis and went on a tour of the state.

古文：周文帝遣其右将军李小光据梁州，平以偏师讨擒之。
现代文：周文帝调其右将军李小光占据梁州，平率领偏师征讨，并且虏获了他。
English: Zhou Wendi dispatched his right-hand general, Li Xiaoguang, to occupy Liangzhou, and Ping led the division to attack and capture him.

古文：出为燕州刺史。
现代文：出任燕州刺史。
English: Appointed as the chief historian of Yanzhou.

古文：入兼左卫将军，领众一万讨北徐贼，破之，除济州刺史。
现代文：入朝兼左卫将军，带领一万多兵众击讨北徐之贼，获胜，拜济州刺史。
English: He entered the imperial court and became the General of the Left Division, and led more than ten thousand soldiers to fight against the North Korean invaders, and won. He became a historical figure in Jeju Province.

古文：侯景度江，诏平为大都督，率青州刺史敬显俊、左卫将军厍狄伏连等略定寿阳、宿预三十余城。
现代文：侯景渡江，帝诏令平为大都督，率领青州刺史敬显俊、左卫将军厍狄伏连等强占了寿阳、宿预三十多城。
English: Hou Jing Wujiang, Emperor Ling Ping as the great governor, led by Qingzhou Shishi Jing Xianjun, left guard general Zou Divolian, etc. occupied more than 30 cities in Shouyang and Suyuan.

古文：事罢还州，加开府，进位骠骑大将军，进爵为公。
现代文：事情结束回到了济州，诏令加开府，进位骠骑大将军，晋爵为公。
English: At the end of the event, he returned to Jeju, and was given the title of General of the Horse and Knight.

古文：显祖受禅，别封羡阳侯。
现代文：显祖受禅，另封羡阳侯。
English: Emperor Xianzu accepted Zen, and other emperors followed suit.

古文：行兖州刺史，以黩货除名。
现代文：行兖州刺史事，因贪污被朝廷免官除名。
English: He was removed from office by the imperial court for corruption.

古文：后除开府仪同三司。
现代文：后拜开府仪同三司。
English: After that, the ceremony for the opening of the prefecture and the three divisions began.

古文：废帝即位，拜特进，食沧州乐陵郡干。
现代文：废帝即位，拜特进，食沧州乐陵郡干。
English: The deposed emperor ascended to the throne, Baite Jin, and the food of Cangzhou Le Ling County dried up.

古文：皇建初，封定阳郡公，拜护军。
现代文：皇建初年，封定阳郡公，拜护军。
English: In the first year of the construction of the imperial palace, he became the governor of Dingyang County and worshiped the escorting army.

古文：后为青州刺史，卒。
现代文：后为青州刺史，卒。
English: Later, he was a member of the Qingzhou Shishi.

古文：赠太尉。
现代文：赠太尉。
English: He was awarded the rank of First Lieutenant by the Imperial Court.

古文：史臣曰：斛律金以高祖拨乱之始，翼成王业，忠款之至，成此大功，故能终享遐年，位高百辟。
现代文：史臣曰：斛律金处在高祖拨乱反正创业之始，他助成了高氏大业；忠诚谨慎，成此大功所以能终享天年，位超群僚。
English: Shichen said: "He was at the beginning of Gao Zuji's business at the beginning of Gao Zuji's turmoil, and he helped Gao's great career; he was loyal and prudent, and because of this great achievement, he was able to live to a ripe old age, and he was a superior colleague.

古文：观其盈满之戒，动之微也，才及后嗣，遂至诛夷，虽为威权之重，盖符道家所忌。
现代文：细察他对恩宠盈满的防戒，是洞察世变的机微的，但才传两代，就祸及子孙，全家被杀，虽说是威权招忌，恐怕还是如道家所说 天道忌盈 吧。
English: A careful examination of his defense against the abundance of grace is a subtle insight into the vicissitudes of the world, but only after two generations have passed on, it is a misfortune for the children and grandchildren, and the whole family has been killed. Although it is a sign of authority, I am afraid it is still as the Taoists say, the way of heaven.

古文：光以上将之子，有沈毅之姿，战术兵权，暗同韬略，临敌制胜，变化无方。
现代文：斛律光作为上将之子，有沉稳刚毅之姿，其战术兵权，都暗合于韬略，所以临敌制胜，能变化无穷，稳操胜券。
English: As the son of an admiral, Bao Riguang has a calm, steady and resolute appearance. His tactics and military power are all implicit in the strategy, so the victory of the enemy can change endlessly, and the victory is stable.

古文：自关、河分隔，年将四纪。
现代文：自从关河分隔，东西魏对峙，将近五十年。
English: It has been nearly fifty years since the Guanhe River separated the East from the West and the West from the East.

古文：以高祖霸王之期，属宇文草创之日，出军薄伐，屡挫兵锋。
现代文：以产担图霸之期，逢室塞创业之时，魁建光出军北伐，屡挫兵锋。
English: During the period of production, when the company was founded, Kui Jianguang went to the Northern Expedition and repeatedly defeated the troops.

古文：而大宁以还，东邻浸弱，关西前收巴蜀，又殄江陵，叶建瓴而用武，成并吞之壮气。
现代文：而大宁年代之后，东邻渐渐衰弱下来，而西邻则收取巴蜀，殄灭江陵，以高屋建瓴之势，成并吞天下之谋。
English: However, after the Taining era, the eastern neighbor gradually weakened, while the western neighbor received Bashu, annihilated Jiangling, built high-rises, and became a strategy for annexing the world.

古文：斛律治军誓众，式遏边鄙，战则前无完阵，攻则罕有全城，齐氏必致拘原之师，秦人无复启关之策。而世乱才胜，诈以震主之威；主暗时艰，自毁藩篱之固。
现代文：斛律氏治军严明，谨守边防，战则胜，攻则克，使北齐屡获战胜之捷，而韭眉竟无束出之机。然而，世乱谗言得志，诈以斛律震主之威；君主暗弱昏庸，亲手毁灭藩篱之固。
English: The Han Li clan ruled the army strictly, guarded the border, won the war, and attacked, so that the North Qi repeatedly won victories, and the frown had no chance to come out. However, the world was full of words, and the power of the Han Li was shaken; the monarch was weak and weak, and he personally destroyed the stronghold of the fence.

古文：昔李牧之为赵将也，北翦胡寇，西却秦军，郭开谮之，牧死赵灭。
现代文：当年李牧为趟将，北剪胡狄，西却强台，堑闻进谗，奎丝死而赵减。
English: At that time, Li Mu was the leader, the north cut Hu Di, the west was strong, the gossip entered the cocoon, the queen died and Zhao reduced.

古文：其议诛光者，岂秦之反间欤，何同术而同亡也！
现代文：这次提议杀害斛律光者，难道不就是当年秦施反问计于赵之情形么?
English: Isn't this proposal to kill the man of the light the same situation that Qin Shih asked Zhao about back then?

古文：内令诸将解体，外为强邻报仇。
现代文：为什么其手法与后果如此地一模一样呢?内使战将寒心解体，外为强敌报仇解恨，唉，后来的人可要引为深戒啊!
English: Why are its methods and consequences so exactly the same? Internal warfare disintegrates cold-heartedness, and external warfare avenges strong enemies and relieves hatred. Alas, those who came later should be deeply admonished!

古文：呜呼！后之君子，可为深戒。
现代文：赞曰：英武的咸阳王，真是国家难得的栋梁。
English: Zang said: "The heroic Xianyang Wang is truly a rare pillar of the country.

古文：赞曰：赳赳咸阳，邦家之光。明月忠壮，仍世将相。
现代文：可敬的明月忠诚壮烈，无愧于世代元勋、世代将相。
English: The honorable Mingyue is loyal and heroic, worthy of being the generation's founding father and generation's general.

古文：声振关右，势高时望。
现代文：其声威震于关西，其名望超越凡常。
English: His reputation in Kansai prefecture is beyond ordinary.

古文：迫此威名，易兴谗谤。
现代文：就是这崇高的威名，招来了奸徒的诽谤。
English: It is this exalted prestige that has invited the traitor's calumny.

古文：始自工言，终斯交丧。
现代文：可惜他起于明智的预见，却终于就此沦丧!
English: It is a pity that his wise foresight led to his downfall!

