古文：黄帝问曰：太阴阳明为表里，脾胃脉也，生病而异者，何也？
现代文：黄帝问道：足太阴脾经与足阳明胃经，互为表里，是脾胃所属的经脉，而所生的疾病不同，是什么道理呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor asked: The foot is too yin, the spleen is too yin, and the foot is too yang, the spleen is too yang, and the stomach is too yang. These are the meridians belonging to the spleen and stomach, and the diseases caused by them are different. What is the reason for this?

古文：岐伯对曰：阴阳异位，更虚更实，更逆更从，或从内，或从外，所从不同，故病异名也。
现代文：岐伯回答说：足太阴脾经属阴经，足阳明胃经属阳经，两经循行的部位不同；它们虚实的更替不同，顺逆的更替也不同；疾病或从体内发生，或从体外侵入，因为发病原因各有差异，所以病名也就不同。
English: Qi Bo replied: the foot is too yin, the spleen is too yin, the foot is too yang, the stomach is too yang, and the two meridians are different; their actual replacement is different, and the converse replacement is also different; diseases either occur in the body or invade from outside the body, because the causes of the disease are different, so the names of the diseases are also different.

古文：帝曰：愿闻其异状也？
现代文：黄帝道：我想知道它们不同的具体情况。
English: Huang Di said: I would like to know the specific circumstances of their differences.

古文：岐伯曰：阳者天气也，主外；阴者地气也，主内。
现代文：岐伯说：人身的阳气，犹如天气，负责护卫人体外部；人身的阴气，犹如地气，负责滋养人体内部。
English: Qi Bo said: The yang of the human body, like the weather, is responsible for protecting the outside of the human body; the yin of the human body, like the earth, is responsible for nourishing the inside of the human body.

古文：故阳道实，阴道虚。
现代文：所以，阳气性质刚实固守于外，阴气性质柔虚守于内。
English: Therefore, the yang nature is rigidly adhered to the outside, and the yin nature is softly adhered to the inside.

古文：故犯贼风虚邪者，阳受之；食饮不节，起居不时者，阴受之。
现代文：凡是，贼风虚邪伤人，外表阳气先受侵害；饮食起居失调，内在阴气先受损伤。
English: In general, if the evil wind of thieves injures people, the external yang qi will be violated first; the diet and living will be out of balance, and the internal yin qi will be damaged first.

古文：阳受之则入六腑，阴受之则入五脏。
现代文：阳气受到邪气侵害会传入六腑；阴气受病会多累及五脏。
English: If yang qi is harmed by evil qi, it will spread to the six qi; if yin qi is harmed by disease, it will spread to the five viscera.

古文：入六腑则身热不时卧，上为喘呼。入五脏则䐜满闭塞，下为飧泄，久为肠澼。
现代文：邪入六腑，可见发热不得安卧，气上逆而喘促；邪入五脏，则见脘腹胀满，闭塞不通，在下为大便泄泻，病久而产生痢疾。
English: If the evil enters the six viscera, it can be seen that the fever cannot lie down, and the gas is on the contrary short of breath; if the evil enters the five viscera, it can be seen that the abdomen is swollen, the obstruction is not open, the stool is under the diarrhea, and the dysentery occurs after a long illness.

古文：故喉主天气，咽主地气。
现代文：所以，喉咙司呼吸而通天气，咽部吞饮食而连地气。
English: Therefore, the throat breathes and passes the weather, and the pharynx swallows food and absorbs the earth's gas.

古文：故阳受风气，阴受湿气。
现代文：因此阳经易受风邪，阴经易感湿邪。
English: Therefore, the yang meridian is susceptible to wind and the yin meridian is susceptible to moisture.

古文：故阴气从足上行至头，而下行循臂至指端。阳气从手上行至头，而下行至足。
现代文：所以阴经之气，从足沿内侧上行至头，再向下沿臂膊内侧到达指端；阳经之气，从手沿外侧上行至头，再沿外侧向下行到足。
English: Therefore, the qi of yin qi, from the inside of the foot up to the head, and then down along the inside of the arm to the fingertips; the qi of yang qi, from the outside of the hand up to the head, and then down along the outside to the foot.

古文：故曰： 阳病者上行极而下，阴病者下行极而上。 
现代文：所以说： 阳经的病邪，先上行至头顶再向下行；阴经的病邪，先下行至指端，再向上行。 
English: Therefore, it is said: the disease of the yang jing should first go up to the top of the head and then go down; the disease of the yin jing should first go down to the fingertips and then go up.

古文：故伤于风者，上先受之；伤于湿者，下先受之。
现代文：故风邪为病，人体上部首先感受邪气；湿邪成疾，人体下部首先感受邪气。
English: Therefore, the upper part of the human body is the first to feel the evil spirit, while the lower part is the first to feel the evil spirit.

古文：帝曰：脾病而四肢不用，何也？
现代文：黄帝道：脾病会引起四肢痿弱功能失常，这是什么道理呢？
English: Huang Di said: Spleen disease can cause limb weakness and dysfunction. What is the reason for this?

古文：岐伯曰：四肢皆禀气于胃，而不得至经，必因于脾，乃得禀也。
现代文：岐伯说：四肢都要承受胃中水谷精气的濡养，但胃中精气不能直接到达四肢经脉，必须依赖脾气的传输，才能营养四肢。
English: Qi Bo said: All four limbs must withstand the wet nourishment of the water valley essence in the stomach, but the essence in the stomach cannot directly reach the meridians of the limbs, and must rely on the transmission of temper to nourish the limbs.

古文：今脾病不能为胃行其津液，四肢不得禀水谷气，气日以衰，脉道不利，筋骨肌肉，皆无气以生，故不用焉。
现代文：如今脾有病不能为胃输送水谷精气，四肢失去营养，则精气日渐衰减，经脉不能畅通，筋骨肌肉都得不到濡养，因此四肢便痿弱丧失正常的功能了。
English: Nowadays, if the spleen is diseased and cannot transport the Shuigu essence to the stomach, and the limbs lose nutrition, the essence will gradually decay, the meridians will not flow smoothly, and the musculoskeletal muscles will not be nourished, so the limbs will be weak and lose their normal function.

古文：帝曰：脾不主时，何也？
现代文：黄帝道：脾脏不能主管一个季节，这是什么道理呢？
English: Huang Di said: The spleen cannot be in charge of a season. What is the reason for this?

古文：岐伯曰：脾者土也，治中央，常以四时长四脏，各十八日寄治，不得独主于时也。
现代文：岐伯说：脾在五行中属土，主管中央之位，分别在四季长养四脏，时间在四季之末的最后十八天，故脾不单独主管一个季节。
English: Qi Bo said: The spleen is the most earthy of the five elements, and is in charge of the central position. It is responsible for raising the four internal organs in the four seasons, and the time is the last eighteen days at the end of the four seasons. Therefore, the spleen is not solely responsible for one season.

古文：脾脏者，常着胃土之精也。
现代文：由于脾脏经常为胃土传输水谷精气，就像天地养育万物一样无时或缺的。
English: Since the spleen often transmits water valley essence to the stomach and soil, it is as essential as heaven and earth to nurture all things.

古文：土者，生万物而法天地，故上下至头足，不得主时也。
现代文：所以它能从上到下，从头到足，输送水谷之精气于全身各部位，而不专门主管一个季节。
English: Therefore, it can transport the essence of Mizutani to all parts of the body from top to bottom, from head to toe, without being specifically responsible for a season.

古文：帝曰：脾与胃以膜相连耳，而能为之行其津液，何也？
现代文：黄帝道：脾与胃仅以一层膜相连，而脾能为胃传输津液，这是什么道理呢？
English: Huang Di said: The spleen and the stomach are only connected by a film, but the spleen can transmit blood to the stomach. What is the reason for this?

古文：岐伯曰：足太阴者三阴也，其脉贯胃属脾络嗌，故太阴为之行气于三阴。阳明者表也，五脏六腑之海也，亦为之行气于三阳。
现代文：岐伯说：足太阴脾经，属三阴经脉，它的经脉贯通到胃，连属于脾，环绕咽喉，故脾能把胃中之水谷精气输送到手足的三条阴经；足阳明胃经，为脾经之表，是供给五脏六腑营养之处，故胃也能将太阴之气输送到手足的三条阳经。
English: Qi Bo said: the foot yin spleen meridian belongs to the three yin meridians, and its meridians pass through to the stomach, which also belongs to the spleen and surrounds the throat, so the spleen can transport the essence of the trough in the stomach to the three yin meridians of the hands and feet; the foot yang yang gastric meridian, which is the table of the spleen meridian, is the place to supply nutrients to the five viscera, so the stomach can also transport the yin qi to the three yang meridians of the hands and feet.

古文：脏腑各因其经而受气于阳明，故为胃行其津液。
现代文：五脏六腑各通过脾经以接受胃中的精气，所以说脾能为胃运行津液。
English: The five viscera and six glands each pass through the spleen to receive the qi in the stomach, so the spleen is said to be able to circulate the qi to the stomach.

古文：四肢不得禀水谷气，日以益衰，阴道不利，筋骨肌肉，无气以生，故不用焉。
现代文：如四肢得不到水谷精气的滋养，精气便日趋衰减，脉道不通，筋骨肌肉都失却营养，因而也就丧失正常的功能了。
English: If the limbs are not nourished by the essence of the valley, the essence will gradually decay, the blood vessels will not pass, and the muscles will lose nutrition, thus losing their normal function.

