古文：十有八年春，王正月，公会齐侯于泺。
现代文：十八年春周历正月，桓公在泺地与齐侯会面。
English: In the first month of the 18th year of the Spring Festival, King Kan met with Prince Qi in Handan.

古文：公与夫人姜氏遂如齐。
现代文：桓公陪同夫人姜氏一起到了齐国。
English: Mr. Kan accompanied his wife, Ms. Jiang, to Qing.

古文：夏四月丙子，公薨于齐。
现代文：夏季四月丙子日，桓公在齐国去世。
English: In the summer of April, on the third day of the month, King Kan passed away in Qi Province.

古文：丁酉，公之丧至自齐。
现代文：丁酉日，桓公的丧礼从齐国回到鲁国。
English: On the day of Ding Xi, the funeral of Kan Gong returned from Qi to Lu.

古文：秋七月。
现代文：秋季七月，无事。
English: Autumn in July.

古文：冬十有二月己丑，葬我君桓公。
现代文：冬季十二月己丑日，安葬桓公。
English: In winter, on December's Ugly Day, Huan Gong was laid to rest.

古文：十八年春，公将有行，遂与姜氏如齐。
现代文：十八年春季，鲁桓公准备外出旅行，便和姜氏到齐国去。
English: In the spring of the 18th year, Lu Huan Gong was preparing to go on a trip, so he and Jiang went to Qi Province.

古文：申曰： 女有家，男有室，无相渎也，谓之有礼。
现代文：申繻劝阻说： 女人有夫家，男人有妻室，不可以互相轻慢，这就叫有礼。
English: Shen Yi dissuaded: A woman has a husband's family, a man has a wife's family, and they should not be disrespectful to each other. This is called courtesy.

古文：易此必败。 
现代文：违反这一点必然坏事。 
English: Violation of this is necessarily bad.

古文：公会齐侯于泺，遂及文姜如齐。
现代文：桓公和齐襄公在泺地会见，然后就和文姜到了齐国。
English: Prince Huan and Prince Qixiang met in Handan, and then they went to Qigong with Wenjiang.

古文：齐侯通焉。
现代文：齐襄公和文姜通奸。
English: Qi Xianggong and Wen Jiang committed adultery.

古文：公谪之，以告。
现代文：桓公责怪文姜，文姜把这件事告诉了齐襄公。
English: Prince Huan blamed Wen Jiang, and Wen Jiang told this to Prince Qixiang.

古文：夏四月丙子，享公。
现代文：夏季，四月初十日，齐襄公设宴招待鲁桓公。
English: In the summer, on the 10th day of early April, Qi Xiang held a banquet to invite Lu Huan.

古文：使公子彭生乘公，公薨于车。
现代文：宴后齐襄公派公子彭生帮助桓公登车，桓公死在车中。
English: After the banquet, Qixiang sent his son Peng Sheng to help Huan Gong board the car. Huan Gong died in the car.

古文：鲁人告于齐曰： 寡君畏君之威，不敢宁居，来修旧好，礼成而不反，无所归咎，恶于诸侯。
现代文：鲁国人告诉齐襄公说： 我们国君畏惧您的威严，不敢苟安，来到贵国重修旧好，礼仪完成后却没有回国。我国不知道该归罪于谁，在诸侯中造成了恶劣影响。
English: Lu people told Qixiang that: Our sovereigns are afraid of your majesty and are not at ease. They came to your country to restore the old friendship, but did not return after the ceremony was completed. Our country does not know who to blame, and it has caused a bad influence among the princes.

古文：请以彭生除之。 
现代文：请求用彭生来清除这种影响。 
English: Request Peng Sheng to remove this influence.

古文：齐人杀彭生。
现代文：齐国人杀死了彭生。
English: The people of Qi killed Peng Sheng.

古文：秋，齐侯师于首止，子亹会之，高渠弥相。
现代文：秋季，齐襄公率领军队驻扎在首止。子亹前去会见，高渠弥作为首席随员。
English: In the autumn, Prince Qixiang led the army stationed in Shufang. Ziqi went to meet him, and Gao Quiya was the chief attendant.

古文：七月戊戌，齐人杀子亹而高渠弥，祭仲逆郑子于陈而立之。
现代文：七月初三日，齐国人杀死了子亹而把高渠弥五马分尸。祭仲到陈国迎接郑子而立他为国君。
English: On the third day of the first month of July, the people of Qi killed Zihong and divided his body into five parts. Saizhong went to Chen Province to meet Zheng Zi and set him up as the king.

古文：是行也，祭仲知之，故称疾不往。
现代文：这次会见，祭仲事先预料到情况，所以假称有病而没有去。
English: In this meeting, Saicho anticipated the situation in advance, so he pretended to be ill and did not go.

古文：人曰： 祭仲以知免。 
现代文：有人说： 祭仲由于有先见之明，所以才免祸。 
English: Some people say: Saichu is only safe because of his foresight.

古文：仲曰： 信也。 
现代文：祭仲说： 那是对的。 
English: Said Saichu: That's right.

古文：周公欲弑庄王而立王子克。
现代文：周公打算杀死周庄王而立王子克。
English: Zhou Gong planned to kill Zhou Zhuang Wang and set up a prince.

古文：辛伯告王，遂与王杀周公黑肩。
现代文：辛伯报告庄王，就帮着庄王杀了周公黑肩。
English: When Xinbo reported Zhuang Wang, he helped Zhuang Wang kill Zhou Gong Heihe.

古文：王子克奔燕。
现代文：王子克逃亡到燕国。
English: Prince K fled to Yan's country.

古文：初，子仪有宠于桓王，桓王属诸周公。
现代文：当初，子仪受到桓王的宠信，桓王把他嘱托给周公。
English: At first, Zi Yi was favored by King Kan, who entrusted him to Zhou Gong.

古文：辛伯谏曰： 并后，匹嫡，两政，耦国，乱之本也。 
现代文：辛伯曾劝谏周公说： 妾媵并同于王后，庶子相等于嫡子，权臣和卿士互争权力，大城和国都一样，这都是祸乱的根本。 
English: Xinbo once advised Zou Zhou Gong that: concubine and concubine are the same as the queen, illegitimate son is equal to the legitimate son, powerful ministers and nobles fight each other for power, big cities and capitals are the same, these are the root of evil.

古文：周公弗从，故及。
现代文：周公不听，所以招致杀身之祸。
English: Zhou Gong did not listen, so he incurred the misfortune of killing himself.

