古文：第五琦，京兆长安人。
现代文：第五琦是京兆府长安县人。
English: The fifth is a resident of Chang'an County, Beijing.

古文：少孤，事兄华，敬顺过人。
现代文：小时候失去了父母，侍奉哥哥第五华，恭敬顺从超过常人。
English: He lost his parents when he was a child, served his elder brother, the Fifth Emperor, and was more respectful and obedient than the average person.

古文：进明惶惧，莫知所出，琦乃劝令厚以财帛募勇敢士，出奇力战，遂收所陷之郡。
现代文：长大后，有办事能力，探求富国强兵的办法。天宝初年，在韦坚手下办事，韦坚被治罪后贬官。后来官当到须江县丞、当时郡太守贺兰进明很看重他，遇到安禄山反叛，贺兰进明没立战功，唐玄宗大怒，派宦官带刀来催促他，说： 不能收复失地，就杀贺兰进明的头。 
English: After growing up, he had the ability to do things and explored ways to enrich the country and strengthen the army. In the first year of Tianbao, he worked under Wei Jian, who was demoted after being convicted. Later, he became the governor of Sujiang County. At that time, the county governor, Horan Jinming, valued him very much. When he encountered the Anlu Mountain rebellion, Horan Jinming did not make war achievements, and Tang Xuan Zong was furious. He sent a eunuch with a knife to urge him, saying: If you cannot recover the lost land, kill Horan Jinming's head.

古文：令琦奏事，至蜀中，琦得谒见，奏言： 方今之急在兵，兵之强弱在赋，赋之所出，江淮居多。
现代文：贺兰进明恐惶，不知怎么办，第五琦就劝他出重金招募勇士，出奇兵死战，收复了丢失的地方。后来派第五琦去奏报情况，到了成都，第五琦被召见，上奏说： 当今急务在军事，军队强弱靠赋税，赋税缴纳，江淮占多数。
English: Horan Jinming panicked and didn't know what to do, so the fifth magistrate advised him to spend a lot of money to recruit warriors, and the soldiers fought to the death to recover the lost places. Later, he sent the fifth magistrate to report the situation. When he arrived in Chengdu, the fifth magistrate was called to see him, and the report said: Today's urgent task is military, the strength of the army depends on taxation, taxation and payment, Jianghuai accounts for the majority.

古文：若假臣职任，使济军须，臣能使赏给之资，不劳圣虑。 
现代文：如果让我代行职务，接济军需，我能让犒赏给养的军费不需皇上操心。 
English: If you let me act on your behalf and help the quartermaster, I will be able to pay the military expenses without the emperor having to worry.

古文：玄宗大喜，即日拜监察御史，勾当江淮租庸使。
现代文：唐玄宗很高兴，当天封他为监察御史，勾当江淮租庸使。
English: Tang Xuan Zong was very happy. That day, he was appointed as the inspector of the imperial history, and became the envoy of the Jianghuai Emperor.

古文：寻拜殿中侍御史。
现代文：不久又任命他为殿中侍御史。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as the court chamberlain of the Imperial Palace.

古文：寻加山南等五道度支使，促办应卒，事无违阙。
现代文：很快又加封为山南等五道度支使，交办应急的事，从无违背和漏办的。
English: He was soon appointed as the five-district governor of Shannan and other provinces, and was assigned to deal with emergencies. He never violated or omitted to do so.

古文：迁司金郎中、兼御史中丞，使如故。
现代文：升任司金郎中、兼任御史中丞，使职仍旧。
English: He was promoted to Shikanoroju, concurrently serving as Goshi chujo, and his duties remain the same.

古文：于是创立盐法，就山海井灶收榷其盐，官置吏出粜。
现代文：从此创建食盐法令，到山里海边的盐井盐灶边收取他们的盐专卖，官府派员出售。
English: From then on, the Salt Law was created, and the government sent employees to collect salt from salt wells in the mountains and along the coast, and sell it.

古文：其旧业户并浮人愿为业者，免其杂徭，隶盐铁使，盗煮私市罪有差。
现代文：旧有以制盐为业和无业游民愿干这行的，免去他们的杂役，受盐铁使管辖，偷制和偷卖的按罪论处。
English: In the past, the salt-making industry and the unemployed wanderers who wanted to work in this industry were exempted from their chores, subject to the jurisdiction of the Salt and Iron Ministry, and those who stole and sold salt were punished according to their crimes.

古文：百姓除租庸外，无得横赋，人不益税而上用以饶。
现代文：老百姓除了租庸以外，不许征其他赋税，人民没增加赋税但皇上用度富足了。
English: The common people were not allowed to levy any other taxes except for the rent. The people did not increase their taxes, but the emperor became rich.

古文：迁户部侍郎、兼御史丞，专判度支，领河南等道支度都勾当转运租庸盐铁铸钱、司农太府出纳、山南东西江西淮南馆驿等使。
现代文：于是升任户部侍郎、兼任御史中丞，专管度支；任河南等道支度都勾当转运租庸盐铁铸钱，司农太府出纳，山南东、山南西、江南西、淮南道馆驿等使。
English: As a result, he was promoted to the position of the head of the household department, concurrently serving as the vice-president of the history department, specializing in the management of the provincial branch; he was appointed to the Henan and other provincial branches to act as the transporter and renter, the salt and iron casting money, the cashier of the Sino-Taifu, and the envoy of Shannan Dong, Shannan Xi, Jiangnan Xi, Huainan Province.

古文：乾元二年，以本官加同中书门下平章事。
现代文：乾元二年，在原任官职上增任同中书门下平章事。
English: In the second year of Qianyuan, he was reappointed to the same post as the original official.

古文：初，琦以国用未足，币重货轻，乃请铸乾元重宝钱，以一当十行用之。
现代文：当初，第五琦因国家用度不够，币少货贱，就请求铸造乾元重宝钱，按一枚值旧钱十枚使用。
English: At first, the Fifth Bank of the Republic of China requested the minting of dry yuan heavy treasure money due to insufficient national consumption and low-value coins, and used ten pieces of old money at one value.

古文：及作相，又请更铸重轮乾元钱，一当五十，与乾元钱及开元通宝钱三品并行。
现代文：到任宰相，又请求再铸造重轮乾元钱，一枚值旧钱五十枚，和乾元重宝和开元通宝三种钱同时流通。
English: When he took office as prime minister, he also requested that the heavy wheel of Qianyuan money be re-minted, with one piece of old money worth 50 pieces, and that three kinds of money, Qianyuan heavy treasure and Kaiyuan treasure, be circulated at the same time.

古文：既而谷价腾贵，饿殣死亡，枕藉道路，又盗铸争起，中外皆以琦变法之弊，封奏日闻。
现代文：不久谷价飞涨，饿死的人，相叠于路，同时伪造铸钱风行，朝廷内外都认为是第五琦改革的弊病，每天都有攻击他的奏本。
English: Soon grain prices soared, starving people lined the roads, and counterfeiting minted money became popular. Both inside and outside the court, this was considered to be the fifth evil of the reforms, and there were daily reports attacking him.

古文：乾元二年十月，贬忠州长史，既在道，有告琦受人黄金二百两者，遣御史刘期光追按之。
现代文：乾元二年十月，贬官忠州长史，走在路上，有人告发第五琦接受别人黄金二百两，朝廷派御史刘期光追来审问。
English: In October of the second year of Qianyuan, the governor of the history of the dethroned officials, walked on the road, someone denounced the fifth generation to accept other people's gold two hundred and two, the court sent the imperial historian Liu Ciguang to pursue and interrogate.

古文：琦对曰：二百两金十三斤重，忝为宰相，不可自持。
现代文：第五琦回答说： 二百两黄金有十三斤重，身为宰相，不能自己拿。
English: The fifth replied, "Two hundred taels of gold weigh thirteen catties. As prime minister, I can't take it myself.

古文：若其付受有凭，即请准法科罪。 
现代文：如果能有交谁拿的凭证，就请按法治罪。 
English: If you can provide proof of who took it, please proceed according to the rule of law.

古文：期光以为此是琦伏罪也，遽奏之，请除名，配流夷州，驰驿发遣，仍差纲领送至彼。
现代文：刘期光认为这是第五琦认罪了，急忙奏报，请求削去官职，流放到夷州，派快马告驿站遣送，又派官员执送到那里。
English: Liu Zhiguang thought that this was the fifth time he had pleaded guilty. He hastily filed a report, requesting that he be removed from his official position and exiled to Yizhou. He sent a fast horse to tell the police station to deport him, and also sent an official to escort him there.

古文：宝应初，起为朗州刺史，甚有能政，入迁太子宾客。
现代文：宝应初年，起用他任郎州刺史，有很出色的政绩，后调进京城升任太子宾客。
English: In the first year of Baoying, he was appointed as a lanzhou magistrate and had a very outstanding political performance. Later, he was transferred to Beijing and promoted to the prince's guest.

古文：属吐蕃寇陷京师，代宗幸陕，关内副元帅郭子仪请琦为粮料使、兼御史大夫，充关内元帅副使。
现代文：碰到吐蕃攻陷京城，唐代宗逃到陕州，关内副元帅郭子仪请求任命他为粮料使、兼任御史大夫、关内元帅副使。
English: Faced with the fall of the capital at the Battle of Tubo, Tang Dizong fled to Shaanxi. Guanai Vice-Marshal Guo Ziyi requested that he be appointed as Grain Envoy, concurrently serving as Chief Historian and Guanai Vice-Marshal Envoy.

古文：未几，改京兆尹。
现代文：不久，改任京兆尹。
English: Soon, he was transferred to the post of Jing Zhaoyun.

古文：车驾克复，专判度支，兼诸道铸钱盐铁转运常平等使。
现代文：皇帝回京，任专管度支，兼管各道铸钱、盐铁、转运、常平等使。
English: The emperor returned to Beijing and was appointed to be in charge of the imperial expenditure, as well as in charge of the minting of money, salt and iron, transportation, and transportation of goods.

古文：累封扶风郡公。
现代文：累爵封扶风郡公。
English: He was additionally appointed as the governor of Fufeng County.

古文：又加京兆尹，改户部侍郎，判度支。
现代文：又加官京兆尹，改任户部侍郎，管度支。
English: He was also promoted to the post of Jing Zhaoyun, and was reassigned to the post of household attendant, in charge of the administrative branch.

古文：前后领财赋十余年。
现代文：先后管财赋十几年。
English: He has been managing wealth for more than a decade.

古文：鱼朝恩伏诛，琦坐与款狎，出为处州刺史，历饶、湖二州。
现代文：鱼朝恩被杀，第五琦因与他亲近被判罪，出京任处州刺史，后任过饶州、湖州刺史。
English: Yu Chaon was killed, and the fifth son was found guilty of being close to him. He went to Beijing to serve as the prefectural chief historian, and later served as the prefectural chief historian of Raozhou and Huzhou.

古文：入为太子宾客、东都留司。
现代文：又调入京城任太子宾客、东都留守。
English: He was also transferred to the capital as a guest of the crown prince, while Tōdō stayed behind.

古文：上以其材，将复任用，召还京师，信宿而卒，年七十，赠太子少保。
现代文：皇帝因为他的才干，将再次重用他，召他回京城，但过了一天他就去世了，享年七十岁，赠官太子少保。
English: Because of his talent, the emperor will once again reuse him and call him back to Beijing, but one day later he died at the age of seventy, and was given the title of crown prince.

古文：子峰，峰妇郑氏女，皆以孝著，旌表其门。
现代文：他的儿子第五峰，第五峰的妻子郑氏，都以行孝有名，曾立牌坊赐匾额。
English: His son, Fifth Peak, and Fifth Peak's wife, Zheng, were both famous for their filial piety. They once set up a signboard to bestow the award.

古文：班宏，卫州汲人也。祖思简，春官员外郎。
现代文：班宏是卫州汲县人，他祖父班思简，曾任礼部员外郎。
English: Banhong is from Koxian County, Weizhou Province. His grandfather, Ban Sijian, was a member of the etiquette club.

古文：父景倩，秘书监。
现代文：他父亲班景倩，曾任秘书监。
English: His father, Ban Jingyao, was a secretary inspector.

古文：宏少举进士，授右司御胄曹，后为薛景先凤翔掌书记，又为高适剑南观察判官，累拜大理司直，摄监察御史。
现代文：班宏年轻时考中了进士，被任命为右司御胄曹，又在凤翔府薛景光手下当过掌书记官，后在剑南高适手下当观察御史。
English: When he was young, Banhong passed the entrance examination, and was appointed as the right secretary of the imperial secretary. He also served as the chief secretary under Xue Jingguang in Fengxiangfu, and later as the observer of the imperial history under Jiannan High School.

古文：时青城山有妖贼张安居以左道惑众，事觉，多诬引大将，冀以缓死，宏验理而速杀之，人心乃安。
现代文：当时青城山有个妖道张安居用鬼神迷惑人民，事情被发觉后，妖道瞎牵扯重要将领，想以此推迟死刑，班宏审讯后很快把妖道处死了，民心才安定了。
English: At that time, there was an evil spirit Zhang Anju in Qingcheng Mountain who used ghosts and gods to confuse the people. After the matter was discovered, the evil spirit blindly involved important generals, hoping to postpone the death penalty. After the trial, Banhong quickly put the evil spirit to death, and the people's hearts were stabilized.

古文：既而郭英乂代适，以厌人望，奏署秘书郎，兼雒令，以疾免。
现代文：后来郭英接替高适，为满足人们的愿望，任命他为秘书郎，兼任雒县县令，后来因病免职。
English: Later, Guo Ying succeeded Gao Shih. In order to meet people's wishes, he was appointed secretary and concurrently served as the county magistrate of Handan County. Later, he was relieved of his duties due to illness.

古文：大历三年，迁起居舍人，寻兼理匭使，四迁至给事中。
现代文：大历三年，他升任起居舍人，不久又兼任理匦使，升官四次后任给事中。
English: In the third year of the lunar calendar, he was promoted to the post of the resident overseer, and soon he also served as the official envoy. He was promoted four times and then assigned to the middle office.

古文：时李宝臣卒于其位，子惟岳匿丧求位，上遣宏使成德问疾，且喻之。
现代文：当时李宝臣在任去世了，他儿子李惟岳隐瞒他的丧事要求继任，皇帝派班宏到成德去问候李宝臣的疾病，并劝告李惟岳。
English: At that time, Li Baochen died in office, and his son Li Wei Yue concealed his death to claim succession. The emperor sent Ban Hong to Chengde to greet Li Baochen's illness and advise Li Wei Yue.

古文：惟岳厚赂宏，皆不受，还报合旨，迁刑部侍郎，兼京官考使。
现代文：李惟岳送很多财物贿赂班宏，班宏都不接受，回来汇报很令皇帝满意，升任刑部侍郎，兼任京官考使。
English: Li Wei Yue sent a lot of money and goods to bribe Banhong, but Banhong did not accept it. He came back with a report that was very satisfactory to the emperor. He was promoted to the position of the attendant of the criminal investigation department and concurrently served as the Beijing official examiner.

古文：时右仆射崔宁考兵部侍郎刘乃上下，宏驳曰： 夷荒靖难，专在节制，尺籍伍符，不校省司。
现代文：当时右仆射崔宁任命兵部侍郎刘为上下考，班宏反驳说： 现各地的军队，都归节度使掌管，虽有军务文书，但中央不能审查。
English: At that time, his right-hand man, Ya Cui Ning, appointed Liu Cai, an attendant of the military department, to be in charge of the examination. Ban Hong countered: At present, the armed forces of all regions are under the control of the military departments. Although there are military documents, the central government cannot review them.

古文：夫上行宣美之名，则下开趋竞之路；上行阿容，下必朋党。 
现代文：如朝廷多给封赏，各地会争相投机钻营；朝廷如果宽容，各地就会结党营私。 
English: If the imperial court gives more rewards, various regions will scramble to speculate; if the imperial court is tolerant, various regions will form parties.

古文：因削去之。
现代文：因此免去了这一任命。
English: He was therefore exempted from this appointment.

古文：乃知而谢曰： 乃虽不敏，敢掠一美以徼二罪乎？ 
现代文：刘知道后道歉说： 我虽然不聪明，但怎敢为了虚荣而犯两重罪过呢？ 
English: After knowing this, Liu apologized and said, "Although I am not smart, how dare I commit a double crime for the sake of vanity?"

古文：寻除吏部侍郎，为汪蕃会盟使李揆之副。
现代文：不久班宏被任命为吏部侍郎，担任吐蕃会盟使李揆的副手。
English: Soon after, Banhong was appointed as an attendant of the cadre department and served as the deputy of the envoy of the Tu Han League, Li Xi.

古文：贞元初，仍岁旱蝗，上以赋调为急，改户部侍郎，为度支使韩滉之副。
现代文：贞元初年，连年遭受旱、蝗灾，皇帝认为征收赋税是当务之急，调他任户部侍郎，任度支使韩的副手。
English: In the first year of the Jeongwon era, the country suffered from drought and locust plagues year after year. The emperor considered the collection of taxes to be a top priority, and appointed him as the steward of the household department and the deputy of Han.

古文：迁尚书，复副窦参。
现代文：后升任户部尚书，又任窦参的副手。
English: Later, he was promoted to the position of household secretary, and also served as Dou Sang's deputy.

古文：参初为大理司直，宏已为刑部侍郎，及参为相，领度支，上以宏久司国计，因令副之。
现代文：窦参以前任大理司直，班宏已任刑部侍郎，到窦参任宰相，兼任度支使，皇帝因为班宏长期掌管国家收支，因此命他做副手。
English: Dou Sang previously served as Dali Sinao, while Ban Hong Cuo had already served as the head of the Criminal Investigation Department. To Dou Sang, he served as the Prime Minister and concurrently as the Vice-Minister of Finance. Because Ban Hong had long been in charge of the country's revenue and expenditure, the emperor ordered him to be his deputy.

古文：且曰： 朕藉参宰相以临远，众务悉委于卿，勿以辞也。 
现代文：皇帝又说： 我借窦宰相的名义镇抚远处的人，事务都交给你办，请不要推辞。 
English: The emperor also said, "I will use the name of Prime Minister Dou to pacify people far away. I will leave all my affairs to you. Please don't refuse."

古文：参以先贵，常私解悦之曰： 参后来，一朝居尚书之上，甚不自安，一年之后，当归此使。 
现代文：窦参因班宏比自己资格老，曾私下讨好他说： 我资历浅，一下子当了您的上级，心里很不安，一年以后，我将把使职让给您。 
English: Dou Sheng Banhong, who was older than his qualifications, once privately flattered him by saying: I have little seniority, I suddenly became your superior, I am very uneasy. In a year, I will give up my post to you.

古文：宏心喜，岁余，参绝不复言。
现代文：班宏心里很高兴。一年以后，窦参不再提这话了。
English: A year later, Dou Sang no longer mentioned it.

古文：宏性刚愎，为人间之，且怒食言，公事多异。
现代文：班宏生性刚强任性，听了人挑拨的话，又怀恨窦参说话不算话，处理公务多不听窦参的。
English: Benhong is stubborn and headstrong. He listens to people's provocative words and holds a grudge against Dou Sang. He does not listen to Dou Sang when dealing with official business.

古文：扬子院，盐铁转运委藏也，宏以御史中丞徐粲主之，既不理，且以贿闻，参欲代之，宏执不可。
现代文：杨子院是盐铁、转运使的仓库，班宏任命徐粲主管，管理不当，又被揭发接受贿赂，窦参想派人代替他，班宏坚持不让。
English: Yangzi courtyard is the warehouse of salt iron and transshipment. Banhong appointed Xu Qi as the supervisor, mismanaged, and was exposed for accepting bribes. Dou Sang wanted to send someone to replace him, but Banhong insisted.

古文：参又选诸院吏，未尝访宏，乃疏参所用者过恶以闻，事辄留中。
现代文：窦参又任命各院官员，没有征求班宏的意见，班宏就上奏报告窦参任命的官员的过失，任命没被批准。
English: Dou Sang also appointed officials of various courts, without seeking the opinion of Ban Hong. Ban Hong reported the fault of the officials appointed by Dou Sang, and the appointment was not approved.

古文：无何，参以使劳加吏部尚书，而宏进封萧国公，怨参以虚号宠之，间恶愈甚。
现代文：不久，窦参因任度支使的功劳升任吏部尚书，而班宏被加封为萧国公，班宏恨窦参用虚名笼络自己，更加恨他了。
English: Not long after, Dou Sang was promoted to the post of Secretary of the General Staff due to the merits of the appointment of the Deputy Secretary of the General Staff, and Ban Hong was awarded the title of Xiao Guogong. Ban Hong hated Dou Sang for using a false name to entrap himself, and hated him even more.

古文：每奉诏营建，宏必极壮丽，亲程课役，又厚结权幸以倾参。
现代文：班宏每次奉旨修建宫殿，一定修得极为雄伟漂亮，亲自安排指挥施工，又与权贵宠臣结为深交来压倒窦参。
English: Every time Banhong was ordered to build a palace, he made sure that it was extremely majestic and beautiful. He personally arranged to direct the construction, and made deep friends with powerful favorites to overwhelm Dou Sang.

古文：张滂先善于宏，宏荐为司农少卿，及参欲以滂分掌江淮盐铁，询之于宏，宏以滂嫉恶，虑以法绳徐粲，因曰： 滂强戾难制，不可用。 
现代文：张滂早先和班宏交好，班宏推荐他任司农少卿，到窦参想任命张滂分管江淮盐铁事务，征求班宏的意见，班宏因为张滂嫉恶如仇，担心他按法律惩办徐粲，就说： 张滂固执暴躁难以控制，不能任命。 
English: Zhang Ye had been on good terms with Ban Hong earlier. Ban Hong recommended him to be appointed as the Secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs. He went to Dou Guan to appoint Zhang Ye to be in charge of the Jianghuai Salt and Iron Affairs and to solicit the opinion of Ban Hong. Because of Zhang Ye's jealousy and fear that he would punish Xu Ye according to the law, Ban Hong said: Zhang Ye's stubbornness and irascibility are difficult to control and cannot be appointed.

古文：滂知之。
现代文：张滂知道了这事。
English: Zhang Ye knew about this.

古文：八年三月，参遂为上所疏，乃让度支使，遂以宏专判，而参不欲使务悉归于宏，问计京兆尹薛珏，珏曰： 二子交恶，而滂刚决，若分盐铁转运于滂，必能制宏。 
现代文：窦参后被皇帝疏远，就任命班宏专管度支使，但窦参又不想让度支使的权力都归班宏掌握，就问京兆尹薛珏有什么计策，薛珏说： 他们两人关系不好，张滂生性刚强果断，如果让张滂分管盐铁、转运事务，一定能抑制班宏。 
English: After Dou Zhan was alienated by the emperor, he appointed Ban Hong as the special representative of the State Council. However, Dou Zhan did not want the power of the special representative of the State Council to be controlled by Ban Hong. He asked Jing Zhaoyun and Xue Wei what strategy they had. Xue Wei said: The relationship between the two of them was not good. Zhang Xuan was tough and decisive. If Zhang Pi was put in charge of salt, iron and transportation affairs, he would definitely be able to restrain Ban Hong.

古文：参乃荐滂为户部侍郎、盐铁使、判转运，尚隶于宏以悦之。
现代文：窦参就推荐张滂任户部侍郎、盐铁使、判转运，但还隶属于班宏以取悦于他。
English: Dou San recommended Zhang Xuan to be the head of the household, the salt and iron envoy, and the transfer, but he also belonged to Ban Hong to please him.

古文：江淮两税，悉宏主之，置巡院，然令宏、滂共择其官。
现代文：江淮地区征收赋税，都由班宏主持，但设立巡院，却命班宏、张滂共同任命官员。
English: The collection of taxes in the Jianghuai region is presided over by Banhong, but the establishment of the patrol hospital is ordered by Banhong and Zhang Jun to jointly appoint officials.

古文：滂请盐铁旧簿书于宏，宏不与之。
现代文：张滂向班宏要过去盐铁部门的账本，班宏不给他。
English: Zhang Ye asked Ban Hong for the account book of the former salt and iron department, but Ban Hong refused to give it to him.

古文：每署院官，宏、滂更相是非，莫有用者。
现代文：每次任命巡院的官员，班宏和张滂互相指责，都不能任命。
English: Each time the officials of the patrol hospital were appointed, Banhong and Zhang Ye blamed each other and could not be appointed.

古文：滂乃奏曰： 班宏与臣相戾，巡院多阙官。
现代文：张滂于是上奏说： 班宏和我意见不合，巡院多数缺乏官员。
English: Zhang Ye then said: Ban Hong and I do not see eye to eye, most of the patrol stations are short of officers.

古文：臣掌财赋，国家大计，职不修，无所逃罪。
现代文：我掌管钱财赋税，关系到国家大事，事情没办好，不能逃脱罪责。
English: I am in charge of money and taxation, it is related to national affairs, things have not been done well, and I cannot escape culpability.

古文：今宏若此，何以辑事？ 
现代文：但现在班宏这样，怎么能办事？ 
English: But how can Banhong do business now?

古文：遂令分掌之。
现代文：皇帝于是命他们各管一部分。
English: The emperor then ordered them to each take a portion.

古文：无几，宏言于宰相赵憬、陆贽曰： 宏职转运，年运江淮米五十万斛，前年增七十万斛，以实太仓，幸无过。
现代文：不久，班宏对宰相赵憬、陆贽说： 我管转运时，每年运江淮大米五十万斛，去年增加到七十万斛用来充实太仓，有幸没有过失。
English: Not long after, Ban Hong said to the Prime Minister Zhao Jing and Lu Wei: When I was in charge of transshipment, I transported 500 thousand baht of Jianghuai rice every year, and increased to 700 thousand baht last year to replenish Taicang. Fortunately, I did not make any mistakes.

古文：今职移于人，不知何谓？ 
现代文：现职务改任他人，不知为什么？ 
English: Your current position has been reassigned to someone else, I don't know why?

古文：滂时在侧，忿然曰： 尚书失言甚矣！
现代文：张滂当时在旁边，愤怒地说： 你这话完全说错了！
English: Zhang Ye, who was nearby at the time, angrily said, "What you said is completely wrong!

古文：若运务毕举，朝廷固不夺之，盖由丧公钱、纵奸吏故也。
现代文：如果转运职责履行得好，皇上当然不会剥夺你的职务。现在这样是因为你丢失国家钱财，放纵贪官污吏的原因。
English: If you had performed your duties well, the emperor would not have stripped you of your position. The reason is that you lost the country's money and indulged corrupt officials.

古文：且凡为度支胥吏，不一岁，资累钜万，僮马第宅，僭于王公，非盗官财何以致是？
现代文：凡是担任了度支所属官吏，不到一年，家财就数不清，仆人马匹和住宅，比王公都好，如不是偷窃国家财产，怎能这样？
English: All officials who have served as subordinate officials of the State Council, less than a year, the family wealth is countless. Servants, horses and houses are better than princes. If it is not stealing state property, how can this be?

古文：道呼喧喧，无不知之，圣上故令滂分掌。
现代文：人们议论纷纷，没人不知道，皇上因此命我分管一部分。
English: People were talking about it, and no one knew, so the Emperor ordered me to be in charge of a part of it.

古文：公向所言，无乃归怨于上乎、 宏默然不对。
现代文：你刚才说那话，难道不是埋怨皇上吗？ 班宏沉默了没有回答。
English: Didn't you just say that to complain about the emperor? Banhong was silent and didn't answer.

古文：是日，宏称疾于第，滂往问之，宏不见，憬、贽乃以宏、滂之言上闻。
现代文：这天，班宏在家里称病，张滂去问候他，他不接见，赵憬、陆贽将班宏、张滂的话报告了皇帝。
English: On this day, Banhong called in sick at home, Zhang Ye went to greet him, but he did not receive him. Zhao Jing and Lu Ye reported the words of Banhong and Zhang Ye to the emperor.

古文：由是遵大历故事，如刘晏、韩滉所分。
现代文：从此按大历年间的旧例，像刘晏、韩氵晃那样分管。
English: Since then, according to the old example of the calendar year, they have been in charge like Liu Zhen and Han Zhenguang.

古文：滂至扬州按徐粲，逮仆妾子侄，得赃钜万，乃徙岭表。
现代文：张滂到扬州查办了徐粲，逮捕了他的仆人小妾和后代，搜出赃物无数，于是将徐粲流放到岭南。
English: Zhang Ye went to Yangzhou to investigate Xu Ye, arrested his servants, concubines and descendants, found countless stolen goods, and then exiled Xu Ye to Lingnan.

古文：故参得罪，宏颇有力焉。
现代文：窦参被治罪，班宏起了很大作用。
English: Dou Sang was punished, and Ban Hong played a great role.

古文：勤恪官署，晨入夕归，下吏劳而未尝厌苦，清白勤干，称之于时。
现代文：班宏在官府中勤勉尽职，早晨进去晚上才回家，部下觉得劳累但他却从不叫苦，廉洁勤勉干练，当时人都称赞他。
English: Banhong diligently fulfilled his duties in the government office. He went in in the morning and came home in the evening. His subordinates felt tired, but he never complained. He was honest, diligent and capable. At that time, everyone praised him.

古文：贞元八年七月卒，年七十三，废朝，加赠，谥曰敬。
现代文：贞元八年七月去世，享年七十三岁，皇帝停止上朝为他致哀，又加封官职，赐谥号叫敬。
English: In July of the eighth year of the Zhengyuan era, he died at the age of 73, and the emperor paused his reign to mourn for him. He also added an official post and gave him a posthumous name.

