古文：起旃蒙单阏，尽屠维协洽，凡五年。
现代文：起，字，一共五年。晋穆帝永和十一年
English: five years in total. Jin Mu Di Yonghe is now eleven years old.

古文：孝宗穆皇帝中之下永和十一年
现代文：春季，正月，从前仇池公杨毅的弟弟杨宋奴派他姑姑的儿子梁式王刺杀杨初。
English: In spring, the first month of the year, Yang Songnu, the younger brother of the former enemy Yang Yi, sent his aunt's son, Liang Shiguang, to assassinate Yang Chu.

古文：春，正月，故仇池公杨毅弟宋奴使其姑子梁式王刺杀杨初；初子国诛式王及宋奴，自立为仇池公。
现代文：杨初的儿子杨国杀掉了梁式王的杨宋奴，自立为仇池公。
English: Yang Guo, the son of Yang Chu, killed Yang Song, the son of Liang Shi Wang, and established himself as the enemy of Qi Gong.

古文：桓温表国为镇北将军、秦州刺史。
现代文：桓温上表请求任命杨国为镇北将军、秦州刺史。
English: At the request of Kuan Wen, Yang Guo was appointed as the general of Zhenbei and the governor of Qin.

古文：二月，秦大蝗，百草无遗，牛马相敢毛。
现代文：二月，前秦发生严重蝗灾，百草无遗，牛马互相啃食身上的毛。
English: In February, a serious locust plague occurred in the former Qin Dynasty. Grasses were all over the place, and cattle and horses were eating each other's hair.

古文：夏，四月，燕王俊自和龙还蓟。
现代文：夏季四月，前燕主慕容俊从和龙返回蓟城。
English: In the summer of April, the former master of Yan, Mu Rongjun, returned to Handan from Hailong.

古文：先是，幽、冀之人以俊为东迁，互相惊扰，所在屯结。
现代文：在此之前，幽州、冀州的百姓以为慕容俊已经东迁和龙，因此互相侵扰，据地结集。
English: Prior to this, the people of Yuzhou and Jizhou thought that Murongjun had moved to the east and Long, so they interfered with each other and gathered in their strongholds.

古文：群臣请讨之，俊曰： 群小以朕东巡，故相惑为乱耳。
现代文：慕容俊返回后，群臣请求讨伐他们，慕容俊说： 这帮小人因为朕去东部地区巡视，所以才互相猜忌作乱。
English: After Murongjun returned, the ministers asked him to fight them. Murongjun said, "These villains are only suspicious of each other because I went to inspect the eastern region.

古文：今朕既至，寻当自定，不足讨也。 
现代文：如今朕已返回，用不了多久他们自己就会安定，不值得去讨伐。 
English: Now that I'm back, it won't take long for them to stabilize on their own. It's not worth fighting.

古文：兰陵太守孙黑、济北太守高柱、建兴太守高甕及秦河内太守王会、黎阳太守韩高皆以郡降燕。
现代文：兰陵太守孙黑、济北太守高柱、建兴太守高，以及前秦河内太守王会、黎阳太守韩高全都投降了前燕，将所据之郡拱手相让。
English: Lanling Governor-General Sun Hei, Jibei Governor-General Gao Zhu, Jianxing Governor-General Gao, as well as former Qin Governor-General Wang Hui and Liyang Governor-General Han Gao, all surrendered to Qian Yan and gave up the counties they were based in.

古文：秦淮南王先幼无一目，性粗暴。
现代文：前秦淮南王苻生小时丧失了一只眼睛，性情暴烈。
English: Former King Huainan of Qin lost an eye in infancy and had a violent temper.

古文：其祖父洪尝戏之曰： 吾闻瞎儿一泪，信乎？ 
现代文：他的祖父苻洪曾经和他开玩笑说： 我听说瞎儿只有一只眼流泪，真的吗？ 
English: His grandfather, Hao Hong, used to joke with him: "I heard that only one eye of a blind person sheds tears, is that true?

古文：生怒，引佩刀自刺出血，曰： 此亦一泪也。 
现代文：苻生听后发怒了，拔出佩刀就刺向自己的瞎眼，鲜血直流，说： 这也是一只眼的眼泪！ 
English: After hearing this, the student became angry. He pulled out his sword and stabbed his own blind eye, which was bleeding profusely. He said, "This is just a tear from one eye!"

古文：洪大惊，鞭之。
现代文：苻洪见状十分震惊，用鞭子打他。
English: Shocked by what he saw, Yan Hong hit him with a whip.

古文：生曰： 性耐刀槊，不堪鞭棰！ 
现代文：苻生说： 我生性能够忍耐刀矛，但不堪忍受鞭打！ 
English: The student said, "I am naturally able to endure the sword and spear, but I can't stand being whipped!"

古文：洪谓其父健曰： 此儿狂悖，宜早除之。不然，必破人家。 
现代文：苻洪对苻生父亲苻健说： 这个儿子狂暴悖逆，应该尽早除掉他，不然，一定会导致家破人亡。 
English: Hao Hong said to his father, Hao Jian, "This son is violent and rebellious. We should get rid of him as soon as possible. Otherwise, it will surely lead to the death of our family."

古文：健将杀之，健弟雄止之曰： 儿长自应改，何可遽尔！ 
现代文：苻健正准备杀掉苻生，苻健的弟弟苻雄劝阻说： 儿子长大以后自然就会改变，怎么能这样急不可耐呢！ 
English: Hao Jian was preparing to kill his twin, but Hao Jian's younger brother, Hao Xiong, dissuaded him, saying, "My son will naturally change when he grows up. How can you be so impatient!

古文：及长，力举千钧，手格猛兽，走及奔马，击刺骑射，冠绝一时。
现代文：等到苻生长大以后，能够力举千钧，徒手与猛兽搏斗，跑起来赶得上奔驰的骏马，击刺骑射各种武艺，全都冠绝一时。
English: When the baboons grow up, they will be able to lift thousands of weights, fight ferocious beasts with their bare hands, run as fast as a galloping horse, and master all kinds of martial arts, including stabbing, riding and shooting.

古文：献哀太子卒，强后欲立少子晋王柳；秦主健以谶文有 三羊五眼 ，乃立生为太子。
现代文：太子苻苌死后，强太后想立小儿子晋王苻柳，前秦国主苻健认为谶文中有 三羊五眼 的字样，于是就立苻生为太子。
English: After the death of Prince Xuan, Empress Dowager Qiang wanted to make the youngest son, Jin Wang Qiliu, the crown prince. The former Qin sovereign, Qian Jian, thought that there were three sheep and five eyes in the inscription, so he made Xuan Sheng the crown prince.

古文：以司空、平昌王菁为太尉，尚书令王堕为司空，司隶校尉梁楞为尚书令。
现代文：任命司空、平昌王苻菁为太尉，尚书令王堕为司空，司隶校尉梁楞为尚书令。
English: He appointed Sikyong and PyeongChang's Wang Shujing as Tai-Lieutenant, Shang Shuling Wang Kui as Sikyong, and Sifu Lieutenant Liang Jie as Shang Shuling.

古文：姚襄所部多劝襄北还，襄从之。
现代文：姚襄的部下大多都劝他北返，姚襄听从了。
English: Most of Yao Xiang's subordinates advised him to return north, and Yao Xiang complied.

古文：五月，襄攻冠军将军高季于外黄，会季卒，襄进据许昌。
现代文：五月，姚襄在外黄攻打晋朝冠军将军高季，恰好这时高季去世了，姚襄便进军占据了许昌。
English: In May, Yao Xiang attacked the champion of Jin Dynasty, General Gao Ji, in Waigaoqiao. Just at that time, Gao Ji passed away, and Yao Xiang marched into and occupied Xu Chang.

古文：六月，丙子，秦主健寝疾。
现代文：六月，丙子，前秦国主苻健患病，卧床不起。
English: In June, Hanzi, the former Qin Emperor, fell ill and was bedridden.

古文：庚辰，平昌王菁勒兵入东宫，将杀太子生而自立。
现代文：庚辰，平昌王苻菁率兵进入东宫，准备杀掉太子苻生而自立。
English: Geng Chen, the King of PyeongChang, led his soldiers into the East Palace, prepared to kill the crown prince and became independent.

古文：时生侍疾西宫，菁以为健已卒，攻东掖门。
现代文：这时苻生正在西宫服侍患病的苻健，苻菁以为苻健已经死了，便攻打东掖门。
English: At this time, Zeng Sheng was in the West Palace attending to the ailing Zeng Jian. Zeng Jing thought that Zeng Jian was already dead, so he attacked the East Gate.

古文：健闻变，登端门，陈兵自卫。
现代文：苻健听到变故的消息后，登上端门，布署兵力自卫。
English: After hearing the news of the change of fortune, Zou Jian boarded the gate and deployed troops to defend himself.

古文：众见健，惶惧，皆舍仗逃散。
现代文：苻菁的兵众看见苻健后十分惶恐害怕，全都丢下武器四处逃散。
English: When the soldiers of Yanjing saw He Jian, they were very panicked and scared. They all threw down their weapons and fled.

古文：健执菁，数而杀之，馀无所问。
现代文：苻健抓到了苻菁，数说了他的罪行后把他杀死，其余的人不加以追究。
English: Hao Jian caught Hao Jing, killed him after he confessed to his crime, and the others were not prosecuted.

古文：壬午，以大司马、武都王安都督中外诸军事。
现代文：壬午，前秦任命大司马、武都王苻安为都督中外诸军事。
English: In Renpo, the former Qin Dynasty appointed Dai Sima and Wu Du Wang Xuan as the military governors of the Middle and Outer Provinces.

古文：甲申，健引太师鱼遵、丞相雷弱儿、太傅毛贵、司空王堕、尚书令梁楞、左仆射梁安、右仆射段纯、吏部尚书辛牢等受遗诏辅政。
现代文：甲申，苻健召唤太师鱼遵、丞相雷弱儿、太傅毛贵、司空王堕、尚书令梁楞、左仆射梁安、右仆射段纯、吏部尚书辛牢等人前来接受遗诏辅佐朝政。
English: Gao Shen, Zou Jian summoned the Grand Master Yu Zun, the Prime Minister Lei Weijie, the Grand Master Mao Gui, the Secretary Ku Wang Pu, the Secretary Shang Shuling Liang Qi, the Left Servant Sha Liang An, the Right Servant Sha Duan Zhen, the Secretary Shang Shuling and others to come to accept the imperial edict and assist the imperial government.

古文：健谓太子生曰： 六夷酋师及大臣执权者，若不从汝命，宜渐除之。 
现代文：苻健对太子苻生说： 六夷酋长将帅以及大臣中握有权力的人，如果不听从你的命令，就应该逐渐把他除掉。 
English: Hao Jian said to Prince Xinsheng, "If the chief of Liouyi, General Zhuai, and the ministers who hold power do not obey your orders, they should be eliminated gradually.

古文：臣光曰：顾命大臣，所以辅导嗣子，为之羽翼也。
现代文：臣司马光说：天子临终前之所以要嘱托大臣辅政，是要靠他们来辅佐教导太子，以作为太子的羽翼。
English: The minister Sima Guang said: The reason why the emperor wanted to entrust the ministers with the auxiliary government before his death was to rely on them to assist and teach the prince, to serve as the prince's wings.

古文：为之羽翼而教使剪之，能无毙乎！
现代文：既然是羽翼却又告诉太子翦杀他们，能不自取灭亡吗！
English: Since they are wings, yet they tell the crown prince to kill them, can they not destroy themselves?

古文：知其不忠。则勿任而已矣。任以大柄，又从而猜之，鲜有不召乱者也。
现代文：如果知道他不忠诚，不加以任用就可以了；既然委之以重任，而又横加猜忌，没有不招来祸乱的。乙酉，苻健去世。
English: If it is known that he is not loyal, it is enough not to appoint him; since he has been entrusted with a heavy responsibility, and he is suspicious, there is nothing that will not bring disaster.

古文：乙酉，健卒，谥曰景明皇帝，庙号高祖。
现代文：谥号为景明皇帝，庙号为高祖。
English: His posthumous name was Emperor Jingming, and his temple name was Gaozu.

古文：丙戌，太子生即位，大赦，改元寿光。
现代文：丙戌，太子苻生即位，实行大赦，改年号为寿光。
English: The crown prince and his son ascended the throne, an amnesty was implemented, and the year name was changed to Shuguang.

古文：群臣奏曰： 未逾年而改元，非礼也。 
现代文：群臣上奏说： 即位不满一年就改年号，不合乎古礼。 
English: A group of senior courtiers said, "It is not in accordance with ancient etiquette to change the era name less than a year after ascending the throne."

古文：生怒，穷推议主，得右仆射段纯，杀之。
现代文：苻生很愤怒，于是就深入追查提议的主谋，查到了右仆射段纯，杀掉了他。
English: Enraged, he tracked down the proposed mastermind, tracked down the right-hand man and killed him.

古文：秋，七月，以吏部尚书周闵为左仆射。
现代文：秋季，七月，东晋朝廷任命吏部尚书周闵为左仆射。
English: In the autumn, in July, the Eastern Jin Dynasty court appointed the head of the personnel department, Shangshu Zhouqi, as the left-hand man.

古文：或告会稽王昱曰： 武陵王第中大修器仗，将谋非常。 
现代文：有人向会稽王司马昱报告说： 武陵王司马的宫中大量准备武器，看来将要图谋政变。 
English: Someone reported to the auditor Wang Sima: Wuling King Sima is preparing a large number of weapons in his palace, and it seems that he will attempt a coup.

古文：昱以去太常王彪之曰： 武陵王之志，尽于驰骋数猪而己耳，深愿，静之，以安异同之论，勿复以为言！ 
现代文：司马昱把这一消息告诉了太常王彪之，王彪之说： 武陵王的志向，全都在驰骋狩猎方面而已，愿您安静下来，以平息各种议论，不要再提这事了！ 
English: Sima Ye told this news to Wang Biao Zhi, and Wang Biao Zhi said: Wuling Wang's ambition is all in the field of galloping and hunting. I wish you would calm down, so as to quell all kinds of discussions, and stop mentioning this matter!

古文：昱善之。
现代文：司马昱觉得此话有理。
English: Sima Yi thought this was reasonable.

古文：秦主生尊母强氏曰皇太后，立妃梁氏为皇后。
现代文：前秦国主苻生尊奉母亲强氏为皇太后，立妃子梁氏为皇后。
English: Former Qin sovereign Zeng Sheng honored his mother, Qiang, as empress dowager, and his adopted daughter, Liang, as empress.

古文：梁氏，安之女也。
现代文：梁氏是梁安的女儿。
English: The Liang family is the daughter of Liang An.

古文：以其嬖臣太子门大夫南安赵韶为右仆射，太子舍人赵诲为中护军，著作郎董荣为尚书。
现代文：任命他的宠臣太子门大夫、南安人赵韶为右仆射，太子舍人赵诲为中护军，著作郎董荣为尚书。
English: He appointed his favorite vassal, the prince's gate doctor, the Nan'an native Zhao Jun, as his right-hand man, the prince's concubine, Zhao Ji, as his middle guard, and the writer, Dong Rong, as his superior.

古文：凉王祚淫虐无道，上下怨愤。
现代文：前凉王张祚淫虐无道，上上下下对他都非常怨恨愤怒。
English: The former Liang Wang Zhang Ye was lewd and sadistic, and everyone resented and enraged him.

古文：祚恶河州刺史张瓘之强，遣张掖太守索孚代瓘守枹罕，使瓘讨叛胡，又遣其将易揣、张玲帅步骑万三千以袭瓘。
现代文：张祚憎恨河州刺史张的强大，便派张掖太守索孚代替张镇守罕，派张去讨伐反叛的胡人，又叛手下的将领易揣、张玲率领步兵骑兵一万三千人去袭击张。
English: Zhang Xuan hated the powerful Zhang Xizhi of Hezhou, so he sent Zhang Xuntao, the governor of Sofu, to replace Zhang Zhenshuhan, and sent Zhang to fight against the rebellious Hu people. In addition, the rebel generals Yi Cui and Zhang Ling led 13,000 infantry and cavalry to attack Zhang.

古文：张掖人王鸾知术数，言于祚曰： 此军出，必不还，凉国将危。 
现代文：张掖人王鸾懂得阴阳占卜之术，对张祚说： 这支部队一定是有出无还，凉国将要危险了。 
English: Zhang Ye's man, Wang Ye, who knew the art of yin and yang divination, said to Zhang Ye: "This army must have come out of nowhere. Liangguo will be in danger."

古文：并陈祚三不道。
现代文：同时还历数了张祚三方面的不义之举。
English: At the same time, he also recounted Zhang Ye's three aspects of injustice.

古文：祚大怒，以鸾为妖言，斩以徇。
现代文：张祚听后勃然大怒。便以王鸾宣扬妖言为罪名，将他斩首示众。
English: After hearing this, Zhang Ye became furious. He accused Wang Ye of preaching evil and beheaded him in public.

古文：鸾临刑曰： 我死，军败于外，王死于内，必矣！ 
现代文：王鸾临刑前说： 我死了以后，军队败于外，国王死于内，必定如此！ 
English: Before his execution, Wang Yao said: "After my death, the army will be defeated from the outside, and the king will die from within. It must be so!"

古文：祚族灭之。
现代文：张祚把他整个家族的人全都杀死。
English: Zhang Ye killed his entire family.

古文：瓘闻之，斩孚，起兵击祚，传檄州郡，废祚，以侯还第，复立凉宁侯曜灵。
现代文：张听说这一消息后，杀掉了索孚，起兵攻打张祚。他将讨伐檄文传递到各州郡，宣称废除张祚，让他以侯爵的身份回家，重新立凉宁侯张曜灵为王。
English: After Zhang heard this news, he killed Sofu and raised an army to attack Zhang Youling. He passed the crusade document to all states and counties, declaring the abolition of Zhang Youling, allowing him to return home as a marquis, and re-establishing Zhang Youling as king.

古文：易揣、张玲军始济河，瓘击破之。
现代文：易揣、张玲的军队刚刚渡过黄河，张就击败了他们。
English: Yizhe and Zhang Ling's armies had just crossed the Yellow River when Zhang defeated them.

古文：揣等单骑奔还，瓘军蹑之，姑臧振恐。
现代文：易揣等人单身匹马往回逃奔，张的军队紧追不舍，姑臧城里的人都感到震惊害怕。
English: Yizhe and other single horses fled back, Zhang's army was in hot pursuit, and people in the city of Guzhen were shocked and afraid.

古文：骁骑将军敦煌宋混兄修，与祚有隙，惧祸。
现代文：骁骑将军、敦煌人宋混的哥哥宋和张祚有矛盾，宋混害怕张祚加祸于己。
English: Song, the Dunhuang general and the brother of Song Jian, a Dunhuang native, had a conflict with Zhang Jian. Song Jian was afraid that Zhang Jian would bring misfortune upon himself.

古文：八月，混与弟澄西走，合众万馀人以应瓘，还向姑臧。
现代文：八月，宋混和他的弟弟宋澄向西逃走，聚集了数万人以后又掉头开向姑臧，以策应张。
English: In August, Song Jian and his younger brother, Song Cheng, fled westward. After gathering tens of thousands of people, they turned around and drove to Gushan to meet Zhang.

古文：祚遣杨秋胡将曜灵于东苑，拉其腰而杀之，埋于沙坑，谥曰哀公。
现代文：张祚派杨秋胡把张曜灵带到东苑，扳断他的腰肢后把他斩杀了，尸体埋在沙坑当中，定谥号为哀公。
English: Zhang Qian sent Yang Qiuhu to take Zhang Youling to Dongyuan, and killed him after breaking his lower limbs. The body was buried in a sand pit, and his posthumous name was Yigong.

古文：秦主生封卫大将军黄眉为广平王，前将军飞为新兴王，皆素所善也。
现代文：前秦国主苻生封卫大将军苻黄眉为广平王，封前将军苻飞为新兴王，这两人都是他平常所喜欢的。
English: The former Qin sovereign's son and heir, General Zou Huangmei, was the Guangping king, and the former general Zou Fei was the emerging king, both of whom he usually liked.

古文：征大司马武都王安领太尉。
现代文：征召大司马武都王苻安兼太尉。
English: Conscripted Major Ma Wudu Wang Xuan and Second Lieutenant.

古文：以晋王柳为征东大将军、并州牧，镇蒲坂；魏王廋为镇东大将军、豫州牧，镇陕城。
现代文：任命晋王苻柳为征东大将军、并州牧，镇守蒲阪，任命魏王苻为镇东大将军、豫州牧，镇守陕城。
English: He appointed Jin Wang Qiliu as the general of the Eastern Expedition, the provincial governor and the town guard of Busan, and appointed Wei Wang Xi as the general of the Eastern Expedition, the provincial governor of Yuzhou and the town guard of Shaanxi.

古文：中书监胡文、中书令王鱼言于生曰： 比有星孛于大角，荧惑入东井。
现代文：中书监胡文、中书令王鱼对苻生进言说： 近来异星划过大角星座，火星进入井宿。
English: Hu Wen, the supervisor of Chinese books, and Wang Yu, the director of Chinese books, said to Sheng Sheng: Recently, a strange star has passed through the Great Horn constellation, and Mars has entered the well.

古文：大角，帝坐；东井，秦分；于占不出三年，国有大丧，大臣戮死；愿陛下修德以禳之！ 
现代文：大角，是帝王的星座；井宿，则是前秦国分野。经过占卜，不出三年国家就会出现帝王、皇后死亡，大臣被杀的事情。愿陛下修行德性以避免丧乱的出现！ 
English: The great horn is the constellation of the emperor; the cistern is the field of the former Qin state. After divination, within three years, the country will have the death of the emperor, the queen, and the minister will be killed. May His Majesty practice virtue to avoid the appearance of chaos!

古文：生曰： 皇后与朕对临天下，可以应在丧矣。
现代文：苻生说： 皇后和朕一起统治天下，可以应验大丧的出现。
English: He said: "The Empress and I will rule the world together, and we can meet the emergence of the great tragedy.

古文：毛太傅、梁车骑、梁仆射受遗辅政，可以应大臣矣。 
现代文：太傅毛贵、车骑将军梁楞、左仆射梁安接受遗诏辅佐朝政，可以应验大臣的结局。 
English: Grand Master Mao Gui, General of Chariots and Cavalry Liang Qi, and Left-Handed Footman Liang An accepted the imperial edict to assist the imperial government, and could fulfill the minister's destiny.

古文：九月，生杀梁后及毛贵、梁楞、梁安。
现代文：九月，苻生便杀掉了皇后梁氏以及毛贵、梁楞、梁安。
English: In September, Zeng Sheng killed Empress Liang, as well as Mao Gui, Liang Hui, and Liang An.

古文：贵，后之舅也。
现代文：毛贵是皇后的舅舅。
English: Mao Gui is the Queen's uncle.

古文：右仆射赵韶、中护军赵诲，皆洛州刺史俱之从弟也，有宠于生，乃以俱为尚书令。
现代文：右仆射赵韶、中护军赵诲，都是洛州刺史赵俱的堂弟，得宠于苻生，于是苻生便任命赵俱为尚书令。
English: His right-hand man, Zhao Yao, and his second-in-command, Zhao Yan, were both cousins of the famous Luozhou scholar, Zhao Gu. They were favored by Shansheng, who then appointed Zhao Gu as his second-in-command.

古文：俱固辞以疾，谓韶、诲曰： 汝等不复顾祖宗，欲为灭门之事！
现代文：赵俱以患病为由坚决推辞，并对赵韶、赵诲说： 你们不顾及祖宗了，想要干灭门之事啊！
English: Zhao Qiao firmly refused on the grounds of illness, and said to Zhao Yao and Zhao Yao: You have no regard for the ancestors, you want to do away with the gate!

古文：毛、梁何罪，而诛之？
现代文：毛、梁等人何罪之有，而杀了他们？
English: What were the crimes of Mao, Liang and others, and why did they kill them?

古文：吾何功，而代之？
现代文：我何功之有，而取代他们？
English: What can I do to replace them?

古文：汝等可自为，吾其死矣！ 
现代文：你们可以自以为是，我大概快要死了！ 
English: You can think what you like, I'm probably going to die!

古文：遂以忧卒。
现代文：于是赵俱忧郁而死。
English: So he died of melancholy.

古文：凉宋混军于武始大泽，为曜灵发哀。
现代文：前凉宋混的部队驻扎在武始的大湖边，哀悼张曜录。
English: The troops of the former Liang and Song dynasties were stationed on the edge of the Great Lake in Wuxi, mourning Zhang Yue.

古文：闰月，混军至姑臧，凉王祚收张瓘弟琚及子嵩，将杀之。
现代文：闰六月，宋混的部队抵达姑臧，前凉王张祚拘捕了张的弟弟张琚及儿子张嵩，准备要杀掉他们。
English: In leap June, Song Jian's troops arrived in Gushan. Former Liangwang Zhang Ye arrested Zhang's younger brother Zhang Ye and his son Zhang Song, and prepared to kill them.

古文：琚、嵩闻之，募市人数百，扬言： 张祚无道，我兄大军已至城东，敢举手者诛三族！ 
现代文：张琚、张嵩听说后，招募了城里的数百人，公开宣称： 张祚无道，我哥哥的大军已抵达城东，敢动手杀我们的人诛灭三族！ 
English: After hearing this, Zhang Ye and Zhang Song recruited hundreds of people in the city and publicly declared: Zhang Ye has no way out, my brother's army has arrived in the east of the city, those who dare to kill us will exterminate the three ethnic groups!

古文：遂开西门纳混兵。
现代文：于是打开西城门让宋混的军队进城。
English: So he opened the west gate to let Song Jun's army enter the city.

古文：领军将军赵长等惧罪，入阁呼张重华母马氏出殿，立凉武侯玄靓为主。
现代文：领军将军赵长等人因有请立张祚的罪行，十分害怕，他们入宫请张重华的母亲马氏登堂升殿，立凉武侯张玄靓为国主。
English: The leading general Zhao Chang and others were very afraid because of the crime of inviting Zhang Xuan to be enthroned. They went to the palace to invite Zhang Chonghua's mother Ma Shi to ascend to the throne and to establish Zhang Xuan as the head of the country.

古文：易揣等引兵入殿，收长等，杀之。
现代文：易揣等人率兵进入殿堂，拘捕了赵长等人，杀掉了他们。
English: Yi Cui and others led soldiers into the hall of fame, arrested Zhao Chang and others, and killed them.

古文：祚按剑殿上，大呼，叱左右力战。
现代文：张祚在殿堂上扶剑大喊，命令左右的人奋力战斗。
English: Zhang Ye raised his sword in the hall and shouted, ordering the people on both sides to fight hard.

古文：祚素失众心，莫肯为之斗者，遂为兵人所杀。
现代文：张祚平时失掉了民心，这时没有人肯为他去战斗，于是被士兵杀掉。
English: Zhang Ye lost the people's hearts in peacetime, when no one was willing to fight for him, so he was killed by soldiers.

古文：混等枭其首，宣示内外，暴尸道左，城内咸称万岁。
现代文：宋混等人砍下了他的首级示众，公告宫廷内外，张祚暴尸于路旁，城里的人们都高呼万岁。
English: Song Jian and others cut off his head to show the public, announced inside and outside the court, Zhang Ye's corpse was on the roadside, and people in the city were shouting "long live."

古文：以庶人礼葬之，并杀其二子。
现代文：宋混等人把张祚以普通百姓的规格埋葬，并且杀了他的两个儿子。
English: Song Jian and others buried Zhang Xuan in the manner of an ordinary citizen and killed his two sons.

古文：混、琚上玄靓为大将军、凉州牧、西平公，赦境内，复称建兴四十三年。
现代文：宋混、张琚上书东晋朝廷请立张玄靓为大将军、凉州牧、西平公，在境内实行大赦，纪年恢复为建兴四十三年。
English: Song Jian and Zhang Xuan wrote to the East Jin Dynasty court to request the establishment of Zhang Xuanqian as a general, Liangzhou Mu and Xiping Gong. An amnesty was implemented in the territory, and the calendar year was restored to Jianxing for 43 years.

古文：时玄靓始七岁。
现代文：这时张玄靓刚七岁。
English: At this time, Zhang Xuanqian was just seven years old.

古文：张瓘至姑臧，推玄靓为凉王，自为使持节、都督中外诸军事、尚书令、凉州牧、张掖郡公，以宋混为尚书仆射。
现代文：张瓘抵达姑臧，推戴张玄靓为前凉王，自己则为使持节、都督中外诸军事、尚书令、凉州牧、张掖郡公，任命宋混为尚书仆射。
English: Zhang Ye arrived in Guzheng and promoted Zhang Xuan Ye as the former king of Liangshan, and himself as the envoy of the military, the governor of the Middle and Outer Provinces, the Shang Shuling, the Liangzhou Muc, and the Zhangye County, and appointed Song Jian as the Shang Shuling's servant.

古文：陇西人李俨据郡，不受瓘命，用江东年号，众多归之。
现代文：陇西人李俨据守自己所在的郡，不授受张的命令，仍然用东晋的年号，归附他的民众很多。
English: Li Xi, a native of Shaanxi, remained loyal to his county and refused to obey Zhang's orders. He still used the era name of the Eastern Jin Dynasty, and many people followed his lead.

古文：瓘遣其将牛霸讨之，未至，西平人卫綝亦据郡叛，霸兵溃，奔还。
现代文：张派他的将领牛霸讨伐李俨，还没有到达，西平人卫也占据自己的郡反叛，牛霸的兵众溃散，掉头逃奔。
English: Zhang sent his general, Niubao, to fight Li Yao, but Li Yao had not yet arrived. Xiping Renwei also rebelled and occupied his own county. Niubao's soldiers scattered and fled.

古文：瓘遣弟琚击綝，败之。
现代文：张派弟弟张琚攻击卫，打败了他。
English: Zhang sent his younger brother Zhang Xuan to attack Wei and defeated him.

古文：酒泉太守马基起兵以应綝，瓘遣司马张姚、王国击斩之。
现代文：酒泉太守马基起兵响应卫，张派司马张姚、王国前去攻打，杀掉了马基。
English: Jiuquan's governor, Maqi, raised an army in response to the guard, and Zhang sent his horse, Zhang Yao, to attack the kingdom, killing Maqi.

古文：冬，十月，以豫州刺史谢尚督并、冀、幽三州，镇寿春。
现代文：冬季，十月，东晋朝廷任命豫州刺史谢尚总督并、冀、幽三州，镇守寿春。
English: In the winter, in October, the Eastern Jin Dynasty court appointed the governor of the three states of Henan, Hebei, and Yunnan as well as the town guard of Shuchun.

古文：镇北将军段龛与燕主俊书，抗中表之仪，非其称帝。
现代文：镇北将军段龛给前燕国主慕容俊写信，使用中表亲戚的仪礼，对他称帝加以非难。
English: Zhenbei General Duan Rong wrote a letter to the former ruler of Yan, Mu Rongjun, using the etiquette of a middle-ranking relative to accuse him of claiming to be an emperor.

古文：俊怒，十一月，以太原王恪为大都督、抚军将军，阳骛副之，以击龛。
现代文：慕容俊见信后大怒。十一月，任命太原王慕容恪为大都督、抚军将军，以阳鹜作为他的副手，去攻打段龛。
English: Murongjun was furious when he saw the letter. In November, he appointed the Taiyuan king Murongku as the grand governor and general of the army, with Yang Di as his deputy, to attack Duan Di.

古文：秦以辛牢守尚书令，赵韶为左仆射，尚书董荣为右仆射，中护军赵诲为司隶校尉。
现代文：前秦任命辛牢代理尚书令，任命赵韶为左仆射，尚书董荣为右仆射，中护军赵诲为司隶校尉。
English: The former Qin Dynasty appointed Xin Diao as the deputy of Shang Shuling, appointed Zhao Zhen as the left minion, appointed Shang Shuling Dong Rong as the right minion, and appointed Zhao Rui as the lieutenant of Sili.

古文：十二月，高句丽王钊遣使诣燕纳质修贡，以请其母。
现代文：十二月，高句丽国王钊派遣使者来到前燕进献贡奉，以此请求准许他的母亲返回。
English: In December, the king of Goguryeo sent an envoy to the former Yanjin to pay tribute, in order to request permission for his mother to return.

古文：燕主俊许之，遣殿中将军刁龛送钊母周氏归其国；以钊为征东大将军、营州刺史，封乐浪公，王如故。
现代文：前燕国主慕容同意了，派殿中将军刁龛送钊的母亲周氏回国。任命钊为征东大将军、营州刺史，并封为乐浪公，高句丽王的称号则仍旧保留。
English: The former lord of Yan Province, Murong, agreed and sent the palace middle general, Zou, to escort Zou's mother, Zhou, back to China. Zou was appointed the General of the Expedition to the East, the Historian of Yingzhou, and was given the title of Lelangong, but the title of the King of Goguryeo was still retained.

古文：上党人冯鸯逐燕太守段刚，据安民城，自称太守，遣使来降。
现代文：上党人冯鸯赶走了前燕太守段刚，占据了安民城，自称太守，派遣使者来向东晋投降。
English: The Shang party member Feng Yu drove away the former Yan governor Duan Gang, occupied Anmin City, claimed to be the governor, and sent an envoy to East Jin to surrender.

古文：秦丞相雷弱儿性刚直，以赵韶、董荣乱政，每公言于朝，见之常切齿。
现代文：前秦丞相雷弱儿性格刚烈耿直，因为赵韶、董荣败坏朝政，他经常在朝廷公开议论，看见这两人就咬牙切齿。
English: The former Minister of the Qin Dynasty, Lei Qianren, had a strong and upright personality. Because Zhao Wei and Dong Rong had corrupted the imperial government, he often openly discussed the matter in the imperial court. When he saw the two men, he gritted his teeth.

古文：韶、荣谮之于秦主生，生杀弱儿及其九子、二十七孙。
现代文：赵韶、董荣便向前秦国主苻生进谗言诬陷雷弱儿。苻生于是杀掉了雷弱儿及其九个儿子、二十七个孙子。
English: Zhao Yao and Dong Rong then slandered the former Qin sovereign Lei Weixiong and framed Lei Weixiong, who then killed Lei Weixiong, his nine sons, and twenty-seven grandchildren.

古文：于是诸羌皆有离心。
现代文：各羌族部落因此对前秦产生了离心。
English: As a result, various Yao tribes centrifuged the former Qin Dynasty.

古文：生虽谅阴，游饮自若，弯弓露刃，以见朝臣。锤钳锯凿，可以害人之具，备置左右。
现代文：苻生虽然在为苻健居表，但游玩酣饮如常，在朝接见大臣们时，总是佩刀带箭，锤、钳、锯、凿等可以残害人的刑具，全都放在周围。
English: Although he is keeping a watchful eye on his son, he is still enjoying himself as usual. When he receives ministers in the morning, he always carries a sword with arrows, and hammers, picks, saws, chisels and other instruments of torture that can maim people are all placed around him.

古文：即位未几，后妃、公卿已下至于仆隶，凡杀五百馀人，截胫、拉胁、锯项、刳胎者，比比有之。
现代文：即位没多久，后妃、公卿以下至于奴仆，被杀掉的总共有五百多人；被截下小腿、折断胸肋、锯断脖子、剖开孕腹的人，比比皆是。
English: Not long after his accession to the throne, a total of more than five hundred people were killed, including queens, nobles, and servants; people with their lower legs cut off, their chests and ribs broken, their necks sawn off, and their pregnant bellies cut open were everywhere.

古文：燕主俊以段龛方强，谓太原王恪曰： 若龛遣军拒河，不得渡者，可直取吕护而还。 
现代文：前燕国主慕容俊考虑到段龛势力正强，对太原王慕容恪说： 如果段龛派军队在黄河抵御，你们无法渡河的话，可以直接去捉拿吕护后返回。 
English: Taking into account the fact that Duan Yu's power was strong, the former ruler of Yan, Murong Jun, said to the King of Taiyuan, Murong Kak: If Duan Yu sends an army to resist in the Yellow River, and you cannot cross the river, you can go directly to capture Lvou and return.

古文：恪分遣轻军先至河上，具舟楫以观龛志趣。龛弟罴，骁勇有智谋，言于龛曰： 慕容恪善用兵，加之众盛，若听其济河，进至城下，恐虽乞降，不可得也。
现代文：慕容恪分别派遣轻装部队先到达黄河岸边，准备渡河舟船，用以观察段龛的动向，段龛的弟弟段罴，勇猛善战而且多智多谋，他对段龛进言说： 慕容恪善于用兵，再加上他兵力众多，如果听任他渡过黄河，进军城下，恐怕我们想请求投降，也不能被允许了。
English: Murong Ke separately dispatched light-armed troops to reach the shore of the Yellow River first and prepare to cross the river boat to observe the movement of Duan Xuan. Duan Xuan's younger brother, Duan Xuan, brave and resourceful, said to Duan Xuan: Murong Ke is good at using soldiers, and he has a large number of soldiers. If he is allowed to cross the Yellow River and march into the city, I am afraid we would like to ask for surrender and cannot be allowed.

古文：请兄固守，罴帅精锐拒之于河，幸而战捷，兄帅大众继之，必有大功。
现代文：请哥哥你固守城池，让段罴我率领精锐部队在黄河抵御，如果战斗有幸获胜，哥哥再率领大部队跟进，一定会大举成功。
English: Please ask your brother to hold fast to the castle, and let me lead the elite troops to resist in the Yellow River. If we are fortunate enough to win the battle, my brother will lead a large army to follow up, and we will certainly succeed.

古文：若其不捷，不若早降，犹不失为千户侯也。 
现代文：如果战斗没有获胜，不如及早投降，大约还可以保住千户侯的地位。 
English: If the battle is not won, it is better to surrender as soon as possible, and the status of the thousand households can be preserved.

古文：龛不从。
现代文：段龛没有听从。
English: Duan Yu did not listen.

古文：罴固请不已，龛怒，杀之。
现代文：段罴依然坚持请求，激怒了段龛，把段罴杀掉了。
English: Duan Yu still insisted on the request, which infuriated Duan Yu and killed Duan Yu.

古文：孝宗穆皇帝中之下永和十二年
现代文：永和十二年
English: The 12th year of the Edo period

古文：春，正月，燕太原王恪引兵济河，未至广固百馀里，段龛帅众三万逆战。
现代文：春季，正月，前燕太原王慕容恪率兵渡过了黄河，离广固只有一百多里，段龛率领兵众三万人迎战。
English: In the spring, the first month of the year, the former Yan Taiyuan King Murong led his army across the Yellow River, only more than a hundred miles away from Guanggu, and Duan Yu led 30,000 soldiers to fight.

古文：丙申，恪大破龛于淄水，执其弟钦，斩右长史袁范等。
现代文：丙申，慕容恪在淄水大破段龛的部队，抓获段龛的弟弟段钦，杀死右长史袁范等人。
English: Bishen, Murong and others broke through the troops of Duan Qi in Surabaya, captured Duan Qi's younger brother Duan Qin, and killed Yuanzhong Shi Yuan Fan and others.

古文：齐王龙辟闾蔚被创，恪闻其贤，遣人求之，蔚已死，士卒降者数千人。
现代文：齐国的王友辟闾蔚负伤，慕容恪听说过他的贤明，便派人去寻找他，但辟闾蔚已经死了，段龛士卒中投降的有数千人。
English: Wang You of Qi was wounded, and Murong Ke heard of his wisdom and sent men to look for him. However, Wang You was already dead, and thousands of soldiers had already surrendered.

古文：龛脱走，还城固守，恪进军围之。
现代文：段龛逃脱，返回广固城中固守，慕容恪进军将他包围。
English: Duan Yu escaped and returned to Guanggu to hold on to the city, while Murong Ke marched in to surround him.

古文：秦司空王堕性刚峻，右仆射董荣、侍中强国皆以佞幸进，堕疾之如仇，每朝，见荣未尝与之言。
现代文：前秦司空王堕性格刚峻，右仆射董荣、侍中强国都是靠着谄媚得宠而得到提升重用，王堕恨之如仇，每次上朝，见到董荣都不和他搭话。
English: Former Emperor Qin's second-in-command, Emperor Gaozong, was a stern character. His right-hand man, Emperor Shao's second-in-command, Emperor Shao's right-hand man, Emperor Shao's right-hand man, Emperor Gaozong's right-hand man, Emperor Gaozong's right-hand man, Emperor Gaozong's right-hand man, Emperor Shao's right-hand man, Emperor Gaozong's right-hand man, Emperor Gaozong's right-hand man, Emperor Shao's right-hand man, Emperor Gaozong's right-hand man, Emperor

古文：或谓堕曰： 董君贵幸无比，公宜小降意接之。 
现代文：有人对王堕说： 董君显贵宠幸，无与伦比，您应该稍微抑制一点心意，和他接触。 
English: Some people said to Wang Pu, "Dong Jun is a distinguished and incomparable favorite, you should restrain your mind a little and contact him."

古文：堕曰： 董龙是何鸡狗，而令国士与之言乎！ 
现代文：王堕说： 董荣是什么样的鸡狗之徒，而让国中的贤杰人士和他搭话呢！ 
English: Wang Rui said, "What kind of a coward is Dong Rong to let the country's outstanding people talk to him?"

古文：会有天变，荣与强国言于秦主生曰： 今天谴甚重，宜以贵臣应之。 
现代文：恰巧这时天象有变故，董荣与强国便向前秦国主苻生进言说： 如今上天的谴责非常严重，应该以显贵的大臣去应接谴责。 
English: Coincidentally, it was at this time that there was a change in the heavens, and Dong Rong and the powerful countries made a suggestion to the former Qin sovereign, saying: Today, the condemnation of heaven is very serious, and it should be a prominent minister to respond to the condemnation.

古文：生曰： 贵臣唯有大司马及司空耳。 
现代文：苻生说： 显贵的大臣只有大司马和司空而已。 
English: Zeng Sheng said: The only dignified ministers are Daima and Sikuo.

古文：荣、国曰： 大司马国之懿亲，不可杀也。 
现代文：董荣说： 大司马苻安是王室的至亲，不能杀。 
English: Dong Rong said: Grand Secretary Ma Junan is a close relative of the royal family and cannot be killed.

古文：乃杀王堕。
现代文：于是就杀了王堕。
English: So he killed Wang Po.

古文：将刑，荣谓之曰： 今日复敢比董龙于鸡狗乎？ 
现代文：在将要行刑的时候，董荣对王堕说： 今天还敢把董荣我比作鸡狗吗？ 
English: When he was about to be executed, Dong Rong said to Wang Pu, "Do you still dare to compare Dong Rong and me to a chicken and a dog today?"

古文：堕瞋目叱之。
现代文：王堕怒目痛斥董荣。
English: The king flew into a rage and berated Dong Rong.

古文：洛州刺史杜郁，随之甥也，左仆射赵韶恶之，谮于生，以为贰于晋而杀之。
现代文：洛州刺史杜郁，是王堕的外甥，左仆射赵韶厌恶他，就向苻生进谗言，说他和东晋来往，有二心，把他杀死。
English: Luo Zhou's right-hand man, Du Yu, was the nephew of Wang Pu, and his left-hand man, Zhao Yao, was disgusted with him, so he said to Zang Sheng, that he had been in and out of the Eastern Jin Dynasty, had two hearts, and killed him.

古文：壬戌，生宴群臣于太极殿，以尚书令辛牢为酒监，酒酣，生怒曰： 何不强人酒而犹有坐者！ 
现代文：壬戌，苻生在太极殿宴请群臣，让尚书令辛牢做掌酒官，正喝到尽兴时，苻生愤怒地说： 为什么不让人们尽力去喝而还有坐着的！ 
English: On the other hand, when Zeng Sheng was holding a banquet for his ministers in the Taiji Hall, and he was making Shang Shuling work hard as the head of the wine steward, Zeng Sheng said angrily, "Why not let people drink as much as they can while they are still seated!"

古文：引弓射牢，杀之。
现代文：说着就拉开弓箭射死了辛牢。
English: Saying this, he pulled out his bow and arrow and shot Xin Rong dead.

古文：群臣惧，莫敢不醉，偃仆失冠，生乃悦。
现代文：群臣十分害怕，再也没有人敢不喝醉，全都横躺竖卧，衣冠不整，苻生这才高兴了。
English: The courtiers were so frightened that no one dared not to get drunk, and they all lay on their sides, with their clothes all in disarray. This made the twins happy.

古文：匈奴大人刘务桓卒，弟阏头立，将贰于代。
现代文：匈奴首领刘务桓去世，他的弟弟刘阏头即位，准备要背叛代国。
English: Liu Muhuan, the leader of the Xiongnu, died, and his brother Liu Shantou ascended to the throne, preparing to betray the country.

古文：二月，代王什翼犍引兵西巡，临河，阏头惧，请降。
现代文：二月，代王拓跋什翼犍率兵西巡到达黄河岸边，刘阏头害怕，便请求投降。
English: In February, on behalf of the king, Tuoba Shih-tzu led the troops on a westward patrol to reach the shore of the Yellow River. Liu Shantou was afraid and asked to surrender.

古文：燕太原王恪招抚段龛诸城。
现代文：前燕太原王慕容恪招纳安抚段龛辖境内的各座城邑。
English: The former King Murong of Yan Taiyuan conscripted and pacified all the towns in the territory under the jurisdiction of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：已丑，龛所署徐州刺史阳都公王腾举众降，恪命腾以故职还屯阳都。
现代文：己丑，段龛所设置的徐州刺史、阳都公王腾率领民众投降，慕容恪让王腾以旧有官职的身份回去屯守阳都。
English: As a result, Xuzhou Shishi and Yangdu Prince Wang Teng, who were set up by Duan Yu, led the people to surrender, and Murong Ke let Wang Teng return to Yangdu with his old official position.

古文：秦征东大将军晋王柳遣参军阎负、梁殊使于凉，以书说凉王玄靓。
现代文：前秦征东大将军、晋王苻柳派参军阎负、梁殊出使前凉，带去书信游说前凉王张玄靓。
English: The former Qin general Zheng Dongda and the Jin king Qiliu sent Yan Fei and Liang Jiu to join the army, and Liang Jiu sent Qian Liang to lobby the former Qian Liang king Zhang Xuanqin.

古文：负、殊至姑臧，张瓘见之，曰： 我，晋臣也；臣无境外之交，二君何以来辱？ 
现代文：阎负、梁殊抵达姑臧，张见到他们说： 我是晋王朝的臣下。臣下不能有国外的交情，二位何以前来辱见？ 
English: When Yan Yan and Liang Shu arrived in Guzheng, Zhang saw them and said, "I am a vassal of the Jin Dynasty. Vassals cannot have foreign friendships. Why did you two come to see me?

古文：负、殊曰： 晋王与君邻籓，虽山河阻绝，风通道会，故来修好，君何怪焉！ 
现代文：阎负、梁殊说： 晋王苻柳和您是邻国，虽然山河阻隔，但风俗相通，道路交接，所以前来和您修好，对此您有什么可奇怪的呢！ 
English: Yan Yan and Liang Shu said: Jin Wang Qiliu and you are neighboring countries, although separated by mountains and rivers, but the customs are common, the roads are connected, so we come to make peace with you, what is strange about this!

古文：瓘曰： 吾尽忠事晋，于今六世矣。
现代文：张说： 我竭尽忠诚事奉晋王朝，至今已有六代人了。
English: Zhang said: I have faithfully served the Jin Dynasty for six generations.

古文：若与苻征东通使，是上违先君之志，下隳士民之节，其可乎！ 
现代文：如果与苻柳互通使节，这就是上违先辈的志向，下毁士人百姓的气节，怎么可以呢！ 
English: If we exchange envoys with Gongliu, this is going against the aspirations of our forefathers and destroying the morale of the people. How can this be?

古文：负、殊曰： 晋室衰微，坠失天命，固已久矣。
现代文：阎负、梁殊说： 晋王室衰微，丧失天命，已经很久了。
English: Yan Yan and Liang Shu said: It has been a long time since the Jin royal family declined and lost its destiny.

古文：是以凉之先王北面二赵，唯知机也。
现代文：所以凉国的两位先王向赵国称臣，这是识时务的。
English: Therefore, the two forefathers of Liang claimed to be Zhao's vassals, which was a wise move.

古文：今大秦威德方盛，凉王若欲自帝河右，则非秦之敌。欲以小事大，则曷若舍晋事秦，以保福禄乎！ 
现代文：如今大秦正值威力德性强盛之时，凉王如果想在黄河以西自称为帝，那不是秦国的对手；如果想以小事大，那何不抛弃晋王室而事奉秦国，以求福禄长存呢！ 
English: Now that the Great Qin Dynasty is at the height of its power and virtue, if King Liang wants to proclaim himself emperor west of the Yellow River, he is no match for the Qin State; if he wants to make a big deal out of small things, then why not abandon the Jin royal family and serve the Qin State, so that his good fortune will last forever!

古文：瓘曰： 中州好食言，向者石氏使车适返，而戎骑已至，吾不敢信也。 
现代文：张说： 中原人爱自食其言。过去赵国石氏使臣的车辆刚刚返回，而进攻的骑兵已经到达，我不敢相信你们。 
English: Zhang said: "The Central Plains people like to eat their own words. In the past, the vehicles of the Zhao Guoshi envoys had just returned, and the attacking cavalry had already arrived. I can't believe you.

古文：负、殊曰： 自古帝王居中州者，政化各殊，赵为奸诈，秦敦信义，岂得一概待之乎！
现代文：阎负、梁殊说： 自古以来身居中原的帝王，政事与教化各不相同，赵国施行奸诈，秦国则奉行信义，怎么能一概而论呢！
English: Yan Yan and Liang Shu said: Since ancient times, the emperors who lived in the Central Plains have been different in politics and education. Zhao State practiced treachery, while Qin State practiced faith and righteousness. How can we generalize?

古文：张先、杨初皆阻兵不服，先帝讨而擒之，赦其罪戾，宠以爵秩，固非石氏之比。 
现代文：张先、杨初全都是因为顽抗抵御，拒不降服，所以秦国的先帝才讨伐并擒获了他们，然而又赦免了他们的罪行，用官爵俸禄宠待他们，这本来就不是石氏可比的。 
English: Zhang Xian and Yang Xian are all because of their stubborn resistance and refusal to surrender, so the first emperor of Qin only fought and captured them, but pardoned their crimes and pampered them with the salary of government officials, which is not comparable to Shi.

古文：瓘曰： 必如君言，秦之威德无敌，何不先取江南，则天下尽为秦有，征东何辱命焉！ 
现代文：张说： 如果一定像你们所说的那样，秦国的威力德行所向无敌，为什么不先去夺取长江以南，那样天下就全归秦国所有了，征东将军为什么要辱赐恩命于我们呢！ 
English: Zhang said: "If, as you say, the might and virtue of Qin is invincible, why not first seize the south of the Yangtze River, and then the whole world will belong to Qin. Why would the general of the Eastern Expedition humiliate us by giving us a gracious order?"

古文：负、殊曰： 江南文身之俗，道污先叛，化隆后服。
现代文：阎负、梁殊说： 长江以南现在还是断发文身之俗盛行，朝廷道义衰落，就首先叛乱，教化隆盛，也最后才归服。
English: Yan Yan and Liang Shu said: In the south of the Yangtze River, the custom of intermittent tattooing is still prevalent, and the morality of the imperial court is in decline. It was first a rebellion, then a flourishing of indoctrination, and finally submission.

古文：主上以为江南必须兵服，河右可以义怀，故遣行人先申大好。
现代文：主上认为长江以南必须靠武力征服，而黄河以西可以靠道义安抚，所以派我们来先申明大义。
English: The Lord thought that south of the Yangtze River must be conquered by force, while west of the Yellow River can be pacified by morality, so he sent us to first affirm the great righteousness.

古文：若君不达天命，则江南得延数年之命，而河右恐非君之土也 。
现代文：如果您不洞察天命，那么长江以南尚有残喘数年的命运，而黄河以西恐怕就不是您的领土了。 
English: If you do not have insight into the fate of the heavens, then south of the Yangtze River still has a few years of fate, and west of the Yellow River is probably not your territory.

古文：瓘曰： 我跨据三州，带甲十万，西苞葱岭，东距大河，伐人有馀，况于自守，何畏于秦！ 
现代文：张说： 我有跨越三州的领土，全副武装的十万军队，西有葱岭作依托，东有黄河作屏障，攻击别人尚且有余，何况是自我守卫，为什么要惧怕秦国呢！ 
English: Zhang said: I have a territory spanning the three states, a hundred thousand fully armed troops, the Qin Mountains in the west as a support, the Yellow River in the east as a barrier, and I still have more than enough to attack others, not to mention self-defense. Why should I be afraid of Qin?

古文：负、殊曰： 贵州山河之固，孰若殽、函？
现代文：阎负、梁殊说： 阁下领土内山河的险固程度，哪一个能比得上崤山和函谷关？
English: Yan Yan and Liang Shu said, "Which of the mountains and rivers in your territory is more dangerous and difficult to cross than Mount Lushan and Hakodate Pass?"

古文：民物之饶，孰若秦、雍？
现代文：百姓赖以生存的物产的富饶程度，哪一样能比得上秦州和雍州？
English: What can compare to Qin and Yongzhou in terms of the richness of the products that people rely on to survive?

古文：杜洪、张琚，因赵氏成资，兵强财富，有囊括关中、席卷四海之志，先帝戎旗西指，冰消云散，旬月之间，不觉易主。
现代文：杜洪、张琚虽然占据了赵国的基业，兵强财丰，大有囊括关中、席卷四海的志向，然而先帝战旗西指，顷刻间便冰消云散，一月之内，不知不觉就改换了君主。
English: Although Du Hong and Zhang Ye occupied the foundation of Zhao State, had strong armies and abundant wealth, and had great aspirations to encircle Guanzhong and sweep the four seas, the first emperor's battle flag pointed west, but the ice disappeared in an instant, and within a month, he unknowingly changed the monarch.

古文：主上若以贵州不服，赫然奋怒，控弦百万，鼓行而西，未知贵州将何以待之？ 瓘笑曰： 兹事当决之于王，非身所了。 
现代文：主上如果认为您不顺服，赫然发怒，出兵百万，击鼓西行，不知道您怎样对付。  张笑着说： 此事应当由凉王决定，不是我所能做主的。 
English: If the Lord thinks that you are disobedient, he will fly into a rage, send out a million soldiers, and march westward beating drums, I don't know how you can deal with it.Zhang smiled and said: This matter should be decided by King Liang, it is not up to me to decide.

古文：负、殊曰： 凉王虽英睿夙成，然年在幼冲，君居伊、霍之任，国家安危，系君一举耳。 
现代文：阎负、梁殊说： 凉王虽然从小就有英明智慧的风采，然而年龄幼小。阁下身负伊尹、霍光那样的重任，国家的安危，全都维系在您的决断上了。 
English: Yan Yan and Liang Shu said: Although Liang Wang has had a wise and intelligent demeanor since childhood, he is still young. Your excellency bears the same heavy responsibilities as Yi Yin and Huo Guang, and the safety of the country all depends on your decision.

古文：瓘惧，乃以玄靓之命遣使称籓于秦，秦因玄靓所称官爵而授之。
现代文：张害怕了，于是就以张玄靓的名义派遣使者，去向前秦称臣，前秦也就将张玄靓自称的官爵正式授予了他。
English: Zhang was afraid, so he sent an envoy in the name of Zhang Xuanqian to call him a minister to the former Qin, and the former Qin officially awarded Zhang Xuanqian's self-proclaimed official title to him.

古文：将军刘度攻秦青州刺史王朗于卢氏；燕将军慕舆长卿入轵关，攻秦幽州刺史强哲于裴氏堡。
现代文：东晋将军刘度在卢氏攻打前秦青州刺史王朗。前燕将军慕舆长卿进入轵关，在裴氏堡攻打前秦幽州刺史强哲。
English: The East Jin general Liu Du attacked Wang Lang, the pre-Qin ruler of Qingzhou, in Lu. The pre-Yan general Mu Yuchang entered Shaoguan and attacked the pre-Qin Yuzhou ruler Qiang Zhe, the pre-Qin Yuzhou ruler, in Pei's Fort.

古文：秦主生遣前将军新兴王飞拒度，建节将军邓羌拒长卿。
现代文：前秦国主苻生派前将军新兴王苻飞抵抗刘度，派建节将军邓羌抵抗慕舆长卿。
English: The former ruler of Qin Dynasty sent the former general Xinxing Wang Qianfei to resist Liu Du, and sent the General Jianjie Deng Qianfei to resist Mu Yuchang.

古文：飞未至而度退。
现代文：苻飞还未到达，刘度就已撤退。
English: Before Zoufei arrived, Liu Du had already retreated.

古文：羌与长卿战，大破之，获长卿及甲首二千馀级。
现代文：邓羌与慕舆长卿交战，打败了他，擒获慕舆长卿，并将二千多披甲士兵斩首。
English: Deng Yu fought with Mu Yuchangqing, defeated him, captured Mu Yuchangqing, and beheaded more than two thousand armored soldiers.

古文：桓温请移都洛阳，修复园陵，章十馀上，不许。
现代文：桓温请求东晋朝廷将国都迁移到洛阳，修复帝王的陵墓，奏章递上去十多次，都未获许可。
English: Kuan Wen requested the Eastern Jin Dynasty court to relocate the capital to Luoyang and repair the emperor's mausoleum. The petition was submitted more than ten times, but no permission was granted.

古文：拜温征讨大都督，督司、冀二州诸军事，以讨姚襄。
现代文：只授予桓温征讨大都督的官职，督察司、冀二州各种军务，用以讨伐姚襄。
English: He only granted Kuan Wen the official post of the Grand Governor, the Inspector General, and various military affairs of the two states of Hebei to fight against Yao Xiang.

古文：三月，秦主生发三辅民治渭桥；金紫光禄大夫程肱谏，以为妨农，生杀之。
现代文：三月，前秦国主苻生调集三辅的百姓去修建渭水桥，金紫光禄大夫程肱对此加以劝谏，认为这样做妨碍农耕，苻生把他杀死。
English: In March, the former ruler of Qin, Zeng Sheng, mobilized the people of Sanfu to build the Surabaya Water Bridge. The doctor of Jin Zi Guanglu, Cheng Qi, advised him against this, believing that this would hinder farming, and Zeng Sheng killed him.

古文：夏，四月，长安大风，发屋拔木。
现代文：夏季，四月，长安刮起一场大风，掀掉屋瓦，拔起树木。
English: In the summer, in April, a strong wind blew in Chang'an, tearing off roof tiles and uprooting trees.

古文：秦宫中惊扰，或称贼至，宫门昼闭，五日乃止。
现代文：前秦王宫中一片惊恐混乱，有人说寇贼来了，因此宫门在大白天也紧紧关闭，一直持续了五天。
English: There was panic and confusion in the palace of the former Qin King. Some people said that robbers were coming, so the palace gate was tightly closed during the day, which lasted for five days.

古文：秦主生推告贼者，刳出其心。
现代文：前秦国主苻生追查谎称寇贼来了的人，要挖出他的心。
English: The former Qin Emperor Shen Sheng tracked down the person who falsely claimed that the robbers had come, and wanted to dig out his heart.

古文：左光禄大夫强平谏曰： 天降灾异，陛下当爱民事神，缓刑崇德以应之，乃可弭也。 。
现代文：左光禄大夫强平劝谏说： 天降灾祸，陛下应该关怀民众，奉事神灵，缓施刑罚，崇尚德性，以此来应接天意，才能消除灾祸。 
English: Zuo Guanglu's doctor Qiangping advised him, "Since the calamity was caused by the heavens, Your Majesty should care for the people, serve the gods, delay the imposition of punishment, and advocate morality, in order to respond to the will of heaven and eliminate the calamity.

古文：生怒，凿其顶而杀之。
现代文：苻生听后大怒，凿开他的头顶后把他杀死。
English: Hearing this, the student flew into a rage, chopped off the top of his head and killed him.

古文：卫将军广平王黄眉、前将军新兴王飞、建节将军邓羌，以平，太后之弟，叩头固谏，生弗听，出黄眉为左冯翊，飞为右扶风，羌行咸阳太守，犹惜其骁勇，故皆弗杀。
现代文：卫将军广平王苻黄眉、前将军新兴王苻飞、建节将军邓羌都因为强平是强太后弟弟，叩头恳切地劝谏。但苻生没有听从，并且将苻黄眉贬任到左冯翊，将苻飞贬任到右扶风，贬邓羌代理咸阳太守。只是念及他们作战勇猛，所以没有把他们全杀掉。
English: Wei general Guangping Wang Qian Huang Mei, former general Xinxing Wang Qian Fei, and Jian Jie general Deng Qian all earnestly advised Qian because Qian was the younger brother of Qian. However, Qian did not listen, and demoted Qian Huang Mei to Zuo Feng Qian, demoted Qian Fei to Zuo Fu Feng, and demoted Deng Qian to acting Xianyang governor. However, he did not kill them all because he thought they fought bravely.

古文：五月，太后强氏以忧恨卒，谥曰明德。
现代文：五月，太后强氏终因忧愤而死，谥号为明德。
English: In May, Empress Dowager Qiang finally died of grief and anger, and her nickname was Mingde.

古文：姚襄自许昌攻周成于洛阳。
现代文：姚襄自许昌进发到洛阳，攻打周成。
English: Yao Xiang sent Xu Chang to Luoyang to attack Zhou Cheng.

古文：六月，秦主生下诏曰： 朕受皇天之命，君临万邦；嗣统以来，有何不善，而谤讟言之音，扇满天下！
现代文：六月，前秦国主苻生下达诏书说： 朕禀承上天之命，统治万邦，继承先统以来，有什么不好的地方，诽谤之言竟横行天下！
English: In June, the empress dowager of the former Qin Dynasty issued an imperial edict, saying: "Since I have inherited Heaven's command to rule over all nations and succeeded to the throne, what bad things have happened? Words of slander have been rampant all over the world!

古文：杀不过千，而谓之残虐！
现代文：杀人还没过千，就说这是残酷暴虐！
English: Before a thousand murders have been committed, they say it's a cruel tyranny!

古文：行者比肩，未足为希。方当峻刑极罚，复如朕何！ 
现代文：现在行人还比肩摩踵，不能说稀少，正应当严明重刑，施以极罚，谁又能把朕如何！ 
English: Now, pedestrians are still scarce, it cannot be said that they are rare. Strict and severe punishment and capital punishment should be imposed. Who can tell me what to do?

古文：自去春以来，潼关之西，至于长安，虎狼为暴。
现代文：自从春天过去以后，从潼关以西一直到长安一带，虎狼肆行无忌。
English: Since the spring passed, from the west of Shaoguan all the way to the Chang'an area, tigers and wolves have been rampant.

古文：昼则继道，夜则发屋，不食六畜，专务食人，凡杀七百馀人。
现代文：大白天相继出现在道路上，到了夜晚则毁屋入室，不食六畜，专门吃人，被吃掉的人总共已达七百多。
English: During the day, they appeared on the roads one after another. At night, they destroyed houses and entered homes. They did not eat livestock, but only people. In total, more than 700 people have been eaten.

古文：民废耕桑，相聚邑居，而为害不息。
现代文：百姓们荒废了农耕桑蚕，只能聚集到一块居住，但虎狼仍然不停地为害。
English: The people have wasted the agricultural mulberry and silkworm, and can only gather to live in one place, but the tiger and wolf still continue to do harm.

古文：秋，七月，秦群臣奏请禳灾，生曰： 野兽饥则食人，饱当自止，何禳之有！
现代文：秋季，七月，前秦群臣上奏请求设祭禳除虎狼之害，苻生说： 野兽饿了就要吃人，吃饱了自己就会停止，有什么值得设祭禳除的呢！
English: In the autumn, in July, the former Qin Dynasty ministers made a request to set up a festival to eliminate the harm of tigers and wolves, and Sheng Sheng said: When the beast is hungry, it will eat people, and when it is full, it will stop. What is worth setting up a festival to eliminate?

古文：且天岂不爱民哉，正以犯罪者多，故助朕杀之耳！ 
现代文：况且上天难道能不爱护民众吗？正是因为犯罪的人太多，所以上天才帮助朕消灭他们！ 
English: Besides, how could Heaven not love the people? It is precisely because there are too many criminals that Heaven is helping us to exterminate them!

古文：丙子，燕献怀太子晔卒。
现代文：丙子，前燕国献怀太子慕容晔去世。
English: Prince Murong Jun, the former prince of Yan Province, passed away.

古文：姚襄攻洛阳，逾月不克。
现代文：姚襄攻打洛阳，一个多月也没有攻克。
English: Yao Xiang attacked Luoyang and did not conquer it for more than a month.

古文：长史王亮谏曰： 明公英名盖世，兵强民附。
现代文：长史王亮劝谏姚襄说： 您英名盖世，兵力强盛，民众都来归附。
English: Wang Liang, the chief historian, advised Zou Yao Xiang, saying, "Your fame has spread far and wide, your army is strong, and the people have all come to follow you.

古文：今顿兵坚城之下，力屈威挫，或为它寇所乘，此危亡之道也！ 
现代文：如今屯兵于坚固的城池之下，力量受阻，威势受挫，其他敌人或许会利用这个机会，这是走向危险灭亡的道路！ 
English: Now that the garrison is under a fortified castle, the strength is blocked, the power is frustrated, other enemies may take advantage of this opportunity, this is the road to dangerous death!

古文：襄不从。
现代文：姚襄没有听从。
English: Yao Xiang did not listen.

古文：桓温自江陵北伐，遣督护高武据鲁阳，辅国将军戴施屯河上，自帅大兵继进。
现代文：东晋桓温自江陵出发北伐，派督护高武占据鲁阳，派辅国将军戴施驻扎在大河岸边，自己则率领大军随后进发。
English: Eastern Jin Emperor Kuan-Wen started the Northern Expedition from Gangneung, and sent the governor and protector Gao Wu to occupy Luyang, and sent the auxiliary general Dai Shi to be stationed on the banks of the great river, while he himself led a large army and then set out.

古文：与寮属登平乘楼望中原，叹曰： 遂使神州陆沉，百年丘墟，王夷甫诸人不得不任其责！ 
现代文：他与同僚们登上大船的高楼，遥望中原，深有感慨地说： 使神州大地沉沦，百年基业变为废墟，王衍等人不能不承担责任！ 
English: He and his colleagues boarded the tall building of the large ship, looked at the Central Plains in the distance, and said with deep emotion: Wang Yan and others cannot but bear responsibility for causing the land of Shenzhou to sink, and the hundred-year-old foundation to become ruins!

古文：记室陈郡袁宏曰： 运有兴废，岂必诸人之过！ 
现代文：记室、陈郡人袁宏说： 时运有兴有废，难道一定是这几个人的过错！ 
English: Yuan Hong, a clerk and resident of Chen County, said, "Whether it is good or bad luck, it must be the fault of these few people!"

古文：温作色曰： 昔刘景升有千斤大牛，啖刍豆十倍于常牛，负重致运，曾不若一赢牸，魏武入荆州，杀以享军。 
现代文：桓温脸色一变说： 过去刘表有一头千斤重的大牛，吃进去的草料豆饼比一般的牛多十倍，然而拉车赶路时，竟不如一头瘦弱有病的母牛。魏武帝曹操进入荆州后，就把它杀掉让士兵吃了。 
English: "In the past, Liu Biao had a thousand-pound cow, which ate ten times more bean cakes than the average cow. However, when pulling a cart, it was actually not as good as a weak and sick cow. After Wei Emperor Cao Cao entered Jingzhou, he killed it and let the soldiers eat it.

古文：八月，已亥，温至伊水，姚襄撤围拒之，匿精锐于水北林中，遣使谓温曰： 承亲帅王师以来，襄今奉身归命，愿敕三军小却，当拜伏路左。 
现代文：八月，己亥，桓温抵达伊水，姚襄把包围洛阳的部队撤下来抵抗桓温。他将精锐部队隐藏在伊水以北的树林中，派使者去对桓温说： 承蒙您亲自率领帝王的军队前来，姚襄如今以身归附天命，愿您敕令三军稍微退后，我们当夹道拜迎。 
English: In August, Ji Hai and Huan Wen arrived in Yishui. Yao Xiang withdrew the troops encircling Luoyang to resist Huan Wen. He hid the elite troops in the woods north of Yishui and sent an envoy to say to Huan Wen: Thanks to you personally leading the emperor's army to come, Yao Xiang is now attached to the fate of heaven. May you order the three armies to retreat a little, and we will say goodbye.

古文：温曰： 我自开复中原，展敬山陵，无豫君事。
现代文：桓温说： 我来开辟光复中原，察看拜谒皇陵，和你们无关。
English: Kanwen said, "It has nothing to do with you that I came to open up the Central Plains of Guangfu and inspect the mausoleum of Emperor Baizhang.

古文：欲来者便前，相见在近，何烦使人！ 
现代文：想来见面的随便前来，近在咫尺，无须麻烦使者。 
English: If you want to meet, just come, it's close at hand, no need to bother the messenger.

古文：襄拒水而战。温结陈而前，亲被甲督战。襄众大败，死者数千人。
现代文：姚襄凭借伊水和桓温交战，桓温将部队列阵前进，亲自披甲督战，姚襄的兵众被打败，死亡数千人。
English: Yao Xiang relied on Yi Shui and Huan Wen to fight. Huan Wen advanced his troops in a line and personally wore armor to fight. Yao Xiang's soldiers were defeated, and thousands of people died.

古文：襄帅麾下数千骑奔于洛阳北山，其夜，民弃妻子随襄者五千馀人。
现代文：姚襄率领手下数千骑兵逃奔到洛阳北山。当晚，百姓抛弃妻子儿女追随姚襄的有五千多人。
English: Yao Xiang led thousands of cavalrymen to flee to the Beishan of Luoyang. That night, more than five thousand people abandoned their wives and children to follow Yao Xiang.

古文：襄勇而爱人，虽战屡败，民知襄所在，辄扶老携幼，奔驰而赴之。
现代文：姚襄勇猛而又爱护百姓，虽然他屡战屡败，但百姓一得知姚襄在哪里，就扶老携幼，急忙追赶投奔他。
English: Yao Xiang was brave and loved the people. Although he repeatedly lost battles, as soon as the people learned where Yao Xiang was, they helped the old man with his children and hurried to catch up with him.

古文：温军中传言襄病创已死，许、洛士女为温所得者，无不北望而泣。
现代文：桓温的军队中传说姚襄因受伤已死，被桓温抓获的许昌、洛阳的男女民众，无不面向北方哭泣。
English: According to the legend, Yao Xiang died of his injuries in the army of Huan Wen. The men and women of Xu Chang and Luoyang, who were captured by Huan Wen, all cried facing the north.

古文：襄西走，温追之不及。
现代文：姚襄向西逃走，桓温没有追上。
English: Yao Xiang fled westward, and Guan Wen did not catch up.

古文：弘农杨亮自襄所来奔，温问襄之为人，亮曰： 襄神明器宇，孙策之俦，而雄武过之。 
现代文：弘农人杨亮从姚襄那里来投奔桓温，桓温问他姚襄的为人，杨亮说： 姚襄英明如神，胸怀宽广，如同孙策一样，而雄才武略却超过了孙策。 
English: Yang Liang, a Hongnong farmer, came from Yao Xiang to join Huan Wen. Huan Wen asked him about Yao Xiang's character. Yang Liang said: Yao Xiang is as wise as a god, with a broad mind, just like Sun Ce. However, his great talent in military strategy surpasses that of Sun Ce.

古文：周成帅众出降，温屯故太极殿前，既而徙屯金墉城。
现代文：周成率领兵众出来投降，桓温把部队屯驻在过去的太极殿前，紧接着又转移到金墉城。
English: Zhou Cheng led the troops to surrender, and Kan Wen stationed the troops in front of the former Taiji Temple, and then moved them to Jincheng.

古文：已丑，谒诸陵，有毁坏者修复之，各置陵令。
现代文：己丑，桓温拜谒各个陵墓，有被毁坏的就加以修复，并分别设置了看守陵园的陵令。
English: As a result, Emperor Kan'en paid homage to the various mausoleums, repaired those that had been destroyed, and separately set up a mausoleum order to guard the cemetery.

古文：表镇西将军谢尚都督司州诸军事，镇洛阳。
现代文：上表请求任命镇西将军谢尚为都督司州诸军事，镇守洛阳。
English: The above table requests the appointment of Zhenxi General Xie Shang as the military governor of the prefecture and the town guard of Luoyang.

古文：以尚未至，留颖川太守毛穆之、督护陈午、河南太守戴施以二千人戍洛阳，卫山陵，徙降军三千馀家于江、汉之间，执周成以归。
现代文：因为谢尚还未到达，就留下颍川太守毛穆之、督护陈午、河南太守戴施以二千人的兵力戍守洛阳，保卫皇陵。桓温把三千多家投降的百姓迁徙到长江、汉水之间，押解着周成返回。
English: Because Xie Shang had not yet arrived, he left Shichuan's grand marshal Maomuzhi, the governor Chen Wu, and the grand marshal of Henan, Dai Shi, to defend Luoyang and the imperial mausoleum with a force of two thousand soldiers. Kuan Wen moved more than three thousand surrendered people between the Yangtze River and the Han River, and escorted Zhou Cheng back.

古文：姚襄奔平阳，秦并州刺史尹赤复以众降襄，襄遂据襄陵。
现代文：姚襄逃奔到平阳，前秦并州刺史尹赤又率众投降了姚襄，姚襄于是占据襄陵。
English: Yao Xiang fled to Pingyang, the former Qin and the state stabbed Shi Yin Chieh and led the crowd to surrender to Yao Xiang, Yao Xiang then occupied Xiangling.

古文：秦大将军张平击之，襄为平所败，乃与平约为兄弟，各罢兵。
现代文：前秦大将军张平攻击姚襄。姚襄被张平打败，于是与他结为兄弟，各自罢兵休战。
English: The former Qin general Zhang Ping attacked Yao Xiang. Yao Xiang was defeated by Zhang Ping, so he and Yao Xiang formed a brotherhood, and each of them called a truce.

古文：段龛遣其属段蕰来求救，诏徐州刺史荀羡将兵随蕰救之。
现代文：段龛派他的属下段来东晋求救，朝廷诏令徐州刺史荀羡统领军队跟随段前去救援。
English: Duan Yu sent his subordinate Duan to East Jin to ask for help, and the imperial court ordered Xuzhou Zhisheng to lead the army to follow Duan to the rescue.

古文：羡至琅邪，惮燕兵之强，不敢进。
现代文：荀羡到达琅邪后，由于害怕前燕兵力的强大而不敢继续前进。
English: After Zou En arrived in Shiyan, he was afraid to continue moving forward for fear of the strong force of the former Yan soldiers.

古文：王腾寇鄄城，羡进攻阳都，会霖雨，城坏，获腾，斩之。
现代文：王腾进犯鄄城，荀羡便进攻阳都，这时恰巧碰上连绵大雨，城墙被淋坏，荀羡擒获了王腾，把他杀掉了。
English: Wang Teng invaded the city of Lushan, and Shao Zhen attacked Yangdu. At this time, it happened to rain continuously, and the city wall was damaged. Shao Zhen captured Wang Teng and killed him.

古文：冬，十月，癸巳朔，日有食之。
现代文：冬季十月，癸巳朔，出现日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurs in the winter month of October.

古文：秦主生夜食枣多，旦而有疾，召太医令程延，使诊之。
现代文：前秦国主苻生晚上吃枣过多，第二天早晨不舒服，就召来太医令程延，让他号脉诊断。
English: The former Qin sovereign's son-in-law ate too many dates in the evening and felt unwell the next morning, so he summoned the Great Physician Cheng Yan to diagnose his pulse.

古文：延曰： 陛下无它疾，食枣多耳。 
现代文：程延说： 陛下没有别的病，就是枣吃多了。 
English: Cheng Yan said, "Your Majesty does not have any other illness, except eating too many dates."

古文：生怒曰： 汝非圣人，安知吾食枣！ 
现代文：苻生大怒，说： 你不是圣人，怎么知道我吃枣了！ 
English: He flew into a rage and said, "You're not a saint, how did you know I ate the jujube!"

古文：遂斩之。
现代文：随后就把程延杀了。
English: With that, he too was beheaded.

古文：燕大司马恪围段龛于广固，诸将请急攻之。恪曰： 用兵之势，有宜缓者，有宜急者，不可不察。
现代文：前燕大司马慕容恪在广固包围了段龛，众将领请求马上攻打，慕容恪说： 用兵的方法，有应该缓慢的时候，也有应该急速的时候，不能不仔细审度。
English: Former Yan Daishi, Ma Murong, surrounded Duanlu in Guanggu, and the generals requested to attack immediately. Murong said: The method of using soldiers, there are times when it should be slow, and there are times when it should be fast, we must carefully examine.

古文：若彼我势敌，外有强援，恐有腹背之患，则攻之不可不急。
现代文：如果敌我力量相当，而敌人又在外边有强大的援军，这时恐怕有腹背受敌的危险，则攻打不能不急。
English: If the strength of the enemy and ours are equal, and the enemy has strong reinforcements outside, then I am afraid that there is a danger of being attacked from behind, then the attack must be urgent.

古文：若我强彼弱，无援于外，力足制之者，当羁縻守之，以待其毙。
现代文：如果我强敌弱，敌人在外边又无援军，我们的力量足以制服他的时候，就应该包围并守住他，等待着敌人坐以自毙。
English: If I have a strong enemy and a weak enemy, and the enemy is on the outside and has no reinforcements, when our strength is sufficient to subdue him, we should surround and hold him, and wait for the enemy to commit suicide.

古文：兵法 十围五攻 ，正谓此也。
现代文：兵法中的十围五攻，说的正是这个道理。
English: In the art of war, it is said that ten encirclements make five assaults.

古文：龛兵尚众，未有离心。
现代文：眼下段龛的兵力尚多，还没有出现离心倾向。
English: Right now, there are still a lot of troops in the lower echelon, and there has not yet been a centrifugal tendency.

古文：济南之战，非不锐也，但龛用之无术，以取败耳。
现代文：济南之战时，段龛的军队不是不精锐，只是因为他用兵无术，所以才自取失败。
English: At the time of the Battle of Jinan, Duan Xuan's army was not unskilled, but because he had no skill in using soldiers, he took the defeat on himself.

古文：今凭阻坚城，上下戮力，我尽锐攻之，计数旬可拔，然杀吾士卒必多矣。
现代文：如今他凭借险阻坚守城池，上上下下，齐心合力，我动用全部精锐部队去攻打他，大约有几天也可以攻下来，然而我们士兵的伤亡也一定很多。
English: Now he is holding on to the castle with the help of dangerous obstacles. I will use all my elite troops to attack him. I can attack him for a few days, but there will be a lot of casualties among our soldiers.

古文：自有事中原，兵不暂息，吾每念之，夜而忘寐，奈何轻用其死乎！
现代文：自从中原发生战争以来，士卒们连短暂的休整也没有，每念及此，我便夜不能寐，怎么能轻易地使用让士卒们献身的战术呢！
English: Since the war broke out in the Central Plains, the soldiers have not had even a short rest, and every time I think about it, I can't sleep at night, how can I easily use the tactic of letting the soldiers die!

古文：要在取之，不必求功之速也！ 
现代文：重要的在于把城池攻下来，不必要求迅速成功！ 
English: The important thing is to take the castle, not to succeed quickly!

古文：诸将皆曰： 非所及也。 
现代文：众将领都说： 这些不是我们所能想到的。 
English: The generals all said, "This is not what we had in mind."

古文：军中闻之，人人感悦。于是为高墙深堑以守之。
现代文：军中士兵听说后，人人感动喜悦，于是他们就筑高墙，挖深壕，用来坚守包围圈。
English: When the soldiers in the army heard about it, everyone was moved with joy, so they built high walls and dug deep trenches to defend the encirclement.

古文：齐人争运粮以馈燕军。
现代文：齐地的人争先恐后地运来粮食送给前燕的军队。
English: The people of Qi scrambled to bring grain to Yuan Yan's army.

古文：龛婴城自守，樵采路绝，城中人相食。
现代文：段龛环城自守，连砍柴的小路也被切断，城里人相残食。
English: Duanqianhuan City defended itself, even the path for cutting firewood was cut off, and people in the city ate each other's leftovers.

古文：龛悉众出战。恪破之于围里，先分骑屯诸门。
现代文：段龛调动全部兵力出城战斗，被慕容恪在包围圈里打败。
English: Duan Yu mobilized all his forces to fight outside the city and was defeated by Murong Ke in the encirclement.

古文：龛身自冲荡，仅而得入，馀兵皆没。
现代文：慕容恪事先就分派骑兵控制了各个城门，段龛经过只身拼搏，仅得以逃回城内，其余的士兵全部覆没。
English: Murong Ke dispatched cavalry in advance to control the various gates. Duan Yu, after struggling alone, was only able to escape back into the city, and the remaining soldiers were all overrun.

古文：于是城中气沮，莫有固志。
现代文：从此城里的兵众情绪沮丧，没人再有固守的斗志了。
English: From then on, the soldiers in the city were depressed, and no one had the will to fight anymore.

古文：十一月，丙子，龛面缚出降，并执硃秃送蓟。
现代文：十一月，丙子，段龛将两手反绑于身后出城投降，他和朱秃一起被押解送往蓟城。
English: In November, Cixi and Duan Rong went out of the city to surrender with their hands tied behind their backs. He and Zhu Biao were deported to Lucheng together.

古文：恪抚安新民，悉定齐地，徙鲜卑、胡、羯三千馀户于蓟。
现代文：慕容恪抚慰安定新近归附的民众，全部平定齐地，将三千多户鲜卑族、胡族、羯族人迁徙到蓟城。
English: Murong Guozhu comforted and stabilized the newly annexed people, and all of them were pacified and moved more than three thousand families of the Xianbei, Hu and Yao ethnic groups to Handan.

古文：燕主俊具硃秃五刑，以段龛为伏顺将军。
现代文：前燕国主慕容俊用墨、劓、宫、大辟五刑处死朱秃，任命段龛为伏顺将军。
English: Mu Rongjun, the former ruler of Yan Province, executed Zhu Biao with five punishments of ink, pestle, palace and dagger, and appointed Duan Yu as the general of Fushun.

古文：恪留慕容尘镇广固，以尚书左丞鞠殷为东莱太守，章武太守鲜于亮为齐郡太守，乃还。
现代文：慕容恪留下慕容尘镇守广固，任命尚书左丞鞠殷为东莱太守，任命章武太守鲜于亮为齐郡太守，然后返回。
English: Murong Gu left Murong Chen as the town guard of Guanggu, appointed Shangshu Zuo Jiuyin as the governor of Donglai, appointed Zhangwu Jiu Liang as the governor of Qi County, and then returned.

古文：殷，彭之子也。
现代文：鞠殷是鞠彭的儿子。
English: Juyin is the son of Ju Peng.

古文：彭时为燕大长秋，以书戒殷曰： 王弥、曹嶷，必有子孙，汝善招抚，勿寻旧怨，以长乱源！ 
现代文：鞠彭当时任前燕的大长秋官职，他写信告诫鞠殷说： 王弥、曹嶷，肯定有子孙后代，你一定要很好地招纳抚慰他们，不要计较过去的怨恨，以防扩大祸乱的根源。 
English: At that time, Ju Peng, who was the grand chancellor of Yan, wrote a letter to caution Ju Yin, saying, "Wang Mi and Cao Pi certainly have future generations. You must recruit and comfort them well, and do not pay attention to past grudges, so as to prevent the expansion of the root cause of the disaster.

古文：殷推求，得弥从子立、嶷孙岩于山中，请与相见，深结意分。
现代文：鞠殷经过推问访察，在山中找到了王弥的侄子王立、曹嶷的孙子曹岩，便邀请他们前来相见，结下了深厚的情谊。
English: After making inquiries and visits, Juyin found Wang Li, the nephew of Wang Mi, and Cao Yan, the grandson of Cao Pi, in the mountains, and invited them to come and meet, forming a deep friendship.

古文：彭复遣使遗以车马衣服，郡民由是大和。
现代文：鞠彭又派使者给他们送去车马衣服，东莱郡的百姓从此太平了。
English: Ju Peng also sent an envoy to send them carts, horses and clothes, and the people of Donglai County have been at peace ever since.

古文：荀羡闻段龛已败，退还下邳，留将军诸葛攸、高平太守刘庄将三千人守琅邪。参军谯国戴遂等将二千人守泰山。
现代文：荀羡听说段龛已经失败，便退回到下邳，留下将军诸葛攸、高平太守刘庄统率三千兵众守卫琅邪，参军谯国人戴等统率二千兵众守卫泰山。
English: Upon hearing that Duan Yu had failed, he retreated to the lower castle, leaving the general Zhuge You, the high-ranking eunuch Liu Zhuang to lead three thousand soldiers to guard the evil, and the people of the country Dai, who joined the army, to lead two thousand soldiers to guard Mount Tai.

古文：燕将慕容兰屯汴城，羡击斩之。
现代文：前燕将领慕容兰驻扎在汴城，荀羡攻打并杀掉他。
English: Former Yan general Murong Lan was stationed in Lucheng, and Yan Zhen attacked and killed him.

古文：诏遣兼司空、散骑常侍车灌等持节如洛阳，修五陵。
现代文：东晋穆帝下诏，派兼司空、散骑常侍车灌等人带着符节前往洛阳，修整先帝的五座陵墓。
English: Emperor Mu of the Eastern Jin Dynasty issued an edict, and dispatched concubines and cavalrymen to Luoyang to repair the five mausoleums of the former emperor.

古文：是岁，仇池公杨国从父俊杀国自立；以俊为仇池公。
现代文：十二月，庚戍，穆帝和群臣全都身穿细麻布衣服，到太极殿哭泣谒拜三天。
English: In December, Geng Yao, Mu Di and his ministers, all dressed in fine linen, went to the Taiji Temple to weep and worship for three days.

古文：国子安奔秦。孝宗穆皇帝中之下升平元年
现代文：司州都督谢尚因为有病无法料理政事，东晋朝廷以丹阳尹王胡之代替他。王胡之是王的儿子。这一年，仇池公杨国的叔父杨俊杀掉杨国而自立。
English: Xie Shang, the governor of Sizhou, was unable to attend to government affairs due to illness, and the Eastern Jin court replaced him with Danyang Yin Wang Hu, the son of Wang Hu. In this year, Yang Jun, the uncle of the enemy Yang Guo, killed Yang Guo and became independent.

古文：春，正月，壬戌朔，帝加元服。
现代文：东晋朝廷任命杨俊为仇池公。杨国的儿子杨安投奔前秦。升平元年
English: The Eastern Jin Dynasty court appointed Yang Jun as the Prince of Qi. Yang Guo's son Yang An defected to the Former Qin. In the first year of the Heian period,

古文：太后诏归政，大赦，改元，太后徙居崇德宫。
现代文：春季，正月，壬戌朔，东晋穆帝行加冠礼，太后下诏，让他开始主持朝政，实行大赦，改年号，太后迁居崇德宫。
English: In the spring, the first month of the year, the Eastern Jin Emperor Mu began to be crowned, and the Empress Dowager issued an edict to let him begin to preside over the imperial government, implement an amnesty, change the year, and the Empress Dowager moved to the Chongde Palace.

古文：燕主俊征幽州刺史乙逸为左光禄大夫。
现代文：前燕国主慕容俊征召幽州刺史乙逸为左光禄大夫。
English: Mu Rongjun, the former ruler of Yan Province, conscripted Yuzhou Jishi Yi Yi to be the doctor of Zuo Guanglu.

古文：逸夫妇共载鹿车；子璋从数十骑，服饰甚丽，奉迎于道。
现代文：乙逸夫妇共坐一辆小车前往就任，而他的儿子乙璋却带着随从数十骑，衣着华丽，在路上迎候。
English: Mr. and Mrs. Yi Yi rode together in a small car to the inauguration, while his son, Yi Jun, was greeted on the road by dozens of well-dressed courtiers.

古文：逸大怒，闭车不与言。到城，深责之，璋犹不悛。
现代文：乙逸十分愤怒，紧闭车门，不和他说话，到了蓟城后，乙逸深深地责备他，乙璋还不认错。
English: Yiyi was very angry, closed the car door tightly and did not talk to him. After arriving in Handan, Yiyi deeply reproached him, but Yiyi still did not admit his mistake.

古文：逸常忧其败，而璋更被擢任，历中书令、御史中丞。
现代文：乙逸常常忧虑他要衰败下去，而乙璋却屡被提升，历任中书令、御史中丞。
English: Yitai often worried that he would decline, but Yitai was repeatedly promoted, successively serving as Shurei and Goshi Chujo.

古文：逸乃叹曰： 吾少自修立，克已守道，仅能免罪。
现代文：乙逸于是便叹息道： 我从小修身养性，克己守礼，到头来也只能是得以免罪。
English: Yiyi then sighed and said: I have been cultivating myself since I was a child, restraining myself and observing etiquette. In the end, I was only able to be absolved.

古文：璋不治节俭，专为奢纵，而更居清显。
现代文：乙璋不检点品行，专干放纵奢侈的事情，反而屡任政事清简地位显赫的官职，这难道仅仅是乙璋有愧于宠幸吗？
English: Is it just that Acetylene is not worthy of being favored because of his indiscreet behavior and indulgence in luxury, but on the contrary, he has repeatedly held a high-ranking official position in politics?

古文：此岂唯璋之忝幸，实时世之陵夷也。 二月，癸丑，燕主俊立其子中山王为太子，大赦，改元光寿。
现代文：实在是世道的衰落。 二月，癸丑，前燕国主慕容俊立他的儿子中山王慕容为太子，实行大赦，改年号为光寿。
English: In February, the former ruler of Yan Province, Murong Jun, appointed his son, Zhongshan King Murong, as crown prince, implemented an amnesty, and changed the year name to Guangshou.

古文：太白入东井。
现代文：金星进入井宿。
English: Venus enters the well.

古文：秦有司奏： 太白罚星，东井秦分，必有暴兵起京师。 
现代文：前秦的有关官署上奏章说： 金星是主惩罚之星，井宿则是原秦国分野，京师一定要出现暴动了。 
English: The relevant government office of the former Qin Dynasty issued a proclamation saying: "Venus is the main punishment star, Jingju is the field of the original Qin Dynasty, and there must be a riot in Beijing."

古文：秦主生曰： 太白入井，自为渴耳，何所怪乎！ 
现代文：前秦国主苻生说： 金星入井宿，是它自己渴了，有什么大惊小怪的呢！ 
English: Former Qin sovereign Zeng Sheng said: Venus enters the well, it is itself thirsty, what is the fuss about!

古文：姚襄将图关中，夏，四月，自北屈进屯杏城，遣辅国将军姚兰略地敷城，曜武将军姚益生、左将军王钦卢各将兵招纳诸羌、胡。
现代文：姚襄准备图谋关中，夏季，四月，从北屈出发进据杏城，派辅国将军姚兰攻占敷城，曜武将军姚益生、左将军王钦卢分别统率士兵去招纳羌、胡各部族。
English: Yao Xiang was preparing to plot against Guanzhong, and in the summer, in April, he set out from Beikutou to invade Guanzhong. He sent the auxiliary general Yao Lan to capture Shijicheng, and the Yowu general Yao Yisheng and the left general Wang Qinlu respectively led the soldiers to recruit the Yi and Hu tribes.

古文：兰，襄之从兄；益生，襄之兄也。
现代文：姚兰是姚襄的堂兄；姚益生是姚襄的哥哥。
English: Yao Lan is Yao Xiang's cousin; Yao Yisheng is Yao Xiang's brother.

古文：羌、胡及秦民归之者五万馀户。
现代文：羌、胡部族及汉族的民众归附他们的有五万多户。
English: More than 50,000 households from the Min, Hu and Han tribes have joined them.

古文：秦将苻飞龙击兰，擒之。
现代文：前秦将领苻飞龙攻击姚兰，擒获了他。
English: The former Qin general led the dragonfly to attack Yao Lan and captured him.

古文：襄引兵进据黄落；秦主生遣卫大将军广平王黄眉、平北将军苻道、龙骧将军东海王坚、建节将军邓羌将步骑万五千以御之。
现代文：姚襄率兵进据黄落，前秦国主苻生派卫大将军、广平王苻黄眉，北平将军苻道，龙骧将军东海王苻坚，建节将军邓羌统率步、骑兵一万五千人前去抵御。
English: Yao Xiang led the troops into Huangliao, and the former Qin sovereign Sheng Sheng sent General Wei, Guangping Wang Qian Huangmei, Beiping General Xing Dao, Longjing General Donghai Wang Qianjian, Jianjie General Deng Qian and 15,000 cavalry to resist.

古文：襄坚壁不战。
现代文：姚襄坚壁固守不交战。
English: Yao Xiang Jianbi held fast and did not fight.

古文：羌谓黄眉曰： 襄为桓温、张平所败，锐气丧矣。
现代文：邓羌对苻黄眉说： 姚襄被桓温、张平打败，锐气已丧。
English: Deng Wei said to Zou Huangmei: Yao Xiang was defeated by Huan Wen and Zhang Ping, and his spirit was broken.

古文：然其为人强狠，若鼓噪扬旗，直压其垒，彼必忿恚而出，可一战擒也。 
现代文：然而他为人争强好胜，如果我们敲响战鼓，挥舞战旗，大兵直接压向他的营垒，他一定会愤而出战，这样就可以一战擒获他。 
English: However, he is a competitive person, and if we beat the war drums and wave the battle flags, and the soldiers press directly against his camp, he will certainly be angry and go to war, so that we can capture him in one battle.

古文：五月，羌帅骑三千压其垒门而陈，襄怒，悉众出战。
现代文：五月，邓羌率领三千骑兵压到姚襄的营垒门前，摆开了战阵，姚襄大怒，调动全部兵力出来迎战。
English: In May, Deng Yu led three thousand cavalrymen to the front of Yao Xiang's camp and opened a battle line. Yao Xiang was furious and mobilized all his forces to meet the battle.

古文：羌阳不胜而走，襄追之，至于三原。羌回骑击之，黄眉等以大众继至，襄兵大败。
现代文：邓羌表面上装作不能取胜而逃跑，姚襄追到了三原，这时邓羌掉转骑兵攻击姚襄，苻黄眉等人则率领大部队随后赶到，姚襄的部队被彻底打败。
English: On the surface, Deng Xuan pretended that he could not win and ran away. He chased Yao Xiang to Mihara. At this time, Deng Xuan turned the cavalry to attack Yao Xiang. Zou Huang Mei and others led a large force and arrived later. Yao Xiang's troops were completely defeated.

古文：襄所乘骏马曰黧眉騧，马倒，秦兵擒而斩之，弟苌帅其众降。
现代文：姚襄所骑的骏马叫黧眉，失蹄摔倒，前秦的士兵擒获了姚襄，然后把他杀死。
English: The horse that Yao Xiang was riding was called Frowning, and it lost its hoof and fell down. The soldiers of the former Qin captured Yao Xiang and then killed him.

古文：襄载其父弋仲之柩在军中，秦主生以王礼葬弋仲于孤磐，亦以公礼葬襄。
现代文：姚襄的弟弟姚苌率领部众投降。姚襄把他父亲姚弋仲的棺材停放在军营中，前秦国主苻生以诸侯王的礼仪把姚鞍弋仲埋葬在孤磐，也以公爵的礼仪埋葬了姚襄。
English: Yao Xiang's younger brother, Yao Xuan, led the crowd to surrender. Yao Xiang placed the coffin of his father, Yao Xuanzhong, in the military camp. The former Qin sovereign buried Yao Xuanzhong in Lone Rock with the etiquette of a prince, and also buried Yao Xiang with the etiquette of a duke.

古文：广平王黄眉等还长安，生不之赏，数众辱黄眉。
现代文：苻黄眉等人返回长安，苻生没有奖赏他们，反而还多次当众侮辱苻黄眉。
English: Zou Huangmei and others returned to Chang'an. Zeng Sheng did not reward them, but repeatedly insulted Zou Huangmei in public.

古文：黄眉怒，谋弑生；发觉，伏诛。
现代文：苻黄眉非常愤怒，谋划要杀掉苻生，但被苻生发现，苻黄眉反而被杀。
English: Zou Huang Mei was very angry and planned to kill him. However, when Zou Sheng found out, Zou Huang Mei was killed instead.

古文：事连王公亲戚，死者甚众。
现代文：事情牵连到王公亲戚，被杀死的人很多。
English: Wang Gong's relatives were implicated in the incident, and many people were killed.

古文：戊寅，燕主俊遣抚军将军垂、中军将军虔、护军将军平熙帅步骑八万攻敕勒于塞北，大破之，俘斩十馀万，获马十三万匹，牛羊亿万头。
现代文：戊寅，前燕国主慕容俊派抚军将军慕容垂、中军将军慕容虔、护军将军慕容平熙率领八万步、骑兵在边境以北攻打敕勒部族，彻底攻破了他们，俘获斩首十多万人，缴获马十三万匹，牛羊亿万头。
English: In Wuyin, the former lord of Yan, Murong Jun, sent the general of the army, Murong Tie, the general of the Chinese army, Murong Qian, and the general of the escort army, Murong Pingxi, led by 80,000 paces. The cavalry attacked the Mule tribe in the north of the border, completely defeated them, captured more than 100,000 people, captured 130,000 horses, and hundreds of millions of cattle and sheep.

古文：匈奴单于贺赖头帅部落三万五千口降燕，燕人处之代郡平舒城。
现代文：匈奴单于贺赖头率领本部落的三万五千人投降了前燕，前燕人把他们安置在代郡的平舒城。
English: The Xiongnu, led by He Lai Tou and 35,000 of his tribe, surrendered to the former Yan, and the former Yan people resettled them in Pingshu City, Dai County.

古文：秦主生梦大鱼食蒲，又长安谣曰： 东海大鱼化为龙，男皆为王女为公。 
现代文：前秦国主苻生梦见大鱼吃蒲草，另外长安城里也有谣谚说： 东海大鱼化为龙，男皆为王女为公。 
English: In addition, there is also a rumor in Chang'an City saying: The big fish in the East Sea has turned into a dragon, and all men are princesses.

古文：生乃诛太师、录尚书事、广宁公鱼遵，并其七子、十孙。
现代文：苻生于是就杀掉了太师、录尚书事、广宁公鱼遵以及他的七个儿子、十个孙子。
English: So the twins killed the Grand Master, Luo Shang Shujing, Guangning Gong Yu Zun, and his seven sons and ten grandchildren.

古文：金紫光禄大夫牛夷惧祸，求为荆州；生不许，以为中军将军，引见，调之曰： 牛性迟重，善持辕轭；虽无骥足，动负百石。 
现代文：金紫光禄大夫牛夷害怕祸及自己，请求到荆州任职，苻生不答应，任命他为中军将军，召见时戏弄说： 老牛生性迟缓稳重，善驾车辕，虽然没长骏马的蹄子，但走起路来能负重百石。 
English: Jin Zi Guanglu's doctor, Niu Yi, was afraid of bringing misfortune upon himself. He asked to be posted to Jingzhou, but his father did not agree and appointed him as a general of the Chinese army. When summoned, he teased: "Old cattle are slow and steady, good at driving, and although they do not have the hooves of a horse, they can carry hundreds of stones when walking."

古文：夷曰： 虽服大车，未经峻壁；愿试重载，乃知勋绩。 
现代文：牛夷说： 虽然驾着大车，但没有走过险峻的道路。愿意试拉重车，便可知道我的功用了。 
English: Niu Yi said: Although I drive a big truck, I have not walked the steep road. If you are willing to try to pull a heavy truck, you can know my function.

古文：生笑曰： 何其快也，公嫌所载轻乎？
现代文：苻生笑着说： 多么痛快啊！你嫌所负载的轻吗？
English: Shen Sheng smiled and said, "What a thrill! Don't you think the load is light?

古文：朕将以鱼公爵位处公。 
现代文：朕将用鱼遵的爵位安置你。 
English: I will install you with the peerage of Fushun.

古文：夷惧，归而自杀。
现代文：牛夷十分害怕，回去后就自杀了。
English: Niu Yi was so scared that he committed suicide after returning home.

古文：生饮酒无昼夜，或连月不出。
现代文：苻生喝酒不分昼夜，有时一连数月不临朝处理政事。
English: He would drink all day and night, and sometimes he would not go to the imperial court for several months at a time to deal with political affairs.

古文：奏事不省，往往寝落，或醉中决事。
现代文：进上的奏章不审阅，常常搁置不理，有时在醉酒后处理政事。
English: He did not review the musical scores that came in, often ignored them, and sometimes dealt with political affairs after getting drunk.

古文：左右因以为奸，赏罚无准。
现代文：周围的人因此就常干奸诈之事，赏罚失去标准。
English: As a result, people around them often engage in treachery, and rewards and punishments have lost their standards.

古文：或至申酉乃出视朝，乘醉多所杀戮。
现代文：有时到申时酉时才出来临朝视政，乘着醉意杀了许多人。
English: Sometimes, he came out to the imperial court to watch politics only when it was late in the evening, and killed many people by taking advantage of drunkenness.

古文：自以眇目，讳言 残、缺、偏、只、少、无、不具 之类，误犯而死者，不可胜数。
现代文：他自己由于少了一只眼睛，就忌讳说： 残、缺、偏、只、少、无、不全 一类词，因误说了这些字眼而被杀死的人，不计其数。
English: Because he himself was missing an eye, he avoided saying the following words: remaining, lacking, partial, only, little, none, incomplete. There are countless people who have been killed for mistakenly saying these words.

古文：好生剥牛、羊、驴、马、燖鸡、豚、鹅、鸭，纵之殿前，数十为群。
现代文：他喜欢活着剥掉牛、羊、驴、马的皮，用热水退活鸡、活猪、活鹅、活鸭的毛，把它们放到大殿前面，几十个为一群。
English: He likes to skin cows, sheep, donkeys and horses alive, and use hot water to remove the hair of live chickens, live pigs, live geese and live ducks, placing them in front of the main hall, dozens of them in a group.

古文：或剥人面皮，使之歌舞，临观以为乐。
现代文：有时则剥掉人的脸皮，让他们唱歌跳舞，他来观看，以此作乐。
English: Sometimes he makes music by skinning people and making them sing and dance while he watches.

古文：尝问左右曰： 自吾临天下，汝外间何所闻？ 
现代文：他曾经问周围的人说： 自从我统治天下以来，你们在外边听到些什么？ 
English: He once asked those around him, "What have you heard from the outside world since I came to power?"

古文：或对曰： 圣明宰世，赏罚明当，天下唯歌太平。 
现代文：有人对他说： 圣明君主主宰天下，赏赐得当，刑罚严明，天下人只有歌颂太平盛世了。 
English: It was said to him: "A saintly monarch rules the world. His rewards are just and his punishments are severe. The people of the world can only sing of peace and prosperity."

古文：怒曰： 汝媚我也！ 
现代文：苻生愤怒地说： 你向我献媚！ 
English: The twins angrily said, "You're flattering me!

古文：引出斩之。
现代文：于是就把他拉出去杀了。
English: So they dragged him out and killed him.

古文：它日又问，或对曰： 陛下刑罚微过。 
现代文：改天他又问这个问题，有人对他说： 陛下的刑罚稍微过分了一点。 
English: The next day he asked the question again, and was told: "Your Majesty's punishment is a little excessive."

古文：又怒曰： 汝谤我也！ 
现代文：苻生又愤怒地说： 你诽谤我！ 
English: The twin said angrily, "You slandered me!

古文：亦斩之。
现代文：这人也被杀了。
English: The man was also killed.

古文：勋旧亲戚，诛之殆尽，群臣得保一日，如度十年。
现代文：有功的旧臣和亲戚，被诛杀殆尽，群臣们能保全一天，如同度过十年。
English: The meritorious old ministers and relatives were all killed, and the ministers were able to save one day, as if they had spent ten years.

古文：东海王坚，素有时誉，与故姚襄参军薛赞、权翼善。
现代文：东海王苻坚，一直被时人称誉，和过去姚襄的参军薛、权翼关系很好。
English: Wang Shujian of the East China Sea has always been praised by the people of the time, and the relationship between Yao Xiang's past participation in the army, Xue, and the power wing is very good.

古文：赞、翼密说坚曰： 主上猜忍暴虐，中外离心，方今宜主秦祀者，非殿下而谁！
现代文：薛、权翼秘密地劝苻坚说： 主上猜忌残忍，行为暴虐，宫廷内外对他已经离心，如今适宜于主持秦国祭祀的人，不是殿下是谁！
English: Xue and the authorities secretly persuaded Yu Jian to say: The Lord is suspicious and cruel, his behavior is tyrannical, both inside and outside the court have been alienated from him, and it is not His Royal Highness who is suitable to preside over the sacrificial rites of Qin.

古文：愿早为计，勿使它姓得之！ 
现代文：愿您及早谋划，不要让大权落入他姓人手中！ 
English: May you plan early, and do not let power fall into the hands of his namesake!

古文：坚以问尚书吕婆楼，婆楼曰： 仆，刀镮上人耳，不足以办大事。
现代文：苻坚去问尚书吕婆楼，吕婆楼说： 我，已经是屠刀下的人了，不足以办成大事。
English: Zou Jian went to ask Shang Shu Luba Lou, and Luba Lou said: I am already a person under the butcher's knife, not enough to accomplish great things.

古文：仆里舍有王猛者，其人谋略不世出，殿下宜请而咨之。 
现代文：我的私宅里有一位叫王猛的人，他的谋略世间少见，殿下应该请他出来，并向他请教。 
English: In my private house there is a man called Wang Meng, whose strategy is rare in the world. Your highness should invite him out and ask him for advice.

古文：坚因婆楼以招猛，一见如旧友，语及时事，坚大悦，自谓如刘玄德之遇诸葛孔明也。
现代文：苻坚根据吕婆楼的意见召来王猛，二人一见如故。谈论到国家当前的大事，苻坚十分高兴，自认为如同刘备遇到了诸葛亮。
English: Yu Jian called Wang Meng according to the advice of Luba Lou, and the two of them immediately hit it off. Talking about the current major events in the country, Yu Jian was very happy, and thought that he had met Zhuge Liang just like Liu Bei.

古文：六月，太史令康权言于秦主生曰： 昨夜三月并出，孛星入太微，连东井，自去月上旬，沉阴不雨，以至于今，将有下人谋上之祸。 
现代文：六月，太史令康权对前秦国主苻生进言说： 昨天晚上同时出现了三个月亮，彗星进入太微星座，又连着井宿。自从五月上旬以来，天气沉阴密布，又不下雨，一直到今天。将要出现臣下图谋主上的灾祸了。 
English: In June, the Grand Historian Kang Quan gave the following advice to the former ruler of Qin, Quan Sheng: Yesterday evening, three moons appeared at the same time, the comet entered the Taimiao constellation, and connected to the well. Since the beginning of May, the weather has been gloomy and cloudy, and it has not rained until today. There will be vassals plotting the master's disaster.

古文：生怒，以为妖言，扑杀之。
现代文：苻生十分愤怒，认为这是妖言，把他摔死。
English: He was so angry that he thought it was a magic spell and threw him to his death.

古文：特进、领御史中丞梁平老等谓坚曰： 主上失德，上下嗷嗷，人怀异志，燕、晋二方，伺隙而动，恐祸发之日，家国俱亡。
现代文：特进兼御史中丞梁平老等人对苻坚说： 主上丧失道德，上下怨声载道，人心各异，燕、晋二朝，伺机而动，恐怕灾祸出现之日，宗族、国家都要灭亡。
English: Liang Pinglao and others said to Yu Jian: "The Lord has lost morality, the upper and lower voices are complaining, the hearts of the people are different, Yan and Jin dynasties are waiting for an opportunity, I am afraid that the day the disaster occurs, the clan and the country will perish.

古文：此殿下之事也，宜早图之！ 
现代文：这是殿下的大事。应该及早图谋！ 
English: This is an important matter for His Royal Highness. It should be dealt with as soon as possible!

古文：坚心然之，畏生趫勇，未敢发。
现代文：苻坚内心同意，但又畏惧苻生的勇捷凶猛，没敢作声。
English: Yan Jian agreed in his heart, but he was afraid of the bravery and ferocity of the twins and did not dare to speak out.

古文：生夜对侍婢言曰： 阿法兄弟亦不可信，明当除之。 
现代文：苻生夜里对服侍他的婢女说： 苻坚、苻法兄弟也不可信赖，明天就应当把他们除掉。 
English: In the middle of the night, he said to the maid who was serving him, "You can't trust your brothers, Yan Jian and Yan Fa. You should get rid of them tomorrow."

古文：婢以告坚及坚兄清河王法。
现代文：婢女把这一消息告诉了苻坚以及他的哥哥清河王苻法。
English: The servant girl told this news to Yu Jian and his brother, Qinghe Wang Xuanfa.

古文：法与梁平老及特进光禄大夫强汪，帅壮士数百潜入云龙门，坚与吕婆楼帅麾下三百人鼓噪继进，宿卫将士皆舍仗归坚。
现代文：苻法和梁平老以及特进光禄大夫强汪率领勇士数百人潜入云龙门，苻坚和吕婆楼率领手下三百人击鼓跟进，守卫王宫的将士们全都丢掉武器归顺了苻坚。
English: Gongfa and Liang Pinglao, as well as the special inspector Guanglu Doctor Qiang Wang, led hundreds of warriors to sneak into the Cloud Dragon Gate, and Gong Jian and Luba Lou led three hundred people to play drums. The soldiers guarding the royal palace all lost their weapons and surrendered to Gong Jian.

古文：生犹醉寐，坚兵至，生惊问左右曰： 此辈何人？ 
现代文：苻生这时还醉倒大睡，苻坚的士兵来到后，苻生惊慌地问周围人说： 这是些什么人？ 
English: At this time, the twins were still drunk and sleeping. After the soldiers arrived, the twins panicked and asked the people around them: Who are these people?

古文：左右曰： 贼也！ 
现代文：周围的人回答： 强盗！ 
English: The people around him reply: "Robbers!"

古文：生曰： 何不拜之！ 
现代文：苻生说： 为什么不叩拜！ 
English: The student said: Why don't you bow down!

古文：坚兵皆笑。
现代文：苻坚的士兵全都笑了。
English: The hardened soldiers all laughed.

古文：生又大言： 何不速拜，不拜者斩之！ 
现代文：苻生又大声说： 为什么不赶快叩拜，不拜者杀头！ 
English: The student shouted again, "Why don't you quickly bow down? If you don't bow down, I'll kill you!"

古文：坚兵引生置别室，废为越王。寻杀之，谥曰厉王。
现代文：苻坚的士兵把苻生带到别的房间，黜废他为越王，不久就把他杀了，定谥号为厉王。
English: Shen Jian's soldiers took him to another room, dethroned him as the king of Yue, and soon killed him, naming him Li Wang.

古文：坚以位让法，法曰： 汝嫡嗣，且贤，宜立。 
现代文：坚苻把王位让给苻法，苻法说： 你是嫡传嗣子，而且贤明，应该立为王。 
English: Jian Chen ceded the throne to Yan Fa. Yan Fa said, "You are the legitimate heir, and you are wise. You should be made king."

古文：坚曰： 兄年长，宜立。 
现代文：苻坚说： 哥哥年长，应该立为王。 
English: Yu Jian said: My elder brother should be made king.

古文：坚母苟氏泣谓群臣曰： 社稷重事，小儿自知不能。
现代文：苻坚的母亲苟氏哭泣着对群臣说： 朝政事关重大，我儿子自知不能胜任。
English: Gong Jian's mother, Ms. Guo, wept and said to the ministers, "Diplomacy is very important, and my son knows that he is not up to the job.

古文：它日有悔，失在诸君。 
现代文：以后大家如有悔恨，过失在诸君身上。 
English: In the future, if there is any remorse, the fault lies with you.

古文：群臣皆顿首请立坚。
现代文：群臣全都叩头请求立苻坚为王。
English: All the courtiers bowed their heads and requested that Yu Jian be made king.

古文：坚乃去皇帝之号，称大秦天王，即位于太极殿，诛生幸臣中书监董荣、左仆射赵韶等二十馀人。
现代文：苻坚于是就去掉了皇帝的称号，称为大秦天王，在太极殿即位。杀掉了苻生的宠臣中书监董荣、左仆射赵韶等二十多人。
English: Xuan Jian then removed the title of the emperor, called Daqin Tianwang, and ascended the throne in the Taiji Hall. He killed more than twenty people, including his twin's favorite, the middle school librarian, Dong Rong, and his left-hand man, Zhao Yao.

古文：大赦，改元永兴。
现代文：实行大赦，改年号为永兴。
English: An amnesty was implemented, and the year name was changed to Yongxing.

古文：追尊父雄为文桓皇帝，母苟氏为皇太后，妃苟氏为皇后，世子宏为皇太子，以清河王法为都督中外诸军事、丞相、录尚书事、东海公，诸王皆降爵为公。
现代文：追尊父亲苻雄为文桓皇帝，尊母亲苟氏为皇太后，立妃苟氏为皇后，立长子苻宏为太子，任命清河王苻法为都督中外诸军事、丞相、录尚书事、东海公，诸王全都降为公。
English: He made his father, Emperor Wenhuang, and his mother, Empress Dowager Gong, Empress Dowager Gong, and his eldest son, Crown Prince Gong Hong, princes, and appointed the Qing Dynasty's King Gongfa as military governor, chancellor, record keeper, and governor of the East China Sea. All the kings were reduced to the status of princes.

古文：以从祖右光禄大夫、永安公侯为太尉，晋公柳为车骑大将军、尚书令。
现代文：任命从祖右光禄大夫、永安公苻侯为太尉，晋公苻柳为车骑大将军、尚书令。
English: He appointed Zu Uguanglu as doctor, Yongan as lieutenant, Jin Gong as cavalry general, and Shang Shuling as secretary.

古文：封弟融为阳平公，双为河南公，子丕为长乐公，晖为平原公，熙为广平公，睿为巨鹿公。
现代文：封弟弟苻融为阳平公，苻双为河南公，儿子苻丕为长乐公，苻晖为平原公，苻熙为广平公，苻睿为钜鹿公。
English: Feng's younger brother, Yu Rong, became Yang Ping, Yu Shuang became Henan Gong, and his sons Yu Rong became Changle Gong, Yu Rong became Plains Gong, Yu Xi became Guangping Gong, and Yu Rui became Elk Gong.

古文：以汉阳李威为左仆射，梁平老为右仆射，强汪为领军将军，吕婆楼为司隶校尉，王猛为中书侍郎。
现代文：任命汉阳人李威为左仆射，梁平老为右仆射，强汪为领军将军，吕婆楼为司隶校尉，王猛为中书侍郎。
English: He appointed Li Wei from Hanyang as his left-hand man, Liang Pingruo as his right-hand man, Qiang Wang as the leading general, Luba Lou as the captain of the regiment, and Wang Meng as the secretary.

古文：融好文学，明辩过人，耳闻则诵，过目不忘，力敌百夫，善骑射击刺，少有令誉。
现代文：苻融爱好文献经典，分辨能力过人，耳闻成诵，过目不忘。力量之大，能敌百人，善于骑马射箭刺击，从小就有美好的声誉。
English: He is fond of literature and classics, his ability to distinguish is superior to others, his hearing is perfect, and his eyesight is unforgettable. He has great strength, can defeat hundreds of people, is good at riding and archery, and has had a good reputation since childhood.

古文：坚爱重之，常与共议国事。
现代文：苻坚非常喜欢并看重他，经常和他共商国家大事。
English: Yu Jian likes and values him very much, and often discusses national affairs with him.

古文：融经综内外，刑政修明，荐才扬滞，补益弘多。
现代文：苻融谋划治理天下，刑罚政令，规范清明，荐举贤才，拔擢沉沦之士，对苻坚有很大帮助。
English: It is of great help to Zou Jian to plan the governance of the world, to issue penal decrees, to set clear standards, to recommend and promote talents, and to elevate those who have fallen.

古文：丕亦有文武才干，但治民断狱，皆亚于融。
现代文：苻丕也有文才武略，但治理民众、决断刑狱，全都逊于苻融。
English: Xing also had literary talent and military strategy, but governing the people and deciding on prison sentences were all inferior to Xun Rong.

古文：威，苟太后之姑子也，素与魏王雄友善。生屡欲杀坚，赖威营救得免。
现代文：李威是苟太后姑姑的儿子，和魏王苻雄一直关系很好，苻生多次想杀掉苻坚，全靠李威设法救助才得以幸免。
English: Li Wei is the son of the aunt of the Empress Dowager Guo, and he has always had a good relationship with Wei Wang Shuxiong. Shuxiong tried to kill Shujian many times, but Li Wei managed to save him.

古文：威得幸于苟太后，坚事之如父。
现代文：李威很得苟太后的宠爱，苻坚对待像父亲一样。
English: Li Wei was very favored by the empress dowager, and treated Yu Jian like a father.

古文：威知王猛之贤，常劝坚以国事任之，坚谓猛曰： 李公知君，犹鲍叔牙之知管仲也。 
现代文：李威深知王猛的贤明，经常劝苻坚把国家重任交给他。苻坚对王猛说： 李公了解你，就像鲍叔牙了解管仲一样。 
English: Li Wei was well aware of Wang Meng's wisdom and often advised Yu Jian to entrust him with important state tasks. Yu Jian said to Wang Meng: "Li Gong understands you, just like Bao Shuji understands Guanzhong."

古文：猛以兄事之。
现代文：王猛像对待哥哥一样对待李威。
English: Wang Meng treated Li Wei like an older brother.

古文：燕主俊杀段龛，坑其徒三千馀人。
现代文：前燕国主慕容俊杀掉了段龛，把他的兵众三千多人活埋。
English: The former lord of Yan, Murong Jun, killed Duan Yu and buried more than three thousand of his soldiers alive.

古文：秋，七月，秦大将军冀州牧张平遣使请降，拜并州刺史。
现代文：秋季，七月，前秦大将军冀州牧张平派遣使者到东晋请求投降，朝廷授予他并州刺史官职。
English: In the autumn, in July, the former Qin Dynasty general Jizhou Mu Zhangping sent an envoy to East Jin to request surrender, and the imperial court awarded him the post of Jizhou Provincial Historian.

古文：八月，丁未，立皇后何氏。
现代文：八月，丁未，东晋穆帝立何氏为皇后。
English: In August, during the reign of Emperor Dingwei, the Eastern Jin Emperor Mu Di made Ms. He the empress.

古文：后，故散骑侍郎庐江何淮之女也。
现代文：何氏皇后，是过去散骑常侍郎庐江人何准的女儿。
English: The Empress He is the daughter of He Jun, who used to be a horseback riding equerry.

古文：礼如咸康而不贺。
现代文：立后礼仪像威康二年那次一样，不加以庆贺。
English: The post-inauguration etiquette, like that of the second year of Wellcome, is not to be celebrated.

古文：秦王坚以权翼为给事黄门侍郎，薛赞为中书侍郎，与王猛并掌机密。
现代文：前秦王苻坚任命权翼为给事黄门侍郎，薛为中书侍郎，和王猛一起掌管机要事务。
English: Former Qin King Yu Jian appointed Quan Ying as the attendant of the Yellow Gate, Xue as the attendant of the Middle Gate, and Wang Meng as the attendant of the Central Gate.

古文：九月，追复太师鱼遵等官，以礼改葬，子孙存者皆随才擢叙。
现代文：九月，追认恢复了太师鱼遵等人的官位，按照礼仪对他们重新加以安葬，对他们在世的子孙，全都根据才能加以提拔任用。
English: In September, the official ranks of the Taishigu Zun and others were restored, they were reburied according to etiquette, and their living descendants were all promoted and appointed according to their talents.

古文：张平据新兴、雁门、西河、太原、上党、上郡之地，壁垒三百馀，夷、夏十馀万户，拜置征镇，欲与燕、秦为敌国。
现代文：张平占据了新兴、雁门、西河、太原、上党、上郡等地，修筑了三百多座坚营垒，有夷、汉的十万多户人家，设置了征镇官吏，要与前燕、前秦相对抗。
English: Zhang Ping occupied Xinxing, Yanmen, Xihe, Taiyuan, Shangdang, Shanggun and other places, built more than three hundred strongholds, had more than one hundred thousand households of Yi and Han, and set up town-summoning officials to oppose Qian Yan and Qian Qin.

古文：冬，十月，平寇略秦境，秦王坚以晋公柳都督并、冀州诸军事，加并州牧，镇蒲阪以御之。
现代文：冬季，十月，张平进犯秦地，前秦王苻坚让晋公苻柳总领并、冀二州各种军务，授予并州牧，镇守蒲阪，以抵御张平。
English: In the winter, in October, Zhang Ping invaded Qin. The former Qin king, Jian Jian, had the general of the Jin Dynasty, Jian Liu, take charge of all military affairs in the two states of Hebei, and was awarded the post of provincial governor and the post of town guard of Busan in order to resist Zhang Ping.

古文：十一月，癸酉，燕主俊自蓟徙都鄴。
现代文：十一月，癸酉，前燕国主慕容俊将都城由蓟城迁往邺城。
English: In November, the former lord of Yan, Mu Rongjun, moved the capital from Yancheng to Yancheng.

古文：秦太后苟氏游宣明台，见东海公法之第门车马辐凑，恐终不利于秦王坚，乃与李威谋，赐法死。
现代文：前秦太后苟氏游览宣明台，看见东海公苻法的宅门前车水马龙，她恐怕这最终会对前秦王苻坚不利，于是就与李威商量，赐苻法死。
English: Former Qin Empress Dowager Guo visited the Vision TV station and saw that there was a lot of traffic in front of the door of the East China Public Security Law. She was afraid that this would eventually be unfavorable to the former Qin King Shujian, so she discussed with Li Wei and gave him the death penalty.

古文：坚与法诀于东堂，恸哭欧血；谥曰献哀公，封其子阳为东海公，敷为清河公。
现代文：苻坚和苻法在东堂诀别，二人失声痛哭，以致口吐鲜血。苻法死后，谥号定为献哀公，其儿子苻阳被封为东海公，苻敷被封为清河公。
English: Gong Jian and Gong Fa said their goodbyes in the East Hall. The two of them wept so hard that they vomited blood. After Gong Fa's death, his posthumous name was changed to "Kengai Gong." His son Gong Yang was named "Donghai Gong" and Gong Jiki was named "Qinghe Gong."

古文：十二月，乙巳，燕主俊入鄴宫，大赦。
现代文：十二月，乙巳，前燕国主慕容俊进入邺城宫殿，实行大赦。
English: In December, the former ruler of Yan, Mu Rongjun, entered the palace in Handan to grant an amnesty.

古文：复作铜雀台。
现代文：修复了铜雀台。
English: The bronze sparrow platform has been restored.

古文：以太常王彪之为左仆射。
现代文：东晋任命太常王彪立为左仆射。
English: The Eastern Jin Dynasty appointed King Biao Li of the Taizhang Dynasty as Zuofei.

古文：秦王坚行至尚书，以文案不治，免左丞程卓官，以王猛代之。
现代文：前秦王苻坚巡视到了尚书省，看见文牍案卷凌乱，便罢免了尚书左丞程卓的官职，任命王猛取代他。
English: Former Qin King Jian Jian made a tour to Shangshu Province. Seeing that the Wenjian case file was in disarray, he dismissed Shangshu Zuojo Cheng Zhuo from his official position and appointed Wang Meng to replace him.

古文：坚举异才，修废职，课农桑，恤困穷，礼百神，立学校，旌节义，继绝世；秦民大悦。
现代文：苻坚任用贤才，整治废弛的政事，劝勉农桑，抚恤贫困，礼敬百神，设立学校，表彰节义，恢复已经断绝的世祀，前秦的百姓十分高兴。
English: The people of the former Qin Dynasty were very happy that Yu Jian appointed sages, rectified wasteful government affairs, exhorted farmers and mulberry trees, raised poverty, revered hundreds of gods, established schools, commended festivals, and restored world worship that had been cut off.

古文：孝宗穆皇帝中之下升平二年春，正月，司徒昱稽首归政，帝不许。
现代文：升平二年春季，正月，司徒司马昱叩头请求归还朝政，晋穆帝不同意。
English: In the spring of the second year of the Heian period, in the first month of the year, Emperor Jimmu did not agree with the kowtowing request of Jito Sima Yi to return the imperial government.

古文：初，冯鸯既以上党来降，又附于张平，又自归于燕，既而复叛燕。
现代文：当初，冯鸯已将上党献给东晋，但又归附张平，不久又归附前燕，紧接着又背叛了前燕。
English: At first, Feng Yao had dedicated Shang Party to Eastern Jin, but it was attached to Zhang Ping, and soon it was attached to Qian Yan, and then it betrayed Qian Yan.

古文：二月，燕司徒上庸王评讨之，不克。
现代文：二月，前燕司徒上庸王慕容评前往讨伐冯鸯，但没有攻克。
English: In February, the former Yan's disciple Shangyong Wang Murong Hui went to fight Feng Ye, but failed to conquer him.

古文：秦王坚自将讨张平，以邓羌为前锋督护，帅骑五千，军于汾上；平使养子蚝御之。
现代文：前秦王苻坚准备亲自出征，讨伐张平。他任命邓羌为前锋督护，率领五千骑兵，驻扎于汾水岸边。张平派养子张蚝抵御。
English: The former King of Qin, Qian Jian, prepared to personally go to war to fight against Zhang Ping. He appointed Deng Yao as the vanguard overseer, leading five thousand cavalry, stationed on the shore of Surabaya. Zhang Ping sent his adopted son Zhang Yao to resist.

古文：蚝多力趫捷，能曳牛却走；城无高下，皆可超越。
现代文：张蚝身强力壮又很矫捷，能够拽着牛倒退行走，城墙不论高低，都可以翻越而过。
English: Zhang Xuan is strong and very agile. He can walk backwards dragging a cow. He can climb over city walls, no matter how high or low they are.

古文：与羌相持旬馀，莫能相胜。
现代文：他和邓羌相持了十多天，互不能胜。
English: He and Deng Rong held each other for more than ten days, unable to defeat each other.

古文：三月，坚至铜壁，平尽众出战，蚝单马大呼，出入秦陈者四、五。
现代文：三月，苻坚抵达铜壁，张平用全部兵力出来迎战，张蚝只身匹马，大声呼喊，出入冲杀前秦的兵阵有四、五次。
English: In March, Yu Jian arrived at the Bronze Wall, Zhang Ping came out to meet the battle with all his forces, Zhang Ye rode a horse and shouted loudly. He went in and out of the front Qin army four or five times.

古文：坚募人生致之，鹰扬将军吕光刺蚝，中之，邓羌擒蚝以献，平众大溃。
现代文：苻坚悬赏兵将活捉张蚝，鹰扬将军吕光刺击张蚝，击中了他，邓羌将他擒获，献给了苻坚，张平的兵众彻底溃散。
English: Yan Jian offered a reward to the soldiers who would capture Zhang Jian alive. General Lu Guang of Yingyang stabbed Zhang Jian and hit him. Deng Jian captured him and gave him to Yan Jian. Zhang Ping's soldiers were completely routed.

古文：平惧，请降。
现代文：张平十分害怕，便请求投降。
English: Zhang Ping was very scared and asked to surrender.

古文：坚拜平右将军，以蚝为虎贲中郎将。
现代文：苻坚授他为右将军，任命张蚝为虎贲中郎将。
English: Yu Jian promoted him to Right General, and appointed Zhang Qi as Vice Admiral of the State Council.

古文：蚝，本姓弓，上党人也，坚宠待甚厚，常置左右。
现代文：张蚝本姓弓，上党人。苻坚对待他非常宠厚，经常让他跟随在左右。
English: Zhang Yimeng, surnamed Yu, was a high-ranking member of the Communist Party. Yu Jian treated him very generously, often letting him follow him around.

古文：秦人称邓羌、张蚝皆万人敌。
现代文：前秦人称邓羌、张蚝都可力敌万人。
English: People in the former Qin Dynasty said that Deng Xuan and Zhang Xuan could defeat ten thousand men.

古文：光，婆楼之子也。
现代文：吕光是吕婆楼的儿子。
English: Luguang is the son of Luba Lou.

古文：坚徙张平部民三千馀户于长安。
现代文：苻坚将张平的部众三千多户迁徙到了长安。
English: Yu Jian moved more than three thousand households from Zhangping to Chang'an.

古文：甲戌，燕主俊遣领军将军慕舆根，将兵助司徒评攻冯鸯。
现代文：甲戌，前燕国主慕容俊派领军将军慕舆根带领军队协助司徒慕容评攻打冯鸯。
English: Armor-piercing, the former lord of Yan, Mu Rongjun, sent the leading general, Mu Yugen, to lead the army to assist Stu Mu Ronghan in attacking Feng Yu.

古文：根欲急攻之，评曰： 鸯壁坚，不如缓之。 
现代文：慕舆根想展开急攻，慕容评说： 冯鸯营垒坚固，不如缓攻。 
English: Mu Rong wanted to launch a sudden attack, Mu Rong commented: Feng Rong's camp is solid, it is better to slow down the attack.

古文：根曰： 不然。
现代文：慕舆根说： 不对。
English: Mu Myugen said, "That's not right."

古文：公至城下经月，未尝交锋。
现代文：您抵达城下已经一个多月了，还未曾交锋。
English: It's been more than a month since you arrived in the city, and you haven't fought yet.

古文：贼谓国家力止于此，遂相固结，冀幸万一。
现代文：寇贼认为燕国的力量不过如此而已，于是就互相聚集固守，寄希望于万一侥幸取胜。
English: The bandits thought that the power of Yan's country was nothing more than that, so they gathered together to hold on, hoping to win by chance.

古文：今根兵初至，形势方振，贼众恐惧，皆有离心，计虑未定，从而攻之，无不克者。 
现代文：眼下我慕舆根的军队刚刚抵达，形势正好，众寇贼惶恐害怕，都产生了离心，应对之策还未确定，如果乘势而攻，没有不成功的道理。 
English: Right now, the army of I Mu Mugen has just arrived, the situation is just right, the bandits are panicked and afraid, they have all centrifuged, and the countermeasures have not yet been determined. If you take advantage of the situation and attack, there is no reason not to succeed.

古文：遂急攻之。
现代文：于是就对冯鸯展开了急攻。
English: So they launched a surprise attack on Feng Yu.

古文：鸯与其党果相猜忌，鸯奔野王依吕护，其党尽降。
现代文：冯鸯和他的同党们果然互相猜忌，冯鸯逃奔到野王依附了吕护，他的部众则全部投降。
English: Feng Xuan and his fellow party members were indeed suspicious of each other. Feng Xuan fled to the wild king and clung to Lvong, while his subordinates all surrendered.

古文：夏，四月，秦王坚如雍，祠五畤；六月，如河东，祀后土。
现代文：夏季，四月，前秦王苻坚到了雍州，祭祀五。六月，到河东，祭祀了土地神。
English: In the summer, in April, the former Qin King Jian Jian went to Yongzhou and held a sacrifice on the 5th. In June, he went to Hedong and offered a sacrifice to the land god.

古文：秋，八月，豫州刺史谢弈卒。
现代文：秋季，八月，东晋豫州刺史谢奕去世。
English: In the autumn, in August, the East Jin Yuzhou poet Shi Xieyi passed away.

古文：弈，安之兄也。
现代文：谢奕是谢安的哥哥。
English: Xie Yi is Xie An's brother.

古文：司徒昱以建武将军桓云代之。
现代文：司徒司马昱任命建武将军桓云替代他的职位。
English: Sito Sima Yi appointed Jianwu General Huan Yun to replace him.

古文：云，温之弟也。
现代文：桓云是桓温的弟弟。
English: Kanun is Kanon's younger brother.

古文：访于仆射王彪之。彪之曰： 云非不才，然温居上流，已割天下之半，其弟复处西籓；兵权萃于一门，非深根固蒂之宜。
现代文：司马昱就此去向王彪之询问意见，王彪之说： 桓云不是无能的人，然而桓温已经居守长江上游，管辖着天下的一半，他的弟弟再要掌握朝廷西部藩屏的重要军职，兵权集于一家之手，这不宜于使国家根基牢固。
English: Sima Yi went to ask Wang Biao for his opinion. Wang Biao said: Huan Yun is not an incompetent person. However, Huan Wen has been guarding the upper reaches of the Yangtze River, governing half of the world. His younger brother will also hold an important military post in the western part of the imperial court. Military power is concentrated in the hands of one family. This is not suitable for making the foundation of the country strong.

古文：人才非可豫量，但当令不与殿下作异者耳。 
现代文：人才不是可以预料的，只应当让他不与殿下怀有二心而已。 
English: Talent is not to be expected, only that he should not have a grudge against His Royal Highness.

古文：昱颔之曰： 君言是也。 
现代文：司马昱点头说道： 你说得对。 
English: Sima Ye nodded and said: You are right.

古文：壬申，以吴兴太守谢万为西中郎将，监司、豫、冀、并四州诸军事、豫州刺史。
现代文：壬申，任命吴兴太守谢万为西中郎将，监司、豫、冀、并四州诸军事及豫州刺史。
English: In Jinshin, he appointed Wu Xingtao governor Xie Wan as the West Vice Admiral, Supervisor, Yu, Hebei, and the four states of the military and the history of Yu.

古文：王羲之与桓温笺曰： 谢万才流经通，使之处廊庙，固是后来之秀。今以之俯顺荒馀，近是违才易务矣。 
现代文：王羲之给桓温写信说： 谢万的才能足以经世治国，在时人中堪称通达，如果让他身居朝廷，肯定是后起之秀；如今让他屈身去治理兵荒马乱之后的边境，这就有些违背他的才能而任用了。 
English: Wang Xizhi wrote to Kuan Wen, saying: Xie Wan's talent was enough to rule the country, and he was well-versed among the people of the time. If he had been allowed to stay in the imperial court, he would certainly have been a rising star. Now that he has been asked to bend over and govern the border after the War Horse Riots, this is somewhat contrary to his talent and has been appointed.

古文：又遗万书曰： 以君迈往不屑之韵，而俯同群碎，诚难为意也。
现代文：又给谢万写信说： 以阁下超越前贤、不屑于琐碎事务的风韵，而去屈身治理群民，主持军中琐细杂务，确实是难以称心。
English: He also wrote to Xie Wan, saying, "It is indeed hard to be satisfied with the grace of your excellency surpassing the forerunners and disdaining trivial affairs, but bowing down to govern the people and preside over the trivial chores in the army.

古文：然所谓通识，正当随事行藏耳。
现代文：然而所谓通达的见识，正是应当适应环境的变化而决定如何行动。
English: However, it is the so-called insight that should adapt to changes in the environment and determine how to act.

古文：愿君每与士卒之下者同甘苦，则尽善矣。 
现代文：希望您经常与下层士兵同甘共苦，这就是完美的品行了。 
English: I hope you often share the hardships and joys of lower-ranking soldiers. This is the perfect conduct.

古文：万不能用。
现代文：但谢万却没能照此去办。
English: However, Xie Wan failed to do so.

古文：徐、兗二州刺史荀羡有疾，以御史中丞郗昙为羡军司。
现代文：徐、兖二州刺史荀羡患病，任命御史中丞郗昙为军司。
English: Emperor Xu and Empress Dowager Cixi of the Two Provinces suffered from illness, and appointed Grand Historian Zhongzheng as the military governor.

古文：昙，鉴之子也。
现代文：郗昙是郗鉴的儿子。
English: Zou is the son of Zou Jian.

古文：九月，庚辰，秦王坚还长安，以太尉侯守尚书令。
现代文：九月，庚辰，前秦王苻坚返回长安，任命太尉苻侯暂任尚书令。
English: In September, Geng Chen, the former Qin King Yu Jian, returned to Chang'an and appointed Tai Liang and Hou as the provisional Shang Shuling.

古文：于是秦大旱。
现代文：这时前秦发生大旱。
English: At this time, the Great Drought occurred in the former Qin Dynasty.

古文：坚减膳彻乐，命后妃以下悉去罗纨；开山泽之利，公私共之，息兵养民，旱不为灾。
现代文：苻坚减少了膳食，取消了歌乐，命令后妃以下的人全都换掉绢丝服装。开发山林湖泽，国家与百姓共同享用，停止战争，休养生息。
English: Yu Jian reduced the number of meals, cancelled the singing and music, and ordered all people below the rank of the Empress Dowager to change their silk clothing. He developed the mountains, forests and lakes, so that the country and the people could enjoy them together, stop the war, and rest and recuperate.

古文：王猛日亲幸用事，宗亲勋旧多疾之。
现代文：所以虽遇大旱，但并没有引起灾荒。王猛日益受到任用，王室亲属以及有功的旧臣对他都十分厌恶。
English: Therefore, although there was a drought, it did not cause a disaster. Wang Meng was increasingly appointed, and royal relatives and meritorious old ministers were very disgusted with him.

古文：特进、姑臧侯樊世，本氐豪，佐秦主健定关中，谓猛曰： 吾辈耕之，君食之邪？ 
现代文：特进、姑臧侯樊世，本是氏族的豪强，辅佐前秦国主苻健平定关中，他对王猛说： 我们耕种，你坐享其成吗？ 
English: He said to Wang Meng: "We cultivate, do you sit back and enjoy the results?

古文：猛曰： 非徒使君耕之，又将使君炊之！ 
现代文：王猛说： 不仅让你耕种，还要让你做成熟食！ 
English: Wang Meng said: not only let you cultivate, but also let you make mature food!

古文：世大怒曰： 要当悬汝头于长安城门，不然，吾不处世！ 
现代文：樊世勃然大怒，说： 一定要把你的脑袋悬挂在长安城门上，不这样，我就不活在人世！ 
English: He flew into a rage and said, "You must hang your head over the Chang'an City Gate, otherwise I will not live!"

古文：猛以白坚。坚曰： 必杀此老氐，然后百寮可肃。 
现代文：王猛把这些告诉了苻坚，苻坚说： 一定得杀掉这个氐族老夫，然后群臣百官才能恭敬从命。 
English: Wang Meng told this to Xuan Jian, and Xuan Jian said, "We must kill this old man of the Yi people, and then the ministers and officials can respectfully obey the order."

古文：会世入言事，与猛争论于坚前，世欲起击猛。坚怒，斩之。
现代文：恰好这时樊世进宫商讨事情，和王猛在苻坚面前争论起来，樊世想起身打王猛，苻坚大怒，把樊世杀了。
English: Just at this time, Shixie went to the palace to discuss the matter, and argued with Wang Mengrao in front of Gong Jian. Shixie thought of beating Wang Meng, and Gong Jian was furious and killed Shixie.

古文：于是群臣见猛皆屏息。
现代文：从此，群臣百官见到王猛都连大气也不敢出。
English: From then on, all the courtiers and officials were afraid to look at Wang Meng.

古文：赵之亡也，其将张平、李历、高昌皆遣使降燕，已而降晋，又降秦，各受爵位，欲中立以自固。
现代文：后赵灭亡的时候，其将领张平、李历、高昌都派遣使者投降了前燕，后来又投降了东晋，不久又投降了前秦，从各国分别接受了爵位，想以中立的方式自我保全。
English: After Zhao's death, his generals Zhang Ping, Li Li, and Gaochang all sent envoys to surrender to the former Yan, and later surrendered to the Eastern Jin, and soon surrendered to the former Qin, and separately accepted titles from various countries, hoping to preserve themselves in a neutral manner.

古文：燕主俊使司徒评讨张平于并州，司空阳骛讨高昌于东燕，乐安王臧讨李历于濮。
现代文：前燕国主慕容俊派司徒慕容评在并州讨伐张平，派司空阳鹜在东燕讨伐高昌，派乐安王慕容臧在濮城讨伐李历。
English: Former Yan sovereign Murongjun sent his disciple Stu Murongping to fight against Zhang Ping in Bianzhou, sent his subordinate Kuangjun to fight against Gaochang in Dongyan, and sent his subordinate Le'an King Murongjun to fight against Lili in Handan.

古文：阳骛攻昌别将于黎阳，不拔。
现代文：阳鹜在黎阳攻打高昌另一部将的军队，没有攻破。
English: In Liyang, Impotence attacked Gaochang's other general's army, but failed to break through.

古文：历奔荥阳，其众皆降。
现代文：李历逃奔荥阳，其兵众全部投降。
English: Li Li fled to Fenyang, and all of his soldiers surrendered.

古文：并州壁垒百馀降于燕，俊以右仆射悦绾为并州刺史以抚之。
现代文：并州一百多座营垒都投降了前燕，慕容俊任命右仆射悦绾为并州刺史安抚他们。
English: And more than a hundred camps in the state surrendered to the former Yan, and Murong Jun appointed his right-hand man, She Yue Qi, to pacify them.

古文：平所署征西将军诸葛骧等帅壁垒百三十八降于燕，俊皆复其官爵。
现代文：张平统辖的征西将军诸葛骧等人率领一百三十八座营垒投降了前燕，慕容俊都恢复了他们的官职爵位。
English: Zhu Gejun, the general of the Western Expedition under the command of Zhang Ping, and others led one hundred and thirty-eight battalions to surrender to Qianyan, and Murong Jun restored their official titles and ranks.

古文：平帅众三千奔平阳，复请降于燕。
现代文：张平率领三千兵众逃奔到平阳，又一次向前燕请求投降。
English: Zhang Ping led three thousand soldiers to flee to Pingyang, and once again asked Yan Xuan to surrender.

古文：冬，十月，泰山太守诸葛攸攻燕东郡，入武阳，燕主俊遣大司马恪统阳骛及乐安王臧之兵以击之。
现代文：冬季，十月，泰山太守诸葛攸攻打前燕的东郡，进入武阳后，前燕国主慕容俊派大司马慕容恪统领阳鹜及乐安王慕容臧的部队迎击。
English: In the winter, in October, Taishan Taishou Zhuge You attacked the former Yan's Dong County, and after entering Wuyang, the former Yan's lord Murong Jun sent the grand secretary Ma Murong to lead the troops of Yang Di and Le An Wang Murong Jun to meet the attack.

古文：攸败走，还泰山，恪遂渡河，略地河南，分置守宰。
现代文：诸葛攸被打败逃跑，回到了泰山。慕容恪渡过黄河，占据河南，分别设置了地方官史。
English: Zhuge You was defeated and fled, returning to Mount Tai. Murong Ji crossed the Yellow River, occupied Henan, and separately set up a local official history.

古文：燕主俊欲经营秦、晋，十二月，令州郡校实见丁，户留一丁，馀悉发为兵，欲使步卒满一百五十万，期来春大集洛阳。
现代文：前燕国主慕容俊想要图谋前秦、东晋。十二月，他命令各州郡核实现有的成年男子，每户留下一名，其余的全部征召充军，想使兵员达到一百五十万，以期明年春天汇集洛阳。
English: In December, he ordered all prefectures and counties to round up the existing adult males, leaving one in each household, and the rest to be conscripted into the army, hoping to make the number of soldiers reach 1.5 million, with a view to gathering in Luoyang next spring.

古文：武邑刘贵上书，极陈 百姓凋弊，发兵非法，必致土崩之变。 
现代文：武邑人刘贵上书，有力陈述 民力衰败，征兵的办法违反古法，必定会导致军队士崩瓦解。 
English: Liu Gui from Wuyi wrote a letter, powerfully stating that the decline of the people's strength and the method of conscription violated the ancient law, which would inevitably lead to the collapse of the army.

古文：俊善之，乃更令三五发兵，宽其期日，以来冬集鄴。
现代文：慕容俊认为此话有理，便更改了命令，改为三丁抽二，五丁抽三的办法，而且放宽征调的期限，把汇集邺城的时间改为明年冬天。
English: Mu Rongjun thought that this was reasonable, so he changed the order, changing it to the method of drawing two from three and three from five, and relaxing the deadline for the transfer, changing the time for the collection of Lucheng to next winter.

古文：时燕调发繁数，官司各遣使者，道路旁午，郡县苦之。
现代文：当时前燕征赋调兵频繁，各官府派遣使者，穿梭往返，郡县苦不堪言。
English: At that time, pre-Yan recruitment and transfer of troops were frequent, each government sent envoys, shuttled back and forth, and the county suffered a lot.

古文：太尉、领中书监封弈请 自今非军期严急，不得遣使，自馀赋发皆责成州郡，其群司所遣弹督先在外者，一切摄还。 
现代文：太尉、兼中书监封奕请求： 从今开始，如果不是军令期限紧迫，不得再派使者。其余征赋调兵事宜全都由州郡督促完成，州郡以下的部门派出在外催促监督的人，一律返回。 
English: Second Lieutenant and Acting Central Library Supervisor Zou Fengyi requested: From now on, if the military order deadline is not urgent, no more envoys can be sent. The remaining recruitment and transfer of troops will all be completed by the state and county supervision, and the departments below the state and county will all return those who are sent outside to urge supervision.

古文：俊从之。
现代文：慕容俊听从了这一请求。
English: Feng Jun obeyed and boarded a small boat.

古文：燕泰山太守贾坚屯山茌，荀羡引兵击之；坚所将才七百馀人，羡兵十倍于坚。
现代文：前燕秦山太守贾坚驻扎在山茌，东晋荀羡带领兵众攻击他。贾坚统领的兵士才七百多人，荀羡的兵力十倍于贾坚。
English: Jia Jian, the former governor of Yanqin Mountain, was stationed in Shanshui. Dongjin Shuxuan led the troops to attack him. Jia Jian commanded more than seven hundred soldiers, and Shuxian's troops were ten times that of Jia Jian.

古文：坚将出战，诸将皆曰： 众少，不如固守。 
现代文：贾坚准备出城迎战，众将领都说： 士兵数量少，不如固守。 
English: As Jia Jian prepared to leave the city for battle, all the generals said, "It is better to hold fast if the number of soldiers is small."

古文：坚曰： 固守亦不能免，不如战也。 
现代文：贾坚说： 固守也不能幸免，不如迎战。 
English: Jia Jian said: It is unavoidable to hold fast, it is better to fight.

古文：遂出战，身先士卒，杀羡兵千馀人，复还入城。
现代文：于是出城迎战。贾坚身先士卒，率兵斩杀了荀羡的士兵一千多人，又返回了城中。
English: So he went out of the city to fight. Jia Jian was in the vanguard, and led the soldiers to kill more than a thousand envious soldiers, and then returned to the city.

古文：羡进攻之，坚叹曰： 吾自结发，志立功名，而每值穷厄，岂非命乎！
现代文：荀羡向他发起进攻，贾坚叹息说道： 我自结发成年以来，立志要建立功名，然而每每陷于穷途险境，这岂不是命中注定吗！
English: Shao Envy launched an attack on him, Jia Jian sighed and said: Since I became an adult, I have been determined to build a reputation, but every time I fall into a desperate situation, isn't it fate!

古文：与其屈辱而生，不若守节而死。 
现代文：与其遭受屈辱而苟且偷生，不如保持气节而慨然赴死。 
English: It is better to die with dignity than to live with humiliation.

古文：乃谓将士曰： 今危困，计无所设，卿等可去，吾将止死。 
现代文：于是对将士们说： 如今处于危险的困境，无计可施，你们可以离去，我将只有一死。 
English: So he said to the soldiers: "Now I am in a dangerous predicament, there is nothing to be done, you can leave, I only have one death."

古文：将士皆泣曰： 府君不出，众亦俱死耳。 
现代文：将士们都哭泣着说： 府君您不出城，大家也一起死。 
English: The soldiers all cried and said, "Fuchun, if you don't leave the city, we will all die together."

古文：乃扶坚上马。坚曰： 我如欲逃，必不相遣。
现代文：于是他们就扶持贾坚上马，贾坚说： 我如果想要逃走，一定不会丢开你们。
English: So they helped Jia Jian onto the horse. Jia Jian said: "If I want to escape, I will not leave you.

古文：今当为卿曹决斗，若势不能支，卿等可趣去，勿复顾我也！ 
现代文：现在应当为你们去决死一战，如果力量不支，你们可以赶快离去，不要再顾及我了！ 
English: Now it is time for you to fight a decisive battle. If you are not strong enough, you can quickly leave, and don't worry about me anymore!

古文：乃开门直出。
现代文：说完便打开城门，径直出去。
English: With that, he opened the gate and went straight out.

古文：羡兵四集，坚立马桥上，左右射之，皆应弦而倒。
现代文：荀羡的兵众四面云集，贾坚把马停在护城河的桥上，左右开弓，荀羡的士兵应声倒下。
English: The envious soldiers gathered on all sides. Jia Jian stopped his horse on the bridge of the moat, opened his bow left and right, and the envious soldiers fell down in response.

古文：羡兵众多，从堑下斫桥，坚人马俱陷，生擒之，遂拔山茌。
现代文：然而荀羡的兵力众多，一部分士兵从河下砍断桥梁，贾坚连人带马陷落下去，被活捉。山茌于是被攻克。
English: However, there was a large number of envious soldiers, some soldiers cut bridges from under the river, Jia Jian fell down with his men and horses, and was captured alive. The mountains were then conquered.

古文：羡谓坚曰： 君父、祖世为晋臣，奈何背本不降？ 
现代文：荀羡对贾坚说： 你的父亲、祖父世代都是晋朝的臣子，你为什么要背叛先祖而不肯投降？ 
English: Zou En said to Jia Jian: Your father and grandfathers were all subjects of the Jin Dynasty. Why did you betray your ancestors and refuse to surrender?

古文：坚曰： 晋自弃中华，非吾叛也。
现代文：贾坚说： 是晋王朝自己抛弃了中华大地，不是我背叛了它。
English: Jia Jian said: It was the Jin Dynasty itself that abandoned the land of China, not I who betrayed it.

古文：民既无主，强则托命。
现代文：百姓既然已经没有了君主，只有把命运托付给力量强大的人。
English: Since the people no longer have a monarch, they can only entrust their fate to the powerful.

古文：既已事人，安可改节！
现代文：我既然已经事奉了别人，怎么可以改变气节！
English: Since I have already served others, how can I change my temperament!

古文：吾束脩自立，涉赵历燕，未尝易志，君何匆匆相谓降乎！ 
现代文：我从师就学自立于世以来，历经赵、燕，未曾改变志向，你怎么能一下子就劝我投降呢！ 
English: Ever since I learned from my teacher and became independent in the world, after Zhao and Yan, I have not changed my ambition. How can you persuade me to surrender at once?

古文：羡复责之，坚怒曰： 竖子，儿女御乃公！ 
现代文：荀羡又一次责备贾坚，贾坚愤怒地说： 小子！做儿女的竟想管教父亲！ 
English: Zou En once again rebuked Jia Jian. Jia Jian angrily said, "Kid! Children want to discipline their father!

古文：羡怒，执置雨中，数日，坚愤惋而卒。
现代文：荀羡大怒，把他押到院子里淋雨。过了几天，贾坚满怀悲愤遗憾而死。
English: Enraged, Yao pushed him into the courtyard to soak in the rain. A few days later, Jia Jian died filled with grief, indignation and regret.

古文：燕青州刺史慕容尘遣司马悦明救泰山，羡兵大败，燕复取山茌。
现代文：前燕青州刺史慕容尘派司马悦明去救援秦山，荀羡的军队被打败，前燕又夺取了山茌。
English: Qianyan Qingzhou engraving master Mu Rongchen sent Sima Yueming to rescue Qin Mountain. The envious army was defeated, and Qianyan captured the mountain.

古文：燕主俊以贾坚子活为任城太守。
现代文：前燕国主慕容俊任命贾坚的儿子贾活为任城太守。
English: Mu Rongjun, the former ruler of Yan, appointed Jia Jian's son Jia Huo as the acting governor of the city.

古文：荀羡疾笃，征还，以郗昙为北中郎将、都督徐、兗、青、冀、幽五州诸军事、徐、兗二州刺史，镇下邳。
现代文：荀羡病重，被东晋朝廷召回。任命郗昙为北中郎将，都督徐、兖、青、冀、幽五州诸军事，徐、兖二州刺史，镇守下邳。
English: He was seriously ill and was recalled by the East Jin Dynasty court. He was appointed as the Northern Vice Admiral, the military governor of the five states of Xu, Shun, Qing, Hebei and Yu, the governor of the two states of Xu and Shun, and the town guard.

古文：燕吴王垂娶段末柸女，生子令、宝。
现代文：前燕吴王慕容垂娶了段末的女儿，生下儿子慕容令、慕容宝。
English: Former Yan Wu King Murong married Duan Mei's daughter and gave birth to sons Murong Ling and Murong Bao.

古文：段氏才高性烈，自以贵姓，不尊事可足浑后，可足浑氏衔之。
现代文：段氏才能颇高但性格刚烈，自以为出身于名门贵姓，不恭敬侍奉可足浑王后，可足浑氏对她怀恨在心。
English: Duan's talent is quite high but his character is strong. He thinks he comes from a noble family and serves Queen Ashigun without respect. However, Ashigun holds a grudge against her.

古文：燕主俊素不快于垂，中常侍涅皓因希旨告段氏及吴国典书令辽东高弼为巫蛊，欲以连污垂。
现代文：前燕国主慕容俊历来不喜欢慕容垂，中常侍涅浩便迎合他的心意，诬告段氏及吴国典书令辽东人高弼使用巫蛊邪术加祸于人，想以此株连慕容垂。
English: Former Yan sovereign Murong Jun had always disliked Murong Tie, and the middle-ranking attendant Nie Hao catered to his wishes by falsely accusing Duan and Wu Guoten of ordering the Liaodong people Gao Gan to use witchcraft to harm people, hoping to use this strain to implicate Murong Tie.

古文：俊收段氏及弼下大长秋、延尉考验，段氏及弼志气确然，终无挠辞。
现代文：慕容俊拘捕了段氏和高弼，分别送交大长秋、廷尉审问。段氏及高弼意志坚定，始终没有屈招。
English: Murongjun arrested Duan and Gao Yao, and sent them to be interrogated by the grand chancellor and the imperial lieutenant respectively. Duan and Gao Yao were determined and never gave in.

古文：掠治日急，垂愍之，私使人谓段氏曰： 人生会当一死，何堪楚毒如此！
现代文：严刑拷打日甚一日，慕容垂怜悯他们，就私下派人告诉段氏说： 人生固有一死，何必忍受如此荼毒！
English: Day after day of severe torture, Murong took pity on them and secretly sent someone to tell Mr. Duan: "Life is predicated on death, why should you have to endure such cruel torture!

古文：不若引服。 
现代文：不如屈招服罪。 
English: It's better to give in and accept the punishment.

古文：段氏叹曰： 吾岂爱死者耶！
现代文：段氏叹息道： 我难道是喜欢死的人吗！
English: Duan sighed, "Am I a person who likes to die?"

古文：若自诬以恶逆，上辱祖宗，下累于王，固不为也！ 
现代文：如果诬蔑自己而去迎合邪恶，上辱没祖宗，下连累大王，坚决不能干！ 
English: If you slander yourself and pander to evil, if you dishonor your ancestors, and if you slander the great king, you must not do it!

古文：辩答益明，故垂得免祸，而段氏竟死于狱中。
现代文：此后她辩驳答对越发明确。慕容垂因此得以免遭祸害，而段氏最终死于狱中。
English: After that, she became more and more clear in her rebuttal. Murongdeli was thus spared the scourge, and Duan eventually died in prison.

古文：出垂为平州刺史，镇辽东。
现代文：慕容俊将慕容垂调出，任平州刺史，镇守辽东。
English: Murong Jun transferred Murong Diao out, appointed as the governor of Pingzhou and the governor of Liaodong.

古文：垂以段氏女弟为继室；足浑氏黜之，以其妹长安君妻垂；垂不悦，由是益恶之。
现代文：慕容垂娶段氏的妹妹作为继室。然而可足浑氏却废黜了她，把自己的妹妹长安君嫁给慕容垂。慕容垂很不高兴，从此慕容俊更加讨厌他。
English: Murongtai married Duan's younger sister as a step-sister. However, Kofukun dethroned her and married his younger sister Changanjun to Murongtai. Murongtai was very unhappy, and from then on, Murongjun hated him even more.

古文：匈奴刘阏头部落多叛，惧而东走，乘冰渡河，半渡而冰解，后众尽归刘悉勿祈，阏头奔代。
现代文：匈奴人刘阏头的部落大多都反叛，他由于害怕而东逃。到达黄河后，他踩着冰过河，走到一半，冰面破裂。落在后面的兵众全都归附了刘悉勿祈，刘阏头逃奔到代国。
English: Most of the tribes of Liu Shantou, a Hun, rebelled, and he fled in fear. After reaching the Yellow River, he stepped on the ice to cross the river, and when he was halfway across, the ice cracked. The soldiers who fell behind all joined Liu Shibukhi, and Liu Shantou fled to Dai Province.

古文：悉勿祈，务桓之子也。
现代文：刘悉勿祈是刘务桓的儿子。
English: Liu Xizeki is the son of Liu Muhuan.

古文：孝宗穆皇帝中之下升平三年春，二月，燕主俊立子泓为济北王，冲为中山王。
现代文：升平三年春季，二月，前燕国主慕容俊立儿子慕容泓为济北王，慕容冲为中山王。
English: In the spring of the third year of the Heian period, in February, the former lord of the Yan Kingdom, Murong Jun, appointed his son, Murong Jun, as the King of Jeju, and Murong Chong as the King of Zhongshan.

古文：燕人杀段勤，勤弟思来奔。
现代文：前燕人杀了段勤，段勤的弟弟段思来投奔东晋。
English: Former Yan people killed Duan Qin, Duan Qin's younger brother Duan Si came to East Jin.

古文：燕主俊宴群臣于蒲池，语及周太子晋，潸然流涕曰： 才子难得。
现代文：前燕国主慕容俊在蒲池宴请群臣，谈到周朝太子姬晋的时候，他潸然泪下，说： 有才华的儿子难得。
English: Mu Rongjun, the former ruler of Yan Province, invited a group of ministers to a banquet in the playpen. When talking about the Zhou Dynasty's Prince Hijin, he burst into tears and said, "It is rare to have a talented son."

古文：自景先之亡，吾鬓发中白。
现代文：自从慕容晔死去以后，我鬓发已经半白。
English: Since Murong Yao's death, my hair has turned white.

古文：卿等谓景先何如？ 
现代文：你们说慕容晔怎样？ 
English: What do you think of Murongyao?

古文：司徒左长史李绩对曰： 献怀太子之在东宫，臣为中庶子，太子志业，敢不知之！
现代文：司徒左长史李绩回答说： 献怀太子慕容晔在东宫的时候，我为中庶子，太子的志向业绩，我怎敢说不清楚呢！
English: Szuzu Zangshi Li Bi replied, "When I was in the East Palace, I was the middle child of Prince Murong Hui. How dare I not be clear about the Prince's ambition!

古文：太子大德有八：至孝，一也；聪敏，二也；沈毅，三也；疾谀喜直，四也；好学，五也；多艺，六也：谦恭，七也；好施，八也。 
现代文：太子的大德表现在八个方面：其一，至孝；其二，聪明敏锐；其三，沉着坚毅；其四，痛恨阿谀喜欢刚直；其五，好学；其六，多才多艺；其七，谦恭；其八，喜欢施惠于人。 
English: The prince's great virtue is manifested in eight aspects: first, filial piety; second, intelligence and sensitivity; third, composure and fortitude; fourth, detesting grandma and liking straightforwardness; fifth, eagerness to learn; sixth, versatility; seventh, modesty; eighth, liking to benefit others.

古文：俊曰： 卿誉之虽过，然此儿在，吾死无忧矣。
现代文：慕容俊说： 你的赞誉虽说有点过分，但如果此儿健在，我便死而无忧了。
English: Murongjun said: Although your praise is a bit excessive, if I live here, I will die without worries.

古文：景茂何如？ 
现代文：慕容怎么样？ 
English: What about Murong?

古文：时太子侍侧，绩曰： 皇太子天资岐嶷，虽八德已闻，然二阙未补，好游畋而乐丝竹，此其所以为损也。 
现代文：当时慕容正陪从在旁边，李绩说： 皇太子天资聪慧，虽然已有具备八德的声誉，但尚有两方面的缺憾未能弥补，喜欢游玩打猎和丝竹器乐，这就是导致他有所不如的原因。 
English: At that time, Murong was accompanying him, and Li Yi said: The crown prince is naturally intelligent. Although he has a reputation for virtue, there are still two shortcomings that have not been made up. He likes to play hunting and silk bamboo instruments, which is why he is not as good as others.

古文：俊顾谓暐曰： 伯阳之言，药石之惠也，汝宜诫之！ 
现代文：慕容俊看着慕容说： 李绩的话，是苦口良药，你应该引以为诫。 
English: Murong Jun looked at Murong and said, "Li Jie's words are bitter medicine. You should take them as a warning.

古文：暐甚不平。
现代文：慕容却忿忿不平。
English: Murong, however, was furious.

古文：俊梦赵主虎啮其臂，乃发虎墓，求尸不获，购以百金；鄴女子李菟知而告之，得尸于东明观下，僵而不腐。
现代文：慕容俊梦见后赵王石虎咬他的臂膀，便掘开石虎的坟墓，寻找他的尸体，但没有找到，于是悬赏百金搜求。邺城的女子李菟知道下落，告诉了慕容俊，在东明观下找到尸体。尸体僵而不腐。
English: After Murong Jun dreamed that Zhao Wang Shihu bit his arm, he dug up the grave of Shihu and searched for his body, but did not find it, so he offered a reward of one hundred gold coins. A woman from Lushan City, Li Yan, knew the whereabouts and told Murong Jun to find the body under the Dongming View. The body was stiff and incorruptible.

古文：俊蹋而骂之曰： 死胡，何敢怖生天子！ 
现代文：慕容俊踩着尸体骂道： 死胡人，竟敢吓唬活天子！ 
English: Murongjun stepped on the corpse and cursed, "How dare you scare the living God!

古文：数其残暴之罪而鞭之，投于漳水，尸倚桥柱不流。
现代文：接着历数石虎的残暴罪行，又用鞭子抽打尸体，最后投进漳水之中，但尸体却倚靠在桥柱边而不漂走。
English: He then recounts the atrocious crimes of the stone tigers, lashes the corpse with a whip, and finally throws it into the brackish water, but the corpse leans against the edge of the bridge pillar and does not float away.

古文：及秦灭燕，王猛为之诛李菟，收而葬之。
现代文：等到前秦灭掉了前燕，王猛为此杀掉李菟，将石虎的遗骸收拾起来安葬了。
English: After the former Qin Dynasty had exterminated the former Yan Dynasty, Wang Meng killed Li Qian for this reason, collected the remains of the stone tiger and buried it.

古文：秦平羌护军高离据略阳叛，永安威公侯讨之，未克而卒。
现代文：前秦平羌护军高离据守略阳反叛，永安威公苻侯前往讨伐，没有攻克苻侯就死了。
English: Gao Liang rebelled against the former Qin and Pingxu Protectorate, and Yong'an Weigong marched to fight the warlord, but died before he could conquer the warlord.

古文：夏，四月，骁骑将军邓羌、秦州刺史啖铁讨平之。
现代文：夏季，四月，骁骑将军邓羌、秦州刺史啖铁讨伐并平定了反叛。
English: In the summer, in April, the cavalry generals Deng Wei and Qin Zhou Zhishi launched an iron crusade and quelled the rebellion.

古文：匈奴刘悉勿祈卒，弟卫辰杀其子而代之。
现代文：匈奴刘悉勿祈去世，弟弟刘卫辰杀掉了他的儿子，取而代之。
English: The Hun Liu Siyi Buki died, and his brother Liu Weichen killed his son and took his place.

古文：五月，秦王坚如河东；六月，大赦，改元甘露。
现代文：五月，前秦王苻坚到河东。六月，实行大赦，改年号为甘露。
English: In May, the former Qin King Jiaojian went to the east of the river. In June, an amnesty was implemented, and the name of the year was changed to Nectar.

古文：凉州牧张瓘，猜忌苛虐，专以爱憎为赏罚。
现代文：凉州牧张，猜忌成性，苛刻暴虐，专断地以自己的爱憎进行赏罚。
English: Liangzhou herdsman Zhang is suspicious, harsh and tyrannical, and arbitrarily rewards and punishes with his own love and hate.

古文：郎中殷郇谏之。瓘曰： 虎生三日，自能食肉，不须人教也。 
现代文：郎中殷郇劝他，张说： 老虎生下来三天，自己就会吃肉，不需要别人教导。 
English: Zhang said, "When a tiger is three days old, it will eat meat by itself. It doesn't need to be taught by others.

古文：由是人情不附。
现代文：因此人心都和他疏远。
English: That's why people have distanced themselves from him.

古文：辅国将军宋混，性忠鲠，瓘惮之，欲杀混及弟澄，因废凉王玄靓而代之，征兵数万，集姑臧。
现代文：辅国将军宋混，生性忠诚耿直，张害怕他，想杀掉宋混以及他的弟弟宋澄，乘势将凉王张玄靓废黜，取而代之。
English: Zhang was afraid of General Song Jian, who was loyal by nature, and wanted to kill him and his younger brother Song Cheng. He took advantage of the situation to depose Liangwang Zhang Xuanzang and replace him.

古文：混知之，与澄帅壮士杨和等四十馀骑奄入南城，宣告诸营曰： 张瓘谋逆，被太后令诛之。 
现代文：张征兵数万人，集结于姑臧，宋混知道后，和宋澄一起率领杨和等四十多名勇士骑着马潜入城南，向各个军营宣布： 张阴谋叛逆，奉太后令来杀他。 
English: Zhang conscripted tens of thousands of soldiers and gathered them in Gushan. After Song Jian learned of this, he and Song Cheng led Yang He and more than forty other warriors on horseback to sneak into the south of the city and announce to the various military camps: Zhang is plotting a rebellion and has been ordered by the Empress Dowager to kill him.

古文：俄而众至二千。
现代文：不一会儿，聚集起来的兵众就达二千。
English: In a short time, the number of soldiers who had gathered reached two thousand.

古文：瓘帅众出战，混击破之。
现代文：张率领兵众出来迎战，被宋混击败。
English: Zhang led the troops out to fight and was defeated by Song.

古文：瓘麾下玄胪刺混，不能穿甲，混擒之，瓘众悉降。
现代文：张手下的玄胪刺击宋混，未能刺透盔甲，宋混擒获了他，张的兵众全部投降。
English: Zhang's Xuan Zang stabbed Song Jian, but failed to pierce the armor. Song Jian got him, and all of Zhang's soldiers surrendered.

古文：瓘与弟琚皆自杀，混夷其宗族。
现代文：张和他的弟弟张琚自杀，宋混将其宗族灭绝。
English: Zhang and his brother Zhang Hui committed suicide, and Song Han exterminated their clan.

古文：玄靓以混为使持节、都督中外诸军事、骠骑大将军、酒泉郡侯，代瓘辅政。
现代文：张玄靓任命宋混为使持节、都督中外诸军事、骠骑大将军、酒泉郡侯，取代张辅佐政事。
English: Zhang Xuanqian appointed Song Rong as the envoy of the festival, the military governor of the Middle and Outer Provinces, the cavalry general, and the lord of Jiuquan County, replacing Zhang Yuxia.

古文：混乃请玄靓去凉王之号，复称凉州牧。
现代文：宋混于是就请求张玄靓去掉凉王的称号，恢复凉州牧的称呼。
English: Song Jian then asked Zhang Xuanqian to remove the title of Liangwang and restore the title of Liangzhou Mu.

古文：混谓玄胪曰： 卿刺我，幸而不伤，今我辅政，卿其惧乎？ 
现代文：宋混对玄胪说： 你刺我，我幸运而未伤，如今我辅佐朝政，你大概害怕吧？ 
English: Song Jian said to Xuanzang: You stabbed me, I was lucky and did not get hurt, now I am an assistant to the government, are you afraid?

古文：胪曰： 胪受瓘恩，唯恨刺节下不深耳，窃无所惧！ 
现代文：玄胪说： 我承受了张的恩慧，只恨刺你刺得不够深，内心无所畏惧！ 
English: Xuanzang said, "I have received Zhang's kindness. I only hate that you didn't stab me deeply enough. I have no fear in my heart!"

古文：混义之，任为心膂。
现代文：宋混认为他具有大义，把他当作心腹。
English: Song Jian considered him to be of great significance and regarded him as a confidant.

古文：高昌不能拒燕，秋，七月，自白马奔荥阳。
现代文：高昌抵抗不住前燕的攻击，秋季，七月，从白马逃奔到荥阳。
English: Gaochang could not resist the attack of the former Yan, in the autumn, in July, fled from Baima to Fenyang.

古文：秦王坚自河东还，以骁骑将军邓羌为御史中丞。
现代文：前秦王苻坚从河东返回，任命骁骑将军邓羌为御史中丞。
English: Former Qin King He Jian returned from the east of the river and appointed the general of the imperial cavalry, Deng Yu, as the vice-president of the imperial history.

古文：八月，以咸阳内史王猛为侍中、中书令，领京兆尹。
现代文：八月，任命咸阳内史王猛为侍中、中书令，兼领京兆尹。
English: In August, Wang Meng, the Inner Historian of Xianyang, was appointed as the Chamberlain, the Secretary of the Central Government, and the leader of Beijing Zhaoyun.

古文：特进、光禄大夫强德，太后之弟也，酗酒，豪横，掠人财货、子女，为百姓患。
现代文：特进、光禄大夫强德是强太后的弟弟，他借酒逞凶，骄纵蛮横，抢人财物子女，是百姓的祸害。
English: The younger brother of the empress dowager, Dr. Tetsujin and Dr. Guanglu Qiangde used alcohol to gain strength, was arrogant and rude, robbed people of their property and children, and was a scourge to the people.

古文：猛下车收德，奏未及报，已陈尸于市，坚驰使赦之，不及。
现代文：王猛一上任就拘捕了他，进上奏章请求处理，没等回复，强德就已经陈尸街市。苻坚见到奏章后迅速派使者来要将强德赦免，但为时已晚。
English: Wang Meng arrested him as soon as he took office. He went to Songzhang to request a solution. Without waiting for a reply, Qiangde was already dead. After seeing Songzhang, Yan Jian quickly sent an envoy to pardon Qiangde, but it was too late.

古文：与邓羌同志，疾恶纠案，无所顾忌，数旬之间，权豪、贵戚，杀戮、刑免者二十馀人，朝廷震栗，奸猾屏气，路不拾遗。
现代文：王猛与邓羌志同道合，斩除邪恶，纪正冤案，无所顾忌，几十天时间，被处死和依法黜免的权贵、豪强、王公贵戚有二十多人，震动了朝廷上下，奸猾之辈屏声敛气，境内路不拾遗。
English: Wang Meng and Deng Xiaoping shared the same goal of eradicating evil and correcting injustice. They had no scruples. Over the course of dozens of days, more than 20 members of the powerful, courageous and noble families were executed and pardoned in accordance with the law. This shook the imperial court up and down. The treacherous people held their breath, and there was no way to find the remains within the country.

古文：坚叹曰： 吾始今知天下之有法也！ 
现代文：苻坚感叹地说： 我到如今才知道天下有法律了！ 
English: Hao Jian said with a sigh: I only now know that there is a law in the world!

古文：泰山太守诸慕攸将水陆二万击燕，入自石门，屯于河渚。
现代文：东晋泰山太守诸葛攸统率二万水兵、步兵攻击前燕，从石门进入，驻扎在黄河的小岛上。
English: Zhuge Youtong, the governor of Taishan in East Jin, led 20,000 sailors and infantry to attack Qianyan, entering through the stone gate and stationed on a small island in the Yellow River.

古文：燕上庸王评、长乐太守傅颜帅步骑五万与攸战于东阿，攸兵大败。
现代文：前燕上庸王慕容评、长乐太守傅颜率领五万步兵、骑兵和诸葛攸在东阿交战，诸葛攸的军队大败。
English: Former Yan Shangyong Wang Murong Hui and Changle Taishu Fu Yan led fifty thousand infantry and cavalry to fight Zhuge You in East Africa, and Zhuge You's army was defeated.

古文：冬，十月，诏谢万军下蔡，郗昙军高平以击燕。
现代文：冬季，十月，东晋诏令谢万率军驻扎下蔡，郗昙率军驻扎高平，以攻打前燕。
English: In winter, in October, the Eastern Jin Dynasty ordered Xie Wan to station his army in Lower Cai, and Zou to station his army in Gaoping, in order to attack Qianyan.

古文：万矜豪傲物，但以啸咏自高，未尝抚众。
现代文：谢万豪放自负，对人傲慢，整天只是以啸吟自命清高，不曾抚慰兵众。
English: Xie Wanhao was conceited and arrogant towards others. All day long, he was just shouting to keep himself high and dry. He never consoled the soldiers.

古文：兄安深忧之，谓万曰： 汝为元帅，宜数接对诸将以悦其心，岂有傲诞如此而能济事也！ 
现代文：他的哥哥谢安对此深感忧虑，对谢万说： 你作为统兵主将，应该经常接触众将领以使他们内心高兴愉快，岂有如此傲慢而能成大事的！ 
English: His brother, Xie An, was deeply worried about this and said to Xie Wan: As the commander-in-chief, you should constantly contact the generals to make them happy. How can you be so arrogant and achieve great things?

古文：万乃召集诸将，一无所言，直以如意指四坐云： 诸将皆劲卒 。
现代文：于是谢万就召集众将领，二话没说，直接用如意指着坐在四周的将领们说： 众将领都是精壮的兵卒。 
English: Then Xie Wan called together all the generals and, without saying a word, directly pointed to the generals sitting around him and said: "All the generals are strong soldiers."

古文：诸将益恨之。
现代文：将领们听后越发痛恨他。
English: The generals hated him all the more.

古文：安虑万不免，乃自队帅以下，无不亲造，厚相亲托。
现代文：谢安担心谢万难免遭受不测，就亲自深入到各队主将以下的人中，一一亲访，用深厚的情谊拜托他们。
English: Xie An was worried that Xie Wan would inevitably suffer an accident, so he personally went deep into the people below the team leader, visited them one by one, and implored them with deep feelings.

古文：既而万帅众入涡、颍以援洛阳，郗昙以病退屯彭城。
现代文：此后谢万率兵进入涡水、颍水之间去支援洛阳。郗昙因病后退，驻扎在彭城。
English: After that, Xie Wan led his soldiers into the waters between the Whirlpool and the Surabaya to support Luoyang. Due to illness, the Surabaya retreated and was stationed in Pengcheng.

古文：万以为燕兵大盛，故昙退，即引兵还，众遂惊溃。
现代文：谢万以为郗昙后退是因为前燕的兵势强盛，随即也率兵撤还，于是兵众惊慌溃散。
English: Xie Wan thought that Yan was retreating because of Qian Yan's strong army, and then he also withdrew his army, so the soldiers panicked and dispersed.

古文：万狼狈单归，军士欲因其败而图之，以安故而止。
现代文：谢万自己狼狈地逃回，军中将士想乘着他的失败谋算他，考虑到谢安的缘故，才没这样干。
English: Xie Wan himself fled back in disarray. The lieutenant-general wanted to take advantage of his failure to plot against him, but did not do so for Xie An's sake.

古文：既至，诏废万为庶人，降昙号建武将军。
现代文：逃回建康以后，穆帝下诏黜废谢万为庶人，把郗昙的封号降为建武将军。
English: After escaping back to Jiankang, Mu Di issued an edict abolishing Xie Wan as a commoner and reducing his title to General Jianwu.

古文：于是许昌、颍川、谯、沛诸城相次皆没于燕。
现代文：从此许昌、颍川、谯、沛等城邑都相继覆没于前燕。
English: Since then, Xuchang, Luochuan, Handan, Pei and other towns have successively disappeared in Qianyan.

古文：秦王坚以王猛为吏部尚书，寻迁太子詹事。十一月，为左仆射，馀官如故。
现代文：前秦王苻坚任命王猛为吏部尚书，不久又升迁为太子詹事，十一月，任左仆射，其他官职依旧如前。
English: Former Qin King Yu Jian appointed Wang Meng as the head of the Department of Records, and he was soon promoted to the position of Prince Zhan Zhi. In November, he was appointed as the Left Footman, and his other official positions remained the same.

古文：十二月，封武陵王晞子㻱为梁王。
现代文：十二月，东晋穆帝封武陵王司马的儿子司马为梁王。
English: In December, Emperor Mu of the Eastern Jin Dynasty made Sima, the son of King Sima of Wuling, King of Liang.

古文：大旱。
现代文：发生严重的干旱。
English: There was a severe drought.

古文：辛酉，燕主俊寝疾，谓大司马太原王恪曰： 吾病必不济。
现代文：辛酉，前燕国主慕容俊患病，卧床不起，他对大司马、太原王慕容恪说： 我的病肯定难以好转了。
English: Xin Yao, the former head of Yan Guo, Mu Rongjun, was ill and bedridden. He said to the grand steed, King Mu Rong, "My illness will definitely not get better.

古文：今二方未平，景茂冲幼，国家多难，吾欲效宋宣公，以社稷属汝，何如？ 
现代文：如今晋、秦二国尚未平定，慕容年幼，国家多有磨难，我想效仿宋宣公，把天下嘱托给你，如何？ 
English: Today, the Jin and Qin dynasties have yet to be pacified, Mu Rong is still young, and many countries are experiencing hardships. I want to follow the example of Song Xuan Gong and entrust the world to you. How about it?

古文：恪曰： 太子虽幼，胜残致治之主也。
现代文：慕容恪说： 太子虽然年幼，但却是能遏制顽凶实现大治的君主。
English: Murong Ke said: Although the prince is young, he is a monarch who can curb the obstinate and achieve great governance.

古文：臣实何人，敢干正统！ 
现代文：我其实是什么人，怎么敢当正统的君主呢！ 
English: Who am I, and how dare I be an orthodox monarch!

古文：俊怒曰： 兄弟之间，岂虚饰邪！ 
现代文：慕容俊愤怒地说： 兄弟之间，岂能虚伪掩饰！ 
English: Murongjun said angrily, "Between brothers, how can you cover up hypocrisy!

古文：恪曰： 陛下若以臣能荷天下之任者，岂不能辅少主乎！ 
现代文：慕容恪说： 陛下如果认为我是能够承担天下重任的人，我怎么就不能辅佐少主呢！ 
English: Murong Ke said, "Your Majesty, if you think that I am a person who can take on the heavy responsibilities of the world, why can't I assist you?"

古文：俊喜曰： 汝能为周公，吾复何忧！
现代文：慕容俊高兴地说： 你能做周公，我还有什么可忧虑的！
English: Murongjun said happily: You can be Zhou Gong, I have nothing to worry about!

古文：李绩清方忠亮，汝善遇之。 
现代文：李绩行为清廉，忠诚闻名，你要很好地对待他。 
English: Li Cun is known to be honest and loyal. You should treat him well.

古文：召吴王垂还鄴。
现代文：慕容俊召吴王慕容垂返回邺城。
English: Murong Jun called Wu Wang Murongdiao to return to Handan.

古文：秦王坚以王猛为辅国将军、司隶校尉、居中宿卫、仆射、詹事、侍中、中书令，领选如故。
现代文：前秦国王苻坚任命王猛为辅国将军、司录校尉，在宫中值宿警卫，仆射、詹事、侍中、中书令以及兼任的其他职务一如从前。
English: The former Qin King Yu Jian appointed Wang Meng as an auxiliary general, a secretary and a lieutenant, a guard on duty in the palace, a courier, an attendant, a waiter, a secretary and other concurrent positions as before.

古文：猛上疏辞让，因荐散骑常侍阳平公融、光禄、散骑西河任群、处士京兆硃彤自代。坚不许，而以融为侍中、中书监、左仆射，任群为光禄大夫，领太子家令；硃彤为尚书侍郎、领太子庶子。
现代文：王猛上疏请求辞让，并荐举散骑常侍阳平公苻融，光禄、散骑西河人任群，处士京兆人朱彤来分别替代自己的这些兼职，苻坚没有同意，而是任命苻融为侍中、中书监、左仆射，任命任群为光禄大夫，兼领太子家令，任命朱彤为尚书侍郎，兼领太子庶子。
English: Wang Mengjangsu asked for his resignation, and recommended that Yang Ping Gongjun Rong, Guanglu, Xihe Renqun, and Zhu Xi, the officials of Beijing, should be appointed to replace their part-time jobs. However, Yu Jian did not agree, but appointed Rong as the middle attendant, the middle librarian, and the left footman, appointed Renqun as the doctor of Guanglu, and also led the prince's household, and appointed Zhu Xi as the attendant of Shang, and also led the prince's illegitimate son.

古文：猛时年三十六，岁中五迁，权倾内外；人有毁之者，坚辄罪之，于是群臣莫敢复言。
现代文：王猛时年三十六岁，一年中五次升迁，权势显赫压倒朝廷内外。有诋毁他的人，苻坚就以罪处置，于是群臣没有谁再敢说三道四。
English: Wang Meng was thirty-six years old at the time, he was promoted five times in one year, and his power was overwhelming both inside and outside the imperial court. If anyone slandered him, he punished them with a crime, so none of the ministers dared to say anything.

古文：以左仆射李威领护军，右仆射梁平老为使持节、都督北垂诸军事、镇北大将军，戍朔方之西；丞相司马贾雍为云中护军，戍云中之南。
现代文：苻坚任命左仆射李威兼任护军，右仆射梁平老为使持节、都督北垂诸军事、镇北大将军，戍守朔方以西地区，丞相司马贾雍为云中护军，戍守云中以南地区。
English: Zou Jian appointed his left-hand man, Zha Li Wei, to serve as a military escort, his right-hand man, Zha Liang Ping Lao, to serve as a military attaché, the governor of Beletrao to serve as a military commander, the general of Zhenbei to guard the area west of Shuo Fang, and the prime minister, Zha Ma Jia Yong, to guard the area in Yunzhong and south of Yunzhong.

古文：燕所征郡国兵悉集鄴城。
现代文：前燕从各郡国征调的士兵全部汇集于邺城。
English: The soldiers recruited and transferred by Qianyan from all counties and countries were all gathered in Handan.

