古文：凡兴师深入敌境，若彼坚壁不与我战，欲老我师，当攻其君主，捣其巢穴，截其归路，断其粮草，彼必不得已而须战，我以锐卒击之，可败。
现代文：凡是出兵深入敌境，如果敌人固守营垒不与我方交战，企图以此疲惫拖垮我军，对此我军应该分兵进攻敌军，捣毁他的后方巢穴，切断后路，断绝他的粮草，迫使敌人不得不脱离营垒而出战，我方再乘机以精锐部队进击它，就可以打败敌人。
English: Whenever troops are sent deep into the enemy's territory, if the enemy sticks to the camp and does not engage us, and tries to drag down our army with this exhaustion, our army should divide the troops to attack the enemy, destroy his rear nest, cut off the back road, cut off his grain and grass, and force the enemy to leave the camp and go to war. If we take the opportunity to attack it with elite troops, we can defeat the enemy.

古文：法曰： 我欲战，敌虽深沟高垒，不得不与我战者，攻其所必救也。 
现代文：诚如兵法所说： 我军要想与敌决战，敌人即使固守深沟高垒，也不得不与我方交战，这是由于我军攻击其必然回救之处的缘故。 
English: As stated in the Art of War: If our army wants to fight a decisive battle with the enemy, the enemy will have to fight with us even if he sticks to deep ditches and high fortresses. This is because our army attacks the place where it is bound to be rescued.

古文：三国，魏明帝景初二年，召司马懿于长安，使将兵往辽东讨公孙渊。
现代文：三国时期，魏景初二年，明帝曹叡把太尉司马懿从长安召回京师洛阳，命他率军前往辽东征讨公孙渊。
English: During the Three Kingdoms period, in the first two years of the Wei and Qing dynasties, the Ming emperor Cao E called the lieutenant Sima Yu from Chang'an back to the Beijing division Luoyang, and ordered him to lead the army to Liaodong to conquer Gongsun Yuan.

古文：帝曰： 四千里征伐，虽云用奇，亦当任力，不当稍计役费。
现代文：魏明帝问道： 四千里远征作战，虽说要用奇谋取胜，但也要有足够的兵力，不应当过于计较军费开支的多少。
English: Sending 40,000 soldiers to such a large-scale war is not much, and should not be overestimated in terms of military expenditure.

古文：度渊以何计得策？ 
现代文：据你推测，公孙渊会采用什么计策才比较妥当呢？ 
English: According to your conjecture, what strategy will Gongsun Yuan adopt to be more appropriate?

古文：懿曰： 弃城预走，上计也；拒大军，其次也；坐守襄平，此成擒耳。 
现代文：司马懿回答说： 放弃城邑而预先逃走，这是上策；凭据辽水以抗拒我军，这是中策；坐守襄平而单纯防御，这是他将被俘虏的最下策。 
English: Sima Yi replied: Abandoning the cities and fleeing in advance is the best strategy; using Liao Shui to resist our army is the middle strategy; guarding Xiangping and simply defending it is the last strategy for him to be captured.

古文：曰： 三者何出？ 
现代文：明帝问： 这三种计策，公孙渊会采用哪一种呢？ 
English: Emperor Ming asked: Of these three strategies, which one will Gongsun Yuan adopt?

古文：懿曰： 唯明君能量彼我，预有所弃，此非渊所及也。 
现代文：司马懿答道： 只有深谋远虑之人才能正确估量敌我力量的对比，并能预先对所用计策作出正确取舍，这不是公孙渊能做到的。 
English: Sima Yu replied: Only a person with foresight can correctly estimate the balance of power between the enemy and ourselves, and can make the correct choice of strategy in advance. This is not something that Gongsun Yuan can do.

古文：曰： 往还几日？ 
现代文：明帝又问： 此次出征需要多少时间呢？ 
English: Emperor Ming also asked: How long will this expedition take?

古文：对曰： 往百日，还百日，攻百日，以六十日为休息，一年足矣。 
现代文：司马懿回答说： 去时行军一百天，回征路上一百天，作战一百天，用六十天进行休整。这样，一年就够了。 
English: And he answered, A hundred days' journey, and a hundred days' return, and a hundred days' fighting, and threescore days' preparation, and a year is sufficient.

古文：遂进兵。
现代文：于是，司马懿率军向辽东进发。
English: As a result, Sima Qian led the army to Liaodong.

古文：渊遣将帅步骑数万屯辽隧，围堑二十余里。
现代文：公孙渊派遣部将率领数万步骑兵进驻辽隧，构筑围墙堑壕二十余里，以此抵御司马懿进攻。
English: The dispatching department of Gongsunyuan will lead tens of thousands of infantry and cavalry into the Liao Tunnel and build more than 20 miles of fences and trenches to resist Sima Yi's attack.

古文：诸将欲击之，懿曰： 此欲老吾兵，攻之正堕其计。
现代文：魏军诸将想马上就发起进攻，但司马懿却说： 敌人构筑防御阵地，这是企图长期拖住和疲惫我军，进攻它就中计了。
English: The generals of the Wei army wanted to launch an attack immediately, but Sima Yi said: The enemy's construction of defensive positions is an attempt to delay and exhaust our army for a long time, and attacking it is the plan.

古文：此王邑所以耻过昆阳也。
现代文：这正是王莽时期王邑不肯绕过昆阳坚城而强攻硬打，几乎导致全军覆没的严重教训。
English: This is exactly the serious lesson that Wangyue did not want to bypass Kunyang Jiancheng during Wang Mang's time and attacked hard, almost leading to the annihilation of the entire army.

古文：彼大众在此，巢穴空虚。直抵襄平，出其不意，破之必矣。 
现代文：敌人主力集中在这里，其后方巢穴必然空虚，我军舍此不攻而直捣襄平，出其不意，定能打败公孙渊。 
English: The enemy's main forces are concentrated here, and the lair behind them is bound to be empty. Our army will not attack, but directly attack Xiangping. If they are taken by surprise, they will surely be able to defeat Gongsun Yuan.

古文：乃多张旗帜，欲出其南，贼尽锐赴之。
现代文：于是，便命令魏军多插旗帜，伪装成要出击敌人阵地之南端的样子，将敌人的全部精锐吸引到这里。
English: As a result, he ordered the Wei army to plant more flags, disguise themselves as if they were going to attack the southern end of the enemy's position, and attract all the enemy's elite to here.

古文：懿潜济以出其北，弃贼直趋襄平；贼将战败，懿围襄平。
现代文：司马懿却率领大军偷偷越过辽隧向北，放弃眼前敌人不打而直趋襄平，一路打败敌将的拦截，顺利地完成了对襄平的包围。
English: Sima Yu, however, led a large army to sneak across the Liao Tunnel to the north, abandoning the immediate enemy without fighting and heading straight for Xiangping. He defeated the enemy's interception all the way and successfully completed the encirclement of Xiangping.

古文：诸将请攻之，懿不听。
现代文：这时，众将又请求迅速攻城，但司马懿均未同意。
English: At this time, the generals again requested to quickly attack the city, but Sima Yu did not agree.

古文：陈珪曰： 昔攻上庸，旬日之半破坚城，斩孟达。
现代文：随军司马陈珪提出疑问说： 以往您率军攻打上庸，只用了五天即破城杀了孟达。
English: Following the question raised by the military secretary Ma Chen Yu, he said: In the past, you led the army to attack Shangyong, and it took only five days to break the city and kill Mengda.

古文：今日远来，而更安缓，愚窃惑之。 
现代文：如今长途跋涉而来，却变得安稳缓慢起来，对此，我实在有些迷惑不解。 
English: Now that I've come a long way, it's become steady and slow, and I'm really a bit puzzled about it.

古文：懿曰： 达众少而食支一年；吾将士四倍于达而粮不淹月，以一月较一年，安可不速？
现代文：司马懿耐心解释说： 上庸之战，孟达当时兵少而粮食够吃一年，我军将士数相当孟达军的四倍，但粮食则不够一个月食用，以仅有一个月存粮的部队去与有一年存粮的敌人相较量，怎么可以不采取速战速决？
English: Sima Yu patiently explained: At the time of the Battle of Shangyong, Mengda was short of soldiers but had enough grain to last a year. The number of soldiers in our army was four times that of Mengda's army, but the grain was not enough to eat for a month. With a force that had only one month's supply of grain to compete with an enemy that had a year's supply of grain, how could we not take a quick decision?

古文：以四击一，正令失半而克，犹当为之。
现代文：用四倍于敌的兵力去打击敌人，即使损失一半兵力而战胜了敌人，还是应当干的。
English: If you use four times as many troops as the enemy to fight the enemy, even if you lose half of the troops and defeat the enemy, you should still do it.

古文：是以不计死伤，而计粮也。
现代文：因为，这不是从计较人员伤亡，而是从计较粮食多少这一情况出发，所采取的作战行动。
English: Because this is not a combat action taken from the perspective of casualties, but from the perspective of how much food there is.

古文：今贼众我寡，贼饥我饱，而雨水乃尔，攻具不设，促之何为？
现代文：如今的形势是敌众我寡、敌饥我饱，加之大雨不停，攻城器械未备，似此而急忙进攻又有什么作为呢？
English: Today's situation is that the enemy is few and far between, the enemy is starving and we are full, plus the heavy rain is incessant, and the siege equipment is not ready. If we rush to attack like this, what good will it do?

古文：自发京师，不忧贼攻，但忧贼走。
现代文：我军从京师洛阳出发以来，我所担心的不是敌人向我军进攻，而是担心敌人不战而逃。
English: Since our army set out from Luoyang of the Beijing Division, what I feared was not that the enemy would attack our army, but that the enemy would flee without a fight.

古文：今贼粮垂尽，而围落未合，掠其牛马，抄其樵采，此故驱之走也。
现代文：现在敌人的粮食将要用尽，而我军对敌尚未完成合围之势；如果采取掠夺其牛马、抄取其柴草，那么，这就无异于驱使敌人逃跑。
English: Now the bandit army is running out of grain and grass, and our army has not yet encircled them, robbed their cattle and horses, and confiscated their firewood. This is to deliberately drive them away.

古文：夫兵者诡道，善因事变。
现代文：战争是一种诡诈多变的行动，善于因变制敌才能取胜。
English: The use of soldiers emphasizes the art of deception, and is good at changing at any time.

古文：贼凭恃其众，故虽饥困，不肯束手，当示无能以安之。
现代文：敌人凭恃其兵多，因此虽已处于饥饿困难的境地，但却仍然不肯束手待毙。对于此种敌人，我们应当伪装成无能为力的样子稳住它。
English: Against an enemy who has more soldiers than he needs, and is therefore already in a difficult situation of starvation, but still does not want to lay down his arms and die, we should disguise ourselves as powerless in order to stabilize him.

古文：若求小利而惊之，非计也。 
现代文：如果我们贪求小利而惊跑他们，这不是好的计谋所为。 
English: It's not a good strategy if we scare them away by asking for a small profit.

古文：既而雨霁，造攻具攻之，矢石如雨，粮尽窘急，人相食，乃使其将王健、柳甫乞降，请解围，当君臣面缚，懿皆斩之。
现代文：不久，雨过天晴，司马懿令部队制作攻城器械，并迅速发起进攻，箭飞如雨，攻势迅猛。城中敌人顿时陷于粮尽的困难境地，饥饿严重以至发生人吃人现象。公孙渊窘急无奈，便派部将王建、柳甫出城乞降，请求解除对襄平城的围困，并表示公孙渊君臣一定自缚前来请罪归附。
English: Soon after the rain cleared, Sima Yu ordered the troops to make siege equipment and quickly launched an attack. The arrows flew like rain, and the offensive was fierce. The enemy in the city was suddenly in a difficult situation of running out of food, and the hunger was so severe that cannibalism occurred. Gongsun Yuan was in a desperate situation, so he sent Wang Jian and Liu Fu out of the city to beg for surrender, to request the lifting of the siege of Xiangping City, and said that Gongsun Yuan and his ministers must come to plead guilty.

古文：渊突围而走，懿复追及梁水上杀之，辽地悉平。
现代文：但司马懿断然拒绝，并将王、柳二将杀掉。公孙渊见派将乞降未成，便突围而逃；司马懿挥军紧追，赶到梁水岸边将其击杀。至此，辽东地区完全平定。
English: However, Sima Yi flatly refused and killed Wang and Liu Ercang. Gongsun Yuan saw that the faction would not surrender, so he broke out of the encirclement and fled; Sima Yi led the army in hot pursuit and rushed to the shore of Liangshui to kill him. At this point, the Liaodong region was completely pacified.

