古文：道宗五三年春正月乙卯，如鱼儿泺。
现代文：大安三年春正月初二，皇上到鱼儿泊。
English: On the second day of the first month of the spring of the third year of the Great Peace, the emperor went to stay with the fishes.

古文：甲戌，出钱粟振南京贫民，仍复其租赋。
现代文：二十一日，发放钱米赈济南京贫民，又免除他们的租赋。
English: On the 21st, money and rice were distributed to the poor in Nanjing, and their rent was exempted.

古文：己卯，大雪。
现代文：二十六日，大雪。
English: On the 26th, it snowed heavily.

古文：二月丙戌，发粟振中京饥。
现代文：二月初三，发放粟米赈济中京饥荒。
English: On the third day of the second month of the year, corn was distributed to relieve the famine in Beijing.

古文：甲辰，以民多流散，除安泊逃户征偿法。
现代文：二十一日，因为百姓流离散居外地的很多，废除对留居逃户者处以罚款之法。
English: On the 21st, the law imposing fines on those who stay at home and run away from home was abolished, because many people were displaced and dispersed to other places.

古文：三月乙卯，高丽遣使来贡。
现代文：三月初三，高丽派使者前来进贡。
English: On the third day of the third lunar month, Goryeo sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：己未，免锦州贫民租一年。
现代文：初七，免除锦州贫民一年的田租。
English: On the seventh day of the new year, the poor people of Jinzhou will be exempted from one year's field rent.

古文：甲戌，免上京贫民租如锦州。
现代文：二十二日，免除上京贫民田租与锦州相等。
English: On the 22nd, the exemption of land rent for the poor in Shangjing was equal to that of Jinzhou.

古文：庚辰，女直贡良马。
现代文：二十八日，女真贡献良马。
English: On the 28th, Nyoshin contributed a good horse.

古文：夏四月戊子，赐中京贫民帛，及免诸路贡输之半。
现代文：夏四月初七，赐给中京贫民绢帛，又免除诸路进贡物品及输送土产之一半。
English: On the 7th day of the 4th month of the summer, he gave money to the poor in central Beijing, and exempted all roads from paying tribute and transporting half of the local produce.

古文：丙申，赐隈乌古部贫民帛。
现代文：十五日，赐给隈乌古部贫民以绢帛。
English: On the fifteenth day, the poor people of Kuma-Ukubu were given straw.

古文：庚子，如凉陉。
现代文：十九日，到凉陉。
English: On the 19th, we went to Lengyan.

古文：甲辰，南府宰相王绩薨。
现代文：二十三日，南府宰相王绩逝世。
English: On the 23rd, Wang Jie, the chancellor of Nanfu, passed away.

古文：乙巳，诏出户部司粟，振诸路流民及义州之饥。
现代文：二十四日，诏令发放户部所主管的粟米，赈济诸路流民以及义州的饥荒。
English: On the 24th, a decree was issued to distribute the corn in charge of the Household Department to help the displaced people and the famine in Yizhou.

古文：五月庚申，海云寺进济民钱千万。
现代文：五月初九，海云寺进献救济贫民钱币一千万。
English: On the ninth day of the fifth month, Haiyun Temple donated 10 million coins for the relief of the poor.

古文：秋七月丙辰，猎黑岭。
现代文：秋七月初七，出猎于黑岭。
English: On the 7th day of the 7th month of the autumn and the 7th day of the 7th month of the year, I went hunting in Heiling.

古文：丁巳，出杂帛赐兴圣宫贫民。
现代文：初八，取出杂料绢帛赐给兴圣宫贫民。
English: On the 8th day of the first month, the miscellaneous materials were taken out and given to the poor of Xing Sheng Gong.

古文：庚午，大雨，罢猎。
现代文：二十一日，大雨，停止狩猎。
English: On the 21st, heavy rain stopped the hunt.

古文：丁丑，秦越国王阿琏薨。
现代文：二十八日，秦越国王阿琏逝世。
English: On the 28th, the King of Qin and Yue, King Aba, passed away.

古文：九月乙亥，驻跸匣鲁金。
现代文：九月二十六日，歇驾于匣鲁金。
English: On September 26th, he rested in Jilin.

古文：冬十月庚辰，以参知政事王经为三司使。
现代文：冬十月初二，以参知政事王经为三司使。
English: On the second day of October in winter, the three envoys were led by Wang Jing.

古文：壬辰，罢节度使已下官进珍玩。
现代文：十四日，节度使以下官员免予进献珍珠宝玩。
English: On the 14th, the festival exempted the following officials from donating pearl jewelry.

古文：癸卯，追封秦越国王阿琏为秦魏国王。
现代文：二十五日，追封秦越国王阿琏为秦魏国王。
English: On the 25th, he posthumously crowned the king of Qin and Yue, A Kun, as the king of Qin and Wei.

古文：十一月甲寅，以惕隐耶律坦同知南京留守事，辽兴军节度使耶律王九为南府宰相。
现代文：十一月初六，任命惕隐耶律坦为同知南京留守事，辽兴军节度使耶律王九为南府宰相。
English: On the 6th day of the 11th month of the lunar calendar, Emperor Taizong appointed Emperor Yerutang as his representative in Nanjing, and Liao Xingjun appointed Emperor Yerutang as the prime minister of Nanfu.

古文：十二月己卯朔，以枢密直学士吕嗣立参知政事。
现代文：十二月初一，以枢密直学士吕嗣立为参知政事。
English: On the first day of December, Lv Siu, a Privy Councilor and Direct Scholar, was appointed to be a member of the Council of State.

古文：四年春正月庚戌，如混同江。
现代文：四年春正月初二，到混同江。
English: On the second day of the first month of the fourth year of spring, I arrived at the Mudongjiang River.

古文：甲寅，太白昼见。
现代文：初六，太白金星白昼出现。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the new year, Taibai Venus appeared in broad daylight.

古文：甲子，五国部长来贡。
现代文：十六日，五国部酋长前来进贡。
English: On the 16th, the chiefs of the five provinces came to pay tribute.

古文：庚午，免上京逋逃及贫户税赋。
现代文：二十二日，免除上京流亡百姓以及贫苦家庭的赋税。
English: On the 22nd, it exempted the people living in exile in Beijing and poor families from paying taxes.

古文：甲戌，以上京、南京饥，许良人自鬻。
现代文：二十六日，因为上京、南京饥荒，准予良人自卖。
English: On the 26th, because of the famine in Beijing and Nanjing, it was allowed for people to sell themselves.

古文：丁丑，曲赦西京役徒。
现代文：二十九日，特赦西京服劳役者。
English: On the 29th, an amnesty was announced for laborers in the western capital.

古文：二月己丑，如鱼儿泺。
现代文：二月二十日，到鱼儿泊。
English: On February 20th, we stayed at the Fish Inn.

古文：甲午，曲赦春州役徒，终身者皆五岁免。
现代文：十七日，特赦春州服劳役者，终身劳役均减免为五年。
English: On the 17th, an amnesty was granted to those who had served as forced laborers in Chunzhou, and their term of forced labor was reduced to five years.

古文：己亥，如春州。
现代文：二十二日，到春州。
English: On the 22nd, to Chunzhou.

古文：赦泰州役徒。
现代文：赦免泰州服劳役者。
English: Taizhou forced laborers to be pardoned.

古文：三月己丑，免高丽岁贡。
现代文：三月十八日，免除高丽每年一次的进贡。
English: On March 18th, Korea was exempted from the annual tribute.

古文：己巳，振上京及平、锦、来三州饥。
现代文：二十二日，赈济上京及平、锦、来三州的饥荒。
English: On the 22nd, famine struck Beijing, Ping, Jin, and Sanzhou.

古文：夏四月己卯，振苏、吉、复、渌、铁五州贫民，并免其租税。
现代文：夏四月初三，赈济苏、吉、复、渌、铁五州贫民，一律免除其租税。
English: On the 3rd day of the 4th month of the summer, the poor people of five prefectures of Guizhou, Suzhou, Zhejiang, Fujian, Fujian and Jiangsu were all exempted from tax.

古文：甲申，振庆州贫民。
现代文：初八，赈济庆州贫民。
English: On the 8th day of the first month of the year, the poor people of Qingzhou were rewarded.

古文：乙酉，减诸路常贡服御物。
现代文：初九，减省诸路常时固定进贡的车马服饰器用等物。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month of the lunar calendar, the provincial government reduced the fixed tribute on roads.

古文：丁酉，立入粟补官法。
现代文：二十一日，设立入粟补官法。
English: On the twenty-first day, the law on the establishment of the millet supplementing officer was established.

古文：癸卯，西幸。
现代文：二十七日，西幸。
English: On the 27th, Saiko left.

古文：召枢密直学士耶律俨讲《尚书·洪范》。
现代文：召枢密直学士耶律俨讲解《尚书？洪范》。
English: Invited Yeludong, a member of the Privy Council, to give a lecture on "Shangshu? Hongfan."

古文：五月辛亥，命燕国王延禧写《尚书·五子之歌》。
现代文：五月初六，诏命燕国王延禧抄写《尚书五子之歌》。
English: On the 6th day of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 6th month of the 5th month of the 5

古文：乙卯，振祖州贫民。
现代文：初十，赈济祖州贫民。
English: At the age of ten, he started to help the poor in Zhuzhou.

古文：丁巳，诏免役徒，终身者五岁免之。
现代文：十二日，下诏赦免服劳役者，终身劳役减免为五年。
English: On the 12th, the next edict pardoned those who served as laborers, and the life-long labor service exemption was reduced to five years.

古文：己未，振春州贫民。
现代文：十四日，赈济春州贫民。
English: On the 14th, he visited the poor in Chunzhou.

古文：丙寅，禁挟私引水犯田。
现代文：二十一日，禁止心怀私念引水破坏他人田地。
English: On the 21st, it is forbidden to damage other people's fields by selfishly diverting water.

古文：六月庚辰，驻跸散水原。
现代文：六月初五，歇驾于散水原。
English: On the fifth day of the sixth month of the lunar calendar, he rested in the water-sprinkling plain.

古文：丁亥，命燕国王延禧知中丞司事，以同知南院枢密使事耶律聂里知右夷离毕，知右夷离毕事耶律那也同知南院枢密使事。
现代文：十二日，命燕国王耶律延禧担任知中丞司事，以同知南院枢密使事耶律聂里为知右夷离毕，以知右夷离毕事耶律那也为同知南院枢密使事。
English: On the 12th, Yan King Yelu Yanxi was appointed to serve as the secretary of the Chizhongzheng, with Yelu Quli, the confidential envoy of the Southern Court of the Chizhongzheng, leaving for the Chizhuyi, and with Yelu Qili leaving for the Southern Court of the Chizhongzheng, with Yelu Na also leaving for the Southern Court of the Chizhongzheng.

古文：庚寅，北院枢密使耶律颇德致仕。
现代文：十五日，北院枢密使耶律颇德辞官。
English: On the 15th, the Privy Councilor of the Northern Yuan Dynasty, Yeludupo De, resigned from his post.

古文：秋七月戊申，曲赦奉圣州役徒。
现代文：秋七月初四，特赦奉圣州服劳役者。
English: On the 4th day of the 7th month of the autumn, there was an amnesty for Feng Shengzhou service laborers.

古文：丙辰，遣使册李乾顺为夏国王。
现代文：十二日，派遣使者册立李乾顺为夏国王。
English: On the 12th, an envoy was sent to proclaim Li Qianshun as the king of Xia.

古文：庚申，如秋山。
现代文：十六日，皇上到秋山。
English: On the 16th, the Emperor went to Akiyama.

古文：己巳，禁钱出境。
现代文：二十五日，禁止钱币流通入境外。
English: On the 25th, the circulation of coins was banned outside the country.

古文：八月庚辰，有司奏宛平、永清蝗为飞鸟所食。
现代文：八月初七，有司奏称宛平、永清二县蝗虫为飞鸟所食。
English: On the 7th day of the 8th month, there was a report that locusts in Wanping and Yongqing counties were eaten by birds.

古文：庚寅，谒庆陵。
现代文：十七日，拜谒庆陵。
English: On the 17th, they paid their respects at the Qing Tomb.

古文：冬十一月丁丑，猎辽水之滨。
现代文：冬十月初五，出猎于辽水之滨。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of October in winter, I went hunting on the coast of Liao Shui.

古文：己卯，驻跸藕丝淀。
现代文：初七，歇驾于藕丝淀。
English: On the 7th day of the 7th month of the lunar calendar, he rested in Fuxi Dian.

古文：癸未，免百姓所贷官粟。
现代文：十一日，注销百姓所借贷的官府粟米。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the government's loan of millet to the people was cancelled.

古文：己丑，知北院枢密使事耶律阿思封漆水郡王。
现代文：十七日，知北院枢密使事耶律阿思封为漆水郡王。
English: On the 17th, Jeru Asifon, the envoy of the Privy Council of Chihokuin, became the king of Urushimizu County.

古文：癸巳，以乙室大王耶律敌烈知西北路招讨使事，权知西北路招讨使事萧朽哥知乙室大王事。
现代文：二十一日，以乙室大王耶律敌烈为知西北路招讨使事，以权知西北路招讨使事萧朽哥为知乙室大王事。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the envoys were invited to Zhixi North-West Road by the Second Great King Jeru, and the envoys were invited to Zhixi North-West Road by the Second Great King Xiaoguo.

古文：壬寅，诏诸部长官亲鞫狱讼。
现代文：三十日，诏令诸部长官亲自审理案件。
English: On the 30th, he ordered the ministers to personally examine the case.

古文：十一月庚申，兴中府民张化法以父兄犯盗当之，请代，皆免。
现代文：十一月十八日，兴中府百姓张化法因为父亲和兄长犯盗窃罪将被处死，请求代死，皇上将三人全都赦免。
English: On November 18th, Zhang Huafa, a citizen of Xingzhongfu, whose father and brother were sentenced to death for theft, requested to die in place of them, and the emperor pardoned all three.

古文：十二月戊寅，南府宰相耶律王九致仕。
现代文：十二月初六，南府宰相耶律王九辞官。
English: On the 6th day of the 12th month, the chancellor of Nanfu, Ye Luo Wang, resigned from his post.

古文：癸未，以孟父敞稳耶律慎思为中京留守。
现代文：十一日，以孟父敞稳耶律慎思为中京留守。
English: On the 11th day of the month, with Meng father's openness, stability and prudence, he stayed in Beijing.

古文：闰十二月癸卯朔，预行正旦礼。
现代文：闰十二月初一，先期举行正旦典礼。
English: On the first day of the second lunar month of December, the Zhengdan ceremony will be held in advance.

古文：丙午，如混同江。
现代文：初四，到混同江。
English: On the fourth day of my junior year, I went to the Mudongjiang River.

古文：五年春正月癸未，如鱼儿泺。
现代文：五年春正月十二日，到鱼儿泊。
English: On the twelfth day of the first month of the fifth year of spring, he went to stay with the fishes.

古文：甲午，高丽遣使来贡。
现代文：二十三日，高丽派使者前来进贡。
English: On the 23rd, Goryeo sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：三月癸酉，诏析津、大定二府精选举人以闻，仍诏谕学者，当穷经明道。
现代文：三月初二，诏令析津、大定二府精心挑选举人奏闻，又下诏晓谕学者，应极力钻研经籍以求通晓经术。
English: On the second day of March, the emperor ordered the two prefectures of Dading and Tianjin to carefully select the electors and report the results, and also ordered scholars to study the scriptures as much as possible in order to understand the scriptures.

古文：夏四月甲辰，以知奚六部大王事涅葛为本部大王。
现代文：夏四月初四，以知奚六部大王事涅葛为本部大王。
English: On the 4th day of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 6th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 5th month of the 6th month of the 6

古文：壬子，猎北山。
现代文：十二日，出猎于北山。
English: On the 12th, they went hunting in Kitayama.

古文：甲子，霖雨，罢猎。
现代文：二十四日，大雨连绵，停止狩猎。
English: On the 24th, continuous heavy rain stopped the hunting.

古文：五月丁亥，驻跸赤勒岭。
现代文：五月十八日，歇驾于赤勒岭。
English: On the 18th of May, he stopped in Chitraling.

古文：己丑，以阻卜磨古斯为诸部长。
现代文：二十日，以阻卜磨古斯为诸部君长。
English: On the 20th day, Dombomagus was chosen as the ruler of all the provinces.

古文：癸巳，回鹘遣使贡良马。
现代文：二十四日，回鹘派使者贡献良马。
English: On the 24th, the Uighurs sent an envoy to bring good horses.

古文：己亥，以同知南府枢密使事耶律那也知右夷离毕事，左祗候郎君班详稳耶律涅里知北院大王事。
现代文：三十日，以同知南院枢密使事耶律那也为知右夷离毕事，以左祗候郎君班详稳耶律涅里为知北院大王事。
English: On the 30th, Jerutsuna, the privy envoy of the Southern Court of Tongzhi, was also the cause of the separation of the right and the left, and Panjong Yerutsuneri, the left attendant, was the cause of the great king of the Northern Court of Tongzhi.

古文：六月甲寅，夏国遣使来谢封册。
现代文：六月十五日，夏国派使者前来感谢封册。
English: On June 15th, Xia Guo sent an envoy to thank the seal.

古文：壬戌，以参知政事王言敷为枢密副使，前枢密副使贾士勋参知政事，兼同知枢密院事。
现代文：二十三日，以参知政事王言敷为枢密副使，以前枢密副使贾士勋为参知政事，兼任同知枢密院事。
English: On the 23rd, Wang Yanjiki, the Councillor of State, was appointed as the Privy Vice-Minister, and Jia Shixun, the former Vice-Minister of State, was appointed as the Councillor of State, concurrently serving as the Councillor of the Privy Council.

古文：秋七月庚午，猎沙岭。
现代文：秋七月初二，出猎于沙岭。
English: On the 2nd day of the 7th month of autumn, I went hunting in Sha Ling.

古文：九月辛卯，遣使遗宋鹿脯。
现代文：九月二十四日，派使者赠送鹿脯给宋主。
English: On September 24th, an envoy was sent to present deer antlers to Lord Song.

古文：壬辰，驻跸藕丝淀。
现代文：二十五日，歇驾于藕丝淀。
English: On the 25th, he rested in Jinshidian.

古文：冬十月乙巳，以新定法令太烦，复行旧法。
现代文：冬十月初九，因新定法令过于烦琐，恢复执行旧法。
English: On the 9th day of the 10th month of winter, the enforcement of the old law was resumed because the newly enacted law was too cumbersome.

古文：庚申，以辽兴军节度使何葛为乙室大王。
现代文：二十四日，以辽兴军节度使何葛为乙室大王。
English: On the 24th, the Liao Xing Army made He Ge the second Great King.

古文：十一月丁卯朔，燕国王延禧生子，大赦，妃之族属进爵有差。
现代文：十一月初一，燕国王延禧得子，大赦天下，皇妃之族人亲属晋封爵位各有等差。
English: On the first day of the first month of November, King Yan Yan's son, Yan Xi, was pardoned by the world, and the relatives of the queen's relatives were promoted to the ranks of knighthood.

古文：六年春正月，如混同江。
现代文：六年春正月，皇上到混同江。
English: In the first month of the spring of the sixth year, the emperor went to the Mudong River.

古文：二月辛丑，驻跸双山。
现代文：二月初六，歇驾于双山。
English: On the 6th day of the 2nd month, he stopped at Shuangshan.

古文：三月辛未，女直遣使来贡。
现代文：三月初六，女真派使者前来进贡。
English: On the 6th day of the 3rd month, Jurchen sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：夏四月丁酉，东北路统军司设掌法官。
现代文：夏四月初二，东北路统军司设置掌法官。
English: On the 2nd day of the 4th month of the summer, the Northeast Military Command was established.

古文：庚子，以同知南院枢密使事耶律吐朵知左夷离毕事。
现代文：初五，以同知南院枢密使事耶律吐朵为知左夷离毕事。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Yerut Todo, a confidential envoy of the Southern Yuan Dynasty, left for Chizaoi.

古文：五月壬辰，驻跸散水原。
现代文：五月二十八日，歇驾于散水原。
English: On the 28th of May, he stopped at the watering place.

古文：六月甲辰，遣使决五京囚。
现代文：六月二十一日，派使者提审五京囚犯。
English: On June 21, an envoy was sent to arraign the Wujing prisoners.

古文：秋七月丙子，如黑岭。
现代文：秋七月十三日，到黑岭。
English: On the 13th of July in autumn, I went to Heiling.

古文：冬十月丁酉，驻跸藕丝淀。
现代文：冬十月初六，歇驾于藕丝淀。
English: On the 6th day of the 10th month of winter, it stopped in Goseidian.

古文：十一月壬戌，高丽遣使来贡。
现代文：十一月初二，高丽派使者前来进贡。
English: On the second day of the eleventh month, Goryeo sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：己巳，以南府宰相窦景庸为武定军节度使。
现代文：初九，以南府宰相窦景庸为武定军节度使。
English: In the early 9th century, Dou Jingyong, the chancellor of Nanfu, was the highest-ranking envoy of the Wuding Army.

古文：是年，放进士文充等七十二人。
现代文：这一年，放榜录进士文充等七十二人。
English: In this year, there were 72 people such as Wenzhong who entered the list.

古文：七年春正月壬戌，如混同江。
现代文：七年春正月初二，到混同江。
English: On the second day of the first month of the seventh year of spring, I arrived at the Mudongjiang River.

古文：二月己亥，驻跸鱼儿泺。
现代文：二月初十，歇驾于鱼儿泊。
English: On the 10th day of the 2nd month, he rested at the fish pond.

古文：壬寅，诏给渭州贫民耕牛、布绢。
现代文：十三日，诏令配给渭州贫民耕牛、布绢。
English: On the 13th, the imperial edict distributed to the poor people of Zhangzhou the farm cattle and cloth bags.

古文：三月丙戌，驻跸黑龙江。
现代文：三月二十七日，歇驾于黑龙江。
English: On March 27th, it stopped in Heilongjiang.

古文：夏四月丙戌，以汉人行宫副部署耶律谷欲知乙室大王事。
现代文：夏四月二十七日，以汉人行宫副部署耶律谷欲为知乙室大王事。
English: On the 27th day of the 4th month of the summer, the sub-deployment of the Han people to the palace and the desire to go to Yerut Valley became the great king of the second chamber.

古文：五月己未朔，日有食之。
现代文：五月初一，日食。六月初六，歇驾于赤勒岭。
English: On the first day of May, the sun and moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：六月甲午，驻跸赤勒岭。己亥，倒塌岭人进古鼎，有文曰： 万岁永为宝用。 
现代文：十一日，倒塌岭人进献古鼎，上有文字曰 万岁永为宝用 。十三日，回鹘派使者贡献土产。
English: On the 11th day, the people of the collapsed ridge presented ancient tripods, with the words "long live, treasure forever." On the 13th day, the Hui sent an envoy to contribute local products.

古文：辛丑，回鹘遣使贡方物。癸卯，以权知东京留守萧陶隗为契丹行宫都部署。
现代文：十五日，以权知东京留守萧陶瑰为契丹行宫都部署。
English: On the fifteenth day, Xiao Taoqi, who stayed in Tokyo, was deployed to the palace of Khitan.

古文：丁未，端拱殿门灾。
现代文：十九日，端拱殿门发生火灾。
English: On the 19th, a fire broke out at the end arch gate.

古文：秋七月戊午朔，回鹘遣使来贡异物，不纳，厚赐遣之。
现代文：秋七月初一，回鹘派使者前来贡献异物，皇上没有接收，给以厚重之赏赐打发他回去。
English: On the first day of the seventh month of the autumn, Hui sent an envoy to offer the foreign object, but the emperor did not accept it and sent him back with a heavy reward.

古文：八月庚寅，以霖雨，罢猎。
现代文：八月初三，因大雨连绵，停止狩猎。
English: On the third day of August, due to continuous heavy rain, hunting was stopped.

古文：壬寅，幸庆州，谒庆陵。
现代文：十五日，临幸庆州，拜谒庆陵。
English: On the 15th, Linxing Qingzhou paid homage to the Qing Qing Mausoleum.

古文：九月丙申，还上京。
现代文：九月十一日，回上京。
English: On September 11, he returned to Tokyo.

古文：己亥，日本国遣郑元、郑心及僧应范等二十八人来贡。
现代文：十四日，日本国派遣郑元、郑心及僧人应范等二十八人前来进贡。
English: On the 14th, Japan sent 28 people including Zheng Yuan, Zheng Xin and the monk Ying Fan to pay tribute.

古文：冬十月辛巳，命燕国王延禧为天下兵马大元帅，总北南院枢密使事。
现代文：冬十月二十六日，下令燕国王延禧担任天下兵马大元帅，总领北南院枢密使事。
English: On the 26th day of October in winter, King Yan ordered Yan Xiyi to serve as the grand marshal of the world's soldiers and horses and the leader of the North-South Privy Council.

古文：十一月庚子，如藕丝淀。
现代文：十一月十六日，皇上到藕丝淀。
English: On November 16th, the emperor arrived in Gansu.

古文：甲子，望祀木叶山。
现代文：十二月初十，遥祭木叶山。
English: On the tenth day of the twelfth month, the remote festival of Mujiyama begins.

古文：八年春正月乙酉，如山榆淀。
现代文：八年春正月初二，到山榆淀。
English: On the second day of the first month of the eighth year of spring, I went to Yamagata-Yodo.

古文：乙未，阻卜诸长来降。
现代文：十二日，阻卜各酋长前来降附。
English: On the twelfth day, all the chiefs came to surrender.

古文：三月己亥，驻跸挞里舍淀。
现代文：三月十六日，歇驾于挞里舍淀。
English: On the 16th of March, he stopped in Baoli Sheyang.

古文：丁未，曲赦中京、蔚州役徒。
现代文：二十四日，特赦中京、蔚州服劳役者。
English: On the 24th, amnesty was granted to forced laborers from Chukyo and Ulshu.

古文：夏四月乙卯，阻卜长来贡。
现代文：夏四月初三，阻卜君长前来进贡。
English: On the third day of the fourth month of the summer, Dabokunchang came to pay tribute.

古文：丁丑，猎西山。
现代文：二十五日，出猎于西山。
English: On the 25th, they went hunting in the West Mountains.

古文：惕德酋长胡里只来附。
现代文：惕德酋长胡里只前来归附。
English: The German chieftain, Huli, only came to annex it.

古文：五月甲辰，驻跸赤勒岭。
现代文：五月二十二日，歇驾于赤勒岭。
English: On the fourth day of the fifth lunar month, he stopped in Cholering.

古文：六月乙丑，夏国为宋侵，遣使乞援。
现代文：六月十三日，夏国遭到宋朝侵犯，派使者请求援助。
English: On June 13, Xia Province was invaded by the Song Dynasty and sent an envoy to request assistance.

古文：秋七月丁亥，猎沙岭。
现代文：秋七月初六，出猎于沙岭。
English: On the 6th day of the 7th month of autumn, I went hunting in Sha Ling.

古文：九月乙巳，驻跸藕丝淀。
现代文：九月二十五日，歇驾于藕丝淀。
English: On September 25th, he took a rest in Goseidian.

古文：丁未，日本国遣使来贡。
现代文：二十七日，日本国派使者前来进贡。
English: On the 27th, Japan sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：冬十月庚戌朔，遣使遗宋鹿脯。
现代文：冬十月初一，派使者赠送鹿脯给宋王。
English: On the first day of October in winter, an envoy was sent to present deer antlers to King Song.

古文：丙辰，振西北路饥。
现代文：初七，赈济西北路饥荒。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the new year, the Northwest Road of Shaanxi Province was hit by famine.

古文：辛酉，阻卜磨古斯杀金吾吐古斯以叛，遣奚六部秃里耶律郭三发诸蕃部兵讨之。
现代文：十二日，阻卜磨古斯杀死金吾吐古斯反叛，皇上派遣奚六部秃里耶律郭三征发诸蕃部兵马讨伐。
English: On the 12th day of the month, the emperor dispatched the 36th Division of the Baldur's Gate to dispatch soldiers and horses to fight against the rebels.

古文：壬申，南府宰相王经薨。
现代文：二十三日，南府宰相王经逝世。
English: On the 23rd, Wang Jing, the chancellor of Nanfu, passed away.

古文：戊寅，以左夷离毕耶律涅里为彰圣军节度使。
现代文：二十九日，以左夷离毕耶律涅里为彰圣军节度使。
English: On the 29th, Zuo Yi left Bieru Niri as a messenger to celebrate the holy army's festival.

古文：十一月戊子，以枢密副使王是敦兼知枢密院事，权参知政事韩资让参知政事，汉人行宫都部署奚回离保知奚六部大王事。
现代文：十一月初九，以枢密副使王是敦兼任知枢密院事，以权参知政事韩资让为参知政事，以汉人行宫都部署奚回离保为知奚六部大王事。
English: On the 9th day of the 11th month of the year, the vice-minister of the privy council, Wang Jidong, was appointed as the minister of the privy council, the vice-minister of the political council, Han Zijian, was appointed as the vice-minister of the political council, and the Han people's marching to the palace was deployed as the vice-minister of the political council.

古文：丁酉，以通州潦水害稼，遣使振之。
现代文：十八日，因通州积水成涝伤害庄稼，派使者赈济。
English: On the 18th, due to the accumulation of water in Tongzhou that caused damage to crops, an envoy was sent to help.

古文：戊申，北院大王合鲁薨。
现代文：二十九日，北院大王合鲁逝世。
English: On the 29th, Hokuei Daio Hachiro passed away.

古文：是年，放进士冠尊文等五十三人。
现代文：这一年，放榜录进士冠尊文等五十三人。
English: This year, fifty-three people, including the winner of the honorable mention, were listed in the list.

古文：九年春正月庚辰，如混同江。
现代文：九年春正月初二，到混同江。
English: On the second day of the first month of the ninth year of spring, I arrived at the Mudongjiang River.

古文：二月，磨古斯来侵。
现代文：二月，磨古斯前来进犯。
English: In February, Mogus came to invade.

古文：三月，西北路招讨使耶律阿鲁扫古追磨古斯还，都监萧张九遇贼，与战不利。
现代文：三月，西北路招讨使耶律阿鲁扫古追击磨古斯返回，都监萧张九遭遇贼军，与之交战，失利。
English: In March, the Northwest Road Invitation made Yelu Aru Saigu pursue and return to Malkuth, and the governor Xiao Zhangjiu encountered the thief army, fought with it, and lost.

古文：二室韦、拽剌、北王府、特满群牧、宫分等军多陷没。
现代文：二室韦、拽剌、北王府、特满群牧、宫分等军大多阵亡。
English: Most of the troops such as the Ninmurowe, Nagatoro, Hokwangfu, Tumen-gunmu, and Miyabun were killed in battle.

古文：夏四月乙卯，兴中府甘露降，遣使祠佛饭僧。
现代文：夏四月初九，兴中府降甘露，派使者到佛寺祈祷并斋僧。
English: On the 9th day of the 4th month of the summer, Xingzhongfu sent an envoy to the Buddhist temple to pray and become a monk.

古文：癸酉，猎西山。
现代文：二十七日，出猎于西山。
English: On the 27th, they went hunting in the West Mountains.

古文：六月丁未朔，驻跸散水原。
现代文：六月初一，歇驾于散水原。
English: On the first day of June, I stopped at the watering place.

古文：庚申，以辽兴军节度使荣哥为南院大王，知左夷离毕事耶律吐朵为左夷离毕。
现代文：十四日，以辽兴军节度使荣哥为南院大王，以知左夷离毕事耶律吐朵为左夷离毕。
English: On the 14th, the Liao Xing Army Festival made Rongge the great king of the Southern Yuan Dynasty, and the Chizhao Yixing separated from the Yerut Todo for the Zuoying.

古文：秋七月辛卯，如黑岭。
现代文：秋七月十六日，到里岭。
English: On the 16th day of the 7th month of autumn, I arrived in Liling.

古文：壬寅，遣使赐高丽羊。
现代文：二十七日，派使者赐羊给高丽。
English: On the 27th, a messenger was sent to give the sheep to Goryeo.

古文：九月癸卯，振西北路贫民。
现代文：九月二十八日，赈济西北路贫民。
English: On September 28th, the poor people of Northwest Road, Handan, Jiangsu Province.

古文：冬十月庚戌，有司奏磨古斯诣西北路招讨使耶律挞不也伪降，既而乘虚来袭，挞不也死之。
现代文：冬十月初六，有司奏称磨古斯前往西北路招讨使耶律挞不也处伪降，接着乘虚袭击，挞不也战死。
English: On the 6th day of the 10th month of the winter, Siso said that Maegus went to the Northwest Road to solicit the false surrender of Yeludong, and then took advantage of the false attack, and Yeludong also died in battle.

古文：阻卜乌古札叛，达里底、拔思母并寇倒塌岭。
现代文：阻卜乌古札叛乱，达里底、拔思母均进犯倒塌岭。
English: In order to thwart the Uguzza rebellion, Dalidi and Batshima both attacked the collapsed ridge.

古文：壬子，遣使籍诸路兵。
现代文：初八，派使者登记诸路士兵。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, he sent an envoy to register the soldiers.

古文：癸丑，以南院大王特末同知南京留守事，命郑家奴率兵往援倒塌岭。
现代文：初九，以南院大王萧特末为同知南京留守事，命令郑家奴率兵前往倒塌岭增援。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, Xiao Te, the great king of the Southern Yuan Dynasty, ordered Zheng Jiannu and his soldiers to go to the collapsed ridge for reinforcement.

古文：甲寅，驻跸藕丝淀，以左夷离毕耶律秃朵、围场都管撒八并为西北路行军都监。
现代文：初十，歇驾于藕丝淀。以左夷离毕耶律秃朵、围场都管撒八同为西北路行军都监。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, he rested in Jianshidian. With Zuoyi away from Biyelu Baldo, the paddocks were all scattered, and he was the marshal of the Northwest Road.

古文：乙卯，诏以马三千给乌古部。
现代文：十一日，诏令以三千匹马拨给乌古部。
English: On the 11th, the imperial edict allocated 3,000 horses to the Ugubo.

古文：丙辰，有司奏阻卜长辖底掠西路群牧。
现代文：十二日，有司奏称阻卜酋长辖底掳掠西路群牧。
English: On the twelfth day, there was a report that the chiefs had been prevented from capturing the West Road herdsmen.

古文：丁巳，振西北路贫民。
现代文：十三日，赈济西北路贫民。
English: On the 13th, the poor people of Northwest Road, Handan, Lijiang.

古文：己未，燕国王延禧生子，肆赦，妃之族属并进级。
现代文：十五日，燕国王延禧得子，赦免犯人，皇妃同族的亲属一概晋级。
English: On the fifteenth day, Yan King Yan Xizhi's son pardoned the prisoners, and the relatives of the same race as the empress were all promoted.

古文：壬戌，以枢密直学士赵廷睦参知政事兼同知南院枢密使事。
现代文：十八日，以枢密直学士赵延睦为参知政事兼同知南院枢密使事。
English: On the 18th, Zhao Yanmu, a Privy Councilor and Direct Scholar, was appointed to the post of Councillor of State and Councillor of the Privy Council of the Southern Yuan.

古文：癸亥，乌古敌烈统军使萧朽哥奏讨阻卜等部捷。
现代文：十九日，乌古敌烈统军使萧朽哥奏称攻讨阻卜等部告捷。
English: On the 19th, the Ugwu enemy united army led by Xiao Kui's brother said that the attack and obstruction and other departments were successful.

古文：甲子，宋遣使告其母后高氏哀，即遣使吊祭。
现代文：二十日，宋国派遣使者前来为其母后曹氏告哀，当即派遣使者前往吊唁祭祀。
English: On the 20th, Song dispatched an envoy to mourn for his mother, Queen Cao, and immediately sent an envoy to the condolence ceremony.

古文：己巳，诏广积贮，以备水旱。
现代文：二十五日，诏令大力储存粮食，以防备水灾和旱灾。
English: On the 25th, the Emperor issued an order to vigorously store grain to prevent floods and droughts.

古文：十一月辛巳，特抹等奏讨阻卜捷。
现代文：十一月初七，特抹等奏称攻讨阻卜告捷。
English: On the 7th day of the 11th month of the lunar month, Te-Maku and others made a call to attack and obstruct, which was successful.

古文：十二月丙辰，宋遣使以母后遗留物来馈。
现代文：十二月十三日，宋国派遣使者以其母后遗物前来馈赠。
English: On December 13th, Song dispatched an envoy to present the relic of his mother.

古文：十年春正月，如春水。
现代文：十年正月，皇上到春水。
English: In the first month of the tenth year, the emperor went to Chunshui.

古文：癸未，惕德来贡。
现代文：十一日，惕德前来进贡。
English: On the 11th day, they came to pay tribute.

古文：戊子，乌古紥等来降，达里底、拔思母二部来侵，四捷军都监特抹死之。
现代文：十六日，乌古扎等前来归降，达里底、拔思母二部前来进犯，四捷军都监特抹战死。
English: On the 16th, Uguzha and others came to surrender, Dalidi and Batshima came to attack, and four Czechoslovak troops were killed in battle.

古文：二月甲辰，以破阻卜，赏有功者。
现代文：二月初二，因为攻破阻卜，赏赐有功将士。
English: On the 2nd day of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2

古文：丙午，西南面招讨司奏讨拔思母捷。
现代文：初四，西南面招讨司奏上攻讨拔思母之捷报。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, the southwestern side invited the sitar player to attack the mother's successful report.

古文：癸丑，排雅、仆里、同葛、虎骨、仆果等来降。
现代文：十一日，排雅、仆里、同葛、虎骨、仆果等前来归降。
English: On the 11th day, Paiya, Minori, Tongge, Tiger Bone, Minka and others came to surrender.

古文：达里底来侵。
现代文：达里底前来进犯。
English: Daridi came forward to attack.

古文：三月壬申朔，日有食之。
现代文：三月初一，日食。
English: On the first day of March, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：山北路副部署萧阿鲁带奏讨达里底捷。
现代文：山北路副部署萧阿鲁带奏上攻讨达里底之捷报。
English: Xiao Aru, deputy commander of Shanbei Road, announced the successful attack on Dalidi.

古文：夏四月壬寅朔，惕德萌得斯、老古得等各率所部来附，诏复旧地。
现代文：夏四月初一，惕德萌得斯、老古得等人分别率领所部人马前来归附，诏令返回其故地。
English: On the first day of the fourth month of the summer, Ti De Mengde Si, Lao Gu De and others separately led the staff to come to attach, and ordered to return to their hometowns.

古文：甲辰，驻跸春州北平淀。
现代文：初三，歇驾于春州北平淀。
English: On the third day of junior high school, he stopped in Chunzhou Beipingyuan.

古文：丙午，乌古部节度使耶律陈家奴奏讨茶紥剌捷。
现代文：初五，乌古部节度使耶律陈家奴奏称攻讨茶扎剌告捷。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the Wu Gu Bu Festival made Yerut Chen Jia Nuo play and said that the attack on the tea party was successful.

古文：庚戌，以知北院枢密使事耶律斡特剌为都统，夷离毕耶律秃朵为副统，龙虎卫上将军耶律胡吕都监，讨磨古斯，遣积庆宫使萧虬里监战。
现代文：初九，以知北院枢密使事耶律斡特剌为都统，以夷离毕耶律秃朵为副统，以龙虎卫上将军耶律胡吕为都监，讨伐磨古斯，并派积庆宫使萧纠里监战。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, with the Chihokuin Privy Envoy Yerutsu as the governor of the capital, with the Ili Biyorut Baldo as the vice-governor, with the Dragon and Tiger Guards General Yerut Hulü as the governor of the capital, they fought against the Mongols, and sent the Jieqing Palace to supervise the war in Xiaoqili.

古文：辛亥，朽哥奏颇里八部来侵。
现代文：初十，萧朽哥奏称颇里八部前来进犯。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, Xiao Kui's brother Song said that eight departments came to attack.

古文：击破之。
现代文：击破之。
English: Break it up.

古文：己巳，除玉田、密云流民租赋一年。
现代文：二十八日，免除玉田、密云流民租赋一年。
English: On the 28th, the residents of Tamada and Miyunliu were exempted from rent for one year.

古文：闰月庚子，赐西北路贫民钱。
现代文：闰四月三十日，赐钱给西北路贫民。
English: On April 30, he gave money to the poor on Northwest Road.

古文：达里底、拔思母二部来降。
现代文：达里底、拔思母二部前来降附。
English: Dalidi, Baximou two parts came forward to annex.

古文：五月甲辰，驻跸赤勒岭。
现代文：五月初四，歇驾于赤勒岭。
English: On the fourth day of the fifth lunar month, he stopped in Cholering.

古文：甲寅，括马。
现代文：十四日，清点马匹。
English: On the 14th, the horses were counted.

古文：戊午，西北路招讨司奏敌烈等部来侵，统军司出兵与战，不利，招讨司以兵击破之，敦睦宫太师耶律爱奴及其子死之。
现代文：十八日，西北路招讨司奏称敌烈等部前来进犯，统军司出兵与之交战，不利，招讨司率兵击败了敌人，敦睦宫太师耶律爱奴及其子战死。
English: On the 18th, the Northwest Road recruiting sergeant said that the enemy soldiers and other departments came to attack, and the United Army Division sent soldiers to fight against them, which was unfavorable. The recruiting sergeant led the soldiers to defeat the enemy, and the Dunmu Palace Grand Master Jeru Ainu and his son died in battle.

古文：辛酉，以知国舅详稳事萧阿烈同领西北路行军事。
现代文：二十一日，以知国舅详稳事萧阿烈同领西北路行军事。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Xiao A Lai led his troops on a military march along the Northwest Road.

古文：六月辛未，宋遣使来谢吊祭。
现代文：六月初二，宋国派使者前来感谢吊唁祭祀。
English: On the second day of the first month of June, the Song Dynasty sent an envoy to thank the condolence offering.

古文：乙酉，乌古敌烈统军使朽哥有罪，除名。
现代文：十六日，乌古敌烈统军使萧朽哥有罪，除去其名籍。
English: On the 16th, the Ugwu enemy united army made Xiao Kui guilty and removed his name and nationality.

古文：丙戌，和烈葛等部来聘。
现代文：十七日，和烈葛等部来访。
English: On the 17th, He Lige and other ministers visited.

古文：癸巳，惕德来贡。
现代文：二十四日，惕德前来进贡。
English: On the 24th, Tiide came to pay tribute.

古文：己亥，禁边民与蕃部为婚。
现代文：三十日，禁止边民与蕃部通婚。
English: On the 30th, it was forbidden for border residents to marry foreigners.

古文：是夏，高丽国王运薨，子昱遣使来告，即遣使赙赠。
现代文：这年夏天，高丽国王王运逝世，子王昱派使者前来告哀，当即派使者赠送助丧钱物。
English: In the summer of that year, the king of Goryeo, Wang Yun, passed away. His son, King Min, sent an envoy to offer his condolences. The envoy immediately sent a gift to help with the funeral expenses.

古文：秋七月庚子朔，猎赤山。
现代文：秋七月初一，出猎于赤山。
English: On the first day of autumn in July, I went hunting in Akayama.

古文：是月，阻卜等寇倒塌岭，尽掠西路群牧马去，东北路统军使耶律石柳以兵追及，尽获所掠而还。
现代文：同月，阻卜等部侵犯倒塌岭，尽数掳掠西路群牧之马匹后离去，东北路统军使耶律石柳率兵追上，尽数夺回所掠物品而回。
English: In the same month, the Blocking and Other Departments encroached on the collapsed ridge, took the horses of the West Road herdsmen as many as possible and left, and the Northeast Road United Army made Yelu Shiliu and his soldiers catch up and take back the looted goods as many as possible.

古文：九月己未，以南院大王特末为南院枢密使。
现代文：九月二十一日，以南院大王萧特末为南院枢密使。
English: On September 21, Xiao Temu, the great king of the Southern Yuan, was appointed as the envoy of the Southern Yuan.

古文：甲子，敌烈诸酋来降，释其罪。
现代文：二十六日，敌烈众酋长前来归降，释免其罪。
English: On the 26th, all the chiefs of the enemy soldiers came to surrender and absolve him of his crime.

古文：是月，斡特剌破磨古斯。
现代文：同月，斡特剌击破磨古斯。
English: In the same month, 斡特 defeated Mágus.

古文：冬十月丙子，驻跸藕丝淀。
现代文：冬十月初八，歇驾于藕丝淀。
English: On the 8th day of the 10th month of winter, it stopped in Goseidian.

古文：壬午，山北路副部署萧阿鲁带以讨达里底功，加左金吾卫上将军。
现代文：十四日，山北路副部署萧阿鲁带因为征讨达里底之功，加号为金吾卫上将军。
English: On the 14th, Xiao Aru, the vice-delegate of Shanbei Road, was given the additional title of General Jinwu Wei because of his contribution to the conquest of Dalidi.

古文：癸巳，西北路统军司获阻卜长拍撒葛、蒲鲁等来献。
现代文：二十五日，西北路统军司擒获阻卜首领拍撒葛、蒲鲁等人前来进献。
English: On the 25th, the Secretary of the Northwest Road Union Army was invited by the leader of the blockades, Pat Saget, Bulu and others to come and make a donation.

古文：十一月乙巳，惕德铜刮、阻卜的烈等来降。
现代文：十一月初七，惕德铜刮、阻卜的烈等人前来归降。
English: On the 7th day of the 11th month of the lunar month, the soldiers who had fought bravely and resisted the enemy came to surrender.

古文：达里底及拔思母等复来侵，山北副部署阿鲁带击败之。
现代文：达里底及拔思母等再度前来侵犯，山北副部署萧阿鲁带击败之。
English: Daridi and Batshima and others came to invade again, and Xiao Aru, the vice-delegate of Shanbei, defeated them.

古文：十二月癸酉，三河县民孙宾及其妻皆百岁，复其家。
现代文：十二月初六，三河县百姓孙宾及其妻子都已一百岁，免除他全家赋税。
English: On the 6th day of the 12th month, Sun Bin and his wife, who are both 100 years old, were exempted from paying taxes.

古文：甲戌，以参知政事赵廷睦兼同知枢密院事，枢密副使王师儒参知政事兼同知枢密院事。
现代文：初七，以参知政事赵延睦兼任同知枢密院事，枢密副使王师儒为参知政事兼同知枢密院事。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Zhao Yanmu, the co-chancellor and political secretary, also served as the co-chancellor and privy councilor, and Wang Shiru, the vice-secretary of the privy council, served as the co-chancellor and political secretary and the co-chancellor and privy councilor.

古文：己卯，诏录西北路有功将士及战殁者，赠官。
现代文：十二日，诏令登录西北路有功将士为官，又给阵亡将士追赠官职。
English: On the 12th, a decree was issued to register the meritorious soldiers of the Northwest Road as officials, and to give the deceased soldiers official positions.

古文：乙酉，诏改明年元，减杂犯死罪以下，仍除贫民租赋。
现代文：十八日，下诏明年改元，死罪以下的杂罪犯人减刑，又免除贫民租赋。
English: On the 18th, it was decided to change the era next year, commute the sentences of miscellaneous criminals below the death penalty, and exempt the poor from rent.

古文：戊子，西北路统军司奏讨磨古斯捷。
现代文：二十一日，西北路统军司奏称征讨磨古斯告捷。
English: On the twenty-first day, the North-West Road Union Military Department announced that the conquest of Magus had been successful.

