古文：严挺之，名浚，以字行，华州华阴人。
现代文：严挺之，名浚，以字通行，是华州华阴人。
English: According to Yan Tingzhi, the famous dredge, commonly known by its Chinese name, is the Huazhou Huaying.

古文：少好学，姿质轩秀。
现代文：年少时就好学，姿质轩昂儒秀。
English: When he was young, he was eager to learn, and his posture was excellent.

古文：举进士，并擢制科，调义兴尉，号材吏。
现代文：举进士及第，制科也得中，调任义兴尉，时人称之为材吏，赞誉他很能干。
English: He was promoted to the first and second grade, and was also ranked in the middle of the science system. He was transferred to the position of Yixing lieutenant. At that time, people called him a clerk. He was praised for his ability.

古文：姚崇为州刺史，异之。
现代文：那时，姚崇为州刺史，很赏识他。
English: At that time, Yao Chong was a state senator, and he appreciated him very much.

古文：崇执政，引为右拾遗。
现代文：后来，姚崇任相位执政，引荐严挺之为右拾遗。
English: Later, Yao Chongren came to power and introduced Yan Tingtao as the rightful successor.

古文：睿宗好音律，每听忘倦。
现代文：玄宗又长于音律。
English: Xuanzong was also good at musical notation.

古文：先天二年正月望夜，胡人婆陀请然百千灯，因弛门禁，又追赐元年酺，帝御延喜、安福门纵观，昼夜不息，阅月未止。
现代文：先天二年的元宵节，由胡僧婆聗建议，点燃万千灯火，打开宫门，再补赐 元年 玄宗与太上皇到延喜门、安福门观灯。其灯昼夜不息，一个月还未罢息。
English: During the Lantern Festival two years ago, at the suggestion of Hu Sangpo, thousands of lanterns were lit, the palace gates were opened, and in the first year, Emperor Xuanzong and the Empress Dowager went to Yanxi Gate and Anfu Gate to see the lanterns. The lanterns were lit day and night, and have not been extinguished for a month.

古文：挺之上疏谏，以为： 酺者因人所利，合醵为欢也，不使靡敝。
现代文：严挺之上疏劝谏 ：元年是让大家在一起聚饮，庆祝皇上登基创业，但不可有失礼仪，放松戒备。
English: Strictness over laxity: In the first year, everyone was allowed to drink together to celebrate the emperor's enthronement and start a business, but there must be no loss of etiquette and relaxation of vigilance.

古文：今暴衣冠，罗伎乐，杂郑、卫之音，纵倡优之玩，不深戒慎，使有司跛倚，下人罢剧，府县里阎课赋苛严，呼嗟道路，贸坏家产，营百戏，扰方春之业，欲同其乐而反遗之患。 
现代文：如今舞姬乐伎，郑、卫之音不绝。为筹办此宴以致有司偏倚，下人疲惫，百姓增加赋税，甚至有变卖家产的。如此耗损万人之力而为百戏之资，且扰乱了春季的工作，恐怕会形成原想臣民同乐却反遗留祸患。 
English: Nowadays, there is no end to the sound of the dance and music of Zheng and Wei. In order to prepare for this banquet, the officials are biased, the subordinates are tired, the people increase their taxes, and even sell their family property. Such a waste of people's power is the capital of a hundred plays, and disrupts the work of spring. I am afraid that it will form a legacy of the original intention of the subjects to have fun together.

古文：乃陈 五不可 ，诚意忠到，帝纳焉。
现代文：接着陈述了延长大的 五不可 。意诚词切，皇帝接纳。
English: He then stated the five impossibilities of prolonging the Great Leap Forward. The emperor accepted his sincere words.

古文：侍御史任正名恃风宪，至廷中责詈衣冠，挺之让其不敬，反为所劾，贬万州员外参军事。
现代文：那时，侍御史任正名恃其上官的威仪，在廷中责骂缙绅，严挺之责备他不敬，反遭台司检举，贬为万州员外参军事。
English: At that time, the attendant, Ren Zheng, defied the dignity of his superior officer, scolded his squire in the court, and was severely reprimanded for disrespecting him. On the other hand, he was reported by the Taiji and demoted to the rank of foreign military attache.

古文：开元中，为考功员外郎，累进给事中，典贡举，时号平允。
现代文：开元年间，任考功员外郎，后升任给事中，主持贡举事，当时称之为公允。
English: At the beginning of the first year of the year, he was appointed as an examination meritorious person, and later he was promoted to be in charge of the tribute, which was called fair at that time.

古文：会杜暹、李元纮为相，不相中。
现代文：那时，黄门侍郎杜暹、中书侍郎李元为相，两个人不和。
English: At that time, Huangmen waiter Du Siem and Zhongshu waiter Li Yuan were dating, and the two did not get along.

古文：暹善挺之，而元纮善宋遥，用为中书舍人。
现代文：杜暹平时与严挺之友善，而李元与宋遥友好，引荐宋遥任中书舍人。
English: Du Siam was friendly with Yan Ting in peacetime, while Li Yuan was friendly with Song Yao, and recommended Song Yao to be a scholar.

古文：遥校吏部判，取舍与挺之异，言于元纮，元纮屡诘谯，挺之厉言曰： 公位相国，而爱憎反任小人乎？ 
现代文：宋遥考核吏部所判等第、取舍与严挺之有不同意见，宋遥去对李元说了，李元多次去责问严挺之，严挺之说 ：明公位于国相，而竟然听任小人之言而生爱憎？ 
English: Song Yao told Li Yuan that there was a difference of opinion between him and Yan Ting, and that Li Yuan had repeatedly questioned Yan Ting, and Yan Ting had said, "Ming Gong is in the position of the Minister of State, but he is actually listening to the words of a villain, resulting in love and hatred?

古文：元纮曰： 小人为谁？ 曰： 宋遥也。 
现代文：说时声色俱厉。李元问 ：谁是小人？ 严挺之说 ：就是宋遥。 
English: Li Yuan asked, "Who is the villain?" Yan Ting replied, "It is Song Yao."

古文：由是出为登州刺史，改太原少尹。
现代文：为此，严挺之出京任登州刺史，改为太原少尹。
English: For this reason, Yan Tingzhi was appointed to go to Beijing, and changed his name to Taiyuan Shao Yin.

古文：初，殿中监王毛仲持节抵太原朔方籍兵马，后累年，仍移太原取兵仗，挺之不肯应，且以毛仲宠幸，久恐有变，密启于帝。
现代文：事隔几年后，发文件到太原索取兵仗。严挺之以不见皇帝的敕书而不肯给，且认为王毛仲恃宠已久，恐生变故，于是向皇帝密奏。
English: A few years later, he sent a document to Taiyuan to request a military campaign. Yan insisted that he did not see the emperor's imperial edict and refused to give it, and believed that Wang Maozhong had been favored for a long time and was afraid of changing the past, so he played a secret game with the emperor.

古文：俄改濮、汴二州刺史，所治皆严威，吏至重足胁息。
现代文：不久，改任他为濮、汴二州刺史。严挺之治州严整有威仪，吏不敢有越轨行为。
English: Not long after, he was appointed as the governor of the two prefectures of Gansu and Shandong. The strict governance of the prefectures was dignified, and officials did not dare to deviate from the path.

古文：会毛仲败死，帝以挺之言忠，召为刑部侍郎，迁太府卿。
现代文：后来王毛仲出事败死，皇帝因严挺之以前的奏言忠君为国，招他为刑部侍郎，升任太府卿。
English: Later, Wang Maozhong was killed in an accident, and the emperor called him to be the minister of the Department of Justice and promoted him to the position of Dafuqing.

古文：宰相张九龄雅知之，用为尚书左丞，知吏部选。
现代文：宰相张九龄很赏识他，任他为尚书左丞，要他主管吏部的人才选拔。
English: Prime Minister Zhang Juering appreciated him very much, appointed him as Shang Shuxuzhong, and asked him to be in charge of the talent selection of the personnel department.

古文：李林甫与九龄同辅政，以九龄方得君，谄事之，内实不善也。
现代文：李林甫与张九龄同时为相，因为张九龄那时正被皇帝看重，就表面讨好他，内心却颇忌恨。
English: Li Linfu and Zhang Jiuling were the same person at the same time, because Zhang Jiuling was valued by the emperor at that time, and he liked him on the surface, but he hated him inside.

古文：户部侍郎萧炅，林甫所引，不知书，尝与挺之言，称蒸尝伏腊，乃为 伏猎 。
现代文：户部侍郎萧炅，是李林甫引荐的，是个不读书的人。曾与严挺之同行去庆吊，将《礼记》中的 蒸尝伏腊 读成 蒸尝伏猎 。
English: Xiao Yao, the steward of the household, was recommended by Li Linfu, and was a person who did not read books. He once went to celebrate the hanging with Yan Tingzhi's companions, and read "Steaming Fula" in "The Book of Rites" as "Steaming Fula."

古文：挺之白九龄： 省中而有伏猎侍郎乎！ 
现代文：严挺之回来对张九龄说： 省中岂能有伏猎侍郎！ 
English: Yan Tingzhi came back and said to Zhang Jiuling: "How can there be a fujian waiter in the province!

古文：乃出炅岐州刺史，林甫恨之。
现代文：于是将萧炅贬为岐州刺史，李林甫恨得要死。
English: As a result, Xiao Wei was relegated to the history books of Qizhou, which Li Linfu hated to death.

古文：九龄欲引以辅政，使往谒林甫，挺之负正，陋其为人，凡三年，非公事不造也，林甫益怨。
现代文：张九龄曾有意引荐严挺之共同辅政，要他去见李林甫。严挺之一向自负严正，鄙薄李林甫的为人。三年中，不是公事从来不登他家门，因此更遭李林甫嫉恨。
English: Zhang Jiuling had intended to introduce Yan Ting, a common aide-de-camp, to Li Linfu, and asked him to meet Li Linfu. Yan Ting was a person who was proud and upright, and despised Li Linfu. In the past three years, he never came to his house for business, so he was even more envied by Li Linfu.

古文：会挺之有所诿于蔚州刺史王元琰，林甫使人暴其语禁中，下除洛州刺史，徙绛州。
现代文：其时，蔚州刺史王元琰犯法，严挺之为他辩解了几句，李林甫让人在廷中责问严挺之，于是降官为氵名州刺史，后来调为绛州刺史。
English: At that time, Wang Yuanqi, the governor of Ulshu, violated the law, and Yan Tinggang defended him with a few words. Li Linfu had someone question Yan Tinggang in court, so he was demoted to the governor of Shennai and later transferred to the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：天宝初，帝顾林甫曰： 严挺之安在？
现代文：天宝初年，皇帝曾对李林甫说： 现在严挺之在哪里？
English: In the first year of Tianbao, the emperor once said to Li Linfu: Where is Yan Tingzhu now?

古文：此其材可用。 
现代文：这是个可用的人才。 
English: This is a usable talent.

古文：林甫退召其弟损之与道旧，谆谆款曲，且许美官，因曰： 天子视绛州厚，要当以事自解归，得见上，且大用。 
现代文：李林甫乃把严挺之的弟弟严损之招到家里叙旧，且许他美官，对他说 ：天子对你哥哥很好，你可以用你哥哥的名义，去见天子，将会得到重用的。 
English: Li Linfune invited Yan Tianzhi's younger brother Yan Zhizhi to his home for a family reunion, and gave him a blessing, saying to him: God is very good to your brother, you can use your brother's name to go see God, and you will be of great use.

古文：因绐挺之使称疾，愿就医京师。
现代文：于是要严挺之假称有病，希望到京师来就医。
English: As a result, Yan Tingzhi pretended to be ill, hoping to go to a doctor in Beijing.

古文：林甫已得奏，即言挺之春秋高，有疾，幸闲官得自养。
现代文：李林甫拿到了严挺之的这一 请求 ，就对皇帝说严挺之年纪大了，有病，可以给他一个闲官，让他就医养病。
English: When Li Linfu received Yan Tingzhi's request, he told the emperor that Yan Tingzhi was old and sick, and that he could give him an idle official and let him seek medical treatment.

古文：帝恨吒久之，乃以为员外詹事，诏归东都。
现代文：皇帝听说后，叹息惋惜了好久，于是任他员外詹事，令他回东都。
English: When the emperor heard of this, he sighed and regretted it for a long time, so he dismissed him from his post and ordered him to return to Dongdu.

古文：挺之郁郁成疾，乃自为文志墓，遗令薄葬，敛以时服。
现代文：严挺之郁郁不得志，终于成疾，自己写好墓志，遗令薄葬，大殓时就用平日穿的衣服。
English: Yan Ting's melancholy was not aspirational, and finally it became a disease. He wrote his own epitaph, ordered a short burial, and wore his everyday clothes when he died.

古文：挺之重交游，许与生死不易，嫁故人孤女数十人，当时重之。
现代文：严挺之看重朋友交往，且生死不变。曾为旧友的孤女几十人安排出嫁，为当时人称道。
English: Yan Tingzhi valued friendships, and this was true in life and death. He arranged marriages for dozens of orphaned daughters of old friends, which was praised at the time.

古文：然溺志于佛，与浮屠惠义善，义卒，衰服送其丧，已乃自葬于其塔左，君子以为偏。
现代文：但后来沉溺于佛，与僧人惠义友善，惠义死，严挺之竟着孝服为他送葬。后来遗嘱将自己葬在惠义塔之左侧。此举，君子以为有偏。
English: However, he later indulged in Buddhism, became friendly with the monk Huiyi, and when Huiyi died, Yan Ting actually buried him in filial piety. Later, he willed to be buried on the left side of Huiyi Pagoda. This move, the gentleman thought was biased.

古文：上皇合剑南为一道，擢武成都尹、剑南节度使。
现代文：儿子严武，广德年间任黄门侍郎、成都尹、剑南节度使。
English: His son Yanwu, during the Guangde era, served as the Yellow Gate Chamberlain, Chengdu Yin, and Jian'nan Festival Envoy.

