古文：周昭王吴夫差汉武帝司马相如阴贵人张奂郑玄范迈许攸薛夏蒋济
现代文：周昭王吴夫差汉武帝司马相如阴贵人张奂郑玄范迈许攸薛夏蒋济
English: Zhou Zhao Wang Wu Fu Zhaohan Emperor Wu Wudi Sima Xiangru Yin Dignitaries Zhang Qian Zheng Xuan Fan Ma Xiu You Xue Xia Jiang Ji

古文：周宣王戎邹湛陈桃吕蒙王穆张天锡张骏索充宋桶苻坚后赵宣咸张甲张茂晋明帝冯孝将徐精商仲堪商灵均桓豁司马恬贾弼王奉先宗叔林沙门法称刘穆之徐羡之沈庆之明歒之刘诞袁愍孙刘沙门诸仲务孙氏桓誓张寻徐祖桓邈周氏婢何敬叔
现代文：周宣王戎邹湛陈桃吕蒙王穆张天锡张骏索充宋桶苻坚后赵宣咸张甲张茂晋明帝冯孝将徐精商仲堪商灵均桓豁司马恬贾弼王奉先宗叔林沙门法称刘穆之徐羡之沈庆之明歒之刘诞袁愍孙刘沙门诸仲务孙氏桓誓张寻徐祖桓邈周氏婢何敬叔
English: Zhou Xuan Wang Rong Zhan Zhan Zhan Zhan Zhan Zhan Zhan Zhan Zhan Zhan Zhan Zhan Zhan Zhan Zhan Zhan Zhan Zhan Zhan Zhan Zhan Zhan Zhan Zhan Zhan Zhan Zhan Zhan Zhan Zhan Zhan Zhan Zhan Zhan Zhan Zhan Zhan Zhan Zhan Zhan Zhan Zhan Zhan Zhan Zhan Zhan Zhan Zhan Zhan Zhan Zhan Zhan Zhan Zhan

古文：周昭王
现代文：周昭王
English: Zhou Zhaowang

古文：昭王即位三十年，王坐祗明之室，昼而假寐。
现代文：周昭王即位三十年了。一天，他坐在神殿里和衣小睡。
English: Zhou Zhao Wang has been on the throne for thirty years. One day, he was sitting in the temple taking a nap.

古文：忽白云蓊郁而起，有人衣服皆毛羽，因名羽人。
现代文：忽见白云盛然而起，一个浑身长满羽毛的人飘然而至。
English: Suddenly, I saw a white cloud rise, and a man with feathers all over his body floated in.

古文：王梦中与语，问以上仙之术。
现代文：昭王在梦中同那人对话，并询问成仙之道。
English: In his dream, King Zhao had a dialogue with the man and asked him about the path to immortality.

古文：羽人曰：大王精智未开，求长生久视，不可得也。
现代文：那位羽人说：大王尚未脱俗，想求长生不老，这是不可能的。
English: The feathered one said, "The great king has not yet been dethroned. If he wants to live forever, it is impossible.

古文：王跪请绝欲之教。
现代文：昭王跪下来，向羽人苦求脱俗绝欲之法。
English: King Zhao knelt down and pleaded with Feather Man for a way to rid himself of his unbridled lust.

古文：羽人乃以指画王心，应手即裂。
现代文：羽人就用指头划划昭王的心，那心便裂开了。
English: The feathered man then scratched the king's heart with his finger, and it broke.

古文：王乃惊悟，而汗湿于衿席，因患心疾，即却膳撤乐。
现代文：昭王从梦中惊醒，汗水把袍子和坐垫都溻湿了，于是便患了心病。从此，他不吃不喝也不娱乐，十天一晃儿就过去了。
English: King Zhao woke up from his dream, and his robe and cushion were soaked with sweat. As a result, he suffered from heart disease. From then on, he did not eat, drink, or have fun. Ten days passed in a flash.

古文：移于旬日，忽见所梦者来，语王曰：先欲易王之心。
现代文：一天，那位羽人忽然来到他的面前，并对他说：我想先把大王的心变换一下。
English: One day, the feathered man suddenly came to him and said, "I want to change the king's heart first."

古文：乃出方寸绿囊，中有药，名曰续脉丸补血精散，以手摩王之臆，俄而即愈。
现代文：说罢，拿出一方寸绿药囊，内装续脉丸补血精散。羽人用手按摩昭王的前胸。
English: Having said that, he took out a one-inch green pill capsule, which contained a pulse-lengthening pill and a blood purifying essence. Feather Man massaged Zhao Wang's forearm with his hand.

古文：王即请此药，贮以玉缶，缄以金绳。
现代文：一会儿，昭王的病便全好了。昭王当即要下这药，装进玉缶里，并缠上金线。
English: In a moment, Zhao Wang's illness was completely cured. Zhao Wang immediately took the medicine, put it in a jade jar, and wrapped it with gold thread.

古文：以之涂足，则飞天地之外，如游咫尺之内。
现代文：他用这药抹脚，就可以飞到云天外，而且像玩似的。
English: If he rubs his feet with this medicine, he can fly into the sky, and it's like playing.

古文：有得服之，后天而死。
现代文：昭王常常服食这药，终于活了老长时间才死。
English: Zhao Wang often took this medicine, and finally he lived a long time before he died.

古文：吴夫差
现代文：吴夫差
English: Wu Fuzha

古文：吴王夫差夜梦三黑狗号，以南以北，炊甑无气。
现代文：吴王夫差晚上梦见三只黑狗叫，一会在南一会在北，炊甑也断了烟火。
English: In the evening, Wu Wangfu Chia dreamed of three black dogs barking, one in the south and one in the north. The fireworks also stopped.

古文：及觉，召群臣言梦，群臣不能解。
现代文：他醒来之后，立即召集群臣说梦，可是谁也解释不了。
English: When he woke up, he immediately summoned his ministers to talk about the dream, but no one could explain it.

古文：乃召公孙圣。
现代文：于是，夫差便召见公孙圣。
English: As a result, her husband sent for his grandson.

古文：圣被召，与妻诀曰：以恶梦召我，我岂欺心者，必为王所杀。于是圣至，以所梦告之。
现代文：公孙圣得到消息之后，便与妻子诀别，说：大王因为作了恶梦召我去解，决非好事。可是我又不能说谎，必定被他杀害公孙圣来到殿前，夫差将自己作的梦告诉了他。
English: After receiving the news, he said goodbye to his wife and said, "It is not a good thing that the king has called me to interpret a bad dream. However, I cannot lie. He must have killed my grandson. When he came to the temple, my husband told him about the dream he had had.

古文：圣曰：王无国矣！
现代文：公孙圣说：大王要亡国了！
English: The great-grandson said, "The great king is going to ruin the country!"

古文：犬号者，宗庙无主；炊甑无气，不食矣。
现代文：狗叫，说明宗庙没了主人；炊甑无气，说明粮食已绝。
English: If a dog barks, it means that there is no master in the ancestral temple; if the cooking pot is out of gas, it means that there is no food.

古文：王果怒，杀之。
现代文：吴王果然大怒，杀了公孙圣。
English: King Wu was furious and killed Gongsun Sheng.

古文：及越兵至，王谓左右曰：吾无道，杀公孙圣，汝可呼之。
现代文：不久，越国兵马杀将过来，夫差对左右说：我没有道理杀公孙圣啊，你们快唤他出来吧！
English: Soon, the Viet soldiers and horsemen will come over, and the messenger will say to the left and right: I have no reason to kill Gongsun Sheng, you should call him out!

古文：于是三呼三应。
现代文：众人三呼公孙圣，公孙圣果然答应了三声。
English: Everyone called out three times for Gongsun Sheng, and Gongsun Sheng agreed three times.

古文：吴卒为越所灭。
现代文：最后，吴国终于被越国灭掉了。
English: In the end, Wu was finally wiped out by Yue.

古文：汉武帝
现代文：汉武帝
English: Emperor Hanwu

古文：汉武帝梦大鱼，求去口中钩。
现代文：汉武帝梦见一条大鱼，哀求他替自己摘掉口中的鱼钩。
English: Emperor Hanwu dreamed of a big fish and begged him to remove the hook from his mouth.

古文：明日游昆明池，见一鱼衔钩，帝取钩放之。
现代文：第二天，他游昆明池的时候，果然看见了一条衔着钩的大鱼。汉武帝急忙替它摘下鱼钩，把它放入水中。
English: The next day, when he was swimming in Kunming Lake, he saw a big fish with a hook. Han Wu Di quickly removed the hook and put it in the water.

古文：三日，池滨得明珠一双。司马相如司马相如，字长卿。
现代文：三天后，他在池边拾到了两颗明珠。司马相如司马相如，字长卿。
English: Three days later, he found two pearls on the edge of the pond. Sima Xiangru is Sima Xiangru, and his name is Changkui.

古文：将献赋而未知所为，梦一黄衣翁谓之曰：可为《大人赋》，言神仙之事。
现代文：一天，他想作一首赋献上去却不知道怎么写好。晚上，梦见一位穿黄衣服的老人对他说：你可作《大人赋》，谈谈神仙的事情。
English: One day, he wanted to write a tribute to Fu, but he didn't know how to write it. In the evening, he dreamed of an old man in a yellow robe who said to him, "You can write "Adult Fu" and talk about the immortals."

古文：赋成以献，帝大嘉赏。
现代文：司马相如醒来，照老人说的写成一赋献给了汉武帝，汉武帝大大地奖赏了他。
English: Sima Xiangru woke up and, as the old man said, wrote a tribute to Emperor Hanwu, who rewarded him greatly.

古文：阴贵人
现代文：阴贵人
English: Yin Guijin

古文：汉明帝阴贵人，梦食瓜甚美。
现代文：汉明帝时有一位阴贵人，作梦吃瓜，味道美极了。
English: In the time of Emperor Han Ming, there was an obscure nobleman who dreamed of eating melons. The taste was exquisite.

古文：时敦煌献异瓜种，名穹隆。
现代文：这时，恰巧赶上敦煌献来名叫穹隆的一种奇异的瓜籽。
English: At this time, I happened to catch up with a strange melon seed called Dome, which was presented by Dunhuang.

古文：父老云：有道士从蓬莱得此种，食之不饥。
现代文：老人们说，有一位道士从蓬莱弄来的这种瓜籽，吃了它就再也不会觉得饥饿了。
English: The old people said that a Taoist monk brought this kind of melon seed from Penglai, and if you eat it, you will never feel hungry again.

古文：张奂
现代文：张奂
English: Zhang Ye

古文：后汉张奂为武威太守。
现代文：东汉，张奂任武威太守。
English: In the Eastern Han Dynasty, Zhang Ye became the military governor of Wuwei.

古文：其妻梦帝与印绶，登楼而歌，觉以告奂。
现代文：一天，他的妻子梦见皇帝给了她一方大印，高兴极了，登楼而歌。醒来，她把这件事告诉了张奂。
English: One day, his wife dreamed that the emperor gave her a great seal. She was so happy that she went upstairs to sing. When she woke up, she told Zhang Ye about it.

古文：奂令占之。曰：夫人方生男，复临此郡，命终此楼。
现代文：张奂让人占了一卦，那人说：夫人将来生了儿子，还得管理此地，而且会死在这座楼上。
English: Zhang Ye let people guess, and the man said: "My wife will have a son in the future, she will have to manage this place, and she will die on this floor."

古文：后生子猛。
现代文：他耻于被擒，就登楼自焚而死了。
English: Ashamed of being arrested, he set himself on fire and died.

古文：郑玄
现代文：郑玄
English: Zheng Xuan

古文：郑玄师马融，三载无闻，融还之。
现代文：郑玄跟老师马融学习，三年没有学到什么。
English: Zheng Xuan studied with teacher Ma Rong, but learned nothing in three years.

古文：玄过树阴下假寐，梦一人，以刀开其心，谓曰：子可学矣。
现代文：后来，马融让他回去。一日，郑玄在树荫下和衣小睡，梦见一个人用刀划开他的心，对他说：你是完全可以使自己成为有学问的人！
English: Later, Ma Rong let him go back. One day, Zheng Xuan was taking a nap in the shade of a tree. He dreamed that a man opened his heart with a knife and said to him: "You can completely make yourself a learned person!"

古文：於是寤而即返，遂洞精典籍。
现代文：郑玄睡醒后立即返回，不久就把所有的典籍弄懂弄通了。
English: Zheng Xuan returned immediately after waking up, and soon understood all the classics.

古文：后东归，融曰：诗书礼乐皆东矣。
现代文：后来，他回了东方。马融叹了口气说：诗书礼乐全去东方啦！
English: Later, he returned to the East. Ma Rong sighed and said, "All the poems, books and music have gone to the East!"

古文：范迈
现代文：范迈
English: Fan Mai

古文：林邑谓紫磨金为上金，俗谓之杨迈金。
现代文：林邑国称紫磨金为上等金，民间叫它杨迈金。
English: Lin's country called the purple gold the highest grade of gold, and the people called it Yangmei gold.

古文：范迈母梦人铺杨迈金席，与其生儿，儿生席色昭晰。
现代文：范迈的母亲当年梦见一个人铺杨迈金编的席子，跟她生下个儿子，生儿时席子金光四射，十分耀眼。
English: Fan Mai's mother had a dream that a man was weaving a golden mat, and she gave birth to a son. When he was born, the mat was very bright and shiny.

古文：后因生儿，名曰范迈，为林邑王。
现代文：后来，她就给儿子取名范迈，范迈长大以后成了林邑国的国王。
English: Later, she named her son Fan Mai, and when Fan Mai grew up, he became the king of Lin's country.

古文：许攸
现代文：许攸
English: Xu Youxuan

古文：许攸梦乌衣吏，奉漆案，案上有六封文书，拜跪曰：府君当为北斗君，明年七月复有一案，四封文书，云：陈康为主簿。
现代文：许攸梦见黑衣小吏为他搬来一张漆案，案上有六封文书，那小吏向他拜跪说：大人应当成为北斗府君。明年七月还有一张漆案，上面有四封文书，那是送给陈康的。
English: Xu You dreamed that a black-clad minor official brought him a case with six documents. The minor official bowed to him and said, "Adults should become the governor of Beidufu." Next July, there will be another case with four documents, which will be given to Chen Kang.

古文：觉后，适康至，曰：今来当谒。
现代文：醒来后，陈康刚好赶到，并且说：我今天是来拜见你的。
English: After waking up, Chen Kang arrived just in time and said: I came to see you today.

古文：攸闻益惧。
现代文：许攸更觉害怕。
English: Xu Yuanyuan felt even more scared.

古文：问康曰：我作道师，死不过作社公；今日得北斗、主簿，余为忝矣。
现代文：有顷，他对陈康说：我问过法师，死后不过是土地神而已；今天能当北斗府君、主簿，岂不高攀了么？
English: One day, he said to Chen Kang, "I asked the sorcerer, after death you are nothing more than a god of the land. Today, can you be the ruler of Hokuto-fu and the head librarian? Won't you have climbed higher?"

古文：明年七月，二人同日而死。
现代文：第二年七月，他和陈康在同一天死去。
English: In July of the following year, he and Chen Kang died on the same day.

古文：薛夏
现代文：薛夏
English: Xue Xia

古文：薛夏，天水人也，博学绝伦。
现代文：薛夏是天水人，博学多才，举世无双。
English: Xue Xia is a Tianshui person, erudite and versatile, unparalleled in the world.

古文：母孕夏之时，梦有人遗一箧衣，云：夫人必生贤明之子，为帝王所宗。
现代文：他母亲怀他的时候，梦见有人送来一箱衣服，说：你一定能生个贤明的儿子，被帝王所尊崇。
English: When his mother was pregnant with him, she dreamt that someone brought her a box of clothes and said: "You will surely give birth to a wise son who will be revered by the emperor."

古文：母记其梦之时。及生夏，年及弱冠，才术过人。
现代文：母亲牢记起这个梦的时间，等生下了薛夏，长到二十岁左右时，就学识过人了。
English: My mother remembered the time of this dream, gave birth to Xue Xia, and when she was about twenty years old, she learned a lot.

古文：魏文帝与之讲论，弥日不息，辞华旨畅，应对如流，无有凝滞。
现代文：魏文帝与他谈论起来，整日不休息。他思想深刻，辞采华美，什么问题都难不倒。
English: Emperor Wei Wen began to talk with him and did not rest all day. His thoughts were profound, his words were beautiful, and he could solve any problem.

古文：帝曰：昔公孙龙称为辩捷，而迂诞诬妄，今子所说，非圣人言不谈，则子游、子贡之俦。不能过也。
现代文：魏文帝说：当年公孙龙称为辩才，但他迂腐而又狂妄。今天你所说的，都是圣人之言，只有子游、子贡之辈才能赶得上。
English: Wei Wendi said: In the past, Gongsun Long was known as a debater, but he was pedantic and arrogant. What you said today are the words of a saint, only Ziyou and Zigong can catch up.

古文：若仲尼在魏，复为入室焉。帝手制书与夏，题云入室生。
现代文：如果孔老夫子在魏国，也一定会进来看你的。说罢。魏文帝亲手为他题字：入室生。
English: If Confucius were in Wei, he would certainly come to see you. Let's just say that Emperor Wei personally inscribed for him: "Welcome to the family."

古文：位至秘书丞。
现代文：后来成为秘书丞。
English: He later became a secretary.

古文：居甚贫，帝解御衣以赐之，以符先梦。
现代文：他的家很穷，魏文帝解下自己的衣服赐给他。这与其母之梦相符。
English: His family was very poor, and Emperor Weiwen unzipped his clothes and gave them to him, which was in line with his mother's dream.

古文：名冠当时，为一代高士。
现代文：当时他的名气很大，成为一代风流人物。
English: At that time, he was very famous and became a popular figure.

古文：蒋济
现代文：蒋济
English: Jiang Jie

古文：魏蒋济为领军也。
现代文：蒋济是领军将军。
English: Jiang Jie was the leading general.

古文：其妻梦亡儿涕泣言曰：死生异路。
现代文：一日，他的妻子梦见死去的儿子哭泣着说：我与你们生死相隔。
English: One day, his wife dreamed of her dead son and wept, saying: "I am separated from you in life and death."

古文：我生时为卿相子孙，今在地下为泰山伍伯，憔悴困辱，不可复言。
现代文：我活着的时候为将相子弟，今天在阴间却是泰山的小役卒，憔悴不堪，忍辱负重，简直没法说了！
English: When I was alive, I was the son-in-law, but today, in the underworld, I am Tarzan's little servant. It is unbearable, humiliating and burdensome, it is almost impossible to say!

古文：今太庙西有孙阿者，将召为泰山令。
现代文：现在，在太庙西边有个叫孙阿的人，蒋被封为泰山县令。
English: Now, there is a man named Sun Ah on the west side of the Great Temple, and Jiang has been named the county magistrate of Taishan County.

古文：愿母为白领军，嘱阿转我，今得乐处。
现代文：希望母亲转告父亲，嘱咐孙阿给我换个好地方。
English: I hope my mother will tell my father and tell Sun Ah to find a better place for me.

古文：言讫，母遂惊寤。
现代文：儿子说完，母亲便惊醒了。
English: After the son finished speaking, the mother woke up.

古文：以白济，济曰：梦不足凭耳。
现代文：她把这事告诉了丈夫。将济却说，梦是没有根据的。
English: She told her husband about it, but he said the dream was unfounded.

古文：明日，母复梦之，言曰：我今来迎新君，止在庙下，未发之间，暂得归来。
现代文：第二天，母亲又作了同样的梦，儿子说：我今天是来迎接新县令的，住在太庙下，在出发前的间隙，暂得脱身归来。
English: The next day, the mother had the same dream again, and the son said, "Today I came to welcome the new county magistrate. I live under the Great Temple. I had to get away for a while before I left.

古文：新君明日日中当发，临发多事，不得复归于此。
现代文：新县令明天中午出发，出发前的事务繁多，我不能再来这里。
English: The new prefectural order is to set off at noon tomorrow. There are many things to do before setting off, so I can't come here again.

古文：愿重启之，何惜一试验也。遂说阿形状，言甚备悉。
现代文：希望你再跟父亲说说，不妨试验一下然后他说出孙阿的模样，十分熟悉似的。
English: I hope you'll talk to your father again, maybe try it out and he'll say Sun Ah looks very familiar.

古文：天明，母又为言之曰：昨又梦如此，虽知梦不足凭，何惜一验之乎？
现代文：天亮之后，母亲又把这事对父亲讲了，并说：虽然说梦是没有根据的，但也不妨验证一下看看。
English: After dawn, the mother told the story to the father again, and said, "Although the dream is unfounded, you might as well verify it."

古文：济乃遣人诣太庙下，推问孙阿，果得之，形状如其梦。
现代文：蒋济派人去太庙周围打听孙阿，果然找到了这个人，模样跟梦中说的一样。
English: Jiang Ji sent people to the area around the Great Temple to inquire about Sun A, and they found this person, who looked just like he had said in his dream.

古文：济乃涕泣曰：几负我儿。
现代文：蒋济哭泣道：差一点对不起我儿子啊。
English: Jiang Jie cried: I almost feel sorry for my son.

古文：于是乃见孙阿，具语其事。
现代文：于是，他找到孙阿，详细谈了此事。
English: So he found Sun Ah and talked to him in detail.

古文：阿不惧当死，而喜为泰山令，惟恐济言之不信也，乃谓济曰：若诚如所言，某之愿也，不知贤郎欲得何职？
现代文：孙阿听说要当泰山令，一点也不怕死，只是担心蒋济的话不可信。他对蒋济说：如果真是这样，我当然愿意帮忙，可不知你儿子想干什么？
English: When Sun Ah heard that he was to be the Taishan Emperor, he was not afraid of death at all, but was worried that Chiang Chieh's words could not be trusted. He said to Chiang Chieh: "If this is really the case, of course I am willing to help, but I don't know what your son wants to do."

古文：济曰：随地下乐者与之。
现代文：蒋济说：你在阴间给他找个他喜欢干的差事吧。
English: Jiang Jie said: You should find him a job he likes to do in the underworld.

古文：阿许诺。
现代文：孙阿答应下来。
English: Sun Ah agreed.

古文：言讫遣还，济欲速知其验，从领军门下至庙下，十步安一人，以传阿之消息。
现代文：说完，蒋济便回到府中，为了快一点得到验证，他从领军门前到庙下，每十步安排一人，传递孙阿的消息。
English: After saying this, Jiang Jie returned to the capital. In order to get the verification faster, he arranged one person every ten steps from the front of the leading army to the temple to pass on Sun Ah's message.

古文：辰时传阿心痛，日中传阿亡。
现代文：辰时时报告说孙阿心痛，中午就接到了孙阿的死讯。
English: Sun Ah's heartache was reported at all hours of the day, and Sun Ah's death was reported at noon.

古文：涕泣曰：虽哀儿之不幸，见喜亡者之有知。
现代文：蒋济流泪道：我虽然为儿子悲哀，但他让我找这位不怕死的人还是颇有见识的。
English: Jiang Jie shed tears and said: Although I am sad for my son, it was quite insightful for him to let me find this person who is not afraid of death.

古文：后月余，母复梦儿来告曰：已得转为录事矣。
现代文：一个多月后，母亲又梦见儿子告诉她，自己已经转为掌管文书的录事了。
English: More than a month later, the mother had another dream about her son, telling her that he had been transferred to be in charge of the clerical records.

古文：周宣
现代文：周宣
English: Zhou Xuan

古文：魏周宣，字孔和，善占梦。
现代文：魏国有个人叫周宣，字孔和，善于解梦。
English: Zhou Xuan, a native of Wei, was good at interpreting dreams.

古文：或有问宣者：吾梦刍狗。
现代文：一日，有人对周宣说，我梦见了草扎的狗。
English: One day, someone said to Zhou Xuan, "I dreamed of a grass-covered dog."

古文：宣曰：君当得美食。
现代文：周宣说，你能够得到美味的食品。
English: Zhou Xuan said that you can get delicious food.

古文：未几，复有梦刍狗，曰：当堕车折脚。
现代文：不一会儿，那人说自己又梦见了草扎的狗。周宣说，你要从车上摔下来弄折脚。
English: Soon after, the man said that he had another dream about a grass-covered dog. Zhou Xuan said that you would fall from the car and break your foot.

古文：寻而又云梦刍狗，宣曰：当有火灾。
现代文：有顷，那人又说自己第三次梦见了草扎的狗。周宣说，这回你该有火灾。
English: Suddenly, the man said that he had dreamed of a grass-covered dog for the third time. Zhou Xuan said that this time you should have a fire.

古文：后皆如所言。
现代文：后来，正如周宣说的那样。
English: Later, as Zhou Xuan said.

古文：其人曰：吾实不梦，聊试君耳！
现代文：那人道：我其实没有作梦，只是想看看你的本事。
English: That person: I didn't actually have a dream, I just wanted to see what you were capable of.

古文：三占不同，皆验，何也？
现代文：三次虽然不同，可为什么都应验呢？
English: Although the three times are different, why do they all come true?

古文：宣曰：意形于言，便占吉凶。
现代文：周宣说：人的意念是通过语言表现出来的，所以能占卜吉凶。
English: Zhou Xuan said: People's thoughts are expressed through language, so they can tell fortunes.

古文：且刍狗者，祭神之物，故君初言梦之，当得美食也。
现代文：刍狗是用来祭祀神灵的，所以你第一次说自己梦见了它，是应得到美味食品的。
English: Hyenas are used to sacrifice to the gods, so the first time you say you dreamed about it, you should get delicious food.

古文：祭祀即毕，则为所轹，当堕车伤折。
现代文：祭祀完毕，那刍狗也就被车轮碾轧，所以你会从车上摔下来弄坏脚。
English: After the sacrifice, the hyena is also crushed by the wheel, so you will fall off the car and break your foot.

古文：车轹之后，必载以樵，故云失火。
现代文：车轧之后，它只能当柴烧，所以我说你家要失火。
English: After rolling, it can only be used as firewood, so I said your house will catch fire.

古文：王戎
现代文：王戎
English: Wang Rong

古文：王戎梦有人以七枚椹子与之，著衣襟中。
现代文：王戎梦见有人给他七颗椹子，他便揣入怀中。
English: Wang Rong dreamed that someone gave him seven dice, and he took them into his arms.

古文：既觉得之，占曰：椹，桑子也。
现代文：他占了一卦，结果说：椹，桑子啊。
English: He made up a story and ended up saying, "Oh, mulberry."

古文：自后男女大小凡七丧。邹湛
现代文：不久，他的七个儿女全死了。邹湛
English: Before long, all seven of his children were dead.

古文：邹湛梦一人拜，自称甄仲舒，求葬。
现代文：邹湛梦见一个人向他跪拜，说自己叫甄仲舒，请求为他安葬。
English: Yan Zhan dreamed that a person kneeled to him, said his name was Zhen Zhongshu, and asked to be buried with him.

古文：湛觉，思之曰：舍西瓦土中人也。
现代文：邹湛醒来，心想：甄仲舒三个字，不就是我乃舍西瓦土中人么？
English: Yan Zhan woke up and thought to himself: Zhen Zhongshu three words, isn't it true that I am a person from the soil of Sheshiwa?

古文：乃取葬之。复梦其人来拜谢。
现代文：于是，他在屋西瓦土中找到一个死人，将他重新安葬了。他又梦见那人来向他道谢。
English: So he found a dead man in the soil and buried him again, and he dreamed that the man came to thank him.

古文：陈桃
现代文：陈桃
English: Chen Tao

古文：虞翻注《易》，上奏曰：臣郡吏陈桃，梦臣与道士相遇，散发粗裘，付《易》六爻。
现代文：虞翻注释易经，向皇帝奏道：我手下有个叫陈桃的小吏，梦见我与道士相遇。那道士披头散发，衣衫褴褛。
English: Gu Guan, commenting on the I Ching, recited to the emperor: There is a minor official named Chen Tao under my command, who dreamed that I met a Taoist monk. The Taoist monk was bearded and disheveled.

古文：烧其三，以饮臣。
现代文：他给我易经中的六爻，被他烧了三爻，让我喝下去。
English: He gave me six gourds from the I Ching, and he burned three gourds for me to drink.

古文：臣乞尽吞之。
现代文：臣请求把那三爻也吞下去。
English: The minister asked him to swallow the three worms as well.

古文：道士言： 易在天上，三爻足以 。
现代文：那道士却说： 《易》在天上呢，地上有三爻足够了。
English: The Taoist, however, said, "Yi" is in the sky, and three kites are enough on the ground.

古文：岂臣受命，应当知也。
现代文：臣子是受天之命，这一点是应当知道的。
English: It should be known that a vassal is subject to the order of heaven.

古文：吕蒙吕蒙入吴，王劝其学。
现代文：吕蒙吕蒙入吴，王劝其学。
English: Liumeng Liumeng entered Wu, and Wang advised him to study hard.

古文：乃博览群籍，以《易》为宗。
现代文：乃博览群籍，以《易》为宗。
English: He is a member of the exposition group, with "E" as his family name.

古文：常在孙策坐酣醉，忽于眠中，诵《易》一部，俄而起惊。
现代文：常在孙策坐酣醉，忽于眠中，诵《易》一部，俄而起惊。
English: Sun Ce would often get drunk, and suddenly, in his sleep, he would recite a part of Yi and suddenly be startled.

古文：众人皆问之。
现代文：众人皆问之。
English: Everyone is asking about it.

古文：蒙云： 向梦见伏羲、文王、周公，与我言论世祚兴亡之事，日月广明之道，莫不穷精极妙；未该玄言，政空诵其文耳。 
现代文：吕蒙说：我在梦中见到了伏羲、文王和周公。他们跟我谈论国家兴亡之事，天地宇宙之理，观点都十分精辟绝妙。他们可不是空发议论，仅仅背诵原文而已呵。
English: Lv Meng said, "I saw Fu Rong, Wen Wang and Zhou Gong in my dream. They talked to me about the rise and fall of the country, the principles of heaven and earth, and the universe, and their views were very incisive and brilliant. They were not just talking, they were just reciting the original text."

古文：众坐皆知蒙呓诵文也。
现代文：语惊四座，众人都知道吕蒙说梦话诵易经这件事了。
English: To everyone's surprise, everyone knew that Lu Meng was talking in his sleep and reciting the Book of Changes.

古文：王穆
现代文：王穆
English: Wang Mu

古文：洛阳王穆起兵酒泉，西伐索嘏，长史郭瑀谏，不从。
现代文：洛阳的王穆从酒泉发兵，向西讨代索嘏。长史郭瑀出面劝阻，王穆不听。
English: Luoyang's Wang Mu sent troops from Jiuquan to the west to solicit a replacement. Long Shi Guoqi came forward to dissuade him, but Wang Mu would not listen.

古文：夜梦乘青龙上天，至屋而止。
现代文：晚上，他梦见自己乘青龙上天，刚到屋顶就停住了。
English: In the evening, he dreamed that he had ascended to heaven on a blue dragon, and stopped just after reaching the roof.

古文：觉叹曰：屋字尸至也，龙飞屋上尸至，吾其死矣。
现代文：他醒来叹道：屋字就是尸至呵。龙飞屋上尸至，看来我得死了！
English: He woke up and sighed, "The rooftop sign is a corpse. A dragon is flying up to the rooftop, it looks like I'm going to die!"

古文：后果验。
现代文：后来，果然应验了。
English: Later, it came true.

古文：出张天锡
现代文：张天锡
English: Zhang Tianxi

古文：张天锡在涼州。梦一绿色犬，甚长，从南来，欲咋天锡，床上避之，乃堕地。
现代文：张天锡在凉州梦见一只绿色的狗，特别高大，从南边扑来，想咬他，吓得他逃到床上想藏起来，结果却摔到地上。
English: In Liangzhou, Zhang Tianxi had a dream about a green dog, a particularly tall one, which jumped from the south and tried to bite him. He was so scared that he fled to his bed to hide, but ended up falling to the ground.

古文：后苻坚遣苟苌者，绿地锦袍，从南来，攻入门，大破之。
现代文：后来，前秦皇帝苻坚派苟苌杀来。那苟苌就穿着绿色锦袍，从南边攻进城门，把涼州给破了。
English: Later, the former Qin Emperor Qian Jian sent Gogol to kill him. Wearing a green brocade robe, Gogol broke into the city gate from the south and destroyed Liangzhou.

古文：张骏
现代文：张骏
English: Zhang Ye

古文：涼文王张骏，梦一人鬓眉皓白，自称子俞，曰：地上之事付你，地下之事付我。
现代文：涼文王张骏，梦见一个鬓眉皆白的老人，自称叫子俞，对他说道：地上的事情交给你，地下的事情交给我。
English: Liang Wen Wang Zhang Ye dreamed of an old man with white eyebrows, who called himself Zi Ye, and said to him: "Leave the things on the ground to you, and the things underground to me."

古文：王寤问之，有侯子瑜先死。得其曾孙亮。
现代文：他醒来之后一打听，才知道有位叫子瑜的侯爷刚死，便得了个叫亮的曾孙子。
English: After he woke up, he asked around and found out that a great-grandfather named Ziyu had just died and had a great-great-grandson named Liang.

古文：为祈连令矣。
现代文：原来，他是想祈求连任呵。
English: Turns out, he wanted to pray for re-election.

古文：索充宋桶
现代文：索充宋桶
English: Saucer filled with Song barrels

古文：索充梦一虏，脱上衣来诣充。
现代文：索充梦见一个外夷的俘虏，脱了上衣来拜见自己。
English: Socheng dreamed of a foreign captive, took off his shirt to pay homage to himself.

古文：索紞占曰：虏去上半，下男字也。
现代文：他请人算了一卦，说：虏去上半身，下边是个男字。
English: He asked someone to calculate a riddle, saying: Take away the upper part of the body, and the lower part is a man.

古文：夷虏阴类，君妻当生男也。
现代文：外夷的俘虏属于阴类，指你妻子，意思是说你的妻子应该生个男孩儿。
English: The captives of the barbarians belong to the yin category, which refers to your wife, meaning that your wife should give birth to a boy.

古文：已后果验。
现代文：以后果然应验了。
English: The prophecy came true.

古文：又宋桶梦内中有一人著衣，桶一手把两杖，极打之。
现代文：又有一个叫宋桶的人，梦见家内有个人在穿衣服，于是他一手拿两根棍子狠狠打去。
English: Another man, Song Jie, dreamed that someone in his family was getting dressed, so he took two sticks in one hand and beat him severely.

古文：索紞占曰：内中有人，是肉子也；两杖著之象，极打肉食也。
现代文：醒来，他请人算了一卦，说：内中有人，分明是肉字嘛；两杖呈筷子之象。这回你该有肉吃了！
English: When he woke up, he asked someone to calculate a riddle and said, "There is someone among you who is clearly a meat character; the two sticks are like chopsticks. This time you should eat meat!"

古文：过三日，过三家，皆得肉食矣。苻坚
现代文：他一连过了三天，走了三家，结果都吃到了肉。苻坚
English: He spent three days in a row, went to three homes, and ended up eating meat.

古文：苻坚将欲南伐，梦满城出菜，又地东南倾。
现代文：前秦皇帝苻坚想向南讨伐，晚上梦见城里长满蔬菜，而且大地向东南倾。
English: Former Qin Emperor Yu Jian wanted to march southward, and at night he dreamed that the city was full of vegetables, and the earth was tilting to the southeast.

古文：其占曰：菜多，难为酱也。东南倾，江左不得平也。
现代文：第二天占了一卦，说：菜多，难为酱呵；大地东南倾斜，更说明江左难以夺取了。
English: The next day, he made up a story, saying: There are many dishes, it is difficult to make sauce; the earth is tilted to the southeast, and it is even more difficult to capture the left side of the river.

古文：后赵宣咸
现代文：后赵宣咸
English: After Zhao Xuanhan

古文：宣咸卒后五年，石虎梦见咸。
现代文：宣咸死后五年，后赵皇帝石虎梦见了他。
English: Five years after Xuan Xian's death, the late Emperor Zhao Shihu dreamed of him.

古文：涕泗嘱其子奋，曰：非心力所达也。
现代文：他哭啼着嘱咐儿子奋，说：不是我心想着就能实现的呵。
English: He cried and told his son, Fen, "It's not like I can do it in my head.

古文：通梦之言而有征：奋今何在？
现代文：石虎想，他这梦中之言是有求于我，便问：奋现在什么地方？
English: Shihu thought that the words in his dream were asking for me, so he asked: Where is Fen now?

古文：左右对曰：为赵郡守。
现代文：手下人回答说当郡守呢。
English: His subordinate replied that he wanted to be county governor.

古文：于是即擢拜廷尉，为太常。
现代文：于是，石虎当即提升他为廷尉，掌管宗庙礼仪等。
English: As a result, Shihu was immediately promoted to the position of courtier, in charge of the etiquette of the family temple.

古文：才力不及父，因咸梦登列卿也。
现代文：虽然奋的才华赶不上父亲，但却因父亲托的一个梦，而成为了九卿之一。
English: Although Fen's talent is not as good as his father's, he became one of the nine lords because of a dream his father gave him.

古文：张甲
现代文：张甲
English: Zhang Jia

古文：张甲者，与司徒蔡谟有亲，侨住谟家。
现代文：张甲跟司徒蔡谟有亲戚，寄居在蔡谟家中。
English: Zhang Jia is a relative of Szeto Czajmo and has been living as a guest in Czajmo's home.

古文：暂数宿行，过期不及。
现代文：开始几宿还不错，过些日子就不行了。
English: The first few nights were fine, but after a few days it was no longer possible.

古文：谟昼眠，梦甲云：暂行，忽暴病，患心腹痛病，胀满不得吐下，某时死。
现代文：一天，蔡谟白天睡着了，梦见张甲对他说：我刚要走，忽然得了个急病，心腹疼痛，胀满想吐又吐不出来，说不定什么时候就死了。
English: One day, Zhaimu fell asleep during the day and dreamed that Zhang Jia said to him, "I was just about to leave when I suddenly fell ill with a sudden illness. My heart and abdomen were in pain. I felt like I was going to vomit but couldn't. I might die at any moment."

古文：谟曰：何以治之？
现代文：蔡谟问道：怎么能治呢？
English: Cai Mu asked: How can it be ruled?

古文：甲曰：蜘蛛生断去脚，吞之则愈。
现代文：张甲答道：把活蜘蛛的腿弄掉，吞下去就好了。
English: Zhang Jia replied, "Just remove the leg of the live spider and swallow it."

古文：谟觉，使人往甲行所验之，果死。
现代文：蔡谟醒来，派人去张甲的住处检验，他果然已经死了。
English: When Cai Mu woke up, he sent someone to Zhang Jia's residence to check on him, and sure enough, he was dead.

古文：张茂
现代文：张茂
English: Zhang Mao

古文：会稽张茂，尝梦大象，以问万推。
现代文：会稽的张茂。
English: Zhang Mao, a member of the audit committee.

古文：曰：君当为大郡，而不能善终。
现代文：曾经梦见过大象。他请人帮助解梦，说：你应当管理大郡的，但却不能善终。
English: Once he dreamed of an elephant. He asked someone to help interpret the dream, saying: "You should manage a large county, but you can't end well."

古文：大象者大兽也，取诸其音，兽者守也。
现代文：大象者大兽也，而兽就是守，取它的谐音嘛。
English: An elephant is a big beast, and a beast is a guardian, take its homonym.

古文：象以齿焚其身，后必为人所杀。
现代文：大象因它的牙齿宝贵却毁坏了它的生命，将来必被人所杀。
English: The elephant will be killed in the future, because its teeth are precious, but it has ruined its life.

古文：茂永昌中，为吴兴太守。
现代文：张茂在永昌年间，任吴兴郡太守。
English: During the Yongchang period, Zhang Mao served as the governor of Wuxing County.

古文：值王敦问鼎，执正不移，敦遣沈充灭之。
现代文：等王敦掌管东晋大权时，他刚正不阿，王敦便派沈充把他灭掉了。
English: When Wang Dun was in charge of the Eastern Jin Dynasty, he was not upright, so Wang Dun sent Shen Cong to eliminate him.

古文：晋明帝
现代文：晋明帝
English: Emperor Jinming

古文：晋明时，献马者梦河神请之。
现代文：晋明帝的时候，一位来献马的人梦见河神向他要这匹马。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jinming, a man who came to offer a horse dreamed that the river god asked him for the horse.

古文：及至，与帝梦同。
现代文：等他赶到殿前，一说，恰与晋明帝作的梦一样。
English: When he arrived at the front of the hall, he said, "It's just like the dream of Emperor Jinming."

古文：即投河以奉神。
现代文：于是，这马就被投进水里献给了河神。
English: As a result, the horse was thrown into the water and dedicated to the river god.

古文：始太傅褚褒，亦好此马。帝云：已与河神。
现代文：当初，太傅褚褒也想要这马，晋明帝说，已经送给河神了。
English: At first, Emperor Taifu also wanted the horse, but Emperor Jinming said that it had already been given to the river god.

古文：及褚公卒，军人见公乘此马矣。
现代文：等到褚褒死后，士兵们看见他骑着那匹马而行。
English: After Gongpo died, the soldiers saw him riding the horse.

古文：冯孝将
现代文：冯孝将
English: Feng Xiaojing

古文：广平太守冯孝将，男马子。
现代文：广平太守冯孝将，有个儿子名叫马子。
English: The Guangping Empress Dowager Feng Xiaojing had a son named Ma Zi.

古文：梦一女人，年十八、九岁，言我乃前太守徐玄方之女，不幸早亡，亡来四年，为鬼所枉杀。
现代文：一日，马子梦见一个女子，十八九岁的样子，说：我是前太守徐玄方的女儿，不幸夭折，死了四年后，又被鬼屈杀。
English: One day, Ma Zi had a dream about a woman who looked like she was 18 or 19 years old. She said, "I am the daughter of the former governor Xu Xuanfang. Unfortunately, I died prematurely. Four years after my death, I was killed by a ghost.

古文：按生录，乃岁至八十余。
现代文：按生死簿上讲，我能活到八十多岁。
English: According to the book of life and death, I can live to be over eighty.

古文：今听我更生，还为君妻，能见聘否？
现代文：现在，听凭我再生一次，返回阳间作你的妻子，不知你肯不肯娶我？
English: Now, if I were to be born again and return to the sun to be your wife, I wonder if you would marry me?

古文：马子掘开棺视之，其女已活，遂为夫妇。
现代文：第二天，这马子掘开那女子的棺材一看，那女子已经活了。于是，他俩便结成了夫妻。
English: The next day, the horse dug up the woman's coffin and saw that she was still alive, and the two became husband and wife.

古文：徐精
现代文：徐精
English: Xu Jing

古文：晋咸和初，徐精远行，梦与妻寝，有身。
现代文：晋代咸和初年，徐精出远门的时候，梦见和妻子睡觉，并使她有了身孕。
English: In the first year of the Han and Jin dynasties, when Xu Jing was away from home, he dreamed of sleeping with his wife and made her pregnant.

古文：明年归。妻果产。
现代文：第二年，他从外地回到家，妻子果然生下个孩子。
English: The following year, he returned home from abroad and his wife gave birth to a child.

古文：后如其言矣。
现代文：后来一问，一切都跟他说的一样。
English: When I asked him later, everything was the same as he said.

古文：商仲堪
现代文：商仲堪
English: Business matchmaker

古文：商仲堪在丹徒，梦一人曰：君有济物之心，岂能移我在高燥处，则恩及枯骨矣。
现代文：商仲堪在丹徒县梦见一个人，对他说：你既然有济困扶危的博爱之心，能不能把我挪到一个干燥的高地方？
English: Shang Zhongkan dreamed of a man in Dantu County and said to him: Since you have a philanthropic heart to help the poor, can you move me to a dry high place?

古文：明日，果有一棺逐水。
现代文：这样，你就对一具枯骨也有恩了。
English: In this way, you are also grateful for a dead bone.

古文：仲堪取而葬之于高冈，酹酒。
现代文：第二天，果然顺水漂来一具棺材。商仲堪捞上来之后，又将他埋葬在山岗上，且用酒祭奠了他。
English: The next day, a coffin did indeed float down the river. After Shangzhong Kanlu was fished out, he was buried on the hill, and he was buried with a wine offering.

古文：其夕，梦见其人来拜谢。
现代文：当晚，商仲堪梦见那人前来感谢他。
English: That night, the merchant dreamed that the man came to thank him.

古文：商灵均
现代文：商灵均
English: Business-to-business

古文：商灵均，义熙中，梦人来缚其身将去，形神乖散。
现代文：晋义熙年间，商灵均作了一个梦，梦见有人把他用绳子绑上就走，吓得他魂飞魄散。
English: During the Jin and Yixi dynasties, a merchant had a dream that someone tied him up with a rope and walked away, scaring him out of his wits.

古文：复有一人云：且置之，须作衡阳，当取之耳。
现代文：这时，又走出一个人来说：放了他吧。衡阳还缺个太守，应当在那儿取他。
English: At this time, another person came out and said, "Let him go. Hengyang still lacks a governor-general, and he should be picked up there."

古文：后除衡阳守，辞不得免，果卒官。
现代文：后来，商灵均果然被任命为衡阳太守，想推辞也不行，结果死在衡阳任上。
English: Later, Shanglingjun was indeed appointed as Hengyang's governor-general. He could not refuse the appointment, and as a result, he died in Hengyang.

古文：桓豁
现代文：桓豁
English: Kanpaku

古文：荆州刺史桓豁，所住斋中，见一人长丈余，梦曰：我龙山之神，来无好意，使君既贞固，我当自去耳。
现代文：荆州刺史桓豁住在自己的书房里。一日，他梦见一个人，足有一丈多高，对他说道：我是龙山之神，这次来没有什么喜事，使君已经坚贞不移，我自然就会离去。
English: One day, he had a dream about a man who was as tall as he was long, and he said to him, "I am the god of the Longshan Mountains. This time, there is nothing to celebrate. Since you have been steadfast, I will naturally leave."

古文：司马恬
现代文：司马恬
English: Sima Yi

古文：京口新城有邓艾庙，毁久。
现代文：京城旁边有座邓艾庙，坍塌已经好长时间了。
English: There is a temple of Deng Ai next to the capital. It has been collapsing for a long time.

古文：晋谯王司马恬为都督，梦一人自称邓公，求治舍宇。
现代文：这时，晋谯王司马恬当上了都督。一天，他梦见一个人自称邓艾，请求他帮助修造一座房舍。
English: One day, he dreamed of a man who called himself Deng Ai and asked him to help him build a house.

古文：恬乃令与修造之。
现代文：第二天，司马恬就派人把那座邓艾庙重新建造起来。
English: The next day, Sima Yi sent someone to rebuild the Deng Ai Temple.

古文：贾弼
现代文：贾弼
English: Jia Wei

古文：河东贾弼为琅琊参军，夜梦一人，塺龅大鼻閉目，请曰：爱君之貌，换君之头，可乎？
现代文：河东的贾弼是琅琊郡的参军。晚上，他梦见一个人，样子长得很难看要求说：我实在是太爱你的相貌了，想和你换换脑袋，可以吗？
English: In the evening, he dreamed of a man who looked very ugly and demanded: "I really love your appearance so much, I want to change my head with you, is that OK?"

古文：梦中不获已，遂被换去。
现代文：因为在梦中不能够阻止，脑袋当即被那人换去。
English: Unable to stop the dream, the head is immediately replaced by the man.

古文：觉而人见者悉惊走。
现代文：醒来之后凡是见到他的人全都吓跑了。
English: When he woke up, everyone who saw him was scared away.

古文：还家，家人悉藏。
现代文：回到家里，家里人也都吓得躲藏起来。
English: Back home, the family members were too scared to hide.

古文：自此后能半而笑啼，两手足及口中，各题一笔书之，词翰俱美。
现代文：从此以后，他能用半面脸哭笑，两手、两足及口中可以各拿一支笔写字，写出来的词章都很有文采。
English: Since then, he has been able to smile and cry with only half of his face. He can write with one pen in each hand, foot and mouth, and his lyrics are very poetic.

古文：王奉先
现代文：王奉先
English: Wang Bongsian

古文：有贵人亡后，永兴令王奉先梦与之相对如平生。
现代文：有一个地位贵显的人死后，永兴县令王奉先梦见与他相对而坐，跟平时没什么两样。
English: After the death of a high-ranking person, Yongxing County Governor Wang Bongxian dreamed of sitting opposite him, which was no different from usual.

古文：奉先问：远有情色乎？
现代文：王奉先问道：你们阴间也有男女之情吗？
English: Wang Bong first asked: Do you also have love between men and women in the underworld?

古文：答云：某日至某家，问婢。
现代文：那位贵人答道，哪天你有工夫去我家，一问我的婢女便知。
English: The nobleman replied, "If one day you have time to come to my house, just ask my maid.

古文：后觉，问其婢，云：此日某梦郎君来。
现代文：王奉先醒来之后，便赶到他家去问他的婢女，婢女答说：今天，我梦见了大人来到我家。
English: After Wang Bong first woke up, he rushed to his house to ask his maid. The maid replied, "Today, I dreamt that an adult came to my house."

古文：宗叔林
现代文：宗叔林
English: Zong Shulin

古文：晋阳守宗叔林得十头鳖，付厨曰：每日以二头作臛。
现代文：晋阳太守宗叔林得到了十只老鳖，交给厨师说：每天用二只鳖作肉羹。
English: Zongshulin, the governor of Jinyang, obtained ten old yaks and gave them to the cook, saying, "Use two yaks to make meat soup every day."

古文：其夜，梦十丈夫，皂布衣裤褶，扣头求哀。
现代文：当天晚上，他梦见十位汉子，穿黑色的布衣服，向他叩头并苦苦哀求。
English: That night, he dreamed of ten men, dressed in black cloth, bowing down to him and begging.

古文：不悟而食二枚。
现代文：宗叔林没有醒悟，吃了两只老鳖。
English: Zongshulin didn't come to his senses and ate two old cormorants.

古文：明夜，又梦八人求命，方悟。
现代文：第二天晚上，又梦见八位汉子向他跪请饶命。
English: The next night, he had another dream in which he saw eight men kneeling before him, begging for their lives.

古文：乃放之，后梦八人来谢。
现代文：这时，他才醒悟过来，把剩下的那八只鳖全放生了。后来，他梦见了那八个人前来道谢。
English: Only then did he come to his senses and set free the remaining eight baboons. Later, he dreamt that the eight people came to thank him.

古文：沙门法称
现代文：沙门法称
English: Salmon law said

古文：宋沙门法称，临终曰：有嵩山人告我，江东刘将军应受天命。
现代文：北宋初年，佛门弟子法称，临死前说：嵩山上有个人告诉我，江东的刘将军应当受命于天。
English: In the early years of the Northern Song Dynasty, a disciple of the Buddha Fa said that before he died, he said: There is a person on Songshan Mountain who told me that General Liu of the East River should be ordered by heaven.

古文：吾以三十二璧一饼为信物。
现代文：我拿出三十二块宝玉和一饼金子为信物。
English: I took out thirty-two jewels and a piece of gold as a token.

古文：宋祖闻之，命僧惠义往嵩山。
现代文：宋太祖听说了这件事，命令僧人惠义前往嵩山。
English: When Song Taizu heard about this, he ordered the monk Huiyi to go to Songshan.

古文：七日七夜行道，梦有一长须翁指示。
现代文：路上走了七天七夜。最后这天夜里，惠义梦见了一位须发飘然的老人为他指示道路。
English: He walked on the road for seven days and seven nights. On the last night, Huiyi dreamed of an old man with flowing hair who showed him the way.

古文：及觉，分明忆所在，掘而得之。
现代文：等到他醒来的时候，还记得老人告诉他的那个藏宝的地方，结果一挖，就把那三十二块宝玉和一饼金全挖了出来。
English: When he woke up, he still remembered the place where the old man had told him the treasure was hidden. As a result, he dug out the thirty-two jewels and a piece of gold.

古文：刘穆之
现代文：刘穆之
English: Liu Muzhi

古文：刘穆之常渡扬子江宿，梦合两船为舫，上施华盖，仪饰甚盛，以升天。
现代文：刘穆之曾在扬子江的船上过夜。一天晚上，他梦见两只船合拼成一只大游舫，上头盖着华丽的篷子，装饰得十分讲究，这游舫刚刚升天，天就亮了。
English: Liu Muzhi once spent the night on a boat on the Yangtze River. One night, he dreamed that two boats combined to form a large peregrine falcon, covered with a gorgeous canopy, decorated with great care. This peregrine falcon had just ascended into the sky, and the sky was bright.

古文：既晓，有一姥问曰：君昨夜有佳梦否？
现代文：这时，有一位老妇人问他说：你昨天夜里是不是作了个美梦？
English: At that time, an old woman asked him, "Did you have a good dream last night?"

古文：穆之乃具说之，姥曰：君必位居端揆。
现代文：刘穆之以实相告。老妇人笑着说：你一定能够当上宰相。
English: The old woman smiled and said, "You will definitely be able to become prime minister."

古文：言讫不见。
现代文：老妇人说完就不见了。
English: After saying this, he disappeared.

古文：后官至仆射丹阳尹，以元功也。
现代文：后来，刘穆之果然位居仆射和丹阳尹等要职，真是功德圆满呵。
English: Later, Liu Muzhi was indeed appointed to important positions such as Min Zha and Danyang Yin, which is truly a great achievement.

古文：穆之又梦，有人称刘镇军相迎。
现代文：刘穆之又作了一个梦，梦见有人称呼他刘镇军，并笑脸相迎。
English: Liu Muzhi had another dream. He dreamed that someone called him Liu Zhenjun and greeted him with a smile.

古文：旦占之：吾死矣，今岂有刘镇军耶？
现代文：早晨，他占了一卦后说：我就要死了！这里哪有什么刘镇军呢？
English: In the morning, he made up a story and said: "I'm going to die! Where are Liu Zhen's troops?

古文：后宋武帝遣人迎，共定大业。
现代文：后来，宋武帝派人来迎他进宫，与他共商国家大事。
English: Later, Emperor Songwu sent someone to welcome him into the palace and discuss national affairs with him.

古文：武帝时为镇军将军。
现代文：不久，他真的被封为镇军将军。
English: Before long, he was actually named the town's general.

古文：徐羡之
现代文：徐羡之
English: Xu Enzhi

古文：徐羡之为王雄少傅主簿。
现代文：徐羡之为王雄少傅当主簿。
English: Xu envies Wang Xiong for being the main role of Shao Fu.

古文：梦父作谓曰：汝从今己后，勿渡朱雀桁，当贵。
现代文：一天晚上，他梦见父亲对他说：你从今往后，不再过朱雀桥，就能大富大贵。
English: One night, he dreamed that his father said to him, "From now on, you will no longer have to cross the Suzaku Bridge, and you will be able to become very rich."

古文：羡之后行半桁，忆先人梦，回马。
现代文：后来，羡之有一次上了朱雀桥刚走一半，不由想起父亲托的那个梦，立刻策马返回。
English: Later, Enzhi was once on the Suzaku Bridge, halfway across, when he couldn't help but think of the dream his father had told him, and he immediately turned around and rode back.

古文：而以此除主簿，后果为宰相。
现代文：他因此被免去了主簿之职。后来，他记取这次教训，结果当上了宰相。
English: As a result, he was removed from his post as chief accountant. Later, he learned this lesson and eventually became prime minister.

古文：沈庆之
现代文：沈庆之
English: Shen Qingzhi

古文：沈庆之，元嘉中，始梦牵卤部入厕中，虽忻清道，而甚恶之。
现代文：沈庆之是南北朝时宋文帝元嘉年间的人。一天夜里，他梦见自己带领仪仗队进到厕所里。虽然清洁，却使他十分厌恶。
English: Shen Qingzhi, who lived during the Southern and Northern Dynasties under Emperor Songwen and Empress Yuanjia, dreamed one night that he was leading an honor guard into a toilet. Although it was clean, he was disgusted.

古文：或为之解曰：君必贵，然未也。
现代文：有人为他解梦说：你一定会得到富贵。
English: Someone interpreted the dream for him and said, "You will definitely become rich and famous."

古文：卤部者，富贵之容；厕中，所谓后帝也。
现代文：但是得等到将来。仪仗队是富贵的象征，厕所代表后帝的意思。
English: But that will have to wait for the future. The guard of honour is a symbol of wealth, and the lavatory stands for the emperor.

古文：君富贵不在今主矣。
现代文：所以说，你在当今皇帝在位时是得不到富贵的。
English: Therefore, you will not get rich during the reign of the current emperor.

古文：后果中焉。明歒之
现代文：后来先帝死了，太子继位，他果然得到了富贵。明歒之
English: Later, the former emperor died, and the crown prince succeeded to the throne, and he did indeed become wealthy.

古文：嘉九年，征北参军明歒之，有一从者，夜眠大魇。
现代文：南朝宋文帝元嘉九年，征讨北方的参军明歒之有一个随从，夜晚睡觉时惊吓得大叫起来。
English: In the ninth year of Emperor Yuanjia of the Southern Song Dynasty, there was an attendant of the Ming Dynasty, who was enlisting to join the army in the north. When he went to bed at night, he was so frightened that he cried out.

古文：歒之自往唤之，顷间不能应。
现代文：明歒之亲自去唤他，半天却不能应声。
English: Akira Shizuku himself went to call him, but he couldn't answer for half a day.

古文：又失其头髻，三日乃寤。
现代文：梳在头上的发髻也不见了。
English: The braided hair on his head was gone.

古文：说云：被三人捉足，一人髻之。
现代文：他三天之后才睡醒。对大家说：我梦见自己被三人按住脚，一人割去发髻。
English: After three days he awoke and said to them, "I had a dream that three men held me by the feet, and one of them cut off my hair.

古文：忽梦见一道人，以丸药与之，如桐子，令以水服之。
现代文：忽然又梦见一位道士，掏出一丸药给我，那药象一颗梧桐子，并让我用水把它服下去。
English: Suddenly, I had another dream about a Taoist monk. He took out a pill for me, which looked like a sycamore, and told me to swallow it with water.

古文：及悟，手中有药，服之遂瘥。
现代文：等到醒了，大家这才看到他手中果然有一丸药，他服下之后病马上就好了。
English: When he woke up, everyone saw that he did indeed have a pill in his hand, and that he felt better immediately after taking it.

古文：刘诞
现代文：刘诞
English: Liu Xing

古文：竟陵刘诞，在广陵，左右直眠，梦人告之曰：官须发为矟旄。
现代文：竟陵太守刘诞带人来到广陵。正当手下人都睡着了的时候，他梦见有人告诉他说，你的头发应该做长矛和旗帜呀。
English: Liu Xing, the abbot of the Great Mausoleum, brought people to Guangling. Just as his subordinates were falling asleep, he dreamed that someone told him, "Your hair should be made into spears and flags."

古文：则觉已失发矣，如此数十人。
现代文：当他醒来时便已经失去了头发。像他这样的还有几十个人。
English: When he woke up, he had lost his hair, like dozens of others.

古文：袁愍孙
现代文：袁愍孙
English: Yuan Shisun

古文：袁愍孙，世祖出为海陵守，梦日堕身上，寻而追还，与机密。
现代文：袁愍孙这个人，在宋太祖时出任海陵郡守。一天，他梦见太阳落到自己身上。太祖很快把他召了回来，让他参与机密。
English: Yuan Shisun was the governor of Hailing County during the reign of Emperor Song. One day, he dreamed that the sun fell on him. Emperor Song quickly called him back to participate in the secret meeting.

古文：刘沙门
现代文：刘沙门
English: Liu Shamen

古文：刘沙门居彭城，病亡。
现代文：刘沙门家住彭城，因病而死。
English: Liu Shamen lived in Pengcheng and died of illness.

古文：妻贫儿幼，遭暴风雨，墙宇破坏。
现代文：撇下孤儿寡母，苦不堪言。一天，下了一场暴风雨，房子遭到严重破坏。
English: One day, there was a storm and the house was badly damaged.

古文：其妻泣拥稚子曰：汝父若在，岂至於此！
现代文：妻子搂着小儿子哭泣着说：你父亲如果还活着，咱们怎么也不致于落到这一步呵！
English: His wife, holding her little son, wept and said, "If your father were still alive, we would never have come to this!"

古文：其夜梦沙门将数十人料理宅舍，明日完矣。
现代文：当夜，她梦见丈夫带领几十人前来修理房子。第二天她醒来一看，那房子果然修理完了。
English: That night, she dreamed that her husband brought dozens of people to repair the house. The next day she woke up and saw that the house had been repaired.

古文：诸仲务
现代文：诸仲务
English: Various middlemen

古文：诸仲务一女显姨，嫁为米元宗妻，产亡于家。
现代文：诸仲务有一个女儿叫显姨，嫁给米元宗为妻，因为生孩子难产死在家中。
English: Zhuzhongwu had a daughter named Xianyi, who married Yimengzong and died at home after giving birth to a stillborn child.

古文：俗闻产亡者，以墨点面。
现代文：老百姓们说，凡因难产而死的女人，都应该在她脸上点上墨汁。
English: People say that any woman who dies in childbirth should have ink smeared on her face.

古文：其母不忍，仲务密自点之，无人见者。
现代文：她的母亲不忍心这样做，诸仲务就悄悄地给她点上，没有让任何人看见。
English: Her mother didn't have the heart to do it, so the officials quietly gave her a mark without letting anyone see it.

古文：元宗为始新县丞。梦妻来上床，分明新白妆面上有墨点。
现代文：后来，米元宗当上了始新县令，梦见妻子来到眼前，分明看见她刚化了妆的脸上有墨点。
English: Later, when Yim Yuen Tsung became the chief of Shixin County, he dreamed that his wife came to his eyes, and he clearly saw that she had just put on makeup and there were ink dots on her face.

古文：孙氏
现代文：孙氏
English: The Sun Dynasty

古文：有孙氏求官，梦双凤集其两拳，以问占者宋董。
现代文：有个姓孙的人总想当官。一天，他梦见一对凤凰落在自己的两只手上。醒来之后，他去问算命先生宋董。
English: A man surnamed Sun always wanted to be an official. One day, he dreamed that a pair of phoenixes landed on his two hands. After waking up, he went to ask the fortune teller Song Dong.

古文：曰：凤凰非梧桐不栖。非竹实不食。
现代文：宋董说：凤凰不是梧桐树不落，不是竹子的种子不吃。
English: Song Dong said: The phoenix is not a sycamore tree that does not fall, not a bamboo seed that does not eat.

古文：卿当大凶，非苴杖，即削杖。
现代文：看来，你要遭大难了。你不是得拿居父丧的苴杖，就得拿居母丧的削杖。
English: Behold, thou shalt be in tribulation, and shalt take, not the staff of mourning for thy father, but the razor of mourning for thy mother.

古文：后孙氏果遭母丧。
现代文：后来，他果然死了母亲。
English: Later, he did indeed die with his mother.

古文：桓誓
现代文：桓誓
English: I swear.

古文：桓誓字明期，居豫章时，梅玄龙为太守，先已病矣，誓往看之。语玄龙云：吾昨夜忽梦见君，着丧衣来迎我。
现代文：桓誓，字明期。他住豫章郡的时候。梅玄龙当太守。一天，梅玄龙在桓誓之前先病倒了，桓誓前去看望他，并对玄龙说：我昨天晚上忽然梦见你身穿丧衣来迎接我。
English: When he lived in Yuanzhang County, Mei Xuanlong was the governor. One day, Mei Xuanlong fell ill before he swore the oath. He went to visit him before he swore the oath and said to Xuanlong, "I suddenly dreamed last night that you came to meet me in mourning clothes."

古文：经数日，复梦如前，云：二十八日当拜。
现代文：过了几天之后，桓誓又作了那样的梦，并梦见梅玄龙说二十八日再相见。
English: A few days later, Kensei had the same dream again, and dreamed that Mei Xuanlong said that they would meet again on the 28th.

古文：二十七日，桓忽中恶，就玄龙索麝香丸。
现代文：二十七日那天，桓誓忽然也病倒了，派人向梅玄龙要麝香丸。
English: On the 27th day, Kensei suddenly fell ill, and sent someone to ask Mei Xuanlong for some fennel pills.

古文：玄龙闻，令作凶具。
现代文：玄龙听说了这件事，便吩咐下人赶紧准备棺材。
English: When Xuanlong heard about this, he ordered his subordinates to quickly prepare the coffin.

古文：二十七日桓亡。二十八日龙卒。
现代文：二十七日桓誓病故，二十八日梅玄龙也死了。
English: On the 27th, Kanzei died of illness, and on the 28th, Mei Xuanlong also died.

古文：张寻
现代文：张寻
English: Zhang Huan

古文：巴西张寻梦庭生一竹，节相似。都为一门。
现代文：巴西郡的张寻梦见院子里长出一棵竹子，那竹子每节都一样长，且长成了一个门形。
English: Zhang Xingmeng from Brazil County saw a bamboo shoot growing in his yard. Each section of the bamboo was the same length and had grown into a door shape.

古文：以问竺法度，云：当暴贵，但不得久矣。
现代文：为此，张寻去请教竺法度，回答说：你能够大富大贵，但却不能长久。
English: For this reason, Zhang went to consult the law and answered: You can be very rich, but not for long.

古文：果然如其所言。
现代文：后来，果然像他说的那样。
English: Later, it turned out to be as he said.

古文：徐祖
现代文：徐祖
English: Xu Zu

古文：嘉兴徐祖幼孤，叔隗养之如所生。
现代文：嘉兴县的徐祖幼年成了孤儿，被叔叔徐隗收养，待他如亲生儿子一样。
English: Xu Zu, from Jiaxing County, was orphaned at a young age and was adopted by his uncle Xu Yao, who treated him like his own son.

古文：隗病，祖营作甚勤。
现代文：忽一日，徐隗病倒了。徐祖跑前跑后更加勤快。
English: Suddenly one day, Xu Yao fell ill. Xu Zu was more diligent before and after running.

古文：是夜，梦二人来云：汝叔应合死也。
现代文：当夜，徐祖梦见二个人对他说：你叔叔应该死了。
English: That night, Xu Zu dreamed that two people said to him: "Your uncle should be dead."

古文：祖叩头祈请哀愍。
现代文：徐祖急忙跪下磕头，祈求免他叔叔一死，样子十分悲伤。
English: Xu Zu hurriedly knelt down and bowed his head, praying that his uncle would not die. He looked very sad.

古文：二人云：念汝如此。为活之。
现代文：那二人说：看在你如此孝顺的份上，那就让他活下去吧。
English: The two said, "For the sake of your filial duty, let him live."

古文：祖觉，叔乃瘥。
现代文：徐祖醒来，他叔叔的病已经好了。
English: When Xu Zu woke up, his uncle's illness had been cured.

古文：桓邈
现代文：桓邈
English: Kanazawa

古文：桓邈为汝南，郡人赍四乌鸭作礼。
现代文：桓邈为汝南郡太守。一天，手下人送来四只黑色的鸭子作礼物。
English: One day, his subordinates brought him four black ducks as a gift.

古文：大儿梦四乌衣人请命。
现代文：当夜，他的大儿子梦见四个穿黑衣服的人请求他救命。
English: That night, his eldest son dreamed of four men dressed in black asking for his help.

古文：觉，忽见鸭将杀，遂救之，买肉以代。
现代文：醒来之后，忽然看见那四只鸭子就要被杀，急忙救了下来，并买来几斤肉顶替。
English: After waking up, he suddenly saw that the four ducks were about to be killed. He quickly rescued them and bought several pounds of meat to replace them.

古文：还梦四人来谢而去。
现代文：事后，他还梦见那四个人前来道谢呢。
English: Afterwards, he dreamed that the four men came to thank him.

古文：周氏婢
现代文：周氏婢
English: Zhou Shihong

古文：陈留周氏婢入山取樵，倦寝。
现代文：陈留县老周家的婢女上山砍柴，因劳累过度便睡着了。
English: The maidservant of the old Zhou family in Chenliu County went up the mountain to cut firewood, but fell asleep due to overwork.

古文：忽梦一女子，坐中谒之曰：吾目中有刺，愿乞拔之。
现代文：忽然，她梦见一个女子坐在面前拜道：我眼睛里有刺，请你帮我拔去吧！
English: Suddenly, she dreamed of a woman sitting in front of her, saying, "I have a thorn in my eye. Please help me remove it!"

古文：及觉，忽见一棺中有髑髅，眼中草生，遂与拔之。
现代文：婢女立刻醒来，忽然看见一口棺材，棺内有具骷髅，头骨眼中已生出草，她当即拔了下来。
English: The maid immediately woke up and suddenly saw a coffin with a skeleton in it. Grass had sprouted in the eyes of the skull, and she immediately pulled it out.

古文：后于路旁得双金指环。
现代文：后来，她在路边拾到了一对金戒指。
English: Later, she found a pair of gold rings on the side of the road.

古文：何敬叔
现代文：何敬叔
English: Uncle He Jing

古文：何敬叔少奉法，作一檀像，未有木。
现代文：何敬叔少年就敬爱佛学，想做一个檀木佛像供起来，却没有木头。
English: He Jingzhu, a young boy, loved Buddhism and wanted to make a sandalwood Buddha statue, but there was no wood.

古文：先梦一沙门纳衣杖锡来云：县后何家桐甚良。
现代文：这时，他梦见一个和尚穿着粗布衣拄着禅杖来说：县城后面何家的梧桐树就很好。
English: At this time, he dreamed of a monk wearing a coarse cloth and holding a Zen stick, saying: How many sycamore trees behind the county seat are good.

古文：觉，如梦求之，果得。
现代文：何敬叔醒来，照梦中的地点去寻找，果然找到了一片梧桐树。
English: When Uncle He Jing woke up, he searched for the place in his dream and found a plane tree.

