古文：尔朱兆，字万仁，荣从子也。
现代文：尔朱兆，字万仁，尔朱荣的侄子。
English: Lzhu Zhao, Zi Wanren, nephew of Lzhu Rong.

古文：少骁猛，善骑射，手格猛兽，蹻捷过人。
现代文：少时骁勇刚猛，善于骑射，徒手与猛兽搏斗，矫捷过人。
English: At a young age, he was brave and strong, good at riding and shooting, fighting with ferocious beasts with his bare hands, and excelling in agility.

古文：数从荣游猎，至于穷岩绝涧人所不能升降者，兆先之。
现代文：几次跟随尔朱荣出猎，到了那些穷岩绝涧人们不知升降的地方，尔朱兆先行开路。
English: Several times he followed Er Zhurong on hunting trips, and when they reached places where people did not know where to go, Er Zhuzhao led the way.

古文：荣以此特加赏爱，任为爪牙。
现代文：尔朱荣因此对他特加褒赏怜爱，任他为身边爪牙。
English: Le Zhu Rong was particularly fond of him, often gave him rewards, and regarded him as a subordinate.

古文：荣曾送台使，见二鹿，乃命兆前，止授二箭，曰： 可取此鹿供今食也。 
现代文：尔朱荣曾经送朝中使者，看见两只鹿，命令尔朱兆上前来，只给他两支箭，说： 射杀这两只鹿以供今天饭食。 
English: Zhu Rong once sent an envoy to North Korea and China. He saw two deer and ordered Zhu Zhao to come forward. He only gave him two arrows and said, "Shoot these two deer for today's meal."

古文：遂停马构火以待之。俄然兆获其一。
现代文：于是停马备火等待二鹿送来，不一会尔朱兆射杀一只。
English: So he stopped his horse to prepare a fire and waited for two deer to be sent, and before long, Zhu Zhao shot one.

古文：荣欲矜夸，使人责兆曰： 何不尽取？ 
现代文：尔朱荣本想自夸一番，派人责备尔朱兆说： 何不尽取？ 
English: Lzhu Rong wanted to boast, so he sent someone to scold Lzhu Zhao, saying, "Why don't you try your best?

古文：杖之五十。
现代文：让人打他五十棍杖。
English: Let him be beaten with fifty rods.

古文：后以军功除平远将军、步兵校尉。
现代文：后来因军功尔朱兆被授予平远将军、步兵校尉。
English: Later, he was awarded the title of General Pingyuan and Infantry Lieutenant Zhu Zhao for his military exploits.

古文：荣之入洛，兆兼前锋都督。
现代文：尔朱荣入洛阳，尔朱兆兼前锋都督。
English: Le Zhu Rong entered Luoyang, and Le Zhu Zhao served as the forward governor.

古文：及孝庄即阼，特除中军将军、金紫光禄大夫，又假骁骑将军、建兴太守。
现代文：等到孝庄帝即位，特授他为中军将军、金紫光禄大夫，又假骁骑将军、建兴太守。
English: When Emperor Xiaozhuang ascended to the throne, he was specially appointed as the general of the Chinese army, the doctor of Jin Zi Guanglu, and the general of the fake cavalry and the governor of Jian Xing.

古文：寻除使持节、车骑将军、武卫将军、左光禄大夫、都督、颍川郡开国公，食邑千二百户。
现代文：不久除任使持节、车骑将军、武卫将军、左光禄大夫、都督、颍川郡开国公，食邑二千户。
English: He was soon removed from his posts as envoy, general of cavalry and cavalry, general of armed guards, doctor of agriculture, governor of the capital, and founding father of the county of Suichuan, with 2,000 households in food villages.

古文：后从上党王天穆讨平邢杲。
现代文：后跟从上党王天穆讨伐平定邢杲。
English: Followed by the top party king, Tianmu, to fight and settle the dispute.

古文：及元颢之屯于河桥，荣遣兆与驾拔胜等自马渚西夜渡数百骑，袭击颢子冠受，擒之。
现代文：等元颢屯军于河桥，尔朱荣派尔朱兆与贺拔胜等从马渚西夜渡数百骑兵，袭击元颢儿子元冠受，擒获了他。
English: Hundreds of cavalrymen, including Yuan Shikun's army in Heqiao, Er Zhu Rong's army, Er Zhu Zhao's army and He Ba Sheng's army, crossed from Mazhu to the west at night, attacked Yuan Shikun's son, Yuan Guanzhu, and captured him.

古文：又进破安丰王延明，颢于是退走。
现代文：又进军打败安丰王元延明，元颢于是退兵而去。
English: He also marched to defeat the Anfeng King Yuan Yanming, and Yuan Xuan then withdrew from the army.

古文：庄帝还宫，论功除散骑常侍、车骑大将军、仪同三司，增邑八百户。
现代文：庄帝还归宫中，论功除任他为散骑常侍、车骑大将军、仪同三司，增加食邑八百户。
English: Zhuang Di also returned to the palace, and on the basis of his meritorious service, he was appointed as a horseback riding attendant, chariot and cavalry general, and the three departments of ceremony and etiquette, increasing the number of restaurants by 800.

古文：为汾州刺史，复增邑一千户。
现代文：为汾州刺史，增食邑一千户。
English: This is a historic event for Zhangzhou, and it will increase the number of households in the county by a thousand.

古文：寻加侍中、骠骑大将军，又增邑五百户。
现代文：不久又加授侍中、骠骑大将军，又增食邑五百户。
English: Soon, he also conferred the titles of Chamberlain and Cavalry General, and increased the number of households to 500.

古文：及尔朱荣死也，兆自汾州率骑据晋阳。
现代文：等到尔朱荣死后，尔朱兆从汾州率领骑兵据占晋阳。
English: After the death of Er Zhu Rong, Er Zhu Zhao led the cavalry from Zhangzhou to occupy Jinyang.

古文：元晖立，授兆大将军，爵为王。
现代文：元晔登基，授尔朱兆大将军，爵位为王。
English: Yuan Shao ascended to the throne, bestowed the title of Zhu Zhaoda General, and became king.

古文：兆与世隆等定谋攻洛，兆遂率众南出，进达太行。
现代文：尔朱兆与尔朱世隆等定计谋取洛阳，尔朱兆于是率军南出。
English: Lzhu Zhao and Lzhu Shilong planned to capture Luoyang, and Lzhu Zhao led the army south.

古文：大都督源子恭下都督史仵龙开垒降兆，子恭退走。
现代文：进军到达太行山，大都督源子恭部下都督史忤龙开营降顺尔朱兆，子恭退军而走。
English: When the army reached Taihang Mountain, the grand governor, Yuan Ziqong, and his subordinate, the governor, Shi Xilong, marched to Shun'er Zhu Zhao, and Ziqong retreated.

古文：兆轻兵倍道从河梁西涉渡，掩袭京邑。
现代文：尔朱兆轻兵兼程从河梁西渡涉黄河，进攻京城。
English: Zhu Zhao's light soldier Kanecheng waded into the Yellow River from the west of the river and attacked the capital.

古文：先是，河边人梦神谓己曰： 尔朱家欲渡河，用尔作氵垒波津令，为之缩水脉。 
现代文：这以前，河边人梦见神人对自己说： 尔朱家想渡过黄河，用你作氵垒波令，为他缩小水脉。 
English: Before this, the man by the river dreamed of the godman and said to himself, "The Zhu family wants to cross the Yellow River, and they want to use you as a barrier to narrow the waterway for them.

古文：月余，梦者死。
现代文：一月以后，梦者死去。
English: After more than a month, the dreamer dies.

古文：及兆至，有行人自言知水浅处，以草往往表插而导道焉。
现代文：等到尔朱兆来到，有个行人自己说他知道水浅的地方，用草表插而作标记。
English: When Lzhu Zhao arrived, a pedestrian said that he knew where the water was shallow and marked it with a straw watch.

古文：忽失其所在。
现代文：忽然那人不见踪影。
English: Suddenly there was no sign of the man.

古文：兆遂策马涉渡。
现代文：尔朱兆于是策马渡河。
English: Le Zhu Zhao then crossed the river on a horse.

古文：是日，暴风鼓怒，黄尘涨天，骑叩宫门，宿卫乃觉。
现代文：这一天，狂风暴起，黄尘遮天，尔朱兆骑兵叩击宫门，宿卫武士才发现大事不妙。
English: On this day, the storm raged, the yellow dust covered the sky, the Zhu Zhao cavalry knocked on the palace gate, and the guards only found out that something was wrong.

古文：弯弓欲射，袍拨弦，矢不得发，一时散走。
现代文：弯弓要射，战袍裹住弓统，箭不能射出，禁卫人员一时散走。
English: He tried to shoot an arrow with a bent bow, but his robe got caught in the bowstring, so he couldn't shoot the arrow. He scattered and ran away.

古文：帝步出云龙门外，为兆骑所絷，幽于永宁佛寺。
现代文：皇帝徒步冲出云龙门外，被尔朱兆骑兵抓住，幽禁在永宁佛寺。
English: The emperor rushed out of the Yunlong Gate on foot, was caught by the Zhu Zhao cavalry, and was imprisoned in the Yongning Buddhist Temple.

古文：兆扑杀皇子，污辱妃嫔，纵兵虏掠。
现代文：尔朱兆扑杀皇子，污辱妃嫔，任士兵抢劫掠夺。
English: Er Zhu Zhao killed the prince, insulted the concubine, and allowed the soldiers to rob and plunder.

古文：停洛旬余，先令卫送庄帝于晋阳。
现代文：在洛阳停军十多天，先命令人把庄帝送到晋阳。
English: The army halted in Luoyang for more than ten days, and it was ordered to send Zhuangdi to Jinyang.

古文：兆后于河梁监阅财货，遂害帝于五级寺。
现代文：尔朱兆断后在河梁监查抢来的财物，又在三级寺害死庄帝。
English: After he broke up with Zhu Zhao, he inspected the stolen property in He Liang and killed Zhuang Di in the Third Class Temple.

古文：初，兆将向洛也，遣使招齐献武王，欲与同举。
现代文：当初，尔朱兆准备向洛阳进发，派使者请齐献武王，想与他共同采取行动。
English: At first, Er Zhu Zhao was preparing to march to Luoyang, and sent an envoy to invite King Wu, hoping to take action together with him.

古文：王时为晋州刺史，谓长史孙腾曰： 臣而伐君，其逆已甚。
现代文：齐献武王当时任晋州刺史，对长史孙腾说： 作为臣子而讨伐君主，其叛逆之罪就已很严重了。
English: At that time, Qi Xianwu Wang was the chief historian of Jinzhou, and he said to the chief historian Sun Teng: As a vassal who fights against the monarch, his crime of treason is already very serious.

古文：我今不往，彼必致恨。
现代文：我如今天不去，他必然忌恨在心。
English: If I don't go today, he's bound to hold a grudge.

古文：卿可往申吾意，但云山蜀未平，今方攻讨，不可委之而去，致有后忧。
现代文：卿你可前去申述我的意思，就说山蜀未平，今天正要攻讨，不可放下此处而前往，导致生出后忧。
English: Sir, you can go ahead and explain what I mean, just say that the mountain Shu Weiping, today is about to be attacked, you can not leave this place and go there, leading to worries.

古文：定蜀之日，当隔河为掎角之势。
现代文：平定蜀地之后，当隔河与他成犄角之势。
English: After the pacification of Shu, when across the river with him into a conflict situation.

古文：如此报之，以观其趣。 
现代文：就这样跟他解释，看他有什么反应。 
English: Explain it to him like this and see how he reacts.

古文：腾乃诣兆，及之于并州大谷，具申王言。
现代文：孙腾于是到尔朱兆那里去，在并州大谷找到尔朱兆，向他说了这番话。
English: Sun Teng then went to Lzhu Zhao, found Lzhu Zhao in the Bozhou Valley, and told him these words.

古文：兆殊不悦，且曰： 还白高兄，弟有吉梦，今段之行，必有克获。 
现代文：尔朱兆很不高兴，说： 回去后告诉高兄，弟我有吉祥之梦，今天此番必定会有收获。 
English: Lzhu Zhao was very unhappy and said: "When I get back, I will tell my elder brother and younger brother that I had an auspicious dream, and this time there will definitely be a harvest."

古文：腾问： 王梦如何？ 
现代文：孙腾问： 王梦如何？ 
English: Sun Teng asked: How is Wang Meng?

古文：兆答曰： 吾比梦吾亡父登一高堆，堆旁之地悉皆耕熟，唯有马蔺草株往往犹在。
现代文：尔朱兆回答说： 我前番梦见我亡故伯父登上一高堆，堆旁之地全都耕熟，只有马兰草株往往还在。
English: "The last dream I had, I saw my late uncle standing on top of a high mound. The land around the mound was all cultivated, but the marram grass was often still there.

古文：吾父问言何故不拔，左右云坚不可去。
现代文：吾伯父问为什么不拔掉，左右人说坚不可除。
English: My uncle asked why they didn't pull it out, but they said they couldn't remove it.

古文：吾父顾我，令下拔之，吾手所至，无不尽出。
现代文：我伯父看着我令我拔草，我手之所至，无不尽拔。
English: My uncle looked at me and told me to pull weeds, and I pulled as much as I could.

古文：以此而言，往必有利。 
现代文：由此而论，此番前往必定有利。 
English: From this point of view, this trip to Beijing will surely be a success.

古文：腾还具报，王曰： 兆等猖狂，举兵犯上，吾今不同，猜忌成矣，势不可反事尔朱。
现代文：孙腾回去汇报了全部情况，齐献武王说： 尔朱兆等猖狂，举兵犯上，我今天不愿参与，便惹起猜忌，看样子是不能和尔朱氏合作下去了。
English: Sun Teng went back and reported the whole situation. Qi Xianwu Wang said: "Er Zhu Zhao and others are rampant, raising troops and committing crimes. I don't want to participate today, which arouses suspicion. It looks like I can't continue to cooperate with Er Zhu."

古文：今也南行，天子列兵河上，兆进不能渡，退不得还。
现代文：而今南行，天子在黄河边列兵待之，尔朱兆进不能渡，退不能还。
English: And now southbound, Tianzi is waiting for the soldiers on the edge of the Yellow River, and Zhu Zhao can't cross and can't return.

古文：吾乘山东下，出其不意，此徒可以一举而擒。 
现代文：我从太行山东而下，出其不意，这帮家伙便可一举擒获了。 
English: I went down from Taihang to Shandong, and to my surprise, these guys were captured in one fell swoop.

古文：俄而兆克京师，孝庄幽絷。
现代文：没多久，尔朱兆攻克京城，孝庄帝被幽禁。
English: Not long after, Zhu Zhao conquered the capital, and Emperor Xiaozhuang was imprisoned.

古文：都督尉景从兆南行，以书报王。
现代文：都督尉景跟随尔朱兆南行，写信告诉齐献武王。
English: Governor Lieutenant Jing followed Er Zhu Zhao to the south and wrote a letter to King Qi Xianwu.

古文：王得书大惊，召腾示之曰： 卿可驰驿诣兆，示以谒贺，密观天子今在何处，为随兆军府，为别送晋阳。
现代文：王得到书信大惊，召见孙腾给他信看说： 卿可驰马到尔朱兆那里去，对他表示祝贺，秘密察访天子现在何处，是随行尔朱兆军府，还是另外送往晋阳。
English: The king was shocked to receive the letter and summoned Sun Teng to show him the letter, saying, "Sir, you can ride your horse to Lzhu Zhao's place, congratulate him, and secretly visit where Tianzi is now, whether you accompany Lzhu Zhao's military headquarters or send him to Jinyang separately.

古文：脱其送并，卿宜驰报，吾当于路邀迎，唱大义于天下。 
现代文：假如被送到并州，卿当驰马来报，我当在路上迎接，倡大义于天下。 
English: If I were to be sent to Bozhou, my lord should ride a horse to report, I should meet him on the road, and advocate the great cause to the world.

古文：腾晨夜驱驰，已遇帝于中路。
现代文：孙腾日夜驰行，在半路上遇到庄帝。
English: Sun Teng traveled day and night and met Zhuang Di halfway.

古文：王时率骑东转，闻帝已渡，于是西还。
现代文：王当时率领骑兵东转，听说庄帝已渡过黄河，于是西还。
English: At that time, Wang led the cavalry to the east, and heard that Zhuangdi had crossed the Yellow River, so he returned to the west.

古文：仍与兆书，陈其福祸，不宜害天子，受恶名。
现代文：他仍给尔朱兆写信，陈说祸福，说不宜伤害天子，蒙受恶名。
English: He still wrote a letter to Er Zhuzhao, saying that it was bad luck, that it was not appropriate to harm the heavenly son, and that he would receive a bad name.

古文：兆怒不纳，帝遂暴崩。
现代文：尔朱兆大怒，不接受他的意见，庄帝于是被害。
English: Zhu Zhao was furious and did not accept his opinion, and Zhuang Di was killed.

古文：初，荣既死，庄帝诏河西人纥豆陵步蕃等令袭秀容。
现代文：当初，尔朱荣死后，庄帝下诏令河西人纥豆陵、步蕃等袭击秀容。
English: At first, after the death of Er Zhu Rong, Emperor Zhuang issued a decree ordering the people of Hexi to attack Xiurong's mausoleum and tomb.

古文：兆入洛后，步蕃兵势甚盛，南逼晋阳，兆所以不暇留洛，回师御之。
现代文：尔朱兆进入洛阳之后，步蕃兵势很强大，南逼晋阳，尔朱兆所以无暇久留洛阳，是要回师抵御他们。
English: After Lzhu Zhao entered Luoyang, the foot soldiers were very strong, and they pushed south to Jinyang. Therefore, Lzhu Zhao did not have time to stay in Luoyang for a long time. He wanted to return to the division to resist them.

古文：兆虽骁果，本无策略，频为步蕃所败，于是部勒士马，谋出山东。
现代文：尔朱兆虽然骁勇果敢，但没有计谋策略，频频被步蕃打败，于是统领兵马，谋求东出太行山。
English: Although Zhu Zhao was courageous and daring, he did not have a strategy. He was frequently defeated by the foot soldiers, so he led the soldiers and horses to seek the east out of Taihang Mountain.

古文：令人频征献武王于晋州，乃分三州六镇之人，令王统领。
现代文：令人频频到晋州征召齐献武王，又分出三州六镇之人，让王统领。
English: People were frequently summoned to Jinzhou to pay homage to Wang, and people from six towns in three prefectures were selected for Wang to lead.

古文：既分兵别营，乃引兵南出，以避步蕃之锐。
现代文：既分兵别营，于是又引兵向南出发，以避步蕃锐气。
English: As soon as the battalions were separated, the leading soldiers set out to the south to avoid the enemy and keep their spirits up.

古文：步蕃至于乐平郡，王与兆还讨破之，斩步蕃于秀容之石鼓山，其众退走。
现代文：步蕃到了乐平郡，齐献武王与尔朱兆一起征讨打败敌人，在秀容的石鼓山斩杀步蕃，他的兵马退逃。
English: Bokun arrived in Leping County. King Wu and Er Zhuzhao jointly fought and defeated the enemy. Bokun was killed in the beautiful Shigu Mountain, and his soldiers and horses fled.

古文：兆将数十骑诣王，通夜宴饮。
现代文：尔朱兆的数十名将领到齐献武王那里，通夜喝酒。
English: Dozens of Zhu Zhao's generals were led to Qi Xianwu's place for a night of drinking.

古文：后还营招王，王知兆难信，未能显示，将欲诣之。
现代文：后来还营招王，王知道尔朱兆难以信任，但也没有显示出来，准备前往。
English: Later, the camp also recruited Wang. Wang knew that it was difficult to trust Lzhu Zhao, but he did not show it and was ready to go.

古文：临上马，长史孙腾牵衣而止。
现代文：临上马，长史孙腾牵住王的衣服制止了他。
English: Once on the horse, the elder Shisun Teng grabbed Wang's clothes to stop him.

古文：兆乃隔水责骂腾等。于是各去，王还自襄垣东出，兆归晋阳。
现代文：尔朱兆于是隔着黄河责骂孙腾等人，这样两军各自散去，王从襄垣东出还营，尔朱兆回晋阳。
English: So, across the Yellow River, Er Shuzhao scolded Sun Teng and others, and the two armies dispersed separately. Wang returned to the camp from the east of Xiangyuan, and Er Shuzhao returned to Jinyang.

古文：及前废帝立，授兆使持节、侍中、都督中外诸军事、柱国大将军、领军将军、领左右、并州刺史、兼录尚书事、大行台。
现代文：等到前废帝登基，授尔朱兆为使持节、侍中、都督中外诸军事、柱国大将军、领军将军、领左右、并州刺史、兼钅录尚书事、大行台。
English: By the time the former emperor ascended to the throne, Zhu Zhao had been appointed as the envoy of the festival, the attendant, the governor of the military in and out of the military, the general of the pillar country, the leading general, the leader of the left and right, the governor of the state, the secretary of the book, and the general of the parade.

古文：又以兆为天柱大将军，兆谓人曰： 此是叔父终官，我何敢受？ 
现代文：又欲命其为天柱大将军，尔朱兆对人说： 这是叔父临终时的官职，我何敢受。 
English: He also wanted to appoint him as the general of Tianzhu, and Er Zhu Zhao said to the man: This is the official position of my uncle on his deathbed, how dare I.

古文：遂固辞不拜。
现代文：于是坚决推辞不接受。
English: As a result, the firm refusal was not accepted.

古文：寻加都督十州诸军事，世袭并州刺史。
现代文：不久加授都督十州诸军事，世袭并州刺史。
English: Soon, he was appointed as the military governor of ten states, hereditary and state history.

古文：齐献武王之克殷州也，兆与仲远、度律约共讨之。
现代文：齐武献王攻克殷州后，尔朱兆与尔朱仲远、尔朱度律约定共同讨伐他。
English: After Qi Wu Xianwang conquered Yinzhou, Lzhu Zhao, Lzhu Zhongyuan and Lzhu Duru agreed to jointly fight him.

古文：仲远、度律次于阳平，北出井陉，屯于广阿，众号十万。
现代文：度律、仲远驻军阳平，尔朱兆兵出井陉，屯军广阿，号称十万。
English: Doru, Zhongyuan and Yangping garrisons, Zhuzhao and Guang'a garrisons, are known as the hundred thousand.

古文：王广纵反间，或云世隆兄弟谋欲害兆，复言兆与王同图仲远等，于是两不相信，各致猜疑，徘徊不进。
现代文：齐献武王广布反间计策，或说尔朱世隆兄弟谋划想要加害尔朱兆，又说尔朱兆与王同谋图取仲远等人，于是他们彼此两不相信，各生猜疑，徘徊不进。
English: Qi Xianwu and Wang Wuhong had plotted against each other, or Zhu Shilong's brothers had plotted to harm Zhu Zhao, and Zhu Zhao and Wang had plotted to get close to each other. As a result, they did not trust each other, were suspicious of each other, and did not get along.

古文：仲远等频使斛斯椿、贺拔胜往喻之，兆轻骑三百来就仲远，同坐幕下。
现代文：尔朱仲远频频派遣斛斯椿、贺拔胜前去申述，尔朱兆带轻骑三百到仲远帐中，同室坐定。
English: Zhu Zhongyuan frequently dispatched Zhu Shizhuan and He Baxian to appeal. Zhu Zhao rode three hundred meters to Zhongyuan's account and sat in the same room.

古文：兆性粗犷，意色不平，手舞马鞭，长啸凝望，深疑仲远等有变，遂趋出驰还。
现代文：尔朱兆性格粗犷，忿忿不平，手舞马鞭，长啸凝望，深深怀疑仲远等有变，于是奔出驰马还军。
English: He was rough by nature, his face was uneven, he waved a whip in his hands and stared with a long sigh, but fearing that there would be other changes, he soon got on his horse and left.

古文：仲远遣椿、腾等追而晓譬，兆遂拘缚。将还，经日放遣。
现代文：仲远派椿、胜等追上他说明情况，尔朱兆于是拘捕二人带回营中，过了一天才放还。
English: Zhongyuan sent Tsubaki, Sheng and others to catch up with him to explain the situation. Er Zhuzhao then arrested the two men and took them back to the camp. They were not released until a day later.

古文：仲远等于是奔退。
现代文：仲远等人于是奔退而去。
English: They were not released until a day later, at which point Nakayama and the others led the troops away.

古文：王乃进击兆，兆军大败。
现代文：齐献武王于是进军打击尔朱兆，尔朱兆军队大败。
English: King Qi Xianwu then marched to fight against Lzhu Zhao, and Lzhu Zhao's army was soundly defeated.

古文：兆与仲远、度律遂相疑阻，久而不和。
现代文：尔朱兆与仲远、度律从此相互猜疑，很长时间都不和。
English: He and his distant companion, Du Ritsu, were suspicious of each other and had a long-term falling out.

古文：世隆请前废帝纳兆女为后，兆乃大喜。
现代文：尔朱世隆请前废帝娶尔朱兆的女儿为皇后，尔朱兆大为高兴。
English: Lzhu Shilong asked the former deposed emperor to marry Lzhu Zhao's daughter as his empress. Lzhu Zhao was delighted.

古文：世隆厚礼喻兆赴洛，深示卑下，随其所为，无敢违者。
现代文：尔朱世隆以厚礼通知尔朱兆赴洛阳，深示卑下，随其所为，无人敢违逆。
English: Lr Zhu Shilong informed Lr Zhu Zhao to go to Luoyang with great courtesy, showing deep humility. No one dared to disobey him.

古文：兆与天光、度律更自信约，然后大会于韩陵山。
现代文：尔朱兆与尔朱天光、尔朱度律更自相互约定，然后与齐献武王在韩陵山大战。
English: Lzhu Zhao made a mutual agreement with Lzhu Tianguang and Lzhu DuLu, and then fought with Qi Xianwu Wang in Mount Hanling.

古文：战败，复奔晋阳，遂大掠并州城内。
现代文：战败，尔朱兆又奔晋阳，于是大掠并州城内财物民众。
English: Defeated, Er Zhu Zhao again rushed to Jinyang, whereupon he carried out a large-scale looting of the people's property in Jianzhou.

古文：献武王自鄴进讨之，兆遂走于秀容。
现代文：齐献武王从邺城出发讨伐他们，尔朱兆于是逃往秀容而去。
English: King Qi Xianwu set out from Lucheng to fight them, and Er Zhu Zhao fled to Xiurong.

古文：王又追击，度赤洪岭，破之，众并降散。
现代文：王又追击，越过赤洪岭，破之，尔朱兆部下全都散降而去。
English: Wang also chased, crossed the Chahong Ridge, broke it, and all the subordinates of Lzhu Zhao scattered and left.

古文：兆窜于穷山，杀所乘马，自缢于树。
现代文：尔朱兆逃窜于穷山之中，杀了自己乘坐的马，自己在树上吊死了。
English: He fled to the mountains, killed the horse he was riding and hanged himself from a tree.

古文：王收而葬之。
现代文：齐献武王收拾他的尸体葬了。
English: King Qi Xianwu collected his body and buried it.

古文：兆果于战斗，每有征伐，常居锋首，当时诸将伏其材力。
现代文：尔朱兆打起战来很果敢，每有征伐，经常位处前锋，当时众将都佩服他的勇力。
English: Lzhu Zhao was very brave when he started the war. Whenever there was a campaign, he was often at the front. At that time, the generals all admired his courage.

古文：后与天光等于韩陵战败，南走东郡，仍奔萧衍，死于江南。
现代文：然而他却粗俗少智，没有将领之才。尔朱荣虽然以其胆量为奇，但经常说： 尔朱兆最多只能领三千骑兵，多了也就乱了。 
English: However, he was vulgar and unintelligent, and lacked the ability to be a general. Although Le Zhu Rong was surprised by his courage, he often said: Le Zhu Zhao can only lead a maximum of three thousand cavalry, and if there are more, there will be chaos.

古文：仲远弟世隆，字荣宗。
现代文：尔朱仲远弟弟尔朱世隆，字荣宗。
English: Zhu Zhongyuan's younger brother Zhu Shilong, also known as Rongzong.

古文：肃宗末，为直斋。
现代文：肃宗末年，任直斋。
English: In the last years of Su Zong's life, he was appointed to the post of Naosa.

古文：转直寝，后兼直阁，加前将军。
现代文：转任直寝，后来兼任直尔，加授前将军。
English: He was transferred to direct sleeping, and later concurrently served as Naur, and was awarded the title of former general.

古文：尔朱荣表请入朝，灵太后恶之，令世隆诣晋阳慰喻荣，荣因欲留之。
现代文：尔朱荣上表请求入朝，灵太后很厌恶，命令尔朱世隆到晋阳慰喻尔朱荣，尔朱荣因此想留住他。
English: Lr Zhu Rong requested to enter the imperial court at the table. The Dowager Empress was disgusted and ordered Lr Zhu Shilong to go to Jinyang to console Lr Zhu Rong. Lr Zhu Rong therefore wanted to keep him.

古文：世隆曰： 朝廷疑兄，故令世隆来，今若遂住，便有内备，非计之善者。 
现代文：世隆说： 朝廷怀疑兄，所以让世隆来，现在如果停住不走，朝廷便有内备，这并不是上策。 
English: Shilong said, "The court is suspicious of my brother, so let Shilong come. If he doesn't leave now, the court will have internal reserves. This is not the best strategy."

古文：荣乃遣之。
现代文：尔朱荣只好让他回到朝中。
English: Le Zhu Rong had no choice but to let him return to the court.

古文：荣举兵南出，世隆遂遁走，会荣于上党。
现代文：尔朱荣举兵南进，尔朱世隆于是逃走，在上党与尔朱荣相会。
English: Lr Zhu Rong raised an army and marched south. Lr Zhu Shilong then fled and met with Lr Zhu Rong at Shangdang.

古文：建义初，除给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：建义初年，朝廷除任其为给事黄门侍郎。
English: In the first year of Jianyi, the imperial court appointed him as the attendant of the Yellow Gate.

古文：庄帝即位，乃特除侍中、领军将军、左卫将军、领左右、肆州大中正，封乐平郡开国公，食邑一千二百户。
现代文：庄帝即位，又特除侍中、领军将军、左卫将军、领左右、肆州大中正，封乐平郡开国公，食邑一千二百户。
English: Emperor Zhuang ascended to the throne, and specially removed the attendants, the leading generals, the left and right generals, the leaders of the left and right, the high school students of Wuzhou University, and the founding father of Leping County, with 1,200 households.

古文：又除车骑将军、兼领军，俄授左光禄大夫、兼尚书右仆射，寻即真。
现代文：又被除授为车骑将军、兼领军，不久又授左光禄大夫、兼尚书右仆射，不久即真。
English: He was also awarded the title of General of Chariots and Cavalry, concurrently leading the army, and soon he was also awarded the title of Doctor of the Left Hand and the Doctor of the Right Hand, concurrently being awarded the title of General of Chariots and Cavalry, concurrently leading the army, and soon he was awarded the title of Doctor of the Left Hand and the Doctor of the Right Hand.

古文：元颢逼大梁，诏假议同三司、前军都督，镇虎牢。
现代文：元颢兵逼大梁，帝诏假他为仪同三司、前军都督，镇守虎牢关。
English: Yuan Shao's soldiers forced the girders, and the emperor decreed that he would be the ceremonial third secretary, the former military governor, and the town guard tiger.

古文：世隆不关世事，无将帅之略。
现代文：尔朱世隆不问世事，没有将帅大略。
English: Le Zhu Shilong did not care about the world, and did not try to be handsome.

古文：颢既克荥阳，擒行台阳回，世隆惧而遁还。
现代文：元颢克定荥阳，擒捉行台杨昱，尔朱世隆害怕不已便逃回来了。
English: Yuan Xuan was determined to capture Xiangyang, and Yang Xuan was determined to capture Xiangyang. Zhu Shilong was so scared that he fled back.

古文：庄帝仓卒北巡，世隆之罪也。
现代文：庄帝仓猝北巡，是尔朱世隆的罪过。
English: It was Zhu Shilong's fault that Zhu Di Cang made a sudden northern tour.

古文：驾在河内，假骠骑大将军、行台右仆射、都督相州诸军事、相州刺史、当州都督。
现代文：帝驾在河内，假他为骠骑大将军、行台右仆射、都督相州诸军事、相州刺史、当州都督。
English: The emperor is in Hanoi, pretending to be a general on horseback, marching to the right, shooting arrows, the military governor of the province, the military governor of the province, and the governor of the province.

古文：及车驾还宫，除骠骑大将军、尚书左仆射，摄选，左右厢出入。
现代文：等到皇帝车驾还宫，尔朱世隆被除授骠骑大将军、尚书左仆射，摄管选官事宜，左右厢出入。
English: By the time the emperor drove back to the palace, Er Zhu Shilong had been stripped of the title of General of Cavalry, Shang Shuxu's left-hand man shot, and his left and right carriages removed.

古文：又以停年格取士，颇为猥滞所称。
现代文：又按停年格取士，颇为滞留之人所称赞。
English: He was also awarded the title of Kettori in the year of his retirement, which was highly praised by those who stayed behind.

古文：又请解侍中，诏加散骑常侍。
现代文：又请求解除侍中之职，帝诏加散骑常侍。
English: He also requested to be relieved of his duties as an equerry, and the emperor decreed that the equerry be removed.

古文：庄帝之将图尔朱荣也，或有榜世隆门以陈其状者，世隆封以呈荣，劝其不入。
现代文：庄帝准备图取尔朱荣，有人在世隆门前陈说这个情况，世隆封书以启尔朱荣，劝他不要入京。
English: Zhuangdi was preparing to capture Zhu Rong. Someone came to the gate of Shilong to explain the situation. Shilong sealed a letter with Zhu Rong and advised him not to enter Beijing.

古文：荣自恃威强，不以为意，遂手毁密书，唾地曰： 世隆无胆，谁敢生心！ 
现代文：尔朱荣自恃威强，并不在意，于是他手毁密信，丢在地上，唾啐说： 尔朱世隆没有胆量，谁敢生出异心！ 
English: Le Zhurong considered himself powerful and did not care, so he destroyed the secret letter with his hand and threw it on the ground, saying, "Le Zhurong does not have the courage, who dares to have a different heart!

古文：及荣死，世隆奉荣妻，烧西阳门率众夜走，北攻河桥，杀武卫将军奚毅，率众还战大夏门外。
现代文：等到尔朱荣死，尔朱世隆奉携尔朱荣妻，烧西阳门率部夜逃，北攻河桥，杀了武卫将军奚毅，率部还战大夏门外。
English: When Er Zhu Rong died, Er Zhu Shilong took Er Zhu Rong as his wife, burned the Xiyang Gate and led his troops to flee at night, attacked the river bridge to the north, killed Wuwei General Zou Yi, and led his troops to fight outside the Summer Gate.

古文：朝野震惧，忧在不测。
现代文：朝野人士震动害怕，担心会遭不测。
English: Those in the government and opposition are afraid of the tremors, fearing that something unexpected will happen.

古文：庄帝遣前华阳太守段育慰喻，世隆斩之以徇。
现代文：庄帝派前华阳太守段育慰问，世隆斩了他以殉尔朱荣。
English: Emperor Zhuang sent condolences to the former Huayang governor Duan Yu, and Shilong executed him with the martyrdom of Zhu Rong.

古文：会李苗烧绝河梁，世隆乃北遁。
现代文：逢李苗烧断河梁，世隆于是北逃。
English: When Li Miao burned down the river, Shilong fled north.

古文：建州刺史陆希质闭城拒守，世隆攻克之，尽杀城人以肆其忿。
现代文：建州刺史陆希质闭城抵抗，尔朱世隆攻克下来，杀尽城中人口以发泄愤怒。
English: Jianzhou was besieged and besieged and besieged and besieged and besieged and besieged and besieged and besieged and besieged.

古文：及至长子，与度律等共推长广王晔为主，晔以世隆为开府仪同三司、尚书令、乐平郡王，加太傅，行司州牧，增邑五千户。
现代文：等到了长子，与尔朱度律等共同推举长广王元晔为主，元晔任世隆为开府仪同三司、尚书令、乐平郡王，加授太傅，行司州牧，增加食邑五千户。
English: When the eldest son was born, he and Le Zhu Du Lu and others jointly nominated the chief Guang Wang, Yuan Shilong, as the main. Yuan Shilong appointed Shilong as the third secretary of Kaifu Yi Tong, the third secretary of Shang Shuling, the third secretary of Leping County, the second secretary of Taifu, and the third secretary of Shuzhou Maki, increasing the number of food villages by five thousand.

古文：先赴京师，会兆于河阳。
现代文：他先赴京城，在河阳与尔朱兆会合。
English: He first went to Beijing and met with Lzhu Zhao in Heyang.

古文：兆既平京邑，自以为功，让世隆曰： 叔父在朝多时，耳目应广，如何不知不闻，令天柱受祸！ 
现代文：尔朱兆攻下京城，认为是自己一人的功劳，讥刺世隆说： 叔父在朝多时，耳目应该很广，怎么竟一点风声也不知道，以致天柱遭受灾祸！ 
English: Lzhu Zhao captured the capital and considered it to be his own achievement. He mocked Shilong and said, "My uncle was in the imperial court for a long time, his ears and eyes should have been very wide, how could he not know a single rumor, so that Tianzhu suffered a calamity!

古文：按剑瞋目，声色甚厉。
现代文：按剑尔目，声色俱厉。
English: When Erqin Rongzhao spoke, his hand pressed the sword, his eyes were angry and his voice was harsh.

古文：世隆逊辞拜谢，然后得已。
现代文：尔朱世隆小心措辞拜谢，然后才算了结此事。
English: Le Zhu Shilong carefully phrased his thanks, and then settled the matter.

古文：世隆深恨之。
现代文：尔朱世隆深深怀恨。
English: Le Zhu Shilong held a deep grudge.

古文：时仲远亦自滑台入京，世隆与兄弟密谋，以元晔疏远，欲推立前废帝。
现代文：当时尔朱仲远也从滑台入京，尔朱世隆与兄密谋，因为元晔与自己关系疏远，打算立前废帝。
English: At that time, Er Zhu Zhongyuan also entered Beijing from the slide, and Er Zhu Shilong conspired with his brother, because Yuan Shao was estranged from himself, and planned to depose the emperor.

古文：而尔朱度律意在宝炬，乃曰： 广陵不言，何以主天下？ 
现代文：而尔朱度律却意在宝炬，于是说： 广陵不能说话，那拿什么统治天下？ 
English: But Er Zhudu Lu meant the torch, so he said: Guangling can't speak, so what's the best way to rule the world?

古文：世隆兄彦伯密相敦喻，乃与度律同往龙花佛寺观之，后知能语，遂行废立。
现代文：尔朱世隆兄彦伯暗记在心，便与尔朱度律一同到龙花佛寺观看广陵，后来知道他能说话，于是立了前废帝。
English: Er Zhu Shilong's elder brother Yanbo memorized it in his heart, so he and Er Zhu Duru went to Longhua Buddha Temple to see the Guangling. Later, he knew that he could speak, so he set up the former emperor.

古文：初，世隆之为仆射，自忧不了，乃取尚书文簿在家省阅。
现代文：当初，尔朱世隆任仆射，自己担心胜任不了，于是拿来尚书文簿在家省阅。
English: At first, Er Zhu Shilong was in charge of shooting, and he was worried that he would not be able to do it, so he took the Shang book to study at home.

古文：性聪解，积十余日，然后视事。
现代文：他天性聪颖捷达，看了十多天后，正式处理公务。
English: After more than ten days of watching Jetta, who is naturally intelligent, he officially took up his duties.

古文：又畏尔朱荣威，深自克勉，留心几案，傍接宾客，遂有解了之名。
现代文：又害怕尔朱荣的威势，深深勉励自己，留心案牍，傍接宾客，于是有勤于公务的名声。
English: He was also afraid of the power of Er Zhu Rong, encouraged himself deeply, paid attention to the case, and received guests, so he had the reputation of being diligent in his official duties.

古文：荣死之后，无所顾惮。
现代文：尔朱荣死后，便无所顾忌惧怕。
English: After the death of Er Zhu Rong, he had no scruples.

古文：及为尚书令，常使尚书郎宋游道、邢昕在其宅视事，东西别坐，受纳诉讼，称命施行。
现代文：等到任尚书令，经常让尚书郎宋游道、邢昕在自己家里处理公务，二人东西坐定，世隆受纳诉讼，二人得命施行。
English: When he was appointed Shang Shuling, he often let Shang Shulang, Song Youdao, and Zou handle official business in their own homes. The two sat down together, Shilong accepted the lawsuit, and the two were ordered to carry it out.

古文：其专恣如此。
现代文：其专横恣肆如此之盛。
English: Its high-handedness and arbitrariness are so prevalent.

古文：既总朝政，生杀自由，公行淫佚，无复畏避，信任群小，随其与夺。
现代文：既总揽朝政，生与杀任他随心所欲，公开淫逸不端，无所回避，信任一群小人，随他们胡作非为。
English: Now that he is in charge of the government, he can live and die as he pleases, openly indulge in lewdness and debauchery, avoid nothing, trust a group of villains, and act as they please.

古文：又欲收军人之意，加泛除授，皆以将军而兼散职，督将兵吏无虚号者。
现代文：又想收买军人之心，肆滥授予他们官职，都以将军而兼散职，从督将到兵吏人无虚号。
English: He also wanted to buy the hearts of soldiers, and gave them official positions without restraint. They were all appointed as generals, but had part-time jobs, and everyone from the commander-in-chief to the military officer had a good name.

古文：自此五等大夫，遂致猥滥，又无员限，天下贱之。
现代文：从此五等大夫，便致猥亵粗滥，又无员额限制。
English: Since then, fifth-class doctors have been treated indecently and crudely, and there are no post restrictions.

古文：武定中，齐文襄奏皆罢，于是始革其弊。
现代文：武定年间，齐文襄奏启都应罢免废弃他那一套，从此才革除其弊病。
English: During the Wuding era, Qibun Xiangso Qidu should remove and abolish his system, and only then eliminate its ills.

古文：世隆兄弟群从，各拥强兵，割剥四海，极其暴虐。
现代文：尔朱世隆兄弟群从，各拥强兵，侵夺四海，极其暴虐。
English: The Zhu Shilong brothers, each with a strong army, invaded and conquered the four seas, and were extremely violent.

古文：奸谄蛆酷多见信用，温良名士罕预腹心，于是天下之人莫不厌毒。
现代文：奸谄残酷之人多见信用，温良名士罕知其心。于是天下之人无不对他们恨之入骨。
English: Treacherous and cruel people are often trusted, and gentle celebrities rarely know their hearts. Therefore, people all over the world hate them to the bone.

古文：世隆寻让太傅，改授太保，又固辞，前废帝特置仪同三师之官，次上公之下，以世隆为之。
现代文：尔朱世隆不久辞让了太傅，朝廷改授太保，又坚决推辞，前废帝特别置设仪同三师之官，位处上公之下，让世隆充任。
English: Er Zhu Shilong soon resigned from the position of Taifu, and the imperial court awarded him the position of Taibao, but he firmly refused. The former deposed emperor specially set up an official with three divisions, and placed him under Shangguan, and allowed Shilong to fill the position.

古文：赠其父买珍使持节、侍中、相国、录尚书事、都督定相青齐济五州诸军事、大司马、定州刺史。
现代文：赠其父尔朱买珍使持节，侍中，相国，录尚书事，都督定、相、青、齐、济五州诸军事，大司马，定州刺史。
English: He presented his father, Lzhu Mai Zhen, with the following titles: Grand Marshal, Chamberlain, Father of the Nation, Recorder of the Year, Military Governor of the Five Provinces of Dadu, Dadu, Qing, Qi, and Jie, Grand Master of the Horse, and Historian of the State of Dingzhou.

古文：及齐献武王起义兵，仲远、度律等愚戆恃强，不以为虑，而世隆独深忧恐。
现代文：等到齐献武王起义兵，尔朱仲远、尔朱度律等愚陋憨呆，依恃势强不挂于怀，而尔朱世隆独自深深忧恐。
English: When the King Wu's insurgents were sacrificed en masse, Er Zhu Zhongyuan, Er Zhu DuLu, and others were so stupid and stupid that they did not care about whether they were strong or weak, while Er Zhu Shilong was deeply worried.

古文：及天光战败，世隆请出收兵，前废帝不许。
现代文：及尔朱天光战败，尔朱世隆请出朝收兵，前废帝不同意。
English: When Zhu Tianguang was defeated, Zhu Shilong invited him to go to the North to collect troops, but the former emperor did not agree.

古文：世隆令其外兵参军阳叔渊单骑驰赴北中，简阅败众，以次内之。
现代文：尔朱世隆命令其外兵参军阳叔渊单骑驰赴北中，检阅败兵，依次接纳了他们。
English: Er Zhu Shilong ordered his foreign soldiers to join the army, and Yang Shuyuan rode alone to the North Middle School to inspect the defeated soldiers and accepted them in turn.

古文：而斛斯椿未得入城，诡说叔渊曰： 天光部下皆是西人，闻其欲掠京邑，迁都长安。
现代文：而斛斯春未能够入城，对叔渊撒谎说： 尔朱天光部下都是西域人，听说他们准备掠夺京城，迁都长安。
English: However, before Gong Shichun could enter the city, he lied to Shu Yuan and said, "Er Zhu Tianguang's subordinates are from the Western Regions. I heard that they are preparing to plunder Beijing and move the capital to Chang'an.

古文：宜先内我，以为其备。 
现代文：你应先接纳我，以作好准备。 
English: You should prepare by receiving me first.

古文：叔渊信而内之。
现代文：叔渊相信了他的话，开城接纳了他。
English: Shu Yuan believed his words, and Kaesong accepted him.

古文：椿既至桥，尽杀世隆党附，令行台长孙稚诣阙奏状，别使都督贾智、张劝率骑掩执世隆与兄彦伯，俱斩之。
现代文：斛斯椿既至桥头，尽杀尔朱世隆的党附之徒，命令行台长孙稚到皇宫启奏发生的情况，另外派都督贾智、张劝率领骑兵攻打抓住世隆与其兄彦伯，都斩杀之。
English: Having arrived at the bridgehead, Jushi Tsubaki did his best to kill the followers of Zhu Shilong's party, ordered the stationmaster Sun Waki to the imperial palace to explain the situation that had occurred, and in addition sent the governor Jia Zhi and Zhang Xuan to lead the cavalry to attack and capture Shilong and his brother Yan Bo, all of whom were killed.

古文：时年三十三。
现代文：尔朱世隆时年三十三岁。
English: He was thirty-three years old.

古文：初，世隆曾与吏部尚书元世俊握槊，忽闻局上欻然有声，一局之子尽皆倒立，世隆甚恶之。
现代文：当初，尔朱世隆曾经与吏部尚书元世隽下棋，突然听见棋盘上哗然声响，一局棋子全都倒立起来，尔朱世隆十分厌恶。
English: At first, Er Zhu Shilong used to play chess with the cadre Shang Shu Yuan Shi, and suddenly heard a loud noise on the chessboard, and all the pieces of a game were upside down. Er Zhu Shilong was very disgusted.

古文：世隆又曾昼寝，其妻奚氏忽见有一人持世隆首去，奚氏惊怖就视，而世隆寝如故也。
现代文：尔朱世隆又曾昼寝，他妻子奚氏忽然看见有一个人拿着尔朱世隆的脑袋离开了，奚氏惊恐地到世隆那里察看，而他依然安睡。
English: When his wife, Ms. Zou, suddenly saw a man take Mr. Shilong's head and leave, Ms. Zou went to see Mr. Shilong in a panic, but he was still sleeping peacefully.

古文：既觉，谓妻曰： 向梦人断我头去，意殊不适。 
现代文：醒后，对妻说： 刚才梦见别人把我的头砍下拿走了，特别不舒服。 
English: After he woke up, he said to his wife, "I just had a dream that someone cut off my head and took it away. I feel very uncomfortable.

古文：又此年正月晦日，令、仆并不上省，西门不开。
现代文：又这一年正月最后一天，令、仆都不上省，西门不开。
English: In addition, on the last day of the first month of this year, Shang Shuling and Puxia did not go to the provincial capital, and the west gate of the palace did not open.

古文：忽有河内太守田怗家奴告省门亭长云： 今且为令王借车牛一乘，终日于洛滨游观。
现代文：忽然河内太守田怙家奴告诉省门亭长说： 今天为令王借牛车一乘，一天都在洛水边游玩。
English: All of a sudden, the governor of Hanoi, Tien Ho Chi Nu, told the governor of the provincial gate, saying, "Today, I borrowed an ox-drawn carriage for the king, and spent the whole day playing around Luoshui.

古文：至晚，王还省，将军出东掖门，始觉车上无褥，请为记识。 
现代文：到晚上，王还省，备车出东门，才发现车上没有被褥，请你记下来。 
English: In the evening, Wang was still saving, preparing the car to go out of the east gate, only to find that the car was not stolen, please write it down.

古文：时世隆封王，故呼为令王。
现代文：当时尔朱世隆已封为王，所以叫他令王。
English: At that time, Jiu Shilong had already been crowned king, so he was called the king.

古文：亭长以令、仆不上，西门不开，无车入省，兼无车迹。
现代文：亭长说令、仆不上省，西门不开，无车入省，又没有车印。
English: The chief of the pavilion said, the servant does not go to the province, the west gate does not open, no car enters the province, and there is no car stamp.

古文：此奴固陈不已，公文列诉。
现代文：而这个人固陈不已，著文列诉。
English: But the servant kept insisting on his request for a statement, and he wrote a document and submitted it to the higher-ranking officials.

古文：尚书都令史谢远疑谓妄有假借，白世隆付曹推检。
现代文：尚书都令史谢远怀疑说此事颇可怀疑，告诉世隆交付曹司检验真假。
English: Shangshu made Shi Xieyuan suspect that the matter was quite doubtful, and told Shilong to deliver Cao Si to check the truth and falsehood.

古文：时都官郎穆子容穷究之，奴言： 初来时至司空府西，欲向省，令王嫌迟，遣二防阁捉仪刀催车。
现代文：当时都官郎穆子容穷究之，家奴说： 初来时至司空府西，想向省而来，令王嫌太慢了，派两名防尔捉仪刀催车。
English: At that time, the son-in-law of the governor of the capital, Mu Zi Rong, made an exhaustive investigation, and the family slave said: When I first came to the west of Sikuofu, I wanted to come to the province, but the king was too slow, so he sent two guards to catch the instrument and speed up the car.

古文：车入，到省西门，王嫌牛小，系于阙下槐树，更将一青牛驾车。
现代文：车子入省到省西门，王嫌牛小，便把它系在宫檐下的槐树上，换成一青牛驾车。
English: The car entered the province to the west gate of the province. Wang disliked the small cow, so he tied it to the eucalyptus tree under the palace and replaced it with a young cow.

古文：令王著白纱高顶帽，短黑色，傧从皆裙襦袴褶，握板，不似常时章服。
现代文：令王戴白纱高顶帽，短小黑色，跟从都穿裙短袄、衤夸褶，手握朝板，不像平时打扮。
English: Ling Wang wore a white gauze top hat, short and black, followed by wearing a short skirt, short trousers, holding a morning board, unlike usual dress up.

古文：遂遣一吏将奴送入省中事东阁内东厢第一屋中。 
现代文：又派一名官吏把奴送到省中厅事东尔内东厢第一间房子里。 
English: An official was also sent to bring the slave to the first room in the east wing of the office of the Provincial Central Office.

古文：其屋先常闭籥。子容以 西门不开，忽言从入；此屋常闭，奴言在中 诘其虚罔。
现代文：而其屋先前经常是锁着的，子容因西门不开，忽然其家奴说跟从而入；这间屋子常关着，而此奴说他在其中。诘其虚妄。
English: But his house was often locked before, and Ziyong would not open the door because of Xiamen, and suddenly his manservant said that he would follow him in; this house was often closed, and this manservant said that he was in it.

古文：奴云： 此屋若闭，求得开看，屋中有一板床，床上无席，大有尘土，兼有一甕米。
现代文：奴说： 如果说这间屋子是闭着的，奴请求打开看，屋子里有一张板床，床上无席子，满是尘土，还有一瓮米。
English: He said: If this room is closed, and he asks to open it, there is a wooden bed in the room, the bed has no mattress, it is full of dust, and there is a bushel of rice.

古文：后解大行台，总隶长孙稚，战于韩陵，败还。
现代文：奴打扫床铺后坐在上面，还在地上画了些东西消磨时间，瓮中的米我也抓起来看了。如果它一定是闭着的，那这话必定无验。 
English: After cleaning the bed, the slave sat on it and also drew something on the floor to pass the time. I also picked up the rice in the bowl and looked at it. If it must be closed, then there must be no test.

古文：斛斯椿先据河梁，度律欲攻之，会大雨昼夜不止，士马疲顿，弓矢不得施用，遂西走于氵垒波津，为人擒执。
现代文：子容与谢远一起进去查看，门户关闭极久，全无开启迹象。等到入内，拂床画地印迹，历历在目，米也与所说无差，这才知奴仆说的并不错。
English: Zoyong and Xieyuan went inside to check. The gate had been closed for a long time, and there was no sign of it being opened. It was only when they got inside that they saw the marks from the whisk, and the rice was just as they said it would be, that they knew what the servant had said was right.

古文：椿囚之，送于齐献武王。
现代文：他仍把这些都告诉了尔朱世隆。
English: He still told all this to Le Zhu Shilong.

古文：王送于洛，斩之都市。
现代文：世隆叹惜了很久，觉得这是恶兆。
English: Shillong lamented for a long time, feeling that this was a bad omen.

古文：尔朱天光，荣从祖兄子。
现代文：不久，尔朱世隆就被杀了。尔朱天光，尔朱荣从祖兄的儿子。
English: Soon after, Er Zhu Shilong was killed. Er Zhu Tianguang, the son of Er Zhu Rong's paternal uncle.

古文：少勇决，善弓马，荣亲爱之，每有军戎事要，常预谋策。
现代文：少年勇猛果敢，善于弓马，尔朱荣亲近怜爱他，每有军戎大事，经常邀他参预谋划。
English: The boy was brave and courageous, good at archery and horsemanship. Er Zhu Rong loved him dearly and often invited him to participate in the planning of every military event.

古文：孝昌末，荣将拥众南转，与天光密议。
现代文：孝昌末年，尔朱荣准备率军南下，与尔朱天光密议。
English: At the end of Xiaochang's life, Le Zhu Rong was preparing to lead an army to the south, and had secret discussions with Le Zhu Tianguang.

古文：既据并肆，仍以天光为都将，总统肆州兵马。
现代文：既据并、肆之后，尔朱荣仍以尔朱天光为都将，总统肆州兵马。
English: Even after the merger, Er Zhu Rong still regarded Er Zhu Tianguang as the commander-in-chief, and the president commanded the state troops and horses.

古文：肃宗崩，荣向京师，以天光摄行肆州，委以后事。
现代文：肃宗去世，尔朱荣兵向京城，以尔朱天光摄管肆州，委以后方事务。
English: After the death of Su Zong, Zhu Rongbing went to Beijing, and Zhu Tianguang took charge of Zhouzhou, and was in charge of the future affairs.

古文：建义初，特除抚军将军、肆州刺史，长安县开国公，食邑一千户。
现代文：建义初年，特除他为抚军将军、肆州刺史，长安县开国公，食邑一千户。
English: In the first year of Jianyi, in addition to him being the general of the Fuzhou army, the governor of Zhouzhou, and the founding father of Chang'an County, there were a thousand households in the food village.

古文：荣将讨葛荣，留天光在州，镇其根本。
现代文：尔朱荣准备讨伐葛荣，留尔朱天光在州，镇守自己的大本营。
English: Zhu Rong is preparing to fight Ge Rong, while Zhu Tianguang is in the state, guarding his base camp.

古文：谓之曰： 我身不得至处，非汝无以称我心。 
现代文：对他说： 我身不能到的地方，非你无人能称我心。 
English: And said unto him, Where I cannot go, no man can come, except thou send me.

古文：永安中，加侍中、金紫光禄大夫、北秀容第一酋长。
现代文：永安年间，加授其为侍中、金紫光禄大夫、北秀容第一酋长。
English: During the Yongan era, he was additionally awarded the titles of chamberlain, gold and purple light doctor, and the first chief of North Xiuyong.

古文：寻转卫将军。
现代文：不久转任卫将军。
English: He was soon transferred to the post of General of the Guards.

古文：大将军元天穆东征邢杲，诏天光以本官为使持节、假镇东将军、都督，隶天穆讨破之。
现代文：大将军元天穆东征邢杲，帝诏尔朱天光以本官为使持节，假镇东将军、都督，隶属元天穆，讨伐打败了敌人。
English: The great general, Yuan Tianmu, led the Eastern Expedition, and the emperor, Zhu Tianguang, sent his envoy to hold the festival. The false Eastern General, the governor, who was subordinate to Yuan Tianmu, defeated the enemy in the crusade.

古文：元颢入洛，天光与天穆会荣于河内。
现代文：元颢进入洛阳，尔朱天光与元天穆在河内与尔朱荣会师。
English: Yuan Xuan entered Luoyang, and he and Yuan Tianmu met with Le Zhu Rong in Hanoi.

古文：荣发之后，并肆不安，诏天光以本官兼尚书仆射，为并肆云恆朔燕蔚显汾九州行台，仍行并州，委以安静之。
现代文：尔朱荣出发之后，并、肆二州又骚动不安起来，帝诏尔朱天光以本官兼任尚书仆射，为并、肆、云、恒、朔、燕、蔚、显、汾九州行台，仍行并州之职，委派他安抚人心。
English: After Zhu Rong's departure, the two states were in turmoil and unrest, and Emperor Zhu Tianguang appointed him as his own official and also served as Shang Shufu, and still performed the duties of the state to appease the hearts of the people.

古文：天光至并州，部分约勒，所在宁辑。
现代文：尔朱天光到并州，采取了一些措施，使局势安静下来。
English: When he arrived in Anhui Province, he restricted and managed the unstable areas. Everywhere he went, there was tranquility and stability.

古文：颢破，寻还京师，迁骠骑将军，加散骑常侍，改封广宗郡公，增邑一千户，仍为左卫将军。
现代文：元颢破灭之后，不久尔朱荣就还归京城，迁任骠骑将军、加散骑常侍，改封广宗郡公，增加食邑一千户，仍为左卫将军。
English: After the collapse of the Yuan Dynasty, Er Zhu Rong returned to Beijing soon after, and was transferred to the post of General of Horse Cavalry and the post of General of Horse Cavalry and the post of General of Horse Cavalry and the post of General of Horse Cavalry and the post of General of Horse Cavalry and the post of General of Horse Cavalry and the post of General of Horse Cavalry and the post of General of Cavalry.

古文：建义元年夏，万俟丑奴僭大号，朝廷忧之。
现代文：建义元年夏天，万俟丑奴擅僭帝号，朝廷以之为忧。
English: In the summer of the first year of Jianyi, the imperial court was worried about the number of villains using the title of emperor.

古文：乃除天光使持节、都督雍岐二州诸军事、骠骑大将军、雍州刺史，率大都督、武卫将军贺拔岳，大都督侯莫、陈悦等以讨丑奴。
现代文：于是除任尔朱天光为使持节，都督雍、岐州诸军事，骠骑大将军，雍州刺史，率领大都督、武卫将军贺拔岳，大都督侯莫陈悦等人讨伐丑奴。
English: Therefore, in addition to the appointment of Zhu Tianguang as the envoy of the festival, the military of the governors of Yong and Qizhou, the cavalry general, Yongzhou Shishi, led by the grand governor, the general of the armed forces He Batyue, the grand governor Hou Mo Chen Yue and others to fight the ugly.

古文：天光初行，唯配军士千人，诏发京城已西路次民马以给之。
现代文：天光出发时，只配给了军士千人，帝诏征发京城以西沿途民马以充兵力。
English: When Tenkuro set out, he was only allotted a thousand soldiers, and the emperor issued an edict to send people and horses along the route west of the capital to fill up the army.

古文：时东雍赤水蜀贼断路，诏侍中杨侃先行晓慰，并征其马。
现代文：当时东雍、赤水的蜀贼切断了前进的道路，帝诏侍中杨侃先行慰问说明来意，并征召其马。
English: At that time, the Shu bandits of Dongyong and Chishui cut off the way forward. Yang Kan, the Emperor's attendant, first expressed his condolences and summoned his horse.

古文：侃虽入慰劳，而蜀持疑不下。
现代文：杨侃虽然到当地慰劳，而蜀人却犹豫不决。
English: Although Yang Kan went to the local area to offer consolation, the people of Shu were hesitant.

古文：天光遂入关击破之，简取壮健以充军士，悉收其马。
现代文：尔朱天光于是入关打败了他们，拔取壮健兵力以充当士兵，尽收其马。
English: Er Zhu Tianguang then defeated them at the entrance to the pass, took strong troops to serve as soldiers, and collected as many horses as possible.

古文：至雍，又税民马，合得万余匹。
现代文：到了雍州，又征民马，总计得到一万多匹。
English: When he arrived in Yongzhou, he also requisitioned people's horses, and obtained a total of more than ten thousand horses.

古文：以军人寡少，停留未进。
现代文：因军人缺少，停军未进。
English: Because the number of troops was too small, they stayed for a few days and did not advance.

古文：荣遣责之，杖天光一百，荣复遣军士二千人以赴。
现代文：尔朱荣谴责他，杖击天光一百下，尔朱荣又派二千名士兵前去。
English: Lv Zhurong condemned him and gave him a hundred strokes of the cane. Lv Zhurong also sent two thousand soldiers to punish him.

古文：天光令贺拔岳率千骑先驱，至岐州界长城西，与丑奴行台尉迟菩萨相遇，遂破擒之，获骑士三千，步卒万余。
现代文：尔朱天光令贺拔岳率领一千名骑兵先驱，到岐州界内长城西与丑奴行台尉迟菩萨相遇，于是打败擒捉了骑士三千人、步兵一万多人。
English: Zhu Tianguang ordered He Batyue to lead a thousand cavalry pioneers to the west of the Great Wall within the boundaries of Qizhou to meet with Ugly Slave Lieutenant Qi Bodhisattva, thus defeating and capturing three thousand knights and more than ten thousand infantrymen.

古文：丑奴弃岐州，走还安定，置栅于平亭。
现代文：丑奴放弃岐州退还安定，在平亭设置栅寨。
English: The villain abandoned Qizhou to return stability and set up a stockade in Ping Ting.

古文：天光发雍至岐，与岳合势于汧渭之间，停军牧马，宣言远近曰： 今时将热，非可征讨，待至秋凉，别量进止。 
现代文：尔朱天光从雍州出发到岐州，与贺拔岳在尔、渭之间合集兵力，停军牧马，大肆宣扬说： 现在时令已到谷子快成熟的时候，不是征讨的时机，等到秋凉以后，我们再另外伺机进击。 
English: Lzhu Tianguang set out from Yongzhou to Qizhou, and gathered troops with He Batyue between Cangren and Lu, halted the army and horses, and loudly proclaimed: Now the time has come when the grain is almost ripe, it is not the time to collect, wait until after the autumn cool, we will wait for another opportunity to attack.

古文：丑奴每遣窥觇，有执送者，天光宽而问之，仍便放遣。
现代文：丑奴每每派人窥探，探子被执送到他面前，天光总是宽慰一番之后又放掉了他们。
English: The villain always sent someone to spy, and the spies were brought to him, but Tian Guang always relieved them and then let them go.

古文：免者传其待秋之言，丑奴谓以为实，分遣诸军散营农稼，在岐州之北百里泾川。
现代文：被放的人都传其秋后征战的话，丑奴以为这是真的，便分遣诸军散营农稼，兵力散落在岐州以北百里泾川。
English: Those who were released spread the word that they would go to war after the autumn. The villains thought it was true, so they dispatched troops to camp and harvest crops. The troops were scattered along the Qin River, a hundred miles north of Qizhou.

古文：使其太尉侯伏、侯元进领兵五千，据险立栅，且耕且守。
现代文：丑奴派其太尉侯伏侯元进领兵五千，据险立栅寨，边耕边守。
English: Ugly slave sent his eunuch Hou Fu Hou Yuan Jin to lead five thousand soldiers, according to the perilous fence, while cultivating and guarding.

古文：在其左右，千人已下为一栅者，乃复数处。
现代文：在其左右，千人以下为一栅营的又有几处。
English: Around it, there are several camps of less than a thousand people.

古文：天光知其势分，遂密严备。
现代文：尔朱天光知道他的兵力分散之后，便秘密安排严密准备。
English: After Zhu Tianguang knew that his troops had been dispersed, he secretly arranged for rigorous preparations.

古文：晡时，潜遣轻骑先行断路，以防贼知，于后诸军尽发。
现代文：天晚时分，暗暗派轻骑先行断绝敌人归路，以防敌人知道，然后，诸军竞发。
English: In the late afternoon, they secretly sent light cavalry ahead to cut off the enemy's way back, in case the enemy knew, and then the armies raced.

古文：昧旦，攻围元进大栅，拔之，诸所俘执，并皆放散，须臾之间，左右诸栅悉来归款。
现代文：天还没亮，攻打元进大栅，拔除敌人，众被俘的将士，都被放归，须臾之间，左右诸栅敌人都来归降。
English: The sky was not yet bright, attacking the Yuanjin Great Gate, uprooting the enemy, all the captured soldiers were released, and the enemies on both sides of the gate came to surrender.

古文：前去泾州百八十里，通夜径进，后日至城，贼泾州刺史侯几长贵疑仍以城降。
现代文：离泾州一百八十里，尔朱天光通夜行军，第三天赶到城下，敌泾州刺史侯几长贵以城归降。
English: One hundred and eighty miles away from Zhangzhou, Lzhu Tianguang marched through the night, and arrived at the city on the third day. The enemy, Zhangzhou prince Qianlonggui, surrendered in the city.

古文：丑奴弃平亭而走，欲趋高平。
现代文：丑奴放弃平亭而逃，想到高平。
English: The villain abandons Ping Ting and flees, thinking of Gaoping.

古文：天光遣岳轻骑急追，明日，及丑奴于平凉长平坑，一战擒之。
现代文：尔朱天光派贺拔岳轻骑急追，第二天，在平凉长平坑追上丑奴，一战擒获。
English: Zhu Tianguang sent He Baduyue to lightly ride in hot pursuit. The next day, he caught up with Ugly Bastard in Pingliang Changping pit and won the battle.

古文：天光明便共逼高平，城内执送萧宝夤而降。
现代文：天光第二天便率大军逼攻高平，城内人执送萧宝夤而降。
English: The next day, Tian Guang led a large army to forcefully attack Gaoping, and the people in the city sent Xiao Baojun down.

古文：贼行台万俟道洛率众六千人入山不下。
现代文：敌行台万俟道洛率众六千人进入山中不下平地。
English: The enemy marched into the mountains at the head of six thousand people.

古文：时高平大旱，天光以马乏草，乃退于城东五十许里，息众牧马。
现代文：当时高平大旱，尔朱天光因马缺少草料，便退到离城东五十里的地方，息兵牧马。
English: At that time, there was a severe drought in Gaoping. Due to the lack of grass for the horses, Lzhu Tianguang withdrew to a place 50 miles east of the city to graze the horses.

古文：于是泾、豳、二夏，北至灵州，贼党结聚之类，并来归降。
现代文：于是，泾、豳、二夏，北至灵州，敌人结聚的，都前来归降。
English: As a result,,,, north to Lingshou, the enemies gathered, all came to surrender.

古文：天光遣都督长孙邪利率二百人行原州事以镇之。
现代文：尔朱天光派都督长孙邪利率领二百人到原州镇守。
English: Zhu Tianguang sent the governor, Sun Yanzhong, to lead two hundred people to the town of Wonju.

古文：道洛招诱城人来掩袭，杀邪利并其所部。
现代文：道洛招诱城中人掩击邪利，杀了邪利并其部卒。
English: Dolo lured the people in the city to cover up Zari, killed Zari and his subordinates.

古文：天光与岳、悦等驰赴之，道洛出城拒战，暂交便退，追杀千余人，道洛还走入山，城复降附。
现代文：尔朱天光与贺拔岳、侯莫陈悦等驰兵赴敌，道洛出城迎战，刚一交锋便败退而去，被追杀一千多人，道洛逃入山中，城池降顺。
English: Er Zhu Tianguang and He Batyue, Hou Mo Chen Yue and other galloping soldiers went to the enemy, Dollo went out of the city to meet the battle, just after the battle, he was defeated and retreated, more than a thousand people were chased and killed, Dollo fled into the mountains, and the city fell down.

古文：天光遣慰喻，道洛不从，乃率众西依牵屯山，据险自守。
现代文：尔朱天光派人慰问，道洛不从，于是率部西依牵屯山，凭险自守。
English: Zhu Tianguang sent someone to offer condolences, but Daoluo did not comply, so he led his troops westward to the Tunshan Mountains, taking the risk to protect himself.

古文：荣责天光失邪利，不获道洛，复遣使杖之一百，诏降为散骑常侍、抚军将军、雍州刺史，削爵为侯。
现代文：尔朱荣责备天光让邪利逃走了，没有抓住道洛，又派使者杖击他一百下，又让皇帝诏书降为散骑常侍、抚军将军、雍州刺史，削爵为侯。
English: Le Zhurong reproached Tianguang for letting the evil Li run away and not catching Douluo, and sent an envoy to hit him with a hundred strokes, and let the emperor's edict reduce him to a straggler, a general of the army, a Yongzhou stabber, and a marquis.

古文：天光与岳、悦等复向牵屯讨之。
现代文：尔朱天光与贺拔岳、侯莫陈悦又向牵屯山进军讨伐敌人。
English: Zhu Tianguang, He Baturake and Hou Mo Chen Yue also marched to Luitun Mountain to fight the enemy.

古文：天光身讨道洛，道洛战败，率数千骑而走，追之不及，遂得入陇，投略阳贼帅王庆云。
现代文：天光亲自讨伐道洛，道洛战败，率领数千骑兵逃去，追赶不上，道洛进入陇中，投奔略阳贼帅王庆云。
English: Tianguang personally fought against Douluo. Douluo was defeated and led thousands of cavalrymen to flee, but he could not catch up with them. Douluo entered the middle of the Yunnan River and rushed to Wang Qingyun.

古文：庆云以道洛骁果绝伦，得之甚喜，便谓大事可图，乃自称皇帝，以道洛为大将军。
现代文：庆云清楚道洛骁勇果决无与伦比，得到他十分高兴，便说大事可图，于是自称皇帝，任道洛为大将军。
English: Qingyun was overjoyed because of Dolo's bravery and thought that the whole world could plot against him, so he declared himself emperor and made Dolo general.

古文：天光欲讨之，而庄帝频敕，荣复有书，以陇中险邃，兼天盛暑，令待冬月。
现代文：尔朱天光打算讨伐他们，而庄帝频频下诏书，尔朱荣也有信来，认为陇中险恶，加上天气炎热，说等到冬天来了再作打算。
English: Zhu Tianguang planned to fight them, but Emperor Zhuang frequently issued edicts, and Zhu Rong also received letters, saying that the situation was dangerous and the weather was hot, and that he would wait until winter came before making plans.

古文：而天光知其可制，乃率诸军入陇，至庆云所居永洛城。
现代文：而尔朱天光知道敌人可以制服，于是率领诸军入陇，军到王庆云所居的水洛城。
English: However, Zhu Tianguang knew that the enemy could be subdued, so he led the army into the camp, and the army went to Shuiluo City, where Wang Qingyun lived.

古文：庆云、道洛出城拒战，天光复射中道洛臂，失弓还走。
现代文：王庆云、道洛出城迎战，天光射中道洛肩膀，道洛受伤失弓而逃。
English: Wang Qingyun and Douluo went out of the city to meet the battle. The skylight hit Douluo's shoulder, and Douluo was injured, lost his bow and fled.

古文：破其东城，贼遂并趋西城，城中无水，众聚热渴。
现代文：尔朱天光破其东城，敌人于是都奔至西城，城中无水，敌人受热受渴。
English: When the light of day broke over the eastern city of Lzhu, the enemy fled to the western city. There was no water in the city, and the enemy suffered from heat and thirst.

古文：有人走降，言庆云、道洛欲突出死战。
现代文：有人逃出投降，说王庆云、道洛想突城死战。
English: Some people ran away and surrendered, saying that Wang Qingyun and Douluo wanted to fight to the death.

古文：天光恐失贼帅，烬衅未已，乃遣谓庆云曰： 力屈如此，可以早降。若未敢决，当听诸人今夜共议，明晨早报。 
现代文：天光担心把敌帅放走了，祸乱不绝，于是派人对王庆云说： 力量屈劣如此，可早早来降，如果不敢早下断决，就应当召集众人今夜共同商议，明天一早来报。 
English: Tian Guang was worried that he had let the enemy commander go and that the disaster would not end, so he sent a person to Wang Qingyun and said: The strength is so inferior, you can come down early. If you do not dare to make a decision early, you should gather everyone tonight to discuss and report tomorrow morning.

古文：而庆云等冀得小缓，待夜突出，报天光云： 请待明日。 
现代文：而王庆云等人希望缓一口气，等到夜晚突出重围，报尔朱天光说： 请让我们到明天给个结果。 
English: But Wang Qingyun and others hope to take a breath, and wait until the night is highlighted, and Zhu Tianguang said: Please let us give a result by tomorrow.

古文：天光因谓曰： 相知须水，今为小退，任取河饮。 
现代文：天光便对他们说： 我知道你们需要水，今天我们退后一点，听任你们在黄河取水饮用。 
English: Tian Guang then said to them: I know you need water, today we will step back and let you fetch water from the Yellow River to drink.

古文：贼众安悦，无复走心。
现代文：敌人安适喜悦，没有逃走的愿望了。
English: The enemy is at ease and happy, and has no desire to escape.

古文：天光密使军人多作木枪，各长七尺，至黄昏时，布立人马为防卫之势，周匝立枪，要路加厚。
现代文：天光秘密派军人多作木枪，各长七尺，到黄昏时分，布立人马作防卫架势，周匝立枪，路边更多。
English: Daylight secretly sent soldiers to make more wooden guns, each seven feet long, and by dusk, they had set up a defensive perimeter, with more guns along the roadside.

古文：又伏人枪中，备其冲突，兼令密缚长梯于城北。
现代文：又在枪中埋伏人马、防备敌人突围，又令秘密在城北绑长梯准备登城。
English: He also used guns to ambush people and horses, to prevent the enemy from breaking through the encirclement, and secretly tied long ladders in the north of the city to prepare to enter the city.

古文：其夜，庆云、道洛果便突出，驰马先进，不觉至枪，马各伤倒，伏兵便起，同时擒获。
现代文：这天夜里，王庆云、道洛果然突出城来，驰马先行，不觉撞上木枪，马匹受伤倒下，枪中伏兵便起，同时擒住两人。
English: On this night, Wang Qingyun and Douluo really came out of the city, galloping ahead, unknowingly hit a wooden gun, the horses were injured and fell down, and the ambush began when they were shot, and at the same time choked two people.

古文：余众皆出城南，遇枪而止。
现代文：其他人都从城南出城，遇枪而止。
English: The others all left the city from the south of the city and were stopped by gunfire.

古文：城北军士登梯上城，贼徒路穷乞降，至明尽收其仗。
现代文：城北军人登梯上城，敌人穷途末路请求投降，到天亮时，尽收其器杖。
English: Soldiers from the north of the city ascended the stairs to the city, the enemy desperately asked for surrender, and by dawn, they had taken all their tools.

古文：天光、岳、悦等议悉坑之，死者万七千人，分其家口。
现代文：尔朱天光、贺拔岳、陈悦等共议坑埋敌人，死者有七千多人，家口被分。
English: Le Zhu Tianguang, He Batyue, Chen Yue and others discussed burying the enemy. More than seven thousand people died, and families were divided.

古文：于是三秦、河、渭、瓜、凉、鄯善咸来款顺。
现代文：于是三秦、河、渭、瓜、凉、鄯善等都来归降。
English: As a result, Sanqin, He, Handan, Gua, Liang, and Handan all surrendered.

古文：天光顿军略阳，诏复天光前官爵，寻加侍中、仪同三司，增邑至三千户。
现代文：尔朱天光屯军略阳，帝诏恢复天光先前官爵，不久又加授侍中、仪同三司，增加食邑至三千户。
English: Zhu Tianguang disbanded the army, and the emperor restored Tianguang's former title of nobility. Soon, he also conferred the title of chamberlain and the three titles of honor, and increased the number of food villages to three thousand.

古文：秦州城民谋杀刺史骆超，超觉，走归天光。
现代文：秦州城民准备谋杀刺史骆超，骆超发现了，逃到天光那里。
English: Qinzhou citizens prepared to murder the assassin Luo Chao. Luo Chao found out and fled to Tianguang.

古文：天光复与岳、悦等讨平之。
现代文：天光又与贺拔岳、陈悦等讨伐平定叛民。
English: Tianguang also joined He Baturake, Chen Yue and others in a crusade to quell the rebels.

古文：南秦滑城人谋害刺史辛琛显，琛显走赴天光。
现代文：南秦滑城人谋害刺史辛琛显，琛显逃到天光那里。
English: The people of South Qinliao Town plotted to assassinate Shi Xin Rongxian, and Rongxian fled to Tianguang.

古文：天光遣帅临之，往皆克定。
现代文：天光派部队前去，也平定了。
English: Tian Guang sent troops to advance, and they were also pacified.

古文：初，贼帅夏州人宿勤明达降天光于平凉，后复北走，收聚部类谋为逆，攻降人叱干麒麟，欲并其众。
现代文：当初，敌帅夏州人宿勤明达在平凉降归天光，后又向北逃去，收聚兵力叛逆，攻击降人叱干麒麟，想吞并其兵力。
English: At first, the enemy commander, Xiazhou Renshukin Mingda, surrendered to Tianguang in Pingliang, and then fled to the north, gathered troops and rebelled, attacked and defeated Gan Qilin, and wanted to absorb his troops.

古文：麒麟请救于天光，天光遣岳讨之，未至，明达走于东夏。
现代文：麒麟向天光求援，天光派贺拔岳前去讨伐，军未到，明达逃往东夏。
English: Kirin asked Tianguang for help. Tianguang sent He Baturu to go and fight. Before the army arrived, Mingda fled to Dongxia.

古文：岳闻荣死，故不追之，仍还泾州以待天光。
现代文：贺拔岳听说尔朱荣死了，所以停军不追，仍还泾州等待尔朱天光。
English: He Batyue heard that Lzhu Rong had died, so he did not pursue the army, but still waited for Lzhu Tianguang in Zhangzhou.

古文：天光亦下陇，与岳图入洛之策。
现代文：天光也下陇中，与贺拔岳图谋入洛之策。
English: Tianguang was also in the middle of the battle and plotted with He Bailu to enter Luo.

古文：进至雍州北，此破叛已疑。
现代文：进军到雍州北面，叛乱的迹象已被朝廷察觉。
English: Marching to the north of Yongzhou, the signs of rebellion have been detected by the imperial court.

古文：诏遣侍中朱瑞诣天光慰喻。
现代文：帝下诏派侍中朱瑞到天光那里慰问。
English: The emperor sent the chamberlain, Zhu Rui, to Tianguang to offer condolences.

古文：天光与岳谋，欲令帝外奔，别更推立。
现代文：天光与贺拔岳谋划，想让皇帝逊位外奔，另外推立皇帝。
English: Tenku and He Baturake plotted to have the emperor abdicate and run away, and to install another emperor.

古文：乃频启云： 臣实无异心，惟仰奉天颜，以申宗门之罪。 
现代文：于是频频启奏说： 为臣实无异心，惟思仰奉天颜，以申宗门之罪。 
English: As a result, there were frequent recitations of the following: There is nothing wrong with being a subject, but it is a sin to be a member of the Shin sect.

古文：又其下僚属启云： 天光密有异图，愿思胜算，以防微意。 
现代文：又有他的僚属秘密启奏说： 尔朱天光密有异图，愿陛下思考对策以防不测。 
English: Another of his colleagues secretly revealed: "Er Zhu Tianguang has a secret plan, may His Majesty think about countermeasures to prevent accidents."

古文：既而庄帝进天光爵为广宗王，元晔又以为陇西王。
现代文：既而庄帝进尔朱天光爵位为广宗王，元晔又任他为陇西王。
English: Soon after, Emperor Xiaozhuang gave Tianguang the title of Guangzong King, and the Yuan Dynasty also made him the King of Shaanxi.

古文：及闻尔朱兆已入京师，天光乃轻骑向都见世隆等，寻便还雍。
现代文：等到听说尔朱兆已入京城，尔朱天光于是轻骑赴京见尔朱世隆等人，不久便还归雍州。
English: When he heard that Lr Zhu Zhao had entered Beijing, Lr Zhu Tianguang rode to Beijing to meet Lr Zhu Shilong and others, and soon returned to Yongzhou.

古文：世隆等议废元晔，更举亲贤，遣使告天光。
现代文：尔朱世隆等商议废弃元晔，另举亲贤，派使者告诉尔朱天光。
English: Le Zhu Shilong and others discussed the abandonment of the Yuan Dynasty, and sent an envoy to tell Le Zhu Tianguang.

古文：天光与定策立前废帝，加开府仪同三司、兼尚书令、关西大行台。
现代文：天光参预定策立前废帝，又加授开府仪同三司、兼尚书令、关西大行台。
English: Tenkuangsan was destined to become the former deposed emperor, and he was also conferred the title of Kaifu, the title of Sanji, the title of Shang, and the title of Kansai Daigandai.

古文：天光出夏州，遣将讨宿勤明达，擒之送洛。
现代文：尔朱天光北出夏州，派将讨伐宿勤明达，擒获后送到洛阳。
English: Zhu Tianguang north of Dexia Prefecture, sent the crusader to stay in Qinmingda, captured and sent to Luoyang.

古文：时费也头帅纥豆陵伊利、万俟受洛于等据有河西，未有所附。
现代文：当时费也头率纥豆陵伊利、万俟受洛干等人占据河西，并不归附。
English: At this time, the leaders of Feiyadu, such as Peasling Yili and Wanxu Lokan, occupied the west of the river and did not depend on other forces.

古文：天光以齐献武王起兵信都，内怀忧恐，不复北事伊利等，但微遣备之而已。
现代文：尔朱天光因齐献武王起兵信都，十分担心，不再对付北边的伊利等人，只是略略派兵防备而已。
English: Because of Qi's offering to King Wu, Lzhu Tianguang raised an army and sent it to the capital. He was very worried and no longer dealt with Yili and others in the north, but only sent a few soldiers to be on the alert.

古文：又除大司马。
现代文：又被朝廷除授为大司马。
English: He was also stripped of the title of grand steward by the imperial court.

古文：于时献武王义军转盛，尔朱兆、仲远等既经败退，世隆累使征天光，天光不从。
现代文：这时，献武王义军势力壮大起来，尔朱兆、尔朱仲远等既经败退，尔朱世隆累次派人征召尔朱天光，天光不听从调遣。
English: At this time, King Zhenwu's army of volunteers was growing in strength. After the defeat and retreat of Er Zhu Zhao, Er Zhu Zhongyuan and others, Er Zhu sent a second envoy to summon Er Zhu Tianguo, but Tianguo did not listen to the dispatch.

古文：后令斛斯椿苦要天光云： 非王无以能定，岂可坐看宗家之灭也？ 
现代文：后来令斛斯春苦邀天光说： 非王无人能平定局势，你怎能坐看我们宗家破灭呢？ 
English: Later, Ling Shichun implored Tian Guang and said, "If no king can calm the situation, how can you sit by and watch our family fall apart?"

古文：天光不得已而东下，与仲远等败于韩陵。
现代文：尔朱天光不得已率军东下，与仲远等败于韩陵。
English: Le Zhu Tianguang had no choice but to lead the army to the east, and he and Nakayama were defeated at Hanling.

古文：斛斯椿等先还，于河梁拒之。
现代文：斛斯春等先回，在河梁迎战。
English: We waited for the Spring Festival to come first, and then faced the battle in He Liang.

古文：天光既不得渡，西北走，遇雨不可前进，乃执获之，与度律送于献武王。
现代文：尔朱天光既不能渡过黄河，便朝西北方向逃去。遇雨，军马不能前进，被抓住了，与度律一起被送到齐献武王处。
English: Unable to cross the Yellow River, Le Zhu Tianguang fled in a northwesterly direction. When it rained, the army horses could not advance, and he was caught and sent to Qi Xianwu Wang's place together with Du Lu.

古文：王致于洛，斩于都市，年三十七。
现代文：齐献武王又把他们送到洛阳，斩于都市，年三十七岁。
English: Qi Xianwu also sent them to Luoyang and beheaded them in the city at the age of thirty-seven.

古文：尔朱专恣，分裂天下，各据一方。
现代文：尔朱家族专横恣肆，分裂天下，各据一方。
English: The Lzhu family is domineering and arbitrary, splitting the world, each according to one side.

古文：天光有定关西之功，差不酷暴，比之兆与仲远为不同矣。
现代文：尔朱天光有平定关西之功，一点也不残酷暴虐，与尔朱兆、尔朱仲远相比，很是不同。
English: Lzhu Tianguang had the merit of pacifying Kansai, and he was not cruel and tyrannical at all. Compared with Lzhu Zhao and Lzhu Zhongyuan, he was very different.

