古文：夏父弗忌为宗，蒸将跻僖公。
现代文：夏父弗忌担任宗伯，冬祭时要把鲁僖公的位次升到鲁闵公之前。
English: In the summer, Father Fu Bo served as the patriarch, and during the winter festival, he would raise the rank of Lu Ye Gong to before that of Lu Ye Gong.

古文：宗有司曰： 非昭穆也。 
现代文：手下具体办事的人说： 这不合乎昭穆的次序。 
English: A person who is in charge of specific tasks said: This is not in accordance with Shomu's order.

古文：曰： 我为宗伯，明者为昭，其次为穆，何赏之有！ 
现代文：夏父弗忌说： 我是宗伯，僖公有明德当为昭，不如他的就为穆，有什么固定的次序？ 
English: Xia's father, Fo Hui, said, "I am the eldest son of a noble family. If you have wisdom and virtue, you should be honored. If you are not as good as him, you should be despised. What is the fixed order?

古文：有司曰： 夫宗庙之有昭穆也，以次世之长幼，而等胄之亲疏也。
现代文：主事人说： 宗庙的昭穆次序，是用来排列世系的先后，理顺后人的亲疏关系。
English: The person in charge said: The Zhaomu order of the ancestral temple is used to arrange the succession of the lineage and straighten out the kinship and estrangement of the descendants.

古文：夫祀，昭孝也。
现代文：祭祀，是表明孝道的。
English: Sacrifices are an expression of filial piety.

古文：各致齐敬于其皇祖，昭孝之至也。
现代文：各自向皇天宗祖献上敬意，这是表明孝道的最高礼仪。
English: They each paid their respects to the Emperor's ancestor, which is the highest etiquette to show filial piety.

古文：故工史书世，宗祝书昭穆，犹恐其踰也。
现代文：所以乐师和史官要记载世次的先后，宗伯和太祝要记载昭穆的次序，还生怕出现越礼的现象。
English: Therefore, musicians and historians should record the order of succession, and patriarchs and empresses should record the order of Shomu, and they should also be afraid of the phenomenon of over-ceremony.

古文：今将先明而后祖，自玄王以及主癸莫若汤，自稷以及王季莫若文、武，商、周之蒸也，未尝跻汤与文、武，为不踰也。鲁未若商、周而改其常，无乃不可乎？ 
现代文：现在你要把所谓有明德的僖公排在前，而把世次在前的闵公列在后，那么从玄王到主癸都不及汤的明德，从后稷到王季都不及周文王和周武王的明德，可是商人、周人在冬祭时，并没有因此把汤和文王、武王排列在前，这是为的不越礼啊，鲁国不像商人、周人那样做反而改变常规，这多么不可以啊！ 
English: Now, if you were to rank the so-called wise and virtuous King Gong in the first place, and the second-generation wise and virtuous King Gong in the last, then from King Xu to King Gong would not be as wise and virtuous as Tang, and from King Gong to King Ji would not be as wise and virtuous as King Zhouwen and King Zhouwu. However, during the Winter Festival, the merchants and Zhou people did not rank the Tang and King Wen and King Wu in the first place for this reason. This was considered to be impolite. Lu did not do as the merchants and Zhou people did, but instead changed the rules. How wrong this was!

古文：弗听，遂跻之。
现代文：夏父弗忌不听劝告，还是把僖公的位次升到闵公之前。
English: Xia's father, Fu Boi, did not listen to the advice, but still raised the rank of Shao Gong to before Shao Gong.

古文：展禽曰： 夏父弗忌必有殃。
现代文：展禽说： 夏父弗忌一定有灾祸。
English: The show bird said, "There must be a calamity befalling Xia's father Fu Boi."

古文：夫宗有司之言顺矣，僖又未有明焉。
现代文：宗庙主事人的话是合乎礼的，况且僖公又没有明德。
English: The words of the head priest of the ancestral temple are proper, moreover, Shoko has no virtue.

古文：犯顺不祥，以逆训民亦不祥，易神之班亦不祥，不明而跻之亦不祥，犯鬼道二，犯人道二，能无殃乎？ 
现代文：违犯了礼不吉祥，用违礼的话教育民众也不吉祥，变换神的位次也不吉祥，没有明德反升到前面也不吉祥，前两条违犯了人道，后两条违犯了鬼道，能没有灾祸吗？ 
English: It is not auspicious to violate etiquette, nor is it auspicious to educate the public with words that violate etiquette, nor is it auspicious to change the order of gods, nor is it auspicious to rise to the front without virtue, the first two violated humanity, and the last two violated the spirit world. Can there be no disaster?

古文：侍者曰： 若有殃焉在？
现代文：旁边的侍者问： 如果有灾祸会在哪里呢？
English: The waiter next to him asked, "If there is a disaster, where will you go?"

古文：抑刑戮也，其天札也？ 
现代文：是被刑杀，还是因瘟疫而早死？ 
English: Was he executed, or did he die an early death from the plague?

古文：曰： 未可知也。
现代文：回答说： 这还不能知道。
English: "It's too early to know," he said.

古文：若血气强固，将寿宠得没，虽寿而没，不为无殃。 
现代文：假如这个人身体壮实，将侥幸而尽天年，但即使是寿终而死，也不会没有灾祸。 
English: If this person is physically strong, he will be lucky and live to a ripe old age, but even if he dies at the end of his life, it will not be without disaster.

古文：既其葬也，焚，烟彻于上。
现代文：夏父弗忌死后，下葬的时候棺椁忽然起火，烟气直上天空。
English: When Xia's father Fu Boi died, the coffin suddenly caught fire during the burial, and the smoke went straight up into the sky.

