古文：十有八年春，王正月，晋杀其大夫胥童。
现代文：十八年春季，周历正月，晋国杀掉自己的大夫胥童。
English: In the spring of the 18th year, the first month of the lunar calendar, Jin Guo killed his own doctor.

古文：庚申，晋弑其君州蒲。
现代文：庚申日，晋国人杀掉自己的国君州蒲。
English: On Goshun's Day, the people of Jin killed their own sovereign, Zhou Pu.

古文：齐杀其大夫国佐。
现代文：齐国杀掉自己的大夫国佐。
English: Qi killed his own doctor, Guo Zuo.

古文：公如晋。
现代文：成公去晋国。
English: Lu Zhaogong went to Jin Province.

古文：夏，楚子、郑伯伐宋。
现代文：夏季，楚国与郑国一起攻打宋国。
English: In the summer, Chu attacked Song together with Zheng.

古文：宋鱼石复入于彭城。
现代文：宋国的左师鱼石重新进入彭城。
English: Song's left division, Yu Shi, re-entered Pengcheng.

古文：公至自晋。
现代文：鲁成公从晋国回来。
English: Prince Xiang returned from Jin to Lu.

古文：晋侯使士匄来聘。
现代文：晋侯派遣士匄来鲁国聘问。
English: The Jin princes dispatched their envoys to Lu to ask questions.

古文：秋，杞伯来朝。
现代文：秋季，杞伯来鲁国朝见。
English: In autumn, Zibo came to see the imperial court of Lu.

古文：八月，邾子来朝。
现代文：八月，邾子来鲁国朝见。
English: In August, Xunzi came to see the Emperor of Lu.

古文：筑鹿囿。
现代文：在鹿囿筑城。
English: He built a castle in Shikano.

古文：己丑，公薨于路寝。
现代文：己丑日，成公去世。
English: On his birthday, Chenggong passed away.

古文：冬，楚人、郑人侵宋。
现代文：冬季，楚国、郑国入侵宋国。
English: In winter, Chu and Zheng invaded Song.

古文：晋侯使士鲂来乞师。
现代文：晋侯派遣士鲂来鲁国请求出兵援救。
English: The Jin princes sent their envoys to Lu to request the dispatch of troops for rescue.

古文：十有二月，仲孙蔑会晋侯、宋公、卫侯、邾子、齐崔杼同盟于虚朾。
现代文：十二月，仲孙蔑与晋侯、宋公、卫侯、邾子、齐崔杼在虚朾结盟。
English: In December, Zhong Sun Zi allied with Jin Hou, Song Gong, Wei Hou, Zizi and Qi Cui Yao.

古文：丁未，葬我君成公。
现代文：丁未日，安葬我国君主成公。
English: On the day of Dingwei, the monarch of our country was buried.

古文：十八年春，王正月庚申，晋栾书、中行偃使程滑弑厉公，葬之于翼东门之外，以车一乘。
现代文：十八年春季，周王朝历法的正月初五日，晋国的栾书、中行偃派程滑杀死晋厉公，葬在翼地的东门外边，仅仅用了一辆车子。
English: In the spring of the 18th year, on the 5th day of the first month of the Zhou Dynasty calendar, Jin Liguo was killed by Jin Shuxu and Zhong Xing Ba Cheng Slide, and was buried outside the east gate of the wing. Only one car was used.

古文：使荀、士鲂逆周子于京师而立之，生十四年矣。
现代文：派遣荀罃、士鲂到京师迎接周子而立他为国君，这时周子才十四岁。
English: When Zhou Zi was only fourteen years old, he sent his emissaries and officials to Beijing to welcome Zhou Zi and make him the ruler of the country.

古文：大夫逆于清原，周子曰： 孤始愿不及此。虽及此，岂非天乎！
现代文：大夫在清原迎接，周子说： 我开始的愿望并没有到这地步，现在虽然到了这地步，难道不是上天的意志吗？
English: When the doctor greeted him in Qingyuan, Zhou Zi said, "My initial wish did not reach this point, but now that I have reached this point, isn't it God's will?

古文：抑人之求君，使出命也，立而不从，将安用君？
现代文：然而人们要求有国君，这是为了让他发布命令。立了以后又不听他的，还哪里用得着国君？
English: Yet men require a prince in order that he may give them orders, and when he has been set up, they do not listen to him; what further need is there of a prince?

古文：二三子用我今日，否亦今日，共而从君，神之所福也。 
现代文：您几位用得着我，在今天；用不着，也在今天，恭敬而听从国君，这是神灵所保佑的。 
English: Some of you may need me today, and some of you may not need me today, but to respect and obey the sovereign is to be blessed by the gods.

古文：对曰： 群臣之愿也，敢不唯命是听。 
现代文：大夫们回答说： 这是下臣们的愿望，岂敢不唯命是听。 
English: The doctors replied, "This is the wish of our subordinates, how dare we disobey their orders?"

古文：庚午，盟而入，馆于伯子同氏。
现代文：十五日，结盟以后才进入国都，住在伯子同氏家里。
English: On the fifteenth day, after the alliance, he entered the national capital and lived in the same house as his uncle.

古文：辛巳，朝于武宫，逐不臣者七人。
现代文：二十六日，周子在武宫朝见。驱逐了不适合做臣的七个人。
English: On the 26th, Zhou Zi met with the Emperor at the Imperial Palace and expelled seven people who were not fit to be ministers.

古文：周子有兄而无慧，不能辨菽麦，故不可立。
现代文：周子有一个哥哥是白痴，不能辨别豆子和麦子，所以不能立为国君。
English: Zhou Zi had a brother who was an idiot and couldn't distinguish between beans and wheat, so he couldn't become the king.

古文：齐为庆氏之难故，甲申晦，齐侯使士华免以戈杀国佐于内宫之朝。师逃于夫人之宫。
现代文：齐国由于庆氏祸难的缘故，正月二十九日，齐灵公派士华免用戈把国佐杀死在内宫的前堂，大家逃到夫人的宫里。
English: On the 29th day of the first month of the year, due to the calamity of the Qing Dynasty, the Qiling Emperor sent Shihua to kill Guo Zuo in the vestibule of the Inner Palace, and everyone fled to his wife's palace.

古文：书曰： 齐杀其大夫国佐。 弃命，专杀，以穀叛故也。
现代文：《春秋》记载说 齐杀其大夫国佐 ，这是由于国佐丢弃君命、专权杀人、据有穀地而叛变的缘故。
English: "Spring and Autumn" records that he killed his doctor, Guo Zuo, as a result of Guo Zuo's abandonment of the king's life, arbitrary killing, and rebellion against the grain fields.

古文：使清人杀国胜。
现代文：让清地人杀了国胜。
English: Let the Qing people kill Guosheng.

古文：国弱来奔，王湫奔莱。
现代文：国弱逃亡到鲁国来。王湫逃亡到莱地。
English: Guo Weak fled to Lu. Wang Yao fled to Lai.

古文：庆封为大夫，庆佐为司寇。
现代文：庆封做大夫，庆佐做司寇。
English: Qingfeng as doctor, Qingza as scout.

古文：既，齐侯反国弱，使嗣国氏，礼也。
现代文：不久以后，齐灵公让国弱回国，要他继承国氏宗嗣，这是合于礼的。
English: Soon after, Prince Qiling returned to China, leaving the country weak, and he was asked to succeed to the throne, which was proper.

古文：二月乙酉朔，晋悼公即位于朝。
现代文：二月初一日，晋悼公在朝廷上即位。
English: On the first day of February, Emperor Jinmu ascended the throne at the Imperial Court.

古文：始命百官：施舍已责，逮鳏寡，振废滞，匡乏困，救灾患，禁淫慝，薄赋敛，宥罪戾，节器用，时用民，欲无犯时。
现代文：开始任命百官，赐舍财物而免除百姓对国家的欠债，照顾施恩惠给鳏夫寡妇，起用被废黜和长居下位的好人，救济贫困，援救灾难，禁止邪恶，少征赋税，宽恕罪过，节约器用，在农闲时使用农民，个人的欲望不侵占农时。
English: He began to appoint a hundred officials, give away wealth and absolve the people's debts to the state, take care of the widows and widowers, appoint good people who had been deposed and remained in the lower ranks, relieve poverty, rescue disasters, prohibit evil, reduce taxes, forgive sins, use economizers, use farmers during idle time, and do not encroach on farm time with personal desires.

古文：使魏相、士鲂、魏颉、赵武为卿。荀家、荀会、栾黡、韩无忌为公族大夫，使训卿之子弟共俭孝弟。
现代文：派魏相、士鲂、魏颉、赵武做卿；荀家、荀会、栾黡、韩无忌做公族大夫，让他们教育卿的子弟恭敬、节俭、孝顺、友爱。
English: He appointed Wei Xiang, Shijun, Wei Wei, and Zhao Wu to be ministers, and sent Xing Jia, Xing Hui, Xuan Zi, and Han Mu to be ministers to the nobility, so that they could educate the children of the ministers to be respectful, thrifty, filial, and friendly.

古文：使士渥浊为大傅，使修范武子之法。右行辛为司空，使修士之法。
现代文：派士渥浊做太傅，让他学习范武子的法度；右行辛做司空，让他学习士?的法度。
English: He sent Wuchang as taifu to study the teachings of Fan Wuzi, and sent Yu Xing as sikong to study the teachings of Shichao.

古文：弁纠御戎，校正属焉，使训诸御知义。
现代文：弁纠驾御战车，校正官属他管辖，让他教育御者们明白道理。
English: He is in charge of driving the chariot, and the calibration officer is under his jurisdiction, so that his education drivers understand the truth.

古文：荀宾为右，司士属焉，使训勇力之士时使。
现代文：荀宾作为车右，司士官属他管辖，让他教育勇士们待时选用。
English: As the right side of the car, the sergeant-major is under his jurisdiction, let him educate the warriors to wait and choose.

古文：卿无共御，立军尉以摄之。
现代文：卿没有固定的御者，设立军尉兼管这些事。
English: Sir doesn't have a regular driver, so he's set up a lieutenant to take care of these things.

古文：祁奚为中军尉，羊舌职佐之。魏绛为司马。张老为候奄。铎遏寇为上军尉。籍偃为之司马，使训卒乘亲以听命。
现代文：祁奚做中军尉，羊舌职辅佐他；魏绛做司马，张老做侦察长，铎遏寇做上军尉，籍偃为他做司马，让他教育步兵车兵，一致听从命令。
English: Zhai was a lieutenant in the middle, and Sheep Tongue assisted him in his duties; Wei Zhou was a sergeant, Zhang Lao was a chief scout, Zhou Jiankou was a captain, and Zeki Zhou was a sergeant for him, let him educate infantry and chariots, and unanimously obey orders.

古文：程郑为乘马御，六驺属焉，使训群驺知礼。
现代文：程郑做乘马御，六驺属他管辖，让他教育他们明白礼仪。
English: Cheng Zheng did the horse-riding imperial court, the six counties belonged to his jurisdiction, let him educate them to understand the etiquette.

古文：凡六官之长，皆民誉也。
现代文：凡是各部门的长官，都是百姓赞扬的人。
English: All the heads of various departments are people who are praised by the people.

古文：举不失职，官不易方，爵不踰德，师不陵正，旅不偪师，民无谤言，所以复霸也。
现代文：举拔的人不失职，做官的人不改变常规，爵位不超过德行，师不欺陵正，旅不逼迫师，百姓没有指责的话，这就是晋悼公再次称霸于诸侯的原因。
English: Those who are promoted do not fail in their duties, those who are officials do not change the routine, the title does not exceed the virtue, the teacher does not deceive, the traveler does not persecute the teacher, and the people do not criticize. This is the reason why Jin Yue Gong once again dominates the princes.

古文：公如晋，朝嗣君也。
现代文：鲁成公去到晋国，朝见新立的国君晋悼公。
English: Lu Chenggong went to Jin Province to pay his respects to the newly-installed Emperor Jin.

古文：夏六月，郑伯侵宋，及曹门外。
现代文：夏季，六月，郑成公入侵宋国，到达宋国曹门外。
English: In the summer, in June, Zheng Chenggong invaded Song and arrived outside Song Cao's gate.

古文：遂会楚子伐宋，取朝郏。
现代文：于是就会合楚共王一起进攻宋国，占领了朝郏。
English: As a result, they attacked Song together with Chu and the Communists and occupied the Imperial Palace.

古文：楚子辛、郑皇辰侵城郜，取幽丘，同伐彭城，纳宋鱼石、向为人、鳞朱、向带、鱼府焉。以三百乘戍之而还。
现代文：楚国子辛、郑国的皇辰入侵城郜，占取幽丘。一起进攻彭城，送回了宋国的鱼石、向为人、鳞朱、向带、鱼府，用三百辆战车留守，然后回国。
English: Zi Xin of Chu and Wang Chen of Zheng invaded Chengyu and occupied Yucheng. They attacked Pengcheng together and sent back to Song the fish stone, Xiangren, Yan Zhu, Xiangzhe and Yufu. They left with three hundred chariots and then returned to China.

古文：书曰： 复入。 
现代文：《春秋》记载说 复入 。
English: "Spring and Autumn" records that it was reinstated.

古文：凡去其国，国逆而立之曰入。复其位曰复归。诸侯纳之曰归。以恶曰复入。
现代文：凡是离开自己的国家，本国迎接而且立他，叫做 入 ；回复原来的位置，叫做 复归 ；诸侯把他送回来，叫做 归 ；用武力的叫做 复入 。
English: If anyone leaves his country, the country that welcomes and establishes him is called entry; if he returns to his original place, it is called return; if the lords send him back, it is called return; if force is used, it is called return.

古文：宋人患之，西鉏吾曰： 何也？
现代文：宋国人担心这件事。西鉏吾说： 担心干什么？
English: The Song people were worried about this. Xi Jingwu said, "What are you worried about?

古文：若楚人与吾同恶，以德于我，吾固事之也，不敢贰矣。
现代文：如果楚国人和我们同仇敌忾，施恩德给我们，我们本来是会事奉他们的，不敢有三心二意。
English: If the people of Chu, our common enemy, had been kind to us, we would have served them. We dare not be half-hearted.

古文：大国无厌，鄙我犹憾。
现代文：现在大国的欲望没有个止境，即使把我国作为他们的边邑还会觉得遗憾。
English: Now there is no limit to the desires of the great powers, and even if they regard our country as their border town, they will still feel regret.

古文：不然，而收吾憎，使赞其政，以间吾衅，亦吾患也。
现代文：否则，收留我们讨厌的人，让他们辅助政事，等机会钻我们的空子，也是我们的祸害。
English: Otherwise, it is also our misfortune to take in people we dislike, have them assist in government affairs, and take advantage of opportunities to take advantage of us.

古文：今将崇诸侯之奸，而披其地，以塞夷庚。逞奸而携服，毒诸侯而惧吴、晋。吾庸多矣，非吾忧也。
现代文：现在却尊崇诸侯的乱臣而且分给他们以土地，阻塞各国之间的通道，使乱臣得以快意而使服从他们的国家离心，毒害诸侯而使吴国，晋国恐惧，这样，我们的利益多啦，并不是我们的忧患。
English: Now, however, they honor the turbulent vassals of the lords and give them land, block the channels between countries, make the turbulent vassals happy and the countries that obey them distracted, poison the lords and make Wu and Jin fear, so our interests are more, not our worries.

古文：且事晋何为？
现代文：而且事奉晋国为了什么？
English: And to serve the state of Jin for what?

古文：晋必恤之。 
现代文：晋国必然会来救助我们。 
English: Jin will surely come to our rescue.

古文：公至自晋。
现代文：鲁成公从晋国回到鲁国。
English: Prince Xiang returned from Jin to Lu.

古文：晋范宣子来聘，且拜朝也。
现代文：晋国的范宣子来鲁国聘问，同时答拜对晋君的朝见。
English: Fan Xuan Zi from Jin Province came to Lu Province to ask questions, and at the same time paid homage to the imperial court of Jin.

古文：君子谓： 晋于是乎有礼。 
现代文：君子认为晋国在这件事情上合于礼。
English: The gentleman thought that Jin was being polite in this matter.

古文：秋，杞桓公来朝，劳公，且问晋故。
现代文：秋季，杞桓公前来朝见，慰劳成公，同时询问晋国的消息。
English: In the autumn, Prince Shokan came to see him in the morning, consoled him for his hard work, and asked him about the news from Jin.

古文：公以晋君语之。
现代文：成公把晋君的政治措施告诉他。
English: Chengong told him about Jinjun's political measures.

古文：杞伯于是骤朝于晋而请为昏。
现代文：杞桓公因此很快地向晋国朝见并请求通婚。
English: Therefore, Prince Shokan quickly met with the Emperor of Jin and asked for a marriage.

古文：七月，宋老佐、华喜围彭城，老佐卒焉。
现代文：七月，宋国的老佐、华喜包围彭城，老佐死于这次战役中。
English: In July, the elder statesman of the Song Dynasty, Hua Xi, besieged Pengcheng. The elder statesman died in this battle.

古文：八月，邾宣公来朝，即位而来见也。
现代文：八月，邾宣公前来朝见，这是由于他新即位而前来进见。
English: In August, Emperor Xuanxuan came to see the emperor, which was due to his new accession to the throne.

古文：筑鹿囿，书不时也。
现代文：鲁国建造鹿囿，《春秋》所以记载这件事，是由于不合于时令。
English: Lu built the Deer Gate, and "Spring and Autumn" recorded this event because it was out of season.

古文：己丑，公薨于路寝，言道也。
现代文：初七日，鲁成公死在寝宫里，这是说合于正常的情况。
English: On the seventh day of the first lunar month, Lu Chenggong died in his bedroom, which is said to be in line with normal circumstances.

古文：冬十一月，楚子重救彭城，伐宋，宋华元如晋告急。
现代文：冬季，十一月，楚国的子重救援彭城，进攻宋国。宋国的华元去到晋国告急。
English: In winter, in November, Zizhong of Chu rescued Pengcheng and attacked Song. Hua Yuan of Song went to Jin in a hurry.

古文：韩献子为政，曰： 欲求得人，必先勤之，成霸安疆，自宋始矣。 
现代文：这时韩献子执政，说： 想要得到别人的拥护，一定要先为他付出勤劳。成就霸业，安定疆土，从宋国开始了。 
English: At this time, Han Xianzi came to power and said: "If you want to win the support of others, you must first work hard for him. Achieving hegemony and stabilizing the territory began in Song.

古文：晋侯师于台穀以救宋，遇楚师于靡角之穀。楚师还。
现代文：晋悼公领兵驻扎在台谷以救宋国。在靡角之谷和楚军相遇，楚军退走回国。
English: The Jin and Miao troops were stationed in Tai Valley to save the Song Dynasty. They met the Chu troops in Meizhou Valley, and the Chu troops retreated back to the country.

古文：晋士鲂来乞师。
现代文：晋国的士鲂前来请求出兵。
English: The Shih Tzu of Jin came to request the dispatch of troops.

古文：季文子问师数于臧武仲，对曰： 伐郑之役，知伯实来，下军之佐也。
现代文：季文子向臧武仲问出兵的数字，他回答说： 攻打郑国那次战役，是知伯来请求出兵的，他是下军的辅佐。
English: Ji Wenzi asked Zhai Wuzhong about the number of soldiers sent, and he replied: In the battle against Zheng, it was Zhi Bo who requested the dispatch of troops, and he was an assistant to the troops.

古文：今彘季亦佐下军，如伐郑可也。
现代文：现在士鲂也辅佐下军，所出兵数，像攻打郑国时一样就可以了。
English: Now, Shisheng is also assisting the lower army, and the number of soldiers dispatched is the same as when attacking Zhengguo.

古文：事大国，无失班爵而加敬焉，礼也。 
现代文：事奉大国，不要违背使者的爵位次序而要更加恭敬，这是合于礼的。 
English: In the service of a great power, it is proper not to violate the order of rank of the envoys, but to be more respectful.

古文：从之。
现代文：季文子听从了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：十二月，孟献子会于虚朾，谋救宋也。
现代文：十二月，孟献子和晋悼公、宋平公、卫献公、邾宣公、齐国崔杼在虚朾会见，策划救援宋国。
English: In December, Meng Xianzi, Jin Rongguo, Song Pingguo, Wei Xianguo, Yu Xuanguo, and Qi Guo Cuiqi met in Qianlong to plan the rescue of Songguo.

古文：宋人辞诸侯，而请师以围彭城。
现代文：宋国人辞谢诸侯，而请求出兵以包围彭城。
English: The people of Song renounced their lordships and requested the dispatch of troops to encircle Pengcheng.

