古文：凡行兵之法，斥候为先。
现代文：凡是行军作战的法则，是以侦察敌情为先务。
English: The general rule for marching into battle is that reconnaissance of the enemy's position should come first.

古文：平易用骑，险阻用步。
现代文：平坦开阔的地方使用骑兵侦察、险要狭隘的地方使用步兵侦察。
English: Cavalry reconnaissance is used in flat and open areas, and infantry reconnaissance is used in narrow areas.

古文：每五人为一甲，人持一白旗，远则军行前后左右，接续候望。
现代文：每五个侦察人员编为一甲，每人手持一面白旗，远离大军而对前后左右方向实施连续侦察。
English: Each of the five reconnaissance personnel is made up of one person, each holding a white flag, away from the large army and carrying out continuous reconnaissance in the front, back, left and right directions.

古文：若见贼兵，以次转近，告白主将，令众预为之备。
现代文：如果发现了敌情，就由远及近地转递消息，将情况报告给主将，然后再下令部队预先做好应敌准备。
English: If a hostile situation is discovered, it transmits information from far and near, reports the situation to the commander, and then orders the troops to prepare for the enemy in advance.

古文：法曰： 以虞待不虞者胜。 
现代文：诚如兵法所说： 有准备的军队对付没有准备的敌人，就一定能取得胜利。 
English: As it is said in the Art of War: If a prepared army confronts an unprepared enemy, it is sure to win.

古文：汉宣帝时，先零诸羌叛，犯边塞，攻城邑，杀长吏。
现代文：西汉宣帝时期，先零羌等部发动叛乱，进犯边塞，攻打城镇，杀害官吏。
English: During the Western Han Dynasty's proclamation of the emperor, the First and Second Departments launched a rebellion, attacked border fortresses, attacked towns, and killed officials.

古文：时后将军赵充国，年七十余，上老之，使问：谁可将者？充国曰： 百闻不如一见。
现代文：此时的后将军赵充国已经七十多岁了，宣帝认为他年纪大了，便派御史大夫丙吉问他，谁可以率兵前往平息叛乱时，赵充国回答说： 没有能超过我的人啦。 
English: At this time, the future general Zhao Chongguo was already more than seventy years old. Emperor Xuanzong thought he was too old, so he sent the imperial historian Bingji to ask him who could lead the troops to quell the rebellion. Zhao Chongguo replied, "There is no one who can surpass me."

古文：兵难预度，臣愿驰至金城，图上方略。
现代文：宣帝所遣使者又问： 将军估计一下羌兵现在的情况怎样，我们应当派多少兵去？ 
English: The emissary sent by Emperor Xuan also asked: General, estimate what the situation of the soldiers is now, how many soldiers should we send?

古文：然羌戎小夷，逆天背叛，灭亡不久，愿陛下属之老臣，勿以为忧。 上笑曰： 诺。 
现代文：赵充国回答说： 百闻不如亲眼一见。战争的态势是很难在远离前线的地方预估的，我愿意立即赶赴金城前线，据实地以绘制军事地图，依敌情而拟定攻讨方略，一并上报陛下。
English: Zhao Chongguo replied, "Seeing is not as good as hearing. It is difficult to predict the war situation far away from the front line. I am willing to rush to the Jincheng front line immediately, draw a military map according to the actual situation, and draw up a strategy of attack according to the enemy situation, and report it to His Majesty.

古文：充国至金城，须兵满万骑，欲渡河，恐为虏所遮。
现代文：但是先零羌是个小部族，它违背天意而发动叛乱，离灭亡之日不远了。希望陛下把平叛的任务交给我，不要再为此事担忧了。 宣帝听后笑着说： 好！ 
English: However, the First Zeros were a small tribe, and they rebelled against the will of Heaven, and the day of their demise is not far away. I hope that His Majesty will give me the task of putting down the rebellion, and stop worrying about this matter. After listening to this, Emperor Xuan smiled and said, "Good!

古文：即夜遣三校衔枚先渡，渡辄营阵。会明，遂以次尽渡。
现代文：赵充国到了金城，等到集结了万名骑兵以后，便打算渡过黄河，但又怕被羌兵阻遏截击，因此就于夜间派遣三校部队悄悄首先渡过黄河，渡河之后立即安营布阵。
English: When Zhao Chongguo arrived at Jincheng, after he had gathered ten thousand cavalry, he planned to cross the Yellow River. However, he was afraid of being blocked and intercepted by the enemy soldiers. Therefore, he quietly dispatched the troops of three regiments to cross the Yellow River first at night, and set up camp immediately after crossing the river.

古文：羌数十百骑来，出入军傍。
现代文：等到天亮的时候，汉军依次全部渡过了黄河。他们发现有几百羌族骑兵出入于汉军附近。
English: By dawn, the Chinese army had all crossed the Yellow River in succession. They found that several hundred Yao cavalrymen were entering and leaving the vicinity of the Chinese army.

古文：充国曰： 吾士马新至困倦，不可驰逐。
现代文：赵充国对将士说： 我们的人马刚到，因疲乏不能出击驱赶羌兵。
English: Zhao Chongguo said to the soldiers: Our men have just arrived, and they are too tired to attack and drive away the enemy soldiers.

古文：此皆骁骑难制，又恐为其诱兵也。
现代文：这些羌兵都是一下难以战胜的骁勇骑兵，且又怕他们是引人上钩的诱兵。
English: These horsemen are a hard-to-beat gallant cavalry, and they are afraid that they are baiters.

古文：击羌以殄灭为期，小利不足贪。 
现代文：打击敌人是以全歼有生力量为目的，小利是不值得贪图的。 
English: The purpose of striking the enemy is to completely annihilate the living forces, and small profits are not worth coveting.

古文：令军中勿击。
现代文：于是，他下令汉军不得随意出击。
English: As a result, he ordered the Chinese army not to attack at will.

古文：遣骑候望四望峡中，无羌。夜半兵至落都，召诸校、司马，谓曰： 吾知羌戎不能为矣。
现代文：其后，赵充国派遣骑兵到四望狭进行侦察，没有发现敌兵，于是乘夜率军进至落都谷，召集各校指挥官，说： 现在我才知道羌人是不会用兵的。
English: Afterwards, Zhao Chongguo dispatched cavalry to Siwangzang to conduct reconnaissance, but no enemy soldiers were found, so he took the night to lead the army into the valley of the fallen capital, summoned the commanders of each school, and said: Now I know that Xiang people will not use soldiers.

古文：使彼发数千人守杜四望峡中，兵众岂得入来！ 
现代文：假使他们派出数千兵扼守四望狭，我们的部队还怎么能进得来呢！ 
English: If they send thousands of soldiers to keep watch, how can our troops get in?

古文：充国常以远斥候为务，行必为战备，止必坚营壁，尤能持重，爱士卒，先计而后战。遂平先零。
现代文：赵充国用兵打仗的特点是，往往把派员到远处侦察敌情作为重要任务，行军时必定做好战斗准备，驻扎时必定构筑坚固营垒。尤其难能可贵的是，他用兵谨慎持重，关心爱护士卒，每次都是先制定作战计划之后，再投入战斗，所以他把先零人的叛乱很快平定了。
English: The characteristic of Zhao Chongguo's use of soldiers in war is that he often regards it as an important task to send soldiers to a distance to investigate the enemy situation. When marching, he must be prepared for battle, and when stationed, he must build a solid camp. What is especially valuable is that he is cautious in his use of soldiers and cares about his subordinates. Each time, he first formulates a battle plan and then engages in battle, so he quickly quelled the rebellion of the first zero.

