古文：起阏逢摄提格五月，尽柔兆执徐二月，凡一年有奇。
现代文：起阏逢摄提格五月，尽柔兆执徐二月，凡一年有奇。
English: The month of May is auspicious, the month of February is auspicious and the month of February is auspicious. Every year is special.

古文：太祖圣神恭肃文武孝皇帝下显德元年五月，甲戌朔，王逵自潭州迁于朗州。以周行逢知潭州事，以潘叔嗣为岳州团练使。丙子，帝至晋阳城下，旗帜环城四十里。
现代文：后周太祖显德元年五月，甲戌朔，王逵从潭州迁居朗州，任命周行逢为知潭州事，任命潘叔嗣为岳州团练使。丙子，后周世宗到达晋阳城下，后周军队的旗帜环绕晋阳城长达四十里。
English: In May of the first year of the Later Zhou Dynasty, Emperor Xiande's great-great-grandfather, Emperor Jia of Jiajing, moved his capital from Tanzhou to Langzhou, appointed Zhou Xingfeng as the governor of Zhitan, and appointed Pan Shushi as the regimental commander of Yuezhou. Later Zhou Shizong arrived at the foot of Jinyang City, and the banner of the Later Zhou Army encircled Jinyang City for forty miles.

古文：杨兗疑北汉代州防御使郑处谦贰于周，召与计事，欲图之。处谦知之，不往。
现代文：杨衮怀疑北汉代州防御使郑处谦要向后周投降，便召他来共同商计军事，准备借机处置他，郑处谦知道情况，不肯前往。
English: Yang Kun suspected that the defense of the North Han Dynasty State made Zheng Shucheng want to surrender to Hou Zhou, so he called him to jointly discuss military affairs and prepare to take the opportunity to deal with him. Zheng Shucheng knew the situation and refused to go.

古文：兗使胡骑数十守其城门，处谦杀之，因闭门拒兗。
现代文：杨衮派胡人骑兵数十名把守代州城门，郑处谦杀死他们，就关上城门拒绝杨衮进来。
English: Yang Hui sent dozens of Hu cavalrymen to guard the gate of Daizhou. Zheng Decheng killed them and closed the gate to refuse Yang Hui to enter.

古文：兗奔归契丹。
现代文：杨衮逃奔返回契丹。
English: Yang Hui fled back to Khitan.

古文：契丹主怒其无功，囚之。
现代文：契丹主恼怒杨衮没有立功，囚禁了他。
English: The Khitan lord was angry that Yang Hui did not do any meritorious service and imprisoned him.

古文：处谦举城来降。
现代文：郑处谦率领全城前来投降。
English: Zheng Duanqian led the whole city to surrender.

古文：丁丑，置静塞军于代州，以郑处谦为节度使。
现代文：丁丑，后周在代州设置静塞军，任命郑处谦为节度使。
English: Ding Yuxi, the next week in Daizhou, set up the Jingye Army and appointed Zheng Shucheng as the commander of the army.

古文：契丹数千骑屯忻、代之间，为北汉之援，庚辰，遣符彦卿等将步骑万馀击之。
现代文：契丹数千骑兵屯驻在忻州、代州之间，作为北汉的援军，庚辰，后周派遣符彦卿等人率领步兵、骑兵一万多出击。
English: Thousands of Khitan cavalry were stationed between Zhangzhou and Daizhou, and as reinforcements for the Northern Han Dynasty, Geng Chen sent Fu Yanqing and others to lead more than 10,000 infantry and cavalry to attack.

古文：彦卿入忻州，契丹退保忻口。
现代文：符彦卿进入忻州，契丹军队后退保守忻口。
English: Lord Fuhiko entered Bozhou, and the Khitan army retreated to a defensive position.

古文：丁亥，置宁化军于汾州，以石、沁二州隶之。
现代文：丁亥，后周在汾州设置宁化军，将石、沁二州隶属于它。
English: After Dinghai, Ninghua Army was set up in Ganzhou the following week, and the two states of Shishi and Handan were subordinated to it.

古文：代州将桑珪、解文遇杀郑处谦，诬奏云潜通契丹。
现代文：代州将领桑、解文遇杀死郑处谦，诬奏说郑处谦私通契丹。
English: On behalf of the state, the generals Sang and Xie killed Zheng, and falsely said that Zheng was a Khitan.

古文：符彦卿奏请益兵，癸巳，遣李筠、张永德将兵三千赴之。
现代文：符彦卿上奏请求增加兵力，癸巳，后周派遣李筠、张永德领兵三千赶赴。
English: Fu Yanqing made a request to increase the number of troops, and the next week Li Xi and Zhang Yongde were dispatched to lead 3,000 soldiers to rush there.

古文：契丹游骑时至忻州城下，丙申，彦卿与诸将陈以待之。
现代文：契丹流动骑兵时常到达忻州城下，丙申，符彦卿和众将列阵等待契丹军队。
English: The Khitan mobile cavalry often arrived at the foot of Zhangzhou Castle, and Bishen, Fuyan and the generals lined up to wait for the Khitan army.

古文：史彦超将二十骑为前锋，遇契丹，与战，李筠引兵继之，杀契丹二千人。
现代文：史彦超带领二十骑兵作为前锋，遇到契丹军队，进行战斗，李筠领兵增援，杀死契丹二千人。
English: Shi Yanchao led twenty cavalrymen as the vanguard, encountered the Khitan army, fought, Li Yanchao led reinforcements, and killed two thousand Khitan.

古文：彦超恃勇轻进，去大军浸远，众寡不敌，为契丹所杀，筠仅以身免，周兵死伤甚众。
现代文：史彦超恃仗勇敢，轻易冒进，离开大部队越来越远，寡不敌众，被契丹军队杀死，李筠也只不过幸免于死，后周士兵死伤很多。
English: Shi Yan was incredibly brave and easily rushed into battle. He got farther and farther away from the main army and was outnumbered. He was killed by the Khitan army. Li Yao only escaped death. In the following weeks, many soldiers were killed and wounded.

古文：彦卿退保忻州，寻引兵还晋阳。
现代文：符彦卿后退保守忻州，不久领兵返回晋阳。
English: Fu Yanqing retreated to Bozhou and soon led his troops back to Jinyang.

古文：府州防御使折德扆将州兵来朝。辛丑，复置永安军于府州，以德扆为节度使。
现代文：府州防御使折德率领州兵前来朝见；辛丑，后周又在府州设置永安军，任命折德为节度使。
English: The defense of Fuzhou caused Oride to lead the National Guard to come to see the emperor; it was so ugly that the Yongan Army was set up in Fuzhou the following week, and Oride was appointed as the envoy to the festival.

古文：时大发兵夫，东自怀、孟，西及薄、陕，以攻晋阳，不克。
现代文：当时大量征发军队民夫，东起怀州、孟州，西至蒲州、陕州，用以进攻晋阳，没有攻克。
English: At that time, a large number of conscripts were sent to attack Jinyang from Huizhou and Mengzhou in the east to Puzhou and Shaanxi in the west, but the city was not conquered.

古文：会久雨，士卒疲病，及史彦超死，乃议引还。
现代文：遇上长时间下雨，士兵疲劳生病，于是商议退兵回还。
English: When it rained for a long time, the soldiers got tired and sick, so they discussed returning the soldiers.

古文：初，王得中返自契丹，值周兵围晋阳，留止代州。
现代文：当初，王得中从契丹返回，正值后周军队围困晋阳，便停留住在代州。
English: At first, Wang Dezhong returned from Khitan, but when the Zhou army besieged Jinyang, he stayed in Daizhou.

古文：及桑珪杀郑处谦，囚得中，送于周军。帝释之，赐以带、马，问， 虏兵何时当至？ 
现代文：及至桑杀死了郑处谦，便囚禁王得中，将他送到后周军中，世宗释放王得中，赐给玉带、马匹，问： 契丹军队什么时候会到？ 
English: When San killed Zheng Shuxuan Qian, he imprisoned Wang Dezhong and sent him to Hou Zhou's army. Shizong released Wang Dezhong, gave him a jade belt and horses, and asked: When will the Khitan army arrive?

古文：得中曰： 臣受命送杨衮，他无所求。 
现代文：王得中说： 我只受命送杨衮，没有别的使命。 
English: Wang De said: I was only ordered to send Yang Ye, I have no other mission.

古文：或谓得中曰： 契丹许公发兵，公不以实告，契丹兵即至，公得无危乎？ 
现代文：有人对王得中说： 契丹答应您发兵，您不将实情禀告，倘若契丹军队立即到达，您不就危在旦夕了吗？ 
English: Someone said to Wang De: The Khitan promised to send troops to you, but you did not report the truth. If the Khitan army arrived immediately, wouldn't you be in imminent danger?

古文：得中太息曰： 吾食刘氏禄，有老母在围中，若以实告，周人必发兵据险以拒之。如此，家国两亡，吾独生何益！
现代文：王得中叹息说： 我吃刘氏的俸禄，又有老母在围城之中，倘若将实情禀告，周人必定发兵占据险要来抵抗，像这样，家庭、国家双亡，我独自活着又有何用！
English: Wang Dezhong sighed and said: I eat Liu's salary, and my mother is under siege. If I were to report the truth, Zhou would certainly send troops to occupy and resist. In this way, the family and the country are both dead. What is the use of me living alone?

古文：不若杀身以全家国，所得多矣！ 
现代文：不如杀身来保全家、国，所得到的就多了！ 
English: It's better to kill yourself to save your home and country, you'll get more than that!

古文：甲辰，帝以得中欺罔，缢杀之。
现代文：六月甲辰，世宗因为王得中进行欺骗，便勒死了他。
English: In June Jia Chen, Shizong strangled Wang Dezhong for cheating.

古文：乙巳，帝发晋阳。
现代文：乙巳，世宗从晋阳出发。
English: Suddenly, Sejong set off from Jinyang.

古文：匡国节度使药元福言于帝曰： 进军易，退军难。 
现代文：匡国节度使药元福向世宗进言说： 进军容易，退军困难。 
English: During the festival of Kuang Guo, Yue Yuanfu said to Shizong, "It is easy to advance, but it is difficult to retreat.

古文：帝曰： 朕一以委卿。 
现代文：世宗说： 朕的身家性命就全部委托给爱卿了。 
English: Sejong said, "I have entrusted my entire family and life to Aikyo.

古文：元福乃勒兵成列而殿。
现代文：药元福于是整顿军队排成行列断后。
English: Therefore, Yueyuan Fu rectified the army after the line-up was broken.

古文：北汉果出兵追蹑，元福击走之。
现代文：北汉果然派出军队追踪，药元福打跑追兵。
English: North Han sent troops to track them down, and Yueyuan Fu gave chase.

古文：然军还匆遽，刍粮数十万在城下者，悉焚弃之。
现代文：然而军队返回匆忙仓促，数十万粮草还在晋阳城下，只好全部焚烧丢弃。
English: However, the army returned in a hurry, hundreds of thousands of grain and grass were still under the city of Jinyang, and they had to be burned and discarded.

古文：军中讹言相惊，或相剽掠，军须失亡不可胜计。
现代文：军队中谣言流传相互惊扰，有的互相抢劫，军用物资损失无法计算。
English: In the army, rumors circulated of mutual alarm, some mutual looting, and the loss of military supplies was incalculable.

古文：所得北汉州县，周所置刺史等皆弃城走，惟代州桑珪既叛北汉，又不敢归周，婴城自守，北汉遣兵攻拔之。
现代文：所得到的北汉州、县，后周所设置的刺史等都弃城逃跑，只有代州桑已经叛变北汉，但又不敢归顺后周，只好环城自守，北汉派兵攻占代州。
English: The northern Han states and counties that were captured, and the ambush set up by Hou Zhou, all abandoned the city and fled. Only Daizhou San had already rebelled against Northern Han, but did not dare to surrender to Hou Zhou, so he had to surround the city to defend himself, and Northern Han sent troops to capture Daizhou.

古文：乙酉，帝至潞州。甲子，至郑州。丙寅，谒嵩陵。庚午，至大梁。
现代文：乙酉，后周世宗到达潞州；甲子，到达郑州；丙寅，拜谒嵩陵；庚午，到达大梁。
English: Acetylene, after Zhou Shizong arrived in Bozhou; Jiazi, arrived in Zhengzhou; Binyin, Baizhongong Mausoleum; Geng Wu, arrived in Dalian.

古文：帝违众议破北汉，自是政事无大小皆亲决，百官受成于上而已。
现代文：后周世宗违背朝臣众议击败北汉，从此政事无论大小全都亲自决定，文武百官只是从皇上那里接受成命罢了。
English: Later, Zhou Shizong defeated the Northern Han Dynasty against the advice of courtiers. From then on, all political affairs, no matter how big or small, were decided by himself. Civil and military officials only accepted orders from the emperor.

古文：河南府推官高锡上书谏，以为： 四海之广，万机之众，虽尧舜不能独治，必择人而任之。
现代文：河南府推官高锡上书劝谏，认为： 天下四海之广大，日常政务之繁多，即使是唐尧、虞舜也不能独自治理，必定要选择贤人来任用他们。
English: Gao Xi, the governor of Henan Province, wrote a letter to advise him, saying: The vastness of the four seas and the variety of daily government affairs, even the Tang Dynasty and the Yuezhi Dynasty cannot govern alone, we must choose wise men to appoint them.

古文：今陛下一以身亲之，天下不谓陛下聪明睿智足以兼百官之任，皆言陛下褊迫疑忌举不信群臣也。
现代文：如今陛下全部亲自处理，但天下人并不认为陛下聪明智慧足以兼负百官的重任，却都说陛下狭隘多疑全不相信朝廷群臣啊！
English: Nowadays, His Majesty deals with everything personally, but people around the world do not think that His Majesty is clever and wise enough to take on the heavy responsibilities of a hundred officials, but they all say that His Majesty is narrow-minded, suspicious and does not trust the courtiers of the court!

古文：不若选能知人公正者以为宰相，能爱民听讼者以为守令，能丰财足食者使掌金谷，能原情守法者使掌刑狱，陛下但垂拱明堂，视其功过而赏罚之，天下何忧不治！
现代文：不如选择能够知人善任、公正无私的人作为宰相，能够爱护百姓、善理诉讼的人作为州守县令，委派能够增加财富、丰衣足食人掌管金银粮食，委派能够推究实情、遵守法制的人掌管刑法监狱，那么陛下只须在朝廷垂衣拱手，根据他们的功过而进行赏罚，天下何愁不能太平！
English: It would be better to choose as prime minister a person who knows people, is good at taking responsibility, is fair and selfless, a person who loves the people and is good at reasoned litigation as the prefect of the prefecture, to appoint a person who can increase wealth, rich in clothes and food, and to appoint a person who can investigate the truth and abide by the legal system as the person in charge of the criminal prison. Then His Majesty would only have to bow his head at the imperial court and reward and punish according to their merits. The world would not be peaceful!

古文：何必降君尊而代臣职，屈贵位而亲贱事，无乃失为政之本乎！ 
现代文：何必降低国君的尊严而代替臣子的职责，枉屈高贵的地位亲理低贱的事务，不是丢失为政的根本了吗！ 
English: Why lower the dignity of the sovereign in place of the duties of a vassal, and abdicate the lofty position of kinship for a lowly affair? Isn't this a fundamental loss for politics?

古文：帝不从。
现代文：世宗不听从。
English: The emperor does not obey.

古文：锡，河中人也。
现代文：高锡是河中人。
English: Gao Xi is from the middle of the river.

古文：北汉主忧愤成疾，悉以国事委其子侍卫都指挥使承钧。
现代文：北汉主忧愤成疾，将国家大事全部委托给他的儿子侍卫都指挥使刘承钧。
English: The ruler of Northern Han was so upset that he entrusted all state affairs to his son, Liu Chengyao, the commander of the imperial guards.

古文：河西节度使申师厚不俟诏，擅弃镇入朝，署其子为留后。
现代文：河西节度使申师厚没有等到诏令，擅自离弃镇所进京入朝，安排他的儿子作为留后。
English: The Hexi Emperor did not wait for the imperial edict, but abandoned the town to go to Beijing, and arranged for his son to stay behind.

古文：秋，七月，癸酉朔，责授率府副率。
现代文：秋季，七月，癸酉朔，后周世宗斥责他，改授东宫率府副率之职。
English: In the autumn, in July, after Zhou Shizong rebuked him, he was awarded the post of deputy leader of the Eastern Palace.

古文：丁丑，加吴越王钱弘亻叔天下兵马都元帅。
现代文：丁丑，后周世宗下诏吴越王钱弘加官天下兵马都元帅。
English: Ding Yuxiu, later Zhou Shizong, issued an edict to Wu Yue Wang Qian Hong to be promoted to the post of general of the world's soldiers and horses.

古文：癸巳，加门下侍郎、同平章事范质守司徒，以枢密直学士、工部侍郎长山景范为中书侍郎、同平章事、判三司。加枢密使、同平章事郑仁诲兼侍中。
现代文：癸巳，门下侍郎、同平章事范质加官守司徒，任命枢密直学士、工部侍郎长山人景范为中书侍郎、同平章事、判三司，枢密使、负平章事郑仁诲加官兼任侍中。
English: At the same time, his subordinate attendant, Tongping Zhang, was promoted to the position of official guardian, and Changshan Renjing Fan, a direct scholar of the Privy Council and attendant of the Ministry of Industry, was appointed to the position of the secretary of the Central Office, Tongping Zhang, and the judge of the Third Division, and Zheng Renyu, an envoy of the Privy Council and a negative subordinate of the Privy Council, was also promoted to the position of attendant.

古文：乙未，以枢密副使魏仁浦为枢密使。
现代文：乙未，任命枢密副使魏仁浦为枢密使。
English: B Wei appointed Wei Rimpu, Deputy Privy Envoy, as Privy Envoy.

古文：范质既为司徒，司徒窦贞固归洛阳，府县以民视之，课役皆不免。
现代文：范质既已担任司徒，原司徒窦贞固回归洛阳老家，当地府、县都按平民看待他，赋税徭役全不减免。
English: Now that he has served as a monk, the former monk Dou Zhengu has returned to his hometown in Luoyang. Local prefectures and counties regard him as a commoner, and there is no reduction or exemption for tax collectors.

古文：贞固诉于留守向训，训不听。
现代文：窦贞固向留守向训诉说，向训不理睬。
English: Dou Zhenggu told Xun Xun that he was staying behind, but Xun Xun ignored him.

古文：初，帝与北汉主相拒于高平，命前泽州刺史李彦崇将兵守江猪岭，遏北汉主归路。
现代文：当初，后周世宗与北汉主在高平对峙，命令前泽州刺史李彦崇领兵扼守江猪岭，阻断北汉君主的归路。
English: At first, Emperor Zhou Shizong confronted the Northern Han ruler in Gaoping, and ordered the former Zhezhou governor Li Yan Chong to lead an army to guard the Yangtze River and block the Northern Han monarch's way back.

古文：彦崇闻樊爱能等南遁，引兵退，北汉主果自其路遁去。
现代文：李彦崇听说樊爱能向南逃跑，便领兵撤退了，后来北汉君主果然从这条路逃跑离去。
English: When Li Yan Chong heard that Zou Ai could escape to the south, he led the troops to retreat. Later, the Northern Han Dynasty monarch did indeed escape from this road.

古文：八月，己酉，贬彦崇率府副率。
现代文：八月，己酉，贬李彦崇为率府副率。
English: In August, Ji Yan, Li Yan Chong was demoted to deputy head of the provincial government.

古文：己巳，废镇国军。
现代文：己巳，后周撤销镇国军。
English: The next week, the town's militia was disbanded.

古文：初，太祖以建雄节度使王晏有拒北汉之功，其乡里有滕县，徙晏为武宁节度使。
现代文：当初，后周太祖因建雄节度使王晏有抵抗北汉军队的功劳，他的故乡在滕县，便调任王晏为武宁节度使。
English: In the beginning, the late Zhou Taizu gave Wang Xun the credit of resisting the Northern Han Dynasty army by establishing the Xiong Xingdu. His hometown was in Teng County, so he transferred Wang Xun to be the Xiong Xingdu Envoy of Wu Ning.

古文：晏少时尝为群盗，至镇，悉召故党，赠之金帛、鞍马，谓曰： 吾乡素名多盗，昔吾与诸君皆尝为之，想后来者无能居诸君之右。
现代文：王晏年轻时曾经做过强盗，到达镇所，召集所有旧日同党，赠送金钱绢帛、鞍子马匹，对他们说： 我们家乡素来以强盗多出名，从前多和诸位都曾经干过，料想后来的强盗没有能胜过诸位的。
English: When Wang Yao was young, he used to be a bandit. When he arrived at the town hall, he called together all his former comrades-in-arms, presented them with money bags, saddles and horses, and said to them: Our hometown has always been famous for bandits. In the past, many of you have done the same, and I expect that no future bandits will be able to beat you.

古文：诸君幸为我语之，使勿复为，为者吾必族之。 于是一境清肃。
现代文：诸位替我告诉其他强盗，让他们不要再干，再干的人我必定灭他的家族。 于是全境强盗绝迹。
English: Tell the other bandits for me not to do it again, and if they do it again, I will kill their families, and the bandits will disappear from the whole country.

古文：九月，徐州人请为之立衣锦碑。
现代文：九月，徐州人请求为王晏树立衣锦碑。
English: In September, the people of Xuzhou requested to erect a clothing monument for Wang Hui.

古文：许之。
现代文：后周世宗准许。
English: The customs officer allowed him to pass through.

古文：冬，十月，甲辰，左羽林大将军孟汉卿坐纳藁税，场官扰民，多取耗馀，赐死。
现代文：冬季，十月，甲辰，左羽林大将军孟汉卿因交纳藁税时，场院官吏侵扰百姓，多取所谓 耗余 而定罪，赐他自杀。
English: In the winter, in October, in Jia Chen, General Meng Hanqing of the Left Feather Forest was convicted of harassing the people and taking more so-called "waste" when he paid the poll tax, and he was sentenced to suicide.

古文：有司奏汉卿罪不至死。上曰： 朕知之，欲以惩众耳！ 
现代文：有关官员奏称孟汉卿的罪还不至于死，世宗说： 朕知道这些，只不过想借此惩戒众人罢了！ 
English: Officials said that Meng Hanqing's crime did not lead to death, and Shizong said: I know this, but I just want to use it to punish everyone!

古文：己酉，废安远、永清军。
现代文：己酉，后周撤销安远军、永清军。
English: The Anyong Army and the Yongqing Army were revoked the following week.

古文：初，宿卫之士，累朝相承，务求姑息，不欲简阅，恐伤人情，由是羸老者居多。
现代文：当初，宫禁警卫士兵，历朝相承，只求息事宁人，不想再检查挑选，恐怕伤害人情，因此瘦弱年老的占据多数。
English: At first, soldiers of the imperial palace guards, successively from one dynasty to the next, only wanted peace and quiet, and did not want to check the selection again, for fear of hurting people's feelings. Therefore, the thin and old occupied the majority.

古文：但骄蹇不用命，实不可用，每遇大敌，不走即降。其所以失国，亦多由此。
现代文：但又骄横傲慢，不听命令，实际无法使用，每次遇到大敌，不是逃跑就是投降，各朝之所以丧失国家，也大多由于这个原因。
English: However, they were also arrogant, disobeyed orders, and were practically useless. Every time they encountered a great enemy, they either ran away or surrendered. The reason why each dynasty lost its country was mostly due to this reason.

古文：帝因高平之战，始知其弊。癸亥，谓侍臣曰： 凡兵务精不务多，今以农夫百未能养甲士一，奈何浚民之膏泽，养此无用之物乎！
现代文：后周世宗通过高平一战，开始知道它的弊端，癸亥，对侍从大臣说： 大凡军队只求精而不求多，如今用一百个农夫也未必能供养得起一名全副武装的士兵，怎么能榨取百姓的血汗，去养活这批无用的东西呢！
English: Later, Zhou Shizong passed through the First Battle of Gaoping and began to know its drawbacks. He said to the attendant minister: The great army only seeks excellence but not more. Nowadays, a hundred farmers may not be able to support a fully armed soldier. How can the blood and sweat of the people be squeezed to feed this useless thing?

古文：且健懦不分，众何所劝！ 
现代文：况且勇健懦弱不加区分，用什么去激励士众！ 
English: What's more, there is no distinction between bravery and cowardice, so what should be used to inspire the scholars?

古文：乃命大简诸军，精锐者升之上军，羸者斥去之。
现代文：于是命令各军普遍检查挑选兵员，精锐的提升到上军，瘦弱的逐出军队。
English: Therefore, he ordered all armies to generally inspect and select soldiers, the elite to be promoted to the army, and the weak to be expelled from the army.

古文：又以骁勇之士多为诸籓镇所蓄，诏募天下壮士，咸遣诣阙，命太祖皇帝选其尤者为殿前诸班，其骑步诸军，各命将帅选之。
现代文：又因强健勇猛的战士大多被藩镇所收养，下诏征募天下壮士，全部遣送到京城，命令宋太祖皇帝赵匡胤挑选其中最好的组成殿前诸班，其余骑兵、步兵各军，分别命令将帅挑选士兵。
English: In addition, because most of the strong and brave soldiers were adopted by the towns of the domain, the emperor issued an edict to recruit the world's strong men, all of whom were sent to the capital, and ordered the Song Emperor Zhao Kuangyin to select the best of them to form the front squads, and the remaining cavalry and infantry of each army separately ordered the general to select soldiers.

古文：由是士卒精强，近代无比，征伐四方，所向皆捷，选练之力也。
现代文：由此士兵精干强壮，近代以来没有比得过的，征伐四方，所到之处频传捷报，这就是挑选兵员的功效啊！
English: As a result, the soldiers are capable and strong, which has not been matched since modern times. They have been sent to four directions, and wherever they go, they frequently spread good news. This is the effect of selecting soldiers!

古文：戊辰，帝谓侍臣曰： 诸道盗贼颇多，讨捕终不能绝，盖由累朝分命使臣巡检，致籓侯、守令皆不致力。
现代文：戊辰，后周世宗对侍从大臣说： 各道盗贼很多，讨伐搜捕终究不能绝迹，是由于历朝另外命令使臣巡视检查，致使藩镇主帅、州守县令都不再努力。
English: Later, Zhou Shizong said to the minister's aide: There are many thieves in every province, and the crusade and search and seizure cannot be eliminated after all. It is due to the fact that all the dynasties have ordered the envoys to patrol and inspect separately, resulting in the fact that the captain of the town and the governor of the prefecture have ceased to make efforts.

古文：宜悉召还，专委节镇、州县，责其清肃。 
现代文：应该全部召回使臣，专门委托藩镇节度使、州守县令，责成他们肃清盗贼。 
English: The envoys should all be recalled, and the envoys should be specially entrusted with the task of clearing out the thieves.

古文：河自杨刘至于博州百二十里，连年东溃，分为二派，汇为大泽，弥漫数百里。
现代文：黄河从杨刘直至博州有一百二十里，连年在东面冲溃堤防，分成两个支流，汇合为巨大湖泽，河水弥漫达数百里。
English: The Yellow River stretches a hundred and twenty miles from Yang Liu to Bozhou. Year after year, it breaks through the dike on the east side, splits into two tributaries, and merges into a huge lake. The river water covers hundreds of miles.

古文：又东北坏古堤而出，灌齐、棣、淄诸州，至于海涯，漂没民田庐不可胜计，流民采菰稗、捕鱼以给食，朝廷屡遣使者不能塞。
现代文：黄河又向东北冲毁古堤而流出，灌淹齐、棣、淄各州，直至海边，漂流淹没百姓田地房屋不可胜计，流民只好采集茭白稗子、捕捞鱼虾来充食，朝廷屡次派遣使者没能堵塞住。
English: The Yellow River also broke through the ancient dike to the northeast and flowed out, flooding Qi, Yunnan and Shandong provinces until it reached the seashore. It was impossible to calculate how the drifting water would flood the people's fields and houses. The displaced people had no choice but to collect bamboo shoots and fish and shrimp to fill their stomachs. The imperial court repeatedly sent emissaries but failed to block it.

古文：十一月，戊戌，帝遣李谷诣澶、郓、齐按视堤塞，役徒六万，三十日而毕。
现代文：十一月，戊戌，后周世宗派遣李到澶州、郓州、齐州检查监督堤防决口的堵塞，征发役徒六万，三十天完工。
English: In November, Zhou Shizong sent Li to Bozhou, Ganzhou and Qizhou to inspect and supervise the blockage of the dike breach, and the construction was completed in 30 days with 60,000 conscripts.

古文：北汉主疾病，命其子承钧监国，寻殂。
现代文：北汉主病重，命令他的儿子刘承钧代理国政，不久去世。
English: The ruler of Northern Han was seriously ill and ordered his son, Liu Chengyao, to take over state affairs. He died soon after.

古文：遣使告哀于契丹。
现代文：北汉派遣使者向契丹报丧。
English: North Han dispatched an envoy to offer condolences to Khitan.

古文：契丹遣骠骑大将军、知内侍省事刘承训册命承钧为帝，更名钧。
现代文：契丹派遣骠骑大将军、知内侍省事刘承训册立刘承钧为皇帝，刘承改名为钧。
English: Khitan dispatched Liu Chengxun, general of the cavalry and minister of the interior, to install Liu Chengxun as emperor, and Liu Chengxun changed his name to Yu.

古文：北汉孝和帝性孝谨，既嗣位，勤于为政，爱民礼士，境内粗安。
现代文：北汉孝和帝刘钧生性孝顺谨慎，继承皇位后，勤理朝政，爱护百姓，礼贤下士，境内基本平安。
English: Emperor Liu Bei of the Northern Han Dynasty was a filial and prudent person. After inheriting the throne, he diligently administered the imperial government, loved the people, was a virtuous corporal, and the country was basically safe.

古文：每上表于契丹主称男，契丹主赐之诏，谓之 儿皇帝 。
现代文：他每次向契丹主上表自称为 男 ，契丹君主回赐诏书，叫他 儿皇帝 。
English: Each time he presented himself to the Khitan lord as a man, the Khitan monarch gave him an edict and called him the emperor.

古文：马希萼之帅群蛮破长沙也，府库累世之积，皆为溆州蛮酋苻彦通所掠，彦通由是富强，称王于溪洞间。
现代文：马希萼率领各蛮族部落攻破长沙，府库中历代积累的财富，全被溆州蛮族部落酋长苻彦通所抢，苻彦通因此富有强盛，在溪谷洞壑之间自称为王。
English: Ma Xichal led the barbarian tribes to break through Changsha. The wealth accumulated over the ages in the government treasury was all robbed by the chief of the barbarian tribes of Zhangzhou, Zhang Yantong. As a result, Zhang Yantong was rich and powerful, and he called himself the king between the valleys and caves.

古文：王逵既得湖南，欲遣使抚之，募能往者，其将王虔朗请行。
现代文：王逵既已得到湖南，打算派遣使者安抚他，招募能前往的人选，他的部将王虔朗请求出行。
English: Now that Wang Qian had gained Hunan, he planned to send an envoy to appease him and recruit candidates who could go. His subordinate, Wang Qianlang, requested to travel.

古文：既至，彦通盛侍卫而见之，礼貌甚倨。
现代文：王虔朗到达后，苻彦通警卫森严地会见王虔朗，举止态度十分傲慢。
English: After Wang Qianlang's arrival, the guards of Yan Yan Tong met Wang Qianlang in a strict manner, and his demeanor was very arrogant.

古文：虔朗厉声责之曰： 足下自称苻秦苒裔，宜知礼义，有以异于群蛮。
现代文：王虔朗声音严厉地斥责他说： 您自称是苻秦的后裔，应该知道礼义，有区别于其他蛮族部落的地方。
English: In a stern voice, Wang Qianlang scolded him: "You claim to be a descendant of the Qin Dynasty, you should know the etiquette, which is different from other barbarian tribes.

古文：昔马氏在湖南，足下祖父皆北面事之。
现代文：从前马氏在湖南时，您的祖父、父亲都北面称臣。
English: Once upon a time, when Mr. Ma was in Hunan, your grandfather and father were both famous in the north.

古文：今王公尽得马氏之地，足下不早往乞盟，致使者先来，又不接之以礼，异日得无悔乎！ 
现代文：如今王公取得马氏全部的领地，您既不及早前往请求结盟，致使王公派我这个使者先来，又不以礼相迎，他日难道不会后悔吗！ 
English: Now that Wang Gong has obtained all the territories of the Ma clan, since you did not go to request an alliance early enough, causing Wang Gong to send me, the messenger, to come first, and did not greet me with courtesy, will he not regret it one day!

古文：彦通惭惧，起，执虔朗手谢之。
现代文：苻彦通惭愧恐惧，从座位上起来，握住王虔朗的手向他道歉。
English: Embarrassed and afraid, Yan Yan Tong got up from his seat, shook Wang Qianlang's hand and apologized to him.

古文：虔朗知其可动，因说之曰： 溪洞之地，隋、唐之世皆为州县，著在图籍。
现代文：王虔朗知道苻彦通可以说动，就劝说道： 这溪谷洞壑之地，隋、唐的时代都是州、县，记载在地图簿籍上。
English: Wang Qianlang knew that Yan Yan Tong could speak fluently, so he persuaded him and said: This valley is the land of caves, and in the Sui and Tang dynasties, it was a prefecture and county, recorded in the map book.

古文：今足下上无天子之诏，下无使府之命，虽自王于山谷之间，不过蛮夷一酋长耳！
现代文：如今您上无天子的诏书，下无节度使都府的命令，虽然自己在山谷之间称王，实际不过蛮夷落的一个酋长罢了。
English: Now that you have issued an imperial edict without a son of heaven, and issued an order without restraint to make the capital rise, although you call yourself a king between the valleys, in reality you are nothing more than a chief who has been brutally overthrown.

古文：曷若去王号，自归于王公，王公必以天子之命授足下节度使，与中国侯伯等夷，岂不尊荣哉！ 
现代文：不如去掉王号，自动归顺王公，王公必定用天子的命令授于您节度使之职，与中原的侯伯等同，岂不尊贵荣耀吗？ 
English: Wouldn't it be better to get rid of the title of king and automatically submit to the prince, who will surely use the order of the Son of Heaven to grant you a degree and make it a position, equal to the Hou Bo of the Central Plains, wouldn't it be honor and glory?

古文：彦通大喜，即日去王号，因虔朗献铜鼓数枚于王逵。
现代文：苻彦通大为喜欢，当天去掉王号，通过王虔朗向王逵进献多枚铜鼓。
English: Yan Yan Tong liked it very much. On the same day, he removed the king's trumpet and presented a number of bronze drums to Wang Qianjin through Wang Qianlang.

古文：逵曰： 虔朗一言胜数万兵，真国士也！ 
现代文：王逵说： 王虔朗一席话胜过数万军队，真是国家的贤士啊！ 
English: Wang Yao said: Wang Qianlang's one-sentence speech is better than tens of thousands of troops. He is truly a national sage!

古文：承制以彦通为黔中节度使，以虔朗为都指挥使，预闻府政。
现代文：王逵接受皇帝制书任命苻彦通为黔中节度使；任命王虔朗为都指挥使，参与都府政务。
English: Wang Qian accepted the emperor's calligraphy and appointed Zou Yantong as the envoy of the Central Government of Fujian Province; appointed Wang Qianlang as the envoy of the Central Government of Fujian Province to participate in the government affairs of the capital.

古文：虔朗，桂州人也。逵虑西界镇遏使、锦州刺史刘瑫为边患，表为镇南节度副使，充西界都招讨使。
现代文：王逵顾虑西界镇遏使、锦州刺史刘会成为边境隐患，上表请求任命刘为镇南节度副使，担任西界都招讨使。
English: Wang Hui was concerned that Liu Zhen and Liu Zhen would become a hidden border danger, and requested that Liu be appointed as the deputy envoy of the Southern Zhen Festival and serve as the envoy of the Western Zhen Festival.

古文：是岁，湖南大饥，民食草木实。
现代文：当年，湖南出现大饥荒，百姓食用草木的果实。
English: In that year, a great famine occurred in Hunan, and the people ate the fruits of plants and trees.

古文：武清节度使、知潭州事周行逢开仓以赈之，全活甚众。
现代文：武清节度使、知潭州事周行逢打开粮仓赈济灾民，保全救活许多人。
English: The Wuqing Festival envoy and the Zhitan State Affairs Week tour opened grain silos to help the victims, saving and reviving many people.

古文：行逢起于微贱，知民间疾苦，励精为治，严而无私，辟署僚属，皆取廉介之士，约束简要，吏民便之，其自奉甚薄；或讥其太俭，行逢曰： 马氏父子穷奢极靡，不恤百姓，今子孙乞食于人，又足效乎！ 
现代文：周行逢出身贫贱，知道民间疾苦，励精图治，执法严厉，公正无私，征召安排属官，都选取廉洁方正之士，规约简单明了，给自己的奉养十分菲薄。有的人讥讽他太节俭，周行逢说： 马氏父子穷奢极欲，不体恤百姓，如今他的子孙在向人要饭，还值得效法吗！ 
English: Zhou Xingfeng was born in a poor family. He knew the hardships of the people, worked hard to improve the situation, enforced the law strictly, was fair and selfless, and recruited and arranged subordinate officials. He selected honest and upright people. The regulations were simple and clear, and he gave himself a very poor upbringing. Some people ridiculed him for being too frugal. Zhou Xingfeng said: Mr. Ma's father and son were extremely extravagant and did not sympathize with the people. Now his children and grandchildren are asking people for food. Is it worth following their example?

古文：世宗睿武孝文皇帝上
现代文：世宗睿武孝文皇帝上
English: Emperor Taizong, Emperor Wu and Emperor Xiaowen

古文：太祖圣神恭肃文武孝皇帝下显德二年
现代文：后周世宗显德二年
English: Two years after the death of Zhou Zongxiande

古文：春，正月，庚辰，上以漕运自晋、汉以来不给斗耗，纲吏多以亏欠抵死，诏自今每斛给耗一斗。
现代文：春季正月，庚辰，后周世宗因为漕运自从后晋、后汉以来不给 斗耗 ，负责运送的官吏不少因为损耗造成粮食亏欠而抵死罪，下诏命令从今开始每斛粮食给损耗一斗。
English: In the first month of spring, Geng Chen, later Zhou Shizong, because of the rowing transport since the Later Jin and Later Han Dynasties, did not give a bucket of consumption, many officials responsible for transportation were sentenced to death because of the loss of grain caused by grain deficit, and ordered to give a bucket of consumption for each grain from now on.

古文：定难节度使李彝兴以折德扆亦为节度使，与己并列，耻之，塞路不通周使。
现代文：定难节度使李彝兴因为折德也当了节度使，与自己地位相同，感到羞耻，便阻塞道路不与后周互通使者。
English: Due to the difficulty of the festival, Li Yuxing felt ashamed because he was also the festival's emissary, with the same status as himself, so he blocked the road and did not exchange envoys with the following week.

古文：癸未，上谋于宰相，对曰： 夏州边镇，朝廷向来每加优借，府州褊小，得失不系重轻，旦宜抚谕彝兴，庶全大体。 
现代文：癸未，后周世宗与宰相商量，宰相回答说： 夏州是边关重镇，朝廷历来格外从宽优待，府州地方偏僻狭小，利害得失不关轻重，暂且应该安抚李彝兴，可以保全大局。 
English: Later, after Zhou Shizong and the prime minister had a discussion, the prime minister replied: Xiazhou is an important border town, the imperial court has always been exceptionally lenient and preferential, Fuzhou is a remote and small place, and the gains and losses are not important. For the time being, Li Shuxing should be appeased, and the overall situation can be preserved.

古文：上曰： 德扆数年以来，尽忠戮力以拒刘氏，奈何一旦弃之！
现代文：世宗说： 折德多年以来，尽忠报国努力作战来抵御北汉刘氏，怎么能一下子抛充他！
English: Sejong said, "For so many years, Ori De devoted himself to serving the country and fought hard to resist the Northern Han Liu clan. How can he be discarded all of a sudden!

古文：且夏州惟产羊马，贸易百货，悉仰中国，我若绝之，彼何能为！ 
现代文：况且夏州只出产羊马，交易其他百货，全部仰仗中原，我若断绝关系，他还能有什么作为！ 
English: Moreover, Xiazhou only produces sheep and horses, and trades other general merchandise, all relying on Zhongyuan. If I sever the relationship, what else can he do!

古文：乃遣供奉官齐藏珍赍招书责之，彝兴惶恐谢罪。
现代文：于是派遣供奉官齐藏珍带着诏书责问李彝兴，李彝兴惊惶恐惧连忙认罪道歉。
English: As a result, he dispatched the offering officer Qi Zangzhen with an edict to interrogate Li Yuxing. Li Yuxing, alarmed and afraid, quickly confessed and apologized.

古文：戊子，蜀置威武军于凤州。
现代文：戊子，后蜀在凤州设置威武军。
English: Wuzi, after Shu, set up a powerful military force in Fengzhou.

古文：辛卯，初令翰林学士、两省官举令、录。
现代文：辛卯，后周开始命令翰林学士、门下和中书两省官员荐举县令、录事参军人选。
English: Xinwu, the following week, ordered Hanlin Baccalaureate, his disciples and the officials of the two provinces of Zhongshu to recommend the election of the county magistrate, and to record the candidates for the military election.

古文：除官之日，仍署举者姓名，若贪秽败官，并当连坐。
现代文：授官之日，同时记下荐举人的姓名，倘若被荐人贪婪污秽败坏公务，荐举人一并连同坐罪。
English: On the day of the investiture, the names of the recommenders shall be noted down. If the person recommended is greedy, filthy and corrupt, the recommenders shall be punished together.

古文：契丹自晋、汉以来屡寇河北，轻骑深入，无籓篱之限，效野之民每困杀掠。
现代文：契丹自从后晋、后汉以来，频繁侵犯河北地区，轻骑兵长驱直入，没有任何屏障的阻隔，郊区野外的农民经常陷入烧杀抢掠的困境。
English: Since the Later Jin and Later Han dynasties, the Khitan frequently invaded the Hebei region, the light cavalry drove straight in, without any barrier, and farmers in the suburbs often fell into the predicament of burning, killing and looting.

古文：言事者称深、冀之间有胡卢河，横亘数百里，可浚之以限其奔突。
现代文：向朝廷陈述政见的人称说深州、冀州之间有胡卢河，绵延横亘几百里，可以疏通河道来阻截契丹骑兵的横冲直撞。
English: The person who presented his political views to the imperial court said that between Shenzhou and Jizhou there is the Hulu River, which stretches for hundreds of miles, and that the river can be cleared to stop the rampaging of the Khitan cavalry.

古文：是月，诏忠武节度使王彦超、彰信节度使韩通将兵夫浚胡卢河，筑城于李晏口，留兵戍之。
现代文：当月，绍令忠武节度使王彦超、彰信节度使韩通率领士兵、民夫疏通胡卢河，在李晏口筑城，留驻军队守卫。
English: In the same month, Shao Ling Zhongwu sent Wang Yanchao, and Zhang Xin sent Han Tong, who led soldiers and civilians to clear the Hulu River, built a city in Li Yingkou, and stationed troops to guard it.

古文：帝召德州刺史张藏英，问以备边之策，藏英具陈地形要害，请列置戍兵，募边人骁勇者，厚其禀给，自请将之，随便宜讨击。帝皆从之，以藏英为沿边巡检招收都指挥使。
现代文：后周世宗召见德州刺史张藏英，询问边疆防备的对策，张藏英具体陈说地理形势、军事要塞，请求部署戍边军队，招募边疆百姓中矫健勇猛的，多给军饷，自己请求率领他们，随时根据情况征讨攻击契丹骑兵；世宗全都同意，任命张藏英为沿边巡检招收都指挥使。
English: Later, Zhou Shizong summoned Zhang Zangying, the Texas chief historian, to inquire about the countermeasures for border defense. Zhang Zangying specifically stated the geographical situation and military fortresses, requested the deployment of the border troops, recruited the most vigorous and courageous people in the border areas, gave them military pay, asked him to lead them, and solicited the attack of the Khitan cavalry at any time according to the situation. Shizong all agreed and appointed Zhang Zangying as the commander of the patrol along the border.

古文：藏英到官数月，募得千馀人。
现代文：张藏英赴任几个月，招募到一千多人。
English: A few months after Zhang Zangying took office, more than a thousand people were recruited.

古文：王彦超等行视役者，尝为契丹所围。藏英引所募兵驰击，大破之。
现代文：王彦超等巡视疏通河道的工程，曾经被契丹军队所包围；张藏英带领所招募的士兵驰马出击，大败敌军。
English: Wang Yanchao and others inspected the project of dredging the river, which was once surrounded by the Khitan army; Zhang Zangying led the recruited soldiers to attack on horseback and defeated the enemy army.

古文：自是契丹不敢涉胡卢河，河南之民始得休息。
现代文：从此契丹军队不敢再过胡卢河，胡卢河以南的百姓开始得到休养生息。
English: From then on, the Khitan army no longer dared to cross the Hulu River, and the people south of the Hulu River began to get rest and recuperation.

古文：二月，庚子朔，日有食之。
现代文：二月，庚子朔，出现日食。
English: In February, Geng Zishuo, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：蜀夔恭孝王仁毅卒。
现代文：后蜀夔恭孝王孟仁毅去世。
English: Later, King Meng Renyi passed away.

古文：壬戌，诏群臣极言得失，其略曰： 朕于卿大夫，才不能尽知，面不能尽识，若不采其言而观其行，审其意而察其忠，则何以见器略之浅深，知任用之当否！
现代文：壬戌，后周世宗诏令群臣畅所欲言陈述政事的得失利弊，诏书大致说： 朕对各位卿大夫，才能没法全部知道，面孔没法全都认识。倘若不采集他们的言论从而观察他们的行为，明悉他们的意见从而考察他们的忠诚，那凭什么来看出各人才器韬略的高低深浅，了解任用是否得当！
English: Later, Emperor Zhou Shizong issued an edict ordering the courtiers to speak freely and state the pros and cons of political affairs. The edict said roughly: "I cannot know all of you noble doctors, and I cannot recognize all of your faces. If you do not collect their words to observe their behavior, know their opinions to examine their loyalty, then how can you find out the level of each talent and understand whether the appointment is appropriate!

古文：若言之不入，罪实在予；苟求之不言，咎将谁执！ 
现代文：倘若卿大夫陈说了而听不进，罪确实在朕身上。假使我要求了而不说，罪责将归谁呢？ 
English: If I speak and do not listen, the fault is mine. If I want to listen and do not speak, whose responsibility is it?

古文：唐主以中书侍郎、知尚书省严续为门下侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：南唐主任命中书侍郎、知尚书省严续为门下侍郎、同平章事。
English: The Lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty appointed Chushushujiroro, Chishang Shusho, as junior attendants, and Tongpei Shoji.

古文：三月，辛未，以李晏口为静安军。
现代文：三月，辛未，后周在李晏口设置静安军。
English: In March, Xinwei, and the following week, the Jing'an Army was set up in Li Yingkou.

古文：帝常愤广明以来中国日蹙，及高平既捷，慨然有削平天下之志。
现代文：后周世宗经常为唐僖宗广明以来中原日益缩小而愤慨，及至高平一战奏捷，慨然萌生削平各国统一天下的志向。
English: Later, Zhou Shizong was often indignant at the shrinking of the Central Plains since the Guangming of Tang Xizong, and at the height of the First Sino-Japanese War, the ambition to unify all countries was born.

古文：会秦州民夷有诣大梁献策请恢复旧疆者，帝纳其言。
现代文：正好秦州各族百姓有到大梁进献计策请求恢复旧日大唐疆域的，世宗采纳他的意见。
English: Just as the people of all ethnic groups in Qinzhou came to Dalian to submit proposals and request the restoration of the old Datang territory, Shizong adopted his opinion.

古文：蜀主闻之，遣客省使赵季札案视边备。
现代文：后蜀主闻知情况，派遣客省使赵季札巡视边防。
English: After the Lord of Shu heard of the situation, he dispatched the guest provincial envoy Zhao Jizhada to inspect the border defense.

古文：季札素以文武才略自任，使还，奏称： 雄武节度使韩继勋、凤州刺史王万迪非将帅才，不足以御大敌。 
现代文：赵季札素来以有文武双全的才略自许，出使回来，上奏道： 雄武节度使韩继勋、凤州刺史王万迪不是将帅之才，不能够抵御大敌入侵。 
English: Zhao Jizhazu had always prided himself on his ability to be both a man of letters and a man of arms. When he returned from his mission, he said, "Han Jixun and Wang Wandi of Fengzhou were not able to resist the invasion of the great enemy because of their strong martial arts.

古文：蜀主问： 谁可往者？ 
现代文：后蜀主问： 谁可前往呢？ 
English: Then the Lord of Shu asked: Who can go there?

古文：季札自请行。
现代文：赵季札请命自己前往。
English: Zhao Jifu requested to go by himself.

古文：丙申，以季札为雄武监军使，仍以宿卫精兵千人为之部曲。
现代文：丙申，任命赵季札为雄武监军使，并将宫禁警卫精兵一千人作为他的私属部队。
English: Bishen, appointed Zhao Jizhada as the military envoy of the military overseer, and appointed one thousand palace guards as his private troops.

古文：帝以大梁城中迫隘，夏，四月，乙卯，诏展外城，先立标帜，俟今冬农隙兴板筑，东作动则罢之，更俟次年，以渐成之。
现代文：后周世宗因为大梁城中局促狭窄，夏季，四月，乙卯，下诏拓展外城，先设立标记，等待今年冬天农闲再兴土木。农事开始就停止，再等来年开工，以此逐渐完成。
English: Later, Zhou Shizong expanded the outer city in the summer, April, May, and June because of the narrowness of the middle section of Dalian City. He first set up a marker and waited for the agricultural idle time this winter to resume civil engineering. The agricultural work stopped at the beginning, and then waited for the next year to start construction, so as to gradually complete it.

古文：且令自今葬埋皆出所标七里之外，其标内俟县官分画街衢、仓场、营廨之外，听民随便筑室。
现代文：并且命令从今开始葬埋死人都要出城，离所立标记七里之外，在标记内等待官府划分出街道、仓库场院、营房官舍，除此之外，听凭百姓随便盖房。
English: He also ordered that from now on, anyone burying the dead should leave the city, seven miles away from the established marker, and wait for the government to divide the streets, warehouses, courtyards, barracks, and official residences within the marker. In addition, the people were allowed to build houses at will.

古文：丙辰，蜀主命知枢密院王昭远按行北边城寨及甲兵。
现代文：丙辰，后蜀主命令知枢密院王昭远巡视检查北部边界的城镇营寨和武备。
English: After the death of Emperor Xuancheng, Emperor Shu ordered the Privy Councillor Wang Zhaoyuan to inspect the northern border towns of Yingzhai and Wubi.

古文：上谓宰相曰： 朕每思致治之方，未得其要，寝令不忘。
现代文：后周世宗对宰相说： 朕经常思考达到大治的方略，没有得到其中的要领，睡觉吃饭都不能忘记。
English: Later, Zhou Shizong said to the prime minister: I often think about the strategy to achieve great governance, but I have not obtained the essentials. I cannot forget it while sleeping or eating.

古文：又自唐、晋以来，吴、蜀、幽、并皆阻声教，未能混壹，宜命近臣著《为君难为臣不易论》及《开边策》各一篇，朕将览焉。 
现代文：又从后唐、后晋以来，吴地、蜀地、幽州、并州都被隔断了政令教化，不能统一，应该命令左右大臣撰写《为君难为臣不易论》和《开边策》各一篇，朕将一一阅览。 
English: In addition, since the Later Tang and Later Jin Dynasties, Wu, Shu, Yuzhou, and Hanzhou have been separated by government edicts and cannot be unified. It is necessary to order the left and right ministers to write "On the Difficulty of Being a King" and "Opening the Border" one by one, and I will read them one by one.

古文：比部郎中王朴献策，以为： 中国之失吴、蜀、幽、并，皆由失道。
现代文：比部郎中王朴进献策文，认为： 中原朝廷丧失吴地、蜀地、幽州、并州，都是由于丧失了治国之道。
English: King Pak Jin, the hiburō of the Central Plains, contributed an essay, arguing that: The Central Plains imperial court's loss of Wu, Shu, Yuzhou, and Bianzhou was due to the loss of the way of governing the country.

古文：今必先观所以失之之原，然后知所以取之之术。
现代文：如今一定要首先考察所以丧失土地的根本原因，然后才能知晓所以收取失地的方法。
English: Now we must first look at the root cause of the loss of land, and then we will know how to recover the lost land.

古文：其始失之也，莫不以君暗臣邪，兵骄民困，奸党内炽，武夫外横，因小致大，积微成著。
现代文：当开始丧失国土时，没有不是因为君主昏庸臣子奸邪，军队骄横百姓穷困，奸人乱党在朝内炙手可热，强将武夫在外面横行霸道，由小变大，积微成著。
English: When the country began to be lost, it was not because the monarch was weak, the vassals treacherous, the army arrogant, the people impoverished, the traitors and ruffians were hot in the imperial court, and the strong generals and warriors were domineering outside.

古文：今欲取之，莫若反其所为而已。
现代文：如今要收取失地，只不过反其道而行之罢了。
English: Now they want to recover the lost ground, but only in the opposite direction.

古文：夫进贤退不肖，所以收其才也；恩隐诚信，所以结其心也；赏功罚罪，所以尽其力也；去奢节用，所以丰其财也；时使薄敛，所以阜其民也。
现代文：进用贤人斥退坏人，是收罗人材的办法；布施恩泽讲究信用，是团结人心的办法；奖赏功劳惩罚罪过，是鼓励大家贡献力量的办法；革除奢侈节约费用，是增加财富办法；按时使用民力，减少赋税，是使百姓富足的办法。
English: Employing the wise and rejecting the wicked is the way to attract talent; extending grace and paying attention to credit is the way to unite the hearts of the people; rewarding merit and punishing sin is the way to encourage everyone to contribute; eliminating extravagance and saving expenses is the way to increase wealth; using people's power on time and reducing taxes is the way to make the people rich.

古文：俟群才既集，政事既治，财用既充，士民既附，然后举而用之，功无不成矣！
现代文：等到群贤毕集，政事理顺，财用充足，士民归附，然后起兵而使用他们，千秋功业没有不成功的了！
English: Wait until the group of sages is complete, the political affairs are streamlined, the financial resources are sufficient, the scholars and the people are attached, and then raise an army and use them, the work of thousands of years will not be unsuccessful!

古文：彼之人观我有必取之势，则知其情状者愿为间谍，知其山川者愿为乡导，民心既归，天意必从矣。凡攻取之道，必先其易者。
现代文：对方的人民看到我方有必定取胜的形势，知道内部情况的就愿意当间谍，熟悉山川地理的就愿意当向导，民心已归附，那么天意也必然会顺从了。 大凡进攻夺取的方法，必定先从容易的地方下手。
English: When the people on the other side see that we are in a situation where we are sure to win, if they know the internal situation, they are willing to be spies, and if they are familiar with the geography of mountains and rivers, they are willing to be guides. If the people's hearts have been won over, then the will of heaven will surely obey.

古文：唐与吾接境几二千里，其势易扰也。
现代文：南唐与我们相接的国境将近二千里，这地势很容易骚扰对方。
English: Nantang shares a nearly 2,000-mile border with China, which makes it easy for the two sides to harass each other.

古文：扰之当以无备之处为始，备东则扰西，备西则扰东，彼必奔走而救之。
现代文：骚扰对方应当从没有防备的地方开始，防备东面就骚扰西面，防备西面就骚扰东面，对方必定东奔西走去救援。
English: The harassment of the other side should start from an unprepared place. If the east side is prepared, the west side will be harassed. If the west side is prepared, the east side will be harassed. The other side must rush to the rescue.

古文：奔走之间，可以知其虚实强弱，然后避实击虚，避强击弱。
现代文：东奔西走之间，就可以探明对方的虚实强弱，然后避实击虚，避强击弱。
English: While running from east to west, you can find out the other side's strength and weakness, and then avoid the truth, avoid the strong, and avoid the weak.

古文：未须大举，且以轻兵扰之。
现代文：不须大举进攻时，暂且用小部队骚扰。
English: When there is no need for a large-scale attack, use small units to harass temporarily.

古文：南人懦怯，闻小有警，必悉师以救之。
现代文：南方人生性懦弱胆小，听说有小小的警报，必定出动全部军队去救援。
English: Southerners are naturally cowardly and timid, and when they hear of a small alarm, they are sure to send out the entire army to rescue.

古文：师数动则民疲而财竭，不悉师则我可以乘虚取之。
现代文：军队频繁出动就会使百姓疲劳而财物耗竭，不出动全国军队救援，我们就可以乘着空虚夺取土地。
English: If the army is frequently dispatched, it will make the people tired and their property exhausted. If we do not mobilize the national army to rescue, we can seize the land by taking advantage of the emptiness.

古文：如此，江北诸州将悉为我有。
现代文：像这样，长江以北各州将全部被我们占有。
English: In this way, all the provinces north of the Yangtze River will be occupied by us.

古文：既得江北，则用彼之民，行我之法，江南亦易取也。
现代文：既得长江以北，就可利用他们的百姓，实行我们的办法，那长江以南也容易夺取了。
English: Once we have gained the north of the Yangtze River, we can use their people and implement our methods, and the south of the Yangtze River is also easy to seize.

古文：得江南则岭南、巴蜀可传檄而定。
现代文：取得江南，那么岭南、巴蜀之地就可以传递檄文而平定。
English: If the south of the Yangtze River is gained, then Lingnan and Bashu will be able to pass on the imperial edict and be pacified.

古文：南方既定，则燕地必望风内附。若其不至，移兵攻之，席卷可平矣。
现代文：南方既已平定，那燕地必定望风披靡归附中原；倘若它不归顺，就调动军队进攻，犹如卷席子那样很快可以平定了。
English: Now that the south has been pacified, Yan's land will surely follow the wind to the Central Plains; if it does not submit, it will mobilize the army to attack, and it can be quickly pacified as if it were rolled up.

古文：惟河东必死之寇，不可以恩信诱，当以强兵制之。然彼自高平之败，力竭气沮，必未能为边患。宜且以为后图，俟天下既平，然后伺间一举可擒也。
现代文：只有河东北汉是必然要拼死一战的敌人，没法用恩惠信义诱导，应当用强大的军队制服它，然而它从高平失败以后，国力空虚士气沮丧，必定不能再起边患，应该暂且放在以后谋取，等待天下已经平定，然后瞅准时机，一举就可以擒获。
English: The Northeast Han Dynasty was the only enemy that was bound to fight to the death in the First World War. It could not be induced by grace and good faith, and it should be subdued by a powerful army. However, after its defeat at the Battle of Gaoping, its national strength was empty and its morale was depressed. It must not have any more border disputes. It should be put aside for the time being to seek gains later, wait for the world to be pacified, and then seize the opportunity. It could be captured in one fell swoop.

古文：今士卒精练，甲兵有备，群下畏法，诸将效力，期年之后可以出师，宜自夏秋蓄积实边矣。 
现代文：如今士兵精干，武器齐全，部下畏服军法，众将愿意效力，一年以后可以出师，应该从夏季、秋季就开始积蓄粮草来充实边疆了。 
English: Now the soldiers are capable, the weapons are complete, the subordinates are afraid to obey the military law, the generals are willing to serve, and they can leave the division after one year. It is time to start accumulating grain and grass from the summer and autumn to enrich the frontier.

古文：上欣然纳之。
现代文：后周世宗欣然接受。
English: Later, Zhou Shizong gladly accepted.

古文：时群臣多守常偷安，所对少有可取者，惟朴神峻气劲，有谋能断，凡所规画，皆称上意，上由是重其器识。未几，迁左谏议大夫，知开封府事。
现代文：当时群臣大多墨守常规，苟且偷安，所对策略很少有可取的，只有王朴神情峻逸、气势刚劲，有智谋能决断，凡是有所规划建议，都符合世宗的心意，世宗因此看重王朴的气质胆识，不久，迁升他为左谏议大夫、知开封府事。
English: At that time, most of the courtiers adhered to the routine, carefully and secretly, and their strategies were rarely desirable. Only Wang Pak, who had a sharp mind, strong momentum and wisdom, could make a decision. All planning proposals were in line with Shizong's intentions. Therefore, Shizong valued Wang Pak's temperament and courage. Soon, he was promoted to the position of the doctor of the Left Division of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, and was responsible for the affairs of the government.

古文：上谋取秦、凤，求可将者。
现代文：后周世宗谋划攻取秦州、凤州，寻找可以统领军队的人。
English: Later, Zhou Shizong planned to invade Qin and Feng, looking for someone who could lead the army.

古文：王溥荐宣徽南院使、镇安节度使向训。
现代文：王溥推荐宣徽南院使、镇安节度使向训。
English: Wang Qi recommended the envoy of the Southern Yuan of Xuanhui and the envoy of the Zhen'an Festival to Xiangxun.

古文：上命训与凤翔节度使王景、客省使高唐昝居润偕行。
现代文：世宗命令向训与凤翔节度使王景、客省使高唐人昝居润同行。
English: Shizong ordered Xiangxun and Fengxiang to make Wangjing and Hakka province to make Gaotang people live and work together.

古文：五月，戊辰朔，景出兵自散关趣秦州。
现代文：五月，戊辰朔，王景从散关出兵直奔秦州。
English: In May, Wang Jing marched from Sankuan to Qinzhou.

古文：敕天下寺院，非敕额者悉废之。
现代文：后周世宗敕命天下寺院，未经朝廷敕赐匾额的全部废除。
English: Later, Zhou Shizong ordered that all the temples in the country be abolished without the approval of the imperial court.

古文：禁私度僧尼，凡欲出家者必俟祖父母、父母、伯叔之命。惟两京、大名府、京兆府、青州听设戒坛。
现代文：禁止私下剃发出家当和尚、尼姑，凡是打算出家的人必须得到祖父母、父母亲、伯伯叔叔的同意，只有东京、西京、大名府、京兆府、青州准许设立受戒的佛坛。
English: It is forbidden to be ordained as a monk or nun in private. Anyone who intends to become a monk or nun must obtain the consent of their grandparents, parents, and uncles. Only Tokyo, Saikyo, Daimyo-fu, Kyosho-fu, and Aoshu are permitted to establish Buddhist altars for ordination.

古文：禁僧俗舍身、断手足、炼指、挂灯、带钳之类幻惑流俗者。
现代文：禁止僧侣舍身自杀、斩断手足、手指上燃香、裸体挂钩点灯、身带铁钳之类惑乱破坏社会风俗的行为。
English: It is forbidden for monks to commit suicide, cut off their hands and feet, burn incense on their fingers, light lamps while naked, or carry shovels to destroy social customs.

古文：令两京及诸州每岁造僧帐，有死亡、归俗，皆随时开落。
现代文：命令东京、西京以及各州每年编制僧侣名册，如有死亡、返俗，都随时注销。
English: Ordered Tokyo, Saikyo, and all prefectures to compile a roster of monks every year, and to cancel it at any time in the event of death or return to monasticism.

古文：是岁，天下寺院存者二千六百九十四，废者三万三百三十六，见僧四万二千四百四十四，尼一万八千七百五十六。
现代文：这一年，天下寺院保存的有二千六百九十四座，废除的有三万三百三十六座，现有和尚四万二千四百四十四人，尼姑一万八千七百五十六人。
English: In that year, 2,694 monasteries and nunneries were preserved around the world, while 33,366 were abolished, leaving 42,444 monks and 18,756 nuns.

古文：王景拔黄牛等八寨。
现代文：王景攻拔黄牛等八个营寨。
English: Wang Jing captured eight encampments including Huang Niu.

古文：戊寅，蜀主以捧圣控鹤都指挥使、保宁节度使李廷珪为北路行营都统，左卫圣步军都指挥使高彦俦为招讨使，武宁节度使吕彦珂副之，客省使赵崇韬为都监。
现代文：戊寅，后蜀主任命捧圣控鹤都指挥使、保宁节度使李廷为北路行营都统，左卫圣步军都指挥使高彦俦为招讨使，武宁节度使吕彦珂为招讨副使，客省使赵崇韬为都监。
English: Wu Yin, after the appointment of the Lord of Shu, appointed Li Ting as the commander of the North Road Campaign in the North, Gao Yanqi as the commander of the Left Guards Holy Marching Army, Lyu Yanke as the deputy commander of the Invitation, and Zhao Chongyi as the supervisor of the Invitation in the Guest Province.

古文：蜀赵季札至德阳，闻周师入境，惧不敢进，上书求解边任还奏事，先遣辎重及妓妾西归。
现代文：后蜀赵季札到达德阳，听说后周军队入境，恐惧不敢前进，上书请求解除守边任务返回京城奏报情况，先遣送随身携带的包裹箱笼和妓女侍妾向西返归。
English: After Shu Zhao Jizha arrived in Deyang, he heard that the army of Hou Zhou had entered the country, and he was afraid to move forward. He sent a letter requesting that the border guard duty be lifted and that he return to Beijing to report on the situation. He first sent the package boxes and prostitute concubines that he carried with him back to the west.

古文：丁亥，单骑驰入成都，众以为奔败，莫不震恐。
现代文：丁亥，赵季札单人匹马奔入成都，众人都以为是打败仗逃回，没有不震惊恐慌的。
English: Dinghai and Zhao Jizhata ran into Chengdu single-handedly on horseback. Many people thought that they had lost the battle and fled back. They were shocked and panicked.

古文：蜀主问以机事，皆不能对。
现代文：后蜀主问他军事机务，都不能回答。
English: After Lord Shu asked him about the military machine, he could not answer.

古文：蜀主怒，系之御史台，甲午，斩之于崇礼门。
现代文：后蜀主勃然大怒，将他关押在御史台，甲午，在崇礼门斩首。
English: Later, Lord Shu flew into a rage, and he was detained at the Imperial History Museum, and in the afternoon, he was beheaded at the Chongli Gate.

古文：六月，庚子，上亲录囚于内苑。
现代文：六月，庚子，后周世宗在宫内园林中亲自查阅囚犯的档案。
English: In June, Geng Zi and later Zhou Shizong personally inspected the prisoners' files in the palace gardens.

古文：有汝州民马遇，父及弟为吏所冤死，屡经覆按，不能自伸，上临问，始得其实，人以为神。
现代文：有个汝州的百姓叫马遇，父亲以及弟弟被官吏冤枉致死，屡经核查审理，自己不能申诉，世宗当面审问，才获得真实情况，众人都认为神奇。
English: There is a story of a citizen of Ruzhou called Ma Ying, whose father and younger brother were unjustly sentenced to death by officials. After repeated verification and trial, he could not appeal, and only after he was interrogated in person by Shizong did he obtain the true situation. Everyone thought it was amazing.

古文：由是诸长吏无不亲察狱讼。
现代文：从此各部门长官无不亲自省察刑事诉讼案件。
English: Since then, the heads of various departments have all personally inspected the criminal proceedings.

古文：壬寅，西师与蜀李廷珪等战于威武城东，不利，排陈使濮州刺史胡立等为蜀所擒。
现代文：壬寅，西征军队与后蜀李廷等在威武城东交战，失利，排阵使濮州刺史胡立等人被后蜀擒获。
English: Ren Yin, the Westward Expeditionary Army, fought against Hou Shu Li Ting and others in the east of Weiwu City, but were defeated, and the formation of a line of battle led to the capture of Zhangzhou Jishi Hu Li and others by Hou Shu.

古文：丁未，蜀主遣间使如北汉及唐，欲与之俱出兵以制周，北汉主、唐主皆许之。
现代文：丁未，后蜀主派遣秘密使者前往北汉和南唐，准备和他们共同出兵来遏制后周，北汉主、南唐主都答应。
English: After the death of Emperor Ding Wei, Emperor Shu sent a secret envoy to Northern Han and Southern Tang to prepare to send troops together with them to contain Hou Zhou. Both Northern Han and Southern Tang agreed.

古文：己酉，以彰信节度使韩通充西南行营马步军都虞候。
现代文：己酉，后周任命彰信节度使韩通充任西南行营马步军都虞候。
English: The following week, the appointment of Changxin Jiedu made Han Tong serve as the commander of the southwestern campaign horse cavalry.

古文：戊午，南汉主杀祯州节度使通王弘政，于是高祖之诸子尽矣。
现代文：戊午，南汉主杀死祯州节度使通王刘弘政，于是南汉高祖的所有儿子全死了。
English: In the afternoon of the 4th day of the 4th month, the Southern Han Emperor killed Zhangzhou Jiedu and made Liu Hongzheng king, and all the sons of the Southern Han Emperor Gaozu died.

古文：壬戌，以枢密院承旨清河张美为右领军大将军、权点检三司事。
现代文：壬戌，后周世宗任命枢密院承旨清河人张美为右领军大将军、权点检三司事。
English: Later, Zhou Shizong appointed Zhang Mei, a man from Qinghe, to be the right-hand leading general and the third secretary of the power point inspection under the order of the Privy Council.

古文：初，帝在澶州，美掌州之金谷隶三司者，帝或私有所求，美曲为供副。
现代文：当初，世宗在澶州时，张美掌管州中隶属于三司的钱粮，世宗有时私下有所索求，张美千方百计为他提供满足。
English: At the beginning, when Shizong was in Zhangzhou, Zhang Mei was in charge of the state grain fund, which was under the Third Division. Shizong sometimes made requests in private, and Zhang Mei did her best to satisfy him.

古文：太祖闻之怒，恐伤帝意，但徙美为濮州马步都虞候。
现代文：后周太祖听说此事很生气，又恐怕伤害世宗的感情，只是调任张美为濮州马步军都虞候。
English: Later, Zhou Taizu was very angry when he heard about this, and I'm afraid it hurt Shizong's feelings. He just transferred Zhang Mei to be the commander of the Zhangzhou horse-marching army.

古文：美治财精敏，当时鲜及，故帝以利权授之。帝征伐四方，用度不乏，美之力也，然思其在澶州所为，终不以公忠待之。
现代文：张美治理财政很精明，当时很少有人及得上，所以世宗将财政收入的大权授给他；然而想到他在澶州的作为，终究不将他当作公正忠诚的人来对待。
English: Zhang Mei's management of finances was very astute. At that time, very few people were able to keep up with him, so Shizong gave him the power of financial income. However, when he thought about his actions in Zhangzhou, he was not treated as a fair and loyal person.

古文：秋，七月，丁卯朔，以王景兼西南行营都招讨使，向训兼行营兵马都监。
现代文：秋季七月，丁卯朔，后周世宗任命王景兼西南行营都招讨使，向训兼行营兵马都监。
English: In the autumn of July, Ding Yushuo, later Zhou Shizong, appointed Wang Jing as the envoy of the southwestern campaign, and the inspector of the training and campaign of the soldiers and horses.

古文：宰相以景等久无功。馈运不继，固请罢兵。
现代文：宰相因王景等长久没有成功，粮草运输跟不上，坚持请求撤兵。
English: The prime minister insisted on requesting the withdrawal of troops because Wang Jing and others had been unsuccessful for a long time, and grain and grass transportation could not keep up.

古文：帝命太祖皇帝往视之，还，言秦、凤可取之状，帝从之。
现代文：世宗命令宋太祖皇帝赵匡胤前往视察，回来，陈述秦州、凤州可以攻取的情况，世宗听从了他意见。
English: Shizong ordered Emperor Zhao Kuangyin, the founder of the Song Dynasty, to inspect the situation and come back with a report on the situation in Qin and Fengzhou, and Shizong followed his advice.

古文：八月，丁未，中书侍郎、同平章事景范罢判三司，寻以父丧罢政事。
现代文：八月，丁未，中书侍郎、同平章事景范罢免判三司之职，不久因为父丧免去朝政事务。
English: In August, Ding Wei, the chancellor's secretary, and Tong Ping Zhang removed Jianjing Fan from the post of the third secretary, and soon he was removed from the imperial government affairs because of his father's death.

古文：王景等败蜀兵，获将卒三百。
现代文：王景等击败后蜀军队，捕获将吏士卒三百人。
English: Wang Jing and others defeated the post-Shu army and captured 300 generals and officers.

古文：己未，蜀主遣通奏使、知枢密院、武泰节度使伊审征如行营慰扶，仍督战。
现代文：己未，后蜀主派遣通奏使、知枢密院、武泰节度使伊审徵前往军营慰劳安抚，并且督战。
English: Not long after, Emperor Shu dispatched the envoy, the Privy Councilor, and the Military Attaché to go to the military camp to comfort and pacify the conscripts, and supervise the war.

古文：帝以县官久不铸钱，而民间多销钱为器皿及佛像，钱益少，九月，丙寅朔，敕始立监采铜铸钱，自非县官法物、军器及寺观钟磐钹鐸之类听留外，自馀民间铜器、佛像，五十日内悉令输官，给其直；过期隐匿不输，五斤以上其罪死，不及者论刑有差。
现代文：后周世宗因为朝廷长久没有铸造铜钱，而民间许多人销毁钱币做成器皿以及佛像，铜钱越来越少，九月，丙寅朔，敕令开始设立机构采集铜来铸造钱币，除了朝廷的礼器、兵器以及寺庙道观的钟磬、钹镲、铃铎之类准许保留外，其余民间的铜器、佛像，五十天内全部让送交官府，付给等值的钱；超过期限隐藏不交，重量在五斤以上的判死罪，不到五斤的量刑判处不同的罪。
English: Later, Zhou Shizong, because the imperial court had not minted copper money for a long time, and many people destroyed coins to make utensils and Buddha statues, copper money became less and less. In September, the imperial edict began to set up an organization to collect copper to mint coins. In addition to the ceremonial objects and weapons of the imperial court and the bells, cymbals and bells of the temple's doctrine, the remaining folk bronze objects and Buddha statues were all sent to the government within 50 days and paid the equivalent amount of money; if the time limit was exceeded, they were hidden and not paid; if the weight was more than five pounds, they were sentenced

古文：上谓侍臣曰： 卿辈勿以毁佛为疑。
现代文：世宗对侍从大臣说： 你们不要为毁佛而疑虑。
English: Sejong said to the minister's attendants, "Don't hesitate to destroy the Buddha.

古文：夫佛以善道化人，苟志于善，斯奉佛矣。
现代文：佛用善道来教化人，假如立志行善，这就是信佛了。
English: Buddha used the good way to enlighten people. If you set out to do good, this is believing in Buddha.

古文：彼铜像岂所谓佛邪！
现代文：那些铜像岂是所说的佛呢！
English: Are those bronze statues of the said Buddha?

古文：且吾闻佛志在利人，虽头目犹舍以布施，若朕身可以济民，亦非所惜也。 
现代文：况且我听说佛的宗旨是在于利人，即使是脑袋、眼睛也都可以舍弃布施给需要的人，倘若朕的身子可用来普济百姓，也不值得吝惜啊。 
English: Moreover, I heard that the purpose of the Buddha is to benefit people. Even the head and eyes can be donated to those in need. If my body can be used to help the people of Phu Quoc, it is not worth grudging.

古文：臣光曰：若周世宗，可谓仁矣！不爱其身而爱民；若周世宗，可谓明矣！不以无益废有益。
现代文：臣司马光曰：像周世宗，可以称得上仁爱了，不吝惜自身而爱护百姓；像周世宗，可以称得上英明了，不为无益的东西来废弃有益的东西。
English: Minister Sima Guang said, "Like Zhou Shizong, you can be called benevolent, you don't spare yourself but love the people; like Zhou Shizong, you can be called wise, you don't discard something beneficial for something useless."

古文：蜀李廷珪遣先锋都指挥使李进据马岭寨，又遣奇兵出斜谷，屯白涧，又分兵出凤州之北唐仓镇及黄花谷，绝周粮道。
现代文：后蜀李廷派遣先锋都指挥使李进占据马岭寨，又派遣准备突然出击的部队从斜谷而出，屯驻白涧，又分出军队从凤州以北的唐仓镇和黄花谷而出，断绝后周的粮道。
English: After Shu Li Ting dispatched the vanguard to command Li Jin to occupy Ma Lingzhai, he also dispatched the troops preparing for a sudden attack from the valley and stationed them in Baiyun, and he also dispatched troops from Tangcang Town and Huanghua Valley north of Fengzhou to cut off Hou Zhou's grain route.

古文：闰月，王景遣裨将张建雄将兵二千抵黄花，又遣兵千人趣唐仓，扼蜀归路。
现代文：闰月，王景派遣副将张建雄领兵二千抵达黄花谷，又派遣军队一千赶赴唐仓镇，扼住后蜀军队归路。
English: In the leap month, Wang Jing dispatched Vice-General Zhang Jianxiong to lead 2,000 soldiers to arrive in Huanghua Valley, and dispatched another 1,000 troops to rush to Tangcang Town to strangle the return route of the post-Shu army.

古文：蜀染院使王峦将兵出唐仓，与建雄战于黄花，蜀兵败，奔唐仓，遇周兵，又败，虏峦及其将士三千人。马岭、白涧兵皆溃，李廷珪、高彦俦等退保青泥岭。
现代文：后蜀染院使王峦领兵从唐仓镇而出，与张建雄在黄花谷交战，后蜀兵败，逃奔唐仓镇，路遇后周军队，又被击败，俘虏王峦及其将吏士卒三千人；马岭、白涧的军队全都溃逃，李廷、高彦俦等后退保守青泥岭。
English: After Shu Dyeing Institute sent Wang Hui to lead the troops from Tangcang Town, he fought with Zhang Jianxiong in Huanghua Valley. After Shu's defeat, he fled to Tangcang Town. Encountering Zhou's army on the road, he was defeated again. Wang Hui and his 3,000 officers and men were captured. The armies of Ma Ling and Bai Yu all fled. Li Ting, Gao Yan Hui and others retreated to Qingdeiling.

古文：蜀雄武节度使兼侍中韩继勋弃秦州，奔还成都、观察判宫赵玭举城降，斜谷援兵亦溃。
现代文：后蜀雄武节度使兼侍中韩继勋放弃秦州，逃回成都，观察判官赵率城投降，斜谷增援部队也溃散。
English: After the Shu Xiong Wu Festival, Han Jixun, who was also an attendant, abandoned Qinzhou and fled back to Chengdu, observing the surrender of the judge Zhao and the city, and the reinforcement troops in the valley were also dispersed.

古文：成、阶二州皆降，蜀人振恐。
现代文：成、阶二州都投降，后蜀人震惊恐慌。
English: Chengdu and Zhuhai both surrendered, leaving the Shu people shocked and panicked.

古文：玭，澶州人也。
现代文：赵是澶州人。
English: Zhao is from Zhangzhou.

古文：帝欲以玭为节度使，范质固争以为不可，乃以为郢州刺史。
现代文：世宗打算任命赵为节度使，范质坚持争辩认为不可，于是任命赵为郢州刺史。
English: Shizong planned to appoint Zhao as the festival envoy, but the standard insisted on arguing that it was impossible, so he appointed Zhao as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：壬子，百官入贺，帝举酒属王溥曰： 边功之成，卿择帅之力也！ 
现代文：壬子，文武百官入朝祝贺，世宗举杯为王溥敬酒说： 边疆战功的取得，全仗爱卿选择主帅得当之力啊！ 
English: Jinshi, congratulating the entry of hundreds of officers and men into the imperial court, Shizong raised his glass to toast Wang Yao and said: "For the achievement of frontier war exploits, it is the power of choice of the commander-in-chief!

古文：甲子，上与将相食于万岁殿，因言： 两日大寒，朕于宫中食珍膳，深愧无功于民而坐享于禄，既不能躬耕而食，惟当亲冒矢石为民除害，差可自安耳！ 
现代文：甲子，后周世宗与将军、丞相在万岁殿就餐，因而说道： 两天大寒，朕在宫中吃美味佳肴，对百姓没功劳而坐享上天赐予的禄位深感渐愧，既然不能自己耕耘而吃饭，那就只有亲身去冒飞矢流石的危险来为民除害，还略可自我安慰。 
English: Gao Zi, later Zhou Shizong, dined with the general and the prime minister in the Hall of Long Life, and thus said: "It was very cold for two days. I ate delicious food in the palace. I felt deeply ashamed of the people who did not work hard and enjoyed the position given by God. Since I could not work hard and eat by myself, I had no choice but to take the risk of flying stones to eliminate harm to the people. I could also console myself a little.

古文：乙丑，蜀李廷珪上表待罪。
现代文：乙丑，后蜀李廷上表等候治罪。
English: Second ugly, after Shu Li Ting on the table waiting for punishment.

古文：冬，十月，壬申，伊审征至成都请罪。
现代文：冬季，十月，壬申，伊审徵到达成都请罪。
English: Winter, October, Jinshin, and I all pleaded guilty before the trial was over.

古文：皆释之。蜀主致书于帝请和，自称大蜀皇帝，帝怒其抗礼，不答。
现代文：后蜀主送书信给周世宗请求讲和，自称大蜀皇帝。世宗恼怒他以对等礼节相待，不作回答。
English: Later, the Lord of Shu sent a letter to Zhou Shizong requesting to make peace, calling himself the Great Shu Emperor. Shizong was annoyed that he treated him with reciprocal courtesy and did not answer.

古文：蜀主愈恐，聚兵粮于剑门、白帝，为守御之备，募兵既多，用度不足，始铸铁钱，榷境内铁器，民甚苦之。
现代文：后蜀主愈加恐慌，在剑门、白帝聚集军队、粮草，作好防守抵抗的准备，招募士兵已经很多，费用开支不够，开始铸造铁钱，对境内铁器实行专卖，百姓很为此所苦累。
English: Later, Lord Shu became more and more panicked. He gathered troops, grain and grass in Jianmen and Baidi, and made preparations for defensive resistance. There were already many soldiers recruited, and the expenses were not enough. He began to mint iron money, and implemented a monopoly on domestic ironware. The people were very tired of this.

古文：唐主性和柔，好文章，而喜人顺己，由是谄谀之臣多进用，政事日乱。
现代文：南唐主生性温和柔顺，爱好文采辞章，而且喜欢人奉承自己，因此善于花言巧语、献媚取宠的臣子大多晋升任用，政事日益混乱。
English: Southern Tang emperors were gentle and soft-spoken, fond of literary phrases, and liked people to flatter themselves. Therefore, most of the courtiers who were good at rhetoric and flattery were promoted and appointed, and political affairs became increasingly chaotic.

古文：既克建州，破湖南，益骄，有吞天下之志。
现代文：既已攻克建州，击破湖南，就更加骄傲，产生吞并天下的志向。
English: After conquering Jianzhou and defeating Hunan, they became even more proud and aspired to annex the whole world.

古文：李守贞、慕容彦超之叛，皆为之出师，遥为声援。又遣使自海道通契丹及北汉，约共图中国。
现代文：李守贞、慕容彦超叛乱，南唐都为之出兵，远远地进行声援，又派遣使者从海道联络契丹和北汉，约定共同谋取中原。
English: Li Shouzhen and Murong Yanchao rebelled, and Southern Tang sent troops to support them from afar. They also sent envoys from the sea route to contact Khitan and Northern Han, and agreed to jointly seek the Central Plains.

古文：值中国多事，未暇与之校。
现代文：后周正值中原多事，没有时间来与他计较。
English: The week after was a busy one for Nakahara, and there was no time to think about him.

古文：先是，每冬淮水浅涸，唐人常发兵戍守，谓之 把浅 。
现代文：从前，每年冬天淮河水浅干涸，南唐人经常发兵守卫淮河，称做 把浅 。
English: In the past, when the shallow water of the Huaihe River dried up every winter, the Southern Tang Dynasty often sent soldiers to guard the Huaihe River, calling it the shallow water.

古文：寿州监军吴廷绍以为疆场无事，坐费资粮，悉罢之。
现代文：寿州监军吴廷绍认为边境平安无事，白费财物粮草，全部撤回。
English: Wu Ting Shao, the inspector of Shoushu, thought that the border was safe and nothing happened. He wasted his wealth, grain and grass and withdrew everything.

古文：清淮节度使刘仁赡上表固争，不能得。
现代文：清淮节度使刘仁赡上表一再争辨，没能取胜。
English: The Qing and Huai dynasties made Liu Renyi repeatedly argue with the upper table, but failed to win.

古文：十一月，乙未朔，帝以李谷为淮南道前军行营都部署兼知庐、寿等行府事，以忠武节度使王彦超副之，督侍卫马军都指挥使韩令坤等十二将以伐唐。
现代文：十一月，乙未朔，后周世宗任命李为淮南道前军行营都部署兼知庐州、寿州等行府事务，任命忠武节度使王彦超为行营副都部署，督领侍卫马军都指挥使韩令坤等十二名将领来攻伐南唐。
English: In November, shortly after, Zhou Shizong appointed Li to be the commander of the former military camp in Huainan Province and to be in charge of the administrative affairs of Zhizhou and Shuzhou, appointed Zhongwu Jiedu to be the deputy commander of the former military camp and to be in charge of the administrative affairs of Zhizhou, appointed Wang Yanchao to be the deputy commander of the former military camp, and appointed Han Lingkun and other twelve generals to invade Southern Tang.

古文：令坤，磁州武安人也。
现代文：韩令坤是磁州武安人。
English: Han Lingkun is a native of Wu'an, Gyeongju.

古文：汴水自唐末溃决，自埇桥东南悉为污泽。
现代文：汴水从唐朝末年溃堤决口以来，自桥东南全都成为污泥沼泽。
English: Since the end of the Tang Dynasty, when the dam was breached, all of Surabaya from the southeast of the bridge has become a sludge swamp.

古文：上谋击唐，先命武宁节度使武行德发民夫，因故堤疏导之，东至泗上。议者皆以为难成，上曰： 数年之后，必获其利。 
现代文：后周世宗图谋攻击南唐，先命令武宁节度使武行德征发民夫，顺着原来河堤疏通引水，东面直到泗水；参与议事的人都认为难以成功，世宗说： 数年以后，必定获得它的好处。 
English: Later, Zhou Shizong plotted to attack Southern Tang, and first ordered the Wu Ning Festival to recruit and dispatch civilians, and dredge and divert water along the original river dike to the east to Surabaya. The people involved in the deliberation thought that it would be difficult to succeed, and Shizong said: After a few years, we will definitely get its benefits.

古文：丁未，上与侍臣论刑赏，上曰： 朕必不因怒刑人，因喜赏人。 
现代文：丁未，后周世宗与侍从大臣谈论刑赏，世宗说： 朕一定不因为自己发怒而惩处人，因为自己高兴而奖赏人。 
English: Ding Wei, after Zhou Shizong talked about punishment and reward with the attendant minister, Shizong said: I must not punish people because I am angry, and reward people because I am happy.

古文：先是，大梁城中民侵街衢为舍，通大车者盖寡，上悉命直而广之，广者至三十步。又迁坟墓于标外。
现代文：在这以前，大梁城中居民侵占街道修筑房舍，能通大车的路比较少，后周世宗命令将街道全部取直并且拓宽，最宽的到三十步；又将坟墓迁移到标记以外。
English: Prior to this, the residents of Dalian City occupied the streets to build houses, and there were relatively few roads that could be used by trucks. Later, Zhou Shizong ordered that all the streets be straightened and widened, the widest to thirty paces; and the graves were moved outside the mark.

古文：上曰： 近广京城，于存殁扰动诚多。
现代文：世宗说： 近来拓宽京城，给活人、死者骚扰动乱确实很多。
English: Sejong said, "Recently, the expansion of the capital has caused a lot of disturbance to the living and the dead.

古文：怨谤之语，朕自当之，他日终为人利。 
现代文：怨恨诽谤的言语，朕自己承当，然而将来终究会对百姓有利。 
English: I bear the responsibility of resentment and slander, but in the end, it will be beneficial to the people in the future.

古文：王景等围凤州，韩通分兵城固镇以绝蜀之援兵。
现代文：王景等包围凤州，韩通分兵修筑固镇城来截断后蜀的援军。
English: Wang Jing and others encircled Fengzhou, and Han Tong's detachment built a fortified town to cut off the reinforcements from Hou Shu.

古文：戊申，克凤州，擒蜀威武节度使王环及都监赵崇溥等将士五千人。
现代文：戊申，攻克凤州，擒获后蜀威武节度使王环以及都监赵崇溥等将吏士兵五千人。
English: Wushen, conquered Fengzhou, captured the Shuweiwu Festival, sent Wang Huan and the governor of the capital, Zhao Chongyi, and other generals and soldiers of five thousand.

古文：崇溥不食而死。
现代文：赵崇溥不进食而死。
English: Zhao Chongyao did not eat and died.

古文：环，真定人也。
现代文：王环是真定人。
English: Wang Huan is a real person.

古文：乙卯，制曲赦秦、凤、阶、成境内，所获蜀将士，愿留者优其俸赐，愿去者给资装而遣之。
现代文：乙卯，制令在秦州、凤州、阶州、成州境内实行特赦，所俘获后蜀将吏士兵，愿意留下的给他们优厚的俸禄赏赐，愿意离去的送给路费服装而遣返。
English: Second, the system ordered to implement amnesty in Qinzhou, Fengzhou, Chaozhou, and Chengzhou. The captured soldiers of the late Shu generals would be rewarded with generous salaries if they were willing to stay, and would be repatriated with clothing for travel expenses if they were willing to leave.

古文：诏曰： 用慰众情，免违物性，其四州之民，二税征科之外，凡蜀人所立诸色科徭，悉罢之。 
现代文：诏书说： 用来安慰民众的情绪，避免违背事物的本性，这四州的百姓，除了夏税、秋税的征收之外，凡是蜀人所设立的各种赋税徭役，全部取消。 
English: The edict said: In order to comfort the people's emotions and avoid violating the nature of things, the people of these four states, in addition to the collection of summer and autumn taxes, all kinds of tax collection agencies established by the Shu people have been abolished.

古文：唐人闻周兵将至而惧，刘仁赡神气自若，部分守御，无异平日，众情稍安。
现代文：南唐人听说后周军队即将到达而恐惧。刘仁赡神态自若，部署军队守卫抵御，与平日没有两样，大家的情绪稍趋安稳。
English: When the people of southern Tang heard that the army was about to arrive the following week, they were afraid. Liu Renyi looked confident, and the deployment of the army to guard and resist was no different from the usual day. Everyone's mood stabilized slightly.

古文：唐主以神武统军刘彦贞为北面行营都部署，将兵二万趣寿州，奉化节度使、同平章事皇甫晖为应援使，常州团练使姚凤为应援都监，将兵三万屯定远。
现代文：南唐主任命神武统军刘彦贞为北面行营都部署，领兵二万奔赴寿州，奉化节度使、同平章事皇甫晖为应援使，常州团练使姚凤为应援都监，领兵三万屯驻定远。
English: The Lord of Southern Tang appointed Liu Yanzhen of the Shenwu Unification Army to be the commander of the northern camp, and led 20,000 soldiers to rush to Shoushou. Fenghua Jiedu envoy, Tongping Zhangjihuang Fuxi was the assistant envoy, Changzhou Reunification Envoy sent Yao Feng as the assistant overseer, and led 30,000 soldiers to stay in Dingyuan.

古文：召镇南节度使宋齐丘还金陵，谋国难，以翰林承旨、户部尚书殷崇义为吏部尚书、知枢密院。
现代文：征召镇南节度使宋齐丘返回金陵，商讨应付国难，任命翰林承旨、户部尚书殷崇义为吏部尚书、知枢密院。
English: Zhenan Jiedu was summoned to make Song Qiqiu return to Jinling to discuss how to deal with the national calamity, and appointed Hanlin Zengzhi, Hubei Shangshu, and Yin Chongyi as officials of Hubei Shangshu and Zhizhu Secret Academy.

古文：李谷等为浮梁，自正阳济淮。
现代文：李等架设浮桥，从正阳渡过淮河。
English: Li et al. erected a floating bridge to cross the Huai River from Zhengyang.

古文：十二月，甲戌，谷奏王彦超败唐兵二千馀人于寿州城下，己卯，又奏先锋都指挥使白延遇败唐兵千馀人于山口镇。
现代文：十二月，甲戌，李奏报王彦超在寿州城下击败南唐军队二千余人。己卯，又奏报先锋都指挥使白延遇在山口镇击败南唐军队一千多人。
English: In December, Ji Jun and Li Song reported that Wang Yanchao defeated more than 2,000 Southern Tang troops at the foot of Shoushu Castle. Ji Yu and Song also reported that the vanguard were commanded by Bai Yan, who defeated more than 1,000 Southern Tang troops in Yamaguchi Town.

古文：丙戌，枢密使兼侍中韩忠正公郑仁诲卒。
现代文：丙戌，枢密使兼侍中韩忠正公郑仁诲去世。
English: Han Zhongzheng Zheng Renyi, Privy Envoy and Attendant to Han Zhongzheng, passed away.

古文：上临其丧，近臣奏称岁道非便，上曰： 君臣义重，何日时之有！ 
现代文：后周世宗要亲临吊丧，侍从近臣进奏说时日不吉利，世宗说： 君臣情义深重，讲究什么日子时辰！ 
English: Afterward, Zhou Shizong wanted to be present at the funeral, and the attendant of his close vassal Jin Song said that the time was unlucky. Shizong said: The king and his vassal have deep feelings, and they pay attention to what day and time it is!

古文：往哭尽哀。
现代文：前往痛哭尽表哀思。
English: Go and cry your heart out.

古文：吴越王弘亻叔遣元帅府判官陈彦禧入贡，帝以诏谕弘亻叔，使出兵击唐。
现代文：吴越王钱弘派遣元帅府判官陈彦禧入朝进贡，后周世宗赐诏书指示钱弘，让他出兵进攻南唐。
English: Qian Hong, the king of Wu Yue, sent Chen Yan Xi, the judge of the Marshal's Office, to the court to pay tribute. Later, Zhou Shizong issued an imperial edict instructing Qian Hong to send troops to attack Southern Tang.

古文：太祖圣神恭肃文武孝皇帝下显德三年春，正月，丙午，以王环为右骁卫大将军，赏其不降也。丁酉，李谷奏败唐兵千馀人于上窑。
现代文：显德三年春季，正月，丙午，后周任命王环为右骁卫大将军，奖赏他的不投降。丁酉，李奏报在上窑击败南唐军队一千多人。
English: In the spring of the third year of Xiande, the first month, the third afternoon, and the last week, Wang Huan was appointed as the right guard general to reward his non-surrender. Ding Yao and Li Soo defeated more than a thousand Southern Tang troops in Shangyao.

古文：戊戌，发开封府、曹、滑、郑州之民十馀万筑大梁外城。
现代文：戊戌，后周征发开封府、曹州、滑州、郑州的百姓十多万建筑大梁外城。
English: More than 100,000 people from the provinces of Kaifeng, Caozhou, Leshou and Zhengzhou were recruited and dispatched to build the outer city.

古文：庚子，帝下诏亲征淮南，以宣徽南院使、镇安节度使向训权东京留守，端明殿学士王朴副之，彰信节度使韩通权点检侍卫司及在京内外都巡检。
现代文：庚子，后周世宗颁下诏书亲自出征淮南，任命宣徽南院使、镇安节度使向训暂时代理东京留守，端明殿学士王朴为副留守，彰信节度使韩通暂代理点检侍卫司以及在京内外都巡检。
English: Geng Zi, after Zhou Shizong issued the edict, personally went to Huainan, appointed the envoy of the Southern Academy of the Xuan Hui Dynasty, the Zhen'an Festival envoy to stay in Tokyo as a temporary representative of Xiang Xun, the academician Wang Pak of the Tangming Palace as a deputy, and the Zhangxin Festival to make Han Tong temporarily act as the inspector of the guards and inspectors in and out of Beijing.

古文：命侍卫都指挥使、归德节度使李重进将兵先赴正阳，河阳节度使白重赞将亲兵三千屯颍上。
现代文：命令侍卫都指挥使、归德节度使李重进领兵先赶赴正阳，河阳节度使白重赞带领随身亲兵三千屯驻颍上。
English: He ordered Li Chongjin to go to Zhengyang first to command the attendants and guards, and Heyang Jiedu to lead the troops, and Bai Chongzhan to lead the 3,000 soldiers with him to stay in Fucheng.

古文：壬寅，帝发大梁。
现代文：壬寅，世宗从大梁出发。
English: Renin and Sejong set off from Daliang.

古文：李谷攻寿州，久不克。唐刘彦贞引兵救之，至来远镇，距寿州二百里，又以战舰数百艘趣正阳，为攻浮梁之势。
现代文：李进攻寿州，许久没攻下；南唐刘彦贞领兵救援，到达来远镇，距离寿州二百里，又派战舰数百艘赶赴正阳，造成攻击浮桥的态势。
English: Li attacked Shoushou, but did not capture it for a long time; the Southern Tang Liu Yanzhen led the rescue, arrived in Yuanzhen, two hundred miles from Shoushou, and sent hundreds of warships to Zhengyang, causing the situation of attacking the pontoon.

古文：李谷畏之，召将佐谋曰： 我军不能水战，若贼断浮梁，则腹背受敌，皆不归矣！
现代文：李畏惧南唐水军，召集将领僚佐商量说： 我军不善于水战，倘若贼寇截断浮桥，就会腹背受敌，全都不能返回了。
English: Li was afraid of the Southern Tang's navy, so he called together his generals and adjutants and said: "Our army is not good at naval warfare. If the bandits cut off the pontoon bridge, they will be overwhelmed by the enemy and will not be able to return."

古文：不如退守浮梁以待车驾。 
现代文：不如退守浮桥来等待皇上。 
English: Better retreat to the pontoon to wait for the Emperor.

古文：上至圉镇，闻其谋，亟遣中使乘驿止之。
现代文：世宗到达圉镇，听说李的计谋，立即派遣朝廷使臣乘着驿站车马去制止。
English: When Shizong arrived at Handan Town, he heard of Li's scheme and immediately dispatched imperial envoys to the scene in a horse-drawn carriage.

古文：比至，已焚刍粮，退保正阳。
现代文：等使者到达，李已焚烧粮草，退守正阳浮桥。
English: By the time the envoy arrived, Li had burned grain and grass and retreated to the Zhengyang floating bridge.

古文：丁未，帝至陈州，亟遣李重进引兵趣淮上。
现代文：丁未，世宗到达陈州，立即派遣李重进领兵赶赴淮上。
English: When Ding Wei and Shizong arrived in Chenzhou, they immediately sent Li Chongjin to lead the troops to Huai Shang.

古文：辛亥，李谷奏： 贼舰中淮而进，弩砲所不能及，若浮梁不守，则众心动摇，须至退军。
现代文：辛亥，李上奏： 贼寇战舰在淮水中央前进，弓弩石炮的射程不能到达，倘若浮桥失守，就会人心动摇，必定退兵。
English: Xinhai, Li Shangso: Thieves and robbers warships are advancing in the middle of Huai Shui, the range of the bow and arrow cannon can not be reached, if the pontoon is lost, people will be shaken and will definitely retreat.

古文：今贼舰日进，淮水日涨，若车驾亲临，万一粮道阻绝，其危不测。
现代文：如今贼寇战舰每日前进，淮水日益上涨，倘若皇上大驾亲临，万一粮道断绝，那危险就难以预测。
English: Nowadays, the pirate warships are advancing every day, and the floodwaters are rising day by day. If the emperor arrives in person, in case the food supply is cut off, the danger is difficult to predict.

古文：愿陛下且驻跸陈、颍，俟李重进至，臣与之共度贼舰可御，浮梁可完，立具奏闻。
现代文：希望陛下暂且驻在陈州、颍州，等待李重进到达，臣下与他共同商量如何阻止贼寇战舰，如何保全浮桥，立即陈奏报告。
English: I hope that His Majesty will stay in Chenzhou and Zhangzhou for the time being, waiting for Li Chongjin to arrive, and his subjects will discuss with him how to stop the pirate warships and how to preserve the pontoon bridge, and immediately report to him.

古文：但若厉兵秣马，春去冬来，足使贼中疲弊，取之未晚。 
现代文：倘若我军厉兵秣马作好准备，春去冬来等待时机，足以使贼寇疲惫不堪，到那时取之未晚。 
English: If our army is well prepared, and waits for the right time from spring to winter, it will be enough to make the bandits tired. By then, it will not be too late.

古文：帝览奏，不悦。
现代文：世宗阅览奏报，很不高兴。
English: Sejong reads the report and is very unhappy.

古文：刘彦贞素骄贵，无才略，不习兵，所历籓镇，专为贪暴，积财巨亿，以赂权要，由是魏岑等争誉之，以为治民如龚、黄，用兵如韩、彭，故周师至，唐主首用之。
现代文：刘彦贞素来骄横宠贵，既无才能谋略，又不熟悉军事，历次任职藩镇，专行贪污暴虐，积累财产达万万，用来贿赂当权要人，因此魏岑等权臣争相称誉他，认为他治理百姓如同西汉的龚遂、黄霸，用兵打仗如同西汉的韩信、彭越，所以后周军队来到，南唐主首先起用他。
English: Liu Yanzhen had always been arrogant and spoiled. He had no ability to strategize and was not familiar with military affairs. He had served as a feudal lord several times, was dedicated to corruption and tyranny, and had accumulated tens of thousands of dollars in property, which he used to bribe important people in power. Therefore, Wei Wei and other powerful ministers praised him, believing that he governed the people like the Western Han Dynasty's Shuxi and Huangba, and fought wars with soldiers like the Western Han Dynasty's Han Xin and Peng Yue. Therefore, when the army came the next week, the Lord of Southern Tang used him first.

古文：其裨将咸师朗等皆勇而无谋，闻李谷退，喜，引兵直抵正阳，旌旗辎重数百里，刘仁赡及池州刺史张全约固止之。
现代文：刘彦贞的副将咸师朗等人都有勇无谋，听说李退兵，大喜，领兵直接抵达正阳，各色旗帜、军需运输前后长达数百里，刘仁赡和池州刺史张全约再三劝阻刘彦贞。
English: Liu Yanzhen's vice-commander, Xian Shilang, and others were all brave and reckless. They heard that Li retired from the army and were overjoyed. The leader of the army arrived directly in Zhengyang. The transportation of flags of all colors and military supplies lasted for hundreds of miles. Liu Renyi and Zhang Quanzhong of Chizhou repeatedly dissuaded Liu Yanzhen.

古文：仁赡曰： 公军未至而敌人先遁，是畏公之威声也，安用速战！
现代文：刘仁赡说： 您的军队未到而敌人先跑，这是畏惧您的声威啊，怎么能用速战速决的办法！
English: Liu Renyi said, "Your army has not yet arrived, but the enemy is running ahead of you. This is because they are afraid of you. How can they use the method of quick battle and quick decision?

古文：万一失利，则大事去矣！ 
现代文：万一失利的话，大事就完了。 
English: If we lose, it's all over.

古文：彦贞不从。
现代文：刘彦贞不听。
English: Liu Yanzhen did not listen.

古文：既行，仁赡曰： 果遇，必败。 
现代文：已经出行，刘仁赡说： 果真遇上敌人，必定失败。 
English: Having traveled, Liu Renyi said: If we really encounter the enemy, we will surely fail.

古文：乃益兵乘城为备。
现代文：于是增加士兵登上城楼作好战备。
English: As a result, more soldiers boarded the city tower to prepare for battle.

古文：李重进度淮，逆战于正阳东，大破之，斩彦贞，生擒咸师朗等，斩首万馀级，伏尸三十里，收军资器械三十馀万。
现代文：李重进渡过淮河，在正阳东面迎战，大败南唐军队，斩杀刘彦贞，活捉咸师朗等，斩得首级一万多，躺伏地上的尸体长达三十里，收缴军用物资器材三十多万件。
English: Li Chongjin crossed the Huai River and went to war on the east side of Zhengyang. He defeated the Southern Tang army, killed Liu Yanzhen, captured Xian Shilang alive, etc. He killed more than ten thousand first-class soldiers, the bodies lying on the ground were up to thirty miles long, and more than three hundred thousand pieces of military supplies and equipment were collected.

古文：是时江、淮久安，民不习战，彦贞既败，唐人大恐，张全约收馀众奔寿州，刘仁赡表全约为马步左厢都指挥使。
现代文：此时长江、淮河一带长久平安无事，百姓不懂打仗，刘彦贞既已战败，南唐人大为恐慌，张全约收集残余的部众投奔寿州，刘仁赡上表荐举张全约为马步左厢都指挥使。
English: At this time, the Yangtze River and the Huaihe River had been safe for a long time, the people did not know how to fight, Liu Yanzhen had already been defeated, the South Tang people were panicking, Zhang Quanzhong gathered the remaining troops and rushed to Shoushou, and Liu Renyi recommended Zhang Quanzhong as commander and envoy.

古文：皇甫晖、姚凤退保清流关。滁州刺史王绍颜委城走。
现代文：皇甫晖、姚凤后退保守清流关，滁州刺史王绍颜弃城逃跑。
English: Emperor Fuxi and Yao Feng retreated to keep the border clear, and the governor of Zhangzhou, Wang Shaoyan, abandoned the city and fled.

古文：壬子，帝至永宁镇，谓侍臣曰： 闻寿州围解，农民多归村落，今闻大军至，必复入城。
现代文：壬子，世宗到达永宁镇，对待从大臣说： 听说寿州围困解除，农民大多回归村落，如今听说大部队到达，必定再次入城。
English: After arriving at Yongning Town, Renzi Shizong said to the minister: I heard that the siege of Shoushu was lifted, and most farmers returned to their villages. Now that I heard that a large force has arrived, I will definitely enter the city again.

古文：怜其聚为饿殍，宜先遣使存抚，各令安业。 
现代文：可怜他们聚集起来会成为饿殍，应先派遣使者安抚，让他们各自安心务农。 
English: Alas, they will become hungry maggots when they gather. An emissary should be sent to pacify them first, so that they can work as farmers with peace of mind.

古文：甲寅，帝至正阳，以李重进代李谷为淮南道行营都招讨使，以谷判寿州行府事。
现代文：甲寅，世宗到达正阳，任命李重进代替李为淮南道行营都招讨使，任命李兼理寿州行府政务。
English: When Jia Yin and Shizong arrived in Zhengyang, they appointed Li Chongjin to replace Li as the envoy of Huainan Province, and appointed Li Jianli as the governor of Shoushou Province.

古文：丙辰，帝至寿州城下，营于淝水之阳，命诸军围寿州，徙正阳浮梁于下蔡镇。
现代文：丙辰，世宗到达寿州城下，在淝水北岸宿营，命令各军包围寿州，将正阳浮桥移到下蔡镇。
English: Hsin-Chen and Shizong arrived at the foot of Shoushu Castle and camped on the north shore of Surabaya. They ordered the armies to encircle Shoushu and move the Zhengyang Floating Bridge to Lower Cai Town.

古文：丁巳，征宋、毫、陈、颍、徐、宿、许、蔡等州丁夫数十万以攻城，昼夜不息。
现代文：丁巳，征发宋州、亳州、陈州、颍州、徐州、宿州、许州、蔡州等地壮丁数十万来攻城，昼夜不停。
English: At that time, hundreds of thousands of soldiers from Songzhou, Zhangzhou, Chenzhou, Zhangzhou, Xuzhou, Suzhou, Huzhou, Caizhou and other places were sent to attack the city, day and night.

古文：唐兵万馀人维舟于淮，营于涂山之下。
现代文：南唐一万多人将船只停靠在淮河上，在涂山脚下宿营。
English: More than 10,000 people in southern Tang docked their boats on the Huai River and camped at the foot of Tu Mountain.

古文：庚申，帝命太祖皇帝击之，太祖皇帝遣百馀骑薄其营而伪遁，伏兵邀之，大败唐兵于涡口，斩其都监何延锡等，夺战舰五十馀艘。
现代文：庚申，世宗命令宋太祖皇帝赵匡胤出击，宋太祖皇帝派遣一百多骑兵进逼南唐军营而又假装逃跑，埋伏的部队乘机拦击南唐追兵，在涡口大败南唐军队，斩杀南唐都监河延锡等人，夺取战舰五十多艘。
English: According to Genshin, Shizong ordered Emperor Zhao Kuangyin, the founder of the Song Dynasty, to attack. Emperor Song dispatched more than one hundred cavalrymen into the military camp of the Southern Tang Dynasty and pretended to flee. The ambush troops took the opportunity to intercept the Southern Tang Dynasty's pursuers, defeated the Southern Tang Dynasty's army in Turukou, killed the Southern Tang Dynasty's governor He Yanxi and others, and captured more than fifty warships.

古文：诏以武平节度使兼中书令王逵为南面行营都统，使攻唐之鄂州。
现代文：后周世宗下诏任命武平节度使兼中书令王逵为南面行营都统，让他进攻南唐的鄂州。
English: Later, Zhou Shizong issued an edict appointing Wuping Jiedu Envoy and General Secretary of the CPC Central Committee to order Wang Qian to go to the south to encamp the Southern Tang Dynasty, and let him attack the Southern Tang Dynasty's Ezhou.

古文：逵引兵过岳州，岳州团练使潘叔嗣厚具燕犒，奉事甚谨。逵左右求取无厌，不满望者谮叔嗣于逵，云其谋叛，逵怒形于词色，叔嗣由是惧不自安。
现代文：王逵领兵经过岳州，岳州团练使潘叔嗣准备丰厚的宴饮食物来慰劳，招待非常恭敬；王逵手下的人贪得无厌，不满足而抱怨的人对王逵说潘叔嗣的坏话，说他谋划叛变，王逵忿怒溢于言表，潘叔嗣因此恐惧而不能自安。
English: Wang Hui led the troops through Yuezhou. The Yuezhou regimental drill made Pan Shucun prepare a rich banquet food to comfort the troops, and the invitation was very respectful. Wang Hui's men were insatiably greedy, and those who were not satisfied but complained spoke ill of Pan Shucun to Wang Hui, saying that he was plotting a mutiny. Wang Hui's anger was palpable, and Pan Shucun was afraid and could not calm down.

古文：唐主闻湖南兵将至，命武昌节度使何敬洙徙民入城，为固守之计。敬洙不从，使除地为战场，曰： 敌至，则与兵民俱死于此耳！ 
现代文：南唐主听说湖南军队将要到达，命令武昌节度使何敬洙将百姓都迁移入城，筹划固守鄂州之计，何敬洙没有听从，让百姓清理地方作为战场，说： 敌军到达，就和军民一齐战死在这里！ 
English: When the lord of Southern Tang heard that the Hunan army was about to arrive, he ordered the Wuchang Festival to make He Jinglian move the people into the city and plan to firmly defend Ezhou. However, He Jinglian did not listen and let the people clear the place as a battlefield, saying: When the enemy army arrives, they will die here together with the soldiers and people!

古文：唐主善之。
现代文：南唐主赞赏他。
English: The Lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty appreciated him.

古文：二月，丙寅，下蔡浮梁成，上自往视之。
现代文：二月，丙寅，下蔡浮桥架成，后周世宗亲自前往视察。
English: In February, Cui Yin, the lower Cai Floating Bridge was built, after which Zhou Shizong personally went to inspect it.

古文：戊辰，庐、拜、光、黄巡检使元城司超奏败唐兵三千馀人于盛唐，擒都监高弼等，获战舰四十馀艘。
现代文：戊辰，庐、寿、光、黄巡检使司超奏报在盛唐击败南唐军队三千多人，擒获都监高弼等人，缴获战舰四十多艘。
English: According to the report, the inspectors of the Southern Tang Dynasty, including the inspectors of the Eastern Tang Dynasty, the Southern Tang Dynasty, and the Southern Tang Dynasty, including the inspectors of the Southern Tang Dynasty, the inspectors of the Southern Tang Dynasty, the inspectors of the Southern Tang Dynasty, the inspectors of the Southern Tang Dynasty, the inspectors of the Southern Tang Dynasty, the inspectors of the Southern Tang Dynasty, the inspectors of the Southern Tang Dynasty, the inspectors of the Southern Tang Dynasty, the inspectors of the Southern Tang Dynasty, the inspectors of the Southern Tang Dynasty, the inspectors of the Southern Tang Dynasty,

古文：上命太祖皇帝倍道袭清流关。
现代文：后周世宗命令宋太祖皇帝兼程而行袭击清流关。
English: Later, Zhou Shizong ordered Emperor Song Taizu to make a side trip to attack Qingshui Pass.

古文：皇甫晖等陈于山下，方与前锋战，太祖皇帝引兵出山后；晖等大惊，走入滁州，欲断桥自守。太祖皇帝跃马麾兵涉水，直抵城下。
现代文：皇甫晖等在山下列阵，正与后周前锋部队交战，宋太祖皇帝领兵从山后出来；皇甫晖等大吃一惊，逃入滁州城中，打算毁断护城河桥坚守，宋太祖皇帝跃马指挥军队涉水而过，直抵城下。
English: Empress Dowager Cixi and others were lined up under the mountain and were fighting with Hou Zhou's forward troops. Emperor Song Taizu led the troops out from behind the mountain. Empress Dowager Cixi and others were taken aback and fled into the city of Zhangzhou, intending to break the moat and bridge. Emperor Song Taizu commanded the troops to wade through the water and reach the city.

古文：晖曰： 人各为其主，愿容成列而战。 
现代文：皇甫晖说： 人都各为自己的主子效力，希望容我排好队列再战。 
English: The Empress Dowager said, "Everyone works for their own master. I hope you will allow me to line up and fight again."

古文：太祖皇帝笑而许之。
现代文：宋太祖皇帝笑着答应了他。
English: Emperor Song Taizu smiled and agreed.

古文：晖整众而出，太祖皇帝拥马颈突陈而入，大呼曰： 吾止取皇甫晖，他人非吾敌也！ 
现代文：皇甫晖整顿部众出城，宋太祖皇帝抱住马脖子突破敌阵冲进去，大喊道： 我只取皇甫晖，别的都不是我的敌人！ 
English: Emperor Song Taizu hugged the horse's neck to break through the enemy's line and rushed in, shouting: I only take the Emperor Fuxi, nothing else is my enemy!

古文：手剑击晖，中脑，生擒之，并擒姚凤，遂克滁州。
现代文：手持长剑攻击皇甫晖，刺中脑袋，生擒活捉，并擒获姚凤，于是攻克滁州。
English: Holding a long sword, he attacked Wang Fuxuan, stabbed him in the head, captured him alive, and captured Yao Feng, thus conquering Zhangzhou.

古文：后数日，宣祖皇帝为马军副都指挥使，引兵夜半至滁州城下，传呼开门。
现代文：数日以后，宋太祖皇帝的父亲宋宣祖皇帝为马军副都指挥使，半夜领兵到达滁州城下，传令呼喊开门。
English: A few days later, Emperor Song Taizu's father, Emperor Song Xuanzu, sent an envoy as the deputy commander of the horse army. At midnight, he led the soldiers to the foot of Zhangzhou City and shouted the command to open the door.

古文：太祖皇帝曰： 父子虽至亲，城门王事也，不敢奉命！ 
现代文：宋太祖皇帝说： 父子虽然最亲，但城门开启是王朝大事，不敢随便从命。 
English: Emperor Song Taizu said: Although father and son are the closest, the opening of the city gate is a great event of the dynasty, and they dare not follow orders casually.

古文：明旦，乃得入。上遣翰林学士窦仪籍滁州帑藏，太祖皇帝遣亲吏取藏中绢。
现代文：后周世宗派遣翰林学士窦仪清点登记滁州库存的物资，宋太祖皇帝派心腹官吏提取库藏绢帛。
English: Later, Zhou Shizong sent Hanlin Shiao Dou Yi to check and register the inventory of materials in Bozhou, and Emperor Song Taizu sent officials to extract the treasure.

古文：仪曰： 公初克城时，虽倾藏取之，无伤也。
现代文：窦仪说： 您在攻克州城之初时，即使把库中东西取光，也无妨碍。
English: Dou Yi said: At the beginning of your conquest of Zhouzhuang, even if you take things out of the storehouse, it will not be a hindrance.

古文：今既籍为官物，非有诏书，不可得也。 
现代文：如今已经登录为官府物资，没有诏书命令，是不可取得的。 
English: Now it has been registered as government property and cannot be obtained without an imperial decree.

古文：太祖皇帝由是重仪。
现代文：宋太祖皇帝因此器重窦仪。
English: As a result, Emperor Taizu of the Song Dynasty placed great importance on the douzi.

古文：诏左金吾卫将军马崇祚知滁州。
现代文：世宗诏令左金吾卫将军马崇祚主持滁州政务。
English: Emperor Taizong ordered General Ma Chongyi to preside over the administration of Zhangzhou.

古文：初，永兴节度使刘词遗表荐其幕僚蓟人赵普有才可用。
现代文：当初，永兴节度使刘词遣送表书荐举他的幕僚蓟州人赵普有才能可以重用。
English: At the beginning, Yongxing Festival made Liu Ji send a letter of recommendation to his staff member Zhao Pu, a native of Zhangzhou, who had the ability to reuse.

古文：会滁州平，范质荐普为滁州军事判官，太祖皇帝与语，悦之。
现代文：适逢滁州平定，范质推荐赵普为滁州军事判官，宋太祖皇帝和他交谈，很喜欢他。
English: When Bozhou was pacified, the emperor recommended Zhao Pu as the military judge of Bozhou. Emperor Song Taizu talked with him and liked him very much.

古文：时获盗百馀人，皆应死，普请先讯鞫然后决，所活什七八。
现代文：当时捕获强盗一百余人，都应处死，赵普请求先审讯然后处决，结果活下来的占十分之七八。
English: At that time, more than a hundred robbers were captured and should be put to death. Zhao Pu requested that they be tried first and then executed. As a result, only seven or eight out of ten survived.

古文：太祖皇帝益奇之。
现代文：宋太祖皇帝愈发认为他是个奇才。
English: Emperor Taizu of Song increasingly thought he was a genius.

古文：太祖皇帝威名日盛，每临陈，必以繁缨饰马，铠仗鲜明。
现代文：宋太祖皇帝的威名日益盛大，每当亲临军阵，必定用精美的辂马绳带装饰坐骑，铠甲兵器锃亮耀眼。
English: The prestige of Emperor Song Taizu became more and more grandiose. Whenever he personally visited the army, he would certainly decorate his mount with an exquisite horse harness, and his armored weapons would shine brightly.

古文：或曰： 如此，为敌所识。 
现代文：有人说： 像这样，会被敌人所认识。 
English: Some people say: Like this, you will be recognized by the enemy.

古文：太祖皇帝曰： 吾固欲其识之耳！ 
现代文：宋太祖皇帝说： 我本就想让敌人认识我！ 
English: Emperor Song Taizu said: I wanted the enemy to know me!

古文：唐主遣泗州牙将王知朗赍书抵徐州，称： 唐皇帝奉书大周皇帝，请息兵修好，愿以兄事帝，岁输货财以助军费。 
现代文：南唐主派遣泗州牙将王知朗携带书信抵达徐州，称： 唐皇帝奉上书信致达大周皇帝，请求休战讲和，情愿把皇帝当作兄长来事奉，每年贡献货物财宝来襄助军费。 
English: The lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty sent Wang Zhilang, the commander of the Bozhou Fang, to arrive in Xuzhou with a letter, saying: The Tang Emperor sent a letter to the Emperor of Dazhou, requesting a truce and peace, and was willing to serve the Emperor as a brother, and contribute goods and treasures every year to help with military expenses.

古文：甲戌，徐州以闻；帝不答。
现代文：甲戌，徐州将书信奏报；后周世宗不作回答。
English: Jiajing and Xuzhou reported the letter; later, Zhou Shizong did not reply.

古文：戊寅，命前武胜节度使侯章等攻寿州水寨，决其壕之西北隅，导壕水入于淝。
现代文：戊寅，后周世宗命令前武胜节度使侯章等人进攻寿州水寨，在护城河的西北角打开决口，将护城河水引入淝水。
English: Wu Yin, later Zhou Shizong, ordered Hou Zhang and others to attack Shoushou Water Town before the Wu Sheng Festival, open a breach in the northwest corner of the moat, and bring the moat water into the water.

古文：太祖皇帝遣使献皇甫晖等，晖伤甚，见上，卧而言曰： 臣非不忠于所事，但士卒勇怯不同耳。
现代文：宋太祖皇帝派遣使者献上皇甫晖等战俘，皇甫晖伤势很重，见到世宗，卧着说道： 臣下不是不忠于所事奉的主人，只是士兵有勇敢胆怯的不同罢了。
English: Emperor Taizu of the Song Dynasty sent an envoy to present the prisoners of war, including Emperor Fu Rong. Emperor Fu Rong was seriously wounded. When he saw Shizong, he lay down and said, "The vassals are not disloyal to the masters they serve, but the soldiers are brave and fearless.

古文：臣曏日屡与契丹战，未尝见兵精如此。 
现代文：臣下往日屡次与契丹交战，未曾见到过像您这样精锐的军队。 
English: Our vassals have fought against the Khitans many times in the past. I have never seen such an elite army as yours.

古文：因盛称太祖皇帝之勇。
现代文：因而盛赞宋太祖皇帝的勇敢。
English: Therefore, he praised the bravery of Emperor Song Taizu.

古文：上释之，后数日卒。
现代文：世宗释放他，数日之后去世。
English: Sejong released him, and he died a few days later.

古文：帝诇知扬州无备，己卯，命韩令坤等将兵袭之，戒以毋得残民；其李氏陵寝，遣人与李氏人共守护之。
现代文：世宗探知扬州没有防备，己卯，命令韩令坤等领兵袭击扬州，告诫不得残害百姓；那里的李氏陵墓寝庙，派人与李氏族人共同守卫看护。
English: When Shizong sensed that Yangzhou was unprepared, he ordered Han Lingkun and other military leaders to attack Yangzhou, warning them not to harm the people. The Li clan's mausoleum and temple there were jointly guarded and taken care of by members of the Li clan.

古文：唐主兵屡败，惧亡，乃遣翰林学士、户部侍郎钟谟、工部侍郎、文理院学士李德明奉表称臣，来请平，献御服、茶药及金器千两，银器五千两，缯锦二千匹，犒军牛五百头，酒二千斛，壬午，至寿州城下。
现代文：南唐主因军队屡遭败绩，惧怕灭亡，于是派遣翰林学士、户部侍郎钟谟和工部侍郎、文理院学士李德明奉持表书称臣，前来请求和平，进献皇帝专用的服装、汤药以及金器一千两，银器五千两，缯帛锦缎二千匹，犒劳军队的牛五百头，酒二千斛，壬午，到达寿州城下。
English: The lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty, fearing that his army would perish due to repeated defeats, sent the scholar of Hanlin, the steward of the household, Zhong Miao, and the steward of the engineering department, the bachelor of the Academy of Arts and Sciences, Li Deming, to come to ask for peace, presenting the emperor's special clothing, soup and medicine, as well as one thousand and two gold vessels, five thousand and two silver vessels, two thousand brocade horses, five hundred cattle for the army, and two thousand jars of wine, and arrived at the foot of Shoushou Castle.

古文：谟、德明素辩口，上知其欲游说，盛陈甲兵而见之，曰： 尔主自谓唐室苗裔，宜知礼义，异于他国。
现代文：钟谟、李德明一向能说善辩，世宗知道他们打算游说，命全副武装的士兵严整列队而接见，说： 你们君主自称是唐皇室的后裔，应该懂得礼义，同别的国家有区别。
English: Zhong Mu and Li Deming have always been able to speak eloquently. Shizong knew that they intended to lobby, and ordered fully armed soldiers to line up and receive them, saying: Your monarch claims to be a descendant of the Tang royal family, you should understand the etiquette, it is different from other countries.

古文：与朕止隔一水，未尝遣一介修好，惟泛海通契丹，舍华事夷，礼义安在？
现代文：与朕只有一水之隔，却未曾派遣过一位使者来建立友好关系，反而飘洋过海去勾结契丹，舍弃华夏而臣事蛮夷，礼义在哪里呢？
English: It is only a stone's throw away from me, but it has never sent an envoy to establish friendly relations. Instead, it has floated across the ocean to collude with the Khitan, abandoning China and serving the barbarians. Where is the sense of propriety?

古文：且汝欲说我令罢兵邪？
现代文：再说你们准备向我游说让我休战吧？
English: And you're going to lobby me for a truce?

古文：我非六国愚主，岂汝口舌所能移邪！
现代文：我不是战国时代六国那样的愚蠢君主，岂是你们用口舌所能改变主意的人！
English: I'm not a stupid monarch like the Six Kingdoms in the Warring States period, aren't you the ones who can change your minds with your words!

古文：可归语汝主：亟来见朕，再拜谢过，则无事矣。
现代文：你们可以回去告诉你们的君主：马上来见朕，下跪再拜认罪谢过，那就没有事情了。
English: You can go back and tell your sovereign: Come to see me at once, kneel down, confess your sins and say thank you, and then there will be nothing to worry about.

古文：不然，朕欲观金陵城，借府库以劳军，汝君臣得无悔乎！ 
现代文：不然的话，朕打算亲自到金陵城观看，借用金陵国库来慰劳军队，你们君臣可不要后悔啊！ 
English: Otherwise, I plan to personally go to Jinling City to watch, borrow the Jinling National Treasury to comfort the army, you lords and gentlemen, do not regret it!

古文：谟、德明战栗不敢言。
现代文：钟谟、李德明全身发抖不敢说话。
English: Zhong Mu and Li Deming were shaking all over and did not dare to speak.

古文：吴越王弘亻叔遣兵屯境上以俟周命。
现代文：吴越王钱弘派遣军队屯驻边境上以等待后周命令。
English: King Qianhong of Wuyue dispatched troops to garrison the border to await orders the following week.

古文：苏州营田指挥使陈满言于丞相吴程曰： 周师南征，唐举国惊扰，常州无备，易取也。 
现代文：苏州营田指挥使陈满向丞相吴程进言说： 后周军队南下征伐，南唐举国震惊骚乱，常州没有防备，容易攻取。 
English: Suzhou Yingtian commander Chen Man gave advice to the prime minister Wu Cheng, saying: After the Zhou army invaded the south, the whole country of Nantang was shocked by the turmoil, and Changzhou was unprepared and easy to capture.

古文：会唐主有诏抚安江阴吏民，满告程云： 周诏书已至。 
现代文：适逢南唐主有诏书安抚江阴官吏百姓，陈满禀告吴程说： 后周诏书已经到达。 
English: When the ruler of Southern Tang issued an edict to pacify the officials and people of Jiangyin, Chen Manju told Wu Cheng that the edict had arrived the following week.

古文：程为之言于弘亻叔，请亟发兵从其策。
现代文：吴程为此向钱弘进言，请求立即发兵采用陈满的计策。
English: To this end, Wu Cheng proposed to Qian Hong to immediately send troops and adopt Chen Man's strategy.

古文：丞相元德昭曰： 唐大国，未可轻也。
现代文：丞相元德昭说： 南唐是大国，不可轻视啊。
English: Prime Minister Yuan Dezhao said: Nantang is a big country, it should not be despised.

古文：若我入唐境而周师不至，谁与并力，能无危乎！
现代文：倘若我军进入南唐境界而周兵没到，谁来与我们合力作战，能不危险吗！
English: If our army enters the southern border of Tang and Zhou's soldiers do not arrive, who will fight with us, can it not be dangerous!

古文：请姑俟之。 
现代文：请暂且等待一下。 
English: Please wait for a moment.

古文：程固争，以为时不可失，弘亻叔卒从程议。
现代文：吴程再三争辩，认为时机不可错过，钱弘结果听从了吴程的建议。
English: Wu Cheng repeatedly argued that the opportunity should not be missed, and Qian Hong eventually followed Wu Cheng's suggestion.

古文：癸未，遣程督衢州刺史鲍修让、中直都指挥使罗晟趣常州。
现代文：癸未，钱弘派遣吴程督领衢州刺史鲍修让、中直都指挥使罗晟奔赴常州。
English: At this time, Qian Hong dispatched Wu Chengguo to lead the Zhangshi Baoshu from Zhangzhou, and the Zhongzhidu commander sent Luo Wei to go to Changzhou.

古文：程谓将士曰： 元丞相不欲出师。 
现代文：吴程对将士们说： 元丞相不愿意出兵。 
English: Wu Cheng said to the soldiers: "The former prime minister is still unwilling to send troops.

古文：将士怒，流言欲击德昭。
现代文：将士们恼怒，有流言说要袭击元德昭。
English: The generals were furious, and there were rumours that they were going to attack Yuan Dezhao.

古文：弘亻叔匿德昭于府中，令捕言者，叹曰： 方出师而士卒欲击丞相，不祥甚哉！ 
现代文：钱弘把元德昭藏匿在自己府中，下令逮捕散布流言的人，叹息说： 正要出兵而士卒想要袭击丞相，不吉利得很啊！ 
English: Qian Hong hid Yuan Dezhao in his residence and ordered the arrest of the rumor-mongers, sighing, "It's very unlucky when soldiers are about to be dispatched and soldiers want to attack the prime minister!"

古文：乙酉，韩令坤奄至扬州。平旦，先遣白延遇以数百骑驰入城，城中不之觉。
现代文：乙酉，韩令坤突然到达扬州；天大亮，先派遣白延遇率数百骑兵奔驰入城，城中没有觉察。
English: Suddenly, Han Lingkun arrived in Yangzhou; it was broad daylight, and Bai Yan sent hundreds of cavalry to enter the city, but they were not noticed in the city.

古文：令坤继至，唐东都营屯使贾崇焚官府民舍，弃城南走，副留守工部侍郎冯延鲁髡发被僧服，匿于佛寺，军士执之。
现代文：韩令坤接着到达，南唐东都营屯使贾崇焚毁政府官邸、百姓房屋，弃城往南逃奔，副留守工部侍郎冯延鲁剃光头发，披上僧服躲藏进佛寺，军士抓获了他。
English: Han Lingkun arrived next, Jia Chong was sent by the Southern Tang Dongduyingtun to burn down the government residence and people's houses, abandon the city and flee to the south, and Feng Yanlu, the deputy attendant of the Ministry of Industry, shaved his hair, put on a monk's robe and hid in a Buddhist temple. The sergeant caught him.

古文：令坤慰抚其民，使皆安堵。
现代文：韩令坤慰问安抚扬州百姓，让他们都安居乐业。
English: Han Lingkun's condolences pacify the people of Yangzhou and let them all live and work in peace.

古文：庚寅，王逵奏拔鄂州长山寨，执其将陈泽等，献之。
现代文：庚寅，王逵奏报攻拔鄂州长山寨，抓获南唐将领陈泽等人献上。
English: Geng Yin and Wang Xi reported the attack on the Governor of Hubei's villa, captured the South Tang Dynasty general Chen Ze and others, and presented them.

古文：辛卯，太祖皇帝奏唐天长制置使耿谦降，获刍粮二十馀万。
现代文：辛卯，宋太祖皇帝奏报南唐天长制置使耿谦投降，缴获粮草二十多万。
English: Xinwu, Emperor Song Taizu reported that the Southern Tang Emperor ordered Geng Qian to surrender, and seized more than 200,000 tons of grain and grass.

古文：唐主遣园苑使尹延范如泰州，迁吴让皇之族于润州。
现代文：南唐主派遣园苑使尹延范前往泰州，将吴让皇的家族迁居到润州。
English: The Lord of Southern Tang dispatched the garden envoy Yin Yanfan to Taizhou to relocate Emperor Wu's family to Rongzhou.

古文：延范以道路艰难，恐杨氏为变，尽杀其男子六十人，还报，唐主怒，腰斩之。
现代文：尹延范因为道路艰难，恐怕杨氏家族发生变乱，将其中男子六十人全部杀死，返回报告，南唐主大怒，腰斩尹延范。
English: Because of the difficult road, Yin Yanfan is afraid that the Yang family will have a riot, killing all sixty men among them, returning the report, the Lord of Southern Tang will be furious, and will behead Yin Yanfan.

古文：韩令坤攻唐泰州，拔之，刺史方讷奔金陵。
现代文：韩令坤等进攻泰州，占领泰州，刺史方讷逃奔金陵。
English: Han Lingkun and others attacked Taizhou, occupied Taizhou, stabbed Fangna and fled to Jinling.

古文：唐主遣人以蜡丸求救于契丹。
现代文：南唐主派人拿着封有书信的蜡丸去向契丹求救。
English: The master of the Southern Tang Dynasty sent a man with a wax pill sealed with a letter to ask Khitan for help.

古文：壬辰，静安军使何继先获而献之。
现代文：壬辰，静安军使何继筠截获后献给后周世宗。
English: In Imjin, the Jing'an military envoy He Jixuan was intercepted and later dedicated to Zhou Shizong.

古文：以给事中高防权知泰州。
现代文：后周任命给事中高防临时主持泰州政务。
English: Later in the week, he was appointed to temporarily preside over Taizhou's government affairs.

古文：癸巳，吴越王弘亻叔遣上直都指挥使路彦铢攻宣州，罗晟帅战舰屯江阴。
现代文：癸巳，吴越王钱弘派遣上直都指挥使路彦铢进攻宣州，罗晟率领战舰屯驻江阴。
English: At that time, Qian Hong, the king of Wu Yue, dispatched Shang Zhi Du to command Lu Yanqi to attack Xuanzhou, and Luo Yu led the warships stationed in Jiangyin.

古文：唐静海制置使姚彦洪帅兵民万人奔吴越。
现代文：南唐静海制置使姚彦洪率领士兵、百姓一万人投奔吴越。
English: The establishment of the Southern Tang's Sea of Tranquility caused Yao Yanhong to lead ten thousand soldiers and civilians to rush to Wuyue.

古文：潘叔嗣属将士而告之曰： 吾事令公至矣，今乃信谗疑怒，军还，必击我。吾不能坐而待死，汝辈能与我俱西乎？ 
现代文：潘叔嗣集合将士告诉他们说： 我事奉王令公好得无以复加了，如今反而听信谗言怀疑发怒，军队返回来的话，必定攻击我，我不能坐着等死，你们能和我一道西进吗？ 
English: Uncle Pan gathered the soldiers together and said to them, "I have served the king's order to the best of my ability, but now, on the contrary, I have listened to slander, doubt and anger. If the army returns, it will certainly attack me. I cannot sit and wait for death. Can you go west with me?"

古文：众愤怒，请行，叔嗣帅之西袭朗州。
现代文：部众很愤怒，请求出行，潘叔嗣率领所部向西袭击朗州。
English: The club members were very angry and asked to leave. Pan Shushi led the club to attack Lanzhou in the west.

古文：逵闻之，还军追之，及于武陵城外，与叔嗣战，逵败死，或劝叔嗣遂据朗州，叔嗣曰： 吾救死耳，安敢自尊？宜以督府归潭州太尉，岂不以武安见处乎！ 
现代文：王逵听说这消息，调回军队追赶，追到武陵城外，与潘叔嗣交战，王逵兵败身死。有人劝说潘叔嗣就此占据朗州，潘叔嗣说： 我只不过救命罢了，怎么敢自己称尊称王，应该将朗州督府交归潭州太尉周行逢，难道他不会安排我当武安节度使吗！ 
English: Upon hearing this news, Wang Yao sent his army back to chase after Tan Zhou outside of Wuling City, and fought with Pan Shuxi. Wang Yao's soldiers were defeated and killed. Someone persuaded Pan Shuxi to occupy Langzhou. Pan Shuxi said, "I'm just saving lives. How dare I call myself a king? I should return the Langzhou governor's office to Tan Zhou's lieutenant Zhou Xingfeng. Won't he arrange for me to be the messenger of the Martial Arts Festival!"

古文：乃归岳州，使团练判官李简帅朗州将吏迎武安节度使周行逢。
现代文：于是返归岳州，派团练判官李简率领郎州将领官吏迎接武安节度使周行逢。
English: So he returned to Yuezhou, sent the judge Li Jian to lead the lanzhou generals and officials to welcome the Wu'an Festival.

古文：众谓行逢： 必以潭州授叔嗣。 
现代文：部众对周行逢说： 一定要把潭州授予潘叔嗣。 
English: The club members said to Zhou Xingfeng: "We must award Tanzhou to Pan Shuzhi."

古文：行逢曰： 叔嗣贼杀主帅，罪当族。
现代文：周行逢说： 潘叔嗣杀害主帅，罪该灭族。
English: Zhou Xingfeng said: Pan Shushi killed the coach, the crime is to exterminate the tribe.

古文：所可恕者，得武陵而不有，以授吾耳。
现代文：可以宽恕的地方，只是取武陵而不占有，交给我罢了。
English: Where forgiveness is possible, it is only to take Wuling and not to possess it, but to give it to me.

古文：若遽用为节度使，天下谓我与之同谋，何以自明！
现代文：倘若马上起用他为节度使，天下人就会认为我和他是同谋，我还怎么自我表白！
English: If I were to use him immediately as a moderating force, the world would think that I and he were accomplices, and how would I prove myself!

古文：宜且以为行军司马，俟逾年，授以节钺可也。 
现代文：现宜暂时任命为行军司马，等过了一年，便可以授予节度使的职权。 
English: It is now appropriate to temporarily appoint him as a marching steward, and after a year, he can be granted the authority of a festival envoy.

古文：乃以衡州刺史莫弘万权知潭州，帅众入朗州，自称武平、武安留后，告于朝廷，以叔嗣为行军司马。
现代文：于是任命衡州刺史莫弘万临时主持潭州政务，率领部众进入朗州，自称武平、武安留后，向朝廷报告，任命潘叔嗣为行军司马。
English: Therefore, he appointed the Henzhou clerk Mo Hongwan to temporarily preside over the government affairs of Tanzhou, led his subordinates into Langzhou, and after claiming to be Wu Ping and Wu An, reported to the imperial court and appointed Pan Shushi as the marching steward.

古文：叔嗣怒，称疾不至。
现代文：潘叔嗣恼怒，称病不到任。
English: Pan Shushi was angry and said that he was ill and could not take up the post.

古文：行逢曰： 行军司马，吾尝为之，权与节度使相埒耳，叔嗣犹不满望，更欲图我邪！ 
现代文：周行逢说： 行军司马，我曾经做过，权力与节度使大致相当，潘叔嗣却还不满意，难道还想对我图谋不轨吗！ 
English: Zhou Xingfeng said: Marching Sima, I have done it before, the power and the degree are roughly equivalent, but Pan Shushi is still not satisfied, do you still want to plot against me!

古文：或说行逢： 授叔嗣武安节钺以诱之，令至都府受命，此乃机上肉耳！ 
现代文：有人劝说周行逢： 用授予潘叔嗣武安节度使职权来引诱他，让他到都府来接受任命，他就成为案板上的肉了！ 
English: Some people tried to persuade Zhou Xingfeng: lure him with the authority granted to Pan Shuxi during the Martial Arts Festival, let him come to the capital to accept the appointment, and he would become the meat on the board!

古文：行逢从之。
现代文：周行逢听从此计。
English: Zhou Xingfan followed this plan.

古文：叔嗣将行，其所亲止之，叔嗣自恃素以兄事行逢，相亲善，遂行不疑。
现代文：潘叔嗣将要上路，亲近的人阻止他。潘叔嗣自仗素来以兄长事奉周行逢，相互亲善，于是登程，不加怀疑。
English: Pan Shuxi was about to set out on a journey, but people close to him stopped him. Pan Shuxi had always served as his brother's attendant, and they were friendly with each other, so he set out without any doubts.

古文：行逢遣使迎候，道路相望，既至，自出效劳，相见甚欢。
现代文：周行逢派遣使者迎接等候，一路不断，已经到达，周行逢亲自出城到郊外慰劳，相互见面非常高兴。
English: Zhou Xingfeng sent an envoy to meet the waiting, all the way, has arrived, Zhou Xingfeng personally went out of the city to the suburbs to comfort, very happy to meet each other.

古文：叔嗣入谒，未至听事，遣人执之，立于庭下，责之曰： 汝为小校无大功，王逵用汝为团练使，一旦反杀主帅。吾以畴昔之情，未忍斩汝，以为行军司马，乃敢违拒吾命而不受乎！ 
现代文：潘叔嗣入府谒见，还没到办公大厅，周行逢便派人拘捕他，让他立在厅堂下，斥责他说： 你做了个小校并无大功，王逵起用你为团练使，却突然反过来杀死主帅；我因往昔的情谊，不忍心杀你，任你为行军司马，竟敢违抗我的命令而不接受！ 
English: When Uncle Pan came to the palace for an audience, he had not yet arrived at the office hall, but Zhou Xingfeng sent someone to arrest him, made him stand under the hall, and scolded him, saying: You did not do a great job as a schoolmaster. Wang Xuan used you as a regimental drill sergeant, but suddenly turned around and killed the commander. Because of my past friendship, I could not bear to kill you. I let you be the marshal, how dare you disobey my orders and not accept them!

古文：叔嗣知不免，以宗族为请。遂斩之。
现代文：潘叔嗣自知难免一死，请求保全宗族。于是将他斩首。
English: Pan Shushi, knowing that his death was inevitable, asked for the preservation of his clan. So he was beheaded.

