古文：朱浮字叔元，沛国萧人也。
现代文：◆朱浮传，朱浮字叔元，沛国萧人。
English: ◆Zhu Fu Chuan, Zhu Fu Zi Shu Yuan, and Pei Guo Xiao Ren.

古文：初从光武为大司马主簿，迁偏将军，从破邯郸。
现代文：初从光武为大司马主簿，迁偏将军，跟从破邯郸。
English: At first, he was the chief steward of the grand steward of the horse from Guangwu, the general of the relocation, and the leader of the broken horse.

古文：光武遣吴汉诛更始幽州牧苗曾，乃拜浮为大将军幽州牧，守蓟城，遂讨定北边。
现代文：光武遣吴汉诛更始幽州牧苗曾，于是拜朱浮为大将军幽州牧，守蓟城，于是讨定北部边疆。
English: Guangwu sent Wu Hanqi to Yuzhou Mucunao for the first time, so Bai Zhufu became the general of Yuzhou Mucunao, guarded Yunnan City, and negotiated the northern border.

古文：建武二年，封舞阳侯，食三县。
现代文：建武二年，封舞阳侯，食三县。
English: In the second year of Jianwu, he was given the title of Maoyang Hou and served in three counties.

古文：浮年少有才能，颇欲厉风迹，收士心，辟召州中名宿涿郡王岑之属，以为从事，及王莽时故吏二千石，皆引置幕府，乃多发诸郡仓谷，禀赡其妻子。
现代文：朱浮年少有才能，很想振奋风化之迹，收拢士子之心，招来州中名宿涿郡王岑之流，任为从事，以及王莽时故吏二千石，都引进安置在幕府，就多发诸郡仓谷，赡养他们的妻子儿女。
English: Zhu Fulin, who had few talents, wanted to cheer up the signs of the weather and win the hearts of the scholars. He invited the famous Suqian County Wang Qian's family from the state to work for him, as well as Wang Mengshi's late officials of two thousand stones, all of whom were brought in and placed in the bakufu. They were sent to Canggu County to support their wives and children.

古文：渔阳太守彭宠以为天下未定，师旅方起，不宜多置官属，以损军实，不从其实。
现代文：渔阳太守彭宠以为天下未定，师旅方兴，不宜多置官属，以损兵甲粮储，不听朱浮命令。
English: Peng Jia, the governor of Yuyang, thought that the world was undecided, and that it was not appropriate to place more officials and subordinates, which would damage the grain reserves of the soldiers, and did not listen to Zhu Fu's order.

古文：浮性矜急自多，颇有不平，因以峻文诋，宠亦很强，歉负其功，嫌怨转积。
现代文：朱浮性情矜持急躁，自视甚高。对彭宠很为不满。因以严厉文字诋毁彭宠；彭宠也很要强，兼负其功，嫌怨越积越深。
English: Zhu Fu is quick-tempered and has a very high opinion of himself. He is very dissatisfied with Peng Cun. Because he slandered Peng Cun with harsh words; Peng Cun is also very strong, and he is also responsible for it. The resentment is getting deeper and deeper.

古文：浮密奏宠遣吏迎妻而不迎其母，又受货贿，杀害友人，多聚兵谷，意计难量。
现代文：朱浮密奏彭宠遣吏迎妻而不迎其母，又接受货赂，杀害友人，多聚兵谷，其心叵测。
English: Zhu Fumi plays the role of Peng Zhaozhu, who sends officials to meet his wife instead of his mother, accepts bribes, kills his friends, and gathers more soldiers.

古文：宠既积怨，闻之，遂大怒，而举兵攻浮。
现代文：彭宠既积怨在心，闻之大怒，而举兵攻朱浮。
English: Peng Cossack not only accumulated resentment in his heart, but also felt great anger, and raised an army to attack Zhu Fu.

古文：浮以书质责之曰：盖闻知者顺时而谋，愚者逆理而动，常窃悲京城太叔以不知足而无贤辅，卒自弃于郑也。
现代文：朱浮以书信责备他说：我听说智者顺时而谋，愚者逆理而动，常私下悲京城太叔以不知足而无贤人辅佐，结果是自弃于郑。
English: Zhu Fu rebuked him in a letter: "I have heard that the wise man acts in accordance with the times, while the fool acts contrary to reason. I have often privately felt sorry for the great uncle of Beijing for not being content without the assistance of a wise man. As a result, he abandoned himself to Zheng.

古文：伯通以名字典郡，有佐命之功，临人亲职，爱惜仓库，而浮秉征伐之任，欲权时救急，二者皆为国耳。
现代文：伯通以名字显著而主持郡政，有佐命之功，临人亲职，爱惜仓库，而我秉征伐之任，想审时救急，二者都是为国家哩。
English: Bertone presides over the county government with a prominent name, has the merit of saving lives, performs personal duties, and cherishes the warehouse, while I uphold the duty of recruitment, and want to examine the emergency, both of which are for the country.

古文：即疑浮相谮，何不诣阙自陈，而为族灭之计乎？
现代文：既怀疑我诬告了你，何不到京师自陈，而为此族灭之计呢？
English: Since you suspect that I have falsely accused you, why don't you come to Beijing to confess, and what is your plan for the destruction of this race?

古文：朝廷之于伯通，恩亦厚矣，委以大郡，任以威武，事有柱石之寄，情同子孙之亲。
现代文：朝廷对你伯通，恩德也是很厚的了，委你以大郡，赐号大将军，事有柱石之寄，情同子孙之亲。
English: The imperial court is also very generous to you, entrusting you with a large county, giving you the title of general, sending you a pillar stone, and being a relative of your children and grandchildren.

古文：匹夫媵母尚能致命一餐，岂有身带三绶，职典大邦，而不顾恩义，生心外畔者乎！
现代文：匹夫媵妾尚能舍己以报一餐之恩，岂有身带三绶，职典大邦，而不顾恩义，生心外叛的吗？
English: If a husband and a concubine are able to sacrifice themselves to repay the kindness of a meal, will there be a person with three gongs and a great job title, regardless of gratitude, and a rebellious heart?

古文：伯通与吏人语，何以为颜？
现代文：伯通与官吏们讲话，有何面目呢？
English: Bertone speaks with officials, what is his face like?

古文：行步拜起，何以为容？
现代文：行步拜起，何以自容呢？
English: How dare you walk around bowing down?

古文：坐卧念之，何以为心？
现代文：坐卧想想，何以为心呢？
English: Sit down and think about it. What do you think?

古文：引镜窥影，何施眉目？
现代文：拿镜子自己照照，置眉目于何处呢？
English: Take a mirror and look at yourself. Where do your eyes go?

古文：举措建功，何以为人？
现代文：举措建功，何以为人呢？
English: What is man, that he should be praised?

古文：惜乎弃休令之嘉名，造枭鸱之逆谋，捐传世之庆祚，招破败之重灾，高论尧、舜之道，不忍桀、纣之性，生为世笑，死为愚鬼，不亦哀乎！
现代文：可惜你弃美令的嘉名，造鸱枭食母之逆谋，抛弃传给后代的福祚，招来破败的重灾，高谈尧舜之道，不弃桀纣之性，生为世笑，死为愚鬼，不是很悲哀吗！
English: It is a pity that you have abandoned the reputation of beauty, created the mother-eater's counter-strategy, abandoned the blessings passed on to future generations, brought about the devastation of the disaster, talked about the way of the dragon, did not abandon the nature of the dragon, was born for the world to laugh, and died as a fool, is not it very sad!

古文：伯通与耿侠游俱起佐命，同被国恩。
现代文：伯通与耿况都起来佐命汉室，同受国恩。
English: Both Bertone and Geng Quan were appointed to the Han family, and both received the grace of the state.

古文：侠游廉让，屡有降挹之言；而伯通自伐，以为功高天下。
现代文：耿况谦让，屡有降损之言；而伯通自夸其能，以为功高天下。
English: Geng Zhou was humble and often said that he would reduce the losses; while Bertong boasted of his ability and thought that his achievements were the best in the world.

古文：往时辽东有豕，生子白头，异而献之，行至河东，见群豕皆白，怀惭而还。
现代文：以前辽东有猪，生了一头白猪，猪主人异而献之，行到河东，见到所有的猪都是白的，就惭愧而还。
English: In the past, there was a pig in Liaodong that gave birth to a white pig. The pig's owner presented it as a gift, but when he went to Hedong and saw that all the pigs were white, he was ashamed and returned it.

古文：若以子之功论于朝廷，则为辽东豕也。
现代文：若把你的功劳拿到朝廷去讨论，那么只是辽东猪了。
English: If you bring your merits to the imperial court for discussion, then you are just a Liaodong pig.

古文：今乃愚妄，自比六国。
现代文：今却愚妄，自比六国。
English: Now, however, it is foolish to compare itself with six countries.

古文：六国之时，其势各盛，廓土数千里，胜兵将百万，故能据国相持，多历年世。
现代文：六国之时，其势各盛，国土数千里，雄兵百万，所以能据国相持，经历许多年世。
English: At the time of the Six Kingdoms, each country was at the height of its power, with thousands of miles of land and millions of soldiers, so they were able to hold on to each other and go through many ages.

古文：今天下几里，列郡几城，奈何以区区渔阳而结怨天子？
现代文：今天下有多大，列郡有多少城？你怎么能以区区渔阳而结怨天子？
English: How big is the country today, how many cities are there in the counties? How can you grudge the Son of Heaven by fishing for the sun?

古文：此犹河滨之人捧土以塞孟津，多见其不知量也！
现代文：这正如河滨之人捧土以塞孟津，是多么不自量呢！
English: This is just like the people on the riverbank holding soil to block the monsoon, how inconsiderate they are!

古文：方今天下适定，海内愿安，士无贤不肖，皆乐立名于世。
现代文：方今天下刚定，海内希望安宁，士无论贤或不肖，都乐意立名于世。
English: Today, the situation is stable, the country hopes for peace at sea, and all officials, whether wise or not, are willing to make a name for themselves in the world.

古文：而伯通独中风狂走，自捐盛时，内听骄妇之失计，外信谗邪之谀言，长为群后恶法，永为功臣鉴戒，岂不误哉！
现代文：而伯通独中风狂走，自弃盛世，内听娇妇之失计，外信谗邪之谀言，长为群后恶法，永为功臣鉴戒，岂不是错误？
English: But isn't it a mistake for Bertone to go off in a huff, abandoning the prosperous world, listening to the miscalculations of a young woman, listening to the slander of an evil woman, growing up as a follower of evil, and always being a hero?

古文：定海内者无私仇，勿以前事自误，愿留意顾老母幼弟。凡举事无为亲厚者所痛，而为见仇者所快。
现代文：定天下者不计私仇，希勿以前事自误，愿留意照顾老母幼弟，凡举事不要为亲者所痛，而为仇者所快。
English: It is determined that the people of the world should not consider personal vendettas, hope that they will not make mistakes in the past, and would like to pay attention to the care of the old mother and the younger brother. In all matters, do not be hurt by relatives, but by enemies.

古文：宠得书愈怒，攻浮转急。
现代文：彭宠得书更怒，进攻朱浮也更急。
English: Peng Zhaozhu was more angry, and Zhu Fu's attack was also more urgent.

古文：明年，涿郡太守张丰亦举兵反。
现代文：第二年，涿郡太守张丰也举兵反叛。
English: In the following year, Zhang Feng, the governor of Shixian County, also raised an army to rebel.

古文：时，二郡畔戾，北州忧恐，浮以为天子必自将兵讨之，而但遣游击将军邓隆阴助浮。
现代文：这时二郡叛逆，北州忧惧，朱浮以为天子必自率兵征讨，而朝廷只派了游击将军邓隆暗中帮助朱浮。
English: At this time, the two counties rebelled, Beizhou was worried, and Zhu Fu thought that Tianzi would lead the army to fight, but the court only sent the guerrilla general Deng Long to secretly help Zhu Fu.

古文：浮怀惧，以为帝怠于敌，不能救之，乃上疏曰：昔楚、宋列国，俱为诸侯，庄王以宋执其使，遂有投袂之师。
现代文：朱浮恐惧，以为帝懈怠于敌，不能救他，就上疏说 ：以前楚宋列国，都是诸侯，庄王以宋杀了他的使者，于是投袂而起兵围宋。
English: Fearing that the emperor was slacking off in the face of the enemy and unable to save him, Zhu Fu said, "In the past, all the countries of the Chu and Song dynasties were vassals. The king of Zhuang killed his envoy with Song, so he threw in the towel and raised an army to surround Song.

古文：魏公子顾朋友之要，触冒强秦之锋。
现代文：魏公子无忌顾及姐夫的需要，窃符触冒强秦之军锋。
English: Wei Gongzi did not hesitate to take into account the needs of his brother-in-law, stealing the strong military front of Qin.

古文：夫楚、魏非有分职匡正之大义也，庄王但为争强而发忿，公子以一言而立信耳。
现代文：楚魏非有职责匡正的大义，庄王也只是为争强而发忿，公子只是以一言而立信而已。
English: Chu Wei did not have the responsibility to rectify the great justice, Zhuang Wang was only angry because of the competition, and the prince was only convinced by a word.

古文：今彭宠反畔，张丰逆节，以为陛下必弃捐它事，以时灭之，既历时月，寂寞无音。
现代文：今彭宠反叛，张丰逆节，以为陛下必弃捐他事，及时讨灭他们。然隔了这么久，寂寞无音。
English: Now Peng Zhaotong rebelled, Zhang Feng rebelled, and thought that His Majesty would abandon his cause and destroy them in time. However, after such a long interval, there was no sound of loneliness.

古文：从围城而不救，放逆虏而不讨，臣诚惑之。
现代文：纵敌人围城而不救，放逆虏而不讨，我实在困惑不解。
English: Even if the enemy besieges the city and does not save it, and does not retaliate against the captors, I am really puzzled.

古文：昔高祖圣武，天下既定，犹身自征伐，未尝宁居。
现代文：昔高祖圣武，天下既定，还亲自征伐，没有宁息安居。
English: In the past, Gao Zu Shengwu, the world's established, but also personally conquered, there is no peace and tranquility.

古文：陛下虽兴大业，海内未集，而独逸豫，不顾北垂，百姓遑遑，无所系心。三河、冀州，曷足以传后哉！
现代文：陛下虽兴大业，海内未集，而独逸豫，不顾北陲，百姓遑遑，无所系心，三河、冀州，怎可传于后世呢！
English: Although His Majesty has embarked on a great undertaking, he has not gathered the resources at home, and he has been isolated and hesitant, disregarding the north and the people, and has nothing to do, how can the three rivers and Jizhou be passed on to future generations!

古文：今秋稼已熟，复为渔阳所掠。
现代文：今秋稼已熟，又被渔阳所掠。
English: This autumn, the harvest has been ripe, and it has been plundered by the fishing sun.

古文：张丰狂悖，奸党日增，连年拒守，吏士疲劳，甲胄生虮虱，弓弩不得施，上下焦心，相望救护，仰希陛下生活之恩。
现代文：张丰狂悖，奸党日增，连年拒守，吏士疲劳，甲胄生了虮，弓弩不能放下，上下焦心，相望救护，仰希陛下救生之恩。 
English: Zhang Feng is furious, the traitor party is increasing day by day, he has refused to defend the palace for years, the officials are tired, the armor is rusty, the bow and arrow cannot be put down, the people are anxious, looking forward to the rescue, and hoping for the grace of His Majesty to save their lives.

古文：诏报曰： 往年赤眉跋扈长安，吾策其无谷必东，果来归降。
现代文：诏报道 ：往年赤眉暴虐长安，我料他无谷必东向，后果东来归降。
English: Zhao reported: In previous years, the Red Eyebrows tyrannized Chang'an. I expected that he would go east without a valley, and the consequences would be a return to the east.

古文：今度此反虏，势无久全，其中必有内相斩者。
现代文：今料此反虏，势不能久全，贼内部必有人斩贼首。
English: Now that this counter-capture is expected, the situation cannot last for long. Someone within the bandits must behead the bandits.

古文：今军资未充，故须后麦耳。 
现代文：今军资未充，所以要等到麦收以后。 
English: Right now, military funds have not been replenished, so we have to wait until after the wheat harvest.

古文：浮城中粮尽，人相食。
现代文：朱浮城中粮尽，人相食。
English: Zhu Fucheng ran out of food and people began to eat each other.

古文：会上谷太守耿况遣骑来救浮，浮乃得遁走。
现代文：恰逢上谷太守耿况派遣骑兵来救朱浮，朱浮才得逃走。
English: At the same time, Shanggu Taishu Geng Zheng sent cavalry to rescue Zhu Fu, and Zhu Fu had to flee.

古文：南至良乡，其兵长反遮之，浮恐不得脱，乃下马刺杀其妻，仅以身免，城降于宠，尚书令侯霸奏浮败乱幽州，构成宠罪，徒劳军师，不能死节，罪当伏诛。
现代文：南到良乡，其兵之长帅反阻拦，朱浮恐不能脱身，就下马刺杀其妻，仅免于死，城降于彭宠。尚书令侯霸奏朱浮败乱幽州，才构成彭宠之罪，军师徒劳，不能死节，罪当伏诛。
English: South to Liangxiang, the commander of his soldiers counter-blocked Zhu Fugu. Fearing that he would not be able to escape, he mounted his horse and killed his wife. He was only spared from death, and the city fell to Pengcai. Shangshu ordered Houba to play Zhu Fugu to defeat the chaotic Yuzhou, which constituted the sin of Pengcai. The military master was in vain, he could not die, and the sin should be put to death.

古文：帝不忍，以浮代贾复为执金吾，徙封父城侯。
现代文：帝不忍，以朱浮代贾复为执金吾，徙封父城侯。
English: The emperor could not bear it, so he appointed Zhu Fu's successor, Jia Fu, as his regent and exiled the lord of the city.

古文：后丰、宠并自败。
现代文：后来彭宠、张丰都失败了。
English: Later, both Peng Zhao and Zhang Feng failed.

古文：帝以二千石长吏多不胜任，时有纤微之过者，必见斥罢，交易纷扰，百姓不宁。
现代文：帝以二千石长吏多不胜任，时有微小之过者，必见斥罢，变换纷扰，百姓不宁。
English: An emperor with a 2,000-koku chieftain is often incompetent, and when there is a minor transgression, there is bound to be a rebuke, altercations, and unrest among the people.

古文：六年，有日食之异，浮因上疏曰：臣闻日者众阳之所宗，君上之位也。
现代文：建武六年，有日蚀之异，朱浮因而上疏说： 臣闻日是众阳之所宗，君上之位。
English: In the sixth year of Jianwu's reign, there was an eclipse of the sun, which made Zhu Fu rise up and say to Shang Shao: "The Sun is the father of all the suns and the ruler of all the kingdoms.

古文：凡居官治民，据郡典县，皆为阳为上，为尊为长。
现代文：凡居官治民，据郡典县，都为阳为上，为尊为长。
English: According to the county and prefectures, wherever officials live and govern the people, the yang is the highest and the dignity is the longest.

古文：若阳上不明，尊长不足，则干动三光，垂示王者。
现代文：如果阳上不明，尊长不足，则干犯日月星辰，以垂示王者。
English: If it is not clear in the sun, and there is not enough reverence, then the sun, moon and stars will intervene to show who is the king.

古文：五典纪国家之政，《鸿范》别灾异之文，皆宣明天道，以征来事者也。
现代文：五典记国家之政，《鸿范》别灾异之文，都是宣明天道，以征验后来的。
English: The Five Classics of Statecraft, the "Great Standard" and other writings on disasters and changes are all the teachings of Xuanming, which were later collected and verified.

古文：陛下哀愍海内新罹祸毒，保宥生人，使得苏息。
现代文：陛下哀悯海内新遭祸毒，保宥生人，使得休养生息。
English: His Majesty took pity on the newly afflicted sailors at sea, pardoned the living, and allowed them to recuperate.

古文：而今牧人之吏，多未称职，小违理实，辄见斥罢，岂不粲然黑白分明哉！
现代文：而今牧人之吏，多未称职，少违理实，动遭斥罢，岂不是粲然黑白分明吗？
English: But now the shepherds' officials, many of whom are incompetent, few of whom violate reason and truth, and are subject to rejection at every turn, are they not black and white?

古文：然以尧、舜之盛，犹如三考，大汉之兴，亦累功效，吏皆积久，养老于官，至名子孙，因为氏姓。
现代文：然而以尧舜的盛世，还加三考，大汉之兴，也累积功效，官吏积久，养老于官，以至子孙相因，以官名为氏姓。
English: However, the flourishing of the sheng era, the addition of the three examinations, and the rise of the great man have also accumulated effects. Officials have accumulated for a long time, and they have been in office for a long time, and even their children and grandchildren have official names and surnames.

古文：当时吏职，何能悉理；论议之徒，岂不喧哗。
现代文：当时吏职，何能悉理；议论之徒，岂不喧哗。
English: At that time, officials, how can they not understand; talkers, how can they not make noise.

古文：盖以为天地之功不可仓卒，艰难之业当累日也。
现代文：我以为天地之功不可仓卒而就，艰难之业当累日才能有成。
English: I thought that the merits of heaven and earth cannot be achieved in a hurry, and that hard work can only be accomplished when it takes a long time.

古文：而间者守宰数见换易，迎新相代，疲劳道路。
现代文：而近来守宰数见换易，迎新相代，疲劳奔波于道路。
English: But recently, the number of defenders has seen a change of fortune, welcoming a new generation, and fatigue is running on the road.

古文：寻其视事日浅，未足昭见其职，既加严切，人不自保，各自顾望，无自安之心。
现代文：由于视事经验不足，未足昭著其职，既加严格切责，人不能自保，各相顾望，不可自安。
English: Due to the lack of experience in dealing with things, they are not sufficiently aware of their duties, and even if they are strictly responsible, they cannot protect themselves, look out for each other, and cannot be self-assured.

古文：有司或因睚眦以骋私怨，苟求长短，求媚上意。
现代文：有司或因睚眦小怨以报私恨，苛求其短，求媚上意。
English: There are people who, because of a petty grudge, retaliate with a personal grudge, demanding that it be short and flattering.

古文：二千石及长吏迫于举劾，惧于刺讥，故争饰诈伪，以希虚誉。
现代文：二千石及长吏迫于举劾，惧于讥刺，所以争着弄虚作假，以求取虚名。
English: Two thousand koku and chief officials were forced to impeach, afraid of ridicule, so they fought to deceive and deceive in order to gain a false reputation.

古文：斯皆群阳骚动，日月失行之应。
现代文：这都是群阳骚动，日月失行的应验。
English: This is all the result of the turmoil of the sun and the moon.

古文：夫物暴长者必矢折，功卒成者必亟坏，如摧长久之业，而造速成之功，非陛下之福也。
现代文：物暴长者必夭折，功猝成者必亟坏，如摧长久之业，而造速成之功，这不是陛下的福哩。
English: Those who grow old in a materialistic society will die young, and those who achieve sudden success will be very bad. If you destroy a long-term career, but create a quick success, this is not your majesty's blessing.

古文：天下非一时之用也，海内非一旦之功也。
现代文：天下不是一时之用，海内不是一旦之功。
English: The world is not a one-time use, the sea is not a one-time effort.

古文：愿陛下游意于经年之外，望化于一世之后，天下幸甚。
现代文：愿陛下注意于长远之计，望化于一代之后。天下幸甚。 
English: May His Majesty pay attention to the long-term plan and hope to be transformed into a generation later. The world is very fortunate.

古文：帝下其议，群臣多同于浮，自是牧守易代颇简。
现代文：帝将其奏章交下面讨论，群臣多同意朱浮的意见，自此以后牧守的调动就减少了。
English: The emperor submitted his report to the following discussion, and the courtiers mostly agreed with Zhu Fu's opinion. Since then, the number of herdsmen's movements has decreased.

古文：旧制，州牧奏二千石长吏不任位者，事皆先下三公，三公遣掾史案验，然后黜退。
现代文：按旧制，州牧奏二千石长吏不任其位者，都应先下给三公，由三公派遣掾史加以案验，然后给予降职或罢退。
English: According to the old system, if a prefect of a prefecture with 2,000 koku of rice failed to be appointed, he or she should first be reported to the three great lords, who would send an official to investigate the case, and then demote or dismiss him or her.

古文：帝时用明察，不复委任三府，而权归刺举之吏。
现代文：帝当时为便于明察，不复委任三府，而权归州牧之吏。
English: At that time, in order to facilitate the inspection, the emperor did not appoint the three prefectures, and the power belonged to the officials of the state pastors.

古文：浮复上疏曰： 陛下清明履约，率礼无违，自宗室诸王、外家后亲，皆奉遵绳墨，无党势之名。
现代文：朱浮复上疏道 ：陛下清明履行约法，率礼无违，自宗室诸王、外家后妃亲属，都遵纪守法，无结党营私之名。
English: Zhu Fu Fu on the way to the ditch: His Majesty has clearly fulfilled the law of the covenant and led the ceremony without any violation. From the royal family to the relatives of the queens, they all follow the rules and abide by the law, and have no reputation of being a partisan.

古文：至或乘牛车，齐于编人。
现代文：外出乘牛车，象编入户籍的平民一样。
English: They go out by ox-drawn cart, just like the commoners who have been registered.

古文：斯固法令整齐，下无作威者也。
现代文：这当然是法令整齐，下面没有作威作福的人。
English: Of course, this is because the regulations are neat and there are no arrogant people below.

古文：求之于事，宜以和平，而灾异犹见者，而岂徒然？
现代文：求之于事，宜以和平，而灾异仍现，难道是徒然的吗？
English: Is it in vain to pray for things, that peace may come, when evils abound?

古文：天道信诚，不可不察。
现代文：天道信诚，不可不察。
English: You can't help but notice the sincerity of Tendo.

古文：窃见陛下疾往者上威不行，不专国命，即位以来，不用旧典，信赖举之宫，黜鼎辅之任，至于有所劾奏，便加免退，复案不关三府，罪谴不蒙澄察。
现代文：我见陛下恨以前上威不行，下专国命，即位以来，不用旧典，信任州牧之官，废除三公之职，以至只要有人弹劾二千石之大吏，就加以免退，覆案不由三府，罪谴不经澄察。
English: I see that His Majesty abhors the authority of the past, and since ascending the throne, he does not use the old code, trusts the officials of the state pastors, abolishes the three public offices, so that as long as someone impeaches the officials of two thousand koku, they will be exempted, the case will not be overturned by the three prefectures, and the crime will not be investigated.

古文：陛下以使者为腹心，而使者以从事为耳目，是为尚书之平，决于百石之吏，故群下苛刻，各自为能。
现代文：陛下以使者为腹心，而使者以从事为耳目，这本是尚书平决之责任，却决于百石之吏，所以群下苛刻，各自为能。
English: Your Majesty takes the envoy as his confidant, and the envoy as his eyes and ears. This is the responsibility of decision-making, but it depends on the officials of a hundred stones, so the group is harsh, each for their own ability.

古文：兼以私情容长，憎爱在职，皆竞张空虚，以要时利，故有罪者心不厌服，无咎者坐被空文，不可经盛衰，贻后王也。
现代文：加以私情容长，憎爱各由在职者所左右，都竞张空虚，以谋一时之利，所以有罪者心不折服，而无罪者反被空文所牵累，这种作法不可以经盛衰，贻于后世。
English: Add selfishness, hatred and love, all of which are influenced by the incumbent, all compete for emptiness to seek short-term benefits, so the guilty are unconvinced, while the innocent are affected by the empty text. This practice cannot withstand the rise and fall, and will linger in future generations.

古文：夫事积久则自重，吏安则人自静。
现代文：事积久了官吏就自重，官吏安人民就自静了。
English: After a long period of time, the officials became self-respecting, and the officials and the people calmed down.

古文：传曰： 五年再闰，天道乃备。 
现代文：古人说： 五年一闰，天道就完备了。 
English: The ancients said: Once every five years, the heavenly way is complete.

古文：夫以天地之灵，犹五载以成其化，况人道哉！
现代文：以天地之灵，就像五年一闰以成其化一样，何况人道呢？
English: To take the spirit of heaven and earth is like taking a leap of five years to transform it, and what about humanity?

古文：臣浮愚戆，不胜忄卷々，愿陛下留心千里之任，省察偏言之奏。 
现代文：臣朱浮愚戆，不胜恳切之忱，愿陛下留心千里之任，审察偏言之奏。 
English: Minister Zhu Fuguo, with great earnestness, I hope that Your Majesty will pay attention to the responsibility of thousands of miles and examine the play of the parable.

古文：七年，转太仆。
现代文：七年，转太仆。
English: Seven years later, he was promoted to Taibu.

古文：浮又以国学既兴，宜广博士之选，乃上书曰：夫太学者，礼义之官，教化所由兴也。
现代文：朱浮又以国学既兴，应扩大博士的选拔，就上书说： 太学，是礼义之宫殿，教化兴起的源头。
English: Zhu Fu also wrote a letter saying that the selection of doctoral candidates should be expanded, since Chinese studies were flourishing. He said, "Chinese studies is the palace of etiquette and the source of the rise of enlightenment.

古文：陛下尊敬先圣，垂意古典，官室未饰，干戈未休，而先建太学，进立横舍，比日车驾亲临观飨，将以弘时雍之化，显勉进之功也。
现代文：陛下尊敬先圣，重视古典，宫室未饰，干戈未休，而先建太学，建立黉舍，近日车驾亲临观飨，将以弘扬时事安定太平的教化，显示勉励进取的功效。
English: His majesty respects the first saint, attaches importance to the classics, the palace room is not decorated, the battle is not over, and the first to build a school, build a schoolhouse, and recently drive to the observation tower, will carry forward the enlightenment of current affairs, stability and peace, and show the effect of encouraging progress.

古文：寻博士之官，为天下宗师，使孔圣之言传而不绝。
现代文：考寻博士之官，为天下宗师，能使孔圣之言传而不绝。
English: As the world's guru, the official of the Confucius Institute can make the words of Confucius spread endlessly.

古文：旧事，策试博士，必广求详选，爰自畿夏，延及四方，是以博举明经，惟贤是登，学者精励，远近同慕，伏闻诏书更试五人，惟取见在洛阳城者。
现代文：以前，策试博士，必广求详选，于是自从王畿华夏，遍延四方，因此博举明经，唯贤是登，学者精励，远近同慕。我听说诏书更试五人，只取现在洛阳城里的人。
English: In the past, candidates for doctoral examination had to seek detailed selection from a wide range of people, so since the reign of King Gui Huaxia, the examination has been extended to all four directions. Therefore, the sutras have been widely cited, the virtuous have been promoted, the scholars have been diligent, and they have been admired from far and near. I heard that the imperial edict will test five more people, only those who are now in Luoyang City.

古文：臣恐自今以往，将有所失。
现代文：我恐自此以往，将有所失。
English: I'm afraid we're going to lose something.

古文：求之密迩，容或未尽，而四方之学，无所劝乐。
现代文：求才的范围过小，人才包罗未尽，而四方的学者，也没有奔头了。
English: The scope of talent is too small, talent is not exhaustive, and scholars in the four directions have not rushed.

古文：凡策试之本，贵得其真，非有期会，不及远方也。
现代文：策试之本，贵在得其真实，非有约期集会，不及远方。
English: This is a test of strategy. You have to get it right. If there is no scheduled meeting, it is not far away.

古文：又诸所征试，皆私自发遣，非有伤费烦扰于事也。
现代文：又诸所征试，都是私自发遣，非有伤费烦扰于事。
English: In addition, all the recruitment tests were self-initiated, and there was no injury or inconvenience.

古文：语曰： 中国失礼，求之于野。 
现代文：俗话说： 中国失礼而求之于野。 
English: As the saying goes: China is rude and asks for it in the open.

古文：臣浮幸得与讲图谶，故敢越职。
现代文：臣朱浮有幸参与讲解图谶，所以敢越职呈奏。 
English: Minister Zhu Fu had the honor to participate in the explanation of the diagram, so he dared to play beyond his duties.

古文：帝然之。
现代文：帝同意。
English: The emperor agreed to Wang Hun's score.

古文：二十年，代窦融为大司空，二十二年，坐卖弄国恩免。
现代文：建武二十年，代窦融为大司空。二十二年，以卖弄国恩被免职。
English: In the 20th year of Jianwu, Daidou Rong was promoted to Daishi Kuo, and in the 22nd year, he was removed from his post for making fun of the national debt.

古文：二十五年，徙封新息侯。
现代文：二十五年，徙封新息侯。
English: Twenty-five years later, he passed away.

古文：帝以浮陵轹同列，每衔之，惜其功能，不忍加罪。
现代文：帝以朱浮常欺蔑同列官员，每恨他，但爱惜其功劳才能，不忍加罪。
English: Emperor Zhu often bullied officials of the same rank, and they hated him, but they cherished his merits and talents, and could not bear to add to his guilt.

古文：永平中，有人单辞告浮事者，显宗大怒，赐浮死。
现代文：永平年间，有人没有证据告朱浮，显宗大怒，赐朱浮死罪。
English: During the Yongping era, someone accused Zhu Bui without any evidence, which made Emperor Xuanzong very angry and sentenced Zhu Bui to death.

古文：长水校尉樊言于帝曰： 唐尧大圣，兆人获所，尚优游四凶之狱，厌服海内之心，使天下咸知，然后殛罚。
现代文：长水校尉樊矹向帝说 ：唐尧大圣，天下人都得其所，还优柔四凶之狱，厌服海内之心，使天下人知道，然后施以极刑。
English: Changshui lieutenant Zou Xiang said to the emperor: "Tang Zi is a great saint, all people in the world have their place, but also the prison of the four evils, the heart of the sea is disgusted, so that people in the world know, and then impose capital punishment.

古文：浮事虽昭明，而未达人听，宜下廷尉，章著其事。 
现代文：朱浮事虽昭明，而人们并不知道，宜由廷尉，彰著其事。 
English: Although Zhu Bu's matter is clear, and people do not know, it is appropriate for the court lieutenant to highlight the matter.

古文：帝亦悔之。
现代文：帝也悔悟。
English: The emperor also repented.

古文：论曰：吴起与田文论功，文不及者三，朱买臣难公孙弘十策，弘不得其一，终之田文相魏，公孙宰汉，诚知宰相自有体也。
现代文：史官评论道：吴起与田文论功，田文三事都不如吴起，朱买臣难公孙弘十策，弘不得一，结果田文成了魏相，公孙弘成了汉朝宰相，可知宰相是自有其人的。
English: The historian commented: Wu Qi and Tianwen discussed the merits, Tianwen's three things were not as good as Wu Qi, Zhu's vassal was difficult, Gongsun Hong's ten measures, Hong was not one, as a result, Tianwen became the Wei Minister, Gongsun Hong became the Han Dynasty Prime Minister, so the Prime Minister was his own person.

古文：故曾子曰： 君子所贵乎道者三，笾豆之事则有司存。 
现代文：所以曾子说： 君子所贵于道者有三，祭祀之事则有司所主，非人主之事 。
English: Therefore, Zengzi said, "There are three things that a gentleman values in the Tao. In the matter of sacrifice, there is the master of the priest, and in the matter of not being the master of man.

古文：而光武、明帝躬好吏事，亦以课核三公，其人或失而其礼稍薄，至有诛斥诘辱之累。
现代文：而光武、明帝亲躬吏事，监督三公以课其勤惰，核其得失，其人或有过失而其礼稍薄，往往有诛杀、罢斥、诘责、侮辱的。
English: However, Emperor Guangwu and Emperor Ming personally supervised the officials, supervised the three public servants, lectured them on their diligence, checked their gains and losses, punished those who were negligent, and often had fights, reprimands, rebukes, and insults.

古文：任职责过，一至于此，追感贾生之论，不亦笃乎！
现代文：任职责过，一至于此，追感贾谊 廉耻礼节以绳君子 之论，不是很好吗？
English: Having done my duty, as far as this is concerned, isn't it good to follow the principles of friendship, modesty, etiquette, and being a gentleman?

古文：朱浮讥讽苛察欲速之弊，然矣，焉得长者之言哉！
现代文：朱浮讥讽苛察欲速的弊端，却最终遇害，哪里能听到长者之言呢？
English: Zhu Fu ridiculed and criticized the evils of haste, but he was eventually killed. Where can you hear the words of the elders?

古文：冯鲂字孝孙，南阳湖阳人也。
现代文：◆冯鲂传，冯鲂字孝孙，南阳湖阳人。
English: ◆Feng Yu Chuan, Feng Yu Zi Xiaosun, Nanyang Hoyang people.

古文：其先魏之支别，食菜冯城，因以氏焉。
现代文：其先祖是魏之分支，因在冯城生活，故姓冯。
English: His ancestors were from the Wei branch, and because he lived in Fengcheng, his surname was Feng.

古文：秦灭魏，迁于湖阳，为郡族姓。
现代文：秦灭魏，迁于湖阳，为郡中大姓。
English: Qin Zhaowei, moved to Hoyang, is the county's largest surname.

古文：王莽末，四方溃畔，鲂乃聚宾客，招豪桀，作营堑，以待所归。
现代文：王莽末年，四方崩溃反叛，冯鲂就聚宾客，招豪杰，作营垒，以待明主。
English: At the end of Wang Mang's life, when the four sides collapsed and rebelled, Feng Xuan gathered guests, invited heroes and made a camp to wait for the Lord.

古文：是时湖阳大姓虞都尉反城称兵，先与同县申屠季有仇，而杀其兄，谋灭季族。
现代文：这时湖阳大姓虞都尉反城称兵，先与同县申屠季有仇，而杀其兄，计划诛灭申屠季全家。
English: At this time, Captain Yu, surnamed Hoyang, rebelled against the city and raised an army. First, he had a grudge against Shen Tuoqi of the same county, and killed his brother, planning to exterminate Shen Tuoqi's entire family.

古文：季亡归鲂，鲂将季欲还其宫，道逢都尉从弟长卿来，欲执季。
现代文：申屠季逃亡归冯鲂，冯鲂带领申屠季欲还营，路上遇到虞都尉堂弟虞长卿来，准备捉拿申屠季。
English: Shen Tuoqi fled to Feng Gan. Feng Gan led Shen Tuoqi to return to the camp. On the way, he met Yu Du's cousin Yu Changqing, who was preparing to capture Shen Tuoqi.

古文：鲂叱长卿曰： 我与季虽无素故，士穷想归，要当以死任之，卿为何言？ 
现代文：冯鲂叱虞长卿道： 我与申屠季虽平素没有交往，穷相归，要当以死任之，你有什么要说？ 
English: Feng Qi scolded Yu Changqing: Although I have no contact with Shen Tuqi, we are poor and should be left to die. What do you have to say?

古文：遂与俱归。
现代文：于是与他同回。
English: So I went back with him.

古文：季谢曰： 蒙恩得全，死无以为报，有牛马财物，愿悉献之。 
现代文：申屠季谢道： 蒙恩得全，死无以相报，有牛马财物，愿全部献给你。 
English: Shen Tuji said with gratitude: I have been blessed with everything, death is nothing in return, I have cattle, horses and property, I would like to dedicate them all to you.

古文：鲂作色曰： 吾老亲弱弟皆在贼城中，今日相与，尚无所顾，何云财物乎？ 
现代文：冯鲂生气说： 我老亲弱弟都在贼城中，今日相与，尚且无所顾及，还讲什么财物呢？ 
English: Feng Yu said angrily: My old relatives and weak brothers are all in the thief city, today they are the same, yet they do not care, what kind of property are they talking about?

古文：季惭不敢复言。
现代文：申屠季惭愧不敢再说了。
English: Ashamed, Shen Tuoqi did not dare to say any more.

古文：鲂自是为县邑所敬信，故能据营自固。
现代文：冯鲂自此为县邑所敬重信任，所以能据营自固。
English: Since then, Feng Xuan has been respected and trusted by the county and town, so he can firmly establish himself.

古文：时天下未定，而四方之士拥兵矫称者甚众，唯鲂自守，兼有方略。
现代文：当时天下未定，四方之士拥兵假托名义的很多，只有冯鲂持重自守，兼有方略。
English: At that time, the world was undecided, and there were many people in the name of supporting the soldiers of the four sides, but only Feng Xuan held on to self-preservation and had a strategy.

古文：光武闻而嘉之，建武三年，征诣行在所，见于云台，拜虞令。
现代文：光武听说而嘉奖他，建武三年，征召到帝所在，在南宫云台接见他，拜虞县令。
English: Guangwu heard of him and commended him. Jianwu, who was three years old, was summoned to the emperor's residence and received him at the Southern Palace in Yuntai. He bowed to the county magistrate.

古文：为政敢杀伐，以威信称。
现代文：为政敢于杀伐，以威信著称。
English: He dared to fight for politics and was known for his prestige.

古文：迁郏令。
现代文：迁郏县令。
English: The order to move the county was issued.

古文：后车驾西征隗嚣，颍川资贼群起，郏贼延褒等众三千余人，攻围县舍，鲂率吏士七十许人，力战连日，弩矢尽，城陷，鲂乃遁去。
现代文：后光武西征隗嚣，颍川盗贼群起，郏贼延褒等众三千人，攻围县舍，冯鲂率吏士七十余人，力战连日，弓矢尽，城陷，冯鲂才逃去。
English: After the Western Conquest of Guangwu, there was a clamor of robbers in Luochuan, and the robbers of Yanbo led a crowd of 3,000 people to besiege the county seat. Feng Hui led more than 70 officials to fight for days, and the city fell before Feng Hui could escape.

古文：帝闻郡国反，即驰赴颍川，鲂诣行在所。
现代文：帝听说郡国反，即驰赴颍川，冯鲂到帝所在。
English: When the emperor heard about the rebellion in the county, he immediately went to Luochuan, while Feng Rong went to the emperor.

古文：帝案行斗处，知鲂力战，乃嘉之曰： 此健令也。所当讨击，勿拘州郡。 
现代文：帝察看了行斗处所，知冯鲂经过力战，嘉奖说 ：这是一位勇猛刚强的县令啊，应即行讨击，不必拘于州郡。 
English: The imperial inspector saw the location of the battle, knew that Feng Yu had fought hard, and said in praise: This is a brave and strong county magistrate, you should immediately counterattack, you don't have to stick to the county.

古文：褒等闻帝至，皆自髡剔，负鈇锧，将其众请罪。
现代文：延褒等听说帝驾到了，都自剃了头发，背着坐刂刃椹等，率领其众共来请罪。
English: When Yan Bo and the others heard that the emperor had arrived, they all shaved their hair, carried saddles, blades, etc. on their backs, and led their people to plead guilty.

古文：帝且赦之，使鲂转降诸聚落，县中平定，诏乃悉以褒等还鲂诛之。
现代文：帝暂赦免其罪，使冯鲂转降服诸聚落，县中平定，诏令将延褒等全部发还给冯鲂诛杀。
English: The emperor temporarily pardoned his crime, made Feng Xuan surrender to the settlements, the county was pacified, and the imperial decree was issued to return all the rewards to Feng Xuan.

古文：鲂责让以行军法，皆叩头曰： 今日受诛，死无所恨。 
现代文：冯鲂责让将行军法，贼众都叩头说： 今日受诛，死无所恨。 
English: When Feng Xuan was ordered to give up martial law, all the thieves bowed down and said, "Today I was arrested, I have no hatred for death."

古文：鲂曰： 汝知悔过伏罪，今一切相赦，听各反农桑，为令作耳目。 
现代文：冯鲂说 ：知道悔过伏罪，今全部赦罪，听任各自回去从事农桑，为县令作耳目。 
English: Feng Yu said, "Knowing that I have repented of the crime of lying in ambush, I now completely forgive the crime. Let each of you go back to work as a farmer, and be the eyes and ears for the county magistrate."

古文：皆称万岁。
现代文：贼众皆称万岁。
English: Long live the thieves.

古文：是时每有盗贼，并为褒等所发，无敢动者，县界清静。
现代文：这时每有盗贼，都被延褒等所举报，没有敢动，县界清静。
English: At this time, every thief was reported by Yanbao and others. They did not dare to move, and the county was quiet.

古文：十三年，迁魏郡太守。
现代文：建武十三年，迁魏郡太守。
English: In the thirteenth year of Jianwu, he was transferred to Wei County.

古文：二十七年，以高等入代赵憙为太仆。
现代文：二十七年，以才学优异入代赵为太仆。
English: In the 27th year, he was appointed as Zhao's eunuch on the basis of academic excellence.

古文：中元元年，从东封岱宗，行卫尉事。
现代文：中元元年，从帝东封泰山，代理卫尉事。
English: In the first year of the Middle Ages, Mount Tai was assigned to the East from the emperor, acting as a guard.

古文：还，代张纯为司空，赐爵关内侯。
现代文：回后，代张纯为司空，赐爵关内侯。
English: After his return, Zhang Jun became the deputy of Kuang and was given the title of Lord of Guanai.

古文：二年，帝崩，使鲂持节起原陵，更封杨邑乡侯，食三百五十户。
现代文：中元二年，帝崩，使冯鲂持符节起原陵，更封杨邑乡侯，食三百五十户。
English: In the 2nd year of the Middle Ages, the emperor died, so that Feng Xizhi set up the original mausoleum on the Day of the Rune, and was awarded the title of Yangyi Township, feeding 350 households.

古文：永平四年，坐考陇西太守邓融，听任奸吏，策免，削爵士。
现代文：永平四年，因考究陇西太守邓融，听任奸吏获罪，策书免职，削爵土。
English: In the fourth year of Yongping, because of the investigation of Deng Rong, the governor of Shaanxi Province, he was convicted of listening to officials, dismissed from his post, and stripped of his peerage.

古文：六年，显宗幸鲁，复行卫尉事。
现代文：永平六年，显宗幸鲁，冯鲂复行使卫尉事。
English: In the sixth year of Yongping, Xian Zong Xinglu and Feng Xuanfu were promoted to the rank of lieutenant.

古文：七年，代阴嵩为执金吾。
现代文：七年，代阴嵩为执金吾。
English: In the seventh year, he became the successor of Kingu.

古文：鲂性矜严公正，在位数进忠言，多见纳用。
现代文：冯鲂性矜严公正，在位数进忠言。多见采纳施行。
English: Feng Xuan's nature is strict and fair, and he is a loyal adviser. It is often adopted and implemented.

古文：十四年，诏复爵士。
现代文：十四年，诏令恢复爵封土地。
English: Fourteen years later, the imperial edict restored the land to the peerage.

古文：明年，东巡郡国，留鲂宿卫南宫。
现代文：第二年，帝东巡郡国，留冯鲂宿卫南宫。
English: In the second year, Emperor Dongxun toured the county and stayed at the Southern Palace of Fengxuan.

古文：卒，子肃嗣，为黄门侍郎。
现代文：建初三年以老病乞身求退，肃宗允许了。这年冬天冯鲂乡里为五更，帝诏冯鲂朝贺，就列侯位。
English: At the beginning of the third year of Jianchu, Su Zong begged to retire due to an old illness, and Su Zong allowed it. This winter, there were five chang in Fengye Township, and Emperor Fengye conferred the title of vassal.

古文：虞延字子大，陈留东昏人也。
现代文：元和二年，去世，时年八十六岁。◆虞延传，虞延字子大，陈留东昏人。
English: He died in the second year of the Yuan Dynasty, at the age of eighty-six. ◆Yu Yan Chuan, Yu Yan Zizi Da, Chen Liu Dong Dou Ren.

古文：延初生，其上有物若一匹练，遂上升上，占者以为吉。
现代文：虞延初生时，其上面有物像一匹白绢，慢慢升天而去，卜者以为是吉庆。
English: When Yu Yan was born, there was something like a white stork on top of him. It slowly ascended into the sky and went away. The soothsayer thought it was good luck.

古文：及长，长八尺六寸，要带十围，力能扛鼎。
现代文：等到长大，身长八尺六寸，腰阔十围，力气大能举鼎。
English: When he grows up, he will be eight feet six inches tall, with a waist ten times wider, and he will be extremely strong.

古文：少为户牖亭长。
现代文：年少时为户牖亭长。
English: When he was young, he was the head of the household.

古文：时王莽贵人魏氏宾客放从，延率吏卒突入其家捕之，以此见怨，故位不升。
现代文：当时王莽的贵人魏氏宾客放纵，虞延率官吏兵士突入其家中捕拿，以此被怨恨，不能升官。
English: At that time, Wang Mang's noble Wei guests were indulgent, and Gu Yan led officials and soldiers to break into his home and arrest him. As a result, he was resented and could not be promoted.

古文：性敦朴，不拘小节，又无乡曲之誉。
现代文：虞延性情敦厚朴实，不拘小节，又无乡曲的美誉。
English: Yu Yan's temperament is thick and simple, and he has the reputation of being a free-spirited composer.

古文：王莽末，天下大乱，延常婴甲胄，拥卫亲族，御抄盗，赖其全者甚众。
现代文：王莽末年，天下大乱，虞延常披挂甲胄拥卫亲族，捍御强盗，依赖他获得安全的很多。
English: In Wang Mang's later years, when the world was in turmoil, Gu Yan often wore armor to protect his relatives and robbers, and many people relied on him for safety.

古文：延从女弟年在孩乳，其母不能活之，弃于沟中，延闻其号声，哀而收之，养至成人。
现代文：虞延的堂妹年在婴幼，其母不能养活，把她遗弃在沟中，虞延听到她的哭声，可怜而收养了她，把她抚养成人。
English: Yu Yan's cousin was a baby. Her mother couldn't feed her and abandoned her in a ditch. Yu Yan heard her cries, took her in and raised her to adulthood.

古文：建武初，仕执金吾府，除细阳令。
现代文：建武初，在执金吾府为吏，任为细阳县令。
English: At the beginning of the Jianwu period, he was an official in the administration of Kingu Prefecture and was appointed as the governor of Xieyang County.

古文：每至岁时伏腊，辄休遣徒系，各使归家，并感其恩德，应期而还。
现代文：每到岁时伏腊，常把囚徒犯人放遣回家，囚徒们感其恩德，如期而还。
English: Every year when he came of age, Fula often sent prisoners home, and the prisoners felt grateful and returned as scheduled.

古文：有囚于家被病，自载诣狱，既至而死，延率掾史，殡于门外，百姓感悦之。
现代文：有的囚犯在家得了病，还自己乘着车子返狱，回后就死在狱中，虞延率掾史送殡于门外，百姓感激喜悦。
English: Some prisoners got sick at home and drove back to prison by themselves. After returning, they died in prison. Yu Yan and Zou Shi conducted the funeral outside the gate, and the people were grateful and happy.

古文：后去官还乡里，太守富宗闻延名，召署功曹。
现代文：后来去官回乡里，太守富宗听到虞延名声，召他代为功曹。
English: Later, when he returned to his hometown after leaving the government, the daimyō Fuzong heard of Yu Yan's fame and summoned him to serve as gong cao on his behalf.

古文：宗性奢靡，车服器物，多不中节。
现代文：富宗性奢侈浪费，车服器物，多不合乎法度。
English: The extravagant extravagance and waste of the rich and the rich, and the clothing and utensils of cars, are mostly illegal.

古文：延谏曰： 昔晏婴辅齐，鹿裘不完，季文子相鲁，妾不衣帛，以约失之者鲜矣。 
现代文：虞延劝谏说 ：以前晏婴辅佐齐国，穿的是布衣鹿裘，季文子为鲁相，妾不衣帛马不食粟，以节约而受到损失是很少有的。 
English: Yu Yan advised Gong that: in the past, Gong Yingzhu assisted Qi Guo, wearing a cloth robe, Ji Wenzi was Lu Xiang, concubines did not wear clothes, horses did not eat millet, and it was rare to suffer losses due to economy.

古文：宗不悦，延即辞退。
现代文：富宗不高兴，虞延即辞退。
English: Fu Zong was not happy, and Yu Yan immediately declined.

古文：居有顷，宗果以侈从被诛，临当伏刑，揽涕而叹曰： 恨不用功曹虞延之谏！ 
现代文：不久，富宗果以奢侈被诛，临刑之前，揽涕而叹道 ：只恨自己不接受功曹虞延的劝谏！ 
English: Not long after, Fuzongguo was arrested for extravagance, and before he was sentenced, he sighed and said, "I only hate myself for not accepting Cao Yuyan's advice!"

古文：光武闻而奇之。
现代文：光武听说而奇之。
English: Mitsutake was surprised to hear this.

古文：二十年东巡，路过小黄，高帝母昭灵后园陵在焉，时延为部督邮，诏呼引见，问园陵之事。
现代文：二十年，帝东巡，路过小黄，高帝母昭灵后园陵在这里。当时虞延为部督邮，帝令引见，问以园陵之事。
English: Twenty years ago, when the emperor was on a tour of the East, Xiao Huang passed by, and Gao's mother Zhaoling's mausoleum was here. At that time, Yu Yan was the postmaster, and the emperor introduced him and asked him about the mausoleum.

古文：延进止从容，占拜可观，其陵树株蘖，皆谙其数，俎豆牺牲，颇晓其礼。
现代文：虞延进止从容，占拜可观，其陵的树木株蘖，都符合规定数目，所陈俎豆牺牲，颇晓其礼。
English: Yu Yan advanced and stopped at a leisurely pace, and his achievements were impressive. The number of trees and bushes in his mausoleum were all in accordance with the regulations, and the sacrifice of the harvested peas was quite admirable.

古文：帝善之，敕延从驾到鲁。
现代文：帝称善，命虞延从帝到鲁。
English: The emperor praised the good, and the fate of life extended from the emperor to Lu.

古文：还经封丘城门，门下小，不容羽盖，帝怒，使挞侍御史，延因下见引咎，以为罪在督邮。
现代文：回来经过封丘城门，门低小，皇帝以翠羽为饰的车盖不能通过，帝怒，使人鞭挞侍御史，虞延因下车拜谒皇上，以为罪在督邮。
English: After returning, he passed through the Fengqiu city gate. The gate was low and small. The emperor could not pass through the lid of the car, which was decorated with cedar feathers. The emperor was so angry that he had the attendant of the imperial historian whipped. Because Yu Yan got off the car and bowed to the emperor, he thought it was the postmaster's fault.

古文：言辞激扬，有感帝意，乃制诰曰： 以陈留督邮虞延故，贳御史罪。 
现代文：言辞激昂高亢，感动了皇帝，就制诰说 ：以陈留督邮虞延的缘故，赦免御史罪过。 
English: The emperor was so moved by Chen's words that he issued an edict: "For the sake of Chen Ruzhu and Po Yu Yan, I will absolve you of your historical sins."

古文：延从送车驾西尽郡界，赐钱及剑带佩刀还郡，于是声名遂振。
现代文：虞延跟从车驾西尽郡界，赏赐钱财及剑带佩刀还郡，于是声名遂振。
English: Yu Yan followed the car to the west of the county boundary, and was rewarded with money and a sword to return to the county, so he became famous.

古文：二十三年，司徒玉况辟焉。
现代文：建武二十三年，司徒玉况征召虞延。
English: In the 23rd year of the Jianwu era, Yu Yan was conscripted by the State Council.

古文：时元正朝贺，帝望而识延，遣小黄门驰问之，即日召拜公车令。
现代文：正月初一朝驾，帝望见虞延就认识他，遣小黄门跑去问他，当天就召拜他为公车令。
English: On the morning of the first day of the first month of the year, Emperor Wang saw Yu Yan and recognized him. He sent Xiao Huangmen to run to ask him, and on the same day he called him to be a bus driver.

古文：明年，迁洛阳令。
现代文：第二年，迁洛阳令。
English: The following year, the relocation to Luoyang was ordered.

古文：是时，阴氏有客马成者，常为奸盗，延收考之。
现代文：这时阴氏有宾客马成，常为奸盗，虞延收系拷问。
English: At this time, the Yin clan had a guest, Ma Cheng, who was often a thief, and he was tortured and interrogated.

古文：阴氏屡请，获一书辄加二百。
现代文：阴氏屡请宽恕，虞延获一书就加打二百大板。
English: Mr. Yin repeatedly asked for forgiveness, and Mr. Gu was fined an additional 200 taels for each letter he received.

古文：信阳侯阴就乃诉帝，谮延多所冤枉。
现代文：信阳侯阴就，就告帝，诬虞延多冤枉好人。
English: Xinyang Houyin on, on to the emperor, Yan Yan Guo wronged more good people.

古文：帝乃临御道之馆，亲录囚徒。延陈其狱状可论者在东，无理者居西。
现代文：帝就亲到御道之馆，讯视记录囚徒的罪状，虞延陈告说其狱状可以研究讨论的在东边，无可议论的到西边去。
English: The emperor personally went to the hall of the imperial road to record the prisoner's crimes, and Gu Yan announced that his prison record could be studied and discussed in the east, and that it was indisputable in the west.

古文：成乃回欲趋东，延前执之，谓曰： 尔人之巨蠹，久依城社，不畏熏烧。
现代文：马成就回转来想到东边去，虞延往前捉住他，对他说： 你是人中的巨蠹，长久以来依赖权贵的庇护，不畏熏烧。
English: When Ma Chengcheng turned around, he thought of going to the east. Gu Yanzhong caught him and said to him, "You are a giant among men. You have long relied on the protection of the powerful, and you are not afraid of being burned.

古文：今考实未竟，宜当尽法！ 
现代文：今考实没有完，应当依法处置！ 
English: Now the fact-finding is not over, it should be dealt with according to the law!

古文：成大呼称枉，陛戟郎以戟刺延，叱使置之。
现代文：马成大呼冤枉，皇帝的陛戟郎以戟刺虞延，叱虞延放开马成。
English: Ma Chengda shouted unjustly, the emperor's majesty's son-in-law stabbed Yu Yan with a shovel, and Yu Yan Yan let go of Ma Chengda.

古文：帝知延不私，谓成曰： 汝犯王法，身自取之！ 
现代文：帝知虞延无私，对马成道： 你犯了王法，是你自取的。 
English: Dizhi Yuyan selflessly said to Ma Chengdu: You have violated the royal law, you have taken it upon yourself.

古文：呵使速去。
现代文：叱其速去。
English: Tell him to hurry back.

古文：后数日伏诛，于是外戚敛手，莫敢干法。
现代文：没几天就正法了。于是外戚们敛手，不敢犯法了。
English: It took only a few days to rectify the law. Therefore, the relatives held back and did not dare to break the law.

古文：在县三年，迁南阳太守。
现代文：在县三年，迁南阳太守。
English: After three years in the county, he was transferred to Nanyang.

古文：永平初，有新野功曹邓衍，以外戚小侯每豫朝会，而容姿趋步，有出于众，显宗目之，顾左右曰： 朕之仪貌，岂若此人！ 
现代文：永平初年，有新野功曹邓衍，以外戚小侯每豫朝会，而其容貌姿势走路，都出于众，显宗见到，对左右说： 我的仪貌，岂能像此人！ 
English: In the first year of Yongping, there was Shinno Gong Cao Dengyan, who was a relative of a minor lord of the Eluan Dynasty, and his appearance and walking posture were out of the ordinary. Seeing this, Xian Zong said to the right and left, "My appearance, can it be like this person!"

古文：特赐舆马衣服。
现代文：特赐舆马衣服。
English: A special gift of clothes for my horse.

古文：延以衍虽有容仪而无实行，未尝加礼。
现代文：虞延以邓衍虽有容仪而无实行，不与他行礼。
English: Gu Yan did not bow to Deng Yan, although he had the manners to do so.

古文：帝既异之，乃诏衍令自称南阳功曹诣阙。既到，拜郎中，迁玄武司马。
现代文：帝感到奇怪，就诏邓衍令他自称南阳功曹到皇帝的金殿，既到，拜为郎中，迁玄武司马。
English: The emperor was puzzled and ordered Deng Yan to take his self-proclaimed Nanyang gong cao to the emperor's golden hall. Once there, he was to pay homage to Geng Wusima and become his disciple.

古文：衍在职不服父丧，帝闻之，乃叹曰：  知人则哲，惟帝难之。 
现代文：邓衍在职父亲死了不服父丧，帝听到后，就叹道： 能知人者就是哲人，只有皇帝难做到。
English: Deng Yan's father, who was in office, died without acknowledging his father's death. After hearing this, the emperor sighed: Anyone who can know people is a philosopher. Only the emperor can do this.

古文：信哉斯言！ 
现代文：这话不假。 
English: This is true.

古文：衍惭而退，由是以延为明。
现代文：邓衍惭愧而退，由此都以虞延为明白人。
English: Deng Yan was ashamed and retreated, which made everyone think that Yu Yan was a wise man.

古文：三年，征代赵憙为太尉；八年，代范迁为司徒，历位二府，十余年无异政绩。
现代文：永平三年，征虞延代赵为太尉；八年，代范迁为司徒。历位太尉、司徒二府，十多年没有异常政绩。
English: In the third year of Yongping, Zheng Yu replaced Zhao as the first lieutenant; in the eighth year, he replaced Fan Qian as the second apprentice. He was promoted to the second lieutenant and second apprentice in two prefectures, and had no abnormal political achievements for more than ten years.

古文：桓帝时为尚书，以议诛大将军梁冀功封都亭侯，后为司空，坐水灾免。性疾恶宦官，遂为所陷，灵帝初，与长乐少府李膺等俱以党事诛。郑弘字巨君，会稽山阴人也。从祖吉，宣帝时为西域都护。
现代文：恰逢楚王刘英谋反，阴氏想阴谋中伤他，暗中使人把楚王谋反的消息告诉虞延，虞延以楚王刘英是藩戚至亲，不信他会谋反，又想招幽州从事公孙弘来京做官，以公孙弘与楚王有往来而止，但没向帝奏明情况。后来刘英谋反的事被帝发觉，帝以诏书切责虞延，虞延于是自杀。家里很清贫，子孙不免寒馁。◆郑弘传，郑弘字巨君，会稽山阴人。从祖郑吉，宣帝时为西域都护。
English: When Liu Ying, King of Chu, was plotting a rebellion, the Yin clan wanted to frame him in a conspiracy and secretly had someone tell Yu Yan the news of Chu Wang's rebellion. Yu Yan believed that Liu Ying, King of Chu, was a close relative of the clan, and did not believe that he would rebel. He also wanted to recruit Yuzhou to engage in Gongsun Hong's coming to Beijing to work as an official, and ended up with Gongsun Hong having dealings with King of Chu, but did not inform the emperor of the situation. Later, Liu Ying's rebellion was discovered by the emperor, and the emperor rebuked Yu Yan with an edict. Yu

古文：弘少为乡啬夫，太守第五伦行春，见而深奇之，召署督邮，举孝廉。
现代文：郑弘年轻时为乡啬夫，太守第五伦春行，见郑弘而深为奇异，召他暂为督邮，举孝廉。
English: When Zheng Hong was young, he was a miserly husband of the township, and the fifth-ranking eunuch, Chunxing, saw Zheng Hong and was deeply surprised, called him to be the postmaster for a while, and raised him to be a filial son.

古文：弘师同郡河东太守焦贶。
现代文：郑弘曾以同郡河东太守焦贶为师。
English: Zheng Hong was once mentored by Jiao Tong, the governor of the same county.

古文：楚王英谋反发觉，以疏引贶，贶被收捕，疾病于道亡没，妻子闭系诏狱，掠考连年。
现代文：楚王刘英谋反被发觉，以书信中涉及焦贶，焦贶被收捕，因病在路上死亡，妻子儿子被关进监狱，拷掠连年。
English: Liu Ying, the king of Chu, was discovered to be plotting a counter-coup, with letters implicating Jiao Tong. Jiao Tong was arrested and died on the road due to illness. His wife and son were imprisoned and tortured for years.

古文：诸生故人惧相连及，皆改变名姓，以逃其祸，弘独髡头负鈇锧，诣阙上章，为贶讼罪。
现代文：他的学生友好害怕连牵到自己，都改名换姓，以逃其祸，郑弘独剃去头发身负铁钅质，到殿上章，为焦贶雪罪。
English: His students were so afraid of being implicated that they all changed their names to avoid the same fate. Zheng Hongdu shaved off his hair, put on a suit of iron armor, and went to the palace to be beheaded for the crime of burning the snow.

古文：显宗觉悟，即赦其家属，弘躬送贶丧及妻子还乡里，由是显名。
现代文：显宗觉悟，即赦免其家属，郑弘躬身送焦贶丧及妻子儿女回乡里，因此名声大显。
English: Zheng Hong's fame was greatly enhanced by the fact that he showed his awareness of the sect, that is, he pardoned his family members, Zheng Hong bowed his head and sent his wife and children back to the countryside.

古文：拜为驺令，政有仁惠，民称苏息。
现代文：拜为驺县县令，政治有仁惠，民众得到休养生息。
English: As the county magistrate of Jixian County, there is benevolence and benefit in politics, and the people can rest and recuperate.

古文：迁淮阳太守。
现代文：迁淮阳太守。
English: He was transferred to the position of Huaiyang governor.

古文：四迁，建初初，为尚书令。
现代文：四次迁徙，建初初年，为尚书令。
English: It was moved four times in the first year of its construction.

古文：旧制，尚书郎限满补县长令史丞尉。
现代文：按旧规定，尚书郎任期满补县长令史丞尉。
English: According to the old regulations, upon the completion of his term of office, Shang Shuro will be promoted to lieutenant of the county magistrate Shi Rong.

古文：弘奏以为台职虽尊，而酬赏甚薄，至于开选，多无乐者，请使郎补千石令，令史为长。
现代文：郑弘奏以为台职虽尊，而酬赏甚为微薄，等到开选，大多不高兴，请求使尚书郎补千石令，令史为长。
English: Zheng Hongso thought that although the post was honorable, the reward was very meager. When the election was held, most people were not happy and asked Shang Shulang to make up the 1,000 koku reward. The history of the reward was long.

古文：帝从其议。
现代文：帝从其议。
English: The emperor followed his advice.

古文：弘前后所陈有补益王政者，皆著之南宫，以为故事。
现代文：郑弘前后所陈有补益王政的事情，都著之于南宫，以为故事。
English: Zheng Hong's previous and subsequent histories of the Sui Dynasty were all written in the Southern Palace, as if they were stories.

古文：出为平原相，征拜侍中。
现代文：出为平原王相，征拜侍中。
English: Appeared as the king of the plains, and was recruited as a samurai.

古文：建初八年，代郑众为大司农。
现代文：建初八年，代郑众为大司农。
English: In the eighth year of the Jianchu era, Zheng Zong became the chief secretary of farmers.

古文：旧交阯七郡贡献转运，皆从东冶泛海而至，风波艰阻，沉溺相系。
现代文：旧交趾七郡贡献物品转运，都从东冶泛海而至，风波艰阻，时常发生沉没。
English: The transfer of goods contributed by the seven counties of the former trading partners all came from Dongye across the sea, with stormy and difficult conditions, and sinking often occurred.

古文：弘奏开零陵、桂阳峤道，于是夷通，至今遂为常路。
现代文：郑弘奏开通零陵、桂阳山道，于是山道被拓宽夷平，成为以后的通道。
English: Zheng Hongso opened the Ziling Mountain Road and Guiyang Mountain Road, so the mountain road was widened and razed to become the future passage.

古文：在职二年，所息省三亿万计。
现代文：郑弘在职二年，所节约的资财达三万亿。
English: In the two years that Zheng Hong has been in office, the savings amount to three trillion yuan.

古文：时岁天下遭旱，边方有警，人食不足，而帑藏殷积。
现代文：当时天下遭旱灾，边方有警，人食不足，而帑藏却积聚很多。
English: At that time, the whole country was suffering from drought, there were police on the border, there was a shortage of food, but there was a lot of hoarded food.

古文：弘又奏宜省贡献，减徭费，以利饥人。
现代文：郑弘又奏应省贡献，减徭费，以利饥民。
English: Zheng Hong also reported on the contribution of the province and the reduction of subsidies to benefit the hungry.

古文：帝顺其议。
现代文：帝采纳了他的建议。
English: The emperor accepted his suggestion.

古文：元和元年，代邓彪为太尉。
现代文：元和元年，郑弘代邓彪为太尉。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, Zheng Hongdai promoted Deng Biao to the rank of lieutenant.

古文：时举将第五伦为司空，班次在下，每正朔朝见，弘曲躬而自卑。
现代文：当时曾推举他的第五伦为司空，位次在他之下，每正朔朝见，郑弘弯着腰而自卑。
English: At that time, Zheng Hong had elected his fifth cousin as his subordinate, and every time he saw Zheng Hong in the morning, he would bend down and feel inferior.

古文：帝问知其故，遂听置云母屏风，分隔其间，由此以为故事。
现代文：帝问知其原因，于是听其言，置云母屏风，将郑弘与第五伦隔开，由此成了一种制度。
English: The emperor asked to know the reason, so he listened to his words and set up a mica screen to separate Zheng Hong from the fifth generation, which became a system.

古文：在位四年，奏尚书张林阿附侍中窦宪，而素行臧秽，又上洛阳令杨光，宪之宾客，在官贪残，并不宜处位。
现代文：在位四年，奏尚书张林阿谀附和侍中窦宪，而素行藏污纳秽，又上奏洛阳令杨光，是窦宪的宾客，在官贪残，都不宜原职不动。
English: During the four years of his reign, Zhang Lin, an aide-de-camp, and Dou Xian, an aide-de-camp, were guests of Dou Xian, while Luoyang's Yang Guang, a guest of Luoyang, was a guest of Dou Xian. It is not appropriate to be greedy while in office.

古文：书奏，吏与光故旧，因以告之。
现代文：书奏上去，掌管奏书的官吏与杨光是故旧，因而告诉了杨光。
English: When the calligraphy was played, the official in charge of the calligraphy and Yang Guang were old-fashioned, so he told Yang Guang.

古文：光报宪，宪奏弘大臣漏泄密事。
现代文：杨光报告窦宪，于是窦宪奏郑弘为大臣而泄漏机密事。
English: Yang Guang reported to Dou Xian, so Dou Xian played Zheng Hong as a minister and leaked confidential information.

古文：帝诘让弘，收上印绶。
现代文：帝责让郑弘，收回印绶。
English: The emperor ordered Zheng Hong to withdraw the seal.

古文：弘自诣廷尉，诏敕出之，因乞骸骨归，未许。
现代文：郑弘自到廷尉，请罪，诏令他离去，因请退职，未准许。
English: Zheng Hong went to the court officer and pleaded guilty. The court ordered him to leave. Since he asked to retire, he was not allowed to return.

古文：病笃，上书陈谢，并言窦宪之短。
现代文：病重，上书陈谢，并言窦宪的短处。
English: He was seriously ill and wrote to Chen Xie, mentioning Dou Xian's shortcomings.

古文：帝省章，遣医占弘病，比至已卒。
现代文：帝看了奏章，派医生看郑弘病，等医生到时郑弘已病逝。
English: The emperor read the play and sent a doctor to see Zheng Hong's illness. By the time the doctor arrived, Zheng Hong had already passed away.

古文：临殁悉还赐物，敕妻子褐巾布衣素棺殡殓，以还乡里。
现代文：临死前将帝赏赐给他的东西全部归还，命妻子儿女褐巾布衣素棺殡殓，以还乡里。
English: Before his death, he returned all the things given to him by the emperor, and ordered his wife and children to be buried in a brown cloth coffin to return to the countryside.

古文：周章子次叔，南阳随人也。
现代文：◆周章传，周章字大叔，南阳郡随县人。
English: ◆Zhou Zhang Chuan, Zhou Zhang Zi's great uncle, was from Suixian, Nanyang County.

古文：初仕郡为功曹。
现代文：起初仕郡为功曹。
English: At first, Shigun was given credit.

古文：时大将军窦宪免，封冠军侯就国。
现代文：这时大将军窦宪免，封为冠军侯就国。
English: At this time, the general Dou Xian was pardoned, and he was awarded the title of champion.

古文：章从太守行春到冠军，太守犹欲谒之。
现代文：周章从太守行春到冠军，太守还想去拜谒窦宪。
English: Zhou Zhang went from the governor to the champion, and the governor also wanted to pay homage to Zou Douxian.

古文：章进谏曰： 今日公行春，岂可越仪私交。
现代文：周章进谏说 ：今日因公行春，岂可越过仪礼私交权贵。
English: Zhou Zhangjin said: Today, because it is the Spring Festival, can we not go beyond the ceremony and the personal relationship?

古文：且宪椒房之亲，势倾王室，而退就籓国，祸福难量。
现代文：且窦宪是后妃亲属，势倾王室，今退就藩国，祸福难量。
English: In addition, Dou Xian was a relative of the empress dowager and had a strong affinity for the royal family. Now that he has retired to the domain, it is difficult to say whether it is good or bad.

古文：明府剖符大臣，千里重任，举止进退，其可轻乎？ 
现代文：你是剖符大臣，负有千里重任，举止进退，岂可轻举妄动吗？ 
English: You are the Minister of Decoration, you have a thousand and one responsibilities, and your behavior is erratic. Should you act rashly?

古文：太守不听，遂便升车。
现代文：太守不听，便要升车。
English: If you don't listen to the superintendent, you'll have to get a lift.

古文：章前拔佩刀绝马鞅，于是乃止。
现代文：周章前去拔佩刀割断套在马颈上的皮子，太守才被迫停止下来。
English: Zhou Zhang went to draw his sword and cut off the skin around the horse's neck, and the governor was forced to stop.

古文：及宪被诛，公卿以下多以交关得罪，太守幸免，以此重章。
现代文：等到窦宪被诛，公卿以下官吏多以与窦宪交往而得罪，太守却幸免，以此重视周章。
English: By the time Dou Xian was arrested, most of the officials below the court nobles were guilty of associating with Dou Xian, but the daimyo was spared, so they paid attention to Zhou Zhang.

古文：举孝廉，六迁为五官中郎将。
现代文：举孝廉，六迁为五官中郎将。
English: He was raised as a filial son and transferred six times to become the fifth-ranked middle-ranked general.

古文：延平元年，为光禄勋。
现代文：延平元年，为光禄勋。
English: In the first year of the Yanping era, he was awarded the Guanglu Medal.

古文：永初元年，代魏霸为太常。
现代文：永初元年，代魏霸为太常。
English: In the first year of the Yongchu era, the Wei dynasty was overthrown.

古文：其冬，代尹勤为司空。
现代文：这年冬，代尹勤为司空。
English: In the winter of that year, the deputy Yin Qin became the chief of the air force.

古文：是时中常侍郑众，蔡伦等皆秉势豫政，章数进直言。
现代文：这时中常侍郑众、蔡伦等都仗势干预朝政，周章数次进直言。
English: At this time, the regular attendants Zheng Zong and Cai Lun all intervened in the imperial politics, and Zhou Zhang spoke out several times.

古文：初，和帝崩，邓太后以皇子胜有痼疾，不可奉承宗庙，贪殇帝孩抱，养为己子，故立之，以胜为平原王。
现代文：起初，和帝死后，邓太后以皇子刘胜有痼疾，不可奉承宗庙，殇帝是幼儿，养为己子，因而立为太子，以刘胜为平原王。
English: At first, after the death of Emperor He, Empress Dowager Deng took the prince Liu Sheng as the cause of his illness, and forbade him to flatter the ancestral temple. Emperor He was a toddler, and raised him as his own son, and thus made him the crown prince, and took Liu Sheng as the king of the plain.

古文：及殇帝崩，群臣以胜疾非痼、意咸归之，太后以前既不立，恐后为怨，乃立和帝兄清河孝王子祐，是为安帝。
现代文：殇帝死后，群臣以为刘胜的病不是痼疾，都主张立刘胜，太后以前既未立刘胜，恐立后怨恨她，就立和帝兄清河孝王儿子刘，是为安帝。
English: After the death of Emperor Xuan, the courtiers thought that Liu Sheng's illness was not a malignancy, and all advocated the appointment of Liu Sheng. The empress dowager had not appointed Liu Sheng before, and fearing that the empress would resent her, she appointed Liu, the son of the emperor's brother, Qinghe Xiaowang, as Emperor An.

古文：章以众心不附，遂密谋闭宫门，诛车骑将军邓骘兄弟及郑众、蔡伦，劫尚书，废太后于南宫，封帝为远国王，而立平原王胜。
现代文：周章以众心不附，于是密谋闭宫门，杀掉车骑将军邓骘兄弟及郑众、蔡伦，劫持尚书，废太后于南宫，封安帝为远国王，而立平原王刘胜为帝。
English: Zhou Zhang did not agree with everyone, so he plotted to close the palace door, kill the chariot and cavalry general Deng Yu brothers and Zheng Zong and Cai Lun, kidnap Shang Shu, depose the empress dowager in the South Palace, anoint Emperor An as the distant king, and establish the plain king Liu Sheng as the emperor.

古文：事觉，策免，章自杀。
现代文：密谋被发觉、策免，周章自杀。
English: The conspiracy was discovered and Zhou Zhang committed suicide.

古文：家无余财，诸子易衣而出，并日而食。
现代文：家无余财，诸子易衣而出，并日而食。
English: The family had no spare money, so the children changed clothes and went out to eat.

古文：论曰：孔子称 可与立，未可与权 。
现代文：史官评论道：孔子称 可以与立功立事，而不可与争权。 
English: The historian commented: Confucius said that it is possible to do things with merit, but not with power.

古文：权也者，反常者也。
现代文：权，是反常的东西。
English: Power is a perverse thing.

古文：将从反常之事，必资非常之会，使夫举无违妄，志行名全。
现代文：将从反常之事，必乘非常的机遇，使所举不成为空妄，志行通了名也在成全了。
English: From abnormal things, we must take advantage of extraordinary opportunities, so that what is raised does not become empty, and the name of the aspiration is also completed.

古文：周章身非负图之托，德乏万夫之望，主无绝天之？地有既安之执，而创虑于难图，希功于理绝，不已悖乎！
现代文：周章并没有像霍光那样受到武帝的负图之托，德也没有万夫景仰之望，主无绝天之，地有既安之势，而密谋创虑于难图，希冀建功于理绝，不是很荒谬吗？
English: Zhou Zhang was not entrusted with a negative plan by Emperor Wu as Huo Guang was, nor did he have the admiration of all men. There is no such thing as God, and there is a trend of peace on earth, but it is absurd to conspire to create a difficult plan and hope to build on reason.

古文：如令君器易以下议，即斗筲必能叨天业，狂夫竖臣亦自奋矣。
现代文：如果君器更易由下面来作决议，那么斗筲之徒也必能叨天业，狂夫庸臣也会奋斗不息了。
English: If it is easier for the king to make decisions from below, then the fighters will surely be able to talk about the heavenly inheritance, and the madmen and vassals will also struggle incessantly.

古文：孟轲有言曰： 有伊尹之心则可，无伊尹之心则篡矣。 
现代文：孟轲有言说： 有伊尹之心则可，无伊尹之心则构成篡夺了。 
English: Meng Xuan once said: "If you have the heart of Yin, you can succeed, but if you don't have the heart of Yin, it's usurpation."

古文：於戏，方来之人戒之哉！
现代文：唉，将来的人要警戒啊！
English: Alas, people of the future should be on their guard!

