古文：黄帝曰：余受九针于夫子，而私览于诸方，或有导引行气、乔摩、灸、熨、刺、爇、饮药之一者，可独守耶，将尽行之乎？
现代文：黄帝说：我从您那里学到了九针的知识，又自己阅读了一些记载治疗方法的书籍，诸如：导引行气、按摩、灸法、温熨、针刺、火针和汤药等，治疗时是只采用一种方法呢，还是把所有的方法都使用上呢？
English: Huang Di said: I have learned the knowledge of the nine needles from you, and I have read some books that record the treatment methods, such as: guided qi, massage, moxibustion, warm ironing, acupuncture, fire needles and decoction, etc. When treating, do you use only one method, or do you use all the methods?

古文：岐伯曰：诸方者，众人之方也，非一人之所尽行也。
现代文：岐伯说：上述各种疗法，是为了适应不同人的不同疾病而设的，而不是在某一个病人身上同时都使用。
English: Qi Bo said: The above-mentioned various therapies are designed to adapt to different diseases of different people, rather than being used at the same time on a particular patient.

古文：黄帝曰：此乃所谓： 守一勿失，万物毕者也 。
现代文：黄帝说：这就是通常所说的： 掌握了一个总的原则，并以此为指导而不相违背，就能够处理各种复杂而具体的事物 。
English: Huang Di said: This is what is usually said: Having mastered a general principle and using it as a guide without contradicting it, you can deal with all kinds of complex and specific things.

古文：今余已闻阴阳之要，虚实之理，倾移之过，可治之属，愿闻病之变化，淫传绝败而不可治者，可得闻乎？
现代文：现在我已经懂得了阴阳的要点，虚实的道理，由阴阳气血盛衰导致疾病的病理及能够治愈的疾病，我还想了解一下疾病的变化，以及其演变导致脏气衰竭而成为不能治疗的疾病的情况，我可以知道吗？
English: Now that I have understood the main points of yin and yang, the true reason, the pathology of diseases caused by the rise and fall of yin and yang qi and blood, and the diseases that can be cured, I would also like to know the changes of the disease, and the situation of its evolution leading to gas exhaustion and becoming an incurable disease, may I know?

古文：岐伯曰：要乎哉问也。
现代文：岐伯回答说：您所问的问题很重要啊！
English: Gibo replied, "The question you asked is very important!

古文：道，昭乎其如日醒，窘乎其如夜瞑。
现代文：对于医学道理，如果明白了，就好像白天醒着一样清楚，如果不明白，就好像夜间睡觉一样昏昧。
English: With regard to the principles of medicine, if you understand them, they are as clear as if you were awake during the day; if you do not understand them, they are as hazy as if you were sleeping at night.

古文：能被而服之，神与俱成；毕将服之，神自得之。
现代文：如果能按医道去做，就会得到神助、成就大业；如果始终运用它，就会得到它的神妙。
English: If you can do it according to the medical way, you will get divine help and achieve a great career; if you always use it, you will get its magic.

古文：生神之理，可著于竹帛，不可传于子孙。
现代文：达到极高水平的医学道理，应该写在竹简、帛书上广泛流传，不应该只传给自己的后代据为己有。
English: The medical principles that have reached a very high level should be written on bamboo slips and scrolls and widely circulated, and should not be passed on only to one's own descendants.

古文：黄帝曰：何谓日醒？
现代文：黄帝问：什么是像白天醒着一样清楚呢？
English: Huang Di asked: What is as clear as waking in the daytime?

古文：岐伯曰：明于阴阳，如惑之解，如醉之醒。
现代文：岐伯答道：明白了阴阳的道理，就好像从迷惑中解脱出来，从酒醉中清醒过来一样。
English: Qi Bo replied, "Understanding the principle of yin and yang is just like being freed from confusion and sobering up from drunkenness.

古文：黄帝曰：何谓夜瞑？
现代文：黄帝又问：什么是像夜间睡觉一样昏昧呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor asked again, "What is drowsiness like sleeping at night?"

古文：岐伯曰：瘖乎其无声，漠乎其无形，折毛发理，正气横倾，淫邪泮衍，血脉传溜，大气入脏，腹痛下淫，可以致死，不可以致生。
现代文：岐伯回答说：外邪侵入人体，悄无声息，寂无形迹，引起毫毛皮肤发寒，腠理发泄，正气耗散，淫邪蔓延，传入并滞留血脉之中，随之亢盛的邪气侵入五脏，造成腹部疼痛，精气大量下泄，这样可以致人死命，却不可以使人生命延续下去。
English: Qi Bo replied: The external evil invades the human body, silently and silently, causing the hairless skin to feel cold, the hairless skin to vent, the positive air to dissipate, the lewdness to spread, and enter and stay in the blood vessels. The evil gas then invades the five internal organs, causing abdominal pain, and a large amount of essence to leak out. This can cause people to die, but it cannot make people live longer.

古文：黄帝曰：大气入脏，奈何？
现代文：黄帝问：亢盛的邪气侵入五脏的情况是怎样呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor asked, "What is the reason for the evil spirits to invade the five viscera?"

古文：岐伯曰：病先发于心，一日而之肺，三日而之肝，五日而之脾，三日不已，死。
现代文：岐伯答道：邪气首先侵入心而发病的，经过一天就会传到肺，再经过三天传到肝，再经过五天传到脾，如果再经过三天还不能治愈，就会死亡。
English: Qi Bo replied: The evil spirit first invades the heart and causes illness. After one day, it will spread to the lungs, after three days to the liver, after five days to the spleen, and if it cannot be cured after three days, it will die.

古文：冬夜半，夏日中。
现代文：发生在冬季的，半夜死亡；发生在夏季的，中午死亡。
English: If it happened in winter, he died in the middle of the night; if it happened in summer, he died at noon.

古文：病先发于肺，三日而之肝，一日而之脾，五日而之胃，十日不已，死。
现代文：邪气首先侵入肺而发病的，经过三天就会传到肝，再经过一天传到脾，再经过五天传到胃，如果再经过十天还未能治愈，就会死亡。
English: The evil spirit first invades the lungs and causes illness. After three days, it will spread to the liver, after another day to the spleen, after another five days to the stomach, and if it has not been cured after another ten days, it will die.

古文：冬日入，夏日出。
现代文：发生在冬季的，日落时死亡；发生在夏季，日出时死亡。
English: If it happened in winter, he died at sunset; if it happened in summer, he died at sunrise.

古文：病先发于肝，三日而之脾，五日而之胃，三日而之肾，三日不已，死。
现代文：邪气首先侵入肝而发病的，经过三天就能传到脾，再经过五天传到胃，再经过三天传到肾，如果再经过三天还不能治愈，就会死亡。
English: The evil spirit first invades the liver and causes illness. After three days, it can spread to the spleen, after five days to the stomach, after three days to the kidneys, and if it cannot be cured after another three days, it will die.

古文：冬日入，夏蚤食。
现代文：发生在冬季的，日落时死亡；发生在夏季的，早饭时死亡。
English: In the winter, he died at sunset; in the summer, he died at breakfast.

古文：病先发于脾，一日而之胃，二日而之肾，三日而之膂膀胱，十日不已，死。
现代文：邪气首先侵入脾而发病的，经过一天就能传到胃，再经过二天传到肾，再经过三天传到脊背和膀胱，如果再经过十天还不能治愈，就会死亡。
English: The evil spirit first invades the spleen and causes illness. After one day, it can spread to the stomach, after two days to the kidneys, after three days to the spine and bladder, and if it cannot be cured after ten days, it will die.

古文：冬人定，夏晏食。
现代文：发生在冬季的，在人们刚入睡时死亡；发生在夏季的，晚饭时死亡。
English: If it happened in winter, he died when people were just falling asleep; if it happened in summer, he died during dinner.

古文：病先发于胃，五日而之肾，三日而之膂膀胱，五日而上之心，二日不已，死。
现代文：邪气首先侵入胃而发病的，经过五天就能传到肾，再经过三天传到脊背和膀胱，再经过五天向上传到心，如果再经过二天还不能治愈，就会死亡。
English: The evil spirit first invades the stomach and causes illness. After five days, it can be transmitted to the kidneys. After three days, it can be transmitted to the spine and bladder. After five days, it can be transmitted to the heart. If it cannot be cured after two days, it will die.

古文：冬夜半，夏日昳。
现代文：发生于冬季的，半夜死亡；发生在夏季的，午后死亡。
English: If it happened in winter, he died in the middle of the night; if it happened in summer, he died in the afternoon.

古文：病先发于肾，三日而之膂膀胱，三日而上之心，三日而之小肠，三日不已，死。
现代文：邪气首先侵入肾而发病的，经过三天就会传到脊背和膀胱，再经过三天向上传到心，再经过三天传到小肠，如果再经过三天还不能治愈，就会死亡。
English: The evil spirit will first invade the kidney and cause illness. After three days, it will spread to the spine and bladder. After another three days, it will spread upwards to the heart. After another three days, it will spread to the small intestine. If it cannot be cured after another three days, it will die.

古文：冬大晨，夏晏晡。
现代文：发生在冬季的，天大亮时死亡；发生在夏季时，黄昏时死亡。
English: In winter, they die at dawn; in summer, they die at dusk.

古文：病先发于膀胱，五日而之肾，一日而之小肠，一日而之心，二日不已，死。
现代文：邪气首先侵入膀胱而发病的，经过五天就会传到肾，再经过一天传到小肠，再经过一天传到心，如果再经过二天还不能治愈，就会死亡。
English: The evil spirit first invades the bladder and causes illness. After five days, it will spread to the kidneys, after another day to the small intestine, after another day to the heart, and if it cannot be cured after another two days, it will die.

古文：冬鸡鸣，夏下晡。
现代文：发生在冬季的，早晨鸡鸣时死亡；发生在夏季的，午后死亡。
English: If it happened in winter, he died in the morning when the rooster crowed; if it happened in summer, he died in the afternoon.

古文：诸病以次相传，如是者，皆有死期，不可刺也；间一脏及二、三、四脏者，乃可刺也。
现代文：外邪侵入各脏腑发生的疾病，如果按照上述五行相克的规律传变，则都有特定的死亡时间，不能运用针刺方法治疗。如果间隔一脏，或者间隔二脏、三脏、四脏传变的，才能够运用针刺方法治疗。
English: Diseases caused by external pathogens invading various organs, if they are transmitted according to the above-mentioned five-element rule, have a specific time of death and cannot be treated with acupuncture. If there is a gap between one organ, or a gap between two organs, three organs, and four organs, then acupuncture can be used for treatment.

