古文：王全斌，并州太原人。
现代文：王全斌，并州太原人。
English: Wang Quanbin, a native of Taiyuan.

古文：其父事庄宗，为岢岚军使，私畜勇士余人，庄宗疑其有异志。召之，惧不敢行。
现代文：其父奉事庄宗，任岢岚军使，私下畜养一百多名勇士，庄宗怀疑他心存异志，召见他，他害怕不敢去。
English: His father worked for Zhuangzong, was appointed as a military envoy, and privately raised more than a hundred warriors. Zhuangzong suspected that he had a different intention and summoned him. He was afraid to go.

古文：全斌时年十二，谓其父曰： 此盖疑大人有他图，愿以全斌为质，必得释。 父从其计，果获全，因以隶帐下。及庄宗入洛，累历内职。
现代文：当时全斌十二岁，对他的父亲说 ：这是因为怀疑大人有别的图谋才召见您，您让我去作人质，一定会消去怀疑。 他的父亲照计行事，果然得以保全，于是庄宗把全斌收用在军中。到庄宗入洛时，历任宫内职务。
English: At that time, Quanbin was twelve years old, and he said to his father: "This is because I suspect that the adults have other plans before summoning you. If you let me go as a hostage, I will certainly erase the suspicion." His father acted according to the plan and was saved, so Zhuangzong conscripted Quanbin into the army. When Zhuangzong entered Luo, he held various positions in the palace.

古文：同光末，国有内难，兵入宫城，近臣宿将皆弃甲遁去，惟全斌与符彦卿等十数人居中拒战。
现代文：同光末年，国家有内难，乱兵攻入宫城，近臣宿将都弃甲逃走，只有全斌与符彦卿等十几人在宫中抵抗。
English: At the end of the Tōgō era, the country was beset by internal difficulties. Rebel soldiers invaded Miyagi, and the closest vassals and retainers abandoned their homes and fled. Only a dozen or so people, including Zenbin and Lord Fuhiko, resisted in the palace.

古文：庄宗中流矢，扶掖至绛霄殿，全斌恸哭而去。
现代文：庄宗中了流箭，全斌等扶他到绛霄殿，全斌痛哭而去。
English: Zhuang Zong was hit by a stray arrow. Quan Bin waited for him and helped him get to the Hall of Heaven. Quan Bin cried bitterly and left.

古文：明宗即位，补禁军列校。
现代文：明宗即位，补任他为禁军列校。
English: When Emperor Mingzong ascended to the throne, he was appointed as a substitute and the school was enlisted into the Imperial Army.

古文：晋初，从侯益破张从宾于汜水，以功迁护圣指挥使。周广顺初，改护圣为龙捷，以全斌为右厢都指挥使。
现代文：后晋初年，跟从侯益在汜水大败张从宾的军队，因战功升任护圣指挥使，后周广顺初年，改护圣为龙捷，任命全斌为右厢都指挥使。
English: In the first year of the Later Jin Dynasty, he followed the army of Hou Yi in the great defeat of Zhang Congbin in Surabaya, and was promoted to the commanding officer of the guard of the saint for his war service. In the first year of the Later Zhou Guangshun Dynasty, he changed the guard of the saint to Long Jie and appointed Quan Bin as the commanding officer of the right compartment.

古文：及讨慕容彦超于兖州，为行营马步都校。
现代文：到了讨伐慕容彦超于兖州时，任行营马步都校。
English: When it came to the campaign against Murong Yanchao in Zhangzhou, he was stationed at Ma Budu School.

古文：显德中，从向训平秦、凤，遂领恩州团练使。
现代文：显德年间，跟随向训平定秦、凤，于是兼任思州团练使。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xiande, he followed Xiangxun to subdue the Qin and Feng Dynasties, and concurrently served as the Shizhou regimental training envoy.

古文：俄迁领泗州防御使。
现代文：不久升为兼任泗州防御使。
English: He was soon promoted to the post of Zhangzhou Defense Envoy.

古文：从世宗平淮南，复瓦桥关，改相州留后。
现代文：跟从世宗平定淮南。收复瓦桥关，改任相州留后。
English: He followed Shizong to pacify Huainan, recover Wawu Bridge Pass, and stay in Sangzhou.

古文：宋初，李筠以潞州叛，全斌与慕容延钊由东路会大军进讨，以功拜安国军节度。
现代文：宋初，李筠占据潞州叛乱，全斌与慕容延钊由东路会合大军进讨，因战功授任安国军节度。
English: At the beginning of the Song Dynasty, Li Qian occupied Zhangzhou rebellion, Quan Bin and Murong Yanzhong met from the East Road to advance the army, and were awarded the An Guo Jun Festival for their war service.

古文：诏令完葺西山堡砦，不逾时而就。
现代文：诏令他修葺西山堡塞，不到限期就完成了。
English: He was ordered to repair the West Hill Fortress, which was completed before the deadline.

古文：建隆四年，与洺州防御使郭进等率兵入太原境，俘数千人以归，进克乐平。
现代文：建隆四年，与洛州防御使郭进等人率领军队攻入太原境内，俘获敌人数千人而归，进克乐平。
English: In the fourth year of Jianlong, with the defense of Luozhou, Guo Jin and others led the army into Taiyuan, captured thousands of enemies and returned to Kleping.

古文：乾德二年冬，又为忠武军节度。
现代文：乾德二年冬天，又任忠武军节度。
English: In the winter of the second year of Qiande, he was also appointed as the commander of the loyal military.

古文：即日下诏伐蜀，命全斌为西川行营前军都部署，率禁军步骑二万、诸州兵万人由凤州路进讨。
现代文：当天朝廷下诏征伐蜀地，命全斌任西川行营前军都部署，率领禁军步兵骑兵二万人、各州军队一万人由凤州路进讨。
English: On the same day, the imperial court issued an edict to invade Shuxi, and ordered Quan Bin to be deployed in front of the Nishikawa encampment, leading 20,000 infantry and cavalry of the Imperial Army and 10,000 troops from various states to march from Fengzhou Road.

古文：召示川峡地图，授以方略。
现代文：皇帝召他来看川陕地图，并且告诉他战略方针。
English: The emperor called him to look at the map of Sichuan and Shaanxi and told him the strategic direction.

古文：十二月，率兵拔乾渠渡、万仞燕子二砦，遂下兴州，蜀刺史蓝思绾退保西县。
现代文：十二月，率领军队攻拔乾渠渡、万仞燕子两个营寨，于是攻下兴州，蜀刺史蓝思绾退保西县。
English: In December, he led the army to attack the two camps of Qianqiuduodu and Wanluyanzi, and then attacked Xingzhou. Shu Zhishulan thought about retreating to Baoxi County.

古文：败蜀军七千人，获军粮四十余万斛。
现代文：打败蜀军七千人，俘获军粮四十多万斛。
English: They defeated seven thousand Shu soldiers and captured more than four hundred thousand cormorants.

古文：进拔石圌、鱼关、白水二十余砦，先锋史延德进军三泉，败蜀军灵数万，擒招讨使韩保正、副使李进，获粮三十余万斛。
现代文：接着攻拔石、鱼关、白水二十多座兵营。先锋史延德进军三泉，打败数万蜀军，擒俘招讨使韩保正、副使李进，缴获粮食三十多万斛。
English: Next, more than 20 military camps in Shishi, Yuguan, and Baishui were attacked. Pioneer Shi Yende marched into Sanquan, defeated tens of thousands of Shu troops, captured Han Baozheng, deputy envoy Li Jin, and seized more than 300,000 baht of grain.

古文：既而崔彦进、康延泽等逐蜀军过三泉，遂至嘉陵，杀虏甚众。
现代文：不久崔彦进、康延泽等人的军队把蜀军赶过三泉，于是达到嘉陵，杀死、俘虏很多蜀军。
English: Soon, the armies of Cui Yanjin, Kang Yanze and others drove the Shu army past Sanquan, and then reached Jialing, killing and capturing many Shu troops.

古文：蜀人断阁道，军不能进，全斌议取罗川路以入，延泽潜谓彦进曰： 罗川路险，军难并进，不如分兵治阁道，与大军会于深渡。 彦进以白全斌，全斌然之。
现代文：蜀人阻断阁道，军队不能前进。全斌打算夺取罗川路攻入，延泽暗里对彦进说 ：罗川路险，军队难以齐头并进，不如分兵修治阁道，与大军在深渡会合。 彦进把这个意见告诉全斌，全斌认为正确。
English: The Shu people blocked the Gege Road, and the army could not advance. Quan Bin planned to capture Luochuan Road and advance. Yan Ze secretly said to Yan Jin: Luochuan Road is dangerous, and it is difficult for the army to advance together. It would be better to divide the army to repair the Gege Road and meet the big army at Fukado. Yan Jin told this opinion to Quan Bin, and Quan Bin thought it was correct.

古文：命彦进、延泽督治阁道，数日成，遂进击金山砦，破小漫天砦。
现代文：命令彦进、延泽监督修治阁道，几天后成功，于是进攻金山砦，攻破小漫天砦。
English: He ordered Hikojin and Yanze to supervise the repair of Jigaku-dori Street, which was successful a few days later. He then attacked Jinshan Fort and broke through the Small Manteng Fort.

古文：全斌由罗川趣深渡，与彦进会。
现代文：全斌领兵由罗川赶到深渡，与彦进的部队会合。
English: Quan Bin, the leader of the troops, rushed from Luochuan to Shengdu to meet with the troops of Yan Jin.

古文：蜀人依江列阵以待，彦进遣张万友等夺其桥。
现代文：蜀人沿长江列阵以待，彦进派张万友等攻夺敌人的桥梁。
English: Shu people lined up along the Yangtze River to wait, and Yan Jin sent Zhang Wanyu and others to capture the enemy's bridge.

古文：会暮夜，蜀人退保大漫天砦。
现代文：正遇天黑，蜀人退保大漫天砦。
English: It was getting dark, and the people of Shu were retreating to a large fort.

古文：诘朝，彦进、延泽、万友分三道击之，蜀人悉其精锐来逆战，又大破之，乘胜拔其砦，蜀将王审超、监军崇渥遁去，复与三泉监军刘延祚、大将王昭远、赵崇韬引兵来战，三战三败，追至利州北。
现代文：到天明，彦进、延泽、万友分三路进攻，蜀人出动全部精锐部队来迎战，又大破蜀人，乘胜攻拔敌军兵营，蜀将王审超、监军赵崇渥逃走，又与三泉监军刘廷祚、大将王昭远、赵崇韬带领军队来战，蜀军三战三败，全斌等领兵追至利州北。
English: At dawn, Yanjin, Yanze and Wanyou launched a three-pronged attack. The Shu people sent out all their elite troops to meet the battle. They also defeated the Shu people and took advantage of the victory to attack the enemy's barracks. The Shu general Wang Qianchao and the supervisor Zhao Chongwu fled, and Liu Tingyao, the supervisor of the Three Springs, the general Wang Zhaoyuan and Zhao Chongwu led the army to fight. The Shu army lost three times in three battles, and the leaders such as Quan Bin chased the soldiers to the north of Lishu.

古文：昭远遁去，渡桔柏江，焚梁，退守剑门。
现代文：昭远逃走，渡过桔柏江，焚烧桥梁，退守剑门。
English: Zhaoyuan fled, crossed the Jibei River, burned bridges, and retreated to Jianmen.

古文：遂克利州，得军粮八十万斛。
现代文：于是攻克利州，缴获军粮八十万斛。
English: As a result, Kure Prefecture was attacked, and 800,000 baht of military rations were seized.

古文：自利州趋剑门，次益光。
现代文：从利州到剑门，中途驻扎在益光。
English: From Lizhou to Jianmen, he was stationed in Yiguang.

古文：全斌会诸将议曰： 剑门天险，古称一夫荷戈，万夫莫前，诸君宜各陈进取之策。 待卫军头向韬曰： 降卒牟进言： 益光江东，越大山数重，有狭径名来苏，蜀人于江西置砦，对岸有渡，自此出剑关南二十里，至清强店，与大路合。
现代文：全斌与诸将商议说： 剑门是天险，古称一夫持戈，万夫不能前进，各位应当各陈进取之策。 侍卫军头向韬说 ：降卒牟进说 ：益光对江的东边，越过几座大山，有条小路叫来苏，蜀人在江的西边设置兵营，对岸有渡口，从这里出剑关南行二十里，到清强店，与大路相合。
English: Quan Bin consulted with the generals and said, "Kenmen is a natural hazard. In ancient times, it was said that one man could hold the fort, but all men could not advance. You should each devise a strategy. The head of the bodyguards said to the eunuch, "Drop down and advance." He said, "Yiguang is on the east side of the river, across several mountains, there is a path called Su, the Shu people set up a military camp on the west side of the river, and there is a ferry on the opposite bank. From here, it is twenty miles south of Jianguan to Qingqiangdian, where it meets the highway

古文：可于此进兵，即剑门不足恃也。 全斌等即欲卷甲赴之，康延泽曰： 来苏细径，不须主帅亲往。
现代文：可以从这里进兵，则剑门不足为恃也。  全斌等人就准备带甲出发，康延泽说： 来苏小路，不须主帅亲自去。
English: Zhenbin and the others prepared to set off with A. Kang Yanze said, "If you come to Su Xiao Lu, you don't have to go in person.

古文：且人屡败，并兵退守剑门，若诸帅协力进攻，命一偏将趋来苏，若达清强，北击剑关与大军夹攻，破之必矣。 全斌纳其策，命史延德分兵趋来苏，造浮梁于江上，蜀人见梁成，弃砦而遁。
现代文：况且蜀人屡次战败，合兵退守剑门，不如各位元帅协力进攻，命令一位偏将到来苏，如果到达清强，向北进攻剑关，与大军夹攻，必然攻破剑门。 全斌采纳他的策略，命史延德分兵去来苏，在江上建造浮桥，蜀人见桥建成，弃营而逃。
English: In addition, the Shu people were repeatedly defeated, and the combined forces retreated to defend the Jianmen Gate. It would be better for the marshals to attack together and order a partial commander to come to Su. If they reached Qingqiang, they would attack Jianguan to the north and attack the large army, which would inevitably break through the Jianmen Gate. Quanbin adopted his strategy and ordered Shi Yende's detachment to come to Su and build a pontoon bridge on the river. When the Shu people saw the bridge completed, they abandoned the camp and fled.

古文：昭远闻延德兵趋来苏，至清强，即引兵退，阵于汉源坡，留其偏将守剑门。
现代文：昭远听说延德领兵攻来苏，到达清强，就带领军队撤退，在汉源坡列阵，留偏将守剑门。
English: When Zhaoyuan heard that Yan De had led an army to invade the Soviet Union and reached Qingqiang, he led the army to retreat and formed a line of battle at Hanyuan slope. He was left to guard Jianmen.

古文：全斌等击破之，昭远、崇韬皆遁走，遣轻骑进获，传送阙下，遂克剑州，杀蜀军万余人。
现代文：全斌等人大败蜀军，昭远、崇韬都逃走，全斌派轻骑追击擒俘了他们，押送到朝廷，于是攻克剑州，杀死蜀军一万多人。
English: Quan Bin and others defeated the Shu army, and both Zhaoyuan and Chongyi fled. Quan Bin sent light cavalry to chase and capture them and escort them to the imperial court, and then conquered Jianzhou and killed more than 10,000 Shu soldiers.

古文：四年正月十三日，师次魏城，孟昶遣使奉表来降，全斌等入成都。
现代文：乾德四年正月十三日，驻军魏城，孟昶派遣使者奉表投降，全斌等将领进入成都。
English: On the 13th day of the first month of the 4th year of Qian De, the garrison Weicheng, Meng Wei sent an envoy to submit a surrender form, and Quan Bin and other generals entered Chengdu.

古文：旬余，刘廷让等始自峡路至。
现代文：十多天后，刘廷让等人领兵才从峡路到达。
English: More than ten days later, Liu Tingzang and others arrived from the gorge road to lead the troops.

古文：昶馈遗廷让等及犒师，并同全斌之至。
现代文：孟昶赠送廷让财物以及犒劳部队的规格，都与全斌到达时相同。
English: Meng Xuan's gifts to the imperial court, as well as the specifications of the labor force, were all the same as when Quan Bin arrived.

古文：及诏书颁赏，诸军亦无差降。
现代文：诏书颁赏时，各军也没有差别。
English: When the imperial rescript was issued, there was no difference between the armies.

古文：由是两路兵相嫉，蜀人亦构，主帅遂不协。
现代文：从此两军互相忌恨，蜀人也相争，主帅于是不和。
English: Since then, the two armies have hated each other, the people of Shuxi have also been in conflict, and the coach has been at odds.

古文：全斌等先受诏，每制置必须诸将佥议，至是，虽小事不能即决。
现代文：全斌等人先接到诏令，每处理事务必须诸将合议，至此，即使小事也不能独自决断。
English: Zhenbin and the others first received the imperial edict that every transaction must be discussed by all generals, so that even small matters could not be decided independently.

古文：俄诏发蜀兵赴阙，人给钱十千，未行者，加两月廪食。
现代文：不久诏令征发蜀兵到京城，每人给钱十千，不走的人，加发两个月廪食。
English: Soon after, the emperor issued a decree to conscript Shu soldiers to the capital, each of whom was to be paid ten thousand, and those who did not go were to receive two months of rations.

古文：全斌等不即奉命，由是蜀军愤怨，人人思乱。
现代文：全斌等人不立即执行，从此蜀军愤恨不已，人人想作乱。
English: When Quan Bin and others did not carry out the order immediately, the Shu army was furious, and everyone wanted to start a riot.

古文：两路随军使臣常数十百人，全斌、彦进及王仁赡等各保庇之，不令部送蜀兵，但分遣诸州牙校。
现代文：两军随军使者常常有数十上百人，全斌、彦进及王仁赡等各自保庇他们，不让他们遣送蜀兵，只分别派遣诸州牙校遣送。
English: The envoys of the two armies often have dozens or hundreds of people, including Quan Bin, Yan Jin and Wang Renyi, who protect them individually. They do not allow them to send the Shu soldiers, but send them separately to the dental schools in various states.

古文：蜀军至绵州果叛，劫属邑，众至十余万，自号 兴国军 。
现代文：蜀军到了绵州果然叛乱，抢劫属县，聚众十多万人，自称 兴国军 。
English: When the Shu army arrived in Mianzhou, they rebelled, robbed the county, gathered more than one hundred thousand people, and called themselves the Xingguo Army.

古文：有蜀文州刺史全师雄者，尝为将，有威惠，士卒畏服。
现代文：蜀人中有个曾任文州刺史全师雄的人，曾经当过将领，有威望有德惠，士兵们都畏服他。
English: Among the people of Shu, there was a man who had been the most influential person in the history of Wenzhou, who had once been a general, who had prestige and virtue, and the soldiers were all afraid of him.

古文：适以其族赴阙下。绵州遇乱，师雄恐为所胁，乃匿其家于江曲民舍。
现代文：当时正带领全族人到京城，在绵州遇到叛乱，师雄恐怕被士兵们挟制，于是全家藏在江曲民舍。
English: At that time, he was leading the whole family to Beijing, but encountered a rebellion in Mianzhou. He was afraid that the soldiers would take him hostage, so the whole family hid in the Jiangqu townhouse.

古文：后数日为乱兵所获，推为主帅。
现代文：几天以后被乱兵捉到，推拥为主帅。
English: A few days later, he was caught by the rioters and was promoted to the position of head coach.

古文：全斌遣都监米光绪往招抚之，光绪尽灭师雄之族，纳其爱女及橐装。
现代文：全斌派都监米光绪前往招抚叛军，光绪把师雄全族人杀尽，又把他的爱女纳为妾并收没他家的财富。
English: Quan Bin sent the procurator of the capital, Yimi Guangxu, to appease the rebels. Guangxu killed all the people of the whole clan, and took his beloved daughter as a concubine and confiscated his family's wealth.

古文：师雄闻之，遂无归志，率众急攻绵州，为横海指挥使刘福、龙捷指挥使田绍斌所败；遂攻彭州，逐刺史王继涛，杀都监李德荣，据其城。
现代文：师雄听说后，就没有归心，率领士兵急攻绵州，被横海指挥使刘福、龙捷指挥使田绍斌打败；于是进攻彭州，赶走刺史王继涛，杀死都监李德荣，占据州城。
English: After hearing this, Shixiong did not come to his senses. He led the soldiers to attack Mianzhou in a hurry, and was defeated by the command of Henghai commander Liu Fu, and the command of Long Jie commander Tian Shaobin; he then attacked Pengzhou, drove away the assassin Wang Jitao, killed the governor Li Derong, and occupied the state capital.

古文：成都十县皆起兵应师雄，师雄自号 兴蜀大王 ，开幕府，置僚属，署节帅二十余人，令分据灌口、导江、郫、新繁、青城等县。
现代文：成都十县都起兵响应师雄，师雄自号 兴蜀大王 ，建立幕府，设置官员，任命节帅二十多人，命他们分别据守灌口、导江、郫、新繁、青城等县。
English: All ten counties of Chengdu raised an army in response to Shi Xiong, who called himself the Great King of Xingshu, established a shogunate, set up officials, and appointed more than 20 marshals. They were ordered to guard Gankou, Dujiangyan, Handan, Xinxiang, Qingcheng and other counties.

古文：彦进与张万友、高彦晖、田钦祚同讨之，为师雄所败，彦晖战死，钦祚仅免，贼众益盛。
现代文：彦进与张万友、高彦晖、田钦祚共同讨伐他们，被师雄打败，彦晖战死，钦祚仅仅免死，贼兵越来越多。
English: Together with Zhang Wanyu, Gao Yanyu and Tian Qinqian, Yanjin fought against them. He was defeated by his mentor, Yanqian died in battle, Qinqian only escaped death, and the number of bandits increased.

古文：全斌又遣张廷翰、张煦往击之，不利，退入成都。
现代文：全斌又派张廷翰、张煦前往镇压，战斗不利，退入成都。
English: Zhenbin also sent Zhang Tinghan and Zhang Ye to suppress the uprising, but they were not successful in the battle and retreated to Chengdu.

古文：师雄分兵绵、汉间，断阁道，缘江置砦，声言欲攻成都。
现代文：师雄分兵驻守绵、汉之间，阻断阁道，依江建立兵寨，声言准备进攻成都。
English: Shishong's detachment of soldiers stationed between Mian and Han, blocked the pavilion road, built a military camp by the river, and claimed to be preparing to attack Chengdu.

古文：自是，邛、蜀、眉、雅、东川、果、遂、渝、合、资、简、昌、普、嘉、戎、荣、陵十七州，并随师雄为乱。
现代文：从此，邛、蜀、眉、雅、东川、果、遂、渝、合、资、简、昌、普、嘉、戎、荣、陵十七州，都跟随师雄作乱。
English: From then on, the seventeen states of Min, Shu, Mei, Ya, Dongchuan, Gua, Sui, Chong, He, Zi, Jian, Chang, Pu, Jia, Rong, Rong, and Ling, all followed the master to create chaos.

古文：邮传不通者月余，全斌等甚惧。
现代文：邮传一个多月不畅通，全斌等人非常害怕。
English: After more than a month of slow mail delivery, Quan Bin and the others were very afraid.

古文：时城中蜀兵尚余二万，全斌虑其应贼，与诸将谋，诱致夹城中，尽杀之。
现代文：当时城中还有二万蜀兵，全斌害怕他们响应叛贼，与诸将计谋，把蜀兵引诱到夹城中，全部杀死。
English: At that time, there were still twenty thousand Shu soldiers in the city. Quan Bin was afraid that they would respond to the traitors, and he plotted with the generals to lure the Shu soldiers into the city and kill them all.

古文：未几，刘廷让、曹彬破师雄之众于新繁，俘万余人。
现代文：不久，刘廷祚、曹彬在新繁大败师雄的军队，俘获一万多人。
English: Soon, Liu Tingyao and Cao Bin defeated the army of their mentor in Xincheng and captured more than ten thousand people.

古文：师雄退保郫县，全斌、仁赡又攻破之。师雄走保灌口砦。
现代文：师雄退保郫县，全斌、仁赡又打破他们，师雄走保灌口砦。
English: Shi Xiong retreated to Baoying County, Quan Bin and Yan Yan broke them again, and Shi Xiong marched to Bao Huankou Fort.

古文：贼势既衄，余党散保州县。
现代文：贼势受到压制，余党散保州县。
English: The banditry was suppressed, and the remaining party spread to Bozhou County.

古文：有陵州指挥使元裕者，师雄署为刺史，众万余，仁赡生擒之，磔于成都市。
现代文：有位陵州指挥使元裕，被师雄任命为刺史，有部队一万多人，仁赡活捉了他，在成都市中斩首。
English: There was a lingzhou commander, envoy motoyu, who was appointed by his teacher as a stabbing history, with more than ten thousand troops, who was captured alive and beheaded in chengdu.

古文：俄虎捷指挥使吕翰为主将所不礼，因杀知嘉州客省使武怀节、战棹都监刘汉卿，与师雄党刘泽合，众至五万，逐普州刺史刘楚信，杀通判刘沂及虎捷都校冯绍。
现代文：不久虎捷指挥使吕翰被主将相待无礼，于是杀死知嘉州、客省使武怀节，战都监刘汉卿，与师雄的部属刘泽会合，兵至五万，赶走普州刺史刘楚信，杀死通判刘沂及虎捷都校冯绍。
English: Soon after, the commander of the Tiger Army made Lü Han and his commander treat each other rudely, so he killed the Chijiazhou and guest provincial envoy Wu Huai Jie, the military governor Liu Hanqing, met with Liu Zexiong's subordinate Liu Zexiong, and raised the number of soldiers to 50,000, drove away the governor of Puzhou Liu Chuxin, and killed the general magistrate Liu Zhen and the commander of the Tiger Army, Feng Shao.

古文：又果州指挥使宋德威杀知州八作使王永昌及通判刘涣、都监郑光弼，遂州牙校王可璙率州民为乱。
现代文：又有果州指挥使宋德威杀死知州、八作使王永昌及通判刘涣、都监郑光弼，遂州牙校王可砲率领州民叛乱。
English: In addition, the commanding officer of Guozhou ordered Song Dewei to kill Zhizhou, and the eight generals sent Wang Yongchang, Liu Zhen, and Zheng Guangya, the governor of Zhizhou. As a result, the governor of Zhizhou, Wang Keqiang, led the rebellion of the people of Zhizhou.

古文：仁赡等讨吕翰于嘉州，翰败走入雅州。
现代文：仁赡等人领兵在嘉州讨伐吕翰，吕翰败走逃到雅州。
English: Renyi and others led an army to fight Luhan in Jiazhou, but Luhan was defeated and fled to Yazhou.

古文：师雄病死于金堂，推谢行本为主，罗七君为佐国令公，与贼将宋德威、唐陶鳖据铜山，旋为康延泽所破。
现代文：师雄在金堂病死，叛贼们推举谢行本为主帅，罗七君为佐国令公，与贼将宋德威、唐陶敝龟占据铜山，不久被康延泽打败。
English: Shi Xiong died of illness in Jintang, and the traitors nominated Xie Xingben as the head coach, Luo Qijun as the governor of Sakao, and Song Dewei and Tang Tao Yingge as the thieves to occupy Tongshan, and were soon defeated by Kang Yanze.

古文：仁赡又败吕翰于雅州，翰走黎州，为下所杀，弃尸水中。
现代文：仁赡又在雅州大败吕翰，吕翰逃到黎州，被部下杀死，把尸体丢在水中。
English: Renyi also defeated Lü Han in Yazhou. Lü Han fled to Lizhou, was killed by his subordinates, and his body was thrown into the water.

古文：后丁德裕等分兵招辑，贼众始息。
现代文：后来丁德裕等分兵招降，叛贼才平息。
English: Later, Ding Deyu and other detachments called for surrender, and the traitors calmed down.

古文：全斌之入蜀也，适属冬暮，京城大雪，太祖设毡帷于讲武殿，衣紫貂裘帽以视事，忽谓左右曰： 我被服若此，体尚觉寒，念西征将冲犯霜雪，何以堪处！ 即解裘帽，遣中黄门驰赐全斌，仍谕诸将，以不遍及也。
现代文：全斌入蜀时，正是深冬季节，京城下大雪，太祖在讲武殿设毡帷，穿着紫貂裘皮衣帽处理政事，忽然对身边的大臣说： 我穿这样的衣服，身上还感到寒冷，想到西征将士冒着风雪，怎么过呢？ 就解下衣帽，派中黄门骑马送给全斌，仍然晓谕诸将，因为恩泽不能遍及。
English: When Quan Bin entered Shuxi, it was the late winter season, and there was heavy snow in the capital city. The great-grandfather was setting up the curtains in the palace, wearing a purple and indigo fur coat and hat to deal with political affairs, and suddenly said to the ministers around him: I wear such clothes, I still feel cold, I think of the Western Expedition soldiers braving the snowstorm, how can I get through it? He took off his coat and hat, sent Zhonghuangmen to ride a horse to Quan Bin, and still told the generals, because grace cannot be pervasive.

古文：全斌拜赐感泣。
现代文：全斌跪拜赏赐感激得哭起来。
English: Zhenbin knelt down and wept with gratitude.

古文：初，成都平，命参知政事吕余庆知府事，全斌但典军旅。
现代文：当初，成都平定后，朝廷命令参知政事吕馀庆知府事，全斌只管理军队事务。
English: At first, after Chengdu was pacified, the imperial court ordered Lyu Yuqing, who was a political advisor to the governor, to manage the affairs of the government, while Quan Bin only managed the affairs of the army.

古文：全斌尝语所亲曰： 我闻古之将帅，多不能保全功名，今西蜀既平，欲称疾东归，庶免悔吝。 或曰： 今寇盗尚多，非有诏旨，不可轻去。 全斌犹豫未决。
现代文：全斌曾经对亲近的人说 ：我听说古代的将帅，大多不能保全功名，现在西蜀既然平定，我打算称病告归，以免后悔。 有人说 ：现在盗寇还很多，没有诏书，不能轻易离去。 全斌犹豫未决。
English: Quan Bin once said to people close to him: I heard that most of the ancient generals could not preserve their reputation, and now that West Shu has been pacified, I plan to call in sick so as not to regret it. Some people said: There are still many thieves and robbers, there is no edict, I can't easily leave. Quan Bin hesitated.

古文：会有诉全斌及彦进破蜀日，夺民家子女玉帛不法等事，与诸将同时召还。
现代文：正遇有人告发全斌及彦进攻破蜀时，抢夺民家子女玉帛等违法之事，准备与诸将一起都召回来。
English: Just as someone was denouncing Quan Bin and Yan Yan for robbing people's children of precious stones and other illegal things when they attacked and destroyed Shu, they were preparing to call them back together with the generals.

古文：太祖以全斌等初立功，虽犯法，不欲辱以狱吏，但令中书问状，全斌等具伏。诏曰： 王全斌、王仁赡、崔彦进等被坚执锐，出征全蜀，彼畏威而纳款，寻驰诏以申恩。
现代文：太祖看在全斌等人初立功，虽然犯法，不打算让狱吏污辱他，只令中书省问清罪状，全斌等人都供认了，太祖下诏说： 王全斌、王仁赡、崔彦进等人披坚执锐，出征全蜀，蜀人畏威而送款，不久向蜀人宣诏申恩。
English: The great-grandfather saw that Quan Bin and others had made initial contributions. Although they had broken the law, he did not intend to let the prison officials insult him. He only ordered the Ministry of Education and Culture to clarify the charges. Quan Bin and others confessed. The great-grandfather said: Wang Quan Bin, Wang Renyi, Cui Yanjin and others were steadfast and determined. They went to the war in Quan Shu. The people of Shu were awe-struck and sent money. Soon, they declared their gratitude to the people of Shu.

古文：用示哀矜，务敦绥抚，应孟昶宗族、官吏、将卒、士民悉令安存，无或惊扰；而乃违戾约束，侵侮宪章，专杀降兵，擅开公帑，豪夺妇女，广纳货财，敛万民之怨嗟，致群盗之充斥。
现代文：宣示哀矜之心，敦务绥抚之举，一应孟昶的宗族、官吏、将卒、士民都得以安存，没有一点惊扰；然而违背约束，侵侮法律，专杀降兵，擅开公帑，抢夺妇女，广纳财货，导致万民怨嗟，群盗横行。
English: In response to Meng Xuan's act of mourning and condolence, his clan, officials, soldiers, and people were all able to live in peace and were not disturbed at all. However, they violated the restraints, violated the law, killed and demoted soldiers, arbitrarily opened public funds, robbed women, and accepted a wide range of goods and goods, leading to the resentment of the people and the rampant banditry.

古文：以至再劳调发，方获平宁。
现代文：以致闹到再度调发军队，才得以平定。
English: So much so that it took the redeployment of troops to quell the unrest.

古文：洎命旋归，尚欲含忍，而衔冤之诉，日拥国门，称其隐没金银、犀玉、钱帛十六万七百余贯。
现代文：自从命令归来，还想含忍不究，但衔冤之人每日拥在国门告状，说他隐藏金银、犀玉、钱帛十六万七百余贯。
English: Since the return of the order, he still wanted to be patient and not investigate, but the wrongdoers held a complaint at the national gate every day, saying that he had hidden more than 167,700 yuan worth of gold and silver, rhinestones and money.

古文：又擅开丰德库，致失钱二十八万一千余贯。
现代文：又擅自打开丰德库，致使失去钱币二十八万一千余贯。
English: He also opened the treasure vault without authorization, resulting in the loss of more than 281,000 yuan in coins.

古文：遂令中书门下召与讼者质证其事。而全斌等皆引伏。
现代文：于是下令中书门下召他与告状者质证此事，而全斌等人都供认。
English: Therefore, he ordered Zhongshumen to summon him to testify against the accuser, and Quanbin and the others all confessed.

古文：其令御史台于朝堂集文武百官议其罪。 
现代文：下令御史台在朝堂集合文武百官定他的罪。 
English: He ordered the Imperial Historian's Office to assemble a hundred civil and military officials in the Imperial Court to find him guilty.

古文：于是百官定议，全斌等罪当大辟，请准律处分。
现代文：于是百官议定，全斌等人罪当处斩，请求按律处理。
English: As a result, the hundred officials agreed that the crime of Quan Bin and others should be punished, and requested that they be dealt with according to the law.

古文：乃下诏曰： 有征无战，虽举于王师；禁暴戢兵，当崇于武德。
现代文：于是下诏说 ：即使王师出动也应有征无战；更当崇尚武德而禁暴戢兵。
English: Therefore, the next edict said: Even if Wang Shi goes out, there should be no conscription and no war; moreover, martial arts should be respected and violence should be prohibited.

古文：蠢兹庸蜀，自败奸谋，爰伐罪以宣威，俄望风而归命。
现代文：庸蜀愚蠢，自败奸谋，王师讨伐罪犯以宣朝威，蜀人不久望风而归命。
English: Yangshuo is stupid, self-defeated and treacherous, Wang Shih fights criminals to proclaim imperial power, and the Shu people soon surrender to the wind.

古文：遽令按堵，勿犯秋毫，庶德泽之涵濡，俾生聚之宁息。
现代文：于是下令按堵，勿犯秋毫，希望布恩德于天下，使百姓安宁。
English: Then he gave the order to stop the blockade, not to make any mistakes, and to hope that peace would reign in the world and bring tranquility to the people.

古文：而忠武军节度王全斌、武信军节度崔彦进董兹锐旅，奉我成谋，既居克定之全功，宜体辑柔之深意。
现代文：而忠武军节度王全斌、武信军节度崔彦进指挥劲旅，实行朝廷的谋划，既然取得克定的大功，就应当体谅朝廷安抚百姓的用意。
English: On the other hand, Wang Quanbin, the commander-in-chief of the Loyalist Army, and Cui Yan, the commander-in-chief of the Wu Xin Army, went on a vigorous journey to implement the imperial court's plan. Since they have made great achievements, they should understand the intention of the imperial court to appease the people.

古文：比谓不日清谧，即时凯旋，懋赏策勋，抑有彝典。
现代文：本以为不日蜀地清宁，及时凯旋班师，赏赐功勋，举行庆典。
English: Originally, I thought that there would be no Qingning in Shuxi any day, and it would be best to return the victorious team members in time, award them for their merits, and hold a celebration.

古文：而罔思寅畏，速此悔尤，贪残无厌，杀戮非罪，稽于偃革，职尔玩兵。尚念前劳，特从宽贷，止停旄钺，犹委藩宣。
现代文：然而不顾法律，造成过错，贪残无厌，杀害无辜，不图平抑民情，却玩弄兵权，尚且顾及以前的功劳，特别给予宽大，只停任节度，仍然委任藩镇宣政。
English: However, he disregarded the law, caused mistakes, was insatiably greedy, killed innocents, did not try to pacify the people, but played with military power, took into account his previous merits, and was given special clemency. He was only suspended from the post of governor, but was still appointed to proclaim the government.

古文：我非无恩，尔当自省。
现代文：我不是没有恩惠，你们应当自己反省。
English: I am not without grace, you should reflect on yourselves.

古文：全斌可责授崇义军节度观察留后，彦进可责授昭化军节度观察留后，特建随州为崇义军、金州为昭化军以处之。
现代文：全斌可责授崇义军节度观察留后，彦进可责授昭化军节度观察留后，特别改建随州为崇义军、金州为昭化军来安置他们。
English: Quan Bin may order the Chongyi Army to stay and observe the festival, and Yan Jin may order the Zhaohua Army to stay and observe the festival, and specially rebuild Suizhou for the Chongyi Army and Jinzhou for the Zhaohua Army to accommodate them.

古文：仁赡责授右卫大将军。 开宝开，车驾幸洛阳郊祀，召全斌侍祠，以为武宁军节度。
现代文：仁赡责授右卫大将军。 开宝末年，太祖到洛阳举行郊祀，召全斌侍候祭祀，任命为武宁军节度。
English: At the end of Kibo's life, the great-grandfather held a suburb service in Luoyang, called Quan Bin to attend the service, and appointed him as the military commander of the Wu Ning Army.

古文：谓之曰： 朕以江左未平，虑征南诸将不尊纪律，故抑卿数年，为朕立法。
现代文：太祖对他说 ：因为江左未平，我怕征南诸将不遵守纪律，所以压抑你几年，为我立下典型。
English: The great-grandfather said to him: "Because the river is not flat, I am afraid that the Southern Expedition generals will not abide by discipline, so I will suppress you for a few years and set a model for me."

古文：今已克金陵，还卿节钺。 仍以银器万两、帛万匹、钱千万赐之。
现代文：现在已经攻克金陵，还给你节度之职。 仍然赐给他银器万两、帛万匹、钱千万。
English: Now that he has conquered Jinling, he has given you back the post of the festival. He still gave him 10,000 taels of silver, 10,000 horses, and tens of millions of money.

古文：全斌至镇数月卒，年六十九。
现代文：全斌到镇后几个月就去世，终年六十九岁。
English: A few months after arriving in the town, Quan Bin passed away at the age of 69.

古文：赠中书令。
现代文：追赠中书令。
English: The order of posthumous gift of Chinese calligraphy is issued.

古文：天禧二年，录其孙永昌为三班奉职。
现代文：天禧二年，录用他的孙子王永昌为三班奉职。
English: In the second year of Tian Hei, his grandson Wang Yongchang was hired to work in the third shift.

古文：全斌轻财重士，不求声誉，宽厚容众，军旅乐为之用。
现代文：全斌轻财重士，不追求声誉，宽厚容人，军队愿意为他效力。
English: Quan Bin is a man of light wealth, does not pursue reputation, is generous and tolerant, and the army is willing to serve him.

古文：黜居山郡十余年，怡然自得，识者称之 
现代文：贬居山郡十多年，怡然自得，有识之士称赞他的风度。
English: He has lived in Shanshan County for more than ten years. He is cheerful and self-satisfied, and people with insight praise his demeanor.

古文：子审钧，崇仪使、富州刺史、广州兵马钤辖；审锐，供奉官、閤门祗候。
现代文：儿子审钧，任崇仪使、富州刺史、广州兵马钤辖；审锐，任供奉官、门合门祗候。
English: His son, Zhenyu, was appointed as the official of Chongyi, Fuzhou Zhi Shi, and Guangzhou Terracotta Warriors and Horses; Zhenyu, Zhenyu, was appointed as the official of Zhenyu, and Zhenyu, Zhenyu.

古文：曾孙凯。
现代文：曾孙名凯。
English: The great-grandson of Makae.

