古文：《易》曰： 形而上者谓之道，形而下者谓之器。 
现代文：《易》记载： 无形、抽象的东西称之为道，具体、实在的东西称之为器。 
English: "Yi" records: The intangible, abstract thing is called the Tao, and the concrete, real thing is called the vessel.

古文：夫神道广大，妙本于阴阳；形器精微，义先于律吕。
现代文：神秘的道无所不包，其神妙体现于阴阳；有形器物的精微，其根本体现在律吕。
English: The mysterious Tao is all-encompassing, and its magic is embodied in yin and yang; the subtlety of tangible objects is fundamentally embodied in rutong.

古文：圣人观四时之变，刻玉纪其盈虚，察五行之声，铸金均其清浊，所以遂八风而宣九德，和大乐而成政道。
现代文：圣人观察四季的变化，制成圭表记录时令的递衍；体察五行对应的乐音，铸成钟来区分它们的高低，这样才能顺乎音乐宣养九功之德的特性，使隆盛、严肃庄重的音乐能够和谐地辅佐国政。
English: The sage observed the changes of the four seasons and made a Gui watch to record the succession of the seasons; he observed the corresponding musical sounds of the five elements and cast a bell to distinguish their height and depth. In this way, he could follow the characteristics of music to promote the virtue of nine merits, so that the prosperous and solemn music could harmoniously support the national politics.

古文：然金质从革，侈弇无方；竹体圆虚，修短利制。
现代文：然而铜的质地就像皮革，使钟口的大小不好裁定；竹子外圆而中空，长短利于裁制。
English: However, the texture of copper is like leather, which makes the size of the bell mouth difficult to judge; the bamboo is round and hollow, and the length is good for cutting.

古文：是以神瞽作律，用写钟声，乃纪之以三，平之以六，成于十二，天之道也。
现代文：所以神瞽就用竹子作律来规范钟的音高。于是先确定黄钟、姑洗、夷则三律，然后再让太蔟、蕤宾、无射三律平分如上三律，并插入其间，最后以大吕等其他六律插入上述六律之间，就形成了十二律，这是自然规律的体现。
English: Therefore, the gods used bamboo to regulate the pitch of the bell. Therefore, they first determined the three laws of Huang Zhong, Gu Qi, and Yi Zi, and then divided the three laws of Taishan, Zhibin, and Muzha into three equal parts as above, and inserted them in the middle. Finally, they inserted other six laws such as Dai Lu between the above six laws, forming twelve laws, which is the embodiment of natural laws.

古文：又叶时日于晷度，效地气于灰管，故阴阳和则景至，律气应则灰飞。
现代文：同时，还用晷影度调时令月，用律管葭灰候应地气，所以阴阳调和则晷影准确，地气应于律管就会飞灰。
English: At the same time, the degree of the mirage is also used to adjust the time of the month, and the degree of the mirage is adjusted according to the earth's atmosphere, so the harmony of the yin and yang is accurate, and the earth's atmosphere will fly in the direction of the mirage.

古文：灰飞律通，吹而命之，则天地之中声也。
现代文：律管能飞灰应验，吹其所发之声，则是天地间的中和之声。
English: The voice uttered by the wind is the voice of the balance between heaven and earth.

古文：故可以范围百度，化成万品，则《虞书》所谓 叶时月正日，同律度量衡 者也。
现代文：它才可以规范各种度量标准，运用于各种物品的度量，造就是《虞书》所说 使四时之气、日、月长短齐一，使律度量衡齐一 的道理。
English: It can standardize all kinds of measurement standards and be applied to the measurement of all kinds of items, which is the reason for making the four time zones, the length of the day and the month the same, and the rhythm of measurement the same, as stated in the "Book of Fortunes."

古文：中声节以成文，德音章而和备，则可以动天地，感鬼神，道性情，移风俗。
现代文：中和之声有法度可以充分体现美与善，有德性的音乐既盛大又和谐，它们可以感动天、地、鬼、神，可以导养情性，移风易俗。
English: The sound of harmony can fully embody beauty and goodness. Virtuous music is grand and harmonious. It can move heaven, earth, ghosts, and gods. It can guide and nurture sentiments, and change customs.

古文：叶言志于咏歌，鉴盛衰于治乱，故君子审声以知音，审音以知乐，审乐以知政，盖由兹道。
现代文：叶是说将志向的表达寄托于咏唱，将世事盛衰的鉴别寄托于国事的治理，所以君子能够审听声音去选择乐音，审听乐音能够把握音乐，审听音乐能够考察政事，大概都出于这个道理。
English: Ye said that the expression of aspirations is entrusted to the chorus, and the identification of the rise and fall of world affairs is entrusted to the governance of state affairs. Therefore, the gentleman can listen to the sound to select the music, listen to the music to grasp the music, and listen to the music to examine the political affairs, probably all for this reason.

古文：太史公律书云： 王者制事立物，法度轨则，一禀于六律。
现代文：太史公《律书》称： 王在制定事物的标准法则时，一律遵循六律。
English: The "Law Book" of the Grand Historian said: When the king establishes the standard law of things, he always follows the six laws.

古文：六律为万事之本，其于兵械尤所重焉。
现代文：以六律为万事的根本，特别体现在战事上更为重要。
English: Taking the six laws as the foundation of all things, especially in war, is even more important.

古文：故云望敌知吉凶，闻声效胜负，百王不易之道也。 
现代文：所以说察看敌情能预测吉凶，听吹律声可以占验胜负，这是历代帝王不变的法则。 
English: Therefore, it is said that observing the enemy situation can predict the fate of the enemy, and listening to the sound of the rhythm can account for the victory or defeat, which is the invariable rule of the emperors of all ages.

古文：及秦氏灭学，其道浸微。
现代文：到秦始皇焚书以后，这些法则渐渐衰微了。
English: After Qin Shi Huang burned the books, these rules gradually faded away.

古文：汉室初兴，丞相张苍首言律，未能审备。
现代文：汉朝刚刚兴起，丞相张苍便开始考察音律，但未能审定完备。
English: When the Han Dynasty was just emerging, the Prime Minister Zhang Cang began to examine the musical rhythms, but was unable to verify that they were complete.

古文：孝武帝创置协律之官，司马迁言律吕相生之次详矣。
现代文：孝武帝时开始设置调协音律的官职，司马迁则更为详实地考察了律吕相生的顺序。
English: Emperor Xiaowu began to set up the official position of tuning and harmonizing music, and Sima Qian made a more detailed on-site inspection of the order of the birth of music.

古文：及王莽际，考论音律，刘歆条奏，大率有五：一曰备数，一、十、百、千、万也；二曰和声，宫、商、角、徵、羽也；三曰审度，分、寸、尺、丈、引也；四曰嘉量，龠、合、升、斗、斛也；五曰权衡，铢、两、斤、钧、石也。
现代文：王莽执政以来，又考察研讨音律，由刘歆逐条上奏，大体有五条：一讲数理完备，包括一、十、百、千、万；二讲调和声调，即宫、商、角、征、羽；三讲审定长度标准，即分、寸、尺、丈、引；四讲嘉量，即籥、合、升、斗、斛；五讲权衡，即稣、两、斤、钩、石。
English: Since Wang Meng came to power, he has also examined and studied the musical notation, which is played by Liu Bei one by one, and there are roughly five: one is mathematically complete, including one, ten, one hundred, one thousand, and ten thousand; two is the tone and tone, that is, palace, merchant, horn, sign, and feather; three is the approved length standard, that is, minute, inch, yard, length, and pull; four is the weight, that is,, 合,升,斗, ; five is the balance, that is, 耶稣,两,斤,钩,石.

古文：班固因而志之。
现代文：班固将这些内容编入《漠书。律历志》。
English: Ban Gu compiled these contents into the "Desert Book. Legal History."

古文：蔡邕又记建武已后言律吕者，至司马绍统采而续之。
现代文：蔡邕则记录了以后研讨律吕的学者，到司马绍统时又将这些内容编入《续汉书》。
English: Cai Wei recorded the scholars who later studied the Law and Lu, and compiled these contents into the "Continuation of the Han Dynasty" when he came to Sima Shao.

古文：汉末天下大乱，乐工散亡，器法堙灭，魏武始获杜夔，使定乐器声调。
现代文：漠末天下大乱，乐工亡命奔散，律吕法度都毁散殆尽。魏武帝时得到了乐人杜夔，命他考定乐器音律。
English: At the end of the Heian period, the world was in turmoil. Musicians were scattered, and the laws and regulations were all destroyed. Emperor Weiwu got the musician Du Xi, and ordered him to determine the musical instrument's melody.

古文：夔依当时尺度，权备典章。
现代文：杜夔依照当时的尺度，权衡完备了法令制度。
English: Du Xuan perfected the legal system according to the standards of the time.

古文：及武帝受命，遵而不革。
现代文：后晋武帝开国，遵依此制没有改变。
English: After Emperor Wu of the Jin Dynasty founded the country, there was no change in this system.

古文：至泰始十年，光禄大夫荀勖奏造新度，更铸律吕。
现代文：到晋泰始十年，光禄大夫荀勘上奏重造新尺度，重铸新律管。
English: In the first decade of the Jin and Tai Dynasties, Dr. Guanglu Xing Kanjangso re-established a new standard and recast a new legal system.

古文：元康中，勖子籓嗣其事，未及成功，属永嘉之乱，中朝典章，咸没于石勒。
现代文：元康年间，荀勋之子萤蓬接续了这一工作，尚未完成，便值永台之乱，中原礼乐和制度规范都陷落于石勒之手。
English: During the Yuan and Kang dynasties, Gong Xun's son, Guopeng, continued this work. Before it was completed, the Yongtai Rebellion broke out, and the Central Plains ceremonial music and institutional norms fell into Shiller's hands.

古文：及元帝南迁，皇度草昧，礼容乐器，扫地皆尽，虽稍加采掇，而多所沦胥，终于恭、安，竟不能备。
现代文：到晋元帝迁都建康，皇帝的品德和器量刚刚树立，礼仪器物及乐器几近于无，虽然经过一些搜集，但多已沦丧，甚至在安帝、恭帝时已不能备举。
English: By the time Emperor Jin Yuan moved the capital to Jiankang, the emperor's character and stature had just been established, and ceremonial instruments and musical instruments were almost non-existent. Although they had been collected, most of them had been lost, and even in the time of Emperor An and Emperor Gong, they could no longer be kept.

古文：今考古律相生之次，及魏武已后言音律度量者，以声明于篇云。
现代文：如今考证古律相生的顺序，并将魏武帝以后讨论律度量的学者一并着绿于后。
English: Nowadays, scholars who have examined the sequence of the birth of ancient laws and discussed the measurement of laws since Emperor Wu of Wei are all together in the background.

古文：《传》云： 十二律，黄帝之所作也。
现代文：记载称 十二律，是黄帝时代产生的。
English: Records say that the Twelve Precepts originated in the era of the Yellow Emperor.

古文：使伶伦自大夏之西，乃之昆仑之阴，取竹之嶰谷生，其窍厚均者，断雨节间长三寸九分而吹之，以为黄钟之宫，曰含少。
现代文：黄帝命令乐官伶伦从大夏西面，昆仑山北面的谷砍竹子，选择管壁薄厚均匀的竹管，截取两节中间长三寸九分的一截儿，将其所发之音定为黄钟之宫，称作含少。
English: The Yellow Emperor ordered the music official, Gong Lun, to cut bamboo from the valley of the western side of Daxia and the northern side of Kunlun Mountain, select a thin-walled, uniformly thick bamboo pipe, cut off a three-inch-nine-centimeter section in the middle of the two sections, and make the sound it emits as the Yellow Bell Palace, known as containing less.

古文：次制十二竹筒，写凤之鸣，雄鸣为六，雌鸣亦六，以比黄钟之宫，皆可以生之以定律吕。
现代文：以后又制成十二支竹筒，模仿凤凰的呜叫声。其间凤呜六声，凰呜六声，它们都以黄钟之宫的律管开始产生，构成了十二律。
English: Later, twelve bamboo tubes were made to imitate the cry of the phoenix. Among them, six cries of the phoenix and six cries of the phoenix, all of which began with the bell of the Yellow Bell Palace, and formed twelve rhythms.

古文：则律之始造，以竹为管，取其自然圆虚也。 
现代文：可见开始造律采用竹管，因为它的腔体大小是自然形成的 。
English: It can be seen that the bamboo tube is used for the first time, because its cavity size is naturally formed.

古文：又云 黄帝作律，以玉为管，长尺，六孔，这二十月音。
现代文：还有记载说 黄帝用玉做律管，长一尺，六孔，十二月每月各用一管。
English: There is also a record that the Yellow Emperor used jade to make a jade pipe, one foot long, six holes, and one pipe each month in December.

古文：至舜时，西王母献昭华之琯，以玉为之。 
现代文：舜的时候，西王旦献纳昭华律管就是玉质的 。
English: At the time of his death, Xi Wangdan donated the Zhaohua Law Pipe, which was made of jade.

古文：及汉章帝时，零陵文学奚景于泠道舜祠下得白玉琯。
现代文：漠章帝时，零陵文学奚景在泠道舜祠地下掘得白玉律管。
English: During the reign of Emperor Mozhang, the white jade law pipe was unearthed in the underground of the Shandao Ancestral Shrine.

古文：又武帝太康元年，汲郡盗发六国时魏襄王冢，亦得玉律。
现代文：武童主尘元年，盗掘主周时魏襄王的陵寝，也得到了玉律。
English: In the first year of King Wudong's reign, the tomb of King Wei Xiang, which was robbed during the reign of King Zhou, was also found to contain jade.

古文：则古者又以玉为管矣。
现代文：可见古代又有以玉做律管的例子。
English: It can be seen that in ancient times, there were also examples of jade being used as ritsukan.

古文：以玉者，取其体含廉润也。
现代文：用玉做律管的优点是管体清亮润泽。
English: The advantage of using beads to make a regular tube is that the tube body is shiny and moist.

古文：而汉平帝时，王莽又以铜为之。
现代文：漠平帝时，王菱又用铜做律管。
English: During the reign of Emperor Mo Ping, Wang Ling also used copper for the ratchet.

古文：铜者，自名也，所以同天下，齐风俗也。
现代文：铜，寓义天下大同，风俗一致。
English: Copper, allegory of the world is the same, the customs are the same.

古文：为物至精，不为燥湿寒暑改节，介然有常，似士君子之行，故用焉。
现代文：铜的质地精良，不因干燥、潮湿、寒冷、酷热而变形，其性能长期稳定，就像士君子的品行，所以才采用它。
English: Copper has a fine texture, does not deform due to dryness, dampness, cold, and extreme heat, and its performance is stable for a long time, just like the conduct of a gentleman, so it is used.

古文：《周礼》太师掌六律、六吕，以合阴阳之声。
现代文：《周礼》记载，太师掌管六律、六吕，用来配合阴阳之声。
English: "Zhou Li" records that the Grand Master is in charge of the six laws and six ryu, which are used to match the yin and yang voices.

古文：六律阳声，黄钟、太蔟、姑洗、蕤宾、夷则、无射也；六吕阴声，大吕、应钟、南吕、林钟、仲吕、夹钟也。
现代文：六律为阳声，指的是黄钟、太蔟、姑洗、蕤宾、夷则、无射；六吕是阴声，指的是大吕、应钟、南吕、林钟、仲吕、夹钟。
English: "六律" is a masculine sound, referring to Huang Zhong, Taizhe, Gou Qi, Zhibin, Yizi, and Muxia; "六吕" is a feminine sound, referring to Dalu, Ying Zhong, Nan Zhong, Lin Zhong, Zhong Lü, and Jian Zhong.

古文：又有太师则执同律以听军声，而诏以吉凶。
现代文：《周礼》还载有太师用十二律吕来占验军事，以告吉凶的说法。
English: "Zhou Li" also contains the saying that the Grand Master used the Twelve Precepts to test the military and to tell fortunes.

古文：其典同掌六律之和，以辩天地四方阴阳之声，以为乐器，皆以十有二律而为之数度，以十有二声而为之齐量焉。
现代文：同时，典同执掌着六律、六吕之和，用来辨析天地四方的阴阳之声，制成乐器，它们都以十二律作为长短的规范，以十二声作为检验的标准。
English: At the same time, Peng Tong is in charge of the sum of the six laws and six ryu, which is used to distinguish the yin and yang sounds of the four directions of heaven and earth, and is made into musical instruments. They all use the twelve laws as the standard for length, and the twelve tones as the standard for inspection.

古文：及周景王将铸无射，问律于泠州鸠，对曰： 夫六，中之色，故名之曰黄钟，所以宣养六气九德也。
现代文：周景王要铸无射钟，向捡；啮询问有关音律的问题，史嘘答道： 六为天地之中，其色对应五行为土，色黄，所以称之为黄钟，寓义宣养好、恶、喜、怒、哀、乐之情和以六府三事构成的九功之德。
English: Zhou Jing Wang wanted to cast a bell without a projector, and asked Zhao Zhao about the melody. Shi Xiu replied: Six is the number of heaven and earth, and its color corresponds to the five elements of earth, and the color is yellow, so it is called the yellow bell. It is a metaphor to promote the good, evil, happiness, anger, sorrow, and joy, and the virtue of nine merits composed of the three things of the six prefectures.

古文：由是第之。二曰太蔟，所以金奏赞阳出滞也。
现代文：从黄钟向下，则有第二律太蔟，寓义施用金奏，辅助阳气生发，走出滞伏的时节。
English: From the yellow bell downwards, there is a second law, the golden melody, which is used as an allegory to assist the generation of yang, and to get out of the stagnant season.

古文：三曰姑洗，所以羞洁百物，考神纳宾也。
现代文：第三律称姑洗，寓义能够进用洁净的物品祭拜神祇、招待宾客。
English: The third precept is called guba, which means being able to use clean objects to worship deities and invite guests.

古文：四曰蕤宾，所以安静神人，献酬交酢也。
现代文：第四律称蕤宾，寓义能够用于宗庙，使神人静好、安享，像宾主一样互相敬酒。
English: The fourth precept is called "宾," and the allegory can be used in ancestral temples to make gods and mortals feel calm and at ease, and to toast each other like guests.

古文：五曰夷则，所以咏歌九德，平人无贰也。
现代文：第五律称夷则，寓义能够咏唱九功之德。成百姓之志，使人们没有疑惑。
English: The fifth precept is known as the "Law of Emptiness," and the parable is able to sing the virtue of nine merits. It has become the people's aspiration, so that people have no doubts.

古文：六曰无射，所以宣布哲人之令德，示人轨仪也。
现代文：第六律称无射，寓义能够宣布哲人的美德，昭示作人的规范。
English: The sixth law is called no-shooting, and the allegory can proclaim the virtues of the philosopher and show the norms of the writer.

古文：为之六间，以扬沈伏而黜散越也。
现代文：又有六间，用来发扬滞伏之气，丢弃激扬之情。
English: There are six more rooms, which are used to develop the spirit of stagnation and discard the feeling of excitement.

古文：元间大吕，助宣物也，二间夹钟，出四隙之细也。
现代文：第一间称大吕，寓义可辅助阳律黄钟规范百物。第二间称夹钟，寓义使四时之微气协调而发。
English: The first room is called the Great Lu, and the allegory can assist the yang-rule yellow bell to standardize a hundred things. The second room is called the clamped bell, and the allegory makes the four o'clock breeze harmonize.

古文：三间中吕，宣中气也。
现代文：第三间称仲吕，寓义宣养中和之气。
English: The third room is called "Zhonglu," which is an allegory to promote the spirit of neutrality.

古文：四间林钟，和展百事，俾莫不任肃纯恪也。
现代文：第四间称林钟，寓义当世大事和顺，百事无伪，人们应当各任其事，速获成功，敬重其职。
English: The fourth room is called Lin Zhong, which is an allegory of the world's major events and harmony, and everything is true. People should do their own thing, get success quickly, and respect their duties.

古文：五间南吕，赞阳秀也。
现代文：第五间称南吕，寓义辅佐万物的形成。
English: The fifth room is called Nanlu, which represents the formation of all things.

古文：六间应钟，均利器用，俾应复也。 
现代文：第六间称应钟，寓义百器皆备，有利于当世大事，百官器用皆能恢复对应其礼的常态。 
English: In the sixth room, there is a bell to mark the time. All the hundred allegorical instruments are available, which is conducive to current events. All the hundred official instruments can be used to restore the normal state of the corresponding ritual.

古文：此皆所以律述时气效节物也。
现代文：这些都是以律来验正四时之气，并与人间事物相对应的说法。
English: These are all expressions that use the law to verify the four seasons and correspond to things in the human world.

古文：及秦始皇焚书荡覆，典策缺亡，诸子琐言时有遗记。
现代文：秦始皇焚书毁坏了文化，典籍散佚殆尽，诸子记述琐闻佚事的文章偶或流传下来。
English: Qin Shihuang's book-burning destroyed the culture, the classic books were scattered and destroyed, and the children's articles describing trivia and anecdotes were occasionally passed down.

古文：吕不韦《春秋》言：黄钟之宫，律之本也，下生林钟，林钟上生太蔟，太蔟下生南吕，南吕上生姑洗，姑洗下生应钟，应钟上生蕤宾，蕤宾下生大吕，大吕下生夷则，夷则上生夹钟，夹钟下生无射，无射上生中吕。
现代文：吕不韦《春秋》称：黄钟之宫是律的根本。黄钟下生林钟，林钟上生太蔟，太蔟下生南吕，南吕上生姑洗，姑洗下生应钟，应钟上生蕤宾，蕤宾下生大吕，大吕下生夷则，夷则上生夹钟，夹钟下生无射，无射上生仲吕。
English: Lu Buwei's "Spring and Autumn" said: "The Yellow Bell Palace is the root of the law. The Yellow Bell gives birth to the Forest Bell, the Forest Bell gives birth to the Great Dragonfly, the Great Dragonfly gives birth to the South Dragonfly, the South Dragonfly gives birth to the Southern Dragonfly, the Southern Dragonfly gives birth to the Great Dragonfly, the Great Dragonfly gives birth to the Great Dragonfly, the Great Dragonfly gives birth to the Wild Goose, the Wild Goose gives birth to the Little Dragonfly, the Little Dragonfly gives birth to the Little Dragonfly, the Little Dragonfly gives birth to the Little Dragonfly, the Little Dragonfly gives birth to

古文：三分所生，益其一分以上生；三分所生，去其一分以下生。
现代文：三分所生之律长，增加一分，产生上生的律；减少一分，产生下生的律。
English: The law of the third birth is long, increase one point, produce the law of the previous birth; decrease one point, produce the law of the next birth.

古文：后代之言音律者多宗此说。
现代文：后代研讨音律一般遵从这一法则。
English: Subsequent generations of musicologists have generally followed this rule.

古文：及汉兴，承秦之弊，张苍首治律历，颇未能详。
现代文：汉朝兴盛之后，制止了秦朝焚书之弊，张苍开始研讨律历，但尚未完备。
English: After the prosperity of the Han Dynasty, the evil of the Qin Dynasty's book burning was stopped, and Zhang Cang began to study the legal calendar, but it was not yet complete.

古文：故孝武帝正乐，乃置协律之官，虽律吕清浊之体粗正，金石高下之音有准，然徒捃采遗存，以成一时之制，而数犹用五。
现代文：所以孝武帝考校乐事，设置协律官职，使得律吕的音准高低有了初步规范，乐器的音高音低也有了准确的把握，然而这也不过是采集以往的成果，作为暂时的制度，其音数还是用五。
English: Therefore, the Emperor Xiaowu's examination of school music and the establishment of the post of deputy legal officer have made the pitch of the ryu have a preliminary standard, and the pitch of the musical instrument has been accurately grasped. However, this is nothing more than the collection of previous achievements. As a temporary system, the number of notes is still five.

古文：时淮南王安延致儒博，亦为律吕。
现代文：当时淮南王刘安邀请诸位学者研讨律吕。
English: At that time, Liu An, the king of Huainan, invited scholars to study Lu Lu.

古文：云黄钟之律九寸而宫音调，因而九之，九九八十一，故黄钟之数立焉，位在子。
现代文：说黄钟律九寸则宫音有定，因而以九相乘，九九八十一，黄钟的律数就确定了，其位在子。
English: It is said that if the yellow bell has a regularity of nine centimeters, then the palatal consonant is fixed. Therefore, by multiplying nine by nine, the number of the yellow bell's regularity is fixed, and its position is in the son.

古文：林钟位在未，其数五十四。
现代文：林钟之位在未，律数五十四。
English: Lin Zhong's place is in the future, the number of laws is fifty-four.

古文：太蔟其数七十二，南吕之数四十八，姑洗之数六十四，应钟之数四十二，蕤宾之数五十七，大吕之数七十六，夷则之数五十一，夹钟之数六十八，无射之数四十五，中吕之数六十，极不生。
现代文：太蔟律数七十二，南吕律数四十八，姑洗律数六十四，应钟律数四十二，蕤宾律数五十七，大吕律数七十六，夷则律数五十一，夹钟律数六十八，无射律数四十五，仲吕律数六十，仲吕为十二律相生之末，不再上生、下生。
English: The Taishang number is 72, the Nanlu number is 48, the Guqin number is 64, the Yinglu number is 42, the Xingbin number is 57, the DaLu number is 76, the Yizhe number is 51, the Jianlu number is 68, the Sansha number is 45, the Zhonglu number is 60, and the Zhonglu number is 12.

古文：以黄钟为宫，太蔟为商，姑洗为角，林钟为徽，南吕为羽。
现代文：其间以黄钟为宫，太蔟为商，姑洗为角，林钟为征，南吕为羽。
English: Among them, Huang Zhong is the palace, Ta Ying is the merchant, Gu Qi is the corner, Lin Zhong is the emissary, and Nan Lv is the feather.

古文：宫生徵，徵生商，商生羽，羽生角，角生应钟，不比正音，故为和；应钟生蕤宾，不比正音，故为缪。
现代文：它们是由宫音产生征音，征音产生商音，商音产生羽音，羽音产生角音，角音产生应钟，不能与宫、商、角、征、羽五正声相提并论，所以称作和；应钟产生蕤宾，也不能与正声相提并论，所以称作缪。
English: They are produced by the palace sound of the pronunciation, the pronunciation of the pronunciation of the pronunciation of the pronunciation of the pronunciation of the pronunciation of the pronunciation of the pronunciation of the pronunciation of the pronunciation of the pronunciation of the pronunciation of the pronunciation of the pronunciation of the pronunciation of the pronunciation of the pronunciation of the pronunciation of the pronunciation of the pronunciation of the pronunciation of the pronunciation of the pronunciation of the pronunciation of the pronunciation of the pronunciation of the pronunciation of the pronunciation of the pronunciation of the pronunciation of the pronunciation of the pronunciation of the pronunciation of the pronunciation of the pronunciation of the pronunciation of the pronunciation of the pronunciation of the pronunciation of the pronunciation of the pronunciation of the pronunciation of the pronunciation of the pronunciation of the pronunciation of the pronunciation

古文：日冬至，音比林钟浸以浊。
现代文：节令在冬至时，音律对应于林钟，音调逐渐显得低沉。
English: At the time of the winter solstice, the rhythm corresponds to the forest bell, and the tone gradually becomes muffled.

古文：日夏至，音比黄钟浸以清。
现代文：节令在夏至时，音律对应于黄钟，音调逐渐显得高昂。
English: At the time of the summer solstice, the rhythm corresponds to the yellow bell, and the tone gradually appears high.

古文：十二律应二十四时之变。
现代文：可见十二律是与二十四个节令变化相对应的。
English: It can be seen that the twelve precepts correspond to the twenty-four seasonal changes.

古文：甲子，中吕之徵也。
现代文：甲子曰对应仲吕之征。
English: Koshi said that it corresponded to the call of Zhong Lv.

古文：丙子，夹钟之羽也。
现代文：丙子曰对应夹钟之羽。
English: Cixi said that it corresponds to the cuckoo of the clock.

古文：戊子，黄钟之宫也。
现代文：戊子日对应黄钟之宫。
English: Boshi corresponds to the Palace of the Yellow Bell.

古文：庚子，无射之商也。
现代文：庚子日对应无射之商。
English: Geng Zi Day corresponds to the no-shooting day.

古文：壬子，夷则之角也。
现代文：壬子日对应夷则之角。
English: The day of Imago corresponds to the cape of Izu.

古文：其为音也，一律而生五音，十二律而为六十音。
现代文：作为五声之音，它们都是一律所生，因此十二律可以产生六十音。
English: As the five tones, they are all born from the same principle, so the twelve principles can produce sixty tones.

古文：因而六之，六六三十六，故三百六十音以当一岁之日。
现代文：再以六相乘，六六三十六，所以三百六十音可以对应一年的日数。
English: Then multiply by six to get 6636, so 360 tones can correspond to the number of days in a year.

古文：故律历之数，天地之道也。
现代文：因此说律历之数，体现着天地之理。
English: Therefore, the number of rites and calendars reflects the principle of heaven and earth.

古文：司马迁八书言律吕，粗举大经，著于前史。
现代文：司马迁《八书》说到律吕，以常规粗略地探讨，并著录于前代史籍。
English: Sima Qian's "Eight Books" mentioned Lulü, discussed it in a general way, and recorded it in the previous historical records.

古文：则以太极元气函三为一，而始动于子，十二律之生，必所起焉。
现代文：它主要说最原始的混沌之气含天、地、人三气为一体，发动于子，十二律的相生，必定起之于此。
English: It mainly says that the most primitive chaotic qi contains heaven, earth and human three qi as a whole, which is initiated in the Son, and the mutual birth of the twelve laws must arise from this.

古文：于是参一于丑得三，因而九三之，举本位合十辰，得一万九千六百八十三，谓之成数，以为黄钟之法。
现代文：于是以三、一相乘在丑得三，因而再以九个三相乘，连同本位共十辰，得一万九千六百八十三，称为比率之数，用作计算黄钟律长的除数。
English: Thus, three multiplied by one is three, and nine multiplied by three is nineteen hundred and eighty-three, which is called the ratio, and is used to calculate the divisor of the longitude of the yellow bell.

古文：又参之律于十二辰，得十七万七千一百四十七，谓之该数，以为黄钟之实。
现代文：再以三相乘历十二辰，得十七万七干一百四十七，称之为包容之数，用作黄钟律长计算的被除数。
English: Then, the three phases were multiplied by 12 hours to get 177,000 to 147,000, which is called the number of tolerance and is used as the divisor calculated by Huang Zhong Rongchang.

古文：实如法而一，得黄钟之律长九寸，十一月冬至之气应焉。
现代文：以被除数舆除数相约，得黄钟律长九寸，候气则有十一月冬至气应验。
English: Using the divisor of the divisor of the divisor of the divisor of the divisor of the divisor of the divisor of the divisor of the divisor of the divisor of the divisor of the divisor of the divisor of the divisor of the divisor of the divisor of the divisor of the divisor of the divisor of the divisor of the divisor of the divisor of the divisor of the divisor of the divisor of the divisor.

古文：盖阴阳合德，气钟于子，而化生万物，则物之生莫不函三。
现代文：这就是阴气、阳气一致了，都聚集于子，才能使万物孕化产生，而万物的产生都包含着三这个数。
English: This is because the yin and yang qi are the same, and they are all gathered in the son, so that all things can be conceived and produced, and the production of all things contains the number three.

古文：故十二律空径三分，而上下相生，皆损益以三。
现代文：所以十二律管径为三分，而它们的上生、下生都以三为增损的比率。
English: Therefore, the diameter of a dodecahedron is three points, and the ratio of increase and decrease is three for both their upper and lower growth.

古文：其术则因黄钟之长九寸，以下生者倍其实，三其法：以上生者，四其实，三其法。
现代文：其计算方法是以黄钟律长九寸为准，下生的律用二乘以九，以三相除；上生的律，用四乘以下生所得，再以三相除。
English: The calculation method is based on the law of the yellow bell, which is nine inches long. The law of the lower birth is two multiplied by nine and divided by three phases; the law of the upper birth is four multiplied by the income of the lower birth and divided by three phases.

古文：所以明阳下生阴，阴上生阳。起子，为黄钟九寸，一。
现代文：所谓阳律下生阴律，阴律上生阳律就是这样计算的。起始于子，为黄钟九寸，一。
English: The so-called male-to-female sex ratio under the yang principle and female-to-male sex ratio above the yang principle are calculated in this way.

古文：丑，三分之二。
现代文：丑，三分之二。
English: Ugly, two-thirds black.

古文：寅，九分之八。
现代文：寅，九分之八。
English: C, eight out of nine.

古文：卯，二十七分之十六。
现代文：卯，二十七分之十六。
English: U, sixteen twenty-sevenths.

古文：辰，八十一分之六十四。
现代文：辰，八十一分之六十四。
English: Sixty-four times out of eighty-one.

古文：巳，二百四十三分之一百二十八。
现代文：巳，二百四十三分之一百二十八。
English: That's one hundred and twenty-eight out of two hundred and forty-three.

古文：午，七百二十九分之五百一十二。
现代文：午，七百二十九分之五百一十二。
English: at 5:12 a.m.

古文：未，二千一百八十七分之一千二十四。
现代文：未，二千一百八十七分之一千零二十四。
English: One in 2,187 is 1,024 years old.

古文：申，六千五百六十一分之四千九十六。
现代文：申，六千五百六十一分之四千零九十六。
English: petition, 4,096 out of 6,561.

古文：酉，一万九千六百八十二分之八千一百九十二。
现代文：酉一万九千六百八十二分之八千一百九十二。
English: Nineteen hundred and ninety-two of nineteen thousand six hundred and eighty-two.

古文：戌，五万九千四十九分之三万二千七百六十八。
现代文：戌，五万九千零四十九分之三万二千七百六十八。
English: and 32,768 out of 59,049.

古文：亥，十七万七千一百四十七分之六万五千五百三十六。
现代文：亥，十七万七千一百四十七分之六万五千五百三十六。
English: boar, sixty-five thousand five hundred thirty-six out of a hundred and seventy-seven thousand one hundred forty-seven.

古文：如是周十二辰，在六律为阳，则当位自得而下生阴，在六吕为阴，则得其所衡而上生于阳，推算之术无重上生之法也。
现代文：这样，律对应十二辰，其间六律为阳律，以第一律自得之数下生，产生阴律，而六吕为阴律，以生得阴律之数上生，产生阳律，推算过程中没有连续上生的法则。
English: In this way, the law corresponds to twelve hours, during which the six laws are the male law, and the first law is the number of children born, resulting in the female law, and the six laws are the female law, and the number of children born to the female law, resulting in the male law. There is no continuous birth law in the calculation process.

古文：所谓律取妻，吕生子，阴阳升降，律吕之大经也。
现代文：造就是所谓律娶妻，吕生子，形成的阴阳升降，也是律吕运作的常规。
English: The formation of yin and yang, the rise and fall of yin and yang, is also the routine of the operation of RuLu.

古文：而迁又言十二律之长，今依淮南九九之数，则蕤宾为重上。
现代文：但司马迁又说十二律的长度，如果依照《淮南子》的律数计算，则蕤宾为重复上生。
English: However, Sima Qian also said that the length of the twelve laws, if calculated according to the number of laws of "Huainanzi," is repeated.

古文：又言五音相生，而以宫生角，角生商，商生徵，徵生羽，羽生宫。
现代文：还说五音相生是用宫生角，角生商，商生征，征生羽，羽生宫。
English: It is also said that the pentatonic pentatonic scale is composed of the pentatonic horn, the pentatonic horn, the pentatonic horn, the pentatonic horn, the pentatonic horn, the pentatonic horn, the pentatonic horn, the pentatonic horn, the pentatonic horn, the pentatonic horn, the pentatonic horn.

古文：求其理用，罔见通途。
现代文：探求其相生道理，则根本不通。
English: Exploring the reason for their affinity does not work at all.

古文：及元始中，王莽辅政，博征通知钟律者，考其音义，使羲和刘歆典领调奏。
现代文：到元始年间，王莽辅佐国政，广泛征召通晓钟律的学者，考校音律问题，让羲和刘歆逐条整理上奏。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, Wang Mangsu assisted in the national politics, and extensively recruited scholars who were familiar with the chime rhythms to solve the problems of the chime rhythms for the examination, and let Yu and Liu Xi sort out and play the chimes one by one.

古文：班固《汉书》采而志之，其序论虽博，而言十二律损益次第，自黄钟长九寸，三分损一，下生林钟，长六寸。
现代文：班固的《汉书》采编入志，其间依次论列的内容虽然广博，但谈到十二律损益相生的顺序，则是以九寸长的黄钟三分损一，下生林钟，长六寸。
English: Ban Gu's "Hanshu" was compiled into a book, and although the contents of the sequential discussion were extensive, when it came to the sequence of the twelve laws of loss and gain, it was a nine-inch-long yellow bell with a three-minute loss of one, and a six-inch-long forest bell.

古文：三分益一，上生太蔟而左旋，八八为位。一上一下，终于无射，下生中吕。
现代文：又以林钟长三分益一，左旋上生太蔟，这样每隔八律产生一律，上生下生往复，结束于无射，下生仲吕。
English: Also, with the length of the forest clock three points plus one, the left-hand rotation of the top generation is too steep, so every eight laws are produced uniformly, the top generation and the bottom generation are reciprocating, ending in no shot, and the bottom generation is in the middle.

古文：校其相生所得，与司马迁正同。班固采以为志。
现代文：考校其相生的结果，与司马迁相同，所以班固才采编入志。
English: The result of the examination was the same as that of Sima Qian, so the class was selected and enrolled.

古文：元帝时，郎中京房知五音六十律之数，上使太子傅玄成、谏议大夫章杂试问房于乐府，房对： 受学于故小黄令焦延寿。
现代文：元帝时，郎中京房通晓五音六十律的数理，皇上命太子太傅玄成、谏议大夫章在乐府测问京房，京房答道： 得学问于已故的小黄令焦延寿。
English: At the time of the Yuan Dynasty, his son and heir, Kyofusa, was well versed in the mathematics of the five-syllable and sixty-syllable rhythms. The crown prince, Taifu Gensho, and the imperial advisor, Taifu Zhang, questioned Kyofusa at the Lefu. Kyofusa replied, "I learned from the late Xiao Huangling Jiao Yan Shou."

古文：六十律相生之法：以上生下，皆三生二；以下生上，皆三生四。
现代文：六十律相生的方法是：用上方律产生下方律，都以三分之二为比率；用下方律产生上方律，都以三分之四为比率。
English: The method of generating the sixty laws is: using the upper square law to produce the lower square law, both at a ratio of two-thirds; using the lower square law to produce the upper square law, both at a ratio of four-thirds.

古文：阳下生阴，阴上生阳，终于中吕，而十二律毕矣。
现代文：阳律下生阴律，阴律上生阳律，到仲吕为止，十二律相生完毕。
English: According to the law of yin and yang, under the law of yang, under the law of yin and yang, above the law of yin and yang, up to Zhonglu, the twelve laws are complete.

古文：中吕上生执始，执始下生去灭。
现代文：仲吕上生执始律，执始下生去减律。
English: Zhong Lv adhered to the law of initiation in his previous life and to the law of subtraction in his next life.

古文：上下相生，终于南事，而六十律毕矣。
现代文：上下相生，到南事律为止，六十律就相生完毕了。
English: Up and down are interrelated, and as far as the Southern Law is concerned, the sixtieth law is complete.

古文：夫十二律之变至于六十，犹八卦之变至于六十四也。
现代文：十二律变化相生到六十律，就像八卦变为六十四卦一样。
English: The twelve principles change into sixty principles, just as the eight principles change into the sixty-four principles.

古文：宓牺作《易》，纪阳气之初以为律法。
现代文：宓牺作《易》，综理阳气萌动的情状作为律高的规范。
English: "Yi" (易) was written by Zou Zhisheng, and the situation of yang qi germination was summarized as the norm of the higher law.

古文：建日冬至之声，以黄钟为宫，太蔟为商，姑洗为角，林钟为徽，南吕为羽，应钟为变宫，蕤宾为变徵，此声气之元，五音之正也。
现代文：建立冬至那一天所用的音阶，即以黄钟为宫，太蔟为商，姑洗为角，林钟为征，南吕为羽，应钟为变宫，蕤宾为变征，这是声气的根本，五音的正位。
English: To establish the scale used on the day of the winter solstice, that is, to take the Yellow Bell as the palace, the Taiko as the merchant, the Gucho as the corner, the Lin Bell as the sign, the South Lu as the feather, the Ying Bell as the changing palace, and the Xing Bin as the changing sign. This is the foundation of the tone, the positive position of the five tones.

古文：故各统一日，其余以次运行，当日者各自为宫，而商角徽羽以类从焉。
现代文：所以它们可以各自统领，其余数可依顺序排列，统领该曰的律各自为宫音，商角征羽各依其宫顺次排列。
English: Therefore, they can be ruled by themselves, and the remaining numbers can be arranged in order. The ruler of the day's rite is the palace sound, and the merchants and warriors are arranged in order according to their palaces.

古文：《礼运》曰 五声、六律、十二管还相为宫 ，此之谓也。
现代文：《礼运》记载 五声、六律、十二管旋相为宫，的道理就在于此。
English: "Li Yun" records that the five-part, six-part, and twelve-pipe swirls are the palace, and this is the reason.

古文：以六十律分期之日，黄钟自冬至始，及冬至而复，阴阳、寒燠、风雨之占生焉。
现代文：以六十律对应期，黄钟从冬至这天开始应验使用，到下一个冬至日复还，其间阴阳、冷热、风雨的占验就产生了。
English: According to the sixtieth law of the corresponding period, the yellow bell began to be used from the day of the winter solstice, and returned to the next winter solstice day, during which the yin and yang, hot and cold, and wind and rain occurred.

古文：于以检摄群音，考其高下，苟非革木之声，则无不有所合。《虞书》曰 律和声，此之谓也。 
现代文：是以规范各种音乐，考校它们的高低，如果不是皮革或木质乐器的演奏，则没有不相合的。《虞书》所说 律和声 ，讲得就是这个道理。 
English: It is to standardize all kinds of music, examine their high and low, and if it is not the performance of leather or wooden instruments, then there is no incompatibility.

古文：京房又曰： 竹声不可以度调，故作准以定数。
现代文：京房又说： 竹管的音高不好调得准确，所以作准器来确定音律的数据。
English: Kyofusa also said: The pitch of the bamboo pipe is difficult to adjust accurately, so the calibrator is used to determine the rhythm data.

古文：准之状如瑟，而长丈，十三弦，隐间九尺，以应黄钟之律九寸。
现代文：准的形状像瑟，长一丈，张十三弦，有效弦长九尺，与黄钟律九寸对应。
English: The corresponding shape is like a serif, the length is one meter, the tension is thirteen strings, and the effective string is nine feet long, corresponding to the yellow bell law of nine inches.

古文：中央一弦，下有画分寸，以为六十律清浊之节。 
现代文：中央的一根弦下面，刻画有分寸记号，那是六十律高低音的标识。 
English: At the bottom of the central string, there is a measure mark, which is the mark of the sixty-law high and low tone.

古文：房言律详于歆所奏，其术施行于史官，候部用之，文多不悉载。
现代文：京房对律的讨论比刘歆的奏文详备，其相生方法由职掌天时星历的官员实施，负责占卜吉凶的部门使用，其内容太多不全部记载。
English: The discussion on the laws of the Jing Fang is more detailed than Liu Xuan's report, and the method of its birth is implemented by the officials in charge of the celestial calendar, and is used by the departments responsible for divining the auspicious and inauspicious. Its contents are too many to be recorded in full.

古文：截管为律，吹以考声，列以效气，道之本也。
现代文：截竹管定律，吹律管考校乐音，将律管排列起来候气，这是道的根本。
English: Cut bamboo tube law, blowing the rhythm tube to test the school music sound, the rhythm tube will be arranged to wait for the wind, this is the foundation of the road.

古文：术家以其声微而体难知，其分数不明，故作准以代之。
现代文：古代掌管律历的人知道律管的微小音高变化，其长度难以确知，尺寸不明确，所以作了准器来代替它们。
English: The people in charge of the ancient rhythms knew that the rhythms of the rhythms of the rhythms of the rhythms of the rhythms of the rhythms of the rhythms of the rhythms of the rhythms of the rhythms of the rhythms of the rhythms of the rhythms of the rhythms of the rhythms of the rhythms of the rhythms.

古文：准之声明暢易达，分寸又粗，然弦以缓急清浊，非管无以正也。
现代文：准器的音高明确顺畅易于通晓，其分寸刻画明显，但由于弦的张力松紧而造成音的高低偏差，没有律管来校定又难以标准。
English: The pitch of the sight is clear, smooth and easy to understand, and its minute mark is obvious. However, due to the tight tension of the strings, the pitch deviation is caused, and it is difficult to calibrate and standardize without a regulator.

古文：均其中弦，令与黄钟相得，案画以求诸律，则无不如数而应者矣。
现代文：调定它的中央一弦，使其与黄钟律管音高相同，然后按刻画求得各律弦长，其音高则都能够如数而应。
English: Adjust its central string so that it is the same pitch as the yellow bell-tuned pipe, and then find the length of each string according to the character, and its pitch can correspond to the number.

古文：《续汉志》具载其六十律准度数，其相生之次与《吕览》、《淮南》同。
现代文：《续汉志》全部记载了六十律在准器上的度数，它们相生的顺序与《吕览》、《淮南》一样。
English: "Continuation of the Han Dynasty" all recorded the power of the sixty laws on the sight, and the order of their occurrence is the same as "Luzhang" and "Huainan."

古文：汉章帝元和元年，待诏候钟律殷肜上言： 官无晓六十律以准调音者。
现代文：汉章帝元和元年，待诏官候钟律的殷肜上奏说： 朝中已没有人能懂得用准器来调定六十律的方法。
English: Emperor Zhang of the Han Dynasty and the first year of the year, waiting for the official to wait for the bell to ring, said: No one in the DPRK has been able to understand the method of using the sight to adjust the rule of sixty.

古文：故待诏严崇具以准法教子男宣，原召宣补学官，主调乐器。 
现代文：而待韶严崇将用准器调律的方法教给了他的儿子严宣，希望征召严宣补为学官，负责调校乐器。 
English: While waiting, Yan Chong taught his son Yan Xuan the method of tuning with a tuning fork, hoping to recruit Yan Xuan as a scholar, responsible for tuning musical instruments.

古文：诏曰： 崇子学审晓律，别其族，协其声者，审试。
现代文：皇帝的诏书说： 严崇的儿子如确实知晓音律，分辨它们的类别，调协它们的音高，应予测试。
English: The emperor's edict said: "The sons of Yan Chong should be tested if they really know the musical rhythms, distinguish their categories, and harmonize their pitches.

古文：不得依托父学，以聋为聪。
现代文：不能依托父亲的学问，以不辨音高为聪敏。
English: You can't rely on your father's learning to be smart.

古文：声微妙，独非莫知，独是莫晓。
现代文：音律微妙，但难道就再没有了解它的人，掌握它的人了吗。
English: The melody is subtle, but are there no longer people who understand it, master it?

古文：以律错吹，能知命十二律不失一，乃为能传崇学耳。 
现代文：将十二律序列错开吹奏，凡能将各律准确判断，不错一律的人，才可以接传严崇的学位。 
English: Anyone who can accurately judge and correctly play the sequence of twelve melodies can pass on a highly respected degree.

古文：试宣十二律，其二中，其四不中，其六不知何律，宣遂罢。
现代文：测试严宣十二律，其中二律辨别准确，四律不精，有六律竟不能判别为什么律，严宣于是不能补为学官。
English: In the test, Yan Xuan had twelve rules, of which two were accurate, four were not, and six could not be determined. Therefore, Yan Xuan could not be appointed as a scholar.

古文：自此律家莫能为准。
现代文：从此以后律学家都不能调理准器了。
English: Since then, jurists have been unable to adjust their sights.

古文：灵帝熹平六年，东观召典律者太子舍人张光等问准意，光等不知，归阅旧藏，乃得其器。
现代文：熹平六年，灵帝在东观召见主管音律的太子舍人张光等人，询问准器的道理，张光等人均不知其意，回去查看所藏，才找到了它。
English: Six years later, Lingdi summoned Zhang Guang and others in Dongguan, the prince who was in charge of the music, to inquire about the reason for the standard. Zhang Guang and others did not know what to do, went back to check the collection, and found it.

古文：形制如房书，犹不能定其弦缓急。
现代文：其形制就像京房所说的那样，但仍不能确定弦音的高低。
English: Its shape is just as Kyofusa said, but it is still not possible to determine the pitch of the string.

古文：音，不可书以晓人，知之者欲教而无从，心达者体知而无师，故史官能辨清浊者遂绝。
现代文：于是，音律问题不能够总结出来让人了解，懂一些音律道理的人想着教授没有根据，心裹明白的人能够体察它却没有表达的器物，史宫中能够辨别音律高低的人已经没有了。
English: As a result, the problem of musical rhythm cannot be summed up so that people can understand it. People who understand some principles of musical rhythm think that there is no basis for teaching, and people who have a clear mind can experience it but do not express it. In the palace of history, there are no longer people who can distinguish the high and low of musical rhythm.

古文：其可以相传者，唯候气而已。
现代文：而可以相传的内容，衹剩下候气了。
English: But the content that can be passed on to others, that's what's left.

古文：汉末纷乱，亡失雅乐。
现代文：汉末战乱纷纷，雅乐散失亡佚。
English: At the end of the Han Dynasty, wars broke out one after another, and the aristocracy died out.

古文：魏武时，河南杜夔精识音韵，为雅乐郎中，令铸铜工柴玉铸钟，其声均清浊多不如法，数毁改作，玉甚厌之，谓夔清浊任意，更相诉白于魏武王。
现代文：魏武帝时，河南杜夔精通音律，官拜雅乐郎中，命令铸铜工柴玉铸钟，钟的音律高低经常不合规范，数次毁掉重铸，柴玉十分厌烦，就说杜夔任意决断音的高低，并连续向魏武王诉说。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wu of Wei, Du Juan of Henan, who was well versed in musical rhythms and was a high-ranking court musician, ordered the bronze worker Chai Yu to cast a bell. The pitch of the bell was often not up to standard, and it was destroyed and recast several times. Chai Yu was very bored. He said that Du Juan arbitrarily decided the pitch of the bell, and he continuously told this to King Wu of Wei.

古文：魏武王取玉所铸钟杂错更试，然后知夔为精，于是罪玉。
现代文：魏武王将柴玉所铸的钟拿来交错校验，方知杜夔的见解是精确的，于是降罪于柴玉。
English: King Weiwu took the bell cast by Chaiyu for interlaced calibration. He knew that Du Yao's opinion was accurate, so he sentenced Chaiyu.

古文：泰始十年，中书监荀勖、中书令张华出御府铜竹律二十五具，部太乐郎刘秀等校试，其三具与杜夔及左延年律法同，其二十二具，视其铭题尺寸，是笛律也。
现代文：泰始十年，中书监苟勖、中书令张华出示宫廷所藏铜、竹律管二十五支，令太乐郎刘秀等校验，其中三支舆杜夔及左延年的律法相符，另外二十二支，根据铭题尺寸判断，是笛律。
English: In the 10th year of the Tai Shi era, the Censors Gou Qi and the Censors Zhang Hua brought out 25 bronze and bamboo rhythms from the court collection, and had them checked by the Tai Le Lang Liu Xiu and others. Among them, three of the cuckoo rhythms matched the laws of Zuo Yan Nian, and the other 22 rhythms were flute rhythms, judging by the size of the inscription.

古文：问协律中郎将列和，辞： 昔魏明帝时，令和承受笛声以作此律，欲使学者别居一坊，歌咏讲习，依此律调。
现代文：问协律中郎将列和，他告知： 从前魏明帝时，让和继承了笛的音高，做成这套律管，以使学乐的人另居一处时，歌唱练习，依此律规范音调。
English: When he asked the assistant director of music to list the scales of the flute, he told him: In the time of Emperor Wei Ming, the director of music inherited the pitch of the flute and made this set of scales, so that when people who study music live in different places, they can practice singing and standardize the tone according to this scale.

古文：至于都合乐时，但识其尺寸之名，则丝竹歌咏，皆得均合。
现代文：至于全体合乐时，祇要识得律名尺寸，则器乐歌唱，都能合调。
English: As for the whole ensemble, it is only necessary to know the nominal size of the chorus, then the instrumental singing can be in tune.

古文：歌声浊者用长笛长律，歌声清者用短笛短律。
现代文：歌声低沉时用长笛长律，歌声高昂时用短笛短律。
English: When the singing voice is low, the flute flute is used, and when the singing voice is high, the piccolo piccolo is used.

古文：凡弦歌调张清浊之制，不依笛尺寸名之，则不可知也。 
现代文：大凡弦歌调弦的高低规范，不依照笛律尺寸，则不知如何调准。 
English: If you don't follow the size of the melody, you won't know how to tune the flute.

古文：勖等奏： 昔先王之作乐也，以振风荡俗，飨神祐贤，必协律吕之和，以节八音之中。
现代文：荀勖等奏言： 从前先王作乐，为了移易风俗，祭献神灵，保佑贤明，一定要使律吕谐和，用其规范各种乐器。
English: Zou et al. said: In the past, the previous king made music. In order to change customs, sacrifice gods, and bless sages, he must make the rules harmonious and use it to standardize all kinds of musical instruments.

古文：是故郊祀朝宴，用之有制，歌奏分献，清浊有宜。
现代文：所以郊祀朝宴的用乐，都有一定的乐制，歌唱和奏乐各有次序，音律的高低也都相适宜。
English: Therefore, the music for the suburban worship morning banquet has a certain musical system, the singing and the music have their own order, and the pitch of the melody is also appropriate.

古文：故曰 五声、十二律还相为宫 ，此经传记籍可得知者也。
现代文：经传记载所谓 五声、十二律旋相为宫 ，于此可以得到了解。
English: According to historical records, the so-called five-voice, twelve-rhythm melody is a palace, and this can be solved.

古文：如和对辞，笛之长短无所象则，率意而作，不由曲度。考以正律，皆不相应；吹其声均，多不谐合。
现代文：像列和所告知的那样，笛的长短没有法度规范，不根据曲调的要求，随意而作，用标准的律管校验，都不能相应和；吹出的乐调，也多不谐合。
English: As reported by Lianhe, there is no legal standard for the length of the flute, it is not made according to the requirements of the tune, it is made arbitrarily, and it cannot be matched with a standard pipe checker; the tone that is blown out is also more discordant.

古文：又辞 先师传笛，别其清浊，直以长短。工人裁制，旧不依律。 是为作笛无法。
现代文：还说 从前老师传下来的笛子，径直以长短分别音阶高低，工人制作时，原不依照律管，可见其作笛并不规范。
English: He also said that the flutes handed down by the former teacher were made according to the length of the flute and the pitch of the scale. When the workers were making them, they did not follow the rules. It can be seen that their flute making was not standardized.

古文：而和写笛造律，又令琴瑟歌咏，从之为正，非所以稽古先哲，垂宪于后者也。
现代文：而列和模仿笛音造律，又让演奏乐器和歌唱的人当作正律遵从，这并不是考察古代先哲的学问，并给后人垂示法则的作法。
English: It is not the way to study the knowledge of ancient philosophers and teach the rules to future generations, but to arrange and imitate the flute to make the rules, and to make the musicians and singers follow them as if they were the right rules.

古文：谨条牒诸律，问和意状如左。
现代文：谨将诸律条例，及询问列和的内容记录如下。
English: I would like to record the contents of the various laws and regulations, and the sum of inquiries as follows.

古文：及依典制，用十二律造笛象十二枚，声均调和，器用便利。讲肄弹击，必合律吕，况乎宴飨万国，奏之庙堂者哉？
现代文：依照典章制度。用十二律造合乎律法的十二笛，声均调和，使用便利，讲论练习、弹奏表演，都能合于律吕，更何况用于宴飨万国和祭祀于庙堂的音乐呢?
English: According to the legal code system, using the twelve rules to make the twelve flute rhythms that conform to the law, the sound is evenly harmonized, the use is convenient, the lecture practice, the playing performance can all conform to the law, not to mention the music used for the banquet of all countries and the temple.

古文：虽伶夔旷远，至音难精，犹宜仪形古昔，以求厥衷，合乎经礼，于制为详。
现代文：虽说伶伦拄夔离我们久远了，最美妙的音乐难于精通了，但还是应当效法古制，以求其中正，并合乎经籍礼制，所以笛制理论颇详。
English: Although we are a long time away from the Qilian and Qianlong dynasties, and the most beautiful music is difficult to master, we should still follow the ancient system to ensure that it is correct and consistent with the scripture and ritual system, so the theory of flute system is quite detailed.

古文：若可施用，请更部笛工选竹造作，下太乐乐府施行。
现代文：如果可以施用，请再让笛工选竹制作，令太乐乐府施行。
English: If it can be used, please let the piper choose bamboo to make it, and let the Taile Music Office implement it.

古文：平议诸杜夔、左延年律可皆留，其御府笛正声、下徽各一具，皆铭题作者姓名，其余无所施用，还付御府毁。 
现代文：评议过的杜夔、左亘蝗律都可留下，帝王府库中留正声笛、下征笛各一支，都铭刻作者姓名，其余不用的，交还帝王府库销毁。 
English: The reviewed cuckoo and the left-winged locust can be left, and each upright flute left in the imperial treasury and the down-drawn flute are engraved with the author's name. The remaining ones that are not used will be returned to the imperial treasury for destruction.

古文：奏可。
现代文：皇帝准奏。
English: The Emperor assents.

古文：勖又问和： 作笛为可依十二律作十二笛，令一孔依一律，然后乃以为乐不？ 
现代文：苟勖又问列和： 作笛的方法可依十二律作十二支笛，让笛子的每一孔依照一律定音，然后用于演奏，可否? 
English: Gong Li also asked Lianhe: Can the method of making a flute be made according to the principle of making twelve flutes, so that each hole of the flute is uniformly tuned, and then used for playing?

古文：和辞： 太乐东厢长笛正声已长四尺二寸，今当复取其下徵之声。于法，声浊者笛当长，计其尺寸乃五尺有余，和昔日作之，不可吹也。
现代文：列和答道： 太乐束厢的长笛正声已有四尺二寸长，如今再取其下征调，按照规律，声低的笛应当长，计算其尺寸能有五尺多长，翅从前作过，已不能吹奏。
English: Queue and answer: The upright flute of the orchestra box is already four feet two inches long, and now it will be tuned down again. According to the law, the low-pitched flute should be long, and its size can be calculated to be more than five feet long. The wings have been made before, and can no longer be played.

古文：又，笛诸孔虽不校试，意谓不能得一孔辄应一律也。 
现代文：此外，笛的各孔因为没有校试，我认为不能够作到每一孔对应一律。 
English: In addition, I don't think it is possible to make every hole of the flute the same because there is no school test.

古文：案太乐四尺二寸笛正声均应蕤宾，以十二律还相为宫，推法下徵之孔当应律大吕。
现代文：太乐四尺二寸的正声笛对应蕤宾律，依照十二管旋相为宫的推法，其下征之孔当对应大吕一律。
English: Tai Le's four-foot-two-inch sine tone flute corresponds to the koto-bin rhythm, and according to the deduction of the twelve-pipe spinning phase as the palace, the holes below it should correspond to the big bow.

古文：大吕笛长二尺六寸有奇，不得长五尺余。
现代文：大吕笛长二尺六寸挂零，不得用五尺多长。
English: The large lute is 2'6" long, and must not exceed 5' in length.

古文：辄令太乐郎刘秀、邓昊等依律作大吕笛以示和，又吹七律，一孔一校，声皆相应。
现代文：于是让太乐郎刘秀、邓昊等依律作大吕笛给乏迪看，又吹七律，以笛每一孔对应一律校验，声音都能应合。
English: Therefore, let the Taileurs Liu Xiu, Deng Hao and others play the large lute according to the rhythms and show it to the teddy bear, and play seven rhythms, with each hole of the flute corresponding to a uniform check, and the sound can be matched.

古文：然后令郝生鼓筝，宋同吹笛，以为杂引、《相和》诸曲。
现代文：然后让郝生鼓筝，宋同吹笛，演奏杂引、《相和》等乐曲。
English: Then, let Zou Sheng play the koto, Song Tong play the flute, and play miscellaneous music, "Sohwa" and other music.

古文：和乃辞曰： 自和父祖汉世以来，笛家相传，不知此法，而令调均与律相应，实非所及也。 
现代文：列和答道： 和的祖上从谨世以来，家传作笛，不知这种方法，特别是让笛孔发音与律相对应，实在是我所不能的。 
English: Reiwa replied, "My family has been making flutes since my ancestors were still alive. I don't know how to do it, especially how to make the hole of the flute correspond to the tone. I really can't do it.

古文：郝生、鲁基、种整、硃夏皆与和同。
现代文：超生、垒茎、壁整、塞夏都与型塑有同感。
English: Super-raw, base stem, wall trim, and seat cushion all have the same feeling as molding.

古文：又问和： 笛有六孔，及其体中之空为七，和为能尽名其宫商角徵不？
现代文：又问乏迪： 笛有六孔，加上筒音为七声，乏回你能说出它们所发的宫、商、角、征等音名吗?
English: He also asked Bodhi: A flute has six holes, and with the reeds it has seven tones. Bodhi, can you tell me the names of the tones emitted by them, such as palace, merchant, horn, and call?

古文：孔调与不调，以何检知？ 
现代文：孔音是否调校准确，怎样检验呢? 
English: How to check whether the hole tone is accurately adjusted?

古文：和辞： 先师相传，吹笛但以作曲，相语为某曲当举某指，初不知七孔尽应何声也。
现代文：列和答言： 先师所传，吹笛衹是用来演奏曲调，如告诉你某曲调某音应抬起某个手指，最初并不知七孔分别对应于何律。
English: Column and answer: According to the previous teacher, the flute reed is used to play tunes. If you tell someone to play a certain tune or note, they should lift a certain finger. At first, they didn't know what the seven holes corresponded to.

古文：若当作笛，其仰尚方笛工依案旧像讫，但吹取鸣者，初不复校其诸孔调与不调也。 
现代文：说到作笛，那是仰仗官署中的笛工按照旧图制作完毕，拿来演奏的人不必重新校正各孔音高是否准确。 
English: When it comes to making the flute, it depends on the fact that the piper in the government office has finished making the flute according to the old map, and the person playing it does not have to recalibrate the pitch of each hole.

古文：案《周礼》调乐金石，有一定之声，是故造钟磬者先依律调之，然后施于厢悬。
现代文：《周礼》记述钟磬乐队，都需符合一定的音律规范，所以造钟磬的人先依律调协，然后才能在四厢乐悬中使用。
English: "Weekly Rituals" describes the carillon band, all of which need to meet a certain musical standard, so the person who makes the carillon must first adjust it according to the rhythm, and then it can be used in the Sifang Music Suspension.

古文：作乐之时，诸音皆受钟磬之均，即为悉应律也。
现代文：演奏过程中，其他乐器都能舆钟磬的音高相协，那就都算应律了。
English: During the performance, other musical instruments can match the pitch of the gong, so they are all considered to be in tune.

古文：至于飨宴殿堂之上，无厢悬钟磬，以笛有一定调，故诸弦歌皆从笛为正，是为笛犹钟磬，宜必合于律吕。
现代文：至于说在殿堂上的飨宴，没有四厢的钟磬乐悬，由于笛有固定的音高，所以弦歌等皆以笛音为音高准则，因此说笛就像钟磬，当然必定与律吕相合。
English: As for the banquet in the hall of fame, there is no four-chamber carillon music hanging, because the flute has a fixed pitch, so the string songs and so on all use the flute sound as the pitch criterion, so saying that the flute is like a carillon, of course, must be consistent with the rule.

古文：如和所对，直以意造，率短一寸，七孔声均，不知其皆应何律，调与不调，无以检正，唯取竹之鸣者，为无法制。
现代文：像列和所说径直以想象去制作，每孔位置递减一寸，七孔中相邻两孔问的音程距离均等，则不知它们对应于哪一律，音高准确与否也无从检验，仅从笛子发出的音来说，它们是不规范的。
English: As mentioned above, the straight lines are made by imagination, and the position of each hole is reduced by one inch. If two adjacent holes in the seven holes are of equal pitch, it is unknown which one they correspond to. It is also impossible to check whether the pitch is accurate or not. Only from the sound emitted by the flute, they are not standardized.

古文：辄部郎刘秀、邓昊、王艳、魏邵等与笛工参共作笛，工人造其形，律者定其声，然后器象有制，音均和协。
现代文：让太乐郎刘秀、邓昊、王艳、魏邵等与笛工一道研究制作，工人负责笛的形制，律家调定它们的音律，于是乐器形制有了规范，音均和谐了。
English: Let the musicians Liu Xiu, Deng Hao, Wang Yan, Wei Shao and others study and produce with the flute players. The workers are responsible for the shape of the flute, and the lawyers adjust their rhythm. As a result, the shape of the musical instrument has become standardized, and the sound is harmonious.

古文：又问和： 若不知律吕之义作乐，音均高下清浊之调，当以何名之？ 
现代文：又问列和： 如果不知律吕的道理而表演音乐，那么音律的高低，曲调的起伏，应当以什么来称呼? 
English: He also asked Lihe: If you don't know the principles of music and perform music, then what should the high and low of the rhythm and the ups and downs of the melody be called?

古文：和辞： 每合乐时，随歌者声之清浊，用笛有长短。
现代文：列和答道： 每当合奏之时，随着歌唱者声调的高低，选择长短不同的笛子。
English: Column and answer: Whenever there is an ensemble, choose a flute of different length according to the pitch of the singer's voice.

古文：假令声浊者用三尺二笛，因名曰此三尺二调也；声清者用二尺九笛，因名曰此二尺九调也。
现代文：假使声调低的人用三尺二的笛，则称之为三尺二调；声调高的人用二尺九的笛，则称之为二尺九调。
English: If a low-pitched person uses a flute with three feet two, it is called three feet two; if a high-pitched person uses a flute with two feet nine, it is called two feet nine.

古文：汉魏相传，施行皆然。 
现代文：漠魏以来代为相传，都是这样做的。 
English: It has been handed down from generation to generation since the Wei Dynasty.

古文：案《周礼》奏六乐，乃奏黄钟，歌大吕；乃奏太蔟，歌应钟，皆以律吕之义，纪歌奏清浊。
现代文：而《周礼》所记奏六乐，则是奏黄钟，歌大吕；奏太蔟，歌应钟，都是以律吕名称来表示歌唱和演奏的高低。
English: However, the six pieces of music recorded in the "Weekly Rituals" were played by Huang Zhong (黄鐘) and Gu DaLu (歌大吕) and Taishan (太) and Gu Ying Zhong (歌应钟), all of which used the name of RuLu to indicate the level of singing and playing.

古文：而和所称以二尺，三尺为名，虽汉魏用之，俗而不典。
现代文：列和所称用二尺、三尺为名，虽是汉魏以来沿用，但庸俗而不典雅。
English: Although the names "two shaku" and "three shaku" have been used since the Han and Wei dynasties, they are vulgar and inelegant.

古文：部郎刘秀、邓昊等以律作笛，三尺二寸者应无射之律，若宜用长笛，执乐者曰请奏无射；二尺八寸四分四厘应黄钟之律，若宜用短笛，执乐者曰请奏黄钟。
现代文：令太乐郎刘秀、邓昊等按律作笛，三尺二寸的笛对应无射律，如果适宜用长笛表演，主持奏乐的人就说请奏无射；二尺八寸四分四厘的笛对应黄钟律，如果适宜用短笛表演，主持奏乐的人就说请奏黄钟。
English: Liu Xiu, Deng Hao and others, who were the music directors, made the flute according to the rhythm. The flute of three feet and two inches corresponds to no shooting rhythm. If it is suitable to perform with a flute, the person conducting the music said please play without shooting. The flute of two feet, eight inches, four minutes and four percent corresponds to the yellow bell rhythm. If it is suitable to perform with a piccolo, the person conducting the music said please play the yellow bell.

古文：则歌奏之义，若合经礼，考之古典，于制为雅。
现代文：这样，歌唱与演奏就都合乎经籍礼制的要求，考校古代典章，乐制也更为典雅。
English: In this way, the singing and performance meet the requirements of the scripture and etiquette system, and the music system is also more elegant.

古文：《书》曰： 予欲闻六律、五声、八音，在治忽。 
现代文：《尚书》记载： 我希望听到以六律协和五声，播之于八音乐器的音乐来考察治乱。 
English: "Shang Shu" records: I would like to hear the music of the six-part harmony and five-part harmony played on eight musical instruments to investigate the control of chaos.

古文：《周礼》、《国语》载六律六同，《礼记》又曰 五声、十二律还相为宫 。
现代文：《周榔、《国语》记载了六律六同，《礼记》又说： 五声、十二律旋相为宫。 
English: "Zhou Xuan" and "National Language" recorded six rhythms and six rhythms, and "Li Ji" also said: Five voices and twelve rhythms are the palace.

古文：刘歆、班固撰《律历志》亦纪十二律，惟京房始创六十律。
现代文：刘歆、班固撰写的《律历志》也记载了十二律，衹有京房开创了六十律。
English: The "Law Calendar" written by Liu Xi and Ban Gu also recorded twelve laws, and Zou Youjingfang created sixty laws.

古文：至章帝时，其法己绝，蔡邕追纪其言，亦曰今无能为者。
现代文：到章帝时，其生律法已绝传，蔡邕虽然追记了一些内容，但也认为当今已无人能掌握它。
English: By the time of Emperor Zhang, his birth law had already been passed down. Although Cai Ye wrote down some content, he also believed that no one could master it today.

古文：依案古典及今音家所用，六十律者无施于乐。
现代文：考察古代及当今音乐家的实践，六十律没有被音乐表演所用。
English: Examining the practice of ancient and contemporary musicians, the Rule of Sixty has not been used in musical performance.

古文：谨依典记，以五声、十二律还相为宫之法，制十二笛象，记注图侧，如别，省图，不如视笛之孔，故复重作蕤宾伏孔笛。
现代文：现依照典籍所记，用五声、十二律旋相为宫的方法，制成十二笛图像，并在图侧加注，此外，察看图像不如考察笛的音孔，所以又重作蕤宾伏孔笛。
English: Now, in accordance with the method described in the classics, using the five-voice, twelve-rhythm-spin-phase-for-palace method, twelve flute images are made and annotated on the side of the picture. In addition, inspecting the image is not as good as examining the flute's sound hole, so it is re-made.

古文：其制云：
现代文：其形制为：
English: Its shape is:

古文：黄钟之笛，正声应黄钟，下徵应林钟，长二尺八寸四分四厘有奇。
现代文：黄钟之笛，正声对应黄钟律，下征对应林钟律，长二尺八寸四分四厘挂零。
English: The flute of the yellow bell, the positive tone corresponds to the yellow bell rhythm, the lower tone corresponds to the forest bell rhythm, the length is two feet eight inches and four minutes and four percent.

古文：其宫声正而不倍，故曰正声。
现代文：正声调指法，以黄钟为宫，姑洗为角，笛的全闭音孑发音为姑洗，所以以角音长度的四倍为黄钟笛的长度。
English: The fingering of the positive tone is based on the yellow bell as the palace and the gong as the horn, and the fully closed tone of the flute is the gong, so the length of the yellow bell flute is four times the length of the horn.

古文：正声调法：黄钟为宫，第一孔也。应钟为变宫，第二孔也。
现代文：它发的宫声居中音区为正，不属于低音区的倍声，因而称作正声。正声调的指法：黄钟为宫。应钟为变宫，第二孔。
English: The palace sound it emits is positive in the midrange, and is not an overtone in the low range, so it is called a positive tone. How to indicate a positive tone: the yellow bell is the palace. The bell is the changing palace, the second hole.

古文：南吕为羽，第三孔也。
现代文：南吕为羽，第三孔。
English: South ridge is the feather, the third hole is the top.

古文：林钟为徵，第四孔也。
现代文：林钟为征，第四孔。
English: Lin Zhong is the champion, and the fourth hole is up.

古文：蕤宾为变徵，第五附孔也。
现代文：蕤宾为变征，第五附孔。
English: Yibin is the variation, and the fifth appended hole is the climax.

古文：姑洗为角，笛体中声。
现代文：姑洗为角，闭合笛上所有按音孔所发之音。
English: Gucha is a horn, which closes all the sound holes on the flute.

古文：太蔟为商。
现代文：太蔟为商。
English: Taiko is a merchant.

古文：笛后出孔也。
现代文：笛后所开孔。
English: The hole opened after the whistle.

古文：商声浊于角，当在角下，而角声以在体中，故上其商孔，令在宫上，清于宫也。
现代文：商声低于角声，当在角音的下方，而角声已在音孔全闭的筒音中，所以祇能在上端确定商孔，让它比宫音高。
English: Merchant tone is lower than horn tone, it should be below the horn tone, and the horn tone is already in the tube tone with the sound hole completely closed, so it is only possible to determine the merchant hole at the upper end and make it higher than the palace tone.

古文：然则宫商正也，余声皆倍也；是故从宫以下，孔转下转浊也。
现代文：然而宫商都是中音区的正声，其余各声为低音区的倍声；所以从宫孔以下孑位越来越向笛体下方，音也转入低音区。
English: However, the palace merchants are all positive voices in the midrange, and the remaining voices are all overtones in the low range; therefore, from below the palace orifice, the gong is more and more below the flute body, and the sound is also transferred to the low range.

古文：此章记笛孔上下次第之名也。
现代文：这一段记述笛子上下的顺序名称。
English: This paragraph describes the sequential names of the flute up and down.

古文：下章说律吕相生，笛之制也。
现代文：下一段说律吕相生，笛的律制。
English: The next paragraph says that the laws of music and the laws of the flute are interrelated.

古文：正声调法，黄钟为宫。
现代文：正声调律法，黄钟为宫。
English: The law is in the right tone, and the yellow bell is the palace.

古文：作黄钟之笛，将求宫孔，以始洗及黄钟律，从笛首下度之，尽二律之长而为孔，则得宫声也。
现代文：作黄钟笛，要求宫声音孔，用姑洗律和黄钟律的长度，从笛首吹孔处往下度量，在黄钟律与姑洗律长度之和处开孔，则为宫孔。
English: To make a yellow bell flute, the palace sound hole is required, using the length of the yellow bell and the yellow bell, measured from the blowing hole of the flute, and the hole is made at the sum of the length of the yellow bell and the yellow bell, which is the palace hole.

古文：宫生徵，黄钟生林钟也。
现代文：宫生征，黄钟生林钟。
English: Gong Shengzheng, Huang Zhong Shenglin Zhong.

古文：以林钟之律从宫孔下度之。尽律作孔，则得徵声也。
现代文：用林钟律之长从宫孔往下度量，满林钟律长处开孑，则为征孔。
English: Using the length of the forest bell curve to measure from the palace hole downwards, the place where the forest bell curve is long, is the detection hole.

古文：徵生商，林钟生太蔟也。
现代文：征生商，林钟生太蔟。
English: Lin Zhongsheng, a recruiter, is too shy.

古文：以太蔟律从徵孔上度之，尽律以为孔，则得商声也。
现代文：用人蔟律长从征孔往上方度量，满太蔟律长处开孔，则是商孔。
English: It is measured by using a man-made borehole from the borehole to the top. If a borehole is drilled at the borehole, it is a merchant borehole.

古文：商生羽，太蔟生南吕也。
现代文：商生羽，太蔟生南吕。
English: Shang Shou Yu, Taibing Shou Nanlu.

古文：以南吕律从商孔下度之，尽律为孔，则得羽声也。
现代文：用南吕律长从商孔向下方度量，满南吕律长处开孔，则是羽孔。
English: Measure from the merchant hole downwards with the South Lvlong, and the hole at the South Lvlong is the feather hole.

古文：羽生角，南吕生姑洗也。
现代文：羽生角，南吕生姑洗。
English: Hanyu Cape, South Lv Sheng Gu Zai.

古文：以姑洗律从羽孔上行度之，尽律而为孔，则得角声也。
现代文：用姑洗律长从羽孔向上度量，满姑洗律长处开孔，则是角孑。
English: Measure from the feather hole upwards using the length of the socket. If the socket is full and a hole is drilled at the length of the socket, it is the angle of the socket.

古文：然则出于商孔之上，吹笛者左手所不及也。
现代文：然而它在商孔的上方，吹笛者左手已按不到了。
English: However, it is above the merchant's hole, and the piper's left hand cannot reach it.

古文：从羽孔下行度之，尽律而为孔，亦得角声，出于商附孔之下，则吹者右手所不逮也，故不作角孔。
现代文：从羽孑向下方度量，满姑洗律长处开孔，也能得到角孔，但它在商附孔之下，吹笛的人右手又顾及不上了，所以不开角孔。
English: If you measure downwards from the feather duster, you can also get a horn hole by drilling a hole in the long part of the flute, but it is below the merchant's hole, and the right hand of the flute player cannot reach it, so it does not open the horn hole.

古文：推而下之，复倍其均，是以角声在笛体中，古之制也。
现代文：向下推算，再低一个八度，那就是音孔全闭的筒音所发的角音了，这是古已有之的规范。
English: Extrapolated downwards, one octave lower, it is the horn sound emitted by a fully closed sound hole, which is an ancient norm.

古文：音家旧法，虽一倍再倍，但令均同，适足为唱和之声，无害于曲均故也。
现代文：音律家这种旧的开孔办法，虽然已低了两个八度，但它们音高的框架没变，刚好适用于唱和的音乐表演，丝毫无损于曲调的表现力。
English: Although the old method of opening the holes of the tuning fork has been lowered by two octaves, the framework of their pitch has not changed, which is just suitable for singing and musical performance, and does not detract from the expressiveness of the tune.

古文：《国语》曰，匏竹利制，议宜，谓便于事用从宜者也。角生变宫，姑洗生应钟也。
现代文：国语》称，笙箫类乐器音律便于协和规范，这个说法是适宜的，也就是说它们易于运用变通的办法解决问题。角生变宫，姑洗生应钟。
English: "Chinese Language" said that the tunes of cymbals are convenient for harmonic norms, which is appropriate, that is to say, they are easy to use alternative methods to solve problems.

古文：上句所谓当为角孔而出于商上者，墨点识之，以应钟律。从此点下行度之，尽律为孔，则得变宫之声也。
现代文：上句所说当为角孔而出于商孔上方的音孔，以墨点标识，用应钟律长从这一点向下度量，满应钟律长处开孔，就是变宫孔。
English: As mentioned in the previous sentence, if it is a horn hole and comes out of the sound hole above the merchant hole, it is marked with an ink dot, and measured from this point downward with the bell-shaped length. If the hole is opened at the bell-shaped length, it is a metamorphic hole.

古文：变宫生变徵，应钟生蕤宾也。
现代文：变宫生变征，应钟生蕤宾。
English: With the changing of the signs of confinement, it is time for the bell to ring.

古文：以蕤宾律从变宫下度之，尽律为孔，则得变徵之声。
现代文：用蕤宾律长从变宫孔向下方度量，满蕤宾律长处开孔，则是变征孔。
English: Measure from the variable uterine foramen downwards using the longitudinal length of the umbilicus, and open the hole where the longitudinal length of the umbilicus is full, which is the variable uterine foramen.

古文：十二笛之制，各以其宫为主，相生之法，或倍或半，其便事用，例皆一也。
现代文：十二笛的制作，各笛分别以它的宫音为主，相生的办法或低八度或高八度，以其易于变通为准，道理是一样的。
English: The reason is the same for the production of twelve flutes, each of which is based on its imperial tone, and the method of crossbreeding is either low octave or high octave, depending on its ease of flexibility.

古文：下徵调法：林钟为宫，第四孔也。本正声黄钟之徵。
现代文：下征调指法：林钟为宫，本来是正声黄钟宫音阶的征音。
English: Lower register fingering: Lin Zhong for Gong, originally the positive tone of the Huang Zhong Gong scale.

古文：徵清，当在宫上，用笛之宜，倍令浊下，故曰下徵。
现代文：征声高，在宫声上方，由于笛孔上的变通办法，取其下方低八度的征声，所以称下征。
English: The call is high, at the top of the palace sound, because of the workaround on the flute hole, take the call of the lower octave below it, so it is called the lower call.

古文：下徵更为宫者，《记》所谓 五声，十二律还相为宫 也。然则正声清，下徵为浊也。
现代文：下征声代替了宫声的地位，正是《记》所说的 五声、十二律旋相为宫 然而正声调音区高，下征调音区低。
English: The lower consonant replaced the status of the palatal consonant, and it was the five-voice, twelve-melody melody that was the palatal consonant, as described in the Records of the Grand Historian. However, the positive tone has a high tuning area, while the lower consonant has a low tuning area.

古文：南吕为商，第三孔也。
现代文：南吕为商，第三子乙。
English: Nan Lv was a merchant, the third son of B.

古文：本正声黄钟之羽，今为下徵之商也。
现代文：本是正声调黄钟为宫音阶的羽声，现为下征音阶的商声。
English: Originally, the sound of the yellow bell in the positive tone was the feather sound of the palace scale, but now it is the commercial sound of the lower pitch scale.

古文：应钟为角，第二孔也。
现代文：应钟为角，第二孔。
English: The second hole is a bell-shaped corner.

古文：本正声黄钟之变宫，今为下徵之角也。
现代文：本是正声调黄钟为宫音阶的变宫，现为下征调的角声。
English: Originally, it was the changing palace of the positive tone yellow bell for the palace scale, and now it is the horn sound of the descending tone.

古文：黄钟为变徵，下徵之调，林钟为宫，大吕当为变徵，而黄钟笛本无大吕之声，故假用黄钟以为变徵也。
现代文：黄钟为变征，下征调，林钟为宫，大吕应为变征，而黄钟笛原本没有大吕的音位，所以用黄钟音孔代替变征。
English: The yellow bell is the variation, the downbeat is the key, the forest bell is the palace, and the big lute is the variation, but the yellow bell flute originally did not have the tone of the big lute, so the yellow bell sound hole was used instead of the variation.

古文：假用之法，当为变徵之声，则俱发黄钟及太蔟、应钟三孔。
现代文：其演奏方法是，发变征声时，将黄钟、太蔟、应钟三孔一起打开。
English: The performance method is to open the three holes of the yellow bell, the big bell, and the bell together when the call for change sounds.

古文：黄钟应浊而太蔟清，大吕律在二律之间，俱发三孔而徵硙蒦之，则得大吕变徵之声矣。
现代文：黄钟应低而太蔟应高，大吕在二律之间，三孔都打开，而稍微快速半按黄钟孔，就能得到变征声大吕的音高。
English: The yellow bell should be low and the cymbal should be high. The big lute should be between the two rhythms, with all three holes open. If you press the yellow bell hole a little faster, you can get the pitch of the variable tone big lute.

古文：诸笛下徵调求变徵之法，皆如此也。
现代文：其他各笛下征调求变征声的方法，都是这样。
English: This is the case with all other methods of changing the tone under each flute.

古文：太蔟为徵，笛后出孔。
现代文：太蔟为征，笛后出孔。
English: The cymbals are played, and a hole is drilled after the whistle.

古文：本正声之商，今为下徵之徵也。
现代文：本正声调的商声，现在是下征调的征声。
English: The commercial voice of the main tone is now the voice of the lower tone.

古文：姑洗为羽，笛体中翕声。
现代文：姑洗为羽，笛孔全闭的筒音。
English: The sound of a flute with all its holes completely closed.

古文：本正声之角，今为下徵之羽。
现代文：本是正声调的角声，现在是下征调的羽声。
English: Originally, it was the horn sound of the positive tone, and now it is the feather sound of the descending tone.

古文：蕤宾为变宫。
现代文：蕤宾为变宫。
English: 宾为变宮.

古文：附孔是也。
现代文：附孔。
English: Attached hole.

古文：本正声之变徵也，今为下徵之变宫也。
现代文：本是正声调的变征，现在是下征调的变宫了。
English: Originally, it was a variation of the positive tone, but now it is a variation of the negative tone.

古文：然则正声之调，孔转下转浊，下徵之调，孔转上转清也。
现代文：然而在正声调，音孔在下方，音区也低；在下征调，音孔则向上，音区也高了。
English: However, in the positive tone, the sound hole is at the bottom and the range is low; in the negative tone, the sound hole is up and the range is high.

古文：清角之调：以姑洗为宫，即是笛体中翕声。
现代文：清角之调指法：以姑洗为宫，就是笛孔全闭的筒音。
English: The fingering for the tuning of "Clear Angle": With "Gucchi" as the palace, it is the sound of the reed with the flute hole completely closed.

古文：于正声为角，于下徵为羽。
现代文：在正声调是角音，在下微调是羽音。
English: In the positive tone is the horn sound, in the lower fine tuning is the feather sound.

古文：清角之调乃以为宫，而哨吹令清，故曰清角。
现代文：在清角之调则是宫音，用超吹的方法让它高八度，所以称清角。
English: In the tuning of the clear angle, it is the palace sound, using the method of super blowing to make it high octave, so it is called the clear angle.

古文：惟得为宛诗谣俗之曲，不合雅乐也。
现代文：衹是用于小诗和谣俗之曲的音乐，不合乎雅乐的用乐规范。
English: Gong is the music used for poems and folk songs, which does not meet the standards of classical music.

古文：蕤宾为商，正也。
现代文：蕤宾为商，音高准确。
English: The guest is a merchant, the pitch is accurate.

古文：林钟为角，非正也。
现代文：林钟为角，音高不准。
English: Lin Zhong is a horn, the pitch is not allowed.

古文：南吕为变徵，非正也。
现代文：南昌为变征，音高不准确。
English: Nanchang is variable, pitch is not accurate.

古文：应钟为徵，正也。
现代文：应钟为征，音高准确。
English: In response to the clock, the pitch is accurate.

古文：黄钟为羽，非正也。
现代文：黄钟为羽，音高不准确。
English: The yellow bell is a feather, the pitch is not accurate.

古文：太蔟为变宫。
现代文：太蔟为变宫。
English: Taiko is the changing of the guard.

古文：非正也。
现代文：音高不准确。
English: Inaccurate pitch.

古文：清角之调，唯宫、商及徵与律相应，余四声非正者皆浊，一律哨吹令清，假而用之，其例一也。
现代文：清角之调，衹有宫、商、征舆律相应，音高准确，其余四声音高都偏低，一律用超吹办法让该音升高，所应律各音高均有变化，道理都一样。
English: In the clear-angle tuning, the gong has the palace, the merchant, and the choirmaster correspondingly, the pitch is accurate, and the remaining four sound heights are low, and the sound is raised by the super-blowing method, and the corresponding laws of each pitch are changed, and the reason is the same.

古文：凡笛体用律，长者八之，蕤宾、林钟也。
现代文：大凡确定笛体的长度以该笛的角声所应律律长为参照，较长的笛全长相当于它的角律律长的八倍，蕤宾笛、林钟笛就是这样。
English: The length of a flute body is generally determined by reference to the length of the melody that corresponds to the horn sound of the flute. The total length of a longer flute is equivalent to eight times the length of its melody, as is the case with the Yibin flute and the Lin bell flute.

古文：短者四之。
现代文：较短之笛的长度，相当各自角律律长的四倍。
English: The length of the shorter flute is four times the length of the respective melody.

古文：其余十笛，皆四角也。
现代文：其余十律所应笛都取各自角律的四倍。
English: The remaining ten ritsusho flute players all played four times their respective rhythms.

古文：空中实容，长者十六。
现代文：笛管的容积，是其角律容积的十倍。
English: The volume of a flute is ten times the volume of its horn.

古文：短笛竹宜受八律之黍也。
现代文：短笛竹管以容受其每律八倍的黍粒为宜。
English: It is recommended that the flute bamboo tube should be able to withstand eight times its normal force of sound.

古文：若长短大小不合于此，或器用不便声均法度之齐等也。
现代文：如果笛制长短大小舆此不合，则其他乐器不便以笛的音高为准。
English: If the length of the flute and the size of the cymbals do not match, then other musical instruments are inconvenient to the pitch of the flute.

古文：然笛竹率上大下小，不能均齐，必不得已，取其声均合。
现代文：然而竹管大多上大下小，管径不平均，这是不得已的，祇要取其声与律合即可。
English: However, most of the bamboo pipes are large and small, and the pipe diameter is not equal. This is a last resort, and it is only necessary to take its sound and rhythm.

古文：三宫，一曰正声，二曰下徵，三曰清角也。
现代文：三宫，一为正声，二为下征，三为清角。二十一变。
English: Three palaces, one for the positive tone, two for the downward march, three for the clear angle. Twenty-one changes.

古文：二十一变也。宫有七声，错综用之，故二十一变也。
现代文：每一宫均有七声，各为调首，交错使用，所以有二十一变。
English: Each palace has seven tones, each of which is the first tone, used intermittently, so there are twenty-one changes.

古文：诸笛例皆一也。
现代文：各笛的道理都一样如此。
English: This is the same for all flutes.

古文：伏孔四，所以便事用也。
现代文：伏孔有四，为了音高变通时使用。
English: There are four reverb holes, which are used for changing the pitch of the chorus.

古文：一曰正角，出于商上者也，二曰倍角，近笛下者也，三曰变宫，近于宫孔，倍令下者也；四曰变徵，远于徵孔，倍令高者也。
现代文：第一个伏孔为正角，在商孔上方；第二个伏孔为低八度的角音，近于音孔全闭的筒音；第三个伏孔为变宫，近于宫孔，属低八度内的变宫；第四个伏孔为变征，远于征孔，属高八度内的变征。
English: The first fovea is a right angle, above the meridian; the second fovea is a low octave horn, close to the sound hole of a fully closed cylinder; the third fovea is a metamorphosis, close to the sound hole, belonging to a low octave metamorphosis; the fourth fovea is a metamorphosis, far from the sound hole, belonging to a high octave metamorphosis.

古文：或倍或半，或四分一，取则于琴徽也。
现代文：或低或高八度，或再高八度，其比率与琴徽所示相同。
English: or low or high octave, or even higher octave, the ratio is the same as shown in the emblem.

古文：四者皆不作其孔，而取其度，以应退上下之法，所以协声均，便事用也。
现代文：四个伏孔都不实开，衹取其尺寸，以适应上下进退的开孔、发音需要，也就是适应使声均谐和，而变通音高的办法。
English: The four holes are not solidly open, and the size is taken by the horn to meet the opening and pronunciation needs of the up and down movement, that is, to adapt to the method of harmonizing the sound and changing the pass-through pitch.

古文：其本孔隐而不见，故曰伏孔也。
现代文：这些孔隐而不现，所以称作伏孔。
English: These holes are invisible, so they are called voids.

古文：大吕之笛，正声应大吕，下徵应夷则，长二尺六寸六分三厘有奇。
现代文：大吕之笛，正声应合大吕律，下征应合夷则律，长二尺六寸六分三厘挂零。
English: Great Lyu's flute, the positive tone should be in accordance with the Great Lyu Law, and the lower tone should be in accordance with the Yi Zi Law. It is two feet, six inches, six minutes and three minutes long.

古文：太蔟之笛，正声应太蔟，下徵应南吕，长二尺五寸三分一厘有奇。
现代文：太蔟之笛，正声应合太蔟律，下征应合南吕律，长二尺五寸三分一厘挂零。
English: Taiko's flute, the positive tone should be in accordance with Taiko's law, the lower tone should be in accordance with South Lyu's law, and the length is two feet, five inches, three-point-one percent.

古文：夹钟之笛，正声应夹钟，下徵应无射，长二尺四寸。
现代文：夹钟之笛，正声应合夹钟律，下征应合无射律，长二尺四寸。
English: The bell's whistle, the positive tone should be in accordance with the bell's rhythm, the lower tone should be in accordance with the no-shooting rhythm, two feet and four inches long.

古文：姑洗之笛，正声应姑洗，下徵应应钟，长二尺二寸三分三厘有奇。
现代文：姑洗之笛，正声应合姑洗律，下征应合应钟律，长二尺二寸三分三厘挂零。
English: The gushing flute, the positive tone should be in accordance with the gushing law, the lower tone should be in accordance with the bell law, and the length is two feet, two inches, three minutes and three percent.

古文：蕤宾之笛，正声应蕤宾，下徵应大吕，长三尺九寸九分五厘有奇。
现代文：蕤宾之笛，正声应合蕤宾律，下征应合大吕律，长三尺九寸九分五厘挂零。
English: Qibin's flute, the positive tone should be in accordance with the Qibin melody, the lower tone should be in accordance with the Great Lu melody, the length is three feet, nine inches, nine and a half percent hanging zero.

古文：变宫近宫孔，故倍半令下，便于用也。
现代文：变宫近于宫孔，所以其高低八度音都再低一个八度，便于使用。
English: The metamorphosis is closer to the foramen magnum, so its high and low octaves are one octave lower, making it easier to use.

古文：林钟亦如之一。
现代文：林钟之笛也一样。
English: The same goes for Lin Zhong's flute.

古文：林钟之笛，正声应林钟，下徵应太蔟，长三尺七寸九分七厘有奇。
现代文：林钟之笛，正声应合林钟律，下征应合太蔟律，长三尺七寸九分七厘挂零。
English: Lin Zhong's flute, the positive tone should be in accordance with Lin Zhong's law, and the lower tone should be in accordance with Taiyuan's law. It is three feet seven inches, nine minutes and seven minutes long.

古文：夷则之笛，正声应夷则，下徵应夹钟，长三尽六寸。
现代文：夷则之笛，正声应合夷则律，下征应合夹钟律，长三尺六寸。
English: The Yizi flute, with the positive tone corresponding to the Yizi melody and the negative tone corresponding to the clamped bell melody, is three feet and six inches long.

古文：变宫之法，亦如蕤宾，体用四角，故四分益一也。
现代文：变宫孔的确定，与蕤宾律相同，笛长用四倍的角音，所以用四分益一的方法。
English: To determine the diaphragm, the same as the cymbal, the flute uses four times the horn, so it uses the method of four points plus one.

古文：南吕之笛，正声应南吕，下徵姑洗，长三尺三寸七分有奇。
现代文：南吕之笛，正声应合南吕律，下征应合姑洗律，长三尺三寸七分挂零。
English: Nan Lv's flute, the positive tone should be in accordance with Nan Lv's law, the lower tone should be in accordance with Gu Lv's law, the length is three feet, three inches and seven minutes.

古文：无射之笛，正声应无射，下徵应中吕，长三尺二寸。
现代文：无射之笛，正声应合无射律，下征应合中吕律，长三尺二寸。
English: A flute with no shooting, the positive tone should be in accordance with the law of no shooting, the lower tone should be in accordance with the law of the middle, and the length is three feet and two inches.

古文：应钟之笛，正声应应钟，下徵应蕤宾，长二尺九寸九分六厘有奇。
现代文：应钟之笛，正声应合应钟律，下征应合蕤宾律，长二尺九寸九分六厘挂零。
English: According to the bell's whistle, the positive tone should be in accordance with the bell rhythm, the lower tone should be in accordance with the cymbal rhythm, the length is two feet nine inches and nine minutes and six percent hanging zero.

古文：五音十二律土音宫，数八十一，为声之始。
现代文：土音为宫，律数八十一，是诸音相生的起点。
English: The tone of the earth is the palace, the regular number eighty-one, is the starting point of all sounds.

古文：属土者，以其最浊，君之象也。
现代文：因为它最低，所以属土，是君主的象征。
English: Because it is the lowest, it belongs to the land and is a symbol of the monarch.

古文：季夏之气和，则宫声调。
现代文：夏季最后一个月的气平和，则宫声就谐和。
English: The atmosphere of the last month of summer is peaceful, and the sounds of the palace are harmonious.

古文：宫乱则荒，其君骄。
现代文：宫声紊乱则逸乐无度，君主骄横。
English: When the palace is in turmoil, there is boundless pleasure, and the monarch is arrogant.

古文：黄钟之宫，律最长也。
现代文：黄钟律为宫，是诸律中最长的。
English: The Yellow Bell Rhyme is the longest of all the rhymes.

古文：火音徵，三分宫去一以生，其数五十四。
现代文：火音为征，三分宫音的律数，去其一分而得。律数为五十四。
English: The fire sound is a sign, and the regular number of the three-pointed palace sound is the highest, and it is obtained by subtracting one point. The regular number is fifty-four.

古文：属火者，以其徵清，事之象也。
现代文：之所以属火，是因为征音较高，它也是事的象征。
English: The reason why it is fire is because it has a high consonant, and it is also a symbol of things.

古文：夏气和，则徵声调。
现代文：夏季之气平和，征声就谐和。
English: The atmosphere of summer is peaceful, and the call for applications is harmonious.

古文：徵乱则哀，其事勤也。
现代文：征声紊乱就会悲哀，事端也多有所发。
English: Disturbances in the collection of votes will be sad, and accidents are more likely to occur.

古文：金音商，三分徵益一以生，其数七十二。
现代文：金音为商，三分征音的律数，增其一分而得。律数为七十二。
English: The gold tone is the quotient, and the regular number of the three-part consonant is obtained by increasing it by one point. The regular number is 72.

古文：属金者，以其浊次宫，臣之象也。
现代文：之所以属金，是因为其音之低仅次于宫，是臣的象征。
English: The reason why it is gold is because its tone is second only to the palace, and it is a symbol of a vassal.

古文：秋气和，则商声调。
现代文：秋季之气平和，商声就谐和。
English: In autumn, the atmosphere is peaceful and commerce is harmonious.

古文：商乱则诐，其官坏也。
现代文：商声紊乱则风气不正，官员们都败坏。
English: When business is bad, morals are bad, and officials are corrupt.

古文：水音羽，三分商去一以生，其数四十八。
现代文：水音为羽，三分商声的律数去其一分而得。律数为四十八。
English: The water sound is a feather, and the regular number of the three-part consonant is obtained by subtracting one from it. The regular number is forty-eight.

古文：属水者，以为最清，物之象也。
现代文：之所以属水，是因为其音最高，是物的象征。
English: The reason why it belongs to water is because it has the highest pitch and is a symbol of things.

古文：冬气和，则羽声调。
现代文：冬季之气平和，羽声就谐和了。
English: The atmosphere of winter is peaceful, and the feathers are in harmony.

古文：羽乱则危，其财匮也。
现代文：羽声紊乱就会有危难，财政就匮乏。
English: If things get out of hand, there will be a crisis, and finances will be scarce.

古文：木音角，三分羽益一以生，其数六十四。
现代文：木音为角，三分羽声的律敷增其一分而得。律数为六十四。
English: The wooden sound is a horn, and the rhythm of the three-minute feather sound is increased by one minute. The number of beats is sixty-four.

古文：属木者，以其清浊中，人之象也。
现代文：之所以属木，是因为其音高低适中，是人的象征。
English: The reason why it is a tree is because its pitch is low and moderate, and it is a symbol of man.

古文：春气和，则角声调。
现代文：春季之气平和，角声就谐和。
English: The atmosphere of spring is peaceful, and the horns sound in harmony.

古文：角乱则忧，其人怨也。
现代文：角声紊乱了就会发生忧患，引起人们的怨愤。
English: Disturbance in the sound of the horn will cause distress and arouse people's resentment.

古文：凡声尊卑，取象五行，数多者浊，数少者清；大不过宫，细不过羽。
现代文：乐音有尊卑，以五行为参照，律敷多的声音低，律数少的声音高；敷大音低不过宫音，数小声高不过羽音。
English: There is a hierarchy of musical sounds, with reference to the five actions. The sound with more rhythms is lower, and the sound with fewer rhythms is higher; the sound with more rhythms is lower, but the sound with fewer rhythms is higher; the sound with more rhythms is lower, but the sound with more rhythms is higher; the sound with more rhythms is lower, but the sound with more rhythms is higher; the sound with more rhythms is lower, but the sound with more rhythms is higher, but the sound with fewer rhythms is higher, but the sound with fewer rhythms is higher.

古文：十一月，律中黄钟，律之始也，长九寸。
现代文：十一月，对应律为黄钟，这是十二律的开端，长九寸。
English: In November, the corresponding law is the yellow bell, which is the beginning of the twelve laws and is nine inches long.

古文：仲冬气至，则其律应，所以宣养六气九德也。
现代文：冬季第二月的气来了，该律则相应合，用以全面地培养六气和九功之德。
English: In the second month of winter, the qi comes, and this law is combined accordingly to comprehensively cultivate the six qi and nine meritorious virtues.

古文：班固三分损一，下生林钟。
现代文：班固的记载为其律三分损一，下生林钟。
English: The record of Ban Gu is one-third loss of its law, and the lower forest bell is up.

古文：十二月，律中大吕，司马迁未下生之律，长四寸二百四十三分寸之五十二，倍之为八寸二百四十三分寸之一百四。
现代文：十二月，对应律为大吕，司马迁记载的未位下生而得的律，长四又二百四十三分之五十二寸，二倍为八又二百四十三分之一百零四寸。
English: In December, the corresponding rite was the rite of the Great Lu, recorded by Sima Qian, who was not born to the throne, with a length of four and two hundred and forty-three fifty-two centimeters and a double of eight and two hundred and forty-three one hundred and four centimeters.

古文：季冬气至，则其律应，所以助宣物也。
现代文：冬季第三个月的气来了，该律则相应合，用来助阳气培养各种物类。
English: When qi comes in the third month of winter, this law is adjusted accordingly, and is used to help yang qi cultivate various species.

古文：三分益一，上生夷则；京房三分损一，下生夷则。
现代文：三分益一，上生夷则；京房的记载是三分损一，下生夷则。
English: A gain of three points is one, and an upper birth is one; the record of Beijing House is a loss of three points is one, and a lower birth is one.

古文：正月，律中太蔟，未上生之律，长八寸。
现代文：正月，对应律为太蔟，未位上生而得的律，长八寸。
English: In the first month of the year, the corresponding rite is Taiko, the rite of the unborn, eight centimeters long.

古文：孟春气至，则其律应，所以赞阳出滞也。
现代文：春季第一个月的气来了，该律就相应合，佐阳气离开滞积的状态。
English: When the qi of the first month of spring comes, the law will be correspondingly combined, and the qi of the sun will leave the state of stagnation.

古文：三分损一，下生南吕。
现代文：三分损一，下生南吕。
English: After losing one-third, Nanlu was born.

古文：二月，律中夹钟，酉下生之律，长三寸二千一百八十七分寸之一千六百三十一，倍之为七寸二千一百八十七分寸之一千七十五。
现代文：二月，对应律为夹钟，酉位下生而得的律，长三又二千一百八十七分之一千六百三十一寸，其二倍为七又二千一百八十七分之一千零七十五寸。
English: In February, the corresponding law is the pendulum, the law born under the yoke, the length is 3 1/2,187,1631 inches, and its double is 7 1/2,187,1075 inches.

古文：仲春气至，则其律应，所以出四隙之细也。
现代文：春季第二月的气来了，该律就会应合，并且能出四时之微气。
English: When the qi of the second month of spring comes, this law will be met, and the four-hour breeze will come out.

古文：三分益一，上生无射；京房三分损一，下生无射。
现代文：三分益一，上生无射；京房则用三分损一，下生无射。
English: The three-point gain is one, and there is no shot on the top; the Beijing House uses the three-point loss as one, and there is no shot on the bottom.

古文：三月，律中姑洗，酉上生之律，长七寸九分寸之一。
现代文：三月，对应律为姑洗，酉位上生而得的律，长七又九分之一寸。
English: In March, the corresponding rite is the baptism, the rite of birth, and the length is seven and one-ninth of an inch.

古文：季春气至，则其律应，所以修絜百物，考神纳宾也。
现代文：春季末一个月的气来了，该律就会应合，且百物整洁清净，可以用于祭神飨宾。
English: When the month of qi arrives at the end of spring, this law will be fulfilled, and all things will be neat and clean, and can be used to offer sacrifices to the gods.

古文：三分损一，下生应钟。
现代文：三分损一，下生应钟。
English: One loss in three minutes and it's game over.

古文：四月，律中中吕，亥下生之律，长三寸万九千六百八十三分寸之六千四百八十七，倍之为六寸万九千六百八十三分寸之万二千九百七十四。
现代文：四月，对应律为仲吕，亥位下生而得的律，长三又一万九千六百八十三分之六千四百八十七寸，其二倍为六又一万九千六百八十三分之一万二千九百七十四寸。
English: In April, the corresponding law is Zhonglu, the law born under the boar, the length is 3,19,683/6,487 cm, and the double is 6,19,683/1,29,744 cm.

古文：孟夏气至，则其律应，所以宣中气也。
现代文：夏季第一个月的气来了，该律就会应合，用以培养阳气。
English: When the qi of the first month of summer comes, this law will be met to cultivate yang qi.

古文：五月，律中蕤宾，亥上生之律，长六寸八十一分寸之二十六。
现代文：五月，对应律为蕤宾，亥位上生而得的律，长六又八十一分之二十六寸。
English: In May, the corresponding rite is the rite of the peacock, the rite of the boar, born in the position of the boar, with a length of twenty-six and a half inches.

古文：仲夏气至，则其律应，所以安静人神，献酬交酢也。
现代文：夏季第二个月的气来了，该律就会应合，它可以使神人静好，像宾主一样互相敬酒。
English: When the breath of the second month of summer comes, this law will be fulfilled. It can make the gods and mortals calm down and toast each other like guests.

古文：三分损一，下生大吕；京房三分益一，上生大吕。
现代文：三分损一，下生大吕；京房用三分益一，上生大吕。
English: A three-point loss is a big loss for the lower birth; a three-point gain for the upper birth is a big gain for the upper birth.

古文：六月，律中林钟，丑下生之律，长六寸。
现代文：六月，对应律为林钟，丑位下生而得的律，长六寸。
English: In June, the corresponding law is Lin Zhong, the law born under the ugly position, six inches long.

古文：季夏气至，则其律应，所以和展百物，俾莫不任肃纯恪也。
现代文：夏季末一个月的气来了，该律就会应合，它使得时务和顺，百事无伪，人们各任其事，并速获成功。
English: When the breath of a month comes at the end of summer, this law will be met. It makes the time harmonious, the best things are authentic, people do their own thing, and quickly succeed.

古文：三分益一，上生太蔟。
现代文：三分益一，上生太蔟。
English: Three-point gain one, upper-class too lazy.

古文：七月，律中夷则，丑上生之律，长五寸七百二十九分寸之四百五十一。
现代文：七月，对应律为夷则，丑位上生而得的律，长五又七百二十九分之四百五十一寸。
English: In July, the corresponding rite was that of the heathen, and the rite of those born to the lowest rank was the rite of those born to the highest rank, with a length of 5'729" x 451."

古文：孟秋气至，则其律应，所以咏歌九则，平百姓而无贷也。
现代文：秋季第一个月的气来了，该律就会应合，并可以咏歌九功之德，成百姓之志，使他们不疑惑。
English: When the qi of the first month of autumn comes, this law will be met, and it will be possible to sing the virtue of nine merits and become the people's aspiration, so that they do not doubt.

古文：三分损一，下生夹钟；京房三分益一，上生夹钟。
现代文：三分损一，下生夹钟；京房用三分益一，上生夹钟。
English: One-third loss, the next generation of the clock; Beijing House with one-third gain, the next generation of the clock.

古文：八月，律中南吕，卯下生之律，长五寸三分寸之一。
现代文：八月，对应律为南吕，卯位下生而得的律，长五又三分之一寸。
English: In August, the corresponding rite was Nan Lv, the rite of birth to the throne, with a length of five and one-third inches.

古文：仲秋气至，则其律应，所以赞阳秀也。
现代文：秋季第二个月的气来了，该律就会相应合，并辅佐万物的形成。
English: When the qi of the second month of autumn comes, this law will correspondingly coalesce and assist the formation of all things.

古文：三分益一，上生姑洗。
现代文：三分益一，上生姑洗。
English: A three-point gain is a one-point gain.

古文：九月，律中无射，卯上生之律，长四寸六千五百六十一分寸之六千五百二十四。
现代文：九月，对应律为无射，卯位上生而得的律，长四又六千五百六十一分之六千五百二十四寸。
English: In September, the corresponding law is no ejection, the law of the birth of the throne, and the length is four thousand and six thousand five hundred and sixty-four inches.

古文：季秋气至，则其律应，所以宣布哲人之令德，示人轨仪也。
现代文：秋季末一个月的气来了，该律就会相应合，并能宣布哲人的美德，昭示作人的规范。
English: When the month of qi arrives at the end of autumn, this law will be correspondingly fulfilled, and will be able to proclaim the virtues of philosophers and show the norms of being a person.

古文：三分损一，下生中吕；京房三分益一，上生中吕。
现代文：三分损一，下生中吕；京房用三分益一，上生中吕。
English: One-third loss, lower birth, middle rebirth; three-thirds gain, upper birth, middle rebirth.

古文：十月，律中应钟，巳下生之律，长四寸二十七分寸之二十。
现代文：十月，对应律为应钟，巳位下生而得的律，长四又二十七分之二十寸。
English: In October, the corresponding rite is the rite of the bell, the rite of the birth of the snake, and the length is twenty-four and twenty-sevenths inches.

古文：孟冬气至，则其律应，所以均利器用，俾应复也。
现代文：冬季第一个月的气来了，该律就会应合，且百器具备，有利于世事，百官器用，皆能恢复对应其礼的常态。
English: When the wind of the first month of winter comes, this law will be met, and with a hundred tools, it is beneficial to the world, and with a hundred official tools, everyone can restore the normal state of the corresponding ritual.

古文：三分益一，上生蕤宾。
现代文：三分益一，上生蕤宾。
English: One point for every three points, and you're out.

古文：淮南、京房、郑玄诸儒言律历，皆上下相生，至蕤宾又重上生大吕，长八寸二百四十三分寸之百四；夷则上生夹钟，长七寸千一百八十七分寸之千七十五；无射上生中吕，长六寸万九千六百八十三分寸之万二千九百七十四；此三品于司马迁、班固所生之寸数及分皆倍焉，余则并同。
现代文：淮南、京房、郑玄各位学者研究律历，都认为，上下相生到蕤宾律，又重复上生得大吕律，长八又二百四十三分之一百零四寸；夷则上生夹钟，长七又一千一百八十七分之一千零七十五寸；无射上生仲吕，长六又一万九千六百八十三分之一万二千九百七十四寸：这三次计算在司马迁、班固的记载中，均为所得之寸数乘以二的结果，其余律的相生办法则一样。
English: Huainan, Jingfang, and Zheng Xuan, all scholars who studied the rhythms of the calendar, believed that the upper and lower rhythms were interrelated to the rhythms of Xingbin, and the upper and lower rhythms were repeated to obtain the rhythms of Lv, with a length of 8'243"/104," the upper and lower rhythms were interrelated to obtain the rhythms of Lv, with a length of 7'11"187"/1075," and the upper and lower rhythms were interrelated to obtain the rhythms of Lv, with a length of 6'19"6"8"1/3"/12

古文：斯则泠州鸠所谓六间之道，扬沈伏，黜散越，假之为用者也。
现代文：那些泠州鸠所说的六间的文字，所谓发扬滞伏之气，丢弃激扬之情，都是假托的有用之辞。
English: Those six-syllable words spoken by Zhang Zhouqi, the so-called promotion of stagnation and abandonment of excitement, are all false and useful words.

古文：变通相半，随事之宜，赞助之法也。
现代文：而或倍或半的变通办法，则是因事而宜，丰富了生律的方法。
English: But the workaround of doubling or halving is a method that enriches the biological law, depending on the circumstances.

古文：凡音声之体，务在和均，益则加倍，损则减半，其于本音恆为无爽。
现代文：凡律管的长短，重在合乎调均的音高，所谓益一，则得低八度的该音，所谓损一，则得到高八度的该音，它们对于这个音的本质来说，并没有什么差别。
English: The length of a tuning fork is based on the equalized pitch. The so-called gain one obtains the low octave sound, and the so-called loss one obtains the high octave sound. There is no difference between them in terms of the nature of the sound.

古文：然则言一上一下者，相生之道；言重上生者，吹候之用也。
现代文：然而所说的一个上生，一个下生，那是相生的道理；主张重复上生，为候气吹灰所用。
English: However, what is said about one previous life and one next life, that is the principle of mutual birth; advocates the repetition of the previous life, which is used by the wind to blow dust.

古文：于蕤宾重上生者，适会为用之数，故言律者因焉，非相生之正也。
现代文：在蕤宾那一律重复使用上生，其数正适应了这种情况，所以研究律的人沿袭下来的，并不是律吕相生的正法。
English: In Xingbin, all the rules are repeated, and the number of rules is adapted to this situation. Therefore, the people who study the law are not the legitimate laws of the law.

古文：杨子云曰： 声生于日，谓甲己为角，乙庚为商，丙辛为徵，丁壬为羽，戊癸为宫也。
现代文：杨子云说： 五声产生于记的办法，即甲己为角，乙庚为商，丙辛为征，丁壬为羽，戊癸为宫。
English: Yang Ziyun said: The five sounds are produced by the method of notation, that is, A is the horn, B is the merchant, C is the sign, D is the feather, and G is the palace.

古文：律生于辰，谓子为黄钟，丑为大吕之属也。
现代文：律产生于记时辰的办法，即子为黄钟，丑为大吕等等。
English: The law arose from the method of recording the hours, that is, the son is the yellow bell, the ugly one is the big Lu, and so on.

古文：声以情质，质，正也。各以其行本情为正也。
现代文：五声以表达情为正，质，就是正，各声以其代表的情为正。
English: The five syllables are positive in expressing emotion, the quality is positive, and each syllable is positive in its representative emotion.

古文：律以和声，当以律管钟均和其清浊之声。
现代文：律用来调协声，应当以律管代表的音高系统去规范声的音高。
English: The pitch system represented by the tuning fork should be used to regulate the pitch of the sound when the tuning fork is used to tune the harmonic.

古文：声律相协而八音生。协，和也。 
现代文：声律谐和了才能有乐器产生。协，就是和谐。 
English: A musical instrument can only come into being when the vocal rhythms are in harmony.

古文：宫、商、角、徵、羽，谓之五声。
现代文：宫、商、角、征、羽，称为五声。
English: Gong, Shang, Angle, Zheng, and Feather are called the five voices.

古文：金、石、匏、革、丝、竹、土、木，谓之八音。
现代文：金、石、匏、革、丝、竹、土、木各类乐器，称之为八音。
English: Various musical instruments made of gold, stone, rattan, leather, silk, bamboo, earth and wood are called eight tones.

古文：声和音谐，是谓五乐。
现代文：八音能够以五声相谐，称为五乐。
English: The eight tones can harmonize with the five tones, which is called five sounds.

古文：夫阴阳和则景至，律气应则灰除。
现代文：阴阳平和晷影就准确，律管所候之气应验，管内葭灰就飞除。
English: The yin and yang and the mirage will be accurate, the qi of the legal department will be fulfilled, and the ashes in the pipe will be removed.

古文：是故天子常以冬夏至日御前殿，合八能之士，陈八音，听乐均，度晷景，候钟律，权土灰，效阴阳，冬至阳气应则灰除，是故乐均清，景长极，黄钟通，土灰轻而衡仰。
现代文：所以天子常在冬至、夏至那一天临幸前殿，召集能调和阴阳律历的人，摆开各种乐器，审听律调，审度晷影，候测钟律，权衡土炭，以测阴阳之气。冬至那天阳气应律，葭灰飞除，所以乐音高，晷影长，黄钟律管通透，土炭轻而衡器仰起。
English: Therefore, on the day of the winter solstice and summer solstice, the heavenly son often visits the auspicious front hall, convenes people who can harmonize the yin and yang rhythms, sets up various musical instruments, listens to the rhythms, examines the mirage, waits to measure the clock rhythm, weighs the soil charcoal to measure the yin and yang. On the day of the winter solstice, the yang responds to the rhythm, and the ashes fly away, so the music is high, the mirage is long, the yellow clock rhythm is transparent, and the soil charcoal is light and the weighing instrument is raised.

古文：夏至阴气应则乐均浊，景短极，蕤宾通，土灰重而衡低。
现代文：夏至那天阴气应律，则乐音低，晷影短到极点，蕤宾律管通透，土炭重而衡器低下。
English: On the day of the summer solstice, when the weather is cloudy, the music is low, the mirage is short to the extreme, the meridian is transparent, the soil is heavy with carbon and the balance is low.

古文：进退于先后五日之中，八能各以候状闻，太史令封上。
现代文：这些明显的消长变化发生在先后五内，调和阴阳律历的学者们各以见到的征兆奏闻皇上，太史令将结果封闭。
English: These obvious changes in waxing and waning took place within five years, and scholars who harmonized the yin and yang calendars reported to the emperor with the signs they saw, and the results were sealed by the order of the emperor.

古文：效则和，否则占。
现代文：应验就意味着祥和，不应验则需要预测吉凶。
English: Fulfillment means peace, while non-fulfillment requires the prediction of good or bad fortune.

古文：候气之法，为室三重，户闭，涂衅周密，布缇幔。
现代文：候气的方法是，造三重密室，紧闭门户，并用血涂四壁，挂桔红色的帘幕。
English: The traditional method is to build a triple secret room, close the portal, paint the four walls with blood, and hang an orange-red curtain.

古文：室中以木为案，每律各一，内房中外高，从其方位，加律其上，以葭莩灰抑其内端，案历而候之：气至者灰去；其为气所动者，其灰散；人及风所动者，其灰聚。
现代文：屋内为每一律位作一木案，裹面低外面高，按照方位，将律管放在案上，将葭莩灰压放入管内，按照历法而等候气至：气到了则葭莩灰飞除；如果真是为气所动，葭灰飞散；如果是被风或人所动，葭灰就会聚集。
English: Inside the house, a wooden case is made for each regular place, the wrapping surface is low and the outside is high. According to the position, the regular tube is placed on the case, the fly ash is pressed into the tube, and the air is waited for according to the calendar: when the air arrives, the fly ash is removed; if it is really moved by the air, the fly ash is scattered; if it is moved by the wind or people, the fly ash will be collected.

古文：殿中候用玉律十二，惟二至乃候。
现代文：宫中候气用十二支玉质律管，惟有冬至、夏至才有此举。
English: In the palace, the weather vane uses twelve jade law tubes, but only the winter solstice and the summer solstice have this move.

古文：灵台用竹律。
现代文：灵台则使用竹质律管。
English: Lingtai, on the other hand, uses bamboo tubing.

古文：杨泉记云： 取弘农宜阳县金门山竹为管，河内葭莩为灰。 
现代文：杨泉记述： 用弘农宜阳县金门山的竹子做成律管，用河内的葭莩为灰。 
English: Yang Quan's account: He used bamboo from Kinmen Mountain in Hongnong Yiyang County to make the rutabaga, and straw from Hanoi to make the ash.

古文：或云以律著室中，随十二辰埋之，上与地平，以竹莩灰实律中，以罗縠覆律吕，气至吹灰动縠。
现代文：或者说将律管置于室中，随十二辰的位置埋放，上端与地面取平，将竹莩灰装入管中，用疏细的丝织品覆盖律管，气到则吹灰使细丝抖动。
English: In other words, the tube is placed in the room, buried with the position of the twelve hours, the upper end is leveled with the ground, the bamboo ash is loaded into the tube, the tube is covered with thin silk fabric, and the air is blown to make the filaments shake.

古文：小动为和，大动，君弱臣强；不动，君严暴之应也。
现代文：抖动很小则预示平和；抖动大，则预示君弱臣强；不抖动，则预示君王严酷暴虐。
English: If the tremor is small, it indicates peace; if the tremor is large, it indicates that the ruler is weak and the vassal is strong; if there is no tremor, it indicates that the ruler is harsh and tyrannical.

古文：审度起度之正，《汉志》言之详矣。
现代文：正确的长度标准，《漠志》的记述已很详细了。
English: According to the correct length standard, the description of "Moshi" is already very detailed.

古文：武帝泰始九年，中书监荀勖校太乐，八音不和，始知后汉至魏，尺长于古四分有余。
现代文：武帝泰始九年，中书监荀勖校验太乐，各类乐器不和，了解到从后漠到魏，尺的标准比古代长出四分多。
English: In the ninth year of the reign of Emperor Wu of Tai, the inspector of the Chinese Academy of Letters examined the Tai Le, and found that all kinds of musical instruments were not compatible. He learned that from the Western Desert to the Wei Dynasty, the standard of the ruler was more than four points higher than that of ancient times.

古文：勖乃部著作郎刘恭依《周礼》制尺，所谓古尺也。
现代文：荀勖就率著作郎刘恭依《周礼》标准制作尺度，即所说的古尺。
English: He and his co-author Liu Qiong followed the standard of "Zhouli" to make the scale, that is, the so-called ancient ruler.

古文：依古尺更铸铜律吕，以调声韵。
现代文：依照古尺重新铸造铜质律管，用来调定音律。
English: A copper tuning fork was recast in accordance with the old ruler and used to set the tuning.

古文：以尺量古器，与本铭尺寸无差。
现代文：用该尺度量古代器物，与器物所铭刻的尺寸没有差误。
English: Using this scale to measure ancient artifacts, there is no difference with the dimensions inscribed on the artifacts.

古文：又，汲郡盗发六国时魏襄王冢，得古周时玉律及钟、磬，与新律声韵闇同。
现代文：后来，汲郡盗掘六国时魏襄王墓，得到了古代周朝的玉律及钟磬乐器，它们也与新律暗中相合。
English: Later, when excavating the tomb of Wei Xiang Wang in the Six Kingdoms period, Gu County obtained the ancient Zhou Dynasty's jade and bell musical instruments, which also coincided with the new rhythms.

古文：于时郡国或得汉时故钟，吹律命之皆应。
现代文：那时候一些地区如果得到汉代古钟，吹新律校验都能相合。
English: At that time, in some regions, if they obtained an ancient bell from the Han Dynasty, they could match the sound of the new law.

古文：勖铭其尺曰： 晋泰始十年，中书考古器，揆校今尺，长四分半。
现代文：荀勖对该尺的铭题是： 晋泰始十年，中书考证古代器物，参照校验今尺，发现比古尺长四分半。
English: The inscription on the ruler reads: "In the first ten years of the Jin and Tai dynasties, the Chinese Book of Records examined ancient artifacts and found that the current ruler is four and a half times longer than the ancient ruler.

古文：所校古法有七品：一曰姑洗玉律，二曰小吕玉律，三曰西京铜望臬，四曰金错望臬，五曰铜斛，六曰古钱，七曰建武铜尺。
现代文：所依据的古代标准器物有七种：一是姑洗玉律，二是小吕玉律，三是西京铜望臬，四是金错望臬，五是铜斛，六是古钱，七是建武铜尺。
English: There are seven kinds of ancient standard utensils based on: one is the Guzai jade rule, the second is the Xiao Lv jade rule, the third is the West Beijing bronze watch, the fourth is the gold wrong watch, the fifth is the bronze shovel, the sixth is the ancient money, and the seventh is the Jianwu bronze ruler.

古文：姑洗微强，西京望臬微弱，其余与此尺同。 
现代文：其中姑洗玉律略长，西京望臬略短，其余诸器与该尺相同。 
English: Among them, the Gushiyu Gyoroku is slightly longer, the Saikyo Bozhong is slightly shorter, and the rest of the instruments are the same as this ruler.

古文：铭八十二字。
现代文：铭文共八十二字。
English: The inscription contains a total of eighty-two words.

古文：此尺者勖新尺也，今尺者杜夔尺也。
现代文：该尺为荀勖的新尺，今尺即杜夔尺。
English: This shaku is a new shaku for the monme, and the present shaku is the cuckoo shaku.

古文：荀勖造新钟律，与古器谐韵，时人称其精密，惟散骑侍郎陈留阮咸讥其声高，声高则悲，非兴国之音，亡国之音。
现代文：荀勖制成的新钟律，舆古器物度量标准相合，当时人们都称赞其精密。惟有散骑侍郎陈留医咸讥笑他的律音偏高，音高就会引起悲哀，就不是兴国的音乐，而是亡国的音乐。
English: At that time, people praised the precision of the new bell rhythms made of gongs, which matched the measurement standard of ancient artifacts. However, the horseback riding attendant Chen Liuyi sneered that his rhythms were too high, and the high pitch would cause sadness. It was not the music of rejuvenating the country, but the music of ruining the country.

古文：亡国之音哀以思，其人困。
现代文：亡国的音乐哀而且悲，人们陷于困苦之中。
English: The music of a dying country is sad and mournful, and the people are mired in misery.

古文：今声不合雅，惧非德正至和之音，必古今尺有长短所致也。
现代文：如今音律不合雅乐的规范，恐怕不是体现盛德的至和之音，必定是由古尺、今尺长短不同所造成的。
English: Today's musical rhythms do not conform to the standards of classical music, and are probably not the harmonious sound that embodies virtue. This must be caused by the different lengths of the ancient and modern shaku.

古文：会咸病卒，武帝以勖律与周汉器合，故施用之。
现代文：适逢阮咸病故，武帝认为荀勖所造律管与周、漠两朝标准器相合，所以诏令使用。
English: When Nguyn Ánh died of illness, Emperor Wu believed that the legal system created by Qu Rn was compatible with the standard instruments of the Zhou and M Dynasties, so he used the imperial edict.

古文：后始平掘地得古铜尺，岁久欲腐，不知所出何代，果长勖尺四分，时人服咸之妙，而莫能厝意焉。
现代文：后来，始平时挖地得到了古代铜尺，年代久远形将腐蚀，不知是什么朝代的器物，果然较荀勖尺长四分，人们便叹服阮咸见识高明，但已不能再引起注意了。
English: Later, when an ancient copper ruler was excavated from the ground at the beginning of the year, the age-old shape would be corroded, and I don't know what dynasty's utensils were found to be four points longer than the imperial ruler. People then admired Nguyen Hanh for his insight, but he could no longer attract attention.

古文：史臣案： 勖于千载之外，推百代之法，度数既宜，声韵又契，可谓切密，信而有徵也。
现代文：史臣们认为：荀勖在千年之后，推定百代之前的律法，尺度既适宜，声韵又契合，说得上确切精密，令人信服而有证验。
English: Historians believe that:  After a thousand years, the law of a hundred generations ago is appropriate, the scale is appropriate, the rhyme is consistent, it can be said to be precise, convincing and verifiable.

古文：而时人寡识，据无闻之一尺，忽周汉之两器，雷同臧否，何其谬哉！
现代文：而当时人们见识寡陋，根据一个不曾听说的尺子，忽视周漠两代标准器的校验，随声附和进行褒贬，谬误到了极点!
English: But at that time, people had little knowledge, and based on a ruler that they had never heard of, they ignored the calibration of two generations of standard instruments, and praised and criticized with the voice. The fallacy reached the extreme!

古文：《世说》称 有田父于野地中得周时玉尺，便是天下正尺，荀勖试以校己所治金石丝竹，皆短校一米 。
现代文：《世说》称 田父在郊野得到的周代玉尺，就是天下适用的正尺，荀勖尝试着用它校验自己所制的金石丝竹各类乐器，都短了极少的一点 。
English: "The World" said that the Zhou Dynasty jade ruler obtained by Tian father in the countryside was the world's applicable positive ruler, and when he tried to use it to check all kinds of musical instruments made by himself, it was very short.

古文：又，汉章帝时，零陵文学史奚景于泠道舜祠下得玉律，度以为尺，相传谓之汉官尺。
现代文：此外，汉章帝时，零陵文学史奚景在泠道舜祠地下得到玉律，作为尺度的标准，相传称之为汉宫尺。
English: In addition, during the reign of Emperor Han Zheng, Emperor Jingjing of the Ziling Literature History obtained the jade rule as a standard of measurement in the basement of the Lingdao Ancestral Hall, and it was called the Han Palace yardstick.

古文：以校荀勖尺，勖尺短四分；汉官、始平两尺，长短度同。
现代文：用来校验荀勖尺，荀勖尺短四分；汉宫尺、始平尺，两尺长短相同。
English: Used to calibrate the imperial ruler, the imperial ruler is four minutes shorter than the imperial ruler; the imperial ruler and the imperial ruler are the same length.

古文：又，杜夔所用调律尺，比勖新尺，得一尺四分七厘。
现代文：另外，杜夔所用的调律尺，对照荀勖新尺，为一尺四分七厘。
English: In addition, the tuning scale used by the cuckoo, compared to the new shaku, is one foot four minutes and seven percent.

古文：魏景元四年，刘徽注《九章》云：王莽时刘歆斛尺弱于今尺四分五厘，比魏尺其斛深九寸五分厘；即荀勖所谓今尺长四分半是也。
现代文：魏景元四年，刘徽注释《九章》称：王莽时刘歆的斛尺短于今尺四分五厘，对照魏尺它的斛高九寸五分五厘；就是荀勖所说的今尺长四分半。
English: In the fourth year of Wei Jing Yuan, Liu Hui's commentary on the "Nine Chapters" said: At the time of Wang Mang, Liu Hui's shaku was four-and-a-half times shorter than the current shaku. In comparison with the Wei shaku, its shaku was nine-and-a-half times higher; that is, the current shaku was four-and-a-half times longer.

古文：元帝后，江东所用尺，比荀勖尺一尺六分二厘。
现代文：元帝后，江东所用的尺度，等于荀勖尺一尺六分二厘。
English: After the Yuan Dynasty, the measure used in the East River was equal to one shaku and one shaku and two minutes.

古文：赵刘曜光初四年铸浑仪，八年铸土圭，其尺比荀勖尺一尺五分。
现代文：赵刘曜光初四年铸浑仪，八年铸土圭，其尺等于荀勖尺一尺五分。
English: In the first four years of Zhao Liuyoguang's life, he cast a mud instrument, and in the eighth year he cast a clay gu, whose length is equal to one shaku and one shaku and a half.

古文：荀勖新尺惟以调音律，至于人间未甚流布，故江左及刘曜仪表，并与魏尺略相依准。
现代文：荀勖新尺仅用作调律，至于民间社会交易则没有怎么流传，所以江左以及刘曜仪表等，都与魏尺大体相等。
English: The Qin new shaku was only used for tuning, and as for civil society transactions, it did not circulate much, so the Jiangzuo and Liuyang instruments were roughly the same as the Wei shaku.

古文：嘉量《周礼》： 栗氏为量，鬴深尺，内方尺而圆其外，其实一鬴。其臀一寸，其实一豆。其耳三寸，其实一升。
现代文：《周礼》记载： 栗氏制成的嘉量，包括黼，其高一尺，体积为圆柱体内接一尺见方的正方体，其容量为一黼；嘉量底部称臀，高一寸，容量为一豆；嘉量两旁有耳，高三寸，容量为一升。
English: "Zhou Li" records: "Jia Rong" made by Mr. Li, including the cucumber, its height is one foot, its volume is a square of one foot square inside the cylinder, and its capacity is one cucumber; the bottom of the jia Rong is hip, one inch high, and the capacity is one bean; the jia Rong has ears on both sides, three inches high, and the capacity is one liter.

古文：重一钧，其声中黄钟。
现代文：容量的总重为一钧，其尺寸标准来源于黄钟律管。
English: The total weight of the capacity is one crock, and its size standard is derived from the yellow bell law tube.

古文：概而不税。其铭曰： 时文思索，允臻其极。
现代文：度量时以刮平嘉量各部表面，不使实物遇量溢出为准。它的铭文是： 这是时代文明的思考与探求，诚信其臻于完美。
English: Its inscription reads: "This is the thinking and exploration of the civilization of the times, and its integrity has reached perfection."

古文：嘉量既成，以观四国。
现代文：嘉量既已制成，即可考察各地的度量标准，并永远以它的法度昭示后人。  
English: Once the Jiayuan has been made, it can be used to examine the measurement standards of various regions, and it will always be used to show the future generations.

古文：永启厥后，兹器维则。  《春秋左氏传》曰： 齐旧四量，豆、区、釜、钟。四升曰豆，各自其四，以登于釜。 
现代文：《春秋左氏传》记载： 从前齐国有四种容量单位，豆、区、辅、钟。四升为一豆，以下各以四进，升晋到黼。 
English: "Chunqiu Zuo's Biography" records: In the past, there were four kinds of capacity units in Qi State, bean, district, auxiliary and bell. Four shillings was one bean, and the following were four shillings, and promoted to.

古文：四豆为区，区斗六升也。
现代文：即四豆为区，一区合一斗六升。
English: That is to say, four beans are a quarter, and one quarter is equal to one six-liter barrel.

古文：四区为釜，六斗四升也。
现代文：四区为黼，一脯合六斗四升。
English: The four districts are, and one  is equal to six doos and four liters.

古文：釜十则钟，六十四斗也。
现代文：十鯆为一钟，一钟合六十四斗。
English: Ten cormorants make one bell, and one bell makes sixty-four cormorants.

古文：郑玄以为釜方尺，积千寸，比《九章粟米法》少二升八十一分升之二十二。
现代文：郑玄认为黼内一尺见方的容器容积为一千立方寸，比《九章粟米法》少二又八十一分之二十二升。
English: Zheng Xuan believes that the volume of a container of one foot square in the bowl is no more than one thousand cubic inches, which is 22/81 liters less than the "Corn Law of Nine Chapters."

古文：以算术考之，古斛之积凡一千五百六十二寸半，方尺而圆其外，减傍一厘八毫，其径一尺四寸一分四毫七秒二忽有奇，而深尺，即古斛之制也。
现代文：用算术来考察，古斛的容积为一千五百六十二又二分之一立方寸，圆内接一尺见方正方形的对角线，还需减旁一厘八毫，其直径应为一尺四寸一分四毫七秒二忽之多，而高为一尺，造就是古斛的形制。
English: Using arithmetic to investigate, the volume of the ancient cocoon is one thousand five hundred and sixty-two and a half cubic inches, the circle is connected by a one-foot square diagonal, and it needs to be reduced by one-eighth of a millimeter. Its diameter should be as much as one foot four inches, one minute and forty-seven seconds, and the height is one foot, which is the shape of the ancient cocoon.

古文：《九章商功法》程粟一斛，积二千七百寸；米一斛，积一千六百二十七寸；菽荅麻麦一斛，积二千四百三十寸。
现代文：《九章商功法》认为，容粟一斛，体积为二千七百立方寸；容米一斛，体积为一千六百二十七立方寸；容豆类、芝麻、麦子一斛，体积为二千四百三十立方寸。
English: According to the "Nine Chapters of Shang Gong Law," the capacity of a bowl of corn is 2700 cubic inches; the capacity of a bowl of rice is 1627 cubic inches; and the capacity of a bowl of beans, sesame seeds and wheat is 2430 cubic inches.

古文：此据精粗为率，使价齐，而不等其器之积寸也。以米斛为正，则同于《汉志》。
现代文：这是根据容受物质密度不同而设立的不同标准，不同的容受物质容量单位虽同，但其实际价值却不等。斛的容受积寸，以米斛为标准，这是与《汉志》相同的。
English: This is based on different standards set up according to the different density of the material to be tolerated. Although the different units of the capacity of the material to be tolerated are the same, their actual value does not vary. The tolerance of the rice bran is based on the rice bran, which is the same as "Hanzhi."

古文：魏陈留王景元四年，刘徽注《九章商功》曰： 当今大司农斛，圆径一尺三寸五分五厘，深一尺，积一千四百四十一寸十分寸之三。
现代文：魏陈留王：匡五四年，塑隧注释《九章。商功》说： 如今大司农斛，圆径为一尺三寸五分五厘，高一尺，容积为一千四百四十一又十分之三立方寸。
English: Wei Chen Liu Wang: In 1954, the commentary of "Nine Chapters. Shang Gong" on Shouguang Tunnel said: Today, the Daishi farmhouse has a diameter of one foot three inches fifty-five percent, a height of one foot, and a volume of one thousand four hundred forty-one and three tenths of a cubic inch.

古文：王莽铜斛，于今尺为深九寸五分五厘，径一尺三寸六分八厘七毫。以徽术计之，于今斛为容九斗七升四合有奇。 
现代文：王茎铜斛，高等于今尺九寸五分五厘，直径一尺三寸六分八厘七毫，以刘徽的计算法，等于今斛容量的九斗七升四合挂零。 
English: Wang Zhi copper ingot, higher than the current shaku 9'5"5," diameter 1'3"6"8"7mm, according to Liu Hui's method of calculation, is equal to the current ingot capacity of 9'7"4"0.

古文：魏斛大而尺长，王莽斛小而尺短也。
现代文：逭说明魏斛大而且尺长，王莽斛小而且尺短。
English: It shows that Wei Zhen is large and long, and Wang Mangyuan is small and short.

古文：衡权衡权者，衡，平也；权，重也。
现代文：对衡权的解释是，衡，为平的意思；权，为重的意思。
English: The interpretation of the weight is that the weight is the meaning of flat; the weight is the meaning of heavy.

古文：衡所以任权而均物，平轻重也。
现代文：衡就是由权来称量物质的轻重数量。
English: Weighing is to weigh the weight of a substance by weight.

古文：古有黍、垒、锤、锱、镮、钧、锊、镒之目，历代参差。
现代文：古代有黍、累、锤、锱、缳、钩、锷、溢等不同单位，历代单位标准不一。
English: In ancient times, there were different units such as,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,

古文：《汉志》言衡权名理甚备，自后变更，其详未闻。
现代文：《漠志》讲到衡权的名义、道理十分详备，以后制度的变化，没有详细听说。
English: "Moses" talked about the name of the balance of power, the reason is very detailed, but I have not heard about the changes in the system in detail.

古文：元康中，裴頠以为医方人命之急，而称两不与古同，为害特重，宜因此改治权衡，不见省。
现代文：五尘年间，墓题认为医生的处方人命关天，而称量单位与古制不同，为害严重，应当改治权衡制度，但不见省察。
English: During the Five Dusty Years, the epitaph believed that the doctor's prescription was a matter of life and death, and that the weighing unit was different from the old system, causing serious harm, and the weighing system should be changed, but there was no reflection.

古文：赵石勒十八年七月，造建德殿，得圆石，状如水碓，铭曰： 律权石，重四钧，同律度量衡。
现代文：赵石勒十八年七月，建造建垄殿时，得一圆石，如水碓形状，上面刻有铭文： 律权石，重四钩，使律度量衡统一标准。
English: In July of the 18th year of Zhao Shile's reign, when he began to build the Ridge Temple, he obtained a round stone, like the shape of a leech, with an inscription on it: "The Ruling Stone, heavy with four hooks, makes the rhythms of measurement a unified standard."

古文：有辛氏造。 
现代文：由辛氏制作。 
English: Produced by Shin.

古文：续咸议，是王莽时物。
现代文：说是王莽时的东西。
English: He said it was something from the time of Wang Mangshi.

