古文：典妇功掌妇式之法，以授嫔妇及内人女功之事赍。
现代文：典妇功掌管妇功用材数量的标准，据以授给九嫔、世妇及女御从事妇功所需取用的材料。
English: The Handmaid's Work presided over the standard for the quantity of materials for women's work, according to which the materials needed for women's work were awarded to the nine concubines, concubines and empresses.

古文：凡授嫔妇功，及秋献功，辨其苦良，比其小大而贾之物书而楬之。以共王及后之用，颁之于内府。
现代文：凡分配给嫔妇的任务，到秋季呈献成绩时，辨别所做活计质量好坏，比较数量多少，而估定价值，书写标签加以标明，以供给王和王后所用，交到内府收藏。
English: All the tasks assigned to the concubines, by the autumn, when the results were presented, were to distinguish the quality of the work done, compare the quantity, and estimate the value, write the label to indicate, to be used by the king and queen, and handed over to the inner collection.

古文：典丝掌丝入而辨其物，以其贾楬之。
现代文：典丝掌管入贡之丝的收受，而辨别丝的种类和精粗，依据丝的价值题写标签。
English: The silversmiths were in charge of receiving the silk tributes, and to distinguish the type and fineness of the silk, they wrote labels according to the value of the silk.

古文：掌其藏与其出，以待兴功之时。
现代文：掌管丝的收藏和支出，以准备制作丝织品所用。
English: In charge of collecting and disbursing silk to prepare it for use in making silk products.

古文：颁丝于外内工，皆以物授之。
现代文：颁授丝给外、内女工，都按照她们所当制作的丝织品的种类授给所需的丝。
English: Silk was given to the maids, both inside and out, according to the type of fabric they were to make.

古文：凡上之赐予，亦如之。
现代文：凡王用丝物赏赐臣下也由典丝授给。
English: Whenever the king rewarded his vassals with silk, they would also receive it from Denshi.

古文：及献功，则受良功而藏之，辨其物而书其数，以待有司之政令，上之赐予。
现代文：到呈献成绩的时候，就接受所献的丝织品加以收藏，辨别丝的种类，登记它们的数目，以待有关官吏下令，以及供王赏赐所用。
English: At the time of the presentation of the results, they receive the donated silk and collect it, identify the types of silk, and register their number, to be ordered by the relevant officials and used for the king's reward.

古文：凡祭礼，共黼画组就之物。
现代文：凡祭祀，供给制作祭服、冕旒等所用的丝。
English: For all rituals, the silk used to make ceremonial clothing, crowns, etc. is provided.

古文：丧纪，共其丝纩组文之物。
现代文：丧事，供给所需用的丝线、丝绵、丝绳、有绘画的缯帛等物。
English: Funeral, supply the necessary silk thread, silk, silk ropes, painted cocoons and other items.

古文：凡饰邦器者，受文织丝组焉。
现代文：凡修饰国家器物的，可以前来领受有绘画的缯帛，刺绣的锦、丝线、丝绳等物。
English: Those who decorate the national utensils can come to receive painted enamel, embroidered brocade, silk thread, silk rope and other items.

古文：岁终，则各以其物会之。
现代文：年终，就分类进行结算。
English: At the end of the year, the classification is settled.

古文：典枲掌布缌、缕、纻之麻草之物，以待时颁功而授赍。
现代文：典枲掌管制作麻布、细而疏的麻布、麻线、白而细的麻布等的材料麻和葛、萌等，以待按季节分配任务时授予所当取用的。
English: He was in charge of the production of linen, fine and loose linen, twine, white and fine linen, and other materials such as flax, gooseberry, and mauve, to be used as appropriate when assigning tasks according to seasons.

古文：及献功，受苦功，以其贾楬而藏之，以待时颁，颁衣服，授之。
现代文：到呈献成绩的时候，就接受所献的麻织品，依照价值题写标签而加以收藏，以待随时颁发给需用者。到颁发衣服的时候，就授给领取的人。
English: At the time of the presentation of the results, the hemp fabric offered is accepted and stored with a value label, ready to be given to those who need it. At the time of the presentation of the clothes, they are given to those who receive them.

古文：赐予，亦如之。
现代文：王赏赐臣下也这样由典枲授给。
English: The rewards given by the king to his vassals were also given by the courtier.

古文：岁终则各以其物会之。
现代文：年终，就分类进行结算。
English: At the end of the year, the classification is settled.

古文：内司服掌王后之六服：褘衣、揄狄、阙狄、鞠衣、展衣、缘衣、素纱。
现代文：内司服掌管王后的六种服装，即秫衣、揄狄、阙狄、鞠衣、展衣、缘衣，都是白纱里子。
English: The six kinds of clothing of the queen, namely, the pleated dress, the embroidered dress, the embroidered dress, the jersey dress, the show dress, and the hem dress, are all made of white gauze.

古文：辨外内命妇之服，鞠衣、展衣、缘衣、素纱。
现代文：辨别外命妇和内命妇所当穿的以下几种服装，即鞠衣、展衣、缘衣，都是白纱里子。
English: The following types of clothing, i.e. the yakitori (ball gown), the geisha dress, and the maiko dress, are all made of white yarn.

古文：凡祭祀、宾客，共后之衣服，及九嫔世妇。凡命妇，共其衣服，共丧衰，亦如之。
现代文：凡举行祭祀、招待宾客，供给王后应穿的衣服，以及九嫔、世妇，凡内外命妇，都供给所应穿的衣服。供给丧服也这样。
English: And they that offered sacrifices, and invited guests, and furnished the apparel of a queen, and of virgins, and of maidens, and of all that were within, and of all that were out of the house of the king, and of all that were in the king's house, and of all that were in the king's house,

古文：后之丧，共其衣服，凡内具之物。
现代文：王后的丧事，供给所需的衣服，以及凡妇人所应具备的物件。
English: The funeral of the queen, the supply of the necessary clothes, and the things that every woman should have.

古文：缝人掌王宫之缝线之事。以役女御，以缝王及后之衣服。
现代文：缝人掌管王宫中缝纫的事，而听从女御的指使，以缝制王及王后的衣服。
English: Seamstresses were in charge of the sewing in the royal palace, and at the behest of the empress, they sewed the clothes of the king and queen.

古文：丧，缝棺饰焉，衣翣柳之材。
现代文：丧事，就缝制棺饰，用彩缯缠饰翣和柳的木材。
English: For funerals, coffin ornaments are sewn, and the wood of birch and willow is decorated with colored ribbons.

古文：掌凡内之缝事。
现代文：掌管宫内所有缝纫的事。
English: In charge of all the sewing in the house.

古文：染人掌染丝帛。
现代文：染人掌管染丝和帛。
English: The dyer is in charge of dyeing silk and satin.

古文：凡染，春暴练，夏纁玄，秋染夏，冬献功。
现代文：凡染，春季煮晒丝帛，夏季染纁色和玄色，秋季染五色，冬季呈献染成品。
English: Van dyeing, boiled and dried silk cocoons in spring, indigo dyeing and black dyeing in summer, five-color dyeing in autumn, and donated dyeing finished products in winter.

古文：掌凡染事。
现代文：掌管所有有关染色的事。
English: In charge of all matters relating to dyeing.

古文：追师掌王后之首服。
现代文：追师掌管王后头部的服饰，制作副、编、次，琢治衡和笄。
English: The pursuer is in charge of the queen's head dress, making the vice, the knitting, the second, the cutting, and the knitting.

古文：为副编次，追衡笄，为九嫔及外内命妇之首服，以待祭祀宾客。
现代文：制作九嫔以及外、内命妇的头饰，以备祭祀和招待宾客时用。
English: The headdresses of the nine maids of honour and the maids of honour of the outer and inner court were made for use in rituals and for entertaining guests.

古文：丧纪，共笄绖，亦如之。
现代文：有丧事，也这样供给丧笄和絰带。
English: In the same way, when there is a funeral, they offer the coffin and the burial band.

古文：屦人掌王及后之服屦。
现代文：屦人掌管王和王后配合各种服装所应穿的鞋。
English: The eunuch is in charge of the shoes that the king and queen should wear to match the various costumes.

古文：为赤舄、黑舄、赤繶、青句、素屦、葛履。
现代文：制作赤舄、黑舄等，制作装饰屦舄的赤缌、黄缝、青绚等，并制作白色的屦和葛屦。
English: Produce red maple, black maple, etc., produce decorative maple red maple, yellow seam, blue luster, etc., and produce white maple and kudzu maple.

古文：辨外内命夫命妇之命屦、功屦、散屦。
现代文：辨别外、内命夫和命妇所应穿的命屦、功屦和散屦。
English: Distinguish between the outer and inner life-jacket, the meritorious life-jacket and the loose life-jacket, which should be worn by the husband and wife.

古文：凡四时之祭祀，以宜服之。
现代文：凡四季的祭祀，使他们穿所应穿的鞋。
English: All the four seasons of sacrifice, so that they wear the shoes they should wear.

