古文：以四月、七月、十月、正月膚田牛。卒歲，以正月大課之，最，賜田嗇夫壺酉束脯，為旱〈皂〉者除一更，賜牛長日三旬；殿者，誶田嗇夫，罰冗皂者二月。其以牛田，牛絜，治主者寸十。
现代文：在每年四月、七月、十月、正月评比耕牛，满一年，在正月举行大考核，成绩优秀的，赏赐田啬夫酒一壶，干肉十条，免除饲牛者一次更役，赏赐牛长资劳三十天；成绩低劣的，申斥田啬夫，罚饲牛者资劳两个月，如果用牛耕田，牛的腰围减瘦了，每减瘦一寸要笞打主事者十下。
English: In April, July, October, and the first month of each year, the evaluation of cattle farming is carried out. After one year, a big assessment is held in the first month. If the results are excellent, the farmer will be rewarded with a pot of wine and ten pieces of dried meat. The cattle feeder will be exempted from one more duty and will be rewarded with thirty days of long-term labor. If the results are inferior, the farmer will be reprimanded and the cattle feeder will be punished with two months of long-term labor. If the cow is used for farming, the waistline of the cow will be thinner, and the person in charge will be beaten ten times for every

古文：有里課之，最者，賜田典日旬殿，治卅。
现代文：又在乡里进行考核，成绩优秀的赏赐里典资劳十天，成绩低劣的笞打三十下。
English: They were also evaluated in the countryside, and those with excellent results were rewarded with ten days of forced labor, while those with poor results were beaten thirty times.

古文：廄苑律。鐵器，銷敝不勝而毀者，為用書，受勿責。
现代文：借用铁制家具，因破旧不堪使用而损坏的，以文书上报损耗，收下原物而不令赔偿。
English: If the borrowed iron furniture is damaged due to dilapidation and cannot be used, the loss shall be reported in writing, and the original shall be taken back without compensation.

古文：將牧公馬牛，馬牛死者，亟謁死所縣，縣亟診而入之，其入之其弗亟而令敗者，令以其未敗直賞之。
现代文：率领放牧官有的牛马，牛马有残废的应急向牛马死亡所在县呈报，由县加以检验后将已死牛马上缴。如因不及时而使死牛马腐败，则令按未腐败时的价格赔偿。
English: Lead the cattle and horses owned by the herdsmen, and report to the county where the cattle and horses died if the cattle and horses are disabled. The dead cattle will be immediately handed over after the county has inspected it. If the dead cattle and horses are corrupted due to untimely, it will be ordered to compensate according to the price when they were not corrupted.

古文：其小隸臣疾死者，告其□□之；其非疾死者，以其診書告官論之。
现代文：如小隶臣病死，应告其处理；如小隶臣不是因病而死亡，应将检验文书报告主管官府论处。
English: If Xiao Lixin died of illness, he should be reported for handling; if Xiao Lixin did not die of illness, the authority in charge of the inspection document report should be dealt with.

古文：其大廄、中廄、宮廄馬牛，以其筋、革、角及其賈錢效，其人詣其官。
现代文：如系大厩、中厩、宫厩的牛马，应以其筋、皮、角和肉的价钱呈缴，由这个率领放牧的人送该官府。
English: If it is a cow or horse belonging to the grand stable, middle stable or palace stable, it should be presented with the price of its sinew, hide, horn and meat, and sent to the government office by the person leading the herdsman.

古文：其乘服公馬牛亡馬者而死縣，縣診而雜買其肉，即入其筋、革、角，及入其賈錢。錢少律者，令其人備之而告官，官告馬牛縣出之。
现代文：驾用官牛马而牛马死于某县，应由该县将肉全部卖出，然后上缴其筋、皮、角，并将所卖的价钱全部上缴，所卖钱如少于规定数目，令该驾用牛马的人补赔而向主管官府报告，由主管官府通知卖牛马的县销帐。
English: In the case of driving a government-owned cow or horse and the cow or horse dies in a certain county, the county shall sell all the meat, and then hand over its sinew, skin and horn, and hand over all the selling price. If the selling price is less than the specified amount, the person driving the cow or horse shall be ordered to make up the loss and report to the competent government office, and the competent government office shall notify the county selling the cow or horse to pay the account.

古文：今課縣、都官公服牛各一課，卒歲，十牛以上而三分一死；不盈十牛以下，及受服牛者卒歲死牛三以上，吏主者、徒食牛者及令、丞皆有罪。
现代文：现在每年对各县各都官的官有驾车用牛考核一次，有十头以上，一年间死了三分之一，不满十头的以及领用牛一年间死了三头以上，主管牛的吏、饲牛的徒、令、丞都有罪。
English: Now, the officials of each county and city have a driving cattle assessment once a year. If there are more than ten cattle, one-third will die in one year. If there are less than ten cattle and more than three cattle will die in one year, the officials in charge of cattle, the cattle feeders, the order, and the yo-yo will all be guilty.

古文：內史課縣，大倉課都官及受服者。
现代文：由内史考核各县、太仓，考核各都官和领用牛的人。
English: From the internal history, the counties and Taicang were examined, and the officials of the capital and the people who led the cattle were examined.

