古文：雍氏之役，韩征甲与粟于周。周君患之，告苏代。
现代文：楚国攻打韩国雍氏，韩国向西周征调士兵粮食，周王为此感到忧虑，就与大臣苏代共商对策。
English: Chu attacked South Korea's Yong, and South Korea sent soldiers to West Zhou to collect grain. King Zhou was worried about this and discussed countermeasures with Minister Su Dai.

古文：苏代曰： 何患焉?
现代文：苏代说： 君王何必为这件事烦恼呢？
English: Sudai said, "Why should the king worry about this?

古文：代能为君令韩不征甲与粟于周，又能为君得高都。 
现代文：我能让韩国不向西周征调士兵和粮食，又能让您得到高都。 
English: I can get South Korea not to send soldiers and grain to West Zhou, and I can get you Gaodu.

古文：周君大悦曰： 子苟能，寡人请以国听。 
现代文：周王听后非常高兴，说： 您如果能做到，那么以后寡人就让你来管理国家政事。 
English: Upon hearing this, King Zhou was very pleased and said, "If you can do this, then no one will let you manage the country's political affairs in the future."

古文：苏代遂往见韩相国公中曰： 公不闻楚计乎?
现代文：苏代于是前往韩国拜见相国公仲侈，对他说道： 您没有听说楚国的计策吗？
English: So Sudai went to Korea to visit his countryman, Kunchaku, and said to him: Haven't you heard about the machinations of Chu?

古文：昭应谓楚王曰： 韩氏罢于兵，仓廪空，无以守城，吾收之以饥，不过一月必拔之。 
现代文：楚将昭应当初曾对楚王说： 韩国疲于征战，因而粮库空虚，已经没有什么力量守住城池。我要乘韩国饥荒，率兵夺取韩国的雍氏，不到一个月就能攻下。 
English: Chu Zhao should have said to King Chu at the beginning: Korea is exhausted from the war, so the granary is empty, and there is little power to defend the city. I want to take advantage of the Korean famine and lead the troops to capture the Korean Yongshi, and I can capture it in less than a month.

古文：今围雍氏五月不能拔，是楚病也。
现代文：如今楚国包围雍氏已经五个月了，还不能攻克，这暴露了楚军的处境困窘，楚王已经开始准备放弃昭应的计策了。
English: Now it has been five months since Chu has surrounded Yong, but has not yet been able to conquer him. This exposes the predicament of the Chu army, and King Chu has begun to prepare to abandon Zhao's strategy.

古文：楚王始不信昭应之计矣，今公乃征甲及粟于周，此告楚病也。昭应闻此，必劝楚王益兵守雍氏，雍氏必拔。 
现代文：如今您来征调西周的士兵和粮食，这是在告诉楚国，韩国已经处于危险境地了。如果昭应知道以后，一定劝说楚王增兵包围雍氏，届时雍氏必然被攻陷。 
English: Now that you have come to recruit soldiers and grain from West Zhou, you are telling Chu that South Korea is already in a dangerous situation. If Zhao should know, he will certainly persuade King Chu to increase troops to surround Yong, and then Yong will inevitably be captured.

古文：公中曰： 善。然吾使者已行矣。 
现代文：公中说： 很好，但是我国的使者已经赶往西周了。 
English: He said publicly, "That's fine, but our envoy has already rushed to West Zhou."

古文：代曰： 公何不以高都与周。 
现代文：苏代接着说： 您为什么不把高都之地送给西周呢？ 
English: Sudai went on to say: Why don't you give the land of Gaodu to Xizhou?

古文：公中怒曰： 吾无征甲与粟于周，亦已多矣。何为与高都? 
现代文：公仲侈听后非常愤怒，很生气地说： 我不向西周征调士兵和粮食已经不错了，为什么还要送给西周高都呢？ 
English: After listening to this, Guozhong was very angry and said angrily, "I don't want to send soldiers to West Zhou, and the grain is already good, why should I give it to West Zhou High School?"

古文：代曰： 与之高都，则周必折而入于韩，秦闻之必大怒，而焚周之节，不通其使，是公以弊高都得完周也，何不与也? 公中曰： 善。 
现代文：苏代说： 假如您能把高都送给西周，那么西周会再次跟韩国修好，秦国知道以后，必然大为震怒，不仅会焚毁西周的符节，而且还会断绝使臣的来往。西周断了与其他国家的联盟，而单单和好韩国，这样一来，阁下就是在用一个破烂的高都，换取一个完整的西周，阁下为什么不愿意呢？ 公仲侈说： 好吧。 
English: Su Dai said, "If you can give Gaodu to Xizhou, then Xizhou will make peace with Korea again. When Qin knows this, he will be furious. He will not only burn Xizhou's symbols, but also cut off the envoys' contacts. Xizhou broke off the alliance with other countries and only made peace with Korea. In this way, you are exchanging a broken Gaodu for a complete Xizhou. Why don't you want to do this?" Gongzhong said, "Okay."

古文：不征甲与粟于周而与高都，楚卒不拔雍氏而去。
现代文：于是就不再向西周征调士兵和粮食，并且将高都割让给了西周，楚国军队因没能攻克雍氏而离去了。
English: As a result, soldiers and grain were no longer sent to West Zhou, and Gaodu was ceded to West Zhou. The Chu army left because they were unable to defeat the Yong Dynasty.

