古文：官者，事之所主，为治之本也。
现代文：设置各级官吏，主管各项事务，是治理国家的根本措施。
English: The establishment of officials at all levels in charge of various affairs is a fundamental measure for governing the country.

古文：制者，职分四民，治之分也。
现代文：各种官制，按职守分管士、农、工、商各个部门，这是治理国家的分工。
English: Various bureaucratic systems, according to the duties of managers, agricultural, industrial and commercial departments, this is the division of labor in the governance of the country.

古文：贵爵富禄必称，尊卑之体也。
现代文：天官冢宰主管授予官爵俸禄必须与其德才相称，这是区别尊卑贵贱的体制。
English: It is a system of distinguishing between the high and the low, that the salary of a high-ranking official must be commensurate with his or her merits.

古文：好善罚恶，正比法，会计民之具也。均，节赋敛，取与之度也。
现代文：表扬好人，惩罚坏人，执行比法，以考核、统计人冒及其财产，均分土地，减轻赋税，以保障对民众取予的适度。
English: Praise the good people, punish the bad people, implement the comparison method, assess and count the risk of people and their property, divide land equally, and reduce taxes to ensure the appropriateness of the people.

古文：程工人，备器用，匠工之功也。
现代文：分配工人的任务，供应物资器材，提高工作效率。
English: Assign tasks to workers, supply materials and equipment, and improve work efficiency.

古文：分地塞要，殄怪禁淫之事也。
现代文：划分防区，守备要地，以防止和消灭各种变乱事件。
English: the division of defense zones and the guarding of important places in order to prevent and eliminate all kinds of disorderly incidents.

古文：守法稽断，臣下之节也。
现代文：执法严肃，处理果断，这是臣子的本分。
English: It is the duty of a courtier to enforce the law seriously and deal with it decisively.

古文：明法稽验，主上之操也。
现代文：制订法令，实行考核，这是君主的责任。
English: It is the responsibility of the monarch to enact laws and implement assessments.

古文：明主守，等轻重，臣主之权也。
现代文：明确属下的主管业务，区别政事的轻重缓急，这是各部大臣的职权。
English: It is the responsibility of each minister to make clear the responsibilities of their subordinates, and to distinguish between the priorities of political affairs.

古文：明赏赉，严诛责，止奸之术也。
现代文：奖赏公正，惩罚严格，这是防止坏人活动的手段。
English: Fair rewards and strict punishments are the means to prevent the activities of bad people.

古文：审开塞，守一道，为政之要也。
现代文：研究应兴应革的事项，坚持统一的方针政策，这是治理国家的关键。
English: It is the key to governing the country to study the issues of the times and to adhere to a unified policy.

古文：下达上通，至聪之听也。
现代文：下情上达，上情下通，这是全面了解情况的方法。
English: This is a method of comprehensively understanding the situation.

古文：知国有无之数，用其仂也。
现代文：了解国家资财的多少，这是节约开支的根据。
English: Knowing how much the state has is the basis for cost-saving.

古文：知彼弱者，强之体也。
现代文：了解国家的薄弱环节，这是弥补弱点，变弱为强的依据。
English: Understanding the country's weak links is the basis for remedying weaknesses and turning them into strengths.

古文：知彼动者，静之决也。
现代文：预见国家可能发生的动乱，这是防患未然安定国家的决定因素。
English: Anticipating possible unrest in the country is a decisive factor in preventing trouble and stabilizing the country.

古文：官分文武，惟王之二术也。
现代文：设置文武官吏，分管政治、军事，这是王者治理国家的两种手段。
English: The establishment of civil and military officials, in charge of politics and military affairs, are the two means by which the king governs the country.

古文：俎豆同制，天子之会也。
现代文：祭祀的制度有统一的规定，这是天予会合诸侯的仪式。
English: There is a unified regulation for the system of sacrificial rites, which is a ceremony of the Tenyo Association of lords.

古文：游说谍无自入，正议之术也。
现代文：不听信游士的邪说和间谍的诡计，这是贯彻正确主张的保证。
English: Not to listen to the heresies of wanderers and the trickery of spies is the guarantee of carrying out correct propositions.

古文：诸侯有谨天子之礼，君民继世，承王之命也。
现代文：诸侯谨守天子的礼法，君臣关系，世代相传，这是承受天子之命的前提。
English: Princes and lords carefully observe the manners and etiquette of the Son of Heaven, and the relationship between monarch and vassal is passed down from generation to generation. This is the prerequisite for receiving the order of the Son of Heaven.

古文：更易常，违王明德，故礼得以伐也。
现代文：如果改换国号变更制度，违背天子的德政，按礼就可以进行讨伐。
English: If you change the system of changing the country name and violate the German government of the Son of Heaven, you can carry out a crusade according to etiquette.

古文：官无事治，上无庆赏，民无狱讼，国无商贾，何王之至！
现代文：要做到社会安定，不须官吏去管理，万民勤奋不需上级去鼓励，民众没有纠纷，国家没有商贩，造成最好的政治局面。
English: To achieve social stability, there is no need for officials to manage, the diligence of all people does not need to be encouraged by superiors, the people have no disputes, and the country has no merchants, resulting in the best political situation.

古文：明举上达，在王垂听也。
现代文：我之所以坦率地陈述这些意见，也就是希望你能施行这种德政。
English: It is in the hope that you will practice this virtue that I am forthrightly stating these opinions.

