古文：东海大鱼
现代文：东海大鱼
English: Big fish in the East China Sea

古文：东方之大者，东海鱼焉。
现代文：东方最大的动物，是东海鱼。
English: The largest animal in the East is the fish of the East Sea.

古文：行海者，一日逢鱼头，七日逢鱼尾。
现代文：出海的人，在第一天遇见鱼头，走到第七天才遇见鱼的尾巴。
English: A man going to sea encounters the head of a fish on the first day and the tail of a fish on the seventh day.

古文：鱼产则百里水为血。
现代文：东海鱼生产的时候那百里方圆的海水都是血红的。
English: When the fish in the East China Sea give birth, the hundred-mile-square sea water is blood-red.

古文：鼍鱼
现代文：鼍鱼
English: Sea bream

古文：《博物志》云： 南海有鼍鱼，斩其首，干之，椓去其齿，而更复生者，三乃已。 
现代文：《博物志》上说： 南海有一种鼍鱼，砍下它的头，晒干了，敲去它的牙齿，然后又再生出来，再生三次才停止生长。 
English: "Natural History" said: There is a catfish in the South China Sea, cut off its head, dried in the sun, knocked out its teeth, and then regenerated, regenerated three times before it stopped growing.

古文：《南州志》亦云然。
现代文：《南州志》里也是这样说。
English: "Nanzhou History" also said so.

古文：又闻广州人说，鳄鱼能陆追牛马，水中覆舟杀人，值网则不敢触，有如此畏慎。
现代文：又听广州人说，鳄鱼能在陆地上追逐牛马，能在水里颠覆舟船吃人，碰到鱼网就不敢触碰了，它也害怕这些东西。
English: I also heard people from Guangzhou say that crocodiles can chase cattle and horses on land, can overturn boats and eat people in the water, and are afraid to touch fishing nets. They are also afraid of these things.

古文：其一孕，生卵数百于陆地，及其成形，则有蛇，有龟，有鳖，有鱼，有鼍，有为蛟者，凡十数类。
现代文：鳄鱼怀一次孕，在陆地上生下几百枚卵，等到卵成形的时候，就生出蛇、龟、鳖、鱼、鼍、还有蛟，一共有十几种。
English: Crocodiles have one pregnancy and lay hundreds of eggs on land. When the eggs are formed, they give birth to snakes, turtles, toads, fish, earthworms, and earthworms, a total of more than a dozen species.

古文：及其被人捕取宰杀之，其灵能为雷电风雨，比殆神物龙类。
现代文：等到它们被人捉住宰杀了的时候，它们的神灵能够制造雷电风雨，这大概就是龙一类的神物。
English: When they were caught and killed, their gods were able to create thunder, lightning, wind and rain, which is probably a dragon-like god.

古文：南海大鱼
现代文：南海大鱼
English: Big fish in the South China Sea

古文：岭南节度使何履光者，朱崖人也。
现代文：岭南节度使何履光，是朱崖人，住的地方靠近大海。
English: Lingnan Festival makes He Liguang, is a Zhuya people, live near the sea.

古文：所居傍大海，云，亲见大异者有三：其一曰，海中有二山，相去六七百里，晴朝远望，青翠如近。
现代文：他说，亲眼看见三件特别奇异的事。其中之一是：海中有两座山，相距六七百里，晴朗的早晨远远地望去，山上一片青翠，好象就在眼前。
English: He said that he had seen three particularly strange things with his own eyes, one of which was: there are two mountains in the sea, six or seven hundred miles apart, a clear morning looks far away, and a green mountain seems to be right in front of you.

古文：开元末，海中大雷雨，雨泥，状如吹沫，天地晦黑者七日。
现代文：唐玄宗开元末年，海里出现了大雷雨，雨中有泥，样子象吹出的泡沫，天地之间暗黑色，持续了七天。
English: At the end of the first year of the reign of Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty, there was a thunderstorm in the sea. There was mud in the rain, which looked like blown foam. It was dark and black between heaven and earth, and lasted for seven days.

古文：人从山边来者云，有大鱼，乘流入二山，进退不得。久之，其鳃挂一崖上，七日而山拆，鱼因而得去。
现代文：有个从山边来的人说，有条大鱼，顺着水流进入海中两座大山之间，不能进退，时间一长，鱼鳃挂在一个山崖上，七天以后，山崖裂了，鱼因此才能离开。
English: A man who came from the mountains said that there was a big fish that followed the current into the sea between two mountains. It couldn't go back and forth. After a long time, the fish's fin hung on a cliff. Seven days later, the cliff cracked, so the fish could leave.

古文：雷，鱼声也；雨泥，是口中吹沫也；天地黑者，是吐气也。
现代文：雷声就是鱼的叫声，雨泥是鱼口中吹出的水沫，天地黑了，是鱼吐出的水气造成的。
English: The thunder is the cry of the fish, the rain and mud are the water droplets blown out of the fish's mouth, and the sky and earth are darkened by the water vapor exhaled by the fish.

古文：其二曰，海中有洲，从广数千里，洲上有物，状如蟾蜍数枚。大者周回四五百里，小者或百余里。
现代文：其中之二是：海中有块陆地，长和宽有几千里，陆地上有几个东西，样子象蟾蜍，大的周长有四五百里，小的周长一百多里。
English: The second is that there is a piece of land in the sea that is several thousand miles long and wide, and there are several things on the land that look like clams, with a large circumference of four or five hundred miles and a small circumference of more than one hundred miles.

古文：每至望夜，口吐白气，上属于月，与月争光。
现代文：每当到了十五这天夜里，口中吐出白气，向上同月亮相连接，与月亮争辉。
English: On the night of the fifteenth day of the month, the mouth spits out white gas, which connects upward with the moon and competes for glory with the moon.

古文：其三曰，海中有山，周回数十里。
现代文：其中之三是：大海中有座山，周长有几十里。
English: Three of them are: There is a mountain in the ocean with a circumference of dozens of miles.

古文：每夏初，则有大蛇如百仞山，长不知几百里。
现代文：每年初夏的时候，就有一条大蛇象很高的山峰一样，不知道它有几百里长。
English: At the beginning of summer every year, there is a big snake like a very high mountain peak, I don't know how many hundreds of miles long it is.

古文：开元末，蛇饮其海，而水减者十余日。
现代文：唐玄宗开元末年，蛇在海里饮水，海面降低了十多天。
English: At the end of the first year of the reign of Emperor Xuanzong of Tang Dynasty, a snake drank water in the sea, and the sea level dropped for more than ten days.

古文：意如渴甚，以身绕一山数十匝，然后低头饮水。久之，为海中大物所吞。半日许，其山遂拆，蛇及山被吞俱尽，亦不知吞者是何物也。鲸鱼
现代文：样子象很渴，用身子绕着那座山一共绕了几十圈，然后才低下头来喝水，喝了很久，又被海中的大动物吞吃了，大约半天时间，那座山就崩裂了，蛇和山都吞光了，也不知道吞吃它们的是什么动物。鲸鱼
English: It looked like it was very thirsty. It made dozens of circles around the mountain with its body, and only then lowered its head to drink water. It drank for a long time, and was eaten by a large animal in the sea. After about half a day, the mountain broke apart, and the snake and the mountain were swallowed up, and it is not known what animal ate them. The whale

古文：开元末，雷州有雷公与鲸斗，身出水上，雷公数十在空中上下，或纵火，或诟击，七日方罢。
现代文：唐玄宗开元末年，在雷州有雷公与鲸鱼打斗。鲸鱼的身子露出水面，几十个雷公在空中忽上忽下，有的放火烧，有的边骂边打，斗了七天才停止。
English: At the end of the first year of Tang Xuan Zong's reign, there was a fight between Lei Gong and a whale in Leizhou. The whale's body was exposed to the water, and dozens of Lei Gongs were flying up and down in the air. Some were setting fires, while others were cursing and fighting. The fight lasted for seven days.

古文：海边居人往看，不知二者何胜，但见海水正赤。
现代文：海边的居民去观看，不知双方谁胜利了，只看见海水一片红。
English: Residents along the coast went to watch, not knowing who had won, only to see the water turn red.

古文：鲤鱼
现代文：鲤鱼
English: Sea bream

古文：开元中，台州临海，大蛇与鲤鱼斗。
现代文：唐玄宗开元年间，台州面临大海，有大蛇与鲤鱼争斗。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Xuanzong of Tang Dynasty, Taizhou faced the sea, and there were big snakes fighting with eels.

古文：其蛇大如屋，长绕孤岛数匝，引头向水。
现代文：那条蛇大得象间屋子，身长能绕孤岛好几圈，伸着头向着水面。
English: The snake was as big as a room and was long enough to make several loops around the isolated island, stretching its head out towards the water.

古文：其鱼如小山，鬐目皆赤，往来五六里，作势交击。
现代文：那条鱼象座小山，鱼脊鳍和眼睛都是红的，身长能有游五六里，它们作出要互相攻击的样子。
English: That little mountain in the constellation of Pisces. The fish's dorsal fin and eyes are red. It can swim five or six miles in length. They look like they want to attack each other.

古文：鱼用鳞鬐上触蛇，蛇以口下咋鱼。
现代文：鲤鱼用鳞和脊鳍向上撞蛇，蛇用口向下咬鲤鱼。
English: The eel bumps the snake up with its scales and dorsal fin, while the snake bites the eel down with its mouth.

古文：如是斗者三日，蛇竟为鱼触死。
现代文：象这样斗了三天，蛇竟被鲤鱼撞死了。
English: After fighting like this for three days, the snake was actually killed by the eel.

古文：海人鱼
现代文：海人鱼
English: Sea Mermaid

古文：海人鱼，东海有之，大者长五六尺，状如人，眉目、口鼻、手爪、头皆为美丽女子，无不具足。
现代文：海人鱼，东海里就有。大的长五六尺，样子象人。眉毛、眼睛、口、鼻子、手、脚和头都象美丽的女人，没有一样缺少的。
English: There is a mermaid in the East Sea. The largest mermaid is five or six feet long and looks like a human. The eyebrows, eyes, mouth, nose, hands, feet and head are all like a beautiful woman, and nothing is missing.

古文：皮肉白如玉，无鳞，有细毛，五色轻软，长一二寸。发如马尾，长五六尺。
现代文：皮肉白得象玉石，身上没有鳞，有细毛，毛分五种颜色，又轻又柔软，毛长一二寸，头发象马尾巴一样，长五六尺。
English: His skin was as white as jade, his body was without scales, he had fine hair, the hair was five colors, light and soft, the hair was one or two inches long, and his hair was like a horse's tail, five or six feet long.

古文：阴形与丈夫女子无异，临海鳏寡多取得，养之于池沼。
现代文：阴部的形状和男人女人的一样，靠海的鳏夫寡妇大多都捉海人鱼，放在池沼中养育。
English: The shape of the nether regions is the same as that of men and women, and most widows and widowers who live by the sea catch mermaids and raise them in ponds.

古文：交合之际，与人无异，亦不伤人。
现代文：交合时，与人没什么两样，也不伤人。
English: When they mate, they are no different from humans and do not hurt anyone.

古文：南海大蟹
现代文：南海大蟹
English: South Sea crabs

古文：近世有波斯常云，乘舶泛海，往天竺国者已六七度。
现代文：近代，有个波斯人常说，乘坐着大海船渡海，前往天竺国已经六七次了。
English: In modern times, a Persian man used to say that he had crossed the sea in a large ship and had been to the Land of Heaven and Earth six or seven times.

古文：其最后，舶漂入大海，不知几千里，至一海岛。
现代文：那最后一次，海船漂进大海，不知漂了几千里，漂到一个海岛，在岛上看见一个胡人穿着用草和树叶编的衣服，很惊诧地问他。
English: That last time, the ship drifted thousands of miles out to sea and came to an island. On the island, he was surprised to see a goose wearing a dress made of grass and leaves, and asked him about it.

古文：岛中见胡人衣草叶，惧而问之，胡云，昔与同行侣数十人漂没，唯己随流，得至于此。因而采木实草根食之，得以不死。
现代文：胡人说： 从前和自己一起的几十个同行伙伴漂在海上沉没了，只有自己随着水流，才能到达这个地方，因此就采树上的水果和草根吃，这才能活下来。 
English: Hu said: Dozens of his companions who were once with him have drowned at sea. Only by following the current can he reach this place, so he picks fruits and roots from trees to eat in order to survive.

古文：其众哀焉，遂舶载之，胡乃说，岛上大山悉是车渠、玛瑙、玻璃等诸宝，不可胜数，舟人莫不弃己贱货取之。
现代文：船上的人都可怜他，就让他乘坐海船。胡人这才说： 这个岛上的大山全是车渠、玛瑙、玻璃等各种宝贝，多得数不过来。 船上的人都扔掉自己的贱货去取宝贝。
English: The people on board took pity on him and let him go on the sea-boat. Then the fox said: "The mountains on this island are full of all kinds of treasures, such as canals, onyx, glass, and so on, too many to count. The people on the boat threw away their worthless goods to get the treasure.

古文：既满船，胡令速发，山神若至，必当怀惜。
现代文：装满船后，那胡人命令赶快开船，如果山神来了，一定会痛惜丢失的宝贝。
English: After filling the boat, the Nahu ordered the boat to set sail immediately. If the mountain god came, he would surely regret the lost treasure.

古文：于是随风挂帆，行可四十余里，遥见峰上有赤物如蛇形，久之渐大。
现代文：于是顺着风挂上船帆。走了大约四十多里，远远地看见山峰上有个红色的东西象蛇一样，时间一长渐渐地变得大了。
English: So he sailed with the wind, and after sailing for more than forty miles, he saw in the distance a red snake-like thing on a mountain peak, which gradually grew larger as time went on.

古文：胡曰： 此山神惜宝，来逐我也，为之奈何？ 
现代文：胡人说： 这是山神痛惜宝贝，来追赶我们了，怎么办呢？ 
English: Hu said, "It's the mountain god's pity, darling. He's come to chase us. What should we do?"

古文：舟人莫不战惧。
现代文：船上的人都很害怕。
English: Everyone on board was scared.

古文：俄见两山从海中出，高数百丈，胡喜曰： 此两山者，大蟹螯也。其蟹常好与山神斗，神多不胜，甚惧之。
现代文：不一会儿，就看见两座山从海中伸出来，高有几百丈。胡人高兴地说： 这两座山，是大蟹的螯，那个大蟹常常喜欢与山神打斗，山神大多数没取胜，很惧怕大蟹。
English: After a while, he saw two mountains protruding from the sea, several hundred meters high. The fox said happily: These two mountains are the crab's nests. The crab often likes to fight with the mountain gods. Most of the mountain gods did not win, and they are very afraid of the crab.

古文：今其螯出，无忧矣。 
现代文：现在，大蟹的螯伸出来了，不用担心了。 
English: Now that the crab's beak is sticking out, don't worry.

古文：大蛇寻至蟹许，盘斗良久，蟹夹蛇头，死于水上，如连山。
现代文：大蛇很快到了大蟹跟前，翻动着斗了很久，蟹夹断了蛇头，蛇死在水上，象连绵的山。
English: The snake soon came to the crab, flipped and fought for a long time, the crab clamp broke the snake's head, and the snake died on the water, like a continuous mountain.

古文：船人因是得济也。
现代文：船上的人因此得救了。
English: As a result, the people on board were saved.

古文：海
现代文：海
English: Sea bream

古文：海鱼，即海上最伟者也，小者亦千余尺。
现代文：海鱼，是海上最大的动物，小的也有一千多尺。
English: The sea trout is the largest animal in the sea, and the smallest is more than a thousand feet long.

古文：吞舟之说，固非谬矣。
现代文：吞舟的说法，并不是荒谬的事。
English: The boat-swallowing argument is not an absurdity.

古文：每岁，广州常发铜船过南安货易，北人有偶求此行，往复一年，便成斑白。云，路经调黎深阔处，又见十余山，或出或没，初甚讶之。
现代文：每年，广州常常开出铜船到南安去进行贸易，偶尔有个北方人要求去走一趟，往来一年，头发便斑白了，他说： 一天，船路过调黎的又深又宽的地方，就看见十多座山，有时露出来，有时沉没下去，开始很惊讶。
English: Every year, Guangzhou would often sail a copper ship to Nan'an to conduct trade. Occasionally, a northerner would ask to take a trip. After a year of traveling back and forth, his hair turned white. He said: One day, the ship passed through a deep and wide place in Zhao Li, and he saw more than ten mountains. Sometimes they were exposed, and sometimes they sank. He was very surprised.

古文：篙工曰： 非山，海鱼背也。 
现代文：撑篙工说： 这不是山，是海鱼的脊背。 
English: "It's not a mountain, it's the backbone of a sea trout," said the propper.

古文：果见双目闪烁，鬐鬣若簸米箕。
现代文：果然看见双眼在闪烁，海鱼的脊鬐象簸箕一样。
English: Sure enough, I saw that the eyes were twinkling and the dorsal fin of the sea bass was like a fin.

古文：危沮之际，日中忽雨霂霡。舟子曰： 此鱼喷气，水散于空，风势吹来若雨耳。 
现代文：正在危险沮丧的时候，大晴天里忽然下起了小雨，舟子说： 这是鱼喷气，水珠散在空中，顺风吹来象雨罢了。 
English: When he was in danger and depressed, a light rain suddenly fell on a sunny day. Funako said, "It's a squid jet, water droplets are scattered in the air, and the tail wind is blowing like rain."

古文：及近鱼，即鼓船而噪，倏尔而没去。
现代文：等到靠近鱼，人们就敲着船大声乱叫，鱼一下子就沉了下去。
English: When they got close to the eel, they knocked on the boat and shouted loudly, and the eel sank immediately.

古文：交趾回，乃舍舟，取雷州缘岸而归，不惮苦辛，盖避海之难也。
现代文：从交趾回来，就扔了船，顺着雷州的海岸边上回到广州，不怕苦和累，就是为了躲避海的灾难。
English: After returning from Kota Kinabalu, he abandoned the boat and followed the coast of Leizhou back to Guangzhou, not afraid of hardship and fatigue, just to avoid the disaster of the tsunami.

古文：乃静思曰： 设使老瞋目张喙，我舟若一叶之坠眢井耳，宁得不为人皓首乎？ 
现代文：于是静下心来想一想说： 假如老海睁开眼睛张开嘴巴，我们坐的船就会象一片树叶掉到枯井里一样，怎么能使人不变成白头发呢？ 
English: So I thought about it and said: If the old seagull opened his eyes and mouth, the boat we were on would be like a leaf falling into a dry well. How could people keep their hair from turning white?

古文：鳄鱼
现代文：鳄鱼
English: Crocodile

古文：鳄鱼，其身土黄色，有四足，修尾，形状如鼍，而举止矫疾。
现代文：鳄鱼的身体是土黄色的，有四只脚，长尾巴，形状象鼍一样。
English: The body of the crocodile is earthy yellow, with four legs, a long tail, and a shape like a beak.

古文：口森锯齿，往往害人。
现代文：可是动作矫捷，口里阴森森地长着锯一样的牙齿，常常害人。
English: However, it is quick-moving, and its mouth is ghastly with saw-like teeth, which are often harmful.

古文：南中鹿多，最惧此物。
现代文：南中一带鹿很多，鹿最怕鳄鱼。
English: There are many deer in the south-central area, and the deer are most afraid of crocodiles.

古文：鹿走崖岸之上，群鳄嗥叫其下，鹿必怖惧落崖，多为鳄鱼所得，亦物之相摄伏也。
现代文：鹿走到山崖上，一群鳄鱼在崖下嗥叫，鹿会因为惊吓害怕而掉到山崖下，大多被鳄鱼捉住吃了，这也是动物的互相克制。
English: A deer walks up to a cliff, a group of crocodiles howl under the cliff, the deer will fall under the cliff because of shock and fear, and most of them are caught and eaten by crocodiles. This is also a mutual restraint of animals.

古文：故太尉相国李德裕贬官潮州，经鳄鱼滩，损坏舟船，平生宝玩，古书图画，一时沈失。
现代文：从前的太尉宰相李德裕，被贬官到潮州，路过鳄鱼滩，船损坏了，平生积蓄的宝贝珍玩、古书和图画，一下子都沉没丢失了。
English: The former First Lieutenant Prime Minister Li Deyu, who was demoted to Chaozhou, passed the crocodile beach, the ship was damaged, and the precious toys, old books and pictures he had saved all his life were suddenly lost.

古文：遂召舶上昆仑取之，见鳄鱼极多，不敢辄近，乃是鳄鱼之窟宅也。
现代文：于是叫来大船上的黑人下水捞取，看见鳄鱼极多，不敢靠近。这里是鳄鱼的洞穴。
English: So he called the blacks on the big boat to go down to the water to fish. They saw a lot of crocodiles and did not dare to approach. This is the crocodile cave.

古文：吴余鲙鱼
现代文：吴余鲙鱼
English: Wu Yu squid

古文：吴王孙权曾江行，食鲙有余，因弃之中流，化而为鱼。
现代文：吴王孙权曾经在江上泛舟，吃完鲙鱼，把剩下的扔到江中，变化成鱼。
English: King Sun Quan of Wu once went rafting on the river. After eating eel, he threw the rest into the river and it turned into fish.

古文：今有鱼犹名吴余鲙者，长数寸，大如箸，尚类鲙形也。
现代文：现在有一种鱼还叫吴余鲙，长几寸，粗细象筷子一样，还类似鲙鱼的形状。
English: Now there is a kind of fish also called Wu Yujing, a few inches long, thick and thin like chopsticks, and also similar to the shape of a carp.

古文：石头鱼
现代文：石头鱼
English: Stonefish

古文：石头鱼，状如鱼，随其大小，脑中有二石子，如乔麦。莹白如玉。
现代文：石头鱼，样子象鱼，不论是大鱼还是小鱼，脑中都有两个石子，象荞麦粒一样，晶莹洁白象玉石。
English: Stone fish, look like carp, whether big fish or small fish, have two stones in the brain, like buckwheat grains, crystal clear white like jade.

古文：有好奇者，多市鱼之小者，贮于竹器，任其坏烂，即淘之，取其鱼脑石子，以植酒筹，颇脱俗。
现代文：有好奇的人，买了很多小石头鱼，装在竹器里，任凭它腐败。就用水淘，取出脑中的石子，用来做喝酒计数的工具，非常与众不同。
English: Curious people bought a lot of small stone fish, put it in a bamboo container, and let it rot. They used water to pick out the stones in the brain, and used it as a tool for counting alcohol. It was very unique.

古文：黄腊鱼
现代文：黄腊鱼
English: Yellow Waxfish

古文：黄腊鱼，即江湖之横鱼。头嘴长，鳞皆金色，脔为炙，虽美而毒。
现代文：黄腊鱼，就是江河潮水中的横鱼，头和嘴很长，鳞全是金色的。把鱼肉烤吃，味道虽美却有毒。
English: Yellow cod is a type of catfish found in rivers and tidal waters. It has a long head and mouth, and its scales are all golden. When grilled, the fish meat has a beautiful but poisonous taste.

古文：或煎煿干，夜即有光如笼烛。
现代文：或者煎炒，或者晒干，夜里就放光象灯笼里的蜡烛一样。
English: Or fried, or dried in the sun, at night they give off light like a candle in a lantern.

古文：北人有寓南海者，市此鱼食之，弃其头于粪筐。
现代文：有个暂时住在南海的北方人，买了这种鱼吃，把鱼头扔到粪筐里，半夜以后，忽然有了亮光。
English: A northerner temporarily living in the South China Sea bought this fish to eat, threw the head of the fish into the waste basket, and after midnight, there was suddenly light.

古文：中夜后，忽有光明，近视之，益恐惧，以烛照之，但鱼头耳，去烛复明。
现代文：走近一看，更是害怕，点蜡烛一照，只是个鱼头罢了，拿开蜡烛又放出光亮。
English: When I looked closer, I was even more afraid. I lit a candle and saw that it was just a fish head. I took out the candle and let out the light.

古文：以为不祥，各启食奁，窥其余脔，亦如萤光。达明，遍询土人，乃此鱼之常也，忧疑顿释。
现代文：他认为是不吉祥的事，就把所有的食具都打开看，看那吃剩的鱼，也闪着莹光一样，到了第二天，询问了很多当地人，都说这是正常的事。他的忧虑和担心便没有了。
English: He thought it was unlucky, so he opened all the utensils and looked at the leftover fish, which also glistened. The next day, he asked many local people and they all said it was normal. His worries and concerns were gone.

古文：乌贼鱼
现代文：乌贼鱼
English: The cuttlefish

古文：乌贼，旧说名河伯从事。
现代文：乌贼，旧的传说名叫 河伯从事 。
English: squid, an old legend called the Hebe is engaged in.

古文：小者遇大鱼，辄放墨方数尺以混身，江东人或取其墨书契，以脱人财物。
现代文：小乌贼遇到大鱼，就放出墨水染黑方圆好几尺，用来藏身。有的江东人取出它的墨用来写契约，以便诈骗别人的钱物。
English: When a small squid encounters a big fish, it will release ink to dye a black square circle several feet long to hide. Some Jiangdong people take out its ink to write contracts in order to defraud other people's money.

古文：书迹如淡墨，逾年字消，唯空纸耳。
现代文：写出的字迹象淡墨，过一年字就消失了，只剩下一张空白纸。
English: The written words are in light ink, and after a year the words disappear, leaving only a blank piece of paper.

古文：海人言，昔秦王东游，弃算袋于海，化为此鱼，形如算袋，两带极长。
现代文：海人说： 从前秦王东游，把一个算袋扔到海里，变成了这种鱼。 这种鱼外形象算袋一样，两根带子很长。
English: The seafarer said, "Once upon a time, King Qin traveled to the East and threw a counting bag into the sea, which turned into this fish.

古文：一说，乌贼有矴，遇风则前一须下矴。
现代文：另一种说法是，乌贼身上有个石碇，遇到大风时它的前一根须子就卷住石碇。
English: Another theory is that the squid has a stone cocoon on its body, and when it encounters a strong wind, its front whisker wraps around the stone cocoon.

古文：横公鱼
现代文：横公鱼
English: Male horse mackerel

古文：北方荒中有石湖，方千里，岸深五丈余，恒冰，唯夏至左右五六十日解耳。
现代文：北方的荒野中有个石湖，方圆有千里，湖岸有五丈多深，长年结冰，只有夏至前后五六十天才解冻。
English: There is a stone lake in the northern wilderness, with a circumference of thousands of miles, the shore of the lake is more than five meters deep, and it has been frozen for many years. It only thaws around the summer solstice for fifty or sixty days.

古文：有横公鱼，长七八尺，形如鲤而赤，昼在水中，夜化为人。
现代文：湖里有种横公鱼，长七八尺，样子象鲤鱼，红色，白天生活在水里，夜里变成人，用尖物刺它刺不进去，用开水煮它煮不死。
English: In the lake, there is a kind of horizontal male fish, seven or eight feet long, looks like an eel, red, lives in the water during the day, turns into a person at night, cannot be pierced with a sharp object, and cannot be boiled with boiling water.

古文：刺之不入，煮之不死，以乌梅二枚煮之则死，食之可止邪病。
现代文：用两个乌梅果煮就能煮死它，吃了可以治邪病。
English: If you boil it with two ume fruits, you can cook it to death. If you eat it, you can cure evil diseases.

古文：骨雷
现代文：骨雷
English: Bone mines

古文：扶南国出鳄鱼，大者二三丈，四足，似守宫状。
现代文：扶南国出产鳄鱼，大的有二三丈长，四只脚，样子象守宫，常常吞吃人。
English: Crocodiles are produced in Funan Province. The largest ones are two or three meters long and have four legs. They look like they are guarding a palace and often eat people.

古文：常生吞人，扶南王令人捕此鱼，置于堑中，以罪人投之。若合死，鳄鱼乃食之；无罪者，嗅而不食。
现代文：扶南国王派人捕捉这种鱼，放在壕沟里，把犯罪的人扔进壕沟，如果该死，鳄鱼就吃了他，没有罪的人，嗅一嗅它也不吃。
English: The King of Funan sent someone to catch this fish and put it in a ditch. He threw the criminal into the ditch. If he should die, the crocodile would eat him. If he was not guilty, he would not even sniff it.

古文：鳄鱼别号忽雷，熊能制之。握其嘴至岸，裂擘食之。
现代文：鳄鱼另外有个称呼叫忽雷，熊能制住鳄鱼，熊握住鳄鱼的嘴拖到岸上，撕开来吃。
English: Crocodiles are also known to call thunder and lightning. The bear can restrain the crocodile. The bear holds the crocodile's mouth, drags it to the shore, and tears it open to eat it.

古文：一名骨雷，秋化为虎，三爪，出南海思雷二州，临海英潘村多有之。
现代文：鳄鱼的另一个名叫骨雷，秋天变化成老虎，三只爪，出产在南海的思州和雷州，靠海的英潘村有很多。
English: Another crocodile is called Bone Lei, which turns into a tiger in autumn, and Three Claws, which is produced in Shizhou and Leizhou in the South China Sea, and there are many in Yingpan Village by the sea.

古文：彭蚏
现代文：彭蚏
English: Peng Quan

古文：蟹属名彭蚏，以螯取土作丸，从潮来至潮去，或三百丸，因名三百丸大彭蚏。
现代文：蟹一类中有名叫彭蚏的，用螯取土造成土丸，从涨潮到退潮，大约能制成三百个土丸，因而给它起名叫三百丸大彭蚏。
English: One of the crabs, known as the Penghu, uses its beak to scoop up soil to create a mound. From high tide to low tide, it can make about three hundred mounds, which is why it is called the three-hundred-round Penghu.

古文：鲮鱼
现代文：鲮鱼
English: Sea bream

古文：鲮鱼吐舌，蚁附之，因吞之。
现代文：鲮鱼吐出舌头，蚂蚁爬到舌头上，因而吞吃了蚂蚁。
English: The eel spits out its tongue and the ants crawl onto it and eat the ants.

古文：又开鳞甲，使蚁入其中，乃奋迅，则舐取之。
现代文：鲮鱼还张开鳞甲，让蚂蚁爬进去，于是很快地合上鳞甲，然后就用舌头舐吃了。
English: The eel also opened its scales to let the ants crawl in, then quickly closed the scales and licked them with its tongue.

古文：鲵鱼
现代文：鲵鱼
English: Sea bream

古文：金义岭之西南，有盘龙山，山有乳洞，斜贯一溪，号为灵水溪。
现代文：金义岭的西南方，有座盘龙山，山上有个钟乳石山洞，洞里斜着贯穿着一条溪水，人们称之为灵水溪。
English: In the southwest of Jinyi Mountains, there is a Panlong Mountain. There is a stalactite cave on the mountain. A stream runs diagonally through the cave, which is called Lingshui Creek.

古文：溪内有鱼，皆修尾四足，丹其腹，游泳自若，渔人不敢捕之。
现代文：溪内有鱼，全都是长尾巴四只脚，它的腹部是红色的，自由自在地游泳，渔人不敢捕捉它。
English: There were fish in the stream, all of them long-tailed, four-legged, with red bellies, swimming freely, and the fishermen were afraid to catch them.

古文：《尔雅》云： 鲵似鲇，四足，声如小儿。 
现代文：《尔雅》里说： 鲵鱼象鲇鱼一样，四只脚，叫声象小孩一样。 
English: In "Lya" it says: "The eel is like an eel, with four legs and a cry like a child.

古文：金商州溪内亦有此鱼，谓之魶鱼。
现代文：金商州的溪水里也有这种鱼，把这种鱼叫做魶鱼。
English: This kind of fish is also found in the streams of Jinshangzhou. This kind of fish is called carp.

古文：比目鱼
现代文：比目鱼
English: Flounder

古文：比目鱼，南人谓之鞋底鱼，江淮谓之拖沙鱼。
现代文：比目鱼，南方人叫它鞋底鱼，江淮一带的人叫它拖沙鱼。
English: Flounder, people in the south call it sole fish, people in the Jianghuai area call it towfish.

古文：《尔雅》云：东方有比目鱼焉，不比不行，其名谓之鲽。状如牛脾，细鳞紫色，一面一目，两片相合乃行。
现代文：《尔雅》上说：东方有一种比目鱼，不是一对不能行走，名叫鲽，样子象牛的脾脏，长细鳞，紫色，只有一面有一只眼睛，两条鱼相合才能行走。
English: "Rya" said: "In the East, there is a flounder, not a pair of fish that cannot walk. It is called a carp. It looks like a cow's spleen. It is long, thin, and purple. It only has one eye on one side. The two fish can only walk when they are together.

古文：鹿子鱼
现代文：鹿子鱼
English: Roe deer fish

古文：鹿子鱼，頳色，其尾鬣皆有鹿斑，赤黄色。
现代文：鹿子鱼，是红色的，它的尾巴和小伷都有梅花鹿一样的斑点，斑点是红黄色的。
English: Deer roe is red, its tail and little beak have spots like sika deer, the spots are reddish-yellow.

古文：《罗州图经》云： 州南海中有洲，每春夏，此鱼跳出洲，化而为鹿。 
现代文：《罗州图经》上说： 罗州南面的海里有块陆地，每到春夏时，这种鱼跳上陆地，变成鹿。
English: "Luozhou Pictorial Classic" said: There is a piece of land in the sea south of Luozhou. Every spring and summer, this fish jumps onto the land and turns into a deer.

古文：曾有人拾得一鱼，头已化鹿，尾犹是鱼。
现代文：曾经有人拾到一条这种鱼，头已经变成鹿，尾巴还是龟尾巴。 
English: Someone once found one of these fish with its head turned into a deer and its tail into a turtle's tail.

古文：南人云： 鱼化为鹿，肉腥，不堪食。 
现代文：南方人说： 鱼变成鹿，肉有腥气，不能吃。
English: Nanfang people said: The fish has turned into a deer. The meat has a bad odor and cannot be eaten.

古文：子归母
现代文：子归母
English: A son returns to his mother

古文：杨孚《交州异物志》云： 鲛之为鱼，其子既育，惊必归母，还其腹。
现代文：杨孚的《交州异物志》上说： 鲛这种鱼，它的幼鱼长成以后，受惊便回到母亲身边，回到母亲的腹中去。
English: Yang Fu's "History of Foreign Objects in Jiaozhou" said: "This fish, after its young fish grow up, is frightened and returns to its mother's side, back to its mother's belly.

古文：小则如之，大则不复。 
现代文：小时如此，大时就不这样了。 
English: This is the case during the day, but not during the night.

古文：《潘州记》云： 鱼昔鱼长二丈，大数围。
现代文：《潘州记》上说： 鱼昔长二丈，大有好几围。
English: "The Chronicle of Panzhou" said: The fish used to be twice as long and had several girths.

古文：初生子，子小，随母觅食，暮惊则还入母腹。 
现代文：刚刚生下幼鱼，鱼很小，跟着母亲找食吃，突然受惊就回到母亲的肚子里。 
English: A baby fish has just been born. The fish is very small and follows its mother to find food. Suddenly, it is startled and returns to its mother's belly.

古文：《吴录》云： 鱼昔鱼子，朝出索食，暮入母腹。 
现代文：《吴录》说： 鱼昔鱼的幼鱼，早晨出去找食吃，晚上回到母亲的肚子里。 
English: "Wu Lu" said: "Fish used to be the young fish of fish, go out in the morning to find food to eat, and return to the mother's belly in the evening.

古文：《南越志》云： 暮从脐入，旦从口出也。 
现代文：《南越志》上说： 晚上从肚脐进去，早晨从口中出来。 
English: "The South Vietnam Chronicle" said: "It enters through the navel in the evening and comes out of the mouth in the morning.

古文：鲋鮧鱼
现代文：鲋鮧鱼
English: Sea bream

古文：鲋鮧鱼，文斑如虎。
现代文：鲋鮧鱼，身上的纹理和斑点象老虎一样。
English: The texture and spots of the eel are like those of a tiger.

古文：俗云，煮之不熟，食者必死。
现代文：俗话说： 煮不熟的鱼，吃了必死。 
English: As the saying goes: If you eat undercooked fish, you will die.

古文：相传以为常矣。
现代文：传说中认为这是很平常的。
English: Legend has it that this is quite common.

古文：饶州有吴生者，家甚丰足，妻家亦富。夫妇和睦，曾无隙间。
现代文：饶州有个吴生，家里很富裕，妻子家也富足，夫妻之间很和睦，从来没有隔阂。
English: There is a Wu Sheng in Raozhou. His family is very wealthy, and his wife's family is also wealthy. The husband and wife are very harmonious, and there has never been a rift.

古文：一旦，吴生醉归，投身床上，妻为整衣解履，扶舁其足。醉者运动，误中妻之心胸，其妻蹶然而死，醉者不知也。
现代文：有一天，吴生喝醉酒回到家里，横身躺在床上，妻子替他脱下衣服和鞋子，抬起他的脚，吴生的脚乱动了一下，无意中踢中了妻子的心胸部位，他的妻子跌倒地上就死了，吴生喝醉了一点也不知道。
English: One day, Wu Sheng came home drunk and lay on his side on the bed. His wife took off his clothes and shoes for him and lifted his feet. Wu Sheng's feet moved a bit and inadvertently kicked his wife in the chest. His wife fell to the ground and died. Wu Sheng did not know he was drunk.

古文：遽为妻族所凌执，云殴击致毙。
现代文：他很快被妻族的人凌辱捆绑起来，说妻子是被吴生殴打而死的，关到狱中打了一年的官司。
English: He was quickly tied up and abused by members of his wife's family, who said that his wife had been beaten to death by Wu Sheng. He spent a year in prison while fighting a lawsuit.

古文：狱讼经年，州郡不能理，以事上闻。吴生亲族，惧敕命到而必有明刑，为举族之辱，因饷狱生鲋鮧。
现代文：州里和郡里不能处理，把事情报到朝廷，吴生的亲族，害怕皇上的命令下来一定有明确的刑罚，成为全族人的耻辱，因而给关在监狱里的吴生吃鲋鮧鱼。
English: The prefecture and county could not handle it, and reported the matter to the imperial court. Wu Sheng's relatives, fearing that the emperor's order would definitely come down with a clear punishment and become a disgrace to the whole family, gave Wu Sheng, who was in prison, eel to eat.

古文：如此数四，竟不能害，益加充悦，俄而会赦获免。
现代文：一共吃了四次，竟然不能害死他，吴生显得更加充实有精神，不久遇到大赦被免罪。
English: They ate four times in total, and they couldn't kill him. Wu Sheng appeared to be fuller and more spirited, and was soon pardoned by an amnesty.

古文：还家之后，胤嗣繁盛，年洎八十，竟以寿终。
现代文：回家以后，子孙很昌盛，活到八十岁，竟然在家安然死去。
English: After returning home, his children and grandchildren were very prosperous. He lived to be eighty years old, and died peacefully at home.

古文：且烹之不熟，尚能杀人，生陷数四，不能为害，此其命与？
现代文：都说煮不熟的鲋鮧，吃了能死人，吴生吃了四次，没受伤害，这就是他的命运吧。
English: They all say that if you eat undercooked clams, you could die. Wu Sheng ate clams four times and was not harmed. I guess this is his fate.

古文：鲫鱼
现代文：鲫鱼
English: Sea bream

古文：东南海中有祖州，鲫鱼出焉。
现代文：东南海中有个祖州，鲫鱼就出产在那里。
English: In the southeastern South China Sea, there is a place called Zuzhou, where eels are produced.

古文：长八尺，食之宜暑而避风，此鱼状，即与江湖小鲫鱼相类耳。
现代文：长有八尺，吃了它能解暑避寒。这种鱼的样子，就同江河湖泊中的小鲫鱼相类似。
English: With a length of eight feet, eating it can relieve the summer and avoid the cold. The appearance of this fish is similar to the small carp in rivers and lakes.

古文：浔阳有青林湖，鲫鱼大者二尺余，小者满尺，食之肥美，亦可止寒热也。
现代文：浔阳有个青林湖。鲫鱼大的有二尺多长，小的有一尺长，吃这种鱼，味道肥美，也能治寒热病。
English: There is a Qinglin Lake in Shenyang. The big eels are more than two feet long, and the small ones are one foot long. If you eat this kind of fish, it tastes delicious and can also cure colds and fevers.

古文：鯌鱼
现代文：鯌鱼
English: Sea bream

古文：鯌鱼，济南郡东北有鯌坑，传云，魏景明中，有人穿井得鱼，大如镜。
现代文：鯌鱼，济南郡的东北有个鯌坑。据传说：北魏景明年间，有人挖井挖到一条鱼，大小象个镜子。
English: According to legend, during the Northern Wei Dynasty, someone dug a well and found a fish the size of a mirror.

古文：其夜，河水溢入此坑，坑中居人，皆为鯌鱼焉。
现代文：那天夜里，河水上涨流入这个坑，坑中的居民，都变成了鯌鱼。
English: That night, the river rose and flowed into the pit, and the inhabitants of the pit turned into carp.

古文：黄魟鱼
现代文：黄魟鱼
English: Stingray swims

古文：黄魟鱼，色黄无鳞，头尖，身似大槲叶，口在颔下，眼后有耳，窍通于脑，尾长一尺，末三刺，甚毒。
现代文：黄魟鱼，黄颜色不长鳞，头是尖的，身子象大槲树的叶子，嘴在下巴的下面，眼睛后面有耳朵，耳眼通到脑子里，尾巴长一尺，尾巴尖有三根尖刺，有剧毒。
English: Stingray, the yellow color is not long scales, the head is pointed, the body is like the leaves of a large eucalyptus, the mouth is under the chin, there are ears behind the eyes, the ears and eyes pass into the brain, the tail is one foot long, the tail tip has three spikes, it is highly poisonous.

古文：蟕虫隽
现代文：蟕虫隽
English: Insect repellent

古文：蟕虫隽者，俗谓之兹夷，乃山龟之巨者。
现代文：蟕虫隽，人们叫它兹夷，是山龟之中形状最大的。
English: The giant tortoise, called Ziyi, is the largest tortoise in the world.

古文：人立其背，可负而行。
现代文：人站在它的背上，能驮着你行走，出产在潮循山中。
English: People can stand on its back, walk around you, and produce crops in the mountains.

古文：产潮循山中，乡人采之，取壳以货。要全其壳，须以木楔出肉。
现代文：乡里人捉到它，取它的壳去卖。想要它完整的壳，必须用木楔插入弄出里面的肉。
English: Villagers catch it, take its shell and sell it. If you want its complete shell, you have to use a wooden wedge to get the meat inside.

古文：龟吼如牛，声响山谷。
现代文：龟吼叫象牛叫一样，叫声能响遍山谷。
English: A turtle's roar is like a cow's. It can be heard throughout the valley.

古文：广州有巧匠，取其甲黄明无日脚者，煮而拍之，陷黑玳瑁花，以为梳篦杯器之属，状甚明媚。
现代文：广州有巧匠，取龟甲中的黄色润泽没有黑晕的，用水煮然后拍打，嵌上黑色的玳瑁花，用来制作梳子、篦子、酒杯一类的器具，样子很好看。
English: There is a craftsman in Guangzhou who takes the yellow glaze from the tortoise shell, boils it with water and then beats it, and embeds black enamel flowers. It is used to make combs, tweezers, wine glasses and other utensils, and looks very good.

古文：海燕
现代文：海燕
English: Petrels

古文：齐监官县石浦有海鱼，乘潮来去，长三十余丈，黑色无鳞，其声如牛，土人呼为海燕。
现代文：齐地监官县的石浦有海鱼，鱼是趁涨潮落潮时来去。长三十多丈，黑色不长鳞。它的叫声象牛叫，当地人叫它海燕。
English: There are sea fish in Shipo, Qiidi Supervisor County. The fish takes advantage of the high tide and low tide to come and go. It is more than 30 meters long, black and not long. Its call sounds like a cow, and the locals call it a petrel.

