古文：杨副使僧珉楚陈守规广陵贾人浦城人刘道士清源都将王誗妻林昌业潘袭胡澄王攀郑守澄刘骘
现代文：杨副使僧珉楚陈守规广陵贾人浦城人刘道士清源都将王誗妻林昌业潘袭胡澄王攀郑守澄刘骘
English: Yang vice envoys the monk Jie Chu Chen Shou Gu Gu Guang Ling Jia Ren Pu Cheng Ren Liu Daoshi Qingyuan both Wang Jie's wife Lin Changye Pan Wei Hu Cheng Wang Pan Zheng Shou Cheng Liu Jie

古文：杨副使
现代文：杨副使
English: Vice-Envoy Yang Zhou

古文：壬午岁，广陵瓜州市中，有人市果实甚急。
现代文：壬午年间，广陵瓜州的街上，有个人急着买果子。
English: During the Jingu period, on the streets of Guazhou, Guangling, there was a man in a hurry to buy fruit.

古文：或问所用，云：吾长官明日上事，有问长官为谁，云：杨副使也。
现代文：有问买它作什么，回答说：我家长官明天要上任。又有人问长官是谁，回答说是杨副使。
English: When asked what he was buying it for, he replied: "My parent official will take office tomorrow." Another person asked who the official was, and he replied that it was Vice-Ambassador Yang.

古文：又问官署何在，云：金山之东。遂去，不可复问。时浙西有副使被召之扬都，明日，船至金山，无故而没。
现代文：又问杨副使的官府在哪里，说是在金山之东，说罢，买水果的就走了，不知去了哪里，当时，浙西有一名副使被召到扬都，第二天，他坐的船走到金山时无缘无故地就沉没在江中了。
English: He also asked the Yang deputy envoy where the government office was, saying that it was in the east of Jinshan, and the fruit buyer left without knowing where he went. At that time, a deputy envoy from western Zhejiang was summoned to Yangdu. The next day, when he went to Jinshan, the boat he was on sank in the river for no reason.

古文：僧珉楚
现代文：僧珉楚
English: Sanghyeon Cho

古文：广陵法云寺僧珉楚，常与中山贾人章某者亲熟。章死，珉楚为设斋诵经。
现代文：广陵法云寺有个和尚叫珉楚，曾和中山县的商人章某是好友，后来章某死了，珉楚为他设斋念经超度亡灵。
English: There is a monk at Guangling Fanyun Temple named Zou Chu. He was once a good friend of Zhang Mou, a merchant from Zhongshan County. Later, Zhang Mou died, and Zou Chu set up a fast for him to recite the Sutra of the Dead.

古文：数月，忽遇章于市中，楚未食，章即延入食店，为置胡饼。
现代文：几个月后，珉楚突然在街上遇见了章某。当时珉楚还没吃饭，章某就请他进了饭馆，买了几个烧饼。
English: A few months later, Zou Chu suddenly met Zhang Mou on the street. At that time, Zou Chu had not eaten, Zhang Mou invited him into the restaurant and bought a few biscuits.

古文：既食，楚问：君已死，那得在此？
现代文：两个人吃饭时，珉楚就问道：你已经死了，怎么能出现在这里呢？
English: When the two of them were eating, Gaochu asked, "You're already dead, how can you appear here?"

古文：章曰：然，吾以小罪而未得解免，今配为扬州掠剩鬼。
现代文：章某说：是的。我因为生前的一点不大的罪而受到阴府惩罚，发配我到扬州当掠剩鬼。
English: Zhang Mou said: Yes. I was punished by the underworld for a small crime in my lifetime, and I was sent to Yangzhou to be a ghost.

古文：复问何为掠剩，曰：凡吏人贾贩，利息皆有数常，过数得之，即为余剩，吾得掠而有之。
现代文：问他什么叫掠剩，鬼说：凡是官员商贩，他们的利润都有一定的数目，超过了这个数目就是不该得的，就叫 剩余 ，我就可把这些剩余的钱物掠为己有。
English: Asked him what he meant by "loot surplus," the ghost said: "All officials and merchants have a certain amount of profit, and if it exceeds this amount, it is not deserved, it is called "surplus," and I can take these surplus money and goods as my own."

古文：今人间如吾辈甚多。
现代文：现在派在人间和我一样的很多。
English: There are many like me in the world now.

古文：因指路人男女曰，某人某人，皆是也。
现代文：说着就指着路上的一些男女说某人某人都是掠剩鬼。
English: While talking, he pointed to some men and women on the road and said that some people are leftover ghosts.

古文：顷之。有一僧过于前，又曰：此僧亦是也。
现代文：不一会儿，有一个和尚走过他们面前，章某指着和尚说：他也是个掠剩鬼。
English: After a while, a monk walked in front of them. Zhang pointed at the monk and said, "He is also a ghost."

古文：因召至，与语良久，僧亦不见楚也。
现代文：说着就把和尚叫到跟前谈了半天，那和尚也没看见楚珉。
English: Saying this, he called the monk to come and talk to him for half a day, but the monk did not see Chu Xuan.

古文：顷之，相与南行，遇一妇人卖花，章曰：此妇人亦鬼，所卖花，亦鬼用之，人间无所见也。章则出数钱买之，以赠楚曰：凡见此花而笑者，皆鬼也。
现代文：不一会儿，他们一块往南走，遇见一个卖花女人，章某说：这卖花女也是鬼，她卖的花也是鬼用的。说着就掏钱买了一束花给珉楚说：凡是看见这花就笑的，都是鬼。
English: Not long after, they walked south together and met a woman selling flowers. Zhang said, "This flower seller is also a ghost, and the flowers she sells are also used by ghosts." Saying this, he bought a bunch of flowers for Zou Chu and said, "Anyone who sees this flower and laughs is a ghost."

古文：即告辞而去。
现代文：说完告辞而去。
English: After saying his farewells, he left.

古文：其花红芳可爱而甚重，楚亦昏然而归，路人见花，颇有笑者。
现代文：那束花红艳芳香，拿着很重，珉楚掐着花昏昏沉沉地往回走，一路上还真有些看见花就笑的。
English: The bouquet was red and fragrant, it was very heavy to hold, and I walked back drowsily carrying the flowers. Along the way, some people actually smiled when they saw the flowers.

古文：至寺北门，自念吾与鬼同游，复持鬼花，亦不可，即掷花沟中，溅水有声。
现代文：到了寺庙北门，心想我和鬼在一起游了半天，手里又拿着鬼花，这怎么行，就把花扔道了水沟里，花落水溅起了声音。
English: When I arrived at the north gate of the temple, I thought to myself that I had been swimming with a ghost for half a day, and I was holding a ghost flower in my hand. How is this possible? I threw the flower into the gutter, and the sound of the flower splashing in the water was heard.

古文：既归，同院人觉其色甚异，以为中恶，竞持汤药以救之。
现代文：回来后，庙里人们都觉得他脸色很不正常，以为是中了邪，都抢着送来汤药来救他。
English: After he came back, people in the temple thought that his complexion was abnormal and thought that he had been possessed by evil spirits. They all rushed to send him medicinal herbs.

古文：良久乃复，具言其故。因相与覆视其花，乃一死人手也，楚亦无恙。
现代文：过了很久，珉楚剧恢复了常态，说了他遇见鬼的经过，大家就到水沟里去找那束花，捞上来一看，竟是一只死人的手。后来珉楚倒很平安，没有出什么事。
English: After a long time, Xing Chu Opera returned to normal, and told the story of how he met the ghost. Everyone went to the ditch to look for the bunch of flowers, and when they pulled it out, it turned out to be a dead man's hand. Later, Xing Chu was very safe, and nothing happened.

古文：陈守规
现代文：陈守规
English: Chen Shoubei

古文：军将陈守规者，常坐法流信州，寓止公馆。
现代文：陈守规将军曾由于犯了罪被流放到江西信州，住在公馆里。
English: General Chen Shoubei was once exiled to Shinshou, Jiangxi Province, for committing a crime, and lived in a mansion.

古文：馆素凶，守规始至。即鬼物昼见，奇形怪状，变化倏忽。
现代文：这公馆是个凶宅，陈守规刚住进去，大白天鬼怪就出现，一个个奇形怪状千变万化。
English: The mansion was a haunted house. As soon as Chen Shoujun moved in, ghosts would appear in broad daylight, one after another, in ever-changing strange shapes.

古文：守规素刚猛，亲持弓矢刀杖，与之斗。
现代文：守规是个凶猛刚强的人，就抄起刀枪棍棒和鬼斗了起来。
English: Obey the rules is a fierce and strong man, so he picked up a knife, a gun, a club, and a ghost to fight.

古文：久之，乃空中语曰：吾鬼神，不欲与人杂居。君既坚正，愿以兄事，可乎？
现代文：打了半天之后，听得空中说：我们鬼神不想和人住在一起，但老兄你为人正派刚毅，我们愿意尊称为大哥。
English: After batting for half a day, we could hear them saying in the air: "We ghosts and gods don't want to live with people, but you, my brother, are a man of integrity and fortitude, and we would like to respectfully call you big brother."

古文：守规许之。
现代文：陈守规同意了。
English: Chen Shoubei agreed.

古文：自是常与交言，有吉凶，辄先报。
现代文：从此守规和鬼怪经常交谈，有什么吉凶事，鬼也先报告。
English: Since then, he has been following the rules and talking to the ghost regularly. If there is any good or bad luck, the ghost will report it first.

古文：或求饮食，与之，辄得钱物。
现代文：有时鬼向他要东西吃，他就给。鬼们也曾给过他钱物。
English: Sometimes the ghosts ask him for something to eat, and he gives it to them. The ghosts have also given him money.

古文：既久，颇为厌倦，因求方士，手书章疏，奏之上帝。
现代文：天长日久之后，陈守规厌倦和鬼打交道了，就求一个方士写了一道奏章告到上天那里。
English: After a long time, Chen Shoujun was tired of dealing with ghosts, so he asked a sorcerer to write a musical score and take it to heaven.

古文：翌日，鬼乃大骂曰：吾与君为兄弟，奈何上章诉我。
现代文：第二天，鬼怪们大骂说：我们和你是弟兄，你为什么写状子告我们？
English: The next day, the ghosts scolded and said, "We are brothers with you. Why did you write a complaint against us?

古文：大丈夫结交，当如是耶？
现代文：男子汉大丈夫结交友人，能这么办吗？
English: It's okay for a man to make friends. Can you do that?

古文：守规曰：安得有此事？
现代文：守规说：哪有这事？
English: The rule-abiding say: where does this come from?

古文：即于空中掷下章疏，纸笔宛然。
现代文：只听空中啪地扔下来那份奏章，还有写状子用过的纸和笔也都扔了下来。
English: Just listen to the sound of the score being flung through the air, and the paper and pen used to write the score are also thrown down.

古文：又曰：君图我居处，谓我无所止也。
现代文：鬼怪说：你想占我们的住处，别以为我们离开这房子就没处去了！
English: The ghost said: "You want to take over our home. Don't think that we have nowhere to go when we leave this house!

古文：吾今往蜀川，亦不下于此矣。
现代文：我们要去四川，那里比这儿一点也不差。从此这里就再不闹鬼了。
English: We're going to Sichuan, which is no worse than here, and from now on there will be no more ghosts here.

古文：由是遂绝。广陵贾人
现代文：广陵贾人
English: Guangling Jia Ren

古文：广陵有贾人，以柏木造床，凡什器百余事，制作甚精。
现代文：有个广陵的商人，用柏木制作床，还作了一百多件器具，作得十分精巧，已花去了二十万本钱。
English: There was a merchant in Guangling who used cypress wood to make a bed, and also made more than a hundred pieces of equipment. It was very elaborate, and he had already spent two hundred thousand yuan.

古文：其费已二十万，载之建康，卖以求利。
现代文：他把这些家具运到建康，打算卖了挣钱。
English: He transported the furniture to Jiankang and planned to sell it to make money.

古文：晚至瓜步，微有风起，因泊山下。顷之，有巨舟，其中空，惟篙工三人乘之，亦泊于其侧。
现代文：晚上船到了瓜步山时起了风，被困停泊在山下，片刻间驶来一艘大船，船里是空的，只有三个船工，大船也停在商人船的旁边。
English: In the evening, when the ship arrived at Guabu Mountain, the wind picked up. It was trapped and anchored at the bottom of the mountain. In a few moments, a large ship came. The ship was empty, with only three sailors. The large ship was also parked next to the merchant ship.

古文：贾人疑之，相与议：此为群盗也，将伺夜而劫我。
现代文：商人很怀疑，认为大船上的人是强盗，到了夜里就会抢劫商船。
English: The merchant was very suspicious and thought that the people on the big ship were robbers and would rob the merchant ship at night.

古文：岸上则星月了然。食顷、雨止云散。
现代文：前面码头还很远，风也越来越大，没处逃避，夜里商人上了岸，钻进树林中躲了起来。
English: The quay was still far ahead, the wind was getting stronger, and there was nowhere to escape. At night, the merchant went ashore and hid in the woods.

古文：见巨舟稍稍前去。乃敢归。
现代文：不一会儿，雷电交加风雨大作，把江上的船都遮得看不见了，但岸上却非常晴朗，有星星月亮。
English: In a short time, the thunder and lightning and the wind and rain caused havoc, obscuring the boats on the river, but it was very clear on the shore, with stars and the moon.

古文：舟中所载柏木什器，都不复见，余物皆在。
现代文：一顿饭工夫，雨住云散，只是那大船慢慢走开，商人才敢回到自己船上，一看整船的家具都不见了，其余的东西还都在。
English: After a meal, the rain stopped and the clouds dispersed, but the big ship slowly moved away, and the merchant dared to return to his ship. At a glance, the entire ship's furniture was gone, and the rest of the things were still there.

古文：巨舟犹在东岸，有人呼曰：尔无恨，当还尔价。
现代文：远看那只大船已到东岸，船上有人喊道：你别难过，我们会给你钱的。
English: Far away in the distance, the big ship has sailed to the east coast. Someone on board shouts: "Don't be sad, we'll give you money."

古文：贾人所载既失，复归广陵。
现代文：商人把货都丢了，只好又回到广陵。
English: The merchant lost all his goods and had to return to Guangling.

古文：至家，已有人送钱三十万，置之而去。
现代文：到家后，才知道已有人往他家送了三十万钱，扔下钱就走了。
English: When he got home, he found out that someone had sent 300,000 yuan to his home. He threw down the money and left.

古文：问其人，即泊瓜步之明日也。
现代文：家里人说那人送钱来的时间，商人一想，正是他的船停在瓜步山下的第二天。
English: When the family member said that the man had sent the money, the merchant thought that it was the day after his boat had stopped at the foot of Mount Guabou.

古文：浦城人
现代文：浦城人
English: People from Uracho

古文：浦城人少死于路，家有金一斤，其妻匿之，不闻于其姑。
现代文：有个年轻的浦城人死在了外乡，他家里有一斤金子，被他妻子偷偷藏了起来，没告诉她的婆婆。
English: There was a young man from Pucheng who died in the countryside. His wife had secretly hidden a kilo of gold in their home without telling her mother-in-law.

古文：逾年，忽夜扣门，号哭而归。
现代文：一年之后，已死的年轻人忽然哭着回到家门口敲门，他母亲大吃一惊，母子抱头痛哭。
English: A year later, the dead young man suddenly came back crying and knocked on the door of the house. His mother was taken aback, and the mother and son hugged their heads and cried.

古文：其母惊骇，相与哀恸，曰：汝真死耶？曰：儿实已死，有不平事，是以暂归。
现代文：母亲说：你真的死了吗？儿子说：我真死了，因为有一件不平的事，我暂时回来一趟。
English: The mother said, "Are you really dead?" The son said, "I am really dead, because there was a quarrel and I came back for a while."

古文：因坐母膝，言语如平生，但手足冷如冰耳。
现代文：说着坐在母亲膝上，说话像活着一样，但手脚冰凉。
English: She sat on her mother's lap and spoke as if she were still alive, but her hands and feet were cold.

古文：因起握刀，责其妻曰：我此有金，尔何供老母而自藏耶？
现代文：说完就抄起一把刀对妻子说：你为什么把我的一斤金子藏起来不供养我的妈妈？说着就要杀了妻子。
English: After saying this, he took out a knife and said to his wife: "Why did you hide my kilo of gold and not support my mother? You are going to kill your wife."

古文：即欲杀之，其母曰：汝已死矣，倘杀是人，必谓吾所杀也。
现代文：母亲说：你已经死了，倘若你把她杀了，人们会认为她是我杀的。
English: My mother said: You are dead, if you kill her, people will think I killed her.

古文：于是哭辞母而去。复自提刀，送其妻还父家。
现代文：于是他哭了起来，辞别了母亲，提着刀把妻子送回他岳父家。
English: He burst into tears, said goodbye to his mother and took his wife back to his father-in-law's house with a knife.

古文：迨晓，及门数十步，忽然不见。
现代文：到了早晨，离大门几十步，忽然就消失了。
English: In the morning, a few dozen steps from the gate, it suddenly disappeared.

古文：刘道士
现代文：刘道士
English: Liu Daoshi

古文：庐山道士刘某，将游南岳，路出宜春，宿一村家。
现代文：庐山有个姓刘的道士打算去游南岳衡山，走到宜春城外时住进村子一户人的家中。
English: In Lushan, a Taoist priest surnamed Liu planned to travel to Nan Yue Heng Mountain, and when he went outside Yichun City, he lived in the home of a family in the village.

古文：其家至贫，复丧其子，未有以敛。
现代文：这家很穷，又死了儿子，还没有入殓。
English: The family was very poor, and their son had died before they were married.

古文：既夕，忽有一男子，行哭而来，但抚膺而呼曰：可惜，可惜。
现代文：这天晚上，忽然有个男子哭着走来，手抚着胸口不断喊着可惜可惜。
English: That evening, a man suddenly came crying, stroking his chest and shouting, "What a pity, what a pity."

古文：刘出视之，见面白如雪，作两髽结。径入其家，负其□去，莫知所之。
现代文：刘道士出门看，只见那人脸色像雪一样白，头发扎成两个结，一直走进门来，扛起这家儿子的尸体就走，转眼间就不知去了哪里。
English: Liu Taoist went out to take a look, only to see the man with a face as white as snow, his hair tied in two knots, walking all the way into the door, carrying the corpse of this son and leaving, not knowing where he had gone in the blink of an eye.

古文：清源都将
现代文：清源都将
English: Seigen will all be gone

古文：清源都将杨某，为本郡防过营副将，有大第在西郭。
现代文：清源有个姓杨的都将，是本郡防过营里的副将，他有一座大宅院在城西。
English: Qingyuan has a commander surnamed Yang, who is the vice-commander of the county's defense battalion, and he has a mansion in the west of the city.

古文：某晨趋府未归，有人方食，忽有一鹅，负纸钱，自门而入，径诣西廊房中。
现代文：有天早晨他到公府去没有回来，家中人正吃饭时，忽然一只大鹅背着一些纸钱从门外走进来，直奔西廊房而去。
English: One morning he went to the government office and did not return. While the family was eating, a large goose carrying some paper money suddenly walked in through the door and went straight to the west hall.

古文：家人云：此鹅自神祠中来耶？
现代文：家里人说，这是一只神庙里的鹅，就让家仆去赶它。
English: The family member said that it was a goose in the temple, and asked the servant to chase it.

古文：乃令奴逐之，奴入房，但见一双髻白髯老翁，家人莫不惊走。
现代文：仆人进了屋，只见屋里坐着一个双髻白胡子的老人，家里人都吓得跑了。
English: The servant entered the house and saw an old man with a long white beard sitting in the house. The family all ran away in fright.

古文：某归，闻之怒，持杖击之，鬼出没四隅，变化倏忽，杖莫能中。
现代文：杨某回家听说这事后，大怒，拿起棍子去追打那个老鬼，那鬼四处逃避，不断地变化现身。
English: After Yang went home and heard about this, he flew into a rage, picked up a stick and chased the old ghost. The ghost fled everywhere, constantly changing its appearance.

古文：某益怒曰：食讫，当复来击杖之。
现代文：杨某打不着他，就更加恼怒，说：等我吃完饭还接着揍你！
English: When Yang couldn't hit him, he became even more angry and said, "I'll hit you after I finish eating!"

古文：鬼乃折腰而前曰：诺。
现代文：那老鬼向杨某施礼说：好吧。
English: The old ghost bowed to Yang Mou and said, "Okay.

古文：杨有二女，长女入厨切肉，且食，肉落砧辄失去。女执刀向空四斫，乃露一大黑毛手，曰：请斫。
现代文：杨某有两个女儿，大女儿进厨房切肉吃，可是肉一切到菜板上就没有了，她拿刀向空中乱砍，只见空中出现了一只很大的长黑毛的手说：请你随便砍吧！
English: Yang has two daughters. The eldest daughter went into the kitchen to cut meat to eat, but all the meat was gone by the time it reached the chopping board. She took a knife and slashed wildly into the air, only to see a large, long, black-haired hand appear in the air and say: "Please cut it however you like!"

古文：女走气殆绝，因而成病。
现代文：大女儿连气带吓就病倒了。
English: The eldest daughter even fainted and fell ill.

古文：次女于大瓮中取盐，有一猴，自瓮突出，上女子背。女走至堂前，复失之，亦成疾。
现代文：二女儿在大瓮里取盐，突然从瓮中钻出一只猴子爬上了她的背，二女儿走进屋里，那猴子又不见了，二女儿也病了。
English: The second daughter was taking salt in the large urn, when suddenly a monkey emerged from the urn and climbed onto her back. The second daughter went inside, but the monkey was gone and the second daughter was also ill.

古文：乃召巫女，坛召之。
现代文：杨某召来了巫师，女巫设下神坛抓鬼。
English: Yang summoned a sorcerer, and the witch set up a shrine to catch the ghost.

古文：鬼亦立坛作法，愈甚于巫。
现代文：但鬼也摆了坛作法，比巫师还厉害。
English: But the ghosts also set up an altar, which is more powerful than the sorcerer.

古文：巫不能制，亦惧而去。
现代文：巫师制不住鬼，也吓跑了。
English: Unable to control the ghost, the sorcerer scared it away.

古文：顷之，二女及妻皆卒。
现代文：不久，杨某的妻子和两个女儿都死了。
English: Soon after, Yang's wife and two daughters died.

古文：后有善作魔法者，名曰明教，请为持经一宿，鬼乃唾骂某而去，尔因遂绝。
现代文：后来杨某请来一位善作魔法的人，叫做明教，请他在家念一夜的经，那鬼才大骂着逃掉，杨某这年也死去。
English: Later, Yang invited a person who was good at doing magic, called Ming Jiao, and asked him to read scriptures at home for one night. The ghost only cursed loudly and ran away. Yang also died this year.

古文：王誗妻
现代文：王誗妻
English: Wang Xizhe

古文：王誗者，南安县大盈村人也。妻林氏忽病，有鬼凭之言：我陈九娘也，以香花祠我，当有益于主人。
现代文：王誗是福建南安县大盈村人，有一天，他的妻子林氏忽然得了病，有个鬼附在她身上说：我是陈九娘，你们必须用香花供奉我，那样对主人才会有利。
English: Wang Yao was a villager in Daying Village, Nan'an County, Fujian Province. One day, his wife Lin suddenly fell ill. A ghost attached to her said, "I am Chen Jiu's daughter. You must offer me fragrant flowers. That will be beneficial to my master."

古文：誗许之。
现代文：王誗答应了。
English: Wang Yao agreed.

古文：乃呼林为阿姐，为人言祸福多中。
现代文：从此鬼就称林氏为大姐，为别人说吉凶的事也非常灵验。
English: Since then, the ghost has called Lin the eldest sister, and it is also very effective to tell others about auspicious and inauspicious things.

古文：半余岁乃见形，自腰已下可见。人未常来者，亦未见也，但以言语相接。
现代文：半年后，鬼渐渐现出人形，腰以下已能看得见，但不常来的人还是看不见，只能听到鬼的说话声。
English: Half a year later, the ghost gradually appeared as a doll, visible from the waist down, but people who didn't visit often still couldn't see it, and could only hear the ghost's voice.

古文：乡人有召者，不择远近，与林偕往。
现代文：村里人有人请鬼去办事，鬼就和林氏一同去，不管道路远近。
English: Someone in the village asked the ghost to go on an errand, and the ghost went with Lin, no matter how far the road was.

古文：一旦，忽悲泣谓林曰：我累生为人女，年未笄而夭。
现代文：如果谁家有祭祀的事，只要备了酒食，鬼就去召唤神灵，而且念着很动听的祝祷词，使听的人都忘了疲倦，而林氏这时只是拱身坐着。两年人间，女鬼得了不少钱财。
English: If there is a religious service in someone's home, as long as food and wine are prepared, the ghost will summon the gods and recite beautiful prayers to make the listeners forget their tiredness, while Lin just sits back. In two years, the female ghost has gained a lot of money.

古文：闻于地府，乃前生隐没阿姐钱二十万，故主者令我为神，以偿此钱讫，即生为男子而获寿。今酬已足，请置酒为别。
现代文：这天，鬼忽然哭着对林氏说：我活着时也是好人家的女儿，没成年就死了，我在阴间察问，才知道是因为前世偷藏了姐姐二十万钱，所以阴曹判我用祭祀收来的钱还前世的债。还完了债，我就可以转世为男子。现在，我已经挣够了钱，就要转世了，请你备些酒我们告别吧。
English: On this day, the ghost suddenly cried and said to Mr. Lin: "When I was alive, I was also the daughter of a good family. I died before I was an adult. I investigated in the underworld, only to find out that it was because my sister had stolen 200,000 yuan in the previous life, so the evil spirit sentenced me to repay the debt of the previous life with the money received from the sacrifice. Once the debt was repaid, I could be reincarnated as a man. Now that I have earned enough money, I am about to be reincarnated. Please prepare some wine for us to say goodbye.

古文：乃尽见其形，容质端媚，言辞婉转，殷勤致谢，呜咽云：珍重珍重。遂不见。
现代文：说罢立刻现了人形，这陈九娘原来是一个非常美丽的姑娘。她向林氏一再致谢，不断哭着嘱咐林氏多多保重，然后就不见了。
English: As soon as she said that, a doll appeared. This Chen Jiu Niang turned out to be a very beautiful girl. She repeatedly thanked Mr. Lin, kept crying and told Mr. Lin to take good care of her, and then disappeared.

古文：林昌业
现代文：林昌业
English: Lin Changye

古文：林昌业，漳浦人也，博览典籍，精究术数，性高雅，人不可干。
现代文：漳浦人林昌业博学多艺，尤其精通术学。为人高雅，谁也不敢小看，他曾当过福建泉州的军事衙门的推官。
English: Lin Chang, a native of Mengpu, was an erudite and versatile scholar, especially proficient in academics. He was an elegant person, and no one dared to look down on him. He was once the military commander of Quanzhou, Fujian Province.

古文：尝为泉州军事衙推，年七十余，退居本郡龙溪县关额山之阳，乡里宗敬之。
现代文：七十多岁退职回乡，住在本郡龙溪的羊额山阳坡，乡间邻里都十分崇敬他。
English: He retired in his seventies and returned to his hometown, living in Yangye Mountain, Longxi County. He was highly revered by his rural neighbors.

古文：有良田数顷，尝欲舂谷为米，载诣州货之。
现代文：他家种着几顷好地，曾打算把打下的粮食运到州里去卖掉，但是年纪大人手少没法办这件事。
English: His family had several hectares of good land and had planned to transport the harvested grain to the state to sell it, but his age and lack of manpower made it impossible to do this.

古文：功力未集，忽有双髻男子，年可三十，须髯甚长，来诣林。林问何人，但微笑，唯唯不对。
现代文：这天忽然有个梳着双髻留着长胡子的三十多岁的男人来求见林昌业，林昌业问他是谁，那人光笑不说话。
English: On this day, a man in his thirties with a long beard and a double beard suddenly came to see Lin Changye. Lin Changye asked who he was. The man only smiled and did not speak.

古文：取谷砻之。而林问：无故辛苦耶？鬼亦笑不言。复置丰馔，饭蔬而已。
现代文：林昌业问鬼累不累，鬼仍是笑而不语。后来林昌业就又给他饭吃，也不过是粗菜淡饭而已。
English: Lin Changye asked the ghost whether it was tired or not, and the ghost still laughed and did not speak. Later, Lin Changye gave him food again, but it was just plain rice.

古文：凡月余，砻谷不辍。鬼复自斗量，得米五十余石，拜辞而去，卒无一言。不复来矣。
现代文：那鬼磨了一个多月的谷子，并用斗量，磨出了五十石，然后才拜别而去。走时这鬼也没有说一句话，从那以后就再也没来过。
English: The ghost grinded the grain for more than a month and used a bucket to grind out fifty stones before bowing out. The ghost didn't say a word as he left, and he hasn't been back since.

古文：潘袭
现代文：潘袭
English: Pan attack

古文：潘袭为建安令，遣一手力赍牒下乡，有所追摄。
现代文：潘袭当建安县令时，曾派了一个干练的公差带着文书下乡去抓人。
English: When Pan Wei was the county magistrate of Jian'an County, he once sent a capable inspector to the countryside with a document to arrest someone.

古文：手力新受事，未尝行此路。
现代文：那差役新接这种差事，也不熟悉路，走到晚上，见道边有间草房。
English: The policeman, new to the job and unfamiliar with the road, came upon a grass hut on the side of the road in the evening.

古文：至夕，道左有草舍，扣门求宿。
现代文：就上前敲门求宿。
English: They knock on the door and ask for a place to stay.

古文：其家唯一妇人应门，云：主人不在，又将移居，无暇延客也。
现代文：这家只有一个女人来应门，说主人不在，又要搬家，没有工夫待客。
English: Only one woman answered the door, saying that the owner was not at home, that they were moving and did not have time to wait for guests.

古文：手力以道远多虎，苦苦求之，妇人即召入门侧，席地而寝。
现代文：差役说路远，夜里怕遇上虎，苦苦哀求，妇人就召他进屋，让他在门边的地上睡。
English: The attendant said that it was a long way, and that he was afraid of encountering tigers at night, so he begged for help. The woman called him into the house and let him sleep on the floor by the door.

古文：妇人结束箱箧什器之类，达旦不寐。
现代文：那妇人正在整理家具杂物，一夜也没有睡。
English: The woman was sorting through the clutter and hadn't slept all night.

古文：手力向晓辞去，行数里，乃觉失所赍牒。
现代文：差役天亮后告辞上路，走了几里，忽然想起把文书丢在投宿的妇人家了，就返回去取。
English: After dawn, the policeman left for the road and walked a few miles. Suddenly, he remembered that he had left the document at the woman's house where he was staying, so he went back to get it.

古文：复返求之，宿处乃是一坟，方见其家人改葬。
现代文：一看，昨晚投宿的地方竟是一坟，坟主正在迁葬。
English: At first glance, the place where we stayed last night turns out to be a grave, and the owner of the grave is in the process of moving.

古文：及开棺，席下得一书，即所失之牒也。
现代文：等家人打开棺材，差役丢失的文书真就在棺材里。
English: When the family opened the coffin, the lost paperwork was indeed in the coffin.

古文：胡澄
现代文：胡澄
English: Hu Cheng

古文：池阳人胡澄，佣耕以自给。
现代文：池阳有个人叫胡澄，给别人种田为生。
English: In Chiyang, there is a man named Hu Cheng, who makes a living by cultivating fields for others.

古文：妻卒，官给棺以葬，其平生服饰，悉附棺中。
现代文：他妻子死了，官家给了一副棺材以埋葬。胡澄把妻子生前穿过的衣服首饰都随棺埋葬。
English: When his wife died, the government gave her a pair of coffins to be buried in. Hu Cheng buried all the clothes and jewelry that his wife had worn during her lifetime with the coffin.

古文：后数年，澄偶至市，见到肆卖首饰者，熟视之。乃妻送葬物也。
现代文：几年后，胡澄偶然在街上遇见一个摆摊卖首饰的，仔细看，那人卖的都是妻子生前的首饰。
English: A few years later, Hu Cheng happened to meet a stall selling jewelry on the street. Look closely, the man was selling his wife's jewelry.

古文：问其人，云：一妇人寄于此，约某日来取。
现代文：问那人怎么回事，说他卖的这些首饰都是一个女人寄存在他那里的，女人并约定某天来取钱。
English: Ask the man what's going on and he says that all the jewellery he sells is deposited with him by a woman, who has agreed to collect the money one day.

古文：澄如期复往，果见其妻取直而去。
现代文：胡澄按照那个日子又去街上等着，果然看到妻子来找卖首饰的人取钱，钱拿到手妻子就走了，胡澄就在后面偷偷跟着。
English: According to that day, Hu Cheng again went to the street to wait, and indeed saw his wife come to the jewelry seller to withdraw money. After getting the money, his wife left, and Hu Cheng secretly followed behind.

古文：言讫不见，澄遂为僧。
现代文：到了郊外，胡澄追上了她，问是怎么回事。妻子设：当初我死后，虽然官家给了一副棺材以免我暴尸荒郊，但后来却不断催要棺材钱，我实在没办法，只好把首饰卖了还债吧。说完就不见了。后来胡澄出家当了和尚。
English: When he got to the suburbs, Hu Cheng caught up with her and asked what was going on. His wife said, "When I died, although the government gave me a coffin so that I wouldn't be buried in the wilderness, they kept demanding money for the coffin. I really couldn't do anything, so I had to sell my jewelry to pay off my debt. After I said that, he disappeared. Later, Hu Cheng became a monk."

古文：王攀
现代文：王攀
English: Wang Pang

古文：高邮县医工王攀，乡里推其长者，恒往来广陵城东。
现代文：高邮县有位医生叫王攀，被大家推崇为长者。他经常往来于广陵城东。
English: There is a doctor in Gaoyou County called Wang Pan, who is respected by everyone as an elder. He often travels to and from the east of Guangling City.

古文：每数月，辄一直县。
现代文：每隔几个月要到县里去一次。
English: I have to go to the county every few months.

古文：自念明日当赴县，今夕即欲出东水门，夜泛小舟，及明可至。
现代文：这天他算着明天又该去县城了，就决定今天晚上出东水门乘小船，天晚就能到县里。
English: On this day, he calculated that it was time to go to the county seat again tomorrow, so he decided to take a small boat out of the East Water Gate this evening, and he would be able to get to the county by the end of the day.

古文：既而与亲友饮于酒家，不觉大醉，误出参佐门，投一村舍宿。
现代文：没想到这天晚上他上路前在家喝醉了酒，走错了路出了参佐门，半夜在一间村舍里投宿。
English: Unexpectedly, he got drunk at home before going on the road that night, took the wrong way out of Sansamon, and stayed in a village house at midnight.

古文：向晓稍醒，东壁有灯而不甚明。仰望屋室，知非常宿处，因独叹曰：吾明日须至县，今在何处也？
现代文：天亮时醒了酒，睁眼看见东墙下有盏不太亮的灯，仰头看看屋里，才知道这儿不是自己向来投宿的那个旅店，不觉独自叹了口气说：我明天必须赶到县里，可现在我这是在什么地方啊！
English: When he woke up at dawn, he opened his eyes and saw a dim light under the east wall. He looked up and saw that this was not the inn where he had always stayed. Unconsciously, he sighed and said, "I have to get to the county tomorrow, but where am I now?"

古文：久之，乃闻其内蹑履声，有妇人隔壁问曰：客将何之？
现代文：过了半天，就听见里屋有轻轻的脚步声，接着就听一个女人隔墙问道：客官要去哪里呀？
English: After half a day, I heard soft footsteps in the inner room, and then I heard a woman ask from the other side of the wall: Where is the steward going?

古文：因起辞谢曰：欲之高邮，醉中误至于是。
现代文：王攀说：我要去高邮，因为喝醉酒竟走错了路来到了这里。
English: Wang Pan said, "I want to go to Gaoyou, because I got drunk and took the wrong road to get here."

古文：妇曰：此非高邮道也，将使人奉送至城东，无忧也。
现代文：女人说：这里不是去高邮的路，我找个人送你到东城，你不用担心。
English: The woman said, "This is not the way to Gaoyou. I'll find someone to take you to Dongcheng. Don't worry."

古文：乃有一村竖至，随之而行。
现代文：后来女人让一个村里的童子带路。
English: Later, the woman asked a village boy to lead the way.

古文：每历艰险，竖辄以手捧其足而过。既随至城东尝所宿店，告辞而去。
现代文：王攀跟着村童走，每次遇到险路，村童就捧起王攀的脚飞一样地越过，一直把王攀送到城东他经常投宿的旅店，村童才告辞而去。
English: Wang Pang followed the village boy. Every time he encountered a dangerous road, the village boy would pick up Wang Pang's foot and fly over it. He always took Wang Pang to the hotel in the east of the city where he often stayed. Only then did the village boy leave.

古文：攀解其襦以赠之，竖不受，固与之，乃持去。
现代文：王攀脱下身上的短袄送给村童，村童不要，王攀坚持送给他，他才拿着袄走了。
English: Wang Pang took off his short ponytail and gave it to the village boy. The village boy did not want it, but Wang Pang insisted on giving it to him. Only then did he take the ponytail and leave.

古文：既而入店易衣，乃见其襦故在腰下，即复诣处寻之，但古冢耳，并无人家。
现代文：王攀进了旅店换衣服，突然发现送给村童的短袄仍在自己腰带上掖着。随即，王攀又到他曾误投的村舍去看，只有一座古坟，根本就没有人家。
English: Wang Pang went into the hotel to change his clothes and suddenly found that the short poncho he had given to the village boy was still attached to his belt. Immediately, Wang Pang went back to the village house he had mistakenly entered to see that there was only one ancient grave, and there was no home at all.

古文：郑守澄
现代文：郑守澄
English: Zheng Shoucheng

古文：广陵裨将郑守澄，新买婢。旬日，有夜叩门者曰：君家买婢，其名籍在此，不可留也。
现代文：广陵副将郑守澄新近买了个丫环，十多天后夜里听见有人敲门说：你买的那个丫环，她的户籍在我这里，你万万不可以留她！
English: Guangling Vice Admiral Zheng Shoucheng recently bought a maid, and more than ten days later, he heard someone knocking on the door and saying: "The maid you bought, her household registration is with me, you must not keep her!"

古文：开门视之，无所见。
现代文：郑守澄开门看，什么人也没有，心理非常奇怪。
English: Zheng Shoucheng opened the door and saw that there was no one there, which was very strange.

古文：方怪之，数日，广陵大疫，此婢亦病，遂卒。既而守澄亦病卒。而吊客数人，转相染者，皆卒。
现代文：过了几天，广陵突然流行大瘟疫，那个婢女得病死了，接着守澄也病死，连前来祭吊的人也传染了瘟疫相继死去。
English: A few days later, there was a sudden outbreak of plague in Guangling. The maid fell ill and died, and then Shoucheng also died. Even the people who came to the hanging ceremony were infected with the plague and died one after another.

古文：甲寅岁春也。
现代文：这是甲寅年春天的事。
English: This happened in the spring of the year of the Goat.

古文：刘骘
现代文：刘骘
English: Liu Xuan

古文：洪州高安人刘骘，少遇乱，有姊曰粪扫，为军将孙金所虏。有妹曰乌头，生十七年而卒。
现代文：刘骘是洪州高安县人，少年时遇到战乱，他的姐姐名叫粪扫，被一名叫孙金的军官抢去，她的妹妹名叫乌头，十七岁上也死了。
English: Liu Wei is from Gao'an County, Hongzhou. When he was a boy, he was caught up in the war. His older sister, named Guan Suo, was snatched by an officer named Sun Jin. Her younger sister, named Wu Tou, also died at the age of seventeen.

古文：卒后三岁，孙全为常州团练副使。粪扫从其女君会宴于大将陈氏，乃见乌头在焉。
现代文：三年后，孙金当上了常州团练副使，粪扫跟着她的女主人参加大将陈某的宴会，突然看见妹妹乌头也在客人中间。
English: Three years later, Sun Jin became the deputy envoy of the Changzhou Team Training. The dung sweeper followed her mistress to attend the banquet of General Chen Mou, and suddenly saw her sister Wu Tou was also among the guests.

古文：问其所从来，云：顷为人所虏，至岳州，与刘翁媪为女。嫁得北来军士任某，即陈所将卒也。从陈至此尔。
现代文：粪扫问乌头从哪儿来，乌头说也是被人抢到岳州，给了刘家老夫妇作养女，后来又嫁给从北方来的军士任某，任某是陈将军的下属，就跟着他来到此地。
English: The dung sweeper asked Wu Tou where she came from. Wu Tou said that she was also snatched to Yuezhou and given to the Liu family as an adopted daughter. Later, she married Ren Mou, a military officer from the north. Ren Mou was a subordinate of General Chen, and followed him to this place.

古文：通信至其家，骘时为县手力。
现代文：于是粪扫给家里通了这个消息。
English: So the muck-sweeper broke the news to the family.

古文：后数年，因事至都，遂往昆陵省之。
现代文：刘骘当时在县里当一名管杂役的小官，几年后到城里办公事，就到昆陵去看望姐妹。
English: At that time, Liu Wei was a minor official in charge of miscellaneous services in the county. A few years later, when he went to work in the city, he went to Kunling to visit his sisters.

古文：晚止逆旅。翌日，先谒孙金。即诣任营中。
现代文：刘骘一天晚上住在旅店中，第二天先去拜见孙金找到姐姐粪扫，然后领她到任某的军营里去找乌头。
English: One night, Liu Wei stayed in a hotel. The next day, he first went to see Sun Jin to find his sister, the dung sweeper, and then led her to Ren's military camp to find the acorn.

古文：先遣小仆觇之，方见洒扫庭内，曰：我兄弟将至矣。
现代文：刘骘虽派了个童仆在门外偷看，见乌头正在打扫庭院，一面打扫一面说：我兄弟来看我来了。
English: Although Liu Ye sent a servant boy to peep outside the door, he saw that Wu Tou was cleaning the courtyard. While cleaning, he said, "My brother has come to see me."

古文：仆良久扣门，问为谁。曰：高安刘之家使。
现代文：仆人敲了半天门，乌头问门外是谁，童仆说：我是高安县刘骘派来的。
English: The servant knocked on the door for half a day. Wu Tou asked who was outside the door. The boy servant said, "I was sent by Liu Ye from Gao'an County."

古文：乃曰：非二兄名骘多髯者乎，昨日晚当至，何为迟也。
现代文：乌头说：莫非是我那大胡子二哥吗？昨天晚上就该来，为什么才来看我呢？
English: Wu Tou said, "Isn't he my bearded second brother? He should have come last night, why did he come to see me?

古文：即自出营门迎之，容貌如故，相见悲泣，了无少异。
现代文：说着就开门迎接。刘骘见妹妹容貌和过去完全一样，兄妹相见悲伤地哭起来。
English: Saying this, he opened the door to greet her. Liu Yao saw that his sister's appearance was exactly the same as before, and his brother and sister cried with sadness when they saw each other.

古文：顷之，孙金遣其诸甥持酒食，至任之居，宴叙良久，乌头曰：今日乃得二兄来，证我为人。
现代文：过了一会儿，孙金派他的几个外甥拿着酒到任某这里来，欢宴了很久。乌头说：今天幸亏我二哥来才证明我是人，过去我一直被外甥们当作鬼。
English: After a while, Sun Jin sent several of his nephews to Ren Mou with wine, and they feasted for a long time. Wu Tou said, "Today, fortunately, my second brother came to prove that I am human. In the past, I was always treated as a ghost by my nephews."

古文：向者恒为诸生辈呼我为鬼也。任亦言其举止轻捷，女工敏速，恒夜作至旦，若有人为同作者。
现代文：任某也说乌头行动举止十分轻快，针线活也极精巧，常常夜时作活干到天亮，就象有不少人和她一起做针线女工一样。
English: Ren also said that Wu Tou's actions and demeanor are very brisk, and her needlework is also very exquisite. She often works at night until dawn, just as many people do needlework with her.

古文：饮食必待冷而后食。
现代文：还说乌头每次吃饭必须等饭凉后才能吃。
English: He also said that the eel must wait for the meal to cool before eating it every time.

古文：骘因密问：汝昔已死，那得至是？
现代文：刘骘背后偷偷问乌头：你当年已经死了，怎么现在到了这里呢？
English: Behind Liu Yao's back, he secretly asked Wu Tou: You were already dead back then, how did you get here now?

古文：对曰：兄无为如此问我，将不得相见矣。
现代文：乌头说：哥哥你要再追问我这些事，我们就再也不能相见了。
English: Wu Tou said, "Brother, if you ask me these questions again, we will never see each other again."

古文：骘乃不敢言之。
现代文：刘骘就再也不敢说什么了。
English: Liu Yi no longer dared to say anything.

古文：久任卒，再适军士罗氏，隶江州。
现代文：不久之后乌头的丈夫任某死了，乌头又嫁给一个姓罗的军官，罗某驻守江州。
English: Soon after, Wu Tou's husband Ren Mou died, and Wu Tou married an officer surnamed Luo. Luo Mou was stationed in Jiangzhou.

古文：陈承昭为高安制置使，召骘问其事。令发墓视之。
现代文：后来陈承昭当了高安县的制置使，听说乌头死而复生的事后，召来刘骘询问，并下令挖开乌头的墓看一看。
English: Later, when Chen Chengzhao was the chief of staff of Gao'an County, he heard that Wu Tou had been resurrected from the dead. He summoned Liu Qi to inquire, and ordered that Wu Tou's grave be dug up for inspection.

古文：墓在米岭，无人省视，数十年矣。
现代文：墓在米岭山上，根本没人照管，已经荒芜了好几十年。
English: The tomb, on the Miling Mountain, has not been looked after at all and has been abandoned for decades.

古文：伐木开路而至，见墓上有穴，大如碗，其深不测。众惧不敢发，相与退坐大树下，笔疏其事，以白承昭。
现代文：人们砍伐通往墓地的树木，只见墓上有个洞，像碗口大，往里面深不可测，大家都很怕，不敢挖墓，都退坐在大树下，笔记录了墓地的情况呈报给陈承昭。
English: People were cutting down the trees leading to the cemetery, only to see that there was a hole in the grave, like a bowl mouth, unfathomable inside. Everyone was afraid and did not dare to dig the grave. They all retreated to sit under the big tree. The pen recorded the situation of the cemetery and reported to Chen Chengzhao.

古文：是岁，乌头病，骘往省之，乃曰：顷为乡人十余辈，持刀杖劫我，几中我面。我大责骂，力拒之，乃退坐大树下，作文书而去。
现代文：这一年，乌头生了病，刘骘去探望，乌头对刘骘说：前些日子有一伙乡下人拿着刀枪拦劫我，差点砍伤我的脸，我大骂他们一顿，他们才吓得退回去坐在树下，写了一篇文书，后来才去了。
English: This year, Wu Tou fell ill and Liu Ye went to visit him. Wu Tou said to Liu Ye, "A few days ago, a group of villagers held me at gunpoint and robbed me, almost slashing my face. I yelled at them, and they were so scared that they went back and sat under a tree, wrote a document, and then left.

古文：至今举身犹痛。
现代文：到现在我全身还痛得要命。
English: Even now, my whole body is in excruciating pain.

古文：骘乃知恒出入墓中也，因是亦惧而疏之。
现代文：这时刘骘才知道妹妹乌头经常在坟穴里出入，确实是鬼，因而就对他有些惧怕疏远。
English: At this time, Liu Yao only knew that his sister Wu Tou often went in and out of the grave, and that she was indeed a ghost. Therefore, he was somewhat afraid and distanced himself from her.

古文：罗后移隶晋王城成。显德五年，周有淮南之地，罗陷没，不知所在，时年六十二岁矣
现代文：姓罗的军官后来又调归山西的王城成部下，显德五年，周军占领了淮南一带，罗军官所在的部队被消灭，不知他带着乌头去了什么地方，算来乌头那年应该是六十二岁了。
English: The officer with the surname of Luo was later transferred to Wangcheng in Shanxi to become a subordinate. In the five years of Xiande, the Zhou army occupied the Huainan area. The troops in which Luo was an officer were eliminated. I don't know where he went with Wu Tou. According to Wu Tou, he must have been 62 years old that year.

