古文：文公问于胥臣曰： 我欲使阳处父傅欢也而教诲之，其能善之乎？ 
现代文：晋文公问胥臣说： 我想叫阳处父做欢的老师来教育他，能教育好吗？ 
English: Jin Wenkong asked his vassal, "I want to ask the teacher of Yang's father to educate him, can you educate him?

古文：对曰： 是在欢也。
现代文：胥臣回答说： 这主要取决于欢。
English: The retainer replied, "It mainly depends on Huan."

古文：蘧蒢不可使俯，戚施不可使仰，僬侥不可使举，侏儒不可使援，矇瞍不可使视，嚚瘖不可使言，聋聩不可使听，童昏不可使谋。
现代文：直胸的残疾人不能让他俯身，驼背不能让他仰头，小种人不能让他举重物，矮子不能让他攀高，瞎子不能让他看东西，哑巴不能让他说话，聋子不能让他听音，糊涂人不能让他出主意。
English: The straight-chested handicapped cannot make him stoop, the hunchback cannot make him look up, the dwarf cannot make him lift weights, the short man cannot make him climb, the blind man cannot make him see, the dumb man cannot make him speak, the deaf man cannot make him hear, and the muddle-headed man cannot make him make up his mind.

古文：质将善而贤良赞之，则济可竢。
现代文：本质好而又有贤良的人教导，就可以期待他有所成就。
English: If a man of good character and ability teaches, he can be expected to succeed.

古文：若有违质，教将不入，其何善之为！
现代文：如果本质邪恶，教育他也听不进去，怎么能使他为善呢！
English: If his nature is evil and he cannot listen to education, how can he be made good?

古文：臣闻昔者大任娠文王不变，少溲于豕牢，而得文王不加疾焉。
现代文：我听说，以前周文王的母亲怀孕时身体没有变化，小便的时候在厕所里生下文王，没有添加任何痛苦。
English: I heard that in the past, when Zhou Wenwang's mother was pregnant, there was no change in her body. When she urinated, she gave birth to Zhou Wenwang in the toilet, without adding any pain.

古文：文王在母不忧，在傅弗勤，处师弗烦，事王不怒，孝友二虢，而惠慈二蔡，刑于大姒，比于诸弟。
现代文：文王不让母亲增添忧虑，无需保傅多操心思，未让师长感到烦扰，事奉父王不让他生气，对两个弟弟虢仲和虢叔很友爱，对两个儿子大蔡和小蔡很慈惠，为自己的妻子大姒做出榜样，与同宗的兄弟也很亲近。
English: King Wen didn't let his mother worry, didn't need to worry too much about his tutor, didn't bother his teacher, didn't make him angry when he served his father, was very friendly to his two brothers and uncle, was very kind to his two sons, Dazai and Xiao Cai, set an example for his wife Dazai, and was very close to his brothers of the same family.

古文：《诗》云： 刑于寡妻，至于兄弟，以御于家邦。 
现代文：诗上说： 为自己的妻子做出表率，进而及于兄弟，以此来治理家庭和国家。 
English: In the poem it says: to set an example for one's wife, and then for one's brothers, in order to govern the family and the country.

古文：于是乎用四方之贤良。
现代文：这样就能任用天下的贤良之士。
English: In this way, we will be able to appoint the best people in the world.

古文：及其即位也，询于八虞，而谘于二虢，度于闳夭而谋于南宫，诹于蔡、原而访于辛、尹，重之以周、邵、毕、荣，亿宁百神，而柔和万民。
现代文：到他即位之后，有事咨询掌管山泽的八虞，与虢仲、虢叔两兄弟商量，听取闳夭、南宫括的意见，咨访蔡公、原公、辛甲、尹佚四位太史，再加上有周文公、邵康公、毕公和荣公的帮助，从而让百神安宁，使万民安乐。
English: After he ascended to the throne, he consulted the eight emperors who were in charge of the mountains and rivers, discussed with the two brothers Gongzhong and Gongshu, listened to the opinions of Gongxiao and Nan Gongbu, and consulted the four emperors Cai Gong, Huan Gong, Xin Jia, and Yin Qi, together with the help of Zhou Wen Gong, Shao Kang Gong, Bi Gong, and Rong Gong, so as to keep the hundreds of gods in peace and make the people happy.

古文：故《诗》云：  惠于宗公，神罔时恫。 
现代文：因此诗上说： 孝敬祖庙里的先公，神灵都没有怨恨。 
English: Therefore, the poem says: "Honor and respect the ancestors in the ancestral temple, the gods have no resentment."

古文：若是，则文王非专教诲之力也。 
现代文：像这样的话，那么周文王就不单单是教诲的作用了。 
English: If this is the case, then Zhou Wenwang's role is not merely that of an educator.

古文：公曰： 然则教无益乎？ 
现代文：晋文公说： 这样说来，那教育就没有用了吗？ 
English: Jin Wenkong said: So, is that education useless?

古文：对曰： 胡为文，益其质。
现代文：胥臣回答说： 要文采干什么呢，就是为了使本质更加美好。
English: The retainer replied, "What do you want Wen Cai to do, just to make the essence more beautiful."

古文：故人生而学，非学不入。 
现代文：所以人生下来就要学习，不学习就不能进入正道。 
English: Therefore, it is necessary to study after one's life is over. Without studying, one cannot enter the right path.

古文：公曰： 奈夫八疾何！ 
现代文：文公说： 那对先前所说的八种残疾人怎么办呢？ 
English: Wengong said: What about the eight types of disabled people mentioned earlier?

古文：对曰： 官师之所材也，戚施直镈，蘧蒢蒙璆，侏儒扶卢，矇瞍修声，聋聩司火。
现代文：胥臣回答说： 这就要看官长因材而用了，驼背的让他俯身敲钟，直胸的让他戴上玉磬，矮子让他表演杂技，瞎子让他演奏音乐，聋子让他掌管烧火。
English: The retainer replied, "It depends on the officials' abilities. The hunchback should bend over and ring a bell, the straight-chested should wear a jade bracelet, the short should perform acrobatics, the blind should play music, and the deaf should be in charge of lighting fires.

古文：童昏、嚚瘖、僬侥，官师之所不材也，以实裔土。
现代文：糊涂的、哑巴和小种人，官长认为难以因材而用的，就让他们去充实边远的地区。
English: Dim-witted, dumb and small-breed people, whom officials find it difficult to employ according to their abilities, are sent to enrich remote areas.

古文：夫教者，因体能质而利之者也。若川然有原，以卬浦而后大。 
现代文：教育，就是根据他内在的性能、本质加以因势利导，就像河川有它的源头，迎它到江河里然后让它汇成大流。 
English: Education is to guide him according to his inherent ability and nature, just as a river has its source, welcome it to the river and then let it merge into a torrent.

