古文：知伯索地于魏桓子，魏桓子弗予。
现代文：知伯向魏桓子索要土地，魏桓子不给。
English: Zhi Bo demanded land from Wei Huan Zi, but Wei Huan Zi refused to give it.

古文：任章曰： 何故弗予？ 
现代文：任章问他说： 为什么不给他呢？ 
English: Ren Zhang asked him: Why not give it to him?

古文：桓子曰： 无故索地，故弗予。 
现代文：魏桓子说： 无缘无故来索要土地，所以不给他。 
English: Wei Huan Zi said, "He came to ask for land for no reason, so I won't give it to him."

古文：任章曰： 无故索地，邻国必恐；重欲无厌，天下必惧。
现代文：任章说： 没有缘由就来索取土地，邻国一定会感到害怕；胃口太大又不知满足，天下诸侯都会害怕。
English: Ren Zheng said: If you come to claim land without any reason, your neighbors will certainly be afraid; if your appetite is too big and you don't know how to satisfy it, all the princes in the world will be afraid.

古文：君予之地，知伯必憍。
现代文：如果你把土地给了他，知伯必定越发骄横。
English: If you give him the land, he will become more and more arrogant.

古文：憍而轻敌，邻国惧而相亲。
现代文：一骄横就会轻敌，邻国害怕就自然会互相亲近联合。
English: If one is arrogant, one will despise one's enemies, and if one's neighbors are fearful, they will naturally draw closer together.

古文：以相亲之兵，待轻敌之国，知氏之命不长矣！
现代文：用相互团结的军队来防御对付轻敌的国家。知伯肯定活不长了！
English: To defend a country against a minor enemy with a mutually united army. Zhibo will certainly not live long!

古文：《周书》曰： 将欲败之，必姑辅之；将欲取之，必姑与之。 
现代文：《周书》上说： 想要打败他，一定要先帮助他；想要夺取他，一定要先给予他。
English: "If you want to defeat him, you must first help him; if you want to capture him, you must first give him," the Weekly said.

古文：君不如与之，以骄知伯。
现代文：所以您不如把土地给他，以便使知伯越来越骄横。
English: So you might as well give him the land to make him more and more arrogant.

古文：君何释以天下图知氏，而独以吾国为知氏质乎？ 
现代文：您怎么能放弃和天下诸侯共同图谋知伯的机会，而使我国成为知伯进攻的对象呢？ 魏桓子： 好。 
English: How could you give up the opportunity to work together with the world's princes to seek wisdom, and make our country the object of wisdom's attack? Wei Huan Zi: Good.

古文：君曰： 善。 乃与之万家之邑一。
现代文：于是就把一个有万户人家的城邑给了知伯。
English: As a result, a town with ten thousand households was given to Cibo.

古文：知伯大说，因索蔡、皋梁于赵，赵弗与，因围晋阳。
现代文：知伯很高兴，于是就又向赵国索取蔡、皋梁等地，赵国不答应，知伯就围攻晋阳。
English: Zhibo was very happy, so he asked Zhao Guo for Cai, Qiliang and other places. Zhao Guo did not agree, and Zhibo besieged Jinyang.

古文：韩、魏反于外，赵氏应之于内，知氏遂亡。
现代文：这时韩魏从国外反击，赵氏从国内接应，知伯于是是很快就灭亡了。
English: At this time, Han Wei counterattacked from abroad, the Zhao clan responded from within the country, and Chibo soon perished.

