古文：韦仁寿，雍州万年人也。
现代文：韦仁寿，雍州万年县人。
English: Wei Renshou, a native of Yongzhou County.

古文：大业末，为蜀郡司法书佐，断狱平恕，其得罪者皆曰： 韦君所断，死而无恨。 
现代文：隋朝大业末年，为蜀郡司法书佐，审判案件平息争端，那些被判获罪的人都说： 韦君所审判的案子，死而无恨。 
English: In the last years of the Sui Dynasty, he was the judicial assistant of Shu County, and tried cases to quell disputes. Those who were convicted said: The case that Wei Jun tried, died without hatred.

古文：高祖入关，遣使定巴蜀，使者承制拜仁寿巂州都督府长史。
现代文：高祖进入函谷关内执政，派遣使臣安抚巴蜀两郡之地，使臣奉诏命授予仁寿州都督府长史官职。
English: Gaozu came to power in Hakodate, dispatched envoys to pacify the land of Bashu two counties, and the envoys were ordered by the emperor to award the post of governor of Renshou Prefecture.

古文：时南宁州内附，朝廷每遣使安抚，类皆受贿，边人患之，或有叛者。
现代文：当时南宁州归顺唐朝，朝廷每每派遣使者去进行安抚，大抵都接受贿赂，边境上的民众很忧虑，时有叛变。
English: At that time, Nanning Province had surrendered to the Tang Dynasty. The imperial court sent emissaries to pacify the situation, and most of them accepted bribes. The people on the border were worried, and there were occasional rebellions.

古文：高祖以仁寿素有能名，令检校南宁州都督，寄听政于越巂，使每岁一至其地以慰抚之。
现代文：高祖因仁寿向有干才的名声，命他为检校南宁州都督，寄居州听政，让他每年一次到南宁州进行安抚慰问。
English: Due to Gao Zu's reputation for benevolence and talent, he was appointed as the governor of Nanning Province to inspect the school and listen to the politics of the province. He was allowed to visit Nanning Province once a year to comfort and console.

古文：仁寿将兵五百人至西洱河，承制置八州十七县，授其豪帅为牧宰，法令清肃，人怀欢悦。
现代文：仁寿带了五百名兵士到洱河，按照诏命设置八州十七县，任命地方豪杰统帅为州县长官，法令清明整肃，人们都心怀欣喜之情。
English: Renshou brought five hundred soldiers to Minhe, set up seventeen counties in eight prefectures in accordance with the imperial edict, appointed the local hero commander as the prefect of the prefecture, the decree was clear and rectified, and people were full of joy.

古文：及将还，酋长号泣曰： 天子遣公镇抚南宁，何得便去？ 
现代文：到他准备返回时，当地酋长都大声哭泣道： 天子派您镇守安抚南宁，您怎么这就要离去？ 
English: By the time he was ready to return, the local chiefs were weeping loudly, saying, "God has sent you as the town guard to pacify Nanning. Why are you leaving now?"

古文：仁寿以城池未立为辞，诸酋长乃相与筑城，立廨舍，旬日而就。
现代文：仁寿以城池没有修建作为托辞，众酋长便一起派人修筑城池，建立官舍，十天就都造好了。
English: Renshou used the excuse that the castle had not been built, so all the chiefs together sent people to build the castle and establish the official residence, and it was all built in ten days.

古文：仁寿又曰： 吾奉诏但令巡抚，不敢擅住。 
现代文：仁寿又说： 我奉诏命只是负责巡察安抚，不敢擅自住下来。 
English: Renshou also said, "I was ordered by the emperor to only be responsible for patrolling and pacifying, and I dare not live there without permission.

古文：及将归，蛮夷父老各挥涕相送。
现代文：到他回归时，边地少数民族的父老乡亲们挥泪相送。
English: When he returned, the parents and fellow villagers of the outlying ethnic minorities sent him away in tears.

古文：因遣子弟随之入朝，贡方物，高祖大悦。
现代文：南宁州还派遣子弟随仁寿进京朝见唐朝皇帝，进贡地方土产，高宗十分高兴。
English: Nanning also sent his son Su Ren Shou to Beijing to meet the Emperor of the Tang Dynasty to pay tribute to local products. Gao Zong was very happy.

古文：仁寿复请徙居南宁，以兵镇守。
现代文：仁寿又请求迁居南宁，用兵力加以守卫。
English: Renshou also requested to move to Nanning and to be guarded by troops.

古文：其年，入为太府少卿，转少府少监。
现代文：诏命听任仁寿见机行事，命令益州派兵给他。
English: The imperial edict ordered Ren Renshou to act as he saw fit and ordered Yizhou to send troops to him.

古文：九年，坐事除名。后起授虔州刺史，卒。
现代文：益州刺史窦轨嫉妒他的功劳，借口蜀地仡佬族人反叛，还来不及派出兵力顾及远略，不按时发送兵士前来。过了一年多，仁寿病逝。
English: Jealous of his services, the governor of Yizhou Province, Jinshi Douluo, under the pretext that the Shudi Yingya people were rebelling, did not have time to send troops and did not send soldiers on time. After more than a year, Renshou died of illness.

古文：张允济，青州北海人也。
现代文：张允济，青州北海县人。
English: Zhang Yunji, from Beihai County, Qingzhou.

古文：隋大业中为武阳令，务以德教训下，百姓怀之。
现代文：隋大业年间为武阳县县令，致力于以德行教育训导民众，百姓怀归。
English: During the Sui Dynasty, he was the county magistrate of Wuyang County. He was committed to educating and training the people with virtue, and the people returned home.

古文：元武县与其邻接，有人以牸牛依其妻家者八九年，牛孳产至十余头；及将异居，妻家不与，县司累政不能决。
现代文：元武县与武阳县接壤，县里有个人带了头母牛随他妻子的娘家一起生活了八九年，母牛生下了十多头小牛。到了要分居时，妻子娘家人不肯给那头牛，元武县衙门几任政权都不能解决这问题。
English: There was a man in Yuanwu County, which borders Wuyang County, who lived with his wife's family with a cow for 89 years. The cow gave birth to more than 10 calves. When it was time to separate, his wife's family refused to give him the cow. Several governments in Yuanwu County could not solve this problem.

古文：其人诣武阳质于允济。允济曰： 尔自有令，何至此也？ 
现代文：那人就到武阳县请求允济评判，允济说： 你自有元武县令，怎么到这里来了？ 
English: The man went to Wuyang County to ask Yunji for a judgment. Yunji said: You have your own Yuanwu County Order, how did you come here?

古文：其人垂泣不止，具言所以。
现代文：那人泪流不止，把事情的始末都讲了出来。
English: The man burst into tears and told the whole story.

古文：允济遂令左右缚牛主，以衫蒙其头，将诣妻家村中，云捕盗牛贼，召村中牛悉集，各问所从来处。
现代文：允济于是命令手下人绑了牛的主人，用衣衫蒙住他的头，准备好到他妻子的娘家所在的村子去，说是抓盗牛贼。允济召集村人将牛全部集中在一起，一头头询问是从哪里来的。
English: Yunji then ordered his men to tie up the owner of the cow, cover his head with a shirt, and get ready to go to the village where his wife's daughter's house was located, saying that they were going to catch the cattle thief. Yunji gathered the villagers to gather all the cattle together and ask where they came from.

古文：妻家不知其故，恐被连及，指其所诉牛曰： 此是女婿家牛也，非我所知。 
现代文：妻子娘家人不知道其中另有缘故，恐怕被连累，指着那头强占来的牛说： 这是我女婿家的牛，从哪里来的我就不知道了。 
English: The wife, daughter and family members did not know that there was another reason for this and feared that they would be implicated. Pointing to the cow that had been taken by force, she said: This is my son-in-law's cow, I don't know where it came from.

古文：允济遂发蒙，谓妻家人曰： 此即女婿，可以牛归之。 
现代文：允济便揭开牛主人蒙头的衣衫，对他妻子娘家人说： 这就是你女婿，你可以把牛还给他。 
English: Uncovering the head-covered shirt of the cow's owner, Yunji said to his wife and daughter: "This is your son-in-law, you can return the cow to him."

古文：妻家叩头服罪。
现代文：妻子娘家人叩头服罪。
English: His wife, daughter and family members bowed their heads in penitence.

古文：元武县司闻之，皆大惭。
现代文：元武县主管官听说后，都十分惭愧。
English: After hearing this, the officials in charge of Yuanwu County were very ashamed.

古文：又尝道逢一老母种葱者，结庵守之。允济谓母曰： 但归，不烦守也。若遇盗，当来告令。 
现代文：允济还曾在路途中遇到一个种葱的老妇人，搭了一座圆形草房在那里守葱，允济对老妇人说： 你只管回去，不要麻烦地守着，如果遇到盗贼，应当来报告县令。 
English: On the way, Yunji also met an old woman who grew onions. She built a round grass hut to keep the onions there. Yunji said to the old woman: Just go back, don't bother to keep them, and if you encounter thieves, you should report to the county government.

古文：老母如其言，居一宿而葱大失。母以告允济。
现代文：老妇人听从了他的劝告。
English: The old woman took his advice.

古文：悉召葱地十里中男女毕集，允济呼前验问，果得盗葱者。
现代文：回家住了一夜那葱就丢失了很多，老妇人把情况告诉了张县令，他便把葱地十里之内的全部男女都集中起来，一个个喊到跟前来检验查问，果然找到了盗葱的人。
English: After staying at home for one night, a lot of onions were lost. The old woman told the Zhang County magistrate about the situation. He gathered all the men and women within ten miles of the onion field and called them one by one to come to inspect and investigate. They found the onion thief.

古文：曾有行人候晓先发，遗衫于路，行十数里方觉。
现代文：曾有个赶路的行人，天亮前就出发，把衣衫掉到了路上，走了十几里才发觉。
English: There was once a pedestrian in a hurry, who set out before dawn, dropped his shirt on the road, and walked more than ten miles before he was discovered.

古文：或谓曰： 我武阳境内，路不拾遗，但能回取，物必当在。 
现代文：有人对他说： 我们这武阳县境内，路不拾遗，只要能返回去取，东西一定在。 
English: Someone said to him: In our territory of Wuyang County, there is no way to pick up the remains. As long as we can return to pick them up, they must be there.

古文：如言果得。
现代文：正如这人所说，果然找到了衣衫。
English: As the man said, he did indeed find the shirt.

古文：远近称之。政绩尤异。
现代文：远近之人都称赞允济，他的政绩尤其卓异。
English: People from near and far praised Yun Zhi, and his political achievements were particularly outstanding.

古文：迁高阳郡丞，时无郡将，允济独统大郡，吏人畏悦。
现代文：后迁升高阳郡丞，当时没有郡将，允济独自统领大郡，官吏百姓心悦诚服。
English: Later, he was transferred to the position of Yang Guzheng. At that time, there was no Guzheng, and Yun Zi was in sole charge of the large county. The officials were well received by the people.

古文：及贼帅王须拔攻围，时城中粮尽，吏人取槐叶藁节食之，竟无叛者。
现代文：当叛贼统帅王须拔进攻围城时，城中粮食吃光了，官吏百姓采集槐树叶藁本草充饥，竟然没有人叛变。
English: When the rebel commander Wang Suba attacked the besieged city, the food in the city ran out, and the officials and commoners collected eucalyptus leaves and eucalyptus grass to satisfy their hunger, but no one rebelled.

古文：素立从兄子游道，则天时官至冬官尚书、同凤阁鸾台三品。
现代文：贞观初，积功升任刑部侍郎，封爵武城县男。后出京任幽州刺史，不久去世。
English: At the beginning of the Zhenguan period, he was promoted to the position of the attendant of the criminal department, and was given the title of the man of Wucheng County. Later, he went to Beijing to serve as the governor of Yuzhou, and died soon after.

古文：薛大鼎，蒲州汾阳人，周太子少傅博平公善孙也。
现代文：薛大鼎，蒲州汾阳人，北周太子少傅博平公薛善的孙子。
English: Xue Dading, a native of Shiyang, Puzhou, was the grandson of the Northern Zhou Prince Shao Fu Bo Ping Gong Xue Shan.

古文：父粹，隋介州长史。汉王谅谋反，授绛州刺史，谅败伏诛。
现代文：父亲薛粹，隋朝介州长史，汉王杨谅谋反，授予薛粹绛州刺史官职，谅失败后被杀。
English: His father, Xue Qi, was the governor of the Sui Dynasty and the assistant governor of the Sui Dynasty, and the Han King Yang Piao plotted a rebellion and awarded Xue Qi the official post of the governor of Bozhou. He was killed after the failure of the plot.

古文：大鼎以年幼免死，配流辰州，后得还乡里。
现代文：薛大鼎因年幼被免死，流放辰州，后得以返回乡里。
English: Due to his young age, Xue Dading was spared death and exiled to Chenzhou, after which he was able to return to his hometown.

古文：义旗初建，于龙门谒高祖，因说： 请勿攻河东，从龙门直渡，据永丰仓，传檄远近，则足食足兵。既总天府，据百二之所，斯亦拊背扼喉之计。 
现代文：唐高祖刚树义旗时，大鼎到龙门拜谒高祖，并说： 请不要攻打黄河以东地区，就从龙门径直渡河，占据永丰粮仓，传递檄文给远近四方之人，那么粮食兵员就都充足了，既然统领着肥沃丰饶的天府地区，占据着河山险固的有利地形，这就是控制要害致敌死命的计策。 
English: When Emperor Gaozhu of Tang was about to raise the banner of righteousness, Dading came to Longmen to pay homage to Emperor Gaozhu, and said: "Please do not attack the area east of the Yellow River, just cross the river from Longmen, occupy Yongfeng granary, and pass the imperial edict to people far and near. Then the grain soldiers will be sufficient. Since he commands the fertile and abundant Tianfu area and occupies the advantageous terrain of rivers and mountains, this is a strategy to control the harm and cause the death of the enemy.

古文：高祖深然之。
现代文：高祖很同意他的意见。
English: Gaozu agreed with him.

古文：时将士咸请先攻河东，遂从众议。
现代文：而当时将士们都请求先攻打河东地区，便听从了众人的意见。
English: At that time, the generals all requested to attack the eastern part of the river first, and they listened to everyone's opinion.

古文：授大将军府察非掾。
现代文：授予大鼎大将军府察非掾的职务。
English: Awarded the position of Chief of the General Staff of the General Staff of the People's Liberation Army.

古文：贞观中，累转鸿胪少卿、沧州刺史。
现代文：贞观年间，转任鸿胪少卿、沧州刺史。
English: During the reign of Zhenguan, he was transferred to the posts of Hongyao Shaoqing and Cangzhou Zhiguo.

古文：州界有无棣河，隋末填废。大鼎奏开之，引鱼盐于海。
现代文：州界上有一条无棣河，隋朝末年被填塞废弃了，大鼎上奏章请求准予开凿，并从大海引水来发展渔业和盐业。
English: On the state border there is a river, the Mujiang River, which was dammed up and abandoned at the end of the Sui Dynasty. The emperor requested permission to dig it up and divert water from the sea to develop fisheries and the salt industry.

古文：百姓歌之曰： 新河得通舟楫利，直达沧海鱼盐至。
现代文：百姓歌咏此事道： 新河得通舟楫利，直达沧海鱼盐至。
English: The people sang a song about this, saying: The new river is navigable, and the fish in the sea can be caught.

古文：昔日徒行今骋驷，美哉薛公德滂被。 
现代文：昔日徒行今骋驷，美哉薛公德滂被。 
English: In the past, he was a hitchhiker, but now he is the beautiful Xue Gongde.

古文：大鼎又以州界卑下，遂决长芦及漳、衡等三河，分泄夏潦，境内无复水害。
现代文：大鼎又因州界地势低下，便疏通长芦水及漳水、衡水三条河道，分头导泄夏日的洪水，使境内不再有水害。
English: Due to the low terrain of the state border, Dating also dredged the three rivers of Changlu Water, Lushui Water and Hengshui Water, and diverted the summer floods, so that there would be no more water damage in the territory.

古文：时与瀛州刺史贾敦颐、曹州刺史郑德本，俱有美政，河北称为 铛脚刺史 。
现代文：当时他与瀛州刺史贾敦颐、曹州刺史郑德本都有善政美名，河北地区称他们为 铛脚刺史 。
English: At that time, he and Jia Dunyao, the governor of Zhangzhou, and Zheng Deben, the governor of Caozhou, were famous for their good governance. Hebei Province called them "lame politicians."

古文：永徽四年，授银青光禄大夫，行荆州大都督府长史。
现代文：永徽四年，授官银青光禄大夫，任荆州大都督府长史。
English: In the fourth year of Yonghui, he was awarded the title of "Silver Qing Guanglu Doctor" and was appointed as the governor of Jingzhou.

古文：明年卒。
现代文：第二年去世。
English: He died the following year.

古文：有二子：克构、克勤。
现代文：有两个儿子：薛克构、薛克勤。
English: They have two sons: Xue Kejie and Xue Keqin.

古文：时有吐谷浑犯塞，以君球素有威重，转为灵州都督。
现代文：克构，天授年间官做到麟台监。克勤，任司农少卿，被来俊臣陷害处死。
English: Kechi, who was given the position of Lintai Supervisor when he was young, and Keqin, who was given the position of Junior Secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture, were framed and executed by Lai Junshi.

古文：寻卒官。
现代文：克构受牵累获罪流放岭南而死。
English: He died in office shortly afterwards.

古文：崔知温，许州鄢陵人。
现代文：崔知温，许州鄢陵人。
English: Cui Zhiyuan, a native of Fuling, Huzhou.

古文：祖枢，司农卿。
现代文：祖父崔枢，司农卿。
English: His grandfather, Cui Zu, was the Minister of Agriculture.

古文：父义真，陕州刺史。
现代文：父亲崔义真，为陕州刺史。
English: His father, Cui Yizhen, was a historian from Shaanxi Province.

古文：知温初为左千牛。
现代文：崔知温开始为官任左千牛。
English: Cui Zhiyuan began to serve as the official left thousand cows.

古文：麟德中，累转灵州都督府司马。
现代文：麟德年间，转任灵州都督府司马。
English: During the Lingde era, he was transferred to the post of Sima, the prefectural governor of Lingzhou.

古文：州界有浑、斛薛部落万余帐，数侵掠居人，百姓咸废农业，习骑射以备之。
现代文：州界上有吐谷浑、斛薛部落一万多帐幕的人马，屡次侵扰掳掠当地的居民，百姓们都只好废弃农业，练习骑马射箭的本领以防备侵犯。
English: On the state border, there are more than ten thousand tents of the Tuyugun and Xuexue tribes, which have repeatedly invaded and plundered local residents. The people had to abandon agriculture and practice horseback archery skills to prevent encroachment.

古文：知温表请徙于河北，斛薛不愿迁移。时将军契苾何力为之言于高宗，遂寝其奏。
现代文：知温上书请求把这些人迁徙到黄河以北去，斛薛人不愿意迁移，当时有个将军契絆何力替他们向高宗讲情，于是知温的奏请被搁置起来。
English: Zhi Wen wrote a request to relocate these people to the north of the Yellow River, but the Jixue people did not want to move. At that time, there was a military alliance to intercede for them with Gao Zong, so Zhi Wen's request was shelved.

古文：知温前后十五上诏，竟从之，于是百姓始就耕获。
现代文：他前后共上书十五次，皇上终于听从了他的意见，于是当地百姓才能安心从事耕种收获。
English: He wrote a total of fifteen times, and the emperor finally listened to his opinion, so that the local people could safely engage in farming and harvesting.

古文：后斛薛入朝，因过州谢曰： 前蒙奏徙河北，实有怨心。然牧地膏腴，水草不乏，部落日富，始荷公恩。 
现代文：后来斛薛人进京朝拜，还趁路过灵州之便来拜谢他说： 从前承蒙您上奏章让我们迁往黄河以北，当时确有怨恨之心；然而迁移后的牧场土地肥沃，水草丰美，部落一天比一天富裕，这是当初蒙受您的恩泽的结果。 
English: Later, the Xue people went to Beijing to pay homage, and also took the opportunity of passing through Lingzhou to pay homage to him. He said: Once upon a time, thanks to your blessing, we moved north of the Yellow River. At that time, there was indeed resentment; however, after the relocation, the pasture land is fertile, the aquatic plants are bountiful, and the tribe is getting richer day by day. This is the result of your grace at the beginning.

古文：拜伏而去。
现代文：说完伏地叩拜而去。
English: After saying this, he bowed down and went away.

古文：知温四迁兰州刺史。会有党项三万余众来寇州城，城内胜兵既少，众大惧，不知所为。
现代文：知温第四次迁官任兰州刺史，碰上党项族三万多人来侵犯州城，城内精壮士兵较少，众人十分害怕，不知如何是好。
English: Chih-Wen was appointed as the fourth official to move to Lanzhou, and he encountered more than 30,000 people from the party and clan to invade the state capital. There were few elite soldiers in the city, and everyone was very afraid and did not know what to do.

古文：知温使开城门延贼，贼恐有伏，不敢进。
现代文：知温让人打开城门以迎贼寇，贼兵恐怕有埋伏，不敢贸然进城。
English: Zhiyuan asked people to open the city gate to welcome the bandits. The bandits were afraid of being ambushed and dared not enter the city.

古文：俄而将军权善才率兵来救，大破党项之众。
现代文：不久权善才将军率领大军来救援，大破党项贼兵。
English: Soon after, General Quan Zencai led a large army to come to the rescue and defeated the bandits.

古文：善才因其降，欲尽坑之，以绝后患，知温曰： 弗逆克奔，古人之善战。
现代文：善才准备趁党项人投降之机，把他们全都活埋了，以杜绝后患，知温说： 不要进击已被打败溃逃的军队，这是古人善战的举动。
English: The good guys were ready to take advantage of the surrender of the party members and buried them all alive to prevent future troubles, Zhi Wen said: Do not attack the army that has been defeated and fled. This is a good war move of the ancients.

古文：诛无噍类，祸及后昆。
现代文：杀戮到没有活人留存，那祸害将延及子孙后代。
English: Kill until there are no survivors, and the scourge will be passed on to future generations.

古文：又溪谷峥嵘，草木幽蔚，万一变生，悔之何及！ 
现代文：加上这儿溪谷深邃高峻，草木幽深繁茂，万一生变，将后悔莫及。 
English: In addition, the valley here is deep and steep, and the plants are deep and lush. If you change your life, you will regret it.

古文：善才然其计。又欲分降口五百人以与知温。
现代文：善才认为知温的分析很正确，接受了他的意见。
English: Xiancai thought that Zhiwen's analysis was very correct and accepted his opinion.

古文：知温曰： 向论安危之策，乃公事也，岂图私利哉！ 
现代文：善才又想分出五百口投降的人给知温，知温说道： 我前面所谈论的有关安危的对策，是从公事出发，哪里能图谋私利呢！ 
English: Good talent also wanted to allocate five hundred surrendered people to Zhi Wen. Zhi Wen said: The countermeasures for safety and security that I talked about earlier are based on business, where can I seek self-interest?

古文：固辞不受。
现代文：坚决推辞不接受。
English: Sun Qian resolutely refused to accept soldiers.

古文：党项余众由是悉来降附。
现代文：党项人被打散的剩余兵士因此都来投降归附知温。
English: As a result, the remaining soldiers, who had been dispersed by the party members, all surrendered to Zhiwen.

古文：知温累迁尚书左丞，转黄门侍郎、同中书门下三品，兼修国史。
现代文：知温后升任尚书左丞，转为黄门侍郎、同中书门下三品官职，兼任撰写国史的事。
English: After Zhiyuan, he was promoted to the left of Shang Shuxu, and was transferred to the Yellow Gate Chamberlain, the three official posts under the Yellow Gate Chamberlain, and also served as a writer of national history.

古文：永隆二年七月，迁中书令。
现代文：永隆二年七月，升任中书令。
English: In July of the second year of Yonglong, he was promoted to the post of middle secretary.

古文：永淳三年三月卒，年五十七，赠荆州大都督。
现代文：永淳二年三月去世，时年五十七岁，追赠荆州大都督。
English: Yongjun passed away in March of the second year, at the age of fifty-seven, and was posthumously awarded the title of Grand Governor of Jingzhou.

古文：子泰之，开元中官至工部尚书。
现代文：儿子崔泰之，开元年间官做到工部尚书。
English: His son, Cui Taizhi, rose to the top of the ministry in the first year of the year.

古文：少子谔之。
现代文：小儿子崔谔之。
English: The youngest son, Cui Yanzhi.

古文：谔之，神龙初为将作少匠，预诛张易之有功，封博陵县侯，赐实封二百户。
现代文：谔之，神龙初为将作少匠，参与诛杀张易之有功，封爵博陵县侯，赐给二百户封地以食租税。
English: According to the legend, Shenlong was originally a minor craftsman, and was knighted as the lord of Boling County for his participation in the assassination of Zhang Yi, and was given 200 households of the fiefdom as tax.

古文：子宾庭，开元中为光禄卿。
现代文：开元初，迁任少府监。知温的哥哥知悌。
English: At the beginning of the 19th century, he was transferred to the position of Junior Prefectural Supervisor.

古文：韦机，雍州万年人。
现代文：崔知悌，高宗时官职升到户部尚书。韦机，雍州万年人。
English: Cui Zhisheng, Gao Zongjian, was promoted to the post of Hubei Shangshu. Wei Ji, Yongzhou Wannenren.

古文：祖元礼，隋浙州刺史。
现代文：祖父韦元礼，隋朝浙州刺史。
English: Grandfather Wei Yuanli, Sui Dynasty in Zhejiang history.

古文：父恪，洛州别驾。
现代文：父亲韦恪，洛州别驾。
English: Father Wei, don't come to Los Angeles.

古文：机，贞观中为左千牛胄曹，充使往西突厥，册立同俄设为可汗。
现代文：韦机，贞观年间为左千牛胄曹，充任大使前往西突厥，以册封同俄设为其最高统治者可汗。
English: Wei Ji, Zhenguan years for the left Qian Niu Yao Cao, acting as ambassador to West Turkistan, with the title of Russia set as its supreme ruler Khan.

古文：会石国反叛，路绝，三年不得归。
现代文：碰到石国反叛，道路阻绝，三年不能返回。
English: Encountered the rebellion of Shikoku, blocked the road, and could not return for three years.

古文：机裂裳录所经诸国风俗物产，名为《西征记》。
现代文：韦机把衣裳撕成片，记录出使沿途经过的各国风俗物产，起名为《西征记》。
English: The wei machine tore the clothes into pieces and recorded the customs and products of various countries that the envoy passed along the way. It was named "Western Enlistment."

古文：及还，太宗问蕃中事，机因奏所撰书。太宗大悦，擢拜朝散大夫，累迁至殿中监。
现代文：回国后，太宗问到蕃邦的事情，韦机便把他撰写的书奏呈皇上，太宗十分高兴，提拔他为朝散大夫，后升任殿中监。
English: After returning to China, Emperor Taizong asked about the state of Shan, and Wei Jiramo presented the book he had written to the emperor. Emperor Taizong was very pleased and promoted him to the position of Choshan doctor, and later to the position of palace middle supervisor.

古文：显庆中为檀州刺史。
现代文：显庆年间韦机任檀州刺史。
English: During the Xianqing period, Wei Ji was appointed as the head of the history of Danzhou.

古文：边州素无学校，机敦劝生徒，创立孔子庙，图七十二子及自古贤达，皆为之赞述。
现代文：边塞州郡向来没有学校，韦机勤勉门徒，创立了孔子庙，画出孔子七十二贤人以及自古以来贤达士人的像，为画像一一写了赞文。
English: There has never been a school in Fengtai County. Wei Jiahu, a diligent disciple, founded the Confucius Temple, painted the images of Confucius's seventy-two sages and the sages since ancient times, and wrote praise for each image.

古文：会契苾何力东讨高丽，军众至檀州，而滦河泛涨，师不能进，供其资粮，数日不乏。
现代文：适逢契絆何力向东讨伐高丽国，军队到达檀州后，滦河泛滥，军队不能前进，檀州供给军队资金粮食，数日不匮乏。
English: When the time was right, he went east to fight against the Koryo Kingdom. After the army arrived in Danzhou, the Li River flooded and the army could not advance. Danzhou supplied the army with funds and grain, and there was no shortage for several days.

古文：何力全师还，以其事闻。
现代文：何力全军返回时，将以上情况禀告皇上。
English: When the whole army returned, Ho Li reported the above situation to the emperor.

古文：高宗以为能，超拜司农少卿，兼知东都营田，甚见委遇。
现代文：高宗认为他很有才干，破格提拔为司农少卿，兼任东都营田使。很受重用礼遇。
English: Gao Zong thought he was very talented, and he was exceptionally promoted to the position of Sino-Minor Secretary of Agriculture, and concurrently held the position of Dongdu Yingtan Envoy. He was treated with great courtesy.

古文：有宦者于苑中犯法，机杖而后奏。高宗嗟赏，赐绢数十疋，谓曰： 更有犯者，卿即鞭之，不烦奏也。 
现代文：有个宦官在畜养禽兽的苑囿中犯了法，韦机将他杖打后奏明皇上，高宗十分叹赏，赐给他几十匹绢，并对他说： 再有犯法的，你就只管鞭打，不必麻烦禀报。 
English: There was a eunuch who broke the law in the courtyard of an animal-breeding farm. The weaver beat his cane and reported it to the emperor. Gaozong was very impressed and gave him dozens of eunuchs. He said to him, "If there is any further violation of the law, you just have to whip them, and don't bother to report it."

古文：上元中，迁司农卿，检校园苑。造上阳宫，并移中桥从立德坊曲徙于长夏门街，时人称其省功便事。
现代文：上元年间，升任司农卿，检校园苑，建造了上阳宫，并把中桥从立德坊曲巷迁移到长夏门街，当时人都赞许这样省功便利。
English: During the first year of the 21st century, he was promoted to the Secretary of Agriculture, inspected the campus garden, built the Shangyang Palace, and moved the Middle Bridge from Lidefang Qu Xiang to Changxia Men Street. At that time, everyone praised this effort-saving and convenient.

古文：有道士硃钦遂为天后所使，驰传至都，所为横恣。
现代文：有个道士朱钦遂被武则天派遣，乘驿站车马赶到都城，恣意横行。
English: A Taoist Zhu Qin was sent by Wu Zetian and rushed to the capital by stagecoach, running amok.

古文：机囚之，因密奏曰： 道士假称中宫驱使，依倚形势，臣恐亏损皇明，为祸患之渐。 
现代文：韦机把他囚禁起来，秘密地禀告皇上： 这道士假称是中宫派遣来的，倚仗权力地位横行无忌，我恐怕会有损于皇上圣明，成为祸患的端倪。 
English: Wei Jie imprisoned him and secretly reported to the emperor: This Taoist pretended to be sent by the Middle Palace, and he did not hesitate to rely on his position of power to run amok. I am afraid that I will harm the emperor Shenming and become a sign of disaster.

古文：高宗特发中使慰谕机，而钦遂配流边州，天后由是不悦。
现代文：高宗特地派遣宫中使者好言慰解韦机，而钦遂被流放边远州郡。武后因此不高兴。
English: Gao Zong specially dispatched an emissary from the palace to console Wei Ji, but Qin was eventually exiled to Yuanzhou County. Empress Wu was not happy.

古文：仪凤中，机坐家人犯盗，为宪司所劾，免官。
现代文：仪凤年间，韦机因家人犯盗窃罪受到牵累，为御史弹劾，被免去官职。
English: During the Yi and Feng years, Wei Ji was implicated in the crime of theft committed by his family members, and was impeached and removed from office.

古文：永淳中，高宗幸东都，至芳桂宫驿，召机，令白衣检校园苑。
现代文：永淳年间，高宗巡幸东都，到芳桂宫驿站，召见韦机，让他以平民身份检校园林苑囿。
English: During the Yongchun era, Gao Zong, who was on a tour of the eastern capital, went to the Fanggui Palace Railway Station, summoned Wei Ji, and asked him to inspect the campus Linyuan Railway as a civilian.

古文：将复本官，为天后所挤而止，俄令检校司农少卿事，会卒。
现代文：准备恢复韦机的官职，因被武则天所排挤而终止。不久让他检校司农少卿事，正遇韦机去世。
English: Preparations to restore Wei Jie to his official position were terminated when he was ousted by Wu Zetian. Shortly after, Wei Jie died when Wu Zetian sent him to check on the school's vice-minister of agriculture.

古文：子余庆。
现代文：儿子名为余庆。
English: His son's name is Yu Qing.

古文：余庆官至右骁卫兵曹，早卒。
现代文：韦余庆任官至右骁卫兵曹，过早去世。
English: Wei Yuqing was appointed to the rank of right guard sergeant, and died prematurely.

古文：余庆子岳。
现代文：余庆的儿子名叫韦岳。
English: Yu Qing's son's name is Wei Yue.

古文：岳亦以吏干著名，则天时，累转汝州司马。
现代文：韦岳也以做官才干著名，武则天时，任汝州司马。
English: Wei Yue was also famous for his ability to be an official. Wu Zetian was appointed as the Sima of Ruzhou.

古文：会则天幸长安，召拜尚舍奉御，从驾还京，因召见。
现代文：正遇武则天巡幸长安县，召韦岳前来授官尚舍奉御，随后跟从武则天车驾回京城，被召见。
English: Wu Zetian was on a tour of Chang'an County and summoned Wei Yue to come and bestow an official post on him. He then followed Wu Zetian's carriage back to Beijing and was summoned to meet him.

古文：则天谓曰： 卿是韦机之孙，勤干固有家风也。
现代文：武则天对韦岳说： 你是韦机的孙子，勤谨能干有韦氏家风。
English: Wu Zetian said to Wei Yue: You are the grandson of Wei Ji, and you are diligent and capable, which is the style of the Wei family.

古文：卿之家事，朕悉知之。 
现代文：你家的事，我全都知道。 
English: I know everything about your family.

古文：因问家人名，赏慰良久。
现代文：随后问他家人的名字，称赞抚慰很长时间。
English: He then asked him the names of his family members, and the praise went on for a long time.

古文：寻拜太原尹。岳素不习武，固辞边任。
现代文：不久授官太原尹，韦岳平素不练习武功，坚决推辞边防要职。
English: Taiyuan Yin was soon appointed to the post, and Wei Yue, who did not practice martial arts, resolutely declined the important post of border guard.

古文：由是忤旨，左迁宋州长史，历海、虢二州刺史，所在皆著威名。
现代文：他因此忤逆了圣上旨意，被贬为宋州长史。后历任海州、虢州二州刺史，所到之处都有显赫的声威。
English: As a result, he rebelled against the divine will and was relegated to Song prefectural history. Subsequent governors of Haizhou and Zhangzhou two prefectures made history, and had a prominent reputation everywhere they went.

古文：睿宗时，入为殿中少监，甚承恩顾。
现代文：睿宗时，入京城做殿中少监，很得皇帝顾遇之恩。
English: When Ruizong entered Beijing to work as a junior inspector in the palace, he was very grateful to the emperor.

古文：及窦怀贞、李晋等伏诛，以岳尝与交往，为姜皎所陷，左迁渠州别驾，稍迁陕州刺史。
现代文：到窦怀贞、李晋等人被处死刑时，韦岳因曾与两人有过交往，被姜皎所陷害，贬为渠州别驾。不久升为陕州刺史。
English: When Dou Huai Zhen, Li Jin and others were sentenced to death, Wei Yue was framed by Jiang Chen because he had had dealings with two people, and was relegated to the status of Quzhou special driver. He was soon promoted to the status of Shaanxi special driver.

古文：开元中，卒于颍州别驾。
现代文：开元年间，逝世于颍州别驾任上。
English: At the beginning of the first year of the year, he died in Zhangzhou on duty.

古文：岳子景骏。
现代文：韦岳的儿子名叫韦景骏。
English: Wei Yue's son was named Wei Jingyu.

古文：景骏明经举，神龙中，累转肥乡令。
现代文：韦景骏以明经科中举。神龙年间，任肥乡县令。
English: Wei Jingyao was awarded the first prize in the Middle School of the Ming Dynasty. He was appointed as the county magistrate of Feixiang County during the reign of Shenlong.

古文：县北界漳水，连年泛溢。
现代文：县的北界是漳水，连年泛滥。
English: The northern border of the county is Surabaya, which has been flooded for years.

古文：旧堤迫近水漕，虽修筑不息，而漂流相继。
现代文：旧的河堤接近于河流湍急之处，虽然不停地修筑，而水流溃堤不断。
English: The old dike is close to the fast-flowing river, although it is constantly being built, and the water flow is constantly breaking the dike.

古文：景骏审其地势，拓南数里，因高筑堤。
现代文：景骏察看水流地势，把河堤向南岸拓展了几里，把河堤筑得高高的。
English: Looking at the flow of water and the topography, Jingyao extended the river embankment several miles to the south bank and built the river embankment high.

古文：暴水至，堤南以无患，水去而堤北称为腴田。
现代文：洪水到来，堤南便无水患，水去以后堤北也可称为丰腴的田地。
English: When the flood comes, there will be no flood in the south of the dyke, and after the water goes, the north of the dyke can also be called a rich field.

古文：漳水旧有架柱长桥，每年修葺，景骏又改造为浮桥。自是无复水患，至今赖焉。
现代文：漳水上过去有用木柱支撑的长桥，每年洪水过后都要加以修葺，景骏又改造为浮桥，从此再无水患，至今依靠此桥往来。
English: The long bridge over the Surabaya River, which used to be supported by wooden pillars, was torn down and has to be repaired every year after a flood. The scenic pier was converted into a pontoon bridge. Since then, there have been no more floods, and people still rely on this bridge for transportation.

古文：时河北饥，景骏躬抚合境村闾，必通赡恤，贫弱独免流离。
现代文：当时黄河以北地区发生饥荒，景骏亲自安抚全境百姓，村庄里巷间必尽互通赡养抚恤的责任，贫困弱小的人都能免除流离之苦。
English: At that time, there was a famine in the area north of the Yellow River. King Min personally pacified the people throughout the territory. The villages and alleys must fulfill the responsibility of mutual maintenance and support. The poor and weak people can be exempted from the suffering of displacement.

古文：及去任，人吏立碑颂德。
现代文：到韦景骏离任时，百姓官吏为他立碑颂德。
English: When Wei Jingyao left office, the people and officials erected a monument in his honor.

古文：开元中，为贵乡令。
现代文：开元年间，为贵乡县令。
English: During the first year of the year, it was the order of Guixiang County.

古文：县人有母子相讼者，景骏谓之曰： 吾少孤，每见人养亲，自恨终天无分，汝幸在温清之地，何得如此？
现代文：县里有家人母子互相告状，景骏对他们说： 我年轻时失去双亲，每每看到别人赡养父母时，自恨终身再无侍奉双亲的缘份。你如今有幸处在冬温夏冫青侍奉母亲的境地，怎么能这样呢？
English: There are family members in the county who are suing each other. Jingyao said to them, "I lost my parents when I was young. Whenever I see others supporting my parents, I hate myself for never being able to serve my parents again. You are now fortunate enough to be in the position of serving your mother in winter and summer. How can you do this?

古文：锡类不行，令之罪也。 
现代文：以善施及众人的事不能推行，这是我县令的罪过。 
English: It is the fault of my prefectural government that I could not implement the policy of doing good and benefiting many people.

古文：因垂泣呜咽，仍取《孝经》付令习读之。
现代文：说完垂泪呜咽，随即取出本《孝经》交给他们，让他们学习诵读。
English: After saying this with tears and sobs, he immediately took out a copy of the "Filial Piety Sutra" and gave it to them so that they could learn to recite it.

古文：于是母子感悟，各请改悔，遂称慈孝。
现代文：从此母子二人被感动觉悟，各自请求改悔，于是可称母慈子孝。
English: From then on, both mother and son were moved to awareness, and each of them asked for repentance, so they could be called mother and son.

古文：累转赵州长史，路由肥乡，人吏惊喜，竞来犒饯，留连经日。
现代文：后转任赵州长史，赴任途中路过肥乡，百姓官吏非常欣喜，竞相犒劳宴请他，留连整日不能离去。
English: After being transferred to Zhao Guozhongshi, he passed through Feixiang on his way to the post. The people and officials were very pleased and invited him to a banquet. He could not leave for the whole day.

古文：有童稚数人，年甫十余岁，亦在其中，景骏谓曰： 计吾为此令时，汝辈未生，既无旧恩，何殷勤之甚也？ 
现代文：有几个小孩子，年龄刚刚十多岁，也挤在人群中，景骏对他们说： 算起来我在这儿做县令时，你们还没有出生呢，既没有昔日的恩情，怎么这样热情殷切？ 
English: There were a few children, just over ten years old, also crowded in the crowd. Jingyao said to them, "You weren't even born when I was the county magistrate here. You don't have the kindness of the past. Why are you so enthusiastic?

古文：咸对曰： 此间长宿传说，县中廨宇、学堂、馆舍、堤桥，并是明公遗迹。
现代文：小孩子们都回答说： 我们这儿的长辈们传说，县里的官舍、学堂、客馆、堤桥，都是明公您的遗迹。
English: The little children all answered: Our elders here have a legend that the government house, school, guest house, and causeway bridge in the county are all relics of Emperor Ming.

古文：将谓古人，不意亲得瞻睹，不觉欣恋倍于常也。 
现代文：我们还以为您是一位古人，没料到能够亲眼瞻仰，不觉感到有比平常加倍的欣喜与爱慕。 
English: We also thought that you were an ancient person, but we did not expect to be able to look at you with our own eyes, and we unconsciously felt twice as much joy and love as usual.

古文：其为人所思如此。
现代文：景骏就是这样被百姓们思念爱戴的。
English: This is how Jingyao is remembered and loved by the people.

古文：十七年，迁房州刺史。
现代文：开元十七年，升任房州刺史。
English: In the 17th year of the first year of the year, he was promoted to the post of Fangzhou chief historian.

古文：州带山谷，俗参蛮夷，好淫祀而不修学校。
现代文：房州四面山谷环绕，参杂有少数民族不开化的风俗习惯，喜欢滥设祠庙进行祭祀而不修建学校。
English: Surrounded by valleys on all four sides, Fangzhou is mixed with the unenlightened customs and habits of ethnic minorities, who like to set up temples and shrines indiscriminately for worship without building schools.

古文：文集五卷。王方翼，并州祁人也，高宗王庶人从祖兄也。
现代文：开元二十年，转授奉先县令，还未赴任就去世了。王方翼，并州祁人，是高宗王庶人堂祖父家的哥哥。
English: In the 20th year of the first century, he was transferred to the position of county magistrate, but he died before taking office. Wang Fangyi, also a county magistrate, was the elder brother of Gaozong Wang's grandfather.

古文：祖裕，武德初隋州刺史。裕妻即高祖妹同安大长公主也。
现代文：祖父王裕，武德初为隋州刺史，王裕的妻子就是高祖的妹妹同安大长公主。
English: Wang Yu's grandfather, Wu De, was the first to write a history of Suizhou. Wang Yu's wife was Gao Zu's younger sister, the eldest princess of Tong'an.

古文：太宗时，以公主属尊年老，特加敬异，数幸其第，赏赐累万。
现代文：太宗时，因公主辈尊年长，所以特别敬重不同一般，多次亲临王裕的宅第，赏赐的东西成千上万。
English: At the time of Emperor Taizong, because the princesses were older than him, he had a special respect for those who were different from him. He visited Wang Yu's residence many times and gave thousands of gifts.

古文：方翼父仁表，贞观中为岐州刺史。
现代文：方翼的父亲王仁表，贞观年间为歧州刺史。
English: Fang Ying's father Wang Ren watch, Zhenguan during the years of history.

古文：仁表卒，妻李氏为主所斥，居于凤泉别业。
现代文：仁表去世，妻子李氏被公主赶出家门，住在凤泉别墅。
English: Ren table died, his wife Li was driven out of the house by the princess and lived in the Fengquan villa.

古文：时方翼尚幼，乃与佣保齐力勤作，苦心计。
现代文：当时王方翼还很小，就与雇工合力辛勤耕作，苦心经营。
English: At that time, Wang Fangyi was still very young, and he and his employees worked hard to cultivate and manage the business.

古文：功不虚弃，数年辟田数十顷，修饰馆宇，列植竹木，遂为富室。
现代文：功夫不负有心人，几年间开垦田地几十顷，修建装饰馆舍楼宇，遍种翠竹绿树，于是成为富裕人家。
English: Those who are willing to work hard can reclaim dozens of hectares of fields in a few years, build decorative museum buildings, and plant green bamboo trees everywhere, thus becoming a wealthy family.

古文：公主卒后，归长安。
现代文：公主死后，他们便回到长安。
English: After the death of the princess, they returned to Chang'an.

古文：友人赵持满犯罪被诛，暴尸于城西，亲戚莫敢收视。
现代文：友人赵持满犯罪被杀，尸体被抛弃在城西，内外亲属没有人敢前去探视收尸。
English: His friend, Zhao Mochiman, was killed in a crime, and his body was dumped in the west of the city. None of his relatives at home or abroad dared to visit and collect the body.

古文：方翼叹曰： 栾布之哭彭越，大义也；周文之掩朽骼，至仁也。
现代文：王方翼感叹道： 栾布哭祭彭越，是大义之举；周文掩埋朽骨，是仁厚之行。
English: Wang Fangyi sighed and said, "Burying Peng Yue in the mourning ceremony is a great act of righteousness; burying the dead bones of Zhou Wen is an act of benevolence.

古文：绝友之义，蔽主之仁，何以事君？ 
现代文：弃绝对朋友的大义，泯灭对主君的仁爱，怎么来奉事国君？ 
English: How can you serve the sovereign if you abandon the great cause of your absolute friend and annihilate your benevolence to your master?

古文：乃收其尸，具礼葬之。
现代文：于是他去收敛了赵持满的尸体，按照礼仪埋葬了朋友。
English: So he went to collect Zhao Mochiman's body and buried his friend in accordance with etiquette.

古文：高宗闻而嘉叹，由是知名。
现代文：高宗听说后大为感叹称赞，方翼因此知名。
English: Gao Zong was greatly impressed and praised after hearing about it, and Fang Ying became famous as a result.

古文：永徽中累授安定令。诛大姓皇甫氏，盗贼止息，号为善政。
现代文：永徽年间他被授予安定县令官职，杀了大姓皇甫氏的人，制止了盗贼为患，号称为善政。
English: During the Yonghui era, he was awarded the post of Anning County magistrate, killed a person with the surname of Huang Fu, and stopped the thieves, which was known as good governance.

古文：五迁肃州刺史。
现代文：第五次迁升任肃州刺史。
English: This is the fifth time he has been promoted to the post of Suizhou magistrate.

古文：时州城荒毁，又无壕堑，数为寇贼所乘。
现代文：当时肃州城墙荒芜毁坏，又没有护城河，屡次被贼寇侵袭。
English: At that time, the city wall of Suzhou was desolate and destroyed, and there was no moat. It was repeatedly attacked by thieves and robbers.

古文：方翼发卒浚筑，引多乐水环城为壕。
现代文：方翼派遣士卒疏浚修筑城池，引入多乐水的水流环城而成护城河。
English: The square wing dispatched officers and men to dredge and build a castle pond, and introduced the water flow of water to surround the city and form a moat.

古文：又出私财造水碾硙，税其利以养饥馁，宅侧起舍十余行以居之。
现代文：他又拿出私人的钱财修造水磨，用水磨的利税来赡养饥饿的人，并在住宅边修建了几十排房舍让他们居住。
English: He also took out private money to build a water mill, and used the profits and taxes from the mill to support the hungry, and built dozens of rows of houses for them to live in.

古文：属蝗俭，诸州贫人死于道路，而肃州全活者甚众，州人为立碑颂美。
现代文：碰到蝗虫为害的歉收年成，各州穷苦的人死于道路上的比比皆是，而肃州被他周全养活的人很多，肃州人为他立碑赞颂其美德。
English: Locusts caused poor harvests year after year, and poor people in all prefectures died on the roads everywhere, but many people in Suzhou were well-fed by him, and people in Suzhou erected a monument to praise his virtues.

古文：会吏部侍郎裴行俭西讨遮匐，奏方翼为副，兼检校安西都护。
现代文：适逢吏部侍郎裴行俭向西讨伐遮匐，奏请方翼为副帅，兼任检校安西都护。
English: At the right time, the attendant of the cadre department, Pei Xingjian, went to the west to fight against Zhairuan, and asked Fang Ying to be the vice-commander, and also served as the inspector of Anxi Capital.

古文：又筑碎叶镇城，立四面十二门，皆屈曲作隐伏出没之状，五旬而毕。
现代文：他们又修筑了碎叶镇城墙，城墙四周修了十二个门，都弯弯曲曲的呈幽深潜藏忽隐忽现的样子，五十天就竣工了。
English: They also built the city wall of the town of Broken Leaves. Twelve gates were built around the city wall, all of which were curved and had the appearance of being deeply hidden and appearing and disappearing. It was completed in fifty days.

古文：西域诸胡竞来观之，因献方物。
现代文：西域各国人竞相来参观，进献土产。
English: People from all over the West compete to visit and offer their local products.

古文：永隆中，车簿反叛，围弓月城。
现代文：永隆年间，车簿人反叛，围攻弓月城。
English: During the Yonglong Dynasty, Chepo people rebelled and besieged Yuhetsu City.

古文：方翼引兵救之，至伊丽河。贼前来拒，因纵击。大破之，斩首千余级。
现代文：方翼率领军队前去救援，到达伊犁河，叛贼前来抵抗，方翼驰逐进击，大破敌军，斩首一千多。
English: Fang Ying led the army to go to the rescue, arrived at the Ili River, the traitors came to resist, Fang Ying galloped into the attack, broke the enemy army, and beheaded more than a thousand.

古文：俄而二姓咽曲悉发众十万，与车簿合势，以拒方翼。
现代文：不久三姓咽面人派出全部十万人马，与车簿人合力抵抗。
English: Before long, the three surnamed Yanmen sent out all 100,000 men and women to join forces with the drivers to resist.

古文：屯兵热海，与贼连战，流矢贯臂，徐以佩刀截之，左右莫有觉者。
现代文：方翼把军队驻扎在热海，与叛军接连大战，一支流箭穿透他的手臂，他安然举起佩刀截去了那只手臂，身边的人竟都没有觉察。
English: Fang Ying stationed his army in Atami and fought a series of battles with the rebels. A stray arrow pierced his arm, and he raised his sword and cut off the arm without anyone around him noticing.

古文：既而所将蕃兵怀贰，谋执方翼以应贼。
现代文：随后他所率领的军队中一些少数民族兵士怀有二心，打算抓住方翼去投靠叛军。
English: Then some ethnic minority soldiers in his army had second thoughts and decided to defect to the rebels.

古文：方翼密知之，悉召会议，佯出军资以赐之。
现代文：方翼暗中知道了这件事，他把这些士兵全部集中在一起讲话，佯装拿出军需物品赏给他们。
English: Fang Ying secretly knew about this, and he gathered all these soldiers together to give a speech, pretending to give them military supplies.

古文：续续引去，便令斩之。会大风，又振金鼓以乱其声，遂诛七千余人。
现代文：然后一个个连续不断地把他们引出去，命令把他们杀掉，正碰上大风天气，又敲金鸣鼓以扰乱杀人发出的声音，便一个个杀掉了那七千多人。
English: And they led them out one by one, and commanded them to kill them: and when there arose a great storm of wind, with a very great noise, to disturb the sound of the slaying, they killed those seven thousand men one by one.

古文：因遣裨将分道讨袭咽曲等。贼既无备，因是大溃，擒首领突骑施等三百人，西域遂定。
现代文：于是派遣副将分路讨伐袭击咽面等国人，叛军毫无防备，于是被打得大败，活捉了首领突骑施等三百人，西域便被平定。
English: Therefore, the vice-commander was dispatched to make a detour to attack the Kokujin such as Gokumen, and the rebels were defenseless, so they were defeated, and the leader, Tukikishi, and three hundred others were captured alive, and the western region was pacified.

古文：以功迁夏州都督。
现代文：方翼因功升任夏州都督。
English: Fang Ying was promoted to the post of the governor of Xia Province.

古文：属牛疫，无以营农，方翼造人耕之法，施关键，使人推之，百姓赖焉。
现代文：碰上牛发瘟疫，没有牛耕田，方翼便发明了人耕地的方法，即在犁上加上机关，用人来推，百姓就是依赖这个方法来恢复生产的。
English: Faced with the epidemic of bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) and no fields for cattle, Fang Ying invented the method of cultivating land by hand, that is, adding an organ to the plough and pushing it with a person. The people relied on this method to resume production.

古文：永淳二年，诏征方翼，将议西域之事，于奉天宫谒见，赐食与语。
现代文：永淳二年，诏命征召方翼前去，准备谈谈西域的事。方翼便在奉天宫拜见了高宗，被赐与食物并与皇上交谈。
English: In the second year of Yongjun, Fang Ying was summoned by the imperial command to go and prepare to talk about the western region. Fang Ying then met Gao Zong at the Feng Tian Palace, was given food and had a conversation with the emperor.

古文：方翼衣有旧时血渍之处，高宗问其故，方翼具对热海苦战之状。
现代文：方翼衣服上有从前苦战中留下的血渍，高宗问那是怎么回事，方翼便将热海苦战的情形全都讲述一遍。
English: There are bloodstains on Fang Ying's clothes left from the previous bitter battle. Gao Zong asked what was going on, and Fang Ying recounted the whole situation of the bitter battle.

古文：高宗使袒视其疮，叹曰： 吾亲也。 
现代文：高宗让他脱下衣袖看他的伤疤，感叹道： 你真是我的亲信。 
English: Gao Zong asked him to take off his sleeves to see his scars, exclaiming: You are really my close friend.

古文：赏赐甚厚。俄属绥州白铁余举兵反，乃诏方翼副程务挺讨之。
现代文：所受赏赐很丰厚，不久遇绥州白铁余兴兵反叛，于是诏命王方翼为程务挺的副将讨伐白铁余。
English: The reward he received was very rich, and soon the Bozhou Baitie Yu Xing soldiers rebelled, so Wang Fangyi ordered the vice-general who was Cheng Mu Ting to fight against Baitie Yu.

古文：贼平，封太原郡公。
现代文：叛贼被铲平后，封爵太原郡公。
English: After the traitors were wiped out, the lord of Taiyuan County was knighted.

古文：则天临朝，以方翼是庶人近属，阴欲除之。
现代文：武则天当朝理政后，因王方翼是王庶人的近亲，私下想把他除掉。
English: After Wu Zetian became the ruler of the dynasty, he secretly wanted to get rid of Wang Fangyi because he was a close relative of Wang Shihong.

古文：及程务挺被诛，以方翼与务挺连职素善，追赴都下狱，遂流于崖州而死。
现代文：到程务挺被杀后，便以方翼与程务挺合作任职时一直相处很好为由，把方翼追捕捉拿到京城关押进监狱，后流放崖州而死。
English: After Cheng Mu Ting was killed, on the grounds that Fang Ying and Cheng Mu Ting had always got along well when they worked together, Fang Ying was taken to Beijing and imprisoned, and later died in exile in Yazhou.

古文：子宝、珣、瑨，并知名。
现代文：儿子王王缶、王王旬、王王晋，都有名声。
English: His sons, Wang Wang Can, Wang Wang Shun, and Wang Wang Jin, are all famous.

古文：宝、瑨，开元中皆为中书舍人；珣，至秘书监。
现代文：王王缶、王王晋，开元年间都曾为中书舍人；王王旬官职做到秘书监。
English: Wang Wang Can and Wang Wang Jin were both Chinese school librarians in the first year of the year; Wang Wang Shun fulfilled the official position of secretary supervisor.

