古文：刘德愿李镇柳元景向玄季滕景直王晏留宠尔朱世隆刘敏李广王氏张雕虎强练李密张鷟唐望之
现代文：刘德愿李镇柳元景向玄季滕景直王晏留宠尔朱世隆刘敏李广王氏张雕虎强练李密张鷟唐望之
English: Liu De wishes that Li Zhen, Liu Yuanjing, Xuan Ji, Teng Jing, Nao Wang, Zhu Shilong, Liu Min, Li Guangwang, Zhang Jiao, Tiger Qiangren, Li Mi, Zhang Xuan, Tang Wangzhi

古文：刘德愿
现代文：刘德愿
English: Liu Deyan

古文：宋太始中，豫州刺史彭城刘德愿镇寿阳。
现代文：宋朝太始年间，豫州刺史彭城的刘德愿镇守寿阳。
English: In the early years of the Song Dynasty, Liu Deyan, a town guard of Shouyang, lived in the city of Spen in Henan Province.

古文：住内屋，闭户未合，辄有人头进门扉，窥看户内。
现代文：住在妻子屋内，门没关严，就发现有个人头从门扇进来，窥看门里。
English: When he lived in his wife's house and the door was not tightly closed, he discovered that a man had come through the door and peeked inside.

古文：是丈夫，露髻团面。
现代文：是个成年男子的头，露着发髻圆脸。
English: It was the head of a fully grown man, with a round face and a shock of hair.

古文：内人惊告，把火搜觅，了不见人。
现代文：他的妻子惊慌地把这事告诉他，他拿灯火到处找，根本看不见人。
English: His wife panicked and told him about it, and he searched everywhere with a flashlight, but couldn't see anyone.

古文：刘明年被诛。
现代文：刘德愿第二年被诛杀。
English: Liu Deyan was beaten to death the following year.

古文：李镇
现代文：李镇
English: Li Zhen

古文：庐山自南行十余里，有鸡山。
现代文：庐山往南走十多里的地方有座鸡山。
English: More than ten miles south of Lushan, there is a chicken mountain.

古文：山上有石鸡，冠距如生。
现代文：山上有个石鸡。雄鸡冠和爪趾很大就象活的一样。
English: There is a rock chicken on the mountain. The rooster's crown and toes are large, as if it were alive.

古文：道士李镇于此下住，常宝玩之。
现代文：道士李镇就在鸡山下住，常常象对宝物一样赏玩这个石鸡。
English: The Taoist priest Li Zhen lived just below the chicken mountain, and often played with the stone chicken as if it were a treasure.

古文：鸡一日忽摧毁，镇告人曰： 鸡忽如此，吾其终乎！ 
现代文：有一天，石鸡忽然毁碎了。李镇就告诉别人说： 石鸡突然这样，我的死期到了。 
English: One day, the stone chicken was suddenly destroyed. Li Zhen told others: "The stone chicken is suddenly like this, my time to die has come."

古文：因与知故诀别，后月余遂卒。
现代文：于是与知己故旧作最后的告别。
English: So he bade his old friend a final farewell.

古文：柳元景
现代文：后来仅一个多月李镇就死了。
English: Just over a month later, Li Zhen died.

古文：宋骠骑大将军河东柳元景，大明八年，少帝即位，元景乘车行还。
现代文：柳元景宋朝的骠骑大将军河东人柳元景，在太明八年，少帝即位时，元景乘车远行回来。
English: Liu Yuanqing, the cavalry general of the Song Dynasty, Liu Yuanqing, a person from the east of the river, in the eighth year of Taiming, when the young emperor ascended to the throne, Yuanjing traveled back by car.

古文：使人于中庭洗车，卸辕晒之。
现代文：命人在庭院中洗车，然后卸下车辕晒晒车。
English: The perpetrator washed the car in the courtyard, then unloaded the car and left it to dry.

古文：有飘风中门而入，直来冲车。
现代文：忽然有一阵风从中门吹过来，一直过来冲车而吹。
English: Suddenly, there was a gust of wind blowing from the middle of the gate, blowing all the way to the car.

古文：明年而阖门被诛。
现代文：第二年全家都被杀了。
English: The next year the whole family was killed.

古文：向玄季
现代文：向玄季
English: by Xiang Xuanqi

古文：宋河南向玄季为南郡太守。
现代文：宋朝河南的向玄季任南郡太守。
English: Xiang Xuanji of the Song Dynasty in Henan became the governor of Nan County.

古文：其妻煮练，忽烂如粥，汁赤如血。
现代文：他的妻子煮白绢。忽然烂得象粥一样，煮白绢的水红得象血。
English: His wife boiled some egrets, and suddenly they were as rotten as porridge, and the water from the boiling egrets was as red as blood.

古文：夜有人扣阁而呼曰： 府君今可去矣！
现代文：夜晚有人敲小门招呼说： 太守现在可以走了。 
English: At night, someone knocks on the small door and says, "Taishou can go now."

古文：俄而刺史南郡王义宣作逆，玄季力弱，不能自固，以附于逆。
现代文：不久，刺史南郡王义宣谋反，玄季力量薄弱，不能使自己坚持正义，随附反叛。
English: Before long, Wang Yi of Zhishenan County declared a rebellion, and with his weak power, Xuanzi could not make himself adhere to justice and accompanied the rebellion.

古文：父子并伏法。
现代文：父子全都被正法。
English: Both father and son have been ordained.

古文：滕景直
现代文：滕景直
English: Teng Jingzhi

古文：宋滕景直家在广州。
现代文：宋朝人滕景直家在广州。
English: Song Dynasty ruler Teng Jing Nao was in Guangzhou.

古文：元徽中，使婢炊，釜中有声如雷。
现代文：元徽年间，他让婢女做饭。锅里发出雷一样的声音，婢女惊慌地告诉了滕景直。
English: During the Yuanhui era, he asked his maid to cook. A thunderous sound came out of the pot, and the maid panicked and told Teng Jingzhi.

古文：婢惊白，景直及家人走视，釜声更壮。釜上花数十，渐长如莲花而大，赤色，俄顷萎绝。
现代文：景直和全家人跑来看，锅中的声音更大，锅上有几十朵花，长得象莲花又渐渐变大，红色，不一会儿枯萎不见了。
English: Jing Zhi and the whole family ran to see. The noise in the pot was louder. There were dozens of flowers in the pot. They looked like lotus flowers and gradually became big and red. Soon they withered and disappeared.

古文：旬日，景直病死。
现代文：十多天后，景直病死。
English: More than ten days later, Jing Zhi died of illness.

古文：王晏
现代文：王晏
English: Wang Yao

古文：齐王晏字休默，位势隆极，而骄盈怨望，伏诛焉。
现代文：齐国的王晏字休默。地位财势都很兴盛，性格骄傲而盛气凌人并满腹怨恨，最后伏法被诛杀。
English: The king of Qi was silent. His status and wealth were prosperous, his character was proud and domineering, and he was full of resentment. In the end, Fuba was killed.

古文：其将及祸也，见屋桷悉是大蛇，就视之则灭焉。
现代文：他将有这杀身之祸的时候，曾看见屋的椽子都是大蛇，到近处看则没有影迹了。
English: At the time of his death, he had seen that the rafters of the house were full of snakes, but when he looked closer, there was no trace of them.

古文：晏恶之，乃令以纸裹桷，犹纸内动摇，籁籁有声。
现代文：王晏很讨厌这事，就让人用纸裹起椽子，但裹住之后好象还在纸里摇动，并发出籁籁的声响。
English: Wang Yao hated this very much, so he had people wrap the dice in paper, but after they were wrapped, they seemed to shake in the paper and made a rattling sound.

古文：留宠
现代文：留宠
English: To stay in favour

古文：东阳留宠字道弘，居于湖熟。
现代文：东阳人留宠字道弘。家住湖熟。
English: Dongyang people have a favorite word, Michihiro. He lives in the lake.

古文：每夜，门庭自有血数升，不知所从来，如此三四。
现代文：每到夜晚，门前就会有几升血，不知道是从哪里来的。象这种情况有三四次。
English: Every night, there would be a few litres of blood in front of the door, I don't know where it came from. This happened three or four times.

古文：后宠为折冲将军，受命北征，将行而炊饭尽变为虫。其家人蒸麹，亦变为虫。
现代文：后来留宠任折冲将军，接受了北征的命令，即将出发时军营所做的饭都变成了虫子，他家的人蒸麦米，也变成虫子。
English: Later, he was favored by General Ren Orichong and accepted the order of the Northern Expedition. When he was about to leave, the meals made in the military camp turned into worms, and the people in his family steamed barley rice and also turned into worms.

古文：其火逾猛，其虫逾壮。
现代文：灶火愈猛，虫子逾壮实。
English: The stove is getting hotter and hotter, and the bugs are getting bigger and bigger.

古文：宠遂北征，军败于坛丘，为徐龙所杀。
现代文：留宠于是北征，在坛丘失败，被徐龙杀了。
English: Therefore, he stayed in favor of the Northern Expedition, failed at the Altar Hill, and was killed by Xu Long.

古文：尔朱世隆
现代文：尔朱世隆
English: by Er Zhu Shilong

古文：后魏仆射尔朱世隆，昼寝。
现代文：后魏的仆射尔朱世隆，有一天，他白天睡觉。
English: One day, Zhu Shilong, a henchman of the late Wei Dynasty, was sleeping during the day.

古文：妻奚氏，忽见有一人，携世隆头出。奚氏遽往视之，隆寝如故。
现代文：他的妻子奚氏忽然看见有一个人携带着世隆的头走了，她立刻跑到世隆那里去看，见世隆照常睡觉。
English: His wife, Ms. Zou, suddenly saw a man carrying Shilong's head away. She immediately ran to Shilong's place and saw him sleeping as usual.

古文：及隆觉，谓妻曰： 向梦见有人，断我头将去。 
现代文：等到世隆睡醒了，对妻子说： 刚才梦见有一个人，砍掉我的头拿走了。 
English: When Shilong woke up, he said to his wife, "I just dreamed that someone cut off my head and took it away.

古文：数日被诛。
现代文：几天以后世隆被杀。
English: Shilong was killed a few days later.

古文：刘敏
现代文：刘敏
English: Liu Min

古文：梁侯景乱。
现代文：梁代时侯景作乱。
English: During Liang's reign, Houjing caused a riot.

古文：支江人刘敏于江中接得一豫章木，大数十围。
现代文：支江人刘敏在江里接得一块豫章木，粗有几十围。
English: Liu Min, a resident of the Zhijiang River, received a piece of Yuzhang wood in the river, dozens of meters thick.

古文：敏求以施入寺。
现代文：刘敏要求把这块木头施舍给寺庙用。
English: Liu Min asked that the wood be donated to the temple.

古文：陆法和曰： 此木正可与君家自用。 
现代文：陆法和说： 这块木头正好可以给你家自己用。 
English: Lu Fa said, "This piece of wood is just right for your family to use.

古文：敏不悟此语。
现代文：刘敏没有领悟这句话的意思。
English: Liu Min did not understand the meaning of this sentence.

古文：后十余日，敏妇亡，即解用此木为棺。法和曰： 犹未了。 
现代文：过了十多天，刘敏的妻子死了，就把这块木头锯开作了棺材。法和说： 还没有结束。 
English: After more than ten days, Liu Min's wife died, and he sawed this piece of wood into a coffin. Fa said, "It's not over yet."

古文：更一月，敏弟亡，用此木仅足。
现代文：又过了一个月，刘敏的弟弟死了，用这块木头刚好够。
English: Another month passed, and Liu Min's brother died. This piece of wood was just enough.

古文：李广
现代文：李广
English: Li Guang

古文：北齐文宣天保年，御史李广勤学博物，拜侍御史。
现代文：北齐文宣天保年间。御史李广勤学博闻，见多识广，知识丰富。
English: During the time of Northern Qi, Wen Xuan and Tian Bao, Gu Shi Li was a diligent scholar, well-read and knowledgeable.

古文：夜梦见一人，出于其身中，谓广曰： 君用心过苦，非精神所堪。 
现代文：被任命为侍御史。有一天晚上梦见一个人从他身子里出来，对李广说： 您用心太苦了，不是你的精力所能忍受得了的，我现在辞别您走了。 
English: One night, he dreamed that a person came out of his body and said to Li Guang, "Your heart is too hard, it's not what your energy can bear, I'm going to leave you now."

古文：因而惚恍，数日便遇疾，积年而终。
现代文：李广因此精神不振，神志不清，几天以后得了疾，刚一年就死了。
English: As a result, Li Guang was depressed and delirious. A few days later, he fell ill and died just a year later.

古文：王氏
现代文：王氏
English: The Wang family

古文：北齐后主武平初，平邑王氏与同邑人李家为婚，载羊酒，欲就亲家宴会。
现代文：北齐后主武平初年。平邑王家与同邑的李家结为亲家。于是用牛车装着羊和酒等，想到亲家去宴会。
English: In the first year of Wu Ping, the ruler of Northern Qi, the Wang family in Pingyi and the Li family in the same town became relatives. So they used ox carts to carry sheep and wine, and thought of going to a banquet.

古文：行不过三里，日没渐暗，见东南五十步外，有赤物大如升，若流星曳影，直来著车轮。牛即不动，见者并怖。
现代文：走了不到三里多路，太阳被遮住天渐渐暗下来。这时只见东南方向约五十步开外，有个象升那么大的红色东西，象流星闪影，径直落在车轮上，牛立刻就拉不动了。
English: After walking less than three miles, the sun was covered and the sky gradually darkened. At this time, only about fifty paces away in the southeast direction, there was a red thing as big as a meteor, like a meteor flash, falling straight on the wheel, and the cow immediately could not be pulled.

古文：其妻遂下车，向而再拜，张裙引之。
现代文：见此情景的人都很害怕，王家妻就下了车，朝那里一再叩拜，张开裙子引那物，那个东西便进入裙下。
English: People who saw this scene were very scared. The royal wife got out of the car, bowed repeatedly, opened her skirt and pulled the object, and the object got under her skirt.

古文：便入裙下，升车还家，照看乃真金，遂盛于库柜。
现代文：然后上车回家。回家以后点灯照看，原来是块真金，就装到库房的柜子里。
English: Then I got on the bus and went home. After I got home, I lit the lamp and looked after it. It turned out to be a piece of real gold, which I put in a cabinet in the storeroom.

古文：每至良晨，恒以香火祈恩。
现代文：每到良辰吉日，经常供上香火祈祷谢恩。
English: Every auspicious day, incense is often offered to pray for thanks.

古文：后四方异货，毕集其家，田蚕每年百倍。
现代文：从此以后，四方异货，全集聚在他家里；田蚕等收入每年都比过去增长百倍。
English: Since then, the complete collection of Sifang's foreign goods has been gathered in his home; the income from fields and silkworms has increased a hundredfold every year.

古文：至春，其庭生一桑树，枝叶异于众木。数年之间，遍满一院。奇禽异鸟，莫不栖集。
现代文：到春天，王家的庭院中生出一棵桑树，枝叶和别的桑树不同，几年之间，枝叶遍布庭院，奇禽异鸟没有不来聚集落下休息的。
English: In the spring, a mulberry tree sprouted in the courtyard of the royal family. Its branches and leaves were different from those of other mulberry trees. Within a few years, the branches and leaves were all over the courtyard. Strange birds gathered there to rest.

古文：其家大富，将三十年。王氏妻以老病终。
现代文：他们家大富起来。将近三十年，王家的妻子因老了病死。
English: Their family became very rich. Nearly thirty years later, the wife of the royal family died of old age and illness.

古文：后凌朝有白鸟似鹭，飞至桑树侧，吐血久之，堕地而死。
现代文：后来有一天凌晨，一只白鸟象白鹭，飞到桑树边上，吐了好长时间血。坠下地死了。
English: Then, early one morning, a white bird, like an egret, flew to the edge of a mulberry tree, vomited blood for a long time, and fell to its death.

古文：日午后，西北大旋风，涨天而来，绕旋此树，竦上其枝柯，如扫帚形。
现代文：当天午后，西北面刮起大旋风，满天铺地而来，绕着这棵桑树旋转，一会又上到枝茎上，形状象扫帚。
English: In the afternoon of the same day, a big whirlwind blew from the northwest, coming from all over the sky, spinning around this mulberry tree, and then going up to the branches and stems, shaped like a broom.

古文：不经十日，奴婢逃走，首尾相继，家资略尽。及开柜取金，唯见萤火蚰蜒腐草之余耳。
现代文：不到十天，王家的奴婢相继逃走，家财几乎光了，等到开柜拿那块真金，只见萤火虫蚰蜒烂草等东西罢了。
English: In less than ten days, the slaves and maidservants of the Wang family fled one after another, and the family's wealth was almost gone. When they opened the chest to take the piece of real gold, they only saw fireflies, weeds, and other things.

古文：张雕虎
现代文：张雕虎
English: ZHANG Jiaohu

古文：北齐末，监吏待诏张雕虎，未死一日前，骑马在路。有人望，不见其头。
现代文：北齐末年，监吏待诏张雕虎。在未死的前一天，骑着马在路上走，有人望见他没有头。
English: In the last years of the Northern Qi Dynasty, the supervisors waited for Zhang Zhaohu to arrive. On the day before he died, he was riding a horse on the road, and some people saw that he had no head.

古文：俄而见杀。
现代文：紧接着就被杀了。
English: He was killed immediately afterwards.

古文：强练
现代文：强练
English: Strong practice

古文：后周武帝时，有强练者，岐山人，佯狂，号曰强练。
现代文：后周武帝时，有个叫强练的，是岐山人，装疯，自称大号叫强练。
English: Later, during the reign of Emperor Wu of Zhou, there was a man named Qiangren, a Qishan man, who pretended to be mad and called himself Qiangren.

古文：时皋公侯龙思兄弟被冢宰宠遇，燻灼当时。强练度其门，思妻妪等遣婢呼入，为设饮食，察其言语。练谓思等云： 与我作婢。 
现代文：冢宰晋国公宇文护家没破败时，强练曾拿着一个瓠子，到宇文护的门前，敲破了那个瓠子，说： 瓠破，可怜你儿子太苦。 后来宇文护被杀，宇文护的几个儿子也他们的门外来回走，龙思的妻子老太太派奴婢招呼他进来，给他准备饭吃，观察他的言语。强练对龙思等说： 给我作奴婢吧。 
English: Later, when Uwenshu was killed and several sons of Uwenshu returned from outside their door, Long Si's wife, an old lady, sent servants to invite him in, prepare a meal for him, and observe his speech. Qiangren said to Long Si and the others, "Be my servants."

古文：众妪大笑。
现代文：众老太太大笑。
English: The old ladies burst out laughing.

古文：练又云： 作婢会不免。他人将去，安能胜我。 
现代文：强练又说： 作奴婢正不可避免，其他的人将走，怎么能比我好？ 
English: Qiangren also said, "Being a slave is inevitable. Other people will leave. How can you be better than me?"

古文：未几冢宰诛，思兄弟亦同被戮。
现代文：不长时间冢宰被杀，龙思兄弟也一同被杀。
English: Not long after, Gongzai was killed, and the Longsi brothers were also killed together.

古文：李密
现代文：李密
English: Li Mi

古文：隋李密即会众，屯洛口，设坛，大张旌旗，告天即公位。
现代文：隋朝时李密聚会众人起义。
English: During the Sui Dynasty, Li Mi rallied the people to revolt.

古文：其夜，狐狸鸣于坛侧。
现代文：屯扎在洛口。设了祭坛，树起很多大旗，上告苍天即公位。
English: They camped in Lokou. They set up an altar, raised many large flags, and appealed to the heavens for a public position.

古文：翌日，临行事，大风四起，飞沙拔木，旗竿有折者。
现代文：那天夜间，有狐狸在坛边上叫。第二天，就要起事的时候，四面刮起大风，飞沙走石力拔树木，旗竿也有被吹折的。
English: That night, a fox was howling on the edge of the altar. The next day, when things were about to get out of hand, there was a strong wind blowing on all sides. The flying sand was so strong that it uprooted trees, and the flagpole was also broken.

古文：其后果败。
现代文：以后果然失败了。
English: It failed miserably.

古文：张鷟
现代文：张鷟
English: Zhang Ye

古文：唐永徽年中，张鷟筑马槽厂，宅正北掘一坑丈余。
现代文：唐永徽年间。张鷟修筑马槽厂，在住宅的正北挖一个一丈多深的大坑。
English: During the reign of Emperor Yonghui, Zhang Xuan built a manger factory, digging a large pit in the north of the house.

古文：时阴阳书云： 子地穿，必有人堕井死。 
现代文：当时的阴阳书上说： 你的地如果挖开，一定会有人掉到井里死。 
English: At that time, the Yin and Yang book said: If your land is dug up, someone will surely fall into the well and die.

古文：鷟有奴名永进，淘井土崩，压死。
现代文：张鷟一个家奴名叫永进。因淘井土方崩塌，被压死。
English: One of Zhang Ye's slaves, named Yong Jin, was crushed to death when the earthwork of a mine collapsed.

古文：又鷟故宅，有一桑，高四五丈，无故枯死。
现代文：还有，张鷟的旧宅，有一棵桑树，高有四五丈，无缘无故枯死了。
English: Also, in Zhang Ye's old house, there was a mulberry tree that was four or five meters tall, but it died for no reason.

古文：寻而祖亡。
现代文：接着鷟的父亲就死了。
English: And then my father died.

古文：没后，有明阴阳云： 乔木先枯，众子必孤。 
现代文：死后，有善解阴阳的说： 乔木先枯死，其众子一定会成孤儿。 
English: After his death, a person who was good at understanding yin and yang said: "If the tree dies first, his children will surely become orphans."

古文：此其验也。
现代文：这就是验证。
English: This sword in Prince Joe's tomb is proof of that.

古文：唐望之
现代文：唐望之
English: Tang Wanzhi

古文：唐咸亨四年，洛州司户唐望之，冬选科五品，进止未出。
现代文：唐朝咸亨第四年，洛州司户唐望之，在那年冬被选升为五品官。
English: In the fourth year of the Tang Dynasty's Xianheng, the head of the Lozhou family, Tang Wangzhi, was selected to be the fifth grade official that winter.

古文：闻有一僧来觅。
现代文：还没有派什么职务时，听说有一个和尚来找他。
English: Before he was assigned to any post, he heard that a monk was looking for him.

古文：初不相识，延之共坐。少顷云： 贫道出家人，得饮食亦少。以公名人，故暗相鷟，能设一顿鲙否？ 
现代文：他们并不相识，请和尚同坐，过一会儿和尚说： 我是出家人，吃过的东西很少，凭你是当今名人，所以我糊涂地想托你一件事：能让我吃顿鱼汤吗？ 
English: They didn't know each other, so they invited the monk to sit with them. After a while, the monk said, "I'm a monk, and I've eaten very few things. You're a celebrity today, so I'm confused and want to ask you for something: Can you make me some fish soup?"

古文：司户欣然，即处置买鱼。
现代文：司户高兴地同意了，立即买鱼作菜。
English: The steward happily agreed and immediately bought fish to make a dish.

古文：此僧云： 看有蒜否？ 
现代文：那个和尚又说： 看看有没有蒜？ 
English: The monk said, "Let's see if there's any garlic."

古文：司户家人云： 蒜尽。 
现代文：司户的家人说： 蒜尽 也就是说没有蒜了。
English: The steward's family said: "All the garlic is gone, that is to say, there is no garlic."

古文：此僧云： 既蒜尽，去也。 
现代文：和尚又说： 既然蒜尽，我走了。 
English: The monk also said, "Since I've run out of garlic, I'm leaving."

古文：即起。
现代文：说着就站起身。
English: He stood up as he spoke.

古文：司户留之，云： 蒜尽，遣买即得。 
现代文：司户挽留他，说： 蒜尽，派人去买就有了。 
English: The steward detained him and said, "If you run out of garlic, send someone to buy it and you will have it."

古文：僧云： 蒜尽不可更住者，留不得。 
现代文：和尚说： 蒜尽，更不能住，留不得。 
English: The monk said, "If you run out of garlic, you can't live, and you can't stay."

古文：司户无疾，至夜暴亡。
现代文：当天晚上，司户无病突然死亡。
English: In the evening of the same day, Sido suddenly died of illness.

古文：蒜者算也，年尽，所以异僧告之。
现代文：蒜，就是算。年尽。所以不平常的和尚告诉他。
English: Garlic, that is. At the end of the year. So the unusual monk told him.

