古文：鲁襄时，晋、楚争郑。
现代文：原文春秋鲁襄公时期，晋楚两国争夺郑国。
English: During the Spring and Autumn Period and the reign of King Lu Xiang, the two countries of Jin and Chu fought over Zheng.

古文：襄公九年，晋悼公帅诸侯之师围郑，郑人恐，乃行成。
现代文：襄公九年，晋悼公联合其他诸侯的军队一起围攻郑国，郑国人感到害怕，于是派遣使者前去求和。
English: In the ninth year of Emperor Xiang, Emperor Jinmu and the armies of other princes besieged Zheng. The people of Zheng were afraid, so they sent an envoy to sue for peace.

古文：荀偃曰： 遂围之，以待楚人之救也，而与之战。不然，无成。 
现代文：荀偃说： 应该继续围攻郑国，等到楚国救郑的时候，就可以迎战楚军；如果现在和郑国议和，就不会得到实际的利益。 
English: Zhai said: We should continue to besiege Zheng. When Chu rescues Zheng, we can fight against the Chu army. If we negotiate peace with Zheng now, we will not get any practical benefits.

古文：荀罂曰： 许之盟而还师以敝楚：吾三分四军，与诸侯之锐，以逆来者，于我未病，楚不能矣。
现代文：荀罂却说： 不可，应该和郑国结盟引兵而归，这样楚国就会出兵讨伐郑国。先让楚军疲惫不堪，再将我国的军队分成三部分，联合其他诸侯的军队轮流迎战楚军。
English: However, Zou said: No, we should ally with Zheng and lead the troops back, so that Chu would send troops to fight against Zheng. First, let the Chu army be exhausted, then divide our army into three parts, and join forces with other vassals to take turns fighting the Chu army.

古文：犹愈于战，暴骨以逞，不可以争。
现代文：那么在我们的军队还没有疲惫之前，楚军就早已疲惫没有能力作战了，比现在就和楚国交战要好得多。
English: Then, before our army is exhausted, the Chu army will already be exhausted and unable to fight, which is much better than fighting with Chu right now.

古文：大劳未艾。君子劳心，伍员小人劳力，先王之制也。 
现代文：假如现在就和楚国交战，必然会伤亡惨重，因此应该以不战为上策。所谓聪明的人靠智慧取胜，愚笨的人靠蛮力克敌，这就是先王克敌制胜的道理啊。 
English: If we were to go to war with Chu right now, there would inevitably be heavy casualties, so the best strategy would be not to fight. So-called smart people win by wisdom, while stupid people defeat their enemies by brute force. This is the reason why the previous king defeated his enemies.

古文：乃许郑成，后三驾郑，而楚卒道敝，不能争，晋终得郑。
现代文：群臣都表示赞成，于是接受郑国的求和。后来晋国三次出兵讨伐郑国，但楚国军队由于长途行军而精疲力竭，根本没有办法作战。因此最后终于由晋国取得了郑国。
English: The group of ministers all expressed their approval, and thus accepted Zheng's request for peace. Later, Jin sent troops to fight Zheng three times, but the Chu army was exhausted due to the long march and had no way to fight. Therefore, Jin finally won Zheng.

古文：吴阖闾既立，问于伍员曰： 初而言伐楚，余知其可也。而恐其使余往也，又恶人之有余之功也。
现代文：吴王阖闾即位后，曾经问伍员说： 当初贤卿曾经建议讨伐楚国，寡人也有讨伐楚国的意思，但唯恐吴王僚派我伐楚，又不愿意他占有我的功劳。
English: After the enthronement of King Wu, he once asked a military officer: "At the beginning, the sages had suggested a campaign against the State of Chu, and many people also had the intention of a campaign against the State of Chu, but I am afraid that King Wu sent me to fight Chu, and I do not want him to take credit for my work.

古文：今余将自有之矣，伐楚何如？ 
现代文：现在寡人想亲自率领军队讨伐楚国，贤卿认为怎么样呢？ 
English: Now, few people want to personally lead the army to fight against Chu, what do you think?

古文：对曰： 楚执政众而乖，莫适任患。
现代文：伍员答： 楚国执政者众多但意见不一，谁也不肯承担责任。
English: Corporal A: There are many people in power in the State of Chu, but their opinions differ, and no one is willing to take responsibility.

古文：若为三师以肄焉，一师至，彼必皆出；彼出则归，彼归则出，楚必道敝。
现代文：假如大王动员三军，只是白白地劳民伤财，因此不如先发一军，诱使楚国出兵迎战。当楚国出兵后，大王就立刻退兵；楚国退兵之后，大王再次出兵。
English: If the great king mobilized three armies, it would only be a waste of labor and money, so it would be better to send an army first and entice Chu to send troops to fight. When Chu sent troops, the great king immediately withdrew; after Chu withdrew, the great king sent troops again.

古文：亟肄以罢之，多方以误之。既罢，而后以三军继之，必大克之。 
现代文：此时大王再运用各种手段，使楚国的军事政治更加混乱，彻底瓦解楚国人的斗志，然后大王再动员三军，必定能彻底摧毁楚国。 
English: At this time, the great king again used various means to make the military politics of Chu more chaotic and completely destroy the fighting spirit of the people of Chu, and then the great king mobilized the three armies, which would certainly be able to completely destroy Chu.

古文：阖闾从之，楚于是乎始病。
现代文：阖闾欣然采纳了伍员的意见，从此楚军就陷入疲于奔命的苦境之中。
English: He gladly accepted the opinions of the soldiers, and from then on, the Chu army fell into a desperate predicament.

古文：晋、吴敝楚，若出一辙。然吴能破楚，而晋不能者，终少柏举之一战也。
现代文：晋和吴削弱楚国的实力，用的都是一样的手法，但是吴能在柏举大败楚军，而晋却不能在城濮消灭楚。
English: Both Jin and Wu used the same methods to weaken the power of the State of Chu. However, Wu was able to defeat the Chu army in the Battle of Pu, while Jin was unable to destroy the Chu in the Battle of Chenghu.

古文：宋儒乃以城濮之战咎晋文非王者之师。
现代文：宋儒在批评楚晋城濮之战的时候，竟然说晋文公不是真正的王者之师，不能伐楚。唉!
English: When Song Confucius criticized the battle of Chu-Jin Fortress, he went so far as to say that Jin Wengong was not a true king's teacher and could not defeat Chu. Alas!

古文：噫!有此议论，所以养成南宋为不战之天下，而竟奄奄以亡。
现代文：正是因为宋儒有这种思想，才使南宋出现不战而和的妥协论调，终于使南宋逐渐由衰而亡，真是可悲!
English: It was precisely because of this kind of thought in Song and Confucius that the compromise theory of peace without war emerged in the Southern Song Dynasty, and finally caused the Southern Song Dynasty to gradually decline and die. How sad!

古文：悲夫!按：吴璘制金，亦用此术。
现代文：按：宋将吴璘对付金兵，也是用的这种方法。
English: Press: This is also the method used by Song to deal with the Jin soldiers.

古文：虏性忍耐坚久，令酷而下必死，每战非累日不决。
现代文：金兵的特点是忍耐力强，命令严酷，一旦令下，必定会誓死执行任务，因此每次决战的时候，总是要打上好几天。
English: The characteristics of gold soldiers are strong patience, strict orders, and once the order is given, they will surely swear to carry out the task, so every time there is a decisive battle, it always takes several days.

古文：于是选据形便，出锐卒，更迭挠之，与之为无穷，使不得休暇，以沮其坚忍之气，俟其少怠，出奇胜之。
现代文：吴璘于是选择有利的地形，派出精锐兵卒，轮番进行骚扰，使金兵穷于应付，没有办法休息，以磨蚀他们坚忍的耐力，然后趁着金兵稍稍有些惰怠时，立即以奇兵进行袭击，从而大获全胜。
English: Wu Gan then chose a favorable terrain, dispatched elite soldiers, took turns to harass, made the gold soldiers overwhelmed, unable to rest, to erode their patient endurance, and then took advantage of the gold soldiers a little lazy, immediately attacked with a strange soldier, and thus won a great victory.

