古文：诸葛亮字孔明，琅邪阳都人也。汉司隶校尉诸葛丰后也。
现代文：诸葛亮，字孔明，琅琊郡阳都县人，汉朝司隶校尉诸葛丰的后人。
English: Zhuge Liang, also known as Kongming, was a native of Yangdu County, Gansu County, and a descendant of Zhuge Feng, an officer of the Han Dynasty.

古文：父珪，字君贡，汉末为太山郡丞。
现代文：诸葛亮的父亲诸葛珪，字君贡，汉朝末年担任过泰山郡城。
English: Zhuge Liang's father Zhuge Yao, known as Jun Gong, served as the county seat of Taishan in the late Han Dynasty.

古文：亮早孤，从父玄为袁术所署豫章太守，玄将亮及亮弟均之官。
现代文：诸葛亮，年少时父亲就去世了，叔父诸葛玄是袁术所设置的豫章太守，诸葛玄带着诸葛亮以及诸葛亮的弟弟诸葛均前去到官任职。
English: Zhuge Liang's father died when Zhuge Liang was young. His uncle Zhuge Xuan was the governor of Yuzhang set up by Yuan Shuxu. Zhuge Xuan took Zhuge Liang and Zhuge Liang's younger brother Zhuge Jun to work as officials.

古文：会汉朝更选朱皓代玄。
现代文：正值汉朝改派朱皓代替诸葛玄。
English: At the time of the Han Dynasty, Zhu Xi was reassigned to replace Zhu Gexuan.

古文：玄素与荆州牧刘表有旧，往依之。
现代文：诸葛玄向来跟荆州牧刘表有交情，就前往投奔刘表。
English: Zhuge Xuan has always had a friendship with Jingzhou Mugu Liu table, so he went to Liu table.

古文：玄卒，亮躬耕陇亩，好为梁父吟。
现代文：诸葛玄去世后，诸葛亮在南阳耕地，喜欢吟诵歌谣《梁父吟》。
English: After the death of Zhuge Xuan, Zhuge Liang cultivated land in Nanyang and liked to chant the ballad "Liangfujing."

古文：身长八尺，每自比於管仲、乐毅，时人莫之许也。
现代文：诸葛亮身高八尺，经常自比于管仲、乐毅，当时的人都不赞同。
English: Zhuge Liang was eight feet tall and often compared himself to Guan Zhong and Le Yi. People at the time did not agree.

古文：惟博陵崔州平、颍川徐庶元直与亮友善，谓为信然。
现代文：只有博陵的崔州平、颍川的徐庶元直和诸葛亮交好，认为确实如此。
English: Only Boling's Cui Zhuping and Luochuan's Xu Shiao Yuan Zhi and Zhuge Liang, who were on good terms with each other, believed this to be true.

古文：时先主屯新野。徐庶见先主，先主器之，谓先主曰： 诸葛孔明者，卧龙也，将军岂愿见之乎？ 
现代文：当时先主驻扎在新野，徐庶拜见先主，先主对他很是器重，徐庶对先主说： 诸葛孔明是卧龙啊，将军愿意前去见见他吗？ 
English: At that time, the former lord was stationed in Shinno, and Xu Shiao went to see the former lord. The former lord was very important to him, and Xu Shiao said to the former lord: Zhuge Kongming is Wolong, is the general willing to go and see him?

古文：先主曰： 君与俱来。 庶曰： 此人可就见，不可屈致也。
现代文：先主说： 你陪他一起过来吧。 徐庶说： 这个人只能前去相见，不能让他前来拜见。
English: The patriarch said, "You should come with him." Xu Zhuang said, "This man can only go to meet you, he can't make you come to meet him."

古文：将军宜枉驾顾之。 
现代文：将军应该屈尊去探望他。 
English: The general should deign to visit him.

古文：由是先主遂诣亮，凡三往，乃见。
现代文：因此先主就去拜访诸葛亮，一共去了三次，才得以相见。
English: Therefore, he went to visit Zhuge Liang a total of three times before they were able to meet.

古文：因屏人曰： 汉室倾颓，奸臣窃命，主上蒙尘。
现代文：先主禀退左右，对诸葛亮说： 汉室衰微，奸臣谋朝篡位，皇上在外奔波流离。
English: When his forefathers were about to retire, they said to Zhuge Liang: The imperial family is in decline, treacherous vassals are plotting to usurp the throne, and the emperor is running around the world.

古文：孤不度德量力，欲信大义於天下，而智术浅短，遂用猖蹶，至于今日。
现代文：我自不量力，想要为天下伸张正义，但是智谋和权术都很浅薄，所以遭遇挫折，以致到了今天这个地步。
English: I tried my best to uphold justice for the world, but my wisdom and power were shallow, so I suffered setbacks, which led to today's situation.

古文：然志犹未已，君谓计将安出？ 
现代文：但是志向没有改变，您认为该怎么办呢？ 
English: But the ambition hasn't changed. What do you think should be done?

古文：亮答曰： 自董卓已来，豪杰并起，跨州连郡者不可胜数。
现代文：诸葛亮回答说： 自从董卓作乱以来，天下豪杰并起，占据地方称王的人数不胜数。
English: Zhuge Liang replied: Since Dong Zhuo's rebellion, the world's heroes have risen together, and the number of people who occupy the local king is countless.

古文：曹操比於袁绍，则名微而众寡，然操遂能克绍，以弱为强者，非惟天时，抑亦人谋也。
现代文：曹操对比于袁绍，就是名望低并且兵力少，但是曹操最终能攻克袁绍，以弱胜强，不是因为天时，也在于人谋。
English: Compared to Yuan Shao, Cao Cao had a lower reputation and fewer troops. However, Cao Cao was able to defeat Yuan Shao in the end. The weak defeated the strong, not because of the weather, but because of human strategy.

古文：今操已拥百万之众，挟天子而令诸侯，此诚不可与争锋。
现代文：现在曹操已经拥有百万之众，挟持天子号令诸侯，这实在是不能与他争锋的。
English: Now that Cao Cao already has a million people, he can't really compete with him in holding the title of "Son of Heaven" and commanding princes.

古文：孙权据有江东，已历三世，国险而民附，贤能为之用，此可以为援而不可图也。
现代文：孙权占据江东，已经经历了三代，国家占有天险，而百姓归附，能任用贤能之人，这是能用来作为援助而不能图谋的。
English: Sun Quan has occupied the eastern part of the Yangtze River for three generations. The country is in possession of natural hazards, and the people are attached to it. It is possible to appoint capable people, which can be used as assistance but cannot be schemed.

古文：荆州北据汉、沔，利尽南海，东连吴会，西通巴、蜀，此用武之国，而其主不能守，此殆天所以资将军，将军岂有意乎？
现代文：荆州北面占据着汉水、沔水，东边一直到南海，连接吴郡、会稽，西面沟通巴蜀，这是用兵的地方，但是它的主人不能守地，这大概是上天赐给将军的，将军您有意吗？
English: To the north of Jingzhou, it occupies the Han River and Surabaya River. To the east, it stretches all the way to the South China Sea, connecting Wu County and Hui County. To the west, it communicates with Bashu. This is a place where soldiers are used, but its owner cannot defend the land. This was probably given to the general by God. Are you interested in becoming a general?

古文：益州险塞，沃野千里，天府之土，高祖因之以成帝业。
现代文：益州地势险要，沃野千里，乃天府之国，从前汉高祖就是凭借这块地方而成就帝业。
English: The terrain of Yizhou is perilous, fertile fields stretch for thousands of miles, and it is the country of heaven. In the past, the ancestors of the Han Dynasty used this place to achieve imperial success.

古文：刘璋闇弱，张鲁在北，民殷国富而不知存恤，智能之士思得明君。
现代文：刘璋昏庸懦弱，北面有张鲁的威胁，百姓饮食地方富强，但不知道体恤爱护，智谋才干的士人都希望得到一位贤明的主上。
English: Liu Bei was dim-witted and cowardly, there was the threat of Zhang Lu in the north, the people were rich and powerful, but those who did not know compassion and love, and those who were clever and talented, all hoped for a wise master.

古文：将军既帝室之胄，信义著於四海，总揽英雄，思贤如渴，若跨有荆、益，保其岩阻，西和诸戎，南抚夷越，外结好孙权，内脩政理；天下有变，则命一上将将荆州之军以向宛、洛，将军身率益州之众出於秦川，百姓孰敢不箪食壶浆以迎将军者乎？
现代文：将军既然是汉朝皇室的后裔，信义文明天下，招揽天下英才，求贤若渴，如果能占据荆州、益州，凭借天险拒守，西面跟少数民族交好，南面对南越进行安抚，对外跟孙权交好，对内治理好各种政事，天下一旦有变故，就派一名上将率领荆州的部队向宛城、洛阳一带进发，将军您就亲自率领益州的部队出兵秦川，百姓怎么能不挑着粮食带着水来迎接将军您呢？
English: Since the general is a descendant of the imperial family of the Han Dynasty, he is the leader of the civilized world of sincerity and righteousness, recruiting the world's talents and thirsting for talents. If you can occupy Jingzhou and Yizhou, refuse to defend by virtue of natural hazards, make friends with ethnic minorities in the west, pacify South Vietnam in the south, make friends with Sun Quan in the outside world, and manage various political affairs well in the inside, if there is any change in the world, you will send an admiral to lead the troops of Jingzhou to Wancheng and Luoyang. General, you will personally lead the troops of Yizhou to send troops to Q

古文：诚如是，则霸业可成，汉室可兴矣。 先主曰： 善！ 
现代文：如果真的能这么做，那么功业就能成功，汉朝王室就能复兴了。 先主说： 好。 
English: If you can really do this, then your work will be successful, and the Han Dynasty royal family will be revived.

古文：於是与亮情好日密。关羽、张飞等不悦，先主解之曰： 孤之有孔明，犹鱼之有水也。
现代文：于是先主跟诸葛亮的关系日益密切，关羽、张飞等人不悦，先主开导他们说： 我有了孔明，就好像鱼有了水一样。
English: As a result, the relationship between the lord and Zhuge Liang became increasingly close. Guan Yu, Zhang Fei and others were not pleased. The lord enlightened them and said: "I have Kongming, just like a fish has water.

古文：愿诸君勿复言。 
现代文：希望你们不要再说了。 
English: I wish you'd stop saying that.

古文：羽、飞乃止。
现代文：关羽、张飞就不再议论了。
English: Guan Yu and Zhang Fei stopped talking.

古文：刘表长子琦，亦深器亮。
现代文：刘表的长子刘琦，也很器重诸葛亮。
English: Liu Biao, the eldest son of Liu Biao, also attaches great importance to Zhuge Liang.

古文：表受后妻之言，爱少子琮，不悦於琦。
现代文：刘表受到后妻言论的影响，喜爱少子刘琮，不喜欢刘琦。
English: Liu Biao was influenced by his wife's remarks and liked his younger son Liu Yao, but did not like Liu Yao.

古文：琦每欲与亮谋自安之术，亮辄拒塞，未与处画。
现代文：刘琦每次想要和诸葛亮讨论安顿自身的计策，诸葛亮都拒绝搪塞，没有与他相见谋划。
English: Every time Liu Wei wanted to discuss with Zhuge Liang the strategy of settling himself, Zhuge Liang refused to give in and did not plan to meet with him.

古文：琦乃将亮游观后园，共上高楼，饮宴之间，令人去梯，因谓亮曰： 今日上不至天，下不至地，言出子口，入於吾耳，可以言未？ 
现代文：刘琦就带着诸葛亮游览后花园，一同登上高楼，在宴饮之时，让人将梯子拿走，趁机对诸葛亮说： 现在往上不能到天，往下也不能触地，话从你嘴里说出来，听进我的耳朵里，可以说了吗？ 
English: Liu Ye took Zhuge Liang on a tour of the back garden, and together they ascended a tall building. During the banquet, someone had the ladder taken away, and took the opportunity to say to Zhuge Liang: "Now you can't go up to the sky, and you can't touch the ground below. Words come out of your mouth and enter my ears. Can you say it?"

古文：亮答曰： 君不见申生在内而危，重耳在外而安乎？ 
现代文：诸葛亮回答说： 您看不到申生在朝内危险，重耳在国外却安全吗？ 
English: Zhuge Liang replied, "Don't you see that Shen Sheng is dangerous in the DPRK, but Chong Er is safe abroad?

古文：琦意感悟，阴规出计。
现代文：刘琦领悟，就暗中规划离开都城的计策。
English: Realizing this, Liu Ye secretly planned a strategy to leave the capital.

古文：会黄祖死，得出，遂为江夏太守。
现代文：刚好黄祖去世，刘琦得以出城，就担任了江夏太守。
English: Just as Huang Zu died, Liu Bei was able to leave the city and became the governor of Jiangxia.

古文：俄而表卒，琮闻曹公来征，遣使请降。
现代文：不久刘表就去世了，刘琮得知曹公前来征讨，就派使者请求投降。
English: Liu Biao died soon after, and when Liu Bei learned that Cao Gong was coming to invade, he sent an envoy to request the emperor's surrender.

古文：先主在樊闻之，率其众南行，亮与徐庶并从，为曹公所追破，获庶母。
现代文：先主在樊城得知了这个消息，就率军往南进发，诸葛亮和徐庶都跟着，被曹公追击攻破，并抓获了徐庶的母亲。
English: When the forefather learned of this news in Lucheng, he led his army to the south, Zhuge Liang and Xu Shizhe followed, and were pursued by Cao Gong. Cao Gong broke through and captured Xu Shizhe's mother.

古文：庶辞先主而指其心曰： 本欲与将军共图王霸之业者，以此方寸之地也。
现代文：徐庶向先主辞别，并指着胸口说： 本来想着和将军共同谋划王图霸业，就凭借这方寸的小地方。
English: Xu Zheng said goodbye to his ancestor, and pointed to his chest and said: Originally, I wanted to work with the general to plan Wang Tuo's hegemony, so I relied on this small place.

古文：今已失老母，方寸乱矣，无益於事，请从此别。 
现代文：现在已经失去了母亲，心中已经烦乱，对大事无益，请求从此辞别。 
English: Now that she has lost her mother, she is distraught, useless to the cause, and asks to leave.

古文：遂诣曹公。
现代文：就到了曹公那里。
English: I arrived at Cao Gong's place.

古文：先主至於夏口，亮曰： 事急矣，请奉命求救於孙将军。 
现代文：先主到了夏口，诸葛亮说： 事情很危急了，请求奉命向孙将军求救。 
English: When his master arrived in Xiakou, Zhuge Liang said, "The situation is very critical. I have been ordered to ask General Sun for help."

古文：时权拥军在柴桑，观望成败，亮说权曰： 海内大乱，将军起兵据有江东，刘豫州亦收众汉南，与曹操并争天下。
现代文：当时孙权率军在柴桑，观望胜负的形势，诸葛亮劝说孙权： 天下大乱，将军起兵占据江东地区，刘豫州也在汉南招募士兵，和曹操一同争夺天下。
English: At that time, Sun Quan was leading his army in Chaisang, watching the situation of victory and defeat. Zhuge Liang persuaded Sun Quan: The world was in turmoil, the generals raised an army to occupy the east of the Yangtze River, Liu Yuzhou also recruited soldiers in Hannan, and competed with Cao Cao for the world.

古文：今操芟夷大难，略已平矣，遂破荆州，威震四海。
现代文：曹操已经消灭吕布袁术和袁绍等割据势力，局势稍稍平定了，就攻破荆州，威震天下。
English: Cao Cao had already eliminated the separatist forces such as Lv Bu, Yuan Shu and Yuan Shao. When the situation was somewhat stabilized, he broke through Jingzhou and dominated the world.

古文：英雄无所用武，故豫州遁逃至此。
现代文：英雄豪杰没有用武之地，所以刘豫州逃奔到这里。
English: Hero Hero has no use, so Liu Yuzhou fled here.

古文：将军量力而处之：若能以吴、越之众与中国抗衡，不如早与之绝；若不能当，何不案兵束甲，北面而事之！今将军外讬服从之名，而内怀犹豫之计，事急而不断，祸至无日矣！ 
现代文：将军您依据力量而处理这件事情，如果能凭借吴越之地的部队与中原地区相抗，不如早日跟他们断绝来往，如果不能抵挡他们，为什么不放下武器，臣服并侍奉他们呢，现在将军对外假托服从的名义，但心中却怀着不能决定的计策，事情紧急却不决断，祸患没有多久就会来到了。 
English: General, you are dealing with this matter according to your strength. If you can use the troops from Wuyue to resist the Central Plains, it is better to cut off contact with them as soon as possible. If you can't resist them, why not lay down your weapons, submit to them and serve them? Now the general is pretending to be obedient to the outside world, but in his heart he has a strategy that can't be decided. The matter is urgent but indecisive, and the disaster will come soon.

古文：权曰： 苟如君言，刘豫州何不遂事之乎？ 
现代文：孙权说： 如果确实像你说的那样，刘豫州为什么不干脆侍奉他们呢？ 
English: Sun Quan said: If it is indeed as you said, why doesn't Liu Yuzhou just serve them?

古文：亮曰： 田横，齐之壮士耳，犹守义不辱，况刘豫州王室之胄，英才盖世，众士慕仰，若水之归海，若事之不济，此乃天也，安能复为之下乎！ 
现代文：诸葛亮说： 田横，只是齐国的壮士罢了，尚且守着信誉，不辱使命，更何况刘豫州是王室后裔，才能卓著，世人都仰慕他，就像水流进海里一样，如果大事不成，这也是天意，怎么能处于下位呢？ 
English: Zhuge Liang said, "Tian Yang is just a strong man of Qi. He still keeps his reputation and does not dishonor his mission. What's more, Liu Yuzhou is a descendant of the royal family. His talent is outstanding. People all over the world admire him. It's like water flowing into the sea. If great things don't happen, which is also God's will, how can he be in a lower position?

古文：权勃然曰： 吾不能举全吴之地，十万之众，受制於人。吾计决矣！
现代文：孙权大怒说： 我不能倾尽全东吴的土地，依靠十万的部众，受制于人，我已经决定了。
English: Sun Quan said angrily, "I can't exhaust all the land in Dongwu, rely on a hundred thousand followers, and be controlled by others. I've made up my mind."

古文：非刘豫州莫可以当曹操者，然豫州新败之后，安能抗此难乎？ 
现代文：除了刘豫州，没有可以抵挡曹操的人，但是刘豫州失败之后，谁能抵抗这个困境呢？ 
English: Apart from Liu Yuzhou, there was no one who could resist Cao Cao, but after Liu Yuzhou's defeat, who could resist this predicament?

古文：亮曰： 豫州军虽败於长阪，今战士还者及关羽水军精甲万人，刘琦合江夏战士亦不下万人。
现代文：诸葛亮说： 刘豫州的大军虽然在长坂战败，现在生还的战士以及关羽的水军，还有上万的精锐士兵，刘琦的部队，再加上江夏的战士也不下万人。
English: Zhuge Liang said: Although Liu Yuzhou's large army was defeated in the Battle of Nagasaka, the soldiers and sailors of Guan Yu who are still alive, as well as tens of thousands of elite soldiers, Liu Bei's troops, plus the soldiers of Jiangxia are not less than ten thousand.

古文：曹操之众，远来疲弊，闻追豫州，轻骑一日一夜行三百馀里，此所谓 强弩之末，势不能穿鲁缟 者也。
现代文：曹操的部队远来疲惫，我得知他追赶豫州，轻装骑兵，一天一夜行进了多里，这就是所说的 强弩之末，一定不能穿透鲁缟 。
English: Cao Cao's troops were exhausted from their long journey. I learned that he chased after Yuzhou with light cavalry and marched many miles day and night. This is the so-called "end of a strong shackle" and must not penetrate the shackles.

古文：故兵法忌之，曰 必蹶上将军 。
现代文：所以兵法很忌讳，说 必蹶上将军 。
English: That's why it's taboo to use military tactics, and why it's said that you must be a general.

古文：且北方之人，不习水战；又荆州之民附操者，偪兵势耳，非心服也。
现代文：况且北方之人，不习惯水上战斗，依附曹操只是被势力逼迫罢了，并不是心悦诚服。
English: Moreover, the people in the north are not used to fighting on the water, and their attachment to Cao Cao is just a result of being persecuted by the forces, not a result of their sincerity.

古文：今将军诚能命猛将统兵数万，与豫州协规同力，破操军必矣。
现代文：现在将军如果真的能下令勇猛将领率兵数万，和刘豫州同心协力，攻破曹操的军队是一定的。
English: Now, if the general can really order the brave generals to lead tens of thousands of soldiers, and work together with Liu Yuzhou, it is certain to break Cao Cao's army.

古文：操军破，必北还，如此则荆、吴之势强，鼎足之形成矣。
现代文：曹操军队战败，一定北还，这样那荆州、吴地的势力强盛，就会形成了三足鼎立的形势。
English: If Cao Cao's army was defeated, the north would definitely fight back, and if the forces of Jingzhou and Wu were strong, a three-pronged situation would be formed.

古文：成败之机，在於今日。 
现代文：成败的时机，就在于今日了。 
English: The opportunity for success or failure is today.

古文：权大悦，即遣周瑜、程普、鲁肃等水军三万，随亮诣先主，并力拒曹公。
现代文：孙权大悦，随即派遣周瑜、程普、肃等率领水军三万，跟随诸葛亮到先主那里，合力抗拒曹公。
English: Sun Quan Da Yue then dispatched Zhou Yu, Cheng Pu, Su and others to lead a naval force of thirty thousand and follow Zhuge Liang to the ancestor's place to jointly resist Cao Gong.

古文：曹公败於赤壁，引军归邺。先主遂收江南，以亮为军师中郎将，使督零陵、桂阳、长沙三郡，调其赋税，以充军实。
现代文：曹公在赤壁战败，率军返回邺城，先主于是占有了江南，让诸葛亮担任军师中郎将，让他督领零陵、桂阳、长沙三郡，征调当地的赋税，以充作军饷。
English: Cao Gong was defeated in the Battle of Chibi and led his army back to Lucheng. The lord then took possession of the south of the Yangtze River, made Zhuge Liang the general of the army, and made him the governor of the three counties of Luling, Guiyang, and Changsha. He levied and transferred local taxes to serve as military pay.

古文：建安十六年，益州牧刘璋遣法正迎先主，使击张鲁。
现代文：建安十六年，益州牧刘璋派法正迎接先主，并派他攻打张鲁。
English: In the 16th year of Jian'an, Liu Ye, the patriarch of Yizhou, sent Fa Zheng to meet his predecessor, and sent him to attack Zhang Lu.

古文：亮与关羽镇荆州。先主自葭萌还攻璋，亮与张飞、赵云等率众溯江，分定郡县，与先主共围成都。
现代文：诸葛亮和关羽镇守荆州，先主从葭萌返回攻打刘璋，诸葛亮与张飞，赵云等率众逆流而上，分别安定郡县，和先主共同围困成都。
English: Zhuge Liang and Guan Yu Zhen guarded Jingzhou, while the previous lord returned from Qimeng to attack Liu Bei. Zhuge Liang, Zhang Fei, Zhao Yun and others led the crowd against the current, stabilizing counties and counties respectively, and besieging Chengdu together with the previous lord.

古文：成都平，以亮为军师将军，署左将军府事。先主外出，亮常镇守成都，足食足兵。
现代文：成都平定之后，先主任命诸葛亮为军师将军，兼任左将军府事，先主外出，诸葛亮经常镇守成都，确保当地粮食士兵充足。
English: After Chengdu was pacified, the lord appointed Zhuge Liang as the general of the military division, and also served as the left general of the government. When the lord went out, Zhuge Liang often guarded Chengdu to ensure that local grain soldiers were sufficient.

古文：二十六年，群下劝先主称尊号，先主未许，亮说曰： 昔吴汉、耿弇等初劝世祖即帝位，世祖辞让，前后数四，耿纯进言曰： 天下英雄喁喁，冀有所望。
现代文：建安二十六年，大臣们劝说先主登上帝位，先主没有答应，诸葛亮劝说道： 过去吴汉、耿翕等最开始劝说世祖登上帝位，世祖前后推辞四次，耿纯进谏说： 天下英雄很多，都盼望有所依附。
English: In the 26th year of Jian'an, the ministers persuaded the patriarch to ascend to the throne of God. The patriarch did not agree, and Zhuge Liang advised: In the past, Wu Han, Geng Shu and others first persuaded the patriarch to ascend to the throne of God. The patriarch declined four times. Geng Chunjin said: There are many heroes in the world, and they all hope to be attached.

古文：如不从议者，士大夫各归求主，无为从公也。
现代文：如果不遵从大家的意见，士大夫就会各自离开追随主君，就没有跟随主公的了。 
English: If you don't follow everyone's opinion, the scholars will leave to follow their master, and you won't be able to follow your master.

古文：世祖感纯言深至，遂然诺之。
现代文：世祖有感于耿纯的言论诚恳深切，于是就答应了。
English: The patriarch felt that Geng Chun's words were sincere and profound, so he agreed.

古文：今曹氏篡汉，天下无主，大王刘氏苗族，绍世而起，今即帝位，乃其宜也。
现代文：现在曹氏篡夺汉朝权位，天下没有主君，大王您是刘氏的后裔，在合适的时机兴起，现在登上帝位是应该的。
English: Now that the Cao clan has usurped the throne of the Han Dynasty, there is no ruler in the world. You, the great king, are a descendant of the Liu clan. You have risen at the right time. It is right for you to ascend the throne now.

古文：士大夫随大王久勤苦者，亦欲望尺寸之功如纯言耳。 先主於是即帝位，策亮为丞相曰： 朕遭家不造，奉承大统，兢兢业业，不敢康宁，思靖百姓，惧未能绥。
现代文：士大夫有很多勤勉，辛苦追随大王的人，也想要得到一些像耿纯一样的功劳，先主于是登上帝位，在封诸葛亮为丞相的策书上说： 朕家中遭遇不幸之事，继承大统，兢兢业业，不敢只图自己的安宁，还想着安抚百姓，担心他们不能安定。
English: There are many diligent and hard-working people who follow the great king, and also want to get some merit like Geng Chun. The forefather then ascended to the throne, and said in the policy book of appointing Zhuge Liang as the prime minister: I have suffered misfortune in my family, inherited the general line, worked hard, dared not only seek my own peace, but also thought about appeasing the people, worried that they could not be stable.

古文：於戏！丞相亮其悉朕意，无怠辅朕之阙，助宣重光，以照明天下，君其勖哉！ 
现代文：啊，丞相诸葛亮，熟悉朕的心意，对于辅佐朕的事情没有懈怠，帮助王朝重新振兴，以光照天下，您多么勉励啊。 
English: Ah, Prime Minister Zhuge Liang, you are familiar with my thoughts, you have not slacked off in assisting me, you have helped to revitalize the dynasty, and you have shined a light on the world. How encouraging you are.

古文：亮以丞相录尚书事，假节。
现代文：诸葛亮担任丞相兼任录尚书事，持符节。
English: Zhuge Liang served as chancellor and concurrently held the posts of record keeper and secretary, holding the rank of signet.

古文：张飞卒后，领司隶校尉。
现代文：张飞去世之后，兼任司隶校尉。
English: After Zhang Fei's death, he also served as the captain of Sili.

古文：章武三年春，先主於永安病笃，召亮於成都，属以后事，谓亮曰： 君才十倍曹丕，必能安国，终定大事。
现代文：章武三年春天，先主在永安病重，将诸葛亮召到成都，把后事托付给他，对诸葛亮说： 您的才能是曹丕的十倍，一定能安邦定国，最终能成就大事。
English: In the spring of the third year of Zhangwu's reign, Zhuge Liang was seriously ill in Yong'an. He summoned Zhuge Liang to Chengdu and entrusted the succession to him. He said to Zhuge Liang: Your talent is ten times that of Cao Pi. You will surely be able to stabilize the country and ultimately achieve great things.

古文：若嗣子可辅，辅之；如其不才，君可自取。 亮涕泣曰： 臣敢竭股肱之力，效忠贞之节，继之以死！ 
现代文：如果我的继承人可以辅佐，那就辅佐他，如果他没有才能，您就可以取代他。 诸葛亮流泪说： 臣希望竭尽全部力量，尽忠于上，一直到去世为止！ 
English: If my successor can assist, then assist him, if he has no talent, you can replace him. Zhuge Liang said with tears: Minister hopes to do his best and be loyal to the top until he dies!

古文：先主又为诏敕后主曰： 汝与丞相从事，事之如父。 
现代文：先主要写好诏令下令后主说： 你和丞相共事，要像父亲一样对待他。 
English: After the forefather had ordered the imperial edict to be written, the lord said: You work with the prime minister, so treat him like a father.

古文：建兴元年，封亮武乡侯，开府治事。
现代文：建兴元年，封诸葛亮为武乡侯，开建府衙处理事务。
English: In the first year of Jianxing, Zhuge Liang was appointed as the mayor of Wu Township, and the construction of prefectural government offices began.

古文：顷之，又领益州牧。
现代文：不久又兼任益州牧。
English: Soon he was also appointed as the pastor of Yizhou.

古文：政事无巨细，咸决於亮。
现代文：国家的政事无论大小，都由诸葛亮决断。
English: The affairs of state, no matter how big or small, are decided by Zhuge Liang.

古文：南中诸郡，并皆叛乱，亮以新遭大丧，故未便加兵，且遣使聘吴，因结和亲，遂为与国。
现代文：南中的各郡，都共同起兵叛乱，诸葛亮因为刚遭逢大丧，所以没有立即出兵，只派遣使者向东吴求亲，就和他们和亲，成为了结盟的友好国家。
English: The counties in the south and the middle all revolted together. Zhuge Liang, because he had just suffered a great loss, did not immediately send troops. He only sent envoys to East Wu to ask for relatives. He made friends with them and became an allied friendly country.

古文：三年春，亮率众南征，其秋悉平。
现代文：章武三年春天，诸葛亮率军南征，到了秋天都平定了。
English: In the spring of Zhangwu's third year, Zhuge Liang led the army to the south, and by the autumn, everything was settled.

古文：军资所出，国以富饶，乃治戎讲武，以俟大举。
现代文：军用物资的支出都由这些地方负担，国家因此富饶，就整治军队讲授武事，等待出兵的时机。
English: The expenditure of military supplies is borne by these places, and the country is therefore rich. In order to rectify the army, they teach martial arts and wait for the opportunity to send troops.

古文：五年，率诸军北驻汉中，临发，上疏曰：
现代文：建兴五年，诸葛亮率军往北进驻汉中，临出发前，向后主上疏说：
English: In the fifth year of Jianxing, Zhuge Liang led the army to the north to enter Hanzhong. Before leaving, he said to his master:

古文：先帝创业未半而中道崩殂，今天下三分，益州疲弊，此诚危急存亡之秋也。
现代文：先帝开创的大业未完成一半却中途去世了。现在天下分为三国，益州地区民力匮乏，这确实是国家危急存亡的时期啊。
English: The great work initiated by the former emperor was not completed by half, but he died in the middle. Now the world is divided into three countries, and the Yizhou region is short of manpower. This is indeed a time of national crisis.

古文：然侍卫之臣不懈於内，忠志之士忘身於外者，盖追先帝之殊遇，欲报之於陛下也。
现代文：不过宫廷里侍从护卫的官员不懈怠，战场上忠诚有志的将士们奋不顾身，大概是他们追念先帝对他们的特别的知遇之恩，想要报答在陛下您身上。
English: However, the officials in the court accompanying the guards did not slack off, and the loyal and aspiring soldiers on the battlefield did their best, probably because they remembered the emperor's special kindness to them and wanted to repay it to his majesty.

古文：诚宜开张圣听，以光先帝遗德，恢弘志士之气，不宜妄自菲薄，引喻失义，以塞忠谏之路也。
现代文：陛下实在应该扩大圣明的听闻，来发扬光大先帝遗留下来的美德，振奋有远大志向的人的志气，不应当随便看轻自己，说不恰当的话，以致于堵塞人们忠心地进行规劝的言路。
English: His Majesty really should expand his knowledge of the sacred, to carry forward the virtues left behind by the great emperors, and to encourage the aspirations of people with lofty aspirations. He should not casually belittle himself and say inappropriate words, so as to block the way for people to faithfully carry out their exhortation.

古文：宫中府中俱为一体，陟罚臧否，不宜异同。
现代文：皇宫中和朝廷里的大臣，本都是一个整体，奖惩功过，好坏，不应该有所不同。
English: The ministers in the imperial palace and the imperial court are a whole, and there should be no difference between rewarding and punishing good and bad.

古文：若有作奸犯科及为忠善者，宜付有司论其刑赏，以昭陛下平明之理，不宜偏私，使内外异法也。
现代文：如果有做奸邪事，犯科条法令和忠心做善事的人，应当交给主管的官，判定他们受罚或者受赏，来显示陛下公正严明的治理，而不应当有偏袒和私心，使宫内和朝廷奖罚方法不同。
English: If there are those who commit treason, violate discipline and laws, and those who are loyal and do good deeds, they should be handed over to the competent officials, and they should be punished or rewarded to show His Majesty's fair and strict governance, and there should be no favoritism and selfishness, so that the methods of reward and punishment in the palace and the court are different.

古文：侍中、侍郎郭攸之、费祎、董允等，此皆良实，志虑忠纯，是以先帝简拔以遗陛下。
现代文：侍中、侍郎郭攸之、费祎、董允等人，这些都是善良诚实的人，他们的志向和心思忠诚无二，因此先帝把他们选拔出来辅佐陛下。
English: The chamberlains, attendants Guo Youzi, Fei Yao, Dong Yun and others were all good and honest people, and their aspirations and minds were loyal. Therefore, the former emperor selected them to assist his majesty.

古文：愚以为宫中之事，事无大小，悉以咨之，然后施行，必能裨补阙漏，有所广益。
现代文：我认为宫中的事情，无论事情大小，都拿来跟他们商量，这样以后再去实施，一定能够弥补缺点和疏漏之处，可以获得很多的好处。
English: I think that the things in the palace, no matter how big or small, should be discussed with them, so that when they are implemented in the future, they will definitely be able to make up for shortcomings and omissions, and can gain a lot of benefits.

古文：将军向宠，性行淑均，晓畅军事，试用於昔日，先帝称之曰能，是以众议举宠为督。
现代文：将军向宠，性格和品行善良公正，精通军事，从前任用时，先帝称赞说他有才干，因此大家评议举荐他做中部督。
English: The general was a favorite, his character and conduct were kind and fair, and he was proficient in military affairs. When he was appointed by his predecessor, the former emperor praised him for his talent, so everyone recommended him to be the governor of the central region.

古文：愚以为营中之事，悉以咨之，必能使行阵和睦，优劣得所。
现代文：我认为军队中的事情，都拿来跟他商讨，就一定能使军队团结一心，好的差的各自找到他们的位置。
English: I think that if all the things in the army are discussed with him, it will definitely make the army unite as one, and the good and the bad will find their place.

古文：亲贤臣，远小人，此先汉所以兴隆也；亲小人，远贤臣，此后汉所以倾颓也。
现代文：亲近贤臣，疏远小人，这是西汉之所以兴隆的原因；亲近小人，疏远贤臣，这是东汉之所以衰败的原因。
English: To be close to the wise men and distant from the villains is the reason for the prosperity of the Western Han Dynasty; to be close to the villains and distant from the wise men is the reason for the decline of the Eastern Han Dynasty.

古文：先帝在时，每与臣论此事，未尝不叹息痛恨於桓、灵也。
现代文：先帝在世的时候，每逢跟我谈论这些事情，没有一次不对桓、灵二帝的做法感到叹息痛心遗憾的。
English: When the former emperor was alive, whenever he talked to me about these things, there was never a time when he did not sigh and regret the actions of Emperor Huan and Emperor Ling.

古文：侍中、尚书、长史、参军，此悉贞良死节之臣，愿陛下亲之信之，则汉室之隆，可计日而待也。
现代文：侍中、尚书、长史、参军，这些人都是忠贞诚实、能够以死报国的忠臣，希望陛下亲近他们，信任他们，那么汉朝的兴隆就指日可待了。
English: The chamberlains, the courtiers, the chroniclers, and the soldiers are all loyal and honest, loyal servants who can serve the country with their lives. I hope that His Majesty will be close to them and trust them, and then the prosperity of the Han Dynasty can be expected.

古文：臣本布衣，躬耕於南阳，苟全性命於乱世，不求闻达於诸侯。
现代文：我本来是平民，在南阳务农亲耕，在乱世中苟且保全性命，不奢求在诸侯之中出名。
English: I was originally a commoner, working as a farmer in Nanyang, trying to save my life in a chaotic world, and not seeking to be famous among the princes.

古文：先帝不以臣卑鄙，猥自枉屈，三顾臣於草庐之中，谘臣以当世之事，由是感激，遂许先帝以驱驰。
现代文：先帝不因为我身份卑微，见识短浅，降低身份委屈自己，三次去我的茅庐拜访我，征询我对时局大事的意见，我因此十分感动，就答应为先帝奔走效劳。
English: The former emperor, not because of my humble status, short-sightedness, lowering my status and wronging myself, visited me three times in my thatched hut to solicit my opinions on current affairs. I was so moved that I promised to run and serve the former emperor.

古文：后值倾覆，受任於败军之际，奉命於危难之间，尔来二十有一年矣。
现代文：后来遇到兵败，在兵败的时候接受任务，在危机患难之间奉行使命，那时以来已经有二十一年了。
English: Twenty-one years have passed since then, when I was defeated, when I accepted the mission, and when I carried out the mission in times of crisis.

古文：先帝知臣谨慎，故临崩寄臣以大事也。
现代文：先帝知道我做事小心谨慎，所以临终时把国家大事托付给我。
English: The late Emperor knew that I was careful and prudent, so on his deathbed he entrusted the affairs of state to me.

古文：受命以来，夙夜忧叹，恐讬付不效，以伤先帝之明，故五月渡泸，深入不毛。
现代文：接受遗命以来，我早晚忧愁叹息，只怕先帝托付给我的大任不能实现，以致损伤先帝的知人之明，所以我五月渡过泸水，深入到人烟稀少的地方。
English: Since I accepted the will, I have been sad and sighing morning and night, fearing that the great task entrusted to me by the former emperor could not be realized, which would damage the reputation of the former emperor, so I crossed Surabaya in May and went deep into a sparsely populated place.

古文：今南方已定，兵甲已足，当奖率三军，北定中原，庶竭驽钝，攘除奸凶，兴复汉室，还于旧都。
现代文：现在南方已经平定，兵员装备已经充足，应当激励、率领全军将士向北方进军，平定中原，希望用尽我平庸的才能，铲除奸邪凶恶的敌人，恢复汉朝的基业，回到旧日的国都。
English: Now that the south has been pacified and the soldiers and equipment have been sufficient, I should encourage and lead the whole army to march to the north and pacify the Central Plains, hoping to exhaust my mediocre talents, eradicate the treacherous and vicious enemies, restore the Han Dynasty's inheritance, and return to the old capital.

古文：此臣所以报先帝，而忠陛下之职分也。
现代文：这就是我用来报答先帝，并且尽忠陛下的职责本分。
English: This is how I repay the former emperor and fulfill my duty of loyalty to his majesty.

古文：至於斟酌损益，进尽忠言，则攸之、祎、允之任也。
现代文：至于处理事务，斟酌情理，有所兴革，毫无保留地进献忠诚的建议，那就是郭攸之、费祎、董允等人的责任了。
English: As for the handling of affairs, it is the responsibility of Guo Youzhi, Fei Yao, Dong Yun and others to make suggestions that are discretionary, innovative, and loyal without reservation.

古文：愿陛下讬臣以讨贼兴复之效；不效，则治臣之罪，以告先帝之灵。
现代文：希望陛下能够把讨伐曹魏，兴复汉室的任务托付给我，如果没有成功，就惩治我的罪过，用来告慰先帝的在天之灵。
English: I hope that His Majesty will entrust me with the task of fighting against Cao Wei and restoring the Han Dynasty. If I do not succeed, he will punish my sins and use them to console the spirit of the former emperor in heaven.

古文：若无兴德之言，则责攸之、祎、允等之慢，以彰其咎。陛下亦宜自谋，以谘诹善道，察纳雅言，深追先帝遗诏。
现代文：如果没有振兴圣德的建议，就责罚郭攸之、费祎、董允等人的怠慢,来揭示他们的过失；陛下也应自行谋划，征求、询问治国的好道理，采纳正确的言论，以追念先帝临终留下的教诲。
English: If there is no suggestion to revitalize the sanctity, he should punish the negligence of Guo Youcun, Fei Yao, Dong Yun and others to reveal their faults; His Majesty should also plan on his own, solicit and inquire about the good principles of governing the country, adopt the correct speech, and remember the teachings left by the late emperor.

古文：臣不胜受恩感激，今当远离，临表涕零，不知所言。
现代文：我感激不尽。今天我将要告别陛下远行了，面对这份奏表禁不住热泪纵横，也不知说了些什么。
English: I can't thank you enough. Today I'm going to say goodbye to His Majesty, and I can't help but shed tears in front of this record, and I don't know what I said.

古文：遂行，屯于沔阳。
现代文：于是出兵，驻扎在沔阳。
English: As a result, troops were dispatched and stationed in Shenyang.

古文：六年春，扬声由斜谷道取郿，使赵云、邓芝为疑军，据箕谷，魏大将军曹真举众拒之。
现代文：建兴六年春，诸葛亮宣称从斜古取道进取郿县，派赵云、邓芝作为疑军，占据箕谷，魏曹大将军曹真率兵抗拒。
English: In the spring of the sixth year of Jianxing, Zhuge Liang declared that he would advance into Shixian from the ancient road, and sent Zhao Yun and Deng Zhi as suspicious troops to occupy Shigu. Wei Cao's general Cao Zhen led the troops to resist.

古文：亮身率诸军攻祁山，戎陈整齐，赏罚肃而号令明，南安、天水、安定三郡叛魏应亮，关中响震。
现代文：诸葛亮亲自率各军攻打祁山，军队严整，赏罚严肃而号令分明，南安、天水、安定三郡都反叛魏朝响应诸葛亮，关中震动。
English: Zhuge Liang personally led the armies to attack Lushan. The army was strict, the rewards and punishments were serious, and the orders were clear. Nan'an, Tianshui, and Anding counties all rebelled against the Wei Dynasty in response to Zhuge Liang, and Guanzhong was shaken.

古文：魏明帝西镇长安，命张郃拒亮，亮使马谡督诸军在前，与郃战于街亭。
现代文：魏明帝往西镇守长安，命张郃抗击诸葛亮，诸葛亮派马谡督领各军在前做为先锋，和张郃在街亭交战。
English: Wei Mingdi went to the west town to defend Chang'an, and ordered Zhang Ye to fight Zhuge Liang. Zhuge Liang sent Ma Jun to lead the army as the vanguard, and fought with Zhang Ye in the street pavilion.

古文：谡违亮节度，举动失宜，大为郃所破。
现代文：马谡违背诸葛亮的调度，行动失去了时机，被张郃大败。
English: Ma Jun disobeyed Zhuge Liang's schedule, lost the opportunity to act, and was soundly defeated by Zhang Jun.

古文：亮拔西县千馀家，还于汉中，戮谡以谢众。
现代文：诸葛亮攻占西县一千多家，后返回汉中，杀了马谡向众人谢罪。
English: Zhuge Liang conquered more than a thousand people in West County, then returned to Hanzhong, killed Ma Jun and apologized to everyone.

古文：上疏曰： 臣以弱才，叨窃非据，亲秉旄钺以厉三军，不能训章明法，临事而惧，至有街亭违命之阙，箕谷不戒之失，咎皆在臣授任无方。
现代文：并上书说： 臣以微弱的才能，亲自拿着旌旗以勉励三军，不能训导章程，明示军法，面对事情的时候心中恐惧，以至于出现了街亭之战违命的情况，在箕谷出现了不够谨慎的过失，错误都在于臣任用人无方。
English: And the letter said: The minister, with weak talent, personally took up the banner to encourage the three armies, could not teach the regulations, express the military law, and was afraid in the face of things, so that there was a situation of disobeying orders in the battle of the street pavilion, and there was a mistake of insufficient caution in Shibuya. The mistakes were all due to the minister's inability to appoint people.

古文：臣明不知人，恤事多闇，春秋责帅，臣职是当。
现代文：臣不能明辨用人，行事存在昏暗，依据《春秋》军事失利先罚主帅的典则，是臣的过错。
English: According to the "Spring and Autumn" military defeat, the first to punish the coach is the fault of the minister.

古文：请自贬三等，以督厥咎。 
现代文：现在请求自贬三级，以督促改变过错。 
English: He is now asking to be demoted three levels and urged to change his ways.

古文：於是以亮为右将军，行丞相事，所总统如前。
现代文：于是后主任命诸葛亮为右将军，代理丞相事宜，像以前一样管理各项事务。
English: As a result, his successor appointed Zhuge Liang as the right general, acting as the prime minister, and managed various affairs as before.

古文：冬，亮复出散关，围陈仓，曹真拒之，亮粮尽而还。
现代文：冬天诸葛亮再次出兵散关，围攻陈仓，曹真率军抗拒诸葛亮，因为军粮吃尽而返回。
English: In winter, Zhuge Liang once again sent troops to Sankuan and besieged Chen Cang. Cao Zhen led the army to resist Zhuge Liang and returned because the army had run out of food.

古文：魏将王双率骑追亮，亮与战，破之，斩双。
现代文：魏朝将领王双率领骑兵追击诸葛亮，诸葛亮与之交战，大破王双军队并斩杀了王双。
English: The Wei Dynasty general Wang Shuang led the cavalry to chase Zhuge Liang, Zhuge Liang fought with him, defeated Wang Shuang's army and killed Wang Shuang.

古文：七年，亮遣陈式攻武都、阴平。魏雍州刺史郭淮率众欲击式，亮自出至建威，淮退还，遂平二郡。
现代文：建兴七年，诸葛亮派陈式攻打武都、阴平，魏朝的雍州刺史郭淮率众想要攻打陈式，诸葛亮亲自率军到建喂，郭淮撤军返回，于是诸葛亮平定了二郡。
English: In the seventh year of Jianxing, Zhuge Liang sent Chen style to attack Wudu and Yinping. Guo Huai, the Yongzhou chief of the Wei Dynasty, led the crowd to attack Chen style. Zhuge Liang personally led the army to Jianye, Guo Huai withdrew and returned, so Zhuge Liang leveled the two counties.

古文：诏策亮曰： 街亭之役，咎由马谡，而君引愆，深自贬抑，重违君意，听顺所守。
现代文：后主下诏对诸葛亮说： 街亭之战，过错都在于马谡，而您将过错归咎于自己身上，深自悔恨，当时难以违背您的心意，所以听从了贬谪您的意见。
English: Afterward, the lord said to Zhuge Liang, "In the battle of the street pavilion, the fault was all in the horse, and you blamed the fault on yourself, and deeply regretted it. At that time, it was difficult to go against your will, so I listened to your opinion.

古文：前年耀师，馘斩王双；今岁爰征，郭淮遁走；降集氐、羌，兴复二郡，威镇凶暴，功勋显然。
现代文：前年出兵征战，斩杀了王双，今年再次出征，使得郭淮逃走，将使敌人枪族，使氐族、羌族之人前来归顺，光复了武都、阴平二郡，威势能镇压凶暴之人，功勋卓著。
English: In the previous year, he sent troops to fight and killed Wang Shuang. This year, he went to fight again and made Guo Huai escape. He made the enemy gunmen surrender, made the Yi and Yao people come to submit, and recovered Wudu and Yinping two counties. He was powerful enough to suppress the violent people, and his feats were outstanding.

古文：方今天下骚扰，元恶未枭，君受大任，幹国之重，而久自挹损，非所以光扬洪烈矣。
现代文：现在天下动乱，为首作恶的人还没有铲除，承受着国家大任，却长久的压抑自己，这不是用来，这不是能光大先帝基业的。
English: At present, the world is in turmoil, and those who are the first to commit evil have not yet been eradicated. They bear the great responsibility of the country, but suppress themselves for a long time. This is not for use, this is not for the glory of the emperor's legacy.

古文：今复君丞相，君其勿辞。 
现代文：现在恢复您的丞相之位，希望您不要推辞。 
English: Now resume your position as prime minister. I hope you will not resign.

古文：九年，亮复出祁山，以木牛运，粮尽退军，与魏将张郃交战，射杀郃。
现代文：建兴九年，诸葛亮再次率兵出祁山，用木牛来运输粮草，粮草吃尽之后就退兵了，期间与魏国的将领张颌交战，射杀了张郃。
English: In the ninth year of Jianxing, Zhuge Liang once again led his troops out of Lushan, using wooden oxen to transport grain and grass. After eating all the grain and grass, he left the army. During this time, he fought with the Wei general Zhang Xuan and shot Zhang Xuan.

古文：十二年春，亮悉大众由斜谷出，以流马运，据武功五丈原，与司马宣王对於渭南。
现代文：建兴十二年年春天，诸葛亮率大队人马从斜谷出兵，用牛马来运输物资，占据武功五丈原，跟司马宣王在渭南相对。
English: In the spring of the twelfth year of Jianxing, Zhuge Liang led a large group of men and horses to send troops from the valley, used cattle and horses to transport materials, occupied Wu Gong Wuzhongyuan, and opposed Sima Xuanwang in southern Fujian.

古文：亮每患粮不继，使己志不申，是以分兵屯田，为久驻之基。
现代文：诸葛亮经常担忧粮食不济，导致自己的志向不能抒发，所以分出部队，进行屯田，作为长久驻扎的基础。
English: Zhuge Liang was often worried about food shortages, which led to his inability to express his aspirations, so he separated his troops and carried out tunden as the basis for long-term stationing.

古文：耕者杂於渭滨居民之间，而百姓安堵，军无私焉。
现代文：耕种的士兵交杂在住渭水之滨的百姓中间，百姓安居乐业，军队也不谋取私利。
English: Soldiers engaged in farming mingle with the people living along the coast of Surabaya. The people live and work in peace, and the military does not seek personal gain.

古文：相持百馀日。
现代文：两军相持了一百多天。
English: The two armies held out for more than a hundred days.

古文：其年八月，亮疾病，卒于军，时年五十四。
现代文：同年八月，诸葛亮生病，在军中去世，享年五十四岁。
English: In August of the same year, Zhuge Liang fell ill and died in the army at the age of fifty-four.

古文：及军退，宣王案行其营垒处所，曰： 天下奇才也！ 
现代文：等到大军撤退，司马宣王在诸葛亮的军营之地巡视，说： 诸葛亮真是天下间的奇才啊。 
English: When the large army withdrew, King Sima Xuan inspected Zhuge Liang's military camp and said, "Zhuge Liang is truly a wonder of the world."

古文：亮遗命葬汉中定军山，因山为坟，冢足容棺，敛以时服，不须器物。
现代文：诸葛亮一命将自己葬在汉中的定军山中，沿着山势修建坟墓，墓地只需要能容下棺木，用穿着平常的衣服入殓，不需要陪葬的器物。
English: Zhuge Liang buried himself in the Dingjun Mountain in the Han Dynasty, and built a tomb along the mountain. The cemetery only needed to accommodate a coffin, and he was buried wearing ordinary clothes. There was no need for accompanying burial objects.

古文：诏策曰： 惟君体资文武，明叡笃诚，受遗讬孤，匡辅朕躬，继绝兴微，志存靖乱；爰整六师，无岁不征，神武赫然，威镇八荒，将建殊功於季汉，参伊、周之巨勋。
现代文：后主下诏说： 君文武兼备，明智忠诚，接受先帝的遗诏，亲自辅佐朕，使衰微待绝的汉室复兴，立志平定天下战乱，整治六军，岁岁出战，英武盖世，威镇天下，将为蜀汉建成伟大功业，所取勋绩有如伊尹、周公。
English: Later, the emperor issued an edict saying: "You are well-versed in literature and martial arts, wise and loyal, you accepted the last emperor's edict, you personally assisted me in reviving the dwindling Han dynasty, you are determined to settle the world's war, rectify the Six Armies, go to war every year, conquer the world, and dominate the world, you will accomplish great feats for Shu Han, and you have won honors such as Yi Yin and Zhou Gong.

古文：如何不吊，事临垂克，遘疾陨丧！
现代文：为何有此不幸，大业即将功成，您却染疾归天!
English: Why do you have this misfortune, a great career is about to succeed, but you are dying of a disease!

古文：朕用伤悼，肝心若裂。
现代文：朕痛悼您的逝世，心肝欲裂。
English: I mourn your passing with a heavy heart.

古文：夫崇德序功，纪行命谥，所以光昭将来，刊载不朽。
现代文：推崇您的德行，论评您的功勋，根据您生前事迹追封谥号，让您的精神传扬天下，英名永垂史册。
English: Your virtues will be praised, your merits will be commented on, and you will be given a posthumous name according to your deeds during your lifetime. Let your spirit spread throughout the world, and your fame will be immortalized in history.

古文：今使使持节左中郎将杜琼，赠君丞相武乡侯印绶，谥君为忠武侯。
现代文：现在派遣使者左中郎将杜琼持符节，赠予您丞相武乡侯的印绶，为您封谥号为忠武侯。
English: Now, we are sending the messenger Zuochungro to present Du Qiong with the seal of the Prince of Wuxiang and the seal of the Prince of Wuxiang to you, and the seal of the Prince of Wuxiang to you.

古文：魂而有灵，嘉兹宠荣。
现代文：如果魂魄有灵，也会有感于这样的荣宠。
English: If the queen's soul has a spirit, it should be honored.

古文：呜呼哀哉！
现代文：悲痛啊，悲痛啊！ 
English: Alas, alas!

古文：呜呼哀哉！ 初，亮自表后主曰： 成都有桑八百株，薄田十五顷，子弟衣食，自有馀饶。
现代文：当初，诸葛亮自己向后主上表说： 我在成都有八百株桑树，十五顷薄田，家中孩子使用之外还有一些富余。
English: At the beginning, Zhuge Liang said to himself: I have 800 mulberry trees and 15 hectares of thin fields in Chengdu, and there are some surplus resources in addition to the use of children at home.

古文：至於臣在外任，无别调度，随身衣食，悉仰於官，不别治生，以长尺寸。
现代文：至于臣在外任官，没有其他的调度，随身的衣食住行都是仰赖于官府，没有别的营生，以增长自己的资产。
English: As for the vassals serving as officials abroad, there is no other scheduling. They depend on the government for their food, clothing, housing and transportation. They have no other livelihood to increase their assets.

古文：若臣死之日，不使内有馀帛，外有赢财，以负陛下。 
现代文：等到臣去世之时，不让家里有多的衣物，外有多余的钱财以辜负陛下的恩宠。 
English: When a vassal died, he was not allowed to have too many clothes at home, or too much money and property outside, in order to live up to His Majesty's grace.

古文：及卒，如其所言。
现代文：等到他去世之后，都像他所说的那样。
English: After he died, it was just like he said.

古文：亮性长於巧思，损益连弩，木牛流马，皆出其意；推演兵法，作八陈图，咸得其要云。
现代文：诸葛亮擅长巧思，对连弩进行了改造，包括运输粮食的木牛流马，都是出自于他的意见。他推演兵法，制作八阵图，都得到了其中的精要。
English: Zhuge Liang was good at ingenuity. He reformed Lianhu, including the wooden oxen and horses used to transport grain, all from his own ideas. He deduced the art of war and made eight maps, all of which were refined.

古文：亮言教书奏多可观，别为一集。
现代文：诸葛亮的议论、教令、书信、奏疏都有很多，另外编成了《诸葛氏集》。
English: Zhuge Liang's speeches, edicts, letters, and records are many, and in addition, the "Zhuge Collection" was compiled.

古文：景耀六年春，诏为亮立庙于沔阳。
现代文：景耀六年春天，后主下诏为诸葛亮在沔阳修建祠庙。
English: In the spring of the sixth year of Jingyao, the empress issued an edict to build an ancestral temple for Zhuge Liang in Fenyang.

古文：秋，魏镇西将军钟会，至汉川，祭亮之庙，令军士不得于亮墓所左右刍牧樵采。
现代文：秋天，魏朝的镇西将军钟会征讨蜀国，大军到了汉川，祭祀诸葛亮的祠庙，并下令士兵不能在诸葛亮墓地的左右牧马砍柴。
English: In autumn, Zhenxi General Zhong Hui of the Wei Dynasty went to conquer Shu, and the large army went to Hanchuan to sacrifice Zhuge Liang's ancestral temple, and ordered the soldiers not to cut firewood on the left and right sides of Zhuge Liang's cemetery.

古文：亮弟均，官至长水校尉。亮子瞻，嗣爵。
现代文：诸葛亮的弟弟诸葛均做官到长水校尉，诸葛亮的孩子诸葛瞻承袭了诸葛亮的爵位。
English: Zhuge Liang's younger brother Zhuge was promoted to the rank of Changshui school captain, and Zhuge Liang's child Zhuge Zhan inherited Zhuge Liang's title.

古文：诸葛氏集目录：开府作牧第一权制第二南征第三北出第四计算第五训厉第六综核上第七综核下第八杂言上第九杂言第十贵和第十一兵要第十二传运第十三与孙权书第十四与诸葛谨书第十五与孟达书第十六废李平第十七法检上第十八法检下第十九科令上第二十科令下第二十一军令上第二十二军令中第二十三军令下第二十四右二十四篇，凡十万四千一百一十二字。
现代文：诸葛氏集目录：开府作牧第一权制第二南征第三北出第四计算第五训厉第六综核上第七综核下第八杂言上第九杂言第十贵和第十一兵要第十二传运第十三与孙权书第十四与诸葛谨书第十五与孟达书第十六废李平第十七法检上第十八法检下第十九科令上第二十科令下第二十一军令上第二十二军令中第二十三军令下第二十四右二十四篇，凡十万四千一百一十二字。
English: Zhuge's Collection Catalogue: Kaifu Pastoralism First Authority System Second Southern Expedition Third Northern Expedition Fourth Calculation Fifth Discipline Sixth General Survey Upward Seventh General Survey Downward Eighth Miscellany Upward Ninth Miscellany Tenth Noble and Eleventh Military Order Twelfth Conveyance Thirteenth and Sun Quan Book Fourteenth and Zhuge Zheng Book Fifteenth and Meng Da Book Sixteenth Annulment of Li Ping Seventeenth Legal Inspection Upward Eighteenth Legal Inspection Downward Nineteenth Division Order Upward Twentieth Division Order Downward Twenty-first Military Order Upward Twenty-second Military Order Middle Twenty-third Military Order Downward Twenty-fourth Right

古文：臣寿等言：臣前在著作郎，侍中领中书监济北侯臣荀勖、中书令关内侯臣和峤奏，使臣定故蜀丞相诸葛亮故事。
现代文：臣陈寿等人进言：臣之前担任著作郎，侍中兼任中书监、济北侯荀冒、中书令，关内侯和峤上奏，令臣论定已故丞相诸葛亮的旧事。
English: The minister Chen Shou and others spoke up: the minister had previously served as a scholar, and the chamberlain had also served as a middle librarian, a Jibei lord, a middle librarian, a Guanai lord, and a high librarian, and ordered the minister to settle the old matter of the late chancellor Zhuge Liang.

古文：亮毗佐危国，负阻不宾，然犹存录其言，耻善有遗，诚是大晋光明至德，泽被无疆，自古以来，未之有伦也。
现代文：诸葛亮辅佐危亡的国家，利用地势斗争，不肯屈服，但是大晋依然保存着他的言论记载，对遗漏善言感到耻辱，这实在是大晋弘扬宏大仁德的，恩泽惠及天下，自古以来，没有可以相比的。
English: Zhuge Liang assisted the perilous country, took advantage of the terrain struggle, and refused to give in, but Dajin still preserved his speech records, and was ashamed of the omission of his kind words. This is really no comparison since ancient times for Dajin to promote magnanimity and benevolence, and benefit the world.

古文：辄删除复重，随类相从，凡为二十四篇，篇名如右。
现代文：现在对诸葛亮的著述文字删繁就简，分门别类，共集成二十四篇，篇名如上。
English: Now, the text of Zhuge Liang's writings is simplified by cutting and pasting, divided into categories, and a total of twenty-four articles are integrated. The title of the article is as above.

古文：亮少有逸群之才，英霸之器，身长八尺，容貌甚伟，时人异焉。
现代文：诸葛亮年少的时候就有超群的才智，威武霸气，身长八尺，容貌很雄伟，当时的人都认为他很奇异。
English: When Zhuge Liang was young, he had a superior intellect, a powerful and domineering spirit, was eight feet tall, and had a majestic appearance. At that time, people thought he was very strange.

古文：遭汉末扰乱，随叔父玄避难荆州，躬耕于野，不求闻达。
现代文：遭逢汉末的动乱，诸葛亮跟随叔父诸葛玄到荆州避难，亲自在田野中耕种，不求显达。
English: In the turmoil at the end of the Han Dynasty, Zhuge Liang followed his uncle Zhuge Xuan to Jingzhou to take refuge, and personally cultivated in the fields, not seeking recognition.

古文：时左将军刘备以亮有殊量，乃三顾亮於草庐之中；亮深谓备雄姿杰出，遂解带写诚，厚相结纳。
现代文：当时左将军刘备因为诸葛亮有特殊的才能，就三次到草庐之中去拜见诸葛亮，诸葛亮认为，刘备雄姿英发，于是劳心劳力，跟先主结下了很好的关系。
English: At that time, the left general Liu Bei, because Zhuge Liang had a special talent, went three times to the middle of the haystack to meet Zhuge Liang. Zhuge Liang believed that Liu Bei Xiong was a hero, so he worked hard and forged a good relationship with his forefather.

古文：及魏武帝南征荆州，刘琮举州委质，而备失势众寡，无立锥之地。
现代文：等到魏武帝曹操往南征讨荆州，刘琮率全州百姓投降，而刘备失去了势力支持，部众又少，没有立锥之地。
English: By the time Emperor Cao Cao went to the south to conquer Jingzhou, Liu Bei led the people of the whole state to surrender, and Liu Bei lost the support of the forces, and the number of followers was small, and there was no place to stand.

古文：亮时年二十七，乃建奇策，身使孙权，求援吴会。
现代文：诸葛亮当时二十七岁，就制定了健全的计策，亲自出使孙权，向吴会求援。
English: Zhuge Liang, who was 27 years old at the time, developed a sound strategy and personally sent Sun Quan to ask the Wu Association for help.

古文：权既宿服仰备，又睹亮奇雅，甚敬重之，即遣兵三万人以助备。
现代文：孙权向来仰慕佩服刘备，又目睹诸葛亮的奇异风雅，非常的敬重他，随即派出三万部队帮助刘备。
English: Sun Quan had always admired Liu Bei, and when he witnessed Zhuge Liang's extraordinary style, he respected him so much that he immediately sent thirty thousand troops to help Liu Bei.

古文：备得用与武帝交战，大破其军，乘胜克捷，江南悉平。
现代文：刘备得以用这支部队跟魏武帝作战，攻破了魏武帝的军队，大获全胜，并趁着胜利的形势，攻克各县，江南地区就平定了。
English: Liu Bei was able to use this army to fight against Emperor Wei Wudi, defeated Emperor Wei Wudi's army, won a complete victory, and took advantage of the victorious situation to conquer all counties, and the south of the Yangtze River was leveled.

古文：后备又西取益州。益州既定，以亮为军师将军。
现代文：后来刘备又往西攻取益州，益州平定之后，任命诸葛亮为军师将军。
English: Later, Liu Bei went west to conquer Yizhou, and after Yizhou was pacified, he appointed Zhuge Liang as military division general.

古文：备称尊号，拜亮为丞相，录尚书事。
现代文：刘备登基后，任命诸葛亮为丞相，兼理尚书事宜。
English: After Liu Bei ascended to the throne, he appointed Zhuge Liang as chancellor, who was also in charge of official documents.

古文：及备殂没，嗣子幼弱，事无巨细，亮皆专之。
现代文：等到刘备去世，因为继承人还幼小，所以事情无论大小，诸葛亮都独自决断。
English: When Liu Bei died, because the heir was still young, Zhuge Liang made all decisions independently, no matter how big or small.

古文：於是外连东吴，内平南越，立法施度，整理戎旅，工械技巧，物究其极，科教严明，赏罚必信，无恶不惩，无善不显，至於吏不容奸，人怀自厉，道不拾遗，强不侵弱，风化肃然也。
现代文：于是西蜀对外连接东吴，对内平定南越，建立法度，整顿军队，各种工艺器械都探究他们的道理，教化严明，赏罚必信，惩恶扬善，以至于官吏中没有奸邪之人，人人都自我勉励，路不拾遗，强势的不侵犯弱小的，当地的风俗教化非常的淳朴。
English: As a result, Xishuo connected East Wu to the outside world, and pacified South Vietnam to the inside, established laws and regulations, reorganized the army, and all kinds of technological devices explored their principles. The education was strict, rewards and punishments must be credible, and evil and good were punished, so that there were no evil-doers among the officials, and everyone was self-motivated. The path was not lost, the strong did not encroach on the weak, and the local customs and education were very simple.

古文：当此之时，亮之素志，进欲龙骧虎视，苞括四海，退欲跨陵边疆，震荡宇内。
现代文：当时，诸葛亮一向的志向，进兵想要虎踞龙盘，平定四海，退守想要跨越边疆，震动天下。
English: At that time, Zhuge Liang's long-standing aspiration was to pacify the four seas by advancing troops, and to shake the world by crossing the border when retreating.

古文：又自以为无身之日，则未有能蹈涉中原、抗衡上国者，是以用兵不戢，屡耀其武。
现代文：又自认为没有长久的寿命，去世后西蜀就不能踏足中原，跟魏朝相抗衡，所以连年用兵，多次炫耀武力。
English: He also thought that he did not have a long life, and after his death, Xishu would not be able to set foot on the Central Plains and compete with the Wei Dynasty, so he used soldiers for years and repeatedly showed off force.

古文：然亮才，於治戎为长，奇谋为短，理民之幹，优於将略。
现代文：但是诸葛亮的才能在治兵上是长处，但在出谋划策上有所不足，在治理百姓的才干上比做将领的能力要强。
English: However, Zhuge Liang's talent in military administration is a strength, but he lacks in making plans and proposals, and his ability to govern the people is stronger than his ability as a general.

古文：而所与对敌，或值人杰，加众寡不侔，攻守异体，故虽连年动众，未能有克。
现代文：而对于所对抗的敌人，也有很多人中豪杰，再加上两方的人数多寡不相等，攻守的形势不同，所以虽然连年兴师动众，也没有能攻克。
English: As opposed to the enemy they were fighting against, there were also many heroes and heroines, plus the number of people on both sides was not equal, and the situation of attack and defense was different, so even though Lian Nian Xing was a dynamic teacher, he was not able to conquer.

古文：昔萧何荐韩信，管仲举王子城父，皆忖己之长，未能兼有故也。
现代文：过去萧何推荐韩信，管仲推举王子城父，都是估计自己的长处能治理国家。
English: In the past, Xiao He recommended Han Xin, Guanzhong recommended Prince Chengfu, all of them estimated that their strengths could govern the country.

古文：亮之器能政理，抑亦管、萧之亚匹也，而时之名将无城父、韩信，故使功业陵迟，大义不及邪？盖天命有归，不可以智力争也。
现代文：诸葛亮的才干能处理政事，也不在管仲萧何之下，而当时的名将没有像城夫、韩信这样的人，所以导致功业推迟，大义不能完成，大概是天命所归，不能以智慧抗争吧。
English: Zhuge Liang's talent can handle political affairs, and he is not in charge of Zhong Xiao under any circumstances, and at that time there will be no such person as Shi Fu and Han Xin, so the work will be delayed, the great righteousness can not be completed, it is probably the fate of heaven, can not fight with wisdom.

古文：青龙二年春，亮帅众出武功，分兵屯田，为久驻之基。
现代文：青龙二年春天，诸葛亮率军出武功，分派士兵开荒屯田，作为长久驻军的基础。
English: In the spring of the second year of the Qinglong, Zhuge Liang led the army to achieve military feats and dispatched soldiers to reclaim barren farmlands as the basis for a long-term garrison.

古文：其秋病卒，黎庶追思，以为口实。
现代文：同年秋天他就病逝了，百姓追忆感念他，把他的功绩作为谈话的材料。
English: He died of illness in the autumn of the same year, and the people remembered him fondly, using his exploits as material for conversation.

古文：至今梁、益之民，咨述亮者，言犹在耳，虽甘棠之咏召公，郑人之歌子产，无以远譬也。
现代文：直到今天凉州益州的百姓，依然还能听到称赞诸葛亮的话。即使《甘棠》称赞毛公，郑人歌颂子产，也不能跟这样的情况相比。
English: To this day, the people of Liangzhou and Yizhou can still hear Zhuge Liang's words of praise. Even if "Sweet Pea" praises Mao Gong and Zheng people sing about Zi Yuan, it cannot be compared to such a situation.

古文：孟轲有云： 以逸道使民，虽劳不怨；以生道杀人，虽死不忿。 
现代文：孟子曾说： 用最终的目的在于让百姓享受安乐的措施来役使百姓，即使人们劳苦也不会口出怨言，用最终使百姓得以生存的手段来伤害生命，即使人被杀死也不会心存怨恨。 
English: Mencius once said: Use the ultimate goal of allowing the people to enjoy peace and comfort to serve the people. Even if people work hard, they will not complain. Use the ultimate means of allowing the people to survive to harm life. Even if people are killed, they will not hold grudges.

古文：信矣！
现代文：这是真的啊！
English: I do believe it.

古文：论者或怪亮文彩不艳，而过於丁宁周至。臣愚以为咎繇大贤也，周公圣人也，考之尚书，咎繇之谟略而雅，周公之诰烦而悉。
现代文：有人认为诸葛亮的文采词藻不够华丽，而过于啰嗦详尽，臣认为皋陶是贤人，周公是圣人，但考察《尚书》中的文字，其中关于皋陶的话比较简略而典雅，关于周公的话比较繁复而详尽，为什么呢？
English: Some people think that Zhuge Liang's literary vocabulary is not gorgeous enough, but too elaborate. The minister thinks that Jintao is a sage and Zhou Gong is a saint. However, when examining the words in the "Shang Shu," the words about Jintao are relatively simple and elegant, and the words about Zhou Gong are more complex and detailed. Why?

古文：何则？咎繇与舜、禹共谈，周公与群下矢誓故也。
现代文：因为皋陶在与舜帝、大禹交谈，周公在和大臣们一起发誓。
English: Because Zhou Tao was talking with Emperor Zhou and Dayu, Zhou Gong was swearing together with the ministers.

古文：亮所与言，尽众人凡士，故其文指不得及远也。
现代文：而和诸葛亮交流的都是普通的世人百姓，所以它的含义不必太过深远。
English: But Zhuge Liang communicates with ordinary people of the world, so its meaning does not have to be too far-reaching.

古文：然其声教遗言，皆经事综物，公诚之心，形于文墨，足以知其人之意理，而有补於当世。
现代文：但他的著述文字都是他亲身经历的事情或者抄录的资料，他将这些公正诚实的精神付诸于笔墨，足以使人知道他的他的心中所想，并且对当今世事有着补充借鉴的意义。 
English: However, his writings are all things that he personally experienced or copied materials, and he put these fair and honest spirits into pen and ink, which is enough to make people know what he thinks in his heart, and has the meaning of supplemental reference to today's world.

古文：伏惟陛下迈踪古圣，荡然无忌，故虽敌国诽谤之言，咸肆其辞而无所革讳，所以明大通之道也。
现代文：俯首思虑陛下，效仿古代圣贤，胸怀坦荡，无所顾忌，所以即使是敌国的诽谤言论，也都全部抄录而不加删改，借此传扬治理天下的道理。
English: Your Majesty, bowing your head in thought, following the example of ancient sages, is open-minded and has no scruples, so even the slanderous remarks of an enemy country are all copied without deletion, thereby propagating the principle of governing the world.

古文：谨录写上诣著作。
现代文：臣恭敬记录下这些文字并上交著作。
English: I respectfully record these words and submit them for publication.

古文：臣寿诚惶诚恐，顿首顿首，死罪死罪。泰始十年二月一日癸巳，平阳侯相臣陈寿上。
现代文：臣陈寿诚惶诚恐，叩头再叩头，罪该万死，晋武帝泰始十年二月一日，平阳侯相臣陈寿上。
English: Minister Chen Shoucheng panicked, kowtowed and kowtowed again, a crime worthy of death, on February 1st, the 10th year of the reign of Emperor Jinwu, the courtier Chen Shoucheng of Pingyang.

古文：乔字伯松，亮兄瑾之第二子也，本字仲慎。
现代文：诸葛乔，字伯松，是诸葛亮的兄长诸葛瑾的第二个儿子，原本的字叫仲慎。
English: Zhuge Qiao, also known as Bo Song, is the second son of Zhuge Liang, the elder brother of Zhuge Liang. His original name was Zhong Sheng.

古文：与兄元逊俱有名於时，论者以为乔才不及兄，而性业过之。
现代文：他跟兄长元逊在当时都很有名气，有人认为诸葛乔的才能比不上他的兄长，但是性情上要更好。
English: He and his older brother, Yuan Song, were both famous at the time. Some people thought that Zhuge Qiao's talent was not as good as his brother's, but his temperament was better.

古文：初，亮未有子，求乔为嗣，瑾启孙权遣乔来西，亮以乔为己適子，故易其字焉。
现代文：当初诸葛亮还没有孩子，请求让诸葛乔作为继承人，诸葛瑾说孙权派诸葛桥到西蜀，诸葛亮认为诸葛乔是自己的继子，所以改换了他的名字。
English: At first, Zhuge Liang did not have a child and asked Zhuge Qiao to be his heir. Zhuge Yao said that Sun Quan sent Zhuge Qiao to West Shu. Zhuge Liang thought that Zhuge Qiao was his stepson, so he changed his name.

古文：拜为驸马都尉，随亮至汉中。年二十五，建兴六年卒。子攀，官至行护军翊武将军，亦早卒。
现代文：诸葛乔被任命为驸马都尉，跟随诸葛亮到了汉中，二十五岁的时候，在建兴六年去世，他的儿子诸葛攀做官代理护军翊武武将军，也早逝。
English: Zhuge Qiao was appointed lieutenant of the Horse Guards and followed Zhuge Liang to the Han Dynasty. At the age of twenty-five, he died six years after Jianxing. His son Zhuge Pang, who was an official acting as a military escort for General Xiong Wuwu, also died young.

古文：诸葛恪见诛於吴，子孙皆尽，而亮自有胄裔，故攀还复为瑾后。
现代文：诸葛恪在东吴被诛杀，子孙都断绝了，而诸葛亮自有后裔，所以诸葛攀又作为诸葛瑾的后代。
English: Zhuge Liang had his own descendants, so Zhuge Pan was also the descendant of Zhuge Xuan.

古文：瞻字思远。建兴十二年，亮出武功，与兄瑾书曰： 瞻今已八岁，聪慧可爱，嫌其早成，恐不为重器耳。 年十七，尚公主，拜骑都尉。
现代文：诸葛瞻字思远，建兴十二年，诸葛亮率军出武功，给兄长诸葛瑾写信说： 诸葛瞻现在已经八岁，聪慧可爱，如果担心他早成而不加以培养，恐怕他不能成为大器啊。 十七岁的时候娶了公主，被封为骑都尉。
English: Zhuge Liang led the army to achieve military feats in the twelfth year of construction. He wrote to his brother Zhuge Liang, saying: Zhuge Liang is now eight years old, intelligent and lovely. If you are worried about his early success and don't train him, I'm afraid he can't become a great weapon. At the age of seventeen, he married a princess and was named a cavalry captain.

古文：其明年为羽林中郎将，屡迁射声校尉、侍中、尚书仆射，加军师将军。
现代文：第二年，他担任了羽林中郎将，屡次升迁担任了射声校尉、侍中、尚书仆射，加官军师将军。
English: In the second year, he served as the commander of the middle echelon of the eagle forest, and was repeatedly promoted to serve as the captain of the ejection, the chamberlain, the secretary of the ejection, and the general of the division.

古文：瞻工书画，强识念，蜀人追思亮，咸爱其才敏。
现代文：诸葛家擅长于书画，长于识记背诵，蜀人追思诸葛亮，都敬爱他的才思敏捷。
English: Zhuge family is good at calligraphy and painting, and is good at memorizing and reciting. Shu people think about Zhuge Liang, and they all respect his talent and quick thinking.

古文：每朝廷有一善政佳事，虽非瞻所建倡，百姓皆传相告曰： 葛侯之所为也。 是以美声溢誉，有过其实。
现代文：每当朝廷有好的政事，虽然不是诸葛瞻所倡导提出的，但百姓都口耳相传说： 是葛侯所做的。 所以他的名声在外，超过了实际情况。
English: Whenever the imperial court had a good policy, although it was not advocated by Zhuge Zhan, the people would say that it was Ge Hou who did it. Therefore, his reputation outside exceeded the actual situation.

古文：景耀四年，为行都护卫将军，与辅国大将军南乡侯董厥并平尚书事。
现代文：景耀四年，他担任行都护卫将军，跟辅国大将军南乡侯董厥共为平尚书事。
English: During the four years of the reign of King Jingyao, he served as the general of the escort of the capital, and he and the assistant to the general of the state, Nanxiang Hou Dong Jue, were in charge of the bookkeeping of Ping Shang.

古文：六年冬，魏征西将军邓艾伐蜀，自阴平由景谷道旁入。
现代文：景耀六年冬，魏朝征西将军邓艾征讨蜀国，从阴平出发，由景古道的旁边进军。
English: In the winter of the sixth year of Jingyao, Deng Ai, the general of the Western Expedition of the Wei Dynasty to conquer Shu, set out from Yinping and marched next to the Jinggu Road.

古文：瞻督诸军至涪停住，前锋破，退还，住绵竹。
现代文：诸葛瞻督领各军到了涪县驻扎，前锋部队被攻破，退还驻守在绵竹。
English: Zhuge Zhan led the troops to be stationed in Handan County. The forward troops were defeated and returned to be stationed in Mianzhu.

古文：艾遣书诱瞻曰： 若降者必表为琅邪王。 
现代文：邓艾派人送书信诱导诸葛瞻说： 如果投降，一定为你上表封你为琅琊王。 
English: Deng Ai sent someone to send a letter to induce Zhuge Zhan to say: "If you surrender, I will definitely put a seal on your letterhead for you, you are the king of Shao."

古文：瞻怒，斩艾使。遂战，大败，临陈死，时年三十七。
现代文：诸葛瞻大怒，斩杀了邓艾的使者，于是两军交战，诸葛瞻大败，在战场上战死，时年三十七岁。
English: Zhugezhan flew into a rage and killed Deng Ai's envoy. The two armies then engaged in battle. Zhugezhan was badly defeated and died on the battlefield at the age of thirty-seven.

古文：众皆离散，艾长驱至成都。
现代文：他的部众都四处离散，邓艾长驱直入直到成都。
English: His subordinates were scattered everywhere, and Deng Ai Chang drove them straight into Chengdu.

古文：瞻长子尚，与瞻俱没。次子京及攀子显等，咸熙元年内移河东。
现代文：诸葛瞻的长子诸葛尚与诸葛瞻一同战死，他的次子诸葛京以及诸葛攀的儿子诸葛显等人，在咸熙元年迁移到了河东地区。
English: Zhuge Zhan's eldest son Zhuge Shang died in the war together with Zhuge Zhan, his second son Zhuge Jing and Zhuge Pan's son Zhuge Xian and others migrated to the eastern part of the river in the first year of the Han Dynasty.

古文：董厥者，丞相亮时为府令史，亮称之曰： 董令史，良士也。
现代文：董厥，在丞相诸葛亮时期担任府令史，诸葛亮称赞他说： 董令史，是良士啊。
English: Dong Jue served as the prefectural governor during the reign of the chancellor Zhuge Liang. Zhuge Liang praised him saying: "Dong Rongshi is a good man."

古文：吾每与之言，思慎宜適。 徙为主簿。
现代文：我每次与他交谈都要思考合适的话。 后来他升迁为主簿。
English: Every time I had a conversation with him, I had to think of the right words.

古文：亮卒后，稍迁至尚书仆射，代陈祗为尚书令，迁大将军，平台事，而义阳樊建代焉。
现代文：诸葛亮去世后，董厥渐渐升迁到尚书仆射，代理陈衹担任尚书令，被提拔为大将军，代理尚书台事宜，而义阳人樊建代替他的职务。
English: After Zhuge Liang's death, Dong Jue was gradually promoted to the post of Shang Shudi, acting as Chen Qi's deputy and acting as Shang Shuling, was promoted to general, acting as Shang Shudai's deputy, and Yiyang's Zou Jian replaced him.

古文：延熙十四年，以校尉使吴，值孙权病笃，不自见建。
现代文：延熙十四年，以校尉的身份出使东吴，正值孙权病重，没有亲自见樊建。
English: In the 14th year of Yanxi, he was sent to Dongwu as a lieutenant, when Sun Quan was seriously ill, but he did not see Yu Jian in person.

古文：权问诸葛恪曰： 樊建何如宗预也？ 
现代文：孙权问诸葛恪说： 樊建和宗预相比，怎么样呢？ 
English: Sun Quan asked Zhuge Ke: Compared with Zong Yue, how is it?

古文：恪对曰： 才识不及预，而雅性过之。 
现代文：诸葛恪回答说： 他的才能见识比不上宗预，但是他的温雅性情要比宗预好。 
English: Zhuge Ke replied: His talent and insight are not as good as Zong Yu, but his gentle temperament is better than Zong Yu.

古文：后为侍中，守尚书令。自瞻、厥、建统事，姜维常征伐在外，宦人黄皓窃弄机柄，咸共将护，无能匡矫，然建特不与皓和好往来。
现代文：后来担任侍中，兼任尚书令，自从诸葛瞻、董厥、樊建统领事务，姜维经常在外征战，宦官黄皓窃取国家权柄，咸共将护，没有人能匡扶朝政的，但只有樊建不和黄皓等人和好往来。
English: Later, he served as an aide-de-camp, and concurrently held the post of Shang Shuling. Since Zhugezhan, Dong Jue, and Zou Jian took charge of affairs, Jiang Wei often went abroad to fight, eunuch Huang Qi stole state power, and the Han Communists protected him. No one could support the government, but only Zou Jian did not get along well with Huang Qi and others.

古文：蜀破之明年春，厥、建俱诣京都，同为相国参军，其秋并兼散骑常侍，使蜀慰劳。
现代文：西蜀被攻破的第二年春天，董厥、樊建都到了京城，一同担任相国参军，到了秋天又共同兼任散骑常侍，出使蜀国慰问当地。
English: In the spring of the second year after Western Shu was conquered, Dong Jue and He Jiandu both came to Beijing to join the army together, and in the autumn, they also jointly served as stragglers, dispatched by Shu to offer condolences to the local people.

古文：评曰：诸葛亮之为相国也，抚百姓，示仪轨，约官职，从权制，开诚心，布公道；尽忠益时者虽雠必赏，犯法怠慢者虽亲必罚，服罪输情者虽重必释，游辞巧饰者虽轻必戮；善无微而不赏，恶无纤而不贬；庶事精练，物理其本，循名责实，虚伪不齿；终於邦域之内，咸畏而爱之，刑政虽峻而无怨者，以其用心平而劝戒明也。可谓识治之良才，管、萧之亚匹矣。
现代文：评曰：诸葛亮担任丞相的时候，安抚百姓，教导礼仪，规范官职，明确制度，开诚布公。那些尽忠竭力的人，虽然有仇怨但是一定会赏赐，违犯律法的人虽然亲近但也一定要受罚，愿意认罪的人，虽然罪行重但一定会宽恕那些巧言令色的人，虽然影响轻微但一定会处死。没有细小的善事不受到赞赏，没有细微的恶是不被贬黜，处事精炼，探究事理的根本，根据事实来进行责罚，不录用虚伪之人，最后在国家之内，百姓都敬畏并爱戴他，刑法虽然严峻但没有埋怨的人，因为他是用心安抚，并且劝诫是明确的，真可以说是治国的良材，是管仲、萧何一样的人。
English: Comment: When Zhuge Liang served as prime minister, he pacified the people, taught etiquette, standardized official duties, clarified the system, and was open and honest. Those who are loyal and hardworking will surely be rewarded, although they have grudges, those who violate the law must be punished, although they are close, those who are willing to confess, although the crime is serious, but will forgive those who are clever, although the influence is slight, but will surely be executed. There is no small good deed that is not appreciated, no small evil that is not disparaged, deal with refinement, explore the root of the matter, punish according to the facts, do not recruit hypocrites,

古文：然连年动众，未能成功，盖应变将略，非其所长欤！
现代文：但是连年征战也没有能成就功业，大概是随机应变、率军统兵不是他的所长吧。
English: But even after years of campaigning, he has not been able to accomplish his mission. It is probably a random contingency, and he is not the commander of the army.

