古文：胡瘌杀
现代文：胡瘌杀
English: Hu Yanzhi

古文：或看审囚回，人问之，答曰： 今年重囚五人，俱有认色：一痴子、一颠子、一瞎子、一胡子、一瘌痢。 
现代文：甲看审判犯人回来，乙问他审判结果，甲答道： 今年重犯五人，都有特征：一痴子、一癫子、一瞎子、一胡子、一瘌痢。 
English: A saw the trial prisoners return, B asked him the outcome of the trial, A replied: There are five repeat offenders this year, all of whom have characteristics: one is mentally retarded, one has epilepsy, one is blind, one has a mustache, and one has dysentery.

古文：问如何审了，答曰： 只胡子与瘌痢吃亏，其余免死。 
现代文：乙问是如何审的，甲回答道： 只胡子与瘌痢吃亏，其余免死。 
English: When B asked how the trial was conducted, A replied: Only the mustache and dysentery suffered, the rest were spared death.

古文：又问何故，曰： 只听见问官说痴弗杀，颠弗杀，一眼弗杀，胡子搭瘌杀。 
现代文：乙又问是什么缘故，甲说： 只听见审判官说： 痴不杀，癫不杀，一眼不杀，胡子瘌痢杀。  
English: B also asked what the reason was, and A said, "I only heard the judge say, 'Don't kill the idiot, don't kill the lunatic, don't kill the one-eyed man, kill the bearded man with dysentery.'

古文：抛锚
现代文：抛锚
English: Cast anchor

古文：道士、和尚、胡子三人过江。
现代文：道士、和尚、胡子三人过江，突然遇到狂风大作，船将翻沉。
English: A Taoist priest, a monk, and a bearded man are crossing a river. Suddenly, they encounter a strong wind, and the boat is about to capsize.

古文：忽遇狂风大作，舟将颠覆，僧道慌甚，急把经卷投入江中，求神救护。
现代文：僧、道十分恐慌。急忙把经书抛入江中，求神救助。
English: The monk and Tao were very panicked. They hurriedly threw the scriptures into the river and asked God for help.

古文：而胡子无可掷得，惟将胡须逐根拔下，投于江内。
现代文：胡子无物可掷，便将胡须一根根拔下，抛入江内。
English: The beard has nothing to throw, so he pulls it out by the roots and throws it into the river.

古文：僧道问曰： 你拔胡须何用？ 
现代文：僧、道问他说： 你拔胡须干什么？ 
English: The monk asked him, "What are you pulling out your beard for?"

古文：其人曰： 我在此抛毛。 
现代文：胡子答道： 我在此抛毛。 
English: The beard answered: I'm shedding hair here.

古文：过桥嚏
现代文：过桥嚏
English: Sneeze across the bridge

古文：一乡人自城中归，谓其妻曰： 我在城里打了无数喷嚏。 
现代文：有个乡下人从城里回到家，对妻子说： 我在城里时打了好几个喷嚏。 
English: A villager came home from the city and said to his wife, "I sneezed several times while I was in the city.

古文：妻曰： 皆我在家想你之故。 
现代文：妻子说： 那都是因为我在家里想你。 
English: My wife said, "It's all because I miss you at home."

古文：他日挑粪过危桥，复连打数嚏几乎失足，乃骂曰： 骚花娘，就是思量我，也须看什么所在！ 
现代文：有一天，他挑了一担粪从一座摇摇晃晃的小桥走过，忽然连打了几个喷嚏，差点掉进河里，就骂道： 这个骚婆娘，就是想我，也得看看是在什么地方呀！ 
English: One day, he picked up a load of dung and walked across a rickety little bridge. Suddenly, he sneezed several times and almost fell into the river. He cursed: "This bitch, even if she misses me, has to see where I am!"

古文：蒜治口臭
现代文：蒜治口臭
English: Garlic for bad breath

古文：一口臭者问人曰： 治口臭有良方乎？ 
现代文：有一个人口臭，就问别人说： 治口臭有什么好办法吗？ 
English: If someone has bad breath, they ask others: Is there any good way to cure bad breath?

古文：答曰： 吃大蒜极好。 
现代文：那人回答说： 吃大蒜最好。 
English: The man replied: It is best to eat garlic.

古文：问者讶其臭，曰： 大蒜虽臭。还臭得正路。 
现代文：口臭的人说： 蒜臭味多难闻呀。 那人说： 大蒜味虽臭，但臭得对路。 
English: The person with bad breath said: How bad is the smell of garlic.The man said: Although the smell of garlic is bad, it smells the right way.

古文：讳聋哑
现代文：讳聋哑
English: Deaf, dumb and blind

古文：聋、哑二人各欲自讳。
现代文：一聋子忌讳其聋，一哑巴忌讳其哑。
English: A deaf man should not hide his deafness, and a dumb man should not hide his dumbness.

古文：一日聋见哑者，恳其唱曲，哑者知其聋也，乃以嘴唇开合而手拍板作按节状，聋者侧听良久。
现代文：一天聋子见到哑巴，恳求哑巴唱一曲，其实是嘲笑他的缺陷。哑巴知道对方是聋子，就用嘴唇一张一合，并且用手打着节拍，装出唱歌的样子。
English: One day, a deaf man saw a mute man and begged him to sing a song. The mute man, knowing that the man was deaf, put his lips together and beat time with his hands, pretending to sing.

古文：见其唇住即大赞曰： 妙绝妙绝，许久不听佳音，今日一发更进了。 
现代文：聋子也装着侧耳倾听的样子，见哑巴的嘴唇不动了，就大加称赞说： 好极了，好久没有听你美妙的歌声，今天又有长进了。 
English: Seeing that the mute's lips didn't move, the deaf man complimented him saying, "That's great, I haven't heard your wonderful singing voice for a long time, and today it has grown again."

古文：呵欠
现代文：呵欠
English: yawn

古文：一耳聋人探友。犬见之吠声不绝。其人茫然不觉。
现代文：有个聋子去拜访朋友，友人家的狗看见他狂叫不止，聋子毫无察觉。
English: A deaf man went to visit a friend. The friend's dog saw him yelping, but the deaf man didn't notice.

古文：入见主人。揖毕告曰： 府上尊犬，想是昨夜不曾睡来。 
现代文：进到里屋见了主人，互相作揖之后，他对主人说： 府上的狗想是昨夜没有睡觉？ 
English: When he entered the inner room and saw his master, after they had exchanged pleasantries, he said to his master: "I suppose the dog in the house didn't sleep last night?

古文：主人问： 何以见得？ 
现代文：主人问： 何以见得？ 
English: The host asked: How come?

古文：答曰： 见了小弟，只是打呵欠。 
现代文：聋子说： 此狗见了小弟就不停地打呵欠。 
English: The deaf man said, "This dog kept yawning when it saw my little brother.

古文：鼻影作枣
现代文：鼻影作枣
English: Nose shadow for dates

古文：近视者拜客。主人留坐待茶。
现代文：有个近视眼到别人家做客，主人留他坐下喝茶吃水果。
English: A short-sighted man was a guest at someone else's house. The host let him sit down to drink tea and eat fruit.

古文：茶果吃完。视茶内鼻影。以为橄榄也。捞摸不已，久之忿极，辄用指撮起，尽力一咬，指破血出。
现代文：茶果吃完，看见茶杯里自己鼻子的影子，以为是一块橄榄，就用手指去捞，捞了半天捞不起来，就生气地用手指猛一撮，随即放进嘴里用力一咬，结果手指咬出了血。
English: After eating the tea fruit, he saw the shadow of his own nose in the teacup and thought it was a piece of olive, so he used his fingers to fish it out. When he couldn't fish it out for half a day, he angrily poked it with his finger, then immediately put it in his mouth and bit it hard. As a result, his finger bit out blood.

古文：近视乃仔细认之，曰： 啐，我只道是橄榄，却原来是一个红枣。 问路
现代文：问路有个近视眼迷了路，看见路边一块石头上站着一只乌鸦，以为是人，就上前去问路。
English: Asking for directions A short-sighted man lost his way and saw a crow standing on a rock by the side of the road. Thinking it was a person, he went up to ask for directions.

古文：一近视眼迷路，见道旁石上栖歇一鸦，疑是人也，遂再三诘之。少顷，鸦飞去，其人曰： 我问你不答应，你的帽子被风吹去了，我也不对你说。 
现代文：问了几次，都不见回答。过了一会儿，乌鸦飞走了。近视眼自言自语地说： 哼，刚才我问你不答应，你的帽子被风吹走了，我也不对你说。 
English: After asking several times, there was no answer. After a while, the crow flew away. Myopic eyes said to himself: Well, just now I asked you not to say yes, your hat was blown away by the wind, I won't tell you.

古文：老面皮
现代文：老面皮
English: Old face skin

古文：或问世间何物最硬，曰： 石头与钢铁。 
现代文：两个人在一起，没胡子的人问有胡子的人说： 世上什么东西最硬？ 有胡子的人说： 石头和钢铁最硬。 
English: Two men are sitting together. The beardless man asks the bearded man, "What is the hardest thing in the world?" The bearded man says, "Stone and steel are the hardest."

古文：其人曰： 石可碎，铁可錾，安得为硬？
现代文：没胡子的人说： 不对，石头可碎，钢铁可锻，怎么能说是最硬的呢？
English: The man without a mustache said: No, stone can be broken, steel can be forged, how can it be said to be the hardest?

古文：以弟看来惟兄面上的髭须最硬，铁石总不如也。 
现代文：以我看来，只有老兄的胡子最硬，石头和钢铁都没有它硬。 
English: In my opinion, only my brother's mustache is the hardest, and neither stone nor steel is that hard.

古文：问其故，答曰： 兄面皮厚，竟被其出。 
现代文：有胡子的人问： 为什么？ 没胡子的人说： 看老兄这么厚的脸皮，都被它钻出来了。 
English: The bearded man asked: Why? The beardless man said: Look, it's all drilled out of my thick face.

古文：须者回嘲曰： 足下面皮更老，这等硬须还钻不透。 
现代文：有胡子的人也反唇相讥说： 老弟面皮更厚，这么硬的胡子，还是没钻透。 
English: People with beards also retorted with sarcasm, saying: My brother's face is thicker, and his beard, which is so hard, still hasn't penetrated.

古文：臭辣梨
现代文：臭辣梨
English: Stinky spicy pear cream

古文：北人曰： 此物吃下，转气就臭，味又带辣，只该唤他做臭辣梨。 
现代文：北方出产梨，北方人到南方要梨吃，没吃着梨。南方人给他吃萝卜，说： 这是我们这里的土产梨。 北方人说： 这东西吃下去，气臭味辣，只能叫它臭辣梨。 
English: The north produces pears, the northerners go to the south to eat pears, but they don't eat pears. The southerners give him a turnip to eat and say, "This is our local pear." The northerners say, "If you eat this thing, it's smelly and spicy, you can only call it a smelly and spicy pear."

古文：鸽舌
现代文：鸽舌
English: Dove's Tongue

古文：有涩舌者，俗云鸽口是也。
现代文：结巴，俗云鸽口。
English: Stammering, vulgar pigeon mouth.

古文：来到市中买桐油，向店主曰： 我要买桐桐桐 油字再也说不出口。
现代文：有个结巴到街上买桐油，他对店主说： 我要买桐桐桐  油 字怎么也说不出口。
English: A stutterer went to the street to buy tung oil. He said to the shopkeeper: "I want to buy tung oil. I can't get the words out.

古文：店主取笑曰： 你这人倒会打铜鼓，何不再敲通铜锣与我听？ 
现代文：店主取笑说： 你这人倒会打铜鼓，何不再敲通铜锣给我听？ 
English: The shopkeeper joked, "You know how to play the gong, why don't you play the gong for me?"

古文：鸽者怒曰： 你不要当当当面来腾腾腾倒刮刮刮削我。 
现代文：结巴大怒道： 你不要当当当面来腾腾腾倒刮刮刮削我。 
English: He stammered angrily, "You shouldn't come and scratch me in front of my face.

古文：驼叔
现代文：驼叔
English: Uncle Camel

古文：有驼子赴席，泰然上座。
现代文：有个驼背去赴宴，泰然坐在上座。
English: A hunchback went to a banquet and sat down at the head table.

古文：众客既齐，自觉不安，复趋下谦。
现代文：等到客人到齐后，自己感到不安，又起身走向下座以示谦逊。
English: When the guests arrived, I felt uneasy and got up and moved to the next seat to show humility.

古文：众客曰： 驼叔请上座，直背怎敢。 
现代文：众客说： 驼叔请上坐，直背怎敢。 
English: All the guests said: Uncle Camel, please take a seat. How dare you stand up straight?

古文：善屁
现代文：善屁
English: Good riddance

古文：有善屁者，往铁匠铺打铁锛，方讲价，连撒十余屁。
现代文：有个爱放屁的人到铁匠铺去打铁锛，正当讲价时，连放十多个屁。
English: There was a farting man who went to a blacksmith's shop to hammer an anvil, and when he was bargaining, he farted more than ten times.

古文：匠曰： 汝屁直恁多，若能连撒百个，我当白送一把铁锛与你。 
现代文：铁匠说： 你真能放屁，若能连放一百个，我就白送一把铁锛给你。 
English: The blacksmith said, "You really can fart. If you can fart a hundred times, I'll give you a shovel for free."

古文：其人便放百个。匠只得打成送之。
现代文：那个人立刻放了一百个屁，铁匠只得打了一把铁锛送给他。
English: The man immediately let out a hundred farts, and the blacksmith had to make a shovel and give it to him.

古文：临出门又撒数个屁。乃谓匠曰： 算不得许多，这几个小屁，乞我几只钯头钉罢。 
现代文：那人临出门时，又放了数个屁，接着对铁匠说： 算不得许多，这几个小屁换给我几只钯头钉算了。 
English: When the man was on his way out, he let out a few more farts, and then said to the blacksmith: "That's not much. I'll trade these little farts for a few hammer nails."

古文：忍屁
现代文：忍屁
English: Shinobara

古文：一女善屁，新婚随嫁一妪、一婢，嘱以忍屁遮羞。
现代文：有个女人常放屁，结婚时身边带着一个老妇、一个婢女，嘱咐她们作掩护，以免闹笑话。
English: There was a woman who farted a lot. When she got married, she took an old woman and a maid with her and told them to cover her up so as not to make a fuss.

古文：临拜堂，忽撒一屁，顾妪曰： 这个老妈无体面。 
现代文：拜堂时，女子突然放了一屁，随即看着老妇说： 这个老妈不体面。 
English: While praying, the woman suddenly farted, then looked at the old woman and said, "This old woman is not respectable.

古文：少顷又撒一屁，顾婢曰： 这个丫头恁可恶！ 
现代文：不一会儿，女子又放了一屁，瞅着婢女说： 这个丫头真可恶。 
English: After a while, the woman farted again, hugged her maid and said, "This maid is really disgusting.

古文：随后又一屁，左右顾而妪、婢俱不在，无可说得，乃曰： 这张屁股好没正经。 
现代文：随后又放了一屁，左右瞅瞅，老妇、婢女都不在，没有推的，于是说： 这个屁股没正经。 
English: Then he farted again, puking left and right, the old woman and the maid were not there, they did not push him, so he said: "This ass is not dignified.

古文：錾头
现代文：錾头
English: Shantou

古文：数人同舟，有撒屁者，众疑一童子，共錾其头。
现代文：几个人一同坐船，有人放了一屁，众人怀疑是一个小孩放的，便一起去打他的头。
English: Several people were on a boat together, someone farted, and everyone suspected that a child had let it out, so they went to hit him on the head.

古文：童子哭曰： 阿弥陀佛，别人打我也罢了，亏那撒屁的乌龟担得这只手起，也来打我！ 
现代文：小孩哭道： 阿弥陀佛，旁人打我也就算了，亏那放屁的乌龟举得起手，也来打我。 
English: The child cried: Amitabha Buddha, I don't mind if others beat me, but that farting turtle raised his hand and beat me.

古文：路上屁
现代文：路上屁
English: Road fart

古文：昔有三人行令。要上山见一古人，下山又见一古人，半路见一物件，后句要总结前后二句。
现代文：从前有三个人行令，要求上山看见一个古人，下山看见一个古人，半路上看见一样东西，最后一句要总结前后两句。
English: Once upon a time, three people issued an order, demanding that those who went up the mountain should see an ancient man, those who went down the mountain should see an ancient man, those who were halfway up the mountain should see one thing, and the last sentence should summarize the two sentences.

古文：一人曰： 上山遇见狄青，下山遇见李白，路上拾得一瓶酒，不知是青酒是白酒。 
现代文：一人说： 上山遇见狄青，下山遇见李白，路上拾得一瓶酒，不知是青酒还是白酒。 
English: One person said, "I met Di Qing on the way up the mountain and Li Bai on the way down. I picked up a bottle of wine on the way. I don't know if it was Qing wine or Baijiu.

古文：一人曰： 上山遇见樊哙，下山遇见赵盾，路上拾得一把剑，不知是快剑是钝剑。 
现代文：一个人说： 上山遇见樊哙，下山遇见赵盾，路上拾得一把剑，不知是快剑还是钝剑。 
English: One person said: "I met Zhai on the way up the mountain, Zhao Dun on the way down, and I picked up a sword on the way, I don't know if it's a fast sword or a blunt sword."

古文：一人云： 上山遇见林放，下山遇见贾岛，路上拾得一个屁，不知是放的屁、岛的屁。 
现代文：一人说： 上山遇见林放，下山遇见贾岛，路上拾得一个屁，不知是放的屁还是岛的屁。 
English: One person said: "Coming up the mountain, I met Lin Fang, going down the mountain, I met Jia Dao. On the way, I picked up a fart. I don't know if it was a fart from Lin Fang or a fart from Dao."

古文：吃屁
现代文：吃屁
English: Farting

古文：酒席间有撒屁者，众人互相推卸。
现代文：酒席间有个人放了一屁，众人互相推赖。
English: Someone farted in the middle of the banquet, and everyone shied away from each other.

古文：内一人曰： 列位请各饮一杯，待小弟说了罢。 
现代文：其中一人说： 诸位请各吃一杯，待小弟说了罢。 
English: One of them said, "Everyone, please have a cup of tea, and wait for my younger brother to say something."

古文：众饮讫，其人曰： 此屁实系小弟撒的。 
现代文：众人吃完酒，那人说： 这屁其实是小弟放的。 
English: After everyone finished their drinks, the man said, "Actually, it was my younger brother who did this."

古文：众人不服曰： 为何你撒了屁，倒要我们众人吃？ 
现代文：众人不服说： 为何你放了屁，倒要我们大家吃？ 
English: The crowd disagreed: "Why did you fart and make us all eat it?"

古文：不默
现代文：不默
English: Not silent

古文：各行酒令要默饮。
现代文：有几个人行酒令，相约静默不语。
English: A few people sipped their drinks in silence.

古文：席中有撒屁者，令官曰： 不默，罚一杯。 
现代文：席中有个人放了一屁，主令的人说： 不静默，罚一杯。 
English: Someone at the table farted, and the host said, "If you don't shut up, you'll get a drink."

古文：其人曰： 是屁响。 
现代文：那人说： 是屁响。 
English: The man said, "It's the sound of an ass."

古文：令官曰： 又不默，再罚一杯。 
现代文：主令的人说： 又不静默，再罚一杯。 
English: The man in charge said, "If you don't shut up, you'll get another drink."

古文：举座为之大笑。
现代文：在座的人听了，都哄堂大笑。
English: Everyone in the room burst out laughing.

古文：令官曰： 通座皆不默，各罚一杯。 
现代文：主令的人说： 全坐席的人都不静默，各罚一杯。 
English: The man in charge said: "Everyone at the table is not remaining silent. Everyone is fined one glass."

古文：善生虱
现代文：善生虱
English: Good Health

古文：有善生虱者。自言一年只生十二虱。
现代文：有个人好生虱子，自己说自己一年只生十二个虱子。
English: There was a man who loved to have lice. He said that he only had twelve lice a year.

古文：诘其故。曰： 我身上的虱者，真真一月一个。 
现代文：有人追问他为什么这样说，那个人回答说： 我身上的虱子，真是一月一个。 
English: When asked why he said this, the man replied: "I've had lice for a month.

古文：拾蚂蚁
现代文：拾蚂蚁
English: Ant-picking

古文：近视眼行路，见蚂蚁摆阵，疏密成行，疑是一物。因掬而取之，撮之不起，乃叹息曰： 可惜一条好线，毁烂得蹙蹙断了。 
现代文：有一个近视眼在路上走，看见路边一队蚂蚁排成阵，整整齐齐成一行，以为是个什么东西，就弯腰用手去捡，怎么也捡不起来，他就叹气说： 哎，可惜一条好线，都腐烂断了。 
English: A short-sighted man was walking along the road, when he saw a line of ants on the roadside, neatly arranged in a row. Thinking it was something, he bent down to pick it up with his hands, but he couldn't pick it up. He sighed and said, "Oh, what a pity, a good line, all rotten and broken."

古文：光屁股
现代文：光屁股
English: Light bum

古文：有上司面胡者，与光脸属吏同饭。
现代文：有个长胡子的上司与光脸属吏在一起吃饭。
English: A long-bearded boss dined with a bare-faced subordinate.

古文：上台须间偶带米糁。门子跪下禀曰： 老爷龙须上一颗明珠。 
现代文：上司胡须间粘上一粒饭，其门客跪下禀告说： 老爷龙须上有一颗明珠。 
English: A grain of rice was stuck between the whiskers of the boss, and his customer knelt down and reported: There is a pearl on the whiskers of the dragon.

古文：官乃拂去。
现代文：上司抹掉了饭粒。
English: The boss wiped away the rice grains.

古文：属吏回衙。责备门子： 你看上台门子何等伶俐！汝辈愚蠢，不堪重用。 
现代文：属吏回到官府，责备自己的门客： 你们看上司的门客何等伶俐，你们这些人愚蠢不堪重用。 
English: The subordinate official returned to the government office and reproached his own servants: "You see how stupid your boss's servants are. You people are too stupid to be of much use.

古文：一日，两官又聚会吃面。
现代文：又一天，上司和属吏又在一起吃面条。
English: Another day, the boss and the subordinate officers were eating noodles together again.

古文：属吏方举箸动口。有未缩进之面挂在唇角。门子急跪下曰： 小的禀事。 
现代文：属吏一条面未吃进去，挂在嘴边，其门客急忙跪下说： 小的有事禀告。 
English: The official didn't eat a single noodle, it hung on his lips. His guest hurriedly knelt down and said, "I have something to report."

古文：问禀何事，答曰： 爷好张光净屁股，多了一条蛔虫挂在外面。 
现代文：属吏问禀告什么事，门客回答说： 老爷好一张光净屁股，多了一条蛔虫挂在外面。 
English: When the official asked what the obituary was about, the doorkeeper replied: "The master had a nice clean bottom, but there was an extra tapeworm hanging out.

古文：亲爷
现代文：亲爷
English: My Grandfather

古文：有妻甫受孕而夫出外经商者，一去十载，子已年长，不曾识面。
现代文：有个人的妻子刚怀孕，自己就出外经商了。一去十年，儿子已长大，但不曾见过父亲。
English: One man's wife had just become pregnant, and he went abroad to do business. A decade later, his son had grown up, but he had never met his father.

古文：及父归家，突入妻房，其子骤见乃大喊曰： 一个面生胡子大胆闯入母亲房里来了！ 
现代文：等到父亲回家，突然进入妻子房里，儿子猛然见到后大喊： 一个陌生的大胡子，进母亲房里去了！ 
English: When the father came home and suddenly entered his wife's room, the son suddenly saw him and shouted: "A strange bearded man has entered my mother's room!"

古文：其母曰： 我儿勿做声，这胡子正是你的亲爷！ 
现代文：母亲说： 我儿不要声张，那满脸胡须的人，正是你的亲爹！ 
English: His mother said: My son, don't make a fuss, that bearded man is your real father!

古文：无须狗
现代文：无须狗
English: No need for a dog

古文：一税官瞽目者，恐人骗他，凡货船过关，必要逐一摸验，方得放心。
现代文：有个税官，是瞎子，怕别人骗他，凡是货船过关，必定要逐一用手摸一遍才放心。
English: There is a tax inspector who is blind. He is afraid that others will deceive him. Whenever a cargo ship passes through customs, he must touch the masts one by one before he can rest assured.

古文：一日，有贩羊者至。
现代文：有一天，一个贩羊的人过关。
English: One day, a sheep trader passed through.

古文：规例羊有税，狗无税。尽将羊角锯去，充狗过关。
现代文：按规定羊有税，狗无税，贩羊的人将羊角锯去，冒充狗过关。
English: According to regulations, there is a tax on sheep, but no tax on dogs. Sheep traders cut off the horns of sheep and pass them off as dogs.

古文：官用手摸着项下胡须，乃大怒曰： 这些奴才都来骗我。明明是一船羊，狗是何曾出须的！ 
现代文：税官用手摸着羊须大怒道： 狗奴才，想骗我。明明是一船羊，偏说是狗，狗哪有长胡须的？ 
English: The tax inspector felt the sheep's whiskers with his hand and angrily said, "Dog slave, you're trying to deceive me. It's clearly a ship of sheep, but you're saying it's a dog. Which dog has a long whisker?

古文：没须屁股
现代文：没须屁股
English: No Butt Required

古文：一公领孙溪中洗澡。
现代文：有个人领着小孙子在小河沟里洗澡。
English: A man was leading his young grandson to bathe in a small ditch.

古文：孙拿得一虾，或前跳，或却走。
现代文：孙子抓住一只虾，虾有时前跳，有时后退。
English: Grandson caught a shrimp, shrimp sometimes jump forward, sometimes backward.

古文：孙问公曰： 前赶后退，后赶前行，不知何处是头，何处是尾？ 
现代文：孙子问爷爷说： 这虾前面捉它就后退，后面赶它就前行，不知何处是头何处是尾？ 
English: Grandson asked his grandfather: "This shrimp, if you catch it in front, it will move back, if you catch it behind, it will move forward. I don't know where is the head and where is the tail?"

古文：公答曰： 有须的是头，没须的是尾。 
现代文：爷爷答道： 有须的是头，没须的是屁股。 
English: Grandpa replied, "The bearded one is the head, and the hairless one is the buttocks."

古文：长卵叹气
现代文：长卵叹气
English: Long-egg sighs

古文：一官到任，出票要唤兄弟三人。一胖子、一长子、一矮子备用。异姓者不许进见。
现代文：有个当官的刚刚到任，写了张字条想找三兄弟：一个胖子、一个高个儿、一个矮个儿，并要求三人非同姓的不许进见。
English: An official had just arrived and wrote a note to look for three brothers: a fat one, a tall one and a short one, and asked that the three who did not have the same surname not be allowed to enter.

古文：一家有兄弟四人，仅有一胖三矮。私相计议曰： 四人之中，胖矮俱有，单少一长人。只得将二矮缝一长裤。
现代文：一家有兄弟四人，仅有一胖三矮，私下商议说： 四人之中，胖子矮个儿都有，只少一高个儿，何不将俩矮个接起，缝一条长裤冒充高个儿。 
English: In a family of four brothers, only one was fat and three were short. They had a private discussion and said, "Of the four of us, all the fat ones are short, except for the tall one. Why don't we connect the two short ones and sew on a pair of trousers to pretend to be taller."

古文：两个接起充作长人，便觉全备。 
现代文：四人觉得完全满足了当官的要求，便按计而行。
English: The four men felt that they had fully satisfied the requirements of the authorities and proceeded according to plan.

古文：如计行之。官见大喜，簪花赏酒。三人一时荣宠。
现代文：当官的见到他们十分高兴，买酒慰劳，三人感到十分荣幸。
English: The officials were very happy to see them and bought wine to console them. The three of them felt very honored.

古文：下矮压得受苦，在内哓哓，大有怨词。
现代文：下边的矮个儿由于挨压受苦，在裤内哓哓，还有怨愤之词。
English: The short one on the bottom is suffering from the pressure, shivering in his pants and muttering.

古文：官听见，问： 下面甚响？ 众慌禀曰： 这是长卵叹气。 
现代文：当官的听到裤内有声，问里面是什么动静，三人慌忙禀报： 这是长卵叹气。 
English: The official heard a noise in the trousers and asked what was going on inside. The three hurriedly reported: "It's a sigh."

古文：搁浅
现代文：搁浅
English: stranded

古文：矮人乘舟出游，因搁浅，自起撑之。
现代文：有个矮子乘小船出外游玩，因为搁浅，便用篙去撑船。
English: A dwarf was out on a small boat, and because he was stranded, he used his oar to prop up the boat.

古文：失手坠水，水没过顶，矮人起而怒曰： 偏我搁浅搁在深处。 
现代文：矮子失足掉进水里，水没过他的头顶，他浮起来，生气地说： 偏偏我搁浅搁在深处。 
English: The dwarf slipped and fell into the water, but the water did not go over his head. He floated to his feet and said angrily, "I am stranded in the depths.

古文：被打
现代文：被打
English: Beaten

古文：二瞽者同行。曰： 世上惟瞽者最好，有眼人终日奔忙，农家更甚。怎如得我们心上清闲。 
现代文：两个瞎子同行，说： 世上只有瞎子最好，有眼人终日奔忙，农家更惨，哪里赶得上我们清闲。 
English: Two blind men were walking along and said, "Only the blind are the best in the world. People with eyes are busy all day long, and farmers are even worse. Where can we find time for leisure?"

古文：众农夫窃听之，乃伪为官过，谓其失于回避，以锄把各打一顿而呵之去。
现代文：众农夫听了他们所说的话，假装当官的走过，说瞎子不回避有失礼仪，用锄头把各打一顿后，叫他们快滚。
English: The farmers listened to what they had to say, pretended an official was passing by, said it was rude for a blind man not to avoid them, beat them all with hoes and told them to get out.

古文：随复窃听之。
现代文：随即又偷偷地听他们说什么。
English: Then he secretly listened to what they had to say.

古文：一瞽者曰： 毕竟是瞽者好，若是有眼人，打了还要问罪哩！ 
现代文：一个瞎子说： 毕竟是眼瞎好，如果是有眼睛的，打了之后还要问罪哩！ 
English: A blind man said: After all, it's good to be blind. If you have eyes, you'll have to answer for it after the beating!

古文：金漆盒
现代文：金漆盒
English: Gold lacquer box

古文：一近视出门，见街头牛屎一大堆，认为路人遗下的盒子，遂用双手去捧。
现代文：有个近视眼出门，看见街旁一大堆牛屎，以为是过路人丢下的盒子，于是用双手去捧。
English: A short-sighted man went out and saw a large pile of cow dung on the side of the street. He thought it was a box left by a passer-by, so he picked it up with both hands.

古文：见其烂湿，乃叹曰： 好个盒子，只可惜漆水未干。 
现代文：见其腐烂，叹气说： 好个盒子，只可惜油漆水没干。 
English: Seeing it rotting, he sighed and said, "It's a good box, but it's a pity that the paint hasn't dried."

古文：噀面
现代文：噀①面
English: 1 side

古文：一乡人携鹅入市。近视见之。以为卖布者，连呼 买布 ，乡人不应。急上前揪住鹅尾，逼而视之。
现代文：有个乡下人带着一只鹅去街上卖，被一个近视眼看见，以为是卖布的，连连呼喊买布。乡下人不应声，近视眼上前揪住鹅尾巴，凑近观看。
English: There was a countryman who took a goose to the street to sell it, and was seen by a short-sighted man, who thought he was a cloth seller and kept calling out to buy cloth. The countryman did not answer, but the short-sighted man covered the goose's tail in front of his eyes and watched it closely.

古文：鹅忽撒屎，适喷其面。
现代文：鹅突然撒屎，恰巧喷在那人脸上。
English: The goose suddenly shits, accidentally spraying the man in the face.

古文：近视怒曰： 不卖就罢，值得这等发急，就噀起人来！ 
现代文：近视眼生气地说： 不卖就算了，为何这样发脾气喷起人来！ 
English: Myopic eyes angrily said: Even if you don't sell, why are you throwing such a tantrum!

古文：乌云接日
现代文：乌云接日
English: Dark clouds for the next day

古文：近视者赴宴，对席一胡子吃火朱柿。
现代文：有个近视眼赴宴，席对面有个大胡子正在吃火红的柿子。
English: A short-sighted man went to a banquet, while across the table a bearded man was eating fiery red persimmons.

古文：即起别主人曰： 路远告辞。 
现代文：近视眼马上起来告别主人说： 路远告辞。 
English: The short-sighted eye immediately rose to bid farewell to its master and said: "Farewell, far away."

古文：主曰： 天色甚早。 
现代文：主人说： 天色还早。 
English: The owner said, "It's still early.

古文：答云： 恐天下雨，那边乌云接日头哩。 
现代文：近视眼回答道： 恐怕天要下雨，那边乌云接日头哩。 
English: The nearsighted one replied, "I'm afraid it's going to rain. There are dark clouds overhead."

古文：虾酱
现代文：虾酱
English: Shrimp sauce

古文：一乡人挑粪经过，近视唤曰： 拿虾酱来。 
现代文：有个乡下人挑粪经过，一近视眼召唤道： 拿虾酱来。 
English: A villager passed by picking up excrement and called out myopically: "Bring me shrimp sauce."

古文：乡人不知，急挑而走。
现代文：乡下人不知是召唤他，仍然挑着粪快走。
English: The villager calls him out, but he still picks up the dung and runs away.

古文：近视赶上，将手握粪一把于鼻上闻之。乃骂道： 臭已臭了，什么奇货，还在这等行情！ 
现代文：近视眼追赶上，用手捞了一把粪凑近鼻子闻，于是骂道： 都已经臭了，还以为奇货可居哩！ 捡银包
English: My nearsighted eye caught up with him, fished out a handful of dung with my hand, brought it close to my nose to smell it, and then scolded: It's all smelly, I thought it was a rare commodity!

古文：至夜，乃就灯启视。药线误被火燃，立时作响，方在吃惊，旁一聋子抚其背曰： 可惜一个花棒槌，无缘无故，如何就是这样散了。 
现代文：有个近视眼新年出门，捡到一个爆竹，误以为是别人丢失的银包，暗自高兴新年发财，于是藏在袖子里。晚上拿出来在油灯前观看，药线触火就燃，爆竹立刻炸响。近视眼正在吃惊，旁边一个聋子抚摸着他的背说： 可惜一个花棒槌，无缘无故怎么就这样散了。 
English: A short-sighted man went out on New Year's Eve and picked up a firecracker, mistaking it for someone else's lost purse. Secretly, he was happy to make a fortune in the New Year, so he hid it in his sleeve. At night, he took it out to look at it in front of the oil lamp. The cord caught fire and ignited, and the firecracker immediately exploded. The short-sighted man was in shock, and a deaf man next to him stroked his back and said, "It's a pity that a flower stick broke for no reason."

古文：疑蛋
现代文：疑蛋
English: Suspicious eggs

古文：一近视见朋鱼，疑为鸭蛋，握之而腹瘪。
现代文：一近视眼见朋鱼，以为是鸭蛋。用手一捏，肚子就瘪了。
English: Seeing a friend fish with myopic eyes, I thought it was a duck egg. When I squeezed it with my hand, I felt sick to my stomach.

古文：讶曰： 如何小鸭出得恁快，蛋壳竟瘪下去了。 
现代文：他诧异地问： 为何小鸭出得这么快，蛋壳竟瘪下去了？ 
English: He asked in amazement: Why did the duckling come out so quickly and why did the eggshell fall off?

古文：漂白眼
现代文：漂白眼
English: Bleached eyes

古文：一漂白眼与赤鼻头相遇。谓赤鼻者曰： 足下想开染坊，大费本钱，鼻头都染得通红。 
现代文：有个漂白眼与一个红鼻子相遇，漂白眼对红鼻子说： 老兄想开染坊，舍得本钱，连鼻头都染得通红。 
English: A bleached eye met a red nose. The bleached eye said to the red nose: My brother wants to open a dyeing factory. He is willing to invest the capital, and even his nose is dyed red.

古文：赤鼻答曰： 不敢也，只浅色而已。怎如得尊目，漂白得有趣。 
现代文：红鼻子答道： 不敢，只是浅色而已，怎么赶得上你的眼睛，漂白得有趣。 
English: Red Nose replied, "I wouldn't dare, it's just a light color, how could it catch up with your eyes, it's so bleached it's funny."

古文：屁股麻
现代文：屁股麻
English: Ass hemp

古文：俗云： 脚麻以草柴贴眉心，即止。 
现代文：俗话说： 脚麻用草柴贴眉心就能止住。 
English: As the saying goes: You can stop athlete's foot by sticking a piece of straw to the centre of the eyebrow.

古文：一人遍贴额上。人问： 为何？ 答曰： 我屁股通麻了。 
现代文：有个人将草柴遍贴额上，别人问他为什么这样做，那人回答说： 我屁股全都麻了。 
English: One man spread straw all over the board. When asked why he did it, the man replied, "I've got numbness all over my bottom."

古文：怕冷
现代文：怕冷
English: Afraid of the cold

古文：或问 世间何物不怕冷？ 
现代文：有人问： 世上什么东西不怕冷？ 
English: Someone asked: What in the world is not afraid of the cold?

古文：曰： 鼻涕，天寒即出。 
现代文：另一人回答： 鼻涕，越冷越往外流。 
English: Another replied: "Snot, the colder it is, the more it flows out."

古文：又问： 何物最怕冷？ 
现代文：又问： 什么东西最怕冷？ 
English: He also asked: What is the most afraid of cold?

古文：曰： 屁，才离窟臀，又向鼻孔里钻进。 
现代文：又回答说： 屁最怕冷，刚从屁眼里跑出来，马上又从鼻孔里钻进去。 
English: He also replied, "Farts are most afraid of the cold. As soon as they come out of the anus, they immediately go back in through the nostrils.

古文：直背
现代文：直背
English: Straight back

古文：一瞎子、一矮子、一驼子，吃酒争座。各曰： 说得大话的便坐头一位。 
现代文：一个瞎子、一个矮子、一个驼背吃酒时都争着坐上位，互相商定，谁最能说大话谁就坐上位。
English: A blind man, a short man, and a hunchback were all fighting for the best seat at a banquet, and they agreed among themselves that the one who could talk the most nonsense would get the best seat.

古文：瞎子曰： 我目中无人，该我坐。 
现代文：瞎子说： 我目中无人，我该坐上位。 
English: The blind man said, "I don't see anyone, I should be in a higher seat."

古文：矮子曰： 我不比常人，该我坐。 
现代文：矮子说： 我不比常人，我该坐上位。 
English: The dwarf said, "I am no better than an ordinary person. I should sit higher."

古文：驼子曰： 不要争，算来你们都是直背，自然让我坐。 
现代文：驼背说： 不用争了，算来你们都是直背，当然该让我坐。 
English: The hunchback said, "There's no need to argue, considering that you're both straight-backed, of course you should let me sit."

古文：不养子
现代文：不养子
English: Don't have children

古文：一大夫子孙繁衍，而同侪有无子者，乃矣语之曰： 尔没力量，儿子也养不出一个。
现代文：有一个大夫，子孙众多，而他的同辈中，有一个人没有儿子。于是，他便骄傲地对那人说： 你没有能力，连儿子都养不出一个。
English: There was a doctor who had many sons and daughters, but one of his contemporaries had no son. So he proudly said to the man, "You are not able to have even one son."

古文：像我这等子孙多，何等热闹。 
现代文：像我这样，多子多孙，何等的热闹。 
English: Like me, many children and grandchildren, what a lively scene.

古文：同侪答曰： 其子尔力也，其孙非尔也。 
现代文：同辈回答他说： 你的儿子，的确是你的能力，但是你的孙子，却不是你的能力了。 
English: His peers replied to him, "Your son is indeed your ability, but your grandson is not your ability.

古文：头场
现代文：头场
English: First movement

古文：玉帝生日，群仙毕贺，东方朔后至。
现代文：玉帝过生日那天，所有的神仙都去给他贺寿，东方朔去晚了。
English: On the day of the Jade Emperor's birthday, all the immortals went to wish him a happy birthday, but Dongfang Shuo was late.

古文：见寿星门外，问之。
现代文：当他赶到时，见寿星正在门外走来走去，东方朔见了，就问寿星这是为什么。
English: When he arrived, he saw Shouxing walking around outside the door. Seeing this, Dongfang asked Shouxing why.

古文：曰： 有告示贴出，不放我进。 
现代文：寿星回答说： 有告示贴出，不放我进来。 
English: The birthday girl replied, "There is a sign posted not to let me in.

古文：又问： 何故贴出？ 
现代文：东方朔又问为什么会贴出这种告示。
English: Dongfang Shuo also asked why such a notice was posted.

古文：答曰： 怪我头长。 
现代文：寿星回答说： 他们怪我头长。 
English: The birthday girl replied, "They hurt my head."

古文：颂屁
现代文：颂屁
English: Ode to a fart

古文：一士死见冥王，自称饱学，博古通今。
现代文：有一个秀才死了之后去见阎王，秀才自称饱学多才，博古通今。
English: There was a gifted man who went to see the king of hell after he died. The gifted man claimed to be well-educated and multi-talented.

古文：王偶撒一屁。士即进词云： 伏惟大王，高耸金臀，洪宣宝屁，依稀乎丝竹之声，仿佛乎麝兰之气。臣立下风，不胜馨香之味。 
现代文：这时，阎王偶然放了一个屁，秀才立即作词奉承说： 伏惟大王，高耸金臀，洪宣宝屁，依稀乎丝竹之声，仿佛乎麝兰之气，臣立下风，不胜馨香之味。 
English: At this time, the king of hell accidentally let out a fart, and Xiu Cai immediately wrote a flattering lyric: Fuxi King, towering golden buttocks, Hong Xuan treasure fart, faintly like the sound of silk bamboo, as if like the breath of a dragonfly, subordinate to the wind, incomparable to the taste of sweet incense.

古文：王喜，命赐宴。准与阳寿一纪。至期自来报到。不消鬼卒勾引。
现代文：阎王听了，非常高兴，命令手下设宴款待秀才，并答应再给秀才延长十二年的阳寿，到时候要秀才自己前来报到，不再派小鬼们去抓。
English: Hearing this, the king of hell was very happy and ordered his servants to hold a banquet to entertain the scholar. He also promised to extend the scholar's life by twelve years. At that time, the scholar should come to report himself, and no longer send the little devils to catch him.

古文：士过十二年，复诣阴司。谓门上曰： 烦到大王处通禀，说十二年前做放屁文章的秀才又来了。 
现代文：过了十二年以后秀才又来到了阴府，他对看门的小鬼说： 请你到大王那里去通报一下，就说十二年前作放屁文章的秀才又来了。 
English: After twelve years, the scholar came to the underworld again. He said to the little gatekeeper, "Please go to the king and inform him that the scholar who wrote the farting article twelve years ago has come again."

古文：抄祭文
现代文：抄祭文
English: 抄祭文

古文：东家丧妻母，往祭。
现代文：东家妻子的母亲死了，要前往祭奠。
English: Dong Jia's wife's mother died, and he wanted to go to pay his respects.

古文：托馆师撰文，乃按古本误抄祭妻父者与之。
现代文：东家请学馆先生替他写一篇祭文。于是，先生就按照古书上的样本抄了一篇，但是，却错抄成了祭妻父的祭文。
English: The host family asked Mr. Gakukan to write an offering for him. Therefore, he copied one according to the sample in the old book, but he mistakenly copied it as an offering to his wife's father.

古文：识者看出，主人怪而责之。
现代文：被明白人看出了，主人就责怪先生。
English: When this was pointed out by a member of the public, the owner blamed the gentleman.

古文：馆师曰： 此文是古本刊定的，如何得错？
现代文：先生说： 这篇祭文是古书上刊定的样本，怎么会出错？
English: The teacher said: This sacrificial text is a sample published in an ancient book, how could there be a mistake?

古文：只怕倒是他家错死了人。
现代文：只怕是他家死错了人。
English: Even if it was the wrong person who died in his family.

古文：这便不关我事。 
现代文：这就不关我的事了。 
English: It's none of my business.

古文：四等亲家
现代文：四等亲家
English: Fourth-degree relatives

古文：两秀才同时四等，于受责时曾识一面。
现代文：有两个秀才同时考了第四等，在受罚的时候两人曾经见了一面。
English: There were two geniuses who took the fourth-class examination at the same time, and when they were punished, the two of them saw each other.

古文：后联姻。
现代文：后来，两位秀才结成了亲家。
English: Later, the two geniuses formed a family.

古文：会亲日相见，男亲家曰： 尊容曾在何处会过来？ 
现代文：在儿女成亲的那天，两个秀才又相见了。男方的亲家说： 亲家的尊容我好像在哪里见过似的？ 
English: On the day of their children's marriage, the two geniuses met again. The man's relatives said: "I seem to have seen the respect of my relatives somewhere?

古文：女亲家曰： 便是有些面善，一时想不起。 
现代文：女方的亲家紧盯着男方的亲家说： 总觉得有些面熟，可是一时又想不起来。 
English: The woman's relatives stared at the man's relatives and said: I always feel a little familiar, but I can't remember it at the moment.

古文：各沉吟间，忽然同悟。男亲家点头曰： 嗄。 
现代文：两人各自低头回想了一会，忽然，两人同时恍然大悟，男方的亲家点点头说： 喔！ 
English: Both of them looked down and thought about it for a while. Suddenly, both of them suddenly realized, and the man's relatives nodded and said, "Wow!

古文：女亲家亦点头曰： 嗄。 
现代文：女方的亲家也点点头说： 喔！ 
English: The woman's relatives also nodded and said: "Wow!

古文：腹内全无
现代文：腹内全无
English: There is no swelling in the abdomen

古文：一秀才将试，日夜忧郁不已。
现代文：有一个秀才将要去参加考试了，在考前这些日子，秀才日夜忧郁。
English: There is a talented person who is about to take the exam. In these days before the exam, the talented person is gloomy day and night.

古文：妻乃慰之曰： 看你作文，如此之难，好似奴生产一般。 
现代文：于是，妻子便安慰他说： 看你写文章，怎么这么为难，好像我生孩子似的。 
English: So his wife consoled him: "Look at you, writing an article, why are you so troubled, it's like I'm having a baby.

古文：夫曰： 还是你每生子容易。 
现代文：丈夫说： 还是你每次生孩子要容易些。 
English: My husband said, "It's easier for you to have a child every time."

古文：妻曰： 怎见得？ 
现代文：妻子不明白，问他： 怎么见得？ 
English: His wife didn't understand and asked him, "How can you see that?"

古文：夫曰： 你是有在肚里的，我是没在肚里的。 
现代文：丈夫回答说： 你生孩子，毕竟是肚子里面有的，而我却是肚子里面没有的。 
English: The husband replied: After all, you give birth to a child, which is in your stomach, but I do not have it in my stomach.

古文：教法
现代文：教法
English: Teaching methods

古文：主人怪师不善教。师曰： 汝欲我与令郎俱死耶？ 
现代文：主人责怪先生不善于教书，先生说： 你想让我和令郎都死掉吗？ 
English: The master accused the teacher of not being good at teaching. The teacher said: Do you want me and my son to die?

古文：主人不解。师曰： 我教法已尽矣。
现代文：主人不明白他的意思，先生回答说： 我已经想尽一切办法教令郎了。
English: His master did not understand him, so he replied, "I have tried everything to teach my son.

古文：只除非要我钻在令郎肚里去，我便闷杀，令郎便胀杀。 
现代文：那么除非让我钻到令郎的肚子里面去。不过这样做的话，我就会被闷死，而令郎便会被胀死。 
English: Well, unless you want me to crawl inside your belly, but then I'll suffocate and you'll bloat to death.

古文：浇其妻妾
现代文：浇其妻妾
English: With his wife and concubine

古文：人家请一馆师，书房逼近内室。
现代文：有一户人家请了一个教书先生，书房和内室很接近。
English: One family hired a tutor, and the study was very close to the inner room.

古文：一日课，徒读 譬如四时之错行 句。注曰： 错，犹迭也。 
现代文：有一天，先生给学生上课，读到 譬如四时之错 一句的时候，给学生解释说： 错，就是轮流、替换的意思。 
English: One day, a teacher was giving a lesson to his students, and when he read the sentence, "For example, the mistake at four o'clock," he explained to the students: "Mistake means taking turns and substituting."

古文：东家母听见。嗔其有意戏狎，诉于主人。
现代文：内室里的女主人听见了，怪先生有意戏弄侮辱她，便告诉了主人。
English: The mistress in the inner room heard the strange gentleman deliberately teasing and insulting her, and she told her master.

古文：主人不能书解，怒欲逐之。
现代文：主人也不理解文字的意思，生气地要赶先生走。
English: The owner did not understand the meaning of the text and angrily wanted to send him away.

古文：师曰： 书义如此，汝自不解耳，我何罪焉？ 
现代文：先生说： 书上的意思就是这样，是你自己不理解，我又有什么罪过。 
English: The teacher said, "That's what it says in the book. You don't understand it yourself. What's my fault?"

古文：遂迁居于厅楼，以避啰唣。
现代文：于是，把学馆迁到厅楼，以避免吵闹。
English: As a result, the school was moved to the hall building to avoid noise.

古文：一日，东家妻妾游于楼下。
现代文：有一天，东家的妻妾在楼下游玩，先生想要撒尿却没地方撒，于是便从墙壁上的间隙处撒了出去。
English: One day, the master's wife and concubine were playing downstairs. The master wanted to urinate, but there was no place to do it, so he threw it out from a gap in the wall.

古文：师欲小便不得，乃从壁间溺之，不意淋在妻妾头上，复诉于主人。
现代文：不料，竟淋在了东家妻妾的头上，妻妾非常生气，又告诉了主人。
English: Unexpectedly, it fell on the head of the host's wife and concubine. The wife and concubine was very angry and told the host.

古文：主因思前次孟浪怪他。今番定须考证书中有何出典。
现代文：主人因为考虑到前一次错怪了先生，这一次一定要考证一下，看看书上有没有这个典故。
English: Master, considering that he made a mistake the last time, this time he must do some research to see if there is this allusion in the book.

古文：乃左右翻释。忽大悟曰： 原来在此，不然，几被汝等所误矣。 
现代文：于是，他就不停地翻着书本，想要理出事情的头绪来。忽然，他恍然大悟道： 原来在这里，要不然，差一点被你们错怪了。 
English: So he kept turning over the books, trying to figure things out. Suddenly, he suddenly realized: It was here, otherwise, you almost made a mistake.

古文：问： 有何凭据？ 
现代文：妻妾忙问： 有什么凭据？ 
English: The wife and concubine hurriedly asked: What evidence do you have?

古文：主曰： 施施从外来，骄其妻妾。 
现代文：主人回答说： 你们看：施施从外来，骄其妻妾。 
English: His lord answered and said unto him, Behold, he which receiveth gifts without money scattereth abroad, and honoureth not his wife.

古文：猫逐鼠
现代文：猫逐鼠
English: The cat chases the mouse

古文：一猫捕鼠，鼠甚近，无处躲避。急匿在竹轿杠中。
现代文：有一只猫捕捉老鼠，老鼠被追得慌了，没有地方可以躲避，急忙之中躲进了竹轿的竹管里面。
English: A cat was chasing a mouse. The mouse was so panicked that it had nowhere to hide. In its haste, it hid inside the bamboo tube of a bamboo carriage.

古文：猫顾之叹云： 看你管便进得好，这几个节如何过得去！ 
现代文：猫看着它，叹惜地说： 看你这管是进得好，只这几个节你怎么过得去。 
English: The cat looked at it and said regretfully, "Look, this pipe fits you well. How can you get by with just these few knots?"

古文：想船家
现代文：想船家
English: Shipwrecked sailors

古文：教书先生解馆归，妻偶谈及 喷嚏鼻子痒，有人背地想。 夫曰： 我在学堂内也常常打喷嚏的。 
现代文：年终的时候，教书先生离馆回家过年。妻子偶然提到 喷嚏鼻子痒，有人背地想 ，丈夫说： 我在学馆里教书的时候也常常打喷嚏的。 
English: At the end of the year, the teacher left the school to go home for the New Year. The wife casually mentioned sneezing and itchy nose, someone thought behind his back, and the husband said: I often sneezed when I was teaching in the school.

古文：妻曰： 就是我在家想你了。 
现代文：妻子说： 那都是因为我在家里想你的原因。 
English: My wife said, "It's all because I miss you at home."

古文：及开年，仍赴东家馆。
现代文：等过了年，学馆开了堂，丈夫仍去东家学馆教书。
English: After waiting for a year, the school opened, and my husband still went to the host school to teach.

古文：别妻登舟，船家被初出太阳搐鼻，连打数嚏。
现代文：告别了妻子登上了船，船家被初升的太阳刺激，鼻子抽搐了几下，连续打了好几个喷嚏。
English: After saying goodbye to his wife, the sailor boarded the ship. The sailor was stimulated by the rising sun, his nose twitched a few times, and he sneezed several times in a row.

古文：师顿足曰： 不好了，我才出得门，这婆娘就在那里直想船家了！ 
现代文：先生跺着脚说： 不好了，我才出家门，这婆娘就在那里想着船家了。 
English: The teacher stamped his foot and said, "I'm sorry, I just came out of the house, and the old woman is thinking about the boatman right there."

古文：村牛
现代文：村牛
English: Murakami beef

古文：一士善于联句，偶同友人闲步，见有病马二匹卧于城下。
现代文：有一个秀才善于作对子。一次，偶然同朋友散步，看见有两匹生病的马躺在城墙底下。
English: Once, while casually walking with a friend, he saw two sick horses lying under the city wall.

古文：友即指而问曰： 闻兄捷才，素善作对，今日欲面领教。 
现代文：朋友就指着那两匹马对秀才说： 常听人说兄台才思敏捷，向来善于作对，小弟今天倒想当面领教一下。 
English: Pointing to the two horses, my friend said to Xiu Cai Wu, "I often hear people say that the elder brother is quick-witted and has always been good at confrontation, but my younger brother would like to have a face-to-face lesson today."

古文：士曰： 愿闻。 
现代文：秀才说： 愿听指教。 
English: The scholar said, "I am willing to listen to your advice."

古文：友出题曰： 城北两只病马。 
现代文：朋友出题说： 城北两匹病马。 
English: A friend posed the question: Two sick horses in the north of the city.

古文：士即对曰： 江南一个村牛。 
现代文：秀才马上对道： 江南一头村牛。 
English: The talent immediately went to the right path: one head of Jiangnan village cattle.

古文：拔须去黑
现代文：拔须去黑
English: Whisk to remove blackness.

古文：一翁须白，令姬妾拔之。
现代文：有一个老头的胡须白了很多，他让妾帮他把白胡须拔掉。
English: There was an old man whose beard was very white. He asked his concubine to help him remove the white hairs from his beard.

古文：妾见白者甚多，拔之将不胜其拔，乃将黑须尽去。
现代文：小妾见他的白须太多了，如果拔白的，将拔不完，于是，就把黑须全部拔掉。
English: The concubine saw that his white whiskers were too many, and if she plucked the white ones, she would not be able to finish, so she plucked all the black whiskers.

古文：拔讫，翁引镜自照，遂大骇。因咎其妾，曰： 难道少的倒不拔，倒去拔多的？ 
现代文：拔完以后，老头拿起镜子一照，吓了一大跳，便责备他的小妾说： 难道少的你倒不拔，倒去拔多的？ 
English: After pulling it out, the old man picked up the mirror and took a picture. He was startled and scolded his concubine, saying, "Didn't you pull out a little, instead of pulling out a lot?

古文：善忘
现代文：善忘
English: Easy to forget

古文：一人持刀往园砍竹，偶腹急，乃置刀于地，就园中出恭。
现代文：有个人拿着刀到竹园里去砍竹子。突然腹痛想要大便，于是把刀放在地上，就在竹园里大便。
English: A man took a knife to the bamboo garden to cut bamboo. Suddenly he had a stomachache and wanted to defecate, so he put the knife on the ground and defecated in the bamboo garden.

古文：忽抬头曰： 家中想要竹用，此处倒有许多好竹，惜未带得刀来。 
现代文：忽然抬头看见园子里的竹子，说： 家里面要竹子用，这里倒有许多好竹，可惜没有带刀来。 
English: Suddenly, he looked up and saw the bamboo in the garden and said, "We need to use bamboo in the house. There are many good bamboos here. Unfortunately, I didn't bring a knife."

古文：解毕，见刀在地，喜曰： 天随人愿，不知哪个遗失这刀在此。 
现代文：他解完后，看见地上他刚才放的刀，高兴地说： 天随人愿，不知是谁遗失了一把刀在这里。 
English: When he had finished untying it, he saw the knife he had just placed on the ground and said happily: "God willing, I don't know who lost a knife here."

古文：方择竹要砍，见所遗粪便骂曰： 是谁狗东西，屙此脓血，几乎脏了我的脚。 
现代文：刚刚选好了竹子想要砍，他又看见了地上自己屙的屎，便开口骂道： 是哪个狗东西，屙此脓血在这里，差点踩了我一脚。 
English: He had just chosen the bamboo he wanted to chop, when he saw his own excrement on the ground, he began to curse: "What kind of dog is it, it's bleeding here, it almost stepped on me."

古文：须臾抵家。徘徊门外曰： 此何人居？ 
现代文：过了不久，他砍好竹子回了家，在自己家门口徘徊说： 这是哪一户人家？ 
English: After a while, he finished cutting the bamboo and went back home. He lingered at the door of his house and said, "Which family is this?"

古文：妻适见，知其又忘也，骂之。
现代文：刚好妻子看见了他，知道他一时又忘记了，就开口骂他。
English: Just as his wife saw him, she realized that he had momentarily forgotten, and began to scold him.

古文：其人怅然曰： 娘子颇有些面善，不曾得罪，如何开口便骂？ 
现代文：这个人很怅然，说： 这位娘子很有些面熟，但是，我又没有得罪你，为什么开口便骂？ 
English: The man was stunned and said, "This girl is very familiar, but I didn't offend you, why did you start cursing?

古文：作揖
现代文：作揖
English: Composed by

古文：两亲家相遇于途，一性急，一性缓。
现代文：两亲家在路上相遇，他们一个性急，一个性缓。
English: Two families meet on the road, one impatient, the other impatient.

古文：性缓者，长揖至地，口中谢曰： 新年拜节奉扰，元宵观灯又奉扰，端午看龙舟，中秋玩月，重阳赏菊，节节奉扰，未曾报答，愧不可言。 
现代文：性缓的亲家见了性急的亲家，一揖到地，嘴里道谢说： 每逢过年过节都要打扰府上，元宵节观灯又来打扰，端午节看龙舟，中秋节赏月，重阳节赏菊，每次都来打扰，又从来没有回报过，我心里感到非常惭愧。 
English: The slow-moving relative saw the quick-moving relative, and as soon as he hit the ground, he mouthed thanks and said: Every New Year's Eve, I have to disturb the house, the Lantern Festival to disturb again, the Dragon Boat Festival to see the dragon boat, the Mid-Autumn Festival to see the moon, and the Chongyang Festival to see the chrysanthemums. I have come to disturb every time, and I have never returned. I feel very ashamed.

古文：及说毕而起，已半晌矣。
现代文：等他说完以后，站直身子，已经老半天了。
English: When he's finished, stand up straight, it's been half a day.

古文：性急者苦其太烦，早先避去。
现代文：性急的亲家觉得他太烦，早已经回避走了。
English: His impatient family thought he was too boring and had already shunned him.

古文：性缓者视之不见，问人曰： 敝亲家是几时去的？ 
现代文：性缓的亲家四周一看，见不到性急的亲家，就问别人说： 请问我那亲家是什么时候走的？ 
English: If you see a slow-moving family, look around. If you don't see a fast-moving family, ask someone else: "Excuse me, when did that family leave?"

古文：人曰： 看灯之后，就不见了，已去大半年矣！ 
现代文：那人回答说： 看完灯以后，就不见了，已经走了大半年了呢！ 
English: The man replied: "After looking at the lamp, it disappeared. It's been gone for more than half a year!"

古文：籴米
现代文：籴①米
English: 1 m

古文：有持银入市籴米者，失米袋于途，归谓妻曰： 今日市中闹甚，没得好失袋也。 妻曰： 你的莫非也没了？ 
现代文：有个人拿着银子去集市上买米，半路上把米袋给丢了。回到家里，他对妻子说： 今天集市里面太吵闹了，很多人都丢失了米袋。 妻子问： 你的米袋莫非也丢失了？ 
English: A man went to the market with money to buy rice, but he lost his bag of rice on the way. When he got home, he said to his wife, "There was a lot of noise at the market today, and a lot of people lost their bags of rice." His wife asked, "Did you lose your bag of rice too?"

古文：答曰： 随你好汉便怎么？ 
现代文：丈夫回答说： 就算你是好汉又怎么样？
English: The husband replied, "Even if you are a hero, so what?

古文：妻惊问： 银子何在？ 
现代文：还不是一样的丢。 妻子惊慌地又问： 那么银子在哪？ 
English: The wife panicked and asked again: So where is the money?

古文：答曰： 这倒没事，我紧紧拴好在叉袋角上。 
现代文：丈夫回答说： 银子倒没事，我把它紧紧地拴好在米袋角上了。 
English: The husband replied, "The money is all right. I tied it tightly to the corner of the rice bag.

古文：不斟酒
现代文：不斟酒
English: Not pouring the wine

古文：一家宴客，座中一大胡子，酒僮畏缩不前，杯中空如也。
现代文：有户人家设宴请客，在座中有一位大胡子客人。酒童看见他很害怕不敢向前给他斟酒，所以，大胡子的酒杯中已经空空如也。
English: A family was having a party, and among the guests was a bearded man. When the bartender saw him, he was afraid to pour the wine, so the bearded man's glass was empty.

古文：主举杯朝拱数次，胡子愠曰： 安得有酒？ 
现代文：主人不知，举杯连续朝他敬酒好几次，大胡子不高兴地说： 哪里有酒？ 
English: Unknown to the host, he raised his glass several times in succession to toast him. The bearded man said with displeasure: Where is the wine?

古文：主骂僮为何不斟，僮曰： 这位相公没有嘴的。 
现代文：主人见了，骂酒童为什么不给客人斟酒。酒童说： 这位相公没有嘴的。 
English: When the host saw this, he scolded the bartender for not pouring the wine for his guest. The bartender said, "This comrade has no mouth."

古文：胡子忿极，揭须以示曰： 这是不是嘴？ 
现代文：大胡子听了，非常愤怒，揭开胡须露出嘴巴说： 这是不是嘴？ 
English: When the bearded man heard this, he was very angry. He uncovered his beard to reveal his mouth and said: "Is this a mouth?

古文：通谱
现代文：通谱
English: General spectrum

古文：有一人须长过腹，人见之，无不赞为美髯。
现代文：有个人须长过腹，人见之无不赞为美髯。
English: There is a person who has a long belly, and is admired as a beautiful woman.

古文：偶一日，遇见风监先生，请他一相。
现代文：一天偶然遇到相面先生，让其相一下面。
English: One day, he happened to meet Mr. Facemask, and let him make a mask.

古文：相者曰： 可惜尊髯短了些。 
现代文：相面先生说： 可惜你的胡须短了些。 
English: Mr. Two-Face said, "It's too bad your beard is shorter.

古文：其人曰： 我之须已过腹，人尽赞羡，为何反嫌其短？ 
现代文：那人说： 我的胡须已过腹，人人见之都赞美，为什么你倒嫌它短？ 
English: The man said, "My beard is too long, everyone compliments it, why do you want it short?

古文：相者曰： 若再长得寸许，便好与下边通谱同姓的人互认宗族了。 
现代文：相面先生说： 如果再长得一寸多，便好和下边通谱了。 
English: Mr. Facing said, "If I grow another inch or so, I'll be able to see through to the bottom."

古文：联宗
现代文：联宗
English: United Church of Christ

古文：胡须与眉毛曰： 当今世情浅薄，必要帮手相助。
现代文：胡须跟眉毛说： 当今世上风情浅薄，必须要有帮手相助。
English: Whiskers and eyebrows say: In today's shallow world, we must have helpers.

古文：我已与鬓毛联矣。
现代文：我已经与鬓毛联宗。
English: I've joined forces with Mane.

古文：看来眼前高贵，惟二位我们俱在头面，联了甚好。 
现代文：看来眼前高贵，只有我们俩在头面上，联宗极好。 
English: It looks noble in front of us, only the two of us in the foreground, and the union is excellent.

古文：眉曰： 承不弃微末，但我根基浅薄，何不往下路孔家前门，一带茂林，旗杆底下联的更好。 
现代文：眉毛说： 承你不鄙弃微末，但我根基浅薄，何不到下路孔家前门去，一带茂林，旗杆底下联宗更好。 
English: The eyebrows said, "I know you don't despise the little things, but my foundation is shallow. Why don't you go to the front door of Kong's house on the way down? It's better to go to the nearby forest and the United Church under the flagpole."

古文：一般胡
现代文：一般胡
English: General Hu

古文：两人聚论《论语》一书，皆讲胡子。
现代文：有两个人在一起评论《论语》一书，认为讲的都是胡子。
English: There were two people who reviewed the Analects of Confucius together and thought that it was all about beards.

古文：开章就说：  不亦悦乎 ， 不亦乐乎 ， 不亦君子乎 ，这三个都是好胡； 为人谋而不忠乎 ， 与朋友交而不信乎 ， 传不习乎 ，这三个是不好胡； 君子者乎 ， 色壮者乎 ，这两个胡一好一不好。 或问： 使乎，使乎。 
现代文：开篇就说：  不亦悦乎，不亦乐乎，不亦君子乎？ 这三个是好胡子； 为人谋而不忠乎，与朋友交而不信乎，传不习乎？ 这三个是不好的胡子； 君子者乎，色壮者乎？ 这两个胡子一好一坏。 有人问：  使乎，使乎 是什么意思？ 
English: At the beginning of the article, it said: "Not pleasing, not pleasing, not gentlemanly? These three are good moustaches; scheming but not loyal, befriending but not trusting, and not accustomed to? These three are bad moustaches; gentlemanly, handsome? These two moustaches are good and bad." Some people asked: What does it mean to make a good moustache, a good moustache?

古文：答曰： 上面的胡与下面的胡总是一般。 
现代文：那两个人回答说： 上面的胡子与下面的胡子总是一般。 
English: The two men replied, "The upper mustache and the lower mustache are always the same.

古文：稀胡子
现代文：稀胡子
English: Thin mustache

古文：一稀胡子要相面，相士云： 尊相虽不大富，亦不至贫。 
现代文：有个胡子稀疏的人让相面先生相面，相面先生说： 尊相虽不十分富有，也不十分贫穷。 
English: A man with a thin beard asked Mr. Facing to meet him. Mr. Facing said, "Though Mr. Facing is not very rich, he is not very poor either.

古文：胡者云： 何以见得？ 
现代文：那个人问： 凭什么这样说？ 
English: The man asked, "Why do you say that?"

古文：相士云： 看公之须，比上不足，比下有馀。 
现代文：相面先生回答说： 看你的胡须，比上不足，比下有余。 
English: Mr. Face-to-Face replied, "Look at your beard. It's less than the top and more than the bottom.

古文：胡答嘲
现代文：胡答嘲
English: Fool's laughter

古文：颜回、子路、伯鱼三人私议曰： 夫子惟胡，故开口不脱 乎 字。 
现代文：颜回、子路、伯鱼三人暗地议论说： 夫子留有胡须，所以开口不离 乎 字。 
English: Three people, Yan Hui, Ziluo and Bo Yu secretly discussed, "My husband has a beard, so he can't open his mouth without saying a word."

古文：颜回曰： 他对我说： 回也，其庶乎。  
现代文：颜回说： 他对我说： 回也，其庶乎。  
English: Yan Hui said: He said to me: Hui also, it is common.

古文：子路曰： 他对我说： 由也，诲汝知之乎？  
现代文：子路说： 他对我说： 由也，诲汝知之乎？ 
English: Zilu said, "He said to me, 'How do you know that?'

古文：伯鱼曰： 我家尊对我也说 汝为周南、召南矣乎。  
现代文：伯鱼说： 我家尊对我也说： 汝为周南、召南矣乎。  
English: He said, "My father-in-law also said to me, 'You are Zhou Nan, go and call Nan.'

古文：孔子在屏后闻之，出责伯鱼曰： 回是个短命，由是个不得其死的，说我胡出罢了。你是我的儿子，如何也来说我老子？ 
现代文：孔子在屏风后面听到三人的议论，出来责怪伯鱼道： 颜回是个短命，由是个不得好死的，他们说我胡也算了，你是我的儿子，为什么也来说我老子？ 
English: Confucius heard the discussion of the three people behind the screen, and came out to reproach Squidward: Yan Hui's life was short, so she died a tragic death. They said, "Forget my beard, you are my son. Why do you call me Lao Zi?"

古文：黄须
现代文：黄须
English: Yellow whiskers

古文：一人须黄，每于妻前自夸： 黄须无弱汉，一生不受人欺。 
现代文：有个人胡须黄色，经常在妻子面前自夸： 黄须无弱汉，一生不受欺。 
English: There was a man with yellow whiskers who often boasted to his wife: "There is no weak man with yellow whiskers. I will never be cheated in my life."

古文：一日出外被殴而归，妻引前言笑之。答曰： 哪晓得那人的须竟是通红的。 
现代文：一天出外被殴打回来，妻子引他先前自夸的话嘲笑他，丈夫回答道： 哪晓得那人的胡须竟是通红的。 
English: On returning from a day's outing in which he had been beaten, his wife taunted him with his earlier boast, to which he replied: "Who knew that man's beard was red?"

古文：扇坠
现代文：扇坠
English: Fan pendant

古文：有持大扇者，遇矮子，戏以扇置其头曰： 欲借兄权作扇坠耳。 
现代文：有个人拿着大扇子，遇到矮子，用扇子搁在矮子的头上开玩笑说： 借用你一下做个扇坠吧。 
English: A man holding a large fan met a dwarf, put the fan on the dwarf's head and jokingly said, "Let me borrow you to make a fan pendant."

古文：矮子大怒骂曰： 娘贼！若拿我做扇坠，我就兜心一脚踢杀你！ 
现代文：矮子十分愤怒地大骂道： 娘贼，如果拿我做扇坠，我就狠心一脚踢死你！ 
English: The dwarf cursed furiously, "Thief, if you make me a fan pendant, I will kick you to death!"

古文：瞽笑
现代文：瞽笑
English: 笑

古文：一瞽者与众人同坐，众人有所见而笑，瞽者亦笑。
现代文：有个盲人与众人同坐，众人见到好笑的事笑了起来，盲人也笑起来。
English: A blind man was sitting with a group of people. When they saw something funny, they all laughed, and the blind man laughed too.

古文：众问之曰： 汝何所见而笑？ 
现代文：众人问盲人说： 你看到什么了而笑？ 
English: The crowd asked the blind man, "What did you see that made you laugh?"

古文：瞽者曰： 列位所笑，定然不差，难道是骗我的？ 
现代文：盲人说： 诸位所笑，一定不会错，难道是骗我的？ 
English: The blind man said, "What you are laughing at can't be wrong. Are you lying to me?"

古文：吃螺蛳
现代文：吃螺蛳
English: Eating snails

古文：有盲子暑月食螺蛳，失手坠一螺肉在地，低头寻摸，误捡鸡屎，放在口里。
现代文：有个盲人大热天吃螺蛳，失手把一螺肉掉在地上，低头寻摸，误捡鸡屎，放在嘴里。
English: A blind man was eating snail stew on a hot day. He accidentally dropped a piece of snail meat on the ground, looked down to find it, picked up chicken feces by mistake, and put it in his mouth.

古文：向人曰： 好热天气，东西才落下地，怎就这等臭得快！ 
现代文：他对人说： 好热天气，东西才掉在地上，怎么就臭得这样快！ 
English: He said to the man: "It's a hot day, things just fall on the ground, why do they stink so fast!"

古文：兄弟认匾
现代文：兄弟认匾
English: Brothers confess their sins

古文：兄弟三人皆近视，同拜一客。堂上悬 遗清堂 一匾。
现代文：有兄弟三人都是近视，同去拜访一个客人，看见客人堂上悬挂 遗清堂 一匾。
English: Three brothers, all of whom were nearsighted, went to visit a guest together, and saw that the guest hall was hung with an 遺清堂 and a.

古文：伯曰： 主人原来患此病，不然何以取 遗精室 也。 
现代文：老大说： 主人原来患此病，不然为什么取名为 遗精室 呢？ 
English: The eldest said, "My master originally suffered from this disease, otherwise why was it named the semen collection room? "

古文：仲细看良久曰： 非也。想主人好道，故名 道情堂 耳。 
现代文：老二仔细看了许久说： 不是的，想必是主人好道，故取名 道情堂 。 
English: The second son looked at it carefully for a long time and said, "No, it must be because the owner is a good Taoist. That's why it's called the Taoist Love Hall."

古文：二人争论不已。以季弟目力更好，使辨之。
现代文：老大老二争论不休，认为三弟目力最好，让他辨认。
English: The eldest and the second argued endlessly, thinking that the third brother had the best eyesight, and asked him to identify it.

古文：乃张目眈视半晌。曰： 汝两人皆妄，上面安得有匾！ 
现代文：于是，老三瞪大眼睛瞅了半天说： 你们两人都错了，上面哪里有匾！ 
English: As a result, Lao San stared wide-eyed for half a day and said: Both of you are wrong, there is something wrong with it!

古文：麻卵袋
现代文：麻卵袋
English: sack of eggs

古文：文宗岁试唱名，吏善读别字。第一名 郁进徒 ，错唤曰： 都退後。 诸生闻之，皆山崩往后而退。
现代文：文宗岁试点名。官吏好读别字，第一名 郁进徒 念成 都退後。 众考生听后山崩般地向后退去。
English: The official was good at reading the Chinese characters, and the first-place student, Yancheng, retreated. After listening, all the candidates retreated like a landslide.

古文：次名 潘傅采 ，又错唤 番转来 ，诸生又跑上前。
现代文：第二名 潘傅采 又错念成 番转来 。众考生又跑上前。
English: The second place Pan Fu Cai also misread the number. The candidates ran forward again.

古文：宗师大怒，逐之。
现代文：宗师大怒，赶走了那个念别字的官吏。
English: The guru was furious and drove away the official who was chanting the farewell words.

古文：第三名林卯伐，上前谢曰： 多谢大宗师，若不斥逐此人，则生员必唤做 麻卵袋 了。 
现代文：第三名林卯伐，上前谢恩道： 多谢大宗师，如果不斥退那人，生员我必被唤做 麻卵袋 了。 
English: The third, Lin Yuhua, stepped forward and said, "Thank you, great master. If you don't expel that person, I'll be called to be a sack of eggs."

古文：赤鼻
现代文：赤鼻
English: Red Nose Day

古文：一官经过，有赤鼻者在旁，皂隶喝曰： 老爷专要拿吃酒的，还不快走！ 
现代文：有个当官的经过，一个红鼻子的人在旁边，差役吆喝说： 老爷专要捉拿吃酒的，还不快跑。 
English: An official was passing by, and a man with a red nose was standing next to him. The policeman shouted, "The man you're trying to catch is not running fast enough.

古文：其人无处躲闪，只得将鼻子塞进人家板缝中。官已过，里面人看见骂曰： 这人不达时务，外面多少毛厕，如何倒向人家屋里来撒尿？ 
现代文：红鼻子的人无处躲闪，只得将鼻子塞进人家板缝中，当官的已走过，屋里的人看见骂道： 这人不通晓时务，外面有许多茅厕，为什么偏向人家屋里来撒尿？ 
English: The man with the red nose had nowhere to hide, so he had to stick his nose into the cracks in the boards of other people's houses. The official had already passed by, and the people in the house saw him and scolded him: This man doesn't know the current affairs, there are many latrines outside, why does he prefer to pee in other people's houses?

古文：塌鼻狗
现代文：塌鼻狗
English: snub-nosed dog

古文：黄鼠狼遇狗追逐，即撒屁以触其鼻。
现代文：黄鼠狼如遇狗追逐，就撒屁以触其鼻。
English: If a weasel is chased by a dog, it will fart to touch its nose.

古文：有雄鼠觅食田间，被一犬逐之。鼠狼连放数屁，逐之愈甚，乃竭力跑脱。
现代文：有个雄性黄鼠狼在田间觅食，被一条狗追逐，黄鼠狼连放数屁，狗追赶更加厉害。
English: A male weasel was foraging in a field and was being chased by a dog. The weasel let out several farts and the dog gave chase even harder.

古文：至穴诉之雌鼠，雌鼠曰： 汝防身屁何在？ 曰： 连撒数屁，全然不理。 
现代文：黄鼠狼拼命逃脱后，回到洞穴告诉了雌黄鼠狼。雌鼠说： 你为何不放防身屁？ 雄鼠说： 连撒数屁，全然不理。 
English: After the weasel desperately escaped, he returned to the cave and told the female weasel. The female mouse said: Why don't you fart? The male mouse said: Even if you fart a few times, they won't pay any attention.

古文：雌鼠曰： 我知道了，决然是塌鼻狗。 
现代文：雌鼠说： 我知道了，肯定是个塌鼻狗。 
English: The female mouse said: I know, it must be a snub-nosed dog.

古文：齆鼻请酒
现代文：齆鼻请酒
English: 鼻请酒

古文：甲乙俱齆鼻。
现代文：甲乙二人都是齆鼻。
English: Both A and B have hooked noses.

古文：甲设席不能治柬，画秤、尺、笤帚各一件。
现代文：甲备酒席请乙，但不会写请帖，画 秤、尺、笤帚 各一件，让仆人送给乙。
English: A prepares a banquet for B, but cannot write an invitation, draws a scale, ruler, and pestle, and asks a servant to give them to B.

古文：乙见之，便意会曰： 秤尺帚。 乙答柬画蜈蚣一条、斧一把。
现代文：乙见了会意说： 请吃酒。 随后乙画了蜈蚣一条，斧子一把，让仆人捎回。
English: Seeing the meeting, B said, "Please have some wine." Then B drew a plough and an axe and asked the servant to plough it back.

古文：甲见之，点头曰： 蜈蚣斧。 
现代文：甲见了点头道： 无工夫。 鼻耐性
English: When A saw this, he nodded and said, "No effort.

古文：鼻耐性人患口臭，一友问曰： 别人也罢，亏你自家鼻头如何过了？ 
现代文：有个人患口臭，一个朋友问道： 别人也罢，亏你自己鼻头如何受得了？ 
English: A friend asked a man with bad breath, "How do you put up with that in your own nose, let alone someone else's?"

古文：旁人代答曰： 做了他的鼻头，随你臭极，也只索耐性跟他。 
现代文：旁人代答说： 做了他的鼻头，即使口臭得再厉害，它也只好耐着性子跟他。 
English: The bystander replied, "I made his nose, and even if his bad breath gets worse, he has to put up with it."

古文：残疾婿
现代文：残疾婿
English: Disabled son-in-law

古文：一家有三婿，俱带残疾。
现代文：某户人家有三个女婿，都带残疾。
English: One family has three disabled sons-in-law.

古文：长是瘌痢，次淌鼻脓，又次患疯癫。
现代文：长婿是瘌痢，二女婿是鼻脓，三女婿患疯癫。
English: The eldest son-in-law was suffering from dysentery, the second son-in-law from rhinitis, and the third son-in-law from insanity.

古文：翁一日请客，三婿在座，恐其各露本相，观瞻不雅，嘱咐俱要收敛。三人唯唯。
现代文：有一天老头请客，三位女婿在座，恐怕他们各露本相，观瞻不雅，便嘱咐他们都要收敛，三人答应了。
English: One day, the old man invited three of his sons-in-law to dinner. Fearing that they might not look their best, he ordered them all to restrain themselves. All three agreed.

古文：至中席，各人忍耐不住。
现代文：到了宴席时，三人实在忍耐不住。
English: When it came to the banquet, the three of them really couldn't stand it.

古文：长婿曰： 适从山上来，撞见一鹿，生得甚怪。 
现代文：长婿说： 刚才从山上来，撞见一鹿，长得十分怪异。 
English: The eldest son-in-law said, "I just came down from the mountains and ran into a deer. It looked very strange.

古文：众问何状。瘌痢头疮痒甚，用拳满首击曰： 这边一个角，那边一个角，满头生了无数角。 
现代文：大家问鹿长的是什么样子，长婿瘌痢头疮骚痒得十分厉害，便用拳头满头击打说： 这边一个角，那边一个角，满头长了无数角。 
English: Everyone asked what the deer looked like. The eldest son was very itchy, so he hit his head with his fist and said: "A horn here, a horn there, a head full of countless horns."

古文：其次鼻涕长流，正无计揩抹，随应声曰： 若我见了，拽起弓来，棚的一箭。 
现代文：二女婿鼻涕长流，正无计揩抹，听了长婿的话，接着应声道： 如果我见了，拽起弓来， 棚 的一箭。 
English: The second son-in-law, with a long stream of snot dripping from his nose, listened to his eldest son-in-law's words and then replied, "If I see you, I'll draw my bow and shoot you an arrow."

古文：急将右手作挽弓状，鼻间一拂，涕尽拭去。
现代文：边说边急忙将右手作挽弓状，在鼻间一抹，鼻涕全部被揩去。
English: While talking, he hurriedly made his right hand into a bow, wiped it between his nostrils, and all the snot was sucked out.

古文：三癞子浑身发痒难禁，忙将身背牵耸曰： 你倒胆大，还要射他！把我见了，几乎吓杀，几乎吓杀。 
现代文：三女婿浑身发痒，难以自控，忙将身体伸拉说： 你倒大胆，还要射它，我若看见几乎吓死，几乎吓死。 
English: The third son-in-law, itching all over and unable to control himself, quickly stretched out his body and said, "How dare you shoot it. If I see it, I'll almost die of fright. Almost die of fright."

古文：争座
现代文：争座
English: Contested seats

古文：眼与眉毛曰： 我有许多用处，你一无所能，反坐在我的上位。 
现代文：眼睛跟眉毛说： 我有许多用处，你却一无所能，却坐在我的上位。 
English: The eyes and eyebrows say: I have many uses, but you can do nothing, yet you sit above me.

古文：聋耳一医者耳聋，至一家看病女人。
现代文：眉毛回答说： 我的确没用，只是如果没我在上面，看你还像个人哩！ 
English: The eyebrows answered: "I am indeed useless, but if I am not there, you still look like a human being!"

古文：病女问： 莲心吃得否？ 医者曰： 面筋发病，是吃不得的。 
现代文：聋耳有个医生耳聋，到一病女家看病。病女问莲心是否能吃，医生说： 面筋是吃不得的。 
English: A deaf doctor went to a sick woman's home to see if she could eat lotus hearts. The doctor said, "You can't eat gluten."

古文：病女曰： 是莲肉。 
现代文：病女说： 是莲肉。 
English: The sick woman said, "It's lotus meat."

古文：医者曰： 就是盐肉，也要少吃些。 
现代文：医生说： 就是盐肉，也要少吃些。 
English: The doctor said: Even salted meat should be eaten sparingly.

古文：病女曰： 先生耳朵是聋的。 
现代文：病女说： 先生耳朵是聋的。 
English: The sick girl said, "Teacher, my ears are deaf.

古文：医者曰： 若是里股是红的，只怕要生横痃，倒要脱开来，待我看看好用药。 
现代文：医生说： 如果里股是红的，只怕是横痃，倒要脱下来，待我看看好用药。 
English: The doctor said, "If the groin is red, even if it's just a transverse mole, you should take it off and wait for me to take a look before using the medicine."

