古文：赠少傅。刘子羽，字彦修，建之崇安人，资政殿学士韐之长子也。
现代文：刘子羽字彦修，崇安人，资政殿学士刘韦合的长子。
English: Liu Zihua, the eldest son of Liu Weihe, a scholar of the Academy of Governance, was from Chong'an.

古文：宣和末，韐帅浙东，子羽以主管机宜文字佐其父。
现代文：宣和末年，刘韦合任浙东军事长官，刘子羽以主管机宜文字的官职辅佐他的父亲。
English: In the late years of the declaration of peace, Liu Wei served as the military commander of eastern Zhejiang, and Liu Zi Yu assisted his father with the official post of chief of the Qigong script.

古文：破睦贼，入主太府、太仆簿，迁卫尉丞。
现代文：击破睦州贼寇，入朝主管太府、太仆簿，升任卫尉丞。
English: He defeated the Mutsu bandits, entered the imperial court as the head of the Taifu and the Taihakusho, and was promoted to the rank of Lieutenant-General.

古文：韐守真定，子羽辟从。
现代文：刘韦合守卫真定，刘子羽被批准随从。
English: Liu Weihe guarded Zhending, and Liu Zi Yu was approved to accompany him.

古文：会金人入，父子相誓死守，金人不能拔而去，由是知名。
现代文：恰逢金军入侵，父子立誓死守，金军不能攻拔而退走，因此出名。
English: Coinciding with the invasion of the Golden Army, father and son swore to defend to the death, the Golden Army could not attack and withdrew, so they became famous.

古文：除直秘阁。
现代文：朝廷任命他为直秘阁。
English: The Imperial Court appointed him as a direct secretary of the cabinet.

古文：京城不守，韐死之，既免丧，除秘阁修撰、知池州。
现代文：京城失守，刘韦合战死，免除服丧后，朝廷任命刘子羽为秘阁修撰、知池州。
English: The capital was lost, Liu Wei was killed in battle, and after he was exempted from mourning, the imperial court appointed Liu Zi Yu as the secretary of the secret cabinet and the leader of Chichi Prefecture.

古文：以书抵宰相，论天下兵势，当以秦、陇为根本。
现代文：写信给宰相，议论天下军事形势，应当以秦、陇作为根本。
English: When writing a letter to the prime minister and discussing the military situation in the world, Qin and Qi should be taken as the basis.

古文：改集英殿修撰、知秦州。
现代文：改任集英殿修撰、知秦州。
English: He was reassigned to Shueiden Shusan and Chichin State.

古文：未行，召赴行在，除枢密院检详文字。
现代文：还没出发，诏令他到行营，担任枢密院检详文字。
English: Before he left, the emperor ordered him to go to the encampment to serve as a Privy Council scrutineer.

古文：建炎三年，大将范琼拥强兵江西，召之弗来，来又不肯释兵。
现代文：建炎三年，大将范琼在江西手握重兵，召他不至，来了后又不肯放弃兵权。
English: After three years of construction, General Fan Qiong held a heavy army in Jiangxi, called him to come, and then refused to give up military power.

古文：知枢密院事张浚，与子羽密谋诛之。
现代文：知枢密院事张浚，同刘子羽密谋诛杀他。
English: Zhang Jun knew about the Privy Council and conspired with Liu Zi Yu to kill him.

古文：一日，命张俊以千兵渡江，若备他盗者，使皆甲而来。
现代文：一天，命令张俊率兵一千人渡江，装作防备其他盗贼，使他们都身穿铠甲前来。
English: One day, Zhang Jun ordered a thousand soldiers to cross the river, pretending to guard against other thieves, so that they all came in armor.

古文：因召俊、琼及刘光世赴都堂议事，为设饮食，食已，诸公相顾未发。
现代文：于是召张俊、范琼和刘光世到枢密院大堂议事，并设宴招待，食罢，众人互相观望不敢发动。
English: As a result, Zhang Jun, Fan Qiong and Liu Guangshi were summoned to the lobby of the Privy Council for deliberation, and a banquet was set up. After eating, everyone watched each other and did not dare to move.

古文：子羽坐庑下，恐琼觉，取黄纸趋前，举以麾琼曰： 下，有敕，将军可诣大理置对。 琼愕不知所为，子羽顾左右拥置舆中，卫以俊兵，送狱。
现代文：刘子羽坐在对面的小屋里，恐怕时间一长被范琼觉察，取出黄纸来到堂前，举起对范琼说： 皇上有敕令下，将军可到大理寺对质。 范琼惊愕不知是干什么，刘子羽让左右把范琼拥进车中，用张俊的兵力护卫，送到狱中。
English: Liu Zi Yu was sitting in the opposite hut, and was probably noticed by Fan Qiong for a long time. He took out a piece of yellow paper, came to the front of the hall, and held it up to Fan Qiong and said, "The emperor has issued an order, and the general can go to Dali Temple to confront him." Fan Qiong was stunned and didn't know what to do. Liu Zi Yu let Fan Qiong be pushed into the car and escorted to the prison by Zhang Jun's troops.

古文：光世出抚其众，数琼在围城中附金人迫二帝出狩状。
现代文：刘光世出去安抚范琼部众，历数范琼在京城被包围时依附金朝逼迫徽、钦两帝北去的罪状，并说： 所诛杀的只有范琼一人，你等本是皇上自己率领的军队。 
English: Liu Guangshi went out to appease Fan Qiong's followers, recounting the charges that Fan Qiong had adhered to the Kim dynasty to persecute Hui and Qin emperors to go north when the capital was besieged, and said: Only Fan Qiong was killed, and you were the army led by the emperor himself.

古文：且曰： 所诛止琼尔，汝等固天子自将之兵也。 众皆投刃曰： 诺。 有旨分隶御营五军，顷刻而定。琼竟伏诛。
现代文：众人都放下武器说 ：是。 朝廷降旨将范琼的兵力分散隶属御营五军中，军心片刻安定下来。范琼最终被诛杀。
English: Everyone put down their weapons and said, "Yes." The imperial court decreed that Fan Qiong's forces be dispersed among the five armies of the imperial camp, and the military spirit settled down for a moment. Fan Qiong was eventually killed.

古文：浚以此奇其材。
现代文：张浚因此惊奇刘子羽的才能。
English: Zhang Jun was therefore surprised by Liu Zi Yu's talent.

古文：浚宣抚川、陕，辟子羽参议军事。
现代文：张浚奉命任川、陕宣抚使，奏请让刘子羽参谋军事。
English: Zhang Jun was assigned to be the envoy to Sichuan and Shaanxi, and requested Liu Zi Yu to be the military staff officer.

古文：至秦州，立幕府，节度五路诸将，规以五年而后出师。
现代文：到达秦州，设立幕府，指挥五路各将，规划五年以后出师北伐。
English: Arrived in Qinzhou, established the shogunate, commanded the five generals, and planned to join the Northern Expedition five years later.

古文：明年，除徽猷阁待制。
现代文：次年，朝廷任命刘子羽为徽猷阁待制。
English: The following year, the Imperial Court appointed Liu Zi Yu to be the next Emperor of the State of Hebei.

古文：金人窥江、淮急，浚念禁卫寡弱，计所以分挠其兵势者，遂合五路之兵以进。
现代文：金军窥视江淮紧急，张浚想到禁卫军人数少而战斗力又弱，计议分散阻挠敌军势头，于是集合五路兵马前进。
English: The Chinese army peered into the urgent situation of the Huai River. Zhang Jun thought that the number of the guards was small and the combat effectiveness was weak. He planned to disperse and block the enemy's momentum, so he gathered five soldiers and horses to advance.

古文：子羽以非本计，争之。
现代文：刘子羽认为这不是本来的计策，同张浚争论。
English: Liu Zi Yu thought that this was not the original strategy and argued with Zhang Jun.

古文：浚曰： 吾宁不知此？
现代文：张浚说 ：我难道不知道这一点？
English: Zhang Jun said: Didn't I know this?

古文：顾今东南之事方急，不得不为是耳。 遂北至富平，与金人遇，战不利。
现代文：但是现在东南事情正处危急之中，迫不得已这样做罢了。 于是向北到富平，同金军相遇，战斗失利。
English: However, now that the situation in Southeast Asia is in a critical situation, this was the last thing they could do, so they headed north to Fuping, where they encountered the Chinese army and lost the battle.

古文：金人乘胜而前，宣抚司退保兴州，人情大震。
现代文：金军乘胜前进，宣抚司退保兴州，民心大震。
English: The Chinese army advanced on the strength of its victory, the Propaganda Department retreated to Baoxing Prefecture, and the people's hearts were shaken.

古文：官属有建策徙治夔州者，子羽叱之曰： 孺子可斩也！
现代文：官属中有人建议将宣抚司移到夔州，刘子羽斥责他说： 孺子应当斩首！
English: One of the officials suggested moving the propaganda department to Zhangzhou. Liu Zihua rebuked him, saying: "The mule should be beheaded!"

古文：四川全盛，敌欲入寇久矣，直以川口有铁山、栈道之险，未敢遽窥耳。
现代文：四川地位十分重要，敌人打算侵入蓄谋已久，只因川口有铁山、栈道险隘，不敢贸然窥视罢了。
English: Sichuan's status is very important. The enemy has been plotting to invade for a long time, but because there is an iron mountain at the mouth of the river and a steep path, they dare not look too closely.

古文：今不坚守，纵使深入，而吾僻处夔、峡，遂与关中声援不相闻，进退失计，悔将何及。
现代文：今不坚守此地，纵任敌军深入，而我却居于偏僻的夔、峡，遂使同关中地区的音讯阻绝，进退失策，将后悔莫及。
English: If I don't stick to this place now, even if the enemy troops go deeper, and I live in a remote pass or gorge, I will block the news in the same area and make mistakes in advance and retreat, and I will regret it.

古文：庶几犹或可以补前愆而赎后咎，奈何乃为此言乎？ 浚然子羽言，而诸参佐无敢行者。
现代文：今天幸运的是敌人正在四处抢劫，没有逼近附近的州郡。宣抚司只应留驻在兴州，以在外维系关中军民的希望，内部安定保全四川的民心；急忙派遣官员出关，召呼众将，收集离散的士卒，分布在险隘之地，坚壁固垒，伺机而动，这样才可以弥补以前的过错而抵销以后的责罚，怎么能说出这样的话呢？ 
English: Today, fortunately, the enemy is looting everywhere, and has not approached the nearby prefectures and counties. The Propaganda and Publicity Department should only stay in Xingzhou, in order to maintain the hope of the soldiers and civilians of Guanzhong in the outside world, and to maintain the internal stability of the people's hearts in Sichuan; hastily send officials out of Guanzhong, call generals, collect scattered soldiers, distribute them in dangerous places, fortify walls, and wait for opportunities, so that they can make up for previous mistakes and offset future punishments. How can you say such a thing?

古文：子羽即自请奉命北出，复以单骑至秦州，召诸亡将。
现代文：张俊认为刘子羽说的对，但众参佐中无人敢于前往。刘子羽当即请求奉命北去，单人独骑到秦州，召集各位离散的将领。
English: Zhang Jun thought that Liu Zi Yu was right, but none of the senators dared to go. Liu Zi Yu immediately requested and was ordered to go north, ride alone to Qinzhou, and gather all the scattered generals.

古文：诸亡将闻命大喜，悉以其众来会。
现代文：众将听说命令大喜，全部率众前来会合。
English: When the generals heard about the order, they were overjoyed and all of them led the people to come to the meeting.

古文：子羽命吴玠栅和尚原，守大散关，而分兵悉守诸险塞。
现代文：刘子羽命令吴在和尚原立寨，守卫大散关，又分兵守卫所有险隘要塞。
English: Liu Zi Yu ordered Wu to set up a village in Monzhangyuan, guard the Great Sankuan Pass, and have detachments guard all the narrow fortresses.

古文：金人知有备，引去。
现代文：金军知道宋军有准备，退走。
English: The Jin Army knew that the Song Army was prepared and withdrew.

古文：明年，金人复聚兵来攻，再为玠所败。
现代文：第二年，金军又聚兵前来进攻，再次被吴击败。
English: The following year, the Jin army again gathered troops to attack, and was again defeated by Wu.

古文：浚移治阆州，子羽请独留河池，调护诸将，以通内外声援，浚许之。
现代文：张浚将宣抚司移到阆州，刘子羽请求独自留在河池，以调度众将，沟通内外消息，张浚答应了他。
English: Zhang Jun moved the propaganda department to Zhangzhou, Liu Zi Yu asked to stay alone in Hechi to dispatch generals and communicate domestic and foreign news, Zhang Jun agreed to him.

古文：明年，玠以秦凤经略使戍河池，王彦以金、均、房镇抚使戍金州。
现代文：次年，吴以秦凤经略使的身份戍守河池，王彦以金、均、房镇抚使的身份戍守金州。
English: The following year, Wu stayed in Hechi as the envoy of Qin Fengjing, and Wang Yan stayed in Jinzhou as the envoy of Jin, Jun and Fangzhen.

古文：二镇皆饥，兴元帅臣闭籴，二镇病之。
现代文：两地都发生饥荒，兴元守臣关闭粮食交易，两地对此极为不满。
English: Famine occurred in both places, and Xingyuan Shouwen closed the grain trade. Both places were extremely dissatisfied with this.

古文：玠、彦皆愿得子羽守汉中，浚乃承制拜子羽利州路经略使兼知兴元府。
现代文：吴、王彦都愿意刘子羽守卫汉中，张浚于是按照朝廷诏命任命刘子羽为利州路经略使兼知兴元府。
English: Wu and Wang Yan were both willing to have Liu Zi Yu guard Han Zhong, so Zhang Jun, in accordance with the imperial edict, appointed Liu Zi Yu to be the Li Prefecture's envoy and the Chixing Yuanfu.

古文：子羽至汉中，通商输粟，二镇遂安。
现代文：刘子羽到汉中，开放通商转输粮食，两地于是安定。
English: Liu Zi Yu came to Hanzhong, opened up trade and transferred grain, and the two places became stable.

古文：除宝文阁直学士。
现代文：朝廷任命刘子羽为宝文阁直学士。
English: The imperial court appointed Liu Zi Yu as the first direct graduate of Baowen Pavilion.

古文：是冬，金人犯金州。
现代文：这年冬天，金军侵犯金州。
English: This winter, the Chinese army invaded Jinzhou.

古文：三年正月，王彦失守，退保石泉。
现代文：绍兴三年正月，王彦守卫的金州失守，退保石泉。
English: In the first month of the third year of Shaoxing, Wang Yan lost the defense of Jinzhou and withdrew to Shiquan.

古文：子羽亟移兵守饶风岭，驰告玠。
现代文：刘子羽急忙移兵守卫饶风岭，快马驰告吴。
English: Liu Zi Yu hurriedly moved his troops to guard Rao Fengling, and galloped to Wu.

古文：玠大惊，即越境而东，日夜驰三百里至饶风，列营拒守。
现代文：吴大惊，立即率部越境向东，日夜兼程三百里赶到饶风，列营守卫抵御。
English: Wu was shocked, and immediately led his troops to cross the border to the east, traveling three hundred miles day and night to catch up with the wind, and guarding the camp against it.

古文：金人悉力仰攻，死伤山积，更募死士，由间道自祖溪关入，绕出玠后。
现代文：金军尽全力向上仰攻，死伤如同山积，改变方法召募死士，从小路自祖溪关进入，绕出吴背后。
English: The Chinese army made every effort to attack uphill, and the deaths and injuries were like a mountain. They changed the method of recruiting dead soldiers, entering from Zu Xiguan via a small road, and going around the back of Wu.

古文：玠遽邀子羽去，子羽不可，而留玠同守定军山，玠难之，遂西。
现代文：吴急忙邀请刘子羽离去，刘子羽不同意，反而留吴共同守卫定军山，吴感到很困难，于是率部西去。
English: Wu hurriedly invited Liu Zi Yu to leave. Liu Zi Yu did not agree, but instead left Wu to jointly guard Dingjun Mountain. Wu felt very difficult, so he led his troops west.

古文：子羽焚兴元，退守三泉县，从兵不满三百，与士卒取草牙、木甲食之，遗玠书诀别。
现代文：刘子羽焚毁兴元，退守三泉县，随从的士兵不满三百人，与士卒取草芽、树皮充饥，写信给吴诀别。
English: Liu Zi Yu burned and destroyed Xingyuan and retreated to Siquan County. He was accompanied by less than 300 soldiers. He and his soldiers gathered sprouts and bark to satisfy their hunger and wrote a farewell letter to Wu.

古文：玠时在仙人关，其爱将杨政大呼军门曰： 节使不可负刘待制，不然，政辈亦舍节使去矣。 玠乃间道会子羽，子羽留玠共守三泉。
现代文：吴当时在仙人关，他的爱将杨政在营门前大声呼喊： 节使不能背负刘待制，否则，我们也要舍弃节使离去了。 吴才从小道会合刘子羽，刘子羽挽留吴共守三泉县。
English: Wu was in Xianren Pass at the time, and his love interest Yang Zheng shouted loudly in front of the gate of the camp: "We can't carry Liu Bei on our backs, otherwise, we'll have to abandon him and leave." Wu only met Liu Zi Yu from the trail, and Liu Zi Yu retained Wu to jointly guard Sanquan County.

古文：玠曰： 关外蜀之门户，不可轻弃。 复往守仙人关。
现代文：吴说 ：关外是四川的门户，不能轻易放弃。 又回去守卫仙人关。
English: Wu said: "Guanwei is the gateway to Sichuan, and we cannot give it up so easily.

古文：子羽以潭毒山形斗拔，其上宽平有水，乃筑壁垒，十六日而成。
现代文：刘子羽因为潭毒山形状如斗挺立，上面宽平有水泉，于是修筑营垒，十六天后竣工。
English: Liu Zi Yu, because the shape of the lake-poisoned mountain was like a dipper, and there was a wide plain with a water spring above, built a camp, which was completed sixteen days later.

古文：金人已至，距营十数里。
现代文：金军已经来到，距离营垒十余里。
English: The gold army has arrived, more than ten miles away from the camp.

古文：子羽据胡床，坐于垒口。
现代文：刘子羽把一架床置于营门口，坐在上面。
English: Liu Zi Yu placed a bed at the gate of the camp and sat on it.

古文：诸将泣告曰： 此非待制坐处。 子羽曰： 子羽今日死于此。 敌寻亦引去。
现代文：众将哭着请求说 ：此处不是待制坐的地方。 刘子羽说 ：我今天就死在这里。 敌军不久也退走。
English: Crying and pleading, the generals said, "This is not a place to sit idly by," and Liu Zihua said, "I will die here today."

古文：自金人入梁、洋，四蜀复大震。
现代文：自从金军侵入梁、洋州，四川又极为震动。
English: Since the invasion of Liang and Yangzhou by the Chinese army, Sichuan has been extremely shaken.

古文：张浚欲移潼川，子羽遗浚书，言己在此，金人必不南，浚乃止。
现代文：张浚准备转移到潼川，刘子羽写信给他，说已经到了这里，金军必然不会进一步南下，张俊才停止。
English: Zhang Jun was preparing to move to Luochuan. Liu Zi Yu wrote to him, saying that he had already arrived here, and that the Chinese army would certainly not go further south. Zhang Jun only stopped moving.

古文：撒离曷由斜谷北去，子羽谋邀之于武休，不及，既回凤翔，遣十人持书旗招子羽，子羽尽斩之，而留其一，纵之还，曰： 为我语贼，欲来即来，吾有死尔，何可招也！ 先是，子羽预徙梁、洋公私之积，至是，金人深入，馈不继，又腹背为子羽、玠所攻，死伤十五六，疫疠且作，亟遁去。
现代文：撒离喝从斜谷北归，刘子羽谋划在武休邀击他，没有追上，撒离喝回到凤翔后，派遣十人拿着书信旗号招降刘子羽，刘子羽把他们全部杀掉，只留下一人，放他回去，说： 替我告诉撒离喝，要来就来，我只有一死，怎么会接受招降！ 开始，刘子羽预先将梁、洋公私积蓄全部转移，到这时，金军深入宋境，粮饷不继，背后又被刘子羽、吴攻击，部众死伤的十占五六，加上发生瘟疫，急忙逃走。
English: When Liu Zi Yu returned north from the valley, Liu Zi Yu planned to invite him to attack him in Wuxiu, but he did not catch up. After Liu Zi Yu returned to Fengxiang, he sent ten people with the letter banner to recruit Liu Zi Yu. Liu Zi Yu killed them all, leaving only one person, let him go back, saying: Tell Liu Zi Yu for me, if you want to come, come, I only have one death, how can I accept the recruitment and demotion! At the beginning, Liu Zi Yu transferred Liang, Yang Gong and private savings in advance. By this time, the Golden Army had penetrated deep into the Song territory,

古文：子羽出师掩击，堕溪涧死者不可胜计，余兵不能自拔者，悉降。
现代文：刘子羽派兵掩击，坠入深涧而死的不可胜计，其余不能逃走的士兵，全部投降。
English: Liu Zi Yu sent soldiers to cover the attack, but they fell into the depths and died. The remaining soldiers who could not escape all surrendered.

古文：始，金人攻蜀，所选士卒千取百，百取十；战被重铠，登山攻险，每一人前，辄二人推其后，前者死，后者被其甲以进，又死，则又代之，其为必取计如此。
现代文：当初，金军进攻四川，所选的士卒是千中取百，百中取十；战斗时披重铠，登山攻险，每一人在前，两人在后推行，前面的战死，后面的披其铠甲前进，又死，则又会有后继者代替他，就这样一定要到攻取为止。
English: At the beginning, when the Golden Army attacked Sichuan, the selected soldiers were 100 out of a thousand and 10 out of a hundred; when fighting, they wore heavy coats, and when climbing, everyone was in front, and two were behind. If the front died in battle, and the rear advanced with its armor and died again, then there would be a successor to replace him. In this way, they must go on until the conquest.

古文：浚虽衄师，卒全蜀，子羽之力居多。
现代文：张浚虽然战败，但最终得以保全四川，刘子羽出力最大。
English: Although Zhang Jun was defeated, he was eventually able to preserve Sichuan, and Liu Zi Yu had the greatest output.

古文：子羽还兴元。
现代文：刘子羽返回兴元。
English: Liu Zi Yu returned to Xingyuan.

古文：四年，坐富平之役，与浚俱罢。
现代文：绍兴四年，因受富平战役失败的牵连，刘子羽同张浚一起被罢免。
English: In the fourth year of Shaoxing, Liu Zi Yu and Zhang Jun were both removed from their posts because they were implicated in the defeat of the Battle of Fuping.

古文：寻为言者所论，责授单州团练副使，白州安置。
现代文：不久又被议论者所攻击，贬任单州团练副使，安置到白州。
English: Soon after, he was attacked by commentators, demoted to the position of vice-envoy for group training in Shan State, and relocated to Baizhou.

古文：新除川、陕宣抚副使吴玠，始为裨将，未知名。
现代文：新任川陕宣抚副使吴，开始时是偏将，没有什么名声。
English: Wu, the newly appointed vice-envoy of the Sichuan-Shaanxi Proclamation, was a partial general at the beginning and had little reputation.

古文：子羽独奇之，言于浚，浚与语大悦，使尽护诸将。
现代文：刘子羽独自惊奇他的才能，推荐给张浚，张浚同吴谈话后大喜，让他指挥众将。
English: Liu Zi Yu alone was surprised by his talent and recommended him to Zhang Jun. Zhang Jun was overjoyed after talking with Wu and let him command the generals.

古文：至是，上疏论子羽之功，请纳节赎其罪。诏听子羽自便。
现代文：到这时，吴上奏论述刘子羽的功绩，请求交还自己的官职以抵消刘子羽的罪名。
English: At this time, Wu Shangso discussed Liu Zi Yu's achievements and requested to return his official position to offset Liu Zi Yu's crime.

古文：明年，复元官，提举江州太平观。
现代文：诏令刘子羽随意择处安居，次年，复任原官，提举江州太平观。
English: The edict ordered Liu Zi Yu to choose a safe place to live at will, and the following year, he was reinstated as the original official, and Jiangzhou Taiping Guan was promoted.

古文：张浚还朝，议合兵大举，乃请召子羽，令谕旨西帅，以集英殿修撰知鄂州。
现代文：张浚重新回朝任职后，计议集中兵力大举攻金，于是请求召回刘子羽，让他向西部将帅说明朝廷旨意，任命刘子羽以集英殿修撰身份知鄂州。
English: After Zhang Jun returned to the imperial court, he planned to concentrate his forces to attack Jin, so he requested Liu Zi Yu to be recalled, asked him to explain the imperial court's will to the western commander, and appointed Liu Zi Yu to know Ezhou as a member of the imperial court.

古文：未几，权都督府参议军事，与主管机宜文字熊彦诗同抚谕川、陕。
现代文：不久，任都督府参议军事，同主管机宜文字熊彦诗一起抚慰川、陕。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as a military councilor of the prefectural government, and together with the competent and expedient writer Xiong Yanxi, he went to soothe Sichuan and Shaanxi.

古文：时吴玠屡言军前乏粮，故令子羽见玠谕指，且与都转运使赵开计事，并察边备虚实以闻，时五年冬也。
现代文：当时吴多次奏说军中缺粮，因此命令刘子羽会见吴说明旨意，并与都转运使赵开计议供应事宜，同时考察边境防务的虚实情况上报，这时是绍兴五年冬天。
English: At that time, Wu repeatedly said that there was a shortage of grain in the army, so he ordered Liu Zi Yu to meet with Wu to explain his will, and with both of them to transfer Zhao to discuss supply matters, and at the same time to investigate and report the false situation of border defense. This was the winter of Shaoxing in the fifth year.

古文：明年秋，与彦诗同还朝。
现代文：第二年秋天，与熊彦诗一同返回朝廷。
English: In the autumn of the following year, he returned to the Imperial Court together with Kumahikoshi.

古文：子羽言： 金人未可图，宜益兵屯田，以俟机会。 时张浚以淮西安抚使刘光世骄惰不肃，密奏请罢之，而以其兵属子羽。
现代文：刘子羽说： 金朝不能轻易图谋，应该增兵屯田，等待机会。 当时张浚因为淮西安抚使刘光世骄逸懈惰军纪不严，密奏请求将他罢免，而把他的兵权交给刘子羽。
English: Liu Zi Yu said: The Kim dynasty cannot easily plot, it should increase the number of troops in the field and wait for an opportunity. At that time, Zhang Jun, because of the appeasement of Huaixi, made Liu Guangshi arrogant and lazy, and the military discipline was not strict. He secretly requested to remove him and give his military power to Liu Zi Yu.

古文：子羽辞，乃以徽猷阁待制知泉州。
现代文：刘子羽推辞，于是任命他以徽猷阁待制的身份出知泉州。
English: Liu Zi Yu refused, so he appointed him as the leader of Quanzhou.

古文：七年，淮西郦琼叛，张浚罢相。
现代文：绍兴七年，淮西郦琼反叛，张浚被罢免宰相职务。
English: In the seventh year of Shaoxing, Huaxi Yanqiong rebelled, and Zhang Jun was removed from the post of prime minister.

古文：八年，御史常同论子羽十罪，上批出 白州安置 。
现代文：绍兴八年，御史常同论说刘子羽十项罪状，高宗批 白州安置 。
English: In the eighth year of Shaoxing, Gu Shi Changtong argued that Liu Zi Yu was guilty of ten crimes, and Gao Zong approved his resettlement in Baizhou.

古文：赵鼎曰： 章疏中论及结吴玠事，今方倚玠，恐不自安。 同疏再上，以散官安置漳州。
现代文：赵鼎说： 章疏中说到刘子羽勾结吴的事情，现在正依赖吴，恐怕他难以自安。 常同再次上奏，刘子羽以散官被安置到漳州。
English: Zhao Ding said: Zhang Zuo mentioned Liu Zi Yu's collusion with Wu, and now he is relying on Wu, I'm afraid he can't be at ease. Chang Tong played again, and Liu Zi Yu was placed in Zhangzhou as a non-official.

古文：十一年，枢密使张浚荐子羽复元官，知镇江府兼沿江安抚使。
现代文：绍兴十一年，枢密使张浚推荐恢复刘子羽原来职务，刘子羽被任命为知镇江府兼任沿江安抚使。
English: In the eleventh year of Shaoxing, the confidential envoy Zhang Jun recommended the restoration of Liu Zi Yu's original duties. Liu Zi Yu was appointed to Zhizhenjiang Prefecture and concurrently served as a peacekeeper along the river.

古文：金人入寇，子羽建议清野，淮东之人，皆徙镇江，抚以恩信，虽兵民杂居，无敢相侵者。
现代文：金军南下入侵，刘子羽建议坚壁清野，淮东的民众，都迁徙到镇江，用恩信安抚，虽然兵民杂居一起，没有人敢于互相侵犯。
English: When the gold army invaded the south, Liu Zi Yu suggested that Qianbi Qingye should take the lead, and the people of Huaidong all migrated to Zhenjiang and were pacified with the letter of gratitude. Although soldiers and civilians lived together, no one dared to encroach on each other.

古文：既而金人不至，浚问子羽，子羽曰： 异时金人入寇，飘忽如风雨，今久迟回，必有他意。 盖金人以柘皋之败，欲急和也。
现代文：不久金军没来，张浚询问刘子羽，刘子羽说： 从前金军入侵，飘忽不定犹如风雨，现在久驻不归，必定有其他意图。 原来是金朝由于柘皋之败，急于同宋讲和。
English: Not long after, the Chinese army did not come, and Zhang Jun asked Liu Zi Yu about it. Liu Zi Yu said, "In the past, the Chinese army invaded and wandered like the wind and rain, but now they have not returned for a long time, so they must have other intentions. It turned out that the Kim dynasty was in a hurry to make peace with the Song dynasty because of the defeat of Chiang Kai-shek.

古文：未几，果遣使议和。
现代文：不久，金果然派使者前来议和。
English: Soon after, Kim sent an envoy to negotiate peace.

古文：复徽猷阁待制。
现代文：复任徽猷阁待制。
English: He was reappointed to Huiyangge.

古文：秦桧风谏官论罢之，复提举太平观。
现代文：秦桧暗示谏官上奏罢免刘子羽，又提举太平观。
English: Qin Yu hinted that the eunuchs should call for the dismissal of Liu Zi Yu, and also raised the idea of Taiping.

古文：十六年，卒。
现代文：绍兴十六年，刘子羽去世。
English: In the 16th year of Shaoxing, Liu Zi Yu passed away.

古文：子珙，自有传。
现代文：子刘珙，另有传记。
English: His son, Liu Ye, has another biography.

古文：吏部郎朱松以子熹托子羽，子羽与弟子翚笃教之，异时卒为大儒云。
现代文：吏部郎朱松将儿子朱熹托付给刘子羽，刘子羽同弟弟刘子一心一意地教育他，后来终于成为大学问家。
English: Zhusong, a bureaucrat, entrusted his son Zhu Xi to Liu Zi Yu. Liu Zi Yu and his brother Liu Zi devotedly educated him, and later he finally became a university professor.

古文：吕祉，字安老，建州建阳人。
现代文：吕祉字安老，建州建阳人。
English: Lv Zhi is an old man, Jianzhou is a young man.

古文：宣和初，上舍释褐。
现代文：宣和初年，以上舍生得到官职。
English: In the first year after the declaration of peace, the above-mentioned students received official positions.

古文：建炎二年，为右正言，以论事忤执政，通判明州。
现代文：建炎二年，任右正言，因为上章论事忤逆当朝执政，出任明州通判。
English: In the second year of Jianyan, he was appointed to the post of the Right Chief Councilor, and because the previous chapter was about treachery when the government was in power, he was appointed to the post of the Ming State Chief Judge.

古文：绍兴元年，盗起湖南、北，为荆湖提刑。祉既至，招捕有方，逾年盗平。
现代文：绍兴元年，湖南、湖北地区盗贼蜂起，吕祉任荆湖提刑，来到之后，招降捕获有方，一年后盗贼平定。
English: In the first year of Shaoxing, the thieves in Hunan and Hubei regions revolted, and Lv Zili was appointed by Jinghu to impose punishment. After he arrived, he invited and captured Yifang, and the thieves were subdued a year later.

古文：进直秘阁，寻召赴行在。
现代文：进任直秘阁，不久召他到行在。
English: He was appointed to the direct secretary cabinet, and was soon called to the line.

古文：淮南宣抚使韩世忠将出师，辟祉议军事，除直徽猷阁，充参议官，辞不行。
现代文：淮南宣抚使韩世忠准备出师，奏请让吕祉议军事，朝廷任命吕祉直徽猷阁，充任参议官，吕祉推辞没有到任。
English: Huainan proclaims that Han Shizhong is ready to enter the army, and asks Lv Zhi to discuss military affairs. The imperial court appoints Lv Zhi Zhihui to serve as a councillor, but Lv Zhi's resignation is not accepted.

古文：三年，升直龙图阁、知建康府。
现代文：绍兴三年，升任直龙图阁、知建康府。
English: After three years in Shaoxing, he was promoted to the posts of Zhilong Tu Ge and Zhijian Kangfu.

古文：祉到官，与通判府事吴若、安抚司准备差遣陈充共议，作《东南防守利便》三卷上之，大略谓： 立国于东南者，当联络淮甸、荆、蜀之势，今临安僻在海隅，移跸江上，然后可以系南北离散之心。 
现代文：吕祉到任后，与通判府事吴若、安抚司准备差遣陈充共同商议，著作《东南防守利便》三卷上报朝廷，大概是说： 立国于东南地区，应当联络淮甸、荆、蜀成一体，现在临安地处偏僻的海边，应移居长江一带，然后才能够维系南北离散的民心。 
English: After Lv Zhi took office, he discussed with the chief magistrate, the prefectural magistrate Wu Ruo, and the appeasement department preparing to send Chen Chong. The three-volume work "Southeast Defense Convenience" was reported to the imperial court, probably saying: Founded in the southeastern region, it should connect Huai Dian, Jing and Shu into one. Now it is located in Lin'an on the remote coast. It should move to the Yangtze River area. Then it will be able to maintain the discrete people's hearts in the north and south.

古文：四年冬，金人攻淮，江左戒严，独韩世忠统锐卒在高邮。
现代文：绍兴四年冬，金军进攻淮河地区，江左地区戒严，只有韩世忠率领精兵驻屯在高邮。
English: In the winter of the fourth year of Shaoxing, the Chinese army attacked the Huaihe area, and the area to the left of the river was under martial law. Only Han Shizhong led the elite soldiers stationed in Gaoyou.

古文：金既陷涟水，破山阳、盱眙，遂犯承州。
现代文：金军攻陷涟水之后，攻破山阳、盱眙，于是进犯承州。
English: After conquering Surabaya, the Chinese army broke through Shanyang and Handan, and then attacked Chenzhou.

古文：祉上章言： 宜遣兵为世忠援。 既而援兵不至，世忠退保镇江。
现代文：吕祉上奏说 ：应派兵作为韩世忠的后援。 后来援兵没到，韩世忠退保镇江。
English: Lv Zhi said in his report that soldiers should be sent to support Han Shizhong, but when the reinforcements did not arrive, Han Shizhong retreated to Zhenjiang.

古文：祉再上言： 置江北于度外，非命帅宣抚两淮之意，且恐失中原心。
现代文：吕祉再次上奏 ：把江北地区置之度外，不是朝廷任命宣抚两淮地区的本意，并且恐怕失去中原民心。
English: Lv Zhi made another appeal: it was not the intention of the imperial court to appoint the proclamation of the two Huai regions to exclude the Jiangbei region, and I am afraid of losing the hearts of the Central Plains people.

古文：唯当急遣诸将，且乞亲御六师，庶几上下协心，可以不战而胜。 于是降诏亲征。
现代文：只有紧急派遣诸将，并且请皇上亲率六军，才能使上下齐心协力，可以不战而胜。 于是高宗下诏亲征。
English: Only by urgently dispatching generals and asking the emperor to lead the six armies could the upper and lower echelons make a concerted effort to win without a fight.

古文：车驾至平江，金人退师。
现代文：高宗到达平江，金朝退兵。
English: Gao Zong arrived in Pingjiang, and the Kim dynasty withdrew.

古文：五年，召为中书门下省检正诸房文字，寻除兵部侍郎兼户部侍郎、给事中。
现代文：绍兴五年，任命吕祉为中书门下省检正诸房文字，不久任兵部侍郎兼户部侍郎、给事中。
English: In the fifth year of Shaoxing, Lv Zhi was appointed as the provincial inspector of correcting the characters of the houses under the tutelage of Zhongshu, and was soon appointed as the attendant of the military department and the attendant of the household department.

古文：六年，迁刑部侍郎、都督府参议军事，俄迁吏部侍郎。
现代文：绍兴六年，改任刑部侍郎、都督府参议军事，不久改任吏部侍郎。
English: In the sixth year of Shaoxing, he was reappointed as the attendant of the criminal department, the military counselor of the governor's office, and soon he was reappointed as the attendant of the criminal department.

古文：刘豫分道入寇，时车驾驻平江，或请回临安，且令守江防海。
现代文：刘豫兵分数路入侵，当时高宗停驻平江，有人请求高宗回临安，并下令守卫长江防备海上。
English: When Gaozong was stationed in Pingjiang during Liu Yu's invasion, someone asked Gaozong to return to Lin'an and ordered him to guard the Yangtze River and prepare for the sea.

古文：祉独抗言： 士气当振，贼锋可挫，不可遽退以示弱。 刘麟众十万，已次濠、寿。
现代文：吕祉独自抗争说 ：士气应当振作，敌人锋芒可以挫败，不能急忙后退示弱。 刘麟率十万大军，已进至濠、寿州。
English: Lv Zhi protested alone, saying: Morale should be buoyant, the enemy's edge can be frustrated, and it is not possible to retreat in a hurry to show weakness.Liu Lin led a hundred thousand army, which has entered Shantou and Shoushou.

古文：刘光世在合肥，欲移屯太平州，军已行，乃命祉驰往军前，督其还。
现代文：刘光世在合肥，想移居太平州，军队已经行动，于是命令吕祉奔驰到军前，督促刘光世回到合肥。
English: Liu Guangshi was in Hefei and wanted to move to Taiping, but the army had already moved, so he ordered Lv Zhi Benz to go to the front and urge Liu Guangshi to return to Hefei.

古文：七年，迁兵部尚书，升督府参谋军事，往淮西抚谕诸军。
现代文：绍兴七年，迁升兵部尚书、督府参谋军事，前往淮西安抚各军。
English: In the seventh year of Shaoxing, Shang Shu of the Ministry of Military Affairs and the military staff officer of the governor's office moved to Huaixi to pacify the troops.

古文：浚以刘光世持不战之论，罢之，乃命行营左护军前统制王德为都统制，又以统制官郦琼为之副。
现代文：张浚由于刘光世坚持不战的议论，罢免他，于是命令行营左护军前统制王德任都统制，又以统制官郦琼担任王德的副手。
English: Zhang Jun dismissed Liu Guangshi because of his insistence on not going to war, so he ordered Wang De, the former commander of the camp's left guard, to take charge of the whole camp, and appointed the officer in charge of the camp, Zou Qiong, as Wang De's deputy.

古文：琼与德素不协，祉还朝，琼与德交讼于都督府及御史台，乃命德还建康，以其军隶督府。
现代文：郦琼同王德素来不和，吕祉回到朝廷，郦琼和王德互相到都督府和御史台控告对方，于是命令王德返回建康，将他的军队隶属于都督府。
English: Yan Qiong and Wang De had been at odds with each other for a long time, and Lü returned to the imperial court. Yan Qiong and Wang De went to the governor's office and the imperial court to sue each other, so he ordered Wang De to return to Jiankang and subordinate his army to the governor's office.

古文：八月，复命祉往庐州节制之。
现代文：八月，又命令吕祉前往庐州节制各军。
English: In August, he also ordered Lv Zhi to go to Zhangzhou to restrain the troops.

古文：祉至庐州，琼等复讼德。
现代文：吕祉到庐州，郦琼等人再次控告王德。
English: Lv Zhi went to Zhangzhou, and Zi Qiong and others sued Wang De again.

古文：祉谕之曰： 若以君等为是，则大相诳。
现代文：吕祉劝谕他说 ：如果以为你们是对的，那是诳骗人。
English: Lü Zhi advised him, "If you think you are right, you are deceiving people.

古文：然张丞相但喜人向前，傥能立功，虽有大过亦阔略，况此小嫌乎？
现代文：但张丞相只喜欢人向前，倘若能够立功，即使有很大的过错也会忽略不问，何况这点小小的嫌疑呢？
English: But Premier Zhang only likes people to move forward. If he can make a contribution, even if there is a big mistake, he will ignore it. What about this small suspicion?

古文：当力为诸公辨之，保无他虑。 琼等感泣。
现代文：我当尽力为你们辩明，保证没有其他疑虑。 郦琼等人感动泪下。
English: I should do my best to argue for you and make sure that there are no other doubts.

古文：事小定，祉乃密奏乞罢琼及统制官靳赛兵权。
现代文：事情稍为安定，吕祉于是秘密上奏请求罢免郦琼和统制官靳赛的兵权。
English: Things were a little more stable, and Lv Zhi secretly petitioned for the removal of Qiong Qiong and the military power of the commanding officer Qisai.

古文：其书吏漏语于琼，琼令人遮祉所遣邮置，尽得祉所言，大怨怒。
现代文：但属下书吏将其泄漏给郦琼，郦琼派人拦截吕祉派遣的送信人员，全部得到吕祉的奏章，郦琼十分怨恨。
English: However, the clerk under him leaked it to Zou Qiong. Zou Qiong sent someone to intercept the messenger dispatched by Lv Zhi, and all of them received Lv Zhi's record. Zou Qiong was very resentful.

古文：会朝廷命张俊为淮西宣抚使，置司盱眙；杨存中为淮西制置使，刘锜为副，置司庐州；召琼赴行在。
现代文：恰逢朝廷任命张俊为淮西安抚使，置宣抚司于盱眙；杨存中任淮西制置使，刘钅奇为副使，置于庐州；诏令郦琼赶赴行在。
English: At the same time, the imperial court appointed Zhang Jun as the Huaixi pacification envoy and placed the propaganda and pacification department in Handan; Yang Cunzhong as the Huaixi construction and installation envoy, Liu Bingqi as the deputy envoy and placed in Handan; and ordered Gong Qiong to hurry to travel there.

古文：琼惧，遂叛。
现代文：郦琼害怕了，于是反叛。
English: Yan Qiong got scared and rebelled.

古文：诸将晨谒祉，坐定，琼袖出文书，示中军统制官张璟曰： 诸兵官有何罪，张统制乃以如许事闻之朝廷邪？ 祉见之大惊，欲返走，不及，为琼所执。
现代文：众将早晨拜见吕祉，坐下后，郦琼从袖中取出文书，交给中军统制官张王景说： 众位将官有什么罪，张统制竟然将这些事报告朝廷呢？ 吕祉看见大惊，想返回逃走，来不及，被郦琼逮住。
English: In the morning, the generals paid a visit to Lv Zhi, and after they sat down, Zi Qiong took out a document from his sleeve and handed it to Zhang Wangjing, the commander of the Chinese army, saying: "What is the crime of the generals, and how could Zhang Zi Zi report these things to the imperial court? Lv Zi saw the shock and wanted to return and escape, but he was too late and was caught by Zi Qiong.

古文：璟及兵马钤辖乔仲福，统制刘永、衡友死之。
现代文：张王景和兵马钤辖乔仲福，统制刘永、衡友被处死。
English: Zhang Wangjing and the Terracotta Warriors and Horses controlled Qiao Zhongfu, while Liu Yong and Heng You were executed.

古文：琼遂率全军四万人渡淮降刘豫，拥祉次三塔，距淮三十里。
现代文：郦琼于是率领全军四万人渡过淮河投降刘豫，挟持吕祉到三塔，距离淮河三十里。
English: Yan Qiong then led the whole army of forty thousand people across the Huai River to surrender to Liu Yu, holding Lv Zhi to the Three Towers, thirty miles away from the Huai River.

古文：祉下马曰： 刘豫逆臣，我岂可见之？ 众逼祉上马，祉骂曰： 死则死于此！ 又语其众曰： 刘豫逆臣，尔军中岂无英雄，乃随郦琼去乎？ 众颇感动，凡千余人环立不行。
现代文：吕祉下马说： 刘豫是逆臣贼子，我怎能见他？ 众人逼迫吕祉上马，吕祉大骂说 ：死就死在这里！ 又对其众说： 刘豫是叛臣，你们军中难道没有英雄豪杰，就这样跟随郦琼而去吗？ 众人颇受感动，共有一千多人在他周围环立不走。
English: Lv Zhi dismounted and said, "Liu Yu is a traitorous son of a traitor, how can I see him?" The crowd forced Lv Zhi to mount his horse, and Lv Zhi shouted, "Die here, die here!" He also said to the crowd, "Liu Yu is a traitor, aren't there any heroes in your army, so why are you following Yu Qiong?" The crowd was deeply moved, and more than a thousand people stood around him and refused to leave.

古文：琼恐摇动众心，急策马先渡，祉遇害。
现代文：郦琼恐怕动摇众心，急忙策马首先渡过淮河，吕祉遇害。
English: Fearing that she would shake the hearts of the public, Zou Qiong hurriedly crossed the Huaihe River on her horse first, and Lv Youyi was killed.

古文：时有得祉括发之帛归吴中者，其妻吴氏持帛自缢以徇葬，闻者哀之。庆元间，诏立庙赐额，以旌其忠云。
现代文：当时有人得到包裹吕祉头发的毛巾回到吴中，吕祉妻子吴氏手持毛巾自缢身亡殉葬，听说的人都感到哀伤，庆元年间，诏令为吕祉立庙赐匾，以表彰他的忠诚。
English: At that time, someone received a towel wrapped in Lv Zhi's hair and returned to Wuzhong. Lv Zhi's wife, Ms. Wu, hanged herself with a towel and was buried. Everyone who heard about it was saddened. In the first year of the Qing Dynasty, a decree was issued to build a temple for Lv Zhi in recognition of his loyalty.

