古文：姚崇为灵武道大总管。
现代文：原文
English: Original text from

古文：张柬之等谋诛二张，崇适自屯所还，遂参密议，以功封梁县侯。
现代文：唐朝名臣姚崇任灵武道大总管的时候，张柬之等人谋划诛杀武后宠幸的张易之、张昌宗二人，正赶上姚崇从屯驻之地回京，就参与了这个秘密计划，后来因功封为梁县侯。
English: When Yao Chong, a famous retainer of the Tang Dynasty, was the general manager of Lingwu Dao, Zhang Xizhi and others plotted to assassinate Zhang Yizhi and Zhang Changzong, who were favorites of the Empress Dowager Wu. They were just in time for Yao Chong to return to Beijing from the place where he was stationed, so they took part in this secret plan. Later, because of their achievements, they were made the lords of Liang County.

古文：武后迁上阳宫，中宗率百官问起居。
现代文：把武后迁往上阳宫时，中宗率领百官前去问安。
English: When he moved Empress Wu to Shangyang Palace, Zhongzong led hundreds of officials to pay their respects.

古文：五公相庆，崇独流涕。
现代文：张柬之等人相互称庆，只有姚崇悲伤流泪。
English: Zhang Khamzhi and others congratulated each other, only Yao Chong shed tears of sorrow.

古文：柬之等曰： 今岂流涕时耶？
现代文：张柬之等人说： 现在哪里是流泪的时候呢？
English: Zhang Khamzhi and others said: "When is it time to shed tears?

古文：恐公祸由此始。 
现代文：这样会惹祸上身的。 
English: That's going to get you in trouble.

古文：崇曰： 比与讨逆，不足为功。
现代文：姚崇说： 和你们一起讨平叛逆，本不算什么功劳。
English: Yao Chong said: Working with you to defeat the rebels is no mean feat.

古文：然事天后久，违旧主而泣，人臣终节也。
现代文：然而侍奉武后已久，一旦分别，因而伤心哭泣，这是人臣应有的节义。
English: However, having served the empress dowager for a long time, once they are separated, they will cry with sadness. This is the dignity that a vassal should have.

古文：由此获罪，甘心焉。 
现代文：如果因此获罪，我也心甘情愿。 
English: If I am found guilty of this, I will do so willingly.

古文：后五王被害，而崇独免。
现代文：后来柬之等人都被杀害了，只有姚崇幸免于难。
English: Later, Kamji and the others were all killed, and only Yao Chong survived.

古文：武后迁，五公相庆，崇独流涕。
现代文：评译武后迁入上阳宫，五公相庆贺，只有姚崇流泪伤心。
English: When the Empress Wu moved into the Shangyang Palace, the five princes celebrated, but only Yao Chong shed tears.

古文：董卓诛，百姓歌舞，邕独惊叹。
现代文：东汉时董卓被杀，百姓载歌载舞，只有蔡邕叹息不止。
English: When Dong Zhuo was killed in the Eastern Han Dynasty, the people sang and danced, only Cai Xuan sighed more and more.

古文：事同而祸福相反者，武君而卓臣，崇公而邕私也。
现代文：事情相同而遭遇的祸福却相反。因为武后是君，董卓是臣；姚崇为公，蔡邕为私的缘故。
English: Because Wu Hou was a prince, and Dong Zhuo was a vassal; Yao Chong was a public official, and Cai Xuan was a private citizen.

古文：然惊叹者，平日感恩之真心；流涕者，一时免祸之权术。
现代文：然而叹息是感恩的真心表现，流泪却是一时免祸的权术。
English: However, sighing is a sincere expression of gratitude, but shedding tears is a power trick to avoid disaster.

古文：崇逆知三思犹在，后将噬脐，而无如五王之不听何也。
现代文：姚崇想到武三思还在朝廷之上，日后必会报复，便不像其他几人那样忘乎所以。
English: Yao Chong did not get carried away like several others when he thought that Wu San Si was still above the court and would surely take revenge in the future.

古文：吁，崇真智矣哉！
现代文：唉，姚崇真聪明啊！
English: Alas, Yao Chong is really smart!

