古文：◎叛臣李鋋，小字松寿，濰州人，李全子也。
现代文：李鋋小字松寿，潍州人，李全的儿子。
English: Li Zhaozhong, a native of Zhangzhou, was the son of Li Quan.

古文：或曰鋋本衢州徐氏子，父尝为扬州司理参军，全盖养之为子云。
现代文：也有人说，鋋本衢州徐氏的后人，其父曾为扬州司理参军，李全只是招鋋为养子而已。
English: It is also said that the descendant of 本州徐, whose father had joined the army for the Yangzhou Secretary, Li Quan only recruited him as an adopted son.

古文：太祖十六年，全叛宋，举山东州郡归附，太师、国王孛鲁承制拜全山东淮南楚州行省，而以其兄福为副元帅。
现代文：太祖成吉思汗二十一年，李全背叛宋朝，举山东州郡归附蒙古。太师、国王孛鲁承制拜李全为山东淮南楚州行省，而以全兄李福为副元帅。
English: In the twenty-first year of the great-grandfather Genghis Khan, Li Quan betrayed the Song Dynasty and annexed Shandong Province to Mongolia. The Grand Master and King Janglu made Li Quan the governor of Shandong, Huainan and Chuzhou, and his brother Li Fu the deputy marshal.

古文：太宗三年，全攻宋扬州，败死，鋋遂袭为益都行省，仍得专制其地。
现代文：太宗三年，李全攻宋朝扬州，兵败而死，李鋋便继承父职为益都行省，仍统制其地。
English: In the third year of Emperor Taizong, Li Quan attacked Yangzhou of the Song Dynasty and was defeated and died. Li Ye then inherited his father's position to benefit the capital and the province, and still controlled his land.

古文：朝廷数征兵，辄诡辞不至。
现代文：蒙古朝廷数次征兵，都受鋋托词拒绝。
English: Several times the Mongolian imperial court conscripted soldiers, but they were all rejected on pretexts.

古文：宪宗七年，又调其兵赴行在，鋋亲诣帝言曰： 益都乃宋航海要津，分军非便。 
现代文：宪宗七年，又调鋋军来皇帝住处，鋋亲自向皇上说： 益都是宋朝航海的重要口岸，把军队调走一部分很不方便。 
English: In the seventh year of the reign of Emperor Xianzong, the imperial army was transferred to the emperor's residence. Emperor Xizong himself said to the emperor, "Yiwu is an important port for the Song Dynasty's navigation, and it is very inconvenient to transfer part of the army.

古文：帝然之，命鋋归取涟海数州。
现代文：宪宗只好接受鋋的意见，不调动鋋的军队，但要鋋带兵攻取涟海数州。
English: Xianzong had no choice but to accept Yao's opinion and not to mobilize Yao's army, but to take soldiers to capture several states in the Bohai Sea.

古文：鋋遂发兵攻拔涟水相连四城，大张克捷之功。
现代文：鋋发兵连下四城，大肆宣扬了克敌制胜之功。
English: He sent troops to four cities in succession and trumpeted his victory over the enemy.

古文：中统元年，世祖即位，加鋋江淮大都督。鋋言： 近获生口，知宋调兵将攻涟水。且谍见许浦、射阳湖舟舰相望，势欲出胶西，向益都，请缮城堑以备。 
现代文：中统元年世祖即位，加鋋官位为江淮大都督，鋋说： 近日抓到一些百姓，知道宋在调兵将攻涟水，且侦察到许浦射阳湖一带，舟舰相望，看来宋兵的势头是想出胶西，向益都进发，请修缮城池以备。 
English: In the first year of the Middle Kingdom, the founder of the dynasty ascended to the throne, and the official rank of Jiajing became the governor of Jianghuai Province. Zou said, "Recently, I caught some people who knew that the Song Dynasty was mobilizing troops to attack Shanshui. I also detected that there were boats and ships looking at each other in the area of Xupu Shayang Lake. It seems that the momentum of the Song Dynasty soldiers was to come up with Jiaoxi and go to Yiwu. Please repair the castle in preparation."

古文：诏出金符十、银符五授鋋，以赏将士有功者，且赐银三百锭，降诏奖谕。
现代文：世祖便下诏，授鋋金符十、银符五，以赏有功，且赐银三百锭，降诏嘉奖一般将士。
English: The patriarch then issued an edict awarding ten gold and five silver talismans for meritorious service, as well as three hundred silver talismans and the award of an edict of commendation to ordinary soldiers.

古文：蒙古、汉军之在边者，咸听节制。
现代文：又令蒙古军与汉人军都听从鋋的节制。
English: He also made the Mongolian army and the Han Chinese army obey the temperance of Gan.

古文：鋋复扬言： 宋吕文德合淮南兵七万五千，来攻涟水，且规筑堡以临我。
现代文：鋋又宣称 ：宋朝吕文德集中淮南兵七万五千来攻涟水，且分区筑堡威胁我。
English: He also claimed that the Song Dynasty's Lü Wende concentrated seventy-five thousand Huainan soldiers to attack Surabaya, and threatened to build a fortress there.

古文：及得贾似道、吕文德书，辞甚悖傲。
现代文：及得宋贾似道、吕文德书，措辞傲慢。
English: It is similar to Song Jia Dao and Lu Wende Shu, and the wording is arrogant.

古文：知朝廷近有内顾之忧，必将肆志于我。
现代文：他们大概知道蒙古朝廷近来有内顾之忧，一定是想乘机进攻。
English: They probably knew that the Mongolian imperial court had recently been worried about internal affairs and must have wanted to take the opportunity to attack.

古文：乞选将益兵，臣当帅先渡淮，以雪慢书之辱。 
现代文：因此请求朝廷选将增兵，我当率先渡淮，以雪其来书出言不逊之辱。 
English: Therefore, I requested the imperial court to choose to increase the number of soldiers, I should take the lead in crossing the Huai River, and use his letter to express my humiliation.

古文：执政得奏，谕以 朝廷方通和议，边将惟当固封圉。
现代文：执政得了鋋的报告后，告谕鋋说： 朝廷方与宋通和议，边将只能固守所辖地区。
English: After the report was received by the governor, he issued an edict to the governor saying: The imperial court and Song Tong agreed to make peace, and the governor could only hold fast to the area under his jurisdiction.

古文：且南人用间，其诈非一，彼既不至，毋或妄动 。
现代文：且南人好用离间之计，其欺诈行为已不止一次。所以，只要他军队未来，就不要轻举妄动。 
English: Moreover, the Nan people are good at using divisive tactics, and their fraudulent behavior has been more than once. Therefore, as long as his army is coming, don't act rashly.

古文：鋋乃上言： 臣所领益都，土旷人稀，自立海州，今八载，将士未尝释甲，转挽未尝息肩，民力凋耗，莫甚斯时。
现代文：鋋接通知后又向皇帝上奏说： 我所领的益都，地广人稀，自立海州，至今八载，不曾解甲，运输者不曾休息。民力之凋疲，此时最甚。
English: After being notified of the docking, he reported to the emperor, "I have been in charge of the capital of Yiwu, a sparsely populated, self-reliant coastal province, for eight years now. I have never disarmed, and the transporters have never rested. The exhaustion of the people's strength is at its worst at this time.

古文：以一路之兵，抗一敌国，众寡不侔，人所共患。
现代文：我们以一路之兵，抗击一国之师，众寡不等，人们都担忧。
English: We are fighting against a country's division with soldiers from all over the country. There are few and far between, and people are worried.

古文：赖陛下神武，既克涟、海二州，复破夏贵、孙虎臣十余万之师。然臣岂敢恃此必敌人之不再至哉！
现代文：幸赖皇帝神武，已攻下涟海二州，还打败夏贵、孙虎臣等十余万军队，但是，我怎敢恃此而使敌人不再来呢？
English: Fortunately, Emperor Jinwu has conquered the two states of the Bohai Sea, and defeated more than 100,000 troops such as Xia Gui and Sun Huchen. However, how dare I use this to make the enemy stop coming?

古文：且宋人今日西无掣肘，宜得并力而东。
现代文：而且，今日宋朝在西方已无牵制，它可以合并所有力量向东。
English: Moreover, today the Song Dynasty has no restraint in the West, it can combine all forces to the East.

古文：若以水陆缀涟，而遣舟师遵海以北，捣胶、莱之虚，然后帅步骑直指沂、莒、滕、峄，则山东非我有矣，岂可易视而不为备哉。
现代文：若他们以水陆力量包围涟州，再遣海军北上乘虚进攻胶州、莱州，然后率步兵骑兵直指沂、莒、滕、峄，则山东将不再是我所有了。对此我们怎能轻视而不做好充分准备呢？
English: If they encircle Bozhou with land and sea forces, and then send the navy to the north to attack Jiaozhou and Laizhou, and then lead the infantry and cavalry to point directly at,, Teng and, then Shandong will no longer belong to me. How can we despise this and not be fully prepared?

古文：臣昨追敌至淮安，非不能乘胜取扬、楚，徒以执政止臣，故臣不敢深入。
现代文：臣昨日追宋兵至淮安，不是不能乘胜占取扬、楚，只是因为执政制止我进攻，所以我不敢深入。
English: Yesterday, my vassals chased the Song soldiers to Huai'an. It's not that I couldn't take advantage of the victory to occupy Yang and Chu. It's just that the government stopped me from attacking, so I didn't dare to go deeper.

古文：若以枣阳、唐、邓、陈、蔡诸军攻荆山，取寿、泗，以亳、宿、徐、邳诸军，合臣所统兵，攻扬、楚，则两淮可定。
现代文：若以枣阳、唐、邓、陈、蔡诸军攻荆山，取寿、泗，以亳、宿、徐、邳诸军联合我统率的军队，进攻扬、楚，则两淮可定。
English: If the armies of Zaoyang, Tang, Deng, Chen and Cai attack Jingshan, Zhouzhou and Handan, and the armies of Handan, Shukou, Xu and Handan join forces with the army under our command to attack Yang and Chu, then the outcome can be determined.

古文：两淮既定，则选兵以取江南，自守以宽民力，将无施不可，此上策也。 
现代文：两淮若定，则进兵可取江南，自守可减轻人民负担，那时，你要做什么就可做什么，这实是上策也。 
English: If the two conditions are met, then the soldiers can take the south of the Yangtze River, and self-defense can reduce the burden on the people. At that time, you can do whatever you want to do, which is really the best strategy.

古文：因上将校冯泰等功第状，诏以益都官银分赏之。
现代文：鋋在上这篇要求采取进攻策略的说明的同时，进呈将校冯泰等的功勋等级的名字，皇上便下诏以益都官银分赏诸将校。
English: At the same time as the above-mentioned explanation of the requirement to adopt an offensive strategy, the name of the officer Feng Tai's merit level was presented, and the emperor issued an edict to reward the officers with benefits.

古文：二年正月，鋋言于行中书省，以宋人聚兵粮数十万，列舰万三千艘于许浦，以侵内郡，而宣抚司转输不继，恐一旦水陆道绝，缓急莫报。
现代文：二年正月，鋋向行中书省说： 宋人聚兵粮数十万，列舟舰三千艘于许浦，准备进攻内郡。而宣抚司在运输方面不能保证畅通，我担心一旦水陆交通割断，连报告战况信息也不可能，那就糟了。
English: In the first month of the second year, the Ministry of Literature said: "The Song people have gathered hundreds of thousands of soldiers and food, and three thousand ships and boats are in Xupu, preparing to attack the county. And the Propaganda Department cannot guarantee smooth transportation. I am worried that once the water and land transportation is cut off, it will not be possible to even report the status of the war. That would be bad.

古文：请选精骑，倍道来援，表里协攻，乘机深入，江淮可图也。
现代文：所以请选派精良奇军，兼程来援，内外配合，乘机出击，则江淮是能为我所占领的。 
English: Therefore, please choose to send elite troops, come to the aid of both sides, cooperate at home and abroad, and take the opportunity to attack, then the Jianghuai can be occupied by me.

古文：既而来献涟水捷，诏复奖谕，仍给金符十七、银符二十九，增赐将士。
现代文：接着，又向皇上送来涟水捷报，皇上便再下诏书表示嘉奖，并给金符十七、银符二十九赠赐将士。
English: Next, the Emperor was sent the report of the victory at Surabaya. The Emperor then issued an imperial edict to express his appreciation, and presented seventeen gold and twenty-nine silver charms to the soldiers.

古文：庚寅，鋋辄发兵修益都城堑，且报宋人来攻涟水。
现代文：正月二十九日，鋋擅自发兵修治益都城墙和围城河，且向皇上报告宋人来攻涟水的消息。
English: On the 29th day of the first month of the year, Yao sent troops without authorization to repair the Yidu city wall and besiege the city river, and reported to the emperor the news that the Song people had come to attack Surabaya.

古文：诏遣阿术、哈剌拔都、爱仙不花等悉兵赴之，仍谕度宜益兵赴调。
现代文：皇上乃下诏派遣阿鋋、哈剌拔都、爱仙不花等全部兵力开赴益都，还告谕说，在认为适宜的情况下还要增兵调赴益都。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict to dispatch all the troops including the Grand Empress Dowager Cixi, Grand Empress Dowager Cixi, Grand Empress Dowager Cixi and Grand Empress Dowager Cixi to Yidu, and also announced that more troops would be dispatched to Yidu if deemed appropriate.

古文：鋋遂请节制诸道所集兵马，且请给兵器，中书议与矢三万，诏给矢十万。
现代文：于是鋋向朝廷要求给予他以节制各路来集的兵马的权力，并请求调拨一批兵器。中书议定给与箭三万，皇上下诏给十万。
English: Therefore, Shun asked the imperial court to grant him the power to control the soldiers and horses coming from all directions, and requested the allocation of a batch of weapons. The document agreed to give 30,000 arrows, and the emperor issued an edict to give 100,000 arrows.

古文：三年四月，又以宋贾似道诱总管张元、张进等书来上。
现代文：三年正月，又将宋朝贾似道引诱蒙古总管张元、张进等人投宋的招降书呈送皇上。
English: In the first month of the third year, he also presented the Emperor with a letter of invitation to the Song Dynasty, which was written by Jia Xiangdao to lure the Mongolian general managers Zhang Yuan and Zhang Jin to vote for the Song Dynasty.

古文：盖鋋专制山东者三十余年，其前后所奏凡数十事，皆恫疑虚喝，挟敌国以要朝廷，而自为完缮益兵计，其谋亦深矣。
现代文：鋋统制山东三十余年，他对皇上前后所奏的有几十件事，说的都是些恫吓朝廷的虚话，其目的是谎报敌国的动向以要挟朝廷对他做各种让步，而他自己却想方设法修缮城池和增加军队。
English: During the more than thirty years that he ruled Shandong, he played dozens of tricks on the emperor, both before and after, but all of them were lies to intimidate the imperial court. His aim was to report the enemy's movements falsely in order to blackmail the imperial court into making various concessions to him, while he tried his best to repair the city and increase the army.

古文：初以其子彦简质于朝，而潜为私驿，自益都至京师质子营。
现代文：鋋的谋算也可说是很深的了。开始，鋋将儿子彦简作为人质送到京师，而自己又暗地私设从益都到京师质子营的驿站。
English: Zou's scheming can be said to be very deep. At the beginning, Zou sent his son, Hikojan, as a hostage to Beijing Division, while he secretly set up a relay station from Yidu to Beijing Division proton camp.

古文：至是，彦简遂用私驿逃归。
现代文：后来，彦简便利用此私驿逃回益都，鋋便公开反叛朝廷，将涟、海三城献给宋。
English: Later, Yan Jian took advantage of this ruse to escape back to Yidu, whereupon he openly rebelled against the imperial court and dedicated the three cities of Handan and Hai to Song.

古文：鋋遂反，以涟、海三城献于宋，歼蒙古戍兵，引麾下具舟舰，还攻益都。甲午，入之，发府库以犒其党，遂寇蒲台。
现代文：并歼灭蒙古驻兵，率领自己指挥的舟舰，返攻益都。二月八日，攻入益都，开仓库犒赏部下，又继续进攻蒲台。
English: He also annihilated the Mongolian garrison, and led the ships under his command back to attack Yidu. On February 8, he attacked Yidu, opened a warehouse to reward his subordinates, and continued to attack Pudai.

古文：民闻鋋反，皆入保城郭，或奔窜山谷，由是自益都至临淄数百里，寂无人声。
现代文：民众听说李鋋反叛，或入保城郭，或逃奔山林，因此，自益都至临淄的数百里之地，寂无人声。
English: The people heard that Li Qiye had rebelled, or taken refuge in the city walls, or fled to the mountains and forests. Therefore, hundreds of miles from the capital to Linyi, there was no sound.

古文：癸卯，帝闻鋋反，遂下诏暴其罪。
现代文：二月十七日，皇上听说李鋋反元，便下诏书公开揭发李鋋的罪过。
English: On February 17th, when the emperor heard of Li Xuan's rebellion, he issued an imperial edict to publicly expose Li Xuan's crimes.

古文：鋋帅众出掠辎重，将及城，官军邀击，大败之，斩首四千级，鋋退保济南。
现代文：十八日，世祖命诸将讨鋋。二十三日杀与李鋋有勾结的中书平章王文统。二十六日，鋋军占据济南。鋋军出掠蒙古军辎重，受到蒙古军阻击，鋋军败，斩首四千级，鋋乃退保济南。
English: On the 18th, the patriarch ordered the generals to discuss the issue. On the 23rd, the Chinese scholar Pingzhang Wangwen, who had colluded with Li Xi, was killed. On the 26th, the Han army occupied Jinan. The Han army outran the Mongol army, and was blocked by the Mongol army. The Han army was defeated, and four thousand were beheaded. The Han army retreated to Jinan.

古文：五月庚申，筑环城围之；甲戌，围合。
现代文：五月五日，官军筑环城围攻济南，十九日环城合围，鋋自是不得复出，犹日夜拒守。
English: On May 5th, the government army besieged Jinan by building a ring around the city. On the 19th, they surrounded the ring around the city. Yu himself was not allowed to return and refused to defend the city day and night.

古文：鋋自是不得复出，犹日夜拒守，取城中子女赏将士，以悦其心；且分军就食民家，发其盖藏以继，不足，则家赋之盐，令以人为食。至是，人情溃散，鋋不能制，各什伯相结，缒城以出。
现代文：据说鋋还取城中子女赏将士，以取悦将士；又分军人就食民家，尽取民家所藏以继续守城。不足，便每家征盐，令以人为食。至此，人情溃散，鋋已无法控制，人们各自十百结伙，缒城出走。
English: It is said that Yao also took the children in the city to reward the soldiers in order to please the soldiers; he also divided the soldiers to eat the houses of the people, and tried to take what the houses had hidden in order to continue to defend the city. When there was not enough, he collected salt from each house and ordered people to eat it. At this point, the people's feelings broke up and Yao was no longer able to control them, and people left Yao in groups of ten hundred each.

古文：鋋知城且破，乃手刃爱妾，乘舟入大明湖，自投水中。
现代文：鋋知城将破，乃手刃爱妾，乘舟入大明湖，自投水中。
English: Shanchicheng will be broken, but the blade of the hand will love the concubine, take a boat into the Daming Lake, and throw themselves into the water.

古文：水浅不得死，为官军所获，缚至诸王合必赤帐前。丞相史天泽言： 宜即诛之，以安人心。 
现代文：水浅，很难淹死，为蒙古军所俘，捆至诸王合必赤的帐前，丞相史天泽说： 应马上杀死他，以便安人心。 
English: The water was shallow, and it was difficult to drown. As a prisoner of the Mongol army, he was tied up in front of the inn where all the kings would meet, and the chancellor, Shi Tianze, said: "He should be killed immediately in order to pacify the hearts of the people."

古文：遂与蒙古军官囊家并诛焉。
现代文：遂与蒙古军官囊家一起将鋋处死。
English: He was then executed together with the Mongolian officer Tsuchiya.

古文：王文统，字以道，益都人也。
现代文：王文统字以道，益都人。
English: Wang Wenzhong is a Taoist and a native of Yicun.

古文：少时读权谋书，好以言撼人。
现代文：少时读讲权谋的书，好以言词打动人。
English: At a young age, he read a book about power politics so that he could impress people with his words.

古文：遍干诸侯，无所遇，乃往见李鋋。鋋与语，大喜，即留置幕府，命其子彦简师事之，文统亦以女妻鋋。
现代文：到处拜访诸侯，都没有见到。于是去见李，和他谈话后大喜，即留置于幕府中，并要求自己儿子彦简以文统为师。文统也把自己的女儿嫁给。
English: He visited the lords everywhere, but they did not see him. So he went to see Li Quan, and after talking with him, he was so happy that he left him in the shogunate, and asked his son, Yan Jian, to take Wenzhong as his teacher. Wenzhong also married his daughter.

古文：由是军旅之事，咸与谘决，岁上边功，虚张敌势，以固其位，用官物树私恩，取宋涟、海二郡，皆文统谋也。
现代文：因此，有关军事行动的事，也都由两人共同商议决定。每年向上报告边境将士的功劳，夸大宣传宋人的实力，借以巩固自己的地位。还用官府的财物树立私恩，取得涟、海二郡，这些都是文统的计谋。
English: Therefore, matters related to military operations were also decided jointly by the two men. Every year, they reported the merits of the border soldiers to the top, exaggerated the strength of the Song people to consolidate their position. They also used the government's property to establish a personal favor, and obtained the two counties of Min and Hai. These were all literati stratagems.

古文：世祖在潜藩，访问才智之士，素闻其名。
现代文：世祖在即位以前，访求才智之士，素闻文统之名。
English: Before ascending to the throne, the founder of the world sought out men of wisdom, known as the literati.

古文：及即位，厉精求治，有以文统为荐者，亟召用之。
现代文：及即位，励精图治，有人推荐文统，便迅速用了他。
English: When he was enthroned, he worked hard to govern, and when someone recommended Wensun, he quickly used him.

古文：乃立中书省，以总内外百司之政，首擢文统为平章政事，委以更张庶务。
现代文：于是成立中书省，总管内外百司之政。第一个提拔的平章政事便是王文统，让他改革各种政务。
English: As a result, the Ministry of Literature and Calligraphy was established, and Wang Wenzhong, the first Pingzhang government official to be promoted, was put in charge of reforming various government affairs.

古文：建元为中统，诏谕天下，立十路宣抚司，示以条格，欲差发办而民不扰，盐课不失常额，交钞无致阻滞。
现代文：这年建元为中统，诏告天下，立十路宣抚司，提出各种例式规定，所以，想发办什么差事，百姓并不惊扰。政府的盐税收入，不失常额。市面上的货币流通，也无阻滞。
English: In this year, the founding principle was unified, the edict was announced to the world, and the Ten-Way Relief Division was established, and various routine regulations were proposed. Therefore, the people were not alarmed if they wanted to run any errands. The government's salt tax revenue did not fluctuate. There was no blockage in the circulation of money on the market.

古文：寻诏行中书省造中统元宝交钞，立互市于颍州、涟水、光化军。
现代文：接着又诏行中书省，造中统宝钞，在颍州、涟水、光化军设立交易市场。
English: Next, it issued a decree to establish the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, issued the Centralized Treasury Notes, and set up trading markets in Luzhou, Surabaya, and Gwanghwamun.

古文：是年冬，初行中统交钞，自十文至二贯文，凡十等，不限年月，诸路通行，税赋并听收受。
现代文：此年冬，初次发行中统交钞，自十文至二贯文，凡十等。不限年月，诸路通行，民众可以钞交纳赋税。
English: In the winter of that year, the first issue of Zhongtongfa banknotes was issued, ranging from ten to two consecutive notes, all of which were ten grades. People could pay taxes with banknotes for an unlimited number of years.

古文：明年二月，世祖在开平，召行中书省事祃祃与文统，亲率各路宣抚使俱赴阙。
现代文：明年二月，世祖在开平，召见行中书省事与文统，文统亲率各路宣抚使都到上都开平。
English: In February of the next year, the patriarch was in Kaiping, and he summoned Wen Tong, who was in the process of writing a book on the subject. Wen Tong's relatives led all the envoys to Kaiping.

古文：世祖自去秋亲征叛王阿里不哥于北方，凡民间差发、宣课盐铁等事，一委文统等裁处。
现代文：世祖自去年秋天，在北方亲自征讨叛王阿里不哥时起，凡民间的差派及征收盐铁税等事，都由文统等裁处。
English: Since last autumn, when King Sejong himself went to the north to collect money from the traitor King Ali, all matters of dispatching people and collecting salt and iron taxes have been handled by the Ministry of Civil Affairs.

古文：及振旅还宫，未知其可否何若，且以往者急于用兵，事多不暇讲究，所当振其纪纲者，宜在今日。
现代文：以往急于用兵，许多事来不及研究。
English: In the past, there was a rush to use troops, and many things could not be studied in time.

古文：故召文统等至，责以成效，用游显、郑鼎、赵良弼、董文炳等为各路宣抚司，复以所议条格诏谕各路，俾遵行之。
现代文：因此，在今天，应搞些规矩以整顿纲纪。但不知哪些该办、应如何办，所以在班师回朝前，便把文统等召来，责成他们在这方面做出成效。用游显、郑鼎、赵良弼、董文炳等为各路宣抚司，又以所议的各种条款诏告各路，以便遵行。
English: Therefore, today, some rules should be made to rectify the discipline. But I don't know what should be done and how it should be done, so before the class teacher returned to the DPRK, I called Wen Tong and others and ordered them to make results in this regard. I used You Xian, Zheng Ding, Zhao Liangqi, Dong Wenqi and others as the announcement and support department for each road, and also announced to each road with the various terms discussed in order to comply.

古文：未几，又诏谕宣抚司，并达鲁花赤管民官、课税所官，申严私盐、酒醋、曲货等禁。
现代文：不久，又诏告宣抚司及达鲁花赤管民官及税官，严禁制造和贩卖私盐、私酒醋及曲货等。
English: Not long after, he also issued an edict to the Publicity Secretary and the civil servants and tax officials of the Daruhwa Red Guards, strictly prohibiting the manufacture and sale of illegal salt, illegal wine vinegar and illegal goods.

古文：文统为人忌刻，初立中书时，张文谦为左丞。
现代文：文统为人妒忌尖刻，开始成立中书省时，张文谦为左丞，文谦素以安国利民为己任，故凡讨论问题，观点明确，总和文统意见不一致。
English: When the Ministry of Literature and Calligraphy was first established, Zhang Wenqian was the left-hand man. Wenqian's duty was to safeguard the country and benefit the people. Therefore, when discussing issues, his views were clear, and his opinions did not coincide with those of the Ministry of Literature and Calligraphy.

古文：文谦素以安国利民自负，故凡讲论建明，辄相可否，文统积不能平，思有以陷之，文谦竟以本职行大名等路宣抚司事而去。
现代文：文统便对此愤愤不平，总想找个借口来陷害文谦。后来，文谦终于以左丞之职行大名等路宣抚司事而离开中书省。这时姚枢、窦默、许衡等都是世祖所敬重和信任的人。
English: Wen Tong was indignant about this, and always wanted to find an excuse to frame Wen Qian. Later, Wen Qian finally left the Central Literature Department as the assistant secretary of the left-hand side. At that time, Yao Zhou, Dou Miao, Xu Heng and others were all respected and trusted by the ancestors.

古文：时姚枢、窦默、许衡，皆世祖所敬信者，文统讽世祖授枢为太子太师，默为太子太傅，衡为太子太保，外佯尊之，实不欲使朝夕备顾问于左右也。
现代文：文统便暗示世祖授枢为太子太师，授默为太子太傅，授衡为太子太保。在外表上，文统装出对这些人很尊重的样子，其实不想他们朝夕作为顾问在世祖左右。
English: On the surface, he pretended to have great respect for these people, but in reality, he did not want them to be around him as advisors day and night.

古文：默尝与王鹗及枢、衡俱侍世祖，面诋文统曰： 此人学术不正，必祸天下，不可处以相位。 
现代文：默曾与王鹗、枢、衡都侍奉在世祖身旁，他们在世祖面前斥责文统，说： 此人学术不正，必祸天下，不可把他安插在相位上。 
English: Mei Zeng, Wang Qian, Zu and Heng all served alongside the patriarchs. In front of the patriarchs, they rebuked Wen Du, saying, "This man is academically dishonest and will bring disaster to the world. Do not put him on the throne."

古文：世祖曰： 若是，则谁可为者？ 
现代文：世祖说 ：如是这样，则谁可为相呢？ 
English: The patriarch said, "If that is the case, then who can be the heir?"

古文：默以许衡对，世祖不怿而罢。
现代文：默说许衡可以。世祖不高兴，此议就作罢了。
English: Xu Heng could say it silently. The ancestor was not happy, so the suggestion was dropped.

古文：鹗尝请以右丞相史天泽监修国史，左丞相耶律铸监修《辽史》，文统监修《金史》。世祖曰： 监修阶衔，俟修史时定之。 
现代文：鹗曾请世祖让右丞相史天泽监修国史，让左丞相耶律铸监修辽史，让文统监修金史，世祖说： 监修诸史的阶衔，俟修史时再定。 
English: He once asked the founder of the dynasty to have Tian Ze, the Minister of the Right, supervise the national history, Ye Lu, the Minister of the Left, supervise the casting of the Liao history, and Wen Tong supervise the gold history. The founder of the dynasty said: The rank of supervising the history will be decided later.

古文：又明年二月，李鋋反，以涟、海三城献于宋。
现代文：中统三年二月，李反元，以涟海三城献给宋朝。
English: In February of the third year of the Middle Kingdom, Li Tan Yuan dedicated three cities in the Bohai Sea to the Song Dynasty.

古文：先是，其子彦简，由京师逃归，鋋遣人白之中书。
现代文：先是其子彦简，由京师逃回山东后，遣人告诉中书。
English: First, his son, Hikojane, fled back to Shandong from the capital, after which he sent someone to tell Chushin.

古文：及反书闻，人多言文统尝遣子荛与鋋通音耗。
现代文：及李的反书传及世祖时，许多人都说文统曾派遣自己的儿子荛与暗通音信。
English: When Li's counter-book was passed down to the ancestors, many people said that Wen Tong had sent his own son, Zou, to secretly communicate with the ancestors.

古文：世祖召文统问之曰： 汝教鋋为逆，积有岁年，举世皆知之。朕今问汝所策云何，其悉以对。 
现代文：世祖召见王文统质问： 你教唆李反对朝廷，已经有好多年了，这是举世皆知的事，我今问你，到底你策划些什么，要都告诉我！ 
English: The patriarch summoned Wang Wenzhong to interrogate him: You have been instigating Li to oppose the imperial court for many years. This is a matter known to the whole world. I ask you now, what exactly are you planning? Tell me everything!

古文：文统对曰： 臣亦忘之，容臣悉书以上。 
现代文：文统对答说： 我也忘了，容我详细写下来，再交给您。 
English: Wen Rong replied, "I also forgot, let me write it down in detail and then give it to you."

古文：书毕，世祖命读之，其间有曰： 蝼蚁之命，苟能存全，保为陛下取江南。 
现代文：写完后，世祖要他自己宣读。其中有句话说 ：如果你保存我蝼蚁之命，那我就保证为皇上夺取江南。 
English: When he had finished, the ancestor asked him to read aloud: "If you save the life of my ant, then I promise to capture the southern part of the Yangtze River for the emperor."

古文：世祖曰： 汝今日犹欲缓颊于朕耶？ 
现代文：世祖对文统说 ：你今天还想向朕为李说情吗？ 
English: Shizu said to Wenzhong, "Do you still want to plead with me for Li today?"

古文：会鋋遣人持文统三书自洺水至，以书示之，文统始错愕骇汗。
现代文：恰遣人持文统三书自氵名水来，世祖以书示文统，文统惊慌失措，汗流不止。
English: It is fitting to send someone to fetch the three books of the Classic of Confucianism. The founder showed the Classic of Confucianism with the books. The Classic of Confucianism panicked and sweated profusely.

古文：书中有 期甲子 语，世祖曰： 甲子之期云何？ 
现代文：书中有 甲子期 字样，世祖问 ：甲子期是什么意思？ 
English: In the book there is the word "Koshidai" (甲子期), and the ancestor asked: What does "Koshidai" mean?

古文：文统对曰： 李鋋久蓄反心，以臣居中，不敢即发，臣欲告陛下缚鋋久矣，第缘陛下加兵北方，犹未靖也。比至甲子，犹可数年，臣为是言，姑迟其反期耳。 
现代文：文统答道 ：李久有反元之心，因我在朝中，不敢立即发动。我很久就想告之皇上以捉拿李，但因皇上用兵北方，局势还未平定，等到甲子年，则还有数年，我说这话，是为了推迟他的反期而已。 
English: Wen Rong replied, "Li Jiu has a rebellious heart, because I am in the north, I dare not immediately launch. I have long wanted to tell the emperor to capture Li, but because the emperor has used soldiers in the north, the situation has not yet been settled, and when it comes to the Year of the Horse, there will still be a few years, I say this to delay his rebellion.

古文：世祖曰： 无多言。朕拔汝布衣，授之政柄，遇汝不薄，何负而为此？ 
现代文：世祖说 ：不必多说了，我把你从一个平民的地位提拔起来，给你以很大的权力，待你可说不薄，你为何负心做出这种事？ 
English: The patriarch said, "Needless to say, I have elevated you from the status of a commoner and given you great power. I have treated you well. Why did you do such a thing?

古文：文统犹枝辞傍说，终不自言 臣罪当死 ，乃命左右斥去，始出就缚。
现代文：文统还支吾其词，始终不肯自己说出 臣罪当死 四个字。世祖乃命左右赶他出去，一出去就将他捆起来。
English: Wenzong also prevaricated and refused to say the four words "the crime of a vassal is punishable by death." The patriarch was ordered to drive him out, and he was tied up as soon as he left.

古文：犹召窦默、姚枢、王鹗、僧子聪及张柔等至，示以前书曰： 汝等谓文统当得何罪？ 
现代文：世祖还召窦默、姚枢、王鹗、僧子聪及张柔等来，将文统三书给他们看，并问道： 你们看文统当得何罪？ 
English: The patriarch also summoned Dou Mo, Yao Zu, Wang Xi, the monk Zicong, and Zhang Rong, and showed them the three books of the Classic of Confucianism, and asked: What is the crime of reading the Classic of Confucianism?

古文：柔独疾声大言曰： 宜剐！ 
现代文：张柔高呼道 ：宜千刀万剐！ 
English: Zhang Rong chanted: "It is better to die a thousand deaths!"

古文：世祖又曰： 汝同辞言之。 
现代文：世祖又说 ：你们说该如何？ 
English: The patriarch also said: What do you say should be done?

古文：诸臣皆曰： 当死。 
现代文：众臣都说 ：当死。 
English: All the courtiers said: Let him die.

古文：世祖曰： 渠亦自服朕前矣。 
现代文：世祖说 ：他自己也在我跟前服罪了。 
English: The patriarch said: He also confessed his sins in front of me.

古文：文统乃伏诛。子荛并就戮。
现代文：文统伏诛，子荛也同时被杀。
English: The general was killed and his son was also killed at the same time.

古文：诏谕天下曰： 人臣无将，垂千古之彝训；国制有定，怀二心者必诛。
现代文：世祖乃诏告天下，其中说： 国制有规定，怀二心者必杀。没有想到，地位如此之高的宰相居然会心怀奸邪。
English: The founder of the dynasty issued an edict to the world, in which he said: There is a rule in the state system that those who harbor double-mindedness must be killed. I did not expect that a prime minister with such a high position would harbor evil thoughts.

古文：何期辅弼之僚，乃蓄奸邪之志。平章政事王文统，起由下列，擢置台司，倚付不为不深，待遇不为不厚，庶收成效，以底丕平。焉知李鋋之同谋，潜使子荛之通耗。
现代文：平章政事王文统，自底层起用，提升到台司，我对他的信赖不可说不深，对他的待遇不可说不厚，是希望他报效朝廷，谁知他与李是同谋，暗中使子荛通消息。
English: Wang Wenzhong, the political secretary of Pingzhang, was appointed from the bottom and promoted to the secretary. My trust in him cannot be said to be too deep, and his treatment cannot be said to be too generous. I hoped that he would serve the imperial court. Who knows if he and Li were in cahoots, secretly sending messages to each other.

古文：迩者获亲书之数幅，审其有反状者累年，宜加肆市之诛，以著滔天之恶。
现代文：近来得到他的亲笔书信数幅，察觉他的谋反之心已有多年，宜斩首示众，使民众知道其滔天罪恶。
English: Recently, we have obtained several pieces of his handwritten letters, and we have been aware of his plotting for many years. It is appropriate to show his head to the public, so that the public knows about his heinous crime.

古文：已于今月二十三日，将反臣王文统并其子荛，正典刑讫。
现代文：已于二十三日将反臣王文统及其子荛依法处死。
English: On the 23rd, the anti-vassal Wang Wenzhong and his son were executed in accordance with the law.

古文：於戏！负国恩而谋大逆，死有余辜；处相位而被极刑，时或未喻。咨尔有众，体予至怀。 
现代文：呜呼，负国而谋反，死有余辜，处宰相之位而被刑，一时还不明白，你们众百姓，应该好好体会我的这些用心。 
English: You, the people, should have a good understanding of these intentions of mine. I did not understand at the time that I was being punished for betraying the country and plotting a rebellion, that I deserved to die, and that I was being punished for holding the position of prime minister.

古文：然文统虽以反诛，而元之立国，其规模法度，世谓出于文统之功为多云。
现代文：文统虽以反元而被处死，但元之立国，元的规模法度，实多出自文统之功。
English: Although Buntong was executed as a rebel against Yuan, the founding of the Yuan Dynasty and the establishment of the Yuan Dynasty's scale and laws were largely due to Buntong's efforts.

古文：阿鲁辉帖木儿，灭里大王之裔也。
现代文：阿鲁辉帖木儿是灭里大王的后裔。
English: Aruhui Timur is a descendant of the great king Shuri.

古文：初，太宗生七子，而灭里位第七。
现代文：开始时，太宗生七子，灭里最小。
English: At the beginning, Taizong had seven children, with Zhili being the youngest.

古文：世祖既定天下，乃大封宗亲为王，灭里其一也。
现代文：世祖既定天下，便大封宗室为王，所以灭里也被封王。
English: When the founder of the world established the world, the daifu, the head of the family, became the king. Therefore, Shuri was also crowned king.

古文：灭里生脱忽，脱忽生俺都剌，俺都剌生秃满，至大元年，始封阳翟王，赐金印螭纽，俾镇北藩。
现代文：后来，灭里生脱忽，脱忽生俺都剌，俺都剌生秃满。至大元年始封阳翟王，赐金印螭纽，使镇守北藩。
English: Later, I was born bald, I was born bald, I was born bald, I was born bald, I was born bald, I was born bald, I was born bald, I was born bald, I was born bald, I was born bald.

古文：秃满传曲春，曲春传太平，太平传帖木儿赤，而阿鲁辉帖木儿袭其封。
现代文：秃满传曲春，曲春传太平，太平传帖木儿赤，后来阿鲁辉帖木儿承袭这个封号。
English: Bald Man inherits Quchun, Quchun inherits Taiping, Taiping inherits Timur Red, and later Aru Hui inherits Timur Red.

古文：会兵起汝、颍，天下皆震动，帝屡诏宗王，以北方兵南讨。
现代文：在阿鲁辉帖木儿承袭王位时，适逢汝州、颍州兴起反对元朝的起义运动，这时天下震动，帝屡诏宗室亲王，带北方兵到南方来镇压起义。
English: At the time of Aruhui Timur's succession to the throne, the uprising movement against the Yuan Dynasty arose in Ruzhou and Zhangzhou. At this time, the whole world was shaken. The emperor repeatedly ordered the prince of the imperial family to take the northern soldiers to the south to suppress the uprising.

古文：阿鲁辉帖木儿知国事已不可为，乃乘间拥众数万，屯于木儿古兀彻之地，而胁宗王以叛。
现代文：阿鲁辉帖木儿知国家大势已去，便乘机发展势力，拥有数万之众，屯兵于木儿古兀彻之地，要挟其他宗王起来反叛朝廷。
English: Aruhui Timur, knowing that the country's great potential had passed, took advantage of the opportunity to develop his power. He had tens of thousands of people, stationed troops in the ancient land of Timur, and threatened other patriarchs to rebel against the imperial court.

古文：且遣使来言于帝曰： 祖宗以天下付汝，汝何故失其太半？
现代文：并且还派人向皇帝说 ：祖宗以天下给你，你何故失其大半？
English: Moreover, they sent someone to say to the emperor, "Our ancestors gave you the whole world, why did you lose most of it?

古文：盍以国玺授我，我当自为之。 
现代文：何不持国玺给我，由我来当元朝的皇帝？ 
English: Why not give me the imperial scepter and let me become the emperor of the Yuan Dynasty?

古文：帝闻，神色自若，徐曰： 天命有在，汝欲为则为之。 
现代文：皇帝听到这些话后，神色自若，慢慢说 ：天命有一定，难道你想当皇帝就能当皇帝吗？ 
English: After hearing these words, the emperor looked confident and slowly said, "Man's destiny is certain. If you want to be an emperor, can you be an emperor?"

古文：于是降诏开谕，俾其悔罪。
现代文：于是降诏书启发他自己悔罪。
English: The imperial edict inspired him to repent.

古文：阿鲁辉帖木儿不听。乃命知枢密院事秃坚帖木儿等击之。
现代文：阿鲁辉帖木儿不肯听劝告，皇帝乃命知枢密院事秃坚帖木儿等攻击之。
English: Aruhui Timur refused to listen to the advice, and the emperor ordered the Privy Council to attack him, including Bald Kian Timur.

古文：行至称海，起哈剌赤万人为军。
现代文：行至称海，征发哈剌赤万人为军。
English: He marched as far as the Shouhai Sea, and conscripted tens of thousands of people from Harbin and Hebei as his army.

古文：阿鲁辉帖木儿遂谋东遁。其部将脱欢知其势穷，乃与宗王囊加、玉枢虎儿吐华擒阿鲁辉帖木儿送阙下，帝命诛之。
现代文：这些人素来不知兵，临时让他们上战场，战斗还未打响，便纷纷脱号衣奔投阿鲁辉帖木儿军中，使秃坚帖木儿惨败，单骑回上都。至正二十一年，又命少保、知枢密院事老章，以兵十万再度攻打阿鲁辉帖木儿军，这次政府军中因为有阿鲁辉帖木儿弟弟忽都帖木儿从征，大败阿鲁辉帖木儿。阿鲁辉帖木儿准备东遁，其部将脱与宗王囊加、玉枢虎儿吐华等将阿鲁辉帖木儿擒送帝都，被帝处死。
English: These people did not know how to be soldiers. They were allowed to go to the battlefield on an ad hoc basis, and before the battle started, they rushed to join the army of Alu Hui Timur, defeating Bald Jian Timur and riding back to Shangdu alone. In the 21st year of the Shogunate, Shao Bao, a veteran of the Privy Council, once again attacked the army of Alu Hui Timur with 100,000 soldiers. This time, because Alu Hui Timur's younger brother, Qudu Timur, was enlisted in the government army, Alu Hui Timur was defeated. Alu Hui Timur was preparing to march to the

古文：于是加老章太傅，脱欢知辽阳行枢密院事，仍以忽都帖木儿袭封阳翟王，而宗王囊加等，悉议加封。
现代文：于是，加封老章为太傅，授脱知辽阳行枢密院事，以忽都帖木儿袭封阳翟王。宗王囊加等也都加封。
English: As a result, the old chapter was sealed as the Taifu, the Zhizhi of Liaoyang was given to the Privy Council, and the Timur of the capital attacked and sealed the Yang Zi Wang. The Zong Wang Zuca and others were also sealed.

古文：寻又诏加封老章和宁王，以岭北行省丞相知行枢密院事，俾镇北藩云。
现代文：不久，又诏加封老章为和宁王，以岭北行省丞相知行枢密院事的职务镇守北藩。
English: Not long after, he also issued an edict to add the old title of He Ning Wang, and took the position of the Northern Zhengu, the Northern Zhengu, the Northern Zhengu, the Northern Zhengu, and the Northern Zhengu.

