古文：起玄黓执徐，尽旃蒙大荒落，凡十四年。
现代文：起，止，一共十四年。
English: It lasted for a total of fourteen years.

古文：孝和皇帝下永元四年
现代文：汉和帝永元四年
English: The Han Dynasty and Emperor Yongzheng's Fourth Year

古文：春，正月，遣大将军左校尉耿夔，授于除鞬印绶，使中郎将任尚，持节卫护屯伊吾，如南单于故事。
现代文：春季，正月，派遣大将军左校尉耿夔授予北匈奴于除印信绶带，命中郎将任尚持符节护卫，屯驻伊吾，一如南匈奴单于先例。
English: In the spring, in the first month of the year, the Northern Huns were sent a general, Left Lieutenant Geng Yao, to give the Northern Huns a letter and ribbon, and the hit man would be stationed in Igu, as the Southern Huns had done before.

古文：初，庐江周荣辟袁安府，安举奏窦、景及争立北单于事，皆荣所具草，窦氏客太尉掾徐齮深恶之，胁荣曰： 子为袁公腹心之谋，排奏窦氏，窦氏悍士、刺客满城中，谨备之矣！ 荣曰： 荣，江淮孤生，得备宰士，纵为窦氏所害，诚所甘心！ 
现代文：当初，庐江人周荣在司徒袁安府中供职。袁安弹劾窦景和反对封立北匈奴单于等事所上的奏章，都由周荣起草。窦家的门客、太尉掾徐深为痛恨，他威胁周荣说： 您做袁公的心腹谋士，排斥弹劾窦家，窦家的壮士、刺客遍布京城，请好生防备吧！ 周荣说： 我周荣是长江、淮河地区的一介孤单书生，有幸能在司徒府中任职，纵然被窦家所害，也确实心甘情愿！ 
English: At the beginning, Zhou Rong, a native of the Minjiang River, served in the Yuan's government in Szczecin. Zhou Rong drafted Yuan's impeachment of Dou Jing and the petition against the banishment of the Northern Huns. The Dou family's protégé, Second Lieutenant Zou Xishen, hated him. He threatened Zhou Rong and said, "You should be Yuan's trusted advisor and reject the impeachment of the Dou family. The Dou family's stalwarts and assassins are all over Beijing. Please be on your guard!" Zhou Rong said, "I, Zhou Rong, am a lonely student from the Yangt

古文：因敕妻子： 若卒遇飞祸，无得殡敛，冀以区区腐身觉悟朝廷。 
现代文：于是他告诫妻子： 如果我突然遭遇飞来横祸，不要收殓安葬，我希望借此区区遗躯使朝廷省悟。 
English: So he warned his wife: If I suddenly encounter a sudden disaster, don't accept it and bury it, I hope to use this dead body to make the court reflect.

古文：三月，癸丑，司徒袁安薨。
现代文：三月癸丑，司徒袁安去世。
English: In March of this year, Szu Yuan An passed away.

古文：闰月，丁丑，以太常丁鸿为司徒。
现代文：闰三月丁丑，将太常丁鸿任命为司徒。
English: In March of the same year, Ding Yuxi appointed Tai Chang Ding Hong as a disciple.

古文：夏，四月，丙辰，窦宪还至京师。
现代文：夏季，四月丙辰，窦宪回到京城洛阳。
English: In the summer, in April, Bing Chen and Dou Xian returned to Luoyang, Beijing.

古文：六月，戊戌朔，日有食之。
现代文：六月戊戌朔，出现日食。
English: In June, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：丁鸿上疏曰： 昔诸吕握权，统嗣几移；哀、平之末，庙不血食。
现代文：丁鸿上书说： 当年吕氏家族专权，皇统几乎移位；哀帝、平帝末年，皇家宗庙祭祀中断。
English: Ding Hong wrote: At that time, the Lv family had absolute power, and the imperial line was almost displaced; in the last years of Emperor Yei and Emperor Ping, the royal ancestral temple rituals were interrupted.

古文：故虽有周公之亲而无其德，不得行其势也。
现代文：所以，即便是像周公那样的近亲，如果其人没有品德，也不能让他得势。
English: Therefore, even a close relative like Zhou Gong, if he has no moral character, cannot be allowed to gain power.

古文：刺史、二千石初除，谒辞、求通待报，虽奉符玺，受台敕，不敢便去，久者至数十日，背王室，向私门，此乃上威损，下权盛也。
现代文：如今大将军窦宪虽然希望自我约束，不敢有所僭越等级，但天下远近之人，全都对他诚惶诚恐地奉承听命。新任命的刺史、二千石官员，要到窦家拜谒辞行，求通姓名，听候答复。尽管已敬受皇上赐予的印信，接受过尚书台的训令，也不敢就此离去。等待召见的时间，久的要长达数十天。背对朝廷，趋向私门，这是君王威望受损、臣下权势过盛的表现。
English: Nowadays, although General Dou Xian hopes to self-discipline and does not dare to overstep his rank, everyone in the world, near and far, is flattering him and obeying his orders. The newly appointed chief historian, a 2,000-koku official, has to go to Dou's house to resign, ask for his name, and wait for a reply. Although he has respected the seal letter given by the emperor and received the order of Shang Shudi, he does not dare to leave. The waiting time for summoning is long, up to dozens of days. Turning his back on the court and tending to his private life, this is a manifestation of the loss of the king's prestige and the

古文：人道悖于下，效验见于天，虽有隐谋。
现代文：人间的伦常如果在下面被扰乱，天象就会出现相应的变化。
English: If human morals are disturbed below, corresponding changes will occur in the heavenly bodies.

古文：神照其情，垂象见戒，以告人君。
现代文：尽管事有隐密，神灵也能洞察内情，用天象示警，以告诫人间的君王。
English: In spite of the secrecy, the gods can see into the inner workings of things and warn the kings of the human world with celestial signs.

古文：禁微则易，救末者难；人莫不忽于微细以致其大，恩不忍诲，义不忍割，去事之后，未然之明镜也。
现代文：在灾祸之初，可以轻易地加以禁绝，而到了灾祸之末，则难以挽救。人们无不是因疏忽了微小的祸端，以致酿成了大祸。出于恩情而不忍教诲，由于仁义而不忍割爱，而事过之后，再看灾祸发生前的迹象，便昭如明镜了。
English: At the beginning of a calamity, it is easy to stop it, but at the end of the calamity, it is difficult to save. It is not because people have neglected a small calamity that they have caused a big disaster. Out of kindness, they can't bear to teach, because of benevolence, they can't bear to cut off love, and after the event, looking at the signs before the disaster, it is clear as a mirror.

古文：夫天不可以不刚，不刚则三光不明；王不可以不强，不强则宰牧从横。
现代文：上天不可以不刚，不刚则日、月、星三光不亮；君王不可以不强，不强则大小官员横行无道。
English: Heaven cannot but be just, and if it is not just, then the sun, moon, and stars will not shine brightly; kings cannot but be strong, and if they are not strong, then officials of all ranks will run amok.

古文：宜因大变，改政匡失，以塞天意。 
现代文：应当趁着天象示警，改正朝政的失误，以回报天意！ 
English: It is necessary to take advantage of the time of great change, the change of government and the loss of power, to supplement the will of heaven.

古文：丙辰，郡国十三地震。
现代文：丙辰，有十三个郡和封国发生地震。
English: On the first day of June, there was a solar eclipse. On the 19th, there was an earthquake.

古文：旱，蝗。
现代文：发生旱灾和蝗灾。
English: Drought, locust plagues.

古文：窦氏父子兄弟并为卿、校，充满朝廷，穰侯邓叠、叠弟步兵校尉磊及母元、宪女婿射声校尉郭举、举父长乐少府璜共相交结；元、举并出入禁中，举得幸太后，遂共图为杀害，帝阴知其谋。
现代文：窦氏父子兄弟同为九卿、校尉，遍布朝廷。穰侯邓叠，他的弟弟、步兵校尉邓磊，母亲元，窦宪的女婿、射声校尉郭举，郭举的父亲、长乐少府郭璜等人，相互勾结在一起。其中元、郭举都出入宫廷，而郭举又得到窦太后的宠幸，他们便共同策划杀害和帝。
English: Both father and son brothers of the Dou clan were nine nobles and school lieutenants, and they were all over the imperial court. Sheng Hou Deng Jui, his younger brother, infantry school lieutenant Deng Lei, his mother Yuan, Dou Xian's son-in-law, lieutenant Guo Jiu, Guo Jiu's father, Changle major Guo Wei, and others colluded with each other. Among them, Yuan and Guo Jiu both entered and left the court, and Guo Jiu was favored by the Dowager Empress Dou, and they jointly plotted to kill Emperor He.

古文：是时，宪兄弟专权，帝与内外臣僚莫由亲接，所与居者阉宦而已。
现代文：和帝暗中了解到他们的阴谋。当时，窦宪兄弟掌握大权，和帝与内外臣僚无法亲身接近，一同相处的只有宦官而已。
English: At that time, the Dou brothers held great power, and the emperor and his domestic and foreign ministers could not personally approach each other, and only eunuchs could get along with each other.

古文：帝以朝臣上下莫不附宪，独中常侍钩盾令郑众，谨敏有心几，不事豪党，遂与众定议诛宪，以宪在外，虑其为乱，忍而未发。
现代文：和帝认为朝中大小官员无不依附窦宪，唯独中常侍、钩盾令郑众谨慎机敏而有心计，不谄事窦氏集团，便同他密谋，决定杀掉窦宪。由于窦宪出征在外，怕他兴兵作乱，所以暂且忍耐而未敢发动。
English: Emperor He thought that all the officials of the dynasty and the imperial court were not independent of Dou Xian. However, the attendants of the imperial court and Hu Jia ordered Zheng Zong to be prudent and astute, and they conspired with him to kill Dou Xian regardless of the Dou clan group. Since Dou Xian was away on a military expedition, they were afraid that he would stir up trouble, so they were patient for the time being and did not dare to launch the attack.

古文：会宪与邓叠皆还京师。
现代文：恰在此刻，窦宪和邓叠全都回到了京城。
English: Just at this moment, Dou Xian and Deng Laixing all returned to Beijing.

古文：时清河王庆，恩遇尤渥，常入省宿止；帝将发其谋，欲得《外戚传》，惧左右，不敢使，令庆私从千乘王求，夜，独内之；又令庆传语郑众，求索故事。
现代文：当时清河王刘庆特别受到和帝的恩遇，经常进入宫廷，留下住宿。和帝即将采取行动，想得《汉书·外戚传》一阅。但他惧怕左右随从之人，不敢让他们去找，便命刘庆私下向千乘王刘伉借阅。夜里，和帝将刘庆单独接入内室。
English: At that time, Liu Qing, the king of the Qing Dynasty, was particularly favored by Emperor He, often entering the court and staying there. When Emperor He was about to take action, he wanted to read "The Book of Han and Her Relatives." However, he was afraid of his followers on both sides and did not dare to let them find it, so he ordered Liu Qing to privately borrow it from Liu Xuan, the king of Qianjiang. At night, Emperor He brought Liu Qing into the inner room alone.

古文：庚申，帝幸北宫，诏执金吾、五校尉勒兵屯卫南、北宫，闭城门，收捕郭璜、郭举、邓叠、邓磊，皆下狱死。
现代文：又命刘庆向郑众传话，让他搜集皇帝诛杀舅父的先例。六月庚申，和帝临幸北宫，下诏命令执金吾和北军五校尉领兵备战，驻守南宫和北宫；关闭城门，逮捕郭璜、郭举、邓叠、邓磊，将他们全部送往监狱处死。
English: He also ordered Liu Qing to send a message to Zheng Zongzhu, asking him to collect precedents of emperors assassinating their uncles. In June, Goshun and Emperor Linxuan issued an edict to the Northern Palace, ordering the execution of Kingu and the fifth lieutenant of the Northern Army to lead the troops to prepare for war, stationed in the South Palace and the North Palace; closed the city gate, arrested Guo Jun, Guo Jou, Deng Jia, and Deng Lei, and sent them all to prison to be executed.

古文：遣谒者仆射收宪大将军印绶，更封为冠军侯，与笃、景、瑰皆就国。
现代文：并派谒者仆射收回窦宪的大将军印信绶带，将他改封为冠军侯，同窦笃、窦景、窦一并前往各自的封国。
English: He also sent a messenger to recover Dou Xian's general seal letter and sash, changed his title to champion, and went to their respective fiefs together with Dou Tu, Dou Jing, and Dou.

古文：帝以太后故，不欲名诛宪，为选严能相督察之。
现代文：和帝因窦太后的缘故，不愿正式处决窦宪，而为他选派严苛干练的封国宰相进行监督。
English: Because of the Dowager Dowager Dou, Emperor He did not want to formally execute Dou Xian, but selected a strict and capable vassal prime minister to supervise him.

古文：宪、笃、景到国，皆迫令自杀。
现代文：窦宪、窦笃、窦景到达封国以后，全都强迫命令自杀。
English: Dou Xian, Dou Tu and Dou Jing were all forced to commit suicide after they arrived in the fief.

古文：初，河南尹张酺，数以正法绳治窦景，及窦氏败，酺上疏曰： 方宪等宠贵，群臣阿附唯恐不及，皆言宪受顾命之托，怀伊、吕之忠，至乃复比邓夫人于文母。
现代文：当初，河南尹张曾屡次依法制裁过窦景。及至窦氏家族败亡，张上书说： 当初窦宪等人受宠而身居显贵的时候，群臣阿谀附从他们唯恐不及，都说窦宪接受先帝临终顾命的嘱托，怀有辅佐商汤之伊尹、辅佐周武王之吕尚的忠诚，甚至还将邓叠的母亲元比作周武王的母亲文母。
English: At the beginning, Yin Zhang of Henan Province repeatedly sanctioned Doujing in accordance with the law. As far as the fall of the Dou family, Zhang Shangshu said: At the beginning, when Dou Xian and others were favored and lived in a dignified manner, the vassals were too afraid to follow them. They all said that Dou Xian accepted the last request of the late emperor, had the loyalty of Yi Yin, the assistant of Shang Tang, and Lushang, the assistant of King Zhou Wu, and even compared Deng Lai's mother Yuan to the mother of King Zhou Wu.

古文：今严威既行，皆言当死，不顾其前后，考折厥衷。
现代文：如今圣上的严厉诏命颁行以后，众人又都说窦宪等人该当处死，而不顾他们的前前后后，推究他们的真实思想。
English: Now, after the Holy Father's stern edict was issued, everyone is saying that Dou Xian and others should be put to death, regardless of their past and present, to investigate their true thoughts.

古文：臣伏见夏阳侯瑰每存忠善，前与臣言，常有尽节之心，检敕宾客，未尝犯法。
现代文：我看到夏阳侯窦一贯忠诚善良，他曾与我交谈，经常表露出为国尽节之心。他约束管教宾客，从未违犯法律。
English: I saw that Xia Yang Hou Dou was always loyal and good-natured. He talked to me and often showed his heart for the country. He restrained and disciplined guests and never violated the law.

古文：臣闻王政骨肉之刑，有三宥之义，过厚不过薄。
现代文：我听说圣明君王之政，对于亲属的刑罚，原则上能够赦免三次，可以过于宽厚，而不过于刻薄。
English: The vassal heard that the punishment of the flesh and blood, there are three yoke of righteousness, too thick but not thin.

古文：今议者欲为瑰选严能相，恐其迫切，必不完免，宜裁加贷宥，以崇厚德。 
现代文：如今有人建议为窦选派严厉干练的封国宰相，我担心这样会使窦遭到迫害，必不能保全性命而免去一死。应只对窦予以宽大，以增厚恩德。 
English: Now it is suggested that a stern and capable vassal prime minister should be selected for Dou. I am afraid that this will cause Dou to be persecuted, and it will not be possible to save his life and avoid death. It should only be lenient to Dou in order to increase grace.

古文：帝感共言，由是瑰独得全。
现代文：和帝被他的言辞所感动，因此窦独得保全。
English: Emperor He was moved by his words, so Dou was spared.

古文：窦氏宗族宾客以宪为官者，皆免归故郡。
现代文：窦氏家族及其宾客，凡因窦宪的关系而当官的，一律遭到罢免，被遣回原郡。
English: The Dou family and their guests, all of whom were officials due to their relationship with Dou Xian, were all dismissed and sent back to their original county.

古文：初，班固奴尝醉骂洛阳令种兢，兢因逮考窦氏宾客，收捕固，死狱中。
现代文：当初，班固的奴仆曾因醉酒辱骂过洛阳令种兢。种兢便借着捉拿审讯窦家宾客的机会，逮捕了班固。班固死在狱中。
English: At first, Ban Gu's servant had insulted Luoyang Ling Zengjing for being drunk. Zengjing seized the opportunity to interrogate the guests of the Dou family and arrested Ban Gu. Ban Gu died in prison.

古文：固尝著《汉书》，尚未就，诏固女弟曹寿妻昭踵而成之。
现代文：班固曾编著《汉书》，当时尚未完稿。和帝下诏，命班固的妹妹、曹寿的妻子班昭继续撰写，完成此书。
English: At that time, Ban Gu was compiling "The Book of the Han Dynasty," but the manuscript was not yet complete. In accordance with the Emperor's edict, Ban Zhao, Ban Gu's sister and Cao Shou's wife, continued to write and complete the book.

古文：华峤论曰：固之序事，不激诡，不抑抗，赡而不秽，详而有体，使读之者亹亹而不厌，信哉其能成名也！
现代文：华峤论曰：班固记述史事，不偏激，不诋毁，不贬抑，不抬举，丰富而不芜杂，周详而有系统，令人一读再读，不知厌倦。正是由于这个原因，他才得以成名。
English: According to Huayuan, "Banggu's historical record is not biased, not slanderous, not derogatory, not exalted, rich and not mixed, detailed and systematic, and makes people read it again and again without getting tired. It is precisely for this reason that he became famous.

古文：固讥司马迁是非颇谬于圣人，然其论议，常排死节，否正直，而不叙杀身成仁之为美，则轻仁义，贱守节甚矣！
现代文：班固讥刺司马迁所是所非颇违背圣人之道，然而他自己的议论，却常常排斥死节，否定公正刚直，而且不记述杀身成仁者的美德。如此看来，班固本人则是太轻仁义、贱守节了！
English: Ban Gu's criticism of the Sima Relocation Center is not contrary to the saint's way, but his own arguments often exclude the Day of the Dead, deny justice and rectitude, and do not describe the virtues of those who kill themselves to become benevolent. In this light, Ban Gu himself is too light on benevolence and lowly to keep the festival!

古文：初，窦宪纳妻，天下郡国皆有礼庆。
现代文：当初，窦宪娶妻的时候，天下各郡各封国都致送贺礼。
English: At first, when Dou Xian married his wife, all counties and fiefdoms in the world sent congratulations.

古文：汉中郡亦当遣吏，户曹李郃谏曰： 窦将军椒房之亲，不修德礼而专权骄恣，危亡之祸，可翘足而待；愿明府一心王室，勿与交通。 
现代文：汉中郡也要派官员前去送礼，户曹李劝谏太守说： 窦将军身为皇后的亲属，不修养德礼，却专权骄横，他的危险败亡之祸，马上就要来临。愿阁下一心效忠王室，不要与他来往。 
English: Hanzhong County should also send officials to send gifts. Hou Cao Li advised the Empress Dowager to say: General Dou, as a relative of the queen, does not cultivate virtue and courtesy, but is autocratic and arrogant. His dangerous downfall is about to come. May your heart be loyal to the royal family and do not associate with him.

古文：太守固遣之，郃不能止，请求自行，许之。
现代文：但太守坚持要派人送礼，李不能阻止，就请求让自己前去。
English: But the daimyō insisted on sending someone to deliver the gift, and Li could not stop him, so he asked to be allowed to go.

古文：郃遂所在迟留以观其变，行至扶风而宪就国。
现代文：太守应允。李便随处拖延停留，以观察形势变化。当他走到扶风时，窦氏家族倾覆。窦宪被遣送封国。
English: The daimyō agreed. Li then delayed his arrival everywhere to observe the changing situation. When he reached Fufeng, the Dou family was overthrown. Dou Xian was sent into exile.

古文：凡交通者皆坐免官，汉中太守独不与焉。
现代文：凡与窦宪交往的官员，全都因罪免官，而汉中郡太守独不在内。
English: All officials who had dealings with Dou Xian have been removed from office for their crimes, but Hanzhong County Governor Du Du is not among them.

古文：帝赐清河王庆奴婢、舆马、钱帛、珍宝，充牣其第。
现代文：和帝赏赐清河王刘庆奴婢、车马、钱帛、珍宝，装满他的府第。
English: The emperor rewarded the Qing River King Liu Qing with slaves, chariots, horses, money bags, and precious treasures, filling his palace.

古文：庆或时不安，帝朝夕问讯，进膳药，所以垂意甚备。
现代文：刘庆身体偶有不适，和帝就派人早晚探问，送去饮食和医药，垂顾关怀十分周到。
English: Liu Qing occasionally felt unwell, and Emperor He sent someone to inquire morning and evening, and sent food and medicine. The care was very thoughtful.

古文：庆亦小心恭孝，自以废黜，尤畏事慎法，故能保其宠禄焉。
现代文：而刘庆也小心谨慎而恭敬孝友，因自身曾遭废黜，他特别怕事，唯恐触犯法律，所以能够保住恩宠和厚禄。
English: But Liu Qing was also cautious and respectful of his friends. Because he had been deposed, he was particularly afraid of things, lest he break the law, so he was able to keep his grace and fortune.

古文：帝除袁安子赏为郎，任隗子屯为步兵校尉，郑众迁大长秋。
现代文：和帝将袁安的儿子袁赏任命为郎，将任隗的儿子任屯任命为步兵校尉，将郑众擢升为大长秋。
English: Emperor He appointed Yuan An's son Yuan Yun as his brother-in-law, Ren Yao's son Ren Tun as an infantry captain, and promoted Zheng Zhuanzhong to the rank of grand chancellor.

古文：帝策勋班赏，众每辞多受少，帝由是贤之，常与之议论政事，宦官用权自此始矣。
现代文：和帝论功行赏，郑众总是谦让多而接受少。和帝因此认为郑众是位贤臣，常常同他一起讨论政事。宦官掌权，便从此开始了。
English: When discussing and rewarding merit with the emperor, Zheng Zong always humbly conceded more and accepted less. Therefore, Emperor He considered Zheng Zong to be a wise minister, and often discussed political affairs with him. The eunuch took power, and this is where it all began.

古文：秋，七月，己丑，太尉宋由以窦氏党策免，自杀。
现代文：秋季，七月己丑，太尉宋由被指控为窦氏党羽，由和帝颁策罢免。宋由自杀。
English: In the autumn, in July, Taifu Song Yu was accused of being a Dou faction member and was dismissed by Emperor He. Song Yu committed suicide.

古文：八月，辛亥，司空任隗薨。
现代文：八月辛亥，司空任隗去世。
English: In August Xinhai, Sikuo Renjun passed away.

古文：癸丑，以大司农尹睦为太尉。
现代文：癸丑，将大司农尹睦任命为太尉。
English: 丑, appointed the head of the department, Nong Yin Moo, as a second lieutenant.

古文：太傅邓彪以老病上还枢机职，诏许焉，以睦代彪录尚书事。
现代文：太傅邓彪因年老多病，请求辞去主管中枢机要的职务。和帝下诏应允，命令尹睦代替邓彪主管尚书事务。
English: Deng Biao, due to his old age and illness, asked to resign from the post of the head of the central cardinal. The emperor agreed and ordered Yin Mutu to replace Deng Biao as the head of Shangshu affairs.

古文：冬，十月，己亥，以宗正刘方为司空。
现代文：冬季，十月，将宗正刘方任命为司空。
English: In the winter, in October, Zongzheng Liufang was appointed as Sikuo.

古文：武陵、零陵、澧中蛮叛。
现代文：武陵、零陵、澧中蛮人反叛。
English: The barbarians in Wuling, Zeruling and Yanzhong rebelled.

古文：护羌校尉邓训卒，吏、民、羌、胡旦夕临者日数千人。
现代文：护羌校尉邓训去世。宦吏、百姓、羌人和胡人从早到晚前往哀悼的，每日有数千人。
English: Thousands of cadres, commoners, Xiongnu and Hu people went to mourn the death of the cadre captain Deng Xun from morning to night.

古文：羌、胡或以刀自割，又刺杀其犬马牛羊，曰： 邓使君已死，我曹亦俱死耳！ 
现代文：有的羌人和胡人甚至用刀自刺，并杀死自己的狗马牛羊，说： 邓使君已死，我们也一起死吧！ 
English: Some Han and Hu people even stabbed themselves with a knife and killed their dogs, horses, cattle and sheep, saying: "Deng Zhijun is dead, let's die together!"

古文：前乌桓吏士皆奔走道路，至空城郭；吏执，不听，以状白校尉徐傿，傿叹息曰： 此为义也！ 
现代文：邓训先前担任护乌桓校尉时的部下，全都上路奔丧，以至城郭为之一空。有关官员用逮捕奔丧者的手段进行阻拦，但人们并不理会。有关官员将情况报告了护乌桓校尉徐，徐叹道： 这是为了义呵！ 
English: All of Deng Xun's subordinates, who had previously served as Wuhuan's bodyguards, were killed on the road, so much so that the castle was empty. Relevant officials used the means of arresting the dead to stop them, but people did not pay attention. Relevant officials reported the situation to Wuhuan's bodyguard Xu, and Xu sighed: This is for the sake of justice!

古文：乃释之。
现代文：便下令将被捕者释放。
English: As a result, the brother was released.

古文：遂家家为训立祠，每有疾病，辄请祷求福。
现代文：于是，当地家家户户为邓训立祠进行供奉，每当疾疫发生，人们就向邓训祭告祈福。
English: As a result, local families have made offerings to the Dengxun Temple, and whenever a disease occurs, people pray to the Dengxun Festival.

古文：蜀郡太守聂尚代训为护羌校尉，欲以恩怀诸羌，乃遣译使招呼迷唐，使还居大、小榆谷。
现代文：蜀郡太守聂尚接替邓训担任护羌校尉。他打算对羌人各部落实行怀柔政策，便派翻译做使者招抚迷唐，让他返回大、小榆谷居住。
English: Emperor Taizong of Shu County, who succeeded Deng Xun as the captain of the Xiongnu garrison, intended to implement a policy of appeasement towards the Xiongnu, and sent an interpreter as an emissary to entice Fan Tang to return to live in the large and small Xiongnu valleys.

古文：迷唐既还，遣祖母卑缺诣尚，尚自送至塞下，为设祖道，令译田汜等五人护送至庐落。
现代文：迷唐回到大、小榆谷以后，派他的祖母卑缺来拜见聂尚。聂尚亲自将卑缺送到边塞之外，为她饯行，命翻译田汜等五人护送她回到羌人驻地。
English: After Mian Tang returned, he sent his grandmother, Hie Kuo, to Gongsang. Gongsang personally sent Hie Kuo to the border, offered sacrifices to the Road God and held a banquet to see her off, and sent five people, including the translator Tian Qi, to escort her to the tribe.

古文：迷唐遂反，与诸种共生屠裂汜等，以血盟诅，复寇金城塞。
现代文：但迷唐又一次反叛，会同各部落一道生屠田汜等人，割裂他们的肢体，用鲜血盟誓，再度侵犯金城塞。
English: However, the Tang Dynasty once again rebelled and, together with various tribes, created the Tuyetian and other tribes, severed their limbs, swore with blood, and once again invaded Jincheng.

古文：尚坐免。
现代文：聂尚因罪而免官。
English: Gong Shang was removed from office for his crime.

古文：孝和皇帝下永元五年
现代文：永元五年
English: The fifth year of the Yongyuan era

古文：春，正月，乙亥，宗祀明堂，登灵台，赦天下。
现代文：春季，正月乙亥，和帝在明堂祭祀祖宗。登上灵台，观察天象。大赦天下。
English: In spring, in the first month of the year, Emperor Go-Shirakawa and Emperor Go-Shirakawa offer sacrifices to their ancestors in the Myodo Hall. They climb onto the platform to observe the celestial bodies.

古文：戊子，千乘贞王伉薨。
现代文：戊子，千乘贞王刘伉去世。
English: Wu Zi, Qian Rong Zhen Wang Liu Yao passed away.

古文：辛卯，封皇弟万岁为广宗王。
现代文：辛卯，将皇弟刘万岁封为广宗王。
English: Xinwu then crowned the emperor's younger brother Liu Wanying as the Guangzong Emperor.

古文：甲寅，太傅邓彪薨。
现代文：甲寅，太傅邓彪去世。
English: Emperor Jiajing, Emperor Deng Biao passed away.

古文：戊午，陇西地震。
现代文：戊午，陇西郡发生地震。
English: On the 25th, the Shaanxi earthquake.

古文：夏，四月，壬子，绍封阜陵殇王兄鲂为阜陵王。
现代文：夏季，四月壬子，将已故阜陵殇王刘冲的哥哥刘鲂封为阜陵王。
English: In the summer, in April, Ren Zi made Liu Xuan, the brother of the late Liu Chong, the King of Fulin, the King of Fulin.

古文：九月，辛酉，广宗殇王万岁薨，无子，国除。
现代文：九月辛酉，广宗王刘万岁去世。因无子嗣，封国撤除。
English: In September, Guangzong King Liu Wanli passed away. As he had no children, his fief was revoked.

古文：初，窦宪既立于除鞬为北单于，欲辅归北庭，会宪诛而止。
现代文：当初，窦宪将於除立为北匈奴单于以后，曾计划护送他返回北匈奴王庭。遇到窦宪败亡，该计划作罢。
English: At first, Dou Xianjun had planned to escort him back to the Northern Xiongnu royal court after he became the sole ruler of the Northern Xiongnu. When Dou Xianjun was defeated, the plan was abandoned.

古文：于除鞬自畔还北，诏遣将兵长史王辅以千馀骑与任尚共追讨，斩之，破灭其众。
现代文：於除自行叛离，返回北方。和帝下诏，派将兵长史王辅率领一千余骑兵，同中郎将任尚一同追击讨伐。汉军将於除斩杀，消灭了他的部众。
English: In addition to defecting on his own, he returned to the north. In accordance with the emperor's edict, he sent the commander Shi Wangfu to lead more than a thousand cavalry, and together with the middle-ranking officer Ren Shang to pursue the crusade. The Chinese army killed in addition to eliminate his subordinates.

古文：耿夔之破北匈奴也，鲜卑因此转徙据其地。
现代文：自从耿夔大败北匈奴，鲜卑人便乘此机会辗转迁徙，占据了北匈奴的故地。
English: Since the great defeat of the Northern Xiongnu by Genghis Khan, the Xianbei people have taken this opportunity to migrate and occupy the ancestral land of the Northern Xiongnu.

古文：匈奴馀种留者尚有十馀万落，皆自号鲜卑；鲜卑就此渐盛。
现代文：匈奴人残存的还有十余万户，全都自称为鲜卑人。鲜卑从此日益强盛。
English: There are still more than a hundred thousand remaining Hun households, all of which call themselves Xianbei. Xianbei has become increasingly powerful since then.

古文：冬，十月，辛未，太尉尹睦薨。
现代文：冬季，十月辛未，太尉尹睦去世。
English: In the winter, in October, Lieutenant Yin Mucong passed away.

古文：十一月，乙丑，太仆张酺为太尉。
现代文：十一月乙丑，将太仆张任命为太尉。
English: In November of the second month of the ugly, Zhang was appointed as the first lieutenant.

古文：酺与尚书张敏等奏 射声校尉曹褒，擅制汉礼，破乱圣术，宜加刑诛。 
现代文：张与尚书张敏等人上书指出： 射声校尉曹褒，擅自制定汉朝礼仪，破坏扰乱圣人之道，应当处以刑罚。 
English: Zhang and Shangshu Zhang Min et al. pointed out in their petition: the firing of Lieutenant Cao Bo, the unauthorized formulation of Han Dynasty etiquette, and the destruction and disruption of the saint's path should be punished.

古文：书凡五奏。
现代文：先后共上书五次。
English: It has been submitted five times.

古文：帝知酺守学不通，虽寝其奏，而汉礼遂不行。
现代文：和帝知道张严守儒学正统，但僵固而不通达。他虽然不理会张的奏书，但从此便不再实行曹褒制定的汉礼。
English: Emperor He knew that Zhang strictly adhered to the orthodoxy of Confucianism, but he was inflexible and incompetent. Although he ignored Zhang's report, he no longer practiced the Chinese etiquette established by Cao Bo.

古文：是岁，武陵郡兵破叛蛮，降之。
现代文：本年，武陵郡郡兵打败叛乱的蛮人，接受蛮人投降。
English: This year, the soldiers of Wuling County defeated the rebels and subdued them.

古文：梁王畅与从官卞忌祠祭求福，忌等谄媚云： 神言王当为天子。 
现代文：梁王刘畅与随从官卞忌一道祭祀祈福。卞忌等谄媚说： 神灵说大王应当做皇帝。 
English: Liang Wang Liu Chang together with the attendant official Zou Ji made a sacrifice to pray for good luck. Zou Ji and others said: The gods said that the great king should be the emperor.

古文：畅与相应答，为有司所奏，请征诣诏狱。
现代文：刘畅便同他对答谈论起来。有关官员对此提出弹劾，请求下令将刘畅征召进京，囚禁诏狱。
English: Relevant officials filed an impeachment against this, requesting an order to conscript Liu Chang to Beijing and imprison him.

古文：帝不许，但削成武、单父二县。
现代文：和帝没有批准，只将刘畅的封土削去成武、单父两县。
English: Emperor He did not give his approval, and only cut Liu Chang's fief to Chengwu and the two single-parent counties.

古文：畅惭惧，上疏深自刻责曰： 臣天性狂愚，不知防禁，自陷死罪，分伏显诛。
现代文：刘畅惭愧而又惶恐，上书痛切地自责道： 我生性狂妄愚昧，不知禁忌，自陷于死罪，按理该当诛杀示众。
English: Embarrassed and terrified, Liu Chang wrote a letter to himself, bitterly blaming himself: I am born with arrogance and stupidity, I don't know the taboos, I've been caught in a capital crime, I should be killed.

古文：陛下圣德，枉法曲平，横贷赦臣，为臣受污。
现代文：但陛下恩德深厚，违背法律和公平，而硬将我予以赦免，为我受到了玷污。
English: However, His Majesty's kindness was profound, and he violated the law and fairness, and forced me to be pardoned, and I was tarnished.

古文：臣知大贷不可再得，自誓束身约妻子，不敢复出入失绳墨，不敢复有所横费，租入有馀，乞裁食睢阳、穀熟、虞、蒙、宁陵五县，还馀所食四县。
现代文：我心知宽大的赦免不可再得，因此发誓约束自己和妻子儿女，不敢再有越轨的举动，也不敢再有浪费的行为。封国租税收入有余，我请求只享用睢阳、谷熟、虞、蒙、宁陵五县，将剩下的四县封土交还国家。
English: I know in my heart that a lenient pardon can never be obtained again, so I swear to restrain myself, my wife and children, not to dare any more deviant behavior, nor wasteful behavior. There is more than enough tax revenue from the fief, I request that I only enjoy the five counties of Fenyang, Guzhu, Yu, Meng and Ningling, and return the remaining four counties of fief to the state.

古文：臣畅小妻三十七人，其无子者，愿还本家，自选择谨敕奴婢二百人，其馀所受虎贲、官骑及诸工技、鼓吹、仓头、奴婢、兵弩、厩马，皆上还本署。
现代文：我有妾三十七人，其中没有子女的，愿将她们送回娘家。我自己挑选谨慎规矩的奴婢二百人留下，除此之外，将赐给我的虎贲武士、骑兵仪仗，以及各种技艺的工匠、乐队、仆隶、奴婢、兵器、马匹，全部上缴原来所属官署。
English: I have thirty-seven concubines, of whom there are no children, and I would like to send them back to their mothers. I will keep the two hundred slaves and maidservants whom I have carefully selected. In addition, I will hand over to the government office to which I belonged all the tiger-soldiers, cavalry, and craftsmen of various skills, bands, servants, slaves, weapons, and horses that were given to me.

古文：臣畅以骨肉近亲，乱圣化，污清流，既得生活，诚无心面目以凶恶复居大宫，食大国，张官属，藏什物，愿陛下加恩开许。 
现代文：我身为圣上的骨肉近亲，竟扰乱圣明的教化，玷污纯洁的风气，如今既然已经保全性命，我实在无心无颜以罪恶之身再在巨大的宫室居住，拥有广袤的封国，设置官员僚属，收罗享用各种器具。愿陛下开恩准许我的请求。 
English: I, as a flesh-and-blood relative of the Holy One, have disturbed the sanctity of the enlightenment and defiled the purity of the culture, and now that I have saved my life, I really have no intention or shame to live in a huge palace with a sinful body, have a vast country, set up officials and subordinates, and enjoy all kinds of utensils. May His Majesty graciously grant my request.

古文：上优诏不听。
现代文：和帝下诏表示宽大，温和地拒绝了他的请求。
English: Emperor He showed clemency and gently rejected his request.

古文：护羌校尉贯友遣译使构离诸羌，诱以财货，由是解散。
现代文：护羌校尉贯友派翻译官做使者，离间羌人诸部落，并用财物进行引诱，羌人诸部落联盟因此瓦解。
English: The captain of the garrison sent an interpreter to act as an emissary, to drive the tribes apart, and lured them with wealth. As a result, the alliance of the tribes collapsed.

古文：乃遣兵出塞，攻迷唐于大、小榆谷，获首虏八百馀人，收麦数万斛。遂夹逢留大河筑城坞，作大航，造河桥，欲度兵击迷唐。
现代文：于是贯友派兵出塞，在大、小榆谷对迷唐展开进攻，斩杀及俘虏八百余人，缴获小麦数万斛，然后又在逢留大河两岸修筑城堡，制造大船，兴建河桥，打算派兵渡河去追击迷唐。
English: As a result, Su Xunyou sent troops out of the city and launched an attack on Fan Tang in Dai and Xiaoshu valleys, killing and capturing more than 800 people and seizing tens of thousands of shekels of wheat. He then built a castle on both sides of the Fenglu River, made large ships, built a river bridge, and planned to send troops across the river to pursue Fan Tang.

古文：迷唐率部落远徙，依赐支河曲。
现代文：迷唐率领部落向远方迁徙，到达赐支河曲。
English: Meitang led the tribe to migrate to a distant place and arrived at Jizhihequ.

古文：单于顿屠何死，单于宣弟安国立。
现代文：匈奴单于屯屠何去世，前单于宣的弟弟安国继位。
English: Xun Nuan died in Tun Tu He, and was succeeded by his younger brother, An Guo.

古文：安国初为左贤王，无称誉；及为单于，单于適之子左谷蠡王师子以次转为左贤王。
现代文：安国曾为左贤王，声誉不佳，及至他当了单于，前单于适的儿子右谷蠡王师子按照顺序转升为左贤王。
English: An Guo used to be King Zuoxian, with a bad reputation, until he became Shanyu, and the son of the former Shanyu, Ugu Ying Wang Shizi, was promoted to King Zuoxian in accordance with the order.

古文：师子素勇黠多知，前单于宣及屯屠何皆爱其气决，数遣将兵出塞，掩击北庭，还，受赏赐，天子亦加殊异。
现代文：师子一向勇猛狡黠而足智多谋，前单于宣和屯屠何二人都喜爱他的勇气和果敢，屡次派他领兵出塞，去袭击北匈奴。他回师后，受到赏赐，汉朝皇帝也对他特别看重。
English: His mentor had always been brave, cunning and resourceful. The two previous emperors, Xuan Zhan and Tun Tu, loved his courage and determination, and repeatedly sent him to lead troops out of Tibet to attack the Northern Xiongnu. After he returned to his mentor, he was rewarded, and the Han Dynasty emperor also paid special attention to him.

古文：由是国中尽敬师子而不附安国，安国欲杀之。
现代文：因此，匈奴国内都尊敬师子而不依附安国，安国想杀死师子。
English: Therefore, all the Huns in the country respected their mentors and did not cling to Ankoku, and Ankoku wanted to kill their mentors.

古文：诸新降胡，初在塞外数为师子所驱掠，多怨之。
现代文：而那些新投降的北匈奴人，当初在塞外曾屡遭师子的袭击掳掠，多对他十分痛恨。
English: And those newly surrendered Northern Huns, who had been repeatedly attacked and plundered by their masters outside of Serbia, mostly hated him very much.

古文：安国因是委计降者，与同谋议。
现代文：安国便将自己的打算寄托在投降者身上，和他们一同策划。
English: Therefore, An Guo appointed some people who had surrendered to conspire and discuss with them.

古文：师子觉其谋，乃别居五原界，每龙庭会议，师子辄称病不往。
现代文：师子察觉了他们的阴谋，就分居五原郡界。每逢匈奴王庭集会，他总是称病而不肯前往。
English: The master and apprentice discovered their plot and separated to live on the border of Wuhuan County. Whenever there was a meeting of the Xiongnu royal court, he always called in sick and refused to go.

古文：度辽将军皇甫稜知之，亦拥护不遣，单于怀愤益甚。
现代文：度辽将军皇甫棱知悉这一内情，也支持保护师子而不派他前往王庭。单于安国愈发怀恨。
English: Emperor Furen, the general of Du Liao, was aware of this secret, and also supported the protection of Shishi without sending him to the royal court.

古文：孝和皇帝下永元六年
现代文：永元六年
English: In the sixth year of Yongyuan

古文：春，正月，皇甫稜免，以执金吾硃徽行度辽将军。
现代文：春季，正月，将皇甫棱免官，命执金吾朱徽代理度辽将军职务。
English: In the spring, the first month of the year, Emperor Furen was relieved of his duties, and Jinwu Zhuhui was appointed as the acting general of Liao.

古文：时单于与中郎将杜崇不相平，乃上书告崇；崇讽西河太守令断单于章，单于无由自闻。
现代文：当时因匈奴单于与中郎将杜崇不和，单于便上书控告杜崇。杜崇暗示西河太守截留单于的奏章，使单于无法申诉自己的意见。
English: At that time, because the Xiongnu Sanyu was at odds with the Middle Lord Du Chong, Sanyu wrote a letter to sue Du Chong. Du Chong implied that the Western Governor had cut off Sanyu's record, so that Sanyu could not appeal his own opinion.

古文：崇因与硃徽上言： 南单于安国，疏远故胡，亲近新降，欲杀左贤王师子及左台且渠刘利等；又，右部降者，谋共迫胁安国起兵背畔，请西河、上郡、安定为之儆备。 
现代文：杜崇自己却乘机与朱徽一同上书说： 南匈奴单于安国，疏远旧部，亲近新降之人，想要杀害左贤王师子和左台且渠刘利等。再者，匈奴右部的投降者正在策划共同胁迫安国起兵反叛。请西河、上郡、安定三郡为此警戒备战。 
English: Du Chong himself, however, took the opportunity to write a letter together with Zhu Hui, saying: The Southern Xiongnu is isolated in An Guo, estranged from the old faction, close to the newly surrendered people, and wants to kill Zuo Xian Wang Shizi and Zuo Tai Kechi Liu Li. Furthermore, the surrenderers on the right side of the Xiongnu are planning to jointly coerce An Guo to rise up in rebellion. Please be alert and prepare for war in the three counties of Xihe, Shangguan, and Anding.

古文：帝下公卿议，皆以为： 蛮夷反覆，虽难测知，然大兵聚会，必未敢动摇。
现代文：和帝将此事交付公卿进行讨论。众人都认为： 匈奴反复无常，尽管难以预料，但由于汉朝有重兵集结，它必定不敢有大的举动。
English: The emperor referred the matter to the nobles for discussion, and everyone agreed: The Xiongnu is capricious, and although it is difficult to predict, due to the heavy concentration of troops in the Han Dynasty, it must not dare to make a big move.

古文：今宜遣有方略使者之单于庭，与杜崇、硃徽及西河太守并力，观其动静。
现代文：如今应派遣有谋略的使者前往单于王庭，与杜崇、朱徽及西河太守合作，观察匈奴的动静。
English: Now it is time to send an emissary with a strategy to the royal court in Shanyu, cooperate with Du Chong, Zhu Hui and the governor of the West River, and observe the movement of the Xiongnu.

古文：如无它变，可令崇等就安国会其左右大臣，责其部众横暴为边害者，共平罪诛。
现代文：如果没有其它变化，可命令杜崇等人在安国那里召集他的左右大臣，责罚横行凶暴侵害边疆的部众，共同评议，论罪诛杀。
English: If there are no other changes, Du Chong and others can be ordered to go to the State Security Office, call together the ministers who are alone, blame the cruel people who harm the border among the ministers, and jointly discuss their crimes.

古文：若不从命，令为权时方略，事毕之后。裁行赏赐，亦足以威示百蛮。 
现代文：倘若安国不听从命令，则授权使者随机应变，采取权宜之计，等事情结束之后，再酌情进行赏赐，也足以向所有蛮族显示汉朝的国威。 
English: If An Guo did not obey the order, he would authorize the emissary to make random adjustments, take expedient measures, and reward him as appropriate after the matter was over. It was also enough to show the national prestige of the Han Dynasty to all barbarians.

古文：帝从之，于是徽、崇遂发兵造其庭。安国夜闻汉军至，大惊，弃帐而去。因举兵欲诛师子。
现代文：朱徽、杜崇便率军来到匈奴王庭。安国夜里听到汉军抵达的消息，大为震惊，丢弃庐帐而逃，随即调集军队，要诛杀师子。
English: Zhu Hui and Du Chong then led the army to the Hun king's court. An Guo was greatly shocked when he heard the news of the arrival of the Chinese army in the night. He threw away his money and fled, and then mobilized the army to fight and kill his mentor.

古文：师子先知，乃悉将庐落入曼柏城，安国追到城下，门闭，不得入。
现代文：师子事先得到消息，便率领全体部众进入曼柏城。安国追到城下，城门关闭，不能进入。
English: Having received the news in advance, the master and disciple led the entire congregation into Manpai City. Ankoku chased them to the foot of the city, but the gates were closed and they could not enter.

古文：硃徽遣吏晓譬和之，安国不听。
现代文：朱徽派官员进行调停，安国不肯接受。
English: Zhuhui sent officials to mediate, but An Guo refused to accept.

古文：城既不下，乃引兵屯五原。
现代文：城既不能攻克，安国便率兵驻扎五原。
English: Since Manpo Castle could not be taken, An Guo led his troops to garrison Wuhuan.

古文：崇、徽因发诸郡骑追赴之急，众皆大恐，安国舅骨都侯喜为等虑并被诛，乃格杀安国，立师子为亭独尸逐侯鞮单于。
现代文：于是杜崇、朱徽调发各郡骑兵急速追击，匈奴人全都大为恐慌。安国的舅父、骨都侯喜为等担心一并被诛，便将安国格杀，拥立师子为亭独尸逐侯单于。
English: As a result, Du Chong and Zhu Hui dispatched cavalry from various counties to pursue them rapidly, and the Xiongnu people were all very panicked. An Guo's uncle, Bone Capital Hou Xi, was worried that he would be arrested, so he killed An Guo Ge, and took his teacher and son as his only corpse.

古文：己卯，司徒丁鸿薨。
现代文：正月己卯，司徒丁鸿去世。
English: On the 21st, Szu Dinghong passed away.

古文：二月，丁未，以司空刘方为司徒，太常张奋为司空。
现代文：二月丁未，将司空刘方任命为司徒，将太常张奋任命为司空。
English: In February, Ding Wei appointed Liu Fang, the Secretary of the Air Force, as the Secretary of the Air Force, and Zhang Fen, the Secretary of the Navy, as the Secretary of the Air Force.

古文：夏，五月，城阳怀王淑薨，无子，国除。
现代文：夏季，五月，城阳怀王刘淑去世。因无子嗣，封国撤除。
English: In the summer, in May, Liu Shu, the King of Chengyang Huai, passed away. As he had no children, the feudal state was abolished.

古文：秋，七月，京师旱。
现代文：秋季，七月，京城发生旱灾。
English: In the autumn, in July, there was a drought in Kyoto.

古文：西域都护班超发龟兹、鄯善等八国兵合七万馀人讨焉耆，到其城下，诱焉耆王广、尉犁王泛等于陈睦故城，斩之，传首京师；因纵兵钞掠，斩首五千馀级，获生口万五千人，更立焉耆左侯元孟为焉耆王。
现代文：西域都护班超征发龟兹、鄯善等八国军队，共七万余人，讨伐焉耆。大军抵达焉耆城下，把焉耆王广、尉黎王等引诱到已故西域都护陈睦驻扎过的故城，然后斩杀，将人头送往京城洛阳。班超乘胜放纵士兵抄劫掳掠，斩杀五千余人，生擒一万五千人，改立焉耆左侯元孟为焉耆王。
English: The troops of eight countries, including more than 70,000 soldiers from the Western Capital Guards, led by the superintendent of the Western Capital Guards, Ban Chaozhong, were sent to fight Yanqi. The large army arrived at the city of Yanqi, lured Wang Guang and Li Wang to the old city where the late Western Capital Guards Chen Mutu had been stationed, and then killed them and sent their heads to the capital city of Luoyang. The superintendent of the Western Capital Guards took advantage of the victory to indulge the soldiers to plunder and loot, killed more than 5,000 people, killed 15,000 people, and re-established Yuan Meng, the left-handed governor of Yan

古文：超留焉耆半岁，慰抚之。
现代文：班超留驻焉耆半年，进行安抚。
English: The superintendent stayed for half a year to pacify the situation.

古文：于是西域五十馀国悉纳质内属，至于海滨，四万里外，皆重译贡献。
现代文：于是西域五十余国全都派送人质，归附汉朝。远至西海之滨，四万里外的国家，都经过几重翻译来汉朝进贡。
English: As a result, all of the more than fifty countries in the western region sent hostages to the Han Dynasty. Countries as far away as the coast of the West Sea, forty thousand miles away, all paid tribute to the Han Dynasty through several translations.

古文：南单于师子立，降胡五六百人夜袭师子，安集掾王恬将卫护士与战，破之。
现代文：南匈奴单于师子即位后，有五六百投降的北匈奴人乘夜袭击师子。安集掾王恬率领卫士迎战，将他们击败。
English: After the Southern Xiongnu ascended to the throne, five or six hundred Northern Xiongnu, who had surrendered, attacked the Southern Xiongnu at night. Anji Wang Yao led the guards into battle and defeated them.

古文：于是降胡遂相惊动，十五部二十馀万人皆反，胁立前单于屯屠何子薁鞮日逐王逢侯为单于，遂杀略吏民，燔烧邮亭、庐帐，将车重向朔方，欲度幕北。
现代文：于是投降的北匈奴人互相惊扰，十五个部落、二十余万人全部叛变。他们胁迫前单于屯屠何的儿子日逐王逢侯，将他立为单于。然后，屠杀抢劫官吏百姓，焚烧邮亭和庐帐，带着辎重前往朔方，打算穿越大漠北去。
English: As a result, the Northern Huns, who had surrendered, alarmed each other, and fifteen tribes, with more than 200,000 people, all mutinied. They coerced the son of the former ruler of Tun Tuo, Sun Quan Hou, and set him up as king. Then, they slaughtered and robbed officials and commoners, burned post offices and bank accounts, and went to Shuo Fang with their baggage, intending to cross the desert to the north.

古文：九月，癸丑，以光禄勋邓鸿行车骑将军事，与越骑校尉冯柱、行度辽将军硃徽将左右羽林、北军五校士及郡国迹射、缘边兵，乌桓校尉任尚将乌桓、鲜卑，合四万人讨之。
现代文：九月癸丑，和帝命光禄勋邓鸿代理车骑将军职务，同越骑校尉冯柱、代理度辽将军朱徽一道率领左右羽林军、北军五校士及各郡各封国的弓箭手、边郡士兵，另由乌桓校尉任尚率领乌桓、鲜卑部队，共计四万人，进行讨伐。
English: At the end of September, with the Emperor's blessing, Deng Hong was appointed as the acting cavalry general. Together with the Vietnamese cavalry lieutenant Feng Zhu and the acting general Zhu Hui, he led the left and right Ulin Army, the five school soldiers of the Northern Army, the archers of each county and the soldiers of the border counties, and the Wuhuan and Xinbei troops, a total of 40,000 people, led by the Wuhuan and Xinbei troops.

古文：时南单于及中郎将杜崇屯牧师城，逢侯将万馀骑攻围之。
现代文：当时，南匈奴单于和中郎将杜崇驻扎在牧师城，逢侯率领万余骑兵向他们发动围攻。
English: At that time, the Southern Xiongnu alone and Zhong Lang stationed Du Chong in the vicarage, and Feng Hou led more than 10,000 cavalry to launch a siege against them.

古文：冬，十一月，邓鸿等至美稷，逢侯乃解围去，向满夷谷。
现代文：冬季，十一月，邓鸿等到达美稷，逢侯这才解围离去，向满夷谷行进。
English: In the winter, in November, Deng Hong and others arrived in Meili, and it was only after the siege was lifted that they left and marched towards the Mani Valley.

古文：南单于遣子将万骑及杜崇所领四千骑，与邓鸿等追击逢侯于大城塞，斩首四千馀级。
现代文：南单于派他的儿子率领一万骑兵及杜崇部下四千骑兵，会同邓鸿的部队，在大城塞追击逢侯，斩杀四千余人。
English: Nan Danyu sent his son Zhuo to lead ten thousand cavalry and Du Chong's subordinates four thousand cavalry, together with Deng Hong's troops, to pursue Feng Hou in the Great Fortress, killing more than four thousand people.

古文：任尚率鲜卑、乌桓要击逢侯于满夷谷，复大破之，前后凡斩万七千馀级。
现代文：任尚则率领鲜卑、乌桓兵在满夷谷进行截击，再次大败叛军。先后共斩杀一万七千余人。
English: Ren Shang, on the other hand, led the Xianbei and Wuhuan soldiers to make an interception in Mani Valley, again defeating the rebels. A total of more than 17,000 people were killed in succession.

古文：逢侯遂率众出塞，汉兵不能追而还。
现代文：于是逢侯率领部众逃出塞外，汉军因无法追击而返回。
English: As a result, Feng Hou led the troops to escape from the fortress, and the Chinese army returned because they could not pursue them.

古文：以大司农陈宠为廷尉。
现代文：苛刻的风气，从此稍有衰减。
English: The harsh climate has since eased slightly.

古文：宠性仁矜，数议疑狱，每附经典，务从宽恕，刻敝之风，于此少衰。帝以尚书令江夏黄香为东郡太守，香辞以： 典郡从政，才非所宜，乞留备冗官，赐以督责小职，任之宫台烦事。 
现代文：和帝任命尚书令江夏人黄香为东郡太守。黄香推辞道： 主管郡的地方行政，我的能力并不适宜。请让我留下充当散官，赐予从事督察的微职，承担宫中尚书台的繁琐事务。 
English: Emperor He appointed Shang Shuxin to make Huang Xiang, a native of Jiangxia, the governor of Dong County. Huang Xiang said: "As the head of the local administration of the county, my ability is not suitable. Please let me stay as a non-commissioned officer, give me the minor post of inspector, and take on the tedious affairs of Shang Shuxiao in the palace.

古文：帝乃复留香为尚书令，增秩二千石，甚见亲重。
现代文：于是和帝便重新任命黄香为尚书令，而将官秩增加为二千石，对他很是亲近器重。
English: As a result, Emperor He reappointed Huang Xiang as Shang Shuling and increased his official rank to two thousand koku, which was very important to him.

古文：香亦祗勤物务，忧公如家。
现代文：黄香本人也谦恭勤奋，忠于职守，忧公事如忧家事。
English: Huang Xiang himself is also humble and diligent, loyal to his duties, worried about business as if he were worried about family affairs.

古文：孝和皇帝下永元七年
现代文：永元七年
English: The seventh year of the Yongyuan era

古文：春，正月，邓鸿等军还，冯柱将虎牙营留屯五原。
现代文：春季，正月，邓鸿等率军班师，冯柱率虎牙营留驻五原。
English: In the spring, the first month of the year, Deng Hong and others led the military squadron, and Feng Zhu led the Koga battalion to stay in Wuhuan.

古文：鸿坐逗留失利，下狱死。
现代文：邓鸿被指控逗留不进、坐失军机，下狱处死。
English: Deng Hong was accused of overstaying and missing a military plane, and was sentenced to death.

古文：后帝知硃徽、杜崇失胡和，又禁其上书，以致胡反，皆征下狱死。
现代文：后来，和帝发现了朱徽、杜崇与匈奴不和，并使单于无法上书，致使匈奴反叛，于是将朱、杜二人征召进京，下狱处死。
English: Later, Emperor He found out that Zhu Hui and Du Chong were at odds with the Xiongnu, and made it impossible for them to write, which caused the Xiongnu to rebel. Therefore, he conscripted Zhu and Du into Beijing, and they were sentenced to death.

古文：夏，四月，辛亥朔，日有食之。
现代文：夏季，四月辛刻朔，出现日食。
English: In summer, in April, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：秋，七月，乙巳，易阳地裂。
现代文：秋季，七月乙巳，易阳发生地裂。
English: In autumn, at the seventh day of the seventh month, the Yiyang earthquake occurred.

古文：九月，癸卯，京师地震。
现代文：九月癸卯，京城洛阳发生地震。
English: At the end of September, an earthquake occurred in Luoyang, Beijing.

古文：乐成王党坐贼杀人，削东光、鄡二县。
现代文：乐成王刘党被指控有杀人之罪，削去封国的东光、县二县。
English: Liu Party, the ruler of Lecheng, was accused of homicide, and Dongguang and two counties were removed from the country.

古文：孝和皇帝下永元八年
现代文：永元八年
English: In the eighth year of the Yonggen era

古文：春，二月，立贵人阴氏为皇后。后，识之曾孙也。
现代文：春季，二月，将贵人阴氏立为皇后，阴皇后是阴识的曾孙女。
English: In the spring, in February, the noble Yin clan was established as the queen. The Yin queen was the great-granddaughter of Yin Zheng.

古文：夏，四月，癸亥，乐成靖王党薨。
现代文：夏季，四月，乐成靖王刘党去世。
English: In the summer, in April, Liu Dang, the son of Le Cheng Jing Wang, passed away.

古文：子哀王崇立，寻薨，无子，国除。
现代文：他的儿子哀王刘崇继位为王，不久也去世了。因无子嗣，封国撤除。
English: His son, Liu Chong, the King of Lamentation, succeeded to the throne and died soon after. As he had no children, his fief was revoked.

古文：五月，河内、陈留蝗。
现代文：五月，河内、陈留两郡发生蝗灾。
English: In May, locusts infested Hanoi and Chenliu.

古文：南匈奴右温禺犊王乌居战畔出塞。
现代文：南匈奴右温禺犊王乌居战反叛出塞。
English: The Southern Huns, led by King Uju, rebelled and left the country.

古文：秋，七月，度辽将军庞奋、越骑校尉冯柱追击破之，徙其馀众及诸降胡二万馀人于安定、北地。
现代文：秋季，七月，度辽将军庞奋、越骑校尉冯柱出兵追击，打败乌居战，将他的残余部众及归降的匈奴部落二万余人迁徙到安定、北地二郡。
English: In the autumn, in July, Du Liao's general, Pang Fen, and the Vietcong's cavalry captain, Feng Zhu, sent troops to pursue and defeat the Wu Ju battle, and moved his remaining troops and more than 20,000 Hun tribesmen who had surrendered to two counties in the north of the country.

古文：东师后部王涿鞮反，击前王尉毕大，获其妻子。
现代文：车师后部王涿反叛，攻击车师前王尉毕大，俘虏了尉毕大的妻子儿女。
English: Rear engineer Wang Qi rebelled and attacked former engineer Wang Bi Da, capturing his wife and children.

古文：九月，京师蝗。
现代文：九月，京城洛阳发生蝗灾。
English: In September, a plague of locusts hit Kyoto.

古文：冬，十月，乙丑，北海王威以非敬王子，又坐诽谤，自杀。
现代文：冬季，十月乙丑，北海王刘威由于不是前北海王刘睦的亲子，并被指控犯有诽谤之罪，因而自杀。
English: In the winter, in October, North Sea King Liu Wei committed suicide because he was not the son of the former North Sea King Liu Mu and was accused of defamation.

古文：十二月，辛亥，陈敬王羡薨。
现代文：十二月辛亥，陈敬王刘羡去世。
English: In December of Xinhai, Chen Jingwang Liu Sheng passed away.

古文：丁巳，南宫宣室殿火。
现代文：丁巳，南宫宣室殿失火。
English: On the 16th, a fire broke out in the South Palace's Nobushitsu-den.

古文：护羌校尉贯友卒，以汉阳太守史充代之。
现代文：护羌校尉贯友去世。命汉阳太守史充接替贯友之职。
English: Lieutenant Sukenobu passed away, and Hanyang Taishou Shichong was appointed to succeed Sukenobu.

古文：充至，遂发湟中羌、胡出塞击迷唐。
现代文：史充到任后，便征发湟中的羌人、胡人出塞攻打迷唐。
English: After Shicheng took office, he conscripted the people of Shicheng and Hujing in Fuzhou to go out and attack the Tang Dynasty.

古文：迷唐迎败充兵，杀数百人。
现代文：迷唐迎战，打败史充的部队，杀死数百人。
English: Fan Tang went to war, defeated Shicheng's troops, and killed hundreds of people.

古文：充坐征，以代郡太守吴祉代之。
现代文：史充因罪被召回京城，命代郡太守吴祉接替史充之职。
English: Shicheng was recalled to the capital for his crime, and Wu Zhi, the deputy county magistrate, took over Shicheng's duties.

古文：孝和皇帝下永元九年
现代文：永元九年
English: The ninth year of the Yongyuan era

古文：春，三月，庚辰，陇西地震。
现代文：春季，三月庚辰，陇西郡发生地震。
English: In the spring, in March, an earthquake occurred in Gengchen, Shaanxi County.

古文：癸巳，济南安王康薨。
现代文：癸巳，济南安王刘康去世。
English: Recently, Liu Kang, the King of An in Jinan, passed away.

古文：西域长史王林击车师后王，斩之。
现代文：西域长史王林进攻车师后王，将他斩杀。
English: Shi Wanglin, the governor of the western region, attacked the driver, Hou Wang, and killed him.

古文：夏，四月，丁卯，封乐成王党子巡为乐成王。
现代文：夏季，四月丁卯，将乐成王刘党的儿子刘巡封为乐成王。
English: In the summer, April Dingwu, Liu Junfeng, the son of Liu Party, the King of Lecheng, was crowned the King of Lecheng.

古文：五月，封皇后父屯骑校尉阴纲为吴防侯，以特进就第。
现代文：五月，将皇后的父亲、屯骑校尉阴纲封为吴房侯，阴纲以特进身份离开官位，前往邸第。
English: In May, Yin Gang, the empress's father and a cavalry officer, was given the title of Wu Fang Hou, and he left his official position as a special promotion and went to his residence.

古文：六月，旱，蝗。
现代文：六月，发生旱灾和蝗灾。
English: In June, droughts and locust plagues occurred.

古文：秋，八月，鲜卑寇肥如，辽东太守祭参坐沮败，下狱死。
现代文：秋季，八月，鲜卑侵犯肥如。辽东太守祭参被指控怯懦无能、作战失利，下狱处死。
English: In the autumn, in August, the Liaodong Empress Dowager Saizan was accused of cowardice, incompetence, and failure in battle, and was sentenced to death.

古文：闰月，辛巳，皇太后窦氏崩。
现代文：闰八月辛巳，皇太后窦氏驾崩。
English: In late August, Empress Dowager Dou passed away.

古文：初，梁贵人既死，宫省事秘，莫有知帝为梁氏出者。
现代文：当初，梁贵人死后，宫廷保守秘密，没有人知道和帝是梁贵人所生。
English: At first, after Liang Guiren's death, the court kept it a secret. No one knew that Emperor He was born to Liang Guiren.

古文：舞阴公主子梁扈遣从兄襢奏记三府，以为 汉家旧典，崇贵母氏，而梁贵人亲育圣躬，不蒙尊号，求得申议。 
现代文：至此，舞阴公主之子梁扈派堂兄梁向太尉、司徒、司空三府上书，提出： 汉朝旧制，一向尊崇皇帝生母。然而梁贵人亲自诞育皇上，却没有尊号，请求得到申理讨论。 
English: At this point, Princess Muyin's son, Liang Qi, sent his cousin Liang to write to the three prefectures of Taifeng, Szeto, and Siku, proposing: In the old Han Dynasty system, the emperor's birth mother was always revered. However, Liang Guiren personally gave birth to the emperor, but did not have the honorific title, and requested that the matter be discussed.

古文：太尉张酺言状，帝感恸良久，曰： 于君意若何？ 
现代文：太尉张向和帝报告了实情。和帝伤感哀痛良久，说道： 您认为应当怎样？ 
English: Lieutenant Zhang Xiang reported the truth to Emperor He. Emperor He was sad for a long time and said: What do you think should be done?

古文：酺请追上尊号，存录诸舅。
现代文：张建议为梁贵人追加尊号，并查找各位舅父，给予他们应有的名份。
English: Zhang suggested adding honorific titles for Liang Guiren, and finding uncles to give them their due names.

古文：帝从之，会贵人姊南阳樊调妻嫕上书自讼曰： 妾父竦冤死牢狱，骸骨不掩；母氏年逾七十，及弟棠等远在绝域，不知死生。
现代文：和帝听从了他的建议。适逢梁贵人的姐姐、南阳人樊调的妻子梁上书自诉道： 我的父亲梁竦屈死在牢狱之中，尸骨不得掩埋；母亲年过七十，同弟弟梁堂等在极远的边域，不知道是死是活。
English: Emperor He listened to his suggestion. It was time for Liang Shangshu, the sister of Liang Guotian and the wife of Nanyang Zhengyuan, to write a complaint: My father, Liang Xuan, died in prison, and his bones must not be buried; my mother is over seventy years old, and she and her brother, Liang Tong, are waiting in a very remote border area, not knowing whether they are dead or alive.

古文：愿乞收竦朽骨，使母、弟得归本郡。 
现代文：我请求准许安葬父亲的朽骨，让我的母亲和弟弟返回故郡。 
English: I ask for permission to bury my father's bones and for my mother and brother to return to the county where they died.

古文：帝引见嫕，乃知贵人枉殁之状。
现代文：和帝召见梁，这才知道生母梁贵人枉死的惨状。
English: The emperor summoned Liang to see him, and only then did he know the tragic circumstances of his birth mother Liang Guiren's needless death.

古文：三公上奏， 请依光武黜吕太后故事，贬窦太后尊号，不宜合葬先帝， 百官亦多上言者。
现代文：三公上书： 请依照光武帝罢黜吕太后的先例，贬去窦太后的尊号，不应让他与先帝合葬。 文武百官也纷纷上言。
English: The three princes wrote: Please follow the precedent of Emperor Guangwu dethroning Empress Dowager Lv, and degrade the honorific title of Empress Dowager Dou, and should not allow him to be buried with the former emperor.

古文：帝手诏曰： 窦氏虽不遵法度，而太后常自减损。
现代文：和帝亲手写诏作答： 窦氏家族虽不遵守法律制度，但窦太后却常常自我减损。
English: And the imperial edict said: Although the Dou clan did not abide by the law, the empress dowager often derogated from it.

古文：朕奉事十年，深惟大义，礼，臣子无贬尊上之文，恩不忍离，义不忍亏。
现代文：朕将她当作母亲，侍奉了十年。深思母子大义：依据礼制，为臣、为子者没有贬斥尊长的道理。从亲情出发，不忍将太后之墓与先帝之墓分离；从仁义考虑，不忍作有损于窦太后的事情。
English: I treated her as a mother and served her for ten years. I thought deeply about the great justice of mother and son: according to the etiquette, those who are vassals and sons did not disparage their elders. From the perspective of kinship, I could not bear to separate the tomb of the empress dowager from the tomb of the former emperor; from the perspective of benevolence and righteousness, I could not bear to do anything that would be detrimental to the empress dowager Dou.

古文：案前世，上官太后亦无降黜，其勿复议。 
现代文：考察前代，上官桀被诛杀，而上官太后也不曾遭到贬降罢黜。对此事不要再作议论！ 
English: If you look at the previous generation, Shangguan Yi was beaten to death, but Shangguan Dowager Empress was never demoted or dismissed. Let's not discuss this matter any further!

古文：丙申，葬章德皇后。
现代文：丙申，安葬窦太后。
English: On the 29th, the funeral of Empress Zhengde took place.

古文：烧当羌迷唐率众八千人寇陇西，胁塞内诸种羌合步骑三万人击破陇西兵，杀大夏长。
现代文：烧当羌部落首领迷唐率领部众八千人侵犯陇西郡，并裹胁塞内各羌人部落，共计步兵、骑兵三万人，打败了陇西郡郡兵，杀死大夏县长。
English: Fan Tang, the leader of the Burnt Dang Si tribe, led a group of eight thousand people to invade Shaanxi County, and encircled the Shaanxi tribes, a total of thirty thousand infantry and cavalry, defeated the county soldiers of Shaanxi County and killed the governor of Daxia County.

古文：诏遣行征西将军刘尚、越骑校尉赵世副之，将汉兵、羌、胡共三万人讨之。
现代文：和帝下诏，派遣刘尚代理征西将军，以越骑校尉赵世为刘尚的副手，率领汉兵和羌、胡兵，共三万人，进行讨伐。
English: He issued an imperial edict to dispatch Liu Shang as acting general of the Western Expedition, with the Vietcong cavalry lieutenant Zhao Shih as Liu Shang's deputy, leading the Han soldiers and the Yao and Hu soldiers, a total of 30,000 people, to carry out the crusade.

古文：尚屯狄道，世屯枹罕；尚遣司马寇盱监诸郡兵，四面并会。
现代文：刘尚驻扎在狄道，赵世驻扎在罕。刘尚派司马寇盱监督各郡郡兵，从四面一同会合。
English: Liu Shang stationed in Di Dao, Zhao Shie stationed in Han. Liu Shang sent Sima Qiao to supervise the county soldiers and meet with them from all sides.

古文：迷唐惧，充老弱，奔入临洮南。
现代文：迷唐感到恐惧，抛弃了部落中的老弱成员，逃到临洮之南。
English: Panic-stricken, he abandoned the weak and old members of the tribe and fled to the south of Linyi.

古文：尚等追至高山，大破之，斩虏千馀人，迷唐引去，汉兵死伤亦多，不能复追。
现代文：刘尚等人追击到高山，大败迷唐军，斩杀、俘获一千余人。
English: Liu Shang and others pursued them to the high mountains, defeated the Tang army, killed and captured more than a thousand people.

古文：乃还。
现代文：迷唐退走。
English: So I came back.

古文：九月，庚申，司徒刘方策免，自杀。
现代文：汉军也有大量死伤，不能再继续追赶，于是回师。九月庚申，和帝颁策将刘方免官。刘方自杀。
English: The Han army also had a large number of deaths and injuries, and could no longer continue to catch up, so they returned to the division. In September, Emperor Go-shin and Emperor He issued a policy to remove Liu Fang from office. Liu Fang committed suicide.

古文：甲子，追尊梁贵人为皇太后，谥曰恭怀，追服丧制。
现代文：甲子，和帝追尊梁贵人为皇太后，谥号 恭怀 ，追补服丧。
English: Ji Zi, and Emperor Huizhong honored Liang Guizhong as the empress dowager, and gave her the posthumous title of "Congratulations."

古文：冬，十月，乙酉，改葬梁太后及其姊大贵人于西陵。
现代文：冬季，十月乙酉，将梁太后及她的姐姐梁大贵人之墓改葬到章帝陵墓之西。
English: In the winter, at the end of October, the tomb of Empress Dowager Liang and her sister Liang Daguang were moved to the west of Emperor Zhang's mausoleum.

古文：擢樊调为羽林左监。
现代文：将樊调擢升为羽林左监。
English: He was promoted to the position of the left overseer of Uebayashi.

古文：追封谥皇太后父竦为褒亲愍侯，遣使迎其丧，葬于恭怀皇后陵傍。
现代文：追封皇太后之父梁竦为褒亲侯，谥号为 愍 ，派使者迎接他的灵柩，葬在梁太后墓旁。
English: The Dowager Empress Dowager's father, Liang Qian, was a well-wisher, and his posthumous name was Yu. He sent an envoy to meet his coffin, which was buried next to the Dowager Empress Dowager's tomb.

古文：征还竦妻子；封子棠为乐平侯，棠弟雍为乘氏侯，雍弟翟为单父侯，位皆特进，赏赐以巨万计，宠遇光于当世，梁氏自此盛矣。
现代文：召回梁竦的妻子儿女，将梁竦的儿子梁棠封为乐平侯，将梁棠的弟弟梁雍封为乘氏侯，将梁雍的弟弟梁翟封为单父侯，全都位居特进。他们所得的赏赐极多，所蒙受的的恩宠和优待荣耀于当世。梁氏家族从此兴盛了。
English: He recalled the wives and children of Liang Jian, and made Liang Jian's son Liang Tang a prince of Leping, Liang Jian's brother Liang Yong as a prince of Jishi, and Liang Yong's brother Liang Jian as a prince of a single father. All of them were specially promoted. They received a lot of rewards, and the grace and preferential treatment they received were glorified in this world. The Liang family has flourished ever since.

古文：清河王庆始敢求上母宋贵人冢，帝许之，诏太官四时给祭具。
现代文：清河王刘庆这才敢请求为母亲宋贵人祭扫坟墓。和帝应许，下诏命令太官春夏秋冬四季供应祭祀之物。
English: It was only then that Liu Qing, the king of the Qing Dynasty, dared to request that the tomb of his mother, Song Guiren, be swept. Emperor He promised and issued an edict ordering the eunuch to supply sacrificial objects in the four seasons of spring, summer, autumn and winter.

古文：庆垂涕曰： 生虽不获供养，终得奉祭祀，私愿足矣！ 
现代文：刘庆流泪说道： 虽然不能在母亲生前供养，但最终能为她进行祭祀，我的心愿满足了！ 
English: Liu Qing said in tears: Although I can't provide for my mother while she is alive, I can finally make a sacrifice for her. My wish has been fulfilled!

古文：欲求作祠堂，恐有自同恭怀梁后之嫌，遂不敢言，常泣向左右，以为没齿之恨。
现代文：他想请求为母亲建造祠堂，但又害怕有自比梁太后的嫌疑，于是不敢开口。他经常对左右随从哭泣，认为这是终身之憾。
English: He wanted to ask for an ancestral hall to be built for his mother, but he was afraid of being suspected by Empress Dowager Bi Liang, so he did not dare to open his mouth. He often cried to his attendants left and right, thinking that this was a lifelong regret.

古文：后上言： 外祖母王年老，乞诣雒阳疗疾。 
现代文：后来，他上书说： 我的外祖母王氏年事已高，请准许她到洛阳治病。 
English: Later, he wrote: "My grandmother Wang Shihong is very old, please allow her to go to Luoyang for treatment.

古文：于是诏宋氏悉归京师，除庆舅衍、俊、盖、暹等皆为郎。
现代文：于是和帝下诏准许宋氏全家返回京城，并将刘庆的舅父宋衍、宋俊、宋盖、宋暹等全都任命为郎。
English: Therefore, the imperial edict ordered the entire Song family to return to Beijing to study, awarding Liu Qing's uncle Song Yan, Song Jun, Song Gai, Song Siam, etc. as his sons.

古文：十一月，癸卯，以光禄勋河南吕盖为司徒。
现代文：十一月癸卯，将光禄勋、河南人吕盖任命为司徒。
English: In November, Guanglu Xun and Lu Gai from Henan Province were appointed as the tutors.

古文：十二月，丙寅，司空张奋罢。
现代文：十二月丙寅，将司空张奋免官。
English: In December, Hsin-Yin removed Zhang Teng from his post.

古文：壬申，以太仆韩稜为司空。
现代文：十二月壬申，将太仆韩棱任命为司空。
English: In December, Emperor Jinshin appointed Han Ren, a great retainer of the emperor, as the second-in-command.

古文：西域都护定远侯班超遣掾甘英使大秦、条支，穷西海，皆前世所不至，莫不备其风土，传其珍怪焉。
现代文：西域都护、定远侯班超派遣属官甘英出使大秦帝国和条支王国。甘英走遍了西海一带，沿途所经，都是前代之人所未到过的地方，他在各处都全面了解风土人情，收集带走珍奇的物产。
English: Western Dugu and Dingyuan Houbancha dispatched the official Gan Ying as the envoy of the Great Qin Empire and the Jochi Kingdom. Gan Ying traveled all over the West Sea, and along the way, he passed through places that no previous generation had ever been to. He comprehensively understood the customs and customs everywhere, and collected and took away rare products.

古文：及安息西界，临大海，欲度，船人谓英曰： 海水广大，往来者逢善风，三月乃得度，若遇迟风，亦有二岁者。
现代文：当他到达安息国西部边界的时候，遇到了大海。他打算渡过大海，船夫告诉他说： 海水广阔，航海者遇到顺风，要用三个月才能到达彼岸；如果遇到逆风，也有用两年的。
English: When he came to the western border of the land of Shabbat, he came upon the sea, and as he was about to cross it, the boatman said to him, "The sea is wide, and it takes three months for a sailor to reach the other side if the wind is favorable, and two years if the wind is unfavorable."

古文：故入海，人皆赍三岁粮。
现代文：所以，渡海的人都带上三年的口粮。
English: Therefore, everyone who crosses the sea takes three years of rations with them.

古文：海中善使人思土恋慕，数有死亡者。 
现代文：海上容易使人怀恋乡土，经常有人死亡。 
English: At sea, people often miss their hometowns, and people often die.

古文：英乃止。
现代文：甘英这才作罢。
English: This was the last straw for Amaeng.

古文：孝和皇帝下永元十年
现代文：永元十年
English: In the 10th year of Yongyuan

古文：夏，五月，京师大水。
现代文：夏季，五月，京城洛阳发生水灾。
English: In the summer, in May, floods occurred in the capital Luoyang.

古文：秋，七月，己巳，司空韩稜薨。
现代文：秋季，七月己巳，司空韩棱去世。
English: In the autumn, in July, Siku Hanren passed away.

古文：八月，丙子，以太常太山巢堪为司空。
现代文：八月丙子，将太常太山人巢堪任命为司空。
English: August Cixi, will be too often too mountainous nest can be named Siku.

古文：冬，十月，五州雨水。
现代文：冬季，十月，有五个州大雨成灾。
English: In the winter, in October, five states were affected by heavy rains.

古文：行征西将军刘尚、越骑校尉赵世坐畏懦征，下狱，免。
现代文：代理征西将军刘尚、越骑校尉赵世被指控畏惧敌人、怯懦无能，被召回京城，下狱，免去官职。
English: Acting Western Expeditionary Force General Liu Shang and Viet Cavalry Lieutenant Zhao Shih were accused of fearing the enemy, cowardice and incompetence. They were recalled to Beijing, sent to prison and relieved of their official duties.

古文：谒者王信领尚或屯枹罕，谒者耿谭领世营屯白石。
现代文：谒者王信率领刘尚的部队，驻扎在罕；谒者耿谭率领赵世的部队，驻扎在白石。
English: Wang Xin, the instigator, led Liu Shang's troops and was stationed in Han; Geng Tan, the instigator, led Zhao Shi's troops and was stationed in Baishi.

古文：谭乃设购赏，诸种颇来内附，迷唐恐，乃请降；信、谭遂受降罢兵。
现代文：耿谭便悬赏招降，有不少羌人部落前来依附。迷唐感到恐惧，就向汉军请降。于是王信、耿谭接受归降而罢兵。
English: Geng Tan then offered a reward for surrender, and many Xiongnu tribesmen came to join him. Panicked and fearful, Tang asked the Han army to surrender. Wang Xin and Geng Tan accepted the surrender and left the army.

古文：十二月，迷唐等率种人诣阙贡献。
现代文：十二月，迷唐等率领本族人到京城朝见进贡。
English: In December, the Ming and Tang dynasties led their own people to the capital to pay tribute.

古文：戊寅，梁节王畅薨。
现代文：戊寅，梁节王刘畅去世。
English: Wu Yin, Liang Jie Wang Liu Chang passed away.

古文：初，居巢侯刘般薨，子恺当嗣，称父遗意，让其弟宪，遁逃久之，有司奏请绝恺国。
现代文：起初，居巢侯刘般去世，他的儿子刘恺应当继位。但刘恺声称遵从父亲的遗愿，要将爵位让给弟弟刘宪，自己却逃走了。刘恺逃走后很久，有关部门上书请求撤除他的封国。
English: At first, Liu Han, the lord of the manor, died, and his son Liu Xun was supposed to succeed him. However, Liu Xun claimed that he would follow his father's last wishes and give the title to his brother Liu Xian, but he fled. Long after Liu Xun fled, the relevant departments sent a letter requesting the removal of his fief.

古文：肃宗美其义，特优假之，凯犹不出。
现代文：章帝赞美刘恺的义行，特别优待宽容，可刘恺还是不肯露面。
English: Emperor Zhang praised Liu Yao's righteous deeds and gave him special preferential treatment and tolerance, but Liu Yao still refused to show his face.

古文：积十馀岁，有司复奏之，侍中贾逵上书曰： 孔子称 能以礼让为国乎何有 。
现代文：过了十余年，有关部门重申原来的请求。侍中贾逵上书说： 孔子说： 能够以礼让治国吗？这有什么困难？ 
English: After more than ten years, the relevant departments reiterated the original request. Chamberlain Jia Jun said in a letter: Confucius said: Can you rule the country with courtesy? What are the difficulties?

古文：有司不原乐善之心，而绳以循常之法，惧非长克让之风，成含弘之化也。 
现代文：有关部门不推究刘恺乐于为善的本意，而依照平常的法则处理此事，这恐怕不能鼓励礼让的风气，也不能成全宽容仁厚的教化。 
English: The relevant departments did not investigate Liu Wei's intention to do good, but handled the matter according to the usual rules. This may not encourage the culture of courtesy, nor can it complete the enlightenment of tolerance and benevolence.

古文：帝纳之，下诏曰： 王法崇善，成人之美，其听宪嗣爵。
现代文：和帝采纳了他的意见，下诏说： 王法推崇善举，助人完成美事。现准许刘宪袭爵。
English: Emperor He adopted his opinion and issued the following edict: The king and the law promote good deeds and help people to accomplish beautiful things. Liu Xianrong is now allowed to inherit the title.

古文：遭事之宜，后不得以为比。 
现代文：这是对特殊情况的权宜处理，以后不得以此为例。 
English: This is an expedient solution to a special situation and must not be used as an example in the future.

古文：乃征恺，拜为郎。
现代文：于是征召刘恺，将他任命为郎。
English: He then conscripted Liu Bei and appointed him as his second-in-command.

古文：南单于师子死，单于长之子檀立，为万氏尸逐鞮单于。
现代文：南匈奴单于师子去世，前单于长的儿子檀继位，此即万氏尸逐单于。
English: Nan Xiongnu died only after the death of his disciple, and was succeeded by his eldest son, Dan. This means that the dead bodies of the Wan family were successively buried only after the death of their son.

古文：孝和皇帝下永元十一年
现代文：永元十一年
English: The 11th year of Yongyuan

古文：夏，四月，丙寅，赦天下。
现代文：夏季，四月丙寅，大赦天下。
English: In the summer, in April, there is a general amnesty.

古文：帝因朝会，召见诸儒，使中大夫鲁丕与侍中贾逵、尚书令黄香等相难数事，帝善丕说，罢朝，特赐衣冠。
现代文：和帝利用朝会之机召见儒生，让中大夫鲁丕和侍中贾逵、尚书令黄香等，就儒家经书中的难点互相质疑。
English: Emperor He took advantage of the opportunity of the imperial meeting to invite Confucian scholars to question each other on the difficulties in the Confucian scriptures.

古文：丕因上疏曰： 臣闻说经者，传先师之言，非从己出，不得相让；相让则道不明，若规矩权衡之不可枉也。
现代文：和帝赞同鲁丕的观点，散朝后，特别赏赐他礼服冠帽。于是鲁丕上书说： 我听说，讨论经书，乃是传述先师的理论，并非发表个人见解，不能相互退让。如果相互退让，道理就难以明白，如同圆规、方矩、秤锤、尺寸的标准不可随意增减一样。
English: Emperor Go-Shirakawa agreed with Lu Xun's view, and after the fall of the Ming Dynasty, he specially rewarded him with a ceremonial robe, crown and cap. So Lu Xun wrote: I have heard that the discussion of the scriptures is the transmission of the theory of the predecessors, not the expression of personal opinions, and cannot be mutually conceded. If mutually conceded, the reason will be difficult to understand, just as the standard of the compass, square, balance hammer and size cannot be arbitrarily increased or decreased.

古文：难者必明其据，说者务立其义，浮华无用之言，不陈于前，故精思不劳而道术愈章。
现代文：质疑的一定要说清根据，解答的务必讲明观点。那些华而不实的言辞，不在人前铺陈办列，因此神思不劳苦而道理却愈发明白。
English: The basis for questioning must be made clear, and the viewpoint must be made clear for the answer. Those flashy words are not displayed in front of people, so the mind does not have to work hard, but the truth becomes clearer.

古文：法异者各令自说师法，博观其义，无令刍荛以言得罪，幽远独有遗失也。 
现代文：当意见分歧时，让各自申说先师的理论，以便面了解经典的大义，不使儒生们因言辞不当而获罪，不可唯独让那些精微深刻的见解有所遗漏。 
English: When there is a difference of opinion, let each side explain the theory of the previous teacher, so as to understand the great justice of the classics, not to make Confucians guilty of improper speech, and not to let those subtle and profound insights be omitted.

古文：孝和皇帝下永元十二年
现代文：永元十二年
English: In the twelfth year of the Yongyuan era

古文：夏，四月，戊辰，秭归山崩。
现代文：夏季，四月戊辰，秭归山发生山崩。
English: In the summer, in April, a landslide occurred in the mountains.

古文：秋，七月，辛亥朔，日有食之。
现代文：秋季，七月辛亥朔，出现日食。
English: In autumn, in July at the turn of the year, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：九月，戊午，太尉张酺免。
现代文：九月戊午，将太尉张免职。
English: In the afternoon of September, Lieutenant Zhang was relieved of duty.

古文：丙寅，以大司农张禹为太尉。
现代文：丙寅，将大司农张禹任命为太尉。
English: Cui Yin appointed Zhang Yu, the chief farmer, as the second lieutenant.

古文：烧当羌豪迷唐既入朝。其馀种人不满二千，饥窘不立，入居金城。
现代文：烧当羌人部落首领迷唐到京城洛阳朝见以后，他的残余部众已不足两千人，饥饿穷困无法生存，全部迁入金城居住。
English: After Fan Tang, the leader of the Burntang people tribe, went to Luoyang, the capital, for an audience, his remaining followers were less than two thousand, unable to survive due to hunger and poverty, and they all moved to Jincheng to live.

古文：帝令迷唐将其种人还大、小榆谷；迷唐以汉作河桥，兵来无常，故地不可复居，辞以种人饥饿，不肯远出。
现代文：和帝命令迷唐率领部众返回大、小榆谷。而迷唐认为，汉朝修筑了河桥，军队来往无常，而旧地已不能再去居住，于是推辞说部众饥饿，不肯远行。
English: Emperor He ordered Fan Tang to lead his followers back to the large and small valleys. However, Fan Tang believed that the Han Dynasty had built a river bridge, and the army could not travel back and forth, and the old place could no longer be lived in. Therefore, he declined, saying that his followers were hungry and did not want to travel far.

古文：护羌校尉吴祉等多赐迷唐金帛，令籴谷市畜。
现代文：护羌校尉吴祉等赐给迷唐很多金帛，命他购买谷物牲畜，催促早日出塞。
English: The garrison captain Wu Ji, etc. gave a lot of gold ingots to Fan Tang, ordered him to buy grain and livestock, and urged him to leave Tibet at an early date.

古文：促使出塞，种人更怀猜惊。
现代文：但羌人却更加猜疑和惊恐。
English: But the eunuchs were even more suspicious and alarmed.

古文：是岁，迷唐复叛，胁将湟中诸胡寇钞而去，王信、耿谭、吴祉皆坐征。
现代文：本年，迷唐再度叛乱，裹胁湟中地区各胡人部落，攻杀抢掠而去。王信、耿谭、吴祉三人全都因罪被征召入京。
English: This year, the Ming and Tang Dynasties rebelled again, and all the Hu tribes in the Central Yunnan region joined them to attack, kill, and loot. Wang Xin, Geng Tan, and Wu Zhi were all conscripted to Beijing for their crimes.

古文：孝和皇帝下永元十三年
现代文：永元十三年
English: The 13th year of Yongyuan

古文：秋，八月，己亥，北宫盛馔门阁火。
现代文：秋季，八月己亥，洛阳北宫盛馔门楼失火。
English: In the autumn, in August, the gate tower of the Northern Palace of Luoyang caught fire.

古文：迷唐复还赐支河曲，将兵向塞。
现代文：迷唐又回到赐支河曲，率兵接近汉朝边塞。
English: Mad Tang returned to the Jiezhihe bend and led his troops close to the Han Dynasty border fortress.

古文：护羌校尉周鲔与金城太守侯霸及诸郡兵、属国羌、胡合三万人出塞至允川。
现代文：护羌校尉周鲔和金城太守侯霸，率领各郡郡兵、附属国的羌兵、胡兵，共三万人，到达允川。
English: Zhou Qi, the captain of the garrison, and Hou Ba, the governor of Jincheng, led the soldiers of each county, the soldiers of the subordinate countries, and the soldiers of Hu, a total of 30,000 people, arrived in Yuncheon.

古文：侯霸击破迷唐，种人瓦解，降者六千馀口，分徙汉阳、安定、陇西。
现代文：侯霸打败迷唐，烧当部落瓦解，六千余人投降，将他们分别迁徙到汉阳、安定和陇西。
English: Houba defeated Fan's Tang, and when the tribe collapsed, more than six thousand people surrendered, and they were migrated to Hanyang, Ding'an and Shaanxi.

古文：迷唐遂弱，远逾赐支河首，依发羌居。
现代文：迷唐从此势力衰弱，他越过赐支河源头远逃，投靠到发羌部落定居。
English: From then on, the power of the Ming and Tang dynasties waned. They fled across the source of the Jizhi River and settled in the Hatao tribe.

古文：久之，病死，其子来降，户不满数十。
现代文：多年以后，迷唐病死，他的儿子前来归降，部众已不足数十户。
English: Many years later, when Meitang died of illness and his son came to surrender, there were fewer than dozens of followers.

古文：荆州雨水。
现代文：荆州大雨成灾。
English: Heavy rain in Jingzhou has become a disaster.

古文：冬，十一月，丙辰，诏曰： 幽、并、凉州户口率少，边役众剧，束脩良吏进仕路狭。
现代文：冬季，十一月丙辰，和帝下诏说： 幽州、并州、凉州地区户口大多稀少，而边境差役繁重，奉公守法的优秀官吏升迁困难。
English: In the winter, in November, Emperor He issued the following edict: Most of the hukou in Yuzhou, Bianzhou and Liangzhou regions are scarce, while the border guards are onerous, and it is difficult for excellent officials who are law-abiding to be promoted.

古文：抚接夷狄，以人为本，其令缘边郡口十万以上，岁举孝廉一人，不满十万，二岁举一人，五万以下，三岁举一人。 
现代文：安抚外族和与异国交往，人才最为重要。现规定：边疆人口十万以上的郡，每年推举孝廉一人；人口不足十万的郡，每两年推举孝廉一人；人口五万以下的郡，每三年推举孝廉一人。 
English: In order to appease foreigners and communicate with foreign countries, talent is the most important. The current regulations are as follows: counties with a population of more than 100,000 in the border regions shall nominate one filial piety every year; counties with a population of less than 100,000 shall nominate one filial piety every two years; and counties with a population of less than 50,000 shall nominate one filial piety every three years.

古文：鲜卑寇右北平，遂入渔阳，渔阳太守击破之。
现代文：鲜卑进攻右北平，继而侵入渔阳。渔阳太守迎战，打败鲜卑军。
English: The Xianbei attacked the right Beiping, and then invaded Yuyang. The Yuyang governor fought back and defeated the Xianbei army.

古文：戊辰，司徒吕盖以老病致仕。
现代文：戊辰，司徒吕盖因年老患病退休。
English: Boshin, Satoru Ryugei retired due to old age and illness.

古文：巫蛮许圣以郡收税不均，怨恨，遂反；辛卯，寇南郡。
现代文：巫山蛮人许圣因本郡官府征收赋税不均，心怀怨恨，于是起兵造反。辛卯，攻打南郡。
English: Xu Sheng, a barbarian from Wushan, harbored a grudge against the county government for levying unequal taxes, so he rebelled and attacked Nan County.

古文：孝和皇帝下永元十四年
现代文：永元十四年
English: In the 14th year of the Yongyuan era

古文：春，安定降羌烧何种反，郡兵击灭之。
现代文：春季，安定郡原已归降的羌人烧何部落造反，被郡兵剿平。
English: In the spring of the year, the returnees of the Yan people in Anding County rebelled and were defeated by the county soldiers.

古文：时西海及大、小榆谷左右无复羌寇，隃麋相曹凤上言： 自建武以来，西羌犯法者，常从烧当种起，所以然者，以其居大、小榆谷，土地肥美，有西海鱼盐之利，阻大河以为固。
现代文：至此，西海及大、小榆谷一带，不再有羌人叛乱。麋国相曹凤上书说： 自从光武帝建武年代以来，西羌人犯法作乱，常由烧当部落发起。所以如此的原因，是由于烧当部落所居住的大、小榆谷，土地肥沃，享有西海的渔业、盐业收益，以大河作为固守的屏障。
English: At this point, there was no longer any rebellion of the Xidi people in the West Sea and the areas of the Greater and Lesser Fenwei Valleys. Cao Feng, the Vice Premier of the State of Fenwei, wrote: Since the time of Emperor Guangwu's Jianwu, the Xidi people have been breaking the law and causing disturbances, often initiated by the Boudang tribe. The reason for this is that the Greater and Lesser Fenwei Valleys, where the Boudang tribe lives, have fertile land, enjoy the benefits of the West Sea's fisheries and salt industry, and use the river as a barrier to hold on to.

古文：又，近塞内诸种，易以为非，难以攻伐，故能强大，常雄诸种，恃其权勇，招诱羌、胡。
现代文：再者，靠近边塞的各部落，易于作乱，而汉朝又难以进行讨伐，所以他们能够强大起来，经常称雄于其他部落，并倚仗自己的实力和骁勇，招揽引诱羌人、胡人。
English: In addition, the tribes near the border fortress are easy to make trouble, and it is difficult for the Han Dynasty to carry out the crusade. Therefore, they can become strong, often dominate other tribes, and rely on their own strength and courage to attract and lure the Xiong people and Hu people.

古文：今者衰困，党援坏沮，亡逃栖窜，远依发羌。
现代文：如今烧当部落衰落困窘，孤立无援，仓惶逃亡，到远方投靠发羌部落。
English: Today, the Burntang tribe is in a state of decline and distress, isolated and helpless, fleeing in panic and seeking refuge in distant lands with the Hatao tribe.

古文：臣愚以为宜及此时建复西海郡县，规固二榆，广设屯田，隔塞羌、胡交关之路，遏绝狂狡窥欲之源。
现代文：我认为应当乘这个时机重建恢复西海郡县，规划、控制大、小榆谷，广设屯田，切断边塞内外羌人、胡人的交往通道，遏止切断狂妄狡猾者觊觎的源泉。
English: I think that we should take this opportunity to rebuild and restore the West Sea counties, plan and control the large and small reclamation valleys, set up a large number of reclamation fields, cut off the communication channels of the Qiang people and Hu people inside and outside the border fortress, and stop cutting off the source of arrogance and cunning.

古文：又殖谷富边，省委输之役，国家可以无西方之忧。 
现代文：同时广种粮食，使边疆富庶，减少由内地向边塞运输粮秣的差役。这样，国家便可以没有西方的忧虑。 
English: And by planting grain, enriching the frontier, and saving transportation labor, the country would not have to worry about the West.

古文：上从之，缮修故西海郡，徙金城西部都尉以戍之，拜凤为金城西部都尉，屯龙耆。
现代文：和帝听从了他的建议，下令对原西海郡进行修缮整治，命金城西部都尉府迁往该地戍守。又将曹凤任命为金城西部都尉驻扎龙耆。
English: Emperor He listened to his suggestion, ordered the renovation of the former Xihai County, and ordered the Western Jincheng Governor's Office to move to this place. He also appointed Cao Feng as the Western Jincheng Governor stationed in Longyan.

古文：后增广屯田，列屯夹河，合三十四部。
现代文：随后扩大垦田面积，在黄河西岸屯兵，共计有三十四部。
English: Subsequently, the area of Putian was expanded, and troops were stationed on the west bank of the Yellow River, with a total of thirty-four units.

古文：其功垂立，会永初中诸羌叛，乃罢。
现代文：这一事业即将告成时，恰逢安帝永初年间羌人各部落叛乱，于是废止。
English: When this undertaking was about to be completed, it coincided with the rebellion of the Xiongnu tribes in the early years of the Andean era, and was therefore abolished.

古文：三月，戊辰，临辟雍飨射，赦天下。
现代文：三月戊辰，和帝临幸太学，饮宴射箭，举行飨射之礼。大赦天下。
English: In March, at the time of the Dragon Boat Festival, Emperor Go-Shirakawa and Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager

古文：夏，四月，遣使者督荆州兵万馀人，分道讨巫蛮许圣等，大破之。
现代文：夏季，四月，派使者督领荆州兵一万余人，分路讨伐巫山蛮人许圣等，大败叛军。
English: In the summer, in April, he sent an emissary to lead more than ten thousand Jing soldiers to fight the Wushan barbarians Xu Sheng and others, and defeated the rebels.

古文：圣等乞降，悉徙置江夏。
现代文：许圣等乞求投降。东汉朝廷将巫山蛮人全部迁徙安置到江夏。
English: Xu Sheng and others begged for surrender. The Eastern Han Dynasty resettled all the barbarians from Wushan to Jiangxia.

古文：阴皇后多妒忌，宠遇浸衰，数怀恚恨。
现代文：阴皇后忌妒心十分强烈，因和帝对她的宠幸逐渐减退，心中常怀怨恨。
English: Queen Yin's jealousy was very strong, and she often harbored resentment in her heart as her favor with the emperor gradually faded.

古文：后外祖母邓硃，出入宫掖，有言后与硃共挟巫蛊道者；帝使中常侍张慎与尚书陈褒案之，劾以大逆无道，硃二子奉、毅，后弟辅皆考死狱中。
现代文：她的外祖母邓朱，出入往来于内宫，有人指控阴皇后和她一同施用巫蛊。和帝让中常侍张慎与尚书陈褒审讯核实，张、陈二人以 大逆无道 的罪名进行弹劾。邓朱的两个儿子邓奉、邓毅，以及阴皇后的弟弟阴辅都在狱中被拷打而死。
English: Her grandmother, Deng Zhu, went in and out of the Inner Court, and some people accused the Queen of Yin of using witchcraft with her. After the trial of Zhang Shen and Shang Shu Chen Bo, the Emperor's regular attendants, Zhang and Chen were impeached on charges of high treason. Deng Zhu's two sons, Deng Feng and Deng Yi, as well as the Queen of Yin's brother, Yin Shu, were all tortured to death in prison.

古文：六月，辛卯，后坐废，迁于桐宫，以忧死。
现代文：六月辛卯，阴皇后因罪罢黜，被迁到桐宫，忧愁而死。
English: In June, Xinwu, the Queen of Yin, was banished for her crimes and moved to Tonggong. She died of grief.

古文：父特进纲自杀，后弟轶、敞及硃家属徙日南比景。
现代文：她的父亲特进阴纲自杀，弟弟阴轶、阴敞及邓朱的家属被流放到日南郡比景县。
English: Her father, Tujin Yin Gang, committed suicide, and the families of her younger brothers, Yin Xi, Yin Bo, and Deng Zhu, were exiled to Yongding County, Nichinan County.

古文：秋，七月，壬子，常山殇王侧薨，无子，立其兄防子侯章为常山王。
现代文：秋季，七月壬子，常山殇王刘侧去世。因无子嗣，将他的哥哥防子侯刘章立为常山王。
English: In the autumn, in July of Renzi, Liu Xiang, the King of Changshan, died. Because he had no son, he appointed his brother Liu Zhang, the son-in-law, as the King of Changshan.

古文：三州大水。
现代文：有三个州发生水灾。
English: Flooding has occurred in three states.

古文：班超久在绝域，年老思土，上书乞归曰： 臣不敢望到酒泉郡，但愿生入玉门关。
现代文：班超久在遥远的边域，因年老而思念故乡，上书请求回国。奏书说： 我不敢企望能到酒泉郡，但愿能活着进入玉门关。
English: Ban Chaoju was in a faraway frontier, and because of his old age he missed his hometown. He wrote a letter requesting to return to China. The letter said: I dare not hope to get to Jiuquan County, but I hope I can get to Yumen Pass alive.

古文：谨遣子勇随安息献物入塞，及臣生在，令勇目见中土。 
现代文：现在派遣我的儿子班勇随同安息国的进贡使者入塞，趁我尚在人世，让班勇亲眼看到中原的风土。 
English: Now I am sending my son, Ban Yong, along with the tribute envoys of the Sabbat, to enter Tibet. While I am still alive, let Ban Yong see the customs of the Central Plains with his own eyes.

古文：朝廷久之未报，超妹曹大家上书曰： 蛮夷之性，悖逆侮老；而超旦暮入地，久不见代，恐开奸宄之源，生逆乱之心。
现代文：奏书呈上，朝廷久不答复。班超的妹妹曹大家上书说： 蛮夷生性欺老，而班超已经年迈，随时可能故世，却久不被人替代。我担心这将打开奸恶的源泉，使蛮夷萌生叛逆之心。
English: The imperial court did not reply for a long time after the report was submitted. Banchao's sister Cao Duan wrote a letter saying: "Barbarians are born to cheat the elderly, and Banchao is already old, may die at any time, but has not been replaced for a long time. I am worried that this will open up the source of treachery and make barbarians sprout rebellious hearts."

古文：而卿大夫咸怀一切，莫肯远虑，如有卒暴，超之气力不能从心，便为上损国家累世之功，下弃忠臣竭力之用，诚可痛也！
现代文：但大臣们都只顾眼前，不肯作长远考虑。如果猝然有变，班超力不从心，将对上损害国家累世建立的功业，对下毁弃忠臣竭力经营的成果，实在是令人痛惜！
English: However, the ministers are only concerned with the immediate future and are not willing to consider the long term. If there is a sudden change and the team is overstretched, it will damage the achievements that the country has built up over the years, and destroy the achievements that loyalists have worked hard to achieve. It is really regrettable!

古文：故超万里归诚，自陈苦急，延颈逾望，三年于今，未蒙省录。
现代文：因此，班超万里之外表示忠诚，陈述困苦急迫之情，伸长脖颈遥望，至今已经三年，但朝廷却没有考虑批准他的请求。
English: Therefore, it has been three years since the team has been more than ten thousand miles away, with the sincerity of returning to the country, self-reporting pain and anxiety, and stretching their necks to hope.

古文：妾窃闻古者十五受兵，六十还之，亦有休息，不任职也。
现代文：我曾听说，在古代，十五岁当兵，六十岁复员，也有休息之日，年老便不再任职。
English: I once heard that in ancient times, soldiers were conscripted at the age of fifteen and demobilized at the age of sixty. There was also a day of rest, and old people were no longer employed.

古文：故妾敢触死为超求哀，匄超馀年，一得生还，复见阙庭，使国家无劳远之虑，西域无仓卒之忧，超得长蒙文王葬骨之恩，子方哀老之惠。 
现代文：因此我胆敢冒死代班超哀求，请在班超的余年，让他能够活着回来，再次看到京都城阙和皇家宫庭，使国家没有远方的忧虑，西域没有猝然的变故，而班超也能蒙受周文王埋葬骸骨的厚恩和田子方哀怜老马的仁慈。 
English: Therefore, I dare to risk my life to plead on behalf of Banchao. Please, in the remaining years of Banchao, let him come back alive and see the Kyoto castle moat and the royal palace again, so that the country does not have faraway worries, there is no sudden change in the western region, and Banchao can also receive the kindness of King Zhou Wen to bury the skeleton and the mercy of Tian Zifang to mourn the old horse.

古文：帝感其言，乃征超还。
现代文：和帝被班超的奏书所感动，于是召班超回国。
English: Emperor Wotei was moved by Banchao's recitation, so he summoned Banchao to return to China.

古文：八月，超至洛阳，拜为射声校尉；九月，卒。
现代文：本年八月，班超抵达洛阳，被任命为射声校尉。九月，班超去世。
English: In August of this year, Banchao arrived in Luoyang and was appointed as a captain of the shooting team. In September, Banchao passed away.

古文：超之被征，以戊己校尉任尚代为都护。
现代文：班超被召，戊己校尉任尚受命继任西域都护。
English: The superintendent of the class was summoned, and Captain Wu Ji was appointed to succeed him as the protector of the western capital.

古文：尚谓超曰： 君侯在外国三十馀年，而小人猥承君后，任重虑浅，宜有以诲之！ 
现代文：任尚对班超说： 您在外国三十多年，而由我接替您的职务，责任重大，但我的见识短浅，希望您能予以指教！ 
English: Ren Shang said to Ban Chao: You have been in a foreign country for more than thirty years, and I will take over your duties. The responsibility is great, but my knowledge is shallow. I hope you can give me some advice!

古文：超曰： 年老失智。君数当大位，岂班超所能及哉！
现代文：班超说： 我年纪已老，智力衰退，而您多次担任高官，难道我班超能比得上吗！
English: The superintendent said: I am old and my intelligence is fading, but you have served as a high-ranking official many times. Can my superintendent be compared to you?

古文：必不得已，愿进愚言：塞外吏士，本非孝子顺孙，皆以罪过徙补边屯；而蛮夷怀鸟兽之心，难养易败。
现代文：一定要我提建议，我就想贡献一点愚见。塞外的官吏士兵，本来就不是孝子顺孙，都是因为犯有罪过，而被迁徒塞外，守边屯戌。而西域各国，心如鸟兽，难于扶植，却容易叛离。
English: If I must make a suggestion, I would like to contribute a bit of stupidity. Foreign officials and soldiers are not filial sons and daughters. They were all exiled for committing crimes and were forced to live outside the country, guarding the border. And the countries in the western region are like birds and beasts. It is difficult to support them, but it is easy to defect.

古文：今君性严急，水清无大鱼，察政不得下和，宜荡佚简易，宽小过，总大纲而已。 
现代文：如今您性情严厉急切，但清水无大鱼，明察之政不得人心，应当采取无所拘束、简单易行的政策，宽恕他们的小过，只总揽大纲而已。 
English: Now your disposition is stern and eager, but there are no big fish in the clear water, and the politics of discernment is not popular. You should adopt an unrestrained, simple and easy-to-implement policy, forgive their minor mistakes, and only deal with the general outline.

古文：超去，尚私谓所亲曰： 我以班君当有奇策，今所言，平平耳。 
现代文：班超走后，任尚私下对自己的亲信说： 我以为班君会有奇策，而他今天所说的这番话，不过平平罢了。 
English: After Ban Chao left, Ren Shang said to his close friends in private: I thought that Ban Jun would have a brilliant strategy, but what he said today was just ordinary.

古文：尚后竟失边和，如超所言。
现代文：任尚后来终于断送了西域和平，正如班超的预言。
English: Later, Ren Shang finally broke the peace in the Western Regions, just as Banchao had predicted.

古文：初，太傅邓禹尝谓人曰： 吾将百万之众，未尝妄杀一人，后世必有兴者。 
现代文：当初，太傅邓禹曾对人说： 我率领百万兵众，却不曾错杀一人，后世必有子孙兴起。 
English: At the beginning, Deng Yu once said to the people: I led a million soldiers, but I never killed a single person by mistake. In the future, there will surely be descendants.

古文：其子护羌校尉训，有女曰绥，性孝友，好书传，常昼修妇业，暮诵经典，家人号曰 诸生 。
现代文：他的儿子、护羌校尉邓训，有个女儿名叫邓绥，性情孝顺友爱，喜好读书，经常白天学习妇女的活计，晚上诵读儒家经典，家人称她为 女学生 。
English: His son, Deng Xun, a lieutenant of the Guard, has a daughter named Deng Jun, who is filial and obedient, likes to read, often studies women's work during the day, and recites Confucian classics at night. Her family calls her a female student.

古文：叔父陔曰： 尝闻活千人者子孙有封。
现代文：她的叔父邓陔说： 我曾听说，救活一千人的，子孙将会受封。
English: Her uncle Deng Yao said, "I once heard that if you can save a thousand lives, your descendants will be crowned."

古文：兄训为谒者，使修石臼河，岁活数千人，天道可信，家必蒙福。 
现代文：我的兄长邓训当谒者时，奉命修石臼河，每年救活数千人。天道可以信赖，我家必定蒙福。 
English: When my elder brother, Deng Xun, was a cadaver, he was ordered to repair the Shisu River, saving thousands of lives every year. We can rely on the heavenly way, and our family will surely be blessed.

古文：绥后选入宫为贵人，恭肃小心，动有法度，承事阴后，接抚同列，常克己以下之，虽宫人隶役，皆加恩借，帝深嘉焉。
现代文：后来，邓绥被选入后宫，当了贵人。她谦恭小心，举止合乎法度，侍奉阴皇后和同其他嫔妃相处时，总是克制自己，居人之下。即使是对宫人和作杂役的奴仆，也都施以恩惠和帮助。和帝对她深为赞赏。
English: Later, Deng Yao was selected into the harem and became a noblewoman. She was modest and careful, behaved in accordance with the law, and always restrained herself and lived below others when serving the Yin Queen and getting along with other concubines. Even for the palace people and the servants who worked as handymen, they also provided favors and help. Emperor He deeply appreciated her.

古文：尝有疾，帝特令其母、兄弟入亲医药，不限以日数，贵人辞曰： 宫禁至重，而使外舍久在内省，上令陛下有私幸之讥，下使贱妾获不知足之谤，上下交损，诚不愿也！ 帝曰： 人皆以数入为荣，贵人反以为忧邪！ 每有宴会，诸姬竞自修饰，贵人独尚质素，其衣有与阴后同色者，即时解易，若并时进见，则不敢正坐离立，行则偻身自卑，帝每有所问，常逡巡后对，不敢先后言。
现代文：若是和阴皇后同时进见，则不敢正坐或并立，行走时微躬上身，表示自己身分卑微。
English: If you and the Queen of Yin look into the future at the same time, you dare not sit or stand side by side. When you walk, you bow slightly to show your lowly status.

古文：阴后短小，举止时失仪，左右掩口而笑，贵人独怆然不乐，为之隐讳，若己之失。
现代文：每当和帝有所询问，她总是退让在后，不敢先于阴皇后开口。阴皇后身材矮小，举止时有不合礼仪之处，左右随从之人掩口窃笑，唯独邓贵人忧而不乐，为阴皇后隐瞒遮掩，仿佛是自己的过失一样。
English: Whenever she had a question for the Emperor, she always gave in and did not dare to speak before the Queen of Yin. The Queen of Yin was short in stature, her behavior was not in accordance with etiquette, and her followers on both sides covered their mouths and sniggered. However, Deng Gui was sad and unhappy, concealing and covering up for the Queen of Yin, as if it were his own fault.

古文：帝知贵人劳心曲体，叹曰： 修德之劳，乃如是乎！ 
现代文：和帝知道邓贵人的苦心和委屈，叹息道： 修养德性的辛劳，竟达到这种样子！ 
English: Knowing Deng Guiren's painstaking efforts and grievances, Emperor He sighed, "The hard work of cultivating virtue has led to this appearance!

古文：后阴后宠衰，贵人每当御见，辄辞以疾。
现代文：后来，阴皇后失宠，邓贵人每当遇到和帝召见，就借病推辞。
English: Later, when the Empress Yin fell out of favor, whenever Deng Guiren was summoned to meet the emperor, he used illness as an excuse.

古文：时帝数失皇子，贵人忧继嗣不广，数选进才人以博帝意。
现代文：当时和帝接连失去皇子，邓贵人担心后嗣不多，屡次挑选才人进献，以博取和帝的欢心。
English: At that time, Emperor He had lost one prince after another, and Deng Guiren was worried that there would not be many heirs, so he repeatedly selected talented people to make offerings in order to win Emperor He's favor.

古文：阴后见贵人德称日盛，深疾之。
现代文：阴皇后见邓贵人的德望一天比一天高，十分嫉妒。
English: The Yin Queen was very jealous when she saw that Deng Guiren's virtue was getting higher and higher day by day.

古文：帝尝寝病，危甚，阴后密言： 我得意，不令邓氏复有遗类！ 
现代文：和帝曾经卧病，情况非常危险，阴皇后暗中说： 我若是能够得意，就不让邓家再留下活口！ 
English: When Emperor He was ill and the situation was very dangerous, the Queen of Shades said in secret: "If I am able to succeed, I will not allow the Deng family to survive!"

古文：贵人闻之，流涕言曰： 我竭诚尽心以事皇后，竟不为所祐。
现代文：邓贵人听到这番话，流泪说道： 我全心全意地侍奉皇后，竟然得不到她的护佑。
English: When Deng Guiren heard these words, he shed tears and said, "I have served the Empress wholeheartedly, but I can't get her blessing.

古文：今我当从死，上以报帝之恩，中以解宗族之祸，下不令阴氏有人豕之讥。 
现代文：我今天应当跟随皇上去死，上报皇上的大恩，中解家族的灾祸，下不使阴氏如吕太后那样有 人彘 的讥讽。 
English: Today, I should follow the emperor to death, report the emperor's great favor, solve the family's misfortune, and prevent the Yin clan from being ridiculed like Empress Dowager Lv.

古文：即欲饮药，宫人赵玉者固禁之，因诈言 属有使来，上疾已愈 ，贵人乃止。
现代文：说完，就要喝毒药自杀。有个叫赵玉的宫人坚决阻止她，于是谎称： 适才有差人来，皇上的病已经好了。 邓贵人这才作罢。
English: After saying this, she was about to drink poison and commit suicide. A palace official named Zhao Yu resolutely stopped her, and then falsely claimed: "It is only appropriate to send someone, the emperor's illness has already been cured. Deng Guiren should not do this."

古文：明日，上果瘳。
现代文：次日，和帝果然病愈。
English: The next day, Watei did indeed recover from his illness.

古文：及阴后之废，贵人请救，不能得。
现代文：及至阴皇后被罢黜，邓贵人求情挽救，没有成功。
English: When Empress Zhiyin was deposed, Deng Guiren pleaded for her to be saved, but to no avail.

古文：帝欲以贵人为皇后，贵人愈称疾笃，深自闭绝。
现代文：和帝打算将邓贵人立为皇后，而邓贵人却愈发谦恭，她声称病重，闭门深居，把自己隔绝起来。
English: Emperor He intended to make Deng Guiren the empress, but Deng Guiren became more and more humble. She claimed to be seriously ill, lived behind closed doors, and isolated herself.

古文：冬，十月，辛卯，诏立贵人邓氏为皇后；后辞让，不得已，然后即位。
现代文：本年冬季，十月辛卯，和帝下诏，将邓贵人立为皇后。邓贵人表示辞让，不得已，然后才即位为皇后。
English: In the winter of this year, in October Xinwu, the emperor issued an edict to make Deng Guiren the empress. Deng Guiren was forced to resign, and only then did she become the empress.

古文：郡国贡献，悉令禁绝，岁时但供纸墨而已，帝每欲官爵邓氏，后辄哀请谦让，故兄骘终帝世不过虎贲中郎将。
现代文：她下令：各郡、各封国一律不再进贡物品，每年四季只供应纸墨而已。每当和帝想封邓氏家族官爵时，邓皇后总是苦苦哀求，表示谦让。因此，在和帝生前，她的哥哥邓骘的官职没有超过虎贲中郎将。
English: She ordered that all counties and fiefdoms should no longer pay tribute, and that only paper and ink should be supplied during the four seasons of the year. Whenever Emperor He wanted to make the Deng family a peerage, Empress Deng always pleaded hard and showed humility. Therefore, during Emperor He's lifetime, her brother Deng Yao's official position did not exceed that of Vice Admiral of the Tiger Regiment.

古文：丁酉，司空巢堪罢。
现代文：十月丁酉，和帝将司空巢堪罢免。
English: On the 30th, Secretary Kuok Chao resigned.

古文：十一月，癸卯，以大司农沛国徐防为司空。
现代文：十一月癸卯，和帝将大司农、沛国人徐防任命为司空。
English: At the end of November, Emperor He appointed Xu Fang, who was a farmer and a native of Pei Province, as the Chief Secretary of the Air Force.

古文：防上疏，以为： 汉立博士十有四家，设甲乙之科以勉劝学者。
现代文：徐防上书指出： 汉朝设立十四家博士，规定科别等级，用以鼓励学者。
English: Xu Fang's letter pointed out: The Han Dynasty established fourteen doctorates and stipulated subject levels to encourage scholars.

古文：伏见太学试博士弟子，皆以意说，不修家法，私相容隐，开生奸路。
现代文：但是，我看到，太学考察博士弟子，都是凭个人的意见立说，并不钻研本家的理论，而私自互相包容，生出邪门歪道。
English: The vassal saw that the disciples of the doctoral examination of the Taixue Examination were all mean to say, did not practice the family law, concealed their private life, and opened the way for adultery.

古文：每有策试，辄兴诤讼，论议纷错，互相是非。
现代文：每当进行策试，总是发生争执，议论纷纷，互相批驳。
English: Every time there is a plot, there are lawsuits, disputes, and pointing out the rights and wrongs to each other.

古文：孔子称 述而不作 ，又曰 吾犹及史之阙文 。
现代文：孔子称自己 阐述先代圣贤的成说，自己并不创作 。又说： 在我年轻时，还曾赶上见到史书上有缺文。 
English: Confucius said that he did not create the creation stories of the previous sages and sages. He also said: When I was young, I was able to see that there were gaps in the history books.

古文：今不依章句，妄生穿凿，以遵师为非义，意说为得理，轻侮道术，浸以成俗，诚非诏书实选本意。
现代文：如今人们不依照经书原文的章句，自己妄加发挥，认为遵循先师是错误的，而自己的意见才正确合理，对传统经典学术轻蔑不敬，逐渐成为风气，这实在不符合陛下遴选人才的本意。
English: Nowadays, it has gradually become a custom not to follow the precepts and regulations, to randomly create affiliated associations, to think that it is illegal to follow the teacher, to think that the meaning is justified, and to despise the Taoism. This is certainly not the original intention of the edict.

古文：改薄从忠，三代常道；专精务本，儒学所先。
现代文：改变浅薄的习俗，遵从忠诚之道，这是夏、商、周三代的一贯法则。专注而精心地研究经典大师的理论，是儒家学者的首要任务。
English: To change the shallow customs and follow the path of loyalty is the consistent principle of the Xia, Shang and San dynasties. It is the primary task of Confucian scholars to study the theory of classic masters attentively and carefully.

古文：臣以为博士及甲乙策试，宜从其家章句，开五十难以试之，解释多者为上第，引文明者为高说。
现代文：我认为，对于博士和科别等级的策试，应当依从各家的经典传本，设立五十个问答来考试他们，解释周详的为上等，引文出处明确的为优秀。
English: I think that for doctoral and discipline-level examinations, we should follow the classics of each family and set up fifty questions and answers to examine them. The most detailed explanation is the best, and the citation source is clear.

古文：若不依先师，义有相伐，皆正以为非。 
现代文：如果不根据先师学说，而是个人见解发生冲突，都一律作为错误予以纠正。 
English: If there is a conflict that is not based on the teachings of the predecessors, but on personal opinions, it will be corrected as a mistake.

古文：上从之。
现代文：和帝听从了他的意见。
English: Emperor Dezong accepted his suggestion.

古文：是岁，初封大长秋郑众为为鄛乡侯。
现代文：本年，和帝打破常例，首次将大长秋郑众封为乡侯。
English: This year, Emperor He broke with the usual practice and for the first time made the eldest son, Emperor Qiu Zhengzong, a villager.

古文：孝和皇帝下永元十五年
现代文：永元十五年
English: The 15th year of Yongyuan

古文：夏，四月，甲子晦，日有食之。
现代文：夏季，四月甲子晦，出现日食。
English: In the summer, the solar eclipse occurs in April at the turn of the year.

古文：时帝遵肃宗故事，兄弟皆留京师，有司以日食阴盛，奏遣诸王就国。
现代文：当时，和帝遵循章帝的前例，把兄弟们都留在京城。有关部门认为，日食意味着阴气过盛，上书请求派遣诸位亲王前往封国就位。
English: At that time, Emperor He followed the example of Emperor Zhang and left his brothers in the capital. The relevant departments believed that the solar eclipse meant that the gloom was overpowering, and sent a letter requesting that the princes be sent to seal the country and take their places.

古文：诏曰： 甲子之异，责由一人。
现代文：和帝下诏说： 甲子那天出现日食，责任在朕一人身上。
English: The emperor said, "I am the only one responsible for the difference between my two sons."

古文：诸王幼稚，早离顾复，弱冠相育，常有《蓼莪》、《凯风》之哀。
现代文：诸位亲王幼年时便早早地失去了父母的照顾，长大以后互相扶持，经常有《经》《蓼莪》篇和《凯风》篇中所吟咏的悲哀。
English: The princes were young and left their parents very early. They supported each other until they were weak. There is often a sadness of missing their parents in "The Plough" and "The Wind."

古文：选儒之恩，知非国典，且复宿留。 
现代文：手足亲情使我恋恋不舍，明知这样违背国法，但姑且再次让他们留居京城。 
English: I'm in love with my in-laws. I know it's against the law, but let them stay in the capital again.

古文：秋，九月，壬年，车驾南巡，清河、济北、河间三王并从。
现代文：秋季，九月壬午，和帝去南方巡视。清河王、济北王、河间王三王一同随从前往。
English: In the autumn, in September at noon, he went to the south with the emperor on a tour. The three kings, Qinghe Wang, Jibei Wang, and Kawama Wang, accompanied him.

古文：四州雨水。
现代文：有四个州大雨成灾。
English: Four states have been hit by torrential rain.

古文：冬，十月，戊申，帝幸章陵；戊午，进幸云梦。
现代文：冬季，十月戊申，和帝临幸章陵。十月戊午，又临幸云梦。
English: Winter, October Boshin, and the emperor Lin Xingzhang Mausoleum. October Boshu afternoon, and Lin Xingyun dream.

古文：时太尉张禹留守，闻车驾当幸江陵，以为不宜冒险远游，驿马上谏。
现代文：当时太尉张禹在京城留守，他听说和帝要临幸江陵，认为不应冒险远行，便派官府驿马传送奏书进行劝阻。
English: At that time, Lieutenant Zhang Yu was staying in Beijing. He heard that the emperor wanted to visit the Yangtze River, and thought that he should not risk traveling far, so he sent the government to dissuade him.

古文：诏报曰： 祠谒既讫，当南礼大江；会得君奏，临汉回舆而旋。 
现代文：和帝下诏答复道： 祭祀先祖陵庙已毕，本当南下观瞻长江，恰好收到阁下的奏书，我只到达汉水便掉转车驾返回。 
English: And Emperor Zhao replied: The ancestral mausoleum and temple sacrifices are over. I actually went south to view the Yangtze River. I happened to receive Your Excellency's report. As soon as I arrived at Hanshui, I turned around and drove back.

古文：十一月，甲申，还宫。
现代文：十一月甲申，返回京城皇宫。
English: In November, he returned to the Imperial Palace in Kyoto.

古文：岭南旧献生龙眼、荔枝，十里一置，五里一候，昼夜传送。
现代文：以往，岭南地区进贡鲜龙眼和荔枝，十里设一个驿站，五里设一个岗亭，日夜不停地传送。
English: In the past, fresh longan and litchi were brought in from Lingnan, and a post station was set up 10 miles away and a guard post was set up 5 miles away, and they were continuously delivered day and night.

古文：临武长汝南唐羌上书曰： 臣闻上不以滋味为德，下不以贡膳为功。
现代文：临武县长汝南人唐羌上书说： 我听说，在上位的人不因享受美味而为有德，在下位的人不因进贡美味而为有功。
English: Linwu County Governor Yunan Tang Yao wrote: I have heard that people in the upper ranks are not virtuous because they enjoy delicious food, and people in the lower ranks are not meritorious because they pay tribute to delicious food.

古文：伏见交趾七郡献生龙眼等，鸟惊风发；南州土地炎热，恶虫猛兽，不绝于路，至于触犯死亡之害。
现代文：我看到交趾州的七郡进贡鲜龙眼等物，一路疾驰，鸟惊风动。南方州郡土地炎热，毒虫猛兽在路上到处可见，传送贡物的人甚至会遭到死亡的危害。
English: I saw tributes of fresh longan and other things from seven counties in Jiaozuo, speeding all the way, and the birds were frightened by the wind. The land in Nanfang County is hot, poisonous insects and beasts can be seen everywhere on the road, and those who transfer tributes will even be in danger of death.

古文：死者不可复生，来者犹可救也。
现代文：已死的人不能复活，后来的人仍可挽救。
English: Those who have died cannot be brought back to life, but those who come later can be saved.

古文：此二物升殿，未必延年益寿。 
现代文：而将这两种水果献上殿堂，也不一定能使人延年益寿。 
English: But presenting these two fruits to the hall of fame does not necessarily make people live longer.

古文：帝下诏曰： 远国珍羞，本以荐奉宗庙，苟有伤害，岂爱民之本，其敕太官勿复受献！ 
现代文：和帝下诏说： 边远地区进贡珍奇的美味，本是用来供奉宗庙。如果因此造成伤害，岂是爱护人民的本意！现在下令：太官不再接受此类贡品！ 
English: Emperor He decreed: The exotic delicacies brought in from outlying regions were originally intended to be offered to the ancestral temple. If they cause harm as a result, isn't that the intention of protecting the people! Now decree: the eunuchs will no longer accept such tributes!

古文：是岁，初令郡国以日北至按薄刑。
现代文：本年，首次命令各郡、各封国从夏至日开始审理轻刑案件。
English: This year, for the first time, counties and counties were ordered to start hearing cases of light punishment from the summer solstice.

古文：孝和皇帝下永元十六年
现代文：永元十六年
English: Founded in 16th year of Yongyuan

古文：秋，七月，旱。
现代文：秋季，七月，发生旱灾。
English: In the autumn, in July, there was a drought.

古文：辛酉，司徒鲁恭免。
现代文：辛酉，将司徒鲁恭免职。
English: Hsin-tao removed Stuluk-gyon from his post.

古文：庚午，以光禄勋张酺为司徒；八月，己酉，酺薨。
现代文：庚午，将光禄勋张任命为司徒。八月己酉，张去世。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, Zhang Guanglu was appointed as a disciple. In August, he died.

古文：冬，十月，辛卯，以司空徐防为司徒，大鸿胪陈宠为司空。
现代文：冬季，十月辛卯，将司空徐防任命为司徒，将大鸿胪陈宠任命为司空。
English: In the winter, in October Xinwu, appointed Sifu Xu Bao as Sifu, and appointed Da Hongjun Chen Jie as Sifu.

古文：十一月，己丑，帝行幸缑氏，登百岯山。
现代文：十一月己丑，和帝出行，临幸缑氏，登上百山。
English: November is ugly, travel with the emperor, Lin Xingyu, climb a hundred mountains.

古文：北匈奴遣使称臣贡献，愿和亲，修呼韩邪故约。
现代文：北匈奴派遣使者称臣进贡，愿意和亲通好，请求重新修订呼韩邪单于时代的旧约。
English: The Northern Xiongnu dispatched an envoy to demand tribute from their vassals, and were willing to be on good terms with their relatives, requesting that the Old Testament, which had been corrupted by the Han Dynasty, be revised.

古文：帝以其旧礼不备，未许；而厚加赏赐，不答其使。
现代文：和帝认为北匈奴不具备呼韩邪单于的礼数，没有接受请求，只给厚重的赏赐，不派使者回报。
English: Emperor He considered that the Northern Huns did not have the number of courtesies to call on Han, and did not accept the request, only gave a heavy reward, and did not send an envoy in return.

古文：孝和皇帝下元兴元年
现代文：元兴元年
English: In the first year of the Genko era

古文：春，高句骊王宫入辽东塞，寇略六县。
现代文：春季，高句丽国王宫侵入辽东郡边塞，抢掠该郡下属六县。
English: In the spring, the Goguryeo royal court invaded the border fortress of Liaodong County and plundered six counties under the county.

古文：夏，四月，庚午，赦天下，改元。
现代文：夏季，四月庚午，大赦天下，改年号。
English: In the summer, at noon in April, there is a general amnesty and the year is changed.

古文：秋，九月，辽东太守耿夔击高句骊，破之。
现代文：秋季，九月，辽东郡太守耿夔进攻高句丽，将高句丽军打败。
English: In the autumn, in September, Liaodong County Governor Geng Yao attacked Goguryeo and defeated the Goguryeo army.

古文：冬，十二月，辛未，帝崩于章德前殿。
现代文：冬季，十二月辛未，和帝在章德前殿驾崩。
English: In winter, in late December, Emperor He died in the Zhangde Ancestral Hall.

古文：初，帝失皇子，前后十数，后生者辄隐秘养于民间，群臣无知者。
现代文：当初，和帝的儿子接连夭亡，前后达十余人。后出生的皇子就被秘密地送到民间养育，群臣无人知晓。
English: At first, more than a dozen sons of Emperor Hotei died in quick succession. The prince who was born later was secretly sent to be raised by the common people, unbeknownst to the courtiers.

古文：及帝崩，邓皇后乃收皇子于民间。
现代文：及至和帝驾崩，邓皇后才将皇子从民间收回。
English: It was not until Emperor He died that Empress Deng took the prince back from the people.

古文：长子胜，有痼疾；少子隆，生始百馀日，迎立以为皇太子，是夜，即皇帝位。
现代文：长子刘胜，身患久治不愈的顽疾；幼子刘隆，出生才一百多天。于是邓皇后将刘隆接回宫中，立为皇太子。当夜，刘降即位为皇帝。
English: The eldest son, Liu Sheng, was suffering from a long-term incurable disease; the youngest son, Liu Long, was only a hundred days old. Therefore, Empress Deng took Liu Long back to the palace and established him as the crown prince. That night, Liu Qian ascended to the throne as emperor.

古文：尊皇后曰皇太后，太后临朝。
现代文：邓皇后被尊称为皇太后，临朝摄政。
English: The revered empress is the empress dowager, and the empress dowager rules the imperial court.

古文：是时新遭大忧，法禁未设，宫中亡大珠一箧；太后念欲考问，必有不辜，乃亲阅宫人，观察颜色，即时首服。
现代文：当时刚刚遭受大丧，法律、禁令还不完备，宫中丢失大珠一箱。邓太后想到，如果要审问，必会牵累无罪受冤的人。于是她亲自查看宫人，审视涉嫌者的面容神色。盗珠人当即自首认罪。
English: At that time, she had just suffered a great loss, the laws and prohibitions were not yet complete, and a box of pearls was lost in the palace. Empress Dowager Deng thought that if she wanted to interrogate, she would inevitably involve people who were innocent of wrongdoing. So she personally checked the palace people and examined the faces of the suspects. The pearl thief immediately surrendered and pleaded guilty.

古文：又，和帝幸人吉成御者共枉吉成以巫蛊事，下掖庭考讯，辞证明白。
现代文：再有，和帝的一个宠幸者叫吉成，侍从们一同诬陷他施用巫蛊害人。吉成被交付掖庭进行审讯，供词、证据都很清楚。
English: Furthermore, one of the emperor's favorites was called Yoshicheng, and the attendants together accused him of using witchcraft to harm people. Yoshicheng was brought to the court for trial, and the confession and evidence were very clear.

古文：太后以吉成先帝左右，待之有恩，平日常无恶言，今反若此，不合人情；更自呼见实核，果御者所为，莫不叹服以为圣明。
现代文：但邓太后认为吉成是和帝身边的人，对他有恩，平时尚且不讲自己的坏话，如今反而采取这种手段，不合人情。于是她亲自下令传见吉成，重新核实，查出果然是出自侍从们的陷害。众人无不赞叹佩服，认为太后圣明。
English: However, Empress Dowager Deng thought that Jicheng was a person who was close to the emperor, was kind to him, was modest and did not speak ill of herself, but now she is taking this kind of means, which is not humane. Therefore, she personally ordered to see Jicheng, re-checked, and found out that it was indeed a trap from the attendants. Everyone admired and admired, and thought that the empress dowager was saintly.

古文：北匈奴重遣使诣敦煌贡献，辞以国贫未能备礼，愿请大使，当遣子入侍。
现代文：北匈奴再次派遣使者到敦煌进贡，解释说：由于我国贫穷，不能礼数周全，希望能请汉朝使者前来，北匈奴将派遣王子到汉朝充当人质。
English: The Northern Xiongnu once again sent an envoy to Dunhuang to pay tribute, explaining: "Because of our country's poverty, we can't have perfect etiquette. We hope to invite the Han Dynasty envoy to come. The Northern Xiongnu will send a prince to the Han Dynasty to serve as a hostage."

古文：太后亦不答其使，加赐而已。
现代文：邓太后也没有派使者回报，只给予赏赐而已。
English: Empress Dowager Deng did not send an envoy to reciprocate, but only offered rewards.

古文：雒阳令广汉王涣，居身平正，能以明察发擿奸伏，外行猛政，内怀慈仁。
现代文：洛阳令广汉人王涣，为人正直，办事公平，能够洞察暗藏的奸邪，予以惩治。从表面看，他施行苛猛之政，而内心却十分仁慈。
English: Luoyang ordered the Guanghan people to be honest, to act fairly, to be able to see the hidden evil and to punish it. On the surface, he carried out a harsh policy, but his heart was very kind.

古文：凡所平断，人莫不悦服，京师以为有神。
现代文：凡是他所作的判决，人们无不心悦诚服，整个京城都认为他似有神明相助。
English: All the judgments he has made have been well received by the people, and the entire capital believes that he seems to have divine assistance.

古文：是岁卒官，百姓市道，莫不咨嗟流涕。
现代文：本年，王涣在任上去世，百姓们围住道路，无不叹息流泪。
English: This year, Wang Hui died in office, the people surrounded the road, all sighing and shedding tears.

古文：涣丧西归，道经弘农，民庶皆设盘木案于路，吏问其故，咸言： 平常持米到雒，为吏卒所钞，恒亡其半，自王君在事，不见侵枉，故来报恩。 
现代文：王涣的灵柩向西运回家乡，途经弘农时，当地人民全都在路旁设案摆盘，进行祭祀。官吏询问缘故，他们一致说道： 我们以往运米到洛阳，受到官吏和士卒的掠夺，总要损失一半。而自从王君到任，我们就不再遭受侵害和冤屈了，因此前来报恩。 
English: Wang Qian's coffin was transported westward to his hometown, and when it passed through Hongnong, the local people all set up a table by the side of the road to offer sacrifices. When the officials asked the reason, they unanimously said: In the past, when we transported rice to Luoyang, we were plundered by officials and soldiers, and we always lost half. But since Wang Qian took office, we no longer suffer from infringement and grievance, so we came to repay the favor.

古文：雒阳民为立祠、作诗，每祭，辄弦歌而荐之。
现代文：洛阳人民为王涣建立祠庙，并作诗纪念他。每逢祭祀的时候，就奏乐歌唱这些诗篇。
English: The people of Luoyang built an ancestral temple for Wang Qian and wrote poems to commemorate him. Whenever there was a religious service, these poems were played and sung.

古文：太后诏曰： 夫忠良之吏，国家之所以为治也，求之甚勤，得之至寡，今以涣子石为郎中，以劝劳勤。 
现代文：邓太后下诏说： 有了忠良的官吏，国家才得到治理。朝廷十分殷切地寻求这种官吏，但却极少得到。现任命王涣的儿子王石为郎中，以勉励那些任职劳苦而勤奋的官吏。 
English: Empress Dowager Deng issued an imperial edict saying, "The country can only be governed with loyal officials. The imperial court earnestly seeks such officials, but rarely gets them. Now, Wang Shi, the son of Wang Xi, has been appointed as a tutor to encourage those officials who work hard and diligently.

