古文：无宿治，则邪官不及为私利于民。
现代文：不允许官吏留下当日的政务不办理，那样有私心的官吏就没有机会到百姓那里谋取私利。
English: Officials are not allowed to leave the day's government affairs unattended, so selfish officials will not have the opportunity to seek personal gain from the people.

古文：而百官之情不相稽，则农有余日；邪官不及为私利于民，则农不败。
现代文：假如群臣的政务不相互拖延，那么农民就会有充裕时间来耕田。有私心的官吏没有时间到百姓中谋取私利，那么农民就不会受到危害。
English: If the government affairs of the ministers did not delay each other, then the farmers would have plenty of time to cultivate their fields. If the selfish officials did not have time to seek personal gain among the people, then the farmers would not be harmed.

古文：农不败而有余日，则草必垦矣。
现代文：农民就不会受到危害，就会有充裕时间来从事农业生产，那荒地就一定能得到开垦了。
English: Farmers will not be harmed, they will have plenty of time to engage in agricultural production, and the wasteland will definitely be reclaimed.

古文：訾粟而税，则上壹而民平。
现代文：根据粮食的产量来计算田赋，国家田赋制度就会统一，百姓承担的赋税才会公平。
English: If the rice tax is calculated according to grain production, the national rice tax system will be unified, and the tax borne by the people will be fair.

古文：上壹，则信；信，则臣不敢为邪。
现代文：国家的田赋制度统一了，就会在百姓中有信誉，有了信誉大臣便不敢再谋取私利。
English: Once the country's Tianfu system is unified, it will have credibility among the people, and with credibility, ministers will no longer dare to seek personal gain.

古文：民平，则慎；慎，则难变。
现代文：百姓的负担公平，就会谨慎对待自己的职业，百姓慎重对待自己的职业就不会轻易改变。
English: If the people's burden is fair, they will be cautious about their occupation, and if the people are cautious about their occupation, they will not change easily.

古文：上信而官不敢为邪，民慎而难变，则下不非上，中不苦官。
现代文：如此百姓就不会议论君主不对，心中也不会感到官吏害民。
English: In this way, the people will not think that the monarch is wrong, and they will not feel in their hearts that officials are harming the people.

古文：下不非上，中不苦官，则壮民疾农不变。
现代文：百姓就不认为君主不对，心中也不恨官吏，那么壮年农民就会尽力从事农业生产不改做其它行业。
English: If the people do not think that the monarch is wrong, and do not hate officials in their hearts, then the farmers in their prime will do their best to engage in agricultural production without changing to other industries.

古文：壮民疾农不变，则少民学之不休。
现代文：壮年人努力从事农业生产，那么年轻人一定会不断向他们学习，从事农业生产。
English: If adults work hard to engage in agricultural production, then young people will surely continue to learn from them and engage in agricultural production.

古文：少民学之不休，则草必垦矣。
现代文：年轻人不断学习务农，那么荒地就一定能开垦了。
English: If young people continue to learn about farming, then wasteland can definitely be reclaimed.

古文：无以外权爵任与官，则民不贵学问，又不贱农。民不贵学则愚，愚则无外交，无外交则国安不殆。
现代文：不要用务农以外的因素来衡量给某些人封官晋爵，那样百姓就不会看重学问，也不会轻视农业，百姓不认为有学问尊贵，就会愚笨，百姓愚笨无见识，就不会到外国交游。
English: Don't use factors other than farming to measure the promotion of certain people to knighthoods. In that way, the people will not attach importance to learning and will not despise agriculture. If the people do not think that learning is noble, they will be stupid. If the people are stupid and have no knowledge, they will not travel abroad.

古文：民不贱农，则勉农而不偷。
现代文：百姓不到外国交游，那么国家就会安全没有危险；百姓不轻视农业，那么就会努力务农而不懈怠。
English: If the people do not travel abroad, then the country will be safe and there will be no danger; if the people do not despise agriculture, then they will work hard at farming and not slack off.

古文：国安不殆，勉农而不偷，则草必垦矣。
现代文：国家没有危险，农民尽力从事农业生产不偷懒，那么荒地就一定能开垦了。
English: If there is no danger to the country and farmers do their best to engage in agricultural production without being lazy, then wasteland can definitely be reclaimed.

古文：禄厚而税多，食口众者，败农者也。则以其食口之数赋而重使之，则辟淫游惰之民无所于食。
现代文：士大夫贵族的俸禄高并且收取的租税很多，食客数量也众多，这是危害农业生产的事，就要根据他们豢养的食客数量收税，从重役使他们。那么这些邪僻、淫荡、四处游说、懒惰的人就没处混饭吃，士大夫贵族也没有办法多收留食客。
English: The aristocrats and magistrates have high salaries and collect a lot of taxes, and the number of diners is also large, which is harmful to agricultural production. It is necessary to collect taxes according to the number of diners they support, and make them from the executives. Then these perverse, lascivious, lobbying, and lazy people have nowhere to eat, and the aristocrats and magistrates have no way to accommodate more diners.

古文：民无所于食，则必农；农，则草必垦矣。
现代文：懒惰的人没有地方混饭吃，就一定务农。人们都去务农，那么荒地就一定能开垦了。
English: If lazy people don't have a place to eat and mingle, they will definitely go into farming. If everyone goes into farming, then the wasteland will definitely be reclaimed.

古文：使商无得籴，农无得粜。
现代文：商人不准买进粮食，农民不准卖出粮食。
English: Merchants are not allowed to buy grain, and farmers are not allowed to sell grain.

古文：农无得粜，则窳惰之农勉疾。
现代文：农民不准卖出粮食，那么懒惰的农民就会努力积极从事农业生产。
English: If farmers are not allowed to sell grain, then lazy farmers will try to actively engage in agricultural production.

古文：商不得籴，则多岁不加乐。多岁不加乐，则饥岁无裕利。
现代文：商人不准买进粮食，丰年没有丰厚的利润，那么饥年更没有过多的利润可图。
English: Merchants were not allowed to buy grain, and there was no great profit in good years, and even less in bad years.

古文：无裕利，则商怯；商怯，则欲农。
现代文：没有厚利可图，那么商人一定会害怕经商，会想去务农。
English: If there are no big profits to be made, then businessmen will definitely be afraid of doing business and will want to go into agriculture.

古文：窳惰之农勉疾，商欲农，则草必垦矣。
现代文：懒惰的农民努力从事生产，商人也想去务农，那么荒地就一定能开垦了。
English: If lazy farmers make an effort to engage in production, and businessmen also want to go into agriculture, then wasteland can definitely be reclaimed.

古文：声服无通于百县，则民行作不顾，休居不听。休居不听，则气不淫。
现代文：供人享乐的音乐和奇异的服装不准在各郡县流行，那么农民在外出劳作时就不会看见奇异服装，在家里休息时听不到靡靡之音，那么他的精神和意志就不会涣散。
English: If music for enjoyment and strange costumes are not allowed to become popular in counties and counties, then the peasants will not see strange costumes when they go out to work, and will not hear mournful sounds when they rest at home. Then his spirit and will will not be scattered.

古文：行作不顾，则意必壹。
现代文：到田间劳动时看不见奇异的服装，那么他的心思一定会专心在农业生产上。
English: When he went to work in the fields, he could not see the strange clothing, so his mind must have been concentrated on agricultural production.

古文：意壹而气不淫，则草必垦矣。
现代文：心思专一且意志不涣散，那么荒地就一定能开垦了。
English: If the mind is single-minded and the will is not scattered, then the wasteland will surely be able to be reclaimed.

古文：无得取庸，则大夫家长不建缮，爱子不惰食，惰民不窳，而庸民无所于食，是必农。
现代文：不准雇用佣工，那么卿、大夫、家主就没不会建院修屋，他们那些娇生惯养的儿女就无法不劳动吃闲饭，懒惰的人也不能偷懒，那些靠给人作佣工生活的人就没有地方混饭吃，这样他们就一定去务农。
English: If it is not allowed to employ domestic helpers, then the lords, doctors, and landlords will not be able to build hospitals and repair houses, their pampered children will not be able to eat idle food without working, lazy people will not be able to be lazy, and those who live by working as domestic helpers will not have a place to eat, so they will definitely go to farming.

古文：大夫家长不建缮，则农事不伤。
现代文：卿、大夫、家主不建房修房，那么农业生产就不会受到危害。
English: If the lord, doctor, and landlord do not build or repair houses, then agricultural production will not be harmed.

古文：爱子、惰民不窳，则故田不荒。农事不伤，农民益农，则草必垦矣。
现代文：卿大夫娇生惯养的儿女和不愿从事农业生产的懒惰之人就不再偷懒，那么原有的农田就不会荒掉，农业生产不会受危害，农民更加努力从事农业生产，那么荒地就一定能开垦了。
English: Dr. Jing's pampered children and lazy people who do not want to engage in agricultural production will no longer be lazy, so the original farmland will not be deserted, agricultural production will not be harmed, farmers will make more efforts to engage in agricultural production, then the wasteland will definitely be able to be reclaimed.

古文：废逆旅，则奸伪、躁心、私交、疑农之民不行，逆旅之民无所于食，则必农。
现代文：取缔旅馆，那么奸邪伪诈、不安心本职、私下交游、不专心从事农业生产的人就不会外出四处周游，而且那些开旅馆的人就没有办法谋生，那么他们一定会去务农。
English: If hotels are banned, then those who are dishonest, shiftless, unscrupulous, make friends in secret, and do not devote themselves to agricultural production will not go out and travel around, and those who run hotels will not be able to make a living, so they will definitely go to farming.

古文：农，则草必垦矣。
现代文：这些人都去务农，那么荒地就一定能开垦了。
English: If these people go into agriculture, then the wasteland will surely be reclaimed.

古文：壹山泽，则恶农、慢惰、倍欲之民无所于食。
现代文：国家统一管理山林、湖泽，那么讨厌务农、怠慢懒惰、贪婪的人就没有吃饭的地方。
English: The state has unified management of mountains, forests and lakes, so people who hate farming, are lazy and greedy will not have a place to eat.

古文：无所于食，则必农。农，则草必垦矣。
现代文：没有吃饭的地方，就一定会去务农，这些人都去务农，那么荒地就一定能开垦了。
English: If there is no place to eat, they will definitely go to farming, these people all go to farming, then the wasteland will definitely be able to be reclaimed.

古文：贵酒肉之价，重其租，令十倍其朴，然则商贾少，农不能喜酣奭，大臣不为荒饱。
现代文：抬高酒肉等奢侈品的价钱，加重收取这些东西的赋税，让赋税的数量高出它的本钱十倍，如果这样的话，卖酒、肉等东西的商人就会减少，农民也就不能纵情饮酒作乐，大臣也就不会荒废政事吃喝享乐。
English: Raise the price of luxury goods such as wine and meat, increase the tax collected on these things, and let the amount of tax be ten times higher than its cost. If this is the case, there will be fewer merchants selling wine, meat and other things, farmers will not be able to indulge in drinking and entertainment, and ministers will not waste political affairs on eating and drinking.

古文：商贾少，则上不费粟。
现代文：从事经商的人少了，那么国家就不会浪费粮食。
English: Fewer people are engaged in business, so the country does not waste food.

古文：民不能喜酣奭，则农不慢。
现代文：农民不能纵情饮酒作乐，就不会懒惰了。
English: If farmers can't indulge in drinking and having fun, they won't be lazy.

古文：大臣不荒，则国事不稽，主无过举。
现代文：大臣不荒废政事，处理国家的政事就不会拖延，君主也就不会有错误的举措。
English: The minister will not waste political affairs, the handling of the country's political affairs will not be delayed, and the monarch will not have wrong measures.

古文：上不费粟，民不慢农，则草必垦矣。
现代文：国家不浪费粮食，农民不怠慢放松农业，那么荒地就一定能开垦了。
English: If the state does not waste grain and farmers do not neglect to relax agriculture, then wasteland can definitely be reclaimed.

古文：重刑而连其罪，则褊急之民不斗，很刚之民不讼，怠惰之民不游，费资之民不作，巧谀、恶心之民无变也。
现代文：加重刑罚处罚措施，建立连坐机制，使他们互相监视，如果一个人犯了罪，其他人一起受处罚，那么那些气量小、性格暴躁的人就不再敢打架斗殴，凶狠强悍的人便不敢争吵斗嘴，懒惰的人也不敢到处游荡，喜欢挥霍的人也不再会产生，善于花言巧语、心怀不良的人就不敢再进行欺诈。
English: If one person commits a crime and the others are punished together, then those who are short-tempered and short-tempered will no longer dare to fight and fight, fierce and tough people will not dare to quarrel and fight, lazy people will not dare to wander around, people who like to squander will no longer be born, and people who are good at rhetoric and have bad intentions will not dare to commit fraud.

古文：五民者不生于境内，则草必垦矣。
现代文：这五种人在国内不存在，那么荒地就一定能开垦了。
English: These five types of people do not exist in the country, so the wasteland can certainly be reclaimed.

古文：使民无得擅徙，则诛愚。乱农农民无所于食而必农。
现代文：让百姓不能随便搬迁，那么就会愚昧迟钝，而那些不安心务农的人就失去混饭吃的地方，一定会去务农了。
English: If people are not allowed to relocate at will, they will become stupid and dull, and those who are not anxious about farming will lose their place to eat and will definitely go into farming.

古文：愚心、躁欲之民壹意，则农民必静。
现代文：愚昧无知、性情浮躁的人也能专心从事农业生产了，那么农民就一定会安心务农。
English: Ignorant and impetuous people will also be able to concentrate on agricultural production, so farmers will definitely be able to do farming with peace of mind.

古文：农静、诛愚，则草必垦矣。
现代文：农民安心务农又愚昧迟钝，不安心务农的人也想去务农，那么荒地就一定能得到开垦了。
English: If farmers who are comfortable with farming are also stupid and slow-witted, and if people who are not comfortable with farming also want to go into farming, then wasteland can definitely be reclaimed.

古文：均出余子之使令，以世使之，又高其解舍，令有甬官食，概。不可以辟役，而大官未可必得也，则余子不游事人，则必农。
现代文：统一发布有关卿大夫、贵族嫡长子以外弟子担负徭役赋税的法令，根据他们的出身让他们服徭役，再提高他们服徭役的条件，让他们从掌管为服徭役之人供给谷米的官吏那里领取粮食，他们就不可能逃避徭役，而且想做大官也未必能够获得，那么他们就不再四处游说或投靠权贵，就一定会去务农。
English: It is impossible for them to escape the yakitori, and they may not be able to get it if they want to be a high-ranking official, so they will no longer lobby around or rely on the powerful, and they will definitely go into agriculture.

古文：农，则草必垦矣。
现代文：这些人去务农，那么荒地就一定能开垦了。
English: If these people go into agriculture, then the wasteland will surely be reclaimed.

古文：国之大臣诸大夫，博闻、辨慧、游居之事，皆无得为，无得居游于百县，则农民无所闻变见方。
现代文：国家的大臣诸大夫们，不准做那些提高闻见、辩论、周游居住外乡之类的事；更不准到各郡县去居住游说，那么农民就没有地方能听到奇谈怪论。
English: The ministers and doctors of the state are not allowed to do things such as raise awareness, debate, travel around and live in foreign villages; they are not allowed to live in counties and counties to lobby, so there is no place for farmers to hear strange talk.

古文：农民无所闻变见方，则知农无从离其故事，而愚农不知，不好学问。
现代文：听到蛊惑人心的学说。农民没有地方听到异端学说，那么有智慧的农民就没有办法脱离他们原来从事的农业，而那些愚笨的农民就会无知识，不喜欢学问。
English: If the peasants have no place to hear heretical doctrines, then the wise peasants will have no way to escape from the agriculture they were originally engaged in, and those stupid peasants will have no knowledge and dislike learning.

古文：愚农不知，不好学问，则务疾农。
现代文：愚笨的农民无知识，不喜欢学问，那么就会积极务农。
English: Stupid farmers do not have knowledge and do not like learning, so they will actively engage in farming.

古文：知农不离其故事，则草必垦矣。
现代文：有智慧的农民不脱离他们原来所从事的农业，那么荒地就一定能开垦了。
English: If wise farmers do not abandon the agriculture they were originally engaged in, then wasteland can definitely be reclaimed.

古文：令军市无有女子。而命其商，令人自给甲兵，使视军兴；又使军市无得私输粮者。则奸谋无所于伏，盗输粮者不私稽，轻惰之民不游军市。
现代文：命令军队的市场上不准有女子，还要命令内部市场上的商人自己给军队准备好铠甲兵器，让他们时刻关注军队军事行动开始时的战斗动员；还要让军队内部的市场不能有私自运输粮食的人，那么那些奸诈狡猾的人举动就没办法隐藏，偷军粮的人没有地方卖出去，运粮食的人也不能私藏粮食，那些轻浮懒惰的人就不能到军中市场上游荡。
English: It was ordered that there should be no women in the market of the army, and the merchants in the internal market should be ordered to prepare armored weapons for the army themselves, so that they should always pay attention to the combat mobilization of the army at the beginning of military operations; it was also ordered that there should be no people smuggling grain in the market of the army, so that those who are treacherous and cunning would not be able to hide their actions, those who steal grain would have no place to sell, those who transport grain would not be able to hide grain, and those who are frivolous and lazy would not be able to wander in the market of the army.

古文：盗粮者无所售，送粮者不私，轻惰之民不游军市，则农民不淫，国粟不劳，则草必垦矣。
现代文：偷运粮食的人没有地方出卖，运送粮食的人全由国家派出，轻浮懒惰的人不能到军中市场游逛，那么农民就不能四处游荡，国家的粮食就不会浪费，荒地就一定能开垦了。
English: People who smuggle grain have no place to sell it, people who transport grain are all sent by the state, frivolous and lazy people can't wander around the military market, so farmers can't wander around, the country's grain will not be wasted, and wasteland can definitely be reclaimed.

古文：百县之治一形，则从迂者不敢更其制，过而废者不能匿其举。
现代文：各郡县的政令和统治措施必须一致，那么离任、升迁、接任的官吏不能随意更改已有的制度，犯了错误而被罢官的人不能隐藏自己的错误。
English: The decrees and governing measures of all counties must be consistent, so that officials who leave office, are promoted or take over cannot arbitrarily change the existing system, and those who make mistakes and are dismissed cannot hide their mistakes.

古文：过举不匿，则官无邪人。
现代文：错误行为不能隐藏，那么官吏中就会没有不正派的人。
English: If wrongdoing cannot be hidden, then there will be no rogue officials.

古文：迂者不饰，代者不更，则官属少而民不劳。
现代文：升迁的人不用粉饰自己，接任的官吏不敢更改制度，那么官史的从属人员就会减少，农民的负担就不会过重。
English: Those who are promoted do not need to whitewash themselves, and the officials who take over do not dare to change the system. Then the subordinate personnel of official history will be reduced, and the burden on farmers will not be too heavy.

古文：官无邪，则民不敖；民不敖，则业不败。
现代文：官吏中没有邪恶的人，农民就不用到外躲避邪恶的官吏；农民不用四处躲避，那么农业就不会受到危害。
English: If there are no evil people among officials, farmers will not have to go out to avoid evil officials; if farmers do not have to hide everywhere, then agriculture will not be harmed.

古文：官属少，征不烦。
现代文：官吏的从属小吏少了，那么征收的赋税就不会多。
English: If there are fewer subordinate officials, the amount of taxes collected will not increase.

古文：民不劳，则农多日。
现代文：农民的负担不重，那农民从事农业生产的时间就多。
English: The burden on farmers is not heavy, so farmers have more time to engage in agricultural production.

古文：农多日，征不烦，业不败，则草必垦矣。
现代文：农民从事农业生产的时间多，征收的赋税也不多，农业不受损害，那么荒地就一定能开垦了。
English: Farmers have more time to engage in agricultural production, the taxes collected are not much, and agriculture is not damaged, then wasteland will definitely be able to be reclaimed.

古文：重关市之赋，则农恶商，商有疑惰之心。
现代文：加重关口、集市上商品的税收，那么农民就会讨厌经商，商人就会对经商产生怀疑甚至懒得干的思想。
English: If the taxes on goods at customs and markets are increased, then farmers will hate doing business, and merchants will have doubts about doing business or even be too lazy to do it.

古文：农恶商，商疑惰，则草必垦矣。
现代文：农民讨厌经商，商人对自己所从事的工作产业怀疑，不愿意经商，那么荒地就一定能开垦了。
English: Farmers hate doing business, businessmen are suspicious of the work industry they are engaged in and do not want to do business, then the wasteland will definitely be able to be reclaimed.

古文：以商之口数使商，令之厮、舆、徒、重者必当名，则农逸而商劳。农逸，则良田不荒；商劳，则去来赍送之礼无通于百县。
现代文：根据商人家的人口数量向他们摊派徭役，让他们家中砍柴的、驾车的、供人役使的、做僮仆的人都一定要到官府登记注册，并且按名册服徭役，那么农民的负担就会轻，商人的负担就会重，来来往往送礼的人就不会在各地通行。
English: According to the number of the merchant's population, they will be assigned to the service of the eunuch, so that those who cut firewood, drive cars, provide laborers, and serve as eunuchs in their homes must register with the government and perform the service of the eunuch according to the roster. Then the burden of the farmer will be light, the burden of the merchant will be heavy, and the people who come and go to give gifts will not pass through all parts of the country.

古文：则农民不饥，行不饰。
现代文：如果这样，农民就不会饥饿，做什么事也不用送礼讲排场。
English: If this were the case, farmers would not go hungry, and they would not have to give gifts or make a big show of doing anything.

古文：农民不饥，行不饰，则公作必疾，而私作不荒，则农事必胜。
现代文：农民不挨饿，做什么事不送礼，那么他们就一定会对国家让做的事积极努力，并且个人的事也不会荒废，那么在农业上的事就会做好。
English: If farmers do not go hungry and do not give gifts for whatever they do, then they will definitely make active efforts to do what the state asks them to do, and personal affairs will not be wasted, then things in agriculture will be done well.

古文：农事必胜，则草必垦矣。
现代文：农业上的事优先发展了，那么荒地就一定能开垦了。
English: If priority is given to the development of agriculture, then the wasteland will surely be reclaimed.

古文：令送粮无取僦，无得反庸，车牛舆重设必当名。
现代文：命令运送粮食的人不能花钱雇别人的车，更不准运粮车辆在返回时揽载私人货物。
English: Ordering the grain transporters not to hire other people's cars, and not to allow the grain vehicles to pick up private goods when returning.

古文：然则往速来疾，则业不败农。
现代文：车、拉车的牛、车在运粮时的载重量服役时一定要同注册登记时一致。
English: The weight of the truck, the ox that pulls the truck, and the load of the truck when transporting grain must be the same as that at the time of registration.

古文：业不败农，则草必垦矣。
现代文：如果这样的话，那么运粮车就会去得迅速回来得也快，运粮的事就不会危害农业生产。
English: If this is the case, then the grain trucks will go quickly and come back quickly, and the grain transportation will not endanger agricultural production.

古文：无得为罪人请于吏而饷食之，则奸民无主。
现代文：运粮不会危害农业生产，那么荒地就一定能开垦了。不准许犯罪的人向官吏求情并且给他们送饭吃，那么奸民就没有了依靠。
English: If grain transports do not endanger agricultural production, then wasteland can definitely be reclaimed. If criminals are not allowed to plead with officials and send them food, then the traitors will have nothing to rely on.

古文：奸民无主，则为奸不勉。
现代文：奸民没有了依靠，那么他们做坏事就得不到鼓励。
English: If the traitors have no support, they will not be encouraged to do bad things.

古文：为奸不勉，则奸民无朴。
现代文：做坏事得不到鼓励，那么奸民就没有了靠山的支持者。
English: If people are not encouraged to do bad things, then the villains will have no reliable supporters.

古文：奸民无朴，则农民不败。
现代文：做坏事的人没有靠山，那么农民就不会受到危害。
English: If the people who do bad things do not have any support, then farmers will not be harmed.

古文：农民不败，则草必垦矣。
现代文：农民不会受到危害，那么荒地就一定能开垦了。
English: Farmers will not be harmed, so wasteland can definitely be reclaimed.

