古文：实意者，气之虑也。
现代文：要使思想充实，就必须效法螣蛇。
English: If you want to enrich your thoughts, you must imitate the python.

古文：心欲安静，虑欲深远；心安静则神策生，虑深远则计谋成；神策生则志不可乱，计谋成则功不可间。
现代文：思想充实，产生于气的思考活动。
English: Thought is substantial and arises from the thinking activity of qi.

古文：意虑定则心遂安，心遂安则所行不错，神自得矣。
现代文：内心要保持安静，思考要深谋远虑。内心安静，精神便会爽朗充沛；思考深谋远虑，谋划事情便能周详。
English: Keep your heart quiet, and think with forethought. With a quiet heart, your spirit will be refreshed; with forethought, you will be able to plan things thoroughly.

古文：得则凝。识气寄，奸邪得而倚之，诈谋得而惑之；言无由心矣。
现代文：精神爽朗充沛，志向就不可能扰乱；谋划周详，事业的成功便没有了阻碍。
English: The spirit is fresh and full of energy, the ambition can not be disturbed; the plan is well-planned, and the success of the cause is not hindered.

古文：固信心术守真一而不化，待人意率之交会，听之候也。
现代文：思想坚定，心里便顺畅；内心平静，他所作的一切便不会有差错。精神便自得其所，便会专一集中。
English: When the mind is firm, the heart is at ease; when the heart is at peace, there is no fault in anything one does; when the mind is at ease, one can concentrate.

古文：寄谋者，存亡之枢机。虑不会，则听不审矣。
现代文：如果思想活动不安定而游离在外，奸邪之徒便可凭借这种状况干坏事，欺诈阴谋便可乘机迷惑自己，于是说出话来便不会经过心的仔细思考。所以，要使心术真诚。
English: If one's thought activity is unstable and wandering, the evil-doers can take advantage of this situation to do bad things, and deceitful plots can take advantage of the opportunity to confuse oneself, so that words are not carefully thought out by the heart. Therefore, make the mind sincere.

古文：候之不得，寄谋失矣。
现代文：必须坚守专一之道而不改变，等待别人开诚相见。
English: We must stick to the single-minded way without changing, and wait for others to be honest with each other.

古文：则意无所信，虚而无实。
现代文：彼此交流。认真听取和接受别人的意见。
English: Communicate with each other. Listen carefully and accept the opinions of others.

古文：故寄谋之虑，务在实意；实意必从心术始。
现代文：计谋是关系国家成败的关键。如果思想不交融，听到的情况便不周详；接受的东西不恰当，计谋就会发生失误。
English: Strategy is the key to the success or failure of a country. If the ideas are not integrated, the situation will not be well understood; if what is accepted is not appropriate, the strategy will fail.

古文：无为而求，安静五脏，和通六腑；精神魂魄固守不动，乃能内视反听，定志虑之太虚，待神往来。
现代文：那么，思想上便没有真诚可信的东西，变得空虚而不实在。所以在考虑计谋的时候，必须了解真实的情况和意图，而真实的情况和意图是从内心开始。要自然无为，使五脏平静，六腑畅通，人的精神和魂魄都能固守不动。这样便可以精神内敛来审视自己、反听他人。便可以志向坚定，使头脑达到毫无杂念的空灵境界。等待神妙的灵感活动往来。
English: Then, there is nothing sincere and credible in thought, and it becomes empty and unreal. Therefore, when considering stratagems, it is necessary to understand the true situation and intention, and the true situation and intention start from the heart. It is necessary to naturally do nothing, so that the internal organs are calm, the six limbs are smooth, and the human spirit and soul can remain immobile. In this way, the spirit can be restrained to examine itself and listen to others. It can be determined to make the mind reach the ethereal realm without any distractions. Wait for the miraculous inspiration activity.

古文：以观天地开辟，知万物所造化，见阴阳之终始，原人事之政理。
现代文：从而可以观察天地的开辟，了解造化万物的规律。发现阴阳二气周而复始的变化，探讨出人世间治国方法的原理。
English: Thus, it is possible to observe the development of heaven and earth, understand the laws of the creation of all things, discover the changes of yin and yang, and explore the principles of the methods of governing a country.

古文：不出户而知天下，不窥牖而见天道；不见而命，不行而至；是谓道知。
现代文：这便叫做：不出门户便可了解天下的万事万物。不把头探出窗外便可了解自然界的变化规律；没有见到事物便可叫出它的名称。
English: This is called: without opening the door, you can understand everything in the world; without sticking your head out of the window, you can understand the laws of change in the natural world; without seeing things, you can call out its name.

古文：以通神明，应于无方，而神宿矣。
现代文：不走动便可以达到目的地。这便叫做 道知 ，即凭借道来了解一切。
English: You can reach your destination without moving. This is called "Dōchi" (道知), which means to understand everything by virtue of the Tao.

