古文：起强圉大渊献，尽上章困敦，凡十四年。
现代文：起，止，一共十四年。
English: It lasted for a total of fourteen years.

古文：孝景皇帝下前三年
现代文：汉景帝前三年
English: Three years before Emperor Han Jing

古文：冬，十月，梁王来朝。
现代文：冬季，十月，梁王来长安朝见景帝。
English: In winter, in October, King Liang came to Chang'an to see Emperor Jing.

古文：时上未置太子，与梁王宴饮，从容言曰： 千秋万岁后传于王。 
现代文：当时，景帝没有立太子，与梁王宴饮时，景帝很舒缓地说： 等我百年之后，把帝位传给你。 
English: At that time, Emperor Jing did not appoint a crown prince. When dining with King Liang, Emperor Jing said very soothingly: Wait for me for a hundred years, I will pass the throne to you.

古文：王辞谢，虽知非至言，然心内喜，太后亦然。
现代文：梁王表示谦谢，虽然知道这不是认真的话，但心中很高兴；窦太后也是如此。
English: Liang Wang expressed humble thanks, although he knew that this was not serious, but he was happy in his heart; the same was true for Dou Dowager.

古文：詹事窦婴引卮酒进上曰： 天下者，高祖之天下，父子相传，汉之约也，上何以得传梁王！ 
现代文：詹事窦婴捧着一杯酒献给景帝说： 这个天下，是高祖的天下，帝位由父亲传给儿子，这是汉朝的规定，皇上怎么能够传给梁王！ 
English: Holding a glass of wine dedicated to Emperor Jing, Zhan Zhi Dou Yu said: This world is the world of Gao Zu. The imperial throne is passed from father to son. This is the rule of the Han Dynasty. How could the emperor pass it on to King Liang!

古文：太后由此憎婴。婴因病免；太后除婴门籍，不得朝请。
现代文：窦太后因此憎恶窦婴；窦婴便借口有病而辞职；窦太后在准许出入皇宫殿门的名册上除去了窦婴的姓名，不许他参加春秋两季的盛大朝会。
English: As a result, Empress Dowager Dou detested Dou Yu; Dou Yu resigned on the pretext that he was ill; Empress Dowager Dou deleted Dou Yu's name from the list of people allowed to enter and leave the palace, and did not allow him to participate in the grand imperial meetings in spring and autumn.

古文：梁王以此益骄。
现代文：梁王因此更加骄横。
English: As a result, Liang Wang became even more arrogant.

古文：春，正月，乙巳，赦。
现代文：春季，正月，乙巳，景帝下达赦令。
English: In spring, the first month of the year, Emperor Jing issued a pardon.

古文：长星出西方。
现代文：彗星出现在西方天空。
English: A long-beamed comet appears in the west.

古文：洛阳东宫灾。
现代文：洛阳的东宫发生火灾。
English: A fire broke out in the East Palace of Luoyang.

古文：初，孝文时，吴太子入见，得侍皇太子饮、博。
现代文：当初，孝文帝在位时，吴国太子进京朝见文帝，得以陪伴皇太子饮酒、博戏。
English: Initially, when Emperor Xiaowen was on the throne, the Prince of Wu went to Beijing to see Emperor Wen, and was able to accompany the crown prince to drink and play games.

古文：吴太子博争道，不恭；皇太子引博局提吴太子，杀之。
现代文：吴太子在博戏过程中与太子争棋路，态度不恭；皇太子就拿起棋盘猛击吴太子，把他打死了。
English: Prince Wu was playing chess with the prince during the game, and he was not respectful; the crown prince picked up the chessboard and hit Prince Wu, killing him.

古文：遣其丧归葬，至吴，吴王愠曰： 天下同宗，死长安即葬长安，何必来葬为！ 
现代文：朝廷送他的灵柩回去安葬，灵柩到达吴国，吴王恼怒地说： 天下都是刘氏一家的天下，死在长安就葬在长安，何必送回来安葬呢！ 
English: The imperial court sent his coffin back to be buried. When the coffin arrived in the State of Wu, the King of Wu angrily said, "The whole world belongs to the Liu family. If you die in Chang'an, you will be buried in Chang'an. Why should you be sent back for burial?"

古文：复遣丧之长安葬。
现代文：吴王又把太子的灵柩送回长安安葬。
English: The remains were also sent to Chang'an for burial.

古文：吴王由此稍失籓臣之礼，称疾不朝。
现代文：吴王从此渐渐失去藩臣的礼节，声称身体有病，不来朝见皇帝。
English: From then on, King Wu gradually lost the etiquette of a vassal, claiming that he was ill and would not come to see the emperor.

古文：京师知其以子故，系治、验问吴使者；吴王恐，始有反谋。
现代文：京城知道吴王是为了儿子的缘故，就拘留和审问吴国的使者；吴王恐惧，开始产生了谋反的念头。
English: The capital knew that King Wu was doing this for the sake of his son, so he detained and interrogated the emissary of the State of Wu; King Wu was afraid and began to have thoughts of rebellion.

古文：后使人为秋请，文帝复问之，使者对曰： 王实不病；汉系治使者数辈，吴王恐，以故遂称病。
现代文：后来，吴王派人代替他去长安行秋季朝见之礼，文帝再一次追问吴王不来朝见的原因，使臣回答说： 吴王其实没有生病；朝廷拘留了几批吴国使者，又治他们的罪，吴王恐惧，所以才声称有病。
English: Later, King Wu sent someone to Chang'an in his place for the autumn imperial court ceremony. Emperor Wen once again asked the reason why King Wu did not come to the imperial court. The envoy replied: King Wu is actually not ill; the imperial court has detained several groups of emissaries from the State of Wu and punished them for their crimes. King Wu is afraid, so he claims to be ill.

古文：夫察见渊中鱼不祥，唯上弃前过，与之更始。 
现代文：有这么一句话， 察见深潭中的鱼，不吉利 ；希望皇上不再追究他以前的过失，让他改过自新。 
English: There is a saying that it is unlucky to see a fish in a deep pool; I hope that the emperor will no longer investigate his previous mistakes and let him reform.

古文：于是文帝乃赦吴使者，归之，而赐吴王几杖，老，不朝。
现代文：这样，文帝就释放了吴国使者，让他们回去；并且赏赐给吴王几案和拐杖，表示照顾他年事已高，不必前来朝见。
English: In this way, Emperor Wen released the emissaries of the State of Wu and let them go back; and rewarded the King of Wu with several cases and crutches, saying that he would take care of his old age and did not have to come to the court.

古文：吴得释其罪，谋亦益解。
现代文：吴王见朝廷不再追究他的罪名，谋反之心也就渐渐消除了。
English: King Wu was able to absolve him of his sins, and the rebellion was relaxed.

古文：然其居国，以铜、盐故，百姓无赋；卒践更，辄予平贾；岁时存问茂材，赏赐闾里；他郡国吏欲来捕亡人者，公共禁弗予。
现代文：但是，因为他国内有冶铜、制盐的财源，便不向百姓征收赋税；百姓应该为官府服役时，总是由吴王发给代役金，另外雇人应役；每到年节时，慰问有贤才的士人，赏赐平民百姓；其他郡国的官吏要来吴国捕捉流亡的人，吴国公然阻止，不把罪犯交出去。
English: However, because he had the financial resources of copper smelting and salt production in his country, he did not levy taxes on the people; when the people were supposed to serve the government, the king of Wu always paid the substitute money and hired other people to serve; every New Year's Day, he would offer condolences to the talented scholars and reward the common people; other county officials wanted to come to Wu to capture the exiles, but Wu openly prevented them from handing over the criminals.

古文：如此者四十馀年。
现代文：这样，前后持续了四十多年。
English: This went on for more than forty years.

古文：晁错数上书言吴过，可削；文帝宽，不忍罚，以此吴日益横。
现代文：晁错多次上书奏说吴王的罪过，认为可以削减其封地；汉文帝宽厚，不忍心惩罚，所以吴王日益骄横。
English: He mistakenly wrote several times that it was King Wu's fault and believed that his fief could be reduced; Emperor Hanwen was generous and could not bear to punish, so King Wu became increasingly arrogant.

古文：及帝即位，错说上曰： 昔高帝初定天下，昆弟少，诸子弱，大封同姓，齐七十馀城，楚四十馀城，吴五十馀城；封三庶孽，分天下半。
现代文：等到汉景帝即位，晁错劝说景帝： 当初，高帝刚刚平定天下，兄弟少，儿子们年幼，大封同姓诸侯王，封给齐国七十多座城，封给楚国四十多座城，封给吴国五十多座城；封给这三个并非嫡亲的诸侯王的领地，就去了全国的一半。
English: When Emperor Han Jing ascended to the throne, he tried to persuade Emperor Jing: At the beginning, Emperor Gao had just pacified the world. He had few brothers and young sons. He granted more than 70 cities in Qi Province, more than 40 cities in Chu Province, and more than 50 cities in Wu Province to princes with the same surname. The territories granted to these three princes, who were not legitimate relatives, went to half of the country.

古文：今吴王前有太子之郤，诈称病不朝，于古法当诛。
现代文：现在，吴王以前因有吴太子之死的嫌隙，假称有病不来朝见，按照古法应当处死。
English: Now, according to the ancient law, King Wu should be put to death because he had a grudge against the death of Prince Wu and pretended to be ill and did not come to the court.

古文：文帝弗忍，因赐几杖，德至厚，当改过自新，反益骄溢，即山铸钱，煮海水为盐，诱天下亡人谋作乱。
现代文：文帝不忍心，因而赐给他几案手杖，对他是恩德极为深厚，他本应该改过自新；但他反而更加骄横无法，利用矿山采铜铸钱，熬海水制盐，招诱天下流亡人口，图谋叛乱。
English: Emperor Wen could not bear it, so he gave him several cases of canes. He was extremely grateful to him, and he should have reformed himself. But instead, he became even more arrogant, using mines to mine copper to make money, boiling seawater to make salt, luring the world's exiled population, and plotting rebellion.

古文：今削之亦反，不削亦反。削之，其反亟，祸小；不削，反迟，祸大。 
现代文：如今，削减他的封地他会叛乱，不削减他的封地，他也会叛乱；如果削减他的封地，他反得迅速匆忙，祸患会小一些；如果不削减他的封地，他反得慢，将来有备而发，祸患更大。 
English: Today, if his fief is reduced, he will rebel; if his fief is not reduced, he will also rebel; if his fief is reduced, he will be in a hurry, and the disaster will be less; if his fief is not reduced, he will be in a hurry, and the disaster will be greater.

古文：上令公卿、列侯、宗室杂议，莫敢难；独窦婴争之，由此与错有郤。
现代文：景帝下令公卿、列侯、宗室共同讨论晁错的建议，没有人敢与晁错辩驳；只有窦婴一人坚决反对，从此与晁错之间产生了矛盾。
English: Emperor Jing ordered the nobles, the vassals, and the family to jointly discuss the erroneous proposal, and no one dared to argue with the erroneous proposal; only Dou Ying alone firmly opposed it, and from then on, a contradiction arose between him and the erroneous proposal.

古文：及楚王戊来朝，错因言： 戊往年为薄太后服，私奸服舍，请诛之。 
现代文：等到楚王刘戊来京朝见，晁错借机说： 刘戊去年为薄太后服丧期间，在服丧的居室里私下奸淫，请求处死他。 
English: When the King of Chu, Liu Wu, came to Beijing to meet with the imperial court, Zou took the wrong opportunity to say: During the mourning period for the Empress Dowager Bo last year, Liu Wu secretly committed adultery in the mourning room and requested that he be executed.

古文：诏赦，削东海郡。
现代文：景帝下诏，免去刘戊的死罪，但把原楚国封地东海郡收归朝廷。
English: The emperor pardoned his death sentence, but reduced his territory to Sokhaigun.

古文：及前年，赵王有罪，削其常山郡；胶西王卬以卖爵事有奸，削其六县。
现代文：另外，在前一年，赵王有罪，朝廷削夺了他的常山郡；胶西王刘因在卖爵事上有不法行为，朝廷削夺了他封地中的六县之地。
English: In addition, in the previous year, Zhao Wang was found guilty, and the court deprived him of Changshan County; Guoxi Wang Liu, because of his illegal behavior in the matter of selling his title, the court deprived him of six counties in his fief.

古文：廷臣方议削吴。
现代文：朝廷大臣们正在议论削夺吴王的封地。
English: The ministers of the imperial court are discussing the seizure of King Wu's fief.

古文：吴王恐削地无已，因发谋举事。念诸侯无足与计者，闻胶西王勇，好兵，诸侯皆畏惮之，于是使中大夫应高口说胶西王曰： 今者主上任用邪臣，听信谗贼，侵削诸侯，诛罚良重，日以益甚。语有之曰： 狧穅及米。 
现代文：吴王刘濞恐怕削夺没有止境，就打算举兵叛乱；想到其他诸侯王没有足以共商大事的，听说胶西王刘勇武，喜欢兵法，诸侯都畏惧他，于是吴王派中大夫应高去亲口游说胶西王刘，说： 现在，主上重用奸邪之臣，听信谗言恶语，侵夺削弱诸侯国，对诸侯王的惩罚极为严厉，而且一天比一天厉害俗语有这样的说法： 开头吃糠，后来就会发展到吃米。 
English: The king of Wu, Liu Bei, was afraid that there would be no end to the plundering, so he planned to raise an army to rebel. Thinking that the other princes did not have enough power to discuss important matters, he heard that Liu Yongwu, king of Jiaoxi, liked the art of war, and the princes were afraid of him. Therefore, the king of Wu sent the middle doctor, Ying Gao, to personally lobby Liu, king of Jiaoxi, saying, "Nowadays, the Lord is heavy on the use of treacherous vassals, listens to the evil words of slander, and weakens the principalities by invasion and plunder. The punishment

古文：吴与胶西，知名诸侯也，一时见察，不得安肆矣。
现代文：吴国和胶西国，都是著名的诸侯王国，同时朝廷注意，不会有安宁了。
English: Wu and Jiaoxi are famous among the princes. If they are investigated and punished, they will not be able to act freely.

古文：吴王身有内疾，不能朝请二十馀年，常患见疑，无以自白，胁肩累足，犹惧不见释。窃闻大王以爵事有过。
现代文：吴王身体患有暗疾，已有二十多年不能朝见，时常担心受到朝廷怀疑，无法自己表白，缩紧肩膀、脚压着脚地自我约束，仍怕得不到朝廷的宽容，我私下听说大王因出卖爵位的过失而受朝廷处置。
English: King Wu is suffering from a secret illness. He has not been able to visit the imperial court for more than 20 years. He is often worried about being suspected by the imperial court, unable to express himself, self-restrained by clenching his shoulders and pressing his feet. He is still afraid of not being tolerated by the imperial court. I have heard in private that the great king has been dealt with by the imperial court for the mistake of selling his title.

古文：所闻诸侯削地，罪不至此；此恐不止削地而已。 王曰： 有之。
现代文：我所听到的其他诸侯被削夺封地的事情，若按所犯罪名来处理，都不应该受到如此严重的惩罚。恐怕朝廷的用意，不仅仅是要削夺诸侯王的封地吧！ 胶西王刘说： 我确实有被削夺的事。
English: Other cases I have heard of lords being deprived of their fiefs, if they were dealt with according to the crimes committed, should not have been punished so severely. I'm afraid the intention of the court is not just to deprive lords of their fiefs! King Liu of Jiaoxi said: I do have the matter of being deprived.

古文：子将奈何？ 
现代文：你认为该怎么办？ 
English: What do you think should be done?

古文：高曰： 吴王自以与大王同忧，愿因时循理，弃躯以除患于天下，意亦可乎？ 
现代文：应高说： 吴王自认为与大王面临着共同的忧患，希望顺应时势，遵循情理，牺牲生命去为天下消除祸患，我想您也同意吧？ 
English: Ying Gao said, "Wu Wang thinks that he is facing a common sorrow with the great king, and hopes to conform to the current situation, follow reason, and sacrifice his life to eliminate the scourge for the world. I think you agree?

古文：胶西王瞿然骇曰： 寡人何敢如是！
现代文：胶西王大吃一惊，说： 我怎么敢做这样的事！
English: Taken aback, Guoxi Wang said, "How dare I do such a thing!

古文：王上虽急，固有死耳，安得不事！ 
现代文：天子待诸侯虽然很严苛，我只有一死了事，怎能起意反叛呢？
English: Although the Son of Heaven is very strict with the princes, I only have one thing to do, how can I rebel?

古文：高曰： 御史大夫晁错，营惑天子，侵夺诸侯，朝廷疾怨，诸侯皆有背叛之意，人事极矣。
现代文：应高说： 御史大夫晁错，在天子身边蒙骗蛊惑，侵夺诸侯封地，诸侯王都有背叛之心，从人事来看，形势已发展到极点了。
English: Ying Gao said, "Gishi Daifu made a mistake, deceived and bewitched those around him, and usurped the fiefs of the princes. The princes all had a spirit of betrayal. From a personnel point of view, the situation has developed to the extreme.

古文：彗星出，蝗虫起，此万世一时；而愁劳，圣人所以起也。
现代文：彗星出现，蝗灾发生，这是千载难逢的好时机；而且愁恼困苦的局势，正是圣人挺身而出之时。
English: A comet appears, a locust plague occurs, it's a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity; and the sad and difficult situation is exactly when the sage comes forward.

古文：吴王内以晁错为诛，外从大王后车，方洋天下，所向者降，所指者下，莫敢不服。
现代文：吴王准备对朝廷提出清除晁错的要求，在战场上则跟随于大王之后，纵横天下，所向无敌，锋芒所指之处，没有人胆敢不服。
English: King Wu is preparing to make a request to the imperial court to clear up the mistakes. On the battlefield, he will follow the great king, across the world, invincible, and no one dares to disobey where the edge points.

古文：大王诚幸而许之一言，则吴王率楚王略函谷关，守荥阳、敖仓之粟，距汉兵，治次舍，须大王。
现代文：大王若真能许诺一句话，吴王就率领楚王直捣函谷关，据守荥阳、敖仓的粮库，敌御汉军，整治好驻扎之地，恭候大王到来。
English: If the great king can really promise a word, the king of Wu will lead the king of Chu to directly attack Hanzhongguan, guard the grain storehouses of Poyang and Hanzhong, and the enemy Han army, rectify the stationed place, and wait for the great king to arrive.

古文：大王幸而临之，则天下可并，两主分割，不亦可乎！ 王曰： 善！ 
现代文：有幸得到大王光临，就可以吞并天下，吴王和大王平分江山，不也很好吗！ 胶西王说： 好！ 
English: If you are fortunate enough to be visited by the great king, you can annex the whole world. Isn't it great that King Wu and the great king divide the country equally? King Jiaoxi said: Good!

古文：归，报吴王，吴王犹恐其不果，乃身自为使者，至胶西面约之。
现代文：应高返归崐吴国，向吴王汇报，吴王还怕胶西王不实行诺言，就亲自前往，到胶西国与刘当面约定。
English: Ying Gao returned to the State of Jiaowu and reported to the King of Wu. The King of Wu was afraid that the King of Jiaoxi would not keep his promise, so he went to Jiaoxi in person and made a face-to-face appointment with Liu.

古文：胶西群臣或闻王谋，谏曰： 诸侯地不能当汉十二，为叛逆以忧太后，非计也。
现代文：胶西国群臣中，有人得知胶西王的图谋，谏阻说： 诸侯王的封地还不到汉朝廷的十分之二，发动叛乱而使太后担忧，这不是高明的计策。
English: Among the ministers of the Koxi Kingdom, someone learned of the plot of King Koxi and said: The fiefs of the princes are less than two-tenths of the Han Dynasty. It is not a clever strategy to launch a rebellion and worry the empress dowager.

古文：今承一帝，尚云不易；假令事成，两主分争，患乃益生。 
现代文：现在侍奉一个天子，都说不容易；假设吴与胶西的计划能够成功，两位君主并立相争，祸患就更多了。 
English: Now it is said that it is not easy to serve a heavenly son; if Wu and Guoxi's plan succeeds, and the two monarchs fight side by side, there will be more disasters.

古文：王不听，遂发使约齐、菑川、胶东、济南，皆许诺。
现代文：胶西王不听，于是派使者与齐王、川王、胶东王、济南王约定共同举事，这些诸侯王都答应了。
English: King Jiaoxi did not listen to the advice, but sent his envoys separately to the provinces of Yochi, Miaochuan, Jiaokam, and Jinan. They all agreed.

古文：初，楚元王好书，与鲁申公、穆生、白生俱受《诗》于浮丘伯；及王楚，以三人为中大夫。
现代文：当初，楚元王刘交喜爱书籍，和鲁地人申公、穆生、白生都拜浮丘伯为师，学习《诗经》；等到他当了楚王，就任命他们三人为中大夫。
English: At first, Liu Jiao, the King of Chu, was fond of books. He studied the "Book of Songs" under the tutelage of the Lu people Shen Gong, Mu Sheng, and Bai Sheng. When he became the King of Chu, he appointed the three of them as junior doctors.

古文：穆生不耆酒；元王每置酒，常为穆生设醴。
现代文：穆生不喜欢喝酒；楚元王每次设宴饮酒时，都特意为穆生准备甜酒。
English: Mousheng did not like to drink alcohol; King Chu Yuan specially prepared sweet wine for Mousheng every time he held a banquet.

古文：及子夷王、孙王戊即位，常设，后乃忘设焉。穆生退，曰： 可以逝矣！
现代文：等到楚元王的儿子夷王以及孙子刘戊为王时，也总在举行宴会时为穆生特备甜酒，但以后就忘记这样做了。穆生退席而出，说： 应该离去了！
English: When Chu Yuan's son, Yi Wang, and grandson, Liu Wu, became kings, they always prepared special sweet wine for Musheng at banquets, but later they forgot to do so. Musheng left the table and said, "I should leave!"

古文：醴酒不设，王之意怠；不去，楚人将钳我于市。 
现代文：不特设甜酒，说明楚王对我已怠慢了；再不离去，楚王将会给我戴上刑具在街市上示众。 
English: If I don't drink the special sweet wine, it means that King Chu has neglected me; if I don't leave again, King Chu will put the torture device on me and show it to the public at the market.

古文：遂称疾卧。
现代文：于是，穆生声称有病，卧床不起。
English: As a result, Musen claimed to be ill and bedridden.

古文：申公、白生强起之，曰： 独不念先王之德与！
现代文：申公、白生极力劝他继续为楚王效力，说： 你就不念先王的恩德吗吗？
English: Shen Gong and Bai Sheng strongly advised him to continue to work for King Chu, saying: "Don't you remember the kindness of the former king?

古文：今王一旦失小礼，何足至此！ 
现代文：现在楚王一时稍有礼貌不周怎么至于这样！ 
English: Now, if the king were to lose his self-respect, what would happen?

古文：穆生曰： 《易》称： 知几其神乎！
现代文：穆生说： 《易经》上说： 知道契机的神妙吗？
English: Mu Sheng said: "In the I Ching, it says: Do you know the magic of opportunity?

古文：几者，动之微，吉凶之先见者也。
现代文：契机，是动机的微妙变化，是显示吉凶的先兆。
English: A trigger is a subtle change in motivation, a precursor that indicates good or bad luck.

古文：君子见几而作，不俟终日。 
现代文：君子看到契机而采取行动，并不整天等待。 
English: A gentleman acts when he sees an opportunity and does not wait all day.

古文：先王之所以礼吾三人者，为道存也。今而忽之，是忘道也。
现代文：先王礼待我们三人的原因，是他心中有道义；现在楚王怠慢我们，是忘记了道义。
English: The reason why the previous king treated the three of us with courtesy was that he had morality in his heart; now King Chu is neglecting us and has forgotten about morality.

古文：忘道之人，胡可与久处，岂为区区之礼哉！ 
现代文：怎么能和忘了道义的人长期共处，难道我这样只是因为那区区的礼节吗！ 
English: How can I coexist for a long time with people who have forgotten their morals, am I only like this because of their poor etiquette!

古文：遂谢病去。
现代文：于是，穆公声称有病，离开了楚国。
English: So he called in sick.

古文：申公、白生独留。
现代文：申公和白生却继续留任楚国。
English: If there is a petition, it is useless to stay.

古文：王戊稍淫暴，太傅韦孟作诗讽谏，不听，亦去，居于邹。
现代文：楚王刘戊逐渐荒淫残暴，太傅韦孟作了一首诗，用来进行委婉的批评，楚王不加理睬，韦孟也离开楚国，去邹地居住。
English: Liu Wu, the king of Chu, gradually became wild, lewd, and cruel. Wei Meng, the grand tutor, composed a poem to be used as a tactful criticism, but the king of Chu ignored it. Wei Meng also left the state of Chu and went to live in Handan.

古文：戊因坐削地事，遂与吴通谋。
现代文：刘戊因犯罪被朝廷削夺封地，就与吴王刘濞通谋，准备叛乱。
English: Liu E was deprived of his fief by the imperial court for his crime, so he conspired with Wu King Liu Ye to prepare a rebellion.

古文：申公、白生谏戊，戊胥靡之，衣之赭衣，使雅舂于市。
现代文：申公、白生去劝谏刘戊，刘戊将他们二人罚为罪徒，让他们被绳拴着，穿着刑徒的红褐色囚衣，在街市上舂米。
English: Mr. Shen went to persuade Liu E in vain. Liu E punished the two of them as criminals and had them handcuffed, wearing the reddish-brown prison clothes of convicts, and selling rice in the street market.

古文：休侯富使人谏王。王曰： 季父不吾与，我起，先取季父矣！ 
现代文：休侯刘富派人来劝阻楚王，楚王说： 叔父不与我合作，我一旦起事，就先攻打叔父了！ 
English: Hugh Hou Liu Fu sent someone to dissuade King Chu. King Chu said, "Uncle doesn't cooperate with me. If I start a fight, I'll attack Uncle first!"

古文：休侯惧，乃与母太夫人奔京师。
现代文：休侯刘富害怕，就与他的母亲太夫人逃奔长安。
English: Afraid to leave town, he and his mother fled to the capital.

古文：及削吴会稽、豫章郡书至，吴王遂先起兵，诛汉吏二千石以下；胶西、胶东、菑川、济南、楚、赵亦皆反。
现代文：及至朝廷削夺吴国会稽郡、豫章郡的文书到达，吴王刘濞就首先起兵，杀死朝廷任命的二千石以下的官员；胶西王、胶东王、川王、济南王、楚王、赵王也都举兵叛乱。
English: When the documents for the imperial court to seize the Wu Congressional County and Yuzhang County arrived, the king of Wu, Liu Bei, was the first to raise an army and kill the officials appointed by the imperial court who were less than 2,000 koku. King Jiaoxi, King Jiaodong, King Chuan, King Jinan, King Chu, and King Zhao also raised an army and rebelled.

古文：楚相张尚、太傅赵夷吾谏王戊，戊杀尚、夷吾。
现代文：楚相张尚、太傅赵夷吾谏阻楚王刘戊，刘戊杀死了张尚和赵夷吾。
English: Zhang Shang, the Prince of Chu, and Zhao Yiwu, the Tai Fu, resisted Liu E, the King of Chu, and Liu E killed Zhang Shang and Zhao Yiwu.

古文：赵相建德、内史王悍谏王遂，遂烧杀建德、悍。
现代文：赵相建德、内史王悍谏止赵王刘遂，刘遂将他们两人烧死。
English: Zhao Xiangjiande and Neishi Wang bravely stopped Zhao Wang Liu Sui, and Liu Sui burned them both to death.

古文：齐王后悔，背约城守。
现代文：齐王后悔通谋叛乱，违背与吴楚的盟约，依据城池进行抵御。
English: King Qi regretted that he had plotted the rebellion, violated the treaty with Wu Chu, and resisted on the basis of the castle.

古文：济北王城坏未完，其郎中令劫守，王不得发兵。
现代文：济北王的城墙坏了没有修好，他的郎中令劫持了他，使他无法举兵参加叛乱。
English: The city wall of the king of Jibei was broken and had not been repaired, and his lieutenant-general kidnapped him, making it impossible for him to raise an army to join the rebellion.

古文：胶西王、胶东王为渠率，与菑川、济南共攻齐，围临菑。
现代文：胶西王和胶东王为统帅，联合川王、济南王共同攻打齐国，围攻齐国都城临淄。
English: King Guoxi and King Guodong were the commanders, and together with King Chuan and King Jinan, they jointly attacked Qi and besieged the capital city of Qi, Linyi.

古文：赵王遂发兵住其西界，欲待吴、楚俱进，北使匈奴与连兵。
现代文：赵王刘遂把军队调往赵国西部边境，准备与吴、楚等国军队联合进攻，又向北方的匈奴派出使者，联络匈奴一起举兵。
English: Zhao Wang Liu then moved his army to the western border of Zhao, preparing for a joint attack with the armies of Wu, Chu and other countries, and sent an envoy to the Huns in the north to contact the Huns to raise troops together.

古文：吴王悉其士卒，下令国中曰： 寡人年六十二，身自将；少子年十四，亦为士卒先。
现代文：吴王征发了所有士卒，下令全国说： 我今年六十二岁了，亲自担任统帅；我的小儿子十四岁，也身先士卒。
English: King Wu sent for all the soldiers and ordered the whole country to say: I am sixty-two years old this year, and I am the commander-in-chief; my youngest son is fourteen years old, and he is also the first soldier.

古文：诸年上与寡人同，下与少子等，皆发。 
现代文：所有年龄上与我一样，下与我的小儿子一样的人，都征发从军！ 
English: Everyone of the same age as me and my youngest son was conscripted into the army!

古文：凡二十馀万人。
现代文：吴国共征发了二十多万人。
English: More than 200,000 people were conscripted and sent to labor camps in Wu.

古文：南使闽、东越，闽、东越亦发兵从。
现代文：吴王向南方派出使者去联络闽、东越，闽和东越也发兵响应。
English: At the same time, he also sent envoys to the southern provinces of Shandong and Sokou, both of which also sent troops to accompany him.

古文：吴王起兵于广陵，西涉淮，因并楚兵，发使遗诸侯书，罪状晁错，欲合兵诛之。
现代文：吴王在广陵起兵，向西渡过淮河，随即与楚国的军队合并，派使者致书诸侯，指控晁错罪状，准备联合进兵诛杀晁错。
English: King Wu raised an army in Guangling, crossed the Huai River to the west, and then merged with the army of the State of Chu. He sent an envoy to write to the princes, accuse them of wrongdoing, and prepare to jointly enter the army to kill them.

古文：吴、楚共攻梁，破棘壁，杀数万人；乘胜而前，锐甚。
现代文：吴、楚两国军队一起攻打梁国，攻破了棘壁，杀死数万人；吴、楚联军乘胜前进，兵锋锐不可当。
English: The armies of Wu and Chu attacked Liang Province together, broke through the thorny wall, and killed tens of thousands of people; the allied forces of Wu and Chu advanced on the basis of victory, and the military front was formidable.

古文：梁孝王遣将军击之，又败梁两军，士卒皆还走。
现代文：梁孝王派将军迎击，又有两支军队被吴楚联军打败，梁军士兵都向后逃跑。
English: Liang Xiaowang sent a general to meet the attack, and two more armies were defeated by the Wu Chu allied forces. Liang's soldiers all fled backwards.

古文：梁王城守睢阳。
现代文：梁王固守都城睢阳。
English: Liang Wang held fast to the capital Shenyang.

古文：初，文帝且崩，戒太子曰： 即有缓急，周亚夫真可任将兵。 
现代文：当初，汉文帝临终前，告诉太子说： 假若国家有危难，周亚夫足以胜任军队统帅的重担。 
English: At first, before dying, Emperor Hanwen told the prince: If the country is in danger, Zhou Yafu is competent enough to shoulder the burden of the army commander.

古文：及七国反书闻，上乃拜中尉周亚夫为太尉，将三十六将军往击吴、楚，遣曲周侯郦寄击赵，将军栾布击齐；复召窦婴，拜为大将军，使屯荥阳监齐、赵兵。
现代文：等到七国叛乱的文书到达朝廷，景帝就任命中尉周亚夫为太尉，统帅三十六位将军及其部队，前去迎击吴、楚叛军；派遣曲周侯郦寄攻打赵国，派将军栾布攻打齐境叛军；景帝又召回窦婴，任命他为大将军，让他率军驻守荥阳，监督用兵于齐国和赵国境内的汉军。
English: When the documents of the Seven Kingdoms Rebellion arrived at the imperial court, Emperor Jing appointed Lieutenant Zhou Yafu to be the first lieutenant and commander of the thirty-six generals and their troops to go to meet the rebels of Wu and Chu; dispatched Qu Zhou Houyi to attack Zhao and sent General Zibo to attack the rebels of Qi; Emperor Jing also recalled Dou Ying and appointed him as the general, and let him lead the army to stay in Fenyang and supervise the Han troops in Qi and Zhao.

古文：初，晁错所更令三十章，诸侯讙哗。
现代文：当初，晁错所修改的法令有三十章，诸侯王纷纷议论表示反对。
English: At first, there were 30 chapters in the revised edict, and the lords and princes discussed and opposed it one after another.

古文：错父闻之，从颍川来，谓错曰： 上初即位，公为政用事，侵削诸侯，疏人骨肉，口语多怨，公何为也？ 
现代文：晁错的父亲得知消息，从颍川赶来京师，对晁错说： 皇上刚即位，你掌权处理政事，侵夺削弱诸侯，疏离人家的骨肉，让大家都怨恨你，你为何这么做呢？ 
English: When his father learned the news, he rushed to Beijing from Luochuan to tell Luochuan: The emperor has just ascended the throne, you are in power to deal with political affairs, usurp and weaken lords, alienate people's bones and flesh, and make everyone resent you. Why did you do this?

古文：错曰： 固也。不如此，天子不尊，宗庙不安。 
现代文：晁错说： 本就应该这样做；如果不这样做，天子不尊贵，宗庙不安宁。 
English: He mistakenly said, "This is how it should be done; if it is not done, the Son of Heaven will not be honored, and the ancestral temple will not be peaceful."

古文：父曰： 刘氏安矣而晁氏危，吾去公归矣！ 
现代文：他的父亲说： 这样做，刘氏的天下安宁了，但晁氏却危险了，我离开你回去了！ 
English: His father said, "If you do this, the world will be peaceful for Mr. Liu, but it will be dangerous for Mr. Zou. I will leave you and go back!"

古文：遂饮药死，曰： 吾不忍见祸逮身！ 
现代文：他父亲就服毒自杀，临死前说： 我不忍心见到大祸临到我身上！ 
English: His father took poison and committed suicide, saying before he died: "I can't bear to see such a terrible thing happen to me!"

古文：后十馀日，吴、楚七国俱反，以诛错为名。
现代文：此后过了十多天，吴、楚等七国就以诛除晃错为名一同举兵叛乱。
English: More than ten days later, seven countries, including Wu and Chu, jointly raised an army and rebelled in the name of eliminating the error.

古文：上与错议出军事，错欲令上自将兵而身居守；又言： 徐、僮之旁吴所未下者，可以予吴。 
现代文：景帝与晁错商谈出军平叛的事情，晁错想让景帝统兵亲征而他自己留守长安；晁错又建议： 徐县、僮县附近一带，吴国没有攻占的地方，可以送给吴国，争取他们退兵。 
English: Emperor Jing talked with the wrong negotiator about the army's counter-rebellion. The wrong negotiator wanted Emperor Jing to personally conscript the soldiers while he himself remained in Chang'an. The wrong negotiator also suggested that the areas around Xuxian and Jixian that were not occupied by the State of Wu could be given to the State of Wu to win their withdrawal.

古文：错素与吴相袁盎不善，错所居坐，盎辄避；盎所居坐，错亦避；两人未尝同堂语。
现代文：晁错一直与吴相袁盎不友善，有晁错在某处就坐，袁盎总是避开；袁盎出现在何处，晁错也总是避开；两人未曾在同一个室内说过话。
English: Yan Ke has always been unfriendly with Wu Xiang Yuan Ang. If Yan Ke sits somewhere, Yuan Ang always avoids it; wherever Yuan Ang appears, Yan Ke always avoids it; the two have never spoken in the same room.

古文：及错为御史大夫，使吏按盎受吴王财物，抵罪；诏赦以为庶人。
现代文：等到晁错升任御史大夫，派官员审查袁盎接受吴王财物贿赂的事，处以相当崐的刑罚，确定袁盎有罪；景帝下诏赦免袁盎，把他降为平民。
English: When Yao was mistakenly promoted to the post of imperial historian, he sent officials to examine Yuan Ang's acceptance of the bribe of King Wu's money and goods, and imposed a considerable punishment to determine Yuan Ang's guilt; Emperor Jing issued an edict to pardon Yuan Ang and reduce him to a commoner.

古文：吴、楚反，错谓丞、史曰： 袁盎多受吴王金钱，专为蔽匿，言不反；今果反，欲请治盎，宜知其计谋。 
现代文：吴、楚叛乱发生后，晁错对御史丞、侍御史说： 袁盎接受了吴王的许多金钱，专门为吴王掩饰，说他不会叛乱；现在，吴王果然反叛了，我想奏请严惩袁盎，他肯定知道吴王的密谋。 
English: After the rebellion of Wu and Chu, Zou Zhe wrongly said to Mi Shi Rong and Mi Shi Rong: Yuan Ang accepted a lot of money from King Wu, especially to cover up for King Wu, saying that he would not rebel; now, King Wu has indeed rebelled. I would like to ask you to severely punish Yuan Ang. He must have known about King Wu's conspiracy.

古文：丞、史曰： 事未发，治之有绝；今兵西向，治之何益！且盎不宜有谋。 
现代文：御史丞、侍御史说： 如果在吴国叛乱前，治袁盎的罪，可能会中止叛乱密谋；现在叛军大举向西进攻，审查袁盎，能有什么作用！况且，袁盎不会参预密谋。 
English: "If we had punished Yuan Ang for his crimes before the rebellion in the State of Wu, it might have stopped the rebellion and conspiracy; now that the rebels have launched a large-scale attack to the west, what is the use of investigating Yuan Ang? Moreover, Yuan Ang will not participate in the pre-plot.

古文：错犹与未决。
现代文：晁错犹豫不决。
English: He hesitates.

古文：人有告盎，盎恐，夜见窦婴，为言吴所以反，愿至前，口对状。
现代文：有人把晁错的打算告知了袁盎，袁盎很害怕，连夜去见窦婴，对他说明吴王叛乱的原因，希望能面见景帝，亲口说明原委。
English: Someone told Yuan Ang about the plot, Yuan Ang was afraid, so he met Dou Ying at night, explained to him the reasons for King Wu's rebellion, and was willing to confront the emperor in person.

古文：婴入言，上乃召盎。
现代文：窦婴入宫奏报景帝，景帝就召见袁盎。
English: Dou Ying entered the palace to report to Emperor Jing, and Emperor Jing summoned Yuan Ang.

古文：盎入见，上方与错调兵食。
现代文：袁盎入宫晋见，景帝正与晁错在调度军粮。
English: When Yuan Huan entered the palace, he saw that Emperor Jing was making a mistake in the distribution of military rations.

古文：上问盎： 今吴、楚反，于公意何如？ 
现代文：景帝问袁盎： 现在吴、楚叛乱，你觉得局势会怎样？ 
English: Emperor Jing asked Yuan Ang: Now that Wu and Chu have rebelled, what do you think the situation will be like?

古文：对曰： 不足忧也！ 
现代文：袁盎回答说： 不值得担忧！ 
English: Yuan Ang replied, "It's nothing to worry about!

古文：上曰： 吴王即山铸钱，煮海为盐，诱天豪杰；白头举事、此其计不百全，岂发乎！
现代文：景帝说： 吴王利用矿山就地铸钱，熬海水为盐，招诱天下豪杰；到年老发白时举兵叛乱，如果他没有计出万全的把握，难道会起事吗？
English: Emperor Jing said: King Wu used mines to mint money locally, boiled seawater into salt, and invited the world's heroes; when he was old and white, he raised an army to rebel. If he did not have a perfect grasp, would there be a problem?

古文：何以言其无能为也？ 
现代文：为什么说他不能有所作为呢？
English: Why say he can't make a difference?

古文：对曰： 吴铜盐之利则有之，安得豪杰而诱之！
现代文：袁盎回答说： 吴王确实有采铜铸币、熬海水为盐的财利，但哪有什么豪杰被他招诱去了呢！
English: Yuan Ang replied, "King Wu indeed has the financial advantage of mining copper to mint coins and boiling seawater to make salt, but how many heroes has he lured away?

古文：诚令吴得豪杰，亦且辅而为谊，不反矣。
现代文：假若吴王真的招到了豪杰，豪杰也会辅佐他按仁义行事，也就不会叛乱了。
English: If the King of Wu had really invited the hero, the hero would have assisted him to act according to benevolence and righteousness, and would not have rebelled.

古文：吴所诱皆亡赖子弟、亡命、铸钱奸人，故相诱以乱 错曰： 盎策之善。 
现代文：吴王所招诱的，都是些无赖子弟、没有户籍的流民、私铸钱币的坏人，所以才能相互勾结而叛乱。 晁错说： 袁盎分析得很好。 
English: What King Wu invited were all ruffians, refugees without household registration, and bad people who minted money illegally, which is why they were able to collude with each other and rebel.

古文：上曰： 计安出？ 
现代文：景帝问： 应采取什么妙计？ 
English: Emperor Jing asked: What should be done?

古文：盎对曰： 愿屏左右。 
现代文：袁盎说： 请陛下让左右回避。 
English: Yuan Ang said, "Please stand back, left and right.

古文：上屏人，独错在。盎曰： 臣所言，人臣不得知。 
现代文：景帝让人退出，唯独还有晁错在场；袁盎说： 我要说的话，任何臣子都不应听到。 
English: Emperor Jing asked everyone to leave the room, except for Zou Kuo, who was still present. Yuan Ang said, "What I have to say should not be heard by any courtier.

古文：乃屏错。
现代文：景帝就让晁错回避。
English: Then the screen went blank again.

古文：错趋避东厢，甚恨。
现代文：晁错迈着小而快的步伐，退避到东边的厢房中，对袁盎极为恼恨。
English: Zou Er took a small but quick step, retreated to the east wing, and was extremely angry with Yuan Ang.

古文：上卒问盎，对曰： 吴、楚相遗书，言高皇帝王子弟各有分地，今贼臣晁错擅適诸侯，削夺之地，以故反，欲西共诛错，复故地而罢。
现代文：景帝突然问袁盎，袁盎回答说： 吴王和楚王互相通信，说高皇帝分封子弟为王，各自有封地，现在贼臣晁错擅自贬谪诸侯，削夺他们的封地，因此他们才造反，准备向西进军，共同诛杀晁错，恢复原有的封地才罢休。
English: Emperor Jing suddenly asked Yuan Ang, and Yuan Ang replied: The King of Wu and the King of Chu corresponded with each other, saying that the Emperor Gao had appointed his younger son as king, and they each had their own fiefdoms. Now, the treacherous vassals of the Kuomintang arbitrarily disparaged the princes and seized their fiefs. Therefore, they rebelled and prepared to march to the west to fight the Kuomintang together and restore the original fiefs.

古文：方今计独有斩错，发使赦吴、楚七国，复其故地，则兵可毋血刃而俱罢。 
现代文：现在的对策，只有斩晁错，派出使臣宣布赦免吴、楚七国，恢复他们原有的封地，那么，七国的军队可以不经过战争就都会撤走。 
English: The current countermeasure can only make a mistake by sending envoys to announce the amnesty of the seven countries of Wu and Chu and the restoration of their original fiefdoms. Then, the armies of the seven countries can withdraw without a war.

古文：于是上默然良久，曰： 顾诚何如？
现代文：于是，景帝沉默了很长时间，说： 不这样做，还有什么别的办法？
English: Then, Jingdi was silent for a long time and said, "If we don't do this, what other way is there?"

古文：吾不爱一人以谢天下。 
现代文：我不会为了爱惜他一个人而向天下谢罪的。 
English: I wouldn't change him for the world.

古文：盎曰： 愚计出此，唯上孰计之！ 
现代文：袁盎说： 我计策就是这样，请皇上认真考虑！ 
English: Yuan Ang said: This is my strategy. I ask the emperor to seriously consider it!

古文：乃拜盎为太常，密装治行。
现代文：景帝就任命袁盎为太常，秘密收拾行装，做出使吴王的准备。
English: Emperor Jing then appointed Yuan Ang as the Grand Vizier, secretly packing up and making preparations for the accession of King Wu.

古文：后十馀日，上令丞相青、中尉嘉、廷尉欧劾奏错： 不称主上德信，欲疏群臣、百姓，又欲以城邑予吴，无臣子礼，大逆无道。
现代文：过了十多天，景帝授意丞相陶青、中尉嘉、廷尉张欧上疏弹劾晁错： 辜负皇上的恩德和信任，要使皇上与群臣、百姓疏远，又想把城邑送给吴国，毫无臣子的礼节，犯下了大逆无道之罪。
English: After more than ten days, Emperor Jing ordered the impeachment of the imperial minister Tao Qing, the lieutenant Jia, and the courtier Zhang Ou Shangzho, saying that they had failed to live up to the emperor's grace and trust, that they wanted to alienate the emperor from the vassals and the people, and that they wanted to give the city to the State of Wu. Without the etiquette of a vassal, they had committed the crime of high treason.

古文：错当要斩，父母、妻子、同产无少长皆弃市。 
现代文：晁错应判处腰斩，他的父母、妻子、兄弟不论老少全部公开处死。 
English: If found guilty, he should be sentenced to beheading, and his parents, wife, and brothers, regardless of age, should all be publicly executed.

古文：制曰： 可。 
现代文：景帝批复说： 同意所拟判决。 
English: The Emperor's order said: Let's play.

古文：错殊不知。
现代文：晁错对此却一无所知。
English: He didn't know anything about it.

古文：壬子，上使中尉召错，绐载行市，错衣朝衣斩东市。
现代文：壬子，景帝派中尉召晁错，欺骗他说坐着车巡察市中，于是，晁错穿着上朝的官服在东市被斩首。
English: According to his son, Emperor Jing sent a lieutenant to summon him and tricked him into saying that he was inspecting the city in a car. As a result, he was beheaded in Dongshi while wearing the official uniform of the previous dynasty.

古文：上乃使袁盎与吴王弟子宗正德侯通使吴。
现代文：景帝就派袁盎与吴王的侄子、宗正德侯刘通为使臣，出使吴国。
English: Emperor Jing sent Yuan Ang and the nephew of King Wu, Prince Zong Zhengde Liu Tong, as envoys to the State of Wu.

古文：谒者仆射邓公为校尉，上书言军事，见上，上问曰： 道军所来，闻晁错死，吴、楚罢不？ 
现代文：谒者仆射邓公正担任校尉，向景帝上书分析战争情况，在进见皇帝时，景帝问道： 你从军中而来，听到晁错被杀，吴国和楚国撤兵了没有？ 
English: When he went to see the emperor, Jing Di asked: You came from the army and heard that Zou Er was killed. Did Wu and Chu withdraw their troops?

古文：邓公曰： 吴为反数十岁矣；发怒削地，以诛错为名，其意不在错也。
现代文：邓公说： 吴王准备叛乱已有几十年了；他是因朝廷削夺了他的封地发怒，杀晁错只是他的借口，他的本意不在晁错啊。
English: Deng Gong said: King Wu has been preparing for a rebellion for decades; he is angry because the imperial court has deprived him of his fiefdom, and the killing is only his excuse, his intention is not to make a mistake.

古文：且臣恐天下之士拑口不敢复言矣。 
现代文：再说，朝廷杀晃错，我担心天下的士大夫都不敢再向朝廷进忠言了！ 景帝问： 为什么？ 
English: Besides, the imperial court made a terrible mistake, and I'm worried that all the magistrates in the world will no longer dare to offer loyal advice to the imperial court! Emperor Jing asked: Why?

古文：上曰： 何哉？ 邓公曰： 夫晁错患诸侯强大不可制，故请削之以尊京师，万世之利也。
现代文：邓公说： 晁错忧虑诸侯王国势力过于强大，朝廷不能制服，所以，请求削减王国封地，从而尊崇朝廷，这本来是造福万世的好事。
English: Deng Gong said: "I was worried that the power of the vassal kingdoms was too strong for the imperial court to subdue, so I asked for the reduction of the royal fiefs, thereby honoring the imperial court, which was originally a good thing for the benefit of the world.

古文：计画始行，卒受大戮。
现代文：计划刚刚实行，他本人突然被杀。
English: He was killed suddenly, just as the plan was being implemented.

古文：内杜忠臣之口，外为诸侯报仇，臣窃为陛下不取也。 
现代文：这样做，对内堵塞了忠臣的口，对外替诸侯王报了仇，我私下认为陛下不应该如此。 
English: In doing so, he gagged his loyal vassals at home and took revenge on behalf of the princes and kings abroad. Privately, I don't think His Majesty should have done that.

古文：于是帝喟然长息曰： 公言善，吾亦恨之！ 
现代文：于是，景帝深深地感叹说： 您说得对，我也很后悔杀了晁错！ 
English: As a result, Jingdi sighed deeply and said: You are right, I also very much regret having killed the wrong person!

古文：袁盎、刘通至吴，吴、楚兵已攻梁壁矣。
现代文：袁盎、刘通到达吴国，吴军和楚军已开始进攻梁国的壁垒了。
English: Yuan Ang and Liu Tong arrived in Wu, and the Wu and Chu armies had already begun to attack the walls of Liang.

古文：宗正以亲故，先入见，谕吴王，令拜受诏。
现代文：宗正刘通因是同姓亲属，先入内会见吴王，告知吴王，让他跪拜接受皇帝的诏书。
English: Because Zongzheng Liu Tong was a relative with the same surname, he went inside first to meet with King Wu and told him to kneel down and accept the emperor's edict.

古文：吴王闻袁盎来，知其欲说，笑而应曰： 我已为东帝，尚谁拜！ 
现代文：吴王听说袁盎来了，估计到他要劝说自己撤兵，就笑着回答说： 我已经做了东方的崐皇帝了，还向谁跪拜呢！ 
English: When King Wu heard that Yuan Ang was coming, he thought that Yuan Ang was trying to persuade him to withdraw his troops, so he smiled and replied, "I have already become the emperor of the East, so who should I bow down to?

古文：不肯见盎，而留军中，欲劫使将；盎不肯，使人围守，且杀之。
现代文：吴王不肯与袁盎见面，把他留在军营中，准备强迫他担任吴军的将领；袁盎不答应，吴王派人把他关押起来，准备杀死他。
English: The king of Wu refused to meet with Yuan Ang and kept him in a military camp, preparing to force him to serve as the general of the Wu army; Yuan Ang did not agree, and the king of Wu sent someone to detain him and prepare to kill him.

古文：盎得间，脱亡归报。
现代文：袁盎寻机逃脱回来向景帝汇报出使情况。
English: Yuan Huan escaped and came back to report the situation to Emperor Jing.

古文：太尉亚夫言于上曰： 楚兵剽轻，难与争锋，愿以梁委之，绝其食道，乃可制也。 
现代文：太尉周亚夫对景帝说： 楚军剽悍敏捷，与他们正面交锋很难取胜，我建议放弃梁国，先断绝吴、楚军队的粮道，这样才可以制服它们。 
English: Captain Zhou Yafu said to Emperor Jing: The Chu army is fierce and agile, and it is difficult to win a head-to-head battle with them. I suggest abandoning Liang Province and cutting off the food supply of the Wu and Chu armies first, so that they can be subdued.

古文：上许之。
现代文：景帝同意了这个部署。
English: Emperor Jing agreed with this opinion.

古文：亚夫乘六乘传，将会兵荥阳。
现代文：周亚夫乘坐着六辆驿站的马车，将去荥阳与大军会合。
English: Zhou Yafu is riding in six stagecoach carriages to join the army in Shenyang.

古文：发至霸上，赵涉庶说亚夫曰： 吴王素富，怀辑死士久矣。此知将军且行，必置间人于殽、渑厄狭之间；且兵事上神密，将军何不从此右去，走蓝田，出武关，抵洛阳！
现代文：走到霸上，赵涉拦住去路，劝说周亚夫： 吴王一直很富有，早就收买了一批甘愿为他献身的刺客，现在得知将军将去前线，必定会在崤山、渑池之间的险要地段安排刺客对付您；况且军事行动最讲究秘密，将军为什么不改变路线，从此处向右走，经过蓝田，出武关，抵达洛阳！
English: When he reached the top of the hill, Zhao Zhan stopped him on the way and persuaded Zhou Yafu: "Wu Wang has always been very rich, and long ago he bribed a group of assassins who were willing to die for him. Now that you know that the general is going to the front, he will certainly arrange assassins to deal with you in the critical area between Shaoshan and Dianchi. Moreover, military operations are most secretive. Why doesn't the general change his route and go to the right from here, passing through Lantian, out of Wuhan, and arrive in Luoyang!"

古文：间不过差一二日，直入武库，击鸣鼓。
现代文：这样绕着走，不过差一两天，却可以直接进入洛阳武库，擂响战鼓。
English: Walking around this way, although it is a day or two away, you can directly enter the Luoyang Arsenal and hear the drums of war.

古文：诸侯闻之，以为将军从天而下也。 
现代文：参与叛乱的诸侯王听到了，会认为将军是自天而降呢！ 
English: When the lords heard this, they thought the general had fallen from the sky.

古文：太尉如其计，至洛阳，喜曰： 七国反，吾乘传至此，不自意全。
现代文：太尉按照他的计策行事，到达洛阳，高兴地说： 七国共同叛乱，我乘坐驿车平安到达此处，真是出乎意料之外。
English: The captain followed his plan and arrived in Luoyang. He said happily, "Seven countries rebelled together. I arrived here safely in a tuk-tuk. It was really unexpected."

古文：今吾据荥阳，荥阳以东，无足忧者。 
现代文：现在我已驻守荥阳，荥阳以东没有什么可担心的了。 
English: Now that I am stationed in Fenyang, there is nothing to worry about east of Fenyang.

古文：使吏搜殽、渑间，果得吴伏兵。
现代文：周亚夫派官吏搜索崤山、渑池之间，果然抓住了吴国的伏兵。
English: Zhou Yafu sent officials to search between Lushan and Dianchi, and they caught the ambush in Wuxi.

古文：乃请赵涉为护军。
现代文：周亚夫就向景帝奏请，让赵涉担任护军。
English: Zhou Yafu appealed to Emperor Jing to let Zhao Zhan serve as a military escort.

古文：太尉引兵东北走昌邑。
现代文：太尉周亚夫领兵向东北到达昌邑。
English: Captain Zhou Yafu led the troops in a northeasterly direction to Chang'e.

古文：吴攻梁急，梁数使使条侯求救，条侯不许。
现代文：吴军猛烈进攻梁国，梁王多次派使者向条侯周亚夫求救，周亚夫不答应。
English: The Wu army attacked Liang Province fiercely. King Liang repeatedly sent envoys to the warlord Zhou Yafu to ask for help, but Zhou Yafu refused.

古文：又使使诉条侯于上。
现代文：梁王又派使臣向景帝告状，说周亚夫不肯救援。
English: King Liang also sent an envoy to complain to Emperor Jing, saying that Zhou Yafu refused to help.

古文：上使告条侯救梁，亚夫不奉诏，坚壁不出；而使弓高侯等将轻骑兵出淮泗口，绝吴、楚兵后，塞其饟道。
现代文：景帝派使臣命令周亚夫援救梁国，周亚夫不执行皇帝诏令，仍坚守营垒，不派军队出战；但他却命令弓高侯韩颓当等人率领轻骑兵，奔袭淮泗口，断绝吴、楚军队的后路，堵塞吴、楚的粮道。
English: Emperor Jing sent envoys to order Zhou Yafu to rescue Liang Province. Zhou Yafu did not carry out the emperor's edict, but still held fast to the fortifications and did not send troops to fight. However, he ordered the Bow Highlord Han Xiantang and others to lead the light cavalry to attack Huaiyagou, cut off the rear path of the Wu and Chu armies, and block the food supply route of Wu and Chu.

古文：梁使中大夫韩安国及楚相尚弟羽为将军；羽力战，安国持重，乃得颇败吴兵。
现代文：梁国派中大夫韩安国及楚相张尚的弟弟张羽为将军；张羽作战勇猛，韩安国指挥持重，才得以挫败吴军。
English: Liang Guo sent the middle doctor Han An Guo and Chu Xiang Zhang Shang's younger brother Zhang Yu as generals; Zhang Yu fought bravely, Han An Guo commanded heavily, and was able to defeat the Wu Army.

古文：吴兵欲西，梁城守，不敢西；即走条侯军，会下邑，欲战。
现代文：吴军想向西进兵，但因梁军据城死守，便不敢越过梁向西进兵；因此，吴军就前来进攻条侯周亚夫的军队，两军在下邑相遇，吴军急于求战。
English: The Wu army wanted to march to the west, but because the Liang army held the city, they did not dare to cross the Liang to march to the west; therefore, the Wu army came to attack the army of Zhou Yafu, the two armies met in the lower town, and the Wu army was eager to fight.

古文：条侯坚壁不肯战；吴粮绝卒饥，数挑战，终不出，条侯军中夜惊，内相攻击，扰乱至帐下，亚夫坚卧不起，顷之，复定。
现代文：条侯坚守壁垒不肯交战；吴军粮道断绝，士卒饥饿，多次挑战，周亚夫始终不应战。周亚夫的军营中，夜间突然惊乱，内部互相攻击，甚至闹到了周亚夫的大帐附近，周亚夫坚持睡着不起，过了一会儿，就恢复平静了。
English: The feudal lords held fast to the barriers and refused to fight; the Wu army was cut off from the grain route, the soldiers were starving, and there were many challenges, but Zhou Yafu always refused to fight. In Zhou Yafu's military camp, there was a sudden disturbance at night, and they attacked each other internally, and even got into a row near Zhou Yafu's big table. Zhou Yafu insisted that he could not fall asleep, and after a while, he regained his calm.

古文：吴奔壁东南陬，亚夫使备西北；已而其精兵果奔西北，不得入。
现代文：吴军向汉军营垒的东南角调集军队，周亚夫却命令营中加强对西北方向的防御，不久，吴、楚的精兵果然突袭汉营西北，因汉军早有防备，不能攻入。
English: The Wu army mobilized troops to the southeast corner of the Chinese army camp, but Zhou Yaf ordered the camp to strengthen the defense of the northwest direction. Soon, the elite soldiers of Wu and Chu actually raided the northwest of the Han camp. Because the Chinese army had already prepared, they could not break in.

古文：吴、楚士卒多饥死叛散，乃引而去。
现代文：吴、楚军队中，有许多士卒饿死或者背叛离散，吴王就领兵撤退了。
English: In the armies of Wu and Chu, many soldiers starved to death or defected and scattered, and the king of Wu withdrew with his army.

古文：二月，亚夫出精兵追击，大破之。
现代文：二月，周亚夫派出精锐军队追击，大败吴、楚军队。
English: In February, Zhou Yafu sent elite troops to pursue and defeat the Wu and Chu armies.

古文：吴王濞弃其军，与壮士数千人夜亡走；楚王戊自杀。
现代文：吴王刘濞丢下他的军队，与几千名精壮士兵连夜逃跑；楚王刘戊自杀。
English: The king of Wu, Liu Bei, abandoned his army and fled overnight with several thousand strong soldiers; the king of Chu, Liu Wu, committed suicide.

古文：吴王之初发也，吴臣田禄伯为大将军。
现代文：吴王刚开始举兵叛乱时，吴国臣子田禄伯担任大将军。
English: When the king of Wu just sent out an army, Wu Tingtian Lu Bo became a great general.

古文：田禄伯曰： 兵屯聚而西，无它奇道，难以立功。
现代文：田禄伯说： 大军集结向西进攻，没有可以出奇兵的通道，难以成功。
English: He said to King Wu, "There is no other way to win a surprise victory than to concentrate the army to the west, and it is difficult to make a contribution.

古文：臣愿得五万人，别循江、淮而上，收淮南、长沙，入武关，与大王会，此亦一奇也。 
现代文：我请求给我五万人马，另外沿长江、淮河逆流而上，占领淮南、长沙，攻入武关，与大王主力军队会师，这也是一路奇兵。 
English: The vassal is willing to lead 50,000 people to advance along the Yangtze River and Huaihe River, recover Huainan and Changsha, enter Wuguan, and then meet with the great king, which is also a good plan.

古文：吴王太子谏曰： 王以反为名，此兵难以借人，人亦且反王，奈何？
现代文：吴王的太子劝阻说： 大王以造反为名义，这样的军队不能让别人带领，假若别人也背叛您，又该怎么办？
English: The prince of the king of Wu dissuaded him, saying, "The great king has set out in the name of rebellion. Such an army cannot be led by others. If others also betray you, what should you do?

古文：且擅兵而别，多它利害，徒自损耳！ 
现代文：况且，让别人全权指挥一崐支军队，又走另外一条路，容易产生许多其他利害问题，只是白白地削弱了自己的力量！ 
English: Moreover, letting someone else have full authority to command an army and then taking a different path is likely to create many other problems of interests, but it only weakens one's own strength in vain!

古文：吴王即不许田禄伯。
现代文：吴王就没有批准田禄伯的请求。
English: King Wu also did not agree to Tian Luo Bo's suggestion.

古文：吴少将桓将军说王曰： 吴多步兵，步兵利险；汉多车骑，车骑利平地，愿大王所过城不下，直去，疾西据洛阳武库，食敖仓粟，阻山河之险以令诸侯，虽无入关，天下固已定矣。
现代文：吴国的青年将领桓将军劝吴王说： 吴国军队步兵多，步兵利于在险阻的地方作战；汉军中以战车、骑兵为主力，战车和骑兵利于在平原地区作战。希望大王不进攻沿途的城池，挥兵直进，迅速向西进兵，占领洛阳武库，利用敖仓的粮食供应军队，凭借山势和黄河天险号令诸侯，这样，即使没有进入函谷关，天下就已经被您平定了。
English: The young general of the State of Wu, led by General Huan, advised the King of Wu, saying: The army of the State of Wu has a large number of infantry, and the infantry is good for fighting in dangerous places; the Chinese army is mainly composed of chariots and cavalry, and the chariots and cavalry are good for fighting in the plain area. I hope that the great king will not attack the cities along the way, wave the troops straight ahead, quickly march to the west, occupy the Luoyang Arsenal, use the grain of Kamakura to supply the army, and rely on the mountain situation and the Yellow River to command the princes. In this way, even if you do

古文：大王徐行留下城邑，汉军车骑至，驰入梁、楚之郊，事败矣。 
现代文：如果大王进军缓慢，因沿途攻占城邑而延误时机，汉军战车、骑兵到来，冲入梁国和楚国的郊野，您的大事就失败了。 
English: If the great king marches slowly, delays the time by capturing towns along the way, and the Chinese chariots and cavalry arrive and rush into the countryside of Liang and Chu, your great event will fail.

古文：吴王问诸老将，老将曰： 此年少，椎锋可耳，安知大虑！ 
现代文：吴王征询老将军们的意见，老将们说： 这个青年人，让他去冲锋陷阵还可以，怎么懂得全局战略呢！ 
English: Wu Wang asked the old generals for their opinions. The old generals said, "This young man, it's okay to let him charge into the battlefield, but how can he understand the overall strategy?"

古文：于是王不用桓将军计。
现代文：于是，吴王不采用恒将军的计策。
English: As a result, King Wu did not adopt General Huan's strategy.

古文：王专并将兵。
现代文：吴王独揽全军指挥权。
English: King Wu took sole command of the entire army.

古文：兵未度淮，诸宾客皆得为将、校尉、候、司马，独周丘不用。
现代文：在吴军尚未渡过淮河时，吴王就把投靠他的众宾客任命为将军、校尉、军候、军司马，唯独周丘没有得到任用。
English: When the Wu army had not yet crossed the Huai River, King Wu appointed all the guests who supported him as generals, lieutenants, army sergeants, and army sergeants. However, Zhou Qiu was not appointed.

古文：周丘者，下邳人，亡命吴，酤酒无行；王薄之，不任。
现代文：周丘是下邳人，流亡到吴国，以卖酒为生，品行不好；吴王刘濞很鄙视他，所以未予任用。
English: Zhou Qiu was from the Lower Yunnan Province. He was exiled to the State of Wu and made a living by selling liquor. He was not a good person. The King of Wu, Liu Bei, despised him very much, so he was not appointed.

古文：周丘乃上谒，说王曰： 臣以无能，不得待罪行间。
现代文：周丘就自己求见吴王，说： 我因为没有本事，不能在军队中为您效力。
English: Therefore, Zhou Qiu asked to see King Wu, and said to King Wu: "Since my vassal is not capable, he cannot take the blame and take the credit for the army.

古文：臣非敢求有所将也，愿请王一汉节，必有以报。 
现代文：我不敢要求带兵做官，只希望从大王处得到汉朝的一个符节，必定做成一番事业来回报大王。 
English: The vassal dared not ask the great king to bring me some soldiers, but hoped that the great king would give me a token, and I would certainly be rewarded.

古文：王乃予之。
现代文：吴王就给了他。
English: King Wu gave him a rune.

古文：周丘得节，夜驰入下邳；下邳时闻吴反，皆城守。
现代文：周丘得到符节，连夜驱车进入下邳县城；这时，下邳的官民得知吴王叛乱，都据城防守。
English: Zhou Qiu got the signal and drove all night to enter the city of Jiaozuo County. At this time, the officials and people of Jiaozuo learned of Wu Wang's rebellion and all defended the city.

古文：至传舍，召令入户，使从者以罪斩令，遂召昆弟所善豪吏告曰： 吴反，兵且至，屠下邳不过食顷；今先下，家室必完，能者封侯矣。 
现代文：周丘到达驿站，传召县令进入室内，命令他的随从用罪名把县令杀死，于是召见与他的兄弟们友善的有权势的官吏说： 吴王已经造反，大军马上就到，屠灭下邳城不过用吃顿饭的时间；如果先归降吴王，家室必定保全，有本事的人还能立功封侯。 
English: Zhou Qiu arrived at the station, summoned the county magistrate into the room, ordered his entourage to kill the county magistrate with the accusation, and then summoned the powerful officials who were friendly with his brothers and said: King Wu has rebelled, the army will arrive soon, and it will only take a meal time to slaughter the city of Xiamen; if King Wu returns first, his family will certainly be preserved, and those who have the ability can make contributions.

古文：出，乃相告，下邳皆下。
现代文：官吏出去后，转告给其他人，下邳的官民就都归顺了吴王。
English: After the officials went out, they told the others, and all the officials and commoners obeyed King Wu.

古文：周丘一夜得三万人，使人报吴王，遂将其兵北略城邑；比至阳城，兵十馀万，破阳城中尉军；闻吴王败走，自度无与共成功，即引兵归下邳，未至，疽发背死。
现代文：周丘一夜之间得到了三万人，派人向吴王汇报，就率领他的军队向北方攻取城邑；打到城阳时，周丘的军队已有十多万人了，打败了城阳中尉指挥的军队。周丘得知吴王失败逃走，自已估计无法和他共同成就事业了，就领兵返回下邳，还没有到达，因背上生毒疮而死去。
English: Zhou Qiu received 30,000 men overnight, sent someone to report to King Wu, and then led his army to the north to capture cities and towns. By the time he reached Chengyang, Zhou Qiu's army had more than 100,000 men, and defeated the army commanded by Lieutenant Chengyang. Zhou Qiu learned that King Wu had failed to escape, and he estimated that he would not be able to achieve the cause together with him. He led the soldiers back to Jiaozuo, but did not arrive, and died of poisonous sores on his back.

古文：壬午晦，日有食之。
现代文：壬午晦，发生日食。
English: On the 30th, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：吴王之弃军亡也，军遂溃，往往稍降太尉条侯及梁军。
现代文：因为吴王刘濞丢掉军队自己逃跑，吴军就崩溃瓦解了，许多部队渐渐向太尉条侯周亚夫和梁国的军队投降。
English: After the death of King Wu, the Wu army was broken up, and soldiers surrendered to Han Tai Fu Zhihou and Liang's army at any time and anywhere.

古文：吴王渡淮，走丹徒，保东越，兵可万馀人，收聚亡卒。
现代文：吴王刘濞渡过淮河，逃到丹徒县，依附东越，以求自保，约有军队一万多人，并召集逃散的士兵。
English: The king of Wu, Liu Kun, crossed the Huai River and fled to Dantou County. He attached himself to East Vietnam in order to protect himself. He had an army of more than ten thousand people and gathered the soldiers who had fled.

古文：汉使人以利啖东越，东越即绐吴王出劳军，使人鏦杀吴王，盛其头，驰传以闻。
现代文：汉朝派人用金钱利禄收买东越首领，东越首领就骗吴王出来慰劳军队，派人用矛戟刺杀了吴王，装上他的头颅，派人乘传车疾驰到汉朝廷报告。
English: The Han Dynasty sent someone to bribe the leader of East Vietnam with money and riel. The leader of East Vietnam tricked King Wu into coming out to comfort the troops. He sent someone to kill King Wu with a spear, mount his head, and send someone to report to the Han Imperial Court in a speeding car.

古文：吴太子驹亡走闽越。
现代文：吴国太子刘驹逃亡到闽越国。
English: Liu Ye, the prince of Wu, fled to Suiyue.

古文：吴、楚反，凡三月，皆破灭，于是诸将乃以太尉谋为是；然梁王由此与太尉有隙。
现代文：吴、楚叛乱，共三个月的时间，就全被平定了，这时，所有将领都认为太尉周亚夫的战略布署是正确的；但是，梁王却因此与太尉有了矛盾。
English: The rebellions of Wu and Chu lasted a total of three months and were all put down. At that time, all the generals believed that the strategic deployment of Lieutenant Zhou Yafu was correct; however, Liang Wang had a conflict with the lieutenant because of this.

古文：三王之围临菑也，齐王使路中大夫告于天子。
现代文：当胶西王等三个诸候王的叛军围困临的时候，齐王派一位姓路的中大夫向景帝报告。
English: When King Jiaosi and three other princes were besieged by the rebels, King Qi sent a middle-ranking doctor named Lu to report to Emperor Jing.

古文：天子复令路中大夫还报，告齐王坚守， 汉兵今破吴楚矣。 
现代文：景帝又命令这位姓路的中大夫返回齐国复命，告诉齐王坚守临，说： 朝廷军队已经打败吴楚叛军了。 
English: Emperor Jing also ordered the middle doctor, surnamed Lu, to return to Qi to answer for his life, and told the king of Qi to stick to Lin, saying: The imperial army has defeated the Wu Chu rebels.

古文：路中大夫至，三国兵围临菑数重，无从入。
现代文：路中大夫赶回时，三国的军队已把临城重重包围，无法入城。
English: Dr. Lu Zhongfu returned to Qi. The troops of the three countries surrounded Linyi, and Dr. Lu Zhongfu was unable to enter the city.

古文：三国将与路中大夫盟曰： 若反言： 汉已破矣，齐趣下三国，不，且见屠。  
现代文：三国的将领迫使路中大夫与他们结盟，说： 你反过来说： 汉朝廷的军队已被打败了，齐国赶快向三个王国的军队投降吧。不然，临就要被屠灭了。  
English: The generals of the three kingdoms forced Dr. Lu Zhongfu to make an alliance with them, saying: You, on the other hand, should say: The army of the Han Dynasty has been defeated. Qi should quickly surrender to the army of the three kingdoms. Otherwise, it will soon be slaughtered.

古文：路中大夫既许，至城下，望见齐王曰： 汉已发兵百万，使太尉亚夫击破吴、楚，方引兵救齐，齐必坚守无下！ 
现代文：路中大夫应允了，到了城下，远远见到齐王，他就说： 汉已经派出了百万大军，让太尉周亚夫指挥，打败了吴楚军队，正领兵前来救齐，齐一定要坚守不降！ 
English: The middle-of-the-road doctor agreed. When he arrived at the foot of the city and saw King Qi in the distance, he said: "Han has sent out a million-strong army, let Lieutenant Zhou Yafu command it, defeated the Wu Chu army, and is leading soldiers to come and save Qi. Qi must stand firm and not surrender!"

古文：三国将诛路中大夫。
现代文：三个王国的将领杀死了路中大夫。
English: The generals of the three countries killed Dr. Tong.

古文：齐初围急，阴与三国通谋，约未定；会路中大夫从汉来，其大臣乃复劝王无下三国。
现代文：齐都城当初被围紧急时，齐王曾暗中与三个王国联络，准备参预叛乱，盟约未定；恰好路中大夫从汉朝廷而来，齐王的大臣们又劝他不能向三国叛军投降。
English: When the city of Qi was besieged, King Qi had secretly contacted the three kingdoms to prepare to participate in the pre-rebellion, but the alliance was not yet decided. It just so happened that the road doctor came from the Han court, and the ministers of King Qi advised him not to surrender to the rebels of the three countries.

古文：会汉将栾布、平阳侯等兵至齐，击破三国兵。
现代文：恰逢汉将栾布、平阳侯曹襄等率军到达齐国，打败了三国的军队。
English: Coincidentally, Han Zengbu and Pingyang Hou Cao Xiang arrived in Qi with their armies and defeated the armies of the three countries.

古文：解围已，后围齐初与三国有谋，将欲移兵伐齐。
现代文：解除了临之围以后，汉军将领听说齐王当初与三国密谋勾结，就准备调集军队攻打齐国。
English: After the siege of Linyi was lifted, the Chinese generals heard that King Qi had conspired with the three countries, and they prepared to mobilize troops to attack Qi.

古文：齐孝王惧，饮药自杀。
现代文：齐孝王害怕，服毒自杀。
English: Qi Xiaowang was terrified and committed suicide by drinking poison.

古文：胶西、胶东、菑川王各引兵归国。
现代文：胶西王、胶东王、川王分别领军队返回封地。
English: King Jiaoxi, King Jiaodong, and King Chuan led their armies back to their fiefs.

古文：胶西王徒跣、席藁、饮水谢太后。
现代文：胶西王赤着脚、坐卧在禾秆编的席上饮水，向太后请罪。
English: King Jiaoxi, barefoot and reclining on a straw-covered seat, drank water and apologized to the empress dowager.

古文：王太子德曰： 汉兵还，臣观之，已罢，可袭，愿收王馀兵击之！
现代文：胶西王的太子刘德说： 汉军已开始撤兵，据我观察，他们已很疲乏，可以突袭，希望召集大王的残余军队去袭击他们！
English: Liu De, Prince of Jiaoxi, said: The Chinese army has begun to withdraw. According to my observation, they are very tired and can make a surprise attack. I hope to gather the remnants of the great king's army to attack them!

古文：不胜而逃入海，未晚也。 
现代文：如果突袭不能获胜，再逃入海岛隐蔽，也还不晚。 
English: If the raid doesn't work, it's not too late to escape to an island hideout.

古文：王曰： 吾士卒皆已坏，不可用。 
现代文：胶西王说： 我的部队都已残破，无法作战了。 
English: King Koxi said, "My troops have all been destroyed and cannot fight any more.

古文：弓高侯韩颓当遗胶西王书曰： 奉诏诛不义，降者赦除其罪，复故；不降者灭之。
现代文：弓高侯韩颓当给胶西王送来一封信，信中说： 我奉皇帝诏令诛杀不义的人，投降的，赦免他的罪名，恢复原有的官爵；不投降的，一定要消灭他。
English: Han Xi, the Marquis of Yuguo, sent a letter to King Jiaosi, saying, "I have been ordered by the emperor to kill the unjust. If he surrenders, I will pardon his crime and restore his official title. If he does not surrender, I will definitely eliminate him."

古文：王何处？
现代文：你准备选择哪一条道路？
English: Which path are you going to choose?

古文：须以从事。 
现代文：等待你做出选择，我好采取相应的处置措施。 
English: Waiting for you to make a choice, so I can take the appropriate measures.

古文：王肉袒叩头，诣汉军壁谒曰： 臣卬奉法不谨，惊骇百姓，乃苦将军远道至于穷国，敢请菹醢之罪！ 
现代文：胶西王光着上身、磕着头来到汉军营垒前请谒，他说： 我刘遵法不谨慎，惊骇了百姓，竟使将军辛苦地远道来到我们这个穷国，我请求处以剁成肉酱的惩罚！ 
English: Guoxi Wang, bare-chested and holding his head, came to the front of the Chinese army camp to beg for mercy. He said: I Liu did not follow the law carefully, shocked the people, and made the general travel a long way to our poor country. I request the punishment of being made into meat sauce!

古文：弓高侯执金鼓见之曰： 王苦军事，愿闻王发兵状。 
现代文：弓高侯手持指挥作战用的金鼓来见他，说： 你被发兵的举动害苦了，我希望听你解释发兵的原因。 
English: Bow Gao Hou came to see him, holding a golden drum used for commanding battles, and said: You have been hurt by the act of sending troops. I hope to hear you explain the reasons for sending troops.

古文：王顿首膝行，对曰： 今者晁错天子用事臣，变更高皇帝法令，侵夺诸侯地。
现代文：胶西王一边磕头一边跪着向前走，回答说： 当时，晁错是受天子信任的执政大臣，变更高皇帝的法令，侵夺诸侯王国的封地。
English: Guoxi Wang bowed his head and kneeled as he walked forward. He replied: At that time, Guoxi was the ruling minister who was trusted by the Son of Heaven, changed the emperor's decree to a higher one, and invaded the fiefs of the princely kingdom.

古文：卬等以为不义，恐其败乱天下，七国发兵且诛错。
现代文：我们认为他的做法不符合道义，恐怕他败坏、扰乱天下，所以我们七国才发兵，准备杀晁错。
English: We believe that his actions are immoral, and we are afraid that he will corrupt and disrupt the world. That is why our seven countries have sent troops to prepare to kill him.

古文：今闻错已诛，卬等谨已罢兵归。 
现代文：现在听说晁错已被皇帝处死，我们就很谨慎地撤兵回国了。 
English: Now I hear that Zou Er has been killed, and Liu Ying and others are withdrawing their troops and returning to China.

古文：将军曰： 王苟以错为不善，何不以闻？
现代文：韩将军说： 你如果认为晃错不好，为什么不向皇上奏报？
English: Han Xudong said, "If the king thinks that what you have done is wrong, why not appeal to the emperor?"

古文：及未有诏、虎符，擅发兵击义国？
现代文：并在没有接到皇上诏令和调兵虎符的情况下，擅自调发军队去进攻忠于朝廷的封国？
English: and, without receiving the Emperor's edict and the dispatch of troops, dispatched troops without authorization to attack a fiefdom loyal to the imperial court?

古文：以此观之，意非徒欲诛错也。 
现代文：由此看来，你们发兵的用意，不只是想杀晃错。 
English: From this point of view, your intention to send troops is not just to kill.

古文：乃出诏书，为王读之，曰： 王其自图！ 
现代文：韩将军就拿出诏书，向胶西王宣读，然后说： 你自己考虑应该怎样处置吧！ 
English: General Han took out the imperial edict, read it to King Jiaosi, and then said: You should consider what to do with it!

古文：王曰： 如卬等死有馀罪！ 
现代文：胶西王说： 像我刘这样的人，死有余辜！ 
English: Guoxi Wang said: People like me, Liu, deserve to die!

古文：遂自杀，太后、太子皆死。
现代文：于是自杀了，胶西王国的太后、太子都死了。
English: So he committed suicide, and the empress dowager and the crown prince of Jiaoxi Kingdom both died.

古文：胶东王、菑川王、济南王皆伏诛。
现代文：胶东王、川王、济南王都被处死。
English: King Jiaodong, King Chuan and King Jinan were all executed.

古文：郦将军兵至赵，赵王引兵还邯郸城守。
现代文：郦将军的军队到达赵国，赵王领兵从边界返回都城邯郸，据城自守。
English: General Zhao's army arrived in Zhao Province, and Zhao Wang led the troops from the border back to the capital city, and the city defended itself.

古文：郦寄攻之，七月不能下。
现代文：郦寄发动进攻，连续用兵七个月，没有攻破邯郸城。
English: Myeongseong launched an attack and continuously used troops for seven months, but failed to break through Yeongseong.

古文：匈奴闻吴、楚败，亦不肯入边。
现代文：匈奴得知吴军和楚军失败，也不肯进入边境援救赵王。
English: When the Huns learned that the Wu and Chu armies had failed, they also refused to enter the border to rescue King Zhao.

古文：栾布破齐还，并兵引水灌赵城。城坏，王遂自杀。
现代文：栾布平定齐国率军返回，与郦将军的军队会合，引河水淹灌邯郸；城墙毁坏，赵王刘遂自杀。
English: Zibo Pingding Qi Guo's army returned and met with General Zou's army, flooding the city with river water; the city wall was destroyed, and Zhao Wang Liu committed suicide.

古文：帝以齐首善，以迫劫有谋，非其罪也，召立齐孝王太子寿，是为懿王。
现代文：景帝因为齐国首先抵御叛军，后来因迫于形势与叛军有串联，不是齐王的罪过，就召来齐孝王的太子刘寿，立为齐王，他就是齐懿王。
English: Emperor Jing, because the State of Qi was the first to resist the rebels, and later, due to the pressure of the situation, had a series of links with the rebels, which was not the fault of the King of Qi, summoned Liu Shou, the prince of the King of Qi Xiao, and established him as the King of Qi. He was the King of Qi.

古文：济北王亦欲自杀，幸全其妻子。
现代文：济北王也准备自杀，以求侥幸保全他的妻子儿女。
English: King Jibei, who was implicated in the conspiracy, also wanted to commit suicide in order to save his wife and children.

古文：齐人公孙玃谓济北王曰： 臣请试为大王明说梁王，通意天子；说而不用，死未晚也。 
现代文：齐国人公孙对济北王说： 我请求试为大王去劝说梁王，通过他向皇上解释；如果我的劝说不被采纳，大王再死也不晚。 
English: Gongsun, a native of Qi, said to King Jibei, "I request you to try to persuade King Liang for the great king and explain to the emperor through him. If my persuasion is not accepted, the great king will not be late to die.

古文：公孙玃遂见梁王曰： 夫济北之地，东接强齐，南牵吴、越，北胁燕、赵。
现代文：公孙就去求见梁王，说： 济北国的封地，东边邻近强大的齐国，南面连接着吴国和越国，北面受到燕国和赵国的威胁。
English: Gongsun then went to see King Liang and said, "The fief of North Jizhou is at a crossroads. To the east, the powerful Qi is nearby. To the south, it is connected to Wu and Yue. To the north, it is threatened by Yan and Zhao.

古文：此四分五裂之国。权不足以自守，劲不足以捍寇，又非有奇怪云以待难也；虽坠言于吴，非其正计也。
现代文：这是一个四面受敌，随时有可能被人瓜分的国家，济北王的权谋不足以自守封地，实力不足以防御外敌入侵，又没有什么奇方妙计可用来抵御灾难；虽然他曾失言答应与吴国联合行动，却并不是出于他的本意，只不过是为形势所迫。
English: This was a country beset on all sides by enemies, which could be carved up by others at any time. King Jibei's strategy was not enough to defend his fiefdom, his strength was not enough to defend against foreign invasion, and there was no magic formula to fend off disaster. Although he had made a slip of the tongue and promised to act jointly with the State of Wu, it was not his intention, but he was forced by the situation.

古文：乡使济北见情实，示不从之端，则吴必先历齐，毕济北，招燕、赵而总之，如此，则山东之从结而无隙矣。
现代文：假若当初济北王表露出忠于朝廷的真心，显示出不顺从吴王的痕迹，那么，吴国一定会先放过齐国，攻占济北国，招诱燕国、赵国而统领它们，这样，崤山以东的诸侯联盟就会形成，并可连成完整的一片。
English: If the King of Jibei had shown his true loyalty to the imperial court at the beginning and showed signs of not obeying the King of Wu, then the State of Wu would have surely let go of the State of Qi, conquered the State of Jibei, and invited the State of Yan and the State of Zhao to rule them. In this way, the alliance of princes east of Shaoshan would be formed and could be connected into a complete piece.

古文：今吴王连诸侯之兵，驱白徒之众，西与天子急衡，济北独底节不下；使吴失与而无助，跬步独进，瓦解土崩，破败而不救者，未必非济北之力也。
现代文：现在吴王会合七国的军队，驱使没有受过训练的徒众，向西进军与天子争夺天下；而只有济北一国固守臣节不归降吴王，使吴国丧失盟友而孤立无援，只能艰难地单独进军，结果土崩瓦解，一蹶不振，追寻其原因，未必不是济北国坚守不降所做出的贡献。
English: Now the king of Wu gathered the armies of seven countries, drove the untrained masses, and marched westward to compete with the Son of Heaven for the world. However, only one country, North Jeju, held fast to the principle of not surrendering to the king of Wu. As a result, North Jeju lost its allies and was left alone without support. It had to march alone with difficulty. As a result, it collapsed and collapsed. The search for its cause is not necessarily a contribution made by North Jeju's adherence to non-surrender.

古文：夫以区区之济北而与诸侯争强，是以羔犊之弱而扞虎狼之敌也。
现代文：用微不足道的济北国，与几国叛军相抗衡，这就如同弱小的羊羔牛犊与凶猛的虎狼搏斗一样。
English: Taking the small Jibei Province to fight against the princes is like letting a weak lamb resist the attack of a tiger and a wolf.

古文：守职不桡，可谓诚一矣。
现代文：济北王恪尽职守，不肯屈服，可称得上忠心耿耿了。
English: Adhering to one's post, being unyielding, can be described as loyalty and single-mindedness.

古文：功义如此，尚见疑于上，胁肩低首，累足抚衿，使有自悔不前之心，非社稷之利也。
现代文：济北王有这样的功业道义，竟然还受到朝廷的怀疑，整天缩肩低头，手足无措，使他产生了后悔当初没有与吴王联合行动的念头，这对国家是不利的。
English: Such merit and integrity were also doubted by the emperor, leaving them disheartened and uneasy, so much so that they regretted not joining the army with Wu at the beginning, which was not good for the country.

古文：臣恐籓臣守职者疑之。
现代文：我害怕那些恪尽职守的封国诸侯，都由此而产生疑虑！
English: I'm afraid that those feudal lords who have fulfilled their duties will have doubts about this!

古文：臣窃料之，能历西山，径长乐，抵未央，攘袂而正议者，独大王耳。上有全亡之功，下有安百姓之名，德沦于骨髓，恩加于无穷，愿大王留意详惟之。 
现代文：我私下估计：在当今能够经过西方的山险，直入长乐宫和未央宫，在太后和皇上面前勇于据理力争的，只有大王您一个人；这样，上有保全面临亡国厄运的济北国的功德，下有安定百姓的名誉，您的功德及于骨髓，您的恩惠世代相传，希望大王认真考虑这件事！ 
English: In my private estimation, only you, the great king, are able to pass through the mountain passes in the west, directly enter the Changle Palace and the Weiyang Palace, and have the courage to argue in front of the empress dowager and the emperor. In this way, you have the merit of Jibei Province, which guarantees the doom of the country, and the reputation of stable people. Your merit is in the bone marrow, and your favor is passed down from generation to generation. I hope the great king will seriously consider this matter!

古文：孝王大悦，使人驰以闻；济北王得不坐，徙封于菑川。
现代文：梁孝王听了很高兴，派人急速进京向朝廷奏报；因此，济北王得以不坐罪，被改封到川国为王。
English: Liang Xiaowang was very pleased to hear this and sent someone to rush to Beijing to report to the imperial court. As a result, King Jibei was able to get off scot-free and was made king of Sichuan.

古文：河间王太傅卫绾击吴、楚有功，拜为中尉。
现代文：河间王太傅卫绾进攻吴、楚叛军有功，景帝任命他为中尉。
English: Emperor Jing appointed Wang Taifu Weijuan, the ruler of Kawama, as a lieutenant for his contribution to the attack on the rebel forces of Wu and Chu.

古文：绾以中郎将事文帝，醇谨无它。
现代文：卫绾曾以中郎将的身分侍奉文帝，除宽厚谨慎之外，没有其他特长。
English: He had served Emperor Wen as a middle-ranking general, and had no special skills other than being generous and prudent.

古文：上为太子时，召文帝左右饮，而绾称病不行。
现代文：景帝做太子的时候，曾召请文帝的左右侍从饮酒，而卫绾推说身体有病不去参加宴会。
English: When Emperor Jing was crown prince, he invited Emperor Wen's right and left attendants to drink alcohol, while Emperor Wei suggested that he was too ill to attend the banquet.

古文：文帝且崩，属上曰： 绾长者，善遇之。 
现代文：文帝临终前，嘱咐景帝说： 卫绾是忠厚长者，你要好好对待他！ 
English: Before his death, Emperor Wen instructed Emperor Jing to say: Wei Xuan is a loyal elder, you should treat him well!

古文：故上亦宠任焉。
现代文：所以，景帝也宠幸信任他。
English: Therefore, Emperor Jing was also fortunate enough to trust him.

古文：夏，六月，乙亥，诏： 吏民为吴王濞等所诖误当坐及逋逃亡军者，皆赦之。 
现代文：夏季，六月，乙亥，景帝下诏说： 官吏百姓被吴王刘濞等人连累而应当判罪的，以及从军而逃亡的，都给予赦免。 
English: In the summer, in June of the second year of the Heian period, Emperor Jing issued an edict saying, "Officials and commoners who were implicated by Wu Wang Liu Ye and others and should be convicted, as well as those who fled from the army, will be pardoned."

古文：帝欲以吴王弟德哀侯广之子续吴，以楚元王子礼续楚。
现代文：景帝打算让吴王之弟哀侯刘广的儿子刘德接续当吴王，让楚元王的儿子刘礼接续当楚王。
English: Emperor Jing planned to let Liu De, the son of Liu Guang, the brother of King Wu, succeed as King of Wu, and let Liu Li, the son of King Chu Yuan, succeed as King of Chu.

古文：窦太后曰： 吴王，老人也，宜为宗室顺善；今乃首率七国纷乱天下，奈何续其后！ 
现代文：窦太后说： 吴王是宗室中的老人，理应为宗室做忠于朝廷的表率；但他却首先发难，率领七国叛乱，扰乱天下，为什么给他续后！ 
English: Empress Dowager Dou said, "King Wu is the oldest member of the imperial family, and he should set an example of loyalty to the imperial court for the imperial family. However, he was the first to start trouble, led the Seven Kingdoms Rebellion, and disturbed the world. Why give him a successor!

古文：不许吴，许立楚后。
现代文：不许再立吴王，允许楚王续后。
English: He did not agree to renew the title of Wuzhong, but promised to give it to the Empress of Chu.

古文：乙亥，徙淮阳王馀为鲁王；南王非为江都王，王故吴地；立宗正礼为楚王；立皇子端为胶西王，胜为中山王。
现代文：乙亥，景帝改封淮阳王刘余为鲁王；改封汝南王刘非为江都王，管辖原属吴国的封地；立宗正刘礼为楚王；立皇子刘端为胶西王，刘胜为中山王。
English: In Yihai, Emperor Jing changed the title of Huaiyang King Liu Yu to King of Lu; changed the title of Yunan King Liu Fei to King of Jiangdu, governing the fief originally belonging to the State of Wu; established Zongzheng Liu Li as King of Chu; established Prince Liu Duan as King of Jiaoxi, and Liu Sheng as King of Zhongshan.

古文：孝景皇帝下四年
现代文：孝景皇帝下四年
English: Emperor Xiaojing reigns for four years

古文：春，复置关，用传出入。
现代文：春季，重新设置关卡，凭符传出入。
English: In the spring, reset the level, and pass in and out tokens.

古文：夏，四月，己巳，立子荣为皇太子，彻为胶东王。
现代文：夏季，四月，己巳，景帝立皇子刘荣为皇太子，刘彻为胶东王。
English: In the summer, in April, Liu Rong, the son of Emperor Jing, became the crown prince, and Liu Che became the King of Jiaodong.

古文：六月，赦天下。
现代文：六月，大赦天下。
English: In June, there was a general amnesty.

古文：秋，七月，临江王阏薨。
现代文：秋季，七月，临江王刘阏去世。
English: In the autumn, in July, the King of Linjiang, Liu Ye, passed away.

古文：冬，十月，戊戌晦，日有食之。
现代文：冬季，十月，戊戌晦，出现日食。
English: In winter, in October, when the moon is eclipsed, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：初，吴、楚七国反，吴使者至淮南，淮南王欲发兵应之。
现代文：当初，吴、楚七国叛乱，吴王的使者到达淮南国，淮南王想发兵响应吴王。
English: At the beginning, when the seven kingdoms of Wu and Chu rebelled, King Wu's envoys arrived in Huainan. King Huainan wanted to send troops to respond to King Wu.

古文：其相曰： 王必欲应吴，臣愿为将。 
现代文：他的丞相说： 大王如果一定要响应吴王，我愿意出任将领。 
English: His chancellor said, "If the Great King must raise an army with King Wu, I am willing to be the general."

古文：王乃属之。
现代文：淮南王就把军队交给他指挥。
English: King Huainan then put the army under the command of the prime minister.

古文：相已将兵，因城守，不听王而为汉，汉亦使曲城侯将兵救淮南，以故得完。
现代文：淮南国的丞相掌握军权之后，就据城防守，不听从淮南王的指挥而效忠汉朝廷，汉朝廷也派曲城侯领兵援救淮南国，因此淮南王得以保全。
English: After the chancellor of Huainan seized military power, he defended the city, disobeyed the command of the king of Huainan and served the Han Dynasty. The Han Dynasty also sent Qu Chenghou to lead the troops to rescue Huainan, so the king of Huainan was preserved.

古文：吴使者至庐江，庐江王不应，而往来使越。
现代文：吴王的使者到庐江，庐江王不答应与吴王联合，而与南越国多次互通使臣。
English: The envoys of the King of Wu came to the Min River. The King of the Min River did not agree to unite with the King of Wu, but exchanged envoys with South Vietnam many times.

古文：至衡山，衡山王坚守无二心。
现代文：吴王的使者到衡山，衡山王坚守城池，对朝廷忠心不二。
English: The emissary of the king of Wu went to Hengshan. The king of Hengshan held fast to the castle and was loyal to the imperial court.

古文：及吴、楚已破，衡山王入朝。
现代文：等到吴、楚叛军被打败后，衡山王入京朝见景帝。
English: After the Wu and Chu rebels were defeated, King Hengshan went to Beijing to meet Emperor Jing.

古文：上以为贞信，劳苦之，曰： 南方卑湿。 
现代文：景帝认为他忠贞，就慰问他说： 南方地势低而潮湿。 
English: Emperor Jing believed him to be loyal, and consoled him by saying: Nanfang is low-lying and wet.

古文：徙王王于济北以褒之。
现代文：改封衡山王为济北王，以示褒奖。
English: As a result, the king of Qianheng Mountain rewarded him with the title of king in Jibei.

古文：庐江王以边越，数使使相交，徙为衡山王，王江北。
现代文：庐江王因与南越国相邻，多次派使者与南越交结，景帝把他改封为衡山王，在长江以北为王。
English: The king of the Li River is located at the border where it meets the Yue River. He sent envoys to interact with the Yue River many times. Later, he changed his name to the King of Hengshan and became known as the king in the northern part of the river.

古文：孝景皇帝下五年春，正月，作阳陵邑。
现代文：前五年春季，正月，兴建阳陵邑。
English: In the spring of the fifth year before last, in the first month of the year, Yangling was built.

古文：夏，募民徙阳陵，赐钱二十万。
现代文：夏季，景帝下令召募百姓迁居阳陵，赐给二十万铜钱。
English: In the summer, he recruited people to move to Yangling and gave them 200,000 yuan.

古文：遣公主嫁匈奴单于。
现代文：景帝送公主出嫁匈奴单于。
English: The selected princess married into the Hun dynasty.

古文：徙广川王彭祖为赵王。
现代文：景帝改封广川王刘彭祖为赵王。
English: Emperor Jing changed the title of Guangchuan King Liu Pengzu to King Zhao.

古文：济北贞王勃薨。
现代文：济北王刘勃去世。
English: Jibei King Liu Bo passed away.

古文：孝景皇帝下六年冬，十二月，雷，霖雨。
现代文：前六年冬季，十二月，天空打雷，降雨多日。
English: In the winter of the first six years, in December, the sky thundered and it rained for many days.

古文：初，上为太子，薄太后以薄氏女为妃；及即位，为皇后，无宠。
现代文：当初，景帝做太子的时候，薄太后给他选定了一个薄氏女子为妃；及至景帝做了皇帝，薄氏就成了皇后，却不受景帝的宠幸。
English: At first, when Emperor Jing was crown prince, Empress Dowager Bo chose a Bo woman to be his wife; when Emperor Jing became emperor, Bo became the empress, but she was not favored by Emperor Jing.

古文：秋，九月，皇后薄氏废。
现代文：秋季，九月，皇后薄氏被废。
English: In the autumn, in September, the Empress Bo was abolished.

古文：楚文王礼薨。
现代文：楚王刘礼去世。
English: Chu King Liu Li passed away.

古文：初，燕王臧荼有孙女曰臧儿，嫁为槐里王仲妻，生男信与两女而仲死；更嫁长陵田氏，生男分、胜。
现代文：当初，燕王臧荼有个孙女，名叫臧儿，嫁给槐里王仲为妻，生下儿子王信和两个女儿之后，王仲死了；臧儿便改嫁长陵人田氏，生下儿子田和田胜。
English: At the beginning, Yan Wangya had a granddaughter, named Yaer, who married Baoli Wangzhong. After Wangzhong gave birth to a son, Wangxin, and two daughters, Wangzhong died. Yaer then remarried Changling man, Tian, and gave birth to a son, Tianwada Sheng.

古文：文帝时，臧儿长女为金王孙妇，生女俗。
现代文：汉文帝时，臧儿的大女儿嫁给金王孙为妻，生下女儿金俗。
English: During the reign of Emperor Hanwen, Jie Er's eldest daughter married Jin Wangsun and gave birth to a daughter, Jin Zhuang.

古文：臧儿卜筮之，曰： 两女皆当贵。 
现代文：臧儿替子女占卜命运，卜人说： 两个女儿都应当是尊贵的命。 
English: The daughter divined the fates of her children, and the soothsayer said, "Both daughters should live a noble life."

古文：臧儿乃夺金氏妇，金氏怒，不肯予决；内之太子宫，生男彻。
现代文：臧儿就从金王孙家中夺回女儿，金王孙愤怒，不肯与妻子分手；臧儿却把大女儿送到太子宫中，生下儿子刘彻。
English: Ya'er took back her daughter from the family of King Sun, and King Sun became angry and refused to break up with his wife; Ya'er, however, sent her eldest daughter to the royal womb and gave birth to her son Liu Che.

古文：彻方在身时，王夫人梦日入其怀。
现代文：王夫人怀着刘彻的时候，曾梦见太阳进入她的怀中。
English: When Mrs. Wang was pregnant with Liu Che, she dreamed that the sun entered her bosom.

古文：及帝即位，长男荣为太子。其母栗姬，齐人也。
现代文：等到景帝即位，大儿子刘荣被立为太子；太子刘荣的生母栗姬，是齐国人。
English: When Emperor Jing ascended the throne, his eldest son Liu Rong was made crown prince; the birth mother of Crown Prince Liu Rong, was a native of Qi.

古文：长公主嫖欲以女嫁太子，栗姬以后宫诸美人皆因长公主见帝，故怒而不许；长公主欲与王夫人男彻，王夫人许之。
现代文：景帝的姐姐长公主刘嫖，想把自己的女儿嫁给太子，栗姬因为后宫中各位美人都是由长公主推荐给景帝的，所以对长公主很恼怒而未予同意。长公主又想把女儿嫁给王夫人所生的皇子刘彻，王夫人同意了。
English: Emperor Jing's sister, the eldest princess Liu Ye, wanted to marry her daughter to the prince, and Li Ji was angry with the eldest princess because all the beauties in the harem were recommended to Emperor Jing by the eldest princess, so she did not agree. The eldest princess also wanted to marry her daughter to the prince Liu Che born by Mrs. Wang, and Mrs. Wang agreed.

古文：由是长公主日谗栗姬而誉王夫人男之美；帝亦自贤之，又有曩者所梦日符，计未有所定。
现代文：从此之后，长公主每天都在景帝面前说栗姬的坏话而称赞王夫人的美德；景帝自己也觉得王夫人贤惠，又有从前梦日入怀的祥瑞符兆，对是否应改立太子和皇后的事，犹豫未定。
English: From then on, the eldest princess spoke ill of Kuriki every day in front of Emperor Jing and praised the virtues of Mrs. Wang; Emperor Jing himself also felt that Mrs. Wang was virtuous and had the auspicious sign of auspiciousness that he had dreamed of, and hesitated about whether to change the prince and queen.

古文：王夫人知帝嗛栗姬，因怒未解，阴使人趣大行请立栗姬为皇后。
现代文：王夫人知道景帝恨栗姬，趁着景帝怒火未熄，暗中派人去催促大行，让大行请求景帝立栗姬为皇后。
English: Mrs. Wang knew that Emperor Jing hated Kurihisa, and she took advantage of Emperor Jing's lingering anger to secretly send someone to urge Da Xing to ask Emperor Jing to make Kurihisa the empress.

古文：帝怒曰： 是而所宜言邪！ 
现代文：景帝大怒，说： 这是你应该说的话吗！ 
English: Jing Di was furious and said, "Is this what you should have said!

古文：遂按诛大行。
现代文：就把大行问罪处死了。
English: So he put him to death.

古文：孝景皇帝下七年
现代文：孝景皇帝下前七年
English: Seven years before the reign of Emperor Xiao Jing

古文：冬，十一月，己酉，废太子荣为临江王。
现代文：冬季，十一月，己酉，景帝废掉太子刘荣，改封他为临江王。
English: In winter, in November, Emperor Jing abolished Prince Liu Rong and made him the King of Linjiang.

古文：太子太傅窦婴力争不能得，乃谢病免。
现代文：太子太傅窦婴极力劝谏，未能改变景帝的决定，就自称有病，请求免职。
English: Prince Taifu Douyong tried his best to dissuade him, but when he failed to change Emperor Jing's decision, he claimed to be ill and asked to be relieved of his duties.

古文：栗姬恚恨而死。
现代文：栗姬愤恨而死。
English: Kurihisa died in a rage.

古文：庚寅晦，日有食之。
现代文：庚寅晦，出现日食。
English: Geng Yinwei, the solar eclipse occurs.

古文：二月，丞相陶青免。
现代文：二月，丞相陶青被罢免。
English: In February, the chancellor, Tao Qing, was dismissed.

古文：乙巳，太尉周亚夫为丞相。
现代文：乙巳，太尉周亚夫出任丞相。
English: Soon after, Second Lieutenant Zhou Yafu became chancellor.

古文：罢太尉官。
现代文：景帝诏令罢除太尉这一官职。
English: Emperor Jing decreed that the position of captain should be abolished.

古文：夏，四月，乙巳，立皇后王氏。
现代文：夏季，四月，乙巳，景帝立王氏为皇后。
English: In the summer, in April, at the stroke of midnight, Emperor Jing installed Wang as empress.

古文：丁巳，立胶东王彻为皇太子。
现代文：丁巳，景帝立胶东王刘彻为皇太子。
English: On April 29, Liu Che, the King of Jiaodong, became crown prince.

古文：是岁，以太仆刘舍为御史大夫，济南太守郅都为中尉。
现代文：这一年，景帝任命太仆刘舍任御史大夫，任命济南郡太守郅都为中尉。
English: In the same year, Emperor Jing appointed his eunuch Liu She to the post of Imperial Historian, and appointed Jinan County's eunuch Juntao as a lieutenant.

古文：始，都为中郎将，敢直谏。
现代文：从前，郅都担任中郎将，敢于直言进谏。
English: Once upon a time, 都 served as churo shogun and dared to speak his mind.

古文：尝从入上林，贾姬如厕，野彘卒来入厕。
现代文：他曾经跟随景帝进入上林苑，当贾姬去上厕所时，一头野猪突然闯入厕所。
English: He once followed Jing Di into Shanglin Yuan. When Jackie went to the toilet, a wild boar suddenly broke into the toilet.

古文：上目都，都不行；上欲自持兵救贾姬。都伏上前曰： 亡一姬，复一姬进，天下所少，宁贾姬等乎！
现代文：景帝用眼光示意郅都去救护贾姬，郅都站立不走；景帝打算自己拿着武器去救贾姬，郅都跪伏在景帝面前说： 失去了一个姬妾，又会有另一个姬妾进宫，天下所缺少的，难道是贾姬这一类的人吗！
English: Jingdi indicated with his eyes that both of them should go to rescue Jiaji, but both of them stood still; Jingdi planned to save Jiaji with his own weapon, and both of them knelt down in front of Jingdi and said: Having lost one concubine, there will be another concubine entering the palace. What the world is missing is someone like Jiaji!

古文：陛下纵自轻，奈宗庙、太后何！ 
现代文：陛下纵然不爱惜自己，又如何对待宗庙和太后！ 
English: Even though His Majesty does not spare himself, how does he treat the ancestral temple and the empress dowager!

古文：上乃还，彘亦去。
现代文：景帝就走了回来，崐野猪也离去了。
English: Jingdi walked back, and the wild boar also left.

古文：太后闻之，赐都金百斤，由此重都。
现代文：太后听说了这件事，赏赐给郅都一百斤黄金，从此器重郅都。
English: When the empress dowager heard about this, she rewarded Shudu with a hundred catties of gold, and from then on, Shudu was given a heavy burden.

古文：都为人，勇悍公廉，不发私书，问遗无所受，请谒无所听。
现代文：郅都为人勇猛有力，公正廉洁，不拆阅私人给他的书信，不接受问候馈赠的礼品，不理睬托人情、拉关系的要求。
English: He was brave, powerful, just and incorruptible. He did not open his private letters, did not accept greetings and gifts, and ignored requests for patronage and withdrawal of relations.

古文：及为中尉，先严酷，行法不避贵戚。
现代文：及至做了中尉，倡导严厉酷苛的作风，执行法律进行赏罚，不避开皇亲国戚。
English: Until he became a lieutenant, he advocated a strict and harsh style of work, enforced the law to reward and punish, and did not avoid the emperor's relatives.

古文：列侯、宗室见都，侧目而视，号曰 苍鹰。 
现代文：列侯和宗室皇族见到郅都，都侧目而视，送他一个绰号叫 苍鹰 。
English: When the feudal lords and the royal family saw him, they all looked sideways at him and gave him the nickname "Goshawk."

古文：孝景皇帝下中元年夏，四月，乙巳，赦天下。
现代文：中元年夏季，四月，乙巳，景帝颁布诏令大赦天下。
English: In the summer of the middle of the first century, in April, Emperor Jing issued a decree of amnesty to the whole world.

古文：地震。衡山原都雨雹，大者尺八寸。
现代文：发生地震，衡山国的原都一带降冰雹，最大的冰雹直径达一尺八寸。
English: An earthquake occurred, and hail fell around the original capital of Hengshan Province, with the largest hailstone reaching a diameter of one foot and eight inches.

古文：孝景皇帝下二年春，二月，匈奴入燕。
现代文：中二年春季，二月，匈奴入侵燕国封地。
English: In the spring of the second year of middle school, in February, the Xiongnu invaded the fiefdom of Yan.

古文：三月，临江王荣坐侵太宗庙壖垣为宫，征诣中尉府对簿。
现代文：三月，临江王刘荣因为修建宫室侵占了太宗庙前空地上的围墙而犯了罪，景帝征他去中尉府接受审问。
English: In March, King Liu Rong of Linjiang committed a crime by building a palace that encroached on the enclosure wall in front of the Taizong Temple, and Emperor Jing summoned him to the lieutenant's residence for interrogation.

古文：临江王欲得刀笔，为书谢上，而中尉郅都禁吏不予；魏其侯使人间与临江王。
现代文：临江王想要写字用的刀笔，以写信向景帝谢罪，而中尉郅都禁止官吏提供刀笔。魏其侯派人把刀笔送给了临江王。
English: When King Linjiang wanted a pen to write with, he wrote a letter to Emperor Jing to thank him for his sin. However, Lieutenant Qiu forbade officials from providing pens. Wei Qihou sent someone to give the pen to King Linjiang.

古文：临江王既为书谢上，因自杀。
现代文：临江王写完了向景帝谢罪的信之后，就自杀了。
English: King Linjiang wrote a letter of apology to the emperor and then committed suicide.

古文：窦太后闻之，怒，后竟以危法中都而杀之。
现代文：窦太后听说了这件事，很恼怒；后来就加以严重的罪名，把郅都杀死了。
English: When Dowager Dou heard about this, she was very angry; later, she made a serious accusation and killed them all.

古文：夏，四月，有星孛于西北。
现代文：夏季，四月，在西北天空出现一颗异星。
English: In the summer, in April, a strange star appeared in the northwest sky.

古文：立皇子越为广川王，寄为胶东王。
现代文：景帝封立皇子刘越为广川王，刘寄为胶东王。
English: The crown prince Liu Yue became the king of Guangchuan, and Liu Ying became the king of Jiaodong.

古文：秋，九月，甲戌晦，日有食之。
现代文：秋季，九月，甲戌晦，出现日食。
English: Autumn, September, Armageddon, solar eclipse.

古文：初，梁孝王以至亲有功，得赐天子旌旗。从千乘万骑，出跸入警。
现代文：当初，梁孝王因为与景帝是一母所生，关系最为亲密，又有平定吴、楚叛乱的大功，被赐予天子使用的族旗，有成千上万的车辆马匹做随从，出称 跸 ，入称 警 ，都要清道戒严。
English: At first, Liang Xiaowang, because he was born from the same mother as Emperor Jing, had the closest relationship with him. He also played a great role in suppressing the Wu and Chu rebellion. He was given the national flag to use by the Son of Heaven. There were thousands of vehicles and horses to accompany him. He was known as the "devil" and became known as the "police," and had to clear the way for martial law.

古文：王宠信羊胜、公孙诡，以诡为中尉。
现代文：梁孝王宠信羊胜、公孙诡，任命公孙诡为中尉。
English: Liang Xiao Wang favored Yang Sheng and Gongsun Qi, and appointed Gongsun Qi as a lieutenant.

古文：胜、诡多奇邪计，欲使王求为汉嗣。
现代文：羊胜和公孙诡有许多奇诡不正的计谋，想怂恿梁孝王争取成为汉景帝的继承人。
English: Yang Sheng and Gongsun Qi had many cunning and dishonest schemes to entice Liang Xiao Wang to become the heir of Emperor Han Jing.

古文：栗太子之废也，太后意欲以梁王为嗣，尝因置酒谓帝曰： 安车大驾，用梁王为寄。 
现代文：当栗太子被废的时候，窦太后想让梁王为帝位继承人，曾利用宴饮的时候对景帝说： 你出入乘坐大驾和安车，要让梁王在你身旁。 
English: When Prince Li was dethroned, Empress Dowager Dou wanted to make Prince Liang the heir to the throne. She once said to Emperor Jing during a banquet: "When you go out and come in by carriage and horse-drawn carriage, you should have Prince Liang by your side.

古文：帝跪席举身曰： 诺。 
现代文：景帝跪坐在席上，挺直了身回答说： 好。 
English: Jingdi knelt down on the seat, straightened up and replied, "Good.

古文：罢酒，帝以访诸大臣，大臣袁盎等曰： 不可。
现代文：喝完了酒，景帝就此征询大臣们的意见，大臣袁盎等人说： 不成。
English: After drinking the wine, Emperor Jing inquired the opinions of the ministers. Minister Yuan Ang and others said, "It won't work.

古文：昔宋宣公不立子而立弟，以生祸乱，五世不绝。
现代文：过去宋宣公不传位给儿子而传位给弟弟，因此产生了祸乱，祸乱持续了五代人。
English: In the past, Song Xuan Gong did not pass the position to his son but to his younger brother, thus creating a calamity that lasted for five generations.

古文：小不忍，害大义，故《春秋》大居正。 
现代文：小处不忍心，会伤害大义，所以《春秋》赞成大义为主宰。 
English: Smallness is intolerant and will hurt great righteousness, so "Spring and Autumn" is in favor of great righteousness as the main.

古文：由是太后议格，遂不复言。
现代文：因此，太后的意见被阻止，也就再不提让梁王继承帝位了。
English: Therefore, the opinion of the empress dowager was blocked, and there was no longer any mention of letting King Liang succeed to the throne.

古文：王又尝上书； 愿赐容车之地，径至长乐宫，自梁国士众筑作甬道朝太后。 
现代文：梁王又曾经上书给景帝： 希望赐给我能容得下车辆通过的地方，直达太后居住的长乐宫，我自己派梁国的士兵修筑一条甬道，以便朝见太后。 
English: King Liang also once wrote to Emperor Jing: "I hope you will give me a place that can accommodate the passage of vehicles, all the way to the Changle Palace, where the empress lives. I myself will send soldiers from Liang to build a causeway so that I can meet the empress."

古文：袁盎等皆建以为不可。
现代文：袁盎等大臣都建议不批准梁王的请求。
English: Yuan Ang and other ministers all recommended that Liang Wang's request not be approved.

古文：梁王由此怨袁盎及议臣，乃与羊胜、公孙诡谋，阴使人刺杀袁盎及他议臣十馀人。
现代文：梁王因此怨恨袁盎和参与议论的大臣，就和羊胜、公孙诡商量，暗中派人刺杀了袁盎及其他参与议论的大臣十多人。
English: As a result, King Liang resented Yuan Ang and the ministers who took part in the discussion, so he secretly sent someone to assassinate Yuan Ang and more than ten other ministers who took part in the discussion.

古文：贼未得也，于是天子意梁；逐贼，果梁所为。
现代文：刺客没有抓到，于是景帝估计与梁王有关；追查刺客，果然是梁王派来的。
English: The assassins were not caught, so King Jing estimated that it was related to King Liang; the pursuit of the assassins was indeed sent by King Liang.

古文：上遣田叔、吕委主往按梁事，捕公孙诡、羊胜；诡、胜匿王后宫，使者十馀辈至梁，责二千石急。
现代文：景帝派田叔、吕季主前往梁国查究此案，逮捕公孙诡和羊胜；公孙诡和羊胜躲藏在梁王的后宫中。朝廷派出的十多批使臣先后来到梁国，严厉地责问二千石官员。
English: Emperor Jing sent Uncle Tian and Lord Lv Ji to Liang Province to investigate the case and arrest Gongsun Rong and Yang Sheng; Gongsun Rong and Yang Sheng were hiding in the harem of King Liang. More than ten groups of envoys sent by the imperial court came to Liang Province first and severely questioned the officials of 2,000 koku.

古文：梁相轩丘豹及内史韩安国以下举国大索，月馀弗得。
现代文：梁相轩丘豹和内史韩安国及以下官员，进行了全国性大搜捕，经过一个多月，没有抓到公孙诡和羊胜。
English: Liang Xiang Xuan Qiu leopard and the following officials of Inner History Hanan Guo carried out a nationwide large-scale manhunt. After more than a month, Gongsun Qiu and Yang Sheng were not caught.

古文：安国闻诡、胜匿王所，乃入见王而泣曰： 主辱者臣死。
现代文：韩安国得知公孙诡和羊胜藏匿在梁王宫中，就进入王宫去见梁王，哭着说： 君主蒙受耻辱，臣子应该为他而死。
English: Internal history Han'an heard that Gongsun Zi, Yosheng and others were hiding in the palace of King Xiao, so they went to the palace to see the king, crying: If the monarch is insulted, the vassal should die.

古文：大王无良臣，故纷纷至此。
现代文：大王身边没有良臣辅佐，所以才闹到这种地步。
English: The great king has no good vassals, that's why things are in such a mess.

古文：今胜、诡不得，请辞，赐死！ 
现代文：现在捉不到羊胜、公孙诡，我请求与您诀别，赐我自杀！ 
English: Now I can't catch Yang Sheng, Gongsun Qi, I beg to say goodbye to you, let me commit suicide!

古文：王曰： 何至此！ 
现代文：梁王说： 为什么至于这样呢！ 
English: King Liang said, "Why is it like this?

古文：安国泣数行下，曰： 大王自度于皇帝，孰与临江王亲？ 
现代文：韩安国泪如泉涌，说： 大王自己估计您与皇上的关系，比起皇上和临江王来，哪一个更亲？ 
English: Han An Guo burst into tears and said, "The great king himself estimates your relationship with the emperor, compared to the emperor and the king of Linjiang, which one is closer?

古文：王曰： 弗如也。 
现代文：梁王说： 我不如临江王。 
English: Takao said, "I can't compete with them.

古文：安国曰： 临江王鳣长太子，以一言过，废王临江；用宫垣事，卒自杀中尉府。
现代文：韩安国说： 临江王是皇上的亲生长子，又曾是太子，因为一句错话，被废去太子，封为临江王；又因为修宫侵占围墙的事，终于在中尉府自杀。
English: Han An Guo said: Linjiang Wang is the emperor's own son, and was once a prince, because of a wrong word, he was abolished as a prince and named Linjiang Wang; and because of the repair of the palace encroaching on the fence, he finally committed suicide in the lieutenant's house.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么这样呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：治天下终不用私乱公。
现代文：皇上治理天下终究不能因为私情而干扰公事。
English: Because the governance of the world must not harm the public because of me.

古文：今大王列在诸侯，訹邪臣浮说，犯上禁，桡明法。
现代文：现在大王身为诸侯，受奸臣胡言乱语的引诱，违犯皇上的禁令，扰乱尊严的法律。
English: Now the great thrones are filled with princes, but they have listened to the false speech of an evil minister, violated the monarch's ban, and perverted the strict law.

古文：天子以太后故，不忍致法于大王；太后日夜涕泣，幸大王自改，大王终不觉寤。
现代文：皇上因为太后疼爱您的缘故，才不忍心按国法来惩办您；太后日夜哭泣，希望大王能改过自新，大王却始终不觉悟。
English: Your Majesty, it is because the Empress Dowager loves you so much that she cannot bear to punish you according to the law of the land; the Empress Dowager cries day and night, hoping that the Great King can reform himself, but the Great King never wakes up.

古文：有如太后宫车即晏驾，大王尚谁攀乎？ 语未卒，王泣数行而下，谢安国曰： 吾今出胜、诡。 
现代文：假若太后即刻去世，大王还依靠谁呢？话还没有说完，梁王泪流满面，向韩安国赔罪说： 我现在就交出羊胜和公孙诡。 
English: If the empress dowager died immediately, who would the great king still rely on? Before the speech was over, King Liang, with tears streaming down his face, apologized to Han'an and said: I will now hand over Yang Sheng and Gongsun Qi.

古文：王乃令胜、诡皆自杀，出之。
现代文：梁王就命令羊胜、公孙诡都自杀，交出了他们的尸体。
English: King Liang ordered Yang Sheng and Gongsun Zi to commit suicide and handed over their bodies.

古文：上由此怨望梁王。
现代文：景帝因此怨恨梁王。
English: Emperor Jing therefore resented King Liang.

古文：梁王恐，使邹阳入长安，见皇后兄王信说曰： 长君弟得幸于上，后宫莫及；而长君行迹多不循道理者。
现代文：梁王恐惧，派邹阳到达长安，去见皇后的哥哥王信说： 您的妹妹得到皇上的宠幸，在后宫没人能比得上，但是您的行为却有许多不遵循道理的地方。
English: King Liang was so afraid that he sent Shenyang to Chang'an to meet the queen's brother, Wang Xin, and said: Your sister has won the favor of the emperor, and no one in the harem can match her, but there are many things about your behavior that do not follow reason.

古文：今袁盎事即究竟，梁王伏诛，太后无所发怒，切齿侧目于贵臣，窃为足下忧之。 
现代文：现在如果袁盎被杀一事追究到底，梁王被依法处死，太后的怒火无处发泄，就会向贵臣咬牙侧目地痛恨，我私下为您担忧。 王信说： 那该怎么办呢？ 
English: Now, if the murder of Yuan Ang is investigated to the end, and Liang Wang is executed according to the law, and the empress dowager's anger has nowhere to vent, she will hate the noblemen with gritted teeth. I am worried about you in private. Wang Xin said: Then what should I do?

古文：长君曰： 为之奈何？ 阳曰： 长君诚能精为上言之，得毋竟梁事；长君必固自结于太后，太后厚德长君入于骨髓，而长君之弟幸于两宫，金城之固也。
现代文：邹阳说： 您如果能好好地劝告皇上，使他能不深究梁王的事，您一定会受到太后的信任，太后从骨髓中深深感谢您的大德，而您的妹妹可以受到太后和皇上的宠幸，这就会使你们家的荣宠像金城一样牢固。
English: Shanyang said: "If you can advise the emperor well, so that he can not investigate the matter of King Liang, you will certainly be trusted by the empress dowager. The empress dowager is deeply grateful for your great virtue from the marrow of her bones, and your sister can be favored by the empress dowager and the emperor. This will make the glory of your family as solid as a golden city."

古文：昔者舜之弟象，日以杀舜为事，及舜立为天子，封之于有卑。
现代文：当初，舜的弟弟象，整日只想杀死舜，等到舜做了天子，却把象封到了有卑。
English: At first, Zou's younger brother Xiang only wanted to kill Zou all day long. However, when Zou became a god, he reduced Xiang to a lowly position.

古文：夫仁人之于兄弟，无藏怒，无宿怨，厚亲爱而已。
现代文：仁义的人对于自己的弟弟，不暗藏怒火，不记过去的怨仇，只是很好地对待他罢了。
English: A righteous man does not harbor anger against his brother or remember past grudges, but treats him well.

古文：是以后世称之。
现代文：正因为如此，后代人都称赞舜。
English: Because of this, generations of people have praised the dragonfly.

古文：以是说天子，徼幸梁事不奏。 
现代文：用这番道理去劝说皇上，梁王的事就可能侥幸不处置了。 王信说： 好 。
English: Using this reasoning to persuade the emperor, the matter of Liang Wang may not be dealt with.Wang Xin said: Good.

古文：长君曰： 诺。 乘间入言之。帝怒稍解。
现代文：他找到一个机会，入宫向景帝说了上面的这番道理，景帝对梁王的恼怒稍稍化解。
English: He found an opportunity to enter the palace and told the above-mentioned reason to Emperor Jing, and Emperor Jing's irritation with King Liang was slightly alleviated.

古文：是时，太后忧梁事不食，日夜泣不止，帝亦患之。
现代文：这时，太后担心梁王的事情，不进饮食，日夜哭泣不止，景帝也很忧虑。
English: At this time, the empress dowager was worried about the affairs of King Liang. She stopped eating and crying day and night, and Emperor Jing was also worried.

古文：会田叔等按梁事来还，至霸昌厩，取火悉烧梁之狱辞，空手来见帝。
现代文：正好田叔等人查办完梁王的事，返回长安，到达霸昌厩，田叔等用火把在梁国办案取得的证词全部烧毁，空着手来见景帝。
English: Just as Uncle Tian and others finished investigating the Liang Wang case, they returned to Chang'an and arrived at the Bajang stable. Uncle Tian and others burned all the testimony obtained in the Liang Guo case with torches and came to see Emperor Jing empty-handed.

古文：帝曰： 梁有之乎？ 
现代文：景帝问： 梁王有罪吗？ 
English: Emperor Jing asked: Is Liang Wang guilty?

古文：叔对曰： 死罪。有之。 
现代文：田叔崐回答说： 犯死罪的事是有的。 
English: Tian Shuxuan replied, "There is such a thing as committing a capital crime.

古文：上曰： 其事安在？ 
现代文：景帝问： 他的罪证在哪里？ 
English: The emperor said, "Do you have incriminating evidence?"

古文：田叔曰： 上毋以梁事为问也。 
现代文：田叔说： 陛下不要过问梁王的罪证了。 景帝问： 为什么？ 
English: Uncle Tian said, "Your Majesty, don't ask about the evidence of King Liang's crime." Emperor Jing asked, "Why?

古文：上曰： 何也？ 曰： 今梁王不伏诛，是汉法不行也；伏法而太后食不甘味，卧不安席，此忧在陛下也。 
现代文：田叔说： 有了罪证，如今不杀梁王，就废弃了汉朝的法律；如果处死梁王，太后会吃东西没有滋味，睡不好觉，这样就会给陛下带来忧愁。 
English: Uncle Tian said, "Now that there is evidence of guilt, if you don't kill King Liang, you will abolish the laws of the Han Dynasty. If you execute King Liang, the empress dowager will not eat well and sleep well, which will bring sorrow to your majesty.

古文：上大然之，使叔等谒太后，且曰： 梁王不知也。造为之者，独在幸臣羊胜、公孙诡之属为之耳，谨已伏诛死，梁王无恙也。 
现代文：景帝非常赞成他所说的道理，让田叔等人谒见太后，并且说： 梁王不知情；主持这件事的，只有梁王的宠臣羊胜、公孙诡之流，这些人都已经按国法处死，梁王没有受到伤害。 
English: Emperor Jing was very much in favor of what he said, and let Uncle Tian and others see the empress dowager, and said: King Liang did not know; the only ones who presided over this matter were King Liang's favorite, Yang Sheng, and Gongsun Qizhi. These people had been executed according to the national law, and King Liang was not harmed.

古文：太后闻之，立起坐餐，气平复。
现代文：太后听到这些话，立即起来坐着吃饭，情绪也稳定了。
English: When the empress dowager learned of this, she immediately got up, sat down to eat, and her mood returned to calm.

古文：梁王因上书请朝。既至关，茅兰说王，使乘布车，从两骑入，匿于长公主园。
现代文：梁王乘机上书请求朝见景帝，已经到达函谷关，茅兰劝说梁王，让他乘坐着普通的布车，只带两名骑士为随从入关，藏匿在长公主的园内。
English: King Liang requested to see Emperor Jing in the morning in a letter on the plane. He had already arrived at the Huan Valley Pass. Maoran persuaded King Liang to let him enter the pass in an ordinary cloth carriage, with only two knights as attendants, and hide in the park of the eldest princess.

古文：汉使使迎王，王已入关，车骑尽居外，不知王处。
现代文：朝廷派使臣迎接梁王，梁王已入关，随从的车骑都在关外，不知道梁王的下落。
English: The imperial court sent an envoy to meet Liang Wang, but Liang Wang had already entered the customs, and his attendants and horses were outside the customs, and they did not know where Liang Wang was.

古文：太后泣曰： 帝果杀吾子！ 
现代文：太后哭着说： 皇帝果然杀了我儿子！ 
English: The Empress Dowager cried and said, "The Emperor has indeed killed my son!"

古文：帝忧恐。
现代文：景帝很担忧害怕。
English: The emperor was also nervous.

古文：于是梁王伏斧质于阙下谢罪。
现代文：这时，梁王来到皇宫门前，伏在刑具上面，表示认罪，请求处置。
English: At this time, Liang Wang came to the front of the palace, prostrated himself on the torture device, pleaded guilty, and requested a disposition.

古文：太后、帝大喜，相泣，复如故，悉召王从官入关。
现代文：太后、景帝喜出望外，三人相对哭泣，恢复原来的骨肉手足之情，把梁王的随从官员都召入关内。
English: The empress dowager and Emperor Jing were overjoyed. The three of them wept together, restored the original brotherhood and sisterhood, and called all of King Liang's officials into the palace.

古文：然帝益疏王，不与同车辇矣。
现代文：但是，景帝愈发疏远梁王，不再和他乘坐一辆车出入了。
English: However, Emperor Jing distanced himself even further from Prince Xiaowang and no longer rode in the carriage with him.

古文：帝以田叔为贤，擢为鲁相。
现代文：景帝认为田叔贤能，就提升他做了鲁国的相。
English: Emperor Jing believed that Tian Shuxi was capable, so he promoted him to be the prime minister of Lu.

古文：孝景皇帝下三年
现代文：孝景皇帝下三年
English: Emperor Xiaojing reigns for three years

古文：冬，十一月，罢诸侯御史大夫官。
现代文：冬季，十一月，朝廷宣布废除诸侯王国的御史大夫官职。
English: In winter, in November, the Imperial Court announced the abolition of the post of Imperial Historian in the Princely Kingdom.

古文：夏，四月，地震。
现代文：夏季，四月，发生了地震。
English: In the summer, in April, there was an earthquake.

古文：旱，禁酤酒。
现代文：出现旱灾，朝廷禁止卖酒。
English: When there was a drought, the imperial court banned the sale of alcohol.

古文：三月，丁巳，立皇子乘为清河王。
现代文：三月，丁巳，景帝封立皇子刘乘为清河王。
English: In March, Ding Si, Emperor Jing installed his son Liu Xuan as the King of Qinghe.

古文：秋，九月，蝗。
现代文：秋季，九月，发生蝗灾。
English: In autumn, in September, the locust plague occurs.

古文：有星孛于西北。戊戌晦，日有食之。
现代文：西北天空出现了一颗异星。戊戌晦，出现日食。
English: A strange star appeared in the northwestern sky. It was eclipsed, and a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：初，上废栗太子，周亚夫固争之，不得；上由此疏之。
现代文：当初，景帝废掉栗太子，周亚夫坚决反对，没有产生作用；景帝因此疏远了周亚夫。
English: At first, Emperor Jing abolished the crown prince, and Zhou Yafu resolutely opposed it, but it had no effect; Emperor Jing thus alienated Zhou Yafu.

古文：而梁孝王每朝，常与太后言条侯之短。
现代文：而梁孝王每次来朝见，经常对太后说周亚夫的短处。
English: And every time Liang Xiaowang went to Beijing for a morning meeting, he often talked to the empress dowager about the shortcomings of Zhou Yafu.

古文：窦太后曰： 皇后兄王信可侯也。 
现代文：窦太后说： 皇后的哥哥王信可以封侯。 
English: One day, Empress Dowager Dou said, "The queen's brother, Wang Xin, can be made a prince."

古文：帝让曰： 始，南皮、章武，先帝不侯，及臣即位乃侯之；信未得封也。 
现代文：景帝表示谦让说： 当初，您的侄子南皮侯和您的弟弟章武侯，先帝都不封他们为侯；等到我即位后才封他们为侯；现在王信也不得封侯。 
English: Emperor Jing showed humility and said: At the beginning, your nephew Nanpi Hou and your brother Zhang Wu Hou, the former emperor did not appoint them as princes; I did not appoint them as princes until after I ascended the throne; now Wang Xin is not allowed to appoint princes.

古文：窦太后曰： 人生各以时行耳。
现代文：窦太后说： 人生在世，只各自根据当时的情况办事罢了。
English: Empress Dowager Dou said, "We all have to act according to the times in our lives."

古文：自窦长君在时，竟不得侯，死后，其子彭祖顾得侯，吾甚恨之！
现代文：当年我弟弟窦长君在世时，竟然不得封侯，死后，他的儿子窦彭祖反而得以封为南皮侯，我十分遗憾！
English: At that time, when my brother Dou Changjun was alive, he was not allowed to be given the title of prince. After his death, his son Dou Pengzu was instead given the title of Nanpi Prince. I am very sorry!

古文：帝趣侯信也。 
现代文：皇帝赶快封王信为侯吧。 
English: The emperor should quickly appoint Wang Xin as marquess.

古文：帝曰： 请得与丞相议之。
现代文：景帝说： 请允许我和丞相商议此事。 
English: Emperor Jing said: Please allow me to discuss this matter with the prime minister.

古文：上与丞相议。亚夫曰： 高皇帝约： 非刘氏不得王，非有功不得侯。 
现代文：景帝和丞相商议，周亚夫说： 高皇帝约定： 不是刘氏宗亲不得封王，没有立功的人不得封侯。 
English: During the discussion between Emperor Jing and Premier Zhou Yafu, Zhou Yafu said: Emperor Gao agreed that no one who was not an ancestor of the Liu clan could be crowned king, and no one who had not rendered meritorious service could be crowned prince.

古文：今信虽皇后兄，无功，侯之，非约也。 
现代文：现在王信虽然是皇后的哥哥，但没有立功，如果封他为侯，就违背了前约。 
English: Today, although Wang Xin is the older brother of the empress, he has no merit, and it is against the regulations of Emperor Gaozhu to make him a marquis.

古文：帝默然而止。
现代文：景帝默然，只好把这件事放下了。
English: Jing Di was silent and had to put the matter down.

古文：其后匈奴王徐庐等六人降，帝欲侯之以劝后。
现代文：后崐来，匈奴王徐卢等六人归降朝廷，景帝想封他们为侯，以鼓励后来人继续归降。
English: Later, King Xu Lu of the Xiongnu and six others surrendered to the imperial court. Emperor Jing wanted to make them princes in order to encourage his successors to continue to surrender.

古文：丞相亚夫曰： 彼背主降陛下，陛下侯之，则何以责人臣不守节者乎？ 
现代文：丞相周亚夫说： 他们背叛自己的君主投降陛下，陛下封他们为侯，那么还怎样责问不守节操的臣子呢？ 
English: The chancellor Zhou Yafu said, "They betrayed their sovereign and surrendered to His Majesty, and His Majesty appointed them as marquesses, so how can we reprimand those courtiers who do not observe discipline?"

古文：帝曰： 丞相议不可用。 
现代文：景帝说： 丞相的议论不可采用。 
English: Emperor Jing said: The prime minister's argument cannot be used.

古文：乃悉封徐庐等为列侯。
现代文：于是把徐卢等人全封为列侯。
English: As a result, Xu Lu and others were all made vassals.

古文：亚夫因谢病。
现代文：周亚夫因此就自称有病，请求免职。
English: As a result, Zhou Yafu said he was ill and retired to his home.

古文：九月，戊戌，亚夫免；以御史大夫桃侯刘舍为丞相。
现代文：九月，戊戌，景帝罢免了周亚夫，任命御史大夫桃侯刘舍为丞相。
English: In September, Emperor Jing dismissed Zhou Yafu and appointed Imperial Historian Taohou Liu She as chancellor.

古文：孝景皇帝下四年
现代文：孝景皇帝下四年
English: Emperor Xiaojing reigns for four years

古文：夏，蝗。
现代文：夏季，发生蝗灾。
English: In summer, locust plagues occur.

古文：冬，十月，戊午，日有食之。
现代文：冬季，十月，戊午，出现日食。
English: In winter, in October, at noon, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：孝景皇帝下五年
现代文：孝景皇帝下五年
English: Emperor Xiao Jing's Last Five Years

古文：夏，立皇子舜为常山王。
现代文：夏季，景帝封立皇子刘舜为常山王。
English: In the summer, Emperor Jing enthroned Prince Liu Ye as the King of Changshan.

古文：六月，丁巳，赦天下。
现代文：六月，丁巳，大赦天下。
English: In June, Ding Si was granted amnesty.

古文：大水。
现代文：发生水灾。
English: It's a big mess.

古文：秋，八月，己酉，未央宫东阙灾。
现代文：秋季，八月，己酉，未央宫东门阙发生火灾。
English: In the autumn, in August, a fire broke out at the east gate of Ji'an and Weiyang Palace.

古文：九月，诏： 诸狱疑，若虽文致于法，而于人心不厌者，辄谳之。 
现代文：九月，景帝下诏说： 诸项疑难案件，如果根据法律条文可以定为重罪，但却无法使人心服的，立即予以平议。 
English: In September, Emperor Jing issued the following edict: In cases of doubt, if it can be defined as a serious crime according to the provisions of the law, but it is not convincing, it should be immediately discussed.

古文：地震。
现代文：发生地震。
English: An earthquake.

古文：孝景皇帝下六年
现代文：孝景皇帝下六年
English: Emperor Xiaojing reigned for six years

古文：冬，十月，梁王来朝，上疏欲留；上弗许。
现代文：冬季，十月，梁王来京朝见，给景帝上书想留居长安；景帝不同意。
English: In winter, October, Liang Wang came to Beijing to see the emperor, and wrote to Emperor Jing to stay in Chang'an; Emperor Jing did not agree.

古文：王归国，意忽忽不乐。
现代文：梁王返回封国，心情郁郁不乐。
English: Liang Wang returned to his fiefdom in a depressed mood.

古文：十二月，改诸廷尉、将作等官名。
现代文：十一月，景帝下诏，更改廷尉、将作少府等官名。
English: In November, Emperor Jing issued an edict to change the names of officials such as the imperial lieutenant and the minor prefect.

古文：春，二月，乙卯，上行幸雍，郊五畤。
现代文：春季，二月，乙卯，景帝亲临雍地，在祭祀天地五帝的处所祭天。
English: In the spring, in February, Emperor Jing visited Yongdi in person and offered sacrifices to Heaven and Earth at the place where the Five Emperors were worshipped.

古文：三月，雨雪。
现代文：三月，降雪。
English: Snow in March.

古文：夏，四月，梁孝王薨。
现代文：夏季，四月，梁孝王去世。
English: In the summer, in April, Liang Xiaowang passed away.

古文：窦太后闻之，哭极哀，不食，曰： 帝果杀吾子！ 
现代文：窦太后听到消息，哭得极其悲哀，不进饮食，说： 皇帝果然杀了我儿子！ 
English: Upon hearing the news, Empress Dowager Dou wept bitterly and refused to eat, saying, "The emperor has indeed killed my son!"

古文：帝哀惧，不知所为；与长公主计之，乃分梁为五国，尽立孝王男五人为王：买为梁王，明为济川王，彭离为济东王，定为山阳王，不识为济阴王；女五人皆食汤沐邑。
现代文：景帝悲哀恐惧，不知怎么办才好；与姐姐长公主商议，于是把梁国分为五国，把梁孝王的五个儿子全都封为诸侯王：刘买为梁王，刘明为济川王，刘彭离为济东王，刘定为山阳王，刘不识为济阴王；梁孝王的五个女儿也都封给汤沐邑。
English: King Jing was sad and afraid, and did not know what to do. He discussed with his sister, the eldest princess, and divided Liang Province into five provinces, and all five sons of King Liang Xiao were made princes: Liu Buy was King Liang, Liu Ming was King of Jichuan, Liu Peng Li was King of Jidong, Liu was designated as King of Shanyang, and Liu Baizhi was King of Jiyin; the five daughters of King Liang Xiao were also given the title of Tang Muyi.

古文：奏之太后，太后乃说，为帝加一餐。
现代文：景帝把这一决定禀告窦太后，太后才高兴起来，为景帝这一做法而吃了一顿饭。
English: Emperor Jing reported this decision to Empress Dowager Dou. The Empress Dowager became happy and ate a meal for Emperor Jing's action.

古文：孝王未死时，财以巨万计，及死，藏府馀黄金尚四十馀万斤。他物称是。
现代文：梁孝王没死的时候，有数以万万计的财产，他死后，梁国府库中剩余的黄金还有四十多万斤，其他财物的价值也与此相当。
English: When Liang Xiaowang was still alive, he had tens of millions in assets. After his death, the remaining gold in Liang Guofu's treasury was more than 400,000 kg, and the value of other assets was also equivalent to this.

古文：上既减笞法，笞者犹不全；乃更减笞三百曰二百，笞二百曰一百。
现代文：景帝减少了对罪犯的笞打次数之后，受笞刑的人还难保全生命；就再崐次减少笞刑，该笞打三百下的，减为笞打二百，该笞打二百下的，减为笞打一百。
English: After Emperor Jing reduced the number of beatings for criminals, it was still difficult for those who were beaten to save their lives. So he reduced the number of beatings again, from 300 to 200, and from 200 to 100.

古文：又定棰令：棰长五尺，其本大一寸，竹也；末薄半寸，皆平其节。
现代文：又制定了实施笞刑的法令：用于打人的笞杖，长为五尺，用竹子做成，根部手握之处，竹管的直径为一寸；末梢为半寸薄的竹片，竹节全要磨平。
English: An ordinance was also formulated for the execution of caning: the cane used for beating people is made of bamboo and has a length of five feet. At the base, where the hand is held, the diameter of the bamboo tube is one inch; at the end, there is a half-inch thin piece of bamboo, and all the bamboo knots must be ground flat.

古文：当笞得笞臀；毕一罪，乃更人。
现代文：被判处笞刑的人，笞打他的臀部；一个罪人打完之后，才更换行刑的人。
English: The person sentenced to flogging, beat his buttocks; a sinner after the beating, only then change the executioner.

古文：自是笞者得全。
现代文：从此以后，受笞刑的人就得以保全了。
English: From then on, those who were flogged were spared.

古文：然死刑既重而生刑又轻，民易犯之。
现代文：但这样一来，死刑很重而不到死刑的其他惩罚又很轻，百姓就把违法犯罪看得很轻淡了。
English: But in this way, the death penalty is very heavy and other punishments less than the death penalty are very light, and the people regard illegal crimes very lightly.

古文：六月，匈奴入雁门，至武泉，入上郡，取苑马。吏卒战死者二千人。
现代文：六月，匈奴攻入雁门郡，直到武泉县，并攻入上郡，抢去了官府牧马场的马匹；汉军将士二千人战死。
English: In June, the Xiongnu invaded Yanmen, went to Wuquan, entered Shang County, and plundered horses from the ranch. More than two thousand Han soldiers were killed.

古文：陇西李广为上郡太守，尝从百骑出，卒遇匈奴数千骑。
现代文：陇西人李广担任上郡太守，曾率领一百名骑士出行，遇到几千匈奴骑兵。
English: Li Guang, a native of Shaanxi Province, served as the governor of Shang County. He once led a hundred knights on a journey and encountered several thousand Hun cavalry.

古文：见广，以为诱骑，皆惊，上山陈。
现代文：匈奴人看见李广的小队伍，以为是汉军大部队派出的诱兵，都吃了一惊，占据高山摆开阵势。
English: When the Huns saw Li Guang's small army, they thought it was a decoy sent by a large Chinese army. They were all taken aback and took up positions high in the mountains.

古文：广之百骑皆大恐，欲驰还走。广曰： 吾去大军数十里，今如此以百骑走，匈奴追射我立尽。
现代文：李广所率领的一百名骑兵都很害怕，想驰马逃跑回去，李广制止说： 我们离开大军数十里远，现在，如果就靠这一百骑兵的队伍逃跑，匈奴人追杀射击，我们马上就完了。
English: The hundred cavalrymen led by Li Guang were very scared and wanted to run back on horseback. Li Guang stopped them and said, "We are dozens of miles away from the main army. Now, if we rely on this group of one hundred cavalrymen to escape, and the Huns chase and shoot, we will be finished immediately."

古文：今我留，匈奴必以我为大军之诱，必不敢击我。 
现代文：现在我们留在这里，匈奴人必定把我们看成大军的诱敌队伍，一定不敢进攻我们。 
English: Now that we are staying here, the Huns must see us as a large army of tempting enemies, and they must not dare to attack us.

古文：广令诸骑曰： 前！ 
现代文：李广命令骑兵们说： 前进！ 
English: Li Guang ordered the cavalry: Forward!

古文：未到匈奴阵二里所，止，令曰： 皆下马解鞍！ 
现代文：来到距离匈奴阵地约有二里的地方，停止下来，李广命令说： 都下马解下马鞍！ 
English: When he came to a place about two miles from the Hun's position and stopped, Li Guang ordered: "All of you dismount and unsaddle your horses!"

古文：其骑曰： 虏多且近，即有急，奈何？ 
现代文：他的骑兵说： 敌人很多，而且离我们很近，如果出现紧急情况，怎么办？ 
English: His cavalry said: The enemy are many and very close to us, what if there is an emergency?

古文：广曰： 彼虏以我为走；今皆解鞍以示不走，用坚其意。 于是胡骑遂不敢击。
现代文：李广说： 敌人估计我们会逃跑；我命令都解下马鞍，向他们表示不逃跑，用这个办法来坚定他们认为我们是诱敌部队的想法。 于是匈奴骑兵便真的不敢进攻。
English: Li Guang said, "The enemy thought we would run away; I ordered everyone to unsaddle their horses and told them not to run away, using this method to reinforce the idea that they thought we were a decoy force.

古文：有白马将出，护其兵；李广上马，与十馀骑奔，射杀白马将而复还，至其骑中解鞍，令士皆纵马卧。
现代文：有一位骑白马的匈奴将领出阵来，监护他的军队，李广上马，和十多个骑兵奔向前去，射死了匈奴的白马将军，又返回来，到达他的百骑阵营中，解下马鞍，命令战士们放开战马，卧地休息。
English: There was a Hun general on a white horse who led the battle and guarded his army. Li Guang mounted his horse and ran forward with more than ten cavalrymen. He shot the Hun general on a white horse, and then returned to his hundred-horse camp. He unsaddled his horse and ordered the soldiers to let go of their horses and lie down to rest.

古文：是时会暮，胡兵终怪之，不敢击。
现代文：这时，正好是黄昏，匈奴骑兵一直对李广部队的行为觉得奇怪，不敢进攻。
English: By this time it was dusk, and the Hun army still felt strange and did not dare to attack.

古文：夜半时，胡兵亦以为汉有伏军于旁，欲夜取之，胡皆引兵而去。
现代文：到了半夜时分，匈奴军队仍然认为附近有埋伏的汉朝大军，想夜间袭击他们，便都领兵撤走了。
English: In the middle of the night, the Hun army still thought that there was an ambush of the Han Dynasty army nearby, and if they wanted to attack them at night, they withdrew their troops.

古文：平旦，李广乃归其大军。
现代文：到黎明时，李广才回到他的大军营垒。
English: It was not until dawn that Li Guang returned to his large army camp.

古文：秋，七月，辛亥晦，日有食之。
现代文：秋季。七月，辛亥晦，出现日食。
English: Autumn. In July, on the eve of the Chinese New Year, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：自郅都之死，长安左右宗室多暴犯法。
现代文：自从郅都死后，长安及附近的宗室皇族有许多人凶暴犯法。
English: Since the death of Emperor Xizong, many members of the imperial family in and around Chang'an have committed violent crimes.

古文：上乃召济南都尉南阳宁成为中尉。
现代文：景帝就征召济南都尉南阳人宁成出任中尉。
English: Emperor Jing then conscripted Jinan governor Nanyangjin Ningcheng to serve as a lieutenant.

古文：其治效郅都，其廉弗如。然宗室、豪桀皆人人惴恐。
现代文：宁成的治政仿效郅都，但清廉不及郅都，然而宗室皇族、地方豪强人人都恐惧不安。
English: The governance of Ningcheng emulates that of Shantou, but it is not as clean as Shantou. However, the royal family and local strongmen are all afraid and uneasy.

古文：城阳共王喜薨。
现代文：城阳王刘喜去世。
English: Liu Xi, the King of Chengyang, passed away.

古文：孝景皇帝下后元年
现代文：孝景皇帝下后元年
English: Emperor Xiao Jing's downfall in the first year of the new year

古文：春，正月，诏曰： 狱，重事也。
现代文：春季，正月，景帝下诏说： 审判案件，是国家的重大政务。
English: In the spring, in the first month of the year, Emperor Jing issued an edict saying: The trial of cases is a major state affair.

古文：人有智愚，官有上下。
现代文：人有智愚的不同，官有上下的区别。
English: People have differences in wisdom and stupidity, and officials have differences between the upper and lower ranks.

古文：狱疑者谳有司；有司所不能决，移廷尉；谳而后不当，谳后不为失。
现代文：有疑问的案件要上交给有关机构复审；有关机构仍难以断案的，要上交廷尉复审。下级把疑案送呈上级复审，而发现断案有错误，送呈疑案的官员不必负担任何责任。
English: In case of doubt, the case should be submitted to the relevant institution for review; if the relevant institution is still difficult to adjudicate the case, it should be submitted to the lieutenant for review. The lower level will submit the doubtful case to the higher level for review, and if it is found that there is an error in the adjudication of the case, the official who submitted the doubtful case does not have to bear any responsibility.

古文：欲令治狱者务先宽。 三月，赦天下。
现代文：主要是想让审案的司法官员，一定重视从宽判案。 三月，景帝下诏，大赦天下。
English: In March, Emperor Jing issued an edict to grant amnesty to the whole world.

古文：夏，大酺五日，民得酤酒。
现代文：夏季，景帝下诏，特许百姓相聚饮酒五天，允许百姓卖酒。
English: In summer, the national feast lasts for five days, and people can buy and sell wine.

古文：五月，丙戌，地震。
现代文：五月，丙戌，发生地震。
English: In May, an earthquake occurred in Heping.

古文：上庸地震二十二日。坏城垣。
现代文：上庸地震持续了二十二天，毁坏了城墙。
English: The Shangyong earthquake lasted 22 days and destroyed the city wall.

古文：秋，七月，丙午，丞相舍免。
现代文：秋季，七月，丙午，丞相刘舍被免职。
English: In the autumn of July, on the afternoon of the third day, the prime minister Liu She was removed from office.

古文：乙巳晦，日有食之。
现代文：乙巳晦，出现日食。
English: At dusk, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：八月，壬辰，以御史大夫卫绾为丞相，卫尉南阳直不疑为御史大夫。
现代文：八月，壬辰，景帝任命御史大夫卫绾为丞相，任命卫尉南阳人直不疑为御史大夫。
English: In August of the same year, Emperor Jing appointed Goshi no daifu (Minister of History) Weihai as chancellor, and appointed Weiwei Nanyangren as Goshi no daifu (Minister of History).

古文：初，不疑为郎，同舍有告归，误持其同舍郎金去。
现代文：当初，直不疑做郎官，同住一处的某人告假回家，错拿了同处另一位郎官的黄金走了。
English: At first, without any doubt, someone who worked as a steward and lived in the same place went home on leave and mistakenly took the gold of another steward in the same place.

古文：已而同舍郎觉亡，意不疑，不疑谢有之，买金偿。
现代文：不久，同住一处的郎官发觉自己丢了金子，怀疑是直不疑偷去了；直不疑向他道歉说确有其事，买来黄金还给了失金人。
English: Soon, the steward who lived with him found that he had lost the gold and suspected that he had stolen it; he apologized and bought the gold and returned it to the person who had lost the gold.

古文：后告归者至而归金，亡金郎大惭。
现代文：后来，告假回家的人回来，交还了错拿的黄金，丢失黄金的那位郎官大为惭愧。
English: Later, the person who went home on leave came back and handed back the gold he had taken by mistake. The steward who lost the gold was very ashamed.

古文：以此称为长者，稍迁至中大夫。
现代文：因此，直不疑被称为长者，他慢慢地升官直至做了中大夫。
English: Therefore, he was unquestionably called an elder, and he slowly rose through the ranks until he became a junior doctor.

古文：人或廷毁不疑，以为盗嫂，不疑闻，曰： 我乃无兄。 
现代文：有人在朝廷上诋毁直不疑，说他与嫂子私通。直不疑听到了，就说： 我并没有哥哥。 
English: Someone slandered Zhenpo Doubtless at court, saying that he was having an affair with his sister-in-law. When Zhenpo Doubtless heard this, he said, "I have no brother."

古文：然终不自明也。
现代文：可是终究不自我辩白。
English: After saying that, he finally stopped making any other excuses.

古文：帝居禁中，召周亚夫赐食，独置大胾，无切肉，又不置箸。
现代文：景帝在宫中，召见周亚夫，赏赐食物，只放了一大块肉，没有切开，又不准备筷子。
English: In the palace, Emperor Jing summoned Zhou Yafu and rewarded him with food. He only gave him a large piece of meat, which he did not cut and did not prepare chopsticks.

古文：亚夫心不平，顾谓尚席取箸。
现代文：周亚夫心中不高兴，回过头来吩咐主管宴席的官员取筷子来。
English: Unhappy in his heart, Yaf turned back and told the chairman to take the chopsticks.

古文：上视而笑曰： 此非不足君所乎！ 
现代文：景帝看着周亚夫，笑着问： 这莫非不满足您的意思吗？ 
English: Jingdi looked at Zhou Yafu and asked with a smile: Isn't this what you wanted?

古文：亚夫免冠谢上，上曰： 起。 
现代文：周亚夫摘下帽子向景帝谢罪，景帝说： 起来！ 
English: Zhou Yafu took off his hat to thank Emperor Jing for his sin. Emperor Jing said: Get up!

古文：亚夫因趋出。
现代文：周亚夫就快步退了出去，景帝目送着他走出去。
English: Yaf walked out at a brisk pace.

古文：上目送之曰： 此鞅鞅，非少主臣也。 
现代文：说道： 这位愤愤不平的人，不能做幼年君主的臣子。 
English: He said: "This embittered man is not fit to be a courtier to the infant monarch.

古文：居无何，亚夫子为父买工官尚方甲楯五百被，可以葬者。取庸苦之，不与钱。
现代文：不久，周亚夫的儿子给父亲从工官那里买了专给皇室制造的可用于殉葬的五百件铠甲盾牌，虐待搬运这些东西的雇工，却不给他们工钱。
English: Not long after, Zhou Yafu's son bought his father five hundred armored shields, which could be used for funerals, specially made for the royal family, from a foreman, and abused the employees who carried these things, but did not pay them.

古文：庸知其盗买县官器，怨而上变，告子，事连污亚夫。
现代文：雇工知道这是盗买皇室专用器物，怀着怨恨上书朝廷，检举周亚夫的儿子，事情牵连到周亚夫。
English: The hired worker knew that this was the theft of special royal equipment, and with resentment, he wrote to the court to report Zhou Yafu's son, and Zhou Yafu was implicated in the matter.

古文：书既闻，上下吏。
现代文：景帝见到了检举信，就下令将此案交给司法官员审理。
English: After the document was submitted, the emperor ordered officials to investigate.

古文：吏簿责亚夫。亚夫不对。
现代文：官员用簿书逐条审问周亚夫，周亚夫拒不回答。
English: The officials interrogated Zhou Yafu with books and records one by one. Zhou Yafu refused to answer.

古文：上骂之曰： 吾不用也！ 
现代文：景帝得知，骂他说： 朕不必要你的供词，也可以杀你！ 
English: When Emperor Jing learned of this, he scolded him: "I don't need your confession, I can kill you!

古文：召诣廷尉。
现代文：下诏让周亚夫去廷尉处接受审判。
English: He also ordered that Zhou Yafu be handed over to the court lieutenant.

古文：廷尉责问曰： 君侯欲反何？ 
现代文：廷尉审问说： 您为什么要造反？ 
English: The courtier scolded: "Why are you making a fuss?

古文：亚夫曰： 臣所买器，乃葬器也，何谓反乎？ 
现代文：周亚夫说： 我购买的东西，都是殉葬用的，怎能说是要造反呢？ 
English: And he said, Behold, I have bought a potter's vessel; what shall I do with it?

古文：吏曰： 君纵不欲反地上，即欲反地下耳！ 
现代文：审案的官员说： 您即使不在地上造反，也要在地下造反！ 
English: The official in charge of the case said: Even if you don't rebel above ground, you should rebel underground!

古文：吏侵之益急。
现代文：官吏的审讯逼供越来越残酷。
English: The guards' pressure became more and more intense.

古文：初，吏捕亚夫，亚夫欲自杀，其夫人止之，以故不得死，遂入廷尉，因不食五日，欧血而死。
现代文：当初，官吏逮捕周亚夫的时候，周亚夫就想要自杀，他夫人劝阻了他，因此没有死，被关进了廷尉的牢狱。于是，周亚夫绝食五天，吐血而死。
English: At first, when officials arrested Zhou Yafu, Zhou Yafu wanted to commit suicide, but his wife dissuaded him, so he did not die and was put in the lieutenant's prison. Therefore, Zhou Yafu went on a hunger strike for five days, vomited blood and died.

古文：是岁，济阴哀王不识薨。
现代文：这一年，济阴王刘不识去世。
English: In the same year, the king of Jilin, Liu Wuzhong, died.

古文：孝景皇帝下二年
现代文：孝景皇帝下二年
English: Two years after the death of Emperor Xiao Jing

古文：春，正月，地一日三动。
现代文：春季，正月，一天中发生三次地震。
English: In spring, in the first month of the year, three earthquakes occurred in one day.

古文：三月，匈奴入雁门，太守冯敬与战，死。
现代文：三月，匈奴入侵雁门郡，太守冯敬与匈奴交战，战死。
English: In March, the Xiongnu invaded Yanmen County. Grand Duke Feng Jing fought with the Xiongnu and died in battle.

古文：发车骑、材官屯雁门。
现代文：朝廷征发战车和骑兵、步兵驻防雁门郡。
English: The imperial court conscripted and dispatched chariots, cavalry and infantry to garrison Yanmen County.

古文：春，以岁不登，禁内郡食马粟；没入之。
现代文：春季，因为连年歉收，景帝下诏禁止内地各郡臣民用粮食喂养马匹；崐有违犯此禁令的，由官府没收他的马匹。
English: In the spring, because of poor harvests year after year, Emperor Jing issued an edict prohibiting all county subjects in the inland from feeding horses with civilian grain; if anyone violated this ban, his horses would be confiscated by the government.

古文：夏，四月，诏曰： 雕文刻镂，伤农事者也；锦绣纂组，害女工者也。
现代文：夏季，四月，景帝下诏说： 追求器物的精雕细镂，就会损害农业；追求丝织物品的锦绣多彩，就会损害纺织业。
English: In the summer, in April, Emperor Jing issued an edict saying, "Pursuing the finely carved patterns of utensils will damage agriculture; pursuing the colorful embroidery of silk products will damage the textile industry."

古文：农事伤则饥之本，女工害则寒之原也。
现代文：农业受到损害，是造成天下饥荒的根本原因，纺织业受到损害，是导致百姓受寒的根本原因。
English: The damage to agriculture is the root cause of famine in the world, and the damage to the textile industry is the root cause of people suffering from cold.

古文：夫饥寒并至而能亡为非者寡矣。
现代文：天下百姓，在饥寒交迫时还能够不违法犯罪的，是很少的。
English: There are very few people in the world who can not break the law and commit crimes when they are hungry and cold.

古文：朕亲耕，后亲桑，以奉宗庙粢盛、祭服，为天下先；不受献，减太官，省繇赋，欲天下务农蚕，素有蓄积，以备灾害。强毋攘弱，众毋暴寡；老耆以寿终，幼孤得遂长。
现代文：朕亲身从事农耕，皇后亲自种桑养蚕，以其收获作为供奉宗庙的粮食和祭服，为天下做表率；不接受进贡，减少太宫的皇家饮食供应，节省徭役和赋税，想让天下百姓都从事农业和纺织，平常都有储备，以防备灾害；强的不抢夺弱的，多的不欺凌少的，老年人可以安享天年，年幼的孤儿可以平安长大成人。
English: I am personally engaged in farming. The empress personally grows mulberry and silkworms, and uses her harvest as food and sacrificial clothing for the ancestral temple to set an example for the world. I do not accept tribute, reduce the supply of royal food to the Imperial Palace, save labor and taxes, and want the people of the world to engage in agriculture and textiles. There are usually reserves to prevent disasters; the strong do not rob the weak, the more do not bully the less, the elderly can enjoy their golden years, and the young orphans can grow up safely.

古文：今岁或不登，民食颇寡，其咎安在？
现代文：而现在，只要有一年收成不好，百姓的食物就很缺乏，造成这种局面的祸根是什么？
English: But now, whenever there is a poor harvest, the people are short of food. What is the root cause of this situation?

古文：或诈伪为吏，以货赂为市，渔夺百姓，侵牟万民。
现代文：或许是因为奸诈的人做了官吏，公开行贿受贿，贪求钱财，剥削百姓，侵夺万民。
English: Perhaps it is because treacherous people have become officials, openly bribe and accept bribes, covet money, exploit the people, and rob the people.

古文：县丞，长吏也；奸法与盗盗，甚无谓也！
现代文：县丞是重要官员，执法犯法，与盗贼共盗，太不像话！
English: The county magistrate is an important official, breaking the law by enforcing the law, and stealing with thieves. This is outrageous!

古文：其令二千石各修其职；不事官职、耗乱者，丞相以闻，请其罪。
现代文：命令郡国守、相等二千石官员，各自严格遵守职责；不履行职责、政绩不好的官员，丞相要向朕奏报，议定处置的罪名。
English: It is now ordered that officials of 2,000 koku each perform their duties, and all those who neglect their duties and abuse their duties to the detriment of the people should be reported to the prime minister and punished.

古文：布告天下，使明知朕意。 
现代文：把诏书向全国公布，使天下吏民都知道朕的本意。 
English: Announce it to the whole world, so that people will know my will.

古文：五月，诏赀算四得官。
现代文：五月，景帝下诏规定，家中资财达到四万钱的，就可以做官。
English: In May, Emperor Jing issued an edict stipulating that anyone with household wealth of 40,000 yuan could become an official.

古文：秋，大旱。
现代文：秋季，发生大旱。
English: In autumn, there is a big drought.

古文：孝景皇帝下三年
现代文：孝景皇帝下三年
English: Emperor Xiaojing reigns for three years

古文：冬，十月，日月皆食，赤五日。
现代文：冬季，十月，发生了日食和月食，日月呈红色，持续了五天。
English: In winter, in October, there was a solar eclipse and a lunar eclipse. The sun and the moon were red, and it lasted for five days.

古文：十二月晦，雷；日如紫；五星逆行守大微；月贯天廷中。
现代文：十二月月底，天空打雷；日光呈紫色；五大行星逆行，停留在太微星座；月亮从天廷中部穿过。
English: At the end of December, the sky thundered; the sunlight was purple; the five planets retrograde, staying in the Taimu constellation; the moon passed through the middle of the celestial court.

古文：春，正月，诏曰： 农，天下之本也。
现代文：春季，正月，景帝下诏说： 农业是天下的根本。
English: In the spring, the first month of the year, Emperor Jing issued an edict saying: Agriculture is the foundation of the world.

古文：黄金、珠、玉，饥不可食，寒不可衣，以为币用，不识其终始。
现代文：黄金、珍珠、美玉之类的东西，饥饿时不能当饭吃，寒冷时不能做衣穿，把它当做货币使用，不知它何时使用何时废止。
English: Gold, pearls, precious stones and the like cannot be used as food when one is hungry, nor as clothing when one is cold. They are used as money, and it is not known when they will be used or when they will be abolished.

古文：间岁或不登，意为末者众，农民寡也。
现代文：近来有时年成不好，或许是因为从事工商末业的人多，从事农业的人少。
English: Sometimes the harvest is not good this year. I think there are too many people engaged in business and too few people engaged in agriculture.

古文：其令郡国务劝农桑，益种树，可得衣食物。
现代文：命令郡国官员，一定要提倡发展农桑，多种树，这样就可以得到衣服和食物等用品。
English: Now, the county government has issued a special order to encourage farmers to engage in agricultural mulberry, plant more trees, and have enough food and clothing.

古文：吏发民若取庸采黄金、珠、玉者，坐赃为盗。
现代文：官吏如果征发百姓，雇他们去开采黄金、珍珠、美玉，就按偷盗的罪名，把所得作为赃物来定罪处置。
English: If officials conscript people and hire them to mine gold, pearls and precious stones, they will be convicted of theft and the proceeds will be treated as stolen goods.

古文：二千石听者，与同罪。 
现代文：二千石官员如果听之任之，也按同样的罪名处置。 
English: An official with a salary of two thousand koku who does not investigate this is guilty of the same crime.

古文：甲寅，皇太子冠。
现代文：甲寅，皇太子成年，举行冠礼。
English: Katoin, the crown prince, comes of age and is crowned.

古文：甲子，帝崩于未央宫。
现代文：甲子，景帝在未央宫驾崩。
English: On the 27th day of the first month, Emperor Jing died at the Miao Palace.

古文：太子即皇帝位，年十六。
现代文：太子当上了皇帝，年仅十六岁。
English: The prince became emperor at the age of sixteen.

古文：尊皇太后为太皇太后，皇后为皇太后。
现代文：尊奉皇太后为太皇太后，尊奉皇后为皇太后。
English: The revered empress dowager is the great empress dowager, and the revered empress is the empress dowager.

古文：二月，癸酉，葬孝景皇帝于阳陵。
现代文：二月，癸酉，将孝景皇帝安葬在阳陵。
English: In February, Emperor Xiaojing was buried in the Yangling Mausoleum.

古文：三月，封皇太后同母弟田分为武安侯，胜为周阳侯。
现代文：三月，封立皇太后的同母弟田为武安侯，田胜为周阳侯。
English: In March, the empress dowager's maternal half-brother Tian was made the prince of Wu'an and Tian Sheng was made the prince of Zhouyang.

古文：班固赞曰：孔子称： 斯民也，三代之所以直道而行也。 
现代文：班固赞曰：孔子说： 现在的民众，与三代圣明的君主推行王道达到天下大治所依靠的民众，没有什么不同。 
English: Ban Guzan said: Confucius said: The people of today are no different from the people on whom the three generations of holy emperors relied to promote the royal way and achieve the great rule of the world.

古文：信哉！
现代文：确实是这样啊！
English: This is indeed the case!

古文：周、秦之敝，罔密文峻，而奸轨不胜，汉兴，扫除烦苛，与民休息；至于孝文，加之以恭俭；孝景遵业。
现代文：周末、秦代政治的弊病，在于法网繁密，政令严苛，但奸邪盗寇却防不胜防。汉朝建国以后，废除繁苛的法令，让民众休养生息；到孝文帝时，用谨慎俭朴的作风治理国家；孝景皇帝遵守大业成规而不改。
English: At the end of the week, the political ills of the Qin Dynasty lay in the fact that the legal network was complex and the government decrees were strict, but the evil thieves and robbers could not be prevented. After the founding of the Han Dynasty, the onerous decrees were abolished, allowing the people to rest and recuperate; when Emperor Xiaowen came to power, he governed the country with a prudent and frugal style; Emperor Xiaojing adhered to the great cause and did not change.

古文：五六十载之间，至于移风易俗，黎民醇厚。
现代文：五六十年之间，就达到移风易俗，百姓淳朴敦厚。
English: Between the fifties and sixties, it reached the point of changing customs and customs, and the people were simple and dignified.

古文：周云成、康，汉言文、景，美矣！
现代文：说到天下大治的时代，周代有成王和康王时期，汉代有文帝和景帝时期，真是好啊！
English: The Zhou Dynasty praised Chengkang, the Han Dynasty praised Dao Wenjing, what a wonderful golden age!

古文：汉兴，接秦之弊，作业剧而财匮，自天子不能具钧驷，而将相或乘牛车，齐民无藏盖。
现代文：汉朝建国，承接的是秦末营造繁多而财力匮乏的疲困社会，纵是天子都不能配备四匹同样毛色的马匹拉车，将相有的只能坐牛车，平民百姓没有积蓄。
English: The founding of the Han Dynasty was succeeded by the end of the Qin Dynasty, which created an exhausted society with a large number of people and a lack of financial resources. Even the emperor could not equip four horses of the same color to pull a cart, and the common people could only ride in ox carts. The common people had no savings.

古文：天下已平，高祖乃令贾人不得衣丝、乘车，重租税以困辱之。
现代文：天下平定之后，高祖就命令商人不许穿丝织的衣服、不许坐车，并且加重征收他们的租税，用这些办法来控制和羞辱商人。
English: After the country was pacified, Gaozu ordered merchants not to wear silk clothes, not to ride in cars, and to increase their taxes, using these methods to control and humiliate merchants.

古文：孝惠、高后时，为天下初定，复驰商贾之律；然市井之子孙，亦不得仕宦为吏。
现代文：孝惠帝和高后在位时，因为天下刚刚平定，又放松了限制商人的律令，但是商人的子孙，仍然不允许做官为吏。
English: When Emperor Xiao Hui and Empress Gao were on the throne, because the country had just been pacified, the laws restricting merchants were relaxed, but the descendants of merchants were still not allowed to become officials.

古文：量吏禄，度官用，以赋于民。
现代文：朝廷计算官吏俸禄和官府各项费用的总额，据此向百姓征收赋税。
English: The imperial court calculated the total amount of officials' salaries and various expenses of the government, and levied taxes on the people accordingly.

古文：而山川、园池、市井租税之入，自天子以至于封君汤沐邑，皆各为私奉养焉，不领于天下之经费。漕转山东粟以给中都官，岁不过数十万石。
现代文：而自天子到封君的汤沐邑，都把山川、园池、市井商业税收作为各自费用的来源，而不向朝廷领取经费。经由陆路、水路运输到京师，供给各官府使用的来自于崤山以东地区的粮食，每年不超过数十万石。
English: However, from Tianzi to Fengjun's Tangmu, all of them regarded the mountains, rivers, parks, and municipal commercial taxes as the source of their own expenses, instead of receiving funds from the imperial court. Grain from the area east of Lushan was transported to Beijing via land and water to supply the various government offices, with no more than several hundred thousand koku per year.

古文：继以孝文、孝景，清净恭俭，安养天下，七十馀年之间，国家无事，非遇水旱之灾，民则人给家足。
现代文：接着是孝文帝、孝景帝先后治理国家，清静廉正，谨慎俭朴，安养天下百姓，七十多年之间，国家无事，如果不发生旱涝灾害，百姓就可以人人自给，家家足用。
English: Then, Emperor Xiaowen and Emperor Xiaojing successively governed the country. They were quiet and upright, prudent and frugal, and kept the people of the world safe. For more than 70 years, there was nothing wrong with the country. If there were no drought and flood disasters, the people could be self-sufficient, and every family would have enough to use.

古文：都鄙廪庾皆满，而府库馀货财；京师之钱累巨万，贯朽而不可校；太仓之粟陈陈相因，充溢露积于外，至腐败不可食。
现代文：城乡的粮仓都装满了粮食，府库中贮存了剩余的物资；京城国库中的钱累积万万，串钱的绳子都已朽烂，无法清点数目；京城粮仓中的陈旧粟米一层盖一层，装满太仓而流出仓外，只好在外面堆积着，以至于腐烂而不能食用。
English: The granaries in urban and rural areas are full of grain, and the surplus materials are stored in the government treasury; the money in the capital treasury has accumulated tens of thousands of dollars, and the strings of money have rotted, and it is impossible to count the number; the old corn in the capital granary is covered layer by layer, and it is filled with too much and flows out of the warehouse, and it has to be piled up outside, so that it rots and cannot be eaten.

古文：众庶街巷有马，而阡陌之间成群，乘字牝者摈而不得聚会。
现代文：百姓居住的大街小巷都可看见马，在田野间的马匹更是成群结队，骑母马的人要受到排斥而不能与人聚会。
English: Horses can be seen in the streets and alleys where people live, and in the fields the horses are even more in groups. People riding mares are to be excluded and cannot meet with people.

古文：守闾阎者食粱肉，为吏者长子孙，居官者以为姓号。
现代文：把守里巷大门的人吃的是白米好肉；做官的人长期任职，可在任期内把子孙抚养成人，有的人则把官名做为自己的姓。
English: Ordinary people living in the alleys and lanes eat refined grains and meat, and officials do not change their posts because they die of old age. Officials use their official title as their surname and name.

古文：故人人自爱而重犯法，先行义而后绌辱焉。
现代文：所以人人自爱而不愿触犯法律，以行义为先而避免羞辱。
English: Therefore, everyone loves himself and does not want to break the law, and avoids humiliation by putting righteousness first.

古文：当此之时，罔疏而民富，役财骄溢，或至兼并；豪党之徒，以武断于乡曲。
现代文：在这个时期，法令宽松，百姓富足，有人依凭钱财骄横不法，兼并土地；那些豪强之辈，在乡间作威作福，横行霸道。
English: In this period, the laws were lax, the people were rich, and some people relied on money and wealth to arrogantly and illegally annex land. Those strong and powerful people were arrogant and tyrannical in the countryside.

古文：宗室有土，公、卿、大夫以下，争于奢侈，室庐、舆服僭于上，无限度。
现代文：享有封地的宗室贵族、公、卿、大夫及以下官员，互相比赛谁更奢侈，房屋、车辆、衣服都不顾地位名分地僭越于上，没有限度。
English: The aristocrats, dukes, lords, doctors and other officials who enjoy fiefdoms compete with each other to see who can be more extravagant. There is no limit to the number of houses, vehicles and clothes that can be worn, regardless of status.

古文：物盛而衰，固其变也。
现代文：事物发展到鼎盛就会走向衰败，这本是变化的规律。
English: Things will turn to decay after prosperity, which is an inevitable law of change.

古文：自是之后，孝武内穷侈靡，外攘夷狄，天下萧然，财力耗矣！
现代文：从此之后，孝武帝对内穷奢极侈，对外攻打夷狄各族，天下萧条，财富全都耗费完了！
English: From then on, Emperor Xiaowu was lavishly extravagant at home and attacked the Yi and Di ethnic groups abroad. The world was in a depression, and all the wealth had been spent!

