古文：吴任生鄥涛曾季衡赵合韦安之李佐文胡急
现代文：吴任生鄥涛曾季衡赵合韦安之李佐文胡急
English: Wu Rensheng, Zeng Tao, Zhao Hewei'an, Li Zuwen and Hu Qiu

古文：吴任生
现代文：吴任生
English: Wu Rensheng

古文：吴郡任生者，善视者，庐於洞庭山。
现代文：吴郡的任生，善于看鬼，住在浻庭山，他的面貌总象个孩童。
English: Ren Sheng from Wuxi County, who is good at seeing ghosts, lives in Fengting Mountain. He always looks like a child.

古文：貌常若童儿，吴楚之俗，莫能究其甲子。
现代文：按照吴楚的风俗，也不能查出他的生辰。
English: According to Wu Chu's custom, his date of birth could not be ascertained.

古文：宝历中，有前昆山尉杨氏子，侨居吴郡。常一日，里中三数辈，相与泛舟，俱游虎丘寺。
现代文：宝历年间，有个前昆山尉杨氏的儿子，侨居在吴郡，曾经有一天，里中几个人，共同荡着小船，一起游览虎丘寺。
English: During the Baoli era, there was a son of the former Kunshan lieutenant Yang, who lived in Wu County. One day, several people in the village, together with a small boat, visited the Tiger Hill Temple.

古文：时任生在舟中，且语及鬼神事。
现代文：当时任生在船里，又说到鬼神的事情。
English: At that time, Ren Sheng was in the boat and talked about ghosts and gods.

古文：杨生曰：人鬼殊迹，故鬼卒不可见矣。
现代文：杨生说：人和鬼的踪迹不一样，所以鬼的踪迹不能看见。
English: Yang Sheng said: The tracks of people and ghosts are different, so the tracks of ghosts cannot be seen.

古文：任生笑曰：鬼甚多，人不能识耳，我独识之。
现代文：任生笑着说：鬼很多，人不能识别罢了，我单单能识别。
English: Ren Sheng said with a smile: There are many ghosts, people can't identify them, I can only identify them.

古文：然顾一妇人，衣青衣，拥竖儿，步於岸。
现代文：这样，他们看到一个妇人，穿着黑衣服，抱着个小孩，在岸边走。
English: Then they saw a woman, dressed in black and carrying a child, walking along the shore.

古文：生指语曰：此鬼也。其拥者乃婴儿之生魂耳。
现代文：任生指着说：这是鬼，她抱的是婴儿的灵魂。
English: Ren Sheng pointed and said, "This is a ghost. She is holding the soul of a baby."

古文：杨曰：然则何以辨其鬼耶？
现代文：杨说：那么凭什么辨别他是鬼呢？
English: Yang said, "Then how can you tell if it's a ghost?"

古文：生曰：君第观我与语。
现代文：任生说：你只管看我和他说话。
English: Ren said, "Just watch me talk to him."

古文：即厉声呼曰：尔鬼也，窃生人之子乎？
现代文：就大声叫道：你是鬼，偷活人的孩子吗？
English: And he cried out with a loud voice, Are you a spirit, and do you take the children of men alive?

古文：其妇人闻而惊慑，遂疾回去，步未十数，遽亡见矣。
现代文：那妇人听后很惊惧。就急忙往回跑，走了不到十几步，就不见了。
English: The woman was very alarmed after hearing this. She hurriedly ran back, walked less than a dozen steps, and disappeared.

古文：杨生且叹且异。
现代文：杨生又赞叹又惊异。
English: Yang Sheng was both impressed and surprised.

古文：及晚还，岸傍一家，陈宴席，有女巫，鼓舞於其左，乃醮神也。
现代文：到晚上回家，离城有几里，岸边有一人家，摆设宴席。有个女巫，在那右边鼓动挥舞，是祈祷神灵。
English: Coming home in the evening, a few miles from the city, there was a family on the shore, holding a banquet. There was a witch, waving and waving on the right, a praying deity.

古文：杨生与任生俱问之，巫曰：今日里中人有婴儿暴卒，今则寤矣，故设宴以谢。
现代文：杨生和任生一起问他，女巫说：今天里中人有个婴儿突然死去，现在又醒过来了！
English: Yang Sheng and Ren Sheng asked him together. The witch said, "Today, there was a baby who died suddenly, and now he has woken up again!"

古文：遂命出婴儿以视，则真妇人所拥者。
现代文：所以设宴谢神。就让把婴儿抱出来看，正是妇人所抱的那个！
English: Wherefore make a feast unto the Lord: and let the babe come forth, which the woman hath taken in her arms.

古文：诸客惊叹之，谢任生曰：先生真道术者，吾不得而知也。
现代文：各位客人震惊叹服，感谢任生说：先生是真正有道术的人，我们是不能知道的。
English: All the guests were shocked and impressed, thanking Ren Sheng and saying, "Sir, you are a true Taoist, we cannot know that.

古文：邬涛
现代文：邬涛
English: Haitao

古文：邬涛者，汝南人，精习坟典，好道木。旅泊婺州义乌县馆，月余。
现代文：邬涛是汝南人，精习三皇五帝所作的书，喜欢道术，出游住在婺州义鸟县馆。
English: Gong Tao is from the south of the country. He studies the books written by the three emperors and five emperors, likes Taoism, and travels to and lives in the Yidiao County Museum in Zhangzhou.

古文：忽有一女子，侍二婢夜至，一婢进曰：此王氏小娘子也，今夕顾降於君子。
现代文：一个多月，忽然有一个女子，两个婢女夜晚来到。一个婢女进前说：这是王氏小娘子，今天晚上特意前来看望你。
English: After more than a month, a woman and two maids suddenly arrived in the evening. One of the maids stepped forward and said, "This is Wang's little daughter. She has come specially to visit you tonight."

古文：涛视之，乃绝色也。谓是豪贵之女，不敢答。
现代文：涛看她，是绝色佳人，认为这是豪门权贵家的女子，不敢答话。
English: Tao saw her as a beautiful woman, and thought that she was a woman from a wealthy and powerful family. She did not dare to answer.

古文：王氏笑曰：秀才不以酒色於怀，妾何以奉托？
现代文：王氏笑着说：秀才不把酒色放在心上。我用什么奉献托咐？
English: Mr. Wang said with a smile, "Experts don't care about the color of the wine. What kind of dedication should I ask for?"

古文：涛乃起拜曰：凡陋之士，非敢是望。
现代文：涛就站起拜谢道：我是平凡鄙陋的人，不敢有这种欲望。
English: Tao stood up and said, "I am an ordinary and humble person, I dare not have such a desire."

古文：王氏令侍婢施服玩於涛寝室，炳以银烛，又备酒食。
现代文：王氏让待婢解下外衣在涛的寝室里玩。点燃银色的蜡烛，又备办了酒饭。
English: Mr. Wang had the maidservants take off their coats to play in Tao's bedroom, lit silver candles, and prepared food and drink.

古文：饮数巡，王氏起谓涛曰：妾少孤无托，今愿事君子枕席，将为可乎？
现代文：喝了几巡，王氏站起对涛说：我年少丧父母没有依托，现在愿意待奉你共枕席，将要做行吗？
English: After a few rounds of drinks, Mr. Wang stood up and said to Tao: I lost my parents when I was young and have no support. Now I am willing to serve you and share a table. Will you do it?

古文：涛逊辞而许，恩意款洽。
现代文：涛恭顺辞谢而答应，恩爱亲密。
English: Tao Qiong thanked him and agreed to be intimate with him.

古文：而王氏晓去夕至，如此数月。
现代文：王氏早晨离去晚上回来，如此几个月。
English: Mr. Wang left in the morning and came back in the evening for several months.

古文：涛所知道士杨景霄至馆访之，见涛色有异，曰：公为鬼魅所惑，宜断之。不然死矣。
现代文：涛所认识的道士杨景霄到馆拜访他，看见涛的脸色异常，说：你被鬼魅所迷惑，应该断绝她，不然的话就死了。
English: Taoist priest Yang Jingxiao, whom Tao knew, came to visit him at the hall. When he saw Tao's abnormal face, he said, "You have been bewitched by a ghost. You should break up with her, otherwise you will die."

古文：涛闻之惊，以其事具告，景霄曰：此乃鬼也。
现代文：涛听说很吃惊，把那事全都告诉了他。景霄说：这是鬼呀！
English: Hearing this, Tao was very surprised and told him the whole story. Jingxiao said: "It's a ghost!

古文：乃与符二道，一施衣带，一置门上，曰：此鬼来，当有怨恨，慎忽与语。
现代文：就给他两道符，一道放在衣带上，一道放在门上。说：这鬼来，一定怨恨你，千万不要和她说话。
English: And he gave her two tokens, one to put on her girdle, and the other to put on the door, saying, This evil woman hates thee; speak not to her.

古文：涛依法受之。
现代文：涛按照方法接受了。
English: Tao accepted according to the method.

古文：女子是夕至，见符门上，大骂而去，曰：来日速除之，不然生祸。
现代文：女子这天晚上来到，看见符在门上，大骂而离去。说：明天赶紧去掉它，不然要造成祸患！
English: The woman came that evening, saw the mark on the door, cursed loudly and left, saying, "Remove it tomorrow, or it will cause trouble!"

古文：涛明日访景霄，具言之，景霄曰：今夜再来，可以吾咒水洒之，此必绝矣。
现代文：涛第二头拜访景霄，把全部情况告诉了他。景霄说：今晚再来，可以用我的咒水洒她，这一定能断绝了。
English: At the second end of the river, he visited Jingxiao and told him the whole situation. Jingxiao said: "If you come again tonight, you can sprinkle her with my magic water, and this will surely be broken."

古文：涛持水归，至夜，女子复至，悲恚之甚。
现代文：涛拿着水回去。到了晚上，女子又来了，悲愤到极点。
English: Tao took the water and went back. In the evening, the woman came again, sad and angry to the extreme.

古文：涛乃以景霄咒水洒之，於是遂绝。
现代文：涛就用景霄的咒水洒她，于是就断绝了。
English: Tao then sprinkled her with Jingxiao's curse water and broke off the relationship.

古文：曾季衡
现代文：曾季衡
English: Zeng Jiheng

古文：大和四年春，监州防御使曾孝安有孙曰季衡，居使宅西偏院。
现代文：大和四年春天。监州防御使曾孝安有个孙子叫季衡，住防御使宅院的西偏院。
English: In the spring of the 4th year of the Yamato era, Zeng Xiaoan, who was in charge of the defense of Jianzhou, had a grandson named Ji Heng, who lived in Xiyuan, which was in charge of the defense.

古文：室屋壮丽，而季衡独处之。
现代文：房屋壮丽，季衡单独住在这里。
English: The house is magnificent, and Ji Heng lives here alone.

古文：有仆夫告曰：昔王使君女暴终於此，乃国色也。
现代文：有个仆人告诉他说：从前王使君的女儿在这里突然死去，有着倾国的容貌。
English: A servant told him: "Once upon a time, the daughter of the king's envoy died suddenly here. She had the appearance of having been overthrown.

古文：昼日其魂或见於此，郎君慎之。
现代文：她的灵魂白天在这里有时就能看见，你要谨镇小心。
English: Her spirit can sometimes be seen here during the day, so be careful.

古文：季衡少年好色，愿睹其灵异，终不以人鬼为间。
现代文：季衡少年好女色，想要看她的灵魂，终究不把人和鬼当作隔阂。
English: Ji Heng, a boy with a penchant for women, wants to see her soul. After all, he doesn't see people and ghosts as a barrier.

古文：频注名香，颇疏凡俗，步游闲处，恍然凝思。
现代文：频频点上名香，与凡俗很疏远，在安静的地方散步，恍恍惚惚冥思苦想。
English: Frequent points of famous incense, very distant from the mundane, walking in a quiet place, trance-like meditation.

古文：一日哺时，有双鬟前揖曰：王家小娘子遣某传达厚意，欲面拜郎君。
现代文：一天黄昏的时候，有一个梳着双鬟发型的婢女上前打揖道：王家小娘子派我传达深厚情意，要当面拜访你。
English: One evening, a servant girl with a double-bun hairstyle came forward and said, "The little daughter of the royal family has sent me to convey her deep feelings and to visit you in person."

古文：言讫，瞥然而没。
现代文：说完，突然就不见了。
English: After saying this, he suddenly disappeared.

古文：俄顷，有异香袭衣。
现代文：一会儿，有特殊的香味袭入，季衡就束上带子等候她。
English: After a while, a special fragrance hit her, and Ji Heng put on a headband to wait for her.

古文：季衡乃束带伺之，见向双鬟，引一女而至，乃神仙中人也。
现代文：看见先前两个婢女，带领一女子而来，真是象神仙中的人。
English: Seeing the two maids earlier, leading a woman to the raft, was truly like being in the presence of the gods.

古文：季衡揖之，问其姓氏，曰：某姓王氏，字丽真。父今为重镇，昔侍从大人牧此城，据此室，无何物故。
现代文：季衡拱手，问她们的姓氏。回答说：我姓王，名字叫丽真，父亲现在做重镇，从前跟随父亲到这个城邑，住在这屋里，不久死亡。
English: He asked them their surnames, and they replied, "My surname is Wang, my first name is Lizhen, my father is now an important town official, I used to follow my father to this town, lived in this house, and died soon after."

古文：感君思深杳冥，情激幽壤，所以不间存没，颇思神会。
现代文：感谢你思念深远的冥府，情意激烈达到地下深处，所以生与死没有隔阂，很想领会。
English: Thank you for thinking about the far-reaching Hades, and your passion has reached the depths of the underground, so there is no separation between life and death, and I would like to understand.

古文：其来久矣，但非吉日良时。
现代文：来已很久了，只是没有吉日良辰。
English: It's been a long time coming, but there's no better time.

古文：今方契愿，幸垂留意。
现代文：现在才合心愿，希望有留我的心意。
English: Now is the time to fulfill my heart's desire. I hope to retain my heart's desire.

古文：季衡留之款会，移时乃去。
现代文：季衡留下她亲切私会，过了很长时间才离去。
English: Ji Heng left her intimate private meeting, and it took a long time to leave.

古文：握季衡手曰：翌日此时再会，慎勿泄於人。
现代文：她握着季衡的手说：明天这个时间再相会，千万不要泄露给别人。
English: Holding Ji Heng's hand, she said, "Let's meet again at this time tomorrow. Don't let anyone know."

古文：遂与侍婢俱不见。
现代文：就与侍婢都不见了。
English: She and her maids disappeared.

古文：自此每及晡一至，近六十余日。
现代文：从此每到黄昏时就来到。将近六十多天，季衡没有疑虑。
English: From then on, he came every evening. For more than sixty days, Ji Heng had no doubts.

古文：季衡不疑，因与大父麾下将校，说及艳丽，误言之。
现代文：因为和祖父部下的将校说到她的艳丽，不慎失言了。
English: Because when talking to an officer of his grandfather's unit about her beauty, he accidentally made a slip of the tongue.

古文：将校惊惧，欲实其事，曰：郎君将及此时，愿一扣壁，某当与二三辈潜窥焉。
现代文：将校惊惧，想要证实那事。说：你等她来到这里的时候，希望你敲下墙壁，我和两三个人偷偷地窥视她。
English: "When she gets here, I want you to knock down the walls," said the officer, alarmed and wanting to confirm it, "and I and two or three others will spy on her."

古文：季衡亦终不能扣壁。
现代文：季衡终究也没敲墙壁。
English: After all, Ji Heng did not knock on the wall.

古文：是日，女郎一见季衡，容声惨怛，语声嘶咽，握季衡手曰：何为负约而泄於人？
现代文：这一天，女子一见季衡，面色忧伤，声音嘶哑，握着季衡的手说：为什么违背约定泄露给别人？
English: On this day, when the woman saw Jiheng, her face was sad and her voice was hoarse. She held Jiheng's hand and said, "Why did you break the agreement and leak it to others?

古文：自此不可更接欢笑矣。
现代文：从此不能够再继续欢乐了。
English: I couldn't go on being happy after that.

古文：季衡惭悔，无词以应，女曰：殆非君之过，亦冥数尽耳。
现代文：季衡感到惭愧悔恨，无话回答。女子说：大概不是你的过错，也是冥数完了。
English: Ji Heng felt ashamed and remorseful, and had nothing to say. The woman said: "It's probably not your fault, it's just that the magic number is over."

古文：乃留诗曰：五原分袂真吴越，燕折莺离芳草竭。
现代文：就留给他诗道：五原分袂真吴越，燕拆莺离芳草竭。
English: It was left to him to recite the poem: Wuyue is the true Wuyue of the Five Elements, and Yan is the exhaustion of the fragrant grass.

古文：年少烟花处处春，北邙空恨清秋月。
现代文：年少烟花处处春，北邙空恨清秋月。
English: In the younger years, fireworks are everywhere in spring, and the northern sky hates the clear autumn moon.

古文：季衡不能诗，耻无以酬，乃强为一篇曰：莎草青青雁欲归，玉腮珠泪洒临歧。
现代文：季衡不能写诗，羞愧没有什么酬谢，就免强写了一篇道：莎草青青雁欲归，玉腮珠泪洒临歧。
English: Ji Heng couldn't write a poem, and there was no reward for his shame, so he wrote a poem: The sedge plants and the geese long to return, and the jade ferns and the pearls shed tears of regret.

古文：云鬟飘去香风尽，愁见莺啼红树枝。
现代文：云鬟飘去香风尽，悉见莺啼红树枝。
English: The clouds drift away and the fragrant wind dies down. The branches of the mangrove trees can be seen everywhere.

古文：女遂於襦带，解蹙金结花合子，又抽翠玉双凤翘一只，赠季衡曰：望异日睹物思人，无以幽冥为隔。
现代文：女子从衣带上解下蹙金结花合子，又抽出翠玉双凤翘一只，赠给季衡说：希望他日睹物思人，不要因为幽冥成为阻隔。
English: The woman unfastened the brooch from the belt, took out a jade double phoenix, and gave it to Ji Heng, saying, "I hope he sees the sun and thinks about people, and does not become a barrier because of the darkness."

古文：季衡搜书箧中，得小金缕花如意，酬之。
现代文：季衡在书箱中寻找，找到小金缕花如意，酬谢她。
English: Ji Heng searched in the bookcase, found a small witch hazel and thanked her.

古文：季衡曰：此物虽非珍异，但贵其名如意，愿长在玉手操持耳。
现代文：季衡说：这东西虽然不是珍奇，但是贵在它叫如意，希望在你的手里永久操持。
English: Ji Heng said: Although this thing is not rare, it is precious because it is so named, and I hope to hold it forever in your hands.

古文：又曰：此别何时更会？
现代文：又说，这次分别什么时候再相会？
English: He also said, when will we meet again after this separation?

古文：女曰：非一甲子，无相见期。
现代文：女子说：不是哪一年，没有相见的日期。
English: The woman said: "It's not a year, there's no date.

古文：言讫，呜咽而没。
现代文：说完，哭着就不见了。
English: After saying this, she cried and disappeared.

古文：季衡自此寝寐求思，形体羸瘵。
现代文：季衡从此睡觉也追求思念，身体瘦弱多病。
English: Since then, Ji Heng has been pursuing his dreams while sleeping. His body is weak and sickly.

古文：故旧丈人玉回，推其方术，疗以药石，数日方愈。
现代文：旧友前辈王回，运用他的方术，用药物治疗，几个月才治好。
English: His old friend and predecessor, Wang Hui, used his methods and medication to treat it, and it took several months to get better.

古文：乃询五原纫针妇人，曰：王使君之爱女，不疾而终於此院。今已归葬北邙山，或阴晦而魂游於此，人多见之。
现代文：向五原的一位缝纫妇人询问，她说：是王使君的爱女，没病而死在这个院里，现在已安葬在北邙山，有时阴暗时魂灵就在这里游荡，很多人都看见过她。
English: If you ask a sewing woman in Gohara, she will say, "It was Wang Xizhong's beloved daughter. She did not get sick and died in this courtyard. She is now buried in Beilun Mountain. Sometimes, when it is dark, spirits wander here. Many people have seen her."

古文：则女诗云北邙空恨清秋月也。赵合
现代文：这就是那女子在诗里所说的北邙空恨清秋月。赵合
English: This is what the woman said in the poem, "Beijing's sky hates the Qing dynasty's autumn moon."

古文：进士赵合，貌温气直，行义甚高。
现代文：进士赵合，容貌温和性情直爽，品德高尚。
English: Jin Shi Zhao He was mild-looking, with a straightforward disposition and high moral character.

古文：大和初，游五原。路经沙碛。睹物悲叹。遂饮酒，与仆使并醉，因寝於沙碛。
现代文：大和初年，游览五原，路过沙碛，睹物悲叹，于是喝酒，和仆人都渴醉了，就住在沙碛。
English: In the first year of the Yamato era, he toured the Wuhara region, passed through Shaoshan, saw things and lamented, so he drank alcohol. He and his servants were thirsty and drunk, so he stayed in Shaoshan.

古文：中宵半醒，月色皎然，闻沙中有女子悲吟曰：云鬟消尽转蓬稀，埋骨穷荒无所依。
现代文：半夜睡醒，月色明亮，听到沙中有个女子悲伤地吟道：云鬟消尽转蓬稀，埋骨穷荒无所依。
English: Waking up in the middle of the night, with the moon shining brightly, I heard a woman in the sand mournfully chanting: "The clouds have all disappeared, the clouds have become thin, and there is nowhere to hide.

古文：牧马不嘶沙月白，孤魂空逐雁南飞。
现代文：牧马不嘶沙月白，孤魂空逐雁南飞。
English: The wrangler does not hiss, the sand is white and the moon is white, and the lonely soul flies south.

古文：合遂起而访焉。
现代文：赵合起身拜访她。
English: Zhao He Rong got up to visit her.

古文：果有一女子，年犹未笄。
现代文：果然有一个女子，年纪还未成年，容貌是绝代佳人。
English: Sure enough, there was a girl, still a minor, with the appearance of a perfect beauty.

古文：色绝代，语合曰：某姓李氏，居於奉天。有姊嫁洛源镇帅，因住省焉。道曹党羌所虏。至此挝杀，劫其首饰而去。
现代文：她告诉合说：我姓李，住在奉天，有个姐姐嫁给洛源镇帅，因为前往探视，在路上遭到羌人俘获，至这儿被打死了，抢去了我的首饰逃离。
English: She told him: "My surname is Li, I live in Fengtian. I have a sister who is married to a Luoyuan town marshal. Because I went to visit her, I was captured on the road and beaten to death here. They took my jewelry and fled.

古文：后为路人所悲，掩於沙内，经今三载。
现代文：后来被过路人哀怜，掩埋在沙内，到现在已经三年了。
English: Later, he was mourned by passers-by and buried in the sand. It's been three years now.

古文：知君颇有义心，倘能为归骨於奉天城南小李村，即某家榆耳，当有奉报。
现代文：听说你颇有侠义之心，倘或能把尸骨送回到奉天城南的小李村，就是我的故乡，一定能报答你。
English: I heard that you have a chivalrous heart, and if you can return the bones to Xiao Li Village, south of Fengtian City, which is my hometown, I will definitely repay you.

古文：合许之。
现代文：赵合答应了。
English: Zhao He agreed.

古文：请示其掩骼处，女子感泣告之。
现代文：让她指明掩埋尸骨的地方。女子感谢哭着告诉了他。
English: Asking her to point out where the bones were buried, the woman thanked him and wept as she told him.

古文：合遂收其骨，包於囊中。
现代文：合于是收起她的尸骨，包在口袋里，待候到早晨。
English: So he gathered up her bones, put them in his pocket, and waited until morning.

古文：伺旦，俄有紫衣丈人，跃骑而至，揖合曰：知子仁而义，信而廉。女子启祈，尚有感激。
现代文：不久有个穿紫衣的男子汉，急忙骑马来到，向合拱揖道：知道你仁而义，信而廉，女子开始请求，还有感激。
English: Before long, a man in a purple robe arrived on horseback in a hurry and said to Xiang He, "Knowing that you are kind and righteous, trustworthy and honest, the woman began to ask for and thank you.

古文：我李文悦尚书也，元和十三年，曾守五原。
现代文：我是李文悦尚书。
English: My name is Li Wenyue Shangshu.

古文：为犬戎三十万围逼城池之四隅，兵各厚十数里，连弩洒雨，飞梯排云。穿壁决濠，昼夜攻击。
现代文：元和十三年，曾经驻守五原，被犬戎的三十万大军包围逼近城池的四角，士兵各厚十几里，连续发出的箭象下雨，飞梯排云一般，穿墙掘沟，昼夜攻击。
English: Yuan and 13 years, once stationed in Wuhuan, surrounded by three hundred thousand troops of Injun Rong, approaching the four corners of the city, soldiers each more than ten miles thick, arrows sent continuously like rain, flying ladders like clouds, digging trenches through walls, attacking day and night.

古文：城中负户而汲者，矢如蝟毛。
现代文：城里靠窗取水的，被箭射中象蝟毛。
English: He drew water at a window in the city, and was shot through with arrows like a badger.

古文：当其时，御捍之兵，才三千。激厉其居人，妇女老幼负土而立者，不知寒馁。
现代文：那个时候，防御的士兵，才三千人，激励那居住的人，妇女老幼站立的，不知道冷饿。
English: At that time, the defending soldiers, only three thousand, inspired the people who lived there, women, old and young, standing, not knowing cold or hunger.

古文：犬戎於城北造独脚楼，高数十丈，城中巨细，咸得窥之。
现代文：犬戎在城北建造了独脚楼，高几十丈，城里的详细情况，都能看见。
English: Injun Rong built a one-storey building in the north of the city, dozens of meters high, and the details of the city can be seen.

古文：某遂设奇计，定中其楼立碎。
现代文：我于是设奇计，真的打中那楼立刻粉碎。
English: So I devised a plan to really hit the building and immediately smash it.

古文：羌酋愕然，以为神功。
现代文：羌的头领非常吃惊。认为是神功。
English: The leader of the baboons was very surprised. He thought it was a miracle.

古文：又语城中人曰：慎勿拆屋烧，吾且为汝取薪，积於城下，许人钓上。
现代文：又对城中人说：千万别拆房子当柴烧，我将给你们寻柴禾，堆在城下。许多人把些禾钓上城。
English: And he said unto them that were in the city, Destroy not the houses, lest they be consumed with fire: and I will give you wood and heap it under the city; and many shall go into the city for to burn it with fire.

古文：又太阴稍晦，即闻城之四隅，多有人物行动，声言云：夜攻城耳。
现代文：又有一天特别阴暗，就听到城的四角，有很多人行动，声言说：夜间攻城了！
English: And it came to pass on another day, when it was very dark, that the four corners of the city heard the noise of a great multitude making much ado, and saying, The city is come into the night.

古文：城中慑慓，不敢暂安。
现代文：城中人非常恐惧，不敢暂且安歇。
English: The people of the city were very afraid and did not dare to rest for a while.

古文：某曰：不然。
现代文：我说：不是这样！
English: I said: that's not true!

古文：潜以铁索下烛而照之，乃空驱牛羊行胁其城，兵士稍安。
现代文：偷偷地用铁索下去用烛光照它，是空赶着牛羊走威胁那城池。兵士稍微安稳。
English: Sneaking down with an iron rope and lighting it with a candle, it was the sky that drove the cattle and sheep to threaten the city pond. The soldiers were a little safe.

古文：又西北隅被攻，摧十余丈。将遇昏晦，群胡大喜，纵酒狂歌，云：候明晨而入。
现代文：又一天西北城角被击，摧毁十多丈，将要到天黑群胡非常高兴，纵情喝酒狂歌乱舞，说：等到明天早晨就攻进城！
English: Another day, the northwest corner of the city was hit, destroying more than a dozen buildings, and it was going to be dark. Gu Gu was very happy, indulging in drinking and dancing wildly, saying: Wait until tomorrow morning to attack the city!

古文：某以马弩五百张而拟之，遂下皮墙障之。
现代文：我用马弩五百张而模仿它，于是放下皮墙阻挡。
English: I imitated it with five hundred stirrups, so I put down the leather wall to block it.

古文：一夕，併工暗筑，不使有声，涤之以水。
现代文：一天晚上，同时用人暗地修筑，不让有声音，用水浇上。
English: One night, at the same time, someone was secretly building it, not allowing any sound, and pouring water on it.

古文：时寒，来日冰坚，城之莹如银，不可攻击。
现代文：当时天寒，第二天成为坚冰，城墙象银子一样晶莹，不可攻击。
English: At that time, the sky was cold, and the next day it became hard ice. The city wall was as crystal clear as silver, and could not be attacked.

古文：又羌酋建大将之旗，乃赞普所赐，立之於五花营内。
现代文：又一天，羌头建大将的旗帜，是赞普所赐给的，立在五花营内。
English: The next day, Shantou General Jian's banner, which was given to him by Zampu, was erected in the camp of the Five Flowers.

古文：某夜穿壁而夺之如飞，众羌号泣，誓请还前掳掠之人，而赎其旗。纵其长幼妇女百余人，得其尽归。
现代文：我夜里穿墙而夺取它象飞一样回来。众羌兵号啕痛哭，宣称用以前掳去的人，换回那大旗，释放那老少妇女一百多人，能够全部回去。
English: I went through the wall in the night and took it back like a fly. The crowd of soldiers cried bitterly, declaring that they would exchange the people they had previously captured, return the flag, and release the more than one hundred old and young women, so that they could all go back.

古文：然后掷旗而还之。
现代文：然后投掷旗还给他们。
English: He then threw the flag back to them.

古文：时邠泾救兵二万人临其境，股慓不进。
现代文：当时邠泾救兵两万多人面对那境界，两腿发抖不敢前进。
English: At that time, more than twenty thousand rescue soldiers faced the border, their legs trembling and not daring to advance.

古文：如此相持三十七日。羌酋乃遥拜曰：此城内有神将，吾今不敢欺。
现代文：如此相持三十七天，羌头遥远拜道：这城内有神将，我现在不敢欺悔他。
English: For thirty-seven days they held each other in this way, and Shantou, far away, prayed: There is a god in this city, and I dare not deceive him now.

古文：遂卷甲而去。
现代文：于是收兵离去。
English: So they withdrew their troops and left.

古文：不信宿，达宥州，一昼而攻破其城。老少三万人，尽遭掳去。
现代文：不到两夜，到达宥州，一天就攻破了那城，老少三万人，都被掳去。
English: In less than two nights, they reached Yuzhou, and in one day they broke through the city. Thirty thousand people, both young and old, were taken captive.

古文：以此厉害，则余之功及斯城不细。
现代文：凭着这种利益和害处的比较，那么我对这个城的功劳是不小的。
English: Based on this comparison of benefits and harms, then I owe a great deal to this city.

古文：但当对时相，使余不得仗节出此城，空加一貂蝉耳。
现代文：但是当时的宰相，让我不能拿着符节离开这城，空赏给一个美女。
English: But the prime minister at the time wouldn't let me leave the city with the amulet and give it to a beautiful woman.

古文：余闻锺陵韦夫人，旧筑一堤，将防水潦，后三十年，尚有百姓及廉问周公感其功，而奏立德政碑峨然。
现代文：我所说钏陵的韦夫人，从前修筑了一个大堤，要防水灾，三十年后，还有百姓和廉访使周公，感谢好的功德而上奏给立了巍峨的德政碑。
English: Mrs. Wei of Fuling, as I said, once built a large dike to prevent water disasters. Thirty years later, the people and corrupt officials of Zhou Gong, thanks to their good deeds, erected a towering monument to virtue.

古文：若余当守壁不坚，城中之人，尽为羌胡之贱隶，岂存今日子孙乎？
现代文：如果我那时守城不牢固，都将成为羌胡的卑贱的奴隶，哪能有现在的子孙呢？
English: If I hadn't defended the city well back then, we would all have become the lowly slaves of Menghu. How could we have the children and grandchildren we have now?

古文：知子有心，请白其百姓，讽其州尊，与立德政碑足矣。
现代文：知道你是有心的人，请先诉那百姓，委婉劝说那州官，给立个德政碑就心满意足了。
English: Knowing that you are a person with a heart, please first sue the people and gently persuade the state officials to erect a monument of virtue, and your heart will be satisfied.

古文：言讫，长揖而退。
现代文：说完，长长拱揖而离去。
English: After saying this, he walked away with a long bow.

古文：合即受教，就五原。
现代文：赵合接受了指教，到了五原，把这事告诉了百姓和刺史。
English: Zhao He accepted the instruction, and when he arrived at Wuhuan, he told this to the people and the magistrate.

古文：以语百姓及刺史，俱以为妖，不听，惆账而返。
现代文：都认为是妖言惑众，不听信。赵合失望地返回，到了沙中。
English: Zhao He returned disappointed and went to the middle of the sand.

古文：至沙中，又逢昔日神人，谢合曰：君为言，五原无知之俗，刺史不明，此城当有火灾。
现代文：又遇见从前的神人，感谢赵合说：你给说明了，五原无知的百姓，刺史不贤明，这个城一定有火灾。
English: He also met a godman from the past, thanked Zhao He and said: You have explained that the five original ignorant people are not wise in history, and there must be a fire in this city.

古文：方与祈求幽府，吾言於五原之事，不谐，此意亦息。
现代文：我正想祈求天幽府，我告诉五原的事不能随心，这种想法也就停止了。
English: I just wanted to pray to the Heavenly Palace. I told Gohara that I couldn't do whatever I wanted, and this thought stopped.

古文：其祸不三旬而及矣。
现代文：那灾祸不超过三旬就要发生了。
English: The calamity will occur no later than the third trimester.

古文：言讫而没，果如期灾生。五原城馑死万人，老幼相食。
现代文：说完就不见了。果然按期发生了灾祸，五原城里饿死的有一万多人，老少互相吃。
English: After he said this, he disappeared. As expected, the disaster occurred on schedule. More than 10,000 people died of starvation in Wuhuan City, and the old and the young ate each other.

古文：合挈女骸骨至奉天，访得小李村而葬之。
现代文：赵合带着女子的尸骨到达奉天，找到小李村而埋葬了她。
English: Zhao He arrived in Fengtian with the woman's bones, found Xiao Li Cun and buried her.

古文：明日道侧，合遇昔日之女子来谢而言曰：感君之义，吾大父乃贞元得道之士，有《演参同契续混元经》，子能穷之，龙虎之丹，不日而成矣。
现代文：第二天在道边，赵合遇到了从前的女子前来拜谢并对他说：感谢你的恩义，我祖父是贞之年间得道的人，有演参同契续混之经。你能读完，龙虎丹药，不久就能成功。
English: On the roadside the next day, Zhao He met a former woman who came to offer thanks and said to him: "Thank you for your kindness. My grandfather was a man who received the Tao in the age of Zhen, and he had a sutra of the same name. If you can finish reading it, you will soon succeed.

古文：合受之，女子已没。
现代文：赵合接受了它，女子就不见了。
English: Zhao He accepted it, and the woman disappeared.

古文：合遂舍举，究其玄微，居於少室。烧之一年，皆使瓦砾为金宝；二年，能起毙者；三年能度进。
现代文：赵合就放弃了求举之事，研究那部经书的玄妙，住在少室山，炼了一年龙虎丹，就能使瓦砾变成金宝山；两年后，能让死者回生；三年后，吃它能超脱现世。
English: Zhao He gave up the matter of seeking a promotion, studied the mystery of that scripture, lived in Shomuro Mountain, and refined dragon and tiger for one year, which could turn the rubble into a golden mountain; after two years, he could bring the dead back to life; after three years, he could eat it and transcend this world.

古文：今时有人遇之於嵩岭耳。韦安之
现代文：现在还常有人在嵩岭遇见他。韦安之
English: Even now, people often meet him in Songling.

古文：韦安之者，河阳人，时至阳翟，拟往少室寻师。
现代文：韦安之是河阳人，当时到了阳翟，打算到少室寻拜老师。
English: Wei Anzhi, a native of Heyang, was impotent at the time and planned to go to the juvenile detention center to find a teacher.

古文：至登封，逢一人，问欲何往，曰：吾姓张名道，家金乡，欲往少室山读书。
现代文：到达登封，遇见一人，问要到哪里去。说：我姓张名字叫道，家在金乡，想要到少室山读书。
English: When he arrived in Dengfeng, he met a man who asked him where he wanted to go. He said, "My family name is Zhang. My home is in Jinxiang. I want to go to Shomuroshan to study."

古文：安之亦通姓字。所往一志，乃约为兄弟，安之年长，为兄。
现代文：安之也道报了姓名，向往的志向是一样的，于是结为兄弟。安之年龄大，做哥哥。
English: Anzhi also reported his name, aspiring to be the same, so they became brothers. Anzhi is older, so he is an older brother.

古文：同入少室，师李潜。
现代文：一起到少室，拜李潜为师。
English: At one time, he was assigned to a junior high school, where he studied under Li Qian.

古文：经一年，张道博学精通，为学流之首。
现代文：经过一年，张道学识广博学业精进，是学生们中的第一。
English: After one year, Zhang Dao has become more knowledgeable and diligent in his studies, and is the first among the students.

古文：一日。语安之曰：兄事业全未，从今去五载，方成名，官亦不过县佐。
现代文：一天，他告诉安之说：兄的事业还没有完成，从现在开始还得五年，才能成名，官也不过是个县佐。
English: One day, he told Anzhi, "My brother's career is not yet complete. It will take five years from now for him to become famous. An official is nothing more than a prefectural deputy."

古文：安之惊异曰：弟何以知之？
现代文：安之惊异道：弟凭什么知道？
English: Anzhi's surprise: How could his brother know?

古文：道曰：余非人，乃冥司主典也。泰岳主者欲重用，为以才识尚寡，给一年假於人间学。今年限已满，功业稍成，将辞君去。慎勿泄於人。
现代文：张道说：我不是人，是冥司的主典，泰岳主要重用我，认为我才识还少，给一年的假，到人间学习，现在年限已满，功业稍有成就，将要辞别你而去，千万不要泄露给别人。
English: Zhang Dao said: I am not a person, I am the main author of the myth, Taiyue mainly reuses me, thinks I know too little, gives me a year's leave to study on earth, now the year is over, my work is slightly accomplished, I am going to leave you, don't leak it to others.

古文：言讫，辞其师。
现代文：说完，辞别他的老师。
English: Saying goodbye to his teacher.

古文：安之送道下山，涕泣而别。
现代文：安之送张道下山，哭泣分别。
English: After seeing off Ahn, they walked down the mountain, crying separately.

古文：道曰：君成名之后，有急，当呼道，必可救矣。
现代文：张道说：你成名以后，有急难，要呼唤我，一定能够救你。
English: Zhang Dao said, "After you became famous, you were in dire straits. If you wanted to call me, I would definitely be able to save you."

古文：安之五年乃赴举。其年擢第，授杭州於潜县尉，被州遣部物，将抵河阴。
现代文：安之五年后才去考举，那年考中，授给杭州於潜县尉，被州派遣到外地。
English: It was five years before An went to take the examination. In the middle school examination that year, he was awarded the title of "Hangzhou Submerged County Lieutenant" and was sent to other places by the state.

古文：至淇泽浦，为淮盗来劫。
现代文：将要到河阴，到达淇泽浦，被淮盗抢劫。
English: He will have to go to Hexin, arrive at Qizepu, and be robbed by Huai.

古文：安之遂虔启於道，俄而雷雨暴至，群盗皆溺。
现代文：安之就虔诚地呼唤张。一会雷雨突然到来，群盗都被淹没。
English: Anzhi piously called for Zhang. A thunderstorm suddenly arrived, and the bandits were all drowned.

古文：安之为龙兴县丞卒。
现代文：安之做龙兴县丞时死。
English: An died while serving as the Longxing County magistrate.

古文：李佐文
现代文：李佐文
English: Li Zuowen

古文：南阳临湍县北界，秘书郎袁测、襄阳椽王汧皆止别业。
现代文：南阳临湍县北边，秘书郎袁测、襄阳掾王汧都建立了别墅。
English: On the north side of Nanyang Linyi County, secretaries Lang Yuan Jie and Xiangyang Jie Wang Jie both built villas.

古文：大和六年，客有李佐文者，旅食二庄。
现代文：大和六年，有个客人李佐文，寄食二庄。
English: In the sixth year of the Yamato era, there was a guest, Li Zuwen, who sent food to Nizhuang.

古文：佐文琴棋之流，颇为袁、王之所爱。
现代文：佐文是个擅长琴棋的人，袁、王很喜欢他。
English: Sawen is a good player of the piano, and Yuan and Wang like him very much.

古文：佐文一日向暮，将止袁庄。
现代文：佐文一天将晚时，要到袁庄休息。
English: At the end of the day, Zuo Wen had to go to Yuanzhuang to rest.

古文：仆夫抱衾前去，不一二里，阴风骤起，寒埃昏晦。
现代文：仆夫抱着被先走了。没走到一二里，冷风突然刮起。天昏地暗一会夜漆黑。
English: The servant was led away in his arms. Before they had gone a mile or two, a cold wind suddenly blew. The sky darkened and for a while the night was pitch black.

古文：俄而夜黑，劣乘独行，迷误甚远。
现代文：佐文乘着劣马独自行进，迷失道路很远。
English: Sawon rode a poor horse and traveled alone. The lost road was far away.

古文：约三更，晦稍息，数里之外，遥见火烛。
现代文：大约三更天，昏黑稍微停止，几里地外，远远看见灯光。
English: About three days later, the darkness stopped a little, and I saw lights a few miles away.

古文：佐文向明而至，至则野中回舍，卑狭颇甚。
现代文：佐文向亮处走去，到了眼前一看却是荒野中几间陋室，很低矮狭窄。
English: Sawen walked towards the light, but in front of his eyes he saw several very low and narrow huts in the wilderness.

古文：中有田叟，织芒。
现代文：屋里有个年老的农民，正在编织草鞋。
English: Inside, an old farmer is knitting straw sandals.

古文：佐文逊辞请讬，久之。
现代文：佐文恭顺地请求投宿，很久才请进门。
English: Sawon obediently asked for lodging, and it was a long time before he was let in.

古文：方延入户，叟云：此多豺狼，客马不宜远絷。
现代文：老头说：这里豺狼很多，客人的马不要在远处系缚。
English: The old man said, "There are a lot of jackals here. Don't tether your guest's horse far away.

古文：佐文因移檐下，迫火而憩。
现代文：佐文于是移到檐下，靠近火而休息。
English: Savin then moved under the eaves, resting close to the fire.

古文：叟曰：容本何诣而来此？
现代文：老头说：客人因为什么原因而来到这里？
English: The old man said: For what reason did the guests come here?

古文：佐文告之，叟哂曰：此去袁庄，乖於极矣。然必俟晓，方可南归。
现代文：佐文告诉了他。老头微笑首说：这里距离袁庄，相隔很远，这样必须等到天亮，向南去才能到达。
English: Zuo Wen told him. The old man smiled and said: "This is far from Yuan Zhuang, it is very far apart, so you have to wait until dawn and go south to reach it.

古文：而叟之坐后，纬萧障下，时闻稚儿啼号甚痛，每发声，叟即曰：儿可止，事已如此，悲哭奈何？
现代文：老头坐下后，草帘子屏障下边常常传出小孩非常悲痛的啼哭声。每当发出哭声，老头就说：孩儿应该停止，事已如此，悲哭能怎么样？
English: After the old man sat down, the wailing of a very sad child often came from under the grass curtain barrier. Whenever a cry was emitted, the old man said: The child should stop, that's it, how can crying be sad?

古文：俄则复啼，叟辄以前语解之。
现代文：一会儿又哭，老头还用前边的话劝说。
English: After a while, he started crying again, and the old man tried to persuade him with the previous words.

古文：佐文不谕，从而诘之，叟则低回他说。
现代文：佐文不明白，问他。老头就纡回曲折说其他的事情。
English: Sawen didn't understand, so he asked him. The old man went back and forth about other things.

古文：佐文因曰：孩幼苦寒，何不携之近火？
现代文：佐文于是说：孩子小怕冷，为什么不领他靠近火？
English: Sawen then said: The child is afraid of the cold, why not bring him closer to the fire?

古文：如此数四，叟则携致就炉，乃八九岁村女子耳。
现代文：如此多次，老头就领她靠近火炉，是个八九岁的农村女孩。
English: So many times, the old man led her to the stove. She was an eighty-nine-year-old rural girl.

古文：见客初无羞骇，但以物画灰，若抱沈恨。
现代文：看见客人开始没有害羞和惊怕，只是用东西画灰，象怀着深深的怨恨。
English: At the sight of the guests, he was no longer shy and frightened, but began to draw ashes with something, as if with deep resentment.

古文：忽而怨咽惊号，叟则又以前语解之。
现代文：忽然悲哭惊号。老头就又用前边的话劝她。
English: She suddenly burst into tears. The old man tried to persuade her with the previous words.

古文：佐文问之，终不得其情。
现代文：佐文问他，终究不能得到那实情。
English: Sawon asked him, unable to get the truth after all.

古文：须叟平晓，叟即遥指东南乔求曰：彼袁庄也，去此十里而近。
现代文：不久天亮，老头就远远指着东南的乔木说：那就是袁庄，离这有十里远近。
English: Soon after dawn, the old man pointed to a tree far to the southeast and said, "That's Yuanzhuang. It's about ten miles away from here."

古文：佐文上马四顾，乃穷荒大野，曾无人迹，独田叟一室耳。
现代文：佐文上马向四下看，是片很大的荒野，不曾有人的痕迹，只有田叟一座房子。
English: Sawen got on his horse and looked around. It was a vast wilderness. There was no sign of people, only a house in the field.

古文：行三数里，逢村妇，携酒一壶，纸钱副焉。
现代文：走了三里多，遇到一个村妇，带着一壶酒，纸钱和一些附带的东西。
English: After walking more than three miles, I met a village woman carrying a jug of wine, paper money and some incidentals.

古文：见佐文曰：此是巨泽，道无人。客凌晨何自来也？
现代文：看见佐文说：这是巨泽，路上没人，客人一清早从哪里来的？
English: Saw Sawon and said: This is Kouzawa, there's no one on the road, where did the guests come from in the early morning?

古文：佐文具白其事，妇乃附膺长号曰：孰为人鬼之遇耶？
现代文：佐文把那事全告诉了她。村妇就拍胸大哭道：为什么人和鬼能在路上相遇呢？
English: Sawen told her the whole story. The village woman beat her chest and cried loudly: Why can people and ghosts meet on the road?

古文：佐文细询之，其妇曰：若客云去夜所寄宿之室，则我亡夫之殡闾耳。
现代文：佐文细问她，那村妇道：象客人说的昨晚寄宿的房子，是我亡夫的殡闾。
English: Sawen asked her in detail, the village woman said: As the guest said, the boarding house last night was my late husband's funeral home.

古文：我佣居袁庄七年矣。前春，夫暴疾而卒。翌日，始龀之女又亡。
现代文：我受人雇用住在袁庄七年了，前年春天，丈夫得急病死去，第二天，才七岁的女儿又死了。
English: I have been hired to live in Yuanzhuang for seven years. Last spring, my husband died of sudden illness, and the next day, my seven-year-old daughter died.

古文：贫究无力，父子同瘗焉。
现代文：因为贫穷没有能力，父子一起埋葬。
English: Because poverty has no power, father and son were buried together.

古文：守制嫠居，官不免税，孤穷无托，遂意再行。今夕将适他门，故来夫女之瘗告诀耳。
现代文：我尊守丧规寡居，官府不给免税，孤独穷困没有依托，就想再嫁，今天晚上将要嫁到别人家，所以来到丈夫女儿的葬地告别。
English: I respect the rules of mourning, I am a widow, the government does not give tax exemption, I am lonely and poor without support, I want to remarry, tonight I will marry someone else's home, so I came to the burial place of my husband's daughter to say goodbye.

古文：佐文则与同往，比至昨暮之室，乃殡宫也，历历踪由，分明可复。
现代文：佐文就和她一同前往，等到了昨晚的房子，是个殡宫，经由的踪迹历历在目，分明可以踏着再走。
English: Sawen went with her and waited until they reached last night's house. It was a funeral parlor, and the trail leading there was clearly visible, so they could continue on foot.

古文：妇乃号恸，泪如绠縻。
现代文：村妇就号啕大哭，泪如绳索。
English: The village woman burst into tears, tears like ropes.

古文：因弃生业，剪发于临湍佛寺，役力誓死焉。
现代文：于是她放弃了谋生之业，在临湍佛寺剪掉头发，劳苦出力发誓到死。
English: So she gave up her livelihood, cut off her hair at the Linyi Buddhist Temple, and vowed to work until she died.

古文：其妇姓王，开成四年，客有见者。
现代文：那个妇女姓王，开成四年，有人看见过她。
English: The woman, surnamed Wang, has been missing for four years. Someone has seen her.

古文：胡急
现代文：胡急
English: Hu Qiu

古文：安定胡急，家于河东郡，以文学知名。
现代文：安定的胡急，家住在河东郡，以文章学问出名，大和七年春考中进士。
English: Hu Qiu, who is stable and lives in Hedong County, is famous for his academic articles. He won a prize in the spring examination of the seventh year of the Great Leap Forward.

古文：大和七年春登进士第，时贾餗为礼部侍郎。
现代文：当时贾餗任礼部待郎。
English: At that time, Jia Jia was appointed as Reibu Machiro.

古文：后二年，文宗皇帝擢餗相国事。
现代文：两年后，文宗皇帝提拔贾餗做相国。
English: Two years later, Emperor Wenzong promoted Jia Jun to the position of consort of the emperor.

古文：是岁冬十月，京兆乱，餗与宰臣涯已下，俱遁去，有诏捕甚急。
现代文：这年冬天十月份，京城叛乱，贾餗和宰臣涯被打败，一起逃走。
English: In October of that winter, when the capital rebelled, Jia Yu and Zaisengai were defeated and fled together.

古文：时中贵人仇士良，护左禁军，命部将执兵以穷其迹。
现代文：皇上有诏书捉拿很紧急，当时宦官仇士良，监领左禁军，命令部将带兵极力寻求他们踪迹。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict that it was urgent to capture them. At that time, the eunuch Qiu Shiliang, the commander of the Left Forbidden Army, and the commanding general led the troops to vigorously search for their traces.

古文：部将谓士良曰：胡急受贾餗恩。今当匿在急所。愿骁健士五百，环其居以取之。
现代文：部将对士良说：胡急承受贾餗的恩惠，现在应该藏在胡急家，愿带领五百名勇猛矫健的士兵，包围他的住所捉取他。
English: The minister said to Shiliang, "Hu Qiu is the beneficiary of Jia Wei's favor, and now he should hide in Hu Qiu's house. He is willing to lead five hundred brave and vigorous soldiers to surround his house and capture him."

古文：士良可其请，於是部将拥兵至急门，召急出，厉声道：贾餗在君家，君宜立出，不然，与餗同罪。
现代文：士良允许了他的请求。于是部将率领士兵到达胡急家门。召唤胡急出来，厉声叫道：贾餗在你家，你要立刻把他放出来！不这样，与贾餗同罪！
English: Shiliang allowed his request. So the commander led the soldiers to Hu Jia's home. He called Hu Jia out and shouted: "Jia Chen is in your home, you must release him immediately! Otherwise, you are guilty of the same crime as Jia Chen!"

古文：急度其势不可以理屈，抗辞拒之。
现代文：胡急考虑他的来势不能用道理说服，就严辞拒绝。
English: Thinking that his offer could not be reasoned with, Hu refused it.

古文：部将怒，执急诣士良，戮于辕门之外。
现代文：部将大怒，捉拿胡急到士良处，杀死在辕门外。
English: The commander was furious, arrested Hu Qiu and took him to Shiliang, where he was killed outside the city gate.

古文：时急弟湘在河东郡，是日，湘及家人，见一人无首，衣绿衣，衣有血濡之迹，自门而入，步至庭。
现代文：当时胡急的弟弟胡湘在河东郡，这天，胡湘和家人看见一个人没有头，穿着绿衣，衣服上有血染的痕迹，从门面进入，走到庭院。
English: At that time, Hu Qiu's younger brother Hu Xiang was in Hedong County. On that day, Hu Xiang and his family saw a man without a head, wearing a green coat, with bloodstained marks on his clothes, enter through the front door and walk to the courtyard.

古文：湘大怒，命家人逐之，遽不见。
现代文：胡湘大怒，命令家人驱逐他，立刻就不见了。
English: Hu Xiang flew into a rage, ordered his family to expel him, and immediately disappeared.

古文：后三日，而急之凶闻至
现代文：三天后，胡急的死讯就到了。
English: Three days later, the news of Hu's death arrived.

