古文：初六日饭而行。
现代文：初六日吃了饭后出发。
English: On the 6th day of the first month, after eating dinner, we set off.

古文：出东门，五里，一山突于路北，武水亦北向至，路由山南水北转山嘴复东南去。
现代文：走出城东门，五里，一座山突立在路北边，武水也向北流来，路从山南边延伸。水向北边转过山嘴，又往东南流去，路折往东北。
English: Going out of the east gate of the city, for five miles, a hillock stood on the north side of the road, and the water also flowed northward, and the road extended from the south side of the mountain. The water turned northward over the mountain mouth, and flowed southeastward, and the road turned to the northeast.

古文：路折而东北，一里，一路直北，乃桂阳间道；一岐东北，乃宜章道也。
现代文：一里后，一条路直朝北去，这是通往桂阳州的小路；一条路岔往东北，它是去宜章县的路。
English: After one mile, one road goes straight north, which is the path to Guiyang Prefecture; one road goes northeast, which is the road to Yizhang County.

古文：三里至阿皮洞，武溪复北折而来，经其东北去。
现代文：三里到阿皮洞，武溪又折往北流来，经过阿皮洞的东北面流去，溪水西面有几家居民。
English: Three miles to Api-dong, Wuxi flows north again, passing the northeast side of Api-dong, and there are several residents on the west side of the stream.

古文：水西有居民数家，从此渡桥东上牛庙岭，俱寂无村落矣。
现代文：从此处跨过桥往东攀上牛庙岭，就都是一片荒寂，没有村落。
English: From here across the bridge to the east to climb the Niu Miao Ling, it is all desolation, no villages.

古文：逾岭下四里，为川州水凉亭。
现代文：越岭往下走四里，是川州水凉亭。
English: Cross the ridge and walk down for four miles, it is the Chuanzhou Water Pavilion.

古文：又五里，升降山谷，为桐木郎桥。
现代文：又从山谷中上上下下跋涉五里，到桐木郎桥。
English: They also trekked five miles up and down from the middle of the valley to the Kiri Bridge.

古文：桥下去水，自南而北，其发源当自秀岩穿穴之水也。
现代文：桥下流淌的水，自南而北，它的源头应当是从秀岩穿过石穴流出来的水。
English: The water flowing under the bridge flows from south to north, and its source should be the water flowing from the rocks through the caves.

古文：桥东有古碑，大书飞白，为广福桥。
现代文：桥东面有块古碑，飞白大字写着 广福桥 三字。
English: There is an ancient monument on the east side of the bridge, with the words "Guangfu Bridge" written in large white letters.

古文：其书甚遒劲，为宋桂阳军知临武县事曾晞颜所书。
现代文：字体非常遒劲，是宋代桂阳军临武县知县曾烯颜书写的。
English: The font is very vigorous. It was written by the Song Dynasty Guiyang Army Linwu County Zhixian Zeng Renyan.

古文：从此南而东上一岭，又东向循山半行五里，路忽四岐，乃不东而从北。
现代文：从此处向南而后往东登上一座岭，又向东顺半山腰走五里，路忽然岔向四个方向，于是我们不从东而从北面的路走。
English: From here, we walked south and then east up a ridge, and then walked east along the mid-mountain for five miles. The road suddenly forked in four directions, so we walked not from the east but from the north.

古文：下岭，又东从山坞行五里，为牛行。
现代文：下了岭，又往东从山坞中走五里，为牛行。
English: After descending the ridge, I walked five miles eastward from the dockyard to the cattle line.

古文：牛行人烟不多，散处山谷。
现代文：牛行人烟不多，民户散居在山谷中。
English: There aren't many cattle or pedestrians, and people live scattered throughout the valley.

古文：盖大路从四岐直东，俱高岭无人，而此为小路，便于中火耳。
现代文：大路从四条岔路中的东边那条直走，一路都是高大的山岭无人居住，我们所走的是小路，便于中途找人家烧火做饭。
English: The main road goes straight from the eastern side of the four branch roads, and all the way are high mountains and uninhabited. What we are taking is a small road, so it is easy to find someone halfway to cook.

古文：由牛行又东，从小径登岭。
现代文：由牛行又往东走，从小路登上岭。
English: From Niu Xing, walk east again and climb up the ridge from the path.

古文：逾而下，三里，为小源，亦有村民数家。
现代文：越过岭下去，走三里，为小源，也有几家村民住着。
English: Cross the ridge and walk three miles to Xiaoyuan, where several villagers live.

古文：从此又东北逾二岭而下，共五里，为水下。
现代文：从此处又往东北翻过两座岭而往下走，共五里，到水下。
English: From here, we went northeast, over two ridges and down, a total of five miles, to the water.

古文：遇一人，言： 水下至凤集铺止三里，而岭荒多盗，必得送者乃可行。 
现代文：遇到一人，他对我们说： 水下到凤集铺只有三里，但岭间荒僻而盗贼多，一定要找得护送的人才可以走。 
English: When we met one person, he said to us: "It's only three miles underwater to the phoenix market, but the ridge is desolate and there are many thieves, so we must find someone who can escort us.

古文：余乃饭于水下村家，其人为我觅送者不得，遂东南一里，复南上小径，连逾二岭，则铺在山头矣。
现代文：于是我在水下村民家吃了饭，那人为我找护送的人然而未找到，我们便往东南走，一里后，又往南从一条小路上攀爬，接连翻过两座岭，见释铺就在山头上。
English: So I ate a meal at the underwater villager's house. The person who was looking for an escort for me, however, was not found, so we walked to the southeast. After one mile, we climbed south from a path and climbed over two mountains in succession, and we found Shibuya right at the top of the mountain.

古文：其铺正在岭侧脊，是为临武、宜章东西界，而铺亭颓落，寂无一家。
现代文：此铺正好在岭侧的山脊上，铺所在处为临武、宜章两县的东西分界地，但铺亭倾塌衰败，荒寂而无一户人家居住。
English: This shop is right on the ridge on the side of the ridge. The shop is located on the east-west border between the two counties of Linwu and Yizhang. However, the shop collapsed and fell into disrepair. It was desolate and not a single family lived there.

古文：乃东下岭，转而东北行。
现代文：于是往东走下岭，转往东北行。
English: So I walked east down the ridge and turned to the northeast.

古文：二里，始有村落，在小溪西。
现代文：两里，才有村落，在小溪的西边。
English: The village is only two miles away, on the west side of the stream.

古文：渡溪桥，而东北循水下二里，至锁石，村落甚盛。
现代文：跨过溪上的桥，往东北顺溪水向下行两里，到锁石，这里村落很繁盛。
English: Across the bridge over the stream, two miles downstream along the stream to the northeast, to Lock Rock, where the village is very prosperous.

古文：北望有大山高穹，是为麻田大岭。
现代文：朝北望去，有大山高高隆起，这是麻田大岭。
English: Looking to the north, there is a large mountain high rise, this is the Asada ridge.

古文：由锁石北上岭，三里过社山，两峰圆削峙，一尖圆而一斜突，为锁石水口。
现代文：从锁石往北登上岭，走三里经过社山，有两座圆而陡削的山峰耸立着，一座尖圆而另一座倾斜突兀，两峰相夹处为锁石的水们。
English: From the Keystone to the north up the ridge, walk three miles past Sheshan, there are two round and steep peaks, one pointed and the other inclined, and the two peaks are the waters of the Keystone.

古文：由其东下岭二里，则武溪复自北而南，路与之遇。
现代文：从锁石水口东面朝岭下走两里，武溪又自北而南流来，路与溪水相交汇，这才沿溪南岸往东走。
English: After walking for two miles from the east side of the Zhoushi water outlet to the morning ridge, Wuxi River flowed from north to south, and the road and the stream water intersected, so I walked east along the south bank of the stream.

古文：乃循溪南东行，溪复转而北，溪北环成一坪，是为孙车坪，涯际有小舟舶焉。
现代文：溪又折往北，溪北岸山水环抱形成一块平地，这是孙车坪，溪边有小船停泊着。
English: The stream turns north again, and the north bank of the stream is surrounded by mountains and water to form a flat land. This is Sun Cheping. There is a small boat moored by the stream.

古文：即从溪南转入山峡，一里，南上一岭，曰车带岭。
现代文：我们便从溪南边转进山峡中，走一里，往南上了一座岭，叫车带岭。
English: We turned from the south side of the stream into the gorge, walked one mile, went south to a ridge, and called a car to take us to the ridge.

古文：其岭嶕嵌而荒，行者俱为危言。
现代文：岭高而荒凉，行人都讲的是如何如何危险的话。
English: The ridge is high and desolate, pedestrians are talking about how dangerous it is.

古文：余不顾，直上一里半，登其巅，东望隐隐有斑黄之色，不辨其为云为山，而麻田大岭已在其北矣。
现代文：我不顾这些，直朝上走一里半，登上岭的顶端，往东望去，远处隐隐地有斑黄色，辨不出是云还是山，而麻田大岭已经在它的北面了。
English: In spite of all this, I walked straight up for a mile and a half, climbed to the top of the ridge, and looked to the east. In the distance, there were faint yellow spots. I couldn't tell whether it was a cloud or a mountain, and the Asada ridge was already north of it.

古文：下岭里半，有溪流淙淙，其侧石穴中，有泉一池，自穴顶下注，清泠百倍溪中，乃掬而饮之，以溪水盥焉。
现代文：朝岭下走一里半，有条溪流涂涂流淌，溪侧面的石穴中，有一池泉水，从石穴顶上流下来，清爽寒凉胜过溪中百倍，于是我捧了些池中的水喝，用溪水洗了手。
English: Walking a mile and a half down the morning ridge, there was a stream flowing. In the stone cave on the side of the stream, there was a pool of spring water flowing down from the top of the stone cave. It was a hundred times cooler than the stream. So I took some water from the pool to drink and washed my hands with the stream water.

古文：更下而东，共七里，至梅田白沙巡司。
现代文：再往下折朝东，共走七里，到达梅田白沙巡检司。
English: Then turn down to the east, walk a total of seven miles, and arrive at the Umeda Baisha Inspection Division.

古文：武溪复北自麻田南向而下，经司东而去。
现代文：武溪又从北面的麻田向南边流下来，经巡检司东面而去。
English: Wuxi also flows down from Asada in the north to the south, passing through the inspection station to the east.

古文：是日午后大霁，共行六十里，止于司侧肆中。
现代文：这天午后天气大晴，共行了六十里，停在巡检司侧边的旅店中。
English: In the afternoon of this day, the weather was very fine, and we traveled a total of sixty miles, stopping at an inn on the side of the patrol division.

古文：先是，途人屡以途有不测戒余速行，余见日色尚早，何至乃尔，抵逆旅，始知上午有盗，百四十人自上乡来，由司东至龙村，取径道向广东，谓土人无恐，尔不足扰也。
现代文：原先，路上遇着的人屡屡说途中恐有不测，告诫我要快走，我见天色还早，心想何至于像他们说的那样，抵达旅店中，才知道上午有盗贼一百四十人从上乡来，由巡检司东面到龙村，走小路向广东去了，他们告诉当地人说不要害怕，你等老百姓不值得骚扰。
English: Originally, the people I met on the road repeatedly said that they were afraid of accidents on the way and warned me to go quickly. I saw the sky was still early and thought about what to do. As they said, I arrived at the hotel, only to find out that in the morning there were 140 thieves who came from the countryside, from the east of the patrol and inspection department to Longcun, and took a small road to Guangdong. They told the locals not to be afraid, you and other people are not worth harassing.

古文：初七日晨餐后乃行，以夜来体不安也。
现代文：初七日早餐后才出发，因为昨天夜里我身体不舒适。
English: I didn't leave until after breakfast on the seventh day of the first month, because I wasn't feeling well last night.

古文：由司东渡武溪，遂东上渡头岭。
现代文：从巡检司东渡武溪，便往东上了渡头岭。
English: From Dongdu Wuxi, the Division of Inspection and Quarantine, they went east to Wudouling.

古文：东北行，直逼麻田大岭下，共三里，乃转东南，再上岭，二里而下，始就坞中行。
现代文：朝东北走，直逼麻田大岭下，共三里，才折向东南，再次登上岭，两里后下了岭，才往山坞中走。
English: Heading northeast, I walked straight down to the foot of the Asada Great Ridge, a total of three miles, before turning southeast and climbing up the ridge again. After two miles, I walked down the ridge before walking to the middle of the dock.

古文：又五里，有数十家散处山麓间，是为龙村。
现代文：又走了五里，有几十户人家散处在山麓间，这是龙村。
English: After another five-mile walk, there are dozens of homes scattered at the foot of the mountain. This is Longcun.

古文：其北有石峰突兀路左。
现代文：村北有座石峰突兀在路左边。
English: In the north of the village, there is a rocky peak on the left side of the road.

古文：又东北二里，乃南向登岭，从岭上平行三里，始南下峡中，有细流自南而北，渡溪即东上岭，里半为高明铺。
现代文：又往东北走两里，便向南登上一岭，从岭上平平地走三里，才向南下到山峡中，有细流自南而北流去，渡过溪水就朝东边上了岭，一里半后到高明铺。
English: He walked another two miles to the northeast, and then went south to climb a ridge. From the ridge, he walked flatly for three miles, and then went south to the canyon. A trickle flowed from the south to the north, crossed the stream, and went up the ridge to the east. After a mile and a half, he reached Gaomingpu.

古文：又下岭，又三里，为焦溪桥。
现代文：又下了岭，再走三里，为焦溪桥。
English: Down the ridge again, walk another three miles, and you will reach the Jiaoxi Bridge.

古文：焦溪在高明南，有数十夹桥而居，其水自北而南。
现代文：焦溪在高明铺南面，有几十户人家夹桥而居，溪水自北向南流淌。
English: Jiao Creek is south of Gaomingpu. There are dozens of families living between the bridges, and the stream flows from north to south.

古文：由此东南三里，逾一岭，为芹菜坪。
现代文：由此处往东南走三里，翻过一座岭，为芹菜坪。
English: From here, walk southeast for three miles, turn over a ridge, and you will come to the Celery Pond.

古文：其南有峰分突，下有层崖承之，其色斑赭杂黑，极似武彝之一体。
现代文：南面有山峰分突出来，峰下面有重叠的石崖支撑着，颜色赤褐而杂有黑色，极像武彝山的一部分。
English: In the south, there are mountain peaks protruding, supported by overlapping cliffs below the peaks. The color is reddish-brown and mixed with black, very much like a part of Mount Wuyi.

古文：此处四山俱青萼藿珮，独此有异。
现代文：此处四周的山都是青绿色，高峻尖峭，唯独此峰显得特别。
English: The mountains around here are green and blue, high and sharp, but this peak is special.

古文：又三里，逾岭，颇高。
现代文：又走三里，翻越一座岭，那岭很高峻。
English: Another three miles, over a ridge, that ridge is very steep.

古文：其先行岭北，可平瞻麻田、将军寨、黄岑岭诸峰，已行岭南，则南向旷然开拓，想武江直下之境矣。
现代文：如先从岭北走，可以平平地观览麻田、将军寨、黄岑岭等众山峰，现在已经从岭南走，则岭南空阔而向南面延展，我想它是武江直往下流经的地方。
English: If you first walk from the north of the ridge, you can see many peaks such as Asada, Zhenzhenzhai, and Huangpi Ridge. Now, if you walk from the south of the ridge, the south of the ridge is wide and extends to the south. I think it is the place where the Wujiang River flows straight down.

古文：下岭，又北二里，有楼横路口，是为隘口。
现代文：下了岭，又往北走两里，有座楼横在路口，这里为隘口。
English: After descending the ridge, we walked another two miles to the north. There was a building across the intersection. This was the pass.

古文：其东南山上，有塔五层，修而未竟。
现代文：隘口东南面的山上，有座五层高的塔，正在营建而没有竣工。
English: On the hill to the south-east of the pass, there is a five-storey tower, which is still under construction and has not been completed.

古文：过隘口，循塔山之北垂，觅小径转入山坳，是为艮岩。
现代文：过隘口后，顺着塔山的北睡，寻找到小路折进山坳，这里为良岩。
English: After passing through the pass, follow the north sleep of the tower mountain, find a path and turn into the mountains, here is a good rock.

古文：寺向西南，岩向西北，岩口有池一方。
现代文：寺向着西南，岩向着西北，岩口有个池子。
English: The temple faces southwest, the rock faces northwest, and there is a pool at the mouth of the rock.

古文：僧凤岩为我煮金刚笋，以醋油炒之以供粥，遂卧寺中，得一觉。
现代文：僧人凤岩为我煮了些金刚笋，用醋和油炒了下着粥吃，便躺在寺中，睡了一觉。
English: The monk Fengyan cooked some aconite for me, stirred it with vinegar and oil and ate it with porridge. Then he lay down in the temple and slept for a while.

古文：下午入南镇关，至三星桥。
现代文：下午进入南镇关，到达三星桥。
English: In the afternoon, enter Nanzhen Pass and arrive at Sanxing Bridge.

古文：过桥，则市肆夹道，行李杂遝，盖南下广东之大道云。
现代文：跨过桥，集市上店铺夹道，行李杂沓，因为此处是南下广东的大路。
English: Across the bridge, the market is a maze of shops and luggage, because this is the main road of Guangdong to the south.

古文：桥即在城南，而南门在西，大道循城而东。
现代文：桥就在县城南边，而城南门在桥西面，大路顺城墙外往东延伸。
English: The bridge is just south of the county seat, while the south gate of the city is on the west side of the bridge, and the highway extends eastward along the city wall.

古文：已乃北过东门，又直北过演武场。
现代文：随后往北过了东门，又直朝北经过演武场。
English: It then went north past the East Gate, and then straight north past the martial arts arena.

古文：其内萼石藿珮，横卧道侧。
现代文：演武场西面，一块块高峻尖削的青石横卧在路旁。
English: To the west of the martial arts arena, blocks of steep, sharp bluestone lie on the roadside.

古文：共北十里，过牛筋洞，居民将及百家，在青岑山下。
现代文：共往北走十里，经过牛筋洞，有将近百家居民，居住在青岑山下。
English: A total of ten miles to the north, passing through Niu Jiu Dong, there are nearly a hundred residents living under the Qingtao Mountain.

古文：盖大山西南，初峙为麻田大岭，犹临武地。其东北再峙为将军寨。
现代文：大山西南，首先耸起的是麻田大岭，麻田大岭东北面再耸起的是将军寨。
English: In the southwest of Dashan, the first to rise is Asada Dairing, and in the northeast of Asada Dairing, the next to rise is General Zhai.

古文：已属宜章。此最高之顶，乃东北度为高云山，有寺焉。乃北转最深处，于是始东列为黄岑。
现代文：山的最高顶往东北延伸为高云山，山上有寺庙。高云山折往北转到最深处，才东列为黄岑山。
English: The highest peak of the mountain extends to the northeast as Gaoyun Mountain, and there are temples on the mountain. Gaoyun Mountain turns north to the deepest point, and is then classified as Huangpi Mountain in the east.

古文：其山南北横列，其南垂即为曲折岭，又东更列一层，则青岑也，牛筋洞在其东北麓。
现代文：这座山南北横列，南睡就是曲折岭，又往东再横列一层，这就是青岑山，牛筋洞在它的东北麓。
English: This mountain is aligned north-south, Nan Somi is the zigzag ridge, and to the east it is again aligned one layer, this is Qingtao Mountain, and Niu Si Dong is at its northeastern foot.

古文：更出行一里，为野石铺。
现代文：再往北走一里，为野石铺。
English: Go one mile further north and you'll come to the Wild Rock Shop.

古文：其北石峰嵌空，蹲踞路左，即为野石岩，而始不知。
现代文：铺北面石峰玲珑，蹲立在路左边气，这里就是野石岩，但开初我不知道。
English: The stone peak on the north side of the pavement is exquisite, crouching on the left side of the road, here is the wild stone rock, but I don't know at the beginning.

古文：问其下居人，曰： 由其北小径入即是。 
现代文：向岩下居民打探情况，回答说： 从峰北面小路进去就是岩洞。 
English: He asked the people living under the rock about the situation, and they replied: "The cave can be entered from the path on the north side of the peak.

古文：乃随其北垂，转出山背，乃寺场，非岩洞也。
现代文：于是顺山峰的北睡，转出山背后，那地方是寺场，不是岩洞。
English: So he slept along the north side of the mountain peak, turned out behind the mountain, and that place was a temple, not a cave.

古文：亟出，欲投宿于岩下人家，有一人当门拒客，不入纳。
现代文：赶快返出来，想投宿在岩下的居民家中，有个人挡在门口拒绝了客人，不让进去。
English: They hurried back and wanted to stay at a resident's home under the rock. A man stood in the doorway and refused to let the guests in.

古文：余见其岩石奇，以为此必岩也，苦恳之，屋侧一小户中容留焉。
现代文：我见这座岩石头奇异，以为此处一定是岩洞，苦苦恳求，他家侧边的一小户才允许住留在他家。
English: I saw this strange rock head, thought it must be a cave, and begged a small family on the side of his house to be allowed to stay in his house.

古文：欲从其舍后上岩，而其家俱编篱绝，须自其中舍后门出，而拒客人犹不肯容入。
现代文：我想从他家房屋后面上岩，而他家在屋后到处编了篱笆隔绝着，必须从中间那家屋子的后门出去，但那个拒留客人的人仍不肯让我们进去。
English: I wanted to climb the rock from the back of his house, and his house was fenced off from the back of the house, and I had to go out through the back door of the middle house, but the person who refused to let us in still refused to let us in.

古文：乃从南畔乱石中攀崖逾石而入。
现代文：于是从岩南边的乱石中攀崖越进到岩内。
English: As a result, the cliff climbs from the rocks on the south side of the rock into the rock.

古文：先登一岩，其门岈然，而内有透顶之隙，而不甚深。
现代文：先登上一个岩洞，洞门显出深邃的样子，洞内有条通到顶端的石缝，但洞不很深。
English: First, we ascended a rock cave. The cave entrance appeared to be deep, and there was a stone slit leading to the top of the cave, but the hole was not very deep.

古文：仰观门左，有磴埋草间，亟披荆上。
现代文：仰见洞门的左边，有些石瞪隐没在草丛间，便赶忙披开荆棘往上爬。
English: Looking up at the left side of the cave door, some stones were hidden in the grass, so they hurriedly opened the thorns and climbed up.

古文：西南行石径间，复得石门如合掌，其内狭而稍深，右裂旁窍，其上亦透天光，而右壁之半，一圆窍透明如镜。出峡门，更西北随磴上，则穹崖削立，上有叠石耸霄，下若展幛内敛。
现代文：往西南走在石径间，又见到一个如双掌相合般的石门，石门内狭窄而稍深，右边裂开个小支洞，上边也露出天光，而右边石壁的半中腰，有个圆状的孔穴透明如镜 走出石峡门，再沿石瞪往西北向上爬，便是弯隆的崖壁如刀削般直立着，崖壁上面有重叠的石头耸入云霄，下面若展开的帷嶂向内卷起。
English: Walking between the stone paths to the southwest, I saw a stone gate that looked like two hands clasped together. The stone gate was narrow and slightly deep, with a small supporting hole on the right side. The skylight was also exposed on the upper side, and there was a round hole on the right side of the stone wall that was transparent like a mirror. Stepping out of the stone gate, and then climbing up along the stone cliff to the northwest, the steep cliff wall stood upright like a knife. There were overlapping stones on the cliff wall soaring into the sky, and the curtains that were spread out below rolled inward.

古文：时渐就晚，四向觅路不得，念此即野石岩无疑。
现代文：当时渐渐临近夜晚，四下里找路但没有找到，心想此处就是野石岩无疑。
English: At that time, it was getting closer and closer to night. I looked everywhere for a way but couldn't find it. I thought to myself that this place was undoubtedly Wild Rock.

古文：《志》原云 临官道旁 ，非山后可知，但恨无补叠为径以穷其胜者。
现代文：志书上原记载说野石岩 临近官道旁， ，由此可知不是在山后，但遗憾的是没有人用石头一层层修砌成道路以便人们能穷尽此岩的优美景观。
English: The original record in the book says that the wild stone rock is near the official road, so it can be known that it is not behind the mountain, but unfortunately no one has built a road with stone layer by layer so that people can exhaust the beautiful landscape of this rock.

古文：乃下，就坐其庑下，而当门人已他去。
现代文：于是走下山，就坐在小屋中，而那挡门的人已经到别处去了。
English: So he went down the mountain and sat in his hut, while the man who had blocked the door had gone elsewhere.

古文：已而闻中室牖内有呼客声，乃主人卧息在内也。
现代文：随即听到中间那家房间的窗户内有呼喊客人的声音，原来是主人躺在房内休息。
English: A guest's voice was then heard shouting from the window of the room in the middle, which turned out to be the owner lying down for a rest.

古文：谓： 客探岩曾见仙诗否？ 
现代文：他问道： 客人探寻岩洞曾见到仙诗没有？ 
English: He asked: Did the guests who explored the cave ever see Xianshi?

古文：余以所经对。
现代文：我将所经过的地方对他说了一遍。
English: I told him where I had been.

古文：曰： 未也，穹崖之右，峡门之上，尚有路可上，明日当再穷之。 
现代文：他听后说： 你没有去到有仙诗的地方。弯隆的岩壁右边，石峡门的上面，还有路可以上去，明日应当再继续探寻到尽头。 
English: After listening, he said: You did not go to the place where there is a fairy poem. There is a road to the right of the curved rock wall, above the stone gorge gate, and you should continue to explore to the end tomorrow.

古文：时侧户主人意虽爱客，而室甚卑隘，猪圈客铺共在一处，见余意不便，叩室中妇借下余榻，而妇不应，余因就牖下求中室主人，主人许之，乃移卧具于中。
现代文：当时侧边那户的主人虽然好客，但他家的屋子很低矮狭窄，猪圈和客人的床铺共同在一处，见我有不便的意思，他便问屋中主妇是否可在里边借我个睡觉的地方，而妇人不答应，我于是走到窗子下求中间那家屋子的主人，结果他允许了，这才把卧具搬到他家中。
English: At that time, although the owner of the house on the side was hospitable, his house was very low and narrow, the pigsty and the guest's bed were in the same place. Seeing that I was inconvenient, he asked the housewife if she could borrow me a place to sleep inside. The woman did not agree, so I went under the window to ask the owner of the house in the middle. As a result, he allowed me to move the bedding to his house.

古文：中室主人起向客言： 客爱游名山，此间有高云山，乃众山之顶，路由黄岑岭而上，宜章八景有 黄岑滴翠 、 白水流虹 二胜在其下，不可失也。 
现代文：中间那家屋子的主人起床来向我说： 客人喜好游览名山，此地有座高云山，是众山的顶端，到山上的路由黄岑岭往上走。宜章县八景中有 黄岑滴翠 、 白水流虹 两处胜景在这座山下，不可错过。 
English: The owner of the house in the middle got up and said to me: Guests like to visit famous mountains. There is a Gaoyun Mountain here, which is the top of many mountains. The route to the mountain is to go up to Huangpi Ridge. Among the eight scenic spots in Yizhang County, there are Huangpi drip cedar, whitewater rainbow Two scenic spots under this mountain are not to be missed.

古文：余颔之。
现代文：我点头表示接受他的建议。
English: I nodded in agreement.

古文：初八日晨，觅导游高云者，其人欲余少待，上午乃得同行。
现代文：初八日早晨，找到个导引我游高云山的人，他要我稍候，上午才得以一同前往。
English: On the morning of the eighth day of the first month, I found a guide to take me to Mount Gaoyun. He asked me to wait for a while, so that we could go together in the morning.

古文：余饭后复登岩上，由穹崖之东，丛郁之下，果又得路。
现代文：我饭后又攀到野石岩上，从弯隆的岩壁东边、丛密繁茂的树木下走，果然又找到路。
English: After dinner, I climbed onto the wild stone rock, walked from the east side of the curved rock wall, under the thick trees, and finally found the way.

古文：上数步，乱石纵横，路复莫辨。
现代文：往上走几步，乱石纵横，路又分辨不出来了。
English: Walk up a few steps, the rocks are jumbled up and down, and the road is indistinguishable.

古文：乃攀逾石萼，上俱嵌空决裂，有大石高耸于外，夹成石坪，掩映愈胜，然终不得洞中诗也。
现代文：于是从花尊似的石头间攀越，上面都是玲珑而破裂开的石头，有些大石头高高耸立在外围，与里面的石头夹峙而形成石坪，它们相互掩映，显得愈加奇美，然而终究没能找到洞中的诗。
English: So he climbed between the flower-like stones, all of which were delicate and cracked stones, and some large stones towered high on the periphery, clashing with the stones inside to form a stone pavement. They overshadowed each other and appeared more and more beautiful, but in the end he could not find the poem in the cave.

古文：徘徊久之，还至失路处，见一石穴，即在所逾石上。
现代文：来回地漫游了许久，回到迷失道路处，看见个石穴就在我所越过的石头下面。
English: After wandering back and forth for a long time, I returned to the lost path and saw a stone cave just below the stone I had crossed.

古文：乃匍伏入，其内崡岈起裂，列穴旁通，宛转透石坪下，皆明朗可穿。
现代文：于是甸甸着身体爬进去，石穴内深邃幽长，纵横裂开，形成孔穴通到周围，这些孔穴曲折延伸到石坪下面，都是明朗而可穿过。
English: So I crawled into the cave. The cave was deep and narrow, and it was split vertically and horizontally, forming holes that led to the surrounding area. These holes meandered to the bottom of the stone pavement. They were clear and could be walked through.

古文：盖前越其上，兹透其底，求所谓仙诗，竟无有也。
现代文：总的说，前面是攀越到上面，现在是穿行在底下，寻找所谓的仙诗，竟然没有。
English: On the whole, the front is to climb over to the top, and now it is to go through the bottom, looking for the so-called fairy tale, but there is none.

古文：下岩，导者未至，方拽囊就道，忽北路言，大盗二百余人自北来。
现代文：下了岩，导游还未到，正拽起行李袋要上路，忽然北边路上传来消息说，有两百多个大盗正从北面过来。
English: After descending the rock, before the tour guide arrived, he was pulling up his luggage bag to go on the road. Suddenly, news came from the north side road that more than two hundred thieves were coming from the north.

古文：主人俱奔，襁负奔避后山，余与顾仆复携囊藏适所游穴中，以此处路幽莫觉，且有后穴可他走也。
现代文：岩下人家的主人都忙着逃走，背着孩童奔到后山躲起来。我与顾仆又携着行李袋藏到刚刚游览的石穴中，因为此处道路僻静木易被发觉，而且有后穴可以跑到其他地方。
English: The owners of the houses in Iwashita were busy fleeing, carrying their children on their backs and running to the back of the mountain to hide. My companion and I also hid with our luggage bags in the stone cave we had just visited, because here the road is secluded and the trees are easy to spot, and there are back holes to run to other places.

古文：余伏穴中，令顾仆从穴旁窥之。
现代文：我藏在石穴中，叫顾仆从石穴旁边窥视外面的动静。
English: I hid in a stone cave and asked Gu's servant to peep out from beside the cave.

古文：初奔走纷纷，已而路寂无人。
现代文：开初众人奔走纷纷，随即路上静悄悄的没有人。
English: At the beginning of the race, many people were running, but soon there was no one on the road.

古文：久之，复有自北而南者，乃下问之，曰： 贼从章桥之上，过外岭西向黄茅矣。 
现代文：过了好久，又有从北往南来的人，于是向下询问，回答说： 盗贼从章桥上经过桥外的山岭西向黄茅去了。 
English: After a long time, there was another person coming from the north to the south, so he asked down and answered: The thief went from Zhangqiao across the mountains west of the bridge to Huangmao.

古文：乃下岩南行，则自北南来者甚众，而北去者犹蹜蹜不前也。
现代文：这才下了岩往南走，这时从北往南来的人很多，而向北去的仍不敢大胆举步向前。
English: Only then did they leave the rock and walk south. At this time, there were many people coming from the north to the south, but they still did not dare to step forward to the north.

古文：途人相告，即梅前司渡河百四十名之夥即 伙 ，南至天都石坪行劫。
现代文：路上的人相互传告，这些盗贼就是从梅前司渡河、有一百四十人的那伙，他们往南到天都石坪行劫。
English: People on the road told each other that these thieves were the group of one hundred and forty people who crossed the river from Meizenshi and went south to the Heavenly Capital, Shiping.

古文：乃东从间道，北出章桥，转而西还，盖绕宜章之四郊，而犹不敢竟度国门也。
现代文：他们从东面的小路，往北出了章桥，再转回西边，差不多绕了宜章县城四郊一圈，但仍不敢直通过城门。
English: They took the small road to the east, went north out of Zhangqiao, and then turned back to the west, almost around the four suburbs of Yizhang County, but still dared not go straight through the city gate.

古文：南从旧路一里半，抵牛筋洞北，遂从小径，西南循大山行。
现代文：我们往南从原路走了一里半，抵达牛筋洞北面，便从小路往西南顺大山走。
English: We walked south from the original road for a mile and a half, arrived at the north side of Niu Jiu Cave, and then walked from the path to the southwest along the mountain.

古文：里半，出牛筋洞之后，乃西越山峡，共五里，出峡，乃循青岑南麓行。
现代文：一里半，转出到牛筋洞的后面，就向西穿越山峡，共五里，走出山峡，便沿青岑山的南麓往前走。
English: After a mile and a half, I turned to the back of Niu Jiu Cave and walked west across the gorge for a total of five miles. After walking out of the gorge, I walked along the southern foot of Qingtao Mountain.

古文：有路差大，乃西南向县者，而黄岑之道则若断若续，惟以意拟耳。
现代文：有一条路比较大，是往西南到县城去的，而到黄岑岭的路却若断若续，只是猜测着走。
English: There is a relatively large road that goes to the southwest to the county seat, but the road to Huangpi Ridge is intermittent, just guessing.

古文：共西三里，转一冈，始与南来大道合，遂北向曲折岭。
现代文：共往西走三里，转过一条山冈，才与南面来的大路交合，于是往北向曲折岭上走。
English: I walked west for three miles, turned around a hill, and only then did I meet the main road coming from the south, so I walked north up the tortuous ridge.

古文：二里，直跻岭坳，其西即 白水流虹 。
现代文：两里，直登到岭坳上，岭坳西边就是 白水流虹 处。
English: Two miles, straight up to the ridge, on the west side of the ridge is the white water flow rainbow.

古文：章水之上源，自高云山南径黄岑峒，由此出峡，布流悬石而下者也。
现代文：章水的上源，自高云山往南流经黄岑桐，由此处流出山峡，分散奔涌的水流从石头上悬空泻下形成此景。
English: The upper source of Zhangshui flows from Gaoyun Mountain to the south through Huanghuangdong, from where it flows out of the mountain gorge, and the scattered rushing water flows from the stone under the sky to form this scene.

古文：逾岭，西北半里，即溯涧行，黄岑山高峙东北，其阳环成一峒，大溪横贯之。
现代文：当地人就称此岭为黄岑岭，然而黄岑山还耸立在北边，此处是它向南延伸下来的支脉。越过岭，往西北走半里，就溯涧流走，黄岑山高高耸立在东北边，它南面山峦环绕，形成一个酮，一条大溪横贯炯中。
English: Locals call this ridge the Huangpi Ridge, but Huangpi Mountain still stands to the north, and this is its branch extending south. Cross the ridge, walk half a mile to the northwest, and follow the stream. Huangpi Mountain stands tall in the northeast, and it is surrounded by mountains to the south, forming a ketone. A large stream runs through the middle of the ridge.

古文：竟峒里半，有小径北去，云可通章桥。
现代文：走一里半到达蛔的尽头，有条小路向北去，据说可通到章桥。
English: Walk a mile and a half to the end of the pier, there is a path to the north, it is said to lead to Zhangqiao.

古文：仍溯溪西行三里，为兵马堂路口。
现代文：仍旧溯溪往西行三里，到兵马堂路口。
English: I still followed the stream three miles to the west, to the intersection of Terracotta Warriors and Horses.

古文：仍溯溪北转一里，乃舍溪登岭。
现代文：而后仍然溯溪折往北一里，才离开溪水登上岭。
English: After that, I still followed the creek one mile to the north, before leaving the creek to climb the ridge.

古文：北上一里，西下坞中，是为藏经楼。
现代文：往北朝上走里，再向西下到山坞中 这里为藏经楼。
English: Walk north uphill, then west downhill to the middle of the dock. This is the Zangjing Building.

古文：高山四绕，小涧潆门，寺甚整洁。
现代文：高山环绕在四周，小涧潦泅在门前，寺庙非常整洁。
English: High mountains surround it on all sides, a small gate is in front of it, and the temple is very neat.

古文：昔为贮藏之所，近为贼劫，寺僧散去，经移高云，独一二僧闭户守焉。
现代文：它原先是贮藏佛经等物件的地方，近来被盗贼抢劫，寺中僧人多数逃散到别处去了，经书移到高云粼只剩下一两个僧人闭门守护在寺内。
English: It was originally a place for storing Buddhist scriptures and other objects. Recently, it was robbed by thieves. Most of the monks in the temple fled to other places. The scriptures were moved to Gaoyunlu, leaving only one or two monks to guard the temple behind closed doors.

古文：因炊粥其中，坐卧其中久之。
现代文：于是我们在寺中煮粥吃，坐立躺卧了许久。
English: So we cooked porridge and ate it in the temple, and sat and lay down for a long time.

古文：下午，乃由寺左登岭，岧峣直上者二里，是为坪头岭。
现代文：下午才从寺左侧登岭，向高峻的岭上直上两里，为坪头岭。
English: It was only in the afternoon that I climbed the ridge on the left side of the temple and walked straight up the steep ridge for two miles to reach Pingtou Ridge.

古文：逾岭稍下，得坞甚幽，山帏翠叠，众壑争流，有修篁一丘，丛木交映中，静室出焉。
现代文：越过岭头稍往下走，见到个很幽静的山坞，四周筛纱似的山峦堆青叠翠，众多沟谷中溪水争流，并且有一片修竹。交相掩映的丛密树木中，有一间静室。
English: After crossing the ridge, walk down a bit and you will see a very quiet dock, surrounded by a sieve-like pile of mountain reeds, streams in many valleys, and there is a patch of pruned bamboo. There is a quiet room in the dense trees that shade each other.

古文：其室修洁，而空寂无人，高山流水，窈然而已。
现代文：那静室完好整洁，但里边空寂无人，周围是高山流水，显得幽远美好。
English: The quiet room is intact and tidy, but there is no one inside, and it is surrounded by high mountains and running water, making it seem remote and beautiful.

古文：半里，逾坞，复溯涧北上岭一里，岭穷而水不绝。
现代文：走半里，穿过山坞，又溯洞往北朝岭上走一里，岭到了尽头而水流不绝。
English: Walk half a mile, go through the dock, and then walk a mile up the North Morning Ridge through the tunnel. When the ridge comes to an end, the water flows endlessly.

古文：此坪头而上第二岭也。水复自上坞透峡下，路透峡入，又平行坞中半里，渡涧，东北上岭。岭不甚高，不过半里，渐盘出黄岑北。
现代文：涧流从东边的黄岑山后面流来，平缓地流淌在山坞中，石坪殷红，清泉素涧，如在水中洗涤锦布一样；水流出山峡向下奔泻，发出珠鸣玉韵般的声响，重重树木遮蔽了它，幽暗而不可窥见；再往下绕过静室西南向下倾注，流出藏经岭南边，为大章水的源头。这座岭不很高，不超过半里，我们渐渐绕到黄岑山的北面。
English: The turbulent flow comes from the back of Huangpi Mountain in the east, and flows smoothly in the dockyard. The stone pavement is red, and the clear spring is salty, as if it were washing a brocade in water. The water flows out of the gorge and rushes down, emitting a bead-like sound. It is covered by many trees, dark and invisible. It then flows down to the southwest of the still room, and flows out of the south side of the Tibetan ridge, which is the source of the Dazhang water. This ridge is not very high, no more than half a mile, and we gradually go around to the north side of Huangpi

古文：其处山鹃鲜丽，光彩射目，树虽不繁，而花色绝胜，非他处可比。
现代文：这地方山中的杜鹃花鲜艳美丽，光彩耀目，树木虽然不繁茂，花色却极其美好，不是其他地方可以比得上的。
English: The rhododendrons in the mountains of this place are bright and beautiful, shining brightly. Although the trees are not lush, the colors are extremely beautiful and cannot be compared to other places.

古文：此坪头上第三岭也。
现代文：这是坪头岭以上的第三岭。
English: This is the third ridge above Pingtou Ridge.

古文：稍过坪，又东北上一里，逾岭脊。
现代文：稍微经过一小段平地，又往东北朝上攀一里，便翻越岭脊。
English: Slightly after a short stretch of flat land, I climbed one mile to the northeast, and then climbed over the ridge.

古文：此坪头上第四岭矣。
现代文：这是坪头岭以上的第四岭。
English: This is the fourth ridge above Pingtou Ridge.

古文：其西石峰突如踞狮，为将军山南来东转之脉，其东则南度为黄岑山者也。
现代文：它西面石峰突兀如同蹲坐着的雄狮，这是将军山向南延伸而来再折往东的脉，东面则是往南穿过而成为黄岑山的一座山脉。
English: To the west, its jagged stone peaks look like a crouching male lion. This is the vein of the General's Mountain that extends southward and then bends to the east. To the east, it passes southward and becomes a mountain range of Huangpi Mountain.

古文：逾岭北下一里，折而西北下，行深树中又一里，得高云寺。
现代文：越过岭脊往北下一里，折往西北朝下走，在深树丛中又行一里，见到高云寺。
English: Cross the ridge to the north for one mile, turn to the northwest and walk down, walk another mile in the deep trees, and see Koyunji Temple.

古文：寺虽稍倚翠微，犹踞万峰绝顶。
现代文：此寺虽然靠在青翠掩映的山腰幽深处，但仍旧高高雄踞在千万座山峰的最高顶端。
English: Although this temple is nestled deep in the mountainside, hidden by the greenery, it is still perched high and high on the highest peak of thousands of mountains.

古文：并肇于隆庆五年，今渐就敝，而山门方丈，犹未全备，洵确实峻极之构造非易也。
现代文：它创建于隆庆五年，如今已渐渐破败，但是寺的大门和方丈，仍然未齐全，实在是高大建筑的营建确实是不容易。
English: It was founded in the fifth year of the Longqing era, and now it has gradually deteriorated, but the temple's gate and abbot are still incomplete. It is really not easy to build a tall building.

古文：寺向有五十僧，为流寇所扰，止存六七僧，以耕种为业，而晨昏之梵课不废，亦此中之仅见者。
现代文：寺内先前有五十个僧人，因为被流寇侵扰，现在只留得有六七个，他们以耕种为业，而清晨和天黑时的佛经诵读并未废弃，这也是此处仅见的。
English: There used to be fifty monks in the temple, but now only six or seven remain due to the invasion of the nomads. They are engaged in farming, and the chanting of Buddhist scriptures in the early morning and at dusk has not been abandoned, which is also only seen here.

古文：主僧宝幢，颇能安客。
现代文：主僧宝幢，很能安顿客人。
English: The head monk, Baodong, is very good at accommodating guests.

古文：至寺，日犹未衔山，以惫极，急浴而卧。
现代文：到寺中时，太阳还未落山，因为疲惫至极，急忙洗浴后就睡下。
English: When I arrived at the temple, the sun had not yet set, and I was so exhausted that I took a quick bath and fell asleep.

古文：初九日晨起，浓雾翳山，咫尺莫辨，问山亦无他奇，遂决策下山，东北向丛木中下。
现代文：初九日早晨起来，浓：雾遮掩了山岭，咫尺间什么都不能分辨。询间后得知山间也没有其他奇异的景物，便决计下山，往东北朝丛密的树木中向下走。
English: I got up in the morning of the 9th day of the first month, and it was thick: fog covered the mountains, and I couldn't distinguish anything within a few feet. After an inquiry, I learned that there were no other strange sights in the mountains, so I decided to go down the mountain and walk down among the dense trees to the northeast.

古文：初，余意为萝棘所翳，即不能入，而身所过处，或瞻企不辜。
现代文：开初，我心想山间被萝棘遮蔽，即便有些地方不能进去，但身体经过之处，向周围观看或许不会见不到景物。
English: At the beginning, I thought to myself that the mountains were obscured by thorns. Even if there were some places where I couldn't go in, I might not be able to see the scenery when I looked around.

古文：及五里至山麓，村落数家散处坞中，问所谓坦山，皆云即此，而问所谓万华岩，皆云无之。
现代文：等走五里到达山麓，有几户人家散处在山坞中，打听所谓的坦山，都说就是此处，而探间所谓的万华岩，都说没有。
English: After walking five miles to the foot of the mountain, there were several households scattered in the docks. When asked about the so-called Tanzan, they all said that it was here, but when asked about the so-called Wanhua Rock, they all said that it was not there.

古文：徘徊四顾，竟无异处。
现代文：徘徊四顾，没有奇异的地方。
English: Wandering around, there is no strange place.

古文：但其水东下章桥，大路从之，甚迂；由此北逾虎头岭出良田，为间道，甚便。
现代文：但山坞中的水流下章桥，大路顺水而去，很曲折；由此坞往北翻越虎头岭到良田，是小路，很近便。
English: However, the water flow in the dock goes under Zhangqiao Bridge, and the road goes along the water, which is very tortuous. From there, the dock climbs northward over Hougouling to Liangta, which is a small road, very convenient.

古文：遂从村侧北上岭，岭东坳中，洞水泻大石崖而下，悬帘泄布，亦此中所仅见。
现代文：于是便从村子侧面往北上了岭，岭东面的山坳中，涧水从大石崖上奔泻而下，若挂着的帘子散泄的布帛，也是此地所仅见的。
English: As a result, they went up the ridge from the side of the village to the north. In the foothills on the east side of the ridge, rushing water cascaded down from the large rock cliff. The cloth curtain hanging from the curtain is the only one seen here.

古文：一里，逾坳上，一里半，复溯流北行坞中，一里半，又逾岭而下，有溪自西而东，问之，犹东出章桥者也。
现代文：一里，攀越到山坳上，又走一里半，重新溯流往北走到山坞中，再走一里半，又越过岭向下行，有条溪水自西向东流，一询间，它仍是往东流出章桥的溪水。
English: One mile, climb to the top of the ridge, walk another mile and a half, retrace the flow north to the dock, walk another mile and a half, and then go down over the ridge. There is a stream flowing from west to east, and it is still the stream flowing out of Zhangqiao to the east.

古文：渡溪，又有一溪自北来入。
现代文：渡过此溪，又有条溪水从北面流来相汇。
English: After crossing this stream, there is another stream coming from the north.

古文：溯溪北行峡中，二里为大竹峒，居民数家，水自西来，想亦黄茅岭下之余波也。
现代文：溯溪往北从山峡中走，两里为大竹炯，这里有几家居民，水从桐西面流来，我想它也是黄茅岭下面溪水的未流。
English: Tracing the stream to the north from the mountain gorge, two miles is the big bamboo raft, there are several residents here, the water flows from the west of Tongxi, I think it is also the unbroken flow of the stream below Huangmaoling.

古文：由竹峒东逾大竹岭，岭为大竹山南下之脊，是为分水，东由吴溪出郴，西由章桥入宜。
现代文：由大竹婀往东翻越大竹岭，此岭为大竹山向南延伸下来的山脊，是分水岭，一路上上的少下的多。
English: From the Big Bamboo Pass to the east, climb over the Big Bamboo Ridge. This ridge is the ridge of the Big Bamboo Mountain extending southward. It is a watershed. There are more ups and downs along the way.

古文：上少下多。东向直下二里，是为吴溪。
现代文：向东直下两里，为吴溪。
English: Two miles straight down to the east is Wuxi.

古文：居民数家，散处甚敞，前章桥流贼所从而西者也。
现代文：几家居民分散居住在一个很宽阔的地带上，昨天经过章桥的流贼就是从这里往西去的。
English: Several residents live scattered over a very wide area, and it was from here that the bandits who passed through Zhangqiao yesterday went west.

古文：村东一里，有桥跨溪上，度桥北，上小分岭，亦上少下多。
现代文：村东面一里，有座桥横架在溪上，越过桥往北走，登上小分岭，也是上的少下的多。
English: One mile east of the village, there is a bridge across the stream. Cross the bridge to the north and walk up a small ridge. There are more ups than downs.

古文：二里，下至仙人场，有水颇大，北自山峒透峡而东，一峰当关扼之，水激石奋。
现代文：走两里，下到仙人场，有条较大的水流，从北面山炯中穿过山峡向东流去，一座山峰扼踞在水边，水流腾涌、石头飞突。
English: Walk two miles, go down to the Fairy Field, there is a large stream of water, flowing from the mountains in the north through the canyon to the east, a mountain peak clutched at the water's edge, the water is surging and the stones are flying.

古文：水折而南，峰剖其西，若平削而下者，以为下必有洞壑可憩；及抵崖下，乃绝流而渡，则寂无人烟。
现代文：水折向南，它西面的山峰破裂开，若像平平切削下去的，我以为下面必定有洞壑可供休息；等低达石崖下，便横渡过水流，却是荒寂而无人烟。
English: The water bent to the south, the peaks to the west of it cracked open. If it was like a flat cut, I thought there must be caves below for rest; when it reached the bottom of the cliff, I crossed the stream, but it was desolate and uninhabited.

古文：乃北逾一冈，二里为歪里。
现代文：于是往北翻越一座山冈，走两里为歪里。
English: So he climbed a mountain to the north and walked two miles.

古文：先为廖氏，居人颇盛，有小水自北南去。
现代文：此处原先是姓廖的人家居住，居民很多，有条小水自北向南流去。
English: This place was originally inhabited by a family named Liao, there are many residents, and there is a small stream flowing from north to south.

古文：乃从其村东上平岭，北行一里，其西坞中为王氏，室庐甚整。
现代文：于是从此村东面上了平缓的山岭，往北走一里，岭西面山坞中是姓王的人家居住，房舍很整洁。
English: So from the east of the village, they went up a gentle mountain ridge and walked one mile to the north. In the dockyard on the west side of the ridge, a family with the surname Wang lived. The house was very tidy.

古文：询之土人，昨流贼自章桥北小径，止于村西大山丛木中，经宿而去，想必有所阚不敢动也。
现代文：询间此处居民得知，昨天流贼从章桥北面的小路来，停在村西大山的丛林中，过了一夜才离去，想必也是窥视到了什么情况而不敢行动。
English: During the inquiry, the residents here learned that yesterday the thief came from the path north of Zhangqiao, stopped in the jungle of the west mountain of the village, and left after one night. He must have peeked at the situation and did not dare to act.

古文：从此东北出山坳，石道修整，十二里而抵良田。
现代文：从此处往东北走出山坳，石头铺筑的道路通畅齐整，共走十二里抵达良田。
English: From here, head northeast out of the foothills. The stone-paved road is smooth and well-maintained. Travel a total of twelve miles to reach Ryoda.

古文：自歪里雨作，至此愈甚，乃炊饭索饮于肆中。
现代文：从歪里就下起了雨到此雨势更大，于是在店中煮饭买酒。
English: It started raining from the crooked place, and the rain became more intense, so I cooked rice and bought wine in the store.

古文：良田居市甚众，乃中道一大聚落，二月间，流寇三四百人亦群而过焉。
现代文：良田的住户和市场很多，是往来路途中的一个大村落，二月间，三四百个流寇也曾结队经过这里。
English: There are many households and markets in Ryota, and it is a large village on the way to and from. In February, three or four hundred robbers passed through here.

古文：饭后，雨不尽，止北十里，宿于万岁桥。
现代文：饭后，雨没有全停，只往北走了十里，投宿在万岁桥。
English: After dinner, the rain didn't stop completely, we just walked ten miles north and stayed in Wanlianqiao.

古文：按《志》，郴南有灵寿山，山有灵寿木，昔名万岁，故山下水名千秋。
现代文：按志书记载，郴州南面有座灵寿山，山上产灵寿木，原先称万岁木，所以山下的水名叫千秋水。
English: According to legend, there is a Ling Shou Mountain in the south of Luzhou. The mountain produces Ling Shou Wood, which was originally called Wan Hei Wood, so the water under the mountain is called Qian Qiu Water.

古文：今有小万岁、大万岁二溪，俱有桥架其上，水俱自西而东。
现代文：如今有小万岁、大万岁两条溪，都有桥架在溪上，水都是自西向东流。
English: Today, there are two streams, Small Long Live and Big Long Live, both of which have bridges on the stream, and the water flows from west to east.

古文：余以灵寿山必有胜可寻，及遍询土人，俱无可征，惟二流之易 千秋 存 万岁 耳。
现代文：我以为灵寿山必定有名胜风景可以探寻，等问遍当地人，才知都无可征询，只是两条水改掉了 千秋 的名保存着 万岁 的称谓。
English: I thought that Lingshou Mountain must have famous scenic spots that can be explored. After asking the local people, there is no way to know. However, the two rivers have changed their names, but they still retain the name of "Wanlong."

