古文：子曰： 道不远人。
现代文：孔子说： 中庸之道并不会远离人。
English: Confucius said: The way of moderation will not be far away from people.

古文：人之为道而远人，不可以为道。
现代文：如果有人实行中庸之道却远离他人，那就无法实行中庸之道。 
English: You can't practice the middle way if some people practice the middle way and stay away from others.

古文：诗云： 伐柯伐柯，其则不远。 
现代文： 《诗经》说： 砍削斧柄，砍削斧柄，斧柄的式样就在眼前。 
English: The "Song of Songs" says: "Cut the axe handle, cut the axe handle, the shape of the axe handle is in front of you."

古文：执柯以伐柯，睨而视之，犹以为远。
现代文：拿着斧子去砍树做斧把，准备照着旧斧把的样子做新斧把，但是斜着眼睛看上去，斧把的样子好像还是离得很远。
English: Hand holding axe handle logging axe handle, squinting to judge the two, still feel too far apart.

古文：故君子以人治人，改而止。忠恕违道不远。
现代文：所以，君子总是根据不同人的情况采取不同的办法治理，只要他能改正错误实行道就行。  做到忠恕就离道不远了，什么叫忠恕呢？
English: Therefore, a gentleman always takes different methods of governance according to the circumstances of different people, as long as he can correct the mistakes and implement the way. To achieve loyalty is not far from the way, what is loyalty?

古文：施诸己而不愿，亦勿施于人。
现代文：自己不愿意的事，也不要施加给别人。 
English: Do not impose on others what you are not willing to do yourself.

古文：君子之道四，丘未能一焉：所求乎子，以事父，未能也；所求乎臣，以事君，未能也；所求乎弟，以事兄，未能也；所求乎朋友，先施之，未能也。
现代文： 君子践行道有四个基本要求，我孔丘连其中的一项也没有能够做到：侍奉父亲的儿子所要求的，我尚未做到；对侍奉国君的臣下所要求的，我尚未做到；对侍奉兄长的。弟弟所要求的，我尚未做到；要求朋友做到的自己先做，我尚未做到。
English: There are four basic requirements for a gentleman to practice the Way, and I, Confucius, have not been able to fulfill even one of them: I have not yet fulfilled the requirements of a son serving his father; I have not yet fulfilled the requirements of a vassal serving the sovereign; I have not yet fulfilled the requirements of a brother serving his elder brother; I have not yet fulfilled the requirements of a younger brother; I have not yet fulfilled the requirements of a friend.

古文：庸德之行，庸言之谨；有所不足，不敢不勉；有余，不敢尽。言顾行，行顾言。
现代文：平常的德行努力实践，平常的言谈尽量谨慎。德行的实践有不足的地方，不敢不勉励自己努力；言谈却不敢放肆而无所顾忌。
English: Practice ordinary virtue diligently, and be as cautious as possible in ordinary speech. The practice of virtue is deficient, and you dare not encourage yourself to work hard; but you dare not speak recklessly without any scruples.

古文：君子胡不慥慥尔。 
现代文：说话符合自己的行为，行为符合自己说过的话，这样的君子怎么会不忠厚诚实呢？ 
English: How can such a gentleman be unfaithful and honest when his words match his actions and his actions match his words?

