古文：初六日，洞中事完，余欲一探铁旗岩，遂为行计。
现代文：初六日洞中事完毕，我想去探一探铁旗岩，便为出行做准备。
English: After the first six days in the cave, I wanted to explore Tieqi Rock, so I prepared for the trip.

古文：而是日雨复沛然，余不顾，晨餐即行。
现代文：可这一天雨又倾盆而下，我不顾，早餐后就动身。
English: But on this day, the rain poured down again. I ignored it and set off after breakfast.

古文：一里，过来时横列之北洞，又半里，抵横列之南洞，雨势弥大。
现代文：一里，路过来时横列的北洞，又走半里，抵达横列的南洞，雨势更大了。
English: One mile later, when I came to the North Cave, which is next to the row, I walked another half mile and arrived at the South Cave, which is next to the row. The rain was heavier.

古文：余犹欲一登南洞，乃攀丛披茅，冒雨而上，连抵二崖下，竟不得洞。
现代文：我仍想登一次南洞，便攀着树丛分开茅草，冒雨而上。一连到达两道山崖下边，竟然找不到洞。
English: I still wanted to climb the south cave once, so I climbed the trees to separate the thatch and climbed up in the rain. I reached the bottom of two cliffs in a row, but I couldn't find the cave.

古文：雨倾盆下注，乃倚崖避之。
现代文：雨倾盆下注，只好靠着崖壁避雨。
English: The rain poured down and we had to shelter from the rain against the cliff wall.

古文：益不止，顶踵淋漓，崖不能久倚，遂去盖拄伞为杖，攀茅为絙，复冒雨下。
现代文：雨益发不停，头顶脚跟雨水淋漓，石崖不能长久靠着，便去掉伞盖拄着雨伞当做拐杖，抓住茅草作为绳子，又冒雨下山。
English: The rain continued to fall, the rain was pouring down on my head and heels, and I couldn't stay on the cliff for long. I took off the umbrella cover, used the umbrella as a crutch, grabbed the thatch as a rope, and went down the mountain in the rain.

古文：盖其洞尚东，余所跻者在西，下望则了然，而近觅则茫不得见耳。
现代文：原来那洞还在东边，我登上去的地方在西面，从下边望去一目了然，可在近处寻找却茫然不可见了。
English: It turned out that the cave was still in the east, and the place I climbed up to was in the west. It was clear at a glance from the bottom, and I could look for it nearby, but it was nowhere to be seen.

古文：又冒雨一里，南过安灵潭。
现代文：又冒雨行一里，向南路过安灵潭。
English: I walked another mile in the rain, passing Anling Lake to the south.

古文：又半里，西渡溪，乃从岐西向山坳。
现代文：又走半里，向西渡过溪流，就从岔道往西向着山坳走。
English: After walking another half-mile, I crossed the stream to the west, and walked west from the trail to the mountains.

古文：半里，逾坳而西，路渐大，雨渐杀。
现代文：半里，越过山坳往西行，路渐渐宽起来，雨慢慢减弱。
English: Half a mile, over the mountains to the west, the road gradually widened, the rain slowly abated.

古文：透山峡而出，共一里，南逾小桥，则仰望桥南山半，有洞北向，有路可登，亟从之。
现代文：穿过山峡出来，共一里，向南越过小桥，就是来时横涉过的小溪的上游了。仰望桥南的山腰上：有个洞向北，有路可登，急忙顺着路走。
English: After crossing the gorge, a total of one mile, I crossed a small bridge to the south, which was the upstream of the stream I crossed when I came. Looking up at the mountainside south of the bridge: there is a hole to the north, there is a road to climb, and I hurriedly walked along the road.

古文：洞入颇深，而无他岐，土人制纸于中，纸质甚粗，而池灶烘具皆依岩而备。
现代文：洞进去很深，没有别的岔洞，本地人在洞中造纸，纸质十分粗糙，可水池炉灶烘烤的器具全都齐备地安置在洞中。
English: The cave is very deep, there are no other caves, the locals make paper in the cave, the paper is very coarse, but all the utensils for baking in the pool stove are fully equipped in the cave.

古文：中虽无人，知去古鼎不远。
现代文：洞中虽、无人，但心知距古鼎山已不远，便就在洞中扭去衣服上的水。
English: Although there was no one in the cave, he knew that the Gu Ding Mountain was not far away, so he wrung out the water on his clothes in the cave.

古文：乃就其中绞衣去水，下山，循麓再西，则村店鳞次，称山中聚落之盛焉。
现代文：下山后，沿山麓再往西走，就见村庄房屋鳞次栉比，称得上是山中村落的盛况。
English: After descending the mountain, walking further west along the foot of the mountain, you can see the village houses in staggered order, which can be said to be the grand situation of the villages in the mountains.

古文：问所谓铁旗岩者，居人指在西北峰半。
现代文：打听所谓铁旗岩的地方，居民指点在西北山峰的半腰上。
English: When residents enquire about the location of the so-called Tieqi Rock, they point to a spot halfway up the northwest peak.

古文：又半里，抵其峰之东南，见峰腰岩罅层出，余以为是矣。
现代文：又行半里，到达这座山峰的东南麓，见到山腰上岩石裂隙层层现出，我以为是了。
English: After another half-mile, when I reached the southeastern foot of this peak, I saw layers of rock cracks appear on the mountainside, and I thought that was it.

古文：左右觅路不得，为往返者数四。
现代文：在左右找不到路，为此往返了四次。
English: I couldn't find my way around, so I made four round trips.

古文：既乃又西，始见山半洞悬于上，阁倚于前，而左右终不得路。
现代文：随即就又往西走，才见半山腰洞高悬在上，楼阁紧靠在前，但在左右始终找不到路。
English: Then I walked west again, only to see the mid-mountain waist cave hanging high, the pavilion close to the front, but I could not find the road on the left and right.

古文：复往返久之，得垂钓童子为之前导。
现代文：再往返了很久，遇到个钓鱼的儿童为我在前领路。
English: After a long round trip, I met a fishing child who led the way for me.

古文：盖其径即在山下，入处为水淹草覆，故茫无可辨。
现代文：原来那小径就在山下，入口处被水淹没草丛覆盖着，所以茫然不能辨认出来。
English: Originally, the trail was at the bottom of the mountain, and the entrance was covered with flooded grass, so I couldn't make it out.

古文：稍上即得层级，有大木横偃级旁，上丛木耳，下结灵芝，时急于入岩，不及细简。
现代文：略上走马上遇到层层石阶，有大树横卧在石阶旁，上面丛生着木耳，下边结着灵芝，当时急于进洞，来不及细细查看。
English: As soon as you walk slightly up, you will encounter layers of stone steps. There are big trees lying next to the stone steps, with fungus on the top and reishi on the bottom. At that time, you were in a hurry to get into the hole and didn't have time to take a closer look.

古文：其岩南向，正与百步塘南之陆垅山相对。盖岩前古鼎之推扉以入。
现代文：及到岩洞时，却见岩洞的门双双掩着，用绳子结了个扣，知道僧人不在，可雨仍在倾泻，为此推开门进去。
English: When he reached the cave, however, he saw that the doors of the cave were both covered, and a knot had been tied with a rope. He knew that the monk was not there, but the rain was still pouring down, so he pushed open the door to get in.

古文：其岩南向，正与百步塘南之陆垅山相对。
现代文：这个岩洞向南，正与百步塘南面的陆垅山相对。
English: This cave faces south, directly opposite the Luye Mountain to the south of Baibutang.

古文：盖岩前古鼎村之山峙于左，沸水岩之山峙于右，岩悬山半，洞口圆通，而阁衙于内。
现代文：大体上岩洞前方古鼎村所在之山矗立在左边，沸水岩所在之山屹立于右边，岩洞悬在山腰上，洞口圆圆的无阻碍，而楼阁排列于内。
English: In general, in front of the cave, the mountain where Gu Ding Village is located stands on the left, the mountain where Boiling Water Rock is located stands on the right, the cave hangs on the mountainside, the cave mouth is round and unobstructed, and the castles are arranged inside.

古文：其内不甚宽广，丛列神像，右转宏扩而暗然，数丈之内，亦回环无他岐入矣。
现代文：洞内不怎么宽广，成群排列着神像，向右转去宏大开阔却很昏暗，几丈之内，也就回环曲折没有别的岔洞可入了。
English: The cave is not very wide, with statues of deities lined up in groups. Turning to the right, it is large and open, but very dark. Within a few meters, there is no other cave to enter.

古文：洞内之观虽乏奇瑰，而洞之胜，颇饶罨映。
现代文：洞内的景观虽缺乏奇伟的瑰丽，可洞中的景致，颇富有掩映的情趣。
English: Although the landscape inside the cave lacks the magnificent magnificence, the scenery inside the cave is quite interesting.

古文：铁旗之名，其以峰著，非以洞著耶！
现代文：铁旗的名字，那是以山峰著称的，不是以洞著名的！
English: The name of the Iron Banner, which is famous for its peaks, not for its caves!

古文：环视僧之爂具，在右转洞中，而卧帐设于前阁。
现代文：环视僧人的炊具，在向右转的洞中，而卧具蚊帐设在前边的阁中。
English: Looking around, the monk's cooking utensils are in the cave to the right, while the mosquito bed net is in the pavilion in front.

古文：因登其上，脱衣绞水而悬之窗间，取僧所留衣掩体以俟之。
现代文：因而登上楼阁，脱去衣服绞水并挂在窗口上，取来和尚留下的衣服遮身以等待他。
English: So he climbed up to the attic, took off his clothes, wrung them out and hung them on the window, and took the clothes the monk had left behind to cover himself and wait for him.

古文：过午，望见山下一僧，戴笠拨茅而登，既久不至，则采耳盈筐，故迟迟耳。
现代文：过了中午，望见山下有一个和尚，戴着斗笠拨开茅草上登，随后很久不到，原来是采木耳装满了竹筐，所以迟迟不到。
English: After midday, I saw a monk at the foot of the mountain, wearing a bucket hat and pushing aside the thatch to climb up. He didn't come for a long time afterwards. It turned out that the woodpile was full of bamboo baskets, so he didn't come late.

古文：初至，以余擅启其闭，辞色甚倨傲慢。
现代文：初到时，因为我擅自开了他关着的门，语言脸色都十分傲慢。
English: When I first arrived, because I opened his closed door without his permission, he was very arrogant.

古文：余告以远来遇雨，不得不入以待餔。
现代文：我告诉他因为远道而来遇上下雨，不得不进来等着给饭吃。
English: I told him that because I had come a long way and it was raining, I had to come in and wait for the meal.

古文：初辞以无米且无薪，余先窥其盎有夙储指存余的柴米等，不直折之而穿，强其必炊。
现代文：起初他用无米又无柴来推辞，我事先窥见他的瓦瓮里有平素储藏着的粮食，不直说揭穿他，强逼他必得烧饭。
English: At first, he used the excuse that he had no rice and no firewood. I had previously seen grain stored in his earthenware pot. I did not tell him the truth, but forced him to cook rice.

古文：时雨渐止，余因问龙岩所在。
现代文：做饭之后，我凑过去与他讲话，话一说便合拍，不但煮米供饭吃，而且煮木耳作菜，又找来木柴烤衣服。
English: After cooking, I went over to talk to him, and as soon as we spoke, we hit it off, not only cooking rice for meals, but also cooking wood for cooking, and finding firewood to bake clothes.

古文：僧初住山，误以沸水岩为龙岩，指余西南入。
现代文：吃过饭，拿钱酬谢他，又不接受。此时雨慢慢停了，我因而打听了龙岩所在之处。这个和尚刚住进山里，错把沸水岩当作龙岩，指点我往西南进山。
English: After eating, I took the money to thank him, but he did not accept it. At this time, the rain slowly stopped, so I inquired about the location of Longyan. This monk had just moved into the mountains, mistook Boiling Water Rock for Longyan, and pointed me to the southwest into the mountains.

古文：余初不知，从之。半里至其下，山下有水穴东北向，潴水甚满，而内声崆峒，其东复然，盖其下皆中空，而水满潴之。
现代文：我起初不知道，按他的话走，半里路来到山下，山下有个水洞朝向东北，积水非常满，而洞内水声空洞洞的，山东面又是这样，大概山下中间都是空的，而水满满的积在里边。
English: At first, I didn't know. I followed his words and walked half a mile to the bottom of the mountain. There was a water cave at the bottom of the mountain facing northeast. The water was very full, and the water inside the cave was hollow. The same was true on the east side of the mountain. The middle of the mountain was probably empty, but the water was full inside.

古文：然余所闻龙岩在山半，因望高而跻。
现代文：不过我听说龙岩在半山腰，因而望着高处上登。
English: However, I heard that Longyan was in the middle of the mountain, so I looked for a higher place to climb.

古文：其山上岐两峰，中削千仞，西有浅穴在削崖之下，东有夹罅在侧峰之侧，践棘披搜，终无危岩贮水。
现代文：此山上面岔出两峰，中间陡削高千初，西面在削崖之下有个浅穴，东面在侧峰的侧面有道夹缝，踩着荆棘拨开搜寻，始终没有贮着水的高洞。
English: There are two peaks on the top of this mountain. In the middle, there is a steeply-sharpened cliff. In the west, there is a shallow hole under the cliff. In the east, there is a slit in the side of the side peak. I stepped on the thorns to search, and there was no high cave with water.

古文：乃下，然犹不知其岩之为沸水不为龙岩也。
现代文：只好下山，但仍不知这个岩洞是沸水岩不是龙岩。
English: I had to go down the mountain, but I still didn't know whether this cave was boiling water rock or dragon rock.

古文：东半里，趋古鼎村。
现代文：往东半里，赶到古鼎村。
English: Half a mile to the east, we arrived at Gu Ding Village.

古文：望村后山南向洞开，一高峡上穹，一圆窍并峙。私念此奇不可失，即从岐东上。
现代文：望见村子后山上有向南张开的洞，一个又高又窄上边隆起，一个圆窍并峙，私下想来这处奇景不可错过，立即从岔道向东上山。
English: I saw a hole in the mountain behind the village that opened to the south, with a high and narrow ridge on the upper side, and a round hole standing side by side. I secretly thought that I should not miss this wonderful view, and immediately went up the mountain from the side road to the east.

古文：上穹者，如楼梯内升，而前有一垂石当门，东透为台，下从台前南入并峙之窍；圆窍者，如圜室内剜，而内有一突石中踞。
现代文：上边隆起的洞，里面如楼梯一样上升，而洞前有一块下垂的岩石挡在洞口，向东穿过去是平台，下去从平台前往南就进入并峙的圆窍；圆窍里边，如内中挖空的圆屋子，而洞内有一块突起的岩石盘踞在中央。
English: The raised hole on the upper side rises like a staircase inside, and in front of the hole there is a sagging rock blocking the hole. To the east, it is a platform, and when you go down from the platform to the south, you enter a parallel round hole; the inside of the round hole is like a hollowed-out round house, and there is a protruding rock in the middle of the cave.

古文：此时亦犹以沸水为龙岩，不复知此地可别觅龙岩也。
现代文：此时也仍把沸水岩当作龙岩，不再知道此地可找到别的龙岩了。
English: At this time, the boiling water rock is still regarded as dragon rock, and it is no longer known that other dragon rocks can be found here.

古文：既下，仍由村北旧路过小桥，则溪水暴涨，桥没水底者二尺余，以伞拄测以渡。
现代文：下山后，仍由村北的原路过小桥，就见溪水暴涨，桥身淹没在水下有二尺多，用伞拄着探测深浅才得以渡过来。
English: After descending the mountain, still on the original path from the north of the village, we crossed a small bridge and saw that the stream had risen sharply. The bridge was submerged under more than two feet of water, and we had to use an umbrella to detect the depth before we could cross over.

古文：念此小溪如此，若灵寿石堰，涨高势涌，必难东渡。
现代文：心想这条小溪如此，如是灵寿溪的石坝，水流高涨水势汹涌，必定难以涉到东面。
English: Think of this creek as if it were the stone dam of Lingshou Creek, the water flow is high and the water is turbulent, it must be difficult to wade to the east.

古文：适有土人取笋归古鼎，问之，日： 大溪诚难涉，然亦不必涉。
现代文：适好有当地人拿了竹笋回归古鼎村，向他打听，答： 大溪确实难涉过去，不过也不必涉水。
English: Fortunately, some local people took bamboo rafts to return to Gu Ding Village and asked him about it. He replied: It is indeed difficult to wade through the big stream, but you don't have to wade through the water.

古文：逾岭抵溪，即随溪北下，所涉者止一小溪，即可绕出老君洞左。 
现代文：越过岭走到溪边，立即顺溪流往北下走，要涉的只是一条小溪，就可绕到老君洞的左边。 
English: Cross the ridge to the stream and immediately follow the stream to the north. All you have to do is cross a small stream to get to the left side of Laojun Cave.

古文：余闻之喜甚。
现代文：我听到这话十分欢喜。
English: I was very happy to hear that.

古文：盖不特可以避涉，而且可以得安灵以北入洞源流，正余意中事，遂从之。
现代文：原来不但可以避免涉水，而且可以找到安灵潭以北流入洞中的源流，正是我心意中的事，便按他的话走。
English: It turned out that I could not only avoid wading, but also find the source of the stream that flows into the cave from the north of Anling Lake. This was exactly what I had in mind, so I followed his words.

古文：逾坳，抵来所涉安灵西堰，则水势汹涌，洵非揭厉所及。
现代文：越过山坳，到达来时涉过的安灵潭西侧的堤坝，就见水势汹涌，实在不是揭起衣服所能涉过去的。
English: After crossing the mountains and arriving at the dam on the west side of Anling Lake, which I had waded through when I arrived, I saw that the water was raging, and it was really not possible to wade through with uncovered clothes.

古文：乃即随溪左北行，里半，近隔溪横列之南洞，溪遂西转。
现代文：于是马上顺溪左往北行，一里半，走近隔溪横列的南洞，溪流于是向西转去。
English: So I immediately followed the stream to the left and headed north for a mile and a half, approaching the South Cave, which is across from the stream. The stream then turned to the west.

古文：又环西面一独峰，从其西麓转北，东向以趋老君后洞焉。
现代文：又环绕西面一座独立的山峰，从它的西麓转到北面，向东便能赶到老君岩后洞了。
English: It also encircles an independent mountain peak in the west, turning from its western foot to the north, and can reach the Laojun Rock Cave in the east.

古文：路至是俱覆深茅间，莫测影响，惟望峰按向而趋。
现代文：路到了这里全部覆盖在深深的茅草间，无法测知虚实，唯有望着山峰根据方位赶路。
English: The road to here is all covered in deep thatch, and it's impossible to tell what's real and what's not, except that you're expected to climb the mountain according to your position.

古文：共二里，见灵寿大溪已东去，不能为余阻；而西山夹中，又有一小溪西来注之，其上有堰可涉。
现代文：共行二里，见灵寿大溪已向东流去，不能阻挡我了；可西山夹谷中，又有一条小溪从西流来注入灵寿溪，溪上有坝可涉过去。
English: After two miles of walking together, I saw that the Lingshou Creek had flowed to the east and could no longer stop me. However, in the west mountain valley, there was another stream flowing from the west into the Lingshou Creek, and there was a dam on the stream to wade through.

古文：然挟涨势骄，以投鞭可渡之区，不免有望洋濡足之叹。
现代文：然而溪水仗着涨势骄横，在投鞭于溪就可断流而过的地方，不免有浸湿鞋子望洋兴叹之感。
English: However, the creek is proud of its rising tide, and in places where the stream can be cut off by throwing a whip at the creek, there is inevitably a feeling of soaking wet shoes looking at the ocean.

古文：踌躇半晌，既济而日已西沉，遂循溪而东。
现代文：踌躇了半响，涉过溪流后太阳已西沉，便沿溪流往东走。
English: He hesitated for a moment. After wading through the stream, the sun had set in the west, so he walked along the stream to the east.

古文：盖此处有径，乃北经刘公岩出下廓大道者，按方计里，迂曲甚多；时暮色已上，谓已在洞后，从其左越坳而下，即可达洞前，即无路，攀茅践棘，不过里许，乃竭蹶趋之，其坳皆悬石层嵌，藤刺交络，陷身没顶，手足莫施，如倾荡洪涛中，汩汩终无出理。
现代文：原来此处有小径，是往北经刘公岩通到去下廓的大道的路，按方位估计里程，迂回得太多；此时暮色已经上来，我以为已在洞后，从它左侧越过山坳下走，马上可到达洞前，即便无路，攀着茅草踏着荆棘，不过一里路左右，便尽力跌跌撞撞地往前赶路。那山坳都是悬石层层深嵌，藤条刺棘交缠，陷下身子没过头顶，手脚无法施展，如倾斜漂荡在洪水波涛之中，似湍急的水流终归没有走出去的办法。
English: Originally, there was a path here, which was the road to the north through Liu Gongyan leading to the lower gorge. The distance was estimated by the direction, and there were too many detours. At this time, the twilight had already come up, and I thought that I had walked behind the cave, from the left side of it, under the ridge, and I could immediately reach the front of the cave. Even if there was no path, climbing the thatch and stepping on the thorns, but about a mile away, I tried my best to stumble forward. The ridge was deeply embedded with layers of overhanging rocks, intertwined with thorns and thorns of rattan,

古文：计欲反辄刘公岩，已暝莫能及，此时无论虎狼蛇虺，凡飞走之簇，一能胜予。
现代文：打算返回刘公岩，天已昏黑无法赶到，此时无论是虎狼毒蛇，凡是会飞能走的族类，一概能胜过我。
English: I planned to return to Liu Gongyan, but it was already dark and I couldn't make it. At this time, no matter if it was a tiger, a wolf, a poisonous snake, or any species that can fly and walk, they would all be able to beat me.

古文：幸棘刺中翳，反似鸿蒙泥沌未凿，或伏穿其跨下，或蹂踔其翳端，久之竟出坳脊。
现代文：幸好刺棘在中间障蔽着，反而似未开凿的宇宙一片混沌，或者趴下穿过它的胯下，或者似猿猴样跳过那屏障的顶端，很久之后居然出到了坳脊上。
English: Fortunately, the thorn is covered in the middle barrier, but it seems like an unexplored universe is a chaos, or lie down and go through its armpit, or like a monkey jump over the top of the barrier, and after a long time actually come out on the ridge.

古文：俯而攀棘滚崖，益觉昏暗中下坠无恐。
现代文：俯身抓住荆棘滚下山崖，益发觉得在昏暗中下坠没有恐惧之感。
English: Leaning over, grabbing the thorns and rolling down the cliff, I increasingly felt that there was no fear of falling in the dark.

古文：既乃出洞左蔬蛙中，始得达洞，则参慧已下楗支扉矣。
现代文：不久到了洞左的菜地中，这才得以来到岩洞，参慧却已放下门门撑住了门。
English: Soon she was in the vegetable patch to the left of the cave, and only then did she reach the cave. However, Sanhui had already put down the door and was holding it open.

古文：呼而启扉，再以入洞，反若更生焉。
现代文：呼叫后开了门，再次得以入洞，反而觉得好像是再生了一样。
English: After the call, I opened the door and was able to enter the cave again. Instead, I felt as if I had been reborn.

古文：初七日，参慧早赴斋坛，余以衣濡未干，自炊自炙于岩中。
现代文：初七日参慧一早赶去念经做法事，我由于衣服潮湿未干，在岩洞中自己烧饭独自烤火。
English: On the morning of the seventh day of the first month of the year, I had to rush to the sutra chanting ceremony. Because my clothes were damp and not dry, I had to cook and bake my own food in the cave.

古文：而是日雨淋漓不止，将午稍间，乃趋城南讯舟，更入城补衣焉。
现代文：可这一天雨下得淋漓不止，将近中午时稍微间断了一下，于是赶到城南打听船，再进城去补衣服。
English: But on this day it rained incessantly, with a slight break around noon, so I hurried to the south of the city to ask about the boat, and then went into the city to mend clothes.

古文：是早有三舟已发，计须就其处俟等待之意之，盖舟从怀远来，非可预拟，而本地之舟则不时发也。
现代文：这天早 晨有三条船已开走，估计必须到此处等船，大致船从怀远驶来，不能预先计划，而本地的船却不定时发船。
English: Three boats had left that morning, and it was necessary to wait for them here. The boats generally came from far away, so it was impossible to plan ahead, while the local boats did not leave at regular intervals.

古文：薄暮乃返洞取囊，以就城南逆旅，而参慧犹未返岩，不及与别，为留钱畀其徒而去。
现代文：傍晚才返回洞中取行李，以便住到城南的旅店中，可参慧还未返回洞中，来不及与他道别，为此留了些钱给他徒弟便离开了。
English: In the evening, he returned to the cave to pick up his luggage so that he could stay at a hotel in the south of the city. However, before he returned to the cave, Sang-Hui had no time to say goodbye to him, so he left some money for his apprentice and left.

古文：是日七夕，此方人即以当中元七月十五日，民间传统节日，当晚追祀祖先，益不知乞巧，只知报先，亦一方之厚道也。其时雨阵时作，江水暴涨，余为沽酒浸酌，迨夜拥刍而卧，雨透茅滴沥，卧具俱湿。
现代文：这天是七夕，这地方的人就拿它当中元节，更不知乞巧，只知祭祖，也是这一方厚道淳朴的风俗了。此时阵雨不时发作，江水暴涨，我因而买酒来漫不经心地喝下，到夜里抱着干草便躺下了，雨水透过茅屋顶滴下来，铺盖全湿了。
English: It was the seventh day of the seventh lunar month, and the people of this place took it as the midpoint of the Lantern Festival. They did not know how to beg, only how to sacrifice ancestors, which was also a kind and simple custom. At this time, showers occurred from time to time, and the river rose sharply. I therefore bought wine and drank it carelessly. At night, I lay down holding the hay. Rainwater dripped down through the thatched roof, and the pavement was completely wet.

古文：初八日，雨势愈急，江涨弥甚。
现代文：初八日雨势更急，江水涨得更猛。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the rain became more intense and the river rose more violently.

古文：早得一舟，亟携囊下待；久之，其主者至，舟甚隘，势难并处，余乃复负囊还旅肆。
现代文：早上找到一只船，连忙带着行李下去等；很久之后，船主人到了，船很窄，情势难以共处，我只得又背着行李回旅店。
English: I found a boat in the morning, hurried down with my luggage and waited; a long time later, the owner arrived, the boat was very narrow, the situation was difficult to coexist, and I had to carry my luggage back to the hotel.

古文：是午水势垂垂，逾涯拍岸，市人见其略长刻增可能继续上涨，多移栖高原以避之。
现代文：这天中午水势浩浩森森，越过岸边拍打着江岸，街市中人见水位上涨刻度增高，多移居到地势高的原野上去避洪水。
English: At noon on that day, the water level was very high, and it was lapping over the bank of the river. People in the market saw the water level rise higher and higher, and many moved to high-lying fields to avoid floods.

古文：余坐对江流滔滔，大木连株蔽江而下，分陈漩涡，若战舰之争先。
现代文：我坐着面对滔滔江流，大树连根带叶布满江面流下来，分成队列打着漩涡，好像战舰一样争先恐后。
English: I sat facing the rushing river current. Large trees with roots and leaves streamed down the river, swirling in a line, scrambling like warships.

古文：土人多以小舟截其零枝，顷刻满载；又以长索系其巨干，随其势下至漩湾处，始掣入洄溜，泄之涯间。
现代文：当地人大多用小船拦截其中的零散枝叶，顷刻就装满一船；又用长绳系住那大树干，顺水势下到水湾漩流之处，方才拖入回旋的水流，把树拉到岸边。
English: Most of the local people used small boats to intercept the scattered branches and leaves, and immediately filled a boat; they also tied the large tree trunk with a long rope, and dragged it into the swirling water flow and pulled the tree to the shore.

古文：涯人谓： 庐且不保，何有于薪？ 舟人谓： 余因水为利，不若汝之胥溺等待淹没。 
现代文：岸边的人说： 房屋都将保不住，要柴火有什么用？  船上的人说： 我趁水势得到好处，不像你们等着被淹。 
English: And the men of the ship said, Behold, I have found grace in the face of the waters: and ye are not come unto the flood.

古文：交相笑也。
现代文：相互都笑了。
English: They both laughed.

古文：初九日，夜雨复间作，达旦少止，而水弥涨。
现代文：初九日夜里雨又断断续续地下起来，到天明慢慢停了，可江水更加上涨。
English: On the night of the 9th day of the first month, the rain intermittently rose again, and by dawn it slowly stopped, but the river water continued to rise.

古文：余仍得一小舟，坐其间，泊城南吊桥下。
现代文：我仍然找到一条小船，坐在船中，停泊在城南吊桥下。
English: I still found a small boat, sitting in the boat, moored under the South of the city suspension bridge.

古文：其桥高二丈，桥下水西北自演武场来，初涸不成流，至是倏而凌岸，倏而逾梁，人人有产蛙沉灶之虑。
现代文：此桥高二丈，桥下水从西北方自演武场流来，起初干涸不成流，到这里倏地越过江岸，倏地漫过了桥，人人都有炉灶沉入水底生出青蛙的忧虑。
English: This bridge is two stories high. The water under the bridge comes from the northwest from the martial arts arena. At first, it was dry and did not form a stream. At this point, it rushes over the riverbank and rushes over the bridge. Everyone is worried about the stove sinking to the bottom of the water and producing frogs.

古文：过午，主舟者至，则都司促表差也。
现代文：过了中午，主管船只的人来了，是都指挥使司催促奏表的差役。
English: After midday, the person in charge of the ship arrived. He was the person in charge of urging the captain to play the music.

古文：又有本邑差以独木舟四，缀其两旁，以赴郡焉，乃郡徼取以载卤者拦截载盐的舟。
现代文：又有本县的差役用四条独木舟，连缀在小船两旁，以便赶赴府城，是府里发公文取来装载盐卤的船。
English: In addition, there were four canoes used by the officials of this county, which were attached to both sides of the boat, in order to rush to the capital city. It was the government that issued the official document to load the brine boat.

古文：其舟虽小，得此四舟，若添两翼。
现代文：那船虽刁六得到这四条独木舟，好像添了两个翅膀。
English: The boat, though it was late in getting the four canoes, seemed to have gained two wings.

古文：下午发舟，东南行，已转西南，二十里，有山突立江石，乃西自古东山逾鸡笼坳而东抵于此者，又二十里为高街，有百家之聚在江右。
现代文：下午开船，往东南行，不久转向西南，二十里，有座山突立在江右，是自西边古东山越过鸡笼坳而后往东延到此地的山。又行船二十里是高街，有个百户人家的村落在江右。
English: In the afternoon, we set sail, heading south-east, and soon turned south-west. Twenty miles away, a mountain juts out on the right side of the river. It is a mountain that extends from the west of the ancient Dongshan over the chicken coop and then to the east to this place. Another twenty miles away is Gao Jie, and there is a village of a hundred households on the right side of the river.

古文：又五里，为芙蓉山亘其东南，有百家之聚在江左。
现代文：又行五里，是芙蓉山横亘在江流的东南，有个百户人家的村落在江左。
English: Another five miles away, across the southeast of the river, is Mount Hibiscus. A village of a hundred households is on the left side of the river.

古文：又西南五里为和睦墟。
现代文：又向西南行五里是和睦墟。
English: Another five miles to the southwest is Harmony Market.

古文：又西十里过舞阳江口。
现代文：又向西十里过了舞阳江口。
English: Another ten miles to the west passed the mouth of the Maiyang River.

古文：晚泊于沙弓，水且及街衢，尽失来时之砂碛悬崖矣。
现代文：晚上停泊在沙弓，江水将要漫到街道上，完全失去了来时满是沙石浅滩的悬崖了。
English: At anchor in the evening in the sand bow, the river water will flow into the streets, completely losing the cliff full of sand and stone shoals.

古文：初十日，昧爽放舟。一十五里，马头。
现代文：初十日黎明开船。行十五里，到马头。
English: We set sail at dawn on the 10th day of the 1st month. We sailed 15 miles to Ma Tau.

古文：五里，杨城，舟泊而待承差官署中的一般官吏取供给于驿。其江之西北有崖濒江，盖东与马头对者也。
现代文：五里，到杨城，船停下来等差役去骚站取给养。此处江的西北有山崖濒临江流，大致是在东面与马头相对的山。
English: Five miles to Yangcheng, the boat stopped to wait for the officers to go to Suo Station to get supplies. Here, in the northwest of the river, there is a cliff on the edge of the river, roughly the mountain opposite Ma Tou in the east.

古文：抵午始放舟。
现代文：到中午才开船。
English: The boat doesn't leave until noon.

古文：五里，草墟，十五里，罗岩。
现代文：五里，到草墟，十五里，到罗岩。
English: Five miles to Kushu, fifteen miles to Luoyan.

古文：村在江左，岩在江右。
现代文：村子在江左，罗岩在江右。
English: The village is on the left side of the river, and Luoyan is on the right side.

古文：其岩层突沓斑驳，五色灿然。
现代文：那岩石层层突起杂沓斑驳，五色灿烂。
English: The rocky outcrops are mottled with variegated, brilliant colors.

古文：南崖稍低，有石芝偃峰顶，有洞匏剜崖半，当亦有胜可寻，而来时以暑雨掩篷，去复仅隔江遥睇，崖间猿鹤，能不笑人耶！
现代文：南面的石崖稍低，有灵芝状的岩石倒卧在峰顶，山崖半腰有个山洞似葫芦样刺空，应当也有胜景可以探寻，但来时因为炎热天下雨掩着船篷，去的时候又仅能隔江远远斜视，山崖间的猿猴白鹤，能不讥笑人吗！
English: The stone cliff to the south is a little lower, with reishi-like rocks lying upside down on the peak, and there is a cave like a gourd-like hollow in the middle of the cliff. There should also be wonderful views to explore, but because of the hot weather and rain, the canopy covers the boat when coming, and when going, it can only look across the river far away. Can the monkey white crane between the cliffs not mock people?

古文：又五里杨柳，又五里大堡，又十五里旧县，又五里古城，又五里白沙湾。
现代文：又行五里到杨柳，又行五里是大堡，又是十五里为旧县，又行五里到古城，又五里到白沙湾。
English: Another five miles to Yangliu, another five miles to Dacheng, another fifteen miles to the old county, another five miles to the ancient city, and another five miles to Baisha Bay.

古文：江北有尖峰，两角分东西起，峭拔特甚，其南丛山即县治所倚也。
现代文：江北有座尖峰，两个尖角分在东西两头突起，特别陡峭挺拔，它南边成丛的山峦就是县城紧靠的地方了。
English: There is a sharp peak in the north of the Yangtze River. Two sharp corners protrude at the east and west ends. It is particularly steep and straight. The cluster of mountains to the south of it is where the county seat is located.

古文：江至白沙又曲而南，又十里，下午抵柳城县西门。龙江西至庆远来会。
现代文：江水流到白沙湾又曲向南，又行十里，下午抵达柳城县西门，龙江从西边流到庆远前来会合。
English: The river water flows to Baisha Bay and bends to the south, traveling another ten miles. In the afternoon, it arrives at Ximen, Liucheng County. The Longjiang River flows from the west to Qingyuan and comes to meet.

古文：按《志》，县治西有穿山，而治西平临江渚，地且无山，安得有 穿 ？
现代文：根据志书，县城西边有座穿山，但县城西面地势平坦濒临江中的小洲，地上尚且无山，哪能有 穿， ？
English: According to the record, there is a mountain pass on the west side of the county seat, but the west side of the county seat is flat and bordered by a small island in the river. There is no mountain on the ground. How can there be a pass?

古文：又按，城北有笔架、文笔峰，而不得其据。
现代文：又按，城北有笔架峰、文笔峰，可找不到它的根据。
English: It is also said that the north of the city has a pen stand peak and a writing peak, but there is no basis for it.

古文：遍询土人，有识者指城西南隔江峭峰丛立者为笔架、文笔，又言其巅有洞中透，穿山当亦即此。
现代文：问遍当地人，有认识的人指出城西南隔江山峰陡峭成丛矗立之处是笔架峰、文笔峰，又说峰顶有洞从山腹中穿透，穿山应当也就是此处。
English: After asking all the local people, some people pointed out that the place where the steep peaks of the mountains southwest of the city stand in a clump is the Pen Stand Peak and the Pen Pen Peak. They also said that the peak has a hole penetrating from the mountainside, and the mountain should be pierced here.

古文：然方隅与《志》不合，而《志》既各标，兹何以并萃耶？
现代文：但是方位与志书不相符，而且志书既然各自标出，这里为什么聚集在一起呢？
English: But the orientation does not match the books, and since the books are marked separately, why are they gathered here?

古文：承差复往驿中，余坐待甚久，泊多行少，不意顺流之疾，淹留乃尔！
现代文：差役再次前往骤站中去，我坐等了很久，停泊的时候多行船的时间少，想不到顺流而快行的常理到这时滞留如此！
English: The officer went to the jetty again. I had been waiting for a long time. When moored, there is less time to travel by boat. I couldn't have imagined that the fast-moving boat would be stranded like this!

古文：既暮，差至，促舟人夜行，遂得补日之不足焉。
现代文：天黑后，差役来了，催促船夫夜间行船，于是得以补足白天的不足了。
English: After dark, the guards came and urged the boatmen to sail at night, so they were able to make up for the lack of daylight.

古文：南二里，江之左为峦拦山，削崖截江，为县城南障；江之右即峭峰丛立，土人所指为笔架、穿山者，而透明之穴终无从瞩。
现代文：向南二里，江的左岸是峦拦山，陡削的山崖横截江流，是县城在南边的屏障；江的右岸就是成丛峭立的山峰，是当地人指认为笔架峰、穿山的地方，然而透亮光的洞穴始终无从看到。
English: Two miles to the south, on the left bank of the river, there is a steep cliff that cuts across the river and is a barrier to the south of the county seat; on the right bank of the river, there is a clump of steep peaks, which the locals refer to as the pen stand peak and the place where the mountain is pierced. However, there is no way to see the cave through the bright light.

古文：棹月顺流，瞬息十五里，转而东北行。
现代文：顺流月夜划船，瞬息就是十五里，转向东北行。
English: Rowing along the moonlit night, the instant is fifteen miles, turning to the northeast.

古文：又五里，有山兀耸江东岸，排列而南，江亦随之南折，滩声轰轰，如殷雷不绝，是为倒催滩。
现代文：又行五里，有座山突兀耸立在江东岸，排列着往南延伸，江流也随山势向南折，河滩水声轰轰，如隆隆雷声不绝于耳，这是倒催滩。
English: Another five miles, there is a mountain jutting out on the east bank of the river, extending southward, the river flow also turns southward with the mountain momentum, the sound of the water on the beach is booming, such as the rumble of thunder is incessant in the ear, this is the beach.

古文：岂山反插而水逆流，故谓之 倒 ，而交并逼促，故谓之 催 耶？
现代文：莫非是山反插而水逆流，所以把它标为 倒 ，而互相依傍逼近，故而把它叫做 催 吗？
English: Is it not that the mountain thrusts against the mountain and the water flows against it, so it is marked as upside down, but they are approaching each other, so it is called rushing?

古文：其时波光山影，月色滩声，为之掩映，所云挟飞仙者非欤！
现代文：此时波光山影，月色滩声，为它们衬托，所说的挟飞仙遨游的事没有啊！
English: At this time, the shimmering mountain shadows, the moon-colored beach sounds, as a foil for them, there is no such thing as the so-called flying fairies!

古文：又南十五里为古陵，又二十里为皇泽墟，西与鹅山隔山相向矣。
现代文：又往南十五里是古陵，又行二十里是皇泽墟，西面与鹅山隔山相望了。
English: Another fifteen miles to the south is the ancient mausoleum, another twenty miles is the imperial garden, and the west is separated from the Goose Mountain.

古文：又东南三里抵柳州府，泊其南门，城鼓犹初下也。
现代文：又南行三里抵达柳州府，停泊在府城南门，城中更鼓还刚刚敲响。
English: Another three miles southbound, we arrived at Liuzhou, anchored at the south gate of the city, and the city's traditional drum had just sounded.

古文：十一日，早入西南门，抵朱寓，则静闻与顾仆病犹未瘥痊愈也。
现代文：十一日早晨进入西南门，来到朱家寓所，就见静闻与顾仆的病仍未痊愈。
English: On the morning of the 11th day, when he entered the southwest gate and came to the Zhu family's apartment, he saw that Jing Xuan and his servant's illness had not yet been cured.

古文：下午出南门，沿江询往浔州舡，以中元节无有行者。
现代文：往返二十日，希望他们都有起色，而顾仆尤其瘦削虚弱，为此心中怅然不乐。十二日出了东门，投递名帖拜见王翰简的儿子罗源公，用生病推辞了。
English: On the 20th day of the round trip, I hoped that they would all get better, but Gu Min was particularly thin and weak, so I was very unhappy. On the 12th day, I went out of the east gate to deliver a famous postcard to meet Wang Hanjian's son Luo Yuan Gong, but he declined with illness.

古文：十三日，早，从南门渡江，循马鞍山北麓西行，折而南，循其西麓，由西南坞中登山。
现代文：返回来从北门进城。下午出了南门，沿江打听去得州的船，因为过中元节没有上路的人。十三日清早，从南门渡江，沿马鞍山北麓向西行，折向南，顺着山的西麓走，由西南方的山坞中登山。
English: In the afternoon, I went out of the south gate and walked along the river to inquire about the boat to Texas, because there were no people on the road during the Mid-Autumn Festival. In the early morning of the 13th, I crossed the river from the south gate, walked west along the northern foot of Ma'an Mountain, turned south, walked along the western foot of the mountain, and climbed from the dock in the southwest.

古文：石级草没，湿滑不能投足。
现代文：石阶没在草中，又湿又滑不能下脚。
English: The stone steps were not in the grass. They were wet and slippery and I couldn't get off my feet.

古文：附郭名岩，其荒芜乃尔，何怪深崖绝谷耶！
现代文：城郭附近的著名岩洞，荒芜如此，怎么怪得了深崖绝谷呢！
English: The famous rock cave near the castle is so deserted, how strange it is to have a deep cliff and valley!

古文：仙奕岩在山半削崖下，其门西向，正与立鱼山对，其岩内逼如合掌，深止丈余，中坐仙像，两崖镌题满壁。
现代文：仙奕岩在山半腰的削崖下，洞口向西，正与立鱼山相对，只隔着山下平敞的壑谷中的一个水潭。此岩洞内狭窄得如同合起来的手掌，深处只有一丈多，正中坐着神仙像，两侧石崖上刻着满壁的题记。
English: Xianyi Rock is under the cliff halfway up the mountain. The mouth of the cave faces west, directly opposite Standing Fish Mountain, only separated by a pool in the flat valley below the mountain. The cave is as narrow as the palm of a hand, with a depth of only one meter. In the middle sits a statue of a fairy god, and on both sides of the rock cliff are inscriptions carved all over the walls.

古文：岩外右有石端耸，其上迸裂成纹，参差不齐，虽可登憩，而以为黑肌赤脉，分十八道可弈，似未为确；左有崖上削，大篆 钓台 二字，江遥潭隘，何堪羡鱼。
现代文：洞外右边有岩石端端正正地耸起，石上进裂成花纹，参差不齐，虽可登上去休息，但认为它是黑色的肌肤红色的脉络，分为十八道线，可以下棋，似乎不确实；左边有石崖上削，用大篆写着 钓台 二字，江流遥远水潭狭小，怎能想钓鱼！
English: On the right side outside the cave, there is a rock that rises straight up, the stone is cracked into patterns, jagged, although it can be climbed to rest, but it is considered to be a black skin-red vein, divided into eighteen lines, can play chess, it seems not true; on the left there is a stone cliff, with a big anchor writing "fishing platform two words," the river flow is far away, the pond is narrow, how can you want to fish!

古文：盖博不及魏叔卿之台，钓不及严子陵之矶，惟登憩崖右石端，平揖立鱼，岩中梵音磬响，飘然天钧，振溢山谷也。崖左有级东南上，又裂一岩，形与仙弈同，中砌石为座，后有穴下坠，颇深而隘。
现代文：这里下棋赶不上魏叔卿的高台，钓鱼比不过严子陵的钓鱼台，唯有登上山崖右侧岩石顶上歇息，平对着立鱼山作揖。岩洞中的诵经声和钟磐的响声，飘飘然似天宫的仙乐，震荡洋溢在山谷间•石崖左侧有石阶向东南上去，又裂开一个岩洞，形状与仙奕岩相同，朝向西南。中央用石块砌成基座，后面有洞穴下坠，很深很窄。
English: The game of chess here is not as good as Wei Shujing's high table, and the fishing is no better than Yan Ziling's fishing table. The only way is to climb to the top of the rock on the right side of the cliff, rest, and stand flat against the fish mountain. The sound of chanting in the cave and the sound of the bell rock, floating like the celestial music of the Heavenly Palace, vibrate and overflow in the valley. • On the left side of the cliff, there are stone steps to the southeast, and a rock cave is cracked, the shape is the same as Xianyi Rock, facing the southwest. The center is built with

古文：右有两圆穴，大仅如筒，而中外透漏，第隘不能入其下。
现代文：右边有两个圆穴，大处仅如竹筒，可里外透亮漏风，只是太窄不能进入到那下面。
English: There are two round holes on the right. The large area is just like a bamboo tube, but the inside and outside are transparent and leak air. It's just too narrow to get underneath.

古文：东南抵坳中，又进一岩，亦浅隘不足观。
现代文：往东南走到山坳中，又迸裂开一个岩洞，也是又浅又窄不值得观览。
English: Walking south-east into the folds of the mountain, the ridge opens up a cave, which is shallow and narrow and not worth seeing.

古文：盖仙弈三岩，齐列山半，俱相伯仲而已。
现代文：大体上仙奕岩有三个洞，齐齐地排列在山腰，都不相上下而已。
English: In general, there are three caves in Xianyi Rock, which are all lined up on the mountainside, and they are all comparable.

古文：既西下山麓还望，复得一岩，亦西向，正在中岩之下。
现代文：向西下到山麓后回身望去，又见到一个洞，也是向西，正在中洞之下。
English: After descending to the west to the foot of the mountain, I looked back and saw another hole, also to the west, just below the middle hole.

古文：其岩亦浅隘，中昔有碑，今止存其趺。
现代文：此洞也是又浅又窄，洞中从前有碑，今天只存留下碑座。
English: This cave is also shallow and narrow. There used to be a monument in the cave, but today only the pedestal remains.

古文：岩上覆有三圆岩，若梅花之瓣，惜飘零其二，不成五。
现代文：洞上方下覆有三块圆形岩石，好似梅花的花瓣，可惜飘落了其他的两瓣，不成五瓣。
English: There are three round rocks above and below the cave, like the petals of a plum blossom, but unfortunately the other two petals have fallen, not making five petals.

古文：出岩前，有石平砥如枰，而赤纹纵横，亦未之有。岩右有石窟如峡，北透通明，其中开朗可憩。
现代文：出到洞前，有块平得如磨刀石样的岩石很像棋盘，而且红色花纹纵横交错，也是不曾有过的东西，岩石右方有个石窟如像峡谷，通向北边透出亮光，其中开阔明朗可以歇息。
English: In front of the cave, there is a piece of rock that is as flat as a grindstone, very much like a chessboard, and the red patterns criss-crossing are also something that has never existed before. On the right side of the rock, there is a grotto like a canyon, leading to the north side of the light, where the open and bright can rest.

古文：而有病夫卧其前，已蠕蠕不能屈伸。
现代文：可是有个病人躺在它前边，已蠕蠕而动不能屈伸了。
English: But a sick man lay in front of it, unable to move.

古文：荒谷断崖，樵牧不至，而斯人托命于此，可哀亦可敬也！
现代文：在荒凉的山谷断绝的石崖之中，樵夫牧人来不到，可此人把性命托付在此，值得同情也值得敬重呀！
English: In the desolate valley of the broken stone cliffs, the woodcutter herdsman cannot come, but this man entrusts his life here, worthy of sympathy and respect!

古文：出岩，西盘一山嘴，转其东南，山半有洞西南向。
现代文：出了岩洞，往西绕过一个山嘴，转到山东南麓，山腰有个洞朝向西南。
English: Out of the cave, to the west around a promontory, turn to the south-eastern foot of the mountain, there is a cave on the mountainside facing south-west.

古文：乃践棘而登，洞门岈然，其中高穹而上，深坠而下，纵横成峡，层叠为楼，不甚宽宏，而以危峻逼裂见奇者也。
现代文：于是踩着荆棘上登，洞口样子十分深邃，洞中向上高高隆起，往下深坠，纵横交错形成峡谷，层层叠叠成为楼台，不怎么宽大，却是以高险陡峻逼窄迸裂见奇的山洞。
English: As a result, I climbed up on thorns. The mouth of the cave looked very deep. The middle of the cave rose up high and fell down deep, crisscrossing to form a canyon. The layers became a platform. It was not very wide, but it was a cave with a high, dangerous, steep and narrow crevice.

古文：入门，有石突门右，蹲踞若牛而青其色，其背复高突一石，圆若老人之首。
现代文：进入洞口，有岩石突立洞口右侧，蹲卧着好像牛而颜色是青的，它背上又高高突起一石，圆得像老人的头。
English: Entering the cave, there is a rock protruding from the right side of the cave mouth, crouching like a cow and the color is blue, and a rock protrudes high on its back, round like an old man's head.

古文：先是，立鱼僧指其处有寿星岩，必即此矣。
现代文：这之前，立鱼山的僧人指点此处有个寿星岩，必定就是这里了。
English: Before that, a monk from Tateyushan pointed out that there was a rock called Shouxing Rock here, so it must be here.

古文：但所指尚在东南黄崖悬削处，盖黄崖西面与立鱼对，而此则侧隐于北，当时未见耳。
现代文：但他指的地方还在东南方黄色石崖悬绝陡削之处，大概是黄色石崖在西面与立鱼山相对，而此地却在侧边隐藏于北面，当时未见到罢了。
English: But the place he was referring to was still in the southeast, where the yellow cliff clung precipitously. Presumably, the yellow cliff was on the west side opposite Standing Fish Mountain, while this place was hidden on the north side, and it was not seen at that time.

古文：由突石之左悬级下坠，西出突石之下，则下坠渊削，而上级虚悬，皆峭裂不通行。
现代文：由突出之石左边高悬的石阶下坠，向西来到突出的岩石下边，就见下边陷成陡削的深渊，而上面石阶悬在虚空中，全然峭拔绽裂不能通行。
English: From the protruding stone on the left, the high-hanging stone steps fall down, and when you come to the west to the underside of the protruding rock, you can see the underside falling into a steep abyss, while the upper stone steps are suspended in the void, completely cracked and impassable.

古文：东入峡道中，湾环而进，忽得天光上映，仰睇若层楼空架，而两崖上覆下嵌，无由蹠虚上跻。
现代文：往东走入峡中的道路上，弯弯绕绕地前进，忽然天光在上方照射进来，仰面斜视好像层层高楼架在空中，而两侧的石崖上面覆盖下来下边深嵌地中，无从踏着虚空上登。
English: On the road to the east into the canyon, the bends wind around and around, and suddenly the skylight shines in above, the back looks sideways like layers of high-rise buildings in the air, and the stone cliffs on both sides are covered from above and deeply embedded in the ground, and it is impossible to climb up into the void.

古文：第遥见光映处，内门规列，高悬夹崖之端，外户楞分，另透前山之上，其顶平若覆帷，恨不能牵绡一登，怅怅而出。
现代文：只是远远见到亮光照射之处，里面排列着圆圆的洞口，高悬在狭窄的石崖顶端，外边分出门窗，另外穿透到前山之上，洞顶平得如下覆的筛慢，恨不能拉着绳索登上，只好闷闷不乐地出来。
English: However, the place where the light shines can be seen from far away. Inside, round holes are lined up, hanging high on the top of a narrow stone cliff, with doors and windows on the outside, and penetrating to the top of the mountain in front. The top of the cave is as flat as a sieve. If you want to climb up with a rope, you have to come out sullenly.

古文：更下山而东，仰见北山之半，复有一门南向，计其处当即前洞光映所通也。
现代文：再下山往东走，抬头见北山的半中腰，又有一个洞口向南，估计那里应当就是前边那个洞亮光照射通着的地方了。
English: Further down the mountain to the east, I looked up and saw the half-way up the north mountain, and there was another cave opening to the south. I estimated that it should be the place where the bright light of the hole in front passed through.

古文：见其下俱回崖层亘，乃稍东，循崖端西北而上，逾下崖，抵中崖，而上崖悬绝不得上。
现代文：见它下边都是回绕的山崖层层横亘着，便稍向东走，沿崖外端往西北上登，越过下层山崖，来到中间一层山崖，可上层山崖悬绝不能上去。
English: Seeing that the lower side of it is covered with layers of winding cliffs, I walked a little to the east, climbed along the outer edge of the cliff to the northwest, crossed the lower cliff, and came to the middle cliff, but the upper cliff can never go up.

古文：复从前道下，更东循崖角西北登上崖。
现代文：又从先前的路线下来，再往东沿崖角向西北登上上层山崖。
English: After descending from the previous route, I continued eastward along the cliff angle and climbed the upper mountain cliff to the northwest.

古文：沿崖西陟，则洞前三面皆危壁倚空，惟此一线盘崖可通。
现代文：沿山崖向西上登，就见洞前三面都是高壁刺天，唯有此一线绕着山崖可以通行。
English: Climbing westward along the cliff, you can see that the three sides in front of the cave are high walls piercing the sky. Only this line around the cliff is passable.

古文：前有平石如露台，内旋室万丈，四壁俱环柱骈枝，细若镂丝垂络，联布密嵌，而顶平如幕，下平如砥。
现代文：前边有个平台如像露天舞台，洞内是一个方方一丈的石室，四，壁都环绕着石柱和并列的枝条，细得好似镂刻出的丝束和下垂的缨络，联贯铺开密实镶嵌，但洞顶平得如同幕布，下边平得好似磨刀石。
English: In front, there is a platform like an open-air stage. Inside the cave, there is a square-shaped stone chamber. Fourth, the walls are surrounded by stone pillars and parallel branches, as thin as silk bundles carved with a chisel and hanging twine. They are densely inlaid, but the top of the cave is flat like a curtain, and the bottom is flat like a sharpening stone.

古文：西北内通一门，下临深峡，果即前所仰望透空处也。
现代文：西北面的深处通着一个洞口，下临深峡，果然就是先前抬头望见透出天空之处了。
English: In the depths of the northwest, there is a cave entrance leading to a deep gorge, which is indeed the place where I looked up and saw the sky.

古文：若断塞所登一线盘崖，从峡中设梯以上，此岩高朗如阁，正巢栖穴处之妙境矣。
现代文：假如阻断登上来的那一线曲折的山崖，从峡中架梯子上来，此洞高悬明朗如像楼阁，正是避世隐居的绝妙场所了。
English: If you block the line of twists and turns of the cliff and climb up the ladder from the middle of the gorge, this cave is high and clear like a castle, and it is a wonderful place to hide from the world.

古文：坐憩久之，仍循崖端东南下，其南复有山鹊起。
现代文：坐着休息了很久，仍沿山崖顶端向东南下山，它南面又有座山趁势奋起。
English: After sitting and resting for a long time, I still went down the mountain along the top of the cliff to the southeast, and there was another mountain to the south that took advantage of the situation.

古文：从两山夹中取道而东，可出马鞍之东隅，而中塞无路；循南山西麓取道而南，可抵上龙潭，乃往来大道也。
现代文：从两山相夹中取道往东走，可以出到马鞍山的东隅，但中段阻塞无路；沿南山的西麓取道往南走，可到达上龙潭，是行人往来的大道。
English: If you take the road to the east between the two mountains, you can get to the eastern corner of Ma'anshan, but there is no road in the middle. If you take the road to the south along the western foot of Nanshan, you can reach Shanglongtan, which is a pedestrian thoroughfare.

古文：从西麓仰眺山半，悬崖穹拓，黄斑赭影，轰然西向，欲一登无路。
现代文：从西麓仰望山腰，悬崖弯隆宽阔，满是黄色赫红色的斑影，巍然向西，想登一次却无路。
English: Looking up at the mountainside from the western foot, the cliff is steep and wide, full of yellow and red splotches, rushing to the west, but there is no way to climb it.

古文：循山南行，有微径从草中东上，顷即翳没。
现代文：顺山往南行，有毛毛路从草丛中往东上去，顷刻就湮没了。
English: Heading south along the mountain, there is a rough road from the grass to the east, and it disappears in an instant.

古文：蝎蹶上登，得一门，外虽穹然，而内仅如合掌，无可深入。
现代文：竭力跌跌绊绊上登，找到一个洞口，外边虽弯然隆起，但洞内仅如合起的手掌，不能深入。
English: He struggled to climb up, stumbling and tripping, until he found a hole. Although the outside was curved and raised, the inside of the hole was just like the palm of a closed hand and could not be penetrated.

古文：望黄赭轰削处，已在其北，而崖嘴间隔，不可盘陟。
现代文：望见黄红色崩裂陡削之处，已在它的北面，但山崖的尖嘴从中间隔断，不能绕着上登。
English: You can see the yellow-red cracked scarp to the north of it, but the tip of the cliff is cut off from the middle, so you can't climb around it.

古文：复下至山麓，再从莽中望崖而登，久之抵轰崖下。
现代文：再下到山麓，又从草莽中望着山崖上登，很久之后才到了崩裂的山崖下边。
English: Then I went down to the foot of the mountain, and climbed up the cliff from the middle of the grass, looking up at it. It was a long time before I reached the bottom of the cracked cliff.

古文：其崖危削数千尺，上覆下嵌，若垂空之云，亘接天半。
现代文：此处山崖高削有数千尺，上边下覆下面深嵌，如垂在空中的云彩，绵亘连接到半空中。
English: Here, the mountain cliff is thousands of feet high, and the top and bottom are deeply embedded, like clouds hanging in the air, connected to the mid-air.

古文：每当平削处，时裂孔一方，第琐碎不能深入。
现代文：每当有一平削之处，时常裂开一个孔洞，其中有许多纷纭奇异之状，但只是细小繁多不能深入。
English: Whenever there is a flattened place, a hole is often cracked, in which there are many strange shapes, but only small ones can not go deep.

古文：循崖下北行，上有飞突之崖，下有累架之石，升降石罅中，虽无窈窕之门，如度凌虚之榭，亦足奇也。
现代文：沿山崖下往北行，上方有飞突之崖，下边有重重叠叠架起来的岩石，在石缝中爬上爬下，虽然没有幽深的洞口，如越过凌空的台榭，也算得上是不寻常的了。
English: Going north along the cliff, there are cliffs of flying buttresses above, and rocks stacked on top of each other below. Climbing up and down in the crevices, although there are no deep openings, such as over the overhanging ledge, is also unusual.

古文：时日已过午，下山欲南寻上龙潭，计无从得饭；而东向峡中，循马鞍东麓，即傍郭循江，即易得食，而又可窥屏风、登台，兼尽王氏山房诸胜，且取道两山间，更惬所愿也。
现代文：此时日色已过中午，下山想向南去找上龙潭，考虑无法找到饭吃；而向东经由峡中，沿马鞍山东麓走，就能靠近城郭顺江而行，既容易得到食物，且又可窥视屏风山、登台山，兼而游王氏山房诸处胜景，况且取道两山之间，更满足了我的心愿。
English: At this time, the sun had passed noon, and I wanted to go down the mountain to the south to find Shanglongtan, considering that I could not find food to eat; and to the east, through the middle of the gorge, along the eastern foot of Ma'an Mountain, I could walk close to the castle along the river. It was easy to get food, and I could also look at Pingfeng Mountain, Mount Tengdai, and tour the scenic spots of Wang's mountain house. Moreover, taking the road between the two mountains satisfied my wish.

古文：乃披莽而东，见两崖石皆巉á山势险峻嵌，丛翠翳之，神愈飞动。
现代文：于是拨开丛莽往东行，见两侧石崖都高险深嵌，成丛的翠色遮盖着山石，神魂愈加飞动。
English: So he pushed aside the clumps and drove eastward. He saw that the cliffs on both sides were steep and deeply embedded. The emerald color of the clumps covered the rocks, and his spirit soared even higher.

古文：既而得艺蔬之畦。
现代文：随即遇上种菜的菜地。
English: Then I came across a vegetable patch where they grow vegetables.

古文：又东一里，得北来大道。
现代文：又向东一里，遇上北来的大道。
English: Another mile to the east, I met the main road coming from the north.

古文：截大道横过，东去一里得聚落，则郡东门之对江渡也。
现代文：横截大道而过，往东去一里见到村落，是府城东门对面江边的渡口。
English: Cross the avenue and go one mile east to see the village. It is the ferry crossing on the opposite side of the river from the east gate of the prefecture.

古文：于是濒江南岸倚屏风山北麓东行，其处村居连络。
现代文：从这里濒临江流南岸紧傍屏风山北麓往东行，此处村庄居屋连接不断。
English: From here on the southern bank of the river close to the northern foot of Mount Byobu to the east, here the village HOS is constantly connected.

古文：转而北去，路从山南绕其东麓而北。
现代文：一里路，抵达登台山，居民聚居得愈加稠密。江流被山扼住，转向北流去，路从山南绕到山的东麓往北走。
English: After a one-mile journey, when they arrived at Mount Tengdai, the residents were living more and more densely. The river flow was choked by the mountain and turned to the north, and the road went north from the south of the mountain to the eastern foot of the mountain.

古文：闻其处有杨文广洞，甚深杳，从江底潜通府堂，今其洞已塞，土人莫能指导，仅人人言之而已。
现代文：听说此处有个杨文广洞，非常深邃，从江底潜通到府衙的大堂，今天此洞已堵塞，当地人无人能指路领路，只是人人这样说而已。
English: I heard that there is a Yang Wenguang cave here, very deep, from the bottom of the river to the hall of the prefectural government, today this hole has been blocked, no local people can show the way, but everyone just says so.

古文：登台之北又一里，有山横列三峰，其阴即王氏山房所倚，余昔从洛容来，从其北麓渡江者也。
现代文：登台山的北面又走一里，有座山横列着三座山峰，山北就是王氏山房依傍之处，是我以前从洛容县来，从它的北麓渡江的地方。
English: I walked another mile to the north of Mount Taishan. There is a mountain with three peaks in a row. The north of the mountain is where Wang's lodge is located. I used to come from Lorong County and crossed the river from its northern foot.

古文：兹从南至，望见南麓有洞骈列，路当出其东隅，而遥闻洞前人声沸然，乃迂而西北至其下，则村氓之群社于野庙者也。
现代文：这次从南面来到，望见南麓有洞并列，路应当出到它的东隅，但远远听见洞前人声鼎沸，便绕道向西北来到洞下，原来是村民成群在野外庙宇中祭祀土地神。
English: This time, coming from the south, I saw a row of caves at the southern foot, and the road should go out to the eastern corner of it. However, I heard people's voices booming in front of the cave from far away, so I took a detour to the northwest and came to the bottom of the cave. It turned out to be a group of villagers worshiping the land god in an open-air temple.

古文：洞在庙北半里，南向岈然。
现代文：洞在庙北半里处，朝向南方，样子十分深邃。
English: The cave is located half a mile north of the temple, facing south, and is very deep.

古文：其山倒石虚悬，内裂三峡，外通三门，宛转回合而不甚深扩，然石青润而穴旁通，亦不意中所难得者。
现代文：那山倒石虚悬，洞内裂成三条 峡谷，外边通有三个洞口，弯弯转转回绕着却不怎么深广，然而石色青润而洞穴四通八达，也是不意之中所难得的了。
English: The rock-climbing mountain is suspended, the cave is split into three canyons, and there are three openings on the outside. It is not very deep, but the stone is bluish and the cave extends in all directions. It is also unexpectedly rare.

古文：出洞，望西峰之阳，复有一岩南向，乃涉洼从之。
现代文：出洞来，望见西峰的南面，又有一个岩洞向南，便涉过洼地走向那里。
English: When I came out of the cave, I could see the south side of the west peak, and there was another cave to the south, so I waded through the depression to get there.

古文：适有妇负刍自北坳来，问东西二洞何名，曰： 东洞名蛮王，西洞浅而无名，然中有蛇穴之。 
现代文：恰好有个妇女背着草从北面山坳中走来，打听东西两个洞叫什么名字，答： 东洞名叫蛮王洞，西洞浅而无名，但洞中有蛇筑了巢穴。 
English: Just then, a woman carrying grass on her back came walking from the ridge on the north side of the mountain. She asked what the names of the two caves were, and the answer was: The east cave is called the Barbarian King Cave, and the west cave is shallow and nameless, but there are snakes in the cave that have built nests.

古文：问： 北坳可达王氏山房？ 
现代文：问： 北边的山坳可否到达王氏山房？ 
English: Q: Can the north ridge of the mountain reach Wang's mountain house?

古文：曰： 北坳樵径，无岐可通；大路从东麓而遥，小径缘西坡而近，然晚辄有虎，须急行。 
现代文：答： 北面山坳中是打柴的小径，没有岔路可通；大路从东麓走但远，小径沿西面的山坡走要近些，但晚上常有老虎，必须快走。 
English: A: In the mountains to the north, there is a path for collecting firewood. There is no alternative route. The main road is far from the eastern foot of the mountain, and the path along the western slope is closer. However, there are often tigers in the evening, so you have to walk fast.

古文：余乃上西洞。
现代文：我于是登上西洞。
English: So I went up to the West Cave.

古文：洞门亦南向，而中果浅，皆赭赤之石，下无旁通之窍，何以穴蛇？
现代文：洞口也是向南，而洞中果然浅，都是褚红色的岩石，下边没有旁通的洞穴，用什么来做蛇的巢穴？
English: The mouth of the cave is also to the south, but the cave is indeed shallow, all of it is reddish-brown rock, and there is no side passage to the cave below. What is used to make a snake's nest?

古文：内高五六尺，复有石板平庋，虚悬不能上。
现代文：洞内高五六尺，又有石板平架着，悬在虚空不能上去。
English: The inside of the cave is five or six feet high, and the stone slabs are flat, so you can't go up if you are suspended in the void.

古文：而石板中央有孔一圆，如井栏中剜，下适有突石，践石透孔，颈项恰出孔上，如罪人之囊三木古代戴在犯人颈、手、脚上的木制刑具者，然耸肩束臂，可自此上跃也。
现代文：可石板中央有一圆孔，如井栏一样在中央荆空，下边恰好有块突起的岩石，踩着石头穿入圆孔，脖子正好钻出圆孔上边，如犯人戴着木枷的样子，不过耸起肩紧束手臂，可从此处跃上去。
English: However, there is a round hole in the middle of the stone slab. Like a well fence, there is a hollow space in the middle, and there is a protruding rock at the bottom. Stepping on the rock will penetrate the round hole, and the neck will just drill out the top of the round hole. It looks like the prisoner is wearing shackles, but if you shrug your shoulders and tightly bind your arms, you can jump up from here.

古文：但其上亦不宽奥，不堪舒憩。
现代文：但那上面也不宽深，不能舒展身体歇息。
English: But it's not wide and deep up there, so you can't stretch out and rest.

古文：遂下，从西坡小径下山，循西麓而北逾一冈，竹坞蓊丛。
现代文：于是下来，从西面山坡的小径下山，沿西麓往北越过一道山冈，坞中竹林成丛郁郁葱葱。
English: So I went down, descending from the path on the western slope of the mountain, along the western foot to the north over a mountain, lush bamboo groves in the dock.

古文：里余而得一茅舍，东倚山麓，西临江坡。
现代文：一里多路便见到一间茅屋，东面紧靠山麓，西边面临江岸的坡地。
English: After more than a mile, they came across a thatched cottage. To the east, it was close to the foot of the mountain, and to the west, it faced the slope of the riverbank.

古文：坡上密箐蔽空，连麓交荫，道出其下，如行空翠穴中，不复知有西烁之日也。
现代文：坡地上密布的竹林遮蔽了天空，连到山麓树荫相接，道路途径树荫下，如像行走在高空的翡翠洞穴之中，不再知道有西晒的烈日了。
English: The dense bamboo forest on the slope obscured the sky, and even the foot of the mountain was in the shade. The road was in the shade, like walking in a high-altitude emerald cave, no longer knowing the scorching sun.

古文：一里，北抵姚埠，即东门渡也。
现代文：一里，向北抵达姚埠，就是东门的渡口。
English: One mile north to Yaobu is the ferry port of Dongmen.

古文：其上村居数十家。
现代文：渡口上有村庄民居数十家。
English: There are dozens of village residences on the ferry crossing.

古文：由村后南向登，上即王氏山房。
现代文：由村后向南登山，上面就是王氏山房。
English: From the back of the village to the south of the mountain, above is the Wang's mountain hut.

古文：时日已昃太阳偏西。
现代文：此时日已西斜。
English: By this time, the sun had already set.

古文：余先每入一岩，辄以所携龙眼、饼饵箕踞啖之，故至此而后索餐，得粥四瓯，饭与茶兼利之矣，遂南入竹坞中，憺筜万个，森森俱碧玉翔烟，觉尘嚣之气俱尽。
现代文：我先前每进入一个岩洞，总是拿出带着的龙眼、糕饼盘腿坐下吃，所以到此地后才找饭吃，得到四小盆稀粥，饭与茶的好处兼而得之了。于是往南走入布满竹林的山坞中，大小竹子千万株，竹影森森全是碧玉飞烟，觉得尘世间纷扰喧嚣的气息全消失了。
English: Previously, every time I entered a cave, I always took out the longan and pastry I had brought with me and sat down cross-legged to eat, so I only looked for food after I got here. I got four small pots of gruel, and I got the benefits of rice and tea. So I walked south into the dock full of bamboo forests, with tens of thousands of bamboo trees of all sizes, and the bamboo forest was all jasper and smoke. I felt that the atmosphere of the hustle and bustle of the world had completely disappeared.

古文：已而上山，石磴甚峻，西缘南折，穿榕树根中，透其跨下。
现代文：随即上山，石瞪很陡，往西顺着走向南折过去，穿过榕树根中，钻过它的胯下。
English: Then I went up the mountain, the rock face was very steep, and I went west along the south bend, through the roots of the eucalyptus tree, and under its branches.

古文：其树小于桂林之榕树门，而一横跨街衢，一侧倚崖丰，穿根透隙则同也。已又东上，过一庋石片下，则山房在焉。
现代文：随后又向东上走，经过一块平架的石片下边，石片离地面五六尺，在山崖侧旁平架出来，薄处与作木架的木板相等，王氏山房就在这里。
English: Then he walked eastward, passing under a flat stone slab. The stone slab is five or six feet off the ground, flatly erected on the side of the cliff, and the thin part is equal to the wooden board used for the wooden frame. Wang's mountain hut is here.

古文：小楼三楹横列洞前，北临绝壑，西瞻市堞纵横，北眺江流奔衍，东指马鹿、罗洞诸山，分行突翠，一览无遁形。
现代文：小楼三间横列在洞前，北边下临悬绝的壑谷，远望西面纵横的街市城墙，眺望北方江流奔泻，东面指点马鹿、罗洞诸山，分成行列苍翠突起，一览无余。
English: Three small buildings are lined up in front of the cave, with the north side facing the overhanging Shibuya Valley, looking out to the west at the vertical and horizontal city walls, overlooking the rushing of the Hokkien River, and pointing to the mountains of Mala and Luodong in the east, divided into rows of verdant protrusions, with an unobstructed view.

古文：楼后即洞，洞高不为楼掩，中置西方诸像，而僧则托栖楼中，若为洞门锁钥者。
现代文：楼后就是洞，洞高未被楼遮住，洞中放着许多佛像，而僧人却寄宿在楼中，好像是守护山洞大门的锁和钥匙。
English: Behind the building is a cave, the height of the cave is not covered by the building, there are many Buddha statues in the cave, but the monks are lodging in the building, it seems to be the lock and key to guard the cave door.

古文：盖王氏昔读书于此，今则以为僧庐，而名东林洞焉。
现代文：原来是王氏从前在此读书，今天却成了僧房，并起名叫东林洞了。
English: Originally, Wang used to study here, but today it has become a monk's house and is called Donglin Cave.

古文：洞后西、东分两窍：西窍从南入，稍转而东，渐黑隘，不堪深入；东窍从南入，转而东忽透明焉。
现代文：洞后西、东两面分出两个洞穴：西边的洞穴从南面进去，渐渐转向东，慢慢变得又黑又窄，不能深入；东边的洞穴从南面进去，转向东忽然透人亮光来。
English: Behind the cave, on the west and east sides, there are two caves: the cave on the west side enters from the south and gradually turns to the east, slowly becoming dark and narrow, and cannot be penetrated; the cave on the east side enters from the south and turns to the east, suddenly shining brightly.

古文：逾东阈而出，巨石迸裂成两罅：一罅北透则石丛，而平台中悬，可以远眺；一罅东下则崖削，而茅阁虚嵌，可以潜栖。
现代文：越过东边的石门槛出洞来，巨石迸裂成两条裂缝：一条石缝裂透北边则岩石成丛，而中间悬着平台，可以远眺；一条石缝往京卞裂则崖壁陡削，而茅草建成的楼阁嵌在虚空中，可以隐居。
English: After crossing the stone threshold on the east side, a hole appeared, and the boulder cracked into two cracks: a stone crack through the north side is a rock clump, and a platform hangs in the middle, which can be viewed from afar; a stone crack to the Beijing cliff is a steep cliff, and a thatch-built mansion is embedded in the void, which can be secluded.

古文：四旁皆耸石云嘘慢慢地吐气，飞翠鸾舞，幽幻险烁，壶中之透别有天，世外之栖杳无地，非若他山透腹而出，一览即尽也。
现代文：四旁都是高耸的岩石吐着云气，翠色翻飞莺凤起舞，幽寂奇幻，险峻闪烁，钻入酒壶中就别有洞天，世外的仙境杳然无处可寻，如果不是穿透别座山的山腹出来，看一眼就完了。
English: On all sides are towering rocks exhaling clouds, emerald-colored flying dragonflies and phoenixes dancing, quiet fantasy, precipitous twinkling, there is no cave in the wine jug, and the wonderland outside the world is nowhere to be found, if it is not through the mountainside of another mountain, it is over at a glance.

古文：既而还至前洞，望渡舟甫去西岸。
现代文：不久返回到前洞，望见渡船刚离开西岸。
English: Soon after returning to Mae-dong, we could see the ferry just leaving the west coast.

古文：乃从洞东南跻岭上，石磴危峻，所望愈扩，遂南瞰登台焉。
现代文：于是从洞前向东南登到岭上，石瞪险峻，望得见的地方更广阔，终于向南俯瞰到登台山了。
English: As a result, I climbed up the ridge from the front of the cave to the southeast, the rocks were steep, the view was wider, and finally I could look down to the south and see Mount Dengdai.

古文：久之下山，则渡舟适至，遂由东门，共二里返寓。
现代文：很久才下山，就见渡船适好来到，就经由东门，共走二里返回寓所。
English: It took me a long time to get down the mountain, but when I saw the ferry coming, I went through the east gate and walked a total of two miles back to my apartment.

古文：十四日，在柳寓。
现代文：十四日在柳家寓所。
English: On the 14th, at the Yanagiya residence.

古文：十五日，在柳寓。
现代文：十五日在柳家寓所。
English: On the 15th at the Yanagiya residence.

古文：十六日，作一书与王翰简之子罗源公。
现代文：十六日写了一封给王翰简之子罗源公的信。
English: On the 16th, he wrote a letter to Luo Yuan Gong, the son of Wang Han Jian.

古文：促静闻往天妃庙赎所当被，竟不得。
现代文：催促静闻去天妃庙赎取抵押的被盖，竟然要不来。
English: He urged Jingwen to go to the Temple of Heaven to redeem the mortgaged quilt cover, but she refused to come.

古文：十七日，以书投王罗源，不俟其回书，即携行李下舟。
现代文：十七日把信投递给王罗源，不等他的回信，立即带上行李下船。
English: On the 17th, he posted the letter to Wang Luoyuan. Without waiting for his reply, he immediately took his luggage and disembarked.

古文：过午，雨如注。
现代文：过了中午，大雨如注。
English: After noon, it started to rain heavily.

古文：既而复从南门入抵北门，市土药于朱医士，得山豆根、猪腰子、天竺黄、水萝葡、兔金藤诸药各少许，下舟已昏黑矣。
现代文：随后再从南门进城走到北门，向朱医士买了些草药，买到山豆根、猪腰子、天竺黄、水萝葡、兔金藤各种药材各有一些，下船时天已昏黑了。
English: Afterwards, they walked from the south gate to the north gate, and bought some herbs from Dr. Zhu, including yam root, pork loin, astragalus, water radish, and rabbit gold vine. By the time they disembarked, it was already dark.

