古文：起柔兆执徐，尽著雍敦牂，凡三年。
现代文：起，止，一共三年。宋苍梧王元徽四年
English: Song Cangwu Wang Yuanhui four years

古文：苍梧王下元徽四年春，正月，己亥，帝耕籍田，大赦。
现代文：春季正月，己亥，刘宋皇帝刘昱亲自主持耕田典礼，实行大赦。
English: In the first month of spring, in the Year of the Pig, Liu Song Emperor Liu Bei personally presided over the farmland ceremony and implemented an amnesty.

古文：二月，魏司空东郡王陆定国坐恃恩不法，免官爵为兵。
现代文：二月，北魏司空东郡王陆定国因仗恃皇恩违犯国法，被免除官爵，发配军中当兵。
English: In February, King Lu Dingguo, the governor of the East County of the Northern Wei Dynasty, was stripped of his title and assigned to be a soldier in the army for violating the law of the country by seeking the favor of the emperor.

古文：魏冯太后内行不正，以李弈之死怨显祖，密行鸩毒，夏，六月，辛未，显祖殂。
现代文：北魏冯太后行为不正，因情夫李奕之死，深深怨恨她的嫡子献文帝，于是秘密下毒。夏季，六月，辛未，献文帝死亡。
English: Empress Dowager Feng of the Northern Wei Dynasty acted improperly. Due to the death of her lover Li Yi, she deeply resented her legitimate son Emperor Xianwen, so she secretly poisoned him. Emperor Xianwen died in summer, June, Xinwei.

古文：壬申，大赦，改元承明。
现代文：壬申，实行大赦,改年号承明。
English: Jinshin, the implementation of amnesty, the change of the year is clear.

古文：葬显祖于金陵，谥曰献文皇帝。
现代文：安葬在金陵，谥号称献文皇帝。
English: He was buried in Jinling, and his posthumous name was Xingwen Emperor.

古文：魏大司马、大将军代人万安国坐矫诏杀神部长奚买奴，赐死。
现代文：北魏大司马、大将军、鲜卑人万安国因假传圣旨诛杀神部长奚买奴罪，被命令自尽。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, the Grand Master, the Great General, and the humble man Wan'an Guo were ordered to commit suicide for the crime of falsely preaching the holy order, killing the minister of God, and buying slaves.

古文：戊寅，魏以征西大将军、安乐王长乐为太尉，尚书左仆射、宜都王目辰为司徒，南部尚书李訢为司空。
现代文：戊寅，北魏任命征西大将军、安乐王拓跋长乐为太尉，尚书左仆射、宜都王拓跋目辰为司徒，南部尚书李为司空。
English: Wu Yin, the Northern Wei appointed the general of the Western Expedition, An Le Wang Tuoba Changle as the first lieutenant, Shang Shuxu Zuopu Ya, Yidu Wang Tuoba Mechen as the scholar, and Southern Shang Shuxu Li as the scholar.

古文：尊皇太后曰太皇太后，复临朝称制。
现代文：尊皇太后冯氏为太皇太后，冯大后再次摄政。
English: The revered Empress Dowager Feng became the Grand Empress Dowager, and Empress Dowager Feng once again became regent.

古文：以冯熙为侍中、太师、中书监。
现代文：冯太后任命冯熙为侍中、太师、中书监。
English: Empress Dowager Feng appointed Feng Xi as a chamberlain, grand master and librarian.

古文：熙自以外戚，固辞内任；乃除都督、洛州刺史，侍中、太师如故。
现代文：冯熙认为自己是皇家外戚，坚决辞让朝内官职，于是任命他为都督、洛州刺史，但仍保留侍中，太师职位。
English: Feng Xi believed that he was a royal relative, and resolutely resigned from the position of an official in the imperial court, so he appointed him as the governor and the governor of Lozhou, but still retained the positions of chamberlain and grand master.

古文：显祖神主祔太庙，有司奏庙中执事之官，请依故事皆赐爵。
现代文：献文帝的牌位进入太庙之日，有关部门奏称：依照前例，太庙中有关官员都应加封爵位。
English: On the day that Emperor Xianwen's card entered the Great Temple, the relevant departments reported that: according to precedent, relevant officials in the Great Temple should be knighted.

古文：秘书令广平程骏上言： 建侯裂地，帝王所重，或以亲贤，或因功伐，未闻神主祔庙而百司受封者也。
现代文：秘书令广平人程骏上疏说： 加封爵位，赏赐采邑，是帝王最重视的事情，或是皇上的亲戚、贤才，或是对国家有功劳贡献的人，从来没有听说因为皇帝牌位进庙而有关官员接受封爵的。
English: The secretary, Guangping Ren Cheng, said: "Adding a knighthood and awarding a title of nobility is the most important thing for the emperor. Whether it is the emperor's relatives, sages, or people who have made meritorious contributions to the country, I have never heard of relevant officials receiving a knighthood because the emperor's card entered the temple.

古文：皇家故事，盖一时之恩，岂可为长世之法乎！ 
现代文：皇家前例，只是一时的恩庞，怎么可以作为后世的法则！ 
English: How can a royal precedent, just a momentary boon, be the law of posterity!

古文：太后善而从之，谓群臣曰： 凡议事，当依古典正言，岂得但修故事而已！ 
现代文：冯太后认为他说得对，采取了他的意见，对文武官员说： 凡讨论问题，都应当依照古代正确的言论，不可一味援引前例！ 
English: Empress Dowager Feng thought he was right, accepted his opinion, and said to the civil and military officials: Whenever issues are discussed, they should be in accordance with the ancient correct speech, and precedent should not be invoked blindly!

古文：赐骏衣一袭，帛二百匹。
现代文：赏赐给程骏衣服一套，绸缎二百匹。
English: He gave her a set of clothes and two hundred camels.

古文：太后性聪察，知书计，晓政事，被服俭素，膳羞减于故事什七八；而猜忍多权数。
现代文：冯太后生性聪慧，心思细密，读过书，会算术，通晓政事，衣着简单朴素，日用饮食要比过去的规定减省十分之七八，但生性猜忌残忍，工于权术。
English: Empress Dowager Feng is naturally intelligent and meticulous, she has read books, can do arithmetic, is familiar with political affairs, her clothing is simple and plain, and her daily diet is seven-eighths less than the previous regulations, but she is naturally suspicious and cruel, and works at power.

古文：高祖性至孝，能承颜顺志。
现代文：孝文帝拓跋宏对这位祖母皇太后至为孝顺，能够尽量使她高兴欢乐。
English: Emperor Takubahiro was very filial to his grandmother, the Empress Dowager, and tried his best to make her happy.

古文：事无大小，皆仰成于太后。
现代文：事情无论大小，都由她决定。
English: She makes all the decisions, big and small.

古文：太后往往专决，不复关白于帝。
现代文：冯太后往往独断专行，所作决定不再告诉孝文帝。
English: Empress Dowager Feng often acted on her own, and would not tell Emperor Xiaowen about her decisions.

古文：所幸宦者高平王琚、安定张祜、杞嶷、冯翊王遇、略阳苻承祖、高阴王质，皆依势用事。
现代文：她所宠爱的宦官高平人王琚、安定人张和杞嶷、冯翊人王遇、略阳人苻承祖、高阳人王质都依仗冯太后的权势，在朝廷中掌权。
English: Her favorite eunuchs, the high-ranking eunuch Wang Xi, the stable eunuch Zhang He Rong, the Feng Xi eunuch Wang Yu, the low-ranking eunuch Yao Yang, and the high-ranking eunuch Gao Yang, all relied on the power of Empress Dowager Feng to hold power in the imperial court.

古文：祜官至尚书左仆射，爵新平王；琚官至征南将军，爵高平王；嶷等官亦至侍中、吏部尚书、刺史，爵为公、侯，赏赐巨万，赐铁券，许以不死。
现代文：张官至尚书左仆射，封新平王；王琚官至征南将军，封高平王；杞嶷等也都官至侍中、吏部尚书、刺史，封公爵、侯爵，赏赐钱财数万之多，发给他们铁券，承诺对他们绝不处死。
English: Zhang Guan was awarded the title of Shangshu Zuofusa, and was given the title of Xinping Wang; Wang Yiguan was awarded the title of General of the Southern Expedition, and was given the title of Gaoping Wang; Zou Guan was also awarded the titles of Shangshu, Zhishi, Duke, and Marquis, and was given tens of thousands of money and goods, and was given iron coupons, and promised that they would never be executed.

古文：又，太卜令姑臧王睿得幸于太后，超迁至侍中、吏部尚书，爵太原公。
现代文：另外，崐太卜令姑臧人王睿受冯太后的宠幸破格提拔，官至侍中、吏部尚书，封为太原公。
English: In addition, Wang Rui, who was favored by Empress Dowager Feng, was exceptionally promoted by Empress Dowager Pu, and was given the title of Prince of Taiyuan.

古文：秘书令李冲，虽以才进，亦由私宠，赏赐皆不可胜纪。
现代文：秘书令李冲，虽然以他的才华受到赏识，但也是由于得到冯太后的私自宠爱的缘故。
English: Although Secretary Ling Li Chong was appreciated for his talent, it was also because he was favored by Empress Dowager Feng.

古文：又外礼人望东阳王丕、游明根等，皆极其优厚，每褒赏睿等，辄以丕等参之，以示不私。
现代文：冯太后对他们的赏赐，都多到无法计算。表面上，冯太后对众望所归的大臣东阳王拓跋丕、游明根等，也都特别礼敬优厚。每次褒扬王睿等时，一定把拓跋丕等列入，表示并不出于私心。
English: Empress Dowager Feng bestowed more rewards on them than can be counted. On the surface, Empress Dowager Feng also paid special respects to the highly respected ministers Dongyang Wang Tuobao and You Minggen. Every time she praised Wang Rui, she always included Tuobao, indicating that it was not out of selfishness.

古文：丕，烈帝之玄孙；冲，宝之子也。
现代文：拓跋丕是烈帝拓跋翳槐的玄孙。李冲是李宝的儿子。
English: Tuobao is the great-great-grandson of the heroic emperor Tuobao. Li Chong is the son of Li Bao.

古文：太后自以失行，畏以议己，群下语言小涉疑忌，辄杀之。
现代文：冯太后因为淫乱行为，害怕别人对自己讥讽议论，官员言谈中只要一句话被疑为对她的讽刺，就立即诛杀。
English: Empress Dowager Feng, because of her lewd behavior, was afraid of others making sarcastic remarks about her. If a single sentence in an official's speech was suspected of being sarcastic about her, she was immediately killed.

古文：然所宠幸左右，苟有小过，必加笞棰，或至百馀；而无宿憾，寻复待之如初，或因此更富贵。
现代文：她所宠爱的左右侍从，即使有小小的过错，也一定鞭打，甚至打一百余鞭。可是，冯太后对人从不记仇，第二天仍然善待，同平常一样，甚至有人被鞭打而更富贵。
English: Her favorite attendants, left and right, even if there is a small mistake, they will certainly be whipped, even more than a hundred lashes. However, Empress Feng never bears a grudge against anyone, and the next day she is still kind, as usual, and even some people are whipped and become richer.

古文：故左右虽被罚，终无离心。
现代文：所以左右虽受体罚，但始终没有离心的。
English: Therefore, although the left and right sides received physical punishment, there was no centrifugal force.

古文：乙亥，加萧道成尚书左仆射，刘秉中书令。
现代文：乙亥，刘宋加授萧道成为尚书左仆射，刘秉为中书令。
English: Yi Hai, Liu Song and Xiao Dao became the left hand of Shang Shu, and Liu Bing became the right hand of Zhong Shu.

古文：杨运长、阮佃夫等忌建平王景素益甚，景素乃与录事参军陈郡殷沵、中兵参军略阳垣庆延、参军沈颙、左暄等谋为自全之计。
现代文：杨运长、阮佃夫等对建平王刘景素的忌恨越发厉害。于是刘景素与录事参军阵郡人殷、中兵参军略阳人垣庆延、参军沈、左暄等密谋保卫自己的办法。
English: Yang Yunchang, Nguyn Xuân Phúc and others became more and more jealous of the king of Jianping, Liu Jingsu. Therefore, Liu Jingsu conspired to defend himself with the following people: Du Fu joined the army, Gu Ren Yin joined the army, Zhong Bei joined the army, Liang Yang joined the army, Ling Qing Yan joined the army, Shen joined the army, Zuo Xi joined the army, and so on.

古文：遣人往来建康，要结才力之士，冠军将军黄回、游击将军高道庆、辅国将军曹欣之、前军将国韩道清、长水校尉郭兰之、羽林监垣祗祖，皆阴与通谋；武人不得志者，无不归之。
现代文：派人来往建康，寻访结交有才能有勇力的人士。寇军将军黄回、游击将军高道庆、辅国将军曹欣之、前军将军韩道清、长水校尉郭兰之、羽林监垣祗祖，先后都与刘景素秘密通谋。
English: They sent people to and from Jiankang to seek out and make friends with talented and courageous people. General Huang Hui of the Crusader Army, guerrilla general Gao Daoqing, general Cao Xinzhi of the Auxiliary Army, former army general Han Daoqing, Changshui lieutenant Guo Lanzhi, and Ulin supervisor Gao Zuo all conspired secretly with Liu Jingsu.

古文：时帝好独出游走郊野，欣之谋据石头城，伺帝出作乱。
现代文：所有未能满足志愿的军人，没有不归附刘景素的。当时，刘昱喜爱独自出来游逛，常常去远郊野外。曹欣之打算占领石头城，趁刘昱单独外出时，发动政变。
English: At that time, Liu Yao liked to go out alone and often went to the countryside. Cao Xinzhi planned to occupy Stone Town and launch a coup while Liu Yao was out alone.

古文：道清、兰之欲说萧道成因帝夜出，执帝迎景素，道成不从者，即图之；景素每禁使缓之。
现代文：韩道清、郭兰之准备游说萧道成，利用昱夜间出游机会，把他抓获，迎接刘景素。萧道成如果拒绝，便谋杀萧道成。但刘景素每次都禁止这样做，嘱咐不可仓促发动。
English: Han Daoqing and Guo Lanzhi prepared to lobby Xiao Daocheng, taking advantage of the opportunity to travel at night, to capture him and meet Liu Jingsu. If Xiao Daocheng refused, he would murder Xiao Daocheng. However, Liu Jingsu forbade this every time and ordered not to start hastily.

古文：杨、阮微闻其事，遣伧人周天赐伪投景素，劝令举兵。
现代文：杨运长、阮佃夫稍稍得到一点风声，派一个北方人周天赐，假装投靠刘景素，劝刘景素起兵。
English: Yang Yunchang and Nguyn Xuân sent a northerner, Zhou Tianxu, to persuade Liu Jingsu to take up arms, pretending to support her.

古文：景素知之，斩天赐首送台。
现代文：刘景素查出他的底细，杀了周天赐，把人头送到朝廷。
English: Liu Jingsu found out his details, killed Zhou Tianxia, and sent the head to the imperial court.

古文：秋，七月，祗祖帅数百人自建康奔京口，云京师已溃乱，劝令速入。
现代文：秋季，七月，垣祗祖率数百人，从建康逃到京口，声称京师已经大乱，劝刘景素火速前往接收。
English: In the autumn, in July, hundreds of people led by Kakehi Zu fled from Jiankang to Jingkou, claiming that the capital had been in turmoil, and persuaded Liu Jingsu to rush to receive them.

古文：景素信之，戊子，据京口起兵，士民赴之者以千数。
现代文：刘景素信以为真，戊子，占据京口起兵，士人和平民响应的数以千计。
English: Liu Jingsuxin believed it to be true, and thousands of soldiers, officials and civilians responded.

古文：杨、阮闻祗祖叛走，即命纂严。
现代文：杨运长、阮佃夫得知垣祗祖叛变逃走的消息，下令戒严。
English: Yang Yunchang and Nguyn Xuân Phúc learned of the news of the defection and escape of Quy Nhc and ordered martial law.

古文：己丑，遣骁骑将军任农夫、领军将军黄回、左军将军兰陵李安民将步军，右军将军张保将水军，以讨之；辛卯，又命南豫州刺史段佛荣为都统。
现代文：己丑，派骁骑将军任农夫、领军将军黄回、左军将军兰陵人李安民率领陆军；右军将军张保率领水军，出发讨伐他们。辛卯，又任命南豫州刺史段佛荣为都统。
English: He sent the general of the cavalry to be a farmer, the general of the leading army, Huang Hui, and the general of the left army, Li Anmin, who was from Lanling, to lead the army; the general of the right army, Zhang Bao, led the navy, and set out to fight them. Xin Wu also appointed the South Yuzhou chief historian, Fo Rong, as the general of the capital.

古文：萧道成知黄回有异志，故使安民、佛荣与之偕行。
现代文：萧道成已经发现黄回怀有二心，所以故意派李安民、段佛荣跟他同行。
English: Xiao Daocheng had already discovered that Huang Hui was of two minds, so he deliberately sent Li Anmin and Duan Fuerong to accompany him.

古文：回私戒其士卒： 道逢京口兵，勿得战。 
现代文：黄回暗中警告他的士卒： 途中遇到京口军，不要作战。 
English: Huang Hui secretly warned his soldiers: If you meet the Kyoguchi army on the way, don't fight.

古文：道成屯玄武湖，冠军将军萧赜镇东府。
现代文：萧道成驻防玄武湖，冠军将军萧赜镇守东府。
English: Xiao Daocheng was stationed at the defense of Xuanwu Lake, and the champion general Xiao Yaozhen guarded the eastern capital.

古文：始安王伯融，都乡侯伯猷，皆建安王休仁之子也，杨、阮忌其年长，悉称诏赐死。
现代文：始安王刘伯融、都乡侯刘伯猷，都是建安王刘休仁的儿子，杨运长、阮佃夫对他们年纪渐大感到威胁，于是假传圣诏，命他们自尽。
English: Liu Bolong, the King of the First An, and Liu Bolu, the Prince of the Capital Town, were both sons of Liu Xuren, the King of Jian'an. Yang Yunchang and Ruan Shifu felt threatened by their growing age, so they falsely preached the holy edict and ordered them to commit suicide.

古文：景素欲断竹里以拒台军。
现代文：刘景素打算以切断竹里来抵抗官军。
English: Liu Jingsu planned to resist the government army by cutting off the bamboo.

古文：垣庆延、垣祗祖、沈颙皆曰： 今天时旱热，台军远来疲困，引之使至，以逸待劳，可一战而克。 
现代文：垣庆延、垣祗祖、沈都说： 今年天气干旱炎热，官军远道而来，一定疲劳困顿，把他们引到城下，我们以逸待劳，可以一战取胜。 
English: "This year, the weather is hot and dry, and the government troops have come from far away. They must be tired and exhausted. Let's lead them to the outskirts of the city. We can win the battle with our hard work," said the leaders of the opposition parties, including Kaki Qing Yan, Kaki Shizuo, and Shen Du.

古文：殷沵等固争，不能得。
现代文：殷等坚决反对，但得不到上级支持。
English: Yin and others resolutely opposed it, but did not receive support from their superiors.

古文：农夫等既至，纵火烧市邑。
现代文：任农夫等抵达之后，纵火焚烧城市村落，垣庆延等互相观望，全无斗志。
English: After the arrival of farmers such as Ren, they set fire to cities and villages, and watched each other, with no fighting spirit.

古文：庆延等各相顾望，莫有斗志；景素本乏威略，恇扰不知所为。
现代文：刘景素本来缺乏军事上的谋略和威望，惶恐怯懦，不知所措。
English: Liu Jingsu originally lacked military strategy and prestige, and was overwhelmed by fear and cowardice.

古文：黄回迫于段佛荣，且见京口军弱，遂不发。
现代文：黄回迫于段佛荣在旁，而且又看到京口军兵力薄弱，于是也不敢发动进攻。
English: Huang Hui forced Duan Fo Rong to be by his side, and also saw that the strength of the Jingkou army was weak, so he did not dare to launch an attack.

古文：张保泊西渚，景素左右勇士数十人，自相要结，进击水军。
现代文：朝廷将领张保，停泊西渚，刘景素左右勇士几十人，互相约定以死相拚，攻击张保的水军。
English: Imperial generals Zhang Bao, moored West Nagisa, Liu Jingsu and dozens of other warriors agreed to fight to the death to attack Zhang Bao's navy.

古文：甲午，张保败死，而诸将不相应赴，复为台军所破。
现代文：甲午，击斩张保，可是，京口军其他将领为了各自保全实力，不肯增援扩大战果，又被官军反攻击败。
English: In the afternoon of the first day, Zhang Bao was defeated, but the other generals of the Beijing-Kowloon army, in order to preserve their own strength, refused to reinforce and expand the results of the battle, and were defeated by the counterattack of the government army.

古文：台军既薄城下，颙先帅众走，祗祖次之，其馀诸军相继奔退，独左暄与台军力战于万岁楼下；而所配兵力甚弱，不能敌而散。
现代文：官军紧逼城下后，沈首先率领他的部众逃走，垣祗祖也跟着逃走，其他各路人马一哄而散，只有参军左暄与官军奋战在万岁楼下，但因分配给他的兵务不足，不能抵挡，最终溃败。
English: After the government army pressed down on the city, Shen first led his subordinates to flee, followed by Guan Yuzu. All other people scattered. Only Zeng Jun Zuo fought with the government army in the basement, but due to the lack of military services assigned to him, he could not resist and was eventually defeated.

古文：乙未，拔京口。
现代文：乙未，官军攻克京口。
English: In less than a year, the imperial army conquered Kyoguchi.

古文：黄回军先入，自以有誓不杀诸王，乃以景素让殿中将军张倪奴。
现代文：黄回军首先入城，因自己曾有 不杀诸王 的誓言，于是把刘景素交给殿中将军张倪奴。
English: Huang Hui's army entered the city first, because he had sworn not to kill the kings, so he handed Liu Jingsu to the palace general Zhang Ni'nu.

古文：倪奴擒景素，斩之，并其三子，同党垣祗祖等数十人皆伏诛。
现代文：张倪奴生擒刘景素后，连同他的三个儿子及同党垣祗祖等数十人一齐斩首。
English: After Zhang Ni'nu's birth, Liu Jingsu, together with his three sons and dozens of party members such as Guan Yuzu, were beheaded.

古文：萧道成释黄回、高道庆不问，抚之如旧。
现代文：萧道成对黄回、高道庆、不再追问，像往常一样抚慰他们。
English: Xiao Daocheng no longer questioned Huang Hui and Gao Daoqing and comforted them as usual.

古文：是日，解严。
现代文：当天，解除戒严。
English: On the same day, martial law was lifted.

古文：丙申，大赦。
现代文：丙申，实行大赦。
English: Bishen, implement the amnesty.

古文：初，巴东建平蛮反，沈攸之遣军讨之。
现代文：当初，巴东建平蛮族叛变，沈攸之派军讨伐他们。
English: At first, Badong Jianping rebelled against the barbarians, and Shen Yuanzhi sent troops to fight them.

古文：及景素反，攸之急追峡中军以赴建康。
现代文：等到刘景素起兵反叛时，沈攸之紧急追回已进入三峡的讨蛮军，改命直赴京师建康勤王。
English: When Liu Jingsu raised an army to rebel, Shen Youzhi urgently recovered the anti-barbarian army that had entered the Three Gorges, and changed his mission to go straight to Beijing to teach Jiankang Qinwang.

古文：巴东太守刘攘兵、建平太守刘道欣疑攸之有异谋，勒兵断峡，不听军下。
现代文：巴东太守刘攘兵、建平太守刘道欣，认为沈攸之一定有阴谋，于是，下令戒严，封锁峡口，阻止沈攸之军队东下。
English: Liu Joibing, the eunuch governor of Padong, and Liu Daoxin, the eunuch governor of Jianping, thought that there must be a plot against Shen You, so they ordered martial law, blocked the mouth of the gorge, and prevented Shen You's army from going east.

古文：攘兵子天赐为荆州西曹，攸之遣天赐往谕之。攘兵知景素实反，乃释甲谢愆，攸之待之如故。
现代文：刘攘兵的儿子刘天赐任荆州西曹，沈攸之派刘天赐前往，向他父亲说明原因，刘攘兵才知道刘景素真的已经起兵，乃下令各军撤退，向沈攸之道歉，沈攸之待他同往常一样。
English: Liu Jing Su's son Liu Tian Zi was appointed the Western Cao of Jingzhou. Shen You sent Liu Tian Zi to go and explain the reason to his father. It was only when Liu Jing Su knew that Liu Jing Su had indeed raised an army that Liu Tian Zi ordered the troops to retreat and apologized to Shen You. Shen You treated him as usual.

古文：刘道欣坚守建平，攘兵譬说不回，乃与伐蛮军攻斩之。
现代文：可是，刘道欣仍继续固守建平，对刘攘兵派人前去解释，刘道欣一口拒绝。
English: However, Liu Daoxin still continued to adhere to Jianping and sent someone to explain to Liu Yohei, but Liu Daoxin flatly refused.

古文：甲辰，魏主追尊其母李贵人曰思皇后。
现代文：于是刘操兵与讨蛮军一起发动攻击，斩刘道欣。甲辰，北魏国主追尊母亲李贵人为思皇后。
English: As a result, Liu Shuxing launched an attack together with the anti-barbarian army, beheading Liu Daoxin. Jia Chen, the Northern Wei sovereign, chased his mother, Li Guiguan, thinking she was the queen.

古文：八月，丁卯，立皇弟翙为南阳王，嵩为新兴王，禧为始建王。
现代文：八月，丁卯，刘宋封皇弟刘为南阳王，刘嵩为新兴王，刘禧为始建王。
English: In August, Dingwu, Liu Songfeng's younger brother Liu became the king of Nanyang, Liu Song became the emerging king, and Liu Xie became the founding king.

古文：庚午，以给事黄门侍郎阮佃夫为南豫州刺史，留镇京师。
现代文：庚午，任命给事黄门侍郎阮佃夫为南豫州刺史，仍留镇京师。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month of the 7th year of the 7th lunar calendar, the Yellow Gate attendant Nguyn Văn Phúc was appointed to write the history of Southern Henan Province, but he still remained in Beijing.

古文：九月，戊子，赐骁骑将军道庆死。
现代文：九月，戊子，下令赐骁骑将军高道庆自尽。
English: In September, Empress Dowager Cixi ordered General Gao Daoqing to commit suicide.

古文：冬，十月，辛酉，以吏部尚书王僧虔为尚书右仆射。
现代文：冬季，十月，辛酉，提升吏部尚书王僧虔为尚书左仆射。
English: In the winter, October, Hsinchu, the promotion of the cadre department of Shang Shou Wang Sang Qian to Shang Shou Zuofu shot.

古文：十一月，戊子，魏以太尉、安乐王长乐为定州刺史，司空李訢为徐州刺史。
现代文：十一月，戊子，北魏任命太尉、安乐王拓跋长乐为定州刺史，司空李为徐州刺史。
English: In November, Wu Zi and the Northern Wei Dynasty appointed Tai Li and An Le Wang Tuoba Changle as the governor of Dingzhou, and Sikuo Li as the governor of Xuzhou.

古文：顺皇帝
现代文：顺皇帝
English: Emperor Shun

古文：苍梧王下升明元年春，正月，乙酉朔，魏改元太和。
现代文：宋顺帝升明元年春季，正月，乙酉朔，北魏改年号太和。
English: Emperor Song Shun ascended to the throne in the spring of the first year of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month

古文：己酉，略阳氐王元寿聚众五千馀家，自称冲天王；二月，辛未，魏秦、益二州刺史尉洛侯击破之。
现代文：己酉，略阳平民王元寿，聚集部众五千余家，自称冲天王。二月，辛未，北魏秦、益二州刺史尉洛侯击败王元寿。
English: In February, Xin Wei, Northern Wei Qin, and Yizhou Zhishi Luo defeated Wang Yuan Shou.

古文：三月，庚子，魏以东阳王丕为司徒。
现代文：三月，庚子，北魏任命东阳王拓跋丕为司徒。
English: In March, Geng Zi and the Northern Wei Dynasty appointed Dongyang Wang Tuobao as a disciple.

古文：夏，四月，丁卯，魏主如白登；壬申，如崞山。
现代文：夏季，四月，丁卯，北魏国主前往白登。壬申，前往崞山。
English: In the summer, in April, Dingwu, the Northern Wei sovereign went to Baideng. Jinshin, went to Lushan.

古文：初，苍梧王在东宫，好缘漆帐竿，去地丈馀；喜怒乖节，主帅不能禁。
现代文：当初，刘宋苍梧王刘昱当皇太子时，常常亲自动手，油漆逢帐高竿，能爬到距地面一丈多的高处。他喜怒无常，侍从官员无法劝阻。
English: At the beginning, when Liu Song and Liu Cangwu were crown princes, they often painted themselves with their own hands, and they could climb as high as they wanted. He was temperamental, and officials could not dissuade him.

古文：太宗屡敕陈太妃痛捶之。
现代文：明帝屡次让他的母亲陈太妃痛打他。
English: Emperor Ming repeatedly let his mother, Chen Tofei, beat him.

古文：及即帝位，内畏太后、太妃，外惮诸大臣，未敢纵逸。
现代文：刘昱即帝位后，对内害怕皇太后、皇太妃，对外害怕各位大臣，不敢放纵。
English: After Liu Bei ascended the throne, he was afraid of the Empress Dowager and the Empress Dowager at home, and he was afraid of the ministers abroad, and he did not dare to indulge.

古文：自加元服，内外稍无以制，数出游行。
现代文：可是，自从行过加冠礼后，宫内宫外对他逐渐失去控制，于是刘昱不断出宫游逛。
English: However, since the crowning ceremony, the palace gradually lost control over him, so Liu Ye constantly wandered out of the palace.

古文：始出宫，犹整仪卫。
现代文：最初出宫，还有整齐的仪仗卫队。
English: When he first left the palace, there was an orderly guard of honour.

古文：既而轻骑远走一二十里，太妃不复能追；仪卫亦惧祸不敢追寻，唯整部伍，别在一处，瞻望而已。
现代文：不久，便丢下随从车马，只带身边几个人，或跑到荒郊野外，或出入街头闹市。陈太妃每次乘坐青盖牛犊车，尾随其后，监视、约束他，他便换乘轻装快马，一气奔跑一二十里，让太妃追赶不上。仪仗卫队也畏惧大祸临头，不敢追寻刘昱的去向，只好把部队驻扎在另外一个地方，远远眺望而已。
English: Soon, he left his attendant horses and chariots, taking only a few people with him, or ran to the wild countryside, or went in and out of the busy streets. Every time Chen Tofei rode a Qingai ox-drawn carriage, he followed behind, monitored and restrained him, and he changed to a lightly loaded fast horse, running ten or twenty miles at a stretch, so that Tofei could not catch up. The honor guard was also afraid of imminent disaster and did not dare to track Liu Ye's whereabouts, so he had to station the troops in another place, just looking out.

古文：初，太宗尝以陈太妃赐嬖人李道儿，已复迎还，生帝。
现代文：初，太宗尝以陈太妃赐嬖人李道儿，已复迎还，生帝。
English: In the beginning, Emperor Taizong gave the throne to Empress Chen Taifei, and Emperor Li Daoru was restored to the throne.

古文：故帝每微行，自称 刘统 ，或称 李将军 。
现代文：故帝每微行，自称 刘统 ，或称 李将军 。
English: The late Emperor Zhigong, called himself Liu Tong, or General Li.

古文：常著小袴衫，营署巷陌，无不贯穿；或夜宿客舍，或昼卧道旁，排突厮养，与之交易，或遭慢辱，悦而受之。
现代文：常著小裤衫，营署巷陌，无不贯穿；或夜宿客舍，或昼卧道傍，排突厮养，与之交易，或遭慢辱，悦而受之。
English: They often wear short trousers and are unfamiliar with the lanes and alleys of the camp; they sleep in guest houses at night or on the side of the road during the day. They keep away intruders, trade with them, or are humiliated, and are pleased with it.

古文：凡诸鄙事，裁衣、作帽，过目则能；未尝吹篪，执管便韵。
现代文：凡诸鄙事，裁衣、作帽，过目则能；未尝吹，执管便韵。
English: All sorts of things, tailoring, making hats, can be done by eye; if you don't try to blow, you will rhyme.

古文：及京口既平，骄恣尤甚，无日不出，夕去晨返，晨出暮归。
现代文：及京口既平，骄恣尤甚，无日不出，夕去晨返，晨出暮归。
English: And Beijing is flat, especially arrogant, no sunrise, evening to morning, morning to evening.

古文：从者并执鋋矛，行人男女及犬马牛驴，逢无免者。
现代文：从者交执矛，行人男女及犬马牛驴，逢无免者。
English: From those who exchange spears, pedestrians, men and women, and dogs, horses, cows and donkeys, there is no escape.

古文：民间扰惧，商贩皆息，门户昼闭，行人殆绝。
现代文：民间扰惧，帝贩皆息，门户昼闭，行人殆绝。
English: The people are afraid, the imperial merchants are all dead, the gates are closed at noon, and pedestrians are almost extinct.

古文：针、椎、凿、锯，不离左右，小有忤意，即加屠剖，一日不杀，则惨然不乐；殿省忧惶，食息不保。
现代文：针、椎、凿、锯，不离左右，小有忤意，即加屠剖，一日不杀，则惨然不乐；殿省忧惶，食息不保。
English: Needles, vertebrae, chisels, saws, do not leave the right and left, small and pleasant, that is, add butchering, do not kill for a day, then terribly unhappy; the palace is worried, and food and breath are not guaranteed.

古文：阮佃夫与直阁将军申伯宗等谋因帝出江乘射雉，称太后令，唤队仗还，闭城门，遣人执帝废之，立安成王准。
现代文：阮佃夫与直将军申伯宗等，密谋趁刘昱到江乘打野鸡之时，宣称奉皇太后命令，传唤仪仗卫队回京，关闭城门，派人逮捕刘昱，废黜，拥护安成王刘准。
English: Nguyn Văn Thiệu, together with General Sin Bc and others, conspired to take advantage of Liu B's visit to the river to hunt pheasants. They claimed to have been ordered by the empress dowager to summon the guard of honor to return to Beijing, close the city gates, arrest Liu B, depose him, and support Prince Ancheng Liu Quan.

古文：事觉，甲戌，帝收佃夫等杀之。
现代文：想不到密谋泄漏，甲戌，刘昱逮捕阮佃夫等，斩首。
English: Unexpectedly, conspiracy leaks, armour, Liu Ye arrested Nguyen Xuan Phuc and others, and beheaded him.

古文：太后数训戒帝，帝不悦。
现代文：皇太后经常教训刘昱，刘昱很不高兴。
English: The Empress Dowager often lectured Liu Ye, and Liu Ye was very unhappy.

古文：会端午，太后赐帝毛扇。帝嫌其不华，令太医煮药，欲鸩太后。
现代文：正逢端午节，太后赏赐给刘昱一把羽毛扇，刘昱嫌它不够豪华，下令御医配制毒药，打算毒死太后。
English: At the time of the Dragon Boat Festival, the empress dowager presented Liu Ye with a feather fan. Liu Ye thought it was not luxurious enough and ordered his doctor to prepare poison, intending to poison the empress dowager.

古文：左右止之曰： 若行此事，官便应作孝子，岂复得出入狡狯！ 
现代文：左右劝阻他说： 如果真的这样做，陛下便要当孝子，怎么还能出入宫门玩耍游戏？ 
English: They tried to dissuade him, saying, "If you really do this, Your Majesty will have to be a filial son. How can you still go in and out of the palace gates to play games?

古文：帝曰： 汝语大有理！ 
现代文：刘昱说： 你这话很有道理。 
English: Liu Wei said, "What you said makes a lot of sense.

古文：乃止。
现代文：于是打消主意。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：六月，甲戌，有告散骑常侍杜幼文、司徒左长史沈勃、游击将军孙超之与阮佃夫同谋者，帝登帅卫士，自掩三家，悉诛之，刳解脔割，婴孩不免。
现代文：六月，甲戌，有人上告散骑常侍杜幼文、司徒左长史沈勃、游击将军孙超之，跟阮佃夫同谋。刘昱立即率领卫士，亲自突击三家，全部诛杀，砍断肢体，把肉一块块割下，连婴儿也不能幸免。
English: In June, in Jiaozuo, there was a complaint that Du Juwen, the head of the cavalry, Shen Bo, the left-hand captain of the cavalry, and Sun Chaozhi, the guerrilla general, were conspiring with Ruan Shifu. Liu Hui immediately led the guards and personally attacked the three families, killed them all, cut off their limbs, and cut off the meat piece by piece. Even babies could not be spared.

古文：沈勃时居丧在庐，左右未至，帝挥刀独前。勃知不免，手搏帝耳，唾骂之曰： 汝罪逾桀、纣，屠戮无日。 
现代文：沈勃当时正在家里守丧，卫队还没有到，刘昱挥刀独自一人冲在前面，沈勃知道不能避免，赤手空拳搏斗，猛击刘昱耳朵，唾骂道： 你的罪恶，超过桀、纣，死在眼前。 
English: At that time, Shen Bo was holding a funeral at home. The guards had not yet arrived. Liu Yao, wielding a sword, rushed ahead alone. Shen Bo knew that he could not avoid it. He fought with his bare hands, hit Liu Yao's ear, and swore: "Your crime is more than a whimper, a whimper. You will die in front of my eyes."

古文：遂死。
现代文：于是被砍死。
English: He was then hacked to death.

古文：是日，大赦。
现代文：当天，下诏大赦。
English: On the same day, a general amnesty was announced.

古文：帝尝直入领军府。时盛热，萧道成昼卧裸袒。
现代文：一天，刘昱一直闯入领军府，当时天气炎热，萧道成正裸身躺在那里睡觉。
English: One day, Liu Ye kept breaking into the leader's residence. At that time, the weather was hot, and Xiao Daocheng was lying naked and sleeping there.

古文：帝立道成于室内，画腹为的，自引满，将射之。道成敛板曰： 老臣无罪。 
现代文：刘昱把萧道成叫醒，让他站在室内，在他肚子上画一个箭靶，自己拉紧了弓，就要发射。萧道收起手版说： 老臣无罪。 
English: Liu Yao woke Xiao Daocheng up, asked him to stand in the room, drew an arrow target on his stomach, tightened the bow himself, and was about to fire. Xiao Daocheng put away his tablet and said, "The old minister is not guilty."

古文：左右王天恩曰： 领军腹大，是佳射堋；一箭便死，后无复射；不如以骲箭射之。 
现代文：左右侍卫王天恩说： 萧道成肚子大，是一个奇妙的箭靶，一箭射死，以后就再也找不到这样的箭靶了。
English: Wang Tian'en, the left and right guards, said: Xiao Doucheng has a big belly and is a wonderful arrow target. Once he is shot dead, he will never find such an arrow target again.

古文：帝乃更以骲箭射，正中其脐。
现代文：不如改用圆骨箭头，多射几次。 
English: It would be better to switch to round bone arrows and shoot more times.

古文：投弓大笑曰： 此手何如！ 
现代文：刘昱就改用圆骨箭头。一箭射去，正中萧道成的肚脐，他把弓扔到地上，得意地大笑，说： 这只手如何！ 
English: Liu Yao changed to using a round bone arrow. One arrow went off, and right in the middle was the belly button. He threw the bow to the ground, laughed with pride, and said, "How's this hand!"

古文：帝忌道成威名，尝自磨鋋，曰： 明日杀萧道成！ 
现代文：刘昱对萧道成的威名十分畏惧忌恨，曾亲自磨短矛，说： 明天就杀萧道成。 
English: Liu Bei was so afraid of and envious of Xiao Daocheng's prestige that he personally sharpened a short spear and said, "I will kill Xiao Daocheng tomorrow."

古文：陈太妃骂之曰： 萧道成有功于国，若害之，谁复为汝尽力邪！ 
现代文：陈太妃骂他说： 萧道成对国家有大功，如果杀了他，谁还为你尽力！ 
English: Chen Taifei scolded him, saying: Xiao Daocheng has made great contributions to the country. If you kill him, who will do your best for you?

古文：帝乃止。
现代文：刘昱才住手。
English: Emperor Wu then gave up.

古文：道成忧惧，密与袁粲、褚渊谋废立。
现代文：萧道成忧愁恐惧，与尚书令袁粲、中书监褚渊密谋废黜刘昱，另立新君。
English: Sorrowful and fearful, Xiao Daocheng conspired with Shang Shuling (尚書令), Yuan Qi (袁) and Zhongshuo (中書监), Yu Yuan (渊) to depose Liu Bei and set up a new ruler.

古文：粲曰： 主上幼年，微过易改。
现代文：袁粲说： 主上年纪还小，轻微的过失，容易改正。
English: Yuan Qi said: The Lord is still young, and minor mistakes are easy to correct.

古文：伊、霍之事，非季世所行；纵使功成，亦终无全地。 
现代文：伊尹、霍光的往事，在这末世已难实行。即使成功，最后仍无安身之地。 
English: The past affairs of Yi Yin and Huo Guang are difficult to implement in this end time. Even if they succeed, they will still have no place to live.

古文：渊默然。
现代文：褚渊沉默不语。
English: Shanyuan was silent.

古文：领军功曹丹阳纪僧真言于道成曰： 今朝廷猖狂，人不自保；天下之望，不在袁、褚，明公岂得坐受夷灭！
现代文：领军功曹丹阳人纪僧真对萧道成说： 现在，皇上凶残疯狂，无人可以自保，天下百姓的盼望，不在袁粲、褚渊，明公怎么能坐待被剿灭？
English: The leader of the army, the meritorious Cao Danyang person, Ji Sangzhen, said to Xiao Daocheng: Now, the emperor is ferocious and crazy, no one can protect themselves, the hope of the people in the world is not in Yuancheng and Qianyuan, how can Ming Gong wait to be annihilated?

古文：存亡之机，仰希熟虑。 
现代文：存亡的关键，请深思熟虑。 
English: The key to survival, please think about it.

古文：道成然之。
现代文：萧道成同意。
English: Xiao Daocheng agreed.

古文：或劝道成奔广陵起兵。
现代文：有人劝萧道成回广陵起兵。
English: Some people advised Xiao Dao to return to Guangling and raise an army.

古文：道成世子赜，时为晋熙王长史，行郢州事，欲使赜将郢州兵东下会京口。
现代文：萧道成的大儿子萧赜正任晋熙王刘燮的长史，兼行郢州事，萧道成打算命萧赜率郢州军顺长江东下，在京口中师。
English: Xiao Daocheng's eldest son, Xiao Yan, was serving as the long history of the Jin Dynasty King Liu Xuan, and also engaged in Zhangzhou affairs. Xiao Daocheng planned to order Xiao Yan to lead the Zhangzhou army eastward along the Yangtze River and set up a division in Jingkou.

古文：道成密遣所亲刘僧副告其从兄行青、冀二州刺史刘善明曰： 人多见劝北固广陵，恐未为长算。
现代文：萧道成派他的亲信刘僧副，秘密通告堂兄、代理青、冀二州刺史刘善明，说： 很多人劝我北上据守广陵，恐怕不是长远的打算。
English: Xiao Daocheng sent his close confidant, Liu Zengfei, to secretly inform his cousin, Liu Zhenming, who was the agent of the Qing Dynasty and the ruler of the two states of Hebei, saying: Many people advised me to go north to defend Guangling, but I'm afraid it wasn't a long-term plan.

古文：今秋风行起，卿若能与垣东海微共动虏，则我诸计可立。 
现代文：现在秋风将起，你如果能跟垣荣祖联合，稍稍挑动胡虏，我的各种计划当可实施。 
English: Now that the autumn wind is about to blow, if you can unite with Kaki Rongzu and slightly provoke Huru, my various plans can be implemented.

古文：亦告东海太守垣荣祖。
现代文：同时也告诉东海太守垣荣祖。
English: At the same time, he also told Tokaido Governor Ogaki Renzo.

古文：善明曰： 宋氏将亡，愚智共知，北虏苦动，反为公患。
现代文：刘善明说： 宋国将亡，无论愚蠢人和明智人，都看得一清二楚。北虏如果有什么行动，反而会成为你的祸患。
English: Liu Shanming said, "The Song Dynasty is about to die, and both the foolish and the wise can see it clearly. If Beigui takes any action, it will be your misfortune.

古文：公神武高世，唯当静以待之，因机奋发，功业自定，不可远去根本，自贻猖蹶。 
现代文：你的智慧韬略和英勇武功高过当世，只有一个办法，那就是安静地等待时机，再趁机猛烈出击，大业自然告成，不可以远离根本之地，自找灾祸。 
English: Your wisdom and strategy and heroic exploits are higher than the world. There is only one way, that is, to quietly wait for the opportunity, and then take advantage of the opportunity to attack violently. The great cause will naturally come to fruition. You can't stay away from the root cause and look for disaster.

古文：荣祖亦曰： 领府去台百步，公走，人岂不知！
现代文：垣荣祖也说： 领府距离宫城，不过一百步，如果你全家出奔，别人怎么会不知道？
English: Gaki Rongzu also said: The capital is only a hundred paces away from Miyagi, but if your whole family flees, how will others not know?

古文：若单骑轻行，广陵人闭门不受，公欲何之！
现代文：如果单枪匹马，轻装前往，广陵官员万一崐关闭城门，拒绝接纳，下一步将逃向哪里？
English: If Guangling officials close the city gate and refuse to accept him, where will he flee to next?

古文：公今动足下床，恐即有叩台门者，公事去矣。 
现代文：你只要举脚下床，马上就会有人敲宫城的城门，向朝廷告发，你的大事就糟糕了。 
English: All you have to do is lift up your feet and get out of bed, and someone will immediately knock on the palace gate and inform the court, and your big day will be ruined.

古文：纪僧真曰： 主上虽无道，国家累世之基犹为安固。
现代文：纪僧真说： 主上虽然凶暴丧失天道，可是刘家王朝几世建立的政权还算坚固。
English: Ji Sang Zhen said: Although the violence has lost its heavenly way, the political power established by several generations of the Liu family dynasty is still relatively strong.

古文：公百口，北度必不得俱。
现代文：你百口之家，同时向北出奔，绝不可能。
English: It is absolutely impossible for your hundred-member family to run away to the north at the same time.

古文：纵得广陵城，天子居深宫，施号令，目公为逆，何以避之！此非万全策也。 
现代文：即使进入广陵，天子居住深宫之中，发号施令，指控你是叛逆，你有什么办法躲避！这不是万全之策。 
English: Even if you enter Guangling, the heavenly son lives in the middle of the deep palace, gives orders, accuses you of being a rebel, what can you do to avoid! This is not a panacea.

古文：道成族弟镇军长史顺之及次子骠骑从事中郎嶷，皆以为： 帝好单行道路，于此立计，易以成功；外州起兵，鲜有克捷，徒先人受祸耳。 
现代文：萧道成的族弟、镇军长史萧顺之，以及萧道成的次子、骠骑从事中郎萧嶷，都认为： 皇上喜爱单独出来乱窜，在这方面下手，比较容易成功。外州起兵，很少能够成功，反而徒然比别人先受灾祸。 
English: Xiao Shao Shunzhi, Xiao Dousheng's younger brother and the commander of the town army, and Xiao Dousheng's second son, Xiao Yan, who was engaged in horseback riding, both believed that: The emperor likes to go out alone and make a mess, and in this respect, it is easier to succeed. It is rare to succeed in starting an army from outside the state, but it is in vain to suffer disaster before others.

古文：道成乃止。
现代文：萧道成这才取消原意。
English: It was only then that Xiao Daocheng cancelled the original intention.

古文：东中郎司马、行会稽郡事李安民欲奉江夏王跻起兵于东方，道成止之。
现代文：东中郎司马、代理会稽郡事李安民，打算拥护江夏王刘跻，在东方起兵，萧道成加以制止。
English: Lang Sima of Dongzhong and Li Anmin, the acting county auditor of the association, planned to support Liu Lin, the king of Jiangxia, and raised an army in Dongzhong, but Xiao Daocheng put a stop to it.

古文：越骑校尉王敬则潜自结于道成，夜著青衣，扶匐道路，为道成听察帝之往来。
现代文：越骑校尉王敬则主动暗中结交萧道成，一到夜里，王敬则就换上平民衣服，匍匐路旁，替萧道成侦察刘昱的行踪。
English: Wang Jing, the Vietcong cavalry captain, took the initiative to secretly make friends with Xiao Daocheng. As soon as it was night, Wang Jing changed into civilian clothes and stood by the side of the road to investigate Liu Ye's whereabouts for Xiao Daocheng.

古文：道成命敬则阴结帝左右杨玉夫、杨万年、陈奉伯等一十五人，于殿中诇伺机便。
现代文：萧道成命王敬则秘密结交刘昱左右亲信杨玉夫、杨万年、陈奉伯等二十五人，他们都在宫城内殿中任职，窥探有什么机会。
English: Xiao Daoxing's subordinate Wang Jing, on the other hand, secretly made friends with twenty-five of Liu Bei's closest confidants, including Yang Yufu, Yang Wanyian, and Chen Bongbo. They all worked in the inner palace of Miyagi to spy out any opportunities.

古文：秋，七月，丁亥夜，帝微行至领军府门。左右曰： 一府皆眠，何不缘墙入？ 
现代文：秋季，七月，丁亥，夜晚，刘昱身穿便装，走到领军府门口，左右侍从说： 府里的人全都睡熟，我们为什么不跳墙进去？ 
English: In autumn, July, Dinghai, and at night, Liu Ye, dressed in casual clothes, walked to the entrance of the leader's residence. The attendants on his right and left said, "The people in the residence are all fast asleep. Why don't we jump over the wall to get in?"

古文：帝曰： 我今夕欲于一处作適，宜待明夕。 
现代文：刘昱说： 今天晚上，我要到别的地方玩个痛快，明晚再来。 
English: Liu Wei said: Tonight, I want to go somewhere else to have a good time. I will come back tomorrow night.

古文：员外郎桓康等于道成门间听闻之。
现代文：员外郎桓康等在领军府大门后全都听到。
English: Outside the gate of the commander's residence, all of them, including Kan'yasu, the retainer, heard it.

古文：戊子，帝乘露车，与左右于台冈赌跳。
现代文：戊子，刘昱乘坐露天无篷车，跟左右侍从前往台冈，比赌跳高。
English: Wu Zi and Liu Wei took an open-air car without a trailer and went to Taigao with their attendants. They won the high jump.

古文：仍往青园尼寺，晚，至新安寺偷狗，就昙度道人煮之。
现代文：然后，前往青园尼姑庵。夜晚，来到新安寺偷狗，偷来狗找到昙度道人，煮吃狗肉。
English: Then, they went to the Qingyuan Nunnery. At night, they came to Xin'an Temple to steal a dog. They stole a dog, found a gongdu practitioner, and cooked and ate dog meat.

古文：饮酒醉，还仁寿殿寝。
现代文：吃过狗肉，醉醺醺地回仁寿殿睡觉。
English: After eating dog meat, he drunkenly went back to Renshuden to sleep.

古文：杨玉夫常得帝意，至是忽憎之，见辄切齿曰： 明日当杀小子，取肝肺！ 
现代文：弄臣杨玉夫一向得到刘昱的庞信，而今天，刘昱忽然对杨玉夫大为痛恨，一看见他就咬牙切齿，说： 明天就杀了你这小子，挖出肝肺！ 
English: The jester Yang Yufu had always been trusted by Liu Bei, but today, Liu Bei suddenly hated Yang Yufu very much. As soon as he saw him, he gritted his teeth and said, "Tomorrow, I will kill you, kid, and dig out your liver and lungs!"

古文：是夜，令玉夫伺织女度河，曰： 见当报我；不见，将杀汝！ 
现代文：这天深夜，命杨玉夫观察织女渡河，说： 看见织女渡河时，马上叫醒我；看不见，就杀了你。 
English: Late that night, he ordered Yang Yufu to watch Weaver Girl crossing the river, saying, "If you see Weaver Girl crossing the river, wake me up immediately; if you don't see her, I'll kill you."

古文：时帝出入无常，省内诸阁，夜皆不闭，厢下畏相逢值，无敢出者；宿卫并逃避，内外莫相禁摄。
现代文：当时，刘昱出宫进宫，没有一定时间，宫中各阁门，夜间都不敢关闭，负责宫廷保卫的官员，惧怕跟皇帝见面，都不敢出门。禁卫军士卒更是躲得远远的，内外一片紊乱，互不相关，没有人管理。
English: At that time, Liu Bei did not have a certain time to enter and leave the palace, all the palace gates in the palace did not dare to close at night, and the officials responsible for the palace guard did not dare to go out for fear of meeting the emperor. The guards were hiding far away, and there was chaos inside and outside the palace. They were not related to each other, and there was no one in charge.

古文：是夕，王敬则出外。玉夫伺帝熟寝，与杨万年取帝防身刀刎之。
现代文：当天夜晚，王敬则出营等候消息，杨玉夫等到刘昱呼呼大睡时，与杨万年合伙取下刘昱的防身佩刀，砍下刘昱的人头。
English: On the evening of the same day, Wang Jing went out of the camp to wait for news. Yang Yufu waited until Liu Xiu was sound asleep, and in partnership with Yang Wanyuan, he took down Liu Xiu's defensive sword and cut off Liu Xiu's head.

古文：敕厢下奏伎陈奉伯袖其首，依常行法，称敕开承明门出，以首与敬则。
现代文：然后假传圣旨，命外庭演奏音乐。陈奉伯把刘昱的人头，藏在袍袖里面，跟往常一样，神色自若，宣称奉皇帝派遣，打开承明门出宫，把人头交给王敬则。
English: Chen Bongbo hid Liu Ye's head in his robe sleeve and, as usual, looked confident, declared that he had been sent by the emperor, opened the Chengming Gate to leave the palace, and handed the head to Wang Jingzhe.

古文：敬则驰诣领军府，叩门大呼，萧道成虑苍梧王诳之，不敢开门。
现代文：王敬则飞马奔向领军府，敲门大喊，萧道成恐怕是刘昱的诡计，不敢开门。
English: Wang Jing, meanwhile, galloped to the headquarters of the leading army, knocked on the door and shouted that Xiao Daocheng was probably a trick of Liu Bei, and did not dare to open the door.

古文：敬则于墙上投其首，道成洗视，乃戎服乘马而出，敬则、桓康等皆从。入宫，至承明门，诈为行还。
现代文：王敬则把人头从墙上扔进去，萧道成令人洗净血迹辨识，果然不错，这才全副武装，骑马而出，王敬则、桓康等都随从其后，直往宫城，到了承明门，宣称皇帝御驾回宫。
English: Wang Jing, on the other hand, threw a human head from the wall into the water, and the result was so good that the bloodstains could be washed away and identified. He was fully armed and rode out. Wang Jing, Huan Kang, and others followed him all the way to Miyagi, to the Chengming Gate, and declared that the emperor was returning to the palace.

古文：敬则恐内人觇见，以刀环塞窐孔，呼门甚急，门开而入。
现代文：王敬则恐怕守门官兵从门洞往外察看，用刀柄堵住门洞，同时咆哮催促。门打开，进入宫城。
English: Wang Jing, fearing that the soldiers guarding the gate might look through the hole in the door, blocked the hole with the handle of his sword, and at the same time roared and urged them to open the door and enter Miyagi.

古文：他夕，苍梧王每开门，门者震慑，不敢仰视，至是弗之疑。
现代文：从前，每逢夜晚，刘昱闯出闯进，都急躁凶暴，守门卫土震恐，从不敢抬头。所以，今晚之事，没有一人怀疑。
English: In the past, every night, Liu Ye would break out and break in, he was impatient and violent, the gatekeeper was terrified, and he never dared to look up. Therefore, no one doubted tonight's event.

古文：道成入殿，殿中惊怖。
现代文：萧道成进入仁寿殿，殿中官员惊慌恐怖。
English: When Xiao Daocheng entered the Jinshou Palace, officials in the palace panicked.

古文：既而闻苍梧王死，咸称万岁。
现代文：但紧接着听到刘昱已死的消息，都高呼万岁。
English: But immediately after hearing the news that Liu Wei had died, they all shouted "long live."

古文：己丑旦，道成戎服出殿庭槐树下，以太后令召袁粲、褚渊、刘秉入会议。
现代文：己丑旦，道成戎服出殿庭槐树下，以太后令召袁粲、褚渊、刘秉入会议。
English: As soon as he became ugly, Daocheng dressed in military uniform and went out of the palace under the eucalyptus tree. Later, he ordered Yuan Qi, Yu Yuan, and Liu Bing to come to the meeting.

古文：道成谓秉曰： 此使君家事，何以断之？ 
现代文：道成谓秉曰： 此使君家事，何以断之？ 
English: Tao Chengzai said, "This is your family's business, how can you cut it off?"

古文：秉未答。
现代文：秉未答。
English: Bing did not answer.

古文：道成须髯尽张，目光如电。
现代文：道成须髯尽张，目光如电。
English: His eyes are wide open and his gaze is electric.

古文：秉曰： 尚书众事，可以见付；军旅处分，一委领军。 
现代文：秉曰： 尚书众事，可以见付；军旅处分，一委领军。 
English: Bing said: Shang Shuxuan affairs, you can see it; military travel punishment, the first committee led the army.

古文：道成次让袁粲，粲亦不敢当。
现代文：道成次让袁粲，粲亦不敢当。
English: Dao Chengji let Yuan Shao, Shao also did not dare to be the first.

古文：王敬则拔白刃，在床侧跳跃曰： 天下事皆应关萧公！
现代文：王敬则拔白刃，在床侧跳跃曰： 天下事皆应关萧公！
English: Wang Jing pulled out a white blade and jumped on the side of the bed, saying: Everything under heaven should be related to Xiao Gong!

古文：敢有开一言者，血染敬则刀！ 
现代文：敢有开一言者，血染敬则刀！ 
English: If anyone dares to say a word, blood-stained respect is the sword!

古文：仍手取白纱帽加道成首，令即位，曰： 今日谁敢复动！
现代文：仍手取白纱帽加道成首，令即位，曰： 今日谁敢复动！
English: He still took the white gauze cap and added the crown to his head, proclaiming his enthronement, saying: "Who dares to move today!

古文：事须及热！ 
现代文：事须及热！ 
English: Things are heating up!

古文：道成正色呵之曰： 卿都自不解！ 
现代文：道成正色呵之曰： 卿都自不解！ 
English: Daocheng Zhengyi said, "Sir, I don't understand!

古文：粲欲有言，敬则叱之，乃止。
现代文：粲欲有言，敬则叱之，乃止。
English: If you want to have a talk, respectfully reprimand him, but stop.

古文：褚渊曰： 非萧公无以了此。 
现代文：褚渊曰： 非萧公无以了此。 
English: Shanyuan said: If it is not Xiao Gong, there is no other way.

古文：手取事授道成。
现代文：手取事授道成。
English: If you do things by hand, you will succeed.

古文：道成曰： 相与不肯，我安得辞！ 
现代文：道成曰： 相与不肯；我安得辞！ 
English: Daocheng said, "If you are willing, I am willing; if you are not willing, I am not willing!"

古文：乃下议，备法驾诣东城，迎立安成王。
现代文：乃下议，备法驾诣东城，迎立安成王。
English: It was discussed below, and preparations were made to capture Dongcheng and welcome King Ancheng.

古文：于是长刀遮粲、秉等，各失色而去。
现代文：于是长刀遮粲、秉等，各失色而去。
English: As a result, the long knives, such as the shade and the stick, each faded away.

古文：秉出，于路逢从弟韫，韫开车迎问曰： 今日之事，当归兄邪？ 
现代文：秉出，于路逢从弟韫，韫开车迎问曰： 今日之事，当归兄邪？ 
English: He said, "Today's event, should I return to my evil brother?

古文：秉曰： 吾等已让领军矣。 
现代文：秉曰： 吾等已让领军矣。 
English: Bing said, "We have already let the leader go."

古文：韫拊膺曰： 兄肉中讵有血邪！
现代文：韫拊膺曰： 兄肉中讵有血邪！
English: He said, "There is evil blood in my brother's flesh!"

古文：今年族矣！ 
现代文：今年，全族难逃屠杀。 
English: This year, an entire tribe was massacred.

古文：是日，以太后令，数苍梧王罪恶，曰： 吾密令萧领军潜运明略。
现代文：当天，萧道成以皇太后的名义，发布命令，列举刘昱罪状，说： 我密令萧道成暗中运用智谋。
English: On the same day, Xiao Daocheng, in the name of the Empress Dowager, issued an order to list Liu Ye's charges, saying: I secretly ordered Xiao Daocheng to use wisdom and strategy.

古文：安成王准，宜临万国。 
现代文：安成王刘准，应君临万国。 
English: Liu Jun, the Prince of Ancheng, should reign over all nations.

古文：追封昱为苍梧王。
现代文：追封刘昱为苍梧王。
English: Liu Bei was crowned King of Heaven and Earth.

古文：仪卫至东府门，安成王令门者勿开，以待袁司徒。
现代文：皇帝仪仗队抵达东府门前，刘准命守门的人不要开门，等待袁粲的到来。
English: When the emperor's honor guard arrived in front of the Dongfu Gate, Liu ordered the gatekeepers not to open the door and wait for Yuan Shao's arrival.

古文：粲至，王乃入居朝宫。
现代文：袁粲到了之后，刘准才动身到金銮殿。
English: It was only after Yuan Shao arrived that Liu Jun left for the Golden Pavilion.

古文：壬辰，王即皇帝位，时年十一。改元，大赦。
现代文：壬辰，刘准即皇帝位，本年十一岁，改年号，实行大赦。
English: In Imjin, Liu Jun, that is, the emperor, is eleven years old this year, changed his name, and implemented an amnesty.

古文：葬苍梧王于郊坛西。
现代文：把刘昱安葬在南郊祭天神坛之西。
English: Liu Qian was buried in the south of the suburb, to the west of the Temple of Heaven.

古文：魏京兆康王子推卒。
现代文：北魏京兆康王拓跋子推去世。
English: Northern Wei Jingzhao Kang Wang Tuoba Zi died.

古文：甲午，萧道成出镇东府。
现代文：甲午，刘宋中领军萧道成亲自坐镇东府。
English: In the afternoon of the 1st day of the 1st month, Xiao Daocheng, the leader of Liu Song's middle army, personally sat in the town's eastern government.

古文：丙申，以道成为司空、录尚书事、骠骑大将军；袁粲迁中书监；褚渊加开府仪同三司；刘秉迁尚书令，加中领军；以晋熙王燮为扬州刺史。
现代文：丙申，任命萧道成为司空、录尚书事、骠骑大将军；袁粲为中书监；加授褚渊开府仪同三司；刘秉为尚书令，加授中领军；晋熙王刘燮为扬州刺史。
English: Bishen appointed Xiao Dao as the Secretary of the Air Force, the Secretary of the Records of the War, and the General of the Cavalry; Yuan Qi as the Supervisor of the Books of the Middle Kingdom; awarded the Grand Cordon of the Three Departments; Liu Bing as the Secretary of the Books of the War, and awarded the leader of the Middle Kingdom; and the King of Jinxi, Liu Qi, as the Historian of Yangzhou.

古文：刘秉始谓尚书万机，本以宗室居之，则天下无变；既而萧道成兼总军国，布置心膂，与夺自专，褚渊素相凭附，秉与袁粲阁手仰成矣。
现代文：刘秉原来以为尚书省总揽全国政务，由皇族主持，政权就可稳固。想不到萧道成手握军权，把心腹同党安排在重要位置，独断专行。褚渊又一向站在萧道成一边，刘秉与袁粲束手无策，不能有所作为。
English: Liu Bing originally thought that Shangshu Province would take over the whole country's government affairs, and the royal family would preside over it, and the regime would be stable. It was unimaginable that Xiao Dao Cheng would seize military power, place his confidants and party members in important positions, and act arbitrarily. Gongyuan has always stood on the side of Xiao Daocheng, and Liu Bing and Yuan Shao were helpless and unable to make a difference.

古文：辛丑，以尚书右仆射王僧虔为仆射。
现代文：辛丑，任命尚书右仆射王僧虔为尚书仆射。
English: Xin Yuxiu appointed Shang Shuxu's right-hand man Shaowang Xiangqian as Shang Shuxu's right-hand man.

古文：丙午，以武陵王赞为郢州刺史；萧道成改领南徐州刺史。
现代文：丙午，任命武陵王刘赞为郢州刺史，萧道成改兼南徐州刺史。
English: In the afternoon of the 4th, Liu Zan, the king of Wuling, was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou, and Xiao Daocheng was appointed as the governor of South Xuzhou.

古文：八月，壬子，魏大赦。
现代文：八月，壬子，北魏实行大赦。
English: In August, Jinsi, Northern Wei implemented an amnesty.

古文：癸亥，诏袁粲镇石头。
现代文：癸亥，诏命袁粲出京镇守石头。
English: In the year of the Rooster, Yuan Shao was ordered to leave Beijing to guard the stone.

古文：粲性冲静，每有朝命，常固辞；逼切不得已，乃就职。
现代文：袁粲性情淡泊，每次任命他新官职，都要坚决辞让，实在迫不得已，才勉强就职。
English: Yuan Shao's temperament was indifferent. Every time he was appointed to a new official position, he had to make a firm concession. It was really out of necessity that he reluctantly took up the post.

古文：至是知萧道成有不臣之志，阴欲图之，即时受命。
现代文：现在他发现萧道成有推翻刘家王朝的野心，打算秘密谋划除掉萧道成，所以立即接受。当初，明帝命陈昭华抚养刘准。
English: Now he found out that Xiao Daocheng had the ambition to overthrow the Liu Dynasty and planned to secretly plot to eliminate Xiao Daocheng, so he immediately accepted. At first, Emperor Ming ordered Chen Zhaohua to raise Liu Jun.

古文：初，太宗使陈昭华母养顺帝；戊辰，尊昭华为皇太妃。丙子，魏诏曰： 工商皁隶，各有厥分；而有司纵滥，或染流俗。
现代文：戊辰，刘准尊陈昭华为皇太妃。丙子，北魏下诏说： 工匠、商人、衙役，都有固定的身份，而有关部门放任纵容，使他们有的混入高贵的官场。
English: Wu Chen, Liu Quanzhong, Chen Zhaohua, and Empress Dowager Wu Zi, the Northern Wei Dynasty issued the following edict: Craftsmen, merchants, and officials all have a fixed status, but the relevant departments indulge them and allow some of them to mix into the noble officialdom.

古文：自今户内有役者，唯止本部丞；若有勋劳者，不从此制。 
现代文：从今以后，家庭里有人充当工匠的，他本人的官职最高只到各部的丞。能够建功立业的，不在此限。 
English: From now on, if there is someone in the family who works as a craftsman, his or her highest official position will only be the secretary of various ministries, unless he or she is able to build a career.

古文：萧道成固让司空；庚辰，以为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：萧道成坚决辞让司空。庚辰，任命萧道成为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: Xiao Daocheng resolutely resigned from the position of Siku. Gengchen, and appointed Xiao Daocheng to be the commander of the cavalry and the commander of the three divisions.

古文：九月，乙酉，魏更定律令。
现代文：九月，乙酉，北魏更改法令。
English: In September, the Northern Wei Dynasty amended the edict.

古文：戊申，封杨玉夫等二十五人为侯、伯、子、男。
现代文：戊申，刘宋朝廷分别封杨玉夫等二十五人为侯爵、伯爵、子爵、男爵。
English: Twenty-five people, including Yang Yufu, were made marquesses, counts, viscounts, and barons respectively by the court of Emperor Wushin and Liu Song.

古文：冬，十月，氐帅杨文度遣其弟文弘袭魏仇池，陷之。
现代文：冬季，十月，氐王杨文度派他的弟弟杨文弘袭击北魏占领的仇池，攻克。
English: In the winter, in October, the king of Qi, Yang Wendu, sent his younger brother, Yang Wenhong, to attack and conquer the Northern Wei-occupied Qiuchi.

古文：初，魏徐州刺史李訢，事显祖为仑部尚书，信用卢奴令范檦。
现代文：当初，北魏徐州刺史李，在献文帝时任仓部尚书，对卢奴县令范宠爱信任。
English: At the beginning, the Northern Wei Emperor Xuzhou Jishi Li, who was the Cangbu Shangshu at the time of Emperor Xianwen, trusted the favor of Lulu County's Ling Fan.

古文：讠斤弟左将军瑛谏曰： 檦能降人以色，假人以财，轻德义而重势利；听其言也甘，察其行也贼，不早绝之，后悔无及。 
现代文：李的弟弟、左将军李瑛警告说： 范一直笑脸迎人，用财物结交权贵，鄙视恩德道义，眼中只有势利。听他说的话，比蜜还甜；观察他的行为，却十分邪恶，不及早跟他断绝来往，后悔莫及。 
English: Li's younger brother, the left-wing general Li Ying, warned: Fan has always greeted people with a smile, used wealth to make friends with the powerful, despised kindness and morality, and only had snobbery in his eyes. Listening to his words was sweeter than honey; observing his actions, however, was very evil. It was too early to break off contact with him, and there was no time for regret.

古文：讠斤不从，腹心之事，皆以语檦。
现代文：李不但不相信，反而把心里的秘密，全部告诉范。
English: Li not only didn't believe her, but told Fan all her secrets.

古文：尚书越黑，与讠斤皆有宠于显祖，对掌选部。
现代文：尚书赵黑与李都受献文帝的宠信，也同时任吏部尚书。
English: Shangshu Zhao Hei and Li were both favored by Emperor Xianwen, and also served as Shangshu of the cadre department.

古文：讠斤以其私用人为方州，黑对显祖发之，由是有隙。顷之，讠斤发黑前为监藏，盗用官物，黑坐黜为门士。
现代文：李用他的私人任州长，赵黑向献文帝报告了这件事，从此二人产生矛盾。不久，李报复，检举赵黑在前任官职时，贪赃枉法，盗用国家财产。赵黑遂被罢免，充当城门看守员。
English: Li used his private governor, Zhao Hei, to report the matter to Emperor Xianwen, and from then on, the two had a conflict. Soon, Li retaliated, accusing Zhao Hei of embezzlement and misappropriation of state property when he was a former official. Zhao Hei was then dismissed and served as a gatekeeper.

古文：黑恨之，寝食为之衰少；逾年，复入为侍中、尚书左仆射，领选。
现代文：赵黑对李恨之入骨，为此，食不甘味，夜不能寐。过了一年，赵黑再次任侍中、尚书左仆射，兼任吏部。
English: Zhao Hei hated Li to the bone, and for this reason, he could not eat anything sweet and could not sleep at night. A year later, Zhao Hei once again served as an attendant, Shang Shushi Zuo Shuai, and also served as a clerk.

古文：及显祖殂，黑白冯太后，称讠斤专恣，出为徐州。
现代文：献文帝去世后，赵黑向冯太后私下报告，说李独断专横，于是被外放任徐州刺史。
English: After the death of Emperor Xianwen, Zhao Hei privately reported to Empress Dowager Feng that Li was arbitrary and despotic, so he was exiled to Xuzhou to make history.

古文：范檦知太后怨讠斤，乃告讠斤谋外叛。
现代文：范知道冯太后痛恨李，就告发李通敌叛国。
English: Fan knew that Empress Dowager Feng hated Li, so he accused Li of treason.

古文：太后征讠斤至平城问状，讠斤对无之，太后引檦使证之。
现代文：冯太后把李召回平城审问，李回答说： 根本没有此事。 冯太后命范当面作证。
English: Empress Dowager Feng called Li back to Pingcheng for interrogation. Li replied, "There is no such thing. Empress Dowager Feng ordered Fan to testify in person.

古文：讠斤谓檦曰： 汝今诬我，我复何言！
现代文：李对范说： 你今天血口喷人，诬陷于我，我还能说什么！
English: Li said to Fan: You have been spitting blood today, framing me, what else can I say!

古文：然汝受我恩如此之厚，乃忍为尔乎！ 
现代文：然而，你受我的恩惠如此之厚，怎么忍心下此毒手？ 
English: However, since you are so favored by me, how can you tolerate such a cruel act?

古文：檦曰： 檦受公恩，何如公受李敷恩！
现代文：范说： 我受你的恩惠，怎比得上你受李敷的恩惠？
English: Fan said, "How can I be favored by you compared to you being favored by Li Shigu?"

古文：公忍之于敷，檦何为不忍于公！ 
现代文：你忍心对李敷下毒手，我为什么不能忍心对你。 
English: You can bear to lay a cruel hand on Li, why can't I bear to do the same to you?

古文：讠斤慨然叹曰： 吾不用瑛言，悔之何及！ 
现代文：李叹息说： 我不听李瑛的话，真是后悔莫及。 
English: Li sighed and said: I didn't listen to Li Ying's words, and I really regret it.

古文：赵黑复于中构成其罪，丙子，诛讠斤及其子令和、令度；黑然后寝食如故。
现代文：赵黑又在中间制造罪名。丙子，斩李及他的儿子李令和、李令度。赵黑的寝食，从此才恢复安稳。
English: Zhao Hei also fabricated a crime in the middle. Cixi, beheaded Li and his sons Li Linghe and Li Lingdu. Zhao Hei slept and ate, and only then did he regain stability.

古文：十一月，癸未，魏征西将军皮欢喜等三将军帅众四万击杨文弘。
现代文：十一月，癸未，北魏征西将军皮欢喜等三名将军率军四万人崐攻击杨文弘。
English: In November, three generals, including Pi Huanxi, the general of the Western Expedition of the Northern Wei Dynasty, led an army of 40,000 to attack Yang Wenhong.

古文：丁亥，魏怀州民伊祁苟自称尧后，聚众于重山作乱；洛州刺史冯熙讨灭之。
现代文：丁亥，北魏怀州平民伊祁苟自称尧的后裔，在重山聚众起兵制造叛乱，洛州刺史冯熙出兵把他们击败。
English: Ding Hai, a descendant of the self-proclaimed Yigong, a commoner from Huizhou in Northern Wei, rallied troops in Chongshan to create a rebellion. Luozhou's Feng Xi dispatched troops to defeat them.

古文：冯太后欲尽诛阖城之民，雍州刺史张白泽谏曰： 凶渠逆党，尽已枭夷；城中岂无忠良仁信之士，奈何不问白黑，一切诛之！ 
现代文：冯太后打算屠杀全城的百姓，雍州刺史张白泽劝阻说： 凶恶的叛党，已经杀光，城里难道没有一个忠良仁义之士？怎么可以不分青红皂白全部诛杀！ 
English: Empress Feng planned to massacre the entire population of the city, but was dissuaded by Zhang Baizhe, the Yangzhou chief historian, who said: "The vicious rebels have already been killed, is there not a single loyal, benevolent and righteous person in the city? How can all be killed indiscriminately!

古文：乃止。
现代文：冯太后这才打消念头。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：十二月，魏皮欢喜军至建安，杨文弘弃城走。
现代文：十二月，北魏皮欢喜大军抵达建安，杨文弘弃城逃走。
English: In December, the Northern Wei Pi Huanqi army arrived in Jian'an, and Yang Wenhong abandoned the city and fled.

古文：初，沈攸之与萧道成于大明、景和之间同直殿省，深相亲善，道成女为攸之子中书侍郎文和妇。
现代文：当初，沈攸之与萧道成在孝武帝及废帝刘昱在位时，曾经同时担任朝廷警卫，轮流入殿值班。萧道成的女儿嫁给沈攸之的儿子、中书侍郎沈文和为妻。
English: At first, Shen Youzhi and Xiao Daocheng both served as imperial guards during the reigns of Emperor Xiaowu and the deposed Emperor Liu Bei, taking turns to be on duty when entering the palace. Xiao Daocheng's daughter married Shen Youzhi's son, the attendant Shen Wenhe.

古文：攸之在荆州，直阁将军高道庆，家在华容，假还，过江陵，与攸之争戏槊。驰还建康。言攸之反状已成，请以三千人袭之。
现代文：沈攸之在荆州，直将军高道庆家住华容，请假回家，路过江陵，跟沈攸之赌博，发生争执，高道庆返回建康，检举沈攸之已经准备叛变，请求朝廷调拨三千人，袭击沈攸之。
English: While Shen Youzhi was in Jingzhou, Gao Daoqing, the direct general of Gao Daoqing's family, lived in Huarong. He took a leave of absence and went home. He passed by Jiangling. He and Shen Youzhi gambled and quarreled. Gao Daoqing returned to Jiankang. He accused Shen Youzhi of preparing a mutiny and asked the imperial court to allocate three thousand people to attack Shen Youzhi.

古文：执政皆以为不可，道成仍保证其不然。
现代文：在朝执政的官员都认为不可，萧道成仍保证沈攸之不会谋反。
English: The officials in power in the DPRK all thought it was impossible, and Xiao Daocheng still guaranteed that Shen Youzhi would not rebel.

古文：杨运长等恶攸之，密与道庆谋遣刺客杀攸之，不克。
现代文：杨运长等憎恶沈攸之，跟高道庆秘谋派出刺客，准备刺杀沈攸之，失败。
English: Yang Yunchang and others hated Shen Youzhi, and sent an assassin with Gao Daoqing's secret plan to assassinate Shen Youzhi, but failed.

古文：会苍梧王遇弑，主簿宗俨之、功曹臧寅劝攸之因此起兵。
现代文：正在这时，苍梧王刘昱被杀，主簿宗俨之、功曹臧寅，都劝沈攸之抓住这个机会起兵。
English: It was at this time that the Cangwu king Liu Bei was killed, and the master of the book, Zong Yu Zi, and Gong Cao Yu Yin, both advised Shen Yu Zi to seize this opportunity to raise an army.

古文：攸之以其长子元琰在建康为司徒左长史，故未发。
现代文：沈攸之因他的长子沈元琰在建康任司徒左长史，所以没有发动。
English: Shen Youzhi did not launch the attack because his eldest son, Shen Yuanjun, was in Jiankang serving as the head of the imperial guard.

古文：寅，凝之之子也。
现代文：臧寅是臧凝之的儿子。
English: Kagero is the son of Kagero.

古文：时杨运长等已不在内，萧道成遣元琰以苍梧王刳斫之具示攸之。
现代文：当时，杨运长等已不在朝廷，萧道成派沈无琰携带苍梧王杀人剖腹时所用的凶器，请沈攸之过目。
English: At that time, Yang Yunchang and others were no longer in the imperial court, and Xiao Daocheng sent Shen Wuxuan to carry the murder weapon used in the disembowelment of King Cangwu. Please pay attention to Shen You.

古文：攸之以道成名位素出己下，一旦专制朝权，心不平，谓元琰曰： 吾宁为王陵死，不为贾充生。 
现代文：沈攸之因萧道成的名望、官位一向比自己低，却时来运转，控制朝廷，心里愤愤不平，对沈元琰说： 我宁为王凌，讨伐逆贼而死；也不愿做贾充，投降叛逆而生。 
English: Shen Youzhi's reputation and official position had always been lower than his own because of Xiao Daoxing, but he had been running from time to time, controlling the imperial court, and his heart was resentful. He said to Shen Yuanqi: I would rather die for Wang Ling and fight against the traitors; I would rather not be Jia Chong and surrender and rebel.

古文：然亦未暇举兵。乃上表称庆，因留元琰。
现代文：便也没马上起兵，反而上表向刘准祝贺，并把沈元琰留下。
English: He did not immediately raise an army, but instead congratulated Liu Jun on the table and left Shen Yuanjun behind.

古文：雍州刺史张敬儿，素与攸之司马刘攘兵善，疑攸之将起事，密以问攘兵。攘兵无所言，寄敬儿马镫一只，敬儿乃为之备。
现代文：雍州刺史张敬儿，一向同沈攸之的司马刘攘兵友好。张敬儿怀疑沈攸之将要发动兵变，派人秘密询问刘攘兵，刘攘兵一言不发，只送给张敬儿一只马镫，张敬儿领悟，暗中戒备。
English: Zhang Jing'er, the historian of Yongzhou, has always been friendly with Liu Jiaohe, Shen Youzhi's steed. Zhang Jing'er suspected that Shen Youzhi was going to launch a mutiny, and sent someone to secretly interrogate Liu Jiaohe. Liu Jiaohe did not say a word, but only gave Zhang Jing'er a horse, and Zhang Jing'er understood and was secretly on guard.

古文：攸之有素书十数行，常韬在裲裆角，云是明帝与己约誓。
现代文：沈攸之有一封写在白绸缎上、约有十几行的信件，平常总是藏在背心衣角里，宣称是明帝和他的盟誓。
English: Shen Youzhi had a letter of about a dozen lines written on a white silk scarf, usually hidden in the waistcoat, claiming to be Emperor Ming and his oath.

古文：攸之将举兵，其妾崔氏谏曰： 官年已老，那不为百口计！ 
现代文：沈攸之将要起兵，他的妾崔氏规劝说： 你年纪已老，怎么不为百口之家想一想！ 
English: Shen Youzhi is about to raise an army, and his concubine Cui Shijie persuades him: You are old, why don't you think about a family of a hundred!

古文：攸之指裲裆角示之，且称太后使至，赐攸之烛，割之，得太后手令云： 社稷之事，一以委公。 
现代文：沈攸之指指背心衣角。又扬言：皇太后使节到来，赐给沈攸之一双蜡烛，剖开蜡烛，看见太后手令，说： 国家大事，全交给你。 
English: Shen Youzhi pointed to the crotch of his waistcoat. He also threatened: When the emissary of the Empress Dowager arrives, he will give Shen Youzhi a pair of candles. Shen Youzhi opened the candles, saw the Empress Dowager's handwriting, and said: "In matters of national importance, everything is entrusted to you."

古文：于是勒兵移檄，遣使邀张敬儿及豫州刺史刘怀珍、梁州刺史梓潼范柏年、司州刺史姚道和、湘州行事庾佩玉、巴陵内史王文和同举兵。
现代文：于是，沈攸之发动军队，发布檄文，派人邀请张敬儿和豫州刺史刘怀珍、梁州刺史梓潼人范柏年、司州刺史姚道和、湘州行事庾佩玉、巴陵内史王文和，一同起兵。
English: As a result, Shen Youzhi mobilized the army, issued an imperial edict, and sent people to invite Zhang Jing'er, Liu Huizhen, the governor of Yuzhou, Fan Paknian, the governor of Liangzhou, Yao Dao, the governor of Shizhou, Zhou Peiyu, the governor of Hunan, and Wang Wenhe, the governor of Baling, to join the army.

古文：敬儿、怀珍、文和并斩其使，驰表以闻；文和寻弃州奔夏口。
现代文：张敬儿、刘怀珍、王文和都诛杀了沈攸之派去的使节，快马奏报朝廷。王文和不久就放弃巴陵，投奔夏口。
English: Zhang Jing Er, Liu Huai Zhen, Wang Wen He all killed the envoys sent by Shen You, and quickly reported to the imperial court. Wang Wen He soon abandoned Baling and fled to Xia Kou.

古文：柏年、道和、佩玉皆怀两端。
现代文：范柏年、姚道和、庾佩玉都存心观望，一时难以决定。
English: Fan Bainian, Yao Daohu, and Zou Peiyu were all watching and waiting, and it was difficult to decide for a while.

古文：道和，后秦高祖之孙也。
现代文：姚道和是后秦文桓帝姚兴的孙子。
English: Yao Daowu was the grandson of Emperor Yao Xing of the Later Qin Dynasty.

古文：辛酉，攸之遣辅国将军孙同等相继东下。
现代文：辛酉，沈攸之派辅国将军孙同等，相继顺长江东下。
English: Xin Xuan and Shen You sent auxiliary generals to the east of the Yangtze River, one after another.

古文：攸之遗道成书，以为： 少帝昏狂，宜与诸公密议，共白太后，下令废之；奈何交结左右，亲行弑逆，乃至不殡，流虫在户？
现代文：沈攸之写信给萧道成，认为： 幼主昏暴疯狂，你应与朝中大臣秘密商议，共同报告太后，下令废黜。怎么可以勾结他的左右侍从，下手杀害，甚至不肯早日入殓下葬，致尸体生蛆，爬到门户之上！
English: Shen Youzhi wrote a letter to Xiao Daocheng, saying: "The young master is delirious and crazy. You should secretly discuss with the ministers of the two Koreas, jointly report to the empress dowager, and order the dethronement. How can you collude with his right and left attendants, kill him, and even refuse to be buried in the coffin as soon as possible, leaving the corpse alive and crawling to the top of the portal!

古文：凡在臣下，谁不惋骇！
现代文：身为臣属，谁不惊骇叹息！
English: As a subject, who is not shocked and sighed!

古文：又，移易朝旧，布置亲党，宫阁管籥，悉关家人。
现代文：另外你把朝廷的旧臣，纷纷驱逐，全部安排你的党羽，宫殿官署的门禁钥匙，都由萧家的人掌管。
English: In addition, you expelled the old courtiers of the imperial court one after another, arranged all your followers, and the access control keys of the palace government office were all controlled by people from the Xiao family.

古文：吾不知子孟、孔明遗训固如此乎！
现代文：霍光、诸葛亮的遗训，难道就是这样！
English: Ho Guang, Zhuge Liang's last words, is this it?

古文：足下既有贼宋之心，吾宁敢捐包胥之节邪！ 
现代文：你既然有灭亡宋国的野心，我岂敢捐弃申包胥乞秦救楚的节操！ 
English: Since you have the ambition to destroy the Song Dynasty, I dare not give up the struggle to save the Qin Dynasty!

古文：朝廷闻之，恟惧。
现代文：朝廷听到这个消息，惊恐万状。
English: When the Imperial Court heard the news, they were horrified.

古文：丁卯，道成入守朝堂，命侍中萧嶷代镇东府，抚军行参军萧映镇京口。
现代文：丁卯，萧道成入宫坐镇，命侍中萧嶷代替自己镇守东府，抚军行参军萧映镇守京口。
English: Dingwu, Xiao Daocheng entered the palace and sat in the town, ordered the attendant Xiao Jun to guard the eastern capital in place of himself, led the army and joined the army Xiao Ying to guard the capital.

古文：映，嶷之弟也。
现代文：萧映是萧嶷的弟弟。
English: Xiao Ying is Xiao Yao's younger brother.

古文：戊辰，内外纂严。
现代文：戊辰，朝廷内外戒严。
English: On the 24th, martial law was declared throughout the country.

古文：己巳，以郢州刺史武陵王赞为荆州刺史。
现代文：己巳，任命郢州刺史武陵王刘赞为荆州刺史。
English: At the same time, he appointed Liu Zan, the king of Wuling, the chief historian of Zhangzhou, as the chief historian of Jingzhou.

古文：庚午，以右卫将军黄回为郢州刺史，督前锋诸军以讨攸之。
现代文：庚午，任命右卫将军黄回为郢州刺史，率前锋各支军，讨伐沈攸之。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, Huang Hui, the right guard general, was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou, leading the vanguard of each branch of the army to fight against Shen Yuanzhi.

古文：初，道成以世子赜为晋熙王燮长史，行郢州事，修治器械以备攸之。
现代文：当初，萧道成任命长子萧赜为晋熙王刘燮的长史，代理郢州事，整修城池，磨砺武器，以防备沈攸之。
English: At first, Xiao Daocheng appointed his eldest son Xiao Jun to be the Long History of the Jinxi King Liu Jun, acting as the agent of the state affairs, renovating the castle, and sharpening the weapons to prevent Shen Yu.

古文：及征燮为扬州，以赜为左卫将军，与燮俱下。
现代文：到萧道成征召刘燮任扬州刺史时，任命萧赜为左卫将军，与刘燮同时东下。
English: When Liu Ye was called up by Xiao Daocheng to serve as Yangzhou chief historian, Xiao Ye was appointed as the left guard general and went east at the same time as Liu Ye.

古文：刘怀珍言于道成曰： 夏口冲要，宜得其人。 
现代文：刘怀珍对萧道成说： 夏口是军事要冲，应该有适当的人驻守。 
English: Liu Huai Zhen said to Xiao Daocheng: Niaokou is a military important place, there should be appropriate people stationed there.

古文：道成与赜书曰： 汝既入朝，当须文武兼资与汝意合者，委以后事。 
现代文：萧道成写信给刘赜说： 你既然前来京师，应该物色一个文武双全，而又与你见解一致的人，把你走后的大事委托给他。 
English: Xiao Daocheng wrote a letter to Liu Xuan saying: Since you have come to Beijing, you should find a person who is both literate and armed, and who agrees with your views, and entrust him with the important things after you leave.

古文：赜乃荐燮司马柳世隆自代。
现代文：萧赜乃推荐刘燮的司马柳世隆代替自己。
English: Xiao Qian recommended Liu Qian's Sima Liu Shilong to replace him.

古文：道成以世隆为武陵王赞长史，行郢州事。
现代文：萧道成遂命柳世隆任武陵王刘赞的长史，代理郢州事。
English: Xiao Daocheng was appointed by Liu Shilong as the long history of Wuling King Liu Zan, acting for the state affairs.

古文：赜将行，谓世隆曰： 攸之一旦为变，焚夏口舟舰，沿流而东，不可制也。
现代文：萧赜将要动身，对柳世隆说： 沈攸之一旦叛变，纵火焚烧夏口战船，顺长江东下，就很难控制。
English: Xiao Yao was about to leave and said to Liu Shilong: Once Shen You mutinied, set fire to the Hacou warship, and sailed east along the Yangtze River, it would be difficult to control.

古文：若得攸之留攻郢城，必未能猝拔。
现代文：如果能把沈攸之引诱到郢州城下，留他攻城，一定不会立即攻下。
English: If you can lure Shen Youzhi to the outskirts of Zhangzhou and let him attack the city, you will not be able to capture it immediately.

古文：君为其内，我为其外，破之必矣。 
现代文：这样，你在城内，我在城外，两面夹击，一定可以击败他。 
English: In this way, you in the city, I outside the city, the two sides of the sandwich, will be able to defeat him.

古文：及攸之起兵，赜行至寻阳，未得朝廷处分，众欲倍道趋建康，赜曰： 寻阳地居中流，密迩畿甸。若留屯湓口，内籓朝廷，外援夏首，保据形胜，控制西南，今日会此，天所置也。 
现代文：等到沈攸之宣布起兵，萧赜才到寻阳，还没有得到朝廷的指示，众人都打算加快速度，直回建康。萧赜说： 寻阳地处长江中游，接近京师，我们如果留下来据守湓口，内可以作朝廷的屏藩，外可以援助夏口，占据有利地形，控制西南。我们今天路过此地，全是上天的安排。 
English: It was not until Shen Youzhi announced the start of the army that Xiao Yao arrived at Xuanyang. He had not yet received instructions from the imperial court, and everyone was planning to speed up and go straight to Jiankang. Xiao Yao said: Xuanyang is located in the middle reaches of the Yangtze River, close to Beijing Division. If we stay and defend Xuankou, we can serve as the imperial palace of Pingfang, and we can help Xiakou, occupy favorable terrain, and control the southwest. We passed this place today, all by God's arrangement.

古文：或以为湓口城小难固，左中郎将周山图曰： 今据中流，为四方势援，不可以小事难之；苟众心齐一，江山皆城隍也。 
现代文：有人认为湓口城池太小，难以坚守。左中郎将周山图说： 我们据守长江中游，声援四方，不可以把这种小事当作困难，只要万众一心，到处都是城池。 
English: Some people think that the city of Hukou is too small and difficult to hold on to. Zuozhongro said to Zhou Shantu: We are defending the middle reaches of the Yangtze River and supporting the four sides. We should not regard this small matter as a difficulty. As long as everyone is united, there will be cities everywhere.

古文：庚午，赜奉燮镇湓口；赜悉以事委山图。
现代文：庚午，萧赜陪同刘燮镇守湓口，把军事的事情全部交给周山图。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, Xiao Zhen accompanied Liu Zhen to guard Hekou, and handed over all military affairs to Zhou Shantu.

古文：山图断取行旅船板以造楼橹，立水栅，旬日皆办。
现代文：周山图封锁长江，掠取民间旅行船上的木板，建造战船，树立水中木栅，十天时间，全部完成。
English: Zhou Shantou blockaded the Yangtze River, plundered the planks on the civilian cruise ship, built warships, and set up wooden grates in the water. It took ten days to complete everything.

古文：道成闻之，喜曰： 赜真我子也！ 
现代文：萧道成接到报告，高兴地说： 萧赜不愧是我的儿子！ 
English: Upon receiving the report, Xiao Daocheng said happily, "Xiaoxuan is truly my son!

古文：以赜为西讨都督。赜启山图为军副。
现代文：任命萧赜为西讨都督，萧赜又推荐周山图任军副。
English: Xiao Wei was appointed as the governor of Xitun. Xiao Wei also recommended Zhou Shantu to be the deputy of the military.

古文：时江州刺史邵陵王友镇寻阳，赜以为寻阳城不足固，表移友同镇湓口，留江州别驾豫章胡谐之守寻阳。
现代文：当时，江州刺史邵陵王刘友，镇守寻阳，萧赜认为寻阳城池不够坚固，上奏朝廷，命刘友同自己一起镇守湓口，留江州别驾豫章人胡谐之，驻防寻阳。
English: At that time, Liu You, the governor of Shao Ling Wang, the governor of Jiangzhou, and Xiao Yao, the governor of Xiangyang, thought that Xiangyang Castle was not strong enough. They appealed to the imperial court and ordered Liu You to guard the city gate together with himself.

古文：湘州刺史王蕴遭母丧罢归，至巴陵，与沈攸之深相结。
现代文：湘州刺史王蕴因母亲去世，辞职回家守丧。路过巴陵，与沈攸之结交密切。
English: Due to the death of his mother, Wang Yun, a member of the Shishi clan in Hunan Province, resigned and went home to mourn. He passed by Baling and became close friends with Shen Youxuan.

古文：时攸之未举兵，蕴过郢州，欲因萧赜出吊作难，据郢城。
现代文：当时，沈攸之还没有起兵。王蕴路过郢州时，打算趁萧赜出来吊丧时下手，占领郢城。
English: At that time, Shen Youzhi had not yet raised an army. When Wang Yun was passing through Zhangzhou, he planned to seize the opportunity to seize Zhangcheng when Xiao Yu came out to mourn.

古文：赜知之，不出。
现代文：萧赜知道，不肯出来吊丧。
English: Xiao Yao knew this and refused to come out to mourn.

古文：还，至东府，又欲因萧道成出吊作难，道成又不出。
现代文：王蕴回到京师，前往东府，又打算趁萧道成出来吊丧时下手，而萧道成也拒绝出门。
English: Wang Yun returned to Beijing Division and went to Dongfu. He also planned to take advantage of Xiao Daocheng's funeral, and Xiao Daocheng also refused to go out.

古文：蕴乃与袁粲、刘秉密谋诛道成，将帅黄回、任候伯、孙昙瓘、王宜兴、卜伯兴等皆与通谋。
现代文：于是王蕴跟袁粲、刘秉密谋铲除萧道成。黄回、任候伯、孙昙、王宜兴、卜伯兴等将领全都参与。
English: As a result, Wang Yun conspired with Yuan Shao and Liu Bing to eradicate Xiao Daocheng. Generals such as Huang Hui, Ren Hou Bo, Sun Yat-sen, Wang Yixing, and Bu Boxing all participated.

古文：伯兴，天与之子也。
现代文：卜伯兴是卜天与的儿子。
English: Bu Bo Xing is the son of Bu Tian You.

古文：道成初闻攸之事起，自往诣粲，粲辞不见。
现代文：萧道成接到沈攸之起兵的消息时，亲自拜访袁粲，袁粲拒绝接见。
English: When Xiao Daocheng received the news that Shen You had raised an army, he personally visited Yuan Shao. Yuan Shao refused to meet him.

古文：通直郎袁达谓粲 不宜示异同 ，粲曰： 彼若以主幼时艰，与桂阳时不异，劫我入台，我何辞以拒之！
现代文：通直郎袁达对袁粲说： 不应该表示不同的态度。 袁粲说： 如果他以主上年幼，时局艰难，跟桂阳王时的情形相同，用暴力挟持我进宫，我用什么理由拒绝！
English: Tongzhi Lang Yuan Da said to Yuan Shao: "One should not express a different attitude." Yuan Shao said: "If he, with the main reason that he is young and the situation is difficult, the same as the situation at the time of King Guiyang, took me to the palace by force, what reason would I use to refuse!

古文：一朝同止，欲异得乎！ 
现代文：只要有一天同行同止，以后还怎么能反对他！ 
English: As long as they stay together one day, how can they oppose him in the future!

古文：道成乃召褚渊，与之连席，每事必引渊共之。
现代文：于是萧道成又召褚渊，跟他并肩共坐，每一件事情都跟褚渊研究商量。
English: So Xiao Daocheng called Gongyuan again and sat side by side with him. He discussed everything with Gongyuan.

古文：时刘韫为领军将军，入直门下省；卜伯兴为直阁，黄回等诸将皆出屯新亭。
现代文：当时，刘韫为领军将军，入值门下省；卜伯兴担任直，黄回等诸将领率军出京，驻防新亭。
English: At that time, Liu Wei was the leading general and was assigned to the province; Bu Bo Xing served as the commander, and Huang Hui and other generals led the army out of Beijing and stationed in Xingting.

古文：初，褚渊为卫将军，遭母忧去职，朝廷敦迫，不起。
现代文：当初，褚渊任卫将军，因母亲去世而离职，朝廷一再征召他，他都拒绝。
English: At first, the imperial court repeatedly called him to serve as a general, but he refused.

古文：粲素有重名，自往譬说，渊乃从之。
现代文：袁粲一向有高贵的声誉，亲自前去劝解，褚渊才接受。
English: Yuan Shao always had a noble reputation. He went to persuade them in person, but it was only after that that Yuanyuan accepted.

古文：及粲为尚书令，遭母忧，渊譬说恳至，粲遂不起，渊由是恨之。
现代文：后来，袁粲任尚书令，也因母亲去世离职，褚渊也去劝他复职，言辞恳切，袁粲始终不肯，褚渊于是深恨袁粲。
English: Later, Yuan Shao was appointed to the post of secretary, and also left the post due to his mother's death. Gongyuan also went to persuade him to resume his post, and his words were sincere. Yuan Shao always refused, and Gongyuan deeply hated Yuan Shao.

古文：及沈攸之事起，道成与渊议之。渊曰： 西夏衅难，事必无成，公当先备其内耳。 
现代文：沈攸之起兵之后，萧道成与褚渊共商对策，褚渊说： 西夏闹事，一定不会成功，你应该戒备的是内部。 
English: After Shen Youyou's army was raised, Xiao Daocheng and Gongyuan discussed the countermeasures. Gongyuan said: The Western Xia riot will not succeed, you should be on guard inside.

古文：粲谋既定，将以告渊；众谓渊与道成素善，不可告。
现代文：袁粲图谋萧道成的计划已经确定，打算告诉褚渊。众人认为，褚渊跟萧道成的关系一向密切，不能让他知道。
English: Yuan Xuan's plan to plot against Xiao Daocheng had been determined and he planned to tell Gongyuan. Everyone believed that Gongyuan had always had a close relationship with Xiao Daocheng and could not let him know.

古文：粲曰： 渊与彼虽善，岂容大作同异！
现代文：袁粲说： 褚渊虽然跟萧道成私交至深，难道能完全反对我们！
English: Yuan Qi said, "Although Gongyuan has a deep personal friendship with Xiao Dao, can he completely oppose us?

古文：今若不告，事定便应除之。 
现代文：今天若不告诉他，事情平定后，就应该把他杀掉。 
English: If you don't tell him today, when things have calmed down, you should kill him.

古文：乃以谋告渊，渊即以告道成。
现代文：于是把计划告诉了褚渊，褚渊立刻告诉萧道成。
English: So he told Gongyuan about the plan, and Gongyuan immediately told Xiao Ducheng.

古文：道成亦先闻其谋，遣军主苏烈、薛渊、太原王天生将兵助粲守石头。
现代文：萧道成早已得到消息，派军主苏烈、薜渊、太原人王天生，率军前往石头，增援袁粲。
English: Xiao Daocheng had already received the news and sent the army's commander, Su Lie, Gongyuan, and the Taiyuan native, Wang Tian Sheng, to lead the army to Stone to reinforce Yuan Shao.

古文：薛渊固辞，道成强之，渊不得已，涕泣拜辞，道成曰： 卿近在石头，日夕去来，何悲如是，且又何辞？ 
现代文：薜渊坚决不肯，萧道成强迫他非去不可，薜渊不得已，痛哭流涕告辞，萧道成说： 你到石头，近在咫尺，早上去晚上回来，何至如此悲伤？又何至要正式辞行？ 
English: Gongyuan resolutely refused, Xiao Daocheng forced him to go, Gongyuan had no choice but to bid farewell with tears, Xiao Daocheng said: You go to the stone, close at hand, go in the morning and come back in the evening, why are you so sad? And why do you want to officially resign?

古文：渊曰： 不审公能保袁公共为一家否？
现代文：薜渊说： 不知道你能不能保全袁粲一家老小？
English: Gongyuan said, "I don't know if you can keep Yuan Qi's family safe.

古文：今渊往，与之同则负公，不同则立受祸，何得不悲！ 
现代文：今天我奉命前往，赞成他，则辜负你；不赞成他，则立刻会被杀，怎么能不悲伤！ 
English: Today I have been ordered to go. If you agree with him, you will fail; if you do not agree with him, you will be killed immediately. How can you not be sad!

古文：道成曰： 所以遣卿，正为能尽临事之宜，使我无西顾之忧耳。
现代文：萧道成说： 所以派你去，是因为你能随机应变，使我解除西顾之忧。
English: Xiao Daocheng said, "That's why I sent you here, because you can make changes at random to relieve my worries about going to the West."

古文：但当努力，无所多言。 
现代文：只管尽力，不要多说。 
English: Just do your best and don't talk too much.

古文：渊，安都之从子也。
现代文：薜渊是薜安都的侄儿。
English: Gongyuan is the nephew of Gong Andu.

古文：道成又以骁骑将军王敬则为直阁，与伯兴共总禁兵。
现代文：萧道成又任命骁骑将军王敬则主管宫廷，与卜伯兴共同统领禁军。
English: Xiao Daocheng also appointed the cavalry general Wang Jing to be in charge of the court, and jointly led the forbidden army with Bu Boxing.

古文：粲谋矫太后令，使韫、伯兴帅宿卫兵攻道成于朝堂，回等帅所领为应。
现代文：袁粲谋划假传皇太后的命令，派刘韫、卜伯兴率领宫廷禁卫军，攻打坐镇宫城的萧道成，黄回等率军响应。
English: Yuan Shao planned to falsely transmit the order of the empress dowager, sent Liu Wei and Bu Bo Xing to lead the palace guards to attack Xiao Daocheng in the palace city, and Huang Hui led the army to respond.

古文：刘秉、任候伯等并赴石头，本期壬申夜发，秉恇扰不知所为，晡后即束装；临去，啜羹，写胸上，手振不自禁。
现代文：刘秉、任候伯等同时赴赴石头，商定壬申夜晚动身出发。可是刘秉胆小如鼠，恐慌不安，不知如何是好，中午稍过，便吩咐收拾行李，临出发时，由于紧张过度，喝汤全都倾泻到胸脯上，双手发抖，不能自制。
English: Liu Bing, Ren Xubo and others went to Shishi at the same time and agreed to leave for Jinshin in the evening. However, Liu Bing was as timid as a mouse, panicked and uneasy, and did not know what to do. Shortly after noon, he ordered to pack his luggage. Upon departure, due to excessive tension, the soup was all poured onto his chest, his hands were shaking, and he could not control himself.

古文：未暗，载妇女，尽室奔石头，部曲数百，赫奕满道。
现代文：天还没黑，就用车马拉着妇女和全部财产，投奔石头，私人卫队数百人，挤满街道，车水马龙。
English: Before it was dark, they dragged the women and all the property by car and rushed to the stone, hundreds of private guards crowded the streets, and the traffic was heavy.

古文：既至，见粲，粲惊曰： 何事遽来？今败矣！ 
现代文：到达石头后，晋见袁粲，袁粲大惊说： 发生了什么事，提前赶来，这次大事必败无疑了！ 
English: After arriving at the stone, Jin saw Yuan Shao, Yuan Shao was shocked and said: What happened, come early, this big event will undoubtedly fail!

古文：秉曰： 得见公，万死何恨！ 
现代文：刘秉说： 能见公一面，万死无怨！ 
English: Liu Bing said: If you can see the public side, there is nothing to complain about!

古文：孙昙瓘闻之，亦奔石头。
现代文：孙昙听说后，也逃奔到石头。
English: After hearing this, Sun Yat-sen also fled to Shimen.

古文：丹阳丞王逊等走告道成，事乃大露。
现代文：丹阳丞王逊等跑去报告萧道成，这事才彻底暴露。
English: Danyangcheng Wangxun and others ran to report Xiao Daocheng, and the matter was thoroughly exposed.

古文：逊，僧绰之子也。
现代文：王逊是王僧绰的儿子。
English: Wang Xun is the son of Wang Soqiao.

古文：道成密使人告王敬则。
现代文：萧道成秘密派人通知王敬则。
English: Xiao Daocheng secretly sent someone to inform Wang Jingze.

古文：时阁已闭，敬则欲开阁出，卜伯兴严兵为备，敬则乃锯所止屋壁，得出，至中书省收韫。
现代文：当时，宫殿门户已经关闭，王敬则打算开门出去。
English: At that time, the palace gate was already closed, but Wang Jing planned to open the door and go out.

古文：韫已成严，列烛自照。
现代文：而卜伯兴的部队已进入战斗状态。
English: But Bu Bo Xing's troops have entered a state of combat.

古文：见敬则猝至，惊起迎之，曰： 兄何能夜顾？ 
现代文：于是王敬则用锯把木墙锯成一个洞逃出，冲入中书省去逮捕刘韫。刘韫已经做好准备，火把通明，看见王敬则突然出现，惊慌起立迎去，说： 老兄，怎么能晚上来？ 
English: So Wang Jing used a saw to cut a hole in the wooden wall to escape and rushed into the library to arrest Liu Ye. Liu Ye was already prepared and the torches were lit. When Wang Jing suddenly appeared, he panicked and stood up to greet him, saying, "Brother, how can you come at night?

古文：敬则呵之曰： 小子那敢作贼！ 
现代文：王敬则骂道： 好小子，你竟敢做叛徒！ 
English: Wang Jing scolded: Good boy, how dare you be a traitor!

古文：韫抱敬则，敬则拳殴其颊仆地而杀之，又杀伯兴。
现代文：刘韫突然抱住王敬则，王敬则用拳头猛击刘韫的面颊，刘韫跌倒在地，被王敬则诛杀，王敬则又杀了卜伯兴。
English: Liu Ye suddenly hugged Wang Jing, Wang Jing punched Liu Ye in the cheek with his fist, Liu Ye fell to the ground and was beaten to death by Wang Jing, who then killed Bu Boxing.

古文：苏烈等据仓城拒粲。
现代文：苏烈等占领仓城，抵抗袁粲。
English: Su Lie and others occupied Cangcheng and resisted Yuan Shao.

古文：王蕴闻秉已走，叹曰： 事不成矣！ 
现代文：王蕴听到刘秉先行逃走的消息，叹息说： 事情成功不了啦！ 
English: When Wang Yun heard the news that Liu Bing had fled first, he sighed and said, "This won't work out!

古文：狼狈帅部曲数百向石头。
现代文：狼狈集结部众数百人，奔向石头。
English: Panicked, hundreds of people rushed to the stone.

古文：本期开南门，时暗夜，薛渊据门射之。蕴谓粲已败，即散走。
现代文：本来约定开南门进去，可是正值黑夜，薛渊在城楼上发箭射击，王蕴认为袁粲已经被捕，部众霎时四处逃走。
English: Originally, it was agreed to open the south gate to enter, but it was night, Xue Yuan was shooting arrows on the castle tower, Wang Yun thought that Yuan Shao had been arrested, and the crowd fled everywhere.

古文：道成遣军主会稽戴僧静帅数百人向石头助烈等，自仓门得入，与之并力攻粲。
现代文：萧道成派军主会稽人戴僧静率数百人前往石头，援助苏烈等，自仓门进入，与苏烈联合攻击袁粲。
English: Xiao Daocheng sent hundreds of people led by Dai Sangjing, the inspector of the Military Commander's Association, to Stone to assist Suren, etc. They entered from the warehouse door and jointly attacked Yuan Qi with Suren.

古文：孙昙瓘骁勇善战，台军死者百馀人。
现代文：孙昙骁勇善战，朝廷军阵亡一百多人。
English: Sun Yat-sen fought bravely, and more than a hundred members of the imperial army were killed.

古文：王天生殊死战，故得相持，自亥至丑，戴僧静分兵攻府西门，焚之，粲与秉在城东门，见火起，欲还赴府。
现代文：王天生带部众殊死搏斗，才得以阻止孙昙的反扑。从亥时苦战到丑时，朝廷将领戴僧静抽出一部分兵力，攻击袁粲总部西门，纵火焚烧。袁粲与刘秉正在总部东门城楼上，望见西门起火，打算返回总部。
English: Wang Tianwen led his troops in a desperate fight to stop Sun Yat-sen's counter-attack. From the worst of times to the worst of times, the imperial general Dai Sang-jing pulled out a part of the troops, attacked the west gate of Yuan Shao's headquarters, and set it on fire. Yuan Shao and Liu Bing were on the tower of the east gate of the headquarters. They saw the west gate on fire and planned to return to the headquarters.

古文：秉与二子俣、陔逾城走。
现代文：刘秉跟两个儿子刘俣、刘陔，跳墙逃走。
English: Liu Bing and his two sons, Liu Matan and Liu Yao, jumped over a wall to escape.

古文：粲下城，烈烛自照，谓其子最曰： 本知一木不能止大厦之崩，但以名义至此耳。 
现代文：袁粲下城后，命燃起火把，对他的儿子袁最说： 本来就知道，一根木头不能支持住大厦的倒塌，只是为了名分和道义，才到今天这个地步。 
English: After Yuan Xuan left the city, he lit a torch and said to his son Yuan Zhi: I knew that a piece of wood could not support the collapse of a building, but it was only for the sake of reputation and morality that it has come to this point today.

古文：僧静乘暗逾城独进，最觉有异人，以身卫粲，僧静直前斫之。粲谓最曰： 我不失忠臣，汝不失孝子！ 
现代文：戴僧静在黑夜掩护下，跳进城墙，一个的提刀前进。袁最发觉有外人，急忙用身体护住袁粲，戴僧静立刻上前，举刀猛砍，袁粲对袁最说： 我不失为忠臣，你不失为孝子。 
English: Under the cover of the night, Dai Sonjing jumped into the city wall and advanced with a sword. Yuan most discovered that there were outsiders and rushed to protect Yuan Qi with his body. Dai Sonjing immediately went forward, raised his sword and slashed. Yuan Qi said to Yuan most: I am a loyal subject, you are a filial son.

古文：遂父子俱死。
现代文：父子同时被杀。
English: Father and son were killed at the same time.

古文：百姓哀之，为之谣曰： 可怜石头城，宁为袁粲死，不作褚渊生！ 
现代文：民间百姓对这件事深为哀悼，流传歌谣说： 可怜石头城，宁为袁粲死，不作褚渊生！ 
English: The common people were deeply saddened by this event, and a song was circulated saying: "Poor stone city, it is better to die for Yuan Shao than to be born in the abyss!"

古文：刘秉父子走至额檐湖，追执，斩之。
现代文：刘秉父子逃到额檐湖，被官军追上捉拿，斩首。
English: Liu Bing and his son fled to Lake Fore, where they were caught by government troops and beheaded.

古文：任候伯等并乘船赴石头，既至，台军已集，不得入，乃驰还。
现代文：任伯候等一起率领战船，前往石头，到达时，朝廷大军已经聚集到，不能入城，于是迅速撤回。
English: Ren Boduo and others led the warship to the stone, and when they arrived, the imperial army had already gathered and could not enter the city, so they quickly withdrew.

古文：黄回严兵，期诘旦帅所领从御道直向台门攻道成。闻事泄，不敢发。
现代文：黄回严守起兵时间，预计在天亮时，率部队从御用大道，直奔宫城城门，准备攻打萧道成，听说事情已经泄漏，不敢发动。
English: Huang Hui strictly observed the starting time of the army, and it was expected that at dawn, he would lead the troops from the Royal Highway, straight to the gate of the palace, ready to attack Xiao Daocheng. Hearing that the matter had leaked, he did not dare to launch.

古文：道成抚之如旧。
现代文：萧道成待他跟从前一样。
English: Xiao Daocheng treated him as before.

古文：王蕴、孙昙瓘皆逃窜，先捕得蕴，斩之，其馀粲党皆无所问。
现代文：王蕴、孙昙分别逃亡，萧道成先抓住了王蕴，斩首。袁粲的其他同党，则一律赦免。
English: Wang Yun and Sun Qian fled separately. Xiao Daocheng first caught Wang Yun and beheaded him. Yuan Qian's other party members were all pardoned.

古文：粲典签莫嗣祖为粲、秉宣通密谋，道成召诘之曰： 袁粲谋反，何不启闻？ 
现代文：袁粲的典签莫嗣祖为袁粲与刘秉的密谋充当联络，萧道成把他召来责问道： 袁粲叛变，你为什么不报告？ 
English: Yuan Shun's signature Mo Shizhu acted as a liaison between Yuan Shun and Liu Bing's conspiracy. Xiao Daocheng summoned him and asked: Why didn't you report Yuan Shun's mutiny?

古文：嗣祖曰： 小人无识，但知报恩，何敢泄其大事！
现代文：莫嗣祖回答说： 我地位卑下，没有见识，只知道报恩，怎么敢泄漏大事。
English: Mochizucho replied, "I am in a lowly position, I have no insight, I only know how to repay favors. How dare I divulge such a big thing?"

古文：今袁公已死，义不求生。 
现代文：现在袁公已死，从道义上说，我不要求活命崐。 
English: Now that Yuan Gong is dead, morally speaking, I do not ask to be taken alive.

古文：蕴嬖人张承伯藏匿蕴，道成并赦而用之。
现代文：嗜好饮酒，喜爱吟讽诵。身负天下重任，却不肯过问事务。
English: He is fond of drinking alcohol and likes to recite sarcastic sayings. He is entrusted with the world's heavy responsibilities, but he refuses to do anything about it.

古文：粲简淡平素，而无经世之才；好饮酒，喜吟讽，身居剧任，不肯当事；主事每往咨决，或高咏对之。闲居高卧，门无杂宾，物情不接，故及于败。
现代文：有关要事，尚书省主事请求他裁决时，他甚至高声吟咏，作为回答。生活闲散舒适，来往除了权贵外，没有不相干的宾客，对于人情世故，完全不懂，所以失败。
English: On important matters, when the principal of Shangshu Province asked him to adjudicate, he even chanted in a loud voice as an answer. Life is idle and comfortable, except for the dignitaries, there are no irrelevant guests, and he does not understand the human world at all, so he failed.

古文：裴子野论曰：袁景倩，民望国华，受付托之重；智不足以除奸，权不足以处变，萧条散落，危而不扶。
现代文：裴子野论曰：袁粲是民众的期望，国家的精英，身负重大责任，但智能不足以铲除奸恶，权术不足以处理变局。政权萧条崩溃，他面对危险却无力扶持。
English: Pei Zino said: Yuan Shao is the leader of the people's expectations, the country's elite, and bears great responsibility, but his intelligence is not enough to eradicate evil, and his power is not enough to deal with changes. The regime is depressed and collapsing, but he is powerless to support him in the face of danger.

古文：及九鼎既轻，三才将换，区区斗城之里，出万死而不辞，盖蹈匹夫之节，而无栋梁之具矣！
现代文：等到国家衰败，天下将要改朝换代，袁粲困在斗大的小城之内，面对万死，而不推辞，这只是个人的节操，而非栋梁之才。
English: When the country is in decline and the world is about to change dynasties, Yuan Shao will be trapped in a small city, facing death, but he will not give up. This is just a personal act of self-preservation, not a talent.

古文：甲戌，大赦。
现代文：甲戌，刘宋大赦天下。
English: Kuching, Liu Song pardoned the world.

古文：乙亥，以尚书仆射王僧虔为左仆射，新除中书令王延之为右仆射，度支尚书张岱为吏部尚书，吏部尚书王奂为丹阳尹。
现代文：乙亥，任命尚书仆射王僧虔为左仆射，新任中书令王延之为右仆射，度支尚书张岱为吏部尚书，吏部尚书王奂为丹阳尹。
English: Yi Hai appointed Shang Shuxu's servant Shaowang Xiangqian as his left-hand man, the newly-appointed middle-ranking Shuxu Wang Yan as his right-hand man, Du Shi Shang Shuxu Zhang Jie as Shang Shuxu's secretary, and Shang Shuxu Wang Jie as Danyang Yin's secretary.

古文：延之，裕之孙也。
现代文：王延之是王裕的孙子。
English: Wang Yanzhi is the grandson of Wang Yu.

古文：刘秉弟遐为吴郡太守。
现代文：刘秉的弟弟刘遐任吴郡太守。
English: Liu Bing's younger brother, Liu Hui, became the governor of Wu County.

古文：司徒右长史张瑰，永之子也，遭父丧在吴，家素豪盛，萧道成使瑰伺间取遐。
现代文：司徒右长史张是张永的儿子，因父亲去世，在吴郡守丧，家族势力强大，萧道成命张伺机处理刘遐。
English: Zhang is the son of Zhang Yong. Because of his father's death, he was in mourning in Wu County. The family is powerful. Xiao Daoxing ordered Zhang to wait for an opportunity to deal with Liu Yao.

古文：会遐召瑰诣府，瑰帅部曲十馀人直入斋中，执遐，斩之，郡中莫敢动。
现代文：正巧，刘遐邀请张到郡府，张率部曲十余人，直入刘遐的书房，捉住刘遐，斩首，郡中没有人敢起来反抗。
English: Coincidentally, Liu Bei invited Zhang to the county government. Zhang led more than ten people to Liu Bei's study, captured Liu Bei and beheaded him. No one in the county dared to resist.

古文：道成闻之，以告瑰从父领军冲，冲曰： 瑰以百口一掷，出手得卢矣。 
现代文：萧道成得到报告，告诉了张的叔父中领军张冲，张冲说： 张以百口之家作赌注，第一次出手就赢得满贯。 
English: Xiao Daocheng got the report and told Zhang's uncle, the middle leader Zhang Chong. Zhang Chong said: Zhang bet on a family of a hundred and won a grand slam with his first shot.

古文：道成即以瑰为吴郡太守。
现代文：萧道成当即任命张为吴郡太守。
English: Xiao Daocheng immediately appointed Zhang as the governor of Wu County.

古文：道成移屯阅武堂，犹以重兵付黄回使西上，而配以腹心。
现代文：萧道成指挥部迁移到阅武堂，仍把重兵交给黄回，派他西上讨伐沈攸之，但也在黄回周围安插上自己的心腹。
English: Xiao Daocheng's headquarters moved to the Military Reading Hall. He still handed over the heavy troops to Huang Hui and sent him to the west to fight Shen Youzhi, but he also planted his henchmen around Huang Hui.

古文：回素与王宜兴不协，恐宜兴反告其谋，闰月，辛巳，因事收宜兴，斩之。
现代文：黄回一向跟王宜兴不和，唯恐王宜兴反告他叛变，闰十二月，辛巳，寻找借口，逮捕王宜兴，斩首。
English: Huang Hui had always been at odds with Wang Yixing, fearing that Wang Yixing would counter-accuse him of treason. In December, Xin Si, looking for an excuse, arrested Wang Yixing and beheaded him.

古文：诸将皆言回握强兵必反，宁朔将军桓康请独往刺之，道成曰： 卿等何疑！
现代文：萧道成手下的将领们都说黄回手握强兵，一定谋反。宁朔将军桓康，请求独自前往观察刺探。萧道成说： 你们不必多疑，他不会反叛。 
English: Xiao Daocheng's generals all said that Huang Hui had a strong army and would definitely plot a rebellion. Ningshuo General Huan Kang asked to go alone to observe the spies. Xiao Daocheng said: You don't have to be suspicious, he won't rebel.

古文：彼无能为也。 沈攸之遣中兵参军孙同等五将以三万人为前驱，司马刘攘兵等五将以二万人次之；又遣中兵参军王灵秀等四将分兵出夏口，据鲁山。
现代文：沈攸之派中兵参军孙同等五位将领率三万人担任前锋，司马刘攘兵等五位将领率两万人随即出发，又派中兵参军王灵秀等四位将领，分别攻击夏口，占据鲁山。
English: Shen Yuanzhi sent five generals of the same rank as Sun to lead 30,000 soldiers as the vanguard, Sima Liu, five generals of the same rank led 20,000 soldiers, and sent four generals of the same rank as Wang Lingxiu to separately attack Xiakou and occupy Lushan.

古文：癸巳，攸之至夏口，自恃兵强，有骄色。
现代文：癸巳，沈攸之抵达夏口城外，仗恃兵强，面露骄傲神色。
English: Soon after, Shen Youzhi arrived outside the city of Xiakou, with a strong army and a proud look on his face.

古文：以郢城弱小，不足攻，云 欲问讯安西 ，暂泊黄金浦，遣人告柳世隆曰： 被太后令，当暂还都。卿既相与奉国，想得此意。 
现代文：认为郢城兵力薄弱，不值得认真攻打，只说： 要见刘赞问好！ 便暂时停泊在黄金浦，派人通知行郢州事柳世隆说： 奉皇太后命令，应暂时还都，你跟崐我一样郊忠皇家，一定能了解我的意思。 
English: He thought that the military strength of Lucheng was weak and not worth a serious attack, and only said, "I want to see Liu Zhan, say hello!" Then he temporarily anchored in Huangpu and sent a person to inform Liu Shilong of the situation in Lucheng, saying, "According to the order of the Empress Dowager, you should temporarily return the capital, you are a loyal royal like me, you will surely understand my meaning.

古文：世隆曰： 东下之师，久承声问。
现代文：柳世隆说： 东下军队的用意，我们早已听说。
English: Liu Shilong said: We have already heard about the intention of the army to go to the east.

古文：郢城小镇，自守而已。 
现代文：郢城不过是一个小镇，只求自保。 
English: Lucheng is just a small town, just seeking self-preservation.

古文：宗俨之劝攸之攻郢城；臧寅以为： 郢城兵虽少而地险，攻守势异，非旬日可拔。若不时举，挫锐损威，今顺流长驱，计日可捷。
现代文：主薄宗俨之劝沈攸之攻打郢城，功曹臧寅认为： 郢城虽然兵力薄弱，可是地势险要，攻击和防守，是两种相反的情势，不是十天半月就能见分晓的，如果不能马上夺取，锐气一挫，声威便告消失。而今，顺长江而下，胜利的日子，可以预期。
English: Shen You's advice to attack the city of Handan from his master, Bo Zongxu, is credited to Cao Handan: Although Handan's military strength is weak, the terrain is precarious. Attack and defense are two opposite situations. It will not be clear for ten days and a half months. If it cannot be captured immediately, the spirit will be dampened and the prestige will disappear. And now, down the Yangtze River, the day of victory can be expected.

古文：既倾根本，则郢城岂能自固！ 
现代文：只要根本被颠覆，郢城岂能独存？ 
English: As long as it is fundamentally subverted, will Handan City be able to survive alone?

古文：攸之从其计，欲留偏师守郢城，自将大众东下。
现代文：沈攸之接受了他的建议，打算留下一小部分军队围守郢城，亲自率大军东下。
English: Shen Youzhi accepted his suggestion and planned to leave a small part of the army to surround Lucheng and personally lead the large army to the east.

古文：乙未，将发，柳世隆遣人于西渚挑战，前军中兵参军焦度于城楼上肆言骂攸之，且秽辱之。
现代文：乙未，即将出发，柳世隆派人到西渚挑战，前军中兵参军焦度在城楼上对沈攸之破口大骂，而且用脏话侮辱。
English: On the eve of departure, Liu Shilong sent someone to challenge Xizhuang, and the former army soldiers who had joined the army shouted at Shen You on the castle tower, and insulted him with dirty words.

古文：攸之怒，改计攻城，令诸军登岸烧郭邑，筑长围，昼夜攻战。
现代文：沈攸之果然被激怒，撤销东下命令，回军攻郢州，命各军登陆，焚烧村庄，在郢州外城修筑长长的围城屏障，日夜攻打。
English: Shen Youzhi was really enraged, revoked the order to go east, returned the army to attack Zhangzhou, ordered the armies to land, burn villages, build a long siege barrier in the outer city of Zhangzhou, and attack day and night.

古文：世董随宜拒应，攸之不能克。
现代文：柳世隆随机抵抗，沈攸之不能攻克。
English: Liu Shilong randomly resisted, but Shen Youyou could not defeat him.

古文：道成命吴兴太守沈文秀督吴、钱唐军事。
现代文：萧道成命吴兴太守沈文秀为督吴、钱塘军事。
English: Xiao Daocheng ordered Wu Xing Taishu Shen Wenxiu to be the governor of Wu and Qiantang military.

古文：文秀收攸之弟新安太守登之，诛其宗族。
现代文：沈文秀逮捕了沈攸之的弟弟、新安太守沈登之，诛杀沈家全族。
English: Shen Wenshu arrested Shen Youzhi's younger brother, the new An governor Shen Dengzhi, and killed the entire Shen family.

古文：乙未，以后军将军杨运长为宣城太守；于是太宗嬖臣无在禁省者矣。
现代文：乙未，任命后军将军杨运长为宣城太守。至此，明帝的亲信宠臣，全部离开朝廷重位。
English: Emperor Biwei appointed the rear army general Yang Yunchang as the governor of Xuancheng. At this point, all of Emperor Ming's close friends and favorites left the imperial court.

古文：沈约论曰： 夫人君南面，九重奥绝，陪奉朝夕，义隔卿士，阶闼之任，宜有司存。
现代文：沈约论曰：君王面向南面而坐，皇宫九重，与民间隔绝。早晚奉陪的都是受宠的左右侍从，而与朝廷大臣相距甚远。
English: Shen Yu's theory says: the monarch sits facing south, the imperial palace is nine stories high, and is isolated from the people. In the morning and evening, he is accompanied by the favored attendants on his right and left, and is far away from the ministers of the imperial court.

古文：既而恩以狎生，信由恩固，无可惮之姿，有易亲之色。
现代文：上下情况的沟通，应该由固定的机构执行。到后来，这些侍从由于生活上亲近而受到恩宠，由于宠爱进而受到信任。在君王眼里，左右侍从没有使人畏惧的力量，而只有取悦于人的脸色。
English: Communication of the situation from above and below should be carried out by a fixed organization. Later, these attendants were favored because of their closeness in life, and they were trusted because of their favor. In the eyes of the king, the left and right attendants did not have the power to frighten people, but only to please people's faces.

古文：孝建、泰始，主威独运，而刑政纠杂，理难遍通，耳目所寄，事归近习。
现代文：于是人主产生一种印象，认为他们地位卑微，身份低贱，不可能专权，擅作威福。没想到，鼠凭地贵，狐假虎威。
English: As a result, people have the impression that their status is low, their status is low, it is impossible for them to have absolute power, and they can do whatever they want. Unexpectedly, the mouse is expensive, and the fox is powerful.

古文：及觇欢愠，候惨舒，动中主情，举无谬旨；人主谓其身卑位薄，以为权不得重。
现代文：外面，他们没有对人主造成伤害的嫌疑；内部，他们受人主的驱使，却有独揽大权的际遇。
English: Externally, they are not suspected of causing harm to the master; internally, they are driven by the master, but have the opportunity to monopolize power.

古文：曾不知鼠凭社贵，狐藉虎威，外无逼主之嫌，内有专用之效，势倾天下，未之或悟。及太宗晚运，虑经盛衰，权幸之徒，慑惮宗戚，欲使幼主孤立，永窃国权，构造同异，兴树祸隙，帝弟宗王，相继屠剿，宝祚夙倾，实由于此矣。
现代文：所以，当他们的权势膨胀到可以颠覆政权的时候，人主也许仍不能觉悟。明帝晚年，担心皇子孤危，考虑到国家的盛衰，而受宠信的弄臣，也恐惧皇族的压迫，打算使幼主陷于孤立，永远控制朝廷。于是，制造矛盾，挑起猜忌，使明帝的弟弟、皇家的亲王先后遭到屠杀。刘氏天下很快倾覆，原因就在于此。
English: Therefore, when their power swells to the point of overthrowing the regime, the human masters may still not be able to come to their senses. In the later years of Emperor Ming, he was worried that the prince was alone and in danger, considering the rise and fall of the country, and his favorite jester was also afraid of the oppression of the royal family, planning to isolate the young master and control the imperial court forever. As a result, he created conflicts and aroused suspicion, so that Emperor Ming's younger brother, the prince of the royal family, was slaughtered one after another. This was the reason why the Liu dynasty was quickly overthrown.

古文：辛丑，尚书左丞济阳江谧建议假萧道成黄钺，从之。
现代文：辛丑，尚书左丞济阳人江谧，建议朝廷授给萧道成黄钺，顺帝刘准批准。
English: Xin Xiu, Shang Shuxu Zu Rong of Jiyang, recommended that the imperial court grant Xiao Daocheng Huang Yao, and Emperor Shun approved it.

古文：加北秦州刺史武都王杨文度都督北秦、雍二州诸军事，以龙骧将军杨文弘为略阳太守。
现代文：加授北秦州刺史、武都王杨文度都督北秦、雍二州诸军事，任命龙骧将军杨文弘为略阳太守。
English: He also conferred military honors on the military governor of North Qin, Yang Wendu, the military governor of North Qin, and Yang Erzhou, the military governor of North Qin, and the military governor of Liaoyang, Yang Wenhong, the general of Longjing.

古文：壬寅，魏皮欢喜拔葭芦，斩文度。
现代文：壬寅，北魏征西将军皮欢喜攻陷葭芦，斩杨文度。
English: Ren Yin, the Northern Wei general who conquered the West, was overjoyed when he captured Huludao and killed Yang Wendu.

古文：魏以杨难当族弟广香为阴平公、葭芦戍主，用诏欢喜筑骆谷城。
现代文：北魏封杨难当的族弟杨广香为阴平公、葭芦戍主。下诏，命皮欢喜修筑骆谷城。
English: Yang Guangxiang, the younger brother of the Northern Wei emperor Yang Nantang, was the lord of Yinping and the lord of Huludao. According to the following edict, he was happy to build Luogu City.

古文：文弘奉表谢罪于魏，遣子苟奴入侍。
现代文：杨文弘投降，上疏北魏，请求处罚，派儿子杨苟奴前去充当人质。
English: Yang Wenhong surrendered, went to the Northern Wei court, asked for punishment, and sent his son Yang Guo Nu to serve as a hostage.

古文：魏以文弘为南秦州刺史、武都王。
现代文：北魏任命杨文弘为南秦州刺史，封武都王。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty appointed Yang Wenhong as the governor of Southern Qin and the king of the capital.

古文：乙巳，萧道成出顿新亭，谓骠骑参军江淹曰： 天下纷纷，君谓何如？ 
现代文：乙巳，萧道成出居新亭，对骠骑参军江淹说： 天下大乱，你认为形势如何？ 
English: Suddenly, Xiao Daocheng came out of Xinting, and said to his cavalry and soldiers: The world is in turmoil, what do you think of the situation?

古文：淹曰： 成败在德，不在众寡。
现代文：江淹说： 成功失败在于德行，不在于人数的多少。
English: Jiang said: Success and failure lie in virtue, not in the number of people.

古文：公雄武有奇略，一胜也；宽容而仁恕，二胜也；贤能毕力，三胜也；民望所归，四胜也；奉天子以伐叛逆，五胜也。
现代文：你具有雄才大略，这是第一胜因。你宽宏大量，仁爱宽恕，这是第二胜因。贤能的人才，愿意为你竭尽全力，这是第三胜因。民心归附，这是第四胜因。奉天子之命，讨伐叛逆，名正言顺，这是第五胜因。
English: You have great talent, which is the first cause of victory. You are magnanimous, benevolent and forgiving, which is the second cause of victory. Talented people, willing to do their best for you, which is the third cause of victory. People's attachment, which is the fourth cause of victory. By the order of the Son of Heaven, fight against rebellion, and be righteous, which is the fifth cause of victory.

古文：彼志锐而器小，一败也；有威而无恩，二败也；士卒解体，三败也；搢绅不怀，四败也；悬兵数千里，而无同恶相济，五败也。
现代文：沈攸之性情急躁，器量狭小，这是第一败因。只有威严，没有恩德，这是第二败因。士卒离心离德，这是第三败因。地方势力和豪门世族不支持他，这是第四败因。深入敌境几千里，而无同党援助，这是第五败因。
English: The first reason why they will fail is that they are ambitious but narrow-minded; the second reason why they will fail is that they are powerful but mean and ungracious; the third reason why they will fail is that their soldiers are scattered and disunited; the fourth reason why they will fail is that the officials do not support them; the fifth reason why they will fail is that they have advanced thousands of miles alone and have no allies to help them.

古文：虽豺狼十万，终为我获。 
现代文：他们即使是十万只豺狼，也会最终被我们活捉。 
English: Even if they are a hundred thousand jackals, they will eventually be caught alive by us.

古文：道成笑曰： 君谈过矣！ 
现代文：萧道成笑着说： 你的议论太过了。 
English: Xiao Daocheng said with a smile: Your argument is too much.

古文：南徐州行事刘善明言于道成曰： 攸之收众聚骑，造舟治械，苞藏祸心，于今十年。
现代文：南徐州行事刘善明对萧道成说： 沈攸之招兵买马，制造船只，铸造武器，野心勃勃，迄今已有十年。
English: Liu Shanming, who was in South Xuzhou, said to Xiao Daocheng: Shen Youzhi has been recruiting soldiers, making ships, casting weapons, and has been ambitious for ten years.

古文：性既险躁，才非持重；而起逆累旬，迟回不进。
现代文：他的性情阴险而急躁，缺乏深谋远虑，起兵已经数十天，却迟迟不敢前进。
English: His temperament is insidious and impetuous, lacks forethought, has been in the army for dozens of days, but hesitates to advance.

古文：一则暗于兵机，二则人情离怨，三则有掣肘之患，四则天夺其魄。
现代文：他一是不懂军事，二是军心离散，三是受到牵制，四是上天夺取了他的灵魂。
English: On the one hand, he does not understand military affairs, on the other hand, his military spirit is scattered, on the third hand, he is constrained, and on the fourth hand, heaven has taken away his soul.

古文：本虑其剽勇轻速，掩袭未备，决于一战；今六师齐奋，诸侯同举，此笼中之鸟耳！ 
现代文：我本来担心他骠悍勇猛，轻装急进，在我们尚未准备妥当之前发动袭击，一战决定成败。而今朝廷各路大军已经集结，士气高昂，各地诸侯，都统一行动，沈攸之已成为笼中之鸟。 
English: I was originally worried that he would be bold and brave, rushing in lightly armed, launching an attack before we were properly prepared, and deciding the outcome of the First World War. But now the armies of the Imperial Court have assembled, morale is high, and princes from all over the country are acting in unison. Shen Youzhi has become a bird in a cage.

古文：萧赜问攸之于周山图，山图曰： 攸之相与邻乡，数共征伐，颇悉其为人，性度险刻，士心不附，今顿兵坚城之下，适所以为离散之渐耳。 
现代文：萧赜向周山图打听沈攸之的有关情况，周山图说： 沈攸之是我的邻乡，我们多次一同带兵出征，我非常了解他这个人，他性情阴险刻薄，不得军心。现在屯兵于坚城之下，正是离散逃亡的开始！ 
English: Xiao Yao asked Zhou Shantu about Shen Youyou. Zhou Shantu said, "Shen Youyou is my neighbor. We have sent soldiers to war together many times. I know him very well. He has a sinister and caustic disposition and is not a military man. Now that the soldiers are under Jiancheng, it is the beginning of their dispersed escape!

古文：苍梧王下升明二年
现代文：升明二年
English: Two years after graduation

古文：春，正月，巳酉朔，百官戎服入朝。
现代文：春季，正月，己酉朔，文武百官全副武装入朝，参加元旦御前祝贺。
English: Spring, the first month of the year, has just begun, and hundreds of civil and military officials have entered the DPRK fully armed to participate in the New Year's Day congratulation.

古文：沈攸之尽锐攻郢城，柳世隆乘间屡破之。
现代文：沈攸之出动全部精锐部队，猛烈攻击郢城，柳世隆利用对方弱点，屡次击败敌人攻势。
English: Shen Yuanzhi dispatched all the elite troops and fiercely attacked Shicheng. Liu Shilong took advantage of the other side's weakness and repeatedly defeated the enemy's offensive.

古文：萧赜遣军主桓敬等入军据西塞，为世隆声援。
现代文：萧赜派军主桓敬等八支军队占据西塞，作为柳世隆的声援。
English: Xiao Yu sent eight armies, including the army commander Kuan Jing, to occupy the west coast as a show of support for Liu Shilong.

古文：攸之获郢府法曹南乡范云，使送书入城，饷武陵王赞犊一羫，柳世隆鱼三十尾，皆去其首。
现代文：沈攸之俘虏了郢城法曹南乡人范云，命他带一封信回郢城，送给武陵王刘赞一只小牛，送给柳世隆三十条鱼，全都砍去头部。
English: Shen Youzhi captured Fan Yun, the legal officer of Lucheng, and ordered him to take a letter back to Lucheng, to give a calf to Liu Zan, the king of Wuling, and thirty fish to Liu Shilong, all of which were decapitated.

古文：城中欲杀之，云曰： 老母弱弟，悬命沈氏，若违其命，祸必及亲；今日就戮，甘心如荠。 
现代文：城中守军打算杀了范云，范云说： 我的老母亲和小弟弟的性命，都握在沈攸之的手中，如果拒绝他的派遣，灾祸一定会降临到亲人身上，今天被杀，死也甘心。 于是，释放了他。
English: The defenders in the city planned to kill Fan Yun. Fan Yun said, "The lives of my old mother and little brother are both in Shen Youzhi's hands. If I refuse his dispatch, disaster will surely befall my relatives. If I am killed today, I am willing to die." So, he was released.

古文：乃赦之。攸之遣其将皇甫仲贤向武昌，中兵参军公孙方平向西阳。
现代文：沈攸之派他的将领皇甫仲贤攻打武昌，中兵参军公孙方平攻打西阳。
English: Shen Yuanzhi sent his general, Emperor Fuzhongxian, to attack Wuchang, and the middle soldiers joined the army of Gongsun Fangping to attack Xiyang.

古文：武昌太守臧涣降于攸之，西阳太守王毓奔湓城。
现代文：武昌太守臧涣向沈攸之投降，西阳太守王毓逃往湓城。
English: The Wuchang daimyō surrendered to Shen You, and the Xiyang daimyō, Wang Xi, fled to Licheng.

古文：方平据西阳，豫州刺史刘怀珍遣建宁太守张谟等，将万人击之。
现代文：公孙方平占据了西阳，豫州刺史刘怀珍，派建宁太守张谟等率一万人反击。
English: Gongsun Fangping occupied Xiyang, and Liu Huizhen, the governor of Yuzhou, and Zhang Moo, the governor of Jianning, were sent to counterattack with a total of ten thousand people.

古文：辛酉，方平败走。
现代文：辛酉，公孙方平战败，逃回。
English: Xin Yao, Gongsun Fang Ping were defeated and fled back.

古文：平西将军黄回等军至西阳，溯流而进。
现代文：平西将军黄回等军抵达西阳，逆流而上。
English: The troops of Pingxi General Huang Hui and others arrived in Xiyang and swam upstream.

古文：攸之素失人情，但劫以威力。
现代文：沈攸之一向丧失人心，只靠暴力来胁迫。
English: Shen You always loses the hearts of the people and only uses violence to coerce them.

古文：初发江陵，日有逃者；及攻郢城，三十馀日不拔，逃者稍多；攸之日夕乘马历营抚慰，而去者不息。
现代文：刚从江陵出发时，便有人逃亡。后来攻击郢城，历时三十多天，不能攻克，逃亡的人却无法制止。沈攸之骑马崐日夜不停地视察各营，好言抚慰，可是逃亡者不见减少。
English: As soon as they set out from Gangneung, some people fled. Later, they attacked Lucheng, which lasted for more than thirty days. They could not conquer it, but they could not stop the people who fled. Shen Yuanzhi on horseback kept inspecting the battalions day and night, saying good words of consolation, but there was no decrease in the number of fugitives.

古文：攸之大怒，召诸军主曰： 我被太后令，建义下都。
现代文：沈攸之大怒，召集各军主说： 我奉皇太后的命令，首唱大义，前往京都。
English: Enraged, Shen Yu summoned the commanders and said, "On the orders of the empress dowager, I will march to Kyoto.

古文：大事若克，白纱帽共著耳；如其不振，朝廷自诛我百口，不关馀人。
现代文：大事如果成功，有官大家做。如果失败，朝廷自然会杀我满门百口，跟任何人无关。
English: If it is a success, all officials will do it. If it is a failure, the imperial court will naturally kill me, it has nothing to do with anyone.

古文：比军人叛散，皆卿等不以为意。
现代文：最近士卒纷纷叛离，都是你们没有尽心。
English: Recently, officers and men have been defecting in droves, and it's all because you haven't done your best.

古文：我亦不能问叛身，自今军中有叛者，军主任其罪。 
现代文：我也不能一一追捕，从今天起，军中士卒逃亡，军主承担罪责。 
English: I can't chase them down one by one. From today, the army sergeant fled, and the army commander took the blame.

古文：于是一人叛，遣人追之，亦去不返，莫敢发觉，咸有异计。
现代文：于是，一个人逃亡，派人追捕，追捕的人也跟着逃亡，没有一个人敢报告沈攸之。
English: As a result, a person fled, sent someone to chase him, and the person who chased him also fled, and no one dared to report it to Shen Yue.

古文：刘攘兵射书入城请降，柳世隆开门纳之；丁卯夜，攘兵烧营而去。
现代文：军心不稳，各怀异心。司马刘攘兵将请降书射入郢城，柳世隆开门接纳。丁卯，夜晚，刘攘兵纵火烧营，率军离去。
English: The military spirit was unstable, with each side harboring dissent. Sima Liu Shilong sent a letter of surrender to Shicheng, and Liu Shilong opened the door to accept it. In the evening, Liu Shilong set fire to the camp and led the army away.

古文：军中见火起，争弃甲走，将帅不能禁。
现代文：沈攸之军中发现起火，士卒们纷纷弃甲逃命，将领们无法制止。
English: When a fire broke out in Shen You's army, the soldiers abandoned their armor and ran for their lives. The generals were unable to stop it.

古文：攸之闻之，怒，衔须咀之，收攘兵兄子天赐、女婿张平虏，斩之。
现代文：沈攸之得到消息，暴跳如雷，气得咬住自己的胡须。立即逮捕刘攘兵的侄儿刘天赐、女婿张平虏，斩首。
English: When Shen Youzhi got the news, he jumped up and down and bit his beard in anger. He immediately arrested Liu Tianzai, the nephew of Liu Jiaohe, and Zhang Pingrui, the son-in-law of Liu Jiaohe, and beheaded them.

古文：向旦，攸之帅众过江，至鲁山，军遂大散，诸将皆走。
现代文：天色微亮，沈攸之率军过江，抵达鲁山，部众纷纷溃散，各将领也都逃走。
English: The sky was just beginning to brighten. Shen Youyou's army crossed the river and arrived in Lushan. The troops scattered, and all the generals fled.

古文：臧寅曰： 幸其成而弃其败，吾不忍为也！ 
现代文：臧寅说： 贪图他侥幸成功，去享富贵；而在失败时，把他抛弃，我不忍心这样做。 
English: "I want him to succeed and be rich, but I can't bear to abandon him if he fails," said Yu Yin.

古文：乃投水死。
现代文：于是投水自杀。
English: As a result, she drowned.

古文：攸之犹有数十骑自随，宣令军中曰： 荆州城中大有钱，可相与还，取以为资粮。 
现代文：沈攸之身边仍有数十个骑兵侍卫，向军中士卒宣称： 荆州城有的是钱粮，你们可以回来，一同去取。 
English: Shen Youyou still had dozens of cavalry guards around him, declaring to the army sergeants: Jingzhou City has plenty of grain, you can come back and get it together.

古文：郢城未有追军，而散军畏蛮抄，更相聚结，可二万人，随攸之还江陵。
现代文：此时，郢城没有派兵追击，逃散的士卒，又害怕遭到蛮族的劫杀，于是重新集结，约有两万人，跟随沈攸之，折回江陵。
English: At this time, Lucheng did not send troops to chase the fleeing soldiers, and they were afraid of being robbed and killed by the barbarians, so they regrouped. About twenty thousand people followed Shen Youzhi and returned to Gangneung.

古文：张敬儿既斩攸之使者，即勒兵；侦攸之下，遂袭江陵。
现代文：雍州刺史张敬儿杀了沈攸之的策反使节，随即整顿部队。得到沈攸之东下的消息，立即率兵袭击江陵。
English: Zhang Jing'er, the Yongzhou assassin, killed Shen Youyou's envoy of strategy and counter-strategy, and immediately reorganized the troops. When he received the news of Shen Youyou's departure to the east, he immediately led his troops to attack Gangneung.

古文：攸之使子元琰与兼长史江乂、别驾傅宣共守江陵城。
现代文：沈攸之命儿子沈元琰，与兼长史江、别驾傅宣，共同守卫江陵城。
English: Shen Yuanzhang, the son of Shen Yuanzhang, together with Changshi Jiang and Beji Fu Xuan, jointly guarded Jiangling City.

古文：敬儿至沙桥，观望未进。
现代文：张敬儿率军抵达沙桥，驻军观望，暂不前进。
English: Zhang Jing'er's army arrived at the sand bridge, the garrison watched, and did not advance for the time being.

古文：城中夜闻鹤唳，谓为军来，乂、宣开门出走，吏民崩溃。
现代文：江陵城中百姓，夜晚听见鹤叫，非常惊慌，传言说敌军已到，江、傅宣打开城门逃走，官民溃散。
English: The people in the city of Gangneung were very alarmed when they heard cranes calling at night. The rumor was that the enemy army had arrived, Jiang and Fu Xuan opened the city gate and fled, and the officials and people dispersed.

古文：元琰奔宠洲，为人所杀。
现代文：沈元琰逃到宠州，被人诛杀。
English: Shen Yuanjun fled to Jiuzhou and was beaten to death.

古文：敬儿至江陵，诛攸之二子、四孙。
现代文：张敬儿开进江陵，诛杀沈攸之两个儿子、四个孙子。
English: Zhang Jing'er entered Jiangling and killed Shen You's two sons and four grandchildren.

古文：攸之将至江陵百馀里，闻城已为敬儿所据，士卒随之者皆散。
现代文：沈攸之率残兵西返，距江陵一百余里，得知江陵城已被张敬儿占领，士卒再度逃散。
English: The remnants of the army led by Shen Youzhi returned to the west, more than a hundred miles away from Gangneung. When they learned that Gangneung City had been occupied by Zhang Jing'er, the soldiers fled again.

古文：攸之无所归，与其子文和走至华容界，皆缢于栎林；己巳，村民斩首送江陵。
现代文：沈攸之走投无路，跟他的儿子沈文和逃到华容边界，在栎树林中上吊自杀。已巳，乡民砍下沈攸之父子人头，送到江陵。
English: With no other choice, Shen Youyou and his son Shen Wenhe fled to the Huarong border and hanged themselves in the eucalyptus forest. Since then, villagers have chopped off the heads of Shen Youyou's father and son and sent them to Gangneung.

古文：敬儿擎之以楯，覆以青丝，徇诸市郭，乃送建康。
现代文：张敬儿把沈攸之父子的首级放到盾牌上，用青布伞盖在上面，到各集市上展览，然后送到建康。
English: Zhang Jing'er put the heads of Shen Yu's father and son on a shield, covered them with a blue cloth umbrella, exhibited them at various fairs, and then sent them to Jiankang.

古文：敬儿诛攸之亲党，收其财物数十万，皆以入私。
现代文：张敬儿大肆屠杀沈攸之的亲友党羽，没收财产数十万，皆中饱私襄。
English: Zhang Jing'er massacred Shen Youzhi's relatives, friends, party members, and confiscated hundreds of thousands of dollars in property.

古文：初，仓曹参军金城边荣，为府录事所辱，攸之为荣鞭杀录事。
现代文：当初，仓曹参军金城人边荣受到府录事参军的侮辱，沈攸之为了替边荣报仇，将那个录事用皮鞭抽死。
English: At first, Cang Cao, a member of the Jincheng army, and Bian Rong were insulted by the government's record of joining the army. In order to take revenge for Bian Rong, Shen Youyi killed the record with a whip.

古文：及敬儿将至，荣为留府司马，或说之使诣敬儿降，荣曰： 受沈公厚恩，共如此大事，一朝缓急，便易本心，吾不能也！ 
现代文：张敬儿快要进城时，边荣正任留守司马。有人劝他到张敬儿那儿投降，边荣说： 身受沈公厚恩，共同担负如此大事，一旦情况危急，就改变本心，我做不到。 
English: When Zhang Jing'er was about to enter the city, Bian Rong was staying with Sima. Someone advised him to surrender to Zhang Jing'er. Bian Rong said, "I am deeply indebted to Shen Gong and jointly shoulder such a big responsibility. If the situation is critical, I will change my mind. I can't do it."

古文：城溃，军士执以见敬儿，敬儿曰： 边公何不早来！ 
现代文：城防崩溃，士卒捉住边荣，带到张敬儿面前。张敬儿说： 你为什么不早来？ 
English: The city's defenses collapsed, and the soldiers captured Bian Rong and brought him to Zhang Jing'er. Zhang Jing'er said, "Why didn't you come earlier?"

古文：荣曰： 沈公见留守城，不忍委去；本不祈生，何须见问！ 
现代文：边荣说： 沈公命我守城，我不忍心丢下不管，自己逃走。
English: Bian Rong said, "Shen Gong ordered me to guard the city. I couldn't bear to leave it unguarded and run away myself.

古文：敬儿曰： 死何难得！ 
现代文：本不希望活命，何必多问！ 张敬儿说： 死有什么难得崐！ 
English: He didn't want to live, why ask more! Zhang Jing'er said, "What's so hard about dying?

古文：命斩之。
现代文：下令斩首。
English: The order was given to execute them.

古文：荣欢笑而去。
现代文：边荣含笑走出。
English: Bian Rong walked out with a smile.

古文：荣客太山程邕之抱荣曰： 与边公周游，不忍见边公死，乞先见杀。 
现代文：边荣的门客太山人程邕之抱住边荣说： 我与边先生交游多年，不忍心看到边先生被杀，我宁愿先死。 
English: "I've been friends with Mr. Bian for many years. I can't bear to see him killed. I'd rather die first."

古文：兵人不得行戮，以白敬儿，敬儿曰： 求死甚易，何为不许！ 
现代文：刽子手不能下刀，报告张敬儿，张敬儿说： 求死容易得很，为什么不准？ 
English: The executioner couldn't lower the knife, reported Zhang Jing'er. Zhang Jing'er said, "It's very easy to ask for death, why not?"

古文：先杀邕之，然后及荣，军人莫不垂泣。
现代文：先斩程邕之，再斩边荣，军卒们都流下了眼泪。
English: The soldiers shed tears as they cut off Cheng Xizhi first and then Bian Rong.

古文：孙同、宗俨之等皆伏诛。
现代文：辅国将军孙同、主簿宗俨之等，全被诛杀。
English: Sun Tong, the auxiliary general, and Zong Xi, the main commander, were all killed in the fighting.

古文：丙子，解严，以侍中柳世隆为尚书右仆射，萧道成还镇东府。
现代文：丙子，朝廷解除戒严。任命侍中柳世隆为尚书右仆射，骠骑大将军萧道成返回，镇守东府。
English: The imperial court lifted martial law, and appointed the equerry, Liu Shilong, as Shang Shuxu's right-hand man. He returned with the cavalry general, Xiao Daocheng, and guarded the eastern capital.

古文：丁丑，以左卫将军萧赜为江州刺史，侍中萧嶷为中领军。
现代文：丁丑，任命左卫将军萧赜为江州刺史，侍中萧嶷为中领军。
English: Ding Yuxi appointed the left guard general Xiao Wei as the governor of Jiangzhou, and the middle guard general Xiao Wei as the middle leader.

古文：二月，庚辰，以尚书左仆射王僧虔为尚书令，右仆射王延之为左仆射。
现代文：二月，庚辰，朝廷提升尚书左仆射王僧虔为尚书令，右仆射王延之为左仆射。
English: In February, Geng Chen, the imperial court promoted the left-hand servant of the shoemaker, Shaowang Sengqian, to the position of shoemaker, and the right-hand servant of the shoemaker, Yan Tong, to the position of left-hand shoemaker.

古文：癸未，加萧道成太尉、都督南徐等十六州诸军事，以卫将军褚渊为中书监、司空。
现代文：癸未，加授萧道成太尉、都督南徐等十六州诸军事。任命卫将军褚渊为中书监、司空。
English: At the same time, Xiao Daocheng was promoted to the rank of lieutenant general and Nan Xu was appointed as the military governor of 16 states. General Wei Yuan was appointed as the Central Library Supervisor and Secretary of the Air Force.

古文：道成表送黄铖。
现代文：萧道成上疏交还皇帝诛杀专用的铜斧。
English: Xiao Daocheng gave back to the emperor the bronze axe used for killing.

古文：吏部郎王俭，僧绰之子也，神彩渊旷，好学博闻，少有宰相之志，时论亦推许之。
现代文：吏部郎王俭是王僧绰的儿子。神采焕发，学而不倦，见识博广，从小就有当宰相的大志，朝野舆论对他很推崇。
English: The son of Wang Soqiao, the head of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, Luo Wangjian was a bright, tireless learner with a broad range of knowledge. From a young age, he had the ambition to become the prime minister, and was highly respected by the public opinion at home and abroad.

古文：道成以俭为太尉右长史，待遇隆密，事无大小专委之。
现代文：萧道成任命王俭为太尉右长史，对他十分尊重，二人关系密切，事无小都交给他处理。
English: Xiao Daocheng appointed Wang Jian as Lieutenant U Changshi, and he respected him very much. The two had a close relationship, and all minor matters were handled by him.

古文：丁亥，魏主如代汤泉；癸卯，还。
现代文：丁亥，北魏国主前往代郡温泉。癸卯，返回平城。
English: Dinghai, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, went to Daegun Hot Spring. He returned to Pingcheng.

古文：宕昌王弥机初立。
现代文：宕昌王梁弥机，刚刚接位。
English: Tang Chang Wang Liang Yiji, has just taken over.

古文：三月，丙子，魏遣使拜弥机征南大将军、梁、益二州牧、河南公、宕昌王。
现代文：三月，丙子，北魏遣使任命梁弥机为征南大将军，梁、益二州州牧，封河南公、宕昌王。
English: In March, Hanzi, the Northern Wei envoy, appointed Liang Yijian as the Southern Expeditionary General, Liang and Yixing as the two state governors, Henan Gong and Tang Changwang.

古文：黄回不乐在郢州，固求南兗，遂帅部曲辄还；辛卯，改都督南兗等五州诸军事、南兗州刺史。
现代文：郢州刺史黄回不愿留在郢州，坚持求任南充州刺史，而且擅自率部曲东下。辛卯，朝廷改命黄回任都督南兖等五州诸军事，兼南兖州刺史。
English: Huang Hui, the military governor of Zhangzhou, did not want to stay in Zhangzhou. He insisted on being appointed the military governor of Nanchong and went to the east without permission. However, the imperial court changed Huang Hui's name to the military governor of five states, including Nanlu, and also the military governor of Nanlu.

古文：初，王蕴去湘州，湘州刺史南阳王翙未之镇，长沙内史庾佩玉行府事。
现代文：当初，湘州刺史王蕴离职时，新任湘州刺史、南阳王刘还没有到任，由长沙内史庾佩玉代理府州事。
English: At the beginning, when Wang Yun, the governor of Hunan Province, left office, the newly appointed governor of Hunan Province and Liu, the governor of Nanyang Province, had not yet arrived at their posts.

古文：翙先遣中兵参军韩幼宗将兵戍湘州，与佩玉不相能。
现代文：刘先派遣中兵参军韩幼宗率军进驻湘州，跟庾佩玉发生摩擦。
English: Liu Xian dispatched Han Yuzong to join the Chinese army and stationed his army in Hunan Province, causing friction with Zou Peiyu.

古文：及沈攸之反，两人互相疑，佩玉袭杀幼宗。
现代文：等到沈攸之起兵反抗朝廷，二人更互相猜疑，庾佩玉就袭击诛杀了韩幼宗。
English: When Shen Youyou raised an army to resist the imperial court, the two became even more suspicious of each other. Zou Peiyu attacked and killed Han Youzong.

古文：黄回至郢州，遣辅国将军任候伯行湘州事；候伯辄杀佩玉，冀以自免。
现代文：黄回到郢州时，派辅国将军任候伯代理湘州事。任候伯又斩庾佩玉，希望能使自己幸免。
English: When Huang returned to Zhangzhou, he sent the general of the Auxiliary State to act as the representative of Xiangzhou. Ren Houbo also killed Peiyu, hoping to save himself.

古文：湘州刺史吕安国之镇，萧道成使安国诛候伯。
现代文：朝廷新任命的湘州刺史吕安国到位后，接到萧道成命令，诛杀任候伯。
English: After the newly appointed imperial court in Hunan Province, Lyu An Guo, was in place, he received an order from Xiao Daocheng to assassinate his successor.

古文：夏，四月，甲申，魏主如崞山；丁亥，还。
现代文：夏季，四月，甲申，北魏国主前往崞山。丁亥，返回平城。
English: In the summer, in April, Jia Shen, the Northern Wei sovereign, went to Lushan. Ding Hai, returned to Pingcheng.

古文：萧道成以黄回终为祸乱；回有部曲数千人，欲遣收，恐为乱。
现代文：萧道成认为黄回终究是祸患。黄回有部曲数千人，萧道成打算遣散或收编，又恐怕激起反抗。
English: Xiao Daocheng thought that the Yellow Revolution was a disaster after all. The Yellow Revolution involved thousands of people, and Xiao Daocheng planned to disband or reorganize it, and feared that it would provoke resistance.

古文：辛卯，召回入东府。
现代文：辛卯，萧道成在东府召见黄回。
English: Xinwu and Xiao Daocheng were summoned to Huangbei in Dongfu.

古文：至，停外斋，使桓康将数十人，数回罪而杀之，并其子竟陵相僧念。
现代文：黄回已到，萧道成留他在会客室，命桓康率数十人，一一列举黄回的罪状，连同黄回的儿子竟陵相黄僧念一并斩首。
English: Huang Hui had already arrived, Xiao Daocheng kept him in the meeting room, ordered Huan Kang to lead dozens of people to list Huang Hui's crimes one by one, and beheaded him together with Huang Hui's son, Huang Soen, who was actually a close relative.

古文：甲午，以淮南、宣城二郡太守萧映行南兗州事，仍以其弟晃代之。
现代文：甲午，任命淮南、宣城二郡太守萧映代理南兖州事，而用他的弟弟萧晃接替二郡太守。
English: In the afternoon of the second day, Xiao Ying, the governor of Huainan and Xuancheng two counties, was appointed as the acting governor of Nancheng, and his brother Xiao Xingru was appointed as the governor of the two counties.

古文：五月，魏禁皇族、贵戚及士民之家不顾氏族，下与非类婚偶；犯者以违制论。
现代文：五月，北魏禁止皇族、贵戚及官员、士大夫不顾门第，与下层不同阶层人通婚，违者以违抗诏书论处。
English: In May, the Northern Wei Dynasty prohibited members of the imperial family, high-ranking relatives, officials, and scholars from marrying people from different social classes, regardless of their social status. Offenders were punished for disobeying the edict.

古文：魏主与太后临虎圈，有虎逸，登阁道，几至御座，侍卫皆惊靡；吏部尚书王叡执戟御之，太后称以为忠，亲任愈重。
现代文：北魏国主随冯太后一齐去虎圈观看老虎，一只老虎突然逃出，跳上御道，几乎跑到御座前，左右侍卫吓得惊呆或逃跑。吏部尚书王睿，手拿长矛抵挡。冯太后赞扬他的忠心，更是宠爱信任。
English: The Emperor of Northern Wei and Empress Dowager Feng went to the tiger enclosure together to watch the tigers. A tiger suddenly escaped, jumped onto the throne, and almost ran to the throne. The attendants on both sides were stunned or fled in fright. The head clerk, Shang Shu Wang Rui, resisted with a spear in his hand. Empress Dowager Feng praised his loyalty, and even loved and trusted him.

古文：六月，丁酉，以辅国将军杨文弘为北秦州刺史、武都王。
现代文：六月，丁酉，刘宋任命辅国将军杨文弘为北秦州刺史，封武都王。
English: In June, Ding Xi and Liu Song appointed Yang Wenhong, the general of the Auxiliary State, as the governor of North Qin and the king of the capital.

古文：庚子，魏皇叔若卒。
现代文：庚子，北魏皇叔拓跋若去世。
English: Geng Zi, the uncle of the Northern Wei Emperor Tuoba, passed away.

古文：萧道成以大明以来，公私奢侈，秋，八月，奏罢御府，省二尚方雕饰器玩；辛卯，又奏禁民间华伪杂事，凡十七条。
现代文：萧道成认为，自大明年间以来，官府与民间查奢侈浪费成为风气。秋季，八月，上疏奏请撤销御府、左右尚方署装饰及玩赏器物。辛卯，再上疏奏请禁止民间使用华贵的衣饰和用品，共十七条。
English: Xiao Daocheng believes that since the Great Leap Forward, it has become a custom for the government and the people to investigate extravagant waste. In the autumn and August, please revoke the decoration and play equipment of the government, the left and right government departments. In the winter, please prohibit the use of expensive clothing and supplies by the people, a total of 17 articles.

古文：乙未，以萧赜为领军将军，萧嶷为江州刺史。
现代文：乙未，任命萧赜为领军将军，萧嶷为江州刺史。
English: B Wei appointed Xiao Wei as the leading general and Xiao Wei as the chief historian of Jiangzhou.

古文：九月，乙巳朔，日有食之。
现代文：九月，已巳朔，出现日食。
English: It's early September, and there's a solar eclipse.

古文：萧道成欲引时贤参赞大业，夜，召骠骑长史谢朏，屏人与语，久之，朏无言；唯二小儿捉烛，道成虑朏难之，仍取烛遣儿，朏又无言；道成乃呼左右。
现代文：萧道成计划延聘当时德高望重的人才，共同帮助他建立伟业。夜晚，召见骠骑长史谢，屏去左右侍从，说出了自己的打算，等了很久，谢却不说一句话。这时仍有两个大手举蜡烛的小儿在旁侍候，萧道成想到谢认为还不够严密，于是萧道成自己手举蜡烛，把两个小儿打发出去，可是，谢仍不语。
English: At that time, Xiao Daocheng planned to recruit highly respected talents to help him build a great career. In the evening, he summoned his equerry, Chang Shi Xie. Ping went to the left and right attendants and told them his plan. He waited for a long time, but Xie did not say a word. At this time, there were still two children with large hands holding candles waiting nearby. Xiao Daocheng thought that Xie was not strict enough, so Xiao Daocheng himself held a candle and sent the two children out, but Xie still did not speak.

古文：朏，庄之子也。
现代文：萧道成只好把侍从唤回房内。谢是谢庄的儿子。
English: Xiao Daocheng had to call the servant back into the room. Xie is the son of Xie Zhuang.

古文：太尉右长史王俭知其指，它日，请间言于道成曰： 功高不赏，古今非一。
现代文：太尉右长史王俭知道萧道成的意图，有一天，他向萧道成请求密谈，王俭说： 功劳太高，就没有赏赐，这种事情，从古到今，不止一人。
English: The captain of the Right Division, Shi Wang Jian, knew Xiao Daocheng's intention. One day, he asked Xiao Daocheng for a secret talk. Wang Jian said, "If the merit is too high, there will be no reward. This kind of thing has happened to more than one person from ancient times to the present.

古文：以公今日位地，欲终北面，可乎？ 
现代文：以公今天的地位，想要始终面北称臣，怎么可以？ 
English: With today's status as a public official, how is it possible to always want to face north and call yourself a minister?

古文：道成正色裁之，而神采内和。
现代文：萧道成严厉斥责他，但神色却很温和。
English: Xiao Daocheng scolded him severely, but his expression was very gentle.

古文：俭因曰： 俭蒙公殊眄，所以吐所难吐；何赐拒之深！
现代文：王俭说： 我蒙公特殊爱护，所以说出别人不敢说的话，为什么拒绝得如此坚决？
English: Wang Jian said: I have received special love from the emperor, so why do I refuse so resolutely to say what others dare not say?

古文：宋氏失德，非公岂复宁济！
现代文：刘姓皇家失德，如果没有你，他们怎么能闯过难关？
English: Liu surnamed royal immorality, without you, how can they get through the difficulties?

古文：但人情浇薄，不能持久；公若小复推迁，则人望去矣。
现代文：可是，人心浇薄，感恩之心，无法持久，只要你稍尺之躯也不能自保。 
English: However, the human heart is thin, the heart of gratitude, can not last, as long as you are a little bit of a body can not protect yourself.

古文：岂唯大业永沦，七尺亦不可得保。 
现代文：萧道成说： 你说的不是没有道理。 
English: Xiao Daocheng said, "What you said is not without reason.

古文：道成曰： 卿言不无理。 俭曰： 公今名位，故是经常宰相，宜礼绝群后，微示变革。
现代文：王俭说： 你今天的名望和地位，本来是固定的常任宰相，最好在礼节上表现得跟一般官员不一样，略微显示政局将发生变化。
English: Wang Jian said: Your fame and status today, originally you were a fixed permanent prime minister, it is best to behave differently from ordinary officials in terms of etiquette, slightly showing that the political situation will change.

古文：当先令褚公知之，俭请衔命。 道成曰： 我当自往。 
现代文：不过此事应先告诉褚渊，我愿意传达这个意思。 萧道成说： 我亲自前往。 
English: However, the matter should be told to Gongyuan first, I am willing to convey this meaning. Xiao Daocheng said: I will go in person.

古文：经少日，道成自造褚渊，款言移晷，乃谓曰： 我梦应得官。 
现代文：过了几天，萧道成亲自拜访褚渊，气氛融洽。谈了很久，萧道成才说： 我梦见升官。 
English: A few days later, Xiao Daocheng personally visited Gongyuan, and the atmosphere was harmonious. After a long conversation, Xiao Daocheng said: I dreamed of promotion.

古文：渊曰： 今授始尔，恐一二年间未容便移；且吉梦未必应在旦夕。 
现代文：褚渊说： 刚刚宣布任命，恐怕一二年间不会再有变更，而且，吉祥的梦，未必旦夕就能应验。 
English: Shanyuan said: The appointment has just been announced, I'm afraid there will be no change for a year or two, and the auspicious dream may not come true immediately.

古文：道成还，以告俭。俭曰： 褚是未达理耳。 
现代文：萧道成回来，告诉王俭，王俭说： 褚渊还没有开窃！ 
English: Xiao Daocheng came back and told Wang Jian. Wang Jian said, "Yanyuan hasn't been robbed yet!

古文：俭乃唱议加道成太傅，假黄钺，使中书舍人虞整作诏。
现代文：王俭就建议加授萧道成为太傅，再赐给黄钺，命中书舍人虞整撰写诏书。
English: Wang Jian suggested that Xiao Dao be awarded the title of Taifu, and that Huang Qi be given the same title. Gu Jian, a scholar, was assigned to write the imperial edict.

古文：道成所亲任遐曰： 此大事，应报褚公。 
现代文：萧道成亲信任遐说： 这种大事，应该告诉褚渊。 
English: Xiao Dao confided to Zou: This kind of big event should be told to Zou Yuan.

古文：道成曰： 褚公不从，奈何？ 
现代文：萧道成说： 褚渊万一不同意，怎么办？ 
English: Xiao Daocheng said, "What if Gongyuan does not agree?

古文：遐曰： 彦回惜身保妻子，非有奇才异节，遐能制之。 
现代文：任遐说： 褚渊珍惜生命，爱护妻子儿女，并无奇特的崐才能和高尚的节操，我能制住他。 
English: Ren Zheng said: Zou Yuan cherishes life, loves his wife and children, and has no special talent or noble discipline. I can control him.

古文：渊果无违异。
现代文：褚渊果然不表示反对。
English: As expected, Shanyuan did not object.

古文：丙午，诏进道成假黄钺、大都督中外诸军事、太傅、领扬州牧，剑履上殿，入朝不趋，赞拜不名，使持节、太尉、骠骑大将军、录尚书、南徐州刺史如故。
现代文：丙午，顺帝下诏，赐给萧道成持有黄钺，任命他为大都督中外诸军事、太傅，兼扬州牧，上殿时可以穿鞋佩剑、入朝时不必快步小跑、奏事时不称名，使持节、太尉、骠骑大将军、录尚书、南徐州刺史等官职，仍然如故。
English: In the afternoon of the 4th day of the 4th month, Emperor Shun issued an edict that Xiao Daocheng hold the Yellow Ribbon, and appointed him as the Grand Governor of the Middle and Outer Military, Taifu, and Yangzhou Herdsman. He could wear shoes and carry a sword when he went to the palace, did not have to trot when he entered the court, and did not have to announce his name when reporting a matter. He still held the official positions such as Jizhi Jie, Taifu, Zhengyi Daizheng, Luo Shangshu, and Nan Xuzhou Zhishi.

古文：道成固辞殊礼。
现代文：萧道成坚决辞让特殊的礼遇。
English: Xiao Daocheng resolutely refused to give up the special courtesy.

古文：以扬州刺史晋熙王燮为司徒。
现代文：任命扬州刺史、晋熙王刘燮为司徒。
English: He appointed Yangzhou chief historian and King of Jin Dynasty Liu Xuan as his disciple.

古文：戊申，太傅道成以萧映为南兗州刺史。
现代文：戊申，太傅萧道成任命萧映为南兖州刺史。
English: Wu Shen, Taifu Xiao Daocheng appointed Xiao Ying as the governor of South Luzhou.

古文：冬，十月，丁丑，以萧晃为豫州剌史。
现代文：冬季，十月，丁丑，任命萧晃为豫州刺史。
English: In winter, October, Dingwu, appointed Xiao Xing as the leader of the history of Yuzhou.

古文：己卯，获孙昙瓘，杀之。
现代文：己卯，抓获叛军将领孙昙，斩首。
English: He captured the rebel general Sun Yat-sen and beheaded him.

古文：魏员外散骑常侍郑羲来聘。
现代文：北魏员外散骑常侍郑羲前来访问。
English: Zheng Yao, a common attendant of the Northern Wei Dynasty, came to visit.

古文：壬寅，立皇后谢氏。
现代文：壬寅，顺帝王谢梵境为皇后。
English: Ren Yin, Shun Emperor Xie Wanzhong became the empress.

古文：后，庄之孙也。
现代文：谢梵境是谢庄的孙女。
English: Xie Fanzhong is the granddaughter of Xie Zhuang.

古文：十一月，癸亥，临澧侯刘晃坐谋反，与其党皆伏诛。
现代文：十一月，癸亥，临澧侯刘晃谋反，连同他的同党，一并诛杀。
English: In November, in the Year of the Boar, Liu Jiao, the lord of Linyi, plotted a rebellion and, together with his fellow party members, went to fight and kill.

古文：晃，秉之从子也。
现代文：刘晃是刘秉的侄儿。
English: Liu Akira is Liu Bing's nephew.

古文：甲子，徙南阳王翙为随郡王。
现代文：甲子，改封南阳王刘为随郡王。
English: Gao Zi changed his title from Nanyang King Liu to Su County King.

古文：魏冯太后忌青州刺史南郡王李惠，诬云惠将南叛；十二月，癸巳，诛惠及妻并其子弟。
现代文：北魏冯太后猜忌青州刺史、南郡王李惠，于是诬陷李惠将投刘宋。十二月，癸巳，诛杀李惠和他的妻子以及弟弟、儿子。
English: The Empress Dowager Feng of the Northern Wei Dynasty suspected Li Hui, the prince of Qingzhou and the king of Nan County, and framed Li Hui to vote for Liu Song. In December, she killed Li Hui and his wife as well as his brother and son.

古文：太后以猜嫌所夷灭者十馀家，而惠所历皆有善政，魏人尤冤惜之。
现代文：冯太后因猜疑而屠杀灭十余家。李惠历任官职，都有成绩，北魏的百姓特别为他呼冤痛惜。
English: Empress Dowager Feng massacred more than ten families because of suspicion. Li Hui had achievements in all his official positions, and the people of the Northern Wei Dynasty especially lamented his injustice.

古文：尚书令王僧虔奏以 朝廷礼乐，多违正典。大明中即以宫县合和鞞拂，节数虽会，虑乖雅体。
现代文：刘宋尚书令王僧虔奏称： 朝廷所用的礼节和音乐，大多违反古代正式规范，大明中期，就把悬挂的钟磬用来伴奏舞和拂舞，节奏虽然可以合拍，但不够高雅，有失体统。
English: Liu Song Shang wrote to Wang Sangyan: Most of the etiquette and music used by the imperial court violated the ancient formal norms. In the middle of the Ming Dynasty, the hanging bell was used to accompany the dance and whip dance. Although the rhythm could be synchronized, it was not elegant enough and was unseemly.

古文：又，今之清商，实由铜爵，三祖风流，遗音盈耳，京、洛相高，江左弥贵，中庸和雅，莫近于斯。
现代文：另外，现在流行的清商乐，实际上来自铜雀台。曹氏三代帝王的风韵，遗留下来的乐声，仍在耳际。京师洛阳，对它十分崇尚。到了长江以南，更显得高贵，没有再比它更中庸清雅的了。
English: In addition, the now popular Qing commercial music actually comes from the Copper Sparrow. The charm of the three emperors of the Cao Dynasty, the music left behind, is still in the ear. Luoyang, the capital, is very reverent about it. To the south of the Yangtze River, it is more noble, and there is nothing more moderate and elegant than it.

古文：而情变听移，稍复销落，十数年间，亡者将半，民间竞造新声杂曲，烦淫无极，宜命有司悉加补缀。 
现代文：可是，情况不断变化，欣赏趣味也跟着转移，以后，逐渐衰落。十几年之间，失传的将近一半，民间竞相制作新的歌曲，乱杂芜，应该命令有关部门，加以整理补充。 
English: However, the situation is constantly changing, and the taste of appreciation is also shifting. Later, it gradually declined. In the past ten years, nearly half of the songs have been lost, and people are competing to make new songs. It is a mess, and the relevant departments should be ordered to sort out and supplement it.

古文：朝廷从之。
现代文：朝廷批准。
English: The court followed his advice.

古文：是岁，魏怀州刺史高允以老疾告归乡里，寻复以安车征至平城，拜镇军大将军、中书监；固辞，不许。
现代文：这一年，北魏怀州刺中高允，因年老及患病请准退职，回到家乡。不久，又被朝廷用安车征到平城，任命为镇军大将军、中书监。高允坚决辞让，朝廷不准。
English: In the same year, Gao Yun, a member of the Northern Wei Dynasty's Waizhou Assassination School, requested permission to retire due to old age and illness and returned to his hometown. Soon after, he was recruited by the court to Pingcheng in an armored car and appointed as the general of the town army and the book supervisor of the school. Gao Yun resolutely refused to concede, and the court did not approve.

古文：乘车入殿，朝贺不拜。
现代文：准许他坐车直接到上殿，朝贺时不用叩头行礼。
English: He was allowed to go directly to the Upper Hall by car, and he did not have to bow his head during morning greetings.

