古文：小司寇之职，掌外朝之政，以致万民而询焉。一曰询国危，二曰询国迁，三曰询立君。
现代文：小司寇的职责，掌管有关外朝的事务，召集民众而征询他们的意见：一是当国家有危难的时候征询他们的意见，二是当国家要迁都的时候征询他们的意见，三是当国家需选立嗣君的时候征询他们的意见。
English: The duties of a minor scout, in charge of affairs related to foreign dynasties, gather the people and solicit their opinions: one is to solicit their opinions when the country is in danger, the second is to solicit their opinions when the country wants to move the capital, and the third is to solicit their opinions when the country needs to elect a successor.

古文：其位，王南乡，三公及州长、百姓北面，群臣西面，群吏东面，小司寇摈以叙进而问焉，以众辅声明而弊谋。
现代文：外朝的朝位：王面朝南而立，三公和州长、百姓面朝北而立，群臣面朝西而立，群吏面朝东而立。小司寇揖请他们依次进前而接受王的征询，用众人的智慧辅助王的思虑而进行谋断。
English: The Imperial Throne of the Outer Court: The king faces south, the three princes, the governor, and the commoners face north, the vassals face west, and the officials face east. Little Scrooge invites them to come forward in turn to receive the king's inquiry, and to use the wisdom of the people to assist the king's deliberation and make a decision.

古文：以五刑听万民之狱讼，附于刑，用情讯之。至于旬，乃弊之，读书，则用法。
现代文：用五刑审断民众的诉讼，对于那些触犯刑律的案件，又用情理加以审断，到十天后才判决，行刑时宣读罪状之后就施用刑罚。
English: The people's lawsuits were adjudicated with five punishments, and for those cases that violated the criminal law, they were adjudicated with reason, and the judgment was made ten days later. At the time of execution, the punishment was imposed after the charges were read.

古文：凡命夫命妇不躬坐狱讼，凡王之同族有罪不即市。
现代文：凡命夫、命妇，审判时不亲自到场对坐受审。凡是王的同族人有罪，不到市朝行刑。
English: All the king's sons and daughters-in-law do not appear in person at the trial. If any of the king's relatives are found guilty, they are not executed until the morning of the next day.

古文：以五声听狱讼，求民情：一曰辞听，二曰色听，三曰气听，四曰耳听，五曰目听。
现代文：依据五个方面来听断诉讼，求得诉讼人的实情：一是依据言辞听断，二是依据神色听断，三是依据气息听断，四是依据听觉听断，五是依据眼神听断。
English: to listen to the lawsuit according to five aspects and find out the truth of the litigant: one is to listen to the words, the second is to listen to the appearance, the third is to listen to the breath, the fourth is to listen to the hearing and the fifth is to listen to the eyes.

古文：以八辟丽邦法，附刑罚：一曰议亲之辟，二曰议故之辟，三曰议贤之辟，四曰议能之辟，五曰议功之辟，六曰议贵之辟，七曰议勤之辟，八曰议宾之辟。
现代文：用八种议罪法附以王国的八法来议论减罪，而后再附诸刑罚：一是对王的亲族的议罪法，二是对王的故旧的议罪法，三是对廉吏的议罪法，四是对有道艺者的议罪法，五是对有大功勋者的议罪法，六是对地位尊贵者的议罪法，七是对勤劳国事者的议罪法，八是对宾客的议罪法。
English: In order to discuss the reduction of crime and then the imposition of punishment, eight kinds of criminal laws were added to the eight laws of the kingdom: the first was the criminal law for the king's relatives, the second was the old criminal law for the king, the third was the criminal law for the corrupt officials, the fourth was the criminal law for the persons of virtue, the fifth was the criminal law for the persons of great merit, the sixth was the criminal law for the persons of high status, the seventh was the criminal law for the diligent persons of state affairs, and the eighth was the criminal law for the guests.

古文：以三刺断庶民狱讼之中：一曰讯群臣，二曰讯群吏，三曰讯万民，听民之所刺宥，以施上服下服之刑。
现代文：通过三次讯问来使对平民诉讼的审断正确无误：一是讯问群臣，二是讯问群吏，三是讯问民众。听从他们的意见来决定诛杀或从宽，决定施用重刑或轻刑。
English: In order to make the judgment of the civil lawsuit correct and accurate, three interrogations were conducted: the first was the interrogation of the ministers, the second was the interrogation of the officials, and the third was the interrogation of the people. Listen to their opinions to decide whether to fight and kill or to be lenient, and to decide whether to impose heavy or light punishment.

古文：及大比，登民数，自生齿以上，登于天府，内史、司会、冢宰贰之，以制国用。
现代文：到进行大校比的时候，登记人民及财产数，自生齿的婴儿以上都登记，上报给天府。内史、司会、冢宰收取副本，据以制定国家的财政计划。
English: At the time of the census, the number of registered people and property, and the number of babies with natural teeth or more were registered and reported to the Heavenly Palace. The internal history, the secretary, and the deputy received copies to formulate the country's financial plan.

古文：小祭祀，奉犬牲。
现代文：举行小祭祀，负责奉进犬牲。
English: Holds small religious services and is responsible for bringing in the dog sacrifices.

古文：凡禋祀五帝，实镬水，纳亨，亦如之。
现代文：凡用裎祀祭祀五帝，负责给镬中添水。
English: Those who use the urns to worship the Five Immortals are responsible for adding water to the urns.

古文：大宾客，前王而辟。
现代文：到祭祀那天黎明王牵牲行纳亨礼的时候，也负责给镬中添水。
English: On the day of the sacrifice, when the king of the dawn led the sacrificial animals to perform the Nakhon Rite, he was also responsible for adding water to the cocoon.

古文：后、世子之丧，亦如之。
现代文：接待来朝的诸侯，为王做前导并清除行人。为王后或太子举办丧事时也这样做。
English: To receive visiting princes, to act as an usher for the king and to clear pedestrians, and to do the same when holding a funeral for a queen or prince.

古文：小师，莅戮。凡国之大事，使其属跸。
现代文：举行小规模军事行动，就亲临监视在军社前对犯令的将士行刑。凡王国有大事，就派属吏禁止闲人通行。
English: When small-scale military operations are held, he personally supervises the execution of soldiers who violate orders in front of the military society. Whenever there is a major event in the kingdom, he sends officials to prohibit the passage of idlers.

古文：孟冬，祀司民，献民数于王，戋拜受之，以图国用而进退之。
现代文：冬十月祭祀司民的时候，把人民数呈献给王，王行拜礼而后接受，据以计划国家开支的增减。
English: In the winter and October, when the priests were offering sacrifices to the people, they presented the number of people to the king. The king then performed a religious service and accepted it, according to which he planned the increase and decrease of state expenditure.

古文：岁终，则令群士计狱弊讼，登中于天府。
现代文：夏历年终，就命令司法官们统计已审结的案件数，把统计的簿书报送天府。
English: At the end of the year of the lunar calendar, he ordered the judicial officers to count the number of cases that have been adjudicated, and report the statistical book to the Heavenly Palace.

古文：正岁，帅其属而观刑象，令以木铎曰：令群士，乃宣布于四方，宪刑禁，乃命其属入会，乃致事。
现代文：夏历正月初一，率领下属观看刑法，摇响木铎命令说： 不遵守刑法的，国家有常设的刑罚在! 又把这话来命令遂士、县士、方士、讶士等。
English: On the first day of the first month of the lunar calendar, he led his subordinates to watch the criminal law, shook the wooden stake and ordered: "If you do not comply with the criminal law, the state has a permanent penalty!" He also ordered this to the magistrate, county magistrate, magistrate, magistrate and so on.

