古文：李广，陇西成纪人也。
现代文：李广，陇西郡盛起毖人。
English: Li Guang, from Shengqi, Shaanxi County.

古文：其先曰李信，秦时为将，逐得燕太子丹者也。
现代文：他的祖先李值，秦朝时任将军，曾追获过燕国太子丹。
English: His ancestor was Li Xin, the general of Qin, who was the one who captured Prince Yan.

古文：广世世受射。
现代文：李广家世代学习射箭。
English: Li Guang's family has been learning archery for generations.

古文：孝文十四年，匈奴大入萧关，而广以良家子从军击胡，用善射，杀首虏多，为郎，骑常侍。
现代文：孝文帝十四年，匈奴大举侵入萧关，李广以良家子弟的身份从军抗击匈奴，因为擅长射箭，杀死、俘虏了很多敌人，当上了汉朝的郎官，任骑常侍。
English: In the 14th year of Emperor Xiaowen, the Xiongnu invaded Xiaoguan in a big way. Li Guang fought against the Xiongnu as the son of a good family. Because he was good at archery, he killed and captured many enemies. He became the vassal of the Han Dynasty and was appointed as the equerry.

古文：数从射猎，格杀猛兽，文帝曰： 惜广不逢时，令当高祖世，万户侯岂足道哉！ 
现代文：李广常随从文帝出猎，格杀猛兽，因而文帝说： 可惜啊，你没有碰到时机；假使你处在高帝的时代，封个万户侯也不在话下呀！ 
English: Li Guang often went hunting with Emperor Wen to kill ferocious beasts, so Emperor Wen said: It's a pity you didn't have the opportunity; if you were in the era of Emperor Gao, you wouldn't have missed the opportunity to seal a million households!

古文：景帝即位，为骑郎将。
现代文：孝景帝即位，李广任骑郎将。
English: Emperor Xiaojing ascended to the throne, and Li Guang became the cavalry commander.

古文：吴、楚反时，为骁骑都尉，从太尉亚夫战昌邑下，显名。
现代文：吴、楚七国起兵叛乱时，李广担任骁骑都尉，跟随太尉周亚夫攻打吴国、楚国，在昌邑城下立功显名。
English: When the seven kingdoms of Wu and Chu rebelled, Li Guang served as a cavalry captain, and followed the lieutenant Zhou Yafu to attack the kingdoms of Wu and Chu, and made outstanding achievements under the city of Changyi.

古文：以梁王授广将军印，故还，赏不行。
现代文：由于梁王私自授给李广将军印，回朝后，没有得到封赏。
English: Since Liang Wang privately awarded Li Guang the general seal, he did not receive the award after returning to the imperial court.

古文：为上谷太守，数与匈奴战。
现代文：调任上谷太守，多次与匈奴交战。
English: He was transferred to the position of Kamitani Taishou and fought against the Xiongnu many times.

古文：典属国公孙昆邪为上泣曰： 李广材气，天下亡双，自负其能，数与虏确，恐亡之。 
现代文：典属国公孙昆邪流着眼泪对皇上说： 李广才气，天下无双。他自恃有本领，屡次和敌人争胜败，恐怕牺牲了他。 
English: With tears streaming down his face, Sun Kunxue, a member of the Imperial Household Agency, said to the emperor: "Li Guang's talent is second to none in the world. He prided himself on his ability, repeatedly competing with the enemy for victory and defeat, and I am afraid that he was sacrificed.

古文：上乃徙广为上郡太守。
现代文：于是就调任上郡太守。
English: As a result, he was transferred to the post of Upper County Governor.

古文：匈奴侵上郡，上使中贵人从广勒习兵击匈奴。
现代文：匈奴侵入上郡，天子派中贵人跟随李广统率亲兵抗击匈奴。
English: The Xiongnu invaded Shang County, and the noblemen of the Tianzi faction followed Li Guangtong and led their own soldiers to fight against the Xiongnu.

古文：中贵人者数十骑从，见匈奴三人，与战。
现代文：中贵人带着几十名骑兵放马驰骋，遇见了三个匈奴人，就和他们战斗起来。
English: The middle-ranking nobleman galloped with dozens of cavalry, met three Huns, and fought with them.

古文：射伤中贵人，杀其骑且尽。
现代文：三个匈奴人转身射箭，射伤了中贵人，把他带去的骑兵几乎杀光。
English: Three of the Huns turned and fired arrows, wounding the middle-ranking officer and killing almost all of the cavalrymen who had led him away.

古文：中贵人走广，广曰： 是必射雕者也。 
现代文：中贵人跑到李广跟前。李广说： 这一定是射雕手。 
English: One of the dignitaries ran up to Li Guang. Li Guang said, "This must be the sculptor."

古文：广乃从百骑往驰三人。
现代文：李广于是就带领一百名骑兵去追赶那三个人。
English: Li Guang then led a hundred horsemen to chase the three men.

古文：三人亡马步行，行数十里。
现代文：那三个人没有骑马徒步而行，走了几十里。
English: The three men had no horses and were on foot.

古文：广令其骑张左右翼，而广身自射彼三人者，杀其二人，生得一人，果匈奴射雕者也。
现代文：李广命令他的骑兵左右散开，李广亲自射那三个人，射死二人，活捉一人，果然是匈奴的射雕手。
English: After walking for dozens of miles, Li Guang ordered his cavalry to spread out to the right and left, encircling both ways. He personally went to shoot the three people, shot two dead, and captured one alive. It was indeed the Xiongnu's archer.

古文：已缚之上山，望匈奴数千骑，见广，以为诱骑，惊，上山陈。
现代文：刚捆绑那个人上山，望见匈奴有几千名骑兵，他们看见了李广，以为是引诱他们的骑兵，都吃惊了，上山摆好阵势。
English: After tying up the man, they went up the mountain and saw that the Huns had several thousand cavalry. They were surprised to see Li Guang, thinking that he was luring their cavalry. They went up the mountain and set up their positions.

古文：广之百骑皆大恐，欲驰还走。
现代文：李广的一百名骑兵都大为惊恐，想快马往回跑。
English: Li Guang's hundred horsemen were also very frightened and wanted to run back.

古文：广曰： 我去大军数十里，今如此走，匈奴追射，我立尽。
现代文：李广说： 我们离开大军几十里，现在这样凭一百名骑兵逃跑，匈奴兵追赶射击我们，我们就会立即死光。
English: Li Guang said, "We are dozens of miles away from the main army, and now we are running away with only a hundred horsemen. If the Xiongnu soldiers chase and shoot us, we will die immediately."

古文：今我留，匈奴必以我为大军之诱，不我击。 
现代文：现在我们停下来，匈奴一定以为我们是大军的诱敌者，不敢来攻击我们。 
English: Now that we have stopped, the Xiongnu must have thought that we were luring a large army and did not dare to attack us.

古文：广令曰： 前！ 
现代文：李广命令说： 前进！ 
English: Li Guang ordered, "Forward!"

古文：未到匈奴陈二里所，止，令曰： 皆下马解鞍！ 
现代文：进到离匈奴阵地约二里的地方，停了下来，命令说： 都下马解下马鞍！ 
English: When he reached a place about two miles from the Hun position, he stopped and ordered: "All of you, dismount and unsaddle your horses!"

古文：骑曰： 虏多如是，解鞍，即急，奈何？ 
现代文：他的骑兵说： 敌人很多并且离得近，倘若解鞍后有紧急情况，怎么办？ 
English: His cavalry said: The enemy are many and close, what if there is an emergency after dismounting?

古文：广曰： 彼虏以我为走，今解鞍以示不去，用坚其意。 
现代文：李广说： 那些敌人以为我们会逃跑，现在都解下马鞍，表示不走，用这办法来坚定他们的猜想。 
English: Li Guang said: Those enemies thought that we would run away, and now they have all unsaddled their horses and said that they would not leave, using this method to strengthen their conjecture.

古文：有白马将出护兵。
现代文：于是匈奴的骑兵终于不敢来攻击。
English: As a result, the Hun cavalry finally dared not attack.

古文：广上马，与十余骑奔射杀白马将，而复还至其百骑中，解鞍，纵马卧。
现代文：有一个骑白马的将领出阵来监护他的士兵，李广上马，与十多个骑兵奔驰过去，射死了匈奴那个骑白马的将领，然后又回到他的骑兵当中，解下马鞍，命令士兵都把马放开并躺下。
English: There was a general on a white horse who led the battle to guard his soldiers. Li Guang got on his horse and galloped with more than ten cavalrymen, shot the Hun general on a white horse, then returned to his cavalry, removed his saddle, and ordered the soldiers to let go of the horse and lie down.

古文：时会暮，胡兵终怪之，弗敢击。
现代文：这睁哈好天近黄昏，匈奴兵始终捉摸不定，不敢进击。
English: It was dusk, and the Xiongnu soldiers were still uncertain and did not dare to attack.

古文：夜半，胡兵以为汉有伏军于傍欲夜取之，即引去。
现代文：夜半时，匈奴兵也以为汉军在附近有埋伏的部队，要乘夜袭击他们，匈奴全部撤退了。
English: At midnight, the Xiongnu soldiers also thought that the Chinese army had ambushed troops nearby and wanted to use the night to attack them. The Xiongnu all retreated.

古文：平旦，广乃归其大军。
现代文：第二天清晨，李广才回到他的大部队。
English: Early the next morning, Li Guang returned to his large army.

古文：后徙为陇西、北地、雁门中云中太守。
现代文：后来先后任陇西、北地、雁门、云中太守。
English: Later, he successively served as the governor of Shaanxi, Hubei, Yanmen, and Yunnan.

古文：武帝即位，左右言广名将也，由是入为未央卫尉，而程不识时亦为长乐卫尉。
现代文：武帝即位，左右近臣说李广是名将，于是李广被调任未央宫的卫尉，而程不识当时也担任长乐宫的卫尉。
English: When Emperor Wu ascended the throne, his close advisers said that Li Guang was a great general, so Li Guang was transferred to the Weiyang Palace as a guard, and Cheng also served as a guard at the Changle Palace at that time.

古文：程不识故与广俱以边太守将屯。
现代文：程不识从前和李广都以边郡太守的身份统率军队，屯田守边。
English: Unbeknownst to Cheng, both he and Li Guang used to command the army as the governor of Bian County, leading the defense of Tonden.

古文：及出击胡，而广行无部曲行陈，就善水草顿舍，人人自便，不击刁斗自卫，莫府省文书，然亦远斥候，未尝遇害。
现代文：等到出兵攻打匈奴时，李广行军没有严格的编制、队列和阵势，靠近良好的水源草地驻扎下来，住宿停留，人人自便，晚上不敲刁斗巡逻来自卫，军部的文书簿籍一概从简，但是也在远处布置了侦察岗哨，没有遭遇过危险。
English: When Li Guang sent out troops to attack the Huns, the Li Guang marching army did not have strict organization, queue and formation. They stationed themselves in a meadow near a good water source, stayed overnight, and everyone was at their own convenience. They patrolled at night to defend themselves without fighting. The military department's records were all simplified, but they also set up a reconnaissance post in the distance and did not encounter any danger.

古文：程不识正部曲行伍营陈，击刁斗，吏治军簿至明，军不得自便。
现代文：程不识严格要求编制、队列和阵势，晚上敲刁斗巡逻，军官处理军事文件到天亮，军队不得自便。
English: Cheng did not know the strict requirements of formation, queue and formation, patrols at night, officers handling military documents until dawn, and the army was not allowed to help itself.

古文：不识曰： 李将军极简易，然虏卒犯之，无以禁；而其士亦佚乐，为之死。
现代文：程不识说： 李广的部队十分随便，然而敌人突然袭击它，却无法招架；而他的士兵也安逸快乐，都乐于为他出死力。
English: Cheng did not know to say: Li Guang's troops are very casual, but the enemy suddenly attacked it, but could not fend off; and his soldiers are also comfortable and happy, are willing to die for him.

古文：我军虽烦忧，虏亦不得犯我。 
现代文：我的部队虽然紧张忙碌，然而敌人也不敢来侵犯我们。 
English: Although my troops are tense and busy, the enemy does not dare to invade us.

古文：是时，汉边郡李广、程不识为名将，然匈奴畏广，士卒多乐从，而苦程不识。
现代文：当时，担任汉朝的边郡太守李广、程不识是名将，但是匈奴畏惧李广的谋略，士兵们也多喜欢跟随李广而苦于跟随程不识。
English: At that time, Li Guang, who served as the governor of the Han Dynasty, and Cheng Wuzhong were famous generals, but the Xiongnu feared Li Guang's strategy, and the soldiers also liked to follow Li Guang and suffered from following Cheng Wuzhong.

古文：不识孝景时以数直谏为太中大夫，为人廉，谨于文法。
现代文：程不识在孝景帝时因为屡次直言劝谏而改任太中大夫。他为人廉洁，谨守法令。
English: Cheng Wukong was appointed to the post of the First Vice-Admiral at the time of Emperor Xiao Jing due to his repeated outspoken advice. He was a man of integrity and scrupulous adherence to the law.

古文：后汉诱单于以马邑城，使大军伏马邑傍，而广为骁骑将军，属护军将军。
现代文：后来，汉朝用马邑城引诱单于。派大军埋伏在马邑附近的山谷中，李广担任骁骑将军，受护军将军韩安国节制。
English: Later, the Han Dynasty used the city of Mayi to lure Shanyu and sent a large army to lie in wait in the valley near Mayi. Li Guang served as the cavalry general, and Han Anguo, the general of the escort army, restrained Shanyu.

古文：单于觉之，去，汉军皆无功。
现代文：当时单于发觉了这种情况，退去了，汉军都没有战功。
English: At that time, the Han army only noticed the situation and retreated, and the Han army did not have any war achievements.

古文：后四岁，广以卫尉为将军，出雁门击匈奴。
现代文：这以后四年，李广由卫尉调任将军，从雁门郡出击匈奴。
English: Four years after this, Li Guang was transferred from lieutenant to general and attacked the Xiongnu from Yanmen County.

古文：匈奴兵多，破广军，生得广。
现代文：匈奴兵多，打败了李广的军队，活捉了李广。
English: There were many Xiongnu soldiers, who defeated Li Guang's army and captured Li Guang alive.

古文：单于素闻广贤，令曰： 得李广必生致之。 
现代文：单于一向听到李广有才能，下命令说： 捉到李广一定要活着解送来。 
English: He just heard that Li Guang was very talented in ordinary times, and ordered: If Li Guang is captured, he must be sent back alive.

古文：胡骑得广，广时伤，置两马间。
现代文：匈奴骑兵捉到了李广，李广当时受伤，他们把李广安置在两马之间，用绳索结成网兜让李广躺着。
English: The Xiongnu cavalry captured Li Guang, who was injured at the time. They placed Li Guang between two horses and used ropes to form a net to keep Li Guang lying down.

古文：络而盛卧。行十余里，广阳死，睨其傍有一儿骑善马，暂腾而上胡儿马，因抱儿鞭马南驰数十里，得其余军。
现代文：走了十多里，李广装死，斜视旁边有个匈奴少年骑着一匹好马，李广突然纵身一跃，跨上匈奴少年的马，抱着少年策马向南奔跑数十里，又收集了他的残余部队。
English: After walking more than ten miles, Li Guang pretended to be dead, squinting next to a Hun teenager riding a good horse, Li Guang suddenly jumped up, stepped on the Hun teenager's horse, hugged the teenager's horse and ran south for dozens of miles, and collected his remaining troops.

古文：匈奴骑数百追之，广行取儿弓射杀追骑，以故得脱。
现代文：匈奴追捕的骑兵几百名追赶他，李广一边跑一边拿起匈奴少年的弓箭，射死了追来的骑兵，因此得以脱身。
English: The Hun chased several hundred horsemen chasing him. Li Guang ran and picked up the Hun teenager's bow and arrow, shot and killed the pursuing horsemen, and thus was able to escape.

古文：于是至汉，汉下广吏。
现代文：于是回到汉京师，汉朝廷把李广交给法官。
English: So he returned to the Han capital, and the Han court handed Li Guang over to the judge.

古文：吏当广亡失多，为虏所生得，当斩，赎为庶人。
现代文：法官判决李广损失伤亡的人马众多，自己又被敌人活捉，应当斩首，用钱赎罪成了平民。
English: The judge ruled that Li Guang, who lost many people and was himself captured alive by the enemy, should be beheaded, and became a civilian to atone for his sins.

古文：数岁，与故颍阴侯屏居蓝田南山中射猎。
现代文：过了几年，李广和退隐住在蓝田县的前颖阴侯的孙子灌强常到南山中打猎。
English: A few years later, Li Guanghe's grandson, Gan Qiang, who lived in seclusion in Lantian County, often went hunting in the Nanshan Mountains.

古文：尝夜从一骑出，从人田间饮。
现代文：曾经在一天夜裹，带着一个骑兵外出，跟别人在田间饮酒。
English: He had been out one night with a riding companion, drinking with others in a field.

古文：还至亭，霸陵尉醉，呵止广，广骑曰： 故李将军。 
现代文：回来到了霸陵亭，霸陵尉喝醉了，呵斥阻止李广。李广的从骑说： 这是前任李将军。 
English: When he came back to Bailing Pavilion, Lieutenant Bailing was drunk and yelled at him to stop Li Guang. Li Guang's rider said, "This is the former General Li."

古文：尉曰： 今将军尚不得夜行，何故也！ 
现代文：亭尉说： 现任将军尚且不能夜间通过，何况是前任的呢！ 
English: The pavilion officer said, "The current general can't pass through at night, let alone his predecessor!

古文：宿广亭下。
现代文：扣留李广住宿在霸陵亭下。
English: Li Guang was detained and lodged under the Bailing Pavilion.

古文：居无何，匈奴入辽西，杀太守，败韩将军。
现代文：过了不久，匈奴入侵杀了辽西太守，打败了韩将军。
English: Soon after, the Huns invaded and killed Liao Xi Taozhu, defeating General Han.

古文：韩将军后徙居右北平，死。
现代文：后来韩将军调到右北平，去世。
English: Later, General Han was transferred to Ubaiping and passed away.

古文：于是上乃召拜广为右北平太守。
现代文：于是天子就征调任命李广作右北平太守。
English: As a result, Emperor Taishi conscripted and appointed Li Guang as the right-hand governor of Beiping.

古文：广请霸陵尉与俱，至军而斩之，上书自陈谢罪。
现代文：李广便请求派霸陵尉跟他一起去，到达军中就杀了他。然后上书自述谢罪。
English: Li Guang then asked for a brigadier to be sent with him, and when he arrived at the army, he killed him. He then wrote a confession.

古文：上报曰： 将军者，国之爪牙也。
现代文：皇上回答说： 将军就是保卫国家的骨干力量。
English: The Emperor replied, "The generals are the backbone of national defense.

古文：《司马法》曰： 登车不式，遭丧不服，振旅抚师，以征不服，率三军之心，同战士之力，故怒形则千里竦，威振则万物状；是以名声暴于夷貉，威棱憺乎邻国。 夫报忿除害，捐残去杀，朕之所图于将军也；若乃免冠徒跣，稽颡请罪，岂朕之指哉！
现代文：《司马法》这部兵法中说： 登上战车不必行礼，遇到丧事，不必穿丧服，整顿抚慰军队，以征服叛逆；统一三军将士的意志，激发战士的战斗力，因此，表现出愤怒就可以震惊千里，显示出威严就可以降服万物；因此威名施于少数民族地区，神灵之威力震慑了邻国，用愤怒铲除祸害，使之放弃残忍和屠杀，正是朕所希望将军去办的事；要是脱帽赤脚叩头谢罪，哪裹是朕的旨意呢！
English: "Sima Fa" said in this martial art: It is not necessary to salute when boarding a chariot, it is not necessary to wear mourning clothes when encountering a funeral, it is necessary to rectify and soothe the army in order to conquer the rebellion; unify the will of the soldiers of the three armies, stimulate the combat effectiveness of the soldiers, therefore, showing anger can shock thousands of miles, showing majesty can conquer everything; therefore, prestige is given to ethnic minority areas, the power of the gods has deterred neighboring countries, and it is exactly what I want the general to do to eradicate the scourge with anger and make it abandon cruelty and slaughter; if I take off my hat

古文：将军其率师东辕，弥节白檀，以临右北平盛秋。 
现代文：将军应率军束征，安定边疆，来迎接右北平金秋时节的战斗。 
English: The general should lead the army to recruit, stabilize the frontier, and meet the battle of the golden autumn season in North Pyongan Province.

古文：广在郡，匈奴号曰 汉飞将军 ，避之，数岁不入界。
现代文：李广在边郡时，匈奴人给他一个 汉飞将军 的称号，一直避开李广，好几年不进入边界。
English: When Li Guang was in Bian County, the Huns gave him the title of General Han Fei. They avoided Li Guang and did not enter the border for several years.

古文：广出猎，见草中石，以为虎而射之，中石没矢，视之，石也，他日射之，终不能入矣。
现代文：李广外出打猎，看到草丛中的石头，以为是老虎就射出了箭，箭头射进了石头里，走近一看，是块石头。后来又去射，却始终不能再射进去了。
English: Li Guang went out hunting and saw a stone in the grass. Thinking it was a tiger, he shot an arrow. The arrow went into the stone. When he got closer, he saw it was a stone. Later, he shot again, but he still couldn't get it in.

古文：广所居郡闻有虎，常自射之。
现代文：李广所在的郡，一听说有老虎，常常亲自去射它。
English: As soon as Li Guang's county heard about the tiger, he often went to shoot it himself.

古文：及居右北平射虎，虎腾伤广，广亦射杀之。
现代文：到他驻守右北平时，一次射老虎，老虎跳起来，扑伤了李广，李广也射死了老虎。
English: When he was stationed in North Pyongan Province, he once shot a tiger. The tiger jumped up and injured Li Guang. Li Guang also shot and killed the tiger.

古文：石建卒，上召广代为郎中令。
现代文：郎中令石建去世了，于是皇上征召李广接替石建作郎中令。
English: His second-in-command, Shi Jian, died, so the emperor summoned Li Guang to succeed him as second-in-command.

古文：元朔六年，广复为将军，从大将军出定襄。
现代文：元朔六年，李广又调任为将军，跟随大将军的军队从定襄郡出击匈奴。
English: In the sixth year of the Yuan Shuo, Li Guang was transferred to be a general, and followed the general's army to attack the Xiongnu from Dingxiang County.

古文：诸将多中首虏率为侯者，而广军无功。
现代文：各将领多有杀敌俘敌达到标准因功封侯的，而李广的部队没有功劳。
English: Most of the generals had killed and captured enemies to meet the standard for merit, while Li Guang's troops had no merit.

古文：后三岁，广以郎中令将四千骑出右北平，博望侯张骞将万骑与广俱，异道。
现代文：过后三年，李广以郎中令的身份率领四千骑兵从右北平出发，博望侯张骞率领一万骑兵和李广同行，分两路走。
English: Three years later, Li Guang, as the second-in-command, led 4,000 cavalrymen from the right side of Beiping, and Bo Wang Hou Zhang Jie led 10,000 cavalrymen to accompany Li Guang, and they went in two directions.

古文：行数百里，匈奴左贤王将四万骑围广，广军士皆恐，广乃使其子敢往驰之。
现代文：走了大约几百里，匈奴左贤王带领四万骑兵包围李广，李广的士兵都很恐惧，李广就派他的儿子李敢快马冲击敌人。
English: After walking about several hundred miles, the Hun Zuoxian Wang led forty thousand cavalry to surround Li Guang. Li Guang's soldiers were very afraid. Li Guang sent his son Li Dang to attack the enemy on a fast horse.

古文：敢从数十骑直贯胡骑，出其左右而还，报广曰： 胡虏易与耳。 
现代文：李敢独自带了几十名骑兵飞奔而去，直穿匈奴骑兵的包围圈，抄出敌军的左右两翼而回，报告李广说： 匈奴人容易对付。 
English: Li Dang alone took dozens of cavalrymen and galloped away, straight through the encirclement of the Hun cavalry, copied out the left and right wings of the enemy army and returned. Li Guang said: The Huns are easy to deal with.

古文：军士乃安。
现代文：士兵才安定下来。
English: This is reassuring for the soldiers.

古文：为圜陈外乡，胡急击，矢下如雨。
现代文：李广布成圆形阵势，面向着四外，匈奴猛攻他们，箭下如雨。
English: Li Guang clothed in a circular formation, facing the outside world, the Xiongnu attacked them, arrows rained down.

古文：汉兵死者过半，汉矢且尽。
现代文：汉兵死亡的超过一半，汉军的箭也快用完了。
English: More than half of the Han soldiers died, and the arrows were used up.

古文：广乃令持满毋发，而广身自以大黄射其裨将，杀数人，胡虏益解。
现代文：李广便命令士兵把弓拉开，不要放箭，李广亲自用大黄弩弓射敌人的副将，射死了几个，匈奴人渐渐松懈。
English: Li Guang then ordered the soldiers to pull their bows apart and not to shoot arrows. Li Guang himself shot the enemy's vice-commander with a large yellow crossbow, killing several, and the Huns gradually slackened.

古文：会暮，吏士无人色，而广意气自如，益治军。
现代文：恰巧天色黑了下来，军官士兵都面无人色，可是李广的神气同平常一样，更加精神振奋地指挥军队。
English: It just so happened that it was getting dark, and the officers and soldiers all looked gloomy, but Li Guang's demeanor was the same as usual, and he commanded the army with more spirit.

古文：军中服其勇也。
现代文：军中士兵很佩服他的勇气。
English: Soldiers in the army admire his courage.

古文：明日，复力战，而博望侯军亦军，匈奴乃解去。
现代文：第二天，继续奋力战斗，博望侯的军队也到了，匈奴军队才解围而去。
English: On the second day, they continued to fight hard. Bohang Hou's army also arrived, and the Xiongnu army was able to break the siege and leave.

古文：汉军邑，弗能追。
现代文：汉军疲乏了，不能去追击。
English: The Chinese army was exhausted and could not pursue.

古文：是时，广军几没，罢归。
现代文：这时李广几乎全军覆没，衹得收兵回去。
English: At this time, Li Guang almost lost his entire army and had to withdraw.

古文：汉法，博望侯后期，当死，赎为庶人。
现代文：按汉朝的法律，博望侯耽误了预定的日期，当处死刑，出钱赎罪，降为平民。
English: According to the laws of the Han Dynasty, if Bohang Hou missed the scheduled date, he would be sentenced to death, pay money to atone for his crime, and be reduced to a commoner.

古文：广军自当，亡赏。
现代文：李广的军功和罪责相当，没有封赏。
English: Li Guang's military service and criminal responsibility are equivalent, and he has not been rewarded.

古文：初，广与从弟李蔡俱为郎，事文帝。
现代文：当初，李广与堂弟李蔡都任郎官，一道侍奉孝文帝。
English: At first, Li Guang and his cousin Li Cai both served Emperor Xiaowen as vassals.

古文：景帝时，蔡积功至二千石。
现代文：景帝时期，李蔡积累功劳领到二千石级的俸禄。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jing, Li Cai accumulated merits and received a salary of more than 2,000 koku.

古文：武帝元朔中，为轻车将军，从大将军击右贤王，有功中率，封为乐安侯。
现代文：孝武帝元朔年间，担任轻车将军，跟随大将军出击右贤王，有功达到了封赏的标准，被封为乐安侯。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xiaowu in the Yuan Shuo era, he served as a light vehicle general and followed the general to attack the Righteous King, and his achievement reached the award standard, and he was awarded the title of Le An Hou.

古文：元狩二年，代公孙弘为丞相。
现代文：元狩二年，代替公孙弘做了丞相。
English: In the second year of the Genkari era, he became chancellor in place of Gongsunhiro.

古文：蔡为人在下中，名声出广下远甚，然广不得爵邑，官不过九卿。
现代文：李蔡为人的品格在下等之中，名声在李广以下很远，但是李广没有得到爵位和封邑，官职没有超过九卿。
English: Li Cai's personal character was in the lower class, and his reputation was far below Li Guang's, but Li Guang did not receive a peerage and fiefdom, and his official position did not exceed nine Lords.

古文：广之军吏及士卒或取封侯。
现代文：许多李广部下的军官和士兵有的取得了封侯之赏。
English: Many of the officers and soldiers under Li Guangbu were rewarded with the title of vassal.

古文：广与望气王朔语云： 自汉击匈奴，广未尝不在其中，而诸妄校尉已下，材能不及中，以军功取侯者数十人。广不为后人，然终无尺寸功以得封邑者，何也？
现代文：李广曾经和望气家王朔闲谈说： 从汉朝出击匈奴以来，我没有一次不在其中，可是各部队校尉以下，才能不够中等人，然而因为出击匈奴的军功取得侯爵的，有几十人，而我没有落在人家的后面，可是没有些微的功劳去取得封地，是什么原因呢？
English: Li Guang once gossiped with Wang Shuo, a well-wisher: "Since the Han Dynasty attacked the Xiongnu, I have not once been absent from it, but the ability of the troops below the rank of captain is not enough for the average person. However, there are dozens of people who have obtained marquesses because of the military exploits of attacking the Xiongnu, and I have not fallen behind others, but there is no slight merit to obtain the fief. What is the reason?

古文：岂吾相不当侯邪？ 
现代文：难道我的生相不该封侯么？ 
English: Isn't it my destiny to become a feudal lord?

古文：朔曰： 将军自念，岂尝有恨者乎？ 
现代文：王朔说： 将军自己回想一下，难道曾经有过悔恨的事吗？ 
English: Wang Shuo said: General, think back for yourself. Have you ever had any regrets?

古文：广曰： 吾为陇西守，羌尝反，吾诱降者八百余人，诈而同日杀之，至今恨独此耳。 
现代文：李广说： 我曾做陇西太守，羌人曾经反叛，我引诱他们投降，投降的有八百多人，我用欺骗的手段在同一天杀死了他们。至今，最大的悔恨就衹有这件事。 
English: Li Guang said: I once served as the governor of Shaanxi Province. The people of Shaanxi once rebelled. I enticed them to surrender. More than 800 people surrendered. I killed them on the same day using deceptive means. To this day, this is the biggest regret.

古文：朔曰： 祸莫大于杀已降，此乃将军所以不得侯者也。 
现代文：王朔说： 罪过没有比杀死已经投降的人更大的了，这就是将军所以不得封侯的原因啊。 
English: Wang Shuo said, "There is no greater crime than killing a person who has already surrendered. This is why generals cannot be put under house arrest."

古文：广历七郡太守，前后四十余年，得赏赐，辄分其戏下，饮食与士卒共之。
现代文：李广历任七个郡的太守，前后四十多年，得到赏赐立即分给部下，饮食与士兵一起。
English: Li Guang successively served as the governor of seven counties for more than forty years. When he received rewards, he immediately distributed them to his subordinates, and the food and drink were shared with the soldiers.

古文：家无余财，终不言生产事。
现代文：家裹没有多余财物，一生不谈购买产业的事。
English: There are no superfluous possessions in the family, and there is no talk of buying property in one's lifetime.

古文：为人长，爰臂，其善射亦天性，虽子孙他人学者莫能及。
现代文：李广身材高大，长臂，具有善射箭的天赋，就是子孙和其他人向他学习射箭，也都赶不上他。
English: Li Guang is tall, long-armed, and has a talent for good archery. Even if his children and grandchildren and others learn archery from him, they can't catch up with him.

古文：广呐口少言，与人居，则画地为军陈，射阔狭以饮。
现代文：李广讷口，不与人多说话，和别人在一起住，就在地上画作战阵图，射箭比射的面宽窄，输了罚酒喝。
English: Li Guangna mouth, do not talk to people more, live with others, on the ground to draw battle lines, archery than the narrow face, lost the penalty drink.

古文：专以射为戏。
现代文：专门以射箭作游戏。
English: It specializes in archery.

古文：将兵，乏绝处见水，士卒不尽饮，不近水；不尽餐，不尝食；宽缓不苛，士以此爱乐为用。
现代文：带兵行军，遇到断粮缺水时，见了水，士兵不全喝到水，他不近水边，士兵不全吃上饭，他不尝一口饭。对待士兵宽厚不苛，士兵因此喜欢替他办事效力。
English: When marching with soldiers and encountering food shortages and water shortages, he saw water, the soldiers did not all drink water, he did not go near the water's edge, the soldiers did not all eat dinner, he did not taste a bite of dinner. He treated the soldiers generously and not harshly, so the soldiers liked to work for him.

古文：其射，见敌，非在数十步之内，度不中不发，发即应弦而倒。
现代文：他射箭，看见敌人，不到几十步之内，估计射不中就不射，一射就要应弦倒地。
English: He shoots arrows, sees the enemy, within a few dozen steps, estimates that he will not shoot if he does not hit, and will fall to the ground with a shot.

古文：用此，其将数困辱，及射猛兽，亦数为所伤云。
现代文：因此，他带兵作战，多次被敌人围困，连射猛兽，也几次被伤害过。
English: As a result, he led soldiers in battle, was repeatedly besieged by the enemy, shot at wild beasts, and was injured several times.

古文：元狩四年，大将军票骑将军大击匈奴，广数自请行。
现代文：元狩四年，大将军和骠骑将军大举出兵攻打匈奴，李广几次自动请求前去。
English: In the fourth year of the Yuan Dynasty, the great general and the general of the imperial cavalry sent troops to attack the Xiongnu, and Li Guang asked several times to go.

古文：上以为老，不许；良久乃许之，以为前将军。
现代文：天子认为他老了，没有允许；过了好久，才允许他，派他担任前将军。
English: The emperor thought he was too old and did not allow it; it took a long time before he allowed him and sent him to be a former general.

古文：大将军青出塞，捕虏知单于所居，乃自以精兵走之，而令广并于右将军军，出东道。
现代文：大将军卫青出了边塞，捉到俘虏，得知单于住的地方，就亲自率领精锐部队赶去袭击，而命令李广的部队跟右将军的部队合并，从东路出击。
English: General Wei Qing left the border fortress, captured the prisoners, and learned that they were living alone. He personally led the elite troops to attack, and ordered Li Guang's troops to merge with General Yu's troops and attack from the east.

古文：东道少回远，大军行，水草少，其势不屯行。
现代文：东路稍微迂回绕远，而大部队行经水草稀少的地方，其势不能聚集行进。
English: The eastern route is a little circuitous, and large forces cannot gather and march through places where water and grass are scarce.

古文：广辞曰： 臣部为前将军，今大将军乃徙臣出东道，且臣结发而与匈奴战，乃令一得当单于，臣愿居前，先死单于。 
现代文：李广亲自请求说： 我是部队的前将军，现在大将军却改让我从东路出兵，况且我从年轻的时候起就和匈奴作战，今天才第一次得与单于敌对，我愿意担任前锋，先同单于决一死战。 
English: Li Guang himself pleaded: "I am a former general of the army, but now the great general has asked me to send troops from the east road. Moreover, I have been fighting against the Huns since I was young. Today is the first time I have to face the enemy alone. I am willing to serve as a forward, and first fight to the death with the enemy alone."

古文：大将军阴受上指，以为李广数奇，毋令当单于，恐不得所欲。
现代文：大将军卫青曾暗中受到皇上嘱咐，认为李广年老了，多次遭受窘困，不要让他正面同单于对阵，恐怕不能实现他的愿望。
English: General Wei Qing had been secretly ordered by the emperor to think that Li Guang was old and had suffered embarrassment many times, and not to let him fight alone. I am afraid that he would not be able to realize his wish.

古文：是时，公孙敖新失侯，为中将军，大将军亦欲使敖与俱当单于，故徙广。
现代文：这时候，公孙敖新近失掉侯爵，担任中将军，大将军也想要让公孙敖和自己一同与单于对阵，所以调开前将军李广。
English: At this time, Gongsun Rong had recently lost his marquis and was serving as a lieutenant general. The general also wanted Gongsun Rong and himself to fight against each other, so he transferred the former general Li Guang.

古文：广知之，固辞。
现代文：李广当时知道这种情况，坚决向大将军拒绝调动。
English: Li Guang knew the situation at that time and resolutely refused to be transferred to the general.

古文：大将军弗听，令长史封书与广之莫府，曰： 急诣部，如书。 
现代文：大将军不听，命令长史下一道文书给李广的幕府，说道： 赶快到所在军部去，照文书所说的办。 
English: The great general did not listen and ordered Changshi to write a letter to the shogunate of Li Guang, saying: Go quickly to your military department and do as the letter says.

古文：广不谢大将军而起行，意象愠怒而就部，引兵与右将军食其合军出东道。
现代文：李广没有向大将军告辞就动身出发了，心裹很恼怒地去了军部，带领士兵和右将军趟食其合兵一处，从东路出发。
English: Li Guang did not say goodbye to the general and set off. He went to the military department with a very angry heart, led the soldiers and the right general to a place where they could eat together, and set off from the east road.

古文：惑失道，后大将军。
现代文：迷失了道路，落在大将军的后面。
English: He lost his way and fell behind the general.

古文：大将军与单于接战，单于遁走，弗能得而还。
现代文：大将军与单于交战，单于逃跑了，没能取得战果而回。
English: The great general and Shan Yu engaged in battle, and Shan Yu fled. Wei Qing had no choice but to return to the army.

古文：南绝幕，乃遇两将军。
现代文：大军向南度过沙漠，才遇到前将军和右将军。
English: The large army moved south across the desert, only to encounter the former general and the right general.

古文：广已见大将军，还入军。
现代文：李广会见大将军之后，回到自己军中。
English: After meeting the general, Li Guangyao returned to his own army.

古文：大将军使长史持糒醪遗广，因问广、食其失道状，曰： 青欲上书报天子失军曲折。 
现代文：大将军派长史拿着酒食送给李广，顺便问了李广、赵食其迷失道路的情况，说： 卫青要上书报告天子军中的曲折情形。 
English: The general sent Changshi to Li Guangru with wine and food, and asked Li Guangru and Zhao Qi about their lost path, saying: Wei Qingru should report the twists and turns in the Tianzi Army.

古文：广未对。
现代文：李广没有回答。
English: Li Guang did not answer.

古文：大将军长史急责广之莫府上簿。
现代文：大将军长史迫令李广的幕府人员写出报告，前去听审。
English: The commander-in-chief forced the shogunate officials of Li Guang to write a report and go to the hearing.

古文：广曰： 诸校尉亡罪，乃我自失道。吾今自上簿。 
现代文：李广说： 各校尉无罪，是我自己迷失了道路，现在我亲自上供状，听候审问。 
English: Li Guang said: The captains are not guilty, I myself have lost my way, and now I myself have confessed and am awaiting interrogation.

古文：至莫府，谓其麾下曰： 广结发与匈奴大小七十余战，今幸从大将军出接单于兵，而大将军徙广部行回远，又迷失道，岂非天哉！
现代文：回到自己的幕府，李广对他的部下说： 我从年轻的时候起与匈奴大大小小经历了七十多次战斗，这一次有幸跟随大将军迎战单于的直属部队，可是大将军又调我的部队走迂回遥远的路，偏又迷失了路，难道不是天意吗？
English: Returning to his own shogunate, Li Guang said to his subordinates: Since I was young, I have experienced more than seventy battles with the Huns, large and small. This time, I was fortunate enough to follow the general to fight against the troops directly under the command of Han Yu. However, the general sent my troops to take a long detour and lost their way. Isn't it the will of heaven?

古文：且广年六十余，终不能复对刀笔之吏矣！ 
现代文：况且我年纪六十多了，毕竟不能再对付审问人员的侮辱了。 
English: Besides, I am more than sixty years old, after all, I can no longer deal with the insults of the interrogators.

古文：遂引刀自刭。
现代文：便拔出刀来自刎了。
English: So he pulled out a knife and killed himself.

古文：百姓闻之，知与不知，老壮皆为垂泣。
现代文：老百姓听到这件事，不论是认识的还是不认识的，不论是年老的还是年轻的，都为他流泪。
English: When ordinary people heard about this, whether they knew him or not, whether they were old or young, they shed tears for him.

古文：而右将军独下吏，当死，赎为遮人。
现代文：而右将军赵食其单独被送交法官，判处死刑，出钱赎罪，降为平民。
English: But the right-wing general Zhao Zhiqui was sent to the judge alone, sentenced to death, offered money to atone for his crime, and was reduced to a civilian.

古文：广三子，曰当户、椒、敢，皆为郎。
现代文：李广有三个儿子，叫李当户、李椒、李敢，都担任郎官。
English: Li Guang had three sons, named Li Danghu, Li Jiao and Li Gan, who all served as officials.

古文：上与韩嫣戏，嫣少不逊，当户击嫣，嫣走，于是上以为能。
现代文：有一次天子与韩嫣戏耍，韩嫣稍有不礼貌，李当户打了韩嫣，韩嫣跑掉了，于是天子认为李当户勇敢。
English: Once, Tian Zi was playing with Han Zi. Han Zi was a bit rude. Li Dang Hau hit Han Zi and Han Zi ran away. Therefore, Tian Zi thought Li Dang Hau was brave.

古文：当户蚤死，乃拜椒为代郡太守，皆先广死。
现代文：李当户去世早，天子授任李椒为代郡太守，都比李广先死。
English: Li Danghu died early, and Li Jiao was appointed as the acting county governor by the Son of Heaven, both of whom died before Li Guang.

古文：广死军中时，敢从票骑将军。
现代文：李广在军中死时，李敢正跟随骠骑将军。
English: When Li Guang died in the army, Li Gan was following the general on horseback.

古文：广死明年，李蔡以丞相坐诏赐冢地阳陵当得二十亩，蔡盗取三顷，颇卖得四十余万，又盗取神道外壖地一亩葬其中，当下狱，自杀。
现代文：李广死去的第二年，李蔡当丞相，因为侵占了孝景帝阳陵的空地，应当交给法官惩办，当时赐给他的空地仅二十亩，李蔡侵占了三顷，卖地后得到了四十多万钱，又侵占了神道外围地一亩当墓地，论罪下狱，于是李蔡也自杀了。
English: In the second year of Li Guang's death, Li Cai, when he was chancellor, should have been punished by the judge for encroaching on the open space of the Xiao Jing Emperor's Yang Mausoleum. At that time, the open space given to him was only twenty mu. Li Cai encroached on three hectares and received more than four hundred thousand yuan after selling the land. He also encroached on one mu of the outer area of Shinto as a cemetery and was sentenced to prison. So Li Cai also committed suicide.

古文：敢以校尉从票骑将军击胡左贤王，力战，夺左贤王旗鼓，斩首多，赐爵关内侯，食邑二百户，代广为郎中令。
现代文：李敢以校尉的身份跟随骠骑将军攻打匈奴左贤王，奋力作战，夺得了左贤王的战鼓和帅旗，斩杀敌人首级多，赏赐丁关内侯的爵位，享受封邑二百户，接替李广做了郎中令。
English: Li Dang, as a lieutenant, followed the cavalry general to attack the Hun Zuoxian Wang, fought hard, won Zuoxian Wang's war drum and handsome flag, killed many enemy heads, was awarded the title of Ding Guanzhong, enjoyed the fief of two hundred households, and succeeded Li Guang as the second-in-command.

古文：顷之，怨大将军青之恨其父，乃击伤大将军，大将军匿讳之。
现代文：不久，李敢怨恨大将军卫青使得他父亲含恨而死，便打伤了大将军，大将军隐瞒了这件事。
English: Soon after, Li Dang grudged General Wei Qing and caused his father's death, injuring the general. The general concealed the incident and did not publicize it.

古文：居无何，敢从上雍，至甘泉宫猎，票骑将军去病怨敢伤青，射杀敢。
现代文：过了不多久，李敢侍从皇上到雍州甘泉宫打猎。骠骑将军霍去病怨恨李敢打伤卫青，射死了李敢。
English: Not long after, Li Dang, an attendant of the emperor, went hunting at Ganquan Palace in Yongzhou. General Huo, who was riding the horse, fell ill, and Li Dang shot Wei Qing and killed Li Dang.

古文：去病时方贵幸，上为讳，云 鹿触杀之 。
现代文：霍去病当时正当显贵宠幸，皇上隐瞒了真相，说是野鹿撞死了他。
English: The emperor hid the truth, saying that a wild deer had killed him.

古文：居岁余，去病死。
现代文：过了一年多，霍去病死了。
English: More than a year later, Huo De fell ill and died.

古文：敢有女为太子中人，爱幸。
现代文：李敢有个女儿是太子的宫女，受到宠爱。
English: Li Gang has a daughter who is the prince's concubine, and she is well-liked.

古文：敢男禹有宠于太子，然好利，亦有勇。
现代文：李敢的儿子李禹也受到太子宠爱，可是爱好财利，也有勇气。
English: Li Gan's son, Li Yu, was also favored by the prince, but he loved money and had courage.

古文：尝与侍中贵人饮，侵陵之，莫敢应。
现代文：他曾经和侍中贵人饮酒，欺侮了贵人，贵人不敢作声。
English: He once drank alcohol with a noble waiter, bullied the noble, and the noble dared not speak out.

古文：后诉之上，上召禹，使刺虎，县下圈中，未至地，有诏引出之。
现代文：后来告诉了皇上，皇上召李禹，让他去刺虎，悬吊着下到圈虎处，没有到地面，下令拉上李禹。
English: Later, he told the emperor that the emperor summoned Li Yu, asked him to stab the tiger, hung down to the tiger's place, did not reach the ground, and ordered Li Yu to be pulled up.

古文：禹从落中以剑斫绝累，欲刺虎。
现代文：李禹从网中砍断绳索，想去刺虎。
English: Li Yu cut the rope from the net and wanted to stab the tiger.

古文：上壮之，遂救止焉。
现代文：皇上认为勇敢，于是把他救起来，阻止他去刺虎。
English: The emperor thought he was brave, so he rescued him and stopped him from stabbing the tiger.

古文：而当户有遗腹子陵，将兵击胡，兵败，降匈奴。
现代文：李当户有一个遗腹子叫李陵，率军攻击匈奴，兵败，投降匈奴。
English: The Li Dang household had a posthumous son named Li Ling, who led an army to attack the Huns, was defeated, and surrendered to the Huns.

古文：后人告禹谋欲亡从陵，下吏死。
现代文：后来有人告李禹想跑去跟从李陵，被处死。
English: Later, someone accused Li Yu of wanting to run away to follow Li Ling, and he was executed.

古文：陵字少卿，少为侍中建章监。
现代文：李陵，字少卿，少年时任侍中建章监。
English: Li Ling, the title of Shaoqing, was a junior chamberlain when he was a boy.

古文：善骑射，爱人，谦让下士，甚得名誉。
现代文：善于骑射，爱护关心他人，对部下谦让，很有好名声。
English: Good at riding and shooting, loving and caring for others, humble to subordinates, very good reputation.

古文：武帝以为有广之风，使将八百骑，深入匈奴二千余里，过居延视地形，不见虏，还。
现代文：武帝觉得他有李广的风度，让他带领八百骑兵，深入匈奴领地二千多里，经过居延地区察看了地形，不见匈奴，返回。
English: Emperor Wu felt that he had the demeanor of Li Guang, so he let him lead eight hundred cavalry, penetrate more than two thousand miles into the territory of the Xiongnu, inspect the terrain through the Jiyan area, not see the Xiongnu, and return.

古文：拜为骑都尉，将勇敢五千人，教射酒泉、张掖以备胡。
现代文：拜官骑都尉，率勇士五千人，在酒泉、张掖地区教射箭，以防备匈奴侵犯。
English: Baiguan riding captain, leading five thousand warriors, taught archery in Jiuquan and Zhangye areas to prevent the Huns from invading.

古文：数年，汉遣贰师将军伐大宛，使陵将五校兵随后。
现代文：过了几年，汉派贰师将军讨伐大宛，派李陵率五校兵随后。
English: A few years later, the Han Dynasty sent the general Zou Shi to fight against Dayuan, and then sent Li Ling to lead five school soldiers.

古文：行至塞，会贰师还。
现代文：行军到边塞时，遇到贰师将军返回。
English: When they marched to the border fortress, they encountered the general Zou Shihong returning.

古文：上赐陵书，陵留吏士，与轻骑五百出敦煌，至盐水，迎贰师还，复留屯张掖。
现代文：皇上赐书李陵，李陵留下军官和士兵，与轻骑五百出敦煌，到盐水，迎接贰师将军还师，然后驻屯张掖。
English: The emperor gave the letter to Li Ling, Li Ling left the officers and soldiers, and rode five hundred out of Dunhuang, to the salt water, to meet the general and the division, and then stationed in Zhangye.

古文：天汉二年，贰师将三万骑出酒泉，击右贤王于天山。
现代文：天汉二年，贰师将军率三万骑出兵酒泉，在天山攻击匈奴右贤王。
English: In the second year of the Tianhan Dynasty, General Zou led 30,000 horsemen to attack the Hun King Uxian in Tianshan.

古文：召陵，欲使为贰师将辎重。
现代文：皇上召见李陵，想让他担任贰师将军的辎重运输任务。
English: Li Ling was summoned by the emperor, who wanted him to carry out the heavy transport tasks of the general.

古文：陵召见武台，叩头自请曰： 臣所将屯边者，皆荆楚勇士奇材剑客也，力扼虎，射命中，愿得自当一队，到兰干山南以分单于兵，毋令专乡贰师军。 
现代文：李陵在武台被召见，叩头自请说： 臣所率领的屯边士兵，都是荆楚的勇士奇材剑客，力大可扼虎，射箭能中目标，希望独立带领一队，到兰干山南去吸引单于的兵力，不让匈奴集中兵力攻击贰师将军。 
English: Li Ling was summoned to meet him in Wudai, and asked the servant to say: The soldiers of Tunbian led by the minister are all warriors of Jingchu, and are skilled swordsmen. They have great strength and can strangle a tiger, and can hit the target with archery. I hope to independently lead a team to the south of Langan Mountain to attract the troops of Han Yu, and prevent the Huns from concentrating their forces to attack the general of the Han Division.

古文：上曰： 将恶相属邪！
现代文：皇上说： 哪里能拨给你人马呀！
English: The emperor said, "Where can I assign men and horses to you?"

古文：吾发军多，毋骑予女。 
现代文：我派出了很多部队，已经没有骑兵派给你了。 
English: I have sent many troops, but I have no cavalry for you.

古文：陵对： 无所事骑，臣愿以少击众，步兵五千人涉单于庭。 
现代文：李陵回答说： 无须派骑兵，臣愿以少击众，步兵五千人就可以开进单于王庭。 
English: Li Ling replied: There is no need to send cavalry, the vassal is willing to attack the crowd with a small number, and five thousand infantry can enter the palace alone.

古文：上壮而许之，因诏强弩都尉路博德将兵半道迎陵军。
现代文：皇上认为他勇壮便答应了，于是令强弩都尉路博德率兵在途中迎接李陵军。
English: The emperor thought he was brave and agreed, so he ordered the strong-arm lieutenant Lu Bode to lead the troops to meet the Li Ling Army on the way.

古文：博德故伏波将军，亦羞为陵后距，奏言： 方秋匈奴马肥，未可与战，臣愿留陵至春，俱将酒泉、张掖骑各五千人并击东西浚稽，可必禽也。 
现代文：路博德原是伏波将军，也耻于为李陵的后卫，上奏说： 正当秋天匈奴马肥之际，不可与之交战，臣愿留李陵到春天，同时率酒泉、张掖骑兵各五千人，一起出击东西浚稽，一定可以擒获单于。 
English: Lubo De was originally a general of Fubao, but he was also ashamed to be the guard of Li Ling. He said in the report: "It is the autumn of the Xiongnu Horse Fertilizer, and it is not possible to fight with it. The vassal is willing to stay in Li Ling until spring, and at the same time lead five thousand cavalrymen from Jiuquan and Zhangye to attack the east and west together, and they will surely be able to capture it.

古文：书奏，上怒，疑陵悔不欲出而教博德上书，乃诏博德： 吾欲予李陵骑，云 欲以少击众 。今虏入西河，其引兵走西河，遮钩营之道。 
现代文：书奏上以后，皇上大怒，怀疑李陵后悔不想出兵，而让路博德上书，便下诏对路博德说： 我想派给李陵骑兵，他说 欲以少击众，如今匈奴进入西河，我军应率兵奔西河，你要去钩营阻挡敌军。 
English: After the call to arms was played, the emperor was furious, suspecting that Li Ling regretted not wanting to send troops, so he asked Lubod to write a letter, and then issued an edict to Lubod saying: I want to send cavalry to Li Ling. He said that he wanted to hit the crowd with fewer soldiers. Now the Hun has entered the West River, our army should lead the soldiers to the West River. You should go to the hook camp to block the enemy army.

古文：诏陵： 以九月发，出庶虏鄣，至东浚稽山南龙勒水上，徘徊观虏，即亡所见，从浞野侯赵破奴故道抵受降城休士，因骑置以闻。
现代文：又下诏对李陵说： 从九月出发，出兵遮虏鄣，到束浚稽山南龙勒水边，来回寻找匈奴，要是没有发现敌军，便从浞野侯趟破奴的旧路抵受降城休整兵士，按骑兵驿站安排休整。
English: He also issued the following edict to Li Ling: "Starting from September, send troops to the south of Shujunqi Mountain to the water's edge of Longle, and search for the Xiongnu back and forth. If no enemy troops are found, the soldiers who have been demoted from the city should go back to the old road of the Xiongnu, and rest according to the arrangement of the cavalry rest station.

古文：所与博德言者云何？
现代文：与路博德讲了些什么话，全都写出来上报。 
English: Write down everything you said to Lubold and submit it to the newspaper.

古文：具以书对。 陵于是将其步卒五千人出居延，北行三十日，至浚稽山止营，举图所过山川地形，使麾下骑陈步乐还以闻。
现代文：于是李陵率领步兵五千从居延出发，北行三十，到浚稽山驻扎，将所过山川地形全部画出来，派部下骑将陈步乐上报朝廷。
English: As a result, Li Ling led 5,000 infantrymen from Jiyan, marched 30 km north, and stationed at Junchi Mountain. He mapped out the entire terrain of the mountain and river crossing, and sent his subordinate cavalryman Chen Bule to report to the imperial court.

古文：步乐召见，道陵将率得士死力，上甚说，拜步乐为郎。
现代文：陈步乐被召见，陈述了李陵作为将领能得士兵效命的情况，皇上很高兴，拜陈步乐为郎。
English: Chen Bule was summoned to see Li Ling, who described how Li Ling, as a general, was able to get soldiers to serve him. The emperor was very pleased, and asked Chen Bule to be his son.

古文：陵至浚稽山，与单于相直，骑可三万围陵军。
现代文：李陵到浚稽山，与单于遭遇，李陵军被三万骑兵包围。
English: Li Ling went to the Dredge Hill and encountered Shan Yu. Li Ling's army was surrounded by thirty thousand cavalry.

古文：军居两山间，以大车为营。
现代文：李陵军队在两山之间，以大车为营。
English: Li Ling's army was encamped between the two mountains, with their chariots.

古文：陵引士出营外为陈，前行持戟盾，后行持弓弩，令曰： 闻鼓声而纵，闻金声而止。 
现代文：李陵带士兵出营外排列战阵，前行执戟、盾牌，后行持弓弩，下令说： 听到鼓声进击，听到钮声止步。 
English: Li Ling led the soldiers out of the camp and lined up the battle lines, marching forward holding shields and shields, and marching backward holding bows and arrows, and ordered: "When you hear the drum beat, when you hear the button, stop marching."

古文：虏见汉军少，直前就营。陵搏战攻之，千弩俱发，应弦而倒。
现代文：匈奴见汉军人少，就径直冲到营前，李陵交战相攻，千弩齐发，敌军应弦而倒。
English: Seeing that there were few Han soldiers, the Xiongnu rushed straight to the front of the camp, Li Ling engaged in battle and attacked, and the enemy army fell in response.

古文：虏还走上山，汉军追击，杀数千人。
现代文：匈奴退回上山，漠军进击，杀死数千敌兵。
English: The Xiongnu retreated back up the mountain, and the Mongols attacked, killing thousands of enemy soldiers.

古文：单于大惊，召左右地兵八万余骑攻陵。
现代文：单于大惊，召集左右步兵、骑兵八万多人攻击李陵。
English: He was so shocked that he called up more than 80,000 infantry and cavalry from both sides to attack Li Ling.

古文：陵且战且引，南行数日，抵山谷中。
现代文：奎瞳且战且退，南行数，到达山谷中。
English: Kui Hitomi fought and retreated, heading south, reaching the middle of the valley.

古文：连战，士卒中矢伤，三创者载辇，两创者将车，一创者持兵战。
现代文：连续交战，士兵中箭受伤，三处受伤的躺在车上，二处受伤的驾车，一处受伤的执兵器作战。
English: Continuous fighting, a soldier was injured by an arrow, three injured lying on the car, two injured driving, one injured operating weapons.

古文：陵曰： 吾士气少衰而鼓不起者，何也？
现代文：李陵说： 我军士气减低衰退，鼓不起来的原因是什么？
English: Li Ling said: The morale of our soldiers is declining, what is the reason for the decline?

古文：军中岂有女子乎？ 
现代文：军中难道有女人吗？ 
English: Are there any women in the army?

古文：始军出时，关东群盗妻子徙边者随军为卒妻妇，大匿车中。
现代文：开始出兵时，关东群盗的妻子徙边的便随军当了士兵的妻子，深藏车中。
English: When the troops were dispatched, the wife of the Guandong bandits followed the troops and became a soldier's wife, hiding in a car.

古文：陵搜得，皆剑斩之。
现代文：垄陆搜出来，全部杀掉。
English: Search the entire area, kill them all.

古文：明日复战，斩首三千余级。
现代文：第二天再战，斩杀敌兵三千多人。
English: They fought again the next day, killing more than three thousand enemy soldiers.

古文：引兵东南，循故龙城道行四五日，抵大泽葭苇中，虏从上风纵火，陵亦令军中纵火以自救。
现代文：率军向东南行进，沿着旧龙城道路行军，四五天到达大泽葭苇中，匈奴从上风放火，李陵也让军中放火烧出隔离带以自救。
English: He led the army to the southeast and marched along the old Longcheng Road. After four or five days of marching, he reached the middle of the Ozawa Plain. The Huns set fire from the upper wind, and Li Ling also let the army set fire to burn out the isolation zone to save themselves.

古文：南行至山下，单于在南山上，使其子将骑击陵。
现代文：南行到山下，单于在南山上，派他的儿子率骑兵攻击李陵。
English: He marched south to the foot of the mountain, and once on Nanshan, he sent his son and cavalry to attack Li Ling.

古文：陵军步斗树木间，复杀数千人，因发连弩射单于，单于下走。
现代文：李陵军在树林中交战，又杀死敌军几千人，用连弩射单于，单于下山退走。
English: Li Ling's army fought in the woods, killed thousands of enemy soldiers, and retreated down the mountain firing single shots at each other.

古文：是日捕得虏，言： 单于曰： 此汉精兵，击之不能下，日夜引吾南近塞，得毋有伏兵乎？ 
现代文：这一天捕到俘虏，交待说： 单于讲： 这些是汉朝的精兵，攻击不能取胜，日夜诱我南近边界，会不会有伏兵呢？ 
English: On this day, the captives were captured, and the report said: Simply put: These are the elite soldiers of the Han Dynasty, the attack can not win, day and night lure me south near the border, will there be an ambush?

古文：诸当户君长皆言： 单于自将数万骑击汉数千人不能灭，后无以复使边臣，令汉益轻匈奴。 
现代文：各部落当户君长都说： 单于亲自率领几万骑兵不能消灭几千人的汉兵，以后再也无法派遣入边的人了，会让汉朝更加轻视我匈奴。
English: The heads of families in each tribe said: "Just by personally leading tens of thousands of cavalrymen, we cannot wipe out several thousand Han soldiers. In the future, we will no longer be able to send people into the country, which will make the Han Dynasty despise us Huns even more."

古文：复力战山谷间，尚四五十里得平地，不能破，乃还。 
现代文：再到山谷中大战，还有四五十里才到平地，不能击败，就退回来。 
English: Then to the great battle in the valley, there are still forty or fifty miles to go to the plain. If you can't beat them, then retreat.

古文：是时，陵军益急，匈奴骑多，战一日数十合，复伤杀虏二千余人。
现代文：当时，李陵军更加危急，匈奴骑兵多，一日交战数十回合，又杀死敌军二千余人。
English: At that time, the Liling Army was more critical, with more Hun cavalry. They fought dozens of rounds a day and killed more than 2,000 enemy soldiers.

古文：虏不利，欲去，会陵军候管敢为校尉所辱，亡降匈奴，具言 陵军无后救，射矢且尽，独将军麾下及成安侯校各八百人为前行，以黄与白为帜，当使精骑射之即破矣。 
现代文：匈奴不利，想退兵，正遇李陵军军候管敢被校尉所辱，逃降匈奴，讲述了汉军情况，说 李陵军无后援，箭也快射完了，独率部下及成安侯校官各八百人为前锋，用黄、白二色旗帜，应当用精锐骑兵箭射便可消灭汉军。 
English: The Xiongnu was at a disadvantage and wanted to retreat, but the Li Ling Army's military governor-in-waiting dared to be humiliated by the captain and fled to the Xiongnu. He described the situation of the Chinese army, saying that the Li Ling Army had no backup, and the arrows were almost finished. He alone led his subordinates and the Cheng'an Hou school officials, each of whom were 800 forwards. With the yellow and white flags, they should use the elite cavalry to shoot arrows to destroy the Chinese army.

古文：成安侯者，颍川人，父韩千秋，故济南相，奋击南越战死，武帝封子延年为侯，以校尉随陵。
现代文：成安侯是颖川人，父亲韩千秋，原为济南相，征讨南越时战死，汉武帝封其子延年为侯，以校尉身份随李陵出征。
English: The Prince of Cheng'an was from Yingchuan. His father, Han Qianqiu, was the Minister of Jinan Province. He died in the war during the conquest of South Vietnam. Emperor Han Wu made his son the Prince of Cheng'an for a year, and he went to war with Li Ling as a captain.

古文：单于得敢大喜，使骑并攻汉军，疾呼曰： 李陵、韩延年趣降！ 
现代文：单于得到管敢后大喜，派骑兵总攻漠军，大声疾呼： 李陵、韩延年赶快投降！ 
English: He was overjoyed to have gained control, and sent his cavalry to attack the desert army, shouting: Li Ling, Han Yan Nian, quickly surrender!

古文：遂遮道急攻陵。
现代文：于是拦截道路，攻击李陵。
English: So they blocked the road and attacked Li Ling.

古文：陵居谷中，虏在山上，四面射，矢如雨下。
现代文：汉军在山谷中，匈奴在山上，四面箭如雨下。
English: The Han army is in the valley, the Xiongnu is on the mountain, and it is raining arrows on all sides.

古文：汉军南行，未至鞮汗山，一日五十万矢皆尽，即弃车去。
现代文：汉军南下，没有到达鞑汗山，一天就消耗掉五十万支箭，立即弃车而退兵。
English: The Han army went south, but did not reach the Jiankang Mountains. It consumed half a million arrows in one day, and immediately abandoned the vehicle and retreated.

古文：士尚三千余人，徒斩车辐而持之，军吏持尺刀，抵山入峡谷。
现代文：士兵还有三千多人，衹是砍断车辐当作武器，军官持短刀，深入到峡谷之中。
English: There are still more than three thousand soldiers, some of whom cut off car spokes as weapons, and officers with knives, deep into the canyon.

古文：单于遮其后，乘隅下垒石，士卒多死，不得行。
现代文：单于断了汉军后路，就山势下投垒石，士兵伤亡惨重，不能行进。
English: Just because they cut off the Chinese army's rear path, they threw foundation stones down the mountain. The soldiers suffered heavy casualties and were unable to march.

古文：昏后，陵便衣独步出营，止左右： 毋随我，丈夫一取单于耳！ 
现代文：黄昏后，李陵便衣独步出营，制止左右随从说： 不要跟随我，大丈夫一人去捉单于就可以了！ 
English: After dusk, Li Ling walked out of the camp alone in plain clothes, stopped his left and right followers and said: "Don't follow me, it's okay to go hunting alone, so that's fine!"

古文：良久，陵还，大息曰： 兵败，死矣！ 
现代文：过了很久。李陵返回来，叹息着说： 兵败，就死吧！ 
English: After a long time, Li Ling returned and said with a sigh, "If you are defeated, just die!"

古文：军吏或曰： 将军威震匈奴，天命不遂，后求道径还归，如浞野侯为虏所得，后亡还，天子客遇之，况于将军乎！ 
现代文：有的军吏说： 将军威震匈奴，天命不能如愿，以后找一条返回去的道路，像浞野侯那样被俘后又逃回来，天子还是礼遇他，何况将军呢！ 
English: Some military officials said: "The general dominates the Xiongnu, the fate of heaven cannot be fulfilled, later he will find a way to return, like the barbarian lord who was captured and escaped again, the Son of Heaven still treats him with courtesy, let alone the general!"

古文：陵曰： 公止！吾不死，非壮士也。 
现代文：李陵说： 你不要说丫，我不死，非壮士。 
English: Li Ling said, "Don't say, 'Oh, I won't die, I'm not a strong man.'

古文：于是尽斩旌旗，及珍宝埋地中，陵叹曰： 复得数十矢，足以脱矣。
现代文：于是砍掉所有旗帜，埋藏了珍宝，李陵叹息说： 再有几十支箭，足可以逃走了。
English: So he cut down all the flags and buried the treasure. Li Ling sighed and said, "With a few more arrows, I can escape."

古文：今无兵复战，天明坐受缚矣！
现代文：今天没有武器再战，天亮了就坐等被俘！
English: Today, without weapons, we will fight again. When dawn comes, we will sit and wait to be captured!

古文：各鸟兽散，犹有得脱归报天子者。 
现代文：大家各自逃命，还会有脱身回报天子的人。 
English: Everyone is running for their lives, and there will be people who run away to return the favor.

古文：令军士人持二升糒，一半冰，期至遮虏鄣者相待。
现代文：令军士每人带二升粮，一大片冰，约定到遮虏鄣等待。
English: The sergeants were each ordered to bring two liters of grain and a large piece of ice, and they agreed to wait at the barracks.

古文：夜半时，击鼓起士，鼓不鸣。
现代文：半夜时，击鼓起程，鼓没有响。
English: At midnight, the drumming started, but there was no sound.

古文：陵与韩延年俱上马，壮士从者十余人。
现代文：李陵与韩延年都上了马，跟从的壮士有十几人。
English: Li Ling and Han Yan Nian both mounted their horses, followed by more than a dozen strong men.

古文：虏骑数千追之，韩延年战死。
现代文：包抠数千骑兵追击，韩延年战死。
English: He was pursued by thousands of cavalrymen, and died in battle the following year.

古文：陵曰： 无面目报陛下！ 
现代文：李绪说： 没有面目向陛下报告了！ 
English: Li Xu said: I have no face to report to His Majesty!

古文：遂降。
现代文：于是便投降。
English: So he agreed to surrender.

古文：军人分散，脱至塞者四百余人。
现代文：军人们分散逃走，逃到边塞的有四百多人。
English: The soldiers scattered and fled. More than four hundred fled to the border fortress.

古文：陵败处去塞百余里，边塞以闻。
现代文：李陵失败处距边塞有一百多里，边塞上报消息。
English: The site of Li Ling's failure is more than a hundred miles away from the border dam, and the border dam has reported the news.

古文：上欲陵死战，召陵母及妇，使相者视之，无死丧色。
现代文：皇上希望李陵死战，召来李陵的老母、妻室，让看相的观察，没有死丧之色。
English: The emperor hoped that Li Ling would fight to the death, and summoned Li Ling's mother and wife, so that the observation of the physiognomy would not have the color of death.

古文：后闻陵降，上怒甚，责问陈步乐，步乐自杀。
现代文：后来听说李陵投降，皇上非常愤怒，责问陈步乐，陈步乐自杀。
English: Later, when he heard that Li Ling had surrendered, the emperor was very angry. He reprimanded Chen Bule, and Chen Bule committed suicide.

古文：群臣皆罪陵，上以问太史令司马迁，迁盛言： 陵事亲孝，与士信，常奋不顾身以殉国家之急。
现代文：群臣皆怪罪李陵，皇上问太史令司马迁对此事的看法，司马迁极力说： 李陵对亲人孝敬，对士人诚信，经常奋不顾身解救国家危难。
English: The courtiers all blamed Li Ling. The emperor asked the Taishi to ask Sima Qian for his opinion on the matter. Sima Qian said emphatically: Li Ling was respectful to his relatives and honest to his scholars. He often risked his life to save the country from danger.

古文：其素所畜积也，有国士之风。
现代文：从他的一向表现来看，有国士之风。
English: Judging from his consistent performance, he has the demeanor of a statesman.

古文：今举事一不幸，全躯保妻子之臣随而媒糵其短，诚可痛也！
现代文：今天他办了一件不幸的事，那些贪生怕死衹顾保全身家性命的臣子，便任意构陷，夸大其罪，是令人痛心的！
English: Today, he has done an unfortunate thing. It is distressing that those courtiers who are greedy for life and afraid of death, and do not care about preserving their own lives, will arbitrarily frame him and exaggerate his crime!

古文：且陵提步卒不满五千，深輮戎马之地，抑数万之师，虏救死扶伤不暇，悉举引弓之民共攻围之。
现代文：况且李陵祇率领不到五千人的步兵，长驱直入到达匈奴腹地，面对数万敌军，使匈奴顾不上救死扶伤，招来全部会射箭的民众一同围攻李陵。
English: Moreover, Li Lingzhi led less than five thousand infantrymen, drove straight into the Hun hinterland, faced tens of thousands of enemy troops, so that the Huns could not take care of saving lives and helping the wounded, and invited all the people who could shoot arrows to besiege Li Ling.

古文：转斗千里，矢尽道穷，士张空拳，冒白刃，北首争死敌，得人之死力，虽古名将不过也。
现代文：李陵转战千里，箭尽路绝，士兵拉的是空弩，冒着白刃箭雨，还是同敌人拼死搏斗，能得到士兵拼死之力，就是古代名将也不能超过他。
English: Li Ling fought for thousands of miles, the arrow ran out of road, the soldier pulled an empty raft, braved a hail of arrows, or fought to the death with the enemy. If a soldier can get the strength to fight to the death, even an ancient famous general cannot surpass him.

古文：身虽陷败，然其所摧败亦足暴于天下。
现代文：他虽然失败被俘，然而他所摧败敌军的战绩，也足以光耀天下了。
English: Although he failed and was captured, his record of defeating the enemy is enough to shine the world.

古文：彼之不死，宜欲得当以报汉也。 
现代文：李陵所以不死，是想在适当的时机报效汉朝。 
English: Li Ling did not die because he wanted to repay the Han Dynasty at the right time.

古文：初，上遣贰师大军出，财令陵为助兵，及陵与单于相值，而贰师功少。
现代文：当初，皇上派贰师将军出征，李陵衹是协助之兵，到李陵与单于遭遇，贰师战功很少。
English: At the beginning, the emperor sent the general of the Yi Division to go to war, Li Lingyi was a supporting soldier, and he encountered Li Ling and Shan Yu, and the performance of the Yi Division was very poor.

古文：上以迁诬罔，欲沮贰师，为陵游说，下迁腐刑。
现代文：皇上便以司马迁诬蠛、诋毁贰师，为李陵游说为罪名，判处他腐刑。
English: The emperor found Sima Qian guilty of slandering, defaming and lobbying for Li Ling, and sentenced him to death for corruption.

古文：久之，上悔陵无救，曰： 陵当发出塞，乃诏强弩都尉令迎军。
现代文：过了很久，皇上后悔没有及时救援李陵，说： 李陵出塞的时候，就应让强弩都尉去迎接。
English: After a long time, the emperor regretted that he did not rescue Li Ling in time, saying: When Li Ling got out of the jam, he should let Captain Qiang Yu go to meet him.

古文：坐预诏之，得令老将生奸诈。 
现代文：在朝廷下诏，才让老将路博德心生奸诈，使李陵军覆没。 
English: It was only after the imperial court issued an edict that the veteran Lubo De conceived the treachery that caused the Li Ling Army to be annihilated.

古文：乃遣使劳赐陵余军得脱者。
现代文：于是派使者慰劳赏赐李陵军中逃回的士兵。
English: So he sent an emissary to reward the soldiers who escaped from Li Ling's army.

古文：陵在匈奴岁余，上遣因杅将军公孙敖将兵深入匈奴迎陵。
现代文：李陵在匈奴一年多，皇上派因杅将军公孙敖率军深入匈奴迎接李陵。
English: After Li Ling had been in Xiongnu for more than a year, the emperor sent General Gongsun Rong and his army deep into Xiongnu to welcome Li Ling.

古文：敖军无功还，曰： 捕得生口，言李陵教单于为兵以备汉军，故臣无所得。 
现代文：公孙敖军无功而回，说： 捕到的俘虏说：李陵教单于用兵以防备汉军，因此臣无所获。 
English: Gongsun Shao's army returned without success, saying: The captured captives said: Li Ling taught Shan to use soldiers to prevent the Chinese army, so the vassal gained nothing.

古文：上闻，于是族陵家，母弟妻子皆伏诛。
现代文：皇上听到报告，于是将李陆家灭族，母、弟、妻、子皆被杀。
English: When the emperor heard the report, he had Li Lu's family exterminated. His mother, brother, wife, and son were all killed.

古文：陇西士大夫以李氏为愧。
现代文：陇西士大夫以奎压灭族为羞愧。
English: The doctor of Shaanxi Province was ashamed of his role in suppressing and exterminating the people.

古文：其后，汉遣使使匈奴，陵谓使者曰： 吾为汉将步卒五千人横行匈奴，以亡救而败，何负于汉而诛吾家？ 
现代文：后来，汉派使者出使匈奴，李陵责问使者说： 我为汉率领步兵五千人横扫鲤塑，因为没有救兵支援而失败，有什么对不起莲室的，要杀我全家？ 
English: Later, the Han Dynasty sent an envoy to the Xiongnu, and Li Ling asked the envoy: "I led five thousand infantrymen to sweep across the Zibo River for the Han Dynasty. I failed because I didn't have the support of the rescuers. What's wrong with you lotus, you want to kill my whole family?"

古文：使者曰： 汉闻李少卿教匈奴为兵。 
现代文：使者说： 汉室听说李少卿教包塑用兵。 
English: The envoy said, "The Imperial Household Agency has heard that Li Shaoqing is teaching plastic soldiers.

古文：陵曰： 乃李绪，非我也。 
现代文：李绪说： 是奎毖，不是我。 
English: Li Xu said: It was Qui Xuan, not me.

古文：李绪本汉塞外都尉，居奚侯城，匈奴攻之，绪降，而单于客遇绪，常坐陵上。
现代文：奎绪原来是还塞外都尉，屯圣泌，鱼躯攻击，奎钟投降，单于礼遇奎绪，常在李陵上坐。
English: Originally, Kuixu was also a foreign captain, Tun Sheng Xiu, fish body attack, Kui Zhong surrender, alone in the courtesy of Kuixu, often sitting on Li Ling.

古文：陵痛其家以李绪而诛，使人刺杀绪。
现代文：李陵痛恨自己的家因李绪而灭族，派人刺杀李绪。
English: Li Ling hated that his family was exterminated because of Li Xiu and sent someone to assassinate Li Xiu.

古文：大阏氏欲杀陵，单于匿之北方，大阏氏死乃还。
现代文：大板氏想杀李陵，单于把他藏在北方，大辟氏死后才回来。
English: The Oita clan wanted to kill Li Ling, so they hid him in the north, and only returned after the death of the Dabi clan.

古文：单于壮陵，以女妻之，立为右校王，卫律为丁灵王，皆贵用事。
现代文：单于认为李陵壮勇，把女儿嫁给李陵为妻，立为右校王，卫律为丁灵王，都受到尊崇而重用。
English: He regarded Li Ling as the strongest and bravest, married his daughter to Li Ling as his wife, established Li Ling as the Right School King, and established Wei Li as the King of Ding Ling, all of which were respected and highly valued.

古文：卫律者，父本长水胡人。
现代文：卫律的父亲原本是长水胡人。
English: Wei Lu's father was originally from Changshui.

古文：律生长汉，善协律都尉李延年，延年荐言律使匈奴。
现代文：卫律生长在坠，与协律都尉奎延年友善，奎旦蝗推荐鼬出使鲤塑。
English: Wei Rui grew up in Sheng, and was friendly with Gui Yan Nian, the lieutenant of Gui Rui. Gui Yan Nian recommended that Gui Yan Nian bring out the crane to make the crane.

古文：使还，会延年家收，律惧并诛，亡还降匈奴。
现代文：返回时，正遇奎延年被抄家，街建畏惧被杀，逃走投降匈奴。
English: When he returned, his house was being ransacked by the Kuei Yan, and fearing that he would be killed, he fled and surrendered to the Xiongnu.

古文：匈奴爱之，常在单于左右。
现代文：匈奴喜爱他，常在单于左右。
English: The Xiongnu loved him and often rode with him.

古文：陵居外，有大事，乃入议。
现代文：奎瞳居外庭，有大事，才入内议事。
English: Kui lived in the outer court, and only entered the inner court when there was an important case.

古文：昭帝立，大将军霍光、左将军上官桀辅政，素与陵善，遣陵故人陇西任立政等三人俱至匈奴招陵。
现代文：昭帝立为帝，大将军霍光、左将军上官桀辅政，向来与李陵友好，派李陵的老朋友陇西人任逃生等三人一同到包塑招回李绪。
English: Emperor Zhaotian, General Huo Guang, and General Zuo, who had been friends with Li Ling for a long time, sent Li Ling's old friend, a Shaanxi native named Ren Fusheng, and three others to Baoshuo to recruit Li Xu.

古文：立政等至，单于置酒赐汉使者，李陵、卫律皆侍坐。
现代文：任立迪等到达包躯，单于摆酒赐濩使者，奎陆、餐律都在座。
English: Ren Lidi waited for the arrival of Baotong, and only the wine was presented to the envoy, and Queluz and the meal rite were present.

古文：立政等见陵，未得私语，即目视陵，而数数自循其刀环，握其足，阴谕之，言可还归汉也。
现代文：任立迪等见到李绪，没有机会私语，便目视李陆，多次抚摸佩刀上的环，摸捉李陵的脚，暗谕可以归莲。
English: When Ren Lidi saw Li Xiu, he didn't have a chance to whisper, so he looked at Li Lu, stroked the ring on his sword many times, and felt Li Ling's feet. He told her to go back to Lian.

古文：后陵、律持牛酒劳汉使，博饮，两人皆胡服椎结。
现代文：后来，奎陆、聋硿都用牛肉和酒慰劳选使者，换杯而饮，两人都着胡服，扎一撮发髻。
English: Later, both Kui Lu and Xiong Yao used beef and wine to console the hard-working election envoys, and drank in turn. Both of them wore Hu clothing and tied a bunch of hairpins.

古文：立政大言曰： 汉已大赦，中国安乐，主上富于春秋，霍子孟、上官少叔用事。 
现代文：任立政大声说： 汉已经大赦，中原安乐，主上年少，霍子盂、上官少叔执政。 
English: Ren Licheng said in a loud voice: Han has been amnestied, Central Plains is at ease, the Lord is young, Huo Zixuan, the superior officer is young.

古文：以此言微动之。
现代文：用这话来先打动李陵。
English: Use these words to impress Li Ling first.

古文：陵墨不应，孰视而自循其发，答曰： 吾已胡服矣！ 
现代文：李陵默不作声，总是看着并抚摸自己的头发，回答说： 我已经穿上胡服了！ 
English: Li Ling kept silent, always looking at and stroking her hair, and replied: "I've put on the Hu clothing!

古文：有顷，律起更衣，立政曰： 咄，少卿良苦！
现代文：不一会儿，卫律起身更衣，任立政说： 哎，少卿劳苦了！
English: After a while, Wei Lu got up to change his clothes, and Ren Licheng said, "Oh, Shaoqing has been working hard!

古文：霍子孟、上官少叔谢女。 
现代文：霍子孟、上官少叔向你问好。 
English: Huo Zi Meng, the superior officer's young uncle, sends his regards.

古文：陵曰： 霍与上官无恙乎？ 
现代文：李陵说： 霍与上官二位无恙吧？ 
English: Li Ling said: Ho and Shangguan are both safe, right?

古文：立政曰： 请少卿来归故乡，毋忧富贵。 
现代文：任立政说： 请少卿回归故乡，不必担忧富贵。 
English: Ren Licheng said: Please return to your hometown, you do not have to worry about being rich.

古文：陵字立政曰： 少公，归易耳，恐再辱，奈何！ 
现代文：李陵叫着任立政的字说： 少公，回去容易，恐怕再受凌辱，怎么办！ 
English: Li Ling shouted the words of Ren Licheng and said: "Young master, it's easy to go back, I'm afraid I'll be insulted again, what should I do?"

古文：语未卒，卫律还，颇闻余语，曰： 李少卿贤者，不独居一国。
现代文：话没说完，卫律返回，听到了余音，便接着说： 李少卿是贤人，不衹是居住在一国。
English: Before he had finished speaking, Wei Lu returned and heard the aftertaste, so he went on to say: Li Shaoqing is a wise man, but he only lives in one country.

古文：范蠡遍游天下，由余去戎人秦，今何语之亲也！ 
现代文：范蠡遍游天下，由余离开西戎到了秦国，今天谈话为何如此亲密！ 
English: Fan Ye has traveled all over the world, from Yu leaving Xi Rong to Qin Guo, why is today's conversation so intimate!

古文：因罢去。
现代文：随后撤去宴席。
English: The banquet was then removed.

古文：立政随谓陵曰： 亦有意乎？ 
现代文：任立政随即问李陵说： 你也有意回去吗？ 
English: Ren Licheng then asked Li Ling: Do you also intend to go back?

古文：陵曰： 丈夫不能再辱。 
现代文：李陵说： 大丈夫不能第二次受辱。 
English: Li Ling said, "A healthy husband cannot be humiliated a second time."

古文：陵在匈奴二十余年，元平元年病死。
现代文：李陵在匈奴二十多年，汉元平元年病死。
English: Li Ling lived in Xiongnu for more than 20 years, and died of illness in the first year of the Han Dynasty.

古文：苏建，杜陵人也。
现代文：苏建，杜陵人。
English: Su Jian, Du Ling Ren.

古文：以校尉从大将军青击匈奴，封平陵侯。
现代文：以校尉身份跟随大将军卫青出击匈奴，封为平陵侯。
English: As a captain, he followed General Wei Qing to attack the Xiongnu, and was given the title of Prince of Pingling.

古文：以将军筑朔方。
现代文：又以将军身份建造朔方城。
English: He also built Shuo Fangcheng as a general.

古文：后以卫尉为游击将军，从大将军出朔方。
现代文：后以卫尉身份任游击将军，跟随大将军出兵朔方。
English: After that, he was appointed as a guerrilla general with the status of a guard lieutenant, and followed the general to the front.

古文：后一岁，以右将军再从大将军出定襄，亡翕侯，失军当斩，赎为庶人。
现代文：一年后，以右将军身份再次跟从大将军出兵定襄，损兵折将，部将翕侯趟信逃降匈奴，损失部队当问斩，赎为平民免了死罪。
English: A year later, as the right general, he once again followed the general to send troops to Dingxiang. The loss of soldiers was broken, and the general fled to the Xiongnu, the loss of troops was questioned, and the civilians were exempted from the death penalty.

古文：其后为代郡太守，卒官。
现代文：之后任代郡太守，死在官位上。
English: He later served as acting county governor and died in office.

古文：有三子：嘉为奉车都尉，贤为骑都尉，中子武最知名。
现代文：有子三人：苏嘉为奉车都尉，苏贤为骑都尉，二儿子苏武最有名气。
English: There are three sons: Su Jia is the vehicle commander, Su Xian is the cavalry commander, and the second son, Su Wu, is the most famous.

古文：武字子卿，少以父任，兄弟并为郎，稍迁至栘中厩监。
现代文：苏武，字子卿，年轻时因父亲苏建为国立功，而与兄弟们一起被任用为郎，苏武后来逐渐升迁为栘中厩监。
English: Su Wu, Ziziqing, when he was young, because his father, Su Jian, was a national hero, he and his brothers were appointed as rowers. Later, Su Wu was gradually promoted to be a middle school stable supervisor.

古文：时汉连伐胡，数通使相窥观，匈奴留汉使郭吉、路充国等，前后十余辈。
现代文：当时汉朝不断讨伐匈奴，双方多次派使者暗察对方情况，匈奴先后扣留了郭吉、路充国等十多批汉使者。
English: At that time, the Han Dynasty was constantly fighting against the Xiongnu, and both sides repeatedly sent emissaries to inspect the situation of the other side. The Xiongnu successively detained more than ten groups of Han emissaries, including Guo Ji and Lu Chongguo.

古文：匈奴使来，汉亦留之以相当。
现代文：匈奴使者到来，汉朝也扣留以相抵偿。
English: When the Huns' envoy arrived, the Han Dynasty detained him to make up for it.

古文：天汉元年，且鞮侯单于初立，恐汉袭之，乃曰： 汉天子我丈人行也。 
现代文：天汉元年，且鞑侯单于刚刚即位，害怕汉朝袭击，于是说： 汉朝的皇帝是我的长辈。 
English: In the first year of the Heian and Han dynasties, and Gong Houdan had just ascended the throne, he was afraid of the Han Dynasty attack, so he said: The emperor of the Han Dynasty is my elder.

古文：尽归汉使路充国等。
现代文：把扣留的汉朝使者路充国等全部放还。
English: Release all detained Han dynasty emissaries, including Lu Chengguo.

古文：武帝嘉其义，乃遣武以中郎将使持节送匈奴使留在汉者，因厚赂单于，答其善意。
现代文：汉武帝称赞他明于大义，就派苏武以中郎将的身份带着汉朝符节护送被扣留在汉朝的匈奴使者，并赠送给单于许多财物，以报答他的好意。
English: Emperor Hanwu praised him for being a man of great virtue, and sent Su Wu to escort the Hunnic envoy detained in the Han Dynasty as a middle-ranking general with Han Dynasty symbols, and presented him with many possessions to repay his kindness.

古文：武与副中郎将张胜及假吏常惠等募士斥候百余人俱。
现代文：苏武与副使汉中郎将张胜以及临时兼任使者属吏的常惠等人招募士卒、斥候一百多人同去匈奴。
English: Su Wu and the deputy envoy Han Zhong Lang recruited Zhang Sheng and Chang Hui, who temporarily served as the envoy's subordinate officer, and more than a hundred others to go to the Xiongnu.

古文：既至匈奴，置币遗单于。
现代文：到达匈奴后，陈设财物赠送给单丁。
English: After arriving in Xiongnu, the furnishings and property were presented to Shan Ding.

古文：单于益骄，非汉所望也。
现代文：单丁更加傲慢，完全不像汉朝所期望的那样。
English: Xingting was even more arrogant, completely different from what the Han Dynasty expected.

古文：方欲发使送武等，会缑王与长水虞常等谋反匈奴中。
现代文：单于正要派使者护送苏武等人返回，正赶上缑王和长水虞常等在匈奴谋反。
English: Just as he was about to send an envoy to escort Su Wu and others back, he was about to catch up with Shao Wang and Changshui Yu Chang, who were plotting against the Huns.

古文：缑王者，昆邪王姊子也，与昆邪王俱降汉，后随浞野侯没胡中。
现代文：缎王是昆邪王姐姐的儿子，曾与昆邪王一起投降汉朝，后来随同漠浞野侯讨伐匈奴，兵败而降。
English: King Yao was the son of King Kunzai's sister. He once surrendered to the Han Dynasty together with King Kunzai, and later fought against the Xiongnu with the princes of the Western Desert, but was defeated and surrendered.

古文：及卫律所将降者，阴相与谋劫单于母阏氏归汉。
现代文：他们与随从卫律投降的人暗中策划，要劫持单于的母亲板氏返回汉朝，恰巧苏武等出使匈奴。
English: Together with those who had surrendered to Wei Lu, they secretly plotted to kidnap Shanyu's mother, Ban, and return her to the Han Dynasty. Coincidentally, Su Wu and others were dispatched by the Xiongnu.

古文：会武等至匈奴，虞常在汉时素与副张胜相知，私候胜曰： 闻汉天子甚怨卫律，常能为汉伏弩射杀之。
现代文：虞常在汉朝时和副使张胜关系一直不错，就暗中拜访张胜，说： 听说汉朝皇帝非常怨恨卫律，我能为汉暗设弓弩杀死他。
English: During the Han Dynasty, Yu Chang had always had a good relationship with the vice-envoy Zhang Sheng, so he secretly visited Zhang Sheng and said: I heard that the Han Dynasty emperor was very resentful of Wei Lu, I can set up a bow and arrow for Han Sheng to kill him.

古文：吾母与弟在汉，幸蒙其赏赐。 
现代文：我的母亲和弟弟在汉朝，希望他们能得到我为汉朝立功的赏赐。 
English: My mother and younger brother were in the Han Dynasty, and I hope they will be rewarded for my contribution to the Han Dynasty.

古文：张胜许之，以货物与常。
现代文：张胜表示同意，并送给虞常财物。
English: Zhang Sheng agreed and gave the money to Gu Chang.

古文：后月余，单于出猎，独阏氏子弟在。
现代文：一个多月以后，单于出去打猎，衹有板氏及其侍从在家。
English: More than a month later, after going out hunting alone, Mr. Zou Youban and his attendant were at home.

古文：虞常等七十余人欲发，其一人夜亡，告之。单于子弟发兵与战。缑王等皆死，虞常生得。
现代文：虞常等匕十多人准备下手，但其中一人晚上逃走，向单于告密，单于及其部下派兵与虞常等展开激战，缑王等都在战斗中被杀。虞常被活捉。
English: More than a dozen people, including Yu Chang, prepared to attack, but one of them fled in the evening, tipped off Shan Yu, and Shan Yu and his subordinates sent soldiers to fight with Yu Chang and others. Shan Wang and others were killed in the battle. Yu Chang was captured alive.

古文：单于使卫律治其事。
现代文：单于任用卫律审理这一事件。
English: Only the appointment of the law of the guard to hear the case.

古文：张胜闻之，恐前语发，以状语武。
现代文：张胜听到这个消息，恐怕以前与虞常密谋之语被泄露，就把情况告诉给苏武。
English: When Zhang Sheng heard this news, he was afraid that the word of conspiracy with Gu Chang had been leaked, so he told the situation to Su Wu.

古文：武曰： 事如此，此必及我。
现代文：苏武说： 事情已发展到这个地步，一定会牵涉到我。
English: Su Wu said, "Things have developed to this point, I will definitely be involved.

古文：见犯乃死，重负国。 
现代文：受到侮辱之后才死，将更加对不起国家。 
English: If he dies after being humiliated, he will be more sorry to the country.

古文：欲自杀，胜、惠共止之。
现代文：于是便要自杀，张胜、常惠一起把他劝住。
English: As a result, he wanted to commit suicide, but Zhang Sheng and Chang Hui persuaded him together.

古文：虞常果引张胜。
现代文：虞常果然供出张胜。
English: Guo Chang actually won the bet.

古文：单于怒，召诸贵人议，欲杀汉使者。
现代文：单于大怒，召集匈奴贵族商议，要杀死汉朝使者。
English: Out of sheer rage, the Hun nobles were called together to discuss the killing of the Han Dynasty's envoy.

古文：左伊秩訾曰： 即谋单于，何以复加？
现代文：左伊秩訾说： 如果有谋害单于的，该如何加重处罚？
English: Zuo Yi Ritsuko said: If there is a single perpetrator of murder, how should the punishment be increased?

古文：宜皆降之。 
现代文：不如让他们全部投降。 
English: Might as well let them all surrender.

古文：单于使卫律召武受辞，武谓惠等： 屈节辱命，虽生，何面目以归汉！ 
现代文：单于便派卫律召来苏武审问。苏武对常惠等人说： 使自己的节操和国家的使命受到屈辱，即使不死，还有什么脸面回到坠朝？ 
English: Su Wu said to Chang Hui and others: If you humiliate your own integrity and the mission of the country, even if you do not die, what face will you have to return to the fallen dynasty?

古文：引佩刀自刺。
现代文：拔出佩刀自杀。
English: He pulled out his sword and committed suicide.

古文：卫律惊，自抱持武，驰召。
现代文：卫律大吃一惊，亲自抱住麸武，派人骑马跑去找医生。
English: Wei Lu was so surprised that he personally hugged Hao Wu and sent someone on horseback to find a doctor.

古文：凿地为坎，置煴火，覆武其上，蹈其背以出血。
现代文：医生在地上凿了一个坑，放进媪火，使苏武伏卧在火坑上，用手叩击他的背使淤血从伤口中流出。
English: The doctor dug a hole in the ground, put it in a bonfire, made Su Wu lie down on the fire pit, and hit his back with his hand to make the congestion flow out of the wound.

古文：武气绝半日，复息。
现代文：苏武昏死过去，很久才苏醒。
English: Su Wu passed out and did not wake up for a long time.

古文：惠等哭，舆归营。
现代文：常惠等人哭着把他抬回营帐。
English: Changhui and the others carried him crying back to the camp.

古文：单于壮其节，朝夕遣人候问武，而收系张胜。
现代文：单于非常佩服他的气节，派人早晚探问他的病情，并拘捕了张胜。
English: He was so impressed with his temperament that he sent someone to inquire about his condition sooner or later, and arrested Zhang Sheng.

古文：武益愈，单于使使晓武。会论虞常，欲因此时降武。
现代文：苏武的伤势逐渐好转，单于派使者劝他投降，又共同审判虞常，想藉此机会迫使苏武投降。
English: Su Wu's injury condition gradually improved, so the emperor sent an envoy to persuade him to surrender, and jointly tried Guo Chang, hoping to use this opportunity to force Su Wu to surrender.

古文：剑斩虞常已，律曰： 汉使张胜谋杀单于近臣，当死，单于募降者赦罪。 
现代文：用剑杀死虞常之后，卫律说： 汉朝使者张胜谋杀单于亲近的大臣，罪当处死，不过单于招募投降的人，赦免他的罪过。 
English: After killing Yu Chang with a sword, Wei Lu said: The Han Dynasty emissary Zhang Sheng murdered a close minister, and the crime should be put to death, but he only recruited those who surrendered and pardoned his sin.

古文：举剑欲击之，胜请降。
现代文：举剑要杀张胜，张胜请求投降。
English: He raised his sword to kill Zhang Sheng, and Zhang Sheng asked him to surrender.

古文：律谓武曰： 副有罪，当相坐。 
现代文：卫律又对苏武说： 副使有罪，你应当与他连坐。 
English: Wei Lu also said to Su Wu: The vice-envoy is guilty, you should sit with him.

古文：武曰： 本无谋，又非亲属，何谓相坐？ 
现代文：苏武说： 我本来没有参与密谋，又不是他的亲属，为什么要与他连坐？ 
English: Su Wu said: I did not participate in the conspiracy, and I am not his relative. Why should I sit with him?

古文：复举剑拟之，武不动。
现代文：卫律用剑比划着要刺苏武，苏武毫不动摇。
English: Wei Rui drew a sword to stab Su Wu, but Su Wu did not waver.

古文：律曰： 苏君，律前负汉归匈奴，幸蒙大恩，赐号称王，拥众数万，马畜弥山，富贵如此。
现代文：卫律说： 苏先生，我卫律从前背叛汉朝，归降匈奴，幸而承蒙单子恩德，赐给我王号，使我拥有部众数万，马畜满山，富贵如此。
English: Wei Lu said: Mr. Su, I, Wei Lu, once betrayed the Han Dynasty and surrendered to the Xiongnu. Fortunately, I received a single favor, and was given the title of king, so that I have tens of thousands of followers, a mountain full of horses and cattle, and I am rich and valuable.

古文：苏君今日降，明日复然。
现代文：您今日投降，明天也会这样。
English: You surrender today, you will surrender tomorrow.

古文：空以身膏草野，谁复知之！ 
现代文：否则被杀，白白葬身于荒野之中，有谁知道你为汉朝而死？ 
English: Otherwise, you will be killed and buried in the wilderness for nothing. Who knows if you died for the Han Dynasty?

古文：武不应。
现代文：苏武不予理睬。
English: Su Wu ignored it.

古文：律曰： 君因我降，与君为兄弟，今不听吾计，后虽欲复见我，尚可得乎？ 
现代文：卫律又说： 您藉助我而投降，我与您结为兄弟；今天不听我的话，以后再想见到我，还有可能吗？ 
English: Wei Lu also said, "You have surrendered with my help, and I have become your brother. If you don't listen to me today, will you still want to see me later?

古文：武骂律曰： 女为人臣子，不顾恩义，畔主背亲，为降虏于蛮夷，何以女为见？
现代文：苏武痛斥卫律说： 你作为汉朝臣民，不顾恩义廉耻，背叛皇帝和亲人，投降蛮夷，我见你干什么？
English: Su Wu excoriated Wei Lu and said, "You, as a Han dynasty subject, disregarded honor, betrayed the emperor and your relatives, and surrendered to the barbarians. What do I see in you?

古文：且单于信女，使决人死生，不平心持正，反欲斗两主，观祸败。
现代文：况且单于信任你，让你裁决人的生死，你却不出于公心，主持平正，反而要使两国之主相互争斗以坐观双方混战所造成的祸乱。
English: Moreover, because they trusted in you alone, to judge the living and the dead, you have not executed justice and righteousness, but have set governors of the two lands at loggerheads, to see what mischief they can do.

古文：南越杀汉使者，屠为九郡；宛王杀汉使者，头县北阙；朝鲜杀汉使者，即时诛灭。
现代文：南越杀汉使者，被夷平成为汉朝的九个郡；大宛王杀汉使者，他的头颅已被悬于汉宫之北阙；朝鲜杀汉使者，立即遭到减顶之灾。
English: South Vietnam's "Kill Han Envoy" was razed to the ground and became the nine counties of the Han Dynasty; King Dawan's "Kill Han Envoy" had his head hung on the north gable of the Han Palace; North Korea's "Kill Han Envoy" was immediately toppled.

古文：独匈奴未耳。
现代文：惟独匈奴未发生这种事。
English: But this did not happen to the Huns.

古文：若知我不降明，欲令两国相攻，匈奴之祸从我始矣。 
现代文：你明知我不投降，如果想让两国相攻伐，匈奴的祸败将从杀我开始。 
English: You know very well that I will not surrender. If you want the two countries to attack each other, the Hun's calamity will begin with killing me.

古文：律知武终不可胁，白单于。
现代文：卫律知道最终不能威胁苏武投降，就把情况汇报给单于。
English: Wei Lu knew that he could not threaten Su Wu to surrender, so he reported the situation to Shan Yu.

古文：单于愈益欲降之，乃幽武置大窖中，绝不饮食。
现代文：单于越发想使苏武投降，便把他囚禁在大窖襄，断绝向他供应饮食。
English: He only wanted to make Su Wu surrender more and more, so he imprisoned him in a large cellar and cut off the supply of food to him.

古文：天雨雪，武卧啮雪与旃毛并咽之，数日不死。
现代文：天降大雪，苏武就卧在地上，吞食雪团与毡毛，得以好多没饿死。
English: Heavy snow fell, and Suwu lay on the ground, devouring snowballs and bristles, so that he did not starve to death.

古文：匈奴以为神，乃徙武北海上无人处，使牧羝，羝乳乃得归。别其官属常惠等，各置他所。
现代文：匈奴以为他是神人，就把他迁徙到北海没有人烟的地方，让他放牧公羊，直到公羊产乳生仔，才允许他回来，并把他与属吏常惠等分开，分别安置在不同的地方。
English: The Xiongnu thought he was a god, so they moved him to an uninhabited part of the North Sea, let him herd rams, and did not allow him to return until the rams had given birth, and separated him from his subordinate officials Chang Hui and others and placed them in different places.

古文：武既至海上，廪食不至，掘野鼠去草实而食之。
现代文：苏武被流放到北海以后，匈奴不供给他粮食，他只好挖掘野鼠所贮藏的草籽充饥。
English: After Su Wu was exiled to the North Sea, the Xiongnu did not provide him with food, so he had to dig up the grass seeds stored by the field mice to satisfy his hunger.

古文：杖汉节牧羊，卧起操持，节旄尽落。
现代文：拄着汉朝节牧羊，时时刻刻把汉朝节带在身边，以致节上的旄都脱落了。
English: Shepherds carry the Han Dynasty Festival with them and carry it with them all the time. As a result, the bumps on the festival have fallen off.

古文：积五、六年，单于弟於靬王弋射海上。武能网纺缴，檠弓弩，於靬王爱之，给其衣食。
现代文：过了五六年，单于的弟弟于轩王下海打猎，因苏武会制做猎网和箭缴，校正弓弩，于轩王很喜欢他，送给他衣服和食物。
English: After five or six years, Shan Yu's younger brother, Yu Xuan Wang, went to the sea to hunt. Because of the Suwu association system, he made hunting nets and arrows, and adjusted the bow and arrow. Yu Xuan Wang liked him very much and gave him clothes and food.

古文：三岁余，王病，赐武马畜、服匿、穹庐。
现代文：又过了三年多，于轩王病了，就赠送苏武牲畜、酒酪器皿和毡帐。
English: More than three years later, when King Yuxuan fell ill, he gave Suwu livestock, wine and cheese utensils, and money.

古文：王死后，人众徙去。
现代文：于轩王死后，他的部众也都走了。
English: After the death of King Xuan, his subordinates also left.

古文：其冬，丁令盗武牛羊，武复穷厄。
现代文：这年冬天，丁令人偷走了苏武的牛羊，苏武再一次陷入了困境。
English: This winter, Ding Rui stole Suwu's cattle and sheep, and Suwu was once again in trouble.

古文：初，武与李陵俱为侍中，武使匈奴明年，陵降，不敢求武。
现代文：起初，苏武与李陵同在汉朝任侍中，苏武出使匈奴的第二年，李陵投降匈奴，不敢求见苏武。
English: At first, Su Wu and Li Ling served as attendants together in the Han Dynasty. In the second year after Su Wu sent an envoy to the Xiongnu, Li Ling surrendered to the Xiongnu and did not dare to ask to see Su Wu.

古文：久之，单于使陵至海上，为武置酒设乐，因谓武曰： 单于闻陵与子卿素厚，故使陵来说足下，虚心欲相待。
现代文：过了很长时间，单于派李陵下海，为苏武置办酒宴，陈设乐舞，趁机对苏武说： 单于听说我与您平素交往很深，因此派我来劝您，单于将诚心待您。
English: After a long time, he sent Li Ling to go to sea, held a banquet for Su Wuqi, set up music and dance, and took the opportunity to say to Su Wu: I just heard that I have a deep relationship with you, so I sent me to persuade you, and I will sincerely treat you.

古文：终不得归汉，空自苦亡人之地，信义安所见乎？
现代文：终究不能回到汉朝，白白地在这无人之地自找苦吃，谁能看见您的信义之心呢？
English: After all, you can't go back to the Han Dynasty, and you're seeking hardship in this no man's land in vain. Who can see your heart of loyalty?

古文：前长君为奉车，从至雍棫阳宫，扶辇下除，触柱折辕，劾大不敬，伏剑自刎，赐钱二百万以葬。
现代文：从前您的哥哥苏嘉任奉车都尉，随皇帝到雍城械阳宫，扶辇下殿阶，辇撞到柱子上，折断了辕，以大不敬罪受到弹劾，拔剑自杀，皇帝赐给了二百万钱的安葬费。
English: Once upon a time, your brother, Su Jia, was a lieutenant in the imperial carriage. He accompanied the emperor to the Yongcheng Palace of Heaven and Earth. He climbed the steps of the palace with his shovel. The shovel hit a pillar, broke the shovel, was impeached for the crime of great disrespect, drew his sword and committed suicide. The emperor gave him two million yuan for funeral expenses.

古文：孺卿从祠河东后土，宦骑与黄门驸马争船，推堕驸马河中溺死，宦骑亡，诏使孺卿逐捕不得，惶恐饮药而死。
现代文：你的弟弟苏贤随从皇帝去河东郡祭祀上神，宦骑与黄门驸马争船，驸马被推入河中淹死，宦骑逃跑，皇帝命令苏贤追捕宦骑，没能捉住，苏贤忧虑害怕，饮药自杀。
English: Your younger brother Su Xian followed the emperor to Hedong County to offer sacrifices to the gods. The rider and the horse fought for the boat. The horse was pushed into the river and drowned. The rider fled. The emperor ordered Su Xian to chase the rider. He couldn't catch him. Worried and afraid, Su Xian drank medicine and committed suicide.

古文：来时，大夫人已不幸，陵送葬至阳陵。
现代文：我领兵离长安时，您的母亲不幸去世，我送葬到阳陵。
English: When I was leading the troops out of Chang'an, your mother unfortunately passed away, and I sent her to Yangling for burial.

古文：子卿妇年少，闻已更嫁矣。
现代文：您的妻子年轻，听说已改嫁了。
English: Your wife is young and I hear she's remarried.

古文：独有女弟二人，两女一男，今复十余年，存亡不可知。
现代文：衹剩下两个妹妹、两个女儿和一个儿子，现在已过去十多年，不知是死是活。
English: The remaining two sisters, two daughters and one son, now more than ten years have passed, do not know whether they are dead or alive.

古文：人生如朝露，何久自苦如此！
现代文：人生如同早上的露珠一样短促，何必长时间地折磨自己！
English: Life is as short as the morning dew, why torture yourself for a long time!

古文：陵始降时，忽忽如狂，自痛负汉，加以老母系保宫，子卿不欲降，何以过陵？
现代文：我开始投降时，心神恍惚，如疯若狂，为自己背叛汉朝而痛心，加上老母亲被囚禁在保宫，您不想投降的心情怎么会超过我呢？
English: When I began to surrender, my mind was in a trance, like a madman, grieving for my betrayal of the Han Dynasty, plus my old mother was imprisoned in Baoguang, how could you not want to surrender?

古文：且陛下春秋高，法令亡常，大臣亡罪夷灭者数十家，安危不可知，子卿尚复谁为乎？
现代文：况且皇帝年老，法令没有常规，大臣无罪而被诛减的有数十家，安危难以预料，您还为谁守节呢？
English: Moreover, the emperor is old, there is no standard for decrees, there are dozens of ministers who have been acquitted and reduced, and it is difficult to predict their safety. Who do you keep the festival for?

古文：愿听陵计，勿复有云。 
现代文：希望听从我的计策，什么也别说了。 
English: I hope you will follow my advice and not say anything.

古文：武曰： 武父子亡功德，皆为陛下所成就，位列将，爵通侯，兄弟亲近，常愿肝脑涂地。
现代文：苏武说： 我们父子无功无德，都是由于皇帝的提拔，才位列将军，爵至通侯，兄弟三人都为皇帝近臣，常愿为此肝脑涂地。
English: Su Wu said, "Our father and son have no merit or virtue. It was only because of the emperor's promotion that they were promoted to the ranks of general, peer, and vassal. The three brothers are all close vassals of the emperor, and they are willing to work hard for this.

古文：今得杀身自效，虽蒙斧钺汤镬，诚甘乐之。
现代文：现在如果能牺牲自己，报效国家，即使蒙受斧钹之诛、汤镬之刑，也甘心情愿。
English: Now, if I can sacrifice myself and serve the country, even if I suffer the punishment of the axe, I am willing to do so.

古文：臣事君，犹子事父也。子为父死亡所恨。
现代文：大臣侍奉君主，如同儿子侍奉父亲，儿子为父亲而死，毫无怨恨。
English: A minister serves his sovereign as a son serves his father, and a son dies for his father without resentment.

古文：愿勿复再言。 
现代文：希望您不要再说了。 
English: I hope you won't say any more.

古文：陵与武饮数日，复曰： 子卿壹听陵言。 
现代文：李陵与苏武宴饮了几天之后，又劝苏武： 您一定要听我的话。 
English: After several days of banqueting with Su Wu, Li Ling advised Su Wu: You must listen to me.

古文：武曰： 自分已死久矣！ 王必欲降武，请毕今日之欢，效死于前！ 
现代文：苏武说： 我早已心甘情愿去死，您一定要使我投降，就请结束今天的欢宴，让我死在您面前！ 
English: Su Wu said, "I have been willing to die for a long time, you must make me surrender, so please end today's feast and let me die in front of you!"

古文：陵见其至诚，喟然叹曰： 嗟乎，义士！
现代文：李陵见他对汉朝如此忠诚，长叹一声，说： 唉，真是义士！
English: Li Ling saw that he was so loyal to the Han Dynasty, sighed and said: Alas, what a righteous man!

古文：陵与卫律之罪上通于天。 
现代文：我和卫律的罪过，比天还高啊！ 
English: My sins and those of the code of conduct are higher than the heavens!

古文：因泣下沾衿，与武决去。
现代文：随之泪如雨下，沾湿了衣襟，与苏武告别离去。
English: With that, tears fell like rain, his clothes got wet, and he bade farewell to Su Wu.

古文：陵恶自赐武，使其妻赐武牛羊数十头。
现代文：李陵羞于亲自赠送苏武财物，就派他的妻子给苏武送去几只牛羊。
English: Li Ling was ashamed to give Su Wu's property in person, so he sent his wife to give Su Wu a few cattle and sheep.

古文：后陵复至北海上，语武： 区脱捕得云中生口，言太守以下吏民皆白服，曰上崩。 
现代文：后来，李陵又到北海，告诉苏武： 匈奴边塞哨所活捉云中汉人，说上自太守下至百姓都穿白色丧服，并说皇帝死了。 
English: Later, Li Ling went to the North Sea again and told Su Wu: The Hun frontier post captured the Han people in Yunzhong alive, saying that everyone from the empress dowager to the common people wore white mourning clothes, and said that the emperor was dead.

古文：武闻之，南乡号哭，欧血，旦夕临数月。
现代文：苏武听到这个消息，面对南方痛哭，以致吐血，每天早晚哭吊武帝。几个月后，昭帝即位。
English: Upon hearing this news, Su Wu cried bitterly in the face of the south, to the point of vomiting blood, and cried every morning and evening to hang Emperor Wu. A few months later, Emperor Zhao ascended to the throne.

古文：昭帝即位数年，匈奴与汉和亲。
现代文：过了几年，匈奴与汉朝和好。
English: A few years later, the Huns made peace with the Han Dynasty.

古文：汉求武等，匈奴诡言武死。
现代文：汉朝寻求苏武等人，匈奴诈说苏武死了。
English: The Han Dynasty sought out Su Wu and others, while the Huns falsely claimed that Su Wu was dead.

古文：后汉使复至匈奴，常惠请其守者与俱，得夜见汉使。具自陈过。教使者谓单于，言天子射上林中，得雁，足有系帛书，言武等在荒泽中。
现代文：后来漠使者又到匈奴，常惠请求看守他的人和他一起晚上去见漠使者，详细叙述了事情的经过，又教汉使者对单于说，汉朝皇帝在上林苑打猎，射下一只雁，脚上系着一封帛书，说苏武在某个大泽中。
English: Later, the desert emissary went to the Xiongnu again. Chang Hui asked his guards to go with him to see the desert emissary in the evening, described the events in detail, and taught the Han emissary to say to Shan Yu that the Han emperor was hunting in Shanglinyuan, shot down a goose, and had a letter tied to his foot, saying that Su Wu was in a certain Osawa.

古文：使者大喜，如惠语以让单于。
现代文：汉使者非常高兴，就按常惠所说的责问单于。
English: The Chinese envoy was very pleased and complied with Chang Hui's request.

古文：单于视左右而惊，谢汉使曰： 武等实在。 
现代文：单于左顾右盼，暗暗吃惊，只好向汉使者道歉说： 苏武确实活着。 
English: Looking around, he was taken aback and had to apologize to the Chinese envoy, saying: Su Wu is indeed alive.

古文：于是李陵置酒贺武曰： 今足下还归，扬名于匈奴，功显于汉室，虽古竹帛所载，丹青所画，何以过子卿！
现代文：这时，李陵摆设酒宴庆贺苏武，说： 您今天回去，美名传颂于匈奴，功勋显扬于汉朝，即使古代史书所载，图画所描绘的，有谁能胜过您！
English: At this time, Li Ling set up a wine banquet to celebrate Su Wu and said: You go back today, your reputation is extolled by the Xiongnu, your merits are prominent in the Han Dynasty, even if it is contained in ancient history books and depicted in pictures, who can beat you!

古文：陵虽驽怯，令汉且贳陵罪，全其老母，使得奋大辱之积志，庶几乎曹柯之盟，此陵宿昔之所不忘也。
现代文：我李陵虽无能怯懦，假使汉朝暂且宽赦我的罪过，保全我的老母，使我能施展由于投降匈奴之耻辱而积蓄已久的志愿，或许能像曹沫那样寻找机会立功赎罪，这是我从前念念不忘的。
English: Although I, Li Ling, am incapable of cowardice, if the Han Dynasty were to temporarily forgive my sins and preserve my mother, so that I could exercise my long-accumulated will due to the humiliation of surrendering to the Xiongnu, I might be able to find an opportunity to make merit and atone for my sins like Cao Mo. This is something I have never forgotten.

古文：收族陵家，为世大戮，陵尚复何顾乎？
现代文：皇帝逮捕族灭了我全家，这是世上最大的侮辱，我还有什么可留恋的？
English: The emperor arrested and killed my entire family. This is the greatest insult in the world. What else do I have to regret?

古文：已矣！
现代文：算了吧！
English: Forget it!

古文：令子卿知吾心耳。
现代文：我衹是让您知道我的心情罢了。
English: I'm just letting you know how I feel.

古文：异域之人，壹别长绝！
现代文：你我各处异国，这一分手将永无相见之曰了！ 
English: You and I are foreign everywhere, this breakup will never see each other again!

古文：陵起舞，歌曰： 径万里兮度沙幕，为君将兮奋匈奴。
现代文：李陵起身舞蹈，唱道： 驰骋万里啊横度沙漠，为皇帝领兵啊奋击匈奴。
English: Li Ling got up and danced, singing: "Ride thousands of miles across the desert, lead the army for the emperor, and fight against the Xiongnu."

古文：路穷绝兮矢刃摧，士众灭兮名已隤。老母已死，虽欲报恩将安归！ 
现代文：被困于狭谷啊矢尽刀折，士兵战死啊我名声扫地。老母已死，虽想报恩何处归！ 
English: Trapped in a narrow valley, my arrows are exhausted, my soldiers are dead, my reputation is ruined. My mother is dead, although I want to return the favor!

古文：陵泣下数行，因与武决。
现代文：李陵涕泪交流，与苏武诀别。
English: Li Ling exchanged tears and said goodbye to Su Wu.

古文：单于召会武官属，前以降及物故，凡随武还者九人。
现代文：单于召集苏武的属吏，除去已投降的和死去的，随苏武返回的总共九人。
English: In addition to summoning Su Wu's subordinate officers, a total of nine people returned with Su Wu, excluding those who had surrendered and died.

古文：武以始元六年春至京师。
现代文：苏武在昭帝始元六年春天回到都城长安。
English: Su Wu returned to the capital, Chang'an, in the spring of the sixth year of Emperor Zhao's reign.

古文：诏武奉一太守谒武帝园庙，拜为典属国，秩中二千石，赐钱二百万，公田二顷，宅一区。
现代文：昭帝命令他供奉牛、羊、豕到武帝陵墓，又授予他典属国之职，官阶为中二干石，并赏赐二百万钱，公田二顷，宅地一处。
English: Emperor Zhao ordered him to donate cattle, sheep and donkeys to Emperor Wu's mausoleum. He was also awarded the title of a vassal of the state, with the official rank of middle-ranking official, and was awarded two million yuan, two hectares of public land, and a house site.

古文：常惠、徐圣、赵终根皆拜为中郎，赐帛各二百匹。
现代文：常惠、徐圣、赵终根均被授予中郎之职，每人得赏赐绢帛二百匹。
English: Chang Hui, Xu Sheng, and Zhao Yangen were all awarded the position of middlemen, and each received a reward of 200 horses.

古文：其余六人老归家，赐钱人十万，复终身。
现代文：其余六人年老归家，每人得赏赐十万钱，免除终身徭役。
English: The remaining six people returned home in their old age, and were each awarded 100,000 yuan and exempted from life-long forced labor.

古文：常惠后至右将军，封列侯，自有传。
现代文：常惠后来官至右将军，封为列侯，在《汉书》中有他的传记。
English: Chang Hui was later promoted to General of the Right and given the title of Count. His biography can be found in the "Chinese Book."

古文：武留匈奴凡十九岁，始以强壮出，及还，须发尽白。
现代文：苏武在匈奴被扣留十九年，出使时年富力强，等到返回时，已须发全白了。
English: Su Wu was detained in Xiongnu for nineteen years. He was rich and strong when he was sent out, and by the time he returned, he had already lost all his hair.

古文：武来归明年，上官桀、子安与桑弘羊及燕王、盖主谋反。
现代文：苏武回来的第二年，上官桀的儿子上官安与桑弘羊及燕王、盖主谋反。
English: In the second year after Su Wu's return, Shangguan An, the son of Shangguan Yao, conspired with Kuang Hongyang, Yan Wang and Gai to rebel.

古文：武子男元与安有谋，坐死。
现代文：苏武的儿子苏元与上官安有密谋，犯罪被杀。
English: Su Wu's son, Su Yuan, conspired with Shangguan An and was killed for the crime.

古文：初，桀、安与大将军霍光争权，数疏光过失予燕王，令上书告之。
现代文：起初上官桀、上官安父子与大将军霍光争权，多次逐条记录霍光的过失，送给燕王，让燕王上书昭帝，告发霍光。
English: At the beginning, Shangguan Xuan, Shangguan An and his son competed for power with the great general Huo Guang. They repeatedly recorded Huo Guang's faults one by one and sent them to King Yan. They asked King Yan to write to Emperor Zhao and denounce Huo Guang.

古文：又言苏武使匈奴二十年不降，还乃为典属国，大将军长史无功劳，为搜粟都尉，光颛权自恣。
现代文：又扬言说苏武衹因出使匈奴二十年不投降，回来才授予典属国之职，霍光的长史杨敞没有功劳，却任搜粟都尉，霍光专权，肆意妄为。
English: He also threatened that because Su Wuxuan had not surrendered to the Xiongnu for twenty years, he returned only to grant him the post of vassal state. Huoguang's long-term governor, Yang Zhan, had no merit, but he was appointed as the captain of the poppy search. Huoguang had exclusive power and acted wantonly.

古文：及燕王等反诛，穷治党与，武素与桀、弘羊有旧，数为燕王所讼，子又在谋中，廷尉奏请逮捕武。
现代文：等到燕王等因谋反被杀，穷究与他们同谋的人。苏武平素与上官桀、桑弘羊有交情，燕王也曾就苏武为国立功之事多次向皇帝申诉过，苏武的儿子又参与谋反，因此廷尉上奏请求逮捕苏武。
English: When Yan Wang and others were killed for plotting a rebellion, the people who had conspired with them were investigated. Su Wu had been friends with Shangguan Zhai and Kuang Hongyang. Yan Wang had also repeatedly complained to the emperor about Su Wu's service to the state. Su Wu's son was also involved in plotting a rebellion, so the captain of the imperial court requested the arrest of Su Wu.

古文：霍光寝其奏，免武官。
现代文：霍光把这个奏章压下，衹免除了苏武的官职。
English: Huo Guang suppressed this report, and Zou dismissed Su Wu from his post.

古文：数年，昭帝崩，武以故二千石与计谋立宣帝，赐爵关内侯，食邑三百户。
现代文：几年以后，昭帝去世，苏武因曾以中二千石的身份参与朝臣迎立宣帝的计谋，被赐给关内侯的爵位和三百户的食邑。
English: A few years later, Emperor Zhao died, and Su Wu, who had participated in the courtier's scheme to usher in Emperor Xuan as a middle-ranking official with 2,000 koku, was given the title of Guanai Marquis and 300 households of food villages.

古文：久之，卫将军张安世荐武明习故事，奉使不辱命，先帝以为遗言。
现代文：过了很长时间，卫将军张安世推荐苏武熟悉过去的典章制度，奉命出使不辱使命，昭帝生前常常提到这些。
English: After a long time, Zhang Anshi, the general of the imperial guard, recommended that Su Wu familiarize himself with the award system of the past, and that he should not despise his mission, which Zhao Di often mentioned in his lifetime.

古文：宣帝即时召武待诏宦者署，数进见，复为右曹典属国。
现代文：宣帝立即征召苏武在宦者署听候命令，苏武多次进见宣帝，又任右曹典属国。
English: Emperor Xuanxuan immediately summoned Su Wu to wait for orders at the Imperial Palace. Su Wu visited Emperor Xuanxuan many times and was appointed as the right Cao Di of the vassal state.

古文：以武著节老臣，命朝朔望，号称祭酒，甚优宠之。
现代文：因为苏武是以有节操著名的老臣，宣帝命令他每逢初一、十五入朝，给予祭酒的尊号，非常优容、尊宠他。
English: Because Su Wu was a senior vassal famous for his self-restraint, Emperor Xuanzong ordered him to be given the honorary title of sacrificial wine every time he entered the imperial court on the first day or the fifteenth day of the first month. He was very handsome and well-respected.

古文：武所得赏赐，尽以施予昆弟故人，家不余财。
现代文：苏武所得赏赐的财物，全都赠送给兄弟和旧友，家里不蓄积财产。
English: All of Su Wu's rewards were given to his brothers and old friends, and there was no accumulation of wealth in the family.

古文：皇后父平恩侯、帝舅平昌侯、乐昌侯、车骑将军韩增、丞相魏相、御史大夫丙吉皆敬重武。
现代文：皇后的父亲平恩侯许伯、宣帝的舅舅子昌侯王无故和乐吕侯王武、车骑将军韩增、丞相魏相、御史大夫丙吉都很敬重苏武。
English: The queen's father, Ping En Hou Xu Bo, Emperor Xuan's uncles, Chang Hou Wang Muguo and Le Lü Hou Wang Wu, the cavalry general Han Zeng, the chancellor Wei Xiang, and the imperial historian Bingji all respected Su Wu.

古文：武年老，子前坐事死，上闵之，问左右： 武在匈奴久，岂有子乎？ 
现代文：苏武年事已高，儿子苏元又犯罪被杀，宣帝很可怜他，就询问左右大臣： 苏武在匈奴那么长时间，难道没有生子？ 
English: Su Wu was very old, his son Su Yuan had committed a crime and was killed. Emperor Xuan was very sorry for him, so he asked the left and right ministers: Su Wu had been in Xiongnu for such a long time, didn't he have a son?

古文：武因平恩侯自白： 前发匈奴时，胡妇适产一子通国，有声问来，愿因使者致金帛赎之。 
现代文：苏武通过平恩侯向宣帝陈述： 当初从匈奴动身回来时，我的匈奴族妻子正好生下一个儿子，叫苏通国，刚好有音信传来，希望能通过使者用财物把他赎回来。 
English: Su Wu made a statement to Emperor Xuan through Ping Enhou: When I returned from the Huns, my Hunnic wife had just given birth to a son, named Sutong Guo. Just then, a message came, hoping to redeem him with wealth through the emissary.

古文：上许焉。
现代文：宣帝同意了。
English: Emperor Xuan agreed.

古文：后通国随使者至，上以为郎。
现代文：后来苏通国随使者回来，宣帝任命他为郎。
English: Later, Sutongguo returned with the envoy, and Emperor Xuan appointed him as his son-in-law.

古文：又以武弟子为右曹。
现代文：又任用苏武的侄子为右曹。
English: He also appointed Su Wu's nephew Mao as U Cao.

古文：武年八十余，神爵二年病卒。
现代文：苏武终年八十多岁，于宣帝神爵二年病死。
English: Su Wu was in his eighties at the end of his life, and died of illness two years after Emperor Xuanzong.

古文：甘露三年，单于始入朝。
现代文：宣帝甘露三年，单于开始入塞朝拜汉朝皇帝。
English: In the third year of Emperor Xuan's reign, he began to enter Tibet to pay homage to the Han Dynasty emperor.

古文：上思股肱之美，乃图画其人于麒麟阁，法其形貌，署其官爵、姓名。唯霍光不名，曰大司马大将军博陆侯姓霍氏，次曰卫将军富平侯张安世，次曰车骑将军龙额侯韩增，次曰后将军营平侯赵充国，次曰丞相高平侯魏相，次曰丞相博阳侯丙吉，次曰御史大夫建平侯杜延年，次曰宗正阳城侯刘德，次曰少府梁丘贺，次曰太子太傅萧望之，次曰典属国苏武。
现代文：宣帝思念那些辅佐自己的大臣的美德，便令人把他们的形体相貌画在麒麟阁上，并注明他们各自的官职、爵位和姓名，衹有霍光不注名字，以示尊崇，称为大司马大将军博陆侯霍氏，以下依次为：卫将军富平侯张安世，车骑将军龙额侯韩增，后将军营平侯赵充国，丞相高平侯魏相，丞相博阳侯丙吉，御史大夫建平侯杜延年，宗正阳城侯刘德，少府梁丘贺，太子太傅董望之，典属国苏武。
English: Thinking of the virtues of those ministers who assisted him, Emperor Xuan made them draw their faces and figures on the Kirin Pavilion, and indicated their respective official positions, titles and names. In order to show their respect, Emperor Xuan did not record their names, but referred to them as the grand general of the Grand Master of the Grand Master of the Grand Master of the Grand Master of the Grand Master of the Grand Master of the Grand Master of the Grand Master of the Grand Master of the Grand Master of the Grand Master of the Grand Master of the Grand Master of the Grand Master of the Grand Master of the Grand Master of the Grand Master of the Grand Master of the Grand Master of the Grand Master of the Grand Master of the

古文：皆有功德，知名当世，是以表而扬之，明著中兴辅佐，列于方叔、召虎、仲山甫焉。
现代文：这些人都功勋卓著品德高尚，为当世人所熟知，因此画名臣图来表彰他们，明确说明他们是汉宣帝中兴的辅佐之臣，可与辅佐周宣王中兴的名臣方叔、召虎、仲山甫媲美。
English: These people are all well-known for their outstanding merits, high moral character, and are well-known to the contemporary world. Therefore, the famous vassals map is drawn to commend them, clearly stating that they are the auxiliary vassals of Han Xuan Emperor Zhongxing, comparable to the famous vassals Fang Xiu, Zhaogu, and Zhongshan Fu who assisted Zhou Xuan Wang Zhongxing.

古文：凡十一人，皆有传。
现代文：共十一人，在《汉书》中各有传记。
English: A total of eleven people, each with a biography in the "Chinese Book."

古文：自丞相黄霸、廷尉于定国、大司农朱邑、京兆尹张敞、右扶风尹翁归及儒者夏侯胜等，皆以善终，著名宣帝之世，然不得列于名臣之图，以此知其选矣。
现代文：从丞相黄霸、廷尉于定国、大司农朱邑、京兆尹张敞、右扶风尹翁归到名儒夏侯胜等，都能善始善终，扬名于宣帝之时，却不能列于名臣图中，由此可知辅佐之臣的选择标准。
English: From the chancellor Huang Ba, the courtier Yu Dingguo, the grand secretary Nong Zhuyi, the general secretary Jing Zhaoying, the vice-premier Yin Zhangzhan, the right-hand man Yin Weng to the famous scholar Xia Hossheng, they all had a good beginning and a good end. They became famous at the time of Emperor Xuan, but they could not be listed in the famous vassals map, which shows the selection criteria for the vassals of the vice-premier.

古文：赞曰：李将军恂恂如鄙人，口不能出辞，及死之日，天下知与不知皆为流涕，彼其中心诚信于士大夫也。
现代文：赞曰：李将军诚实得好像粗鄙之人，口不善言辞，到死的那一天，天下人认识、不认识他的人都为之流泪，说明他对士大夫们是忠心诚信了。
English: Zang said: General Li was as honest as a vulgar person, and he was not good at words. Until the day he died, people all over the world, whether they knew him or not, shed tears for him, which showed that he was loyal and trustworthy to the scholars.

古文：谚曰： 桃李不言，下自成蹊。 
现代文：谚语说： 桃树不招引人，但因为它有花和果实，人们在下边走来走去，不知不觉在下边走出了一条小路。 
English: The proverb says: The peach tree is not attractive, but because it has flowers and fruits, people walk around below, and unknowingly take a path below.

古文：此言虽小，可以喻大。
现代文：这虽然是说小事，也可以喻大。
English: Although this sentence is about a small thing, it can be used to illustrate a big thing.

古文：然三代之将，道家所忌，自广至陵，遂亡其宗，哀哉！
现代文：然而李家三代以后的将领，为道家所忌讳，从李广到李陵，宗亲遭诛灭，可悲呀！
English: However, the generals of the three generations after the Li family were tabooed by the Taoists. From Li Guang to Li Ling, the patriarchs were annihilated. How sad!

古文：孔子称 志士仁人，有杀身以成仁，无求生以害仁 ， 使于四方，不辱君命 ，苏武有之矣。
现代文：孔子说的 志士仁人，有杀身以成仁，无求生以害仁 ， 使于四方，不辱君命 ，这些做人的道德标准，在苏武身上都体现出来了。
English: Confucius said that a person with a benevolent spirit should kill himself to achieve benevolence, not live to harm benevolence, serve the four directions, and not disgrace the king's life. These moral standards of being human are reflected in Su Wu's body.

