古文：孔子谓南宫敬叔曰： 吾闻老聃博古知今，通礼乐之原，明道德之归，则吾师也。
现代文：孔子对南宫敬叔说： 我听说老子博古通今，通晓礼乐的起源，明白道德的归属，那么他就是我的老师，现在我要到他那里去。 
English: Confucius said to Uncle Nangong Jing: I have heard that Lao Zi Bogu is well versed in history, knows the origin of ceremonial music, and understands the attribution of morality, then he is my teacher, and now I want to go to him.

古文：今将往矣。 
现代文：南宫敬叔回答说： 我遵从您的意愿。 
English: Uncle Nangu replied, "I will follow your wishes."

古文：对曰： 谨受命。 遂言于鲁君曰： 臣受先臣之命云：孔子、圣人之后也，灭于宋。
现代文：于是南宫敬叔对鲁国国君说： 我接受父亲的嘱咐说： 孔子是圣人的后代，他的先祖在宋国消亡了。
English: Then Uncle Nangong Jing said to the King of Lu: I accept my father's instruction and say: Confucius is the descendant of a saint, his ancestors died out in Song.

古文：其祖弗父何，始有国而受厉公，及正考父，佐戴、武、宣，三命兹益恭。
现代文：他的祖先弗父何，最初拥有了宋国，后来给了弟弟厉公。到了正考父时，辅佐戴公、武公、宣公三个国君，三次任命，他一次比一次恭敬。
English: His ancestor, Fufu He, first owned Song Province, and later gave it to his brother, Liguo. When he was in the middle of his father's examination, he was appointed three times to assist Dai Gong, Wu Gong, and Xuan Gong, and he was more respectful each time.

古文：故其鼎铭曰： 一命而偻，再命而伛，三命而俯，循墙而走，亦莫余敢侮。
现代文：因此他家鼎上刻的铭文说： 第一次任命，他弯着腰；第二次任命，他弯着身子；第三次任命，他俯下身子。他靠着墙根走，也没有人敢欺侮他。
English: So the inscription on the top of his steeple says: At his first appointment, he bent over; at his second appointment, he bent over; at his third appointment, he bent over; he leaned against the wall, and no one dared to touch him.

古文：饘于是，粥于是，以糊其口。 
现代文：在这个鼎里煮稠粥，煮稀粥，用来糊口。 
English: In this ding, thick porridge and thin porridge are boiled and used for sustenance.

古文：其恭俭也若此。
现代文：他的恭敬节俭就到了这种地步。 
English: That was the extent of his respectful frugality.

古文：臧孙纥有言，圣人之后，若不当世，则必有明德而达者焉。
现代文：臧孙纥曾说过这样的话： 圣人的后代，如果不能执掌天下，那么必定有圣明的君主使他通达。
English: Sun Yat-sen once said: "If the descendants of a saint cannot rule the world, then there must be a saintly monarch to guide them."

古文：孔子少而好礼，其将在矣，属臣： 汝必师之。 
现代文：孔子从小就喜好礼仪，他大概就是这个人吧。 
English: Confucius was fond of etiquette from a young age, and he was probably just like this man.

古文：今孔子将适周，观先王之遗制，考礼乐之所极，斯大业也。
现代文：我父亲又嘱咐我说： 你一定要拜他为师。 现在孔子将要到周国去，观看先王遗留的制度，考察礼乐所达到的高度，这是大事业啊！
English: My father also instructed me, "You must worship him as your teacher." Now, Confucius is going to go to Zhou Province to see the system left behind by the former king and to examine the heights reached by ceremonial music. This is a great undertaking!

古文：君盍以乘资之？
现代文：您何不提供车子资助他呢？
English: Why don't you offer to finance his car?

古文：臣请与往。 
现代文：我请求和他一起去。 鲁君说： 好。 
English: I asked to go with him. Lu Jun said, "Okay."

古文：公曰： 诺。 
现代文：送给孔子一辆车，两匹马，派了一个人侍候他给他驾车。
English: He gave Confucius a car and two horses, and sent a servant to wait on him and drive him around.

古文：与孔子车一乘、马二匹，竖子侍御，敬叔与俱至周。问礼于老聃，访乐于苌弘，历郊社之所，考明堂之则，察庙朝之度。
现代文：南宫敬叔和孔子一起到了周国。孔子向老子询问礼，向苌弘询问乐，走遍了祭祀天地之所，考察明堂的规则，察看宗庙朝堂的制度。
English: Nangong Jingshu and Confucius went to Zhou together. Confucius asked Lao Zi about the ritual, and asked Gong Hong about the music. They walked all over the place of worship in heaven and earth, examined the rules of the Ming Hall, and examined the system of the ancestral temple hall.

古文：于是喟然曰： 吾乃今知周公之圣，与周之所以王也。 
现代文：于是感叹地说： 我现在才知道周公的圣明，以及周国称王天下的原因。 
English: Then he said with a sigh, "Only now do I know the sacred meaning of Zhou Gong and the reason why Zhou Gong is called the king of the world."

古文：及去周，老子送之，曰： 吾闻富贵者送人以财，仁者送人以言。
现代文：离开周国时，老子去送他，说： 我听说富贵者拿财物送人，仁者用言语送人。
English: When leaving Zhou, Lao Zi went to see him off, saying, "I have heard that the rich send people away with wealth, and the benevolent send people away with words.

古文：吾虽不能富贵，而窃仁者之号，请送子以言乎！
现代文：我虽然不能富贵，但私下用一下仁者的称号，请让我用言语送你吧！
English: Although I can not be rich, but privately use the title of a benevolent person, please let me send you with words!

古文：凡当今之士，聪明深察而近于死者，好讥议人者也；博辩闳达而危其身，好发人之恶者也。
现代文：凡是当今的士人，因聪明深察而危及生命的，都是喜欢讥讽议论别人的人；因知识广博喜好辩论而危及生命的，都是喜好揭发别人隐私的人。
English: All the statesmen of the present day, who endanger their lives by their wisdom and insight, are people who like to ridicule others; who endanger their lives by their knowledge and debate, are people who like to expose the privacy of others.

古文：无以有己为人子者，无以恶己为人臣者。 
现代文：作为人子不要只想着自己，作为人臣要尽职全身。 
English: As a son of man, don't just think about yourself. As a vassal, do your duty to the best of your ability.

古文：孔子曰： 敬奉教。 
现代文：孔子说： 我一定遵循您的教诲。 
English: Confucius said: I will surely follow your teachings.

古文：自周反鲁，道弥尊矣。
现代文：从周国返回鲁国，孔子的道更加受人尊崇了。
English: After returning from Zhou to Lu, the way of Confucius was even more revered.

古文：远方弟子之进，盖三千焉。
现代文：从远方来向他学习的，大约有三千人。
English: About three thousand people came from far and wide to be taught by him.

古文：孔子观乎明堂，覩四门墉有尧舜与桀纣之象，而各有善恶之状、兴废之诫焉；又有周公相成王，抱之负斧扆南面以朝诸侯之图焉。
现代文：孔子观看明堂，看到四门的墙上有尧舜桀纣的画像，画出了每个人善恶的容貌，并有关于国家兴亡告诫的话。还有周公辅佐成王，抱着成王背对着屏风面朝南接受诸侯朝见的画像。
English: Confucius looked at the Ming Hall and saw that there were pictures of dragonflies on the walls of the four doors, depicting the good and evil faces of each person, and there were words of warning about the rise and fall of the country. There was also a picture of Zhou Gongfu assisting King Cheng, holding King Cheng with his back to the screen and facing south to receive the princes.

古文：孔子徘徊而望之，谓从者曰： 此周公所以盛也。
现代文：孔子走来走去地观看着，对跟从他的人说： 这是周朝兴盛的原因啊。
English: Confucius walked around and watched, saying to his followers: This is the reason for the prosperity of the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：夫明镜所以察形，往古者所以知今；人主不务袭迹于其所以安存，而急急所以危亡，是犹未有以异于却走而欲求及前人也，岂不惑哉！ 
现代文：明亮的镜子可以照出形貌，古代的事情可以用来了解现在。君主不努力沿着在使国家安定的路上走，而忽视国家危亡的原因，这和倒着跑却想追赶上前面的人一样，难道不糊涂吗？ 
English: A bright mirror can reflect the shape, and ancient things can be used to understand the present. The monarch does not try to walk along the road of stabilizing the country, but ignores the cause of the country's peril. Isn't it the same as running backwards but trying to catch up with the person in front?

古文：孔子观周，遂入太祖后稷之庙，庙堂右阶之前，有金人焉。参缄其口，而铭其背曰： 古之慎言人也，戒之哉！
现代文：孔子在周国观览，进入周太祖后稷的庙内。庙堂右边台阶前有铜铸的人像，嘴被封了三层，还在像的背后刻着铭文： 这是古代说话谨慎的人。警戒啊！
English: Confucius was on a tour of Zhou and entered the temple of the Empress Dowager Cixi of Zhou. In front of the steps on the right side of the temple, there was a bronze statue. The mouth was sealed three times, and an inscription was engraved on the back of the statue: This is an ancient person who speaks cautiously. Be alert!

古文：无多言，多言多败；无多事，多事多患。
现代文：不要多言，多言多败；不要多事，多事多患。
English: Don't talk too much, talk too much and fail; don't do too many things, do too many things and fail.

古文：安乐必戒，无所行悔。
现代文：安乐时一定要警戒，不要做后悔的事。
English: When relaxing, you must be alert and not do anything you will regret.

古文：勿谓何伤，其祸将长；勿谓何害，其祸将大；勿谓不闻，神将伺人。
现代文：不要以为话多不会有什么伤害，祸患是长远的；不要以为话多没什么害处，祸患将是很大的；不要认为别人听不到，神在监视着你。
English: Don't think that talking too much won't do any harm, the harm is long-term; don't think that talking too much won't do any harm, the harm will be great; don't think that others can't hear, God is watching you.

古文：焰焰不灭，炎炎若何；涓涓不壅，终为江河；绵绵不绝，或成网罗，毫末不札，将寻斧柯。
现代文：初起的火苗不扑灭，变成熊熊大火怎么办？涓涓细流不堵塞，终将汇集为江河；长长的线不弄断，将有可能结成网；细小的枝条不剪掉，将来就要用斧砍。
English: If you don't put out the initial flames, how will it turn into a raging fire? If you don't block the trickle, it will eventually converge into a river; if you don't break the long lines, it will be possible to form a net; if you don't cut the small branches, you will have to chop them with an axe in the future.

古文：诚能慎之，福之根也。
现代文：如能谨慎，是福的根源。
English: Prudence is the root of happiness.

古文：口是何伤，祸之门也。
现代文：口能造成什么伤害？是祸的大门。
English: What harm can the mouth do? It is the gate of evil.

古文：强梁者不得其死，好胜者必遇其敌。
现代文：强横的人不得好死，争强好胜的人必定会遇到对手。
English: He who is violent dies a violent death, but he who fights and conquers is sure to meet his match.

古文：盗憎主人，民怨其上。
现代文：盗贼憎恨物主，民众怨恨长官。
English: Thieves hate their owners, and the people hate their rulers.

古文：君子知天下之不可上也，故下之；知众人之不可先也，故后之。
现代文：君子知道天下的事不可事事争上，所以宁愿居下；知道不可居于众人之先，所以宁愿在后。
English: A gentleman knows that he cannot be at the top of the world, so he prefers to be at the bottom; he knows that he cannot be ahead of everyone, so he prefers to be behind.

古文：温恭慎德，使人慕之；执雌持下，人莫逾之；人皆趋彼，我独守此；人皆或之，我独不徙；内藏我智，不示人技；我虽尊高，人弗我害；谁能于此？
现代文：温和谦恭谨慎修德，会使人仰慕；守住柔弱保持卑下，没人能够超越。人人都奔向那里，我独自守在这里；人人都在变动，我独自不移。智慧藏在心里，不向别人炫耀技艺；我虽然尊贵高尚，人们也不会害我。有谁能做到这样呢？
English: To be gentle, humble, and prudent in cultivating virtue, is admirable; to be meek, and humble, is unsurpassed. Everyone rushes there, I alone stay here; everyone is changing, I alone do not change. Wisdom is hidden in the heart, and I do not show off my skills to others. Although I am noble and noble, people will not harm me. Who can do this?

古文：江海虽左，长于百川，以其卑也；天道无亲，而能下人。
现代文：江海虽然处于下游，却能容纳百川，因为它地势低下。上天不会亲近人，却能使人处在它的下面。
English: Although the Jianghai River is downstream, it can accommodate the Baichuan River, because it is low-lying. The heaven will not be close to people, but people can be placed under it.

古文：戒之哉！ 
现代文：要以此为戒啊！ 
English: Take this as a warning!

古文：孔子既读斯文也，顾谓弟子曰： 小人识之！
现代文：孔子读完这篇铭文，回头对弟子说： 你们要记住啊！
English: After reading this inscription, Confucius turned to his disciples and said, "You must remember!

古文：此言实而中，情而信。
现代文：这些话实在而中肯，合情而可信。
English: These words are true and pertinent, reasonable and credible.

古文：《诗》云： 战战兢兢，如临深渊，如履薄冰。 
现代文：《诗经》说： 战战兢兢，如临深渊，如履薄冰。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: "Walk with fear and trembling, as if approaching the abyss, as if walking on thin ice."

古文：行身如此，岂以口过患哉！ 
现代文：立身行事能够这样，哪还能因言语惹祸呢？ 
English: How can you act like this, and how can you get into trouble for your words?

古文：孔子见老聃而问焉，曰： 甚矣！
现代文：孔子见到老子，向他请教说： 太难了啊！
English: When Confucius saw Lao Tzu, he asked him for advice and said, "It's too difficult!

古文：道之于今难行也，吾比执道，而今委质以求当世之君，而弗受也。
现代文：道在今天太难推行了。我近来推行道，而今行大礼请求当政的君主能够采纳，但他们不接受。
English: The way is too difficult to implement today. I have recently implemented the way, and now I make a big gift to ask the reigning monarch to adopt it, but they do not accept it.

古文：道于今难行也！ 
现代文：道在今天太难推行了。 
English: The Tao is too difficult to practice today.

古文：老子曰： 夫说者流于辩，听者乱于辞，知此二者，则道不可以忘也。 
现代文：老子说： 游说的人言辞过于华丽，听的人就会受到扰乱。知道了这两点，道就不会被忘记了。 
English: Lao Tzu said, "If the lobbyist's words are too flashy, the listener will be disturbed. If you know these two points, the Tao will not be forgotten."

