古文：异木
现代文：异木
English: Unusual wood

古文：主一州树偃桑不昼木蚊子树圣鼓枝鹿木倒生木黝木桄榔树
现代文：主一州树偃桑不昼木蚊子树圣鼓枝鹿木倒生木黝木桄榔树
English: Main one canton Tree fern Mulberry not day tree Mosquito tree Sacred drum Branch Deer tree Fallen tree Birch tree Eucalyptus

古文：怪松枫人枫鬼枫生人灵枫破木有肉江中枫材河伯下材斗蚊船木
现代文：怪松枫人枫鬼枫生人灵枫破木有肉江中枫材河伯下材斗蚊船木
English: Weird pine, maple, human, maple, ghost, maple, living, living, living, living, living, living, living, living, living, living, living, living, living, living, living, living, living, living, living, living, living, living, living, living

古文：交让木千岁松汗杖化蝶树涪水材端正树崇贤里槐三枝槐瘿槐
现代文：交让木千岁松汗杖化蝶树涪水材端正树崇贤里槐三枝槐瘿槐
English: Concession tree, thousand-year-old pine, sweat cane, butterfly tree, water tree, water tree, upright tree, lofty tree, three-branched tree

古文：荆根枕五重桑蜻蜓树无患木醋心树登第皂荚辨白檀树
现代文：荆根枕五重桑蜻蜓树无患木醋心树登第皂荚辨白檀树
English: Five-layered mulberry tree, evergreen tree, vinegar heart tree, white sandalwood tree

古文：藟蔓藤实杯钟藤人子藤蜜草蔓胡蔓草野狐丝异木
现代文：藟蔓藤实杯钟藤人子藤蜜草蔓胡蔓草野狐丝异木
English: creeping vines, vines, vines, vines, vines, vines, vines, vines, vines

古文：主一州树东方荒外。有豫章焉。
现代文：主一州树东方荒野之外，有一棵豫章树。
English: The main Yizhou tree Outside the eastern wilderness, there is a Yuzhang tree.

古文：此树主一州。
现代文：这棵树主一州的吉凶祸福。
English: This tree is responsible for a state's good fortune.

古文：其高千丈，围百丈。
现代文：树高一千多丈，树围一百多丈。
English: The tree is more than a thousand high, and its circumference is more than a hundred high.

古文：本上三百丈，始有枝条，敷张如帐。
现代文：树干往上三百多丈的地方才开始有枝条。枝条四下敷张像幔帐一样。
English: It is only when the trunk reaches a height of more than three hundred metres that it begins to have branches. The branches spread out in four directions like a curtain.

古文：上有玄狐黑猿。
现代文：树上有黑色的狐狸和猿猴。
English: There are black foxes and monkeys in the trees.

古文：树主一州，南北并列，面向西南。
现代文：树主一州的吉凶祸福，南北并列，面向西南。
English: The auspicious, inauspicious, and fortuitous signs of the tree's owner are in one state, parallel to the north and south, facing the southwest.

古文：有九力士，操斧伐之，以占九州吉凶。
现代文：曾有九个大力士，拿着斧子来砍伐它，用这种办法来占卜九个州的吉凶。
English: It was once felled with an axe by nine Herculeses, who used it to tell the fortunes of the nine states.

古文：斫复，其州有福；创者州伯有病；积岁不复者，其州灭亡。
现代文：砍完又平复的，这个州就有福；使树受到创伤的，这个州的首领就会生病；砍完之后好长时间也不平复的，这个州的首领就会死亡。
English: If the tree is cut down and does not recover, the state will be blessed; if the tree is injured, the head of the state will fall ill; if the tree is cut down and does not recover for a long time, the head of the state will die.

古文：偃桑
现代文：偃桑
English: Bamboo mulberry

古文：东方有树焉，高八十丈。
现代文：东方有一棵大树，高八十丈。
English: There is a big tree in the east, eighty meters high.

古文：敷张自辅。
现代文：树枝全都张开，自相辅助。
English: The branches are all splayed out, self-supporting.

古文：其叶长一丈，广六七尺。
现代文：树叶长一丈，宽六七尺。
English: The leaves grow to a height and a width of sixty-seven feet.

古文：名曰桑。
现代文：树名叫桑。
English: The tree is called the mulberry.

古文：其上自有蚕，作茧长三尺。
现代文：树上自然生长着蚕。此蚕作出来的茧，长三尺。
English: Silkworms naturally grow on the tree, and the cocoon they make is three feet long.

古文：缲一茧，得丝一斤。
现代文：只缲一个茧，就可以缲出一斤丝来。
English: With just one spindle, you can spin a kilo of silk.

古文：有椹焉，长三尺五寸，围如长。
现代文：还结有桑椹，长三尺五寸，围长也是三尺五寸。
English: There is also a mulberry knot, three feet and five inches long, with a circumference of three feet and five inches.

古文：不昼木
现代文：不昼木
English: Noon Tree

古文：荒外有火山，其中生不昼之木，昼夜火燃，得曝风不猛，猛雨不灭。
现代文：很远的地方有一座火山，山中生长着一种不分白天黑夜的树木，白天黑夜都在燃烧，受到日晒和风吹火势也不变得猛烈，受到大雨的浇泼火也不灭。
English: Far away, there is a volcano. In the mountain, there is a kind of tree that grows day and night. It burns day and night. The fire does not become violent when exposed to the sun and wind, and the fire does not extinguish when doused with heavy rain.

古文：蚊子树
现代文：蚊子树
English: Mosquito trees

古文：有树如冬青，实生枝间，形如枇杷子。
现代文：有一种树很像冬青，果实生在树枝之间，外形像枇杷子。
English: There is a kind of tree that looks a lot like holly. The fruit grows between the branches and is shaped like a hazelnut.

古文：每熟即坼裂，蚊子群飞，唯皮壳而已。
现代文：果实每到成熟期就裂开，一群蚊子从中飞出，所谓果实只是个空壳罢了。
English: Each time the fruit ripens, it splits open and a swarm of mosquitoes flies out of it. The so-called fruit is just an empty shell.

古文：土人谓之蚊子树。
现代文：当地人叫它蚊子树。
English: Locals call it the mosquito tree.

古文：圣鼓枝
现代文：圣鼓枝
English: St Drummer's Branch

古文：含洭县水口下东岸，有圣鼓，即杨山之鼓枝也，横在川侧。
现代文：含洭县水口下东岸，有一根圣鼓枝一一也就是杨山的鼓枝一一横卧在山川之侧。
English: On the lower east coast of Minakuchi, Handan County, there is a sacred drum branch - that is, the drum branch of Yangshan - lying on the side of the mountain river.

古文：冲波所激，未尝移动。
现代文：山洪的冲激，不曾使它移动过。
English: The force of the torrent did not move it.

古文：众鸟飞鸣，莫有萃者。
现代文：各种鸟在附近飞来飞去，鸣叫不已，但是没有往这圣鼓枝上群集的。
English: All kinds of birds were flying around and chirping, but none of them flocked to the branch of the sacred drum.

古文：般人误以篙触，以患疟。
现代文：撑船的误把船篙触到圣鼓枝上，就一定会患上疟疾。
English: If a boatman accidentally touches the stern of the boat to the branch of the sacred drum, he will surely suffer from malaria.

古文：鹿木
现代文：鹿木
English: Deerwood

古文：武陵郡北，有鹿木二株，马伏波所种。
现代文：武陵郡北面，有两棵鹿木，是伏波将军当年栽种的。
English: In the north of Wuling County, there are two deer trees that were planted by General Fubo.

古文：木多节。
现代文：这种树木身上多节。
English: These trees are knotty.

古文：倒生木
现代文：倒生木
English: Falling trees

古文：倒生木，此木依山生，根在上。
现代文：倒生木，依傍着山崖而生，根在上，头在下。
English: An uprooted tree, growing alongside a cliff, with its roots above and its head below.

古文：有人触则叶翕，人去则叶舒。
现代文：如果有人触到它，它的叶子就收拢；人离开之后，叶子又展开。
English: If someone touches it, its leaves curl up; after the person leaves, the leaves open again.

古文：出东海。
现代文：它出在东海。
English: It is found in the East China Sea.

古文：黝木
现代文：黝木
English: Maple trees

古文：黝木，节以盅兽，可以为鞭。
现代文：黝木，树节像毒虫猛兽，可以用来做鞭子。
English: birch, the knots of which resemble venomous beasts and can be used to make whips.

古文：桄榔树
现代文：桄榔树
English: Eucalyptus

古文：古南海县有桄榔树，峰头生叶，有面。
现代文：古代南海县有一种桄榔树，最顶上生叶。树叶上有面。
English: In ancient Nanhai County, there was a kind of eucalyptus tree with fresh leaves at the top. The leaves were flat.

古文：大者出面，乃至百斛。
现代文：一棵大一点的桄榔树，出的面可达一百斛。
English: A larger eucalyptus tree can produce up to a hundred stalks.

古文：以牛乳啖之，甚美。
现代文：这面和牛奶一起吃，特别好吃。
English: This side is especially delicious when eaten with milk.

古文：怪松
现代文：怪松
English: Kaimatsu

古文：南康有怪松。
现代文：南康有一棵很怪的松树。
English: There is a strange pine tree in Nankang.

古文：从前刺史，每令画工写松，必数枝衰悴。
现代文：从前，刺史每次让画工画这棵松，就一定有几个树枝衰败憔悴。
English: In the past, every time the artist asked the painter to paint this pine tree, there must be several branches decaying.

古文：后因一客与妓，环饮其下，经日松死。
现代文：后来因为一个客人和一名歌妓在树下环绕着它饮酒作乐，一日之后，这松树居然死了。
English: Then, a day later, the pine tree died because a guest and a singer were drinking and carousing around it under a tree.

古文：枫人
现代文：枫人
English: The Maple Man

古文：岭中诸山多枫树。
现代文：岭中各山中枫树很多。
English: There are a lot of maple trees in the mountains in the ridge.

古文：树老多有瘤瘿。
现代文：树老之后，很多都长有瘤子。
English: After the trees grow old, many of them develop warts.

古文：忽一夜遇暴雷骤雨，其树赘则暗长三数尺。
现代文：忽然有一天夜里，遇上一场暴雷骤雨，一棵枫树上的瘤子就暗长了好几尺。
English: Suddenly, one night, there was a lightning storm, and a mole on a maple tree grew several feet in the dark.

古文：南人谓之枫人。
现代文：南方人叫它 枫人 。
English: People in the south call it "maple people."

古文：越巫云，取之雕刻神鬼，异致灵验。
现代文：越地的女巫说，用这种枫树上的瘤子雕刻神鬼，特别灵验。
English: According to the witches in Yuezi, it is particularly effective to use the tubercles on this maple tree to carve gods and demons.

古文：枫鬼
现代文：枫鬼
English: Maple Ghost

古文：《临川记》云，抚州麻姑山，或有登者，望之，庐岳彭蠡，皆在其下。
现代文：《临川记》说，抚州的麻姑山，有攀登的人，往四外望去，庐、岳、彭蠡，都比不上它。
English: "Lingchuan Chronicle" said that Fuzhou's Magu Mountain, there are climbers, looking out to the four sides, Yao, Yue, Peng Yao, are not comparable to it.

古文：有黄连厚朴，恒山枫树。
现代文：山上有黄连、厚朴和恒山枫树。
English: There are Huanglian, Houpu and Hengshan maple trees on the mountain.

古文：数千年者，有人形，眼鼻口臂而无脚。
现代文：有棵活了几千年的老树，已经化成人形，眼、鼻、口、臂全有，但是没有脚。
English: An ancient tree, which has lived for thousands of years, has been transformed into a humanoid, complete with eyes, nose, mouth and arms, but no feet.

古文：入山者见之，或有砟之者，皆出血。
现代文：进山的人见到它，如果有人从它身上弄掉一小块儿，全都出血。
English: People who go into the mountains see it, and if someone takes a small piece off it, they all bleed.

古文：人皆以蓝冠于其头，明日看失蓝，为枫子鬼。
现代文：人们都把蓝草像戴帽子那样盖到它的头上，第二天去看就全都没了，是枫子鬼。
English: People put bluegrass on its head like a hat, and the next day it's all gone. It's a maple ghost.

古文：枫生人
现代文：枫生人
English: Feng Sheng Ren

古文：江东江西山中，多有枫木人，于枫树下生，似人形，长三四尺。
现代文：江东江西的山中，有许多枫木人，生长在枫树之下，像人形，高三四尺。
English: In the mountains of East Jiangsu and West Jiangsu, there are many maple people, growing under the maple trees, like dolls, three or four feet high.

古文：夜雷雨，即长与树齐，见人即缩依旧。
现代文：夜间有雷雨，它就长得和树一般高。见到人它就依旧缩回去。
English: If there is a thunderstorm at night, it grows as tall as a tree. It still shrinks back when it sees people.

古文：曾有人合笠于首，明日看，笠子挂在树头上。
现代文：曾经有人把竹笠扣到它的头上，第二天去看，竹笠居然挂到树头上去了。
English: Someone once put a bamboo hat on its head, and the next day I went to check and found that the bamboo hat had actually been hung on a tree.

古文：旱时欲雨，以竹束其头，禊之即雨。
现代文：旱天的时候想要下雨，用竹针扎它的头，然后举行求雨的仪式就下雨了。
English: When the weather is dry, if you want it to rain, stick a bamboo needle in its head, and then hold a rain-making ceremony, and it will rain.

古文：人取以为式盘，极神验。
现代文：人们把它从山上弄回来做成占卜用的盘子，极其灵验。
English: People bring it back from the mountains to make divination plates, which are extremely effective.

古文：枫木枣地是也。
现代文：枫树长在枣地上，就能出现这种情况。
English: If the maple tree grows on the jujube ground, this can happen.

古文：灵枫
现代文：灵枫
English: Ling Feng

古文：南中有枫子鬼，枫木之老者人形，亦呼为灵枫焉。
现代文：南中有 枫子鬼 ，树龄极大的老枫树可以化作人形，也称之为 灵枫 。
English: In the south, there is the Maple Ghost, an extremely old maple tree that can transform into a doll, also known as the Spirit Maple.

古文：破木有肉
现代文：破木有肉
English: Where there is wood there is fire

古文：有人破大木，木中有肉，可五斤，如熟猪肉。
现代文：有人破一根大木头，发现木头里边有肉，能有五斤重，像是熟猪肉。
English: Someone broke a large piece of wood and found that there was meat inside the wood, which could weigh five pounds, like cooked pork.

古文：江中枫材
现代文：江中枫材
English: Maple trees in Jiangzhong

古文：循海之间，每构屋，即命民踏木于江中，短长细大，唯所取。
现代文：循海之间，每有人盖房子，就让村民到江中踩寻木材，长短粗细，需要什么样的就找什么样的。
English: Between the sea, every time someone builds a house, let the villagers go to the river to find wood, long and short, thick and thin, and find what they need.

古文：率松材也。
现代文：大致都是松材。
English: It's mostly pine.

古文：彼俗常用，不知古之何人断截。
现代文：那里的百姓常用它。也不知古时候是谁采伐的。
English: The people there often use it, and it is not known who harvested it in ancient times.

古文：埋泥沙中，既不朽蠹，又多如是。事可异者。
现代文：埋在泥沙当中，既不朽烂，没有虫子叮咬，又有如此之多，这事可真够奇的。
English: Buried in the mud and sand, it's amazing how it hasn't rotted, how it hasn't been bitten, and how there are so many of them.

古文：河伯下材
现代文：河伯下材
English: Hebe lumber mill

古文：中宿县山下有神宇，溱水至此，沸腾鼓怒。
现代文：中宿县山下有供奉神像的房屋，溱水流到这里，波浪翻滚如怒。
English: There is a house dedicated to a statue of a deity at the foot of the mountain in Nakasukusa County. Surge water flows here, and the waves roll furiously.

古文：槎木泛至此沦没，竟无出者，世人以为河伯下材。
现代文：木筏泛到这里就沉没，再也不能露出水面，世人认为这是河神截下来的木材。
English: The raft sinks when it reaches this point, and can no longer rise to the surface of the water. The world believes that this is wood cut down by the river god.

古文：斗蛟船木
现代文：斗蛟船木
English: Dueling wooden boats

古文：樟木，江东人多取为船。
现代文：樟木，江东人大多用它做船。
English: Eucalyptus, the majority of people in eastern Jiangsu use it to make boats.

古文：船有与蛟龙斗者。
现代文：这种船有和蛟龙争斗的。
English: This kind of ship can fight with dragons.

古文：交让木武陵郡记，白雉山有木，名交让。众木敷荣后，方萌芽；亦更岁迭荣也。
现代文：交让木据武陵郡记载，白雉山上有一种树，名叫 交让 ，各种树木普遍茂盛之后，它才萌芽；并且每隔一年才繁荣一次呢。
English: According to the records of Wuling County, there is a kind of tree on Mount Paekdu, named "Jiaojang," which only sprouts after all kinds of trees are generally flourishing; and it only flourishes once every other year.

古文：千岁松
现代文：千岁松
English: Chitose Pine

古文：《玉策记》称，千岁松树，四边披越，上杪不长。望而视之，有如偃盖。其中有物，如青犬，或如人。皆寿万岁。
现代文：《玉策记》说，千岁之松，树皮破裂，凹凸不平，树梢长年不长，远远望去，树冠如偃仰的车盖，那里面有东西，像青色的狗，有的像人，凡是这样的，都有一万年的寿命了。
English: The "Diary of Jade" says that the thousand-year-old pine, the bark is cracked, uneven, the treetops are not long, far away, the canopy is like a car cover, there is something in there, like a blue dog, some like a person, all like this, have a life span of ten thousand years.

古文：汗杖
现代文：汗杖
English: Sweat cane

古文：东方朔西那汗国回。得声木十枚。
现代文：东方朔从西那汗国回来，带回来十根声木。
English: Dongfang Shuo returned from the Sina Khanate, bringing back ten sounding trees.

古文：帝以赐大臣。
现代文：皇上把这些声木赐给大臣。
English: The emperor gave these sounding boards to the minister.

古文：人有疾则杖汗，将死则折。
现代文：人有病，木杖就出汗；人将死，木杖就折断。
English: When a man is ill, his cane sweats; when he dies, his cane breaks.

古文：里语： 生年未半杖不汗。 
现代文：俚俗有这样的谚语： 生年未半杖不汗。 
English: There is a popular saying that goes like this: If you are young, don't sweat.

古文：化蝶树
现代文：化蝶树
English: Butterfly Tree

古文：长安城禁苑内一大树，冬月雪中，忽花叶茂盛。
现代文：长安城禁苑中有一棵大树，在冬天的风雪里，忽然间它就长出茂盛的花叶来。
English: There is a large tree in the Chang'an City Forbidden Garden. In the winter wind and snow, it suddenly sprouts lush flowers and leaves.

古文：及凋落结实，其子光明璨烂，如火之明焉。
现代文：等到花落结果，那些果都光灿灿的，像火一样光明。
English: When the blossoms have fallen and the fruit has ripened, the fruit is brilliant, as bright as fire.

古文：数日，皆化为红蛱蝶飞去。
现代文：几天之后，这些果子都变成蝴蝶飞去。
English: After a few days, the fruits turn into butterflies and fly away.

古文：至明年，唐高祖自唐国入长安。
现代文：到了第二年，唐高祖从唐国进入长安。
English: In the second year, Tang Gaozu entered Chang'an from Tang.

古文：此必前兆也。
现代文：这一定是前兆。
English: This must be an omen.

古文：涪水材
现代文：涪水材
English: Wastewater materials

古文：梓童郪县，唐大历七年，夏六月甲子，涪水泛溢，流木数千条。梁栋欀桷具备。
现代文：梓童郪县，唐大历七年夏天六月甲子日，涪水暴涨，冲下来几千根木头，大大小小做梁做柁的都有。
English: On the seventh day of the sixth month of the seventh year of the seventh month of the seventh year of the seventh month of the seventh year of the seventh month of the seventh year of the seventh month of the seventh year of the seventh month of the seventh year of the seventh month of the seventh year of the seventh year of the seventh month of the seventh year of the seventh month of the seventh year of the seventh year of the seventh year of the seventh year of the seventh year of the seventh year of the seventh year of the seventh year of the seventh year of the seventh year of the seventh year of the seventh year of the seventh year of the seventh year of the seventh year of the seventh year of the seventh year of the seventh year

古文：补内城屋，悉此木。
现代文：补修城内的房屋，全都用这些木材。
English: All the houses in the city are being repaired with this wood.

古文：乔林为之记。
现代文：乔林把这事记了下来。
English: Jolene wrote it down.

古文：端正树
现代文：端正树
English: Neat tree

古文：长安西端正树，去马嵬一舍之程，乃唐德宗皇帝幸奉天，睹其蔽芾，锡以美名。
现代文：长安之西的端正树，离马嵬坡三十里路程，是唐德宗皇帝驾临奉天，看到它葱茏茂盛才赐给它美名的。
English: The Duanzheng tree in the west of Chang'an, 30 miles away from Ma'anpo, was given its beautiful name by Emperor Tang Dezong when he came to Fengtian and saw it in full bloom.

古文：后有文士经过，题诗逆旅，不显姓名。
现代文：后来有一个文士从这里经过，在客栈里题了诗，没有署名。
English: Later, a scribe passed by and inscribed a poem in the inn, without a signature.

古文：诗曰： 昔日偏沾雨露荣，德皇西幸赐嘉名。
现代文：诗说： 昔日偏沾雨露荣，德皇西幸赐嘉名。
English: The poem says: In the past, it was rainy and rainy, and the German Emperor Xi gave it a good name.

古文：马嵬此去无多地，合向杨妃冢上生。 
现代文：马嵬此去无多地，合向杨妃冢上生。 
English: Ma Ying went to this place countless times and met Yang Fei Yao.

古文：风雅有如此焉。
现代文：竟是如此风雅！
English: It's so elegant!

古文：崇贤里槐
现代文：崇贤里槐
English: Sung Hyun Ri

古文：唐陈朴者，元和中，崇贤里此街大门外，有槐树，尝黄昏徙倚窥外。
现代文：唐元和年间，一个叫陈朴的人，从崇贤里北街大门外自己的家里，依着门往外看。
English: During the Tang and Yuan Dynasties, a man named Chen Puk looked out from his home outside the gate of Chongxianli North Street, leaning on the door.

古文：见若妇人及老狐异鸟之类，进入树中。
现代文：这正是黄昏时候，他看见一些好像妇人及老狐异鸟之类的东西，飞入一棵大槐树里。
English: It was just dusk when he saw something that looked like a woman and an old fox fly into a big birch tree.

古文：遂伐视之。
现代文：于是他就把大槐树砍倒，看到底是怎么回事。
English: So he cut down the elm tree to see what was going on.

古文：树凡三槎，并空中，一槎中有独头栗一百二十一枚，中襁一死儿，长尺余。
现代文：大槐树一共三个杈，中间都是空的，一个杈中装有独头栗子一百二十一个，中间用布包着一个死孩子，一尺多长。
English: The big birch tree has a total of three boughs, all of which are empty in the middle. One of the boughs contains a hundred and twenty-one single chestnuts, and in the middle there is a dead child wrapped in cloth, more than a foot long.

古文：三枝槐
现代文：三枝槐
English: Three sprigs of thistle

古文：唐相国李石，河中永乐有宅。
现代文：唐相国李石，在河中永乐有一所宅子。
English: Li Shih of Tang Dynasty had a house in Yongle, Hechu.

古文：庭槐一本，抽三枝，直过堂前屋脊，一枝不及。
现代文：庭中有一棵槐树，三个枝，其中有两枝直过堂前的屋脊，有一枝达不到。
English: In the garden there is an elm tree with three branches, two of which pass straight through the roof ridge in front of the hall, one branch does not reach it.

古文：相国同堂昆弟三人，曰石，曰而，皆登宰执；唯福一人，历七镇使相而已。
现代文：李石兄弟三人，他和一个叫李而的都登相位，而一个叫李福的只做过七镇使相而已。
English: Of the three Li Shi brothers, he and a brother named Li Yu have all held the position of the minister of foreign affairs, while a brother named Li Fu has only served as the minister of foreign affairs for seven towns.

古文：瘿槐
现代文：瘿槐
English: 

古文：华州三家店西北道边，有槐甚大，葱郁周回，可荫数亩。
现代文：华州三家店西北的道边上，有一棵槐树，特别高大，枝叶葱郁，环绕萦回，可以荫盖好几亩地。
English: On the roadside northwest of Huazhou Sanya Store, there is a camphor tree, especially tall, with lush branches and leaves, surrounded by reeds, which can shade several acres of land.

古文：槐有瘿，形如二猪，相趂奔走。
现代文：槐树上有瘤子，形状就像两头猪在互相追逐奔跑。
English: There is a lump on the elm tree, shaped like two pigs chasing each other.

古文：其回顾口耳头足，一如塑者。
现代文：反复地看那两头猪的口、耳、头、足，全都象用泥塑的。
English: Repeatedly looking at the mouths, ears, heads and feet of the two pigs, all of which seemed to be made of mud.

古文：荆根枕
现代文：荆根枕
English: Jingren pillow

古文：贾人张弘者，行至华岳庙前，忽昏懵，前进不可，系马于一金荆树而酣睡。
现代文：商人张弘，走到华岳庙前，忽然感到晕眩，不能继续前进，就把马拴到一棵金荆树上，自己就地酣睡。
English: When the merchant Zhang Hong walked to Huayue Temple, he suddenly felt dizzy and unable to continue, so he tied his horse to a golden wattle tree and fell asleep on the spot.

古文：马惊，拽出树根而去。
现代文：马好像受到惊吓，拽出树根来拖着就跑。
English: The horse appears to be spooked and pulls out the root of the tree, dragging it as it runs.

古文：寤，逐而及之。树根形如狮子，毛爪眼耳足尾，无不悉具。
现代文：张弘醒来，追上马，发现那树根形状很像一只狮子，毛、爪、眼、耳、足、尾，全都具备。
English: Zhang Hong woke up, caught up with the horse, and found that the root of the tree was shaped like a lion, with hair, claws, eyes, ears, feet, and tail.

古文：乃于华阴县，求木工修之为一枕，献于庙。
现代文：于是他就到华阴县，找木工修理加工成一个狮形的枕头，献给庙里。
English: So he went to Huayin County, looking for carpenters to repair and process it into a lion-shaped pillow, dedicated to the temple.

古文：守庙者常以匮锁之。
现代文：守庙的常用柜子锁着它。
English: The usual cupboard of the keepers of the temple locks it.

古文：行人闻者，赂守庙者百钱，始获一见。
现代文：听说这事的行人，要拿一百钱送给守庙的，才能获准看一看。
English: A passer-by who heard about it had to give a hundred dollars to the keeper of the temple in order to be allowed to take a look.

古文：五重桑
现代文：五重桑
English: Five-fold mulberry

古文：洛中愿会寺，魏中书侍郎王翊舍宅立也。
现代文：洛中的愿会寺，是魏时中书侍郎王翊舍宅建起来的。
English: The Wishing Temple in the middle of the city was built in the Wei Dynasty in the residence of the courtier Wang Yanshe.

古文：佛堂前生桑树一株，直上五尺，枝条横绕，柯叶旁布，形如羽盖。
现代文：佛堂前长出一棵桑树，直上五尺，枝条横出，树叶旁生，葱茏茂密，形如羽盖。
English: In front of the Buddhist hall, a mulberry tree grows, straight up five feet, branches out sideways, leaves growing next to it, lush greenery, shaped like a feather cover.

古文：复高五尺，又然。凡为五重。
现代文：又高五尺，又是这样一重枝叶，共是五重。
English: It is also five feet high, and has a single layer of branches and leaves, making a total of five layers.

古文：每一重，叶椹各异。
现代文：每一重的叶和椹都不一样。
English: Each bunch of leaves and stalks is different.

古文：京师道俗，谓之神桑。
现代文：京城的人们，不管是道是俗，都说这是神桑。
English: People in Beijing, whether they are Taoists or not, all say that this is Shenzang.

古文：观者甚众。
现代文：前来观看的人很多。
English: There were a lot of people who came to watch.

古文：帝闻而恶之，以为惑众，命给事黄门侍郎元纪，伐杀之。
现代文：皇帝听了这事很厌恶，认为这是惑众，就命令给事黄门侍郎元纪前去砍伐这棵桑树。
English: Hearing this, the emperor was disgusted and thought it was a trick, so he ordered the Yellow Gate's steward, Yuan Qian, to cut down the mulberry tree.

古文：其日云雾晦冥，下斧之处，流血至地，见者莫不悲泣。
现代文：这一天云低雾重，阴沉昏暗。斧子砍到树上，被砍之处立刻就流血到地，在场观看的人，没有不感到悲伤而哭泣的。
English: It was a cloudy, foggy, gloomy and dark day. An axe was taken to a tree, and the place where it was cut immediately bled to the ground. There was no one present who did not feel sad and cry.

古文：蜻蜓树
现代文：蜻蜓树
English: Eucalyptus

古文：昔娄约居常山，据禅座。
现代文：过去娄约住在常山，坐在座上。
English: In the past, I used to live in Changshan and sit on the bench.

古文：有一野妪，手持一树。植之于庭，言此是蜻蜓树。
现代文：有一个村野中的老女人，手持一棵小树，把它栽到娄约的庭院当中，说这是蜻蜓树。
English: There is an old woman in the village, holding a small tree, planting it in the middle of a narrow courtyard, saying that it is a camphor tree.

古文：岁久芬芳郁茂。
现代文：年头多了，这树枝叶繁茂，气味芬芳。
English: It's old, it's leafy, it's fragrant.

古文：有一乌，身赤尾长，常止息其上。
现代文：有一种身体赤红尾巴很长的鸟雀，常常止息在这棵树上。
English: A bird finch with a reddish-red body and a long tail often perches on this tree.

古文：无患木
现代文：无患木
English: Nothing to worry about

古文：无患木，烧之极香，避恶气。
现代文：无患木，把它点燃，气味极香，避邪恶之气。
English: If there is no wood, burn it. It smells good and wards off evil.

古文：一名噤娄，一名桓。
现代文：一名叫 噤娄 ，一名叫 桓 。
English: One is called, one is called 桓.

古文：昔有神巫曰瑶眊，能符劾百鬼，擒魑魅，以无患木击杀之。
现代文：过去有个神巫叫瑶眊，能用符咒降伏百鬼，擒妖捉怪，用无患木击杀这些鬼怪。
English: In the past, there was a sorcerer named Zou, who could use spells to subdue hundreds of ghosts, capture demons, and kill these ghosts with wood.

古文：世人竞取此木为器，用却鬼，因曰无患木。
现代文：世人争抢着弄这种木头做器县，用它驱鬼避邪，因而就叫无患木。
English: The world is scrambling to get this kind of wood to make vessels, and use it to drive away evil spirits, so it is called Muzang wood.

古文：醋心树
现代文：醋心树
English: The vinegar tree

古文：杜师仁尝赁居。
现代文：杜筛仁曾经租房子住。
English: Du Shiren used to live in a rented house.

古文：庭有巨杏树。
现代文：庭院里有一棵大杏树。
English: There is a big apricot tree in the courtyard.

古文：邻居老人，每担水至树侧，必叹曰： 此树可惜。 
现代文：邻居的一位老人，每当挑水走到树旁，一定会叹息说： 这树可惜了！ 
English: An old man in the neighbourhood, whenever he went to fetch water and came to the tree, would sigh and say: What a pity about the tree!

古文：杜诘之。
现代文：杜师仁问老人怎么回事。
English: Du Shiren asked the old man what was going on.

古文：老人云： 某善知木病，此树有疾，某请治。 
现代文：老人说： 我会给树木看病。这棵树病了，让我给它看看吧。 
English: The old man said, "I am a tree doctor. This tree is sick, let me take a look at it."

古文：乃诊树一处，曰： 树病醋心。 
现代文：于是他就诊视树的一处，然后说，树得的是醋心病。
English: So he examined one part of the tree and said that the tree was suffering from vinegar heart disease.

古文：杜染指于蠹处尝之，味若薄醋。
现代文：杜师仁用手指在虫咬处醮一下放到嘴里一尝，味道确实像薄醋。
English: Du Shiren dipped his finger into the insect bite and put it in his mouth. The taste was indeed like thin vinegar.

古文：老人持小钩披蠹，再三钩之，得一白虫，如蝠。
现代文：老人拿着一把小钩子往外钩虫子，再三地钩，钩出一条小白虫，样子像蝙蝠。
English: The old man took a small hook and hooked out the worm, hooked again and again, and hooked out a small white worm that looked like a bat.

古文：乃傅药于疮中。
现代文：于是就在树的疮中敷了药。
English: So they put medicine in the tree's sores.

古文：复戒曰： 有实，自青皮时，必标之。十去八九，则树活。 
现代文：又警告说： 结了果之后，从青皮的时候起，就要标有记号，除去十分之八九，树就能活。 
English: And he warned them, saying, When the fruit is brought forth, immediately after the budding of the shoots, it shall be marked with a mark, and after the removal of nine parts of the mark, the tree shall live.

古文：如其言，树益茂盛矣。
现代文：杜师仁照他说的去做，果然那树更加茂盛了。
English: Du Shiren did as he was told, and the tree grew even more.

古文：又云： 尝见《栽植经》三卷，言木有病醋心者。
现代文：又说，杜师仁曾经读过《栽植经》三卷，那上面说树木确实有患醋心病的。
English: He also said that Du Shiren had once read the three volumes of the "Planting Sutra," which said that trees do indeed suffer from vinegar heart disease.

古文：登第皂荚
现代文：登第皂荚
English: Tondi Soap Canister

古文：泉州文宣王庙，庭宇严峻，学校之盛，冠于藩府。
现代文：泉州的文宣王庙，庭院屋宇庄严高峻，开办学校的盛况，在藩府是数第一的。
English: Quanzhou's King Wenxuan Temple, the stately courtyard buildings, and the grand opening of the school are the best in the province.

古文：庭中有皂荚树，每州人将登第，则生一荚。
现代文：庭院中有一棵皂荚树，每当州中将有人登第，它就生出一荚。
English: In the courtyard, there is a soap elm tree. Whenever someone from the vice-governor of the state comes to visit, it produces a beak.

古文：以为常矣。
现代文：人们都习以为常了。
English: People have got used to it.

古文：梁真明中，忽然生一荚有半，人莫谕其意。
现代文：梁贞明年间，它忽然生出一个半荚来，人们不知道这是什么意思。
English: During Liang Zhen's next year, she suddenly gave birth to a half-puppy. People didn't know what this meant.

古文：乃其年，州人陈逖，进士及第；黄仁颖，学究及第。
现代文：就在这一年里，本州人陈逖，进士科及第；黄仁颖，学究科及第。
English: In the same year, Honshu's Chen Hao ranked first in the academic science, and Huang Renying ranked first in the academic science.

古文：仁颖耻之，复应进士举。
现代文：黄仁颖感到羞耻，又去参加进士科考试。
English: Huang Renying felt ashamed and went to take the entrance examination again.

古文：至同光中，旧生半荚之所，复生全荚。
现代文：到了同光年间，原先生半荚的地方，长出一个完整的荚来。
English: At the same age, Mr. Hara's half-beak grew into a full beak.

古文：其年，仁颖及第。
现代文：就是这一年，黄仁颖及第了。
English: It was this year that Huang Renying came in second.

古文：后数年，庙为火焚。
现代文：以后过了几年，文宣王庙被火烧。
English: A few years later, the Temple of King Wenxuan was destroyed by fire.

古文：其年，闽自称尊号，不复贡士，遂至于今。
现代文：那一年闽地自称尊号，不再向朝廷举荐人才，直到如今。
English: That year, he brazenly called himself a noble, and stopped recommending talents to the imperial court, until now.

古文：辨白檀树
现代文：辨白檀树
English: White sandalwood

古文：剑门之左峭岩间有大树，生于石缝之中，大可数围，枝干纯白。
现代文：剑门左边的峭岩之间，有一棵大树，生长在石缝中，好几围粗，枝干纯白色。
English: Between the craggy rocks on the left of the Sword Gate, there is a large tree, growing in a stone crevice, several times thicker, with pure white branches.

古文：皆传曰白檀树。
现代文：人们都传说这是一棵白檀树。
English: People say it's a sandalwood tree.

古文：其下常有巨虺，蟠而护之，民不敢采伐。
现代文：树下常常有一条大毒蛇，蟠踞在那里守护着，村民不敢去采伐它。
English: There is often a large poisonous snake under the tree, and the villagers do not dare to harvest it.

古文：又西岩之半，有志公和尚影，路人过者，皆西向擎拳顶礼，若亲面其如来。
现代文：又说西岩壁的半腰处，有志公和尚的影像。路人从这里走过的时候，都要朝西方擎起双手顶礼膜拜，就像亲眼见到了如来一样。
English: It is also said that halfway up the west rock wall, there is an image of a monk with aspirations. When passers-by walk past here, they should raise their hands and bow to the west, just as if they had seen the Buddha with their own eyes.

古文：王仁裕癸未岁入蜀，至其岩下，注目观之，以质向来传说。
现代文：王仁裕于癸未年进入蜀地。他走到那岩下时，尤其注意地观察了一番，来判断向来的传说是否属实。
English: Wang Renyu came to Shoudi in the year of the rooster. When he went under the rock, he paid special attention to observe it to judge whether the old legend was true.

古文：时值晴朗，溪谷洗然，遂勒辔移时望之。
现代文：这时候正赶上天气晴朗，溪谷青翠，就像用水洗过的样子。
English: At this time, the weather was fine and the valley was green, as if it had been washed with water.

古文：其白檀，乃一白栝树也。
现代文：于是他就勒住马辔久久观望。那白檀，原来竟是一棵白栝树！
English: So he held his horse and watched for a long time. The sandalwood turned out to be a birch tree!

古文：自历大小漫天。
现代文：他亲自经历的大小事情漫天皆是。
English: His personal experiences, big and small, are all over the place.

古文：夹路溪谷之间，此类甚多，安有檀香蛇绕之事？
现代文：道路被夹在溪谷中，这类情形特别多，哪有什么毒蛇盘绕香檀树的事！
English: The road is caught in a ravine, there are many such cases, and there are no poisonous snakes coiled around the sandalwood!

古文：又西瞻志公影，盖岩间有圆柏一株，即其笠首也；两面有上下石缝，限之为身形；斜其缝者，即袈裟之文也；上有苔藓斑驳，即山水之毳文也。
现代文：他又向西看那志公和尚的影像。在岩间有圆柏一棵，那就是志公戴着竹笠的头；两边有上下走向的石缝，画出了志公的身形；斜向的石缝，就是袈裟上的花纹了；那上面有斑斑驳驳的苔藓，就勾勒描画出山水图案来。
English: He also looked westward at the image of the monk. Between the rocks there was a cypress tree, that is, the head of Shihong wearing a bamboo hat; on both sides there were up-and-down stone seams, depicting the figure of Shihong; oblique stone seams, that is, the pattern on the cocoon; there were mottled mosses on it, sketching out a landscape pattern.

古文：方审其非白檀。志公不留影于此，明矣。
现代文：这才审定，那树不是白檀树，那影也不是志公的留影。
English: Only then was it confirmed that the tree was not a sandalwood tree and that the shadow was not that of Shigong.

古文：仍知人之误传者何限哉！
现代文：弄明白了，才知道人们的误传没有边际呢！
English: Once I figured it out, I knew that there was no limit to people's misinformation!

古文：藟蔓藤实杯
现代文：藟蔓藤实杯
English: Strawberry vine solid cup

古文：藤实杯出西域。
现代文：藤实杯来自西域。
English: The Fuji Cup came from the western region.

古文：藤大如臂。
现代文：藤有胳膊那么粗。
English: Wisteria has arms so thick.

古文：叶似葛花实如梧桐。
现代文：叶子像葛花的叶，果实像梧桐的果。
English: The leaves are like the leaves of kudzu, and the fruit is like the fruit of sycamore.

古文：实成坚固，皆可酌酒。
现代文：果实成熟之后坚硬结实，都可以酌酒。
English: After the fruit matures, it is hard and firm, and can be drunk.

古文：自有文章，映澈可爱。
现代文：那上面自然生有花纹，明澈可爱。
English: There's a natural pattern on it, it's clear and lovely.

古文：实大如杯，味如豆蔻，香美消酒。
现代文：果实有杯子那么大，味道像豆蔻，既香美又有消酒的功效。
English: The fruit is as big as a cup and tastes like cardamom. It is both fragrant and has the effect of eliminating alcohol.

古文：士人提酒，来至藤下，摘花酌酒，乃以其实消醒。
现代文：士人提着酒来到藤下，摘花舀酒，竟然又用它的果实解酒。
English: The scholar came to Fujishita with wine in hand, picked flowers to make wine, and even used its fruit to make sake.

古文：国人宝之，不传于中土。
现代文：国人把它当成宝贝，不传给东土。
English: The Chinese regard it as a treasure and do not pass it on to the East.

古文：张骞入宛得之。
现代文：张骞通西域的时候入大宛而得之。
English: Zhang Yutong got it when he entered the university in the western region.

古文：事在《张骞出关志》。
现代文：这事记在《张骞出关志》里。
English: This is recorded in "The Diary of Zhang Ye."

古文：钟藤
现代文：钟藤
English: The bell rings.

古文：松桢，即钟藤也。
现代文：松桢就是钟藤。
English: The pine cone is the bell rattan.

古文：叶大者，晋安人以为盘。
现代文：晋安人用较大的钟藤叶做盘子。
English: The Jinan people used the larger bell vine leaves to make plates.

古文：人子藤
现代文：人子藤
English: Nariko wisteria

古文：安南有人子藤，红色，在蔓端有刺。
现代文：安南有一种叫做人子藤的植物，红色，藤蔓的顶端有刺。
English: In Annam, there is a plant called the man-child vine, red, with thorns at the top of the vine.

古文：其子如人状。
现代文：它的籽实有如人形。
English: Its seeds are like dolls.

古文：昆仑烧之集象。
现代文：昆仑岛一带焚烧它的籽实召集大象。
English: Elephants gather around Kunlun Island to burn its seeds.

古文：南中亦难得。
现代文：即使在南中，人子藤也是难得的。
English: Even in the Southern Middle School, it is rare to find a baby rattan tree.

古文：蜜草蔓
现代文：蜜草蔓
English: Honeywort vine

古文：北天竺国出蜜草，蔓生大叶，秋冬不死。
现代文：北天竺国出产一种植物叫蜜草，蔓生，大叶，秋冬也不凋落。
English: In the north of China, there is a plant called honeywort, which has vines and large leaves that do not fall off in autumn and winter.

古文：因重霜露，遂结成蜜，如塞上蓬盐。
现代文：由于屡经霜露，便积结成蜜，就像塞外大地上的蓬盐。
English: As a result of repeated frost dew, it accumulates into honey, just like the salt flakes on the earth outside the plug.

古文：胡蔓草
现代文：胡蔓草
English: Clematis

古文：胡蔓草，此草在邕间，丛生。
现代文：胡蔓草生在邕间，是丛生植物。
English: Cranberry grass grows between the bracts and is a bushy plant.

古文：花偏如栀子，稍大，不成朵，色黄白。
现代文：花偏，像栀子花，比栀子花稍大，不成朵，黄白色。
English: Flowers lateral, like gardenia, slightly larger than gardenia, do not bloom, yellow-white.

古文：叶稍异。
现代文：叶与栀子叶略有不同。
English: The leaves are slightly different from the hazelnut leaves.

古文：误食之，数日卒死。
现代文：误吃了胡蔓草，几天之内就死。
English: He accidentally ate cranberry and died within a few days.

古文：饮白鹅白鸭血则解。
现代文：喝白鹅白鸭血就能解。
English: Drinking the blood of the white goose and white duck can solve the problem.

古文：或以物投之，祝曰： 我买你，食之不死。 
现代文：有的人把什么东西扔向它，祷告说： 我买你，吃了别让我死。 
English: Some people throw things at it and pray, "I'll buy you, eat you, don't let me die."

古文：野狐丝
现代文：野狐丝
English: Wild fox silk

古文：有草蔓生，色白，花微红，大如粟。秦人呼为野狐丝。
现代文：有一种草，蔓生，色白，花微红，大小如同米粒，秦地人叫它野狐丝。
English: There is a kind of grass, creeping, white in color, with reddish flowers, the size of which is like a grain of rice. Qin people call it wild fox silk.

