古文：起阏逢执徐，尽柔兆敦牂，凡三年。
现代文：起，止，一共三年。汉桓帝延熹七年
English: It lasted a total of three years. Emperor Han Huan ruled for seven years.

古文：孝桓皇帝中延熹七年
现代文：春季，二月丙戌，乡侯黄琼去世。
English: In the spring, in February, Huang Qiong passed away.

古文：春，二月，丙戌，邟乡忠侯黄琼薨。
现代文：临下葬时，四方远近知名人士前来吊丧的有六七千人。
English: At the time of the funeral, 67,000 people came from far and wide to pay their respects.

古文：将葬，四方远近名士会者六七千人。初，琼之教授于家。徐稚从之咨访大义，及琼贵，稚绝不复交。至是，稚往吊之，进酹，哀哭而去，人莫知者。
现代文：最初，黄琼在家中教授经书时，徐稚曾经向他询问要旨，到黄琼的地位尊贵以后，徐稚就和黄琼绝交，不再来往。黄琼去世，徐稚前往吊丧，以酒洒地表示祭奠，放声痛哭后离去，别人都不知道他是谁。
English: At first, when Huang Qiong was teaching the scriptures at home, Xu Zhi had asked him about the gist. After Huang Qiong's status was honored, Xu Zhi broke off relations with Huang Qiong and no longer visited. Huang Qiong died, Xu Zhi went to the funeral, expressed his condolences with wine, cried loudly and left, others did not know who he was.

古文：诸名士推问丧宰，宰曰： 先时有一书生来，衣粗薄而哭之哀，不记姓字。 
现代文：吊丧的知名人士们询问主持丧事的人，他说： 早些时候的确有一位儒生来过这里，他衣着粗糙单薄，哭声悲哀，不记得他的姓名。 
English: The well-known mourners asked the person who presided over the funeral, he said: Earlier, there was indeed a Confucian scholar who came here, he was dressed in coarse and thin clothes, his cries were sad, and he did not remember his name.

古文：众曰： 必徐孺子也。 
现代文：大家都说： 肯定是徐稚。 
English: Everyone said: It must be Xu Wuzhong.

古文：于是选能言者陈留茅容轻骑追之，及于涂。
现代文：于是选派善于言辞的陈留人茅容，跨上快马急忙去追赶他，在半途追到。
English: Therefore, they sent Maorong Chen, who was good at rhetoric, on a fast horse to chase him, and they caught up with him halfway.

古文：容为沽酒市肉，稚为饮食。
现代文：茅容为徐稚沽酒买肉，请他一道饮食。
English: Mao Rong buys meat for Xu Zhisheng and invites him to have a meal together.

古文：容问国家之事，稚不答。
现代文：当茅容问及国家大事时，徐稚不作回答。
English: When Mao Rong asked about national affairs, Xu Zhiguo did not answer.

古文：更问稼穑之事，稚乃答之。
现代文：茅容改变话题，谈论耕种和收获谷物的事，徐稚才回答他。
English: When Mao Rong changed the subject to talk about farming and harvesting grain, Xu Zhi answered him.

古文：容还，以语诸人，或曰： 孔子云： 可与言而不与言，失人。 
现代文：茅容返回以后，将上述情况告诉大家。有人说： 孔子曾经说过： 遇上可以交谈的人，却不和他谈论，未免有失于人。 
English: Some people said, "Confucius once said, 'If you meet someone you can talk to, but you don't talk to them, you are bound to lose them.'

古文：然则孺子其失人乎？ 
现代文：这样说来，徐稚岂不是有失于人吗？ 
English: So, isn't it true that Xu Wechi is a loser?

古文：太原郭泰曰： 不然。
现代文：太原人郭泰说： 不是这样。
English: Guo Tai, a native of Taiyuan, said, "It's not like that.

古文：孺子之为人，清洁高廉，饥不可得食，寒不可得衣，而为季伟饮酒食肉，此为已知季伟之贤故也。
现代文：徐稚为人清高廉洁，他饥饿时不会轻易接受别人的食物，寒冷时不会随便穿别人的衣服。而他答应茅容的邀请，一道饮酒食肉，这是因为已经知道茅容贤能的缘故。
English: Xu Zhi is a clean and honest person. When he is hungry, he will not easily accept other people's food, and when he is cold, he will not wear other people's clothes. And he agreed to Mao Rong's invitation to drink alcohol and eat meat together, because he already knew Mao Rong's virtue.

古文：所以不答国事者，是其智可及，其愚不可及也。 
现代文：所以不回答国家大事，是由于他的智慧我们可以赶得上，他的故作愚昧我们却赶不上。 
English: Therefore, he does not respond to national events. It is because of his wisdom that we can catch up with him, but we cannot catch up with his pretended stupidity.

古文：泰博学，善谈论。
现代文：郭泰学问渊博，善于言谈议论。
English: Guo Tai is well-educated and good at talking.

古文：初游雒阳，时人莫识，陈留符融一见嗟异，因以介于河南尹李膺。
现代文：他刚到京都洛阳留学时，当时的人并不认识他。陈留人符融一见他就赞叹惊异，因而将他推荐给河南尹李膺。
English: When he first came to study in Kyoto's Luoyang, people didn't know him at the time. Chen Ruijin was amazed when he saw Fu Rong, so he recommended him to Yin Lijuan from Henan.

古文：膺与相见，曰： 吾见士多矣，未有如郭林宗者也。
现代文：李膺跟他见面后说： 我所见到过的读书人很多，却从来没有遇到过像郭泰您这样的人。
English: After meeting him, Li Wei said: I have met many readers, but I have never met anyone like Guo Tai.

古文：其聪识通朗，高雅密博，今之华夏，鲜见其俦。 
现代文：您聪慧通达，高雅慎密，在今天的中国，很少有人能与您相比。 
English: In today's China, there are very few people who can compare with you in terms of intelligence, sophistication and prudence.

古文：遂与为友，于是名震京师。
现代文：便和他结交为好友，于是郭泰的名声立刻震动京城洛阳。
English: He befriended him, and Guo Tai's fame immediately shook the capital Luoyang.

古文：后归乡里，衣冠诸儒送至河上，车数千两，膺唯与泰同舟而济，众宾望之，以为神仙焉。
现代文：后来，郭泰从洛阳启程返回家乡时，官员和士绅以及儒生将他送到黄河渡口，车子多达数千辆。只有李膺和郭泰同船渡河，前来送行的各位宾客望着他俩，认为简直是神仙。
English: Later, when Guo Tai left Luoyang to return to his hometown, officials, gentry and Confucian scholars sent him to the Yellow River ferry, with thousands of cars. Only Li Qian and Guo Tai crossed the river in the same boat, and the guests who came to see them off looked at them and thought they were gods.

古文：泰性明知人，好奖训士类，周游郡国。
现代文：郭泰善于识别人的贤愚善恶，喜欢奖励和教导读书人，足迹遍布四方。
English: Guo Tai is good at identifying people's virtues and vices, likes to reward and teach readers, and his footprints are all over the world.

古文：茅容，年四十馀，耕于野，与等辈避雨树下，众皆夷踞相对，容独危坐愈恭；泰见而异之，因请寓宿。
现代文：茅容年龄已经四十余岁，在田野中耕作时和一群同伴到树底下避雨，大家都随便地坐在地上，只有茅容正襟危坐，非常恭敬。郭泰路过那里，见此情景，大为惊异，因而向茅容请求借宿。
English: Mao Rong is more than forty years old. When he was ploughing in the fields, he and a group of companions went under the trees to shelter from the rain. Everyone casually sat on the ground, only Mao Rong was sitting with his back to the ground, very respectful. Guo Tai passed by there and was very surprised to see this scene, so he asked Mao Rong for a place to stay.

古文：旦日，容杀鸡为馔，泰谓为己设；容分半食母，馀半庋置，自以草蔬与客同饭。
现代文：第二天，茅容杀鸡作为食品，郭泰以为是为自己准备的，但茅容分了半只鸡侍奉母亲，将其余半只鸡收藏在阁橱里，自己用粗劣的蔬菜和客人一同吃饭。
English: The next day, Mao Rong killed a chicken as food, Guo Tai thought it was for himself, but Mao Rong divided half of the chicken to serve his mother, kept the other half of the chicken in the cupboard, and ate with the guests with poor vegetables.

古文：泰曰： 卿贤哉远矣！
现代文：郭泰说： 你的贤良大大地超过了普通人。
English: Guo Tai said: Your virtuousness greatly surpasses that of ordinary people.

古文：郭林宗犹减三牲之具以供宾旅，而卿如此，乃我友也。 
现代文：我自己尚且减少对父母亲的供养来款待客人，而你却是这样，真是我的好友。 
English: I myself have reduced my parents' support to entertain guests, but you are like this, really my friend.

古文：起，对之揖，劝令从学，卒为盛德。
现代文：于是崐，郭泰站起身来，向他作揖，劝他读书学习。茅容最终成为很有德行的人。
English: Therefore, Guo Tai stood up and taunted him, urging him to study and study. Mao Rong eventually became a very virtuous person.

古文：巨鹿孟敏，客居太原，荷甑堕地，不顾而去。
现代文：巨鹿人孟敏，在太原郡客居，肩上扛的瓦罐掉在地上，他一眼不看便离开了。
English: Meng Min, a giant deer, was staying at a guest house in Taiyuan County. The earthenware jar he was carrying on his shoulder fell to the ground, and he left without a second glance.

古文：泰见而问其意，对曰： 甑已破矣，视之何益！ 
现代文：郭泰见此情景，问他为什么这样，孟敏回答说： 瓦罐已经破碎了，看它有什么益处？ 
English: Guo Tai saw this scene and asked him why. Meng Min replied, "The earthenware pot is already broken. What good is it?

古文：泰以为有分决，与之言，知其德性，因劝令游学，遂知名当世。
现代文：郭泰认为他有分辨和决断能力，于是和他交谈，了解他的天赋和秉性，因而劝他外出求学。结果孟敏成为闻名当世的人。
English: Guo Tai thought that he had the ability to distinguish and decide, so he talked to him, understood his talent and disposition, and advised him to go out to study. As a result, Meng Min became a famous person in the world.

古文：陈留申屠蟠，家贫，佣为漆工；鄢陵庾乘，少给事县廷为门士；泰见而奇之，其后皆为名士。
现代文：陈留人申屠蟠家境贫困，受雇于人做漆工，鄢陵人庾乘年少时在县府担任门卒，郭泰见到他们，对他们另眼相待，后来他们都成为知名的人士。
English: Chen Liu Ren Shen Tuo's family was poor, and he was employed as a lacquer painter. When he was young, Guo Ling Ren Guo served as a gatekeeper at the county government. Guo Tai saw them and treated them differently, and later they all became famous people.

古文：自馀或出于屠沽、卒伍，因泰奖进成名者甚众。
现代文：其他人，有的是屠户出身，有的是卖酒出身，有的是士卒出身，因受到郭泰的奖励和引进而成名的很多。
English: Others, some of whom were butchers, some of whom were wine sellers, and some of whom were soldiers, became famous because they were rewarded and introduced by Guo Tai.

古文：陈国童子魏昭请于泰曰： 经师易遇，人师难遭，愿在左右，供给洒扫。 
现代文：陈国少年魏昭向郭泰请求说： 教授经书的老师容易遇到，但传授做人道理的老师却难遇到。我愿意跟随在您的身边，给您洒扫房屋和庭院。 
English: Wei Zhao, a boy from Chen Guo, asked Guo Tai: "It is easy to meet a teacher who teaches scriptures, but it is difficult to meet a teacher who teaches humanity. I am willing to follow you around and sweep your house and yard."

古文：泰许之。
现代文：郭泰许诺。
English: Guo Tai promised.

古文：泰尝不佳，命昭作粥，粥成，进泰，泰呵之曰： 为长者作粥，不加意敬，使不可食！ 
现代文：后来，郭泰曾因身体不适，命魏昭给他煮稀饭。稀饭煮好以后，魏昭端给郭泰，郭泰大声喝斥魏昭说： 你给长辈煮稀饭，不存敬意，使我不能进食。 
English: Later, Guo Tai, who was unwell, ordered Wei Zhao to cook porridge for him. After the porridge was cooked, Wei Zhao gave it to Guo Tai. Guo Tai shouted at Wei Zhao, saying, "You cook porridge for the elders without respect, so I can't eat."

古文：以杯掷地。
现代文：将杯子扔到地上。
English: Throw the cup on the ground.

古文：昭更为粥重进，泰复呵之。
现代文：魏昭又重新煮好稀饭，再次端给郭泰，郭泰又喝斥他。
English: Wei Zhao cooked the porridge again and served it to Guo Tai again. Guo Tai shouted at him again.

古文：如此者三，昭姿容无变。
现代文：这样一连三次，魏昭的态度和脸色始终没有改变。
English: Three times in a row, Wei Zhao's attitude and countenance remained unchanged.

古文：泰乃曰： 吾始见子之面，而今而后，知卿心耳！ 
现代文：于是郭泰说： 我开始只看到你的表面，从今以后，我知道你的内心了！ 
English: Guo Tai then said, "I only saw your face at first, but from now on, I know your heart!"

古文：遂友而善之。
现代文：就把魏昭当做好友，善意对待。
English: He treated Wei Zhao as a good friend.

古文：陈留左原，为郡学生，犯法见斥，泰遇诸路，为设酒肴以慰之。
现代文：陈留人左原是郡学的学生，因违反法令，被郡学斥退。
English: Chen Ruzhen Zuohara was a student at Guzheng, but was expelled from Guzheng for violating the law.

古文：谓曰： 昔颜涿聚，梁甫之巨盗，段干木，晋国之大驵，卒为齐之忠臣，魏之名贤；蘧瑗、颜回尚不能无过，况其馀乎！
现代文：郭泰在路上遇见他，特地摆设酒和菜肴，对他进行安慰，说： 从前，颜涿聚原是梁甫地区的大盗，段干木本是晋国的大市侩，可是，前一位终于成了齐国的忠臣，后一位终于成了魏国的著名贤人。蘧瑷、颜回尚且不能没有过错，何况其他的人？
English: Guo Tai met him on the road, specially arranged wine and dishes, and comforted him, saying: Once upon a time, Yan Hui was originally a great thief in Liangfu District, and Duan Gan Muben was a great merchant in Jin Province, but the former finally became a loyal subject of Qi Province, and the latter finally became a famous sage in Wei Province. Yan Hui and Yan Hui still cannot be without fault, let alone other people?

古文：慎勿恚恨，责躬而已！ 
现代文：你千万不要心怀怨恨，只是反躬责问自己而已。 
English: You mustn't hold a grudge, just ask yourself.

古文：原纳其言而去。
现代文：左原虚心听取郭泰的劝导后离去。
English: Sawahara accepted his opinion and left.

古文：或有讥泰不绝恶人者，泰曰： 人而不仁，疾之已甚，乱也。 
现代文：有人讥讽郭泰不能和恶人断绝关系，郭泰说： 对于不合于仁的人，如果厌恶他太甚，就会使他为乱。 
English: Some people ridicule Guo Tai for not being able to break off relations with evil people. Guo Tai said: For those who are not benevolent, if you detest him too much, it will make him confused.

古文：原后忽更怀忿结客，欲报诸生，其日，泰在学，原愧负前言，因遂罢去。
现代文：左原后来忽然重新心怀忿怒，结集宾客，想要报复郡学的学生。可是，这一天，郭泰正在郡学，左原惭愧自己辜负了郭泰以前的劝导，于是终于离去。
English: Later, Zuohara suddenly felt angry again, gathered guests and wanted to take revenge on the students of Guotai. However, on this day, Guo Tai was studying at Guotai, Zuohara felt ashamed that he had failed to persuade Guotai before, so he finally left.

古文：后事露，众人咸谢服焉。
现代文：后来这件事传开，大家全都佩服郭泰。
English: Later, the story spread, and everyone admired Guo Tai.

古文：或问范滂曰： 郭林宗何如人？ 
现代文：有人询问范滂说： 郭泰是个什么样的人？ 
English: Someone asked Fan Qi: What kind of person is Guo Tai?

古文：滂曰： 隐不违亲，贞不绝俗，天子不得臣，诸侯不得友，吾不知其它。 
现代文：范滂回答说： 隐居而不离开双亲，坚贞而不隔绝世俗，天子不能使他为臣下，诸侯不能使他为友，除此之外，我不知道还有别的。 
English: Fan Qi said: "To live in seclusion, like Jie Zixu, does not violate the will of the mother; to serve, like Liu Shih-hui, is chaste and loyal, but not vulgar. The heavenly son may not take him as a vassal, and the princes may not take him as a friend. I have no choice but to know the rest."

古文：泰尝举有道，不就，同郡宋冲素服其德，以为自汉元以来，未见其匹，尝劝之仕。
现代文：郭泰曾经被地方官府推荐为 有道 人才，郭泰不肯接受。同郡人宋冲一向佩服郭泰的品德和学问，认为自从汉朝建立以来，没有人能超过他，曾经劝他出去作官。
English: Guo Tai was once recommended by the local government as a virtuous talent, but Guo Tai refused to accept it. Song Chong, a fellow county resident, has always admired Guo Tai's character and learning, and believes that since the establishment of the Han Dynasty, no one can surpass him. He once advised him to go out and become an official.

古文：泰曰： 吾夜观乾象，昼察人事，天之所废，不可支也，吾将优游卒岁而已。 
现代文：郭泰说： 我夜间观看天象，白天考察人事，上天要灭亡的，人力不能支持，我将悠闲地过日子而已。 
English: Guo Tai said, "I watch the celestial bodies at night, and examine people during the day. If heaven is about to perish, manpower cannot support it. I will just live a leisurely life."

古文：然犹周旋京师，诲诱不息。
现代文：但他还是经常到京都洛阳，不停地教诲和劝诱人们读书求学。
English: However, he still often went to Kyoto and Luoyang to constantly teach and persuade people to study.

古文：徐稚以书戒之曰： 夫大木将颠，非一绳所维，何为栖栖不遑宁处！ 
现代文：徐稚写信警告他说： 大树快要倒下，不是一根绳子所能拴住的，为何奔波忙碌，不能安定下来！ 
English: Xu Zhi wrote a letter to warn him: The big tree is about to fall, it can't be tied down with a rope, why are you running around so busy, you can't settle down!

古文：泰感寤曰： 谨拜斯言，以为师表。 
现代文：郭泰有所感而觉悟说： 恭敬地拜受你的话，当做老师的指教。 
English: Guo Tai said with a sense of awareness: Respectfully bow to your words, as a teacher's instruction.

古文：济阴黄允，以俊才知名，泰见而谓曰： 卿高才绝人，足成伟器，年过四十，声名著矣。
现代文：济阴人黄允，以才智出众而知名。郭泰跟他见面时，对他说： 你才华很崐高，超过常人，一定会成为大器，年过四十岁以后，名声一定显著。
English: When Guo Tai met Huang Yun, a resident of Jilin who was known for his outstanding intellect, he said to him, "Your talent is very high, exceeding that of ordinary people. You will surely become a great instrument. After the age of forty, your reputation will surely be remarkable."

古文：然至于此际，当深自匡持，不然，将失之矣！ 
现代文：然而，到了那时候，应该严格要求自己，匡正持重，不然，将丧失声名。 
English: However, at that time, you should strictly require yourself to be upright, otherwise, you will lose your reputation.

古文：后司徒袁隗欲为从女求姻，见允，叹曰： 得婿如是，足矣。 
现代文：后来，司徒袁隗想为他的侄女选择丈夫，见到黄允，赞叹说： 能得到像黄允这样的女婿，就心满意足了。 
English: Later, when he wanted to choose a husband for his niece, he saw Huang Yun and said with admiration, "I am satisfied to have a son-in-law like Huang Yun."

古文：允闻而黜遣其妻。
现代文：黄允听说后，便将妻子休掉，让她回娘家。
English: After hearing this, Huang Yun dismissed his wife and let her return to her daughter's home.

古文：妻请大会宗亲为别，因于众中攘袂数允隐慝十五事而去，允以此废于时。
现代文：黄妻请求同所有宗族和亲戚见面辞别，于是当着众人的面，揎袖捋臂历数黄允的十五件隐私，然后登车而去。黄允因此名声败坏。
English: Huang Yun's wife asked to meet with all the clan members and relatives to say goodbye, so in front of everyone, she counted Huang Yun's fifteen private items, and then boarded the bus. Huang Yun's reputation was tarnished as a result.

古文：初，允与汉中晋文经并恃其才智，曜名远近，征辟不就。
现代文：起初，黄允和汉中人晋文经，同时仗恃他们的才能智慧而远近闻名，官府征聘他们做官，都不肯接受。
English: At first, the government did not want to hire Huang Yun and Hanzhong people, who were well-known for their talent and wisdom.

古文：托言疗病京师，不通宾客，公卿大夫遗门生旦暮问疾，郎吏杂坐其门，犹不得见；三公所辟召者，辄以询访之，随所臧否，以为与夺。
现代文：他俩托辞到京都洛阳疗养疾病，拒绝任何来访的宾客。三公九卿和大夫等派遣他们的门生早晚前来探问病情，郎吏错杂挤坐门房，仍然不能见面。三公府征聘属吏，往往先去征求他俩的意见，根据他俩的品评和褒贬，再决定任用或罢黜。
English: They both pretended to go to Kyoto's Luoyang to recover from illness, and refused any visiting guests. The three kings, nine queens, and doctors sent their protégés to inquire about their illness morning and night, but the servants crowded into the gatehouse by mistake, and still could not meet. The officials of the three public offices often sought the opinions of the two of them first, and then decided to appoint or dismiss them according to their comments and praise.

古文：符融谓李膺曰： 二子行业无闻，以豪桀自置，遂使公卿问疾，王臣坐门，融恐其小道破义，空誉违实，特宜察焉。 
现代文：符融对李膺说： 他俩的操行和事业都没有声名，却以豪杰自居，以致三公九卿都派人前往探病，朝廷命臣都去坐在门房等候召见。我怕他们的小道术会破坏儒家大义，徒具虚名而和实际不相符合，特别应该留意考察。 
English: Fu Rong said to Li Yao, "Both of them are not famous for their deeds and undertakings, but they regard themselves as heroes, so much so that the three princes and nine nobles have all sent people to visit the sick, and the courtiers have all sat in the gatehouse waiting to be summoned. I am afraid that their tricks will undermine the great principles of Confucianism, and that they are only false and do not correspond to reality. Special attention should be paid to the investigation.

古文：膺然之。
现代文：李膺赞同符融的意见。
English: Li Yao thought it was right.

古文：二人自是名论渐衰，宾徒稍省，旬日之间，惭叹逃去，后并以罪废弃。
现代文：黄允和晋文经二人的名誉从此逐渐衰落，宾客和门徒稍稍减少，不到十天的时间，他俩惭愧叹息而逃走。后来，他俩都因有罪而被人们抛弃。
English: From then on, the reputation of Huang Yun and Jin Wenjing gradually declined, the number of guests and disciples decreased slightly, and less than ten days later, they fled with a sigh of shame. Later, they were both abandoned by the people because of their guilt.

古文：陈留仇香，至行纯嘿，乡党无知者。
现代文：陈留人仇香虽德行高尚，但沉默寡言，乡里无人知道他。
English: Although Chen LiuRenFengXiang is virtuous and noble, he is taciturn, and no one in the village knows him.

古文：年四十，为蒲亭长。
现代文：年龄四十岁时，担任蒲亭亭长。
English: At the age of forty, he served as Putin's chief of staff.

古文：民有陈元，独与母居，母诣香告元不孝。
现代文：有个叫陈元的老百姓，一个人和母亲同住，他的母亲向仇香控告陈元忤逆不孝。
English: There was a commoner named Chen Yuan, a single man who lived with his mother. His mother accused Chen Yuanqi of being unfilial to Qixiang.

古文：香惊曰： 吾近日过元舍，庐落整顿，耕耘以时，此非恶人，当是教化未至耳。
现代文：仇香吃惊地说： 我最近经过陈元的房舍，院落整理得干干净净，耕作也很及时，说明他不是一个恶人，只不过没有受到教化，不知道如何做罢了。
English: Qiu Xiang said in surprise, "I recently passed Chen Yuan's house. The courtyard was neat and tidy, and the farming was also timely. This shows that he is not an evil person, but he has not been educated and does not know how to do it."

古文：母守寡养孤，苦身投老，奈何以一旦之忿，弃历年之勤乎！
现代文：你年轻时守寡，抚养孤儿，劳苦一生，而今年纪已老，怎能为了一时的恼怒，抛弃多年的勤劳和辛苦？
English: When you were young, you were a widow, you took care of orphans, you worked hard all your life, but now that you are old, how can you be angry for a moment and throw away years of hard work and hardship?

古文：且母养人遗孤，不能成济，若死者有知，百岁之后，当何以见亡者！ 
现代文：而且，你抚养丈夫遗留的孤儿，有始无终，倘若死者在地下有知，你百年之后，在地下怎么跟亡夫相见？ 
English: Moreover, you have been raising the orphans left by your husband from beginning to end. If the deceased had knowledge underground, how would you meet your dead husband underground a hundred years later?

古文：母涕泣而起，香乃亲到元家，为陈人伦孝行，譬以祸福之言，元感悟，卒为孝子。
现代文：陈元的母亲哭泣着起身告辞。于是仇香亲自来到陈元家里，教导伦理孝道，讲解祸福的道理。陈元感动省悟，终于成为孝子。
English: Chen Yuan's mother got up to say goodbye, crying. So Qixiang Rong personally came to Chen Yuan's home to teach ethical filial piety and explain the principles of good and evil. Chen Yuan was moved to reflect and finally became a filial son.

古文：考城令河内王奂署香主簿，谓之曰： 闻在蒲亭，陈元不罚而化之，得无少鹰鹯之志邪？ 
现代文：考城县令河内人王奂任命仇香为主簿，对他说： 听说你在薄亭，对陈元没有进行处罚，而是用教化来改变他，恐怕是缺少苍鹰搏击的勇气吧？ 
English: Kaocheng County ordered Wang Qian, a native of Hanoi, to appoint Qian Xiang as the main book, and said to him: I heard that you did not punish Chen Yuan in Buting, but used indoctrination to change him. I'm afraid you lack the courage to fight the goshawk.

古文：香曰： 以为鹰鹯不若鸾凤，故不为也。 
现代文：仇香回答说： 我认为苍鹰搏击不如鸾凤和鸣，所以不肯那样去做。 
English: Qiu Xiang replied, "I don't think fighting a goshawk is as good as fighting a phoenix and a warbler, so I won't do that.

古文：奂曰： 枳棘之林非鸾凤所集，百里非大贤之路。 
现代文：王奂又对他说： 荆棘的丛林，不是鸾凤栖身之所，百里之内的县府官职，不是大贤的道路。 
English: Wang Yao also said to him: "A thorny forest is not a place for a phoenix to roost, and a county government post within a hundred miles is not the path of a great man.

古文：乃以一月奉资香，使入太学。
现代文：于是用一个月的俸禄资助仇香，让他进入太学。
English: So he used one month's salary to support Qian Xiang and let him enter Taixue.

古文：郭泰、符融赍刺谒之，因留宿。
现代文：郭泰、符融拿着名帖求见仇香，于是留宿。
English: Guo Tai and Fu Rong took the famous postcard and asked to see Qixiang, so they stayed there.

古文：明旦，泰起，下床拜之曰： 君，泰之师，非泰之友也。 
现代文：第二天早上，郭泰起来，在床前向仇香下拜说： 您是我的老师，不是我的朋友。 
English: The next morning, Guo Tai got up, bowed to Fei Xiang in front of the bed and said: You are my teacher, not my friend.

古文：香学毕归乡里，虽在宴居，必正衣服，妻子事之若严君；妻子有过，免冠自责，妻子庭谢思过，香冠，妻子乃敢升堂，终不见其喜怒声色之异。
现代文：仇香在太学学成，回归乡里，即令是在闲暇无事的时候，也一定是衣服整齐。妻子和儿女侍奉他，就像对待严正的君王一样。妻子和儿女有了过错，仇香就摘下帽子，责备自己，妻子和儿女在院子里道歉思过，仇香才戴上帽子，妻子和儿女才敢进入堂屋。平常，从来看不见仇香因喜怒而改变声音脸色。
English: When he returns to the countryside, even when he is at leisure, his clothes must be neat. His wife and children serve him, just like they treat a strict king. If his wife and children make a mistake, he takes off his hat and blames himself. His wife and children apologize in the yard and think about it. Only then does he put on his hat, and his wife and children dare to enter the courtyard. Normally, you never see him change his voice and face because of joy and anger.

古文：不应征辟，卒于家。
现代文：他不接受官府的征聘，后来在家里去世。
English: He refused to be recruited by the government and later died at home.

古文：三月，癸亥，陨石于鄠。
现代文：三月癸亥，县坠落陨石。
English: In March, a meteorite fell in Jianhai County.

古文：夏，五月，己丑，京师雨雹。
现代文：夏季，五月己丑，京都洛阳降下冰雹。
English: In the summer, when May is at its worst, hail falls in Kyoto's Luoyang district.

古文：荆州刺史度尚募诸蛮夷击艾县城，大破之，降者数万人。
现代文：荆州刺史度尚招募蛮人和夷人士卒，讨伐艾县的盗贼，将其大破，投降的有数万人之多。
English: Jingzhou Zhang Shi still recruited barbarians and barbarians to fight against the thieves in Ai County and defeated them, with tens of thousands of people surrendering.

古文：桂阳宿贼卜阳、潘鸿等逃入深山。尚穷追数百里，破其三屯，多获珍宝。
现代文：在桂阳郡作乱已久的贼帅卜阳、潘鸿等逃入深山，度尚率军穷追不舍，深入数百里，攻破三座屯堡，抢获到不少珍珠财宝。
English: In Guiyang County, Bu Yang, Pan Hong, and other bandits who had been making trouble for a long time, fled into the mountains. Du Shang led the army in relentless pursuit, went hundreds of miles deep, broke through three blockhouses, and seized a lot of pearls and treasures.

古文：阳、鸿党众犹盛，尚欲击之，而士卒骄富，莫有斗志。
现代文：卜阳、潘鸿的党徒势力还很强盛。度尚准备继续进击，可是，他的部队既骄傲而又富有，没有斗志。
English: The power of Bu Yang and Pan Hong's party members was still strong. Du was still ready to continue the attack, but his troops were proud and rich and had no fighting spirit.

古文：尚计缓之则不战，逼之必逃亡，乃宣言： 卜阳、潘鸿作贼十年，习于攻守，今兵寡少，未易可进，当须诸郡所发悉至，乃并力攻之。 
现代文：度尚深知，如果缓兵不继续前进，则不能对盗贼发动攻击；如果强迫部队继续前进，一定会发生士卒逃亡。于是宣称： 卜阳、潘鸿，已经作了十年盗贼，无论是进攻或防守，都很擅长。而今，我们的军队寡不敌众，不能轻率前进，必须等到各郡征发的援军全部赶到，才能合力进行攻讨。 
English: Du Shang was well aware that if the delaying troops did not continue to advance, they could not launch an attack on the thieves; if they forced the troops to continue to advance, there would certainly be soldiers fleeing. So he declared: Buyang, Pan Hong, has been a thief for ten years, whether it is offensive or defensive, they are very good at it. And now, our army is outnumbered, we cannot advance rashly, and we must wait until all the reinforcements conscripted by counties arrive before we can work together to attack.

古文：申令军中恣听射猎，兵士喜悦，大小皆出。
现代文：并且发布命令，准许军中将士们自由打猎。士兵听到命令后，非常喜悦，上自将领，下到小兵，几乎全体都出营打猎取乐。
English: He also issued an order to allow the lieutenant generals to hunt freely. When the soldiers heard the order, they were very happy. From the generals to the soldiers, almost all of them went out to hunt for fun.

古文：尚乃密使所亲客潜焚其营，珍积皆尽。
现代文：于是度尚秘密派遣自己的心腹亲信，暗中纵火焚毁军营，抢获来的珍珠财宝也全都被烧尽。
English: Du Shang then secretly sent his cronies to secretly burn down the camp, and the treasures and savings were all burned.

古文：猎者来还，莫不润涕。
现代文：出营打猎的将士们回来，见此情景，无不哭泣流泪。
English: When the soldiers who went out to hunt came back, they all shed tears at the sight.

古文：尚人人慰劳，深自咎责，因曰： 卜阳等财宝足富数世，诸卿但不并力耳，所亡少少，何足介意！ 
现代文：度尚一方面安慰他们，另一方面，又深深责备自己对火灾疏于防备，然后，激励大家说： 卜阳等积蓄的金银财宝，足够我们用几辈子，只怕你们不肯尽力。所焚烧的那点东西，何必放在心上？ 
English: On the one hand, he consoled them, on the other hand, he deeply reproached himself for being unprepared for the fire, and then encouraged everyone to say: Buyang and other accumulated gold and silver treasures are enough for us to use for several lifetimes, just in case you are not willing to do your best. Why should you care about that little thing that was burned?

古文：众咸愤踊。
现代文：全体将士都发愤踊跃，请求出击。
English: All the soldiers were outraged and asked to attack.

古文：尚敕令秣马蓐食，明旦，径赴贼屯，阳、鸿等自以深固，不复设备，吏士乘锐，遂破平之。
现代文：度尚下令喂饱战马，让将士们早晨未起在寝席上进食，于拂晓前直接攻打盗贼的屯堡。卜阳、潘鸿等自以为山寨坚固，没有戒备。军吏和士兵们乘着锐气，将卜阳、潘鸿等盗贼一举剿灭。
English: Du Shang ordered to feed the war horses, let the soldiers eat on the bed before getting up in the morning, and directly attack the thieves' camp before dawn. Bu Yang, Pan Hong and others thought that the castle was solid and unguarded. The military officials and soldiers took advantage of the spirit to annihilate Bu Yang, Pan Hong and other thieves at one stroke.

古文：尚出兵三年，群寇悉定，封右乡侯。
现代文：度尚出兵三年，将盗贼全部平定，被封为右乡侯。
English: After three years of dispatching troops, he subdued all the thieves and was awarded the title of Right Township.

古文：冬，十月，壬寅，帝南巡；庚申，幸章陵；戊辰，幸云梦，临汉水，还，幸新野。
现代文：冬季，十月壬寅，桓帝前往南方巡视。庚申，抵达章陵。戊辰，抵云梦，到达汉水水滨，返回，抵达新野。
English: In winter, in October, Emperor Jinyin and Emperor Huan went to the south for inspection. Emperor Goshin went to Zhangling. Emperor Wuchen went to Yunmeng, arrived at Hanshui Waterfront, and returned to Xinye.

古文：时公卿、贵戚车骑万计，征求费役，不可胜极。
现代文：当时，随行的三公九卿和皇亲国戚的车辆、马匹以万计，沿途向地方官府征发各种费用和差役，不可胜数。
English: At that time, there were tens of thousands of vehicles and horses accompanying the three princes and nine nobles and the relatives of the emperor, and all kinds of expenses and errands were collected from local government offices along the way.

古文：护驾从事桂阳胡腾上言： 天子无外，乘舆所幸，即为京师。
现代文：护驾从事桂阳人胡腾上书说： 天子本来没有内外之分，凡是皇帝所到之处，就是京城。
English: Hu Teng, a Guiyang man engaged in escorting, wrote: Originally, there was no distinction between inside and outside. Wherever the emperor went, that was the capital city.

古文：臣请以荆州刺史比司隶校尉，臣自同都官从事。 
现代文：我请求将荆州刺史比照司隶校尉，将我视同都官从事。 
English: I asked Lieutenant Jingzhou Zhishibisili to do it, and I myself engaged in it with the city officials.

古文：帝从之。
现代文：桓帝批准。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：自是肃然，莫敢妄干扰郡县。
现代文：从此纪律肃然，没有谁敢妄自扰乱郡县官府。
English: Since then, discipline has been strictly enforced, and no one dares to disrupt the county government.

古文：帝在南阳，左右并通奸利，诏书多除人为郎，太尉杨秉上疏曰： 太微积星，名为郎位，入奉宿卫，出牧百姓，宜割不忍之恩，以断求欲之路。 
现代文：当桓帝在南阳时，左右宦官亲信都营私谋取奸利，桓帝不断下诏，任命了很多人为郎。太尉杨秉上书说： 太微宫五帝座后，积聚着二十五星，名叫郎位。入则在宫中值宿，担任警卫；出则在地方官府任职，牧守百姓。陛下应该割舍不忍拒绝的恩惠，断绝左右谋取奸利的道路。 
English: When Emperor Huan was in Nanyang, the eunuch cronies on his right and left were all working for personal gain. Emperor Huan constantly issued edicts and appointed many people to be his vassals. First Lieutenant Yang Bing wrote: "After the five emperors of the Taiwu Palace, there are twenty-five stars called vassals. When you enter the palace, you are on duty as a guard; when you leave, you are on duty at the local government office, shepherding the people. Your Majesty should give up the favors you can't bear to refuse, and cut off the road of seeking personal gain.

古文：于是诏除乃止。
现代文：桓帝这才不再颁布任命为郎的诏书。
English: It was only then that Emperor Kan no longer issued the imperial decree appointing him as ro.

古文：护羌校尉段颎击当煎羌，破之。
现代文：护羌校尉段，率军进击当煎羌民，将其击破。
English: The sergeant-major hit them with a frying pan and beat them.

古文：十二月，辛丑，车驾还宫。
现代文：十二月辛丑，桓帝返回京都洛阳皇宫。
English: In December, Emperor Kan returned to Kyoto's Luoyang Imperial Palace.

古文：中常侍汝阳侯唐衡、武原侯徐璜皆卒。
现代文：中常侍汝阳侯唐衡、武原侯徐璜二人全都病故。
English: The two middle-ranking attendants of Ryuyang, Tang Heng, and Wuyuan, Xu Xi, both died of illness.

古文：初，侍中寇荣，恂之曾孙也，性矜洁，少所与，以此为权宠所疾。
现代文：起初，侍中寇荣，即寇恂的曾孙，性格矜持清高，很少跟人交往，因此遭到权贵的憎恨。
English: At first, Ko Rong, the great-grandson of Ko Ye, was reserved and reserved, rarely socialized with people, and was therefore hated by the powerful.

古文：荣从兄子尚帝妹益阳长公主，帝又纳其从孙女于后宫。
现代文：寇荣堂兄的儿子娶桓帝的妹妹益阳长公主为妻，而桓帝又纳寇荣的孙女作妃子，所以桓帝左右的宦官亲信对寇荣愈发嫉妒，于是共同诬陷寇荣有罪。
English: The son of Korong's cousin married Emperor Kuan's sister, the eldest princess of Yiyang, and Emperor Kuan also took Korong's granddaughter as his concubine. Therefore, the eunuchs around Emperor Kuan became increasingly jealous of Korong, so they jointly framed Korong guilty.

古文：左右益忌之，遂共陷以罪，与宗族免归故郡，吏承望风旨，持之浸急。
现代文：寇荣被免官，和宗族一道回到本郡。地方官吏根据朝廷权贵们的意旨，对寇荣加紧进行迫害。
English: Ko Rong was dismissed from his post and returned to the county with his family. Local officials intensified their persecution of Ko Rong in accordance with the wishes of the imperial dignitaries.

古文：荣恐不免，诣阙自论。
现代文：寇荣害怕不能免罪，就前往京都洛阳，准备到宫门上书，为自己辩解。
English: Fearing that he would not be exonerated, Ko Rong traveled to Kyoto's Luoyang, preparing to write to the Imperial Palace to defend himself.

古文：未至，刺史张敬追劾荣以擅去边，有诏捕之。
现代文：走到中途，幽州刺史张敬又以寇荣擅自离开边郡住所为理由，追加弹劾他的内容。桓帝下诏逮捕寇荣。
English: Halfway through, Zhang Jing, the governor of Yuzhou, also accused Korong of leaving his residence in Bian County without permission, adding to his impeachment. Emperor Kuan issued an edict to arrest Korong.

古文：荣逃窜数年，会赦，不得除，积穷困，乃自亡命中上书曰： 陛下统天理物，作民父母，自生齿以上，咸蒙德泽；而臣兄弟独以无辜，为专权之臣所见批抵，青蝇之人所共构会，令陛下忽慈母之仁，发投杼之怒。
现代文：寇荣逃亡流窜了好几年，遇到实行大赦，也不能免罪，备受贫穷困苦，于是在逃亡中向桓帝上书说： 陛下统治天下，治理万物，当人民的父母，自长出牙齿的年龄以上的人民，都能得到陛下的恩德。然而，只有我们兄弟，本来无罪，却遭到朝廷专权大臣的百般排挤，被苍蝇一样的谗佞小人阴谋陷害，以致陛下忽略了慈母的仁爱，跟曾参的母亲一样，误信曾参杀人的传闻，发出投梭的愤怒。
English: Ko Rong fled and lived in exile for several years. When amnesty was implemented, he could not be pardoned and suffered from poverty and hardship. So, while on the run, he wrote a letter to Emperor Huan, saying, "Your Majesty rules the world and governs all things. When the parents of the people, the people over the age of growing teeth, can receive Your Majesty's grace. However, only our brothers, who were originally innocent, were crowded out in various ways by the court's autocratic ministers and were framed by a fly-like villain's plot, so that Your Majesty ignored the benevolence of his mother and, like his mother, mistakenly believed rumors that

古文：残谄之吏，张设机网，并驱争先，若赴仇敌，罚及死没，髡剔坟墓，欲使严朝必加滥罚；是以不敢触突天威而自窜山林，以俟陛下发神圣之听，启独睹之明，救可济之人，援没溺之命。
现代文：残暴谄媚的的执法官吏，张开罗网，设立陷阱，并驾齐驱，争先恐后，好似追赶仇敌一样。
English: Brutal and charming law-enforcement officials, casting a wide net, setting up traps, go hand in hand, scrambling, as if chasing an enemy.

古文：不意滞怒不为春夏息，淹恚不为岁时怠，遂驰使邮驿，布告远近，严文克剥，痛于霜雪，遂臣者穷人途，追臣者极车轨。虽楚购伍员，汉求季布，无以过也。臣遇罚以来，三赦再赎，无验之罪，足以蠲除；而陛下疾臣愈深，有司咎臣甫力，止则见扫灭，行则为亡虏，苟生则为穷人，极死则为冤鬼，天广而无以自覆，地厚而无以自载，蹈陆土而有沉沦之忧，远岩墙而有镇压之患。
现代文：我自从受到处罚以来，朝廷实行过三次大赦，又颁布过两次可以用金钱粟米赎罪的诏令，我所犯的属于没有证据的罪，有足够的理由被赦免。可是，陛下却对我恨得更深，有关官吏追究我的罪过更加厉害。我如果停下来，就会被消灭，如果前进，就是逃亡的罪人。苟活则为无路可走的人，拼死则为含冤的鬼，苍天辽阔，却不能复盖我；大地厚实，却不能使我立足。脚踏陆地，而有被埋没的忧患；远离岩石筑成的高墙，而有被高墙压倒的危险。
English: Since I was punished, the imperial court has granted three amnesties, and issued two decrees to expiate my sins with money and corn. I committed a crime without evidence, and there were sufficient reasons to be pardoned. However, His Majesty hated me more deeply, and the relevant officials investigated my sins more severely. If I stopped, I would be eliminated, and if I advanced, I would be a fugitive sinner. To live is to have no way to go, and to die is to be an unjust ghost. The sky is vast, but it cannot cover me; the earth is thick, but it cannot give me a foothold. To step on land, but there are buried sorrows;

古文：如臣犯元恶大憝，足以陈原野，备刀锯，陛下当班布臣之所坐，以解众论之疑。
现代文：如果我犯了十恶不赦的大罪，完全应该身受死刑，陈尸原野，那么，陛下应当公开宣布我的罪状，以解除舆论的疑惑。
English: If I have committed the most heinous of crimes, fully deserving of the death penalty, His Majesty should publicly announce my guilt in order to dispel the doubts of public opinion.

古文：臣思入国门，坐于肺石之上，使三槐九棘平臣之罪，而阊阖九重，陷阱步设，举趾触罘罝，动行絓罗网，无缘至万乘之前，永无见信之期。
现代文：我曾经想进入京都洛阳的大门，坐在宫廷门外的赤色肺石上，让三公九卿公正评判我的罪过。然而，皇宫之门紧闭九重，每走一步都是陷阱，举足便触犯法网，挪步就遭陷害，我无法来到陛下面前，永远没有获得陛下相信的日子。
English: I once wanted to enter the gates of Kyoto's Luoyang, sit on the red lung stone outside the palace gates, and let the three kings and nine lords judge my sins fairly. However, the gates of the imperial palace are tightly closed, and every step is a trap. If you lift your foot, you will break the net of the law, and if you move, you will be trapped. I cannot come before His Majesty, and I will never gain His Majesty's trust.

古文：悲夫，久生亦复何聊！
现代文：真是可悲，我长久活下去，又还有什么意思！
English: It's pathetic, what does it matter if I live a long time!

古文：盖忠臣杀身以解君怒，孝子殒命以宁亲怨，故大舜不避涂廪、浚井之难，申生不辞姬氏谗邪之谤；臣敢忘斯义，不自毙以解明朝之忿哉！
现代文：忠臣为了化解君王的愤怒而不惜杀身；孝子为了宁息双亲的怨恨而不惜殒命，所以虞舜不逃避刷抹仓房和穿井挖土的苦难，申生不逃避骊姬恶意的诽谤和陷害。我岂敢忘记这个道理，不自杀以化解圣明陛下的忿怒？
English: A loyal subject is willing to kill himself in order to defuse the king's anger; a filial son is willing to sacrifice his life in order to appease the resentment of his parents. Therefore, Yu Xuan does not escape the hardships of cleaning warehouses and digging wells, and Shen Sheng does not escape the malicious slander and entrapment of Zou Ji. Do I dare to forget this truth and not commit suicide in order to defuse the wrath of His Majesty?

古文：乞以身塞责，愿陛下匄亡兄弟死命，使臣一门颇有遗类，以崇陛下宽饶之惠。
现代文：我请求用我一个人来抵塞罪责，愿陛下饶恕我兄弟的死罪，使我一家能留下后人，以显示陛下宽厚的恩惠。
English: I ask that I may be the only one to atone for my crime, and that Your Majesty may forgive my brother's mortal sin, so that my family may have descendants to show Your Majesty's gracious favor.

古文：先死陈情，临章泣血！ 
现代文：临死之前，向陛下陈诉苦情，面对奏章，泪尽泣血！ 
English: Before dying, complain to His Majesty, face the score, and weep tears of blood!

古文：帝省章愈怒，遂诛荣，寇氏由是衰废。
现代文：桓帝看到寇荣的奏章后，更加愤怒，于是诛杀寇荣。寇家从此衰败。
English: After Emperor Kuan saw Korong's music, he was even more angry, so he killed Korong. The Korong family has been in decline ever since.

古文：孝桓皇帝中延熹八年
现代文：延熹八年
English: Eight years later

古文：春，正月，帝遣中常侍左悺之苦县祠老子。
现代文：春季，正月，桓帝派遣中常侍左前往苦县祭祀老子。
English: In spring, the first month of the year, Emperor Kan dispatched the middle-ranking attendants to the left to go to Kushu County to worship Laozi.

古文：勃海王悝，素行险僻，多僭傲不法。
现代文：勃海王刘悝，行为一向邪恶，经常超越本分，骄横不法。
English: Bo Hai Wang Liu Ye, his behavior has always been evil, often exceeding his duty, arrogant and illegal.

古文：北军中候陈留史弼上封事曰： 臣闻帝王之于亲戚，爱虽隆必示之以威，体虽贵必禁之以度，如是，和睦之道兴，骨肉之恩遂矣。
现代文：北军中候陈留人史弼向桓帝上呈密封的奏章说： 我听说，帝王对于亲戚，虽然爱得深厚，但一定要他们知道帝王的威严；身份虽然尊贵，但一定要他们遵守国家的法令。必须如此，才能使上下和睦相处，骨肉之间的恩惠得以成全。
English: "I have heard that although the emperor loves his relatives deeply, they must know the majesty of the emperor; although their status is noble, they must abide by the laws of the country. This must be done in order to achieve harmony between the upper and lower ranks, and to complete the grace between the flesh and blood.

古文：窃闻勃海王悝，外聚剽轻不逞之徒，内荒酒乐，出入无常，所与群居，皆家之弃子，朝之斥臣，必有羊胜、伍被之变。
现代文：我听说勃海王刘悝在外集结一批强悍轻浮不得志的歹徒，在内荒废政务，酗酒作乐，出入无常。整天和他住在一起的人，都是被家庭抛弃的浪子，朝廷废黜的官吏，必然会发生羊胜、伍被那样的变乱。
English: I've heard that the Bo Hai King, Liu Bei, has gathered a group of strong, reckless and unambitious gangsters outside his palace, while inside he wastes his time on government affairs, drinks too much, makes fun of others, and is erratic. The people who live with him all day are all prodigal sons who have been abandoned by their families, and officials who have been deposed by the imperial court. It's inevitable that chaos will occur.

古文：州司不敢弹纠，傅相不能匡辅，陛下隆於友于，不忍遏绝，恐遂滋蔓，为害弥大。
现代文：州刺史府不敢弹劾纠察，王国傅、相不能匡正辅佐，陛下手足情深，不忍心加以阻止，恐怕会越来越滋长蔓延，为害更大。
English: The State Historian's Office dares not impeach the pickets, the Kingdom's Minister and Vice-Minister cannot correct and assist, and His Majesty's brothers and sisters are very affectionate and cannot bear to stop them. I am afraid that they will grow and spread, causing even greater harm.

古文：乞露臣奏，宣示百僚，平处其法。
现代文：我请求将我的奏章向百官公布，公平地依法对他进行处理。
English: I request that my report be made public to the authorities and that he be dealt with fairly and in accordance with the law.

古文：法决罪定，乃下不忍之诏；臣下固执，然后少有所许。
现代文：等到判决定罪以后，陛下再颁布不忍惩罚的诏令，臣下坚持要对他进行处理，然后陛下再稍稍让步。
English: After the guilty verdict, His Majesty will issue a decree of no tolerance, and his subjects will insist on dealing with him, and then His Majesty will give in a little.

古文：如是，则圣朝无伤亲之讥，勃海有享国之庆。不然，惧大狱将兴矣。 
现代文：这样，圣明朝廷就不会受到伤害亲戚的讥讽，勃海国就能够庆幸保全，不然的话，恐怕将会兴起大狱。 
English: In this way, the Holy Ming Dynasty will not be hurt by relatives' ridicule, and the Bohai Kingdom can be preserved, otherwise, I am afraid that hell will arise.

古文：上不听。
现代文：桓帝不听。
English: The Emperor did not listen to him.

古文：悝果谋为不道；有司请废之，诏贬为瘿陶王，食一县。
现代文：刘悝果然图谋反叛朝廷，有关官吏请求将他废黜。桓帝下诏，将刘悝贬为瘿陶王，只享有一个县的食邑。
English: Liu Bei successfully plotted to rebel against the imperial court, and the officials concerned requested that he be dethroned. Emperor Kuan issued an edict, relegating Liu Bei to the status of the king of Taoism, with only one county of food.

古文：丙申晦，日有食之。
现代文：丙申晦，发生日食。
English: On the 30th, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：诏公、卿、校尉举贤良方正。
现代文：桓帝下诏，命三公、九卿、校尉向朝廷推荐 贤良方正 人才。
English: Emperor Kan issued an edict ordering the three princes, nine nobles, and the captain of the school to recommend the virtuous Fang Zheng to the imperial court.

古文：千秋万岁殿火。
现代文：千秋万岁殿失火。
English: The hall of fame is on fire.

古文：中常侍侯览兄参为益州刺史，残暴贪婪，累臧亿计。
现代文：中常侍侯览的弟弟侯参担任益州刺史，残暴贪婪，赃款累计多达一亿。
English: The younger brother of the middle-ranking attendant, Hou Shan, served as the history of Yizhou, cruel and greedy, and the accumulated stolen money was as much as one hundred million.

古文：太尉杨秉奏槛车征参，参于道自杀，阅其车重三百馀两，皆金银锦帛。
现代文：太尉杨秉进行弹劾，朝廷用囚车把侯参押解回京，侯参在途中自杀。查看他携载物资的三百余辆车，装的都是金银和锦帛。
English: Second Lieutenant Yang Bing carried out the impeachment, and the imperial court used a prison wagon to escort Hou Zhan back to Beijing. Hou Zhan committed suicide on the way. Check out the more than three hundred cars he carried with supplies, all loaded with gold and silver and brocade.

古文：秉因奏曰： 臣案旧典，宦官本在给使省闼，司昏守夜；而今猥受过宠，执政操权，附会者因公褒举，违忤者求事中伤，居法王公，富拟国家，饮食极肴膳，仆妾盈纨素。
现代文：因此，杨秉又上书弹劾说： 我查考朝廷旧有的典章制度，宦官本来只限于在皇宫内听候差遣，负责早晚看守门户，而今却大多倍受过份的宠信，掌握朝廷大权。凡是依附宦官的人，宦官就趁着朝廷征用人才时推荐他们做官；凡是违背和冒犯宦官的人，宦官便随便找一个借口对他们进行中伤。宦官的居处效法王公，他们拥有的财富可与帝王相比，饮食极尽佳肴珍膳，奴仆侍妾都穿精致洁白的细绢。
English: Therefore, Yang Bing also wrote a letter of impeachment, saying: I checked the old system of the imperial court. Eunuchs were originally limited to waiting for instructions in the imperial palace and were responsible for guarding the portals in the morning and evening, but now most of them have been favored and hold the power of the imperial court. For those who rely on eunuchs, the eunuchs take advantage of the talent requisitioned by the imperial court to recommend them as officials; for those who violate and offend eunuchs, the eunuchs will find an excuse to slander them. The residence of eunuchs follows the example of the pharaohs. The wealth they possess can be

古文：中常侍侯览弟参，贪残元恶，自取祸灭。
现代文：中常侍侯览的弟弟侯参，是贪赃残暴的首恶，自取灾祸和灭亡。
English: Hou Zhan, the younger brother of the middle-ranking attendant Hou Zhan, was the first evil of greed and brutality, and he brought disaster and destruction upon himself.

古文：览顾知衅重，必有自疑之意，臣愚以为不宜复见亲近。
现代文：侯览深知罪恶深重，一定会自感疑惧不安，我愚昧地认为，不应该把侯览再放在陛下左右。
English: Houchen is well aware of the seriousness of the crime and will certainly feel suspicious and uneasy. I foolishly believe that Houchen should no longer be placed around His Majesty.

古文：昔懿公刑邴蜀阝之父，夺阎职之妻，而使二人参乘，卒有竹中之难。
现代文：过去，齐懿公给崐邴的父亲加刑，又夺去阎职的妻子，却使他们二人陪同乘车，终于发生竹林中的大祸。
English: In the past, Qi Yonggong gave Yan's father a longer sentence, and took away Yan Rong's wife, but they were both accompanied by a car, and finally there was a big accident in the bamboo forest.

古文：览宜急屏斥，投畀有虎，若斯之人，非恩所宥，请免官送归本郡。 
现代文：因此，侯览应被急速斥退，投到豺狼虎豹群中。像这一类人，不能施行恩德宽恕罪行，请免除官职，送回本郡。 
English: Therefore, Hou Xiang should be quickly expelled and thrown into a pack of wolves, tigers and leopards. People like this can not carry out the crime of grace and forgiveness, please be removed from office and sent back to this county.

古文：书奏，尚书召对秉掾属，诘之曰： 设官分职，各有司存。
现代文：奏章呈上以后，尚书召来杨秉的属吏，责问说： 朝廷设立官职，各有各的职责范围。
English: After the petition was submitted, Shangshu summoned Yang Bing's subordinate officials and scolded them, saying: The imperial court has set up official positions, each of which has its own scope of responsibility.

古文：三公统外，御史察内。
现代文：三公对外管理政务，御史对内监察官吏。
English: The three dukes managed the external affairs of the government, while the shogun acted as an internal inspector.

古文：今越奏近官，经典、汉制，何所依据？
现代文：而今，三公超越的职责范围，弹劾皇宫内的宦官，无论是经书典籍，还是汉朝制度，有什么根据？
English: But now, what is the basis for the impeachment of eunuchs in the imperial palace, whether from the scriptures or the Han Dynasty system, since the three princes have exceeded the scope of their duties?

古文：其开公具对！ 
现代文：请公开作具体答复。 
English: Please respond publicly and specifically.

古文：秉使对曰： 《春秋传》曰： 除君之恶，唯力是视。 
现代文：杨秉派遣的属吏回答说： 《春秋左传》上说： 为君王排奸去恶，要使出全身的力量。 
English: The subordinate official dispatched by Yang Bing replied: "Spring and Autumn Legend" said: "To root out evil for the king, you must use the strength of your whole body."

古文：邓通懈慢，申屠嘉召通诘责，文帝从而请之。
现代文：邓通懈怠轻慢，申屠嘉召邓通进行责问，汉文帝因而为邓通说情。
English: Dantong was slack and careless, Shen Tuo Jia summoned Dantong for questioning, and Emperor Han Wen thus interceded for Dantong.

古文：汉世故事，三公之职，无所不统。
现代文：汉朝的传统制度是，三公的职责，没有一件事情不可以过问。 
English: The traditional system of the Han Dynasty is that the duties of the three princes, no one thing can not be questioned.

古文：尚书不能诘，帝不得已，竟免览官。
现代文：尚书无法反驳。桓帝迫不得已，终于将侯览免职。
English: Shangshu couldn't refute it, and Emperor Kuan finally had no choice but to remove Houchen from his post.

古文：司隶校尉韩縯因奏左悺罪恶，及其兄太仆南乡侯称请托州郡，聚敛为奸，宾客放纵，侵犯吏民。
现代文：司隶校尉韩乘机弹劾左的罪恶，以及左的哥哥、南乡侯左称向州郡官府请托，搜刮财货，作奸犯科，宾客放纵，侵犯官吏和百姓的罪过。
English: Sifu Captain Han took the opportunity to impeach Zuo's sins, as well as Zuo's brother, Nanxiang Hou Zuo, who said that he asked the state and county government for help, scavenged goods, committed crimes, indulged guests, and violated officials and the people.

古文：悺、称皆自杀。
现代文：左、左称都自杀了。
English: Both the left eunuch and the left prelate committed suicide.

古文：又奏中常侍具瑗兄沛相恭臧罪，征诣廷尉。
现代文：韩又弹劾中常侍具瑗的哥哥、沛国相具恭贪赃枉法。
English: Han also impeached his elder brother, Pei Guozhong, who often served as the vice-premier.

古文：瑗诣狱谢，上还东武侯印绶，诏贬为都乡侯。
现代文：桓帝下令将具恭征召回京都洛阳，送到廷尉狱治罪。于是，具瑗也主动到廷尉狱认罪，并向上交东武侯印信。桓帝下诏将具瑗贬封为都乡侯。
English: Emperor Kuan ordered that Gukong be called back to Kyoto's Luoyang and sent to Tingye Prison to be punished. As a result, Gukje also took the initiative to go to Tingye Prison to confess his guilt, and sent a letter to the prince of Dongwu. Emperor Kuan decreed that Gukje would be demoted to the status of capital township.

古文：超及璜、衡袭封者，并降为乡侯，子弟分封者，悉夺爵土。
现代文：单超及徐璜、唐衡的封爵继承人都被贬为乡侯，子弟得到分封的，全部取消封爵和食邑。
English: The heirs of the knighthoods of Shanchao, Xu Xi and Tang Heng were all reduced to the status of townspeople, and the knighthoods and food townships of their children were all cancelled.

古文：刘普等贬为关内侯，尹勋等亦皆夺爵。
现代文：刘普等被贬为关内侯，尹勋等也都被取消封爵。
English: Liu Pu and others were demoted to Guan Nei Hou, and Yin Xun and others were also stripped of their peerages.

古文：帝多内宠，宫女至五六千人，及驱役从使复兼倍于此，而邓后恃尊骄忌，与帝所幸郭贵人更相谮诉。
现代文：桓帝拥有许多后妃，宫女达到五六千人，其他供驱使的仆役，还是这个数目的两倍。邓皇后仗恃她的尊贵地位，骄傲忌妒，跟桓帝宠幸的郭贵人互相诬陷和控告。
English: Emperor Huan had many concubines, with palace maids reaching five or six thousand, and other servants to drive them, still twice this number. Empress Deng coveted her noble position, was proud and jealous, and framed and sued Guo Guiren, who was Emperor Huan's favorite.

古文：癸亥，废皇后邓氏，送暴室，以忧死。
现代文：二月癸亥，邓皇后被废，送往暴室监禁。
English: In February of the Year of the Rooster, Empress Deng was deposed and sent to a violent prison.

古文：河南尹邓万世、虎贲中郎将邓会皆下狱诛。
现代文：邓皇后忧愤而死。河南尹邓万世、虎贲中郎将邓会，都被逮捕下狱诛杀。
English: Empress Deng died of grief and anger. Henan Yin Deng Wansei and Tigress Chung Lang, the leader of the Deng Association, were both arrested and beaten to death.

古文：护羌校尉段颎击罕姐羌，破之。
现代文：护羌校尉率军进击罕姐羌人部落，将其击破。
English: The bodyguard, Lieutenant Duan Yu, went out to attack the Han sisters and defeat them.

古文：三月，辛巳，赦天下。
现代文：三月辛巳，大赦天下。
English: As soon as March is over, there will be a general amnesty.

古文：宛陵大姓羊元群罢北海郡，臧污狼籍；郡舍溷轩有奇巧，亦载之以归。
现代文：宛陵县的大族羊元群，在北海郡太守任上被罢免。他贪赃枉法，声名狼藉，郡府中厕所里装有精巧的设备，都被他载运回家。
English: Yang Yuanqun, a member of the large ethnic group from Wanling County, was removed from his post as the governor of Beihai County. He was notorious for his corrupt practices, and the toilets in the county government's middle school were equipped with sophisticated equipment, all of which he transported home.

古文：河南尹李膺表按其罪；元群行赂宦官，膺竟反坐。
现代文：河南尹李膺向朝廷上表，请求审查和验问羊元群的罪行。羊元群向宦官们行贿，李膺竟被宦官们指控为诬告，遭受 反坐 之罪。
English: Yin Lijuan of Henan Province petitioned the imperial court to review and interrogate the crimes of Yangyuanqun. Yangyuanqun paid bribes to eunuchs, but Li Jian was accused by eunuchs of making false accusations and suffered the crime of sedition.

古文：单超弟迁为山阳太守，以罪系狱，廷尉冯绲考致其死；中官相党，共飞章诬绲以罪。
现代文：单超的弟弟单迁担任山阳郡太守，因为犯法被囚禁在监狱，廷尉冯绲将他拷打下致死。于是宦官们互相结党，共同起草匿名信，诬告冯绲有罪。
English: Shanchao's brother, Shanqian, served as the governor of Shanyang County. He was imprisoned in prison for breaking the law, and the eunuch Feng Yu tortured him to death. So the eunuchs formed a party and jointly drafted an anonymous letter to falsely accuse Feng Yu of guilt.

古文：中常侍苏康、管霸，固天下良田美业，州郡不敢诘，大司农刘祐移书所在，依科品没入之；帝大怒，与膺、绲俱输作左校。
现代文：中常侍苏康、管霸用贱价强买天下良田美业，州郡官府不敢责问，大司农刘向当地发送公文，依照法令，予以没收。桓帝大为震怒，下令把刘和李膺、冯绲，都一道送往左校营，罚服苦役。
English: Su Kang, the vice-chancellor, and Guan Ba used the low price to forcefully buy the world's good rice field beauty industry, and the state and county government did not dare to ask questions. The chief secretary, farmer Liu, sent official documents to the local area and confiscated them in accordance with the law. Emperor Kuan was very angry and ordered Liu, Li Yao and Feng Yao to be sent to Zuo School Camp together and be punished with hard labor.

古文：夏，四月，甲寅，安陵园寝火。
现代文：夏季，四月甲寅，西汉惠帝陵园安陵寝殿失火。
English: In the summer, in April, the Mausoleum of Emperor Hui of the Western Han Dynasty caught fire.

古文：丁巳，诏坏郡国诸淫祀，特留雒阳王涣、密县卓茂二祠。
现代文：丁巳，桓帝下诏，命各郡各封国拆除滥设的祠庙，仅准许保留京都洛阳王涣和密县卓茂这两处祠庙。
English: At the same time, Emperor Kan issued an edict ordering all counties and fiefdoms to demolish temples that had been built without permission. Only the two temples in Kyoto's Luoyang Wangye and Zhuo in My County were allowed to remain.

古文：五月，丙戌，太尉杨秉薨。
现代文：五月丙戌，太尉杨秉去世。
English: In May, Second Lieutenant Yang Bing passed away.

古文：秉为人，清白寡欲，尝称 我有三不惑：酒、色、财也。 
现代文：杨秉为人清白，欲望很少，曾经自称 我有三不惑：美酒、女色、钱财。 
English: Yang Bing is an innocent person with few desires. He once said, "I have three things I don't care about: fine wine, women, and money."

古文：秉既没，所举贤良广陵刘瑜乃至京师上书言： 中官不当比肩裂土，竞立胤嗣，继体传爵。
现代文：杨秉去世后，他所推荐的贤良、广陵人刘瑜前往京都洛阳上书说： 宦官不应当都裂土分封，竞相选立养子，继承他们的爵位。
English: After the death of Yang Bing, Liu Yu, a virtuous person from Guangling who was recommended by him, went to Luoyang, Kyoto, to submit a letter saying: Eunuchs should not all divide the land and compete to select foster children to inherit their titles.

古文：又，嬖女充积，冗食空宫，伤生费国。
现代文：而美女充斥，无事坐食空宫，不但伤害民生，而且耗费国家财富。
English: However, it is full of beautiful women, who sit idle in empty palaces, which not only harms people's livelihood, but also consumes national wealth.

古文：又，第舍增多，穷极奇巧，掘山攻石，促以严刑。
现代文：还有，宅第巨舍不断增多，式样极其奇异精巧，用严刑峻法催逼人民营造。
English: Moreover, the number of huge houses is constantly increasing, the style is extremely strange and exquisite, and the people are forced to build them by severe punishment.

古文：州郡官府，各自考事，奸情赇赂，皆为吏饵。
现代文：州郡宫府，各审各的官司，为非作恶的人利用贿赂买通官吏，逍遥法外。
English: State and county government offices, individual interrogation of prisoners, adultery and bribery are all ways for government officials to make money.

古文：民愁郁结，起入贼党，官辄兴兵诛讨其罪。
现代文：人民愁苦忧闷，有冤无处伸诉，被迫加入了盗贼之党，官府就征调军队，讨伐他们的罪行。
English: The people are sad and depressed, they have no place to appeal for grievances, they were forced to join the thieves' party, and the government mobilized the army to fight their crimes.

古文：贫困之民，或有卖其首级以要酬赏，父兄相代残身，妻孥相视分裂。
现代文：贫困的人民，有的甚至出卖自己的人头，去向官府领取悬赏，父亲和兄长互相替代杀身，妻子和儿女眼看着亲人死去。
English: Poor people have even sold their own heads to claim rewards. Fathers and brothers mutilate each other's bodies as a substitute, and husbands and wives are separated from each other.

古文：又，陛下好微行近习之家，私幸宦者之舍，宾客市买，熏灼道路，因此暴纵，无所不容。
现代文：陛下又喜好微服出行到左右亲近的人家里，私自到宦官的住宅，使他们的宾客到处兜售这些消息，把整个道路弄得乌烟瘴气，他们因此凶暴骄纵，无所不用其极。
English: His majesty was also fond of travelling in disguise to the homes of his near and dear, and privately to the residences of the eunuchs, causing their guests to peddle these tidings far and wide, so that the whole road was darkened with smoke. They were therefore ferociously proud, and used every means to the utmost.

古文：惟陛下开广谏道，博观前古，远佞邪之人，放郑、卫之声，则政致和平，德感祥风矣。 
现代文：请陛下广开言路，听取臣下的规劝和进谏，多多观察上古的经验和教训，疏远奸佞邪恶的人，不听郑国、卫国的淫荡音乐，则政治达到和平，恩德普降天下，吉祥的和风自然来临。 
English: I would like to ask His Majesty to broaden his speech, listen to the persuasions and advancements of his subjects, pay more attention to the experience and lessons of the ancients, alienate the traitors and evil people, and not listen to the lewd music of Zheng Guo and the motherland. Then politics will achieve peace, Ndebele will descend to the world, and auspicious peace will naturally come.

古文：诏特召瑜问灾咎之征。
现代文：桓帝下诏，特召刘瑜，向他询问灾异的迹象和预兆。
English: Emperor Kuan issued an edict calling Liu Yu to inquire about the signs and omens of the disaster.

古文：执政者欲令瑜依违其辞，乃更策以它事，瑜复悉心对八千馀言，有切于前，拜为议郎。
现代文：掌握朝政大权的官员想让刘瑜在回答时含糊其辞，于是改问别的事情。可是刘瑜再次尽心回奏，共八千余言，言辞比从前的上书更为激烈。桓帝任命他为议郎。
English: The official who held the power of the government wanted Liu Yu to be vague in his answer, so he changed the question to something else. However, Liu Yu once again tried his best to reply, with a total of more than eight thousand words, and the rhetoric was more intense than the previous submission. Emperor Huan appointed him as a negotiator.

古文：荆州兵硃盖等叛，与桂阳贼胡兰等复攻桂阳，太守任胤弃城走，贼众遂至数万。
现代文：荆州士兵朱盖等反叛，和桂阳郡贼帅胡兰等，再次攻打桂阳城。太守任胤充城逃走，盗贼的人数于是多达数万。
English: Jingzhou soldier Zhu Gai and other rebels, and Guiyang County thief commander Hulan and others, once again attacked Guiyang City. The governor Ren Yan fled the city, and the number of thieves was as high as tens of thousands.

古文：转攻零陵，太守下邳陈球固守拒之。
现代文：转而攻打零陵郡，零陵郡太守下邳人陈球坚决进行守御和抵抗。
English: Instead, they attacked Luling County. The governor of Luling County, Chen Gu, resolutely defended and resisted.

古文：零陵下湿，编木为城，郡中惶恐。
现代文：因零陵地势低洼，十分潮湿，城墙是用木头编筑而成的，所以城中的人们恐慌不安。
English: Due to the low-lying, very humid terrain of Joling, the city walls are made of wood, so people in the city are panicked.

古文：掾史白球遣家避难，球怒曰： 太守分国虎符，受任一邦，岂顾妻孥而沮国威乎！
现代文：太守府的属吏建议陈球把家属送走避难，陈球大怒说： 我身为太守，掌握国家的兵符，负责一郡的安全，岂可以为了自己的妻子和儿女而败坏国家的声威呢？
English: An official of the Dai Shoufu advised Chen Ku to send his family members away for refuge. Chen Ku said angrily, "I, as the Dai Shou, hold the military insignia of the country and am responsible for the safety of a county. Can I ruin the reputation of the country for the sake of my wife and children?"

古文：复言者斩！ 
现代文：有再说这种话的人，处斩！ 
English: By the way, kill the head!

古文：乃弦大木为方，羽矛为矢，引机发之，多所杀伤。
现代文：于是，用大木制造弓弦，在矛上粘上羽毛当箭，用机械发射，杀伤不少的盗贼。
English: As a result, they used large trees to make bow strings, stuck feathers on spears to use them as arrows, and fired them mechanically, killing and wounding many thieves.

古文：贼激流灌城，球辄于内因地势，反决水淹贼，相拒十馀日不能下。
现代文：盗贼又堵塞河流，引水灌城，陈球在城内，随即顺着地势，反过来决水去淹盗贼，抵抗了十余天，盗贼无法攻破。
English: The thieves also blocked the river, diverted water to flood the city, and the Chen ball was in the city, then followed the terrain, and in turn broke the water to flood the thieves. They resisted for more than ten days, and the thieves could not break through.

古文：时度尚征还京师，诏以尚为中郎将，率步骑二万馀人救球，发诸郡兵并势讨击，大破之，斩兰等首三千馀级，复以尚为荆州刺史。
现代文：这时，正遇上度尚被调回京都洛阳，桓帝下诏，任命他为中郎将，并率领步兵和骑兵共二万余人，南下援救陈球。度尚征发各郡的地方军队，联合进行讨伐，大破朱盖、胡兰等叛军，斩杀胡兰等三千余人。朝廷重新任命度尚为荆州刺史。
English: At this time, Emperor Kuan issued an edict appointing Du Shang as the second-in-command, and he led a total of more than 20,000 infantry and cavalry to the south to rescue Chen Qu. Du Shang conscripted local troops from all counties, jointly carried out a crusade, defeated rebels such as Zhu Gai and Hulan, and killed more than 3,000 people such as Hulan. The imperial court reappointed Du Shang as the governor of Jingzhou.

古文：苍梧太守张叙为贼所执，及任胤皆征弃市。
现代文：苍梧郡太守张叙曾被盗贼军队俘虏，他和桂阳郡太守任胤都被召回京都洛阳，在街市斩首示众。
English: Zhang Xiu, the governor of Cangwu County, was once captured by an army of thieves. Both he and Guiyang County governor Renlin were recalled to Luoyang, Kyoto, where they beheaded each other in public.

古文：辞状未正，会赦见原，磐不肯出狱，方更牢持械节。
现代文：胡兰的残余部众南逃到苍梧郡，交趾刺史张磐将其击破，盗贼又重新返回荆州境内，荆州刺史度尚害怕成为自己的过失，于是上书谎称苍梧郡盗贼进入荆州境界。
English: The remnants of Hulan fled south to Cangwu County, and the thief was defeated by Zhang Ban, the thief returned to the territory of Jingzhou. The thief was still afraid of becoming his own fault, so he falsely claimed that the thief from Cangwu County had entered the territory of Jingzhou.

古文：狱吏谓磐曰： 天恩旷然，而君不出，何乎？ 
现代文：于是朝廷将张磐征召回京都洛阳，囚入廷尉狱。
English: As a result, the imperial court called Zhang Bang back to Kyoto Luoyang and imprisoned him in the imperial prison.

古文：磐曰： 磐备位方伯，为尚所枉，受罪牢狱。
现代文：供辞和罪状尚未确定，正遇上大赦而被免罪，可是张磐不肯出狱，而将所带刑具的接合处加固。狱吏对张磐说： 皇恩浩荡，而你不肯出狱，能这样做吗？ 
English: The confession and the charges have not yet been determined, and he is being amnestied and exonerated, but Zhang Ban refuses to leave prison, and instead reinforces the joint of the torture device he brought with him. The prison guards said to Zhang Ban: The imperial grace is great, but you refuse to leave prison, can you do this?

古文：夫事有虚实，法有是非，磐实不辜，赦无所除；如忍以苟免，永受侵辱之耻，生为恶吏，死为敝鬼。
现代文：张磐回答说： 我身为一州的地方长官，被度尚诬告，投入监狱，备受苦刑。事情应该分清虚假和真实，法律应该辨明谁是谁非。我确实没有犯罪，赦罪之令与我无干。如果我忍气吞声，只求免除眼前的痛苦，却要遭受永远的耻辱，活着是恶吏，死后是恶鬼。
English: Zhang Ban replied: As a prefect of a prefecture, I have been falsely accused, thrown into prison, and prepared to suffer. Things should be distinguished between the false and the true, and the law should identify who is right and who is wrong. I really did not commit a crime, and the order to pardon me is irrelevant. If I swallow my pride and only ask to be spared the immediate pain, I will suffer eternal shame, live as an evil official, and die as an evil ghost.

古文：乞传尚诣廷尉，面对曲直，足明真伪。
现代文：我请求用传车将度尚征召到廷尉狱，当面对质，一定可以辨明真假。
English: The request has not yet been passed on to the courtier here, and in the face of distortion, it is clear that it is false.

古文：尚不征者，磐埋骨牢槛，终不虚出，望尘受枉！ 
现代文：如果不准许征召度尚，我将把骨头埋葬在监狱之中，始终不能背着虚假的罪名出狱，蒙受飞来的冤枉。
English: If I am not allowed to be drafted, I will bury my bones in prison, and I will never be able to get out of prison on the back of a false accusation, and I will be wronged.

古文：廷尉以其状上，诏书征尚，到廷尉，辞穷，受罪，以先有功得原。
现代文：崐 廷尉将上述情况报告给桓帝，桓帝下诏，将度尚征召回京，到廷尉狱和张磐对质。度尚理屈辞穷，本应治罪。但因他先前有功劳，免予惩处。
English: The imperial lieutenant reported the above-mentioned situation to Emperor Huan, and Emperor Huan issued an edict summoning Du Shang back to Beijing to confront Zhang Bang in the imperial lieutenant's prison. Du Shang rationally declined and should have been punished. However, because of his previous merits, he was exempted from punishment.

古文：闰月，甲午，南宫朔平署火。
现代文：闰月甲午，南宫北门朔平署失火。
English: On the afternoon of the first day of the leap month, a fire broke out in the North Gate of the South Palace.

古文：段颎击破西羌，进兵穷追，展转山谷间，自春及秋，无日不战，虏遂败散，凡斩首二万三千级，获生口数万人，降者万馀落。
现代文：段率军击破西羌，乘胜穷追，转战山谷之间，从春季直到秋季，没有一天不战斗，反叛的羌民终于溃败和逃散，共计斩杀二万三千人，俘虏数万人，投降的有一万余落。
English: Duan led the army to break through the Xidi, take advantage of the victory and desperately chase, turn the battle between the valleys, from spring to autumn, there is no day without fighting, the rebel Xidi people were finally defeated and dispersed, a total of 23,000 people were killed, tens of thousands were captured, and more than 10,000 surrendered.

古文：封颎都乡侯。
现代文：朝廷封段为都乡侯。
English: The imperial seal section is the capital township.

古文：秋，七月，以太史大夫陈蕃为太尉。
现代文：秋季，七月，擢升太中大夫陈蕃为太尉。
English: In the autumn, in July, promoted to the rank of lieutenant.

古文：蕃让于太常胡广、议郎王畅、弛刑徒李膺，帝不许。
现代文：陈蕃先后提出，将太尉之位让给太常胡广、议郎王畅和弛刑徒李膺，桓帝没有批准。
English: Emperor Huan did not approve of Chen Yu's proposal to give the position of the first lieutenant to Taizhong Hu Guang, the negotiator Wang Chang, and the convict Li Yu.

古文：畅，龚之子也，尝为南阳太守，疾其多贵戚豪族，下车，奋厉威猛，大姓有犯，或使吏发屋伐树，堙井夷灶。
现代文：王畅是王龚的儿子，曾担任过南阳郡的太守。他痛恨南阳郡有许多的皇亲国戚和豪门大族，所以到职以后雷厉风行，遇到有大姓人家犯法，便派官吏摧毁他们的家宅房屋，砍伐树木，填平水井，铲平厨房炉灶。
English: Wang Chang is the son of Wang Qian, who once served as the governor of Nanyang County. He hated the fact that Nanyang County had many imperial relatives and wealthy families, so after taking office, he became violent. When he came across a large family breaking the law, he sent officials to destroy their homes, cut down trees, fill wells, and shovel kitchen stoves.

古文：功曹张敞奏记谏曰： 文翁、召父、卓茂之徒，皆以温厚为政，流闻后世。
现代文：功曹张敞向他上书劝阻说： 文翁、召父、卓茂等人，都是因为为政温和宽厚，从而流芳后世。
English: Gong Cao Zhang Zhang sent him a letter to dissuade him, saying: Wen Weng, Zhaofu, Zhuo Mao, and others, are all famous for their moderate and generous politics, and thus popular with future generations.

古文：发屋伐树，将为严烈，虽欲惩恶，难以闻远。
现代文：摧毁家宅房屋，砍伐树木，实在太严厉酷烈，虽然是为了惩治奸恶，可是效果难以长久。
English: Destroying homes and cutting down trees is too severe and cruel. Although it is to punish treason, the effect is not long-lasting.

古文：郡为旧都，侯甸之国，园庙出于章陵，三后生自新野，自中兴以来，功臣将相，继世而隆。
现代文：南阳郡原是古都，又在京都洛阳千里的范围之内，皇帝祖先的陵园就在章陵，三位皇后都出生于新野，自从光武帝中兴以来，功臣将相，一代接着一代崛起。
English: Nanyang County was originally the ancient capital, and within a thousand miles of Kyoto's Luoyang, the cemetery of the emperor's ancestors is in Zhangling. Three empresses were born in Nyno. Since the rise of Emperor Guangwu, meritorious generals have risen one generation after another.

古文：愚以为恳恳用刑，不如行恩；孳孳求奸，未若礼贤。
现代文：我愚昧地认为，与其急切地用刑，不如推行恩德；与其孜孜不倦地去缉拿奸恶之徒，不如礼敬贤能。
English: I thought that to hasten punishment was better than to show mercy, and that to be diligent in prosecution was better than to be virtuous.

古文：舜举皋陶，不仁者远，化人在德，不在用刑。 
现代文：虞舜推荐皋陶，邪恶的人自然远离。教化人民，靠的是恩德，不是靠严刑峻法。 
English: The evil people naturally stay away. To educate the people, rely on benevolence, not on harsh punishments.

古文：畅深纳其言，更崇宽政，教化大行。
现代文：王畅诚恳地接受了他的建议，改为崇尚宽厚为政，使教化得以普遍推行。
English: Wang Chang sincerely accepted his suggestion and changed his policy to advocating clemency, so that the edification could be widely implemented.

古文：八月，戊辰，初令郡国有田者亩敛税钱。
现代文：八月戊辰，首次命令各郡、各封国，对有田者以亩为单位征收赋税。
English: In August, for the first time, the county and county-level governments were ordered to levy taxes on those with rice fields in units of mu.

古文：九月，丁未，京师地震。
现代文：九月丁未，京都洛阳发生地震。
English: In September, an earthquake occurred in Kyoto's Luoyang.

古文：冬，十月，司空周景免；以太常刘茂为司空，茂，恺之子也。
现代文：冬季，十月，司空同景被免官，擢升太常刘茂为司空。刘茂是刘恺的儿子。
English: In the winter, in October, Liu Mao, the son of Liu Ye, was promoted to the position of Sifu.

古文：郎中窦武，融之玄孙也，有女为贵人。
现代文：郎中窦武是窦融的玄孙，他的女儿是桓帝的贵人。
English: His son-in-law Dou Wu was the great-great-grandson of Dou Rong, and his daughter was a noblewoman of Emperor Kuan.

古文：采女田圣有宠于帝，帝将立之为后。
现代文：采女田圣受到桓帝的宠爱，桓帝打算立田圣为皇后。
English: Uneme Tian Sheng was favored by Emperor Kan, who planned to make her his empress.

古文：司隶校尉应奉上书曰： 母后之重，兴废所因；汉立飞燕，胤嗣泯绝。
现代文：司隶校尉应奉上书说： 皇后的地位非常重要，关系着国家的兴废。汉朝曾立赵飞燕为皇后，使后嗣断绝。
English: Lieutenant Sili said in a letter: "The position of the empress is very important, it is related to the prosperity of the country. The Han Dynasty once made Zhao Feiyan the empress, so that heirs were cut off.

古文：宜思《关雎》之所求，远五禁之所忌。 
现代文：陛下选立皇后，应该想到《关雎》篇中的追求，而疏远五种禁忌。 
English: We should think about the desire of "Guan Xuan" and the taboo of going too far.

古文：太尉陈蕃亦以田氏卑微，窦族良家，争之甚固。
现代文：太尉陈蕃也认为田圣出身卑微，而窦姓家族却是良家，并为此竭力争辩。
English: Second Lieutenant Chen Qi also believed that Tian Sheng was from a humble background, while the Dou family was from a good family, and he tried his best to argue for this.

古文：帝不得已，辛巳，立窦贵人为皇后，拜武为特进、城门校尉，封槐里侯。
现代文：桓帝不得已，于辛巳日，立窦贵人为皇后，擢升窦武为特进、城门校尉，封为槐里侯。
English: Emperor Kuan had no choice but to appoint Dou Gui as empress, promote Dou Wu to special envoy, castle gate captain, and make him the prince of Baili.

古文：十一月，壬子，黄门北寺火。
现代文：十一月壬子，黄门北寺失火。
English: In November, a fire broke out at the Huangmen North Temple in Renzi.

古文：陈蕃数言李膺、冯绲、刘祐之枉，请加原宥，升之爵任，言及反覆，诚辞恳切，以至流涕；帝不听。
现代文：太尉陈蕃多次向桓帝陈诉李膺、冯绲、刘所遭受的冤枉，请求加以原谅，恢复官职。再三请求，言辞恳切，甚至流泪，但桓帝不肯接受。
English: Second Lieutenant Chen Yu repeatedly petitioned Emperor Huan for forgiveness for the injustice suffered by Chen v. Li Yu, Feng Yu and Liu Gang, and for the restoration of his official position. Repeated requests, earnest words, and even tears, but Emperor Huan refused to accept.

古文：应奉上疏曰： 夫忠贤武将，国之心膂。
现代文：应奉上书说： 忠臣良将，是国家的心腹和脊梁。
English: The letter said: "Loyal and good generals are the backbone of the country.

古文：窃见左校弛刑徒冯绲、刘祐、李膺等，诛举邪臣，肆之以法；陛下既不听察，而猥受谮诉，遂令忠臣同愆元恶，自春迄冬，不蒙降恕，遐迩观听，为之叹息。
现代文：我认为，左校营弛刑徒冯绲、刘、李膺等人诛杀和弹劾奸臣，完全符合国家法令。陛下既不听取他们的陈述，调查了解事情的真相，却轻信别人的诬告，结果使忠臣良将跟大奸大恶同罪，自春季直到冬季，仍然不能蒙受宽恕。远近的人们看到和听到后，无不为之叹息。
English: In my opinion, the killing and impeachment of the traitorous minister by the left-wing camp prisoners Feng Yu, Liu, Li Yu and others is fully in line with the national laws and regulations. His Majesty did not listen to their statements, investigate and understand the truth of the matter, but believed the false accusations of others. As a result, the loyal minister Liang will be guilty of the same crime as the great traitor. From spring to winter, it still cannot be forgiven. People from far and near will sigh after seeing and hearing it.

古文：夫立政之要，记功忘失；是以武帝舍安国于徒中，宣帝征张敞于亡命。
现代文：处理政事的关键在于，要记住臣下的功劳，忘掉他们的过失。所以，汉武帝从囚徒中选拔韩安国，宣帝从逃亡犯中征召张敞。
English: The key to handling political affairs is to remember the merits of your subjects and forget their faults. Therefore, Emperor Hanwu selected Han'an from among the prisoners, and Emperor Xuan summoned Zhang Zhang from among the fugitives.

古文：绲前讨蛮荆，均吉甫之功；祐数临督司，有不吐茹之节；膺著威幽、并，遗爱度辽。
现代文：冯绲从前讨伐荆州的叛蛮，曾有和吉甫同等的功劳。刘曾多次主持司法，有不畏惧强暴和不欺侮柔弱的气节。李膺的声威震动幽州、并州，在北疆留下仁爱。
English: In the past, Feng Xuan fought against the rebels in Jingzhou, and had the same merit as Ji Fu. Liu presided over justice many times, and had the temperament not to fear violence and not to bully the weak. Li Xuan's voice shook Yuzhou and Bianzhou, and left benevolence in Northern Xinjiang.

古文：今三垂蠢动，王旅未振，乞原膺等，以备不虞。 
现代文：而今，三面的边陲都有战事，而朝廷的军队又都没有班师回京，请求陛下宽赦李膺等人，以备发生意料不到的变化。 
English: But now, there are wars on three sides of the border, and the imperial army has not yet returned to Beijing, asking His Majesty to pardon Li Xi and others in case of unexpected changes.

古文：书奏，乃悉免其刑。
现代文：奏章呈上，桓帝这才下令免除三人全部的刑罚。
English: According to the report, all of them were exempted from punishment.

古文：久之，李膺复拜司隶校尉。
现代文：过了很久，李膺被重新任命为司隶校尉。
English: After a long time, Li Yao was reappointed as the captain of Sili.

古文：时小黄门张让弟朔为野王令，贪残无道，畏膺威严，逃还京师，匿于兄家合柱中。
现代文：当时小黄门张让的弟弟张朔担任野王县的县令，贪污残暴，没有德政，因为畏惧李膺的严厉，逃回京都洛阳，躲在他哥哥张让家的合柱中。
English: At that time, Xiao Huangmen Zhang Zhan's younger brother, Zhang Shuo, served as the county magistrate of Yanwang County. He was corrupt and brutal, and had no virtue. Because he was afraid of Li Xi's severity, he fled back to Luoyang, Kyoto, and hid in the colonnade of his brother Zhang Zhan's house.

古文：膺知其状，率吏卒破柱取朔，付雒阳狱，受辞毕，即杀之。
现代文：李膺得知这个情况以后，率领吏卒破开合柱，将张朔逮捕，交付洛阳监狱，听完供词，立即处决。
English: After Li Wei learned of this situation, he led officers to break open and close the pillar, arrest Zhang Shuo, deliver him to Luoyang Prison, listen to his confession, and immediately execute him.

古文：让诉冤于帝，帝召膺，诘以不先请便加诛之意。
现代文：张让向桓帝诉冤，桓帝召见李膺，责问他为什么不先请求批准就加以诛杀。
English: Zhang Zang complained to Emperor Huan. Emperor Huan summoned Li Yao and asked him why he did not ask for permission to fight and kill him first.

古文：对曰： 昔仲尼为鲁司寇，七日而诛少正卯。今臣到官已积一旬，私惧以稽留为愆，不意获速疾之罪。
现代文：李膺回答说： 从前孔子担任鲁国的大司寇，七天便把少正卯处决，而今我到职已经十天，害怕因拖延时间而获罪，想不到竟会因行动太快而获罪。
English: Li Yan replied: In the past, when Confucius served as the Grand Secretary of the State of Lu, he executed Shao Zhengwu in seven days, but now I have been in office for ten days, I am afraid of being guilty of delaying time, and I did not expect to be guilty of acting too quickly.

古文：诚自知衅责，死不旋踵，特乞留五日，克殄元恶，退就鼎镬，始生之愿也。 
现代文：我深知自己罪责严重，死在眼前，特地向陛下请求，让我再在职位上停留五天，一定拿获元凶归案，然后再受烹刑，这才是我的愿望。 
English: I am well aware of the seriousness of my crime, I am dying before my eyes, and I specifically asked His Majesty to let me stay in my position for another five days, I will definitely catch the culprit, and then I will be punished, this is my wish.

古文：帝无复言，顾谓让曰： 此汝弟之罪，司隶何愆！ 
现代文：桓帝不再说话，回过头来对张让说： 这都是你弟弟的罪，司隶校尉有什么过失？ 
English: Emperor Huan stopped talking and turned to Zhang Zhan and said, "This is all your brother's fault. What is Lieutenant Sili's fault?"

古文：乃遣出。
现代文：于是，命李膺退出。
English: As a result, Li Yao was ordered to withdraw.

古文：自此诸黄门、常侍皆鞠躬屏气，休沐不敢出宫省。
现代文：从此，所有的黄门、中常侍，都谨慎恭敬，不敢大声呼吸，甚至连休假日也不敢出宫。
English: From then on, all Yellow Doors and Middle Chamberlains were cautious and respectful, not daring to breathe loudly, and even dared not leave the palace on holidays.

古文：帝怪问其故，并叩头泣曰： 畏李校尉。 
现代文：桓帝觉得很奇怪，问他们究竟是怎么一回事。大家一齐叩头哭泣说： 我们害怕司隶校尉李膺。 
English: Surprised, the emperor asked what the reason was, and they all bowed their heads and shed tears, saying, "I'm afraid of Captain Li."

古文：时朝廷日乱，纲纪颓弛，而膺独特风裁，以声名自高，士有被其容接者，名为登龙门云。
现代文：当时，朝廷的政治，一天比一天混乱，法度崩塌破坏，然而，只有李膺仍然维护朝纲，执法裁夺，因此声望一天比一天高，凡是读书的士人，能够被他容纳或接见的，都称之为 登龙门 。
English: At that time, the politics of the imperial court were becoming more and more chaotic day by day, and the legal system was collapsing and being destroyed. However, only Li Qian still upheld the imperial syllabus and enforced the law, so his reputation was becoming higher and higher day by day. Any scholar who could be accommodated or received by him was called "Tanglongmen."

古文：征东海相刘宽为尚书令。
现代文：朝廷征召东海国相刘宽担任尚书令。
English: The imperial court summoned the Minister of the East China Sea, Liu Kuan, to serve as Shang Shuling.

古文：宽，崎之子也，历典三郡，温仁多恕，虽在仓卒，未尝疾言遽色。
现代文：刘宽是刘崎的儿子。他先后担任过三个郡的太守，温和仁爱，多行宽恕，即令是时间再匆促，也从来没有疾言厉色过。
English: Liu Kuan is the son of Liu Qi. He has successively served as the governor of three counties. He is gentle, kind, and forgiving. Even if time is short, he has never spoken harshly.

古文：吏民有过，但用蒲鞭罚之，示辱而已，终不加苦。
现代文：凡是官吏和人民犯了错误，只用蒲草做的鞭子抽打，使对方精神上感到羞辱而已，始终不肯给对方增加肉体上的痛苦。
English: Whenever officials and people make mistakes, they only use a whip made of papyrus to beat them, so that the other party feels mentally humiliated, and always refuses to increase the physical pain to the other party.

古文：每见父老，慰以农里之言，少年，勉以孝悌之训，人皆悦而化之。
现代文：每次延见地方父老，总是鼓励他们努力从事农耕。遇到年轻人，则训勉他们孝顺父母，友爱兄弟。人们都很高兴地接受他的教化。
English: Every time Yan Yan met local elders, he always encouraged them to work hard in farming. When he met young people, he exhorted them to be filial to their parents and to love their brothers and sisters. People were happy to accept his enlightenment.

古文：孝桓皇帝中延熹九年
现代文：延熹九年
English: Nine years later

古文：春，正月，辛卯朔，日有食之。
现代文：春季，正月辛卯朔，发生日食。
English: In the spring, the first month of the year, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：诏公卿、郡国举至孝。
现代文：桓帝下诏，命三公、九卿、各郡、各封国向朝廷推荐 至孝 人才。
English: Emperor Kan issued an edict ordering the three princes, nine nobles, counties, and fiefdoms to recommend the most filial talents to the imperial court.

古文：太常赵典所举荀爽对策曰： 昔者圣人建天地之中而谓之礼，众礼之中，昏礼为首。
现代文：太常赵典推荐的孝廉荀爽在考试卷上回答说： 过去，圣人采集天地间的法则称之为礼。在各种礼之中，婚礼是第一位。
English: "In the past, sages collected the laws of heaven and earth and called them rites. Among all the rites, the wedding ceremony is the first.

古文：阳性纯而能施，阴体顺而能化，以礼济乐，节宣其气，故能丰子孙之祥，致老寿之福。
现代文：阳性刚纯而能施舍，阴体柔顺而能消化。用礼来节制欢乐，调和生气，所以，既能得到子孙繁衍的吉利，又能享受到延年益寿的幸福。
English: The male sex is pure and can give alms, the female body is supple and can digest. Use etiquette to control joy and reconcile anger, so you can not only get the good luck of offspring reproduction, but also enjoy the happiness of longevity.

古文：及三代之季，淫而无节，阳竭于上，阴隔于下，故周公之戒曰： 时亦罔或克寿。 
现代文：可是，等到夏、商、周三代的末世，君王乱，没有节制，阳气在上面枯竭，阴气在下面阻隔，所以，周公告诫说： 有时候，也会减少寿命。 
English: However, by the end of the Xia, Shang, and San dynasties, kings and emperors were rampant, there was no restraint, the yang was exhausted at the top, and the yin was blocked at the bottom. Therefore, the Zhou bulletin warned: Sometimes, life expectancy will also be reduced.

古文：《传》曰： 截趾适屦，孰云其愚，何与斯人，追欲丧躯。 
现代文：经传上说： 有人脚大鞋小，为了能够穿鞋，不惜截掉脚趾，谁说他蠢？还有比他更蠢的人，为了追求淫欲，甚至不惜丧失自己的生命。 
English: The legend says: Some people have big feet and small shoes, and they are willing to cut off their toes in order to be able to wear shoes. Who says he is stupid? And there are even more stupid people who are willing to lose their lives in order to pursue lust.

古文：诚可痛也。
现代文：实在令人悲痛。
English: It's just heartbreaking.

古文：臣窃闻后宫采女五六千人，从官、侍使复在其外，空赋不辜之民，以供无用之女，百姓穷困于外，阴阳隔塞于内，故感动和气，灾异屡臻。
现代文：我听说皇宫之中，采女竟有五六千人之多，而侍从的女官、宫女还不在此限。徒然赋敛无辜的人民，来供养无用的女子，百姓在外面贫穷困苦，阴阳在皇宫里面隔绝，所以，冲击了和谐之气，天象才不断发生变异。
English: I have heard that there are as many as five or six thousand concubines in the imperial palace, and this is not limited to the female attendants and maids of honor. It is in vain to encourage innocent people to support useless women. The people are poor and needy outside, and yin and yang are isolated inside the imperial palace. Therefore, the harmony has been impacted, and the celestial bodies are constantly changing.

古文：臣愚以为诸未幸御者，一皆遣出，使成妃合，此诚国家之大福也。 
现代文：我愚昧地认为，应将那些没有被陛下召幸过的女子，一律都遣出皇宫，使她们婚配，这确实是国家的大福。 
English: I foolishly believed that all the women who had not been called by His Majesty should be sent out of the palace to get married, which is indeed a great blessing for the country.

古文：诏拜郎中。
现代文：桓帝下诏，任命荀爽为郎中。
English: Emperor Kanto issued an edict, appointing Shosaku as a retainer.

古文：司隶、豫州饥，死者什四五，至有灭户者。
现代文：司隶、豫州发生饥荒，饿死的人有十分之四五，有的家庭甚至没有留下一个人。
English: Famine occurred in Shili and Yuzhou. Forty-five out of ten people died of starvation, and some families did not even have a single person left.

古文：诏征张奂为大司农，复以皇甫规代为度辽将军。
现代文：桓帝下诏，征召张奂，任命他为大司农，重新任命皇甫规接替张奂担任度辽将军。
English: Emperor Kuan issued an edict, conscripted Zhang Ye, appointed him as the chief farmer, and reappointed Emperor Fu Jie to succeed Zhang Ye as General Du Liao.

古文：规自以连在大位，欲求退避，数上病，不见听。
现代文：皇甫规因自己一连担任高官职位，为了谋求退避，不断上书称病，要求辞职，朝廷都不批准。
English: Because he had been holding high-ranking positions for a long time, in order to seek refuge, the emperor Fubei constantly wrote a letter saying that he was ill and asked to resign, but the court did not approve.

古文：会友人丧至，规越界迎之，因令客密告并州刺史胡芳，言规擅远军营，当急举奏。
现代文：正好有朋友灵柩运回故乡安葬，皇甫规越过辖区边界迎接，然后派他的宾客秘密告诉并州刺史胡芳，指控皇甫规擅自远离军营，应当紧急向朝廷检举弹劾。
English: Just as a friend's coffin was being transported back to his hometown for burial, Wang Fuxi crossed the jurisdictional boundary to meet him, and then sent his guest to secretly tell the concubine Shi Hu Fang, accusing Wang Fuxi of staying away from the military camp without permission, and should urgently report to the imperial court for impeachment.

古文：芳曰： 威明欲避第仕涂，故激发我耳。
现代文：胡芳说： 皇甫规为了想早日脱离官场，所以，对我采取这种激将法。
English: Hu Fang said, "Weiming wants to come in second and leave the career path, so inspire me."

古文：吾当为朝廷爱才，何能申此子计邪！ 
现代文：我应该为朝廷爱惜人才，不能中他的计。 
English: I am supposed to love talent for the imperial court. How can I help him with his plans?

古文：遂无所问。
现代文：便不闻不问。
English: They ignored him.

古文：夏，四月，济阴、东郡、济北、平原河水清。
现代文：夏季，四月，济阴郡、东郡、济北国、平原郡等地黄河河水澄清。
English: In the summer, in April, the water of the Yellow River in Jiyin County, Dong County, Jibei Province, Pingyuan County and other places was clarified.

古文：司徒许栩免；五月，以太常胡广为司徒。
现代文：司徒许栩被免官。五月，擢升太常胡广为司徒。
English: In May, he was promoted to sōtō.

古文：庚午，上亲祠老子于濯龙宫，以文罽为坛饰，淳金釦器，设华盖之坐，用郊天乐。
现代文：庚午，桓帝在濯龙宫亲自祭祀老子。祭坛用西方夷族纺织的毛毡装饰，陈列纯金镶边的祭器，座位上设置豪华的伞盖，演奏郊外祭天时的乐曲。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, Emperor Kuan personally offered sacrifices to Lao Zi at the Dragon Palace. The altar was decorated with Western Yi textile felt, displaying pure gold-trimmed sacrificial vessels, with luxurious umbrella covers on the seats, and the music of the suburban festival was played.

古文：鲜卑闻张奂去，招结南匈奴及乌桓同叛。
现代文：鲜卑听说张奂被调回京都洛阳，于是召集南匈奴和乌桓一齐起兵反叛。
English: Xianbei heard that Zhang Ye had been transferred back to Luoyang, Kyoto, so he called together the Southern Xiongnu and the Wuhuan to rebel.

古文：六月，南匈奴、乌桓、鲜卑数道入塞，寇掠缘边九郡。
现代文：六月，南匈奴、乌桓、鲜卑分兵数路，攻入边塞，劫掠沿边九郡。
English: In June, the Southern Xiongnu, Wuhuan and Xianbei detachments broke into several border fortresses and plundered nine counties along the border.

古文：秋，七月，鲜卑复入塞，诱引东羌与共盟诅。
现代文：秋季，七月，鲜卑再次攻入边塞，引诱东羌部落共同盟誓。
English: In the autumn, in July, the Xianbei once again invaded the border fortress, luring the Dongyi tribe into a common oath.

古文：于是上郡沈氐、安定先零诸种共寇武威、张掖，缘边大被其毒。
现代文：于是上郡的沈氐、安定郡的先零等部羌民联合攻打武威郡、张掖郡，使沿边的郡县深受其害。
English: As a result, the Shang County Shen clan and the Stability First Zero all invaded Wuwei and Zhangye, and the border area suffered greatly.

古文：诏复以张奂为护匈奴中郎将，以九卿秩督幽、并、凉三州及度辽、乌桓二营，兼察刺史、二千石能否。
现代文：桓帝下诏，重新任命张奂为护匈奴中郎将，领取和九卿同等的薪俸，督察幽、并、凉三州和度辽将军、护乌桓校尉两营的军事，兼负责考核州刺史和郡太守的政绩。
English: Emperor Kuan issued an edict to reappoint Zhang Ye as the middle commander of the Xiongnu Protection Corps, receiving the same salary as the nine nobles, inspecting the military of the two battalions of Yu, Bian, Liang San Zhou and Du Liao generals, and Wu Huan lieutenant, and was also responsible for assessing the political performance of the prefectural governor and the county governor.

古文：初，帝为蠡吾侯，受学于甘陵周福，及即位，擢福为尚书。
现代文：起初，当桓帝还是蠡吾侯的时候，曾经跟着甘陵国人周福读过书。等崐到他当了皇帝以后，擢升周福担任尚书。
English: At first, when Emperor Huan was still a vassal, he used to read books with Zhou Fu, a native of Ganling. After he became emperor, Zhou Fu was promoted to serve as a scholar.

古文：时同郡河南尹房植有名当朝，乡人为之谣曰： 天下规矩，房伯武；因师获印，周仲进。 
现代文：当时，和周福同郡的河南尹房植，在朝廷也很有名望。于是，乡里的人编了一首歌谣说： 天下为人言行正派，有房植；靠当老师做官，有周福。 
English: At that time, Yin Fangzhuang of Henan Province, who was in the same county as Zhou Fu, was also well-known in the imperial court. Therefore, the people in the village made up a song saying: In the world, people speak and act decently, there is Fangzhuang; by being a teacher and an official, there is Zhou Fu.

古文：二家宾客，互相讥揣，遂各树朋徒，渐成尤隙。
现代文：两家的宾客，互相讥笑和攻击，于是各人树立自己的党羽和门徒，逐渐结成怨仇。
English: The guests of the two families mocked and attacked each other, so each of them set up their own followers and disciples, and gradually formed a grudge.

古文：由是甘陵有南北部，党人之议自此始矣。
现代文：因此，甘陵国的士人便分为南北两个部党，对党人的议论从此开始。
English: As a result, the Shi'ites in the state of Ganling were divided into two groups, North and South, and the discussion of the party members began from this point.

古文：汝南太守宗资以范滂为功曹，南阳太守成瑨以岑晊为功曹，皆委心听任，使之褒善纠违，肃清朝府。
现代文：汝南郡太守宗资任命范滂为功曹，南阳郡太守成任命岑为功曹，都非常信任，让他们奖励善良，惩罚邪恶，整顿和澄清太守府的吏治。
English: The governor of Runan County, Danzi, appointed Fan Jun as a meritorious person, and the governor of Nanyang County, Shoucheng, appointed Zou as a meritorious person. They were very trusting, allowing them to reward the good, punish the evil, and rectify and clarify the administration of the governor's office.

古文：滂尤刚劲，疾恶如仇。
现代文：范滂尤其刚毅强劲，看见罪恶犹如见到仇敌。
English: Fan Ye is especially strong and tough. Seeing evil is like seeing an enemy.

古文：滂甥李颂，素无行，中常侍唐衡以属资，资用为吏；滂寝而不召。
现代文：范滂的外甥李颂一向没有德行，中常侍唐衡将他托付给汝南郡太守宗资，宗资任用李颂为吏，范滂却将公文搁置案头，不肯召见。
English: Li Song, the nephew of Fan Hui, had never been a virtuous person. The Vice-Regent Tang Heng entrusted him to the Governor of Runan County, Danzi. Danzi appointed Li Song as an official, but Fan Hui put the official document on the desk and refused to be summoned.

古文：资迁怒，捶书佐硃零，零仰曰： 范滂清裁，今日宁受笞而死，滂不可违。 
现代文：宗资迁怒他人，捶打书佐朱零。朱零抬头对宗资说： 这是范滂刚正的决断，今天我宁愿被笞打而死，也不违背范滂的决定。 
English: Zhu Zero looked up at Dousu and said, "This is Fan Ye's righteous decision. Today, I would rather be beaten to death than go against Fan Ye's decision."

古文：资乃止。
现代文：宗资方才作罢。
English: It is only now that the dowry has not been reduced to zero.

古文：郡中中人以下，莫不怨之。
现代文：郡太守府中的中级官吏以下无不怨恨。
English: The mid-level officials and below in the county governor's office are all resentful.

古文：于是二郡为谣曰： 汝南太守范孟博，南阳宗资主画诺；南阳太守岑公孝，弘农成瑨但坐啸。 
现代文：于是，两郡就传出讽刺性的谣言说： 汝南郡的太守是范滂，南阳郡人宗资只不过负责在文书上签字。南阳郡的太守是岑，弘农郡人成只是闲坐着吟咏。 
English: As a result, a satirical rumor spread in the two counties, saying: the governor of Runan County is Fan Ye, while the governor of Nanyang County is Ren Zizhi, who is only responsible for signing documents; the governor of Nanyang County is Gao, and the governor of Hongnong County is Ren Cheng, who just sits idly and chants.

古文：太学诸生三万馀人，郭泰及颍川贾彪为其冠，与李膺、陈蕃、王畅更相褒重。
现代文：太学学生共有三万余人，郭泰和颍川郡人贾彪是他们的首领。他俩和李膺、陈蕃、王畅互相褒扬标榜。
English: There are more than 30,000 students in Taigaku, and Guo Tai and Jia Biao, a native of Luochuan County, are their leaders. They and Li Yu, Chen Yu and Wang Chang praise each other.

古文：学中语曰： 天下模楷，李元礼；不畏强御，陈仲举；天下俊秀，王叔茂。 
现代文：学生中间流行这样一句赞美他们的话： 天下楷模是李膺，不怕强梁横暴是陈蕃，天下才智出众是王畅。 
English: Among the students, there is a popular saying that praises them: the world's model is Li Xi, Chen Xi is not afraid to be strong and violent, and Wang Chang is the world's outstanding talent.

古文：于是中外承风，竞以臧否相尚，自公卿以下，莫不畏其贬议，屣履到门。
现代文：于是朝廷内外受这样的风气影响，竞相以品评朝政的善恶得失为时尚，自三公九卿以下的朝廷大臣，无不害怕受到这种舆论的谴责和非议，都争先恐后地登门和他们结交。
English: As a result, both inside and outside the imperial court, influenced by such a culture, it became fashionable to compete in evaluating the merits and demerits of imperial politics, and the ministers of the imperial court from the third prince to the ninth lord, all of whom were afraid of being condemned and criticized by such public opinion, rushed to make friends with them.

古文：宛有富贾张汎者，与后宫有亲，又善雕镂玩好之物，颇以赂遗中宫，以此得显位，用势纵横。
现代文：宛县有一位富商名叫张泛，他和皇宫的某一位妃子沾点亲戚，而又善于雕刻供人赏玩嗜好的物品，经常不断地送给宦官作礼物，因此，在地方上很有地位，仗恃权势横行霸道。
English: In Wan County, there was a wealthy merchant named Zhang Pan. He was a relative of a certain concubine of the imperial palace. He was also good at carving objects for people to enjoy, and he constantly gave gifts to eunuchs. Therefore, he had a high status in the local area, and he wielded power in a domineering manner.

古文：岑晊与贼曹史张牧劝成瑨收捕汎等，既而遇赦；瑨竟诛之，并收其宗族宾客，杀二百馀人，后乃奏闻。
现代文：岑和贼曹史张牧说服太守成，将张泛等人逮捕。不久遇着朝廷颁布大赦令，成竟然不顾，将张泛诛杀，并收捕他的宗族和宾客共二百余人，全部处死，事后方才奏报朝廷。
English: The ruffian and thief Cao Shi Zhang Mu persuaded Taizhong Cheng to arrest Zhang Pan and others. Soon after, the imperial court issued an amnesty order, but Cheng did not heed it and killed Zhang Pan and arrested more than two hundred of his relatives and guests, all of whom were executed. The matter was only reported to the imperial court afterwards.

古文：小黄门晋阳赵津，贪横放恣，为一县巨患。
现代文：小黄门晋阳县人赵津，贪污残暴，骄纵恣肆，成了全县的大祸害。
English: Xiao Huangmen Zhao Jin, a native of Jinyang County, was corrupt, cruel, arrogant and reckless, and became a great scourge for the whole county.

古文：太原太守平原刘瓆使郡吏王允讨捕，亦于赦后杀之。
现代文：太原郡太守平原郡人刘，派遣郡吏王允将赵津逮捕，也是在朝廷颂布赦令之后，将赵津诛杀。
English: Liu, the governor of Taiyuan County and a native of Pingyuan County, dispatched the county official Wang Yun to arrest Zhao Jin, and also killed Zhao Jin after the imperial court issued a pardon.

古文：于是中常侍侯览使张泛妻上书讼冤，宦官因缘谮诉瑨、瓆。
现代文：于是中常侍侯览指使张泛的妻子，向朝廷上书替张泛鸣冤，宦官又趁着这个机会，诬陷成和刘。
English: As a result, the middle-ranking courtier, Hou Chan, instructed Zhang Pan's wife to write to the court to express her grievances on Zhang Pan's behalf, and the eunuch took advantage of this opportunity to frame Cheng and Liu.

古文：帝大怒，征瑨、质，皆下狱。
现代文：桓帝勃然大怒，将成、刘二人征召回京都洛阳，囚禁监狱。
English: Emperor Kan flew into a rage and recalled Cheng and Liu back to Kyoto's Luoyang, where they were imprisoned.

古文：有司承旨，奏瑨、瓆罪当弃市。
现代文：有关官吏秉承宦官的意旨，弹劾成、刘罪大恶极，应当绑赴市场，斩首示众。
English: The relevant officials, adhering to the intention of the eunuchs, impeached Cheng and Liu for the most heinous crimes, should be tied to the market and beheaded.

古文：山阳太守翟超以郡人张俭为东部督邮。
现代文：山阳郡太守翟超任命该郡人张俭担任东部督邮。
English: Sanyang County Governor Gong Chao appointed Zhang Jian from the county to serve as the eastern postmaster.

古文：侯览家在防东，残暴百姓。
现代文：中常侍侯览家在防东县，残害百姓。
English: The middle-ranking courtier, Houxiao Jia, is in Fangdong County, killing and injuring people.

古文：览丧母还家，大起茔冢。
现代文：侯览母亲病故时，他回到家乡兴建高大的坟墓。
English: When Hou Zhan's mother died of illness, he returned to his hometown to build a tall tomb.

古文：俭举奏览罪，而览伺候遮截，章竟不上。
现代文：张俭向朝廷上书，弹劾侯览的罪行，然而侯览伺机拦截张俭的奏章，使奏章无法呈送到皇帝面前。
English: Zhang Jian wrote to the imperial court to impeach Houzhang for his crime. However, Houzhang waited for an opportunity to intercept Zhang Jian's record, so that the record could not be presented to the emperor.

古文：俭遂破览冢宅，藉没资财，具奏其状，复不得御。
现代文：于是张俭便摧毁侯览的坟墓和住宅，没收所有的家赀和财产，再详细奏报侯崐览的罪状。奏章仍然不能上达。
English: As a result, Zhang Jian destroyed the tombs and residences of Hou Xuan, confiscated all the family heirlooms and property, and then reported in detail the crimes of Hou Xuan. The report still cannot be submitted.

古文：徐璜兄子宣为下邳令，暴虐尤甚。
现代文：中常侍徐璜的侄儿徐宣，担任下邳县令，更加残暴酷虐。
English: Xu Xuan's nephew, Xu Xuan, who served as the county magistrate of Xiamen, was even more brutal.

古文：尝求故汝南太守李暠女不能得，遂将吏卒至家，载其女归，戏射杀之。
现代文：他曾经要求娶前汝南郡太守李的女儿为妻，因为没有得到手，就率领吏卒冲进李家里，将李的女儿抢回自己家中，以箭射女作为游戏，将她杀死。
English: He once asked to marry the daughter of the former Runan County Grand Empress Dowager Li, but because he did not get the hand, he led the officers to storm into Li's home, snatch Li's daughter back to his home, and kill her with arrows as a game.

古文：东海相汝南黄浮闻之，收宣家属，无少长，悉考之。
现代文：东海国宰相汝南郡人黄浮听说这件事后，逮捕徐宣和他的家属，不分男女老幼，一律用严刑拷问。
English: After hearing about this incident, Huang Fu, the prime minister of the East China Sea state and a native of Runan County, arrested Xu Xuan and his family members, and tortured them all, regardless of gender or age.

古文：掾史以下固争，浮曰： 徐宣国贼，今日杀之，明日坐死，足以瞑目矣！ 
现代文：掾史以下的属吏竭力劝阻，黄浮说： 徐宣是国家的蟊贼，今天杀掉他，明天我坐罪抵命，死也瞑目。 
English: The subordinate officials below Zou Shi tried their best to dissuade him, Huang Fu said: Xu Xuan is a traitor to the country, kill him today, tomorrow I will take the blame and die.

古文：即案宣罪弃市，暴其尸，于是宦官诉冤于帝，帝大怒，超、浮并坐髡钳，输作右校。
现代文：立即判处将徐宣绑赴市场斩首，尸体示众。于是宦官向桓帝控诉，桓帝勃然大怒，翟超、黄浮两人都被坐罪，判处髡刑，并送往左校营罚服苦役。
English: The eunuch then complained to Emperor Huan, who flew into a rage. Gong Chao and Huang Fu were both found guilty, sentenced to beheading, and sent to Zuo School Camp to serve hard labor.

古文：太尉陈蕃、司空刘茂共谏，请瑨、瓆、超、浮等罪；帝不悦。
现代文：太尉陈蕃和司空刘茂联名上书劝说桓帝，请求赦免成、刘、翟超、黄浮等人的罪，桓帝很不高兴。
English: The emperor was very displeased with the fact that the captain Chen Yu and the commander Liu Mao jointly wrote a letter to persuade Emperor Huan to pardon the crimes of Cheng, Liu, Yan Chao, Huang Fu and others.

古文：有司劾奏之，茂不敢复言。
现代文：于是有关官吏便对陈蕃和刘茂进行弹劾，刘茂不敢再说话。
English: As a result, the officials concerned impeached Chen Qi and Liu Mao, and Liu Mao did not dare to speak again.

古文：蕃乃独上疏曰： 今寇贼在外，四支之疾；内政不理，心腹之患。
现代文：陈蕃仍单独上书说： 现在，外面的盗贼，只不过是人体四肢的毛病；而内政不能治理，才是心腹的祸患。
English: Chen Yao still wrote a separate letter, saying: Now, the thieves outside are just a problem of the limbs of the human body; while the internal affairs cannot be governed, it is the scourge of the inner circle.

古文：臣寝不能寐，食不能饱，实忧左右日亲，忠言日疏，内患渐积，外难方深。
现代文：我寝不能安，食不能饱，真正忧虑的是，陛下的左右亲近，越发受到宠信，忠言却越发稀少，内患一天比一天严重，外忧一天比一天加深。
English: I can't sleep well, I can't eat enough. What I'm really worried about is that His Majesty's left and right sides are getting closer and closer, and he is becoming more and more favored, but his loyal advisors are becoming more and more rare. His internal problems are becoming more serious day by day, and his external worries are deepening day by day.

古文：陛下超从列侯，继承天位，小家畜产百万之资，子孙尚耻愧失其先业，况乃产兼天下，受之先帝，而欲懈怠以自轻忽乎！
现代文：陛下从列侯超登，继承帝位。即令是小民之家，好容易积蓄到百万钱的家产，做子孙的尚且深以财坏祖先的产业为羞耻，更何况陛下祖先的产业，兼有整个天下。承受先帝的重托，然而却打算松懈怠惰，自己把它看轻和忽视？
English: His Majesty ascended the imperial throne from a feudal lord. Even though he came from a family of commoners, he easily amassed a million-dollar family fortune. As a descendant, he was deeply ashamed of the wealth of his ancestors, not to mention the wealth of his ancestors, which included the entire world. He was entrusted with a great responsibility by the former emperor, yet he intended to slack off and be lazy, and he despised and ignored it?

古文：诚不爱己，不当念先帝得之勤苦邪！
现代文：即令陛下真的不爱惜自己，难道也不应该顾念先帝创业的辛勤劳苦？
English: Even if His Majesty really doesn't spare himself, shouldn't he also spare a thought for the hard work of his predecessor?

古文：前梁氏五侯，毒遍海内，天启圣意，收而戮之。
现代文：从前，梁姓家族的五位侯爵，毒遍全国，上天启发陛下做出决断，将他们收捕杀戮。
English: Once upon a time, five marquesses of the Liang family poisoned the whole country. Heaven inspired His Majesty to make a decision to round them up and kill them.

古文：天下之议，冀当小平；明鉴未远，覆车如昨，而近习之权，复相扇结。
现代文：天下人民的意愿，希望能过上一段太平日子。往事鉴戒不远，覆车如在昨天，可是陛下左右亲信，重新互相勾结。
English: The will of the people of the world, hoping to live a period of peaceful days. The past is not far away, as if it were yesterday, but His Majesty's cronies around him are colluding with each other again.

古文：小黄门赵津、大猾张泛等，肆行贪虐，奸媚左右。
现代文：小黄门赵津、大奸商张泛等人放肆贪污暴虐，谄媚陛下左右，分别被前太原郡太守刘、南阳郡太守成检举杀戮。
English: Xiao Huangmen Zhao Jin, big crook Zhang Pan and others, who indulged in corruption and tyranny and flattered His Majesty, were respectively investigated and killed by former Taiyuan County Governor Liu and Nanyang County Governor Cheng.

古文：前太原太守刘质、南阳太守成瑨纠而戮之，虽言赦后不当诛杀，原其诚心，在乎去恶，至于陛下，有何悁悁！而小人道长，营惑圣听，遂使天威为之发怒，必加刑谪，已为过甚，况乃重罚令伏欧刀乎！
现代文：虽然说赦令颁布后不应该诛杀，但应当原谅他俩的本意，只在除去奸恶；对于陛下来说，怎会对此产生忿怒？然而邪恶小人的办法很多，迷惑陛下的视听，便使天威震怒，一定要加以处罚。这就已经过分了，何况更要从重处理，将他们诛杀。
English: Although it is said that one should not fight and kill after the issuance of the pardon, the intention of the two should be forgiven, only removing the treachery; for His Majesty, how can there be anger about this? However, there are many ways for evil villains to confuse His Majesty's sight and hearing, which will make Heaven's majesty furious and must be punished. This has gone too far, and it is even more important to deal with them seriously and kill them.

古文：又，前山阳太守翟超、东海相黄浮，奉公不桡，疾恶如仇，超没侯览财物，浮诛徐宣之罪，并蒙刑坐，不逢赦恕。
现代文：还有，前山阳郡太守翟超、东海国宰相黄浮秉公执法，不屈服于权贵，痛恨邪恶，犹如仇敌。翟超没收侯览的财产，黄浮依法诛杀徐宣，都遭到坐罪惩处，不能蒙受赦免和宽恕。
English: In addition, the former Shanyang County Governor Gong Chao and the East China Sea State Prime Minister Huang Fuxiong enforced the law impartially, did not yield to the powerful, and hated evil, just like an enemy. Gong Chao confiscated the property of Houchan, and Huang Fuxiong killed Xu Xuan in accordance with the law. They were punished for crimes, and could not be pardoned and forgiven.

古文：览之从横，没财已幸；宣犯衅过，死有馀辜。
现代文：侯览恣肆横行，没收他的财产已是幸事。徐宣所犯的罪过，死有余辜。
English: The confiscation of his property is already a blessing. The crimes committed by Xu Xuan are beyond reproach.

古文：昔丞相申屠嘉召责邓通，雒阳令董宣折辱公主，而文帝从而请之，光武加以重赏，未闻二臣有专命之诛。
现代文：过去，丞相申屠嘉征召邓通当面责备，洛阳县令董宣屈辱公主。然而，文帝出面请求从轻处理，光武帝加以重赏，并没有听说指控二人专擅，把二人处死。
English: In the past, the prime minister Shen Tu Jia summoned Deng Tong for a face-to-face reprimand, and Luoyang County ordered Dong Xuan to humiliate the princess. However, Emperor Wen came forward to ask for a lighter treatment, and Emperor Guangwu rewarded him. He had not heard that the two were accused of being experts, and the two were put to death.

古文：而今左右群竖，恶伤党类，妄相交构，致此刑谴，闻臣是言，当复啼诉。
现代文：而今陛下左右一群宦官小臣，因为怨恨他们的党羽受到伤害，多方设法，妄加诬陷，以致遭受这样的刑罚。他们听到我的这些言辞，定会再向陛下哭泣申诉。
English: Now a group of eunuchs and courtiers around His Majesty, because of their resentment of their followers being harmed, have made every effort to falsely accuse them, so that they suffer such a punishment. When they hear these words of mine, they will surely cry and complain to His Majesty again.

古文：陛下深宜割塞近习与政之源，引纳尚书朝省之士，简练清高，斥黜佞邪。
现代文：我盼望陛下应该切断和堵塞宦官参与朝政的本源，任用尚书台和朝廷大臣，精心挑选清廉高洁的人士，斥退和废黜奸佞小人。
English: I hope that Your Majesty should cut off and block the source of eunuchs' participation in the imperial government, appoint Shang Shudai and imperial ministers, carefully select honest and high-minded persons, and expel and depose traitors and villains.

古文：如是天和于上，地洽于下，休祯符瑞，岂远乎哉！ 
现代文：如能这样，则上天气和，地下融洽，吉利和祥瑞的征兆，难道还需很长时间才能出现？ 
English: If this can be done, then the signs of harmonious weather and underground harmony, auspiciousness and auspiciousness, will it take a long time to appear?

古文：帝不纳。
现代文：桓帝没有采纳。
English: The emperor would not accept it.

古文：宦官由此疾蕃弥甚，选举奏议，辄以中诏谴却，长史以下多至抵罪，犹以蕃名臣，不敢加害。
现代文：宦官因此更加痛恨陈蕃，凡是遇到陈蕃上呈有关选择举用贤能的奏章，都宣称是皇帝的指示，严加谴责，加以退回。长史以下的官吏，很多都被判处罪刑。只因陈蕃是朝廷的著名大臣，暂时还不崐敢对他加以谋害。
English: As a result, eunuchs hated Chen Xuan even more. Whenever they came across a letter from Chen Xuan about the selection and use of merit, they declared that it was the emperor's instruction, severely condemned it, and returned it. Many officials below Long Shi were sentenced to criminal punishment. Just because Chen Xuan was a famous minister of the court, they did not dare to murder him for the time being.

古文：平原襄楷诣阙上疏曰： 臣闻皇天不言，以文象设教。
现代文：平原郡人襄楷前往宫门上书说： 我听说，皇天不会说话，只是用天象变异来显示它的旨意。
English: Xiang Kai, a resident of Pingyuan County, went to the palace gate to write a letter saying: I heard that the emperor cannot speak, but only uses celestial phenomena to show his will.

古文：臣窃见太微、天廷五帝之坐，而金、火罚星扬光其中，于占，天子凶；又俱入房、心，法无继嗣。
现代文：我观察太微星，见天廷五方帝王的星座上，有金、火这样的罚星在其中闪烁。根据占卜，这是天子的凶象。而且金、火二星又都串入房、心二星宿之中，这说明天子不会有继承人。
English: I observed a very faint star. I saw that in the constellation of the Emperor of the Five Quarters of the Celestial Court, there were gold and fire punishment stars twinkling in it. According to divination, this was the evil elephant of the Son of Heaven. Moreover, the two stars of gold and fire were strung into the two constellations of the house and the heart, which indicated that the Son of Heaven would not have an heir.

古文：前年冬大寒，杀鸟兽，害鱼鳖，城傍竹柏之叶有伤枯者。
现代文：前年冬季，气候严寒，地面上的鸟兽，水中的鱼鳖，都被冻死，京都洛阳紧傍城墙的竹林和柏树，枝叶全都枯萎。
English: In the winter of the previous year, the weather was extremely cold. All the birds and animals on the ground and the fishes in the water froze to death. The bamboo groves and cypress trees in Kyoto's Luoyang, right next to the city wall, all withered.

古文：臣闻于师曰： 柏伤竹枯，不出二年，天子当之。 
现代文：我的老师曾经告诉过我： 柏树受伤，竹林枯萎，不出二年，后果就要在天子身上显示。 
English: My teacher once told me: The cypress tree is injured, the bamboo forest withers, and in less than two years, the consequences will be shown in the heavenly son.

古文：今自春夏以来，连有霜雹及大雨雷电，臣作威作福，刑罚急刻之所感也。
现代文：如今从春季和夏季以来，接连不断地降霜、降冰雹，以及下大雨、巨雷、闪电，这是臣下作威作福，刑罚峻急苛刻的反应。
English: Now, since the spring and summer, frosts, hailstorms, heavy rains, thunder and lightning have been falling in succession. This is the reaction of the vassals to impose their wills and punishments.

古文：太原太守刘质，南阳太守成瑨，志除奸邪，其所诛翦，皆合人望。
现代文：太原郡太守刘、南阳郡太守成，他俩立志铲除奸佞邪恶，所诛杀和翦除的人，都符合人民的愿望。
English: Liu, the governor of Taiyuan County, and Cheng, the governor of Nanyang County, both set out to eradicate the evil of traitors. The people they killed and eliminated were in line with the wishes of the people.

古文：而陛下受阉竖之谮，乃远加考逮。
现代文：然而陛下却听信宦官的谗言，把他俩从远处逮捕到京都洛阳，严加拷问。
English: However, His Majesty heeded the eunuch's advice and arrested them both from a distance to Kyoto's Luoyang, where they were severely interrogated.

古文：三公上书乞哀质等，不见采察而严被谴让，忧国之任，将遂杜口矣。
现代文：三公上书，哀求陛下宽恕刘等人，不但没有采纳，反而受到谴责。这样，忧心国事的大臣，势必闭口无言。
English: The three princes sent a letter, imploring His Majesty to pardon Liu and others, but it was not only not accepted, but was condemned. In this way, ministers who are concerned about state affairs are bound to remain silent.

古文：臣闻杀无罪，诛贤者，祸及三世。
现代文：我曾经听说，杀害无罪的人，诛杀贤能的人，大祸会延及三世。
English: I have heard that the killing of the innocent and the slaying of the virtuous is a great calamity that extends to the third generation.

古文：自陛下即位以来，频行诛罚，梁、寇、孙、邓并见族灭，其从坐者又非其数。
现代文：自从陛下即位以来，频繁地进行诛杀惩罚，梁冀、寇荣、孙寿、邓万世等家族，都先后被诛灭，而因此被牵连坐罪的又不计其数。
English: Since His Majesty ascended the throne, he has frequently carried out the punishment of killing, and the families of Liang Ji, Kou Rong, Sun Shou, and Deng Mansei have all been annihilated one after another, and there are countless people who have been implicated in crimes.

古文：李云上书，明主所不当讳；杜众乞死，谅以感悟圣朝；曾无赦宥而并被残戮，天下之人咸知其冤，汉兴以来，未有拒谏诛贤，用刑太深如今者也。
现代文：李云上书，圣明的君主本来不应该忌讳；杜众请求和李云一道处死，不过是希望以此感悟朝廷。结果，他俩没有得到赦免，同时遭受杀戮，天下的人都知道他俩的冤枉。自从汉王朝建立以来，从来没有拒绝规劝，诛杀贤能，刑罚苛刻，像今天这么严重的。
English: Li Yun wrote that the emperor of Shengming should not have been shunned; Du Zhongran requested to be executed together with Li Yun, but hoped to impress the court with this. As a result, they were not pardoned, and they were killed at the same time. People all over the world know their wrongdoing. Since the establishment of the Han Dynasty, there has never been a refusal to persuade, the killing of sages, and harsh punishments, as serious as today.

古文：昔文王一妻，诞致十子；今宫女数千，未闻庆育，宜修德省刑以广《螽斯》之祚。
现代文：过去，周文王只有一个妻子，就生了十个儿子。而今宫女有数千人之多，却没有听说谁有生育。陛下应该增修恩德，减省刑罚，使后嗣象螽斯一样的繁衍。
English: In the past, King Zhou Wen had only one wife and had ten sons. Today, there are thousands of concubines, but no one is known to have given birth. Your Majesty should increase benevolence, reduce punishments, and make heirs multiply like gnomes.

古文：案春秋以来，及古帝王，未有河清。
现代文：自从春秋时代以来，包括远古的帝王，黄河的河水从来没有澄清过。
English: Since the Spring and Autumn Period, including the reign of the ancient emperors, the Yellow River has never been clear.

古文：臣以为河者，诸侯位也。
现代文：我认为，黄河象征着王国的封君。
English: I believe that the Yellow River symbolizes the crown prince of the kingdom.

古文：清者，属阳；浊者，属阴。
现代文：河水澄清，属于阳刚；河水浑浊，属于阴柔。
English: A clear river is masculine; a muddy river is feminine.

古文：河当浊而反清者，阴欲为阳，诸侯欲为帝也。京房《易传》曰： 河水清，天下平。 
现代文：黄河的河水本当浑浊，却反而澄清，显示阴柔将要变成阳刚，王国封君将要篡取帝位。京房《易传》说： 河水澄清，天下太平。 
English: The water of the Yellow River is really turbid, but on the contrary, it is clarified, showing that the feminine will become masculine, and the king of the kingdom will usurp the throne. Beijing House "I Chuan" said: The water is clarified, and the world is peaceful.

古文：今天垂异，地吐妖，人疠疫，三者并时而有河清，犹春秋麟不当见而见，孔子书之以为异也。
现代文：而今天降灾异，地吐妖怪，人间发生瘟疫，三者同时发生而又出现黄河的水清。这犹如春秋时代的麒麟，本来不应该出现的，却竟然出现了，所以，孔丘记录它认为是怪诞的事。
English: Today, however, a calamity befalls, the earth vomits up monsters, and a plague breaks out in the human world. All three occur at the same time, and the waters of the Yellow River are purified. This is just like the unicorn in the Spring and Autumn Period. It should not have appeared, but it did. Therefore, Confucius recorded what he considered to be a grotesque event.

古文：愿赐清闲，极尽所言。 
现代文：如果承蒙陛下有空闲时间召见我，我当详细地陈述我所要说的话。 
English: If Your Majesty has the good grace to summon me at your leisure, I shall state in detail what I have to say.

古文：书奏，不省。
现代文：奏章呈上后，桓帝没有理睬。
English: The book went up and was not accepted.

古文：十馀日，复上书曰： 臣闻殷纣好色，妲己是出；叶公好龙，真龙游廷。
现代文：过了十多天，襄楷再次上书说： 我听说，殷纣王好色，于是出现妲已；崐叶子高好龙，于是真龙降临。
English: After more than ten days, Xiang Kai wrote again, saying, "I heard that the King of Yin and Yang is a womanizer, so the dragonfly has appeared; the dragonfly leaves are high, so the real dragon has come.

古文：今黄门、常侍，天刑之人，陛下爱待，兼倍常宠，系嗣未兆，岂不为此！
现代文：而今黄门、常侍，都是被上天谴责，受过阉割的人，陛下宠爱他们，超过普通人数倍，陛下所以无子，岂不是由于这个原因？
English: But now, the Yellow Gate and the Regular Attendants are all condemned by Heaven and castrated. Your Majesty favors them more than ordinary people. Is it not for this reason that Your Majesty has no son?

古文：又闻宫中立黄、老、浮屠之祠，此道清虚，贵尚无为，好生恶杀，省欲去奢。
现代文：我又听说，皇宫之中建立黄帝、老子、佛陀等庙宇。他们都主张清心寡欲，崇尚清静无为，喜爱生命，厌恶杀戮，克制欲望，力戒奢侈。
English: I also heard that the Yellow Emperor, Laozi, Buddha and other temples were built in the royal palace. They all advocated purity of mind and desire, advocated tranquility and inaction, loved life, abhorred killing, restrained desires, and refrained from extravagance.

古文：今陛下耆欲不去，杀罚过理，既乖其道，岂获其祚哉！
现代文：而今陛下的嗜好和欲望不能去掉，杀戮和刑罚又超过正常情理，既然违背他们的教义，岂能获得神灵的福佑？
English: But now that your majesty's addictions and desires cannot be eliminated, and killing and punishment exceed normal circumstances, since it is contrary to their doctrine, can you obtain the blessing of the gods?

古文：浮屠不三宿桑下，不欲久生恩爱，精之至也；其守一如此，乃能成道。
现代文：佛教信徒不在一棵桑树下连住三夜，为的是避免住久了，会生出爱恋之心，道理至为精密。正因为始终如一地坚持，才能得道成佛。
English: Buddhists do not live under a mulberry tree for three consecutive nights, in order to avoid living for a long time, they will give birth to love, the reason is very precise. It is precisely because of consistent adherence that one can become a Buddha.

古文：今陛下淫女艳妇，极天下之丽，甘肥饮美，单天下之味，奈何欲如黄、老乎！ 
现代文：而今陛下拥有美女艳妇，极尽天下的绝色，吃的喝的，又极尽天下的美味，怎么能和黄帝、老子一样？ 
English: But now His Majesty has a beautiful woman, the most beautiful in the world, food and drink, and the most delicious in the world, how can it be the same as the Yellow Emperor and Laozi?

古文：书上，即召入，诏尚书问状。
现代文：奏章呈上后，桓帝立即召他进宫，命尚书代表皇帝接见和询问。
English: After the report was submitted, Emperor Kuan immediately summoned him to the palace and ordered Shang Shu to meet and inquire on behalf of the emperor.

古文：楷言： 古者本无宦臣，武帝末数游后宫，始置之耳。 
现代文：襄楷说： 古代本来没有设置宦官，汉武帝末年，多次宴游后宫，才开始设置。 
English: Xiang Kai said: In ancient times, eunuchs were not originally set up. It was only in the last years of the Han Emperor Wu that they began to be set up after many banquets in the harem.

古文：尚书承旨，奏： 楷不正辞理，而违背经艺，假借星宿，造合私意，诬上罔事，请下司隶正楷罪法，收送雒阳狱。 
现代文：尚书秉承宦官的旨意，向桓帝回奏： 襄楷的言辞和道理完全不端正，而且违背儒家的经书和典籍，纯粹是假借上天的星宿，牵强附会个人的私意，诬蔑皇帝，歪曲事实，请交付司隶校尉，确定他应得之罪，收捕和送往洛阳监狱关押。 
English: Shangshu, adhering to the eunuch's will, echoed to Emperor Huan: Xiang Kai's words and reason are completely incorrect, and contrary to the Confucian scriptures and classics. They are purely borrowed from the stars of heaven, far-fetched with personal selfishness, slandering the emperor and distorting the facts. Please hand him over to Captain Sili, determine the crime he deserves, arrest and send him to Luoyang Prison.

古文：帝以楷言虽激切，然皆天文恒象之数，故不诛；犹司寇论刑。
现代文：桓帝认为，襄楷的言辞虽然激烈，却都是说的天文星象的演变，所以，不肯诛杀，仅判处两年的徒刑。
English: Emperor Huan believed that although Xiang Kai's words were fierce, they were all about the evolution of astronomical stars, so he refused to fight and was only sentenced to two years in prison.

古文：自永平以来，臣民虽有习浮屠术者，而天子未之好；至帝，始笃好之，常躬自祷祠，由是其法侵盛，故楷言及之。
现代文：自明帝永平年间以来，臣下和人民虽然有崇信和传习佛教的人，然而皇帝尚没有接受和喜好。到了桓帝时，才开始笃信佛教，经常亲自祭祀和祈祷，从此佛教越发盛行。所以，襄楷才在上书中谈到它。
English: Since the Yongping era of the Ming Dynasty, although there were subjects and people who revered and preached Buddhism, the emperor had not yet accepted and liked it. It was only when Emperor Huan began to believe in Buddhism, often personally sacrificing and praying, that Buddhism became more and more popular. Therefore, Xiang Kai only mentioned it in the book.

古文：符节令汝南蔡衍、议郎刘瑜表救成瑨、刘质，言甚切厉，亦坐免官。
现代文：符节令汝南郡人蔡衍、议郎刘瑜上书营救成、刘，因为言辞非常激烈严厉，也都坐罪被免官。
English: Cai Yan and Liu Yu, both of whom were from Runan County, were ordered to write a letter to be rescued, and Liu, because his words were very fierce and severe, was also convicted and removed from office.

古文：瑨、质竟死狱中。
现代文：而成、刘竟然死在狱中。
English: As it turned out, Liu died in prison.

古文：瑨、质素刚直，有经术，知名当时，故天下惜之。
现代文：成、刘一向刚强正直，通晓经学，是当时的知名人士，所以，天下的人无不惋惜。
English: Cheng and Liu have always been strong and honest, knowledgeable about the classics, and were well-known people at that time. Therefore, people all over the world feel sorry for them.

古文：岑晊、张牧逃窜获免。
现代文：岑、张牧逃亡流窜在外，幸免于难。
English: Yao and Zhang Mu fled and went into exile, but survived.

古文：晊之亡也，亲友竞匿之；贾彪独闭门不纳，时人望之。彪曰： 传言 相时而动，无累后人。 
现代文：岑逃亡时，亲戚朋友都竟相掩护藏匿。唯独贾彪闭门不肯接纳，当时人们对于贾彪的这种行为全都怨恨指责。贾彪说： 《左传》上说： 等到时机来时才发动，不要连累别的人。 
English: When he fled, his relatives and friends actually hid behind each other. However, Jia Biao refused to accept them behind closed doors. At that time, people all resented and blamed Jia Biao for this kind of behavior. Jia Biao said: "Zo Zhuan" said: Wait until the time comes to launch, do not involve others.

古文：公孝以要君致衅，自遗其咎，至已不能奋戈相待，反可容隐之乎！ 
现代文：岑胁迫他的长官，闯出大祸，是他自己遗害自己。我恨不得挥动兵器来对待他，岂能反过来掩护隐匿他？ 
English: If his officers, who were threatening him, should come to any harm, he would bring it on himself. I would not hesitate to brandish my weapon against him. Could I not, in turn, cover and conceal him?

古文：于是咸服其裁正。
现代文：于是，大家都佩服他的处裁公正。
English: Banned from holding public office due to his party affiliation, he died at home.

古文：彪尝为新息长，小民困贫，多不养子；彪严为其制，与杀人同罪。
现代文：贾彪曾经担任过新息县长，人民困苦贫穷，生下儿女多不能养育。贾彪下令严厉禁止，认为杀婴和杀人同罪。
English: Jia Biao once served as the governor of Xinxi County. The people were poor and could not afford to raise their children. Jia Biao ordered a strict ban, considering infanticide and homicide to be the same crime.

古文：城南有盗劫害人者，北有妇人杀子者。彪出案验，掾吏欲引南，彪怒曰： 贼寇害人，此则常理；母子相残，逆天违道！ 
现代文：有一次，城南有强盗劫掠杀人，城北有妇人杀害自己的儿子，贾彪出车前往巡查验问，属吏打算引着他的车往城南去，贾彪发怒说： 强盗劫掠杀人，这是常理；母亲杀害儿子，违背天道。 
English: Once, there were robbers robbing and killing people in the south of the city, and a woman killed her son in the north of the city. Jia Biao drove out to inspect and interrogate. His subordinates planned to drive his car to the south of the city. Jia Biao said angrily: Robbers robbing and killing people is common sense; a mother killing her son is against the laws of heaven.

古文：遂驱车北行，案致其罪。
现代文：便驱车前往城北，判决杀子之罪。
English: He then drove to the north of the city, where he was convicted of the murder of his son.

古文：城南贼闻之，亦面缚自首。
现代文：城南强盗听到消息后，也将两手反绑于身后，到官府自首。
English: When the thieves in the south of the city heard about this, they also tied themselves up and went to the county to turn themselves in.

古文：数年间，人养子者以千数。
现代文：数年之间，民间养育儿子的，以千计数。
English: In the space of a few years, there have been thousands of cases of people raising their sons privately.

古文：曰： 此贾父所生也。 
现代文：大家说： 这是贾父生的儿子。 
English: Everyone said, "This is Jia Fusheng's son."

古文：皆名之为贾。
现代文：并且，都用 贾 作为名字。
English: And they all use "Jia" as their first name.

古文：河内张成，善风角，推占当赦，教子杀人。
现代文：不久，果然遇着朝廷颁布赦令，应该赦免。
English: Soon after, the Imperial Court issued a pardon, and he should be pardoned.

古文：司隶李膺督促收捕，既而逢宥获免；膺愈怀愤疾，竟案杀之。
现代文：李膺心中更加愤怒，竟将张成父子处斩。但张成一向用占候术和宦官结交，桓帝有时候也向张成讯问占候。
English: Li Yan was even more furious and had Zhang Cheng and his son beheaded. However, Zhang Cheng had always used divination to make friends with eunuchs, and Emperor Kuan sometimes asked Zhang Cheng for advice.

古文：成素以方伎交通宦官，帝亦颇讯其占；宦官教成弟子牢修上书，告 膺等养太学游士，交结诸郡生徒，更相驱驰，共为部党，诽讪朝廷，疑乱风俗。 
现代文：于是宦官指使张成的徒弟牢修上书，控告 李膺等人专门蓄养太学的游士，结交各郡派到京都洛阳求学的学生和门徒，互相标榜，结成朋党，诽谤朝廷，迷惑和扰乱风俗。 
English: As a result, the eunuch ordered Zhang Cheng's apprentice to study hard and write a book, accusing Li Jun and others of specially cultivating the wanderers of Taigaku, making friends with the students and disciples sent to study in Luoyang, Kyoto, from all counties, to advertise themselves to each other, to form a party of friends, to slander the imperial court, and to confuse and disrupt customs.

古文：于是天子震怒，班下郡国，逮捕党人，布告天下，使同忿疾。
现代文：奏章呈上后，桓帝盛怒，下诏各郡、各封国，逮捕党人，并且明白布告天下，使大家同仇敌忾。
English: After the report was submitted, Emperor Kuan was furious and ordered all counties and fiefdoms to arrest the party members and clearly announce it to the world, so that everyone would be united against the enemy.

古文：案经三府，太尉陈蕃却之曰： 今所案者，皆海内人誉，忧国忠公之臣，此等犹将十世宥也，岂有罪名不章而致收掠者乎！ 
现代文：公文经过太尉、司徒、司空三府，太尉陈蕃将诏书退回，说： 这次所搜捕的，都是海内享有盛名，忧心国事，忠于国家的大臣，即令他们犯了什么罪过，也应该宽恕十世。岂有罪名暖昧不明，而遭致逮捕拷打？ 
English: After the official document had passed through the three prefectures of Tai-fu, Sitou, and Sikuo, Tai-fu Chen Yao returned the edict, saying, "This time, the arrested are all ministers who are famous at sea, concerned about national affairs, and loyal to the country. Even if they have committed any crime, they should forgive the 10th generation. Is it possible that the guilty name is unknown, and they were arrested and tortured?

古文：不肯平署。
现代文：拒绝联合签署。
English: He refused to sign his name on the file.

古文：帝愈怒，遂下膺等于黄门北寺狱，其辞所连及，太仆颍川杜密、御史中丞陈翔及陈寔、范滂之徒二百馀人。
现代文：桓帝更加发怒，便直接下令，逮捕李膺等人，囚禁在黄门北寺监狱。李膺等人的供词牵连涉及到的有太仆颍川郡人杜密、御史中丞陈翔，以及太学学生陈、范滂等二百余人。
English: Emperor Huan was even more enraged, so he directly ordered the arrest of Li Yao and others and imprisoned them in the Huangmen North Temple Prison. The confessions of Li Yao and others implicated more than 200 people, including Du Mi, who was a courtier and a native of Beichuan County, Chen Xiang, who was a member of the Central Committee of the CPC Central Committee, and Chen and Fan Yao, who were students of the Chinese University of Political Science.

古文：或逃遁不获，皆悬金购募，使者四出相望。陈寔曰： 吾不就狱，众无所恃。 
现代文：有的人事先逃亡，未能逮捕归案，朝廷则悬赏缉拿，派遣出去搜捕党人的使者，到处可以见到。陈说： 我不到监狱，大家都没有依靠。 
English: Some people fled in advance and could not be arrested and brought to justice, while the imperial court offered a reward for their capture and sent out emissaries to search for party members. They can be seen everywhere. Chen said: If I don't go to prison, no one can rely on me.

古文：乃自往请囚。
现代文：于是，自己前往监狱请求囚禁。
English: As a result, he went to the prison himself to request imprisonment.

古文：范滂至狱，狱吏谓曰： 凡坐系者，皆祭皋陶。 
现代文：范滂被捕，送到监狱，狱吏对他说： 凡是获罪系狱的人犯，都要祭拜皋陶。 
English: Fan Qi was arrested and sent to prison. The prison officials said to him, "All criminals who have been convicted and sentenced to prison should worship Jintao."

古文：滂曰： 皋陶，古之直臣，知滂无罪，将理之于帝，如其有罪，祭之何益！ 
现代文：范滂回答说： 皋陶是古代的正直大臣，如果他知道我范滂没有犯罪，将会代我向天帝申诉，如果我犯了罪，祭祀他又有什么裨益？ 
English: Fan Ye replied: Juntao was the ancient Minister of Honesty. If he knew that I, Fan Ye, had not committed a crime, he would appeal to the Heavenly Emperor on my behalf. If I had committed a crime, what would be the benefit of sacrificing him?

古文：众人由此亦止。
现代文：所以，其他的囚犯也都不再祭祀。
English: As a result, the other prisoners also stopped making sacrifices.

古文：陈蕃复上书极谏，帝讳其言切，托以蕃辟召非其人，策免之。
现代文：陈蕃再次上书，极力规劝桓帝。桓帝忌讳陈蕃言辞激切，假托陈蕃推荐征召的官员不称职，下诏免除陈蕃的官职。
English: Chen Xi again sent a letter to strongly advise Emperor Huan. Emperor Huan rebuked Chen Xi with harsh words, saying that if the officials recommended by Chen Xi were incompetent, he would dismiss Chen Xi from his official position.

古文：时党人狱所染逮者，皆天下名贤，度辽将军皇甫规，自以西州豪桀，耻不得与，乃自上言： 臣前荐故大司农张奂，是附党也。
现代文：当时，因党人之狱而被牵连逮捕入狱的人，都是天下知名的贤才。度辽将军皇甫规认为自己是西州的英雄豪杰，而竟没有被捕入狱，觉得耻辱，于是自己上书说： 我以前曾经推荐过前任大司农张奂，是阿附党人。
English: At that time, the people who were implicated, arrested and imprisoned because of the imprisonment of party members were all world-renowned talents. Du Liao's general, Wang Fuxi, considered himself a hero of Xizhou, but he was not arrested and imprisoned. He felt humiliated, so he wrote a letter saying: I had previously recommended the former chief secretary of farmers, Zhang Ye, who was a member of the Chinese Communist Party.

古文：又，臣昔论输左校时，太学生张凤等上书讼臣，是为党人所附也，臣宜坐之。 
现代文：并且，我过去被判处送往左校营罚服苦役时，太学生张凤等曾经上书为我申诉辩护，是为党人所依附，我应该坐罪。 
English: Moreover, in the past, when I was sentenced to be sent to the Zuo School Camp for punishment and hard labor, the student Zhang Feng and others wrote a letter to defend my appeal, saying that it was the party members who were attached to me, and I should be punished.

古文：朝廷知而不问。
现代文：朝廷知道后，也不过问。
English: When the imperial court found out, they did not hesitate to ask questions.

古文：杜密素与李膺名行相次，时人谓之李、杜，故同时被系。
现代文：杜密一向和李膺声名相等。当时人们并称李、杜，所以他俩同时被捕入狱。
English: Du Mi has always been as famous as Li Qiye. At that time, people also called Li and Du, so they were both arrested and imprisoned at the same time.

古文：密尝为北海相，行春，到高密，见郑玄为乡啬夫，知其异器，即召署郡职，遂遣就学，卒成大儒。
现代文：杜密曾经担任过北海国的宰相，在一次春季例行巡视中，走到高密县，遇见担任乡啬夫的郑玄，知道郑玄不是平凡的人，就聘请他担任郡职。不久，又选派他到京都洛阳的太学求学，最后终于成为大儒。
English: Du Mi once served as the prime minister of the North Sea State. During a routine spring inspection, he went to Gaomi County and met Zheng Xuan, who served as a miserly farmer. Knowing that Zheng Xuan was not an ordinary person, he hired him to serve as a county official. Soon, he was sent to study at Taigaku in Luoyang, Kyoto, and finally became a great scholar.

古文：后密去官还家，每谒守令，多所陈托。
现代文：后来，杜密离职回乡，每次晋见郡太守或县令，大多都要请托一些事情。
English: Later, after Du Mi left office and returned to his hometown, every time he met the county governor or county magistrate, he usually had to ask him to do something.

古文：同郡刘胜，亦自蜀郡告归乡里，闭门扫轨，无所干及。
现代文：同郡的刘胜也从蜀郡离职回乡，却闭门和外界隔绝，对地方事务从不打扰。
English: Liu Sheng of the same county also left Shu County to return to his hometown, but he closed the door and isolated himself from the outside world, and never disturbed local affairs.

古文：太守王昱谓密曰： 刘季陵清高士，公卿多举之者。
现代文：郡太守王昱对杜密说： 刘胜是清高雅士，三公九卿中有很多人都推荐他。 
English: Wang Xi, the governor-general, said to Du Mi, "Liu Jiling is really a high-ranking person. Many of the nobles have nominated him.

古文：密知昱以激己，对曰： 刘胜位为大夫，见礼上宾，而知善不荐，闻恶无言，隐情惜己，自同寒蝉，此罪人也。
现代文：杜密知道王昱以此激发自己，于是回答说： 刘胜具有大夫的高位，而郡太守待他敬如上宾，可是，对善良的人，他不举荐；对邪恶的事，他不言语；隐瞒真情，明哲保身，闭口不言如同寒蝉一样，这是国家的罪人。
English: Du Mei knew that Wang Yao was inspired by this, so he replied: Liu Sheng has the high position of a doctor, and the county magistrate treats him with respect as a guest. However, he does not recommend good people; he does not say a word about evil things; he hides his true feelings, protects himself wisely, and keeps his mouth shut like a chameleon. This is a national sin.

古文：今志义力行之贤而密达之，违道失节之士而密纠之，使明府赏刑得中，令问休扬，不亦万分之一乎！ 
现代文：而今对于有志大义，身体力行的贤才，我竭力推举；遇到违反正道，丧失节操的人士，我检举纠发；使阁下的奖赏刑罚，能够公平允当，美名远扬，我岂不是也尽到了万分之一的微薄力量？ 
English: But now, for those who aspire to great righteousness and are capable of hard work, I try my best to promote them; when I encounter those who violate the right path and lose self-discipline, I report and correct them; so that your rewards and punishments can be fair and appropriate, and your reputation can be spread far and wide, haven't I also done my best to achieve one ten-thousandth of a meager power?

古文：昱惭服，待之弥厚。
现代文：王昱惭愧佩服，对待杜密更为殷厚。
English: Wang Yao felt ashamed, but also admired him and respected him even more.

古文：九月，以光禄勋周景为太尉。
现代文：九月，擢升光禄勋周景为太尉。
English: In September, Zhou Jing was promoted to the rank of first lieutenant.

古文：司空刘茂免。
现代文：司空刘茂被免官。
English: Siku Liu Mao relieved of duty.

古文：冬，十二月，以光禄勋汝南宣酆为司空。
现代文：冬季，十二月，擢升光禄勋汝南郡人宣酆为司空。
English: In winter, in December, Runan County's Xuanwu was promoted to the position of the Air Vice-Marshal.

古文：以越骑校尉窦武为城门校尉。
现代文：任命越骑校尉窦武为城门校尉。
English: Viet Cavalry Captain Dou Wu was appointed as the captain of the city gate.

古文：武在位，多辟名士，清身疾恶，礼赂不通。妻子衣食裁充足而已。得两宫赏赐，悉散与太学诸生及匄施贫民。
现代文：窦武在任期间，多方延聘知名人士，洁身自爱，疾恶如仇，杜绝贿赂；妻子儿女的衣服饮食费用，仅够开支而已，得到皇帝和皇后两宫的赏赐，全都发散给太学的学生和施舍给贫民，因此，受到大家的一致赞赏和称誉。
English: During his term of office, Dou Wu employed famous people in many ways, kept himself clean, fought evil with evil, and eliminated bribery; the clothing and food expenses of his wife and children were only enough expenses, and were rewarded by the emperor and queen of the two palaces, all of which were distributed to the students of Taixue and alms to the poor. Therefore, he was unanimously appreciated and praised by everyone.

古文：由是众誉归之。匈奴乌桓闻张奂至，皆相率还降，凡二十万口；奂但诛其首恶，馀皆慰纳之。
现代文：南匈奴和乌桓听到张奂回任护匈奴中朗将，都相继归附投降，共计有二十万人。张奂仅诛杀其中煽动起兵反叛的首恶分子，对于其他的人，都进行安慰接纳。
English: When the Southern Xiongnu and the Wuhuan heard that Zhang Ye had been reinstated as the general to protect the middle rank of the Xiongnu, they all surrendered one after another, a total of two hundred thousand people. Zhang Ye only killed the chief villain who incited the soldiers to rebel, and comforted and accepted the other people.

古文：唯鲜卑出塞去。
现代文：唯有鲜卑部落不肯归降，径行出塞而去。
English: Only Xianbei went abroad.

古文：朝廷患檀石槐不能制，遣使持印绶封为王，欲与和亲。檀石槐不肯受，而寇抄滋甚。
现代文：东汉朝廷忧虑不能控制鲜卑酋长檀石槐，于是派遣使节，带着印信，打算封他为王，并且跟他和亲，可是，檀石槐不但不肯接受，反而对缘边要塞的侵犯和劫掠更为厉害。
English: The Eastern Han Dynasty was worried that it would not be able to control the Xianbei chieftain, Dang Shih Chou, so it sent an envoy with a seal letter, intending to make him king and be related to him. However, Dang Shih Chou not only refused to accept it, but the encroachment and looting of the border fortress was even more severe.

古文：自分其地为三部：从右北平以东至辽东，接夫馀、濊貊二十馀邑，为东部；从右北平以西，至上谷十馀邑，为中部；从上谷以西至敦煌、乌孙二十馀邑，为西部。
现代文：他将自己占领的地区分为三部：从右北平以东，直至辽东郡，连接夫馀、貊等二十余个城邑，为东部；从右北平以西，直至上谷郡等十余个城邑，为中部；从上谷郡以西，直至敦煌群、乌孙等二十余个城邑，为西部。
English: He divided the area he occupied into three parts: from the east of the right Beiping to the east of Liaodong County, connecting more than 20 cities and towns such as Fuyu and Handan, for the east; from the west of the right Beiping to more than 10 cities and towns such as Shanggu County, for the middle; from the west of Shanggu County to more than 20 cities and towns such as Dunhuang Group and Wusun, for the west.

古文：各置大人领之。
现代文：每一部设置一名大人，负责统领。
English: One adult is assigned to each section and is responsible for leading the group.

