古文：魏其侯窦婴者，孝文后从兄子也。
现代文：魏其侯窦婴，是汉文帝窦皇后堂兄的儿子。
English: Wei Qihou Dou Yu is the son of the cousin of Emperor Dou of Han Dynasty.

古文：父世观津人。
现代文：他的父辈以上世世代代是观津人。
English: His parents and older generations have been residents of Guanzhou for generations.

古文：喜宾客。
现代文：他喜欢宾客。
English: He likes guests.

古文：孝文时，婴为吴相，病免。
现代文：汉文帝时，窦婴任吴国国相，因病免职。
English: At the time of Emperor Hanwen, Dou Ying served as the Minister of State of Wu, but was relieved of his duties due to illness.

古文：孝景初即位，为詹事。
现代文：汉景帝刚刚即位时，他任詹事。
English: When Emperor Han Jing had just ascended to the throne, he served as Zhanji.

古文：梁孝王者，孝景弟也，其母窦太后爱之。
现代文：梁孝王是汉景帝的弟弟，他的母亲窦太后很疼爱他。
English: Liang Xiaowang was the younger brother of Emperor Han Jing. His mother, Empress Dowager Dou, loved him very much.

古文：梁孝王朝，因昆弟燕饮。
现代文：有一次梁孝王入朝，汉景帝以兄弟的身份与他一起宴饮，这时汉景帝还没有立太子。
English: Once, when Liang Xiaowang entered the imperial court, Emperor Han Jing dined with him as a brother. At that time, Emperor Han Jing had not yet crowned a crown prince.

古文：是时上未立太子，酒酣，从容言曰： 千秋之後传梁王。 
现代文：酒兴正浓时，汉景帝随便地说： 我死之后把帝位传给梁王。 
English: When the wine was getting strong, Emperor Han Jing casually said: After my death, I will pass the imperial throne to King Liang.

古文：太后驩。
现代文：窦太后听了非常高兴。
English: Empress Dowager Dou was very happy to hear this.

古文：窦婴引卮酒进上，曰： 天下者，高祖天下，父子相传，此汉之约也，上何以得擅传梁王！ 
现代文：这时窦婴端起一杯酒献给皇上，说道： 天下是高祖打下的天下，帝位应当父子相传，这是汉朝立下的制度规定，皇上凭什么要擅自传给梁王！ 
English: At this time, Dou Ying took up a glass of wine and offered it to the emperor, saying: The world is ruled by Gao Zu, and the imperial throne should be passed down from father to son. This is a system established by the Han Dynasty. Why should the emperor pass it on to Liang Wang without permission?

古文：太后由此憎窦婴。
现代文：窦太后因此憎恨窦婴。
English: As a result, Empress Dowager Dou hated Dou Yu.

古文：窦婴亦薄其官，因病免。
现代文：窦婴也嫌詹事的官职太小，就借口生病辞职。
English: Dou Ying also felt that Zhan Zheng's official position was too small, and resigned on the pretext of illness.

古文：太后除窦婴门籍，不得入朝请。
现代文：窦太后于是开除了窦婴进出宫门的名籍，每逢节日也不准许他进宫朝见。
English: Empress Dowager Dou then expelled Dou Jiao from entering and leaving the palace gate, and he was not allowed to enter the palace to see the emperor every festival.

古文：孝景三年，吴楚反，上察宗室诸窦毋如窦婴贤，乃召婴。
现代文：汉景帝三年，吴、楚等七国反叛，皇上考察到皇族成员和窦姓诸人没有谁像窦婴那样贤能的了，于是就召见窦婴。
English: In the third year of the reign of Emperor Han Jing, Wu, Chu and other seven countries rebelled. The emperor inspected the members of the royal family and people with the surname Dou, and found that no one was as virtuous as Dou Ying, so he summoned Dou Ying.

古文：婴入见，固辞谢病不足任。
现代文：窦婴入宫拜见，坚决推辞，借口有病，不能胜任。
English: Dou baby into the palace to visit, resolutely refused, the excuse is sick, not competent.

古文：太后亦惭。
现代文：窦太后至此也感到惭愧。
English: Empress Dowager Dou also felt ashamed.

古文：於是上曰： 天下方有急，王孙宁可以让邪？ 
现代文：于是皇上就说： 天下正有急难，你怎么可以推辞呢？ 
English: Then the emperor said, "The world is in dire straits, how can you refuse?"

古文：乃拜婴为大将军，赐金千斤。
现代文：于是便任命窦婴为大将军，赏赐给他黄金千斤。
English: As a result, he appointed Dou Ying as a general and rewarded him with a gold coin.

古文：婴乃言袁盎、栾布诸名将贤士在家者进之。
现代文：这时袁盎、栾布诸名将贤士都退职闲居在家，窦婴就向皇上推荐起用他们。
English: At this time, Yuan Un and Zibo's famous generals and sages were retired and idle at home, and Dou Ying recommended them to the emperor.

古文：所赐金，陈之廊庑下，军吏过，辄令财取为用，金无入家者。
现代文：皇上所赏赐给的黄金，都摆列在走廊穿堂里，属下的小军官经过时，就让他们酌量取用，皇帝赏赐的黄金一点儿也没有拿回家。
English: The gold given by the emperor was laid out in rows in the corridor leading through the hall. When the subordinate petty officers passed by, they were allowed to use it as they saw fit. The gold given by the emperor was never taken home.

古文：窦婴守荥阳，监齐赵兵。七国兵已尽破，封婴为魏其侯。
现代文：窦婴驻守荥阳时，监督齐国和赵国两路兵马，等到七国的叛乱全部被平定之后，皇上就赐封窦婴为魏其侯。
English: When Dou Jiao was stationed in Fenyang, he supervised the soldiers and horses of Qi and Zhao. After the rebellion of the seven countries was completely suppressed, the emperor gave Dou Jiao the title of Prince of Wei.

古文：诸游士宾客争归魏其侯。
现代文：这时那些游士宾客都争相归附魏其侯。
English: At this time, those wandering guests were all vying to join Wei Ji Hou.

古文：孝景时每朝议大事，条侯、魏其侯，诸列侯莫敢与亢礼。
现代文：汉景帝时每次朝廷讨论军政大事，所有列侯都不敢与条侯周亚夫、魏其侯窦婴平起平坐。
English: During the reign of Emperor Han Jing, every time the imperial court discussed military and political events, all the princes did not dare to sit on an equal footing with Zhou Yafu and Wei Qi Dou Yu.

古文：孝景四年，立栗太子，使魏其侯为太子傅。
现代文：汉景帝四年，立栗太子，派魏其侯担任太子的太傅。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Han Jing, Prince Li of Li Province was appointed, and Wei Qihong was sent to serve as the prince's taifu.

古文：孝景七年，栗太子废，魏其数争不能得。
现代文：汉景帝七年，栗太子被废，魏其侯多次为栗太子争辩都没有效果。
English: In the seventh year of Emperor Han Jing, the Chestnut Prince was abolished, and Wei Qihong repeatedly argued for the Chestnut Prince without effect.

古文：魏其谢病，屏居蓝田南山之下数月，诸宾客辩士说之，莫能来。
现代文：魏其侯就推说有病，隐居在蓝田县南山下好几个月，许多宾客、辩士都来劝说他，但没有人能说服他回到京城来。
English: Wei Qihong put forward that he was ill and lived in seclusion at the foot of Nanshan Mountain in Lantian County for several months. Many guests and debaters came to persuade him, but no one could persuade him to return to Beijing.

古文：梁人高遂乃说魏其曰： 能富贵将军者，上也；能亲将军者，太后也。
现代文：梁地人高遂于是来劝解魏其侯说： 能使您富贵的是皇上，能使您成为朝廷亲信的是太后。
English: The Liang people's Gao Sui then came to persuade Wei Qihong and said: It is the emperor who can make you rich, and it is the empress dowager who can make you a close friend of the court.

古文：今将军傅太子，太子废而不能争；争不能得，又弗能死。
现代文：现在您担任太子的师傅，太子被废黜而不能力争，力争又不能成功，又不能去殉职。
English: Now you are acting as the prince's teacher. The prince has been deposed and is unable to fight. He cannot succeed in his struggle, nor can he die in office.

古文：自引谢病，拥赵女，屏间处而不朝。
现代文：自己托病引退，拥抱着歌姬美女，退隐闲居而不参加朝会。
English: He retired on sick leave, hugged the beautiful singer, retired and lived idly without attending the imperial court.

古文：相提而论，是自明扬主上之过。
现代文：把这些情况互相比照起来看，这是您自己表明要张扬皇帝的过失。
English: Taking all these circumstances into consideration, it is your own fault for trying to promote the emperor.

古文：有如两宫螫将军，则妻子毋类矣。 
现代文：假如皇上和太后都要加害于您，那您的妻子儿女都会一个不剩地被杀害。 
English: If the Emperor and Empress Dowager were to harm you, your wife and children would all be killed.

古文：魏其侯然之，乃遂起，朝请如故。
现代文：魏其侯认为他说得很对，于是就出山回朝，朝见皇帝像过去一样。
English: Wei Qihong thought that he was right, so he went out of the mountain to return to the emperor, and met the emperor as in the past.

古文：桃侯免相，窦太后数言魏其侯。
现代文：在桃侯刘舍被免去丞相职务时，窦太后多次推荐魏其侯当丞相。
English: When Taohu Liu She was dismissed from the post of chancellor, Empress Dowager Dou repeatedly recommended Wei Qihou as chancellor.

古文：孝景帝曰： 太后岂以为臣有爱，不相魏其？
现代文：汉景帝说： 太后难道认为我有所吝啬而不让魏其侯当丞相吗？
English: Emperor Han Jing said, "Does the Empress Dowager think I'm being stingy by not letting Wei Qihou become chancellor?

古文：魏其者，沾沾自喜耳，多易。难以为相，持重。 
现代文：魏其侯这个人骄傲自满，容易自我欣赏，做事草率轻浮，难以出任丞相，担当重任。 
English: Wei Qihou is a proud and complacent person, easy to admire himself, hasty and frivolous in doing things, and difficult to serve as prime minister and take on heavy responsibilities.

古文：遂不用，用建陵侯卫绾为丞相。
现代文：终于没有任用他，任用了建陵侯卫绾作丞相。
English: In the end, he was not appointed, but Jianling Hou Weimin was appointed as chancellor.

古文：武安侯田蚡者，孝景后同母弟也，生长陵。
现代文：武安侯田蚡，是汉景帝皇后的同母弟弟，出生在长陵。
English: Wu'an Hou Tian Qi, the younger half-brother of Empress Dowager Han Jing, was born in Changling.

古文：魏其已为大将军後，方盛，蚡为诸郎，未贵，往来侍酒魏其，跪起如子姓。
现代文：魏其侯已经当了大将军之后，正当显赫的时候，田蚡还是个郎官，没有显贵，来往于魏其侯家中，陪侍宴饮，跪拜起立像魏其侯的子孙辈一样。
English: After Wei Qihong had become a great general, when he was justly famous, Tian Qi was still a vassal, not a dignitary. He went back and forth to Wei Qihong's home, served banquets, and kneeled and stood up like Wei Qihong's children and grandchildren.

古文：及孝景晚节，蚡益贵幸，为太中大夫。
现代文：等到汉景帝的晚年，田蚡也显贵起来，受到宠信，做了太中大夫。
English: In the later years of Emperor Han Jing, Tian Qi also rose to prominence, was favored, and became the Grand Physician.

古文：蚡辩有口，学槃盂诸书，王太后贤之。
现代文：田蚡能言善辩，口才很好，学习过《盘盂》之类的书籍，王太后认为他有才能。
English: The Queen Mother thought that Tian Xuan was talented because he was eloquent and had studied books such as "Pan Xuan."

古文：孝景崩，即日太子立，称制，所镇抚多有田蚡宾客计筴，蚡弟田胜，皆以太后弟，孝景後三年封蚡为武安侯，胜为周阳侯。
现代文：汉景帝去世，当天太子登位继立，王太后摄政，她在全国的镇压、安抚行动，大都采用田蚡门下宾客的策略。田蚡和他的弟弟田胜，都因为是王太后的弟弟，在汉景帝去世的同一年，被分别封为武安侯和周阳侯。
English: On the day of Emperor Han Jing's death, the crown prince was enthroned and the queen dowager became regent. In her suppression and appeasement actions throughout the country, she mostly used the strategy of being a guest under Tian Xuan's door. Tian Xuan and his brother Tian Sheng, both because they were the queen dowager's younger brothers, were separately made the princes of Wu'an and Zhouyang in the same year of Emperor Han Jing's death.

古文：武安侯新欲用事为相，卑下宾客，进名士家居者贵之，欲以倾魏其诸将相。
现代文：武安侯刚掌权想当丞相，所以对他的宾客非常谦卑，推荐闲居在家的名士出来做官，让他们显贵，想以此来压倒窦婴等将相的势力。
English: Wu'an wanted to be chancellor as soon as he took power, so he was very humble to his guests, recommending celebrities who were idle at home to come out and become officials, so that they would be distinguished, in order to overwhelm the power of generals such as Dou Ying.

古文：建元元年，丞相绾病免，上议置丞相、太尉。
现代文：建元元年，丞相卫绾因病免职，皇上酝酿安排丞相和太尉。
English: In the first year of the Jianyuan era, the chancellor of the imperial court, Wei Wei, was relieved of his duties due to illness, and the emperor made arrangements for the chancellor and the captain.

古文：籍福说武安侯曰： 魏其贵久矣，天下士素归之。
现代文：籍福劝说武安侯道： 魏其侯显贵已经很久了，天下有才能的人一向归附他。
English: Kuijifu persuaded Wu'an Hou: Wei Qihou has been prominent for a long time, and talented people all over the world have always followed him.

古文：今将军初兴，未如魏其，即上以将军为丞相，必让魏其。
现代文：现在您刚刚发迹，不能和魏其侯相比，就是皇上任命您做丞相，也一定要让给魏其侯。
English: Now that you have just made your fortune, you cannot be compared to Wei Qihou. Even if the emperor appoints you as chancellor, you must give Wei Qihou the lead.

古文：魏其为丞相，将军必为太尉。
现代文：魏其侯当丞相，您一定会当太尉。
English: If Wei Qihou becomes chancellor, you will surely become captain.

古文：太尉、丞相尊等耳，又有让贤名。 
现代文：太尉和丞相的尊贵地位是相等的，您还有让相位给贤者的好名声 。
English: The captain and the prime minister are of the same rank, and you have a reputation for giving way to the wise men.

古文：武安侯乃微言太后风上，於是乃以魏其侯为丞相，武安侯为太尉。
现代文：武安侯于是就委婉地告诉太后暗示皇上，于是便任命魏其侯当丞相，武安侯当太尉。
English: Wu'an Hou then euphemistically told the Empress Dowager to hint to the Emperor, so he appointed Wei Qihou as chancellor and Wu'an Hou as first lieutenant.

古文：籍福贺魏其侯，因吊曰： 君侯资性喜善疾恶，方今善人誉君侯，故至丞相；然君侯且疾恶，恶人众，亦且毁君侯。
现代文：籍福去向魏其侯道贺，就便提醒他说： 您的天性是喜欢好人憎恨坏人，当今好人称赞您，所以您当了丞相，然而您也憎恨坏人，坏人相当多，他们也会毁谤您的。
English: When he went to congratulate Wei Qihou, he reminded him: Your nature is to like good people and hate bad people. Today, good people praise you, so you became the prime minister. However, you also hate bad people. There are quite a few bad people, and they will slander you.

古文：君侯能兼容，则幸久；不能，今以毁去矣。 
现代文：如果您能并容好人和坏人，那么您丞相的职位就可以保持长久；如果不能够这样的话，马上就会受到毁谤而离职。 
English: If you can accommodate both the good and the bad, then your position as prime minister can be maintained for a long time; if you can't do that, you will immediately be slandered and leave office.

古文：魏其不听。
现代文：魏其侯不听从他的话。
English: Wei did not listen to him.

古文：魏其、武安俱好儒术，推毂赵绾为御史大夫，王臧为郎中令。
现代文：魏其侯窦婴和武安侯田蚡都爱好儒家学说，推荐赵绾当了御史大夫，王臧担任郎中令。
English: Wei Qihou Dou Ying and Wu'an Hou Tian Jiao were both fond of Confucianism, and recommended Zhao Jiao to be the chief historian, and Wang Jiao to be the second-in-command.

古文：迎鲁申公，欲设明堂，令列侯就国，除关，以礼为服制，以兴太平。
现代文：把鲁国人申培迎到京师来，准备设立明堂，命令列侯们回到自己的封地上，废除关禁，按照礼法来规定吉凶的服饰和制度，以此来表明太平的气象。
English: He welcomed the Lu people to Beijing, prepared to set up a Ming hall, ordered the feudal lords to return to their fiefs, abolished the ban, and in accordance with the etiquette to stipulate the clothing and system of auspicious and inauspicious, in order to show the peaceful weather.

古文：举適诸窦宗室毋节行者，除其属籍。
现代文：同时检举谴责窦氏家族和皇族成员中品德不好的人，开除他们的族籍。
English: At the same time, the procuratorate denounced the bad moral character of the Dou family and members of the royal family, and expelled them from the nationality.

古文：时诸外家为列侯，列侯多尚公主，皆不欲就国，以故毁日至窦太后。
现代文：这时诸外戚中的列侯，大多娶公主为妻，都不想回到各自的封地中去，因为这个缘故，毁谤魏其侯等人的言语每天都传到窦太后的耳中。
English: At this time, most of the princes among the foreign relatives married princesses and did not want to return to their respective fiefs. Because of this, the words slandering Wei Qihong and others reached the ears of Dowager Empress Dou every day.

古文：太后好黄老之言，而魏其、武安、赵绾、王臧等务隆推儒术，贬道家言，是以窦太后滋不说魏其等。
现代文：窦太后喜欢黄老学说，而魏其侯、武安侯、赵绾、王臧等人则努力推崇儒家学说，贬低道家的学说，因此窦太后更加不喜欢魏其侯等人。
English: Empress Dowager Dou liked Huang Lao's doctrine, while Wei Qihong, Wu Anhou, Zhao Qi, Wang Qi and others worked hard to promote Confucian doctrine and disparage Taoist doctrine, so Empress Dowager Dou disliked Wei Qihong and others even more.

古文：及建元二年，御史大夫赵绾请无奏事东宫。
现代文：到了建元二年，御史大夫赵绾请皇上不要把政事禀奏给太后。
English: In the second year of the first century, the imperial historian Zhao Wei asked the emperor not to report political affairs to the empress dowager.

古文：窦太后大怒，乃罢逐赵绾、王臧等，而免丞相、太尉，以柏至侯许昌为丞相，武彊侯庄青翟为御史大夫。
现代文：窦太后大怒，便罢免并驱逐了赵绾、王臧等人，还解除了丞相和太尉的职务，任命柏至侯许昌当了丞相，武强侯庄青翟当了御史大夫。
English: Empress Dowager Dou was furious, so she dismissed and expelled Zhao Jun, Wang Jun and others, and also dismissed the chancellor and captain, and appointed Bao Zhi Hou Xuchang as chancellor, and Wu Qiang Hou Zhuang Qingyuan as chief historian.

古文：魏其、武安由此以侯家居。
现代文：魏其侯、武安侯从此以列侯的身份闲居家中。
English: Wei Ji Hou and Wu An Hou lived idly at home as feudal lords from then on.

古文：武安侯虽不任职，以王太后故，亲幸，数言事多效，天下吏士趋势利者，皆去魏其归武安，武安日益横。
现代文：武安侯虽然不担任官职，但因为王太后的缘故，仍然受到皇上的宠信，多次议论政事，建议大多见效，天下趋炎附势的官吏和士人，都离开了魏其侯而归附了武安侯。武安侯一天天更加骄横。
English: Although Wu'an Hou did not hold an official position, he was still favored by the emperor for the sake of the empress dowager. He discussed political affairs many times, and most of his suggestions were effective. The world's most powerful officials and nobles left Wei'an Hou and joined Wu'an Hou. Wu'an Hou became more and more arrogant.

古文：建元六年，窦太后崩，丞相昌、御史大夫青翟坐丧事不办，免。
现代文：建元六年，窦太后逝世，丞相许昌和御史大夫庄青翟因为丧事办得不周到，都被免官。
English: In the sixth year of the Jianyuan era, Empress Dowager Dou died, and the chancellor Xu Chang and the imperial historian Zhuang Qingyao were both dismissed because the funeral was not well-handled.

古文：以武安侯蚡为丞相，以大司农韩安国为御史大夫。
现代文：于是任用武安侯田蚡担任丞相，任用大司农韩安国担任御史大夫。
English: As a result, he appointed Buan Hou Tien Ho as chancellor, and appointed the grand secretary of agriculture, Han An Guo, as chief historian.

古文：天下士郡诸侯愈益附武安。
现代文：天下的士人有郡守和诸侯王，就更加依附武安侯了。
English: The world's nobles have county governors and princes, so they are more dependent on Wu'an Hou.

古文：武安者，貌侵，生贵甚。
现代文：武安侯身材矮小，其貌不扬，可是刚一出生就很尊贵。
English: Wu'an Hou was small in stature and unimpressive in appearance, but he was very noble from the moment he was born.

古文：又以为诸侯王多长，上初即位，富於春秋，蚡以肺腑为京师相，非痛折节以礼诎之，天下不肃。
现代文：他又认为当时的诸侯王都年纪大了，皇上刚刚即位，年纪很轻，自己以皇帝的至亲心腹担任朝廷的丞相，如果不狠狠地整顿一番，用礼法来使他们屈服，天下人就不会服服贴贴的。
English: He also thought that the princes and kings at that time were very old, the emperor had just ascended the throne, he was very young, and he himself served as the prime minister of the imperial court as the emperor's closest confidant. If he did not severely rectify the situation and use etiquette to make them submit, the people of the world would not submit.

古文：当是时，丞相入奏事，坐语移日，所言皆听。荐人或起家至二千石，权移主上。
现代文：在那时候，丞相入朝廷奏事，往往一坐就是大半天，他所说的话皇帝都听，他所推荐的人有的从闲居一下子提拨到二千石级，把皇帝的权力转移到自己手上。
English: At that time, when the prime minister came to the imperial court to report, he often sat for half a day. The emperor listened to everything he said. Some of the people he recommended were promoted from idle to two thousand koku level at once, transferring the power of the emperor to their own hands.

古文：上乃曰： 君除吏已尽未？
现代文：皇上于是说： 你要任命的官吏已经任命完了没有？
English: The emperor then said: Have you already appointed the officials you want to appoint?

古文：吾亦欲除吏。 
现代文：我也想任命几个官呢。 
English: I would also like to appoint a few officials.

古文：尝请考工地益宅，上怒曰： 君何不遂取武库！ 
现代文：他曾经要求把考工官署的地盘划给自己扩建住宅，皇上生气地说： 你何不把武器库也取走！ 
English: He once demanded that the land of the Civil Engineering Examiner's Office be used to expand his residence. The emperor angrily said: Why don't you also take away the weapons depot!

古文：是後乃退。
现代文：从这以后才收敛一些。
English: After that, things calmed down a bit.

古文：尝召客饮，坐其兄盖侯南乡，自坐东乡，以为汉相尊，不可以兄故私桡。
现代文：有一次，他请客人宴饮，让他的兄长盖侯南向坐，自己却东向坐，认为汉朝的丞相尊贵，不可以因为是兄长就私下委曲自己。
English: On one occasion, he invited guests to a banquet and asked his brother Gaehong Nan to sit, while he himself sat facing east. He believed that the prime ministers of the Han Dynasty were honorable, and that it was not permissible to secretly favor one over the other because they were brothers.

古文：武安由此滋骄，治宅甲诸第。
现代文：武安侯从此更加骄纵，他修建住宅，其规模、豪华超过了所有的贵族的府第。
English: From then on, Wu'an Hou became even more arrogant. He built residences whose scale and luxury surpassed all the palaces of the aristocracy.

古文：田园极膏腴，而市买郡县器物相属於道。
现代文：田地庄园都极其肥沃，他派到各郡县去购买器物的人，在大道上络绎不绝。
English: The country estates are extremely fertile, and the people he sends to the counties to buy utensils are incessantly on the boulevard.

古文：前堂罗锺鼓，立曲旃；後房妇女以百数。
现代文：前堂摆投着钟鼓，竖立着曲柄长幡，在后房的美女数以百计。
English: In the vestibule, bells and drums are set up, a crank long banner is erected, and there are hundreds of beautiful women in the back room.

古文：诸侯奉金玉狗马玩好，不可胜数。
现代文：诸侯奉送给他的珍宝金玉、狗马和玩好器物，数也数不清。
English: Countless numbers of precious jewels, dogs, horses, and playthings were given to him by the princes.

古文：魏其失窦太后，益疏不用，无势，诸客稍稍自引而怠傲，唯灌将军独不失故。
现代文：魏其侯自从失去了窦太后，被皇上更加疏远不受重用，没有权势，诸宾客渐渐自动离去，甚至对他懈怠傲慢，只有灌将军一人没有改变原来的态度。
English: Since Wei Qihong lost the Dowager Dou, he has been further alienated by the emperor. He is not reused and has no power. The guests gradually leave of their own accord, and are even slack and arrogant towards him. Only General Gan has not changed his original attitude.

古文：魏其日默默不得志，而独厚遇灌将军。
现代文：魏其侯天天闷闷不乐，唯独对灌将军格外厚待。
English: Wei Qihou was sullen and unhappy every day, but he treated General Guan exceptionally well.

古文：灌将军夫者，颍阴人也。
现代文：灌将军夫是颍阴人。
English: General Kan's husband is a goblin.

古文：夫父张孟，尝为颍阴侯婴舍人，得幸，因进之至二千石，故蒙灌氏姓为灌孟。
现代文：灌夫的父亲是张孟，曾经做过颍阴侯灌婴的家臣，受到灌婴的宠信，便推荐他，官至二千石级，所以冒用灌氏家的姓叫灌孟。
English: Kanfu's father was Zhang Meng, who had once been a vassal of Gu Yin's son-in-law Guan Yu. He was a favorite of Guan Yu, who recommended him for an official position of up to 2,000 koku, so he pretended to use the surname of the Guan family to be called Guan Meng.

古文：吴楚反时，颍阴侯灌何为将军，属太尉，请灌孟为校尉。
现代文：吴楚叛乱时，颍阴侯灌何担任将军，是太尉周亚夫的部下，他向太尉推荐灌孟担任校尉。
English: When Wu Chu rebelled, Gu Yin Hou Guan He served as a general. He was a subordinate of Lieutenant Zhou Yafu. He recommended Lieutenant Guan Meng to serve as a captain.

古文：夫以千人与父俱。
现代文：灌夫带领一千人与父亲一起从军。
English: Kanfu led a thousand people to join the army with his father.

古文：灌孟年老，颍阴侯彊请之，郁郁不得意，故战常陷坚，遂死吴军中。
现代文：灌孟年纪已经老了，颍阴侯勉强推荐他，所以灌孟郁郁不得志，每逢作战时，常常攻击敌人的坚强阵地，因而战死在吴军中。
English: As Guan Meng was already old, Gongyin Hou reluctantly recommended him, so Guan Meng was discouraged. Whenever there was a battle, he often attacked the enemy's strong positions, and thus died in the Wu Army.

古文：军法，父子俱从军，有死事，得与丧归。
现代文：按照当时军法的规定，父子一起从军参战，有一个为国战死，未死者可以护送灵柩回来。
English: According to the provisions of the military law at that time, father and son went to war together, one died for the country, and the deceased could escort the coffin back.

古文：灌夫不肯随丧归，奋曰： 原取吴王若将军头，以报父之仇。 
现代文：但灌夫不肯随同父亲的灵柩回去。他慷慨激昂地表示： 希望斩取吴王或者吴国将军的头，以替父亲报仇。 
English: But Ganfu refused to go back with his father's coffin. He said passionately, "I hope to avenge my father by cutting off the head of King Wu or General Wu."

古文：於是灌夫被甲持戟，募军中壮士所善原从者数十人。
现代文：于是灌夫披上铠甲，手拿戈戟，召集了军中与他素来有交情又愿意跟他同去的勇士几十个人。
English: So Kanfu put on his armor, picked up his crossbow, and gathered dozens of warriors in the army who had been friends with him and were willing to go with him.

古文：及出壁门，莫敢前。
现代文：等到走出军门，没有人敢再前进。
English: Once out of the gate, no one dared to advance.

古文：独二人及从奴十数骑驰入吴军，至吴将麾下，所杀伤数十人。
现代文：只有两人和灌夫属下的奴隶共十多个骑兵飞奔冲入吴军中，一直到达吴军的将旗之下，杀死杀伤敌军几十人。
English: Only the two of them and the slaves belonging to Guanfu, a total of more than ten cavalrymen, rushed into the Wu army, reaching all the way under the banner of the Wu army, killing and wounding dozens of enemy soldiers.

古文：不得前，复驰还，走入汉壁，皆亡其奴，独与一骑归。
现代文：不能再继续前进了，又飞马返回汉军营地，所带去的奴隶全都战死了，只有他一人回来。
English: Unable to go any further, Pegasus returned to the Chinese camp. All the slaves he had taken with him died in the war, and only he returned.

古文：夫身中大创十馀，適有万金良药，故得无死。
现代文：灌夫身上受重创十多处，恰好有名贵的良药，所以才得不死。
English: There were more than ten serious injuries on the man's body. It just happened to be a famous and expensive medicine, so he didn't die.

古文：夫创少瘳，又复请将军曰： 吾益知吴壁中曲折，请复往。 
现代文：灌夫的创伤稍稍好转，又向将军请求说： 我现在更加了解吴军营垒中路径曲折，请您让我再回去。 
English: When Guanfu's injuries had slightly improved, he again pleaded with the general, "I now have a better understanding of the twists and turns in the path of the Wu camp, please let me go back."

古文：将军壮义之，恐亡夫，乃言太尉，太尉乃固止之。
现代文：将军认为他勇敢而有义气，恐怕灌夫战死，便向太尉周亚夫报告，太尉便坚决地阻止了他。
English: The general thought he was brave and loyal, and feared that Ganfu would die in battle, so he reported to Lieutenant Zhou Yafu, who resolutely stopped him.

古文：吴已破，灌夫以此名闻天下。
现代文：等到吴军被攻破，灌夫也因此名闻天下。
English: By the time the Wu army was defeated, Ganfu was famous all over the world.

古文：颍阴侯言之上，上以夫为中郎将。
现代文：颍阴侯把灌夫的情况向皇上汇报了，皇上就任命灌夫担任中郎将。
English: Gongyin Hou reported the situation of Guanfu to the emperor, and the emperor appointed Guanfu as the vice-commander.

古文：数月，坐法去。
现代文：过了几个月，因为犯法而丢了官。
English: A few months later, he lost his job for breaking the law.

古文：後家居长安，长安中诸公莫弗称之。
现代文：后来到长安安了家，长安城中的许多显贵没有不称赞他的。
English: Later, he moved to Chang'an. Many dignitaries in Chang'an praised him.

古文：孝景时，至代相。
现代文：汉景帝时，灌夫官至代国国相。
English: During the reign of Emperor Han Jing, Kanfu officials rose to become ministers of state.

古文：孝景崩，今上初即位，以为淮阳天下交，劲兵处，故徙夫为淮阳太守。
现代文：景帝去世，当今皇上武帝刚即位，认为淮阳是天下的交通枢纽，必须驻扎强大的兵力加以防守，因此调任灌夫担任淮阳太守。
English: After the death of Emperor Jing, Emperor Wu, who had just ascended to the throne, thought that Huaiyang was the transportation hub of the world, and it was necessary to station a strong military force to defend it. Therefore, he transferred Guanfu to serve as the governor of Huaiyang.

古文：建元元年，入为太仆。
现代文：建元元年，又把灌夫内调为太仆。
English: In the first year of the Jianyuan era, he transferred Ganfu Nene to the position of Taibu.

古文：二年，夫与长乐卫尉窦甫饮，轻重不得，夫醉，搏甫。
现代文：二年，灌夫与长乐卫尉窦甫喝酒，灌夫喝醉了，打了窦甫。
English: In the second year, Ganfu had a drink with Changle Guardsman Dou Fu. Ganfu got drunk and hit Dou Fu.

古文：甫，窦太后昆弟也。
现代文：窦甫，是窦太后的兄弟。
English: Dou Fu is the brother of Dowager Dou.

古文：上恐太后诛夫，徙为燕相。
现代文：皇上恐怕窦太后杀灌夫，调派他担任了燕国国相。
English: Emperor Dou was afraid that Empress Dowager Dou would kill Guanfu, so he appointed him as the Minister of State of Yan Province.

古文：数岁，坐法去官，家居长安。
现代文：几年以后，又因犯法丢官，闲居在长安家中。
English: A few years later, he was dismissed from his post for violating the law, and lived idly at home in Chang'an.

古文：灌夫为人刚直使酒，不好面谀。
现代文：灌夫为人刚强直爽，好发酒疯，不喜欢当面奉承人。
English: Kanfu is a strong and forthright person, likes to get drunk, and does not like to flatter people in person.

古文：贵戚诸有势在己之右，不欲加礼，必陵之；诸士在己之左，愈贫贱，尤益敬，与钧。
现代文：对皇亲国戚及有势力的人，凡是地位在自己以上的，他不但不想对他们表示尊敬，反而要想办法去凌辱他们；对地位在自己之下的许多士人，越是贫的，就更加恭敬，跟他们平等相待。
English: He not only did not want to show respect to the emperor's relatives and powerful people who were in a higher position than himself, but he wanted to find a way to humiliate them. For many people who were in a lower position, the poorer they were, the more respectful they were, and they treated them as equals.

古文：稠人广众，荐宠下辈。
现代文：在大庭广众之中，推荐夸奖那些比自己地位低的人。
English: Among the general public, it is recommended to praise those who are lower in status than oneself.

古文：士亦以此多之。
现代文：士人们也因此而推重他。
English: That's why the judges are giving him such a hard time.

古文：夫不喜文学，好任侠，已然诺。
现代文：灌夫不喜欢文章经学，爱打抱不平，已经答应了别人的事，一定办到。
English: Guanfu does not like to study articles, loves to hold grudges, has already promised others things, and will definitely do it.

古文：诸所与交通，无非豪桀大猾。
现代文：凡和他交往的那些人，无不是杰出人士或大巨猾。
English: All those with whom he associated were men of distinction or great cunning.

古文：家累数千万，食客日数十百人。
现代文：他家中积累的资产有几千万，每天的食客少则几十，多则近百。
English: His family has accumulated tens of millions in assets, with daily diners ranging from a few dozen to nearly a hundred.

古文：陂池田园，宗族宾客为权利，横於颍川。
现代文：为了在田园中修筑堤塘，灌溉农田，他的宗族和宾客扩张权势，垄断利益，在颍川一带横行霸道。
English: In order to build dykes and ponds in the countryside and irrigate farmland, his clan and guests expanded their power, monopolized interests, and were domineering in the area around the Li River.

古文：颍川兒乃歌之曰： 颍水清，灌氏宁；颍水浊，灌氏族。 
现代文：颍川的儿童于是作歌唱道： 颍水清清，灌氏安宁；颍水浑浊，灌氏灭族。 
English: As a result, the children of Lugu River sang: Lugu River is clear and clear, and the Kan clan is peaceful; Lugu River is muddy, and the Kan clan is exterminated.

古文：灌夫家居虽富，然失势，卿相侍中宾客益衰。
现代文：灌夫闲居在家虽然富有，但失去了权势，达官贵人及一般宾客逐渐减少。
English: Although rich, Guanfu idled at home and lost his power. The number of dignitaries and ordinary guests gradually decreased.

古文：及魏其侯失势，亦欲倚灌夫引绳批根生平慕之後弃之者。
现代文：等到魏其侯失去权势，也想依灌夫去报复那些平日仰慕自己，失势后又抛弃了自己的人。
English: When Wei Qihou lost power, he also wanted to take revenge on those who usually admired him and abandoned him after losing power.

古文：灌夫亦倚魏其而通列侯宗室为名高。
现代文：灌夫也想依魏其侯去结交列侯和皇族以抬高自己的名声。
English: Kanfu also wanted to make friends with the feudal lords and the imperial family to enhance his reputation.

古文：两人相为引重，其游如父子然。
现代文：两人互相援引借重，他们的交往就如同父子之间那样密切。
English: The two invoke mutual respect, and their relationship is as close as that between father and son.

古文：相得驩甚，无厌，恨相知晚也。
现代文：彼此情投意合，没有嫌忌，只恨相知太晚了。
English: They sympathize with each other, there is no aversion, but it is too late to hate each other.

古文：灌夫有服，过丞相。丞相从容曰： 吾欲与仲孺过魏其侯，会仲孺有服。 
现代文：灌夫在服丧期内去拜访丞相，丞相随便地说： 我想和你一起去拜访魏其侯，恰值你现在服丧不便前往。 
English: When Kan went to visit the prime minister during the mourning period, the prime minister casually said, "I want to go with you to visit Wei Qihou. It is inconvenient for you to go at this time of mourning."

古文：灌夫曰： 将军乃肯幸临况魏其侯，夫安敢以服为解！
现代文：灌夫说： 您竟肯屈驾光临魏其侯，我灌夫怎敢因为服丧而推辞呢！
English: The chief cupbearer said, "You are so willing to visit Wei, how dare my chief cupbearer refuse to attend the funeral!"

古文：请语魏其侯帐具，将军旦日蚤临。 
现代文：请允许我告诉魏其侯设置帷帐，备办酒席，您明天早点光临。 
English: Please allow me to tell Wei Qihong to set up the curtains, prepare the banquet, and come early tomorrow.

古文：武安许诺。
现代文：武安侯答应了。
English: Wu'an Hou agreed.

古文：灌夫具语魏其侯如所谓武安侯。
现代文：灌夫详细地告诉了魏其侯，就像他对武安侯所说的那样。
English: Kanfu told Wei Ji Hou in detail, just as he had told Wu An Hou.

古文：魏其与其夫人益市牛酒，夜洒埽，早帐具至旦。
现代文：魏其侯和他的夫人特地多买了肉和酒，连夜打扫房子，布置帷帐，准备酒宴，一直忙到天亮。
English: Wei Qihong and his wife specially bought more meat and wine, cleaned the house overnight, arranged the curtains, prepared the wine banquet, and were busy until dawn.

古文：平明，令门下候伺。
现代文：天刚亮，就让府中管事的人在宅前伺侯。
English: As soon as it was light, he asked the person in charge of the government to wait in front of the house.

古文：至日中，丞相不来。
现代文：等到中午，不见丞相到来。
English: Wait until noon, and you won't see the prime minister arrive.

古文：魏其谓灌夫曰： 丞相岂忘之哉？ 
现代文：魏其侯对灌夫说： 丞相难道忘记了这件事？ 
English: Wei Qihou said to Guanfu: Did the prime minister forget about this?

古文：灌夫不怿，曰： 夫以服请，宜往。 
现代文：灌夫很不高兴，说： 我灌夫不嫌丧服在身而应他之约，他应该来。 
English: The potter was very displeased and said, "I don't want my potter to be in mourning, but according to his agreement, he should come.

古文：乃驾，自往迎丞相。
现代文：于是便驾车，亲自前往迎接丞相。
English: As a result, he drove to meet the prime minister in person.

古文：丞相特前戏许灌夫，殊无意往。
现代文：丞相前一天只不过开玩笑似地答应了灌夫，实在没有打算来赴宴的意思。
English: On the previous day, the prime minister had only jokingly agreed to the banquet, but he really had no intention of attending the banquet.

古文：及夫至门，丞相尚卧。
现代文：等到灌夫来到门前，丞相还在睡觉。
English: When the bailiff came to the door, the prime minister was still sleeping.

古文：於是夫入见，曰： 将军昨日幸许过魏其，魏其夫妻治具，自旦至今，未敢尝食。 
现代文：于是灌夫进门去见他，说： 将军昨天幸蒙答应拜访魏其侯，魏其侯夫妇备办了酒食，从早晨到现在，没敢吃一点东西。 
English: So Ganfu walked through the door to meet him and said, "Yesterday, the general fortunately agreed to visit Wei Qihou. Wei Qihou and his wife prepared wine and food, but from the morning until now, they haven't dared to eat a single thing.

古文：武安鄂谢曰： 吾昨日醉，忽忘与仲孺言。 
现代文：武安侯装作惊讶地道歉说： 我昨天喝醉了，忘记了跟您说的话。 
English: Wu An Hou feigned surprise and apologized, saying: I was drunk yesterday and forgot what I said to you.

古文：乃驾往，又徐行，灌夫愈益怒。
现代文：便驾车前往，但又走得很慢，灌夫更加生气。
English: He drove there, but he drove very slowly, which made him even angrier.

古文：及饮酒酣，夫起舞属丞相，丞相不起，夫从坐上语侵之。
现代文：等到喝酒喝醉了，灌夫舞蹈了一番，舞毕邀请丞相，丞相竟不起身，灌夫在酒宴上用话讽刺他。
English: After drinking and getting drunk, Ganfu danced for a while. After the dance, he invited the prime minister. However, the prime minister did not get up, and Ganfu satirized him with words at the banquet.

古文：魏其乃扶灌夫去，谢丞相。
现代文：魏其侯便扶灌夫离去，向丞相表示了歉意。
English: Wei Qihong then helped Guanfu leave and expressed his apologies to the prime minister.

古文：丞相卒饮至夜，极驩而去。
现代文：丞相一直喝到天黑，尽欢才离去。
English: The prime minister kept drinking until dark, and only left when he was satisfied.

古文：丞相尝使籍福请魏其城南田。
现代文：丞相曾经派籍福去索取魏其侯在城南的田地。
English: The chancellor once sent a citizen of fortune to claim Wei Qihou's fields in the south of the city.

古文：魏其大望曰： 老仆虽弃，将军虽贵，宁可以势夺乎！ 
现代文：魏其侯大为怨恨地说： 我虽然被废弃不用，将军虽然显贵，怎么可以仗势硬夺我的田地呢！ 
English: Wei Qihong said with great resentment: Although I am abandoned and useless, although the general is distinguished, how can I take my field by force?

古文：不许。
现代文：不答应。
English: The Emperor does not allow it.

古文：灌夫闻，怒，骂籍福。
现代文：灌夫听说后，也生气，大骂籍福。
English: After hearing this, Ganfu was also angry and swore at Zekifu.

古文：籍福恶两人有郄，乃谩自好谢丞相曰： 魏其老且死，易忍，且待之。 
现代文：籍福不愿两人有隔阂，就自己编造了好话向丞相道歉说： 魏其侯年事已高，就快死了，还不能忍耐吗，姑且等待着吧！ 
English: Jiufu did not want the two to have a rift, so he made up a good excuse to apologize to the prime minister, saying: Wei Qihou is old, he is about to die, can't you be patient, just wait!

古文：已而武安闻魏其、灌夫实怒不予田，亦怒曰： 魏其子尝杀人，蚡活之。
现代文：不久，武安侯听说魏其侯和灌夫实际是愤怒而不肯让给田地，也很生气地说： 魏其侯的儿子曾经杀人，我救了他的命。
English: Soon, Wu'an Hou heard that Wei Qihou and Guanfu were actually angry and would not give up the fields. He also said angrily: Wei Qihou's son once killed someone, and I saved his life.

古文：蚡事魏其无所不可，何爱数顷田？
现代文：我服事魏其侯没有不听从他的，为什么他竟舍不得这几顷田地？
English: I did not disobey him when I served Wei, his lord. Why did he not want to give up these several hectares of fields?

古文：且灌夫何与也？
现代文：再说灌夫为什么要干预呢？
English: Besides, why should the irrigator intervene?

古文：吾不敢复求田。 
现代文：我不敢再要这块田地了！ 
English: I don't want this field anymore!

古文：武安由此大怨灌夫、魏其。
现代文：武安侯从此十分怨恨灌夫、魏其侯。
English: Since then, Wu'an Hou has been very resentful of Ganfu and Wei Ji Hou.

古文：元光四年春，丞相言灌夫家在颍川，横甚，民苦之。
现代文：元光四年的春天，丞相向皇上说灌夫家住颍川，十分横行，百姓都受其苦。
English: In the spring of the fourth year of the reign of Yuan Guang, the minister of justice told the emperor that the Guanfu family lived in Luchuan. It was very rampant, and the people were suffering from it.

古文：请案。
现代文：请求皇上查办。
English: Ask the emperor to investigate.

古文：上曰： 此丞相事，何请。 
现代文：皇上说： 这是丞相的职责，何必请示。 
English: The emperor said: This is the duty of the prime minister, why do you need to ask for instructions.

古文：灌夫亦持丞相阴事，为奸利，受淮南王金与语言。
现代文：灌夫也抓住了丞相的秘事，用非法手段谋取利益，接受了淮南王的金钱并说了些不该说的话。
English: Kanfu also seized the secret of the prime minister, used illegal means to seek profits, accepted the money of King Huainan and said something that should not be said.

古文：宾客居间，遂止，俱解。
现代文：宾客们从中调解。双方才停止互相攻击，彼此和解。
English: The guests mediate, and the two sides stop attacking each other and reconcile.

古文：夏，丞相取燕王女为夫人，有太后诏，召列侯宗室皆往贺。
现代文：那年夏天，丞相娶燕王的女儿做夫人，太后下了诏令，叫列侯和皇族都去祝贺。
English: That summer, the prime minister married the daughter of King Yan as his wife, and the empress dowager issued an imperial decree, calling the princes and the royal family to congratulate.

古文：魏其侯过灌夫，欲与俱。
现代文：魏其侯拜访灌夫，打算同他一起去。
English: Wei Qihong visits Guanfu and plans to go with him.

古文：夫谢曰： 夫数以酒失得过丞相，丞相今者又与夫有郄。 
现代文：灌夫推辞说： 我多次因为酒醉失礼而得罪了丞相，丞相近来又和我有嫌隙。 
English: "I have offended the prime minister many times because of my drunkenness and impoliteness, and the prime minister has recently had a grudge against me," Kanfu said.

古文：魏其曰： 事已解。 
现代文：魏其侯说： 事情已经和解了。 
English: Wei Qihou said: Things have been reconciled.

古文：彊与俱。
现代文：硬拉他一道去。
English: Drag him along.

古文：饮酒酣，武安起为寿，坐皆避席伏。
现代文：酒喝到差不多时，武安侯起身敬酒祝寿，在坐的宾客都离开席位，伏在地上，表示不敢当。
English: When the wine was almost drunk, Wu'an Hou got up to make a toast to celebrate his birthday. The seated guests all left their seats and lay down on the ground, saying that they did not dare to do so.

古文：已魏其侯为寿，独故人避席耳，馀半膝席。
现代文：过了一会儿，魏其侯起身为大家敬酒祝寿，只有那些魏其侯的老朋友离开了席位，其余半数的人照常坐在那里，只是稍微欠了欠上身。
English: After a while, Wei Qihong stood up to toast everyone's birthday. Only those old friends of Wei Qihong left the seat, and the other half of the people sat there as usual, only slightly missing the upper body.

古文：灌夫不悦。
现代文：灌夫不高兴。
English: The irrigator is not happy.

古文：起行酒，至武安，武安膝席曰： 不能满觞。 
现代文：他起身依次敬酒，敬到武安侯时，武安侯照常坐在那里，只稍欠了一下上身说： 不能喝满杯。 
English: He got up and toasted in turn, and when he toasted Wu'an Hou, Wu'an Hou sat there as usual, only slightly missing his upper body and said, "I can't drink a full glass."

古文：夫怒，因嘻笑曰： 将军贵人也，属之！ 
现代文：灌夫火了，便苦笑着说： 您是个贵人，这杯就托付给你了！ 
English: When the cupbearer was angry, he said with a wry smile, "You are a great man, and this cup has been entrusted to you!

古文：时武安不肯。
现代文：当时武安侯不肯答应。
English: At that time, Lord Wu'an refused to agree.

古文：行酒次至临汝侯，临汝侯方与程不识耳语，又不避席。
现代文：敬酒敬到临汝侯，临汝侯正在跟程不识附耳说悄悄话，又不离开席位。
English: A toast to Lin You Hou, Lin You Hou is following the road without knowing, whispering in his ear and not leaving his seat.

古文：夫无所发怒，乃骂临汝侯曰： 生平毁程不识不直一钱，今日长者为寿，乃效女兒呫嗫耳语！ 
现代文：灌夫没有地方发泄怒气，便骂临汝侯说： 平时诋毁程不识不值一钱，今天长辈给你敬酒祝寿，你却学女孩子一样在那儿同程不识咬耳说话！ 
English: There was no place for Ganfu to vent his anger, so he scolded Lin Ruhong and said, "In normal times, it is not worth a penny to slander someone because you don't know the process. Today, the elders gave you a toast to celebrate your birthday, but like a girl, you don't know how to speak politely!

古文：武安谓灌夫曰： 程李俱东西宫卫尉，今众辱程将军，仲孺独不为李将军地乎？ 
现代文：武安侯对灌夫说： 程将军和李将军都是东西两官的卫尉，现在当众侮辱程将军，仲孺难道不给你所尊敬的李将军留有余地吗？ 
English: Wu'an Hou said to Guan Fu, "General Cheng and General Li are both officers of the East and West Guards. Now you are publicly insulting General Cheng. Won't you leave room for General Li, whom you respect?

古文：灌夫曰： 今日斩头陷匈，何知程李乎！ 
现代文：灌夫说： 今天杀我的头，穿我的胸，我都不在乎，还顾什么程将军、李将军！ 
English: Guan Fu said, "Today, kill my head, wear my chest, I don't care, what do I care about General Cheng, General Li!

古文：坐乃起更衣，稍稍去。
现代文：座客们便起身上厕所，渐渐离去。
English: The guests then got up to go to the toilet and gradually left.

古文：魏其侯去，麾灌夫出。
现代文：魏其侯也离去，挥手示意让灌夫出去。
English: Wei Qihou also left, waving his hand to let Ganfu out.

古文：武安遂怒曰： 此吾骄灌夫罪。 
现代文：武安侯于是发火道： 这是我宠惯灌夫的过错。 
English: Wu'an Hou then said angrily, "This is the fault of my pet water sprinkler.

古文：乃令骑留灌夫。
现代文：便命令骑士扣留灌夫。
English: he ordered the knights to detain the irrigator.

古文：灌夫欲出不得。
现代文：灌夫想出去又出不去。
English: Kanfu wants to go out but can't.

古文：籍福起为谢，案灌夫项令谢。
现代文：籍福起身替灌夫道了歉，并按着灌夫的脖子让他道歉。
English: Qi Fu stood up and apologized on behalf of the irrigator, and pressed the irrigator's neck to make him apologize.

古文：夫愈怒，不肯谢。
现代文：灌夫越发火了，不肯道歉。
English: The bartender became more and more angry and refused to apologize.

古文：武安乃麾骑缚夫置传舍，召长史曰： 今日召宗室，有诏。 
现代文：武安侯便指挥骑士们捆绑灌夫放在客房中，叫来长史说： 今天请宗室宾客来参加宴会，是有太后诏令的。 
English: Wu'an Hou then commanded the knights to tie up the watering cans and put them in the guest room, and called Long Shi to say: Today, invite the ancestral guests to attend the banquet, there is the Empress Dowager's edict.

古文：劾灌夫骂坐不敬，系居室。
现代文：弹劾灌夫，说他在宴席上辱骂宾客，侮辱诏令，犯了 不敬 罪，把他囚禁在特别监狱里。
English: Impeached Ganfu, saying that he abused guests at the banquet, insulted the imperial edict, committed the crime of disrespect, and imprisoned him in a special prison.

古文：遂按其前事，遣吏分曹逐捕诸灌氏支属，皆得弃市罪。
现代文：于是追查他以前的事情，派遣差吏分头追捕所有灌氏的分支亲属，都判决为杀头示众的罪名。
English: As a result, his previous affairs were investigated, and police officers were dispatched to hunt down all of Kan's branch relatives. All of them were found guilty of murder.

古文：魏其侯大媿，为资使宾客请，莫能解。
现代文：魏其侯感到非常惭愧。出钱让宾客向田蚡求情，也不能使灌夫获释。
English: Wei Qihou felt very ashamed. Paying for the guests to plead with Tian Ye could not get Gan Fu released.

古文：武安吏皆为耳目，诸灌氏皆亡匿，夫系，遂不得告言武安阴事。
现代文：武安侯的属吏都是他的耳目，所有灌氏的人都逃跑、躲藏起来了，灌夫被拘禁，于是无法告发武安侯的秘事。
English: Wu'an Hou's subordinates were his eyes and ears. All the Kan people ran away and hid, and Ganfu was detained, so he couldn't reveal Wu'an Hou's secret.

古文：魏其锐身为救灌夫。
现代文：魏其侯挺身而出营救灌夫。
English: Wei Qihou stepped forward to rescue Guanfu.

古文：夫人谏魏其曰： 灌将军得罪丞相，与太后家忤，宁可救邪？ 
现代文：他的夫人劝他说： 灌将军得罪了丞相，和太后家的人作对，怎么能营救得了呢？ 
English: His wife advised him: "General Kan offended the prime minister and fought against members of the empress dowager's family. How can he be saved?

古文：魏其侯曰： 侯自我得之，自我捐之，无所恨。
现代文：魏其侯说： 侯爵是我挣来的，现在由我把它丢掉，没有什么可遗憾的。
English: Wei Qihou said: I earned the marquis, now I have to throw it away, there is nothing to regret.

古文：且终不令灌仲孺独死，婴独生。 
现代文：再说我总不能让灌仲孺自己去死，而我独自活着。 
English: Besides, I can't let Gan Zhongyu die on his own, while I live on my own.

古文：乃匿其家，窃出上书。
现代文：于是就瞒着家人，私自出来上书给皇帝。
English: So, without telling his family, he went out to deliver the letter to the emperor.

古文：立召入，具言灌夫醉饱事，不足诛。
现代文：皇帝马上把他召进宫去，魏其侯就把灌夫因为喝醉了而失言的情况详细地说了一遍，认为不足以判处死刑。
English: The emperor immediately summoned him to the palace, and Wei Qihong recounted in detail the circumstances of Ganfu's drunken slip of the tongue, deeming it insufficient to sentence him to death.

古文：上然之，赐魏其食，曰： 东朝廷辩之。 
现代文：皇上认为他说得对，赏赐魏其侯一同进餐，说道： 到东宫去公开辩论这件事 。
English: The emperor thought he was right and rewarded Wei Qihong with a meal, saying: Go to the East Palace to openly debate this matter.

古文：魏其之东朝，盛推灌夫之善，言其醉饱得过，乃丞相以他事诬罪之。
现代文：魏其侯到东宫，极力夸赞灌夫的长处，说他酗酒获罪，而丞相却拿别的罪来诬陷灌夫。
English: Wei Qihong went to the East Palace and praised Guanfu's strengths, saying that he was convicted of alcoholism, while the prime minister framed Guanfu for other crimes.

古文：武安又盛毁灌夫所为横恣，罪逆不道。
现代文：武安侯接着又竭力诋毁灌夫骄横放纵，犯了大逆不道的罪。
English: Wu'an Hou then tried his best to slander Guan Fu as arrogant and self-indulgent, committing the crime of high treason.

古文：魏其度不可柰何，因言丞相短。
现代文：魏其侯思忖没有别的办法对付，便攻击丞相的短处。
English: Wei Qihou thought there was no other way to deal with it, so he attacked the shortcomings of the prime minister.

古文：武安曰： 天下幸而安乐无事，蚡得为肺腑，所好音乐狗马田宅。
现代文：武安侯说： 天下幸而太平无事，我才得以做皇上的心腹，爱好音乐、狗马和田宅。
English: Wu'an Hou said: The world is fortunate and peaceful, I was able to be the emperor's confidant, love music, dogs, horses and farmhouses.

古文：蚡所爱倡优巧匠之属，不如魏其、灌夫日夜招聚天下豪桀壮士与论议，腹诽而心谤，不仰视天而俯画地，辟倪两宫间，幸天下有变，而欲有大功。
现代文：我所喜欢的不过是歌伎艺人、巧匠这一些人，不像魏其侯和灌夫那样，招集天下的豪杰壮士，不分白天黑夜地商量讨论，腹诽心谤深怀对朝廷的不满，说话没有顾忌，目中无人，窥测于东、西两宫之间，希望天下发生变故，好让他们立功成事。
English: What I like is that these people, the kabuki actors and artisans, are not like Wei Qihou and Guanfu, who gather the world's great and powerful people, discuss and discuss day and night, harbor deep dissatisfaction with the imperial court, speak without scruples, have no one in their sights, spy between the East and West Palaces, and hope that the world will change, so that they can accomplish something.

古文：臣乃不知魏其等所为。 
现代文：我倒不明白魏其侯他们到底要做些什么？ 
English: I don't understand, what are they going to do?

古文：於是上问朝臣： 两人孰是？ 
现代文：于是皇上向在朝的大臣问道： 他们两人的话谁的对呢？ 
English: Then the emperor asked the minister who was in the court: Which of the two of them is right?

古文：御史大夫韩安国曰： 魏其言灌夫父死事，身荷戟驰入不测之吴军，身被数十创，名冠三军，此天下壮士，非有大恶，争杯酒，不足引他过以诛也。
现代文：御史大夫韩安国说： 魏其侯说灌夫的父亲为国而死，灌夫手持戈戟冲入到强大的吴军中，身受创伤几十处，名声在全军数第一，这是天下的勇士，如果不是有特别大的罪恶，只是因为喝了酒而引起口舌之争，是不值得援引其他的罪状来判处死刑的。
English: Han An Guo, the chief historian, said: Wei Qihou said that Ganfu's father died for the country. Ganfu rushed into the powerful Wu army with a halberd in his hand, suffered dozens of injuries, and his reputation was the first in the whole army. This is a brave man in the world. If there is no particularly serious crime, just because he drank alcohol and caused a verbal dispute, it is not worth invoking other charges to impose the death penalty.

古文：魏其言是也。
现代文：魏其侯的话是对的。
English: Wei Qihou's words are right.

古文：丞相亦言灌夫通奸猾，侵细民，家累巨万，横恣颍川，凌轹宗室，侵犯骨肉，此所谓 枝大於本，胫大於股，不折必披 ，丞相言亦是。
现代文：丞相又说灌夫同大巨猾结交，欺压平民百姓，积累家产数万万，横行颍川，凌辱侵犯皇族，这是所谓 树枝比树干大，小腿比大腿粗 ，其后果不是折断，就是分裂。丞相的话也不错。
English: The prime minister also said that Kanfu had made friends with the great cunning, oppressed the common people, accumulated tens of thousands of dollars in household income, rampantly plundered rivers, and abused and violated the royal family. This is the so-called "branch is bigger than the trunk, the calf is thicker than the thigh," and the consequences are either broken or split. The prime minister's words are also good.

古文：唯明主裁之。 
现代文：希望英明的主上自己裁决这件事吧。 
English: Let the good Lord sort it out.

古文：主爵都尉汲黯是魏其。
现代文：主爵都尉汲黯认为魏其侯对。
English: The lord of the manor, Captain Kuching, thought that Wei was right.

古文：内史郑当时是魏其，後不敢坚对。
现代文：内史郑当时也认为魏其侯对，但后来又不敢坚持自己的意见去回答皇上。
English: At that time, Inner Historian Zheng also thought that Wei Qihong was right, but later he did not dare to insist on his own opinion to answer the emperor.

古文：馀皆莫敢对。
现代文：其余的人都不敢回答。
English: The others didn't dare to answer.

古文：上怒内史曰： 公平生数言魏其、武安长短，今日廷论，局趣效辕下驹，吾并斩若属矣。 
现代文：皇上怒斥内史道： 你平日多次说到魏其侯、武安侯的长处和短处，今天当廷辩论，畏首畏尾地像驾在车辕下的马驹，我将一并杀掉你们这些人。 
English: The emperor angrily rebuked Naishi: You have often talked about the strengths and weaknesses of Wei, Wu, and An in your daily life. Today, when you are debating in court, you are as timid as a horse under a cart. I will kill all of you.

古文：即罢起入，上食太后。
现代文：马上起身罢朝，进入宫内侍俸太后进餐。
English: He immediately got up and went into the palace to have dinner with the empress dowager.

古文：太后亦已使人候伺，具以告太后。
现代文：太后也已经派人在朝廷上探听消息，他们把廷辩的情况详细地报告了太后。
English: The empress dowager had also sent people to listen to the news at the court, and they reported the situation of the court debate in detail to the empress dowager.

古文：太后怒，不食，曰： 今我在也，而人皆藉吾弟，令我百岁後，皆鱼肉之矣。
现代文：太后发火了，不吃饭，说： 现在我还活着，别人竟敢都作践我的弟弟，假若我死了以后，都会像宰割鱼肉那样宰割他了。
English: The Queen Mother was so angry that she did not eat, and said, "Now that I am alive, how dare anyone insult my brother. If I were dead, they would butcher him like a fish."

古文：且帝宁能为石人邪！
现代文：再说皇帝怎么能像石头人一样自己不做主张呢！
English: Besides, how could the emperor, like the man of stone, not assert himself!

古文：此特帝在，即录录，设百岁後，是属宁有可信者乎？ 
现代文：现在幸亏皇帝还在，这班大臣就随声附合，假设皇帝死了以后，这些人还有可以信赖吗？ 
English: Now, fortunately, the emperor is still alive, and this group of ministers are following suit. Assuming that the emperor is dead, can these people still be trusted?

古文：上谢曰： 俱宗室外家，故廷辩之。
现代文：皇上道歉说： 都是皇室的外家，所以在朝廷上辩论他们的事。
English: The emperor apologized and said, "They are all foreign families of the imperial family, so we have to argue about them in the imperial court."

古文：不然，此一狱吏所决耳。 
现代文：不然的话，只要一个狱吏就可以解决了。 
English: Otherwise, just one warden can solve the problem.

古文：是时郎中令石建为上别言两人事。
现代文：这时郎中令石建向皇上分别陈述了魏其侯、武安侯两个人的事情。
English: At this time, his second-in-command, Shi Jian, separately told the emperor about the two people, Wei Ji Hou and Wu An Hou.

古文：武安已罢朝，出止车门，召韩御史大夫载，怒曰： 与长孺共一老秃翁，何为首鼠两端？ 
现代文：武安侯既已退朝，出了停车门，招呼韩御史大夫同乘一辆车。生气地说： 我和你共同对付一个老秃翁，你为什么还模棱两可，犹豫不定？ 
English: After Wu'an Hou had retired, he went out of the parking gate and invited Dr. Han Yishi to ride in a car with him. He said angrily: I'm dealing with an old bald man together with you, why are you still ambiguous and hesitant?

古文：韩御史良久谓丞相曰： 君何不自喜？
现代文：韩御史大夫过了好一会儿才对丞相说： 您怎么这样不自爱自重？
English: It took Dr. Han a while before he said to the prime minister, "How can you not have self-respect?

古文：夫魏其毁君，君当免冠解印绶归，曰 臣以肺腑幸得待罪，固非其任，魏其言皆是 。
现代文：他魏其侯毁谤您，您应当摘下官帽，解下印绶，归还给皇上，说： 我以皇帝的心腹，侥幸得此相位，本来是不称职的，魏其侯的话都是对的 。
English: He Wei Qihong slandered you, you should take off the official cap, remove the seal, return it to the emperor, and say: I am the emperor's confidant, I got this position by chance, I was originally incompetent, Wei Qihong's words are all right.

古文：如此，上必多君有让，不废君。
现代文：像这样，皇上必定会称赞您有谦让的美德，不会罢免您。
English: In this way, the emperor will surely praise you for the virtue of modesty and will not dismiss you.

古文：魏其必内愧，杜门齰舌自杀。
现代文：魏其侯一定内心惭愧，闭门咬舌自杀。
English: Wei Qihong must have been ashamed of himself and committed suicide behind closed doors.

古文：今人毁君，君亦毁人，譬如贾竖女子争言，何其无大体也！ 
现代文：现在别人诋毁您，您也诋毁人家，这样彼此互骂，好像商人、女人吵嘴一般，多么不识大体呢！ 
English: Now that others are slandering you, you are also slandering others, so you exchange insults with each other, like businessmen and women quarreling, how ignorant!

古文：武安谢罪曰： 争时急，不知出此。 
现代文：武安侯认错说： 争辩时太性急了，没有想到应该这样做 。
English: Wu'an Hou admitted his mistake and said, "I was too hasty when arguing, I didn't think I should do this.

古文：於是上使御史簿责魏其所言灌夫，颇不雠，欺谩。
现代文：于是皇上派御史按照文簿记载的灌夫的罪行进行追查，与魏其侯所说的有很多不相符的地方，犯了欺骗皇上的罪行。
English: As a result, the emperor sent the imperial historian to investigate Ganfu's crimes according to the records. There were many inconsistencies with what Wei Qihou said, and he committed the crime of deceiving the emperor.

古文：劾系都司空。
现代文：被弹劾，拘禁在名叫都司空的特别监狱里。
English: He was impeached and detained in a special prison called Du Si Quan.

古文：孝景时，魏其常受遗诏，曰 事有不便，以便宜论上 。
现代文：汉景帝时，魏其侯曾接收过他临死时的诏书，那上面写道： 假如遇到对你有什么不方便的事情，你可以随机应变，把你的意见呈报给皇帝。 
English: During the reign of Emperor Han Jing, Wei Qihong received an imperial edict on his deathbed, which read: If you encounter anything inconvenient to you, you can make random contingencies and report your opinions to the emperor.

古文：及系，灌夫罪至族，事日急，诸公莫敢复明言於上。
现代文：等到自己被拘禁，灌夫定罪要灭族，情况一天比一天紧急，大臣们谁也不敢再向皇帝说明这件事。
English: By the time he was arrested and convicted of plotting to exterminate the race, the situation was becoming more urgent by the day, and none of the ministers dared to explain the matter to the emperor.

古文：魏其乃使昆弟子上书言之，幸得复召见。
现代文：魏其侯便让侄子上书向皇帝报告接受遗诏的事，希望再次得到皇上的召见。
English: Wei Qihong then asked his nephew to write a letter to the emperor to report the acceptance of the will, hoping to be summoned by the emperor again.

古文：书奏上，而案尚书大行无遗诏。
现代文：奏书呈送皇上，可是查对尚书保管的档案，却没有景帝临终的这份遗诏。
English: The imperial rescript was presented to the emperor, but a search of the archives where the rescript was kept did not turn up the last will and testament of Emperor Jing.

古文：诏书独藏魏其家，家丞封。
现代文：这道诏书只封藏在魏其侯家中，是由魏其侯的家臣盖印加封的。
English: This edict was only sealed in Wei Qihou's home, and was sealed by Wei Qihou's vassals.

古文：乃劾魏其矫先帝诏，罪当弃市。
现代文：于是便弹劾魏其侯伪造先帝的诏书，应该判处斩首示众的罪。
English: As a result, Wei Qihong was impeached for forging the imperial edict of the former emperor, and should be sentenced to beheading.

古文：五年十月，悉论灌夫及家属。
现代文：元光五年十月间，灌夫和他的家属全部被处决了。
English: In October of the fifth year of Yuan Guang, Ganfu and all his family members were executed.

古文：魏其良久乃闻，闻即恚，病痱，不食欲死。
现代文：魏其侯过了许久才听到这个消息，听到后愤慨万分，患了中风病，饭也不吃了，打算死。
English: It took Wei Qihong a long time to hear the news, and he was so indignant after hearing it that he had a stroke, refused to eat, and planned to die.

古文：或闻上无意杀魏其，魏其复食，治病，议定不死矣。
现代文：有人听说皇上没有杀魏其侯的意思，魏其侯又开始吃饭了，开始医治疾病，讨论决定不处死刑了。
English: Some people heard that the emperor did not mean to kill Wei Qihou, Wei Qihou began to eat again, began to cure diseases, and discussed and decided not to impose the death penalty.

古文：乃有蜚语为恶言闻上，故以十二月晦论弃市渭城。
现代文：意然有流言蜚语，制造了许多诽谤魏其侯的话让皇上听到，因此就在当年十二月的最后一天将魏其侯在渭城大街上斩首示众。
English: He deliberately spread rumours and made many slanderous remarks about Wei Qihong for the emperor to hear, so on the last day of December of that year, he beheaded Wei Qihong in the streets of Fucheng.

古文：其春，武安侯病，专呼服谢罪。
现代文：这年的春天，武安侯病了，嘴里老是叫喊，讲的都是服罪谢过的话。
English: In the spring of this year, Wu'an Hou fell ill. He was always shouting and talking about apologizing for his sins.

古文：使巫视鬼者视之，见魏其、灌夫共守，欲杀之。
现代文：让能看见鬼的巫师来诊视他的病，巫师看见魏其侯和灌夫两个人的鬼魂共同监守着武安侯，要杀死他。
English: He asked a sorcerer who could see ghosts to diagnose his illness. The sorcerer saw the two ghosts of Wei Qihong and Guanfu guarding Wu Anhou and wanted to kill him.

古文：竟死。
现代文：终于死了。
English: He finally died.

古文：子恬嗣。
现代文：儿子田恬继承了爵位。
English: His son, Tian Yao, inherited the title.

古文：元朔三年，武安侯坐衣襜褕入宫，不敬。
现代文：元朔三年，武安侯田恬因穿短衣进入宫中，犯了 不敬 之罪，封爵被废除。
English: In the third year of the Yuan Shuo era, Wu'an Hou Tian Xuan was stripped of his knighthood for wearing a short coat into the palace, committing the crime of disrespect.

古文：淮南王安谋反觉，治。
现代文：淮南王刘安谋反的事被发觉了，皇上让追查此事。
English: Liu An, the king of Huainan, was discovered to be plotting a rebellion, and the emperor ordered that the matter be investigated.

古文：王前朝，武安侯为太尉，时迎王至霸上，谓王曰： 上未有太子，大王最贤，高祖孙，即宫车晏驾，非大王立当谁哉！ 
现代文：淮南王前次来朝，武安侯但任太尉，当时到霸上来迎接淮南王说： 皇上没有太子，大王最贤明，又是高祖的孙子，一旦皇上去世，不是大王继承皇位，还应该是谁呢！ 
English: The last time King Huainan came to the DPRK, Wu An Hou Dan Ren Taifu, when he came to welcome King Huainan, said: The emperor has no prince, the great king is the wisest, and the grandson of Gao Zu, once the emperor dies, it is not the great king who inherits the throne, but who should it be!

古文：淮南王大喜，厚遗金财物。
现代文：淮南王十分欢喜，送给武安侯许多金银财物。
English: King Huainan was very pleased and gave Wu'an a lot of gold and silver.

古文：上自魏其时不直武安，特为太后故耳。
现代文：皇上自从魏其侯的事件发生时就不认为武安侯是对的，只是碍着王太后的缘故罢了。
English: Ever since the incident of Wei Qihou, the emperor did not think that Wu'an Hou was right, but it was just for the sake of interfering with the queen mother.

古文：及闻淮南王金事，上曰： 使武安侯在者，族矣。 
现代文：等听到淮南王向武安侯送金银财物时，皇上说： 假使武安侯还活着的话，该灭族了。 
English: When he heard that King Huainan sent gold, silver, and property to Prince Wu'an, the emperor said, "If Prince Wu'an is still alive, it's time to exterminate the tribe."

古文：太史公曰：魏其、武安皆以外戚重，灌夫用一时决筴而名显。
现代文：太史公说：魏其侯和武安侯都凭外戚的关系身居显要职位，灌夫因为一次下定决心冒险立功而显名于当时。
English: Taishigong said: Wei Ji Hou and Wu An Hou were both in prominent positions by virtue of their maternal relationship. Ganfu was famous at the time because he was determined to take risks and make contributions.

古文：魏其之举以吴楚，武安之贵在日月之际。
现代文：魏其侯的被重用，是由于平定吴、楚七国叛乱；武安侯的显贵，则是由于利用了皇帝刚刚即位，王太后掌权的机会。
English: The re-use of Wei and Qi was due to the suppression of the rebellions in the seven states of Wu and Chu; the prominence of Wu and An was due to the opportunity to take advantage of the emperor's recent accession to the throne and the empress dowager's assumption of power.

古文：然魏其诚不知时变，灌夫无术而不逊，两人相翼，乃成祸乱。
现代文：然而魏其侯实在是太不懂时势的变化，灌夫不学无术又不谦逊，两人互相庇护，酿成了这场祸乱。
English: However, Wei Qihong really did not understand the changes of the times, Guanfu was uneducated, unskilled and immodest, and the two of them protected each other, leading to this calamity.

古文：武安负贵而好权，杯酒责望，陷彼两贤。
现代文：武安侯依仗显贵的地位而且喜欢玩弄权术；由于一杯酒的怨愤，陷害了两位贤人。
English: Wu'an Hou relied on his noble status and liked to play power games; he framed two sages because of the resentment of a glass of wine.

古文：呜呼哀哉！
现代文：可悲啊！
English: Alas, alas!

古文：迁怒及人，命亦不延。
现代文：田蚡把对灌夫的愤怒转移到窦婴身上，以致自己的性命也不长久。
English: Tian Yao transferred his anger towards the water sprinkler operator onto Dou Yu, so that his own life did not last long.

古文：众庶不载，竟被恶言。
现代文：灌夫受不到百姓的拥戴，终究落了坏名声。可悲啊！
English: Kanfu did not receive the support of the people and eventually fell into disrepute. How sad!

古文：呜呼哀哉！祸所从来矣！
现代文：由此可知灌夫灾祸的根源啦！
English: From this, we can see the root cause of the disaster!

