古文：段秀实，字成公，陇州阳人也。
现代文：段秀实的字叫成公，陇州氵开阳县人。
English: Duan Xiu Jian's character is called Chenggong. He is from Jiaoyang County, Luzhou Province.

古文：祖达，左卫中郎。
现代文：祖父段达，曾任右卫中郎。
English: His grandfather, Danda, had served as Ue no churo (Middle Captain of the Right Division of Inner Palace Guards).

古文：父行琛，洮州司马，以秀实赠扬州大都督。
现代文：父亲段行琛，曾任洮州司马，后因段秀实赠官扬州大都督。
English: His father, Duan Xingyong, was once the Sima of Ganzhou, and later became the Yangzhou Grand Governor because of Duan Xiushi.

古文：秀实性至孝，六岁，母疾，水浆不入口七日，疾有间，然后饮食。
现代文：段秀实生来极行孝，六岁时，母亲生病，他不吃不喝七天，母亲病好转了，才喝水吃饭。
English: Duan Xiushi was born with extreme filial piety. When he was six years old, his mother fell ill, and he did not eat or drink for seven days. When his mother's illness improved, he only drank water for meals.

古文：及长，沉厚有断。
现代文：他长大后，沉着稳重有决断。
English: When he grew up, he was calm, steady and decisive.

古文：天宝四载，安西节度马灵察署为别将，从讨护蜜有功，授安西府别将。
现代文：天宝四年，安西府节度马灵察任命他为代理别将，随从讨伐护蜜国有功劳，封安西府别将。
English: In the fourth year of the Tianbao era, the Anxi Provincial Party Secretary Ma Lingcha appointed him as the deputy general. He was awarded the title of general of Anxi Province for his contribution to the defense of the province.

古文：七载，高仙芝代灵察，举兵围怛逻斯，黑衣救至，仙芝大衄，军士相失。夜中闻都将李嗣业之声，因大呼责之曰： 军败而求免，非丈夫也。 
现代文：天宝七年，高仙芝接替马灵察，派兵包围怛罗斯城，大食国救兵到，高仙芝大败，兵将失散，夜晚段秀实听见李嗣业的声音，就高喊道： 兵败逃命，不是大丈夫。 
English: In the seventh year of T'ien Bao, Gao Xianzhi succeeded Ma Lingcha and sent troops to encircle the city of Xi'an, and the great food nation came to rescue the soldiers. Gao Xianzhi was defeated, and the soldiers were dispersed. At night, Duan Xiushi heard the voice of Li Siye and shouted: "It is not okay to be defeated and run for your life."

古文：嗣业甚惭，遂与秀实收合散卒，复得成军。
现代文：李嗣业很惭愧，就和段秀实一起召集失散的士兵，才又整编成军。
English: Li Siye was very ashamed, so he and Duan Xiushi gathered the scattered soldiers together, and only then did they regroup into an army.

古文：师还，嗣业请于仙芝，以秀实为判官，授斥候府果毅。
现代文：部队归来，李嗣业对高仙芝请求，封段秀实为判官，授斥候府果毅官。
English: When the troops returned, Li Siye made a request to Gao Xianzhi. Fudan Hsiu-sheng was the judge, and he scolded Guo Yi, the official in waiting.

古文：十二载，封常清代仙芝，讨大勃律，师次贺萨劳城，战而胜。
现代文：天宝十二年，封常清接替高仙芝，征伐大勃律国，军队抵达贺萨劳城，一接战就打赢了。
English: In the 12th year of Tianbao, Fuzhongqing succeeded Gao Xianzhi and conquered the country of Daborui. The army arrived at the city of Hesalao and won the battle.

古文：常清逐之，秀实进曰： 贼兵羸，饵我也，请备左右，搜其山林。 
现代文：封常清想追击，段秀实劝道： 敌军弱，是引诱我军的。请防备左右两边，搜索山间树林。 
English: Fong Changqing wanted to pursue, Duan Xiuxi advised: The enemy is weak and is luring our army. Please be prepared on both sides and search the mountain forests.

古文：遂歼其伏，改绥德府折冲。
现代文：于是歼灭了敌军伏兵，因功改任绥德府折冲官。
English: As a result, he annihilated the enemy's ambush and was appointed as the officer in charge of the reconnaissance of Shunde.

古文：肃宗即位于灵武，征安西兵节度使梁宰，宰潜怀异图。
现代文：肃宗在灵武登基，征调安西军节度使梁宰，梁宰暗藏二心。
English: Su Zong ascended to the throne in Lingwu, recruited and transferred the Anxi army to the festival to make Liang Zai, Liang Zai secretly hid two hearts.

古文：秀实谓嗣业曰： 岂有天子告急，臣下晏然，信浮妄之说，岂明公之意耶？ 
现代文：段秀实对李嗣业说： 哪有皇上告急，臣子不动，却相信流言的，难道您也这样想？ 
English: Duan Xiushi said to Li Siye, "What emperor is in a hurry, and his vassals do not move, but believe in rumors? Do you think so too?

古文：嗣业遂见宰，请发兵，从之。
现代文：李嗣业于是求见梁宰，请求派兵，梁宰同意了。
English: Li Siye then asked to see Liang Zai and requested the dispatch of troops, to which Liang Zai agreed.

古文：乃出步骑五千，令嗣业统赴朔方，以秀实为援，累有战功。
现代文：就派出步骑兵五千名，命李嗣业率领奔赴朔方军。命段秀实为助手，多次立有战功。
English: He dispatched five thousand infantry and cavalry, and ordered Li Shigeye to lead the army to Shuo Fang. Shide Shuxin was his assistant, and he repeatedly distinguished himself in battle.

古文：而秀实父殁，哀毁过礼。
现代文：段秀实父亲去世，他悲痛守丧超出丧制。
English: When Duan Xiushi's father passed away, his grief and mourning went beyond mourning.

古文：嗣业既授节制，思秀实如失左右手，表请起复，为义王友，充节度判官。
现代文：李嗣业已被任命为节制，想念段秀实像失去了左右手，上表请求征召复官，任命为义王友、节度判官。
English: Li Shigeye has been appointed as a temperance, miss Duan Xiu Jian lost his right and left hands, the above table requested to recruit the reinstatement, appointed as a friend of the king of righteousness, the judge of the festival.

古文：安庆绪奔鄴，嗣业与诸军围之，安西辎重委于河内。
现代文：安庆绪逃奔邺郡，李嗣业和各军包围了他，安西府辎重放在河内。
English: An Qingxu fled to Lop County, Li Siye and the armies surrounded him, and Anxi Province was concentrated in Hanoi.

古文：乃奏秀实为怀州长史，知军州，加节度留后。
现代文：于是上表任命段秀实为怀州长史，代理知军州事，加封节度留后。
English: As a result, the upper table appointed Duan Xiushi as the governor of Huai, acting as the governor of the state affairs, and adding the degree of the festival.

古文：诸军进战于愁思冈，嗣业为流矢所中，卒于军，众推安西兵马使荔非元礼代之。
现代文：众军在愁思冈作战，李嗣业被流箭射中，死在军中，众将推举安西兵马使荔非元礼接替他。
English: The army was fighting in Shuxigang. Li Shigeye was shot by a stray arrow and died in the army. The people elected Anxi soldiers and horses to make Li Fei Yuanli succeed him.

古文：秀实闻嗣业之丧，乃遗先锋将白孝德书，令发卒护嗣业丧送河内。秀实率将吏哭待于境，倾私财以奉葬事。
现代文：段秀实听说李嗣业去世，就写信给先锋将白孝德，叫他派兵护送李嗣业灵柩到河内，段秀实率将领官员哭着在边境等待，用自己所有的钱财办丧事。
English: When Duan Husi heard of the death of Li Siye, he wrote to the vanguard commander Bai Xiaode, asking him to send soldiers to escort Li Siye's coffin to Hanoi. Duan Husi led the generals and officials to cry and wait at the border, using all their money and resources to hold a funeral.

古文：元礼多其义，奏试光禄少卿，依前节度判官。
现代文：荔非元礼赞赏他讲道义，奏本任命为光禄少卿，并仍任节度判官。
English: Lih Fei Yuanli appreciated his preaching of morality and justice. He was appointed as Guanglu Shaoqing, and still served as the judge of the festival.

古文：邙山之败，军徙翼城，元礼为麾下所杀，将佐亦多遇害，而秀实独以智全。
现代文：邙山战败，军队转移到翼城，荔非元礼被部下杀死，将领也多数被害，但段秀实却用智慧保住了性命。
English: Lushan was defeated, and the army was transferred to Yingcheng. Li Fei Yuanli was killed by his subordinates, and most of the generals were also killed, but Duan Xiushi used his wisdom to save his life.

古文：众推白孝德为节度使，人心稍定。
现代文：众人推举白孝德任节度使，人心稍稍安定了。
English: Everyone recommended that Bai Xiaodong be appointed as the festival's emissary, and people's hearts became a little more stable.

古文：又迁试光禄卿，为孝德判官。
现代文：段秀实又升任光禄卿，做白孝德的判官。
English: Duan Husi was also promoted to Guangluqing, and became the judge of the virtue of filial piety.

古文：孝德改镇邠宁，奏秀实试太常卿、支度营田二副使。
现代文：白孝德改任宁节度使，奏本封段秀实为太常卿、支度营田两副使职。
English: Bai Xiaode was reappointed as Ning Jiedu envoy, and Songpan Huan Shusi was appointed as Tai Changqing and Jiedu Yingtian two vice-envoys.

古文：大军西迁，所过掠夺。
现代文：大军西行，掳掠经过的地方。
English: The vast army marched west, pillaging everything in its path.

古文：又以邠宁乏食，难于馈运，乃请军于奉天。
现代文：又因宁缺粮、运输困难，于是请求驻扎在奉天。
English: Due to Ning's lack of grain and transportation difficulties, he requested to be stationed in Mingtian.

古文：是时公廪亦竭，县吏忧恐多逃匿，群行剽盗，孝德不能禁。
现代文：此时国库也空了，县官担心害怕，多数逃跑躲藏了起来，军队成群偷盗，白孝德管不住。
English: At this time, the treasury was also empty, the county officials were worried and afraid, most of them ran away and hid, the army stole in droves, and Bai Xiaodong could not control it.

古文：秀实私曰： 使我为军候，当不如此。 
现代文：段秀实私下说： 让我当都虞候，应不致这样。 
English: Duan Xiushi said in private: Let me wait until the situation is resolved, it should not be like this.

古文：军司马言之，遂以秀实为都虞候，权知奉天行营事，号令严一，军府安泰，代宗闻而嗟赏久之。
现代文：军司马转告了这句话，白孝德就任命段秀实为都虞候，代理知奉天行营事，命令严格统一，军队地方都安宁了，唐代宗听说后长时间赞叹不已。
English: The secretary of the army conveyed this sentence, and Bai Xiaodong appointed Duan Xiusi as the governor of the capital, acting as the deputy commander of the army, the orders were strictly unified, and the army areas were peaceful. After hearing this, Tang Dynasty Zong was amazed for a long time.

古文：兵还于邠宁，复为都虞候，寻拜泾州刺史。
现代文：军队回到宁，又任都虞候，不久任泾州刺史。
English: When the army returned to Ning, he was appointed as the governor of the capital, and soon he was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：大历元年，马璘奏加开府仪同三司。
现代文：大历元年，马瞞奏本封他为开府仪同三司。
English: In the first year of the Great Calendar, he was given the title of Kaifu Yi Tong San Shi.

古文：军中有能引二十四弓而犯盗者，璘欲免之，秀实曰： 将有私爱，则法令不一，虽韩、白复生，亦不能为理。 
现代文：军队中有能拉开二十四石弓的人犯了偷盗罪，马瞞想赦免他，段秀实说： 将领有偏爱，法令就不一致，即使韩信、白起再生，也不能治理好。 
English: There was a man in the army who could draw a twenty-four-stone bow, but he committed the crime of theft. Ma Xie wanted to pardon him. Duan Xiushi said: Generals have preferences, and laws and regulations are not consistent. Even if Han Xin is reincarnated, he will not be able to govern well.

古文：璘善其议，竟使杀之。
现代文：马瞞认为他说得对，终于命令杀死了那人。
English: Machete thought he was right and finally gave the order to kill the man.

古文：璘决事有不合理者，必固争之，得璘引过乃已。
现代文：马瞞决定的事中有不合理的，他一定坚持争辩，到马瞞认错为止。
English: There was something unreasonable about Ma Xie's decision, and he would insist on arguing until Ma Xie admitted his mistake.

古文：璘城泾州，秀实掌留后，归还，加御史中丞。
现代文：马瞞在泾州筑城，段秀实任留后，马瞞归来，加封段秀实为御史中丞。
English: After Ma Shizhe stayed in Chuzhou and Duan Shuxi stayed in Chuzhou, Ma Shizhe returned, and Duan Shuxi was given the title of goshi chujo.

古文：璘既奉诏徙镇泾州，其士众尝自四镇、北庭赴难中原，侨居骤移，颇积劳怨。
现代文：马瞞奉命移任泾州节度使，他的军队曾从西域四镇、北庭到中原勤王，在外地频繁调动，因辛苦很多人埋怨。
English: Ma Shide was ordered to transfer to the post of Zhangzhou Festival envoy. His army had traveled from the four towns in the western region and Beiting to Zhongyuan Qinwang, and was frequently mobilized in other places. Many people complained about the hard work.

古文：刀斧将王童之因人心动摇，导以为乱。
现代文：刀斧将王童之见人心浮动，引诱他们叛乱。
English: The sword and axe swayed Wang Tong's followers, luring them into rebellion.

古文：或告其事，且曰： 候严，警鼓为约矣。 
现代文：有人报告了这事，并且说： 严加戒备，他们约定以打更鼓声为号。 
English: Someone reported it and said: "Be on high alert, they've agreed to play more drums."

古文：秀实乃召鼓人，阳怒失节，且戒之曰： 每更筹尽，必来报。 
现代文：段秀实就把打更人召来，假装因时间不准发怒，告诫他们说： 每到一更筹码到了，一定要来报告。 
English: Duan Xiushi called the gamblers, pretending not to be angry because of the time, and warned them: Every time a chip arrives, be sure to report it.

古文：每白之，辄延数刻，四更毕而曙。
现代文：每次报告，都命令延长几刻时间，四更打完天就亮了。
English: For each report, the order was given to extend the time by a few minutes. After four more minutes, the sky would light up.

古文：既差互，童之乱不能作。
现代文：军中报时不一致，王童之的叛乱不能发动。
English: Wang Tongzhi's rebellion could not be launched because there was a discrepancy in the army's report.

古文：明日，告者复曰： 今夜将焚草场，期救火者同作乱。 
现代文：第二天，报告人又说： 今天晚上将烧草料场，约定救火人一齐叛乱。 
English: The next day, the reporter said, "Tonight, we are going to burn down the hay barn, and the firemen have agreed to rebel."

古文：秀实使严加警备。
现代文：段秀实命严密戒备。
English: Duan Xiu is on high alert.

古文：夜半火发，乃使令于军中曰： 救火者斩。 
现代文：半夜火起，就派人到军队中发令说： 救火的杀头。 
English: When a fire broke out in the middle of the night, he sent someone to the army to issue an order: "Kill anyone who tries to put out the fire."

古文：童之居外营，请入救火，不许。
现代文：王童之住在外边营地，请求进来救火。
English: Wang Tongzhi lived outside the camp and asked to come in to fight the fire.

古文：明日斩之，捕杀其党凡十余人以徇，曰： 敢后徙者族！ 
现代文：段秀实不答应，第二天把他杀了。又逮捕杀死了他的同伙共十多人示众，发令说： 胆敢推迟迁移的人灭族！ 
English: Duan Husi did not agree, and killed him the next day. He also arrested and killed his accomplices, a total of more than ten people, and made a public demonstration, issuing an order: "Those who dare to postpone the migration will be exterminated!"

古文：于是迁泾州。
现代文：这样就迁到了泾州。
English: So they moved to Ganzhou.

古文：既至其理所，人烟夐绝，且无廪食。朝廷忧之，遂诏璘遥管郑、颍二州，以赡泾原军，俾秀实为留后，二州甚理。
现代文：到了驻地，杳无人迹，军无粮食。朝廷担忧，就令马瞞兼管远处的郑、颍两州，供应泾原军，命段秀实任留后，两州治理得很好。
English: When they arrived at the garrison, there was no one there and the army had no food. The imperial court was worried, so they made Ma Shide concurrently in charge of the distant Zheng and Yao two states to supply the Yuyuan army. After the death of Duan Xiusi, the two states were well governed.

古文：璘思其绩用，又奏行军司马，兼都知兵马使。
现代文：马瞞根据他的功劳和才能，又奏本任命他为行军司马，兼任都知兵马使。
English: Based on his merits and talents, the magistrate appointed him to be the marshal of the army, and also served as the military attaché to the capital.

古文：八年，吐蕃来寇，战于盐仓，我军不利。
现代文：大历八年，吐蕃入侵，在盐仓作战，唐军不胜。
English: In the eighth year of the lunar calendar, Tubo invaded, fought in Yancang, and the Tang army was invincible.

古文：璘为寇戎所隔，逮暮未还，败将溃兵争道而入。
现代文：马瞞被敌军拦住，傍晚还没回来，败将乱兵争着回城。
English: Ma Zhe was stopped by the enemy army and did not return in the evening. The defeated soldiers fought their way back to the city.

古文：时都将焦令谌与诸将四五辈狼狈而至，秀实召让之曰： 兵法：失将，麾下当斩。
现代文：当时都将焦令谌和四五名将领狼狈归来，段秀实把他们喊来责备道： 按军法，丢失大将，部将应斩首。
English: At that time, both Jiao Lingyao and four or five generals returned in disarray, and Duan Xiushi shouted at them and reproached them, saying: According to military law, if a general is lost, the general should be beheaded.

古文：公等忘其死而欲安其家耶！ 
现代文：你们忘记了死罪想保全家庭吗！ 
English: Have you forgotten capital punishment to keep the family together!

古文：令谌等恐惧，下拜数十。
现代文：焦令谌等人害怕了，跪拜了几十次。
English: Jiaoling Yao and the others were scared and bowed down dozens of times.

古文：秀实乃悉驱城中士卒未出战者，使骁将统之，东依古原，列奇兵示贼将战，且以收合败亡。
现代文：段秀实把城中全部没出战的士兵都调出城，命勇将率领，东靠高地，列阵向敌军表示要战斗，同时召集败散士兵。
English: Duan Xiushi transferred all the soldiers in the city who did not participate in the battle out of the city. He led the soldiers to the highlands in the east, and told the enemy to fight, and at the same time gathered the defeated soldiers.

古文：蕃众望之，不敢逼。
现代文：吐蕃军看见了，不敢靠近。
English: The Tubo army saw this and did not dare to approach.

古文：及夜，璘方获归。
现代文：到晚上，马瞞才回来。
English: In the evening, the horse came back.

古文：十一年，璘疾甚，不能视事，请秀实摄节度副使兼左厢兵马使。
现代文：大历十一年，马瞞病重，不能管事，请段秀实代理节度副使兼任左厢兵马使。
English: In the eleventh year of the lunar calendar, Ma Shizhe fell seriously ill and was unable to manage affairs. He asked Duan Xiushi to act as deputy vice-envoy of the festival and concurrently serve as the left compartment envoy.

古文：秀实乃以十将张羽飞为招召将，分兵按甲，以备非常。
现代文：段秀实就命十将张羽飞任招召将，派兵警戒，以防意外。
English: Duan Hsiu-sheng appointed the tenth general Zhang Yufei as the summoning general, and sent soldiers to guard against accidents.

古文：璘卒，而军中行哭赴丧事于内，李汉惠接宾客于外，非其亲不得居丧侧，族谈离立者捕而囚之。
现代文：马瞞去世，他安排兵将们哭着到后堂去给他送丧，命李汉惠在前厅接待宾客，不是马瞞的亲人不许呆在灵柩边，聚集谈论背离朝廷自立的人都抓住关起来。
English: When Ma Xie died, he arranged for the soldiers to go to the back hall to mourn for him, and ordered Li Hanhui to receive guests in the front hall. Ma Xie's relatives were not allowed to stay around the coffin, and anyone who gathered to talk about independence from the imperial court was seized and locked up.

古文：都虞候史廷干、裨将崔珍张景华谋作乱，秀实乃送廷干于京师，徙珍及景华外镇，军中遂定，不戮一人。
现代文：都虞候史廷干，偏将张珍、崔景华阴谋叛乱，段秀实就把史廷干送到京城，把崔珍、张景华调到外地镇守，军队就安定了，没有杀一个人。
English: Duan Xiushi sent Shingan to Beijing, and transferred Cui Zhen and Zhang Jinghua to the outlying townships, and the army stabilized, without killing a single person.

古文：寻拜秀实泾州刺史、兼御史大夫，四镇北庭行军泾原郑颍节度使。
现代文：不久任命段秀实为泾州刺史、兼任御史大夫、四镇北庭行军和泾原郑颍节度使。
English: Soon, Duan Hsiu-sheng was appointed as the chief historian of Bozhou, concurrently serving as the chief historian, the commander of the North Court of the Four Towns, and the chief envoy of the Qing Dynasty.

古文：三四年间，吐蕃不敢犯塞，清约率易，远近称之。
现代文：三四年中间，吐蕃不敢侵犯边关。他为人简朴坦率和气，远近的人都称赞他。
English: In the middle of the 1930s and 1940s, Tubo did not dare to encroach on the border. He was simple, frank and kind, and people near and far praised him.

古文：非公会，不听乐饮酒，私室无妓媵，无赢财，退公之后，端居静虑而已。
现代文：不是因公聚会，他不奏乐喝酒，家里没有乐妓和小妾，没有多余的财产，回到家里，只是安居静思。
English: It wasn't a business meeting. He didn't play music or drink alcohol. There were no prostitutes or concubines in his home. He didn't have any extra possessions. When he got home, he just sat quietly and thought.

古文：德宗嗣位，就加检校礼部尚书、张掖郡王。
现代文：德宗皇帝即位，加封为检校礼部尚书、张掖郡王。
English: Emperor Dezong ascended to the throne, and Shang Shu, the King of Zhangye County, was appointed as the inspector of schools.

古文：建中元年，宰相杨炎欲行元载旧志，筑原州城，开陵阳渠，诏中使上闻，仍问秀实可否之状。
现代文：建中元年，宰相杨炎想实施元载过去的计划，修筑原州城，开挖陵阳渠，派宫中使者收集意见，于是问段秀实是否可行。
English: In the first year of Jianzhong, Prime Minister Yang Yan wanted to implement the previous plan of Yuan Zang, build Wonju City, excavate Lingyang Canal, and send an emissary to the palace to collect opinions, so he asked Duan Xiusi whether it was feasible.

古文：秀实以为方春不可兴土功，请俟农隙。
现代文：段秀实认为春天不能征劳役，请求等待农闲。
English: Duan Hsiu-sheng believed that labor service could not be conscripted in the spring, and requested to wait for the farmer's idle time.

古文：炎以其沮己之谋，遂除司农卿，以邠宁节度李怀光兼泾原节度使，以事西拓。
现代文：杨炎认为他反对自己的计划，就任命他为司农卿，派宁节度使李怀光兼任泾原节度使，向西扩张。
English: Yang Yan thought that he was against his own plan, so he appointed him as the Secretary of Agriculture, and the Paning Sect made Li Huaiguang concurrently serve as the prime minister of the Xingyuan Sect to expand westward.

古文：无何，刘文喜叛，亦不果城。
现代文：不久，刘闻喜叛乱，城也没能建。
English: Soon after, Liu Wenxi rebelled, and the city could not be built.

古文：四年，硃泚盗据宫阙，源休教泚伪迎銮驾，阴济逆志。
现代文：建中四年，朱氵此占据京城，源休教朱氵此假装迎接皇帝回京，阴谋杀害皇帝。
English: In the fourth year of Jianzhong, Zhu Xi occupied Beijing, and Yuan Jie taught Zhu Xi to pretend to welcome the emperor back to Beijing and plot to kill the emperor.

古文：泚乃遣其将韩旻领马步三千疾趋奉天。
现代文：朱氵此就派他的将领韩率步骑兵三千人赶去奉天。
English: Zhu Xi therefore sent his general Han with 3,000 infantry and cavalry to rush to Fengtian.

古文：时苍黄之中，未有武备。
现代文：当时变起仓促，皇帝身边没有军队。
English: At that time, the uprising was hasty and the emperor did not have an army at his side.

古文：泚以秀实尝为泾原节度，颇得士心，后罢兵权，以为蓄愤且久，必肯同恶，乃召与谋议。
现代文：朱氵此因段秀实曾任泾原节度，很得军心，后被夺去兵权，以为他一定长期不满，必然愿意合作，就召他参与谋划。
English: Because of this, Zhu Xi thought that Duan Xiushi, who had served as the military governor of Yuyuan and had a strong military spirit, must have been dissatisfied for a long time and must be willing to cooperate, so he called him to participate in the planning.

古文：秀实初诈从之，阴说大将刘海宾、何明礼、姚令言判官岐灵岳同谋杀泚，以兵迎乘舆。
现代文：段秀实起初假装服从他，暗地劝说大将刘海宾、何明礼、姚令言的判官岐灵岳共同计划杀死朱氵此，率军迎回皇帝。
English: Duan Xiushi at first pretended to obey him, secretly persuading generals Liu Haibin, He Mingli, and Yao Lingyan's judge, Qi Lingyue, to jointly plan to kill Zhu Rongguo and lead the army back to the emperor.

古文：三人者，皆秀实夙所奖遇，遂皆许诺。
现代文：这三个人，都是段秀实平生赏识的，他们都答应了。
English: All of these three people were admired by Duan Xiusi in his lifetime, and they all agreed.

古文：及韩旻追驾，秀实以为宗社之危，期于顷刻，乃使人走谕灵岳，窃令言印。
现代文：到韩去追赶皇帝，段秀实认为国家危难，就在眼前，就派人跑去告诉岐灵岳，要他偷姚令言的印。
English: When he went to Korea to catch up with the emperor, Duan Xiushi thought that the country was in danger, so he sent someone to tell Qi Lingyue to steal the seal of Yao Lingyan.

古文：不遂，乃倒用司农印印符以追兵。
现代文：没偷到，就倒盖司农卿的印在命令上去追回军队。
English: When they didn't steal it, they followed the order of the Minister of Agriculture to go and recover the army.

古文：旻至骆驿得符，军人亦莫辩其印文，惶遽而回。
现代文：韩到骆驿接到了命令，军中人也没人细看印文，慌忙回来了。
English: When Han Zuo Luo received the order, no one in the army read the seal carefully, so he hurried back.

古文：秀实谓海宾等曰： 旻之来，吾党无遗类矣！
现代文：段秀实对刘海宾等人说： 韩归来，我们就活不成了！
English: Duan Xiushi said to Liu Haibin and others: If Han comes back, we won't be able to survive!

古文：我当直搏杀泚，不得则死，终不能向此贼称臣。 
现代文：我将直接打死叛贼，不成也自杀，死也不能对这叛贼称臣。 
English: I will directly fight and kill the traitor, and if I fail, I will commit suicide. I will not bow to the traitor even in death.

古文：乃与海宾约，事急为继，而令明礼应于外。
现代文：于是和刘海宾约定，情况紧急时来援助，命何明礼在外接应。
English: So he made an agreement with Liu Haibin that he would come to his aid in an emergency, and ordered He Mingli to receive outside help.

古文：明日，泚召秀实议事，源休、姚令言、李忠臣、李子平皆在坐。
现代文：第二天，朱氵此召见段秀实去商议事情，源休、姚令言、李忠臣、李子平都去了。
English: The next day, Zhu Xi summoned Duan Xiushi to discuss the matter. Yuan Hui, Yao Lingyan, Li Zhongchen and Li Zhiping all went.

古文：秀实戎服，与泚并膝，语至僭位，秀实勃然而起，执休腕夺其象笏，奋跃而前，唾泚面大骂曰： 狂贼，吾恨不斩汝万段，我岂逐汝反耶！ 
现代文：段秀实穿着盔甲，和朱氵此挨着坐，朱氵此谈到称帝，段秀实突然起身，抓住源休手腕夺下他的象牙笏板，冲上前去，对朱氵此吐口唾沫大骂道： 狂妄的叛贼，我只遗憾不能把你砍成万块，我怎会跟着你反叛呢！ 
English: Duan Xiushi, wearing armor, sat next to Zhu Xi, and Zhu Xi talked about praising the emperor. Duan Xiushi suddenly stood up, grabbed Yuan Hui's wrist, snatched his ivory chopping board, rushed forward, and spat at Zhu Xi, saying: Arrogant traitor, I only regret that I can't chop you into a million pieces. How could I follow you and rebel?

古文：遂击之。
现代文：就用板打他。
English: As a result, Jin attacked Qin.

古文：泚举臂自捍，才中其颡，流血匍匐而走。
现代文：朱氵此举手挡住，只打中了额头，他头上流着血爬起来跑了。
English: Zhu Xi raised his hand to block it, but only hit his forehead. He got up with blood streaming from his head and ran away.

古文：凶徒愕然，初不敢动；而海宾等不至，秀实乃曰： 我不同汝反，何不杀我！ 
现代文：叛贼们惊呆了，开始还不敢动；但刘海宾等人没有来，段秀实于是说： 我不跟你们一起反叛，为什么不杀我？ 
English: The traitors were stunned and did not dare to move at first; however, Liu Haibin and others did not come, so Duan Xiushi said: I will not rebel with you, why not kill me?

古文：凶党群至，遂遇害焉。
现代文：叛贼们蜂拥而上，他于是被杀害了。
English: He was killed as the rebels surged forward.

古文：海宾、明礼、灵岳相次被杀。
现代文：刘海宾、何明礼、岐灵岳也相继被杀害。
English: Liu Haibin, He Mingli and Qi Lingyue were also killed one after another.

古文：德宗在奉天闻其事，惜其委用不至，垂涕久之。
现代文：唐德宗在奉天听说了这事，叹惜对段秀实重用不够，流了好一阵眼泪。
English: Tang Dezong heard about this from Feng Tian, lamented that Duan Xiushi was not reused enough, and shed a lot of tears.

古文：初，秀实见禁兵寡少，不足以备非常，乃上疏曰： 臣闻天子曰万乘，诸侯日千乘，大夫曰百乘，此盖以大制小，以十制一也。
现代文：当初，段秀实见禁兵人少，不足以应付突发事件，就上疏说： 我听说天子称万乘、诸侯称千乘、大夫称百乘，这是用大控制小，用十控制一。
English: At first, Duan Xiuxi saw that the number of banned soldiers was small and not enough to cope with emergencies, so he said: I heard that the Son of Heaven is called Wanxiang, the princes are called Qianxiang, and the doctors are called Baixiang. This is to use large control to control small, and use ten control to control one.

古文：尊君卑臣，强干弱枝之义，在于此矣。
现代文：使国君尊显臣子卑下，是和树干强壮树枝细弱同一道理。
English: It is the same reason as the strong trunk and thin branches of a tree to make the sovereign respect and show the inferiority of his subjects.

古文：今外有不庭之虏，内有梗命之臣，窃观禁兵不精，其数全少，卒有患难，将何待之！
现代文：现国外有不服从的异族，国内有不听命的臣子，我看到禁军不精锐，数量太少，突然发生祸难，用什么对付？
English: At present, there are disobedient foreigners abroad and disobedient courtiers at home. I see that the forbidden army is not elite, the number is too small, and disaster suddenly occurs. What should be used to deal with it?

古文：且猛虎所以百兽畏者，为爪牙也。
现代文：况且猛虎之所以被百兽畏惧，是因为爪子和牙齿厉害。
English: Moreover, the reason why tigers are feared by all animals is because of their powerful claws and teeth.

古文：若去其爪牙，则犬彘马牛悉能为敌。
现代文：如果除去它的爪子和牙齿，那么狗猪马牛都能和它对抗了。
English: If its claws and teeth were removed, dogs, pigs, horses and cows would be able to fight it off.

古文：伏愿少留圣虑，冀裨万一。 
现代文：请求稍加留意，希望有补于万一。 
English: Please pay attention to the request, and I hope to be able to make it up to you.

古文：及泾原兵作乱，召神策六军，遂无一人至者。
现代文：到泾原军叛乱，调神策六军，竟没一个人来。
English: When the Shihara army rebelled, six armies were mobilized, but no one came.

古文：秀实守节不二，竟殁于贼，其明略义烈如此。
现代文：段秀实守臣下节操不变，竟然死在叛贼手里，他的明察勇敢于此可见。
English: Duan Hsiu-sze was a staunch and loyal subject who died at the hands of a traitor. You can see his bravery in this.

古文：兴元元年二月，诏曰： 见危致命之谓忠，临义有勇之谓烈。
现代文：兴元元年二月，皇帝下诏说： 遇到危难不怕牺牲叫作忠，为正义勇于斗争叫作烈。
English: In February of the first year of the Xingyuan era, the emperor issued an edict saying: "In the face of danger, not being afraid of sacrifice is called loyalty, and being brave in the struggle for justice is called being fierce."

古文：惟尔励臣节，不惮杀身；惟予式嘉乃勋，懋昭大典。
现代文：你能尽臣下节操，献出了生命；我嘉奖你的功勋，重赏昭示天下。
English: You were able to devote yourself to your subordinates and sacrificed your life; I commend you for your service and reward you.

古文：曰台不德，罔克若天，遘兹殷忧，变起都邑。
现代文：我不仁德，治理不善，遭此祸乱，都城兵变。
English: I am not a benevolent, poor governance, suffered this disaster, the capital mutiny.

古文：惟尔卿士，嗷然靡依，逼畏所加，淄渑共混。
现代文：你们臣下，失去依靠，威逼之下，鱼龙夹杂。
English: Your vassals, no longer dependable, under duress, are caught in the middle.

古文：故开府仪同三司、检校礼部尚书、兼司农卿、上柱国、张掖郡王段秀实，操行岳立，忠厚精至，义形于色，勇必有仁。
现代文：已故开府仪同三司、检校礼部尚书、兼司农卿、上柱国、张掖郡王段秀实，品行杰出，忠诚本份，一身正气，勇敢仁德。
English: The late Kaifu Yi Tong San Si, the proctor of the proctor of the proctor of the proctor of the proctor of the proctor of the proctor of the proctor of the proctor of the proctor of the proctor of the proctor of the proctor of the proctor of the proctor of the proctor of the proctor of the proctor of the proctor of the proctor of the proctor of the proctor of the proctor of the proctor of the proctor of the proctor of the proctor of the proctor of the proctor of the proctor of the proctor

古文：顷者尝镇泾原，克著威惠，叛卒知训，咨尔以诚。
现代文：以前曾守泾原，能行恩威，乱军知道守法，靠你精诚感动。
English: In the past, he had guarded the Plains of Reeds, and was able to show his benevolence. The rebels knew how to abide by the law, and were moved by your sincerity.

古文：贼泚藏奸，欺尔以诈。守人臣之大节，见元恶之深情，端委国门，挺身白刃。
现代文：叛贼朱氵此包藏祸心，用假话欺骗你，你谨守臣下的节操，看出贼首的用心，穿朝服去宫门，挺身入刀丛。
English: The traitor Zhu Xi is harboring evil intentions and deceiving you with lies. You should keep the discipline of your vassals, recognize the intentions of the thief, wear the imperial robe to the palace gate, and stand up to the sword.

古文：誓碎凶渠之首，以敌君父之仇，视死如归，履虎致咥。
现代文：发誓打碎贼首的头，为国君报仇，视死如归，英勇献身。
English: He swore to smash the thief's head and avenge the country's king, and bravely gave his life for the cause.

古文：噫，天未悔祸，事乖垂成，雄风壮图，振骇群盗。
现代文：啊，上天没有停止惩罚，因此功败垂成，但雄风壮举，吓坏了众叛贼。
English: Ah, the heavens did not stop the punishment, so the achievement was a failure, but the heroic feat scared the traitors.

古文：昔王蠋守死以全节，周顗正色而抗词，惟我信臣，无愧前哲。
现代文：古有王虫蜀杀身保全节操，周凛然陈词，我朝良臣，无愧于前贤。
English: In ancient times, there was a king who killed himself to preserve morality, and Zhou Lingran said, "I am a good minister, worthy of the former sages."

古文：声震寰宇，义冠古今，足以激励人伦，光昭史册。
现代文：英名震动天下，义烈古今无双，足可激励民心，光耀历史。
English: A famous name shakes the world, and there is no match for a hero from ancient times to the present. It can inspire the hearts of the people and shine in history.

古文：不有殊等之赏，孰表非常之功。爰议畴庸，特超检限，著之甲令，树此风声。
现代文：没有特别的赏赐，怎显出特殊的功勋，讨论封赏，特超出常规，颁布法令，树立风气。
English: If there is no special award, how to show special merit, discuss awards, go beyond the norm, issue decrees, and establish a culture.

古文：可赠太尉，谥曰忠烈，宣付史官，仍赐实封五百户、庄宅各一区。
现代文：可赠官太尉，赐谥号为忠烈，通知史官，赐食实封五百户、庄园宅院各一处。
English: You can present the official with the rank of captain, give him the title of loyalist, notify the historian, and give food to 500 households and one manor house.

古文：长子与三品正员官，诸子并与五品正员官。
现代文：长子封三品正员官，其余儿子都封五品正员官。
English: The eldest son was made a three-ranked official, and the other sons were all made five-ranked officials.

古文：仍废朝三日，收京城之后，以礼葬祭，旌表门闾。
现代文：停止上朝三天，收复长安以后，按礼仪安葬祭祀，在家乡立牌坊赐匾额。
English: After the three-day halt of the Shang Dynasty and the recovery of Chang'an, according to the etiquette of burial and sacrifice, a plaque was erected in his hometown.

古文：朕承天子人，临驭亿兆，一夫不获，时予之辜，况诚信不达，屡致寇戎，使抱义之臣陷于凶逆。
现代文：我按天意治理国家，管理百姓，一人不安心，就是我的过错。何况我因诚意威信没达到，多次外患内乱，使守义忠臣，陷身贼手。
English: I govern the country and the people according to the will of Heaven, and it is my fault that I am alone and insecure. Moreover, I have not achieved prestige due to my sincerity, and I have suffered from civil unrest many times, and I have had to defend my loyalty and loyalty, and I have fallen into the hands of thieves.

古文：有临危致命，殁而逾彰；有因事成功，权以合道。苟利社稷，存亡一致，酬报之典，岂限常伦。
现代文：有的遇到危险牺牲生命，死得光荣；有的平叛立功，权变合乎道义，只要有利国家，死者生者一样，酬劳报答标准，怎会局限常例。
English: Some encounter danger, sacrifice their lives, and die a glorious death; some make meritorious contributions to counter-rebellion, and the change of power is moral. As long as it is beneficial to the country, the dead and the living, the standard of remuneration and reward, how can it be limited to the usual cases.

古文：并委所司访其事迹，续具条奏，当加褒异，锡其井赋。
现代文：委托有关部门访求他的事迹，继续报告，将增加奖赏，提升官爵。
English: The relevant departments have been entrusted to visit his deeds, continue to report, will increase the reward, and promote the official title.

古文：图形云阁，书功鼎彝，以彰我有服节死义之臣，传于不朽。 
现代文：画像凌烟阁，功劳记史册，用以表彰我守节献身的臣子，流传万世。 
English: The image of Lingyan Pavilion, recorded in the annals of history, is used to commend my devoted vassals for observing the festival, and has been passed down for generations.

古文：德宗还京，又诏曰： 赠太尉秀实，授乎贞烈，激其颓风，苍黄之中，密蕴雄断。
现代文：德宗回到京城后，又下诏书说： 赠官太尉段秀实，用他的贞节勇烈，改变人们不良风气，在突发事变时，秘密怀有决断。
English: After returning to the capital, Emperor Dezong issued another imperial edict, saying: "Granted officer, Taijun Duan Husi, used his chastity and bravery to change people's bad customs, and in the event of an emergency, secretly harbored determination.

古文：将纾国难，诡收寇兵，挠其凶谋，果集吾事。
现代文：为了挽救国难，传假令退贼兵，挫败叛贼阴谋，以利调兵征讨。
English: In order to save the national calamity, fake orders were issued to withdraw the traitor soldiers, the traitor's plot was foiled, and the army was mobilized for conscription.

古文：挺身径进，奋击渠魁，英名凛然，振迈千古。
现代文：起身上前，奋勇击贼首，赫赫英名，万古不朽。
English: Stand up, bravely strike the thief's head, Hehe fame, eternal immortality.

古文：宜差官致祭，并旌表门闾，缘葬所须，一切官给。
现代文：应派官祭祀，并在家乡立牌坊赐匾额，葬礼需要的，全部官府供应。
English: Officials should be dispatched to hold a memorial service, and a memorial plaque should be erected in the hometown, and the government should provide all the necessary funds for the funeral.

古文：仍于墓所官为立碑，以扬徽烈。 
现代文：在墓地由官府树碑，用以表彰功勋。 
English: At the cemetery, there is a monument erected by the government to commend meritorious service.

古文：自贞元后累朝凡赦书节文褒奖忠烈，必以秀实为首。
现代文：从贞元后各皇帝只要发文奖励忠臣烈士，一定把段秀实放在首位。
English: As long as emperors issued documents to reward loyal martyrs after the Zhenyuan era, they must put Duan Xiusi in the first place.

古文：其子伯伦，累官至太子詹事。大和二年正月奏： 亡父赠太尉秀实，准前后制敕令所司置庙立碑，今营造已毕，取今月二十五日行升祔礼。 
现代文：他的儿子段伯伦，官当到太子詹事，大和二年正月，奏本说： 已故父亲赠官太尉段秀实，按前后命令责成有关部门修祠建碑，现已完工，定于本月二十五日举行祭祀仪式。 
English: His son, Duan Buren, became an official of the Prince Zhanji in the first month of the second year of the Yamato era. The report said: "His late father bestowed the official title of Taifeng Duan Husi, and ordered the relevant departments to repair the shrine and build a monument according to the previous and subsequent orders. It has now been completed, and the sacrificial ceremony is scheduled to be held on the 25th of this month.

古文：诏曰： 秀实忠卫宗社，功配庙食，义风所激，千载凛然。
现代文：皇帝下诏说： 段秀实忠贞保卫国家，功勋应立祠祭祀，风范长存，流传千古。
English: The emperor issued an edict saying: Duan Xiusi was loyal and defended the country, and his achievements should be enshrined in an ancestral shrine, and his manners should be preserved and passed down for thousands of years.

古文：间代勋力，须异等夷，宜赐绫绢五百疋，以度支物充。
现代文：罕见功勋，应破格奖赏，赐绸缎五百匹，命度支拨给。
English: A rare achievement, deserving of an exceptional reward, awarded with five hundred silks and yarns, with the highest award of life.

古文：仍令所司供少牢，并给卤簿人夫，兼太常博士一人检校。 
现代文：仍旧命有关部门供给少牢祭品，并提供仪仗役夫，兼派太常博士一人核查。 
English: He still ordered the relevant departments to provide minor prisoners with sacrificial gifts, and provided an honor guard, and also sent one person, Dr. Tai Chang, to check.

古文：寻加伯伦检校左散骑常侍，兼殿中监。
现代文：不久加封段伯伦为检校左散骑常侍，兼任殿中监。
English: Soon after, he was given the additional title of Dan Burren, the left rider of the inspection of the school, and also served as the supervisor of the hall.

古文：大和四年十一月，迁右金吾卫大将军、兼御史大夫，充街使。
现代文：大和四年十一月，升任右金吾卫大将军，兼任御史大夫、街使。
English: In November of the 4th year of the Yamato era, he was promoted to the position of Ukinoue no daisho (Major General of the Right Division of the Middle Palace Guards), concurrently serving as goshi taifu (chief historian) and neighborhood envoy.

古文：八年七月，检校工部尚书，充福建等州都团练观察使，入为太仆卿，卒。
现代文：大和八年七月，任检校工部尚书、福州建州等地都团练观察使，后又入京任太仆卿，直到去世。
English: In July of the 8th year of the Yamato era, he was appointed as an observation envoy for the inspection of schools by the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology in Shinshu, Fuzhou and Jianzhou, and then he entered Beijing as a servant of the emperor until his death.

古文：宰臣李石奏曰： 伯伦，秀实之子。
现代文：宰相李石上奏说： 段伯伦是段秀实的儿子。
English: Prime Minister Li Shisheng said: Duan Buren is the son of Duan Husi.

古文：自古殁身以卫社稷者，无如秀实之贤。 
现代文：从古以来舍身保卫国家的，没人像段秀实这样杰出。 
English: Since ancient times, no one has been as outstanding as Duan Shusi in sacrificing himself to defend the country.

古文：文宗悯然曰： 伯伦宜加赙赠。 
现代文：唐文宗难受地说： 段伯伦应增加丧葬待遇。 
English: Tang Wenzong said bitterly: Duan Buren should be given more funeral treatment.

古文：仍辍朝一日，以礼忠臣之嗣。
现代文：于是停止上朝一天，以表示对忠臣后代的敬意。
English: As a result, the parade was stopped for one day to show respect for the descendants of loyal retainers.

古文：颜真卿，字清臣，琅邪临沂人也。
现代文：颜真卿字清臣，琅笽郡临沂县人。
English: Yan Zhenqing, also known as Qingcheng, was from Linyi County.

古文：五代祖之推，北齐黄门侍郎。
现代文：五代前祖父颜之推，曾任北齐黄门侍郎。
English: Five generations ago, Yan's grandfather Yan Zhihui, once served as the North Qi Huangmen Chamberlain.

古文：真卿少勤学业，有词藻，尤工书。
现代文：颜真卿年少时学习勤奋，有文才，尤其擅长书法。
English: When she was young, Yan Zhenqing was a diligent student and a talented writer. She was especially good at calligraphy.

古文：开元中，举进士，登甲科。
现代文：开元年间，被选送应试，考中甲科。
English: During the first year of the year, he was selected to take the exam, and passed the examination of the middle school.

古文：事亲以孝闻。
现代文：侍奉父母以孝闻名。
English: Children who serve their parents are known for their filial piety.

古文：四命为监察御史，充河西陇右军试覆屯交兵使。
现代文：四次被任命为监察御史，担任河西陇右军覆屯交兵使。
English: He was appointed inspector of imperial history four times, and served as the envoy of the right-wing army in Hexi to overthrow the Tang Dynasty.

古文：五原有冤狱，久不决，真卿至，立辩之。
现代文：五原有桩冤案，长期不能决断，颜真卿去后，很快处理了。
English: After Yan Zhenqing left, he quickly dealt with the grievances of Wuhara, which could not be resolved for a long time.

古文：天方旱，狱决乃雨，郡人呼之为 御史雨 。
现代文：当时久旱，冤案平反后就下了雨，当地人称这是 御史雨 。
English: At that time, there was a long drought. After the injustice was rectified, it rained. Locals called it the "historic rain."

古文：又充河东朔方试覆屯交兵使。
现代文：又担任河东覆屯交兵使。
English: He also served as the envoy for the reoccupation of Hedong.

古文：有郑延祚者，母卒二十九年，殡僧舍垣地，真卿劾奏之，兄弟三十年不齿，天下耸动。
现代文：有个叫郑延祚的，母亲去世二十九年，仍停柩在寺庙院内，颜真卿奏本弹劾他，郑氏兄弟三十年未被录用，全国轰动。
English: There is a man named Zheng Yanjun, whose mother died 29 years ago, and he is still stuck in the temple courtyard. Yan Zhengying wrote a book to impeach him. Zheng's brothers have not been hired for 30 years, causing a national sensation.

古文：迁殿中侍御史、东都畿采访判官，转侍御史、武部员外郎。
现代文：升任殿中侍御史、东都畿采访判官，调任侍御史、武部员外郎。
English: He was promoted to the post of court chamberlain and judge in charge of interviews in the eastern part of Kinki, and transferred to the post of court chamberlain and samurai retainer.

古文：杨国忠怒其不附己，出为平原太守。
现代文：杨国忠恼火他不亲附自己，调他出京任平原郡太守。
English: Yang Guozhong was annoyed that he was not personally attached to him and transferred him out of Beijing to be the governor of Pingyuan County.

古文：安禄山逆节颇著，真卿以霖雨为托，修城浚池，阴料丁壮，储廪实，乃阳会文士，泛舟外池，饮酒赋诗。
现代文：安禄山反意较明显了，颜真卿以久雨为托词，修城墙加深护城河，秘密统计健壮男子，储备粮食；表面却召集文人，在城外水中乘船游玩、喝酒吟诗。
English: Yan Zhenqing used the long rain as an excuse to repair the city wall, deepen the moat, secretly count the able-bodied men, and stockpile grain; on the surface, however, he summoned literati to travel by boat in the water outside the city, drink wine, and recite poetry.

古文：或谗于禄山，禄山亦密侦之，以为书生不足虞也。
现代文：有人向安禄山告发，安禄山也秘密侦察他，认为文人不值得担心。
English: Someone reported to Anlu Shan, and Anlu Shan also secretly spied on him, thinking that the literati were not worth worrying about.

古文：无几，禄山果反，河朔尽陷，独平原城守具备，乃使司兵参军李平驰奏之。
现代文：不久，安禄山果然反叛，河朔都被攻陷；只有平原郡城郭守卫都完备，于是派司兵参军李平飞马奏报。
English: Soon, Anlu Mountain did indeed rebel, and all of Heshuo was conquered; only the castle guards of Pingyuan County were complete, so Li Ping sent soldiers to join the army.

古文：玄宗初闻禄山之变，叹曰： 河北二十四郡，岂无一忠臣乎！ 
现代文：唐玄宗开始听说安禄山叛乱，叹气说： 黄河以北二十四郡，竟没有一个忠臣吗？ 
English: When Tang Xuan Zong first heard of the Anlu Mountain Rebellion, he sighed and said, "Are there not a single loyal subject in the twenty-four counties north of the Yellow River?

古文：得平来，大喜，顾左右曰： 朕不识颜真卿形状何如，所为得如此！ 
现代文：得李平来报，很高兴，扭头对侍从说： 我不知道颜真卿相貌怎样，能够做得这样好！ 
English: Li Ping was very happy to receive the report, and he turned to his attendant and said, "I don't know what Yan Zhenqing looks like, but I can do it so well!"

古文：禄山初尚移牒真卿，令以平原、博平军屯七千人防河津，以博平太守张献直为副。
现代文：安禄山开始还给颜真卿下令，命他率平原、博平郡军队七千人防守河津，任命博平郡太守张献直为副手。
English: An Lushan ordered Yan Zhenqing to lead the seven thousand soldiers of the plain and Boping County to defend Kawazu, and appointed Zhang Xianzhong, the governor of Boping County, as his deputy.

古文：真卿乃募勇士，旬日得万人，遣录事参军李择交统之简阅，以刁万岁、和琳、徐浩、马相如、高抗朗等为将。
现代文：颜真卿就招募精兵，十天募得万名，派录事参军李择交统率训练，任命刁万岁、和琳、徐浩、马相如、高抗朗等为将领。
English: Yan Zhenqing recruited elite soldiers, raised ten thousand in ten days, sent a record to join the army, selected Li Zheng to lead the training, and appointed Zou Wanlian, Wo Lin, Xu Hao, Ma Xiangru, Gao Lang Lang and others as generals.

古文：禄山既陷洛阳，杀留守李忄妻、御史中丞卢奕、判官蒋清，以三首遣段子光来徇河北。
现代文：安禄山攻陷了洛阳，杀死了洛阳留守李忄登、御史中丞卢奕、判官蒋清，派段子光拿三人的头来黄河北边示众。
English: An Lushan conquered Luoyang, killed Li Xudeng, who stayed behind in Luoyang, Lu Yi, the chief historian, and Jiang Qing, the judge, and sent Duan Ziguang to take the heads of the three to the north side of the Yellow River to demonstrate to the public.

古文：真卿恐摇人心，乃许谓诸将曰： 我识此三人，首皆非也。 
现代文：颜真卿担心人心动摇，就假装对诸将说： 我认识这三个人，头都不是真的。 
English: Yan Zhenqing was worried that people's hearts would be shaken, so he pretended to say to the generals: I know these three people, but they are not real.

古文：遂腰斩子光，密藏三首。
现代文：于是腰斩了段子光，秘密藏起三人的头。
English: As a result, Duan Ziguang was beheaded and the heads of the three were secretly hidden.

古文：异日，乃取三首冠饰，草续支体，棺敛祭殡，为位恸哭，人心益附。
现代文：后来，才取出三人的头戴帽佩饰，用草做成身体四肢，用棺木装殓祭祀殡葬，立了牌位痛哭，人心因而更加亲附。
English: Later, they took out the three people's heads to wear hats and ornaments, made body limbs with grass, decorated with coffins for sacrifices and funerals, and set up plaques to cry, which made the hearts of the people more intimate.

古文：禄山遣其将李饮凑、高邈、何千年等守土门。
现代文：安禄山派他的将领李钦凑、高邈、何千年等据守土门。
English: An Lushan sent his generals Li Qinqip, Gao Yao and others to guard the gate for thousands of years.

古文：真卿从父兄常山太守杲卿与长史袁履谦谋杀凑、邈，擒千年送京师。
现代文：颜真卿的叔伯哥哥常山郡太守颜杲卿和长史袁履谦用计杀死了李钦凑、高邈，擒获何千年押送京城。
English: Yan Zhenqing's uncle and elder brother, the grand marshal of Changshan County, Yan Zhenqing, and the chief historian, Yuan Lucheng, killed Li Qinqip and Gao Yao, and captured thousands of people to escort them to Beijing.

古文：土门既开，十七郡同日归顺，共推真卿为帅，得兵二十余万，横绝燕、赵。
现代文：土门攻破后，十七郡同一天宣布效忠皇帝，共同推举颜真卿为主帅，有军队二十多万，拦腰隔断了燕赵。
English: After the earth gate was breached, seventeen counties declared their allegiance to the emperor on the same day, and jointly nominated Yan Zhenqing as the main commander. There were more than two hundred thousand troops, and Yan Zhao was cut off.

古文：诏加真卿户部侍郎，依前平原太守。
现代文：皇帝下诏加封颜真卿为户部侍郎，依旧任平原郡太守。
English: Yan Zhenqing was awarded the title of Hubei Chamberlain by the emperor, and still served as the governor of Pingyuan County.

古文：清河客李萼，年二十余，与郡人来乞师，谓真卿曰： 闻公义烈，首唱大顺，河朔诸郡恃公为长城。
现代文：清河人李萼，二十多岁，和同郡人来借兵，对颜真卿说： 听说您明义忠烈，领头效忠皇帝，河朔各郡以您做靠山。
English: Li Cale, a man in his twenties from Qinghe, came to borrow soldiers with people from the same county, and said to Yan Zhenqing: I heard that you are loyal and loyal, leading the loyalty to the emperor, and the counties in Hexuo rely on you.

古文：今清河，实公之西邻也，仆幸寓家，得其虚实，知可为长者用。
现代文：清河郡是您的西邻，我在那儿居住，了解它的情况，知道它可以成仁德者的根基。
English: Qinghe County is your western neighbor. I live there, understand its situation, and know that it can become the foundation of benevolence.

古文：今计其蓄积，足以三平原之富，士卒可以二平原之强。
现代文：现算它的积蓄，足有平原郡三倍富足，兵力可有平原郡两倍强大。
English: It is now reckoned to be three times as rich as Plains County, and twice as strong.

古文：公因而抚之，腹心辅车之郡，其他小城，运之如臂使指耳。唯公所意，谁敢不从。 
现代文：您借兵安抚它，可成为您的亲信辅助，其余小城，指挥它们像手臂带动手指，您想怎样，谁敢不听。 
English: If you use soldiers to pacify it, you can become your trusted assistant. As for the rest of the small towns, you can command them like an arm leads a finger. Whatever you want, who would dare not to listen.

古文：真卿借兵千人。
现代文：颜真卿借给他一千士兵。
English: Yan Zhenqing lent him a thousand soldiers.

古文：萼将去，真卿谓之曰： 兵出也，吾子何以教我？ 
现代文：李萼将要离去，颜真卿对他说： 借兵派出，先生还有什么指教？ 
English: When Li Caly was about to leave, Yan Zhenqing said to him, "You have sent soldiers on loan. What advice do you have for me?"

古文：萼曰： 今闻朝廷使程千里统众十万自太行东下，将出郭口，为贼所扼，兵不得前。
现代文：李萼说： 现听说皇上派程千里率兵十万从太行东征，准备从山郭口杀出，被叛军扼守，大军不能前进。
English: Li Cale said: Now I have heard that the emperor has sent a hundred thousand soldiers from Taihang to the east, ready to fight from the mountain gate, but they are being held back by the rebels, and the army cannot advance.

古文：今若先伐魏郡，斩袁知泰，太守司马垂使为西南主；分兵开郭口之路，出千里之兵使讨鄴、幽陵；平原、清河合同志十万之众徇洛阳，分兵而制其冲。
现代文：现如先进攻魏郡，杀死袁知泰，命太守司马垂主持西南；分兵打通山郭口道路，使程千里的军队过来讨伐邺郡、幽州；平原、清河郡聚集同志向的十万军队出征洛阳，分兵控制要道。
English: At present, we are at the forefront of the attack on Wei County, killing Yuan Zhitai, and the commander-in-chief Simatli is presiding over the southwest; the detachment has opened the mountain gate road, so that the army of Cheng Qianli has come to fight in Qian County and Yuzhou; the plains and Qinghe County have gathered comrades to send 100,000 troops to Luoyang, and the detachment controls the important road.

古文：计王师亦不下十万，公当坚壁，无与挑战，不数十日，贼必溃而相图矣。 
现代文：估计附近朝廷兵也不少于十万，您坚守营垒，不与敌挑战，不过几十天，叛军必定溃乱并互相内讧。 
English: It is estimated that there are no less than one hundred thousand imperial soldiers in the vicinity. You stick to the camp and do not challenge the enemy, but in a few dozen days, the rebels will certainly break up and fight among themselves.

古文：真卿然之，乃移牒清河等郡，遣其大将李择交、副将平原县令范东馥、裨将和琳、徐浩等进兵，与清河四千人合势，而博平以千人来，三郡之师屯于博平，去堂邑县西南十里。
现代文：颜真卿赞同这话，就发文清河等州郡，派他的大将李择交，副将平原县令范东馥，末将和琳、徐浩等出兵，和清河郡四千人汇合，博平郡派来一千人，三郡的军队驻扎博平，离堂邑西南十里。
English: Yan Zhenqing agreed with this, and issued a document to Qinghe and other counties and prefectures, sending his general Li Zengjiao, vice-general Fan Dongyao of Pingyuan County, and finally generals Waring and Xu Hao to send troops, and Qinghe County sent four thousand people, Boping County sent one thousand people, and the troops of the three counties were stationed in Boping, ten miles southwest of Dongyi.

古文：袁知泰遣其将白嗣深、乙舒蒙等以二万人来拒战，贼大败，斩首万余级。
现代文：袁知泰派他的将领白嗣深、乙舒蒙等率两万人来抵挡，叛军大败，被杀死万余人。
English: Yuan Zhitai sent his generals Bai Shishen, Yi Shumeng and others with 20,000 men to resist. The rebels were soundly defeated and more than 10,000 people were killed.

古文：肃宗幸灵武，授工部尚书、兼御史大夫、河北采访招讨使。
现代文：唐肃宗到了灵武，任命颜真卿为工部尚书，兼任御史大夫、河北采访招讨使。
English: When Tang Su Zong arrived in Lingwu, he appointed Yan Zhenqing as the secretary of the engineering department, concurrently serving as the chief historian and the Hebei interviewing and recruiting envoy.

古文：禄山乘虚遣史思明、尹子奇急攻河北诸郡，饶阳、河间、景城、东安相次陷没，独平原、博平、清河三郡城守，然人心危荡，不可复振。
现代文：安禄山乘他们后防空虚派史思明、尹子奇急攻河北各郡，饶阳、河洵、景城、乐安相继被攻破，只有平原、博平、清河三城守住了，但人心动摇，难以再振作起来。
English: After them, Anlu Mountain was used by the anti-aircraft and anti-virtuous faction of Shi Siming and Yin Ziqi to make a sudden attack on counties in Hebei Province. Raoyang, Hebei, Jingcheng and Le'an were successively breached. Only Plain, Boping and Qinghe were defended, but people's hearts were shaken and it was difficult to cheer up again.

古文：至德元年十月，弃郡渡河，历江淮、荆襄。
现代文：至德元年十月，颜真卿放弃郡城渡过黄河，经过江淮、荆襄。
English: By October of the first year of the German era, Yan Zhenqing abandoned the county seat and crossed the Yellow River, passing through the Jianghuai and Jingxiang.

古文：二年四月，朝于凤翔，授宪部尚书，寻加御史大夫。
现代文：至德二年四月，在凤翔朝见皇帝，封宪部尚书，不久加封御史大夫。
English: In April of the second year of Zhi De, he went to see the emperor at the Fengxiang Court, and was given the title of Constitutional Department, and soon after, the title of Imperial Historian.

古文：中书舍人兼吏部侍郎崔漪带酒容入朝，谏议大夫李何忌在班不肃，真卿劾之；贬漪为右庶子，何忌西平郡司马。
现代文：中书舍人兼吏部侍郎崔漪带着酒色上朝，谏议大夫李何忌在朝廷行列中不恭敬，颜真卿弹劾他们；皇帝贬崔漪为右庶子、李何忌为西平郡司马。
English: Choe Hee, the chancellor of the imperial court and the steward of the cadre department, went to the imperial court drunk with wine, and suggested that the doctor Lee Hoi was disrespectful in the imperial court ranks, and Yan Zhengying impeached them; the emperor dismissed Choe Hee as the right illegitimate son, and Lee Hoi as the Xiping County Sima.

古文：元帅广平王领朔方蕃汉兵号二十万来收长安，出辞之日，百僚致谒于朝堂。百僚拜，答拜，辞亦如之。
现代文：元帅广平王率朔方及各族兵号称二十万去收复长安，出师的那天，百官在朝廷送别广平王，百官施礼，王答礼，致词也同样。
English: The marshal Guangping Wang led the Shuo faction and soldiers of all ethnic groups to recover Chang'an with a total of 200,000 soldiers. On the day of his graduation, hundreds of officials bid farewell to Guangping Wang at the imperial court. Hundreds of officials gave salutes, and Wang reciprocated. The same was true for his speech.

古文：王当阙不乘马，步出木马门而后乘。
现代文：王在宫前不骑马，走出木马门然后上马。
English: The king does not ride a horse in front of the palace. He walks out of the wooden horse gate and then mounts the horse.

古文：管崇嗣为王都虞候，先王上马，真卿进状弹之。肃宗曰： 朕兒子每出，谆谆教诫之，故不敢失礼。
现代文：管崇嗣任广平王都虞候，在王之先上了马，颜真卿呈状弹劾他，唐肃宗说： 我儿子每次外出，我都谆谆告诫他们，所以不敢失礼。
English: Guan Chong's successor, Guangping Wang, was waiting for him and rode ahead of the king. Yan Zhengying filed a petition to impeach him. Tang Suzong said: Every time my son goes out, I warn them, so I don't dare to be rude.

古文：崇嗣老将，有足疾，姑欲优容之，卿勿复言。 
现代文：管崇嗣是老将，脚有病，姑且宽容他，您别再说了。 
English: Guan Chongzhi is a veteran. He has a foot disease. Let's be tolerant of him. Please stop talking about him.

古文：乃以奏状还真卿。
现代文：就将奏折还给了颜真卿。
English: He returned the report to Yan Zhenqing.

古文：虽天子蒙尘，典法不废。
现代文：天子虽在难中，执法也不废弃。
English: Although we are in a difficult situation, law enforcement is not abandoned.

古文：洎銮舆将复宫阙，遣左司郎中李巽先行，陈告宗庙之礼，有司署祝文，称 嗣皇帝 。
现代文：到皇帝将回长安，派左司郎中李巽打前站，举行禀告宗庙的仪式，主事官签署祭文，用 嗣皇帝 。
English: When the emperor was about to return to Chang'an, he sent his left-hand sergeant, Li Ying, to stand in front of the station and hold a ceremony to announce the founding of the temple.

古文：真卿谓礼仪使崔器曰： 上皇在蜀，可乎？ 
现代文：颜真卿对礼仪使崔器说： 太上皇在蜀地，能用这吗？ 
English: Yan Zhenqing said to the etiquette official Cui Jiao: The emperor is in Shu, can I use this?

古文：器遽奏改之。
现代文：崔器即奏本修改。
English: Choi ware improvised music book revised.

古文：中旨宣劳，以为名儒深达礼体。
现代文：圣旨表彰，认为著名学者深知礼制。
English: Holy Will Commendation, that famous scholars are well aware of the etiquette.

古文：时太庙为贼所毁，真卿奏曰： 春秋时，新宫灾，鲁成公三日哭。
现代文：当时太庙被叛军毁坏，颜真卿奏本说： 春秋时代，鲁宣公宗庙遭灾。
English: At that time, the imperial temple was destroyed by the rebels, Yan Zhengying said: In the Spring and Autumn Period, the temple of Lu Xuan Gong suffered a disaster.

古文：今太庙既为盗毁，请筑坛于野，皇帝东向哭，然后遣使。 
现代文：成公哭了三天。现太庙被叛军毁坏，请在郊外筑坛，皇帝朝东边哭，此后派出使者。 
English: Chenggong cried for three days. Now that the Great Temple has been destroyed by the rebels, please build an altar in the suburbs. The emperor cried to the east and then sent an envoy.

古文：竟不能从。
现代文：皇帝竟不听从。
English: The emperor did not listen.

古文：军国之事，知无不言。
现代文：对军政事务，知无不言。
English: He knows everything about military and political affairs.

古文：为宰相所忌，出为同州刺史，转蒲州刺史。
现代文：被宰相憎恨，调出朝廷任同州刺史，又调蒲州刺史。
English: Hated by the prime minister, he was transferred out of the imperial court and appointed as the governor of Tongzhou, and then transferred to the governor of Bozhou.

古文：为御史唐旻所构，贬饶州刺史。旋拜升州刺史、浙江西道节度使，征为刑部尚书。
现代文：被御史唐诬陷，贬为饶州刺史，不久封升州刺史、浙江西道节度使，召进京任刑部尚书。
English: He was framed by Emperor Shi-tang and degraded to Raozhou assassin, and soon he was given the title of Shengzhou assassin and appointed as the envoy of the Western Wei Dynasty in Zhejiang Province. He was called to Beijing to serve as the head of the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：李辅国矫诏迁玄宗居西宫，真卿乃首率百僚上表请问起居，辅国恶之，奏贬蓬州长史。
现代文：李辅国假传诏书将唐玄宗迁居西宫，颜真卿就带头率百官呈表问候唐玄宗身体。李辅国讨厌他，奏本贬他为蓬州长史。
English: Li Yu's state issued a fake imperial edict to move Tang Xuan Zong to the West Palace. Yan Zhenqing led hundreds of officials in presenting a greeting card to Tang Xuan Zong's body. Li Yu's state hated him, and the document denigrated him as the governor of Penghu.

古文：代宗嗣位，拜利州刺史，迁户部侍郎，除荆南节度使，未行而罢，除尚书左丞。
现代文：唐代宗登基，任命为利州刺史，又升任户部侍郎，又任荆南节度使，还未上任就改变了，任命为尚书左丞。
English: Emperor Zong of the Tang Dynasty ascended to the throne, was appointed as Lizhou scribe, and was promoted to the position of household attendant, and was also appointed as Jingnan festival envoy. However, before he took office, he changed his position and was appointed as Shangshuzojo.

古文：车驾自陕将还，真卿请皇帝先谒五陵、九庙而后还宫。
现代文：皇帝将要从陕州回来，颜真卿请求皇帝先拜谒五陵、九庙然后回宫。
English: When the emperor was about to return from Shaanxi, Yan Zhenqing asked the emperor to visit the Five Mausoleums and Nine Temples before returning to the palace.

古文：宰相元载谓真卿曰： 公所见虽美，其如不合事宜何？ 
现代文：宰相元载对颜真卿说： 您的意见虽好，可不怎么合时宜。 
English: The Prime Minister once said to Yan Zhenqing: Although your opinion is good, it is not very timely.

古文：真卿怒，前曰： 用舍在相公耳，言者何罪？
现代文：颜真卿火了，上前说： 用不用在您。进言的人有什么罪过？
English: Yan Zhenqing was enraged and stepped forward and said, "It is not up to you whether to use it or not. What is the fault of the person who made the suggestion?

古文：然朝廷之事，岂堪相公再破除耶！ 
现代文：可朝中的事，怎能容忍您再更改呢！ 
English: But how can I tolerate you changing things in the morning!

古文：载深衔之。
现代文：元载很记恨此事。
English: Yuan Zai was very angry about this.

古文：旋改检校刑部尚书知省事，累进封鲁郡公。
现代文：不久改任检校刑部尚书知省事，多次提升后封鲁郡公。
English: Soon after, he was reassigned to the school inspection and punishment department, where he saved a lot of trouble. After several promotions, he became the governor of Fulu County.

古文：时元载引用私党，惧朝臣论奏其短，乃请：百官凡欲论事，皆先白长官，长官白宰相，然后上闻。
现代文：当时元载引荐任用私人党羽，怕朝中大臣奏本揭他的底，于是请求：百官凡要议论政事，都要先报告各自长官，各级长官报告宰相，此后再向皇帝奏报。
English: At that time, Yuan Zi recommended the appointment of private party members, fearing that the central and northern ministers would write a report to expose him, so he requested that all officials who wanted to discuss political affairs should first report to their respective superiors, and superiors at all levels should report to the prime minister, and then report to the emperor.

古文：真卿上疏曰：
现代文：颜真卿呈奏疏说：
English: Yan Zhengying said after the performance:

古文：御史中丞李进等传宰相语，称奉进止： 缘诸司官奏事颇多，朕不惮省览，但所奏多挟谗毁；自今论事者，诸司官皆须先白长官，长官白宰相，宰相定可否，然后奏闻者。 
现代文： 御史中丞李进等传丞相的话，称奉皇上批示： 因各部官员奏章太多，我虽不怕披阅劳累，但所奏事多夹杂诬告；今后议论政事的人，各部官员都应先报告各自长官，各级长官报告宰相，宰相决定是否可奏，此后再奏报。 
English: Li Jin, the Vice-Minister of History, and others reported the words of the prime minister, saying that they followed the emperor's instructions: Due to the fact that there are too many reports from officials of various ministries, although I am not afraid of reading and working hard, the reports are mostly mixed with false accusations; in the future, those who discuss political affairs, officials of various ministries should first report to their respective superiors, superiors at all levels report to the prime minister, the prime minister decides whether it can be reported, and then report to the newspaper.

古文：何则？诸司长官皆达官也，言皆专达于天子也。
现代文：我从听说这话以后，觉得朝廷内外哗然、人们灰心丧气。为什么？各部长官都是朝官，可直接向皇帝进言。
English: After I heard this, I felt that there was an uproar inside and outside the Imperial Court, and people were disheartened. Why? All ministers are officials of the Imperial Court, and they can speak directly to the Emperor.

古文：郎官、御史者，陛下腹心耳目之臣也。
现代文：他们属下的郎官、御史，是皇帝亲信和了解下情的臣子。
English: Their subordinate steward, Mishi, was a close confidant of the emperor and an understanding subordinate.

古文：故其出使天下，事无巨细得失，皆令访察，回日奏闻，所以明四目、达四聪也。
现代文：因此派他们出使各地，不论政事大小对错，都命令调查了解，归来就奏报，用来了解各种情况。
English: Therefore, they were dispatched to all parts of the country, regardless of the rightness or wrongness of political affairs, and ordered to investigate and understand, and report back to be used to understand various situations.

古文：今陛下欲自屏耳目，使不聪明，则天下何述焉。《诗》云： 营营青蝇，止于棘。
现代文：现皇帝想自己遮住耳朵眼睛，使自己听不见、看不着，那么天下人向谁诉说呢？《诗经》有言： 营营青蝇，止于棘。
English: Now the emperor wants to cover his ears and eyes, so that he cannot hear or see, so to whom does the world speak? "The Book of Songs" has a saying: "The blue fly hides in the thorn."

古文：谗言罔极，交乱四国。 
现代文：谗言罔极，交乱四国。 
English: The war of words escalated to the extreme, and the four kingdoms were in turmoil.

古文：以其能变白为黑，变黑为白也。
现代文：因为有人能把白说成黑，把黑说成白。
English: Because he can talk white into black, talk black into white.

古文：诗人深恶之，故曰： 取彼谗人，投畀豺虎。
现代文：写诗的人很厌恶他们，所以说： 取彼谗人，投畀豺虎。
English: Poets detest them, so they say, "Take a man and throw him into a tiger."

古文：豺虎不食，投畀有北。 
现代文：豺虎不食，投畀有北。 
English: If you don't feed the tiger, the viper will eat you.

古文：则夏之伯明、楚之无极、汉之江充，皆谗人也，孰不恶之？
现代文：夏朝的伯明、楚国的无极、汉朝的江充，都是诬告忠良的人，谁不厌恶他们？
English: The Boming of the Xia Dynasty, the Wuji of the Chu Dynasty, and the Jiangchong of the Han Dynasty were all people who falsely accused the faithful. Who would not detest them?

古文：陛下恶之，深得君人之体矣。
现代文：陛下厌恶诬告者，很合乎治理天下的正道。
English: His Majesty's aversion to false accusers is quite in keeping with the right way to govern the world.

古文：陛下何不深回听察，其言虚诬者，则谗人也，因诛殛之；其言不虚者，则正人也，因奖励之。
现代文：皇上为何不深入反复考察，他说的是错的，就是诬告者，于是处死他。他说的是对的，就是君子，于是奖励他。
English: Why didn't the emperor investigate thoroughly and repeatedly? What he said was wrong, that is, a false accuser, so he executed him. What he said was right, that is, a gentleman, so he rewarded him.

古文：陛下舍此不为，使众人皆谓陛下不能明察，倦于听览，以此为辞，拒其谏诤，臣窃为陛下痛惜之。
现代文：皇上放着这办法不用，让众人都说皇上不能清楚考察，厌倦听看奏章，用这做托词，拒绝劝谏，我私下为陛下深深惋惜。
English: Privately, I feel deeply sorry for His Majesty, because the Emperor did not need to use this method, and let everyone say that the Emperor could not examine the music clearly, that he was tired of listening to the score, and used this as an excuse to refuse to be persuaded.

古文：臣闻太宗勤于听览，庶政以理，故著《司门式》云： 其有无门籍人，有急奏者，皆令监门司与仗家引奏，不许关碍。 
现代文： 臣下听说太宗皇帝听看奏章勤勉，故国家治理得好，因此颁布《司门式》说： 不论有无宫门出入证件的人，如有急事奏报，都应命监门司与仗家引见奏报，不准阻拦。 
English: The vassals heard that Emperor Taizong was diligent in listening to and reading the report, so the country was well governed. Therefore, the "Simon Style" was promulgated, saying: "Regardless of whether a person has a palace entrance and exit certificate or not, if there is an urgent report, the overseer of the gate and the warrior should be ordered to present the report, and they are not allowed to block it.

古文：所以防壅蔽也。
现代文：用这来防止言路堵塞。
English: Use this to prevent speech blockage.

古文：并置立仗马二匹，须有乘骑便往，所以平治天下，正用此道也。
现代文：并设置仗马两匹，需要骑马就去，天下治理得好，正是因为采用了这些措施。
English: And set up two war horses, if you need to ride a horse, the world is well governed, precisely because of these measures.

古文：天宝已后，李林甫威权日盛，群臣不先谘宰相辄奏事者，仍托以他故中伤，犹不敢明约百司，令先白宰相。
现代文：天宝年以后，李林甫威风权势一天天增大，百官有不先向宰相报告就奏本论事的，就借口其他的原因诬陷他，但还不能公然对各部下命令，要求先禀报宰相。
English: After the Tianbao Year, Li Linfu's influence increased day by day. Hundreds of officials did not report to the prime minister in advance, but made false accusations against him on the pretext of other reasons. However, they could not openly order their subordinates to report to the prime minister first.

古文：又阉官袁思艺日宣诏至中书，玄宗动静，必告林甫，先意奏请，玄宗惊喜若神。
现代文：宦官袁思艺每天到中书省宣读诏书，玄宗皇帝的情况，一定告诉李林甫，李林甫在皇帝表示之前上奏请求，玄宗皇帝既惊又喜认为神助。
English: The eunuch Yuan Siyi read the imperial edict every day in Zhongshui Province, and he must have told Li Linfu about the situation of Emperor Xuanzong. Li Linfu made a request before the emperor expressed it, and Emperor Xuanzong was both surprised and pleased to think it was divine help.

古文：以此权柄恩宠日甚，道路以目。
现代文：从此权力宠幸一天天增加，路上百姓只敢用眼示意表示愤恨。
English: Since then, the number of power favorites has increased day by day, and people on the road only dare to show their anger with their eyes.

古文：上意不下宣，下情不上达，所以渐致潼关之祸，皆权臣误主，不遵太宗之法故也。
现代文：皇上的意图不能下传，下面的情况也不敢上报，因此逐渐招致潼关大败，这都是专权大臣祸害主上，不遵从太宗皇帝法规的缘故。
English: The emperor's intention could not be passed down, and the following situation did not dare to be reported, thus gradually leading to the great defeat of Shaoguan. This was mainly due to the evil of the autocratic ministers and their failure to comply with Emperor Taizong's regulations.

古文：陵夷至于今日，天下之蔽，尽萃于圣躬，岂陛下招致之乎？
现代文：发展到今天，天下的问题，都集中到皇上身上，这难道是皇上造成的？
English: To this day, the problems of the world are concentrated on the emperor. Was this caused by the emperor?

古文：盖其所从来者渐矣。
现代文：问题的产生是逐渐的。
English: The emergence of the problem is gradual.

古文：自艰难之初，百姓尚未凋纮，太平之理，立可便致。
现代文：收复长安以后，人民还不穷困，太平盛世，立刻可以达到。
English: After the recovery of Chang'an, the people are not poor, and peace and prosperity can be achieved immediately.

古文：属李辅国用权，宰相专政，递相姑息，莫肯直言。大开三司，不安反侧，逆贼散落，将士北走党项，合集士贼，至今为患。
现代文：遇上李辅国滥用权力，宰相独揽朝政，互相迁就，不肯说真话，大兴刑狱，不让胁从叛军的人安心，这些人纷纷逃散，有的逃往北边的党项，集合成为流寇，至今仍是祸害。
English: In the case of the abuse of power by Li Yu-kuo, the chancellor monopolized the government, accommodated each other, refused to tell the truth, greatly expanded the prison, and did not allow the rebels to be at ease, these people fled one after another, some fled to the north of the party, and gathered to become roving bandits, which is still a scourge.

古文：伪将更相惊恐，因思明危惧，扇动却反。
现代文：叛军将领更是担心，史思明也因为这煽动他们再次反叛。
English: The rebel generals are even more worried, and Shishiming is inciting them to rebel again.

古文：又今相州败散，东都陷没，先帝由此忧勤，至于损寿，臣每思之，痛切心骨。
现代文：以致今天相州战败，洛阳沦陷，肃宗皇帝为这忧虑辛劳，以致短寿逝世，我每当想到这，心里非常悲痛。
English: So that today, when I think of the defeat of Xiangzhou, the fall of Luoyang, and Emperor Su Zong's worries and hardships that led to his short life, I feel very sad.

古文：今天下兵戈未戢，疮磐未平，陛下岂得不日闻谠言以广视听，而欲顿隔忠谠之路乎！
现代文： 现天下战乱未平，祸患未消，皇上怎能不每天听忠言以了解下情，却想完全切断忠谏言路呢！
English: At present, the world is in a state of war and turmoil, and the scourge has not disappeared. How can the emperor not listen to the words of the loyal advisors every day to understand the situation, but want to completely cut off the path of the words of the loyal advisors!

古文：臣窃闻陛下在陕州时，奏事者不限贵贱，务广闻见，乃尧、舜之事也。
现代文：我听说皇上在陕州的时候，不限前往上奏言事者贵贱，只求多了解情况，这是尧、舜治天下的方法。
English: I heard that when the Emperor was in Shaanxi Province, he would go to Shangguan without any restriction on the number of dignitaries and commoners who could make speeches, just to learn more about the situation. This was a way of controlling the world.

古文：凡百臣庶以为太宗之理，可翘足而待也。
现代文：官吏百姓认为太宗皇帝贞观之治，可以马上出现了。
English: The government officials and the common people thought that the reign of Emperor Taizong's Zhenguan could appear immediately.

古文：臣又闻君子难进易退，由此言之，朝廷开不讳之路，犹恐不言，况怀厌怠，令宰相宣进止，使御史台作条目，不令直进。
现代文：我又听说君子进步困难退步容易，根据这个道理，皇上敞开忠谏言路，还担心没人敢说，何况您心里厌倦，让宰相决定批准与否，让御史台登记，不让直接奏报。
English: I have also heard that it is easy for a gentleman to advance and difficult to retreat. According to this principle, the emperor opened the way of loyalty and encouragement, but also worried that no one would dare to say, not to mention your heart is tired, let the prime minister decide whether to approve or not, let the Imperial History Station register, and do not allow direct reporting.

古文：从此人人不敢奏事，则陛下闻见，只在三数人耳。
现代文：这以后人人不敢上奏言事，那么皇上了解的情况，只有少数人提供。
English: After that, no one dared to speak out, and only a few people were able to tell the emperor what they knew.

古文：天下之士，方钳口结舌，陛下后见无人奏事，必谓朝廷无事可论，岂知惧不敢进，即林甫、国忠复起矣。
现代文：全国有识之士，将闭口不说，皇上以后看见没人奏报政事，一定认为朝廷无事可以议论，哪里知道是害怕不敢奏报，这就是李林甫、杨国忠再现了。
English: People of insight throughout the country will shut their mouths and not speak. When they saw that no one reported political affairs after the emperor's death, they must have thought that the imperial court had nothing to discuss, and they were afraid to report. This is the reappearance of Li Linfu and Yang Guozhong.

古文：凡百臣庶，以为危殆之期，又翘足而至也。如今日之事，旷古未有，虽李林甫、杨国忠犹不敢公然如此。
现代文：官吏百姓认为凶险时期马上就会来临了，今天这种做法，千古没有，即使李林甫、杨国忠还不敢公然这样。
English: Officials and common people think that the dangerous period will come soon. Today, there is no such practice in thousands of years, even if Li Linfu and Yang Guozhong do not dare to do so openly.

古文：今陛下不早觉悟，渐成孤立，后纵悔之无及矣！
现代文：现皇上不早日认识到，渐渐被孤立，以后虽后悔也来不及了！
English: If the current emperor does not realize soon that he is gradually being isolated, it will be too late to regret it later!

古文：臣实知忤大臣者，罪在不测，不忍孤负陛下，无任恳迫之至。
现代文：我虽知道冒犯宰相，没有好下场，但不忍心辜负皇上，看着皇上被孤立，心里非常诚恳、急迫。 
English: Although I knew that offending the prime minister would not end well, I could not bear to betray the emperor. Watching the emperor being isolated, I felt very sincere and anxious.

古文：其激切如此。于是中人争写内本布于外。
现代文：他的话像这样激烈急切，因此宫中人争着抄写宫内文本传到宫外。
English: Such was the vehemence and urgency of his words that courtiers scrambled to copy the text inside the palace and get it out.

古文：后摄祭太庙，以祭器不修言于朝，载坐以诽谤，贬硖州别驾、抚州湖州刺史。
现代文：后来在太庙主持祭祀，在朝中说祭器不好，元载判他诽谤罪，贬为硖州别驾、抚州湖州刺史。
English: Later, he presided over a religious service at Taimiao, but the emperor said that the sacrificial vessels were not good, and he was convicted of defamation and demoted to the position of the governor of Zhangzhou and the governor of Fuzhou and Huzhou.

古文：元载伏诛，拜刑部尚书。
现代文：元载被处死，封刑部尚书。
English: After Yuan Zhao was killed, Yan Zhenqing was worshiped as the leader of the criminal investigation department.

古文：代宗崩，为礼仪使。
现代文：唐代宗去世，任礼仪使。
English: When Emperor Daizong passed away, Yan Zhenqing was the ceremonial envoy.

古文：又以高祖已下七圣谥号繁多，乃上议请取初谥为定。
现代文：认为高祖以下七代皇帝谥号繁复，就上奏根据最初的谥法决定。
English: Considering that the seven generations of emperors from Emperor Gao to Emperor Gaozhu had complicated names, it was decided to play according to the original method.

古文：袁傪以谄言排之，遂罢。
现代文：袁腃以谄媚话攻击他，就罢免了。
English: Yuan Shao attacked him with flattering words and dismissed him.

古文：杨炎为相，恶之，改太子少傅，礼仪使如旧，外示崇宠，实去其权也。
现代文：杨炎任宰相，讨厌他，改任太子少傅，恢复旧职礼仪使，外表看非常宠信，实际上夺去了他的实权。
English: Yang Yan held the post of prime minister, hated him, changed his post to prince junior minister, restored the old post of etiquette minister, outwardly looked very trustworthy, but actually took away his real power.

古文：卢杞专权，忌之，改太子太师，罢礼仪使，谕于真卿曰： 方面之任，何处为便？ 
现代文：卢杞独揽大权，畏忌他，改任太子太师，罢免了礼仪使，对颜真卿说： 到地方任职，哪里对您合适？ 
English: Lu Xun monopolized power, feared him, changed his position to that of crown prince, dismissed the etiquette envoy, and said to Yan Zhenqing: If you want to hold a local post, where is the right place for you?

古文：真卿候杞于中书曰： 真卿以褊性为小人所憎，窜逐非一。
现代文：颜真卿等卢到中书省时说： 我因生性急躁被小人憎恶，赶出京城不止一次。
English: When Yan Zhenqing waited for Lu to arrive at the Chinese Literature Department, he said: Because of my natural impatience, I was hated by villains and driven out of the capital more than once.

古文：今已羸老，幸相公庇之。
现代文：现已老朽，全靠宰相庇护。
English: Now it is decrepit, protected only by the prime minister.

古文：相公先中丞传首至平原，面上血真卿不敢衣拭，以舌舐之，相公忍不相容乎？ 
现代文：宰相故世父亲的头被安禄山用来示众经过平原郡，脸上血迹我不敢用衣擦拭，而用舌头舔掉，宰相忍心不容我吗？ 
English: The head of the prime minister's deceased father was used by Anlu Mountain to show the crowd passing through Plains County. I dare not wipe the blood on my face with my clothes, but lick it off with my tongue. Will the prime minister tolerate me?

古文：杞矍然下拜，而含怒心。
现代文：卢杞急忙跪拜致敬，但心中愤恨。
English: Lu Yao hurried to kneel in homage, but his heart was filled with resentment.

古文：会李希烈陷汝州，杞乃奏曰： 颜真卿四方所信，使谕之，可不劳师旅。 
现代文：碰到李希烈叛变攻占汝州，卢杞就提议说： 颜真卿是全国信服的人，派他招降他们，可以不动用军队。 
English: When confronted with Li Xili's mutiny and occupation of Ruzhou, Lu Wei proposed: Yan Zhenqing is a person who is convinced by the whole country, send him to invite them to surrender, you can not use the army.

古文：上从之，朝廷失色，李勉闻之，以为失一元老，贻朝廷羞，乃密表请留。
现代文：皇上同意，满朝官员都吓呆了。李勉听说这事，认为损失一位老臣会给朝廷带来羞辱，就秘密奏本请求留住。
English: The emperor agreed, and all the officials in the court were stunned. When Li Mianlu heard about this, he thought that the loss of an old minister would bring shame to the court, so he requested to keep the secret report.

古文：又遣逆于路，不及。
现代文：又派人在路上拦阻，没赶上。
English: They also sent someone to block the road, but they didn't catch up.

古文：初见希烈，欲宣诏旨，希烈养子千余人露刃争前迫真卿，将食其肉。
现代文：颜真卿刚见到李希烈，想宣讲诏书旨意，李希烈的干儿子一千多人抽出刀抢着上前逼迫他，要吃他的肉。
English: Yan Zhenqing had just met Li Xilai and wanted to proclaim the will of the edict. More than a thousand of Li Xilai's sons drew their swords and rushed forward to force him to eat his flesh.

古文：诸将丛绕慢骂，举刃以拟之，真卿不动。
现代文：许多将领层层围住，随口辱骂，往他的身上挥刀比划，颜真卿毫不畏惧。
English: Many generals surrounded Yan Zhenqing, insulting him and waving their swords at him. Yan Zhenqing was not afraid.

古文：希烈遽以身蔽之，而麾其众，众退，乃揖真卿就馆舍。
现代文：李希烈急忙用身体护住他，驱散了那些人，众人退去，才施礼请颜真卿到住处休息。
English: Li Xilei rushed to protect him with his body and disperse those people. The crowd retreated, and only then did they bow to Yan Zhenqing and invite him to rest at his residence.

古文：因逼为章表，令雪己，愿罢兵马。
现代文：接着逼他写奏章，要他为自己辩护，愿意停战。
English: Then they forced him to write a report, asking him to defend himself and agree to a truce.

古文：累遣真卿兄子岘与从吏凡数辈继来京师。上皆不报。
现代文：颜真卿多次派他哥哥的儿子颜岘和随员几批人相继到京城，皇上都不答复。
English: Yan Zhenqing repeatedly sent his brother's son Yan Xuan and several groups of attendants to the capital, but the emperor did not reply.

古文：每于诸子书，令严奉家庙，恤诸孤而已。
现代文：每次给几个儿子写信，只是要求按时到家庙祭祀，照顾好家族的几个孤儿。
English: Every time I write to my sons, I just ask them to go to the family temple on time to offer sacrifices and take good care of the family's several orphans.

古文：希烈大宴逆党，召真卿坐，使观倡优斥黩朝政为戏，真卿怒曰： 相公，人臣也，奈何使此曹如是乎？ 
现代文：李希烈大摆宴席犒劳他的爪牙，请颜真卿赴宴，让他看艺人指责、亵渎朝廷政事取乐，颜真卿发怒说： 大人是臣下，怎么让这些人做这种事呢？ 
English: Li Xili put on a grand banquet to reward his minions. He invited Yan Zhenqing to the banquet and let him watch entertainers criticize and desecrate the affairs of the imperial court for fun. Yan Zhenqing became angry and said, "Great men are vassals. How can these people be allowed to do such things?"

古文：拂衣而起，希烈惭，亦呵止。
现代文：理理衣裳起身离席，李希烈羞愧，也喝令停止。
English: Ri Ri dressed up and left the table. Li Xilai was ashamed and shouted for them to stop.

古文：时硃滔、王武俊、田悦、李纳使在坐，目真卿谓希烈曰： 闻太师名德久矣，相公欲建大号，而太师至，非天命正位？
现代文：当时叛变唐朝的朱滔、王武俊、田悦、李纳的使者也在酒宴就座，他们看着颜真卿对李希烈说： 我们久闻太师大名和仁德，大人想称帝，太师就来了，岂非上天封为正统？
English: At that time, the emissaries of Zhu Tao, Wang Wujun, Tian Yue and Li Na, who had rebelled against the Tang Dynasty, were also seated at the banquet. They looked at Yan Zhenqing and said to Li Xilai: "We have long heard of the great name of the Great Teacher and benevolence. Adults want to be called emperor, and the Great Teacher comes. Isn't it the right to be sealed in heaven?

古文：欲求宰相，孰先太师乎？ 
现代文：如想任命宰相，谁能比得上太师？ 
English: When it comes to appointing a prime minister, who is better than the Grand Master?

古文：真卿正色叱之曰： 是何宰相耶！
现代文：颜真卿态度严肃地驳斥他们说： 这是什么宰相！
English: Yan Zhenqing sternly refuted them, saying: "What kind of prime minister is this!

古文：君等闻颜杲卿无？
现代文：诸位听说颜杲卿没有？
English: Have you all heard of Yan Xuanqing?

古文：是吾兄也。
现代文：他是我哥哥。
English: He's my brother.

古文：禄山反，首举义兵，及被害，诟骂不绝于口。
现代文：安禄山反叛，他首先起兵反抗，被杀害的时候，口里不停地骂贼。
English: An Lushan rebel, he was the first to raise an army to resist, when he was killed, his mouth kept cursing the thief.

古文：吾今生向八十，官至太师，守吾兄之节，死而后已，岂受汝辈诱胁耶！ 
现代文：我现年龄将近八十，官做到太师，到死我都要保持我哥哥的气节，怎会接受你们的威胁利诱呢！ 
English: I am now nearly eighty years old, an official and a grandmaster, and I will maintain my brother's dignity until I die. How can I accept your threats and inducements?

古文：诸贼不敢复出口。
现代文：那些叛贼们不敢再说那样的话了。
English: Those traitors don't dare say that any more.

古文：希烈乃拘真卿，令甲士十人守，掘方丈坎于庭，曰 坑颜 ，真卿怡然不介意。
现代文：李希烈于是拘禁了颜真卿，派十名兵士看守，在庭院挖了一丈见方的坑，扬言 活埋颜真卿 ，颜真卿神情坦然不在乎。
English: Li Xilai then detained Yan Zhenqing, sent ten soldiers to guard him, dug a square pit in the courtyard, and threatened to bury Yan Zhenqing alive. Yan Zhenqing looked unconcerned.

古文：后张伯仪败绩于安州，希烈令赉伯仪旌节首级讠夸示真卿，真卿恸哭投地。
现代文：后来张伯仪在安州战败，李希烈命将张伯仪的头和旌旗符节向颜真卿炫耀，颜真卿因痛哭而昏倒在地。
English: Later, when Zhang Bo Yi was defeated in Anzhou, Li Xili ordered to show off Zhang Bo Yi's head and banner to Yan Zhenqing, who fainted from crying.

古文：后其大将周曾等谋袭汝州，因回兵杀希烈，奉真卿为节度。
现代文：李希烈的大将周曾等人计划突袭汝州，接着回师杀李希烈，推举颜真卿任节度使。
English: Li Xilai's general Zhou Zeng and others planned to raid Ruzhou, then return to the division to kill Li Xilai and promote Yan Zhenqing to the post of commander-in-chief.

古文：事泄，希烈杀曾等，遂送真卿于龙兴寺。
现代文：计划泄密，李希烈杀死了周曾等人，把颜真卿送到龙兴寺。
English: After the plan was leaked, Li Xilai killed Zhou Zeng and others and sent Yan Zhenqing to Longxing Temple.

古文：真卿度必死，乃作遗表，自为墓志、祭文，常指寝室西壁下云： 吾殡所也。 
现代文：颜真卿估计必然被杀死，就写了临终前的奏章，自己写了墓志铭、祭文，常常指着卧室西边墙壁下面说： 这是我安息的地方。 
English: Yan Zhenqing thought it was inevitable that he would be killed, so he wrote music before his death, wrote his own epitaph and dedication, and often pointed to the west wall of his bedroom and said: This is my resting place.

古文：希烈既陷汴州，僭伪号，使人问仪于真卿，真卿曰： 老夫耄矣，曾掌国礼，所记者诸侯朝觐礼耳。 
现代文：李希烈攻占了汴州，称帝建国，派人问颜真卿仪式，颜真卿说： 我年纪大了，虽曾经执掌国家礼仪，记得的只有诸侯朝拜的礼仪。 
English: Li Xili conquered Zhangzhou, proclaimed himself emperor and founded the country, and sent someone to ask Yan Zhenqing about the ceremony. Yan Zhenqing said: I am old, and although I once presided over the national ceremony, all I remember is the ceremony of the princes' pilgrimage.

古文：兴元元年，王师复振，逆贼虑变起蔡州，乃遣其将辛景臻、安华至真卿所，积柴庭中，沃之以油，且传逆词曰： 不能屈节，当自烧。 
现代文：兴元元年，唐朝军队形势好转，李希烈怕蔡州发生兵变，就派他的将领辛景臻、安华到颜真卿住处，在庭院中堆柴，浇上油，就传达命令说： 不愿投降，就自己烧死。 
English: In the first year of the Xing and Yuan Dynasties, the military situation of the Tang Dynasty improved. Fearing a mutiny in Caizhou, Li Xilai sent his generals Xin Jingzhen and An Hua to the residence of Yan Zhenqing, piled up firewood in the courtyard, poured oil on it, and conveyed the order: "If you don't want to surrender, burn yourself to death."

古文：真卿乃投身赴火，景臻等遽止之，复告希烈。
现代文：颜真卿就往火里跳，辛景臻等急忙拦住他，报告李希烈。
English: Yan Zhenqing jumped into the fire, Xin Jingzhen and others hurried to stop him and report to Li Xilei.

古文：德宗复宫阙，希烈弟希倩在硃泚党中，例伏诛。
现代文：唐德宗收复长安，李希烈的弟弟李希倩属朱氵此一伙，同样被处死。
English: Tang Dezong recovered Chang'an. Li Xili, the younger brother of Li Xili, belonged to Zhu Xi's group and was also executed.

古文：希烈闻之怒。兴元元年八月三日，乃使阉奴与景臻等杀真卿。先曰： 有敕 。
现代文：李希烈听说后发了怒，兴元元年八月三日，就派宦官和辛景臻等人杀颜真卿，他们先通报说： 有圣旨。 
English: After hearing of this, Li Xilei became enraged. On August 3 of the first year of the Xingyuan, he sent eunuchs and Xin Jingzhen and others to kill Yan Zhenqing. They first reported: There is a sacred decree.

古文：真卿拜，奴曰： 宜赐卿死。 
现代文：颜真卿跪拜，宦官说： 应该赐你死。 
English: Yan Zhenqing knelt down, and the eunuch said: You should be put to death.

古文：真卿曰： 老臣无状，罪当死，然不知使人何日从长安来？ 
现代文：颜真卿说： 老臣无礼，罪该处死，但不知使臣哪天从长安来的？ 
English: Yan Zhenqing said: The old minister is rude, the crime is punishable by death, but I do not know which day the envoy came from Chang'an?

古文：奴曰： 从大梁来。 
现代文：宦官说： 从大梁来的。 
English: The eunuch said, "From the crossbeam."

古文：真卿骂曰： 乃逆贼耳，何敕耶！ 
现代文：颜真卿骂道： 那是叛贼，称什么圣旨！ 
English: Yan Zhenqing scolded: That is a traitor, calling what a sacred will!

古文：遂缢杀之，年七十七。
现代文：他们就把他勒死了，享年七十七岁。
English: They strangled him, and he died at the age of seventy-seven.

古文：及淮、泗平，贞元元年，陈仙奇使护送真卿丧归京师。
现代文：淮河、泗河地区叛乱平定后，贞元元年，陈仙奇出使护送颜真卿灵柩回京城。
English: After the rebellion in the Huaihe and Lihe regions was quelled, Chen Xianqi sent an envoy to escort Yan Zhenqing's coffin back to Beijing in the first year of Zhengyuan.

古文：德宗痛悼异常。废朝五日，谥曰文忠。
现代文：唐德宗哀悼悲痛超出一般，停止上朝五天，赐谥号叫文忠。
English: Tang Dezong mourned and grieved more than usual, and stopped mourning for five days. He was given the posthumous name of Wenzhong.

古文：复下诏曰： 君臣之义，生录其功，殁厚其礼，况才优匡国，忠至灭身。
现代文：又下诏书说： 按君主奖励臣下的规矩，活着论功行赏，去世增加礼遇，何况他辅国才能优秀，至死不改忠贞。
English: The following edict also said: "According to the rules of the monarch to reward his subjects, he will be rewarded for his meritorious deeds while he is alive, and his death will increase the courtesy, not to mention his ability to assist the country is excellent, and he will not change his loyalty until death.

古文：朕自兴叹，劳于寤寐。
现代文：我听后赞叹油然而生，以致夜不成眠。
English: After listening to it, I was so amazed that I couldn't sleep at night.

古文：故光禄大夫、守太子太师、上柱国、鲁郡公颜真卿，器质天资，公忠杰出，出入四朝，坚贞一志。属贼臣扰乱，委以存谕，拘肋累岁，死而不挠，稽其盛节，实谓犹生。
现代文：原任光禄大夫、太子太师、上柱国、鲁郡公颜真卿，天生才能品质出众，为国忠心尤为杰出，侍奉四代皇帝，不改一贯节操，时遇叛贼作乱，肩负招降重任，几年拘禁威胁，至死不屈不挠，看他杰出节操，真是虽死犹生。
English: Former Guanglu Doctor, Prince and Grandmaster, Shangzhu Guo, and Lu Guo Gongyan Zhenqing, he was born with outstanding qualities, and his loyalty to the country was particularly outstanding. He served four generations of emperors. He did not change his consistent discipline. In the event of a traitor, he made a riot. He shouldered the heavy responsibility of recruiting and surrendering. He was threatened with several years of detention. He was unyielding until death. Looking at his outstanding discipline, he was really alive and well.

古文：朕致贻斯祸，惭悼靡及，式崇嘉命，兼延尔嗣。
现代文：这损失责任在我，现在愧悔悲伤已来不及了，只有追封他的职务，同时加封后代官职。
English: I am responsible for this loss, and now it is too late for remorse and sorrow. The only thing to do is to restore him to his post, and at the same time to appoint future generations to official positions.

古文：可赠司徒，仍赐布帛五百端。
现代文：追封他为司徒，再赐布五百匹。
English: He was promoted to the rank of assistant, and given another five hundred horses.

古文：男頵、硕等丧制终，所司奏超授官秩。 
现代文：他的儿子颜君页、颜硕等人服丧完毕，所属部门奏报提升官职。 
English: His sons, Yan Junzhi, Yan Shuo, and others have completed their funerals, and their departments have reported for promotion.

古文：贞元六年十一月南郊，赦书节文授真卿一子五品正员官，故頵得录用。
现代文：贞元六年十一月冬至南郊祭天，皇帝亲笔书写符节文字封颜真卿一个儿子正五品官，因此颜君页被任命。
English: In November of the winter solstice of the sixth year of the Zhengyuan, the Southern Suburbs Festival, the emperor personally wrote the characters of the characters to seal Yan Zhenqing's one son as a five-grade official, so Yan Junshi was appointed.

古文：文宗诏曰： 朕每览国史，见忠烈之臣，未尝不嗟叹久之，思有以报。
现代文：唐文宗下诏书说： 我每次阅览我朝历史记载，看到尽忠报国的臣子，总是长时间感到惋惜，想用什么报答他们。
English: Tang Wenzong's second imperial edict said: Every time I read the historical records of my dynasty and see the loyal courtiers, I always feel sorry for a long time and want to repay them with something.

古文：如闻从览、弘式，实杲卿、真卿之孙。
现代文：听说颜从览、颜弘式，是颜杲卿、颜真卿的后代。
English: It is said that Yan Congzhan and Yan Hongxie are the descendants of Yan Xuanqing and Yan Zhenqing.

古文：永惟九原，既不可作，旌其嗣续，谅协典彝。
现代文：烈士长眠九泉，虽然不可复生，表彰他们的后代，想必合乎大义。
English: Although martyrs do not come back to life, honoring their descendants is surely consistent with the greater good.

古文：考绩已深于宦途者，命列于中台；官次未齿于搢绅者，俾佐于左辅。
现代文：如考查他们的政绩已任官很有经验建树，可任三公；如官职未列入士大夫，任命为同州的辅佐官。
English: If their political achievements are examined and they have been appointed officials with a lot of experience and achievements, they can be appointed as three officials; if the official position is not listed as a senior official, they will be appointed as an assistant official of the same state.

古文：庶使天下再新义风。 
现代文：希望能使天下忠义风气进一步发扬。 
English: It is hoped that this will further promote the culture of loyalty in the world.

古文：以真卿曾孙弘式为同州参军。
现代文：任命颜真卿曾孙颜弘式为同州参军。
English: The great-grandson of Yan Zhenqing, Yan Hongshi, was appointed to join the army of the same state.

