古文：己卯二月初一日木公命大把事以家集黑香白镪送。
现代文：己卯二月初一日木公命令大把事把家中收集的黑香白银馈赠我。
English: On the first day of February, the wood god gave me a big order to give me the black incense and silver collected at home.

古文：大肴八十品，罗列甚遥，不能辨其孰为异味也。抵暮乃散。
现代文：下午，在解脱林东堂设宴，地下铺着松毛，让楚雄府姓许的学生陪宴，并用银杯、绸缎酬报。有八十种大菜，排列得很远，不能辨认其中哪道菜是什么味。到傍晚宴席才散。
English: In the afternoon, a banquet was held at Jiezhu Lin Dongtang Church. The ground floor was covered with pine needles, and students from Chuxiongfu surnamed Xu were invited to accompany the banquet, and were rewarded with silver cups and silk scarves. There were eighty kinds of large dishes, arranged far apart, and it was impossible to identify which dish was which. The banquet was not dispersed until the evening.

古文：复以卓席馈许生，为分犒诸役。
现代文：又把一桌席馈赠许生，分别搞劳众差役。
English: In addition, a table was given to the students as a gift, and they were engaged in labor service.

古文：初二日入其所栖林南净室，相迎设座如前。
现代文：初二日进入木公所居住的解脱林南净室，木公相迎、设席位和前次一样。
English: On the first two days of the month, they entered the liberation of Lin Nan's clean room, where Mokong lived. Mokong welcomed them and set up seats, just like the previous time.

古文：既别，仍还解脱林。
现代文：告别后，仍然回到解脱林。
English: After saying goodbye, he still returned to Jiefang Forest.

古文：昨陪宴许君来，以白镪易所侑绿绉纱去。
现代文：昨天陪宴的许君来，用白银把酬报我的绿络纱换去。
English: Xu Jun, who was at the banquet yesterday, came and exchanged my green lace for silver.

古文：下午，又命大把事来，求作所辑《云過ｋē空淡墨》序。
现代文：下午，木公又命大把事来，请我为他编撰的《云菠淡墨集》作序。
English: In the afternoon, Mokong came again with a big order and asked me to write a preface for the "Cloud Spinach Light Ink Collection" that he had compiled.

古文：诸奇点。初四日有鸡足僧以省中录就《云過淡墨》缴纳木公。
现代文：初三日我把叙稿送进去，木公又让大把事来致谢。所馈赠的酒果有白葡萄、龙眼、荔枝等珍贵品种，还有酥饼油线、发糖等奇特点心。初四日有个鸡足山僧人把在省城中抄录好的《云菠淡墨集》交给木公。
English: On the third day of the first month, I sent in the manuscript, and Mokong asked me to do a lot of things to thank me. The presented fruits included white grapes, longan, litchi and other precious varieties, as well as shortbread oil lines, sugar and other strange characteristics. On the fourth day of the first month, a Goktoksan monk handed over to Mokong the "Cloud Spinach Light Ink Set" that had been transcribed in the provincial capital.

古文：木公即令大把事传示，求为较政校正。
现代文：木公就让大把事拿给我看，请求进行校正。
English: Mokong showed me a lot of things and asked me to proofread them.

古文：其所书洪武体虽甚整，而讹字极多，既舛落无序，而重叠颠倒者亦甚。
现代文：僧人写的洪武体字虽然很工整，但错字极多，既错落无序，又重叠颠倒得很厉害。
English: Although the Hongwu script written by the monks is very neat, there are a lot of misspellings. It is not only out of order, but also has a lot of overlapping.

古文：余略为标正，且言是书宜分门编类，庶无错出之病。
现代文：我大致把错误校正，而且说此书应当分门编类，可能才没有错落重出的毛病。
English: I roughly corrected the error, and said that the book should be divided into categories, so there may not be any problems with errors.

古文：晚乃以其书缴入。
现代文：晚上就把书交进去。
English: In the evening, the books are handed in.

古文：初五日复令大把事来致谢。
现代文：初五日木公又让大把事来致谢。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the wood god again asked for a lot of things to express his gratitude.

古文：言明日有祭丁之举，不得留此盘桓，特令大把事一人听候。
现代文：说明天有祭奠先圣先师的活动，不能在这里逗留，特地让一名大把事前来听候分咐。
English: He explained that tomorrow there would be an event to commemorate the saint's predecessor, and that he could not stay here, so he had specifically ordered a large number of people to come in advance.

古文：求再停数日，烦将《淡墨》分门标类，如余前所言。
现代文：请求再停留数日，麻烦将《云菠淡墨集》分门标类，如同我在前所说的那样。
English: Please stay for a few more days, and please categorize "Clouds of Spinach and Light Ink" as I mentioned before.

古文：余从之。
现代文：我同意了。
English: I listened to him.

古文：以书入谢，且求往忠甸，观所铸三丈六铜像。
现代文：写信向木公致谢，并且请求去忠甸，观览那里铸的三丈六尺高的铜像。
English: He wrote a letter of thanks to the wood master, and asked to go to Zhongdian to see the three-and-a-half-meter-tall bronze statue cast there.

古文：既午，木公去，以书答余，言忠甸皆古宗路，多盗，不可行。
现代文：午后，木公离去，写信答复我，说忠甸都是藏族，路上强盗多，不能前往。
English: In the afternoon, Mokong left and wrote a letter in reply to me, saying that everyone in Zhongdian was Tibetan and there were many robbers on the road, so he couldn't go.

古文：盖大把事从中沮之，恐觇看其境也。
现代文：大概是大把事从中阻止，怕窥看他们的辖境。
English: Probably to keep things from getting out of hand, afraid to peek into their territory.

古文：是日，传致油酥面饼，甚巨而多，一日不能尽一枚也。
现代文：这一天，送来油酥面饼，又大又多，一天吃不完一枚。
English: On this day, I was sent a large and plentiful butter noodle cake. I couldn't eat it all in one day.

古文：初六日余留解脱林校书。
现代文：初六日我留在解脱林校书。
English: On the sixth day of the first semester, I stayed at Jiefanglin School to study.

古文：木公虽去，犹时遣人馈酒果。
现代文：木公虽然走了，仍然不时派人送来酒果。
English: Although Mokong has left, he still sends people from time to time to bring him fruit and wine.

古文：有生鸡大如鹅，通体皆油，色黄而体圆，盖肥之极也。
现代文：有像鹅那么大的生鸡，全身都是油，色黄而体圆，肥到了极点。
English: There is a raw chicken as big as a goose, its whole body is oily, yellow and round, fat to the extreme.

古文：余爱之，命顾仆醎为腊鸡。
现代文：我喜爱这种鸡，让顾仆腌为腊鸡。
English: I like this kind of chicken, and I would like to make it into a braised chicken.

古文：解脱林倚白沙坞西界之山。
现代文：解脱林傍靠在白沙坞西部的山上。
English: The Liberation Forest is located on a hill to the west of Baisha Dock.

古文：其山乃雪山之南，十和后山之北，连拥与东界翠屏、象眠诸山，夹白沙为黄峰后坞者也。
现代文：这座山在雪山之南，十和后山之北，和东部的翠屏、象眠等山连接耸立，隔白沙坞为黄峰后坞。
English: This mountain stands in the south of the Snow Mountain, in the north of the Ten and Back Mountains, and in the east of the mountains such as Cui Ping and Xiangmian. It is separated from Baisha Dock by Huangfeng Back Dock.

古文：寺当山半，东向，以翠屏为案，乃丽江之首刹，即玉龙寺之在雪山者，不及也。
现代文：解脱林坐落在山腰，寺门东向，以翠屏山作为案山，是丽江府第一的寺庙，即使是雪山的玉龙寺，也赶不上。
English: Jiefang Forest is located on the mountainside, the temple gate faces east, with Cui Ping Mountain as the mountain, it is the first temple in Lijiang Prefecture, even the Jade Dragon Temple in the Snow Mountain can't keep up.

古文：寺门庑皆极整，而中殿不宏，佛像亦不高巨，然崇饰庄严，壁宇清洁，皆他处所无。
现代文：寺的门廊台阶都极其工整，而正中的殿不宏伟，佛象也不高大，但修饰庄严，壁宇清洁，都是其它地方所没有的。
English: The steps of the porch of the temple are extremely well-made, and the central hall is not grand, and the Buddha image is not tall, but the decoration is solemn and the walls are clean, which are not found elsewhere.

古文：正殿之后，层台高拱，上建法云阁，八角层甍，极其宏丽，内置万历时所赐藏经焉。
现代文：正殿背后，层层的高台拱起，台上建有法云阁，阁为八角，屋脊层叠，极其宏伟壮丽，阁中存放着万历时朝廷所赐的藏经。
English: Behind the main hall, a high platform is arched in layers. On the platform, there is a Law Cloud Pavilion. The pavilion is octagonal, with a cascading roof ridge. It is extremely grand and magnificent. In the pavilion, the Tibetan scriptures given by the imperial court are stored.

古文：阁前有两庑，余寓南庑殿阁周围的廊屋中。两庑之外，南有圆殿，以茅为顶，而中实砖盘。
现代文：阁前两边有厢房，我住在南厢房中，两边厢房之外，南面有圆殿，用茅草盖顶，中间其实是砖绕成的。
English: In front of the pavilion, there are pavilions on both sides. I live in the middle of the southern pavilion. Outside the pavilions on both sides, there is a round hall on the south, covered with thatch, and the middle is actually made of bricks.

古文：佛像乃白石刻成者，甚古而精致。
现代文：佛像是用白石刻成的，十分古朴而精致。
English: The Buddha statue is carved from white stone, very simple and delicate.

古文：中止一像，而无旁列，甚得清净之意。
现代文：殿中只有一座佛像，没有其它塑像列在旁边，很有清净的意境。
English: There is only one Buddha statue in the hall, and no other statues are lined up next to it, creating a very pure artistic atmosphere.

古文：其前即斋堂香积也。
现代文：殿前就是僧人吃斋的食堂和厨房。
English: In front of the main hall is the dining hall and kitchen where the monks break their fast.

古文：北亦有圆阁一座，而上启层窗，阁前有楼三楹，雕窗文槅，俱饰以金碧，乃木公燕憩之处，扃而不开。
现代文：北面也有一座圆阁，阁上开有一层窗子，阁前有三间楼房，雕出花纹的窗子，房屋隔板，都装饰得金碧辉煌，是木公休息的地方，门关着而不打开。
English: There is also a round pavilion on the north side, with a layer of windows on the pavilion, and three buildings in front of the pavilion. The carved windows and the house partitions are all decorated with brilliant gold. It is a place for the wood god to rest, and the door is closed but not opened.

古文：其前即设宴之所也。
现代文：楼前就是设宴的场所。
English: The front of the building is the venue for the banquet.

古文：其净室在寺右上坡，门亦东向，有堂三重，皆不其宏敞，四面环垣仅及肩，然乔松连幄，颇饶烟霞之气。
现代文：静室在寺右坡上，门也向东，有三层房屋，都不太宏伟宽敞，四周环绕的墙只到肩高。但高大的松树繁多，很富有烟雨云霞之气。
English: The seclusion room is on the right slope of the temple, the door is also to the east, there are three-storey houses, they are not too grand and spacious, the surrounding walls are only up to shoulder height. But there are many tall pine trees, very rich in smoke and rain.

古文：闻由此而上，有拱寿台、狮子崖，以迫于校雠，俱不及登。
现代文：听说从这里上去，还有拱寿台、狮子崖，因为忙于校书，都来不及攀登。
English: I heard that from here, there are also Gongsudai and Lion Cliff, but they are too busy with school books to climb.

古文：初六、初七日连校类分标，分其门为八。
现代文：初六、初七日连日校对、分门标类，分全书为八个门类。
English: On the 6th and 7th day of the first day of the school year, the students proofread and divided the books into eight categories.

古文：以大把事候久，余心不安，乃连宵篝灯，丙夜夜半时始寝。
现代文：因为大把事等候久了，我心中不安，于是连夜挑灯，三更时才睡。
English: Because I have been waiting for a long time for a big thing, I am uneasy in my heart, so I picked up the lamp overnight and slept for three hours.

古文：是晚既毕，仍作书付大把事，言校核已完，闻有古冈之胜，不识知道导使一游否？
现代文：这天晚上完成后，就写信交给大把事，信中说书已经校对完了，听说有古冈胜地，不知能否派向导带我游览一次？
English: After finishing this evening, I wrote a letter to the mayor. In the letter, it said that the book had been proofread, I heard that there was a resort in Guoka, I wonder if they could send a guide to take me on a tour?

古文：古冈者，一名癙儸，在郡东北十余日程，其山有数洞中透，内贮四池，池水各占一色，皆澄澈异常，自生光彩。
现代文：古冈一名值锣，在府东北，有十多天的里程，山上有数个中空的洞，山中有四个池子，一池水一个颜色，都异常清澈，各放光彩。
English: Guoka is a famous place, in the northeast of the prefecture, with a distance of more than ten days. There are several hollow caves on the mountain, four pools in the mountain, one pool of water of one color, all of which are unusually clear, each shining.

古文：池上有三峰中峙，独凝雪莹白，此间雪山所不及也。
现代文：池边有三座峰正正耸立，特别凝雪莹白，是这里的雪山所赶不上的。
English: There are three peaks on the edge of the pond, which are particularly snow-capped and white, which cannot be matched by the snow-capped mountains here.

古文：木公屡欲一至其地，诸大把事言不可至，力尼之，数年乃得至，图其形以归，今在解脱林后轩之壁。
现代文：木公多次想去一次古冈，众大把事说不能去，全力阻止，数年后才得以去成，画了占冈图形然后返回。
English: Mokong wanted to go to Guoka many times, but many people said he couldn't go and tried their best to stop him. It was only after several years that he was able to go, draw a picture of Guoka, and then return.

古文：北与法云阁相对，余按图知之。
现代文：图如今在解脱林后楼的壁上，北面和法云阁相对，我察对图而知道了这一胜地。
English: The map is now on the wall of the back building of the Liberation Forest, facing the north and the Fayun Pavilion. I looked at the map and knew this resort.

古文：且询之主僧纯一，言其处真修修行者甚多，各住一洞，能绝粒休粮，其为首者有神异，手能握石成粉，足能顿坡成洼，年甚少而前知。
现代文：并且向住持僧纯一询问此地，纯一说那里真正修行的人很多，各人住一个洞，能够绝食断粮，其中为首的有神异，用手能将石头捏成粉，用脚能把坡踏为洼地，年纪很轻却能预测未来。
English: He also asked the head monk Junichi about this place. Junichi said that there were many people who truly practiced there. Each person lived in a cave and was able to go on a hunger strike. One of them was a supernatural being. He could use his hands to grind stones into powder, and his feet to trample the slope into a depression. He was very young, but he could predict the future.

古文：木公未至时，皆先与诸土人言，有贵人至，土人愈信而敬之。
现代文：木公准备去那里，还未成行，他事先和当地人说，有贵客来到，当地人更加相信和崇敬他。
English: Mokong was preparing to go there, but before he left, he told the locals in advance that a distinguished guest was coming, and the locals believed in and revered him even more.

古文：故余神往而思一至也。
现代文：所以我十分神往并盼望去一次。
English: That's why I'm really keen and looking forward to going there.

古文：初八日昧爽，大把事赍册书驰去，余迟迟起。
现代文：初八日天亮，大把事带着书册急行而去，我迟迟起床。
English: At dawn on the eighth day of the first month of the year, I hurried away with a lot of books, and I got up late.

古文：饭而天雨霏霏。
现代文：吃饭后天气雨色霏霏。
English: It rained heavily after dinner.

古文：纯一馈以古磁杯、薄铜鼎，并芽茶为烹瀹之具。
现代文：纯一和尚赠送我古磁杯、薄铜鼎以及芽茶，作为煮水泡茶之用。
English: Junichi Monk presented me with an ancient magnetic cup, a thin copper ring and bud tea, used as boiling water for brewing tea.

古文：备马，别而下山。
现代文：备好马，和纯一告别后下山。
English: Prepare the horse, and go down the mountain after bidding farewell to Junichi.

古文：稍北，遂折而东下，甚峻，二里，至其麓，路北有涧，自雪山东南下，随之，东半里，有木桥。
现代文：稍往北，就转向东下，路很陡，二里到达山麓。路北有沟涧，从雪山东南延伸下来，顺沟涧往东走半里，有木桥。
English: A little to the north, it turns to the east, the road is very steep, two miles to reach the foot of the mountain. There is a gully to the north of the road, extending from the southeast of the snow mountain, half a mile to the east along the gully, there is a wooden bridge.

古文：渡涧西北逾山为忠甸道；余从桥南东行，半里，转而东，是为崖脚院，倚山东向。
现代文：渡过沟涧往西北翻山是去忠甸的路；我从桥南往东行，半里，转向东，这是崖脚院，靠山向东。
English: Crossing the gully to the northwest and climbing the mountain is the way to Zhongdian; I went from the south of the bridge to the east, half a mile, turned to the east, this is the foot of the cliff, supporting the mountain to the east.

古文：其处居庐连络，中多板屋茅房。
现代文：这里住房连接不断，其中大多是木板房、草房。
English: The houses here are continuously connected, and most of them are wooden houses and grass houses.

古文：有瓦室者，皆头目之居，屋角俱标小旗二面，风吹翩翩，摇漾于夭桃素李之间。
现代文：瓦房都是头目的家，屋角全部插有两面小旗作标志，风吹得小旗翩翩，在夭艳的桃花和素雅的李花之间飘扬。
English: The tile-roofed houses are all the heads' homes, and the corners of the roofs are all marked with two small flags. The wind blows the small flags, and they flutter between the dazzling peach blossoms and the elegant plum blossoms.

古文：宿雨含红，朝烟带绿，独骑穿林，风雨凄然，反成其胜。
现代文：红色的桃花瓣略带隔夜的雨滴，碧绿的树林笼罩在早晨的云烟之中，我独自骑马穿过树林，风雨凄凉，反而形成这种佳境。
English: The red peach petals are slightly tinged with overnight raindrops, the green woods are shrouded in the morning clouds, I ride alone through the woods, the wind and rain are bleak, but they form this beautiful landscape.

古文：院东南有洼地在村庐间，中涸无水，尚有亭台堤柳之形，乃旧之海子，环为园亭者，今成废壑矣。
现代文：院东南的村舍间有洼地，干涸无水，却还有亭台堤柳，是从前湖泊周围的园林亭台，如今成了废壑。
English: There are depressions between the houses in the southeast of the hospital, which are dry and waterless, but there are also pavilions and pavilions, which were once gardens around the lake, but are now abandoned.

古文：又南二里，有枯涧嵌地甚深，乃雪山东南之溪，南注中海者。
现代文：又往南二里，有下陷很深的枯涧，是雪山东南之溪往南流入中海的河道。
English: Another two miles to the south, there is a deep depression of dead reeds, which is the channel through which the south-eastern stream of the Snowy Mountains flows south into the sea.

古文：今引其水东行坞脊，无涓滴下流涧中，仅石梁跨其上。
现代文：如今这股水被引向东顺坞脊流，没有一滴水往下流入涧中，只有石桥横跨在沟涧上。
English: Today, this water is led to the East Shunde Ridge Stream. Not a drop of water flows down into the reeds, only a stone bridge spans the gully.

古文：度梁之东，即南随引水行，四里，望十和村落在西，甚盛。
现代文：过到桥东，就往南顺着引来的水走，四里，看到十和村在西边，很兴盛。
English: After crossing to the east of the bridge, I walked south along the water that had been brought in. After four miles, I saw the village of Towa to the west, which was very prosperous.

古文：其南为中海，望之东南行，其大道直北而去者，白沙道也。
现代文：村南是中海，看着中海往东南行，一直向北伸去的大路，是去白沙的路。
English: The south of the village is the middle of the sea. Looking at the middle of the sea going southeast, the road that stretches all the way to the north is the road to Baisha.

古文：南四里，有枯涧东西横坞中，小石梁南跨之。
现代文：往南走四里，坞中有横跨东西的枯涧，一座小石桥跨向南岸。
English: Four miles to the south, there is a dry moat across the dock, and a small stone bridge across to the south bank.

古文：又东五里，东瞻象眠山已近。
现代文：又往东走五里，往东眺望象眠山已经近了。
English: Another five miles to the east, and the view of the Elephant Sleeping Mountain to the east is already close.

古文：通事向许导观象鼻水，至是乃东南行田间，二里，抵山下。
现代文：以前通事答应带我观看象鼻水，到这时就往东南从田间走，二里，抵达山下。
English: My guide had previously promised to take me to see the elephant trout. At that time, I walked southeast from the fields for two miles and arrived at the foot of the mountain.

古文：水从坎下穴中西出，穴小而不一，遂溢为大溪，折而南去。
现代文：水从坎下的洞中向西流出，洞小而且不止一个，于是溢出来的水成为大溪，转向南流去。
English: The water flows westward from the hole under the bank, the hole is small and there is more than one, so the overflowing water becomes a large stream and turns to the south.

古文：二里，析为二道，一沿象眠而南，一由坞中倒峡，过小石桥，又析为二，夹路东西行。
现代文：二里后分为两股水，一股沿象眠山往南流，一股顺坞中倒流进峡谷，流过小石桥，又分成两股，夹在路东西两旁流。
English: After two miles, the water is divided into two streams, one flowing south along the Elephant Sleeping Mountain, one flowing back into the canyon in the middle of the dock, flowing over the small stone bridge, and then divided into two streams, sandwiched between the east and west sides of the road.

古文：五里，至黄峰山北，所引之水，一道分流山后而去，一道东随黄峰而南。
现代文：五里，到黄峰山北，所引来的水，一股从山后分流而去，一股往东顺黄峰山往南流。
English: Five miles to the north of Huangfeng Mountain, the water is diverted away from the back of the mountain, and flows east along Huangfeng Mountain to the south.

古文：始知黄峰之脉，自象鼻水北坡垂坞中南下，至此结为小峰，当坞之口，东界象眠山亦至此南尽，西界山自中海西南，环绕而北，接十和后山。
现代文：才知道黄峰山脉，从象鼻水北面的山坡顺山坞垂下来往南延伸，到这里聚结成小峰，立在山坞口，东部的象眠山也往南延伸到这里结束，西部的山从中海西南向北环绕，与十和后山相连接。
English: It is only now that we know the Huangfeng Mountains, which extend southward from the hillside along the dock in the north of the elephant's nose, where they coalesce into small peaks and stand at the mouth of the dock. The eastern Xiangmingshan also extends southward to end here. The western mountains surround the north from the south-west to the north, and are connected to the ten and back mountains.

古文：南复横开东西大坞，南龙大脊，自西而东，列案于前，其上乌龙峰，独耸文笔于西南，木家院南峰，回峙雄关于巽。
现代文：南部又横着敞开东西走向的大山坞，南部主峰山脉，从西向东在前面横列为案山，上面的乌龙峰，单独在西南方耸立为文笔峰，木家院南峰，在东南方环峙雄关。
English: In the south, there is a large dockyard that is open to the east and west, the southern main peak mountains, from west to east, are listed as the mountains in front, the above-mentioned Wulong Peak, stands alone in the southwest as Wenpeng Peak, and the southern peak of Mijiayuan, stands in the southeast.

古文：众大之中，以小者为主，所以黄峰为木氏开千代之绪也。
现代文：众多的大山之中，以小山为主，是因为黄峰山为木氏开创了千代的功业。
English: Among the many large mountains, small mountains are predominant, because Huangfeng Mountain has created thousands of years of work for the Wood Clan.

古文：从黄峰左腋南上西转，又一里，出其南，则府治东向临溪而峙，象鼻之水环其前，黄峰拥其后。
现代文：从黄峰左侧往南上后向西转，又一里，走出其南，于是丽江府署向东对着溪水坐落，象鼻水环绕在前，黄峰山耸立在后。
English: From the left side of Huangfeng, go south and then turn west, go up another mile and go out of its south, so Lijiang Prefecture is located east of the stream, surrounded by elephant snot in front, and Huangfeng Mountain stands behind.

古文：闻其内楼阁极盛，多僭制，故不于此见客云。
现代文：听说府署内楼阁极其盛大，很多地方膺越制度，所以不在府署接见客人。
English: I heard that the pavilion in the prefectural office is extremely grand, and many places have a system of patronage, so they do not receive guests at the prefectural office.

古文：先是未及黄峰三里，有把事持书，挈领一人荷酒献胙，冲雨而至，以余尚未离解脱也。
现代文：在不到黄峰三里之前，有名把事拿着信，带领一人挑着酒和肉，冒雨而来，以为我还没离开解脱林。
English: Less than three miles before reaching Huangfeng, a well-known official came with a letter and a man carrying wine and meat, braving the rain, thinking that I had not yet left the forest.

古文：与之同过府治前，度玉河桥，又东半里，仍税驾于通事小楼。
现代文：和他们一齐从府署前经过，渡玉河桥，又往东走半里，仍然到通事家的小楼休息。
English: Together with them, they passed in front of the prefectural government office, crossed the Tamagawa Bridge, walked another half mile east, and still came to rest in the small building of Tsunetoshi's family.

古文：读木公书，乃求余乞黄石斋叙文，并索余书，将令人往省邀吴方生者。
现代文：阅读木公的信，是请我向黄石斋求写叙文，以及要我写信，准备派人到省城邀请吴方生。
English: Reading Kugong's letter, I was asked to write an essay to Huang Shizhai, and to write a letter to prepare to send someone to the provincial capital to invite Wu Fang Sheng.

古文：先是，木公与余面论天下人物，余谓： 至人惟一石斋。
现代文：在这之前，木公和我面谈天下的人物，我说： 唯一的完人就是黄石斋。
English: Before this, Mokong and I interviewed people from all over the world, and I said: The only perfect person is Huang Shisai.

古文：其字画为馆阁第一，文章为国朝第一，人品为海宇第一，其学问直接周、孔，为古今第一。
现代文：他的字画是翰林院的第一名，文章是本朝第一名，人品是天下第一名，学问直接承接周、孔，是古今第一。
English: His calligraphy and painting are the first place in Hanlin Academy, his essays are the first place in this dynasty, his character is the first place in the world, and his learning directly follows Zhou and Kong, and is the first in ancient and modern times.

古文：然其人不易见，亦不易求。 
现代文：但这人不容易见，也不容易求。 
English: But this person is not easy to see, nor is it easy to ask for.

古文：因问： 可以亲炙亲身受到教益者，如陈、董之后，尚有人乎？ 
现代文：木公于是间： 可以亲身受到教益的，例如陈、董等人后，还有人吗？ 
English: Mokong then asked, "After Chen, Dong and others, are there still people who can personally benefit from the teachings?

古文：余谓： 人品甚难。
现代文：我说： 人品很难。
English: I said: Character is hard.

古文：陈、董芳躅，后来亦未见其继，即有之，岂罗致所及？
现代文：陈、董贤哲的行迹，后来也没见有人继承，即使有，哪里能招致得来？
English: The deeds of Chen and Dong Xianzhe have not been inherited by anyone later. Even if they are, where can they be invited?

古文：然远则万里莫俦，而近则三生自遇。
现代文：但是，远则万里没有谁相伴，而近则前生、今生、来生自然相遇。
English: However, in the distant future, there is no one to accompany, while in the near future, the previous life, this life, and the next life will naturally meet.

古文：有吴方生者，余同乡人，今以戍侨寓省中。
现代文：有个吴方生，是我的同乡，如今因为守边疆而在省城侨居。
English: There is a Wu Fang Sheng, a fellow villager of mine, who now lives in the provincial capital because he is guarding the border.

古文：其人天子不能杀，死生不能动，有文有武，学行俱备，此亦不可失者。 木公虑不能要邀致，余许以书为介，故有是请，然尚未知余至府治也。
现代文：这个人天子不能杀，死生不能动摇，有文有武，学问德行皆备，这也是不能失掉的机遇。 木公间能不能邀请得来，我即答应写信介绍，因此有现在的请求，这样看来木公还不知道我回到府城了。
English: This man cannot be killed, cannot be shaken in life or in death, he is literate and armed, he is well-versed in learning and virtuous, and this is also an opportunity that cannot be lost. If Mokong can be invited, I promised to write a letter of introduction, so there is a current request, so it seems that Mokong does not know that I have returned to the capital.

古文：使者以复柬返。
现代文：使者拿着回帖返回。
English: The messenger returned with a reply.

古文：前缴册大把事至，以木公命致谢，且言古冈亦艰于行，万万毋以不赀计算蹈遇到不测。
现代文：在前收下书的大把事来到，按照木公的命令致谢，而且说古冈也难得去，万万不能不作考虑就去赴不测。
English: When the time came to receive the books, he thanked Kogō for his order, and said that it would be difficult for Koga to go, and that he must not go without thinking about it.

古文：盖亦其托辞也。
现代文：大概也是他的托辞。
English: That was probably his excuse, too.

古文：然闻去冬亦曾用兵吐蕃不利，伤头目数人，至今未复，癙儸、古宗皆与其北境相接，中途多恐，外铁桥亦为焚断。
现代文：但是听说去年冬天也曾对吐蕃用兵，不利，伤了好几个头目，至今没有恢复，很锣、古宗都和丽江府北部边境相接，途中令人十分恐惧，外铁桥也被烧断。
English: However, I heard that last winter, troops were also used against Tubo, to no avail. Several leaders were injured and have not yet recovered. Tubo, the ancient Zongdu and the northern border of Lijiang Prefecture are very close. It was very frightening on the way. The outer railway bridge was also burned down.

古文：是日雨阵时作，从楼北眺雪山，隐现不定，南窥川甸，桃柳缤纷，为之引满满杯的酒。
现代文：这一天阵雨不时地下，从楼上往北眺望雪山，隐隐约约、浮现不定，往南窥视坝子，桃花柳树缤纷，因此举饮满杯的酒。
English: On this day, showers from time to time underground, from the upstairs to the north overlooking the snow-capped mountains, looming about, emerging uncertainly, to the south peering at the dam, peach blossom willow trees, so drinking a full glass of wine.

古文：是方极畏出豆天花。
现代文：这一带极其畏惧出天花。
English: Smallpox is greatly feared in the area.

古文：每十二年逢寅，出豆一番，互相牵染，死者相继。
现代文：每十二年中遇到虎年时，就出一次天花，互相传染，死亡的人不断。
English: Every 12 years, when the year of the tiger comes, smallpox comes out again, infecting each other, and people continue to die.

古文：然多避而免者。
现代文：然而大多数人都能躲避开而免于被传染。
English: However, most people can avoid becoming infected.

古文：故每遇寅年，未出之人，多避之深山穷谷，不令人知。
现代文：所以每到虎年，没有出过天花的人，多数都躲进深山穷谷，不让人知道。
English: Therefore, every year in the Year of the Tiger, most people who have not been exposed to smallpox hide in the deep valleys of the mountains, not letting people know.

古文：都鄙间一有染豆者，即徙之九和，绝其往来，道路为断，其禁甚严。
现代文：府城和边镇之间一有传染上天花的人，立即把他迁到九和，断绝往来，道路被截断，禁令很严。
English: If there is a person infected with smallpox between the capital city and a border town, he will be immediately moved to Jiuhe, and the traffic will be cut off, the roads will be cut off, and the ban will be very strict.

古文：九和者，乃其南鄙，在文笔峰南山之大脊之外，与剑川接壤之地。
现代文：靠躲进山谷而避免染上天花的人占一半，而且已经五六十岁的人，仍然惴惴不安地逃避。
English: Half of the people avoid smallpox by hiding in the valley, and people in their fifties and sixties still anxiously flee.

古文：以避而免于出者居半，然五六十岁，犹惴惴奔避。
现代文：木公袭知府职的长子和第三子都没出过天花，因为去年是戊寅年，各自在山中躲避，跨年了还没回来。
English: The eldest son and the third son of the Mokong attack on the governor's post have never had smallpox, because last year was the year of Wu Yin, they each hid in the mountains, and they have not returned for the New Year's Eve.

古文：木公长子之袭郡职者，与第三子俱未出，以旧岁戊寅，尚各避山中，越岁未归，惟第二、第四名宿，新入泮鹤庆。者，俱出过。
现代文：只有第二、第四子，都已出过夭花。
English: Only the second and fourth sons have been born.

古文：公令第四者启来候，求肄ｙì校阅文木家院焉。
现代文：木公让第四子用书信来问候，请求到木家院研讨文章。
English: Mogi asked his fourth son to write a letter to him, asking him to come to Mokya-in to study the article.

古文：初九日大把事复捧礼仪来致谢，酬校书之役也。
现代文：初九日大把事又捧着礼物来致谢，酬劳校书的工作。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, he came with gifts to express his gratitude and reward the work of the school book.

古文：铁皮褥一，黄金四两。
现代文：木公又写信请我编撰《鸡山志》，并恳请明天到木家院为第四子改文章，然后出关。
English: Mokong also wrote to me and asked me to compile "Chicken Mountain Chronicle," and implored me to come to Mokya-in tomorrow to revise the article for the fourth son, and then leave the gate.

古文：再以书求修《鸡山志》，并恳明日为其四子校文木家院，然后出关。院有山茶甚巨，以此当折柳也。
现代文：木家院有很大的山茶，用山茶送别代替折柳。
English: There is a large mountain tea garden at Kiya-in, and it is used as a parting gift in lieu of folding willows.

古文：余许之。
现代文：我答应了。
English: I agreed with him.

古文：是日仍未霁，复憩通事楼。
现代文：这一天天气仍然没晴，还在通事的楼上休息。
English: On this day, the weather was still cloudy, and I was still resting upstairs.

古文：其俗新正重祭天之礼。
现代文：这里的风俗新年正月重视祭天的礼仪。
English: Here, the custom of the New Year's Day attaches great importance to the etiquette of the festival.

古文：自元旦至元宵后二十日，数举方止。
现代文：从元旦到元宵后的二十天内，举行数次才结束。
English: From New Year's Day to the twenty days after the New Year's Eve, it is held several times before it ends.

古文：每一处祭后，大把事设燕通 宴 燕木公。
现代文：每一次祭天后，大把事设宴宴请木公。
English: After every festival, a great deal of effort is put into hosting a banquet for the wood god.

古文：每轮一番，其家好事者费千余金，以有金壶八宝之献也。
现代文：每轮完一遍，那些好事的人家要花费一千多两银子，因为要祭献金壶八宝。
English: After each round, the families of those who did well had to spend more than a thousand taels of silver, because they had to sacrifice eight treasures.

古文：其地田亩，三年种禾一番。
现代文：这里的土地，三年轮种一次稻谷。
English: The land here is planted with rice once every three years.

古文：本年种禾，次年即种豆菜之类，第三年则停而不种。
现代文：当年种稻谷，次年就种豆菜之类。第三年则休耕不种。
English: In that year, they planted rice, in the following year, they planted beans and vegetables, and in the third year, they did not plant any crops.

古文：止分官、民二姓，官姓木，初俱姓麦，自汉至国初。
现代文：又到次年，才再种稻谷。这里的土著居民都是磨萝。本朝初年到这里戍守的汉人，如今都随当地的习俗了。
English: It was not until the following year that rice was planted again. The indigenous people here are millers. The Han Chinese, who came to stay here for the first time this morning, now follow local customs.

古文：太祖乃易为木。民姓和，无他姓者。
现代文：因为本朝初年也是军民府，如今则不再知道还有军人了。只分官姓和民姓，官姓为木，民姓为和，没有其它的姓。
English: Because in the early years of this dynasty, it was also a military and civilian government, but now it is no longer known that there are any military personnel. Only the surname of the official and the surname of the people are divided, the official surname is Moku, the surname of the people is He, and there are no other surnames.

古文：其北即为古宗。
现代文：丽江府北边就是古宗。
English: To the north of Lijiang is Guzong.

古文：古宗之北，即为吐蕃。
现代文：古宗的北边就是吐蕃。
English: To the north of Kuzong is Tsuma.

古文：其习俗各异云。
现代文：他们的习俗各不相同。
English: Their customs vary.

古文：古宗北境，雨少而止有雪，绝无雷声。
现代文：古宗北部边境雨少而只有雪，绝对没有打雷声。
English: There was little rain and only snow on the ancient northern border, and absolutely no thunder.

古文：其人南来者，至丽郡乃闻雷，以为异。
现代文：古宗人往南方来，到丽江府才听到雷声，认为是奇异的事。
English: The ancients went to the south, and only heard thunder in Lijiang, which they thought was a strange thing.

古文：丽郡北，忠甸之路有北岩，高阔皆三丈，崖石白色而东向。
现代文：丽江府北，去忠甸的路上有北岩，高宽都有三丈，崖石白色而且面向东方。
English: In the north of Lijiang Prefecture, on the way to Zhongdian, there is Beiyan Rock. It is three stories high and wide, and the cliff is white and faces east.

古文：当初日东升，人穿彩服至其下，则满崖浮彩腾跃，焕然夺目，而红色尤为鲜丽，若镜之流光，霞之幻影。
现代文：每当旭日东升，人们穿着彩色衣服来到北岸下，于是整块崖石上就会浮彩腾跃，焕然夺目，而且红色尤其鲜艳美丽，如同镜子的流光，彩霞的幻影。
English: Whenever the rising sun rises in the east, people come to the north shore wearing colorful clothes, so the whole cliff stone will be covered with floating colors, dazzling, and the red color is particularly bright and beautiful, like the reflection of a mirror, the illusion of the color haze.

古文：日高则不复然矣。
现代文：太阳升高后则不再是这样了。
English: That's no longer the case once the sun rises.

