古文：浙、闽之游旧矣。
现代文：去浙江、福建旅游已是过去的事了。
English: Traveling to Zhejiang and Fujian is a thing of the past.

古文：余志在蜀之峨眉、粤之桂林，至太华、恒岳诸山；若罗浮广东东樵山、衡岳，次也。
现代文：我的愿望是游四川峨眉山和广西桂林，以及太华山、恒山等名山；至于出游罗浮山、衡山，则是下一步的计划。
English: My wish is to visit Mount Emei in Sichuan and Guilin in Guangxi, as well as famous mountains such as Mount Taihua and Mount Hengshan. As for visiting Mount Luofu and Mount Hengshan, this is the next step.

古文：至越即浙江省之五泄，闽之九漈闽方言瀑布，又次也。然蜀、广、关中，母老道远，未能卒游；衡湘可以假道，不必专游。
现代文：去浙江五泄、福建九潦，文是再下一步的计划。但是去四川、广西和陕西关中等地，因为母亲年迈、路程遥远，不能立即出游；衡山、湘江等地，可以在路过的时候游，不必专程旅游。
English: But to Sichuan, Guangxi and Shaanxi Guanzhong, because the mother is old and the distance is far, can not travel immediately; Hengshan, Hunan River and other places, you can travel while passing by, do not have to make a special trip.

古文：计其近者，莫若由江郎三石抵九漈，遂以庚申午节端午节后一日，期约芳若叔父启行，正枫亭荔枝新熟时也。
现代文：考虑去近处，最好就是经过江郎山、三石，然后到九潦。于是在庚申年端午节的第二天，和叔父芳若按期启程出游，这时正是枫亭市巡检司一带荔枝刚刚成熟的季节。
English: Consider going to the vicinity, it is best to go through Jianglang Mountain, Sanshi, and then to Jiuzhaigou. Therefore, on the second day of the Dragon Boat Festival in the Year of the Horse, Uncle Fang and I set off on a trip as scheduled. At that time, it was the season when the litchi in the area of the Fengting City Inspection and Quarantine Bureau was just ripe.

古文：二十三日始过江山之青湖。
现代文：二十三日开始经过江山县的青湖。
English: On the 23rd, it began to pass through Qinghu in Jiangshan County.

古文：山渐合，东支多危峰峭嶂，西伏不起。
现代文：山峦渐渐重合，东边大多是陡直的山峰，十分峻峭，犹如屏障；西边的山不高，缓缓地低伏着。
English: The mountains gradually overlap. On the east side, most of them are steep peaks, very steep, like a barrier; the mountains on the west side are not high, slowly lying low.

古文：悬望东支尽处，其南一峰特耸，摩云插天，势欲飞动。
现代文：远眺东边山峦尽头处，南部有一座高峰特别突出，直插云天，那气势似乎要振飞。
English: Looking far and wide to the east, at the end of the ridge, there is a particularly prominent peak in the south, sticking straight up into the clouds. The momentum seems to be picking up.

古文：问之，即江郎山也。
现代文：一间，就是江郎山。
English: The first is Mount Jianglang.

古文：望而趋，二十里，过石门街。
现代文：盯着江郎山朝前赶，走了二十里，过石门街。
English: Staring at Jiang Lang Mountain, he hurried forward and walked twenty miles, passing through Shimen Street.

古文：渐趋渐近，忽裂而为二，转而为三；已复半岐其首，根直剖下；迫之，则又上锐下敛，若断而复连者，移步换形，与云同幻矣！
现代文：越行离山越近，山忽然分为两座，再变成三座；不一会，山头又一分为二，直直地向下剖去；靠近山，则又是山头尖锐、下面收敛，像要断开、却又相连，人一移动脚步，山形便变换，是与云彩一起变化啊！
English: The closer you get to the mountain, the closer it gets. The mountain suddenly splits into two, and then into three; before long, the top of the mountain splits into two again, and cuts straight downwards; closer to the mountain, the top of the mountain is sharp again, and the bottom converges. It looks like it's going to break off, but it's still connected. As soon as you move your feet, the shape of the mountain changes, and it changes together with the clouds!

古文：夫雁宕灵峰，黄山石笋，森立峭拨，已为瑰观；穹然俱在深谷中，诸峰互相掩映，反失其奇。
现代文：雁宕山有灵峰，黄山有石笋，丛密、峻峭、挺立，已经是瑰丽的景观，但都位于深山峡谷，众多的山峰互相掩映，反而失掉了各自的 奇 。
English: The Yangtze Mountains have spiritual peaks, and the Yellow Mountains have rocky ridges, dense, steep, and upright, which is already a magnificent landscape, but they are all located in deep mountain canyons. Many peaks cover each other, but they have lost their own strangeness.

古文：即缙云鼎湖，穹然独起，势更伟峻；但步虚山即峙于旁，各不相降，远望若与为一。不若此峰特出众山之上，自为变幻，而各尽其奇也。
现代文：至于绪云县的鼎湖峰，独立高耸，气势更加伟峻；只是步虚山就峙立在旁边，两山不相上下，远望好像是一座山，比不上这江郎山突出于众峰之上，姿态万千，并尽显其奇。
English: As for the Dinghu Peak in Xuyun County, it is independently towering and even more majestic. However, Mt. Bu Qixian stands next to it, and the two mountains are on a par. From a distance, it seems to be a mountain, but it is nothing compared to this Jianglang Mountain, which stands out from all the other peaks, has a thousand different postures, and is truly amazing.

古文：六月初七日抵兴化府。
现代文：六月初七日到达兴化府。
English: It arrived at Xinghua Prefecture on the 7th day of the 6th month.

古文：六月初八日出莆郡西门，西北行五里，登岭，四十里，至莒溪，降陟不啻数岭矣。
现代文：初八日从兴化府城西门出发，往西北行五里，攀登山岭，四十里，到曹溪，一路上上下了不止数座山岭。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, I set out from the west gate of Xinghua City, traveled five miles to the northwest, climbed the mountain ridge, forty miles to Caoxi, and climbed more than several mountains along the way.

古文：莒溪即九漈下流。
现代文：苔溪是九潦的下游。
English: Moss Creek is downstream of Jiuzhaigou.

古文：过莒溪公馆，二里，由石步过溪。
现代文：经过营溪公馆，行二里，从石步渡过溪水。
English: After passing the Yingxi Mansion, walk two miles and cross the stream from Shifu.

古文：又二里，一侧径西向坳，北复有一磴。可转上山。
现代文：又走二里，一条小路往西伸向山坳，北边又有一条石阶道，可以绕上山。
English: After another two miles, a path to the west stretches to the ridge of the mountain, and to the north there is a stone stairway that allows you to walk around the mountain.

古文：时山深日酷，路绝人行，迷不知所往。
现代文：这时山岭深邃、太阳酷热，路上没有一个行人，不知道该往哪里走。
English: At this time, the mountains are deep, the sun is very hot, and there is not a single pedestrian on the road. I don't know where to go.

古文：余意鲤湖之水，历九漈而下，上跻必奇境，遂趋石磴道。
现代文：我估计九鲤湖的水顺着九潦而下，往上攀登定有奇境，于是从石阶道走。
English: I estimated that the water of Jiuzhaigou Lake went down along Jiuzhaigou, and there must be a wonderland on the way up, so I walked from the stone steps.

古文：芳叔与奴辈惮害怕高陟，皆以为误，顷之，境渐塞，彼益以为误，而余行益励。
现代文：芳叔和仆人害怕登高，都认为走错了。不久，四周渐渐狭窄，他们更以为走错了，我却越走越振奋。
English: Both Uncle Fang and his servant were afraid of climbing high, and thought they were going the wrong way. Soon, their surroundings were getting narrower, and they thought they were going the wrong way, but I was getting more and more excited as I walked.

古文：既而愈上愈高，杳无所极，烈日铄铄烁烁，余亦自苦倦矣。
现代文：很快就愈上愈高，路深远得没有尽头，烈日炎炎，我自己也劳累疲倦了。
English: Soon it got higher and higher, the road was so deep that there was no end, the sun was blazing, and I was tired and weary myself.

古文：数里，跻岭头，以为绝顶也；转而西，山之上高峰复有倍此者比这更高出一倍的。
现代文：数里，登上岭头，以为是最高顶峰；折转到西山上，还有高过此岭一倍的山峰。
English: For several miles, I climbed to the top of the ridge, thinking it was the highest peak; I turned to the west mountain, and there were peaks twice as high as this ridge.

古文：循山屈曲行，三里，平畴荡荡，正似武陵误入意即好似进入了桃花源，不复知在万峰顶上也。
现代文：沿着山岭来回曲折行走，三里，平坦的田地空旷广远，正好像武陵人误入桃花源的故事一样，不再知道是在万座峰顶之上。
English: Walking zigzag back and forth along the mountains, three miles, the flat fields are empty and vast, just like the story of the people of Wuling who strayed into the source of the peach blossoms, no longer knowing that they were on top of ten thousand peaks.

古文：中道有亭，西来为仙游道，东即余所行。
现代文：途中有亭，从西边伸来的是去仙游县的路，东边就是我所走的路。
English: There is a pavilion on the way. The road to Xianyu County stretches from the west, and the road I am taking is on the east.

古文：南过通仙桥，越小岭而下，为公馆，为钟鼓楼之蓬莱石，则雷轰漈ì即瀑布在焉。
现代文：往南经过通仙桥，翻越小岭向下走，是公馆，有钟鼓楼的蓬莱石，而雷轰涤也在这里。
English: Passing the Tongxian Bridge to the south, climbing over the small ridge and going down, it is a mansion, with the Penglai stone of the bell and drum tower, and the thunder is also here.

古文：涧出蓬莱石旁，其底石平如砺好像磨平一般，水漫流石面，匀如铺彀。
现代文：涧水从蓬莱石旁边流出，底下的石头像磨石一样平，水从石面上漫流而过，匀称得如同铺了一层给纱。
English: The brackish water flows out from the side of the Penglai stone, the underlying stone is flat like a grindstone, and the water flows through the stone surface, and it is well-balanced as if it were a layer of gauze.

古文：少下，而平者多洼，其间圆穴，为灶，为臼，为樽，为井，皆以丹名，九仙之遗也。
现代文：稍稍往下，平滑的底部出现许多洼坑，洼坑之中的圆孔，分别称为灶、臼、蹲、井，都用 丹 字来命名，是九鲤仙的遗迹。
English: A little further down, many pits appear on the smooth bottom. The round holes in the pits, respectively called stove, mortar, squat, and well, are all named with Danish words and are the remains of the Nine Immortals.

古文：平流至此，忽下堕湖中，如万马初发，诚有雷霆之势，则第一漈之奇也。
现代文：涧水平缓地流到这里，突然往下堕落到湖中，犹如万马初发，确实有雷霆万钧之势，这就是九涤中第一级瀑布奇观。
English: The water slowly flows here horizontally, and suddenly falls down into the lake, as if it were the first time, and there is indeed the potential for thunder and lightning. This is the first-level waterfall wonder in Jiudai.

古文：九仙祠即峙其西，前临鲤湖。
现代文：九仙祠就建立在瀑布西边，前对九鲤湖。
English: Jiuxian Temple was built on the west side of the waterfall, facing Jiuxian Lake.

古文：湖不甚浩荡，而澄碧一泓，于万山之上，围青漾翠，造物之酝灵亦异矣！
现代文：湖水不甚浩荡，但在万山中显出一片清澈碧蓝，绿树围绕、清波荡漾，大自然造物的神化灵奇真是太奇异了！
English: The lake is not very voluminous, but in the mountains there is a clear turquoise blue, surrounded by green trees, clear waves, and the deification of nature's creation is really strange!

古文：祠右有石鼓、元珠、古梅洞诸胜。
现代文：九仙祠右边有石鼓、元珠、古梅洞等胜境。
English: On the right side of the Nine Immortals Shrine, there are stone drums, original beads, ancient plum caves and other scenic spots.

古文：梅洞在祠侧，驾大石而成者，有罅成门。
现代文：古梅洞在祠旁边，大石架空而成，石上的缝隙形成门。
English: Ancient Mei-dong is next to the ancestral hall. Large boulders rise above the ground, and the gaps in the stones form a door.

古文：透而上，旧有九仙阁，祠前旧有水晶宫，今俱圮ǐ倒塌。
现代文：穿石缝往上走，原来有九仙阁，九仙祠前原来有水晶宫，现在都毁坏了。
English: Going up through the stone seams, there used to be the Nine Immortals Pavilion, and there used to be the Crystal Palace in front of the Nine Immortals Shrine, but now they are all destroyed.

古文：当祠而隔湖下坠，则二漈至九漈之水也。
现代文：正对九仙祠并隔着九鲤湖往下坠落的水，就是第二级到第九级的瀑布。
English: The water falling down from the Nine Immortals' Shrine and across Jiuye Lake is the second to the ninth level of the waterfall.

古文：余循湖右行，已至第三漈，急与芳叔返。
现代文：我顺着九鲤湖右边走，已经到了第三级瀑布，急忙和芳叔一齐返回。
English: I walked along the right side of Jiulong Lake and reached the third-level waterfall. I hurriedly returned with my uncle Fang.

古文：曰： 今夕当淡神休力，静晤九仙。
现代文：我说： 今晚应当清静心神、休息体力，静候九仙托梦。
English: I said, "Tonight, you should clear your mind, rest your body, and wait for the Nine Immortal Dreams."

古文：劳心目以奇胜，且俟明日也。 
现代文：烦劳心力目力游览奇观胜景之事，暂且等到明天吧。 
English: Let's wait until tomorrow to go sightseeing and enjoy the sights.

古文：返祠，往蓬莱石，跣光足、赤足足步涧中。
现代文：回到九仙祠，去蓬莱石，光着脚在涧中行走。
English: Back to the Nine Immortals Shrine, go to the Penglai Stone, walk barefoot in the reeds.

古文：石濑石上流过的急水平旷，清流轻浅，十洲三岛，竟褰ā撩起衣而涉也。
现代文：涧底平旷，水清而浅，轻轻流淌，遍布水中的沙洲小岛如仙境一样，撩起衣襟就越过去了。
English: The bottom of the lake is flat, the water is clear and shallow, flowing gently, and the sandbar islets all over the water are like a fairyland.

古文：晚坐祠，新月正悬峰顶，俯挹平湖，神情俱朗，静中沨沨ē水声，时触雷漈声。
现代文：晚上坐在祠前，初升的月亮正悬挂在峰顶上，低头俯视平静的湖水，眼前的景色和自己的心情都非常好，寂静中只有讽讽的水声，不时地还听到雷涤瀑布的声响。
English: Sitting in front of the ancestral hall in the evening, the rising moon is hanging on the peak of the mountain, looking down at the calm lake water, the scenery in front of me and my mood are very good, in the silence there are only ironic water sounds, and from time to time I hear the sound of the Lei Ya waterfall.

古文：是夜祈梦祠中。
现代文：这一夜在祠中祈祷九仙托梦。
English: That night, I prayed the Nine Immortal Dreams in the ancestral hall.

古文：初九日辞九仙，下穷九漈。
现代文：初九日离开九仙祠，往下探游九潦的尽头。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, I left the Nine Immortals' Shrine and went down to explore the end of the Nine Pinnacles.

古文：九漈去鲤湖且数里，三漈而下，久已道绝。
现代文：九涤距离九鲤湖大约数里，从第三级瀑布往下走，路已经断了很久。
English: Jiujiang is about a few miles away from Jiuzhaigou Lake. Walking down from the third-level waterfall, the road has been broken for a long time.

古文：数月前，莆田祭酒尧俞，令陆善开复鸟道，直通九漈，出莒溪。
现代文：几个月前，国子监祭酒、莆田县人尧俞，命令陆善修复，开通这险峻的山路，直达九涤，从营溪出去。
English: A few months ago, Guo Zi, the overseer of the festival of wine and the leader of Putian County, ordered Lu Zhen to repair and open this steep mountain road, up to nine meters, from Yingxi.

古文：悔昨不由侧径溯漈而上，乃纡从大道，坐失此奇。
现代文：后悔昨天没有从侧边的小路溯瀑布而上，而绕道顺大路走，失掉了观览这一奇景的机会。
English: I regret that I did not take the side path up the waterfall yesterday, but took a detour along the main road and lost the opportunity to see this wonder.

古文：遂束装改途，竟出九漈，瀑布为第二漈，在湖之南，正与九仙祠相对。
现代文：于是整理行装改道而行，直接从九涤出去。第二潦就叫瀑布，在九鲤湖的南边，正好与九仙祠相对。
English: So they changed their route and went directly out of Jiudaira. The second waterfall is called the waterfall, on the south side of Jiudaira Lake, just opposite the Nine Immortals' Shrine.

古文：湖穷而水由此飞堕深峡，峡石如劈，两崖壁立万仞。
现代文：湖尽头处水就向深谷飞坠下去，深谷如同被刀劈开，两边的山崖像墙壁一样陡立，高达万丈。
English: At the end of the lake, the water rushes down into a deep valley. The valley seems to have been split open by a knife, and the cliffs on both sides are as steep and high as walls.

古文：水初出湖，为石所扼辖制，势不得出，怒从空坠，飞喷冲激，水石各极雄观。
现代文：水一从湖里流出，便被岩石阻拦，水势不能畅通，汹涌的水流从空中坠落，浪花飞溅、水珠喷洒，水和石都显得极其雄伟壮观。
English: As soon as the water flows out of the lake, it is blocked by rocks, the water cannot flow smoothly, the turbulent water falls from the air, the waves splash, the water droplets spray, and the water and stones are extremely magnificent.

古文：再下为第三漈之珠帘泉，景与瀑布同。
现代文：再下去是第三潦珠帘泉，景致和瀑布相同。
English: Further down is the third bowl, Pearl Curtain Spring, with the same scenery as the waterfall.

古文：右崖有亭，曰观澜。
现代文：右边的山崖上有亭子，叫观澜亭。
English: There is a pavilion on the cliff on the right, called the Guanlan Pavilion.

古文：一石曰天然坐，亦有亭覆之。
现代文：一块名叫天然坐的石头，也有亭覆盖。
English: There is also a pavilion covered with a natural stone called sit.

古文：从此上下岭涧，盘折峡中。
现代文：从这里上岭下涧，在峡谷中曲折行走。
English: From here, walk up and down the ridge, zigzagging through the canyon.

古文：峡壁上覆下宽，珠帘之水，从正面坠下；玉管之水，从旁霭沸溢。
现代文：峡谷两边的山壁上面倾覆、下面宽阔，珠帘瀑布泉从正面坠落下来，玉著泉瀑布从旁边水雾腾腾地涌出。
English: The mountain walls on both sides of the canyon are overturned above and wide below, the Pearl Curtain Waterfall Spring falls down from the front, and the Jade Spring Waterfall gushes out mistily from the side.

古文：两泉并悬，峡壁下削，铁障四周把四周围得紧紧的，上与天并，玉龙双舞，下极潭际。
现代文：两股瀑布并列悬挂，峡谷两壁往下陡削，四周都是铁壁般的山崖，山高得齐天，两道瀑布像玉龙飞舞，往下倾入潭中。
English: Two waterfalls hang side by side, the two walls of the canyon plunge down, surrounded by cliffs like iron walls, the mountains are as high as the sky, the two waterfalls fly like a jade dragon and plunge down into the pool.

古文：潭水深泓澄碧，虽小于鲤湖，而峻壁环锁，瀑流交映，集奇撮胜，惟此为最！
现代文：潭水极深，碧绿清澄，虽然比九鲤湖小，但四周峭壁环绕，瀑布交相辉映，奇景荟萃，只有这里风景最佳！
English: The lake is very deep, green and clear. Although it is smaller than Jiulong Lake, it is surrounded by cliffs, waterfalls, and wonderful scenery. Only here is the scenery the best!

古文：所谓第四漈也。
现代文：是所说的第四潦。
English: This is the fourth trumpet.

古文：初至涧底，芳叔急于出峡，坐待峡口，不复入。
现代文：刚到涧底，芳叔忙着走出峡谷，在峡谷口坐着等我，没有再进来。
English: Just arrived in Loudi, Uncle Fang was busy walking out of the canyon, sitting at the mouth of the canyon waiting for me, and did not come in again.

古文：余独缘涧石而进，踞潭边石上，仰视双瀑从空夭矫，崖石上覆如瓮口。
现代文：我独自沿着涧底的石道前进，到潭边坐在石头上，抬头注视两道瀑布在空中矫健而有气势地飞流，崖石上部倾覆得如同瓮口。
English: I walked alone along the stone path at the bottom of the ravine, sat on a rock at the edge of the pool, and looked up at the two waterfalls flying gracefully and powerfully in the air, the upper part of the cliff collapsing like a mouth.

古文：旭日正在崖端，与颓波突浪，掩晕流辉。
现代文：旭日正好升到崖石顶端，和坠落的水波、腾跃的浪珠，互相掩映、五光十色。
English: The rising sun just rises to the top of the cliff, and the falling water waves, the leaping waves, cover each other, colorful.

古文：俯仰应接，不能舍去。
现代文：我俯视仰视而应接不暇，舍不得离去。
English: I look down and look up and I can't get enough of it. I can't bear to leave.

古文：循涧复下，忽两峡削起，一水斜回，涧右之路之穷。
现代文：顺山涧再往下走，峡谷两边突然陡峭起来，一股溪水弯斜流淌，山涧右边的路已经断了。
English: Walking further down the ridge, both sides of the canyon suddenly steepened, a stream of water flowed obliquely, and the road on the right side of the ridge had been broken.

古文：左望有木板飞架危矶水边突出之石断磴间，乱流而渡，可以攀跻。
现代文：向左边看去，只见木板架在陡岩上的残阶之间，横渡溪流，就可以攀越。
English: Looking to the left, you can see the wooden plank between the remaining steps on the steep rock, crossing the stream, you can climb over.

古文：遂涉涧从左，则五漈之石门矣。
现代文：于是涉过涧从左边走，是第五涤―石门。
English: So I walked past the gate on the left. It was the fifth gate - the stone gate.

古文：两崖至是，壁凑仅容一线，欲合不合，欲开不开，下涌奔泉，上碍云影。
现代文：两边的山崖在这里向中间紧靠，只能容下一线天，要合不合，要开不开，下面山泉汹涌奔腾，上面云遮雾盖。
English: The mountain cliffs on both sides are close to the middle here, and can only accommodate a line of sky, whether it fits or not, whether it can be opened, the mountain springs below are surging, and the clouds above are covered with fog.

古文：人缘陟其间，如猕猿然，阴风吹之，凛凛欲堕。
现代文：人在中间攀援，如同称猴一般，寒风吹来，人阴冷得几乎要掉下去。
English: People were scrambling for help in the middle, as if they were howler monkeys. A cold wind was blowing, and people were so cold that they almost fell down.

古文：盖自四漈来，山深路绝，幽峭已极，惟闻泉声鸟语耳。
现代文：大致从第四潦以来，山谷深邃，道路断绝，幽深陡峭到了极点，只听得到泉水声和鸟鸣声。
English: From about the fourth day onwards, the valley is deep, the road is cut off, the depth is steep to the extreme, and only the sound of spring water and birdsong can be heard.

古文：出五漈，山势渐开。
现代文：走出第五涤，山势渐渐开阔。
English: After the fifth kilometer, the mountain gradually opened up.

古文：涧右危嶂屏列，左则飞凤峰回翔对之，乱流绕其下，或为澄潭，或为倒峡。
现代文：山涧右边的陡崖如同屏障排列，左边的飞凤峰盘旋飞翔而对，水流纵横交错地环绕在下面，有的是清澈的水潭，有的倒映出峡谷。
English: The steep cliffs on the right side of the mountain range are arranged like a barrier, the flying phoenix peaks on the left are circling and flying to the right, and the water currents are crisscrossed around below, some are clear pools, and some reflect the canyon.

古文：若六漈之五星，七漈之飞凤，八漈之棋盘石，九漈之将军岩，皆次第得名矣。
现代文：至于第六涤五星，第七潦飞凤，第八潦棋盘石，第九潦将军岩，都是按顺序得名。
English: As for the sixth, five-star, the seventh, flying phoenix, the eighth, checkerboard stone, and the ninth, general rock, they are all named in order.

古文：然一带云蒸霞蔚，得趣故在山水中，岂必刻迹而求乎？
现代文：既然这一带云蒸霞蔚，所以情趣在山水之中得到，哪里还有必要刻意追求一景一物的形迹呢？
English: Since the clouds are steaming in this area, so the taste is obtained in the landscape, where is it necessary to deliberately pursue a scene of a thing?

古文：盖水乘峡展，既得自恣，其旁崩崖颓石，斜插为岩，横架为室，层叠成楼，屈曲成洞；悬则瀑，环则流，潴则泉；皆可坐可卧，可倚可濯ó洗，荫竹木而弄云烟。
现代文：大致水凭借峡谷的形势伸展，洒脱自得，毫无约束，水流两旁崩塌的山崖巨石，斜插的就是岩岸，横架的为石室，层叠的则像石，曲折弯转的成石洞；飞悬空中的则为瀑布，绕石环流的则为小，积聚起来的则为清泉；山石都可以坐卧休息，泉流都能靠近洗，竹木成荫而云霞烟雾援弄。
English: The general water extends by virtue of the situation of the canyon. It is free and unconstrained. Collapsed mountain cliffs and boulders on both sides of the water flow. The oblique insert is the rock bank. The horizontal one is the stone chamber, the cascading one is like a stone, and the twisting and turning one is the stone cave. The waterfall is in the flying sky, the circulation around the stone is small, and the accumulated one is the clear spring. The mountain stone can sit and rest, the spring flow can be close to the wash, the bamboo and wood are shaded and the cloud haze smokes.

古文：数里之间，目不能移，足不能前者竟日。
现代文：数里之间的美景，让人一整天都目不斜视，流连忘返。
English: The beautiful scenery between several miles, let a person spend the whole day without squinting, lingering and forgetting.

古文：每下一处，见有别穴，必穿岩通隙而入，曲达旁疏，不可一境穷也！
现代文：每下到一处，看见有另外的洞穴，我一定穿过岩缝进去，洞穴曲折旁达，不能一下子穷尽其中的妙境。
English: Every time I go down to one place and see another cave, I must go through the rock crevice. The cave is tortuous and round, and I can't exhaust the beauty of it all at once.

古文：若水之或悬或渟í水积聚而不流通，或翼飞叠注，即匡庐三叠、雁宕龙湫，各以一长擅胜，未若此山微体皆具也。
现代文：至于水流，有的悬挂山崖，有的汇聚一起，有的如鸟翅腾飞，叠水喷注，即使是庐山三叠泉瀑布，雁宕山龙漱瀑布，只能各凭一个特点取胜，不像这座山，局部和整体的风光都完美无缺。
English: As for the water flow, some are hanging from the cliff, some are converging together, some are soaring like bird's wings and spraying superimposed water. Even the Lushan Sanjui Spring Waterfall and the Yangtze Mountain Longsui Waterfall can only win with one feature each. Unlike this mountain, the local and overall scenery are perfect.

古文：出九漈。沿涧依山转，东向五里，始有耕云樵石之家，然见人至，未有不惊讶者。
现代文：从九涤出来，顺山涧靠着山转，往东走五里，才有人家在白云飘荡的山上耕种、打柴，而他们看到有人来到，都感十分惊讶。
English: When they came out of Jiujiang, they walked along the mountain, leaning against the mountain, and walked five miles to the east. Only then did someone come to farm and collect firewood on the mountain where the white clouds were drifting. They were all very surprised to see someone coming.

古文：又五里，至莒溪之石步，出向道。
现代文：又走五里，到达营溪的石步，从来时的路出去。
English: Walked another five miles, arrived at the stone steps of Yingxi, and went out the old way.

古文：初十日过蒜岭驿，至榆溪。
现代文：初十日经过蒜岭释，到达榆溪。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, the train passed through蒜岭释 and arrived at 溪.

古文：闻横路驿西十里，有石所山，岩石最胜，亦为九仙祈梦所。
现代文：听说横路骚西边十里处，有石竹山，山上的岩石最为有名，也是九仙祈祷、做梦的地方。
English: It is said that Shizhu Mountain is located ten miles west of Hengluoshou. The rock on the mountain is the most famous, and it is also the place where the Nine Immortals pray and dream.

古文：闽有 春游石所，秋游鲤湖 语，虽未合其时，然不可失之交臂也。
现代文：福建流传着 春天游石竹山，秋天游九鲤湖，的话，现在游石竹山虽然与最佳节令不相合，但是不能当面错过游这一胜境的机会。
English: It is said that people in Fujian visit Shizhu Mountain in spring and Jiulong Lake in autumn. Now, although visiting Shizhu Mountain does not coincide with the best season, you should not miss the opportunity to visit this beautiful place in person.

古文：乘兴遂行。
现代文：于是乘兴出游。
English: So he took advantage of the opportunity to travel.

古文：以横路去此尚十五里，乃宿榆溪。
现代文：因为横路释距离榆溪还有十五里，就在榆溪住宿。
English: Because the cross-road release is still fifteen miles away from Lixi, it is in Lixi to stay.

古文：十一日至波黎铺，即从小路为石所游。
现代文：十一日到波黎铺后，就从小路去游石竹山。
English: On the 11th day, after arriving at the Po Lih store, I took the path to visit Shizhu Mountain.

古文：西向山五里，越一小岭。
现代文：往西朝着山走五里，越过一座小岭。
English: Walk west towards the mountain for five miles and cross a ridge.

古文：又五里，渡溪，即石所南麓。
现代文：又走五里，横渡溪水，就到石竹山南麓。
English: Walk another five miles, cross the stream, and you will reach the southern foot of Shizhu Mountain.

古文：循麓西转，仰见峰顶丛崖，如攒如劈。
现代文：沿着山麓往西转，抬头看见峰顶上崖石丛丛，如攒聚、如刀劈。
English: Turning west along the foot of the mountain, I looked up and saw the cliff and rock clumps on the peak, as if they were piling up, like knives.

古文：西北行久之，有楼傍山西向，乃登山道也。
现代文：往西北走了很久，有座楼背靠山、面朝西，这就是登山道。
English: I walked northwest for a long time. There was a building with its back to the mountain and its face to the west. This was the hiking trail.

古文：石磴颇峻，遂短衣历级而上。
现代文：石阶很陡，于是身着短衣沿石阶而上。
English: The stone steps were very steep, so he climbed up the stone steps in his shorts.

古文：磴路曲折，木石阴翳，虬枝老藤，盘结危石倚欹崖之上，啼猿上下，应答不绝。
现代文：石阶弯转曲折，树阴遮蔽，弯曲如龙的树干老藤盘绕在陡峭倾斜的岩石上，猿猴上下跳跃，啼叫声不断。
English: Stone steps twisted and turned, shaded by trees, twisted like a dragon's trunk of old rattan coiled on a steep sloping rock, monkeys jumping up and down, howling constantly.

古文：忽有亭突踞危石，拔迥挺拔高远凌虚，无与为对。
现代文：忽见峭石上有座亭子，挺拔高远，凌空而立，没有什么和它相对。
English: Suddenly I saw a pavilion on the cliff, towering high and far away, soaring into the sky, with nothing to oppose it.

古文：亭当山之半。
现代文：亭位于山腰。
English: The pavilion is located on the mountainside.

古文：再折，石级巍然直上，级穷，则飞岩檐覆垂半空。
现代文：再转石阶陡上，石阶尽头处，飞起的岩石像屋稽一样覆盖在半空中。
English: Then turn the stone steps up steeply. At the end of the stone steps, the flying rock is covered in mid-air like a circus act.

古文：再上两折，入石洞侧门，出即九仙阁，轩敞雅洁。
现代文：又往上转两道弯，从石洞侧门进去，一出洞就是九仙阁，阁高大宽敞、雅致整洁。
English: Then turn two turns upwards, enter through the side door of the stone cave, and once out of the cave is the Nine Immortals Pavilion. The pavilion is tall, spacious, elegant and tidy.

古文：左为僧庐，俱倚山凌空，可徙倚凭眺。
现代文：左边为僧人住房，都是靠山凌空而建，可以徘徊远望。
English: On the left are the monks' dwellings, all of which are built against the sky, so you can wander and look far and wide.

古文：阁后五六峭峰离立，高皆数十丈，每峰各去二三尺。峰罅石壁如削成，路屈曲罅中，可透漏各峰之顶。
现代文：阁后有五六座峻峭的山峰各自耸立，都高达数十丈，每座峰之间相距二三尺，间隙如同用刀劈出来的一样，道路曲折地从缝隙间穿过，可以穿行到各座山峰顶上。
English: At the back of the pavilion, there are five or six steep peaks, each towering dozens of meters high, with a distance of two or three feet between each peak. The gap is as if it was cut with a knife, and the road zigzags through the gaps, allowing you to travel to the top of each peak.

古文：松偃藤延，纵目成胜。
现代文：松树卧伏，老藤蔓延，目光所到之处都是胜景。
English: Lying pine trees, old wisteria spreading, everywhere you look is a great view.

古文：僧供茗芳逸，山所产也。
现代文：僧人送来香味四溢的茶，是山中出产的。
English: The fragrant tea sent by the monk was produced in the mountains.

古文：侧径下，至垂岩，路左更有一径。
现代文：从旁边的小路下山，到陡岩，路左边另有一条小路二我说： 从这里去肯定有奇异的景致。 
English: From the side path down the mountain, to the steep rock, there is another path on the left side of the road.2 I said: There must be a strange landscape from here.

古文：余曰： 此必有异， 果一石洞嵌空立。
现代文：于是顺小路走，果然有一个石洞镶嵌在山腰。
English: So I followed the path, and sure enough, there was a stone cave embedded in the mountainside.

古文：穿洞而下，即至半山亭。
现代文：从洞中穿下去，就到了半山亭。
English: After passing through the cave, you will arrive at Mid-mountain Pavilion.

古文：下山，出横路而返。
现代文：下山，到横路释后返回家乡。
English: Go down the mountain, cross the road and return to your hometown.

古文：是游也，为日六十有三，历省二，经县十九，府十一，游名山者三。
现代文：这次出游，一共是六十三天，跨越两个脊，经过十九个县、十一个府，游历了三座名山。
English: This trip lasted a total of sixty-three days, crossing two ridges, passing through nineteen counties and eleven prefectures, and visiting three famous mountains.

