古文：江水暴至，徙家黄鹤楼，汉阳人望见楼上若有光景，是夕，钦若生。钦若早孤，郁爱之。
现代文：王钦若，字定国，临江军新喻人。他的父亲王仲华，陪着祖父王郁在鄂州作官，逢长江水暴涨，迁家居黄鹤楼，汉阳人望见黄鹤楼上好像有光彩之景，这晚，王钦若出生，王钦若早年丧父，王郁疼爱他。
English: His father, Wang Zhonghua, accompanied his grandfather, Wang Yu, to work as an official in Ezhou. When the Yangtze River water surged, they moved to Huanghe Tower. People in Hanyang saw that there seemed to be a glorious scene on the Huanghe Tower. On this night, when Wang Qin Ruo was born, and when Wang Qin Ruo lost his father at an early age, Wang Yu loved him.

古文：太宗伐太原时，钦若才十八，作《平晋赋论》献行在。
现代文：宋太宗征伐太原时，王钦若只有十八岁，作《平晋赋论》进献到太宗的行营处。
English: When Emperor Taizong of Song conquered Taiyuan, Wang Qinluo, who was only eighteen years old, wrote "Treatise on Pingjin Fu" and presented it to Emperor Taizong's encampment.

古文：郁为濠州判官，将死，告家人曰： 吾历官逾五十年，慎于用刑，活人多矣，后必有兴者，其在吾孙乎！ 
现代文：王郁任濠州判官，将死时告诉家人说 ：我当官超过五十年，对用刑很慎重，使许多人能活命，以后必定有大兴刑狱的人，大概出在我的孙儿呵！ 
English: Wang Yu, a judge in Zhangzhou, told his family when he was about to die: "I have been an official for more than fifty years, and I am very careful about the use of punishment, so that many people can live. In the future, there will certainly be people who are great at punishing prisoners, probably my grandchildren!"

古文：钦若擢进士甲科，为亳州防御推官，迁秘书省秘书郎，监庐州税。
现代文：王钦若被选拔为进士甲科，任亳州防御推官，升任秘书省秘书郎、监庐州税。
English: If Wang Qin is selected to enter the A Section, he will be appointed as the defense officer of Zhangzhou, promoted to the secretary of the secretary of the ministry, and the supervisor of Zhangzhou tax.

古文：改太常丞、判三司理欠凭由司。
现代文：改任太常丞、判三司理欠凭由司。
English: He was reassigned to the position of Taijo-jo, and was given the title of Sansei-ri (三司理欠) instead of Yushi.

古文：时毋宾古为度支判官，尝言曰： 天下逋负，自五代迄今，理督未已，民病几不能胜矣。
现代文：当时毋宾古任度支判官，曾谈论说： 天下百姓拖欠赋税，从五代至现在，执法官不停地责罚，百姓精疲力尽不能承受了。
English: At that time, the chief magistrate, who was appointed by Bin Gu, once said: The people of the world are in arrears of taxes. From the fifth generation to the present, the magistrate has been constantly punished. The people are exhausted and can't bear it.

古文：仆将启蠲之。 钦若一夕命吏勾校成数，翌日上之。
现代文：我要启奏皇上蠲免它。 王钦若命官吏一晚校理出数目，第二天上奏皇帝，真宗大吃一惊，说： 先帝竟然不知道吗？ 
English: I want to appeal to the emperor to pardon him. If Wang Qin ordered the officials to work out the number one night and appeal to the emperor the next day, Zhenzong was very surprised and said: Did the former emperor actually not know?

古文：真宗大惊曰： 先帝顾不知邪？ 钦若徐曰： 先帝固知之，殆留与陛下收人心尔。 即日放逋负一千余万，释系囚三千余人。
现代文：王钦若缓缓说： 先帝当然知道这些，大概是留给皇上收揽民心呵。 当天下令蠲免百姓所欠一千多万，释放囚徒三千多人。
English: Wang Qinru slowly said, "Of course, the former emperor knew about this, it was probably left to the emperor to win the hearts and minds of the people. On that day, the emperor forgave the people's debt of more than ten million yuan and released more than three thousand prisoners.

古文：帝益器重钦若，召试学士院，拜右正言、知制诰，召为翰林学士。
现代文：真宗愈加器重王钦若，诏他试学士院，授右正言、知制诰，召他任翰林院学士。
English: When Wang Qinru, the founder of the Shinshu Sect, became more and more important, he was ordered to take an entrance examination for the Academy of Fine Arts, and was awarded the titles of Right Upright Speech and Intellectual Discipline. He was also called to be an academician of the Hanlin Academy.

古文：蜀寇王均始平，为西川安抚使。
现代文：蜀地寇盗王均刚被平定，王钦若出任西川安抚使。
English: The Shu Diqo bandit kings had just been subdued, and Wang Qinruo was appointed as the pacifying envoy to the West River.

古文：所至问系囚，自死罪以下第降之，凡列便宜，多所施行。还，授左谏议大夫、参知政事，以郊祀恩，加给事中。
现代文：他所到之处询问囚犯，自死罪以下的减罪不等，凡列举对国家有利的事，大多均实行，王钦若回朝，被授给左谏议大夫、参知政事，因郊祀之恩，又兼任给事中。
English: Everywhere he went, he asked the prisoners whether they wanted to commute their sentences to anything less than the death penalty. Most of the things listed that were beneficial to the country were implemented. If Wang Qin were to return to the North, he would be awarded the title of Zuo Jianlian Daifu, and the title of Sanzhi Zhengji, and he would also be given the title of Zuo Jianlian Zhong.

古文：河阴民常德方讼临津县尉任懿赂钦若得中第，事下御史台劾治。
现代文：河阴人常德方上告临津县尉任懿贿赂王钦若得以中第，真宗把案事下达御史台处理。
English: Kawashin people often complained to the German side that the lieutenant of Linjin County, Ren Zheng, bribed Wang Qin. If he was able to succeed, Shinsong would submit the case to the Imperial History Station for handling.

古文：初，钦若咸平中尝知贡举，懿举诸科，寓僧仁雅舍。仁雅识僧惠秦者与钦若厚，懿与惠秦约，以银三百五十两赂钦若，书其数于纸，令惠秦持去。
现代文：当初，王钦若于咸平年间曾知贡举，任懿举试诸科，寓居僧仁雅的房舍，僧仁雅所认识的僧惠秦与王钦若交好，任懿与僧惠秦约定，用三百五十两银子贿赂王钦若，把银子数量写在纸上，令僧惠秦拿去给王钦若。
English: At the beginning, Wang Qin, who had known Gongju during the Han and Ping dynasties, was allowed to take the examination in various sciences and lived in the house of the monk Renya. The monk Hui Qin, who was known to the monk Renya, was friendly with Wang Qin, and Ren Rong and the monk Hui Qin agreed to bribe Wang Qin with three hundred and fifty-two silver coins. They wrote the amount of silver on a piece of paper and ordered the monk Hui Qin to take it to Wang Qin.

古文：会钦若已入院，属钦若客纳所书于钦若妻李氏，惠秦减所书银百两，欲自取之。
现代文：正好王钦若已入贡院，僧惠秦托王钦若的门客拿所写的银数给王钦若的妻子李氏，僧惠秦把任懿所写的银数减去一百两，想自个私吞。
English: Just as Wang Qinru had entered the tribute academy, the monk Hui Qin asked Wang Qinru's followers to give the written amount of silver to Wang Qinru's wife Li, and the monk Hui Qin deducted the written amount of silver by one hundred taels and wanted to spend it on himself.

古文：李氏令奴祁睿书懿名于臂，并以所约银告钦若。
现代文：李氏命奴仆祁睿在手臂上写下任懿的名字，并把所约定的贿银数告诉王钦若。
English: Li ordered his servant Zhaorui to write Ren's name on his arm and tell Wang Qinruo the agreed amount of bribe.

古文：懿再入试第五场，睿复持汤饮至贡院，钦若密令奴索取银，懿未即与而登科去。仁雅驰书河阴，始归之。
现代文：任懿再入试第五场，祁睿又持汤饮到贡院，王钦若命奴仆索取贿银，任懿没有立即给贿银就登科第离去，僧仁雅急送信到河阴，才讨回贿银。
English: On the fifth day of Ren Ren's re-entry examination, Yan Rui went to the tribute hall with soup and drink. Wang Qin ordered his servant to ask for a bribe. Ren Rui did not immediately give the bribe and left for the examination room. Monk Renya urgently sent to Heyin to ask for the bribe back.

古文：德方得其书，以告御史中丞赵昌言，昌言以闻。
现代文：常德方获得这封索贿信，把它告诉御史中丞赵昌言，赵昌言把它奏告真宗。
English: The German side often obtained this letter demanding bribes, and told it to the imperial historian Zhao Changyan. Zhao Changyan reported it to the True Sect.

古文：既捕祁睿等，亦请逮钦若属吏。
现代文：逮捕祁睿等人后，又请求逮捕王钦若的属吏。
English: After arresting Zou Rui and others, they also requested the arrest of Wang Qinruo's subordinates.

古文：祁睿本亳小吏，虽从钦若久，而名犹隶亳州。
现代文：祁睿本是亳州的小吏，虽然跟随王钦若很久，而其名字仍隶属亳州。
English: Zou Rui was originally a minor official in Zhangzhou, although he followed Wang Qinruo for a long time, and his name still belongs to Zhangzhou.

古文：钦若乃言： 向未有祁睿，惠秦亦不及门。 帝方顾钦若厚，命邢昺、阎承翰等于太常寺别鞫之。
现代文：王钦若于是说： 过去我家没有祁睿，僧惠秦也不在我的门下。 真宗正厚待王钦若，命令邢籨、阎承翰等人在太常寺另外审讯。
English: Wang Qinruo then said, "In the past, my family did not have a wise man, and the monk Hui Qin was not under my tutelage. The True Sect treated Wang Qinruo generously and ordered Yu, Yan Chenghan and others to be tried separately at Taiji Temple.

古文：懿更云妻兄张驾识知举官洪湛，尝俱造湛门。
现代文：任懿改口说他妻子的哥哥张驾认识知举官洪湛，曾一起造访洪湛的家。
English: Ren Hao changed his story to say that his wife's brother Zhang Jie knew the magistrate Hong Zhan and had visited Hong Zhan's home together.

古文：始但以银属二僧，不知达主司为谁。
现代文：当初只把银子托付二僧，不知他们所送达的主考官员是谁。
English: At first, only the two monks were entrusted with the money, and it is not known who the chief examiner was.

古文：昺等遂诬湛受懿银，湛适使陕西还，而狱已具。
现代文：邢籨等人于是诬告洪湛接受任懿的贿银，洪湛刚好出使陕西回朝，而官司已经办好。
English: Zhai and others then falsely accused Hong Zhan of accepting Ren Zheng's bribe. Hong Zhan just sent an envoy to Shaanxi to return to the DPRK, and the lawsuit has been settled.

古文：时驾且死，睿又悉遁去，钦若因得固执祁睿休役后始佣于家，它奴使多新募，不识惠秦，故皆无证验。
现代文：这时张驾又死了，祁睿又逃得不知去向，王钦若因而得以坚持说祁睿是科举之事结束后才雇到家里的，其他奴仆多为刚召募的，不认识僧惠秦，所以该案都没有证据。
English: At this time, Zhang Jie died again, and Zhai Rui escaped to an unknown destination. If Wang Qin was able to insist that Zhai Rui was hired after the examination was over, the other slaves were mostly newly recruited and did not know the monk Hui Qin, so there was no evidence of the case.

古文：湛坐削藉、流儋州，而钦若遂免。
现代文：洪湛坐罪削籍，流入儋州，而王钦若于是免罪。
English: Hong Tan was stripped of his citizenship and exiled to Ganzhou, while Wang Qinruo was exonerated.

古文：方湛代王旦入知贡举，懿已试第三场，及官收湛赃，家无有也，乃以湛假梁颢白金器输官，湛遂死贬所。
现代文：正好洪湛代理王旦入知贡院，任懿已试第三场，等到官府查收洪湛的赃物，家里没有，就把洪湛借梁颢的银器缴纳官府，洪湛遂死在贬所。
English: Just as Hong Zhan's agent Wang Dan entered the Zhigong Academy, Ren Zhan had already tried the third game, and when the government checked and received Hong Zhan's stolen goods, he did not have it at home, he gave Hong Zhan's borrowed silverware to the government, and Hong Zhan died in the detention center.

古文：人知其冤，而钦若恃势，人莫敢言者。
现代文：人们知道洪湛受冤，而王钦若依仗权势，没有人敢说。
English: People know that Hong Tan suffered injustice, but if Wang Qin relies on power, no one dares to say.

古文：景德初，契丹入寇，帝将幸澶渊。
现代文：景德初年，契丹入侵，真宗将亲征澶渊。
English: In the first year of King Jingde, the Khitan invaded, and Emperor Zhenzong personally led his troops into the Abyss.

古文：钦若自请北行，以工部侍郎、参知政事判天雄军、提举河北转运使，真宗亲宴以遣之。
现代文：王钦若亲自请求北行，他以工部侍郎、参知政事判天雄军，提举河北转运司，真宗亲自设宴送他前往任职。
English: If Wang Qin personally requested to go to the north, he would act as the attendant of the Ministry of Industry and Commerce and the advisor to the government to judge the Tianxiong Army, he would nominate the Hebei Transportation Department, and Zhenzong would personally hold a banquet to send him to the post.

古文：素与寇准不协，及还，累表愿解政事，罢为刑部侍郎、资政殿学士。
现代文：王钦若平素与寇准不和，等到回朝，他累次上表愿解去参知政事，罢为刑部侍郎、资政殿学士。
English: When Wang Qin returned to China, he repeatedly expressed his wish to be relieved of his position as the Vice-premier, Minister of Justice, and Vice-premier.

古文：寻判尚书都省，修《册府元龟》，或褒赞所及，钦若自名表首以谢，即缪误有所谴问，戒书吏但云杨亿以下，其所为多此类也。
现代文：不久又判尚书都省，修纂《册府元龟》，有褒奖赞扬的地方，王钦若把自己的名字写在首位向皇帝谢恩，在出现差错有所责问时，王钦若告诫属吏要他只说是杨亿下面的人做的，他所作所为大都是如此。
English: Soon, he was also sentenced to Shangshu Capital Province for compiling the "Book of the Yuan Turtle." There were places of praise and commendation. If Wang Qin wrote his name in the first place to thank the emperor, if he was reprimanded in the event of an error, if Wang Qin admonished his subordinates to tell him that it was only done by people under Yang Yi, most of what he did was the same.

古文：岁中，改兵部，升大学士、知通进银台司兼门下封驳事。
现代文：年中，他改任兵部侍郎，升为大学士、知通进银台司兼门下封驳事。
English: In the middle of the year, he was reassigned to the position of Hyobushirō, promoted to Daigaku-shihaku (university degree), and promoted to the position of Chitōtsu-shin-Gindai-tsukasa (deputy director of the Bank of Japan) as well as his subordinate.

古文：初，钦若罢，为置资政殿学士以宠之，准定其班在翰林学士下。
现代文：起初，王钦若罢职，真宗为他设置资政殿学士以宠爱他，寇准把他的等级定在翰林学士下面。
English: At first, if Wang Qin were to step down from his post, Zhenzong would give him the title of Scholar of the House of Councillors in order to favor him, while Koujun would set his rank below that of Scholar of Hanlin.

古文：钦若诉于帝，复加 大 字，班承旨上。
现代文：王钦若向真宗诉说，真宗又为他增加 大 字为大学士，其等级承圣旨定为上等。
English: If Wang Qin appealed to the True Sect, the True Sect would add the title of "university scholar" to his name, and his grade would be set as "superior."

古文：以尚书左丞知枢密院事，修国史。
现代文：王钦若又以尚书左丞知枢密院事，修纂国史。
English: Wang Qinruo also used Shangshu Zuozhong to learn about the Privy Council and revise the national history.

古文：大中祥符初，为封禅经度制置使兼判兖州，为天书仪卫副使。
现代文：大中祥符初年，王钦若任封禅经度制置使兼兖州通判，任天书仪卫副使。
English: In the first year of Xiangfu Junior High School, Wang Qinruo was appointed as the envoy for the establishment of the Fuzhen Longitude System and the general magistrate of Zhangzhou, and the deputy envoy of Tianshui Wei.

古文：先是，真宗尝梦神人言 赐天书于泰山 ，即密谕钦若。
现代文：此前，真宗曾梦见神人说： 赐天书于泰山。 就悄悄告诉了王钦若。
English: Previously, Shinshu had dreamed of a god who said, "Give the heavenly book to Mount Tai," and quietly told Wang Qinruo.

古文：钦若因言，六月甲午，木工董祚于醴泉亭北见黄素曳草上，有字不能识，皇城吏王居正见其上有御名，以告。
现代文：王钦若于是说，六月甲午日，木匠董祚在醴泉亭北边看见黄色的绢书在草地上，上面有字不认识。皇城官吏王居正看见上面有御名，报告了这事。
English: Wang Qinruo then said that on the afternoon of the first day of the sixth month, the carpenter Dong Jun saw a yellow scribble on the grass on the north side of the spring pavilion, with unknown words on it. The imperial city official Wang Jiu saw the name on it and reported the matter.

古文：钦若既得之，具威仪奉导至社首，跪授中使，驰奉以进。
现代文：王钦若得到天书后，备办着威严的仪式捧着它走到社首，跪着授给宦官，宦官捧着它飞驰进献真宗。
English: After receiving the heavenly book, Wang Qin would walk to the head of the community holding it in a solemn ceremony, kneel down and present it to the eunuch, who would hold it aloft and gallop into Xianzhong.

古文：真宗至含芳园奉迎，出所上《天书再降祥瑞图》示百僚。
现代文：真宗来到含芳园恭迎天书，真宗拿出所献上的《天书再降祥瑞图》给百官看。
English: Shinshu came to Ganfangyuan to welcome the heavenly book, and Shinshu took out the presented "Heavenly Book Relegated to Xiangrui Map" to show to the hundred officials.

古文：钦若又言至岳下两梦神人，愿增建庙庭。及至威雄将军庙，其神像如梦中所见，因请构亭庙中。
现代文：王钦若又说到大山下两次梦见神人，希望增建庙庭；等到至威雄将军庙，其神像像梦中所见到的一样，于是请求在庙中建亭。
English: Wang Qin also said that he had dreamed of a god-man twice at the foot of the mountain and hoped to build an additional temple garden. When he arrived at the General Weixiong's temple, the statue of the god was just like the one he had seen in his dream, so he asked for a pavilion to be built in the temple.

古文：封禅礼成，迁礼部尚书，命作《社首颂》，迁户部尚书。
现代文：封禅之礼完成，王钦若升任礼部尚书，受命作《社首颂》，升任户部尚书。
English: After the completion of the ceremony of sealing Zen, Wang Qin was promoted to the position of the secretary of the ceremony department, was ordered to write the "Song of the Head of the Society," and was promoted to the position of the secretary of the household department.

古文：从祀汾阴，复为天书仪卫副使，迁吏部尚书。
现代文：他随真宗祭祀汾阴，又任天书仪卫副使，升任吏部尚书。
English: He followed the Shennong sect in worshiping the Yin and Yang deities, and was also appointed as the deputy envoy of the Divine Office of Ceremonies and Ceremonies, and was promoted to the position of the clerk of the Office of Ceremonies.

古文：明年，为枢密使、检校太傅、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：次年，王钦若任枢密使、检校太傅、同中书门下平章事。
English: The following year, Wang Qinruo was appointed as a privy councilor, inspector of schools, and scholar of the same school.

古文：初，学士晁迥草制，误削去官，有诏仍带吏部尚书。
现代文：最初，学士晁迥草拟诏书，因错误削去官职，皇帝下诏仍令他带吏部尚书职。
English: At first, the bachelor drafted the imperial edict, but because of an error, he was stripped of his official post. The emperor still ordered him to take the clerk's post as a clerk under the imperial edict.

古文：圣祖降，加检校太尉。
现代文：圣祖降，加任检校太尉。
English: Sheng Zu was demoted and promoted to the rank of inspector first lieutenant.

古文：钦若居第在太庙后壖，自言出入诃导不自安，因易赐官第于安定坊。
现代文：王钦若的住宅在太庙后面的空地，他说出入时开路喝斥影响太庙自己心中不安，于是真宗在定安坊改赐给他宅第。
English: Wang Qinruo's residence is in the open space behind the Great Temple. He said that when he went in and out, the road was open and the yelling affected the Great Temple. He was uneasy in his heart, so the True Sect gave him a residence in Ding'anfang.

古文：七年，为同天书刻玉使。
现代文：大中祥符七年，他任同天书刻玉使。
English: In the seventh year of his junior high school career, he was appointed the same day as Shukoku Gyokushi.

古文：马知节同在枢密，素恶钦若，议论不相下。
现代文：马知节同王钦若在枢密院，一向厌恶王钦若，议论政事意见不同。
English: Ma Ji Jie and Wang Qin Rong in the Privy Council have always disliked Wang Qin Rong and have different opinions on political affairs.

古文：会泸州都巡检王怀信等上平蛮功，钦若久不决，知节因面诋其短，争于帝前。
现代文：恰逢泸州都巡检王怀信等人上奏平蛮之功，王钦若很久还没批决，马知节于是当面诋毁王钦若的短处，两人在真宗面前争辩。
English: At the same time, Wang Huixin and others, the inspector of the Bozhou Capital, were playing the role of mediocrity. Wang Qinru had not been approved for a long time, so Ma Ji Jie slandered Wang Qinru's shortcomings in person, and the two argued in front of the true sect.

古文：及趣论赏，钦若遂擅除怀信等官，坐是，罢枢密使，奉朝请。
现代文：及催促论功行赏，王钦若遂擅自授王怀信等人以官职，因此获罪，王钦若被罢免枢密使，逢一日、五日朝见皇帝。
English: If Wang Qin succeeds in appointing Wang Huixin and others to official posts without authorization, he will be found guilty. If Wang Qin is dismissed as a privy envoy, he will meet the emperor in the morning every day and every five days.

古文：改刻玉副使、知通进银台司。
现代文：改任刻玉副使、知通进银台司。
English: He was reappointed as the vice-envoy of Kitagyama, and Chitose as the director of the Bank of Taiwan.

古文：复拜枢密使、同平章事。
现代文：后又升任枢密使、同平章事。
English: Later, he was promoted to Privy Counsellor, and received the same rank.

古文：上玉皇尊号，迁尚书右仆射、判礼仪院，为会灵观使。
现代文：王钦若向皇上进献玉皇尊号，升任尚书右仆射、判礼仪院，为会灵观使。
English: If Wang Qin were to present the honorary title of the Jade Emperor to the emperor, he would be promoted to the position of Shangshu Righteous Servant, Shao, and Zhan Rites Institute, and would be the spiritual leader of the meeting.

古文：有龟蛇见拱圣营，因其地建详源观，命钦若总领之。
现代文：有龟蛇出现在拱圣营，在此地建祥源观，命王钦若总领管理。
English: A turtle snake appeared in Gong Sheng Camp, and the Xiangyuan Temple was built here, under the general management of King Qin Ruo.

古文：寻拜左仆射兼中书侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：不久升任左仆射兼中书侍郎、同平章事。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to the position of the left-hand servant of Sho and the junior secretary of the middle school, and the same rank as Shoji.

古文：明年，为景灵使，阅《道藏》，得赵氏神仙事迹四十人，绘于廊庑。
现代文：次年，任景灵观使，检阅《道藏》，得到赵氏神仙事迹四十人，把他们画在走廊上。
English: The following year, Jing Lingguan inspected "Tibetan Taoism" and obtained forty people of Zhao's immortal deeds, and painted them on the corridor.

古文：又明年，商州捕得道士谯文易，畜禁书，能以术使六丁六甲神，自言尝出入钦若家，得钦若所遗诗。
现代文：大中祥符九年，商州捉得道士谯文易，他积聚有禁书，能以法术驱使六丁六甲神，亲自说曾出入王钦若的家，得到王钦若所赠送的诗。
English: In the ninth year of the Great Middle Xiangfu, the Taoist priest Zou Wenyi was caught in Shangzhou. He had accumulated forbidden books and could use magic to drive the six deities, and he personally said that he had visited Wang Qinruo's home and received a poem presented by Wang Qinruo.

古文：帝以问钦若，谢不省，遂以太子太保出判杭州。
现代文：真宗以该事问王钦若，王钦若辞谢不知此事，于是王钦若以太子太保衔外任判杭州。
English: If Wang Qinzong asked Wang Qinzong about the matter, Wang Qinzong would not know about it, so Wang Qinzong awarded Hangzhou the title of Tai Bao.

古文：仁宗为皇太子，自以东宫师保请归朝，复为资政大学士。
现代文：宋仁宗赵桢为皇太子，亲自以王钦若为东宫老师的名义保请他归朝，又任资政殿大学士。
English: Song Renzong Zhao Wei was the crown prince, and he personally invited Wang Qinruo to return to the imperial court in the name of Wang Qinruo as the teacher of the East Palace. He was also appointed as a scholar of the Palace of Councillors.

古文：诏日赴资善堂侍讲皇太子。
现代文：真宗诏令王钦若每天去资善堂为皇太子侍讲。
English: The Imperial edict of the Shinshu Sect ordered Wang Qin to go to Shizen-do every day to serve as an assistant lecturer for the crown prince.

古文：会辅臣兼领三少，钦若以品高求换秩，拜司空，寻除山南道节度使、同平章事、判河南府。
现代文：正好辅臣兼任三少，王钦若以自己官品高请求调换他职，被授职司空，不久授任山南道节度使、同平章事、判河南府。
English: It was a good thing that the assistant minister concurrently held the post of San Shao. If Wang Qin, with his high official qualities, requested to change his post, he would be awarded the post of Sikyong, and soon he would be awarded the post of Shannan Provincial Party Secretary, Tongping Provincial Party Secretary, and Henan Provincial Party Secretary.

古文：与宰相丁谓不相悦，以疾请就医京师，不报。
现代文：王钦若与宰相丁谓不和，以疾病请求到京城就医治疗，朝廷没答复。
English: If Wang Qin was at odds with Prime Minister Ding, and requested to go to Beijing for medical treatment due to illness, the imperial court did not reply.

古文：令其子从益移文河南府，舆疾而归。
现代文：王钦若叫儿子王从益传文河南府，带病回到京城。
English: Wang Qinru called his son Wang Congyi to Henan Province, and he came back to Beijing with an illness.

古文：谓言钦若擅去官守，命御史中丞薛映就第按问。
现代文：丁谓说王钦若擅离职守，命御史中丞薛映到他住宅追究。
English: Ding reportedly said that if Wang Qin left his post without permission, he would order the chief historian Xue Ying to go to his home to investigate.

古文：钦若惶恐伏罪，降司农卿、分司南京，夺从益一官。
现代文：王钦若惶恐认罪，被降职为司农卿，分管南京，削夺王从益一级官职。
English: Wang Qinlu panicked and confessed to the crime. He was demoted to the post of Secretary of Agriculture, in charge of Nanjing, depriving Wang Congyi of a first-class official post.

古文：仁宗即位，改秘书监，起为太常卿、知濠州，以刑部尚书知江宁府。
现代文：宋仁宗登帝位，王钦若改任秘书监，被起用为太常卿、濠州知州，以刑部尚书衔知江宁府。
English: When Song Renzong ascended to the throne, Wang Qin was appointed as secretary-superintendent, and he was also appointed as Tai Changqing, Zhangzhou Chizhou, and Jiangningfu with the title of Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：仁宗尝为飞白书，适钦若有奏至，因大书 王钦若 字。
现代文：仁宗曾作书法飞白体，恰巧王钦若有奏折到，仁宗就大书 王钦若 三字。
English: Rinzong once wrote calligraphy in cursive. If Wang Qin happened to have a composition, Rinzong would write Wang Qin with three characters.

古文：是时，冯拯病，太后有再相钦若意，即取字缄置汤药合，遣中人赍以赐，且口宣召之。
现代文：此时，冯拯生病，皇太后有再次拜王钦若为宰相之意，就拿着仁宗所书三字的纸放在盛汤药的盒子里，派宦官携带着赐给王钦若，且口头宣示召见他。
English: At this time, Feng Zheng fell ill, and the empress dowager had the intention of once again making Wang Qinruo the prime minister, so she took the three-character paper written by Ren Zong and placed it in a box of soup medicine, and sent an eunuch to bring it to Wang Qinruo, and verbally announced to summon him.

古文：至国门而人未有知者。
现代文：至国都门却没有人知道。
English: But no one knows how it got to the capital.

古文：既朝，复拜司空、门下侍郎、同平章事、玉清昭应宫使、昭文馆大学士，监修国史。
现代文：朝见后，再授王钦若为司空、门下侍郎、同平章事、玉清昭应宫使、昭文馆大学士、监修国史。
English: After the morning meeting, Wang Qinruo was awarded the titles of Secretary of the Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager.

古文：帝初临政，钦若谓平时百官叙进，皆有常法，为《迁叙图》以献。
现代文：仁宗皇帝当初亲临朝政，王钦若说平常百官升迁，都有固定的制度，作《迁叙图》献上。
English: At that time, Emperor Renzong was personally in charge of the imperial government. Wang Qinruo said that there was a fixed system for the normal promotion of officials, and presented the "Scenery of Promotion."

古文：《真宗实录》成，进司徒，以郊祀恩，封冀国公。
现代文：《真宗实录》编成，王钦若进升司徒，因郊祭之恩，被封冀国公。
English: According to the "True Record of the True Sect," if Wang Qin were to be promoted to the priesthood, he would be enthroned as the Prince of Hebei Province thanks to the grace of the suburb festival.

古文：知邵武军吴植病，求外徙，因殿中丞余谔以黄金遗钦若，未至，而植复遣牙吏至钦若第问之。
现代文：知邵武军吴植生病，请求外调，通过殿中丞余谔用黄金送给王钦若，尚未送到，而吴植又派小吏到王钦若家里询问此事。
English: Knowing that Shao Wu's army Wu Zhi was ill, he requested to be transferred out, and sent gold to Wang Qinruo through the palace chancellor Yu Xi, but it had not yet been delivered, and Wu Zhi also sent a minor official to Wang Qinruo's home to inquire about the matter.

古文：钦若执以送官，植、谔皆坐贬。
现代文：王钦若执拿他们送官府。吴植、余谔都坐罪贬官。
English: If Wang Qin persisted in taking them, he would be sent to the government office. Wu Zhi and Yu Xi were both punished and demoted.

古文：初，钦若安抚西川，植为新繁县尉，尝荐举之。
现代文：起初，王钦若安抚西川，吴植任新繁县尉，王钦若曾荐举他。
English: At first, if Wang Qin had appeased Xichuan, Wu Zhi would have been appointed as Xinxiang County Lieutenant, and if Wang Qin had recommended him, he would have been promoted.

古文：至是，亦当以失举坐罪，诏勿问。
现代文：至此，王钦若也应当按失察判罪，仁宗下诏不予追究。
English: At this point, if Wang Qin should also be convicted of negligence, Rinzong will not be prosecuted.

古文：兼译经使，始赴传法院，感疾亟归。
现代文：王钦若兼任译经使，刚去传法院，感染疾病急忙回家。
English: Wang Qin, who also served as a translator, had just gone to the courthouse to deliver a message when he contracted the disease and hurried home.

古文：帝临问，赐白金五千两。
现代文：仁宗亲临慰问，赏赐银五千两。
English: Rinzong came in person to offer his condolences and was rewarded with 5,000 taels of silver.

古文：既卒，赠太师、中书令，谥文穆，录亲属及所亲信二十余人。
现代文：王钦若死后，朝廷赠他太师、中书令，谥号文穆，且录用他的亲属以及他所亲信的人二十多个。
English: After Wang Qinruo's death, the imperial court presented him with the titles of Grand Master, Grand Master of the Chinese Academy of Letters, and the nickname Wenmu, and hired more than twenty of his relatives and confidants.

古文：国朝以来宰相恤恩，未有钦若比者。
现代文：宋开国以来，宰相蒙受恤恩，没有能与王钦若相比的。
English: Since the founding of the Song Dynasty, no prime minister has been so favored as Wang Qinruo.

古文：钦若尝言： 少时过圃田，夜起视天中，赤文成 紫微 字。
现代文：王钦若曾说： 我小时候经过圃田，晚上起来看天空，红色的花纹变成 紫微 两字。
English: Wang Qinruo once said: "When I was a child, I walked through the fields. In the evening, I got up and looked at the sky.

古文：后使蜀，至褒城道中，遇异人，告以他日位至宰相。
现代文：后来出使蜀地，到褒城道中，遇见异人，他告诉我将来位至宰相。
English: Later, when I was sent on an assignment to Shu, I met a stranger in the middle of Baocheng Road. He told me that he would become the prime minister.

古文：既去，视其刺字，则唐相裴度也。 及贵，遂好神仙之事，常用道家科仪建坛场以礼神，朱书 紫微 二字陈于坛上。
现代文：他离去后，看他刺的字，就是唐朝宰相裴度。 王钦若富贵后，于是喜好神仙之事，常常按道家科仪建坛场用以敬神，用红笔写 紫微 二字陈放在坛上。
English: After he left, he saw that the character he had engraved was Pei Du, the prime minister of the Tang Dynasty. After Wang Qin became rich and noble, he liked the things of the gods, and often built an altar to worship God according to the Taoist ritual. He wrote the two characters "紫微" and "陈" with a red pen and placed them on the altar.

古文：表修裴度祠于圃田，官其裔孙，自撰文以纪其事。
现代文：向皇帝上表修建裴度祠于圃田，授官给裴度后裔子孙，亲自撰文以记录裴度的事迹。
English: He ordered the emperor to build a Pei Du ancestral shrine in Putian, conferred official positions on the descendants of Pei Du, and personally wrote an article to record the deeds of Pei Du.

古文：真宗封泰山、祀汾阴，而天下争言符瑞，皆钦若与丁谓倡之。
现代文：宋真宗封禅泰山，祭祀汾阴，天下争谈符吉兆，这都是王钦若与丁谓首倡的。
English: The Song Zhen sect enshrines Mount Tai in Zen, worships the yin and yang, and talks about auspicious signs all over the world, all of which were initiated by Wang Qin Ruo and Ding Zuo.

古文：尝建议躬谒元德皇太后别庙，为庄穆皇后行期服。
现代文：王钦若曾建议皇帝亲自拜见元德皇太后别庙，为庄穆皇后服丧一年。
English: If Wang Qin had suggested that the emperor personally visit the former German empress dowager in another temple, it would have been a year of mourning for Empress Zhuangmu.

古文：议者以为天子当绝傍期，钦若所言不合礼。
现代文：有人议论认为天子应当断绝一周年的服丧限制，王钦若所说的不符合礼制。
English: Some people argue that the Son of Heaven should break the one-year mourning restriction, and what Wang Qinru said is not in line with the etiquette.

古文：又请置先蚕并寿星祠，升天皇北极帝坐于郊坛第一龛，增执法、孙星位，别制王公以下车辂、鼓吹，以备拜官、婚葬。
现代文：王钦若又请求设置先蚕和寿星祠，升天皇北极帝坐星为郊祭坛上第一龛，增加执法、孙星的位子，另外制作王公以下的车辂、鼓吹，以准备授官、婚喜丧葬时使用。
English: If Wang Qin also requests the setting up of the first silkworm and the birthday star shrine, the Emperor's North Pole Star will be the first star on the suburban altar, the seats of the law enforcement and the sun star will be increased, and the carriage and trumpet below the prince will be made to prepare for the awarding of officials and the use of weddings and funerals.

古文：所著书有《卤簿记》、《彤管懿范》、《天书仪制》、《圣祖事迹》、《翊圣真君传》、《五岳广闻记》、《列宿万灵朝真图》、《罗天大醮仪》。
现代文：王钦若所著的书有《卤簿记》、《彤管懿范》、《天书仪制》、《圣祖事迹》、《翊圣真君传》、《五岳广闻记》、《列宿万灵朝真图》、《罗天大醮仪》。
English: Wang Qinruo's books include "Halogen Bookkeeping," "Qing Guan Xuan Fan," "Heavenly Book Rites System," "Story of the Holy Ancestors," "Biography of King Sheng Zhen," "Wu Yue Guan Meng Ji," "Map of the World of All Souls" and "Luo Tian Da Zhen Yi."

古文：钦若自以深达道教，多所建明，领校道书，凡增六百余卷。
现代文：王钦若自认为很通晓道教，多有所建议阐明，领头校对道书，总计增加六百多卷。
English: If Wang Qin thinks that he is well versed in Taoism, he will have more suggestions to clarify, and lead the proofreading of Taoist books, adding a total of more than six hundred volumes.

古文：钦若状貌短小，项有附疣，时人目为 癭相 。
现代文：王钦若体形矮小，脖子上长有赘瘤，当时人称之为 颈瘤宰相 。
English: If Wang Qin was short and had a mole on his neck, people called him the "cervical tumor prime minister" at that time.

古文：然智数过人，每朝廷有所兴造，委曲迁就，以中帝意。
现代文：然而他智力权术超过其他人，每当朝廷有所建造，他能委屈迁就，以便符合皇帝的心意。
English: However, he was intellectually superior to the others, and whenever there was construction at court, he would bend over backwards to accommodate the emperor's wishes.

古文：又性倾巧，敢为矫诞。
现代文：他的性情好倾轧伪诈，敢做假传命令欺骗人的事。
English: He has a propensity to commit fraud, and he dares to issue fake orders to deceive people.

古文：马知节尝斥其奸状，帝亦不之罪。
现代文：马知节曾斥责他狡诈的情况，皇帝也没有治他的罪。
English: Machisetsu had rebuked him for his deceitful ways, but the emperor did not punish him.

古文：濰亦有吏能，历官至三司盐铁副使，以秘书监致仕，卒。
现代文：其后宋仁宗曾对辅佐大臣说： 王钦若长久担任朝廷官职，观察他的所作所为，确实是奸邪呵。 王曾回答说 ：王钦若与丁谓、林特、陈彭年、刘承王圭，当时称他们为 五鬼 。
English: Later, Song Renzong said to the assistant minister: "If Wang Qin Rong holds the post of imperial official for a long time, observing his behavior is indeed treachery." Wang replied: "If Wang Qin Rong and Ding Zhuo, Lin Te, Chen Peng Nian, Liu Cheng Wang Gui, they were called the Five Ghosts at that time.

古文：洙，官至司农卿、知寿州，临事苛急，鼓角将夜入州廨，拔堂槛铁钩击杀之。
现代文：奸滑、邪恶、阴险诈伪，的确像皇上所谕示的。 王钦若的儿子王从益，死前任赞善大夫，被追赠进士及第。
English: Treacherous, evil, insidious, and deceitful, he is indeed as the emperor has decreed. Wang Qinruo's son, Wang Congyi, the deceased predecessor of Zanzan Doctor, was posthumously awarded the title of Jin Shi and the first rank.

古文：丁谓，字谓之，后更字公言，苏州长洲人。
现代文：后没有儿子，以叔叔的儿子作为后代。丁谓，字谓之，后来改字为公言，苏州长洲人。
English: Later, he had no son, but took his uncle's son as his descendant. Ding Zhe, the character Zhe Zhe, was later changed to Gong Zhen, the person from Suzhou Province.

古文：少与孙何友善，同袖文谒王禹偁，禹偁大惊重之，以为自唐韩愈、柳宗元后，二百年始有此作。
现代文：他年轻时与孙何友善，一起把文章藏在袖子里拜见王禹翶，王禹翶很惊奇重视他们，认为从唐朝韩愈、柳宗元以后，二百年才有这等创作。
English: When he was young, he was friendly with Sun He, and together they hid articles in their sleeves to meet Wang Ufan. Wang Ufan was very surprised at the importance he attached to them, and thought that such works were only created two hundred years after Han Yu and Liu Zongyuan in the Tang Dynasty.

古文：世谓之 孙丁 。
现代文：世人称他们为 孙、丁 。
English: The world calls them Sun and Ding.

古文：淳化三年，登进士甲科，为大理评事、通判饶州。
现代文：淳化三年，丁谓中进士甲科，任大理评事、饶州通判。
English: In the third year of Chunhua, Ding was promoted to Junior High School Junior Division A, appointed as a university critic, and a Raozhou judge.

古文：逾年，直史馆，以太子中允为福建路采访。
现代文：过一年，他任直史馆，以太子中允衔任福建路采访使。
English: A year later, he was appointed to the direct history museum, and he was appointed to the Fujian Road interview envoy.

古文：还，上茶盐利害，遂为转运使，除三司户部判官。
现代文：他回朝后，上奏茶盐的利弊，于是任转运使，升三司户部判官。
English: After he returned to the imperial court, he explained the pros and cons of tea and salt, and was appointed a transfer envoy and promoted to judge of the Third Division of the Household Department.

古文：峡路蛮扰边，命往体量。
现代文：峡州路少数民族骚扰边地，朝廷命令他前去体察衡量轻重设法解决。
English: He was ordered by the imperial court to go to the border areas where ethnic minorities were harassing people on the Xiaozhou Road to investigate, weigh up the situation and try to resolve it.

古文：还奏称旨，领峡路转运使，累迁尚书工部员外郎，会分川峡为四路，改夔州路。
现代文：他回朝上奏符合皇帝的意图，任峡州路转运使，接连升至尚书工部员外郎，恰好分川峡为四路，改任夔州路转运使。
English: In accordance with the emperor's intention, he returned to the morning to report to the emperor, and was appointed as the transfer envoy of Xiaozhou Road. He was successively promoted to the member of Shang Shuxigong Department, just as the Sichuan Gorge was divided into four roads, he was appointed as the transfer envoy of Zhangzhou Road.

古文：初，王均叛，朝廷调施、黔、高、溪州蛮子弟以捍贼，既而反为寇。
现代文：起初，王均反叛朝廷，朝廷调遣施、黔、高、溪州蛮族武装抵御王均，不久这些少数民族武装反而反叛朝廷。
English: At first, Wang Jun rebelled against the imperial court, and the imperial court dispatched barbarian armed forces from Shi, Yan, Gao, and Xizhou to resist Wang Jun. Soon, however, these armed ethnic minorities rebelled against the imperial court.

古文：谓至，召其种酋开谕之，且言有诏赦不杀。
现代文：丁谓到此，召集少数民族酋长，开导晓谕他们，且说皇帝有诏赦免不杀他们。
English: At this point, Ding called together ethnic minority chiefs to enlighten and instruct them, and said that the emperor had issued an edict to pardon them and not to kill them.

古文：酋感泣，愿世奉贡。
现代文：酋长感激流涕，愿意世代进贡。
English: The chief is grateful and is willing to pay tribute for generations.

古文：乃作誓刻石柱，立境上。
现代文：于是立誓言刻石柱，竖立在边境上。
English: So they set up an oath-carving stone pillar and erected it on the border.

古文：蛮地饶粟而常乏盐，谓听以粟易盐，蛮人大悦。
现代文：少数民族地区富产粟米而缺乏食盐，丁谓允许用粟米交换食盐，当地人十分高兴。
English: Ethnic minority areas are rich in poppy and lack salt, but Ding is said to have allowed the exchange of poppy for salt, which made the local people very happy.

古文：先时，屯兵施州而馈以夔、万州粟。
现代文：以前，朝廷驻军施州却吃夔州、万州的粟米。
English: In the past, the imperial garrison in Shizhou ate millet from Banzhou and Zhangzhou.

古文：至是，民无转饷之劳，施之诸砦，积聚皆可给。
现代文：至此，百姓没有转运军饷的劳役，施州各寨，积蓄聚集起来都可自给。
English: At this point, the people do not have the labor of transporting military pay, Shizhou each village, savings can be self-sufficient.

古文：特迁刑部员外郎，赐白金三百两。
现代文：朝廷特别升丁谓为刑部员外郎，赏赐银三百两。
English: The imperial court specially promoted Ding to the position of vice-minister of justice, and rewarded him with 300 taels of silver.

古文：时溪蛮别种有入寇者，谓遣高、溪酋帅其徒讨击，出兵援之，擒生蛮六百六十，得所掠汉口四百余人。
现代文：当时溪蛮另外一些部落入境骚扰，丁谓调遣高、溪少数民族首领率其兵讨击，又派宋兵援助他们，俘生蛮六百六十人，获得他们所抢掠的汉人口四百多人。
English: At that time, some other tribes in Xixi were harassed by the entry of other tribes. Ding Zuo dispatched Gao and Xixi ethnic minority leaders to lead their soldiers to fight, and also sent Song soldiers to assist them. They captured more than 660 people, and obtained more than 400 Han people they robbed.

古文：复上言：黔南蛮族多善马，请致馆，犒给缗帛，岁收市之。
现代文：丁谓又上奏说： 黔南的少数民族大多擅长养马，请传达三馆衙门，犒赏缗帛，每年征收购买马匹。 
English: Ding Zita also said: Most of the ethnic minorities in southern Fujian are good at raising horses. Please convey to the three embassies that they should be encouraged to purchase horses every year.

古文：其后徙置夔州城砦，皆谓所经画也。
现代文：此后又迁徙少数民族。设置夔州城寨，都是丁谓所治理筹划的。
English: Since then, ethnic minorities have also migrated. The establishment of Zhangzhou Walled City was all planned by Ding Zuo.

古文：居五年，不得代，乃诏举自代者，于是入权三司盐铁副使。
现代文：丁谓管理该事五年，朝廷找不到合适的人选代替他，就下诏求自愿替代该职的人，丁谓于是入朝暂代理三司盐铁副使。
English: After five years of managing the matter, the imperial court could not find a suitable candidate to replace him, so it issued an edict to voluntarily replace the person in the position. Ding then went to the DPRK to temporarily act as the deputy envoy of the Third Salt and Iron Division.

古文：未几，擢知制诰，判吏部流内铨。
现代文：没多久，被提拔为知制诰，判吏部流内铨。
English: Not long after, he was promoted to the position of chief magistrate.

古文：景德四年，契丹犯河北，真宗幸澶渊，以谓知郓州兼齐、濮等州安抚使，提举转运兵马巡检事。
现代文：景德四年，契丹入侵河北，宋真宗亲征澶渊，任丁谓为郓州知州兼齐、濮等州安抚使，提举转运兵马巡检事。
English: In the fourth year of King Jingde, the Khitan invaded Hebei, Song Zhenzong personally led a campaign to conquer Fengtian, appointed Ding as the pacification envoy of Fengtian, Zhizhou, Jianqi, and other provinces, and appointed him as the inspector of troop and horse transportation.

古文：契丹深入，民惊扰，争趣杨刘渡，而舟人邀利，不时济。
现代文：契丹侵入内地，百姓惊惧混乱，争着奔向杨刘渡，而船主抬价求利，不按时开船渡河。
English: The Khitan invaded the inland, the people were alarmed by the chaos and rushed to Yang Liu Wudu, while the ship owner raised the price for profit and did not sail across the river on time.

古文：谓取死罪绐为舟人，斩河上，舟人惧，民得悉渡。
现代文：丁谓拿犯了死罪的人假扮成船主，斩杀在黄河岸上，船主都畏惧，百姓得以全部坐船渡过黄河。
English: Ding is said to have used a person who had committed a capital crime to pose as a boat owner and killed him on the bank of the Yellow River. The boat owners were afraid, and the people were all able to cross the Yellow River by boat.

古文：遂立部分，使并河执旗帜，击刁斗，呼声闻百余里，契丹遂引去。
现代文：丁谓遂马上把部队分开，使士兵沿着黄河岸执旗帜，互相攻击打斗，呼喊声传闻到百里外，契丹兵惊惧退去。
English: Ding Zhe immediately separated the troops, so that the soldiers held flags along the Yellow River bank, attacked each other and fought. The shouts were heard a hundred miles away, and the Khitan soldiers retreated in fright.

古文：明年，召为右谏议大夫、权三司使。
现代文：第二年，丁谓被任命为右谏议大夫、权三司使。
English: In the following year, Ding Zetian was appointed as the doctor of the Right Division of the Legislative Yuan and the envoy of the three departments of power.

古文：上《会计录》，以景德四年民赋户口之籍，较咸平六年之数，具上史馆，请自今以咸平籍为额，岁较其数以闻，诏奖之。
现代文：他进献《会计录》，按照景德四年百姓赋税户口之名册，比较咸平六年的数额，全部送上史馆，请从今以后以咸平时赋税名册作为定数，每年比较该定数报告当年赋税情况，皇帝下诏嘉奖他。
English: He presented the "Accounting Record," according to the roster of people's tax accounts in the four years of Jingdezhen, compared the amount of the six years of the Heian period, and sent them all to the history museum. From now on, please use the tax roster of the Heian period as a constant, and compare the constant report of the tax situation of that year every year. The emperor commended him.

古文：寻加枢密直学士。
现代文：不久他兼任枢密直学士。
English: He was soon appointed a Privy Fellow.

古文：大中祥符初，议封禅，未决，帝问以经费，谓对 大计有余 ，议乃决。
现代文：大中祥符初，朝廷商议封禅，没定下来，宋真宗问此行的经费情况，丁谓答以 大概估计有多余 ，封禅之事才定下来。
English: At the beginning of the Great Middle Xiangfu, the imperial court discussed the sealing of Zen, but it was not settled, Song Zhenzong asked about the funding of this trip, Ding Zu replied that it was probably estimated to be superfluous, and the matter of sealing Zen was only settled.

古文：因诏谓为计度泰山路粮草使。
现代文：于是诏令丁谓任计度泰山路粮草使。
English: Therefore, the Emperor ordered Ding to be appointed as the Grain and Grass Commissioner of Taishan Road.

古文：初，议即宫城乾地营玉清昭应宫，左右有谏者。
现代文：起初，朝廷商议在靠近宫城的干地营建玉清昭应宫，真宗左右有进谏反对的。
English: At first, the imperial court discussed building the Jade Emperor's Palace on dry land close to the palace city, but the Shinshu sect and others opposed it.

古文：帝召问，谓对曰： 陛下有天下之富，建一宫奉上帝，且所以祈皇嗣也。
现代文：真宗召丁谓询问，丁谓回答： 皇上拥有天下的财富，修建一宫奉侍上天，况且是用以祈求皇嗣。
English: The True Sect summoned Ding Zui to inquire, and Ding Zui replied: The emperor has the wealth of the world, built a palace to serve the heavens, and moreover, it is used to pray for the imperial heir.

古文：群臣有沮陛下者，愿以此论之。 王旦密疏谏，帝如谓所对告之，旦不复敢言。
现代文：群臣中有阻止皇上的，希望用此理由辩论他们。 王旦秘密上疏进谏，真宗按丁谓所回答的告诉他，王旦不再敢说什么了。
English: Some of the courtiers tried to dissuade the emperor, hoping to use this as a reason to argue with him, but Wang Dan secretly slipped into the cocoon and told him that Wang Dan no longer dared to say anything.

古文：乃以谓为修玉清昭应宫使，复为天书扶侍使，迁给事中，真拜三司使。
现代文：真宗于是以丁谓任修玉清昭应宫使，又任天书扶侍使，升任给事中，实授官三司使。
English: Therefore, the True Sect asked Ding Zhao to appoint Xiu Yu Qing Zhao as the palace envoy, and also appointed him as the messenger of the heavenly book, and promoted him to the middle of the matter, and appointed him as the envoy of the three departments.

古文：祀汾阴，为行在三司使。
现代文：祭祀汾阴，他任行在三司使。
English: He was appointed as the third envoy to perform the rite of Jieyin.

古文：建会灵观，谓复总领之。
现代文：建造会灵观，丁谓又总管该事。
English: The construction will be spiritual, and Ding Zuo will be in charge of it.

古文：迁尚书礼部侍郎，进户部，参知政事。
现代文：他调任尚书礼部侍郎，入户部，参知政事。
English: He was transferred to the Shosho Ceremonial Department as a chamberlain, then to the Household Department, and finally to the Council of State.

古文：建安军铸玉皇像，为迎奉使。
现代文：建安军铸造玉皇像，他任迎奉使。
English: The Jianan Army cast a statue of the Jade Emperor, and he was appointed as the welcoming envoy.

古文：朝谒太清宫，为奉祀经度制置使、判亳州。
现代文：朝拜太清宫，他任奉祀经度制置使、判亳州。
English: He paid homage to the Taiqing Palace, and was appointed as the Minister of the Longitude System, and was awarded the title of Zhangye Prefecture.

古文：帝赐宴赋诗以宠其行，命权管勾驾前兵马事。
现代文：真宗赐宴席赋诗以使他此行荣耀，任命他权管勾驾前兵马事。
English: Shingzong gave the banquet Fu Shi to make him the glory of this trip, and appointed him to be in charge of the former soldiers and horses.

古文：谓献白鹿并灵芝九万五千本。
现代文：丁谓进献白鹿井灵芝九万五千根。
English: Ding said that the donation of Shirakwai Lingzhi amounted to ninety-five thousand.

古文：还，判礼仪院，又为修景灵宫使，摹写天书刻玉笈，玉清昭应宫副使。
现代文：回朝后，丁谓判礼仪院，又任修景灵宫使，摹写天书雕刻玉质书箱，为玉清昭应宫副使。
English: After returning to the imperial court, Ding was called the judge of the etiquette academy, and he was also appointed as the envoy to build the Jingling Palace, wrote the heavenly book and carved the jade book box, and was the deputy envoy of the Jade Qing Zhao Ying Palace.

古文：大内火，为修葺使。
现代文：皇帝宫殿内着火，丁谓任修葺使。
English: A fire broke out in the emperor's palace, and Ding Biao was appointed to repair it.

古文：历工、刑、兵三部尚书，再为天书仪卫副使，拜平江军节度使、知升州。
现代文：他历任工、刑、兵三部尚书，又任天书仪卫副使，授官平江军节度使、升州知州。
English: He successively held the posts of the three departments of work, punishment and soldiers, and also served as the deputy envoy of Tianshu Yiwei, the official of the Pingjiang Army, and the promotion of Zhizhou.

古文：天禧初，徙保信军节度使。三年，以吏部尚书复参知政事。
现代文：天禧初年，他调任保信军节度使，天禧三年，他以吏部尚书官衔恢复参知政事。
English: In the first year of the jubilee, he was transferred to be the envoy of the Baoxin Army, and in the third year of the jubilee, he resumed his political activities as a councillor with the official title of the Secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs.

古文：是岁，祀南郊，辅臣俱进官。
现代文：这年，祭天于南郊，辅佐大臣一同升官。
English: That year, Saiten was promoted to Minami Suburban, and the assistant minister was promoted as well.

古文：故事，尝为宰相而除枢密使，始得迁仆射，乃以谓检校太尉兼本官为枢密使。
现代文：先例，曾为宰相而授官枢密使，才得升任仆射，真宗于是以丁谓任检校太尉兼本官为枢密使。
English: As a precedent, a person who had been awarded the post of Privy Counsellor for the Prime Minister could only be promoted to the position of a footman, so it is believed that Ding Zhe was appointed as a school inspector and a Privy Counsellor.

古文：时寇准为相，尤恶谓，谓媒蘖其过，遂罢准相。
现代文：当时寇准当宰相，他特别厌恶丁谓，丁谓构陷寇准的缺点过失，寇准遂被罢免宰相职务。
English: At that time, Kojun was the prime minister. He particularly detested Ding Zuo. Ding Zuo framed Kojun for his shortcomings and mistakes. As a result, Kojun was removed from the post of prime minister.

古文：既而拜谓同中书门下平章事、昭文馆大学士、监修国史、玉清昭应宫使。
现代文：旋即授丁谓同中书门下平章事、昭文馆大学士、监修国史、玉清昭应宫使。
English: He was immediately awarded the title of "Dongzhongshu Men Shimo Pingzhangji," "Shobunkwan University Scholar," "Supervisor of National History," and "Gyoku Qing Zhao Ying Gongshi."

古文：周怀政事败，议再贬准，帝意欲谪准江、淮间，谓退，除道州司马。
现代文：周怀政之事败露，主张再贬寇准官，真宗本意想贬寇准到江、淮之间，丁谓降其职，授寇准道州司马。
English: After Zhou Huai Zheng's affair was exposed, Zhen Zong proposed to demote the official to the rank of brigadier general. Zhen Zong originally wanted to demote the official to the rank of brigadier general between Jiang and Huai, while Ding wanted to demote the official to the rank of brigadier general between Daozhou and Sima.

古文：同列不敢言，独王曾以帝语质之，谓顾曰： 居停主人勿复言。 盖指曾以第舍假准也。
现代文：同僚大臣不敢做声，只有王曾用真宗皇帝的话质问丁谓，丁谓对他说 ：让寇准居住的人不要再说了。 这是指王曾把房屋借给寇准。
English: Fellow ministers did not dare to raise their voices, only Wang used the words of Emperor Zhenzong to question Ding Zuo. Ding Zuo said to him: "Let the people who live in Qujun stop talking." This meant that Wang had lent the house to Qujun.

古文：其后诏皇太子听政，皇后裁制于内，以二府兼东宫官，遂加谓门下侍郎兼太子少傅，而李迪先兼少傅，乃加中书侍郎兼尚书左丞。
现代文：此后真宗诏皇太子赵祯听政，皇后在内裁决发令，以二府兼任东宫官职，于是丁谓加官门下侍郎兼太子少傅，而李迪已经先兼任少傅，丁谓就增兼中书侍郎兼尚书左丞。
English: After that, Emperor Zhenzong decreed that the crown prince Zhao Zhen should listen to the government, and the empress issued a ruling to concurrently hold the official post of the East Palace in two prefectures. Therefore, Ding Zhenzong called for the addition of the official's servant and the prince's junior tutor, while Li Di had already served as a junior tutor, and Ding Zhenzong called for the addition of the junior tutor and the junior tutor.

古文：故事，左、右丞非两省侍郎所兼，而谓意特以抑迪也。
现代文：先例，左右丞不由两省的侍郎兼任，而丁谓企图特以此抑制李迪。
English: As a precedent, the posts of both the left and right consuls were not concurrently held by the attendants of the two provinces, and Ding Zuo specifically attempted to restrain Li Di Rong by this means.

古文：谓所善林特，自宾客改詹事，谓欲引为枢密副使兼宾客，迪执不可，因大诟之。
现代文：丁谓所亲善的林特，从宾客改任詹事，丁谓想引荐他任枢密副使兼宾客，李迪坚持不答应，因而大骂李迪。
English: Ding said that Lin Te, who was friendly with him, was changed from a guest to a guest. Ding said that he wanted to recommend him as a vice-minister of the privy council and a guest. Li Di insisted that he would not agree, so he cursed Li Di.

古文：既入对，斥谓奸邪不法事，愿与俱付御史杂治，语在《迪传》。
现代文：李迪就入见皇帝，斥责丁谓奸邪违法之事，愿与丁谓一起交付御史共受处理，其语见《李迪传》。
English: Li Di went to see the emperor, rebuked Ding Zuo for treason and illegal activities, and was willing to be handed over to the emperor together with Ding Zuo to be dealt with together. His words can be found in the "Biography of Li Di."

古文：帝因格前制不下，乃罢谓为户部尚书，迪为户部侍郎；寻以谓知河南府，迪知郓州。
现代文：皇帝由于在法律条文上判决不下，就罢丁谓任户部尚书，李迪任户部侍郎，不久让丁谓知河南府，李迪知郓州。
English: Since the emperor could not make a decision on the legal provisions, he ordered Ding to be appointed as the head of the household, and Li Di to be appointed as the head of the household. Soon, Ding was appointed to Henan Province, and Li Di to Quzhou.

古文：明日，入谢，帝诘所争状，谓对曰： 非臣敢争，乃迪忿詈臣尔，愿复留。 遂赐坐。
现代文：第二天，丁谓入宫谢恩，皇帝责问他们所争的情形，丁谓回答： 不是我敢与他争，而是李迪怨恨辱骂我啊，我希望再留任。 皇帝遂赐给他座位。
English: The next day, Ding Zeta entered the palace to express his gratitude, and the emperor asked him about their dispute. Ding Zeta replied, "It wasn't that I dared to argue with him, but that Li Di insulted me out of spite. I hope to stay in office again." The emperor then gave him a seat.

古文：左右欲设墩，谓顾曰： 有旨复平章事。 乃更以杌进，即入中书视事如故。
现代文：左右正要设置墩，丁谓对他们说： 有圣旨恢复我任平章事。 左右就换成小凳进来，立即入中书省像过去一样管理政事。
English: Right and left were about to set up the urns, and Ding Zi said to them, "I have a sacred decree to restore my appointment to the post of general secretary." Right and left came in exchange for a small bench, and immediately entered the Central Government to manage government affairs as in the past.

古文：仍进尚书左仆射、门下侍郎、平章事兼太子少师。
现代文：又进丁谓任职尚书左仆射、门下侍郎、平章事兼太子少师。
English: In addition, Ding is said to have served as Shangshu's left-hand servant, his attendant, Taira no Shoji and the prince's apprentice.

古文：天章阁成，拜司空。乾兴元年，封晋国公。
现代文：天章阁建成，授丁谓司空，乾兴元年，封丁谓为晋国公。
English: When the Tianzhang Pavilion was completed, Juting was called Jigu, and in the first year of the Qianxing Dynasty, Foding was called Jin Guogong.

古文：仁宗即位，进司徒兼侍中，为山陵使。
现代文：宋仁宗登帝位，丁谓升任司徒兼侍中，为山陵使。
English: When Song Renzong ascended to the throne, Ding Zi was promoted to the position of a disciple and a chamberlain, and became the official of the imperial mausoleum.

古文：寇准、李迪再贬，谓取制草改曰： 当丑徒干纪之际，属先王违豫之初，罹此震惊，遂至沈剧。 凡与准善者，尽逐之。
现代文：寇准、李迪再次贬官，丁谓取皇帝诏书草稿改为 ：当恶徒干预朝纲之际，接着就是先王避开安乐的开始，遭遇这种令人震惊的事，终于陷入严重的状况。 凡是与寇准友好的，全部放逐之。
English: Kojun and Li Di were once again demoted, and Ding Zi took the draft of the Emperor's edict and changed it to: "When the villains interfered with the imperial program, then the former king began to avoid comfort, encountered this shocking thing, and finally fell into a serious situation. Anyone who was friendly with Kojun was all expelled.

古文：是时二府定议，太后与帝五日一御便殿听政。
现代文：当时二府定夺商议，太后与皇帝每五天亲临一次便殿听政。
English: At that time, the two prefectures decided to negotiate, and the empress dowager and the emperor came to the hall every five days to listen to the government.

古文：既得旨，而谓潜结内侍雷允恭，令密请太后降手书，军国事进入印画。
现代文：这获得皇帝同意后，而丁谓暗中交给内侍雷允恭，要他秘密请求太后降下手书，军国大事的处理只送上盖印。
English: After obtaining the emperor's consent, Ding Zu secretly handed it over to the chamberlain Lei Yunqong, asking him to secretly request the empress dowager to hand down a handwritten letter, and only send a stamp on the handling of military affairs.

古文：学士草制辞，允恭先持示谓，阅讫乃进。
现代文：学士起草皇帝的诏书，雷允恭先拿给丁谓看，丁谓阅毕才送给皇帝盖印发布。
English: The bachelor drafted the emperor's edict, and Lei Yunqong first showed it to Ding Zuo, and only after Ding Zuo had read it did he give it to the emperor to be stamped and issued.

古文：盖谓欲独任允恭传达中旨，而不欲同列与闻机政也。
现代文：丁谓想只任命雷允恭传达皇帝圣旨，而不想同僚大臣参与闻知机密大政。
English: Ding said that he only wanted to appoint Lei Yunqong to convey the emperor's will, and did not want his fellow ministers to participate in the secret policy.

古文：允恭倚谓势，益横无所惮。
现代文：雷允恭倚恃丁谓的势力，更加横行无所惮惧。
English: Lei Yun leaned on the so-called power of Yu Ding, and became even more rampant and fearless.

古文：允恭方为山陵都监，与判司天监邢中和擅易皇堂地。
现代文：雷允恭刚任山陵都监，他与判司天监邢中和擅自更换皇堂之地。
English: Lei Yungyong had just been appointed as the superintendent of the imperial mausoleum, and he and the judge, the overseer of the imperial mausoleum, arbitrarily changed the location of the imperial hall.

古文：夏守恩领工徒数万穿地，土石相半，众议日喧，惧不能成功，中作而罢，奏请待命。
现代文：夏守恩带领工匠数万人穿凿该地，土石相互占一半，众人的议论一天比一天大，害怕不能成功，做到半途停下来，上奏请示。
English: Xia Shouen led tens of thousands of craftsmen to drill through the site. The earth and stone accounted for half of the total. The discussion among the crowd grew louder and louder day by day. Fearing that they would not succeed, they stopped halfway and asked for instructions.

古文：谓庇允恭，依违不决。
现代文：丁谓包庇雷允恭，故意拖着不作处理。
English: Ding is said to have covered up Lei Yunqong and deliberately delayed dealing with him.

古文：内侍毛昌达自陵下还，以其事奏，诏问谓，谓始请遣使按视。
现代文：内侍毛昌达从山陵下回来，把这事奏报皇帝，皇帝诏问丁谓，丁谓才请求派使者去调查。
English: Mao Changda, the palace attendant, came back from under the mausoleum and reported the matter to the emperor. The emperor asked Ding Zuo, and Ding Zuo only requested that an envoy be sent to investigate.

古文：既而咸谓复用旧地，乃诏冯拯、曹利用等就谓第议，遣王曾覆视，遂诛允恭。
现代文：不久大家都说再使用原先那块地，于是诏令冯拯、曹利用等人到丁谓家商议，派王曾反复视察，遂诛杀雷允恭。
English: Soon everyone was talking about re-using the original piece of land, so the emperor ordered Feng Zheng, Cao Rong and others to go to Ding Zuo's home for discussion. The emperor had repeatedly inspected, and then killed Lei Yunqong.

古文：后数日，太后与帝坐承明殿，召拯、利用等谕曰： 丁谓为宰辅，乃与宦官交通。 因出谓尝托允恭令后苑匠所造金酒器示之，又出允恭尝干谓求管勾皇城司及三司衙司状，因曰： 谓前附允恭奏事，皆言已与卿等议定，故皆可其奏；且营奉先帝陵寝，而擅有迁易，几误大事。 拯等奏曰： 自先帝登遐，政事皆谓与允恭同议，称得旨禁中。
现代文：几天后，太后与仁宗皇帝坐在承明殿，召冯拯、曹利用等人晓谕说 ：丁谓任宰相，竟然与宦官交结串通。 于是拿出丁谓曾托雷允恭令皇宫后苑工匠所打造的金酒器给他们看，又拿出雷允恭曾找丁谓求取管勾皇城司及三司衙司的凭证，接着说： 丁谓先前党附雷允恭奏事，都说已经同你们这些人商议好了，所以我都同意了他的奏议，而且营建奉侍先帝的陵寝，竟擅自更易陵地，几乎误了大事。 冯拯等人奏说： 自从真宗皇帝故去，政事都是丁谓与雷允恭一同议定的，他们声称是得旨于皇上。
English: A few days later, the empress dowager and Emperor Nanzong were sitting in the Jomyeong Hall, and summoned Feng Zheng, Cao Rong and others to say, "Ding was appointed as prime minister, and he actually colluded with eunuchs." So Ding took out the golden wine vessel that had been made by the craftsmen in the backyard of the imperial palace by order of Emperor Torayongong, and also took out the evidence that Emperor Torayong had asked Ding to obtain the imperial city and the three imperial cities. He then said, "Ding said that the party had consulted with you people before, so I agreed to his proposal. Moreover, the construction of

古文：臣等莫辨虚实，赖圣神察其奸，此宗社之福也。 乃降谓太子少保、分司西京。
现代文：我们这些人没有能辨别真假，赖英明的皇上明察他们的奸事，这是国家的福呵。 于是降职丁谓为太子少保，遣派到西京。
English: We were not able to distinguish between the true and the false, and it was a blessing for the country that the wise emperor saw through their treachery. Therefore, Ding was demoted to the position of crown prince minor protector and sent to the Western Capital.

古文：故事，黜宰相皆降制，时欲亟行，止令拯等即殿庐召舍人草词，仍榜朝堂，布谕天下。
现代文：先例，罢免宰相都要下正式诏令，当时要立即执行，只令冯拯等人就殿召舍人草拟诏词，仍旧张榜公布在朝堂上，发布晓谕天下。
English: As a precedent, a formal edict had to be issued for the removal of the prime minister. At that time, it had to be implemented immediately, but Feng Zheng and others were only ordered to draft an edict on the summoning of a deserter. The edict was still posted in the imperial hall and issued to the world.

古文：追其子珙、珝、玘、珷一官，落珙馆职。
现代文：追夺丁谓之子丁珙、丁繩、丁王己、丁一级官职，解除丁珙的馆职。
English: He chased after Ding Zu's sons, Ding Yao, Ding Jiao, Ding Wang Zi, and Ding Yi, and relieved Ding Yao of his post as curator.

古文：先是，女道士刘德妙者，尝以巫师出入谓家。
现代文：先前，女道士刘德妙，曾以巫师身份出入丁谓家中。
English: Previously, the female Taoist Liu Demiao had entered and left Ding Zuo's home as a sorcerer.

古文：谓败，逮系德妙，内侍鞫之。德妙通款，谓尝教言： 若所为不过巫事，不若托言老君言祸福，足以动人。 于是即谓家设神像，夜醮于园中，允恭数至请祷。
现代文：丁谓事败，官府逮捕刘德妙，内侍审讯她，刘德妙全部交待，丁谓曾教她说： 你所作的不过是巫事，不如假托老君说祸福之事，足以使人心动。 于是她就在丁谓家设神像，晚上在园中设坛祭祀，雷允恭多次来祈祷。
English: Ding Zuo was defeated, the government arrested Liu Demiao, the chambermaid interrogated her, Liu Demiao told her everything, Ding Zuo had taught her to say: What you have done is nothing more than witchcraft, it is better to rely on the old man to say the evil and good things, enough to move people's hearts. So she set up a statue of God in Ding Zuo's home, and in the evening set up an altar in the garden, and Lei Yun Gong came to pray many times.

古文：及帝崩，引入禁中。又因穿地得龟蛇，令德妙持入内，绐言出其家山洞中。
现代文：到真宗皇帝死去，引她进入禁中，又由于凿地得龟蛇，令刘德妙拿入内宫，欺骗说它们出自他家山洞中，仍又教她说： 皇上如果问你，所奉侍的怎么知道是老君，你只说 宰相不是凡人，应当知道这事 。 
English: When Emperor Zhenzong died, he led her into the Forbidden City, and because of the tortoise and the snake, he made Liu Demiao take them into the inner palace, deceiving that they came from his cave, and still taught her to say: If the emperor asks you, how do you know that the person you are serving is an old man, just say that the prime minister is not an ordinary person, and you should know this.

古文：仍复教云： 上即问若，所事何知为老君，第云 相公非凡人，当知之 。 谓又作颂，题曰 混元皇帝赐德妙 ，语涉妖诞。
现代文：丁谓又作颂，标题是 混元皇帝赐德妙 ，辞语牵涉妖言荒诞。
English: Ding Zhao also wrote a eulogy, the title of which was "The Emperor of the Ming and Yuan Dynasties bestows virtue and brilliance," the words of which involved the absurdity of demonic speech.

古文：遂贬崖州司户参军。
现代文：遂贬丁谓为崖州司户参军。
English: Ding was then said to have joined the army as a member of the Yanshou family.

古文：诸子并勒停。玘又坐与德妙奸，除名，配隶复州。
现代文：丁谓诸儿子一并勒令停职，丁王己又犯与刘德妙通奸罪，被除名，发配复州服差役。
English: All the sons of Ding Zu were ordered to be suspended from duty. Ding Wang himself was also found guilty of adultery with Liu Demiao. He was expelled from the Party and assigned to the post of Fuzhou service.

古文：籍其家，得四方赂遗，不可胜纪。
现代文：籍没丁谓的家，抄得四方贿赂赠送的物品，无法统计。
English: It is impossible to count the number of items that have been bribed and given away by the four parties.

古文：其弟诵、说、谏悉降黜。
现代文：他的弟弟丁诵、丁说、丁谏全部降职罢官。
English: His younger brothers, Ding Cao, Ding Cao, and Ding Yao, were all demoted and dismissed.

古文：坐谓罢者，自参知政事任中正而下十数人。
现代文：因丁谓事件犯罪罢官的从参知政事任中正以下达十几人。
English: There are more than a dozen people who have been dismissed from the post of vice-governor due to the so-called Ding incident crime.

古文：在崖州逾三年，徙雷州，又五年，徙道州。
现代文：丁谓在崖州满三年，调到雷州，又过五年，调到道州。
English: Ding said that after three years in Yazhou, he was transferred to Leizhou, and after another five years, he was transferred to Daozhou.

古文：明道中，授秘书监致仕，居光州，卒。
现代文：明道年间，丁谓被授官秘书监退休，住在光州时死去。
English: During the Ming Dynasty, Ding Zetian was awarded the title of secretary superintendent and retired. He died while living in Gwangju.

古文：诏赐钱十万、绢百匹。
现代文：皇帝下诏赐钱十万，绢百匹。
English: The emperor issued an edict to give one hundred thousand yuan in money and one hundred horses.

古文：谓机敏有智谋，憸狡过人，文字累数千百言，一览辄诵。
现代文：丁谓机智敏捷有才智计谋，阴险狡猾超过常人，文章数十万字，他一浏览就能背诵。
English: Ding is said to be quick-witted, resourceful and cunning, with insidious cunning exceeding that of ordinary people. He can recite hundreds of thousands of words of articles at a glance.

古文：在三司，案牍繁委，吏久难解者，一言判之，众皆释然。
现代文：任职三司，案件文书繁多积压，官吏很久难以解决的，他一句话就判决了，众人都喜悦纷纷。
English: He was in charge of three divisions, there was a huge backlog of case documents, and it took officials a long time to solve. He made a decision in one sentence, and everyone was overjoyed.

古文：善谈笑，尤喜为诗，至于图画、博奕、音律，无不洞晓。
现代文：他善谈笑，特别喜欢做诗，甚至对图画、博弈、音律，没有不透彻了解的。
English: He is good at talking and laughing, especially likes to write poetry, and even has a thorough understanding of pictures, games, and music.

古文：每休沐会宾客，尽陈之，听人人自便，而谓从容应接于其间，莫能出其意者。
现代文：每次休息洗沐见宾客，全部陈设各种娱乐玩具，听凭客人自己选择，而丁谓在这些人之间从容应酬接待，没有什么能超出他的意料。
English: Every break, he sees the guests, all of which are equipped with various entertainment toys, leaving it up to the guests to choose, and Ding says that between these people, there is a leisurely entertainment reception, and nothing can exceed his expectations.

古文：真宗朝营造宫观，奏祥异之事，多谓与王钦若发之。
现代文：宋真宗时营造宫观，上奏吉祥灾异之事，多为丁谓与王钦若发起的。
English: When Song Zhenzong created the palace view, he played up auspicious and calamitous events, mostly initiated by Ding Zuo and Wang Qin Ruo.

古文：初，议营昭应宫，料功须二十五年，谓令以夜继昼，每绘一壁给二烛，七年乃成。
现代文：起初，商议营建昭应宫，预料工作需二十五年，丁谓下令夜以继日地干，每绘一壁要供应两只蜡烛，七年就建成昭应宫。
English: At first, the construction of the Zhaoying Palace was discussed, and it was expected that the work would take twenty-five years. Ding Zuo ordered the ground to be worked day and night, and two candles to be supplied for each wall to be painted. The Zhaoying Palace was completed in seven years.

古文：真宗崩，议草遗制，军国事兼取皇太后处分，谓乃增以 权 字。及太后称制，又议月进钱充宫掖之用，由是太后深恶之，因雷允恭遂并录谓前后欺罔事窜之。
现代文：真宗逝世，商议草拟遗诏，军国大事同时要取得皇太后处理同意，丁谓就增加 权 字；等到太后称制听政，他又主张每月送钱充作后宫用，从此太后很厌恶他，由于雷允恭事件就一起审查丁谓前后欺君蒙骗之事而放逐他。
English: After the death of Emperor Zhenzong, they discussed the drafting of the last will and testament, and at the same time obtained the consent of the empress dowager to handle military affairs. Ding Zuo increased his power. When the empress dowager praised the system of listening to the government, he also advocated sending money every month for the use of the harem. Since then, the empress dowager was very disgusted with him, and because of the Lei Yungong incident, Ding Zuo was examined together with the matter of cheating and deceiving. He was banished.

古文：在贬所，专事浮屠因果之说，其所著诗并文亦数万言。
现代文：丁谓在贬所，专门研究佛家浮屠因果之说，他所著的诗和文章也有几万字。
English: Ding is said to be in a detention center, specializing in the study of Buddhist philosophy and causality, and his poems and articles have tens of thousands of words.

古文：家寓洛阳，尝为书自克责，叙国厚恩，戒家人毋辄怨望，遣人致于洛守刘烨，祈付其家。
现代文：他家人寓居洛阳，他曾写信克制和自责，叙述国家的厚恩，告诫家人不要动不动就生怨情，他派人送信给洛阳太守刘烨，祈请刘烨把信交给他家人。
English: His family lived in Luoyang. He had written a letter of restraint and self-reproach, describing the country's bounty and warning his family not to harbor grudges. He sent a letter to Luoyang's governor Liu Bei, asking Liu Bei to give the letter to his family.

古文：戒使者伺烨会众僚时达之，烨得书不敢私，即以闻。
现代文：他告诫送信的使者等候刘烨会见许多同僚时报告刘烨，刘烨得到丁谓的信不敢私自处理，立即把它报告皇帝。
English: He warned the messenger to wait for Liu Bei to meet with many colleagues to report to Liu Bei. Liu Bei did not dare to handle Ding's alleged letter in private and immediately reported it to the emperor.

古文：帝见感恻，遂徙雷州，亦出于揣摩也。
现代文：仁宗看信后受感动，起了恻隐之心，就调丁谓到雷州，这也说明丁谓会揣摩人的心理。
English: After reading the letter, Rinzong was moved and felt compassion, so he transferred Ding Zuo to Leizhou, which also shows that Ding Zuo can figure out people's psychology.

古文：谓初通判饶州，遇异人曰： 君貌类李赞皇。 既而曰： 赞皇不及也。 
现代文：丁谓最初通判饶州时，遇见异人说： 你的容貌像李赞皇。 旋即又说 ：李赞皇不如你呵。 
English: Ding said that when he was the first to pass judgment on Raozhou, he met a stranger who said, "Your appearance is like Emperor Li Zhan," and he immediately said, "Emperor Li Zhan is not as good as you."

古文：夏竦，字子乔，江州德安人。
现代文：夏竦字子乔，江州德安人。
English: Xia Yao Zi Qiao, a native of De'an, Jiangsu Province.

古文：父承皓，太平兴国初，上《平晋策》，补右侍禁，隶大名府。
现代文：父亲夏承皓，太平兴国初年，上呈《平晋策》，补为右侍禁，隶属大名府。
English: His father, Xia Chengjun, submitted the "Ping Jin Strategy" in the first year of Taiping Xingguo, and was added as the right attendant, belonging to the daimyofu.

古文：契丹内寇，承皓由间道发兵，夜与契丹遇，力战死之，赠崇仪使，录竦为润州丹阳县主簿。
现代文：契丹入侵内地，夏承皓由小路发兵，晚上与契丹遭遇，力战死在战场，赠崇仪使，录用夏竦为润州丹阳县主簿。
English: The Khitans invaded the inland, Xia Chengyu sent troops from a small road, encountered the Khitans in the evening, fought hard and died on the battlefield, bestowed honorifics, and hired Xia Chengyu as the main book of Danyang County, Renzhou.

古文：竦资性明敏，好学，自经史、百家、阴阳、律历，外至佛老之书，无不通晓。
现代文：夏竦资质明敏，喜好读书，从经史、百家、阴阳、律历，外到佛老之书，无不通晓。
English: Xia Yao is highly qualified and enjoys reading. He knows everything from the history of the sutras, the hundred schools of thought, yin and yang, and the lunar calendar to the books of the Buddha.

古文：为文章，典雅藻丽。举贤良方正，擢光禄寺丞、通判台州。
现代文：写文章，典雅修饰华丽，考中贤良方正科，提升为光禄寺丞、台州通判。
English: Write articles, elegant decoration gorgeous, the examination in the middle of the virtuous Fang Zhengke, promoted to the Guanglu Temple, Taizhou pass judgment.

古文：召直集贤院，为国史编修官、判三司都磨勘司，累迁右正言。
现代文：召为直集贤院，为国史编修官、判三司都磨勘司，累迁至右正言。
English: He was called to be a member of the Council of Elders, an editor of the national history, and a member of the Council of Three, and moved to Ujishogen.

古文：帝幸亳州，为东京留守推官。
现代文：皇帝临幸亳州，夏竦为东京留守推官。
English: Emperor Linxing was in Bozhou, and Xia Yao was the ambassador in Tokyo.

古文：仁宗初封庆国公，王旦数言竦材，命教书资善堂。
现代文：仁宗初封庆国公，王旦几次说夏竦的才能，命夏竦在资善堂教书。
English: At the beginning of the enthronement of Emperor Yongle, Wang Dan said several times about Xia Yao's talent, and ordered Xia Yao to teach at Shisen Hall.

古文：未几，同修起居注，为玉清昭应宫判官兼领景灵宫、会真观事，迁尚书礼部员外郎、知制诰。
现代文：不久，同修起居注，为玉清昭应宫判官兼领景灵宫、会真观事，升任尚书礼部员外郎、知制诰。
English: Soon after, fellow practitioners began to live in the monastery, including Tamakiyo Akira, the magistrate of the Yingjing Palace and leader of the Jingling Palace, and Kechizane, who was promoted to the member of the Shoshu etiquette club, Wairo, and Chisei.

古文：史成，迁户部。
现代文：国史修成，升户部员外郎。
English: The history of the country was completed, and a member of the promotion committee, Wairo, was born.

古文：景灵宫成，迁礼部郎中。
现代文：景灵宫建成，升礼部郎中。
English: The Jingling Palace was completed, and he was promoted to vice-minister.

古文：竦娶杨氏，杨亦工笔札，有钩距。
现代文：夏竦娶杨氏为妻，杨氏也工于书信，能辗转推问，究其实情。
English: Xia Yao married Mr. Yang as his wife. Mr. Yang was also good at writing letters and was able to ask questions to find out the truth.

古文：及竦显，多内宠，浸与杨不谐，杨悍妒，即与弟媦疏竦阴事，窃出讼之，又竦母与杨母相诟詈，偕诉开封府，府以事闻，下御史台置劾，左迁职方员外郎、知黄州。
现代文：等到夏竦显贵，多宠爱姬妾，渐渐与杨氏不协调，杨氏凶暴横蛮妒忌，就与弟妹疏陈夏竦的隐私之事，偷偷地出来诉讼；又夏竦母亲与杨氏母亲互相辱骂，一同诉到开封府，开封府把事情报告朝廷，传送御史台立案弹劾，降夏竦为职方员外郎、知黄州。
English: When Xia Yao, who was a prominent person and loved concubines more than anything else, gradually lost harmony with the Yang clan, and the Yang clan became violently jealous, he secretly filed a lawsuit with his younger brothers and sisters about Chen Xia Yao's privacy. Moreover, Xia Yao's mother and Yang's mother insulted each other, and together they sued the Kaifeng government. The Kaifeng government reported the matter to the imperial court, and sent the imperial court to file an impeachment, and demoted Xia Yao to the position of a foreign son of an employee of the party and the state of Zhifang.

古文：后二年，徙邓州，又徙襄州。
现代文：后二年，移邓州，又徙襄州。
English: Two years later, it moved to Dangzhou and then to Xiangzhou.

古文：属岁饥，大发公廪，不足，竦又劝率州大姓，使出粟，得二万斛，用全活者四十余万人。
现代文：适值饥年，大肆散发公家仓库粮食，不能满足，夏竦又劝说带领本州大姓，使其拿出粟米，得二万斛，因此而被救活的人四十多万。
English: In the year of famine, unable to be satisfied with the large-scale distribution of grain from public storehouses, Xia Yao also persuaded and led the grand families of Honshu to take out corn and get 20,000 baht. As a result, more than 400,000 people were saved.

古文：仁宗即位，迁户部郎中，徙寿、安、洪三州。
现代文：仁宗即皇帝位，夏竦升任户部郎中，移任寿、安、洪三州。
English: Emperor Nizong ascended to the throne, and Xia Yao was promoted to the middle of the household and transferred to the three provinces of Shou, An and Hong.

古文：洪俗尚鬼，多巫觋惑民，竦索部中得千余家，敕还农业，毁其淫祠以闻。
现代文：洪州习俗尚鬼，多女巫男巫蛊惑百姓，夏竦搜索部中得到一千多家，敕令返归农业，毁掉其祭祀祠堂，以之报告朝廷。
English: Hongzhou customs are still ghostly, many witches and witches have bewitched the people, more than a thousand have been obtained in the Xiaqi search department, the imperial order to return to agriculture, destroy their sacrificial ancestral hall, and report to the imperial court.

古文：诏江、浙以南悉禁绝之。
现代文：诏命江、浙以南全部禁绝。
English: The edict ordered that all travel south of the Yangtze River and Zhejiang Province be prohibited.

古文：竦材术过人，急于进取，喜交结，任数术，倾侧反覆，世以为奸邪。
现代文：夏竦智才过人，急于升官，喜欢交结，纵任方术，反复无常，世人以他为奸邪。
English: Xia Yao is a brilliant man, eager to be promoted, likes to make friends, indulges in tricks, is capricious, and the world regards him as a traitor.

古文：当太后临朝，尝上疏乞与修《真宗实录》，不报。
现代文：值太后临朝，他曾上疏请求参与编修《真宗实录》，没有得到答复。
English: During the reign of Empress Dowager Lin, he had asked Shangsu to participate in the compilation of "The True Record of the True Sect," but received no reply.

古文：既而丁母忧，潜至京师，依中人张怀德为内助，宰相王钦若雅善竦，因左右之，遂起复知制诰，为景灵判官、判集贤院，以左司郎中为翰林学士、勾当三班院兼侍读学士、龙图阁学士，又兼译经润文官。
现代文：不久母亲去世守丧，暗中到京城，依附宦官张怀德为内助，宰相王钦若很欣赏夏竦，因而以他为左右侍从，于是起复知制诰，为景灵判官、判集贤院，以左司郎中的身份为翰林学士、勾当三班院兼侍读学士、龙图阁学士，又兼任译经润文官。
English: Soon after his mother's death, he secretly went to Beijing to attend the funeral, relying on the eunuch Zhang Huide as his inner assistant. The prime minister Wang Qinru admired Xia Yao very much, so he took him as his right and left attendant, and then he took up the post of Fu Zhizhe, as the judge of Jingling, the judge of Shixian Academy, and as the left assistant, he was the scholar of Hanlin, the scholar of Houtang Third Class Academy and the scholar of Longtu Pavilion, and also served as the translator of scriptures.

古文：迁谏议大夫，为枢密副使、修国史，迁给事中。
现代文：升任谏议大夫，为枢密副使、修国史，升给事中。
English: He was promoted to the post of the doctor of the imperial council, the vice-secretary of the privy council, and the national historian, and was promoted to the middle of affairs.

古文：初，武臣赏罚无法，吏得高下为奸，竦为集前比，著为定例，事皆按比而行。
现代文：开始，武臣赏罚没有法律，胥吏得以高下其手狼狈为奸，夏竦为此集中以前例子，著为定例，事情都按此比照实行。
English: In the beginning, there was no law for rewarding and punishing vassals, and officials were able to do whatever they wanted. Xia Yao's book is a good example of this, and things were carried out accordingly.

古文：改参知政事、祥源观使。
现代文：改任参知政事、祥源观使。
English: He was reappointed to the posts of Sanchi Seiji and Shogen Kanshi.

古文：增设贤良等六科，复百官转对，置理检使，皆竦所发。
现代文：增设贤良方正等六科，恢复百官轮流应对，设置理检使，都是夏竦所发明。
English: The addition of six disciplines such as the virtuous and upright, the restoration of the rotation of officials, and the establishment of the physical inspection department were all invented by Xia Yao.

古文：与宰相吕夷简不相能，复为枢密副使，迁刑部侍郎。
现代文：与宰相吕夷简意见合不来，再次为枢密副使，升刑部侍郎。
English: He could not come to an agreement with the prime minister, Lü Yizhan, so he was once again made a privy vice-envoy and promoted to the position of an attendant of the Department of Justice.

古文：史成，进兵部，寻进尚书左丞。
现代文：国史修成，进升兵部侍郎，不久进升尚书左丞。
English: He was promoted to attendant of the War Department, and soon after, he was promoted to junior secretary of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：太后崩，罢为礼部尚书、知襄州，改颍州。
现代文：太后去世，夏竦被罢免为礼部尚书、知襄州，改任颍州。
English: After the death of the empress dowager, Xia Yao was removed from the ceremonial department of Shangshu and Zhiyang Prefecture, and was reassigned to Zhangzhou.

古文：京东荐饥，徙青州兼安抚使。逾年，罢安抚，迁刑部尚书、徙应天府。
现代文：京东连年灾荒，移任青州兼安抚使，过了一年，被解除安抚使，升任刑部尚书，移应天府。
English: After years of famine, Jingdong was transferred to Qingzhou and reassured. After a year, he was relieved of the reassurance, promoted to the Criminal Department of Shangshu, and moved to Tianfu.

古文：宝元初，以户部尚书入为三司使。
现代文：宝元初年，夏竦以户部尚书的身份入为三司使。
English: In the first year of the Hōgen era, Natsuo was appointed as the third envoy in the capacity of the head of the household, Shosho.

古文：赵元昊反，拜奉宁军节度使、知永兴军，听便宜行事。
现代文：赵元昊反叛，授任奉宁军节度使、知永兴军，听任全权处理。
English: Zhao Yuanhao rebelled and was appointed as the envoy of the Fengning Army and the Zhiyongxing Army, and was entrusted with full powers.

古文：徙忠武军节度使、知泾州。
现代文：移任忠武军节度使、泾州知州。
English: He was transferred to the post of the loyal troops' delegate to the Qing Dynasty and became the governor of Zhangzhou and Chizhou.

古文：还，判永兴军兼陕西经略安抚招讨，进宣徽南院使。
现代文：返回，判永兴军兼陕西经略、安抚、招讨，升宣徽南院使。
English: On his return, he was sentenced to the Yongxing Army as well as the Shaanxi Economic Strategy, Pacification, and Invitation, and promoted to the Southern Xuanhui Envoy.

古文：与陈执中论兵事不合，诏徙屯鄜州。
现代文：与陈执中论军事意见不一致，诏命夏竦移屯州。
English: He disagreed with Chen Xizhong's military views and ordered Xia Yao to move to Tunzhou.

古文：初，竦在泾州，朝廷遣庞籍就计事。
现代文：开始，夏竦在泾州，朝廷派庞籍前来计议事情。
English: At the beginning, Xia Yao was in Zhangzhou, and the imperial court sent a large number of officials to discuss the matter.

古文：竦上奏曰：
现代文：夏竦上奏说：
English: Xia Yao said at the beginning of the performance:

古文：顷者继迁逃背，屡寇朔方。
现代文： 近来，李继迁背叛，屡次入侵朔方。
English: Recently, Li Jiquan betrayed and repeatedly invaded the Shuo side.

古文：至道初，洛苑使白守荣等率重兵护粮四十万，遇寇浦洛河，粮卒并没，守荣仅以身免。
现代文：至道初年，洛阳苑使白守荣等人率领重兵护卫粮食四十万，在浦洛河与敌人遭遇，粮食士兵全部覆没，白守荣仅仅保住了性命。
English: In the first year of the Tao, Luoyang Courtyard sent Bai Shou Rong and others to lead the heavy troops to escort the grain of 400,000. Encountered with the enemy in the Pulo River, the grain soldiers were all destroyed, and Bai Shou Rong only saved his life.

古文：吕端始欲发兵，由麟府、鄜延、环庆三路趣平夏，袭其巢穴，太宗难之。
现代文：吕端开始打算发兵，由麟府、延、环庆三路趋往平夏，袭击敌人的巢穴，太宗拒斥之。
English: Lü Duan began to plan to send troops to attack the enemy's lair from Linfu, Yan and Huanqing to Pingxia, but Taizong refused.

古文：后命李继隆、丁罕、范廷召、王超、张守恩五路入讨。
现代文：后来命令李继隆、丁罕、范廷召、王超、张守恩五路进讨。
English: Later, he ordered Li Jilong, Ding Han, Fan Ting Zhao, Wang Chao, and Zhang Shouen to go five ways to investigate.

古文：继隆与罕合兵，行旬日，不见贼；守恩见贼不击；超及廷召至乌白池，以诸将失期，士卒困敝，相继引还。
现代文：李继隆与丁罕合兵，走了十天，不见敌人；张守恩看见敌人不攻击；王超及范廷召到达乌白池，因众将错过约定时间，士兵困乏疲敝，相继率领所部返回。
English: Li Jilong and Ding Han joined forces and marched for ten days without seeing the enemy; Zhang Shouen saw that the enemy did not attack; Wang Chao and Fan Ting were called to arrive at Wubai Pond. As the time was missed and the soldiers were exhausted, they led the detachment back one after another.

古文：时继迁当继捧入朝之后，曹光实掩袭之余，遁逃穷蹙，而犹累岁不能剿灭。
现代文：当时李继迁在李继捧归附宋朝之后，曹光实掩袭之余，遁逃穷窘局促，但还是连年不能剿灭。
English: At that time, after Li Jizhi was annexed to the Song Dynasty, Cao Guangshi covered up the attack and Li Jijian was forced to flee poverty, but he could not be annihilated for years.

古文：先皇帝鉴追讨之敝，戒疆吏谨烽候、严卒乘，来即驱逐之，去无追捕也。
现代文：先皇帝鉴于追讨的弊病，告诫边疆官吏谨守边境情况，严禁士兵追逐，敌人来到就驱逐出去，敌人离开不要追捕。
English: In view of the drawbacks of pursuit, the former emperor admonished the frontier officials to pay attention to the border situation, strictly prohibit soldiers from chasing, expel the enemy when they arrive, and do not pursue the enemy when they leave.

古文：然拓跋之境，自灵武陷没之后，银、绥割弃已来，假朝廷威灵，其所役属者不过河外小羌尔。
现代文： 然而拓跋的境地，自从灵武陷没之后，银州、绥州割让放弃以来，假借朝廷威灵，其所役使的部属不过是河外小羌而已。
English: However, since the fall of Lingwu and the ceding and giving up of Yinzhou and Zhangzhou, the status of Tuoba has been assumed by the imperial court, and the subordinates it has served are nothing more than petty thieves from outside the river.

古文：况德明、元昊相继猖獗，以继迁穷蹙，比元昊富实，势可知也。以先朝累胜之士，较当今关东之兵，勇怯可知也。以兴国习战之帅，方沿边未试之将，工拙可知也。继迁窜伏平夏，元昊窟穴河外，地势可知也。
现代文：何况赵德明、赵元昊相继猖獗，以李继迁困窘局促，与元昊富实相比，情势可知了；以先朝累胜的士兵，与当今关东军队比较，勇敢怯弱可知了；以兴国习战的军队，与沿边没有尝试过的军队相比，优劣可知了；李继迁伏匿在平夏，元昊聚集在河外，地理形势可知了。
English: Moreover, Zhao Deming and Zhao Yuanhao are rampant successively. The situation can be seen from the fact that Li Jiji is in a difficult situation compared to Yuan Hao's wealth; the soldiers who won victories in the previous dynasty can be seen as brave and timid compared to today's Kanto army; the army that is learning to fight for the rejuvenation of the country can be seen as superior or inferior compared to the army that has not been tried along the border; Li Jiji is hiding in Binxia, and Yuan Hao is gathered outside the river, and the geographical situation can be seen.

古文：若分兵深入，糗粮不支，师行贼境，利于速战。
现代文：如果分兵深入，军粮供给不上，军队行进在敌人境内，有利于速战。
English: If the detachment is deep, the supply of military food is not available, and the army is marching in the enemy's territory, it is conducive to a quick war.

古文：傥进则贼避其锋，退则敌蹑其后，老师费粮，深可虞也。
现代文：倘若前进则敌人避开其锋锐，后退则敌人尾追其后，劳师费粮，这是很担心的事。
English: If you advance, the enemy will avoid your sharpness, and if you retreat, the enemy will chase you, which is very worrying.

古文：若穷其巢穴，须涉大河，长舟巨舰，非仓卒可具也。
现代文：如果穷其巢穴，必须渡过大河，长船巨舰，不是仓卒可以备办的。
English: If you are poor in your nest, you must cross the big river, a long ship, a huge ship, is not something that a hoarder can prepare.

古文：若浮囊挽梗，联络而进，我师半渡，贼乘势掩击，未知何谋可以捍御？
现代文：如果用浮桥牵引，军队联络而前进，我军渡到一半，敌人乘势掩击，不知有什么谋略可以抗击抵御？
English: If we are towed by a pontoon bridge and advance with the army in contact, and our army is half-way across and the enemy is taking advantage of the situation to cover up, I don't know what strategy can resist and resist?

古文：臣以为不较主客之利，不计攻守之便，而议追讨者，非良策也。
现代文：我认为不比较主客之利，不计较攻守之便，而议论追讨，这不是良策。 
English: I don't think it's a good idea to talk about recourse without comparing the advantages of the host and the guest, and without considering the convenience of attack and defense.

古文：因条上十事。
现代文：因而条陈上奏十事。
English: Therefore, ten things are listed.

古文：时边臣多议征讨，朝廷乡之，而竦言出师非便。
现代文：当时边疆大臣多建议征讨，朝廷趋向这一观点，但夏竦说出师不适宜。
English: At that time, the Minister of the Frontier suggested to collect more, and the Imperial Court tended to this view, but it was not appropriate for Xia Yao to say anything.

古文：既而诏以泾原、鄜延两路兵进讨，会元昊稍求纳款，范仲淹请留鄜延兵，由是泾原兵亦不行。
现代文：不久诏令以泾原、延两路军队进讨，恰逢元昊有意请求投诚，范仲淹请求留下延军队，由于这样泾原军队也没有出征。
English: Soon after, the imperial edict was issued to send troops from both Xingyuan and Yan, which coincided with Yuan Hao's request to surrender and Fan Zhongyan's request to leave Yan's army behind. As a result, the Xingyuan army did not go to war.

古文：中国之师，卒不出塞。
现代文：中国的军队，始终没有出边塞。
English: The Chinese army has never left the border.

古文：竦上十事：一、教习强弩以为奇兵；二、羁縻属羌以为藩篱；三、诏唃厮啰父子并力破贼；四、度地形险易远近、砦栅多少、军士勇怯，而增减屯兵；五、诏诸路互相应援；六、募土人为兵，州各一二千人，以代东兵；七、增置弓手、壮丁、猎户以备城守；八、并边小砦，毋积刍粮，贼攻急，则弃小砦入保大砦，以完兵力；九、关中民坐累若过误者，许人入粟赎罪，铜一斤为粟五斗，以赡边计；十、损并边冗兵、冗官及减骑军，以舒馈运。
现代文：夏竦上奏十事：一、教习强弩作为奇兵；二、笼络归附的羌人作为屏障；三、诏令口角厮口罗父子协力破敌；四、估计地形险易远近、栅砦多少、军士勇敢怯弱情况，而增减屯驻军队；五、诏令各路互相应援；六、招募当地人为兵，每州各一二千人，以代替东兵；七、增置弓手、壮丁、猎户以备城池守御；八、凡是边地小砦，不要蓄积粮草，敌人攻得急，就放弃小砦入保大砦，以保存兵力；九、关中百姓因受牵连及犯过错的，允许他们纳粟赎罪，一斤铜为五斗粟，以赡给边地财计；十、减少所有边地的冗兵、冗官及减少骑兵，以宽舒运输。
English: Xia Yao recited the following ten things: First, teach and train strong soldiers as a miracle soldier; Second, enlist subordinate soldiers as a barrier; Third, order the father and son to work together to defeat the enemy; Fourth, estimate the terrain, how many gates and forts, and how brave and timid the soldiers are, and increase or decrease the number of troops stationed; Fifth, order all roads to support each other; Sixth, recruit local soldiers, twelve thousand people in each state, to replace the eastern soldiers; Seventh, add archers, strong men, and hunters to prepare for castle defense; Eighth, if it is a small fortress in the outlying areas, do not accumulate grain and grass,

古文：当时颇采用之。
现代文：当时颇采用了他的建议。
English: At the time, his advice was widely followed.

古文：其募土人为兵，令下而杨偕奏言： 西兵比继迁时十增七八，县官困于供亿，今州复益一二千人，则岁费不赀。若训习士卒，使之精锐，选任将帅，求之方略，自然以寡击众，以一当百矣。
现代文：其招募当地人为兵，命令下达但杨偕奏说 ：西兵比李继迁时增加了十分之七八，县官为供给所困扰，现在州又增加一二千人，那么一年费用无可计量；如果训练教习土兵，使之精锐，选任将帅，寻求方略，自然会以少击众，以一当百了。
English: The order was given to recruit local people as soldiers, but Yang Bingso said, "The number of Western soldiers has increased by seventy-eight tenths compared to the time of Li's emigration. The county officials are troubled by the supply, and now the state has added twelve thousand people, so the annual cost is immeasurable. If you train and teach the local soldiers to make them elite, appoint generals, and seek strategies, you will naturally hit the crowd with a few, with one hundred.

古文：竦云 土兵训练可代东兵 ，此虚言也。
现代文：夏竦说 土兵训练可以代替东兵 ，这是空话。
English: Xia Yao said that the training of local soldiers can replace the training of eastern soldiers, which is empty talk.

古文：自德明纳款以来，东兵犹不可代，况今日乎？ 朝廷下竦议，竦奏： 陕西防秋之敝，无甚东兵，不惯登陟，不耐寒暑，骄懦相习，廪给至厚。
现代文：自从赵德明投诚以来，东兵还不可替，何况今天呢？ 朝廷传送给夏竦议论，夏竦奏： 陕西防秋的弊端，不比东兵严重，不习惯登高，不耐寒冷暑热，骄横懦弱相习，廪给很丰厚。
English: Since Zhao Deming's accession to the throne, the Eastern soldiers still cannot be replaced, and how much more so today? The imperial court sent a discussion to Xiamen, and Xiamen played: the drawbacks of Shaanxi's autumn prevention are not more serious than the Eastern soldiers, they are not used to climbing high, they are not tolerant of cold and heat, they are arrogant and cowardly, and they are very richly endowed.

古文：土兵便习，各护乡土，山川道路，彼皆素知，岁省刍粮钜万。
现代文：土兵宜于习俗，各护卫乡土，山川道路，他们都素来知道，每年节省粮草巨万。
English: The local soldiers are suitable for the custom, each guarding the countryside, mountain roads, they have always known that they save a huge amount of grain and grass every year.

古文：且收聚小民，免饥饿为盗，代兵东归，以卫京师，万世利也。
现代文：而且收聚百姓，避免因饥饿为盗贼，代兵东归，以护卫京城，这是万代之利。
English: Moreover, it is in the interest of all generations to gather the people, to avoid being thieves due to hunger, and to protect the capital city by returning to the east on behalf of the soldiers.

古文：偕欲以寡击众，殆虚言也。 
现代文：杨偕想要以少击众，这大概是空话。 
English: Yang Hui wants to hit the public with less, which is probably empty talk.

古文：偕复奏云：
现代文：杨偕又奏说：
English: Yang Zhen also said:

古文：自古将帅深入殊庭，霍去病止将轻骑八百，直弃大将军数百里赴利，斩捕过当；又将万骑逾乌盭，讨遫仆，涉狐奴，历五王国，过焉支山千有余里，合兵鏖皋兰下，杀楼兰王、虏侯王，执昆邪王子，收休屠祭天金人。
现代文： 自古以来将帅深入敌境，霍去病只率领轻骑八百，直弃大将军几百里出战，斩杀捕获超过己方的伤亡数；又率领一万骑兵越过乌韡，征讨仆，经过狐奴，历五王国，过焉支山一千多里，合兵激战于皋兰下，杀死折兰王、卢侯王，活捉昆邪王的儿子，收捕休屠祭天金人。
English: Since ancient times, the commander-in-chief has penetrated deep into the enemy territory. When he became ill, he only led 800 light cavalry, abandoned the general for several hundred miles to go to war, killed and captured more casualties than his own side. He also led 10,000 cavalry to cross the Wuyi River, recruited servants, passed through the Fox Slave, traveled through the Five Kingdoms, passed more than a thousand miles of mountains, and fought fiercely with the soldiers under the Yilan Mountains, killed the King of Orilan and the King of Lu, captured the son of the King of Kunzhai alive, and captured the Tianjin people who had been slaughtered.

古文：赵充国亦以万骑破先零。
现代文：赵充国也以一万骑兵击破先零。
English: Zhao Chongguo also broke the first zero with ten thousand cavalry.

古文：李靖以骁骑三千破突厥，又以精骑一万至阴山，斩首千余级，俘男女十余万，擒颉利以献。
现代文：李靖以三千骁勇骑兵击破突厥，又以一万精锐骑兵到达阴山，斩首一千多级，俘虏男女十多万，擒获颉利进献。
English: Li Jing defeated the Turks with three thousand brave cavalrymen, and arrived at Yinshan with ten thousand elite cavalrymen, decapitating more than one thousand, capturing more than one hundred thousand men and women, and winning great profits.

古文：自汉以来，用少击众，不可胜数。
现代文：从汉代以来，以少击众，不可胜数。
English: Since the Han Dynasty, it is impossible to beat the crowd with a small number.

古文：竦在泾原守城垒，据险阻，来则御之，去则释之，不闻出师也。
现代文：夏竦在泾原防守城垒，占据险阻，敌人来到就抵御，敌人离开就放松，没有听说他出师。
English: Xia Yao took the lead in the defense of the fortress in Yuyuan, occupied dangerous obstacles, resisted when the enemy came, relaxed when the enemy left, and did not hear that he left the division.

古文：竦惧战或败衄，托以兵少为辞尔。
现代文：夏竦害怕战争或者失败，是借兵少为辞而已。
English: Xia Yao was afraid of war or defeat, so he only used the excuse of borrowing soldiers.

古文：竦言土兵各护乡土，自古兵有九地，士卒近家，谓之散地，言其易离散也。
现代文： 夏竦说土兵各护乡土，自古兵有九地，士兵近家，叫作散地，这是说其易于离散。
English: Xia Yao said that since ancient times, there have been nine places for soldiers to defend their hometowns, and soldiers who are close to home are called scattered, which means that they are easy to disperse.

古文：第以近事言之，阁门祗候王文恩出师败北，而土兵皆窜走，惟东兵仅二百人，杀敌兵甚众。
现代文：但以近事来说，门祗候王文恩出师败北，而土兵都流窜逃走，只有东兵二百人，杀死敌兵很多。
English: However, in recent times, the Mongols were defeated by Wang Wen'en's army, and the local soldiers fled. There were only two hundred Eastern soldiers, and they killed many enemy soldiers.

古文：以此知兵之强弱，不系东西，在将有谋与无谋尔。
现代文：因此知兵的强弱，不在于东西，在于将领有谋略与没有谋略而已。
English: Therefore, the strength or weakness of a strategist does not lie in things, but in whether the general has a strategy or not.

古文：今边郡参用东兵、土兵，若尽罢东兵，亦非计也。
现代文：现在边郡参用东兵、土兵，如果全部废除东兵，也不是计谋。
English: At present, the border counties use Eastern soldiers and local soldiers. If all Eastern soldiers were abolished, it would not be a strategy.

古文：古人有言： 非陇西之民有勇怯，乃将吏之制巧拙异也。 今防边东兵，人月受米七斗五升，土兵二石五斗，而竦乃言东兵廪给至厚，又不知之甚也。
现代文：古人有言 ：不是陇西的百姓有勇敢怯懦，而是将领官吏的管束巧妙笨拙不同。 现在防守边地的东兵，每人每月受米七斗五升，土兵二石五斗，而夏竦说东兵廪给最为丰厚，这是又不知之甚。
English: The ancients said: It is not that the people in the west of Shaanxi are brave and cowardly, but that the leaders and officials are cleverly and clumsily different. Nowadays, the eastern soldiers defending the outlying areas receive seven dowels and five liters of rice per person per month, and the local soldiers receive two stones and five dowels, but Xia Yu said that the eastern soldiers are given the most abundant, which is not well known.

古文：竦又言募土兵训练以代东兵，且土兵数万，须募足训练，虽三二岁未得成效，兵精犹恐奔北，岂有骤加训练而能取胜哉？
现代文：说招募土兵训练以代替东兵，而且土兵几万，必须募足训练即使是三二年未必见成效，兵精还恐怕逃奔，难道有一下子加以训练而能取胜的吗？ 
English: It is said that to recruit and train tens of thousands of local soldiers to replace the Eastern soldiers, it is necessary to recruit and train enough local soldiers. Even if it takes thirty-two years, it may not be effective, and the soldiers may still run away. Is it possible to train them all at once and win?

古文：竦议遂屈。
现代文：夏竦的建议于是被停止。
English: Xia Yao's suggestion was therefore stopped.

古文：竦雅意在朝廷，及任以西事，颇依违顾避，又数请解兵柄。
现代文：夏竦向来意在朝廷，等到委任以西部边事，很是犹豫观望，又几次请求解除兵权。
English: Xia Yao had always intended to serve in the imperial court, but when he was assigned to the western frontier, he hesitated to wait and see, and requested several times to be relieved of his military powers.

古文：改判河中府，徙蔡州。
现代文：改判河中府，移任蔡州。
English: He was reassigned to Caizhou.

古文：庆历中，召为枢密使。
现代文：庆历年中，召用为枢密使。
English: In the middle of the year of celebration, he was called to be a Privy Counsellor.

古文：谏官、御史交章论： 竦在陕西畏懦不肯尽力，每论边事，但列众人之言，至遣敕使临督，始陈十策。
现代文：谏官、御史交相上奏章论列： 夏竦在陕西畏缩懦弱不肯尽力，每次议论边事，只列陈大家的言论，到朝廷派敕使前来督促，才陈述十策。
English: In Shaanxi, Xia Yao cowered and was not willing to do his best. Every time he discussed side issues, he only listed everyone's remarks. When the imperial court sent an envoy to urge him, he only presented ten policies.

古文：尝出巡边，置侍婢中军帐下，几致军变。
现代文：曾经出巡边地，把侍婢安排在中军帐下，几乎导致军队叛变。
English: He once went out to patrol the border and arranged the maidservants and maidservants under the account of the Chinese army, which almost led to a mutiny in the army.

古文：元昊尝募得竦首者与钱三千，为贼轻侮如此。
现代文：元昊曾悬赏得到夏竦首级者给钱三千，他为敌人轻视侮辱如此。
English: Yuan Hao once offered a reward of three thousand yuan, which was accepted by Xia Yao's superiors. He treated his enemies with contempt.

古文：今复用之，边将体解矣。
现代文：现在又任用他，边地将要解体了。
English: Now he has been reappointed, the periphery is about to disintegrate.

古文：且竦挟诈任数，奸邪倾险，与吕夷简不相能。
现代文：而且夏竦挟诈任数，奸邪倾险，与吕夷简合不来。
English: Moreover, Xia Yao blackmailed and swindled his way into a number of posts. He was a dangerous traitor and could not be reconciled with Lü Yijian.

古文：夷简畏其为人，不肯引为同列，既退，乃存之以释宿憾。
现代文：吕夷简害怕他的为人，不肯引为同列，辞官隐退后，又推荐夏竦来消除历来的怨恨。
English: Lv Yijian was afraid of him and did not want to be put on the same level as him. The official retreated and recommended Xia Yao to eliminate the old grudge.

古文：陛下孜孜政事，首用怀诈不忠之臣，何以求治？ 会竦已至国门，言者论不已，请不令入见。
现代文：陛下专心政事，首先任用胸怀欺诈不忠的臣子，何以求得治理呢？ 恰逢夏竦已经到达京都城门，说话的人议论不停，请求不令他入见。
English: His Majesty is preoccupied with political affairs, and how can he seek to govern when he first appoints a traitorous and disloyal vassal? It just so happens that Natsu has arrived at the gates of Kyoto, and the speakers are talking incessantly, begging that he not be allowed to enter.

古文：谏官余靖又言： 竦累表引疾，及闻召用，即兼驿而驰。
现代文：谏官余靖又说： 夏竦屡次上表因病辞官，等到听说召用，马上兼程而疾驰。
English: Yujing, the eunuch, also said: Xia Yao repeatedly went to see the eunuch because of illness, and when he heard that he was summoned, he immediately made a trip and hurried away.

古文：若不早决，竦必坚求面对，叙恩感泣，复有左右为之地，则圣听惑矣。 章累上，即日诏竦归镇，竦亦自请还节。
现代文：如果不早早决定，夏竦必定坚持要求皇帝当面召见询问，叙说恩典感动流泪，再有左右为之地，那么圣听就被迷惑了。 奏章接连上呈，当天诏命夏竦返归蔡州，夏竦也自己请求返回。
English: If it had not been decided early on, Xia Yao would have insisted on being summoned by the emperor to face-to-face interrogation, and would have recounted that grace moved him to tears, and that there was a right and a left, and then the audience would have been confused.

古文：徙知亳州，改授吏部尚书。
现代文：移知亳州，改授吏部尚书。
English: He was transferred to Zhangzhou, and was awarded the title of Shang Shu.

古文：岁中，加资政殿学士。
现代文：当年中，加官资政殿学士。
English: In the same year, he was promoted to vice-minister of finance and graduated with a bachelor's degree.

古文：竦之及国门也，帝封弹疏示之，既至亳州，上书万言自辨。
现代文：夏竦到达都城城门时，皇帝封送弹劾的奏疏给他看，到亳州后，他上书万言自我辩护。
English: When Xia Yao arrived at the gate of the capital city, the emperor sent the impeachment report to him. After arriving in Zhangzhou, he wrote a self-defense letter.

古文：复拜宣徽南院使、河阳三城节度使、判并州。
现代文：再授任宣徽南院使、河阳三城节度使、判并州。
English: In addition, he was appointed the envoy of the Southern Yuan of Xuanhui Province, the envoy of the Three Cities Festival of Heyang Province, and the envoy of the merged province.

古文：请复置宦者为走马承受。
现代文：夏竦请求重新设置宦官为走马承受。
English: Xia Yao requested that the eunuch be re-set as a horse-drawn carriage.

古文：明年，拜同中书门下平章事、判大名府。
现代文：第二年，拜官同中书门下平章事、判大名府。
English: In the second year, Baikan and Zhongshumen were pitted against each other in a competition, and the winner was awarded the title of daimyofu.

古文：又明年，召入为宰相。
现代文：第三年，召入为宰相。
English: In the third year, he was called in as prime minister.

古文：制下，而谏官、御史复言： 大臣和则政事修，竦前在关中，与执中论议不合，不可使共事。 遂改枢密使，封英国公。
现代文：制书下达而谏官、御史又说： 大臣和睦则政事修明，夏竦以前在关中，与陈执中议论不合，不能使他们共事。 于是改任枢密使，封英国公。
English: When the edict was issued, the eunuch and the historian also said, "If the ministers are in harmony, then the government affairs will be clarified. Before, Xia Yao was in the middle of the gate, and he and Chen Xizhong had a disagreement, which made it impossible for them to work together. Therefore, he was reappointed as the Privy Envoy and given the title of the Duke of England.

古文：请析河北为四路。
现代文：请求分河北为四路。
English: The request divides Hebei into four regions.

古文：亲事官夜入禁中，欲为乱，领皇城司者皆坐逐，独杨怀敏降官，领入内都知如故。
现代文：亲事官晚上进入禁中，想要作乱，掌领皇城司的人都因此被贬逐，惟独杨怀敏降官职，照旧掌领入内都知。
English: The family affairs officer entered the Forbidden City in the evening and wanted to make trouble, and the people in charge of the Imperial City Division were expelled as a result. However, Yang Huimin was demoted from his official position, and he was still in charge of the Inner Court.

古文：言者以为竦结怀敏而曲庇之。
现代文：谏官认为夏竦勾结杨怀敏而曲意庇护他。
English: The eunuch thought that Xia Yao had colluded with Yang Huimin to protect him.

古文：会京师同日无云而震者五，帝方坐便殿，趣召翰林学士张方平至，谓曰： 夏竦奸邪，以致天变如此，宜出之。 罢知河南府，未几，赴本镇，加兼侍中。
现代文：恰逢京城同一天天上没有云彩而五次震响，皇帝才坐在便殿，急召翰林学士张方平来到，张方平对皇帝说： 夏竦奸恶邪佞，以致天变如此，应把他逐出朝廷。 罢知河南府，不久，前往本镇，加兼侍中。
English: On the same day, there was no cloud in the sky and five earthquakes in Beijing, so the emperor sat in the hall and urgently summoned the scholar Zhang Fangping to come. Zhang Fangping said to the emperor: Xia Yao is a traitor and an evil person, so the heavens have changed, and he should be expelled from the imperial court. After learning about Henan Province, he soon went to this town and became an attendant.

古文：飨明堂，徙武宁军节度使，进郑国公，锡赉与辅臣等。
现代文：祭献明堂，移夏竦武宁军节度使，进封郑国公，赐赏与辅佐大臣相同。
English: Sacrificed Myeongdong, transferred to Nha Trang as the military attaché of the Nanking Army, and was awarded the same reward as the Vice-Minister.

古文：将相居外，遇大礼有赐，自竦始。
现代文：将相居外镇，遇大礼有赏赐，从夏竦开始。
English: They will live together outside the town, and will be rewarded with a large gift, starting from the summer solstice.

古文：寻以病归，卒。
现代文：不久因病归家，去世。
English: He soon returned home due to illness and passed away.

古文：赠太师、中书令。
现代文：赠太师、中书令。
English: He was awarded the title of Grand Master and the Order of the Chinese Academy of Letters.

古文：赐谥文正，刘敞言： 世谓竦奸邪，而谥为正，不可。 改谥文庄。
现代文：赐谥号文正，刘敞说： 世人认为夏竦奸邪，而谥号为正，不可以。 改谥文庄。
English: Giving the posthumous name of Wen Zheng, Liu Chang said: The world thinks that Xia Zheng is evil, but the posthumous name is positive, it is impossible.

古文：竦以文学起家，有名一时，朝廷大典策累以属之。
现代文：夏竦以文学起家，有名于一时，朝廷大典策书屡次让他执笔。
English: Xia Yao started his career as a writer. He was famous for a while, and he was often asked to write the grand imperial edict.

古文：多识古文，学奇字，至夜以指画肤。
现代文：多识古文，学习奇字，到晚上用手指画在皮肤上。
English: He knows many ancient texts, learns strange characters, and in the evening he draws them on his skin with his fingers.

古文：文集一百卷。
现代文：有文集一百卷。
English: There are 100 volumes in the anthology.

古文：其为郡有治绩，喜作条教，于闾里立保伍之法，至盗贼不敢发，然人苦烦扰。
现代文：他任州郡长官有治绩，喜欢制作条条框框，在闾里立保伍之法，致使盗贼不敢显露，但人们苦于苛烦骚扰。
English: As a state and county magistrate, he had a record of success, liked to make rules and regulations, and set up a security team in Bali, so that thieves did not dare to reveal themselves, but people suffered from harassment.

古文：治军尤严，敢诛杀，即疾病死丧，拊循甚至。
现代文：治军尤其严格，敢于诛杀，倘若疾病死丧，抚慰很周到。
English: He is particularly strict in governing the army, dares to fight and kill, and if he dies of illness, he is very considerate in soothing him.

古文：尝有龙骑卒戍边郡，剽，州郡莫能止，或密以告竦。
现代文：曾经有龙骑士兵戍守边地，群起剽掠，州郡不能制止，有人秘密报告夏竦。
English: Once there were dragon-riding soldiers guarding the borderlands, swarming and pillaging, the state and county could not stop them, and someone secretly reported Xia Yao.

古文：时竦在关中，俟其至，召诘之，诛斩殆尽，军中大震。
现代文：当时夏竦在关中，等他来到后，召见士兵诘问，诛斩几乎将尽，军中大震。
English: At that time, Xia Yao was in Guanzhong. When he arrived, he summoned soldiers to interrogate him. The battle was almost over, and the army was shaken.

古文：其威略多类此。
现代文：他的威严方略多类此。
English: His majesty is a bit more than that.

古文：然性贪，数商贩部中。
现代文：但生性贪婪，几次在部中交易。
English: However, he was greedy by nature and traded in the middle of the division several times.

古文：在并州，使其仆贸易，为所侵盗，至杖杀之。
现代文：在并州，指使他的奴仆贸易，为奴仆所侵盗，至用杖杀死他们。
English: In the United States, he ordered his slaves to trade, robbed his slaves, and killed them with a cane.

古文：积家财累钜万，自奉尤侈，畜声伎甚众。
现代文：积累家财累巨万，自奉尤其奢侈，畜养声伎很多。
English: They have accumulated a huge amount of family wealth, are particularly extravagant in their self-worship, and raise a lot of livestock.

古文：所在阴间僚属，使相猜阻，以钩致其事，遇家人亦然。
现代文：所在之处暗中离间部下，使其互相猜疑阻滞，以辗转推问究其实情，对待家人也是这样。
English: Where he is, he secretly alienates his subordinates, causing them to be suspicious of each other, to ask questions about the real situation, and to treat his family in the same way.

