古文：卫剌王直，字豆罗突。
现代文：卫剌王宇文直，字豆罗突。
English: Wang Yuwen Zhi, the king of Wei and Qin.

古文：魏恭帝三年，封秦郡公。
现代文：周文帝宇文泰的儿子，文宣叱奴皇后所生。魏恭帝三年，被封为秦郡公。
English: He was the son of Emperor Zhou and Empress Wenxuan, and was born to Empress Wenxuan. In the third year of the reign of Emperor Wei, he was made Qin Guo.

古文：武成初，进封卫国公，历雍州牧、大司空、襄州总管。
现代文：武成初年，晋封为卫国公，历任雍州牧、大司马、襄州总管。
English: In the first year of Wucheng, he was promoted to the post of defense minister, and successively held the posts of Yongzhou herdsman, grand steward, and general manager of Xiangzhou.

古文：直，武帝母弟也，性浮诡。
现代文：他是武帝宇文邕的同母兄弟，性情浮躁诡谲。
English: He was Emperor Wu's half-brother, and had an impetuous and treacherous nature.

古文：以晋公护执政，遂贰于帝而昵护。
现代文：因晋公宇文护掌握大权，他疏远武帝亲近宇文护。
English: Due to the fact that Jin Gong Uwen Rong held great power, he distanced himself from Emperor Wu and became close to Uwen Rong.

古文：及南讨军败，愠于免黜，又请帝除护。
现代文：他南讨失败后，因恼怒宇文护对他的处罚，又劝说武帝除掉宇文护。
English: After the failure of his southern campaign, he was annoyed by the punishment of Uwenguo and persuaded Emperor Wu to get rid of Uwenguo.

古文：帝宿有诛护意，遂与直谋之。
现代文：武帝早有诛杀宇文护的想法，便与宇文直一起密谋这件事。
English: Emperor Wu had the idea of assassinating Uwen Zhou, and conspired with Uwen Zhou to do so.

古文：及护诛，帝以齐王宪为大冢宰。
现代文：宇文护被处死，武帝让齐王宇文宪任大冢宰。
English: Uwen Guo was executed, and Emperor Wu appointed the King of Qi, Uwen Xian, as grand vizier.

古文：直既乖本望，又请为大司马，欲擅威权。帝知其意，谓曰： 汝兄弟长幼有序，何反居下列也？ 
现代文：宇文直原来的希望破灭，又请求任大司马，想专擅大权，武帝了解他的心思，对他说： 你和齐王长幼有序，何必反而位居他之下呢？ 
English: Yu Wenzhi's original hope was dashed, and he asked to be appointed as the grand steward, wanting to exclusively wield great power. Emperor Wu understood his thoughts and said to him: You and King Qi are of the same age, so why should you be placed under him?

古文：以为大司徒。
现代文：任命他为大司徒。
English: He was appointed as the chief disciple.

古文：建德三年，进爵为王。
现代文：建德三年，他晋爵为王。
English: Jiande three years, he was promoted to the king.

古文：初，帝以直第为东宫，更使直自择所居。
现代文：当初，武帝把宇文直的府第辟为东宫储君住的地方，让他自己再挑选住所。
English: At first, Emperor Wu designated the residence of Emperor Wu as the place where the crown prince of the Eastern Court would live, leaving him to choose his own residence.

古文：直历观府署，无称意者，至废陟屺佛寺，遂欲居之。
现代文：他看遍所有的官署府衙，没有称心满意的地方。到废除的陟屺佛寺，他想住在那里。
English: He looked through all the government offices and was not satisfied with any of them. He wanted to live in the abandoned Buddhist temple.

古文：齐王宪谓曰： 弟兒女成长，此寺偏小，讵是所宜？ 
现代文：齐王宇文宪对他说 ：你的儿女已经长大，这座寺庙狭小，怎么能合适？ 
English: Qi Wang Yuwen Xian said to him: Your children have grown up, this temple is too small, how can it be suitable?

古文：直曰： 一身尚不自容，何论兒女！ 
现代文：他说 ：一身还不能自容，还顾得上什么儿女呢？ 
English: He said: "I can't even look after myself, what children can I look after?

古文：宪怪而疑之。
现代文：宇文宪听了感到奇怪而又生疑。
English: Hearing this, Uwen Xian felt strange and suspicious.

古文：直尝从帝校猎而乱行，帝怒，对众挞之。
现代文：他曾跟从武帝打猎，却任意胡来，武帝恼怒，当着众人的面责打他。
English: He once went hunting with Emperor Wu, but he did something stupid. Emperor Wu got angry and scolded him in front of everyone.

古文：自是，愤怨滋甚。
现代文：从此，他的积怨越来越大。
English: Since then, his resentment has grown.

古文：及帝幸云阳宫，直在京师反，攻肃章门，司武尉迟运闭门，不得入，退走。
现代文：武帝到云阳宫，他在京谋反，攻打肃章门。司武尉迟运关闭宫门，他无法进入，退出京城。
English: Emperor Wu went to the Yunyang Palace, he plotted a rebellion in Beijing and attacked the Suizhang Gate. Sifu closed the palace gate late, he could not enter and left Beijing.

古文：追至荆州获之，免为庶人，囚诸宫中。寻有异志，及其子十人并诛之，国除。
现代文：朝廷派兵到荆州将他擒获，免为庶人，囚禁在宫中，不久他又生异志，连同他的儿子十人都被诛杀，他的封国也被撤掉。
English: The imperial court sent soldiers to Jingzhou to capture him, free him from being a commoner, and imprison him in the palace. Soon, he had a change of heart, and he and his ten sons were killed, and his imperial title was revoked.

古文：齐炀王宪，字毗贺突。
现代文：齐炀王宇文宪，字毗贺突，周文帝宇文泰之子，达步干妃所生。
English: He was the son of King Yuwen Xian of Qi, the son of Emperor Yuwen of Zhou, and the son of Empress Dabu of Gan.

古文：性通敏，有度量。
现代文：他性情通达睿敏，有器识度量。
English: He is intelligent and perceptive, and has a good sense of proportion.

古文：初封涪城县公。
现代文：最初被封为涪城县公。
English: At first, he was appointed as the governor of Licheng County.

古文：少与武帝俱受诗传，咸综机要，得其指归。
现代文：从小与武帝一起攻读《诗经》、《左传》，都能领会其中的要旨，得到里面的精华。
English: From an early age, he studied "The Book of Songs" and "Zhuan" with Emperor Wu, and was able to grasp the essence and get the essence inside.

古文：文帝尝赐诸子良马，唯其所择。
现代文：宇文泰曾赐给儿子们好马，任他们自己选择。
English: Uwentai once gave his sons a good horse to ride and let them choose for themselves.

古文：宪独取驳者。
现代文：宇文宪却挑选了一匹毛色不纯的马。
English: However, Yu Wenxian chose a horse with impure hair.

古文：帝问之，对曰： 此马色类既殊，或多骏逸。
现代文：父亲问他原因，他说： 这匹马的毛色既然特殊，或许更加俊逸神速。
English: When his father asked him why, he said, "This horse's coat color is special, so maybe it's more handsome and faster."

古文：若从军征伐，牧圉易分。 
现代文：如果从军打仗，或者参加围猎，容易区分。 
English: If you fight in the army or participate in hunting, it is easy to distinguish.

古文：帝喜曰： 此兒智识不凡，当成重器。 
现代文：周文帝高兴地说 ：这孩子的智慧识见不同一般，将来会成为重要人才。 
English: Zhou Wenti said happily: This child's wisdom and insight are different from the average, and he will become an important talent in the future.

古文：后从上陇，经官马牧，文帝每见驳马，辄曰 此我兒马也 ，命取以赐之。
现代文：后来，他跟从父亲到陇地，来到官办的牧场，周文帝每看见毛色驳杂的马便说： 这是我儿的马匹。 命取回来赐给他。
English: Later, when he followed his father to Shunde and came to a government-run pasture, Zhou Wendi would say whenever he saw a horse with a mixed coat: "This is my son's horse.

古文：魏恭帝元年，进封安城郡公。
现代文：魏恭帝元年，晋封他为安城郡公。
English: In the first year of Emperor Wei Gong, he was promoted to Ancheng County.

古文：明帝即位，授大将军。
现代文：周明帝即位，授予他大将军的职衔。
English: Emperor Zhou Ming ascended to the throne and granted him the title of general.

古文：武成初，除益州总管，进封齐国公。
现代文：武成初年，朝廷命他为益州总管，晋封为齐国公。
English: In the first year of Wu Cheng's reign, the imperial court appointed him as the governor of Yizhou and promoted him to the position of the prince of Qi.

古文：初，平蜀之后，文帝以其形胜之地，不欲使宿将居之。
现代文：当初，平定蜀地之后，周文帝认为那里是重要之地，不想让军中的老将居守。
English: At first, after the pacification of Shu, Zhou Wendi thought that it was an important place and did not want the veterans of the army to stay there.

古文：诸子中欲有推择，偏问武帝以下，谁欲此行，并未及对，而宪先请。
现代文：他想在诸子中挑选一人。武帝以下他都问遍：谁想守卫蜀地？诸子没来得及回答，宇文宪已抢先请求。
English: He wanted to choose one of his sons. He asked everyone from Emperor Wu down: Who wants to guard Shu? The sons didn't have time to answer, but Uwen Hsien asked first.

古文：文帝曰： 刺史当抚众临人，非尔所及。
现代文：周文帝说 ：刺史应当抚慰百姓，亲临万民，不是你能做到的。
English: Zhou Wendi said: "To stab history is to comfort the people, to be close to the people is not something you can do."

古文：以年授者，当归尔兄。 
现代文：按年龄大小授官，应当让你的哥哥去任这个官职。 
English: The post is awarded on the basis of seniority, so you should ask your elder brother to fill the post.

古文：宪曰： 才用殊不关大小，试而无效，甘受面欺。 
现代文：他说 ：才能与年龄大小没有关系，我先试着干一段时间，如果没有成效，甘心承受当面欺骗父亲的罪名。 
English: He said: "Talent has nothing to do with age. I'll try to work for a while first, and if it doesn't work out, I'm willing to face the accusation of deceiving my father.

古文：文帝以宪年尚幼，未之遣。
现代文：周文帝因他年龄还小，没有派他去。
English: Zhou Wendi did not send him because he was too young.

古文：明帝追遵先旨，故有此授。
现代文：明帝遵照父亲的遗旨，所以任他为益州总管。
English: Emperor Ming, in accordance with his father's last wishes, appointed him as the governor of Yizhou.

古文：宪时年十六，善于抚绥，留心政术，辞讼辐凑，听受不疲。
现代文：宇文宪这时才十六岁，却善于抚绥百姓，留心于为政的方法，告状的人每天接连不断，他受理起来不知疲倦。
English: At that time, Uwen Xian was only 16 years old, but he was good at soothing the people and paying attention to the way of doing politics. The accusers kept coming every day, and he accepted them tirelessly.

古文：蜀人悦之，共立碑颂德。
现代文：蜀地人都拥护他，一起立碑歌颂他的功德。
English: The people of Shu supported him, and together they erected a monument to praise his merits.

古文：保定中，征拜雍州牧。
现代文：保定年间，朝廷任命他为雍州刺史。
English: During the Baoding period, the imperial court appointed him as the chief historian of Yongzhou.

古文：及晋公护东伐，以尉迟迥为前锋，围洛阳。
现代文：晋公宇文护东伐，让尉迟回充当前锋围攻洛阳。
English: Jin Gong Uwen protected the eastward campaign, and let the lieutenant return late to serve as the front line to besiege Luoyang.

古文：齐兵数万，奄出军后，诸军恇骇，并各退散。
现代文：齐国数万大军从周军背后杀出，各军惊骇，纷纷退散。
English: Tens of thousands of troops from the State of Qi broke out from behind the Zhou army. The troops were shocked and scattered.

古文：唯宪与王雄、达奚武拒之，而雄为齐人所败，三军震惧。
现代文：惟有宇文宪与王雄、达奚武临危不乱，抗拒齐军。王雄被敌兵打败，三军震惊。
English: Only Uwen Xian, Wang Xiong and Daguangwu took the lead and resisted the Qi army. Wang Xiong was defeated by the enemy soldiers, and the three armies were shocked.

古文：宪亲自督励，众心乃安。
现代文：宇文宪亲自督促鼓励，军心才安定下来。
English: It was only after being personally urged and encouraged by Uwen Xian that the military spirit settled down.

古文：时晋公护执政，雅相亲委，赏罚之际，皆得预焉。
现代文：这时，晋公宇文护掌管朝政，对他很是亲近和重用，对将士和百官的赏罚，都让他参与。
English: At this time, Jin Gong Uwenguo was in charge of the court politics. He was very close to him and used him a lot. He let him participate in the rewards and punishments of soldiers and officials.

古文：天和三年，以宪为大司马，行小冢宰，雍州牧如故。
现代文：天和三年，朝廷命他任大司马，行小冢宰的权力，雍州刺史的官职不变。
English: Three years ago, the imperial court appointed him as the grand steward, with the power of a petty steward, and the official position of Yongzhou's chief historian remained unchanged.

古文：四年，齐将独孤永业来寇，诏宪与柱国李穆出宜阳，筑崇德等五城，绝其粮道。
现代文：天和四年，齐将独孤永业前来侵犯，朝廷下诏命宇文宪与柱国李穆进向宜阳，修筑崇德等五座城堡，断绝齐军的粮道。
English: In the 4th year of the Heian period, the Qi came to invade Yunnan, and the imperial court ordered Wu Wenxian and the pillar state Li Mu to march to Yiyang, build five castles such as Chongde, and cut off the Qi army's food supply.

古文：齐将斛律明月筑垒洛南。
现代文：齐将斛律明月在洛阳南面修筑堡垒。
English: They will build a fortress in the south of Luoyang in the next month.

古文：五年，宪涉洛邀之，明月遁走。
现代文：天和五年，宇文宪率军涉过洛河进攻齐军，斛律明月败走。
English: On the 5th day of the 5th lunar month, Yu Wenxian led the army across the Luo River to attack the Qi army, but the Qi army was defeated and fled in the following month.

古文：是岁，明月又于汾北筑城，西至龙门。
现代文：这一年，明月又在汾水以北修筑城堡，绵延向西，直达龙门。
English: In the same year, Mingyue also built a castle north of Surabaya, stretching westward as far as Longmen.

古文：晋公护问计于宪，宪曰： 兄宜暂出同州为威容，宪请以精兵居前，随机攻取。 
现代文：宇文护向他询问作战方略，他说： 哥哥你应率军暂趋同州，以显示军威。我请求带领精锐部队列队前面，寻找机会发起进攻。 
English: He said: "Brother, you should lead the army to temporarily converge with the state to show military power. I ask you to lead the elite troops to line up in front and look for opportunities to launch an attack."

古文：六年，宪率众出自龙门，齐将新蔡王康德潜军宵遁。
现代文：天和六年，宇文宪率军到达龙门，齐将新蔡王康德领军乘夜悄悄退却。
English: In six years, Yu Wenxian led the army to Longmen, and the new Cai Wang Kangde led the army to retreat quietly at night.

古文：宪乃度河，攻其伏龙等四城，二日尽拔。
现代文：宇文宪挥军渡过黄河，攻打齐军的伏龙等四座城堡，二天内全部攻破。
English: Wu Wenxian's army crossed the Yellow River and attacked the Qi army's four castles, including Furong, and broke through all of them within two days.

古文：又攻张壁，克之。
现代文：他又挥师攻打张壁，一举拿下。
English: He also swung his sword to attack Zhang Qiao and took him down in one fell swoop.

古文：斛律明月时在华容，弗能救，乃北攻姚襄城，陷之。
现代文：斛律明月这时尚在华谷，不能救援，便向北进攻周的姚襄城，克复。
English: Bao Lu Ming Yue, unable to rescue Hua Gu, attacked Yao Xiang City in Zhou to the north.

古文：汾州又见围日久，宪遣柱国宇文盛运粟馈之。
现代文：汾州又被齐军围困很长时间，宇文宪派柱国宇文盛运粮食救济汾州军民。
English: Bozhou was besieged by the Qi army for a long time, and the pillar of the Uwen Constitution, Uwen Shengyun, sent grain relief to the soldiers and civilians of Bozhou.

古文：宪自入两乳谷，袭克齐伯杜城。使柱国谭公会筑石殿城以为汾州之援。
现代文：他亲自率军进入两乳谷，攻克齐军的伯杜城，派柱国谭公宇文会修建石殿城，作为汾州的后援。
English: He personally led the army into the Two Milk Valleys, conquered the Qi army's Baidu City, and sent the pillar country Tan Gongwu Cultural Association to build the Stone Palace City as a backup for Zhangzhou.

古文：齐平原王段孝先、兰陵王高长恭引兵大至，大将军韩欢为齐人所乘，遂退。
现代文：齐平原王段孝先、兰陵王高长恭率大军赶来，周军大将韩欢被齐军打败，军士退却。
English: Qi Pingyuan Wang Duan Xiaoxian and Lanling Wang Gao Changyong led the army to arrive, Zhou army general Han Huan was defeated by the Qi army, and the sergeant retreated.

古文：宪身自督战，齐众稍却。
现代文：宇文宪亲自督战，齐军稍稍退却。
English: Yu Wenxian personally supervised the battle, and the Qi army retreated slightly.

古文：会日暮，乃各收军。
现代文：适逢天色黄昏，双方各自收军回营。
English: At dusk, both sides withdrew to their respective camps.

古文：及晋公护诛，武帝召宪入，免冠拜谢。
现代文：晋公宇文护被武帝诛杀，武帝召宇文宪入宫，宇文宪免冠向武帝叩拜谢罪。
English: Emperor Wu killed Jin Gong Uwen Rong, Emperor Wu summoned Uwen Xian to the palace, and Uwen Xian bowed to Emperor Wu without a crown.

古文：帝谓曰： 汝亲则同气，休戚共之，事不相涉，何烦致谢？ 
现代文：武帝对他说： 你与我关系亲密，同气连枝，休戚与共。事情和你不相关涉，何劳谢罪？ 
English: Emperor Wu said to him, "You have a close relationship with me, we are like-minded, we are in solidarity. The matter has nothing to do with you, why should you feel guilty?

古文：乃诏宪往护第，收兵符及诸簿籍等。
现代文：便命他到宇文护的府第收取兵符以及各种簿册文书等。
English: He was then ordered to go to the provincial capital of Uwenhuo to collect the military insignia and various books and documents.

古文：寻以宪为大冢宰。
现代文：不久，武帝又命他为大冢宰。
English: Not long after, Emperor Wu ordered him to be the grand vizier.

古文：时帝既诛宰臣，亲览朝政，方欲齐之以刑，爰及亲亲，亦为刻薄。
现代文：这时，武帝既诛杀了担任宰相的大臣，亲自总揽朝政，正想以法治国，涉及到亲友也很峻刻。
English: At this time, Emperor Wu not only killed the minister who served as prime minister, but also personally took over the government, and was trying to rule the country by law. It was also a serious moment involving relatives and friends.

古文：宪既为护所任，自天和后，威势渐隆。
现代文：宇文宪原来被宇文护信任，自天和年以后，威势越来越大。
English: Originally, Uwen Xian was trusted by Uwen Guo. Since then, he has become increasingly powerful.

古文：护欲有所陈，多令宪奏。
现代文：宇文护想有所陈奏，大多令宇文宪出面奏说。
English: If Uwensou wanted to make a statement, most of the time he made Uwenshin make a statement.

古文：其间或有可不，宪虑主相嫌隙，每曲而暢之。
现代文：其中偶尔有些不恰当的意见，他担心帝相之间有矛盾，常常委曲心意以求君臣之间关系和畅。
English: Among them, there were occasionally some inappropriate opinions. He was worried that there was a contradiction between the emperor and the emperor, and often bent his heart to seek a smooth relationship between the monarch and the minister.

古文：帝亦悉其此心，故得无患。
现代文：武帝也理解他的良苦用心，所以，他能够没有祸患。
English: Emperor Wu also understood his good intentions, so he was able to leave without any trouble.

古文：然犹以威名过重，终不能平，虽迁授冢宰，实夺其权也。
现代文：然而，仍因威名过重，武帝内心始终不能平静，虽然授予他冢宰的职务，实际上夺去了他的权力。
English: However, still due to the excessive prestige, Emperor Wu could not be calm in his heart. Although he was granted the post of the regent, he actually lost his power.

古文：开府裴文举，宪之侍读，帝尝御内殿引见，谓曰： 昔魏末不纲，太祖匡辅元氏；有周受命，晋公复执威权。
现代文：开府裴文举是宇文宪的侍读，武帝曾在内殿召见他，对他说 ：过去，北魏末年纲纪败坏，太祖匡扶元氏；周朝受命立国以来，晋公宇文护又掌握极大的权力。
English: Emperor Wu summoned him to the inner hall and said to him, "In the past, at the end of the Northern Wei Dynasty, discipline was corrupted by the great-grandfather Kuang Fuyuan; since the founding of the Zhou Dynasty, Jin Gong Uwengu has wielded great power.

古文：积习生常，便谓法应须尔。
现代文：积习为常，便认为朝廷成法就是这样。
English: Accustomed as we are, we think that this is how the imperial court passes laws.

古文：岂有三十岁天子可为人所制乎？
现代文：哪里有三十岁的天子能够受别人控制的？
English: Where can a thirty-year-old heavenly son be controlled by others?

古文：且近代以来，又有一弊，暂经隶属，便即礼若君臣，此乃乱时权宜，非经国之术。
现代文：而且近代以来，还有一种弊端，暂时有了隶属关系。便立即像君臣一样，这只是动乱时的权宜之计，不是治理国家长久的办法。
English: Moreover, since modern times, there is also a drawback, temporarily having a subordinate relationship, they immediately act like monarchs and ministers, which is only an expedient measure in times of turmoil, not a long-term method of governing the country.

古文：尔虽陪侍齐公，不得即同臣主。且太祖十兒，宁可悉为天子？
现代文：你过去虽然陪侍过齐公宇文宪，不得一直保留臣与主的关系，况且太祖有十个儿子，哪能都成为天子？
English: In the past, although you had accompanied Qigong Yu Wenxin, you had to keep the relationship between the vassal and the lord. Moreover, your great-grandfather had ten sons. How could they all become heavenly sons?

古文：卿宜规以正道，无令兄弟自致嫌疑。 
现代文：你应遵循正道，不要令我们兄弟相互招致嫌疑。 
English: You should follow the right path and not make our brothers suspect each other.

古文：文举再拜而出，归以白宪。宪指心抚几曰： 吾心公宁不悉？
现代文：裴文举听完，再次叩拜武帝出宫，归来将这番话告诉宇文宪，他听后指着心，扶着几案说： 我的心你还不知道？
English: After listening to Pei Wenqiu, he bowed to Emperor Wu again and left the palace. When he returned, he told these words to Yu Wenxian. After listening, he pointed to his heart and said, "Don't you know my heart yet?"

古文：但当尽忠竭节耳，知复何言！ 建德三年，进爵为王。
现代文：只能竭忠尽智去对待天子，其他还能再说什么呢！ 建德三年，他被晋爵为王。
English: You can only treat the Son of Heaven with utmost loyalty and wisdom, what else can you say? After three years of building virtue, he was promoted to the king.

古文：宁友刘休征献王箴一首，宪美之。
现代文：他的好友刘休征送来《王箴》诗一首，他读了十分赞赏。
English: His friend Liu Xiuzheng sent him a poem of "Wang Zhen" and he read it with great appreciation.

古文：休征后又以箴上之，帝方翦削诸弟，甚悦其文。
现代文：休征后来又将这首诗呈给武帝，武帝正要削弱他的兄弟们的力量，也很喜欢这首诗。
English: Later, he presented the poem to Emperor Wu, who was about to weaken the power of his brothers and also liked the poem.

古文：宪尝以兵书繁广，自刊为要略五篇，至是表陈之。帝览而称善。
现代文：宇文宪曾因为兵书过于繁杂，自己编写《要略》五篇，这时上表陈奏，武帝看后连连称赞。
English: Because Wu Wenxian's military manuals were too complicated, he once compiled five "Outlines" by himself. At this time, the above table was played, and Emperor Wu saw it and praised it.

古文：其秋，帝于云阳寝疾，卫王直于京师。帝召宪谓曰： 汝为前军，吾亦续发。 
现代文：这年秋天，武帝在云阳患病，卫王宇文直在京城举兵反叛，武帝召来宇文宪，对他说 ：你作为前军先行，我接着也出发。 
English: In the autumn of that year, Emperor Wu fell ill in Yunyang, and the prince of Wei, Uwen Zhi, raised an army to rebel in the capital. Emperor Wu summoned Uwen Xian and said to him, "As the vanguard, you lead the way, and I will follow.

古文：直寻败走。
现代文：宇文直战败逃走。
English: Uwen was defeated and ran away.

古文：帝至京师，宪与赵王招俱入拜谢。
现代文：武帝到京城，他与赵王宇文招一起入内叩拜谢罪。
English: When Emperor Wu arrived in Beijing, he and Zhao Wang Yuwenzhu went inside to prostrate themselves.

古文：帝曰： 管、蔡为戮，周公作辅，人心不同，有如其面。
现代文：武帝说 ：管叔、蔡叔虽然也是武王的兄弟，却因反叛被杀戮；而周公旦却辅助成王建立国家，人心各不相同，就像人的脸面互不雷同。
English: Emperor Wu said, "Uncle Guan and Uncle Cai, although they were also brothers of King Wu, were killed for rebellion; while Zhou Gongdan assisted King Cheng to establish the country. People's hearts are different, just like people's faces are different from each other.

古文：但愧兄弟亲寻干戈，于我为不能耳。 
现代文：只是兄弟骨肉之间大动干戈，深感惭愧，对我来说不能这样啊。 
English: It's just a big fight between brothers, I'm deeply ashamed, it can't be like this for me.

古文：初，直内忌宪，宪隐而容之，且以帝母弟，每加友敬。
现代文：早先，宇文直心内忌恨宇文宪，宇文宪对他却宽容隐忍。况且，又认为他是武帝的同母兄弟，所以对他友好敬重。
English: Earlier, Uwen Zhi hated Uwen Xian in his heart, but Uwen Xian was tolerant of him. Moreover, he thought that he was the same mother's brother of Emperor Wu, so he was friendly and respectful to him.

古文：晋公护之诛也，直固请及宪。
现代文：晋公宇文护被诛杀后，宇文直请求武帝将宇文宪一齐除掉。
English: After Jin Gong Uwen Guo was killed, Uwen Zhi asked Emperor Wu to get rid of Uwen Xian altogether.

古文：帝曰： 齐公心迹，吾自悉之，不得更有所疑。 
现代文：武帝说： 齐公的心思，我自己知道，不得去怀疑他。 
English: Emperor Wu said, "I know Qigong's mind, so I don't have to doubt him.

古文：及文宣皇后崩，直又密启宪饮酒食肉与平昔不异。
现代文：武帝与宇文直的生母文宣皇后去世，宇文直又密奏宇文宪在守丧时饮酒吃肉。与平常没有什么两样。
English: Emperor Wu and Emperor Wenzhong's birth mother, Empress Wenzhong, passed away, and Emperor Wenzhong and Empress Wenzhong drank alcohol and ate meat during the funeral. It was nothing out of the ordinary.

古文：帝曰： 吾与齐王异生，俱非正嫡，特为吾意，今袒括是同。
现代文：武帝说 ：我们与齐王是异母兄弟，都不是正出，人家的一切都是为了我。
English: Emperor Wu said, "King Qi and I are half-brothers, neither of us is straight, everyone's everything is for me."

古文：汝当愧之，何论得失。
现代文：现在，我对他和你的袒护都一样。你应当感到惭愧，还论什么得失。
English: Now, I'm as protective of him as I am of you. You should be ashamed of yourself.

古文：汝亲太后之子，但须自助。 
现代文：你是太后亲生的儿子，更应该自我勉励。 
English: You are the queen mother's own son, you should be more self-motivated.

古文：直乃止。
现代文：宇文直从此才停止对宇文宪的诽谤。
English: It was only after this that Uwenshin stopped slandering Uwenshin.

古文：四年，帝将东讨，独与内史王谊谋之，余人莫知。
现代文：建德四年，武帝准备东征，只与内史王谊谋划，其他人都不知道。
English: In the fourth year of Jiande, Emperor Wu was preparing for the Eastern Expedition. He only planned with the Inner History Prince, and no one else knew about it.

古文：后以诸弟才略，无出宪右，遂告之。
现代文：后来，他考虑所有兄弟们的才能，没有能赶上宇文宪的，便将东征的事告诉了他。
English: Later, he considered the talents of all the brothers, and if there was no one who could catch up with Yu Wenxian, he told him about the Eastern Expedition.

古文：宪即赞成其事。
现代文：他立即赞成这件事。
English: He was immediately in favour of it.

古文：及大军将出，宪表上金宝等一十六件以助军资。
现代文：大军将要出发，他又献出金银财宝十六件作为军队的开支。
English: A large army was about to set out, and he offered sixteen pieces of gold, silver, and treasure for the expenses of the army.

古文：诏不纳，以宪表示公卿曰： 人臣当如此，朕贵其心耳，宁资此物。 
现代文：武帝下诏不接受，他拿着宇文宪贡献财宝的奏章对公卿大臣们说 ：做臣子的就应该这样，我最珍贵的就是你们的心，怎么能要这些东西！ 
English: Emperor Wu did not accept the edict, and he took the record of Uwen Xian's contribution to the treasury and said to the nobles and ministers: This is how it should be to be a courtier, my most precious is your heart, how can you want these things!

古文：乃诏宁为前军，趣黎阳。
现代文：他下诏命宇文宪为前军，直趋黎阳。
English: He issued an imperial edict ordering Uwen Xian to be the vanguard and march straight to Liyang.

古文：帝亲围河阴，未克。
现代文：武帝亲自围攻河阴，没有攻下。
English: Emperor Wu personally besieged Heyin, but failed to capture it.

古文：宪攻拔武济，进围洛口，拔其东西二城。
现代文：宇文宪攻克武济，包围洛口，打破洛口的东西二城。
English: Uwen Xian attacked Kewu, encircled Lokou, and broke the east and west walls of Lokou.

古文：以帝疾班师。
现代文：因武帝生病，班师返回。
English: Due to Emperor Wu's illness, the class teacher returned home.

古文：是岁，初置上柱国，以宪为之。
现代文：这年，朝廷刚设置上柱国的官职，朝廷命宇文宪担任。
English: In that year, the Imperial Court had just established the official position of Shangzhu Guo, and the Imperial Court ordered Wu Wenxian to assume the position.

古文：五年，大举东讨，宪复为前锋，守雀鼠谷。
现代文：建德五年，周军大举东讨，宇文宪仍任前锋，把守雀鼠谷。
English: In Jiande's fifth year, Zhou Jun vigorously discussed the East, and Yu Wenxian was still the striker, guarding the Sparrow Mouse Valley.

古文：帝亲围晋州，宪进克洪洞、永安二城，更图进取。
现代文：武帝亲自围攻晋州，宇文宪率军克复洪洞、永安两座城池，进一步谋图进取的方向。
English: Emperor Wu personally besieged Jinzhou, and Uwen Xian led the army to conquer the two cities of Fuhongdong and Yong'an, further seeking the direction of advancement.

古文：齐主闻晋州见围，自来援之。
现代文：齐主听说晋州被围，亲自率军救援。
English: Lord Qi heard that Jinzhou was besieged and personally led the army to rescue it.

古文：时陈王纯顿千里径，大将军永是公椿屯鸡栖原，大将军宇文盛守汾水关，并受宪节度。
现代文：这时，陈王宇文纯驻扎在千里径，大将军永昌公宇文椿屯住鸡栖原，大将军宇文盛守卫汾水关，都受宇文宪的指挥。
English: At this time, Chen Wang Yu Wenzhun was stationed in Qianli Path, General Yongchang Gong U Wenzhun was stationed in Jixi Plain, and General U Wensheng was guarding the Yunnan Water Gate, all under the command of U Wensheng.

古文：宪密谓椿曰： 捕者诡道，汝今为营，不须张幕，可伐柏为庵，示有处所。
现代文：他秘密对宇文椿说： 用兵，要有诡诈之道。你现在建造军营，不需要用幕布搭帐篷，可砍伐柏树搭起棚庵，表示正住在这地方。
English: He secretly said to Yu Wenzhong: "When using soldiers, you must be cunning. You are now building a military camp, you do not need to use a curtain to set up a tent, you can cut down cypress trees and set up a shelter, indicating that you are living in this place.

古文：令兵去之后，贼犹致疑。 
现代文：让军队离开之后，敌人仍怀疑你们还驻守在这里。 
English: After you let the troops leave, the enemy still suspects that you are still stationed here.

古文：时齐主分军万人向千里径，又令其众出汾水关，自率大兵与椿对。
现代文：这时，齐主分兵一万人进向千里径，又命其他军队进攻汾水关，他亲自率大军与宇文椿对垒。
English: At this time, Qi's main detachment of ten thousand soldiers marched for a thousand miles, and ordered other armies to attack Surabaya. He personally led a large army to confront Uwenqin.

古文：宇文盛驰告急，宪自救之，齐人遽退。
现代文：宇文盛赶快告急，宇文宪亲率军队救援，齐兵忽然退去。
English: Uwen Sheng was in a hurry, Uwen Xian's relatives led the army to rescue, and the soldiers suddenly retreated.

古文：盛与柱国侯莫陈芮逐之，多有斩获。
现代文：宇文盛与柱国侯莫陈芮追赶，杀死和俘获许多敌兵。
English: Uwen Sheng and pillar state lord Mo Chenqi chased after, killed and captured many enemy soldiers.

古文：俄而椿告齐众稍逼，宪又救之。会椿被敕追还，率兵夜反。
现代文：不久，宇文椿报告齐朝大军逼近，宇文宪又去救援，适逢宇文椿被武帝下令调回，他率兵连夜返回。
English: Not long after, Uwenqin reported that the Qi army was approaching, and Uwenqin went to the rescue. At the right time, Uwenqin was ordered by Emperor Wu to return, and he and his soldiers returned overnight.

古文：齐人果谓柏庵为帐幕，不疑军退，翌日始悟。
现代文：齐兵果然认为柏树搭的庵棚就是军帐，不怀疑周军已经撤退，第二天才明白。
English: The Qi soldiers really thought that the shelter built by the cypress trees was a military account. They did not suspect that the Zhou army had withdrawn, and they did not know until the next day.

古文：时帝已去晋州，留宪后拒。
现代文：这时武帝已去晋州，留下宇文宪把守后路。
English: At this time, Emperor Wu had already gone to Jinzhou, leaving Wu Wenxian to guard the rear.

古文：宪阻水为阵。
现代文：他在水边摆下阵势。
English: He took up a position on the water's edge.

古文：齐领军段暢至桥。
现代文：齐朝领军段畅来到桥边。
English: The leading troops of the Qi Dynasty came to the bridge.

古文：宪隔水问暢姓名，暢曰： 领军段暢也，公复为谁？ 
现代文：他隔着水问段畅的姓名，段畅说： 我是领军段畅，你是谁呢？ 
English: He asked across the water the name of Duan Chang, Duan Chang said: I am the leader Duan Chang, who are you?

古文：宪曰： 我虞候大都督耳。 
现代文：他答道 ：我是虞侯大都督。 
English: He replied, "I am the grand governor."

古文：暢曰： 观公言语，不是凡人，何用隐名位。 
现代文：段畅说 ：看你说话的气概，不是一般人物，为何要隐去自己的姓名和官位？ 
English: Duan Chang said, "Looking at your speaking spirit, you are not an ordinary person. Why do you want to hide your name and official position?"

古文：宪乃曰： 我齐王也。 
现代文：他于是才说 ：我是齐王呀。 
English: He then said, "I am King Qi."

古文：偏指陈王纯已下，并以告之。
现代文：然后，将陈王宇文纯以下的将领姓名，都告诉给了他。
English: Then, he told him the names of the generals below Chen Wang Yu Wenjun.

古文：暢鞭马去，宪即命旋军。
现代文：段畅听后，策马率军离去，宇文宪立即命撤军。
English: After listening to the speech, Tsema and his army left, and Uwen Xian immediately ordered his troops to withdraw.

古文：齐人遽追之，戈甲甚锐。
现代文：齐军突然追来，兵锋勇锐。
English: The Qi army suddenly chased after them, and the soldiers were very brave.

古文：宪与开府宇文忻为殿拒之，斩其骁将贺兰豹子、山褥环等，齐众乃退。
现代文：宇文宪与开府宇文忻殿后抗拒，斩杀齐军骁将贺兰豹子、山褥环等人，齐军才撤退。
English: After Uwen Xian and Kaifu Uwen Yao resisted, the Qi army killed the commanders of the Qi army, such as Horan Leopards and Yamazaki Rings, and the Qi army retreated.

古文：帝又命宪援晋州。
现代文：武帝又命宇文宪救援晋州。
English: Emperor Wu also ordered Uwen Xian to rescue Jinzhou.

古文：齐主攻围晋州，帝次于高显，宪率所部先向晋州。
现代文：齐国君主围攻晋州，武帝到达高显，宇文宪率所部先进向晋州。
English: The monarchs of Qi besieged Jinzhou, Emperor Wu arrived in Gaoxian, and Uwen Xian led the advance towards Jinzhou.

古文：明日诸军总集，稍逼城下。
现代文：第二天，各路人马汇集，进逼晋州城下。
English: The next day, people from all walks of life gathered to force their way into the city of Jinzhou.

古文：齐人大阵于营南，帝召宪驰往观之。
现代文：齐军的大阵布置在军营的南面，武帝召宇文宪骑马前去观察。
English: The large array of Qi troops was arranged on the south side of the military camp, and Emperor Wu summoned Uwen Xian on horseback to observe.

古文：宪反命曰： 请破之而后食。 
现代文：宇文宪回来后对武帝请命说 ：我请求先打破齐军再回来吃饭。 
English: After returning, Uwen Xian said to Emperor Wu, "I request that you first break the Qi army and then come back for dinner."

古文：帝悦。既而诸军俱进，应时大溃，齐主遁走。
现代文：武帝极为高兴，不长时间，各路大军一齐进发，齐军很快溃乱，齐国君主逃走。
English: Emperor Wu was extremely happy. Not long after, the armies of all directions marched forward together. The Qi army soon collapsed, and the monarch of Qi fled.

古文：齐人复据高壁及洛女，帝命宪攻洛女，破之。
现代文：齐军又占据高壁和洛女，武帝命宇文宪攻打洛女，将城堡打破。
English: The Qi army also occupied Gaowei and Luoyang, and Emperor Wu ordered Yuwen Xian to attack Luoyang and break the castle.

古文：齐主已走鄴，留其安德王延宗据并州。
现代文：齐主退回邺城，留下安德王高延宗占据并州。
English: Qi Lord returned to Shicheng, leaving Ando King Gao Yan Zong to occupy and annex the state.

古文：帝进围其城，宪攻其西面，克之。
现代文：武帝率军进围并州，宇文宪攻打城的西面，攻入城内。
English: Emperor Wu led the army to encircle and annex the prefecture, while Emperor Wu attacked the west side of the city and entered the city.

古文：延宗遁走，追而获之。
现代文：高延宗逃走，周军追赶并将他擒获。
English: Gao Yanzong fled, Zhou's army chased and caught him.

古文：以功进封第二子安城公质为河间王，拜第三子宾为大将军。
现代文：因立功，朝廷封宇文宪的第二子安城公宇文质为河间王，命他的第三子宇文宾为大将军。
English: Due to his meritorious service, the imperial court named Uwenshin's second son, Ancheng Gongwenshu, as the King of Kawama, and his third son, Uwenshin, as the Grand General.

古文：仍诏宪趣鄴，进克鄴城。
现代文：武帝下诏命宇文宪率军进向邺城，不久将邺城拿下。
English: Emperor Wu issued an imperial edict ordering Uwen Xian to lead the army to march on Lucheng, and they soon took Lucheng.

古文：宪善兵谋，长于抚御，摧锋陷阵，为士卒先。
现代文：他用兵善于计谋，长于安抚和驾驭将士，冲锋陷阵，都在士卒前面。
English: He is good at scheming with soldiers, good at pacifying and driving soldiers, and rushing into battle, all of which are ahead of soldiers.

古文：齐人闻风，惮其勇略。
现代文：齐军闻风落魄，都害怕他的勇气和胆略。
English: The Qi army was in a bad way, and they were all afraid of his courage and daring.

古文：齐任城王湝、广宁王孝珩等守信都，复诏宪讨之。
现代文：齐国任城王高蔆、广宁王高孝珩等把守信都，武帝又命宇文宪率军讨伐。
English: King Gao Jiong of Qi and King Gao Xiaojun of Quangning made Shushin the capital, and Emperor Wu ordered Uwen Xian to lead the army in a crusade.

古文：仍令齐主手书招湝，湝不纳。
现代文：他命被抓获的齐主写信招高蔆投降，高蔆不听从。
English: When he was captured, his superior wrote a letter to Gao Gan to surrender, but Gao Gan did not listen.

古文：宪军过赵州，湝令间谍二人觇，候骑执以白宪。
现代文：宇文宪率军经过赵州，高蔆命两个间谍侦查周军情况，周军将他们抓住报告给宇文宪。
English: The army led by Yu Wenxian passed through Zhaozhou. Gao Rongmei ordered two spies to investigate the situation of the Zhou army. The Zhou army caught them and reported to Yu Wenxian.

古文：宪乃集齐旧将，偏将示之曰： 吾所争者大，不在汝等。 
现代文：他便召集齐军的旧将，让间谍一一与他们见面，说： 我所争的在于天下，不在你们两人。 
English: He then called together the old generals of the Qi army and asked the spies to meet with them one by one, saying, "What I am fighting for lies in the world, not in you two."

古文：即放还，令充使，乃与湝书。
现代文：立即将他们放还，让他们充做信使，带书信给高蔆。
English: Send them back immediately, and let them act as messengers to take a letter to Gao Zhuang.

古文：宪至信都，湝阵于城南，登张耳冢望之。
现代文：他率军到达信都，高蔆在城南列阵。宇文宪登上张耳墓观察阵势。
English: He led the army to Xindu, and Gao Yao formed a line in the south of the city. Uwen Xian boarded Zhang Er's tomb to observe the formation.

古文：俄而湝所署领军尉相愿伪出略阵，遂降，湝杀其妻子。
现代文：不一会儿，高蔆的部将领军尉相愿假装出来袭击周军，乘机投降。高蔆杀死了他的妻子。
English: Not long after, Gao Jun's subordinate general and lieutenant agreed to pretend to attack Zhou's army and take the opportunity to surrender. Gao Jun killed his wife.

古文：明日擒湝及孝珩等。
现代文：第二天，大败齐军，俘获高蔆和高孝珩等人。
English: The next day, the Qi army was defeated, and Gao Jun and Gao Xiaojun were captured.

古文：先是稽胡刘没铎自称皇帝，又诏宪督赵王招等平之。
现代文：稽胡刘没铎自称皇帝，朝廷又命宇文宪率领赵王宇文招等将他讨平。
English: Hu Liu Mianzhong claimed to be the emperor, and the imperial court ordered Yu Wenxian to lead Zhao Wang Yuwenzhu and others to level him.

古文：宪自以威名日重，潜思屏退。
现代文：他知道自己威望和名声越来越大，暗中想急流勇退。
English: He knew that his prestige and reputation were growing, and he secretly wanted to beat a hasty retreat.

古文：及帝欲亲征北蕃，乃辞以疾。
现代文：武帝想亲自征讨北部的夷族，他以有病推辞。
English: Emperor Wu wanted to personally recruit the northern barbarians, but he declined on the grounds that he was ill.

古文：寻而帝崩，宣帝嗣位，以宪属尊望重，深忌之。
现代文：不久，武帝驾崩，宣帝即位，因为宇文宪辈分较尊，威望又重，内心里很是忌恨。
English: Soon after, Emperor Wu passed away and Emperor Xuan ascended to the throne, because Uwen Xian's generation was more respected, prestige was heavy, and there was a lot of hatred in his heart.

古文：时尚未葬，诸王在内居服。
现代文：这时武帝尚未埋葬，宗室各王都在宫内守丧。
English: At this time, Emperor Wu had not yet been buried, and all the kings of the dynasty were in the palace for the funeral.

古文：司卫长孙览总兵辅政，恐诸王有异志，奏令开府于智察其动静。
现代文：司卫长孙览统领兵马，辅助朝政。他恐怕各王心怀异志，奏请宣帝，令开府于智访察他们的动静。
English: The Chief of the Imperial Guards, Sun Qian, led the troops and horses and assisted the imperial government. He was afraid that the kings would have different ideas, so he asked Emperor Xuan to order the imperial court to visit Yuchi to observe their activities.

古文：及山陵还，帝又命智就宅候宪，因是告宪有谋。
现代文：武帝安葬以后，宣帝又命于智到宇文宪家去问候，于智因此诬告宇文宪有阴谋。
English: After Emperor Wu was buried, Emperor Xuan ordered Yu Zhi to go to Uwen Xian's house to greet him. Yu Zhi therefore falsely accused Uwen Xian of having a plot.

古文：帝遣小冢宰宇文孝伯谓宪曰： 今欲以叔为太师，九叔为太傅，十一叔为太保，何如？ 
现代文：宣帝派小冢宰宇文孝伯对宇文宪说： 现在想让叔父您为太师，九叔为太傅，十一叔为太保，怎么样？ 
English: Emperor Xuanzong sent his young aide-de-camp, Uwen Xiao Bo, to say to Uwen Xian: "What do you think of making your uncle the Grand Master, your ninth uncle the Grand Master, and your eleventh uncle the Grand Protector?

古文：宪辞以才轻。
现代文：他以才能低下拒绝。
English: He declined on the grounds of diminished capacity.

古文：孝伯返命，复来曰： 诏王晚共诸王俱入。 
现代文：孝伯回宫复命，又回来对他说 ：天子命您晚上和其他各王都到宫里去。 
English: Takahiro returned to the palace to receive his orders, and when he came back, he said to him, "By the grace of heaven, you and all the other kings should go to the palace tonight."

古文：既至殿门，宪独被引进。
现代文：到了宫殿门口，他单独被领入宫中。
English: When he arrived at the palace gate, he was ushered into the palace alone.

古文：帝先伏壮士于别室，至即执之。
现代文：宣帝先在别的屋子里埋伏下壮士，一进来就将他逮捕。
English: Emperor Xuan first ambushed the strong man in another room and arrested him as soon as he entered.

古文：宪辞色不挠，固自陈说。
现代文：宇文宪面不改色，说话不屈不挠，坚持陈说。
English: Yu Wenqin does not change his face, speaks unyieldingly, and insists on speaking.

古文：帝使于智对宪。宪目光如炬，与智相质。
现代文：宣帝让于智与他对质，他目光愤怒，如蜡烛燃烧，与于智互相对质。
English: Xuan Di let Yu Zhi confront him, and his angry eyes, like a candle burning, confronted Yu Zhi.

古文：或曰： 以王今日事势，何用多言！ 
现代文：有人说 ：以您今天的处境，何必再多说呢？ 
English: Some people say: Given your current situation, why do you need to say more?

古文：宪曰： 我位重属尊，一旦至此，死生有命，宁复图存？
现代文：他答道： 我官位高，辈分长，一旦到了这种地步，是死是活听天由命，怎么还希望活着？
English: He replied: I am a high-ranking official with a long lineage. Once I have reached this stage, whether I live or die is up to fate. How can I still hope to live?

古文：但老母在堂，恐留慈恨耳。 
现代文：只是有老母尚在堂上，恐怕给她老人家留下怨恨和痛苦。 
English: It's just that my mother is still in the hall, and I'm afraid I'll leave resentment and pain for her old man.

古文：因掷笏于地，乃缢之。
现代文：因而把朝笏扔在地上，自缢身亡。
English: As a result, he threw the kite on the ground and hanged himself.

古文：时年三十五。
现代文：时年仅三十五岁。
English: He was only thirty-five years old.

古文：帝以于智为柱国，封齐国公。
现代文：宣帝命于智为柱国，又封他为齐国公。
English: Emperor Xuan ordered Yu Zhi to become a pillar state, and he was also named the Prince of Qi.

古文：又杀上大将军安邑公王兴、上开府独孤熊、开府豆卢绍等，皆以昵于宪也。
现代文：宣帝又命杀死大将军安邑公王兴、上开府独孤熊、开府豆卢绍等人，因为这些人与宇文宪关系亲近。
English: Emperor Xuan also gave orders to kill the general An'yip Gongwangxing, Shang Kaifu Duolong Xiong, Kaifu Doushiao and others, because these people were close to Uwen Xian.

古文：帝既诛宪，无以为辞，故托兴等与宪结谋，遂加戮焉。
现代文：宣帝杀死宇文宪，没有什么理由，就谎称王兴等人与宇文宪合谋造反，所以杀戮。
English: Emperor Xuan killed Uwen Xian for no reason, and falsely claimed that Wang Xing and others had conspired with Uwen Xian to rebel, and that was why they killed him.

古文：时人知其冤酷，咸云伴宪死也。
现代文：人们都知道他们极为冤枉，都说王兴等人是陪着宇文宪死的。
English: People all know that they were extremely wrong. They all say that Wang Xing and the others died with Yu Wenxian.

古文：宪所生达步干氏，蠕蠕人也。
现代文：宇文宪的生母达步干氏是蠕蠕人。
English: Uwen Xian's birth mother, Dabugang, was a Cree.

古文：建德三年，上册为齐国太妃。
现代文：建德三年，被册封为齐国太妃。
English: Jiande three years, was canonized as the Queen of Qi.

古文：宪有至性，事母以孝闻。
现代文：宇文宪有淳厚的性格，侍奉母亲以孝敬闻名。
English: Uwen Xian has a generous character and is known for his filial piety while serving his mother.

古文：太妃旧患，屡经发动，宪衣不解带，扶持左右。
现代文：太妃的旧病经常发作，他昼夜衣不解带，在左右服侍。
English: Tohei's old illness often flares up, and he serves around the clock.

古文：宪或东西从役，每心惊，母必有疾，乃驰使参问，果如所虑。
现代文：他经常率军东征西战，每次心内惊慌，必定是母亲有病，便骑快马赶回家探视，果然像他所忧虑的那样。
English: He often led the army to the east and west, and every time he panicked in his heart, it must be that his mother was ill, so he rode a fast horse to rush home to visit her, just as he had feared.

