古文：明主者，有术数而不可得欺也，审于法禁而不可犯也，察于分职而不可乱也。
现代文：英明的君主，掌握权谋策略而不可欺瞒，明确法度禁令而不能侵犯，分清上下职事而不容颠倒混乱。
English: A wise monarch grasps the strategy of power and cannot be deceived, clarifies the prohibitions of laws and regulations and cannot be violated, and distinguishes between the upper and lower posts and does not allow the confusion to be reversed.

古文：故群臣不敢行其私，贵臣不得蔽贱，近者不得塞远，孤寡老弱不失其职，竟内明辨而不相逾越。
现代文：所以，群臣不敢行私舞弊，贵臣不能压制贱者，近臣不能阻碍远者，孤寡老弱不会丧失经常供养，国内尊卑分明而没有互相僭越的情况。
English: Therefore, the group of ministers dare not engage in personal misconduct, the high-ranking ministers cannot suppress the low-ranking ones, the close ministers cannot obstruct the distant ones, the lonely, the old and the weak will not lose their regular support, and the domestic superiority and inferiority are clear and there is no mutual arrogance.

古文：此之谓治国。
现代文：这个就叫作治理得好的国家。
English: This is called a well-governed country.

古文：故《明法》曰： 所谓治国者，主道明也。 
现代文：所以，《明法》篇说： 所谓治国者，主道明也。 
English: Therefore, the "Clear Law" article said: The so-called ruler of the country is also the master of the road.

古文：明主者，上之所以一民使下也。私术者，下之所以侵上乱主也。
现代文：明法，是君主用来统一人民役使臣下的；私术，是臣下用来侵犯朝廷扰乱君主的。
English: Ming Fa is used by the monarch to unify the people's servants and vassals; Shizhu is used by the vassals to encroach on the imperial court and disturb the monarch.

古文：故法废而私行，则人主孤特而独立，人臣群党而成朋。
现代文：所以，法度废而私术行，人君就没有依靠而陷于孤立，臣下就拉帮结派而形成朋党。
English: Therefore, when the law is abolished and selfishness prevails, the ruler has no reliance and falls into isolation, and the vassals form cliques to form a party.

古文：如此则主弱而臣强，此之谓乱国。故《明法》曰： 所谓乱国者，臣术胜也。 
现代文：这样就形成主弱臣强的局面，这个就叫作混乱的国家。所以，《明法》篇说： 所谓乱国者，臣术胜也。 
English: In this way, a situation is formed in which the master is weak and the vassal is strong, and this is called a chaotic country. Therefore, the "Clear Law" article says: The so-called troublemaker, the vassal also wins.

古文：明主在上位，有必治之势，则群臣不敢为非。
现代文：明君在上位，有必治的权势，群臣便不敢为非作歹。
English: As the Ming Emperor was in the highest position and had the power to govern, his ministers did not dare to do anything wrong.

古文：是故群臣之不敢欺主者，非爱主也，以畏主之威势也；百姓之争用，非以爱主也，以畏主之法令也。
现代文：所以，群臣之所以不敢欺君，并不是喜爱君主，而是因为害怕君主的权势；百姓之所以争为君用，也不是喜爱君主，而是因为害怕君主法令。
English: Therefore, the reason why ministers do not dare to deceive the monarch is not because they love the monarch, but because they are afraid of the monarch's power; the reason why the people fight for the use of the monarch is not because they love the monarch, but because they are afraid of the monarch's decree.

古文：故明主操必胜之数，以治必用之民；处必尊之势，以制必服之臣。故令行禁止，主尊而臣卑。
现代文：因此，明主掌握着必胜的策略，来统治不得不被使用的人民；控制着 必尊 的势力，来制服不得不服从的臣子，这样就令行禁止，形成君尊臣卑的局面。
English: Therefore, the clear master grasps the winning strategy to rule the people who have to be used; controls the forces that must be respected to subdue the vassals who have to be obeyed, thus prohibiting the action and forming a situation of superior and inferior.

古文：故《明法》曰： 尊君卑臣，非计亲也，以势胜也。 
现代文：所以，《明法》篇说： 尊君卑臣，非亲也，以势胜也。 
English: Therefore, the "Clarification of the Law" says: "Respect your superior, despise your inferiors. Even if you are not a relative, you can win with your strength."

古文：明主之治也，县爵禄以劝其民，民有利于上，故主有以使之；立刑罚以威其下，下有畏于上，故主有以牧之。
现代文：明君治国，立爵禄来鼓励人民，人民可以得利于君主，故君主能使役他们；立刑罚来镇慑人民，人民就将畏惧于君主，故君主能统治他们。
English: If a wise king governs, the people will be encouraged; if the people can profit the king, the king can serve them; if a wise king punishes, the people will fear the king, and the king can rule them.

古文：故无爵禄则主无以劝民，无刑罚则主无以威众。
现代文：所以，没有爵禄，君主就没有办法鼓励人民；没有刑罚，君主就没有办法镇慑人民。
English: Therefore, without peerage, the monarch has no way to encourage the people; without punishment, the monarch has no way to deter the people.

古文：故人臣之行理奉命者，非以爱主也，且以就利而避害也；百官之奉法无奸者，非以爱主也，欲以爱爵禄而避罚也。故《明法》曰： 百官论职，非惠也，刑罚必也。 
现代文：故人臣遵守规范执行君命，并非出于爱君，不过是出于趋利而避害；百官执行法度不行恶事，也不是出于爱君，不过是出于接受爵禄而躲避刑罚。所以，《明法》篇说： 百官论职，非惠也，刑罚必也。 
English: Therefore, the "Clear Law" article said: "For the officials to perform their duties, there must be benefits as well as punishments.

古文：人主者，擅生杀，处威势，操令行禁止之柄以御其群臣，此主道也。
现代文：君主，专擅生杀，据有威势，掌握令行禁止的大权来驾御他的群臣，这就是为君之道。
English: It is the way of kings to be a monarch, to kill arbitrarily, to rule with authority, and to control his subjects with the power of commanding and prohibiting.

古文：人臣者，处卑贱，奉主令，守本任，治分职，此臣道也。
现代文：人臣，处在下位，奉行君令，严守本身职责，做好分内工作，这就是为臣之道。
English: The way to be a vassal is to be a subordinate vassal, follow the orders of the king, strictly observe one's own duties, and do one's job well.

古文：故主行臣道则乱，臣行主道则危。
现代文：君行臣道则陷于混乱，臣行君道则陷于危亡。
English: The way of the ruler to the ruled was in chaos, and the way of the ruler to the ruled was in danger.

古文：故上下无分，君臣共道，乱之本也。
现代文：所以，上下没有分别，君道与臣道混同，是乱国的根本。
English: Therefore, there is no distinction between the upper and lower levels, and the way of the monarch and the way of the subject are confused, which is the root of the chaotic country.

古文：故《明法》曰： 君臣共道则乱。 
现代文：所以，《明法》篇说： 君臣共道则乱。 
English: Therefore, the "Clarification of the Law" says: "When a prince and a minister are on the same path, there will be chaos."

古文：人臣之所以畏恐而谨事主者，以欲生而恶死也。
现代文：人臣之所以惶恐而谨慎地事奉君主，是因为要求生存怕死。
English: The reason why courtiers fearlessly and cautiously serve the monarch is because they are required to live in fear of death.

古文：使人不欲生，不恶死，则不可得而制也。
现代文：假使人们都不要求生存，都不怕死，那就无法控制了。
English: If people don't want to live and aren't afraid to die, it's out of their control.

古文：夫生杀之柄，专在大臣，而主不危者，未尝有也。
现代文：生杀之权专在大臣之手，而君主不危亡的事，是没有的。
English: The power of life and death is exclusively in the hands of ministers, and there is no such thing as a monarch who is not in danger of death.

古文：故治乱不以法断而决于重臣，生杀之柄不制于主而在群下，此寄生之主也。
现代文：所以，国家治乱如不决定在法度，而是由重臣决定；生杀权柄如不掌握在君主自身，而是旁落在下面，这就是寄生的君主。
English: Therefore, if the law does not decide to rule the country, but the vassals do; if the power of life and death does not lie in the hands of the monarch himself, but falls to the side, this is a parasitic monarch.

古文：故人主专以其威势予人，则必有劫杀之患；专以其法制予人，则必有乱亡之祸。
现代文：所以，为人君主专愿把权势送给别人，就一定有被劫杀的忧患；专愿把法度送给别人，就一定有乱亡的祸事。
English: Therefore, if a human monarch is willing to give power to others, there must be the sorrow of being robbed and killed; if he is willing to give laws to others, there must be the disaster of chaos and death.

古文：如此者，亡主之道也。故《明法》曰： 专授则失。 
现代文：这些都是亡国之君所走的道路。所以，《明法》篇说： 专授则失。 
English: These are all the paths taken by the ruler of a ruined country. Therefore, the "Clear Law" article says: special instruction is lost.

古文：凡为主而不得行其令，废法而恣群臣，威严已废，权势已夺，令不得出，群臣弗为用，百姓弗为使，竟内之众不制，则国非其国而民非其民。
现代文：凡是身为君主而不得行其政令，法度废驰而对群臣放任，威严已经丧尽，权势已被剥夺，政令发不出去，群臣不为所用，百姓不为所使，国内的民众不能为所控制，那么，国就不是属于他的国，民也不是属于他的民。
English: If, as monarch, he is not allowed to execute his decrees, if the laws are abrogated and the ministers are left to their own devices, if his authority has been exhausted and his power usurped, if his decrees cannot be issued, if his ministers cannot be used, if the people cannot be used, and if the people within the country cannot be controlled, then the country does not belong to him, and the people do not belong to him.

古文：如此者，灭主之道也。故《明法》曰： 令本不出谓之灭。 
现代文：这种情况，乃是被欺灭君主的世道。所以；《明法》篇说： 令本不出谓之灭。 
English: This situation is the way of the world of the tyrannized monarch. Therefore, the "Clarification of the Law" says: "Doing nothing is equivalent to extinction."

古文：明主之道，卑贱不待尊贵而见，大臣不因左右而进，百官条通，群臣显见，有罚者主见其罪，有赏者主知其功。
现代文：明君的做法，接触下层人士不等待贵臣介绍，进用国家大臣不依靠左右进言，对百官的联系是顺畅的，对群臣的了解是明白的。对受罚的，君主明见他的罪；对受赏的，君主知道他的功。
English: Ming Jun's approach is to contact low-level people without waiting for the introduction of dignitaries, to use state ministers without relying on left and right for input, to have smooth contact with hundreds of officials, and to have a clear understanding of ministers. For those who are punished, the monarch clearly sees his sin; for those who are rewarded, the monarch knows his merit.

古文：见知不悖，赏罚不差。
现代文：所见与所知没有谬误，所赏与所罚没有差错。
English: There is no fallacy in what is seen and known, and there is no error in what is rewarded and punished.

古文：有不蔽之术，故无壅遏之患。
现代文：因为他有不受蒙蔽的办法，所以没有被 堕遏 的忧患。
English: Because he has a way of not being fooled, he has not fallen into the trap of depression.

古文：乱主则不然，法令不得至于民，疏远隔闭而不得闻。
现代文：昏君就不是如此，他的法令通不到人民群众，被疏远隔绝而不得了解情况。
English: This is not the case with Comrade Dou, whose decrees are not passed on to the masses of the people, who are alienated and cut off from the situation.

古文：如此者，壅遏之道也。故《明法》曰： 令出而留谓之壅。 
现代文：这种状况，乃是被壅遏的君主的世道。所以，《明法》篇说： 令出而留谓之壅。 
English: This state of affairs is the way of life of a monarch who has been curbed. Therefore, the "Clear Law" says: "It is a disgrace to be ordered to leave while remaining."

古文：人臣之所以乘而为奸者，擅主也。
现代文：人臣之所以能弄权行恶，是因为揽夺君权。
English: The reason why vassals can use power to do evil is because they have seized royal power.

古文：臣有擅主者，则主令不得行，而下情不上通。
现代文：人臣中一有揽夺君权的，君令就不能贯彻，下情就不能上通。
English: If any vassal tries to usurp the power of the king, the king's order cannot be carried out, and it cannot be carried out.

古文：人臣之力，能鬲君臣之间，而使美恶之情不扬闻，祸福之事不通彻，人主迷惑而无从悟，如此者，塞主之道也。
现代文：以人臣的力量，就能隔离在君臣之间，使好坏的情况不得发表，祸福的事例不得通报，人君迷惑而无从觉悟，这种情况，便是被闭塞的君主的世道。
English: With the power of people and ministers, it is possible to isolate between monarchs and ministers, so that good and bad situations cannot be published, cases of calamity and good fortune cannot be reported, and people and princes are confused and cannot be awakened. This situation is the world of the blocked monarch.

古文：故《明法》曰： 下情不上通谓之塞。 
现代文：所以，《明法》篇说： 下情不上通谓之塞。 
English: Therefore, the "Clear Law" article said: If the situation does not go well, it is called a plug.

古文：明主者，兼听独断，多其门户。
现代文：明君，多听独断，听取意见的门户是很多的。
English: Ming Jun, listen more to the opinion, there are many portals to listen to opinions.

古文：群臣之道，下得明上，贱得言贵，故奸人不敢欺。
现代文：对群臣的政策，也要求下级可以提醒上级，贱者可以评说贵者。所以奸臣不敢对他欺骗。
English: The policy towards vassals also requires that subordinates can remind superiors, and that the inferior can comment on the superior. Therefore, treacherous vassals dare not deceive him.

古文：乱主则不然，听无术数，断事不以参伍。
现代文：昏君则不然，了解情况没有办法，裁决事情又不用参考验证。
English: However, this is not the case with Coma Jun. There is no way to understand the situation, and there is no need to refer to verification to adjudicate the matter.

古文：故无能之士上通，邪枉之臣专国，主明蔽而聪塞，忠臣之欲谋谏者不得进。
现代文：所以，无能的人上来，邪曲之臣专政，君主的视听被蒙蔽阻塞，忠臣想要设谋进谏的，又不得进用。
English: Therefore, incompetent people come up, the evil vassal dictatorship prevails, the monarch's audio-visual is blinded and blocked, and the loyal vassal who wants to plot to enter the palace is not allowed to enter.

古文：如此者，侵主之道也。
现代文：这种情况，乃是被侵夺的君主的世道。
English: This is the way of the usurped monarch.

古文：故《明法》曰： 下情上而道止，谓之侵。 
现代文：所以，《明法》篇说： 下情上而道止谓之侵。 
English: Therefore, the "Clear Law" article said: Under the circumstances, it is an invasion to stop the road.

古文：人主之治国也，莫不有法令赏罚。
现代文：人君治国，没有不具备法令和赏罚的。
English: There is no such thing as a man-king ruling a country who does not have laws and rewards and punishments.

古文：具故其法令明而赏罚之所立者当，则主尊显而奸不生；其法令逆而赏罚之所立者不当，则群臣立私而壅塞之，朋党而劫杀之。
现代文：所以，法令明确而赏罚规定得当，君主就尊显而不出奸臣；法令错误而赏罚规定不当，群臣就一方面行私而蔽塞君主，另一方面结党而劫杀君主。
English: Therefore, if the decree is clear and the reward and punishment are properly prescribed, the monarch will show respect and not betray the treacherous vassal; if the decree is wrong and the reward and punishment are improperly prescribed, the vassals will on the one hand act selfishly and obstruct the monarch, and on the other hand form a party and kidnap the monarch.

古文：故《明法》曰： 灭、塞、侵、壅之所生，从法之不立也。 
现代文：所以，《明法》篇说： 灭、塞、侵、壅之所生，从法之不立也。 
English: Therefore, the "Clarification of the Fa" says: "What is born of annihilation, obliteration, encroachment, and usurpation is not established by the Fa."

古文：法度者，主之所以制天下而禁奸邪也，所以牧领海内而奉宗庙也。
现代文：法度，是君主用来控制天下而禁止奸邪的，是用来统治海内而事奉宗庙的。
English: Laws are used by monarchs to control the world and prohibit treachery. They are used to rule the country and serve the patriarchal temple.

古文：私意者，所以生乱长奸而害公正也，所以壅蔽失正而危亡也。
现代文：私意，是可以产生祸乱、滋长奸邪而危害公正原则的，是可以蒙蔽君主、丧失正道而导致危亡的。
English: Self-interest is capable of producing calamity, nurturing evil and harming the principle of justice. It is capable of blinding the monarch, losing the right path and leading to peril.

古文：故法度行则国治，私意行则国乱。
现代文：法度得行则国治，私意得行则国乱。
English: When the rule of law prevails, the country is governed; when private interests prevail, the country is in turmoil.

古文：明主虽心之所爱而无功者不赏也，虽心之所憎而无罪者弗罚也。
现代文：英明君主，虽对自己心爱的人，无功也不赏；虽对自己憎恶的人，无罪也不罚。
English: A wise prince, although he loves those whom he loves, does not reward them; although he hates those whom he hates, he does not punish them.

古文：案法式而验得失，非法度不留意焉。
现代文：按照法度规程来检验得失，与法度无关的事是不留意的。
English: In accordance with the legal regulations to check the gains and losses, things unrelated to the law are not noticed.

古文：故《明法》曰： 先王之治国也，不淫意于法之外。 
现代文：所以，《明法》篇说： 先王之治国也，不淫意于法之外。 
English: Therefore, the "Clear Law" article said: The previous king's governance of the country was not intended to be outside the law.

古文：明主之治国也，案其当宜，行其正理。
现代文：明君治国，总是根据恰当合适的原则，执行正确道理。
English: Myungun always governs the country according to appropriate principles and implements correct principles.

古文：故其当赏者，群臣不得辞也；其当罚者，群臣不敢避也。
现代文：所以，对于当赏的，群臣不得推辞；对于当罚的，群臣不敢逃避。
English: Therefore, for those who are to be rewarded, the ministers must not refuse; for those who are to be punished, the ministers dare not escape.

古文：夫赏功诛罪，所以为天下致利除害也。
现代文：赏功罚罪，本来是为天下兴利除害的。
English: Rewarding merits and punishing crimes was originally intended to benefit the world and eliminate harm.

古文：草茅弗去，则害禾谷；盗贼弗诛，则伤良民。
现代文：杂草不铲除，就危害庄稼；盗贼不惩治，就伤害良民。
English: If weeds are not uprooted, crops will be damaged; if thieves are not punished, good people will be harmed.

古文：夫舍公法而行私惠，则是利奸邪而长暴乱也。
现代文：如果弃公法而行私惠，那就等于便利奸邪而助长暴乱了。
English: If one abandons public law and pursues private gain, it is tantamount to facilitating treachery and fomenting rebellion.

古文：行私惠而赏无功，则是使民偷幸而望于上也；行私惠而赦有罪，则是使民轻上而易为非也。
现代文：因为行私惠而赏了无功的人，就等于让人民贪图侥幸而谋求向上讨好；行私惠而赦了有罪的人，就等于让人民轻慢君主而轻易为非作歹。
English: To reward those who have done nothing for the sake of private gain is tantamount to letting the people covet opportunity and seek to curry favor; to pardon those who have committed crimes for the sake of private gain is tantamount to letting the people despise the monarch and easily commit crimes.

古文：夫舍公法用私惠，明主不为也。
现代文：弃公法而行私意，明君是不肯干的。
English: Abandoning public law to pursue private interests, Mingjun is not willing to do it.

古文：故《明法》曰： 不为惠于法之内。 
现代文：所以，《明法》篇说： 不为惠于法之内。 
English: Therefore, the "Clear Law" article said: It is not within the law to benefit.

古文：凡人主莫不欲其民之用也。
现代文：大凡君主没有不要求人民效力的。
English: There is no great monarch who does not require the people to be effective.

古文：使民用者，必法立而令行也。
现代文：使人民效力，就必须建立法度而推行政令。
English: In order for the people to be effective, it is necessary to establish the rule of law and push forward the executive order.

古文：故治国使众莫如法，禁淫止暴莫如刑。
现代文：所以治理国家使役人民莫如有法，禁止淫乱抑制暴行莫有刑。
English: Therefore, there is no law to govern the country and the people, and there is no punishment to prohibit fornication and restrain violence.

古文：故贫者非不欲夺富者财也，然而不敢者，法不使也；强者非不能暴弱也，然而不敢者，畏法诛也。
现代文：贫者并非不愿意夺取富者的财物，然而他不敢，是法度不让他夺；强者并非不能施加暴行于弱者，然而他不敢，是畏惧法度的惩治。
English: The poor man is not unwilling to seize the property of the rich, but he does not dare, because the law does not allow him to seize it; the strong man is not unable to inflict violence on the weak, but he does not dare, because he is afraid of the punishment of the law.

古文：故百官之事，案之以法，则奸不生；暴慢之人，诛之以刑，则祸不起；群臣并进，策之以数，则私无所立。
现代文：所以，百官的工作，都按法度检查，奸邪就不会产生；暴慢之人，都用刑律惩治，祸乱就起不来；群臣并进，都用政策来驾御，私术就无法建立。
English: Therefore, the work of all officials should be checked in accordance with laws and regulations, so that treachery and evil will not occur; violent people should be punished with criminal laws, so that disasters will not occur; when ministers are marching together, they should use policies to control them, so that self-dealing cannot be established.

古文：故《明法》曰： 动无非法者，所以禁过而外私也。 
现代文：所以，《明法》篇说： 动无非法者，所以禁过而外私也。 
English: Therefore, the "Clear Law" article said: There is no illegal person, so it is forbidden and foreign and private.

古文：人主之所以制臣下者，威势也。
现代文：君主之所以能控制臣下，靠的是权势。
English: The reason why a monarch can control his subjects is because of his power.

古文：故威势在下，则主制于臣；威势在上，则臣制于主。
现代文：所以，权势旁落在下，君就被臣控制；权势掌握在上，臣就被君控制。
English: Therefore, if the power falls to the side, the ruler is controlled by the vassal; if the power is in the upper hand, the vassal is controlled by the ruler.

古文：夫蔽主者，非塞其门守其户也，然而令不行、禁不止、所欲不得者，失其威势也。
现代文：一个被蒙蔽的君主，并不是谁堵塞和封守着他的门户，然而他令不能行、禁不能止、所要求的什么也得不到，就是因为丧失了权势的缘故。
English: A deluded prince is not one who bars and locks his doors, yet he cannot do, he cannot forbid, he cannot obtain what he asks for, because he has lost his power.

古文：故威势独在于主，则群臣畏敬；法政独出于主，则天下服德。
现代文：所以，权势独揽在君主手里，群臣就畏惧恭敬；法度政令由君主独自决定，天下就服从听命。
English: Therefore, if the power is exclusively in the hands of the monarch, the courtiers will fear and respect him. Laws and decrees are decided by the monarch alone, and the whole world will obey his orders.

古文：故威势分于臣则令不行，法政出于臣则民不听。
现代文：如果权势分散于臣下，命令就无法推行；法度政令产生于臣下，百姓就不会听命。
English: If power is dispersed among vassals, orders cannot be carried out; if laws and decrees are made by vassals, the people will not obey.

古文：故明主之治天下也，威势独在于主而不与臣共，法政独制于主而不从臣出。
现代文：所以，明君治理天下，坚持独揽权势，而不与臣下共分；坚持独定法度政令，而不许出自臣下。
English: Therefore, Emperor Ming governed the world, insisting on monopolizing power, rather than sharing it with his subjects; insisting on dictating laws and decrees, rather than allowing them to come from his subjects.

古文：故《明法》曰： 威不两错，政不二门。 
现代文：所以，《明法》篇说： 威不两错，政不二门。 
English: Therefore, the "Clear Law" article said: "Dignity is not two wrongs, politics is not two doors."

古文：明主者，一度量，立表仪，而坚守之。
现代文：明君，统一法规，建立准则，而且坚决地维护它们。
English: Mingjun, unify laws and regulations, establish standards, and resolutely uphold them.

古文：故令下而民从。
现代文：所以，命令一下人民就服从。
English: Therefore, once the people are ordered, they will obey.

古文：法者，天下之程式也，万事之仪表也；吏者，民之所悬命也。
现代文：法，是天下的规程，万事的准则。执法官吏，是牵制着人民生命的。
English: Law is the world's code, the standard of all things. Law enforcement officials are holding back people's lives.

古文：故明主之治也，当于法者赏之，违于法者诛之。故以法诛罪，则民就死而不怨；以法量功，则民受赏而无德也。
现代文：所以明君治国，对于阻碍法令的就罚。这样，依法治罪，人民受死也无所抱怨；依法量功，人民受赏也不必感恩。
English: In this way, according to the law of crime, the people have no complaints about being killed; according to the law of merit, the people do not have to be grateful for being rewarded.

古文：此以法举错之功也。
现代文：这些都是按照法度处理事情的功效。
English: These are the effects of handling things in accordance with the law.

古文：故《明法》曰； 以法治国，则举错而已。 
现代文：所以，《明法》篇说： 以法治国，则举错而已。 
English: Therefore, the "Clear Law" article said: to rule the country by law is just a mistake.

古文：明主者，有法度之制、故群臣皆出于方正之治而不敢为奸，百姓知主之从事于法也，故吏之所使者，有法则民从之，无法则止，民以法与吏相距，下以法与上从事。
现代文：明君，握有一种法度的控制力量，所以群臣都出于正确的治理而不敢行恶。百姓也理解君主是依法办事的，所以官吏对他们的派使，合法则服从，不合法则抵制不动。人民用法度和官吏互相牵制，下面凭法度与上面办理事务。
English: The Ming Emperor held a controlling power of laws and regulations, so the courtiers did not dare to do evil for the sake of correct governance. The people also understood that the monarch acted according to the law, so the officials obeyed their envoys if they were legal and did not resist them if they were illegal. The people used the laws and officials to restrain each other, and the lower ones did business with the higher ones according to the laws.

古文：故诈伪之人不得欺其主，嫉妒之人不得用其贼心，谗谀之人不得施其巧。
现代文：所以奸诈的人不能欺骗君主，嫉妒的人无法行害人之心，进谗面谀之人不能用其机巧。
English: Therefore, the treacherous person cannot deceive the monarch, the envious person cannot do harm to people's hearts, and the person who enters the face of the enemy cannot use his cunning.

古文：千里之外，不敢擅为非。
现代文：千里之外，人们都不敢为非作歹。
English: Thousands of miles away, people don't dare to do anything wrong.

古文：故《明法》曰： 有法度之制者，不可巧以诈伪。 
现代文：所以，《明法》篇说： 有法度之制者，不可巧以诈伪。 
English: Therefore, the "Clear Law" article said: Those who have the rule of law should not use deception.

古文：故明主在上位，则官不得枉法，吏不得为私。
现代文：权衡，是用来计算轻重数字的，然而人们不去事奉它，并非心里不爱财，而是因为 权 不能替他创造数量的多少， 衡 不能替他创造重量的轻重。
English: Weights and measures are used to calculate weight and weight figures, but people do not serve it, not because they do not love money in their hearts, but because power cannot create the quantity for him, and measurement cannot create the weight and weight for him.

古文：民知事吏之无益，故财货不行于吏，权衡平正而待物，故奸诈之人不得行其私。
现代文：人们看到事奉权衡本身没有益处，所以不去事奉它。所以，有明君处在上位，官不能枉法，吏不能行私，人们看到事奉官吏也没有什么益处，所以就不用财货行贿于官吏了。能做到权衡公正来处理一切事情，奸诈的人就不能行私。
English: People see that there is no benefit in serving and weighing, so they don't serve it. Therefore, when there is a clear ruler at the top, officials can't abuse the law, and officials can't act selfishly. People see that there is no benefit in serving officials, so they don't need to bribe officials with money and goods. If you can balance and deal with everything fairly, you can't act selfishly.

古文：故《明法》曰： 有权衡之称者，不可欺以轻重。 
现代文：所以，《明法》篇说： 有权衡之称者，不可以欺以轻重。 
English: Therefore, the "Clear Law" article says: Those who are said to have a balance should not be deceived by the weight.

古文：尺寸寻丈者，所以得长短之情也。
现代文：尺、寸、寻、丈这些单位，都是用来取得长短实数的。
English: The units of shaku, sun, ho, and jo are all used to obtain the length of real numbers.

古文：故以尺寸量短长，则万举而万不失矣。是故尺寸之度，虽富贵众强，不为益长；虽贫贱卑辱，不为损短。
现代文：所以用尺寸计量短长，就万元一失。尺寸的计量，虽对于富贵众强的人们，不替他增长；虽对于贫贱卑辱的人们，也不替他减短。
English: Therefore, if you measure by the short and long, you will lose ten thousand yuan. Although the measurement of size increases for the rich and powerful, it does not increase for him; although for the poor and humiliated people, it does not reduce for him.

古文：公平而无所偏，故奸诈之人不能误也。
现代文：它是公平而没有偏私的，所以奸诈的人不能制造错误。
English: It is fair and unbiased, so deceitful people cannot make mistakes.

古文：故《明法》曰： 有寻丈之数者，不可差以长短。 
现代文：所以，《明法》篇说： 有寻丈之数者，不可差以长短。 
English: Therefore, the "Clear Law" article says: If there is a number of search lengths, it should not be different from the length.

古文：国之所以乱者，废事情而任非誉也。
现代文：国家之所以乱，是因为办事不根据事实而根据诽谤夸誉的议论。
English: The reason why the country is in turmoil is because it does not act on the basis of facts, but on the basis of slanderous and boastful talk.

古文：故明主之听也，言者责之以其实，誉人者试之以其官。
现代文：所以英明君主在听取意见的时候，对于提建议的，要责成他拿出真实证据；对于夸誉人的，要用试官的办法考验。
English: Therefore, when a wise ruler is listening to opinions, he should order the proposer to produce true evidence, and he should test the praiser by means of an examiner.

古文：言而无实者，诛；吏而乱官者，诛。
现代文：言而不实的，给予惩罚；试官而败坏官职的，也给予惩罚。
English: Those who speak untruths will be punished; those who test officials and corrupt official positions will also be punished.

古文：是故虚言不敢进，不肖者不敢受官。
现代文：所以，假话无人敢说，不肖之徒不敢接受官职。
English: Therefore, no one dares to tell a lie, and no one dares to accept an official post.

古文：乱主则不然，听言而不督其实，故群臣以虚誉进其党；任官而不责其功，故愚污之吏在庭。
现代文：昏君则不是如此，听取意见不考核其真实性，因而群臣就利用虚名来推荐私党；任用官吏不考查其成绩，因而愚污的官吏就进入朝廷。
English: However, this was not the case with Emperor Weizong. He listened to opinions without verifying their authenticity, so his ministers used false names to recommend their own parties. He appointed officials without checking their performance, so corrupt officials entered the imperial court.

古文：如此则群臣相推以美名，相假以功伐，务多其佼而不为主用。
现代文：这样，群臣就互相吹捧他们的美名，互相借助他们的功劳，力求扩大交结而不为君主效力了。
English: In this way, the courtiers touted their good names to each other, helped each other with their merits, and tried to expand their contacts, but did not work for the monarch.

古文：故《明法》曰： 主释法以誉进能，则臣离上而下比周矣；以党举官，则民务佼而不求用矣。 
现代文：所以，《明法》篇说： 主释法以誉进能，则臣离上而下比周矣；以党举官，则民务佼而不求用矣。 
English: Therefore, the "Clear Law" article said: The main interpretation of the law is that if the honor is promoted, the vassal is better than the superior; if the party is promoted, the civil affairs are better than the civil affairs.

古文：乱主不察臣之功劳，誉众者，则赏之；不审其罪过，毁众者，则罚之。
现代文：昏君不肯明察臣下的实际功劳，只看夸誉的人多，就行赏；也不肯详察臣下的实际罪过，只看诽谤的人多，就处罚。
English: He did not want to scrutinize the actual merits of his subordinates, and only rewarded those who praised him. He also did not want to scrutinize the actual sins of his subordinates, and only punished those who slandered him.

古文：如此者，则邪臣无功而得赏，忠正无罪而有罚。
现代文：这样一来，就形成邪臣无功而得赏，忠臣无罪而受罚。
English: As a result, evil ministers are rewarded without merit, and loyal ministers are punished without guilt.

古文：故功多而无赏，则臣不务尽力：行正而有罚，则贤圣无从竭能；行货财而得爵禄，则污辱之人在官；寄托之人不肖而位尊，则民倍公法而趋有势。
现代文：功多而无赏，臣下就不肯尽力；行为忠正而受罚，圣贤就无法竭能报国；行贿赂而得爵禄，恶浊的人就混进宫府；委托重任的人不贤而官位很高，人民就背离公法而趋炎附势了。
English: If merit is abundant but unrewarded, subjects will not be willing to do their best; if conduct is righteous but punished, sages will not be able to do their best to serve the country; if bribery is rewarded with peerage, evil-doers will be mixed into the palace government; if those entrusted with important duties are not virtuous but have high official ranks, the people will deviate from public law and become inflamed.

古文：如此，则悫愿之人失其职，而廉洁之吏失其治。
现代文：因此，忠诚之士反而失其职守，廉洁之官反而治理不好。
English: As a result, loyal people lose their duties, and honest officials are not well governed.

古文：故《明法》曰： 官之失其治也，是主以誉为赏而以毁为罚也。 
现代文：所以，明法》篇说： 官之失其治也，是主以誉为赏，而以毁为罚也。 
English: Therefore, the "Clarification of the Law" says: Even if an official fails to govern, the Lord will reward him with praise and punish him with destruction.

古文：平吏之治官也，行法而无私，则奸臣不得其利焉。
现代文：一般官吏为官，如行法而不掏私，奸臣便得不到什么好处。
English: Ordinary officials are officials. If they practice the law without seeking personal gain, treacherous ministers will not receive any benefits.

古文：此奸臣之所务伤也。
现代文：这样，奸臣就力求对他诬陷中伤。
English: In this way, the treacherous minister tried to frame and slander him.

古文：人主不参验其罪过，以无实之言诛之，则奸臣不能无事贵重而求推誉，以避刑罚而受禄赏焉。
现代文：人君若不对他的 罪过 调查核实，根据不实之词惩罚他，作人臣的就不得不事奉权贵来求得他们的夸誉，以便躲避刑罚而谋求禄赏。
English: If people do not investigate and verify his crimes and punish him based on untrue words, the vassal will have to serve the powerful to gain their praise, in order to avoid punishment and seek reward.

古文：故《明法》曰： 喜赏恶罚之人，离公道而行私术矣。 
现代文：所以，《明法》篇说： 喜赏恶罚之人，离公道而行私术矣。 
English: Therefore, the "Clear Law" article says: Those who like evil punishments should abandon justice and practice selfishness.

古文：奸臣之败其主也，积渐积微，使主迷惑而不自知也。
现代文：奸臣的败坏君主，总是采取渐渐败坏的方法，使君主迷惑而不自觉察。
English: The perfidious prince who corrupts his vassal always adopts the method of gradual corruption, so as to deceive the prince without him realizing it.

古文：上则相为候望于主，下则买誉于民。
现代文：他们在上面对君主进行侦查，在下面向人民收买名誉。
English: Above, they investigate the monarch, and below, they bribe the people.

古文：誉其党而使主尊之，毁不誉者而使主废之。
现代文：他们夸誉同党让君主重视，诽谤非同党的人让君主废黜。
English: They praised party members for making the monarch important, and slandered non-party members for making the monarch deposed.

古文：其所利害者，主听而行之，如此，则群臣皆忘主而趋私佼矣。
现代文：对他们所要利之、害之的，如君主听而行之，这样，群臣就全都忘掉君主而发展私交了。
English: All the courtiers forgot about the monarch and developed personal relationships, as if the monarch listened to them and did what was good or bad for them.

古文：故《明法》曰： 比周以相为慝，是故忘主私佼，以进其誉。 
现代文：所以，《明法》篇说： 比周以相为匿，是故忘主死伎，以进其誉。 
English: Therefore, the "Clear Law" article said: If Zhou hides his identity, it is because he has forgotten his master and is trying to gain his reputation.

古文：主无术数，则群臣易欺之；国无明法，则百姓轻为非。
现代文：君主没有权谋策略，群臣就容易对他欺骗；国家没有修明的法度，百姓就容易为非作歹。
English: If the monarch does not have a power strategy, it is easy for the courtiers to deceive him; if the country does not have clear laws, it is easy for the people to do evil.

古文：是故奸邪之人用国事，则群臣仰利害也。如此，则奸人为之视听者多矣。虽有大义，主无从知之。
现代文：因此，奸邪之人若是执掌国政，群臣的切身利害仰望于他，这样，替奸臣作耳目的人就多了，虽有不义之人，君主也是无从知道的。
English: Therefore, if a treacherous person is in charge of state affairs, the vital interests of the ministers look up to him. In this way, there are more people who are the eyes and ears of the treacherous minister. Although there are unjust people, the monarch has no way of knowing.

古文：故《明法》曰： 佼众誉多，外内朋党，虽有大奸，其蔽主多矣。 
现代文：所以，《明法》篇说： 佼众誉多，外内朋党，虽有大奸，其蔽主多矣。 
English: Therefore, the "Clear Law" article said: The outstanding person has a lot of reputation, and the domestic and foreign friends of the party, although there is a big traitor, his cover-up is more.

古文：凡所谓忠臣者，务明法术，日夜佐主明于度数之理，以治天下者也。
现代文：凡是所谓忠臣，都是力求修明法度政策，日夜帮助君主掌握法度政策的道理，来治理天下的。
English: All so-called loyal vassals strive to clarify the legal policy and help the monarch master the principles of legal policy day and night to govern the world.

古文：奸邪之臣知法术明之必治也，治则奸臣困而法术之士显。
现代文：奸臣知道法度政策修明国家必治，国治则奸臣困难，而坚持法度政策者尊显。
English: The treacherous vassals know that the amendment of the law and order policy makes it clear that the country must be governed, and that it is difficult for the treacherous vassals to govern the country, but those who adhere to the law and order policy are respected.

古文：是故邪之所务事者，使法无明，主无悟，而己得所欲也。
现代文：所以，奸臣所努力争取的，就是法度不要修明，君主不要觉悟，而自己可以为所欲为。
English: Therefore, what the treacherous vassal strives for is that the law should not be amended, the monarch should not be aware, and he can do whatever he wants.

古文：故方正之臣得用则奸邪之臣困伤矣，是方正之与奸邪不两进之势也。
现代文：所以，正直之臣得用则奸臣因伤，这乃是正直与奸邪不能并用的必然趋势。
English: Therefore, it is an inevitable trend that honesty and treachery cannot go hand in hand.

古文：奸邪在主之侧者，不能勿恶也。
现代文：奸臣在君主左右，不能不憎恶忠臣。
English: Treacherous vassals are always around the monarch, and loyal vassals cannot but be detested.

古文：唯恶之，则必候主间而日夜危之。
现代文：唯其憎恶，就必然窥伺君主的时机而日夜进言危害。
English: But his hatred is such that he is bound to spy out the monarch's opportunity and to speak harm day and night.

古文：人主不察而用其言，则忠臣无罪而困死，奸臣无功而富贵。
现代文：君主若不明察而错用其言，忠臣就会无罪而困死，奸臣就会无功而富贵。
English: If the monarch is careless and misuses his words, the loyal vassal will die without guilt, and the treacherous vassal will become rich without merit.

古文：故《明法》曰： 忠臣死于非罪，而邪臣起于非功。 
现代文：所以，《明法》篇说： 忠臣死于非罪。而邪臣起于非功。 
English: Therefore, the "Clear Law" says: "A loyal subject dies without crime, while an evil subject arises without merit."

古文：富贵尊显，久有天下，人主莫不欲也。
现代文：富贵尊显，久有天下，人君没有不愿意的。
English: Riches and honours have long been the order of the day, and there is nothing a man would not do.

古文：令行禁止，海内无敌，人主莫不欲也。
现代文：令行禁止，海内无敌，人君没有不愿意的。
English: Banned by order, invincible at sea, there is no one who does not want to go.

古文：蔽欺侵凌，人主莫不恶也。
现代文：蒙蔽、欺骗、侵权、僧越，人君没有不厌恶的。
English: There is nothing human beings dislike more than being hoodwinked, cheated, infringed upon, and double-crossed.

古文：失天下，灭宗庙，人主莫不恶也。
现代文：失天下，灭宗庙，人君没有不厌恶的。
English: To lose the world, to destroy the ancestral temple, there is nothing that people do not detest.

古文：忠臣之欲明法术以致主之所欲而除主之所恶者，奸臣之擅主者，有以私危之，则忠臣无从进其公正之数矣。
现代文：忠臣修明法度、政策以实现国君的所愿，消除国君的所恶，奸臣的专权者，便用行私来进行危害，忠臣就无从进用他的公正政策了。
English: When a loyal subject amends laws and policies to achieve the sovereign's wishes and eliminate the sovereign's evils, the despot who betrays the loyal subject will use selfishness to do harm, and the loyal subject will not be able to use his fair policy.

古文：故《明法》曰： 所死者非罪，所起者非功，然则为人臣者重私而轻公矣。 
现代文：所以，《明法》篇说： 所死者非罪，所起者非功，然则为人臣者重私而轻公矣。 
English: Therefore, the "Clear Law" article says: The deceased is not a crime, the one who arose is not a merit, but the person who is a subject is selfish and light.

古文：乱主之行爵禄也，不以法令案功劳；其行刑罚也，不以法令案罪过。
现代文：昏君的授爵赐禄，不是依据法度审查功劳；判处刑罚，也不是依据法度审查罪过。
English: The awarding of a knighthood and the granting of a stipend to the late Emperor was not based on a legal examination of merit; the imposition of a criminal sentence was not based on a legal examination of guilt.

古文：而听重臣之所言。
现代文：而全是听从权重之臣的主意行事。
English: Instead, they are all acting in accordance with the will of the influential vassals.

古文：故臣有所欲赏，主为赏之；臣欲有所罚，主为罚之。
现代文：所以，重臣要赏的，君主就替他赏；重臣要罚的君主就替他罚。
English: Therefore, if a senior minister wants to reward someone, the monarch will reward him; if a senior minister wants to punish someone, the monarch will punish him.

古文：废其公法，专听重臣。
现代文：废其公法，专听重臣的主意。
English: Abolish its public law and listen to the ideas of senior ministers.

古文：如此，故群臣皆务其党，重臣而忘其主，趋重臣之门而不庭。
现代文：这样，群臣就发展私党，重视其臣而忘掉其君，奔走于重臣的家门而不肯进入朝廷。
English: In this way, the vassals developed their own parties, valued their vassals and forgot their princes, and rushed to the vassals' homes rather than entering the imperial court.

古文：故《明法》曰： 十至于私人之门，不一至于庭。 
现代文：所以，《明法》篇说： 十至于私人之门，不一至于庭。 
English: Therefore, the "Clear Law" article says: "As for the private door, it is not the same as the court."

古文：明主之治也，明于分职，而督其成事。
现代文：明君的治理臣下，明确他们的职务，而监督他们完成。
English: Ming Jun's governing vassals, clarify their duties, and supervise them to completion.

古文：胜其任者处官，不胜其任者废免。
现代文：胜其任者留官，不胜其任才废免。
English: Those who are better than their appointees remain in office, and those who are not better than their appointees are dismissed.

古文：故群臣皆竭能尽力以治其事。
现代文：所以群臣都竭尽能力来完成职务。
English: Therefore, the ministers did their best to fulfill their duties.

古文：乱主则不然。
现代文：昏君则不是这样行事的。
English: However, this is not how Somi acted.

古文：故群臣处官位，受厚禄，莫务治国者，期于管国之重而擅其利，牧渔其民以富其家。
现代文：所以群臣只占据官位，接受厚禄，而没有致力于治理国家的，只期望掌握重要部门而独专其利，只期望统治搜刮人民而独富其家。
English: Therefore, the vassals only occupy official positions and receive generous rewards, but are not committed to governing the country. They only expect to control important departments and make exclusive profits. They only expect to rule and plunder the people and enrich their families.

古文：故《明法》曰： 百虑其家，不一图其国。 
现代文：所以，《明法》篇说： 百虑其家，不一图其国。 
English: Therefore, the "Clarification of the Law" article said: A hundred considerations of one's home are not a map of one's country.

古文：明主在上位，则竟内之众尽力以奉其主，百官分职致治以安国家。
现代文：明君在上面掌权，国内民众就都能尽心竭力来拥护君主，百官也分工治理来安定国家。
English: When the Ming Emperor held power at the top, the people of the country would do their best to support the monarch, and the officials would divide the work of governing to stabilize the country.

古文：乱主则不然，虽有勇力之士，大臣私之，而非以奉其主也；虽有圣智之士，大臣私之，非以治其国也。
现代文：昏、君在上面掌权就不是这种情况。虽然国内有勇力之士，却被大臣们私养起来，不让他事奉君主；虽然有圣智之士，却被大臣们私用起来，不让他治理国家。
English: However, this is not the case when the emperor is in power. Although there are courageous people in the country, they are privately raised by the ministers and are not allowed to serve the monarch; although there are holy and wise people, they are privately used by the ministers and are not allowed to govern the country.

古文：故属数虽众，不得进也；百官虽具，不得制也。
现代文：所以，统率的人数虽多，却不能进用；百官虽然完备，却不能支配。
English: Wherefore, though the number of them that bear rule is great, yet they have no power: though an hundred be perfect, yet they have no rule.

古文：如此者，有人主之名而无其实。
现代文：这种情况就是有君主之名而无其实。
English: This is a case of having the title of monarch without the reality.

古文：故《明法》曰： 属数虽众，非以尊君也；百官虽具，非以任国也。
现代文：所以，《明法》篇说： 属数虽众，非以尊君也；百官虽具，非以任国也。
English: Therefore, the "Clear Law" article says: Although there are many genera, it is not by virtue of the emperor; although there are hundreds of officials, it is not by virtue of the country.

古文：此之谓国无人。 
现代文：此之谓国无人。 
English: This is called no man's land.

古文：明主者，使下尽力而守法分，故群臣务尊主而不敢顾其家；臣主之分明，上下之位审，故大臣各处其位而不敢相贵。
现代文：明君，使臣下尽力工作而守法，故群臣努力尊君而不敢顾其私家；使君臣本分明确，地位分明，故大臣各安其位而不敢私相抬举。
English: Ming Jun, the envoys and subordinates work hard and abide by the law, so the courtiers work hard to respect the prince and dare not care about his private life; so that the prince and the minister have a clear duty and clear status, so that the minister can keep his place and dare not lift me up.

古文：乱主则不然，法制废而不行，故群臣得务益其家；君臣无分，上下无别，故群臣得务相贵。
现代文：昏君则不然，法度废而不行，故群臣可努力发家；君臣无分，上下无别，故群臣可以私相抬举。
English: However, this is not the case for the dim prince. It is not possible to abolish the law, so the ministers can work hard to make a fortune; the prince and the minister have no points, and there is no difference between the upper and the lower, so the ministers can promote each other.

古文：如此者，非朝臣少也，众不为用也。
现代文：这种情况，不是朝臣少，而是众朝臣不为君主所用。
English: In this situation, it is not that there are few courtiers, but that the courtiers are not used by the monarch.

古文：故《明法》曰： 国无人者，非朝臣衰也，家与家务相益，不务尊君也；大臣务相贵，而不任国也。 
现代文：所以，《明法》篇说： 国无人者，非朝臣衰也，家与家务相益，不务尊君也，大臣务相贵，而不任国也。 
English: Therefore, the "Clear Law" article said: If there is no one in the country, it is not a bad thing to be a courtier, the family and the housework are mutually beneficial, it is not necessary to respect the prince, and it is valuable to be a minister, but it is not a country.

古文：人主之张官置吏也，非徒尊其身厚奉之而已也，使之奉主之法，行主之令，以治百姓而诛盗贼也。
现代文：君主的安官设吏，不只是尊重他们、厚养他们就算完事了，而是使他们遵行君主的法度，执行君主的政令，来治理百姓镇压盗贼的。
English: The monarch's officials are not only to be respected and nurtured, but are to be made to obey the monarch's laws, execute the monarch's decrees, govern the people, and suppress thieves.

古文：是故其所任官者大，则爵尊而禄厚；其所任官者小，则爵卑而禄薄。
现代文：因此，谁担任的官职大，那就爵尊禄厚；谁担任的官职小，那就爵低禄薄。
English: Therefore, whoever holds a high official position will have a high rank and high salary; whoever holds a low official position will have a low rank and low salary.

古文：爵禄者，人主之所以使吏治官也。
现代文：爵禄，正是君主用来使用和治理官吏的。
English: A peerage is precisely what the sovereign uses to employ and govern officials.

古文：乱主之治也，处尊位，受厚禄，养所与佼，而不以官为务。
现代文：至于昏君的官员，则是处在尊高的地位，拿着优厚的俸禄，养着自己的党羽，而不以官职为本务。
English: As for the officials of the late emperor, they were in a high-ranking position, holding a generous salary, and nurturing their own party members, rather than taking their official duties as their main duty.

古文：如此者，则官失其能矣。
现代文：这种情况，官吏就没有作用了。
English: In this situation, officials have no effect.

古文：故《明法》曰： 小臣持禄养佼，不以官为事，故官失职。 
现代文：所以，《明法》篇说： 小臣持禄养佼，不以官为事，故官失职。 
English: Therefore, the "Clear Law" article said: "Minors should keep their salaries high, and should not take officials as their business. Therefore, officials are derelict in their duties."

古文：明主之择贤人也，言勇者试之以军，言智者试之以官。
现代文：明君选拔贤者，对于号称有勇的人，用当兵作试验；对于号称有智的人，用当官作试验。
English: The Ming Emperor selected wise men. For those who were said to be brave, he tested them as soldiers; for those who were said to be wise, he tested them as officials.

古文：试于军而有功者则举之，试于官而事治者则用之。
现代文：在军队里试验有功的就提拔他，在官府里试验干得好的就任用他。
English: In the army, those who have performed well in tests are promoted, and in government, those who have performed well in tests are appointed.

古文：故以战功之事定勇怯，以官职之治定愚智；故勇怯愚智之见也，如白黑之分。
现代文：所以，用战功的事实鉴定勇怯，用官职的治绩鉴定愚智，这样，勇怯愚智的表现，就象黑白一样分明了。
English: Therefore, using the facts of war exploits to identify courage, and using the performance of official duties to identify stupidity, in this way, the performance of courage and stupidity is as clear as black and white.

古文：乱主则不然，听言而不试，故妄言者得用；任人而不官，故不肖者不困。
现代文：昏君则不然，听言论而不试验，所以说假话的人也得以举用；任用人材而不试官，所以不肖者也没有什么困难。
English: However, it is not the case with the dim ruler. He listens to words but does not test them, so those who tell lies can also be appointed. He appoints talent but does not test officials, so there is no problem with those who are not good-looking.

古文：故明主以法案其言而求其实，以官任其身而课其功，专任法不自举焉。
现代文：因此，英明君主用法度验证人的言论以求其实际，把官职放在人的身上以考其成果，是专靠法度取人而不搞个人举荐的。
English: Therefore, the wise monarch uses the law to verify the person's speech in order to seek its reality, and puts the official position on the person to test its results. It is to rely solely on the law to recruit people without personal recommendation.

古文：故《明法》曰： 先王之治国也，使法择人，不自举也。 
现代文：所以，《明法篇》说： 先王之治国也，使法择人，不自举也。 
English: Therefore, the "Clarification of the Fa" says: The previous king's governance of the country was also based on the principle of letting the Fa choose people, not self-promotion.

古文：凡所谓功者，安主上，利万民者也。
现代文：凡所谓功劳，乃是指安定国君，谋利于万民的。
English: All the so-called merits refer to the stability of the country and the benefit of the people.

古文：夫破军杀将，战胜攻取，使主无危亡之忧，而百姓无死虏之患，此军士之所以为功者也。
现代文：破敌军，杀敌将，战而胜，攻而取，使君主没有危殆灭亡之忧，百姓没有死亡被俘之患，这是军士用来作为功劳的。
English: To defeat the enemy army, to kill the enemy general, to win the battle, to attack and take, so that the monarch does not have the danger of death, and the people do not have the danger of death and capture, this is what the sergeant uses as a merit.

古文：奉主法，治竟内，使强不凌弱，众不暴寡，万民欢尽其力而奉养其主，此吏之所以为功也。
现代文：奉行君主的法、度，管好境内的政事，使强者不欺凌弱者，人多势众的不残害人少势弧的，万民竭尽其力来事奉君主，这是官吏用来作为功劳的。
English: It is the merit of officials to observe the laws and regulations of the monarch, to manage the internal affairs of the country well, to ensure that the strong do not bully the weak, that the many do not harm the few, and that all the people do their best to serve the monarch.

古文：匡主之过，救主之失，明理义以道其主，主无邪僻之行，蔽欺之患，此臣之所以为功也。
现代文：匡正君主的过错，挽救君主的失误，申明礼义以开导君主，以致君主没有邪僻的行为，也没有被欺蒙的忧患，这是大臣用来作为功劳的。
English: To rectify the faults of the monarch, to save the mistakes of the monarch, to affirm the propriety of the monarch to enlighten the monarch, so that the monarch does not have perverse behavior, nor the sorrow of being deceived, this is used by the minister as a merit.

古文：故明主之治也，明分职而课功劳，有功者赏，乱治者诛，诛赏之所加，各得其宜，而主不自与焉。
现代文：所以明君的治国，分清职务而考计功劳，有功者赏，乱治者罚，赏罚之所加，各得其宜，而君主不用搞私人干预。
English: Therefore, in the governance of the Ming Dynasty, the duties are clearly distinguished and the merits are considered, the meritorious are rewarded, the chaotic rulers are punished, and the rewards and punishments are appropriate, and the monarch does not need to engage in private intervention.

古文：故《明法》曰： 使法量功，不自度也。 
现代文：所以，《明法》篇说： 使法量功，不自度也。 
English: Therefore, the "Clear Law" passage says: It is better to practice the Fa according to one's ability, without self-condemnation.

古文：明主之治也，审是非，察事情，以度量案之。
现代文：明君治国，分辨是非，考察事物情况，都是用法度审核。
English: To govern a country, to distinguish right from wrong, and to examine the state of affairs are all matters of usage.

古文：合于法则行，不合于法则止。
现代文：合于法度则实行，不合则不实行。
English: If it complies with the law, it will be implemented, but if it does not, it will not be implemented.

古文：功充其言则赏，不充其言则诛。
现代文：客观成果能证实其人的主张，就给予赏赐；不能证实者，给予惩罚。
English: If the objective results can confirm the person's claim, they will be rewarded; if they cannot be confirmed, they will be punished.

古文：故言智能者，必有见功而后举之；言恶败者，必有见过而后废之。
现代文：所以，对所谓有智能的人，必须见到成果而后才用他；对所谓有恶行败德的人，必须见到罪过而后才免他。
English: Therefore, for the so-called intelligent person, it is necessary to see the results before using him; for the so-called evil person, it is necessary to see the sin before forgiving him.

古文：如此则士上通而莫之能妒，不肖者困废而莫之能举。
现代文：这样，士人就可以下情上通而无人能够妒忌，不肖者就困窘失败而无人能够举用。
English: In this way, no one can be jealous when a scholar succeeds, and no one can be envious when a scholar fails.

古文：故《明法》曰： 能不可蔽而败不可饰也。 
现代文：所以，《明法》篇说； 能不可蔽而败不可饰也。 
English: Therefore, the article of "Clear Law" says, "What can be done cannot be covered up and what can be defeated cannot be decorated."

古文：明主之道，立民所欲而求其功，故为爵禄以劝之；立民所恶以禁其邪，故为刑罚以畏之。
现代文：明君的治国之道，是定出人民所喜欢的措施来促使他们立功，所以规定爵禄鼓励他们；定出人民所厌恶的措施来禁止他们行恶，所以规定刑罚震慑他们。
English: The Ming Dynasty's way of governing the country was to determine the measures that the people liked in order to encourage them to perform meritorious deeds, so the stipulation of peerage encouraged them; to determine the measures that the people disliked in order to prohibit them from doing evil, so the stipulation of punishment deterred them.

古文：故案其功而行赏，案其罪而行罚，如此则群臣之举无功者，不敢进也；毁无罪者，不能退也。
现代文：因此，按其功而行赏，按其罪而行罚，这样则群臣即使夸誉无功的人，也不敢进用，即使诽谤无罪的人，也不可能废免。
English: Therefore, they should be rewarded according to their merits and punished according to their crimes. In this way, the courtiers would not dare to use even those who boasted of no merits, and they would not be able to dismiss even those who slandered the innocent.

古文：故《明法》曰： 誉者不能进而诽者不能退也。 
现代文：所以，《明法》篇说： 誉者不能进，而诽者不能退也。 
English: Therefore, the "Clear Law" says: Those who are honored cannot enter, and those who are slandered cannot leave.

古文：制群臣，擅生杀，主之分也；县令仰制，臣之分也。
现代文：控制群臣，专擅生杀，是君的本分；牢记君令，接受节制，是臣的本分。
English: It is your duty to control your vassals and kill them without permission; it is the duty of your vassals to keep your orders in mind and accept restraint.

古文：威势尊显，主之分也；卑贱畏敬，臣之分也。
现代文：威势尊显。是君的本分，卑贱畏敬，是臣的本分。
English: It is your duty to display your power and authority, and it is the duty of your vassals to be humble and respectful.

古文：令行禁止，主之分也；奉法听从，臣之分也。
现代文：令行禁止，是君的本分；奉法听从，是臣的本分。
English: It is your duty to forbid by order; it is the duty of a vassal to obey by law.

古文：故君臣相与，高下之处也，如天之与地也；其分画之不同也，如白之与黑也。
现代文：所以君臣之间的高下地位，有如天之与地；其划分的差别，有如白之与黑。
English: Therefore, the superior and inferior status between monarchs and ministers is like heaven and earth; the difference in their division is like white and black.

古文：故君臣之间明别，则主尊臣卑。
现代文：所以，君臣的界限分明，就形成君尊臣卑的局面。
English: Therefore, if the boundaries between the sovereign and the vassal are clear, the situation of the sovereign's superiority and the vassal's inferiority is formed.

古文：如此，则下之从上也，如响之应声；臣之法主也，如景之随形。
现代文：这样，臣下服从君主，就象回响适应声音一样；臣下效法君主，就象影子跟随身体一样。
English: In this way, the vassal obeys the monarch, just as the reverberation adapts to the sound; the vassal follows the monarch, just as the shadow follows the body.

古文：故上令而下应，主行而臣从，以令则行，以禁则止，以求则得。此之谓易治。
现代文：所以，上面发令而下面响应，君主行事而臣子听从；令则行，禁则止，求则得，这就是所谓容易治理。
English: Therefore, the above issues orders and the below responds, the monarch acts and the vassal obeys; the order is good, the prohibition is stopped, and the request is obtained, which is the so-called easy governance.

古文：故《明法》曰： 君臣之间明别，则易治。 
现代文：所以，《明法》篇说： 君臣之间明别，则易治。 
English: Therefore, the "Clear Law" article said: If there is a clear distinction between officials and subjects, it is easier to govern.

古文：明主操术任臣下，使群臣效其智能，进其长技。
现代文：明君有一套策略来任用臣下，使群臣可以献出他们的智能，贡献他们的专长。
English: Ming Jun has a strategy to appoint vassals, so that the vassals can offer their intelligence and contribute their expertise.

古文：故智者效其计，能者进其功。
现代文：因此，智者便献出他的计策，能者便献出他的成果。
English: Wherefore the wise man will give his counsel, and the man of understanding will give his counsel.

古文：以前言督后事，所效当则赏之，不当则诛之，张官任吏治民，案法试课成功。
现代文：用他们的前言核对后果，所贡献的合宜，就赏赐他；不合宜，就惩罚他。设官任吏治民，都根据法度检查成果。
English: Use their foreword to check the consequences, reward him for his contribution appropriately, punish him if it is not appropriate, and set up officials to govern the people, and check the results according to the law.

古文：守法而法之，身无烦劳而分职。
现代文：遵循法度而又以法治理之，自身既不烦劳而又可使百官分工尽职。
English: If you follow the law and are governed by the law, you will not be tired and can make a hundred officials perform their duties.

古文：故《明法》曰： 主虽不身下为而守法为之可也。 
现代文：所以，《明法》篇说： 主虽不身下为，而守法为之可也。 
English: Therefore, the "Clear Law" passage says: Although the Lord is not a subordinate, it is possible to observe the law.

