古文：孙子曰：用兵之法，有散地，有轻地，有争地，有交地，有衢地，有重地，有圮地，有围地，有死地。
现代文：孙子说：按用兵的原则，战地可分为散地、轻地、争地、交地、衢地、重地、圮地、围地、死地等九类。
English: Sun Tzu said: According to the principle of using soldiers, battlefields can be divided into nine categories: scattered, light, contested, handed over, swamped, heavy, swamped, encircled, and dead.

古文：诸侯自战其地，为散地。入人之地不深者，为轻地。我得则利，彼得亦利者，为争地。我可以往，彼可以来者，为交地。诸侯之地三属，先至而得天下之众者，为衢地。入人之地深，背城邑多者，为重地。行山林、险阻、沮泽，凡难行之道者，为圮地。所由入者隘，所从归者迂，彼寡可以击吾之众者，为围地。疾战则存，不疾战则亡者，为死地。
现代文：诸侯在自己的领地上与敌开战，其部众遇着危急情况很容易逃散，所以称散地；军队进入敌境不深的地区作战，因为距离本土不远，在危急关头可以轻易返回，所以称轻地；我方抢先占据，就对我方有利；敌人抢先占领，就对敌人有利，敌我双方互相争夺，所以称争地；我方可以去，敌人也可以来，地势平坦，交通方便的地区，叫做交地；敌我双方同其他诸侯国接壤的地区，先到达就可以与诸侯结交，取得大多数国家的支持，所以称衢地；军队深入敌境，越过许多城邑，就会面临严峻的形势，所以称重地；军队在山林、险阻、沼泽地带行动，凡是难以通行的地方，就叫做圮地；我方进入的道路狭隘，退出的道路迂远，敌人以少数兵力能打败我方众多兵力的地区，叫做围地；军队迅速奋战就能够生存，不迅速奋战就会被消灭的地区，叫做死地。
English: Princes and lords go to war with the enemy on their own territory. In a critical situation, it is easy for their subordinates to escape and disperse, so they are said to be scattered; the army enters an area where the enemy's territory is not deep, because it is not far from the mainland and can easily return in a critical moment, so it is said to be light; our side seizes first, which is advantageous to us; the enemy seizes first, which is advantageous to the enemy, the two sides compete with each other, so they are said to be contested; we can go, the enemy can come, the area with flat terrain and convenient transportation is called the border; the area where

古文：是故散地则无战，轻地则无止，争地则无攻，交地则无绝，衢地则合交，重地则掠，圮地则行，围地则谋，死地则战。
现代文：因此，处于散地不宜作战，处于轻地不宜停留，处于争地不要勉强强攻，处于交地要保证队伍能相互策应而不被截断，进入衢地应该主动结交诸侯，深入重地要掠取军需物资，遇到圮地则必须要迅速通过，陷入围地就要设计脱险，置于死地就要力战求生。
English: Therefore, it is not appropriate to fight in a scattered area, it is not appropriate to stay in a light area, it is not necessary to attack reluctantly in a contested area, it is necessary to ensure that the team can respond to each other without being cut off in a cross-border area, it is necessary to take the initiative to make friends with the princes when entering a cross-border area, it is necessary to plunder military supplies when entering a heavy area, and it is necessary to pass quickly when encountering a cross-border area, it is necessary to design an escape from danger when trapped in a siege area, and it is necessary to fight for survival when placed in a dead zone.

古文：所谓古之善用兵者，能使敌人前后不相及，众寡不相恃，贵贱不相救，上下不相收，卒离而不集，兵合而不齐。
现代文：古时候善于用兵的人，能使敌人的先头部队和后续部队无法策应，大部队和小部队无法协调，官兵无法救援，上下阻隔，无法收拢，士卒溃散，无法集合，即使集合起来，也很不整齐。
English: In ancient times, those who were good at using soldiers could make the enemy's leading troops and follow-up troops unable to respond, large forces and small forces unable to coordinate, officers and soldiers unable to rescue, upper and lower barriers, unable to close, officers and men dispersed, unable to assemble, and even if assembled, very disorderly.

古文：合于利而动，不合于利而止。
现代文：即使在这样的条件下，也要坚持有利就行动，不利就停止的原则。
English: Even under such conditions, we must adhere to the principle of acting when it is advantageous and stopping when it is disadvantageous.

古文：敢问： 敌众整而将来，待之若何？ 
现代文：试问： 如果敌军众多而且阵势齐整地向我方进攻，该如何对付它呢？ 
English: Question: If a large and well-organized enemy army attacks us, how should we deal with it?

古文：曰： 先夺其所爱，则听矣。 
现代文：回答是： 先夺取敌人的要害之处，这样，敌人就会被迫听任我的摆布了。 
English: The answer was: First seize the enemy's key points, so that the enemy would be forced to submit to my will.

古文：兵之情主速，乘人之不及，由不虞之道，攻其所不戒也。
现代文：用兵的情事势就是要迅速，乘敌人措手不及的时机动手，走敌人意料不到的道路，攻击敌人没有戒备的地方。
English: The situation of using soldiers is to be quick, to take advantage of the enemy's unprepared time to take action, to take the enemy's unexpected path, and to attack the enemy's unguarded place.

古文：凡为客之道：深入则专，主人不克；掠于饶野，三军足食；谨养而勿劳，并气积力，运兵计谋，为不可测。
现代文：凡是进入敌国作战的原则是：深入敌境，军心就越要稳固，敌军就无法战胜我们；在敌国富饶的地区夺取粮草，保障全军补给充足；注意修整，不要让军队太过疲劳，提高士气，养精蓄锐；部署兵力要巧用计谋，使敌人无法揣测我军的真实意图。
English: The principles for entering the enemy's country to fight are as follows: the deeper we go into the enemy's territory, the more solid the military spirit must be, so that the enemy cannot defeat us; seize grain and grass in the rich areas of the enemy's country to ensure that the whole army is well supplied; pay attention to grooming, do not let the army be too tired, improve morale, and keep energy and sharpness; the deployment of troops should be skillfully used to make the enemy unable to speculate on the true intentions of our army.

古文：投之无所往，死且不北，死焉不得，士人尽力。
现代文：把部队置于无路可走的境地，士兵就会死也不败退；既然士卒死都不怕，就会尽力作战了。
English: Put the troops in a hopeless situation, the soldiers will die and not retreat; since the soldiers are not afraid of death, they will fight as hard as possible.

古文：兵士甚陷则不惧，无所往则固。深入则拘，不得已则斗。
现代文：当士卒深陷危地时，就会无所畏惧；无路可走，军心就能稳固；越是深入敌境，军心就不会涣散；迫不得已时，将士们就会拼死战斗。
English: When the soldiers are deeply entangled in the war, they will be fearless; when there is no way out, the military spirit can be stable; the deeper they go into the enemy territory, the military spirit will not be scattered; when they are forced to fight, the soldiers will fight to the death.

古文：是故其兵不修而戒，不求而得，不约而亲，不令而信，禁祥去疑，至死无所之。
现代文：因此，这样的军队不待修整，都懂得戒备，不待筑励，都会竭尽全力战斗，不待约束，都能亲近相助，不待申令，都会信守纪律。禁止迷信，消除部队的疑虑，即使战死也不退避。
English: Therefore, such an army does not need to be trained, knows how to be alert, does not need to be encouraged, will fight to the best of its ability, does not need to be restrained, can be close to help, does not need to be ordered, will abide by discipline, prohibit superstition, eliminate the doubts of the troops, and will not retreat even if it is killed in battle.

古文：吾士无余财，非恶货也；无余命，非恶寿也。
现代文：我军士兵舍弃多余的财物，并不是他们不爱财；不怕牺牲生命，并不是他们不想活命。
English: When our soldiers give away their surplus property, it is not because they do not love money; when they are not afraid to sacrifice their lives, it is not because they do not want to live.

古文：令发之日，士卒坐者涕沾襟。偃卧者涕交颐。投之无所往者，诸、刿之勇也。
现代文：当作战命令下达的时候，士卒们坐着的泪水沾湿了衣襟，躺着的士卒泪流满面，但一旦将他们置于无路可走的绝境，他们就会像专诸、曹刿一样勇敢了。
English: When the order of battle was issued, the soldiers' sitting tears wet their lapels, and the soldiers lying down shed tears, but once they were placed in a hopeless situation, they would be as brave as Zongzhu and Cao Pi.

古文：故善用兵者，譬如率然；率然者，常山之蛇也。
现代文：所以，善于用兵打仗的人，能使部队像 率然 一样。
English: Therefore, those who are good at using soldiers to fight can make the troops as straightforward.

古文：击其首则尾至，击其尾则首至，击其中则首尾俱至。
现代文：率然是指常山的蛇，打它的头，尾部会来呼应肆敝，打它的尾，头部也来援应咬人，打它的腹部，首尾都来夹攻敌人。
English: "Frankly" refers to the snake of Changshan. If you hit its head, its tail will come to echo the wild grasshopper. If you hit its tail, its head will also come to assist the biter. If you hit its abdomen, it will come to attack the enemy.

古文：敢问： 兵可使如率然乎？ 曰： 可。 
现代文：试问： 军队有可能指挥得像率然一样灵活吗？ 回答是： 可以。 
English: Let me ask you: is it possible to command an army as flexibly as frankly? The answer is: yes.

古文：夫吴人与越人相恶也，当其同舟而济，遇风，其相救也如左右手。
现代文：吴国人与越国人虽然互相厌恶仇视，但是当他们同船渡河时，如果遇上大风，他们互相救助就如同一个人的左右手那样。
English: Although the Wu people and the Yue people hate and hate each other, when they cross the river in the same boat, if there is a strong wind, they will help each other just like a person's right and left hand.

古文：是故方马埋轮，未足恃也；齐勇若一，政之道也；刚柔皆得，地之理也。
现代文：因此，用系住马匹、埋起车轮的办法来稳定军队，那是靠不住的。要使全军整齐一致，奋勇杀敌，在于组织指挥得法；要使强弱都能各尽其力，在于恰当地利用地形。
English: Therefore, it is unreliable to stabilize the army by tying the horses and burying the wheels. To make the whole army neat and uniform and kill the enemy bravely, it is necessary to organize and command well; to make the strong and weak do their best, it is necessary to make proper use of the terrain.

古文：故善用兵者，携手若使一人，不得已也。
现代文：所以，善于用兵作战的人，能使全军上下携手团结如同一人一样服从指挥，这是由于客观形势迫使部队不得不如此。
English: Therefore, a person who is good at using soldiers to fight can make the whole army work together and unite as one to obey the command, which is due to the objective situation forcing the troops to do so.

古文：将军之事：静以幽，正以治。
现代文：主持军事行动，要做到考虑谋略沉着冷静而幽深莫测，管理部队公正严明而有条不紊。
English: When presiding over military operations, it is necessary to consider strategies calmly and unpredictably, and manage troops fairly, strictly and methodically.

古文：能愚士卒之耳目，使之无知。
现代文：能蒙蔽士卒的耳目，使他们对作战计划一无所知。
English: It can blind the eyes and ears of soldiers, so that they know nothing about the battle plan.

古文：易其事，革其谋，使人无识；易其居，迂其途，使人不得虑。
现代文：善于用兵的人，故意改变任务，变更计谋，使人们无法识破作战计划。驻军常改变驻地，进军迂回绕道，使人们无法推断行动意图。
English: Those who are good at using troops deliberately change the mission, change the strategy, so that people can't see through the battle plan. The garrison often changes the station, and marches in a roundabout way, so that people can't deduce the action intention.

古文：帅与之期，如登高而去其梯；帅与之深入诸侯之地，而发其机，焚舟破釜，若驱群羊，驱而往，驱而来，莫知所之。
现代文：向部属下达作战命令要像登高抽去梯子一样，使士卒有进无退。率领军队深入诸侯国土，要像击发弯机射出箭一样，使其一往直前。烧掉船只，砸破炊具，表示必死决心；像驱赶羊群一样，把士卒赶过来，赶过去，使他们不知道到底要到哪里去。
English: To issue a combat order to subordinates should be like climbing up and pulling down a ladder, so that the envoys have no retreat. To lead an army deep into the territory of a vassal state should be like firing an arrow from a bending machine, so that it goes straight ahead. To burn ships and smash cooking utensils is to show one's determination; to drive the soldiers like a flock of sheep, so that they do not know where they are going.

古文：聚三军之众，投之于险，此谓将军之事也。
现代文：聚集全军士卒，投置于危险的境地，使他们殊死战斗，这便是将军的责任。
English: It is the duty of the general to gather all the soldiers, throw them into a dangerous situation, and make them fight to the death.

古文：九地之变，屈伸之利，人情之理，不可不察。
现代文：根据不同地区采取不同的行动方针，要及时应变，能屈能伸，进退得宜，掌握士卒在不同情况下的心理状态。这些，都是将帅不能不认真考察和仔细研究的。
English: According to different regions, it is necessary to take different courses of action, to timely respond to changes, to be able to flex and stretch, to advance and retreat appropriately, and to grasp the psychological state of soldiers in different situations. These are all things that must be carefully examined and carefully studied.

古文：凡为客之道：深则专，浅则散。
现代文：深入敌国作战的规律是：进入敌境越深，士卒就越专心一致，进入得浅，士卒就容易逃散。
English: The rule for fighting deep into the enemy country is: the deeper you go into the enemy territory, the more concentrated your soldiers will be. The shallower you go, the easier it will be for your soldiers to scatter.

古文：去国越境而师者，绝地也；四达者，衢地也；入深者，重地也；入浅者，轻地也；背固前隘者，围地也；无所往者，死地也。
现代文：离开本国，越过邻国进入敌国作战的地区，叫做绝地；四通八达的地区叫衢地；进入敌境深的地区叫重地；进入敌境浅的地区叫轻地；后险前狭的地区叫围地；无处可走的地区叫死地。
English: Leaving one's own country and crossing a neighboring country to enter an area where an enemy country is fighting is called "Jedi territory"; a region that can be reached from all directions is called "Skeleton territory"; a region that goes deep into enemy territory is called "heavy territory"; a region that goes shallow into enemy territory is called "light territory"; a region with a narrow escape route is called "surrounded territory"; and a region where there is nowhere to go is called "dead territory."

古文：是故散地，吾将一其志；轻地，吾将使之属；争地，吾将趋其后；交地，吾将谨其守；衢地，吾将固其结；重地，吾将继其食；圮地，吾将进其途；围地，吾将塞其阙；死地，吾将示之以不活。
现代文：因此，在散地作战，我方就要使军心稳固；在轻地，我就要使部队相连接；在争地作战，我方要令后续部队迅速跟进；逢交地，我就要谨慎防守；在衢地，就要巩固与诸侯国的结盟；在重地，就要保证军队粮食的不断供应；经圮地，就要迅速通过；陷入围地，就要堵塞缺口；到了死地，就要显示死战的决心。
English: Therefore, when fighting in scattered areas, we should make the military spirit firm; in light areas, we should connect the troops; when fighting in contested areas, we should make the follow-up troops quickly follow up; when encountering each other, we should carefully defend; in rugged areas, we should consolidate the alliance with the principalities; in heavy areas, we should ensure the continuous supply of grain to the army; when passing through rugged areas, we should quickly pass; in areas under siege, we should plug the gaps; and in dead areas, we should show the determination to fight to the death.

古文：故兵之情，围则御，不得已则斗，过则从。
现代文：所以，士卒的心理变化是：被包围就会抵御，迫不得已就会战斗，深陷于危险的境地就会听从指挥。
English: Therefore, the psychological changes of the soldiers are: if they are surrounded, they will resist; if they are forced to fight, they will fight; if they are in a dangerous situation, they will follow the command.

古文：是故不知诸侯之谋者，不能预交；不知山林、险阻、沮泽之形者，不能行军；不用乡导者，不能得地利。
现代文：不了解列国诸侯作战计谋，就不能与之结交；不熟悉山林、险阻、沼泽等地形情况，就不能行军作战；不用当地人做向导，就不能得到地形之利。
English: If you do not understand the war strategies of the princes of other countries, you cannot make friends with them; if you are not familiar with the terrain conditions such as mountains, forests, obstacles, swamps, you cannot march and fight; if you do not use local people as guides, you cannot get the benefit of the terrain.

古文：四五者，不知一，非霸王之兵也。
现代文：这些情况，如果有一项不了解，都不能算争王称霸的军队。
English: If there is one thing we do not understand, it is that none of these circumstances can be considered as an army vying for supremacy.

古文：夫霸王之兵，伐大国，则其众不得聚；威加于敌，则其交不得合。
现代文：强大的军队，攻伐大国，可使其军民来不及动员、集聚；威力加在敌人头上，可使其无法与别国结交。
English: A powerful army, attacking a large country, can make its soldiers and civilians too late to mobilize and gather; power over the enemy can make it impossible to make friends with other countries.

古文：是故不争天下之交，不养天下之权，信己之私，威加于敌，故其城可拔，其国可隳。
现代文：因此，没有必要去争着同天下诸侯结交，也用不着在各诸侯国里培植自己的势力，只要能施展自己的战略意图，把兵威施加在敌人头上，就可以拔取敌人的城邑，摧毁敌人的国都。
English: Therefore, there is no need to compete with other countries to establish diplomatic relations, and there is no need to cultivate one's own power in other countries. As long as one can exert one's own strategic intention and impose military power on the enemy, one can seize the enemy's cities and destroy the enemy's capital.

古文：施无法之赏，悬无政之令，犯三军之众，若使一人。
现代文：施行超越惯例的奖赏，颁布不拘常规的号令，指挥全军就如同使用一个人一样。
English: Awarding rewards beyond the norm, issuing unconventional orders, commanding the whole army is like using a person.

古文：犯之以事，勿告以言；犯之以利，勿告以害。
现代文：向部下布置作战任务，但不说明其中意图。
English: Assigning operational tasks to subordinates, but not explaining the intention behind them.

古文：投之亡地然后存，陷之死地然后生。
现代文：只告知利益而不指出危害。在特殊情况下，把士卒投入危亡的境地，才能保存他们；把士卒投入灭绝的境地，才能使他们生存下来。
English: Only tell the benefits without pointing out the harms. Under special circumstances, it is necessary to put the soldiers into a perilous situation to preserve them; it is necessary to put the soldiers into a state of extinction to make them survive.

古文：夫众陷于害，然后能为胜败。
现代文：士卒陷于危险的境地，然后才能会殊死战斗。
English: Soldiers are put in harm's way before they can fight to the death.

古文：故为兵之事，在于顺详敌之意，并敌一向，千里杀将，此谓巧能成事者也。
现代文：所以，指挥作战，在于假装顺从敌人意图，一旦发现有可乘之机，便集中兵力指向敌人一点。这样，即使长驱千里，也可擒杀敌将。这便是通常说的机智能成就大事。
English: Therefore, commanding the battle is to pretend to obey the enemy's intention, and once it is found that there is an opportunity to take advantage of, it will concentrate the forces to point the enemy to a point. In this way, even if you drive thousands of miles, you can kill the enemy. This is commonly referred to as a great achievement of machine intelligence.

古文：是故政举之日，夷关折符，无通其使；厉于廊庙之上，以诛其事。
现代文：因此，当决定进行战争的时候，就要封锁边关，废除通行证，停止与敌国使节的往来，在庙堂上反复商议，研究决定作战计划。
English: Therefore, when deciding to go to war, it is necessary to seal the border, abolish the pass, stop the exchange with the envoys of the enemy country, repeatedly discuss in the temple, study and decide on the battle plan.

古文：敌人开阖，必亟入之。
现代文：一旦发现敌人有隙可乘，就要迅速乘机而入。
English: Once it is discovered that the enemy has a gap to take advantage of, it is necessary to quickly take advantage of the opportunity.

古文：先其所爱，微与之期。
现代文：首先要夺取敌人最关紧要的地方，而不要同敌人约期交战。
English: First of all, we must seize the most important places of the enemy, and not engage with the enemy by appointment.

古文：践墨随敌，以决战事。
现代文：实施计划要随着敌情的变化而不断加以改变，以求战争的胜利。
English: The implementation plan should be constantly changed as the enemy situation changes, in order to achieve victory in the war.

古文：是故始如处女，敌人开户，后如脱兔，敌不及拒。
现代文：所以，战争开始要像处女一样沉静，不露声色，使敌放松戒备，战争展开之后，要像脱兔一样迅速行动，使敌人来不及抵抗。
English: Therefore, at the beginning of the war, it is necessary to be as quiet and inconspicuous as a virgin to make the enemy relax their guard, and after the war is launched, it is necessary to act as quickly as a rabbit to make the enemy too late to resist.

