古文：天祚皇帝一
现代文：天祚皇帝，名延禧，字延宁，乳名阿果。
English: Emperor Tenzin, his name is Yanxi, his Chinese name is Yanning, and his nickname is Ago.

古文：天祚皇帝，讳延禧，字延宁，小字阿果。道宗之孙，父顺宗大孝顺圣皇帝，母贞顺皇后萧氏。
现代文：道宗的孙子，父为顺宗大孝顺圣皇帝，母为贞顺皇后萧氏。
English: The grandson of Tao Zong, his father was Shunzong the Great Filial Piety Emperor, and his mother was Empress Zhenshun Xiao.

古文：大康元年生，六岁封梁王，加守太尉，兼中书令。
现代文：大康元年出生。六岁时封为梁王，加号守太尉，兼中书令。
English: He was born in the first year of the Taikang era. At the age of six, he was given the title of Liang Wang, the additional title of Shou Taifeng, and the title of Zhongshirong.

古文：后三年，进封燕国王。
现代文：三年后，进封为燕国王。
English: Three years later, Jinfeng became the King of Yan.

古文：大安七年，总北南府枢密使事，加尚书令，为天下兵马大元帅。
现代文：大安七年，总北南院枢密使事，加尚书令，为天下兵马大元帅。
English: In the seventh year of the Taian era, he served as the chief envoy of the Privy Council of the North and South, and was promoted to the rank of grand marshal.

古文：寿昌七年正月甲戌，道宗崩，奉遗诏即皇帝位于柩前。
现代文：寿隆七年正月十三日，道宗崩逝，延禧奉遗诏即皇帝位于柩前。
English: On the 13th day of the first month of the 7th year of Shulong, Daozong passed away, and Yanxi issued a posthumous edict that the emperor should be placed in front of the throne.

古文：群臣上尊号曰天祚皇帝。
现代文：群臣奉上尊号曰天祚皇帝。
English: The group of courtiers gave him the honorific title of "Tianzhu Emperor."

古文：二月壬辰朔，改元乾统，大赦。
现代文：二月初一，改元乾统，大赦天下。
English: On the first day of February, the Yuan Dynasty was replaced by the Qian Dynasty, and there was a general amnesty.

古文：诏为耶律乙辛所诬陷者，复其官爵，籍没者出之，流放者还之。
现代文：下诏对于遭耶律乙辛所诬陷者，恢复其官职爵位，籍没者放出，流放者召回。
English: The following edict restores the official ranks and titles of those who were framed by Yelu Yitsin, releases those who have not been registered, and recalls those who have been exiled.

古文：乙未，遣使告哀于宋及西夏、高丽。
现代文：初四，派使者向宋朝以及西夏、高丽告哀。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, an envoy was sent to the Song Dynasty, as well as Western Xia and Korea, to offer condolences.

古文：乙巳，以北府宰相萧兀纳为辽兴军节度使，加守太傅。
现代文：十四日，以北府宰相萧兀纳为辽兴军节度使，加号守太傅。
English: On the 14th, Xiao Xunna, the chancellor of Beifu, was appointed as the festival envoy of the Liao Xing Army, and was given the additional title of Shou Taifu.

古文：三月丁卯，诏有司以张孝杰家属分赐群臣。
现代文：三月初六，诏令有司将张孝杰之家属分赐给群臣。
English: On the 6th day of the 3rd month of the year, the imperial edict ordered the magistrate to distribute Zhang Xiaojie's family members among the ministers.

古文：甲戌，召僧法颐放戒于内庭。夏四月，旱。
现代文：十三日，征召僧人法颐在内廷设立斋戒。夏四月，天旱。
English: On the 13th, the monk Fa Xi was conscripted to establish a fast in the Inner Court. In the summer and April, there was a drought.

古文：六月庚寅朔，如庆州。
现代文：六月初一，到庆州。
English: On the first day of June, to Gyeongju.

古文：甲午，宋遣王潜等来吊祭。
现代文：初五，宋朝派遣王潜等前来吊唁祭祀。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the Song Dynasty sent Wang Qian and others to come to offer condolences.

古文：丙申，高丽、夏国各遣使慰奠。
现代文：初七，高丽、夏国分别派使者慰唁祭祀。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, Goryeo and Xia Guo separately sent emissaries to comfort the sacrificial offering.

古文：戊戌，以南府宰相斡特剌兼南院枢密使。
现代文：初九，以南府宰相斡特剌兼任南院枢密使。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, he was appointed as the special envoy of the Southern Prefectural Prime Minister.

古文：庚子，追谥懿德皇后为宣懿皇后。
现代文：十一日，追谥懿德皇后为宣懿皇后。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Empress Sui of Germany became Empress Xuan of China.

古文：壬寅，以宋魏国王和鲁斡为天下兵马大元帅。
现代文：十三日，以宋魏国王和鲁斡为天下兵马大元帅。
English: On the 13th, the King of Song and Wei and Lu Yu served as the grand marshal of the world's soldiers.

古文：乙巳，以北平郡王淳进封郑王。
现代文：十六日，北平郡王耶律淳晋封为郑王。
English: On the 16th, the king of Beiping County, Ye Lu Jun, was promoted to King Zheng.

古文：丁未，北院枢密使耶律阿思加于越。
现代文：十八日，北院枢密使耶律阿思加号于越。
English: On the 18th, the envoy of the Privy Council of the Northern Yuan Dynasty, Yelu Asiga, arrived in Yue.

古文：辛亥，葬仁圣大孝文皇帝、宣懿皇后于庆陵。
现代文：二十二日，安葬仁圣大孝文皇帝、宣懿皇后于庆陵。
English: On the 22nd, Emperor Ren Sheng Da Xiaowen and Empress Xuanzang were buried in Qingling Mausoleum.

古文：秋七月癸亥，阻卜、铁骊来贡。
现代文：秋七月初四，阻卜、铁骊前来进贡。
English: On the 4th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the dragons and the shovels came to pay tribute.

古文：八月甲寅，谒庆陵。
现代文：八月二十五日，拜谒庆陵。
English: August 25th, pay homage to the Yongqing Mausoleum.

古文：九月壬申，谒怀陵。
现代文：九月十四日，拜谒怀陵。
English: On September 14th, he paid his respects at the imperial mausoleum.

古文：乙亥，驻跸藕丝淀。
现代文：十七日，歇驾于藕丝淀。
English: On the seventeenth day, he rested in Jinshidian.

古文：冬十月壬辰，谒乾陵。
现代文：冬十月初五，拜谒乾陵。
English: In winter, on the fifth day of the first month of October, the Qianling Mausoleum is visited.

古文：甲辰，上皇考昭怀太子谥曰大孝顺圣皇帝，庙号顺宗，皇妣曰贞顺皇后。
现代文：十七日，奉上皇考昭怀太子谥号曰大孝顺圣皇帝，庙号顺宗，皇妣谥曰贞顺皇后。
English: On the seventeenth day, the imperial examination certificate was presented to the crown prince, with the imperial title of the Great Filial Obedience to the Holy Emperor, the temple title of the Shunzong, and the imperial scepter of the Empress Zhenshun.

古文：十二月戊子，以枢密副使张琳知枢密院事，翰林学士张奉珪参知政事兼同知枢密院事。
现代文：十二月初二，以枢密副使张琳为知枢密院事，以翰林学士张奉皀为参加政事兼同知枢密院事。
English: On the second day of December, Zhang Lin, a vice-envoy of the Privy Council, was appointed to the Privy Council, and Zhang Fengya, a scholar of Hanlin, was appointed to participate in government affairs and the Privy Council.

古文：癸巳，宋遣黄实来贺即位。
现代文：初七，宋朝派遣黄实前来祝贺皇上即位。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the Song Dynasty sent Huang Sih to congratulate the emperor on his accession to the throne.

古文：丁酉，高丽、夏国并遣使来贺。
现代文：十一日，高丽、夏国均派遣使者前来祝贺。
English: On the 11th day, both Goryeo and Xia Guo sent envoys to congratulate him.

古文：乙巳，诏先朝已行事，不得陈告。
现代文：十九日，诏令对于先朝已经施行之事，不得上奏折议之。
English: On the 19th, the Emperor's edict decreed that no report or discussion could be made on matters that had already been implemented by the previous government.

古文：初，以杨割为生女直部节度使，其俗呼为太师。
现代文：当初，任命杨割为生女真部节度使，其俗称呼为太师。
English: At first, Yang Kuan was appointed as the real-life daughter of the Minister of State, commonly known as the Grand Master.

古文：是岁杨割死，传于兄之子乌雅束，束死，其弟阿骨打袭。
现代文：到了这年杨割死去，传位于兄之子乌雅束，后来乌雅束死，其弟阿骨打即位。
English: In this year, Yang Kewai died, and it was passed down to his brother's son, Uya Sokku. Later, Uya Sokku died, and his brother, Ah Kepa, ascended the throne.

古文：二年春正月，如鸭子河。
现代文：乾统二年春正月，皇上到鸭子河。
English: In the first month of the second year of Emperor Qianlong's reign, the emperor went to the Duck River.

古文：二月辛卯，如春州。
现代文：二月初六，到春州。
English: On the 6th day of the 2nd month, I went to Chunzhou.

古文：三月，大寒，冰复合。
现代文：三月，酷寒，已化之冰再度封合。
English: In March, in the bitter cold, the melted ice is sealed again.

古文：夏四月辛亥，诏诛乙辛党，徙其子孙于边；发乙辛、得里特之墓，剖棺，戮尸；以其家属分赐被杀之家。
现代文：夏四月二十七日，下诏诛杀乙辛党人，迁徙其子孙到边疆；挖开乙辛、萧得里特之墓，剖开棺材，斩戮其尸体；将他们的家属分别赐给遭他们诬陷杀害者的家人。
English: On the 27th day of the 4th month of the summer, they issued an edict to kill the members of the Yixing Party and to deport their children and grandchildren to the frontier; they dug up the graves of Yixing and Shao Derit, opened their coffins, and chopped up their bodies; their families were given separately to the families of those they had framed for murder.

古文：五月乙丑，斡特剌献耶睹刮等部捷。
现代文：五月十一日，斡特剌进献耶睹刮等部俘虏和战利品。
English: On May 11th, the special envoy went to present the captives and spoils of war of Yezhimbu and others.

古文：六月壬辰，以雨罢猎，驻跸散水原。
现代文：六月初八，因为天雨停止狩猎，歇驾于散水原。
English: On the 8th day of the 6th month, because of the rain, the hunting stopped and they rested at the watering place.

古文：丙午，夏国王李乾顺复遣使请尚公主。
现代文：二十二日，夏国王李乾顺再度派使者请求下嫁公主于他。
English: On the 22nd, the king of Xia, Li Qianshun, again sent an envoy to request the princess to marry him.

古文：丁未，南院大王陈家奴致仕。
现代文：二十三日，南院大王陈家奴辞官。
English: On the 23rd, the king of the Southern Yuan Dynasty, Chen Jiannu, resigned.

古文：壬子，李乾顺为宋所攻，遣李造福、田若水求援。
现代文：二十八日，李乾顺遭到宋人攻击，派李造福、田若水前来求援。
English: On the 28th, when Li Qianshun was attacked by the Song people, he sent Li Zuofu and Tian Ruoshui to ask for help.

古文：闰月庚申，策贤良。
现代文：闰六月初七，策试贤良。
English: The 7th day of the 6th month of the leap year is auspicious.

古文：壬申，降惠妃为庶人。
现代文：十九日，降惠妃为庶人。
English: On the 19th, Empress Hui was demoted to a commoner.

古文：秋七月，猎黑岭，以霖雨，给猎人马。
现代文：秋七月，出猎于黑岭，因连降大雨，拨给猎人马匹。
English: In autumn and July, he went hunting in Heiling. Due to continuous heavy rain, he allocated the horses to the hunters.

古文：阻卜来侵，斡特剌等战败之。
现代文：阻卜前来进犯，斡特剌等击败之。
English: Obstruct the advance of the attackers, and defeat them through special means.

古文：冬十月乙卯，萧海里叛，劫乾州武库器甲。
现代文：冬十月初四，萧海里叛乱，劫掠乾州武库兵器甲胄。
English: On the 4th day of the 10th month of winter, Xiao Hai rebelled and plundered the Qianzhou Arsenal.

古文：命北面林牙郝家奴捕之。萧海里亡入陪术水阿典部。
现代文：命令北面林牙郝家奴搜捕之，萧海里逃入陪术水阿典部。
English: He ordered Lin Jiaxuan's henchmen in the north to search for and capture him, and Xiao Hai escaped into the Baoshu Shuian section.

古文：丙寅，以南府宰相耶律斡特剌为北院枢密使，参知政事牛温舒知南院枢密使事。
现代文：十五日，以南府宰相耶律斡特剌为北院枢密使，参知政事牛温舒为知南院枢密使事。
English: On the 15th, the chancellor of Nanfu, Yerutsu Tokuhiro, was appointed as the envoy of the Northern Yuan, and the political advisor Niu Wenshu was appointed as the envoy of the Southern Yuan.

古文：十一月乙未，郝家奴以不获萧海里，免官。
现代文：十一月十四日，郝家奴因为未能捕获萧海里，被免去官职。
English: On November 14th, Xing Jia Nong was removed from his post for failing to capture Xiao Hai Tong.

古文：壬寅，以上京留守耶律慎思为北院枢密副使。
现代文：二十一日，以上京留守耶律慎思为北院枢密副使。
English: On the 21st, Yerut Shinshi, who had been stationed in Beijing, became the Privy Vice-Minister of the Northern Court.

古文：有司请以帝生日为天兴节。
现代文：有司请求以皇上生日作为天兴节。
English: Some officials requested that the emperor's birthday be celebrated as Tianxing Festival.

古文：三年春正月辛巳朔，如混同江。
现代文：三年春正月初一，到混同江。
English: On the first day of the first month of the third year of spring, to the mixed river.

古文：女直函萧海里首，遣使来献。
现代文：女真函盛萧海里首级，派使者前来进献。
English: Lady Zhenhanhan received the head of Xiao Hai and sent an envoy to present it.

古文：戊申，如春州。
现代文：二十八日，皇上到春州。
English: On the 28th, the Emperor went to Chonju.

古文：二月庚午，以武清县大水，弛其陂泽之禁。
现代文：二月二十一日，因武清县发生特大水灾，解除对于陂塘湖泽之禁令。
English: On February 21, the ban on the Qutang Lake was lifted due to a major flood in Wuching County.

古文：夏五月戊子，以猎人多亡，严立科禁。
现代文：夏五月初十，因为猎人很多逃亡，严格定立禁令。
English: On the tenth day of the fifth month of summer, because many hunters had fled, a strict ban was imposed.

古文：乙巳，清暑赤勒岭。
现代文：二十七日，消夏于赤勒岭。
English: On the 27th, I spent the summer in Chitraling.

古文：丙午，谒庆陵。
现代文：二十八日，拜谒庆陵。
English: On the 24th, they paid their respects at the Qing Tomb.

古文：六月辛酉，夏国王李乾顺复遣使请尚公主。
现代文：六月十四日，夏国王李乾顺再次派使者请求皇上下嫁公主于他。
English: On June 14, Li Qianshun, the king of Xia, once again sent an envoy to ask the emperor to marry the princess to him.

古文：秋七月，中京雨雹伤稼。
现代文：秋七月，中京降冰雹，伤害了庄稼。
English: In autumn and July, hail fell in central Beijing, damaging crops.

古文：冬十月甲辰，如中京。
现代文：九月二十八日，到中京。
English: On September 28th, I arrived in Chukyo.

古文：己未，吐蕃遣使来贡。
现代文：冬十月十三日，吐蕃派使者前来进贡。
English: On the 13th day of October in winter, Tubo sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：庚申，夏国复遣使求援。
现代文：十四日，夏国再次派使者求援。
English: On the 14th, Xia Guo again sent an envoy to the emperor to ask for help.

古文：己巳，有事于观德殿。
现代文：二十三日，在观德殿祭祀先祖。
English: On the 23rd, ancestor worship was held at the Kunde Hall.

古文：十一月丙申，文武百官加上尊号曰惠文智武圣孝天祚皇帝，大赦，以宋魏国王和鲁斡为皇太叔，梁王挞鲁进封燕国王，郑王淳为东京留守，进封越国王，百官各进一阶。
现代文：十一月二十日，文武百官给皇上加尊号为惠文智武圣孝天祚皇帝，大赦天下，以宋魏国王和鲁斡为皇太叔，梁王挞鲁晋封为燕国王，以郑王耶律淳为东京留守，晋封越国王，百官分别晋升官阶一级。
English: On November 20th, hundreds of civil and military officials gave the emperor the honorific title of Hui Wen Zhi Wu Sheng Xiao Tian Qi Emperor, the world was pardoned, with the King of Song and Wei and Lu Yu as the Emperor's uncle, the King of Liang and Lu as the King of Yan, the King of Zheng and Ye Lu as the King of Tokyo and the King of Yue, and the officials were promoted to the first level.

古文：丁酉，以惕隐耶律何鲁扫古为南院大王。
现代文：二十一日，以惕隐耶律何鲁扫古为南院大王。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Horu Saiko, the great king of the Southern Court, was crowned.

古文：戊戌，以受尊号，告庙。
现代文：二十二日，因为接受尊号，祭告祖庙。
English: On the 22nd, because he accepted the honorary title, he was denounced to the ancestral temple.

古文：乙巳，谒太祖庙，追尊太祖之高祖曰昭烈皇帝，庙号肃祖，妣曰昭烈皇后；曾祖曰庄敬皇帝，庙号懿祖，妣曰庄敬皇后。
现代文：二十九日，拜谒太祖庙。追尊太祖之高祖为昭烈皇帝，庙号肃祖，尊太祖之高祖妣为昭烈皇后；追尊太祖曾祖曰庄敬皇帝，庙号懿祖，曾祖妣曰庄敬皇后。
English: On the 29th, they paid homage at the Great Ancestor's Temple. The great-grandfather of the revered great-grandfather was Emperor Zhao Rong, the temple name was Su Zu, and the great-grandfather of the revered great-grandfather was Empress Zhao Rong; the revered great-grandfather of the revered great-grandfather was called Zhuang Kei Emperor, the temple name was Su Zu, and the great-grandfather of the revered great-grandfather of the revered great-grandfather was Zhuang Kei Empress.

古文：召监修国史耶律俨纂太祖诸帝《实录》。
现代文：召监修国史耶律俨纂修太祖诸帝《实录》。
English: Supervised the compilation of the "Real Record" of the ancestors and emperors by Guo Shiyeru.

古文：十二月戊申，如藕丝淀。
现代文：十二月初三，到藕丝淀。
English: On the third day of the first month of December, I arrived in Gansu.

古文：是年，放进士马恭回等百三人。
现代文：这一年，放榜录进士马恭回等一百零三人。
English: In this year, there were one hundred and three people who entered the list and returned.

古文：四年春正月戊子，幸鱼儿泺。
现代文：四年春正月十三日，临幸鱼儿泊。
English: On the 13th day of the first month of spring in the fourth year, Lin Xingyu'er stayed overnight.

古文：壬寅，猎木岭。
现代文：二十七日，出猎于木岭。
English: On the 27th, they went hunting in the woodlands.

古文：癸卯，燕国王挞鲁薨。
现代文：二十八日，燕国王挞鲁逝世。
English: On the 28th, King Yan Zhe Lu passed away.

古文：二月丁丑，鼻骨德遣使来贡。
现代文：三月初四，鼻骨德派使者前来进贡。
English: On the fourth day of the third month, the emperor sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：夏六月甲辰，驻跸旺国崖。
现代文：夏六月初三，歇驾于旺国崖。
English: On the 3rd day of the 6th month of summer, I stopped at Wanguo Cliff.

古文：甲寅，夏国遣李造福、田若水求援。
现代文：十三日，夏国派遣李造福、田若水前来求援。
English: On the 13th, Xia Guo sent Li Zuofu and Tian Ruoshui to come for help.

古文：癸亥，吐蕃遣使来贡。
现代文：二十二日，吐蕃派使者前来进贡。
English: On the 22nd, Tubo sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：秋七月，南京蝗。
现代文：秋七月，南京发生蝗灾。
English: In autumn and July, a locust plague occurred in Nanjing.

古文：庚辰，猎南山。
现代文：九日，出猎于南山。
English: On the 9th, they went hunting in Nanshan.

古文：癸未，以西北路招讨使萧得里底、北院枢密副使耶律慎思并知北院枢密使事。
现代文：十二日，以西北路招讨使萧得里底、北院枢密副使耶律慎思同为知北院枢密使事。
English: On the 12th, Xiao Deridi, the North Privy Council's Deputy Privy Councilor, and Yerut Shenshidong, the North Privy Councilor's Deputy Privy Councilor, were summoned from the northwest.

古文：辛卯，以同知南院枢密使事萧敌里为西北路招讨使。
现代文：二十日，以同知南院枢密使事萧敌里为西北路招讨使。
English: On the 20th, the envoys of the Southern Yuan Privy Council were summoned to the Northwest Road.

古文：冬十月己酉，凤凰见于漷阴。
现代文：冬十月初九，凤凰出现于氵郭阴。
English: On the 9th day of the 10th month of winter, the phoenix appeared in the west of Xingguoyin.

古文：己未，幸南京。
现代文：十九日，临幸南京。
English: On the 19th, I went to Nanjing.

古文：十一月乙亥，御迎月楼，赐贫民钱。
现代文：十一月初五，御临迎月楼，赐钱给贫民。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the 11th month, the emperor came to Yingyue Lou to give money to the poor.

古文：十二月辛丑，以张琳为南府宰相。
现代文：十二月初二，任命张琳为南府宰相。
English: On the second day of December, Zhang Lin was appointed the prime minister of Nanfu.

古文：五年春正月乙亥，夏国遣李造福等来求援，且乞伐宋。
现代文：五年春正月初六，夏国派遣李造福等人前来求援，并请求讨伐宋国。
English: On the 6th day of the 1st month of the 5th year of the Spring, Xia sent Li Zuofu and others to ask for help, and requested to attack Song.

古文：庚寅，以辽兴军节度使萧常哥为北府宰相。
现代文：二十一日，以辽兴军节度使萧常哥为北府宰相。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the Liao Xingjun Festival made Xiao Changge the prime minister of Beifu.

古文：丁酉，遣枢密直学士高端礼等讽宋罢伐夏兵。
现代文：二十八日，派遣枢密直学士高端礼等人讽谕宋国撤回伐夏的军队。
English: On the 28th, he dispatched the Privy Councilor and other high-ranking officials to sarcastically order Song to withdraw the troops.

古文：二月癸卯，微行，视民疾苦。
现代文：二月初四，微服出行，探视百姓疾苦。
English: On the fourth day of the second lunar month, he wore a micro-uniform to travel and visit people in need.

古文：丙午，幸鸳鸯泺。
现代文：初七，临幸鸳鸯泊。
English: On the 7th day of the 7th month, Rinchen Dorjee Rinpoche appeared.

古文：三月壬申，以族女南仙封成安公主，下嫁夏国王李乾顺。
现代文：三月初四，以族女南仙封为成安公主，下嫁于夏国王李乾顺。
English: On the 4th day of the 3rd month of the year, Princess Nan Xianfu, a member of the same ethnic group, married King Li Qianshun of Xia.

古文：夏四月甲申，射虎炭山。
现代文：夏四月十七日，在炭山射虎。
English: On the 17th day of the 4th month of summer, a tiger was shot in the Su Mountain.

古文：五月癸卯，清暑南崖。
现代文：五月初七，消夏于南崖。
English: On the seventh day of the fifth month, the summer is over in Nanjia.

古文：壬子，宋遣曾孝广、王戩报聘。
现代文：十六日，宋国派曾孝广、王戬回访。
English: On the 16th, Song Guo sent Zeng Xiaogang and Wang Xi to pay a return visit.

古文：六月甲戌，夏国遣使来谢，及贡方物。
现代文：六月初九，夏国派使者前来致谢，并贡献土产。
English: On the 9th day of the 6th month, Xia Guo sent an envoy to express his gratitude and contribute local produce.

古文：己丑，幸候里吉。
现代文：二十四日，临幸候里吉。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, Rinchen Dorjee Rinpoche passed away.

古文：秋七月，谒庆陵。
现代文：秋七月，拜谒庆陵。
English: In autumn and July, visit the Yongqing Mausoleum.

古文：九月辛亥，驻跸藕丝淀。
现代文：九月十七日，歇驾于藕丝淀。
English: On September 17th, he stopped in Goseidian.

古文：乙卯，谒乾陵。
现代文：二十一日，拜谒乾陵。
English: On the twenty-first day, the Qianling Mausoleum was built.

古文：冬十一月戊戌，禁商贾之家应进士举。
现代文：冬十一月初四，禁止商贾之家应考进士。
English: In winter, on the fourth day of the first month of November, it is forbidden for the Jia family to take the entrance examination.

古文：丙辰，高丽三韩国公王颙薨，子俣遣使来告。
现代文：二十二日，高丽三韩国公王逝世，其子王俣派使者前来告哀。
English: On the 22nd, the Korean prince Goryeo III passed away, and his son Wang Mata sent an envoy to pay his respects.

古文：十二月己巳，夏国复遣李造福、田若水求援。
现代文：十二月初六，夏国再次派遣李造福、田若水求援。
English: On the 6th day of the 12th month, Xia Guo again sent Li Zuofu and Tian Ruoshui to ask for help.

古文：癸酉，宋遣林洙来议与夏约和。
现代文：初十，宋派遣林洙前来商议与夏国订立和约。
English: In the early 10th century, Song dispatched Lin Kui to negotiate a peace treaty with Xia.

古文：六年春正月辛丑，遣知北院枢密使事萧得里底、知南院枢密使事牛温舒使宋，讽归所侵夏地。
现代文：六年春正月初八，派遣知北院枢密使事萧得里底、知南院枢密使事牛温舒出使宋国，劝谕宋国归还所侵占的夏国土地。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the sixth year of the Spring, the Chihoku-in Privy Council sent an envoy to Shoudlidi, and the Chihon-in Privy Council sent an envoy to Niu Wenshu to the Song Dynasty, to persuade the Song Dynasty to return the occupied land of Xia.

古文：夏五月，清暑散水原。
现代文：夏五月，消夏于散水原。
English: Summer in May, summer in the water-sprinkling plain.

古文：六月辛巳，夏国遣李造福等来谢。
现代文：六月二十一日，夏国派遣李造福等前来致谢。
English: On June 21st, Xia Guo dispatched Li Zuofu and others to come and express their thanks.

古文：秋七月癸巳，阻卜来贡。
现代文：秋七月初四，阻卜前来进贡。
English: On the 4th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the dragons came to pay tribute.

古文：甲午，如黑岭。
现代文：初五，皇上到黑岭。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the emperor arrived in Heiling.

古文：庚子，猎鹿角山。
现代文：十一日，在鹿角山狩猎。
English: On the 11th day, I went hunting in Mount Kazuno.

古文：冬十月乙亥，宋与夏通好，遣刘正符、曹穆来告。
现代文：冬十月十七日，宋与夏通使交好，派遣刘正符、曹穆前来告知。
English: On the 17th day of October in winter, Song and Xia Tong sent Liu Zhengfu and Cao Mu to inform him.

古文：庚辰，以皇太叔、南京留守和鲁斡兼惕隐，东京留守、越国王淳为南府宰相。
现代文：二十二日，以皇太叔、南京留守和鲁斡兼任惕隐，以东京留守、越国王耶律淳为南府宰相。
English: On the 22nd, with the Emperor's uncle as the head of the government and Lu Wei, who was in Nanjing, as the vice-premier, and with Tokyo as the seat of the government and King Ye Lu Jun, who was in Tokyo, as the prime minister of Nanfu.

古文：十一月乙未，以谢家奴为南院大王，马奴为奚六部大王。
现代文：十一月初八，任命谢家奴为南院大王，马奴为奚六部大王。
English: On the 8th day of the 11th month, he appointed Xie Jia Nong as the king of the Southern Court and Ma Nong as the king of the Six Provinces.

古文：丙申，行柴册礼。
现代文：初九，举行柴册礼。
English: On the ninth day of the new year, a firecracker ceremony is held.

古文：戊戌，大赦。以和鲁斡为义和仁圣皇太叔，越国王淳进封魏国王，封皇子敖卢斡为晋王，习泥烈为饶乐郡王。
现代文：十一日，大赦天下，任命和鲁斡为义和仁圣皇太叔，越国王耶律淳晋封为魏国王，封皇子敖卢斡为晋王，习泥烈为饶乐郡王。
English: On the 11th day, the emperor pardoned the world and appointed He Luyu as the uncle of the righteous and benevolent holy emperor, the king of Vietnam, Ye Lu Jun, as the king of Wei, the emperor's son, He Luyu, as the king of Jin, and Xi De Liang as the king of Raole County.

古文：己亥，谒太祖庙。
现代文：十二日，拜谒太祖庙。
English: On the 12th, the visit to the Grand Ancestor's Temple began.

古文：甲辰，祠木叶山。
现代文：十七日，祭祀木叶山。
English: On the seventeenth day, the worship of Mujiyama ended.

古文：十二月己巳，封耶律俨为漆水郡王，余官进爵有差。
现代文：十二月十二日，封耶律俨为漆水郡王，其余官员晋升爵位各有等差。
English: On December 12th, Feng Yerutong became the king of Lishui County, and the other officials were promoted to peerage.

古文：七年春正月，钓鱼于鸭子河。
现代文：七年春正月，在鸭子河钓鱼。
English: In the first month of spring in the seventh year, I went fishing in the Duck River.

古文：二月，驻跸大鱼泺。
现代文：二月，歇驾于大鱼泊。
English: In February, it stopped at the Great Fish Pond.

古文：夏六月，次散水原。
现代文：夏六月，驻于散水原。
English: In the summer of June, he was stationed in the Sprinkler Plain.

古文：秋七月，如黑岭。
现代文：秋七月，到黑岭。
English: Autumn and July, to Heiling.

古文：冬十月，谒乾陵，猎医巫闾山。
现代文：冬十月，拜谒乾陵，在医巫闾山狩猎。
English: In winter and October, they visit the Qianling Mausoleum and go hunting in the Lushan Mountains.

古文：是年，放进士李石等百人。
现代文：这一年，放榜录进士李石等一百人。
English: This year, a hundred people, including Li Shi, who entered the list, were released.

古文：八年春正月，如春州。
现代文：八年春正月，到春州。
English: In the first month of the eighth year of spring, I went to Chunzhou.

古文：夏四月丙申，封高丽王俣为三韩国公，赠其父颙为高丽国王。
现代文：夏四月十六日，封高丽王王俣为三韩国公，追赠其父王为高丽国王。
English: On the 16th day of the 4th month of the summer, Wang Mata, the king of Goryeo, was named the third Korean prince, and his father was posthumously named the king of Goryeo.

古文：五月，清暑散水原。
现代文：五月，消夏于散水原。
English: In May, they spend the summer at the watering place.

古文：六月壬辰，西北路招讨使萧敌里率诸蕃来朝。
现代文：六月十三日，西北路招讨使萧敌里率领诸蕃前来朝见。
English: On June 13th, the Northwest Road Invitation was issued, and Xiao Qili led Zhuye to come to see the emperor.

古文：丙申，射柳祈雨。
现代文：十七日，行射柳礼以祈雨。
English: On the 20th, he shot a willow to pray for rain.

古文：壬寅，夏国王李乾顺以成安公主生子，遣使来告。
现代文：二十三日，夏国王李乾顺因成安公主生子，派使者前来报喜。
English: On the 23rd, Li Qianshun, the king of Xia, sent an envoy to announce the birth of Princess Cheng'an's son.

古文：丁未，如黑岭。
现代文：二十八日，皇上到黑岭。
English: On the 28th, the emperor went to Heiling.

古文：秋七月戊辰，以雨罢猎。
现代文：秋七月二十日，因天雨停止狩猎。
English: On the 20th day of the 7th month of autumn, hunting was suspended due to rain.

古文：冬十二月己卯，高丽遣使来谢。
现代文：冬十二月初四，高丽派使者前来致谢。
English: On the 4th day of the 12th month of winter, Goryeo sent an envoy to Sora to thank him.

古文：九年春正月丙午朔，如鸭子河。
现代文：九年春正月初一，皇上到鸭子河。
English: On the first day of the first month of the ninth year of spring, the emperor went to the Duck River.

古文：二月，如春州。
现代文：二月，到春州。
English: In February, I went to Chunju.

古文：三月戊午，夏国以宋不归地，遣使来告。
现代文：三月十四日，夏国因为宋不肯归还土地，派使者前来告知。
English: On March 14th, because Song refused to return the land, Xia Guo sent an envoy to inform him.

古文：夏四月壬午，五国部来贡。
现代文：夏四月初八，五国部前来进贡。
English: On the eighth day of the fourth month of the summer, the five provinces came to pay tribute.

古文：六月乙亥，清暑特礼岭。
现代文：六月初二，在特里岭消夏。
English: On the second day of the first month of June, the summer is over in Trie Ling.

古文：秋七月，陨霜，伤稼。
现代文：秋七月，降霜，伤害了庄稼。
English: In autumn and July, frosts fell and damaged the crops.

古文：甲寅，猎于候里吉。
现代文：十一日，出猎于候里吉。
English: On the 11th day, they went hunting in Huliji.

古文：八月丁酉，雪，罢猎。
现代文：八月二十五日，下雪，停止打猎。
English: On the 25th of August, it snowed and the hunt was called off.

古文：冬十月癸酉，望祠木叶山。
现代文：冬十月初二，遥祭木叶山。
English: In winter, on the second day of the first month of October, the remote festival is held in Mujiyama.

古文：丁丑，诏免今年租税。
现代文：初六，下诏免除今年的租税。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, the emperor issued an edict to exempt this year's tax.

古文：十二月甲申，高丽遣使来贡。
现代文：十二月十四日，高丽派使者前来进贡。
English: On December 14th, Goryeo sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：是年，放进士刘桢等九十人。
现代文：这一年，放榜录进士刘桢等九十人。
English: This year, 90 people, including Liu Wei, who entered the list, were released.

古文：十年春正月辛丑，预行立春礼。
现代文：十年春正月初二，先期举行立春典礼。
English: On the second day of the first month of the tenth year of spring, the Spring Festival ceremony was held ahead of schedule.

古文：如鸭子河。
现代文：到鸭子河。
English: To the Duck River.

古文：二月庚午朔，驻跸大鱼泺。
现代文：二月初一，歇驾于大鱼泊。
English: On the first day of February, it stopped at the Great Fish Pond.

古文：夏四月内子，五国部长来贡。
现代文：夏四月初八，五国部首领前来进贡。
English: On the eighth day of the fourth month of the summer, the leaders of the five provinces came to pay tribute.

古文：丙戌，预行再生礼。
现代文：十八日，先期举行再生礼。
English: On the 18th, a rebirth ceremony was held in advance.

古文：癸巳，猎于北山。
现代文：二十五日，出猎于北山。
English: On the 25th, they went hunting in Kitayama.

古文：六月甲戌，清暑玉丘。
现代文：六月初七，消夏于玉丘。
English: On the 7th day of the 6th month, the summer is over in Gyokuoka.

古文：癸未，夏国遣李造福等来贡。
现代文：十六日，夏国派李造福等人前来进贡。
English: On the 16th, Xia Guo sent Li Zuofu and others to pay tribute.

古文：甲午，阻卜来贡。
现代文：二十七日，阻卜前来进贡。
English: On the 27th, Dabo came to pay tribute.

古文：秋七月辛丑，谒庆陵。
现代文：秋七月初四，拜谒庆陵。
English: On the 4th day of the 7th month of the autumn, it is time to pay homage to the Yongqing Mausoleum.

古文：闰月辛亥，谒怀陵。
现代文：闰七月辛亥日，拜谒怀陵。
English: In July, on the day of the Chinese New Year, pay your respects at the imperial mausoleum.

古文：己未，谒祖陵。
现代文：己未日，拜谒祖陵。
English: It has been a long time since I visited the ancestral mausoleum.

古文：壬戌，皇太叔和鲁斡薨。
现代文：壬戌日，皇太叔和鲁斡逝世。
English: On the same day, the Emperor's uncle and Lu Yuang passed away.

古文：九月甲戌，免重九节礼。
现代文：九月初九，免行重九节典礼。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, the solemn 9th day of the 9th month ceremony will be held.

古文：冬十月，驻跸藕丝淀。
现代文：冬十月，歇驾于藕丝淀。
English: Winter in October, resting in Gansu.

古文：十二月己酉，改明年元。
现代文：十二月十五日，改明年年号。
English: On December 15th, the name of the year will be changed.

古文：是岁，大饥。
现代文：这一年，大饥荒。
English: This year, famine.

古文：天庆元年春正月，钓鱼于鸭子河。
现代文：天庆元年春正月，在鸭子河钓鱼。
English: Tianqing in the first month of spring in the first month of spring, fishing in the duck river.

古文：二月，如春州。
现代文：二月，到春州。
English: In February, I went to Chunju.

古文：三月乙亥，五国部长来贡。
现代文：三月十三日，五国部首领前来进贡。
English: On March 13th, the leaders of the five provinces came to pay tribute.

古文：夏五月，清暑散水原。
现代文：夏五月，消夏于散水原。
English: Summer in May, summer in the water-sprinkling plain.

古文：秋七月，猎。
现代文：秋七月，出猎。
English: In autumn and July, they go hunting.

古文：冬十月，驻跸藕丝淀。
现代文：冬十月，歇驾于藕丝淀。
English: Winter in October, resting in Gansu.

古文：二年春正月己未朔，如鸭子河。
现代文：二年春正月初一，到鸭子河。
English: On the first day of the first month of the second year of spring, I went to Duck River.

古文：丁丑，五国部长来贡。
现代文：十九日，五国部首领前来进贡。
English: On the 19th, the leaders of the five provinces came to pay tribute.

古文：二月丁酉，如春州，幸混同江钓鱼，界外生女直酋长在千里内者，以故事皆来朝。
现代文：二月初十，皇上到春州，临幸混同江钓鱼，境外生女真酋长在千里以内者，依旧例均要前来朝觐。
English: On the 10th day of the 2nd month of the year, the emperor went to Chunzhou, and Lin Xing got mixed up with the river fishing. If there was a foreign-born female true chief within a thousand miles, they still had to come to the imperial court.

古文：适遇 头鱼宴 ，酒半酣，上临轩，命诸酋次第起舞。独阿骨打辞以不能，谕之再三，终不从。
现代文：适逢 头鱼宴 ，酒至尽头，皇上凭临殿前栏杆，命诸位酋长依次起舞；独有阿骨打推辞说不会跳舞。再三劝谕之，始终不肯听从。
English: At the head of the fish feast, when the wine had run out, the emperor leaned on the railing in front of the hall and ordered all the chiefs to dance in turn. The only one who could not dance was Akotsu, who repeatedly tried to persuade him, but he would not listen.

古文：他日，上密谓枢密使萧奉先曰： 前日之燕，阿骨打意气雄豪，顾视不常，可以边事诛之。
现代文：后来一日，皇上私下对枢密使萧奉先说 ：前天的宴会上，阿骨打意气豪迈，顾盼之间不同于常人，可以借口边境事务诛杀他。
English: One day later, the emperor privately said to the envoy Xiao Bongxian, "At the banquet the day before yesterday, Ah Bon was very spirited, and unlike ordinary people, he could be killed under the pretext of border affairs.

古文：否则，必贻后患。 
现代文：否则，必定会留下后患。 
English: Otherwise, we will be left with a legacy.

古文：奉先曰： 粗人不知礼义，无大过而杀之，恐伤向化之心。
现代文：奉先说 ：粗人不懂礼义，没有大的过错而诛杀他，恐怕会伤害向慕归化之心。
English: Fengxian said, "If a vulgar person doesn't know the meaning of etiquette and kills him without a big mistake, I'm afraid it will hurt Xiang Mu's heart."

古文：假有异志，又何能为？ 
现代文：他即使有叛离之心，又能有什么作为呢？ 
English: Even if he is a renegade, what can he do?

古文：其弟吴乞买、粘罕、胡舍等尝从猎，能呼鹿、刺虎、搏熊。
现代文：阿骨打之弟吴乞买、侄儿粘罕、胡舍等人曾经随驾狩猎，能够点鹿射鹿，刺杀虎，搏击熊。
English: Akechi's younger brother, Wu Qimai, and his nephews, Mu Han and Hu She, used to go hunting with him. They were able to spot and shoot deer, kill tigers, and fight bears.

古文：上喜，辄加官爵。
现代文：皇上高兴了，便晋升他们的官爵。
English: The emperor was so pleased that he promoted all of them to the rank of nobility.

古文：夏六月庚寅，清暑南崖。
现代文：夏六月初五，消夏于南崖。
English: Summer ends on the 5th day of the 6th month in Nanjia.

古文：甲午，和州回鹘来贡。
现代文：初九，和州回鹘前来进贡。
English: At the beginning of the 9th month, and the state of Huizhou came to pay tribute.

古文：戊戌，成安公主来朝。
现代文：十三日，成安公主前来朝见。
English: On the 13th, Princess Seian came to see him in the morning.

古文：甲辰，阻卜来贡。
现代文：十九日，阻卜前来进贡。
English: On the twenty-first day, Zibo came to pay tribute.

古文：秋七月乙丑，猎南山。
现代文：秋七月初十，出猎于南山。
English: On the 10th day of the 7th month of autumn, I went hunting in Nanshan.

古文：九月己未，射获熊，燕群臣，上亲御琵琶。
现代文：九月初五，射得一只熊，宴饮群臣，皇上亲自弹奏琵琶。
English: On the 5th day of the 9th month, a bear was shot, a banquet was held for the courtiers, and the emperor himself played the lute.

古文：初，阿骨打混同江宴归，疑上知其异志，遂称兵，先并旁近部族。
现代文：当初，阿骨打在混同江赴宴回府，怀疑皇上得知他有二心，于是举兵，先兼并附近部族。
English: At first, Achebe went to a banquet and returned to the capital after confusing the two rivers. He suspected that the emperor knew that he was of two minds, so he raised an army and first annexed a nearby tribe.

古文：女直赵三、阿鹘产拒之，阿骨打虏其家属。
现代文：女真赵三、阿鹘产抵拒之，阿骨打掳获他们的家属。
English: Onna Zhen Zhao San and Ah Ying objected to this, and Ah Ke beat and captured their families.

古文：二人走诉咸城，详稳司送北枢密院，枢密使萧奉先作常事以闻上，仍送咸州诘责，欲使自新。
现代文：二人赶赴咸州申诉，详稳司送北枢密院处理。枢密使萧奉先当作平常之事上奏，仍旧送交咸州责问，想让他悔过自新。
English: The two rushed to Hanzhou to lodge a complaint, and the details were sent to the North Privy Council for handling by the Department of Stability. The Privy Council treated Xiao Bongxian's appeal as an ordinary matter, but still sent him to Hanzhou for questioning, hoping to make him repent and reform.

古文：后数召，阿骨打竟称疾不至。
现代文：后来多次征召，阿骨打始终称病不肯到京。
English: Later he was called up several times, but he always said that he was ill and did not want to go to Kyoto.

古文：冬十月辛卯，高丽三韩国公王俣之母死，来告，即遣使致祭，起复。
现代文：冬十月二十七日，高丽三韩国公王俣之母去世，前来告哀，当即派遣使者前往祭奠，让王俣起复续任。
English: On the 27th day of winter in October, the mother of King Mata of Goryeo, the third king of Korea, passed away. She came to mourn, and immediately sent an envoy to pay her respects, so that King Mata could resume his duties.

古文：是月，驻跸奉圣州。
现代文：同月，歇驾于奉圣州。
English: In the same month, he stayed in Feng Shengzhou.

古文：十一月乙卯，幸南京。
现代文：十一月初二，临幸南京。
English: On the second day of the first month of November, Linsheng came to Nanjing.

古文：丁卯，谒太祖庙。
现代文：十四日，拜谒太祖庙。
English: On the 14th, I visited the Grand Ancestor's Temple.

古文：是年，放进士韩昉等七十七人。
现代文：这一年，放榜录进士韩窻等七十七人。
English: This year, 77 people, including Han Zheng, who entered the list, were released.

古文：三年春正月丙寅，赐南京贫民钱。
现代文：三年春正月十三日，赐钱给南京贫民。
English: On the 13th day of the first month of the third year of Spring, money was given to the poor in Nanjing.

古文：丁卯，如大鱼泺。
现代文：十四日，到大鱼泊。
English: On the 14th, to the big fish pond.

古文：甲戌，禁僧尼破戒。
现代文：二十一日，严禁僧尼破戒。
English: On the 21st, monks and nuns are strictly forbidden to break the precepts.

古文：丙子，猎狗牙山，大寒，猎人多死。
现代文：二十三日，出猎于狗牙山，酷寒，猎人大多冻死。
English: On the 23rd, they went hunting in the Dogtooth Mountains. It was extremely cold, and most of the hunters froze to death.

古文：三月，籍诸道户，徙大牢古山围场地居民于别土。
现代文：三月，登记诸道民户，将大牢古山围场地之居民迁徙于外地。
English: In March, residents of various households were registered, and the residents of the Dajiao ancient mountain site were relocated to other places.

古文：阿骨打一日率五百骑突至咸州，吏民大惊。
现代文：阿骨打在某日率五百骑兵冲至咸州，百姓大受惊恐。
English: On a certain day, 500 cavalrymen from Akotai rushed to Hamshu, and the people were greatly alarmed.

古文：翌日，赴详稳司，与赵三等面折庭下。
现代文：次日，到详稳司，与赵三等人在法庭上当面互相指责。
English: The next day, he went to the court of justice, where he and Zhao San and others accused each other face to face.

古文：阿骨打不屈，送所司问状。
现代文：阿骨打不服，送交主管部门审讯。
English: Unhappy with the outcome, the case was sent to the competent authorities for trial.

古文：一夕遁去，遣人诉于上，谓详稳司欲见杀，故不敢留。
现代文：在一天晚上逃走。派人向皇上分辩诉说，说是详稳司想杀他，所以不敢留下。
English: One night, he ran away. He sent someone to argue with the emperor, saying that it was Jiangsheng who wanted to kill him, so he did not dare to stay.

古文：自是召不复至。
现代文：此后征召再不肯来。
English: After that, he refused to be conscripted again.

古文：夏闰四月，李弘以左道聚众为乱，支解，分示五京。
现代文：夏闰四月，李弘借妖术左道聚众肇乱，将他肢解，将五段肢体分别拿到五京示众。
English: In the summer of April, Li Hong gathered a crowd with the help of magic to cause a disturbance, dismembered him, and took the five limbs to Beijing to show to the public.

古文：六月乙卯，斡朗改国遣使来贡良犬。
现代文：六月初六，斡朗改国派使者前来贡献良犬。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6

古文：丙辰，夏国遣使来贡。
现代文：初七，夏国派使者前来进贡。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, Xia Guo sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：秋七月，幸秋山。
现代文：秋七月，临幸秋山。
English: In autumn and July, the joy of autumn is at its peak.

古文：九月，驻跸藕丝淀。
现代文：九月，歇驾于藕丝淀。
English: In September, she stopped in Goseidian.

古文：十一月甲午，以三司使虞融知南院枢密使事，西南面招讨使萧乐古为南府宰相。
现代文：十一月十七日，以三司使虞融为知南院枢密使事，以西南面招讨使萧乐古为南府宰相。
English: On November 17th, the Three Departments sent Yu Rong as a confidential envoy to the South China Academy of Sciences, and the southwestern side invited Xiao Legu to be the prime minister of Nanfu.

古文：十二月庚戌，高丽遣使来谢致祭。
现代文：十二月初三，高丽派使者前来感谢祭奠。
English: On the third day of the twelfth month, Goryeo sent an envoy to thank the memorial service.

古文：癸丑，回鹘遣使来贡。
现代文：初六，回鹘派使者前来进贡。
English: On the 6th day of the first month, the Hui sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：甲寅，以枢密直学士马人望参知政事。
现代文：初七，以枢密直学士马人望为参知政事。
English: On the seventh day of his junior year, Ma Renwang, a Privy Councilor and a direct graduate, was appointed to the post of prefectural governor.

古文：丙辰，知枢密院事耶律俨薨。
现代文：初九，知枢密院事耶律俨逝世。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month of the year, the Privy Councillor Ye Lucheng passed away.

古文：癸亥，高丽遣使来谢起复。
现代文：十六日，高丽派使者前来感谢起复。
English: On the 16th, Korea sent an envoy to thank the rebels.

古文：四年春正月，如春州。
现代文：四年春正月，皇上到春州。
English: In the first month of the fourth year of the Spring, the Emperor went to Chunzhou.

古文：初，女直起兵，以纥石烈部人阿疏不从，遣其部撒改讨之。
现代文：当初，女真起兵，因为纥石烈部人阿疏不从，女真派其部人撒改攻讨阿疏。
English: At first, Niang Zhen raised an army, because the members of the Zhi Shi Rong were unwilling to follow A Zuo, Niang Zhen sent his subordinates to attack A Zuo.

古文：阿疏弟狄故保来告，诏谕使勿讨，不听，阿疏来奔。
现代文：阿疏之弟狄故保前来告急，下诏晓谕撒改不要攻打，撒改不听，阿疏前来投奔。
English: Di Gobao, Aso's younger brother, came to express his concern. He issued an edict to Sakae not to attack, but Sakae did not listen, and Aso came to take refuge.

古文：至是女直遣使来索，不发。
现代文：这时女真派使者前来索要，皇上没有遣还阿疏。
English: At this time, the Empress Zhenzhen sent an envoy to ask for it, but the Emperor did not send Ah Zuo back.

古文：夏五月，清暑散水原。
现代文：夏五月，消夏于散水原。
English: Summer in May, summer in the water-sprinkling plain.

古文：秋七月，女直复遣使取阿疏，不发，乃遣侍御阿息保问境上多建城堡之故。
现代文：秋七月，女真再次派使者来要阿疏，我朝不肯放回，又派侍御阿息保责问边境之上多建城堡之缘故。
English: In the autumn and July, Nyoshin again sent an envoy to ask for Aso, but I refused to let him go back, and also sent the attendant Ashi to ask the reason for building more castles on the border.

古文：女直以慢语答曰： 若还阿疏，朝贡如故；不然，城未能已。 
现代文：女真以轻慢的语气回答说： 如果归还阿疏，就像先前一样地朝贡；否则，筑城堡是不会停的。 
English: "If we return Ahso, we will pay the same tribute as before; otherwise, the construction of the castle will not stop," Nyoshin replied in a dismissive tone.

古文：遂发浑河北诸军，益东北路统军司。
现代文：于是征发浑河以北诸军，增补于东北路统军司。
English: As a result, the troops north of the Hunhe River were conscripted and added to the Northeastern Route Army Division.

古文：阿骨打乃与侄粘罕、胡舍等谋，以银术割、移烈、娄室、阇母等为帅，集女直诸部兵，擒辽障鹰官，及攻宁江州，东北路统军司以闻。
现代文：阿骨打便与其侄儿粘罕、胡舍等人商议，派银术割、移烈、娄室、母等人担任军帅，会集女真诸部兵马，擒获辽障鹰官。及至进攻宁江州，东北路统军司奏闻。
English: In consultation with his nephews Mui Han, Hu She and others, Akoda sent Yin Zhi Wai, Empress Dowager, Empress Dowager, his mother and others to serve as military commanders, gathered the female soldiers and horses of various departments, and won the Liao Zhao Eagle Officer. And to attack Ningjiang Province, the Northeast Road Union Army Division reported.

古文：时上在宁州射鹿，闻之略不介意，遣海州刺史高仙寿统渤海军应援。
现代文：当时皇上在庆州射鹿，听说后毫不放在心上，派遣海州刺史高仙寿统领渤海军赴援。
English: At that time, the emperor was shooting deer in Gyeongju, and after hearing about it, he did not pay attention to it and sent Gao Xianshou, the governor of Haeju Province, to lead the navy to help.

古文：萧挞不也遇女直，战于宁江东，败绩。
现代文：萧挞不也遭遇女真，接战于宁江之东，失败。
English: Xiao Jianfu also encountered Jianzhen, fought in the east of the Ningjiang River, and failed.

古文：冬十月壬寅朔，以守司空萧嗣先为东北路都统，静江军节度使萧挞不也为副，发契丹奚军三千人，中京禁兵及土豪二千人，别选诸路武勇二千余人，以虞候崔公义为都押官，控鹤指挥邢颖为副，引军屯出河店。
现代文：冬十月初一，以守司空萧嗣先为东北路都统，静江军节度使萧挞不也为副统，征发契丹奚军三千人，中京禁兵及土豪两千人，另外选派诸路武勇两千余人，以虞候崔公义为都押官，控鹤指挥邢颖为副押官，率军屯驻于出河店。
English: On the first day of October in the winter, Xiao Zhi, the deputy commander of the Northeast Road, was first appointed as the commander of the Guards, Xiao Shifu was also appointed as the deputy commander of the Jingjiang Army, 3,000 soldiers of the Khitan Han Army were conscripted, 2,000 soldiers of the Central Beijing Forbidden Army and the local strongmen were conscripted, and more than 2,000 soldiers of all roads were selected and dispatched, with Gu Xing Cui Gongyi as the officer in charge of the capital, and the commander of the controlling cranes, Jiao Ying, as the deputy officer in charge of the capital, and the army was stationed in Dejian.

古文：两军对垒，女直军潜渡混同江，掩击辽众。
现代文：两军对垒，女真军暗渡混同江，突然袭击辽军。
English: The two armies faced each other, and the Jurchen army secretly crossed the Yangtze River and suddenly attacked the Liao army.

古文：萧嗣先军溃，崔公义、邢颖、耶律佛留、萧葛十等死之，其获免者十有七人。
现代文：萧嗣先军溃散，崔公义、邢颖、耶律佛留、萧葛十等人战死，得免性命的只有十七人。
English: Xiao Zi's first army was dispersed, and ten people including Cui Jiyi, Liang Ying, Yelu Fulu and Xiao Ge were killed in the battle. Only seventeen people were spared from death.

古文：萧奉先惧其弟嗣先获罪，辄奏东征溃军所至劫掠，若不肆赦，恐聚为患。
现代文：萧奉先害怕其弟萧嗣先因战败获罪，便奏称东征溃败之军沿路抢劫，如果不赦免其罪，恐怕聚众成为祸患。
English: Xiao Bongxian was afraid that his brother Xiao Shihxian would be blamed for the defeat of the war, so he said that the defeated army of the Eastern Expedition robbed along the road. If his crime was not pardoned, I am afraid that the crowd would become a disaster.

古文：上从之，嗣先但免官而已。
现代文：皇上听从，萧嗣先只不过被免官而已。
English: The emperor obeyed, but Xiao Xi was only removed from his post.

古文：诸军相谓曰： 战则有死而无功，退则有生而无罪。 
现代文：诸军互相传言说： 力战的会死去且没有功劳，退却的则获得生路，又没有罪。 
English: The soldiers said to one another, "He who fights bravely will die without credit, but he who retreats will live without blame."

古文：故士无斗志，望风奔溃。
现代文：所以士兵没有斗志，见到敌军便奔逃溃散。
English: Therefore, the soldiers had no fighting spirit, and when they saw the enemy, they ran away and scattered.

古文：十一月壬辰，都统萧敌里等营于斡邻泺东，又为女直所袭，士卒死者甚众。
现代文：十一月二十一日，都统萧敌里等人安营于斡邻泊以东，又为女真所袭击，士卒大量死亡。
English: On November 21, Du Tong Xiao Qi Li and others camped in the east of Bu, and were attacked by Nianzhen, and a large number of soldiers died.

古文：甲午，萧敌里亦坐免官。
现代文：二十三日，萧敌里也因兵败免官。
English: On the 23rd, Xiao Zhili was also dismissed from his post due to military defeat.

古文：辛丑，以西北路招讨使耶律斡里朵为行军都统，副点检萧乙薛、同知南院枢密使事耶律章奴副之。
现代文：三十日，以西北路招讨使耶律斡里朵为行军都统，以副点检萧乙薛、同知南院枢密使事耶律章奴为副统。
English: On the 30th, the Northwest Road was used to solicit Yeludo Yulido as the marching capital, with the deputy inspector Xiao Yixue and Yeludo Zhangnu, the confidential envoy of the Southern Yuan, as the deputy governors.

古文：十二月，咸、宾、祥三州及铁骊、兀惹皆叛入女直。
现代文：十二月，咸、宾、祥三州及铁骊、兀惹均反叛附于女真。
English: In December, Ham, Bin, and Xiang of the Three Provinces, as well as Tiexu and Yijia of the Three Provinces, all rebelled and attached themselves to Nian Zhen.

古文：乙薛往援宾州，南军诸将实娄、特烈等往援咸州，并为女直所败。
现代文：萧乙薛前往增援宾州，南军诸将实娄、特烈等前往增援咸州，均为女真击败。
English: Xiao Yixue went to reinforce Pennsylvania, and the Southern Army generals, such as Shizhen and Teli, went to reinforce Anzhou, and were all defeated by Jianzhen.

