古文：遂人掌邦之野。
现代文：遂人掌管王国的野地。
English: So the man took charge of the fields of the kingdom.

古文：以土地之图经田野，造县鄙，形体之法。
现代文：按照地图划分田野，制定县鄙等的区划。
English: Divide the fields according to the map, and draw up the zoning of counties and so on.

古文：五家为邻，五邻为里，四里为酂，五酂为鄙，五鄙为县，五县为遂，皆有地域，沟树之，使各掌其政令刑禁。以岁时稽其人民，而授之田野，简其兵器，教之稼穑。
现代文：五家为一邻，五邻为一里，四里为一酇，五酇为一鄙，五鄙为一县，五县为一遂，都有一定的地域，挖沟种树为界，使各自掌管区域内的政令、刑罚和禁令，按照一年的四季清查区域内的人民，而授给他们田地，检阅他们的武器和器械，教他们种庄稼。
English: Five families are one neighborhood, five neighborhoods are one mile, four miles are one gong, five gongs are one mina, five minas are one county, and five counties are one soju. All of them have a certain area, digging ditches and planting trees is the boundary, making each of them control the decrees, penalties and prohibitions in the area, checking the people in the area according to the four seasons of the year, and giving them fields, inspecting their weapons and equipment, and teaching them to grow crops.

古文：凡治野，以下剂致甿，以田里安氓，以乐昏扰氓，以土宜教氓稼穑，以兴锄利氓，以时器劝氓，以疆予任氓，以土均平政。
现代文：凡治理野地：用最低服役人数的名册来征召民夫服役，用田地和房宅使民众安定，用鼓励民众成婚来使民和顺，用各种土壤所适宜的种植来教民种庄稼，用兴起互助来使民获得好处，用铸造四时所用的农具来鼓励农民耕作，用多授给强有余力的农民土地来任用民力，用按土地合理征收赋税的法则来使赋税公平。
English: Where to govern the field: use the roster of the minimum number of service personnel to recruit people to serve, use the fields and houses to stabilize the people, use the encouragement of the people to marry to make the people peaceful, use the appropriate planting of various soils to teach the people to grow crops, use the rise of mutual assistance to make the people benefit, use the agricultural tools used in the four hours of casting to encourage farmers to cultivate, use more land granted to strong farmers to appoint people, and use the law of reasonable taxation according to land to make taxation fair.

古文：辨其野之土：上地、中地、下地、以颁田里。
现代文：辨别野地的土地，分为上地、中地、下地，据以颁授田地和宅地。
English: Distinguishing the wild land, it is divided into the upper land, the middle land, and the lower land, according to which the field and the residential land are awarded.

古文：上地，夫一廛，田百亩莱五十亩，余夫亦如之。中地，夫一廛，田百亩，余夫亦如之。
现代文：上地，一夫授给一处宅地，田一百亩，休耕地五十亩，余夫也照这样授田；中地，一夫授给一处宅地，田一百亩，休耕地一百亩，余夫也照这样授田；下地，一夫授给一处宅地，田一百亩。
English: In the upper land, one husband was given a house site, 100 mu of field, and 50 mu of fallow land, and the remaining husband was also given a field; in the middle land, one husband was given a house site, 100 mu of field, and 100 mu of fallow land, and the remaining husband was also given a field; in the lower land, one husband was given a house site, and 100 mu of field.

古文：下地，夫一廛，田百亩，菜二百亩，余夫亦如之。
现代文：休耕地二百亩，余夫也照这样授田。
English: Two hundred mu of fallow land, and Yu's husband was also given land.

古文：凡治野，夫间有遂，遂上有径，十夫有沟，沟上有畛，百夫有洫，洫上有涂，千夫有浍，浍上有道，万夫有川，川上有路，以达于几。
现代文：凡治理野地的田地，夫与夫的田之间有遂，遂上有径；十夫与十夫的田之间有沟，沟上有畛；百夫与百夫的田之间有洫，洫上有途；千夫与千夫的田之间有浍，浍上有道；万夫与万夫的田之间有川，川上的路，通达畿内各地。
English: Wherever there is a field of field management in the field, there is a ditch between the husband and the husband's field, and finally there is a road; there is a ditch between the ten men and the ten men's field, and there is a ditch on the ditch; there is a ditch between the hundred men and the hundred men's field, and there is a road on the ditch; there is a ditch between the thousand men and the thousand men's field, and there is a road on the ditch; there is a river between the ten thousand men and the ten thousand men's field, and the road on the river leads to all parts of the Kinai

古文：以岁时登其夫家之众寡，及其六畜、车辇，辨其老、幼、废、疾，与其施舍者，以颁职作事，以令贡赋，以令师田，以起政役。
现代文：按照一年的四季登记男女人数的多少，以及六畜、车辆的数目，辨别老幼、残疾和那些应当免除赋税徭役的人，以分配职事使民众的工作，以使民众缴纳贡赋，以征调民众参加征伐、田猎，以起用民众服劳役。
English: According to the number of men and women registered in the four seasons of the year, as well as the number of livestock and vehicles, distinguish between the old and the young, the disabled and those who should be exempt from tax and labor, to allocate the work of the people, to make the people pay tribute, to recruit the people to participate in the conquest and hunting, and to recruit the people to perform labor service.

古文：若起野役，则令各帅其所治之民而至，以遂之大旗致之，其不用命者，诛之。
现代文：如果起用野地民众服役，就命令属吏各自率领所治理的民众到来，用遂的大旗召集他们，有不服从命令的就加以诛罚。
English: If the people in the field are called up for military service, the officials are ordered to each lead the people they govern to come, gather them together with their banners, and punish those who disobey the order.

古文：凡国祭祀，共野牲；令野职。
现代文：凡国家举行祭祀，命令供给野地所牧养的牲畜，供给柴炭。
English: Whenever a country holds a religious ceremony, it is ordered to provide pasture-raised animals and charcoal.

古文：凡宾客，令修野道而委积。
现代文：凡是接待宾客，命令修治野地的道路并具备粮草。
English: Whenever he received guests, he ordered the roads in the fields to be repaired and the grain and grass to be provided.

古文：大丧，帅六遂之役而致之，掌其政令。
现代文：有大丧，就率领六遂的役徒而到大司徒那里，并掌管有关役徒的政令。
English: When there was a great tragedy, he led the six servicemen to the grand steward and took charge of the relevant decrees.

古文：及葬，帅而属六紼，及窆，陈役。
现代文：到出葬的时候，率领役徒牵引六绰。到下棺的时候，就陈列役徒。
English: When it was time for the funeral, he led the attendants in a procession of six horses. When the coffin was lowered, the attendants were displayed.

古文：凡事致野役，而师田作野民，帅而至，掌其政治禁令。
现代文：凡有兴建工程的事就召集野地的役徒，而有征伐、田猎的事就征调野地的民众，率领他们到来，掌管有关他们的政令、治理和禁令。
English: Whenever there is a construction project, the field servants are summoned, and when there is a conquest or hunting, the people of the field are summoned, led by them, and in charge of the decrees, regulations and prohibitions concerning them.

古文：遂师各掌其遂之政令戒禁。以时登其夫家之众寡、六畜、车辇，辨其施舍与其可任者。
现代文：遂师各自掌管所治理的遂的政令和戒禁，按时登记遂中男女人数的多少，以及六畜、车辆的数目，辨别其中应当免除徭役的以及可以胜任役事的人。
English: Subordinate teachers should respectively take charge of the subordination of the subordination of the subordination of the subordination of the subordination of the subordination of the subordination of the subordination of the subordination of the subordination of the subordination of the subordination of the subordination of the subordination of the subordination of the subordination.

古文：经牧其田野，辨其可食者，周知其数而任之，以征财征。
现代文：在田野上划分田界和井田，辨别今年可以耕种的土地，全面了解它的数量而任用农民耕种，据以征收赋税。
English: It is necessary to divide the field boundary and the well field on the field, distinguish the land that can be cultivated this year, fully understand its quantity and appoint farmers to cultivate, and collect taxes accordingly.

古文：作役事，则听其治讼。
现代文：征发役徒就听断有关的事项和争讼。
English: The requisitioning and dispatching officers and apprentices shall hear the relevant matters and disputes.

古文：巡其稼穑，而移用其民，以救其时事。
现代文：巡视地里的庄稼，而安排农民互助，以帮助农忙时节困难农户的农事。
English: They will inspect the crops in the fields and arrange mutual assistance among farmers to help farmers with their agricultural work during the busy season.

古文：凡国祭祀，审其誓戒，共其野牲，入野职野赋于玉府。
现代文：凡国家举行祭祀，督察遂民遵守誓戒，供给野地所牧养的牲畜。
English: Whenever a country holds a religious ceremony, it is the duty of the inspectors to ensure that the people keep their vows and provide the animals raised in the fields.

古文：宾客，则巡其道修，庀其委积。
现代文：把所征收的野地民众的从业税、地税适合于王用的交给玉府。将有宾客到来来，就巡视所修整的道路，具备粮草。
English: The occupancy tax and land tax collected from the people in the fields will be handed over to the Jade Palace for the king's use. When guests arrive, they will inspect the roads that have been repaired and provide grain and grass.

古文：大丧，使帅其属以幄帟先，道野役。
现代文：有大丧，大宰使遂师率领下属拿幄、帘先行，引导野地的役徒前往墓地。
English: When there was a great mourning, Dazai sent Sui Shi to lead his subordinates to take the coffin and curtain first and guide the field servants to the cemetery.

古文：及窆，抱磨，共丘笼及蜃车之役。
现代文：到下棺的时候，手持执绰人名册查核和陈列役徒，供给用笼取土填圹起坟以及从蜃车上卸下棺柩所需的役徒。
English: When it was time to lower the coffin, he held out a list of names to check and display the attendants, and provided the attendants needed to use a cage to take soil to fill the grave and to unload the coffin from the hearse.

古文：军旅、田猎，平野民，掌其禁令，比叙其事而赏罚。
现代文：征伐和田猎，整齐野地服役民众的队伍，掌管有关的禁令，比较、排列役徒的工作表现而行赏罚。
English: To conquer and hunt in the field, to organize the ranks of the people serving in the field, to administer the relevant prohibitions, to compare and rank the work performance of the servicemen and to reward and punish them.

古文：遂大夫备掌其遂之政令。以岁时稽其夫家之众寡、六畜田野，辨其可任者与其可施舍者，以教稼穑，以稽功事，掌其政令戒禁，听其治讼，令为邑者。
现代文：遂大夫掌管本遂的政令，按照一年的四季稽查遂中男女的多少，以及六畜、田地的数量，辨别遂中可任役事的和可以免除役事的人，教他们种庄稼，考察他们的工作成绩，掌管有关的政令和禁戒，听断有关的事项和争讼。
English: Dr. Sui is in charge of this Sui's edict, and according to the four seasons of the year, he inspects the number of men and women in Sui, as well as the number of livestock and fields, distinguishes those who can be appointed and those who can be exempted from service, teaches them to grow crops, examines their work performance, controls the relevant edicts and prohibitions, and hears the relevant matters and disputes.

古文：岁终则会政致事。
现代文：命令治理邑里的属吏，每年夏历年终总结政事上报。
English: Ordered the subordinate officials in the governance of the county to submit a report on the end-of-year summary of government affairs every year.

古文：正岁，简稼器，修稼政。
现代文：夏历正月，检阅农具，教民做好各项备耕工作。
English: In the first month of the lunar calendar, agricultural tools were inspected, and the people were taught to do all kinds of preparation work.

古文：三岁大比，则帅其吏而兴甿，明其有功者，属其地治者。
现代文：三年大校比，就率领属吏荐举民众中贤能的人，表彰属吏中有功的人，聚集各级属吏教导他们做好工作。
English: After the three-year high school graduation ceremony, he led the subordinate officials to recommend the virtuous people among the people, commended the meritorious people among the subordinate officials, and gathered the subordinate officials at all levels to teach them to do a good job.

古文：凡为邑者，以四达戒其功事，而诛赏废兴之。县正各掌其县之政令、征、比。以颁田里，以分职事，掌其治讼，趋其稼事而赏罚之。
现代文：凡治理邑里的官吏，告诫他们以四项大事作为工作的重点，并据此对他们进行赏赐、诛罚、罢免或提升。县正各自掌管本县的政令、征发和校比，而颁授田地和宅地，分配各种职事，掌管听断有关的事项和争讼，督促人们耕作，并进行赏罚。
English: All the officials who govern the townships should be admonished to take the four great matters as the focus of their work, and they should be rewarded, punished, dismissed or promoted accordingly. Each county is in charge of the county's decrees, requisitions and checks, and awards fields and homesteads, allocates various duties, and is in charge of hearing related matters and disputes, urging people to cultivate, and rewarding and punishing.

古文：若将用野民，师田、行役、移执事，则帅而至，治其政令。
现代文：如果将征用野地的民众参加征伐、田猎、巡狩、劳役，或调用民众帮助困难户就率领役徒到来，掌管有关的政令。
English: If the people of the requisitioned fields are to participate in the conquest, field hunting, patrol hunting, and labor service, or if the people are called to help the needy households, they will lead the servicemen to come and take charge of the relevant government orders.

古文：既役，则稽功会事而诛赏。
现代文：役事完毕后，就稽考、总结他们的工作情况并加以赏罚。
English: After completing their duties, they will review and summarize their work situation and reward and punish them.

古文：鄙师各掌其鄙之政令祭祀。
现代文：鄙师各自掌管本鄙的政令和祭祀。
English: Each of them is in charge of their own government decrees and rituals.

古文：凡作民，则掌其戒令。
现代文：凡征调民众服役就掌管有关的戒令。
English: Where citizens are conscripted for military service, the relevant precepts shall be in charge.

古文：以时数其众庶，而察其恶而诛赏。
现代文：按季节清点鄙中的民众，考察他们的表现好坏而加以赏罚。
English: According to the season, the people in the middle are counted, their performance is examined, and they are rewarded and punished.

古文：岁终，则会其鄙之政而致事。
现代文：夏历年终，就总结本鄙的政事而向上级报告。
English: At the end of the year of the lunar calendar, he would report to his superiors by summing up the basic political affairs.

古文：赞阝长各掌其赞阝之政令。以时校登其夫家，比其众寡，以治其丧纪祭祀之事。
现代文：酇长各自掌管本都的政令，按季清查登记酇中男女的多少，治理酇中的丧事、祭祀等事。
English: The chief priests are in charge of the capital's decrees, check and register the number of men and women in the priesthood on a quarterly basis, and manage funerals and sacrifices in the priesthood.

古文：若作其民而用之，则以旗、鼓、兵革帅而至。
现代文：如果征调酇民服役，就率领役徒带着旗鼓兵器和甲胄到来。
English: If conscripts are called up for military service, they will lead the soldiers to arrive with weapons and armor.

古文：若岁时简器，与有司数之。
现代文：如果到了每年按季检查农具、武器和器械的时候，就同遂大夫共同统计。
English: If it comes to the time of the annual quarterly inspection of agricultural tools, weapons and equipment, they will be counted together with Dr. Sui.

古文：凡岁时之戒令，皆听之。趋其耕耨，稽其女功。
现代文：凡一年四季上级卡，达的最令，都接受而执行、督促酇民耕作，考核妇女的工作成绩。
English: All four seasons of the year, the higher-level card, the highest order, are accepted and implemented, urging the people to cultivate, and assessing the work performance of women.

古文：里宰掌比其邑之众寡，与其六畜兵器，治其政令。
现代文：里宰掌管清查本里男数的多少，以及六畜、武器和器械数，执行有关本里的政令。
English: The lizai is in charge of checking the number of men in the book, as well as the number of livestock, weapons and equipment, and implementing the government decree on the book.

古文：以岁时合耦于锄，以治稼穑。趋其耕耨，行其秩叙，以待有司之政令，而征敛其财赋。
现代文：按照一年的四季在锄处对农民进行耦耕的搭配，以进行耕种，督促农民耕作，安排农民相互帮助以行耦耕的先后次序，以待执行遂人和司稼征税的命令，而征收里中的赋税。
English: According to the four seasons of the year, farmers will be paired with each other in the middle of the year to carry out cultivation, urge farmers to cultivate, arrange farmers to help each other to carry out the order of coupled cultivation, and collect the tax in the middle of the year pending the implementation of the order of the tax collector and the tax collector.

古文：邻长掌相纠相爱。
现代文：邻长掌管使邻中居民相互纠察和相互托付。
English: Neighbors control residents in the neighborhood to picket each other and entrust each other.

古文：凡邑中之政，相赞。
现代文：凡上级下达里中的政令都协助执行。
English: He assisted in the implementation of all decrees issued by his superiors.

古文：徙于他邑，则従而授之。
现代文：邻中有居民迁徙到别的邑里，就跟从迁徙者把他交付给当地官吏。
English: When a resident of the neighborhood moved to another town, he followed the migrant and handed him over to the local officials.

