古文：真君曰：所谓孝子，欲体亲心，当先立身。
现代文：真君说：所谓孝子，要想体恤双亲的心志，首先应当立身处世。
English: Zhenjun said: The so-called filial son, in order to sympathize with the aspirations of his parents, should first of all stand up in the world.

古文：立身之基，贵审其守。
现代文：立身的基始，最为重要的是要慎重自己的操守。
English: The most important foundation for success is to be prudent in one's own conduct.

古文：无身之始，身于何始？
现代文：没有人身的初始之时，我的身体是从何处而来的呢？
English: Where did my body come from in the beginning when there was no body?

古文：有身之后，身于何育？
现代文：有了人身之后，身体又是怎么得以抚育的呢？
English: After having a human body, how can the body be nurtured?

古文：有挟俱来，不可或昧。
现代文：我有从出生挟持同来的良心，此心不可暗昧，我应当仔细想想。
English: I have a conscience that I have carried with me since birth, and I should not be blind to it. I should think about it carefully.

古文：当思在我，设处亲身，爱子之身，胜于己身，苦苦乳哺，望其萌芽，冀其成材，寸节肢体，日渐栽培，何一非亲。
现代文：以父母的立场设身处地地想想，父母怜爱子女的身体，胜过爱护自己的身体。艰难地哺乳，期望他渐渐成长，希冀他能够成为有用的人。一寸一节肢体，日渐栽育培养。
English: Put yourself in the shoes of a parent and think about it. Parents love their children's bodies more than their own. They nurse them with difficulty, hoping that they will gradually grow up and become useful people. Every inch and every limb is gradually nurtured and cultivated.

古文：身自劳苦，得有此身，亲爱我身，如是之切，保此亲身，岂不重大，守此亲身，尤当倍笃。
现代文：哪一点不是靠双亲勤劳保护，才得以有了我的存在？父母爱我此身，是如此的关切，好好保护此身，怎能不关系重大？守持好双亲给我的身体，尤其应当加倍地坚定。
English: Which point is not dependent on the diligent protection of my parents to be able to have my existence? My parents love me this body, is so concerned, to protect this body well, how can it not be important? Safeguarding the body given to me by my parents, in particular, should be doubly firm.

古文：尊规合矩，如前所为，矜骄不形，淫佚不生，嗜欲必节。
现代文：遵守规则符合规范，效法前人的行为。骄横傲慢之貌不显，淫欲放荡之心不生，节制自己的不良嗜好和欲望。
English: Adhering to rules conforms to norms, imitating the behavior of predecessors. Arrogance and arrogance are not apparent, lust and debauchery are not born, and one's bad habits and desires are controlled.

古文：父母之前，声不高厉，气不麤暴，神色温静，举止持祥，习久自然，身有光明，九灵三精，保其吉庆，三尸诸厌，亦化为善，凡有希求，悉称其愿，兢兢终身，保此亲体，无亏而归，是谓守身。
现代文：在父母面前，声音不要太高，气息不要粗大；神色温柔娴静，行动举止舒缓。坚持久了就成为自然的事情。这样，身体就有光明，九灵三精等神就会保佑你吉祥；而三尸等邪神，也会化恶为善。凡有希望得到的东西，都会称心如愿。众生都小心谨慎，保护好双亲给我的身体，没有一点亏损而返归原初，这就是守身。
English: In front of parents, the voice should not be too high, the breath should not be coarse; the look should be gentle and calm, and the actions should be soothing. If you persist for a long time, it will become a natural thing. In this way, the body will have light, and the gods such as the nine spirits and three essences will bless you auspiciously; and the evil gods such as the three corpses will also turn evil into good. Everything that has hope to get will satisfy the heart as desired. All beings are careful and cautious to protect the body given to me by my parents, and return to the original without any loss. This is self-protection.

古文：苟失其守，块然躯壳，有负父母，生而犹死，抑知人生。
现代文：如果不能持受，徒具躯壳，就会辜负父母，虽生犹死。
English: If they can't bear it, they will live up to their parents, even though they are still alive.

古文：体相完备，即有其神，每日在身，各有处所，一身运动，皆神所周。
现代文：哪里会懂得人生，形体相貌完备，就会有神，它每天都在人身中，身体各部位都是它的处所。整个身体的运动，都是由神主宰。
English: Where there is a complete understanding of life and a complete physical appearance, there will be God. It is in the human body every day, and every part of the body is its place. The movement of the entire body is dominated by God.

古文：神在脏腑，欲不可纵；神在四肢，刑不可受，纵欲犯刑，非伤即死。
现代文：神存在于五脏六腑，不可以纵欲；神存在于四肢，不可以受到刑罚。放纵欲望，触犯刑律，非死即伤。
English: God exists in the five viscera and the six limbs, so one must not indulge in lust; God exists in the four limbs, so one must not be punished.

古文：凡有身者，所当守护，守真为上，守心次之，守形为下。
现代文：凡是有身体的人，都应当守护。保守真性是最上乘的，守持良心次之，保守形体最次。
English: Everyone who has a body should guard it. To guard the truth is the best, to guard the conscience is next, and to guard the body is the least.

古文：愚夫匹妇，无所作为，亦足保身，何尔聪明，奸为妄作，昧性忘身，沉溺欲海，全不省悟。
现代文：一般的平民百姓，没有什么作为，也可以做到保身。为什么你这么聪明，却去做奸妄之事，蒙昧心性，忘了自身，沉溺于欲海，却全然不知醒悟？
English: Ordinary people can protect themselves without any effort. Why are you so clever, yet you do things that are treacherous, blind your mind, forget yourself, indulge in the sea of desire, yet you do not know how to wake up?

古文：大罗天神，观见斯若，发大慈悲，降生圣人，以时救度。
现代文：天帝神仙看到这些，发大慈悲心，降生圣人，以便能够随时救度世人。
English: The gods and goddesses, seeing this, felt great compassion and gave birth to saints so that they could save the world at any time.

古文：惟兹圣人，躬先率孝，加检必谨，加恤必至，不忍斯人，堕厥亲身，一切栽持，遂其所守，种种孝顺，当身体物，体在一身，化在众生，畀兹凡有，同归于道，身居不动，肆应常普，如是守身，是为大孝。
现代文：只有这样的圣人，亲自率先躬行孝道。
English: Only such a saint can personally take the lead in practicing filial piety.

古文：即说偈曰：亲视子身重，常轻己身轻，人何仅负己，损身背吾亲，莫将至性躯，看作血肉形，今生受用者，夙世具灵根。
现代文：守身不动，而又能广泛地应接事物，如此守身，那才是大孝。即说偈道：双亲非常看重子女的身体，常常将自己的身体看轻。人们为什么反而背叛自己，损坏自身而违背父母？不要将充满灵性的身躯，看作是血肉形体。今生之所以能够享受一切，是因为前世所造就的灵根。
English: It is the greatest filial piety to keep oneself immobile and yet be able to respond broadly to things. That is to say, according to the teaching of the gurus, parents attach great importance to the bodies of their children and often look down on their own bodies. Why do people instead betray themselves, damage themselves, and disobey their parents? Do not regard the body, which is full of spirituality, as a flesh-and-blood body. The reason why we can enjoy everything in this life is because of the spiritual root created in the previous life.

古文：又说偈曰：一切本来相，受之自父母，谓身即亲身，人犹不之悟，谓亲即身是，重大不可误，完厥惺惺体，尽我所当务，无量大道身，圆满随处是。
现代文：又说偈道：一切本来体相，从父母那里禀受而来。说自己身体即是双亲的身体，人们仍然不能明白这个道理。所谓父母即是自身，此理重大不可有误。保全这个聪明的躯体，完成我当前应作的要务。成就无量大道身，随处都圆满充足。
English: He also said in the sutra, "All original bodies come from the parents. People still cannot understand the truth that one's own body is the body of the parents. The so-called parents are oneself, and this principle cannot be mistaken. Preserve this clever body and complete the important tasks that I should do at present. The achievements are immeasurable, and everywhere are fully sufficient.

古文：又说偈曰：同此亲禀受，一般形体具，善哉孝子身，超出浮尘世，以兹不磨守，保炼中和气，真培金液形，元养玉符体，广大不可限，生初岂有异。
现代文：又说偈道：每个人的形体都是秉承自父母，形体具备。
English: It is also said that each person's body is inherited from his or her parents, and each person has a perfect body.

古文：孝子金身咒：惟恐此光明孝子身，果是金刚不坏身，化成即在当身内，现出千千万亿身。
现代文：好啊，孝子的身体，能够超越尘世。不磨灭自己的对身心的保养守护，保持炼养和谐的元气。以真气培养长生不死的身体，以元气涵养神仙体身。
English: That's right, the body of a filial son can transcend the earthly world. Do not erase your own maintenance and protection of body and mind, maintain the cultivation of harmonious vitality. Cultivate the body of immortality with true energy, and nurture the immortal body with vitality.

