古文：国有十年之蓄，而民不足于食，皆以其技能望君之禄也；君有山海之金，而民不足于用，是皆以其事业交接于君上也。
现代文：国家有十年的粮食贮备，而人民的粮食还不够吃，人民就想用自己的技能求取君主的俸禄；国君不经营山海的大量收入，而人民的用度还不充足，人民就想用自己的事业换取君主的金钱。
English: The country has ten years of grain reserves, but the people's grain is not enough to eat, so the people want to use their skills to obtain the monarch's salary; the sovereign does not operate mountains and seas with a large amount of income, but the people's consumption is not sufficient, so the people want to use their own business to exchange the monarch's money.

古文：故人君挟其食，守其用，据有余而制不足，故民无不累于上也。
现代文：所以，国君能控制粮食，掌握货币，依靠国家的有余控制民间的不足，人民就没有不依附于君主的了。
English: Therefore, if the sovereign can control grain and money, and rely on the surplus of the state to control the shortage of the people, the people will not be independent of the monarch.

古文：五谷食米，民之司命也；黄金刀币，民之通施也。
现代文：粮食，是人民生命的主宰；货币，是人民的交易手段。
English: Grain is the mainstay of people's lives; money is the people's means of transaction.

古文：故善者执其通施以御其司命，故民力可得而尽也。
现代文：所以，善于治国的君主，掌握他们的流通手段来控制主宰他们生命的粮食，就可以最大限度地使用民力了。
English: Therefore, monarchs who are good at governing the country, mastering their means of circulation to control the grain that dominates their lives, can maximize the use of people's power.

古文：夫民者亲信而死利，海内皆然。
现代文：人们总是相信爱己之人而死于谋求财利，这是普天下的通例。
English: People always believe that people who love themselves and die in the pursuit of profit, this is the general rule of the world.

古文：民予则喜，夺则怒，民情皆然。
现代文：百姓又总是予之则喜，夺之则怒，这也是人之常情。
English: People are always happy to give and angry to take, which is human nature.

古文：先王知其然，故见予之形，不见夺之理。
现代文：先王知道这个道理，所以在给予人民利益时，要求形式鲜明；在夺取人民利益时，则要求不露内情。
English: The late king was aware of this principle, so when granting benefits to the people, he required a clear form; when seizing benefits from the people, he required that the inner workings not be revealed.

古文：故民爱可洽于上也。租籍者，所以强求也：租税者，所虑而请也。
现代文：这样，人民就与君主亲爱了。 租籍 ，是强制进行征收的； 租税 ，是经过谋划索取的。
English: In this way, the people are dear to the monarch; the lease is collected by force; the tax is collected by planning.

古文：王霸之君去其所以强求，废其所虑而请，故天下乐从也。
现代文：成就王霸之业的君主，避免强制征收的形式，保留他经过谋划的索取，这样，天下就乐于服从了。
English: The prince who accomplishes the business of a tyrant, avoids the form of compulsory requisition, retains the requisition he has planned, and thus the world is happy to obey.

古文：利出于一孔者，其国无敌；出二孔者，其兵不诎；出三孔者，不可以举兵；出四孔者，其国必亡。
现代文：经济权益由国家统一掌握，这样的国家强大无敌；分两家掌握，军事力量将削弱一半；分三家掌握，就无力出兵作战；分四家掌握，其国家一定灭亡。
English: If economic rights and interests are under the unified control of a country, such a country will be powerful and invincible; if they are under the control of two countries, their military strength will be reduced by half; if they are under the control of three countries, they will not be able to send troops to fight; if they are under the control of four countries, their country will definitely perish.

古文：先王知其然，故塞民之养，隘其利途。
现代文：先王明白这个道理，所以杜绝民间谋取高利，限制他们获利的途径。
English: The previous king understood this principle, so he put a stop to people seeking high profits and limited their ways of making a profit.

古文：故予之在君，夺之在君，贫之在君，富之在君。
现代文：因此，予之、夺之决定于国君，贫之、富之也决定于国君。
English: Therefore, it is up to the sovereign to decide whether to give or take, and it is also up to the sovereign to decide whether to be poor or rich.

古文：故民之戴上如日月，亲君若父母。
现代文：这样，人民就拥戴国君有如日月，亲近国君有如父母了。
English: In this way, the people embrace the sovereign like the sun and moon, and are as close to the sovereign as their parents.

古文：凡将为国，不通于轻重，不可为笼以守民；不能调通民利，不可以语制为大治。
现代文：凡将治国，不懂得轻重之术，就不能组织经济之 笼 来控制民间；不能够调剂民利，就不能讲求管制经济来实现国家大治。
English: Anyone who wants to govern the country but does not know the art of weights and measures cannot organize an economic cage to control the people; if he cannot adjust the people's interests, he cannot talk about controlling the economy to achieve national governance.

古文：是故万乘之国有万金之贾，千乘之国有千金之贾，然者何也？
现代文：所以，一个万乘之国如果出现了万金的大商贾，一个千乘之国如果出现了千金的大商贾，这说明什么呢？
English: So, if a country of ten thousand merits has a great merchant of ten thousand gold, and a country of a thousand merits has a great merchant of a thousand gold, what does this mean?

古文：国多失利，则臣不尽其忠，士不尽其死矣。
现代文：这说明国家大量流失财利的结果，臣子就不肯尽忠，战士也不肯效死了。
English: This shows that as a result of the country's massive loss of wealth and interest, courtiers are not willing to be loyal, and soldiers are not willing to die.

古文：岁有凶穰，故谷有贵贱；令有缓急，故物有轻重。
现代文：年景有丰有歉，故粮价有贵有贱；号令有缓有急，故物价有高有低。
English: The situation of the year is rich and poor, so the grain price is high and low; the order is slow and urgent, so the price is high and low.

古文：然而人君不能治，故使蓄贾游市，乘民之不给，百倍其本。
现代文：如果人君不能及时治理，富商就进出于市场，利用人民的困难，牟取百倍的厚利。
English: If the people cannot be governed in a timely manner, rich businessmen will enter and leave the market, take advantage of the people's difficulties, and make a hundredfold profit.

古文：分地若一，强者能守；分财若一，智者能收。
现代文：相同的土地，强者善于掌握；相同的财产，智者善于收罗。
English: The same land, the strong man is good at grasping; the same property, the wise man is good at collecting.

古文：智者有什倍人之功，愚者有不赓本之事。
现代文：往往是智者可以攫取十倍的高利，而愚者连本钱都捞不回来。
English: It is often the case that the wise man can make ten times as much profit, while the fool can't even get his capital back.

古文：然而人君不能调，故民有相百倍之生也。
现代文：如果人君不能及时调剂，民间财产就会出现百倍的差距。
English: If people can't adjust in time, there will be a hundredfold gap in private property.

古文：夫民富则不可以禄使也，贫则不可以罚威也。
现代文：人太富了，利禄就驱使不动；太穷了，刑罚就威慑不住。
English: If a man is too rich, Lilo will drive him to immobility; if he is too poor, punishment will not deter him.

古文：法令之不行，万民之不治，贫富之不齐也。
现代文：法令的不能贯彻，万民的不能治理，是由于社会上贫富不均的缘故。
English: The impossibility of implementing laws and regulations, and the impossibility of governing all the people, is due to the social inequality between the rich and the poor.

古文：且君引錣量用，耕田发草，上得其数矣。
现代文：而且，君主经过计算度量，耕田垦地多少，本来是心中有数的；百姓口粮，也算有每人一定亩数的土地。
English: Moreover, the monarch calculated and measured how many cultivated fields and cultivated land he had in mind; the people's rations were also calculated to have a certain number of mu of land per person.

古文：民人所食，人有若干步亩之数矣，计本量委则足矣。然而民有饥饿不食者何也？谷有所藏也。
现代文：统计一下产粮和存粮本来是够吃够用的。然而人民仍有挨饿吃不上饭的，这是为什么呢？
English: Take a look at the statistics of grain production and grain reserves. There is enough to eat and enough to use. However, the people are still starving and can't eat. Why is this?

古文：人君铸钱立币，民庶之通施也，人有若干百千之数矣。
现代文：因为粮食被囤积起来了。君主铸造发行的货币，是民间的交易手段。这也算好了每人需要几百几千的数目。
English: Because grain was hoarded. Currency, minted and issued by the monarch, was a means of private trade. This also calculated the number of hundreds of thousands needed per person.

古文：然而人事不及、用不足者何也？
现代文：然而仍有人用费不足，钱不够用，这又是为什么呢？
English: However, there are still people who don't spend enough, and don't have enough money. Why is this?

古文：利有所并藏也。
现代文：钱财被积聚起来了。
English: Money is being hoarded.

古文：然则人君非能散积聚，钧羡不足，分并财利而调民事也，则君虽强本趣耕，而自为铸币而无已，乃今使民下相役耳，恶能以为治乎？
现代文：所以，一个君主，如不能散开囤积，调剂余缺，分散兼并的财利，调节人民的用费，即使加强农业，督促生产，而且自己在那里无休止地铸造货币，也只是造成人民互相奴役而已，怎么能算得上国家得治呢？
English: Therefore, if a ruler cannot disperse the hoards, adjust the surpluses and shortages, disperse the profits and losses of annexation, and regulate the expenses of the people, even if he strengthens agriculture, supervises production, and mints money there endlessly, he will only cause the people to enslave each other. How can he be regarded as ruling the country?

古文：岁适美，则市粜无予，而狗彘食人食。
现代文：年景遇上丰收，农民粮食卖不出去，连猪狗都吃人食。
English: The year saw a bumper harvest, farmers were unable to sell their grain, and even pigs and dogs were eating human food.

古文：岁适凶，则市籴釜十繦，而道有饿民。
现代文：年景遇上灾荒，买粮一釜要花十贯钱，而且道有饿民。
English: In times of disaster and famine, it costs ten yuan to buy a pot of grain, and there are starving people.

古文：然则岂壤力固不足而食固不赡也哉？
现代文：这难道是因为地力不足而粮食不够吃所造成的么？
English: Is this caused by insufficient land and not enough food to eat?

古文：夫往岁之粜贱，狗彘食人食，故来岁之民不足也。
现代文：这是因为往年粮价太低，猪狗都吃人食，所以下一年的民食就不足了。
English: This is because grain prices were too low in previous years, and pigs and dogs ate human food, so there was a shortage of food for the people the following year.

古文：物适贱，则半力而无予，民事不偿其本；物适贵，则什倍而不可得，民失其用。
现代文：商品遇上落价，就按照工价的一半也卖不出去，人民生产不够本钱。商品遇上涨价，就是出十倍高价也买不到手，人民需要不得满足。
English: If the price of a commodity falls, it cannot be sold at even half the price of labor, because the people do not have enough capital to produce it. If the price of a commodity rises, it cannot be bought even at a price ten times higher, and the people's needs cannot be satisfied.

古文：然则岂财物固寡而本委不足也哉？
现代文：这难道是由于东西本来太少，生产和贮存不够所造成的么？
English: Is this due to the fact that there are too few things in the first place, caused by insufficient production and storage?

古文：夫民利之时失，而物利之不平也。
现代文：这是因为错过了调节人民财利的时机，财物价格就波动起来。
English: This is because the opportunity to adjust people's financial interests was missed, and property prices fluctuated.

古文：故善者委施于民之所不足，操事于民之所有余。
现代文：所以善治国者总是在民间物资不足时，把库存的东西供应出去；而在民间物资有余时，把市场的商品收购起来。
English: Therefore, a good statesman always supplies the things in stock when there is a shortage of folk materials; and when there is a surplus of folk materials, he purchases the goods in the market.

古文：夫民有余则轻之，故人君敛之以轻；民不足则重之，故人君散之以重。
现代文：民间物资有余就肯于低价卖出，故君主应该以低价收购；民间物资不足就肯于高价买进，故君主应该以高价售出。
English: If there is a surplus of folk materials, he is willing to sell them at a low price, so the monarch should purchase them at a low price; if there is a shortage of folk materials, he is willing to buy them at a high price, so the monarch should sell them at a high price.

古文：敛积之以轻，散行之以重，故君必有十倍之利，而财之櫎可得而平也。
现代文：用低价收购，用高价抛售，君主不但有十倍的盈利，而且物资财货的价格也可以得到调节后的稳定。
English: With low-priced acquisition and high-priced selling, the monarch not only has ten times the profit, but also the price of materials and goods can be stabilized after adjustment.

古文：凡轻重之大利，以重射轻，以贱泄平。
现代文：轻重之术的巨大利益，就在于先用较高价格购取廉价的商品，然后再用较低价格销出这些平价的物资。
English: The great advantage of this stratagem lies in the fact that first the cheap goods are bought at a higher price, and then the goods at the same price are sold at a lower price.

古文：万物之满虚随财，准平而不变，衡绝则重见。
现代文：各种物资的余缺随季节而有不同，注意调节则维持正常不变，失掉平衡那就价格腾贵了。
English: The surplus of various materials varies with the season, but the attention adjustment remains normal and unchanged. If the balance is lost, the price will be expensive.

古文：人君知其然，故守之以准平，使万室之都必有万钟之藏，藏繦千万；使千室之都必有千钟之藏，藏繦百万。
现代文：人君懂得这个道理，所以总是用平准措施来进行掌握。使拥有万户人口的都邑一定藏有万钟粮食和一干万贯的钱币；拥有千户人口的都邑一定藏有干钟粮食和一百万贯的钱币。
English: People understand this principle, so they always use standard measures to master it. So that a metropolis with a population of ten thousand households must have ten thousand bells of grain and one hundred thousand yuan of coins; a metropolis with a population of one thousand households must have ten thousand bells of grain and one million yuan of coins.

古文：春以奉耕，夏以奉芸。
现代文：春天用来供应春耕，夏天用来供应夏锄。
English: In spring, it is used to supply spring ploughing, and in summer it is used to supply summer ploughing.

古文：耒耜械器，种镶粮食，毕取赡于君。
现代文：一切农具、种籽和粮食，都由国家供给。
English: All farm tools, seeds and grain are supplied by the state.

古文：故大贾蓄家不得豪夺吾民矣。
现代文：所以，富商大贾就无法对百姓巧取豪夺了。那么这样做是为什么呢？
English: Therefore, the rich merchant Dajia could not take advantage of the people. So why did he do this?

古文：然则何？君养其本谨也。
现代文：是因为君主严肃认真地发展农业。
English: It is because the monarch is serious about developing agriculture.

古文：春赋以敛缯帛，夏贷以收秋实，是故民无废事而国无失利也。
现代文：春耕时放贷于民，用以敛收丝绸；夏锄时发放贷款、用以收购秋粮。这样、人民既不会荒废农业，国家也不会流失财利于私商了。
English: During spring ploughing, loans will be made to the people to collect silk; during summer ploughing, loans will be made to purchase autumn grain. In this way, the people will not waste agriculture, and the country will not lose financial benefits to private traders.

古文：凡五谷者，万物之主也。
现代文：粮食是万物之主。
English: Grain is the lord of all things.

古文：谷贵则万物必贱，谷贱则万物必贵。
现代文：粮食价格高则万物必贱。粮价低则万物必贵。
English: When grain prices are high, everything must be cheap. When grain prices are low, everything must be expensive.

古文：两者为敌，则不俱平。
现代文：粮价与物价是互相对立的，而涨落不同。
English: Grain prices and commodity prices are opposite to each other, and their ups and downs are different.

古文：故人君御谷物之秩相胜，而操事于其不平之间。故万民无籍而国利归于君也。
现代文：所以，君主要驾御粮价与物价的交替涨落，在其涨落变化中进行掌握，即使不向万民征税，国家财利也可以归于君主。
English: Therefore, the monarch mainly drives the alternating ups and downs of grain prices and commodity prices, and grasps them in their ups and downs. Even if he does not tax the people, the national wealth can be attributed to the monarch.

古文：夫以室庑籍，谓之毁成；以六畜籍，谓之止生；以田亩籍，谓之禁耕；以正人籍，谓之离情；以正户籍，谓之养赢。
现代文：若是征收房屋税，会造成毁坏房屋；若是征收六畜税。会限制六畜繁殖；若是征收田亩税，会破坏农耕；若是按人丁收税，会断绝人们情欲；若是按门户收税，无异优待富豪。
English: If the house tax is levied, it will cause the destruction of houses; if the six-animal tax is levied, it will restrict the breeding of six animals; if the field mule tax is levied, it will destroy farming; if the tax is levied according to the number of people, it will break people's sexual desire; if the tax is levied according to the number of doors, the rich will be treated no differently.

古文：五者不可毕用，故王者遍行而不尽也。
现代文：这五者不能全面实行。所以，成王业的君主虽然每一种都曾用过，但不能同时完全采用。
English: These five can not be fully implemented. Therefore, although the reigning monarchs have used each of them, they can not be fully adopted at the same time.

古文：故天子籍于币，诸侯籍于食。
现代文：因此，天子应该靠运用货币来 征 得收入，诸侯应该靠买卖粮食来 征 得收入。
English: Therefore, the emperor should rely on the use of currency to raise income, and the lords should rely on the sale and purchase of grain to raise income.

古文：中岁之谷，粜石十钱。大男食四石，月有四十之籍；大女食三石，月有三十之籍：吾子食二石，月有二十之籍。
现代文：粮食在中等年景，每卖出一石如果加价十钱，每月成年男子吃粮四石，就等于每月征收四十钱的税；成年女子吃粮三石，就等于每月征收三十钱的税；小孩吃粮二石，就等于每月征收二十钱的税。
English: For grain in middle age, if the price of each stone sold increases by 10 yuan, if an adult man eats 4 stones of grain per month, it is equivalent to a monthly tax of 40 yuan; if an adult woman eats 3 stones of grain, it is equivalent to a monthly tax of 30 yuan; if a child eats 2 stones of grain, it is equivalent to a monthly tax of 20 yuan.

古文：岁凶谷贵，籴石二十钱，则大男有八十之籍，大女有六十之籍，吾子有四十之籍。
现代文：若是凶年谷贵的情况，买粮每一石加二十钱，则成年男子每月纳八十钱的税；成年女子纳六十钱的税，小孩纳四十钱的税。
English: If, in the case of a bad harvest, the price of grain rises by 20 cents per kilo, the adult man will pay a tax of 80 cents per month; the adult woman will pay a tax of 60 cents; and the child will pay a tax of 40 cents.

古文：是人君非发号令收啬而户籍也，彼人君守其本委谨，而男女诸君吾子无不服籍者也。
现代文：这样，人君并不需要下令挨户征税，只认真掌握粮食的生产和贮备，男人女人大人小孩就没有不纳税的了。
English: In this way, people do not need to order door-to-door taxation, only seriously grasp the production and storage of grain, and men, women, adults and children will not pay taxes.

古文：一人廪食，十人得余；十人廪食，百人得余；百人廪食，千人得余。
现代文：一人从国家仓库买粮，比十人交人丁税还有余；十人从国家仓库买粮，比百人交人丁税还有余；百人从国家仓库买粮，就比千人交税还有剩余了。
English: If one person buys grain from the state storehouse, he will have more than enough to pay the tax; if ten people buy grain from the state storehouse, he will have more than enough to pay the tax; if a hundred people buy grain from the state storehouse, he will have more than enough to pay the tax.

古文：夫物多则贱，寡则贵，散则轻，聚则重。
现代文：各种商品都是多则贱，寡则贵，抛售则价跌，囤积则价涨。
English: All kinds of commodities are cheap in many cases, expensive in few cases, falling in price in selling, and rising in price in hoarding.

古文：人君知其然，故视国之羡不足而御其财物。
现代文：君主懂得这个道理，所以根据国内市场物资的余缺状况来控制国内市场的财物。
English: The monarch understood this principle, so he controlled the wealth of the domestic market according to the shortage of materials in the domestic market.

古文：谷贱则以币予食，布帛贱则以币予衣。
现代文：粮食贱就运用所发的货币投放于粮食，布帛贱就运用所发的货币投放于布帛。
English: In the case of grain, the issued currency is used to invest in grain, and in the case of cloth, the issued currency is used to invest in cloth.

古文：视物之轻重而御之以准，故贵贱可调而君得其利。
现代文：再观察物价的涨落而用平准之法来控制。这样，即可以调剂物价高低，君主又能够得其好处。
English: Then observe the rise and fall of prices and use the method of leveling to control. In this way, it is possible to adjust the level of prices, and the monarch can benefit from it.

古文：前有万乘之国，而后有千乘之国，谓之抵国。
现代文：前有万乘之国，后有千乘之国，这种国家叫作 抵国 。
English: In the past, there was the country of 10,000 passengers, and in the future, there will be the country of 1,000 passengers. This kind of country is called "arrival country."

古文：前有千乘之国，而后有万乘之国，谓之距国。
现代文：前有千乘之国，后有万乘之国，这种国家叫作 距国 。
English: In the past, there was the country of the Thousand Buddhas, and in the future, there will be the country of the Ten Thousand Buddhas. This kind of country is called a distant country.

古文：壤正方，四面受敌，谓之衢国。
现代文：国土见方，四面受敌，这种国家叫作 衢国 。
English: A country with a square-shaped territory and enemies on all sides is called a square-shaped country.

古文：以百乘衢处，谓之托食之君。
现代文：以百乘小国处在四面受敌地位，其君主谓之寄食之君。
English: As a small country with a population of a hundred thousand, it is surrounded by enemies on all sides, and its monarch is known as the Prince of Food.

古文：千乘衢处，壤削少半。
现代文：干乘之国处在四面受敌地位，国土将被削去大半。
English: The country of the Mahayana is in a position of being attacked on all sides, and most of its territory will be stripped away.

古文：万乘衢处，壤削太半。
现代文：万乘之国处在四面受敌地位，国土也将被削去少半。
English: The country of Manchuria is in the position of being attacked from all sides, and its territory will also be reduced by half.

古文：何谓百乘衢处托食之君也？
现代文：什么叫作百乘而四面受敌的寄食之君呢？
English: What do you call a food-sending monarch who is surrounded by enemies on all sides?

古文：夫以百乘衢处，危慑围阻千乘万乘之间，夫国之君不相中，举兵而相攻，必以为捍挌蔽圉之用。
现代文：以一个仅有百辆兵车的小国，处在干乘与万乘大国的威胁与包围之中。一旦大国之君不和，互相举兵相攻，必然会把这小国当作攻守的工具。
English: A small country with only a hundred chariots is threatened and encircled by the great powers of Mahayana and Mahayana. Once the rulers of the great powers are at odds and attack each other, they will inevitably use this small country as an offensive and defensive tool.

古文：有功利不得乡。
现代文：即使有战果小国也不得享受。
English: Even if there are military results, small countries are not allowed to enjoy them.

古文：大臣死于外，分壤而功；列陈系累获虏，分赏而禄。
现代文：而小国的大臣战死在外，还需要分封土地酬功；将士俘获敌虏，还需要分给奖赏加禄。
English: But the minister of a small country who died in the war still needs to be given land as a reward; and if a soldier is captured by the enemy, he still needs to be given a bonus.

古文：是壤地尽于功赏，而税臧殚于继孤也。
现代文：结果，土地全用于论功行赏，税收积蓄全用于抚恤将士的遗孤了。
English: As a result, all the land was used to reward meritorious service, and all the tax savings were used to pay pensions to the orphans of soldiers.

古文：是特名罗于为君耳，无壤之有；号有百乘之守，而实无尺壤之用，故谓托食之君。
现代文：这样的国君仅是虚有其名，实际上没有领土。号称拥有百乘的国家力量，实无一尺的用武之地，所以叫寄食的君主。
English: Such a sovereign is only a name, but in fact has no territory. He claims to have a hundred-fold national power, but in fact has no place to use it, so he is called a food-sending monarch.

古文：然则大国内款，小国用尽，何以及此？
现代文：那么，大国财力空虚，小国财用耗尽，怎样才能补给呢？
English: So, if the financial resources of big countries are empty and the financial resources of small countries are exhausted, how can they be replenished?

古文：曰：百乘之国，官赋轨符，乘四时之朝夕，御之以轻重之准，然后百乘可及也。
现代文：办法是：百乘的小国可以由国家发行法定债券，然后根据不同季节的物价涨落，运用轻重之术的调节措施加以掌握，这样百乘小国就可以得到补给了。
English: The method is as follows: small countries with more than a hundred people can be issued legal bonds by the state, and then according to the fluctuations of prices in different seasons, they can be controlled by using the adjustment measures of gravity, so that small countries with more than a hundred people can be replenished.

古文：千乘之国，封天财之所殖，诫器之所出，财物之所生，视岁之满虚而轻重其禄，然后千乘可足也。
现代文：千乘的中等国家，可以封禁自然资源的基地，这是器械和财物的来源。再根据年景的丰歉，运用轻重之术来调节官吏军队的俸禄。然后干乘之国就可以得到满足了。
English: A middle-ranking country of the Senjō can ban the base of natural resources, which is the source of equipment and wealth. Then, according to the richness of the year, the salary of officials and the army can be adjusted by using the weighting method. Then the country of the Senjō can be satisfied.

古文：万乘之国，守岁之满虚，乘民之缓急，正其号令而御其大准，然后万乘可资也。
现代文：万乘的大国可以根据年景的丰歉，利用人民需要的缓急，正确运用号令而掌握全国性的经济调节。然后万乘之国也就可以够用了。
English: The great country of Manchukuo can grasp the national economic adjustment according to the richness of the year, take advantage of the priorities of the people's needs, and correctly use the call. Then the country of Manchukuo can also be used.

古文：玉起于禺氏，金起于汝汉，珠起于赤野，东西南北距周七千八百里。
现代文：玉出产在禺氏地区，金出产在汝河汉水一带，珍珠出产在赤野，东西南北距离周都七干八百里。
English: Jade is produced in the Jinshi area, gold is produced in the Yu River and Han River area, and pearls are produced in Akano. The distance from east to west and north to south is seven to eight hundred miles.

古文：水绝壤断，舟车不能通。
现代文：山水隔绝，舟车不能相通。
English: Isolated by mountains and rivers, boats and cars can't get through.

古文：先王为其途之远，其至之难，故托用于其重，以珠玉为上币，以黄金为中币，以刀布为下币。
现代文：先王因为这些东西距离遥远，得来不易，所以就借助于它们的贵重，以珠玉为上币，黄金为中币，刀布为下币。
English: Because these things are far away and hard to get, the previous king used their preciousness to get high, using jewels as the upper coin, gold as the middle coin, and cloth as the lower coin.

古文：三币握之则非有补于暖也，食之则非有补于饱也，先王以守财物，以御民事，而平天下也。
现代文：这三种货币，握之不能取暖，食之不能充饥，先王是运用它来控制财物，掌握民用，而治理天下的。
English: The first king used these three kinds of money, which could not be used for heating or for food, to control wealth, to control the people, and to govern the world.

古文：今人君籍求于民，令曰十日而具，则财物之贾什去一；令曰八日而具，则财物之贾什去二；令曰五日而具，则财物之贾什去半；朝令而夕具，则财物之贾什去九。
现代文：现在君主向民间征收货币税，命令规定限十天交齐，财物的价格就下降十分之一。
English: Now the monarch levies a currency tax on the people, and the order stipulates that after the limit of ten days has been reached, the price of property will drop by one tenth.

古文：先王知其然，故不求于万民而籍于号令也。
现代文：先王懂得这个道理，所以不向百姓直接求取钱币，而是运用轻重之术的号令来征得收入。
English: The king understood this principle, so he did not directly ask for coins from the people, but used the call of gravity to collect income.

