古文：刘安世邹浩陈瓘任伯雨
现代文：刘安世字器之，魏人。
English: Liu An Shiji ware, Wei people.

古文：刘安世，字器之，魏人。父航，第进士，历知虞城、犀浦县。虞城多奸猾，喜寇盗；犀浦民弱而驯。
现代文：父亲刘航，进士及第，历任虞城、犀浦知县。虞城多奸猾之徒，喜欢掠夺盗窃；犀浦百姓懦弱而驯服。
English: Liu Hang's father, Jin Shi and Ji Ji, were successively in charge of Yucheng and Xiapu County. The people of Yucheng were often treacherous and liked to plunder and steal; the people of Xiapu were cowardly and tame.

古文：航为政，宽猛急缓不同，两县皆治。
现代文：刘航为政，宽猛缓急不同，两县都太平。
English: Liu Hang is in charge of the government, the priorities are different, and both counties are peaceful.

古文：知宿州。
现代文：任宿州知州。
English: Appointed to the post of Chishu of Shukushu.

古文：押伴夏使，使者多所要请，执礼不逊，且欲服球文金带入见，航皆折正之。
现代文：监督相伴西夏使臣，使臣多所要挟请求，执礼不恭敬，而且想穿皮衣饰以金带入朝见皇帝，刘航都予以指正。
English: Supervising the Western Xia envoys accompanying him, Liu Hang pointed out that the envoys often wanted to extort requests, that they did not respect the etiquette, and that they wanted to wear furs and bring gold to the emperor.

古文：以群牧判官为河南监牧使。
现代文：以群牧判官的身份为河南监牧使。
English: He was appointed as the Henan Supervising Pastoral Envoy with the status of the herding judge.

古文：持节册夏主秉常，凡例所遗宝带、名马，却弗受。
现代文：手执权节册封西夏主秉常，凡是按例所赠送的宝带、名马，推辞不接受。
English: The hand of the execution authority of the festival is written by the master of Xixia Bingchang, and all the gifts of the treasure belt and famous horse that are given as usual are not accepted.

古文：还，上《御戎书》，大略云： 辨士好为可喜之说，武夫徼冀不赀之宠，或为所误，不可不戒。 为河北西路转运使。
现代文：回朝，上呈《御戎书》，大略说 ：辨士喜欢为可喜之说，武夫希冀不可计量的宠爱，有时为其所误，不能不引以为戒。 任河北西路转运使。
English: On his return to the imperial court, he submitted the "Delegation of Military Affairs," which roughly said: "The critic likes to say that it is gratifying, the warrior hopes for immeasurable favors, and sometimes he is mistaken, and cannot but be cautioned."

古文：熙宁大旱求言，航论新政不便者五，又上书言： 人主不可轻失天下心，宜乘时有所改为，则人心悦而天意得矣。 不报。
现代文：熙宁年间大旱求言，刘航论新政不适宜的五件事，又上书说 ：皇帝不可以轻易失去天下人心，应乘时有所改变，那么人心欢悦而且得天意了。 
English: During the reign of Emperor Xining, there was a great drought, and Liu Hang asked for advice on five things that were not suitable for the New Deal. He also wrote a letter saying, "The emperor cannot easily lose the hearts of the people. He should take advantage of the time to make some changes. Then the people will be happy and it will be God's will."

古文：乃请提举崇福宫，起知泾、相二州。
现代文：没有得到答复。于是请求提举崇福宫，起用为泾、相二州知州。
English: There was no reply. Therefore, he requested to elevate the Chongfu Palace and use it as the capital and the second state, Zhizhou.

古文：王师西征，徙知陕府。
现代文：宋朝的军队西征，刘航移知陕府。
English: The Song Dynasty's army marched westward, and Liu Hang moved to Zhishan Prefecture.

古文：时仓卒军兴，馈饷切急，县令佐至荷校督民，民多弃田庐，或至自尽。
现代文：当时突然兴军，供应军饷急切，县令官佐以至拿着囚具督责百姓，百姓多抛弃田地房屋，有的以至自杀。
English: At that time, the army was suddenly raised, the supply of military pay was urgent, the county magistrate even took the prisoners to supervise the people, and the people mostly abandoned the fields and houses, and some even committed suicide.

古文：航独期会如平日，事更以办。
现代文：刘航惟独征发百姓如平时，事情也办得很好。
English: As usual, things went well, except for Liu Hang's decision to conscript more people.

古文：终太仆卿。
现代文：终官太仆卿。
English: His final position was that of a great retainer.

古文：安世少时持论已有识。
现代文：刘安世小时候持论已有识见。
English: When Liu Anshi was a child, he already had the insight to hold this view.

古文：航使监牧时，文彦博在枢府，有所闻，每呼安世告之。
现代文：刘航为河南监牧使时，文彦博在枢密院，有所闻见，每每呼叫刘安世报告。
English: When Liu Hang was the overseer of Henan Province, Wen Yanbo heard something in the Privy Council and called Liu Anshi to report.

古文：安世从容言： 王介甫求去，外议谓公且代其任。 彦博曰： 安石坏天下至此，后之人何可为？ 安世拱手曰： 安世虽晚进，窃以为未然。
现代文：刘安世从容不迫地说： 王介甫请求去相位，外面议论认为您将代替他的职务。 文彦博说 ：王安石败坏天下至于此，后继的人怎样有所作为？ 刘安世拱手说 ：安世虽然是晚辈，私下认为没有这样严重。
English: Liu Anshi calmly said: Wang Jiefu asked you to step down, and the outside opinion is that you will take his place. Wen Yibo said: Wang Anshi corrupted the whole world. As for this, how can the successor make a difference? Liu Anshi said: Although Anshi is a younger generation, he privately believes that it is not so serious.

古文：今日新政，果顺人所欲而为人利乎？
现代文：今天的新政，果真顺应人意而为人谋利吗？
English: Is today's New Deal really about following people's wishes and making a profit?

古文：若不然，公当去所害，兴所利，反掌间耳。
现代文：如果不是这样，您应除去所害，兴扬所利，这只是一瞬间的事而已。 
English: If this is not the case, you should remove the harm and promote the benefit, which is only a matter of time.

古文：彦博默不应，他日见航，叹奖其坚正。
现代文：文彦博默不回答，后来见到刘航，感叹赞许刘安世的坚强正直。
English: Fumihiko Bo silently did not answer, and later, when he saw Liu Hang, he sighed and praised Liu Anshi's strength and honesty.

古文：登进士第，不就选。
现代文：登进士第，不就官选。
English: To be promoted, not to be elected.

古文：从学于司马光，咨尽心行己之要，光教之以诚，且令自不妄语始。
现代文：跟从司马光学习，咨询尽心行己的要旨，司马光教导他诚实，而且令他从不乱说话开始。
English: After learning from Sima Guang and consulting him on the essence of practicing oneself wholeheartedly, Sima Guang taught him to be honest and told him not to speak out of turn.

古文：调洺州司法参军，司户以贪闻，转运使吴守礼将按之，问于安世，安世云： 无之。 守礼为止。
现代文：调任氵名州司法参军，氵名州司户以贪污闻名，转运使吴守礼打算按察他，向刘安世垂问，刘安世说： 不要这样。 吴守礼因而停止。
English: Wu Shouli was transferred from the post of Shennai State Judiciary to join the army. The Shennai State Governor was known for corruption. The transfer made Wu Shouli want to investigate him and ask Liu Anshi. Liu Anshi said, "Don't do that." Wu Shouli stopped.

古文：然安世心常不自安，曰： 司户实贪而吾不以诚对，吾其违司马公教乎！ 后读扬雄《法言》 君子避碍则通诸理 ，意乃释。
现代文：但刘安世内心常常不自安，说： 司户确实贪污而我不以诚实应对，我岂不是违背了司马公的教诲啊！ 后来读扬雄《法言》 君子避碍则通诸理 ，心意才解开。
English: However, Liu Anshi often felt uneasy in his heart, saying, "The steward is indeed corrupt and I do not respond with honesty. Am I not violating Sima Gong's teachings?" Later, he read Yang Xiong's "Dharma Sayings," "A gentleman avoids obstacles by using reason, and only then will his mind be freed."

古文：光入相，荐为秘书省正字。
现代文：司马光入为宰相，推荐刘安世为秘书省正字。
English: Sima Guang Rong as the Prime Minister and recommended Liu An Shih as the Secretary of the Ministry of Justice.

古文：光薨，宣仁太后问可为台谏于吕公著，公著以安世对。
现代文：司马光去世，宣仁太后向吕公著垂问可以任台谏的人，吕公著以刘安世应对。
English: When Sima Guang died, Empress Dowager Xuanren wrote to Lv Gong to inquire about the person who could be appointed to the throne. Lv Gong wrote to Liu Anshi to respond.

古文：擢右正言。
现代文：提升为右正言。
English: He was promoted to the post of the Right Chief Counselor.

古文：时执政颇与亲戚官，安世言： 祖宗以来，大臣子弟不敢受内外华要之职。
现代文：当时执政大臣多给与亲戚官职，刘安世说： 祖宗以来，大臣的子弟不敢接受朝廷内外显贵重要的职务。
English: At that time, the ruling ministers mostly gave official positions to their relatives. Liu Anshi said, "Since the time of our ancestors, the sons and daughters of ministers have not dared to accept prestigious and important positions inside and outside the imperial court.

古文：自王安石秉政，务快私意，累圣之制，扫地不存。
现代文：自从王安石执掌朝政，致力于称心私意，累世的制度，扫地出门不复存在。
English: Since Wang Anshi took charge of the imperial government, he has been committed to satisfying his own desires, and the system of successive generations has been swept away and ceased to exist.

古文：今庙堂之上，犹习故态。 因历疏文彦博以下七人，皆耆德魁旧，不少假借。
现代文：现在朝廷上，还是习于故态。 因而历历疏陈文彦博以下七人，都是年高而有道德学问的魁首旧臣，其子弟亲戚赖其权位而得官者为数不少。
English: At present, the imperial court is still accustomed to the status quo. Therefore, the seven people who have gone through the history of Chen Fenyangbo and below are all old and moral and learned leaders and former ministers, and their children and relatives rely on their positions of power to gain office.

古文：章惇以强市昆山民田罚金，安世言： 惇与蔡确、黄履、邢恕素相交结，自谓社稷之臣，贪天之功，侥幸异日，天下之人指为 四凶 。
现代文：章因强行买昆山民田被罚金，刘安世说 ：章与蔡确、黄履、邢恕向来互相交结，自认为是社稷大臣，贪天之功，侥幸将来得到皇帝的宠幸，天下人指陈他们为 四凶 。
English: Zhang was fined for forcibly buying Kunshan people's farmland, Liu Anshi said: Zhang and Cai Jizhen, Huang Li and Xing Shou have always been in contact with each other. They think of themselves as social and economic ministers, covet the power of heaven, and hope to be favored by the emperor in the future. People around the world refer to them as the four villains.

古文：今惇父尚在，而别籍异财，绝灭义理，止从薄罚，何以示惩？ 会吴处厚解释确《安州诗》以进，安世谓其指斥乘舆，犯大不敬，与梁焘等极论之，窜之新州。
现代文：现在章父亲还健在，却另外立籍谋取异财，绝灭义理，只是从于薄罚，何以表示惩戒？ 恰逢吴处厚解释蔡确《安州诗》进献，刘安世认为蔡确指斥皇帝，触犯大不敬条令，同梁焘等人极论之，把蔡确贬窜新州。
English: Now, Zhang's father is still alive, but he has set up a separate residence to seek extraordinary wealth and destroy the principle of righteousness, just from the light punishment, how to express discipline? It coincided with Wu Shuanhou's explanation of Cai Jicheng's "Anzhou Poem" presentation, Liu Anshi believed that Cai Jicheng rebuked the emperor and violated the "great disrespect" regulation, and the same Liang Yi and others discussed the extreme, and belittled Cai Jicheng to Xinzhou.

古文：宰相范纯仁至于御史十人，皆缘是去。
现代文：宰相范纯仁以下至御史十人，都因此去位。
English: As a result, ten people, from Prime Minister Fan Chunren down to the Minister of State, were removed from their positions.

古文：迁起居舍人兼左司谏，进左谏议大夫。
现代文：刘安世升任起居舍人兼左司谏，进任左谏议大夫。
English: Liu Anshi was promoted to the post of resident priest and Zuo Jian, and was promoted to Zuo Jian Wei doctor.

古文：有旨暂罢讲筵，民间欢传宫中求乳婢，安世上疏谏曰： 陛下富于春秋，未纳后而亲女色。
现代文：有旨意暂时罢免讲筵，民间喜传宫中求取奶妈，刘安世上疏进谏说 ：陛下正当壮年，没有纳皇后而亲近女色。
English: There is a will to temporarily remove the speaker, the people are happy to pass on the legend that the palace is looking for a wet nurse, and Liu An said to the world: His Majesty is in his prime, and he is close to women without accepting the queen.

古文：愿太皇太后保祐圣躬，为宗庙社稷大计，清闲之燕，频御经帷，仍引近臣与论前古治乱之要，以益圣学，无溺于所爱而忘其可戒。 哲宗俯首不语。
现代文：希望太皇太后保佑圣上的身体，为宗庙社稷大事计议，清闲之余，应多临御经帷，仍引用亲信大臣与论前古治乱的要旨，以增广圣学，不要溺于所爱却忘记其可以作为劝戒。 哲宗低头不说话。
English: It is hoped that the empress dowager will bless the saint's body, discuss important matters for the ancestral temple society, and, in her spare time, should visit the sutras more often, still quote the close ministers and the gist of the former anti-chaos to expand the sacred science, do not indulge in what you love but forget that it can be used as a warning.

古文：后曰： 无此事，卿误听尔。 明日，后留吕大防告之故。
现代文：太皇太后说： 没有这种事，你误听而已。 第二天，太后留下吕大防报告原因。
English: The Empress Dowager said, "There is no such thing, you just misheard." The next day, the Empress Dowager left Ludao to report the cause.

古文：大防退，召给事中范祖禹使达旨。
现代文：吕大防退朝后，召来给事中范祖禹使传达旨意。
English: After the withdrawal of Ludao from the imperial court, Fan Zuyu was summoned to convey the will of the emperor.

古文：祖禹固尝以谏，于是两人合辞申言之甚切。
现代文：范祖禹本来曾以此劝谏，于是刘安世与范祖禹两人联合申明此事非常恳切。
English: Fan Zuyu had originally advised him in this way, so Liu Anshi and Fan Zuyu jointly affirmed the matter very earnestly.

古文：邓温伯为翰林承旨，安世言其 出入王、吕党中，始终反覆。
现代文：邓温伯为翰林承旨，刘安世说他 出入王安石、吕惠卿党中，始终反反复复。
English: Deng Wenbo was Hanlin's successor, Liu Anshi said that he was in the party of Wang Anshi and Lü Huixing, and he always repeated it.

古文：今之进用，实系君子小人消长之机。
现代文：现在的进用，实在关系到君子小人力量削弱增长的关键。
English: The current use is really related to the gentleman villain's power to weaken the key to growth.

古文：乞行免黜。 不报。
现代文：请将他罢免贬退。 
English: Please remove him and demote him.

古文：遂请外，改中书舍人，辞不就。
现代文：没有得到答复。于是请求外任，改为中书舍人，辞谢不就任。
English: He did not receive a reply, so he asked to be reassigned to a different post, changing his title to "Chinese scholar" and refusing to take up the post.

古文：以集贤殿修撰提举崇福宫，才六月，召为宝文阁待制、枢密都承旨。
现代文：以集贤殿修撰的身份提举崇福宫，刚到六个月，召用为宝文阁待制、枢密都承旨。
English: In his capacity as the compiler of the Collection of Virtues and Virtues, he raised the status of the Chongfu Palace, and just six months later, he was appointed as the custodian of the Treasure Pavilion and the Keeper of the Privy Seal.

古文：范纯仁复相，吕大防白后欲令安世少避。
现代文：范纯仁恢复相位，吕大防禀告太后想令刘安世稍稍避嫌。
English: Fan Chunren regained his composure, and Luda told the empress dowager that he wanted Liu Anshi to back off a little.

古文：后曰： 今既不居言职，自无所嫌。 又语韩忠彦曰： 如此正人，宜且留朝廷。 乃止。
现代文：太后说 ：刘安世现在不居言官之职，自然无所谓避嫌。 又告诉韩忠彦说： 这样正直的人，应该留在朝廷。 于是停止。
English: The Empress Dowager said, "Liu Anshi is no longer in the position of a spokesperson, so naturally there is no need to avoid him." She also told Han Tadahiko, "Such an honest person should stay in the imperial court," and then stopped.

古文：吕惠卿复光禄卿，分司，安世争以为不可，不听。
现代文：吕惠卿恢复光禄卿的职务，分到陪都执行职务，刘安世争辩认为不可以，没有得到采纳。
English: Lord Lü Hui resumed his duties as Lord Guanglu and was assigned to accompany the capital to perform his duties. Liu Anshi argued that this was unacceptable and was not adopted.

古文：出知成德军。
现代文：出知成德军。
English: The German army was out of sight.

古文：章惇用事，尤忌恶之。
现代文：章当权，特别忌讳厌恶刘安世。
English: Zhang Danggu, in particular, detested Liu Anshi.

古文：初黜知南安军，再贬少府少监，三贬新州别驾，安置英州。
现代文：开始贬知南安军，再贬为少府少监，三贬新州别驾，在英州居住。
English: He began to denigrate the Nan'an Army, and then he was denigrated as a young provincial inspector, and then he was denigrated as a young provincial inspector, and then he was denigrated as a young provincial inspector. He lived in Yingzhou.

古文：同文馆狱起，蔡京乞诛灭安世等家，谗虽不行，犹徙梅州。
现代文：同文馆狱兴起，蔡京请求诛灭刘安世等家，谗言虽然没有实行，刘安世还是被移居梅州。
English: With the rise of the Confucius Institute Prison, Cai Jing requested the annihilation of Liu Anshi and other families. Although the warning was not implemented, Liu Anshi was still moved to Meizhou.

古文：惇与蔡卞将必置之死，因使者入海岛诛陈衍，讽使者过安世，胁使自裁。
现代文：章与蔡卞必置之于死地，由于使者到海南岛杀陈衍，暗示使者过访刘安世，迫使他自杀。
English: Zhang and Cai Xuan must be put to death. Since the emissary went to Hainan Island to kill Chen Yan, it implied that the emissary had visited Liu Anshi and forced him to commit suicide.

古文：又擢一土豪为转运判官，使杀之。
现代文：只擢升一士豪为转运判官，让他去杀刘安世。
English: Only one man, Hao, was promoted to be the transportation judge, and he was allowed to kill Liu Anshi.

古文：判官疾驰将至梅，梅守遣客来劝安世自为计。
现代文：判官快速骑马将要到达梅州，梅州守臣派客人来劝刘安世自己想办法。
English: The magistrate is about to reach Meizhou on a fast horse, and the Meizhou governor sent a guest to persuade Liu Anshi to find a way out.

古文：安世色不动，对客饮酒谈笑，徐书数纸付其仆曰： 我即死，依此行之。 顾客曰： 死不难矣。 客密从仆所视，皆经纪同贬当死者之家事甚悉。
现代文：刘安世面色不改，与客相对饮酒谈笑，慢慢写了几页信交付给他的仆人说： 我如果死了，按照信中所说去做。 回头对客人说 ：死不难了。 客人秘密从仆人那里看到信中所写都是安排同贬当死的人的家事，很周到。
English: Liu An's face did not change, he drank and chatted with the guests, slowly wrote a few pages of a letter and handed it to his servant, saying: If I die, do as it says in the letter. He turned back to the guests and said: It's not hard to die. The guests secretly saw from the servants that the letter was written to arrange the family affairs of those who were about to die, very thoughtful.

古文：判官未至二十里，呕血而毙，危得免。
现代文：判官没有走到二十里，呕血而死，危险得以幸免。
English: The judge did not walk twenty miles, vomited blood and died, and the danger was averted.

古文：昭怀后正位中宫，惇、卞发前谏乳婢事，以为为后设。
现代文：昭怀皇后正位中宫，章、蔡卞告发以前刘安世劝谏奶妈之事，认为是针对皇后而言。
English: The Empress Zhaohai was in the middle of the palace, and Zhang and Cai Qi thought that Liu Anshi's advice to her wet nurse was directed at the Empress.

古文：时邹浩既贬，诏应天少尹鼛孙以槛车收二人赴京师。
现代文：当时邹浩已被贬斥，诏命应天府少尹孙用槛车捉收刘安世、邹浩二人前往京城。
English: At that time, Hao Hao had already been denounced, and was ordered by the emperor to use a threshold car to catch Liu Anshi and Hao Hao and take them to Beijing.

古文：行数驿而徽宗即位赦至，鼛乃还。
现代文：走了几个驿站的路而徽宗即皇帝位赦令来到，孙于是返回。
English: After walking a few stations, Huizong, the emperor, came to pardon Sun, who then returned.

古文：凡投荒七年，甲令所载远恶地无不历之。
现代文：刘安世被流放到荒远的地方共七年，甲令所记载的边远污秽之地没有没经历过。
English: Liu Anshi was exiled to a desolate place for a total of seven years, and he did not experience the remote and filthy places recorded by Order A.

古文：移衡及鼎，然后以集贤殿修撰知郓州、真定府，曾布又忌之，不使入朝。
现代文：移居衡州及鼎州，然后以集贤殿修撰的身份知郓州、真定府，曾布又忌恨他，不让他入朝。
English: He moved to Hengzhou and Dingzhou, and then visited Zhangzhou and Jindingfu as a scholar of the Jixian dynasty. Zengbu also hated him and did not allow him to enter the imperial court.

古文：蔡京既相，连七谪至峡州羁管。
现代文：蔡京既为宰相，把刘安世连续七次贬谪到峡州拘系管制。
English: Since Cai Jing is the prime minister, he has sent Liu Anshi to the Jiaozhou Detention Center seven times in a row.

古文：稍复承议郎，卜居宋都。
现代文：稍复承议郎，寄居宋州州城。
English: Somewhat later, he became a sojourner in Songzhou.

古文：宣和六年，复待制，中书舍人沈思封还之。
现代文：宣和六年，恢复待制职务，中书舍人沈思封还此命。
English: Six years after the proclamation of peace and the resumption of the duties of the government-in-waiting, the Chinese scholar Shen Sifeng died.

古文：明年卒，年七十八。
现代文：第二年刘安世去世，终年七十八岁。
English: Liu Anshi died the following year, at the age of 78.

古文：安世仪状魁硕，音吐如钟。
现代文：刘安世仪表魁梧高大，说话声如洪钟。
English: Liu Anshi is a tall, burly man with a booming voice.

古文：初除谏官，未拜命，入白母曰： 朝廷不以安世不肖，使在言路。
现代文：开始被任命为谏官，没有受君命，进屋禀告母亲说： 朝廷不因为安世不贤，让我在言路。
English: At first, he was appointed as a eunuch, but he did not accept the prince's order. He went into the house and told his mother: "The court does not let me speak because it is unethical.

古文：倘居其官，须明目张胆，以身任责，脱有触忤，祸谴立至。
现代文：倘若居其官职，必须明目张胆，以身任责，倘或有所触犯忤逆，祸患谴责立即到来。
English: If you are in his official position, you must be blatant and take responsibility for yourself. If you have committed treason, the scourge of condemnation will come immediately.

古文：主上方以孝治天下，若以老母辞，当可免。 母曰： 不然，吾闻谏官为天子诤臣，汝父平生欲为之而弗得，汝幸居此地，当捐身以报国恩。
现代文：皇帝正以孝治理天下，如果以老母亲辞谢，应可以免任此职。 母亲说： 不行，我听说谏官是天子的诤臣，你父亲一生想做谏官而没有如愿，你幸运居此地位，应献身以报效国家的恩典。
English: The emperor was ruling the world with filial piety, and if he thanked his old mother by resigning, he should be able to be relieved of his post.His mother said, "No, I heard that eunuchs are the vassals of the son of heaven.Your father wanted to be a eunuch all his life, but did not get his wish.You are lucky to be in this position, and you should dedicate yourself to repay the grace of the country.

古文：正得罪流放，无问远近，吾当从汝所之。 于是受命。
现代文：即使获罪被流放，不论远近，我当跟从你居住。 刘安世于是接受任命。
English: Even if I am convicted and exiled, no matter how far or near, I should live with you. Liu Anshi then accepted the appointment.

古文：在职累岁，正色立朝，扶持公道。
现代文：他在职多年，正色立朝，扶持公道。
English: He has been in office for many years, and is a staunch supporter of the rule of law.

古文：其面折廷争，或帝盛怒，则执简却立，伺怒稍解，复前抗辞。
现代文：他当面在朝廷争辩，有时皇帝大怒，就手执书简站立，等候皇帝怒气稍稍消解，再重复前面的正直之辞。
English: He argued in front of the court, and sometimes the emperor got very angry, so he stood up with a letter in his hand, waited for the emperor's anger to dissipate a little, and then repeated the previous honest speech.

古文：旁侍者远观，蓄缩悚汗，目之曰 殿上虎 ，一时无不敬慑。
现代文：在旁的侍从远远观看，退缩恐惧冒汗，称他为 殿上虎 ，一时无不敬畏。
English: The attendants at his side watched from a distance, flinching and sweating with fear, calling him the "Imperial Tiger," momentarily awestruck.

古文：家居未尝有惰容，久坐身不倾倚，作字不草书，不好声色货利。
现代文：家居从来没有懈怠的样子，长久坐立身不倾斜，写字不写草书，不喜好声色财利。
English: At home, there is never a slacking look, long-term sitting and standing without leaning, writing without cursive, and not liking ostentatiousness and financial gain.

古文：其忠孝正直，皆则象司马光。
现代文：他忠孝正直，立身行事均效法司马光。
English: He is loyal, filial and honest, and acts in accordance with the teachings of Sima Guang.

古文：年既老，群贤凋丧略尽，岿然独存，而名望益重。
现代文：年纪老了，众贤死亡略尽，岿然独存，而名望更高。
English: In old age, when all the sages have died, only one survives, and he is more famous.

古文：梁师成用事，能生死人，心服其贤，求得小吏吴默尝趋走前后者，使持书来，啖以即大用，默因劝为子孙计，安世笑谢曰： 吾若为子孙计，不至是矣。
现代文：梁师成用事当权，他有生杀予夺之权势，内心折服刘安世的贤能，找到曾经在刘安世身边供过事的小吏吴默，派他持信来，以马上重用引诱，吴默因而劝刘安世为子孙打算，刘安世笑着感谢说： 我如果替子孙打算，不至于这样了。
English: Liang Shicheng was in charge of affairs. He had the power to kill or be killed. He was impressed by Liu Anshi's ability. He found Wu Mo, a minor official who had once served Liu Anshi, and sent him a letter to persuade Liu Anshi to plan for his descendants. Liu Anshi smiled and thanked him, saying, "If I had planned for my descendants, this would not have happened."

古文：吾欲为元祐全人，见司马光于地下。 还其书不答。
现代文：我想做元十全十美的人，在黄泉下去见司马光。 归还梁师成的信没有答复。
English: I want to be a perfect person and go to see Sima Guang in the underworld. There was no reply to the letter to return Liang Shicheng.

古文：死葬祥符县。
现代文：死后葬在祥符县。
English: He was buried in Xiangfu County after his death.

古文：后二年，金人发其冢，貌如生，相惊语曰： 异人也！ 为之盖棺乃去。
现代文：二年后，金人挖开他的坟墓，相貌如生，互相惊异告诉说 ：这是异人。 替他盖上棺材才离开。
English: Two years later, the goldsmiths dug up his grave and, seeing that he was still alive, told each other in amazement: "This is a stranger." They covered his coffin before leaving.

